--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---
MANU'S CODE OF LAW


--- PAGE 3 ---
SOUTH ASIA RESEARCH
SERIES EDITOR
Patrick Olivelle
A Publication Series of
The University of Texas South Asia Institute
and
Oxford University Press
THE EARLY UPANISADS
Annotated Text and Translation
Patrick Olivelle
INDIAN EPIGRAPHY
A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit,
and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages
Richard Salomon
A DICTIONARY OF OLD MARATHI
S. G. Tulpule and Anne Feldhaus
DONORS, DEVOTEES, AND DAUGHTERS OF GOD
Temple Women in Medieval Tamilnadu
Leslie C. Orr
JÏMÛTAVAHANA' S DÄYABHÄGA
The Hindu Law of Inheritance in Bengal
Edited and Translated with an Introduction and Notes by
Ludo Rocher
A PORTRAIT OF THE HINDUS
Balthazar Solvyns and the European Image of India 1740-1824
Robert L. Hardgrave, Jr.
DIVINE TESTIMONY
A Study and Translation of the Rajasthani Oral Narrative of Devnarayan
Aditya Malik


--- PAGE 4 ---
MANU'S CODE OF LAW
A Critical Edition and Translation of the
Mänava-Dharmasästra
PATRICK OLIVELLE
With the editorial assistance of
Suman Olivelle
OXTORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
2005


--- PAGE 5 ---
OXPORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Oxford 
New York
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires 
Cape Town Chennai
Dar es Salaam Delhi Hong Kong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne 
Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi
Sao Pauio Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto
Copyright © 2005 by The University of Texas Center for Asian Studies
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Manu (Lawgiver).
[Mänavadharmasästra
. English & Sanskirt]
Manu's code of law : a critical edition and translation of the Mänava-dharmasästr
a /
Patrick Olivelle ; with the editorial assistance of Suman Olivelle
p. cm. — (South Asia research)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-19-517146-4
1. Mänavadharmasästra
. 2. Hindu law—Sources. 3. Law—
India—Sources. 4. Law—India—History. I. Olivelle, Patrick.
II. Olivelle, Suman.
III. Title. IV Series: South Asia research (New York, N.Y.)
KNS127.3.A42004
294.5'94—dc22 
2003070152


--- PAGE 6 ---
Preface
It was in 1991, soon after I joined the University of Texas, that I first thought about
preparing a critical edition of the Mänava-Dharmasästra.
 I first envisaged it as a
collaborative project between me and my colleague Richard Lariviere, who had then
just completed the first-ever critical edition of the Näradasmrti. Little did I realize
that it would take a dozen years to complete the project, nor did I have any idea how
complex, labor-intensive, and time-consuming it would be. I am glad that I did not
have the foresight to know then what I know now in hindsight; if I did I would
never have undertaken it.
Over these past thirteen years many individuals and institutions have helped
me in numerous ways; without their help this work would never have been com-
pleted. At the end of this long road, I now have the pleasant task of expressing my
gratitude to all of them publicly. First and foremost, Suman Olivelle has been a full
partner in the editorial work for the past seven years. She collated most of the manu-
scripts, learning eight different scripts in the process; proofread the entire document
several times; and in general kept this complex project involving several collators
organized. Richard Lariviere took on major administrative responsibilities over the
years; although he could not collaborate directly in this edition, he has assisted this
project in ways too numerous to mention. Albrecht Wezler read several chapters of
my translation and gave valuable and insightful criticism and suggestions. During
the eight months that I spent at Harvard in 2000-01, Stephanie Jamison gave un-
stintingly of her time and knowledge and helped me work through obscure passages
of the text. During the same period Michael Witzel also assisted in a variety of ways
in coming to terms with this difficult text and in the dating of some manuscripts.
Several of my students helped me in collating the manuscripts: Don Davis, Robert
Fulton, Robert Goodding, and Mark McClish. Other students assisted the project in
numerous ways: Stephen Lindquist, Lisa Edwin, and Roger Conant. David Brick
helped with the Dharma Parallels, and Elliott MacGregor with the Pâd a Index. Ludo
Rocher, Anne Feldhaus, and Gregory Schopen read the introduction and gave valu-
able comments and suggestions. Wendy Doniger, Martha Selby, and Dominik Wu-
jastyk provided guidance especially in medical and gynecological matters. Officers
of the American Institute of Indian Studies were immensely helpful in obtaining
manuscripts: Pradeep Mehendiratta, Madhav Bhandare, Venugopala Rao, and Jag-
dish Yadav. Likewise, Karan Singh, Arlo Griffith, Cynthia Talbot, Ulrich Kragh,
v


--- PAGE 7 ---
vi 
Preface
Anne Feldhaus, and V. L. Manjul obtained manuscripts from Jammu, Orissa, Ra-
jasthan, Calcutta, and Nagpur. Allen Thrasher was very helpful in giving me access
to the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. at the very beginning of this project,
and Mammata Misra helped with the reading of difficult passages of an Oriya
manuscript.
Many institutions assisted me in various ways. The Smithsonian Institution,
the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the University of Texas gave gen-
erous grants, without which this edition would never have been completed. The
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute in Pune obtained numerous manuscripts and
did a pilot collation of a few manuscripts under a grant from the Smithsonian. I want
to thank especially Dr. S. D. Laddu, who supervised that collation.
Finally, a big thank you to my daughter, Meera, who has endured this project
that has absorbed both her father and mother both during her high-school years and
through her four years of college! Thanks also to Cynthia Read and Theodore
Calderara of the Oxford University Press, New York, who, as usual, have supported
this project enthusiastically.
This is a long and complex volume with several scripts and fonts. I produced
the camera-ready copy, and even with the most careful attention and proofreading
there are bound to be errors for which I beg the indulgence of the readers.
Austin, Texas 
P.O.
June, 2004


--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
Abbreviations 
ix
INTRODUCTION 
3
I. 
Authorship and Composition 
5
II. Sources of Manu: The Traditions of dharma and artha 
41
III. The Work of Redactors 
50
IV. Nature and Purpose of the Treatise 
62
V. Manu and the Later dharma Tradition 
66
Note on the Translation 
71
TRANSLATION 
75
Editor's Outline 
77
Chapter i 
87
Chapter 2 
94
Chapter 3 
108
Chapter 4 
124
Chapter 5 
138
Chapter 6 
148
Chapter 7 
154
Chapter 8 
167
Chapter 9 
190
Chapter 10 
208
Chapter 11 
215
Chapter 12 
230
Notes to the Translation 
237
CRITICAL EDITION 
351
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
353
I. Editorial History and the Need for a Critical Edition 
353
II. Sources for the Critical Edition 
354
III. Genealogy of Manuscripts 
370
IV.Constitution of the Texts 
374
Note on the Critical Edition 
381
vii


--- PAGE 9 ---
via 
Contents
Chapter i 
383
Chapter 2 
403
Chapter 3 
447
Chapter 4 
504
Chapter 5 
558
Chapter 6 
594
Chapter 7 
613
Chapter 8 
659
Chapter 9 
746
Chapter 10 
810
Chapter 11 
837
Chapter 12 
889
Notes to the Critical Edition 
914
Appendices 
983
Appendix I: Fauna and Flora 
985
Appendix II: Names of Gods, People, and Places 
988
Appendix III: Ritual Vocabulary 
993
Appendix IV: Weights, Measures, and Currency 
997
Bibliography 
999
Dharmasâstri c Parallels 
1009
PädaInde x 
1035
Index to the Translation 
mi


--- PAGE 10 ---
Abbreviations
AB 
Aitareya Brahmana
AÄ 
Aitareya A ranyaka
Apa 
Aparâditya , Aparârka com. on YDh
ÄpDh 
Äpastamba Dharmasutra
ÄpGr 
Äpastamba Grhyasütra
ÄpSr 
Äpastamba Srautasütra
AS 
Kautalya's Arthasästra
ÄsGr 
Äsvaläyana Grhyasütra
ÄsSr 
Äsvaläyana Srautasütra
AU 
Aitareya Upanisad
AV 
Atharvaveda
BauSr 
Baudhäyana Srautasütra
BDh 
Baudhäyana Dharmasütra
Bh 
Bhäruc i
BhG 
Bhagavad GJtä
BhP 
Bhavisya Parana
B-R 
Böhtling k and Roth, Sanskrit-Wörterbuch
BrSni 
Brhaspati Smrti
BrU 
Brhadäranyaka Upanisad
er. ap. 
critical apparatus to the edition
ChU 
Chandagya Upanisad
Dev 
Devannabhatta, Smrticandrika
fh 
first hand
GDh 
Gautama Dharmasütra
Go 
Govindaraja
GobhGr 
Gobhila Grhyasütra
haplo 
haplography
Har-A 
Haradatta, com. on the ÄpDh
Har-G 
Haradatta, com. on the GDh
Hem 
Hemädri , Caturvargacintämani
JaiGr 
Jaiminíya Grhyasütra
JAOS 
Journal of the American Oriental Society
JB 
Jaiminíya Brahmana
JIP 
Journal of Indian Philosophy
Jmv 
Jïmûtavâhana , Däyabhäga
KätSr 
Kätyäyan
a Srautasütr a
KB 
Käthaka Brähmana
ix


--- PAGE 11 ---
Abbreviations 
x
KhGr 
Khadira Grhyasütra
KS 
Kâthaka Samhita
KSS 
Kashi Sanskrit Series
Ku 
KullDka
Kum 
Kumärila , Tantravârttika
Laks 
Laksmïdhara , Krtyakalpataru
ma 
marginal addition
Mâdh 
Mâdhava , Pârâsaramâdhavïya
MBh 
Mahabharata
me 
marginal correction
MDh 
Mänava Dharmasastra
Me 
Medhätith i
Mr 
Manirama
MS 
Maitmyaniya Samhita
M-W 
Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary
Nä 
Näräyan
a
Nd 
Nandana
NSm 
Närada Smrti
NT 
Northern Transmission of the MDh
om 
omission, omitted
PärGr 
Päraskara Grhyasütra
P MS 
Pürva Min tan i sä Sût r a
Räm 
Rämäyana
Rc 
Rämacandr a
Rn 
Räghavänand
a
RV 
Rgveda
Sab 
Sahara's commentary on PMS
SânkhGr 
Sânkhâyana
 Grhyasütra
SB 
Satapatha Brâhmana
sh 
second hand
ST 
Southern Transmission of the MDh
TB 
Taittiñya Brâhmana
TS 
Taittiñya Samhitâ
TU 
Taittiñya Upanisad
VaDh 
Vasistha Dharmasütra
VeS 
Vedanta Sûtra
ViDh 
Visnu-Darmasütra
Vij 
Vijñanesvara, Mitâksarâ
 com. on the YDh
Vis 
Visvesvara, Bâlakndâ
 com. on the YDh
vl 
variant reading
VkhGr 
Vaikhânasa Grhyasütra
WZKM 
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Morgenlandes
WZKS 
Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens
YDh 
Yäjnavakya Dharmasästra
ZDMG 
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morganländischen Gessellschaft


--- PAGE 12 ---
MANU'SCODEOFLAW


--- PAGE 13 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction
The pre-eminent position of the Manava Dharmasastra (MDh) among the ancient
Indian treatises on dharma was clearly established by the 5th century CE and pos-
sibly as early as the 3rd. Compliments are most meaningful when they are given by
one's peers. Sometime toward the middle of the first millennium, Brhaspati, one of
Manu's successors and himself a composer of a Dharmasastra, pays Manu the ulti-
mate compliment: Manu is the authority, and any text contradicting Manu has no
validity.1 A couple of centuries earlier, Vätsyäyana
, the author of the Kamasutra
(1.1.5-10), refers to the origin of the MDh in words reminiscent of the first chapter
of the MDh. And Yâjnavalky a (1.4), another author of an early Dharmasastra,
places Manu at the head of his list of the authors of Dharmasästras.
The fame of Manu did not diminish through the next fifteen centuries right up
to the time when the administration of law was taken over by the colonial power
Britain. More commentaries—nine are extant—were written on the MDh than on
any other Dharmasastra. Even though in some areas of dharma—legal procedure
(vyavahära), for example—other texts, such as those of Närad a and Kätyäyana
, be-
came prominent, the MDh nevertheless remained pre-eminent throughout the long
and distinguished history of Dharmasastric literature during the Middle Ages. I had
to examine closely several prominent texts for citations from the MDh for this criti-
cal edition. It is clear that the MDh is by far the most cited Dharmasastric text in the
medieval Nibandhas.
The fame of Manu, however, had spread outside of India long before the arri-
val of the British. The first king in the Buddhist myth of origins codified in the
Aggaññasutta2 is called Mahäsammata . The figure of this first king becomes identi-
fied with that of Manu in the Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia, especially
Burma and Thailand, where the Buddhistic law codes are ascribed to Manu.3
It is no surprise, then, that the first text on dharma that Sir William Jones, the
great pioneer of Sanskrit studies, chose to translate into English in 1794 was the
MDh. Its translation opened for the first time the world of non-European law and
religion to a western audience. Georg BUhler's translation and study, which has re-
mained the standard for over a century, appeared in the famous Oxford University
1. See below, pp. 69.
2. For a detailed study of this myth, see Steven Collins, "The Discourse on What is Pri-
mary," Journal of Indian Philosophy 21(1993): 301-93.
3. For discussions of this issue, see Lingat 1973, 266-72; Steven Collins and Andrew
Huxley, "The Post-Canonical Adventures of Mahäsammata, " Journal of Indian Philosophy
24(1996): 624-48; Steven Collins, "The Lion's Roar on the Wheel-turning King: A Response
to Andrew Huxley's "The Buddha and the Social Contract'," Ibid., 422-46.
3


--- PAGE 15 ---
4 
Introduction
Press series. Sacred Books of the East, edited by Max Müller , in 1886. With the es-
tablishment of Indo-European linguistics and the discovery of the Sanskrit of the
Vedas as one of the earliest extant members of the family of languages to which
Greek, Latin, and most modern European languages belonged, there was excitement
even among non-Indologists about the cultural heritage of ancient India. During the
critical igth century, which set the agenda for much of scholarship on ancient India,
the MDh was for better or for worse the lens through which most European scholars
viewed India's past. Nietzsche, for example, regarded the MDh as a life-affirming
representation of the Aryan religion, in contrast to the nay-saying Buddhism.4 Pas-
sages from this text are found in every collection of readings given to students of
Indian culture, history, or religion in western universities.
Fame invites controversy, and in India itself during the 2oth century Manu be-
came a lightning rod for both the conservative elements of the Hindu tradition and
the liberal movements intent on alleviating the plight of women and low-caste and
outcaste individuals. For the latter, Manu became the symbol of oppression. His
verses were cited as the source of legitimation for such oppression, even though the
same or similar passages are found in other and older documents. The first confer-
ence by untouchables at Yeola under the leadership of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in 1935,
in which it was resolved to reject Hinduism, passed a resolution with the title "To
the Untouchable Community: A New Message of a New Manu." Within a month a
group of young untouchable men gathered in Nasik to burn a copy of Manu cere-
monially.5 Even the prominent women's rights advocate, Madhu Kishwar, had to do
battle with Manu.6 Kishwar refers to the burning of copies of the MDh in the pre-
cincts of the Rajasthan High Court on March 25, 2000, and observes: "The
protesters believed that the ancient text is the defining document of Brahmanical
Hinduism, and also the key source of gender and caste oppression in India."
In spite of all the attention, including burning, that the MDh has received over
the past two centuries, the study of the text itself has been neglected. More heat, lit-
eral and metaphorical, has been generated than light. Until now, even a close ex-
amination of the numerous extant manuscripts of this work, manuscripts written in
nine scripts and spread all over the Indian subcontinent, has not been undertaken.
Without taking any position about the social value of the MDh, I would hope that
we would take the trouble to read the text with the attention it deserves before we
praise, condemn, or burn it. I also hope that this translation and study will be of
some help in understanding this controversial but important document from India's
past.
4. For a fine examination of the influence of India and the MDh on thinkers such as
Schegel, Schopenhauer, Hegel, Nietzsche, and others, see Wilhelm Halbfass, India and
Europe: An Essay in Understanding, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1988.
5. See Eleanor Zelliot, "The Psychological Dimension of the Buddhist Movement in
India," in Religion in South Asia: Religious Conversion and Revival Movements in South Asia
in Medieval and Modern Times, ed. G. A. Oddie, pp. 119-44 (Columbia, Missouri: South
Asia Books, 1977). The burning of the MDh was advocated also by other reform activists,
such as E. V. Ramasami: see M. R. Barnett, The Politics of Cultural Nationalism in South
India (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976), p. 37.
6. "Manu and the Brits," Hinduism Today, January-February 2001, pp. 56-59.


--- PAGE 16 ---
Introduction 
5
I. AUTHORSHIP AND COMPOSITION
Scholars traditionally have regarded the composition of the MDh as a gradual proc-
ess at the hands of anonymous and successive compilers, editors, and copyists last-
ing for several centuries, the same sort of agentless process that many have thought
lies behind the composition of the great epic Mahäbhärata.
 These compilers and
editors, we are told, did nothing more than gather together proverbial sayings, moral
maxims, and legal axioms that were floating in the mouths of people and handed
down from generation to generation. The composition of the text is thus divorced
from authorial intent and agency and from social, political, and economic context.
The first to propose such a hypothesis was E. Washburn Hopkins (1885,268):
I draw the conclusion that the Çâstra m [MDh] was in great part collated
between the time when the bulk of the epic [MBh] was composed and its
final completion, that previous to its collation there had existed a vast
number of sententious remarks, proverbial wisdom, rules of morality
etc. which were ascribed, not to this treatise of Manu at all, but to the
ancient hero Manu as a type of godly wisdom. These I conceive to have
floated about in the mouths of the people, not brought together but all
loosely quoted as laws or saying of Manu and these sayings were after-
wards welded into one with the laws of a particular text [sect?] called
the Manavas—a union natural enough, as the two bodies of law would
then bear the same title, although the sect had no connection with Manu
except in name. . . . According to my theory, these Manu-verses found
in the Mânav a treatise were simply caught up and drawn from the hear-
say of the whole Brahman world, keeping their form after incorporation
with the Manavas' text.
In the introduction to his influential translation of the MDh, Bühle r agreed
substantially with the hypothesis of Hopkins. Biihler (1886, xc) thought that the
composers of both the MDh and the Mahäbhärata
 drew on a common stock of
Spruchweisheit that, at the hands of the teachers of specialized schools, had spread
to all legal topics. Modern scholarship by and large has accepted this view regarding
the creation of the MDh, as well as of other ancient legal documents. Lariviere
(2003, 3) expressed this widely shared view: "I doubt whether such texts as the
Näradasmrt i or the Manusmrti were composed by a single individual." Hiltebeitel
(2001, 5) cites Gitomer's view regarding the composition of the Mahäbhärata,
 a
view that is common with regard to ancient Indian textual formation in general:
"epic textual growth and redaction proceeded in an unconscious, mechanical
fashion."7
I want to challenge this view regarding the composition of ancient texts in
general and of the MDh in particular. This vision of composition in the case of the
Mahäbhärata
 has recently been rejected, rightly I believe, by several leading epic
7. David Gitomer, "King Duryodhana: The Mahäbhärat
a Discourse of Sinning and
Virtue in Epic and Drama," JAOS 112 (1992): 225.


--- PAGE 17 ---
6
scholars.8 That there were proverbs and legal maxims, principally composed in
sloka verses, outside of fixed texts is beyond doubt. Indeed, it is probably such verse
maxims that are cited by the authors of Dharmasutras to support their judgments
rendered in aphoristic prose, often with the introductory remark: athäpy udäharanti
— "Now they also quote." The term udäharanti probably means that these verses
were recited by experts when questions about some point arose or when circum-
stances warranted.9 It would have been natural for authors of texts in almost any
field, but most especially those, such as the Dharmasästras, dealing with morality
and human relationships, to draw upon these maxims. Indeed, the example of the
Dharmasutras indicates that they clearly did so. These verse maxims, however, are
easily detectable in the Dharmasutras, because they are surrounded by the author's
own prose. In the metrical sastras it is more difficult to separate the cited maxims
from the author's own composition. Let me offer a couple of examples of such
maxims in the MDh: "When an older person comes near, the life breaths of a young-
er person rise up, and as he rises up and greets him, he retrieves them" (2.120). This
must have been a proverbial saying concerning respect for older persons; it is cited
by Patañjali and given twice in the Mahâbhârata.
10 The verse at MDh 4.57 is like-
wise clearly a proverbial saying about inappropriate actions: "He must not sleep
alone in an abandoned house, awaken a sleeping superior, speak with a menstruat-
ing woman, or go to a sacrifice uninvited."11
The authors of legal treatises clearly drew upon such maxims—and, indeed,
on previous scholarship—in composing their texts. My point, however, is that the
composition of these texts did not happen as an unconscious and gradual accumula-
tion at different hands and at different times and places; these texts were authored
by individuals with clear authorial intent. They gave their texts a particular struc-
ture; they argued for particular positions in law and morality; they disagreed with
other experts, both their contemporaries and their predecessors; and they had par-
ticular social, economic, and political axes to grind. In all this they are not much
different from modern authors.
The unitary authorship of the MDh was proposed over a century ago by
Bühle r (1886, xcii), who answered the objections of the proponents of a gradual
8. See Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahâbhârata:
 A Reader's Guide to the Education
of the Dharma King (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001); Madeleine Biardeau, cited
by Hiltebeitel, p. 165 ("I prefer to suppose the creation of a sole Brahman of genius"). James
Fitzgerald offers a more complicated compositional history, with a final Gupta redaction (see
Hiltebeitel 2001, 25-6).
9. Indeed, as one of my students, David Brick, has pointed out, the term sinrti in its earli-
est usage may have referred precisely to such memorable maxims to which attention (sinrti) is
drawn in particular circumstances and which, of course, reside in the collective memory of
the community at large or, in the case of law or grammar, in the memory of a community of
experts. The citation of a maxim (nyäya), now mostly in prose, is also a feature of later me-
dieval texts. For a collection such maxims, see Appendix E of V. S. Apte's The Practical
Sanskrit-English Dictionary.
10. Patañjali's Mahäbhäsya
 on Pänin i 6.1.84 (Kielhorn, III: 58); MBh 5.38.1:13.107.32.
Especially in the case of Patañjali, it is more likely that he would cite a well-known saying to
illustrate a grammatical rule than a verse from a specialized text.
11. For a historical analysis of this verse and its vedic precedents, see Jamison 2000.
Introduction


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction 
7
textual evolution, objections based on such criteria as the contradictions in the ex-
tant text. My argument for the unitary authorship of the MDh is based primarily on
the structure of the text, a structure that has thus far gone unnoticed, perhaps be-
cause it was obscured by the chapter divisions to which the text was subjected,
probably at the hand of a redactor, after its initial composition. I do not propose that
the original text of the author, whom I will call "Manu" for convenience, has re-
mained unaltered through the ages. Through a form of higher textual criticism, I will
propose that certain sections are later additions (see part III) reflecting ongoing re-
dactoral activities. Indeed, when these additions are removed, the structure I have
uncovered becomes more transparent. My argument, then, is that such a unique and
symmetrical structure could not have been given to this text except by a conscious
plan created by a single gifted individual. A deep structure that runs through the en-
tire book—a structure that is not apparent at first glance and that remained unde-
tected even by the commentators—could not have simply happened over time as the
text was being put together by different individuals separated by centuries. If not by
an individual, then it must have been composed by a "strong chairman of a com-
mittee" with the help of research assistants who carried out his plan.
I.i The Structure
The manuscript tradition of the MDh divides the text into 12 adhyäyas (lessons or
chapters). This appears to be an old division; it is followed by all the commentators.
I believe, however, that this division is not original. It was probably imposed on the
text when it was subjected to a revision that added several sections (see part III),
most notably the table of contents given at the conclusion of the first chapter.12 Al-
though several of the chapters follow the natural sequence of topics, a close reading
of the text shows that they are artificial divisions. The chapters also contain different
topics that the author, as I will demonstrate, intended to be separate: ch. 2 contains
the sources of dharma, rites of passage, and the duties of a student; the duties of a
king are spread over chapters 7, 8, and 9; the single topic of judicial procedure and
the grounds for litigation is spread over chapters 8 and 9; and ch. 9 contains the
final discussion of the king's dharma and the dharma of Vaisyas and Sudras. More
importantly, however, the division into chapters obscures the latent and deeper
structure of the text, a structure that spans the entire corpus and must go back to the
author himself.
Manu uses the technique of "transitional verse" to mark the conclusion of one
subject and the beginning of another. Here is an example (2.25):
esa dharmasya vo yonih samâsena prakïrtitâ
 I
sambhavas câsya sarvasya varnadharmân nibodhata II
I have described to you above succinctly this source of the Law, as also
the origin of this whole world. Learn now the Laws of the social classes.
12. Note the parallel imposition of chapters onto the Arthasastra discussed by Scharfe
1993-


--- PAGE 19 ---
8
This verse marks the transition from the two introductory topics, creation of the
world and the sources ofdharma, to the main body of the text, the dharma of the
four varnas. Such a technique is unique to Manu; it is not used in the Dharmasutras
and sparingly, if at all, in the later Dharmasästras. Note also the use of the verb
nibodhata in most transitional verses; this manner of expression becomes a signa-
ture of Manu. This device was, I believe, an innovation conceived by Manu and
provides an insight into the plan he had for his book. By following the trail of these
transitional verses, we can uncover the overall plan and structure of the MDh. The
chart below presents schematically the structure that emerges through this method
together with the transitional verses at the beginning and/or end of topics, verses
that provide the clues to uncovering that structure.
The structure that emerges from tracing the transitional verses consists of four
major divisions of uneven length and importance:
1) Creation of the world.
2) Sources of dharma.
3) The dharma of the four social classes.
4) Law of karma, rebirth, and final liberation.
Obviously, the main section in terms of both length and importance is the third,
dealing with the four varnas. The other three are presented as a preamble, an intro-
duction, and a concluding postscript. The preamble and the introduction are men-
tioned at the end of the second section (2.25) in the transitional verse that also
introduces the central third section on the four varnas. The third section is men-
tioned also at its conclusion (12.1) in the transitional verse that also introduces the
final section on karma.l3
The central third section has two major sub-divisions, the first called
dharmavidhi (rule relating to dharma} and the second called prayascittavidhi (rules
relating to penance). These two sections—3.1 and 3.2 in the chart—are mentioned
only once, at the conclusion of the first of them (10.131): "I have described above
the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law of the four classes. Next, I will explain
the splendid rules pertaining to penance."14
The first subsection (3.1) called dharmavidhi is the longest in the entire book
and is further subdivided into two: rules of action in normal times (anâpadi karma-
vidhih) and rules of action in times of adversity (äpadi karmavidhi). These two sub-
divisions—3.1.1 and 3.1.2 in the chart—are also introduced just once in the
transitional verse at the conclusions of the first of them (9.336): "I have described
above the splendid rules of action for the social classes outside times of adversity.
Listen now to the rules for them in the proper order for times of adversity."
13. After the final section, there is a transitional verse (12.107) that introduces the secret
doctrine of Manu's treatise. I think this verse as well as the section on the secret doctrine is a
later addition: see below part III, chapter 12.
14. Manu may have found a precedent for this division of the book in one of his primary
sources, the Gautama Dharmasutra. Gautama (19.1) begins his section on penance with the
statement that he has completed his discussion of the varnas: "The Law pertaining to the so-
cial classes and the Law pertaining to the orders of life has been stated" (iikto varnadharmas
casramadhartnas ca).
Introduction


--- PAGE 20 ---
Introduction 
9
THE STRUCTURE OF MANU
1) SARVASYA SAMBHAVAH [Origin of the World] 1.1-119
2) DHARMASYA YONIH [Sources of Dharma| 2.1-24
esa dharmasya vo yonih samasena prakîrtitâ
 I
sambhavas câsya sarvasya varnadharmân nibodhata II 2.25
I have described to you above succinctly this source of the Law, as also the origin of this whole
world. Learn now the Laws of the social classes.
3) CÄTURVARNYASY A DHARMAH [Dharma of the Four Varnas] 2.25—11.266
3.1) DHARMAV1DHIH [Rules Relating to Dharma] 2.25—10.131
3.1.1) Anâpad i Karmavidhih [Rules of Action in Normal Times] 2.26—9.336
3.1.1.1) Brähmanasy a Caturvidhah Dharmah [Fourfold Dharma of a Brahmin| 2.26—6.97
esa va 'bhihito clharmo brahmanasya caturvidhah I
punyo 'ksayaphalah pretya räjnäm
 dharmant nibodhata II 6.97
I have explained to you above the fourfold Law of Brahmins, a Law that is holy and
brings imperishable rewards after death. Listen now to the Law of kings.
3.1.1.2) Rajñah Karmavidhih (Rules of Action for King] 7.1 — 9325
eso 'khilah karmavidhir ukto rajñah sanatanah I
imam karmavidhim vidyât kramaso vaisyasiidrayoh II 9.325
I have described above in its entirety the eternal rules of action for the king. What
follows, one should understand, are the rules of action for the Vaisya and the Südr a in
their proper order.
3.1.1.3) Vaisya-SQdrayoh Karmavidhih [Rules of Action for Vaisyas & Südras[9.326-3 6
eso 'näpacli varnänäm
 iiktah karmavidhih subhah l
äpady api hi yas tesäm kramasas tan nibodhata I I I I 9-336
I have described above the splendid rules of action for the social classes outside times of
adversity. Listen now to the rules for them in the proper order for times of adversity.
3.1.2) Äpad i Karmavidhih [Rules of Action in Times of Adversity] 10.1-129
esa dharmavidhih krtsnas câturvarnyasya klrtitah I
atahparam pravaksyâmi prâyascittavidhim subham II 10.131
I have described above the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law of the four classes. Next, I will
explain the splendid rules pertaining to penance.
3.2) PRÄYASCITTAVIDHI H [Rule Relating to Penance] 111-265
câturvarnyasya krtsno 'yam ukto dharmas tvayânagha I
karmanâm phalanirvrttim samsa nas tattvatah paräm II 12.1
You have described this Law for the four classes in its entirety, O Sinless One! Teach us accurately
the ultimate consummation of the fruits of actions.
4) KARMAYOGASYA NIRNAYAH [Determination of Karmayoga] 12.3-116
sä tan uväca dharmatnw maharsm mânavo bhrguh I
asya sarvasya sniuta karmayogasya nirnayam II 12.2
Bhrgu, the son of Manu and the very embodiment of the Law, said to those great seers: "Listen to the
determination with respect to engagement in action."
4.1) KARMANAM PHALODAYAH (Fruits of Action] 12.3-81
esa sarvah samuddistah karmanâm vah phalodayah I
naihsreyasam karmavidhim viprasyedam nibodhata II 12.82
I have declared to you above all the fruits arising from actions. Listen now to these rules of
action for a Brahmin, rules that secure the supreme good.
4.2) NAIHSREYASAH KARMAVIDHIH |Rules of Action for Supreme Good] 12.83-115
etad vo 'bhihitam sarvam nihsreyasakaram param I
asmad apracyuto viprah prapnoti paramám gatim II 12.116
I have explained to you above all the best means of securing the supreme good. A Brahmin
who does not deviate from them obtains the highest state.


--- PAGE 21 ---
10 
Introduction
There is a fourth level of division in section 3.1.1 on rules for normal times.
This section has three further sub-sections. The first—3.1.1.1 in the chart—is called
brähmanasya caturvidhah dharmah ("The Fourfold Dharma of a Brahmin") and its
conclusion (6.97) also introduces the next subsection—3.1.1.2 in the chart—dealing
with the king: "I have explained to you above the fourfold Law of Brahmins. . . .
Listen now to the Law of kings." The third subdivision—3.1.1.3 in the chart—deals
with the remaining two varnas, the Vaisya and the SQdra; it is introduced at the con-
clusion of the section on kings (9.325): "I have described ... the eternal rules of ac-
tion for the king. What follows . . . are the rules of action for the Vaisya and the
Sudra."
The final postscript dealing with karma, rebirth, and liberation, which is in-
troduced in 12.1, also has two subdivisions: the first (12.3-82) is on the fruits of ac-
tions (karmanäm phalodayah) and the second (12.83-115) is on achieving the
highest bliss (naihsreyasah karmavidhih). These two are introduced in the transi-
tional verse at the end of the first subsection (12.82): "I have declared to you above
all the fruits arising from actions. Listen now to these rules of action for a Brahmin,
rules that secure the supreme good."
An objection may perhaps be raised to my analysis, because the transitional
verses I have identified above are not the only verses that introduce a topic. This is
no doubt true, but all such verses simply signal the passage to a new topic within the
broad structure I have outlined. In these verses, Manu does not say that he has fin-
ished one topic and is about to begin another; rather, with a few exceptions I will
consider below, they simply indicate the new topic. Here is an example (2.89):
ekädasendriyäny
 ähur yäni pürve mamsinah \
täni samyak pravaksyämi yathävad anupürvasah II
I will explain precisely and in their proper order the eleven organs
described by wise men of old.
This is part of a long list that uses the word pravaksyämi to introduce a new topic.15
There are other verses using this term that both introduce a new topic and mark the
end of the previous topic, in a manner similar to the transitional verses I have listed
within the structure. In each of these cases, however, the topics are not broad themes
but specific sub-themes within the structure I have identified. Verse 5.26 is an ex-
ample:
etad uktam dvijäfinäm
 bhaksyäbhaksyam asesatah I
mämsasyätah
 pravaksyämi vidhim bhaksanavarjane II
I have described above completely what foods are forbidden and what
permitted to the twice-born. I will now explain the rule on eating and on
avoiding meat.
Here the author introduces the minor topic of meat-eating after his long dis-
quisition on permitted and forbidden foods. Most such verses occur in the long sec-
tion dealing with the eighteen grounds for litigation (vyavahärapada). At 8.214 the
15. Variants of the verb include vakxyämi and sampravaksyami. These introductory
verses are found at: 2.89; 3.22; 3.124, 169, 266} 5.57; 7.1, 36; 8.61, 119, 131, 229:9.1; 10.25;
11.211; 12.30, 39.


--- PAGE 22 ---
introduction 
11
passage is from the non-delivery of gifts to the non-payment of wages; at 8.218,
from the non-payment of wages to breach of contract; at 8.266, from boundary dis-
putes to verbal assault; at 8.278, from verbal assault to physical assault; and at
8.301, from physical assault to theft. In the section on inheritance, at 9.56 there is a
transition from the discussion of the relative importance of the seed (man) and the
womb (woman) in procreation to the dharma of women in a time of adversity. At
11.99 there is a transition from penances for drinking liquor to those for stealing
gold.
There is another group of verses that uses the verb nibodhata, the verb of
choice in the transitional verses within the structure I have identified. Beyond such
transitional verses, however, Manu uses verses with this verb to mark the passage
from one minor topic to another. Thus at 2.68 the transition is from the rite of vedic
initiation to the duties of an initiated student; at 5.100, from the purification follow-
ing a death for those of the same ancestry (sapindd) to the purification for other in-
dividuals (asapinda); at 5.146 from purification to the dharma of women; at 6.86,
from ascetics (yati) to holy retirees (vedasamnyasika); at 9.25, from the duties of
husband and wife to a discussion of children; at 9.103, from the duties of husband
and wife to partition of inheritance; at 9.148, from partition among children by
wives of the same caste to that among children by wives of different castes; at
9.220, from partition of inheritance to gambling, the last ground for litigation; at
11.71, from the list of sins to the penances for their expiation; at 11.248, from
penances for public sins to those for secret sins.16 The verb Vi'ra is used a few times
in introductory verses: at 3.286 the transition is from the five sacrifices to the
livelihood of Brahmins; at 5.no, from bodily purification to purification of articles;
and at 11.180, from penances for sinners to penances for those who associate with
them.
Taken collectively, all these other uses of transitional verses merely indicate
smaller subdivisions of the text. They uniformly refer only to the topics dealt with
just before and just after the verse. With regard to such transitions Manu is not con-
sistent in his use of verses; sometimes he uses them, but most often he does not.
Such usages, however, do not impinge on the broad structure I have outlined above.
Those verses stand out from the rest both because of their consistency and because
they refer back not to the topic immediately preceding them but often to a broad
theme introduced hundreds of verses before. In the case of the duties of the king, for
example, introduced at 6.97 and concluded at 9.325 there are 960 verses that inter-
vene; and in the largest section within the text, the dharma of the four varnas, there
are 2415 verses between its introduction at 2.25 and its conclusion at 12.1. No text
that grew "in an unconscious, mechanical fashion" can account for such a deliberate
structure.
The dharma of a Brahmin
The largest portion of the central section on the four varnas is devoted to the four-
16. At the following places, nibodhata simply introduces a minor topic or is an invitation
to the audience to be attentive: 1.68, 119:2.i; 3.20,183, 193; 9.31; 12.53. The verb VJTM is also
used in similar contexts: 1.4, 60


--- PAGE 23 ---
12 
Introduction
fold dharma of a Brahmin encompassing much of chapter 2 and all of chapters 3-6.
This section is explicitly organized around the four asramas.11 All the traditional
material, however, could not be contained within the scheme of the four asramas,
especially the sections on the childhood rites of passage, rules of a bath-graduate
(snätaka), and holy life styles falling outside the asramas of forest hermit and wan-
dering mendicant. Manu, however, attempts to squeeze these within his overall
âsrama structure.
Chapter 4, on the snätaka, is sandwiched between chapters 3 and 5, dealing
with various aspects of a householder's life. We see the difficulty Manu had with
blending the snätaka into the âsrama framework when we look at the beginnings of
chapters 3 and 4. chapter 3 begins quite naturally with the return home of a student
who has completed his vedic studies. The author deals with the selection of a bride
and marriage, with a long disquisition on the various kinds of marriage. Much of the
material dealt with in chapter 3, including the sräddhas, however, is organized
around the five great sacrifices. For Manu, what distinguishes the householder and
what makes him the epitome of religious life is his daily commitment to the five
great sacrifices. Then, at the beginning of chapter 4, Manu has to repeat this within
the context of the âsrama system: after dwelling at the teacher's house during the
first part of his life, a man should return home, get married, and lead a house-
holder's life during the second part. The fifth chapter is introduced with a question
from the seers to Bhrgu about how a Brahmin could be subject to death. This opens
the way to a discussion of permitted and forbidden foods and means of bodily puri-
fication. The theme of the four asramas is taken up again at the beginning of chapter
6: after living as a householder a man may become a hermit and live in a forest; and
again at 6.33: after living the third part of his life as a forest hermit, he should be-
come a wandering mendicant during the fourth and final period of his life.
Even though this section (3.1.1.1) is explicitly said to deal with the dharma of
Brahmins, a close examination shows that Manu is here following a practice com-
mon in ritual texts. They describe fully the ritual procedure only for the archetypal
rite of a group of related rites; the description of the other rites (ectypes) consists of
pointing out only those ritual elements unique to each and different from the arche-
type. For Manu, the dharma of Brahmins constitutes the archetype, and he describes
it fully. Mutatis mutandis these rules are applicable to all varnas. Indeed, within this
section itself Manu often points out how the dharma is modified for other varnas.
For example, under initiation he points out the different times for the different
varnas, the different ways of manufacturing the girdle, different kinds of staffs, and
the like (2.41-7). Likewise, he enumerates the kinds of marriages and the number of
wives permitted for the different varnas (3.13). Manu is often explicit about the ap-
plicability of the rules in this section to all four varnas. At 5.57, for example, he says
that the rules on purification are applicable to all four varnas. This principle of
descriptive parsimony permits Manu to deal with the other varnas, especially
Vaisyas and Südras , briefly. Only the dharmas specific to them are discussed.
17. For the history of this institution, see Olivelle 1993.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Introduction 
13
The Rules for a King
As I will note below (II.2), the section devoted to the king, statecraft, and law in the
MDh is disproportionately large in comparison to Manu's predecessors within the
expert tradition of dharma. The disproportion becomes even more striking when we
take into account the fact that this section deals with matters specific to the king and
the ksatriya class, whereas the section on the Brahmin includes issues common to
all varnas.
A close reading of the section on the king reveals that Manu organized his
material around a simple structure in three parts. The first part, spanning 7.1-142,
deals with the origin of the king; the organization of the state machinery, including
the appointment of officials; the construction of the fort; the king's marriage; the
conduct of foreign policy, including war; and finally taxation. It appears that
Manu's narrative scheme here envisages a new king occupying a virgin territory. He
is unmarried, he has to settle the land and build a capital, and he has to organize the
state apparatus. This structure suited Manu's purpose well, because it enabled him
to discuss all the points associated with statecraft. Real life, however, is quite an-
other matter; most kings would gain a kingdom either through inheritance or con-
quest. In either case there would be pre-existing cities, forts, and a state
bureaucracy.
In the second part, Manu changes his narrative scheme to span a single day,
from the morning when the king wakes up until nightfall when he goes to bed.
Manu squeezes into a single day the description of all the duties of a king spread
over 182 verses. The morning routine extends from 7.145 to 7.215; the afternoon
routine from 7.216 to 7.222; and the evening routine from 7.223 to 7.226. This part
concludes with the king going "to bed at the proper time and rise up refreshed."
The third part deals with the justice system and comprises the 18 grounds for
litigation (vyavahärapada, often translated as "Titles of Law"). After dealing briefly
with the organization of the court, Manu arranges his material on law and the dis-
pensation of justice under the 18 grounds for litigation, commonly called titles of
law (8.47-9.251). The issues relating to evidence and the interrogation of witnesses
are dealt with not separately but under the first ground for litigation, the non-
payment of debts. This appears to have been a convention borrowed from the artha
tradition, to which Manu is indebted for the material relating to the king (see II.2).
Manu's organization of the 18 vyavahärapadas is based on a few clear princi-
ples and, I believe, is superior to the structure given to them in any other text.
Manu's structure is significantly different from that of the extant Arthasästra, as
well as from the other two major Dharmasästras, Nârad a and Yajnavalkya. The
chart below presents the organization of the vyavahärapadas in the four texts.
The three Dharmasästras have rnädäna
 ("non-payment of debt") as the first.
This is only to be expected, because disputes regarding debts, both personal and
commercial, must have been the most common reason for litigants to come before a
court. It is also within the context of this first ground for litigation that these authors
deal with judicial procedure, including rules of evidence and the examination of
witnesses. Only the Arthasästra departs from this practice; it begins the discussion


--- PAGE 25 ---
14
Introduction to the Critical Edition
The Organization of vyavaharapadas
18. This term is not given in the Arthasastra but the topic is treated at the very outset.
Manu 
Arthasastra 
Yajñavalkya 
Narada
1. mâdâna:
 non- 
*strïpumdharma 
: law 
mâdâna:
 non-payment 
mâdâna:
 non-payment
payment of debt 
concering husband and 
of debt 
of debt
wife
2. niksepa: deposits 
dâyavibhâga:
 partition 
upanidhi: deposits 
niksepa: deposits
3. asvâmivikraya: sale 
vâstuvivâda:
 property 
dâyavibhâga:
 partition 
sambhûyasamutthâna:
without ownership 
disputes 
partnerships
4. sambhûyasamutthâ- 
samayasyânapàkarma:
 
sïmâvivâda:
 boundary 
dattapraddnika: non-
nu: partnerships 
breach of contract 
disputes 
delivery of gifts
5. dattasyânapâkarma:
 
mâdâna:
 non-payment 
svâmipâlavivâda:
 dis- 
abhyupetyäsusrüsä:
non-delivery of gifts 
of debt 
pûtes between owners 
breach of contract of
and hersmen 
service
6. vetanâdana: non- 
aupanidhikam: deposits 
asvâmivikraya: sale 
vetanasyânapâkarma:
payment of wages 
without ownership 
non-payment of wages
7. samvidvyatikrama: 
dâsakarmakalpa: rules 
dattâpradânika:
 non- 
asvâmivikraya: sale
breach of contract 
regarding workers 
delivery of gifts 
without ownership
8. krayavikrayânusaya: 
sambhûyasamutthâna: 
krïtânusaya: cancel- 
vikrïyâsampradâna:
cancellation of sale or 
partnerships 
laion of purchase 
non-delivery after sale
purchase
9. svâmipâlavivâda:
 
vikrïtakrïtânusaya:
 
abhyupetyäsusrüsä:
 
krïtânusaya: cancel-
disputes between 
cancellation of 
breach of contract of 
lation of purchase
owners and herdsmen 
purchase or sale 
service
10. sïmâvivâda:
 
dattasyânapâkarma:
 
samvidvyatikrama: 
samayasyânapàkarma:
bound-ary disputes 
non-delivery of gifts 
breach of contract 
breach of conventions
11. vâkpârusya:
 verbal 
asvâmivikraya: sale 
vetanâdâna:
 non- 
ksetrajavivâda: land
assault 
without ownership 
payment of wages 
disputes
12. dandaparusya: 
sahasa: violence 
dyutasamahvaya: gam- 
strlpumsamyoga: rela-
physical assault 
bling and betting 
lions between husband
and wife
13. steya: theft 
vâkpârusya:
 verbal 
vâkpârusya:
 verbal 
dâyabhâga:
 partition
assault 
assault
14. sâhasa: violence 
dandaparusya: physi- 
dandaparusya: physi- 
sâhasa: violence
cal assault 
cal assualt
15. strisamgrahana: 
dyutasamahvaya: gam- 
sahasa: violence 
vâkpârusya:
 verbal
sexual crimes against 
bling and betting 
assault
women
16. strïpumdharma: 
prakîrnaka: miscella- 
vikriyâsampradâna:
 
dandaparusya: physi-
law concerning 
neous 
non-delivery after sale 
cal assault
husband and wife 
sambhuyasamutthana: 
dyutasamahvaya: gam-
ly. viblwga: partition 
partnerships 
bling and betting
18. dyutasamahvaya: 
steya: theft 
prakîrnaka: miscella-
gambling and betting 
strisamgrahana: sexual 
neous
crimes against women
prakîrnaka: miscella-
neous


--- PAGE 26 ---
Introduction 
15
with marriage and the partition of the paternal estate. The reason for this appears to
be stated in the opening sütra: "All legal transactions begin with marriage" fyivaha-
pürvo vyavahärah: AS 3.2.1). The other convergence in these lists is väkpärusya
(verbal assault) and dandapärusya (physical assault), which always go together,
with sähasa (violence) coming very close. Other than these, the order of the lists
diverges markedly, making it clear that there was no traditionally fixed order for the
vyavaharapadas. The order of enumeration in the MDh, therefore, was probably the
creation of Manu himself, and we get a glimpse into his systematic way of thinking
also in his arrangement of these topics. His arrangement, I think, is far superior to
and more systematic than any of the others and can be presented schematically:
A. 
Individual and group disputes (= 1-10)
B. 
Criminal law (= 11-15)
C. 
Personal law (= 16-17)
D. 
Public order and safety (= 18)
Manu begins with disputes between individuals and between groups. Such
disputes must have been the most common reason for litigation and cover the first
ten grounds. The first nine for the most part deal with individual disputes, with the
possible exception of the fourth, on partnerships, where the dispute is between an
individual and a partnership of which he is a member. Likewise, disputes in the
seventh, on breach of contract, may happen between individuals and between an
individual and a corporate body. Disputes over boundaries—the tenth— can happen
between individual land owners, but the typical dispute discussed by Manu concerns
boundaries between villages.
The next category is criminal law, involving verbal and physical assault, theft,
robbery/violence, and sexual crimes. Unlike in modern law, however, lawsuits for
such crimes were not initiated by the state but by the injured parties.
The third category is personal or family law. The first ground for litigation
under this rubric is disputes between a husband and a wife, although much of what
is discussed relates to laws and conventions governing marital relationships. The
second and clearly the more significant is the partition of inheritance. It is in these
two topics that there is often an overlap with material covered under marriage, espe-
cially in chapter 5. This was probably inevitable when the dharma tradition incorpo-
rated strictly legal matters and, therefore, had to deal with marriage and family in
two places, under proper conduct (acara) and law (vyavahära).
The final category is gambling and betting. One would have expected Manu to
present rules for the orderly conduct of these practices, as is done in other texts.19
Manu, however, was strictly opposed to gambling and betting. For him, these areas
of social practice should be suppressed rather than regulated. It is, therefore, natural
for him to follow his brief discussion of gambling with the important topic of the
"eradication of thorns" (kantakasodhana), that is, the suppression of criminal ac-
tivities, especially theft, in the kingdom. This is a topic found in all artha and
dharma texts, but it falls outside the grounds for litigation. Litigation, according to
ancient Indian jurisprudence, is initiated by private individuals; the king and his
officials are explicitly barred from initiating law suits. The eradication of thorns, on
19. See, for example the Äpastamba Dharmasütra, 2.2512-4.


--- PAGE 27 ---
16 Introduction
the other hand, is one of the principal duties of a king; it is a police activity and falls
outside the judicial process. Nevertheless, Manu sees the eradication of thorns and
the suppression of gambling as part of the same administrative process.
The section on the duties of the king concludes with this pithy statement typi-
cal of Manu (9.324): "Conducting himself in this manner and always devoted to the
Laws pertaining to kings, the king should direct all his servants to work for the good
of his people."
The Rules for Vaisyas and SQdras
Manu's discussion of Vaisyas and SQdras, the last two of the varnas, is extraordi-
narily brief. Eight verses are devoted to the Vaisya and just two to the Sudra. Even
granting that, according to the ritual principle of parsimony I have discussed earlier,
much of the material for these two classes was included in the discussion of the
Brahmin, one would have expected something more than just ten verses.
The reason for this brevity is unclear, but I think it must be understood within
the context of the socio-political motives behind Manu's composition, an issue I
will address later (1.4). Simply put, Manu's interest lay not in the lower classes of
society, which he considered to be an ever-present threat to the dominance of the
upper classes, but in the interaction between the political power and Brahmanical
priestly interests, interests that were under constant threat ranging from the Asokan
imperial polity to the foreign invasions around the turn of the millennium.
On Sin and Penance
The methodical approach demonstrated in the sections on Brahmin and king is evi-
dent also in the chapter on sin and penance (prayascitta).'23 Manu begins the topic
with a discussion on the efficacy of penance, on whether penance can actually re-
move sins. After justifying the efficacy of and the need for penance, he divides his
inquiry into two sections: public sins (11.55-189), which occupy much of the discus-
sion, and private or secret sins (11.227).
Manu first presents the major classifications of sins: i) the five grievous sins
that cause the loss of caste (mahäpätaka:
 11.55-9); 2) a large group of secondary
sins that also cause the loss of caste called upapâtaka: (11.60-7); and 3) four further
classes of sins (11.68-71) that cause a man a) to be excluded from caste
(jätibhramsakara), b) to become mixed caste (samkfrnakara), c) to be unworthy of
receiving gifts (apâtrîkarana), and d) to be impure (malavaha). He concludes the
classification of sins with this transitional verse: "Listen now attentively to the spe-
cific penances by which all these sins individually enumerated above may be re-
moved" (11.72).
Manu then goes on to discuss the appropriate penances for each of the catego-
ries of sins: i) the first four of the grievous sins (11.73-108), 2) secondary sins
(11.109-24), and 3) the four further classes of sins (11.125-6). Finally, he turns from
20. There are, of course, some inconsistencies and extraneous material in this chapter. I
will deal with them later in part III.


--- PAGE 28 ---
Introduction 
17
sins personally committed to association with sinners who have become outcastes as
a result of their sins, a category that forms the fifth grievous sin (11.181-90). Manu
introduces the last discussion with the transitional verse: "I have described above
the expiation for all four kinds of sinners. Listen now to the following expiations for
those who associate with outcastes" (11.180). The mention of the four kinds of sin-
ners has caused some confusion. Grievous and secondary sins make two. The third
category consists of four sins, but the penances for the four are dealt with in two
verses. I think Manu viewed the first (jätibhramsakara) as one class and presented
the penances for it in a single verse (11.125). He appears to have viewed the other
three as forming a single class, dealing with their penances in a single verse (11.126).
So, we have four categories of penances relating to the sins listed previously. The
attempt to come up with four sinners as indicated in verse 11.180 may have led a
redactor to insert the four offenses listed in 11.127-79. I will deal with these
interpolations more extensively below (III).
The discussion of penance for publicly known sins concludes with two crisp
statements. First: "No one should transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and
under no circumstances should anyone abhor those who have been cleansed"
(11.190). There follows an excursus containing miscellaneous items on sins and pe-
nances, which is clearly an interpolation. Manu concludes the section on penances
for public sins with the transitional verse (227), which also gives the penances for
private sins: "By these observances should twice-born persons cleanse themselves
of public sins; they may cleanse themselves of secret sins, however, through ritual
formulas and burnt offerings."
When we take out the accretions in this chapter, the clear and impressive
structure of the original composition emerges. That this section on penance con-
cludes the central portion of the treatise dealing with the dharma of the four
varnas—number 3 in the structure I have outlined above—is evident in the opening
verse of the last chapter: "You have described this Law for the four classes in its
entirety, O Sinless One! Teach us accurately the ultimate consummation of the fruits
of actions" (12.1).
On karma
Chapter 12, dealing with actions and their consequences, as well as with the attain-
ment of ultimate happiness beyond the realm of rebirth, is quite different in style
and substance from the rest of the book. I am not willing to call this chapter a later
addition; sufficient evidence does not exist to draw that conclusion. The entire
chapter is taken up with the theme of action (karma}, both the consequences of good
and bad actions (karmavipaka) and the final triumph over action and the attainment
of the supreme good beyond the process of rebirth. Broadly this discussion falls into
two sections, the one dealing with the fruits of action (12.3-81) and the other dealing
with actions leading to the supreme good (12.83-106). These two sections are di-
vided by Manu's signature transitional verse (12.82):
esa sarvah samuddistah karmanäm vah phalodayah I
naihsreyasakaram karma viprasyedam nibodhata II


--- PAGE 29 ---
18 
Introduction
I have declared to you above the fruits arising from actions. Listen now
to these rules of action for a Brahmin, rules that secure the supreme
good.
This chapter has also undergone redactorial interventions, which I will address be-
low in the section on the work of redactors (see III).
1.2 Author, Title, and Date
Most modern scholars know the work of Manu under the title Manu Smrti. In the
introduction to his influential translation, BUhler uniformly uses the title Manu-
smrti. The term smrti is often used by scholars as a general term to cover all the
Dharmasästras composed in verse, which are called "metrical smrtis." "Manusmrti"
is the term used also by Kane (1962-75) in his encyclopedic work on Dharmasästra,
by Lingat (1973), and by Dave (1972-84). The exceptions are the editions of
Mandlik (1886) and Jolly (1887), both of whom give the title as Mänava-
Dharmasästra.
It is unclear when the word smrti came to be used to designate Dharmasästras
composed in verse and in particular the MDh.21 In the manuscripts, the colophons at
the end of each chapter and at the end of the entire work refer to it as
mänavadharmasästra.
 The title of sastra is confirmed by the self-references found
in the MDh, which repeatedly calls itself sastra?2 It is, therefore, clear that the
original title of the work, the title by which it was known to the manuscript tra-
dition, was mänavadharmasästra.
 The title manusmrti appears to have been a rather
late innovation.
The colophon at the end of each chapter reads: mänave dharmasästre
bhrguproktäyäm
 samhitäyäm,
 that is, the Dharmasästra of Manu as arranged or
compiled by Bhrgu. The use of the term samhitä is clearly intentional and connects
the MDh to the samhitas of the Veda. It also hints at the possibility that there may
be other samhitas of Manu's work than that of Bhrgu.23
The MDh (1.58) presents a textual history of itself, ascribing the original trea-
tise to the creator, the Imperishable One (avyaya, 1.57) and the Self-existent
(svayambhü, 1.3, 6). According to the MDh, the creator taught this treatise to his
son, Manu, and he in turn taught it to his pupils, including Bhrgu. It is Bhrgu who
becomes the spokesman and recites the treatise to the gathered seers. The view that
the creator should have produced a text for the governance of his creatures is found
also in other texts. In the Mahäbhärata,
 Bhïsm a recounts the beginning of the
world, the Krta age, when everything was perfect and laws were unnecessary. When
21. Medieval authors who cite the MDh and other Dharmasästras are of little help, be-
cause they simply say "nianuh" or "yäjnavalkyah." The earliest datable use of the term
manusmrti that I find in the manuscripts is in the colophon of the ms. NNg dated 1503 CE.
22. See 1.58, 59, 102, 104,118,119; 11.243; 12.107,126.
23. The significance of Bhrgu in the formation of the Mahäbhärata
 has received consid-
erable attention both from Sukthankar, the chief editor of its critical edition, and a series of
subsequent scholars. For an overview, see Hiltebeitel 2001, 105-18.


--- PAGE 30 ---
Introduction 
19
things began to deteriorate, however, the creator composed a treatise in one thou-
sand chapters dealing with the three areas of human enterprise (trivarga), including
dharma (12.59.29).24
Later tradition picks up on the theme of samhita in the sense of editions of the
original text of Manu. At the very beginning of the Naradasmrti, it is said that Manu
Prajäpat i created a text containing 1080 chapters and 100,000 verses. Nârad a
abridged it to 12,000 verses; the latter was further abridged by Mârkandeya , which
was further condensed by Sumati Bhârgav a to 4,000 verses.25 The tradition that the
original composition of Manu was subjected to repeated editorial revisions and
abridgments appears to have been old. Medhatithi, the gth-century commentator on
the MDh (on 1.58), refers to Nârada' s statement that the original composition in
100,000 verses of Prajäpati , the creator, was abridged by Manu and others. The
SkandapurSna has preserved the tradition that there are four versions of the original
treatise, those edited by Bhrgu, Nârada , Brhaspati, and Añgiras.26
My own close examination of the MDh and its exquisite structure makes me
agree with BUhler (1886, xcii) that the text we have under the title
Mänavadharmasästra
 ascribed to Bhrgu is not an edition or version of a preexisting
text but an original composition. I further believe that this text was authored by a
single individual or at least by a strong chairman with a committee of research as-
sistants. The kind of deep structure, so subtle yet so clear, that I have discovered in
the MDh makes it impossible to have been composed either through unconscious
accumulation or through a series of editorial interventions spanning long intervals of
time. It was conceived and put together by a single individual with extraordinary
ability and a systematic mind.
The eponym "Manu," of course, is not the name of the historical author of this
text. The name, however, was an astute choice. The Taittirïya Samhitâ (2.2.10.2)
records what appears to have been a proverbial saying: "Whatever Manu has said is
medicine." It is possible that numerous legal maxims were handed down ascribed to
Manu, some of which, as BUhler (1886, Ixxv-xcii) has pointed out, are recorded in
the Mahäbhärata.
 Further, Manu was regarded not just as the first human being but,
at least according to one tradition, as the first king.27 With the rise of urban centers
and large kingdoms in northern India around the middle of the first millennium BCE,
the significance of royalty with regard to various aspects of social life appears to
have increased. In religion, leaders of new sects and ascetic communities were given
royal pedigrees, including the Buddha and the Mahâvïra . "King as teacher" is a mo-
tif in the Upanisads, where numerous significant doctrines are ascribed to kings.
24. The motif of a large treatise composed in illo tempore and subsequently abridged for
the use of humans is a recurrent one in Indian literature. Such claims are made for their tex-
tual histories by the Kamasutra (1.1.5-10), and Äyurvedi c texts (Susrutasamhita, SQtrasthana,
1.3). See also the Nätyasästra
 (1.15-24), whose origin is ascribed to Brahman.
25. Lariviere (1989, II: 2) has shown that this passage did not belong to the original
Naradasmrti. BUhler also had entertained this view, which he later rejected (Bühle r 1886,
xvii, n. 2). Jolly (1885,44) also takes this to be part of Nârada . Given that this section of the
NSm is referred to by Medhatithi, it must have been an old tradition.
26. Cited by Jolly (1889, 274) in the introduction to his translation of the Brhaspatismrti.
27. For a survey of the myths surrounding the figure of Manu, see BUhler 1886, Ivii-lxii.


--- PAGE 31 ---
20 
Introduction
With the rise of devotional religions toward the end of the first millennium BCE, we
have the figures of Rama and Krsna, the divine avalaras, who are kings and not
Brahmins.28 Historically, the rise of the Maurya empire and the overwhelming pres-
ence of Asoka and his imperial reforms must have loomed large. That a treatise on
dharma with universal application should be ascribed not just to any king but to the
first king, therefore, should come as no surprise. The clear intent was to make the
work more authoritative by connecting it to both the sage responsible for the famous
proverbial sayings and to the first king of humankind. The historical and political
reasons for the writing of this text makes this ascription even more significant. I will
examine these reasons presently.
I have used "Manu" here as a shorthand term for the historical author of the
MDh. The name of this author is unknown, as are any details of his life: his date, his
geographical location, influences that may have shaped his life and thought, and a
host of biographical questions that would shed light on the text itself.29 The most we
can say is that he was a learned Brahmin from somewhere in northern India. Some
of the socio-political influences that shaped his thought and that perhaps motivated
the writing on the book, however, may at least be surmised by looking at the possi-
ble date of its composition.30
With regard to the dating of the MDh we do not fare much better. Its relative
chronology, however, has widespread scholarly consensus. The MDh was undoubt-
edly composed after the Dharmasütras; it shows clear advances in thinking on
many fronts, especially in the sections relating to statecraft, royal functions, and ju-
dicial procedure. These were probably borrowed from the artha tradition (see II.2).
The MDh is older than any of the other metrical Dharmasästras, especially the four
old ones ascribed to Yâjnavalkya , Nârada , Brhaspati, and Kätyäyana
. Bühle r has
discussed the relative chronology at length in the introduction to his translation of
the MDh, and I will not repeat all his arguments here. A couple of observations will
suffice. Unlike the later texts, Manu has very little to say about documentary evi-
dence in a court of law; he does not use the later word for a document, lekhya, refer-
ring to such documents by the terms karana and desa (see II.2). Manu is also less
concerned with ordeals as means of proving the guilt or innocence of an accused.
The term divya, which becomes common in later texts, is absent; Manu uses instead
the word sapatha, which he uses both for an ordeal proper and for an oath (8.109-
i6).31 The MDh, therefore, occupies the middle position at the point of transition
from the prose and scholastic Dharmasütras to the metrical Dharmasästras ascribed
to authoritative divine beings.32
28. See Olivelle (1993, 61) for a discussion of this issue.
29. Jayaswal's (1930, 51) conclusion that the "real author" of the MDh was Sumati
Bhärgav a on the basis of the NSni evidence, and that it was a Sunga code is speculative and
without firm evidence.
30. Another issue that cannot be fully resolved is whether the text was composed orally.
That scholars in ancient India learned their texts by heart and that instruction involved memo-
rizing is beyond doubt. However, I think that the MDh was originally composed in writing,
especially in view of the mention of manuscripts at 12.103.
31.1 will discuss below (V.i) the influence of the MDh on the later Dharmasästras.
32. The dating of the four extant Dharmasütras is also problematic. In my earlier work


--- PAGE 32 ---
Introduction 
21
Setting an absolute chronology is a more difficult task. After analyzing all the
data available to him, Bühle r (1886, cxvii) concluded that the MDh must have
existed by the 2nd century CE. and that it must have been composed between that
date and the 2nd century BCE. Both Kane, in his monumental History of Dharma-
sästra (I: 344), and Lingat (1973, 96), in his influential study, broadly agree with
Blihler's dating. Jayaswal (1930, 29) has gone the farthest in narrowing the upper
and lower limits of the MDh. He considers it to be a work of the Sunga period
during a time of Brahmanical revival after the Asokan reforms. Jayaswal places the
MDh during the last 170 years before the common era, but thinks it was written
closer to the upper than the lower limit.
The issue is whether these upper and lower limits can be further refined and
narrowed through internal and external evidence. The lower limit is totally depend-
ent on internal evidence and on the relative chronology of the MDh and other an-
cient texts, especially the Dharmasutras. For the upper limit we have a few pieces
of external evidence.
Given my arguments for the unitary authorship and composition of the MDh,
we can take more seriously than in the past the few internal references within the
text that would help us determine a lower limit. In his discussion of mixed classes,
Manu (10.44) refers to several ethnic groups that are identifiable.33 They are
Yavana, Kämboja , Saka, Pahlava, and Cïna . These are all viewed by Manu to be
Ksatriyas who have fallen to the level of Südra s by neglecting rites and failing to
honor Brahmins properly. Given that they are considered in some sense Ksatriyas, it
is clear that Manu viewed these peoples as having military power and political
authority, although he found them less than exemplary. Yavana, a common Indian
term for Greeks and for north-western border people of Greek heritage, is already
used in Asokan inscriptions and by Pânin i (4.1.49) and does not help us in
narrowing the date. The same is true of Kämboja ; the term is already found in
Pânin i (4.1.175). The term Pahlava, an Indian formation from the middle Persian
pahlav (Parthian), although absent in both Patañjali and the Dharmasutras, does not
help much in narrowing the lower limit of the MDh.
The Sakas were the central Asian tribes who conquered parts of Persia and the
northwestern parts of the Indian subcontinent. Their appearance in this region can
be dated to around the middle of the 2nd century BCE. The first Saka king in India
(Olivelle 2000, 9-10) I placed Äpastamb a in the first half of the 3rd century BCE and
Gautama toward the middle of that century. I still think this is reasonable, but because of my
further exploration of the semantic development of the term dharma (Olivelle, forthcoming a
and c), I am inclined now to place them somewhat later. The earliest literary reference to the
Dharmasutras as a class of literature is in Patañjali's Mahäbhäsya:
 (dharmasütrakäräh)
 in
1.1.47; 5-1.119- The word dharmasästra already occurs in Kätyäyana' s Värttika on Pânin i
1.2.64 (39)-
33. Even this piece of internal evidence is not altogether reliable. The verse in question
comes at the end of the section dealing with mixed classes. This section contains several dis-
courses, some repeating what was stated in earlier discourses. Some doubt, therefore, is cast
on the authenticity of the later discourses; they may have been the result of redactors at-
tempting to incorporate different interpretations of the mixed classes and to take into account
new ethnic groups. Lingat (1973, 94) also considers the verse in question to be an interpola-
tion.


--- PAGE 33 ---
22 Introduction
proper, Maues, has been dated from 94 BCE to 22 BCE. It is difficult to estimate
when the presence of the Sakas as a military or political elite would have drawn the
attention of an Indian scholar like Manu. They are absent in the Dharmasütras in
general and significantly in the parallel list of mixed varnas in the Gautama
Dharmasütra (4.16-28), which contains the word Yavana. We do have, however,
the mention of saka in the compound sakayavana by Patañjali (on Pânin i 2.4.10).
So, the word must have been in circulation by the middle of the 2nd century BCE.
Interestingly, we have the progression from yavana in Pânini , toyavana and saka in
Patañjali, to yavana, saka, and etna in the MDh and the Mahabharata.
The reference to the Chinese with the word cïna is problematic. The term is
not used by Patañjali or the Dharmasütras. The word was probably derived from a
central Asian language and is related to the Qin (Chin) dynasty (221-206 BCE),
which, although short lived, was the first to unify China. The term itself, however,
may have been older, because the Qin was a state in Northwest China prior to that
time with strong trade connections with Central Asia. The term "China," like
"India" itself, is not a term of self-identification by the Chinese. The term came
back to China probably from India via Buddhist monks and texts.34 When a people
known as cïna came to be known in India is difficult to estimate. The term's ab-
sence in the earlier literature, however, makes it likely that it could not have been
known before the ist century BCE. It was during this time or a little earlier under the
Han dynasty that Chinese trade with the west began to flourish.35
This date also fits well with the broad relative chronology of texts belonging
roughly to this period. Patañjali probably lived in the middle of the 2nd century BCE.
He is the first to use the expression äryävarta
 with reference to the middle country
of north India. The term is found also in the Dharmasütras of Baudhâyan a and
Vasistha. All three define the region in almost identical words.36 Significantly, the
expression is absent in the older Dharmasütras of Äpastamb a and Gautama. The
MDh is clearly posterior to Patañjali, Baudhâyana , and Vasistha. A lower limit of
the ist century BCE, thus, fits with this relative chronology as well.
External evidence for the upper date of Manu comes from sources several
centuries later.37 Thus, for example, we have possibly the earliest citation of the
34. I thank the many colleagues who responded to my e-mail request for information on
ana. The migration of the term back into China and into Japan (under the form Shina) has
been studied by Joshua A. Fogel in "The Sino-Japanese Controversy over Shina as a
Toponym for China" in his book The Cultural Dimension of Sino-Japanese Relations: Essays
on the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1995), pp. 66-76.
There he cites the work of a Chinese scholar, Su Zhongxiang, who argues that ciña may be
related not to the Qin but to the ancient state of Jing. The issue becomes even more complex
when the possibility of a southern route to India via Assam is considered. However, the MDh
appears to place the ciña, as well as the other foreigners, in the northwest.
35. Parallel to the MDh, we find the use of ciña in the MBh along with the terms saka
and hüna: see 2.23.29; 2.47.19; 3.48.215.19.15; 5.72.14;6.10.65; 12.65.13; 12120.15. We
also have the compounds ctnapatta and cïnabhûmija in AS 2.11114.
36. For a discussion of this point, see Olivelle 2000,10.
37. Unfortunately, inscriptional references to the MDh do not appear until at least the 6th
century CE. Bühle r (1886, cxiii) refers to the Vallabhl inscriptions of Dhruvasena I etc., which
date from 526 CE. For a survey of the inscriptional evidence, see Hopkins 1885.


--- PAGE 34 ---
Introduction 
23
MDh in Sahara's commentary on the Pûrvamîmâmsâsutra
 (6.1.12), where MDh
8.299 is cited with the simple evam smarati. Sabara is generally dated to the sth
century CE. The clearest reference to the MDh in the early classical literature comes
from the play Mrcchakatikä of Sudraka. In Act IX, the judge notes that according to
Manu a Brahmin is exempt from capital punishment; he should be sent into exile
instead.38 The date of Sudraka, however, is not certain, but the consensus appears to
place him broadly during the Gupta period, although some make him a contempor-
ary of Kälidäsa
. Kälidäsa' s date is also controversial, but the 4~5th centuries CE is
probably the best we can do. He does not refer to the MDh directly. His description
of the penance of following a cow in the Raghuvamsa, however, appears to be based
on the MDh 11.109-17. In a special way, Raghuvamsa 1.89 is clearly an adaptation
of Manu ii.ii2.39
The Kämasütra
 (1.1.5-10), in presenting its own mythical origins, claims that
the creator, Prajäpati , produced a treatise of 100,000 chapters dealing with the three
aims of life. The dharma portion of this treatise was made into a separate edition by
Manu SväyambhQ. 40 All this recalls the introductory verses of the MDh. If we place
the Kämasütra
 roughly in the 3rd century CE, then the fame of the MDh must have
reached some prominence by that time.
The relationship between the MDh and the Mahäbhärata
 has been a topic of
discussion ever since Hopkins's (1885) study. Hopkins (1885, 268) concluded that
the MDh was put together "between the time when the bulk of the epic was com-
posed and its final completion." Bühler , after a lengthy discussion of the parallel
passages in the two works, concluded that the MDh has not drawn on the Mahäbhä-
rata and that both drew on the same stock of "floating proverbial wisdom." The ref-
erences and citations collected by Hopkins, I think, make a compelling case that the
author(s) of the epic knew of and drew upon material from the MDh. It is more
likely, I think, that a narrative epic would draw on expert sastras for its discussions
of legal matters than the other way round.41 The issue for dating the MDh, however,
is the date of the Mahäbhärata
 itself. The latest estimate is by Hiltebeitel (2001,18-
20): "I suggest, then, that the Mahäbhärata
 was composed between the mid-second
century BCE and the year zero." He also suggests that the epic was written by a
committee or team over a relatively brief period of time spanning "at most a couple
38. ayam hi pätaki vipro na vadhyo nianur abravlt / rastrad asinät tu nirväsyo vibhavair
aksatair saha // Act IX, verse 39. This provision is found in the MDh 8.380.
39. The MDh 11112 reads tisthantisv anutisthet tu vrajantlsv apy anuvrajet / ästnäsu
tathâsîta niyato vîtamatsarah // The Raghuvamsa 1.89 reads: prasthitäyäm
 pratisthethäh
sthitäyäin
 sthitim äcareh / nisaimäyäm
 nisîdasyâm pJtämbhasi piber apah // Some of the
divergence is caused by the fact that in the Raghuvamsa Dillpa is told to follow just a single
cow, the divine NandinI, whereas in the MDh the penitent follows a herd of ordinary cows.
40. prajäpatir hi prajäh srstvä täsäin
 sthitinibandhanam trivargasya sädhanam adhyä-
yänäm
 satasahasrenägre provaca / tasyaikadesikam manuh sväyambhuvo dharmädliikäri-
kam prthak cakära /
41. Bühle r is quite skeptical about the citations, because they do not exactly replicate the
verses of the extant MDh. I think the differences and confusions can easily be ascribed to the
team of workers engaged in the epic enterprise. The work of committees often creates confu-
sions, misquotations, and misidentifications, especially in a work of such enormous propor-
tions.


--- PAGE 35 ---
24 
Introduction
of generations." Fitzgerald offers a more conservative view, acknowledging several
redactions, the last taking place during the Gupta period.42 If we accept that the
MDh was known to the writers of the Mahäbhärata,
 then, even with a more conser-
vative dating than Hiltebeitel's, the MDh must have been in existence by about the
2nd century CE.
Scholars as far back as Jolly thought they had found what appeared to be a
solid piece of external evidence in Asvaghosa, a Brahmin convert to Buddhism,
who is generally assigned to the ist-2nd centuries CE. A work ascribed to him, the
Vajrasüci, repeatedly cites the MDh by name.43 Johnston had already cast serious
doubts on the authenticity of this work, calling it "a clever piece of polemics argu-
ing against Brahman claims" and concluding that it "shows no trace of Asvaghosa's
style or mentality."44 A close examination of the Vajrasüci supports Johnston's con-
clusion. It is probably a quite late Buddhist polemical pamphlet against Brahmins
and cannot be dated even close to the and century CE.
All this, unfortunately, does not permit us to narrow the dating as much as we
would like. There is a further piece of evidence, however, that may help us in estab-
lishing a more secure lower limit. At MDh 8.213 a fine of "one Suvarna'' is assessed
for the non-delivery of a gift. At MDh 8.361 a man who talks with a woman after he
is explicitly forbidden to do so is fined "one Suvarna."45 Now, fines in the MDh is
assessed in currency and there is no reason to doubt that Suvarna here means a gold
coin. At MDh 8.393 a man who fails to feed a vedic scholar at a rite is forced to give
twice that amount of food and a gold Mâsaka . Here also I think the reference is to a
gold coin.46 It is significant that the Arthasâstra, which has a section on the minting
of copper and silver coins, does not refer to the minting of gold coins.47 There is
also no unambiguous reference to gold coins (as opposed to gold articles and orna-
ments) in the Arthasâstra.^ There is a scholarly consensus that the minting of gold
currency did not take place until the Kushans. P. L. Gupta (1969, 28) notes with ref-
erence to the Gupta king Vima Kadphises that "his most notable contribution is the
42. See Hiltebeitel 2001, 25-26.
43. See Jolly 1885, 44; Jayaswal 1930,26; Kane (1962-75) I: 330. The false ascription of
this text to Asvaghosa is perpetuated in the recent study by Sarla Khosla, Asvaghosa and his
Times, New Delhi: Intellectual Publishing House, 1986.
44. E. H. Johnston, Asvaghosa's Buddhacarita or Acts of the Buddha (1936; reprint,
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1984), II: xxii. As Johnston observes, the Chinese translation as-
cribes this text to Dharmaklrti. See also de Jong 1988.
45. At MDh 8.220 the fine imposed on a man breaking an agreement is said to be
catuhsuvarnaii sanniskan, which I have taken to mean "6 Niskas each weighing 4 Suvarnas."
Commentators, however, take the fine to be cumulative: 4 Suvarnas and 6 Niskas. In any
case, it appears that here also a fine assessed in gold coins is meant. A fine of 6 Niskas is also
imposed at MDh 8.284.
46. The first two occurrences are in sections about whose authenticity there cannot be
any doubt. They are solidly within the discussion of the eighteen grounds for litigation
(vyavähapada), which must go back to the original composition. Verse 8.393, on the other
hand, occurs in what I call an excursus, and it is likely to come from later redactoral activi-
ties.
47. See D. C. Sircar, Studies in Indian Coins (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1968), p. 78.
48. This supports the possibility that Manu may have borrowed some of his material
from the Arthasâstra; see section II.2


--- PAGE 36 ---
Introduction 
25
introduction of extensive gold coins for the first time in India."49 Vima Kadphises
probably reigned the end of the first and beginning of the second century CE.50
Vima's successors also issued gold coins; and so did the Guptas.51 If this was the
first time that gold coins were minted in any numbers in India proper, then lower
limit for the composition of the MDh must be pushed further forward to at least the
2nd century CE. It is unlikely that the socio-political conditions during which the
MDh was composed reflects those of the indigenous Gupta empire (see 1.4). If this
hypothesis is accepted, the likely period for the composition of the MDh would be
2nd-3rd centuries CE. Indeed, this corresponds to the date of 3rd century CE
assigned to the MDh by the great Indian scholar of epigraphy and numismatics, D.
C. Sircar (1968,52).
1.3 Narrative Structure and Composition
Manu introduced two major innovations in comparison to the previous literature of
the dharma tradition. First, he composed his text entirely in slokas. Second, he set
his text within a narrative structure that consists of a dialogue between an exalted
being in the role of teacher and others desiring to learn from him.
Late vedic texts, especially the early prose Upanisads, regularly cite verses in
support of statements and viewpoints.52 It appears that these verses were somehow
viewed as having greater authority and, therefore, able to lend greater support to the
author's views, much like citations from scripture. The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad,
for example, frequently cites supporting verses with the introduction tad esa sloko
bhavati ("In this connection there is this verse").53 The significance of these verses
in the eyes of the authors is indicated by the fact that they write commentaries on
some of them, as in Brhadaranyaka 1.5. We see this practice continued by the
authors of the Dharmasutras.54 They also present verses as providing support for or
confirmation of views they have already presented in prose and introduce them with
athäpy udäharanti ("Now, they also quote"), indicating that these verses were well-
known sayings that experts would cite in support of a particular practice or view-
point.55 In the later Dharmasütras, however, we find increasing use of verses not
49. There were gold coins issued by the Graeco-Bactrian kings of the north-west and the
Scythian dynasties. It is, however, unlikely that fines would be assessed in a coin that must
have been rare in the Indian heartland.
50. See H. Kulke and D. Rothermund, A History of India (London: Routledge, 1986), p.
81.
51. "The coins of these Gupta emperors are known chiefly in gold. They issued gold
coins so profusely that a contemporary poet has allegorically termed the phenomenon 'rain of
gold'" (Gupta 1969, 52).
52. For a study of verses in the vedic corpus, see Paul Horsch, Die vedische Gäthä-
 und
Sloka-Literatur. Bern: Francke Verlag, 1966.
53. See 2.2.3:4.3.11; 4.4.6, 7, 8. See also ChU, 3.112; 5.2.9; 5.10.9; 5-24-5; 7-26.2; 8.6.6.
54. The exception is Gautama. For a discussion, see Olivelle 2000.
55. See ÄpDh 1.19.15; 1.25.9; 1.31.23; 1.32.23; 2.9.13; 2.13.6; 2.17.7. At 2.23.3 two verses
are cited with the introduction atha puräne slokäv udäharanti ("Now, they quote a couple of
verses in a Puräna" ) indicating that such verses may have been found in the genre Purâna ,
although this probably does not refer to any extant Puräna . See BDh 1.1.8; 1.2.11, 15, 17; 1.7.1;


--- PAGE 37 ---
26 
Introduction
simply as citations but integrated into the composition.56 This strategy is used with
increasing frequency by Vasistha, the author of the latest Dharmasutra; chapters
25-7, for example, are completely in verse.
It appears that during the last few centuries prior to the common era slokas
had assumed an aura of authority, and proverbial wisdom was transmitted as memo-
rable verses. The logical outcome of this tendency was for authoritative texts them-
selves to be composed in verse, lending authority to the text by its very literary
genre. We see this already in some of the earliest Buddhist texts, such as the an-
thologies of the Suttanipäta and the Dhammapada and in the verses of the Jätakas.
The same process was probably responsible for the fact that the early prose
Upanisads, such as the Brhadäranyaka and the Chandogya, are followed by a series
of Upanisads composed entirely in verse, such as the Katha, the Mundaka, and the
Svetäsvatara.
The parallel between the older and the later Upanisads is true of the dharma
literature as well. Whereas the earlier texts are in prose with verse citations, the later
ones are composed entirely in verse. The first such text was that of Manu. His use of
verse for the composition of his Dharmasastra, therefore, must have been part of a
deliberate plan to lend the kind of authority to his text that would come only through
this literary genre. We have, of course, the parallel examples of the epics
Mahäbhärata
 and Rämäyana
 composed in verse and claiming religious authority.
This move away from prose to verse continues especially in religious compositions
such as the Purânas . In what could be regarded as expert traditions, however, the
picture is mixed. The artha and karna traditions continued to produce prose works,
as did the ritual, philosophical, and grammatical traditions. The dharma tradition
followed the trail blazed by Manu; all later Dharmasästras are written in verse,
prose entering the tradition only in commentaries and medieval digests (nibandha).
The second innovation in the composition of the MDh is its narrative struc-
ture. The Dharmasutras are not only written in prose but are also presented as
nothing more than scholarly works.57 There is no literary introduction; the author
gets right down to business. He presents his material in a straightforward manner,
and on points of controversy and debate he presents opposing viewpoints. All this is
eliminated by Manu. Here the real author is presented not as a scholar but as the
primeval lawgiver, the Creator SvayambhQ, and his intermediaries, his son Manu
and the latter's disciple Bhrgu. The law is promulgated authoritatively; there cannot
be any debate, dissension, or scholarly give and take.
An anonymous group of seers approaches Manu and asks him to teach them
dharma. Manu accedes to their wishes. He narrates the creation of the world up to
the emergence of human society hierarchically arranged into the four varnas. Then
he asks his pupil Bhrgu to teach them the rest (1.59), reminding me of a busy profes-
sor letting his graduate assistant do the dirty work of teaching an undergraduate
1.8.23,25, 53; 1.10.61 23; 1.11.16,14; 1.21.2; 2.1.6,17, 21; 2.2.265 2.3.14 16,19, 31, 45; 2.4.1,10,
14,18; 2.5.4, 7, 9; VaDh 1.22, 38; 2.6, 27, 30, si 41, 48; etc.
56. For a discussion see Olivelle 2000, 6-7. For such verses, see BDh 1.10.26; 1.19.8;
2.6.32-42.
57. In this they parallel the older ritual texts, the Srautasütras and the GrhyasUtras.


--- PAGE 38 ---
Introduction 
27
class. Bhrgu takes up the task in earnest; the rest of the book is the oral teaching of
Bhrgu. The seers reappear only twice—once at the beginning of chapter 5 when
they ask how Brahmins can be subject to death, a question that leads to a discussion
of food practices, purification, and duties of women; and a second time at the begin-
ning of chapter 12 when they ask Bhrgu to teach them the effects of actions (karma).
The narrative structure given prominence at the opening of the text fizzles out; there
is no conclusion to the narrative. A similar structure is found in the Pañcatantra,
where the original setting—Visnusarman's instruction of princes in statecraft and
policy under the guise of animal stories—is lost sight of in the conclusion.
We have no way of knowing all the reasons for Manu's strategy of departing
from the tradition of textual composition found in the earlier dharma tradition. The
tradition of dialogue where a teacher instructs a pupil, a son, or a king goes back to
the Brähmana s and the Upanisads. The literary structure of these dialogues, how-
ever, places these individuals within human history. The transition into divine in-
struction is found already in the Chändogya Upanisad, where we have the
instruction of Nârad a by Sanatkumâr a (7.1) and of Indra and Virocana by Prajäpat i
(8.7). Nevertheless, I think the example of the Buddhist texts was also a likely fac-
tor. Hiltebeitel (2001,167) has argued that the Mahâyân
a literature, especially the
Lotus Sutra, offers a parallel to the narrative structure of the Mahäbhärata.
 For the
first time in India, the words of a single charismatic individual were taken as the
sole fountain of authority in a religious tradition. The doctrine of buddhavacana,
that the sole form of textual authority is the words of the Buddha, governed the pro-
duction of texts both in the early forms of Buddhism and in the Mahâyâna.
58 All
texts begin with the preamble "Thus have I heard," placing the text in the mouth of
the Buddha and making the function of the "author" merely that of a transcriber or
re-teller of what he had heard. The narrator narrating what he had heard and placing
his narrative in the distant past is also at the heart of the Mahäbhärata
 structure.59
Although its narrative structure is much simpler, the same is true of the MDh
as well. We have here five layers of "telling," "hearing," and re-telling. At the most
remote level, we have the creator himself soon after his creative activity composing
a treatise and reciting it to his son Manu (1.58). Manu is the first "hearer." He
transmits it to Marïc i and the other sages (1.58), who form the second tier of
"hearers." At Manu's command, one of these sages, Bhrgu, teaches the seers who
had come to Manu with the mission of learning dharma. Bhrgu's first word (1.60),
significantly, is "Listen" (srüyatäm).
 This group of seers, still placed in illo tern-
pore, constitutes the third tier of "hearers." The narrator of the entire text makes
only a fleeting and implicit appearance in the very first verse of the text: "As Manu
was seated, absorbed in contemplation, the great seers came up to him, paid him
homage in the proper manner, and said to him." Here we have the voice of the
58. For an interesting study on ancient instructions on how to "produce" a new Buddhist
text, see Gregory Schopen, "If You Can't Remember, How to Make it Up: Some Monastic
Rules for Redacting Canonical Texts," in Bauddhavidyäsudhäkarah:
 Studies in Honour of
Heinz Bechert on the Occasion of his 6gth Birthday, ed. P. Kieffer-PUlz and Jens-Uwe
Hartmann, Indica et Tibetica 30 (Swisttal-Odendorf, 1997), pp. 571-82.
59. C. Minkowski, "Snakes, Sattras, and the Mahäbhärata"
 in A. Sharma, ed., Essays
on the Mahäbhärata
 (Leiden: Brill, 1991), 384-400; Hiltebeitel 2001.


--- PAGE 39 ---
28 
Introduction
narrator introducing the first group of characters; then he becomes silent except for
two other fleeting appearances to introduce the seers' further request at 5.1-2 and to
introduce Bhrgu's final discourse at 12.2. Evidently the narrator himself, who at one
level can be identified with the historical author of the text, heard the text presuma-
bly from the seers; or he has been eavesdropping on Bhrgu's instruction of the seers.
This narrator is the fourth "hearer." There is then the implied fifth "hearer", that is,
all those who listen to or read this text, including modern scholars. The last verse of
the book, possibly part of an interpolated section (see III), is directed at this audi-
ence: "When a twice-born recites this Treatise of Manu proclaimed by Bhrgu, he
will always follow the proper conduct and obtain whatever state he desires."
Although mediated by a series of tellers and hearers, the ultimate authority of
the text lies in its original promulgator, the Creator himself.60 Paralleling the Bud-
dhist doctrine of buddhavacana and doing one better than that, the MDh grounds its
authority (promana) on the svayambhuvacana, the words of the Self-existent One,
the very ground of creation. This appeal to a single source of authority stands in
sharp contrast to the traditional source of authority for and means of knowing
dharma, namely the Veda supplemented by traditional texts (smrti) and the conduct
of the virtuous (acara).61 Indeed, the MDh itself presents the latter doctrine when it
discusses the sources of dharma in chapter 2. There is thus a disjuncture between
the narrative structure of chapter i and the body of the text. The author is a tradi-
tional pandit, and his habitual methods of reasoning, argumentation, and public
presentation take over in the substantive parts of the text.62 One may ignore the ref-
erences to "that is the teaching of Manu" or "so said Manu,"63 which are peculiar in
a text that was composed by Manu's father and perhaps edited by Manu. The whole
text, after all, constitutes the "sayings of Manu." But such self-referential statements
occur also in other Sanskrit texts. More revealing are the following.
"Whatever Law Manu has proclaimed with respect to anyone, all that has
been taught in the Veda, for it contains all knowledge" (2.7). This assertion is
strange within a text that is Manu's own composition. It appears that the author is
trying here to reconcile the authority of Manu with the authority of the Veda as the
source of dharma. "Tradition holds that the various groups of ancestors are the sons
of all the seers headed by Marlci, seers who are the children of Manu, the son of
Hiranyagarbha" (3.194): why ascribe to tradition (smrtäh) a view when the creator
himself is the speaker? "Because of discipline, on the other hand, Prthu, as well as
Manu, obtained a kingdom; Kubera, lordship over wealth; and the son of Gädhi , the
rank of a Brahmin" (7.42). Here Manu, along with other traditional heroes, is treated
in the third person. "Bed, seat, ornaments, lust, hatred, behavior unworthy of an
60. We, of course, have parallels in other religious traditions for divinely authored law,
such as the Pentateuch in the Jewish tradition and the Koran (and derivatively, Sharia) in
Islam.
61. This contrasts even more with the "community standards" (sämayäcärika)
 espoused
in the ÄpDh (1.1.1-2).
62. We find similar forgetfulness in other texts as well. See, for example, Brhaspati's
reference to the contradictions in the MDh cited below in section V.l.
63. iti manor anusäsanam: 8.139, 279; 9.239; abravln manuh, inanur aha: 3.150, 222;
4.103; 5.41, 131; 6.54; 8.124, 168, 204, 242, 292, 339;9-i58,182; 10.63, 78.


--- PAGE 40 ---
Introduction 
29
Ärya , malice, and bad conduct—Manu assigned these to women" (9.17). Again,
Manu appears here in the third person. At 2.16, moreover, a view is ascribed to
Bhrgu, even though Bhrgu is the narrator! There are also verses that appear to be
commentaries on a previous verse, making it likely that the verse on which the
comments are based has been incorporated into the text from a different source.64
The author of the MDh does not, indeed cannot, openly present diverse opin-
ions of scholars both due to metrical reasons, as Bühle r (1886, xciii) has already
pointed out, and because it would violate his narrative structure; how can the creator
present diverse opinions on points of law? Yet, the pandit mentality is hard to sup-
press, and our author repeatedly forgets his narrative and engages in ordinary schol-
arly give and take (see II.i). The most obvious is the expression iti cet ("if you argue
thus"), which marks an objection or a doubt, occurring at 9.122; 10.66, 82; 12.108.
At 8.140 we have a particular interest rate set by Vasistha, and at 8.110 an appeal to
the practice of former sages and gods with reference to the legitimacy of oaths.65
The author sometimes refers to the opinions of others with the common iti kecit
("some say"). At 3.53 the opinion of some that a bull and a cow are given as a bride
price at a seer's type of marriage is refuted; at 3.261 the author refers to different
customs regarding the disposal of ancestral offerings; and at 9.32 he introduces two
opinions about the person to whom a son belongs, the biological father or the
husband of the mother.
Contradictions in the MDh
The text of the MDh as it has come down to us contains numerous contradictory
statements. This feature has drawn the attention not only of modern scholars66 but
also of ancient commentators. The author of the Brhaspati Smrti, a text written a few
centuries after the MDh, had the same problem with Manu. In his section on niyoga
(levirate), Brhaspati comments (1.25.16):
uktvä niyogo manunä nisiddhah svayam eva tu I
yugahrasad asakyo 'yam kartum sarvair vidhänatah II
Manu has prescribed leviratic union, and then he himself has forbidden
it. Because of the shortening in each age, no one can carry it out in ac-
cordance with the prescriptions.67
Brhaspati provides a traditional solution to the problem; the contradictory rules
apply to different ages. So there is no true contradiction.
Modern scholars cannot accept the traditional hermeneutical solution. Many
have seen these contradictions as proof that the text had multiple authors over a long
period of time; the contradictions represent changing customs and norms. BUhler
64. See for example, MDh 3.171-4; 4.147-9, 195-6, 254-6.
65. There are also historical references: MDh 8.110, 116; 10.105-8.
66. For further discussion and other viewpoints, see Bühle r 1886, xcii-xcv; Doniger
1991, xliv-lviii.
67. The "shortening" has multiple meanings: the ages themselves become shorter in du-
ration, the life span of humans become correspondingly shorter, and their proclivity to virtue
also becomes weaker (See, MDh 1.83-84).


--- PAGE 41 ---
30 
Introduction
(1886, xcii-xciii), the first scholar to posit the unitary authorship of the MDh, sought
to answer these critics. His answer was two-fold:
Thus in weighing the value of the argument drawn from the occurrence
of contradictory passages, two circumstances, which mostly have been
left out of account, must be kept in mind: first, that it is a common habit
of Indian authors to place conflicting opinions, supported by authorities
of equal weight, side by side, and to allow an option, or to mention
time-honoured rules, legal customs, and social institutions, and after-
wards to disapprove of them; and secondly, that, as our Smrti is in any
case a recast of an earlier Sutra, that fact alone is sufficient to account
for contradictions.
The second point is based on BUhler's assumption of a pre-existing Mänava
Dharmasutra and must be ignored (see II. i). In my view, the author's work cannot
be limited to that of an editor; even though he used older sources, as all authors do,
he created a new work, and one would have to assume that a good author would
seek to avoid contradictions, especially contradictions that sit side by side. BUhler's
first point, however, is well taken. Manu was unable to demarcate various views
with the traditional iti followed by the name of the authority both because the trea-
tise was composed by the creator and because it was difficult to incorporate such
attributions into a verse composition. The various views are here woven into the
very fabric of Manu's narrative.68
Manu does, indeed, cite conflicting opinions.69 This is demonstrated by the
fact that sometimes he ascribes differing views to different factions. So, for exam-
ple, the conflicting opinions about the relative superiority of the seed and the field in
determining the person to whom a son belongs are stated clearly (9.32-44).
Although stated less clearly, two views on primogeniture are presented at MDh
9.105-110 and 9-inf. Here the presence of the particle va ("or," "or rather") at the
beginning of 9.111, indicating an alternative that the author himself prefers, shows
that we are dealing with two opinions.70 The clearest attribution of opinions to
authorities is found at 3.16:
According to Atri and the son of Utathya, a man falls from his caste by
marrying a Sudra woman; according to Saunaka, by fathering a son
through her; and according to Bhrgu, by producing all his offspring
through her.
A clear example of an apparent contradiction where two viewpoints are juxta-
posed is found at 9.97-100:
68. See my discussion below (p. 44-46) of the three views presented in MDh 5.61-2.
69. See the various opinions on lawful marriages (3.23-6), on meat eating (5.28-56),
levirate (9.57-70), division of property and primogeniture (9.105-56), whether brothers
should live together or separately (9.104-11), and shares of a son by a Südr a wife (9.150-5).
See also Manu's denunciation of bride-price at 9.98-100 and its acceptance at 8.366, 369;
9-93-7, 204-5.
70. For this use of va as the preferred option, see Paul Kiparsky, Panini as a Variationist
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1979).


--- PAGE 42 ---
Introduction 
31
97If, after the bride-price has been paid for the girl, the man who paid
the price dies, she should be given to the brother-in-law, if she consents
to it. 98Even a SQdra should not take a bride-price when he gives his
daughter; for by accepting a bride-price, he is engaging in a covert sale
of his daughter.
99 That after promising her to one man, she is then given to another—
such a deed was never done by good people of ancient or recent times.
100The covert sale of a daughter for a payment under the name "bride-
price"—we have never heard of such a thing even in former genera-
tions.
We see here that verse 97 assumes the payment of a bride-price, a view rejected in
the very next verse. In verse 99, likewise, the bride-price is assumed; the father
takes money from one man and then gives the girl to another, thus getting two
payments. The next verse again inveighs against the practice of bride-price. One
cannot but assume that Manu is here deliberately pairing the two views.71
Contradictory positions on marrying a SQdra woman are, likewise, placed side by
side at 3.13-4:
«A SOdra may take only a SOdra woman as wife; a Vaisya, the latter
and a woman of his own class; a Ksatriya, the latter two and a woman of
his own class; and a Brahmin, the latter three and a woman of his own
class. H Not a single story alludes to a Brahmin or a Ksatriya taking a
SOdra wife even when they are going through a time of adversity.
Here, we may have not merely a juxtaposition of views but Manu actually siding
with the latter view. From the verses that follow, it becomes clear that Manu did not
approve of a Brahmin marrying a SQdra, even though this view is backed by ancient
authorities who permit hypergamous marriages to all classes.
We may be able here and in other instances to distinguish two voices of
Manu, the legal and the moral, which may also have contributed to apparent contra-
dictions. As a jurist he has to deal with the reality of social life and accepted cus-
tom; he has to decide whether certain actions are legal or not. It is apparent that he
accepted upper-class men marrying lower-class women, even SQdra women, as a
social fact. At 9.149-57, for example, in dealing with the practical matter of dividing
the paternal estate, Manu states what share the son born of a SQdra wife should re-
ceive. Nevertheless, dharma is not just law but also right living, and when he uses
the moral voice Manu often contradicts what he may have said within a legal con-
text. Even today, for example, opposition to birth out of wedlock (the moral posi-
tion) can exist side by side with legal and social provisions for the welfare and legal
status of illegitimate children. We see such a bifurcation in Manu's discussion of
permitted foods (5.4-26), where meat-eating is taken for granted. His discussion of
food at an ancestral offering (3.267-72) also presupposes meat. His discussion of
71. We see a similar juxtaposition of views at 9.122-26. The first view permits seniority
among sons born to wives of equal status, whereas the second view denies this and treats all
of them equally.


--- PAGE 43 ---
32 
Introduction
permitted foods, however, is followed by a long statement about the evils of meat
(5.27-55). Clearly, Manu here is not so much contradicting himself as providing two
sets of guidelines, the one traditional that includes meat, within which he provides
rules on permitted and prohibited animals, and the other reflecting the new morality
of vegetarianism. The moral tone is clearly brought out at the end of Manu's long
discussion on food (5.56):
There is no fault in eating meat, in drinking liquor, or in having sex; that
is the natural activity of creatures. Abstaining from such activity,
however, brings great rewards.
The most famous instance of contradiction is Manu's position on leviratic
union (niyoga), that is, the fathering of a son by a younger brother upon his dead
brother's widow,72 a contradiction already noted by Brhaspati. Niyoga was a long-
established practice in India and is recorded in all the Dharmasûtras. Manu himself
presupposes this practice, for example, in his discussion of partition (9.143-7,190).
At 9.57-63, moreover, he not only admits this practice but also lays down rules as to
how it should be carried out. In the very next breath, however, he opposes this prac-
tice vehemently (9.64-8). This contradiction does not lend itself to an easy resolu-
tion, but I think here also Manu is talking in two voices. He acknowledges the
traditional practice, provides rules for its proper implementation, and deals with the
legal rights of children born from such a union. Nevertheless, he abhors this custom
and calls it a bestial practice. He also preaches chastity to young widows; they do
not need children to attain happiness here or in the hereafter (5.158-60):
Aspiring to that unsurpassing Law of women devoted to a single hus-
band, she should remain patient, controlled, and celibate until her death.
Untold thousands of Brahmins who have remained celibate from their
youth have gone to heaven without producing offspring to continue their
family line. Just like these celibates, a good woman, though she be son-
less, will go to heaven when she steadfastly adheres to the celibate life
after her husband's death.
One other reason for apparent contradictions is the practice of using the best
argument to win a debate. We see Krsna using this sort of argumentation in the
Bhagavad Glta; you should do this for reason X, and if not for that then for reason
Y, even if X and Y are incompatible. Thus, with reference to the question "To
whom does a son belong?" Manu clearly sides with those who argue that a son be-
longs to the husband of the mother, just as the crop belongs not to the owner of the
seed but to the owner of the field (9.41-55). Manu, however, dislikes obtaining chil-
dren through surrogate fathers—a practice recognized within the doctrine of the
twelve kinds of son (9.158-60)—as demonstrated by his denunciation of leviratic
72. Although it is generally the younger brother, an older brother begetting a son on a
younger brother's widow is also recorded (see MDh 9.62). In the absence of a brother it is
possible for a close relative to be appointed for fathering a son. That this practice was
extended beyond the context of a person dying without issue is made clear in MDh 9.137,
where niyo¡>a is permitted even when a husband is impotent or sick.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Introduction 
33
union. All except the natural-born son, that is, a man's own biological son through
his legitimate wife, are viewed by Manu as surrogates. Within this context, the ar-
gument that a son belongs to (or takes after) the biological father, that the seed is
stronger than the field because different plants and trees grow in the same field from
different seeds, is a convenient argument, and Manu uses this at 9.181: "Those who
are designated here as sons because of congruity but who are born from another
man's seed belong only to the one from whose seed they were born and to no one
else."
In both ritual and legal texts, there are often two sets of rules, the one primary
(kalpa) and the other secondary (anukalpa). The primary rules are seen as the nor-
mal and the normative. In times of emergency and when it is impossible to follow
the primary rule due to lack of resources or ability, it is permitted to follow the sec-
ondary mode. Frequently, the secondary mode is associated with what has come to
be known as the "Law in times of adversity" (äpaddharmä).
 Sometimes, as at 3.147,
Manu clearly identifies the primary and the secondary methods. Indeed, at 11.30
Manu condemns a man who follows the secondary rule when he is able to follows
the primary: "When someone, though able to follow the principal mode, yet lives
according to the secondary mode, that fool will obtain no reward for it after death."
The two modes, however, are not always so clearly distinguished, and in those
situations the differing rules may seem to be contradictory.
A major reason for apparent contradiction, as well as for the many non-
sequiturs, that we detect in ancient Indian texts such as the MDh is the technique of
text production that I will call "anthologizing." Hacker (1961, 80) refers to the
"practice of juxtaposition, which is a primitive method of redaction, caused by the
desire to do equal justice to different traditions." In anthologizing, the author opts to
place material drawn from different sources side by side without much editorial in-
tervention or any serious attempt at reconciling differences among these textual ex-
tracts.73 I think the anthologizing technique without editorial comment is most
evident in texts composed in verse; in prose compositions, such as the
Dharmasütras, we see greater use of ascriptions and authorial intervention either to
accept or reject various views presented in the textual extracts. When textual ex-
tracts are presented in an anthological format, not only do contradictions among the
sources of these extracts become apparent; it is also difficult to interpret a particular
verse within the context of the surrounding verses which may come from different
sources.
A final reason for apparent contradictions may be found in the frequent use of
hyperbole in didactic literature. Early western scholars of the Vedas encountered
what they perceived as a problem: the vedic hymns take different gods to be the
highest. This went against their monotheistic presuppositions, as also against com-
mon logic. How could several gods in a pantheon be supreme at the same time?
Max Millier coined the word "henotheism" to account for this phenomenon. A quick
glance at the royal panegyrics (prasastis) of a millennium later is instructive. All
73. Doniger (1991, Iv) also thinks that Manu presents the traditions he has inherited,
"juxtaposing conflicting views and then adjudicating between them." Manu, however, juxta-
poses far more frequently than he adjudicates.


--- PAGE 45 ---
34 
Introduction
kings, from petty chieftains to Gupta emperors, are eulogized as conquerors of the
whole world. One would hardly expect the panegyrist to be accurate—he is a petty
king, a tributary to king X; he managed a couple of small-scale victories! That
would hardly do. Neither can you go to god X and say "You are in the third rank
below Y and Z. And by the way, will you give me a thousand cows?" Even in the
Catholic faith, where theological orthodoxy takes center stage, devotees of the
Virgin or St. Jude do not give theologically accurate descriptions of the powers of
their favorite saint; hyperbole is the norm. The vedic poets were no exception. This
form of rhetoric was recognized as an alankara, a poetic ornament, in Sanskrit aes-
thetics under the name atisayokti, hyperbole. In hyperbole, the literal is the enemy
of the true. As Gerow observes, a hyperbole contains a falsity but is so framed as to
open the door to a deeper truth:
A "skyscraper is so tall they had to put hinges on the two top stories so
to let the moon go by" [Carl Sandburg]. But of course it is not a falsity
that is capable of being detected in truth tables; for the falsity, the 'ex-
aggeration' is only apparent, only for effect. For the lie in the hyperbole
is so framed as to conceal a greater truth, and a truth urgently required
by the context; as these skyscrapers are the tallest things that man ever
built.74
The use of hyperbole in religious and didactic literature is clearly different
from its use in poetry. There is, however, one thing in common; neither can be taken
at face value or read literally without distorting the language, misunderstanding the
meaning, and producing interpretive monstrosities like "henotheism." In religious
literature we have statements that giving a cow to a learned Brahmin is worth one
thousand horse sacrifices, or bathing in a particular river is better than bathing ten
thousand times in the Ganges at Benares. In attempting to inculcate the virtue of
abstention from meat, Manu (5.53) says: "A man who abstains from meat and a man
who offers the horse sacrifice every year for a hundred years—the reward for their
meritorious acts is the same." In praising the life of a vedic student, Äpastamb a
(1.4.29) says: "A student who totally dedicates himself in this manner accomplishes
in that very state all the rites carrying rewards, as well as those that pertain to a
householder." An ascetic text wishes to promote the importance of giving food to
ascetics: "Even if a man gives the entire earth, it would not equal the merit of pre-
paring almsfood and giving it to a mendicant."75 No one expects such statements to
be taken literally; they are meant to eulogize certain lesser known practices and to
recommend their performance. Likewise, in didactic and legal literature a sin or
crime or a virtue or a good act is said to be the worst or the best. "Lack of generosity
is the gravest sin; generosity is the highest austerity," says Baudhäyan a (BDh
1.10.6). And Manu (4.224-5):
The gods once evaluated the food of a miserly vedic scholar and that of
a generous usurer and pronounced the two to be equal. Prajäpat i came
74. E. Gerow, Indian Poetics (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1977), p. 242.
75. Cited ¡n Yädav a Prakasa, Yatidharmasamuccaya, ed. P. Olivelle (Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1995), 6.314.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Introduction 
35
up to them and said, "Don't make equal what is unequal. The food of
the generous man is cleansed by the spirit of generosity, whereas the
other food is defiled by the lack of generosity."
When the topic is generosity, even a usurer is said to be better than a miser.
But when the topic is usury, it is a sin worse than even abortion: "Usury and abor-
tion were once weighed in a balance. The abortionist rose to the top, while the usu-
rer trembled" (BDh 110.23). It is impossible to think that these authors intended
their statements to be taken as literally true, just as it is not possible to think that
there is a device in the skyscrapers to let the moon pass. As in literature and poetry,
so in religious, didactic, and legal literature hyperbole is simply a literary device.
Failure to recognize this can only cause serious misinterpretation of texts. So, it is
not a contradiction when Manu (9.14-6), in warning husbands to guard their wives,
waxes eloquent on the evil tendencies inherent in women:
They pay no attention to beauty, they pay no heed to age; whether he is
handsome or ugly, they make love to him with the single thought, "He's
a man!" Lechery, fickleness of mind, and hard-heartedness are innate in
them; even when they are carefully guarded in this world, therefore,
they become hostile towards their husbands. Recognizing thus the
nature produced in them at creation by Prajâpati , a man should make the
utmost effort at guarding them.
and in urging men to respect women, he eulogizes them (9.26-8):
On account of offspring, a wife is the bearer of many blessings, worthy
of honor, and the light within a home; indeed, in a home no distinction
at all exists between a wife (sir/) and Srï , the Goddess of Fortune. She
begets children; and when they are born, she brings them up—day in,
day out, the wife, evidently, is the linchpin of domestic affairs. Off-
spring, rites prescribed by Law, obedient service,* the highest sensuous
delights, and procuring heaven for oneself and one's forefathers—all
this depends on the wife.
and warns against abusing them (3.56-8):
Where women are revered, there the gods rejoice; but where they are
not, no rite bears any fruit. Where female relatives grieve, that family
soon comes to ruin; but where they do not grieve, it always prospers.
When female relatives, not receiving due reverence, curse any house, it
comes to total ruin, as if struck down by witchcraft.
That some texts fall into the literary genre of hyperbole is not merely a modern and
anachronistic interpretation is demonstrated by an observation made by the com-
mentator Medhätithi . Commenting on MDh 1.107, which says that the Law in its
entirely is given in this text of Manu, Medhätith i remarks: "Therefore, to obtain the
knowledge of the Law there is no need to refer to any other texts. This is an hyper-
bolic eulogy."


--- PAGE 47 ---
36 
Introduction
I do not propose that all apparent contradictions in the MDh can be resolved
in these ways. Authors, even modern ones, do contradict themselves occasionally.
Further, the work of redactors down the centuries, which I discuss below (III), can-
not be completely detected. Changing norms and mores may have prompted some
of them to introduce opinions at variance with those expressed in the original text.
Language and Meter
There is nothing remarkable about the language of the MDh; it is mostly simple and
classical Sanskrit. The meter is the traditional sloka. There are, however, some lin-
guistic and metrical peculiarities that are of interest for the history of both the lan-
guage and the text.
In language, the area of greatest interest is the vocabulary. I will draw atten-
tion to the technical use of the two terms desa, as documentary evidence, and
pravasayati, as the execution of a criminal (see II.2). These terms do not occur in
any other dharma text and were probably borrowed from the Arthasästri c vocabu-
lary. Manu also uses the word avicärayan frequently. I think the usual meaning
given to it, "without hesitation," is correct in many contexts; it probably was used in
the sense of "not giving something a second thought." There are contexts, however,
especially within criminal justice, when it may have a more technical meaning of
inflicting a punishment without any judicial inquiry or process.76
A term not given in any standard Sanskrit dictionary is bhaktaka, found at
MDh 7.126. It appears that even some scribes had problems with this term and
changed it to the common vetaría; but the critical edition has adopted the former for
strong reasons, including the support of ancient commentators. It was probably a
technical term for a particular kind of wages given to a class of people in royal
service. It is derived in all likelihood from "food" or "rice" in the sense of the mod-
ern Indo-Ärya n word bhät "rice" and referred to wages paid in rice or other food-
stuffs, a meaning attested also in inscriptions.77
Another term with possible Prakritic influence is yäpya, found at 9.4 with the
meaning "to be reprimanded or censured." Here also the scribes have introduced the
easier term väcya. How yäpya came to acquire this meaning is unclear, but we have
modern Indo-Ärya n terms such as ¡abo "worthless, contemptible" in Nepali and
zäbar in Assamese.78
Manu also uses the interesting term pracära, which, as Scharfe (1993,195-
200) has demonstrated, means not land or pasture but activities, especially in the
Arthasästri c vocabulary. In addition to the evidence presented by Scharfe, the mean-
ing of "activities" is apparent in the juxtaposition of pracära and cestita at MDh
7.153 and 155. The old meaning of pracära was forgotten early on; even Kâtyâyan
a
76. See, for example, MDh 8.283; 9-270, 280.
77. D. C. Sircar's Indian Epigraphical Glossary (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1966) p.
49, gives bhaktagränia as a village granted to someone for his maintenance and bhaktädäya
as revenue in the form of rice.
78. See R. L. Turner, A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Äryan Languages (London:
Oxford University Press, 1969), 10476. For other occurrences of this term, see GDh 1323;
19.2; BDh 3.io.2;VaDh 15.19.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Introduction 
37
(884), in commenting on MDh 9.219, takes it to mean gopracara, the grazing
ground for cattle; this interpretation is followed by most medieval commentators.
Occasionally we come across sandhi irregularities, especially double sandhi
resorted to for metrical reasons: see 3_47b; ii.sgd; 12.590.
In most verses Manu follows the typical Pathyâ form of the Sloka meter; only
occasionally does a Vipulâ form intervene (see, for example, 9.196-7).
Nevertheless, on several occasions we have hypermetric pädas, most frequently the
first and the third; hypermeter never occurs in the second or fourth pädas, which
maintain their regular iambic cadence. Hypermetric third pädas are found in 3.10,
270, 284; 11.118; 12.32, and hypermetric first pädas in 2.156; 6.93; 8.133; 9.121, 225;
10.35; 11-199, 249 (also 3.228 in most mss.). In all these instances, we have several
variant readings where scribes have attempted to rectify the meter. In verse 2.201,
both first and third pädas are hypermetric. There and in 2.156,1 think, the pädas are
only apparently hypermetric. These pädas read:
parivädät
 kharo bhavati (2.2Oia)
paribhoktä krmir bhavati (2.2Oic)
na lena sthaviro bhavati (2.1563)
I believe that bhavati in these verses should be pronounced in the Prakritic manner
as bhoti with just two syllables. When so pronounced, the meter becomes a perfect
Pathyâ. 79 Manu uses the word bhavati frequently even as the final word of the first
or third pädas, and the meter scans without having to use Prakritic pronunciation.80
This may point to the fact that such hypermetric verses were actually common prov-
erbs, where Prakritic influence is more likely, cited by Manu, and not his own com-
position.
Other metrical irregularities are encountered occasionally. At 5.163 we have
pada-c ending in lake bhavati with a wrong cadence This irregularity appears to
have prompted several scribes to correct it with the reading sä bhavel lake and all
editors to adopt this reading. At 9.238b we have possibly a case of double sandhi.
1.4 The Socio-Political Background
If we assume that the MDh was composed during the first couple of centuries CE—
and I think this is a plausible assumption—then we may be able at least to speculate
about the social and political environment of the author and perhaps the motivations
for its composition. Recently similar questions have been raised with reference to
the Mahäbhärata,
 especially by Hiltebeitel (2001) in his new and significant book.
Fitzgerald (2004,120-1), in the introduction to his translation of the Sänti Parvan,
also sees the epic as a response to the times not too favorable to Brahmanical
privilege:
79. See the similar metrical problems created in the Katha Upanisad 3.5,6, 7, 8. The
reading of bhoti in these passages was first suggested by L. Aisdorf, "Contributions to the
Textual Criticism of the Kathopanisad," ZDMG 100 (1950): 621-37.
80. See MDh 3.50,275; 5.16356.80; 8.16459.22, 173, 302; 10.92; 11.38; 12.72.


--- PAGE 49 ---
38 
Introduction
It seems fair to conjecture that the emergence of the Mauryan empire
generally and Asoka's dharma campaign in particular were profound
challenges to many pious brahmins; and that these events may well have
been a strong stimulus to the creation, development, redaction, and
spreading of the apocalyptic Mahäbhärata
 narrative. This narrative de-
picted violent resistance to the kind "illegitimate" political power that
the Nandas, the Mauryans, and Asoka must have represented to some,
and it depicted a restoration of proper, brahmanya kingship, which un-
dertakes to use violence for the protection and support of brahmins.
I think the socio-political environment that prompted the composition of the
great epic was not too different from that of the MDh. The time frame and the geog-
raphy are more or less the same, and the authors of both works probably came from
the class of educated and somewhat conservative Brahmins intent on protecting the
rights and privileges of their class. They were composed after the collapse of the
Maurya empire in the 2nd century BCE. The last Maurya emperor, Brhadratha, was
assassinated by Pusyamitra, who inaugurated the Sunga dynasty.81 Historical mem-
ory considers Pusyamitra to have been a Brahmin, and his dynasty was viewed as
partial to Brahmin interests. The last Sunga was assassinated around 73BCE. There
followed the short-lived Känv a dynasty, also partial to Brahmin interests, that col-
lapsed in 28 BCE. Roughly during this period, the north-western border region of the
subcontinent was ruled by Greek-Bactrian kings. Although the history is somewhat
murky, around the turn of the millennium, possibly a bit earlier, a new political
force, the Sakas of Central Asian origin, emerged in the north-western borders and
swept across the north-western region of India proper. The Sakas were displaced by
the Kusânas , also from Central Asia, who extended their empire well into the
Gangetic heartland.
We can isolate at least three socio-political elements that provide the back-
ground to the composition of the MDh. i) The major element is certainly the histori-
cal reality and especially the historical memory of two or three centuries later of the
Maurya state and especially of the Asokan political, social, and religious reforms.82
Asoka was certainly a Buddhist; whether he was anti-Brahmanical is debatable. One
thing that his reforms did was to displace the Brahmin from his privileged position
within the social structure. The special relationship between the political power
(ksatrd) and the religious establishment (brahma) was broken. The Sanskrit com-
pound sramana-brähmana used frequently by Asoka in his inscriptions indicates
that his social philosophy envisaged a dual class of religious people worthy of re-
spect and support: the newly formed ascetic communities and the old Brahmin class.
81. The historical accuracy of a "Sunga dynasty" has been cast into some doubt recently
based on numismatic evidence by Shailendra Bhandare in his presentation to the conference
"Between the Empires" held at the University of Texas at Austin, April 10-12, 2003.
82. That such a memory continued to exist long after the demise of Asoka and the
Maurya empire is demonstrated by the Buddhist literature devoted to Asoka. See John Strong,
The Legend of King Asoka: A Study and Translation of the Asokavadana. Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press, 1983.


--- PAGE 50 ---
Introduction 
39
His prohibition of animal sacrifices,83 furthermore, undercut the very raison d'être
of Brahmanical privilege: the Brahmin's ability to perform sacrifices for the well-
being of society and for the furtherance of royal power symbolized principally in the
royal horse sacrifice. The very creation of a Brahmanical genre of literature dedi-
cated to dharma was possibly due to the elevation of this word to the level of
imperial ideology by Asoka (see II.i).
2) To add insult to injury, the Mauryas, as well as the Nandas who preceded
them, were considered at least within Brahmanical historical memory as Südras .
The usurpation of Ksatriya royal privileges by Südra s and the ensuing suppression
of Brahmins are presented as the sure signals of the corrupt times of the Kali age.
Such a political situation creates the mixture of varnas (varnasanikara), the most
serious social and moral corruption within Brahmanical ideology.
3) Finally, there was the contemporary political reality. There were the foreign
invasions first in the border regions of the northwest and then within the heartland
that established foreign rule (Parasher 1991). If we are correct in thinking that the
MDh was written during the Kushana period, then Manu was faced with almost a
new Maurya rule with the added dimension that these were also foreigners, Mlec-
chas. The Kushanas ruled a wide swath of northern India, and they also favored
Buddhism.
Reading the MDh one cannot fail to see and to feel the intensity and urgency
with which the author defends Brahmanical privilege. A major aim of Manu was to
reestablish the old alliance between brahma and ksatra, an alliance that in his view
would benefit both the king and the Brahmin, thereby reestablishing the Brahmin in
his unique and privileged position within society. We hear the repeated emphasis on
the inviolability of the Brahmin in his person and in his property. He has immunity
from the death penalty, from taxes, and from the confiscation of his property. The
king is advised repeatedly that a Brahmin's property is poison. Stealing a Brahmin's
gold is one of the five grievous sins, and the death penalty is imposed on the perpe-
trator. Devotion to Brahmins is a cardinal virtue of kings: "Refusal to turn back in
battle, protecting the subjects, and obedient service to Brahmins—for kings, these
are the best mean of securing happiness" (7.88). The reason why foreign ruling
classes, such as the Greeks, Sakas, Persians, and Chinese, have fallen to the level of
Südras , once again, is their lack of devotion to Brahmins: "By neglecting rites and
by failing to visit Brahmins, however, these men of Ksatriya birth have gradually
reached in the world the level of Südras " (10.43).
Brahmanical privilege is threatened from two quarters: the Südra , within
which class Manu often lumps all the lower classes of society, and the Mlecchas.
Now, it is true that even the Dharmasütras contain passages that are anti-Südra . It is
taken for granted that the sole duty of Südra s is to serve the upper classes; penalties
for killing a Sudra are much less than for killing people of the upper classes; like-
wise, penalties are increased for guilty Südras ; the list could go on. Yet we also see
that Südra s acted as cooks in Brahmin households. Äpastamb a (2.28.11, 15) even
83. See Rock Edict i: hidä nä kichi jive alabhitu pajohitaviye; Sanskrit: ilia na kascit
jlvah älabhya prahotavyah. The term prahotavya has clear reference to Brahmanical sacri-
fice.


--- PAGE 51 ---
40 Introduction
says that one may learn aspects of dharma from Sudras. There is a virulence in
Manu's rhetoric vis-à-vi s Sudras that appears to indicate that there must be a subtext
to it. How could the lowest class of society with little access to material resources
pose such a threat to social order and to Brahmanical hegemony? The fear of the
Sudra contrasts sharply with Manu's view of Vaisyas. These are dealt with in a dis-
passionate and straightforward way. Why were Vaisyas, who are depicted as agri-
culturists and traders, that is, people with resources, not a threat to the brahma-
ksatra alliance that Manu was attempting to forge and strengthen? At one level, I
think, historical memory is at work here; Sudras were once in power and posed a
real threat to Brahmanical hegemony, and history can always repeat itself. There is
also the belief highlighted in the Mahäbhärata
 with the story of Parasu-Rama that
there are no true Ksatriyas in the world any more; they are all Sudras.84
"Sudra" for Manu, I think, is often a code word; it identifies the enemy and it
encompasses a wide cross-section of society, both past and present. It evoked the
memories of bad old days; it heightened the anxiety that what happened under the
Mauryas could be repeated. I also think that there was a contemporary threat to
Brahmanical supremacy not so much from political power but from rival religious
establishments, especially the Buddhist and the Jain monks. I think Manu includes
these within his code "Sudra." The connection between Sudras and non-Brahmani-
cal ascetic sects is drawn by Manu himself. In his advice regarding a Brahmin's
residence, Manu (4.61) says:
na südraräjye
 nivasen nädhärmikajanävrte
 I
na päsandijanäkränte
 nopasrste 'ntyajair nrbhih II
He should not live in a kingdom ruled by a Sudra, teeming with un-
righteous people, overrun by people belonging to heretical ascetic sects,
or swamped by lowest-born people.85
Here we have a clear juxtaposition between a kingdom ruled by a Sudra king and a
region populated by päsandins, a generic term that refers to heterodox ascetics,
principally Buddhist and Jain, by lowest-born people, and by unrighteous men. In-
deed, Manu's instruction (9.225) to the king about cleansing his kingdom of danger-
ous people includes men who belong to heretical sects (pasando). The strength of
Buddhism in the northwestern regions during this period and the patronage offered
to them by what for Manu were Mleccha kings may also have influenced the con-
nection between heretic and Sudra/Mleccha.
Alongside Sudras, we have the Mlecchas. Manu is cognizant of the regions
occupied by the foreign barbarians, for at 2.23 he defines the areas outside the cen-
tral Äryävart
a as the region of Mlecchas. Manu, however, does not have much to
say about the Mlecchas in the rest of the book; his focus is on the Sudras. Or, is the
code "Sudra" meant also to encompass these other outsiders as well? Note that at
84. See also 10.129 (against Südra s accumulating wealth); 8.22 (against having too many
Südra s in a kingdom); and 3.178 (against Brahmins who do ritual work for Südras) . That
some Südra s (possibly foreign ruling classes) were wealthy is hinted at by Manu's adage at
11.34 that a Südra' s power lies in wealth.
85. According to a variant reading, he should not live in a region overrun by ascetic or-
ganizations or groups (päsandigana).


--- PAGE 52 ---
Introduction 
41
10.44 Manu presents the Mleccha groups such as Yavana, Saka, and Clna as sunk to
the level of Südras , although they were Ksatriyas by birth.
The ideology that drives Manu, I think, explains the plan of his book. As we
will see (II. 2), he devotes 1034 verses (38.6%) to the discussion of the Brahmin and
971 verses (36%) to matters relating to the king; these two take up 74.8% of the en-
tire text.86 Manu's agenda is two-fold: he wants to tell Brahmins how to behave as
true Brahmins devoted to vedic learning and virtue, and he wants to tell kings how
to behave as true kings, devoted to Brahmins and ruling the people justly. For this
agenda he brings the authority of no less a person than the Creator himself, who is
presented as the absent author of the text.
II. SOURCES OF MANU
The Traditions of dharma and artha
The MDh presents itself as a sastra both in the prelude to the work at 158-9 and in
the colophons that conclude each chapter: iti mänave dharmasästre. The term sastra
has no exact parallel in English (see IV). It may refer to a system or tradition of ex-
pert knowledge in a particular field, that is, to a science. It refers especially, how-
ever, to the textualized form ofthat science, that is, to an authoritative compendium
of knowledge signaling a breakthrough achievement within the history of that tradi-
tion and serving as a point of reference to subsequent investigations within that
tradition. To use Pollock's (igSgb, 301) felicitous expression, sastras are "cultural
grammars" that both reflect and regulate practice (prayoga). Examples of such
written sastras are found in almost every field, such as grammar, medicine, politics,
erotics, dramaturgy, and poetics.87 A sastra may present new material and present
the material in new ways; but essentially it is a crystallization of a long tradition of
accumulated knowledge. Consequently, the author of any sastra drew on materials
from his predecessors. The MDh was no exception.
Given the elasticity of the concept of dharma and its broad semantic compass,
the MDh drew on not one but at least two expert traditions: the one relating the
dharma proper and the other centered on artha, viz., statecraft, polity, and the legal
process.
An identifiable expert tradition of reflection, teaching, and textual composi-
tion focused on the broad and somewhat ill-defined field represented by dharma
existed in India for a period of at least three to four centuries prior to the composi-
tion of the MDh. The earliest texts of this tradition, composed in prose aphorisms,
were the Dharmasutras. The four extant texts of this tradition,88 the sütras ascribed
to Äpastamba , Baudhäyana , Gautama, and Vasistha, contain the names of numerous
other experts and their conflicting views on a variety of issues. This evidence points
86. The percentage will be even higher if we exclude what I believe are sections that are
later interpolations (below part III).
87. A lucid and penetrating study of the idea of sastra is given in Pollock 19893.
88. For the edition and translation, with a discussions of their dates, see Olivelle igggb
and 2000.


--- PAGE 53 ---
42 
Introduction
both to a vibrant and contentious intellectual tradition and to a rich literature, much
of which, unfortunately, is now lost. The composition of the MDh has to be located
within this tradition.
That a similar expert tradition relating to artha existed prior to the MDh is
also certain. It is, however, more difficult to delineate the early history of artha, be-
cause only one text that has any claim to antiquity, Kautalya's Arthasästra, has sur-
vived. It is clear that for his discussion of statecraft and law in chapters 7-9 Manu
depended on the artha tradition; much of this material has no precedent in the older
Dharmasutras.
II.i The dharma Tradition
It is impossible to determine with any degree of accuracy the early chronology of
the expert tradition on dharma. The term itself is very old, occurring in the Rgveda
and other early vedic texts. Its precise meaning within those contexts, especially in
the hymns of the Rgveda, is not altogether clear.89 That some speculation about
rules of ethical behavior, conventions regarding social conduct, and the judicial
process should have taken place during the vedic times is clear.90 What is less clear
is when an identifiable expert tradition came into being. Some of the dates proposed
by Kane (1962-75) and others for the Dharmasutras, I think, are far too early.
As I have shown elsewhere (Olivelle, forthcoming-a, -c), dharma was not a
central term in the ritual or theological vocabulary of the middle and late vedic
texts. It occurs less frequently in the Brâhmana s and Upanisads than we would have
predicted for a term that was to become the central concept of Indian civilization. Its
semantic range is also restricted, occurring mostly within the royal vocabulary and
relating to the king's function of maintaining law and order in society. The term
does not play a central role even in the post-vedic ritual texts, the Srautasütras and
Grhyasütras. My hypothesis is that the term gained popularity and was given a new
theological definition when it was taken over by the new religions emerging in the
Gangetic valley, especially by Buddhism; dharma became the central concept
within these religions, defining the essence of their theology and way of life. The
term was given even a greater boost when it was made the defining concept in the
political ideology of the Maurya empire, certainly by Asoka and possibly by his
father and grandfather, in the first half of the third century BCE.
I think that the Brahmanical focus on the same term should be seen against
this background and as a response to its appropriation by their rivals for religious
authority and political patronage. After Asoka no one could ignore the term.
If this time-line is correct, then the earliest Brahmanical works on dharma
could not have been composed long before 300 BCE, most probably after that date.
89. For the best study thus far of the early history of the term dharma, see Horsch 1967.
A collection of studies on the history of dharma in various intellectual and religious traditions
and in different time periods is being edited by me and is forthcoming in the Journal of
Indian Philosophy.
90. See, for example, Stephanie Jamison's several studies on the vedic precedents of
Dharmasästri c prescriptions: 1997, 1998, 2000.


--- PAGE 54 ---
Introduction 
43
That still leaves roughly three, may be even four, centuries for the tradition to de-
velop and mature before we come to Manu; that is a long period of time. It need not
take, as some early Indologists appear to assume, two hundred years for anything
new and significant to come about in ancient India.
The first products of Brahmanical reflections on dharma were closely con-
nected to the vedic säkhäs.
 After the composition of the middle and late vedic texts,
literary activities of the säkhäs
 focused on the ritual, both on the solemn vedic sacri-
fices (srauta), which were probably becoming increasingly rare, and on the more
common domestic rites (grhya). These productions adopted the aphoristic sütra
style that was in vogue. It was natural for the Brahmanical scholars to apply the
same genre to its literature on dharma, a term that also had ritual connotations
within Brahmanical thought. Collectively, the Srauta-, Grhya-, and Dharma-sütras
were included in the new category of texts, the Kalpasutra.91 It is, however, unclear
whether every Dharmasütra was attached to a Kalpa. In the post-Mauryan period, it
appears that the production of knowledge within Brahmanism with its strong apolo-
getic dimensions became less confined to säkhäs.
 The sütras of a particular säkhä
was authoritative only within its confines. The post-Mauryan world brought theo-
logical and political challenges that needed united efforts rather than the splintered
responses of the säkhä
 system.92 The notion of a single dharma for all Brahmins
was taking hold; several developments within the dharma tradition itself bear
witness to this.
One such development related to sacred geography. As Jayaswal (1930, 29-
32) has observed, the origin of the notion of Ä ryävarta probably goes back to the
time of Pusyamitra, the founder of the Sunga dynasty, in the middle of the second
century BCE, and possibly coincided with his realm (but see above fn. 81).
Ä ryävarta was the region where Brahmins followed the dharma in an exemplary
manner and where correct Sanskrit was spoken. The practices of this regions
become normative for all. This concept does not occur in the early Dharmasutras of
Äpastamb a and Gautama, appearing for the first time in Patañjali's Mahäbhäsya
and the Dharmasutras of Baudhäyan a and Vasistha.93 It is taken over and expanded
by Manu, with the addition of further and more restricted sacred geographies
labeled brahmävarta, brahmarsidesa, and madhyadesa (MDh 2.17-24). More
importantly, as we have seen, it was this period following the Maurya political
ideology—an ideology that displaced the Brahmins from their privileged position
and placed them on an equal footing with other religious virtuosi, the Sramanas—
that saw a re-assertion of the unique position of the Brahmins and their special
relationship to the king and the political authority. The symbiotic relationship
91. It is unclear when the term Kalpasutra first came to be used with reference to these
three classes of texts. Böhtling k and Roth do not give any reference in their dictionary.
92. Later Mïmâms â developed the theory that texts of each säkhä
 is authoritative with
respect to all säkhäs,
 thus providing the basis for the supra-säkh ä Veda. This theory is ar-
ticulated in the maxim säkhäntarädhikarananyäya
 or sarvasäkhäpratyayanyäya,
 and pre-
sented in the Pürva-Mwmmsäsütra,
 2.4.9. See, Kane (1962-75) IV: 453.
93. See, Patañjali on Pânin i 2.4.20 and 6.3.109; BDh 1.2.9; VaDh 1.8-12. For a
discussion of these passages, see Olivelle 2000,10.


--- PAGE 55 ---
44 
Introduction
between brahma and ksatra was being reestablished.94 This was the time, as
Hiltebeitel (2001) and Fitzgerald (2004) have shown, that saw the creation of the
two epics, a new genre of literature in India with a universal and supra-säkhä
appeal.
One Dharmasütra that was conceived as a sastra with a universal application
and unattached to a säkhä
 was the Gautama Dharmasütra. Unattached as it was to a
larger Kalpasutra, Gautama's sütra may have been conceived as a true sastra in the
manner of Pänini' s grammar, another sastra that was not confined to a particular
säkhä.
 As I have argued elsewhere (Olivelle, 2000), Gautama is not the oldest
extant Dharmasütra. It shows clear signs of a maturing tradition, especially in its
handling of legal procedure. I have also shown (Olivelle, forthcoming-b) that
Gautama exerted strong influence on Manu; the numerous textual parallels between
the two texts could not be accidental.95 It is clear that the Gautama Dharmasütra
was an important source in the composition of the MDh. I will present here just two
examples of Manu's dependence on Gautama.
MDh 2.6 
GDh 1.1-2
vedo 'khilo dharmamülam smrtistte ca 
vedo dharmamülam tadvidäm ça
tadvidäm I MDh 
smrtisïle I
The root of dharma is the entire 
The root of dharma is the Veda, and
Veda, and the tradition and practice 
the tradition and practice of those
of those who know the Veda. 
who know the Veda.
The dependence of Manu on Gautama here is evident; the addition of (a)khilo in
pada-a and the change in word order in pada-b convert the prose into a sloka. What
is less clear, however, is whether the sütra of Gautama itself is a prose rendering of
a verse original. No other dharma text has a formulation quite like this.
One of the most significant parallels occurs in the section on impurity caused
by the birth of a child. The vulgate version of the MDh 5.61-2 contains two verses,
and they are supported by most manuscripts:
yathedam sävam asaucam sapindesu vidhïyate I
janane 'py evam eva syän nipunam suddhim icchatam II 61II
sarvesäm sävam äsaucam mätäpitros
 tu sütakam l
sütakam mätur eva syäd upasprsya pita sucih II 62 II
As this period of death-impurity is prescribed for those who belong to
the same ancestry, so the same holds true at a birth for those who desire
perfect purity. Death-impurity affects all, but birth-impurity affects only
the mother and the father. The mother alone is subject to the period of
birth-impurity; the father becomes pure by bathing.
94. Gautama is explicit: "The Brahma united with the Ksatra upholds the gods, ances-
tors, and human beings" (brahma ksatrena prktam devapitrmanusyan dhärayati).
95. See, for example: GDh 1.28 =MDh 5.143; GDh2.u = MDh 2.101; GDh 2.46 = MDh
2.73; GD/no.36-7 = MDh 8.30; GDh 12.15-7 = MDh 8.337-8; GDh 12.30, 34-5 = MDh
8.153; GDh 12.37 = MDh 8.147-8; GDh 14.22 = MDh 5.81; GDh 15.16 = 3.150; GDh 15.18 =
MDh 3.i58;GD/î28.i- 3 = MDh 9.104-5. See also the use of the term uddhära for both the
preemptive share of the oldest brother in partitioning ancestral property and the king's
preemptive share when dividing war booty: MDh 7.97 and GDh 10.21.


--- PAGE 56 ---
Introduction 
45
In the critical edition, the podas given in bold are retained and the rest is omitted,
resulting in a single verse:
janane 'py evam eva syän mätäpitros
 tu sütakam l
sütakam mâtur eva syâd upasprsya pitä sucih II
The same holds true at a birth. The birth-impurity, however, affects only
the mother and the father. The mother alone is subject to the period of
birth-impurity; the father becomes pure by bathing.
The first half-verse of 61 was probably introduced by a later editor into the text of
Manu. The likely reason for its introduction was the intervention of verse 60, which
defines sapinda, between verses 59 and 61, thus breaking the natural continuity be-
tween the latter two. The significant pädas a-b of verse 59 define the period of im-
purity at the death of a relative: dasäham sävam asaucam sapindesu vidhlyate —"a
ten-day period of death-impurity is prescribed for those who belong to the same an-
cestry." If this verse came immediately before, then evam in the phrase janane 'py
evam of verse 61 becomes clear; the period of impurity after a birth is the same as
that after a death. The intervention of verse 60 prompted a later editor to insert
pädas a-b of verse 61, making the connection between 61 and 59 explicit. A similar
commentarial intrusion occurs in the parallel passage of the Vasistha Dharmasütra
(4.16-22) between sütra 16 (which is identical to Manu 5.59 pädas a-b) and sütra 20
(which is identical to Manu 61 pädas c-d). But in Vasistha, because the commen-
tarial portion is in prose, the connection between the verses 16 and 20 remains trans-
parent.
Both Manu and Vasistha, however, are dependent on Gautama 14.14-6. This
section of Gautama on impurity begins with the determination of the time of impu-
rity following a death (4.1-12). The section begins: sävam äsaucam dasarätram
anrtvigdïksitabrahmacarinam sapindänäm
—"there is a ten-night period of death-
impurity for those belonging to the same ancestry, except an officiating priest, one
consecrated for a sacrifice, and a vedic student"—a provision that parallels Manu
5.59 and Vasistha 4.16. This section in Gautama concludes (4.13) with a brief defini-
tion of sapinda. Then Gautama (14.14-6) deals with impurity resulting from the
birth of a child, two causes of impurity generally treated together in the sastras:
janane 'py evam I 
The same holds true at a birth.
mätäpitros
 tat I 
It affects the father and the mother.
mâtur va I 
Or just the mother.
It is evident that Gautama is giving here three opinions regarding impurity resulting
from childbirth. The first treats it exactly the same as impurity resulting from a
death. The second restricts it to the parents of the newborn child. The third restricts
it even further to just the mother. That these were opposing views is made clear in
the parallel version of Vasistha (4.20-2), which adds reasons for the three opinions
(given below in italics):
janane 'py evam eva syä n nipunäm suddhim icchatäm l
mâtâpitro
r va bïjanimittatvât
 I
mâtu r ity eke — [after which a verse is cited in support of this view]


--- PAGE 57 ---
46 
Introduction
The same holds true at a birth for those who desire perfect purity.
Or it affects the father and the mother, because [the birth] is caused by
the seed.
Or just the mother, according to some.
The same three opinions are found in Manu 5.61-2, but they are difficult to discern
because of the expansion of an original single verse into two. When we look at the
single verse of the critical edition, we see the same three opinions clearly stated:
janane 'py evam eva syan
mätäpitros
 tu sütakam l
sütakam mätur eva syäd upasprsya pita sucih II
Stripped of their commentarial accretions, the textual dependence of both
Manu and Vasistha on Gautama becomes clear.
The inquiry into the possible connections between the MDh and the Dharma-
sütras has a long history. It was Max Müller , in a letter to one Mr. Morley on July
29, 1849, who suggested for the first time that the MDh may have been a recast in
verse of an ancient prose Mänava Dharmasütra. The hypothesis received strong
support from Georg Bühle r (1879-82,1886), the renowned translator of the four
Dharmasütras and of the MDh in the influential series Sacred Books of the East.
Even though there was a Mänav a ritual tradition and we have a Srauta- and a
Grhya-sütra of the Mänavas , there is no evidence that a Mänava Dharmasütra ever
existed. After strong opposition from Jayaswal (1930) and especially from Kane
(1962-75, 1:143-49, 317)). the hypothesis of an early Mänava Dharmasütra has
been largely abandoned by scholars (Lingat 1973, 89). Whether the author of the
MDh belonged to the Mänav a tradition, however, is unclear; there does not appear
to be any direct link between the MDh and the ritual sütras of that tradition. That
there was a connection between the MDh and the Maiträyan a sâkhâ,
 to which the
Mänav a tradition belongs, appears more likely and has been recently argued by
Jamison (2000). The MDh, as I have attempted to show, was an original work of a
gifted author; it was neither a recast nor a text that evolved through numerous and
progressive accretions. However, it is also clear that Manu used the material found
in the Dharmasütra tradition, especially the text of Gautama, in composing his text.
II.2 The artha Tradition
Unlike the Dharmasutras, the MDh devotes a proportionately larger segment to
matters relating to statecraft (râjadharma), law, and legal procedure (vyavahâra),
topics generally viewed as falling within the purview of Arthasästra. The
Äpastamba Dharmasütra, for example, devotes 83 (6%) of its 1364 sütras to state-
craft and law, and the Gautama Dharmasütra 115 (11.8%) of its 973 sütras!* The
MDh, on the other hand, allots 971 (36%) of its 2680 verses to statecraft and law,
96. The Dharmasütraa deal with sons and inheritance separately, whereas the MDh in-
cludes this topic within its section on legal procedure. If we include these sections, still
Äpastamba' s section rises to only 115 sütras (8.4%) and Gautama's to 162 (17.7%).


--- PAGE 58 ---
Introduction 
47
only slightly smaller than the section devoted to the Brahmin, which consists of
1034 verses (38.6%). The difference shrinks even further when we account for the
fact that much of what is discussed in the section on the Brahmin (chapters 2-6) ap-
plies equally to other twice-born individuals. The MDh thus represented a watershed
in the development of the expert tradition of dharma, as it co-opted material that
belonged to the expert tradition of artha.
The tradition of artha, then, is a second textual source in the composition of
the MDh. Although only one treatise of the artha tradition has survived, the one as-
cribed to Kautalya, it refers to opinions of several other schools, including one re-
ferred to as Mânava . What, if any, connection there was between the artha school of
the Mânava s and the author of the MDh is impossible to determine.97 What is clear,
however, is the connection between some verses of the MDh and the extant
Arthas'astm.9* Given the problems inherent in the dating of these two texts, it is not
possible to assert with high degree of confidence who is borrowing from whom. I do
agree with Kangle, however, that it is most likely that at least sections of the
Arthasastra are older than Manu and are the source for some of the passages and
vocabulary I will discuss below.99 The vocabulary analysis does not support Jolly's
(1923) and Fezas's (1996) contention that the AS is contemporaneous with the late
smrti texts of Yäjnavalky a and Närada. 1(K)
We find a close parallel, both textual and with regard to vocabulary, between
MDh 8.52-7 and Arthasastra 3.1.19, especially in the use of the term des'a for docu-
mentary evidence (italicized in the translation):
Manu
apahnave 'dhamarnasya dehïty uktasya samsadi I
abhiyoktä dised desam karanam vänyad uddiset II 52II
adesam yas ca disati nirdisyäpahnute ca yah I
yas cadharottardn arthân vigïtân nâvabudhyate II 53 II
apadisyàpadesyam ca punar yas tv apadhävati \
samyak pranihitam cârtham prstah san nâbhinandati II 54 II
asambhàsye sâksibhis ça dése sambhâsate mithah I
nirucyamânam prasnam ca necched yas capi nispatet II 55 II
bruhlty uktas ca na brüyäd
 uktam ca na vibhâvayet I
na ca pûrvâparam vidyât tasmad art hat sa hïyate II 56 II
jnâtârah
 santi mety uktvâ disety ukto disen na yah I
dharmasthah kâranair etair hïnam tant api nirdiset II 57 II
97. Jayaswal (193, 23) thinks that there was no connection, because opinions contrary to
those ascribed to the Mänava s in the Arthasastra and the MBh are recorded in the MDh.
98. For discussions of the relationship between the two texts, see Sternbach 1959, 1963;
Derretí 1973, 11; 1976-78, I: 120-39.
99. For the dating of the AS, see Trautmann 1971, 185-86; Kangle 1964, and 1963-65, III:
80-83. See also my earlier comments (1.2) about the absence of reference to gold coins in
the AS, making it likely that itjs earlier than the MDh.
100. For example, the AS does not use the term divya for ordeal or lekhya for a legal
document, terms common in the YDh and NSm.


--- PAGE 59 ---
48 
Introduction
52 When the debtor, told in court to pay up, denies the charge, the
plaintiff should produce a document or offer some other evidence.
53 When the plaintiff produces something that is not documentary evi-
dence [or a false document]; produces and then disavows it; does not re-
alize that his earlier points contradict the ones he makes subsequently;
54 states his case and then backs away from it; does not acknowledge
under questioning a point that has been clearly established; 55 secretly
discusses with witnesses a document which is prohibited from being
discussed; objects to a question clearly articulated; retreats; sodoes not
speak when he is ordered "Speak!"; does not prove what he asserts; and
does not understand what goes before and what after—such a plaintiff
loses his suit. 57 When a plaintiff says "I have people who know," but
when told "Produce them" does not produce them, the judge should de-
clare him also the loser for these very reasons.
Arthasastra
(a) nibaddham Madam utsrjyänyam vâdam samkramati, (b) pürvo-
ktam pascimenarthena nâbhisamdhatte, (c) paravâkyam anabhi-
grähyam abhigmhyavatisthate, (d) pratijnäya desam nirdisetyukte na
nirdisali, (e) hmadesam adesam vä nirdisati, (f) nirdistäd desäd
anyam desam upasthapayati, (g) upasthite dése 'rthavacanam
naivam ity apavyayate, (h) säksibhir avadhrtam necchati, (i) asam-
bhäsye dese säksibhir mithah sambhäsate, (j) iti paroktahetavah II
3-1.19
(a) When someone casts aside the plaint as recorded and moves on to
another plaint; (b) does not make a point made later accord with what
was stated before; (c) after challenging an unchallengeable statement of
the opponent, remains (stubborn); (d) promises to produce a document,
but when told "Produce it," does not produce it; (e) produces a defective
document or something that is not documentary evidence [or a false
document}; (f) puts forward a document different from the document
specified; (g) denies a significant statement in the document he has put
forward, saying "It is not so"; (h) does not accept what has been ascer-
tained through witnesses; (i) secretly discusses with witnesses a docu-
ment which is prohibited from being discussed; (j) these are the reasons
for loss of suit.
Both the passages contain the obscure and obsolete word desa. As I have shown in
the notes to the translation of MDh 5.53-5, this was probably an ancient term for
documentary evidence presented in a court of law, a term that was later displaced by
the more common lekhya. Manu's discussion is longer and includes items not noted
by the Arthasastra; but the connection between the two passages is unmistakable.
The closest parallels are Manu 52-3 and AS (d)-(f), Manu 54 (podas c-d) and AS
(g), and Manu 55 (pädas a-b) and AS (i). As Kangle (1964) has pointed out, it is


--- PAGE 60 ---
Introduction 
49
only in this passage that Manu uses the term dharmastha for a judge; elsewhere, he
consistently uses the termprädviväka.
Kangle (1964) gives further examples of textual parallels. The definition of
sähasa (robbery) is nearly identical in the two, and it is obvious that Manu has bor-
rowed this either from Kautalya or from another text of the artha tradition:
sähasam tv anvayavat prasabham karma yat krtam II
niranvayam bhavet steyam hrtväpavyayate ca yat II MDh 8.332
When an act is committed with force and in the presence of the victim,
it is "violence"; when it is committed outside his presence, it is "theft,"
and so is an act that someone commits and then denies.
sähasam anvayavat prasabhakarma niranvaye steyam apavyaya-
ne ca II AS 3.17.1-2
When an act is committed with force and in the presence (of the victim),
it is "violence"; when it is committed outside his presence, it is "theft,"
and also when it is denied.
Another significant parallel in the vocabularies of the MDh and the AS is the
term praväsayet. Its normal meaning is to send someone into exile. As I have shown
in the note to MDh 8.123, Manu frequently uses this term in its technical Artha-
sâstri c meaning of putting someone to death; the term may have been used first as
an euphemism for executing ("getting rid of) a criminal, a kind of euphemism
common in even modern military vocabulary.101 There is also the unusual term
prakrta for an appointed official of the king, a term that is likely borrowed from the
Arthasästri c vocabulary.1CG
The most important influence of the artha tradition on the MDh is the incor-
poration of the "Grounds for Litigations" (vyavaharapada). Legal matters were
dealt with in a disorganized manner in the Dharmasütras. Hence, it is highly un-
likely that the organizing of the material under 18 vyavahärapadas was accom-
plished within the dharma tradition. It is much more probable that this classification
was achieved by the scholars of the artha tradition, law and legal procedure being a
central focus of their labors. The author of the MDh probably borrowed this classifi-
catory system, as well as the material presented within it, from the artha tradition.
The classification of the vyavahärapadas in the MDh and the extant Arthasästra,
however, are so different from each other that it is unlikely that the former borrowed
from the latter. The first two vyavahärapadas in the Arthasästra, for example, deal
with the rules governing the relationship between husband and wife and the parti-
tion of property, whereas in the MDh family law is treated last. The Arthasästra,
moreover, has as the final category the "Miscellaneous" (praklrnaka), which is
101. See MDh 8.123, 332; 9.242, 289. For the Arthasästra references, see 1.18.21; 4.13.8,
20; 11.1.33, 47', 12.4.4. See also Kangle's comment on 4.13.8. Kangle correctly interprets this
term to mean execution. Indeed, Medhätith i (on 8.284) calls this meaning an Arthasästri c us-
age (arthasästrayä).
 Given the double meaning of the term, it is unclear which of the two is
applicable in some places: see, for example, MDh 7.124:10.96. See also 9.2421! where both
Bhâruc i and Medhätith i gloss praväsana with vadha.
102. See my note to the translation of MDh 8.11.


--- PAGE 61 ---
50 
Introduction
absent in the MDh but found in the later Dharmasästras, such as those of
Yajnavalkya and Närada. 103
The Dharmasutras deal with the relationship between husband and wife, the
classification of sons, and the partition of property within their sections on marriage.
The MDh is the first text to include these discussions within the section of judicial
procedure and litigation, clearly indicating the influence of the artha tradition. This
is, moreover, one reason why the MDh deals with matters relating to family and
women in two places, once under marriage in chapter 5, and again under the loth
vyavahärapada in chapter 9.10*
III. THE WORK OF RED ACTORS
After it leaves the hands of the author, every text assumes an independent life. This
is especially true in the case of texts published before the advent of printing. These
pre-modern texts continue their life as they are copied by hand, read, studied, inter-
preted, and commented on by succeeding generations of scribes, readers, and schol-
ars. It is this after-life of a text that a critical edition uncovers through the collation
of manuscripts and presents to the reader in its critical apparatus. This aspect of a
critical edition is as important as its better known feature of attempting to recon-
struct the text as composed by the author.1()5
Both these aspects—the original text and the after-life—laid out in the text
and the critical apparatus of the edition presuppose that changes are introduced into
the author's text by those responsible for its after-life. Some of these changes are
inadvertent, such as scribal errors and misreadings; others are deliberate, such as the
different but equally cogent and intelligible readings found in different recensions
and the additional verses found in numerous manuscripts. These changes introduced
into the text and detectable through the examination of the extant manuscripts and
commentaries can be identified and moved to the critical apparatus, thus restoring
the text. The manuscript and other evidence we possess, however, often do not
cover the entire period from today to the time of the author. In the case of the MDh,
we pick up the textual history midstream, at least several centuries after its compo-
sition.
Native scholars as far back as Bhâruc i challenged the authenticity of individ-
ual verses. Bharuci, for example, rejects the authenticity of 9.93, calling it a verse
103. See above p. 14 for a comparison of the vyavahärapadas in these four texts.
104. For other parallels between the MDh and AS see: MDh 7.99,101 and AS 1.4.3 (see
Scharfe 1993, 46-7); MDh 7.105 and AS 1.1560; MDh 7.205 and AS 6.2.6-12; MDh 7.161 and
AS 7.4.4-7; MDh 8.87-101 and AS Z-H34-37! MDh 8.242 and AS 3.10.24 MDh 8.279 and
AS 3.19.8; MDh 8.299-300 and AS 3.3.8-9; MDh 9.153 and AS 3.6.17; MDh 8.224^and AS
3.15.14; MDh 8.159 and AS 3.169; MDh 8.332 and AS 3.17.1-2; MDh 8.^367 and AS 4.12.3;
MDh 9.271 and AS 4.11.9; MDh 9.277 and AS 4.10.1; MDh 9.280 and AS 4.11.7; MDh 9.282
and AS 2.36.26-7; MDh 9.294-5 and AS 8.1.19; MDh 11.14 and AS 3.1437; MDh 11.14 and AS
3-14-37-
105. For a discussion, see the Introduction to the Critical Edition in Part II of this book
under "Constitution of the Text."


--- PAGE 62 ---
Introduction 
51
from another smrti. Medhâtith i also records this opinion: kecid ähuh amänavo 'yam
slokah. Clearly there were ongoing debates with regard to the authentic text of
Manu. We also find that scribes or scholars introduced deliberate changes into the
text. At 9.299, for example, the reading ärabheta tatah käryam samcintya guru-
läghavam is deliberately changed in the manuscripts of the ST into gurulaghavato
jnätvä
 tatah käryam samäcarel.
If the later tradition of readers and copyists introduced changes, it is fair to as-
sume that earlier generations did so too. Any such changes that were taken over by
the extant manuscript tradition cannot be identified by the normal methods em-
ployed in the critical constitution of texts. These methods are thus called "lower
criticism"; they are dependent on extant manuscripts, citations, commentaries, and
the like. The text constituted by these methods can only be an approximation to the
original text as written by the author.
I agree with Lariviere's (1989, xii) hypothesis that the Dharmasästras contin-
ued to expand with the addition of new materials "until a commentary on the
collection was composed. A commentary would have served to fix the text, and the
expansion of the text would have been more difficult after that." Because I consider
the MDh to have a single author, I take these emendations as produced by redactors
working on the original text. Such activities were made more difficult after the text
was "fixed" by early commentators such as Bhâruc i and Medhâtithi , but they did not
cease completely. Changes after that period, however, were limited to the addition
of individual verses and minor changes in the wording of verses detectable through
"lower criticism."
Methods of identifying early changes undetectable by manuscript evidence
fall into the category of "higher criticism" and are not as sure-footed as methods
employed in "lower criticism." In the former some amount of conjecture is inevita-
ble. In Biblical studies higher criticism has been used profitably especially with re-
gard to the Pentateuch, but there the criticism was used not to construct the original
text of the author but to uncover the sources he used in constructing his text. It has,
therefore, been called "source criticism."
Blihler's (1886, Ixv-lxxiv) attempt to separate the ancient portions from later
additions within the MDh was, likewise, an exercise in source criticism. His aim
was to distinguish the passages going back to his hypothetical Mänava Dharma-
sütra from those added by the editor of the versified version. His criteria were
somewhat crude. He accepted sections that had parallels in other Dharmasutras as
part of the ancient sufra, and took sections without such parallels to be the work of
the editor.
My aim is different. Mine is not a source criticism but a criticism aimed at
identifying possible additions and interpolations into the text composed by Manu
between the time of its composition and the earliest manuscript and other evidence
that we possess. The criterion I use is based on Manu's overall plan for and organi-
zation of his work, which I have outlined above in detail. We saw that Manu is care-
ful to let his reader know that he has completed one subject and is moving on to
another through "transitional verses." The structure of his work shows that Manu
had a very methodical mind and a systematic work plan. It is highly unlikely, I


--- PAGE 63 ---
52 
Introduction
think, that he would have introduced extraneous material right in the middle of his
carefully crafted plan, thus ruining the work's organization. In the following exami-
nation of the entire text, I will follow Manu's organizational scheme and identify
sections that fall outside that scheme.
Most, if not all, extraneous material is found at the interstices of his plan, at
the junctures between two topics. Clearly, it was easier to introduce new material at
these fault lines than within the discussion of a given topic. In the translation, I have
identified these passages as "Excursus"; even if someone does not accept my con-
tention that these are interpolations, they must at best be viewed as parenthetical
statements. Even though I think that the chapter division is a later innovation, in the
following discussion I will follow the chapter sequence for easy reference to the
text.
Chapter One
Why would a treatise on dharma begin with the story of creation? BUhler (1886,
Ixvi) in fact remarks: "The whole first chapter must be considered as a later addi-
tion. No Dharma-sutra begins with a description of its own origin, much less with an
account of creation." Long before BUhler, the gth-century commentator Medhätith i
expressed a similar concern:
Where did we start? And where have we ended? He [Manu] was asked
the dharmas prescribed in the sastras, and he indeed promised to ex-
plain them. To then describe the world in its unmanifest state is both
irrelevant and serves no human purpose. This truly exemplifies the
common saying: "Asked about the mango trees, he talked about the
Kovidär a trees." With regard to this matter, there is neither an authori-
tative basis nor does it serve any purpose. Therefore, this entire chapter
should not be studied.106
There is, however, a cogent defense of Manu's introductory statements found
in the first chapter. I have already dealt with why Manu begins with the origin of the
text, thereby investing it with supreme authority. Why he gives an account of crea-
tion is less obvious. I think the clue is found in the manner the first account of
creation ends (MDh 1.31): "For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced
from his mouth, arms, thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya, and
the Sudra," evoking the conclusion of the creation story in the Purusa Hymn
(Rgveda 10.90). The seers questioned Manu not simply about dharma but about the
dharmas of all social classes (1.2: sarvavarnänäm
 dharmäri). I think the creation
account is intended to show how the four varnas came into being; they are not con-
tingent and temporary social phenomena but part of the very fabric of creation.
106. Medhätith i on MDh 1.5: kva asthäh kva nipatitäh / sästroktanipatitadharmän
 prstas
tan eva vaktavyatayä pratijnaya jagato ' vyäkrtävasthävarnanam
 aprakrtam apurusartham
ca / so 'yam satyo janapravädah "änirän
 prstali kovidärän
 äcaxta" iti / na cäxinin vastuni
pramanam na ca prayojanam astlty atah sarva eväyam adhyäyo nädhyetavyah /


--- PAGE 64 ---
Introduction 
53
The clarity of Manu's presentation is obscured at this point by three
"excursus" containing a quite superfluous second account of creation (1.32-41), a
classification of fauna and flora (1.42-50), and an account of cosmic cycles (1.51-
57).1071 believe these are interpolations introduced at the interstice between creation
of the varnas and the composition of the sastra (1.58). In the second account of
creation, for example, we have humans coming into being in verse 39, while the
human race divided into the four classes already appear in verse 31!
If we eliminate the intervening 26 verses, we see an elegant transition from
the creation account culminating in the production of the four varnas to the
composition of the treatise by the Creator and its transmission to Manu, culminating
in Manu's instruction to Bhrgu to transmit it to the sages thereby publishing it to the
world:
For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced from his
mouth, arms, thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya,
and the Südra . (1.31)
After composing this treatise,108 he himself imparted it first only to
me according to rule; and I, in turn, taught it to Marici and the other
sages. Bhrgu here will recite that treatise to you in its entirety, for this
sage has learnt the whole of it completely from me. (1.58-9)
As the initial dialogue between the seers and Manu ends (1.4) with Manu's
command "Listen!" (srüyatäni),
 so the entire preliminary narrative ends (1.60) with
Bhrgu's command "Listen!"
At this point we should have expected Bhrgu to get on with his task and to ex-
pound the dharmas of the varnas. That, however, is not the case. Here at this inter-
stice between the introductory material and the body of the text, there are five
"excursus" containing an account of time and cosmology (61-86), the occupations
of the varnas (87-91), and the excellence of Brahmins (92-101); a eulogy of Manu's
treatise (102-10); and a table of contents (111-18). This material takes up the rest of
chapter i. Most scholars have taken the table of contents to be a later addition. I
think this entire section represents redactorial interventions and is quite out of place
here. Even though the origin of the sastra and its transmission to Manu and Bhrgu
had already been stated, the eulogy of the treatise ascribes its composition not to the
creator but to Manu himself (1.102). This section ends with the instruction of Bhrgu
(1.119): "Just as, upon my request, Manu formerly taught me this treatise, so you too
must learn it from me today." This duplicates Bhrgu's command "Listen!" and does
not have the same force or elegance. I think the authentic voice of the author is
107. Hacker (1978) also has drawn attention to the discrepancy between the first and the
second account. My argument does not exclude the possibility that some verses in the first
account, especially 28-30 dealing with the repeated creation, are also interpolations, as
argued by Hacker 1978. Another point worthy of note is that the Samkhya terminology,
dominant in the first account, is totally absent in the second account of creation.
108. The introduction of this treatise appears to be abrupt, but it was actually introduced
at the very beginning 1.3: "For you alone, Master, know the true meaning of the duties con-
tained in this entire ordinance (vidhaiid) of the Self-existent One, an ordinance beyond the
powers of thought or cognition."


--- PAGE 65 ---
54 Introduction
heard in this imperious "Listen!" which is repeated in the two other answers to the
seers' queries at 5.3 and 12.2 later in the text.
If we place the first verse of chapter 2 immediately after verse 60 of chapter i,
we see the smooth transition from the preliminary narrative to the body of the text
that the author accomplished:
tatas tathä sa tenokto maharsir manunä bhrguh l
tan abravîdrsln sarvân prltätmä
 srüyatäm
 iti II
vidvadbhih sevitah sadbhir nityam advesarägibhih \
hrdayenäbhyanujnäto
 yo dharmas tarn nibodhata II
When Manu had spoken to him in this manner, the great sage Bhrgu
was delighted; he then said to all those seers: "Learn the Law always
adhered to by people who are erudite, virtuous, and free from love and
hate, the Law assented to by the heart."
Here we have two signature expressions of Manu: srüyatäm
 ("listen") concluding
the first verse, and nibodhata ("learn") concluding the second. I think these two
verses followed each other in the original composition of Manu, the first concluding
the preamble and the second opening the main body of the work.m
Chapters Two to Seven
I find few if any identifiable interpolations in the central chapters of the book, 2-7.
It may well be that the opportunity and/or the impulse to add new material were
present at the beginning and in the concluding chapters.
Suspicion was already raised by BUhler (1886, Ixvii) regarding the first eleven
verses of chapter 2.1 think his doubts about verses 6-11 are unfounded; he considers
these to be repetitions. We would have to eliminate a lot of verses throughout the
text if we were to eliminate all duplications and repetitions; an author surely has the
right to repeat and reiterate. So, for example, Manu deals with women both in his
treatment of marriage and household life (chapters 3-5) and under grounds for
litigation (chapter 9). The only doubt I have focuses on verses 2-5 of chapter 2 that
deal with desire. This section stands outside the flow of the discussion in the rest of
the chapter. The kind of certainty I have with regard to the interpolations I have
identified in the first chapter, however, is lacking here.
The second passage identified by Bühle r is 2.88-100. This deals with the con-
trol of organs and includes an enumeration of the eleven organs. I agree with
Buhler's (1886, Ixvii) assessment that this passage "interrupts the continuity of the
text very needlessly, and has nothing whatsoever to do with the matter treated of."
Although such assessments often contain a heavy dose of subjectivity, in this par-
ticular case it is backed by textual evidence. The Bhavisya Puräna contains much of
109. Note further that, for example, the term yuga occurs in the sense of a world age
only in these interpolated sections of the first chapter (l.68f) and in an interpolated section of
chapter 9 (9.301-2). In the other places where the term occurs, it has the meaning of a new
birth or a succeeding generation (10.42, 64), even though these sections are also not above
suspicion.


--- PAGE 66 ---
Introduction 
55
the early chapter of the MDh (Laszlo 1971; Sternbach 1974). Bhavisya i.2.s-27a-b
reproduces the entire section on the student MDh 2.69-87. Immediately after this
section at i.2.27c-d, the Bhavisya gives the verse MDh 2.101, thus omitting the sec-
tion 2.88-100, precisely the passage that we have suspected of being an
interpolation (Sternbach 1974, 7). It is a possibility that the author of the Bhavisya
had before him a copy of the MDh in which this section was missing.
Furthermore, the very wording of verses 2.87 and 2.101 indicates that they
probably followed each other in the original text; the transition here is smooth, with
verse 101 picking up the word yapa from verse 87:
japyenaiva tu samsidhyed brähmano nätra samsayah I
kuryäd anyan na vä kuiyän maitro brâhmana ucyate II 2.87 ||
pürvam sandhyäm japams tisthet sävitrlm ärkadarsanät
 I
pascimam tu samasîta samyag rksavibhâvanat II 2.1011|
Only by soft recitation does a Brahmin achieve success; on this there
is no doubt. Whether he does anything else or not, a Maitra, they say, is
the true Brahmin.
At the morning twilight, he should stand reciting softly the Savitrï
verse until the sun comes into view; at the evening twilight, however, he
should remain properly seated until the Big Dipper becomes clearly
visible.
Medhätith i also, commenting on 2.88, appears to consider this section an appendix
(parisista) to the section on twilight worship and lacking injunctive force
(arthavada).
On the whole, however, these central chapters are remarkably free of tamper-
ing or interpolations. One may quibble about this verse or that, but there is no sure
way of determining the authenticity of individual verses.110
Chapter Eight
I think there are several identifiable interpolations within this chapter. I will list
them first and offer explanations for my decisions: 20-2 (SQdras as legal interpret-
ers), 27-9 (property of minors and women), 30-40 (lost and stolen property), 386-
420 (miscellanea).
Chapter 8 begins with the king entering the court to adjudicate a law suit. This
is in keeping with Manu's penchant for placing his discourse in concrete situations,
as, for example, discussing the king's duties by following him through a regular day
from getting up in the morning to going to bed at night (7.145-226). So here Manu
places his discussion of the system of justice within the context of the king coming
into the court. After enumerating the 18 grounds for litigation (vyavahârapada; 4-
8), he opens his discussion on legal proceedings. In this section he deals with a) the
no. I also think that verses 3.171-5, which look very much like a commentary explaining
several technical terms, are either parenthetical remarks or interpolations. The theme of
individual alongside whom one should not eat, introduced in verses 169-70, is continued after
the interruption in verse 176.


--- PAGE 67 ---
56 
Introduction
judges, who substitute for the king (9-11), b) the demands of Justice that the law be
administered impartially (12-9), and c) the beginning of the trial proper with a brief
summary of judicial conduct and reasoning (23-6, 41-6). This admirable structure is
marred by three "excursus." The first (20-2) is a diatribe against a king employing a
Sudra to interpret the law, a topic having little to do with matters at hand, coming
between sections (b) and (c). Likewise, section (c) on judicial conduct and reason-
ing is cut in two by the intervention of some totally extraneous material having to do
with property: the property of minors and women (27-9) and stolen and lost
property (30-40). These matters have little to do with litigation or court
proceedings. Indeed, once we remove these two "excursus" the section on judicial
conduct reads smoothly: the judge should infer the truthfulness of litigants and
witnesses by their external demeanor (25-6), find out the special laws of the region,
caste, and family of the litigants (41-2), never initiate a law suit suo moto or try to
suppress an action brought before him (43), apply correct judicial reasoning (44-5),
and stick to the norms recognized by the cultured elite but only if they are not in
conflict with those of particular regions, castes, and families (46). I think it is most
probable that the three sections I have identified—verses 20-2, 27-9, and 30-40—
are the work of later redactors.
The rest of the chapter moves smoothly and there are no obvious interpola-
tions that interfere with the flow of the text. The next interpolation comes right at
the end of the chapter after the section on sexual crimes against women. This
"excursus" contains a motley group of topics including the control of trade, ferries
and tolls, and the occupations of the varnas, topics that have nothing to do with the
administration of justice or law suits and belongs to chapter 7 that deals with state
administration. This section is so out of place and so obviously the work of redac-
tors that it is unnecessary to argue the point at length. It is also instructive that this
long section of 35 verses comes at the end of the chapter, indicating that the addition
was made after the MDh was subjected to the chapter division.
Chapter Nine
This chapter addresses the last three grounds for litigation: marital law, inheritance,
and gambling. The sections on marital law and inheritance are remarkably free of
obvious redactoral interventions. As I have already noted, the section on gambling
and betting does not regulate this practice but rather seeks to abolish it. For Manu
gambling and betting are a social curse and the source of many social ills. Although,
following tradition, Manu lists it under grounds for litigation, in his eyes it is prop-
erly a police function. This naturally leads to the final topic under the duties of a
king, namely the eradication of thorns, that is, the elimination of social parasites.
Unlike law suits, which are brought before the king by private litigants, the eradica-
tion of thorns is to be initiated by the king himself and his officials.
Immediately after the section on gambling (221-8), we should have expected
some concluding statement wrapping up Manu's discussion of the 18 grounds for
litigation. And we find precisely such a statement in verse 250:
udito 'yam vistaraso mitho vivadamanayoh I


--- PAGE 68 ---
Introduction 
57
astädasasu märgesu vyavahärasya nirnayah II
I have described above in great detail how lawsuits brought by litigants
and falling within the eighteen avenues of litigation are to be decided.
After this Manu turns his attention back to the king and his duties with the statement
(251):
evam dharmyani käryäni
 kurvan samyañ mahïpatih I
desan alabdhäml lipseta labdhams ça paripâlayet II
Carrying out properly in this manner his duties flowing from the Law,
the king should both seek to acquire territories not yet acquired and
protect well those that have been acquired.
after which he proceeds with the subject of the eradication of thorns (252):
samyañ nivistadesas tu krtadurgas ca sästratah I
kantakoddharane nityam atisthed yatnam uttamam II
After properly settling the country and building a fort according to tex-
tual norms, he should direct his maximum effort constantly at the eradi-
cation of thorns.
This admirable and methodical discussion is marred and interrupted by two
section that have little to do with the subject and that have all the marks of redacto-
rial activity.
The first comes between the conclusion of the section on gambling (228) and
the closing statement on judicial procedure (250). This section (229-49) of 21 verses
contains various materials dealing with punishments and grievous sins, topics that
are dealt with elsewhere in the book. The natural flow of Manu's discourse is re-
stored when we eliminate this section.
The next "excursus" (294-311) deals with various subjects including the con-
stituents of a kingdom and the activities of the king, topics belonging to chapter 7.
This interpolation is inserted between the section on the eradication of thorns (252-
93) and the statement that closes this section (312). This statement finds its natural
place immediately after verse 293; the intervening verses makes the closing state-
ment out of place.
The final "excursus" (313-23) instructs the king never to offend a Brahmin
and comes between the closing statement on the eradication of thorns (312) and the
concluding statement that brings the entire section on the king to a close (324-5).
Again this interpolated section stands out like a sore thumb next to the finely flow-
ing narrative. See how the flow is restored once this section is eliminated:
In this and other ways should the king, always alert and tireless, sup-
press thieves within his own realm and even in others. (312)
Conducting himself in this manner and always devoted to the Laws
pertaining to kings, the king should direct all his servants to work for
the good of his people. (324)
I have described above in its entirety the eternal rules of action for
the king. What follows, one should understand, are the rules of action of
the Vaisya and the SQdra in their proper order. (325)


--- PAGE 69 ---
58 
Introduction
Chapter Ten
Chapter 9 concludes with the transitional verse that introduces the section on
apaddharma (the law in times of adversity):
eso 'näpadi varnänäm
 uktah karmavidhih subhah I
äpady api hi yas tesam kramasas tan nibodhata II
I have described above the splendid rules of action for the social classes
outside times of adversity. Listen now to the rules for them in the proper
order for times of adversity.
Chapter 10, however, begins with a long discourse on mixed varnas (1-73) that ap-
pears to have little to do with how one must act in a time of adversity.
At first sight, this section also appears to have resulted from the work of later
redactors who were unable to understand how Manu could have omitted a discus-
sion on mixed classes.111 Nevertheless, I think this section is part of the original
treatise. For Manu, I think, a time of adversity was not just a temporary emergency
but also a permanent state of affairs, given the decadent state of contemporary soci-
ety. This enduring period of adversity is signaled by the intermixture of the varnas
giving rise to several intermediate and lower castes (jäti). This was probably the
reason why Manu deals with the mixture of varnas at the start of his discussion of
apaddharma.
Other reasons also support this conclusion. The initial request (1.2) of the
seers that prompted the narration of the text included the dharmas of not just the
four varnas but also of those that are in between:112
bhagavan sarvavarnänäm
 yathävad anupürvasah l
antaraprabhavänäm
 ça dharmân no vaktum arhasi II
Please, Lord, tell us precisely and in the proper order the Laws of all the
social classes, as well as of those born in between.
It would be unlikely that a methodical writer like Manu, having introduced this issue
at the very beginning, would fail to address it in the body of his text. There is no
other place in the text that deals with mixed varnas.
Furthermore, the Gautama Dharmasütra, which was one of the sources Manu
used (see II.i), has a similar section on mixed varnas (4.16-28). Likewise, the
Arthasastra (3.7.20-37) treats this topic in the course of its discussion of sons. With
these examples in his own sources, it is unlikely that Manu would have neglected to
treat this topic.
There are, however, not one but three discourses on mixed classes, and they
are not always in agreement. Some suspicion, therefore, may be directed at the sec-
ond and third re-tellings of the origin of the mixed classes.113
111. Sharma (1990, 225), indeed, considers the entire chapter 10 to be a later interpolation
carried out about the sth century CE This is pure speculation, and there is no evidence
internal or external for such a conclusion.
112. See also MDh 2.18, which also speak of antaräla, those born between the four
regular varnas.
113. Also to be noted is that the term bähya with reference to excluded groups or out-


--- PAGE 70 ---
Introduction 
59
The rest of the chapter flows smoothly, and I see no section that raises suspi-
cions of redactory intervention.
Chapter Eleven
Chapter 10 concludes with the transitional verse that introduces the new topic of
penance (MDh 10.131):
esa dharmavidhih krtsnas cäturvarnyasya ktrtitah I
atah param pravaksyämi pmyascittavidhim subham II
I have described above the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law of
the four classes. Next, I will explain the splendid rules pertaining to
penance.
One would have expected Manu to open the topic of penance immediately, that is, at
the beginning of chapter n. That, however, is not the case. We have to wait until
verse 44 for the introduction of penance. Bhâruci , the earliest commentator on
Manu, also saw this as a problem. Bhâruc i begins his commentary on chapter 11
with the objection that after promising to deal with penance we should have ex-
pected Manu to begin this chapter with verse 44.
When he finally gets to penance, Manu is as usual lucid and methodical. He
begins with a clear and succinct introductory verse (44):
akurvan vihitam karma ninditam ca samäcaran I
prasajams cendriyärthesu präyascittïyate narah II
When a man fails to carry out prescribed acts, performs disapproved
acts, and is attached to the sensory objects, he is subject to a penance.
Then he discusses the significant issue of whether penance does any good. Can a
person erase sins through penance? He devotes the next eight verses to this discus-
sion, and concludes in the affirmative (54): "Therefore, one should always do pe-
nances to purify oneself; for individuals whose sins have not been expiated are born
with detestable characteristics."114 After this Manu proceeds to a methodical treat-
ment of sins and their respective penances (see I.i).
Before we come to this lucid presentation of penance, however, there is a long
(43 verses) section dealing with a gamut of topics unrelated either to penance or to
each other. First is a section on occasions for giving and begging (1-26) followed by
verses dealing with times of adversity (27-30), the power of Brahmins (31-5), and
sacrifices (36-43). I am convinced that this entire section added at the beginning of
the chapter represents not the original work of Manu but the supervening activities
of redactors.
castes is found only in these later sections dealing with mixed classes: 10.28, 291 30, 31, 39,
62. This term is unique to the MDh, except for what appears to be a citation of MDh 10.62 in
ViDh 16.18.
114. In this case also, Manu is probably following the example set by Gautama (19.3-10),
who introduces his discussion with the explicit statement: "With regard to this [i.e., penance]
people raise the question: Should (a sinner) perform a penance or not" (tatra prayascittain
kuryän na kuryäd iti iiiîmaiiisaiite).


--- PAGE 71 ---
60 
Introduction
The discussion of sins and the appropriate penances for them takes up verses
55-126. Manu then turns from personally committed sins to association with out-
caste sinners, within which he deals with both excommunication from caste and re-
admission to it (181-9). The entire section on penance concludes with the nice and
pithy statement (190):
enasvibhir anirniktair närtham kimcit samäcaret I
krtanirnejanäms caiva najugupseta karhi cit II
No one should transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and under
no circumstances should anyone abhor those who have been cleansed.
At the interstice between the sections on penances for sins (73-126) and asso-
ciation with outcaste sinners (181-9), however, we have a long interruption that is
attributable to redactorial activity. This "excursus" (127-79) deals with penances for
a) injury to living beings, b) eating forbidden food, c) theft, and d) sexual offenses.
As I have already noted (I.i), the reason or opportunity for this interpolation is
probably to make up the four sins that Manu mentions in his transitional verse intro-
ducing the topic of association with sinners (180): "I have described above the
expiation for all four kinds of sinners. Listen now to the following expiations for
those who associate with outcastes." These four kinds of sinners, however, were
already presented in the previous authentic segment of the text on the classification
of sins. There follows a long excursus of 126 verses (191-247) containing miscella-
neous expiations for a motley list of sins and infractions. Although it is not possible
to dismiss this entire section as an interpolation, yet I think the entire discourse on
penance would have come to a fine close if it ended with verse 190: "No one should
transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and under no circumstances should
anyone abhor those who have been cleansed." The suspicion that what follows is
redactoral reworking is strengthened by the very first verse of the long excursus
(191): "One must not live together with people who have killed children, women, or
those who come to them for protection, or with people who are ingrates, even if they
have been purified in accordance with the Law." This is obviously an attempt to
modify the provisions of the previous verse.
Chapter Twelve
Chapter 12 poses unique problems because it is so very different from the rest of the
work. It begins with the seers making one final request of Bhrgu to teach them the
law of karma. One is tempted to see this entire chapter as deriving from the work of
redactors. There is, however, no clear evidence that it did not belong to the original
work of Manu; we cannot detect the breaks in the line of discussion that we detected
in other interpolated passages or the violation of the structure that Manu has laid
out.
Broadly this discussion on karma falls into two section, the one dealing with
the fruits of action (3-81) and the other dealing with actions leading to the supreme
good (83-106). These two sections are divided by one of Manu's signature transi-
tional verses (82). It is after these two central sections of the chapter that one begins
to suspect redactorial intervention. At the conclusion of the section on actions lead-


--- PAGE 72 ---
Introduction 
61
ing to the supreme good there is what appears to be the usual transitional verse
(107):
naihsreyasam idam karma yathoditam asesatah I
niänavasyäsya
 sästrasya rahasyam upadisyate II
This is the totality of activities leading to the supreme good as pre-
scribed. The secret doctrine of this Treatise of Manu will now be taught.
There follows a section (108-15) on how to resolve matters relating to dharma
that are not covered by Manu's treatise. The language of this verse is quite different
from all the other transitional verses. The passive verb upadisyate is not found else-
where; Manu prefers the active nibodhata and pravaksyämi. The expression
yathoditam in the first line is also absent in other transitional verses. The expression
mänavasästra
 is also uncharacteristic. Although the issue of how to resolve matters
not covered by the text is addressed at the conclusion of the Dharmasutras as
well,115 nowhere are these rules called rahasya. My best guess is that the text of
Manu concluded with the closing verse 116:
etad vo 'bhihitam sarvam nihsreyasakaram param I
asmad apracyuto viprah pmpnoti paranmm gatim II
I have explained to you above all the best means of securing the su-
preme good. A Brahmin who does not deviate from them obtains the
highest state.
The "excursus" on secret teaching contains material such as the legal assembly
(parisad), however, that is found also in the Dharmasutras and thus has some claim
to authenticity. One possibility is that this section formed the concluding statement
of Manu and that the introductory verse was put there by a not very competent re-
dactor, especially because the word rahasya does not occur in the body of this sec-
tion. Nevertheless, the concluding verse 116 appears out of place after this section,
because it refers back to the major theme of this chapter, namely, the attainment of
the highest good (nihsreyasa), which was the topic covered by verses 83-106. If
verse 116 came directly after 106 it would have provided a fitting and elegant con-
clusion to the entire book.
As it is, this verse is followed by another "excursus." It appears that a redactor
wanted to bring back the voice of Bhrgu, because this section begins with Bhrgu
reflecting on the origin of the text (117): "In this manner, the blessed god, desiring to
do what is beneficial for the people, revealed to me in its entirety this highest secret
of the Law." There follow several verses recommending the contemplation of the
Self with a strong Advaita tinge. The final verse in the extant text is an eulogy of the
text itself where the voice is not that of Bhrgu but of a third person (126): "When a
twice-born recites this Treatise of Manu proclaimed by Bhrgu, he will always fol-
low the proper conduct and obtain whatever state he desires." This entire section is
in all likelihood a later addition to bring the text to a close. I for one think that
Manu's original closure is much better; it is strong and pithy, without unnecessary
emotion.
115. See ÄpDh 2.29.13-15; GDh 28.48-51.


--- PAGE 73 ---
62
In total, then, the sections I have identified as possible interpolations through the
activities on one or more redactors contain 329 verses. Out of a total of 2680 verses
in my critical edition, those verses amount to just 12% of the text.
IV. NATURE AND PURPOSE OF THE TREATISE
The year was 1794. The renowned orientalist William Jones published his English
translation of the MDh and made the Dharmasästra tradition of India known to the
rest of the world for the first time. This translation was not spurred simply by schol-
arly interest; it had also a practical purpose. In 1772 Warren Hastings, the British
Governor General, had proposed a plan for the administration of justice in which the
Hindu law based on Dharmasästra was to play a key role. British judges needed
access to the original legal texts of India to implement the British policy of
"administering native law to the natives" (Rocher 1969). So was born what Lariviere
(1989) has called a "well-intentioned misunderstanding."116
What is the relationship between the provisions of the Dharmasästras, such as
the MDh, and real law administered by courts in India down the centuries? Lariviere
(i997b, 98) presents three positions held by scholars since the time of Hastings: a)
the Dharmasästras are concerned with real law, b) they are merely pious wishes
with no political sanction, and c) they are purely panditic commentaries with no re-
lation to custom. Beyond the administration of law, the issues also relate to the link
between Dharmasästra and the social life in India through the centuries. Lariviere
(i997b, 97) asks: "What is its relationship to 'law"? Does it represent the law of the
land? What is its value for the history of Indian society? What does this literature
tell us about how people actually lived?"
Lariviere (i997b, 98), contrary to accepted wisdom, has boldly articulated his
position: "I believe that the dharmasastra literature represents a peculiarly Indian
record of local social norms and traditional standards of behavior. It represents in
very definite terms the law of the land. . . . What I mean is that the whole of the
dharma corpus can be viewed as a record of custom."1171 am in broad agreement
with Lariviere, but with some caveats. The Dharmasästra represents an expert tra-
dition and, therefore, presents not a "record" of custom but a jurisprudential, or in
Indian terms, a sästri c reflection on custom. Custom is taken here to a second order
of discourse.
The relation between Dharmasästra and real life—whether it is law, social
norms, or morality—can best be analyzed, I think, by taking the self-presentation of
Dharmasästra as a sastra seriously and asking the broader question: What is the
116. Scholars have questioned the position accorded to Manu by early Indologists and
the British administrators. Doniger (1991, Ixi) asks: "Were the British right to privilege
Manu? Did they do it to advance their own interests, or because they found that this text was
really in use?" More recently Dirks (2001, 34) has taken an extreme, and for me an untenable,
position about the position of the MDh and it British appropriation. As I have shown in this
introduction, the treatise of Manu had attained the preminence and prestige that few texts in
India did long before the arrival of the British.
117. This view has been strongly defended and extended further by Wezler 19990.
Introduction


--- PAGE 74 ---
Introduction
connection between sastra and practice? Pollock's (igSga, igSgb) fine studies on
the nature and history of sastra have done much to illuminate this uniquely Indian
form of discourse. Pollock (19893,18) offers the following definition derived from
native reflections on the term: "sastra was thought of generally as a verbal
codification of rules, whether of divine or human provenance, for the positive and
negative regulation of particular cultural practices." Toward the end of this study
Pollock identifies the question at the heart of the relation between Dharmasästra
and real life (igSga, 25): "It is the task of the cultural historian to determine what
precisely may be the relationship between the learned discourse identified (or
generically identifiable) as sastra and the actual cultural practices of traditional
India."118
It is impossible to deal with this issue in detail within the limits of this intro-
duction. Nevertheless, I think it is important at least to sketch the outlines of a solu-
tion in order to grapple with the nature and purpose of Dharmasästra. Pollock
(19893, 25) himself presents some thoughts on the possible relationship between
sastra and practice: "(i) sastra could be viewed as offering a real blueprint for
practice; (2) as merely describing, ex post facto, a cultural product and thereby ex-
plicating its components for the benefit of a cultivated public; (3) as providing, in
the guise of normative injunctions, something like a standard of taste and judgment
to critics, that is, as defining the 'classic'; (4) even as functioning in some cases to
'invent' a tradition; fe) as constituting, in the hegemonic manner of high cultures
elsewhere, practices as 'sciences' for theoretical or actual control; (6) or—last in
order but perhaps first in importance—as endowing a practice with status, legiti-
macy, and authority directly conferred by any 'Vedic' charter, something most
sastras aspire to become" (my numbering). Clearly, these are not mutually exclu-
sive characteristics. Indeed, several of them may and often do coexist in the same
sastra.
The native reflections on sastra come closest to #1 and some elements of #6.
That is, sastra is viewed as in some sense eternal and providing the pre-existing
blueprint for a particular practice. This is clearly so for the pre-eminent sastra, the
Veda, and its relationship to the vedic ritual. Jayanta, in his Nyàyamanjarî,
119 ex-
tends this to all sastras: "All these sciences have existed, like the Vedas, from the
beginning of time; when people ascribe them to one or another author, they are
merely acknowledging someone who has sought to give them concise or detailed
expression." Clearly, the MDh presents itself as just such an eternal sastra, even
though its present shape was given by Manu and Bhrgu. Vätsyäyan
a in his
Kämasütra
 (1.3.1-10), likewise, affirms the priority of sastra over practice
(prayoga). There are people who perform a practice without knowing the corre-
sponding sastra, but that practice would not have existed without the norms pro-
vided by the sastra. So, courtesans practice the art of love without studying the
Kämasütra,
 handlers of horses and elephants do so without knowing the sastras
118. Pollock answers some aspects of the connection between sastra (theory) and
prayoga (practice) in other articles: igSgb, 1990, especially 1985, where he discusses in
greater detail the priority of theory over practice.
119. Cited and translated by Pollock 19893, 23.
63


--- PAGE 75 ---
64 
Introduction
dealing with these animals, and Brahmins speak Sanskrit without necessarily
knowing Pânini . Manu (10.56) himself insists that even Cándala executioners, who
could hardly expected to learn sastras, should carry out there taskyathasastram, in
accordance with sästri c provisions. Yet, Vâtsyâyan
a insists, these rule-governed
activities would not have existed but for their respective sastras: prayogasya ca
dürastham api sästram eva hetuh "The sastra alone, however removed it may be, is
the cause of practice." He concludes the discussion with an example: tathästi räjeti
durastM api janapadä na maryädäm
 ativartante tadvat état "As people in the
provinces do not transgress the bounds, knowing, 'The king is there', so it is in this
case."120 As the absent king is the reason for people far away to observe the bounds
of law and propriety, so the sastra, though unlearned, is the reason why people en-
gage in rule-bound activities.
At a philosophical level, one may argue whether rules come before practice or
practice before rules. Does grammar come before language, or vice versa? The
question, however, is not rules and practice but codified rules in sastras and prac-
tice. From a historical point of view, it is evident that such codes are posterior to the
practices from which the rules are derived, and this is reflected in #2 of Pollock's
list and in Lariviere's view of Dharmasastra as codifying custom. This, however, is
only one part of the question. It deals with the origin of sastra.
The second, and for us the more important question, is how a sastra, once it is
produced, relates to ongoing practice. I take a sastra to be the outcome of an expert
tradition; it is both a repository of received knowledge and a tool of instruction.
Many authors no doubt attempted to write sastras; only the successful ones, those
that the later tradition found worth preserving in the form of memorizing and copy-
ing, have survived. Lariviere (i99?b, 98) attributes the disconnect between the pro-
visions of Dharmasastra and lived reality to the obfuscation created "by the fact
that the idiom of all the dharma literature is one of eternality and timelessness."
This is no doubt true; but I think the disconnect not just in Dharmasastra but in all
sastras lies deeper in the very nature of a sastra. All sastras represent a meta-
discourse; they deal with reality but always once removed. They are blueprints, but
you cannot construct a building with them!
Let us take the Vedas, the pre-eminent sastra. You cannot perform a vedic
sacrifice properly even if you know them all by heart. Take the Srautasütras, the
treatises that are supposed to fill this vacuum. They provide just a skeleton; a vedic
priest knowing just the Srautasütras would be totally lost in the nitty-gritty of the
ritual activities. Take grammar, the queen of the sastras. Knowing Pänin i back-
wards and forwards will not permit someone to speak or read Sanskrit. Knowing the
Carakasamhitä or the Susrulasamhita will not make someone a good doctor. The
native tradition itself admits this character of sastra with its emphasis on a live
teacher to impart sästri c knowledge and its tradition of commentaries that elucidated
the sastras and frequently updated and modified their content.
120. Doniger's translation "In the same way, even citizens far away from the king do not
step across the moral bounds he sets" does not account for the "iti" or capture accurately
Vätsyäyana' s reasoning here. Doniger, Kama Sutra (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002),
p. 14.


--- PAGE 76 ---
Introduction 
65
Sastras exercised control over practice not directly but through the mediation
of experts (sista), who were instructed in the sastras in their youth and who, as
adults, continued to read, reflect, and debate the sastras among themselves.121 If we
take the case of drama, playwrights and directors would not be able to engage in
their craft merely by knowing Bharata's Nätyasästra;
 they would have been in-
structed in the specifics of their craft by their teachers. Yet, their professional life
and work would bear the stamp of the great sastra, which they learned from their
teachers and from which they drew inspiration and guidance. Manu (7.54) insists
that the king's ministers should be sâstravidah, experts in sastra. It is the sastra that
makes a sista. But the sastra provides only a skeleton; it is the sista, the expert, who
provides the living guidance in a variety of human activities.
Turning to Dharmasästra, the experts were the Brahmins knowledgeable in
these treatises, Brahmins whom the MDh calls dharmapathaka (12.111). Although it
is possible that passages from the Dharmasastras may have been cited in courts of
law, these texts did not have a function similar to civil and criminal codes of modern
states within the administration of justice. The administration of justice is mediated
by the expert judges, who are conversant both with the sastras and with the laws
and customs of the particular region, caste, guild, or family involved in the dispute.
The Dharmasastras never pretend to present all the laws and norms that govern the
behavior of people. Manu (8.41) clearly spells out the extra-sâstri c knowledge re-
quired to judge lawsuits: "A king who knows the Law should examine the Laws of
castes, regions, guilds, and families, and only then settle the Law specific to each."
There certainly is more to law than what is given in the sastra, and it was unwise of
the British to equate Dharmasästra with Hindu law.
It is equally unwise to consider Dharmasastras as "purely panditic commen-
taries" with no relation to law or real life, just as it is silly to consider Pânin i as
having no relationship to spoken Sanskrit or the Carakasamhita as having no con-
nection to the practice of medicine or the Nätyasästra
 as having nothing to do with
the production of plays. The relationship of sastra to practice in all these areas is
more nuanced than envisaged by either of these extremes.122
Turning to the MDh, it is clear that it seeks to present itself as an eternal
document parallel to the Vedas and composed by the creator himself. Its
"hegemonic" character is evident in its aim to present a blueprint for a properly or-
dered society under the sovereignty of the king and the guidance of Brahmins. Al-
though it presents the "should" more often than the "is" and may occasionally
121. The etymologies of the two terms also support their connection: sastra is derived
from the verbal root \,vas (to train, teach, educate) with the suffix tra giving the meaning of
"an instrument of training," while sista is the past participle, "a trained or educated" person.
One can, thus, think of sastra as the instrument for creating a sista.
122. Maxwell (1989, 10) dwells on the disconnect between silpasästra and actual speci-
mens of iconography and architecture, citing D. D. Kosambi: "The traditional Sanskrit books
on architecture and iconography are contradicted by the specimens actually found." Maxwell
may be correct in his assessment that those who wrote the sastras were not practitioners of
the craft. This is certainly true in silpa, and probably also in other sastras such as medicine.
This may parallel the modern distinction between the creative artists, whether in literature,
music, or fine arts, and the critics.


--- PAGE 77 ---
66 
Introduction
engage in pious wishes and wishful thinking, the amount of detail it presents with
regard to diverse areas of human activity—ritual, food, marriage, inheritance, adop-
tion, judicial procedure, taxation, punishment, penance—shows that it was not di-
vorced from reality. The long literary tradition of Dharmasästra, the longest such
tradition in India spanning over two millennia, shows that the sastras were used
continuously in the education of young Brahmins and perhaps even princes. It was
this training in the Dharmasästra that the Brahmins selected as judges, lawyers, and
arbiters brought to their judicial reasoning, deliberation, and judgments.l23
The purpose of a central document such as the MDh is multifaceted and hard
to pin down. First, there are the aims of the author when he undertook the project.
These are impossible to discern except when they are reflected in the composition
itself (see 1.4). Second, there are the purposes to which the text was employed by
succeeding generations of scholars, readers, and politicians. These are bound to be
varied depending on time, place, and the varying goals of the individuals and insti-
tutions concerned. As a sastra, however, and the premier Dharmasästra in Indian
history, we can discern some of the roles it may have played both in learned dis-
course and in everyday life. The MDh was clearly not a "how to" book; it was nei-
ther a Handbook of Manners nor a Law Code, although it contains aspects of both.
Its connection with lived reality was not immediate but mediate. I have identified
two significant aspects of this mediation. First, a central sastra such as this would
have been used in the instruction of budding scholars, principally young Brahmins;
it must have been part of the standard curriculum for aspiring dharmapäthakas in
Brahmanical colleges such as ghaükästhänas
 in southern India.124 Second, it was a
point of reference for the ongoing scholarly conversations, debates, and literary pro-
duction in the field of Dharmasästra (see V). Some of these debates and interpreta-
tions may indeed sound panditic pedantry. But they also had a serious and often
practical purposes. After all, many of the medieval Nibandhas and commentaries
were commissioned by kings and others were carried out under royal patronage.
V. MANU AND THE LATER DHARMA TRADITION
The composition of new Dharmasästras appears to have flourished in the four or
five centuries following the composition of the MDh, that is, approximately 300-
600 CE. Most of these are now lost; we only have fragments of them cited in
medieval commentaries and Nibandhas. Only three have survived in more or less
complete form: those ascribed to Visnu, Yäjnavalkya , and Närada . Two others,
Brhaspati and Kätyäyana
, have been reconstructed on the basis of medieval
fragments by Rangaswami Aiyangar and P. V. Kane.
123. On the existence of professional lawyers who gave advice to litigants, see Jayaswal
1930, 288-92.
124. See C. Minakshi, Administration and Social Life under the Pallavas (Madras: Uni-
versity of Madras 1938), pp. 186-212; K. A. Nilakantha Sastri. The Colas (Madras: University
of Madras 1955), pp. 629-33. Sastri shows that Dharmasästra was part of the curriculum in
colleges such as Ennariyam and Tribhuvani.


--- PAGE 78 ---
Introduction 
67
V.i Manu and the Dharma sä sir a s
Manu was a pioneer, and he set the standard for the literary activities of his succes-
sors. All followed Manu in composing their works in verse. Visnu is the only ex-
ception, but this text was a recast of an original sütra composition; indeed, the entire
first chapter, which is clearly the work of the redactor, is in verse. Both Visnu and
Yäjnavalky a follow Manu in the introductory frame of their works. Like Manu,
Visnu begins with the story of creation. It is the Earth personified as a woman who
requests the creator, Visnu, to teach her dharma (ViDh 148): "Tell me, Eternal One,
the dharmas of the social classes and orders of life" (varnänäm
 äsramänäm
 ca
dharman vada sanâtana). Yâjnavalkya' s frame is brief. The sages approach
Yäjnavalky a in Mithilä and ask him to teach them dharma (YDh 1.1): "Tell us com-
pletely the Laws of the social classes, of the orders of life, and of others"
(varnäsrametaränäm
 no brühi dharman asesatah). In all these we hear the echo of
the early verses of the MDh. After Manu, the sastra is no longer simply a scholarly
production as in the Dharmasütras but a teaching by a god or an exalted being.
The influence of Manu on the later literature, I think, runs deeper. I have al-
ready made reference to the tradition of several redactions (samhita) of the original
composition of Manu, that of Bhrgu being only one. The third extant Dharmasästra,
that of Nârada , is explicitly viewed by the tradition to be just such a redaction.125
The text proper is preceded by an introduction in prose that claims to be part of the
text itself, although rejected as a later addition in Lariviere's (1989) critical edition.
Irrespective of its provenance, this introduction claims that the text is a segment of
an abbreviation of Manu's original work carried out by Narada. Clearly, the con-
nection to Manu must have been an old one.
Yäjnavalky a (1.4) places Manu at the head of his list of the authors of
Dharmasästras, the first such list in existence. Yâjnavalkya' s dependence on the
MDh has been considered in detail by Kane (1962-75,1: 430) and I agree fully with
his conclusion:126 "The correspondence of Yâjnavalkya' s words with the text of
Manu is in most cases very close, so much so that one cannot help feeling that Yäj .
had the Manusmrti before him and purposely made an attempt to abridge the some-
what loose expressions of Manu." Indeed, the abridgment and the tighter organiza-
tion of the material are the main features of Yäjnavalkya . He has between 1003 and
loio verses depending on the recension, as opposed to the 2680 in the MDh. We
have clear examples of Yäjnavalky a making a single pithy verse out of several pro-
lix ones of Manu:127
kusüladhänyako
 va syât humbhîdhânyaka eva vä l
tryahaihiko vâpi bhaved asvasthanika eva va II
caturnam api caitesäm dvijânâm
 grhamedhinäm \
jyäyän
 parah paro jñeyo dharmato lokajittamah II MDh 4.7-8
125. See above, p. 19. For a discussion, see also Lingat 1973, 91, lOO-i.
126. See also Jayaswal 1930, 59; Lingat 1973, 99.
127. For other parallels and condensations, see YDh 3.26 (= MDh 5.103-4); YDh 3.27-8
(= MDh 5.93-8). See also MDh 5.8-9 and YDh 1.170; MDh 5.24-5 and YDh 1.169.


--- PAGE 79 ---
68 
Introduction
Let him be a man who stores grain sufficient to fill a granary; a man
who stores grain sufficient to fill a jar; a man who has sufficient grain to
last three days, or a man who keeps nothing for the next day. Among all
these four types of twice-born householders, each should be recognized
as superior to the ones preceding it and better at winning the heavenly
world, according to the Law.
This rambling discussion is abridged by Yâjnavalky a to a single condensed verse
using the same technical terms:
kusûlakumbhïdhânyo va tryâhiko '¿vastaría 'pi vä \
jïved vâpi siloñchena sreyân esâm parahparah II YDh 1.128
Let him be a man who stores grain sufficient to fill a granary; a man
who stores grain sufficient to fill a jar; a man who has sufficient grain to
last three days, or a man who keeps nothing for the next day. Or let him
live by gleaning. Each later mode is superior to the one preceding it.
Note the compression of the two verses of Manu 4.85-6 into a single con-
densed one in YDh 1.141:
na räjnah pratigrhmyäd aräjanyaprasütitah
 I
sünäcakradhvajavatäm
 vesenaiva cajlvatäm II
dam sünäsahasräni
 yo vähayati saunikah l
tena tulyah smrto raja ghoras tasya pratigrahah II MDh 4.84-85
He must never accept gifts from a king who is not from a royal lineage;
from people who operate abattoirs, oil-presses, or taverns; or from peo-
ple who gain their living by keeping brothels. One oil-press equals ten
abattoirs; one tavern equals ten oil-presses; one brothel equals ten tav-
erns; and one king equals ten brothels.
pratigrahe sünicakridhvajivesyänarädhipäh
 I
dustä dasagunam pürvätpûrvâd
 été yathakramam II YDh 1.141
With regarding to accepting gifts, each later one of the following is ten
times worse than each preceding in due order: butcher, oil-presser, tav-
ern keeper, prostitute, and king.
Yâjnavalky a also introduced a new organization of the Dharmasästri c mate-
rial, dividing it into three broad chapters (adhyaya) dealing with proper conduct
(acara), law (vyavahärd), and penance (prâyascùta). To some degree this division
was already accomplished by Manu; but the division is not as clear in the MDh and
these topics are subsumed under the overall plan of the book that we examined. The
threefold division introduced by Yâjnavalky a became standard in later
Dharmasästri c literature. Yâjnavalkya , then, represents both an abridgment of the
MDh and several key advances in the developing genre of Dharmasästra.
As Jolly has already discussed in detail,128 Brhaspati follows the MDh so
128. Jolly 1889, 271-5. See also Kane (1962-75) I: 328-30. Lingat (1973,104) observes
that "Brhaspati follows the Maitu-smrti very closely. He considers it as the highest authority.


--- PAGE 80 ---
Introduction 
69
closely that it appears likely that he had a copy of the MDh before him while he
composed his text. Several verses of Brhaspati are actually commentaries on pas-
sages of the MDh. Indeed, later tradition recorded in the Skanda Puräna (Jolly 1889,
274) takes Brhaspati as one of the redactors of Manu. Brhaspati pays the ultimate
tribute to Manu and his authority:129
vedärthapratibaddhatvätprämänyam
 manoh smrtam I
manvarthavipantS tu yä smrtih sä na sasyate II
Manu, however, is the authority, the tradition declares, because he is
firmly anchored to the meaning of the Vedas. Any smrti opposed to the
tenor of Manu is not approved.
Kâtyâyan
a is probably later than all the authors we have discussed. Kane
(1962-75,1: 496) ) thinks that Kâtyâyan
a took Närad a and Brhaspati as his models.
It is also clear that the MDh was also close at hand while he was writing. Kane
(1962-75, I: 499) has pointed out numerous places where Kâtyâyan
a refers to or
cites the opinions of Manu. Like Brhaspati, Kâtyâyan
a also appears to comment on
verses of the MDh. In his discussion of women's property, for example, Kâtyâyan
a
(895-901) has seven verses explaining the technical terms for the six types of such
property, technical terms that are given without explanation in MDh 9.194.
In some sense, we can extend what Lingat (1973,104) says about Brhaspati to
all the authors of Dharmasastras subsequent to Manu—they are all commentators
on the MDh, which is their exemplar and model. They are certainly not commenta-
tors in the traditional sense; but their works can be viewed as commentaries in the
sense that they are drawing inspiration from and responding to the work of Manu. It
is certainly at the back of their minds and perhaps in front of their eyes as they tried
to both emulate it and to surpass it. Brhaspati, however, was prescient in his obser-
vation that no other smrti will ever measure up to, much less surpass, the sastra of
Manu. This is demonstrated by the influence of Manu on the medieval production of
texts on dharma.
V.2 Manu and Medieval Literature
From around the 8th century CE, the literary activities of legal experts turned from
the production of sastras to commenting upon them. Some of the earliest such
commentaries were on the MDh, Bhâruci' s (assigned to the 7th century by Derretí )
and Medhâtithi' s (gth century) being the oldest surviving ones. Altogether nine such
commentaries have survived, the most on any single Dharmasästra.
Probably by the loth or nth century a new genre of literature enters the pic-
ture. These literary productions are called Nibandha. They differ from commentar-
ies in that they are not tied to a single text and explore the topics of dharma in a
systematic way. Although original compositions of authors whose names are re-
corded, the Nibandhas consist for the most part of citations from older Dharma-
He refers to it and quotes it often, and in many contexts he seems to be merely a commentator
on Manu."
129. Aiyangar, Samskärakända
, 13; Jolly 1889, XXVII, 3.


--- PAGE 81 ---
70 
Introduction
sastras. Some Nibandhas are voluminous, such as the Krtyakalpataru of Laksmï -
dhara and the Caturvargacintämani of Hemadri. Several of these texts were produc-
ed under royal patronage.
One gauge of the influence of the MDh on these medieval authors is the fre-
quency of citations, especially when compared to other Dharmasâstras. As a pilot
project I compared the citations of the MDh in three well-known Nibandhas, four
Kandas of Laksmïdhara' s Krtyakalpataru (KKT)IX Jïmûtavâhana' s Dâyabhaga
(Db) and Mädhava' s Päräsaramädhaviya
 (Pwz)131 with those of the other major
dharma texts. I give below the statistics:
KKT 
Db 
Pm
Manu 
589 
101 
621
Äpastamb a 
141 
4 
86
Gautama 
54 
20 
107
Baudhâyan a 
101 
19 
109
Vasistha 
114 
7 
123
Yâjnavalky a 
324 
41 
461
Visnu 
207 
45 
145
Nârad a 
384 
41 
309
Brhaspati 
342 
64 
316
Kätyäyan
a 
447 
47 
333
Only in the Vyavahärakända
 of the KKT and the Pm are the citations from the
three texts dealing solely with vyavahära greater than those from Manu. In the KKT:
Nârad a 342, Brhaspati 301, Kätyäyan
a 411, and Manu 288. In the Pm: Närad a 282,
Brhaspati 243, Kätyäyan
a 262, and Manu 190.
The centrality of Manu to the dharma tradition, then, is not simply because it
was given prominence by western Orientalitsts, as some have charged. Long before
Sir William Jones entered the scene, Manu was the dominant voice on dharma for
close to two millennia.
Manu has cast a long shadow over the literary activities of experts in the dharma
tradition from the early centuries of the common era right up to medieval and mod-
ern times. It is fitting, then, that, by chance or by design, the Mänavadharmasästra
was the first legal text to be translated into a foreign language.
130. The Kandas are: Brahmacari, Grhastha, Rajadhanna, and Vyavahara.
131. Although strictly a commentary on the Parasarasmrti, for all intents and purposes
this is clearly an independent work more akin to a Nibandha.


--- PAGE 82 ---
Note on the Translation
The Italians say "traduttori traditori"—translators are traitors—and with some justi-
fication. It is simply not possible to capture the full import of a statement when ren-
dering it into another language, especially a language separated from the original by
a cultural and temporal chasm. Such are Sanskrit and English. Yet, translation is not
only possible; it is also a cultural imperative. One can become less of a traitor by
understanding the cultural, historical, and linguistic world of the source text and the
target language, and this I have attempted to do.
Mine is not a "literal" translation but, hopefully, an accurate one. Literal
translations, often requiring frequent parenthetical intrusions, may serve the func-
tion of a crib for those who know the original Sanskrit; they offer little to the reader
without access to the original. If this was simply a translation to accompany the edi-
tion, I could have presupposed a certain knowledge of Sanskrit in my readers. This
translation, however, is intended for a general readership.
Several Sanskrit terms cause special difficulties in translation, some because
of their wide semantic range and others because of difficulties in determining their
precise meanings. The first and the most obvious is dharma. In general, I have
translated the term as "Law." Although dharma means both more and less than law
in contemporary usage, I think "Law" can accurately capture a wide slice of its se-
mantic spectrum, especially if we take into account the use of "law" in such con-
texts as natural law, divine law, law of gravity, and Jewish law. In some contexts,
however, "Law" does not make sense. In 8.12Í, for example, dharma is better trans-
lated as "Justice"; in other contexts it means "merit" (see 4.238; 7.79; 8.83; 1123;
12.19); in 11.129-30 adharma means sin (see 11131 where papa, "sin," is used).
Guru is another difficult term. In a few cases it refers to the teacher (2.131,
231), but most frequently it does not. The general meaning is that of an elder, fre-
quently the father, who deserves special respect. A good example of the multiple
meanings of this term occurring in a single verse is 2.205. This term is context sen-
sitive and I have translated it by a word that approximates its contextual meaning.
In most contexts danda means punishment. Frequently, however, especially
when used with dapyah ("should be made to give"), it means a fine (e.g. 8.297). The
two terms jñati and bandhu are often used interchangeably for a relative. They are
also used, however, with technical meanings. Then jñati refers to paternal relatives
and bandhu to maternal relatives. The term indriya may refer to the senses, but in
71


--- PAGE 83 ---
72 
Note on the Translation
some contexts this is misleading; in the context of controlling the senses, for exam-
ple, the stomach and the sexual organs are also included. Within the context of
caste, sadrsa appears to indicate not simply someone who is similar to another but
also one of the same caste, although it may also suggest a broader meaning of some-
one of the same station or status. The term antya indicates a person of a low caste.
Most frequently such a person is below a SQdra (see 8.68, 385); he is sometimes the
same as an outcaste or Cándala and sometimes distinguished from the latter (see
11.176). The Sanskrit uses many terms for a Brähman a and a Ksatriya. Attempting to
duplicate these would have created confusion to the reader. I have used "Brahmin"
and "Ksatriya" uniformly, except when dvija is used. This term in the MDh
regularly refers to a Brahmin, but not always. In some contexts the meaning is
ambivalent. I have, therefore, translated it as "twice-born." The term vadha
normally means killing and is used for judicial execution. But frequently the term
refers not to killing but to physical violence or corporal punishment.
Consistency in translation is often achieved at the expense of accuracy. I have
not tried to be consistent beyond reason in translating a particular word. I have al-
ready referred to the various nuances of dharma. A good example of different
meanings of the same word is dasyu. In many contexts the word means a bandit, a
lowlife, or a low-born person (5.131; 7.143; 8.66). In other contexts, the term has a
technical meaning, referring to a particular mixed caste (10.32, 45).
Departing from the usual practice, I have translated also the additional verses
given in the critical apparatus to the edition so long as they are attested in a signifi-
cant number of manuscripts; these are given in the endnotes and signaled by a plus
(+) sign in the translation. I have also given the alternate translations of the text if
we follow variant readings, again limiting myself to significant variants that both
affect the meaning and are found in a large number of manuscripts. These, as well
as explanatory notes, are signaled by an asterisk in the translation.
There are nine commentaries on Manu. They are described in the Introduction
to the Critical Edition, pp. 381-83. These represent the native tradition's own
attempts to understand and to interpret the text. They forms an integral part of the
life of Manu within India and are significant even if we may disagree with them
with regard to the original meaning of a particular verse. I have, therefore, cited
their views extensively in the notes.
Finally, I have been asked by friends and colleagues, including one reviewer
of this work for Oxford University Press, to spell out my philosophy and methodol-
ogy of translation. This is something I find difficult to do, even though volumes
have been written precisely on this topic.1 One can present qualities—deep knowl-
See, for example, the recent volume edited by Enrica Garzilli, Translating, Transla-
tions, Translators from India to the West. Harvard Oriental Series, Opera Minora, 1. Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1996. Sheldon Pollock, writing in the same volume (p. 112), expresses the
feelings of real translators when confronted by armchair philosophers of translation: "Years
ago I had the privilege to attend a conference with George Steiner, whose landmark book,
After Babel, had just been published. The entire panel of philosophers and theoreticians
agreed that, yes, translation was really quite impossible. The fine translator from the Dutch,
1


--- PAGE 84 ---
Note on the Translation 
73
edge of the two languages, of the literary genre of the source text, of its cultural and
historical background, and so on—that a good translator should possess. But we
know of many atrocious translations made by very competent scholars. Reading a
good translation is like listening to a fine pianist playing a difficult piece of music.
He or she makes it look easy. When the reader does not notice that the original is a
difficult text; that the translator had to struggle many hours and sleepless nights with
a single line; that sometimes he despaired of ever making sense of a passage—then
the translation has achieved its purpose. To discuss the process of translation is as
counterproductive as to discuss how sausage is made; neither is a pretty sight. In
both cases the proof is in the final product. A good translation should stand alone as
a good piece of literature within the language of the translation. This is goal we as-
pire to but never fully realized; the umbilical cord that binds the translation to the
original text is difficult to sever.
the late James Holmes, was there, and he looked at me, and I at him, in the secure knowledge
that we were going to go home and somehow do the impossible. . . . translation is as philo-
sophically problematic, stylistically individual, and practically hard as life, and as we keep on
living we keep on translating, with the inevitable singular imperfections that define being
human."


--- PAGE 85 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 86 ---
TRANSLATION


--- PAGE 87 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 88 ---
Editor's Outline
CHAPTER ONE
Prologue 
1.1-4
Creation 
1.5-31
Excursus: Second Account of Creation 
1.32-41
Excursus: Classification of Fauna and Flora 
1.42-50
Excursus: Cosmic Cycles 
1.51-57
Transmission of the Law 
1.58-60
Excursus: Time and Cosmology 
1.61-86
Excursus: Occupations of Social Classes 
1.87-91
Excursus: Excellence of the Brahmin 
1.92-101
Excursus: Treatise of Manu 
1.102-110
Excursus: Synopsis 
1.111-119
CHAPTER TWO
The Law 
2.1-24
Excursus: Desire 
2.2-5
Sources of Law 
2.6-11
Knowledge of the Law 
2.12-13
Contradictions in Law 
2.14-15
Competence to Study the Law 
2.16
The Sacred Land 
2.17-24
Consecratory Rites 
2.26-67
Childhood Rites 
2.29-35
Vedic Initiation 
2.36-64
Time for Initiation 
2.36-37
Failure to be Initiated 
2.38-40
Insignia-I 
2.41-47
Food 
2.48-57
Sipping 
2.58-62
Insignia-II 
2.63-64
Shaving Ceremony 
2.65
Consecratory Rites for Women 
2.66-68
The Student 
2.69-249
77


--- PAGE 89 ---
78 
Editor's Outline
Instruction 
2.69-75
The Syllable OM 
2.76-84
Soft Recitation 
2.85-87
Excursus : Control of the Organs 
2.88-100
Twilight Worship 
2.101-103
Vedic Recitation 
2.104-107
Persons Competent to Receive Vedic Instruction 
2.108-116
Salutation 
2.117-133
Precedence 
2.134-139
Teacher 
2.140-163
Vedic Study 
2.164-172
Observances 
2.173-190
Begging and Daily Duties 
2.182-190
Conduct towards the Teacher 
2.191-218
Teacher's Teacher and Other Instructors 
2.205-206
Members of Teacher's Family 
2.207-217
Rules of Conduct 
2.219-249
Mother, Father, Teacher 
2.225-237
Non-Brahmin Teachers 
2.238-242
Life-long Student-I 
2.243-244
Conclusion of Study 
2.245-246
Life-long Student-II 
2.247-249
C H A P T E R T H R E E
Marriage 
3.1-66
Conclusion of Study 
3.1-3
Selection of a Bride 
3.4-19
Prohibition of a SQdra Wife 
3.14-19
Types of Marriage 
3.20-44
Sons from Different Types of Marriage 
3.36-42
Marriage Rite 
3.43-44
Sexual Union 
3.45-50
Purchasing a Wife 
3.51-54
Honoring Women 
3.55-59
Marital Harmony 
3.60-62
Degradation of Families 
3.63-66
The Householder 
3.67-286
Great Sacrifices 
3.68-121
Ancestral Offerings 
3.82-83
Divine Offerings 
3.84-86
Bali Offerings 
3.87-93
Honoring Guests 
3.94-120
Ancestral Offerings 
3.122-286


--- PAGE 90 ---
Editor's Outline 
79
Number of Invitees 
3.125-126
Quality of Invitees 
3.127-149
Unfit Invitees 
3.150-182
Persons Who Purify Those Alongside Whom They Eat 
3.183-186
Invitations 
3.187-191
Classes of Ancestors 
3.192-202
Preparatory Rites 
3.203-213
Principal Offerings 
3.214-223
Feeding the Brahmins 
3.224-246
Rite for the Newly Deceased 
3.247-248
Conclusion of the Meal 
3.249-257
Concluding Rites 
3.258-265
Food at Ancestral Rites 
3.266-272
Times for Ancestral Rites 
3.273-284
Conclusion 
3.385
C H A P T E R F O U R
The Bath-Graduate 
4.1-260
Right Livelihood 
4.2-12
Observances 
4.13-18
Study 
4.19-20
Ritual Duties 
4.21-28
Reception of Guests 
4.29-32
Rules of Conduct—I 
4-33-39
Relationship with Women 
4.40-44
Voiding Urine and Excrement 
4.45-52
Rules of Conduct—II 
4.53-83
People from Whom Gifts May Not Be Accepted 
4.84-91
Morning Duties 
4.92-94
Vedic Study 
4.95-100
Suspension of Vedic Recitation 
4.101-127
Rules of Conduct—III 
4.128-161
Avoiding Violence 
4.162-169
Following the Path of Righteousness 
4.170-179
Family and Social Relations 
4.180-185
Accepting and Giving Gifts 
4.186-194
Hypocrisy 
4.195-200
Using What Belongs to Others 
4.201-204
Unfit Food 
4.205-225
Gifts and Their Rewards 
4.226-237
Accumulating Merit 
4.238-246
Acceptance of Gifts and Food 
4.247-256
Old Age and Retirement 
4.257-260


--- PAGE 91 ---
80 
Editor's Outline
C H A P T E R F I V E
Prologue 
5-1-3
Forbidden Food 
5.3-25
Eating Meat 
5.27-56
Bodily Purification 
5.58-109
Death or Birth of a Person Belonging to the Same Ancestry 
5.58-99
Death in a Distant Region 
5-74-77
Overlapping Period of Impurity 
5-79
Death of Significant Others 
5.80-82
Periods of Impurity for Different Classes 
5.85-87
Impurity fromTouch 
5.85-87
Libations for the Dead 
5.88-91
Funeral Path 
5.92
Instant Purification of Kings 
5-93-99
Death of a Person Belonging to a Different Ancestry 
5.101-104
Means of Purification 
5.105-109
Purification of Articles 
5.111-133
Statutory Purity of Things 
5.128-133
Purification of the Body 
5.134-145
Law with Respect to Women 
5.147-167
Lack of Independence 
5.147-150
Duties towards Husband 
5.151-166
Funeral 
5.167-168
Concluding Statement on the Householder 
5.169
CHAPTER SIX
Forest Hermit 
6.1-32
Time and Procedure 
6.2-4
Mode of Life 
6.5-28
Great Sacrifices 
6.7-11
Food 
6.12-21
Austerities 
6.22-24
Homeless Ascetic 
6.25-28
Conclusion 
6.29-32
Wandering Ascetic 
6.33-85
Qualification 
6.35-37
Initiation 
6.38-41
Mode of Life 
6.42-49
Begging and Food 
6.50-60
Yogic Meditation 
6.61-85
Conduct 
6.66-69
Breath Control 
6.70-71


--- PAGE 92 ---
Editor's Outline 
81
Meditation 
6.72-75
Meditation on the Body 
6.76-78
Final Goal 
6.79-85
Vedic Retiree 
6.87-97
Superiority of the Householder 
6.87-90
The Ten-Point Law 
6.91-93
Retirement 
6.94-96
C H A P T E R S E V E N
The Law for the King 
7.1-226
Origin of the King 
7.2-35
Punishment 
7.14-31
Proper Behavior 
7.32-35
Cultivating Virtue and Learning 
7-37-53
Appointment of Counselors 
7-54-59
Appointment of Officials 
7.60-62
Appointment of an Envoy 
7.63-68
Constructing the Royal Fort 
7.69-76
Marriage 
7-77
Appointment of Chaplain and Priests 
7.78-79
Collectors and Supervisors 
7.80-81
Devotion to Brahmins 
7.82-86
War and Warrior Ethic 
7.87-98
War Booty 
7.96-97
Policies for Good Government 
7.99-113
Organization of the State 
7.114-126
Governance of Villages and Towns 
7.114-119
Supervision of Officials 
7.120-124
Wages 
7.125-126
Taxes and Duties 
7.127-139
Adjudicating Lawsuits 
7.140-141
Protection of the Subjects 7.142-144
Morning Routine 7.145-215
Meeting with Counselors 7.147-155
Constituents of the Circle 7.156-159
Political Strategy—I 7.160-180
War 7.181-200
Conduct in Victory 7.201-205
Political Strategy—II 7.206-215
Afternoon Routine 7.216-222
Evening Routine 7.223-225


--- PAGE 93 ---
82 
Editor s Outline
C H A P T E R E I G H T
The Justice System 
8.1-9.251
Court 
8.1-3
Grounds for Litigation 
8.4-8
Legal Proceedings 
8.9-46
Judges 
8.9-11
Pursuit of Justice 
8.12-19
Excursus: SQdras as Legal Interpreters 
8.20-22
Judicial Conduct and Reasoning—I 
8.23-26
Excursus: Property of Minors and Women 
8.27-29
Excursus: Lost and Stolen Property 
8.30-40
Judicial Conduct and Reasoning—II 
8.41-46
Grounds for Litigation—I Non-payment of Debts 
8.47-178
Qualification of Witnesses 
8.62-72
Assessing Testimony 
8.73-78
Questioning of Witnesses 
8.79-102
Excusable False Testimony 
8.103-106
Failure to Give Evidence 
8.107
Signs of False Testimony 
8.108
Oaths and Ordeals 
8.109-116
False Testimony 
8.117-118
Punishment for Perjury 
8.120-123
Varieties of Punishment 
8.124-130
Weights 
8.132-137
Fines 
8.138-139
Rates of Interest—I 
8.140-144
Pledges 
8.145-149
Rates of Interest—II 
8.150-157
Surety 
8.158-162
Validity of Transactions 
8.163-169
Impartiality of the King 
8.170-175
Recovery of Debt 
8.176-177
Conclusion 
8.178
Grounds for Litigation—II Deposits 
8.179-196
Grounds for Litigation—III Sale Without Ownership 
8.197-205
Fraudulent Sales 
8.203-205
Grounds for Litigation—IV Partnerships 
8.206-211
Grounds for Litigation—V Non-delivery of Gifts 
8.212-214
Grounds for Litigation—VI Non-payment of Wages 
8.215-218
Grounds for Litigation—VII Breach of Contract 
8.219-221
Grounds for Litigation—VIII Cancellation of Sale or Purchase 
8.222-228
Grounds for Litigation—IX Disputes between Owners and
Herdsmen 
8.229-244
Safety of Herd 
8.230-236


--- PAGE 94 ---
Editor's Outline 
83
Damage to Crops 
8.237-243
Grounds for Litigation—X Boundary Disputes 
8.245-266
Boundary Markers 
8.246-251
Settling Boundary Disputes 
8.252-266
Grounds for Litigation—XI Verbal Assault 
8.267-278
Grounds for Litigation—XII Physical Assault 
8.279-301
Personal Injury 
8.279-287
Damage to Property 
8.288-289
Injuries Caused by Vehicles 
8.290-298
Corporal Punishment 
8.299-301
Grounds for Litigation—XIII Then 
8.302-343
Suppression of Thieves 
8.302-303
Obligation to Offer Protection 
8.304-313
Punishment of Thieves 
8.314-343
Grounds for Litigation—XIV Violence 
8.344-351
Permissable Violence 
8.348-351
Grounds for Litigation—XV Sexual Crimes Against Women 
8.352-385
Sexual Crimes against Married Women 
8.352-363
Male Sexual Assault 
8.364-368
Female Sexual Assault 
8.369-370
Adultery 
8.371-385
Excursus 
8.386-420
Miscellanea 
8.386-397
Control of Trade 
8.398-403
Ferries and Tolls 
8.404-409
Occupations of Social Classes 
8.410-420
C H A P T E R N I N E
Grounds for Litigation—XVI Law Concerning Husband and Wife 9.1-103
Guarding the Wife 
9.2-21
Elevation of Wife to Husband's Status 
9.22-24
Importance of Wife 
9.26-30
To Whom Belongs a Son? 
9.32-56
Levirate 
9.57-70
Contract of Betrothal 
9-71-73
Absence of Husband 
9.74-76
Repudiation of a Wife 
9.77- 84
Seniority among Wives 
9.85-87
Marriage of Daughters 
9.88-103
Grounds for Litigation—XVII Partition of Inheritance 
9.104-220
Primogeniture 
9.105-110
Partition and Seniority 
9.111-119
Seniority of Leviratic Sons 
9.120-121


--- PAGE 95 ---
84 
Editor's Outline
Seniority among Sons of Different Wives 
9.122-126
"Female-Son" and Her Sons 
9.127-140
Adopted Son 
9.141-142
Leviratic Sons 
9.143-147
Sons by Wives of Different Castes 
9.149-157
Twelve Types of Sons 
9.158-185
Alternative Heirs 
9.186-191
Women's Property 
9.192-200
Disqualification from Inheritance 
9.201-203
Partition of Non-ancestral Property 
9.204-209
Miscellaneous Rules of Partition 
9.210-219
Grounds for Litigation—XVIII Gambling and Betting 
9.221-228
Excursus: Types of Punishment 
9.229-249
Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
9.235-247
Conclusion of Grounds for Litigation 
9.250-251
Eradication of Thorns 
9.252-323
Excursus: Constituents of a Kingdom 
9.294-297
Excursus: Activities of the King 
9.298-311
Excursus on Brahmins 
9.313-323
Conclusion of the Rules for Kings 
9.324-325
Rules of Action for Vaisyas and SQdras 
9.326-335
Rules for Vaisyas 
9.326-333
Rules for SQdras 
9-334-335
Conclusion of the Law Outside Times of Adversity 
9-335
C H A P T E R T E N
Rules for Times of Adversity 
10.1-130
Mixed Classes 
10.1-73
The Four Classes 
10.1-7
Mixed Classes: First Discourse 
10.8-14
Mixed Classes: Second Discourse 
10.15-23
Mixed Classes: Third Discourse 
10.24-45
Occupations, Residence, and Dress 
10.46-50
Cándalas and Svapacas 
10.51-56
Further Discourse on Mixed Classes 
10.57-61
Advance to Higher Classes 
10.62-73
Occupations of the Four Classes 
10.74-80
Occupations in Times of Adversity 
10.81-129
Brahmins 
10.81-94
Ksatriyas 
10.95-97
Vaisyas 
10.98
SQdras 
10.99-100
Further Occupations for Brahmins 
10.101-114
Acquisition of Property 
10.115-120


--- PAGE 96 ---
Editor's Outline 
85
Livelihood of Sudras 
10.121-129
Conclusion 
10.130-131
C H A P T E R E L E V E N
Penance 
11.1-266
Excursus: Occasions for Giving and Begging 
11.1-26
Excursus: Miscellaneous Topics 
11.27-43
Times of Adversity 
11.27-30
Power of Brahmins 
11.31-35
Sacrifices 
11.36-43
Justification for Penance 
11.44-54
Categories of Sin 
11.55-71
Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
n.55-59
Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
11.60-67
Further Categories of Sin 
11.68-71
Penances for Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
11.73-108
Killing a Brahmin 
11.73-90
Drinking Liquor 
11.91-98
Stealing Gold 
11.100-103
Sex with an Elder's Wife 
11.104-107
Penances for Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
11.109-124
Killing a Cow 
11.109-117
Other Secondary Sins 
11.118
Student Breaking the Vow of Chastity 
11.119-124
Penances for the Remaining Categories of Sins 
11.125-126
Excursus: Penances for Injury to Living Beings 
11.127-146
Homicide 
11.127-131
Killing Animals 
11.132-142
Injuring Vegetation 
11.143-145
Excursus: Penances for Eating Forbidden Food 
11.147-161
Excursus: Penances for Theft 
11.163-170
Excursus: Penances for Sexual Offenses 
11.171-179
Association with Outcastes 
11.181-190
Excommunication 
11.183-186
Re-admission 
11.187-189
Excursus: Miscellanea on Sin and Penance 
11.191-247
Types of Generic Penance 
11.212-222
Observances by the Penitent 
11.223-227
Four Means of Expiaton 
11.228-247
Further Means of Expiation 
11.249-266


--- PAGE 97 ---
86 
Editor's Outline
C H A P T E R T W E L V E
Action 
12.3-115
The Fruits of Action 
12.3-81
The Inner Selves 
12.12-15
The Process of Rebirth 
12.16-23
The Three Attributes 
12.24-52
Sin and Rebirth 
12.54-81
Actions Leading to the Supreme Good 
12.83-106
Excursus: Secret Teaching 
12.108-115
Conclusion 
12.117-126
Excursus: Summation 
12.117-126


--- PAGE 98 ---
CHAPTER ONE
P R O L O G U E
+1Manu was seated, absorbed in contemplation, when the great seers came up to him,
paid homage to him in the appropriate manner, and addressed him in these words:
2"Please, Lord, tell us precisely and in the proper order* the Laws of all the social
classes, as well as of those born in between;* 3for you alone, Master, know the true
meaning of the duties contained in this entire ordinance* of the Self-existent One, an
ordinance beyond the powers of thought or cognition."*
4So questioned in the proper manner* by those noble ones, that Being of
boundless might paid honor to all those great seers and replied: "Listen!"
C R E A T I O N
5"There was this world*—pitch-dark,* indiscernible, without distinguishing marks,
unthinkable, incomprehensible, in a kind of deep sleep all over. 6Then the Self-existent
Lord appeared—the Unmanifest manifesting this world beginning with the elements,*
projecting his might, and dispelling the darkness. HTiat One—who is beyond the
range of senses; who cannot be grasped;* who is subtle, unmanifest, and eternal; who
contains all beings; and who transcends thought—it is he who shone forth* on his
own.
8"As he focused his thought with the desire of bringing forth diverse creatures
from his own body, it was the waters* that he first brought forth; and into them he
poured forth his semen. 9That became a golden egg, as bright as the sun; and in it he
himself took birth as Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds.
10"The waters are called "Närä"
; the waters, clearly, are the offspring of Nara.
Because his first sojourn (ayana) was in them, tradition calls him "Näräyana."
* nThat
cause which is unmanifest and eternal, which has the nature of both the existent and the
non-existent—the Male produced from it is celebrated in the world as Brahma.*
12"After residing in that egg for a full year,* that Lord on his own split the egg in
two by brooding on his own body. 13From those two halves, he formed the sky and the
earth, and between them the mid-space, the eight directions, and the eternal place of the
waters.*
14"From his body, morevoer, he drew out the mind having the nature of both the
existent and the non-existent; and from the mind, the ego—producer of self-awareness
and ruler—15as also the great self (12.14), all things composed of the three attributes
(12.24), and gradually the five sensory organs that grasp the sense objects. 16By
merging the subtle parts of these six* possessing boundless might into particles of his
87


--- PAGE 99 ---
88 
Chapter 1
own body, moreover, he formed all beings. 17Because the six parts of his physical
frame become attached (ä-sri) to these beings, the wise call his physical frame "body"
(sarird). 18The great elements enter it accompanied by their activities, as also the mind,
the imperishable producer of all beings, accompanied by its subtle particles.
19"From the subtle particles of the physical frames of these seven males* of great
might, this world comes into being, the perishable from the imperishable. 20Of these,
each succeeding element acquires the quality specific to each preceding. Thus, each
element, tradition tells us, possesses the same number of qualities as the number of its
position in the series.* 21In the beginning through the words of the Veda alone, he
fashioned for all of them specific names and activities, as also specific stations.*
^"The Lord brought forth the group of gods who are endowed with breath and
whose nature is to act, the subtle group of Sädhyas , and the eternal sacrifice.* 23From
fire, wind, and sun, he squeezed out* the eternal triple Veda characterized by the Rg
verses, the Yajus formulas, and the Saman chants, for the purpose of carrying out the
sacrifice. 24Time, divisions of time, constellations, planets, rivers, oceans, mountains,
flat and rough terrain, ^austerity, speech, sexual pleasure, desire, and anger—he
brought forth this creation in his wish to bring forth these creatures.*
26"To establish distinctions among activities, moreover, he distinguished the
Right (dharmd) from the Wrong (adharma) and afflicted these creatures with the pairs of
opposites such as pleasure and pain. 27Together with the perishable atomic particles of
the five elements given in tradition, this whole world comes into being in an orderly
sequence. 28As they are brought forth again and again, each creature follows on its own
the very activity assigned to it in the beginning by the Lord. 29Violence or non-
violence, gentleness or cruelty, righteousness (dharma) or unrighteousness (adharma),
truthfulness or untruthfulness—whichever he assigned to each at the time of creation,
it stuck automatically to that creature. 30As at the change of seasons each season
automatically adopts its own distinctive marks, so do embodied beings adopt their
own distinctive acts.
31"For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced from his mouth, arms,
thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya, and the SQdra.
Excursus: Second Account of Creation
32"Dividing his body into two, he became a man with one half and a woman with the
other. By that woman the Lord brought forth Viraj.* 33By heating himself with ascetic
toil, that man, Virâj , brought forth a being by himself—know, you best of the twice-
born, that I am that being, the creator of this whole world.
^"Desiring to bring forth creatures, I heated myself with the most arduous
ascetic toil and brought forth in the beginning the ten great seers, the lords of creatures:
35Marïci , Atri, Añgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Pracetas, Vasistha, Bhrgu, and
Närada . 36They, in turn, brought forth seven other Manus of immense energy (1.61^
62); the gods and the classes of gods; and the great sages of boundless might; 37Yaksas,
Râksasas , Pisäcas , Gandharvas, Apsarases, Asuras, Nagas, Sarpas, and Suparnas; the
different groups of ancestors (3.192-201); 38lightnings, thunderbolts, clouds, rainbow
streaks, rainbows, meteors, storms, comets, and the manifold heavenly lights;
39pseudo-humans,* monkeys, fish, birds of various kind, farm animals, wild animals,


--- PAGE 100 ---
Chapter 1 
89
humans, predatory animals, and animals with incisors in both jaws (5.18 n.); 40worms,
insects, moths, lice, flies, bugs, all creatures that sting and bite, and immobile
creatures of various kind.
41"In this manner through ascetic toil, those noble ones brought forth at my
command this whole world, the mobile and the immobile, each creature in accordance
with its activity.
Excursus: Classification of Fauna and Flora
42"I will now explain to you exactly which type of activity is ascribed here* to which
type of creature, and also their relative order with respect to birth. 43Those born from
placentas are farm animals, wild animals, predatory animals, animals with incisors in
both jaws (5.18 n.), Räksasas , Pisâcas , and humans.
•""Those born from eggs are birds, snakes, crocodiles, fish, and turtles, as well as
other similar land and aquatic animals.
45"Those born from warm moisture are creatures that sting and bite; lice, flies,
and bugs; those born through heat; as well as other similar creatures.
46"Those born from sprouts are all flora propagated through seeds or cuttings.
Those that bear copious flowers and fruits and die after their fruits mature are "plants"
(osadhi); 47those that bear fruits without flowers, tradition calls "forest lords"
(vanaspati); and those that bear both flowers and fruits, tradition calls "trees" (vrksd).
48Various kinds of shrubs and thickets and different types of grasses, as also creepers
and vines—all these also grow from either seeds or cuttings. 49Wrapped in a manifold
darkness caused by their past deeds (12.8-9), these come into being with inner
awareness,* able to feel pleasure and pain. 50In this dreadful transmigratory cycle of
beings, a cycle that rolls on inexorably for ever, these are said to represent the lowest
condition, and Brahma the highest.
Excursus: Cosmic Cycles
51"After bringing forth in this manner this whole world and me, that One of
inconceivable prowess once again disappeared into his own body, striking down time
with time.* 52When that god is awake, then this creation is astir; but when he is asleep
in deep repose, then the whole world lies dormant. 53When he is soundly asleep,
embodied beings, whose nature is to act, withdraw from their respective activities, and
their minds become languid. MWhen they dissolve together into that One of immense
body, then he, whose body contains all beings, sleeps tranquil and at ease. 55Plunging
himself into darkness, he lingers there for a long time together with his sense organs
and ceases to perform his own activities. Then he emerges from that bodily frame.
56When, after becoming a minute particle, he enters, conjoined, the seminal form of
mobile and immobile beings, then he discharges the bodily frame.*
57"In this manner, by waking and sleeping, that Imperishable One incessantly
brings to life and tears down this whole world, both the mobile and the immobile.
Transmission of the Law
58"After composing this treatise,* he himself in the beginning imparted it according to
rule to me alone; and I, in turn, to Marîci * and the other sages. 59Bhrgu here will relate


--- PAGE 101 ---
90 
Chapter 1
that treatise to you completely, for this sage has learnt the whole treatise in its entirety
from me."
''"When Manu had spoken to him in this manner, the great sage Bhrgu was
delighted. He then said to all those seers: "Listen!"
Excursus: Time and Cosmology
61-62There are six further Manus* in the lineage of this Manu, the son of the Self-
existent One: Svärocisa , Auttami, Tämasa , Raivata, Cäksus a of great energy, and the
son of Vivasvat. Possessing great nobility and might, they each have brought forth
their own progeny. 63These seven Manus of immense energy, with the son of the Self-
existent One at their head, gave rise to and secured* this whole world, the mobile and
the immobile, each in his own Epoch (1.61 n).
^Eighteen Nimesas ("winks") make a Kästh a ("second"), thirty Kästha s a Kalä
("minute"), thirty Kalâ s a MuhOrta ("hour"),* and thirty MuhQrtas a day-and-night.
6yThe sun divides the day and the night, both the human and the divine. The night is
meant for creatures to sleep, and the day to engage in activities.
^For ancestors, a month constitutes a day and a night, divided into the two
fortnights. The dark fortnight is the day for engaging in activities, and the bright
fortnight is the night for sleeping.* 67For gods, a year is a day and a night and their
division is this: the day is the northward passage of the sun, and the night is its
southward passage.
68Listen now to a concise account of the duration of a day-and-night of Brahma
and of each Age in proper sequence. 69The Krta Age is said to last 4,000 years. It is
preceded by a twilight lasting 400 years and followed by a twilight of the same length.
70For each of the three subsequent Ages, as also for the twilights that precede and
follow them, the first number of the thousands and the hundreds is progressively
diminished by one.* 71These four Ages, computed at the very beginning as lasting
12,000 years, are said to constitute a single Age of the gods.* 72The sum total of
1,000 divine Ages should be regarded as a single day of Brahma, and his night as
having the very same duration. 73Those who know this propitious day of Brahma
lasting 1,000 Ages, as also his night with the same duration—they are people who
truly know day and night.
74At the end of that day-and-night, he awakens from his sleep; and when he has
woken up, he brings forth the mind, which is both existent and non-existent. 75The
mind, driven by the desire to create, transmutes the creation. From the mind is born
ether, whose distinctive quality is said to be sound. 76From ether, as it is being
transmuted, is born wind—powerful, pure, and bearing all odors—whose distinctive
quality is thought to be touch. 77From the wind, as it is being transmuted, is produced
light—shining, brilliant, and dispelling darkness—whose distinctive quality,
tradition says, is visible appearance. 78From light, as it is being transmuted comes
water, with taste as its distinctive quality; and from water, earth, with smell as its
distinctive quality. That is how this creation was at the beginning.
79The divine Age mentioned previously as lasting 12,000—that multiplied 7 i
times is here referred to as an "Epoch of a Manu" (1.71 n.). 80The countless Epochs of


--- PAGE 102 ---
Chapter 1 
91
Manus, as also creation and dissolution—the Supreme Lord does this again and again
as a kind of sport.
81In the Krta Age, the Law is whole, possessing all four feet;* and so is truth.
People never acquire any property through unlawful means. 82By acquiring* such
property, however, the Law is stripped of one foot in each of the subsequent Ages;
through theft, falsehood, and fraud,* the Law disappears a foot at a time.
fflln the Krta Age, people are free from sickness, succeed in all their pursuits, and
have a life span of 400 years. In the Treta and each of the subsequent Ages, however,
their life span is shortened by a quarter.* ^The life span of mortals given in the Veda,
the benefits of rites, and the power of embodied beings—they all come to fruition in
the world in conformity with each Age.
^There is one set of Laws for men in the Krta Age, another in the Treta, still
another in the Dvâpara , and a different set in the Kali, in keeping with the progressive
shortening taking place in each Age.* 86Ascetic toil, they say, is supreme in the Krta
Age; knowledge in Treta; sacrifice in Dvâpara ; and gift-giving alone in Kali.
Excursus: Occupations of Social Classes
87For the protection of this whole creation, that One of dazzling brilliance assigned
separate activities for those born from the mouth, arms, thighs, and feet. 88To
Brahmins, he assigned reciting and teaching the Veda, offering and officiating at
sacrifices, and receiving and giving gifts. 89To the Ksatriya, he allotted protecting the
subjects, giving gifts, offering sacrifices, reciting the Veda, and avoiding attachment
to sensory objects; ^and to the Vaisya, looking after animals, giving gifts, offering
sacrifices, reciting the Veda, trade, moneylending, and agriculture. 91A single activity
did the Lord allot to the Sudra, however: the ungrudging service of those very social
classes (10.74-80).
Excursus: Excellence of the Brahmin
92A man is said to be purer above the navel. Therefore, the Self-existent One has
declared, the mouth is his purest part.* 93Because he arose from the loftiest part of the
body, because he is the eldest, and because he retains the Veda,* the Brahmin is by
Law the lord of this whole creation. 94For, in the beginning, the Self-existent One
heated himself with ascetic toil and brought him forth from his own mouth to convey
divine oblations and ancestral offerings and to protect this whole world. 95What
creature can surpass him through whose mouth the denizens of the triple heaven always
eat their oblations, and the forefathers their offerings (7.84)?
%Among creatures, living beings are the best; among living beings, those who
subsist by intelligence; among those who subsist by intelligence,* human beings; and
among human beings, Brahmins—so the tradition declares. 97Among Brahmins, the
learned are the best; among the learned, those who have made the resolve;* among
those who have made the resolve, the doers; and among doers, the Vedic savants.+
98A Brahmin's birth alone represents the everlasting physical frame of the Law;
for, born on account of the Law, he is fit for becoming Brahman. "For when a Brahmin
is born, a preeminent birth takes place on earth—a ruler of all creatures to guard the
storehouse of Laws.* 100This whole world—whatever there is on earth—is the


--- PAGE 103 ---
92 
Chapter 1
property of the Brahmin. Because of his eminence and high birth, the Brahmin has a
clear right to this whole world. 101The Brahmin eats only what belongs to him, wears
what belongs to him, and gives what belongs to him; it is by the kindness of the
Brahmin that other people eat.*
Excursus: Treatise of Manu
102To determine which activities are proper to him and which to the remaining classes
in their proper order, Manu, the wise son of the Self-existent, composed this treatise.
103It should be studied diligently and taught to his pupils properly by a learned
Brahmin, and by no one else.+
104When a Brahmin who keeps to his vows studies this treatise, he is never
sullied by faults arising from mental, oral, or physical activities; 105he purifies those
alongside whom he eats (3.183-86), as also seven generations of his lineage before
him and seven after him; he alone, moreover, has a right to this entire earth.
106This treatise is the best good-luck incantation; it expands the intellect; it
procures everlasting fame;* and it is the ultimate bliss.+ 107In this, the Law has been
set forth in full—the good and the bad qualities of actions and the timeless norms of
proper conduct—for all four social classes.*
108Proper conduct is the highest Law, as well as what is declared the Veda and
given in traditional texts. Applying himself always to this treatise,* therefore, let a
twice-born man remain constantly self-possessed. 109When a Brahmin has fallen away
from proper conduct, he does not reap the fruit of the Veda; but when he holds fast to
proper conduct, tradition says, he enjoys its full reward. ""Seeing thus that the Law
proceeds from proper conduct, the sages understood proper conduct to be the ultimate
root of all ascetic toil.
Excursus: Synopsis
mOrigin of the world [1.6-110].
Rules for consecratory rites [2.26-67].
Observance of the vow [2.69-139].
Service [2.140-244].
The most excellent rule regarding the final bath [2.245-46].
112Marrying a wife [3.4-19].
Characteristics of the different types of marriage [3.20-44].
Rules regarding the great sacrifices [3.67-121, 285-86].
The timeless ordinance on ancestral rites [3.122-284].
"Characteristics of the different occupations [4.2-12].
Observances of a bath-graduate [4.13-257].
Permitted and forbidden food [5.4-56].
Purification [5.57-109].
Cleansing of articles [5.111-145].
114Law pertaining to women [5.147-168].
Hermit's life [6.1-32].
Renunciation* [6.33-85].
Retirement* [6.87-96].


--- PAGE 104 ---
Chapter 1 
93
The entire Law pertaining to the king [7.1-226].
Adjudication of lawsuits [8.1-46].
115Rules concerning the questioning of witnesses [8.62-123].
Law with respect to husbands and wives [9.1-102].
Law on partitioning of estates [9.104-219].
Gambling [9.221-228].
Eradication of thorns [9.232-293].
116Conduct of Vaisyas and Sudras [9.326-335].
Origin of mixed classes [10.1-73].
Law in times of adversity for social classes [10.81-129].
Rules on penances [11.44-266].
117The three passages into the transmigratory cycle resulting from action
[12.1-81].
Final bliss [12.83-106].
Examination of the good and bad qualities of actions.
118The timeless Laws of regions, of hereditary groups, and of families.
Laws of heretical ascetic groups and guilds.*
All that Manu has set forth in this treatise.
119Just as, upon my request, Manu formerly taught me this treatise, so you too must
learn it from me today.


--- PAGE 105 ---
CHAPTER TWO
THE LAW
^arn the Law always adhered to by people who are erudite, virtuous, and free from
love and hate, the Law assented to by the heart.*
Excursus: Desire*
2To be motivated by desire* is not commended, but it is impossible here to be free
from desire; for it is desire that prompts vedic study and the performance of vedic rites.
Intention is the root of desire;* intention is the wellspring of sacrifices; and intention
triggers every religious observance and every rule of restraint—so the tradition
declares. 4Nowhere in this world do we see any activity done by a man free from desire;
for whatever at all that a man may do, it is the work of someone who desired it.* 5By
engaging in them* properly, a man attains the world of the immortals and, in this
world, obtains all his desires just as he intended.+
Sources of Law
6The root of the Law is the entire Veda; the tradition and practice of those who know
the Veda; the conduct of good people; and what is pleasing to oneself.* 7Whatever Law
Manu has proclaimed with respect to anyone, all that has been taught in the Veda, for it
contains all knowledge.* 8After subjecting all this* to close scrutiny with the eye of
knowledge, a learned man should apply himself to the Law proper to him on the
authority of the scriptures; 9for by following the Law proclaimed in scripture and
tradition, a man achieves fame in this world and unsurpassed happiness after death.
10"Scripture"* should be recognized as "Veda," and "tradition" as "Law
Treatise." These two should never be called into question in any matter,* for it is from
them that the Law has shined forth. "If a twice-born disparages these two* by relying
on the science of logic, he ought to be ostracized by good people as an infidel and a
denigrator of the Veda.
Knowledge of the Law
12Veda, tradition, the conduct of good people, and what is pleasing to oneself—these,
they say, are the four visible marks of the Law. 13The knowledge of the Law is
prescribed for people who are unattached to wealth or pleasures; and for people who
seek to know the Law, scripture is the highest authority.*
94


--- PAGE 106 ---
Chapter 2 
95
Contradictions in Law
14When there are two contradictory scriptural provisions on some issue, however,
tradition takes them both to be the Law with respect to it; for wise men have correctly
pronounced them both to be the Law.15After sunrise, before sunrise, and at daybreak—
the sacrifice takes place at any of these times; so states a vedic scripture.*+
Competence to Study the Law
16A man for whom it is prescribed that the rites beginning with the impregnation
ceremony and ending with the funeral are to be performed with the recitation of vedic
formulas—no one but he is to be recognized as entitled to study this treatise.*
The Sacred Land
17The land created by the gods and lying between the divine rivers SarasvatI and
Drsadvatï is called "Brahmâvarta"—th
e region of Brahman.* 18The conduct handed
down from generation to generation among the social classes and the intermediate
classes ofthat land is called the "conduct of good people."
19Kuruksetra and the lands of the Matsyas, Pañcalas, and Sürasenaka s constitute
the "land of Brahmin seers," which borders on the Brahmâvarta . 20A11 the people on
earth should learn their respective practices from a Brahmin born in that land.
21The land between the Himalaya and Vindhya ranges, to the east of Vinasana
and west of Prayâga , is known as the "Middle Region."
22The land between the same mountain ranges extending from the eastern to the
western sea is what the wise call "Äryävarta"—th
e region of the Äryas .
23The natural range of the black buck is to be recognized as the land fit for
sacrifice; beyond that is the land of foreigners.*
24Twice-born people should diligently settle in these lands; but a SQdra, when he
is when starved for a livelihood, may live in any region at all.
^1 have described to you above succinctly the source of the Law, as
also the origin of this whole world. Learn now the Laws of the social
classes.
C O N S E C R A T O R Y R I T E S
26The consecration of the body, beginning with the ceremony of impregnation, should
be performed for twice-born men by means of the sacred vedic rites, a consecration that
cleanses a man both here and in the hereafter. 27The fire offerings for the benefit of the
fetus, the birth rite, the first cutting of hair, and the tying of the Muñja-grass cord*—
by these rites the taint of semen and womb is wiped off from twice-born men. 28Vedic
recitation, religious observances, fire offerings, study of the triple Veda, ritual
offerings, sons, the five great sacrifices, and sacrifices—by these a man's body is made
"brähmic." *


--- PAGE 107 ---
96 
Chapters
Childhood Rites
29The rule is that the birth rite of a male child* must be performed before his umbilical
cord is cut; he is fed gold, honey, and ghee* to the accompaniment of vedic formulas.
30One should see to it that the child's naming ceremony is performed on the tenth
or the twelfth day after birth, on a day or at a time that is auspicious, or under a favor-
able constellation. 31For a Brahmin, the name should connote auspiciousness; for a
Ksatriya, strength; for a Vaisya, wealth; and for a Südra , disdain. 32For a Brahmin, the
name should connote happiness; for a Ksatriya, protection; for a Vaisya, prosperity;
and for a SQdra, service. 33For girls, the name should be easy to pronounce and without
fierce connotations, have a clear meaning, be charming and auspicious, end in a long
final syllable, and contain a word for blessing.*
MIn the fourth month, one should perform the ceremony of taking the child out
of the house; and in the sixth month, the feeding with rice, as also any other auspicious
ceremony cherished in the family.
35The first cutting of hair, according to the Law, should be performed for all
twice-born children in the first or the third year, in accordance with the dictates of
scripture.
Vedic Initiation
Time for Initiation 
36For a Brahmin, the vedic initiation should be carried out in
the eighth year from conception; for a Ksatriya, in the eleventh year from conception;
and for a Vaisya, in the twelfth year from conception. 37For a Brahmin desiring
eminence in vedic knowledge, it should be carried out in the fifth year; for a Ksatriya
aspiring for power, in the sixth year; and for a Vaisya aspiring for a spirit of enterprise,
in the seventh year.
Failure to be Initiated 
38For a Brahmin, the time for Sâvitrï * does not lapse
until the sixteenth year;* for a Ksatriya, until the twenty-second; and for a Vaisya,
until the twenty-fourth. 39If, after those times, any of these three has not undergone
consecration at the proper time, he becomes a Vrâty a (10.20-23), fallen from Sâvitr ï
(2.38 n.) and spurned by Äryas . 40Even in a time of adversity, a Brahmin should never
establish vedic or matrimonial links* with such people, unless they have been cleansed
according to rule.
Insignia: I 
41Students should wear the skin of a black antelope, a Ruru deer, or a
male goat, and clothes of hemp, flax, or wool, according to the direct order of classes.
42For a Brahmin, the girdle should be made with a triple cord of Muñja grass,
smooth and soft; for a Ksatriya, with a bowstring of MQrvâ hemp; and for a Vaisya,
with a string of hemp. 43When Muñja grass is unavailable, they should be made with
Kusa grass, the Asmantaka plant, or Balvaja grass.* One should wrap the girdle around
the waist three times and make one, three, or five knots.*
^For a Brahmin, the sacrificial cord is made with a triple strand of cotton thread
twisted upwards;* for a Ksatriya, with strands of hemp; and for a Vaisya, with woolen
strands.


--- PAGE 108 ---
Chapter 2 
97
45A Brahmin, according to the Law, is entitled to a wood-apple or Palâs a staff; a
Ksatriya, to a banyan or Khadira staff; and a Vaisya, to a PIlu or Udumbara staff. 46In
terms of length, a Brahmin's staff should reach the hair; a Ksatriya's the forehead; and a
Vaisya's the nose. 47Every staff should be straight, without blemishes, pleasing to the
eye, not liable to alarm people, with the bark intact, and undamaged by fire.
Food 
48Taking his chosen staff, he should worship the sun, walk around the fire
clockwise, and go on his begging round according to rule. 49An initiated Brahmin
should beg placing the word "Madam" at the beginning; a Ksatriya, in the middle; and
a Vaisya, at the end.* ^The very first time, he should beg from his mother, his sister,
or his own mother's sister, or from some other woman who would not snub him.
51After collecting as much almsfood as he needs without guile,* he should
present it to his teacher, purify himself by sipping some water, and eat it facing the
east. 52Facing the east while eating procures long life; facing the south procures fame;
facing the west procures prosperity; and facing the north procures truth.*+ 53A twice-
born should always eat food after sipping* some water and with a collected mind; after
eating also he should sip water in the proper manner and rub water on the orifices.*
^He must always revere his food and eat it without disdain. When he sees the
food, he should rejoice, look pleased, and receive it joyfully in every way. 55For when
food is revered, it always bestows strength and vigor; but when it is eaten without
being revered, it destroys them both.
KHe must not give his leftovers to anyone, eat between meals,* engage in
overeating, or go anywhere while he is sullied with remnants.* 57Eating too much
harms his health, reduces his life expectancy, impedes heaven, hinders merit, and is
despised by people; therefore, he should avoid it.
Sipping 
58A Brahmin should sip water at all times with the part of the palm linked
to Brahma, Prajâpati , or gods, but never with the part linked to ancestors.* 59They call
the flat surface at the base of the thumb the part linked to Brahma; the base of the
fingers, the part linked to Prajâpati ; the finger tips, the part linked to gods; and the area
beneath these two,* the part linked to ancestors.
^He should first sip water three times, then wipe his mouth twice, and finally
rub water on his orifices, body, and head (2.53 n.). 61A man who knows the Law and
desires to become pure should always do the sipping in a secluded place, using water
that is not warm or frothy, employing the appropriate part of the palm, and facing east
or north. 62A Brahmin is purified by water reaching the heart; a Ksatriya, by water
reaching the throat; a Vaisya, by water taken into the mouth; and a SQdra, by water
wetting the lips.
Insignia: 
II 
^When the right hand is raised, a twice-born man is called
"upavitin"—wearing the cord in the sacrificial mode; when the left hand is raised, he is
called "prâclnâvltin"
—wearing the cord toward the east; and when it is worn around the
neck, he is called "nivitin"—wearing the cord down.*
^When the girdle, antelope skin, staff, sacrificial cord, or water pot is damaged,
he should throw it in water and take a new one with the appropriate ritual formula.


--- PAGE 109 ---
98 
Chapter 2
Shaving Ceremony
^The rule is that for a Brahmin the shaving ceremony* is to be performed in the
sixteenth year; for a Ksatriya, in the twenty-second; and for a Vaisya, in the twenty-
fourth (2.38 n.).
Consecretory Rites for Women
66For females, on the other hand, this entire series should be performed at the proper
time and in the proper sequence, but without reciting any vedic formula, for the
purpose of consecrating their bodies.
67For females, tradition tells us, the marriage ceremony equals the rite of vedic
consecration; serving the husband equals living with the teacher; and care of the house
equals the tending of the sacred fires.*+
68I have explained above the initiatory rite of twice-born men, a rite
that signals a new birth and is sanctifying. Learn now the activities
connected with it.
T H E S T U D E N T
Instruction
69After initiating a pupil, the teacher should at the outset train him in purification,
proper conduct, fire rituals, and twilight worship.
70When the pupil is ready for vedic recitation, he should sip water in the
prescribed manner, dress in light clothing,* bring his organs under control, face the
north, and join his palms in "brahniänjah"" —then should he be taught. 71At the
beginning and at the end of a vedic lesson, he should always clasp his teacher's feet and
recite the Veda with joined palms—tradition calls this "brahmânjali," the vedic
joining of palms. ^He should clasp his teacher's feet by crossing his hands, touching
the teacher's right foot with his right hand and the teacher's left with his left.
73When he is ready for vedic recitation, he should say to the teacher, "Teach, Sir
(bho)\", without being lazy at any time; and when commanded "Stop!", he should
cease.* 74At the beginning and at the end of vedic recitation, the student should always
recite the syllable OM. If it is not recited at the beginning, the Veda slips away; if it is
not recited at the end, the Veda wastes away. 75When he is seated on sacred grass with
the tips toward the east, cleansed by the purificatory blades of grass,* and purified by
controlling his breath three times—then he becomes competent to recite OM.
The Syllable O M 
76The phonemes "a," "u," and "m"—Prajäpat
i extracted these
from the three Vedas, as also "bhü," earth; "bhuvah," mid-space; and "svar," heaven.
77Also from the three Vedas, Prajäpati , the Supreme Lord, squeezed out foot by foot
the Sâvitr ï verse:* "That...."
78By softly reciting this syllable and this verse preceded by the Calls during the
two twilights, a Brahmin who knows the Veda wins the merit of reciting the Veda


--- PAGE 110 ---
Chapter 2 
99
itself. 79By reciting these three one thousand times outside the village, a Brahmin is
freed from even a grievous sin within a month, like a snake from its slough. ^Someone
who is a Brahmin, a Ksatriya, or a Vaisya by birth invites the censure of good people
by cutting himself off from this verse and from the timely performance of his rite.*
81The three inexhaustible Great Calls preceded by OM and the three-footed
Sâvitr î verse should be recognized as the mouth of the Veda. 82When a man recites this
verse tirelessly for three years, becoming wind and assuming an ethereal form, he
reaches the highest Brahman.* ^The highest Brahman is the monosyllable OM; the
highest ascetic toil is the control of breath; nothing is higher than the Sâvitrî ; and truth
is better than ascetic silence. ^Offering ghee while seated, offering oblations while
standing*—all such vedic rites perish. The syllable (aksard) OM should be recognized
as imperishable (aksard);* it is Brahman, it is Prajâpati .
Soft Recitation ^The sacrifice consisting of soft recitation is ten times better
than the sacrifice consisting of prescribed rites—a hundred times, if the recitation is
done inaudibly; and a thousand times, if it is done mentally. 86The four types of
cooked oblations* along with the sacrifices consisting of prescribed rites—all these are
not worth a sixteenth part of the sacrifice consisting of soft recitation. 87Only by soft
recitation does a Brahmin achieve success; on this there is no doubt. Whether he does
anything else or not, a Maitra,* they say, is the true Brahmin.
Excursus: Control of the Organs
88As his organs meander amidst the alluring sense objects, a learned man should strive
hard to control them, like a charioteer his horses.
89I will explain precisely and in their proper order the eleven organs described by
wise men of old: ^ear, skin, eyes, tongue, and the fifth, nostrils; anus, sexual organ,
hands, feet, and speech, listed by tradition as the tenth. 91Of these, the five in order
beginning with the ear are called the organs of perception; and the five beginning with
the anus, the organs of action. 92Know that the eleventh is the mind, which, by virtue
of its own distinctive quality, belongs to both groups. So, by mastering it, one
masters both those quintets.
93By attachment to the organs, a man undoubtedly becomes corrupted; but by
bringing them under control, he achieves success. 94Desire is never quenched by
enjoying desires; like a fire fed with ghee, it only waxes stronger. 95Between a man
who obtains all these and a man who gives them all up—giving up all desires is far
better than obtaining them all. %Corrupted as these organs are* by sensory objects, one
cannot bring them under control as effectively by abstinence as by constant insight.
97Vedas, gifts,* sacrifices, constraints,* and ascetic toils—none of these is ever
successful for a man with a corrupt heart.
98When a man feels neither elation nor revulsion at hearing, touching, seeing,
eating, or smelling anything, he should be recognized as a man who has mastered his
organs. "Of all these organs, however, if a single one slips away, through that his
wisdom slips away, like water through the foot of a skin.* 100By bringing the full range
of his organs under control and by restraining his mind, a man will achieve all his
goals without having to shrivel up his body through yoga.


--- PAGE 111 ---
100 
Chapter 2
Twilight Worship
101 At the morning twilight, he should stand reciting softly the Sâvitr ï verse until the
sun comes into view; at the evening twilight, however, he should remain properly
seated* until the Big Dipper becomes clearly visible, 102When he stands reciting softly
at the morning twilight, he banishes any sin committed during the night; and when he
sits at the evening twilight, he removes any taint contracted during the day. 103A man
who neither stands at the morning twilight nor sits at the evening twilight should be
excluded like a Sudra from all rites of the twice-born.
Vedic Recitation
104Intent on carrying out the ritual of daily recitation,* he should go into the wilderness
and, controlled* and composed, recite at least the Sâvitr ï verse near a place of water.
105Rules regarding the suspension of vedic recitation (4.101-27) have no bearing
on Vedic Supplements,* on daily vedic recitation, and on ritual formulas used in fire
offerings. 106The daily vedic recitation is not subject to suspension, for tradition calls it
a sacrificial session consisting of vedic recitation; it is a meritorious rite at which the
vedic recitation takes the place of the burnt oblation and the factors causing a
suspension act as the oblatory exclamation Vasat*
107When someone, after purifying and controlling himself, performs his vedic
recitation for a year according to rule, that recitation will rain milk, curd, ghee, and
honey on him every single day.*
Persons Competent to Receive Vedic Instruction
108Kindling the sacred fire, begging almsfood, sleeping on the floor, and doing what is
beneficial to his teacher—a twice-born who has undergone vedic initiation should do
these until he has performed the rite of returning home.*
109The son of his teacher, a person who offers obedient service, a person who has
given him knowledge, a virtuous person, an honest person,* someone close to him,* a
capable man, someone who gives him money, a good man, and one who is his own*—
these ten may be taught the Veda in accordance with the Law. 110He must never impart
instruction to anyone who has not requested it or who has requested it in an improper
way; for in this world, a wise man, though learned, should conduct himself like an
idiot.* 1UA man who imparts in violation of the Law and a man who requests in
violation of the Law—of these two, the one or the other will incur death or enmity.
112Do not sow knowledge where there is no merit or money, or at least
proportionate service; you don't sow good seed on brackish soil. 113Even in a time of
dreadful adversity, a vedic savant should rather die with his knowledge; let him not
sow it on barren soil.
114Vedic knowledge came up to the Brahmin and said,* "I am your treasure.
Guard me! Do not hand me over to a malcontent. I shall thus become supremely
strong. 115A man you know to be honest, restrained, and chaste—only to such a
Brahmin should you disclose me, as to a vigilant guardian of your treasure."*
116If, however, a man learns the Veda without permission by listening to
someone who is reciting it, he is guilty of stealing the Veda and will go to hell.


--- PAGE 112 ---
Chapter 2 
101
Salutation
117He should greet first* the person from whom he received knowledge—whether it is
the knowledge of worldly matters, of the Veda, or of the inner self. 118A well-
disciplined Brahmin, although he knows just the Sâvitr ï verse, is far better than an un-
disciplined one who eats all types of food and deals in all types of merchandise,
though he may know all three Vedas.
119He should not sit on a bed or seat occupied by a superior, and he should rise
from the bed or seat he is occupying before he greets such a person; 120for when an older
person comes near, the life breaths of a younger person rise up, and as he rises up and
greets him, he retrieves them.* 121When someone is conscientious about greeting and
always renders assistance to the elderly, he obtains an increase in these four: life span,
wisdom, fame, and power.
122When a Brahmin is greeting an older person, he must state his name after the
greeting, saying, "I am so-and-so." 123When greeting people who are ignorant of the
greeting containing the proper name, as also any woman, a wise man should simply
say "I."* 124When he uses the greeting containing his own name, he should say "bho" at
the end; the meaning of "bho"* contains the essential meanings of all proper names—
that is the tradition handed down by the seers. 125In greeting a Brahmin, he should say,
"May you live long, gentle Sir!"; and at the end of the name, he should pronounce "a"
and prolate the previous syllable.* 126A learned man should not greet a Brahmin who
does not know how to return a greeting; he is no better than a SQdra.
127When he meets a Brahmin, he should ask him whether he is doing well
(kusala); a Ksatriya, whether he is all right (anamaya); a Vaisya, whether his property is
secure (ksema); and a SQdra, whether he is in good health (arogyd). 
128A person
consecrated for sacrifice should not be addressed by name even if he is younger; a man
conversant with the Law should address such a person using the words "bho" or "Sir"
(bhavat). 129He should address a woman who is another man's wife and who is not a
blood relative of his using the words "Madam," "Dear Lady," or "Sister." 130He should
rise up and say, "I am so-and-so" to his maternal and paternal uncles, fathers-in-law,
officiating priests, and elders who are younger than he. 131He should honor a maternal
aunt, a wife of a maternal uncle, a mother-in-law, and a paternal aunt as he would his
teacher's wife; they are equal to his teacher's wife.*
132The feet of his brother's wife of the same social class, he should clasp every
day; but the feet of the wives of his paternal and maternal relatives,* only after
returning from a journey. 133Towards a sister of his father and mother and towards his
own older sister, he should behave as towards his own mother; but the mother is more
venerable than they.
Precedence
134Among fellow citizens, people with an age difference of ten years are regarded as
friends; among fellow artisans, people with an age difference of five years; among
vedic scholars, people with an age difference of three years; and among blood relatives,
only people with a slight age difference.
135A io-year-old Brahmin and a ioo-year-old king, one should know, stand
with respect to each other as a father to a son; but of the two, the Brahmin is the father.


--- PAGE 113 ---
102 
Chapter 2
136Wealth, kin, age, ritual life, and the fifth, knowledge—these are the grounds for
respect; and each subsequent one carries greater weight than each preceding. 137Among
persons of the three classes, one who possesses more of and to a higher degree these
five grounds is more deserving of respect; and so is a SQdra who is in his nineties.+
138One should give way to people in vehicles or in their nineties, the sick, people
carrying loads, women, bath-graduates, kings, and bridegrooms. 139When such people
encounter each other, however, a bath-graduate and a king are to receive greater honor;
but when a king and a bath-graduate encounter each other, the king pays honor to the
bath-graduate.
Teacher
140The twice-born man who initiates a pupil and teaches him the Veda together with the
ritual books and the secret texts* is called "Teacher." 141A man who teaches a section of
the Veda or else the Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.) for a living is called "Tutor." 142The
Brahmin who performs the rites beginning with the ceremony of impregnation
according to rule and nourishes with food is called "Elder."* 143The person who, after
he has been chosen by someone, sets up the sacred fires and performs the cooked
oblations and sacrifices such as the Agnistoma offering on his behalf is called here his
"Officiating Priest."
144He should consider the man who fills both his ears* faithfully with the Veda
as his father and mother and never show hostility towards him. 145The teacher is ten
times greater* than the tutor; the father is a hundred times greater than the teacher; but
the mother is a thousand times greater than the father. 146Between the man who gave
life and the man who gave the Veda, the man who gave the Veda is the more venerable
father; for a Brahmin's birth in the Veda is everlasting, both here and in the hereafter.
147When, through lust for each other, his father and mother engender him and he is
conceived in the womb, he should consider that as his mere coming into existence.
148But the birth that a teacher who has fathomed the Veda brings about according to rule
by means of the Sâvitr i verse—that is his true birth, that is not subject to old age and
death.
149A man who assists someone with vedic knowledge, be it a little or a lot, is
also acknowledged here as his elder in recognition of that assistance with vedic
knowledge.
150Even a younger Brahmin who brings about the vedic birth of an older
individual and trains him in the Law proper to him becomes his father according to the
Law. 151The child sage, son of Angiras, gave vedic instruction to his fathers; and
having excelled them in knowledge, he called them "Little Children." 152They became
infuriated and raised the issue with the gods. The gods convened and told them: "The
child addressed you properly. 153An ignorant man, surely, is the child, and the man
who imparts the Veda is the father; for they address an ignorant man as 'Child' and a
man who imparts the Veda as 'Father'."
154The seers have established this Law: "In our eyes, only a vedic savant is an
eminent man"; eminence does not come from age, gray hairs, wealth, or kin. 155For
Brahmins, seniority depends on knowledge, for Ksatriyas on valor, and for Vaisyas on
grain and wealth; for Südra s alone does it depends on age. 156A man does not become a


--- PAGE 114 ---
Chapters 
103
"senior" simply because his hair has turned gray. Gods call a man with vedic learning a
"senior," even though he may be young.
157Like an elephant made of wood, like a deer made of leather, is a Brahmin
without vedic learning; these three only bear the name. 158As fruitless as a eunuch*
with women, as fruitless as a cow with a cow, and as fruitless as a gift given to an
ignorant man, is a Brahmin ignorant of the Veda.
159 A man who wishes to promote the Law should instruct creatures about what is
best without hurting them, employing pleasant and gentle words. 160Only a man whose
mind and speech have been purified and are always well-guarded acquires the entire
fruit of reaching the end of the Veda.* 161Though deeply hurt, let him never use cutting
words, show hostility to others in thought or deed, or use aberrant language* that
would alarm people.
162Let a Brahmin always shrink from praise, as he would from poison; let him
ever yearn for scorn, as he would for ambrosia—163for, a man who is scorned sleeps at
ease, wakes up at ease, goes about in this world at ease; but the man who scorned him
perishes.
Vedic Study
164A twice-born whose body has been consecrated following this orderly sequence
should gradually amass the riches of ascetic toil consisting of vedic study* while he
resides with his teacher. 165A twice-born should study the entire Veda together with the
secret texts (2.140 n.), as he carries out the various observances and special ascetic
practices enjoined by vedic injunctions. 166A Brahmin planning on undergoing ascetic
toil should simply recite the Veda constantly; for vedic recitation is recognized here as
the highest ascetic toil for a Brahmin. 167When a twice-born, even while wearing a
garland, performs his vedic recitation every day according to his ability, he is surely
practising the fiercest ascetic toil down to the very tips of his nails. 168When a Brahmin
expends great effort in other matters without studying the Veda, while still alive he is
quickly reduced to the status of a Sudra, together with his children.
169According to a scriptural injunction, the first birth of a Brahmin is from his
mother; the second takes place at the tying of the Muñja-grass girdle (2.27 n.), and the
third at the consecration for a sacrifice. 170Of these, the one signaled by the tying of the
Muñja-grass girdle is his birth from the Veda. At this birth, the Sävitr i verse is said to
be his mother, and the teacher his father. 171The teacher is called the father because he
imparts the Veda, for a man does not become competent to perform any rite until the
tying of the Muñja-grass girdle. 172Such a man should not pronounce any vedic text,
except when he offers a funerary oblation, for he is equal to a SQdra until he is born
from the Veda.
Observances
173After he has undergone vedic initiation, he is to be instructed in the observances and
then taught the Veda in the proper order and according to rule. 174The very same skin,
cord, girdle, staff, and garment prescribed for him after his initiation* are prescribed for
him also during the observances.


--- PAGE 115 ---
104 
Chapter 2
175Bringing all his organs under control, a vedic student living with his teacher
should observe these restrictions in order to increase his ascetic toil. 176Every day, after
purifying himself by bathing, he should offer quenching libations to gods, seers, and
ancestors; worship the gods; and put firewood into the sacred fire. 177He should avoid
honey, meat, perfumes, garlands, savory foods, women, all foods that have turned
sour, causing injury to living beings, 178rubbing oil on the body, putting collyrium on
the eyes, using footwear or an umbrella, lust, hatred, greed, dancing, singing, playing
musical instruments, 179gambling, gossiping, slander, lies, looking at and touching
women, and hurting others.
180He should always sleep alone and never ejaculate his semen; for when he
voluntarily ejaculates his semen, he breaks his vow. 181When a Brahmin student
ejaculates his semen involuntarily in sleep, he should bathe, worship the sun, and
softly recite three times the verse: "May the virile strength return again to me...."
Begging and Daily Duties 
182He should fetch a pot of water, flowers, cow
dung, loose soil, and Kusa grass—as much as required—and beg for food every day.
183Having made himself pure, a vedic student should gather almsfood every day
from the houses of persons who do not neglect the Veda or sacrifices and who have
distinguished themselves in the activities proper to them. 184He should not beg from
his teacher's family or from the families of his paternal or maternal relatives. When
houses of other people are unavailable, however, he may beg from these, avoiding
those listed earlier when those listed later are available.* 185When the kinds of persons
mentioned above are not available, he may beg from the entire village after purifying
himself and curbing his speech; but he should avoid heinous sinners.*
186Having fetched firewood from afar, he should stack it above ground;* and
using that firewood, he should make offerings in the fire diligently morning and
evening.
187If he fails to beg food or to put firewood into the sacred fire for seven nights
without being sick, he should perform the penitential observance prescribed for a
student who has broken his vow of chastity (see 11.119-24).
188Subsisting on almsfood every day, a votary should never eat a meal given by
one person; tradition says that for a votary subsisting on almsfood is equal to a fast.+
189When he is invited, however, he may freely eat at an offering to the gods while
keeping to his vow, and at an offering to ancestors, conducting himself like a seer;
doing so does not violate his vow. 190Wise men sanction this activity only for
Brahmins; this kind of activity is not commended at all for Ksatriyas and Vaisyas.
Conduct towards the Teacher
191 When he is ordered by the teacher—or even when he is not—he should apply himself
every day to vedic recitation and to activities beneficial to his teacher.
192Bringing his body, speech, organs of perception, and mind under control, he
should stand with joined palms looking at his teacher's face. 193He must always keep
his right arm uncovered,* comport himself properly, cover himself well,* and, when
he is told "Be seated," sit down facing the teacher.
194In his teacher's presence, his food, clothes, and apparel should always be of a


--- PAGE 116 ---
Chapter 2 
105
lesser quality than his teacher's. He should wake up before his teacher and go to bed
after him.
195He must never answer or converse with his teacher while lying down, seated,
eating, standing,* or facing away; 1%he should do so standing up if the teacher is
seated, approaching him if he is standing, going up to meet him if he is walking
towards him, running after him if he is running, 197going around to face him if he is
turned away from him, coming close to him if he is far away, and bending down if he is
lying down or standing at a lower level. 198In his teacher's presence, he should always
occupy a lower couch or seat; and, within his teacher's sight, he must not sit as he
pleases.
199Even out of sight, he must not refer to his teacher by just his name or mimic
his walk, speech, or mannerisms. 200Wherever his teacher is slandered or reviled, he
should either cover his ears or go someplace else.* 201By slandering his teacher, he
becomes an ass; by reviling him, a dog; by living off him, a worm; and by being
jealous of him, an insect.
202When he is far away or angry, he must not pay his respects to his teacher; nor
should he do so in the presence of a woman. When he is riding in a vehicle or seated on
a chair, he should greet his teacher only after getting down. 203He must not sit down
with his teacher in such a way that the wind blows from the teacher towards him or
from him towards the teacher; nor should he talk about anything out of his teacher's
hearing. 204He may sit by his teacher on a cart drawn by an ox, horse, or camel; on a
terrace or a spread of grass;* or on a mat, rock, bench, or boat.
Teacher's Teacher and Other Instructors 
205In the presence of his teacher's
teacher, he should behave towards him as towards his own teacher; and he must not
greet his own elders* unless he is permitted by his teacher.
206He should always behave in the very same manner towards his vedic
instructors and his own blood relatives, as also towards those who keep him from what
is unrighteous and who teach him what is beneficial.
Members of Teacher's Family 
207Towards distinguished persons, as well as
towards the teacher's Äry a sons* and the teacher's own relatives, he should always
behave just as he does towards his teacher.
208A teacher's son who teaches him—whether that son is younger than or of the
same age as himself, or even if he is only a student of the ritual—is entitled to the same
respect as his teacher. 209He must not massage the limbs of his teacher's son, assist him
at his bath, eat his leftovers, or wash his feet.
210The teacher's wives of equal class should receive the same honor as the teacher,
but wives of unequal class should be honored by rising up and greeting them. 211He
must not apply oil on his teacher's wife, assist her at her bath, massage her limbs, or do
her hair. 212Anyone who is over 20 and able to distinguish between the attractive and
the unattractive* should not greet here a young wife of his teacher by clasping her feet.
213It is the very nature of women here to corrupt men. On that account, prudent men are
never off guard in the presence of alluring young women. 214For an alluring young
woman is capable of leading astray not only the ignorant but even learned men under


--- PAGE 117 ---
106 
Chapter 2
the sway of anger and lust. 215He must not sit alone with his mother, sister, or
daughter; the array of sensory organs is powerful and overpowers even a learned man.
216A young man may freely pay his respects to the young wives of his teacher, however,
by prostrating himself on the ground according to rule and saying: "I am so-and-so."
217Recalling the Law followed by good people, he should clasp the feet of his teacher's
wives upon his return from a journey and greet them every day.
218As a man discovers water by digging with a spade, so a student, offering obedient
service, discovers the knowledge contained in his teacher.
Rules of Conduct
219A student may shave his head or keep his hair matted; or else he may keep just his
topknot matted.
He should never let the sun rise or set while he is asleep in a village. ^"If the sun
should rise or set while he is asleep, whether deliberately or inadvertently, he should
fast for one day while engaging in soft recitation.* ^If, after he had been asleep at
sunrise or sunset, he does not perform the penance, he becomes saddled with a great
sin. ^After purifying himself by sipping water and becoming self-possessed, he
should worship both twilights every day, softly reciting the prescribed formula in a
clean spot and according to rule (2.103).
^If he sees a woman or a low-born man doing something conducive to welfare,
he should do all of that diligently, or anything else that he is fond of. 224Some say that
Law and Wealth are conducive to welfare; others, Pleasure and Wealth; and still others,
Law alone or Wealth alone. But the settled rule is this: the entire triple set* is
conducive to welfare.
Mother, Father, Teacher ^Teacher, father, mother, and older brother—these
should never be treated with contempt especially by a Brahmin, even though he may be
deeply hurt. ^The teacher is the embodiment of Brahman; the father is the
embodiment of Prajâpati ; the mother is the embodiment of Earth; and one's brother is
the embodiment of oneself. 227The tribulations that a mother and a father undergo when
humans are born cannot be repaid even in hundreds of years.
228He should do what is pleasing to these two every day, and always what is
pleasing to his teacher. When these three are gratified, he obtains the fullness of ascetic
toil. 229Obedient service to these three is said to be the highest form of ascetic toil.
Without their consent, he should not follow any other rule of conduct.* ^For they
alone are the three worlds; they alone are the three orders of life;* they alone are the
three Vedas;* and they alone are called the three sacred fires. ^The householder's fire
is clearly the father; the southern fire, tradition says, is the mother; and the offertorial
fire is the teacher—this is the most excellent triad of sacred fires.
B2A householder* who does not neglect these three will win the three worlds;
and, shining with his own body, he will rejoice in heaven like a god. 233He obtains this
world by devotion to his mother, and the middle world by devotion to his father; but
he obtains the world of Brahman only by obedient service to his teacher. 234When
someone has attended to these three, he has attended to all his duties; should someone


--- PAGE 118 ---
Chapter 2 
107
not attend to them, all his rites bear him no fruit. 235So long as these three are alive, he
should not follow another rule of conduct;* taking delight in what is pleasing and
beneficial to them, he should always render them obedient service. ^Whenever he
undertakes any mental, verbal, or physical activity for the sake of the next world
without inconveniencing them, he should inform them of it.
237When these three are gratified,* a man has done all he has to do. This is the
highest Law itself in person; all else is called subsidiary Law.
Non-Brahmin Teachers 
H8A man with faith should accept fine learning even
from a low-caste man; the highest Law even from a man of the lowest caste; and a
splendid woman even from a bad family. ^One should take ambrosia even from
poison; words of wisdom even from a child; a good example even from an enemy; and
gold even from filth. 240Women, gems, learning, Law, purification, and words of
wisdom, as well as crafts of various kinds, may be accepted from anyone.
241In a time of adversity, the rules allow a man to study the Veda under a person
who is not a Brahmin; and, as long as he is studying, he should walk after that teacher
and serve him obediently. 242If he desires to attain the highest state, a pupil should not
live all his life with a teacher who is not a Brahmin or who is a Brahmin but not a vedic
scholar.
Life-long Student: I
243If he wishes to live with his teacher's family all his life, however, he should
diligently serve the teacher until he is freed from his body. 244When a Brahmin
obediently serves his teacher until his body comes to an end, he goes immediately to
the eternal abode of Brahman.*
Conclusion of Study
245Knowing the Law, he must not give any present to his teacher beforehand; but when,
with his teacher's permission, he is ready to take his final bath, he should present the
teacher with a gift according to his ability— 246land, gold, a cow, or a horse; or at least
an umbrella or footwear; or grain, vegetables,* or clothes—and thus gladden his
teacher.
Life-long Student: II
247If his teacher happens to die, he should maintain the same conduct towards his
teacher's son possessing the right qualities—or towards his teacher's wife, or towards a
person belonging to his teacher's ancestry (5.60 n.)—as he did towards his teacher.
248If none of these is available, he should end his life by serving the sacred fire
faithfully, standing during the day and seated at night (6.22 n.). 249When a Brahmin
lives the life of a vedic student in this manner without breaking his vow, he will go to
the highest station and will not be reborn on earth again.


--- PAGE 119 ---
CHAPTER THREE
M A R R I A G E
Conclusion of Study
ïH e should carry out the observance relating to the three Vedas at his teacher's house,
an observance lasting thirty-six years, or one-half or one-quarter of that time, or else
until he has learnt them.
2After he has learnt in the proper order the three Vedas* or two of them, or at least
one, without violating his chastity,* he should undertake the householder's order of
life. 3When he has returned in accordance with the Law proper to him and received his
vedic inheritance from his father, he should be honored at the outset with the gift of a
cow, as he sits on a couch wearing a garland.*
Selection of a Bride
4After he has taken the concluding bath with his teacher's permission and performed
the rite of returning home according to rule, the twice-born should marry a wife
belonging to the same class and possessing the right bodily characteristics.
5A girl who belongs to an ancestry (5.60 n.) different from his mother's and to a
lineage* different from his father's, and who is unrelated to him by marriage,* is
recommended for marriage by a twice-born man.
6He should avoid these ten families when contracting a marriage alliance, even
though they may be prominent and rich in cattle, goats, sheep, money, and grain:
families negligent about rites, deficient in male issue, without vedic learning, and
with hairy bodies, as well as families prone to hemorrhoids, tuberculosis, dyspepsia,
epilepsy, leukoderma, or leprosy.
8He must not marry a girl who has red hair or an extra limb; who is sickly; who is
without or with too much bodily hair;* who is a blabbermouth or jaundiced-looking;*
9who is named after a constellation, a tree, a river, a very low caste, a mountain, a bird,
a snake, or a servant; or who has a frightening name.+ 10He should marry a woman who
is not deficient in any limb; who has a pleasant name; who walks like a goose or an
elephant; and who has fine body and head hair, small teeth, and delicate limbs.
"A wise man must not marry a girl who has no brother or whose father is
unknown, for fear that the Law of "female-son" may be in force.*
12At the first marriage, a woman of equal class is recommended for twice-born
men; but for those who proceed further through lust, these are, in order, the preferable
women.* 13A SQdra may take only a Sudra woman as wife; a Vaisya, the latter and a
woman of his own class; a Ksatriya, the latter two and a woman of his own class; and a
Brahmin, the latter three and a woman of his own class.
108


--- PAGE 120 ---
Chapters 
109
Prohibition of a Sudra Wife 
14Not a single story* mentions a Brahmin or a
Ksatriya taking a Sudra wife even when they were going through a time of adversity.
15When twice-born men foolishly marry low-caste wives, they quickly reduce even
their families and children to the rank of Sudras.
16According to Atri and the son of Utathya, a man falls from his caste by
marrying a Sudra woman; according to Saunaka, by fathering a son through her; and
according to Bhrgu, by producing all his offspring through her.* 17By taking a Sudra
woman to bed, a Brahmin will descend along the downward course; and by begetting a
son through her, he falls from the very rank of a Brahmin. 18When such a woman plays
the leading role in his divine, ancestral, and hospitality rites, gods and ancestors do not
partake of them, and he will not go to heaven. 19No expiation is prescribed for a man
who drinks the saliva from the lips of a Sudra woman, who is tainted by her breath, and
who begets himself in her.*
Types of Marriage
20Listen now in brief to these eight types of marriage for all four classes, some
beneficial both here and in the hereafter, and some not. 21They are the Brahma, the
Divine, the Seer's, the Prâjâpatya
, the Demonic, the Gändharva , the Fiendish, and the
Ghoulish, which is the eighth and the worst. ^Which of these is lawful for which class,
their respective merits and defects, the merits and demerits of each with respect to
procreation—I will explain all this to you.
23The first six in the order enumerated should be considered lawful for Brahmins;
the last four for Ksatriyas; the same four, with the exception of the Fiendish, for
Vaisyas and Sudras.* 24The first four, sages say, are recommended for Brahmins; the
Fiendish alone for Ksatriyas; and the Demonic for Vaisyas and Sudras. ^The tradition
recorded here, however, considers three of the last five as lawful and two as unlawful;
the Demonic and the Ghoulish should never be carried out. 26The two marriages
proclaimed earlier, the Gändharv a and the Fiendish, whether undertaken separately or
conjointly,* are viewed by tradition as lawful for Ksatriyas.
27When a man dresses a girl up, honors her, invites on his own a man of learning
and virtue, and gives her to him, it is said to be the "Brahma" Law. 28When a man,
while a sacrifice is being carried out properly, adorns his daughter and gives her to the
officiating priest as he is performing the rite, it is called the "Divine" Law. 29When a
man accepts a bull and a cow, or two pairs of them, from the bridegroom in accordance
with the Law and gives a girl to him according to rule, it is called the "Seer's" Law.
^When a man honors the girl and gives her after exhorting them with the words: "May
you jointly fulfill the Law," tradition calls it the "Prâjâpatya
" procedure. 31When a girl
is given* after the payment of money to the girl's relatives and to the girl herself
according to the man's ability and out of his own free will, it is called the "Demonic"
Law. 32When the girl and the groom have sex with each other voluntarily, that is the
"Gändharva " marriage based on sexual union* and originating from love. 33When
someone violently abducts a girl from her house as she is shrieking and weeping by
causing death, mayhem, and destruction, it is called the "Fiendish" procedure.*


--- PAGE 121 ---
110 
Chapter 3
MWhen someone secretly rapes a woman who is asleep, drunk, or mentally deranged, it
is the eighth known as "Ghoulish," the most evil of marriages.
35Giving a girl away by simply pouring water is recommended for Brahmins,
while among the other classes it may be done through mutual love.
Sons from Different Types of Marriage 
36Brahmins, listen now as I describe
accurately all that Manu has said regarding the merits of each of these marriages.
37A son who is born to a woman married according to the "Brahma" rite and who
does good deeds* rescues from evil* ten generations of forefathers before him and ten
generations after him, with himself as the twenty-first; 38a son born to a woman
married according to the "Divine" rite rescues seven generations before him and seven
after him; a son born to a woman married according to the "Seer's" rite, three before and
three after; and a son born to a woman married according to "Prâjâpatya
" marriage, six
before and six after.
39From all four types of marriage beginning, in order, with "Brahma" are born
sons who are eminent in vedic knowledge and respected by cultured people. 40Endowed
with beauty, spirit, and virtue,* possessing wealth and fame, furnished with every
delight, and righteous to the highest degree, they will live a hundred years. 41But in the
others—the remaining wicked types of marriage—are born sons whose speech is cruel
and false and who hate the Veda and the Law.
42From irreproachable marriages are born children beyond reproach; from
reproachable marriages are born children inviting people's reproach.* Therefore, a man
should avoid reproachable marriages.
Marriage Rite 
43The consecratory rite of taking the hand in marriage is prescribed
only for brides of equal class. The following should be recognized as the procedure for
the rite of marriage when brides are of unequal class. MWhen marrying an upper-class
man, a Ksatriya bride should take hold of an arrow, a Vaisya bride a goad, and a SQdra
bride the hem of his garment.
Sexual Union
45Finding his gratification always in his wife, he should have sex with her during her
season.* Devoted solely to her, he may go to her also when he wants sexual pleasure,
except on the days of the moon's change.*
46The natural* season of women, according to tradition, consists of sixteen
nights, together with the other four days* proscribed by good people. 47Of these
nights, the first four as well as the eleventh and the thirteenth are disapproved; the
remaining ten nights are recommended.*
48Sons are born when he has sex on even nights, and girls on odd nights.
Desiring a son, therefore, he should have sex with his wife on even nights during her
season. 49When the man's semen is dominant, it turns out to be a boy; when the
woman's is dominant, a girl; and when both are equal, a hermaphrodite or a twin boy
and girl. When both are weak or scanty, no conception takes place.*
50Regardless of the order of life in which aman lives,* if he avoids women dur-
ing the forbidden nights and during the other eight nights,* he becomes a true celibate.


--- PAGE 122 ---
Chapter 3 
111
Purchasing a Wife
51A learned father must never accept even the slightest bride-price for his daughter; for
by greedily accepting a bride-price, a man becomes a trafficker in his offspring. 52When
relatives foolishly live off a woman's wealth—slave women, vehicles, or clothes—
those evil men will descend along the downward course.*
53At a "Seer's" marriage, some say, the bull and cow constitute the bride-price.
That is totally false. Whether the amount is great or small, it is still a sale.*+ MWhen
the women's relatives do not take the bride-price for themselves, it does not constitute
a sale. It is an act of respect to the women, a simple token of benevolence.
Honoring Women
55If they desire an abundance of good fortune, fathers, brothers, husbands, and brothers-
in-law should revere their women and provide them with adornments.
56Where women are revered,* there the gods rejoice; but where they are not, no
rite bears any fruit. 57Where female relatives grieve, that family soon comes to ruin; but
where they do not grieve, it always prospers. 58When female relatives, not receiving
due reverence, curse any house, it comes to total ruin, as if struck down by witchcraft.
59If men want to become prosperous, therefore, they should always honor the
women on joyful occasions and festive days with gifts of adornments, clothes, and
food.
Marital Harmony
•^Good fortune smiles incessantly on a family where the husband always finds delight
in his wife, and the wife in her husband.
61For, if the wife does not sparkle, she does not arouse her husband. And if the
husband is not aroused, there will be no offspring. 62When the wife sparkles, so does
the entire household; but when she ceases to sparkle, so does the entire household.
Degradation of Families
63By contracting aberrant marriages, by neglecting rites, and by failing to study the
Veda, respectable families quickly come to ruin;* as also by disregarding Brahmins.
^By practicing crafts, by engaging in trade, by having children only from a SQdra wife,
by dealing in cattle, horses, and vehicles, by engaging in agriculture, by entering a
king's service, 65by officiating at sacrifices of people at whose sacrifices one is
forbidden to officiate, and by denying the efficacy of rites, respectable families fall into
disrepute; as also those families bereft of vedic knowledge.*
66When they are rich in vedic knowledge, however, even poor families attain the
status of "respectable family" and achieve great fame.
T H E H O U S E H O L D E R
67A householder should perform the domestic rites in his nuptial fire according to rule,
as also the five great sacrifices and the daily cooking.


--- PAGE 123 ---
112 
Chapters
Great Sacrifices
68A householder has five slaughter-houses: fireplace, grindstone, broom,* mortar and
pestle, and water pot. By his use of them, he is fettered. 69To expiate successively for
each of these, the great seers devised the five great sacrifices to be carried out daily by
householders.
70The sacrifice to the Veda is teaching; the sacrifice to ancestors is the quenching
libation; the sacrifice to gods is the burnt offering; the sacrifice to beings is the Bali
offering; and the sacrifice to humans is the honoring* of guests. 71If a man never fails to
offer these five great sacrifices to the best of his ability, he remains unsullied by the
taints of his slaughter-houses in spite of living permanently at home. 72Gods, guests,
dependents, ancestors, and oneself—when someone does not make offerings to these
five, he has breath but no life at all.
^The five sacrifices are called Ahuta, Huta, Prahuta, Brähmya-Huta , and Prasita.
74The Ahuta—"not offered in the fire"—is soft recitation. The Huta—"offered in the
fire"—is a burnt offering. The Prahuta—"offered by scattering"—is the Bali offering to
beings. The Brâhmya-Huta—"offere
d in Brahmins"—is the worship of Brahmins. The
Prasita—"consumed"—is the quenching libation to ancestors.
75He should apply himself here* daily to his vedic recitation and to making
offerings to gods; for by applying himself to making offerings to gods, he upholds this
world, both the mobile and the immobile. 76An oblation duly consigned to the fire
reaches the sun; from the sun comes rain; from rain, food; and from food, offspring.*
77As all living beings exist dependent on air, so people in other orders of life*
exist dependent on the householder. 78Because it is householders who sustain people in
all three orders of life every day by giving them knowledge and food, the householder
represents the most senior order of life.* 79This is the order that must be shouldered*
assiduously by anyone who desires undecaying heaven and absolute happiness, an
order that cannot be shouldered by people with feeble faculties.
^Seers, ancestors, gods, beings, and guests seek favors from the householder,
which a wise man should grant them. 81He should duly honor the seers by private vedic
recitation, gods with burnt oblations, ancestors with an ancestral offering, humans
with food, and beings with a Bali offering.
Ancestral Offerings 
82He should make an ancestral offering every day with food
or water, or even with milk, roots, and fruits, gladdening his ancestors thereby. ^He
should feed at least a single Brahmin for the benefit of his ancestors as part of the five
great sacrifices; at this,* he should never feed even a single Brahmin* in connection
with the offering to the All-gods.
Divine Offerings 
^From the oblation to All-gods* that has been cooked, a
Brahmin should offer portions in the domestic fire to the following deities every day
and according to rule: 85first to Fire and to Soma; then to both of them together; to the
All-gods; to Dhanvantari; 86to KuhQ—the goddess of the new moon; to Anumati—the
goddess of the full moon; to Prajâpati ; to heaven and earth together; and finally to
Svistakrt—Fire who makes the offering flawless.


--- PAGE 124 ---
Chapters 
113
Bali Offerings 
87In this manner, having offered the burnt oblation properly, he
should make the Bali offerings to Indra, Death, Lord of the waters (Varuna), and
Moon, together with their attendants, making the offerings clockwise in the direction
of each quarter. 88He should make an offering by the door, saying: "To the Maruts!"; by
the water pot, saying: "To the waters!"; and by the mortar and pestle, saying "To trees!"
89He should make a Bali offering to Sri—the goddess of prosperity—by the head of the
bed; to Bhadrakâlî—th
e auspicious black goddess—by the foot of the bed; and to
Brahman and the Lord of the house in the middle of the house.
^He should throw into the air a Bali offering to All-gods, as well as to beings
that roam during the day and to those that roam at night.* 91In the back house,* he
should make a Bali offering to SarvannabhOti*—the power of all food. The remainder
of the Bali oblation he should offer towards the south for the ancestors. 92He should
also gently place on the ground offerings for dogs, outcastes, dog-cookers, persons
with evil diseases,* crows, and worms.
93When a Brahmin honors all beings in this manner every day, he takes on a body
of effulgence and goes by the direct route to the supreme abode.
Honoring Guests 
94After completing in this manner the Bali offering, he should
feed a guest before anyone else and give almsfood to a mendicant student of the Veda*
according to rule. 95By giving almsfood, a twice-born householder obtains as much
merit as he does by giving a cow to a poor man* according to rule.
%He should garnish* some almsfood or a pot of water and present it in
accordance with the rules to a Brahmin who knows the true meaning of the Veda.
97Divine and ancestral oblations of ignorant men come to naught when the donors offer
them foolishly to Brahmins who are the equivalent of ashes.* 98ObIations offered in
the fires that are the mouths of Brahmins, fires set ablaze by knowledge and ascetic
toil, rescue a man from danger and from grievous sin.+
"When a guest arrives, he should offer him a seat and water and give him food as
well according to rule, after garnishing it according to his ability.+ 100When a Brahmin
resides without being treated with respect, he takes away all the good works of even a
man who lives by gleaning ears of grain (4.5 n.) or who makes daily offerings in the
five sacred fires (3.185 n.). 101Some straw, aplace on the floor, water, and fourth, a
pleasant word of welcome—at least these are never wanting in the houses of good
people.
102Tradition defines a guest as a Brahmin who spends just one night. He is called
"guest" because his stay is brief.* 103A Brahmin living in the same village or on a
social visit cannot be considered a guest even when he comes to a house which has a
wife or even sacred fires.* 104When foolish householders become attached to other
people's cooking, the result is that after death they are born as the cattle of those who
gave them food.+
105A householder must never turn away a guest led there by the sun in the
evening; and whether he arrives at the proper time or not, he should not let him remain
in his house without food. 106Nor should he eat anything that he does not serve his
guest. Honoring (3.70 n.) a guest* leads to wealth, fame, long life, and heaven.


--- PAGE 125 ---
114 
Chapters
107Guests of the highest status should receive the highest treatment with respect
to seat, room, bed, accompanying them as they leave,* and paying honor to them;
those of equal status should receive equal treatment; and those of inferior status should
receive inferior treatment. 108If another guest arrives after he has completed the offering
to All-gods, however, he should provide him also with food according to his ability;
but he need not make a fresh Bali offering.*
109A Brahmin must not advertise his family and lineage for the sake of a meal; for
the wise call a man who flaunts these for a meal "an eater of vomit."
110A Ksatriya is not called a "guest" in the house of a Brahmin; nor is a Vaisya, a
SQdra, a friend, a relative, or an elder.* inlf, however, a Ksatriya comes to his house
fulfilling the conditions of a guest,* he may freely feed him also after the Brahmins
have finished their meal. 112Even when a Vaisya or a Sudra arrives at his house
fulfilling the conditions of a guest, he should show kindness and feed him along with
his servants. 113Even when others, such as his friends, visit his house out of mutual
affection, he should make as special a preparation of food as he can and feed them along
with his wife.* 114Newly married women, young girls, the sick, and pregnant
women—these he may feed without hesitation right after* the guests.
115When a fool eats before he gives food to these persons, as he eats he is unaware
that he is being eaten by dogs and vultures. 116Once the Brahmins, the dependents, and
the servants have finished their meal, only then should the husband and wife eat what
is left over.117After he has honored (3.70 n.) the gods, seers, humans, ancestors, and
the guardian deities of the house, the householder should eat what remains. 118A man
who cooks only for his own sake eats nothing but sin; for the food prescribed for good
men is this—eating the leftovers of a sacrifice.
119He should honor a king, an officiating priest, a bath-graduate, an elder, a
friend,* a father-in-law, and a maternal uncle with a honey-mixture* when they visit
him after the lapse of one year. 120The rule is that a king and a vedic scholar should be
honored with a honey-mixture when a sacrifice is about to take place, but never outside
the context of a sacrifice.
121When the evening meal is cooked, the wife should make a Bali offering without
reciting vedic formulas. This is called "offering to All-gods," and it is prescribed both
in the evening and in the morning.
Ancestral Offerings
122After he has offered the sacrifice to ancestors,* a Brahmin who possesses a sacred fire
should perform the monthly ancestral rite called the "supplementary offering of rice
balls"* on the new-moon day. 123The wise call the monthly offering to ancestors the
"supplementary offering," and it should be performed diligently using the
recommended kinds of meat (cf. 3.266-72).
124Who are the Brahmins to be fed at this rite and who are to be avoided? How
many? And with what kinds of food?—I will explain all that completely.
Number of Invitees 
125Even if he is rich, he should feed two at an offering to
gods, three at an offering to ancestors, or one at either offering; he should not indulge


--- PAGE 126 ---
Chapters 
115
in feeding a large number. 126A large number is detrimental to five things: offering
proper hospitality,* doing things at the right place and the right time, carrying out
purifications, and finding Brahmins of quality. Therefore, he must not try to get a large
number.
Quality of Invitees 
127This rite for the deceased performed at the new moon is
well known by the name "ancestral offering." When a man is devoted to it, the same
non-vedic rite for the deceased benefits him always.*
128Donors should present a divine or ancestral offering only to a vedic scholar;
what is given to such an eminently worthy Brahmin yields abundant fruit. 129He
should feed even a single learned man at each rite to gods or ancestors rather than a lot
of men ignorant of the Veda; he reaps thereby copious fruit. 130He should search far and
wide* for a Brahmin who has mastered the Veda; such a man is the proper recipient of
divine and ancestral offerings, and tradition calls him a "guest." 131For when one man
who knows the Veda is gratified there, in terms of the Law he is worth all the men
ignorant of the Veda who may eat there, be they in their millions. 132Divine and
ancestral offerings should be given to a man renowned for his knowledge, for hands
smeared with blood cannot be cleansed with more blood. 133A man will have to eat as
many red-hot spikes, spears, and iron balls as the rice balls that someone ignorant of
the Veda eats at his divine or ancestral offerings.
134Some Brahmins apply themselves to knowledge, some to ascetic toil, others
to both ascetic toil and vedic recitation, and still others to ritual activities.* 135He
should diligently present divine offerings only to those who apply themselves to
knowledge, but he may present ancestral offerings to any of the four according to rule.
136Between a man whose father is not a vedic savant but whose son has mastered the
Veda and a man whose father has mastered the Veda but whose the son is not vedic
savant, 137the man whose father is a vedic savant should be considered as superior.*
The other deserves honor for the sake of venerating the Veda.
138A friend must not be fed at an ancestral offering; he is to be courted with
presents. A twice-born who is deemed neither friend nor foe is the one who should be
fed at an ancestral offering. 139When a friend takes center stage* at his divine or
ancestral offerings, he reaps no fruit from them after death. 140When a man foolishly
strikes up friendships by means of an ancestral offering, that lowest of twice-born,
using ancestral offerings to make friends, will fall from heaven. 141Such a sacrificial
gift is ghoulish and twice-born people call it "feeding-one-another." It remains in this
very world, like a blind cow in a single stall.*
142As a sower reaps no harvest when he sows his seeds on barren soil, so a giver
earns no reward when he gives his oblation to a man ignorant of the Veda. 143A
sacrificial gift given to a learned man according to rule makes both the givers and the
receivers partake of its rewards both here and in the hereafter.
144He may, if he so wishes, honor a friend at an ancestral offering but never a foe
even if he is quite handsome;* for an oblation is fruitless in the hereafter when it is
eaten by an enemy. 145He should make every effort to feed at his ancestral offering either
a scholar of the Rgveda who has mastered that Veda, or an Adhvaryu priest who has
mastered that vedic branch, or a scholar of the Sâmaved a who has learnt it completely.


--- PAGE 127 ---
116 
Chapters
146When any one of these is received with honor and eats the ancestral offering of
someone, his ancestors up to the seventh generation derive unending satisfaction.
147This, clearly, is the primary method in presenting divine and ancestral
offerings. What follows, on the other hand, should be considered a secondary method
that has always been followed by good people. 148One may feed the following:
maternal grandfather, maternal uncle, sister's son, father-in-law, teacher, daughter's
son, son-in-law, and relative, as also one's officiating priest and a person for whom one
officiates as a priest.
149 A man who knows the Law must never probe into the qualifications of a
Brahmin at a rite to the gods; when he undertakes an ancestral rite, however, he should
diligently probe into his qualifications.H-
Unfit Invitees 
150Brahmins who are thieves, fallen from their caste, or impotent,*
or who follow the livelihood of infidels—Manu has declared these unfit to participate
at divine or ancestral offerings. 151Men who have matted hair, who do not recite the
Veda, who are bald-headed,* who are gamblers, and who officiate at sacrifices offered
by groups of people—these also must not be fed at an ancestral offering. 152Physicians,
temple priests, meat sellers, and those who live by trade—these should be avoided at
divine and ancestral offerings.
153A servant of a village or a king; someone with bad nails or black teeth;
someone who opposes his teacher or has abandoned the sacred fire; an usurer;
154someone suffering from consumption; a cattle herder; a man who sets up a
household before his older brother (cf. 3.171); someone who neglects his ritual duties*
or hates the Veda; a man who sets up a household after his younger brother; someone
linked to an association;* 155a performer; a vedic student who has broken his vow of
chastity; a husband of a SDdra woman; a son of a remarried woman (9.175 n.); a one-
eyed man; someone who lets his wife's paramour live in his house; 156someone who
teaches for a fee, as also the person taught by such a teacher; a pupil or teacher of a
Südra ; a man of uncouth speech; a son of an adultress (3.174); a son of a widow
(3-174); 157someone who repudiates his father, mother, or teacher without good reason;
someone who has established vedic or matrimonial links with people fallen from their
caste; 158an arsonist; a poisoner; someone who eats from the son of an adulteress; a
seller of Soma; a seafarer; a panegyrist; an oil-miller; a suborner of perjury; 159someone
who wrangles with his father; a gambler; a man who drinks liquor; someone with an
evil disease (3.92 n.); a heinous sinner (2.185 n.); a hypocrite; a poison vendor;*
160someone who manufactures bows and arrows; a lover of one's sister-in-law (3.173);
a treacherous friend; a man who lives by gambling; someone whose teacher is his son;
161an epileptic; someone with scrofula or leukoderma; a slanderer; an insane person; a
blind man; and someone who scoffs at the Vedas—these persons should be avoided.
162 A trainer of elephants, oxen, horses, or camels; an astrologer by profession; a
bird breeder; a combat trainer; 163someone who breaches canals or takes delight in
obstructing them;* an architect; a messenger; a tree planter; 164someone who uses dogs
for sport; a professional falconer; a man who rapes virgins; a cruel man; someone who
adopts a Sudra occupation; a man who officiates at sacrifices of corporate bodies;*
165someone lacking in proper conduct; an impotent man (3.150 n.); someone who is


--- PAGE 128 ---
Chapters 
117
always asking for things; a farmer by profession; a club-footed man; someone
condemned by good people; 166a man who keeps sheep or buffaloes; a husband of a
woman who has had a man before (5.163 n.); someone who carries corpses—these
persons should be diligently avoided.
167At both divine and ancestral offerings, a man who is wise and the highest of
the twice-born should avoid these lowest of the twice-born, men of despicable conduct
alongside whom it is unfit to eat. 168For a Brahmin who does not recite the Veda
becomes extinguished like a grass-fire, and he should not be given a divine offering; no
one pours an offering in the ashes (3.97 n.).
169I will explain in full detail the fruit a donor reaps in the hereafter when he feeds
at a divine or ancestral offering a man alongside whom it is unfit to eat. 170What is eaten
by Brahmins who do not keep to their vows, by people such as those who set up a
household before their older brothers, and by other individuals alongside whom it is
unfit to eat—all that is undoubtedly eaten by fiends.
*171When someone gets married or begins to perform the daily fire sacrifice
before his older brother, he is to be considered a Parivettr—"a man who sets up a
household before his older brother"; and that older brother is a Parivitti—"a man who
sets up a household after his younger brother." 172A man who sets up a household
before his older brother, a man who sets up a household after his younger brother, the
woman who marries such a man, the man who gives her away, and, fifth, the priest
who performs the wedding—they all go to hell. 173When a man has a lustful affair with
the wife of his deceased brother, even if she has been legally appointed for leviratic
union (9.57-70), he should be considered a DidhisQpati*—"lover of his sister-in-
law." 174Two types of sons, Kunda and Golaka, are born from someone else's wife. If
her husband is alive, he is a Kunda—"son of an adulteress"; and if her husband is dead,
he is a Golaka—"son of a widow." 175These two creatures, born in someone else's field
(9-33)> make the divine or ancestral offering given to them futile to the donor both here
and in the hereafter.
176When a man alongside whom it is unfit to eat looks at persons alongside
whom it is fit to eat as they are taking their meal, the foolish donor fails to reap the
reward of feeding as many of them as have been looked at by that man. 177When a blind
man looks at them, he destroys the fruit of feeding ninety of them; a one-eyed man,
sixty; a man suffering from leukoderma, one hundred; and a man with an evil disease,
one thousand. 178When a man who officiates at sacrifices of SQdras touches the
Brahmins with a limb of his, the donor fails to reap the fruit of giving non-sacrificial
offerings to as many Brahmins as have been touched by that man. 179When even a
Brahmin learned in the Veda greedily accepts anything from such a man, he quickly
comes to ruin, like an unbaked clay pot in water.
180What is given to a seller of Soma turns into excrement; what is given to a
physician turns into pus and blood; what is given to a temple priest perishes; what is
given to a usurer lacks stability; 181what is given to a trader has no effect either in this
world or the next; and what is given to a twice-born man born to a remarried woman is
like an oblation offered in ashes (3.97 n.). 182The wise declare that the food given to
other evil men enumerated above (3.150-66), men alongside whom it is unfit to eat,
turn into fat, blood, flesh, marrow, and bone.


--- PAGE 129 ---
118 
Chapters
Persons Who Purify Those Alongside 
Whom They Eat 
183Brahmins
who purify a row of eaters defiled by someone alongside whom it is unfit to eat—listen
to a complete enumeration of such Brahmins, who purify those alongside whom they
eat. 184Men of preeminence in all the Vedas and in all the expository texts,* as also
descendants in a line of vedic scholars, should be regarded as persons who purify those
alongside whom they eat. 185An expert in the three Näciketa * fire altars; a man who
maintains the five sacred fires;* a man who knows the Trisuparna verse; a man who
knows the six Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.); a son of a woman married according to
the "Brahma" procedure (3.27); aman who sings the Jyestha Sämans ; 186a man who
knows the meaning of the Veda, as also one who teaches it; a vedic student; a man who
has given a 1,000;* a ioo-year-old man—these should be regarded as Brahmins who
purify those alongside whom they eat.
Invitations 
187When an ancestral offering is about to take place, he should duly
invite the kind of Brahmins mentioned above, a minimum of three, either on the
preceding day or on the very day of the offering.
188When a twice-born has been invited to an ancestral rite, both he and the person
performing the rite should constantly keep themselves controlled and refrain from
vedic recitation; 189forthe ancestors stand by those twice-born who have been invited,
follow them like the wind, and sit by them as they sit.+
190If a Brahmin who has been invited to a divine or ancestral offering according to
rule becomes delinquent in any way, that evil man will become a pig. 191If someone
invited to an ancestral offering has a sexual encounter with a Sudra woman, he will
assume all the sins committed by the donor of that offering.
Classes of Ancestors 
192The ancestors are the primeval deities*—they are free
from anger, devoted to purification, and always chaste; they have laid down their arms;
and they are highly exalted. 193From whom do they all originate; who should be
worshipped and according to what specific rules—listen to an account of all that.
194Tradition holds that the various groups of ancestors are the sons of all the seers
headed by Marici, seers who are the children of Manu, the son of Hiranyagarbha (1.34-
35). 195Somasads, the sons of Viraj, are known in tradition as the ancestors of the
Sädhyas . Agnisvättas , the sons of Marîci , are widely known in the world as the
ancestors of the gods. 1%Barhisads, the sons of Atri, are known in tradition as the
ancestors of Daityas, Dânavas , Yaksas, Gandharvas, Serpents, Räksasas , Suparnas,
and Kinnaras. 197The ancestors of Brahmins are called Somapas; of Ksatriyas,
Havirbhujs; of Vaisyas, Äjyapas ; and of Sudras, Sukälins . 198Somapas are the sons of
Kavi; Havismats, the sons of Añgiras; Äjyapas , the sons of Pulastya; and Sukälins ,
the sons of Vasistha. 199Anagnidagdhas, Agnidagdhas, Kävyas , Barhisads, Agni-
svättas , and Saumyas—these should be regarded as the ancestors only of Brahmins.
200It should be understood, however, that these principal classes of ancestors we have
enumerated have also here countless sons and grandsons.
201From the seers were born the ancestors; from the ancestors, the gods and
demons;* and from the gods, the whole world, the mobile and the immobile, in due
order.


--- PAGE 130 ---
Chapters 
119
202Even some water offered to them with a generous spirit* using vessels made of
silver or inlaid with silver leads to an imperishable reward.
Preparatory Rites 
203Ancestral offerings are far more significant for twice-born
persons than divine offerings; for, according to tradition, a divine offering is a
preliminary rite confering vigor upon the ancestral offering. 204He should perform at the
outset an offering to gods, which provides protection to ancestral rites; for fiends
plunder an ancestral offering lacking such protection. 205He should seek to begin and
end an ancestral offering with offerings to gods; it should never begin or end with
offerings to ancestors. Should he, instead, seek to begin or end with offerings to
ancestors, he will quickly come to ruin together with his offspring.
206He should daub a clean and secluded area with cow dung and carefully make
that area slope towards the south; 207ancestors are always gratified by offerings made in
places that are clean, secluded, in the open, and by the water's edge.+
208On separate seats properly arranged and spread with sacred grass, he should
seat the Brahmins after they have sipped water.* 209After seating those irreproachable
Brahmins on their seats, he should honor them with fragrant perfumes and garlands,
beginning with the ones associated with the divine offering.
210Having brought water and sesame seeds along with purificatory Kusa blades
for them, the Brahmin should make an offering in the sacred fire with the collective
consent of those Brahmins.* 211At the outset he should offer to Agni, Soma, and Yama
oblations that confer vigor, and then satisfy the ancestors by offering them sacrificial
food according to rule. 212If a sacred fire is not available, however, he should offer the
oblation simply in the hand of a Brahmin; for Brahmins who have seen the vedic
formulas declare that the sacred fire is a twice-born.
213They call these highest of twice-born men the ancient* gods of the ancestral
offering, free from anger, totally serene, and devoted to invigorating the world.
Principal Offerings 
214He should perform in the fire the entire series of rites so
that they end in the south;* pour water on the ground with his right hand; 215make three
balls from the remainder of the sacrificial food with a collected mind; face the south
and lay them down following the same procedure as at the pouring of water; 216offer
those balls in accordance with the rules, while keeping himself ritually pure; wipe his
hand on those blades of sacred grass as the share of those who partake of leavings;*
217sip some water; turn around towards the north; control his breath slowly three times;
worship the six seasons and the ancestors while reciting ritual formulas; 218once again
pour the remaining water gently near the balls; smell those balls with a collected mind
in the order they were laid down; 219remove a small portion from each ball in the proper
order; and get those seated Brahmins to eat them first according to rule.
^If his father is alive, however, he should lay down the balls only for the
preceding ancestors; or he may get his own father to eat the ancestral offering like one
of the Brahmins.* ^Hf his father is dead but his grandfather is alive, on the other hand,
he should first recite his father's name and then his great-grandfather's. 222Manu has
declared that either his grandfather may eat that ancestral offering or he may freely
perform it on his own with his grandfather's permission.


--- PAGE 131 ---
120 
Chapters
223After pouring water mixed with sesame seeds along with purificatory Kusa
blades into their hands, he should offer a piece of those balls to each, saying, "Svadhä
be to them!"
Feeding the Brahmins ^Carrying with both his hands and by himself the
vessel heaped with food, he should set it down gently in front of the Brahmins while
thinking of his ancestors. ^When food is brought without being held with both
hands, evil-minded demons forcibly snatch it away. 226Keeping himself ritually pure
and with a collected mind, he should set down on the ground properly the side dishes,*
such as sauces and vegetables; milk, curd, ghee, and honey; 227various kinds of foods
and delicacies; roots and fruits; and delicious meats and fragrant drinks.
^After bringing all these, he should dish them out gradually with a collected
mind and keeping himself ritually pure, pressing all the side dishes on them.* ^He
must never shed a tear, become angry, tell a lie, touch the food with his foot, or flip it
around. ^A tear makes the food go to ghosts;* anger, to enemies; a lie, to dogs;
touching with the foot, to fiends; and flipping around, to evil-doers.
^He should give ungrudgingly anything that the Brahmins may wish. He
should narrate vedic disputations; it is pleasing to the ancestors. ^At a rite for
ancestors, he should make them listen to recitations of the Veda, legal treatises,
stories, epic narratives, Purânas , and ancillary texts.* ^He should cheerfully gratify
the Brahmins and feed them at a leisurely pace, pressing on them repeatedly the main
and the side dishes.
^He should diligently feed a son of his daughter at an ancestral offering, even if
he is only a vedic student; place a goat's wool blanket* on each seat; and scatter sesame
seeds on the ground. ^At an ancestral offering, three things confer purity: daughter's
son, goat-wool blanket, and sesame seeds; and three things are commended:
purification, absence of anger, and doing things unhurriedly. 236A11 the food should be
very warm, and they should eat it in silence; and even when the donor inquires about it,
the Brahmins should not comment on the quality of the sacrificial food. ^As long as
the food is warm, as long as they eat it in silence, and as long as they do not comment
on the quality of the sacrificial food, the ancestors partake of it. 238What is eaten
wearing a turban on the head, what is eaten facing the south, or what is eaten wearing
sandals, is undoubtedly eaten by fiends.
239A Cándala, a pig, a cock, a dog, a menstruating woman, or a eunuch must not
look at the Brahmins while they are eating. 240What is seen by any of these during a fire
offering, the giving of a gift, a ritual feeding, or a divine or ancestral oblation, becomes
inefficacious. 241A pig spoils with its breath, a cock with the waft from its wings, a dog
with its gaze, and a low-caste man with his touch. 242If someone is lame or one-eyed,
lacks a limb, or has an excess limb, he should also be removed from that place, even if
he is a servant of the donor.
243Should a Brahmin or a mendicant come there for food, he should honor him
according to his ability with the permission of those Brahmins.
244Mixing all the varieties of food together, he should drench it with water and
deposit it in front of the diners after they have finished their meal, scattering it on the
ground. 245The remnants of food and what has been scattered on the sacred grass are the


--- PAGE 132 ---
Chapters 
121
share of those who have died before their initiation or committed suicide,* and of
young women of the family. 246The fragments fallen on the ground at an ancestral
offering are declared to be the share of all the deceased servants who have not been
dishonest or crooked.
Rite for the Newly Deceased 
247For a deceased twice-born, he should perform
the rite without the Sapinda offerings; omitting the offering to gods, he should feed the
ancestral offering to one person and lay down one rice ball.* 248Once the rite of Sapinda
has been performed for him in accordance with the Law, his sons should offer the balls
exactly in the above manner.*
Conclusion of the Meal 
249After eating an ancestral offering, if someone gives
his leftovers to a SQdra, that foolish man will fall down head first into the KalasQtra
hell. 250If a man who has eaten an ancestral offering gets into bed with a Sudra woman
that day, his ancestors will lie in her feces during that month.
^He should ask them "Have you eaten well?"; when they are sated, he should
give them water for sipping; and when they have sipped water, he should give them
leave to go, saying "Please, stay around!"* ^Immediately thereafter, the Brahmins
should simply say to him: "May there be Svadhä!" , for the exclamation "Svadhä " is
the highest benediction in all ancestral offerings.
253Then, after they have finished eating, he should inform those Brahmins of the
leftover food and, with their permission, do exactly as they instruct.
254At an offering to ancestors, one should say, "Have you eaten well?"; at a cow-
pen offering,* "Was it well cooked?"; at an offering for prosperity,* "Was it
delicious?"; and at a divine offering, "Was it tasty?"
255The afternoon, Darbha grass, proper preparation of the location, sesame seeds,
liberal outlay, proper preparation of food, and excellent twice-born men—these are
what ensures success at ancestral rites. 256Darbha grass, purifier, forenoon, sacrificial
foods of every kind, purifier, and what was stated above*—these should be regarded as
what ensures success at divine rites. 257Food of sages,* milk, Soma, meat, food
without elaborate preparation,* and natural salt are, by their very nature, called
"sacrificial food."
Concluding 
Rites ^After he has dismissed those Brahmins, he should make
himself pure and collected, control his speech, turn towards the south, and implore his
ancestors for these favors: 259"May donors amidst us thrive, may the Vedas and
progeny! May the generous spirit never abandon us! And may we have a lot to give!"
260Immediately after he has laid down the balls in this manner, he should feed
them to a cow, a Brahmin, a goat, or the fire, or else throw them in water. 261Some
perform the laying down of the balls towards the east;* others feed them to birds or
throw them in fire or water.
262The wife who is wedded according to the Law, devoted to her husband, and
intent on worshipping the ancestors may eat the middlemost of those balls in the
proper manner, if she wants to have a son. 263She will give birth to a son endowed with
long life, fame, intelligence, wealth, progeny, righteousness, and goodness.


--- PAGE 133 ---
122 
Chapters
264After he has washed his hands and sipped some water, he should prepare food
for his paternal relatives; give that well-garnished food to his paternal relatives; honor
(3.70 n.) also his maternal relatives;* 265let the scattered fragments remain until the
Brahmins have been dismissed; and then perform the domestic Bali offering—that is
the settled Law.
Food at Ancestral Rites 
2661 will explain exhaustively the types of sacrificial
food that are efficacious for a long time and those that are efficacious in perpetuity,
when they are offered to the ancestors according to rule.
267By offering sesame seeds, rice, barley, beans, water, roots, and fruits
according to rule, ancestors of men rejoice for one month;* 268by offering fish, for two
months; by offering the meat of the common deer, for three months; by offering sheep
meat, for four months; by offering here the meat of birds, for five months; 269by
offering goat meat, for six months; by offering the meat of the spotted deer, for seven
months; by offering the meat of the Ena antelope, for eight months; by offering the
meat of the Ruru deer, for nine months; 270by offering boar or buffalo meat, they are
satisfied for ten months; by offering rabbit or turtle meat, for eleven months; 271and by
offering beef, milk,* or milk-rice, for one year. The satisfaction from the meat of a
Vârdhrînas a horn-bill lasts for twelve years. 272The Kälasäk
a herb, Mahäsalk a
crustacean, the meat of the rhinoceros and the red goat, and honey, as well as every type
of sage's food (3.257 n.) are efficacious in perpetuity.
Times for Ancestral Rites 
273When someone mixes any kind of food with
honey and offers it on the thirteenth day of a fortnight during the rainy season and
under the Magha* constellation, that also is clearly inexhaustible. 274"Would that a
man be born in our family who would offer us milk-rice with honey and ghee on the
thirteenth day during the elephant's eastern shadow."* 275Whatever a man gives
properly, with a generous spirit, and according to rule, in the other world it becomes
eternal and inexhaustible for his ancestors.+
276The lunar days in the dark fortnight beginning with the tenth but excluding the
fourteenth are commended for ancestral offerings; the other days are unlike these. 277As
the later fortnight is better for an ancestral offering than the earlier fortnight,* so the
afternoon is better than the forenoon. 278When a man performs them on even days and
constellations, he obtains all his wishes; whereas when he worships the ancestors on
uneven days and constellations, he obtains distinguished children.
279He should carry out the ancestral offering tirelessly, correctly, and according to
rule until its completion, wearing the sacrificial cord over the right shoulder and under
the left arm, carrying blades of Darbha grass in his hand, and performing each rite so as
to end in the south (3.214 n.). 280He must not perform an ancestral offering at night—
for the night belongs to fiends—or during the two twilights, or soon after sunrise.
281Following this procedure, he should perform here an ancestral offering three
times a year—in the winter, in the summer, and in the rainy season—but the five
sacrifices, every day.
282The rule is that the fire oblation at an ancestral rite must not be offered in the ordinary
fire. A twice-born man who maintains the three sacred fires shall not perform an


--- PAGE 134 ---
Chapters 
123
ancestral offering except on a new-moon day. 283Even if a Brahmin simply satiates his
ancestors with water after he has bathed, he obtains thereby the full reward of
performing an ancestral rite.
284The fathers, they say, are the Vasus; the grandfathers are the Rudras; and the
great-grandfathers are the Ädityas—thi
s is an ancient scriptural statement.*
Conclusion
285He should become a man who always eats "residue" and who always partakes of
"ambrosia." "Residue" is what remains after people have eaten, and "ambrosia" is the
leftovers of a sacrifice.
286I have explained to you all the rules relating to the five sacrifices.
Listen now to the rules relating to the livelihood of Brahmins.


--- PAGE 135 ---
CHAPTER FOUR
T H E B A T H - G R A D U A T E
1 After spending the first quarter of his life at his teacher's, a twice-born man should
marry a wife and spend the second quarter of his life at home.*
Right Livelihood
2Except during a time of adversity, a Brahmin ought to sustain himself by following a
livelihood that causes little or no harm* to creatures. 3He should gather wealth just
sufficient for his subsistence through irreproachable activities that are specific to him,
without fatiguing his body.*
4Let him sustain himself by means of "true" and "immortal," or by means of
"mortal" and "fatal," or even by means of "truth-cum-falsehood"; but under no
circumstances by means of the "dog's life." 5Gleaning and picking* should be
considered the "true"; what is received unasked is the "immortal"; almsfood that is
begged is the "mortal"; and agriculture, tradition says, is the "fatal." 'Trade is the
"truth-cum-falsehood," and he may sustain himself even by that. Service is called the
"dog's life"; therefore, he should avoid it altogether.
7Let him be a man who stores grain sufficient to fill a granary, a man who stores
grain sufficient to fill ajar,* a man who has sufficient grain to last three days, or a man
who keeps nothing for the next day. 8Among all these four types of twice-born
householders, each should be recognized as superior to the ones preceding it and better
at winning the heavenly world, according to the Law.* 9One of these may engage in the
six activities; another may live by three; yet another by two; and a fourth may subsist
through the sacrificial session of the Veda.* 10A man who lives by gleaning and
picking should be totally dedicated to the daily fire sacrifice and always offer only the
sacrifices at the new- and full-moon days and at the solstices. nHe must never follow a
worldly occupation for the sake of livelihood, but subsist by means of a pure, upright,
and honest livelihood proper to a Brahmin.
12One who seeks happiness should become supremely content and self-
controlled, for happiness is rooted in contentment and its opposite is the root of
unhappiness.
Observances
13Subsisting by one of these means of livelihood, a twice-born who is a bath-graduate
should follow these observances, which procure heaven, long life, and fame.
14He should perform diligently the daily rituals specific to him prescribed in the
Veda; for, by performing them according to his ability, he attains the highest state.
124


--- PAGE 136 ---
Chapter 4 
125
15He must never seek to obtain wealth (artha) with excessive passion,* through
forbidden activities, when he already has sufficient wealth, or from just anyone even in
a time of adversity; 16nor shall he be passionately attached to any of the sensory objects
(artha) out of lust, but using his mind he should stamp out any excessive attachment to
them. 17He should forsake all pursuits (artha) that interfere with his vedic recitation,
eking out a living* some way or other, for that recitation constitutes the fulfillment of
all his obligations. 18He should comport himself here in such a way that his attire,
speech, and mind are in harmony with his age, occupation, wealth (artha), learning,
and family background.
Study
19Every day, he should explore the treatises*—those that aid in the quick development
of one's mind, those that facilitate the acquisition of wealth, and those that promote
well-being—as well as ancillary texts* of the Veda; 20for, the more a man studies
treatises, the more he comes to understand and the more brightly shines his
understanding.+
Ritual Duties
21He must never fail to offer every day and according to his ability the sacrifices to
seers, gods, beings, humans, and ancestors (see 3.70 f.).
22Some individuals who are experts in the sacrificial science and free from
striving offer these great sacrifices incessantly in just their organs. ^Others offer breath
in speech and speech in breath every day, recognizing that the sacrifice reaches its
inexhaustible consummation in speech and breath. 24Still other Brahmins offer these
sacrifices daily through knowledge alone, recognizing by the eye of knowledge that the
execution of those sacrifices is rooted in knowledge.*
25A twice-born man, moreover, should always offer the fire sacrifice at the
beginning and end of each day and night; the new-moon and the full-moon sacrifice at
the end of each fortnight; 26the new-harvest sacrifice at the end of each harvest;* the
seasonal sacrifices at the end of each season; an animal sacrifice at the end of each half-
year;* and Soma sacrifices at the end of each year. 27A twice-born who has established
the sacred fires, if he wants to live a long life, must never eat a new crop without
offering the new-harvest sacrifice, or meat without offering an animal sacrifice; 28for his
sacred fires crave for the new crop and meat and, if they have not been honored with an
offering of the new crop and an animal oblation, yearn to eat his very lifebreaths.
Reception of Guests
29No guest should stay at his house without being honored with a seat, food, and a bed,
or with water, roots, and fruits, according to his ability. 30He must never honor the
following even with a word of welcome: ascetics of heretical sects; individuals
engaging in improper activities, observing the "cat vow," or following the way of
herons (4.195-6); hypocrites; and sophists. 31At rites for gods and ancestors, he should
honor (3.70 n.) individuals who have bathed after completing the Vedas, vedic
learning, or vedic vows,* who are vedic scholars, or who are householders, but avoid


--- PAGE 137 ---
126 
Chapter 4
individuals different from these. 32As far as he is able, a householder should give to
those who do not cook* and share with all beings without causing hardship to himself.
Rules of Conduct: I
33If a bath-graduate is tormented by hunger, he may request money from the king, from
a client at whose sacrifices he officiates, or from a resident pupil, but from no one
else—that is the settled rule. MIf he has the capacity, a Brahmin bath-graduate should
never torment himself with hunger or, if he has the means, wear dirty or worn-out
clothes.
35He shall keep his nails clipped, his hair and beard trimmed, and himself
restrained; wear white clothes; remain pure; and apply himself every day to his vedic
recitation and to activities conducive to his own welfare. ^He shall carry a bamboo
staff, a waterpot filled with water, and a broom of sacred grass, and wear a sacrificial
cord and a pair of bright gold earrings.
37He must never look at the sun as it rises or sets, when it is eclipsed or reflected
in water, or when it is in the middle of the sky. 38He must not step over a rope to which
a calf is tied, run in the rain, or look at his reflection in water—that is the fixed rule. 39A
mound of earth,* a cow, a god, a Brahmin, ghee, honey, and a crossroads—he should
circumambulate these clockwise, as also notable trees.
Relationship with Women
40Though aroused, he must never have sex with his wife after the onset of her menstrual
period, or even lie on the same bed with her; 41for when a man has sex with a woman
besmirched with menstrual blood, his wisdom, energy, strength, sight, and life-force
waste away. 42When he avoids a woman besmirched with menstrual blood, his
wisdom, energy, strength, sight, and life-force* will wax stronger.
43He must never eat with his wife or look at her while she is eating, sneezing,
yawning, or seated at ease; ^nor should the Brahmin,* if he wants energy, look at her
while she is applying collyrium to her eyes or oil on her body, or when she is
undressed or giving birth.+
Voiding Urine and Excrement
45He must never eat food wearing just a single garment; bathe naked; or urinate on a
road, on ashes, in a cow pen, 46on plowed land, into water, onto a mound* or a hill, in a
dilapidated temple, onto an anthill, 47into occupied animal holes, while walking or
standing, by a river bank, or at the top of a hill. 48He must never void urine or
excrement facing the wind, a fire, a Brahmin, the sun, water, or cows.
49Restraining his voice, remaining steadfastly attentive,* covering his body, and
wrapping his head, he should ease himself after strewing the ground with sticks, clods,
leaves, or grass. 50During the day, he should void urine and excrement facing the north,
at night facing the south, and at the two twilights in the same way as during the day.
51Under a shadow or in a place that is pitch-dark, a Brahmin may do so during the day
or at night facing any direction he pleases, as also when he fears for his life.


--- PAGE 138 ---
Chapter 4 
127
52When someone urinates towards a fire, the sun, the moon, water, a twice-born
man, a cow, or the wind, his wisdom perishes.*
Rules of Conduct: II
53He must never blow on a fire with his mouth; look at a woman when she is naked;
throw anything filthy into a fire; warm his feet over it; Aplace it under his bed; step
over it; place it by his feet; hurt living creatures; 55eat, travel, or sleep during the time
of twilight; scribble on the ground; take off his own garland;* 56deposit urine,
excrement, sputum, blood, poison, or anything smeared with filth in water; 57sleep
alone in an abandoned house; awaken a sleeping superior;* speak with a menstruating
woman; or go to a sacrifice uninvited.+
58Within an enclosure for the sacred fire, in a cow pen, in the presence of
Brahmins, during his vedic recitation, and while eating, he shall keep his right arm
uncovered (2.193 n.). 59He must never prevent a cow from suckling her calf or report it
to anyone. When he sees a rainbow in the sky, he should wisely refrain from pointing it
out to anyone.
^He must never reside in a village full of unrighteous people or where diseases
run rampant;* go on a journey alone; stay long on a mountain; 61or live in a kingdom
ruled by a SQdra, teeming with unrighteous people, overrun by people belonging to
heretical ascetic sects, or swamped by lowest-born people.
62He must never eat anything from which the oil has been extracted; eat beyond
capacity; eat very early in the morning or very late in the evening; eat again in the
evening after taking his meal in the morning; ^undertake useless activities; drink water
from his cupped hands; eat food placed on his lap; be in any way inquisitive; ^dance;
sing; play a musical instrument; clap; whistle;* make noises when sexually excited;
^wash his feet in a brass vessel at any time; eat from a broken plate or from one that
looks repulsive to him; 66or use footwear, a garment, a sacrificial cord, an ornament, a
garland, or a waterpot previously used by others.
67He must never travel with draft animals that are untrained, hungry, or sick, or
that have broken horns, bad eyes, damaged hoofs, or deformed tails. 68He should
always travel with ones that are well trained and swift and possess good marks, color,
and appearance, without driving them too hard with the whip.
69He should avoid the morning sun, the smoke from a funeral pyre, and broken
seats. He must never cut his nails or hair;* bite off his nails with his teeth; 70crush
clods of earth; tear off grass with his fingernails; or engage in activities that are fruitless
or have unpleasant future consequences. 71A man who crushes clods, tears off grass, or
bites his nails will quickly come to ruin, as also an informant and one who neglects
purifications.
72He must never engage in a combative discussion or wear a garland outdoors.*
Riding on the back of cattle is altogether reprehensible. 73He must not enter an enclosed
village or house by any passage other than the door; and at night, he should keep far
away from the foot of any tree.
74He must never play with dice; fetch his sandals by himself; eat while lying in
bed; eat anything placed in his hand or on a seat; 75eat anything containing sesame after
sunset; sleep here naked; or go anywhere while he is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.).


--- PAGE 139 ---
128 
Chapter 4
76He should eat with his feet wet, but never go to sleep with wet feet; by eating with
wet feet, he obtains a long life.
^He must never enter a place difficult of access and hidden from sight; look at
urine or excrement; cross a river swimming; 78or, if he wishes to live long, step on hair,
ash, bones, shards, cotton seeds, or chaff.
^He must never live in the company of outcastes, Cándalas, Pulkasas, fools,
arrogant men, lowest-born people, or Antyâvasâyins
. ^He must never give a SQdra
advice, leftovers, or anything offered to the gods; teach him the Law; or prescribe an
observance to him. 81Whoever teaches him the Law or whoever prescribes an
observance to him will plunge along with him into that darkness called Asamvrta.
82He must never scratch his head with both hands together; touch his head while
he is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.); or take a bath excluding the head. ^He should
refrain from pulling the hair or striking the head;* and after taking a bath including the
head, he should not apply oil to any part of his body.
People from Whom Gifts May Not Be Accepted
^He must never accept gifts from a king who is not from a royal lineage; from people
who operate abattoirs, oil-presses, or taverns; or from people who gain their living by
keeping brothels. ^One oil-press equals ten abattoirs; one tavern equals ten oil-presses;
one brothel equals ten taverns; and one king equals ten brothels. 86A king, tradition
tells us, is equal to a butcher who operates ten thousand abattoirs; to accept a gift from
him is a horrendous deed.
87When someone accepts a gift from a king who is greedy and who deviates from
the provisions of the authoritative texts,* he will go in turn to these twenty hells:
^Tämisra , Andha-Tämisra , Mahä-Raurava , Raurava, KälasOtra-Naraka , Mahä-Naraka ,
89Samjîvana , Mahâ-Vïci , Tápana, Sampratâpana , Samghâta , Sakâkola , Kudmala,
Pûtimrttika, 90Lohasanku, Rjïsa , Pathin, Sâlmalï , Nadï , Asipatravana, and Loha-
câraka. *
91Knowing this and yearning for well-being after death, Brahmins who are
learned and vedic savants do not accept gifts from a king.
Morning Duties
92He should wake up at the time sacred to Brahman* and reflect on matters relating to
Law and Wealth, on the bodily discomforts (4.3 n.) they cause, and on the true mean-
ing of the Veda.
93After getting up and answering the call of nature, he should perform the
purifications and, with a collected mind, stand for a long time engaged in soft
recitation during the morning twilight and, at its proper time, also during the evening
twilight (2.101-3). 94Because they performed their twilight devotions for a long time,
the seers obtained long life, wisdom, fame, renown, and eminence in vedic knowledge.
Vedic Study
95On the full-moon day of Srävan a (July-August) or Prausthapada (August-
September), a Brahmin should commence his annual course of study according to rule


--- PAGE 140 ---
Chap te r 4 
129
and intently study the Vedas for four and a half months. 96In the forenoon of the first
day of the bright fortnight of either Pusya (December-January) or Mägha * (January-
February), a twice-born should perform the rite of terminating his vedic study outside
the village.
97After performing in this manner the rite of terminating his vedic study outside
the village in accordance with the authoritative texts, he should suspend recitation for
two days and the intervening night, or just during that single day and night. 98After
that time, however, he should recite the Vedas intently during the bright fortnights and
all the Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.) during the dark fortnights.
"He must never recite indistinctly or in the presence of SQdras. After reciting the
Veda during the last part of the night, he must not go back to sleep even if he is worn
out. 100In accordance with the aforementioned rule, he must recite the metrical sections
of the Veda every day; outside a time of adversity, a twice-born must intently recite
both the metrical sections of the Veda and the Brâhmanas .
Suspension of Vedic Recitation
101Anyone engaged in vedic recitation should always abstain on the following
occasions when vedic recitation is to be suspended, as also should anyone engaged in
teaching vedic recitation to students in the prescribed manner.
102When the wind becomes audible at night or kicks up the dust during the day—
experts in recitation regard these as two occasions for suspending vedic recitation
during the rainy season. 103When there is lightning, thunder, and rain,* and when there
is a shower of large meteors, Manu has enjoined the suspension of vedic recitation
until the same time the following day. 104It should be noted that vedic recitation is to
be suspended only when these occur after the fires have been kindled, and also when
clouds appear out of season. 105When a noise erupts* in the sky, when there is an
earthquake, or when halos surround the heavenly lights—even if these happen in
season—one should know that vedic recitation is to be suspended until the same time
the following day. 106When lightning and the rumbling of thunder occur after the fires
have been kindled, however, the suspension of recitation lasts as long as the heavenly
lights are visible; if the other event also occurs, then the recitation is suspended at
night as during the day.*
107Those who want to adhere strictly to the Law should suspend vedic recitation
permanently in villages and towns and wherever there is a foul smell. 108Vedic
recitation is to be suspended in a village where there is a corpse, in the presence of a
Sudra, at the sound of weeping, and near a gathering of people.
109In water, in the middle of the night, after voiding urine or excrement, when he
is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.), or after he has eaten an ancestral offering, a man
should not even review it in his mind. noAfter accepting an invitation to an offering on
behalf of a newly deceased person, a learned twice-born should not recite the Veda for
three days, as also during the period of birth-impurity (5.58 f.) affecting the king and
during an eclipse. mAs long as the smell and stain of an offering on behalf of a newly
deceased person lingers on the body of a learned Brahmin, he should not recite the
Veda.


--- PAGE 141 ---
130 
Chapter 4
112He must not recite the Veda lying down, putting his feet up, or squatting with
a band tied around his waist and knees;* after eating meat; after eating any food given
by someone in a period of birth-impurity (5.58 f.); 113when there is fog; at the sound of
arrows; during both twilights; on the new-moon day; on the fourteenth day of a
fortnight; on the full-moon day; and on the eighth day of a fortnight. 114The new-moon
day destroys the teacher; the fourteenth day destroys the pupil; and the eighth and full-
moon days destroy the Veda. Therefore, he should avoid them altogether.
115A twice-born must not recite during a dust storm, when the horizons have
turned crimson, at the howling of jackals or the cry of dogs, donkeys, and camels, and
when he is seated in a row.*
116He must never recite the Veda near a cemetery, in the outskirts of a village, in a
cow pen, wearing the same clothes he had on during sexual intercourse, or after
accepting something at an ancestral offering. 117After accepting anything at all, whether
animate or inanimate, given at an ancestral offering, he should suspend vedic
recitation; for the hand of a twice-born, tradition tells us, is his mouth.
118After robbers have raided the village, after a turmoil caused by fire, and after
anything out of the ordinary has happened, he should know that vedic recitation is to
be suspended until the same time the following day.
119The suspension, tradition tells us, lasts for three nights both 
after
commencing and after concluding the annual course of study; for a day and a night,
however, on the eighth day of a fortnight and on the final night of every season.
120He must never recite the Veda while he is on a horse, tree, elephant, donkey, or
camel; in a ship or vehicle; on arid land; mduring an altercation or a brawl; in the midst
of a military unit or a battle; soon after eating; when he has indigestion; after vomiting
or having an acidic belch; 122without obtaining the consent of any guest of his; when
there is a strong wind; when blood is flowing from his body; or when he has been
wounded by a weapon.
123He must never recite Re-verses or Yajus-formulas within earshot of Saman
chanting, after reciting the conclusion of a Veda, and after reciting an Äranyaka. *
124The Rgveda is connected with the gods and the Yajurveda with humans; but the
Sämaveda , tradition tells us, is connected with ancestors. Its sound, therefore, is
impure. 125Knowing this, learned men recite first the extract of the triple Veda daily and
in the proper order and then the Veda.*
126When a farm animal, frog, cat, dog, snake, mongoose, or rat passes in
between,* he should know that vedic recitation is to be suspended for a day and a
night.
127These alone are the two occasions for suspending vedic recitation which a
twice-born should diligently avoid every day: when his place of recitation has not been
cleansed and when his body has not been purified.*
Rules of Conduct: III
128The new-moon day, the eighth day of a fortnight, the full-moon day, and the
fourteenth day of a fortnight—on these days, a twice-born who is a bath-graduate
should always remain chaste, even if his wife is in her season (3.45 n.).


--- PAGE 142 ---
Chapter 4 
131
129He must never take a bath after eating, when he is sick, in the dead of the night,
regularly with his clothes on,* or in an unknown body of water.
130He must never tread deliberately on the shadow of these: god,* elder, king,
bath-graduate, teacher, reddish-brown cow,* and a man consecrated for a sacrifice. 131At
midday and midnight, after eating an ancestral offering containing meat, and during
both twilights, he should not tarry at a crossroads. 132He must not step deliberately on
used bath-powders, water from a bath, urine, excrement, blood, phlegm, spittle, or
vomit.
133He must not consort with an enemy, a friend of an enemy, an unrighteous
person, or a thief—as also with another man's wife; 134for there is nothing in this world
as sure to shorten a man's life as consorting with someone else's wife. 135A Ksatriya, a
snake, and a learned Brahmin—however feeble these may be, he must never treat them
with contempt, if he wants to prosper; 136for when a man treats these three persons with
contempt, they will reduce him to ashes. A wise man, therefore, should not treat these
three with contempt. 137He must not hold himself in contempt for his past failures; he
should pursue prosperity until death, never deeming it too difficult to achieve.
138He should say what is true, and he should say what is pleasant; he should not
say what is true but unpleasant, and he should not say what is pleasant but untrue—
that is the eternal Law.* 139He should call a lucky thing "Lucky"; or rather he should
call everything "Lucky."* He should never start a senseless feud or an argument with
anyone.
140He must never travel very early in the morning, very late in the evening, at
high noon, with an unknown person, alone, or with Südras .
141He must not ridicule people who have too few or too many limbs, who are
uneducated, who are very old, who lack beauty or wealth, or who are of low birth.
142When a Brahmin is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.), he must never touch with
his hand a cow, a Brahmin, or a fire; nor, if he is healthy, should he look at the
heavenly lights in the sky while he is impure. 143If he touches any of these while he is
impure, he should always touch his organs and all his limbs with water, and his navel
with his palm.* 144Unless he is sick, he must not touch his orifices without a good
reason, and he should refrain from touching the hair on any of his private parts.
145He should apply himself to auspicious rites and good conduct, control his
self, subdue his senses, and tirelessly perform soft recitations and fire offerings every
day.+ 146No misfortune befalls those who apply themselves to auspicious rites and
good conduct, control their selves evey day, and perform soft recitations and fire
offerings. 147It is the soft recitation of the Veda that he should tirelessly perform every
day at the proper time—for this is his highest Law, they say; others are called
secondary Laws. 148By reciting the Veda constantly, by performing purifications, by
engaging in ascetic toil, and by showing no hostility to any creature, he gets to
remember his former birth. 149When, while recalling his former birth, a twice-born
recites the Veda,* by that constant recitation of the Veda, he obtains unending bliss.
150He should always make Sävitr a and pacificatory offerings on the days of the moon's
change (3.45 n.) and always worship the ancestors on the eighth and the day following
the eighth of each fortnight.*
151Urine, water from washing the feet, remnants of food, and dirty water—he


--- PAGE 143 ---
132 
Chapter 4
should dispose of all these far away from his house. 152Voiding excrement, adorning
oneself, bathing, brushing the teeth, applying collyrium, and the worship of gods—all
these should be done only in the morning.
153He should visit gods and righteous Brahmins; the ruler for the sake of
protection; and elders on the days of the moon's change (3.45 n.).* 154He should greet
elderly persons, offer them his seat, pay them obeisance with joined palms, and follow
behind them as they leave (3.107 n.).
155He should tirelessly follow the root of the Law, namely, the conduct of good
people, which is well set forth in scripture and tradition and is closely tied to the
activities proper to him (1.107 n.)— 156for by good conduct he obtains long life; by
good conduct he obtains the kind of offspring he desires; by good conduct he obtains
inexhaustible wealth; and good conduct neutralizes unlucky marks.* 157A man of evil
conduct becomes an object of reproach in the world, is always miserable, is afflicted
with disease, and lives a very short life. 158Even if he has no lucky marks at all, a man
who follows the conduct of good people, who has a generous spirit (3.202 n.), and
who is free from resentment, lives a hundred years.
159He should carefully avoid all activities that are under someone else's control,
and diligently pursue those that are under his own control. 160Whatever is under
someone else's control—that is suffering; whatever is under one's own control—that
is happiness. He should know that this, in a nutshell, is the definition of suffering and
happiness. 161He should diligently engage in those activities that give him inner joy
and avoid those that do not.
Avoiding Violence
162He must never cause harm to his teacher, instructor, father, mother, elder, Brahmins,
cows, and all who are given to austerities. 163He should eschew infidelity, denigrating
the Vedas, disparaging the gods, hatred, arrogance,* pride, anger, and harshness.
164He must not raise a stick against another person or bring it down on anyone in
anger, except a son or a pupil; these he may beat in order to discipline them (8.299).
165If a twice-born merely threatens a Brahmin with murderous intent, he will meander
in the Tämisr a hell for one hundred years. 166If he strikes him deliberately in anger with
even a blade of grass, he will be reborn in evil wombs* for twenty-one births. 167If a
man foolishly draws blood from the body of a Brahmin who is not attacking him, he
will experience intense suffering after death. 168A man who draws blood will be eaten
by others in the next world for as many years as the number of dust particles from the
earth that the spilled blood lumps together (see 11.208).
169 A wise man, therefore, must never threaten a twice-born person, strike him
even with a blade of grass, or draw blood from his body.
Following the Path of Righteousness
170A man who is unrighteous, who has gained his wealth dishonestly, and who always
takes delight in causing injury will never achieve happiness in this world. 171Even
when he has been brought low as a result of his righteous conduct, let him never turn to


--- PAGE 144 ---
Chapter 4 
133
unrighteous ways, seeing how quickly the fortunes of unrighteous and evil men are
reversed.
172Like the earth,* practicing unrighteousness does not produce instant results in
this world; but turning around gradually, it cuts off its perpetrator by his roots. 173If not
himself, then his sons; if not his sons, then his grandsons—an unrighteous act once
committed never tails to repay its perpetrator. 174Through unrighteous ways a man first
prospers; then he experiences good fortune; next he vanquishes his opponents; but in
the end he is destroyed root* and all.
175He should always take delight in speaking the truth, in following the Law, in
conforming to the Äry a ways, and in purifying himself. With his speech, hands, and
stomach controlled, he should discipline his disciples* according to the Law. 176He
should abandon any activity relating to Wealth or Pleasure that is in violation of Law,
and even activities sanctioned by Law when they will result in future unhappiness or
are repugnant to the world (2.224 "•)•
177He must never conduct himself in a fickle manner with his hands, feet, eyes, or
speech; follow crooked ways; or show hostility to others in thought or deed. 178The
path trodden by his fathers, the path trodden by his grandfathers—let him tread along
that path of good people; no harm will befall him when he travels by that path.
Family and Social Relations
179Officiating priests; family priests; teachers; maternal uncles; guests; dependents;
children; the aged; the sick; doctors;* paternal, affinal, and maternal relatives;*
180father; mother, sisters; brother; son; wife; daughter; and slaves—he should not get
into arguments with any of these. 181By forswearing arguments with them, he is freed
from all sins; and when he is conquered by them,* the householder conquers all these
worlds.
182The teacher is the ruler of Brahman's world; the father, of Prajäpati' s world;
the guest, of Indra's world; the officiating priests, of the world of gods; 183the sisters,
of the world of Apsarases; maternal relatives, of the world of the Visvedevas; affinal
relatives, of the world of the waters; and the mother and maternal uncles, of the earth.
184The children, the aged, the feeble, and the sick are to be regarded as the rulers of
space. His older brother is equal to his father, and his wife and son are his own body.
185His slaves are his own shadow, and his daughter is the object of supreme
compassion. When he is assailed by any of these, therefore, he should always bear it
without losing his temper.
Accepting and Giving Gifts
186Even if he is qualified to accept gifts, he should avoid becoming addicted to that
practice, for by accepting gifts his vedic energy is quickly extinguished. 187Without
knowing the procedure prescribed by Law for accepting things, a wise man should
never accept a gift even if he is racked by hunger.
188When an ignorant man accepts gold, land, a horse, a cow, food, clothes,
sesame seeds, or ghee, he is reduced to ashes like a piece of wood.* 189Gold and food
burn up his life-force; a cow and land, his body; a horse, his sight; clothes, his skin;


--- PAGE 145 ---
134 
Chapter 4
ghee, his energy; and sesame seeds, his offspring. 190When a twice-born neither
engages in ascetic toil nor recites the Veda and yet loves to receive gifts, he will sink
along with the donor, as a man would sink in water along with his stone float. 191An
ignorant man, therefore, should fear any kind of gift; for by accepting even a trifling
gift, an ignorant man sinks like a cow in the mud.
192A man who knows the Law should not give even water to a twice-born
observing the "cat-vow", to an evil man observing* the "heron-vow," or to one who
does not know the Veda; 193for an object of value given to any of these three, even if it
has been acquired in accordance with the rules, affects both the giver and the receiver
adversely after death. 194As a man making a crossing with a stone float sinks in the
water, so will the ignorant beseecher and the ignorant donor sink to the bottom.
Hypocrisy
195A man who always displays the banner of righteousness and yet is greedy and
deceitful, who deludes the world, who is given to violence, and who beguiles
everybody should be viewed as one who observes the "cat-vow."* 196A twice-born who
goes around with downcast eyes but is cruel,* given to furthering his own ends,
crooked, and being falsely sanctimonious, is a man who is observing the "heron-vow."
197Brahmins who observe the "heron-vow" and those who display the marks of a cat fall
into the Andha-Tämisr a hell as a result of that evil act.
198After committing a sin, he must never perform a penitential observance under
the pretext that he is doing it as a meritorious act, thus covering up his sin with his
observance and deceiving women and SDdras. 199Such Brahmins are denounced by
vedic savants both here and in the hereafter, and that observance, carried out covertly,
goes to the fiends.
200When someone earns his livelihood by wearing the insignia of a religious
profession* to which he does not belong, he takes upon himself the sins of those
belonging to that religious profession and is reborn in the womb of an animal.
Using What Belongs to Others
^He must never bathe in a reservoir that belongs to someone else. By doing so, he
will be tainted with a portion of the evils committed by the man who constructed that
reservoir. 202When a man uses someone's vehicle, bed, seat, well, garden, or house
without permission, he gets a quarter of the owner's sins. 203He should always bathe in
rivers, natural ponds,* lakes, pools, and springs.
204A wise man should always practice the central virtues and not busy himself
constantly with the secondary observances. A man falls when he devotes himself to the
secondary observances while neglecting the central virtues.*+
Unfit Food
205 A Brahmin must never partake of food* at a sacrifice offered by someone who is not
a vedic scholar or who officiates as a priest for a large number of people, or at one
offered by a woman or an effeminate man (3.150 n.). 206When such persons offer an


--- PAGE 146 ---
Chapter 4 
135
oblation, it is unpropitious for virtuous people and disagreeable to gods; therefore, he
should avoid it.
207He must also never eat the following: food given by someone who is drunk,
angry, or sick;* food contaminated with hair or insects or touched deliberately with the
foot; 208food looked at by a murderer of a Brahmin,* touched by a menstruating
woman, pecked by a bird, or touched by a dog; 209food smelled by a cow; in a special
way, food given after a public announcement; food given by a group or by a prostitute;
food that is despised by learned men; 210food given by a thief, a musician, a carpenter, a
usurer, a man consecrated for a sacrifice, a miser, a prisoner, a shackled man,* 211a
heinous sinner (2.185 n.), a eunuch, a promiscuous woman, or a hypocrite; food that
has turned sour or is stale; food of a Sudra; leftovers* (2.56 n.); 212food given by a
physician, a hunter, a cruel man, someone who eats leftovers, or an Ugra; food of a
woman impure by reason of childbirth; food served at a meal where someone sips water
during the meal; food given during the ten days of impurity resulting from a birth ;*+
213food given without respect; meat procured capriciously (5.27); food given by a
woman without a husband; food of an enemy, the chief of a town,* or an outcaste;
food someone has sneezed upon; 214food given by a slanderer, a liar, a trafficker in
rituals, an actor, a tailor, an ingrate, 215a blacksmith, a Misada, a theatrical performer, a
goldsmith, a basket-weaver, an arms merchant, 216those who raise dogs, liquor
merchants, a washerman, a dyer, a heartless man, someone who lets his wife's
paramour live in his house 217or who condones a paramour, or someone who is bossed
by his wife in every way; food of persons during the first ten days after a death in their
family; food offered to a newly deceased person,* and unappetizing food.
218The food of a king robs his energy; the food of a Sudra, his eminence in vedic
knowledge; the food of a goldsmith, his life-force; and the food of a leather-worker,
his fame. 219The food of an artisan destroys his offspring, and the food of a dyer, his
strength. The food of a group or of a prostitute cuts him off from the worlds. 220The
food of a physician is pus; the food of a promiscuous woman is semen; the food of a
usurer is excrement; and the food of an arms merchant is filth. 221The food of those
others who have been listed in order as people whose food is unfit to be eaten—the
wise declare that to be skin, bones, and hair.
•^If someone eats the food of any one of them* unintentionally, he should fast
for three days; if he eats intentionally—as also when he consumes semen, urine, or
excrement—he should perform an arduous penance (11.212).+
223 A learned twice-born must never eat cooked food given by a Sudra who lacks a
spirit of generosity (3.202 n.). If he is without sustenance, he may accept from such a
man only raw provisions sufficient for a single day.*
^The gods once evaluated the food of a miserly vedic scholar and that of a
generous usurer and pronounced the two to be equal. ^Prajapati came up to them and
said, "Don't make equal what is unequal. The food of the generous man is cleansed by
the spirit of generosity, whereas the other food is defiled by the lack of generosity."
Gifts and Their Rewards
^He should tirelessly make sacrificial offerings and give gifts every day in a spirit of
generosity; for, when done with a generous spirit and using justly earned wealth, they


--- PAGE 147 ---
136 
Chapter 4
become inexhaustible.+ 227Finding a suitable recipient, he should practice daily the
Law of giving comprising sacrificial offerings and gifts, according to his ability and
with a cheerful heart.+ ^When he is asked, he should give ungrudgingly at least some-
thing, for one day he may encounter that special recipient who will rescue him from
all.*
^'One who gives water obtains satiety; one who gives food, inexhaustible
happiness; one who gives sesame seeds, the kind of offspring one desires; one who
gives a lamp, the finest eyesight. 230One who gives land, obtains land; one who gives
gold, long life; one who gives a house, superb dwellings; one who gives silver (rüpya),
peerless beauty (rüpä);
 S1one who gives clothes, residence in the same world as the
Moon; one who gives a horse (asvd), residence in the same world as the Asvins; one
who gives an ox, bounteous prosperity; one who gives a cow, the summit of the sun;
232one who gives a vehicle or bed, a wife; one who gives security, lordship; one who
gives grain, eternal happiness; and one who gives the Veda (brahman), equality with
Brahman. *233The gift of the Veda far exceeds every other gift, whether it is the gift of
water, food, cows, land, clothes, sesame seeds, gold, or ghee.
^With whatever disposition a man makes a particular gift, he will be received
with honor and obtain that very thing* with the very same disposition. ^When due
respect is shown in accepting and in giving a gift, both the receiver and the giver go to
heaven; but when the opposite happens, both go to hell.
236He must not flaunt his austerities, lie about a sacrifice* he has performed,
revile Brahmins even though aggrieved, or brag about a gift he has given. S7A sacrifice
is lost by telling a lie about it, austerity by flaunting it, longevity by reviling
Brahmins, and a gift by bragging about it.
Accumulating Merit
^Gradually and without hurting any creature, he should pile up merit (dhainia) like
termites an anthill, so as to secure an escort in the next world; ^for in the next world,
neither father nor mother stands by him as his escort; nor does son, wife, or relative.
Only merit stands by him. 240Alone a creature is born, and alone it dies. Alone it enjoys
the fruits of its good deeds, alone also the fruits of its evil deeds. 241While his relatives
discard the dead body on earth as if it were a piece of wood or a clod of earth and depart
with averted faces, his merit accompanies him. 242To secure an escort, therefore, let him
gradually pile up merit every day; for with merit as his escort, he will cross over the
darkness that is difficult to cross. 243The escort quickly leads that man, who is devoted
to the Law (dharmd) and whose sins have been erased by ascetic toil, to the next world,
glittering with an ethereal body.
244He should always build relationships with people of the highest possible rank
and avoid anyone of a lower rank, if he wants to raise his family to a higher rank. 245By
going to people of the highest possible rank and by avoiding those who are lower, a
Brahmin achieves distinction; by doing the opposite, he is reduced to the level of a
Südra .
246A man who adheres to these observances—a man who is resolute in his
undertakings, who is gentle and controlled, and who does not associate with people of


--- PAGE 148 ---
Chapter 4 
137
cruel conduct or cause harm to anyone—wins heaven by controlling himself and
giving gifts.
Acceptance of Gifts and Food
247Fire wood, water, roots, fruits, food spontaneously given, honey, and the gift of
freedom from fear (6.39 n.)—he may accept these from anyone. 248Prajapati has
determined that almsfood that is brought and presented without being requested
beforehand may be accepted even from a man of evil conduct. 249If a man spurns such
almsfood, his ancestors will not eat from him for fifteen years, and the sacred fire will
not convey his offerings.
250Bed, house, Kusa grass, perfumes, water, flowers, gems, curd, grain, fish,
milk, meat, or vegetables—these he should never reject. ^He may accept a gift from
anyone for the purpose of supporting his elders and dependents and honoring gods and
guests; but he may not use it to gratify himself.
252At a time when his elders have passed away or he is living at home without
them and he is seeking a means of sustenance, he may always accept gifts from good
people.
253 A sharecropper, a friend of the family, and one's cowherd, slave, and barber—
among Sudras, these are the ones whose food is fit to be eaten, as also a person who has
presented himself.*
^He should present himself accurately in all this: what sort of a person he is,
what sort of work he wants to perform, and in what manner he will serve that person.
255A man who misrepresents himself to good people is the worst sinner in the world; he
is a thief, a man who steals his very self. 256A11 things are founded on speech; speech is
their root; and from speech they proceed. A man who steals speech is guilty of stealing
everything.
Old Age and Retirement
257After he has freed himself according to rule from his debts* to the great seers,
ancestors, and gods, he should hand over everything to his son and live in complete
equanimity. 258Living alone in a secluded place, he should always reflect on what is
beneficial to himself; for, by reflecting alone, he attains supreme bliss.
^I have explained above the invariable means of livelihood for a
Brahmin householder, as also the splendid set of observances for a
bath-graduate which enhances his spirit (3.40 n.). 260When a
Brahmin, knowing the vedic teachings, follows this mode of life, he
frees himself always from sins and is exalted in heaven.


--- PAGE 149 ---
CHAPTER FIVE
P R O L O G U E
1 After they had heard the Laws of a bath-graduate described in this manner, the seers
said this to the noble-minded Bhrgu born from the fire:* 2"How, O Lord, does Death
prevail over Brahmins, who know the vedic teachings and follow the Law specific to
them described in this manner?"
3Bhrgu, the embodiment of the Law and the son of Manu, said to those great
seers: "Listen to the fault because of which Death seeks to kill Brahmins."
F O R B I D D E N FOOD
4Death seeks to kill Brahmins because of the failure to recite the Vedas, the dereliction
of the rules of proper conduct, laziness, and faults with respect to food.
5Garlic, leeks, onions, and mushrooms are foods forbidden* to twice-born
persons; and so is anything growing in an impure medium. 6He should scrupulously
eschew the following: the red sap of trees; juices flowing from incisions on trees; Selu
fruit; cow's colostrum; 7Krsara porridge, Samyâv a cake,* milk-rice, or cake prepared
for no good reason; meat of an unconsecrated animal (5.27-57); food offered to
deities; and sacrificial oblations.
8The milk of a cow within ten days after giving birth; milk of camels, single-
hoofed animals, and sheep; milk of a cow that is in heat or has lost its calf; 9milk of all
wild animals except buffaloes; and milk of women—these he should eschew, as also
anything that has turned sour.10Among foods turned sour, he may eat curd and all curd
products, as well as the extracts of wholesome flowers, roots, and fruits.
"He should eschew all carnivorous birds, as also those that live in villages;
single-hoofed animals, except those explicitly permitted;* plovers; 12Kalavinka
sparrows; Plava herons; Hamsa geese; Cakra sheldrakes; village fowl; Sarasa cranes;
Rajjuväl a fowl; DatyQha waterfowl; parrots; mynahs; 13birds that feed by pecking;
web-footed birds; Koyasthi cranes; birds that feed by scratching with their feet; birds
that catch fish by diving; meat from a slaughter-house; dried meat; 14Baka egrets;
Balâk a ibis; Kâkol a ravens; Khañjantaka wagtails; fish eaters; village hogs; and every
kind of fish.
15A man who eats the meat of some animal is called "eater of that animal's meat,"
whereas a fish-eater is an "eater of every animal's meat." Therefore, he should eschew
fish. 16The Pâthïn a and the Rohita fish may be eaten when they are used in an offering
to gods or ancestors; Râjïva , Sirnhatunda, and Sasalka fish may be eaten at any time.
138


--- PAGE 150 ---
Chapters 
139
17He must never eat those that wander alone; unknown animals or birds, even if
they are listed among those that are permitted; as also all animals with five nails.*
18Among animals with five nails, they say, the porcupine, the hedgehog, the monitor
lizard, the rhinoceros, the tortoise, and the rabbit may be eaten; as also animals with
incisors in only one jaw,* with the exception of the camel.
19By eating mushrooms, a village hog, garlic, a village fowl, onion, or leek
intentionally, a twice-born falls from his caste. 20If he eats one of these six unwittingly,
he shall perform the Santapana or the ascetics' lunar penance (11.213, 219). If he eats
any of the others, he shall fast for one day. 21To cleanse himself of what he may have
eaten unwittingly, a Brahmin should perform at least one arduous penance (11.212)
each year; but he is cleansed of what he has eaten intentionally through the specified
penance.
^To perform sacrifices Brahmins may kill sanctioned animals and birds, as also
to feed their dependents; Agastya did that long ago. 23For, at the ancient sacrifices of
seers and at the Soma offerings* of Brahmins and Ksatriyas, the sacrificial cakes were
prepared with the meat of permitted animals and birds.
24Any nonforbidden food or delicacy infused with oil* may be eaten even if it is
stale, as also any leftovers from a sacrificial oblation. ^Though they have not been
infused with oil, however, dishes made with barley or wheat, as well as milk
preparations, may be eaten by the twice-born, even if they have stood for a long time.
26I have described above completely what foods are forbidden and
what permitted to the twice-born. I will now explain the rule on
eating and on avoiding meat.
E A T I N G M E A T
27He may eat meat when it is sacrificially consecrated, at the behest of Brahmins, when
he is ritually commissioned according to rule, and when his life is at risk.*
28Prajapati created* this whole world as food for lifebreath; all beings, the
mobile and the immobile, are nourishment for lifebreath. 29The immobile are food for
the mobile; the fangless for the fanged; the handless for the handed; and the timid for
the brave. 30The eater is not defiled by eating living beings suitable for eating, even if
he eats them day after day; for the creator himself fashioned both the eaters and the
living beings suitable for eating.
31"The sacrifice is the reason for eating meat"—this, the tradition says, is the rule
of gods. Doing it for any other purpose is called the rule of fiends.* 32When a man eats
meat—whether it was purchased, procured by himself, or offered by someone else—
after making an offering to gods and ancestors, he does not become defiled. 33Except in
a time of adversity, a twice-born man who knows the rules must never eat meat in
contravention of the rules; if he eats meat in contravention of the rules, after death he
will be eaten forcibly by those very animals. MIn the afterlife, the sin of someone who
hunts animals for profit is not as great as that of a man who eats meat procured
capriciously. 35If a man refuses to eat meat after he has been ritually commissioned


--- PAGE 151 ---
140 
Chapters
according to rule (5.27 n.), after death he will become an animal for twenty-one
lifetimes. 36A Brahmin must never eat animals that have not been consecrated with
ritual formulas. Abiding by the eternal rule,* however, he must eat those that have
been consecrated with ritual formulas.
37If he gets the urge, let him make an animal out of butter or flour; but he must
never entertain the desire to kill an animal for a futile reason. 38When a man kills an
animal for a futile reason, after death he will be subject in birth after birth to being slain
as many times as the number of hairs on that animal.
39The Self-existent One himself created domestic animals for sacrifice,* and the
sacrifice is for the prosperity of this whole world. Within the sacrifice, therefore,
killing is not killing. 40When plants, domestic animals, trees, beasts, and birds die for
the sake of a sacrifice, they will in turn earn superior births. 41The honey-mixture
(3.119 n.), a sacrifice, an offering to gods or ancestors—at no other occasion than
these, Manu has declared, may animals be killed. 42When a twice-born man who knows
the true meaning of the Veda kills animals for these purposes, he leads himself and
those animals to the highest state. 43Whether he lives at home, at his teacher's, or in the
wilderness, a twice-born man who is self-possessed must never, even in a time of
adversity, carry out a killing that is not sanctioned by the Veda. '"When a killing is
sanctioned by the Veda and well-established in this mobile and immobile creation,* it
should be regarded definitely as a non-killing; for it is from the Veda that the Law has
shined forth.
45If someone, craving his own pleasure, harms harmless creatures, he will not
find happiness anywhere while he is still alive or after death. 46When someone has no
desire to tie up, kill, or cause pain* to living creatures and seeks the welfare of all
beings, he obtains endless bliss. 47Whatever a man contemplates, whatever a man
undertakes, whatever a man takes a liking to*—all that he obtains without effort, when
he does no harm to any creature.
48One can never obtain meat without causing injury to living beings, and killing
living beings is an impediment to heaven; he should, therefore, abstain from meat.
49Reflecting on how meat is obtained and on how embodied creatures are tied up and
killed, he should quit eating any kind of meat. 50When a man refrains from eating meat
like a goblin, except when the rules prescribe it,* he is loved by the world and is not
tormented by diseases.
51The man who authorizes, the man who butchers, the man who slaughters, the
man who buys or sells, the man who cooks, the man who serves, and the man who
eats—these are all killers. 52There is no greater sinner than a man who, outside of an
offering to gods or ancestors, wants to make his own flesh thrive at the expense of
someone else's.
53A man who abstains from meat and a man who offers the horse sacrifice every
year for a hundred years—the reward for their meritorious acts* is the same. 54Even by
living on pure fruits and roots and by eating the food of sages, a man fails to obtain as
great a reward as he would by abstaining completely from meat.
55"Me he (mam sa) will eat in the next world, whose meat (rnämsd) I eat in this
world"—this, the wise declare, is what gave the name to and discloses the true nature
of "meat" (ntamsa).*


--- PAGE 152 ---
Chapters 
141
56There is no fault in eating meat, in drinking liquor, or in having sex; that is the
natural activity of creatures. Abstaining from such activity, however, brings great
rewards.
57I will now explain the purification after a death, as well as the
purification of things, precisely and in their proper order for all four
classes.
B O D I L Y P U R I F I C A T I O N
Death or Birth of a Person Belonging to the Same Ancestry
58Someone who has teethed, someone younger, or someone who has had his first
cutting of hair* (2.35)—when any of these dies, all his relatives become impure; the
same is prescribed after the birth of a child. 59A ten-day period of impurity following a
death is prescribed for those who belong to the same ancestry; alternatively, that period
may last until the collection of bones,* or for three days, or for a single day.
60The relationship based on common ancestry* stops with the seventh
generation; the relationship based on offering libations,* on the other hand, stops only
when someone's birth and name are no longer remembered.
61The same holds true at a birth. The birth-impurity, however, affects only the
mother and the father. The mother alone is subject to the period of birth-impurity; the
father becomes pure by bathing [verse number 62 omitted in critical edition].+ ^On the
contrary, it is after spilling his seed that a man is purified by simply bathing; the
impurity resulting from a seminal relationship adheres to him for three days.*
^Those who touch the corpse are purified in ten days, but those who offer
libations in three.* ^A pupil who performs the funerary rites of his deceased teacher,
on the other hand, is on a par with those who carry a corpse* and is purified in ten days.
66After a miscarriage, a woman is purified after the same number of days as the
months of her pregnancy. A menstruating woman becomes wholesome by taking a
bath after her menstrual flow has ceased.
67When males die before the first cutting of their hair (2.35), tradition tells us,
the impurity lasts a single night;* but when they die after the cutting of their hair,
purity is considered to be restored after three nights. 68When a child under two dies, its
relatives should decorate its corpse and lay it down* in a clean spot outside the village;
the ceremony of collecting its bones is omitted. 69Neither the consecration with fire nor
the offering of water is done for such a child; after leaving it behind in the wilderness
like a piece of wood, one should keep the observances* for just three days. 70Relatives
should not offer libations of water for a child under 3; they may do so optionally if it
has teethed or if its naming ceremony has been performed.
71When someone who had been a fellow student dies, tradition prescribes the
observances for one day. In the event of a birth, the purity of those related through
offering libations (5.60 n.) is considered to be restored after three days. 72The relations


--- PAGE 153 ---
142 
Chapters
of unmarried women are purified in three days, but her siblings* are purified exactly
according to the prescribed rule.*
73For three days* they are to eat food without artificial salt, bathe by immersion,
abstain from eating meat, and sleep separately on the floor.
Death in a Distant Region 
74The above set of rules concerning impurity after
death is prescribed only when a death has occurred close by; when it has happened far
away, kinsmen and relatives* should know that the procedure is as follows.
75When someone living in a far-away place dies and one hears of it within ten
days of his death, one becomes impure only for the remainder of that ten-day period.
76If one hears of it after the lapse of ten days, one becomes impure for three days; but if
it is after a year, one is purified simply by bathing. ^When a man hears about the death
of a paternal relative or the birth of a son after the lapse of ten days, he becomes pure by
immersing himself in water with his clothes on. 78When a child or someone belonging
to a different ancestry* dies in a far-away place, one is purified instantly by immersing
oneself in water with one's clothes on.
Overlapping Periods of Impurity 
^If during one ten-day period of impurity
another death or birth occurs, a Brahmin remains impure only until the end of the
initial ten-day period.
Death of Significant 
Others ^At the death of one's teacher, they prescribe a
three-day period of impurity; and at the death of the teacher's son or wife, the settled
rule is a day and a night. 81One becomes impure for three days at the death of a vedic
scholar living near by,* and for two days plus the intervening night at the death of
one's maternal uncle, pupil, officiating priest, or maternal relative. 82At the death of a
king, anyone residing within his realm* remains impure that day from dawn to dusk or
that night from dusk to dawn (4.106 n.). At the death of someone who is not a vedic
scholar, a vedic savant, or an elder,* one remains impure for a full day.
Periods of Impurity for Different Classes 
œA Brahmin is purified in ten
days, a Ksatriya in twelve, a Vaisya in fifteen, and a SQdra in a month.* ^One should
not prolong the days of impurity or postpone one's fire rituals; while performing that
rite, even a uterine brother (5.72 n.) becomes immune to impurity.*
Impurity from Touch ^When someone touches a Divakïrti, * a menstruating
woman, an outcaste, a woman who has given birth, or a corpse—as also a person who
has touched any of these—he is purified by bathing. ^At the sight of an impure person,
he should make himself ritually pure by sipping water and then softly recite the Solar
formulas according to his capacity, and the Pâvamân
ï verses to the best of his ability.
87After touching a human bone, a Brahmin is purified by bathing if the bone was
greasy, but simply by sipping water, touching a cow, or gazing at the sun, if the bone
was dry.
Libations for the Dead 
88A votary* shall not offer a libation until he has
completed his vow; but once he has completed his vow and offered the libation, he is


--- PAGE 154 ---
Chapters 
143
purified in just three days.* ^Libations are omitted in the case of people born through
capricious caste mingling;* those living in ascetic orders; suicides; '"and women who
have joined heretical sects, roam about at will, harm their fetus or husband, or drink
liquor. 91By carrying his own deceased teacher, tutor (2.141), father, mother, or elder, a
votary (5.88 n.) does not break his vow.
Funeral Path 
92A dead SQdra should be carried out through the southern gate of the
city, and a twice-born person through the western, the northern, or the eastern gate, as
appropriate.*
Instant Purification 
of Kings 
93The taint of impurity does not affect kings,
votaries, and those engaged in a sacrificial session; for they are seated on the seat of
Indra and are ever one with brahman* 94Instant purification is prescribed for a king on
the seat of majesty—the reason for this is that he is seated for the protection of his
subjects—95as also for people killed in a riot or battle, by lightning or the king, or in
defense of cows or Brahmins, and for anyone the king wants.*
%Soma, Fire, Sun, Wind, Indra, the Lords of wealth and water, and Yama—the
king is the embodiment of these eight guardians of the world (see 7.4). 97The lords of
the world abide within the king, and no period of impurity is prescribed for him; for it
is the lords of the world who both bring about and erase purity and impurity in mortal
beings.*
98When a man is killed in battle with upraised weapons according to the Ksatriya
law, the settled rule is that for him both sacrifice and purification are accomplished
instantly.*
"After completing the required rite,* a Brahmin is purified by touching water, a
Ksatriya his conveyance (7.75 n.) or weapon, a Vaisya his goad or reins, and a SQdra
his staff (see 8.113).
100I have explained to you above, O Brahmins, the purification in the
case of people belonging to the same ancestry (5.60 n.). Listen now
to the purification after death in the case of all those belonging to
different ancestries.
Death of a Person Belonging to a Different Ancestry
101If a Brahmin carries the corpse of a twice-born person unrelated to him by ancestry as
if he were a relative, or if he carries a close (2.109 n.) relative of his mother, he is
purified in three days. 102If he eats their food, on the other hand, his purification takes
ten full days; but if he neither eats their food nor stays at their house, it takes just one
day.+ 103If someone willingly follows a corpse, whether it is that of a paternal relative
or of someone else, he is purified after he has bathed with his clothes on, touched the
fire, and eaten some ghee.
104When one's own people are present, one should never let a SQdra carry a
Brahmin's corpse, for a sacrificial offering defiled by a SOdra's touch does not lead a
person to heaven.*


--- PAGE 155 ---
144 
Chapter^
Means of Purification
105Knowledge, austerity, fire, food, earth, mind, water, smearing with cow dung,
wind, rites, sun, time*—these are the agents of purification for embodied beings.+
106Purifying oneself with respect to wealth, tradition tells us, is the highest of all
purifications; for the truly pure man is the one who is pure with respect to wealth, not
the one who becomes pure by using earth and water.
107Learned men are purified by forbearance; those who do forbidden things, by
giving gifts; those who commit secret sins, by soft recitation; and pre-eminent experts
in the Veda, by ascetic toil. 108What needs cleaning is cleansed by using earth and
water, a river by its current, a woman defiled in thought by her menstrual flow, and
Brahmins by renunciation.* 109The body is cleansed with water, the mind by truth, the
elemental self (12.12-13 n.) by learning and austerity, and the intellect by knowledge.
110I have explained to you above the determination with regard to
bodily purification. Listen now to the determination with regard to
the purification of different kinds of articles.
P U R I F I C A T I O N O F A R T I C L E S
mThe wise have determined that metal objects, jewels, and anything lapidary* are
cleaned with ash, water, and earth. 112When they are unstained,* gold vessels are
cleaned with water alone, as also the aquatic, the lapidary,* or any silver article that is
unembellished. 113Gold and silver issued from the union of fire and water; they are best
cleaned, therefore, using their very sources. 114The cleaning of copper, iron, brass,
pewter, tin, and lead is done using as appropriate alkali, acid, and water.
115A11 liquids,* tradition tells us, are cleaned by straining;* solids, by sprinkling
water; and wooden articles, by planing.+
116During a sacrificial rite, sacrificial vessels are rubbed with the hand; the
Camasa-cups and Graha-ladles, on the other hand, are cleaned by washing;* 117the
Caru-pots, Sruk-spoons, and Sruva-spoons are cleaned with warm water, as are Sphya-
swords, Surpa-winnows, Sakata-carts, pestles, and mortars.
118The rule is that large quantities of grain or clothes are cleaned by sprinkling
them with water, whereas small quantities are cleaned by washing them with water.+
119Skin and wicker are to be cleaned the same way as cloth; and vegetables, roots, and
fruits, the same way as grain. 120Silk and wool are cleaned with saline earth, goat's
wool blankets (3.234 n.) with ground Arista fruit, fine fabric with Bel fruit, and linen
with yellow mustard. 121A discerning man should clean conch and horn, as well as
articles made of bone and ivory, the same way as linen, or else with cow's urine or
water. 122Grass, wood, and straw are cleaned by sprinkling water on them, a house by
scrubbing it or by smearing it with cow dung (5.105 n.), and earthenware by firing it
again [verse 123 is omitted].+ 124Scrubbing, smearing with cow dung, sprinkling,
scraping, and letting cows stay in it—by these five means a plot of land is purified.+
125Anything that birds have pecked, cows have sniffed, or hair or insects have
fouled, or over which someone has shaken* or sneezed, is cleaned by spreading some


--- PAGE 156 ---
Chapters 
145
earth over it. 126Whenever anything is being cleaned, one should keep applying earth
and water until the smell and stain are gone from the article smeared with a foul
substance.
127Gods invented three means of purification for Brahmins: being unaware that
something is impure, sprinkling it with water, and getting it verbally declared as
suitable.*
Statutory Purity of Things
128Water collected on the ground is pure if it is sufficient to slake the thirst of a cow, is
uncontaminated with foul substances, and has the right odor, color, and taste. 129The
hand of an artisan is always pure, as are goods displayed for sale; the almsfood received
by a student is always ritually clean—that is the settled rule. 130A woman's mouth is
always pure; so is a bird when it makes a fruit to fall, a calf when it makes the milk to
flow, and a dog when it catches a deer. 131The meat of an animal that has been killed by
a dog or some other predator, or by a Cándala or some other lowlife, is pure—that is
the judgment of Manu.+
132A11 orifices above the navel are ritually clean; those below are ritually unclean,
as are the foul substances that shed from the body.
133Flies, droplets of water,* shadows, cows, horses, rays of the sun, dust, earth,
wind, and fire—these should be regarded as ritually clean to the touch.
P U R I F I C A T I O N OF THE BODY
134To purify oneself after voiding urine or excrement and to clean any of the twelve
bodily impurities, one should use a sufficient amount of earth and water. 135Body oil,
semen, blood, marrow,* urine, feces, ear-wax, nails, phlegm,* tears, discharge of the
eyes, and sweat—these are the twelve impurities of man.
136A man intent on purifying himself should apply one lump of earth on the
penis, three on the anus, ten on one hand,* and seven on both. 137This is the
purification for householders. It is twice that much for students, three times for forest
hermits, and four times for ascetics. 138After he voids urine or excrement, he must sip
water and touch the orifices with water (2.53 n.); he must do so every time he prepares
to recite the Veda or to eat his food.
139A man who desires bodily purification should first sip water three times and
then wipe the mouth with water twice; but a woman or a SOdra sips and wipes just
once. 140SQdras who abide by the proper mode of conduct should shave their heads once
a month, follow the rules of purification laid down for Vaisyas, and eat the leftover
food of twice-born persons.
141Drool spattering from the mouth does not make someone sullied if it does not
fall on his body; nor does hair from the beard getting into the mouth or anything stuck
between the teeth. 142Drops falling on a man's feet while he is pouring water for
someone else to sip are to be considered similar to water on the ground and do not
make him ritually impure. 143If a sullied person touches a man carrying something in
his hand, he becomes pure by sipping some water without laying that thing down.*


--- PAGE 157 ---
146 
Chapters
144After vomiting or purging, one should bathe and consume some ghee; after
eating food,* one should simply sip some water; and after sexual intercourse tradition
requires one to take a bath. 145After sleeping, sneezing, eating, spitting, telling a lie,
and drinking water, as also when one is about to recite the Veda, one should sip some
water even though one is already ritually pure.
146I have explained to you above all the rules of purification, as well
as the cleaning of articles, applicable to all the social classes. Listen
now to the Law with respect to women.
LAW W I T H R E S P E C T TO W O M E N
Lack of Independence
147Even in their own homes, a female—whether she is a child, a young woman, or an
old lady—should never carry out any task independently.* 148As a child, she must
remain under her father's control; as a young woman, under her husband's; and when
her husband is dead, under her sons'. She must never seek to live independently. 149She
must never want to separate herself from her father, husband, or sons; for by separating
herself from them, a woman brings disgrace on both families.*
150She should be always cheerful, clever at housework, careful in keeping the
utensils clean, and frugal in her expenditures.
Duties towards Husband
151The man to whom her father or, with her father's consent, her brother gives her
away—she should obey him when he is alive and not be unfaithful to him when he is
dead. 152The invocation of blessings and the sacrifice to Prajâpat i are performed during
marriage to procure her good fortune; the act of giving away* is the reason for his
lordship over her. 153In season and out of season, in this world and in the next, the
husband who performed the marriage consecration with ritual formulas always gives
happiness to his woman.
154Though he may be bereft of virtue, given to lust, and totally devoid of good
qualities, a good woman should always worship her husband like a god. 155For
women, there is no independent sacrifice, vow, or fast; a woman will be exalted in
heaven by the mere fact that she has obediently served her husband.156A good woman,
desiring to go to the same world as her husband, should never do anything displeasing
to the man who took her hand, whether he is alive or dead.
157After her husband is dead, she may voluntarily emaciate her body by eating
pure flowers, roots, and fruits; but she must never mention even the name of another
man. 158Aspiring to that unsurpassed Law of women devoted to a single husband, she
should remain patient, controlled, and celibate until her death. 159Untold thousands of
Brahmins who have remained celibate from their youth have gone to heaven without
producing offspring to continue their family line. 160Just like these celibates, a good


--- PAGE 158 ---
Chapters 
147
woman, though she be sonless, will go to heaven when she steadfastly adheres to the
celibate life after her husband's death.* 161When a woman is unfaithful to her husband
because of her strong desire for children, she is disgraced in this world and excluded
from the husband's world.* 162No recognition is given here to offspring fathered by
another man or begotten on another's wife; nor is it taught anywhere that a good
woman should take a second husband.
163When a woman abandons her own husband of lower rank and unites with a
man of higher rank, she only brings disgrace upon herself in the world and is called "a
woman who has had a man before."* 164By being unfaithful to her husband, a woman
becomes disgraced in the world, takes birth in a jackal's womb, and is afflicted with
evil diseases (3.92 n.).
165 A woman who controls her mind, speech, and body and is never unfaithful to
her husband attains the worlds of her husband, and virtuous people call her a "good
woman." 166By following this conduct, a woman who controls her mind, speech, and
body obtains the highest fame in this world and the world of her husband in the next.
Funeral
167When a wife who has conducted herself in this manner and who belongs to the same
class as her husband dies before him, a twice-born man who knows the Law should
cremate her with his sacred fire and sacrificial implements. 168After he has given his
sacred fires to his predeceased wife at her funeral, he should marry a wife again and
establish anew his sacred fires.
C O N C L U D I N G S T A T E M E N T O N
T H E H O U S E H O L D E R
169In accordance with these rules, he should never neglect the five sacrifices; and,
marrying a wife, he should live at home during the second quarter of his life.*


--- PAGE 159 ---
CHAPTER SIX
FOREST H E R M I T
+1 After living this way in the householder's order according to rule, a twice-born bath-
graduate should duly live in the forest, controlling his self and mastering his organs.*
Time and Procedure
2When a householder sees his skin wrinkled, his hair turned gray, and his children's
children, he should take to the wilderness. 'Giving up village food and all his
belongings, he should go to the forest, entrusting his wife to his sons or accompanied
by her.
"Taking with him his sacrificial fires and the implements required for his
domestic fire rituals, he should depart from the village to the wilderness and live there
with his organs controlled.
Mode of Life
5Using various kinds of ritually clean sage's food (3.257 n.), or vegetables, roots, and
fruits, he should continue to offer the same great sacrifices (3.68-70) according to rule.
6He should wear a garment of skin or tree bark;* bathe in the morning and evening;
always wear matted hair; and keep his beard, body hair, and nails uncut.
Great Sacrifices 
7He should give Bali offerings and almsfood to the best of his
ability with whatever food he eats and honor those who visit his hermitage with water,
roots, fruits, and almsfood. 8He should be always diligent in his vedic recitation;
remain controlled, friendly, and collected; be always a giver and never a receiver of
gifts; be compassionate towards all creatures; 9offer the daily fire sacrifice in his three
sacred fires according to rule, without neglecting the new-moon and full-moon
sacrifices at their proper time; 10and offer the constellation-sacrifice,* the sacrifice of
first fruits (4.26), the seasonal sacrifices, the Turâyan a sacrifice* and the Däksäyan
a
sacrifice,* in their proper sequence. nWith ritually clean sage's foods that grow in
spring and autumn and that he has gathered himself, he should offer separately the
sacrificial cakes and oblations of milk-rice according to rule.
Food 
12After he has offered that most ritually clean oblation of forest produce to the
gods, he may avail himself of what remains, as also of salt that he has manufactured
himself.
13He may eat vegetables growing on land or in water; flowers, roots, and fruits
coming from ritually clean trees;* and oils extracted from fruits. 14He must avoid
148


--- PAGE 160 ---
Chapter 6 
149
honey, meat, the Bhauma plant, mushrooms,* the Bhüstrn a plant, the Sigruka horse-
radish, and the Slesmâtak a fruit.
15In the month of Äsvayuj a (September-October), he must throw away the sage's
food that he had previously collected, as also vegetables, roots, fruits, and old
garments.
16He must never eat anything grown on plowed land, even if it has been thrown
away by someone; or flowers and fruits* grown in a village, even if he is in dire straits.
17He may eat food that has been cooked with fire or ripened by time; he may use a
grindstone or use his teeth as a mortar; 18he may clean up immediately* after eating or
maintain a supply of food sufficient for a month, six months, or a year.
19Having gathered food to the best of his ability, he may eat it at night, during
the day, at every fourth mealtime, or at every eighth mealtime;* 20or he may maintain
himself during the bright and dark halves of the month according to the lunar rule
(11.217), or eat boiled barley-gruel once at the end of each half month; 21or he may
subsist permanently on just flowers, roots, and fruits that have ripened by time and
wilted on their own*—abiding by the Vaikhânas a doctrine.*
Austerities 
^He should roll on the ground or stand on tiptoes all day; spend the
day standing and the night seated,* bathing at dawn, midday, and dusk; ^surround
himself with the five fires* in the summer; live in the open air during the rainy season;
and wear wet clothes in the winter—gradually intensifying his ascetic toil. 24Bathing at
dawn, noon, and dusk, he should offer quenching libations to ancestors and gods, and
engaging in ever harsher ascetic toil, he should inflict punishment* on his body.
Homeless Ascetic ffiAfter depositing his sacred fires in his body* according to
rule, he should become a sage without house or fire, subsisting on roots and fruits,
26making no effort to obtain pleasurable things, remaining celibate, sleeping on the
ground, showing no attachment to any place of shelter, and making his home at the
foot of a tree.
27He should beg for almsfood just sufficient to sustain life only from Brahmin
ascetics and from other twice-born householders living in the forest. 28Or, while
continuing to live in the forest, he may collect almsfood from a village and eat eight
mouthfuls, receiving the almsfood in a leaf-cone, in a potsherd, or in the hand.
Conclusion
29To attain the full perfection of his self,* a Brahmin living in the forest must pursue
these and other observances, as also the various Upanisadic scriptures, 30and, to
enhance his knowledge and ascetic toil and to purify his body, also those pursued* by
seers, Brahmins, and householders.*
31Or he may set out in a north-easterly direction and, subsisting on water and air,
walk straight on steadfastly until his body drops dead. 32When a Brahmin has
discarded his body through any one of these means employed by the great seers, freed
from sorrow and fear, he will be exalted in the world of Brahman.


--- PAGE 161 ---
150 
Chapter 6
W A N D E R I N G A S C E T I C
33After spending the third quarter of his life this way in the forest, he should cast off
his attachments and wander about as an ascetic during the fourth.* ^When a man goes
forth as an ascetic after he has moved from order to order, offered sacrifices, subdued
his senses, and become worn out by giving alms and oblations, he will prosper after
death.
Qualification
35Only after he has paid his three debts (4.257 n.), should a man set his mind on
renunciation (1.114 n.); if he devotes himself to renunciation without paying them, he
will proceed downward.* 36Only after he has studied the Vedas according to rule,
fathered sons in keeping with the Law, and offered sacrifices according to his ability,
should a man set his mind on renunciation; 37if a twice-born seeks renunciation
without studying the Vedas, without fathering sons, and without offering sacrifices, he
will proceed downward (6.35 n.).
Initiation
38Only after he has offered a sacrifice to Prajâpat i at which all his possessions are given
as the sacrificial gift and after he has deposited the sacred fires within himself (6.25 n.),
should a Brahmin go forth from his home as an ascetic.
39Worlds of resplendent energy await a vedic savant who goes forth from his
home as an ascetic after bestowing freedom from fear* on all creatures. 40Because that
twice-born has not been the cause of even the slightest fear to creatures, he has nothing
to fear from anyone after he is freed from his body.
41 After departing from home with a cloth for straining water, the sage should
wander about, ignoring the sensual delights presented to him.
Mode of Life
42To achieve success, he must always wander alone, without any companions;
recognizing that success comes to the solitary man, he will forsake no one and no one
will forsake him. 43He should live without fire or house, enter a village to obtain food,
be dispassionate, keep no store,* and remain a silent sage and mentally composed. 44A
bowl, the foot of a tree,* a ragged piece of cloth, a solitary life, and equanimity towards
all—these are the marks of a renounces*
45He should long neither for death nor for life, but simply await his appointed
time, as a servant his wages.*+ 46He should place his foot on a spot purified by his
sight,* drink water purified by a cloth, speak words purified by truth, and follow a
conduct purified by the mind.
47He must bear harsh words with patience; never treat anyone with contempt;
never start a feud with anyone merely for the sake of this body; 48never show ire at
anyone who is irate with him; bless those who curse him; and never utter an untrue
word scattered across the seven gates.*


--- PAGE 162 ---
Chapter 6 
151
49Taking delight in what pertains to the self, he should remain seated without
longings or sensual attachments. With himself as his only companion, he should walk
about here, seeking felicity.*
Begging and Food
^He must never try to obtain almsfood by interpreting portents or omens, by his
knowledge of astrology or palmistry,* by giving counsel, or by engaging in debates.
51He should never visit a house crowded with ascetics, Brahmins, birds, dogs, or
other beggars; 52and always go about with his head and beard shaved, with his nails
clipped, carrying a bowl, a staff, and a water-pot, and without causing harm to any
creature.
53His bowls must be non-metallic and undamaged; and tradition says that they
are to be cleaned with just water, like Camasa-cups at a sacrifice (5.116). MA gourd, a
wooden bowl, a clay bowl, and a wicker bowl—Manu, the son of the Self-existent
One, has proclaimed these as the bowls of ascetics.
55He may go on his begging round only once a day. He must not be overly
attached to getting a lot; for when an ascetic is overly attached to almsfood, he becomes
attached also to sensual objects. 56An ascetic should go on his daily begging round
only when the smoke has cleared, the pestles are at rest, the embers are extinguished,
the people have finished their meal, and the dishes have been put away.
57When he receives nothing, he must not become dejected; when he receives
something, it must not make him elated. He should gather food just sufficient to
sustain his life and become free from attachment to his belongings.* 58He should hold
anything received with a show of reverence in total disdain; even an ascetic who has
freed himself is shackled by what is received with a show of reverence.* 59By eating
little and by spending the day standing and the night seated (6.22 n.) in solitude, he
should pull his organs back as they are being drawn away by sensory objects. 60By
restraining his organs, by stamping out love and hatred, and by ceasing to harm
creature, he becomes fit for immortality.
Yogic Meditation
61He should reflect on the diverse paths humans take as a result of their evil deeds; on
how they fall into hell; on the tortures they endure in the abode of Yama; 62on how they
are separated from the ones they love and united with the ones they hate; on how they
are overcome by old age and tormented by diseases; fô on how the inner self departs
from this body, takes birth again in a womb, and migrates through tens of billions of
wombs; ^and on how embodied beings become linked with pain as a result of
pursuing what is against the Law and with imperishable happiness as a result of
pursuing the Law as one's goal.
^By yogic meditation, he should also reflect on the subtle nature of the highest
self and on its appearance in the highest and the lowest of bodies (6.73).
Conduct 
66Though decked in finery,* he should pursue the Law in whichever order
he may live, treating all creatures alike; an emblem does not accomplish the Law.*


--- PAGE 163 ---
152 
Chapter 6
67Although the fruit of the Kataka tree makes water clear, yet the water does not become
clear by mere mention of its name.
68To protect living creatures, he should walk always—whether at night or during
the day—only after inspecting the ground even at the cost of bodily discomfort. 69To
purify himself of killing living creatures unintentionally during the day or at night, an
ascetic should bathe and control his breath six times.
Breath Control 
70Controlling the breath* even three times according to rule while
reciting the Calls and the syllable OM is to be considered the highest type of ascetic
toil for a Brahmin. 71As the impurities of metallic ores are burnt away when they are
blasted in a furnace, so the faults of the organs are burnt away by suppressing the
breath.
Meditation 
72He should burn away his faults by suppressing his breath, his taints
by concentration, his attachments by the withdrawal of senses, and his base qualities
by meditation. 73Through the practice of meditation,* he should discern the course of
this inner self through the highest and the lowest of creatures (6.65), a difficult course
to grasp for persons with uncultivated minds.
74When a man possesses right understanding, he is not fettered by actions; but
when he lacks understanding, he enters the transmigratory cycle. 75By ceasing to harm
living creatures, by withdrawing the organs from their attachments, by performing
vedic rites, and by practicing fierce austerities, individuals do attain that state* here on
earth.
Meditation on the Body 
76Constructed with beams of bones, fastened with
tendons, plastered with flesh and blood, covered with skin, foul-smelling, filled with
urine and excrement, ^infested with old age and sorrow, the abode of sickness, full of
pain, covered with dust, and impermanent—he must abandon this dwelling place of
ghosts.* 78When a tree falls from a river bank, the bird leaves the tree; when he
abandons this body in like manner, he escapes the alligator's painful grasp.*
Final Goal 
79Consigning his good deeds to people he likes and his evil deeds to
people he dislikes, he attains the eternal Brahman through the practice of meditation.
^When by the passion of his spirit he frees himself from attachment to every object of
passion,* then he wins eternal happiness both here and in the hereafter. 81When he
gives up all attachments gradually in this manner, freed from all the pairs of opposites,
he comes to rest in Brahman alone.
82Everything prescribed here is contingent on meditation; for no one ignorant of
the highest self can reap the fruits of his rites. ^He should practice the soft recitation of
vedic texts relating to sacrifice, gods, and self, as also those named "Vedânta"*—^thi
s
is the refuge of the ignorant, as indeed of the learned; this is the refuge of those who
seek heaven, as of those who yearn for the infinite.
ffilf a twice-born lives as a wandering ascetic following the above sequence of
practices,* he will cast off his sins in this world and attain the highest Brahman.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Chapter 6 
153
86I have explained to you above the Law pertaining to self-controlled
ascetics. Listen now to the ritual discipline of vedic retirees (1.114
n.).
V E D I C R E T I R E E
Superiority of the Householder
87Student, householder, forest hermit, and ascetic: these four distinct orders have their
origin in the householder. 88A11 of these, when they are undertaken in their proper
sequence as spelled out in the sacred texts, lead a Brahmin who acts in the prescribed
manner to the highest state. 89Among all of them, however, according to the dictates of
vedic scripture,* the householder is said to be the best, for he supports the other three.
90As all rivers and rivulets ultimately end up* in the ocean, so people of all the orders
ultimately end up in the householder.
The Ten-Point Law
91Twice-born men belonging to all these four orders must always observe the ten-point
Law diligently. 92Resolve, forbearance, self-control, refraining from theft, performing
purifications, mastering the organs, understanding, learning, truthfulness, and
suppressing anger: these are the ten points of the Law. 93Those Brahmins who learn the
ten points of the Law and, after learning, follow them, attain the highest state.
Retirement
94When a twice-born man has followed the ten-point Law with a collected mind,
learned the Vedänt a according to rule, and freed himself from debt (4.257 n.), he may
retire (1.114 n.). 95Casting off the inherent evil of rites by retiring from all ritual
activities, being self-controlled, and reciting the Veda, he should live at ease under the
care of his son.
96When a man retires from ritual activities in this manner and, free from
attachments, devotes himself completely to his duties, he erases his sins by this
retirement and attains the highest state.
97I have explained to you above the fourfold Law of Brahmins, a
Law that is holy and brings imperishable rewards after death. Listen
now to the Law of kings.


--- PAGE 165 ---
CHAPTER SEVEN
THE LAW FOR THE K I N G
JI will explain the Laws pertaining to kings—how a king should conduct himself, how
he came into being, and how he can attain the highest success.
Origin of the King
2A Ksatriya who has received the vedic consecration* according to rule has the
obligation to protect this whole world in accordance with the norms; sfor when people
here were without a king and fleeing in all directions out of fear, to protect this whole
world the Lord created the king 4by extracting eternal particles from Indra, Wind,
Yama, Sun, Fire, Varuna, Moon, and the Lord of wealth.*
5Because the king was fashioned out of particles from these chiefs of the gods, he
overpowers* all beings by reason of his energy. 6Like the sun, indeed, he burns eyes
and minds; no one on earth can bear to gaze upon him. 7He is Fire, he is Wind, he is the
Sun, he is the Moon, he is the King of the Law [Yama], he is Kubera, he is Varuna, and
he is the Great Indra—by reason of his power.
8A king, though a mere child, must never be treated with disrespect, thinking he
is just a human being; for it is a great deity who stands here in human form. 9When
approached recklessly, a fire burns only that single man, but the fire that is the king
burns his family, together with all his livestock and wealth.
10After examining truthfully the task to be accomplished, his own strength, the
time, and the place, he assumes in turn every aspect* in order to fully implement the
Law; "he, in whose* benevolence lies Padmâ , the goddess of prosperity, in whose
valor lies victory, and in whose anger lies death—for he is made from the energies of
them all.*
12The man who in his folly hates him perishes without doubt; for the king makes
up his mind to destroy him quickly.* 13When the king issues a Law favorable to those
he favors or unfavorable to those out of favor, therefore, no one should transgress that
Law.*
Punishment 
14For the king's sake, the Lord formerly created Punishment,* his
son—the Law and protector of all beings—made from the energy of Brahman. 15It is
the fear of him that makes all beings, both the mobile and the immobile, accede to
being used* and do not deviate from the Law proper to them.
16The king should administer appropriate Punishment on men who behave
improperly, after examining truthfully the place and the time,* as well as their strength
and learning. 17Punishment is the king; he is the male; he is the leader; he is the ruler;
and, tradition tells us, he stands as the surety for the Law with respect to the four orders
154


--- PAGE 166 ---
Chapter 7 
155
of life. 18Punishment disciplines all the subjects, Punishment alone protects them, and
Punishment watches over them as they sleep—Punishment is the Law, the wise
declare. 19When he is wielded properly after careful examination,* he gives delight to
all the subjects; but when he is administered without careful examination, he wreaks
total havoc.
20If the king fails to administer Punishment tirelessly on those who ought to be
punished, the stronger would grill the weak like fish on a spit; 21crows would devour
the sacrificial cakes; dogs would lap up* the sacrificial offerings; no one would have
any right of ownership; and everything would turn topsy-turvy.* ^The whole world is
subdued through Punishment, for an honest man is hard to find; clearly, it is the fear of
Punishment that makes the whole creation accede to being used (7.15 n.). 23Gods,
demons, Gandharvas, fiends, birds, and snakes—even these accede to being used only
when coerced by Punishment. 24A11 the social classes would become corrupted, all
boundaries would be breached, and all the people would revolt, as a result of blunders
committed with respect to Punishment. ^Wherever Punishment, dark-hued and red-
eyed, prowls about as the slayer of evil-doers, there the subjects do not go astray—so
long as its administrator* ascertains correctly.
26The proper administrator of Punishment, they say, is a king who speaks the
truth, acts after careful examination (7.19 n.), is wise, and has a masterly grasp of Law,
Wealth, and Pleasure. 27When a king administers Punishment properly, he flourishes
with respect to the triple set (2.224 n.); but the king who is lustful, partial, and vile is
slain by that very Punishment. 28For Punishment is immense energy, and it cannot be
wielded by those with uncultivated selves. It assuredly slays a king who deviates from
the Law, along with his relatives; 29then he oppresses the fort, the realm, and the
mobile and the immobile world, as well as sages and gods dwelling in mid-space.*
30Punishment cannot be justly administered by someone who is without assistants,
who is foolish or greedy, who is irresolute (1.97 n.), or who is attached to sensual
objects. 31Punishment can only be administered by someone who is honest and true to
his word, who acts in conformity with the Treatises, who has good assistants, and who
is wise.
Proper Behavior 
32Within his realm, he should act in accordance with the rules;
upon his enemies, he should impose harsh punishments; towards his friends and loved
ones,* he should behave without guile; and to Brahmins, he should show compassion.
33When a king behaves in this manner, though he may eke out a living by gleaning, his
fame spreads in the world like a drop of oil on water. ^When a king, with no control
over himself, behaves in the opposite way, his fame contracts in the world like a drop
of ghee on water.
35The king was created as the protector of people belonging to all social classes
and orders of life who, according to their rank, are devoted to the Law specific to
them.*
36I will explain to you precisely and in their proper order all that he,
along with his deputies, should do as he protects his subjects.


--- PAGE 167 ---
156 
Chapter 7
Cultivating Virtue and Learning
37After getting up in the morning,* the king should pay his respects to learned
Brahmins who are experts in the triple Veda and follow their admonitions; 38and every
day he should render assistance to old and upright Brahmins who know the Veda, for
even fiends always honor a man who renders assistance to the elderly. 39Even if he is a
disciplined man, he should always learn the rules of discipline from them; for a
disciplined king never comes to ruin.
40Because they lacked discipline, numerous kings came to ruin along with their
possessions; and because of discipline, even those residing in the forest* gained
kingdoms. 41Because he lacked discipline, Vena came to ruin; and so did King Nahusa,
Sudas Paijavana, Sumukha, and Nimi. 42Because of discipline, on the other hand,
Prthu, as well as Manu, obtained a kingdom; Kubera, lordship over wealth; and the
son of Gädhi , the rank of a Brahmin.*
43From experts in the three Vedas, he should learn the triple Veda, the timeless
science of government, logical reasoning, and the philosophy of self; and from the
common people, commercial enterprises.*
MDay and night he should strive vigorously to subdue his organs; for when he
has subdued his own organs, he is able to bring his subjects under his control.
45He must strenuously steer clear of the vices that result in grief: the ten
stemming from pleasure and the eight arising from wrath; 46for when a king is addicted
to vices stemming from pleasure, he is cut off from Law and Wealth, but when he is
addicted to those arising from wrath, he is cut off from his very life.
47Hunting, gambling, sleeping during the day, disparaging others, women,
liquor, music, song, dance, and useless travel—this is the set of ten stemming from
pleasure. 48Slander, violence, hostility, envy, resentment, plunder, verbal abuse, and
physical assault—this is the set of eight arising from wrath.
49Wise men identify the root of both these sets, and it is greed. He should
diligently overcome it; for both these sets originate from it. 50Drinking, gambling,
women, and hunting—one should recognize these four in the order enumerated as the
most harmful of the set stemming from pleasure. "Physical assault, verbal abuse, and
plunder—one should recognize these three as always the most harmful of the set
stemming from wrath. 52Within the latter group of seven, which run rampant
everywhere, a self-composed man should recognize that each preceding vice is more
perilous than each subsequent.*
53Between vice and death, they say, vice is far worse; a man given to vice sinks to
the very bottom (6.35 n.), whereas a man free of vice goes to heaven after death.
Appointment of Counselors
^The king should appoint seven or eight counselors.* They must be individuals who
are natives of the land,* well-versed in the Treatises, brave, well-accomplished,* and
coming from illustrious families, individuals who have been thoroughly investigated.
55Even an easy task becomes difficult when undertaken by a single individual,
especially if he has no associates; how much harder a kingdom yielding great revenue?


--- PAGE 168 ---
Chapter 7 
157
^He should confer with them daily on general matters relating to alliance and
war, and about the state,* revenue, and security, as also the pacification of
acquisitions.* 57After ascertaining their views about his affairs,* first from each
individually and then from all of them as a group, he should do what is in his best
interest. 58From the most distinguished and sagacious Brahmin among them,
however, the king should seek the most important counsel, the one relating to the
sixfold strategy (7.160). 59Trusting him completely, he should always entrust all his
affairs to him and proceed with any task only after reaching a decision jointly with
him.
Appointment of Officials
^He should also appoint other officials.* They must be individuals who are honest,
intelligent, steadfast, and able to collect revenues properly, individuals who have been
thoroughly investigated. 61He should appoint as many tireless, clever, and wise men as
are required to carry out his obligations, 62employing the brave and the clever amongst
them, individuals coming from illustrious families, in financial affairs; the honest in
mines and factories; and the timid in the interior of his residence.*
Appointment of an Envoy
^He should also appoint an envoy. He must be an expert in all the Treatises; able to
grasp a hint, bearing, or gesture;* be honest and clever; and come from an illustrious
family. MA man who is loyal, honest, and clever; who has a sharp memory and knows
the right time and place; and who is handsome, fearless, and eloquent—such a man is
recommended as a king's envoy.
^The army depends on the official; the enforcement of order, on the army; the
treasury and the realm,* on the king; and alliance and its reverse on the envoy. 66For an
envoy is the one who forges an alliance; and he is the one who splits allies apart. An
envoy does the kind of work that splits people apart.
67By means of concealed hints and gestures, he should decode the bearing, hints,
and gestures of the rival king with the help of seducible men* in his service and
uncover his plans with the help of his servants.*
68After finding out all the plans of the rival king accurately, he should take* the
kinds of measures that would prevent damage to himself.
Constructing the Royal Fort
69He should settle in a region that is dry, abounding in grain, populated mainly by
Äryas , healthy,* beautiful, with submissive neighbors, and providing a comfortable
living.
70A fortress secured by a desert, a fortress with an earthen rampart, a fortress
surrounded by water, a fortress protected by a forest, a fortress guarded by soldiers, and
a fortress protected by a hill—finding safety in such a fortress, he should settle in a
fort.* 71He should try his very best to find safety in a hill fortress; for the hill fortress,


--- PAGE 169 ---
158 
Chapter 7
because of its numerous superior features, is the most excellent of them. 72Animals,
creatures living in holes, and fish find safety in the first three of them; and monkeys,
humans, and gods in the last three, respectively. 73As their enemies do not harm these
when they have found safety in a fortress, so his foes do not harm a king who has found
safety in a fortress.
74One archer positioned on a rampart can fight off a hundred, and one hundred can
fight off ten thousand. On account of this, a fortress is most excellent.*+ 75It should be
well supplied with weapons, money, grain, conveyances,* Brahmins, artisans,
machines, fodder, and water.
76At its center, he should have a house built for himself, a house that is spacious,
secure, and bright, suitable for all seasons, and provided with pools and groves.*
Marriage
77After establishing his residence there, he should marry a wife who belongs to the
same class, has the right bodily characteristics (3.8-10), comes from a prominent
family, is charming, and possesses beauty and fine qualities.
Appointment of Chaplain and Priests
78He should also appoint a chaplain and choose his officiating priests. They are to
perform on his behalf the domestic rites, as well as those requiring three sacred fires.*
79The king should perform various sacrifices accompanied by generous sacrificial
gifts; and to acquire merit, he should distribute luxuries and money to Brahmins.
Collectors and Supervisors
^He should employ trusted officials to collect annual taxes from his realm, strictly
follow tradition in his dealings with the population, and behave like a father towards
his people.
81He should appoint perspicacious supervisors of various kinds to oversee
different areas, and they should inspect all the activities of the men responsible for his
affairs.
Devotion to Brahmins
82He should pay honor to Brahmins who have returned from their teacher's house; for
this is the inexhaustible treasure deposited with Brahmins decreed for kings. ^Neither
thief nor enemy can steal it, and it never perishes. Therefore, the king should deposit
this inexhaustible treasure with Brahmins.
^It never spills, it never falls, it never perishes at all—an offering made in the
mouth of a Brahmin is far superior to oblations made in the fire. ffiA gift to a non-
Brahmin brings an equal reward; to a Brahmin by name, a double reward; to one who is
advanced in vedic study, a thousandfold reward;* and to a man who has completely
mastered the Veda, an infinite reward. 86For, whether the reward a man receives after
death is large or small is contingent on his spirit of generosity (3.202 n.) and on the
excellence of the recipient.+


--- PAGE 170 ---
Chapter 7 
159
War and Warrior Ethic
87When challenged by rivals—whether they are stronger, weaker, or of equal strength—
as he protects his subjects, a king must never back away from battle, recalling the Law
of Ksatriyas. 88Refusal to turn back in battle, protecting the subjects, and obedient
service to Brahmins—for kings, these are the best mean of securing happiness. 89When
kings fight each other in battles with all their strength, seeking to kill each other and
refusing to turn back, they go to heaven.
90When he is engaged in battle, he must never slay his enemies with weapons
that are treacherous,* barbed, or laced with poison, or whose tips are ablaze with fire.
91He must never slay a man standing on the ground,* an effeminate man (3.150 n.), a
man with joined palms, a man with loose hair, a seated man, a man declaring "I am
yours," 92a sleeping man, a man without his armor, a naked man, a man without his
weapons, a non-fighting spectator, a man engaging someone else, 93a man with
damaged weapons, a man in distress, a badly wounded man, a frightened man, or a
man who has turned tail—recalling the Law followed by good people.
94When a man is killed in battle by the enemy as he turns tail frightened, he takes
upon himself all the evil deeds committed by his master;* 95while any good deeds that
a man killed as he turns tail has stored up for the hereafter, all of that his master takes
from him.
War Booty 
%Whatever a man wins—chariot, horse, elephant, parasol, money,
grain, livestock, women, all goods, and base metal—all that belongs to him. 97A pre-
emptive share,* however, should be given to the king—so states the vedic scripture;*
and the king should distribute among the soldiers anything that has not been won in
single combat.+
98I have set forth above the eternal Law of warriors without elabora-
tion. A Ksatriya must never deviate from this Law, as he kills his
enemies in battle.
Policies for Good Government
"The king should seek to acquire what he has not acquired, preserve diligently what he
has acquired, augment what he has preserved, and distribute what he has augmented on
worthy recipients.* 100These he should recognize as the four means of securing the
goals of man (2.224 n.); and he should execute them properly and tirelessly every day.
101What he has not acquired, he should seek to acquire with military force; what he has
acquired, he should preserve with vigilance; what he has preserved, he should augment
through profitable investments; and what he has augmented, he should distribute
through gifts.*
102He should keep his military force in constant readiness,* constantly display
his might, constantly guard his secrets, and constantly probe his enemy's weaknesses.
103The whole world stands in awe of the man who keeps his military force in constant
readiness; it is with military force, therefore, that he should subdue all creatures. 104He
should always act without guile and never with guile; and, guarding himself well at all


--- PAGE 171 ---
160 
Chapter 7
times, he should detect the guile employed by his enemies. 105He must not let the
enemy discover any weakness of his, but discover any weakness of the enemy; he
should hide his limbs like a tortoise* and conceal his own weak points.
106He should ponder over his affairs like a heron, dart off like a rabbit, snatch like
a wolf, and attack like a Hon.*
107As he thus engages in conquest, he should bring under his control all the
adversaries he encounters by the use of the strategies beginning with conciliation.*+
108If, after the employment of the first three strategies, they still do not submit, then he
should undoubtedly subdue them by military force and in due course bring them under
his control. 109Among all four strategies beginning with conciliation, experts always
recommend conciliation and military force for the enhancement of his realm.
110As a weeder plucks the weeds and protects the corn, so the king should protect
his realm and kill his adversaries. mWhen a king in his folly oppresses his own realm
indiscriminately, he is soon deprived of his kingdom and his life, along with his
relatives. 112As living beings destroy their lives by oppressing their bodies, so kings
too destroy their lives by oppressing their realms.
113He should observe this rule always in managing his realm, for when his realm
is well managed,* the king prospers* with ease.
Organization of the State
Governance of Villages and Towns 
114He should station well-supervised
constabularies in the middle of two, three, and five villages, as also in the middle of
one hundred villages for the protection of his realm. 
115He should appoint
superintendents responsible for one village, for ten villages, for twenty villages, for
one hundred villages, and for one thousand villages.
116When troubles* arise in a village, the superintendent ofthat village should, in
due course, report them personally to the superintendent of ten villages, and he in turn,
to the superintendent of twenty village. 117The superintendent of twenty villages
should report all that to the superintendent of a hundred villages, and he in turn should
report them personally to the superintendent of a thousand villages.
118The superintendent of a village shall avail himself of the food, drink,
firewood, and the like that the villagers are required to supply daily to the king. 119The
superintendent of ten villages shall enjoy benefits from one "family";* the
superintendent of twenty villages, from five "families"; the superintendent of a
hundred villages, from one village; the superintendent of a thousand villages, from one
town.
Supervision of Officials 
120Their activities pertaining to the villages, as well as
those undertaken by each individually,* should be overseen vigilantly by another loyal
officer of the king.
121In each city he should appoint a general manager of all affairs, a man of high
stature* and fierce appearance, like a planet among the stars.
122He should always make the circuit of all those officials personally and
investigate their conduct within their jurisdictions* thoroughly through resident spies;
123for the king's officials, appointed to protect the people, often become swindlers


--- PAGE 172 ---
Chapter 7 
161
seizing the property of others—he must protect his subjects from them. 124When these
evil-minded men extort money from people who have business* with them, the king
should confiscate all their property and send them into exile.*
Wages 
125He should fix* a daily allowance for women in the royal service and for
menial servants in accordance with their rank and duties. 126One Pana should be given
as maintenance* for those at the bottom and six Panas for those at the top, as also a set
of clothes every six months and one Drona of grain every month.
Taxes and Duties
127The king should levy taxes on traders after taking into consideration the price of
purchase and sale, the distance of transport, maintenance* and other expenses, and the
cost of security.
128The king should always assess taxes in his realm after careful consideration so
that both he and those who do the work get their fair reward. 129As leeches, calves, and
bees eat their food a little at a time, so a king should gather annual taxes from his realm
a little at a time. 130Of livestock and gold, the king shall take a one-fiftieth share;* and
of grains, an eighth share, or a sixth or twelfth. 131He shall also take a sixth share of
trees, meat, honey, ghee, perfumes, herbs, condiments, flowers, roots, fruits, 132leaves,
vegetables, grass, skins, cane, earthen vessels, and everything made of stone.
133Even at the point of death, he shall never extract a tax from a vedic scholar, nor
shall a vedic scholar living within his realm languish from hunger. 134When a vedic
scholar languishes from hunger within the domain of a king, before long his own realm
will also languish from hunger. 135After ascertaining the man's learning and conduct,
he should provide him with a means of subsistence consistent with the Law and protect
him in every way, as a father his own natural son (9.166). 136When such a person
practices the Law every day under the protection of the king, it augments the king's life
span, wealth, and realm.
137He should make the common people in his realm who live by trade pay at least
something annually under the rubric of a tax. 138The king should make artisans and
craftsmen, as also self-employed* Sudras, contribute one day's work each month.
139He must not cut off his own root and that of others through excessive greed;
for by cutting off his own root, he does harm both to himself and to them.*
Adjudicating Lawsuits
140After he has tried a lawsuit,* the king should be both harsh and gentle; a king who is
both harsh and gentle earns high esteem.
141When he becomes tired of trying lawsuits filed by people, he should install on
that seat a leading minister who knows the Law, is wise and self-disciplined, and
comes from an illustrious family.
Protection of the Subjects
142Arranging in this manner for the discharge of all his obligations, he should protect
these subjects with care and vigilance. 143When bandits abduct from his realm subjects


--- PAGE 173 ---
162 
Chapter 7
screaming for help, while he and men in his service stand by—he is surely dead, he is
not alive.+ 144For a Ksatriya, the protection of his subjects is the highest Law; the
enjoyment of the specified rewards* binds the king to this Law.
Morning Routine
145He should rise in the last watch of the night (4.92 n.), perform his personal
purifications with a collected mind, make the fire offering, pay his respects to
Brahmins, and enter his splendid assembly hall.
146Standing there, he should greet all his subjects cheerfully and then dismiss
them. After dismissing all his subjects, he should confer with his counselors.
Meeting with Counselors 
147Climbing up to a hilltop or a terrace, retiring to a
solitary spot, or withdrawing to a wild area or a bare tract, he should confer with them
unobserved.* 148When common people, as they conspire, do not discover a king's
plans, he will enjoy the entire earth, even though his treasury is empty.
149Idiots, the dumb, the blind, the deaf, animals, old people, women, foreigners
(2.23 n.), the sick, and the crippled—he should have these removed when he confers
with his counselors. 150He should pay special attention to this, because these wretched
people and animals, but women in particular, betray secret plans.
151 At midday or midnight, when he is not tired or worn out, he should reflect on
these matters either in consultation with his counselors or alone—on Law, Wealth, and
Pleasure (7.100), 152and on how they may be acquired all together when they are in
mutual opposition; on giving his young girls in marriage; on protecting his young
boys; 153on dispatching ambassadors; on tying up the remaining loose ends of his
undertakings;* on the activities* within the women's quarters; on the conduct of his
spies; 154on the entire eightfold agenda,* as also the set of five,* meticulously; on the
affection and disaffection towards him; on the activities in the circle of neighboring
kingdoms;*+ 155on the activities of the buffer king;* on the conduct of the power-
hungry king; and on the activities of the neutral king and, with great diligence, of the
enemy king.
Constituents of the Circle 
156The above constituents, in brief, form the root of
the circle of neighboring kings; eight others also have been enumerated, bringing the
total, according to the tradition, to twelve.* 157There are also five others and they are
called official, realm, fort, treasury, and army. These are enumerated with reference to
each of the above, the total coming to seventy-two.*
158He should recognize that his immediate neighbor is his enemy, as also anyone
rendering assistance to the enemy; that his enemy's immediate neighbor is an ally; and
that the one beyond these two is neutral.+ 159He should prevail over them by
conciliation and the other strategies (7.107 n.), employed both separately and
collectively, and by valor and policy.
Political Strategy: I 
160He should constantly think about the sixfold strategy:
forging alliances, waging war, marching into battle, remaining stationary, pursuing a


--- PAGE 174 ---
Chapter 7 
163
double stratagem,* and seeking asylum.161 After forging an alliance or waging war,* he
should carefully examine the state of affairs and adopt the tactic of remaining
stationary, marching into battle, pursuing a double stratagem, or seeking asylum.
162The king should realize that there are two ways to forge an alliance, to wage
war, to march into battle, to remain stationary, to pursue a double strategem,* and to
seek asylum. 163He should know that there are two kinds of alliance: the one is when
both parties march together into battle with the same objective—it is of immediate
significance; the other is its opposite—and it looks to the future.* 164Tradition records
two types of war: the one is waged on one's own and for one's own ends, whether it is
at a proper time or not; the other is occasioned when an ally has initiated the
offensive.* 165Marching into battle is said to be of two types: the one is undertaken
alone when an urgent situation has suddenly arisen; the other is undertaken in coalition
with an ally. 166Tradition records two types of remaining stationary: the one is
undertaken when he is gradually weakened either by fate or due to his past deeds; and
the other is undertaken as a favor to an ally. 167Experts in the relative merits of the
sixfold strategy present two types of the double stratagem: the one is when the army
remains stationary and the other is when the ruler remains stationary, for the success of
his undertakings (7.160 n.). 168Tradition records two types of seeking asylum: the one
is intended to attain his objective when he is harassed by enemies; the other is to gain
renown among good people.*
169When he is convinced that his future dominance is certain and that any
immediate disadvantage is slight, then he should resort to an alliance. 170When he
believes that all his subjects are exceedingly content and that he himself is
overwhelmingly powerful, then he should consider waging war.* 171When he believes
in his heart that his own army is in high spirit* and prosperous and that the opposite is
true of his adversary, then he should march into battle against his enemy. 172When he is
weak in terms of mounted units* and infantry, then he should diligently remain
stationary, while gradually appeasing the enemy. 173When the king believes that the
enemy is stronger in every respect, then he should divide his army in two and
accomplish his objective (7.160 n.). 174When he has become extremely vulnerable to
his enemy's forces, then he should quickly seek asylum with a strong and righteous
king. 175Should that king keep both his own subjects and the forces of his enemy in
check, he should always serve him like a teacher with all his strength. 176Even in that
case, however, if he notices a liability resulting from his asylum, he should, even in
that condition, resort to the good war* without hesitation. 177A politically astute king
should employ all the strategies in such a way that his allies, neutrals, or enemies do
not prevail over him.
178He should probe closely into the current status and the future shape of all his
undertakings, as well as the positives and the negatives of all his past undertakings.
179When a man knows the positives and the negatives with respect to the future, takes
quick decisions with respect to the present, and knows the remaining loose ends of his
past undertakings, he will not be overpowered by his enemies.
180He should arrange everything in such a way that his allies, neutrals, or enemies
never prevail over him—that is political strategy in a nutshell.


--- PAGE 175 ---
164 
Chapter 7
War 
181 When the king launches a military expedition against the realm of an enemy,
he should advance at a measured pace towards the enemy's fort according to the
following plan.
182The king should start a military expedition during the auspicious month of
Mârgasïrs a (November-December), or towards the months of Phälgun a (February-
March) or Caitra (March-April), depending on the shape of his armed forces. 183Even at
other times when he foresees certain victory, he should undoubtedly declare war and
launch the expedition,* as also when a calamity has struck the enemy.
184He should first make the necessary arrangements for his home territory, gather
provisions for the expedition according to rule, secure a base for military operations,
deploy spies suitably, 185secure the three types of roads,* and inspect the six divisions
of his army*—and only then march in battle formation at a measured pace against the
enemy's fort.*
186He should be extremely vigilant about an ally who is secretly in league with
the enemy, as well as about someone who has returned after going over to the enemy's
side; for such a man is a very dangerous foe.
187He should march along his road arrayed in one of the following battle
formations: staff, wagon, boar, crocodile, needle, and eagle.* 188He should deploy his
troops in the direction from which he expects danger; always set up his own camp
arrayed in the lotus formation;* 189post the commander-in-chief and the general of the
army in every direction;* designate the direction from which he expects danger as the
frontal direction; 190deploy on all sides platoons of reliable soldiers with whom signals
have been arranged, who are adept both at holding their ground and at pressing an
attack, and who are fearless and unwavering; 191deploy a small group to fight in close
quarters and freely spread out a large group; send them into battle arrayed in the needle
(7.187 n.) and the thunderbolt* formations; 192fight with chariots and horses on level
ground, with boats and elephants in marshy lands, with bows in areas covered with
trees and shrubs, and with swords and shields on flat land; 193and deploy men from the
lands of the Kurus, Matsyas, Ranéalas, and Surasenas, as well as tall and agile men, on
the front lines. mAfter arraying the troops in battle formation, he should rouse them
and inspect them closely; and he should monitor their behavior even when they are
engaged in combat with enemy troops.
195After laying siege to the enemy, he shall remain stationary—he should
plunder his realm; constantly ruin his supplies of fodder, food, water, and fuel;
196demolish reservoirs, ramparts, and moats; launch surprise assaults* against him;
frighten him at night; 197foment sedition among the seditious; keep close watch over
enemy activity;* and when omens are propitious, fearlessly launch the attack with the
determination to win.
198He should strive to triumph over his enemies through conciliation, gifts, and
fomenting dissension, employed collectively or separately, but never through war.
199Victory and defeat in battle are uncertain for the two combatants; he should,
therefore, avoid war. 200When the aforementioned three strategies fail, then let him,
always on guard, pursue war in such a manner that he will triumph over his enemies.
Conduct in Victory 
201After the victory, he should pay homage to gods and
righteous Brahmins; grant exemptions; and issue proclamations of amnesty.*


--- PAGE 176 ---
Chapter 7 
165
202After ascertaining the collective wishes of them all, he should install there a
relation of the enemy king and draw up a treaty; 203make the Laws commonly held
among them authoritative; and honor the new ruler, together with his chief officials,
with precious gifts. 204When carried out at the appropriate time, the unwelcome seizure
of desirable property and their welcome distribution are both commendable.
205A11 activities here depend on divine and human dispensations. Of these,
however, the divine is inscrutable; action is possible only with respect to the
human.*+
Political Strategy: II 
206Alternatively, he may leave after diligently working
out an alliance with him,* recognizing that ally, gold, and land are the three rewards.*
207After taking into consideration the foe at his heel and his rescuer from the rear*
within the circle of kings, he should secure the rewards of his campaign from his
opponent either as ally or as foe.
208A king does not prosper as much by getting gold and land as by securing a
firm ally who, although currently weak, has future potential. 209A man who knows the
Law and is mindful of favors received, whose subjects are content, and who is loyal,
steadfast in his undertakings, and agile,* is commended as an ally.
210The wise consider a man who is intelligent, brave, clever, generous, mindful
of favors received, and steadfast, and who comes from an illustrious family, to be a
very dangerous foe. 211Conduct worthy of an Ärya , sound judgment with regard to
men, valor, compassion, and constant generosity*—these represent the qualities of a
neutral.
212For his own well-being, a king may abandon without hesitation even a land
that is safe and always yields abundant crops and on which livestock thrive. 213A man
should save his wealth for a time of adversity, save his wife even at the cost of his
wealth, and always save himself even at the cost of his wife and wealth. 214When he
sees every kind of adversity rising up fiercely in unison, a wise man should employ all
the strategies collectively and individually. 215The one who employs the strategies, the
goal to be achieved through the strategies, and all the strategies in their entirety—
relying on these three, he should strive for his own success.
Afternoon Routine
216After conferring about all this with his counselors in this manner,* he should do his
exercises and take his bath at midday, and go to his private quarters to take his meal.
217There he should eat food that has been thoroughly examined by servants who
are completely loyal, knowledgeable about time, and incorruptible, while reciting
ritual formulas that remove poison.* 218He should cleanse everything with antidotes
that neutralize poison* and always carefully wear on his body gems that counteract
poison. 219Women who have been thoroughly examined and whose clothing and
jewelry have been searched shall wait on him attentively with fans, water, and
perfumes.
^He should take similar care of his vehicles (7.75 n.), beds, seats, and food, as
well as of his bath, grooming, and all his ornaments.


--- PAGE 177 ---
166 
Chapter y
221 After his meal, he should relax in his private quarters with his women, and
after relaxing, once again turn his attention at the proper time to his affairs. ^Dressed
in his regalia, he should again inspect his armed forces, all his conveyances, and his
weapons and trappings.
Evening Routine
223After performing the evening twilight worship, he should arm himself and receive
reports in his inner chambers from secret informants and spies about their activities.
^After withdrawing to another secure chamber and dismissing those people, he
should again enter his private quarters to take his meal escorted by women.* 225After
eating something there once again while he is being entertained with music, he should
go to bed at the proper time and rise up refreshed.
226 A king should follow this schedule when he is healthy; but when he is unwell, he
may delegate all this to his officials.


--- PAGE 178 ---
CHAPTER EIGHT
T H E J U S T I C E S Y S T E M
Court
When the king is going to try a case, he should enter the court modestly accompanied
by Brahmins and counselors who are experts in policy.* 2Seated or standing there,
dressed in modest clothes and ornaments, and raising his right hand,* he should look
into the cases of the plaintiffs 3every day in accordance with the standards of the region
and those specified in the legal texts, lawsuits that fall individually* under the
eighteen avenues of litigation.
Grounds for Litigation
4Of these, (i) the first is non-payment of debts; (ii) deposits; (iii) sale without
ownership; (iv) partnerships; (v) non-delivery of gifts; 5(vi) non-payment of wages;
(vii) breach of contract; (viii) cancellation of a sale or purchase; (ix) disputes between
owners and herdsmen; 6(x) the Law on boundary disputes; (xi) verbal assault; (xii)
physical assault; (xiii) theft; (xiv) violence; (xv) sexual crimes against women;* 7(xvi)
Law concerning husband and wife; (xvii) partition of inheritance; and (xviii) gambling
and betting. These are the eighteen grounds on which litigation may be instituted in
this world.
8These are the areas in which, for the most part, disputes among people arise; and
the king should decide their cases based on the eternal Law.
Legal Proceedings
Judges 
9When the king does not try a case personally, however, he should appoint a
learned Brahmin to do so.* 10Entering the main court itself accompanied by three
assessors, he should try the cases brought before the king, either seated or standing.
nThe place where three Brahmins versed in the Vedas and a learned officer* of the king
sit, they call the court of Brahman.
Pursuit of Justice 
12When Justice (dharma), pierced by Injustice (adharmd)*
comes to the court for redress and the court officials do not pluck out that dart from
him, then they are themselves pierced by it. 13A man must either not enter the court or
speak candidly; by refusing to speak or by speaking deceitfully, he commits a sin.
14When Justice is struck by Injustice, and Truth by Untruth, while the court offcials
remain idle onlookers, then they are themselves struck down. 15Stricken, Justice surely
strikes back; defended, Justice defends. Therefore, never strike at Justice, lest Justice,
167


--- PAGE 179 ---
168 
Chapter8
stricken, wipes us out. 16Lord Justice is truly the bull (vrsa), and a man who impedes
(alam) him the gods call a low-born (vrsa-la). Therefore, one should never trample
Justice. 17Justice is the only friend who follows a man even in death; for all else
perishes along with the body.*
18One-quarter of an Injustice goes to the perpetrator, one-quarter to the witness,
one-quarter to all the court officials, and one-quarter to the king. 19The king, on the
other hand, becomes sinless, the court officials are freed, and the sin falls squarely on
the perpetrator, when a man deserving condemnation is condemned.
Excursus: Südra s as Legal Interpreters 
20Let a king, if he so wishes, get
someone who is a Brahmin only by name to interpret the Law, or even someone who
simply uses his birth to make a living, but under no circumstances a Sudra. 21When a
SQdra interprets the Law for a king, his realm sinks like a cow in mud, as he looks on
helplessly. ^The entire realm, stricken with famine and pestilence, quickly perishes,
when it is teeming with SQdras, overrun by infidels, and devoid of twice-born people.
Judicial Conduct and Reasoning-I s Ascending the throne of justice with his
body covered and his mind composed, he should pay homage to the guardian deities of
the world and open the trial. 24Paying attention only to these two—what is and what is
not in accord with the provisions of polity (arthd), and what is and what is not in accord
with the Law (dharmd)—he should try all the cases brought by litigants in the order of
their social class.*
25He should discover the internal disposition of men by external signs—voice,
color, expression, bearing, eyes, and gestures. 26Inner thoughts are discerned by the
bearing, expressions, gait, gestures, and manner of speaking, and by changes in the
eyes and face.
Excursus: Property of Minors and Women 
27The king should protect the
estate inherited by a child until he has returned home after his studentship or until he is
no longer a minor.*
28The same protection must be extended to barren women, women without sons
or bereft of family, women devoted to their husbands, widows, and women in distress.
29If their in-laws (2.132 n.) usurp their property while they are alive, a righteous king
should discipline them with the punishment laid down for thieves.
Excursus: Lost and Stolen Property 
3° Any property that is lost and without
an owner* should be kept in deposit by the king for three years. Before the lapse of
three years, the owner can claim it; after that the king may take it. 31A man who claims
"This is mine" and, when questioned according to rule, identifies its physical appear-
ance, number, and the like correctly, is the owner and deserves to have that property;
32but if he is ignorant of the exact place and time when it was lost and its color, physi-
cal appearance, and size, he deserves a fine equal in value to that property.
33The king may take one-sixth of any lost property that is recovered, or else one-
tenth or one-twelfth, calling to mind the Law practiced by good people. 34Lost property
that is recovered shall remain in the care of competent officials, and the king should
have any thieves caught in connection with its disappearance executed by an elephant.


--- PAGE 180 ---
Chapters 
169
35When a man states truthfully in regard to a treasure-trove "This is mine," the
king may take one-sixth or one-twelfth of it. 36If he lies, however, he should be fined
one-eighth of his wealth or, after reckoning the value of the treasure, a smaller portion.
37When a learned Brahmin finds a treasure-trove that had been buried by his
ancestors, however, he may take the whole of it; for a Brahmin is the supreme lord of
all.+ 38When the king discovers an ancient treasure-trove buried in the ground, he
should give one-half of it to Brahmins and deposit one-half in the treasury; 39the king,
by proving protection, is entitled to one-half of all ancient treasure-troves and of
minerals in the ground, for he is the supreme lord of the earth.
40The king must restore to individuals of all classes any property of theirs stolen
by thieves; if the king retains it for himself, he incurs the sin of its thief.
Judicial Conduct and Reasoning-II 
41He who knows the Law should
examine the Laws of castes, regions, guilds, and families, and only then settle the Law
specific to each. 42Even men living far away endear themselves to the world when they
stick to the activity specific to each and carry out their specific activities.
43Neither the king nor any official of his shall initiate a lawsuit* independently;
nor shall he in any way suppress an action brought before him by someone else.*
^As a hunter traces the location of an animal by the trail of blood, so a king
should trace the location of justice by deductive reasoning. 45When he is conducting a
judicial proceeding, he should pay close attention to the truth, the object of the suit,
himself, the witnesses, the place, the time, and the appearance.*
46He should ratify the acknowledged practices of virtuous men and righteous
twice-born individuals, if such practices do not conflict with those of a particular
region, family, or caste.*
Grounds for Litigation: I Non-payment of Debts
47When a creditor petitions for the recovery of his money from a debtor and the facts are
established,* the king should compel the debtor to return the money to the creditor.
48He should constrain the debtor and force him to pay, using any means by which
the creditor may recover his money. 49Money loaned may be recovered by invoking the
Law, by litigation, by cunning, by traditional strategies,* and fifth, by force. 50Should
a creditor recover his money from the debtor on his own, he must not be prosecuted by
the king simply for recovering his own money.
51If a man denies that he took a loan when it has been established by evidence, he
should compel that man to return the money to the creditor and in addition impose a
small fine proportionate to his means. 52When the debtor, told in court to pay up,
denies the charge, the plaintiff should produce a document* or offer some other
evidence.
53When the plaintiff produces something that is not documentary evidence;
produces and then disavows it;* does not realize that his earlier points contradict the
ones he makes subsequently;* ^states his case and then backs away from it;* does not
acknowledge under questioning a point that has been clearly established;* 55secretly
discusses with witnesses a document which is prohibited from being discussed;*
objects to a question clearly articulated;* retreats;* 56does not speak when he is ordered


--- PAGE 181 ---
170 
Chapters
"Speak!"; does not prove what he asserts; and does not understand what goes before
and what after—such a plaintiff loses his suit. 57When a plaintiff says "I have people
who know,"* but when told "Produce them" does not produce them, the judge should
declare him also the loser for these very reasons.
58If the plaintiff fails to present his case, he is subject to corporal punishment and
a fine in accordance with the Law; and if the defendant fails to respond within three
fortnights, he loses the case in the eyes of the Law.* 59The amount that one man falsely
denies and the amount that the other falsely claims—the king should impose a fine
equal to double those amounts on those two men ignorant of the Law.
MWhen a man is summoned to court by a creditor and denies the charge under
questioning, he may be convicted through the testimony of at least three witnesses
given in the presence of the king and Brahmins.
61I will now explain what sorts of individuals creditors may call as
witnesses in lawsuits and how they should be made to speak* the
truth.
Qualifications of Witnesses 
62Householders, men with sons, natives of the
region (7.54 n.), Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Südras , when they are called by the plaintiff,
are competent to give testimony, and not just anybody, except in an emergency.
^Trustworthy men of all social classes may be called as witnesses in lawsuits, men
who know the Law in its entirety and are free from greed; individuals different from
these should be excluded.
^Individuals who have a stake in the suit; individuals close to the litigants; their
associates and enemies; individuals with a criminal record; the very sick; and men of
ill repute—these must not be called as witnesses. ^The king may not be called as a
witness, nor should the following: an artisan; a performer; a vedic scholar; an
individual bearing the insignia of a religious profession (4.200 n.); one who has
severed all attachments; Ma totally subservient individual; a reprehensible person;* a
bandit; a criminal; an old person; a child; a single person;* an individual of the lowest
birth or with impaired organs; 67someone in distress; an intoxicated or insane person;
someone tormented by hunger or thirst, or suffering from fatigue; a lovesick or angry
person; and a thief.
^For women, women shall give testimony; for the twice-born, twice-born
individuals of equal rank; for Südras , upright Südras ; and for the lowest-born, those of
the lowest birth. 69Anyone who has personal knowledge may give testimony for
litigants when the event has taken place inside a house or in the wilderness, or in a case
involving bodily harm.* 70When there is no one else, even a woman, a child, an old
man, a pupil, a relative, a slave, or a servant may give testimony.
71He should recognize the trembling in the voices of children, old men, and sick
persons, as also of individuals with deranged minds, when they give false testimony.*
^He must not investigate* the witnesses in all cases of violence, theft, sexual
crimes, and verbal and physical assault.
Assessing Testimony 
73When witnesses are in disagreement, the king should
accept the testimony of the majority; when they are equally divided, the testimony of


--- PAGE 182 ---
Chapters 
171
those distinguished by superior qualities; and when men with superior qualities are in
disagreement, the testimony of Brahmins.
74Testimony is valid when it is based on what the witness himself has seen or
heard. When a witness speaks truthfully with respect to that, he does not suffer any loss
of merit or wealth. 75If, in a court of Äryas , a witness says something deceitfully
contrary to what he has seen or heard, after death he will plunge headlong into hell and
suffer the loss of heaven.
76When a person, even though he is not listed as a witness* in the plaint, has seen
or heard anything pertaining to the trial and he is questioned during the trial,* he also
should testify in accordance with what he saw or heard.
^Even one man free from greed may be appointed as a witness, but never
women, even if they are many and honest,* because the female mind is unsteady; nor
even other men tainted with defects.
78Only what witnesses testify to in a forthright manner should be accepted as
valid in a trial; anything different that they may testify to deceitfully for the sake of the
Law has no validity.*
Questioning of Witnesses 
79When the witnesses have gathered in the court, the
judge should examine them in the presence of the plaintiff and the defendant, exhorting
the witnesses in the following manner:*
^What you know about any mutual transaction between these two
individuals pertaining to this lawsuit—state all that truthfully; for you are
the witnesses in this matter. 81If a witness speaks the truth when he
testifies, he will obtain magnificent worlds, as well as unsurpassing fame
here below; such speech is honored by Brahman. 82If he speaks an untruth
when he testifies, he will be bound tightly by the fetters of Varuna and lie
helplessly for one hundred lifetimes; therefore, he should speak the truth
when he testifies. 83By truth, the witness is purified; by truth, merit is
increased. Witnesses of all social classes,* therefore, should speak only
the truth. ^Forthe self alone is the witness of the self; the self, likewise,
is the refuge of the self. Do not disdain your own self, the supreme
witness of men. 85Evil doers undoubtedly think "No one sees us";* yet
gods see them clearly, and so does their own inner self. 86Heaven, earth,
waters, heart, moon, sun, fire, Yama, wind, night, the two twilights, and
the Law—these know the conduct of all embodied beings.
87In the presence of gods and Brahmins* and in the forenoon, the judge, after purifying
himself, should ask the twice-born individuals, who have purified themselves and are
facing the north or the east,* to give truthful testimony. ^He should question a Brah-
min, saying "Speak"; a Ksatriya, saying "Speak the truth"; a Vaisya, with a reference to
cows, seeds, and gold;* but a SQdra, with a reference to these sins that cause loss of
caste.*
89The worlds to which tradition consigns a murderer of a Brahmin, a killer
of a woman or child, a betrayer of a friend, and an ingrate—those worlds
will be yours, if you testify falsely. ^Whatever good deeds you have done


--- PAGE 183 ---
172 
Chapter 8
since birth, dear man, all that will go to the dogs, if you testify
dishonestly. 91"I am all alone"—should you think like that about
yourself, good man; there dwells always in your heart this sage, who
observes your good and evil deeds! 92This god, Yama the son of Vivasvat,
dwells in your heart. If you have no quarrel with him, then you do not
have to go to the Ganges or the Kuru land.* 93Naked, blind, shaven-
headed, and racked with hunger and thirst, a man who gives false
testimony will have to go to his enemy's house carrying a skull-bowl to
beg for almsfood. 94If anyone gives a false answer when questioned at a
judicial investigation, in blind darkness that sinner will fall headlong into
hell. 95A person who goes to a court and testifies to what is contrary to the
facts or to what he has not seen is like a blind man, eating fish along with
the bones. %When his discerning Ksetrajna, "the knower of the field"
(12.12-3 n.), remains unperturbed as aman is giving testimony—gods
know of no man superior to him in this world. 97Listen, my friend, to an
orderly enumeration of how many relatives of his a man kills* when he
gives false testimony in a particular case. 98He kills five by false
testimony concerning livestock; ten, by false testimony concerning cows;
one hundred, by false testimony concerning horses; and one thousand, by
false testimony concerning a human being. "He kills the born and yet to
be born by giving false testimony concerning gold; and he kills all by
false testimony concerning land—never give false testimony concerning
land. 100False testimony concerning water,* they say, is similar to that
concerning land; the same is true of false testimony concerning the sexual
enjoyment of women and concerning all gems, whether they are aquatic or
lapidary (5.111-2 n.).+ 101After taking careful note of all these evils
resulting from false testimony, tell the truth forthrightly just as you saw
or heard.*
102He should treat Brahmins who are cattle herders, traders, artisans, performers,
servants, or money lenders, just like S0dras.+
Excusable False Testimony 
103When a man, even though he knows the truth,
gives evidence in lawsuits contrary to the facts for a reason relating to the Law, he does
not fall from the heavenly world; that, they say, is divine speech. 104When telling the
truth will result in the execution of a SQdra, Vaisya, Ksatriya, or a Brahmin, a man
may tell a lie; for that is far better than the truth.
105Such persons, performing the highest expiation for the sin of false testimony,
should offer to the goddess Sarasvatï oblations of milk-rice dedicated to the goddess
Speech. 106Alternatively, such a person may offer an oblation of ghee in the fire
according to rule, reciting the Kûsmând a formulas, the verse to Varuna: "Untie, Varuna
...," or the three formulas addressed to water.*
Failure to Give Evidence 
107When aman who is not sick fails to testify for
three fortnights in cases pertaining to debts and the like, he becomes liable for the
entire debt and is fined one-tenth of the total.*


--- PAGE 184 ---
Chapter 8 
173
Signs of False Testimony 
108When an illness, afire, or the death of a relative is
seen to afflict a witness within seven days of his testimony, he should be compelled to
pay the debt and a fine.
Oaths and Ordeals 
109When two persons are litigating matters for which there are
no witnesses and the judge is unable to discern the truth, he should discover it even by
means of an oath.* n°Grea t sages, as well as gods, have taken oaths to settle a case.
Vasistha* also made an oath before King Paijavana.
niA wise man must not take an oath falsely even with regard to a trifling matter;
for by taking an oath falsely, he comes to ruin here and in the hereafter. 112Taking an
oath is not a sin causing loss of caste when it is made in connection with lovers,
marriages, fodder for cows, or firewood, or to protect a Brahmin.*
113He should make a Brahmin swear by the truth; a Ksatriya by his conveyance
(7.75 n.) and weapons; a Vaisya by his cattle, seeds, and gold; and a Südr a by all the
sins causing loss of caste.*
114Alternatively, he may make the person carry fire, stay submerged in water, or
touch separately the heads of his sons and wife. 115When the blazing fire does not burn a
man, the water does not push him up to the surface, and no misfortune quickly strikes
him,* he should be judged innocent by reason of his oath. 116Long ago when Vatsa was
accused by his younger brother, Fire, the world's spy, did not burn a single hair of his
because he told the truth.*
False Testimony 
117Every case where perjured testimony has been given should
be declared a mistrial, and any judgment rendered there should be annulled.
118Testimony given through greed, delusion, fear, friendship, lust, anger,
ignorance, or immaturity is considered false.
119I will explain in order the specific punishments for a person who
gives false testimony for any one of these reasons.
Punishment for Perjury 
120For giving false testimony through greed, he should
be fined 1,000;* through delusion, the lowest fine (8.138); through fear, double the
middle fine; through friendship, four times the lowest fine; 121through lust, ten times
the lowest fine; through anger, three times the highest fine; through ignorance, a full
200; and through immaturity, just 100. 122These are said to be the punishments for
false testimony prescribed by the wise in order to prevent the miscarriage of justice and
to arrest injustice.
123When individuals of the three classes give false testimony, a righteous king
should first fine them and then execute them; a Brahmin, on the other hand, should be
sent into exile.*
Varieties of Punishment 
124Manu, the son of the Self-existent One, has pro-
claimed ten places upon which punishment may be inflicted. They are applicable to the
three classes; a Brahmin shall depart unscathed. 125They are: genitals, stomach, tongue,
and hands; feet are the fifth; and then, eyes, nose, ears, wealth, and body.


--- PAGE 185 ---
174 
Chapters
126He should inflict punishment on those deserving punishment only after he has
fully ascertained the proclivity,* as also the time and place, accurately, and considered
carefully the ability of the criminal and the severity of the crime. 127Unjust punishment
shatters* his fame and destroys his reputation in this world, and it is also an obstacle to
heaven in the next; therefore, he should avoid it completely. 128When a king punishes
those who do not deserve to be punished and neglects to punish those who deserve, he
brings great infamy upon himself and he will also go to hell.
129He should employ first the punishment of verbal reprimand; next a public
denunciation; third, a fine; and finally, corporal punishment. 130If he is unable to
restrain them even with corporal punishment, then he should impose on them all these
four.*
131I will explain fully the terms spread across the world relating to
copper, silver, and gold for use in commercial transactions among
people.
Weights 
132The fleck of dust seen when the sun shines through a lattice is called
Trasarenu,* the primary weight. 133One should know that eight Trasarenus make one
Liksä in weight; three Liksâs , one Räjasarsapa ; three Rajasarsapas, one Gaurasarsapa;*
134six Gaurasarsapas, one middling Yava; three Yavas, one Krsnala; five Krsnalas, one
Masa; sixteen Masas, one Suvarna;* 135four Suvarnas, one Pala; and ten Palas, one
Dharana.
One should know that two Krsnalas weighed together make one silver Mäsaka ,
136and sixteen Mäsakas , one silver Dharana, as also a Puräna . A copper Kârsika ,
however, should be known as a Kärsäpana
, or simply Pana; 137ten Dharanas, as one
silver Satamäna ; and four Suvarnas, as one Niska in weight.
Fines 
138Tradition has determined 250 Panas as the lowest fine; 500 Panas should
be considered the middle fine; and 1,000 Panas, the highest. 139If the debtor admits
that he owes the debt, he ought to be fined 500; but if he denies, twice as much—that
is Manu's decree.
Rates of Interest: I 
140A money-lender may assess the rate of interest decreed by
Vasistha (cf. VaDh 2.50) for the increase of capital and charge 1.25 per cent per month.
141 Alternatively, he may charge 2 per cent, keeping in mind the Law followed by good
men; for by charging 2 per cent he does not become guilty of a sin involving money.
142He may charge exactly 2, 3, 4, or 5 per cent interest per month, according to the
descending order of the classes.*
143If a pledge together with any profits it may yield has been furnished, however,
the creditor shall not receive any interest on the loan; nor shall the pledge be alienated
or sold because the time has lapsed.* 144He must not make use of a pledge by force; if
he makes use of it, he forfeits the interest and must reimburse the owner the original
value of the pledge. Otherwise, the creditor becomes guilty of stealing the pledge.
Pledges 
145Neither a pledge nor a deposit is liable to forfeiture due to the passage of
time; they may be recovered even after they have been held for a long time.* 146The


--- PAGE 186 ---
Chapter 8 
175
owner never loses his title to anything enjoyed through his benevolence, or to cows,
camels, draft animals,* horses, and animals delivered for breaking in.
147When an owner looks on silently as something is being enjoyed by others in
his presence for ten years, he is not entitled to recover it. 148If something is enjoyed
within his own locality* and he is neither mentally incapacitated nor a minor, he loses
any legal right to it; the user is entitled to that property.
149Pledges, boundaries, assets of minors, open deposits, sealed deposits,
women, and the possessions of the king and of vedic scholars are never lost on account
of enjoyment.
Rates of Interest: II 
150When a foolhardy man makes use of a pledge without the
consent of its owner, he shall refund half the interest as compensation for that use.
151Interest on a loan shall never exceed twice the principal when fixed at one time;
and on grain, fruits, wool, and draft animals, it shall not exceed five times.* 152An
interest rate set above the legal limit is exorbitant and cannot be enforced; that is called
the path of usury—he is entitled to only 5 per cent.
153He must not charge interest beyond one year or an unauthorized rate.
[Authorized forms of interest are] cyclical interest, periodic interest, contractual
interest, and interest paid by manual labor.*
154When someone is unable to repay a debt and wants to redo the contract, he
should first pay the accrued interest and then renew the evidentiary instrument. 155If he
cannot come up with the money at that time, he should renew the instrument; he is
obliged to pay as much interest as is due.*
156When someone has entered into a contract accruing cyclical interest with a
specified place and time, he shall not obtain its reward if he disregards that place and
time.*
157When experts in sea voyages capable of forecasting profits with respect to
particular places and times fix an interest rate, that is exactly the rate for repayment.
Surety 
158When a man stands here* as a surety to produce someone and fails to
produce him, he must pay the man's debt from his own funds.
159A son is not obliged to pay a debt related to being a surety, vain gifts,*
gambling debts, what is owed for liquor, or any remaining portions of fines and duties.
160The above rule applies only to someone who stands as surety for appearance; when a
man who has stood as surety for repayment dies, even his heirs can be compelled to pay
it.*
161When someone who was a surety other than for repayment dies and the
circumstances under which he became a surety are fully known, on what grounds can
the creditor later demand payment of the debt? 162If the money had been consigned to
the surety and he has sufficient money, the rule is that the consignee should pay the
debt from his own funds.*
Validity 
of Transactions ^Transactions carried out by persons who are
intoxicated, insane, distressed, or totally subservient, by children or the aged, or by
unauthorized persons, are invalid. 164Agreements, even if they are well substantiated,
are void if their provisions are contrary to settled Law based on established usage.*


--- PAGE 187 ---
176 
Chapters
165A fraudulent mortgage or sale, a fraudulent gift or receipt, and wherever deceit
is detected—all that must be annulled.
166If the person who took the loan is lost and the loan was used for the family, it
should be paid by the relatives from their own funds even if they are living separately
after the partitioning of the estate.* 167A transaction carried out for the benefit of the
family even by someone totally subservient, whether it is in one's own or in a distant
region, must not be rescinded by his superior.*
168What is given under the threat of force, what is enjoyed under the threat of
force, and any document prepared under the threat of force—all transactions executed
under the threat offeree Manu has declared to be null and void.
169Three suffer for the sake of others: witnesses, surety, and family;* but four
prosper: Brahmin, moneylender, merchant, and king.
Impartiality of the King 
170A king must never take what he ought not to take,
even if he is impoverished; nor must he forgo what he ought to take—be it an amount
ever so little—even if he is rich. 171By taking what he ought not to take and by
eschewing what he ought to take, the king's weakness is broadcasted; and he comes to
ruin here and in the hereafter. 172By taking what is due to him, by bringing together the
social classes,* and by protecting the weak, the king enhances his power;* and he
prospers here and in the hereafter.
173Like Yama, therefore, the ruler should lay aside his own likes and dislikes and
follow Yama's pattern of behavior (9.307), suppressing his anger and mastering his
organs.
174When a king foolishly judges cases in a manner contrary to the Law, his
enemies will soon bring that evil man under their dominion. 175When he controls love
and hatred and looks into cases in accordance with the Law, his subjects follow him,
like rivers the ocean.
Recovery of Debt 
176When a debtor reports a creditor seeking to recover a debt on
his own initiative, the king should compel him to pay the money to the creditor and in
addition a fine equal to a quarter of the debt.
177A debtor belonging to the same or a lower caste should settle with his creditor
even through manual labor (8.153 n.); but a debtor who is superior should repay it in
installments.
Conclusion 
178In this manner, the king should adjudicate equitably lawsuits filed
by litigants, lawsuits whose outcome is based on witnesses and evidence.
Grounds for Litigation: II Deposits
179A wise man should entrust a deposit to a man who is born in an illustrious family,
has an impeccable character, knows the Law, speaks the truth, has a large following, is
wealthy, and is an Ärya .
180A man should recover an article in exactly the same condition as when he
deposited it in the hand of another person—as the delivery, so the recovery.
181-2When a man refuses to hand over a deposit to the depositor upon request and
no witnesses are available, the judge should do the following outside the presence of


--- PAGE 188 ---
Chapters 
177
the depositor. He should have spies of proper age and appearance actually deposit gold
with that man under some pretext and then get them to request it.* 183If he returns it in
the same manner and condition as deposited, then there is nothing to the charges that
the adversaries have brought against him. 184If, however, he does not duly return that
gold to them, he should be arrested and compelled to return both*—that is the fixed
rule of the Law.
185An open or a sealed deposit should never be returned to a next-of-kin. In the
event of a mishap, they both perish; although if there is no mishap, they do not
perish.* 186When he gives them of his own accord to the next-of-kin of a deceased
depositor, neither the king nor the depositor's relatives should press charges against
him.
187One should seek to obtain that article by friendly means, without resorting in
any way to subterfuge; or, after probing closely into the character of the depositary, he
should settle the matter peacefully.
18SThat is the rule for the settlement of all open deposits; in the case of a sealed
deposit, he is in the clear, unless he has removed something from it.* 189He is not
obliged to return a deposit that is stolen by thieves, washed away in a flood, or burnt
up in a fire, unless he had removed something from it.
190Using all the investigative methods as well as vedic oaths, the judge should
examine anyone accused of appropriating a deposit or of demanding a deposit that has
not been made.191 A man who does not hand over a deposit and a man who requests the
return of a deposit he has not made—both these should be punished like thieves and
fined an amount equal to the deposit. 192A man who has appropriated an open deposit,
as well as a man who has appropriated a sealed deposit—the king should compel both
without distinction to pay a fine equal to its value. 193If a man appropriates the property
of others by fraudulent means, however, he and his accomplices should be put to death
publicly using diverse modes of execution.
194When a man makes an open deposit having a specific quality and quantity in
the presence of the community, it should be acknowledged to have that very quality
and quantity; if someone testifies falsely with regard to it, he ought to be punished.
195If a deposit is given or received privately, then it should be returned privately—as
the delivery, so the recovery.*
1%Thus shall the king make judgments regarding property that has
been handed over as an open deposit or entrusted out of affection as a
sealed deposit, without maltreating the person holding the deposit.
Grounds for Litigation: III Sale Without Ownership
197When a man who is neither the owner nor authorized by the owner sells someone
else's property, the king should not let that man, a thief pretending not to be a thief,
offer testimony;* 198and the man should also be fined—if he did it in the owner's
presence, he should be made to pay a fine of 600; if he did it outside his presence and
has no excuse, his liability is the same as for theft.*
199When a gift or sale is made* by someone other than the owner, it should be
considered null and void in accordance with the firm principle of legal process.+


--- PAGE 189 ---
178 
Chapters
200In a case where a man is seen to enjoy something without any evidence of legal
title to it, title is the proof of ownership and not enjoyment—that is the settled rule.
201When a man acquires some property through a sale* in the presence of the
community, he obtains that property with a clear title through legal purchase. 202If,
however, the initial seller* cannot be produced but the property is cleared by the public
purchase, he must not be punished; he is released by the king and the man who lost the
property gets it back.
Fraudulent Sales 
2"3lt is improper to sell one commodity mixed with another, a
flawed product, or something that measures less than claimed, located far away, or is
concealed.
204If a man shows one girl to the bridegroom and gives another, the groom may
marry both for the same price—so has Manu decreed (3.53 n.). 205When a man gives a
girl who is insane, suffers from leprosy, or has lost her virginity, he should not be
punished if he has disclosed the defects beforehand.+
Grounds for Litigation: IV 
Partnerships
206If one officiating priest chosen for a sacrifice quits his work, his partners should give
him a share proportionate to the work he has performed.* 207If a priest quits his work
after the sacrificial fees have been distributed, he should receive the full share but get
someone else to complete the work.
208At a ritual where sacrificial fees are specified for each component, the priest
performing a given component should receive the specified fee or all should share the
entire fee.* 209At the establishment of the sacred fires, the Adhvaryu priest should take
the chariot, the Brahman priest the steed, the Hotr priest the horse, and the Udgât r
priest the cart used for the purchase of Soma. 21°Amon g all the priests, half of the fee
goes to the principals; one-half of that to those in the next rank; one-third of that to
those entitled to a third; and one-quarter of that to those entitled to a quarter.*
211Men who carry out their activities in this world by forming partnerships
should allocate shares by applying these principles.
Grounds for Litigation: V 
Non-delivery of Gifts
212When someone has pledged a monetary gift to a man who begs in order to fulfill the
Law but who later does not follow through, he is not obliged to deliver that gift.* 213If
that man proceeds to enforce payment out of pride or greed, however, the king should
fine him one Suvarna to atone for that theft.
214I have described above accurately the non-delivery of a gift that
accords with the Law. Next, I will explain the non-payment of
wages.
Grounds for Litigation: VI 
Non-payment of Wages
215When a servant who is not sick fails to perform his stipulated work out of pride, he
should be fined eight Krsnalas, and he should not be paid his wages. 216If he was sick,


--- PAGE 190 ---
Chapter 8 
179
however, he should perform the work stipulated at the outset after he has recovered his
health; and he should receive his wages even if a very long time has elapsed. 217Whether
he is sick or well, if he does not have the stipulated work carried out, he should not be
paid his wages, even if only a small portion of the work remains undone.
218I have described above completely the Law relating to the non-
payment of wages. Next, I will explain the Law relating to persons
who breach a contract.
Grounds for Litigation: VII 
Breach of Contract
219When a man belonging to a village, region, or corporate entity enters into a contract
truthfully and then breaks it out of greed, the king should banish that man from his
realm.* ^He should arrest that man who has violated the compact and fine him 6
Niskas, each weighing 4 Suvarnas, and a silver Satamäna. *
^In this manner, a righteous king should apply the rules of punishment to
individuals who violate compacts within a village, caste, or association.
Grounds for Litigation: VIII 
Cancellation of Sale or Purchase
222After buying or selling anything, if someone here regrets his decision, he may return
or take back that article within ten days. 223After ten days, however, he may neither
return nor make someone return; if someone does take back or return, the king shall
fine him 600 (see 8.120 n.).
224When a man gives away a defective girl without disclosing her defects
(8.205), the king shall personally impose on him a fine of 96 Panas. 225When a man
maliciously asserts that a girl is not a virgin, he should be fined 100 (see 8.120 n.) if
he cannot demonstrate her defect. ^The ritual formulas of marriage are applicable only
to virgin girls and nowhere among any people to non-virgins, for they are excluded
from the rituals prescribed by Law. 227The ritual formulas of marriage are a sure sign
that she is the wife, and learned men should recognize that they reach their completion
at the seventh step.*
^After a given transaction has been completed, if someone here regrets his
decision, the king should place him on the path of the Law in accordance with the
above rules.
Grounds for Litigation: IX 
Disputes between Owners and Herdsmen
'm\ will explain accurately and in strict accordance with the Law the
disputes between owners and herdsmen over transgressions with
respect to farm animals.
Safety of the Herd 
23orj)uring the day the liability for their safety lies with the
herdsman, and during the night with the owner, provided they are at his house;
otherwise, the herdsman becomes liable.
231 When a herdsman is paid in milk, he may milk the best cow out often with the
consent of the owner; that is the payment for an uncompensated herdsman.


--- PAGE 191 ---
180 
Chapters
^If an animal is lost, is ravaged by worms, is killed by dogs, or perishes in a
dangerous place because of inadequate effort, it is the herdsman who must pay
compensation. 233If an animal is seized by robbers, the herdsman is not required to pay
compensation, provided he raised the alarm and informs his master at the proper time
and place.
^"When animals die, the herdsman should give their owners both ears, skin,
tails, bladders, tendons, and yellow bile,* and point out their distinguishing marks.
^If goats or sheep are cornered by wolves, however, and the herdsman fails to
come to their assistance, the herdsman shall be culpable for any that a wolf may attack
and kill. 236As they are roaming the woods while being kept under check in a single
group, if a wolf pounces upon and kills one, the herdsman is not culpable for that.
Damage to Crops 
237Anopen field extending one hundred "bows" or three rod's
throws* shall be left around a village; three times as large around a town. ^If farm
animals damage unfenced crops within that area, the king must not punish the
herdsman for that.
^One should erect there a fence over which a camel cannot look and cover every
hole through which a dog or pig could poke its head.
240When damage is done to a fenced field* alongside a road or at the edge of a
village, a fine of 100 (see 8.120 n.) should be imposed if a herdsman was present; if
the animals are without a herdsman, they should be impounded. 241When damage is
done in other fields, one and a half Panas should be assessed for each animal; and in
every case, the owner of the field ought to be compensated for the crop—that is the
fixed rule.
242Manu has declared that a cow within ten days after giving birth, bulls, and
animals dedicated to gods are not subject to punishment, whether they are attended by
a herdsman or not.*
243For an offense committed by the owner of a field, the fine shall be ten times
his share; half that amount, if the offense was committed by the servants without the
knowledge of the owner.*
244A righteous king should follow these rules with regard to
transgressions committed by owners, by animals, and by herdsmen.
Grounds for Litigation: X 
Boundary Disputes
245When a dispute arises between two villages with respect to a boundary, the king
should ascertain the boundary in the month of Jyestha (May-June) when landmarks are
most clearly visible.*
Boundary Markers 
246He should establish boundary trees: banyan, pipal,
Kimsuka, cotton-tree, Sala, palm, and trees with milky sap; 247as also thickets,
different kinds of bamboo, Sam!, creepers, mounds, reeds, and thickets of Kubjaka. In
this way, the boundary will not disappear. 248Reservoirs, wells, ponds, and waterways
should be constructed at the intersection of boundaries, as also temples of gods.
249Seeing that in the world controversies constantly arise due to people's
ignorance of boundaries, he should also have other concealed boundary markers


--- PAGE 192 ---
Chapter 8 
181
ensconced—250stones, bones, cow's hair, chaff, ashes, potsherds, dried cow dung,
bricks, coal, pebbles, and sand. 251He should also have other similar substances that the
soil would not decay over time ensconced as hidden markers at the intersection of
boundaries.
Settling Boundary Disputes 
252By means of these markers, the king should
ascertain the boundary between two litigants, as also by continuous prior possession
and by a watercourse. S3If doubt persists even after seeing the markers, the resolution
of a boundary dispute will have to rely solely on witnesses.
^Witnesses to a boundary should be questioned about the boundary markers in
the presence of the village communities and the two litigants. ^In accordance with the
unanimous decision regarding the boundary they render upon questioning, he should
make a record of the boundary, as well as of all their names. 256Putting earth on their
heads, wearing garlands and red clothes, and being made to swear each by his good
deeds (8.90), they shall render a truthful decision. ^When they render a decision in the
above manner, they remain untainted as truthful witnesses; but when they render a
contrary decision, they should be fined 200 (8.120 n.).
258When witnesses are unavailable, however, four villagers resident in the
vicinity, after making themselves ritually pure, should determine the boundary in the
presence of the king. ^When native inhabitants (7.54 n.) of neighboring villages are
unavailable as witnesses to a boundary, however, he may even question* the following
men who roam the forest: 260hunters, fowlers, herdsmen, fishermen, root-diggers,
snake-catchers, gleaners, and others who inhabit the forest. 
261When, upon
questioning, they identify a particular landmark at the intersection of the boundaries,
he should establish it as the landmark between the two villages according to the Law.
262It should be recognized that the determination of boundary markers between
fields, wells, reservoirs, gardens, and houses depends on the evidence of neighbors.
263If neighbors give false evidence when people are litigating boundary markers, the
king should impose the middle fine (8.138) on each of them individually.
264If someone appropriates a house, reservoir, garden, or field through
intimidation, he should be fined 500; the fine is 200 if it was done inadvertently
(8.120 n.).
265When it is impossible to ascertain the boundary, a king who knows the Law
should apportion land between them on his own on the basis of utility*—that is the
settled rule.
266I have described above the entire Law relating to decisions
regarding boundaries. Next, I will explain how cases of verbal
assault are to be decided.
Grounds for Litigation: XI 
Verbal Assault
267For assailing a Brahmin, a Ksatriya ought to be fined 100, and a Vaisya 150 or 200;
but a Südr a ought to suffer corporal punishment (8.120 n.). 268A Brahmin should be
fined 50 for abusing a Ksatriya, 25 for abusing a Vaisya, and 12 for abusing a Sudra.+


--- PAGE 193 ---
182 
Chapters
269For a violation by a twice-born against a person of the same social class, the fine is
12; the fine is doubled when extremely foul language is used.
270If a once-born man hurls grossly abusive words at twice-born men, his tongue
shall be cut off, for he originated from the lowest part.* 271If he invokes their names and
castes with disdain, a red-hot iron nail ten fingers* long should be driven into his
mouth. 272If he arrogantly gives instruction on the Law to Brahmins, the king should
pour hot oil into his mouth and ears.
273If a man arrogantly makes false statements about someone's learning, country,
caste, occupation, or physical features, he should be fined 200.* 274If a man calls
someone "one-eyed," "lame," or some other similar name, he should be fined at least i
Kärsäpana
, even if what he says is true.
275If a man hurls accusations* at his mother, father, wife, brother, child, or elder,
he should be fined 100, as also a man who fails to give way to an elder.
276In cases involving a Brahmin and a Ksatriya, a discerning king should impose
the following punishment: the lowest fine on the Brahmin and the middle fine on the
Ksatriya (8.138). 277On a Vaisya and a Südr a also, exactly the same punishment,*
except the cutting of the tongue, should be imposed according to their respective
class—that is the firm conclusion^
^I have described above accurately the rules concerning the
punishment for verbal assault. Next, I will explain how cases of
physical assault are to be decided.
Grounds for Litigation: XII 
Physical Assault
Personal Injury 
279When a lowest-born man uses a particular limb to injure a
superior person, that very limb of his should be cut off—that is Manu's decree. 280If he
charges with his hand or with a stick, his hand ought to be cut off; if he strikes with his
foot in anger, his foot ought to be cut off. 281If a low-born man attempts to occupy the
same seat as a man of a high rank, the king should brand him on the hip and send him
into exile or have his buttocks slashed. 282If he arrogantly spits at such a person, the
king should cut off both his lips; if he urinates at him, his penis; and if he breaks wind
at him, his anus. 283If he grabs him by the hair, the king should cut off both his hands
without a second thought, as also if he grabs him by the feet, the beard, the neck,* or
the testicles.
284One who bruises the skin, as also one who draws blood, is to be fined 100;
and one who wounds the flesh, 6 Niskas. One who breaks a bone, however, should be
sent into exile.* 285For injuring any kind of tree, a fine should be imposed
proportionate to its utility—that is the fixed rule. 286If someone strikes humans or
animals in order to inflict pain, the king should impose a punishment proportionate to
the severity of the pain.
287For doing severe harm to a limb, and likewise to vigor* and blood, a man
should be compelled to defray the expenses of the recovery or to pay a total fine.*
Damage to Property 
288When someone damages the property of another, whether
it is deliberate or inadvertent, he should pay reparation to the other and give an equal
amount to the king.


--- PAGE 194 ---
Chapters 
183
289In the case of leather, leather utensils, or wooden or clay products, the fine is
five times their value; so also in the case of flowers, roots, and fruits.
Injuries Caused by Vehicles 
290With respect to a vehicle, its driver, and its
owner, they posit ten exemptions; in other cases punishment is decreed. 291When the
nose-rope snaps; when the yoke breaks; when the vehicle skids to one side; when it
slides backwards; when the axle of the vehicle breaks; when a wheel breaks; 292when
bindings, halters, or reins snap; and when the driver cries out "Get out of the way!"—in
these cases Manu has declared that there should be no punishment.
293When the vehicle veers off due to the driver's incompetence, however, and it
results in injury, the owner should be fined 200; 294but if the driver is skilled, then it is
the driver who ought to be fined; and if he is unskilled, all the riders should be fined
100 each.
295In a case where the driver kills living creatures when his path is obstructed by
farm animals or a vehicle,* the punishment shall be enforced without hesitation. 2%If a
human being is killed, he becomes immediately subject to the same liability as a thief;
half that much for a large animal, such as a cow, elephant, camel, or horse.* 297For
injuring a small farm animal, the fine is 200; for a beautiful animal or bird, 50; 298for a
donkey, goat, or sheep, five Masas; and for killing a dog or a pig, one Masa.
Corporal Punishment 
299When they misbehave, a wife, son, slave, pupil, or
uterine brother* may be beaten with a rope or a bamboo strip 300on the back of their
bodies and never on the head. If he beats them in any other way, his liability is the
same as for theft.
301I have described above completely how to decide cases of physical
assault. Next, I will explain the rules for deciding the punishment
for theft.
Grounds for Litigation: XIII 
Theft
Suppression of Thieves 
302The king should exert utmost effort at suppressing
thieves. Suppressing thieves will expand both his fame and his realm; ^for the king
who gives security is always worthy of worship, and his sacrificial session* will
continuously expand with the granting of safety (6.39 n.) as its sacrificial fee.
Obligation to Offer Protection 
304A sixth portion of everyone's merits goes
to the king who protects; a sixth portion of their demerits likewise goes to him when
he fails to protect.305When one studies, sacrifices, gives gifts, and performs worship,
the king takes a sixth portion of it as his share by providing proper protection.
306gy protecting creatures according to the Law and by putting to death those
who merit execution, the king offers day after day sacrifices with sacrificial fees of one
hundred thousand.
307When a king gathers levies, taxes, duties, gifts, and fines without providing
protection, he will immediately go to hell. 308They call a king who gathers a sixth


--- PAGE 195 ---
184 
Chapters
portion as levy without providing protection "one who gathers all the filth of the entire
population." 309When a king disregards proper bounds, is an infidel, is rapacious, fails
to provide protection, and is predatory, one should know that he is headed along the
downward course.*
310He should strenuously suppress the wicked by three means: imprisonment,
shackling, and diverse forms of corporal punishment (8.320 n.);* 311for by suppressing
the wicked and by gratifying the virtuous kings are always purified, just as twice-born
men by sacrifices.
312The king should always forgive litigants, children, the aged, and the sick who
may insult him, if he wants to do what is beneficial to himself. 313He who bears
patiently when those in anguish insult him will be exalted in heaven for it, but he who
does not forgive because of his royal status will go to hell for it.
Punishment of Thieves 
314A wise thief, with his hair loose, should go to the
king* confessing his theft: "I have done this. Punish me," 315 and carrying on his
shoulder a pestle, a club of Khadira wood, a spear with both ends sharpened, or an iron
rod.
316Whether he is punished or released, the thief is released from the theft; but if
the king fails to punish him, he takes upon himself the thief's guilt. 317The murderer of
a learned Brahmin (4.208 n.) rubs his sin off on the man who eats his food, an
adulterous wife on her husband, a pupil and a patron of a sacrifice on the teacher, and a
thief on the king. 318When men who have committed sins are punished by kings, they
go to heaven immaculate, like virtuous men who have done good deeds.
319A man who steals a rope or a bucket from a well or tears down a place for
distributing water should pay a fine of one Mâs a and restore that article. 320A man who
steals more than ten Kumbha-measures of grain is subject to corporal punishment;*
even in lesser cases he should be fined eleven times the amount and made to restitute
that property to the owner. 321The same goes for articles sold by weight. When it is
more than 100 of gold, silver, and the like, and of the most excellent clothes, he is
subject to capital punishment;* 322but when it is more than 50, his hand ought to be
cut off. In lesser cases, on the other hand, the king should set a fine of eleven times the
value of the property.
323For abducting men from illustrious families and especially women, and for
stealing gems of great value, a man merits the death penalty.
324For stealing large farm animals, as also weapons and medicine, the king
should set a punishment after taking into account its time and purpose;* 325in the case
of cows belonging to Brahmins, the cleaving of the heel;* and for stealing farm
animals, half his foot should be cut off immediately.
326For stealing thread, cotton, liquor-yeast, cow dung, molasses, curd, milk,
buttermilk, water, grass, 327vessels made of bamboo or cane, any kind of salt, clay
vessels, earth, ash, 328fish, birds, oil, ghee, meat, honey, other animal products,
329other similar kinds of food,* boiled rice, and all kinds of cooked food—the fine is
twice the value of the stolen property. 330For flowers, green grain, shrubs, creepers,
trees, and small quantities of unhusked grain, the fine is 5 Krsnalas. 331For husked


--- PAGE 196 ---
Chapters 
185
grain, vegetables, roots, and fruits, the fine is 100 if it is committed outside the
owner's presence, and 50 if it is committed in his presence (8.332 n.).
332When an act is committed with force and in the presence of the victim, it is
"violence"; when it is committed outside his presence,* it is "theft," and so is an act
that someone commits and then denies.
^When a man steals these articles after they have been prepared for use, the king
should fine him 100,* as also a man who steals fire from a house.
334The king should deprive a thief of the very limb with which he commits a
crime against men, to serve as a deterrent.
335A king should never fail to punish even his father, teacher, friend, mother,
wife, son, or personal priest when they deviate from the Law proper to them. 336In a
case where an ordinary person is fined i Kärsäpana
, the king should be fined 1,000—
that is the fixed rule.* 337With respect to theft, the liability for a SDdra is eight times;
for a Vaisya, sixteen times; for a Ksatriya, thirty-two times; 338and for a Brahmin,
sixty-four times, or fully 100 times, or twice sixty-four times; for he knows whether it
is good or bad.*
339Roots and fruits from trees, wood for a fire, and grass to feed cows—Manu has
declared that these do not constitute theft.
^If a Brahmin desires to obtain money from the hands of a man who takes what
is not given—even if he does so by means of officiating at that man's sacrifices or
teaching him—that Brahmin is equal to a thief. ^When a twice-born is on the road and
his provisions are exhausted, he ought not to be punished for taking two roots or two
stalks of sugar-cane from the field of another man.
M2When someone ties up those that are not tied, releases those that are tied, or
takes away a slave, horse, or carriage, his liability is the same as for theft.*
343 A king who undertakes the suppression of thieves in this manner
obtains fame in this world and unsurpassing happiness after death.
Grounds for Litigation: XIV 
Violence
^If a king desires to obtain the seat of Indra and inexhaustible and imperishable fame,
he should never ignore even for a moment a man who perpetrates violence.* M5A man
who perpetrates violence should be considered far more evil than someone who is
offensive in speech, who steals, or who assaults with a rod.* 346A king who condones a
man who engages in violence is quickly brought to ruin and becomes the object of
hatred.
347The king must never release violent men who strike terror in all creatures
eyeing either friendship or a large monetary gain.
Permissible 
Violence 
348Twice-born men may take up arms when the Law is
thwarted or when the vicissitudes of time bring calamity upon twice-born classes.
^When a man kills in accordance with the Law to protect his life, in a conflict over
sacrificial fees,* or in defense of women or Brahmins, he remains untainted.
350When an assailant attacks with the intent to kill—whether he is an elder, a
child, an old person, or a learned Brahmin—one may surely kill him without


--- PAGE 197 ---
186 
Chapter8
hesitation. 351In killing an assailant, the killer incurs no fault; whether it is done openly
or in secret, wrath there recoils on wrath.
Grounds for Litigation: XV 
Sexual Crimes Against Women
Sexual Crimes against Married Women 
352When men violate the wives of
others, the king should disfigure their bodies with punishments that inspire terror and
then execute them* (8.6 n.; 8.284 n.); 353for such violations give rise to the mixing of
social classes among the people, creating deviation from the Law that tears out the very
root* and leads to the destruction of everything.
354When a man carries on a conversation secretly with another man's wife, he is
subject to the lowest fine (8.138) if he has been previously accused of similar offenses.
355lf someone who has not been previously accused engages in such conversation for a
good reason, however, no guilt attaches to him, for he has committed no transgression.
356If a man converses with the wife of another at a sacred ford, in a wild tract, in a
forest, or at the confluence of rivers, he is guilty of adultery. 357Doing favors, dallying,
touching the ornaments or clothes, and sitting together on a bed—all this, tradition
tells us, constitutes adultery. 358When a man touches a woman at an inappropriate place
or permits her to touch him—all such acts done with mutual consent, tradition tells us,
constitute adultery.
359In the case of adultery, everyone other than a Brahmin merits the death
penalty; women of all four classes are to be guarded always with the utmost care.
360Mendicants, bards, men consecrated for sacrifice,* and artisans may converse
with women, unless they have been explicitly banned.* 361A man should never
converse with women* when he has been forbidden to do so; when someone speaks
after being forbidden, he ought to be fined i Suvarna.
362The above rule does not apply to wives of traveling performers or to wives
who earn a living on their own,* for such men get their women to attach themselves to
men and, concealing themselves, get them to have sexual liaisons. 363When someone
engages in secret conversations with such women, as also with female slaves serving a
single master and with female wandering ascetics, he shall be compelled to pay a small
fine.
Male Sexual Assault 
364A man who defiles a virgin against her will merits
immediate execution. When a man of equal status defiles a willing virgin, however, he
is not subject to execution.* 365No fine should be imposed on a virgin who falls in love
with a man superior to herself; but if she makes love to a man inferior to herself, she
should be put under restraint and confined to her house. 366When a man of inferior
status makes love to a superior woman, however, he merits execution; if he makes love
to a woman of equal status, he should pay a bride-price* if her father so desires.
367If a man arrogantly violates a virgin by force, two of his fingers* should be cut
off immediately, and he should also be fined 600.368A man of equal status who defiles
a willing girl shall not be subject to the cutting of his fingers, but he should be
compelled to pay a fine of 200 to deter repetition.
Female Sexual Assault 
369If a virgin violates another virgin, she should be
fined 200, pay three times the bride-price,* and receive ten lashes. 370When a woman


--- PAGE 198 ---
Chap fer 8 
187
violates a virgin, however, her head ought to be shaved immediately—alternatively,
two of her fingers should be cut off—and she should be paraded on a donkey.
Adultery 
371When a woman, arrogant because of the eminence of her relatives and
her own feminine qualities, becomes unfaithful to her husband, the king should have
her devoured by dogs in a public square frequented by many. 372He should have the
male offender burnt upon a heated iron bed; they should stack logs and burn up that
villain there.
373When a convict is accused again within a year, the fine is doubled; likewise
when a man has sex with a Vrätya * or a Cándala woman. 374When a Südr a has sex with
a guarded or unguarded woman of a twice-born class—he loses a limb and all his
possessions, if she was unguarded. If she was guarded, a SQdra loses everything;* 375a
Vaisya is imprisoned for a year and all his property is confiscated; and a Ksatriya is
fined 1,000 and his head is shaved using urine. 376If a Vaisya or a Ksatriya has sex with
an unguarded Brahmin woman, the Vaisya is fined 500 and the Ksatriya 1,000 (see
8.120 n.). 377If any of these two has sex with a guarded Brahmin woman, he should be
punished in the same way as a Südr a or he should be burnt with a straw-fire. 378A
Brahmin who has forcible sex with a guarded Brahmin woman should be fined 1,000;
for sex with a willing partner, he should be fined 500.
379Shaving the head is prescribed as the death penalty for Brahmins; but the other
social classes are actually subject to the death penalty. 380The king should never put a
Brahmin to death, even if he has committed every sort of crime; he should banish such
a Brahmin from his kingdom along with all his property, without causing him hurt.
381There is no greater violation of the Law on earth than killing a Brahmin; therefore, a
king should not even think of killing a Brahmin.
382If a Vaisya has sex with a guarded Ksatriya woman or a Ksatriya with a
guarded Vaisya woman, both ought to receive the same punishment as a man who has
sex with an unguarded Brahmin woman.+ 383When a Brahmin has sex with those two
types of guarded women, however, he should be compelled to pay a fine of 1,000;
likewise, when a Ksatriya or a Vaisya has sex with a Südr a woman, the fine is 1,000.
384For sex with an unguarded Ksatriya woman, a Vaisya is fined 500, but a Ksatriya
has his head shaved using urine or is levied the same fine. 385When a Brahmin has sex
with an unguarded Ksatriya or Vaisya woman or with a Südr a woman, he shall be fined
500, but 1,000 for sex with a lowest-born woman.*
[Excursus]
Miscellanea 
386The king in whose capital there is no thief, no adulterer, no person
who uses offensive speech, no person who uses violence, and no person who commits
physical assault, will attain the world of Indra.* 387The suppression of these five within
his territory secures for the king paramountcy among his peers and fame among his
people.
388If the patron of a sacrifice gets rid of an officiating priest or an officiating priest
the patron when both are capable of performing the rite and are untainted by any fault,
each is fined 100.


--- PAGE 199 ---
188 
Chapters
389 A mother, father, wife, or son ought never to be abandoned. Anyone who
abandons these when they have not fallen from their caste shall be fined 600 by the
king.
390When twice-born men living in hermitages* are arguing with each other about
any duty, the king should never pronounce on the Law, if he cares for his own welfare.
391 Accompanied by Brahmins, the king should first pay them due reverence, pacify
them initially with soothing words, and then teach them the Law specific to them.
392When a Brahmin fails to feed his two worthy neighbors—the one living in
front of his house and the one behind—at a festival attended by twenty Brahmins, he
ought to be fined i Mâsaka . 393When a vedic scholar fails to feed another virtuous vedic
scholar at auspicious rites, he should be compelled to give twice that amount of food
and a gold Masaka.
394A blind man, an idiot, a cripple, a man over 70, and someone who takes care
of vedic scholars—no one should compel these to pay any tax.
395The king should always honor* vedic scholars, the sick and the afflicted,
children, the aged, the poor, men from illustrious families, and Äryas .
3%A washerman shall wash clothes thoroughly and gently on a smooth cotton-
wood board. He must not use some clothes to carry the other clothes or let others wear
those clothes.*
397A weaver receiving thread weighing 10 Palas must return cloth weighing i
Pala more; if he does otherwise, he should be compelled to pay a fine of 12.*
Control of Trade 
398When men who have experience in offices for levying duties
and expertise in all types of merchandise have fixed the value of each commodity, the
king should take one-twentieth of that. 399When someone exports goods that are
designated a royal monopoly* or that are forbidden out of greed, the king should
confiscate all his property. 400When a man bypasses an office for levying duties, buys
or sells at forbidden times, or falsifies the enumeration of goods, he should be fined
eight times what he tried to hide.
401 After investigating the provenance of every commodity, its destination, and
how long it is held by the vendor, as well as gain and loss, he should fix the sale and
purchase prices. 402Every five days or every fortnight the king should publicly fix the
prices of commodities. 403A11 balances, measures,* and weights should be stamped
with the proper mark and should be re-inspected every six months.
Ferries and Tolls 
404A vehicle should be assessed i Pana at a ferry; a porter's
load, half a Pana; an animal or woman, a quarter Pana; and a porter without a load, one-
eighth of a Pana. 405Vehicles loaded with goods should be assessed a toll according to
the value of the goods; empty vehicles and porters without loads should be assessed
some small amount.
406por ]ong vovages tne to\\ should correspond to the place and the time. It
should be understood that this applies to voyages along rivers; for sea voyages, there is
no set rate (8.157).


--- PAGE 200 ---
Chapters 
189
407Women over two months pregnant, wandering ascetics, sages, Brahmins, and
those wearing the insignia of a religious profession (4.200 n.) should not be forced to
pay tolls on a ferry.
^Whenever anything within a boat is damaged due to the negligence of the
boatsmen, it is the boatsmen who should pay reparation collectively, each according to
his share.
^I have described above how to decide a lawsuit brought by
passengers in a boat relating to the negligence of boatsmen on the
water; when it is an act of god, there shall be no punishment.
Occupations of Social Classes 
410The king should make Vaisyas pursue trade,
moneylending, agriculture, and cattle herding, and make Sudras engage in the service
of twice-born people.
411A Brahmin should support a Ksatriya or a Vaisya who is starved for a
livelihood out of compassion and employ them in activities proper to them. 412If a
Brahmin makes twice-born men who have undergone vedic initiation do slave labor
against their will through greed and to show off his power, the king should fine him
600.413He may, however, make a SQdra, whether he is bought or not, do slave labor;
for the Südr a was created by the Self-existent One solely to do slave labor for the
Brahmin.
414Even when he is released by his master, a Südr a is not freed from his slave
status; for that is innate in him and who can remove it from him? 415There are seven
kinds of slaves: a man captured in war, a man who makes himself a slave to receive
food, a slave born in the house, a purchased slave, a gifted slave, a hereditary slave, and
a man enslaved for punishment.
416Wife, son, and slave—all these three, tradition tells us, are without property.
Whatever they may earn becomes the property of the man to whom they belong.
417A Brahmin may confidently seize property from a Südra , because there is
nothing that he owns; for he is a man whose property may be taken by his master.
418The king should strenuously make Vaisyas and Sudras perform the activities
specific to them; for when they deviate from their specific activities, they throw this
world into confusion.
419Every day the king should pay attention to his administrative centers,*
conveyances (7.75 n.), daily income and expenditure, mines, and treasury. 420When
the king thus brings to a satisfactory conclusion all these legal matters, he gets rid of
all sins and attains the highest state.


--- PAGE 201 ---
CHAPTER NINE
Grounds for Litigation: XVI 
Law Concerning Husband and Wife
'For a husband and wife who stay on the path pointed out by the
Law, I shall declare the eternal Laws for both when they are together
and when they are apart.*
Guarding the Wife 
2Day and night men should keep their women from acting
independently; for, attached as they are to sensual pleasures, men should keep them
under their control. 3Her father guards her in her childhood, her husband guards her in
her youth, and her sons guard her in her old age; a woman is not qualified to act
independently (5.147-9).
4A father is reprehensible,* if he does not give her away at the proper time; a
husband, if he does not have sex with her at the right time (3.45 n.); and a son, if he
fails to guard his mother when her husband is dead 5Women in particular should be
guarded against even the slightest evil inclination, for when they are left unguarded,
they bring grief to both families (5.149 n.).+ 6Seeing that this is clearly the highest
Law of all social classes, even weak husbands strive to guard their wives; 7for by
carefully guarding his wife, a man guards his offspring, his character, his family,
himself, and the Law specific to him.
SThe husband enters the wife, becomes a fetus, and is bom in this world. This,
indeed, is what gives the name to and discloses the true nature of "wife" (joya)—that he
is born (jayate) again in her.* 9For, a wife bears a son resembling the man she loves; to
insure the purity of his offspring, therefore, he should carefully guard his wife.
10No man is able to thoroughly guard women by force; but by using the
following strategies, he will be able to guard them thoroughly. uHe should employ her
in the collection and the disbursement of his wealth, in cleaning, in meritorious
activity, in cooking food, and in looking after household goods.* 12When they are kept
confined within the house by trusted men, they are not truly guarded; only when they
guard themselves by themselves are they truly well guarded.
13Drinking, associating with bad people, living away from the husband, travel,
sleep, and staying in the houses of others—these are the six things that corrupt women.
14They pay no attention to beauty, they pay no heed to age; whether he is handsome or
ugly, they make love to him with the single thought, "He's a man!" 15Lechery,
fickleness of mind, and hard-heartedness are innate in them; even when they are
carefully guarded in this world, therefore, they become hostile towards their husbands.
16Recognizing thus the nature produced in them at creation by Prajâpati , a man should
make the utmost effort at guarding them. 17Bed, seat, ornaments, lust, hatred, behavior
unworthy of an Ärya , malice, and bad conduct—Manu assigned these to women.*
190


--- PAGE 202 ---
Chapter 9 
191
18No rite is performed for women with the recitation of ritual formulas—that is
well-established Law. "Without strength or ritual formula, women are the untruth"*—
that is the fixed rule. 19There are, likewise, numerous scriptural passages recited in the
sacred books. Listen to a sample of these* intended to expose the true character of
women. 20Here is an illustration of it:* "May my father keep from me the seed that my
mother, roaming about unfaithful to her husband, craved!" 21When a woman
contemplates anything harmful to her husband in her mind, this is said to be a
thorough expiation ofthat infidelity.*
Elevation of Wife to Husband's Status ^When a wife unites with her
husband according to rule, she takes on the qualities he has, like a river uniting with
the ocean. 23Aksamälä
, a woman of the lowest birth, when she united with Vasistha—
as also Sârng ï with Mandapâla—becam
e worthy of great respect.* 24These and other
women of low birth attained high status in this world by reason of the eminent
qualities of their respective husbands.
25I have described above the splendid conduct of a husband and wife
commonly practiced in the world. Next, listen to the Laws that
pertain to progeny, Laws that bring happiness here and in the
hereafter.
Importance of Wife 
26On account of offspring, a wife is the bearer of many
blessings, worthy of honor, and the light within a home; indeed, in a home no
distinction at all exists between a wife (strt) and Sn, the Goddess of Fortune. 27She
begets children; and when they are born, she brings them up—day in, day out, the
wife,* evidently, is the linchpin of domestic affairs. 28Offspring, rites prescribed by
Law, obedient service,* the highest sensuous delights, and procuring heaven for
oneself and one's forefathers—all this depends on the wife.
29A woman who controls her mind, speech, and body and is never unfaithful to
her husband attains the worlds of her husband, and virtuous people call her a "good
woman" (= 5.165). 30By being unfaithful to her husband, on the other hand, a woman
becomes disgraced in the world, takes birth in a jackal's womb, and is afflicted with
evil diseases (= 5.164).
31Listen now to this holy disquisition, profitable to all, carried out
by virtuous people and by great ancient sages with regard to a son.
To Whom Belongs a Son? 
32It is acknowledged that a son belongs to the
husband; but scripture is divided with respect to the sire—some argue for the man who
fathered the child, others for the "owner of the field."*
33Tradition holds that the woman represents the field and the man the seed; all
embodied beings spring from the union of field and seed. 34Sometimes the seed is
preeminent, at other times the female womb; but when both are equal, that offspring is
greatly esteemed.*


--- PAGE 203 ---
192 
Chapter 9
[FIRST OPINION] 
35Between the seed and the womb, the seed is considered
dominant; for the offspring of all creatures is marked by the characteristics of the seed
(10.70-2). 36When someone sows a particular kind of seed in a field prepared at the
proper time, the very same kind sprouts in that field displaying its own qualities.
37This earth, indeed, is called the eternal womb of creatures; yet the seed, as it
develops, does not manifest any of the qualities associated with the womb. 38Even
when different kinds of seeds are sown by fanners in the very same plot at the right
time, they are seen in the world to sprout differently, each according to its nature.
39Vrîhi-rice , Sâla-rice , mung beans, sesame seeds, beans, barley, garlic, and sugar-
cane—all these sprout according to their seed. 40For one kind to be sown and quite
another to be produced—that is simply impossible. Whatever kind of seed is sown,
that same kind sprouts forth.*
[SECOND OPINION] 
41A wise and well-trained man, therefore, possessing knowledge
and discrimination* and desiring a long life, should never sow his seed in the wife of
another man. 42In this connection, those who know the past relate verses sung by Wind
showing that a man must never sow his seed in someone else's wife. 43"When someone
shoots an arrow at the vitals of an animal that has already been pierced, his arrow is
wasted; in like manner a seed is wasted when discharged in someone else's wife."
^Even as those who know the past regard this earth as the wife of Prthu, so they say
that a field belongs to the man who cleared the stumps and the deer to the man who
owns the arrow.*
45Wife, self, and offspring—that is the full extent of "man." Brahmins, likewise,
proclaim this: "The husband, tradition says, is the wife."* 46Neither sale nor dismissal
cuts the wife loose from her husband; this we consider the Law established formerly by
Prajâpati . 47Once is a partition made; once is a virgin given away; once is it said "I
give"—these three are done only once each.
48As in the case of cows, mares, female camels, slave women, female buffaloes,
female goats, and ewes, the sire does not own the offspring, so is it also in the case of
women. 49When men who have seeds but no fields sow them in someone else's field,
once the crop has grown they do not receive any of the harvest. ^Even if a bull fathers a
hundred calves on someone else's cows, the calves belong to the owner of the cows; the
bull has spilled his semen in vain. 51Likewise, when men without fields sow their seed
in someone else's field, they create profits for the owner of the field; the owner of the
seed reaps no fruit.
52If an agreement* has not been reached between the owner of the field and the
owner of the seed with respect to the fruit, the owner of the field clearly reaps the profit;
the womb is mightier than the seed. 53When a field is handed over by contractual
agreement to someone for sowing the seed, however, we see in the world that both the
owner of the seed and the owner of the field receive shares from it. MWhen a seed,
carried by flood or wind, sprouts in someone's field, it belongs solely to the owner of
the field; the sower does not reap its fruit.*
55This is the Law with regard to the offspring of cows, mares, slave women,
female camels, female goats, ewes, female birds, and female buffaloes.*


--- PAGE 204 ---
Chapter 9 
193
*! have described to you above the relative importance of the seed
and the womb. Next, I shall explain the Law pertaining to women
during a time of adversity.
Levirate 
57Tradition holds that for a younger brother, the wife of his older brother is
the same as the wife of an elder;* and for an older brother, the wife of his younger
brother is the same as a daughter-in-law. 58Except in a time of adversity, if an older
brother has sex with his younger brother's wife or a younger brother with his older
brother's wife, they become outcastes, even if they have been duly appointed.
59If the line is about to die out, a wife who is duly appointed may obtain the
desired progeny through a brother-in-law or a relative belonging to the same ancestry
(5.60 n.). 60The appointed man should smear himself with ghee, approach the widow
at night in silence, and beget a single son, never a second. 
61Some who are
knowledgeable in these matters, seeing that this leaves the purpose of the couple's
appointment unfulfilled in terms of the Law, endorse begetting a second son in such
women.* 62When the purpose of his appointment to the widow has been fulfilled
according to rule, however, they should behave towards each other as an elder and a
daughter-in-law. œlf, on the contrary, the appointed couple disregard the rules and
behave lustfully with one another, both become outcastes, he as a molester of a
daughter-in-law, and she as a violator of an elder's bed.
^Twice-born men should never appoint a widowed woman to another man, for
in appointing her to another man, they assail the eternal Law.* 65The nuptial formulas
nowhere mention appointment, nor do injunctions relating to marriage sanction the
remarriage of widows. 66This Law of beasts, despised by learned twice-born men, was
extended to humans also during the reign of Vena (7.41-2 n.). 67He was a preeminent
royal sage, who once ruled the entire earth and, his mind overcome by lust, created the
intermixing of classes. 68Since that time, good people denounce anyone who is
senseless enough to appoint a woman to have children after her husband dies.
69If the husband of a virgin dies after their betrothal, her brother-in-law should
take* her in the following manner. 70Obtaining* her according to rule, as she is dressed
in white* and devoted to pure observances, he should have sex with her once every
time she is in season (3.45 n.) until she bears a child.
Contract of Betrothal 
71 After giving away a virgin to someone, a prudent man
must never give her away again, for in giving what has already been given, he becomes
guilty of a lie with respect to a human being (8.98). 72Even after he has accepted a
virgin according to rule, he may reject her if she is found to be dishonorable, diseased,
or defiled,* or if she had been given deceptively. 73If a man gives a virgin with defects
without revealing them, one may break the contract with that evil man who gave the
virgin (8.205, 224-7).*
Absence of Husband 
74A man should provide for his wife before he goes away on
business, for even a steadfast woman will go astray when starved for a livelihood. 75If
he provides for her before going away, she should live a life of restraint; but if he leaves
without providing for her, she may maintain herself by engaging in respectable crafts.


--- PAGE 205 ---
194 
Chapter 9
76 A wife should wait* for eight years when her husband has gone away for a
purpose specified by Law, for six years when he has gone for learning or fame, and for
three years when he has gone for pleasure.
Repudiation of a Wife 
^For one year let a husband tolerate a wife who loathes
him; after one year, he should confiscate her inheritance and stop cohabiting with her.
78If a wife commits a transgression against her husband who is deranged, drunk, or
sick, deprived of her ornaments and belongings, she should be cast out for three
months. Tf a wife loathes a husband who has become insane, fallen from caste, or
impotent (3.150 n.), who is without semen,* or who has contracted an evil disease
(3.92 n.), she must neither be abandoned nor deprived of her inheritance.
^When a wife drinks liquor or is dishonest,* cantankerous, sick, vicious, or
wasteful, she may be superseded at any time by marriage to another wife. 81A barren
wife may be superseded in the eighth year; a wife whose children die, in the tenth; a
wife who bears girls, in the eleventh; but a foul-mouthed wife, at once. œlf a wife is
sickly but affectionate and rich in virtue, he may marry a wife to supersede her with her
consent; she should never be treated with disrespect.
œlf a wife who has been superseded storms out of the house incensed, however,
she should be locked up immediately or repudiated in the presence of the family.
MIf, after she is forbidden, a wife drinks liquor, albeit at festivals, or visits shows
and fairs,* she should be fined 6 Krsnalas.
Seniority among Wives 
œlf twice-born men marry women of their own class as
well as others, the order of their class determines their seniority, as also how they are
honored and where they reside.86Among all these, only the wife of equal class may care
for her husband's physical needs* or participate in his daily rites prescribed by Law,
nevera wife belonging to a different class. ^If he foolishly gets another wife to carry
these out while a wife of equal class is available, he becomes exactly like a Brahmin-
Cändäl
a described by the ancients.
Marriage of Daughters 
88When there is a suitor who is eminent, handsome, and
of equal status, one should give the girl to him according to rule, even if she has not
attained the proper age.* 89Even if she has reached puberty, a girl should rather remain
at home until death; one should never give her to a man bereft of good qualities.
90For three years shall a girl wait after the onset of her puberty; after that time, she
may find for herself a husband of equal status. 91If a woman who has not been given in
marriage finds a husband on her own, she does not incur any sin, and neither does the
man she finds. 92A girl who chooses a husband on her own must not take with her any
ornament coming from her father or mother or given by her brothers; if she takes, it is
theft.*
93A man who takes a girl after she has reached puberty shall not pay a bride-price,
for the father has lost his ownership of her by frustrating her menses.*
94A 3O-year-old man should marry a charming girl of 12 years, or an 18-year-old,
a girl of 8 years—sooner, if his fulfilling the Law would suffer. 95A husband marries a
wife given to him by gods, not from his own desire. He should always support that
good woman, thereby doing what is pleasing to the gods.


--- PAGE 206 ---
Chapter 9 
195
%Women were created to bear children, and men to extend the line; therefore,
scriptures have prescribed that the Law is to be carried out in common with the wife.
97If, after the bride-price has been paid for the girl, the man who paid the price
dies, she should be given to the brother-in-law, if she consents to it. 98Even a Súdra
should not take a bride-price when he gives his daughter; for by accepting a bride-price,
he is engaging in a covert sale of his daughter. "That after promising her to one man,
she is then given to another*—such a deed was never done by good people of ancient or
recent times. 100The covert sale of a daughter for a payment under the name "bride-
price"—we have never heard of such a thing even in former generations.
101"Fidelity to each other should be observed until death"—this should be recognized
as the highest Law between husband and wife put in a nutshell. 102A husband and wife,
after they have completed the marriage rite, should always work hard so as to prevent
them from being unfaithful to each other and thus being split apart.*
103I have described above the Law concerning husband and wife
based on love, as well as the way to obtain offspring in times of
adversity. Listen now to the Law of inheritance.
Grounds for Litigation: XVII Partition of Inheritance
104After the father and mother have passed on,* the brothers should gather together and
partition the paternal inheritance evenly; for they are incompetent while those two are
alive.
Primogeniture 
105The eldest alone, on the contrary, ought to take the entire
paternal estate, and the others should live as his dependents just as they did under their
father.
106As soon as the eldest is born, a person becomes a "man with a son" and is
released from his debt to the ancestors (4.257 n.); that son, therefore, is entitled to the
entire amount. 107Only that son to whom he passes on his debt and through whom he
obtains immortality is born through the Law; others, they say, are born through lust.*
108The eldest brother should look after the younger ones as a father his sons; and
they should behave towards their eldest brother as towards their father, in accordance
with the Law. 109It is the eldest who makes the family prosper, the eldest who brings it
to ruin; the eldest receives the highest honor in the world, and the eldest is never treated
with disrespect by good people. 110When the eldest behaves the way the eldest should,
he is like a mother, he is like a father; but when he fails to behave the way the eldest
should, he should receive the same honor as a relative.
Partition and Seniority 
n'They should either live together in this manner, or
rather, separately with a desire for merit. Living separately increases merit; therefore,
the act of separation is meritorious.*
112The preemptive share of the eldest is one-twentieth, as well as the best item in
the entire estate; the middle son gets one-half of that; and the youngest, one-quarter.
113The eldest and the youngest shall take what has been prescribed; the shares of the


--- PAGE 207 ---
196 
Chapter 9
sons other than the eldest and the youngest are the same as that of the middle son.
114Within each category of property, the first-born shall take the finest item, as well as
anything exceedingly special and the best out of each ten. 115When the brothers are
equally accomplished in what they do, there is no preemptive share out of each ten; a
little something should be given to the eldest, however, as a token of respect.
116Once the preemptive share has been subtracted in the above manner, the rest
should be apportioned in equal shares. If, on the other hand, the preemptive share has
not been subtracted, the apportioning of shares should be carried out as follows: 117the
eldest son gets a double share; the son born next gets one and a half; and the younger
ones gets a single share each—that is the settled Law.
118From their shares, however, the brothers shall give individually to the
unmarried girls—one-quarter from the share of each. Those unwilling to give will
become outcastes.
119 A single goat, sheep, or one-hoofed animal left over after the distribution
should never be divided; the rule is that a single goat or sheep left over goes to the
eldest.
Seniority of Leviratic Sons 
120If a younger brother begets a son on the wife of
the eldest, then the division is equal—that is the settled Law. 121That the principal
should become the subordinate is impossible according to the Law; in procreation, the
father is the principal. Therefore, one should allocate a share to that son in accordance
with the Law.*
Seniority among Sons of Different Wives 
122How is the partition done
when the youngest son is born to the seniormost wife and the first-born son to the
juniormost wife? If such a doubt arises, 123the first-born* should take one bull as his
preemptive share; thereafter, the other inferior bulls* are taken by those junior to him
according to the seniority of their mothers. 124The eldest son born to the seniormost
wife, on the other hand, shall take fifteen cows together with a bull; thereafter, the
others receive shares according to seniority of their mothers—that is the fixed rule.
125Among sons born uniformly to wives of equal status, seniority is not based on
their mothers; they declare seniority to be based on birth. 126In the Subrahmanya* texts
also, tradition tells us, it is the eldest by birth who makes the invocation. Tradition
also tells us that even between twins in the same womb seniority is based on birth.
"Female-Son" and Her Sons 
127A man without a son should make his daughter
a "female-son"* in the following manner: "The child this girl bears will be the one who
performs my ancestral rites."+
128In ancient times, Daksa himself, the lord of creatures, made "female-sons" in
the above manner for the multiplication of his lineage.129After adorning them and with
a joyful heart, he gave ten of them to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, and twenty-seven to
King Soma.*
130A son is the same as one's self, and a daughter is equal to a son; while she
stands there as his very self, how can someone else take his property?
131 Anything that is part of a mother's separate property* becomes the share of her
unmarried daughters; and the daughter's son shall take the entire property of a man


--- PAGE 208 ---
Chapter 9 
197
without a son. 132The daughter's son shall indeed take the entire estate of the father who
is without a son, and he shall offer two rice-balls, one to his father and one to his
maternal grandfather. 133The world does not recognize any difference between a son's
son and a daughter's son with respect to the Law, for both the father of the one and the
mother of the other sprang from his own body (9.139). 134If, however, a son is born
after a "female-son" has been appointed, the division in that case is equal; for a woman
has no claim to primogeniture (9.120-1 n.).
135If a "female-son" somehow dies sonless, the husband of that "female-son"
shall indeed take the property without hesitation. 136When a daughter, whether she is
appointed or not, bears a son by a man of equal status*—by that son his maternal
grandfather becomes a man who has a son's son, and the latter shall offer him the rice-
ball and inherit his property.
137Through a son a man gains the worlds; through a son's son he obtains eternal
life; but through the son's grandson he attains the crest of the sun. 138The Self-existent
One himself has called him "son" (putra) because he rescues (Ira) his father from the
hell named Put. 139The world does not acknowledge any difference between a son's son
and a daughter's son, for a daughter's son also rescues him in the hereafter, just like a
son's son (9.133).
140The son of a "female-son" shall offer the first rice-ball to his mother, the
second to her father, and the third to her father's father.*
Adopted Son 
141When a man's adopted son is endowed with all the fine qualities,
he may indeed inherit his estate, even if that son has been obtained from a different
lineage. 142Under no circumstances shall an adopted son inherit his biological father's
lineage or estate. The offering of the rice-ball is consequent upon inheriting the lineage
and estate; so when a man gives a son for adoption, the son's obligation to perform his
funerary rites comes to an end.*
Leviratic Sons 
143The son of an unappointed woman and a son fathered by a
brother-in-law on a woman who already has a son—neither of these is entitled to a
share; the former is born to a prostitute and the latter is born of lust. 144If the rules have
not been followed, a male bom even to an appointed woman is not entitled to inherit
the paternal estate; for he was begotten by an outcaste (9.58, 63).
145A son born to an appointed woman shall inherit it, just as a natural son; that
seed and its issue belong by Law to the owner of the field (9.48-51). 146The man who
keeps* his deceased brother's property and wife should produce an offspring for his
brother and hand over the brother's property to him.
147When an unappointed woman obtains a son either through her brother-in-law
or someone else, that son, born through lust, is not entitled to the estate; he is said to
have been wrongly begotten.
148These should be recognized as the rules for partition when the
wives belong to the same caste. Listen now to the rules regarding
sons of the same man born to several wives belonging to different
castes.


--- PAGE 209 ---
198 
Chapter g
Sons by Wives of Different Castes 
149If a Brahmin has four wives in the
proper order, tradition lays down the following rule regarding partition among sons
born to those wives. 150The plowman, the stud bull, the vehicle, the ornament,* and
the house is to be given to the Brahmin as his preemptive share, as well as one share
from the best property.* 151The Brahmin shall take three shares of the inheritance; the
son by a Ksatriya wife, two shares; the son by a Vaisya wife, one and a half shares; and
the son by a SQdra wife, one share.
152Alternatively, a man who knows the Law may divide his entire estate into ten
shares and carry out a partition consistent with the Law according to the following rule:
153the Brahmin shall take four shares; the son by a Ksatriya wife, three; the son by a
Vaisya wife, two; and the son by a SQdra wife, one. 154Whether he has a proper son or
no son at all,* the Law requires that he give no more than one-tenth to a son by a SQdra
wife.
155The son of a Brahmin, Ksatriya, or Vaisya by a SQdra wife does not share in
the inheritance; his only property is whatever his father may give him.
156Alternatively, when all the sons of a twice-born man are born from wives of
equal class, after giving a preemptive share to the eldest, the rest should take equal
shares.*
157A SQdra, however, has only a wife of his own class; no other wife is prescribed
for him (3.13). All the sons born to such a wife, even if there are a hundred of them,
shall receive equal shares.
Twelve Types of Sons 
158Of the twelve types of sons that Manu, the son of the
Self-existent, has decreed for men, six are both relatives and heirs and six are relatives
but not heirs.* 159A natural son, a son begotten on the wife, a son given in adoption, a
constituted son, a son born in secret, and a son adopted after being abandoned—these
are the six who are both relatives and heirs. 160A son born to an unmarried woman, a
son received with marriage, a purchased son, a son born to a remarried woman, a son
given in adoption by himself, and a son by a SQdra wife—these are the six who are
relatives but not heirs.
161A man gains the same distinction* by crossing the darkness with the aid of
bad sons as he does by crossing the water with the aid of bad boats.
162If a natural son and a son begotten on the wife are heirs to the estate of the same
man, the one whose paternal estate it is shall take it, and not the other.* 163The natural
son is the sole master of his father's wealth; nevertheless, so as not to be unkind, he
should provide maintenance for the others. 164When the natural son divides the paternal
inheritance, he should give a one-sixth or one-fifth share of the paternal property to the
son begotten on the wife. 165The natural son and the son begotten on the wife receive
shares of the paternal estate; but the other ten according to their order share in the
lineage and the estate.*
166When a man fathers a son by himself through his own duly wedded wife, he
should be recognized as a natural son—the principal son.* 167When a wife of someone
who is dead, impotent, or sick bears a son after she has been appointed in accordance
with the Law specific to her, tradition calls him a son begotten on the wife. 168When
during a time of adversity a mother or a father joyfully gives their son in adoption with


--- PAGE 210 ---
Chapter 9 
199
the ceremonial pouring of water, a son belonging to the same class as the recipient, he
should be known as a son given in adoption. 169When someone installs a boy of equal
class as his son, a boy who knows right from wrong and is endowed with filial
qualities, he should be recognized as a constituted son. 170When in someone's house is
born a son whose father is unknown, he is a son born in secret within the house; and he
belongs to the man whose wife gave birth to him. 171When a boy has been abandoned
by his mother and father or by one of them and he is taken by someone as his son, he is
called a son adopted after being abandoned. 172When an unmarried girl gives birth to a
son secretly in her father's house, one should call him by the name son born to an
unmarried woman; the offspring of an unmarried girl belongs to the man who marries
her. 173When a pregnant woman is married off, whether her condition is disclosed or
not, the child in the womb belongs to the man who marries her and is called son
received with marriage. 174When someone purchases a boy directly from his mother and
father so he may have a child, whether that child is of the same class or not, he is his
purchased son. 175When a woman who has been abandoned by her husband or is a
widow marries again* and begets a son of her own will, he is called son of a remarried
woman. 176Such a woman or one who has gone away and returned, so long as she has
not been deflowered, is fit to perform the marriage ceremony once again with her
husband according to the rite of remarriage.* 177When someone who has no mother or
father or who has been abandoned without cause offers himself up to a man, tradition
calls him a son given in adoption by himself. 178When a Brahmin fathers a son by a
Südr a woman out of lust, tradition calls him a Pärasava (10.8), because while still able
(parayan) he is a corpse (savd).
179The son a Sudra begets by a slave woman or by a slave woman married to a
slave* may take a share with his father's permission—that is the settled Law.
180The eleven sons enumerated above beginning with the son begotten on the
wife—wise men call these the surrogates of a son necessitated by the possible
interruption of rites (9.166 n.). 181Those who are designated here as sons because of
congruity but who are born from another man's seed belong only to the one from
whose seed they were born and to no one else (9.35-40).
182If among several brothers born to the same father one gets a son, Manu has
declared that through that son they all become men who have sons. 183If among all the
wives* of the same husband one gets a son, Manu has declared that through that son
they all become women who have sons.*
184In the absence of each superior son each son inferior to him is entitled to the
estate; but if several of them are of equal rank, all of them share the estate. 185The sons
inherit the father's estate—not the brothers, not the fathers. The estate of a man who
has no son, however, is inherited by his father or by his brothers.
Alternative Heirs ^To three water is offered; to three rice-balls are given; and
the fourth offers them—there is no room for a fifth.* 187The closest relative of a person
belonging to the same ancestry shall take his property; beyond such a relative, a man
belonging to the same family, the teacher, or a pupil.* 188When none of these is
available, pure and disciplined Brahmins learned in the triple Veda share the estate; in
this way, the Law is not hurt. 189The king must never take the property of a Brahmin—


--- PAGE 211 ---
200 
Chapter 9
that is the rule; but, in the absence of any heir, the king may take the property of
persons belonging to the other classes.
190When a man has died childless, a son should be procured for him through a
man of the same lineage, and any estate the deceased may have should be handed over
to that son. 191When two individuals fathered by two men litigate over the property
held by the wife, each shall take the estate of his own biological father to the exclusion
of the other.*
Women's Property 
192When their mother dies, all the uterine brothers and sisters
should divide the maternal estate equally among themselves. 193If those sisters have
any daughters, one should joyfully give them also, as is proper, something from their
maternal grandmother's property.
194Tradition presents six types of women's property: what a woman receives at
the nuptial fire, what she receives when she is taken away, what she is given as a token
of love, and what she receives from her brothers, mother, and father. 195What she
receives subsequent to the marriage and what her husband gives her out of affection—
upon her death that property goes to her children even if her husband is alive.
196In a "Brahma," "Divine," "Seer's," "Gândharva, " or "Prâjâpatya
" marriage, the
property of a woman is awarded to her husband alone, if she dies childless. 197In a
"Demonic" or a subsequent form of marriage, on the other hand, any property given to
a woman is awarded to her mother and father, if she dies childless (see 3.20-34).
198Any property given somehow to a woman by her father goes to the unmarried
Brahmin daughter, or to that daughter's offspring.*
199Women must never alienate* common property of the family or even her own
private property without the consent of her husband.
200Any ornaments worn by a woman while her husband was alive shall not be
partitioned by his heirs; if they do, they fall from their caste.
Disqualification 
from Inheritance 
201The following receive no shares: the
impotent (3.150 n.), outcastes, those born blind or deaf, the insane, the mentally
retarded, mutes, and anyone lacking manly strength.* 202It is right, however, that a
wise man should provide all of them with food and clothing according to his ability
until the end; if he does not, he will become an outcaste. 203If, on the other hand, any of
these, the impotent and so forth, somehow want to have wives and do have issue, their
offspring is entitled to a share.
Partition of Non-ancestral Property 
204If the eldest acquires any assets after
his father's death, a share of it goes to his younger brothers, provided they are pursuing
their studies. 205If all of them are uneducated, however, and they acquire assets by their
own labor, then the division is equal, given that it is not part of the paternal estate—
that is the fixed rule. 206Assets that someone acquires through learning, on the other
hand, belong to him alone, as do presents from friends, wedding gifts, and anything
given with the honey-mixture (3.119 n.).
207If one of the brothers, quite able to live by his own activity, does not want any
property, he may be stripped of his share after giving something for his maintenance.


--- PAGE 212 ---
Chapter 9 
201
208If one of them earns anything by his own labor without utilizing the paternal
property, he need not share it against his will, as it was acquired by his own effort.
209If the father recovers any missing ancestral property, he need not share it with
his sons against his will, as it was acquired by himself.
Miscellaneous 
Rules of Partition 
210If parties to a partition again live
together and subsequently undertake a new partition, then the division is equal;
primogeniture is inoperative there.
211If the oldest or the youngest among them is debarred from the distribution of
shares or if either of them dies, his share is not lost.* 212Having assembled together, the
uterine brothers, as well as reunited brothers and uterine sisters, should jointly divide
it equally among themselves.*
213When the eldest defrauds his younger brothers through greed, he shall no
longer be the eldest. Stripped of his share, he should be punished by the king. 214A11
brothers who pursue improper activities are unfit to inherit the property. The eldest,
morevoer, must not establish his own separate property without first giving to his
younger brothers.
215If prior to partition the brothers undertake a joint enterprise, on no account
shall the father give unequal shares to his sons.
216A son born after partition shall inherit the entire paternal property; or, if he has
brothers who have reunited, he shall share it with them.*
217The mother shall receive the inheritance of a childless son; and if the mother is
also dead, the father's mother shall inherit that property.
218If something is uncovered after all debts and assets have been divided
according to rule, it shall be divided equally. 219A garment, a vehicle, an ornament,
prepared food, water, women, and security measures are declared to be exempt from
partition.*
220I have described above the division of property and the ritual
procedure for sons* beginning in due order with the son begotten on
the wife. Listen now to the Law pertaining to gambling.
Grounds for Litigation—XVIII Gambling and Betting
221The king shall suppress gambling and betting within his realm; they are the two
vices of rulers that devastate a kingdom.* 222Gambling and betting amount to open
theft; the king should make constant effort at eradicating them both.
223When it is done with inanimate things, people call it "gambling"; when it is
done with living beings, on the other hand, it is known as "betting."
224The king should have anyone who engages in or facilitates gambling or
betting executed, as also SQdras wearing marks of twice-born men. 225He should
quickly banish from his capital gamblers, performers, entertainers,* men belonging to
heretical sects, individuals engaging in illicit activities, and liquor vendors. 226When
these clandestine thieves remain in a king's realm, they constantly harass his decent
subjects with their illicit activities.


--- PAGE 213 ---
202 
Chapter 9
227In a former age* gambling was seen to create great enmity; therefore, an
intelligent man should never engage in gambling even for fun. 228When a man engages
in it openly or in secret, the kind of punishment to be imposed on him is left to the
discretion of the king.
Excursus: Types of Punishment
229When a Ksatriya, a Vaisya, or a Sudra is unable to pay a fine, he should acquit
himself of the debt through work; a Brahmin, on the other hand, should pay it off in
installments.
230The king should punish women, children, the insane, the elderly, the poor,
those without guardians, and the sick with a lash, a cane, a rope, and the like.
231 when those appointed to adjudicate lawsuits, inflamed by the heat of
money,* undermine cases brought by litigants, the king should confiscate all their
property. 232He should put to death those who forge royal edicts, corrupt the
constituents of the realm,* or kill women, children, or Brahmins, as also those who
give aid to his enemies.
233 Whenever something has been adjudicated and a judgment issued,* he should
recognize it as executed according to the Law and not bring it back again.* 234If an
official or a judge settles a case wrongly, the king himself should settle it and fine him
1,000 (8.120 n.).
Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
235A murderer of a Brahmin, a man
who drinks liquor, a thief, and a man who has sex with an elder's wife—all these men
should be considered individually* as guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste
(11.55 n.).
236If any of these four fails to perform the penance, the king should determine for
them a punishment, both corporal and pecuniary, that accords with the Law. 237For sex
with an elder's wife, the man should be branded with the mark of a vagina; for drinking
liquor, with the sign of a tavern (11.93 n.); for stealing, with the figure of a dog's foot;
and for killing a Brahmin, with the figure of a headless man. 238These wretched men—
with whom one is not permitted to eat, to participate at a sacrifice, to recite the Veda, or
to contract marriages—shall roam the earth, excluded from all activities relating to the
Law. 239Branded with marks, they shall be forsaken by their paternal and maternal
relations; they should be shown no compassion and paid no reverence—that is Manu's
decree.
240If they do perform the prescribed penance, on the other hand, the king should
not brand the higher classes* on the forehead, but make them pay the highest fine
(8.138). 241For these offenses, the middle fine should be imposed on a Brahmin, or he
should be exiled from the realm along with his property and belongings. 242When
others commit these sins, however, they deserve to have all their property confiscated,
if they did them thoughtlessly, or to be executed,* if they did them willfully.+
243 A good king must never take the property of someone guilty of a grievous sin
causing loss of caste; if he takes it out of greed, he becomes tainted with the same sin.
244He should offer that fine to Varuna by casting it into water, or present it to a
Brahmin endowed with learning and virtue. 245Varuna is the lord of punishment, for


--- PAGE 214 ---
Chapter 9 
203
he holds the rod of punishment over kings; and a Brahmin who has mastered the Veda
is the lord of the entire world. 246When a king refrains from taking the fines of evil-
doers, in that land are born in due course men with long lives; 247the fanners' crops
ripen, each as it was sown; children do not die; and no deformed child is born.
248If a man of a lower class deliberately torments Brahmins, the king should kill him
using graphic modes of execution (9.279 n.) that strike terror into men. 249A king
incurs as great a sin by releasing someone who ought to be executed as by executing
someone who ought not to be executed; but he gains merit by its proper exercise.
Conclusion of Grounds for Litigation
250I have described above in great detail how lawsuits brought by
litigants and falling within the eighteen avenues of litigation are to
be decided (see 8.3).
25'Carrying out properly in this manner his duties flowing from the Law, the king
should both seek to acquire territories not yet acquired and protect well those that have
been acquired.*
Eradication of Thorns
252After properly settling the country and building a fort according to textual norms,
he should direct his maximum effort constantly at the eradication of thorns.* 253By
protecting those who follow the Äry a way of life and by clearing the thorns, kings
devoted to the protection of their subjects reach the highest heaven. 254When a king
collects taxes without suppressing thieves, on the other hand, it will cause an upheaval
in his realm and he will be cut off from heaven. 255When his realm, sheltered by the
power of his arm, is made secure, it will always thrive, like a regularly watered tree.
256The king, using spies as his eyes, should identify the two kinds of thieves
who steal the property of others: those who operate overtly and those who operate
covertly. 25?Of these, the overt cheats are those who live by trading in various
merchandise, and the covert cheats are people such as thieves and bandits of the wild.*
258Bribe-takers, frauds, cheats, gamblers, those who live by adjuring good luck,
fortunetellers,* 259high officials and physicians who act crookedly, those engaged in
exhibiting their artistic skills, skilled prostitutes—260people such as these should be
recognized as open thorns on his people's side, and others, the non-Ärya s wearing Äry a
marks,* as operating in secret. 261After identifying these through honest undercover
agents practicing those same occupations and instigating them through mobile agents
posted in various spy establishments, he should lure them into his power. 262After
publicizing accurately the crimes they have committed in their respective activities, the
king should duly punish them, each in proportion to his capacity and his crime. 263For
without punishment, it is impossible to suppress the crimes of evil-minded thieves
who prowl the land in secret.
264Assembly halls, water-booths, sweetmeat-shops, brothels, taverns, restau-
rants, crossroads, memorial trees, fairs, theaters, ^dilapidated parks, wild tracts,


--- PAGE 215 ---
204 
Chapter 9
artisans' workshops, abandoned houses, groves, and parks—266the king should have
these types of places patrolled by mobile and stationary squads and by mobile agents*
in order to interdict thieves.
267By means of clever former thieves who had been their associates and
companions and who are adept at their various activities, he should identify and
instigate them. 268Under the pretext of attending a banquet, seeing Brahmins, or
watching feats of valor, they should assemble these people in one place. 269Those who
do not gather there and those who have become suspicious of the source,* the king
should forcibly attack and kill, along with their friends and paternal and maternal
relatives (2.132 n.).
270A righteous king must never execute a thief unless he is caught with the
stolen goods; if he is caught with the stolen goods and the tools of his trade, the king
should execute him without hesitation. 271He should also execute every individual
within any village who gives food, implements, or shelter* to thieves.
272When individuals appointed to guard the provinces* and rulers of border
districts who have been summoned remain uninvolved during raids, he should
promptly punish them like thieves. 273\Vhen a man who gains his livelihood by the
Law deviates from the conventions of the Law, the king should make him also suffer a
punishment, for he has deviated from the Law specific to him.* 274When a village is
being raided, a dike is being breached, or a highway robbery is taking place, whoever
fails to hasten there with help according to his ability should be banished along with
his belongings.
275Those who rob the king's treasury, those who act contrary to his interests, and
those who conspire with his enemies—he should inflict diverse kinds of capital
punishment on them.
276When robbers cut through walls and commit theft at night, the king should
cut off their hands and impale them on sharp stakes. 277After the first offense, he
should have two fingers* of a pickpocket cut off; after the second, the hands and the
feet; and after the third, he ought to be executed. 278Those who provide fire, food,
weapons, or shelter (9.271 n.), and those who receive stolen goods—the king should
punish* these like thieves.
279Someone who breaks a reservoir should be killed by drowning or clean
execution;* or else, he should repair it and be made to pay the highest fine (8.138).
280He should kill without hesitation those who break into the treasury, the armory, or a
temple, and those who steal elephants, horses, or chariots.*
281Someone who steals water from a reservoir constructed long ago or cuts off its
water intake should be made to pay the lowest fine (8.138). 282Anyone who drops filth
on a royal highway, except in an emergency, should pay a fine of 2 Kärsapana s and
promptly clean up that filth;* 28%ut if it was an individual with an emergency, an old
man, a pregnant woman, or a child, that person merits a reprimand and should be made
to clean it up—that is the settled rule.
284/vny physician guilty of malpractice is subject to a fine, the lowest in the case
of non-humans and the middle in the case of humans (8.138).285Anyone who destroys
a bridge, a flag, a pole, or a statue should repair the entire damage and pay a fine of 500
(8.120 n.).


--- PAGE 216 ---
Chapter g 
205
28|5For adulterating unadulterated substances, and for breaking or improperly
boring gems, the punishment is the lowest fine.* 287If a man deals with equivalent
commodities as if they were unequal, even if he does so in terms of value, he shall
receive the lowest or the middle fine.*
288He should locate all prisons along the royal highway where people will see
the criminals, grieving and mutilated.
289He should promptly execute (8.123 n-) anyone who breaches the rampart, fills
the moat, or breaks the gates.
290For all types of black magic, a fine of 200 should be imposed, as also for
root-witchcraft (11.64 n.) when done by an unrelated person, and for various types of
sorcery.291 Anyone who sells infertile seed corn or jacks up the price of seed corn,* or
who destroys boundary marks, shall be executed with mutilation.*
292A goldsmith who operates dishonestly, however, is the most wicked of all
thorns, and the king should have him cut to pieces with razor knives.
293For stealing agricultural implements, weapons, and medicine, the king
should impose a punishment taking into account the time and the purpose.*
Excursus: Constituents of a Kingdom 
294Lord, official, capital, realm,
treasury, army, and ally—these seven basic constituents are said to form a complete
kingdom.*
295 Among these seven basic constituents of a kingdom in the order enumerated,
a grave evil affecting each preceding one must be considered the more serious. 296In
this world, a kingdom is propped up by the seven limbs like a tripod* and no single
one of them is superfluous, because of their mutual dependence on the special quality
of each. 297For each limb is specially suited to carry out specific tasks; the one that
accomplishes a particular task is said to be the most important with respect to it.
Excursus: Activities of the King 
298-9ßy means of spies, by a display of
strength, and by engaging in enterprises, he should identify his own and his enemy's
relative strength and ascertain the relative gravity of all the adversities and evils
affecting his enemy and himself; and only then should he embark on any operation.
300Indeed, he must embark on his operations repeatedly, though repeatedly exhausted;
for Fortune devotes herself only to a man who embarks on his operations.
301Krta-age, Tretâ-age , Dvâpara-age , and Kali-age—the king's activities
constitute all these; for the king is said to be the age. 302When he is asleep, he is Kali;
when he is awake, he is Dvâpara ; when he is ready to undertake operations, he is Treta;
and when he is on the march, he is Krta.
303The king should follow the energetic activity of Indra, Sun, Wind, Yama,
Varuna, Moon, Fire, and Earth.* 304As Indra showers rain during the four months* of
the rainy season, so the king, following the Indra-vow, should shower delights upon
his realm. 305As Sun extracts water through its rays during the eight months,* so the
king should constantly extract taxes from his realm; for this is the Sun-vow. 306As
Wind moves about infiltrating all creatures, so the king should infiltrate with his
mobile spies; for that is the Wind-vow. 307As Yama, when the time has come, holds
friend and foe alike in his grip, so the king should hold his subjects in his grip; for that


--- PAGE 217 ---
206 
Chapter 9
is the Yama-vow. 308As we see people bound with fetters by Varuna, so the king
should capture criminals; for that is the Varuna-vow. 309When his subjects are as
delighted in him as are people when they see the full moon, that king is observing the
Moon-vow. 3io\Yhen the king is always inflamed and ablaze against evil-doers and
crushes evil rulers of border districts, tradition calls it the Fire-vow. 311The Earth
supports all creatures equally; when a king supports all creatures in the same manner,
he is observing the Earth-vow.
312In this and other ways should the king, always alert and tireless,
suppress thieves within his own realm and even in others.*
Excursus on Brahmins 
313Even in the face of the deepest adversity, he must
never anger Brahmins; for when they are angered, they will destroy him instantly along
with his army and conveyances (7.75 n.). 314They made the fire a consumer of
everything, the ocean undrinkable, and the moon to wane and wax*—who would not
be destroyed when he angers these? 315When angered, they could create other worlds
and other guardians of the world, they could convert gods into non-gods—who would
prosper when he injures these? 316The worlds and the gods always exist by taking
refuge in them, and their wealth is the Veda—who would injure them if he wishes to
live?
317Whether he is learned or not, a Brahmin is a great deity, just as Fire is a great
deity, whether it is consecrated or not. 3)8Even in cemeteries, the Fire, full of energy,
is never tainted; and when it is offered with oblations at sacrifices, it flares up again.
319Similarly, even if they engage in every undesirable act, Brahmins should be
honored in every way; for they are the highest deity.
320When a Ksatriya becomes haughty in any way in his behavior towards
Brahmins, the Brahmin himself must become their controller, for the Ksatriya sprang
from the Brahmin. 32'Fire sprang from water, Ksatriya from Brahmin,* and metal
from stone; their all-pervasive energy is quenched when confronting their own source.
322The Ksatriya does not flourish without the Brahmin, and the Brahmin does not
prosper without the Ksatriya; but when Brahmin and Ksatriya are united, they prosper
here and in the hereafter.
323After giving to Brahmins the money collected from all the fines and handing
over the kingdom to his son, the king should meet his death in battle.
Conclusion of the Rules for Kings
324Conducting himself in this manner and always devoted to the Laws pertaining to
kings, the king should direct all his servants to work for the good of his people.
325I have described above in its entirety the eternal rules of action for
the king. What follows, one should understand, are the rules of
action for the Vaisya and the Sudra in their proper order.


--- PAGE 218 ---
Chapter 9 
207
R U L E S OF ACTION FOR V A I S Y A S AND S Ü D R A
S
Rules for Vaisyas
326After undergoing initiatory consecration and getting married, a Vaisya should
devote himself constantly to trade and to looking after farm animals; 327for, after
creating them, Prajâpat i handed over to the Vaisya the farm animals, and to the
Brahmin and the king, all creatures.
328"I don't want to look after farm animals"—a Vaisya should never entertain
such a wish, and when there is a willing Vaisya, under no circumstances shall anyone
else look after them. 329He shall acquaint himself with the relative values of gems,
pearls, coral, metals, threads, perfumes, and condiments. 
330He should be
knowledgeable about sowing seeds, the good and bad qualities of farmland, all the
various ways of weighing and measuring, 331the desirable and undesirable properties
of goods, the good and bad aspects of regions, the probable profit and loss of
merchandise, and how best to raise farm animals. 332He should be well-informed about
the wages to be paid to servants, the different languages of people, the manner of
storing goods, and the procedures of buying and selling.
333He should make the utmost effort at making his assets grow in accordance
with the Law and diligently distribute food to all creatures.
Rules for Südra s
334For the Südra , on the other hand, the highest Law leading to bliss is simply to
render obedient service to distinguished Brahmin householders who are learned in the
Veda. 335When he keeps himself pure, obediently serves the highest class, is soft-
spoken and humble, and always takes refuge in Brahmins, he obtains a higher birth.
C O N C L U S I O N OF THE LAW O U T S I D E T I M E S OF
A D V E R S I T Y
336I have described above the splendid rules of action for the social
classes outside times of adversity. Listen now to the rules for them
in the proper order for times of adversity.


--- PAGE 219 ---
CHAPTER TEN
RULES FOR T I M E S OF A D V E R S I T Y
Mixed Classes
The Four Classes 
'Devoted to their respective activities, the three twice-born
classes should study the Veda; but it is the Brahmin who should teach them, not the
other two—that is the firm principle. 2The Brahmin must know the means of
livelihood of all according to rule, and he should both teach them to the others and
follow them himself.
3Because of his distinctive qualities, the eminence of his origin, his observance
of restrictive practices, and the distinctive nature of his consecration, the Brahmin is
the lord of all the classes.
4Three classes—Brahmin, Ksatriya, and Vaisya—are twice-born; the fourth,
Südra , has a single birth. There is no fifth.
5In all the classes, children born in the direct order of class* to wives who are of
equal class and married as virgins should be recognized as belonging to the same class
by birth. 6Sons fathered by twice-born men on wives of the class immediately below
theirs are considered only "similar," disdained as they are due to their mother's defect.
7That is the eternal rule with respect to those born from women of the class
immediately below. The following should be recognized as the righteous rule with
respect to those born from women two or three classes below.
Mixed Classes: First Discourse 
8From a Brahmin man by a Vaisya girl* is
born a son called Ambastha; and by a Südr a girl, a Misada, also called Pärasava . 9From
a Ksatriya man by a Südr a girl is born a son called Ugra, who is cruel in his behavior
and in his dealings, a being with the physical characteristics of both a Ksatriya and a
Südra .
10A Brahmin's children by the three lower classes, a Ksatriya's by the two lower
classes, and a Vaisya's by the one lower class—tradition calls these six "low-born"
(10.46 n.).
nFrom a Ksatriya man by a Brahmin girl is born a SQta by caste; sons of a
Vaisya by Ksatriya and Brahmin women are a Mägadh a and a Vaideha, respectively;
12and from a Südr a by Vaisya, Ksatriya, and Brahmin women are born respectively an
Äyogava , a Ksattr, and a Cándala, the worst of all men—so originate the intermixture
of classes.
13As when there is a difference of two classes in a birth, tradition calls them
Ambastha and Ugra if the difference is in the direct order, in like manner they are Ksatr
and Vaideha, if it is in the inverse order. 14The sons of twice-born men by women of the
208


--- PAGE 220 ---
Chapter 10 
209
class immediately below theirs that have been enumerated in their proper order—they
are given the name "Promixate," because of their mother's defect.*
Mixed Classes: Second Discourse 
15From a Brahmin man by an Ugra girl is
born a son called Ävrta ; by an Ambastha girl, an Âbhîra ; and by an Äyogav a girl, a
Dhigvana.
16From a Südr a man are born in the inverse order three "low-borns": Äyogava ,
Ksattr, and Cándala, the worst of all men. 17Three further "low-borns" (10.46 n.) are
born in the inverse order: from a Vaisya man, a Mâgadh a and a Vaideha; and from a
Ksatriya man, a Suta.*
18From a Misada man by a SQdra woman is born a Pulkasa by caste; a son born
from a SQdra man by a Misada woman, tradition tells us, is a Kukkuta. 19A child born
from a Ksattr man by an Ugra woman is said to be a Svapäka ; and from a Vaidehaka
man by an Ambastha woman, a Vena.
20When children fathered by twice-born men on women of equal class do not
keep the observances and have fallen from the Savitrl (2.38 n.), they should be called
by the name Vräty a (2.39). 21From a Vräty a of the Brahmin class are born the evil-
natured Bhrjjakantaka, the Ävantya , the Vâtadhâna
, the Puspadha, and the Saikha.
^From a Vräty a of the Ksatriya class are born the Jhalla, the Malla, the Licchivi, the
Nata, the Karana, the Khasa, and the Dravida. 23From a Vräty a of the Vaisya class are
born the Sudhanvan, the Äcärya
, the Kärusa , the Vijanman, the Maitra, and the
Satvata.*
Mixed Classes: 
Third Discourse 
24By adultery among the classes, by
marrying forbidden women, and by abandoning the activities proper to them, arise the
intermixture of classes.* ^1 will enumerate completely those who are of mixed origin,
born in the direct and in the inverse order and mutually connected.
26Suta, Vaidehaka, Cándala, the worst of men, Magadha, Ksatr, and Äyogava —
27these six beget children similar in class to themselves by women of their own class,
by women of their mother's caste, and by women of higher castes.* 28As from two of
the three classes is born a child that is one's own self—being born from a woman of his
own class because of the contiguity—so the same process applies to excluded men.*
29These same men beget on each other's wives large numbers of excluded children even
more vile than they and despicable. 30Just as a Südr a man begets an excluded child
from a Brahmin woman, so also an excluded man begets from women of the four
classes a child subject to even greater exclusion.
31Having sex in the inverse order, excluded men beget children subject to even
greater exclusion, the low-born beget low-born children, generating as many as fifteen
classes. 32On an Äyogav a woman—a Dasyu man begets a Sairandra, who, although not
a slave, gains his livelihood as a slave, is skilled at adorning and personal attendance,
and lives by trapping animals; 33a Vaideha man begets a Maitreyaka, who has a sweet
voice, eulogizes men constantly, and rings the bell at dawn; Mand a Nisâd a man begets
a Märgava , that is, a Dâsa , who lives by working on ships and whom people living in
Äryävart
a (2.22) call a Kaivarta. 35By Äyogav a women, who are non-Äryas , wear the
clothes of the dead, and eat despicable food, are born severally these three low-borns.*


--- PAGE 221 ---
210 
Chapter 10
36From a Misada man is born a Käravara , who works on leather; from a Vaidehaka, an
Andhra and a Meda, both of whom dwell outside the village. 37On a Vaideha woman—
a Cándala man begets a Pandusopaka, who deals in bamboo; and a Nisäd a man begets
an Ähindika . 38On a Pulkasa woman, a Cándala man begets a Sopâka , a wicked man
who gains his living as an executioner and is despised by good people.* 39A son born
to a Nisäd a woman by a Cándala man is an Antyâvasâyin
, who operates in cemeteries
and is despised even by excluded people.
40These castes arising from intermixture and described above according to their
fathers and mothers—whether they conceal their caste or are open about it—should be
recognized by their respective activities (10.57).*
41The six types of sons born to women belonging to one's own or the class
immediately below have characteristics of a twice-born; but tradition regards all the
"delinquent-born" (10.46 n.) as having the same characteristics as SQdras. 42By the
power of austerity and semen, in each succeeding generation* they attain here among
men a higher or a lower status by birth.
43By neglecting rites and by failing to visit Brahmins,* however, these men of
Ksatriya birth have gradually reached in the world the level of Sudras—44Pundrakas,
Codas, Dravidas, Kämbojas , Yavanas, Sakas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Cïnas , Kirâtas , and
Daradas.* 45A11 the castes in the world that are outside those born from the mouth,
arms, thighs, and feet—whether they speak foreign or Äry a languages—tradition calls
Dasyus.
Occupations, Residence, and Dress 
46The "low-born" among the twice-born,
as well as those that tradition calls "delinquent-born,"* should live by occupations
despised by the twice-born—47to SQtas, management of horses and chariots; to
Ambasthas, medicine; to Vaidehakas, taking care of women; to Mâgadhas , trade; 48to
Nisâdas , fishing; to Äyogavas , carpentry; to Medas, Andras, Cuñcus, and Madgus,
hunting wild animals; 49to Ksattrs, Ugras, and Pulkasas, trapping and killing animals
living in burrows; to Dhigvanas, working in leather; and to Venas, playing drums.
^Tríes e should live by memorial trees and in cemeteries, hills, and groves, well-
recognizable* and living by the occupations specific to them.
Cándalas and Svapacas 
51Cändäla
s and Svapacas, however, must live outside
the village and they should be made Apapâtras. * Their property consists of dogs and
donkeys, 52their garments are the clothes of the dead; they eat in broken vessels; their
ornaments are of iron; and they constantly roam about.
53A man who follows the Law should never seek any dealings with them. All
their transactions shall be among themselves, and they must marry their own kind.
MThey depend on others for their food, and it should be given in a broken vessel. They
must not go about in villages and towns at night; 55they may go around during the day
to perform some task at the command of the king, wearing distinguishing marks. They
should carry away the corpses of those without relatives—that is the settled rule.
56They should always execute those condemned to death in the manner prescribed by
authoritative texts and at the command of the king; and they may take the clothes,
beds, and ornaments of those condemned to death.


--- PAGE 222 ---
Chapter 10 
211
Further Discourse on Mixed Classes 
57An unknown man without the proper
complexion,* born from a squalid womb, a non-Äry a with some measure of Äry a
features—one should detect such a man by his activities (10.40). 58Un-Arya conduct,
harshness, cruelty, and the neglect of rites reveal in this world a man who is born from
a squalid womb. 59He will possess the character of either his father or his mother, or of
both; a man born from an evil womb is never able to conceal his nature. ^If he is the
result of a mixed union, even a man born in a prominent family will undoubtedly
partake of his parents' character to a greater or a lesser extent.
61Wherever these "delinquent-born" (10.46 n.) individuals, who corrupt the
social classes, are born, that realm quickly comes to ruin together with its inhabitants.
Advance to Higher Classes 
62For excluded individuals, giving up their life
without artifice* for the sake of a Brahmin or a cow, or in the defense of women or
children is the means for achieving success.
63Abstention from injuring, truthfulness, refraining from anger,* purification,
and mastering the organs+—this, Manu has declared, is the gist of the Law for the four
classes.
MIf an offspring of a Brahmin man from a Súdra woman were to bear children
from a superior partner, within seven generations the inferior attains the superior caste;
ffia Südr a thus attains the rank of a Brahmin, and so does a Brahmin the rank of a
SQdra*—one should understand that this rule holds good also for offspring born from
a Ksatriya or a Vaisya man.
66If it be asked: who is superior? A child born accidentally to a Brahmin man by a
non-Äry a woman or a child of a non-Äry a man by a Brahmin woman? 67This is the
resolution: a child born to an Äry a man by a non-Äry a woman becomes an Äry a by
reason of his attributes, while a child born to a non-Äry a man by an Äry a woman is a
non-Ärya . "^Neither of these should be permitted to receive vedic initiation—that is the
settled Law; the former because of the inferiority of his birth and the latter because he
was born in the inverse order of class. 69As a good seed sprouting in a good field grows
vigorously, so a child born to an Äry a man by an Äry a woman is worthy of receiving
all the consecratory rites.
70Some wise men extol the seed, others the field, and yet others both the seed and
the field. In this regard, the settled rule is as follows. 71A seed planted in a bad field
dies midstream; a field without seed also is just bare land. 72By the power of the seed,
children born from animals became seers, receiving honor and acclaim; therefore, they
extol the seed (9.32-55).
^The creator evaluated a non-Äry a who acts like an Äry a and an Äry a who acts
like a non-Äry a and declared: "They are neither equal nor unequal."
Occupations of the Four Classes
74Brahmins who are established in that whose source is the Veda* and are devoted to
the activities specific to them should duly live by the six occupations in their proper
order: 75teaching and studying, offering sacrifices and officiating at sacrifices, and
giving and accepting gifts are the six occupations of a highest-born person.


--- PAGE 223 ---
212 
Chapter 10
76Of these six activities, however, three provide him with a livelihood:
officiating at sacrifices, teaching, and accepting gifts from a completely pure person.
^From the Brahmin, three Laws are suspended with respect to the Ksatriya:
teaching and officiating at sacrifices, and the third, accepting gifts; 78the same are
suspended also with respect to the Vaisya—that is the settled rule; for Manu, the
Prajâpati , has not prescribed these Laws with respect to these two.
79Use of arms and weapons has been prescribed as the livelihood for the Ksatriya;
and trade, animal husbandry, and agriculture for the Vaisya. Their Law, however, is
giving gifts, studying, and offering sacrifices. ^ Among the activities specific to each,
the most admirable are: studying the Veda for the Brahmin, protecting the people for a
Ksatriya, and trade alone for the Vaisya.
Occupations in Times of Adversity
Brahmins 
81When a Brahmin is unable to earn a living by means of the activities
specific to him given above, he may live by means of the Ksatriya Law, for the latter is
the one right below him. 82If it be asked: what happens if he is unable to earn a living
by either of these two means? Taking up agriculture or cattle-herding, he should earn a
living by the occupation of a Vaisya.
83 A Brahmin, or even a Ksatriya, who earns a living by the Vaisya occupation,
should try his best to avoid agriculture, which involves injury to living beings and
dependence on others.* ^People think that agriculture is something wholesome. Yet it
is an occupation condemned by good people; the plow with an iron tip lacerates the
ground as well as creatures living in it.
^When someone, deprived of livelihood, is forced to abandon this strict
adherence to the Law, he may sell goods traded by Vaisyas to increase his wealth, with
the following exceptions. 86He should avoid condiments of every kind; cooked food;
sesame seeds; stones; salt; farm animals; human beings; 87every type of dyed cloth;
cloth made of hemp, flax, or wool even if they are undyed; fruits; roots; medicines;
88water; weapons; poison; meat; Soma; all types of perfume; milk; honey; curd; ghee;
oil; bees-wax;* molasses; Kusa grass; 89all wild animals; fanged animals; birds;
liquor; indigo; lac; and all one-hoofed animals.+
90An individual engaged in agriculture may freely sell pure* sesame seeds that he
has cultivated himself, provided they are to be used for purposes relating to the Law
and have not been stored for long. 91If someone uses sesame seeds for purposes other
than eating, anointing the body, and giving as a gift, he will become a worm and
plunge into the excrement of dogs together with his ancestors.
92By selling meat, lac, or salt, a Brahmin falls immediately from his caste; by
selling milk, he becomes a SDdra in three days; 93but by selling here the other
commodities deliberately, a Brahmin is reduced in seven days to the rank of a Vaisya.
94Condiments may be bartered for condiments—but never salt for condi-
ments*—cooked food for uncooked food, and sesame seeds for an equal amount of
grain.*
Ksatriyas 
95 A Ksatriya who has fallen on hard times may earn his living by all the
above means; but under no circumstances should he even think of living by a superior


--- PAGE 224 ---
Chapter 10 
213
occupation. 96If a man of inferior birth out of greed lives by activities specific to his
superiors, the king shall confiscate all his property and promptly send him into exile
(8.123 n.). 97Far better to carry out one's own Law imperfectly than that of someone
else's perfectly; for a man who lives according to someone else's Law falls
immediately from his caste.
Vaisyas 
98When a Vaisya is unable to sustain himself through the Law proper to
him, he may live by the occupation of even a Südra , refraining, however, from
forbidden acts; and he should discontinue it when he is able.
Südra s "When a Südr a is unable to enter into the service of twice-born men and is
faced with the loss of his sons and wife, he may earn a living by the activities of
artisans—100that is, the activities of artisans and various kinds of crafts the practice of
which best serves the twice-born.
Further Occupations for Brahmins 
101A Brahmin firmly committed to his
way of life and unwilling to follow the Vaisya occupations may pursue the following
Law when he is languishing through lack of a livelihood. 102A Brahmin who has fallen
on hard times may accept gifts from anybody; that something pure can be sullied is
impossible according to the Law. 103By teaching, officiating at the sacrifices of, and
accepting gifts from despicable individuals, Brahmins do not incur any sin, for they
are like fire and water.*
104When someone facing death eats food given by anyone at all, he remains
unsullied by sin, as the sky by mud. 105Ajïgarta , tormented by hunger, went up to his
son to kill him; and he was not tainted with sin, as he was seeking to allay his hunger.
106Vâmadeva , a man with a clear vision of what accords with and what is against the
Law, finding himself in dire straits and trying to save his life, wanted to eat dog's
meat, and yet remained unsullied. 107Bharadvaja, a man of great austerities, when he
and his sons were tormented by hunger in a desolate forest, accepted many cows from
the carpenter Brbu. 108Visvâmitra , a man with a clear vision of what accords with and
what is against the Law, when he was tormented by hunger, came to eat the rump of a
dog, taking it from the hand of a Cándala.*
109Accepting gifts, officiating at sacrifices, and teaching—among these,
accepting gifts is the worst and the most reprehensible for a Brahmin with respect to
the hereafter. 110Officiating at sacrifices and teaching always pertain to those who have
undergone consecratory rites, whereas accepting pertains even to a lowest-born Südra .
111A sin committed by teaching or officiating at a sacrifice is removed by soft recitation
and oblations, but a sin incurred by accepting a gift is removed only by discarding it
and performing ascetic toil. 112A Brahmin without a livelihood may even glean or pick
single grains (4.5 n.) from anywhere; gleaning is superior to accepting gifts, and
picking single grains is superior to even that.
113When Brahmin bath-graduates are in dire straits and want wares or money,
they should petition the king; it he refuses to give, they ought to abandon him.
114Unplowed land is less tainted than plowed land; and among a cow, a goat, a
sheep, gold, grain, and cooked food, each preceding one is less tainted than each
subsequent.


--- PAGE 225 ---
214 
Chapter 1O
Acquisition of Property 
115Seven means of acquiring wealth are in accordance
with the Law: inheritance, finding, purchase, conquest, investment, work, and
acceptance of gifts from good people. 116The ten means of livelihood are: learning,
craft, employment, service, cattle-herding, trade, agriculture, fortitude,* begging, and
lending on interest.
117A Brahmin or a Ksatriya must never lend money on interest; to pursue
activities dictated by the Law, however, he may lend to an evil man at a small
interest.*
118Even if a Ksatriya collects 25 per cent as his share (7.130 n.) during a time of
adversity, he is freed from that taint by protecting his subject to the best of his ability.
119The Law specific to him is conquest, and he must not turn back in the face of
danger;* when he protects Vaisyas with his weapons, he may collect a levy in
accordance with the Law: 120from Vaisyas, a one-sixth share of the grain crop and a duty
of one-twentieth on other commodities, with a minimum of i Kärsäpana
; and from
SQdras, artisans, and craftsmen, the contribution of their services (7.128-32).
Livelihood of Südra s 
121If a Südr a desires to earn a living, he may serve a
Ksatriya, or he may seek to earn a living by serving even a wealthy Vaisya. 122He
should serve Brahmins for the sake of heaven or for the sake of both, for when he has
the name "Brahmin" attached to him,* he has done all there is to do. 123The service of a
Brahmin alone is declared to be the pre-eminent activity of a Südra , for whatever other
work he may do brings him no reward.
124They* must allocate a suitable livelihood for him from their own family
resources, taking into account his ability and skill, and the number of his dependents.
125They should give him leftover food, old clothes, grain that has been cast aside, and
the old household items.
126A SOdra is not affected by any sin causing loss of caste, nor is he entitled to
any consecretory rite. He has no qualification with regard to the Law, but he is not
prohibited from following the Law.* 127Those who know the Law and yearn to follow
it, however, incur no sin and receive praise when they imitate the practices of good
men, without reciting any ritual formulas; 128for a SQdra obtains this world and the
next without enduring disdain to the extent that he imitates the practices of good men
without giving way to envy.
129Even a capable SQdra must not accumulate wealth; for when a Südr a becomes
wealthy, he harasses Brahmins.
Conclusion
130I have described above the Laws for the four classes during times
of adversity; when they are properly followed, people attain the
highest state.
131I have described above the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law
of the four classes. Next, I will explain the splendid rules pertaining
to penance.


--- PAGE 226 ---
CHAPTER ELEVEN
P E N A N C E
Excursus: Occasions for Giving and Begging
'A man seeking* to extend his line; a man preparing to perform a sacrifice; a traveler; a
man who has performed the sacrifice at which all his possessions are given away; a man
who begs for the sake of his teacher, father, or mother; a student of the Veda; and a sick
man—2these nine should be known as "bath-graduates," Brahmins who are beggars
pursuant to the Law. Gifts must be given to these destitutes in proportion to their
eminence in vedic learning.
3To these Brahmins food should be given along with the sacrificial fees; to
others, it is said, cooked food should be given outside the sacrificial arena.* 4The king
should bestow all sorts of precious gifts on Brahmins learned in the Veda according to
their merits, as well as fees for the purpose of sacrifices.
5When a married man marries another wife after begging for the expenses, his
reward is only sensual pleasure; the resultant offspring belongs to the man who
defrayed the expenses.+ [verse 6 of the vulgate is omitted in critical edition]
7 A man who has sufficient resources to maintain his dependents for three years,
or someone who has more than that, is entitled to drink Soma. 8If a twice-born man
who possesses less resources than that drinks Soma, he will not reap its reward, even
though he may never have drunk Soma before.* 9When a man of means gives to
outsiders while his own people live in misery, that is counterfeit Law, dripping with
honey but poisonous to taste. 10If a man does anything for his welfare after death to the
detriment of his dependents, it will make him unhappy both when he is alive and after
he is dead.
nWhile a righteous king is ruling, if a man offering a sacrifice finds that his
sacrifice is interrupted for want of a single item, he may, especially if he is a Brahmin,
12take that article from the house of a Vaisya who has a large herd of animals but has
failed to perform rites or to drink Soma, in order to complete the sacrifice.* 13He may
freely take two or three items from the house of a SQdra; for a Südr a has nothing to do
with sacrifices. 14He may also take it without a second thought even from the house of a
man who has a hundred cows but has not established his sacred fires or from that of a
man who has a thousand cows but has not offered a sacrifice. 15He may also take it from
a man who is always a taker* and never a giver, if he refuses to give it; thus his fame
will spread and his merits will increase.
16Likewise, when a man has not eaten during six mealtimes (6.19 n.), at the
seventh mealtime he may take from someone who performs no rites, keeping to the
rule of leaving no provisions for the next day,* 17and taking it from his threshing floor,
field, or house, or from any place where he can find something. If the man questions
him, however, he should confess it to him.
215


--- PAGE 227 ---
216 
Chapter 11
18A Ksatriya must never take anything belonging to a Brahmin; if he has no
sustenance, however, he may take what belongs to a Dasyu or a man who neglects his
rites. 19When a man takes money from evil persons and gives them to the virtuous, he
makes himself a raft and carries them both* to the other side. 20The wise call the wealth
of those devoted to sacrifice the property of gods; the possessions of those who do not
offer sacrifice, on the contrary, is called the property of demons.
21A righteous king should never punish such a man,* for it is because of the
Ksatriya's foolishness that the Brahmin is languishing with hunger. ^After finding
out who his dependents are and inquiring into his learning and virtue, the king should
provide him with provisions for a righteous livelihood from his own house. ^ After
providing him with a livelihood, he should protect him in every way, for by protecting
him the king receives from him one-sixth of his merits.*
24A man who knows the Law should never beg money from a SQdra to perform a
sacrifice; for when the patron of a sacrifice begs in this way, after death he is reborn a
Cándala. 25If a Brahmin begs money for a sacrifice and does not devote all of it for that
purpose, he will become a Bhäsa-vultur e or a crow for one hundred years.
26If a man seizes what belongs to a god or a Brahmin out of greed, in the next
world that evil man will live on the leftovers of vultures.
Excursus: Miscellaneous Topics
Times of Adversity 
27If he is unable to perform the prescribed animal and Soma
sacrifices, he should offer as an expiation the Vaisvänar a oblation at the turn of the
year.*
28When during a normal time a twice-born follows the Law according to the
mode for a time of adversity, he will not receive its reward after death—that is
indisputable.* 29A11 the gods, the Sädhyas , and the great Brahmin sages, afraid of
death during times of adversity, created a substitute for the rule. 30When someone,
though able to follow the principal mode, yet lives according to the secondary mode,
that fool will obtain no reward for it after death.
Power of Brahmins 
31A Brahmin who knows the Law shall not inform the king
about any matter; solely with his own power should he chastise men who do him
harm. 32Between the king's power and his own, his own power is far more potent. A
twice-born, therefore, should punish enemies solely with his own power, 33and make
use of vedic texts of Atharva-Añgírasa—tha
t is indisputable. Clearly, speech is the
Brahmin's weapon; with that a twice-born should strike down his enemies.+
34A Ksatriya overcomes his adversities by the power of his arms; a Vaisya and a
SQdra, by means of wealth; and a Brahmin, through soft recitation and sacrifices. 35A
Brahmin is called the creator, the chastiser, the teacher, and the benefactor; one should
never say anything unpleasant to him or use harsh words against him.
Sacrifices 
36A girl, a young woman, an uneducated man, or a fool should never act
as the officiant at the daily fire sacrifice, nor should a man who is in great anguish or
who has not undergone initiatory consecration; 37for, when these perform the offering,
both they and the person to whom the fire sacrifice belongs fall into hell. Therefore,


--- PAGE 228 ---
Chapter 11 
217
only a man who has mastered the Veda and is an expert in the vedic rituals should be an
officiant.
38When a Brahmin fails to give a horse dedicated to Prajâpat i as a sacrificial fee at
the rite for establishing the sacred fires in spite of having the resources to do so, he is
reduced to the level of one who has not established his sacred fires. 39A man who has
mastered his organs and has a spirit of generosity (3.202 n.) may perform other
meritorious acts; but under no circumstances should he offer sacrifices here with
inadequate sacrificial fees. 40Organs, honor, heaven, life span, fame, offspring and
livestock—a sacrifice with inadequate sacrificial fees destroys all these; a man with
inadequate resources, therefore, should not offer a sacrifice (11.7-8).+
41If a Brahmin who has established his sacred fires abandons his fires
deliberately, he should perform the lunar penance (11.217) for one month; for it is
equal to killing a hero.*
42Those who perform their daily fire sacrifice by obtaining money from a Südr a
are considered reprehensible among vedic savants, for they are the officiating priests of
SQdras. 43Stepping with his foot on the heads of these ignorant men who serve the fires
of SQdras, the giver crosses over difficulties.
Justification of Penance
^When a man fails to carry out prescribed acts, performs disapproved acts, and is
attached to the sensory objects, he is subject to a penance.
45The wise acknowledge a penance for a sin committed unintentionally; some,
on the basis of vedic evidence, admit it even for a deliberately committed sin. 46A sin
committed unintentionally is cleansed by vedic recitation, whereas a sin committed
deliberately through folly is cleansed with various types of penance. 47When a twice-
born, either by fate or by what he did in a previous life, finds himself in a condition
requiring the performance of a penance, he should not associate with good people
before performing that penance. *+
48Some evil men become disfigured because of the bad deeds committed in this
world, and some because of deeds done in a previous life. 49A man who steals gold gets
rotten nails; a man who drinks liquor, black teeth; the murderer of a Brahmin,
consumption; a man who has sex with his elder's wife, skin disease; ^a slanderer, a
smelly nose; an informant, a smelly mouth; a man who steals grain, the loss of a limb;
a man who adulterates grain, an excess limb; 51a man who steals food, dyspepsia; a
man who steals speech,* smelly breath; a man who steals clothes, leukoderma; and a
man who steals horses, lame legs.+ [verse 52 omitted in critical edition] S3In this way,
as a result of the remnants of their past deeds,* are born individuals despised by good
people: the mentally retarded, the mute, the blind, and the deaf, as well as those who
are deformed.
^Therefore, one should always do penances to purify oneself; for individuals
whose sins have not been expiated are born with detestable characteristics.
Categories of Sin
Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
55Killing a Brahmin, drinking liquor,


--- PAGE 229 ---
218 
Chapter 11
stealing,* and having sex with an elder's wife—they call these "grievous sins causing
loss of caste"; and so is establishing any links with such individuals (11.181-2).
56A lie concerning one's superiority,* a slander that reaches the king's ear, and
false accusations against an elder are equal to killing a Brahmin. 57Abandoning the
Veda, reviling the Veda, giving false testimony, killing a friend,* eating unfit food or
forbidden food*—these six are equal to drinking liquor. 58Stealing deposits, men,
horses, silver, land, diamonds, or gems, tradition tells us, is equal to stealing gold.
59Sexual intercourse with uterine sisters, unmarried girls, lowest-born women, and the
wives of a friend or son, they say, is equal to sex with an elder's wife.
Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 
60Killing a cow; officiating at the
sacrifice of an individual at whose sacrifice one is forbidden to officiate; adultery;
selling oneself; forsaking one's teacher, mother, father, vedic recitation, sacred fire, or
son; 61an elder brother permitting a younger brother to marry before him; a younger
brother marrying before his older brother (3.171); giving a girl in marriage to or
officiating at a sacrifice of either of these; 62deflowering a virgin; usury; breaking the
vow;* selling a reservoir, park, wife, or son; 63remaining as a Vrâty a (2.39);
abandoning a relative; giving instruction as a paid teacher; receiving instruction from a
paid teacher; selling proscribed commodities; ^supervising any kind of mine;
constructing large equipment; injuring plants; living off one's wife; sorcery; root-
witchcraft;* ^cutting down live trees for firewood; undertaking activities solely for
one's own sake; eating reprehensible food; 66remaining without establishing the sacred
fires; acting like a woman;* non-payment of debts; studying fallacious treatises; living
a corrupt life; engaging in vices;* 67stealing grain, base metals, and livestock; sex with
women who drink; killing a woman, a Sudra, a Vaisya, or a Ksatriya; and being an
infidel—these are secondary sins causing loss of caste.
Further Categories 
of Sin 
68Making a Brahmin cry, smelling liquor or
substances that should not be smelt, cheating, and sexual intercourse with a man—
tradition calls these sins that cause exclusion from caste.*
69Killing donkeys, horses, camels, deer, elephants, goats, sheep, fish, snakes, or
buffaloes—these should be known as sins that cause a man to be of a mixed caste
(10.8-45).
70Accepting wealth from despicable men, trade, serving a Sudra, and telling
lies—these should be recognized as sins that make a man unworthy of receiving gifts.
71Killing worms, insects, or birds; eating anything that has come into contact
with liquor; stealing fruits, firewood, or flowers; and lack of steadfastness—these
make a man impure.
72Listen now attentively to the specific observances by which all
these sins individually enumerated above may be removed.
Penances for Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste
Killing a Brahmin 
73A man who has killed a Brahmin should construct a hut and
live in the forest for twelve years, eating almsfood and making the head of a corpse his
banner, in order to purify himself.


--- PAGE 230 ---
Chapter 11 
219
74Or, if he so wishes, he may make himself a target for armed men who are
cognizant of his state. Or, he may throw himself headlong three times into a blazing
fire. 75Or, he may offer a horse sacrifice, a Svarjit sacrifice, a Gosava sacrifice, an Abhijt
sacrifice, a Visvajit sacrifice, a Trivrt sacrifice, or an Agnistut sacrifice. 76Or, to rid
himself of the Brahmin's murder, he may walk one hundred leagues* reciting one of
the Vedas, eating little, and keeping his organs under control. ^Or, he may present to a
Brahmin learned in the Vedas all his possessions, or wealth sufficient to maintain a
person, or else a house with furniture. 78Or, he may walk upstream along the
Sarasvatï, * subsisting on sacrificial food. Or, he may recite three times softly one
Collection of the Veda, while limiting his food. 79Or, after getting his hair shaved, he
may live in the outskirts of the village, in a cowshed, in a hermitage, or at the foot of a
tree, taking pleasure in doing what is beneficial to cows and Brahmins. 80Or, he may
duly give up his life for the sake of a Brahmin or a cow; one who protects a cow or
Brahmin is freed from the murder of a Brahmin. 81Or, he becomes freed from it by
fighting at least three times in defense of a Brahmin, by recovering all the property of a
Brahmin, or by losing his life for the sake of a Brahmin.
82Thus always remaining steadfast in his vow, collected in mind, and chaste, he
rids himself of the Brahmin's murder at the end of the twelfth year.*
^Or, he is freed from his sin by proclaiming it in a gathering of the gods of earth
and the gods of men and participating at the bath concluding a horse sacrifice.* ^The
Brahmin is said to be the root of the Law, and the Ksatriya its crest; therefore, by
broadcasting a sin at a gathering of theirs, he becomes purified. ^By his very origin, a
Brahmin is a deity even for the gods and the authoritative source of knowledge for the
world; the Veda clearly is the reason for this. 86When even three of them who know the
Veda declare an expiation for sins, it is sufficient for their purification;* for the speech
of the learned is a means of purification.
87By resorting to any one of the above procedures with a collected mind, a
Brahmin will rid himself of the sin of killing a Brahmin by means of his self-control.
^One must perform the same observance for killing a fetus whose sex cannot be
identified, a Ksatriya or a Vaisya who is engaged in a sacrifice, or a woman soon after
her menstrual period;* 89for bearing false testimony; for assailing an elder; for stealing
a deposit; and for killing a woman or a friend.
90This purification is enjoined for killing a Brahmin unintentionally; for killing
a Brahmin deliberately, there is no prescribed expiation.
Drinking Liquor 
9llf a twice-born man in his folly drinks liquor, he should drink
boiling-hot liquor; when his body is scalded by it, he will be released from that sin.
92Or, he may drink boiling-hot cow's urine, water, milk, ghee, or watery cow dung
until he dies. 93Or, he may eat only broken grain or oil-cake once a day during the night
for a full year, wearing a garment of hair, keeping his hair matted, and carrying a
banner,* in order to remove the guilt of drinking liquor.
94Liquor is clearly the filth* of various grains; sin is also called filth. Therefore,
Brahmins, Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas must not drink liquor. 95It should be understood
that there are three kinds of liquor: one made from molasses, another from ground
grain, and a third from honey. Just as drinking one of them is forbidden to Brahmins,
so are all.* %Intoxicants, meat, liquor, and spirits* are the food of demons and fiends;


--- PAGE 231 ---
220 
Chapter 11
they must not be consumed by a Brahmin, who eats the oblations to the gods. 97When
a Brahmin is intoxicated, he may tumble into filth, blabber vedic texts,* or do other
improper things. 98If the brahman* resident in a man's body is drenched with liquor
even once, his Brahmin nature departs from him and he sinks to the level of a Sudra.
"I have described above the various expiations for drinking liquor.
Next, I will explain the expiation for stealing gold.
Stealing Gold 
100A Brahmin who has stolen gold should go up to the king,
proclaim his deed, and say: "Lord, punish me!" 101Taking the pestle, the king himself
should strike him once. A thief is purified by being put to death or, if he is a Brahmin,
solely by ascetic toil.*
102If a twice-born wants to rid himself of the sin of stealing gold by means of
ascetic toil, however, he should carry out the observance prescribed for killing a
Brahmin, living in the wilderness and dressed in tree bark (6.6 n.).
103A twice-born should eliminate the sin resulting from stealing by
means of the above observances. 
The sin of having sexual
intercourse with an elder's wife, on the other hand, he should
remove by means of the following observances.
Sex with an Elder's Wife 
104A man who had sex with an elder's wife should
proclaim his crime and lie down on a heated iron bed, or embrace a red-hot metal
cylinder;* he is purified by death. 105Or, he may cut off his penis and testicles by
himself, hold them in his cupped hands, and walk straight towards the south-west
until he falls down dead. 106Or, he may perform the Prâjâpatya
 penance (11.212) for one
year with a collected mind, carrying a bed-post, dressed in tree bark (6.6 n.), wearing a
long beard, and living in a desolate forest. 107Or, he may perform the lunar penance
(11.217) for three months, keeping his organs under control and subsisting on
sacrificial food or barley gruel, so as to remove the sin of sexual intercourse with an
elder's wife.
108Men guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste should
eliminate their sin by means of the above observances, but men
guilty of a secondary sin causing loss of caste should do so by
means of the various observances given below.
Penances for Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste
Killing a C o w 
i° 9A man guilty of a secondary sin causing loss of caste by killing
a cow should drink barley gruel* for a month and live in a cow pen with his hair shaved
and wrapped in the skin of that cow. 110During two months,* he should eat a small
amount of food without artificial salt at every fourth mealtime (6.19 n.), bathing with
cow's urine, and keeping his organs under control. nlDuring the day, he should follow
those cows,* remain standing, and inhale their dust; at night, after attending to them
and paying them homage, he should remain seated on his haunches. 112When they


--- PAGE 232 ---
Chapter 11 
221
stand, he should stand behind them; when they walk, he should also walk behind
them; when they sit down, he should likewise sit down, self-control led and free from
rancor.* 113When a cow is sick, is threatened by dangers from thieves, tigers, and the
like, has fallen down, or has got stuck in mud, he should free her with all his strength.*
114When it is hot, raining, or cold, or when the wind is blowing strong, he must never
find shelter for himself without first providing it for the cow to the best of his ability.
115When a cow is eating from his own or another's house, field, or threshing floor, or
when the calf is drinking milk, he must not inform anybody of it.
116When a man who has killed a cow follows cows in this manner, in three
months he rids himself of the sin resulting from killing a cow. 117After he has duly
completed this observance, furthermore, he should give ten cows along with a bull or,
if that is impossible, all his possessions to those who know the Veda.
Other Secondary Sins " 8The very same observance should be performed by
twice-born men who commit any secondary sin causing loss of caste, with the
exception of a vedic student who has broken his vow of chastity, in order to purify
themselves; alternatively, they may perform the lunar penance (11.217).
Student Breaking the Vow of Chastity 
119A vedic student who has broken
his vow of chastity should offer at night a one-eyed donkey to Nirrti at a crossroads,
employing the ritual procedure of a cooked oblation.*
120After offering the oblations in the fire according to rule, he should finally offer
oblations of ghee to Wind, Indra, Teacher, and Fire, reciting the verse: "May the
Maruts...." 121Vedic savants who know the Law declare that when a twice-born votary
ejaculates his semen intentionally he breaks his vow. 122When a votary breaks his vow
of chastity, the vedic energy within him enters these four: Wind, Indra, Teacher, and
Fire.* 123When he has committed this sin, he should wear the skin of a donkey and beg
food from seven houses, proclaiming his deed. 124Subsisting on the almsfood obtained
from them once a day and bathing three times a day, he is purified in a year.
Penances for the Remaining Categories of Sins
125Someone who has committed any of the acts that cause exclusion from caste (11.68)
should perform a Säntapan a penance (11.213) if he did it deliberately, and a Präjäpaty
a
penance (11.212) if he did it inadvertently.
126For committing acts that cause a person to be of a mixed caste or that make a
person unworthy of receiving gifts (11.69-70), the purification is to perform the lunar
penance (11.217) for one month, and for those that make a person impure (11.71), the
purification is to drink hot barley gruel for three days.
Excursus: Penances for Injury to Living Beings
Homicide 
127One-fourth the penance for the murder of a Brahmin is prescribed by
tradition for the murder of a Ksatriya; one-eighth for the murder of a virtuous* Vaisya;
and one-sixteenth for the murder of a SQdra.
128If a Brahmin kills a Ksatriya unintentionally, however, he should give one
thousand cows and a bull to purify himself.* 129Or, he may perform during three years


--- PAGE 233 ---
222 
Chapter 11
the observance prescribed for killing a Brahmin, keeping himself controlled, wearing
matted hair, living far away from the village, and making his home at the foot of a tree.
130A Brahmin who kills a virtuous Vaisya should perform the same observance for one
year, or give one hundred cows along with a bull. 131One who kills a SOdra should
perform the same vow completely for six months, or give ten white cows along with a
bull to a Brahmin.
Killing Animals 
132For killing a cat, a mongoose, a blue jay, a frog, a dog, a
monitor lizard, an owl, or a crow, a man should perform the observance for killing a
SQdra. 133Alternatively, he may drink milk for three days, or walk a distance of one
league (11.76 n.), or bathe in a river, or recite softly the hymn addressed to the waters
(8.106 n.).
134For killing a snake, a Brahmin should give an iron spade; for killing a
castrate,* a load of straw and a Masa of lead; 135for killing a boar, a pot of ghee; for
killing a partridge, a Drona of sesame seeds; for killing a parrot, a 2-year-old calf; and
for killing a Krauñca crane, a 3-year-old calf. 136For killing a ruddy goose, a Baläk a
flamingo, a Baka heron, a peacock, a monkey, a Syena hawk, or a Bhäs a vulture, he
should give a cow to a Brahmin. 137For killing a horse, he should give a garment; for
killing an elephant, five black bulls; for killing a goat or a sheep, a draft ox; and for
killing a donkey, a i-year-old calf. 138For killing wild animals, he should give a milk
cow if they are carnivorous, and a heifer if they are non-carnivorous; for killing a camel,
one Krsnala. 139For killing a licentious woman belong to any of the four classes, he
should give a leather bag, a bow, a goat, and a sheep, respectively.+ 140If a twice-born is
unable to expiate the killing of snakes and the rest by giving gifts, to remove the sin he
may perform one arduous penance (11.212) for each.
141For killing one thousand creatures with bones or a cart-full of boneless
creatures, he should perform the observance for killing a SOdra. 142For killing creatures
with bones, he should give a little something to a Brahmin; when he kills boneless
creatures, he is purified by controlling his breath.
Injuring Vegetation 
143For cutting down fruit trees a person should recite softly
one hundred Re verses; so also for cutting down shrubs, vines, creepers, or flowering
plants.
144For killing any kind of creature growing in food stuffs, condiments, fruits, or
flowers, the purification is to consume ghee.
145For needlessly tearing out cultivated plants or ones that grow spontaneously
in the forest, he should follow a cow for one day, subsisting on milk (11.109-15).
146Through these observances a man should remove all sins he has
committed deliberately or inadvertently by causing injury. Listen
now to the observances relating to eating food that ought not to be
eaten.
Excursus: Penances for Eating Forbidden Food
147When someone drinks Vâïun ï liquor inadvertently, he is purified only by
undergoing vedic initiation. If he drinks it intentionally, no penance is prescribed; its


--- PAGE 234 ---
Chapter n 
223
penance ends in death—that is the settled rule.* 148If someone drinks water that has
stood in a vessel for keeping liquor or an intoxicant (11.96 n.), he should drink milk
boiled with Sankhapuspï plant for five days. 149If he touches, gives, or receives
according to rule an intoxicant, or drinks water left over by a SQdra, he should drink
water boiled with Kusa grass for three days. 150If a Brahmin who has drunk Soma,
however, smells the odor coming from a man who has drunk liquor, he is purified by
controlling his breath three times while submerged in water and then consuming ghee.
151Persons of all three twice-born classes ought to undergo re-initiation if they
inadvertently consume urine or excrement, or anything that has come into contact with
liquor.
152Shaving, girdle, staff, begging, and the vows are dispensed with in the rite of
re-initiation of twice-born men.
153If someone eats the food of individuals whose food is not to be eaten or the
leftovers of a woman or a Sûdra, or consumes forbidden meat,* he should drink barley
gruel (11.109 n.) for seven days. 154When a twice-born drinks anything turned sour or
pungent decoctions, even though they may be pure,* he remains ritually impure until
it has been excreted.*
155If a twice-born consumes the urine or excrement of a village pig, a donkey, a
camel, a jackal, a monkey, or a crow, he should perform the lunar penance (11.217).
156He should perform the same observance after eating dried meat, the Bhauma plant,
mushrooms (6.14 n.), the meat of an unknown animal (5.17), or meat from a slaughter
house.
157The hot-arduous penance (11.215) is the purification for eating the meat of
carnivorous animals, pigs, camels, cocks, humans, crows, or donkeys.
158If a twice-born student who has not performed the rite of return eats food given
at a monthly ancestral rite, he should fast for three days and remain in water for one
day. 159If someone observing the student vow eats honey or meat in any way, he should
perform the standard arduous penance (11.212) and complete the remainder of his vow.
160If someone eats anything that has become impure from the mouth of a cat,
crow, rat, dog, or mongoose, or that has been contaminated by hair or insects, he
should drink a decoction of the Brahmasuvarcalâ plant.
161A person who desires to remain pure should never eat unfit food (5.5 n.); he
should vomit any such thing that he has eaten inadvertently or purify himself quickly
with the various methods of purification.
162I have described above the various rules pertaining to the
observances for eating food that ought not to be eaten. Listen now to
the rules pertaining to the observances that remove the sin of theft.
Excursus: Penances for Theft
103 A Brahmin who deliberately steals grain, cooked food, or money from the house of
someone belonging to his own caste is purified by performing the arduous penance
(11.212) for one year. 164For stealing men, women, a field, a house, or water from a
well or a tank, tradition prescribes the lunar penance (11.217) as purification.
165If he steals articles of little value from the house of someone else, to purify
himself he should return the stolen goods and perform the Säntapan a penance (11.213).


--- PAGE 235 ---
224 
Chapter 11
i66por stealing food or delicacies, as also a vehicle, a bed, a seat, flowers, roots, or
fruits, the purification consists of consuming the five products of the cow.* 167For
stealing grass, wood, trees, dried food, molasses, clothes, skins, or meat, he should
abstain from food for three days. 168For stealing gems, pearls, coral, copper, silver,
iron, brass, or stone, he should subsist on broken grains for twelve days. 169For
stealing cotton, silk, wool, a single-hoofed or double-hoofed animal, a bird, perfume,
medicinal herbs, or a rope, he should subsist on milk for three days.
170Through these observances, a twice-born should remove a sin
incurred by stealing. The sin incurred by having sex with a woman
with whom sex is forbidden, on the other hand, he should remove
by means of the following observances.
Excursus: Penances for Sexual Offenses
171If a man has sexual intercourse with his uterine sisters, the wives of a friend or son,
unmarried girls, or lowest-born women, he should perform the observance prescribed
for sex with an elder's wife (11.55).
172If he has sex with his sister—the daughter of his father's or mother's sister—or
the daughter of his mother's uterine brother, he should perform the lunar penance
(11.217).* 173A wise man must not take these three to be his wife. Marriage with them
is forbidden because they are blood relatives, and anyone marrying them proceeds
downward (6.35 n.).
174If someone ejaculates his semen in non-human females, in a man, in a
menstruating woman, in any place other than the vagina, or on water,* he should
perform the Sântapan a penance (11.213). 175If a twice-born has sexual intercourse with
a man or a woman in an ox-cart, on water (11.174 n.), or during the day, he should
bathe with his clothes on.
176If a Brahmin has sex with Cándala or lowest-born women, or eats food or
accepts presents given by them, he falls from his caste if he does it inadvertently and
becomes equal to them if he does it intentionally.
177The husband should keep an adulterous wife confined in a single room and
make her perform the observance* prescribed for a man who has sex with another man's
wife. 178If she commits adultery again when solicited by a man of the same caste,
tradition prescribes an arduous penance (11.212) and a lunar penance (11.217) as the
means of her purification.+
179The sin that a twice-born commits in a single night by having sex with a Südr a
woman he removes in three years by living on almsfood and performing soft
recitations every day.
180I have described above the expiation for all four kinds of sinners.*
Listen now to the following expiations for those who associate with
outcastes.
Association with Outcastes
181When someone associates with an outcaste by officiating at sacrifices, by teaching,
and by contracting marriages—but not by occupying the same vehicle or seat or by
eating together—in one year he himself becomes an outcaste.*


--- PAGE 236 ---
Chapter n 
225
182When a man forges links (2.40 n.) with any one of these outcastes, he should
perform the same observance prescribed for that man in order to purify himself of his
linkage with him.
Excommunication 
183In the evening of an inauspicious day and in the presence of
his blood relations, officiating priests, and teachers, the rite of offering water to the
outcaste should be performed by the relatives belonging to his ancestry (5.60 n.)
together with his relatives by marriage. 184A slave woman* should overturn a pot filled
with water with her foot, as for a dead man;* and they, along with his relatives by
marriage, shall observe a period of impurity for a day and a night. 185They should
suspend conversing or sitting together with him, giving him his inheritance, and even
ordinary interaction with him. 186The rights of primogeniture are also suspended in his
case, along with the preemptive property owed to the eldest; the preemptive share of
the eldest should go to a younger brother of his with the highest qualities.
Re-admission 
187After he has performed the penance, however, they should bathe
in a sacred body of water and, along with him, throw into it a brand-new pot filled with
water.188After he has thrown that pot in the water and entered his own house, he should
participate in all the activities of the relatives just as he had done before.
189These same rules should be adhered to also in the case of women who become
outcastes; but they should be provided with clothes, food, and drink, and permitted to
live near the house.
190No one should transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and under no
circumstances should anyone abhor those who have been cleansed.*
Excursus: Miscellanea on Sin and Penance
191One must not live together with people who have killed children, women, or those
who come to them for protection, or with people who are ingrates, even if they have
been purified in accordance with the Law.
192When any twice-bom men have not been taught the Sâvitr ï verse according to
rule (2.38 n.), one should make them undergo three arduous penances and have them
initiated according to rule. 193One should prescribe the same when twice-born men who
have followed wrong occupations or neglected the Veda seek to perform a penance.
194When Brahmins have acquired wealth through a reprehensible activity, they
are purified by giving away that wealth and by engaging in soft recitation and ascetic
toil. 195A man is freed from the sin of accepting gifts from a bad individual by softly
reciting the Sâvitr i verse three thousand times with a collected mind and by subsisting
on milk for a month while remaining in a cow pen. 1%When that man, emaciated by the
fast, returns from the cow pen and remains bowing down, they should ask him:
"Friend, do you seek equality?" 197Saying "Truly" to the Brahmins, he should scatter
some grass for the cows. At that place made holy by the cows,* they should perform
his re-admission.
198If someone officiates at a sacrifice of Vrâtya s (2.39), performs the funeral of
outsiders, or carries out a rite of sorcery or an Ahïn a sacrifice, he is purified by doing an
arduous penance (11.212) three times.


--- PAGE 237 ---
226 
Chapter n
199When a twice-born has forsaken someone who has come to him for protection
or has misused* the Veda, he removes that sin by subsisting on barley for one year.
200When a man has been bitten by a dog, a jackal, a donkey, a carnivorous animal
of the village, a man, a horse, a camel, or a pig, he is purified by controlling his breath.
201Eating at every sixth mealtime (6.19 n.) for one month, reciting a Vedic
Collection, offering daily a Säkal ä oblation—these are the means of purification for
individuals alongside whom it is unfit to eat.
202When a Brahmin deliberately gets onto a camel-cart or a donkey-cart, he is
purified by bathing naked and controlling his breath. ^If someone in distress
discharges his bodily waste either without water or in water,* he is purified by bathing
with his clothes on outside the village and then touching a cow.
204For neglecting the daily rites prescribed by the Veda and for breaking the vow
of a bath-graduate, the penance is fasting. 205When someone says "Hum"* to a Brahmin
or addresses a superior as "you,"* he should bathe, fast the rest of the day, and placate
that person by paying him obeisance. 206If he strikes such a man with even a blade of
grass, throttles his neck with a cloth, or defeats him in an argument, he should placate
him by prostrating himself on the ground. 207By wanting to hurt a Brahmin, a man
goes to hell—if he threatens him, for one hundred years; if he strikes him, for one
thousand years. 208As many particles of dust the blood of a twice-born lumps together,
for so many thousands of years will the man who spilled it live in hell (4.168). 209For
threatening, he should perform an arduous penance (11.212); for striking, a very
arduous penance (11.214); and for spilling a Brahmin's blood, both an arduous and a
very arduous penance.
210For the removal of sins for which no expiation has been specified, one should
fix a penance after taking into consideration both the type of sin and the strength of the
sinner.
211I will describe to you the means whereby a human being may
remove sins, means employed by gods, seers, and ancestors.
Types of Generic Penance 
212A twice-born practicing the Präjäpatya
 penance
should eat in the morning for three days and in the evening for three days, eat what is
received unasked for three days, and abstain from food during the final three days.
213Subsisting on cows's urine, cow dung, milk, curd, ghee, and water boiled
with Kusa grass, and fasting during one day*—tradition calls this the Säntapana
penance.
214A twice-born practicing the Atikrcchra (very arduous) penance should eat as
before (11.212) one mouthful a day during the three three-day periods and fast during
the final three days.
215A Brahmin practicing the Taptakrcchra (hot-arduous) penance should drink
hot water, hot milk, hot ghee, and hot air during each three-day period and bathe once
with a collected mind.
216When a man, controlled and vigilant, abstains from food for twelve days, it is
called the Parâka penance, which removes all sins.
217He should decrease his food by one rice-ball a day during the dark fortnight
and increase it likewise during the bright fortnight, bathing three times a day—


--- PAGE 238 ---
Chapter il 
227
tradition calls this Cândrâyana
 (the lunar penance). 218This same procedure in its
entirety should be followed when a man, with his mind controlled, performs the lunar
observance with its middle shaped like a barley corn, beginning it on the first day of
the bright fortnight*
219A man practicing the lunar penance of ascetics should eat each day at noon
eight rice-balls from the sacrificial oblation, controlling his self. 220A Brahmin should
eat four rice-balls in the morning with a collected mind and four after sunset—tradition
calls this the lunar penance of children.
^If a man eats thrice eighty rice-balls from the sacrificial oblation in any manner
whatsoever during one month with a collected mind, he obtains residence in the same
world as the Moon.
^This observance was practiced by the Rudras, the Ädityas , the Vasus, and the
Maruts, along with the great seers, to free themselves from all evil.
Observances by the Penitent ^He should offer a burnt oblation every day by
himself, reciting the Great Calls; and he should practice abstention from injuring,
truthfulness, abstention from anger, and honesty. ^He should enter water with his
clothes three times during the day and three times during the night, and under no
circumstance may he speak with women, SQdras, or outcastes. ^He must remain
standing during the day and seated at night or, if he is unable, lie down on the ground
(6.22 n.). He must remain chaste and devoted to his vow, paying homage to teachers,
gods, and Brahmins. ^He should recite softly the Sâvitr ï verse and the purificatory
texts* every day to the best of his ability, remaining diligent in this way with respect
to all observances carried out for the purpose of a penance.
227By these observances should twice-born persons cleanse themselves of public sins;
they may cleanse themselves of secret sins, however, through ritual formulas and burnt
offerings.
Four Means of Expiation 
228A sinner is freed from his sin by declaring it
publicly, by being contrite, by performing ascetic toil, and by reciting the Veda;
during a time of adversity, also by giving gifts.
^To the extent a man on his own publicly acknowledges an infraction of the
Law he has committed, to that extent is he freed from that infraction, like a snake from
his slough.
23ffThe more his mind abhors that evil deed, the more his body is freed from that
infraction; 231for when a man is contrite about a sin he has committed, he is freed from
that sin. "I will never do so again"*—by this forswearing he is purified. 232Having thus
contemplated in his mind the consequences his actions have on his afterlife, he should
always pursue wholesome activities with his thoughts, speech, and body. 233lf a man
commits a reprehensible act, whether it is inadvertent or deliberate, he must not
commit it a second time if he wants to be freed from it.
^If someone's mind is not at ease with respect to a particular act he has
committed, he should practice ascetic toil for it until his mind is assuaged.* 235A11
happiness here, whether divine or human, has ascetic toil as its root, as its middle, and
as its end—so have wise men who saw the Veda declared. 236Knowledge is the ascetic


--- PAGE 239 ---
228 
Chapter n
toil for a Brahmin; protection, for a Ksatriya; trade, for a Vaisya; and service, for a
Südra . 237Solely by ascetic toil do well-disciplined seers, subsisting on fruits, roots,
and air, observe the three worlds together with their mobile and immobile creatures.
238Solely by ascetic toil do medicines, antidotes, spells, and the various divine
conditions become effective; for ascetic toil is the means by which they become
effective.* 239What is difficult to cross, what is difficult to obtain, what is difficult to
enter, what is difficult to do—all that is accomplished by ascetic toil, for it is difficult
to prevail over ascetic toil. 240Persons guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste, as
also others who have committed misdeeds, are freed from their sins simply by ascetic
toil vigorously carried out. 241Insects, snakes, moths, animals, birds, and immobile
creatures attain heaven by the power of ascetic toil. 242Whatever sin people commit
through their mind, word, or body—with ascetic toil as their only wealth, they quickly
burn off all that simply by ascetic toil. 243The denizens of heaven accept the offerings of
a Brahmin purified solely by ascetic toil, and they fulfill his desires. 244Prajapati, the
Lord, created this Treatise solely by ascetic toil; the seers, likewise, obtained the Vedas
by ascetic toil. 245Thus did the gods proclaim this grandeur of ascetic toil, as they
observed the sacred origin of this whole world from ascetic toil.+
246Reciting the Veda daily to the best of one's ability, performing the great
sacrifices, and forbearance quickly destroy sins, even those rising from grievous acts
causing loss of caste. 247As a fire by its energy burns up in an instant a piece of kindling
placed in it, so a man who knows the Veda burns up all sins by the fire of his
knowledges [verse 248 of the vulgate has been eliminated in the critical edition]
Further Means of Expiation 
249Controlling the breath sixteen times while
reciting the syllable OM along with the Calls, when it is performed every day, purifies
even the murderer of a learned Brahmin (4.208 n.) within one month.
250Even a man who has drunk liquor is purified by reciting softly Kutsa's hymn
"Burning away our evil...," the triple verse of Vasistha "To welcome the Dawn . . .,"
the Mâhitr a hymn, and the Suddhavatï verses.
251A man who has stolen gold, on the other hand, becomes instantly stainless by
reciting softly the Asyavâmïy a hymn and the Sivasamkalpa formulas.
^A man who has had sex with an elder's wife is freed from his sin by reciting
softly the hymns Havispântïya , "No anxiety, no danger . . . ," and "This, yes, this is
my inclination ...," and the Purusa hymn.
253 A man who wants to remove grave or slight sins should recite softly during
one year the verse "May we remove ...," and the verse "Whatever offense.. . ." ^If a
man has accepted a forbidden gift or has eaten reprehensible food, he is purified in three
days by reciting softly the Taratsamandî hymn. 255A man who has committed many
sins is purified by reciting the Somâraudr a hymn and the three verses "Aryaman . . ."
while bathing in a river. ^A sinner should recite softly the seven verses "Indra.. ." for
half a year; but if someone commits a reprehensible act* in the water, he should subsist
for a month on almsfood. 257A twice-born removes even a grave sin by offering
oblations of ghee during one year while reciting the Sâkalahomïy a formulas or by
reciting softly the verse "Adoration 
"
258 A man guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste should follow cows with a
collected mind; he comes purified by subsisting on almsfood and reciting the Pava-


--- PAGE 240 ---
Chapter 11 
229
mân ï verses for one year (11.109-17). 259Or, if a man, being ritually pure, recites three
times a Vedic Collection in the wilderness and cleanses himself by means of three
Paräk a penances, he is freed from all the sins causing loss of caste. 260If a man, self-
controlled, fasts for three days while bathing three times a day and reciting the
Aghamarsana hymn three times, he is freed from all the sins causing loss of caste.261 As
the horse sacrifice, the king of sacrifices, removes all sins, so the Aghamarsana hymn
removes all sins.
262Even if he has slaughtered these three worlds and even if he has eaten food of
anyone at all, no sin taints a Brahmin who retains the Rg-veda in his memory. 263If a
man recites three times with a collected mind the Collection of the Rg-veda, the Yajur-
veda, or the Sâma-veda , along with the secret texts (2.140 n.), he is freed from all sins.
264As a clod dissolves quickly when it falls into a large lake; so all sins become
submerged in the triple Veda. 265The Rg verses, the primary Yajus formulas,* and the
diverse Saman chants—these should be known as the triple Veda. A man who knows it
is one who knows the Veda. 266The primary tri-syllabic Veda,* upon which the triple
Veda is based, is another secret triple Veda. A man who knows it is one who knows the
Veda.+


--- PAGE 241 ---
CHAPTER TWELVE
'"You have described this Law for the four classes in its entirety, O Sinless One! Teach
us accurately the ultimate consummation of the fruits of actions."
2Bhrgu, the son of Manu and the very embodiment of the Law, said to those
great seers, "Listen to the determination with respect to engagement in action."
A C T I O N
The Fruits of Action
3Action produces good and bad results and originates from the mind, speech, and the
body. Action produces the human conditions—the highest, the middling, and the
lowest.
4One should understand that the action of the embodied self—action that in this
world is of three kinds, has three bases, and contains ten characteristics—is set in
motion by the mind.*
5Coveting the property of others, reflecting on undesirable things in one's mind,
and adhering to false doctrines are the three kinds of mental action. 6Harshness,
falsehood, slander of every sort, and idle chatter are the four kinds of verbal action.
Taking what has not been given, unsanctioned killing, and sex with another's wife are
given in tradition as the three kinds of bodily action.
8A man experiences the good and bad results of mental actions in his mind
alone; those of verbal actions, in his speech; and those of bodily actions, in his body
alone.+ 9On account of faults resulting from bodily actions, a man becomes an
immobile creature; on account of faults resulting from verbal actions, he becomes a
bird or an animal; and on account of faults resulting from mental actions, he becomes a
man of the lowest caste.
10The rod of speech, the rod of mind, and the rod of action—a man in whose
intellect these are kept under control is said to be "triple-rodded."*+ nWhen a man has
laid down these rods with respect to all creatures and brought lust and anger under
control, he thereby secures success.
The Inner Selves 
12The one who makes this body act is called Ksetrajna, "the
knower of the field"; the one who does the actions, on the other hand, the wise call
Bhutätman , "the elemental self." "Another inner self innate to all embodied beings
bears the name Jïva , "individual self," by whom are experienced all the pleasures and
pains in succeeding births.*
14These two—Mahat,* "the Great," and Ksetrajna, "the knower of the field"—
united with the elements, remain pervading the one who abides in creatures both great
230


--- PAGE 242 ---
Chapters 
231
and small.+ 15From his body innumerable forms stream forth, which constantly set in
motion the creatures both great and small.
The Process of Rebirth 
16When evil men die, another firm body is produced for
them from the same five elemental particles,* a body designed to suffer torments.
17After experiencing there the torments of Yama with that body, they merge into those
very elemental particles, each into its corresponding particle.*
18After paying for the sins resulting from attachment to sensory objects, sins that
lead to misery, he is freed from taint and approaches the same two beings of great
power.* 19Unwearied, these two jointly examine his merits and sins, linked to which
one secures happiness or suffering here and in the hereafter.
20If he acts righteously for the most part and unrighteously to a small degree,
enveloped in those very elements, he enjoys happiness in heaven. 21If, on the other
hand, he acts unrighteously for the most part and righteously to a small degree,
abandoned by those elements, he suffers the torments of Yama. ^After enduring the
torments of Yama, Jlva, "the individual self," becomes freed from taint and enters
those same five elements, each into its corresponding particle.
23Seeing with his own intellect those transitions of this Jïva , "the individual
self," resulting from righteous and unrighteous conduct, let him always set his mind
on righteous conduct.
The Three Attributes 
24One should understand Goodness, Vigor, and Darkness
as the three attributes of the body,* attributes by which Mahat, "the Great," remains
pervading all these existences completely.
25When one of these attributes thoroughly suffuses the body, it makes the
embodied self dominant in that attribute. 26Goodness is knowledge, tradition tells us;
Darkness is ignorance; and Vigor is passion and hatred. These are their pervasive forms
that inhere in all beings.
27 Among these—when someone perceives within himself a condition full of joy,
a sort of pure and tranquil light, he should recognize it as Goodness; 28when it is full of
pain and causing anguish to himself, he should understand that it is Vigor, irresistible
and constantly drawing embodied beings; 29when it is full of confusion, with an
unclear object, unfathomable by argument, and indiscernible, he should recognize it as
Darkness.
xl will explain to you completely the fruits arising from all these
three attributes—the highest, the middling, and the lowest fruits.
31Vedic recitation, ascetic toil, knowledge, purification, the control of the organs,
righteous activity, and contemplation of the self—these mark the attribute of
Goodness. 32Delight in undertaking activities, resolve,* taking up improper tasks, and
constant indulgence in sensual pleasures—these mark the attribute of Vigor. 33Greed,
sloth, lack of resolve, cruelty, infidelity, deviation from proper conduct, habitual
begging, and carelessness—these mark the attribute of Darkness.
^These, in brief and in the proper order, should be known as the marks of all
these three attributes located in the three times. 35An act about which a man is ashamed


--- PAGE 243 ---
232 
Chapter 12
after he has committed it, while he is committing it, and when he is about to commit
it—a learned man should recognize all that as the mark of the attribute of Darkness.
36An act by which a man seeks to win wide fame in the world and is not disappointed
when he fails to win it—one should recognize it as the mark of the attribute of Vigor.
37What a man seeks to know with all his heart and is not ashamed to perform, at which
his inner being rejoices—that is the mark of the attribute of Goodness.
38Pleasure is said to be the mark of Darkness; Profit, of Vigor; and Law, of
Goodness (2.224 n.). Each later one is superior to each preceding.
39Which of these attributes leads 
to which types of cyclical
existence—I will briefly state them in due order with respect to this
entire world.
40Those who possess Goodness become gods; those who possess Vigor become
humans; and those who possess Darkness always become animals—that is the
threefold course. 41One should recognize, however, that this triple course based on
attributes is itself threefold, namely, lowest, middle, and highest, depending on the
specific type of action and knowledge within each.
42Immobile creatures, worms and insects, fish, snakes, creeping animals, farm
animals, and jackals—these constitute the lowest course related to Darkness.
43Elephants, horses, Sudras, despised foreigners, lions, tigers, and boars—these
constitute the middle course related to Darkness. ^Caranas, Suparnas, hypocritical
men, fiends, and ghouls—these constitute the highest among the courses related to
Darkness.
45Jhallas, Mallas, Natas (10.22), men who live by vile occupations,* and people
addicted to gambling and drinking—these constitute the first course related to Vigor.
46Kings, Ksatriyas, royal chaplains, and professional debaters and soldiers—these
constitute the middle course related to Vigor. 47Gandharvas, Guhyakas, Yaksas, divine
attendants, and all the Apsarases—these constitute the highest among the courses
related to Vigor.
48Hermits, ascetics, Brahmins, divine hosts in celestial chariots, asterisms, and
Daityas—these constitute the first course related to Goodness. 49Sacrificers, seers,
gods, Vedas, celestial lights, years, ancestors, and Sâdhyas—thes
e constitute the
second course related to Goodness. 50Brahma, creators of the universe (1.34-7), Law,
Mahat (12.14), and the Unmanifest—the wise call this the highest course related to
Goodness.
51I have declared above everything coming from the three kinds of
action—the entire transmigratory cycle affecting all beings, a
threefold cycle which contains a further threefold division.
52Vile and ignorant men attain evil transmigratory paths by their attachment to the
senses and by their failure to follow the Law.
53Which kind of womb this Jïva , the "individual self," attains in due
order within this world through which kind of action—listen to all
of that.


--- PAGE 244 ---
Chapter 12 
233
Sin and Rebirth 
MThose who commit grievous sins causing loss of caste first go
to dreadful hells during large spans of years; upon the expiration of that, they reach the
following transmigratory states.
55A murderer of a Brahmin enters the wombs of a dog, a pig, a donkey, a camel, a
cow, a goat, a sheep, a deer, a bird, a Cándala, and a Pulkasa.
56A Brahmin who drinks liquor enters the wombs of worms, insects, moths,
birds that feed on excrement, and vicious animals.
57 A Brahmin who steals enters thousands of times the wombs of spiders, snakes,
lizards, aquatic animals, and vicious ghouls.
58A man who has sex with an elder's wife enters hundred of times the wombs of
grasses, shrubs, creepers, carnivorous animals, fanged animals, and creatures that
commit cruel deeds.
59Vicious individuals become carnivorous animals; those who eat forbidden
food become worms;* thieves become cannibals; and those who have sex with lowest-
born women become ghosts.
60 A man who forges links with outcastes, has sex with someone else's wife, or
steals what belongs to a Brahmin becomes a Brahmin fiend.
61A man who steals gems, pearls, corals, or any of the various precious
substances out of greed is born among goldsmiths.* 62By stealing grain, one becomes
a rat; by stealing bronze, a ruddy goose; by stealing water, a Plava coot; by stealing
honey, a gnat; by stealing milk, a crow; by stealing sweets, a dog; by stealing ghee, a
mongoose; ö by stealing meat, a vulture; by stealing fat, a Madgu cormorant; by
stealing oil, a cockroach; by stealing salt, a cricket; by stealing curd, a Balâk a
flamingo; Mby stealing silk, a partridge; by stealing linen, a frog; by stealing cotton
cloth, a Krauñca crane; by stealing a cow, a monitor lizard; by stealing molasses, a
flying fox; ^by stealing fine perfumes, a muskrat; by stealing leafy vegetables, a
peacock; by stealing various kinds of cooked food, a porcupine; by stealing uncooked
food, a hedgehog; 66by stealing fire, a Baka heron; by stealing household utensils, a
mason-wasp; by stealing dyed clothes, a francolí n partridge; 67by stealing a deer or an
elephant, a wolf; by stealing a horse, a tiger; by stealing fruits or flowers,* a monkey;
by stealing a woman, a bear; by stealing water, a cuckoo; by stealing vehicles, a camel;
and by stealing farm animals, a goat. ^If a man steals anything at all belonging to
some one else by force or eats an oblation before the offering has been completed, he
inevitably becomes an animal.
69Women also, when they steal in the above manner, incur guilt; they become the
wives of the very same creatures.
70When people belonging to the social classes deviate from their respective
occupations outside a time of adversity, they go through evil cyclical existences and
end up as servants of the Dasyu* people. 71When a Brahmin deviates, he will become
an Ulkämukh a ghost eating vomit; a Ksatriya will become a KatapQtana ghost eating
filth and corpses; 72a Vaisya will become a Maiträksajyotik a ghost feeding on pus; and
a SDdra who deviates from the Law proper to him will become a Cailäsak a ghost.
73The more that people addicted to sensual pleasures indulge in sensual
pleasures, the more their proclivity to them grows. 74By repeatedly engaging in these
sinful actions, these men of little understanding undergo torments here in various
births—75tossing about in dreadful hells such as Tämisra ; the hell Asipatravana and the


--- PAGE 245 ---
234 
Chapter 12
like; being tied up and cut up; 76various kinds of torture; being eaten by crows and
owls; being burnt by hot sand-gruel; the unbearable tortures of being boiled in vats;*
^taking birth constantly in evil wombs full of suffering; being assailed by cold and
heat; terrors of various kinds; 78repeated residence in different wombs; being born
agonizingly; being wrapped up in painful ways; doing servile work for others;* 79being
separated from relatives and loved ones; having to live in the company of evil people;
earning and losing wealth; winning friends and enemies; ^old age, against which there
is no remedy; being assailed by illnesses; various afflictions; and death itself, which is
impossible to overcome.
81When a man engages in any act with a certain inner disposition, he reaps its
fruits with a body corresponding to that disposition.
^1 have declared to you above all the fruits arising from actions.
Listen now to these rules of action for a Brahmin, rules that secure
the supreme good.
Actions Leading to the Supreme Good
^Vedic recitation, ascetic toil, knowledge, controlling the senses, refraining from
causing injury, and service of the teacher—these are the highest means of securing the
supreme good.
^Among all these splendid activities, a particular activity has been declared as
the best means for a man here to secure the supreme good. 85Among all these, tradition
holds the knowledge of the self to be the highest; it is, indeed, the foremost of all
sciences, for by it one attains immortality.*
86One should understand that acts prescribed by the Veda are always a more
effective means of securing the highest good both here and in the hereafter than the
above six activities. 87A11 these activities without exception are included within the
scheme of the acts prescribed by the Veda, each in proper order within the rules of a
corresponding act.
88Acts prescribed by the Veda are of two kinds: advancing,* which procures the
enhancement of happiness; and arresting,* which procures the supreme good. 89An
action performed to obtain a desire here or in the hereafter is called an "advancing act,"
whereas an action performed without desire and prompted by knowledge is said to be
an "arresting act." 90By engaging in advancing acts, a man attains equality with the
gods; by engaging in arresting acts, on the other hand, he transcends the five elements.
91A man who offers sacrifices within himself attains absolute sovereignty when
he sees equally himself in all beings and all beings in himself. 92Leaving behind even
the acts prescribed above, a Brahmin should apply himself vigorously to the
knowledge of the self, to inner tranquillity, and to vedic recitation. 93This, indeed, is
the consummation of one's existence, especially for a Brahmin; for only by achieving
this does a twice-born accomplish all he has to do, and never otherwise.*
94The Veda is the eternal eyesight for ancestors, gods, and humans; for vedic
teaching is beyond the powers of logic or cognition (1.3 n.)—that is the settled rule.
95The scriptures that are outside the Veda, as well as every kind of fallacious doctrine—
all these bear no fruit after death, for tradition takes them to be founded on Darkness.


--- PAGE 246 ---
Chapter 12 
235
96All those different from the Veda that spring up and then flounder—they are false and
bear no fruit, because they belong to recent times.*
97The four social classes, the three worlds, and the four orders of life, the past, the
present and the future—all these are individually established* by the Veda. 98Sound,
touch, visible appearance, taste, and, the fifth, smell, are established by the Veda
alone;* their origin is according to attribute and action.* "The eternal vedic treatise
bears all beings; it is the means of success for these creatures; therefore, I consider it
supreme.
100A man who knows the vedic treatise is entitled to become the chief of the
army, the king, the arbiter of punishment, and the ruler of the whole world.101 As a fire,
when it has picked up strength, burns up even green trees, so a man who knows the
Veda burns up his taints resulting from action. 102A man who knows the true meaning
of the vedic treatise, in whatever order of life he may live, becomes fit for becoming
Brahman while he is still in this world.
103Those who rely on books are better than the ignorant; those who carry them in
their memory are better than those who simply rely on books; those who understand
are better than those who simply carry them in their memory; and those who resolutely
follow them are better than those who only understand.
104For a Brahmin, ascetic toil and knowledge are the highest means of securing
the supreme good; by ascetic toil he destroys impurity and by knowledge he attains
immortality.
105Perception, inference, and treatises coming from diverse sources—a man who
seeks accuracy with respect to the Law must have a complete understanding of these
three. 106The man who scrutinizes the record of the seers* and the teachings of the Law
by means of logical reasoning not inconsistent with the vedic treatise—he alone knows
the Law, and no one else.
107This is the totality of activities leading to the supreme good as
prescribed. The secret doctrine of this Treatise of Manu will now be
taught.
Excursus: Secret Teaching
108If it be asked: what happens in cases where specific Laws have not been laid down?
What "cultured" Brahmins state is the undisputed Law. 109Those Brahmins who have
studied the Veda together with its supplements in accordance with the Law and are
knowledgeable in scripture, perception, and inference,* should be recognized as
"cultured."
""Alternatively, when a legal assembly with a minimum of ten members, or
with a minimum of three members firm in their conduct, determines a point of Law,
no one must question that Law. 1UA man who knows the three Vedas, a logician, a
hermeneut, an etymologist, a specialist in Law, and three individuals belonging to the
first three orders of life—these constitute a legal assembly with a minimum of ten
members.* 112A man who knows the Rgveda, a man who knows the Yajurveda, and a
man who knows the Sämaveda —these should be recognized as constituting a legal
assembly with a minimum of three members for settling doubts regarding the Law.


--- PAGE 247 ---
236 
Chapter 12
113When even a single Brahmin who knows the Veda determines something as the
Law, it should be recognized as the highest Law, and not something uttered by
myriads of ignorant men. 114Even if thousands of men who fail to follow the
observances, who are unacquainted with the Veda, and who merely use their caste to
earn a living, come together, they do not constitute a legal assembly. 115When fools
enveloped by Darkness declare something as the Law, though they are ignorant of it—
that sin, increased a hundredfold, stalk those who declare it.
116I have explained to you above all the best means of securing the
supreme good. A Brahmin who does not deviate from them obtains
the highest state.
C O N C L U S I O N
Excursus: Summation
117In this manner, the blessed god, desiring to do what is beneficial for the people,
revealed to me in its entirety this highest secret of the Law.
118With a collected mind, a man should see in the self everything, both the
existent and the non-existent; for when he sees everything in the self, he will not turn
his mind to what is contrary to the Law. 119A11 the deities are simply the self, the whole
world abides within the self; for the self gives rise to engagement in action on the part
of these embodied beings.
120Let him deposit space within his spaces;* the wind within his motion and
touch; the highest fire within his digestive organ and eyes; water within his fluids;
earth within his physical form; 121the moon in his mind; directions in his ears; Visnu
in his stride; Hari* in his strength; Fire in his speech; Mitra in his organ of evacuation;
and Prajâpat i in his organ of procreation.
122The ruler of all, more minute than even an atom, resplendent like gold, and to
be grasped by the sleeping mind—he should know him as the supreme Person.
123Some call him Fire, some Manu the Prajâpati , others Indra, still others Breath, and
yet others the eternal Brahman. 124This one, pervading all beings by means of the five
forms (12.16), makes them go around like a wheel through birth, growth, and death.
125When aman thus sees by the self all beings as the self, he becomes equal towards all
and reaches Brahman, the highest state.
126When a twice-born recites this Treatise of Manu proclaimed by Bhrgu, he will
always follow the proper conduct and obtain whatever state he desires.


--- PAGE 248 ---
NOTES TO THE TRANSLATION
C H A P T E R ONE
1.1 
Additional verse before verse i: "To the Self-existent One, to Brahman of boundless
energy, I pay homage, as I set out to promulgate the diverse and eternal Laws pro-
claimed by Manu." This verse is widespread in both the manuscript tradition and
among commentators and introduces the narrator's voice explicitly and in the first per-
son, although he appears implicitly in 1.1, 4, 60; 5.1, 3; and in 12.2, where he introduces
the three interlocutors within the treatise: the seers, Manu, and Bhrgu. Govinda identi-
fies the narrator as a pupil of Bhrgu, whereas Näräyana
, Räghavänanda
, and
Râmacandr a think that it is Bhrgu himself.
1.2 
precisely and in their proper order: the expression yathävad anupurvasah occupying
either pada-b or pada-c in introductory verses is common in Manu: see 2.89; 5.57;
7.36; and the similar one in 8.229.
those horn in between: namely, the mixed classes dealt with at 10.8-73.
Two additional verses: "Likewise the origin and destruction of the entire mass of
creatures: those born from placentas, eggs, warm moisture, and sprouts; as well as the
settled decision regarding all practices and rites with respect to time and appropriate-
ness—please tell all of that completely."
1.3 
ordinance (vidhäna) : probably refers to the "treatise" (sastra) on dharma that
SvayambhO composed and taught to Manu: see 1.58. Commentators give diverse ex-
planations. Medhâtithi , followed by Näräyana
, KullDka, and Räghavänanda
, takes
vidhäna to be the Veda and interprets svayambhuvah as in apposition to vidhänasya,
giving the verse a strictly Mïmâmsi c interpretation: the Veda is self-existent, therefore
eternal and without an author (apauruseya). Medhâtith i gives "vedic injunction"
(yidhi) as another possible meaning of vidhäna. Govinda glosses simply with sastra.
Râmacandr a takes vidhäna to mean "creation" and to be in apposition to asya sarvasya
("of this whole creation"), which is also the interpretation of some scholars cited by
Medhâtith i in his comments on 1.11. The latter interpretation is doubtful because the
question of the seers concerned not the universe but the dharmas of social groups.
beyond the powers of cognition: the expression aprameya probably has a technical
meaning: the contents of this treatise cannot be known through the normal means of
knowledge (pramäna), principally perception and inference. See the very similar ex-
pression at 1.5 and 12.94.
1.4 
in the proper manner: Bühler , following Medhâtith i and Kullüka , takes the adverb
samyak (in pada-a) as qualifying Manu's reply (in pada-c): "replied in the proper
manner." I follow Govinda and Râmacandra . Within slokas generally the each päda
tend to be a syntactic unit; unless the context is compelling, therefore, I follow the
päda syntax.
1.5 
There was this world: the initial words asid idam clearly indicates the beginning of a
story (cf. for example, the story of Nala), here the story of creation; my translation
seeks to capture this style. Bühle r translates more literally: "This (universe) existed in
237


--- PAGE 249 ---
238 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1
the shape of Darkness. .. ." Commentators note the anomaly of Manu's describing the
process of creation when the question related to dharma. The answer, I think, lies in
the structure of Manu's text. The account of creation ends, as in the PurusasQkta (R V
10.90), with the creation of the four varnas (1.31). If I am right that 1.32-57 is an inter-
polation (see Introduction, p. 53), then the Creator's composition of the treatise
containing the varnadharmas (1.58) is directly related to his creation of the varnas. For
a detailed study of the cosmology presented in the first chapter of the MDh, see Hacker
1959,1961; Lane 1981.
pitch-dark: the expression tamobhütam may also be a reference to the cosmic attribute
(guild) of darkness (tamas) within Sâmkhy a philosophy (see 12.24-49). There is, how-
ever, a clear resonance with the Nâsadly a hymn (RV 1.129), which also describes the
initial state of the cosmos as "darkness hidden by darkness": tama äsit taniasä gûlham.
1.6 
beginning with the elements: I take the compound mahäbhütädi
 as qualifying "this
world" (idain.). Medhätithi , Räghavänanda
, and Rämacandr a Kadmahäbhütädivrttau-
jäh as a compound (Bahuvrïhi) . The translation would then be: "Then the Self-existent
Lord, whose power exerts itself upon the elements and the rest, appeared —the Un-
manifest manifesting this world and dispelling the darkness." If we follow
Medhätithi' s reading avyaktam for avyaktah, the translation would be: ". . . appeared,
manifesting this unmanifest world...."
1.7 
beyond the range . . . grasped: most mss. and commentators read atïndriyagrâhyah,
taking atindriya ("what is beyond the senses") as manas. The translation would then
be: "who can be grasped by the mind." Medhätith i gives a further interpretation based
on the compound being adverbial (avyaytbhava); the meaning being that he is grasped
by going beyond the senses, namely, by yogic knowledge. Govinda accepts atindriya
as mind, but takes the compound to mean atlndriyena manasä grahltum asakyah,
"unable to be grasped by what is beyond senses, i.e., by the mind." The compound
then would be atïndriyagrâhyah.
shone forth (udbabhau): commentators give various explanations: Medhätithi :
udbhûtah sarlragrahanam krtavän; alternatively, with the normal meaning of shining,
svayamprakäsa äsit. Govinda: sarlrain jagräha. Näräyana
: ävirbhütah.
 Kullüka : ma-
hadädikäryarüpatayä
 prädur babhüva. Räghavänanda
: prädur äsit. Nandana: vyakto
babhüva. Rämacandra : utpannah.
1.8 
it was the waters: for the creation of the world through the golden egg floating on the
primordial waters, see SB 11.1.6.
1.10 
The waters . . . "Näräyana"
 : the three terms indicate three levels of word formation in
Sanskrit. "Nara" is the most simple and means "man." "Nârâ
" is something related to
or proceeding from Nara. Finally, Näräyan
a is a patronymic derived from Nara, al-
though here derived from Nara and ayana, meaning way, sojourn, or refuge: "the so-
journ of Nara."
Additional verse: "Näräyan
a is higher than the Unmanifest; and the egg came into
being from the Unmanifest. These worlds and the earth with its seven continents are
within the egg. " In this verse and in verse 11, "unmanifest" (avyakta) probably refers
to the primordial stuff (prakrti) from which, according to Sâmkhy a cosmology, the
manifest creation was produced.
i.io-i These two verses appear to be either interpolations or a parenthetical remark linking
Brahma with the cosmic waters and with Näräyana
, an epithet associated with Visnu.
The beginning of verse 12, "in that egg" (tasmin ande) connects it syntactically with
verse 9, which introduced the golden egg.
1.11 
Brahma: the sandhi in brahmeti makes is difficult to decipher whether the original is
the masculine brahnm or the neuter brahman. Näräyan
a clearly takes it as the mascu-
line, others are unclear. Bühle r translates the term as "Brahman."


--- PAGE 250 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 
239
1.12 full year: most commentators takeparivatsaram this to be a simple year, in accordance
with SB 11.1.6.2. Kulluka, however, takes it to be a year of Brahma (see 1.68-73), and
Rämacandra , 1000 years.
1.13 
place of the waters: the reference is probably to the Milky Way, which is regarded also
as the bright ocean of heaven in vedic cosmology. See Witzel 1984.
1.16 
these six: the reference is unclear. Nandana sees here a reference to the list given in the
preceding two verses. He lists the six as great (self), ego, mind, subtle elements
(tainnatra), and the organs of cognition and action. Räghavänand
a and Rämacandra :
mind and the five senses. Medhätith i and Kulluka: ego and the five subtle elements.
Govinda: great (self) and the five subtle elements. The five elements rising from the
mind are given at 1.75-8, which section, however, probably forms part of a later addi-
tion (Introduction, p. 53). The exact meaning of "six" remains unclear, but mind and
the five elements are the best candidates because they are again referred to in verse 18.
1.19 
seven males: the term "male" (purusa), as all commentators acknowledge, is used
metaphorically, possibly echoing the image of the body of Purusa in the RV hymn
10.90. The meaning of "seven," once again, is unclear. It probably refers to the six al-
ready mentioned, with the addition of the Creator, particles of whose body combines
with those six to create the world (verses 16-7).
1.20 
Of these ... in the series: the order of the series is: ether, air, fire, water, and earth. The
distinctive quality of each is sound, touch, visibility, taste, and smell, respectively.
Ether has only the first; air has the first two (its own and that of ether); fire, the first
three; water, the first four; and earth, all five. See 1.75-8.
1.21 
stations: the meaning of the term sainsthä is unclear. Bühle r translates "conditions,"
again with an unclear meaning. Narayana takes it to mean the different levels of crea-
ture, that some are birds, others trees, etc. Most other commentators take it as referring
to the various occupations of castes, such as making pots in the case of potters.
Nandana is alone in taking it to mean physical appearances (rüpäni),
 gods having one
and humans another. Rämacandr a takes it to mean maryada, that is, the boundaries
existing within the three worlds. I detect a contrast between "specific activities"
(prthak karmani) of pada-b and "specific stations" (prthak samsthah), and Govinda
may be right in seeing ritual obligations in the first and ordinary worldly or profes-
sional activities in the second.
1.22 
The Lord . . . sacrifice: the syntax of the verse is unclear and commentators offer vari-
ous interpretations. Medhätith i says that ca of pada-a should come after devänäm,
 and
he connects präninäm
 with karmätmanäm,
 takes the genitive as having the sense of
purpose, and interprets the verse to mean: "And for the sake of living beings devoted
to rites, the Lord created the group of gods, the subtle group of Sädhyas , and the eter-
nal sacrifice." The meaning of karmätmanäm
 is unclear (see its parallel use at 1.53).
Many commentators take this to mean that these gods are in some essential way con-
nected with rites. Govinda, however, thinks that it refers to their being a subsidiary
element (anga) of a rite, a very Mïmamsi c interpretation. Cf. ÄpDh 1.11.3 about gods
who were originally humans (manusyaprakrti).
1.23 
squeezed out: the term dudoha evokes the image of milking a cow. Each Veda is
drawn out from each deity, the Rgveda from fire, the Yajurveda from the wind, and the
Sämaved a from the sun. This cosmogonie story is found in the AB 25.7.
1.25 
he brought forth . . . these creatures: these words conclude the creation of the physical
universe, and they echo nicely the beginning of the story at 1.8.
1.32 
I think this second account of creation (1.32-41) is an interpolation. The original dis-
course on creation ended at verse 31 with the creation of the four varnas. I think in the
original text verse 31 was immediately followed by the section on transmission of the
dharmasastra (1.58-60). See Introduction, p. 53.


--- PAGE 251 ---
240 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1
1-39 pseudo-humans: the term kimnara refers to mythical animals/humans, sometimes de-
picted as having the body of a man and the head of a horse. The term is also connected
to the older kimpurusa, possibly relating to barbarians in the jungle or "wild men." See
Smith 1994: 255-6.
Variant reading: "birds of various kind, lions, tigers, boars, predatory animals."
1.42 
here: the particle iha simply means "here," but in different contexts can mean "here, in
this world" or "here, in this treatise." Professor Albrecht Wezler in a personal commu-
nication expressed his belief that iha often implies a reference to the generally ac-
cepted view about something, as for example in 1.79 and 2.143, 149, 166. Com-
mentators usually take the term to mean "here, in this world" or "here, in this book,"
i.e., the treatise of Manu.
1.49 
inner awareness: for a detailed analysis of the concept of antahsamjña, see Wezler
1987; Schmithausen 1991. In brief, this term is used by our author to explicitly reject
another opinion prevalent at the time and expressed in Puranic texts that plants lack
both external and internal awareness. See also GDh 8.2 where the same expression
occurs.
1.51 
disappeared . . . with time: the reference is to the end of time, when the Creator with-
draws everything into himself. Most commentators interpret "striking down time with
time" as destroying the time of creation with the time of dissolution. These two times
are conceived as the times when the Creator is awake and asleep.
1.56 
When . . . bodily frame: the subject of this verse, as also that of the preceding one, is
unclear. Bühle r and commentators take it to be the individual human self. Then, these
verses would describe the reemergence of individual humans after their dissolution at
the end of time. Commentators and BUhler interpret the final päda differently from me:
"then he assumes a (new) corporeal frame." This is quite unnecessary, and the verb
vimuncati generally means to give up rather than to assume (Doniger 1991, Ixv). I think
this clause parallels the conclusion of verse 55; in both instances the individual self
emerges from or discharges the bodily frame (mürti) of the Creator into which he had
been merged.
1.58 
treatise: clearly a reference to the primordial form of Manu's own treatise, which was
introduced at 1.3; see the note to it.
MarTci: he is the first of the ten seers that Manu procreated, listed at 1.35, Bhrgu being
the ninth in the list. They are viewed here as both his sons and his pupils.
1.61 
six further Manus: in the Indian cosmological tradition, each Kalpa, which is the larg-
est time span and is considered a day of Brahma, contains 14 units called Manvantaras
("Manu intervals" or epoch), each presided over by a different Manu. There are 14
such epochs within each Kalpa, or a day of Brahma. This roughly translates into
12,000 divine years or 4,320,000 human years. Within each Manvantara there are
other units called Yuga (Age). The seven Manus listed here are the first seven; the
other seven are given diverse names in the Purânas . See Kane, 1962-75, v: 686-93.
The temporal extents of a Kalpa, Manvantara, and Yuga are given by Kane, 1962-75,
i: 68-73, 79-80.
1.63 
secured: commentators take äpuh (literally, "obtained") to mean "protected" or
"governed." There must be an implicit reference here to the image of a king "taking
possession of newly conquered territory; hence the extended meanings of protecting
and governing.
1.64 
Muhurta: this is the basic division of a 24-hour day. It is 48 minutes long. Kalâ , the
Indian minute, therefore, is 1.6 minutes; and a Kâsth a approximately 0.05 seconds. In
legal and ritual literature, however, the term Muhurta is frequently used with a more
generic meaning and refers to a specific time during the day or the night. Auspicious
times for significant activities, such as marriage, are also called Muhurta.


--- PAGE 252 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 
241
1.66 
For ancestors . . . sleeping: the day and night are here inverted, as are most things re-
lating to ancestors, the bright constituting the night and the dark the day. The reason is
ritual, because offerings to ancestors are offered during the dark half of the month
(waning moon) when the ancestors are awake. See 3.277.
1.70 
For each . . . by one: Treta: 3,000 years, with twilights of 300 years each; Dvâpara :
2,000 years, with twilights of 200 years each; Kali: 1,000 years, with twilights of 100
years each. The total for all four Ages comes to 12,000 years.
1.71 
These four . . . of the gods: Medhâtith i and most other commentators interpret this
verse differently, taking 12,000 not as the sum total of years within four Ages, but as
the number of such four-Age periods that constitutes one Age of the gods. This inter-
pretation is rejected, I think rightly, by Kullüka . My interpretation is also supported by
verse 79, where 12,000, mentioned without qualification, must be assumed to be years.
The confusion is created by the repetition of état in both half-verses. I think the repeti-
tion is purely rhetorical: "This, which has been enumerated ... ; this i2,ooo-period is
called an Age of the gods."
1.81 
four feet: various identifications are offered. Medhâtithi : the four principle priests of a
sacrifice, or the four varnas (so also Nandana), or the four asramas, or the four kinds
of speech (R V 1.164.45). He is clearly unable to make up his mind! Medhâtithi , as well
as Näräyana
, Kullüka , and Râghavânanda
, also take them to be austerity, knowledge,
sacrifice, and gift giving mentioned in 1.86. "Four" is clearly a whole and sacred num-
ber, and here may also refer to the four feet of an animal, indicating firm footing and
stability.
1.82 
By acquiring: commentators are sharply divided over the interpretation of the term
ägamät.
 Kullük a is right here in seeing a carryover (anuvrtti) of "through unlawful
means" (adharmend) from the previous verse. Other commentators are off the mark
when they take agarna to mean either the Veda or a sastra.
theft, falsehood, and fraud: it is possible that Manu intended to ascribe each of these
vices to each succeeding Age: theft to Treta, falsehood to Dvâpara , and fraud to Kali.
This is the interpretation offered by Râmacandra , but Kullük a explicitly rejects it.
1.83 
by a quarter: note that in Sanskrit both quarter and foot have the same word päda. So,
we have a clear parallel between the loss of a foot (Law) and the loss of a quarter of
the life span (humans).
1.85 
progressive shortening . . . Age: all the commentators, as well as Bühler , interpret the
compound yugahräsänupürvasah
 to mean "in keeping with the shortening of the
Ages." According to this reading, the different dharinas for the Ages are caused by the
decrease in their length. I think this is less likely. I prefer to connect hräsa ("shorten-
ing") with the human life span; indeed, the same term was used with regard to human
life in verse 83. According to my reading, the meaning is: "in keeping with the pro-
gressive shortening (of the human life span) in each Age." Alternatively, the "shorten-
ing" or decrease may have a broader meaning, including the Ages themselves, the
human life spans, as well as the feet of dharma (cf. 1.81; this being Râghavânanda' s
interpretation), each of which diminishes with each succeeding Age. On verse 85, see
Lingat 1973,184.
1.92 
A man . . . purest part: the reason for the relative impurity of the lower half is given at
5.132. Govinda appears to take both parts of this verse as the words of the Self-existent
One.
1.93 
retains the Veda: the term dhärana means both carrying and retaining in memory. This
statement is more powerful than it may first appear, because at a time when the Veda
did not exist externally in manuscript form it could exist in the world only within the
memory of Brahmins who had learnt it. The Brahmin is thus the receptacle of the Veda
in the world.


--- PAGE 253 ---
242 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1
1.96 
those who subsist by intelligence: the reference here is to higher animals, such as dogs
and jackals, who know to take shelter when it rains and to go after food and water.
This contrasts with plants, which are antahsamjña; see 1.49 n.
1.97 
made the resolve: my interpretation of the expression krtabuddhayah is supported by
Govinda and Kulluka. Govinda refers to samkalpa, i.e., the firm and publicly stated
intention to perform a particular rite. Others take the expression to mean persons who
have properly understood the Veda. It may also refer to persons whose minds are culti-
vated. See also 7.30, where akrtabuddhi refer to someone who is irresolute.
Additional half-verse: "There is no being in this world that is higher than those who
know Brahman."
1.99 
a ruler . . . of Laws: the parallel with the birth of a king is obvious. A king is born in a
particular region to protect the treasures (property) of a particular people. A Brahmin,
on the other hand, rules over all and the treasure he protects is dharma itself.
i.ioi The Brahmin . . . people eat: if the whole world belongs to the Brahmin de jure, then
whatever he eats cannot but be his own. So, as Medhätith i points out, even when a
Brahmin eats someone else's food as a guest, he is actually eating his own food. A
principle such as this is invoked as a justification for stealing or taking forcibly the
property of Südras , or even of other individuals, in order to perform a sacrifice: see
11.11-15. This ideology appears to be based on the principle that property is intended to
be sacrificed. Indeed, the transaction between humans giving to the gods in sacrifice
and the gods sending rain to produce crops is embedded in vedic thought. Given that
Brahmins are closely connected with the offering of sacrifice, they can claim owner-
ship of all property—at least at the level of ideological rhetoric.
1.103 Additional verse given after verse 103, or 104, or 105 in different manuscripts: "A
Brahmin who desires heaven should study this Law Treatise constantly, just as he does
the Veda."
1.106 Variant reading: "it procures fame and long life."
Two additional verses: "It bestows wealth, fame, long life, merit, heaven, and libera-
tion; retaining the Law Treatise in the memory is equal to retaining the Vedas."
"Simply by retaining the Treatise in the mind, a man will not die childless or endure
evils in this world, and he will become the equal of good men."
1.107 ¡n this . . . social classes: here we have a clear distinction made between dharma
("Law") and acara ("proper conduct" or "normative practice"). It is clear that much of
the material in the legal texts is drawn from acara rather than vedic precept, in spite of
the oft-repeated statement that the Veda is the root of the Law; and 1.110 strongly sug-
gests both that dharma proceeds from acara and that this is distinct from what is pre-
scribed in the Veda: see Lariviere I997b. For a detail discussion of this topic, see
Wezler 1999 (especially pp. 101-13). Commentators and translators have taken the
three elements here (Law, good/bad qualities of actions, and proper conduct) as three
separate items (A and B and C). I think Wezler is correct in taking the last two
(qualities of action and proper conduct) as explicating Law (A: B and C). The central
position of acara is reiterated in the subsequent verses. For a similar statement on the
centrality of good conduct, see 4.155-6.
1.108 to this treatise: the term asmin ("in/to this") is taken by most commentators and trans-
lators as referring to proper conduct. Although that is the obvious choice as the antece-
dent, given the proximity, I think that the word refers back to the treatise of Manu, just
as it does in verses 107 (and later in verse 118). See also the repeated use of idam
("this") to refer to the treatise in verses 102,103,104, and 106. Coming immediately
after the word smärta, this pronoun implies that Manu is the preeminent smrti: see
2.10.


--- PAGE 254 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 
243
1.114 Renunciation (moksa), Retirement (sarnnyasa): the Sanskrit term moksa literally means
liberation. Manu, however, attaches a technical meaning to the term, using it as a
synonym of renunciation and the fourth order of life dedicated exclusively to the
search after personal liberation. The term moksa has the same meaning when used in
the common compound moksadharma, which is a section of the MBh and a distinct
topic in medieval legal digests (nibandha). Manu makes a clear distinction between
this renunciatory asceticism and the life of a vedic retiree, which he designates as
samnyäsa (see 6.86 n.). This term, which is the common word for renunciation in later
literature, is never used by Manu with that meaning. BUhler's "(manner of gaining)
final emancipation and (of) renouncing the world," and Doniger's "Freedom, and
renunciaton" ignore the technical use of these two terms here and in ch. 6. For a more
detailed study, see Olivelle 1981.
1.117-8 
Examination o f . . . and guilds: these three topics are not found at the end of the
MDh, although aspects of these are dealt with in different parts of the treatise. Their
absence raises significant questions about the relationship of the synopsis to the text.
The synopsis was clearly written at a later date and inserted into the MDh; but the lack
of these topics suggests the possibility that the author of the synopsis may have been
working with a somewhat different text than the extant version of the MDh. Note also
that most of the vyavahärapadas are not listed in the table of contents.
C H A P T E R TWO
2.1 
the Law assented to by the heart: I have taken pada-c as an independent clause. Others
take it as a syntactic unit with the preceding; it is the erudite people who assent to the
Law in their heart. Taking it as a separate clause, however, makes the Law something
that all people acknowledge in their hearts, paralleling the "what is pleasing to oneself
(atmatusti) of verse 2.6. See also 4.161, 11.234, and 12.35 for the elaboration of the
same theme; what offends one's conscience is against the Law.
2.2 
This section on desire (2.2-5) ¡s out of place here. Bühle r (1886, Ixvii) takes it to be
spurious. At the very least this section appears to be parenthetical within the larger dis-
course on the sources of the Law.
motivated by desire: Thieme (1931, 31), commenting on VaDh 1.6, takes the expression
akämätmä
 to be not "someone free from desire" but a person who does not act freely
and at his own pleasure but in a controlled manner and in accordance with the norms.
This would then be synonymous with niyatätmä,
 "a man who is self-controlled."
Thieme also thinks that in this context kämet should be taken as part of the trivarga, the
three aims of humans: dharma, artha, karna—Law, Wealth, and Pleasure. In this pas-
sage of Manu, however, katna appears to have the clear meaning of desire.
2.3 
Intention is the root of desire: most commentators, as also Bühler , take the compound
samkalpanmlah as possessive (Bahuvrïhi) . I think this is the right interpretation. This
is also the understanding in the version given in the BhP 7.50: samkalpäj jäyate
kämah. The wordww/a, although it can be masculine, is used throughout by Manu as a
neuter noun. If it were a dependent determinative (Tatpurusa) compound the reading
should have been samkalpamulam. Only Nandana, who records the reading mülam,
takes it as Tatpurusa. Doniger's translation "Desire is the very root of the conception
of a definite intention" also takes the compound as Tatpurusa. See 4.24, where we have


--- PAGE 255 ---
244 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2
a similar Bahuvrïh i in the feminine: jnänamüläm
 kriyäm; and 4.12, where we have
both a Bahuvrihi and a Tatpurusa.
2.4 
the work of someone who desired it: Medhâtithi , Govinda, and Kulluka take tat tat of
pada-d as correlatives of yad yad of pada-c. This appears to be the natural way to in-
terpret the syntax, and it is followed by Bühler . The translation would then be: "it is
the work of desire." I think, however, that the second tat forms a Bahuvrïh i compound
with kaniasya with the meaning "one who has the desire for it." This eliminates the
awkwardness of desire actually doing some work, unless Desire is here personified.
This awkwardness makes Bühle r give a labored translation: "it is (the result of) the
impulse of desire." Supporting my view is the nice parallel of tatkämasya of last päda
with akämasya of the first päda. Further, the intervening kimcit, to which yad yad re-
lates, makes the case for taking both tat tat as correlatives weaker.
2.5 
in them: the precise antecedent tern is unclear. BUhler, following Govinda, Kulluka,
Räghavänanda
, and Ramacandra, takes these to be "prescribed duties." Doniger and
Dave, following Medhâtithi : "desires"; Näräyana
: "sacrifices"; Nandana: "studying the
Vedas, and other such activities." The closest antecedent appears to be the activities
listed in verse 3: sacrifices, observances, and restrains.
Two additional verses: "When a man, his mind blinded by desire, behaves improperly
with regard to objects of desire, he goes to hell and does not reap their rewards
[probably of rites]. Optional rites taught in the Veda and traditional texts and carried
out according to rule, therefore, advances prosperity in this world and not its opposite."
2.6 
The root . . . oneself: the first half of this verse parallels GDh 1.1-2 (vedo dharma-
mülam; tadvidam ca smrtisue) and appears to be a versification of the latter. As Bühle r
(1886,30) notes, the distinction that commentators seek between "practice" (sTla) and
"conduct" (acara) may be misplaced. The two probably mean more or less the same,
the first being taken from GDh and the latter from other sources, such as VaDhi.5
(sistäcära).
 Indeed, at 1.12 only four sources are listed with sadäcära
 and without sTla.
On the close connection between Manu and the GDh, see Introduction, p. 44. For
further elaboration of "what is pleasing to oneself," which is not simply one's pleasure
but rites that give a sense of satisfaction, see 4.161,11.234; see also 12.35 for similar
ideas regarding one's conscience as a guide for what is right and wrong.
2.7 
for it contains all knowledge (sarvajnanamayo hi sah): most commentators and inter-
preters take the pronoun sah as referring to the Veda. I think this is correct. Kulluka
and Nandana, however, take it as referring to Manu. The translation would then be:
"for he embodies all knowledge."
2.8 
all this: the referent is unclear. Medhâtithi : "all that is to be known" (sarvam jñeyam);
Nârâyan
a and Räghavänanda
: "treatise of Manu"; Govinda and Kulluka: "all kinds of
treatises" (sarvam sästrajätam);
 Nandana: "Veda and the other sources of Law";
Râmacandra : "the entire Law" (sarvam dharmam). The word nikhila clearly resonates
with vedo 'khilah of verse 6, which lends support to Nandana's interpretation.
2.10 
"Scripture": it is significant that Manu felt the need to define sruti. Bühle r (1886, Ixvii)
takes this to be a sign that this section is a later addition. See, however, 12.95, where
Manu speaks about vedabähyäh
 srutayah ("scriptures outside the Veda"). All this may
be a sign that the term sruti had not become a synonym of Veda by the time of Manu.
Note that the authors of the early Dharmasutras never use sruti within the context of
the sources of dharma. The first to do so is Vasistha (VaDh 1.4).
These two . . . any matter: most mss. and commentators read sarvârthesv amlmamsye,
a reading adopted in the critical edition. But a substantial number of mss., as well as
the Bhavisya Puräna (7.55), read sarvärthesu mlmamsye. The translation would then
be: "These two should be examined in all matters." This reading is strongly defended


--- PAGE 256 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 
245
by Râghavânand
a and follows the common meaning of Humanisa as vedic exegesis.
The meaning then is this: the principles of vedic exegesis should be applied to these
two sources of the Law in every matter. This is an appealing interpretation, even
though the manuscript tradition does not support the reading. Could the negative for-
mulation of the next verse have influenced the reading of this? See 12.106 where the
use of logical argumentation (tarkd) is a significant way to determine the Law. The
only other occurrence of inïmSmsâ in Manu is at 4.224, and there it is used with a
positive meaning.
2.11 
Variant reading: "these two roots by relying."
2.13 
authority: the term pramana has epistemological implications. Beyond mere authority,
it indicates the means of cognition (see 1.3 n.). There are other meanings of knowing
the Law, such as observing the conduct of virtuous people (perception); and even
logical argument (inference: see 12.106). Among all these means, sruti, which falls
under "verbal authority" (sabda) in the enumeration of promanas, is the highest.
2.14-5 
When there . . . a vedic scripture: here we have a basic principle of vedic exegesis.
When two vedic injunctions contradict each other, both are authoritative; such a con-
tradiction gives rise to an option. An example of such an option is given in verse 15.
Some vedic passages prescribe the morning fire offering (agnihotra) to be performed
just before sunrise, and others after sunrise. One has, therefore, the option to follow
either rule. A contradiction, however, gives rise to an option only when the two in-
junctions are of equal force (see GDh 1.4). If one of them is weaker (e.g., a traditional
text) and the other stronger (e.g., an explicit vedic text), then the stronger prevails. The
expression sainayadhyusite is unclear. Bühler , following Kullük a and Râghavânanda
,
translates: "when neither sun nor stars are visible." Medhätith i takes it to mean dawn in
general and refers to the opinion of some who take it to mean the time of twilight when
the night is over but the sun has not yet risen. Nandana takes it as the time when the
sun has partially risen (uditänudite sürye). Rämacandr a cites a long passage from
Kätyäyana
, who defines samayädhyusita as the time of the morning when stars are in-
visible but the sun is not yet seen (tathä ca prätahsamaye naste naksatramandale /
ravir yävan na drsyeta samayädhyusitam ca tat //).
Two additional verses : "Sages see the scriptures and remember the traditional texts.
Therefore, authoritative persons have promulgated on earth that both these are
authoritative. We see transgressions of the Law and violence by eminent persons;
when a foolish man of later times sees that and follows it, he will perish." The last
verse follows GDh 1.3.
2.16 
A man . . . this treatise: the implication of this rule is to exclude all women, as well as
Südra s and other lower castes. The significant term here is mantraih ("with the recita-
tion of vedic formulas"), because women's sainskäras are performed without the
recitation of mantras: see 2.66-7.
2.17-23 This section contains elaborations and further classifications of the original concept
of Äryävart
a first encountered within the legal tradition in BDh 1.2.9 and VaDh 1.8-12,
and recorded also by Patañjali (on Pânin i 2.4.10 and 6.3.109). In these sources the ex-
tent of the Äryävart
a corresponds to the "middle region" of Manu (1.21), and this re-
gion coincides with the natural range of the black buck. The meaning of brahma in
Brahmävart a is unclear. Only two commentators explain the term. Näräyana
: brahmä-
vartate 'nuvartate yatra, which leaves the meaning somewhat ¡n doubt; although it
probably means the Veda, which would be my first choice also. Nandana glosses with
dharma.
2.23 foreigners: often translated "barbarians," mleccha refers to individuals and groups that
do not belong to the mainstream of society represented by the four varnas as envisaged
by Brahmanical theologians. They include foreigners, as well as tribal and other
groups not forming part of the accepted society. Their speech is different (see 10.45),


--- PAGE 257 ---
246 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2
they tend to live in geographically distinct areas (see 2.23), and sometimes they are
coupled with Südra s (12.43). See Parasher 1991.
2.27 
tying of the Munja-grass cord: the reference is to vedic initiation (2.36f), at which the
tying of the girdle around the boy's waist is a central ritual element (2.43).
2.28 body is made brähmic: all commentators take this to mean that the body is made fit for
union with Brahman, all, except Medhätithi , repeating the same gloss: brahma-
praptiyogya ("fit for attaining Brahman"). That this was not a unanimous view is evi-
denced by Medhätithi , who gives two opinions of other interpreters. One of these takes
brahma in this expression to be the Veda. The meaning would then be that the man's
body is made fit for learning and reciting the Veda, or a fit receptacle for the Veda (see
1.93 n). There is, I think, much to commend this interpretation. The other interpreta-
tions are clearly influenced by Vedânti c thinking. Further, it is difficult to see how,
within a Vedânti c view, the body can be made fit for attaining Brahman! This passage
clearly relates to verse 26 that spoke of consecrating or perfecting (samskära) the body
and must carry a similar meaning. The term brähimya does not occur elsewhere in
Manu.
2.29 male child: the specification relates to the phrase "to the accompaniment of vedic for-
mulas" (mantravat). For girls, the same ceremony is performed without such formulas
(cf. 2.16 n; 2.66). Commentators also note that the specification "male" also excludes a
napumsaka, children of indeterminate sex, such as hermaphrodites.
fed gold, honey, and ghee: clearly, the baby is too young to feed him any of these
things. A small mixture is placed within the mouth. Further, gold is obviously not fed
to the child. Either a piece of gold is placed in the mouth or, as some commentators
explain, the ghee and honey^are touched with gold before being placed in the baby's
mouth. Some Grhyasütras (SänkhGr 1.24.3; PärGr 1.16.4) state that these are fed with
a golden spoon or from a golden vessel, while others include gold dust in the mixture
(ÄsGr 1.15.1).
2.31-3 
For a Brahmin . . .for blessing: Kullük a gives the following examples for the four
classes: subhasarmä, balavarma, vasubhuti, dmadasa. For girls irrespective of class:
yasoda, dem, suvadanä, mañgaladevl, subhadrä.
2.38 
Sävitrl: the Savitrï verse is frequently used as a metonym for the rite of initiation, the
imparting of this verse constituting a central element of it.
sixteenth year: we must assume on the basis of the statement in verse 36 that all ages
are counted from conception rather than from birth.
2.40 
vedic links: these refer to any type of ritual relationships, such as officiating at an ini-
tiation or a sacrifice, teaching, studying, and the like.
2.43 
When Muñja . . . Balvaja grass: the plural kartavyäh ("they should be made"), accord-
ing to the commentators, indicates that many girdles are intended. Thus the three subs-
titutes are meant for the three classes, respectively. According to this interpretation, the
statement "When Muñja grass is unavailable" must implicitly mean when any of the
standard material for the three classes is unavailable. Nârâyan
a sees muñja as elliptical,
the full form being muñjadi ("Muñja etc."): munjädyaläbha
 ity âdipadam ¡upturn dras-
tavyam.
One should wrap . . . five knots: the Sanskrit is very terse and elliptical. The major
problem in interpretation is the first word trivrtä ("threefold"). Most commentators
take it as an adjective qualifying granthinä ("with a knot"), supported by the fact that
both are in the instrumental. Bühle r translates: "a single threefold knot." Jha appears to
take it separately: "triplicated"; Doniger also: "triple-ply." The connection with the
knots appears to make little sense, because the number of possible knots are clearly
given. Bühle r is forced to give a convoluted explanation: "seems to mean that each of


--- PAGE 258 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 
247
the strings of the girdle shall first be knotted, and the three knots be afterwards tied to-
gether in one." The fact that the cord is made combining three strings (Doniger's
triple-ply) is already stated in verse 42.1 think that in the second half of verse 43 Manu
is making a transition from the girdle's manufacture to the way it is worn; hence the
mention of the knots. Within this context, trivrtä probably refers to the number of
times the cord is wrapped around the waist before tying the knots. This is precisely the
meaning given to it by Näräyana
: sä ca mauñjí trigunavalitâ trivrtä katau_ trir
vestanena dharyä. For this custom of wrapping three times, see SankhGr 2.2.1; ÄpGr
4.10.11. The commentators are unanimous that the number of knots are not specific to
the three classes; because the particle va ("or") is used, they see here a simple option,
some noting that one should have the number of knots customary in one's own family.
2.44 twisted upwards: most commentators take this to mean that the strands are twisted to
the right. The Sanskrit ürdhva may, however, mean also the north. Nandana comments
that the person places the strands on his left palm and twists them upward with his
right palm. Both, however, may be correct, in that the strands are twisted upwards and
towards the right of the person performing the task. Doniger's "put on above (the right
shoulder)" is off the mark; the discussion here is about the manufacture rather than the
manner of wearing; and the term is vrta and not dhrta.
2.49 placing .. . at the end: the set formula for requesting almsfood is: "Madam, give food"
(bhavati bhiksäm dein; see BDh 1.3.16), which is how a Brahmin would say it. A
Ksatriya would say "Give, Madam, food" (bhiksäm bhavati dehi) and a Vaisya, "Give
food, Madam" (bhiksäm dehi bhavati). The formula implies that it was the housewife
who normally distributed food to students and mendicants.
2.51 
without guile: commentators and translators connect this syntactically with the presen-
tation of the food to the teacher. The translation would then be: "After collecting as
much almsfood as he needs, he should present it to his teacher without guile." Medhä -
tithi says that the student should not cover delicious items with inferior ones when he
presents the food to the teacher. I think, however, that the expression refers rather to
the manner of collecting food; for example, he should not hide any food that may make
the donor think he has less food than he actually has. The major reason for this inter-
pretation is that the expression occurs in the same foot of the verse as the other term
qualifying begging, namely, "as much as he needs" (yavadartham). In general, each
foot of a verse tends to form a single syntactic unit (see 1.4 n.).
2.52 
truth: the precise meaning oirtam is unclear. Medhätith i gives three alternatives: truth,
sacrifice, and the fruit of sacrifice, i.e., heaven. Näräyan
a gives the first two, and the
rest of the commentators take it to mean truth. Govinda, however, equates truth with
immortality (amrta). There is a slight possibility that the original reading was amrtain,
with the elision of the initial vowel due to sandhi; thus 'mrtam may have been changed
tortarn. But this reading is not found in any manuscript.
Addtional verse: "For twice-born persons, scriptures prescribe eating in the morning
and in the evening; one should not eat in between. This practice is equal to a fire sacri-
fice."
2-53 after sipping (upasprsya): Bühle r translates: "after performing an ablution"; Doniger:
"after he has washed." Both interpretations are wrong. The commentators uniformly
take the term to mean sipping water, and they are correct. Here we are dealing not with
washing or bathing but with the ritual sipping of water before and after a meal, as de-
scribed in verse 60. The same term upasprset occurs also in verse 58, where the
meaning is clear, and Bühle r translates it there correctly as sipping. See 3.208 n.
orifices: they are eyes, ears, nostrils, and mouth. For the procedure, see 2.60.
2.56 
eat between meals: the meaning is that he should not eat between the two main meals
taken in the morning and in the evening (see the verse added after 2.52). Medhätith i
agrees with this, but gives another possible meaning: one should not eat again after


--- PAGE 259 ---
248 
Notes to tire Translation: Chapter 2
interrupting a meal by getting up. He also cites the view of some who interpret the
term aiitara to mean that a man should hold the plate in the left hand and eat with the
right. According to this interpretation, the provision forbids eating food without
holding the plate in the left hand.
sullied with remnants: the word ucchista is a technical term for the state of impurity
resulting from the remnants of food attached to lips and fingers after eating. The same
term is used for food that remains after someone has eaten (leftovers), which are also
impure because they have come into contact with one's saliva. The extended meaning
of the term covers also impurities caused by other bodily functions, such as after
voiding urine or excrement. See Olivelle iggSb.
2.58 part of the palm . . . ancestors: the area of the palm used to pour water into the mouth
during sipping bears the technical name tfrtha, literally a ford on a river. As a tlrtha on
a river is where water comes into contact with the body, so the various parts of the
palm are the tlrthas through which water enters the mouth and the body.
2.59 
beneath these two: according to the commentators, this is at the bottom of the thumb
and the index finger.
2.63 When the right... cord down: the sacred cord is worn over the left shoulder and under
the right arm for rites connected with gods and on most other occasions (see 8.2 n.). To
wear it in this manner, one raises the right hand to pass the cord under it. The cord is
worn over the right shoulder and under the left arm (a pattern called pracînavlta in-
volving the raising of the left arm) at ancestral rites, and over the neck like a garland (a
pattern called nivita) in rites involving humans, such as sexual intercourse, sacramen-
tary rites, and going to the toilet. Another mode of wearing it ("suspended or tied
below") is given in BDh 1.8.10. The commentator Govinda explains this as tying it
below the navel when engaged in activities such as applying oil on or massaging the
body. See BDh 1.8.7-9; TS 2.5.11.1; Kane 1962-75, ii. 287-97.
2.65 shaving ceremony (kesanta): this rite of passage relates to the first shaving of the beard
of a teenage boy. The rite is also known by the name Godana ("gift of cow"), because
it involved giving a cow to the teacher.
2.67 For females . . .fires: this verse contradicts the previous one where all the consecra-
tory rites (samskära) were supposed to be performed also for women. Similar contra-
dictions abound in Manu (see Introduction, pp. 29-36). On the initiation of women,
see Kane 1962-75, ii. 293-95; Schmidt 1987, 25.
Two additional verses: "He should perform these together with her: cooking the vedic
oblation, establishing the sacred fires, offering all the sacrifices, and acts such as eating
the oblations. Every day the wife should tend the sacred fire, carrying it out in the eve-
ning, and offer the daily offering of Bali."
2.70 
dress in light clothing: commentators give diverse interpretations. Medhâtithi : dhauta-
väsäh,
 "washed clothes"; Nârâyana
: svalpavâsâh,
 "minimal clothing"; Govinda: asthu-
lavasanah, "not heavy clothing," which is given by Medhâtith i as an alternate
interpretation, the reason offered being that when the pupil is being punished, heavy
clothes will prevent him from feeling the pain! Kulluka and Räghavänanda
: pavitra-
väsäh,
 "clean clothes"; Nandana: anulbanavastrah, "not excessive clothing."
2.73 
When he . . . should cease: for the reading adopted in the critical edition and my inter-
pretation of this verse, see my note to this verse in the critical edition. I take "Teach,
Sir" to be uttered by the pupil and "Stop" to be uttered by the teacher. That the first is
said by the pupil is supported by TU 3.1-6; GobhGr 2.10.38; Oldenberg 1886-92,
I: 67 n. The ambiguity of the Sanskrit verb adhîhi, which means "recite," makes it
possible to ascribe it to the teacher. BUhler, following the reading of the vulgate,
translates: "But to him who is about to begin studying, the teacher, always unwearied,
must say, Ho, recite!" For the term bho, see 2.124.


--- PAGE 260 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 
249
2.75 
cleansed . . . grass: these are blades of grass carried in the hands or twisted around the
fingers to form a purificatory ring. The GDh (1.48) specifies that the various organs are
touched with blades of Darbha grass. Medhätithi , Näräyana
, and Govinda agree with
this, whereas Kulluka and Räghavänand
a take this to mean carrying the blades in the
hands. The Sanskrit pavitra can also refer to various purificatory texts and rites (see
11.226), and Nandana prefers this meaning.
2.76-7 The plionentes .. . SävitrT verse: these phonemes are the constituent parts of the sylla-
ble OM, the initial "o" being dissolved into the two simple vowels "a" and "u." The
three terms for the three spheres of the cosmos are referred collectively as vyahrti (call
or utterance) and are considered sacred sounds. Each of these triads, as well as each
foot of the three-footed Sâvitr ï verse, is viewed as the essence squeezed out (the San-
skrit evokes the milking of a cow) from each of the three Vedas, respectively. See 1.23.
Variant reading: "milked these from the three Vedas."
2.80 
timely . . . rite: Medhätith i and Govinda take this as a reference to initiation (see 2.38-
40), and other commentators as referring to such daily and obligatory rites as the fire
sacrifice and twilight worship. I prefer the latter interpretation, because the context is
the recitation of the Savitri rather than its initial imparting at initiation.
2.82 highest Brahman: here we have a subtle, and in Sanskrit imperceptible, transition from
brahman as Veda (in verse 81) to brahman as the absolute being or state (in verses
82-4).
2.84 
Offering ghee . . . standing: the reference is to a twofold division of rites within the
vedic exegetical tradition. The termjuhoti refers specifically to the offering of ghee in
the sacred fire (homo) carried out while the priest is seated on his haunches. The term
yajati refers to the offering of other substances in the fire (yaga) while the priest re-
mains standing.
The syllable . .. imperishable: here again we have a play on the double meaning of the
Sanskrit term aksara, which can mean both a syllable and something imperishable.
The aksara par excellence in both senses is the syllable OM, which is both a syllable
and the absolute Brahman.
2.86 four types of cooked oblations: probably four of the five great sacrifices that involve
cooked food: offerings to gods, ancestors, beings, and human guests (3.70).
2.87 Maitra: most commentators take this term in its usual sense to mean a man who does
good to all and harms none; all translators follow this interpretation. Bühler : "he who
befriends (all creatures) is declared (to be) a (true) Brähmana. " Räghavänanda
, how-
ever, proposes an interesting interpretation: mitra (friend and the deity Mitra) is the
sun, and maitra is a man devoted to the sun, i.e., to the Savitri verse, whose deity is the
sun. Thus maitra means a man who constantly recites the Sâvitrï , an interpretation fit-
ting the context, which is an eulogy of this verse. Especially in view of the fact that
this verse probably was followed immediately by verse 101 (on the possibility that
verses 88-100 were interpolations, see Introduction, p. 54), this interpretation of
maitra fits nicely with the discussion of the twilight worship of the sun in verse 101.
2.96 Variant reading: "Strongly attached as these sense organs are ..."
2.97 
gifts: some commentators take the term tyägäh
 to mean renunciation (samnyäsa-
dharmah). Medhätith i takes it as either gifts or giving up even permissible things, such
as honey and meat.
constraints: for the kinds of observances falling under the rubric niyama, see 2.175-7,
and 4.204 n.
2-99 foot of a skin: the simile is a water bag made of an animal skin. If any one of its feet is


--- PAGE 261 ---
250 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2
not properly sealed, water will spill through it, just as one's wisdom will slip away
through a single organ that is not properly mastered.
2.101 Variant reading: "he should remain always seated ..."
2.104 ritual of daily recitation (naityakam vidhim, literally, "the daily ritual"): the term
naityaka is used here by Manu, however, with specific reference to the daily vedic
recitation. See, for example, its use with this meaning in verses 106; and in verse 105 it
qualifies svädhyäya
 ("vedic recitation").
controlled: Medhätithi , Näräyana
, and Govinda gloss niyatah with sucili, "pure." In
verse 107, however, we see both these terms used, indicating that they are not used as
synonyms by Manu; see also 3.258.
2.105 Vedic Supplements: the six such supplementary sciences: pronunciation (siksa), meter
(chandas), grammar (vyakarana), astronomy (jyotisa), and ritual (kalpa)
2.106 The daily . . . Vaiaf:_this verse is a very brief allusion to a long passage in the SB
11.5.6.8 and cited in ÄpDh 1.12.3, where this theme is fully developed. A sacrificial
session (sattra) is a sacrifice where the officiating priests and the patrons are the same
individuals and which lasts a long period of time.
2.107 every single day: Manu may be using the word nityam intentionally, paralleling
naityaka (see 1.104 n.), which is used to qualify svädhyäya
 ("vedic recitation").
Variant reading: "When a twice-born, after controlling himself, performs ..."
2.108 rite of returning home: the rite of samävartana, which includes a ritual bath, concludes
the period of studentship (see 2.245; 3-4)- FOT a description of this rite, see Kane 1962-
75, ii: 405-15; Heesterman 1968. This verse appears to signal the transition from the
duties of the student to his relationship to his teacher.
2.109 an honest person: the term sucih could also mean a pure person (Olivelle iggSb).
Given that all the terms in this verse refer to internal dispositions or relationships to the
teacher, I have opted for honesty.
someone close to him: the term äptah indicates a close, often blood, relationship. See
5.101; 11.171.
one who is his own: commentators offer various interpretations of the term svah.
Medhätith i and Rämacandra : a son; Medhätith i and Govinda: a boy one has initiated;
Näräyana
, KullDka, Räghavänand
a and Nandana: a relative.
2.no idiot: all the commentators interpret the term jada to mean a man who cannot speak
(müka).
2.114 Variant reading: "Vedic knowledge said thus to the Brahmin ..."
2.114-5 Vedic knowledge .. . treasure: 
these two verses appear to be modifications of the
two verses in the Tristubh meter in VaDh 2.8-9. See also Nirukta 2.4.
2.117 greet first: most commentators take this to mean that the student should greet the
teacher before he greets anyone else. Medhätith i and Govinda, however, interpret
"first" (pUrvam) to mean that the student should greet the teacher before the teacher
greets him.
2.120 for when an older . . . retrieves them: this was probably a common proverbial saying.
It is cited also by Patañjali on Pänin i 6.1.84.
2.123 When greeting . . . simply say "l": Medhätith i and Govinda explain that this refers to
people who do not know Sanskrit and are thus unable to grasp the meaning of an
elaborate greeting. In such cases, one simply says "I greet you" (abhivâdaye 'ham), the
word "I" (ahani) in the verse being an allusion to this form of greeting.


--- PAGE 262 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 
251
2.124 bho: this is an interjection commonly used in addressing someone. It is especially
common in greetings between teacher and pupil, both using this particle to address
each other. It connotes both respect ("Sir") and endearment ("my dear"). It is viewed
as containing the essence of all names, because it can be used in place of any proper
name. Govinda gives the full form of such a greeting: bhadranamaham asmi bho, "I
am named Bhadra, bho."
2.125 he should say . . . prolate the previous syllable: there has been a lot of controversy re-
garding both the exact reading of this verse and its interpretation. For a detailed expla-
nation, see my note to this verse in the critical edition.
2.131 teacher's wife (gurupatni): I am not certain whether guru here refers specifically to the
teacher (see Note on the Trans., p. 69). In verse 142 guru is defined as the father. In
verse 133, however, we have a clear comparison with the mother, and it seems unlikely
that Manu would have used this roundabout way to refer to his own mother or step-
mother.
2.132 paternal and maternal relatives: the distinction between jñati and sambandhin (also
händhava) is not always clear. Sometimes the terms refer in general to relatives; but
when they are used together the terms appear to have more specific meanings, the for-
mer referring to paternal relatives and the latter to maternal relatives. The latter term
can also refer to relatives by marriage. See 4.179 n., 5.74, and Note on the Trans., p. 69.
2.137 Addtional verse: "Even a SQdra who follows the prescribed Law and practices the Law
every day ought to be honored always by people of all classes."
2.140 secret texts: the term rahasya probably refers to the Upanisads and perhaps also to the
Äranyakas .
2.142 "Elder" (guru): the term here is clearly applied to one's own father. For other mean-
ings of this term, see Note on the Trans., p. 69.
2.144 Variant reading; "who pierces both his ears ..."
2.145 greater: the Sanskrit term gaurava, literally "heaviness" or "gravitas," also refers to
the state of being a guru ("elder"). At one level then, the meaning is that the mother is
a thousand times more a guru than the father, who was presented as the guru par ex-
cellence in verse 142.
2.158 According to an interesting variant reading in the parallel passage in BhP, the transla-
tion is: "As fruitless as a woman with women," which nicely parallels the next com-
parison of a cow with cows. This is a significant reference to lesbian relationships in
ancient India: see also 8.369-70.
2.160 reaching the end of the Veda: commentators offer diverse explanations of the expres-
sion vedantopagatam. Most take vedänta to mean the Upanisads and the entire ex-
pression as a reference to the fruit of Upanisads, which is final liberation (moksa). I
follow Nandana's interpretation. A teacher is supposed to have studied the entire Veda,
that is, gone to its very end. The fruit of such learning is obtained only by a man who
purifies and guards his mind. It is possible that both meanings are implied here.
Medhatithi takes anta to mean siddha and explains the expression to mean the fruits of
various rites established ¡n the Veda.
2.161 aberrant language: all the commentators take alokyam to mean speech that prevents
one from attaining heaven. I prefer to see lokya as something common or usual among
people, and its opposite as something aberrant or uncouth. I think the verse refers to
the use of foul language.
2.164 ascetic toil consisting of vedic study: the meaning of the expression brahmadhi-
gamikam tapah is unclear. All the commentators, except Nandana, take it to mean


--- PAGE 263 ---
252 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2
austerities that are prescribed as connected with or conducive to the study of the Veda.
Bühle r gives a somewhat different interpretation: "cumulatively perform the various
austerities and the vows prescribed by the rules (of the Veda)." I follow Nandana in
seeing the study of the Veda itself as the ascetic toil of students, as clearly stated in
verses 166-7. Being the very first verse of this section, it is natural to see here a
reference to the central element of a student's life; the practice of other observances
and austerities is dealt with in the very next verse.
2.174 The very same . . . initiation: Bühle r places "student at the initiation" within paren-
theses, because the words are missing here. I believe, however, that the phrase krtopa-
nayanasyäsya ("for one who has been initiated") is carried over into this verse by the
common practice of anuvrtti.
2.184 He should not. . . are available: this sentence is extremely elliptical, and my transla-
tion, just like BUhler's, is explanatory rather than literal. For paternal and maternal
relative (jnätibandhu), see 2.132 n.; 5.74 n.
2.185 heinous sinners: the technical term abhisasta probably refers to public sinners or
socially ostracized people. Acts making someone a heinous sinner are given at ÄpDh
1.24.6-9 and VaDh 23.14.
2.186 above ground: the word vihäyasi literally means in the sky. Clearly this is an idiomatic
expression meaning above ground or on an elevated space. Indeed, a variant recorded
in BhP and Lafareads grhopari ("on top of the house/roof).
2.188 Two additional verses: "Almsfood shall not be counted as 'other people's cooking' [cf.
3.104], nor does almsfood constitute the acceptance of a gift. Almsfood is equal to
drinking Soma; therefore, he should subsist on almsfood. Almsfood that is pure in its
origin, that has been sprinkled with water, and that has been offered in the fire—each
mouthful that he eats from such almsfood is equal to a sacrifice."
2.193 right arm uncovered: the literal meaning of uddhrtapänih is that he should have his
hand raised. Most commentators rightly take "hand" (pañi) here as meaning "arm"
(bähu). Raising here, as in the context of wearing the sacrificial cord (cf. 2.63 n),
means raising the (right) arm when wearing the upper garment or shawl. It goes over
the left shoulder and under the right arm, thus leaving the right arm and shoulder un-
covered. Incidentally, this is precisely the way Buddhist monks are depicted as wear-
ing their robes when they were in the presence of the Buddha. Uncovering the right
shoulder appears to have been a mark of respect (8.2 n.).
cover himself well: the critical edition has adopted the reading susamvrtah. Medhâtith i
interprets this to mean controlling speech, mind, and eyes (vanmanascaksubhir
niyatätmä).
 But this was already stated in the previous verse. He gives the opinion of
some that it refers to covering the body with a garment (vastrenäcchäditasarlrah);
 and
this interpretation is followed by Râghavânand
a and Kulluka. See 11.109 where the
term is used with the same meaning; and 7.102, 104 where we have the extended
meaning "cover" in the sense of keeping well guarded ("under wraps"). If we follow
the alternate readings susamyatah, the translation is: "keeping himself well con-
trolled"; and samähitah: "self-possessed."
2.195 standing: if we take this literally and in conjunction with not sitting or lying down,
then the student can never speak with the teacher! Only Medhâtith i and Râghavânand
a
note this problem. The latter explains that the student should not speak "standing far
away." Medhâtithi , rightly I think, explains that the student should not speak while
standing in one place. This agrees with the statement in verse 196 that when the teacher
is standing the student should walk towards him when he wants to speak. Doniger's
"standing with his face turned away" does not work because we have a na ("not") be-
fore each word.


--- PAGE 264 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 
253
2.zoo Wherever . .. else: given the context and especially the statement in verse 201 directed
at the pupil, those doing the reviling are most likely his fellow students living at the
teacher's house, who may occasionally say nasty things about their teacher, rather than
evil people out in the world (so Medhätithi) .
2.204 on a cart • • • spread of grass: all the commentators divide the long Dvandva com-
pound go'svostrayänapräsädaprastaresu
 into two section: first a Tatpurusa section:
go''svostrayäna which combines with the rest as Dvandva. Medhätith i recognizes that
this is an odd way to dissolve the compound and explains that it is impossible for two
men to ride on the bare back of an ox. He further explains that yukta ("yoked") is
dropped from the compound, just as we drop it in dadhighata (curd pot), when it
should be dadhiyuktaghata "pot containing curd." If we take each item in the com-
pound separately, then the translation would be: "He may sit by his teacher on an ox,
horse, camel, cart, terrace, or a spread of grass." See ÄpDh 1.8.12.
2.205 his own elders (svä n gurün) : this is a wonderful example of the multiple meanings of
the term guru (see Note on the Trans., p. 69). The term is used five times in the verse,
four times as teacher and once as elders, meaning one's own father and other senior
relatives.
2.207 Ärya sons: in all likelihood "Ärya " here refers to the three twice-born classes. This
would exclude any son born to a SQdra wife of the teacher, something implied here in
spite of its condemnation 313.14-9. On the number of wives permitted to a Brahmin,
see 9.149-151. I follow Medhätithi , Nârâyana
, Govinda, Kullüka , and Nandana in tak-
ing Äry a as qualifying the teacher's sons. Some take Äry a as referring specifically to
sons born to Brahmin mothers. The reading preferred by Medhätith i is guruputre
tathäcärye,
 according to which the translation would be: "Towards distinguished per-
sons, as well as the teacher's son who has taught him. . . ." This is quite out of place,
because that eventuality is the subject of verse 208.
2.212 the attractive and the unattractive: the literal meaning of gunadosau is "good/quality
and bad/fault," and many commentators accept a moral meaning. I think Medhätith i is
correct in connecting this with sexual attraction: "The 'good' and 'bad' meant here are
the pleasures and pains arising from sexual love, also the beauty and ugliness of
women." The reference may simply be to boys old enough to be sexually attracted to
the young wives of the teacher.
2.220 for one day . . . recitation: the recitation is of the Sävitr i verse. Several commentators
specify that when he is asleep at sunrise he should fast that day, and when he is asleep
at sunset he should fast that night. They follow GDh 23.21: "Someone who is asleep at
sunrise should stand during that day, remaining chaste and without eating any food;
while someone who is asleep at sunset should jitand during that night reciting the
Sâvitr ï verse." A similar provision is given in ÄpDh 2.12.13-4; BDh 2.7.16; VaDh
20.4-5. Medhätithi , however, disagrees because day (dinam) is specified. He sees here
an option: a strong person may do it during the night; others can do it during the day.
2.224 triple set (trivarga): commonly called purusärtha (7.100), the three aims or goals of
human existence, this classification of the three areas of human enterprise is mentioned
by Manu at 7.27, 151; 4.175; 12.38. See also 2.13,112; 4.92,176; 6.64; 8.75. For a study,
see Malamoud 1982.
2.229 other rule of conduct: the meaning of dharmam anyam is not altogether clear. Only
Medhätith i comments on this, saying that the student should not undertake any relig-
ious activity that would hinder his service to his parents and teacher. Examples include
going on pilgrimage and fasting. Manu may also have in mind a student becoming an
ascetic before getting married, a common theme in Brahmanical literature.


--- PAGE 265 ---
254 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2
2.230 three orders of life: some have taken this as evidence of a primitive structure of three
äsramas. Within the context of the student, who is already in the first äsrama, the three
must refer to the remaining three to which he aspires. See Olivelle 1993, 109.
three Vedas: Räghavänand
a further specifies that the father is the Rgveda, the mother
is the Yajurveda, and the teacher is the Sâmaveda .
2.232 householder: it is anomalous to bring in the householder within the section addressed
to a student. Govinda says that this simply indicates that these duties are incumbent
also on the householder. Medhâtith i tries to explain away the problem by saying that it
is only as a householder, when his parents are old, that a student needs to look after
them. It is more likely that this is an indication that these verses were incorporated here
by Manu from a different source and a different context.
2.235 another rule of conduct: the Sanskrit has the elliptical anyam. This is probably a short-
hand for anyam dhannam of verse 229, which is also the interpretation of Govinda and
Kullüka .
2.237 When these three are gratified: the Sanskrit is again elliptical trisv etesu. Here also I
detect a shorthand for these three being gratified, as we see in verse 228.
2.240 Variant reading; "as well as irreproachable crafts, may be accepted ..."
2.243-4 If he wishes .. . Brahman: these two verses are connected to the section on life-long
students at 2.247-9, and it is somewhat of an anomaly for the verses concluding the
life of a student (245-6) to intervene. Logically, it would have been better for 243-4 to
come immediately before verse 247.
2.246 Variant reading: "a cow, a horse, an umbrella, footwear, a seat, grain, vegetables ..."
CHAPTER THREE
3.2 
three Vedas: the Sanskrit vedan is in the plural denoting simply that there are more
than two. The reference to the three Vedas in the first verse makes it clear, however,
that the reference here is to the three Vedas.
without violating his chastity (aviplutabrahmacaryah): the Sanskrit is vague and can
refer to any rules or vows associated with studentship. I think, however, that brahma-
carya here refers specifically to his vow of chastity, which is also the interpretation of
Medhâtith i and Govinda. See ÄpDh 2.21.8 ata eva brahmacaryavan pravrajati, "from
that very state |i.e., studentship], remaining chaste, he goes forth," where brahmacarya
has the same meaning within a similar context.
3.3 
When he has . . . a garland: the first half of this verse is quite obscure and commen-
tators interpret it in widely different ways. Most gloss pratitam with khyâtain,
"renowned/famous," and this interpretation if followed by Bühle r and Doniger.
Medhâtith i takes it to mean "inclined to enter the householder's state." I think Nandana
is correct in taking it as referring to the student's return home from his teacher's house.
The compound brahmadaya also is variously explained. Many take it as a Dvandva:
the Veda and the inheritance; or as meaning "the inheritance that is the Veda."
Nandana thinks that the student takes money from the father to give the teacher his fee.
Bühle r takes this as referring to the Madhuparka (honey mixture, 3.119 n) that the
teacher gives his student upon completion of his studies.
3.5 
lineage: the term sagotra refers to a family line that is connected to a single ancient
teacher as a common ancestor. The definition of this relationship is quite vague and
often confused in the literature: see Kane 1962-75, ii. 479-501. Gotra is connected to
another ancient Indian kinship category called pravara based on having the same


--- PAGE 266 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
255
ancestral seer. Each gotra may have several pravaras. "Connection of gotra and
pravara may be stated thus: Gotra is the latest ancestor or one of the latest ancestors of
a person by whose name his family has been known for generations; while pravara is
constituted by the sages or in some cases the remote ancestor alone" (Kane, 1962-75,
i>- 497)- Two persons related through the one or the other are not permitted to marry
each other.
unrelated to him by marriage: for the reading amaithunî and its possible meaning see
the note to this verse in the critical edition. The vulgate reading is inaithune, whose
meaning is unclear. Bühler , following most commentators, translates: "is recommend-
ed to twice-born men for wedlock and conjugal union." Nandana, who reads amaith-
unl, interprets it to mean a woman who is a virgin (aksatayoni), which is the interpreta-
tion also of Doniger.
3.8 
without or with too much bodily hair: this provision goes against the other which
requires a girl to be given in marriage before puberty. "Without hair" (alomika) refers
frequently to a pre-pubescent girl who has no pubic hair, often called nagnikä (BDh
4.1.11; VaDh 17.70). On the prohibition of sex with a "girl without hair," see PärGr
2.7.9 (ajâtalomnïni). For a long description of the bodily characteristics of a girl, see
ÄpGr 1.3.11-8. For a discussion of the verses dealing with factors that disqualify a
woman, see Sandahl 2001.
jaundiced-looking: several commentators take pingalam as referring to red eyes, an
interpretation followed by Bühler . Nandana thinks that the term can refer to either eyes
or skin, and Näräyan
a takes it as referring to reddish yellow color.
3.9 
Additional verse: "He should not marry a woman who is too fat, too lean, too tall, too
short, or too old; who is deficient in any limb; and who is fond of quarreling."
3.11 
A wise man . . . in force: the major disagreement among interpreters centers on the
compound putrikadharmasafikaya'. Näräyana
, Kullüka , and Räghavänand
a divide this
compound thus: putrikä-adharina-sankayä.
 Bühle r and Doniger follow this division.
The translation would then be: "because of the fear (the she is) a 'female-son' or (of
committing) a sin." The first fear is generated by the absence of a brother and the
second by the absence of the father (she may be related to the prospective husband or
born illegitimately). I follow the interpretation of Medhâtithi , Govinda, and Nandana,
who divide the compound thus: putrikä-dharma-sankayä,
 "because of the fear that the
Law of 'female-son' may be in force." In this interpretation, the absence of either a
brother or the father may give rise to this fear. The first is obvious. As Medhatithi
points out, when the father is absent it is not possible to find out whether the girl has
been appointed as putrikä. On this institution, see 9.127-140. This custom was very old
and discussed at length with Iranian parallels by Schmidt 1987. See VaDh 17.16 citing
RV 1.124.7; the same interpretation of this RV verse is given by Yäska , Nirukta 3.5.
3.12 
preferable women (varäh) : because manuscripts regularly omit the avagraha, the
reading of kramaso varäh is ambiguous; it could also be kramaso (a)varäh. Medha-
tithi, Näräyana
, Govinda, and Kullük a take it as varäh, with the gloss sresthah
("best"). Räghavänanda
, Nandana, and Rämacandr a read avaräh, meaning either lower
or of lower caste. Because the preferable wives in terms of varna are given later in the
list, I think the reading without avagraha is more plausible. See the note to this verse
in the critical edition.
3.14 
story: the reference must be to stories of ancient people, whose behavior may be
viewed as providing legitimation for taking a Südr a wife. For such stories, see 7.41;
10.105-8.
3.16 
by producing . . . through her: I follow Medhâtithi , Govinda, and Nandana in inter-
preting the rather ambivalent compound tadapatyatayä. Literally, it means "by means
of the state of his being a man-with-children through her"; in other words, he has


--- PAGE 267 ---
256 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
children only through the SOdra wife. This interpretation is supported by the statement
in 3.64. Others take it as referring to a son's son; so a man falls if he gets a grandson
through a SOdra wife. This interpretation is given in some interpretive verses of the
Bhavisya Parana cited by Näräyana
. Both the Bhavisya and Näräyan
a also think that
these are not the views of the respective seers, but injunctions that apply to people who
belong to their lineages (gotra). So, for example, a man belonging to the lineage of
Atri falls from his caste simply by marrying a Südr a woman. This is quite implausible.
3.19 
begets himself: on the theme of a husband begetting himself as his son through his
wife, see Olivelle 1993, 41-6.
3.23-6 It is very clear that these four verses contain differing opinions about the legitimacy
of the ten types of marriage. These ten were ingrained in the tradition, and Manu could
not simply ignore them. Here, I think, Manu gives three views of different authorities.
In the normal manner of Brahmanical disputation, the views to be rejected are given
first (pürvapaksa) and Manu's own view is given last in verses 25 and 26; the word
ilia, namely "here in this treatise" (see 1.42 n.), supports my conjecture. Commenta-
tors, however, attempt to reconcile these conflicting views.
3.26 
conjointly: that is, when the two have become lovers first according to the Gändharv a
mode, and then the man abducts the willing girl from her father's house.
3.31 
When a girl is given: all the commentators, except Ramacandra, divide the compound
kanyäpradänam
 as kanya + äpradänam,
 Medhätith i glossing anayanam and the others
svikäram. The word äpradäna
 is not noted in any dictionary. The problem is created
by the gerund dattva, whose subject, according to normal Sanskrit syntax, should be
the same as the subject of the verb or verbal equivalent of the main clause. Here, it is
clear that the subject of dattvâ is the prospective bridegroom. In this context, dividing
kanyäpradänam
 as kanyä + pradänam ("giving away the girl") will not work. The
commentators have resorted to reading the word äpradanam ("receive") rather than the
more common pradänam ("giving away'). Either the commentators are correct in re-
cording this uncommon word, which I very much doubt; or, more likely, kanyapra-
däna is a frozen form that Manu uses for the giving away of the girl after the payment
of the bride-price by the groom.
3.32 
based on sexual union: all the commentators, except Näräyana
, interpret the term
maithunyah to mean that this sort of marriage is conducive to sexual love. Medhätith i
explains: maithunaprayojano maithunah, tasmai hito maithunyah (see Pänin i 5.1.5).
Accordingly, Bühle r translates: "has sexual intercourse for its purpose." I agree with
Thieme (1963,197) that the meaning here is that the marriage springs from or is found-
ed on their act of sexual intercourse. Thieme points to Pänin i 4.3.53 explaining the de-
rivative as tatra bhavah.
3-33 
"Fiendish" procedure: on the Indo-European parallels to this form of marriage, espe-
cially the Roman abduction, see Watkins 19943, 425.
3.37 
does good deeds (sukrtakrt): all the commentators interpret this to mean "if (yadi) he
performs meritorious acts," an interpretation followed by Bühler . It is also possible
that such a son was viewed as naturally prone to doing good deeds. Such natural pro-
pensities of sons resulting from their parent's marriages are assumed in verses 39-42.
from evil: Medhätith i and Kullük a take the term enasah as a reference to the evil state,
i.e., hell. Others, followed by Bühler , think that it refers to sins (papa).
3.40 
beauty, spirit, and virtue: I take the compound rupasattvaguna to contain three sepa-
rate items (following Kullük a and Räghavänanda
) and interpret sattva to mean "spirit"
in the sense of energy and intelligence (Räghavänanda
: bala). Bühle r translates:
"Endowed with the qualities of beauty and goodness," which is the interpretation of
Medhätithi , Näräyana
, and Nandana.


--- PAGE 268 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
257
3.42 
inviting people's reproach: the exact syntactical relation of the genitive nmäm is not
altogether clear. Govinda and Kulluka, followed by Bühler , connect it with prajä
("offspring") oïpada-b; this seems to me improbable. Râmacandr a connects it with the
implicit prajä of pada-c: ninditä prajä bhavati nmäm, which is also the interpretation
of Doniger: "Blameworthy progeny comes to men from blameworthy (marriages)." I
think the term is connected to ninditä in the sense of a partitive genitive: "blamed
among men," that is, they are treated with contempt in the world.
3.45 
during her season: the "season" for the wife is the days of the month when she is fer-
tile, which were thought to be the days following her menstrual period. During that
time a husband was obligated to have sexual intercourse with his wife. ÄpGr 3.9.1 rec-
ommends even days from the fourth day (that is, the day when the period of menstrual
impurity ends with the wife's bath) to the sixteenth following the start of the menstrual
flow. See also 3.46-8.
moon's change (parvan): the new moon, the eighth day after the new moon, the full
moon, and the fourteenth day after the full moon. See 4.128.
3.46 
natural (sväbhävika)
: Medhätith i and most other commentators say that an illness may
prevent menstruation at the normal time and certain foods, such as ghee, may increase
the flow or bring it before its normal time. The time given is not simply the natural but
also the standard or the typical.
together with the other four days (caturbhir itaraih sârdham) : BUhler, following the
interpretation of most commentators, translates: "including four days which differ
from the rest;" so also Doniger. This is a laborious rendering of itara, which in its nu-
merous occurrence in Manu, always points to a contrast with the previous (see 1.70,
82,101; 3.35, 41, 77,113,137,182, 276; 4.225; 8.379; 9.102,107,156,162,181, 189,191,
242; lo.i, 2, 93 11.3; 12.106). The obvious meaning of itara forces us to take these
four days as "other" and, therefore, outside the 16 days mentioned in pada-b. Inter-
preted this way, the period of rtu lasts for 20 days. This is precisely what Nandana says
in his comments on verse 50, namely that the period beginning with the 2ist day from
the onset of menses is outside//».
It is clear that verses 46-50 are a commentary on the expression rtukäläbhigäml
syät ("he should have sex with her during her season") of verse 45. The commentary
spells out what is meant by rtu and further demarcates the days when sex is permitted.
The term rtu covers a longer period of time than the period when sex is enjoined; for
example, it begins at the onset of menses, establishing a clear beginning to the season.
But during the four days of the menstrual period, even though it is technically rtu, he is
not permitted to have sex with his wife.
3.47 
Of these . . . recommended: this verse is as obscure as the preceding. The commen-
tators and translators take the "first four" to refer to the four days of menstruation.
Then we have only 12 days remaining, and excluding the nth and the 13th, there are 10
nights when sex is permitted. This appears to be the view also expressed in the YDh
1.79. I think, however, that this is erroneous. The 16 days, as we saw in the previous
note, excluded the days of menstruation. Further, the word täsäm
 ("of these") is in the
feminine, agreeing with the 16 nights (rätryah, feminine), whereas the other four
"days" (ahobhih) is neuter. It seems, further, unnecessary to repeat that the four days
of menstruation is forbidden, when it was already stated clearly in verse 46. According
to my interpretation, the first four must refer to the first four nights after the menstrual
period. So, the prohibited nights are the four days of menstruation, the first four days
after that, and the nth and 13th days of the menstrual cycle. For further support of this
interpretation, see note to verse 50. For other forbidden days of the month, see 4.128.
3.49 
When the man's . . . takes place: this statement supports the previous one that one
should have sex on even nights. Govinda cites an Äyurvedi c text to the effect that the


--- PAGE 269 ---
258 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
female seed diminishes during even nights and increases during odd nights. For an ex-
tended discussion of this topic, see Carakasamhita, Sanrasthana, 8.
3.50 
Regardless . . . man lives: all the commentators take this statement literally and have
some trouble in explaining it. Govinda goes to the extreme in thinking that this provi-
sion even permits a renouncer whose son dies to have sex with his former wife twice
during her season without breaking his vow of chastity. KullOka takes this provision as
referring to forest hermits. I think the meaning is more simple. Irrespective of his
âsrama, even a householder can be a brahmacarin if he follows this rule. See similar
expressions at 6.66; 12.102.
during the other eight nights: most commentators take these eight nights to be part of
the 16 nights of the rtu, an interpretation followed by Bühle r and Doniger. Under this
interpretation, as the commentators clearly state, sex is permitted only on two nights,
excluding these eight plus the six forbidden nights out of the i6-night season. I think
the word anya here, just as itara in verse 46, contrasts these eight nights to the nights
of rtu mentioned earlier (20, if my interpretation of verse 46 is accepted). Then the rule
is very simple. A man who has sex with his wife only to produce offspring and not for
lust should be considered a celibate. During the last eight days of the cycle (outside the
above 20) the wife is infertile. During the four days of menstruation, she is both infer-
tile and unclean. During the first four days after menstruation and on the nth and the
13th, he is forbidden to have sex. All this accounts for 18 days. He should have sex
outside these 18 days; that is, during the 10 days, which is precisely what is stated in
verse 49. This interpretation has the added benefit of accounting for the 28-day men-
strual cycle. The only commentator who appears to support my interpretation is
Nandana, whose language is, however, somewhat unclear. But he makes this
significant remark about the eight days: ekavinisïprabhrtïnam rtor akälatväd
 astäsv ity
uktam, "the statement 'during eight' is made because the nights beginning with the 2ist
is a period outside the season."
3.52 
When relatives . . . course: relatives, as Medhâtith i clearly points out, are the woman's
father and the like, and not her in-laws. The context is the prohibition of a bride-price.
It is unclear whether nârïyanâni
 is a Tatpurusa or a Dvandva compound. Among the
commentators, Govinda, Kulluka, Nandana, and Ramacandra support a Dvandva,
whereas Medhâtithi , Näräyana
, and Räghavänand
a assume a Tatpurusa, as do Bühle r
and Doniger. I have taken it to be a Dvandva; it appears pleonastic to say the vehicles
belong to the women when the entire verse is dealing with the property of women. I
follow Govinda and Nandana in taking nan to mean "women," i.e., slave women. For
slavery in ancient India, see Bongert 1963. The sentence is clumsy, but I think we are
justified in taking the three words of pada-c as separate items illustrating "woman's
wealth" (stridhana). For studies on slavery in ancient India, see the bibliography in
Silk 1992.
3-53 At a "Seer's" .. . a sale: there is a diversity of opinion regarding the exact meaning of
this verse. The majority of commentators (Medhâtithi , Nârâyana
, Govinda, Nandana,
Ramacandra) think that Manu is prohibiting the giving of a cow and a bull to the
bride's parents. They recognize that this contradicts the provisions of verse 29.
Govinda says that the latter is the view of others (paramata), which Manu rejects.
Kullöka , on the other hand, disagrees with this interpretation. According to him, what
Manu rejects is the designation of sulka for this gift of a cow and bull. He recalls that
in verse 29 Manu uses the expression dharmatah, which he interprets to mean
dharmärtham, "for the sake of the Law." This cow and bull are to be used for ritual
expenses. The term sulka, on the other hand, refers to gratuities that the parents keep
for their own enjoyment. This, according to KullOka, is what Manu objects to. Râgha -
vânand a basically agrees with Kulluka, except that he takes the second half of the
verse also to be part of what "some say." I think Kulluka is right. Verses 51-4 appear
to constitute a single argument against bride-price. Verses 51 and 52 lay down Manu's


--- PAGE 270 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
259
point of view. In verse 53, I think, we have a possible argument against such a view.
The opponent cites the example of the Seer's marriage where a bride-price in the form
of a cow and bull is clearly recognized. Manu rejoins, saying that this is untrue. That
gift does not constitute a true bride-price (sulka). The reason is spelled out in the next
verse (54): when the relatives do not keep the bride-price for themselves, then it does
not constitute a sale; so it is not really a bride-price. Manu uses the word sulka only
three times (5.51, 53, 54) and always with a negative connotation.
That the bride-price was a common practice in ancient India is evident even from
Manu's own statements elsewhere in his treatise. For example, at 8.204-5 the giving
of a girl to her husband is viewed as a sale, and it is indeed listed under the third
vyavahärapada, sale without ownership (see also 8.224). At 9.93, 97 also the bride-
price is presupposed, although at 9.98,100 he again condemns it. The sale of the girl is
explicitly recognized in MS 1.10.11, where adultery on the part of the wife is condemn-
ed because she is cheating her husband who has bought her. See Thieme 1963, 208.
Two additional verses: "In this connection, those who know the past relate verses
sung by Yama. 'Given that even another man should not be sold, how much more
one's own offspring. When a human being wants to get money by selling another
human being, in the hereafter he will live on that person's urine and excrement.'"
3.56 
Where women are revered: following Kullük a and Govinda, I take yatra ("where") to
stand for yatra kule ("in which family"), an interpretation supported also by the paral-
lel reading of verse 57 tat kulam (see also verse 60). The word pujyante ("are revered")
implies—just as in the case of divine puja—not just a mental attitude but outward ex-
pressions of honor, as illustrated in verse 59. See 3.70 n.
3.63 
Variant reading: "respectable families fall into disrepute."
3.65 
by officiating . . . vedic knowledge: Kullük a and Nandana take pada-d as qualifying
kuläni, an interpretation followed by Bühle r and Doniger. Accordingly, the translation
would be: "Those families that are bereft of vedic knowledge quickly come to ruin by
officiating at sacrifices...." Under this interpretation, as Nandana explicitly states, we
would have the absurd conclusion that if a family is not bereft of such knowledge, then
it will not come to ruin even by engaging in these activities. I think this is mistaken. By
engaging in activities spelled out in verses 64 and 65 any family will come to ruin; and
then Manu adds a further provision in pada-d:: even without doing the above, a family
comes to ruin if it is bereft of vedic knowledge. See the parallel in pada-d of 63, where
also an added reason is given for the ruin of families. Variant reading: "respectable
families quickly come to ruin."
3.68 
broom: the term upaskara can refer to any type of household utensil; so Medhätithi :
grhopayogi bhändam kundakatähädi
 ("a vessel used in the house such as a bowl or
frying pan"). Kullük a agrees. Rämacandra : "winnowing basket"; Narayana and Rägha -
vânanda : "broom." The only other place where this term occurs is at 12.66, where also
the meaning is unspecified. In the current context, however, it may be preferable to
take it as referring to a specific household item, such as a broom, rather than to a vague
category, because all other items listed are specific. Given that this tool is supposed to
cause harm to living beings, broom is a better candidate than the other items suggested.
3.70 
honoring: especially when it entails hospitality, honoring (puja) always entails giving
of food etc. This connection between puja and feeding is reflected in the manuscripts,
which often give the variant bhojayet ("he should feed") for pujayet ("he should
honor"): see 3.106, 264. For puja, see Thieme 1939,105-23.
3.75 
here (iha): no commentator explains this word. Bühle r and Doniger see it as a refer-
ence to the man's current order of life (äsramd). I think this is wrong; in Manu, iha re-
fers regularly to this world or to this treatise (i.e., Manu). That the term in this verse
refers to this world is supported by the use of idam ("this") to refer to this world. The


--- PAGE 271 ---
260 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
meaning is that when he is devoted to these activities in this world, he supports this
world containing mobile and immobile beings. For the meaning of the term, see 1.42 n.
3.76 from food, offspring: 
BUhler, I think, has misunderstood this passage, translating:
"therefrom the living creatures (derive their subsistence)," although such a meaning
may also be implied here, given the context of the very next verse. The thrust of the
passage, however, is the chain of causation that brings about children, and the main
source of this image, I think, is the doctrine of five fires (pancSgnividya) found in the
Upanisads (BrU 6.2.9-16; ChU 5.4-10). This verse appears to have combined the view
that fire sacrifices reach the sun and bring down rain and the more specific doctrine of
the re-birth process entailed in the passage to the sun and back to the earth: the dead
person when cremated goes to the sun as smoke, returns to earth as rain, becomes ab-
sorbed into plants, and when eaten becomes semen and finally a child.
3.77 
Variant reading: "so people in all orders of life."
3.78 
most senior order of life: translators generally render jyestha as "most excellent" or
"best." I think, however, that Manu is here playing with the word jyestha, which is also
the term for the oldest brother (see 9.105-10). The eldest is supposed to look after his
younger siblings like a father. Manu applies this image to the äsramas. The house-
holder supplies food and knowledge to the others; so he is comparable to the oldest
brother. See also 1.93 where the Brahmin is called the eldest among the varnas.
3.79 
shouldered: here again Manu is playing with the word samdhärya. In the previous
verse he uses dliäryante with reference to the householder supporting people in other
orders. Now, he uses samdhärya with the double meaning of "undertaking/assuming"
and "bearing" the heavy burden of a householder's life. It is the householder who
through his five daily sacrifices supports the entire cosmos.
3.83 
at this: namely, at the daily ancestral offering forming part of the five great sacrifices.
At other types of sräddhas, such as the monthly pärvanasräddha,
 Brahmins are invited
to represent the All-gods (3.209). See, Kane 1962-75, iv: 403.
Variant reading: "he should not feed anything to a Brahmin."
3.84 
From the oblation to All-gods: the description of this rite in the 3.84-92 parallels its
description in SänkhGr 2.14: see Gopal 1962.
3.90 
being that . . . night: the SankhGr 2.14.16 specifies that he throw an offering in the
evening to those that roam during the night, and in the morning to those that roam
during the day.
3.91 
In the back house (prsthavästuni) : Blihler's translation "In the upper story" and
Doniger's "In the upper part of the house" are off the mark; so are the dictionaries of
B-R and M-W that assign this meaning to the compound citing this verse of Manu.
Back of a house is not at the top but the rear (as opposed to the front). The expression
must be an euphemism for the lavatory, like the English "out-house." In the context of
this rite, SankhGr 2.14.15 has anugupte dése, clearly referring to the "privy." The
GobhGr 1.4.10 uses the term adhivarcam, which the commentator Bhattanäräyan
a ex-
plains nmtroccäranapradesah ("place for voiding urine").
Variant reading: "Sarvätmabhüti.
"
3.92 
evil diseases: the term päparoga, which recurs frequently in Manu, does not refer
simply to a serious sickness. The disease is regarded as the consequence of sins com-
mitted in previous lives (see 11.48-53). Evil diseases are generally viewed as skin
diseases of various types.
3.94 
to a mendicant student of the Veda: opinion is divided as to the syntax of this sentence.
Medhätith i first takes bhiksave as qualifying brahmacärine, which is the interpretation
I have followed. He gives an alternate opinion that takes the two words separately.


--- PAGE 272 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
261
This is also the view of Näräyana
, KullDka, and Räghavänanda
, followed by Bühle r
and Doniger: "to an ascetic and to a student." However, this would require the copula-
tive ca ("and") to be placed after brahmacarine rather than after bhiksam, as
Medhätith i points out: casabdas cästhäne
 vrttänurodhäd
 brahmacarine ceti pathi-
tavyam. Govinda takes brahmacarine as qualifying bhiksave: "to a mendicant who is
celibate."
3.95 
to a poor man: for the reading gain dattvägor yathävidhi of the critical edition, see the
note there. The reading found in most editions and followed by all translators is gam
dativa vidhivad guroh, and according to this, the translation would be: "by giving a
cow to his teacher according to rule."
3.96 
garnish: the term satkrtya can also mean "having honored," which is the interpretation
of Medhätith i and Govinda. Then it refers to the Brahmin, who is to be so honored.
The expression satkrtya vidhipSrvakam occurs also at 3.99, where both these com-
mentators take it to mean garnishing or an elaborate preparation of food. The past par-
ticiple satkrtam occurring at 3.264 in a similar context also means garnishing. See also,
3.126; 9.129.
3.97 
equivalent of ashes: sacrifices are offered in a fire set ablaze. The mouth of a Brahmin
is often compared to such a fire, and his fire is ablaze only through vedic knowledge
(3.98). Feeding an ignorant Brahmin is like offering a sacrifice in ashes; both are
equally futile. See 3.168,181; VaDh 3.10.
3.98 
Four additional verses: "When someone gives to an unworthy man and fails to give to
a worthy man, he loses both wealth and merit by his failure to discriminate between
the worthy and the unworthy. What is given according to rule to a deserving person
who has come in the proper way and at the proper time yields the highest reward both
in this world and in the next. Twice-born persons acquire wealth lawfully through the
proper acceptance of gifts, through conquest, and through trade, in that order. If he de-
sires an imperishable reward, he should give to a virtuous man whatever is most
desirable in the world and whatever is most cherished in his house."
3.99 
Two additional verses: "A man obtains the same—and even a more excellent—reward
by feeding a Brahmin as he would by offering an oblation in the fire according to rule.
The reward of the latter is destroyed for the performer through a mistake in the ritual
formula or by a wrongly made oblation or fire offering, and that of the former by doing
it without a spirit of generosity."
3.102 He is called . . . is brief: here we have a phonetic etymology of "guest" (atithi) derived
from combining "a" from anitya ("brief) and "tithi" from sthiti ("stay"). Identical
verse at VaDh 8.7.
3.103 A Brahmin . . . sacred fires: that there is a problem with this verse is evident because
the identical verse at VaDh 8.8 has a very different second half syntactically separated
from the first half and identical with MDh 3.105 cd. First, the VJordsamgatika is some-
what unclear. Medhätith i thinks it is a gregarious man fond of telling wonderful and
hilarious stories. Similar interpretations are given by Govinda, KullOka, and
Räghavänanda
. Clearly, the commentators are unsure of its meaning. I think BUhler is
right in following the lead of Näräyan
a and taking it to mean someone who visits a
house on some business or for some social purpose. I think it refers specifically to a
friendly social visit; see samgata used in the sense of "friendship" at 3.140. There is
also much dispute regarding the meaning of the last päda. Medhätith i has the most
elaborate explanation: a) when he is away and his wife and fires are at home, then a
guest should be honored; b) when he is away accompanied by his wife and fires, then
also he must honor a guest, even though he is not at home. I think the meaning is
probably more simple: a man described in the first half is not to be regarded as a guest
even when he comes to a house that is "a complete house," i.e., with both wife and


--- PAGE 273 ---
262 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
fires. The implication is that when his wife is away, the husband should not be expect-
ed to entertain a guest.
3.104 Additional verse: "When a householder thrives constantly on someone else's food, all
his sacrifices, gifts, ascetic toil, and learning will belong to the owner of the food."
3.106 Variant reading: "Feeding a guest."
3.107 accompanying them as they leave: the host is expected to accompany the guest from
his house some distance as he leaves. Apastamba (2.9.2-4) is specific: "If a guest has
come in a carriage, he should follow him as far as the carriage; others he should follow
until they give him leave to return. If a guest forgets to do so, he may turn back at the
village boundary."
3.108 he need not. . . offering: the assumption is that the guest has arrived after the family
members have eaten and the food is over. Fresh food has to be cooked for the guest.
Generally, after cooking food one has to perform the Vaisvadeva and Bali offerings.
This provision calls for the omission of these offerings in the event of a second cook-
ing of food.
3.110 elder: most take guru here to mean "the teacher," whereas Näräyan
a takes it to mean
"the father." Given that relatives are listed separately, the meaning here favors the
teacher. See Note on the Trans., p. 71.
3.111 fulfilling the conditions of a guest (atithidharmena): Medhâtith i gives three such con-
ditions: that he has exhausted his provisions; that he lives in another village; and that
he arrives at mealtime. Nandana adds that he should be an unknown person.
3.113 with his wife: commentators note that this does not indicate that she eats at a time dif-
ferent from the husband's, because according to verse 116 the husband and wife eat to-
gether after the rest of the household, a practice rejected later at 4.43. Wife is
mentioned because guests other than close friends do not eat alongside the wife.
3.114 right after: the meaning, according to Medhâtithi , is that these should be given their
food as soon as the guests have started to eat; that is, they do not have to wait until the
guests have completed their meal, unlike other members of the family.
All the NT manuscripts read agrá eva in place of anvag eva adopted in the critical edi-
tion. According to that reading, the translation would be: "these he may feed without
hesitation even before the guests."
3.119 a friend: Bühler , following Medhâtithi , Govinda, KullOka, Râghavânanda
, and Rarna-
candra, translates priya as "son-in-law." Näräyan
a and Nandana take it as referring to a
friend.
honey-mixture (madhuparka): this drink presented to an important guest is made by
mixing honey into curd, milk, or water. See ÄpDh 2.8.5-8.
3.122 sacrifice to ancestors: this is a vedic (srauta) sacrifice called Pindapitryajña: cf. ÄsSr
2.6-7.
supplementary offering 
of rice balls: this refers to the monthly ancestral offering
(sräddha), which is not a srauta but a smârta rite, that is, a rite that is only enjoined in
the traditional texts, especially the Grhyasutras, and not the vedic texts.
3.126 offering proper hospitality (satkriyâ) : Medhâtith i and Rämacandr a take this as refer-
ring to special preparation of food, which agrees with the usage of satkrtya: see 3.96 n.
3.127 This rite . . . him always: this verse is very obscure, and I am not sure whether even the
commentators have understood it. It may be that the pretakrtyä of pada-a refers to the
vedic (srauta) offering for the dead, whereas the "non-vedic (lit., 'worldly') rite" refers
to the smârta ancestral rite (sräddha): see 3.122 n.
3.130 search far and wide: most commentators interpret durad eva parikseta to mean that


--- PAGE 274 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
263
one should look into even the remote ancestors of that person, an interpretation fol-
lowed by Bühle r and Doniger. I think this is farfetched. I follow Näräyan
a
(düragräniastham)
 and Burnell in taking durât as referring to distance rather than to
kinship.
3.134 Some Brahmins . . . ritual activities: Medhätith i and Näräyan
a take these four kinds of
individuals as representing the four orders of life: ascetic, forest hermit, vedic student,
and householder, respectively.
3.136-7 Between a man . . . as superior: the commentators and translators alike take these
two somewhat elliptical verses as referring to a father-son pair. In one case the father
is learned and the son ignorant, and in the other the son is learned and the father is ig-
norant. The conclusion is that the ignorant son whose father is learned is superior to
the learned son with an ignorant father. But this would contradict the statement of
verses 133 and 142 that one should not invite an ignorant man (here the son) to a rite.
According to my interpretation, the verses are speaking about two men who are as-
sumed to be learned. The question is who is better: the one whose father is learned but
whose son is ignorant, or the one whose father is ignorant but whose son is learned?
Manu comes down in favor of the former.
3.139 When a friend takes center stage: the compound mitrapradhänäni
 is not altogether
clear. Most commentators take it as referring to striking friendships through extending
invitations to ancestral and divine rites. Accordingly, Bühle r translates: "chiefly for the
sake of (gaining) friends." See, however, 3.18 where tatpradhanani refers to a SQdra
wife's participating at a rite performed by her Brahmin husband. See also 4.243; 12.46.
3.141 Such a sacrificial. . . same stall: variants of this interesting verse are found in ÄpDh
2.17.8 and MBh_ 13.90.39, both in the Tristubh meter probably indicating an earlier
version. In the ÄpDh, as well as in some recension of the MBh, the reading is pisäca-
bhiksä, "almsfood of ghouls." The simile is also different; instead of a blind cow in the
same stall, the point of which is unclear, we have a cow who has lost its calf and is
roaming around the corrals (säläntare
 gaur iva nastavatsa). The meaning appears to be
that the cow remains in the corral and does not go out to the pastures. Comparing the
sacrificial fee (daksina) to a cow is common in the vedic literature, principally because
the paradigmatic sacrificial fee is a cow.
3.144 handsome: Bühle r and Doniger, following the commentators, take the term abhirupam
to mean someone well qualified. I cannot understand how abhirüpa can be taken to
mean vidvat or gunavat, as the commentators do; and Näräyana' s gloss uktäbhimata-
rüpasälinam
 is an example of a clever pandit stretching a word beyond recognition.
The simple meaning of the term is "handsome," and it is used with precisely this
meaning by Manu at 9.88. Indeed, among the qualities of an invitee to an ancestral of-
fering listed by Gautama (GDh 15.9-10) are youth and beauty (rüpa).
3.149 Additional verse: "Of these, some defile those alongside whom they eat, as others pu-
rify those alongside whom they eat. I will now describe those alongside whom it is un-
fit to eat, the lowest of twice-born who are unfit to be invited to an ancestral rite."
3.150-2 
I think that these verses are taken from a source different from that of the long list
which follows. The two lists are somewhat repetitive, and kitava ("gambler") is actu-
ally listed twice (151 and 159), which has prompted some scribes to change it tokekara
fearing tautology (punarukti), as explicitly stated by Nandana. See also those who sac-
rifice for pugas paralleling gana of 163; and klîba ("impotent") at 150 and 165.
3.150 impotent: the term klîba has been subject to widely different interpretations. It probab-
ly did have a range of meanings, and in different contexts may have assumed some-
what different meanings. In general, it refers to males who are in some way sexually
dysfunctional or deviate from the cultural constructed notions of masculinity. Such in-
dividuals include the impotent, the effeminate, transvestites, hermaphrodites, and the


--- PAGE 275 ---
264 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
like. This term does not refer to castrated eunuchs; I think the term saiidha indicates
such a person, although there is scholarly disagreement even with regard to this. A
verse of Kätyäyan
a cited in the Dayabhaga (5.8,) gives a definition of kllba: "If a
man's urine does not foam, if his stool sinks in water, if his penis has no erection or
sperm, he is called klfba."
3.151 bald-headed: all commentaries take the term durväla to mean bad skin; so also Bühler .
Doniger (reading durbala) translates as "weakling." Bad skin or weakling does not fit
with the rest of the terms; they all refer to classes of people. "Bald-headed" here may
refer to kinds of ascetics, just like "matted hair."
3.154 neglects his ritual duties: a wide variety of opinions exist with regard to the meaning
of the term niräkrtih, Medhätith i listing no less than five possibilities. Medhatithi, fol-
lowed by Kullüka , Räghavänanda
, and Ramacandra, prefers the meaning "a man who
neglects the five great sacrifices"; so also BUhler. Näräyana
: "one who neglects his
vedic recitation"; and Govinda: "one who repudiates the Vedas and the like." Nandana
cites verses from Devala and Kätyäyana
, the former taking him to be a man who has
learnt and then forgotten the Veda, and the latter taking him to be a man who has set
up his sacred fires but then failed to perform the rituals due to laziness. The term also
occurs in GDh 15.18.
linked to an association: the precise meaning of ganäbhyantarah is quite unclear.
Näräyana
: "a village headman," with which Nandana appears to agree. KullQka and
Räghavänand
a think it means someone who has embezzled money from a corporation.
The term literally means "one who is within (or intimately connected with) a corporate
body." No other legal treatise has this term; the closest parallel I have come across is
GDh 15.18, where, within a similar list of people unfit to be invited, it lists ganapresya
"a servant of a corporation." I think a similar person may be intended here.
3.159 poison vendor (rasavikrayin): the term rasa may refer to any liquid, such as milk and
sugarcane juice, and also to poison, generally also a plant extract. Medhätith i and
Nandana opt for poison, whereas others take it to be sugarcane juice, sugar or other
sweets, and milk. The context, I think, supports poison.
3.163 breaches . . . obstructing them: the meaning, as Medhätith i clearly explains, is that
such a person cuts the side of a public water course to divert water to his own field.
Obstructing them may have the same purpose or, because the term ratah is used, may
indicate a man who takes perverse delight in obstructing the free flow of water.
3.164 officiates . . . bodies (ganänär
n yäjakah) : Näräyan
a and Nandana, rightly I believe, take
gana to refer to a group of individuals (see verse 154). The meaning here cannot be
much different from that of verse 151 (yajayanti ca ye pagan); both refer to someone
who officiates at a sacrifice collectively financed by a group. The GDh 15.16 has the
expression grämayäjaka
 with a very similar meaning. Other commentators take gana
to refer to a particular class of deities, such as Ganapati, an interpretation followed by
Bühle r and Doniger.
3.171-5 
It is likely that these verses, which constitute a commentary on five technical terms
used in verses 154-69, are a later interpolation to the text. At the very least, they con-
stitute a parenthetical remark. Their intrusion also breaks the natural continuity
between verses 170 and 176-82.
3.173 Didhisupati: this and the related term agredidhisupati have been subjected to different
interpretations. In many texts these two form a pair, and the meaning appears to be a
man who marries a woman whose younger sister is already married and a man who
marries a woman whose older sister is still unmarried, respectively. See, ÄpDh
2.12.22; GDh 15.16; VaDh 1.18; 20.9-10. Manu gives here a very different meaning to
didhisüpati. I agree with Bühle r that Manu takes these two terms as synonyms, because
173 is clearly a commentary on the term agredidhisupati of verse 160.


--- PAGE 276 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
265
3.184 expository texts: explained by the commentators as the Vedic Supplements (2.105 n-)-
3.185 three Nâciketa: Bodewitz (1985, 8-10, 25) has shown that this term refers not to par-
ticular fires but to the building of a special fire-altar bearing the name of Naciketas, the
central figure in the Katha Upanisad.
five sacred fires: the three mentioned at 2.231, as well as the hearth fire (ävasathya)
and the hall fire (sabhya).
3.186 given a 1,000: when the number is unspecified, cows, the paradigmatic gift, are under-
stood. Nandana, however, interprets it to mean either feeding a thousand Brahmins or
giving 1,000 Suvarnas (gold coins: 8.135). For numbers in the context of fines, see
8.120 n.
3.189 Additional verse: "Gods, together with the hosts of ancestors, would eat that food,
making the Brahmin their mouth; therefore, he should not neglect it."
3.192 primeval deities (pürvadevatäh)
: from the statements in verses 194-9 it is apparent that
these "ancestors" are not the immediate forefathers of a person but mythical ancestors
who originated at the very beginning of creation, identical with the great seers of the
creation account (1.34-37; see also 3.201). Gods themselves are the creation of these
seers. In verse 201, however, ancestors are called the sons of seers, but there
"ancestors" may be used more restrictively with reference to the specific ancestors of
various beings spelled out in verses 196-9.
3.201 Variant reading: "from ancestors, the gods and humans."
3.202 with a generous spirit (sraddhayâ) : the Sanskrit terms sraddadhäna and sraddhä are
often taken as referring to "faith." In the early literature, however, these terms are
closely associated with hospitality and generous giving. Greed and envy are given as
the opposites of sraddhä at VaDh 6.8; 8.9. See also MDh 4.224-5, where sraddhä of
the generous usurer is contrasted with the asräddha of the miserly scholar. For
sraddhä as generosity, see Jamison 1996, 176-84; Hará 1979,1992; Köhle r 1973.
3.207 Additional verse: "He should offer it diligently at Vyatipâtas , at solstices, at solar and
lunar eclipses, and at equinoxes." Vyatipât a is an astronomical point when the sun and
moon are in opposite courses, the sum of their longitudes being 180° .
3.208 after they have sipped water: commentators interpret the compound upasprstodakän as
both sipping water (acontan) and bathing (snätän).
 Within the context of eating, the
verb upa "vsprs generally refers to the ritual sipping of water: see 2.53 n.
3.210 collective consent of those Brahmins: the expression anujñato brahmanaih saha is
quite unusual. The straightforward way to interpret the syntax is to relate brahmanaih
saha with the verb kuryat; the translation would then be: "with (their) consent, the
Brahmin should make an offering in the sacred fire together with those Brahmins."
Clearly, this is not the way the rite was performed; therefore, the commentators are
forced to read a lot into the word saha. Medhätith i comments: brähmanair anujnätah
kuryäd iti sambandhah / saha sarve yugapad anujnam dadyuh ("permitted by the
Brahmins, he should make—that is the syntax; 'with', i.e., all should give their permis-
sion simultaneously"). In some way, therefore, saha should be related to anujnätah, in
a way similar to sahodita ("collectively stated").
3.213 ancient: Medhätith i reads the nominative purätanäh,
 followed by Mandlik and Jha. All
other commentators and the critical edition read the accusative purätanän,
 which gives
a better meaning and is the lectio difficilior. See 3.192 where ancestors are called
pürvadevatäh.
 Medhätith i himself gives the alternative accusative reading, which he
evidently prefers. If we follow the nominative reading, the translation should be: "the
ancients call these the gods of the ancestral offering."
3.214 end in the south: the term apasavyam is obscure and is variously interpreted by


--- PAGE 277 ---
266 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
commentators. See the attempt by ST to change the reading to prasavyam ("towards
the left"). Medhätithi , followed by Govinda, Kulluka, and Räghavänanda
, takes it as a
synonym of daksinasamstha, that is, performing any series of actions so as to termi-
nate towards the south. Näräyan
a and Ramacandra think it means wearing the sacrifi-
cial cord over the right shoulder (prâcînavîta;
 see 2.63 n); this is also Vijnänesvara' s
interpretation of the term at YDh 1.232. Nandana sees in it a reference to a hand gesture
(hastamudra). Kangle regularly translates this term in the Arthasästra as "leftwise,"
i.e., anti-clockwise (AS 1.20.4; 13.2.24; 14.2.38; 14.3.84).
3.216 those who partake of leavings (lepabhägin) : these are the three ancestors beyond the
third generation, i.e., the great-great-grandfather, and his father and grandfather.
3.220 If his father . . . Brahmins: why would the son perform an ancestral offering if his
father is alive? The father would normally do this. Here perhaps we have evidence of
retirement, when the property is divided during the father's lifetime and the son be-
comes the head of household and the chief ritual performer. Variant reading: "or he
may feed his own father at the ancestral offering."
3.226 Variant reading: "he should first set down on the ground the side dishes."
3.228 pressing . . . on them: I follow the interpretation of Näräyan
a and Nandana. The word
guna here must mean side dishes (vyanjana), which is its meaning in verses 226 and
233. All the commentators interpret the parallel in 233 in this manner, and it is unlikely
that the term would have a different meaning here. Medhätithi , Govinda, Kulluka, and
Râghavânand
a interpret the phrase in this verse, however, to mean: "proclaiming all
their qualities." This is followed by BUhler and Doniger.
3.230 ghosts: the term prêta generally refers to newly deceased persons, but here it probably
has an extended meaning of malevolent spirits. Several commentators gloss with
pisäca, "ghoul."
3.232 ancillary texts: the meaning of khila is unclear, but the probable reference, according
to commentators, is to ancillary texts of the Veda, such as Srîsûkta , legends, etc. A
significant variant reads purânâny
 akhilâni, according to which the translation would
be: "... epic narratives, and all the Puränas. "
3.234 goat's wool blanket: the term kutapa is ambiguous and medieval authors assign up to
eight meanings to it: midday, vessel of rhinoceros horn, woolen blanket, silver, Darbha
grass, sesame seed, cow, and daughter's son. See Kane 1965-75, iv: 376-7.
3.245 committed suicide: the term tyäginäm
 occurs only once more in Manu, at 5.89
(ätmanas tyäginäm)
 referring to suicides. This is the interpretation given here also by
Näräyan
a and Râmacandra . Various other interpretations are offered: Medhätithi ,
Râghavânand
a and an alternate opinion quoted by Kulluka: "those who abandon a
teacher and the like"; Nandana: "renouncers" (so also Doniger). Kulluka, as also
authors quoted by Medhätithi , join this word with kulayositam and interpret: "those
who have abandoned women of good family," which is followed by BUhler. See VaDh
11.22-4.
3.247 For a deceased .. . rice ball: the language of this verse is terse and compact, which has
led to both variant readings and variant interpretations. Many mss. and commentators
read äsapindakriyäkarma.
 The translation would then be: "Until the rite of Sapinda
(has been performed), at an ancestral offering for a newly deceased twice-born he
should feed one person omitting ..," (so Bühler) . Under this interpretation, the particle
ä would govern the accusative, a feature not encountered elsewhere in Manu, who
regularly uses the ablative (2.22, 38,108, 167, 171, 243,244; 3.279; 4.137; 5.88; 6.31;
9.89; 10.64; 11.104).
The second half of the verse is also compact, a lot of information being implied.
The word adaivam (singular) says both that a single Brahmin is fed and that he does
not represent the gods (Vaisvadeva). So, only one Brahmin representing the newly de-


--- PAGE 278 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 
267
ceased is fed; all others are eliminated. This type of sräddha is technically called
ekoddistasräddha, an ancestral offering intended for a single person. Such rites are
performed until the rite of Sapinda (or Sapindana or Sapindïkarana ) is performed, usu-
ally on the 12th day after death. This rite makes the newly deceased "share in the rice
balls" offered to the three preceding generations of deceased and thus formally consti-
tutes him as an "ancestor" (pitr). On ancestral rites, see Kane 1962-75, iv: 334-551.
3.248 above manner: verse 247 dealing with the newly deceased is a parenthetical comment.
Manu now picks up the thread of his argument by saying that after the Sapindana the
ancestral offering is carried out precisely in the manner described before the interrup-
tion.
3.251 Please, stay around: Bühler , following Medhâtithi' s explanation ofabhitah, translates:
"Rest either (here or at home)." I think both read too much into this polite invitation to
leave. That abhitah caused some problems is evident in the variant reading invented:
bho abhiramyatäm ("Sirs, do stay"). In polite discourse one does not ask a guest to
simply leave; so we have here the euphemistic "stay," which really mean "go." A
similar example is found in my mother tongue, Sinhala. When guests leave they say
"we'll come."
3.254 cow-pen offering: generally called Gosthïsrâddha , this is one of the twelve types of
ancestral offerings listed in medieval sources. Kane (1962-75, iv: 381-2) gives the
following description: "The Gosthï-srâddh a is one which is performed when a man be-
comes enthusiastic owing to talk about sräddh a or when many learned men gather
together at a sacred place and, finding it impossible to have separate cooking arrange-
ments for each, pool their resources for collecting sräddh a materials and perform si-
multaneously sräddh a for the pleasure it affords to themselves and for the gratification
of the pitrs."
offering for prosperity: called Abhyudayasräddha , these ancestral offerings are per-
formed on joyous occasions, such as the birth of a son.
3.256 Darbha . . . stated above: this verse is quite unclear. The repetition of pavitra (lit.
"means of purifications") has been interpreted differently. The first one is taken to
mean purificatory texts taken from the Veda, as well as purificatory blades of Kusa
grass (3.210). The second poses greater problems, because it is unclear whether it
stands alone or is syntactically connected with what follows. Bühle r opts for the latter,
translating: "and those means of purification, mentioned above." I have followed
Medhâtith i and Nandana in taking yac ca pürvoktam as a separate category (see the
similar expression beginning with yac ca in verse 257). The placement of ca after yat
clearly indicates that this is a separate entry. I think we should take one pavitra as re-
ferring to purificatory Kusa grass and the other to purificatory texts.
3.257 food of sages (munyannäni) : the designation for a variety of food items that are in
some way uncultivated (see 6.12-21), the most common being mvara, a kind of wild
rice.
meat, food without elaborate preparation: here again we have the expression nmmsam
yac cänupaskrtam (see 3.256 n.). Commentators and translators take anupaskrtam as
qualifying nmmsam, although there is no unanimity about the meaning of the former
term. Medhâtith i and Râmacandra : not forbidden; Näräyana
: not prepared with spices
(which appears to be Govinda's interpretation also: anatitiksnam); Kullük a and Rägha -
vänanda : not smelly or rotten. See 5.112; 7.98; 10.62 n. Following the pattern of verse
256, however, I think yac cänupaskrtam is a separate category in this list.
3.259 Additional verse: "May we have an abundance of food! May we obtain guests! May
there be people who beg from us! May we never have to beg from anyone!"


--- PAGE 279 ---
268 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3
3.261 towards the east: following the vulgate reading parastât ("after") Bühle r translates:
"Some make the offering of the cakes after (the dinner)." The critical edition has
adopted the reading purastät (either "before" or "toward the east"). Clearly this verse
gives alternative procedures of performing the rite. It is unclear, however, whether
purastät refers to the direction (as I have taken it) or to the temporal sequence
("before"). My interpretation is supported by verse 215 giving the standard procedure,
according to which the rice balls are offered toward the south. Here we have an alter-
nate procedure.
3.264 Variant reading: "feed also his maternal relatives."
3.267 Variant reading: "ancestors of men are satisfied for one month."
3.271 beef, milk (gavyena payasâ) : I take each word in this list to represent one item, an in-
terpretation supported by Râghavânand
a and authors cited by Medhâtithi . Given that
the three preceding verses contain exclusively the meat of various animals and the sec-
ond half of this verse also deals with meat, it is likely that here also we are dealing
with meat, with milk and milk products (which are generally cow's, in any case) acting
as substitutes for cow's meat. Most commentators, including Medhâtithi , however,
take gavyena as an adjective qualifying payaso. The translation would then be: "by of-
fering cow's milk"; so Bühle r and Doniger. This interpretation is probably influenced
by the later abhorrence of cow's meat.
3.273 Magha: this is the loth of the 15 constellations (naksatra). Nandana takes it as refer-
ring to the Magna month, roughly corresponding to January-February. Others take this
phrase to refer specifically to the 13th day of the dark half of the month of Bhädr a
(August-September) within the rainy season, when a particularly important ancestral
offering named Mahälayasräddh
a is offered. The legal literature developed intricate
rules regarding the dates and times for the performance of ancestral offerings. For de-
tails, see Kane 1965-75, iv: 369-77.
3.274 elephant's eastern shadow: this day is also called Gajachäyä
. As Kane (1965-75, iv:
371 n) has shown, medieval authors interpret this word differently, some even taking it
literally: one should perform the offering in the shadow of an elephant (so
Râghavânanda)
. Most, however, interpret it astronomically: it is the isth day of
Bhâdrapad a (August-September) when the moon is in the Mägh a constellation and the
sun in the Hasta constellation. See also Vijñanesvara and Visvarüp a on YDh 1.218.
Medhâtithi , Näräyana
, and Râmacandr a take it to mean late afternoon when the
shadow of an elephant is cast towards the east.
3.275 Six additional verses: "When a man performs an ancestral offering on the first day of
the fortnight, he obtains handsome sons; on the second day, daughters; on the third,
horses; on the fourth, small animals; on the fifth, splendid sons; on the sixth, success in
gambling; on the seventh, success in agriculture; on the eighth, success in trade; on the
ninth, one-hoofed animals; on the tenth, a lot of cloven-hoofed animals; on the elev-
enth, money and sons excelling in vedic learning; on the twelfth, gold, silver, and
money; on the thirteenth, superiority over relatives; and on the fourteenth, bad off-
spring. All his ancestors who have been killed by the sword in battle are gladdened. A
man who performs an ancestral offering on the fifteenth day obtains an abundance of
things that his heart loves and those specified for people who perform it on the first
days of a fortnight, as well as all his desires."
3.277 later fortnight, earlier fortnight: a lunar month begins on the new-moon day. The first
or earlier fortnight (pürvapaksa) is when the moon is waxing, and the later (apara-
paksa) is the fortnight of the waning moon.
3.284 Variant reading: "this is the eternal scriptural statement."


--- PAGE 280 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 
269
C H A P T E R FOUR
4.1 
After spending ... at home: see parallels at 5.169; 6.1, 33.
4.2 
little or no harm: Medhâtith i interprets clroha not as injury (hinisa), because, according
to him, not causing injury is already prescribed, but as vexation (kheda). The prohibi-
tion here, according to Medhâtithi , is against begging, which is annoying to the donors.
So one should avoid begging altogether or, if that is not possible, beg as little as
possible.
4.3 
without fatiguing his body: according to Medhâtithi , this refers to trade and service,
two activities that cause fatigue.
4.5 
gleaning and picking: Medhâtith i gives the following distinction between the two.
Gleaning (uñcha) is gathering up ears of corn that have fallen on the ground when
farmers take their harvest to their homes or granaries. Picking (silo) is gathering up
ears of corn that have fallen to the ground from the plants in the field either before or
after the harvest. The major difference is that the former is collected along the road and
the latter in the field. See 10.112.
4.7 
to fill a granary . . . jar: commentators understand these to mean individuals who have
grain sufficient for a certain period of time, just like the last two kinds of persons. One
who has a granary-full is taken by different commentators to mean a man who has
grain sufficient to last three years, one year, or twelve days. One who has ajar-full is a
man who has grain sufficient to last one year, six months, or six days.
4.8 
better at winning . . . the Law: I follow the commentators. BUhler translates: "through
his virtue to have conquered the world more completely." Although such a meaning is
possible, I think the commentators are right in relating these means of livelihood to the
worlds that the individuals will obtain after death.
4.9 
One of these . . . of the Veda: commentators offer different and contradictory explana-
tions (see BUhler's comment on this verse). I think Govinda is correct in relating these
to the six occupations of a Brahmin (see 10.75). Three activities are studying, offering
sacrifices, and giving gifts; two are the first two of these; and one is studying, which is
here referred to as brahmasattra (2.106 n.). Bühler , however, thinks that the latter
refers to teaching, which is also the interpretation of commentators.
4.15 
with excessive passion: the meaning of prasañgena is unclear. Medhâtithi , Govinda,
and Kullük a take it as referring to activities that people are attached to, such as singing
and music (thus probably connecting this term implicitly with karmana). Bühle r fol-
lows this interpretation. I think Näräyan
a and Nandana are right in taking it to mean
excessive passion. See the similar use of this term at 2.93; 4.186; 8.368; 9.5; 12.52.
This meaning also fits with the repeated use of words derived from pra ^Isañj in the
next verse.
4.17 
eking out a living: the term yäpayan could also mean "supporting his family," which is
the interpretation of most commentators. However, note the Pâl i yâpeti and the Bud-
dhist Sanskrit yäpayati regularly used with regard to eking out a living especially by
begging.
4.19 
treatises: the term sästräni
 may refer also to the Vedas, which are often referred to
simply as the sastra, and this interpretation is supported by the use of the singular in
verse 20. Commentators, however, take the term as referring to other treatises, includ-
ing epics, Puränas , Dharmasastras, and treatises on logic, grammar, MImämsä
, astrol-
ogy, and medicine (Medhâtithi , Govinda, Nandana, Kullüka) ; or simply the fourteen
fields of knowledge (vidyästhänäni):
 four Vedas, six Vedañgas, Puräna , Nyäya ,
MImämsä
, and Dharmasâstra . On sastra, see Pollock 19893.


--- PAGE 281 ---
270 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4
ancillary texts: Medhätith i takes these to be texts that facilitate the understanding of
the Veda, such as etymologies, grammar, and exegesis. Others take the term as refer-
ring to a specific class of explanatory texts.
4.20 Additional verse: "After learning thoroughly a book (sastra), however, he should study
it repeatedly. He should not disfigure a book or throw it away after studying it."
4.22-4 Some individuals .. . rooted in knowledge: the ritual tradition, often under the influ-
ence of ascetic ideologies, reinterpreted ritual activities providing many substitutes for
actual ritual acts. The offering of food in the breaths (pränSgnihotra) in the act of eat-
ing is one of them. See ChU 5.19-24; Bodewitz 1973.
4.26 at the end of each harvest (sasyänte) : Bühler , following most commentators, translate:
"When the old grain has been consumed." This may well be true, given that the old
crop may have been consumed by the time the new crop was harvested. However, the
parallel with all other terms in this list supports Narayana's and Nandana's interpreta-
tion that the reference here also is to a calendrical time, that is, the end of the harvest
when the new crop is brought in.
Variant reading: "at the beginning of each half-year."
4.31 
after completing the Vedas . . . or vedic vows: most commentators take vedavidyävrata
as three separate categories. The first refer to those who have only learned the Veda by
heart; the second to those who have mastered its meaning; and the third to those who
have completed the vows associated with vedic study, such as living with the teacher
for a certain number of years, even if they have not mastered the Veda.
4.32 
those who do not cook: namely, vedic students and ascetics. Medhätith i objects to this
interpretation, because giving to these have already been enjoined (3.94). He thinks
that the reference here is to the poor and common beggars.
4.39 
mound of earth (mrd): the meaning is obscure. Most commentators take it as a mound
of earth artificially created. It may then refer to some kind of memorial mound. Some
mss., as well as Ramacandra, connect the first two words and read mrdangam, a type
of small drum.
4.42 
Variant reading: "his wisdom, prosperity, fame, sight, and life-force."
4.44 nor should a Brahmin: BUhler takes this verse as a general statement about not looking
at women; I think it is continuation of 43 and refers specifically to the wife.
Additional verse: "A wise bath-graduate should not come near and look at another
man's wife when she is naked; and he should avoid secret conversations with someone
else's wife."
4.46 
onto a mound: I have taken cityam to mean some kind of memorial mound, as in verse
39. Commentators, however, take it as referring specifically to a fire altar
(abandoned?) made with bricks.
4.49 
remaining steadfastly attentive: generally prayata means to be or to make oneself pure
(so Bühler ) and ready for a ritual act. That cannot be its meaning here; there is no puri-
ficatory rite before voiding urine or excrement, which are by definition polluting ac-
tivities. Commentators are hard pressed to find a meaning.
4.52 
When someone . . . perishes: this verse directly relates to verse 48. The intervening
verses, therefore, must be either an interpolation or given parenthetically. Several mss.
and Jha actually place this verse immediately after 48.
4.55 
take off his own garland: Medhätith i comments that one should get someone else to
remove it from one's neck. The reason is unclear; it may have been thought to be in-
auspicious to remove it by oneself.
4.57 
awaken a sleeping superior: see Jamison's (2000) detailed analysis of this expression


--- PAGE 282 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 
271
derived from MS 3.4.5. The two variants in the manuscript tradition—sreyämsa m and
sayänam —are related to the two words in the vedic precedent: sreyämsam visuptam.
According to the variant reading, the translation would be: "awaken sleeping man."
Additional verse: "He may freely go to a sacrifice to pay reverence or to witness it. He
should not go from house to house to obtain secrets without a good reason."
4.60 diseases run rampant: Kullük a and Räghavänand
a take bhrsam as qualifying vaset and
meaning "long." BUhler accordingly translates: "nor (stay) long where diseases are en-
demic." I think Govinda is right in taking it to mean atyartham and connecting it with
vyädhibahule.
4.64 
clap; whistle: the precise meanings of the terms asphotayet and ksedet are unclear. The
former refers to a noise made through a limb. Commentators give the following possi-
bilities: clapping or striking the floor with the palm, slapping the arms, cracking the
finger joints. The latter term refers to a noise made with the mouth. Commentators
give the following range: grinding the teeth, growling like a lion, whistling with the
fingers in the mouth.
4.69 
never cut his nails or hair: commentators offer diverse interpretations. Most take it to
mean that he should not cut them himself but have them cut by a barber. Some think
this forbids the man to cut them before the appropriate time. These interpretations are
unsatisfactory; if this was the meaning Manu could have said it more straightforward-
ly. The odd expression here is not the lack of a causative but the use of the verb VC/H'C/.
The Dharmasutras regularly use the verb "vvap for cutting hair (see ÄpDh 2.3.6; BDh
1.5.7; 2.2.44, etc.; VaDh 24.5). At VaDh 24.5 "vkrt is used for cutting the nails. Manu
uses VWp (4.35; 6.52) with regard to the proper maintenance of hair, nails, and beard.
The only other place where chindyät is used is in ViDh 71.44: na dantair nakhaloinäni
chindyät, "He must not break his nails or hair with his teeth." This provision is given
by Manu in pada-d. Manu uses this verb regularly for cutting off some part of the
body, such as hands, feet, and lips for punishment (8.282, 283; 9.277). I think what is
prohibited here is the cutting of hair and nails by means other than the proper tools
(nail clippers, scissors). We see that in the very next verse the same verb is used to for-
bid breaking off grass with one's fingers.
4.72 wear a garland outdoors: commentators interpret the expression bahirmälyam to mean
that he should not wear a garland either over his hair or over his clothes, an interpreta-
tion followed by BUhler and Doniger. I think it is wrong. The same expression occurs
in GDh 9.32 with the addition of perfume: bahirgandhamälya. It makes little sense to
say that one should not wear perfume over the clothes! The prohibition, I think, con-
cerns wearing these ostentatious adornments in public. See the very similar prohibition
at ÄpDh 1.32.5. See also BDh 2.6.9.
4.83 
refrain from . . . head: it is unclear whose hair and head are meant. Medhatithi gives
two interpretations. According to the first, the injunction is general, including one's
own as well as that of others. The second is based on the context, which deals with
one's own body; so the prohibition affects only one's own hair and head. Pulling the
hair of others and striking their head is, of course, forbidden by other injunctions. The
meaning then is that one should not pull one's hair or strike one's head in anger.
4.87 
deviates . . . texts (ucchästravartinah) : the word ucchästra, as far as I know, occurs
only here and in the parallel passage in YDh 1.140. The dictionary definitions of the
expression in B-R ("ausserhalb der Gesetzlicher übertrentend" ) and M-W ("deviating
from or transgressing the lawbooks") are based solely on these passages. The term
ucchästra parallels utkula ("cast out of the family") and may mean someone who has
left the sastras. Or it may parallel utpatha or unmärga ("bad or wrong road") and may
mean a man who follows a wrong sastra, for example, Jain or Buddhist scriptures.
4.90 
Variant reading: "Lohadäraka. "


--- PAGE 283 ---
272 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4
4.92 time sacred to Brahman: Medhâtith i defines this as the last watch of the night (about
three hours), and most other commentators agree. Nârâyan
a simply identifies it as the
dawn (M;vai).Govinda (on BDh 2.17.22) defines it as the final period (about one hour
and twelve minutes) of the last watch of the night, a watch being one-twelfth of a day
or a period of three hours. On muhurta, see 1.64 n.
4.96 
Pusya . . . Mägha: the meaning of Pusya in uncertain, some commentators taking it to
mean a constellation (naksatra) and others taking it as the Pausa month (December-
January). The latter is the time indicated by PärGr 2.112.1 and KhGf3.2.26. Given that
the period lasts for four and a half months, I take the specification in the last pacía to
refer to both alternatives. The first alternative (December-January) is followed when
one begins the study in Srävan a and the second when one begins in Praustapada.
Blihler understands this verse differently: "When the Pushya-day (of the month,
Pausha), or the first day of the bright half of Mägh a has come, a Brâhman a shall per-
form in the forenoon the Utsarjana of the Vedas."
4.103 lightning, thunder, and rain: commentators note, rightly I think, that the suspension
takes place only when these three occur together (see verse 106). During the rainy sea-
son, it is likely that one or the other of these may occur every day.
4.105 noise erupts: the general interpretation of the commentators is that nirghäte refers to
some sort of atmospheric noise different from thunder. The same interpretation is
given by the commentators ofYDh 1.145. At GDh 16.22, however, Maskarin interprets
the term to mean a lightning strike.
4.106 When lightning . . . during the day: this and verse 104 appear to be commentaries on
verse 103. The term sajyotih (see also 5.82 and GDh 16.31; VaDh 13.37) means that the
suspension lasts as long as the sun is visible (i.e., until nightfall) if the event happened
during the morning twilight, and as long as the stars are visible (i.e., until daybreak) if
the event happened during the evening twilight. The expression "the other event"
(sese) refers to the third event listed in verse 103, namely, rain. The meaning is that if
all three occur together, then, irrespective of whether it happens during the day or the
night, the provision of verse 103 applies and the suspension lasts until the same time
the following day (äkälika).
4.112 squatting . . . knees: the term avasaktikä refers to the band of cloth tied around the
waist and over the knees so as to make it easier for a person to remain in the squatting
position. It is unclear why this position is forbidden, but it may have something to do
with a similar custom among ascetics. The band used by them is called yogapatta, and,
as the name suggests, it was used during yogic practice.
4.115 seated in a row (pañktau): Medhâtithi , Nârâyana
, and Räghavänand
a connect this word
with the crying of dogs etc. The translation would then be: "when a pack of dogs, don-
keys, or camels are crying out." The particle ca coming after pañktau, however, makes
this interpretation unlikely. I have not seen the word pankti used with regard to animals
in the Dharma literature.
4.123 after reciting the conclusion . . . Äranyaka: my translation follows the obvious syntax
of the sentence; but it is supported only by Nandana. Medhâtithi , followed by most
other commentators, takes the second half-verse as a separate clause with an implicit
prohibition against reciting another vedic text. Govinda and others specify that this pe-
riod of suspension lasts for a day and a night. According to this interpretation, the
translation would be:^'... Saman chanting; and after reciting the conclusion of a Veda
or after reciting an Äranyak a (he should not recite any other text for a day and a
night)." The meaning of "conclusion of a Veda" (vedasya antam) is also unclear. Some
take it to mean the Upanisads, an interpretation supported by the mention of Äranyaka ;
others take it to mean the end of any vedic text (see also 2.160 n.).


--- PAGE 284 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 
273
4.125 Knowing . . . then the Veda: this verse is quite obscure and has been subject to two
widely differing interpretations. Medhätith i and, following him, most other commen-
tators take trayiniskarsa as referring to the "essence of the Veda," namely the syllable
OM, the Calls (vyahrti), and the Gayatri verse. The translation would then be:
"Knowing this, learned men recite daily and in due order first the 'essence of the
Veda' and thereafter recite the Veda." My problem with this interpretation, which is
followed by Bühle r and Doniger, is that there is a non sequitur from the previous
verse, on which this is clearly a commentary. The only way it can be connected to the
preceding is by taking the initial recitation of OM as in some way breaking the con-
nection with the impure recitation of the Sämaveda . I think, however, that the term
niskarsa refers to the "extract," probably the first lines, of each Veda. These are recited
first before the actual recitation of the particular Veda of his branch. Nârâyan
a and
Nandana give still another interpretation, taking niskarsa to be the "nature" of the three
Vedas spelled out in the previous verse. The translation would be: "Knowing this na-
ture of the triple Veda, learned men recite daily and in the proper order the early Veda
first and then the later Veda." The meaning is that one first recites the Rgveda, then the
Yajurveda, and finally Sämaveda .
4.126 passes in between: the meaning is that an animal passes either between the teacher and
the pupil, or between a group of reciters, while they are engaged in vedic recitation.
4.127 These alone . . . purified: both Bühle r and Doniger have missed the point of this verse
by misunderstanding the crucial word nityam. As the commentators point out, this re-
fers to the suspension of the daily vedic recitation (svädhyäya),
 which is one of the five
great sacrifices. At 2.105 we have the statement that "Rules regarding the suspension
of vedic recitation have no bearing ... on daily vedic recitation." Thus all the rules
given above apply only to vedic study and recitation that are outside svädhyäya.
 This
verse, however, specifies that on these two occasions even svädhyäya
 is to be sus-
pended.
4.129 with his clothes on: bathing with one's clothes on (saväsä)
 is prescribed for particular
observances and as a purification for various types of offenses (11.174,123). Here the
prohibition pertains to doing it on a regular or daily basis.
4.130 god: this must surely refer to the shadow cast by an image of a god.
reddish-brown cow: the term babhru here appears to refer to be a cow, although
Medhätith i thinks that it may also refer to the Soma plant and others take it as a general
term applying to any reddish-brown animal. The term also means a particular kind of
mongoose (see BDh 1.19.6).
4.138 eternal Law: this is the first time that the common expression dharmah sanätanah oc-
curs in the Dharma literature. Indeed, it is missing in the Dharmasutras and in the ViDh
and the YDh. The expression occurs again in 9.64; for similar expressions, see 7.98;
9.325; and 10.7.
4.139 A lucky thing . . . Lucky: the first half of this verse is very obscure, with a difficult and
possibly elliptical syntax. The only other places in the Dharma literature that the term
bhadra occurs within a similar context are GDh 9.20 and ÄpDh 1.31.12. In the former,
we have the statement that one should call an unlucky thing lucky (abhadram bhadram
iti); and the latter states that one should not call a lucky thing lucky but use other terms
such as holy and auspicious (na bhadram bhadram iti broyât / punyarn prasastam ity
eva brüyät).
 The parallel of these two texts to our verse is unmistakable. Medhätith i
follows the GDh and sees an implied negative in the first bhadra (it should be
abhadra) and the second bhadra he takes as illustrative of the actual words that should
be used, namely kalyäna, mángala, siddha, etc. If we follow his interpretation, the
translation should be: "He should call an unlucky thing by a lucky name, or he should
just say lucky." Nârâyana
, on the other hand, whose interpretation is favored by


--- PAGE 285 ---
274 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4
Bühler , finds an implied negative abhadra in the second clause: "He should call a
lucky thing lucky, or he should just call an unlucky thing lucky." What is clear is that
the context of this verse is the advice in verse 138 that one should not say something
unpleasant even though it may be true. This is basic politeness and underlies several of
the rules in the GDh 9.19-22 and ÄpDh 1.31.11. I think the commentators are right in
detecting an implied abhadra in this statement; most likely this should be in the second
clause. Even without that, however, we can interpret the statement to mean that one
should call not only what is good and auspicious but everything, good or bad, by a
term denoting auspiciousness. Note also that in verse 138 we have two positives in
pada-a, followed by positive-cum-negatives in the next two pädas.
4.143 he should . . . with his palm: an alternative translation, favored by BUhler and Doniger,
would be: "he should always apply water with his palm on his organs, all his limbs,
and his navel."
4.145 Additional verse: "Gold, sandal wood, vermilion, the five products of the cow (11.166
n.), concrete bile, panic seed, mustard seed, and honey are said to be auspicious."
4.149 Variant reading: "former birth, recites the Veda again."
4.150 He should .. .fortnight: Nandana acutely observes that this verse is a commentary on
verse 145 containing the injunction to perform fire offerings (juhuyat). In fact, verses
147-9 comment on the injunction to perform soft recitations (japet) of verse 145; after
which Manu turns to the fire offerings.
4.153 He should .. . moon's change: I have followed the sequence of the pädas in the verse.
This is also the interpretation of Medhâtith i and other commentators. Bühle r and Doni-
ger, however, take the days of the moon's change as applicable to all these visits,
which I think is mistaken.
4.156 unlucky marks: Medhâtith i gives the example of a black mark (tilaka) on the shoulder
that foretells poverty and other such misfortunes.
4.163 Variant reading: "hypocrisy."
4.166 in evil wombs: Medhâtith i takes the compound päpayonisu to be Tatpurusa: päpänäm
yonisu. He and other commentators, however, interpret it as referring to the wombs of
various animals rather than those of evil men, which is Doniger's interpretation: "in
the wombs of evil people." BUhler takes papa as "sin" and gives a torturous transla-
tion: "in the wombs (of such beings where men are born in punishment of their) sins."
I take the compound as Karmadhäraya .
4.172 Like the earth (gaur iva): Medhâtith i and, following him, Govinda and Kulluka see a
double simile here, the one based on similarity (sâdharmya) and the other on dissimi-
larity (vaidharmyd). In the former case, the comparison is with a cow; in the latter, it is
with the earth (also bearing the epithet cow). Like the earth—and unlike a cow—
unrighteous conduct does not bear fruit immediately but only with the passage of time.
4.174 root: commentators take "root" to mean home, fields, wealth, family, and progeny.
The meaning, obviously, is that his destruction is total and leaves no trace behind.
4.175 disciples: all the commentators take sisyän in its etymological meaning "those who
ought to be disciplined," meaning the wife, children, servants, and the like. They cite
8.299 in support. It is clear that Manu is playing with alliteration here: sisyän sisyät.
4.179 doctors: like the English term "doctor," vaidya can refer to both a very learned person
and a medical doctor, although most commentators opt for the former.
paternal, affinal, and maternal relatives: the commentators make a very clear distinc-
tion between the three terms: jñati, "paternal relative"; sambhandhin, "relative by mar-
riage"; and bändhava, "maternal relative": see also 2.132 n.


--- PAGE 286 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 
275
4.181 when he is conquered by them: the critical edition has adopted the reading etair jitah.
Bühler , following the reading etaih jitaih, translates: "by suppressing (all) such
(quarrels)."
4.188 ignorant man: most commentators take avidván to mean simply an ignorant man.
Näräyan
a takes this term in its participial sense with the procedure mentioned in the
previous verse as its direct object: "a man not knowing the procedure for accepting
gifts."
4.192 Variant reading: "to a Brahmin observing."
4.195 Additional verse: "When a man always raises the flag of righteousness as if it were the
flag of gods, but conceals his sins, his is called the 'cat's vow'."
4.196 cruel: the term naikrtika can mean both cruel and dishonest, generally meaning a vile
person.
4.200 insignia of a religious profession: the term liñgin is ambiguous. It refers to a person
who bears a distinguishing mark or emblem. Generally, this refers to the emblems of a
religious professional, such as a vedic student, a forest hermit, or an ascetic. Medhâ -
tithi and Näräyana
, correctly I think, take it with a broad meaning, whereas Govinda
and KullOka restrict it to a vedic student.
4.203 natural ponds: literally, ponds "dug by the gods" (devakhätesii), so as to distinguish
them from the reservoirs built by humans and forbidden in verse 201.
4.204 secondary observances (niyama), central virtues (yama): these two are technical terms
denoting the first two steps in the eightfold path of Yoga. It is, however, more likely
that the terms here refer to two sets of observances, yama being central virtues such as
non-injury and niyama being outward religious rites such as twilight-worship (so
Govinda). YDh 3.312-3 gives ten virtues falling under these two categories.
Two verses cited by Medhâtith i have been incorporated into the text of Manu by sev-
eral mss.: "Compassion, forbearance, truthfulness, non-injury, self-control, not desir-
ing, meditation, serenity, sweetness, and honesty are the ten central virtues.
Purification, sacrifices, ascetic toil, gift giving, vedic recitation, restraining the sexual
organs, observances, fasts, silence, and bathing are the ten secondary observances."
Other mss. give two different verses spelling out the contents of yama and niyama.
"Not injuring, speaking the truth, chastity, honesty, and not stealing—these five are the
central virtues and the observances. Not being angry, obedience to the teacher, purifi-
cation, eating moderately, and vigilance—these five are called the secondary obser-
vances."
4.205 A Brahmin must never partake of food: here begins Manu's discussion of "unfit food,"
as well as persons whose food is unfit to be eaten, both of which are technically called
abhojyänna (4.221): see Olivelle 20023.
4.207 someone . . . sick: Medhâtith i gives two possible interpretations. The first takes this to
refer to someone who is currently intoxicated etc.; the other takes this as referring to
people who are habitually such (bähulyena). Under this interpretation the translation
would be: "by someone who is a drunkard, quick tempered, or sickly."
4.208 murderer of a Brahmin: the Sanskrit term bhrunahan has two meanings: a killer of a
fetus (abortionist) and a killer of a learned Brahmin. The VkhGr (1.1), giving the defi-
nitions of eight types of Brahmins in terms of their learning, defines a hhriiiia as a
Brahmin who has mastered the Veda, set up the ritual fires, and offered a Soma sacri-
fice. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 131,148 n., 334; iii. 612 n. 1161.The Dharma literature uses
the term with both meanings. At GDh 21.9 it means an abortionist, while at BDh
1.18.13 it clearly refers to a murderer of a Brahmin. At other places it is impossible to
tell which meaning is intended. Indeed, both meanings may be intended in many of


--- PAGE 287 ---
276 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4
these passages; VaDh 20.23, in fact, gives both definitions of the term. This term ap-
pears also at MDh 8.317 and 11.248. See also Saksena 1936; Wezler 1994;
4.210 a prisoner, a shackled man (baddhasya nigadasya ca): the problem here centers around
nigada, which is a noun meaning a chain for binding the feet. To get it to mean a per-
son so fettered, commentators have to see it as a substitute for nigaditasya (Nandana)
or nigadabaddhasya (Näräyana)
. Kullük a takes the genitive nigadasya to function as
an instrumental, and Nandana in fact says that the correct reading should be baddhasya
nigadena. Under this interpretation, followed by Bühler , we have a single category
here: "someone bound by chains." I think, however, that nigadasya is the lectio 
diffi-
cilior, and the final ca supports taking these as two separate entries. Medhatithi inter-
prets baddha as referring to a man who is kept under arrest only by a judicial sentence
(vägmäträvaruddhah),
 and nigada as referring to a man actually in shackles. The for-
mer, as Râmacandr a says, may refer to someone under house arrest. Given the unlike-
lihood of such people being able to actually distribute food, the prohibition must refer
to food given by the family or household of such a man. Medhatithi also gives the
variant visadasya ("of a poisoner") for nigadasya.
4.211 food of a Sûdra, leftovers (südrasyocchista m eva ca): most commentators take these as
separate entries. Räghavänand
a and Govinda, however, connect the two: "the leftovers
of a SQdra." Medhatithi jihows unusual inconsistency, interpreting this expression here
to mean "leftovers of a Sûdra" but in his comments on it under verse 223 takes the two
as separate entries. Given the frequency of genitive nouns with an implied annam
("food") in this list, I think it is appropriate to take the two as separate. Also in verse
218 we have the prohibition of eating a Südra' s food (sudrannam). All this confusion
apparently led some to amend the last päda to read ucchistam aguros tathä ("the
leftovers of anyone but the teacher/elder"), a reading recorded by Medhatithi.
4.212 food given . . . birth (anirdasam): some connect this syntactically with sütikännam,
"food of a woman during the first ten days after childbirth." This is quite unlikely.
Medhatithi takes anirdasam to refer to the milk of a cow during the first ten days after
giving birth (see 5.8). The variant reading paryäyännam
 (for paryäcäntam)
 is inter-
preted by Vijnänesvar a (on YDh 1.168) as food specific to someone else, as when a
SDdra gives food specific to Brahmins and vice versa. But Nandana, who has the alter-
nate reading of this verse, says that it means food obtained on a rotational basis.
Additional verse: "When different honor is paid to Brahmins of equal status or equal
honor to Brahmins of unequal status, any gift given on such an occasion should not be
accepted; nor should a gift be given in such a manner." I follow Laksmïdhara's expla-
nation of this elliptical verse.
4.213 chief of a town: the meaning of nagarin is not altogether clear. Most commentators
take the term to mean a leader or chief of a town; some, however, take it as referring
simply to a town dweller. This category is absent in the parallel discussions of food in
other Dharma texts, although towns and villages are looked down upon: ÄpDh 1.32.21;
GDh 16.45.
4.217 food of persons . . . newly deceased person (anirdasam ca pretânnam) : most commen-
tators take the first word as qualifying the second and see here a single category.
BUhler thus translates: "nor food (given by men) whose ten days of impurity on ac-
count of a death have not passed." I follow Näräyan
a and Râmacandr a in taking the
two words as referring to two different categories, even though the placement of ca is
awkward (possibly due to meter). Further, it is difficult to see how pretänna could
mean food given by a person impure by reason of a death in his family; its obvious
meaning is "food offered to a newly deceased person." The term anirdasam, moreover,
occurs in verse 212 with reference to a single category.


--- PAGE 288 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 
277
4.222 food of any one of them (anyatamasyännam) : Medhätith i and Govinda think that, even
though this prescription (governed by the genitive) refers directly to food given by un-
fit individuals (parigrahadusta), nevertheless, because of the context, the penance
should be performed by anyone eating food that is unfit for other reasons, such as
touch, time, and nature (käladusta, samsargadusta, svabhävadusta). Kullüka , how-
ever, rejects this argument and takes the prescription to affect only the first category
(parigrahadusta).
Additional verse: "He should not eat during an eclipse of the moon or the sun; but
when their eclipse is over, he may eat after bathing. When they set before the end of
the eclipse, he may eat after he has seen them the next day."
4.223 who lacks a spirit of generosity (asraddhinah): if we accept the reading of the majority
of mss., asraddhinah, the translation should be: "a Südr a who neglects his ancestral
rites."
4.226 Three additional verses: "Learning, bravery, ascetic toil, virgin, person at whose sacri-
fice one officiates, pupil, and inheritance—what is acquired through these are the
seven kinds of 'white' wealth; gains from these are also of the same type. Usury, agri-
culture, trade, craft, service, ministration, and a man for whom one has done a favor—
what is obtained from these is called 'spotted'. Bribery, gambling, theft, coercion, de-
ception, violence, and fraud—what is acquired through these means is called 'black'."
The term "virgin" in the first verse probably refers to bride-price.
4.227 Two additional verses: "When a Brahmin accepts a gift and uses it for wrongful
ventures, one should not give him anything, even though he may be a worthy recipient.
When a man accepts gifts from everywhere and accumulates them without using them
for purposes dictated by Law, one should not honor that thief."
4.228 from all (sarvatah): the meaning of "all" is unclear. Medhätithi , Näräyana
,
Râmacandra : sins; Nandana: suffering (duhkha); Kullüka : things that lead one to hell
(narakahetu); Räghavänanda
, Govinda: faults (dosa).
4.232 Variant reading: "one who gives the Veda, the eternal Brahman."
4.234 that very thing (tat tat): the commentators correctly point out that "that very thing"
refers not to the article given as a gift but the corresponding reward listed in the above
verses.
4.236 lie about a sacrifice: most commentators simply take this phrase to mean that a person
who has performed a sacrifice must not tell a lie. Bühle r and Doniger follow their in-
terpretation. The whole point of this verse, however, is that people should not boast
about or exaggerate religious activities they have undertaken. I think Räghavänanda' s
interpretation is correct; the meaning must be that one should not tell a lie about a sac-
rifice one has performed, most probably by exaggeration.
4.243 Additional verse: "Neither the Vedas that he has recited nor the treatises that he has
studied go where he is going; merit alone follows him."
4.249 Additional verse: "He should avoid even what is given spontaneously by a physician,
an ingrate, a surgeon, a usurer, a eunuch, or an unchaste woman."
4.253 a person . . . himself: commentators take him to be a SQdra who has fallen on hard
times and has voluntarily entered another man's service. It is unclear whether such a
man becomes a slave or merely a servant or worker.
4.257 debts: fundamental religious obligations of a Brahmin were presented within Brahma-
nical theology as "debts" (see Malamoud 1972). The theology of debts arose quite
early, and three debts are recorded already in the TS 6.3.10.5: "A Brahmin, at his very
birth, is born with a triple debt—of studentship to the seers, of sacrifice to the gods, of
offspring to the fathers. He is, indeed, free from debt, who has a son, is a sacrificer,


--- PAGE 289 ---
278 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4
and who has lived as a student." The SB (1.7.2.1-6) adds the debt of hospitality to men,
bringing the theology of debts into closer alignment with the five great sacrifices. The
obligation to marry, to perform sacrifices, and to beget offspring was used by Brah-
manical theologians against the ascética! ideals of anti-ritualism and celibacy (6.35).
For a discussion of the debts and their relation to asceticism, see Olivelle 1993, 46-53.
CHAPTER FIVE
5.1 
born from the fire: although Bhrgu is said to be a son of Manu (1.34), other accounts of
his origin record his birth from the fire. See AB 3.34; Brhaddevatä 6.97-9; MBh
1.5.216*.
5.5 
forbidden: the Dharma literature makes a clear distinction between abhaksya, foods
forbidden because of their very nature, and abhojya, foods that have become unfit for a
variety of reasons: given by an unfit individual, touched by an impure person or ani-
mal, contaminated by an impure substance, or gone stale or bad due to time, a topic
dealt with at 4.205-25. I translate the former as "forbidden" and the latter as "unfit."
On this distinction and the dietary restrictions in Dharma literature, see Olivelle 2OO2a,
2OO2b.
5.7 
Krsara porridge, Samyava cake: Krsara appears to be a dish made with milk, rice, and
sesame seeds. Samyava is a sweet cake made with flour, milk, and ghee.
5.11 
single-hoofed . . . permitted: there is no text that permits the eating of any single-
hoofed animal. It may well be that this exception is made in view of the horse-sacrifice
during which horse meat is consumed by the priests. Such an exception, however,
would be unique in the Dharma literature (Olivelle 2ooab). Another possible interpre-
tation is to take the two terms anirdista and ekasapha as two separate items, in which
case the translation would be: "animals not explicitly mentioned; single-hoofed ani-
mals; plovers." See VaDh 14.44 where animals not specifically indicated are forbidden.
5.17 
animals with five nails: this is an ancient and widespread rule forbidding the eating of
animals with five nails or claws, with the exception of some. Here seven such excep-
tions are listed, whereas the standard rule contains only five exceptions. The general
formulation of this rule is: "The five five-nailed animals may be eaten" (pañca pañca-
nakhäh bhaksyäh) meaning that five-clawed animals other than those enumerated are
forbidden. This is an example of the so-called parisamkhya injunction, which is a pro-
hibition couched as an injunction. Thus, the intent of the rule is to prohibit five-clawed
animals, not to enjoin the eating of the five listed animals. Accordingly, someone may
avoid eating all five-clawed animals, even those listed, without violating this injunc-
tion. The forbidding of animals with five "nails" may indeed be a residue of the pro-
scription of cannibalism, since human beings are among animals with five nails. See
ÄpDh 1.17.37; 00/117.27; BDh 1.12.5; VaDh 14.39. For a detailed study, see Jamison
1998.
5.18 
animals with incisors in only one jaw: literally "those with a single row of teeth," the
reference is to animals that have incisor teeth only on the lower jaw; cows, goats, and
sheep are examples. These are the paradigmatic farm animals whose meat may be
eaten. The opposite of these are animals with incisor teeth on both jaws. Haradatta and
Govinda (on BDh 1.2.4) give as an example the horse, while Maskarin's (on GDh
17.28) example is a man. In the Purusa Hymn (RV 10.90.10) also animals with teeth on
both jaws are associated with the horse. Other examples include donkeys and mules, as
well as dogs, cats, and most carnivorous animals. See Smith 1994, 244; Olivelle
2OO2b.


--- PAGE 290 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 
279
5.23 
Variant reading: "For, even at ancient sacrifices and at the Soma offerings."
5.24 
infused with oil: many commentators interpret this verse to mean the following: "Any
non-forbidden food or delicacy may be eaten even if it is stale after mixing it with oil."
Medhatithi realizes the syntactical problem of taking snehasamyuktam as part of the
main cause and qualifying tat. Nevertheless, he feels forced to accept this indirect
meaning, because otherwise, according to him, the separate mention of the sacrificial
oblation would become pointless. This interpretation is followed by Blihler, Doniger,
and all other commentators, except Näräyan
a and Nandana. I follow these two. The
clear meaning is that food prepared with oil does not become stale; leftovers of a sacri-
ficial oblation, on the other hand, even if it is not made with oil, is by definition not
subject to becoming stale. The parallel passages in YDh 1.169 and ViDh 51.35 support
this interpretation.
5.27 
He may eat... at risk: this verse opens the discussion on eating meat with a broad and
general statement giving four occasions for eating meat. The discussion ends with
verse 56, which is again a broad statement attempting to reconcile the opposing view-
points given earlier. These two verses bracket the discussion, which, I think, contains
two views. The first (28-30) defends the traditional position regarding meat eating;
that is the natural order of creation established by the Creator himself. The second po-
sition (31-55) proposes the ethic of vegetarianism and non-injury, strongly condemn-
ing killing and eating meat outside very restrictive parameters established by the needs
of the vedic sacrifice. Manu does not tell us explicitly his own view. It is, however, the
traditional method to give the view of an opponent or the view to be refuted first
(purvapaksa) and the view of the author himself last (uttarapaksd). If this holds good
here, then Manu must have favored the restriction of meat to sacrificial occasions. This
is supported by the fact that Manu dispenses with the first view in three verses,
whereas he devotes 25 verses to defending the second view.
Commentators explain the term niyuktah ("ritually commissioned") as referring to a
person who is undertaking a rite such as an ancestral offering and the "honey mixture"
(madhuparka: 3.119 n.). This is distinguished from sacrificial consecration (proksita)
listed earlier. The latter refers to vedic sacrifices, while the former refers to non-vedic
rites. The term niyukta is also used at 5.35.
5.28 
created: the term akalpayat appears to have a double meaning here. On the one hand,
Prajâpat i created the whole world to serve as food for lifebreath, or for living creatures
(see 5.39 where srsta is used). This echoes the creation motif of the Brähmana s and
Upanisads. On the other hand, the term also has a prescriptive meaning; Prajâpat i des-
ignated this world as food for lifebreath (see the similar meaning of akalpayat at 1.87-
8).
5.31 
rule of gods, rule of fiends: possibly, we have here a double entendre. On the one hand,
saying that the rules are divine or fiendish indicates the goodness of the one and the
evil of the other. On the other hand, we can take vidhi as the manner of acting: thus,
gods eat meat only during vedic sacrifices, whereas Räksasa s are well-known as
always relishing blood and meat.
5.36 
Variant reading: "Abiding by the eternal Law (dharma)."
5.39 
The Self-existent. . .for sacrifice: this statement refutes the claim made in verse 28 by
the defenders of meat eating that Prajâpat i created the whole world as food for living
beings.
5.44 
well-established . . . creation (niyatäsmim s caräcare) : Medhatithi and Govinda inter-
pret niyatä to mean "without beginning" (anädi); the sacrificial killing has existed in
the world always. This may be related to the fact that other types of killing, such as
those sanctioned by Tantra, are recent customs. The "beginninglessness" of sacrificial
killing is related to the timelessness of the Veda itself, which is the basis of dharma.


--- PAGE 291 ---
280 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5
Therefore, ethical norms of ahimsä that contradict the Veda cannot be part ofdharma.
Bühler , following Kulluka, interprets this verse differently: "Know that the injury to
moving creatures and to those destitute of motion, which the Veda has prescribed for
certain occasions, is no injury at all." I think this is a misinterpretation of the locative
asmins caneare; it is syntactically connected to niyatä and not to himsä. Further, the
expression caräcara normally refers to the whole world as such and not to individual
creatures (see 1.57, 63; 3.75; 7.29; 11.237).
5.46 
tie up, kill, or cause pain (bandhanavadhaklesän) : I follow Govinda and Kulluka, who
take this as a Dvandva compound of three members. Medhätith i and Räghavänand
a
take bandhanavadha + klesa as Karmadhäraya : "pains consisting of tying up and kill-
ing" (bandhanavadha eva klesäh), which is followed by Bühle r and Doniger.
5.47 
Variant reading: "on whatever a man fixes his mind."
5.50 
except when the rules prescribe it (vidhirn hitvä) : Bühle r takes hitvä as "disregarding."
The meaning then is that he disregards the rule that he should eat meat at a sacrifice
and the like. I think this is mistaken. The meaning, as Medhätith i points out, is that he
does not eat meat except according to the rule. Because of the multiple negatives in
this sentence, the comparison inherent in the simile pisäcavat "like a Pisäca " is also
unclear. I think it means that he acts unlike a Pisäca , who eats anything and everything
(see 5.31).
The fact that this verse caused problems to readers and scribes is evident in variants
recorded. Some, including Hemädr i and Laksmïdhara , take the verse in a negative
manner, reading yas tu bhaksayate in pada-a; taking lake 'priyatäm (with an avagraha
rendering it negative); and eliminating na in päda-d: vyädhibhis caiva pîdyate.
According to this traditional interpretation, the translation would be: "When a man eats
meat disregarding the rules like a goblin, he is hated in the world and becomes
afflicted with diseases."
5.53 
reward for their meritorious acts (punyaphalam): I follow Govinda and Kulluka in
taking this as a Tatpurusa compound. Medhätith i rejects this and takes it as a Dvandva:
punyam ca phalam ca punyaphalam / samaharadvandvah / sastïsamâse
 hy asam-
arthyam.
5.55 
Me he . . . nature of "meat" : the belief that the food a person eats may in turn eat him
appears to have been old. Such sentiments are expressed in the vedic literature with
reference not only to animals but also to plants and grains: JB 1.43; SB 12.9.1.1. Here
Manu gives a phonetic etymology of the Sanskrit term for meat tnamsa, the two sylla-
bles of which mean "me" (mam) and "he" (sa). See Smith 1994, 253.
5.58 
Someone who has teethed . . . of hair: the meaning of "younger" (anujäte), literally
"born after," is unclear. Medhätith i and most other commentators take it to mean
someone younger than a child who has teethed, an interpretation that has led to one
scribe (ms. Tj') emending the text to dantajäte adante ca. Nandana takes it as referring
to a boy who has undergone vedic initiation. Needless to say, all these explanations are
unsatisfactory. A possible clue to the meaning may be found in verse 70 where a child
who has teethed is juxtaposed with a child whose naming ceremony has been per-
formed. If the naming ceremony is considered some kind of birth, then the unusual
term aniijata may refer to it (Nandana's view is based on taking the term to mean an
initiatory birth). Commentators also point out that the full ten-day period of impurity is
observed only when someone who has undergone vedic initiation dies. At the death of
a child who has undergone the hair-cutting ceremony, the period is three days (see YDh
3.23); for a child who has teethed, one day; and for a baby who has not teethed, purity
is restored immediately. BUhler connects anujäte with krtacüde and translates: "When
(a child) dies that has teethed, or that before teething has received (the sacrament of)
the tonsure." This is unlikely because of the ca after both anujäte and krtacüde.
Doniger translates: "When a child dies when he has just got his teeth, or after he has


--- PAGE 292 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 
281
his teeth"; though novel and interesting, I do not see how that meaning can be derived
from the Sanskrit.
5.59 
until the collection of bones: according to the ViDh 19.10, this takes place on the fourth
day after death.
5.60 
common ancestry: the Sanskrit term sapinda refers to a group of close relatives, but
there is great controversy in the tradition with regard to both its meaning and the extent
of the group covered. One interpretation takes piiida (lit., "round lump") to mean a
bodily particle and sapinda to mean people who through birth have bodily particles in
common. Another interpretation takes pinda to mean the balls of rice offered to an-
cestors and sapinda to mean people who are connected through these ancestral offer-
ings. In general, the relationship extends to six generations before and after the father
and five generations before and after the mother. See BDh 1.11.9; Jolly 1885,168-74;
Kane 1962-75, ii. 452-78.
relationship based on offering libations: the term samänodaka refers to a broad and ill-
defined group of extended relatives. Some take it as comprehending the seven genera-
tions of ancestors beyond the seven comprising "common ancestry": see Vijñanesvara
on YDh 2.136.
5.61 
This single verse was expanded in some manuscript traditions into two verses, which
are found in all editions and translations. According to this reading, the translation
would be: "As this period of death-impurity is prescribed for those who belong to the
same ancestry, so the same holds true at a birth for those who desire perfect purity.
Death-impurity affects all, but birth-impurity affects only the mother and the father.
The mother alone is subject to the period of birth-impurity; the father becomes pure by
bathing." For a detailed discussion, see the note to this verse in the critical edition and
Introduction, pp. 44-46.
After the expanded two verses, some manuscripts give two additional verses: "In both
cases, during ten days one does not eat food from that family; further, giving gifts, ac-
cepting gifts, sacrifice, and vedic recitation are suspended. When a boy is born, one
may freely accept on that day a gift of gold, grain, a cow, a garment, sesame seeds,
sugar, and ghee."
5.63 
On the contrary . . . three days: the meaning of this verse and its connection to the rest
of this section are quite unclear. Several commentators take the second half as refer-
ring to begetting a child on a woman who is not one's wife or on a remarried woman. I
think that this verse should be taken within the context of the differing opinions re-
garding the impurity affecting a father and mother mentioned in the previous verse.
This verse appears to be contradicting the view expressed in the final phrase of the
previous verse, namely, that after a birth the father is purified by bathing. The oppo-
nent here says that a father is purified by bathing alone only after having sex; when a
child is actually born, he has to observe a period of impurity lasting three days. See
VaDh 4.21, where also the connection of the new-born child to its parents is described
as based on semen: bijanimittatvät. This interpretation makes sense of the otherwise
incongruous insertion of sexual intercourse within a passage dealing with birth and
death. The author may also be alluding to the view on the three births of a man ex-
pressed in the AU (2.1-3), namely, that the emission of the semen by the man into the
woman constitutes his first birth, and the actual birth of the child constitutes the sec-
ond. If this holds true, then the author of this view is arguing against the earlier view,
saying that a bath alone purifies after his first birth (emission of semen: see the added
verse after 5.144) but not the second, which is the topic of discussion here. If we fol-
low the reading of the ST (api for abhi-), the text makes even a stronger connection
between the birth impurity and the death impurity given in verse 60: "the impurity re-
sulting also from a seminal relationship adheres to him for three days."


--- PAGE 293 ---
282 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5
5.64 
Those who touch . .. in three: the Sanskrit for "ten days" is extremely prolix: "one day,
one night, and three times three nights." Nandana correctly calls this uktivaicitryam,
unless, of course, we are misunderstanding this strange calculation. "Those who touch
the corpse," I think, refers to those close relatives who actually participate in the fu-
neral, rather than to any person who may happen to touch a corpse, because of the
context; this also parallels the statement about the pupil in the very next verse. The ex-
pression "those who offer libations" (udakadayinah), as the commentators point out,
probably refers to the class of relatives who are required to offer water to the deceased
(samänodaka): see 5.60 n.
5.65 
those who carry a corpse: the commentators Govinda, Kullüka , Räghavänanda
, and
Nandana take this as a reference to persons of common ancestry (sapinda), whereas
Medhätithi , Näräyana
, and Râmacandr a think that the expression simply refers to per-
sons who actually carry a corpse. I prefer the former explanation, because it is super-
fluous to say that a pupil who carries a corpse is similar to those who carry a corpse!
5.67 
Variant reading: "tradition tells us, purity is restored in a single night."
5.68 
lay it down: the meaning of the verb nidadhyuh is not altogether clear. Most commen-
tators interpret it to mean "bury"; this is also the understanding of YDh 3.1, where this
verse is recast as: Snadvivarsain nikhanet. The image of leaving the body behind like a
piece of wood found in the very next verse, however, raises the possibility that, ac-
cording to Manu, the body was actually left on the ground rather than buried. Customs,
of course, may have changed over time. Indeed, Vijflanesvara, citing this passage (on
YDh 3.2-3), says that it should not be understood literally; one should bury the child in
the wilderness and return without sorrow, just as one would after throwing a stick
away.
5.69 
keep the observances: most commentators, followed by BUhler, interpret the verb
ksapeta to mean that one should observe three days of impurity (asauca). The term,
however, normally means fasting or undertaking a religious observance (see 4.222).
Medhätith i says that the person should remain secluded without participating in regular
activities: udäsyeta sästracoditam vyäpäram
 na kuryät. Such a meaning is possible:
see the use of ksapana as "waiting" in GDh 18.15. and as "interruption of study" in
PärGr 2.12.4. The three days of impurity is clearly indicated here, but the term may
directly refer to the kinds of observances associated with mourning: see below 5.73,
and ÄpDh 2.15.5-10; GDh 11.24-42.
5.72 
The relations . . . prescribed rule: the verse is quite obscure and a slightly variant ver-
sion occurs in BDh 1.11.5 with akrtavivähänäm
 forasaniskrtänäm.
 It is possible that
the verse is taken from a source which may have provided a different context for un-
derstanding it. So, for example, the context here or in BDh does not permit us to under-
stand what the meaning of "according to prescribed rule" means. Commentators offer
different views, mostly guesses. According to the majority, the reference is to a period
of three days, which is the same as the period for the relatives given in the first half of
the verse and makes no sense. Nandana takes it as referring to the standard 10 days,
which is also the view of some authors cited by Medhätithi . Most commentators also
take the verse as referring to women who have been betrothed but not given in mar-
riage and understand "relatives" (bändhaväh)
 as her future husband's relatives. I see
no reason to take these women as betrothed but unmarried. Although bamlhava in its
restrictive use does refer to relatives by marriage, it has frequently a wider application
(see 2.132 n.). Here the straightforward meaning, I think, is that when an unmarried
woman dies, her relatives (maternal and paternal; possibly sapindas) are impure for
three days, whereas her siblings (and one must assume also her parents) remain impure
for the standard statutory period of 10 days.
siblings: commentators here give diverse interpretations of sanäbhayah (literally,
"those connected by the same navel"): those belonging to the same ancestry (sapinda},


--- PAGE 294 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 
283
paternal relatives, and brothers (sisters?). At verse 84, where the verse recurs, they
give different meanings: sons etc. (puträdi), those belonging to the same lineage
(sagotra), and those belonging to the same ancestry (sapinda). Clearly, this term must
have the same meaning in both contexts. I think it refers to either the "uterine"
(brothers and possibly sisters) or, more likely, to the immediate family, including the
parents.
5.73 
For three days: commentators, as well as Bühle r and Doniger, take this as referring
specifically to bathing rather than to all the observances mentioned here. The parallel
passages in VaDh 4.14 and YDh 3.16 clearly indicate that all the observances connected
with mourning are carried out during three days.
5.74 
kinsmen and relatives: most commentators take the two terms sambandhi and bän-
dhava as referring to relatives by common ancestry (sapinda) and by reason of offering
libations (samSnodaka): see 5.60 n. Näräyana
, Nandana, and Ramacandra, however,
take bändhava as referring to paternal relatives. These two terms have wide applica-
tions, although in their restrictive usage, the former refers to relatives by marriage and
the latter to maternal relatives (see 2.132 n.; 4.179 n.). Elsewhere, however, samban-
dhin refers to maternal relatives (2.132).
5.78 
a child . . . ancestry: in the expression bale desäntasthe ca prthakpinde ca the number
of persons enumerated is uncertain. Medhätith i takes all three terms to be in apposi-
tion: "when a child living in a far away place and belonging to a different ancestry
dies." Others see two categories: a child and an adult belonging to a different ancestry.
When these die in a distant land, one is purified by bathing. The repetition of ca
("and") makes the latter interpretation more probable.
5.81 
vedic scholar living near by: Medhätith i gives several meanings of iipasampanna, in-
cluding someone living with a person and someone endowed with virtues. He also says
that dictionaries give this as a synonym of dead (mrta). This verse parallels GDh 14.22,
which also has srotriye copasampanne. The term cannot mean "dead"; the term
samsthite of verse 80 governs all these phrases (aiiuvrtti). The term is taken by many
commentators as referring to someone living in one's house. Medhätith i also gives the
view of some who connect srotriya with matulo ("a vedic scholar who is one's mater-
nal uncle"), because the latter is redundant as it is comprehended by the term bändhava
("maternal relatives"). This is quite unlikely; bändhava probably has a wider meaning
here, thus making the special mention of the uncle not superfluous.
5.82 
realm: for a discussion of visaya as the realms of a king, see Scharfe 1993,118-9.
someone who is . . . or an elder: this half-verse is very obscure and commentators give
contradictory explanations. First, I agree with the commentators that the term upasam-
panne must be understood here from the preceding verse; this is somewhat problematic
because two half-verses intervene, but without that term this injunction would require a
period of impurity whenever a non-vedic scholar dies, which is absurd. Commentators
are also divided about the final päda. Govinda, Kullüka , and Räghavänand
a connect
the two words: "an elder (or teacher) who is a vedic savant." Näräyan
a and Rarna-
candra take the words as separate, while Medhätith i connects aimcäne with asrotriye,
and take gurau separately. Nandana reads tathägurau, thus reading agurau ("a vedic
savant who is not an elder"). In the parallel at YDh 3.24 also, the words guru and
anucana are taken as separate entries. I think the testimony of Yäjnavalkya , Medhä -
tithi, and Näräyan
a is compelling; this verse contains three categories of individuals at
whose death the period of impurity lasts for a single day.
5.84 
while performing . . . to impurity: for the view that ritual and royal (5.93-7) obligations
take precedence over the observance of impurity, see GDh 14.45-6; YDh 3.27-9.
5.85 
Divâkfrti: the meaning of this term (literally "calling or declaring during the day") is
unclear. Most commentators take it to mean a Cándala. Râmacandr a is alone in taking


--- PAGE 295 ---
284 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5
it as a barber, a meaning rejected by Medhätithi , who cites MBh 12.136.106, where its
meaning is clearly a Cándala (see also MBh 12.136.110). The formdivakirtya occurs
also at GDh 16.19 and VaDh 13.11. The term may refer to the fact that these individuals
were expected to go about only during the day and to announce their presence. Fa-hien
during his travels in India (399-414 CE) notes this practice: "When they {Cándalas]
enter the gate of a city or a market-place, they strike a piece of wood to make them-
selves known, so that men know and avoid them, and do not come into contact with
them." A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms, tr. J. Legge, reprint of 1886 ed. (New York:
Dover, 1965), p. 43.
5.88 
votary: the term ädistl is a hapax in the ancient Dharma literature, except for the cita-
tion of this very verse in ViDh 22.87. All commentators take it as a synonym of
brahmacärin ("vedic student"). See the similar use of vratin at 2.188; 5.91,93; 11.121,
224.
Variant reading: "he becomes impure for three days."
5.89 
born through capricious caste mingling: the meaning of the compound vrthasainkara-
jätänäm
 is obscure, and commentators offer interpretations mostly based on taking it
as constituting two separate categories: vrthäjätänäm
 and sainkarajatänäm..
 The sec-
ond is generally taken to mean children born through caste intermixture. For the first
there is a variety of interpretations. Medhätith i : those who do not honor gods, ances-
tors, or human (yo na devän arcayati na pitfn na manusyan iti = AB 7.9); or those who
remain outside the orders of life. Näräyana
: effeminate or impotent men (kliba);
Govinda and Kullüka : those who, for the most part, have given up their dharma;
Räghavänanda
: those who give up the five great sacrifices. The expression evokes the
vedic expression anaddhäpurusa of the AB (7.9), who is defined there in exactly the
same words as that of Medhätithi . The anaddhäpurusa probably means a "good-for-
nothing fellow." See Olivelle 1993, 50.1 have taken vrthäsamkarajätänämas
 referring
to a single category and assumed vrtho as meaning "wantonly" or "wrongly." This sort
of caste mixture would be different from thea/iuloma ones permitted in 3.12-3. See
the similar use of vrthämämsa
 at 4.213 and 5.34, and vrthäkrsarasamyävain
 at 5.7.
5.92 as appropriate: all the commentators interpret yathäyogam to mean that a Vaisya is
carried through the western gate, a Ksatriya through the northern, and a Brahmin
through the eastern. Variant readings: "according to number"; "according to class";
"according to honor."
5-93 for they . . . with brahman: commentators, rightly I think, see an implied "respectively"
in the second half-verse. The meaning is that the king is seated on Indra's throne;
whereas vedic students and those performing sacrificial sessions are united with
brahman. The meaning of brahman is also unclear. Medhätithi , Govinda: attaining the
state of Brahman (brahmatva); Näräyana
, Kullüka , Räghavänanda
: pure like Brahman;
Nandana: having the very nature of dharma. Given that the context is a student and a
sacrificer, I think it is more likely that brahman here refers to the Veda and vedic rites
in which these two are immersed. For a discussion of the statutory purity of certain in-
dividuals, see Olivelle iggSb. On the king, see also von Stietencron 1997.
5-95 for anyone the king wants: the meaning, as most commentators note, is that a person
delegated by the king to carry out his duties, such as his chaplain or judge, is also sub-
ject to instant purification in order for him to carry out his official functions. This ap-
pears to be an extension of the king's own instant purification. The principle
articulated here is that rules of impurity and the like are overridden by the require-
ments of public office and ritual obligations. Note that the term sadyahsaucam is car-
ried over (anuvrtti) into this verse from the previous one.
5.97 for it is . . . mortal beings: the reading of the last päda has caused numerous problems
to scribes and commentators, resulting in a large number of variant readings. One way
to understand the final compound lokesaprabhaväpyayam is to connect prabhava with


--- PAGE 296 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 
285
sauca, and apyaya with äsauca. Thus, gods are viewed as the ones who bring about
purification and eliminate impurity.
5.98 
both sacrifice . . . instantly: all the commentators, as well as Bühle r and Doniger, see a
sandhi in tathäsaucam (tathä + äsaucam). The meaning they derive is not very differ-
ent from mine; they take äsaucam samtisthate to mean that the period of impurity is
completed, i.e., concluded (Medhatithi glosses: samâptim eti). I have never seen, how-
ever, the expression sadyah äsaucam. It is much better to disregard sandhi and see here
two separate words tathä saucam (this is how Burnell takes it). Thus we get two posi-
tive acts, sacrifice and purification (yajña, sauca) that are accomplished by death in
battle.
5.99 
After completing the required rite (krtakriyah): Medhatithi says that the rite is bathing,
because no other ritual has been prescribed. The completion of the required rite is
obligatory on all classes. See also the parallel prescriptions for the four classes within
the context of a judicial oath at 8.113.
5.102 Additional verse: "If, out of affection, a person of a lower class touches a person of a
higher class who is in a period of impurity—or a person of a higher class similarly
touches a person of a lower class—he is purified in accordance with the time of impu-
rity prescribed for the person whom he has touched."
5.104 When one's . . . heaven: "one's own people" (svesu) is taken by most commentators to
refer to either relatives or persons of one's own class. The term, however, usually re-
fers to persons belonging to one's own household. The cremation is considered the
final sacrifice (antyesti) of the deceased; this is the context of the statement in the last
clause regarding the "sacrificial offering."
5.105 Knowldge . . . time: "smearing" (upänjana) refers specifically to daubing an area with
cow dung (see verses 5.122, 124; and 3.206); "food" refers to special penitential foods,
such as milk and roots, or possibly to fasting (YDh 3.31 nirähärah);
 "time" means the
passage of the statutory period of impurity discussed earlier. Variant reading:
"austerity, fasting, earth."
Additional verse: "When earth, leaves, grass, and wood are touched by a Cándala, a
lowest-born, a dog, or a crow, the rule is that they are made pure by the touch of Soma,
sun, fire, and wind."
5.108 What needs . . . renunciation: a point worth noting in this proverbial saying is that all
the instruments of purification (muddy water, fast current during the rains, menstrual
flow, and the ochre garment of a renouncer) are all dirty colored. This verse recurs
with some variations in VaDh 3.58; ViDh 22.91; YDh 3.32.
5.111-2 lapidary: all the commentators, followed by Bühle r and Doniger, take the term
asmamaya here as referring to articles made of stone. I think this is mistaken. The two
verses, 111 and 112, are related; the first telling us how to clean certain articles when
they are stained, and the second when they are unstained. We should expect to find the
same or similar articles in the two lists; and we do. Stone implements would be out of
place here amidst precious articles. Of the metal objects in ill, gold and unembellished
silver are singled out in 112; and I think abja and asmamaya of 112 parallels mani and
asmamaya of ill. That the tradition recognized two types of precious stones, the one
aquatic (e.g., pearls, corals) and the other stone (e.g., sapphire, ruby, diamond), is clear
from what Manu says at 8.100 (where also we find the expression sarvesv asma-
mayesu). The term mani is probably a generic term for precious gems; here it means
pearls while in 9.329 it is opposed to pearls and must mean stone gems.
unstained: I think the word nirlepam qualifies all the articles listed in this verse. Stain,
often in concert with smell, refers to staining with impure substances such as urine and
excrement: see 4.111; 5.126.


--- PAGE 297 ---
286 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5
5.115 Variant reading: "All substances."
straining: commentators offer a variety of interpretations of the term utpavana. Me-
dhätithi : pouring out a small amount of the polluted liquid, using, according to some,
two blades of Kusa grass (so also Govinda, KullQka, and Räghavänanda)
, or filling the
pot containing the polluted liquid with clean liquid of the same kind until the pot over-
flows (so also Ramacandra); Näräyana
: straining with a cloth. Variant reading: "by
skimming."
Additional verse providing a definition of "solids" in verse 115: "Beds, seats, vehicles,
things tied with hair, and clothes are declared to be 'solids'."
5.116 During . . . by washing: Bühler , following Kullüka , translates: "At sacrifices the puri-
fication of (the Soma cups called) Camasas and Grahas, and of (other) sacrificial ves-
sels (takes place) by rubbing (them) with the hand, and (afterwards) rinsing (them with
water)." The syntax of the verse, however, makes this interpretation untenable, and
commentators such as Näräyan
a and Govinda explain it correctly. Regarding the
cleansing of implements during a sacrifice, see the detailed account in BDh 1.13.11-32.
5.118 Additional verse (in some manuscripts after 126 or 128): "Clothes that are new or that
have been purchased or washed are to be purified by sprinkling water or by burning
incense over it, but those that are dirty by washing."
5.122 Verse 123 of the vulgate has been expunged from the critical edition: "Earthenware
that has come into contact with liquor, urine, feces, phlegm, pus, or blood cannot be
purified by firing it again."
5.124 Additional verse: "Each drop of water when sprinkled purifies an area as large as a
cow's hide irrespective of whether the ground has been swept or not, so long as one
does not notice any stain on it."
5.125 shaken: the meaning of avadhuta is not quite certain. Medhätithi : something over
which someone has blown with the mouth or shaken a cloth. Näräyan
a and Govinda
agree with the second view of Medhätithi ; Nandana also has a similar meaning but re-
fers to the flapping of a chicken's wings. I think something like this must be intended.
Kullük a and Räghavänand
a (followed by Bühle r and Doniger): what someone has
touched with the foot.
5.127 Gods . . . as suitable: for a detailed study of these significant verses on statutory purity
that, interestingly, includes ignorance as one reason for the purity of something, see
Olivelle I998b.
5.131 Two additional verses: "Fire is pure; wind that blows outdoors is pure; water in a se-
cluded place is pure; and a road is pure for traveling. Goats and horses are pure at their
mouths; cows are pure at their backs; Brahmins are pure at their feet; and women are
pure all over."
5.133 droplets of water: the meaning of viprusah is not altogether clear. Medhätith i and
Govinda take it as referring to tiny droplets perceptible only to the touch. Näräyan
a
and Ramacandra: very tiny drops even when they are impure, or droplets falling on the
feet when sipping water (see 5.142); Kullüka , Räghavänanda
: droplets of spit coming
from the mouth (see 2.141). Given that the same term viprusah is used at 5.141 for spit,
I think Kullüka' s interpretation is correct.
5.135 marrow: the inclusion of marrow in this list is anomalous. All others are substances
that commonly ooze out of the human body; I cannot imagine marrow oozing out un-
less someone is seriously wounded. Most commentators ignore the word.
Räghavänand
a takes it as the fat in bones (asthigatasnehali). Kullüka , following
Govinda, comments: siromadhye pinditasnehah. Bühle r appears to understand this
gloss to mean "(the fatty substance of the) brain." But how would the brain ooze out


--- PAGE 298 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 
287
unless there is a serious head wound? Could majjan refer to oily residue on the skin
after sweating?
Variant reading: "urine, feces, mucus of the nose, ear-wax, phlegm."
5.136 on one hand: within the context the meaning is clear: "one hand" refers to the left
hand, with which the person applied the earth and water to the penis and anus. All pu-
rifications below the navel are carried out using the left hand. Variant reading: "on the
left hand."
5.143 If a sullied . . . thing down: a similar provision is given at GDh 1.28. In the other par-
allel passages (BDh 1.8.27-31; VaDh 3.43) the person is required to lay down the thing
he is carrying. The commentators are of little help in understanding this provision. My
view is that the context is a meal, and the man is carrying dishes for serving the guests.
During this time if one of the diners, who is by definition sullied with remnants of food
on his hand, happen to touch the man serving, the latter need not put the dish down
(which he carries in his left hand) but simply sip some water.
5.144 after eating food: all the commentators interpret this within the context of vomiting.
Medhätithi : if after eating one vomits or purges on the same day; Govinda, KullQka: if
immediately after eating one vomits (no mention of purging (Râghavânand
a cites
Govinda on this); Nandana: if immediately after eating one vomits or purges. Bühle r
and Doniger appear to follow Nandana. Medhätithi , however, records the view of some
who take the eating of food (bhuktvä) to be an independent event. I have preferred to
follow the latter interpretation, although it is possible to see a connection between
vomiting/purging and eating, especially because the former are past participles (vänto,
viraktali) and the latter is a gerund (bhuktvä). Given the distance between the two
(pada-a and pada-c), and because padas generally constitute discreet units, I prefer to
take pada-c as containing a distinct provision, just as pada-d.
5.147 Even in their . . . independently: this and the following verse have become cause
celebre in anti-Manu rhetoric, even though these or similar provisions are encountered
in numerous other legal texts: GDh 18.1-2; BDh2.3.44-6; VaDh 5.3; ViDh 25.13; YDh
1.85-6. Similar sentiments are expressed later by Manu (9.2-3). Clearly, Brahmanical
law saw women as eternal minors to be guarded and protected by their male relatives.
Other and more positive depictions of the role of women and their relationship to
males, however, are found in Manu, but are mostly ignored by modern critics (see
Introduction, p. 35). The term svatantra ("independent") has specifically legal
connotations. In Närad a (NSm 1.29-30), for example, the term is taken to indicate a
person who can undertake actions that are legally binding, such as sales and contracts.
He says specifically that a king is independent (svatantra) and his subjects non-
independent (asvatantra); a teacher is independent, and his pupil is not; a head of a
household is independent, and the women, children, and servants are not.
5.149 both families: that is, her natal family and that of her husband. See 9.5.
5.152 act of giving away: this is a significant observation about the centrality of the giving
away (alienation; pradänam) by the father with respect to the husband's authority over
his wife. The term svämya, which I have translated with the broad "lordship," can also
mean ownership; this term is regularly used with regard to someone's legal ownership
of property (see 8.197-205). A factor that is implicit in this statement regarding
"giving away" may be the ancient custom of bride purchase, alluded to at 8.204. If
marriage is a sale, then ownership is transferred from the previous owner (father) to the
new owner (husband).
5.160 Just like . . . death: this and the following verses are clearly directed both against the
custom of levirate (niyoga: see 9.57-70) and against a woman's own desire to have
children, perhaps through re-marriage. The term "good woman" (sädhvi) is probably


--- PAGE 299 ---
288 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5
used with a pregnant meaning: a woman who is always faithful to her husband (see
verse 165).
5.161 Variant reading: "excluded from the next world."
5.163 a woman who has had a man before: the technical term parapürvä
 is often taken as a
synonym of punarbhü ("a remarried woman"). I think the former term has a broader
application than punarbhü, although the former comprehends the latter. The term
parapürvä
 probably refers to a woman who has had a sexual relationship with another
man under any circumstances. Närad a (NSm 12.45-52) makes a sevenfold classifica-
tion of parapürvä,
 calling three of them punarbhü and four svairim ("wanton or
unchaste woman").
5.169 //( accordance . . . of his life: this concluding verse of the section on the householder
who is a bath-graduate nicely recapitulates the subject. Note that the last half-verse
here is identical with the second half-verse of 4.1, thus bracketing the section with this
repetition. See parallels at 6.1, 33.
C H A P T E R SIX
Additional verse before verse i: "Hereafter I shall explain the Law pertaining to the
hermit's order of life, as well as the rules regarding the gathering of roots and fruits of
the forest and their relinquishment."
6.1 
After living . . . his organs: see parallels at 4.1; 5.169; 6.33.
6.6 
bark: the term cira, related to the Buddhist avara, can refer to both a tattered garment
or cloth (so Medhâtithi ) or a garment manufactured from strips of tree bark or grass (so
Näräyana
, Rämacandra) . Govinda, Räghavänanda
, and Kullük a give both possibilities,
and Nandana specifies a garment made of Kuiia grass. Other texts refer to valkala
(BDh 1.13.12-3; YDh 2.180, 246). Emeneau (1962) has clearly demonstrated that the
reference is not to garments made directly from tree bark but to those probably woven
out of fibers from the inner bark of certain trees. It would clearly have been difficult to
make garments directly out of the other bark of trees.
6.10 
constellation-sacrifice: a sacrifice, also called Naksatresti, that is offered to the lunar
mansions and described in TB 3.1.
Turäyana sacrifice: the first of a series of yearly sacrifices performed on the full-moon
day of Phâlgun a (February-March) or Caitra (March-April). See ÄsSr, 11.14. Variant
reading: "Uttaräyan a sacrifice."
Däksäyana
 sacrifice: another in the series of yearly sacrifices. This sacrifice is per-
formed both on the Full-moon and the New-moon. For a description, see Eggeling's
introduction to SB 2.4.4 (p. 374).
6.13 flowers . . . trees: Bühle r takes medhyavrksodbhavani as a separate item and translates:
"flowers, roots, and fruits, the productions of pure trees"; so also Doniger. Of the
commentators, only Govinda offers an opinion, and he takes this compound as quali-
fying puspamülaphaläni
 ofpäda-b. I agree with this interpretation, both because of the
lack of a ca after the second compound and because I cannot think of any products of
tree other than flowers, roots, and fruits, excepts perhaps leaves and sap. It also paral-
lels nicely snehäms ca phalasambhavän ofpada-d.
6.14 
Bhauma plant, mushrooms (bhaumän i kavakän i ca): most commentators take the for-
mer as qualifying the latter, and following them Bühle r translates: "mushrooms grow-
ing on the ground." As Medhatithi observes, given that all types of mushrooms are


--- PAGE 300 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6 
289
forbidden, it is superfluous to specify ground mushrooms here. Both Medhâtith i and
Bhäruci , our two oldest commentators, take the two as separate items. The meaning of
bhauma is uncertain, however. The manuscript of Bhäruci' s commentary is torn at this
point, but Medhâtith i is probably citing Bhäruc i when he identifies the plant as
gojihvika, which Jha identifies as cabbage. The identical expression occurs also at
11.156, which Medhâtith i explains as mushrooms growing on the ground; clearly he has
forgotten the (better!) explanation he gave at 6.14.
6.16 
Variant reading: "roots and fruits."
6.18 
clean up immediately (sadyahpraksalikah): the meaning is that the hermit cleans his
bowl immediately after eating, leaving nothing for the next time. Such a man does not
maintain a store of provisions, but lives from day to day.
6.19 
he may . . . eighth mealtime: the standard mealtime for a normal human being is twice
a day in the morning and in the evening (see 2.56 n.). Eating only at night (i.e., even-
ing) or during the day implies that he skips one meal. Eating every fourth mealtime
means that he skips three meals; when one eats every eighth mealtime, one skips three
days and eats in the evening of the fourth.
6.21 
wilted on their own: Bilhler, following KullOka, translates svayainsîrnailr. "fallen
spontaneously"; so also Doniger. Näräyan
a explains: phalänkurädijananasaktihlnatäm
präptaih ("reached a state where they are unable to produce fruit or sprouts"); Govinda
and Rämacandr a agree. I think the latter is the more likely meaning, also because fal-
ling cannot apply to roots.
Vaikhänasa doctrine: the term Vaikhânas a is frequently used to refer to forest hermits.
The term also refers to the doctrine or treatise of the sage Vikhanas (see BDh 2.11.14).
6.22 spend the day standing and the night seated:', surprisingly, no commentator or tran-
slator has understood the correct meaning of the technical expression sthänäsanä-
bhyäm viharet. It refers to a religious observance during which the person has to
remain standing during the day (without sitting down) and seated during the night
(without lying down). The VaDh (24.5) clearly specifies that this observance involves
standing during the day and sitting at night: sthânâsanasîlo
 'has tisthed râtrâv
 âsïta.
See ÄpDh 1.25.10; GDh 2.2.6; BDh 2.2.10; 4.7.17. The same expression recurs in Manu
at 11.224. For this ascetic/penitential practice, see also 11.111.
6.23 
the five fires: the hermit sits in the middle of four blazing fires at each cardinal point,
with the summer sun scorching overhead as the fifth fire. Note the connection to the
five ritual fires: see 3.185 n.
6.24 
inflict punishment:: beginning at least with Burnell, translators have rendered the term
socayet uniformly as "dry up." Although emaciating the body through fasting may also
be intended, I think the term has a broader meaning of causing severe pain to the body.
6.25 
depositing the sacred fires in his body: Brahmanical theology of renunciation presents
the abandonment of rites and ritual fires as a process of internalization. The technical
expression for the ritual process by which this internalization is accomplished is called
"depositing the fires in one's body/self (ätmasamäropana).
 Its procedure is patterned
after the vedic custom of depositing the fires either in the fire-drills or in the body
when a sacrificer has to undertake a journey. He brings back his fires either by pro-
ducing a fire using the drills or by blowing on to an ordinary fire. The BDh (2.17.26)
gives a simple form of this rite: the ascetic breathes in the smell of each fire, reciting
the vedic formula "With that body of yours worthy of sacrifice" (TB 2.5.8.8). After this
rite the ascetic carries the fires in the form of his breaths.
6.29 
Variant reading: "For the purification of his self."
6.30 
pursued: the term sevitäh has the meaning of both practicing religious observances and
studying scriptural texts. I attempt to capture this double meaning with "pursue."


--- PAGE 301 ---
290 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6
Brahmins, and householders: several commentators, as well and Bühle r and Doniger,
take these to be in apposition: i.e., Brahmin householders. The natural way to read the
three nouns is to see three separate categories here.
6-33 After spending . .. during the fourth: see parallels at 4.1; 5.169; 6.1.
6-35 proceed downward (vrajaty adhah): going downward here and in other similar contexts
(see 6.37; 7.53; 11.173) probably implies both fall from caste (sociologically, going
down the social ladder) and going down to the netherworlds (cosmologically). See the
similar expression at 11.153, where it means that the food eaten has gone down, i.e.,
been excreted.
6-39 freedom from fear (abhaya): the meaning is that the ascetic assures all creatures that no
harm will come to them from him. This is commonly referred to as the "gift of safety"
(abhayadana), and it is also associated with a king after his conquest of a new region
(see 7.201). He is supposed to assure the safety of the people living there. Verse 40
picks up this theme of "fear" with reference to the ascetic's afterlife.
6.43 
keep no store (asamcayika): the vulgate reading is asamkusuka, which has been inter-
preted to mean "firm of purpose" (BUhler) or "unwavering."
6.44 A bowl, the foot of a tree: the Sanskrit kapäla here probably means simply a begging
bowl (see 6.53), although the term can have the meanings of a skull (so Doniger) and a
potsherd (so Bühler) . Foot of a tree is presented as the ideal lodging place for an as-
cetic (6.26).
renouncer: although the term mukta means literally "a liberated man," it is used here in
the same way as moksa (see 1.114 n.) to refer to a wandering ascetic. BUhler's "one
who has attained liberation" and Doniger's "one who is Freed" are, I think, overly lit-
eral. The discussion here is about asceticism and ascetics, not about liberation and lib-
erated individuals.
6.45 his wages (nivesa): according to the vulgate reading nirdesam, the translation would be
"as a servant his orders."
Three additional verses: "A mendicant should wander about during the eight months of
summer and winter; compassionate towards all living being, he should live in one
place during the rainy season. He must not travel on a sunless road or step on un-
inspected ground; and he should always perform his rites using well-strained water. He
should utter words that are true, harmless, inoffensive, without deceit, not harsh, com-
passionate, and not slanderous."
6.46 purified by his sight: the meaning is that he should look at the spot where he is about to
place his foot, lest he trample to death any living creatures such as ants and worms (see
6.68). This must have been a value and custom common to most ascetic communities;
Jain ascetics carry a broom to sweep the ground in front of them lest they step on a tiny
insect unintentionally.
6.48 
seven gates: the meaning was obscure even to the commentators, who give a variety of
interpretation, many of them educated guesses. Medhatithi and Govinda relate them to
the triple set (2.224 n-) in different pairs: Law-Wealth, Law-Pleasure, Wealth-Pleasure,
Pleasure-Wealth, Pleasure-Law, Wealth-Law, and finally the three together. This is
truly far-fetched, as is the opinion of some given by Bhäruci , according to whom the
seven refer to the seven grammatical cases. Näräyana
: the five senses, mind, and ego.
My own view is that they refer to the seven openings of the head: two eyes, two nos-
trils, two ears, and mouth, which are the major organs of perception and communica-
tion. This interpretation is recorded as the view of some by Medhatithi and Bhäruci .
6.49 
Taking delight. . .felicity: commentators have failed to appreciate the contrast drawn
here between being seated and walking (vicaret). The first refers to yogic posture and


--- PAGE 302 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6 
291
meditation, as KullOka has rightly pointed out. Walking must refer to the actual act
rather than living in this world (samsara) as some commentators explain. The life of
the ascetic is split between sitting in meditation and walking about, especially to beg
for food, which is the very next topic. See the use of vicaret again in verse 52.
6.50 palmistry: the term angavidyä has a broader meaning than palmistry, although this
must have been the principal form. It can include the interpretation of other physical
characteristics and marks.
6.57 
belongings: the term mâtrâ
 has acquired somewhat of a specialized meaning in ascetic
vocabulary. It refers to the meager possessions of an ascetic, especially his garment,
bowl, water-pot, and staff. Note the interesting juxtaposition of -mätra at the end of the
compound in pada-c with the meaning "only or merely" and mäträ
 in the sense of the
meager articles of an ascetic in pada-d.
6.58 
with a show of reverence: it is unclear who shows the reverence. Medhatithi thinks that
it is the donor; others think it is the ascetic himself who shows reverence to the giver.
Bühle r appears to follow the latter interpretation, which is the most plausible gram-
matically. Ascetic literature, however, warn the ascetic to fear honors bestowed on him
by ordinary people and to shun such honors as if they were poison, and recommend
that he welcome disrespect as if it were ambrosia: see 2.162 with reference to a student.
6.66 
Though decked in finery (bhusita): the vulgate reading is düsita, following which
Bühle r translates: "though blemished (by a want of the external marks)," and Doniger
"even if he is flawed (in that duty)."
an emblem .. . Law (na lirigam dharmakâranam) : literally, "an emblem is not the cause
of dharma." Bühle r takes dharma as merit, but that would result in the term being used
with two different meanings in the same verse. The meaning, I think, is that wearing an
ascetic emblem does not ipso facto mean that the man is following the Law. In the very
next verse the emblem appears to be compared to a Kataka fruit, which is believed to
have the property of making turbid water clear. But the fruit has to be immersed in the
water for this to happen. Likewise, an emblem itself will not make an ascetic virtuous;
he must live according to the Law of which the emblem is merely an outward sign.
6.70 
Controlling the breath: the definition of what constitutes a single control of breath is
given in a verse cited by commentators and found in VaDh 25.13: "When someone re-
cites three times the Gâyatr l verse together with the Calls, the syllable OM, and the
Siras formula while controlling his breath, it is called 'control of breath'."
6.73 
Variant reading: "Through the practice (yoga) of knowledge."
6.75 
that state: the meaning of tat padam is not altogether clear. In all likelihood, the phrase
refers to the highest state of the liberated self, namely the state of Brahman (see 6.79,
81, 85).
6.76-7 
Constructed . . . ghosts: the human body is here compared to a house, a common
image in ascetic literature. The ascetic has, of course, abandoned his house, but he still
carries his body with him. This imagery invites the reader to regard the house, com-
monly perceived as offering safety and shelter, as a place of torment and danger. The
expression "dwelling place of ghosts" (bhütäväsa)
 carries a double meaning; bhüta can
mean both ghost and element. Indeed, the body is composed of elements, but it is, at
another level, the abode of impure and dangerous ghosts. See Maitrl UpanLsad, 3.4.
6.78 
When a tree . . . painful grasp: I think commentators and translators alike have failed
to understand this simile, which, I must admit, has been cast in turbid syntax. All take
the tree falling from the bank and the bird leaving the tree as two independent similes.
That is very unlikely, given that the first foot concludes with vrksa ("tree"), and the
second foot begins with it, indicating that the latter picks up the theme of the former.
Further, they take gräha (which I think means alligator rather than shark) only with the


--- PAGE 303 ---
292 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6
giving up of the body in the second half of the verse. I think the last foot is connected
to both the simile and the ascetic giving up the body. The meaning then seems to be
that a bird flying off before the fall of the tree escapes the alligator's grasp in the river.
Likewise, when an ascetic abandons the body before its natural fall at death (which is
here compared to the fall of the tree), he escapes the grasp of the alligator, probably
Yama (6.61). This fits nicely with the theme of the preceding verse, namely, that an as-
cetic must abandon the body voluntarily. Variant reading: "he escapes from the painful
village."
6.80 
by the passion . . . object of passion: Manu is clearly playing with the double meaning
of bhäva, which means both the inner disposition of the spirit and external objects, es-
pecially those that are the object of passion.
6.83 
those named "Vedanta" : Medhâtith i takes vedäntäbhihitam
 to mean what has been
called Vedanta; thus he should softly recite the Upanisads. Others take it to mean what
has been stated in the Vedântas ; thus he should softly recite what the Upanisads rec-
ommend. Nandana and Râmacandr a think that this is OM. I prefer Medhâtithi' s inter-
pretation because yat of pada-d, I think, clearly refers back to brahma of pada-a.
6.85 
sequence of practices: some commentators take kramayogena as a reference to yogic
and other practices enjoined on the ascetic. Others take it as a reference to the obliga-
tion to go through the first three äsramas or to pay his three debts before he undertakes
the life of a wandering ascetic. Bühle r accordingly translates: "A twice-born man who
becomes an ascetic, after the successive performance of the above-mentioned acts."
The verb, however, is parivrajati (which means to wander about, and by extension live
the ascetic life) rather than pravrajati (which refers to the initial departure from home,
and thus to the initiation into asceticism).
6.86 
Listen . . . vedic retirees: this verse signals the passage to a different topic. Throughout
his work Manu uses similar verses to signal the transition from one topic to another
(see Introduction, p. 7). In the table of contents given in the first chapter, moreover,
Manu clearly indicates that he has two separate topics in mind. The sequence of topics
at 1.114 (see note to it) is tapasyam moksam samnyasam eva ca. The term sanmyasa
signals a topic different from moksa; nowhere else in this list does Manu use two terms
to refer to a single topic. Sanmyasa refers to the life of Vedasarnnyasikas, which is the
subject of the last section of chapter six that opens with the above verse. Many com-
mentators, such as KullOka, consider Vedasarnnyasika to be a lower type of renouncer.
I think that commentators, such as Govinda and Bhâruci , who take them to be a type of
householder are right. Manu's discussion, furthermore, confirms that he considers
Vedasamnyâsika s to be retired householders who aspire to holiness without resorting
to the two types of asceticism that he had described earlier. A similar use of the term
with reference to retirement of an aged Brahmin occurs in the Manava Srautasutra,
8.25: see Sprockhoff 1987. In what follows, Manu appears to be saying: "I grant that
all these four äsramas can lead a person to the highest state. Nevertheless, the house-
holder is the best and chief among them, and as such it is unnecessary to leave the
household life in old age. I give now this alternative way of leading a holy life in old
age in one's own house." Manu reserves the term sanmyasa for this institution; within
this context the term means retirement rather than renunciation.
6.89 
Variant reading: "according to the Veda and the snirtis."
6.90 
end up: most commentators take samsthiti as a reference to the fact that persons in the
other äsramas must get their sustenance from the householder, even though this is not
strictly true in the case of a forest hermit. The image of the rivers flowing into the
ocean, however, evokes another image: that of the rebirth process as described in the
BrU 6.2.9-14 and the ChU 5.1-9. After death all beings go through the transformations
of smoke, rain, and plants, and finally end up as the semen of a householder before
taking birth in the womb of his wife.


--- PAGE 304 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 
293
CHAPTE R SEVEN
7.2 
vedic consecration: all the commentators take brahmarn sainskaram as a reference to
vedic initiation. Nandana is the only one who gives the royal consecration (abhiseka)
as one alternative, alongside initiation. As BUhler indicates, the royal consecration is
clearly what is intended here, because that is what makes a man a king along with the
obligation to protect his subjects.
7.4 
Indra . . . lord of wealth: these are the eight guardian deities of the cardinal points,
beginning with Indra in the east and ending with Kubera, the lord of wealth, in the
north.
7.5 
overpowers (abhibhavati): Medhâtith i glosses durnirlksyainukho bhavati ("he becomes
one whose face is difficult to be gazed upon"), which is supported by the comparison
with the sun in the very next verse. Kulluka glosses atisete ("surpasses"), which is
followed by Bühler , using tejasä as an instrumental of comparison. I think Medhâtith i
is on the right track, but the meaning is probably broader: overpower and overwhelm
due to both his majesty and his power.
7.10 
every aspect (visvarüpam) : the aspects he assumes are indicated in the next verse: be-
nevolence, valor, anger. Commentators also say that he can be a friend one minute and
an enemy the next. I also think that, in light of his comparison to the sun in verse 6,
that the old meaning of visvarupa (Bodewitz 1985) as dazzling or brilliant (like gold
and the sun) may resonate here also.
7.11 
he, in whose: I am assuming (contra Bühler ) that yasya of this verse is the correlative
of sah of verse 10 rather than that oipada-d of this verse. First, the three aspects given
in verse u seem to be an explication of "all aspects" of verse 10. Second, the presence
of the causal hi ("for") in pada-d makes it very likely that this päda gives the reason
why the king is all that he stated to be in verses 10 and 11. See the very similar con-
struction in 2.7. We see the last päda with a hi giving the reason for what was stated in
the earlier pädas in 8.37, 39, 270, 338, 417, 9.144.
of them all: namely, the eight gods from whose particles he was created.
7.12 
to destroy him quickly (âsuvinâsâya)
: I follow Medhâtith i and Govinda in connecting
äs u with vinäsäya.
 I think the two words form a compound. The fact that the two
words are in the same päda also supports the syntactic connection between the two.
Others take äs u as an adverb modifying the verb: "he quickly makes up his mind" (so
Bühle r and Doniger).
7.13 
When the king . . . that Law: the verse is not altogether clear. I think Medhâtith i is cor-
rect in taking dharma here as a royal decree or edict rather than as simply dharma,
which, as Bhäruc i points out, comes not from the king but from the sastras. Medhâtith i
gives examples of such decrees: "There is a wedding in the minister's house, and all
should gather there." Against those in disfavor: "No one should associate with this
man."
7.14 
Punishment (danda): it appears that Manu begins the discussion of punishment by per-
sonifying it. Punishment is the son of the Lord made from Brahman's energy. But by
verse 32 he passes on imperceptibly to its common meaning of punishment imposed by
the king.
7.15 
accede to being used: verses 22 and 23 make the meaning of the unusual expression
bhogâya ka/paute clear. Different beings open themselves to being used (literally
"enjoyed") by others; one can think of the chain of food and eaters. In a socio-political
context, moreover, "being used" may refer specifically to the king's enjoyment of his
subjects' wealth through taxes and duties.


--- PAGE 305 ---
294 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7
7.16 
the place and the time: that is, when and where the crime was committed.
7.19 
after careful examination (samlksya): the reference is probably to a judicial inquiry.
Medhätith i correctly observes that this phrase relates to what was said in verse 16
(aveksya tattvatah). The two verses bracket this brief discussion of the proper way to
inflict just punishment.
7.21 
lap up (avalihyät) : this makes sense because the term havis refers specifically to ghee
that is poured into the sacred fire.
topsy-turvy: commentators adharottaram take to mean that the lower castes would
usurp the roles and privileges of upper castes.
7.24 
revolt: I take the term prakopa here to mean revolt or tumult among the populace, a
meaning common in the AS (see, e.g., 1.18.1; 1.19.28).
7.25 
administrator: the term neta (literally "leader"; see verse 17) must refer to the king
who actually administers punishment. See the use of pra Vni with reference to inflict-
ing punishment in verses 19-20,31, and again in verses 26-7; and we have the simple
verb n¡ in verse 30.
7.29 as well as . . . mid-space: another translation would be: "as well as sages, gods and
those who dwell in mid-space."
7.32 friends and loved ones (suhrtsu snigdhesu): so Bhäruci , Nârâyana
, and Kullüka . How-
ever, Medhätith i takes this as a single category: "friends who are dear to him"; that is,
where friendship is not based on some ulterior motive as in the case of an ally.
7-35 The king . . . to them: this verse concludes the section on the creation of the king to be
the protector of the people, a section that began with verse 3. The connection to the
latter verse is clearly established by the use here of the word srstah echoing asrjat of
verse 3.
devoted to .. . them (dharme nivistänäm)
: Medhätith i offers another possibility with an
elided "a": dharme (a)nivistänäm.
 The translation would then be: "people . . . are not
devoted to the law specific to them."
7-37 
After getting up in the morning: note that the entire section on the duties of the king is
structured to encompass a single day in the life of the king. Other materials, such as the
appointment of officials, organization of the state, and political strategies, are all pre-
sented, sometimes quite artificially, within that overall structure. The artificiality of the
structure is apparent, because at 7.145 Manu returns to the morning duties of the king,
possibly because so much material (108 verses) had intervened. This is followed by the
afternoon routine (7.216-22) and the evening (7.223-26). Note that this structure par-
allels the AS 1.19.6-25, which recommends that the king develop a routine for the day
and the night. He is asked to divide the day and the night into eight parts each and to
perform specific tasks during each period. For example, during the first part of the day
he reviews matters of defense and revenue; during the second, he looks into the affairs
of the citizens; and during the third, he takes his bath and the midday meal. Likewise,
during the first part of the night he interviews secret agents. This admonition of the
AS, perhaps, was the inspiration for the structure that Manu gives to this central sec-
tion on the duties of a king (räjadharma).
7.40 
those residing in the forest: the reference is probably to the Pandava brothers of the
MBh, They recovered their kingdom after the great war. I thank Professor Albrecht
Wezler for this insight. Commentators ignore this point and take the term as referring
simply to poor persons.
7.41-2 Vena came . . . rank of a Brahmin: these are well-known stories from ancient lore.
Vena was a king notorious for his evil conduct. He prohibited sacrifice and, conse-
quently, was killed by Brahmin ascetics with their spells. Among the many legends


--- PAGE 306 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 
295
surrounding the figure of King Nahusa is one where he wanted to obtain Indra's wife
and was therefore cursed to become a snake. Sudas Paijavana (the son of Pijavana) is a
king named in the Rgveda. The famous seers Vasistha and Visvämitr a were his priests.
Sudas killed Vasistha's son and, abandoned by Visvämitra , comes to ruin. No informa-
tion appears to be available on Sumukha. Nimi, too impatient to wait for Vasistha,
started a sacrifice on his own and dies under a curse by Vasistha. Prthu is the son of
Vena produced posthumously by Brahmins by churning Vena's body. He ruled the
earth justly, and for this reason the earth is named Prthvï , the wife of Prthu. Both
Kubera and Visvämitr a (the son of Gädhi ) came to their respective positions because
of ascetic toil (tapas). Kubera, the guardian of the north, became the lord of wealth,
and Visvämitra , originally a Ksatriya, rose to the rank of a Brahmin.
7.43 
From experts . . . enterprises: this verse lacks a verb and, as Bhäruc i and Medhâtith i
point out, the verb adhigacchait ("he should learn") is carried over (anuvrtti) from
verse 39. In this case, it is likely that the verses 40-2 are either interpolations or at best
a parenthetical comment. Their intervention probably necessitated some scribes and
commentators, including Medhâtithi , to change vidyarn to the verb vidyät. This verb is
used frequently by Manu but always in the sense of "one should know" (when Bhrgu is
imparting some knowledge: e.g., 2.149; 7.50, 100) or "one should discover" (as when a
king should learn the weakness of his enemy: 7.105). It is never used in the sense of
learning from a teacher or studying.
7.52 
Variant reading: "rampant everywhere, a man should recognize that each preceding
vice is more perilous to himself than each subsequent."
7.54 
counselors: this term sacivän occurs only once elsewhere in Manu (7.120), where also
it refers to a very high official. The term occurs only once in the AS (in the verse 1.7.9).
Given that Manu deals with amätyas (government officials) in a later section (7.60-2),
it appears that he uses sativa as the equivalent of inantrin in the/45 (counselors or the
highest kind of ministers). See Scharfe 1993, 125-37. In the MBh (15.14.11)
Yudhisthira's four brothers are called his sativas, indicating the high rank of officials
bearing that name.
natives of the land: the meaning oí maulan is unclear. Commentators take it to mean
people whose ancestors were in royal service. This is followed by Bühle r and Doniger.
The term is used in the AS (2.33.8; 7.8.27; 9.2.1-3,14; 10.1.7; 12.1.28) always with ref-
erence to the first of six classes of troops; and the term is translated by Kangle as
"hereditary." Within that context that indeed may be the meaning, even though it may
also refer to the fact that these soldiers are native inhabitants of the original territory of
the king (muía). The term maula is used by Manu in two other places (8.62, 259), both
in the context of competent witnesses. The meaning of "hereditary" makes no sense
within those contexts. I think that in all three instances maula refers to native or origi-
nal inhabitants of the locality as opposed to newcomers; that is, people with deep roots
in the region. In this sense, it may also imply "hereditary," because the ancestors of
these people were inhabitant of the region.
well-accomplished: the exact meaning of labdhalaksa is unclear. Skill in the use of
weapons is highlighted by commentators; but the term probably means more than this
and includes accomplishment in various undertakings, including ministerial posts and
past battles.
7.56 
state: all the commentators, except Nandana, state that sthäna consists of the army,
treasury, fort, and territory. I have not been able to find this term used technically in
the AS.
pacification of acquisitions (labdhaprasamanäni) : this is a topic of the AS (1.1.15) and
dealt with extensively at AS 13.5.1-24. The pacification of newly won territories is
done both through reconciliation and kindness and by means of force. The king is


--- PAGE 307 ---
296 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7
supposed to publicize the vices of the defeated king, contrasting that with his own
virtues and piety.
7.57 
about his affairs: 
BUhler and Doniger, possibly following Kullüka , connect the word
käryesu with pada-d: "do what is (most) beneficial for him in his affairs." I think it is
syntactically connected to what precedes, because this term concluding that clause as
correctly pointed out by Govinda; the king seeks advice about his affairs.
7.60 
officials (amätyän)
: this is a generic term used with reference to all high ranking gov-
ernment officials (see Scharfe 1993,132), especially those below the level of mantrin
("counselor"). Revenue collection is, of course, one of the principal duties of such of-
ficials. Within the state organization envisaged in the AS, there was a special official
called Samähart r (precisely the same word used here by Manu) who was the revenue
collector: see Scharfe 1993,157-9. Note the parallel between this verse on the ap-
pointment of amatyas and verse 54 on the appointment of counselors, both verses
ending in suparlksitän.
7.62 
employing . . . his residence: I have a feeling that there is something wrong with this
verse. Bhäruci , for example, says that the brave are chiefs of the armed forces, even
though the army is not mentioned here. Also, pädas a, c, and d, form nice self-con-
tained units; this structure is violated in pada-b, which, as it stands, forms a syntactic
unit with pada-a. The initial tesam ("among them") looks suspiciously like a com-
mentarial introduction to this verse, a comment that found its way into the root text
(but see 8.4 where the initial tesam has a similar meaning). One candidate for emenda-
tion isdaksän, which is found also in verse 61. If we read dande in its place following
the ST mss., and replace tesam with sucln, we would have four self-contained pädas.
The repetition of sucln in pada-c makes this emendation somewhat problematic, but
both Bhäruc i and Medhâtith i take the statement about mines and factories to be an ex-
ample of artha, which they take to mean "activities relating to income and expendi-
ture." See also the parallel passage of ViDh (3.16-21), where those employed in mines
are called apta. With this type of emendation, the verse would read: "appointing the
honest to financial affairs, the brave from illustrious families to the army; the honest to
mines and factories; and the timid to the interior of his residence."
7.63 
hint, bearing, or gesture: the AS (1.15.7-9) gives only two: ¡Agita ("hint") and äkära
("bearing"), and defines the former as non-normal movement or gesture (anyathä-
vrttih), and the latter as "putting on an expression" (akrtigrahanam), explained by
commentators as unnatural facial expressions, such as paleness. All three terms clearly
refer to the ability of the envoy to interpret properly the signs that may betray the inner
thoughts of the rival king.
7.65 
realm: according to Scharfe (1993, 124) rastra may also have a more restricted mean-
ing, referring to "incorporated states with some degree of autonomy." See also 7.122 n.
7.67 
seducible men (krtyesu): most commentators and all translators have missed the tech-
nical meaning of krtya within the vocabulary of political science. Bühler , for example,
translates "with respect to the affairs" and produces a forced translation of the verse. In
the AS (see 1.16.24) krtya means a person in the enemy king's service who is open to
being seduced. Nandana correctly detects this meaning: svaräjnä
 bhedyesu para-
paksasthitesu purusesu ("among men in the service of the enemy who can be induced
to break with their king"). See Scharfe 1993, 213-4.
servants (bhrtyesu): the ST mss. read here also krtyesu. The translation would then be:
"his plans with the help of seducible men."
7.68 
he should take: the subject of the verb âtisthet is unclear. Is it the ambassador, whose
activities were the focus of the preceding verses, or the king? Bhäruci , Govinda,
Räghavänanda
, and Nandana take the subject to be the ambassador; and I would tend


--- PAGE 308 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 
297
to agree. Näräyana
, Kullüka , and Rämacandr a take it to be the king, who finds all this
out through his envoy. Medhätithi' s commentary on this verse is missing.
7.69 
healthy (anâvilam) : I follow the interpretation of Bhäruci , Govinda, Kullüka , and
Räghavänanda
. The meaning, according to these, is that the region is free from both
disease and from other harmful things, such as mosquitoes, snakes, vicious animals,
and the like. Näräyana
, Nandana, and Rämacandr a take the term to mean a region free
from mixed castes.
7.70 A fortress .. .by a hill: on the different kinds of fortresses and their relative merits, see
AS 2.3.1-35.
7.74 
Variant reading: "a fortress is enjoined."
Additional verse: "Even the top of the Mandara mountain devoid of soldiers is not
commended. A fort with soldiers, Manu the son of the Self-existent One has declared,
is the best kind of fort."
7.75 
conveyances: the term vähanäni
 is difficult to translate because it includes vehicles
(carts, carriages, chariots), as well as draft animals, beasts of burden, and riding horses
(cavalry).
7.76 
provided with pools and groves: I follow the interpretation of Medhätith i and Nandana.
Others understand this as referring simply to water and trees.
7.78 
domestic rites . . .fires: the distinction here is between the domestic rites (smarta) that
are described in the Grhyasutras, and the solemn vedic rites (¿rauta) that require the
three vedic fires (2.231).
7.82 
Variant reading: "for this is called the inexhaustible treasure of kings deposited with
Brahmins."
7.84 
Variant reading: "to the teacher, a thousandfold reward."
7.86 
Two additional verses: "When an article is given to a worthy recipient at the proper
place and time, according to rule, and in a spirit of generosity—that is the accomplish-
ment of the Law. This alone is the highest and the complete Law laid down for a
king—he should obtain wealth through victory in battle and donate it to the twice-
born."
7.90 
treacherous: most commentators take küta as referring to be a weapon concealed in a
wooden exterior.
7.91 
a man standing on the ground: the implication is that the soldier, in this case the king,
is fighting on a chariot or a mount.
7.94 master: see Scharfe 1993,106 for the use of bhartr with reference to the king. On the
loyalty to the king, see Hará 1994-95.
7.97 preemptive share: the term uddhära is used also with reference to the extra share re-
served for the oldest brother in partitioning ancestral property (see 9.112-7). It appears
that in the division of war booty also, the king, as the chief, received a share of the best
pieces before the rest was divided among the soldiers, as also the best item from the
booty won by individual soldiers in single combat. See also GDh 10.22.
vedic scripture: Medhätith i and other commentators cite AB 3.21: after his victory over
Vrtra, Indra demanded his preemptive share: uddhäram ma uddharata.
Additional verse: "He should distribute the gains among his servants; he alone should
not take them all. The king should be satisfied with the mere title and the parasol."
7.99 
The king . . . worthy recipients: this verse has the hallmarks of a proverbial saying. In
the Pañcatantra (I, verse 2) there is a very similar statement with regard to a merchant
and his ambition to become rich. See the parallel in AS 1.4.3; Scharfe 1993, 46.


--- PAGE 309 ---
298 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7
7.101 Variant reading: "he should distribute to deserving people."
7.102 He should keep . . . readiness: the phrase nityam udyatadandah syät is quoted in AS
1.4.5 and ascribed to "Teachers," making it likely that this is also a proverbial saying.
7.105 hide his limbs like a tortoise: a variant of this verse is cited in AS 1.15.60. The simile
may be a comparison of the five angas of counsel (mantra) to the five angas (four feet
and head) that the tortoise withdraws into the shell. The five limbs of counsel are given
as: means for commencing operations (karmanäm ärambhopäyah);
 provision of men
and material (purusadravyasampad)', distribution of place and time (desakälavibhäga)',
remedies for setbacks (vipattipratlkara); and success of the undertaking (karyasiddhi),
7.106 He should ponder . . . like a lion: Bhâruc i has a long comment on these similes: "Just
as naturally in order to catch a mass of fish who are safe in their water-fort the 'heron'
finds an effective means to take them by employing meditation, after dedicating him-
self to the task, so the king should not be despondent realizing that if one employs
abundant thought on one's affairs even aims very difficult to achieve are attained. Just
as the 'hare', because its body is small, is able to double back from even a host of
enemies, so even one who has no allies and so cannot withstand when his feudatories
are enraged against him and have risen in all quarters, may seal up his fort and fly from
it in search of a suitable refuge. Just as a 'wolf intending to take the cattle, finds out
the keeper's negligence and snatches them, so one should not give up one's hope of
taking what appears to be the object of careful protection, for the time will come when,
like a wolf, he will be able to make his snatch. And just as the 'lion' strikes even large-
bodied creatures like the elephant and so on, overcoming them by employing his might
and power, so the king should not fear, thinking that the enemy's force is large. For
something of large size but weak in spirit is sometimes struck down by a small creature
which is large in spirit" (Trans. Derretí) . In his commentary on this verse, Medhatithi
has plagiarized Bhâruci .
7.107 strategies beginning with conciliation: the four strategies are conciliation (saman),
gifts (daña), fomenting dissension (bheda), and war (yuddha, vigraha). See 7.198-200.
Additional verse: "He should not place his trust in an untrustworthy person; nor should
he place excessive trust in a trustworthy person. Trust is the source of danger; it cuts
him off even by his roots."
7.113 managing .. . well managed: I take saingraha in this context as relating to the manage-
ment or governance of the king's realm, which is the topic of the very next section.
Medhatithi glosses with raksavidhanain, which deals with only one aspect of manage-
ment. Govinda, Kullüka , and Nandana also gloss with raksana. See MBh 12.88.1 where
saingraha is juxtaposed with gupti, the latter referring specifically to protection and
the former, I think, more generally to good governance that would bring satisfaction to
the people.
prospers: on the term edhate, see Thieme 1958.
7.116 troubles: Govinda and Kullük a take dosa to mean thefts and other such crimes. Nära -
yana takes it as referring to agitations among the people and the like (janavidravadin).
The term literally means "faults" and can refer to any types of adversities or problems
arising within a village.
7.119 
"family" : the term kula is interpreted by Medhatithi to mean a segment of a village,
known in some regions as hatta and in others as usta. Närayan a cites a saying that a
kula consists of two halas, a líala being an area of land that can be plowed by eight or
six oxen. The latter view is adopted by Govinda, Kullüka , Räghavänanda
, and
Rämacandra . Nandana thinks it is the share of one cultivator.
7.120 undertaken by each individually (prthakkäryäni)
: the meaning could also be "activities
pertaining to individuals."


--- PAGE 310 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 
299
7.121 high stature: commentators uniformly take uccliaihsthanam to mean a person coming
from an illustrious family or who is in some way eminent. I think that it may well refer
to the physical stature or height rather than the social or moral standing of the individ-
ual, especially in juxtaposition with his fierce appearance.
7.122 within their jurisdictions (rastresu): this is a significant use of the term rastra to refer
to an administrative unit within the state (räjya): see 7.65 n.
7.124 people who have business: commentators generally take käryikebhyah as referring to
people who have lawsuits pending. The reference is then to the bribery of judges. The
term could also have a wider meaning, including other matters requiring official sanc-
tion. In that context, this provision may include bribery and kickbacks.
send them into exile: the term praväsanam can also mean the infliction of capital pun-
ishment (see 8.123 n.).
7.125 He should fix: for a discussion of the relative wages of the different officials in royal
service, see Scharfe 1993, 135.
7.126 maintenance: the critical edition has adopted the reading bhaktakam in preference to
vetanam ("wages") found in most editions and mss. For a discussion of this unusual
term, see Introduction, p. 36.
7.127 maintenance (bhakta): I think this term means more or less the same that bhaktaka of
the preceding verse and must refer to the expenses of maintaining himself and his em-
ployees. I think Nandana has it right when he explains: karmakärädibhyo
 deya/n
("what has to be given to the workmen and the like"). Bühle r and Doniger take the
term literally as meaning "food."
7.130 share: on bhaga as a technical term for the king's share of any produce, occurring al-
ready in the Asokan inscriptions, see Scharfe 1993, 160, where further literature is
given.
7.138 self-employed: most commentators take the expression âtmopajïvisu to mean Südra s
employed as manual laborers. This may well be the case; but the expression has a
wider application, as seen in its use with regard to wives who earn a living on their
own, possibly as prostitutes, at 8.362.
7.139 He must not. . . to them: most commentators see an implicit "non-gathering of taxes"
in the context of cutting off his own root. That is, by being too lenient with taxation a
king cuts his own root, whereas by excessive taxation he cuts off the root of his tax-
paying subjects. Bühle r follows this interpretation. I think Nandana is correct in seeing
excessive greed as the cause of cutting his own root and that of others. "Root" is the
wealth produced by the people that supports both the citizens and the king. Excessive
taxation cuts this common root.
7.140 lawsuits: although the term karyarn may have a broader meaning, such as business or
affairs (Bühler) , I think that here and in the next verse it has the technical meaning of a
lawsuit (see 8.8). The mention of "that seat" in verse 141 indicates a judicial proceed-
ing at which a deputized minister is presiding.
7.143 Additional verse: "Fire, flared up by the anguish of the people's oppression, does not
turn back until it has burnt up the king's family, wealth, and life."
7.144 specified rewards (nirdistaphala): the reference is to the taxes a king collects, which
are considered to be payment for the protection provided by the king.
7.147 Climbing . . . his counselors: for a discussion of the place where the king should meet
with his counselors, see Sternbach 1972.
7.153 tying up . . . undertakings (käryasesam) : the reference is to past activities where some
aspects may not have been completely carried out and need further attention. See 7.179.


--- PAGE 311 ---
300 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7
activities: on the meaning of the term pracära, which has been subject to much misun-
derstanding, see Scharfe 1993, 195-200. He has demonstrated that the term does not
refer to a piece of land or a region but to activities. See 9.219 n.
7.154 eightfold agenda (astavidham karma): there is no consensus among the commentators
as to the identity of these eight. Many cite a verse from Usanas that lists eight activities
of a king: income (ädäna),
 expenditure (visarga), dismissal (praisa, e.g., of bad offi-
cials), preventing (nisedha, e.g., wrong activities on the part of officials), propounding
the correct meaning (arthavacana; others interpret the term to mean resolving difficult
points of Law), resolving lawsuits (vyavaharasya ceksanam), punishment (dando), and
prescribing penances (suddhi). Medhatithi offers two other lists. First: undertaking
what has not been done (akrtarambha), carrying out what has been done (krtänu-
sthäna), enhancing what has been carried out (anusthitavisesana), reaping the fruit of
the activity (karmasatngraha), conciliation (saman), sowing dissension (bheda),
bestowing gifts (daña), and using force (dando). This explanation is preferred by
Nandana. Second: trade (vanikpatha), building bridges and dikes (udakasetu-
bandhand), building forts (durgakarana), keeping them in repair (krtasya tatsamskara-
niyamah), trapping elephants (hastibandhana), constructing mines (khanikhanana),
settling uninhabited lands (sunyanivesana), and clearing forests (daruvanacchedana).
set of five (pañcavargam): most commentators explain this as a reference to the five
kinds of spies employed by a king: deceiver (käpatika, the meaning of this word being
unclear), fallen ascetic (udästhita), householder in distress (grhapati), trader in distress
(vaideha), and one wearing the insignia of a hermit (täpasavyanjana). For a discussion
of the various types of spies, see Scharfe 1993, 204-39. Nârâyana
, Nandana, and
Ramacandra prefer a different set, identical with the five limbs of counsel (7.105 n.).
circle of neighboring kingdoms (mándala): ancient Indian political science envisaged,
perhaps somewhat artificially and geometrically, kingdoms as forming circles around
any given kingdom. The neighboring kingdoms constitute natural enemies; the king-
doms beyond the immediate neighbors constitute the enemy's enemies, and thus one's
own natural allies; the kingdoms beyond these constitute the ally's natural enemies,
and therefore one's own enemies; and so on. See Scharfe 1993, 105-17.
Two additional verses: "In the forest he should place forest-dwellers such as ascetics
and foresters. He should establish a series of spies who are quick, in order to discover
the activities of his enemies. He should uncover those dispatched by his enemy using
the same kinds of spies as those deployed by the enemy—whether they are mobile
spies or resident spies, secret agents without the outwards marks of secret agents."
7.155 buffer king: this is a king whose realm stands between the king and the kingdom he
intends to attack.
7.156 The above constituents . . . twelve: the constituents (prakrtayah) must be four in order
to come up with the total of twelve. Scharfe (1993,108) appears to take the constitu-
ents as the seven listed in AS 6.1; but it is likely that Manu considers them to be the
four encircling kingdoms listed in verse 155. On the "root" of the circle, called "womb"
(niandalayoni) in the AS, see Scharfe 1993, 107-8. The "eight others" are identified by
the commentators as the eight other kinds of surrounding kingdoms listed by
Kämandak i (Nîtisâra, 8.16-7). Four in front beyond the enemy: ally (mitra), enemy's
ally (arinatra), ally's ally (mitramitra), enemy's ally's ally (arimitramitra). Four in the
rear: foe at the heel (pärsnigräha),
 rescuer from the rear (äkranda), supporter of foe at
the heel (pärsnigrähäsära),
 and supporter of rescuer from the rear (äkrandäsära).
 For
these terms, see 7.207 n.
7.157 There are also . . . seventy-two: each of the twelve listed in the previous verse has five
constituents, thus bringing the total to 60 (see A S 6.2.28, which calls these 60


--- PAGE 312 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 
301
dravyaprakrtayah, "material constituents"). Together with the previous twelve (called
rajaprakrtayah, "constituents of kings" in AS 6.2.28), the total comes to 72.
7.158 Additional verse: "When a neutral and powerful king is located along a long and un-
controlled path that a king desiring conquest and seeking the control of the circle of
kings has to take, he is called the buffer king." The verse is somewhat unclear.
7.160 double stratagem: the meaning of dvaidhïbhâvam in Manu is unclear. The explanation
given in verse 167 indicates that the strategy consists of separating the army from the
king. How this was carried out and the strategy behind it are unclear. Most commenta-
tors say that the king divides his army in two, which is also the explanation given in
7.173.1 prefer the view of Bhâruci , followed by Medhâtith i and Govinda, according to
which this strategy calls for pursuing war and peace at the same time. Govinda thinks
that he pursues war with one opponent and peace with another. This appears to be the
basis for the description of the strategy in the AS 7.7: the king obtains troops from one
neighbor promising him part of his treasury and wages war on another neighbor. The
description in verse 167, however, points in another direction. The king pursues peace
and diplomacy, while surreptitiously preparing for war. That may be the reason for
separating the army (or part of the army) from the king, so he can give the appearance
that he is not preparing for war. In verse 167, the meaning may not be that the army
stops in one place and the king in another (so Bühler) , but that the king remains sta-
tionary, while the army is on the march (or vice versa). Here the term sthiti may indeed
be^a synonym of äsana (remaining stationary after suspending military operations); the
AS 7.4.2 gives sthäna as a synonym of äsana. The division of the army into two (7.173)
may also envisage such a strategy: one part remaining stationary, giving the impression
that war in not imminent, while the other launches a surprise attack.
7.161 After forging . . . war: the reading of the critical edition (see note there) is saindhaya
ça vigrhya ça. Bhâruc i gives a very clear and succinct explanation: sanidhäyäsanam
vigrhyäsanam samdhäya yänam vigrhya yänam vä käryatn vlksya prayuñjlta / tathä
dvaidham samsrayam eva ca, "After forging an alliance, he should suspend opera-
tions, and after waging war, he should suspend operations; after forging an alliance, he
should march into battle, and after waging war, he should march into battle—he should
carefully examine the state of affairs and adopt these tactics. Likewise, the double
stratagem or asylum." If we follow the vulgate reading (samdhiin vigraham eva ca),
the translation would be: "He should carefully examine the state of affairs and adopt
the tactic of suspending operations, marching into battle, forging an alliance, waging
war, pursuing a double stratagem, or seeking asylum."
7.162 to pursue a double stratagem: the vulgate reads dvividham ("of two kinds") for dvai-
dham ("double stratagem"), following which BUhler and Doniger omit double
stratagem from the list, giving only five rather than the six strategies. See, however,
that in explaining these twofold divisions, the double stratagem is listed in verse 167.
7.163 two kinds . . . to the future: this verse has been subject to different interpretations.
Bühle r (also Doniger) follows KullQka and takes tadätväyatisamyuktah
 as qualifying
samdhih, and translates: "An alliance which yields present and future advantages, one
must know to be of two descriptions." I follow Bhâruci , Näräyana
, and Govinda in
taking that clause as referring to the two kinds of alliance. I also think that Bhâruc i and
Govinda (who is more explicit) are correct in taking the immediate significance
(tadätva) as relating to an alliance where the allies march together, and the future sig-
nificance as relating to its opposite. Most take -karma at the end of the compound
samänayänakarmä
 as referring to the activity of marching into battle. I think yäna-
karma is a Dvandva and the compound means an alliance where the allies march to-
gether (samänayäna)
 and have the same object (samanakarma, here karma possibly
drawing on its grammatical meaning of object). The opposite of this would be allies
who march into battle separately to further different objectives. In this case, the


--- PAGE 313 ---
302 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7
alliance has no immediate significance but is undertaken with a long-term strategy in
mind.
7.164 an ally has initiated the offensive (mitrena caiväpakrte) : the critical edition adopts the
reading mitrena accepted by Bhäruci , Govinda, and Nandana, and also noted by
Medhâtithi . The second kind of war, as Bhäruc i clearly points out, is initiated when an
ally has attacked one's enemy, who has been rendered vulnerable thereby. The prefer-
red reading of Medhâtithi , followed by other commentators and recorded in the major-
ity of the NT mss., is mitrasya. Following this reading, Bühle r translates: "(that waged
to avenge) an injury done to a friend." So also Doniger.
7.168 Tradition records . . . good people: the variant readings and the diverse interpretations
indicate the difficulties posed especially by the second half of this verse. Medhâtith i
sees sädhusu as syntactically connected with samsrayah, meaning that the king should
seek asylum with only virtuous kings; this is implausible. Nandana reads sädhubhih
and interprets the clause to mean that the second type of asylum is intended to avert
future calamities (bhavisadanarthaparihärärtham).
 Bhäruc i reads the negative avya-
padesa and appears to say that even an evil man may seek asylum so as not be singled
out as evil among good people (sädhusu). The term vyapadesa also means fraud or
faudulent strategy; the meaning then may be not merely to gain renown among good
people but as a fraudulent strategy to be counted as a fine king.
7.170 Variant reading: "then he should wage war."
7.171 When he believes . . . spirit: most commentators connect bhävena with hrstam. Bühle r
translates accordingly: "When he knows his own army to be cheerful in disposition."
The principle of keeping a pâda as a syntactic unit makes it more likely that bhävena
should be connected adverbially with manyeta, an interpretation favored by Näräyana
.
Govinda (with the gloss paramarthena) and KullOka (with tattvatah) also probably fa-
vor the adverbial meaning.
7.172 mounted units: on vähana, see 7.75 n. The reference may be to horses, beasts of bur-
den, vehicles, and the like. But the opposition to bala, which here refers to foot sol-
diers, indicates a division of the army consisting of mounted units (cavalry, elephants,
chariots).
7.176 good war: commentators explain suyuddham by referring to the Ksatriya martial ethic:
in victory one gets to enjoy the kingdom/spoils, and in death one goes to heaven.
7.183 launch the expedition: even though the verb yäyät
 can stand alone (see verse 181), I
think the term yäträm
 should be understood here (anuvrtti) from the previous verse,
although most commentators have not noticed this. Only Govinda and Rämacandr a
mention yäträm.
7.185 three types of roads: most commentators explain this as dry land (júngala), wet land
(anüpa) and forests (ätavika). Näräyan
a prefers villages, wilderness, and hills.
six divisions of his army: most commentators list elephants, horses, chariots, infantry,
general, and workmen. Nandana prefers the sixfold division given by Kâmandak i
(Nïtisâra 16.6): hereditary troops, hired troops, troops from guilds, ally's troops, alien
troops, and foresters. This same list is given in AS 9.2.1.
and only then . . . enemy's fort: note that pada-d of this verse is identical with the final
päda of verse 181, which opened this section on preparations for a military expedition.
This repetition indicates the closure of this small sub-section.
7.187 staff. . . eagle: in the staff formation the army is arranged in a line with the field gen-
eral (balädhyaksa) in the front, the commander in chief (senäpati) at the rear, and the
king in the middle, with the flanks protected by elephants and horses. This is used
when danger is expected from all sides. In the wagon formation, used when there is a
threat from the rear, the front is narrow like a needle and the rear is broad. In the boar,


--- PAGE 314 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 
303
used when danger is perceived from the flanks, the front and the rear are narrow and
the middle broad. In the crocodile, used when danger is expected from the front and
the rear, the front and the rear are broad and the middle is narrow. In the needle, used
when an attack is expected from the front, the army is arranged in a thin and long for-
mation. The eagle formation is similar to the boar, except that it has longer wings ex-
tending outward on the flanks. For a detailed discussion of these and other military
formations, see AS 10.5-6.
7.188 lotus formation: in this formation the king is placed in the middle for protection, and
the various units spread out in semi-circles extending from the center in all directions.
7.189 post. .. in every direction: since this is physically impossible, commentators explain
that by the commander-in-chief and the general are meant all their subordinates. In
other words, these two chief officers are responsible for guarding all the directions.
7.191 thunderbolt: in this formation, the army is deployed in three separate units.
7.196 launch surprise assaults: the meaning of the verb samavaskandayet is not altogether
clear. Most commentators appear to indicate something like commando raids. Nandana
cites Naighantakas who take avaskanda and sauptika as synonyms; the meaning then
is attacks on sleeping troops.
7.197 enemy activity (tatkrtam): the precise antecedent of tat ("his") is unclear. Medhâtith i
and Nandana take it to be the enemy king: one should especially keep watch over what
the enemy himself may do to foment sedition in one's own ranks or to establish contact
with the enemy's allies to his rear. Other commentators take "his" as relating to the se-
ditious people in the enemy ranks.
7.201 After the victory . . . amnesty: all these activities refer to what the king must do within
the conquered territories. So, the gods and Brahmins are those local to those territories.
"Exemptions" (parihära) refer to tax holidays of varying lengths granted to Brahmins
and other significant individuals of the conquered lands. Amnesty is the freedom from
fear (abhaya): see 6.39n.
7.205 All activities . . . to the human: this philosophy is clearly opposed to the "passive" ide-
ology insisting that everything is determined by either fate (daivd) or by one's own
previous actions (karma). See AS 6.2.6-12, which is a close parallel to this verse. For
further discussion of this topic and a somewhat diffferent interpretation of the
expression vidhäne daivamänuse, see Rocher 1977-78.
A few mss. give here fifty additional verses. Their length precludes them from being
translated here.
7.206 alliance with him: given that this strategy is an alternative to war, the alliance must be
with the enemy king.
recognizing . . . rewards: the parallel passage in AS 7.9.1 reads: samhitaprayäne mi-
trahiranyabhümiläbhänäm
 uttarottaro labhah sreyän, "When marching off after
making an alliance, among the gains—ally, money, land—each subsequent one is bet-
ter than each preceding." This is exactly the opposite of Manu's view expressed in
verse 208. The AS 7.9.2 says that land is the best because an ally and money can come
from it, and money the next, because an ally can come from it.
7.207 the foe at his heel... rear: these are technical terms for certain kingdoms constituting
the circle (see 7.154 n.). "The foe at his heel" (parsnigraha) is the king to his imme-
diate rear, who by definition is an ally of his enemy, whom he is attacking and there-
fore is located to his front. The enemy can call on the foe at his heel to attack him from
the rear. When this happens, the attacking king can call on the king located to the rear
of the foe at his heel; this king, being the immediate neighbor of his foe, is his natural
ally. He is called "rescuer from the rear" (akranda). This term literally means "cry for
help"; evidently, when a rear attack took place, the king could send word (cry for help)


--- PAGE 315 ---
304 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7
to this ally, who would attack the former from his rear. On these terms, see the detailed
study by Scharfe 1993, 111-6.
7.209 agile: the meaning of laghu is unclear. Several commentators take it with a negative
connotation, namely weak. Under this interpretation we have to accept an implied api
("even"), as Näräyan
a and Bühle r do. The meaning would then be: "even a weak ally
is commended." I think Nandana is correct in taking laghu to mean a person who does
things quickly (laghukari). Govinda's gloss daksa ("clever") also probably applies to
laghu. This positive interpretation is supported by the use of laghu at 7.193 with refer-
ence to front-line soldiers.
7.211 generosity (sthaulalaksyam): Kullük a cites a verse from a work on synonyms that lists
this term with others for generosity. This interpretation is followed by most commenta-
tors. Govinda explains the term as "acute perception" (suksmadarsitvam): see the use
of laksa at 7.54 n.
7.216 After conferring . . . in this manner: these words connect this section on the afternoon
routine with the section on the king's morning routine and his conferring with his
counselors (7.147). It is to be assumed that the intervening sections on political strate-
gies and war constituted the topics of the king's consultations with his counselors.
7.217 There he should . . . remove poison: several interpretations of this verse are offered by
commentators. First, Govinda and Kullük a detect an implied krtam ("made") in the
first half-verse. Following them, Bühle r translates: "food (which has been prepared) by
faithful, incorruptible (servants)." I think this is quite unnecessary; the instrumentais in
the first half-verse, as Medhâtith i has correctly pointed out, are syntactically connected
with suparfksitam ("thoroughly examined"). The other difficulty in the verse is the
syntax of the final instrumentais mantrair visäpahaih. Näräyana
, Govinda, and Kullü -
ka connect these with suparlksitam. Bühler , accordingly, translates: "which has been
well examined (and hallowed) by sacred texts that destroy poison." Medhâtith i ex-
plains that the king should recite these mantras over the food. Although this is possi-
ble, the simplest way to construct the last päda is to take the instrumentais as
indicating the recitation of the mantras while or right before the king eats. This is quite
a common use of the instrumental within ritual settings with reference to the sacred
texts to be recited while a ritual action is being performed. The expression ätmabhü-
taih, which I have translated "completely loyal," means literally persons who are (like)
one's very self. The expression "knowledgeable about time" (kälajna) has been ex-
plained as servants who know which course to serve at what time during the meal.
Medhâtith i explains the term as servants who know what foods and drinks are to be
given at what age and under what conditions.
7.218 Variant reading: "with liquids that neutralize poison."
7.224 escorted by women: the reference is probably to female guards rather than to servants
(so Bühle r and Doniger). For a description of the various female guards posted around
the king, something already noted by Megasthenes, see Scharfe 1993, 152-3.
C H A P T E R EIGHT
8.1 
who are experts in policy (mantrajñaih): Medhâtith i asks what noun this adjective
qualifies. He argues that it cannot qualify counselors (mantrin), because that would be
a tautology, for mantrins are by definition (and name) supposed to know mantra. He
concludes that it must qualify "Brahmins" of the previous päda. This interpretation is
followed by Rämacandra , whereas Nandana thinks it qualifies both the counselors and
the Brahmins. My translation leaves this issue as vague as the Sanskrit.


--- PAGE 316 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
305
8.2 
raising his right hand (päni m udyamya daksinam): all commentators take pañi
("hand") to mean bähu ("arm"), which is reasonable. The reason for raising the right
arm, however, in unclear. Medhâtith i thinks it is meant to draw attention and to dis-
allow a question. Govinda, Nandana, and Räghavänand
a take it to mean that the king
should have his right arm uncovered. Nandana gives the opinion of some who take it to
mean that he should be wearing his sacrificial cord (yajñopavltin; see 2.63 n.). I think
the answer may be in this direction. In ritual contexts (and legal proceedings are quasi-
ritual), the right shoulder and arm are always left uncovered. See 2.193 n. for this prac-
tice within the context of a vedic student.
8.3 
individually (prthak prthak): Kullük a takes the terms to be syntactically connected with
pasyet ("he should look into") of the previous verse; and this interpretation is followed
by Bühle r and Doniger: "Daily (deciding) one case after another." I think this is quite
unwarranted; Bhâruci , Govinda, and Ramacandra (and possibly also Medhâtithi ) are
correct in connecting them with nibaddhâni ("connected with"). The principle of each
päda being in general a syntactic unit argues in favor of this. The meaning is that any
lawsuit brought before the court should fall under one or the other of the eighteen
grounds for litigation spelled out below. For a detailed explanation of this, see
Vijnânesvara' s commentary on YDh 2.5-8.
8.6 
sexual crimes against women: usually the expression stnsamgrahanatn refers to adul-
tery. I have given it a broader definition, because under this ground for litigation are
included a wide variety of crimes against women, including rape.
8.9 
When the king . . . to do so: for a more detail account of ancient Indian legal proceed-
ings, see AS 3.1.
8.11 
officer (prakrtah): this is an unusual word. Medhâtith i and Näräyan
a gloss this with
adhikrtah, which is the reading in most mss. and commentaries. The term prakrta, like
so many works in this section of Manu, is derived from the Arthasästra vocabulary.
This term occurs twice there with the meaning of officer or minister of the king (AS
2.7.10; 2.8.24). The term clearly has the same meaning here. It may well be that pra-
krta is related to the common term prakrti, which refers to the constituent parts of a
kingdom but especially to the ministers (see 7.157). We have a similar usage in the
commentary on KâtSr 14.3.2. See the use of the verb prakurvfta as "appointing" at
MDh 7.60.
8.12 
pierced by Injustice: the image here is of Justice that is pierced by a dart, which is
Injustice itself, and which the court is obliged to remove. Bharuci and Medhâtithi ,
however, give a different explanation. Justice is pierced by a dart when a judge decides
wrongly and permits a miscarriage of justice to occur in his court. If the other officials
of the court let it go unchallenged, then they are themselves wounded by this dart.
8.17 
Justice . . . with the body: here the meaning of dharma shifts imperceptibly from jus-
tice to merit. See the more explicit image of relatives who abandon the dead man at
4.238-43.
8.24 Paying attention . . . social class: the meaning of the first half-verse is unclear and
commentators offer educated guesses. The main problem is the meaning of arthä-
narthau and its relationship to dharmädharmau. All take kevalau as qualifying only
dharmadharmau. Govinda gives the most plausible explanation, which is followed by
Bühler : "Knowing what is expedient or inexpedient, what is pure justice or injustice."
Doniger: "Recognizing both what is profitable and what is not profitable, and what is
intrinsically just and unjust." I am not convinced that the commentarial explanations or
the translations have grasped the intent of the text. One possible avenue of interpreta-
tion is offered by a parallel in the NSm (Ma 1.31): dharmasästrärthasasträbhyäm
 avi-
rodhena märgatah / saimksamäito nipunam vyavahäragatim nayet // Here the king or
judge is required to conduct the judicial proceedings in such a manner that they do not


--- PAGE 317 ---
306 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
conflict with the provisions of either the Arthasastra or the Dharmasästr a (see also YDh
2.21). I think it is likely that in this verse of Manu artha and dharma stand for
Arthasästr a and Dharmasästra , or at least to the provisions of Artha (which may in-
clude also local conventions, customs, etc.) and Dharma. In verse 8.41, which comes
immediately after the two excursus that may be interpolations, there is again the in-
struction to examine the Laws of castes, regions, guilds, families, and the like, all of
which may fall under artha. See NSm (Ma 1.24) where vyavahâra (recognized stan-
dards of behavior) takes precedence over dharma. If this interpretation is right, then
there is no need to see kevalau as qualifying only dharmadharmau in opposition to
arthanarthau. We may connect ubhau and kevalau together: "only these two," refer-
ring to both compounds.
8.27 no longer a minor: males reach majority at age 16 and females at 12: see AS 3.3.1; NSin
1.31.
8.30 
Any property . . . without an owner: all the manuscripts and commentators read pra-
nastasvamikam as a compound (see note in the critical edition). Accordingly Bühle r
translates: "Property, the owner of which has disappeared." The use of the term pra-
nasta with reference to the owner is awkward; in the following verses (32, 33, 34) the
term is uniformly applied to lost property and not to a lost owner. The parallel in the
GDh (10.36) clearly shows that the reference is to lost property whose owner is un-
known: "If someone finds lost property whose owner is unknown, he should disclose it
to the king." Here we have the uncompounded form pranastain asvamikain, which, I
think, is what Manu's verse also read in the original (see Introduction, p. 44 for
Manu's dependence on Gautama). It was probably changed to pranastasvamikam,
because the former would make the foot hypermetric with 9 syllables (for hypermeter
in Manu, see Introduction, p. 44). It may also be that the original versified form was
pranastasvamikam, which would have the same meaning as the prose. My translation
follows this emendation.
8.37 
Additional verse: "When a Brahmin discovers a treasure-trove, he should inform the
king quickly. He may enjoy whatever the king gives him. Failure to inform makes him
a thief."
8.39 
supreme lord of the earth (bhüme r adhipatih): for the economic consequences of this
conception of kingship, see Scharfe 1993, 240. Note also the parallel with the last päda
of verse 37 where the Brahmin is called sarvasya adhipatih ("the supreme lord of all").
8.43 
initiate a lawsuit: Medhätith i interprets this to mean that the king should not instigate
others to bring lawsuits against people whom he dislikes or from whom he hopes to
obtain fines. It is a common principle of ancient Indian jurisprudence, however, that all
lawsuits are initiated by private individuals and not by the state.
nor shall he .. . someone else: Medhätith i records the opinion of some that takes artha
here to mean money. The meaning then is that he should not take for himself money
brought to him except within the parameters of the lawsuit. The clear intent is to avoid
bribery of court officials.
8.44 
As a hunter . . . reasoning: the term nayati ("lead") is here used, I think, in an interest-
ing way, deliberately juxtaposing it to anumâna ("inference") and echoing its connec-
tion to nyäya ("logic"). The term padam may have a double meaning: the path and the
location. With the first meaning, the hunter follows the track of the wounded animal
along the trail of blood; and the judge by inferential reasoning proceeds along the path
of justice. With the second meaning, the hunter finds the place where the animal has
fallen by following the trail of blood; and the judge determines where justice lies by
inferential reasoning.
8.45 appearance: the meaning of rfíparn is unclear and commentators offer educated
guesses. Medhätith i takes the term to mean the nature (svablwva) of the lawsuit; the


--- PAGE 318 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
307
judge should see whether it is serious or not (gurulaghutvam). KullQka, Räghavänanda
,
and Nandana offer similar explanations, taking mpa as svarüpa. I think their inter-
pretation is reasonable, although in a very similar passage of AS 3.1.15 rüpa is used
with regard to the appearance of an item subject to a legal transaction (e.g., debt) noted
in the document drawn up for the transaction. Bháruci gives a completely different and
somewhat fabulous interpretation of the verse relating it to heaven and celestial beings,
an interpretation that Medhätith i ascribes to "others."
8.46 He should . . . or caste: commentators offer two interpretations, depending on the
syntax of the genitive desakulajäfinäm.
 Bhäruc i and Medhätith i connect it with the
verb prakalpayet and take aviruddham independently with the implication that they are
not opposed to sruti and sinrti. The translation would then be: "The practices of virtu-
ous men and righteous twice-born individuals that are not in opposition (to Veda and
tradition) the king should establish (as the law) for regions, families, and castes." I
have followed the more reasonable interpretation offered by Näräyana
, KullQka, and
Räghavänanda
. This interpretation also fits with what was said in verse 41 with respect
to honoring the laws and customs of different regions and groups.
8.47 facts are established: for the meaning of vibhavitam in this context, see its use in verse
51-
8.49 
by traditional strategies (âcaritena) : most commentators cite the custom of the creditor
fasting at the door of the debtor until he pays up.
8.51 
Additional verse: "If the debt owed is admitted, he should be fined 500; but if it is de-
nied, the fine is doubled—that is Manu's decree."
8.52 
document: on the meaning of the obscure word desa, see Introduction, p. 48.
8.53 
When the plaintiff. . . disavows it: this statement parallels AS 3.1.19: pratijnäya desam
nirdisety ukte na nirdisati, hlnadesam adesam vä nirdisati, nirdistäd desäd anyam
desam iipasthäpayati, upasthite dése ' rthavacanam naivam ity apavyayate / "after
promising documentary evidence, when told 'Produce it', does not produce it; or pro-
duces a deficient document or something that does not constitute documentary evi-
dence; presents a defective document; when the document is presented, denies a
statement whose meaning is transparent, saying 'It is not so'." I think Kangle's ren-
dering of prat(jnaya as "after making an affirmation" is incorrect. Some of the ele-
ments of the AS passage, I believe, is understood in Manu's verse, which appears to be
a very condensed version. Especially the second päda appears to echo the last phrase
of the AS. If this is correct, then the commentators and translators of this verse have
misunderstood it. Bühle r translates: "who retracts his statements." Clearly nirdisya
here must refer to the production of the documents rather than to a previous statement
he may have made. The meaning, if we follow the AS, appears to be that after produc-
ing the document the man denies what is clearly stated in it. The term htnadesa proba-
bly refers to a mutilated document; that is, a document in which crucial sections are
missing or unreadable. The parallel term adesa is probably a document that is legally
inadmissible because of a fatal defect, for example, without the names of the witnesses
to the original transaction.
does not realize . . . subsequently: this parallels AS 3.1.19: pürvoktain pascimenarthena
nabhisamdhatte, "what is said earlier does not agree with points made later." I think
Kangle's rendering of nabhsamdhatte with "does not corroborate" is not accurate.
8.54 
states his . . .from it: this parallels AS 3.1.19: nibaddhani vädani utsrjyänyam vadam
samkrärnati, "he abandons the dispute set down and passes over to another dispute."
does not acknowledge . . . established: although not an exact parallel, Manu's state-
ment is possibly based on AS 3.1.19: saksihhir avadhrtam necchati, "does not concede
a point determined by witnesses."


--- PAGE 319 ---
308 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
8.55 
secretly . . . being discussed: all commentators and translators take dése in this passage
to mean a place. Accordingly, Bühle r translates: "Or who converses with the witnesses
in a place improper for such conversation." The parallel passage in AS 3.1.19 reads:
asambhasye cíese säksibhir mithalf sambhäsate, translated by Kangle: "talks secretly
with witnesses in a place where no conversation is allowed." This is quite an unusual
shift in meaning within this single passage of the AS, a passage where desa occurs six
times, all in the sense of documentary evidence (or witness, according to the other in-
terpretation). We also have the parallel upasthite dése right before asambhasye dése. I
think here also desa must mean a document. I am also not sure whether asambhäsya
can actually refer to a place rather than to a person with whom conversation is forbid-
den or a thing about which it is forbidden. The term mithalf occurs at 8.80, 109, 178
with the meaning "together with" or "mutually." Only Nandana and Medhätith i ex-
plicitly take the term to mean "secretly." Others either do not comment or take it to
mean "together with," i.e., with the witnesses.
objects . . . articulated: the meaning of this phrase is not altogether clear. Most com-
mentators take it to mean that the man does not want to answer a question put to him.
Medhätithi , following Bhäruci , thinks that the man buys time by leaving the court on
some business rather than answer the question. Bhäruc i further thinks that the question
is posed not to him but to the witnesses.
retreats (nispatet): Bhäruc i thinks that the man leaves the court alleging urgent busi-
ness, thus stopping the proceedings. This interpretation is followed by other commen-
tators and Bühler . Medhätithi , however, takes this to be the same as the backing away
from the lawsuit mentioned in verse 54.
8.57 
Variant reading: "I have witnesses."
8.58 
If the plaintiff. . . of the Law: for a discussion of the time limits for the plaintiff and the
defendant to file their responses, see AS 3.1.27-33.
8.61 
should be made to speak: all the commentators take väcyam to be the gerundive of the
simple verb Vvac. Bühle r (and Doniger) follows them: "and in what manner those
(witnesses) must give true (evidence)." I think the section on the questioning of wit-
nesses (8.79-102) clearly indicates that the issue is not about witnesses speaking the
truth but how the court must induce them to speak the truth. In this light, I think we
must take väcyam as the gerundive of the causative väcayati; the confusion is created,
unfortunately, because in the case of this verb the gerundive forms of the simple verb
and of the causative are the same.
8.66 
a reprehensible person: most commentators take the term vaktavyah to mean a person
of bad repute or evil conduct. Bhäruci , on the other hand, thinks it refers to persons
with physical disabilities (angavyasanali) or people with skin diseases, such as lepers
(kustyädih). This interpretation is also mentioned by Medhätithi . See, however, the use
of vaktavyatä as legal culpability at 8.230.
a single person (ekah): all the commentators take this to mean that one should not call
a single witness (so also Bühler ; see verse 60). This is implausible, because the term
occurs within a long list of individuals who are disqualified from being witnesses be-
cause of some disability. The term ekah may, within this context, refer to what we
would call a "single person," that is, an individual who lives on his own and is not part
of a larger household, either his own or of an extended family. Indeed, a single witness
is permitted in verse 77, although this is admittedly a proverbial saying.
8.69 
in a case involving bodily harm (sarïrasyaiv a câtyaye) : most commentators interpret
this to mean physical hurt or death (see this view explicitly stated in verse 72).
Näräyan
a takes it to mean a case where the death penalty may be imposed. Medhätith i
cites an opinion which takes the expression to refer to a situation where without such


--- PAGE 320 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
309
testimony the case would fail or there would be a mistrial; and the following verse
dealing with the absence of regular witnesses, in this view, picks up the same theme.
This appears to be the view of Bhäruc i also.
8.71 
He should recognize . . . false testimony: interestingly, all the commentators interpret
this verse correctly, but none of the translators. Bühle r translates: "But the (judge)
should consider the evidence of infants, aged and diseased men, who (are apt to) speak
untruly, as untrustworthy, likewise that of men with disordered minds." The issue is
not whether what they say is uniformly untrustworthy (then, there is no point in calling
them as witnesses), but how the judge can tell when they are giving false testimony.
8.72 
investigate: the meaning is that the judge should not look into factors that would dis-
qualify a witness (see 8.64-7) in these kinds of cases. Anyone is permitted to testify.
8.76 
not listed as a witness: the term anibaddha probably refers to witnesses not listed in
the original plaint and response by the plaintiff and the defendant. In later legal texts,
listed witnesses are called krta ("appointed"), whereas those not on the original list but
called later as witnesses are called akrta ("unappointed"). See NSm 1.129.
during the trial: BUhler takes tatra (lit. "there") as referring back to what the man has
seen or heard: "is (afterwards) examined regarding it." So also Doniger and Burnell.
The correlative tatra, however, must refer back to yatra of the dependent clause; and
the latter refers to the lawsuit, as acknowledged by the commentators.
8.77 
Even one man . . . and honest: clearly tradition found this verse somewhat difficult;
hence the many variants. A variant reading accepted by Medhatithi and Govinda read:
"But one man who is greedy cannot be a witness." Another variant: "But (even) one
greedy man may be a witness."
8.78 
anything different. . . no validity: Bühler , following Kullüka , translates: "(depositions)
differing from that, which they make improperly, are worthless for (the purposes of)
justice." So also Doniger and Burnell. They connect dharmärtham syntactically with
apärthakam. 1 follow Medhätithi , Räghavänanda
, and Râmacandr a in connecting
dharmärtham adverbially with the verb vibruyuh; the meaning being that they tell a lie
for a higher purpose (so also Derretí and Jha). This point is spelled out in verses 103-4,
where also we have perjury committed for the sake of the Law (dharmatah). Such false
statements are made, for example, if the life of the defendant is at stake. For a long list
of indicators that point to false testimony, see NSm 1.175-8.
8.79 following manner: on the speech by the judge to the witnesses, see Rocher 1964.
8.83 
of all social classes (sarvavarnesu): the locative makes the meaning unclear. It could
be "witnesses from among all the social classes" (as I and others have taken it) or
"with reference to all the social classes." The last interpretation is offered by Govinda
and Kullüka ; the meaning then would be that the witness should bear truthful testi-
mony in cases pertaining to people of all social classes.
8.85 
No one sees us: clearly for exigencies of meter, iti, which should come at the end of
the quotation, is given in the middle: pasyatlti nah.
8.87 
/;/ the presence of gods and Brahmins (devabrähmanasämnidhye)
: commentators and
translators take deva here to mean images of gods. This may well be the case. But deva
can also refer to the king (see 7.8; 11.83), and we have an exact parallel in 8.60:
nrpabrahniaiiasanmidhau, where the questioning of the witness is done in the presence
of the king and Brahmins.
Variant reading: "the judge should ask the twice-born individuals, who have ritually
purified themselves, and are clean and facing the north or the east."
8.88 
with a reference to cows, seeds, and gold (gobljakañcanaih): Nandana explains, cor-
rectly I think, that a Vaisya is made to touch these substances before testifying; and


--- PAGE 321 ---
310 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
this is precisely what is stated in verse 113. Alternatively, the judge may have uttered
an imprecation about the man's cows etc. Most commentators, however, make
pätakaih coming at the end of the verse do double duty with regard to both Vaisyas
and Südras . According to this interpretation, the judge tells a Vaisya that by bearing
false witness he incurs the same sin as he would by stealing gold, killing or stealing a
cow, and the like (see 8.98-100). I think this is rather far-fetched. See also ViDh 8.19-
23-
but a Sudra . . . caste: the critical edition has adopted the reading ebhih in preference
to sarvaih. Following the latter reading, Bühle r translates: "a Südr a (threatening him)
with (the guilt of) every crime that causes loss of caste." The reading sarvaih may have
crept into this verse under the influence of the reading of the parallel passage in verse
113. In verse 88, however, ebhih is not only supported by better evidence but makes
better sense. The long section 89-101 is thus addressed to a Sudra witness.
8.92 
then you do not. . . Kuru land: if the witness has no quarrel with Yama, the god of
death and the judge of the dead, then there is no need for him to visit the Ganges or the
land of the Kurus to expiate his sin.
8.97 
kills: the term hanti is probably used metaphorically here. Medhätithi , Näräyana
,
Govinda, Nandana, and KullOka take it to mean that he sends the relatives to hell.
Räghavänanda
: he makes them to be reborn in animal wombs. Medhätith i and KullOka
present another view according to which the man incurs a sin equal to his killing a
certain number of his relatives.
8.100 concerning water: the reference is unclear. Medhätith i and Kulluka take it as a refer-
ence to reservoirs, wells, and the like. Nandana: ponds (abdhi). In discussing the paral-
lel passage in GDh 13.18, Watkins (l994b, 725-6) thinks that the reference may be to
"the right of way of aquae ductus." See the reference to breaking and obstructing water
courses at 3.163.
Addtional verse: "(False testimony) concerning honey and ghee is similar to one con-
cerning livestock; that concerning vehicles is similar to one concerning a horse; that
concerning silver and clothes, as well as grain and the Veda, is similar to one con-
cerning a cow."
8.101 Bhâruc i states that the first eight verses (89-96) are addressed specifically to Südras ;
verse 97 is generic; and the last five verses (98-101) are applicable to all witnesses.
Bhäruc i must have included the extra verse after verse 100, because without it we have
only four verses.
Variant reading: "tell everything forthrightly just as you saw or heard."
8.102 Additional verse: "Those who have turned away from the Laws specific to them, live
on the food of others, and yet aspire to the twice-born status—these too he should treat
like Südras. "
8.106 addressed to water: these are the three verses (RV 10.9.1-3): äp o hi stha, 'Waters, you
are refreshing." See Appendix III.3.
8.107 of the total: the meaning of sarvatah is unclear. It could be of the total amount under
litigation (Bhäruci , Govinda, Näräyana
, Nandana, and Rämacandra) , of the fine that
would be owed to the king by the losing party (a view cited by Medhätithi) , or of the
debt (Kullüka) . Medhätith i himself thinks that the word is merely a metrical filler
(slokapurana).
8.109 oath: Manu uses the term sapatha for both an oath and an ordeal. In later legal texts,
such as the YDh, ViDh, and NSm, we find the technical term divya for an ordeal. This
term must have entered the legal vocabulary somewhat late, because it is not found in
any of the Dharmasütras , in Manu, or in the AS.


--- PAGE 322 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
311
8.110 Vasistha: this is an interesting lapse on the part of the author of our text. He evidently
forgot his literary setting: it is Manu speaking through his pupil Bhrgu. Bringing in a
historical episode such as this would not be expected of Manu, the father of Vasistha
himself (see 1.35). We find similar lapses at 8.116 (example of Vatsa) and at 8.140 with
a reference to a rule instituted by Vasistha. The story in this verse probably refers to
R V 7.104.15. Vasistha was accused of being a fiend who had eaten his own sons. He
cleared himself by an oath that if it were true he should die that very day.
8.112 to protect a Brahmin: some commentators take hrähmanäbhyupapattau
 to mean "as a
favor for a Brahmin" (so Bühle r and Doniger). I follow the obviously correct interpre-
tation of Nandana, Govinda, Kullüka , and Ramacandra; abhyupapatti is used unambi-
guously as defense in 8.349 and abhyavapatti in 10.62.
8.113 He should make .. . afeaste: see 8.88 n. and, for a discussion of similar legal language
in other Indo-European languages, Watkins I994b, 720. See the parallel prescriptions
for the four classes within the context of purification at 5.99.
8.115 When the blazing . . . strikes him: the procedures for various ordeals are described in
NSm 20. In the fire ordeal, eight circles are drawn on the ground. Seven banyan leaves
are tied to the palms of the person undergoing the ordeal and a hot iron ball is placed in
his hands. He must carry it through the circles and drop the ball at the designated
place. If his palms are not burnt, he is declared innocent. In the water ordeal, an arrow
is shot from a medium-sized bow. The person undergoing the ordeal must remain sub-
merged in the water until a fast runner brings back the arrow. The third ordeal listed
here is actually an oath; if his family does not suffer any mishap soon (during 14 days,
according to commentators), he is innocent.
8.116 Long ago . . . told the truth: Vatsa was accused by his brother of being the son of a
SOdra woman and thus not a pure Brahmin. Vatsa went through fire to prove his pedi-
gree. See Pancavimsa Brähmana 14.6.6.
8.120 fined 1,000: when a simple number is stated, the term Pana is understood within the
context of fines (see 8.138). A Pana was a copper coin widely used in ancient India
(8.136). See also 3.186 n.
8.123 When individuals .. . into exile: "the three classes" here refer to the three classes below
the Brahmin. The major difficulty in interpreting this verse lies in the distinction be-
tween praväsa (prescribed for the three lower classes) and viväsa (prescribed for
Brahmins). Bühler , Doniger, and Burnell take both to mean "banish"; the difference
then being that Brahmins are only banished, whereas the others are both fined and
banished. This is the interpretation offered by Näräyana
, Kullüka , and Räghavänanda
.
Medhätith i and Govinda take viväsa to mean depriving of clothes, i.e., making him na-
ked. Medhâtith i thinks that it may also mean depriving him of his house. I think all
these are mistaken. The correct interpretation is offered by Bhäruc i and Nandana, both
significantly representing the southern tradition. The term praväsayet here has the
same meaning as parallel statements in the AS (1.18.16; 11.1.33, 47, 12.3.4; 12.4.4;
12.5.23; 13.4.29); it refers to execution. The variant reading pramäpayet for praväsayet
recorded at 9.289 also supports this conclusion. Indeed, Medhâtith i (on 8.284) calls
this meaning an Arthasästra usage (arthasästrayä).
 Like the modern military-inspired
term "liquidate" or the more common "get rid of," praväsayet may have been an
euphemism for imposing the death penalty. This meaning of the term is supported by
the very next section (8.124-30) that deals with corporal punishment. The only other
time that viväsa is used (9.241) it means exile, where also it deals with Brahmins who
should be sent into exile without confiscating their property.
8.126 proclivity: most commentators take the term anubandha to mean repetition (punah-
punahkaranam), that is, whether the man is a habitual criminal. Bhäruc i cites this
view, but he contrasts it to his own, which takes the term to mean the reason for the


--- PAGE 323 ---
312 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
crime: vayam punar anubandham aparädhakäranam
 äcaksmahe. Both these interpre-
tations are also given by Medhätithi . Variant reading: "after he has fully ascertained
(the severity of?) the crime." Rocher ( 1954) has demonstrated that anubandha refers to
the criminal propensities of the accused individual, that is, the likelihood that he will
be a repeat offender in the future because of his past behavior patterns. In my transla-
tion that appeared in Oxford World's Classics series (Olivelle 2004) prepared before I
had access to Rocher's study, I translated the term as "motive".
8.127 Variant reading: "Punishing those who do not deserve to be punished shatters."
8.130 If he is unable . . . these four: it seems strange that when the most severe punishment
fails to deter a criminal, he would use all four together, namely that he would use also
the weaker punishments. There appears to be something here that we fail to under-
stand, and commentators offer no help.
8.132 This verse is omitted in several southern mss., and not commented by Bhäruci . Medhä -
tithi says that some doubt its authenticity (see note in critical edition). Although I have
included it in the critical edition, its authenticity is subject to serious doubt.
Trasarenu: the term trasa means something moving or quivering, and renu means a
speck of dust or pollen. The term refers to the smallest visible particle of matter, often
regarded as having the mass of three atoms. For a longer discussion of weights and
measures, see AS 2.19 and the helpful notes of Kangle. For definitions of the weights
and measures given in the following verses, see Appendix IV. I have refrained from
translating these terms, because they are as much technical terms as our foot, yard, or
mile; their common meanings have no bearing on their technical usage.
8.133 Liksä, Räjasarsapa, Gaurasarsapa: although these are technical terms for different
weights, the terms themselves originally had other meanings. Liksä: literally the egg of
a louse, hence a tiny weight. Räjasarsapa: a black mustard seed. Gaurasarsapa: a
white mustard seed.
8.134 Yava, Krsnala, Masa, Suvarna: the literal meaning of Yava is a barley corn, Krsnala is
a small seed of the plant Abrus Precatorius (0.122 or 1.875 grams), and Mâs a is a bean.
Suvarna literally means gold, but in this context refers to a measure of weight.
8.142 He may charge . . . classes: this verse is also found in VaDh 2.48. Verses 141 and 142
give somewhat higher rates of interest than the traditional rate of 1.25% per month (or
15% per annum). This figure is given in both VaDh 2.51 and GDh 12.29. Do these
verses of Manu and Vasistha reflect the later practice of a higher rate of interest, which
is considerably more than the traditional one? See also verse 152 where 5% is assumed
as the standard rate.
8.143 nor shall the pledge . . . time has lapsed (kâlasamrodhât)
: the meaning appears to be
that the time for redeeming the loan has passed. This can happen when the interest on
the loan equals the amount of the loan (payment then becomes double the original
loan). Indian law stipulated that when this happens the interest on the loan stops (see
8.151; this rule is called datndupat in modern times). Even when this happens a pledge
cannot be alienated. Some commentators take this as applying to pledges that are not
used, whereas others take it as applying to pledges that are used by the creditors;
pledges that are not used may be forfeited, as clearly stated in YDh 2.58.
8.145 Neither . . . a long time: Medhätith i takes this not as law but friendly advise and gives
a very different interpretation, taking kälätyayam
 to mean "long lapse of time" (rather
than "forfeiture due to time") and avahäryau to mean "liable to appropriation" (rather
than "recoverable"). The verse instructs the depositor not to let his pledge or deposit
remain too long, for after a long time the man holding the pledge or deposit may think
that it is his and appropriate it. This view, also shared by Bhäruci , Govinda, and Nan-
dana, seems improbable, given that verse 149 clearly states the inalienability of pledges
and deposits.


--- PAGE 324 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
313
8.146 draft animals: most commentators take vahan as qualifying asva; accordingly, Bühle r
translates "a riding-horse." I think Medhätith i is correct in taking vahan as a separate
item; he takes it to mean an ox. This is also the view of Nandana. Lists generally have
separate items; rarely do we find adjectives qualifying just one item in a list.
8.148 within his own locality: Bhäruc i gives two possible meanings of visaya: within one's
sight (caksurvisaye) or in one's own country or region. The latter interpretation is fol-
lowed by Medhätith i and Govinda; and the former by Näräyana
, Kullüka ,
Räghavänanda
, and Rämacandr a (jnänavisaye or darsanavisaye). Nandana, correctly I
think, takes it to mean a place where it is possible for the owner to stop his property
being used by the other (nivaranayogye dése).
8.151 Interest. . . five times: "twice the principal" means that the interest should not exceed
the amount of the loan, so that the repayment (loan plus interest) is twice the original
amount of the loan. Likewise, for grain etc., the interest would be four times the loan;
the repayment then being five times. The phrase "when fixed at one time" (sakrd
ahita), according to some, means that the whole of the interest is payable at the end of
the loan period; this would then not apply to loans where the interest is paid in install-
ments, for example every month. Medhätith i and Bhâruc i take this phrase to mean that
the loan is still with the man who originally took out the loan and that it has not been
transferred to a third party. Medhätith i also thinks of the possibility that the man may
have renewed the loan after it reached double, the new loan including the original loan
plus the accrued interest (8.154). Both when the loan is transferred to a third party and
when the loan has been renegotiated the interest continues to grow.
8.153 He must not charge . . . manual labor: all the commentators take the verse as a syntac-
tic unit with the negative na governing the second half of the verse as well. According
to this interpretation, the four types of interest given in the second half are also prohib-
ited. All the translators follow this interpretation. Bühler : "Let him not take interest
beyond the year, nor such as is unapproved, nor compound interest, periodical interest,
stipulated interest, and corporal interest." I think this is mistaken. These four forms of
interest are explicitly authorized in GDh 12.34-5, a text that Manu follows closely, and
also in NSm 1.87, a text that follows the MDh closely. It is inconceivable to me that
Manu would depart from this tradition or that Närad a would have misunderstood Manu
in such a fundamental way. Laksmidhara (Laks 12.281) cites this verse of Manu
immediately before NSm 1.87 without noting any contradiction between the two. I
think what we have in this verse is broken syntax. The second half-verse is syntactic-
ally independent of the first-half. The problem is the correlative yä at the end of the
second-half, making it a dependent clause. My feeling is that the second half has been
taken from a different context and woven into this verse; we have lost the main clause
to which this was originally attached.
The cyclical rate is a kind of compound interest calculated, for example, monthly
but payable only at the end of the loan period together with the principal (see Lariviere
1989, II. 59). The periodic rate is generally payable each month (GDh 12.29). The con-
tractual rate is variable, either above or below the normal rate of interest, depending on
the reliability of the person taking the loan. Manual labor is probably connected with
indentured labor, the interest on the loan being deducted from the daily wages. On the
question of debts in ancient India, see Kane 1962-75, iii. 414-61; Chatterjee 1971.
8-154-5 When someone ... as is due: these two verses probably refer to cyclical interest.
When at the end of the loan period the debtor is unable to repay the debt along with the
accrued interest, he has the option of paying the accrued interest and renegotiating the
contract for the principal. Verse 155 is somewhat obscure; it appears to be a rider on
the previous verse and deals with a situation when the debtor is unable even to pay the
accrued interest. The intent appears to be that the new debt instrument must include the
accrued interest, if the debtor cannot pay off at least part of it at the time of the new


--- PAGE 325 ---
314 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
loan. That the debtor should at least pay a small amount is the view of several authori-
ties, including Nârada , cited by Medhatithi.
8.156 When someone . . . place and time: Medhatithi and, following him, Govinda, KullQka,
and Räghavänanda
, understand cakravrddhi literally as interest accrued on a "wheel,"
i.e., when a person is traveling. Following this interpretation, Bühle r translates: "He
who has made a contract to carry good by a wheeled carriage for money and has
agreed to a certain place or time, shall not reap that reward, if he does not keep to the
place and the time (stipulated)." It seems to me very unlikely that Manu would use this
technical term in this verse with a meaning so very different from the one in verse 153.
Further, it is quite out of place to talk about payment for carrying goods within a sec-
tion devoted to interest rates. I follow the reasonable explanation of Näräyana
. Bhàruc i
also states clearly that according to this rule the creditor cannot enforce the payment of
the interest if he fails to show up at the appointed time and place.
8.158 here (iha): given that the literary setting of this entire section is the court, it makes
sense to take "here" to mean here in this court. BUhler's "in this (world)" does not fit
the context: see 1.42.
8.159 vain gifts: commentators take vrthädänam
 to mean money promised to others either
frivolously or for illegitimate purposes (to prostitutes, for example). The compound,
however, may also be dissolved into vrtha-Sdanam, which would refer to loans taken
out for illegitimate purposes.
8.160 The above rule . . . to pay it: there are three kinds of sureties: a) for appearance, i.e.,
that the man will appear either at the time stipulated to pay the debt or in court; b) as a
guarantor of the debtor's trustworthiness; and c) as a guarantor of payment (see YDh
2.53). This rule exempts the heirs of only the first two kinds of sureties from the obli-
gation to repay the debts for which the latter stood as surety.
8.161-2 When someone . . . his own funds: these two verses are rather obscure. The question
and answer format is also quite unusual for Manu, leading to the possibility that these
verses have been taken over from a different source and context. Commentators take
nirâdistadhana as a surety to whom money had been entrusted by the debtor so that the
surety may pay off the debt in the event that the debtor is unable. This, however,
makes no sense; why would the debtor take a loan if he has money to put in escrow
with the surety sufficient to pay off the debt? The lack of context for this verse makes
its interpretation difficult. The term niradista appears to be a hapax; it does not occur
elsewhere in Manu or in any other Dharma text. The best sense I can make of this
verse is that the debtor has given a collateral to the surety as assurance of payment.
This collateral may have become part of his wealth that the heirs inherited. In this case,
the heirs are bound to repay the debt from their inheritance.
8.164 contrary to . . . usage: I follow Medhatithi. Here Manu takes Law (dharnia) to be
based on convention (vyavahära): see 1.107 n. Others see two separate items here:
"contrary to Law and/or to settled usage for, established judicial convention]."
8.166 // the person . . . estate: the term nasta has been variously explained: dead, gone
abroad, absconding, etc. If the loan was used for the benefit of the entire family, then
the relative (here probably the brothers or the heirs of the family) must pay the debt
even if the family estate has been divided and they are now living separately.
8.167 Variant reading: "must not be questioned by his superior."
8.169 family: Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kulluka (followed by Biihler) take kulam to mean
judges, which, I think, is a forced interpretation of the term. Clearly the verse is a pro-
verbial saying taken from elsewhere.
8.172 by bringing together the social classes: the compound varnasamsargat has caused
enormous problems for the understanding of the verse. Some have substituted dharnia


--- PAGE 326 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
315
for varna (supported by Burnell); others have inserted the negative particle varnäsam-
sargät. Commentators give diverse and contradictory explanations. Given that the two
other activities are duties performed by the king, I think this also should be something
that the king does. On the face of it, varnasarnsarga means confusion of classes,
something the king is sworn to prevent. I think sainsarga here may be used in close to
its etymological meaning: combining and bringing together, not in a sexual sense
which would cause the intermixing of classes, but in a broader sense. Here we can take
it either as supporting the proper functioning of classes within the broader social
structure or, more restrictively, as referring to the cohesiveness of each class within it-
self (which is preferred by Medhätithi) .
enhances his power: we have a similar stretching of the meaning here of sainjayate
("born together"; see the numerous variants of this also); its parallel with khyäpyate of
the previous verse makes it clear that the meaning is that his strength is not just born
but broadcast.
8.181-2 When a man . . . request it: 
the syntax of these two verses is quite confused. That
must be one of the reasons for the rearrangement of the verses by several commenta-
tors (see note to the edition). Medhätith i is correct, I think, in seeing these two verses
as forming a single sentence; he rearranges the verses to give some syntactic coherence
by placing verse 182 after the first half of 181, and placing the second half of 181 last. I
follow Medhâtithi' s explanation. The translations of Burnell, Bühler , and Doniger,
separate 181 from 182 creating quite a confused meaning.
8.184 both: namely, the gold that was deposited by the judge and the original deposit that
resulted in the lawsuit.
8.185 /// the event. . . they do not perish: "both" here refer to sealed and open deposits. The
point of the second half of the verse is unclear. We can readily understand the risk the
man takes, because if the next-of-kin dies without delivering the deposit, the original
depositor has the right to claim it. The last statement "and if there is no mishap, then
they do not perish" is so obvious, I cannot understand why it needs to be stated, espe-
cially because the second half of the verse is intended to give reasons why the deposit
should not be given to a next-of-kin. Stephanie Jamison (personal communication)
thinks that this half-verse may be a proverbial saying that has lost some of its punch in
this context.
8.188 That is the rule . . .from it: the phrase "That is the rule" cannot clearly refer to the pre-
vious verse. I think this verse refers back to verse 180, which states that a deposit
should be returned in the same state in which it was deposited. An exception is made in
the case of sealed deposits, because the man holding the deposit has no way of know-
ing what the original condition of the deposit was. If this connection between verses
180 and 188 is correct, then the intervening verses (with the possible exception of 187)
are either interpolations or given parenthetically.
8.195 as the delivery, so the recovery: note that this phrase, occurring also in verse 180,
brackets nicely the entire discussion of deposits.
8.196 open deposit, sealed deposit: I take the terms niksipta as a synonym of niksepa, an
open deposit, and upanihita as a synonym of upanidhi, a sealed deposit (see 8.185).
Manu is here recapitulating these two kinds of deposits in this closing verse. Bühle r
does not recognize the technical nature of the two words and translates: "a deposit or a
friendly loan"; so also Doniger.
8.197 the king should not. . . offer testimony: the meaning of this half-verse is not altogether
clear. Most commentators say that such a man should not be permitted to become a
witness in any lawsuit (so Bühler) . This seems somewhat of a strange beginning to the
section of sale without ownership; we would have expected a statement about what
concrete steps should be taken regarding such a person, as indeed stated in the very


--- PAGE 327 ---
316 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
next verse. Räghavänand
a takes the verse to mean that in a court case on the matter
this man should not be allowed to call witnesses in his defense; in other words, the
king can issue a summary verdict. This is quite an appealing interpretation. Professor
Wezler (personal communication) has suggested another alternative. In any lawsuit
filed by the original owner to recover his property from the current owner, the man
who sold the article without ownership cannot be permitted to testify; he is after all a
thief, though he may not consider himself to be one. Clearly, this verse is a very pithy
statement with a whole lot left unsaid.
8.198 if he did it.. .for theft: the meaning of anapasarah ("has no excuse") is unclear. Many
commentators take it to mean that the man has not received it through some means,
such as purchase, from a son or relative of the owner. Nârâyana
, who reads anavasa-
rah, takes it to mean "at an improper place and time," which would add to the serious-
ness of the crime. For the meanings of sänvaya and niranvaya (in or outside the
presence), see 8.332 n. If the sale was done in the presence of the owner, there can be a
presumption of tacit permission; hence the lesser fine. Most commentators erroneously
take the two situations as referring to a relative and a non-relative, respectively, an in-
terpretation followed by all the translators.
8.199 Variant reading: "When a purchase or sale is made."
Additional verse: "Someone who engages in a sale without ownership unknowingly
should be punished in the above manner; if he does it knowingly, however, he ought to
be punished like a thief."
8.201 through a sale: Medhätithi , Govinda, and Kulluka take the term vikrayat as referring to
the market place (so also Bühler) . Räghavänand
a and Nandana take it as referring to
the seller. In any case, the meaning is that a purchase made at a public sale is evidence
of title.
8.202 initial seller: the meaning of the term mSlam has been subject to dispute. Govinda and
Nandana take it to mean the original value of the article. The meaning then is that if the
price cannot be produced in the court because the original seller has disappeared, then
the man who purchased it should not be punished. Other commentators, however, take
ínula to mean the man who sold the article. This interpretation is supported by verses
of BrSm (1.12.5-6) that provides the full context, verses cited by Vijñanesvara on YDh
2.170. In either case, the fraudulently sold article is restored to its rightful owner, and
the purchaser is left high and dry: caveat eniptor.
8.205 Three additional verses: "Someone who makes Vaisyas and other twice-born persons
accept forbidden food or drink ought to be punished with the lowest, middle, and the
highest fines, respectively. In the case of a Südra , the fine is 54 Panas; and the king
should send those who made them eat it into exile. A person who uses a young cow, an
animal belonging to a god, an ox, or a stud bull as a beast of burden should be subject
to the lowest fine; if any is killed, the highest fine."
8.206 If one . . . performed: it is significant that Manu deals with priestly partnerships as the
model (prakrti) for other kinds of commercial partnerships. I think this indicates an
older period when priestly speculation centered mostly around priestly matters. In the
NSm (3.1-11) and YDh (2.259-65), commercial partnerships are given first as the
model and priestly partnerships later.
8.208 At a ritual. . . entire fee: most commentators take this verse as a question to which the
answer is provided in verses 209-10; so also Bühler . I see no indication that this is a
question, and the following verses do not appear to provide a real answer.
8.210 Among all the priests . . . to a quarter: the principal priests are the four mentioned in
the previous verse. Next in rank are Maiträvaruna , Pratiprasthätr , Brähmanacchamsin ,
and Prastotr; then come Acchäväka
, Nestr, Agnïdhra , and Pratihartr; and finally,
Grâvastotr , Netr, Potr, and Subrahmanya. According to Medhätithi , assuming the total


--- PAGE 328 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
317
to be 112, the shares distributed are: 56, 28,16, and 12. According to others, assuming
the total to be 100, the shares distributed are: 48, 24 16, and 12. See Kane 1962-75, v:
1329-30.
8.212 gift: within this ground for litigation, it is apparent that the term datta, literally
"given," has a technical meaning. It does not refer to what has been given, as the term
implies, but to a gift that is pledged but not yet delivered. This pledge appears to have
been legally binding so that the potential recipient was able to move a court to enforce
payment.
8.219 When a man . . . from his realm: the contract dealt with here is not a private one but
pertains to a corporate body. When a contract is made with the stipulation that all those
who belong to that corporate entity will do something, then each individual is bound
by it. Here the corporate entities are a village, a region (group of villages), and a corpo-
ration (traders, artisans, sect). See NSm 10.1; YDh 2.i9of. Some interpret the compound
gramadesasamgha as a corporation located in a village or region (so Bühler) . The term
satyena is also interpreted by some to mean an oath: see 8.113 where a Brahmin has to
swear by the truth.
8.220 fine him . . . Satamäna: some commentators think this passage contains three punish-
ments: four Suvarnas, six Niskas, and one silver Satamäna .
8.227 seventh step: the reference is to the seven steps that the bride and groom take around
the sacred fire during the marriage ceremony. The implication in all these verses com-
ing within the context of the cancellation of a sale or purchase is that marriage is pre-
cisely such a transaction where the bride is sold by the father and bought by the future
husband (see my note on bride-price at 3.53). The reasoning here appears to be that
once the seventh step is taken, the transaction is ritually complete and cannot be an-
nulled.
8.234 yellow bile (rocana): this appears to be a yellow pigment prepared with the bile of
cows. Yet, Medhätith i takes it to be a powder found in the horns of cows: gorocanam
gavatn sr/igesu curnani bhavati.
8.237 one hundred.. . throws: for these measurements, see App. IV
8.240 a fenced field: because of the ambiguous sandhi, the reading could either be parivrte
("fenced") or (a)parivrte ("unfenced"). Bhäruc i supports the negative; Medhâtith i
gives both alternatives; while the other commentators support the positive. The parallel
at GDh i2.2i(pathi ksetre 'navrte) supports the negative, but the rule there places the
blame equally on the herdsman and the farmer. Although generally Manu follows the
GDh, I think here Manu has deliberately introduced a different rule. He dealt with un-
fenced fields in verse 238 and introduced fencing in verse 239. And in 241 he refers to
"other fields," which can only refer to unfenced fields (it would be odd to refer to
fenced fields as "other") in contrast to the fenced ones of verse 240.
8.242 Manu has . . . herdsman or not: commentators explain that the bulls meant here are
those released at certain festivals or rituals, such as the Vrsotsarga. Animals dedicated
to gods are temple cattle and the like. It is unclear whether the punishment concerns
the animals themselves (beating, impounding) or their owners. Possibly the former, be-
cause at least in the case of temple cattle there are no human owners.
8.243 For an offense . . . of the owner: the meaning of this verse and its relation to the con-
text that deals with owners and herdsmen are quite unclear. Most commentators take
bhaga ("share") as the tax that the owner of a field owes to the king; for this meaning
of bhäga, see 7.130 n. Under this interpretation, the offense must involve the wrongful
impounding or injuring of animals that have wandered into his property. Bhäruci , on
the other hand, takes this to be a dispute between an owner of a field and his tenant
farmers. If the owner damages the crops, then he is fined ten times his share of the
crop; whereas, if his servants do the damage unknown to the owner, then the fine is


--- PAGE 329 ---
318 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
half that amount. This interpretation has the benefit of simplicity, but the problem is
that it introduces a different and new topic into the discussion.
8.245 when landmarks . . . visible: commentators note that during this month, which is be-
tween spring and the rains, the land is parched and the grass is dried up. Hidden land-
marks can be seen most clearly during this time of the year.
8.259 question: on the word anuyunjîta as a technical term of judicial interrogation, see 8.79.
8.265 on the basis of utility: commentators point out that a smaller piece of land may be
more productive than a larger parcel. Likewise, a reservoir may be more useful to one
village (for example, it has no other water source) than to the other (which may have
other sources).
8.268 Two additional verses: "Between a Ksatriya and a Vaisya the punishment to be im-
posed is the same as that between Brahmin and Ksatriya; the punishment for Ksatriya
or Vaisya abusing a Südr a is that for a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya or Vaisya. The
punishment imposed on Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Südra s is higher or lower just as for a
Brahmin, with the exception of verbal reprimand—that is the settled rule."
The first verse is somewhat unclear, but the intent appears to be this. Mutual abuse
between Ksatriyas and Vaisyas is treated in the same as that that between Brahmins
and Ksatriyas. So, a Ksatriya abusing a Vaisya = a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya (fine of
50); a Vaisya abusing a Ksatriya = a Ksatriya abusing a Brahmin (fine of 100). The
second half of the first verse is very unclear. 1 think what it states is this. A Ksatriya
abusing a Südr a = a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya (25); a Vaisya abusing a Südr a = a
Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya (50). The reading of the last foot is uncertain. Some manu-
scripts read: "with the exception of monetary fines"; and others: "with the exception of
corporal punishment."
8.270 If a once-born ... lowest part: a once-born man is a Südra . The implied background of
this harsh punishment is the creation myth of the Purusasükt a (RV 10.90), which has
become a root metaphor in the Dharma literature. The twice-born here probably refers
specifically to Brahmins, who were born from the mouth (speech). When a man born
from the feet uses speech to abuse a man born from the mouth, he loses his right to the
tongue, the organ of speech.
8.271 ten fingers: for the measurement, see App. IV.
8.273 If a man . . .fined 200: there are several points that are unclear in this verse. First, does
it apply to all or only to Südras ? Commentators are divided, but I think Bhäruc i and
Medhätith i are right in taking it as applicable to all. Second, is sarlram an adjective
qualifying karma or is it an independent entry? 1 think Medhätithi , Räghavänanda
, and
Nandana are right in taking the two as independent entries. Others take them as refer-
ring to "bodily activities" or to "bodily consecration" such as vedic initiation. I also
follow Medhätith i in taking sarlram to mean bodily features, especially in the light of
what is stated in the very next verse.
8.275 hurls accusations: commentators give different meanings of the word äksärayan.
 See
8.354-5, where it clearly refers to accusations; here the term possibly refers to accusa-
tions relating to crimes or sins.
8.277 exactly the same punishment: when a Vaisya abuses a Südr a or vice versa, the punish-
ment is the same as for a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya or vice versa. See the added
verses after 8.268 and the note to it.
Additional verse: "By telling an outcaste 'You're an outcaste!', or a thief 'You're a
thief! ', a man by his speech becomes as sinful as they; and if his accusation is false, he
becomes twice as sinful."
8.283 Variant reading: "by the feet, the nose, the neck."


--- PAGE 330 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
319
8.284 sent into exile (praväsyah) : this term can also mean imposing the capital punishment
(see 8.123 n.)- Medhâtith i gives this as a possible meaning, following the Arthasästra
usage of the term: praväsanam arthasâstrapravrttya maranam nirväsanam vä .
8.287 vigor (präna) : the meaning is not altogether clear. Medhâtith i glosses with balam
("strength"). The vulgate has the easier reading vrana ("wound"). In any case, a griev-
ous wounding and the shedding of blood are clearly intended.
total fine (sarvadandam): Bhäruci , Medhâtithi , Govinda, and Kullük a explain that if
the injured man does not accept the payment for his medical expenses, then that
amount should be added to the usual fine and both paid to the king. Näräyan
a thinks
that this should be done if the perpetrator does not want to pay the medical bills. Nan-
dana says that the perpetrator should either pay for the full recovery or give to the vic-
tim also a sum equivalent to the full fine he owes the king. Nandana also mentions the
possibility that sarvadandam (sarvasya dandani) may mean taking all the man's
wealth as a fine, possibly when the man is too poor to shoulder the full medical ex-
penses of his victim. I consider this to be the most natural explanation.
8.295 In a case . . . vehicle: Medhâtith i and Nandana take the instrumental pasubhih and
rathena as the instruments of killing: "the driver kills living creatures by means of
animals or vehicles when his path is obstructed." Others, correctly I think, take the in-
strumentais as the agents of obstruction. The meaning, I think, is that the driver kills
the animals or bumps the vehicle that is obstructing the path.
8.296 If a human . . . horse: most commentators take this, correctly I think, as referring to a
vehicle accident. Näräyan
a and Nandana, however, think that the section on vehicle
accidents is over and that this is an independent statement regarding killing humans
and animals.
8.299 Variant reading: "a wife, son, slave, servant, or uterine brother."
8.303 his sacrificial session: on the sattra, see 2.106 n. Here the reign of a king is compared
to a sacrificial session of long duration at which the gift of safety to his subjects is con-
sidered equal to the sacrificial fee. See also 8.306.
8.309 Variant reading: "fails to provide protection, is predatory, and untrue, one should
abandon him."
8.310 Variant reading: "imprisonment, fines, and diverse forms of corporal punishment."
8.314 Variant reading: "A thief, with his hair loose, should run to the king."
8.320 corporal punishment: the term vadha in the legal literature is used both for corporal
punishment, including mutilation and amputation, and for capital punishment. It is of-
ten difficult to tell from the context which is meant. In this verse, given the amount
stolen, I think corporal punishment is meant. In the next verse, on the other hand,
capital punishment is clearly meant, because verse 322 gives lesser forms of corporal
punishment.
8.321 The same goes . . . capital punishment: I think there is broken syntax in this verse,
which may be piecing together podas from different contexts. In NSm 19.32, for exam-
ple, pada-a is placed in a different verse and only a fine is prescribed for stealing arti-
cles sold by weight; examples include ghee and other liquids. I have taken pada-a as
syntactically connected with the previous verse, and pada-b with the second half of the
verse. See Mädhava' s citation of this verse that replaces the first half-verse with that
from NSm 19.34. "more than 100" must refer to weight in the case of gold, etc., and to
pieces in the case of clothes, as pointed out by Medhâtithi .
8.324 time and purpose: the meaning appears to be this. If an article was stolen when it was
urgently needed (e.g., stealing a weapon during a time of war), the theft becomes more
serious. Likewise, the purpose served by the article may make the theft more severe,
such as stealing the medicine of a sick man. See also 9.293 n.


--- PAGE 331 ---
320 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
8.325 in the case . . . of the heel: this half-verse has been subject to much misunderstanding
resulting in several emendations (see the note in the critical edition). One interpretation
takes sthürikä
 (supported by the variant nasika) as the nose. Following several com-
mentators, BUhler translates: "for piercing (the nostrils of) a barren cow." M-W give
"nostrils of a barren cow" as the meaning of sthürikä,
 while B-R gives the alternative
reading chürikä
 with the meaning "Kuhschnauze." I think these interpretations are
mistaken; within a section dealing with stealing, there is no reason to introduce the
mutilation of animals. Lariviere (1983) and in his translation ofNSm 19.40 has cor-
rectly identified sthürä
 as the Achilles tendon; and sthürikä
 cannot be other than a
synonym for it. See also Turner 1966,1: 13775 where sthura is related to thuri meaning
"heel" in the Dardic languages Phalür a and Shina.
8.329 other similar kinds of food (anyesä m caivamädfnä
m adyänäm)
: Bühler , Burnell, and
Doniger follow the alternative: caivamädlnäm
 madyänäm,
 and translate: "other things
of a similar kind, spirituous liquor."
8.332 in the presence . . . outside his presence: this verse is clearly a versification of AS
3.17.1-2: sahasam anvayavat prasabhakanna / niranvaye steyam apavyayane ca /
Kangle translates this passage accurately: "Forcible seizure [or better, violence] is a
deed of force in the presence (of the owner). In the absence (of the owner) it is theft,
also in case of denial." A similar versification of the first sutra is found in Kätyäyana
:
sähasa yat krtain karma tat sahasam udährtam / sänvayas tv apahäro yah prasahya
haranam ca yat ¡I "A deed done with violence is called 'violence,' as also a seizure in
the presence (of the owner) and a forcible seizure." In all these texts, the aim is to de-
fine sähasa "violence." Within this context, it appears that the Arthasästr a tradition
coined the technical terms anvayavat and niranvaya for thefts and robberies committed
in the presence or outside the presence of the owner. The term sänvaya used by Manu
in 8.198 and 331 appears to be a synonym of anvayavat created possibly for metrical
exigencies. Although robbery is more serious than theft, yet in 331 theft (in the pres-
ence of the owner) is considered the lesser offense, possibly because it may imply an
implicit consent, especially if the person taking the article is known to the owner.
These two technical terms appear to have fallen into disuse within the Dharma tradi-
tion; NSm (14.1), for example, which defines sähasa in words reminiscent of Manu and
the AS, does not use these terms. For the meaning of anvaya, see Kangle 1965, III: 229.
For a discussion of sähasa in the Dharmasâstras , see Rocher I976b.
The reason for inserting this verse here is unclear. A definition such as this should
have been given in the section on sähasa (8.344), as it is done in both the AS and the
NSm. Medhâtith i thinks that the following rules deal with robbery rather than theft. It
is more likely, however, that Manu inserts this verse to explain niranvaya and sänvaya
that were used in the previous verse. Indeed, we can detect that this verse is a paren-
thetical statement, because the next verse (333) uses the pronoun etani ("these"), refer-
ring back to the articles mentioned in verse 331.
8-333 Variant reading: "the king should impose on him the lowest fine": see 8.138.
8.336 //; a case . . . fixed rule: this is quite a significant rule. If taken at its face value, it im-
plies that even the king was not above the law! Commentators point out that in the case
of the king, the fine should be thrown into water (9.245). Medieval authors evidently
found the fining of the king hard to swallow; both Laksmldhara and Devannabhatta
change the reading from räjä
 to the genitive räjnäni
 or räjnah (with janah of the pre-
vious päda understood). The meaning then would be that people connected to the king,
such as those mentioned in the previous verse, are subject to this rule.
8.337-8 With respect... good or bad: the penalty is calculated on the basis of the value of
the stolen goods. In general, the principle is that lighter penalties are assessed for peo-
ple of higher classes. But here a different principle is enunciated, a principle more in


--- PAGE 332 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
321
keeping with the penances, where the severity of the penance for the same offense in-
creases for those of higher classes. These two verses appear to be versifications of
GDh 12.15-7. Bühler , following Medhätithi , Govinda, and KullQka, takes the last
clause as applying to all the individuals mentioned. The presence of hi ("for"), how-
ever, makes it clear that this clause applies specifically to a Brahmin, for he is suppos-
ed to know the law. The parallel passage in GDh 12.17, ° n the other hand, makes a
more general statement that a learned man should be punished more severely.
8.342 When someone ties . . . as for theft: clearly these acts must have been viewed as not
real theft, otherwise there is no reason to insist that they should be viewed as theft. The
first two acts fit this category well; the reference is probably to untying someone else's
cattle so they may get lost, or tying up (i.e., impounding) another's cattle in one's own
property, possibly to make use of them. Several commentators take harta to mean "one
who steals" with reference to slaves etc. This is implausible, because if it were real
theft, then there is no need to insist that they are equivalent to theft. Näräyan
a probably
has it right when he says that the reference is to someone taking away a slave, horse, or
carriage for his own use without authorization.
8.344 violence: the distinction between violence as sähasa and physical assault (danda-
pärusya, 8.279-301) is not readily apparent from their treatment in Manu. In the AS
(3.17), on the other hand, sähasa is clearly defined as forcible seizure of property, in-
cluding robbery; whereas physical assault does not involve taking the other's property.
The NSm (14) includes both simple violent acts and robbery under this heading.
8.345 someone who is . . . with a rod: clearly, these three individuals refer to those guilty of
offenses under the previous three grounds for litigation.
8.349 in a conflict over sacrificial fees: this provision provides an interesting historical note.
Conflicts, either between priests or between priests and patrons, over sacrificial fees
must have been a common occurrence for it to be noted by Manu; even more interest-
ing is that violence within this context is condoned.
8.352 execute them (pravâsayet) : for the meaning of this term, see 8.123 n. Commentators
uniformly take it to mean banishment; and so do the translators. This is certainly pos-
sible, but see verse 359 where the death penalty is imposed on all except Brahmins for
adultery. The disfigurement or branding, according to commentators, include cutting
off the nose, penis, testicles, and the like. See also 9.248 where almost identical words
are used for graphic and diverse modes of execution that drive terror into men.
8-353 root: the meaning is unclear. Commentators take it to mean rain that supports life, rea-
soning that the mixing of castes leads to the cessation of sacrifices, which in turn leads
to drought and starvation. See SB 11.1.6.24, where also the absence of rain is associated
with dharma.
8.360 men consecrated for sacrifice (dîksitâh) : this is the understanding of all commentators
and translators. Then this category is somewhat anomalous, because the others deal
with individuals who generally visit houses and must come in contact with house-
wives. It is possible that here dïksita refers more broadly to holy men of diverse relig-
ious sects. See, for example, MB h 1.80.25; 15.17.3, 9: vanaväsäya
 dîksitâh; MB h
1.205.30: hrahmacaryäya dîksitâh. Also at MBh 13.10.8 and Ram 5.3.28 the term ap-
pears to include various kinds of holy men rather than strictly persons consecrated to
perform a sacrifice.
unless . . . banned (aprativäritäh)
: I follow Medhätith i and Nandana (so also Doniger);
the statement about forbidding such conversations in the next verse favors this inter-
pretation. Others take the term to mean "without being hindered," an explanation fol-
lowed by Bühler .
8.361 Variant reading: "A man should never converse with other people's wives."


--- PAGE 333 ---
322 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8
8.362 to wives . . . on their own: the fact that the compound natmopajlvisu is masculine has
caused some problems to commentators. Many take the compound as referring to the
husbands who live off the earnings of their wives. Accordingly, Bühle r translates:
"This rule does not apply to the wives of actors and singers, nor (of) those who live on
(the intrigues of) their own wives." Note the difficulty Bühle r has in finding a genitive
within the locative construction! I think Nandana is right in taking this as referring to
prostitutes; the masculine ending can be justified because it qualifies daresu, which is
grammatically masculine. The point of the rule appears to be that husbands of such
women may use scriptural provisions against adultery to blackmail other men.
8.364 execution: I have followed Medhätith i in taking vadha to mean the death penalty.
Govinda and Kullük a (followed by BUhler) interpret the term as simply corporal pun-
ishment, such as the cutting of sexual organs. See 8.320 n.
8.366 bride-price: I do not think that this provision forces the man to marry the girl he has
violated. It simply means that he should pay reparation to the father in the form of the
bride-price that he would have otherwise received at her wedding. See verse 369 where
even another woman who violates a virgin has to pay a similar price.
8.367 two of his fingers: the cutting of two fingers is prescribed for any deflowering of a
virgin short of sexual intercourse. The reason is probably that the violator used his fin-
gers for the sexual act. See verse 370 where a similar punishment is prescribed also for
a woman who violates a virgin. The AS (4.12.3) specifies that the middle and index
fingers are to be cut off.
8.369 Variant reading: "pay twice the bride-price."
8.373 Vratya woman: the meaning is unclear. Medhätith i gives several possibilities, includ-
ing prostitute, wanton woman, unmarried woman, etc. Others take her to be the wife of
a Vrâtya , that is, a twice-born who has not been initiated at the proper time (2.39).
8.374 loses everything: that is, he loses all his property, as well as his life.
8.382 Additional verse: "If a Brahmin has sex with a guarded Ksatriya or Vaisya woman, he
should not be subject to the urine punishment (8.375), but he should be made to pay the
highest fine."
8.385 lowest-born woman (antyajastriyam): most commentators identify such women as
Cándalas. Näräyan
a specifies washerwomen, leather workers, dancers, basket makers,
fisherwomen, and the like.
8.386 The king . . . world of Indra: the five crimes referred to here are actually the five
grounds for litigation (8.11-5), all involving some degree of violence.
8.390 living in hermitages (äsramesu) : I follow Bhäruci , Medhätithi , and Nandana in taking
asrama here as referring to hermitages of ascetics. The context clearly calls for extra-
ordinary individuals engaged in a dispute; otherwise the king would not take such pre-
cautions. The AS (1.19.31-2) also recommends that the king should decide matters
relating to ascetics only in the company of his Purohita, because otherwise these as-
cetics might direct their anger at him. Other commentators take äsrama to mean orders
of life; and this is followed by Doniger and Bühler , who translates: "If twice-born men
dispute among each other concerning the duty of the orders."
8.392 the one living in front of his house and the one behind (prätivesya , änuvesya) : the
meaning of these two terms are unclear, although they certainly refer to close neigh-
bors. I follow Medhätithi , who explains the former as grhabhimukhah and the latter as
prsthato vasan. Bhäruci , however, rejects this explanation and prefers to see the two
words as simply referring to close neighbors. Other commentators take the first to be
the immediate neighbor and the latter to be the one next to him.
8.395 honor (sampQjayet): Bühle r translates: "treat kindly"; but the term does not mean that.


--- PAGE 334 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 
323
Many commentators interpret correctly that honoring (puja) implies giving money and
food: see 3.70 n.
8.396 He must not. . . those clothes: Bühler , following Kullüka , translates: "he shall not re-
turn the clothes (of one person) for those (of another)." But why would one require a
rule for that? The point of this verse is to lay down minimum ethical standards on
washermen. They are not to tie up a load of clothes within a cloth that has been given
for washing (e.g., a large piece of cloth such as a sari or a sheet). This is the interpreta-
tion of Medhatithi and Nandana. The meaning of the final phrase is clear: he should
not rent out clothes that have been given for washing!
8.397 A weaver . . . fine of 12: only Govinda and Räghavänand
a offer an explanation. The
weight of the yarn would have increased in the process of making the cloth, with the
addition of starch. The fine of twelve is interpreted either as money (Pana), or as
twelve time the weight of the cloth, or else as a twelfth part of the yarn.
8.399 royal monopoly: on the technical term prakhyäta, see Wezler 2000: 496-501. This
term occurs with a related meaning also in the AS 9.6.31; 11.1.28, and with a somewhat
broader meaning at AS 5.2.49. For a similar provision see VaDh 19.14-6.
8.403 balances, measures: I follow Bhäruc i and Medhatithi in taking the compound tulä-
mânam as a Dvandva listing two items: balance and measure. Others take it as refer-
ring to only weights; so also Bühler .
8.419 administrative centers (karmäntän)
: I follow Medhatithi, Govinda, and Näräyana
.
Bühler , following Kullüka , translates: "the completion of his undertakings"; similarly
Doniger and Burnell.
CHAPTER NINE
9.1 
when they are together ... apart: Manu provides here different rules by which married
people should live when they are together and when they are somehow apart, either
temporarily, as when the husband is away, or permanently, as when the husband or
wife dies. See 9-74Í for rules when the husband is missing.
9.4 
reprehensible: the term yäpya is quite unusual. Many mss. have converted this to the
easier väcya, which is also the reading of the vulgate. For a discussion of the term, see
Introduction, p. 36.
9.5 
Additional verse: "When the wife is guarded, the offspring becomes guarded; and
when the offspring is guarded, one's own self becomes guarded."
9.8 
The husband. .. again in her: this is a variant of a verse in AB 7.13. For a discussion of
the son as one's very self born again in the wife, see Olivelle 1993, 41-6. My transla-
tion of jäyätvam
 (lit., "state of being a wife") is non-literal; but the abstract noun in
Sanskrit does carry a pregnant and multivalent meaning, indicating both the nature of a
wife and the etymology of "wife." For a discussion of this usage in Brahmanical lit-
erature, especially the Upanisads, see my note to BrU 1.2.1 in Olivelle 19980, 488.
9.11 
household goods: for a study of the significant term pärinähya
 in early vedic literature,
see Jamison 1997. Initially the term referred to the goods that a bride brings with her
after her marriage; the term itself probably referred to something tied on a wagon
(traveling box). The connection to the wife probably came through the carriage used to
covey the new bride to the groom's house.
9.17 
Bed . . . to women: note the close parallel between this verse and the assigning of the
various duties to different classes at 1.87-91. Variant reading: "lust, hatred, dishonesty,
malice."


--- PAGE 335 ---
324 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9
9.18 
Without strength . . . untruth: I think this may have been viewed by the author as a
vedic citation; see the beginning of the very next verse. In TS 6.5.8.2 we have a very
similar passage: tasmSt striyo nirindriyä adäyädlr
 api päpät
 puinsa upastitarani
vadanti ("Therefore, women are without strength and without inheritance, and they
speak more submissively than even a poor man"). For papa as poor, see Rau 1957, 32-
4. See also BDh 2.3.46.
9.19 
a sample of these: for the adopted reading akrtint, see the note to the critical edition.
The alternative reading is niskrfihlniskrtim, which is adopted by all previous editions.
On the basis of this reading, Bühle r translates: "hear (now those texts which refer to)
the expiation of their (sins)."
9.20 Here is an illustration of it: the text cited is found in SänkhGr 3.13. The exact
reference of "of it" is unclear. Most take it as a reference to the penance indicated in
the previous verse; but we have seen that it is an erroneous reading. Medhätith i and
Nandana, correctly I believe, view this as a reference to the true character
(svalaksanya: 8.19) of women, of which the cited text is illustrative; and this seems to
be the view also of Bhâruci .
9.21 
When a woman . . . infidelity: all the commentators, except Medhätith i and Bhâruc i
(who are silent on this point), think that the expiation is carried out by the son rather
than by the woman who committed the sin.
9.23 Aksamälä
 . . . respect: Aksamälä
, better known as Arundhatï , was the wife of the sage
Vasistha. Although textual sources give her a high pedigree, the commentators state
that she was born in a low caste but attained a high status because of her marriage to
Vasistha. Madanapâl a was an ascetic who was barred from celestial worlds because he
had failed to father sons. He then became a Sarngi bird and mated with the female
Sanigl, Jaritâ . The children born from this union excelled in their knowledge of the
Veda (MBh 1.220-5).
9.27 Variant readings: "brings them up—with regard to each of these, the wife"; "brings
them up—for the sake of joy, the wife."
9.28 
obedient service: the term susrusä usually refers to the service rendered by a person of
lower rank to one of higher rank, especially by a pupil to his teacher. The meaning here
is uncertain; some commentators take it as referring to hospitality and others to taking
care of the husband's physical needs. The latter is supported by the more explicit
statement in 9.86.
9.32 It is acknowledged . .. of the field: the critical edition has adopted the reading hartar i ;
the vulgate reads bhartari, which is tautological and Bühle r has to labor hard to find
meaning here: "They (all) say that the male issue (of a woman) belongs to the lord, but
with respect to the (meaning of the term) lord the revealed texts differ." But, of course,
the passage says nothing to resolve any disputes about the meaning of "lord" (hus-
band). The question, rather, centers on what happens when the sire (kartf) is different
from the husband (bhartf). The first half-verse is rather elliptical: pada-a gives the
consensus opinion that a son belongs to the husband; pada-b introduces the dispute,
which centers around the man who fathers the son but who is not the husband; and the
second half of the verse spells out the two positions in this dispute briefly. Arguments
in support of the first position are given in verses 36-40, and arguments for the second
position in verses 41-55. It is clear that Manu is here following the classical Indian
form of argumentation, presenting first the opinion of the opponent (purvapaksa) and
then the opinion of the author (uttarapaksd). The traditional enumeration of 12 sons
(see 9.i66f.), where gttdhotpaima, ksetraja, kanina, and sahodha are all fathered by
men other than the husband, indicates that the second opinion was the stronger one
within the legal tradition. Derretí cites J.-P. Vernant, Myth et pensée chez les Grecs
(Paris, 1969), pp. 97Í., for Greek sources on this controversy.


--- PAGE 336 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 
325
9.34 
Sometimes . . . esteemed: note that Manu uses the term visista to refer to the social
eminence of the father and the mother in this verse; when both are eminent, you get
eminent children. In the very next verse, however, he uses utkrsta to refer to the bio-
logical superiority of the seed (father) vis-à-vi s the field (mother), from which socio-
logical conclusions, such as to whom the son belongs in reality, are drawn.
9.40 For one kind. . . sprouts forth: it appears to me that there is a lacuna here. The argu-
ment for the dominance of the seed should have included sociological conclusions
from the biological observations given here. See, for example, VaDh 6.8-9, where
precisely such conclusions are drawn. The suspicion of a lacuna here is strengthened
by the beginning of the second argument in verse 41; this verse begins with tat
("therefore"), but the statement in it is unrelated to the previous verse, which supported
quite the opposite view.
9.41 
knowledge and discrimination: commentators explain juana and vijnaiia in widely
different way, indicating educated guesses. Medhätithi : Vedärig a (vedic supplements)
and worldly sciences (logic, fine arts, etc.); Näräyan
a and Rämacandr a take them to re-
fer to Dharma and to worldly matters, respectively; Kullüka : Veda and Vedänga ;
Räghavänanda
: sruti and smrti; Nandana: worldly knowledge and scriptural/textual
(sastra) knowledge.
9.43-4 
When someone shoots . . . owns the arrow: the examples reinforce the notion that a
virgin belongs to the person who first deflowers her, assumed here to be her husband.
This is true with a virgin field as with a virgin girl. So, the first king, Prthu (after
whom is name prthivî, Earth), who tilled the ground took possession of the entire earth;
kings coming after him do not have such a claim. So also a man who first clears the
forest has claim to it. The image changes with the hunt, but here too the one who first
wounds the unwounded (virgin) animal lays claim to it. The Sanskrit term kha, which I
have translated "vitals", literally means hole; Bühle r translates as "wound." I want to
thank Professor Wezler for suggesting that the meaning might be the vital or mortal
parts of the animal (marinan), the parts at which a hunter will shoot an arrow. Shooting
another arrow at the wound created by the first arrow does not make much sense. Note
also the interesting parallel between arrow, the implied plow, and the penis.
9.45 
Wife, self. . . is the wife: vedic texts call the wife one half of the husband: TS 6.1.8.5;
SB 5.2.1.10; AÄ 1.2.5. For a discussion, see Olivelle 1993, 42, and above 9.8 n.
9.52 
agreement: beyond the agreement that the owners of the field and the seed may reach,
the reference here is to leviratic union, where the biological father is officially appoint-
ed (niyoga) to raise a son for the woman's husband, a topic that immediately follows
(8.57-70).
9.54 
When a seed . . . reaps its fruit: the simile here is of a sower in a neighboring field. If
some of the seeds he sows are carried by the wind or by a stream of water (probably in
a paddy field) to an adjacent field, the crop that is produced from those seeds belongs
to the owner of that field and not to the man who sowed the seeds. Variant reading:
"the owner of the seed does not reap its reward."
9-55 This is the Law . . . buffaloes: this is a rather strange and unexpected ending to the ar-
gument. It elevates a simile, already given in verse 48, to the level of a proposition.
See my earlier comments about possible lacunae in this section: 9.40 n.
9-57 
wife of an elder: it may well be that here the term guru (see Note to the Trans., p. 69)
refers specifically to the father, because in the absence of the father the eldest brother
becomes a surrogate father to his younger siblings (9.108).
9.61 
Some who . . . such women: commentators cite a proverb: aputra ekaputrah, "A man
who has one son is a sonless man." The reason evidently is the danger that a single son
may die before he himself can father a son to continue the line, thus defeating the very
purpose of the appointment.


--- PAGE 337 ---
326 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9
9.64 Twice-born men . . . eternal Law: this and the following verse contradict the opinion
on levirate just expressed in verses 57-63. This contradiction was already noticed by
Brhaspati (BrSm 1.25.16), cited by Nandana in his commentary: "after prescribing the
levirate, Manu himself forbids it" (uktvâ niyogas manunâ nisiddhah svayam eva tu).
He ascribes this to the shortening of the Yugas and the inability of contemporary men
to carry this out in accordance with the rules. I think that here also Manu may be en-
gaging in an argument with an opponent, whose view is given first and then refuted
(see 9.32 n.). Manu's own view appears to be that levirate is morally reprehensible in
the case of a widow; the only allowance he makes is when the husband dies after the
betrothal (8.69-70).
9.69-70 take (vindet), obtaining (adhigamya): the meaning of these two terms in this context
is unclear. All the commentators gloss with words that mean "marry": vivähayet,
parinayet, udvahet and vivähya, uduhya. My translation leaves the vagueness of the
terms intact; clearly this is part of the rite of appointment rather than a true marriage,
because the man is allowed to father just one son for his deceased brother.
9.70 
dressed in white: the social meaning of colors is one area where cultural perceptions
may be diametrically opposed. White here may indicate the color of the wedding dress
in the west, but in India it is the color of mourning prescribed for the girl who has lost
her husband.
9.72 
defiled (vipradusta): the meaning is probably that the girl has been deflowered. For
other occurrences of this term with the meaning of moral corruption, see 2.97; 11.176.
9.73 
Variant reading: "one may annul that gift of the virgin by that evil man."
9.76 
A wife should wait: Medhâtith i astutely observes that the text does not say what she
should do after the lapse of the time specified. Manu, indeed, cannot say more because
he was against the re-marriage of widows (5.157-62). Medhâtith i cites various opin-
ions, including the one which permits her to remarry after that time, which is the inter-
pretation that best suits this context and is explicitly stated in NSm 12.97-102. Nandana
is the only commentator who agrees with this. Others say that after this time the wife
should go in search of her husband, citing VaDh 18.76.
9.77 
stop cohabiting with her (na samvaset): Medhâtith i observes that samvaset cannot take
the accusative, forgetting that it does take the accusative when it means to have sex
with someone. Both Medhâtith i and Bharuci, followed by Näräyan
a and Râmacandra ,
nevertheless, object to the interpretation that the husband should banish her from the
house. Bharuci, Govinda, KullOka, Nandana, and Râghavânand
a take samvaset to
mean cohabit.
9.79 
without semen (abïja) : Medhâtith i says that both klïba and abija refer to a napumsaka,
a term that can also mean someone who is not fully a man, such as a hermaphrodite.
Others are even less helpful. Clearly, the reference is to some sort of sexual dysfunc-
tion different from impotence.
9.80 
Variant reading: "When a wife drinks liquor or behaves badly."
9.84 
shows and fairs (preksäsamäjau)
: the meaning of saniaja is unclear. It probably refers
to some sort of fair or public event that attracted crowds, something looked down upon
even by the third-century BCE emperor, Asoka (Rock Edict i). See Ghosh 1973, 56.
9.86 
husband's physical needs: these appear to exclude sex, which is separately listed at
9.28. Commentators offer the examples of preparing and serving food.
9.88 
not attained the proper age: most commentators take apräptäm
 (lit., "not reached") to
mean that the girl has not reached the minimum age of eight years. This appears far-
fetched to me, because there must be a clear point of arrival when one speaks of
"reaching." The probable meaning is that she has not reached puberty (supported by its
mention in the very next verse). I think the first half of the verse implies that a suitor


--- PAGE 338 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 
327
has come asking for the girl's hand. Within this context one can understand the second
half: one should give the girl to such a suitor even if she is below age.
Several manuscripts place an additional verse after the first half of verse 88, thus cre-
ating two verses with a different syntax. I give here the translation of the two with this
rearranged order: "When there is a suitor who is eminent, handsome, and of equal
status, a wise father should give him the girl fearing the onset of her menstruation. For
when a menstruating girl remains, the giver is tainted with sin; one should give the girl
to him according to rule, even if she has not attained the proper age."
9.92 
if she takes, it is theft: variant reading: "if she takes, she is a thief." According to a
significant variant given by Bhâruc i and Medhátithi, it is the groom who becomes a
thief if he accepts these ornaments: "if he takes it, he is a thief."
9.93 A man who . . . her menses: Bhâruc i thinks that this verse is out of place here and is an
interpolation, a view recorded also by Medhätithi .
9.99 
That after promising . . . to another: several commentators explain, correctly I think,
that "promising" here refers to the contract made with the man who gave the bride-
price.
9.102 Variant reading: "from being unfaithful and to remain attached to each other."
9.104 have passed on: the ambiguity of the term urdhvam, which literally means "beyond,
after," has given rise to different interpretations. That the reference is clearly to the
death of the parents is indicated by the last päda: "they are incompetent while those
two are alive." Jïmutivahana , in his influential Däyabhäga
 (1.46), says that Manu uses
the word "after" rather than "deceased" to indicate that the partition can take place
anytime the father's proprietary rights lapse as a result of his becoming an outcaste,
abandoning all worldly desires (e.g., becoming an ascetic), or dying.
9.107 Only that son . . . through lust: for the vedic theology that posits the son as the source
of the father's immortality, see AB 7.13; VaDh 17.1-5; Olivelle 1993, 41-6.
9.111 They should . . . meritorious: clearly, living separately is the preferred option of Manu.
The particle vä , which generally means simply "or," is here used with the more spe-
cific meaning of "or rather," indicating not just an option but the preferred option. On
this use of vä , see Scharfe 1993, 272-4; P. Kiparsky Some Theoretical Problems in
Panini's Grammar (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1982). The in-
crease of dharma takes place because each brother as the head of a separate household
will have to offer separate sacrifices and other rites.
9.120-1 If a younger . . . the Law: the issue here is the share of a son born through a leviratic
union. Should he, as the heir of the eldest brother, receive the preemptive share re-
served for the eldest? The answer given is no; and the argument is that the biological
father of the son is the "principal" and not the biological mother, through whom the
son's connection to the eldest brother is established. Therefore, the leviratic son (i.e.,
the nephew) should receive the same share as all brothers. See a similar situation in
9.134 with regard to the "female-son."
9.123 first-born: all the commentators, except Nandana, take the compound pürvajah to
mean "born to the first (i.e., seniormost) wife" (pürvasyäm
 jätah). This interpretation
is followed by Bühler . I think Nandana is correct; the parallel passage in GDh 28.14
(note that Manu follows Gautama closely) reads jyestha ("eldest") leaving no ambigu-
ity.
inferior bulls: given the ambiguous sandhi of (a)pare ' jyesthavrsah, most commenta-
tors omit the avagraha and read the positive jyesthavrsäh. Bühler , accordingly, trans-
lates: "the next best bulls," followed by Doniger, a meaning that is hard to extract from
the Sanskrit. I think Bhâruc i and Medhätith i are correct in seeing an avagraha here and
reading the negative ajyesthavrsah, "inferior bulls."


--- PAGE 339 ---
328 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9
9.126 Subrahmanyä: this is the name of a ritual invocation addressed to Indra inviting him to
partake of the Soma. See AB 6.3.
9.127 female-son: the term putrikä, which is a feminine construction from putra ("son"), has
generally been translated as "appointed daughter," an institution that is also found in
other Indo-European cultures. This translation is somewhat misleading, because, as
Jolly (1885, 147-9) has pointed out, she is not merely the one who produces a son for
her father but is actually a "son" in her own right. Many legal texts list her
immediately after the natural son and before other kinds of sons (see 8.158-60). See
also verse 130 about her right to inherit the paternal estate. Although somewhat
awkward, I have opted for "female-son" to highlight the fact that she is truly a son who
is female. For an examination of this institution in India and elsewhere, see Schmidt
1980, 30-75. See also The Law Code of Gortyn (ed. Ronald F. Willetts. Berlin: de
Gruyter, 1967, pp. 23-7 and 45-7), a 5th-century BCE text from Crete, which devotes a
substantial section to the "heiress," that is, a daughter who inherits the paternal
property in the absence of sons.
Additional verse: "I will give to you in marriage the brotherless girl adorned with fin-
ery with the provision that the son she bears will be my son." This is VaDh 17.17.
9.128-9 In ancient times .. . King Soma: this story of Daksa's daughters is told in MBh 1.70
(it is unfortunate that van Buitenen translates the technical term putrikä here as
"puppets"). The term satkrtya, which I have, following KullQka, translated "after
adorning them," can also mean simply "after honoring" (see Bühle r and Doniger; it is
unclear whether it is the grooms or the girls who are honored). I think the act of em-
bellishing is implied by this term, something one would do to a daughter who is about
to get married. See my note 3.96 n.
9.131 separate property: the technical term yautaka refers to any kind of separate property
remaining within the umbrella of common property or carved out of it. See 9.214,
where the yautaka refers to the separate property of the oldest brother.
9.136 Variant reading: "bears a son of equal status."
9.140 the second . . . father's father: Bharuci and Medhätith i record variants according to
which the second rice-ball is offered to his biological father (see 9.132). The reading of
the last päda as well as its meaning are uncertain. If we follow one reading, the third
rice-ball would be offered to his biological father's father; this interpretation is follow-
ed by Bühler . It also appears to be the meaning of the parallel passage in BDh 2.3.16.
Medhätithi , Närayana , Kullüka , Räghavänanda
, and Nandana, however, take the final
päda to mean that the third rice-ball is offered to the mother's father's father. This in-
terpretation is based either on the reading tatpituh pituh, where tat in the compound is
taken as tasyäh ("her"), or on the reading (adopted in the critical edition) of tu pituh
pituh, where tasyäh ("her") for pada-c is taken as governing Ihis päda also. I have
followed this interpretation, even though it would exclude the biological father alto-
gether. I think that BDh 2.3.16 also could be interpreted in this way by taking tasyäh of
its pada-c as governing also pitamaham of pada-d. The view expressed here appears to
be different from that expressed in verse 132, where rice-balls are offered to both the
mother and the biological father.
9.142 The offering . . . to an end: the second half-verse is elliptical. The meaning, however,
is clear and my translation reproduces the meaning without attempting to be literal.
9.146 keeps: the verb hibhryat means to keep, in the sense of both carrying away for oneself
and keeping safe (taking care of), and it is related to the term for husband (bhartr). For
a study of the connection between the two terms, see Thieme 1963, 466.
9.150 ornament: the exact reference is unclear, given that a family would have more than one
ornament. Medhätith i gives the example of the father's ring.


--- PAGE 340 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 
329
one share from the best property: the meaning is unclear. Medhätith i and KullQka say
that the property is divided into shares and the most excellent of these shares is given
to the eldest. Nandana takes it to mean that the most excellent items of the property is
divided into shares and the best of these given to the eldest.
9.154 Whether he has . . . no son at all: several interpretations are offered by Medhätithi . If
we take the "proper son" to be a son by a Brahmin wife, then the man may have sons
by other wives. In this case also, the son by a Südr a wife must get only one-tenth of the
property. If the man has no son at all, that is, no son from a wife of an upper class, and
the son from a Sudra wife is the only son he has, then too he must give that son only
one-tenth of the property. The rest of the property should be divided by the next of kin,
following the method for a man who dies without issue.
9.156 When all the sons . . . equal shares: this appears clearly to be an alternative (prefer-
able? see 9.111 n.) to the intricate rules spelled out earlier, even though Medhätith i ob-
jects strongly to this interpretation.
9.158 relatives but not heirs (adäyädabändhaväh)
: the issue is whether the negative suffix
governs only the first member of the compound or both. Näräyan
a and Nandana opt for
the latter: the last six are neither heirs nor relatives. This appears to be the view of
Medhätith i also, although his wording is somewhat unclear (¡tare vipantäh, "others are
the opposite"). The parallel passage in GDh 28.33, however, makes it very clear that
these six kinds of sons do share in the lineage (gotra) of their father.
9.161 Variant reading: "A man gains the same result."
9.162 If a natural son . . . not the other: the verse is obscure. Some commentators assume
this situation. A husband who is impotent gets a son through appointment (niyoga);
after that his impotency is cured and he fathers a natural son. In this case, the natural
son inherits the estate of his father, not the son begotten on the wife. Something like
this appears to be the intent of the verse, especially in light of what is said in verses 163
and 164. Näräyan
a and Nandana take ekarikthin as heirs to an undivided estate. They
contemplate a situation where one of two brothers dies while the estate is undivided,
and the living brother produces a son for the deceased brother by appointment on his
widow. The question is whether the latter son can claim more than one share, because
he is the leviratic son of the dead brother and the biological son of his uncle. At face
value, this is an attractive interpretation; but what is said in the subsequent verses ap-
pears to contradict it. See the parallel at 9.191.
9.165 but the other ten . . . and the estate: this verse is once again not altogether clear. Many
interpretations are offered by commentators. The most probable is the one offered by
Bhäruc i and Medhätithi : the sons enumerated later inherit the estate in the absence of
those enumerated earlier (9.184). This appears to be a version of the so-called ob-
structed inheritance (sapratibandha): Jolly 1885,176. See YDh 2.132.
9.166 principal son (prathamakalpika): following the general view of the commentators,
Bühle r translates: "the first in rank." Thieme (1963, 477) likewise translates: "der den
ersten Rang hat." But why would Manu need to say that he is the first in rank when he
is in fact listed first in rank? I think the meaning here is that the natural son is the stan-
dard son, the son in the true sense of the term (commentators gloss mukhya, which can
have a similar meaning), whereas other sons are in some way secondary or substitutes.
Indeed, in verse 180 the eleven other sons are in fact called substitutes (pratinidhi). See
the identical wording with regard to principal and secondary rules at 11.30.
9.175 marries again (punar bhutva): for an examination of this phrase and the term punar-
bhit, see Thieme 1963, 445-60.
9.176 the rite of remarriage: translators and commentators take paunarbhavena as qualifying
the husband (bhartra). Accordingly, Bühle r translates: "she is worthy to again perform
with her second (or first deserted) husband the (nuptial) ceremony." Thieme (1963,


--- PAGE 341 ---
330 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9
445) has shown that paunarbhavena refers instead to the special rite of remarriage. The
BDh 4.1.16 leaves no doubt about this, using the expression paunarbhavena vidhinä
"following the procedure of a second marriage." On the legal provisions for women to
leave their husbands and on the remarriage of women, see Lariviere 1991.
9.179 a slave woman married to a slave: the expression däsadäsl
 has been subject to much
misunderstanding. Bühle r translates it literally as "female slave of his slave." Rocher
(2002) has demonstrated conclusively that däsa and däsi, although literally "slave
man" and "slave woman," refer in fact to a Südr a man and woman, respectively. In
other words, däsa here is a synonym for Sudra. In the present context, the Südr a has
fathered a son either by an unmarried Sudra woman (däsi) or by a Südr a woman mar-
ried to some other Südr a man (i.e., not to the father of her son).
9.182-3 If among several brothers .. . women who have sons: 
variants of these provisions
occur also in VaDh 17.10-1 and ViDh 15.41-2. The connection between the two verses
is not altogether clear. The second clearly refers to a polygamous marriage. Wezler
(1998) disagrees with Jolly's suggestion that the former may refer to a polyandrie mar-
riage of several brothers to a single wife, as exemplified in the marriage of the five
Pändav a brothers in the MBh. Wezler suggests that when one brother has a son all his
other brothers also become "men who have sons," because through that son they are all
freed from the debt to their father of bearing a son to continue the line. Likewise, the
common wives are relieved of the burden of bearing a son for their common husband.
At a linguistic level, moreover, a man can claim "I have a son" when his father gets a
grandson, just as a woman can claim "I have a son" when her husband gets a son.
Vijnänesvar a (on YDh 3.227) cites a verse that he ascribes to Manu, which has a very
similar thrust: bahünäm
 ekakäryänäm
 sarvesäm sastradhärinäm
 / yady eko ghäteyet
tatra sarve te ghätakäh
 smrtäh // "If among many men pursuing the same task, all of
whom are bearing weapons, one kills, tradition says that all of them are killers."
Variant reading: "If among several wives."
9.186 To three . . .for a fifth: the three are father, grandfather, and great grandfather. These
are the three to whom the standard monthly ancestral offering (pärvanasräddha)
 is of-
fered. The person who is obliged to make the offering, that is the son, is the fourth. A
fifth individual whether grandson or great great grandfather does not enter into this rit-
ual picture. When the grandson becomes the offerer, his father becomes one of the
three and the father's great grandfather falls out of the picture.
9.187 The closest. . . a pupil: I have followed the cogent argument of Bühle r in his note to
this verse with regard to the meaning of sapindät as referring to the deceased. Here, as
in verse 185, the ones mentioned later become heirs only in the absence of the ones
mentioned earlier (see 9.165 n.). The term sakulya ("belonging to the same family") is
defined in BDh 1.11.10 as "those who share in separate oblations," that is, distant rela-
tions who do not share the rice-balls offered at an ancestral offering. See Kane 1962-
75, iii: 746-7.
9.191 When two . . . of the other: at issue here is a woman married consecutively to two men
who have each fathered a son. The men are dead and their estates are in the hands of
their common wife. In this case, each son inherits the estate of his biological father.
See the parallel at 9.162 and the note to it.
9.198 Any property . . . offspring: the verse is unclear and has been subject to different inter-
pretations. Most commentators interpret it to mean that, when a Brahmin has wives of
different classes, the property of a wife of any class goes to the daughter by the Brah-
min wife. The phrase "to her offspring" is also ambiguous; it can mean children in
general, sons in particular, or, in the view of most commentators, daughters in particu-
lar.
9.199 alienate: Bühler , Jha, Derretí , and Doniger, following KullOka and Räghavänand
a
(dhanasamcayam), take nirhära to mean hoarding. Bühler , nevertheless, notes that


--- PAGE 342 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 
331
Näräyan
a and Nandana's explanation as "expenditure" (vyaya) is preferable. The latter
is probably the interpretation also of Bhäruci , even though Derretí has chosen to
translate nirharet as "hoards." The term may mean something broader than simply ex-
penditure, however, and may include other types of alienation. Although this term
does not occur elsewhere in Manu, it is used in VaDh (19.14) with the probable mean-
ing of the exportation of goods from the capital city of a kingdom..
9.201 lacking manly strength: commentators uniformly take the term nirindriyah to refer to
persons lacking a limb or an organ. So, Bühle r "deficient in any organ." This condition
is generally referred to by the term vikalendriya, however, rather than nirindriya. Fur-
ther, persons lacking an organ (though not a limb) were already listed as blind and
deaf. The only other place nirindriya occurs is at 9.18 (see note to it and the citation
from TS), where it clearly refers to manly strength, perhaps with a sexual nuance.
9.211 his share is not lost: that is, his share has to be reserved for his own heirs; it cannot be
divided among themselves by his brothers.
9.212 Having asse?nbled . . . among themselves: the verse is ambiguous and commentators
offer varying explanations. See also Jlmütavähana'
s Däyabhäga
 11.5.32-4 and
Rocher's comment there. The antecedent of the pronoun tarn ("it") is unclear. The pro-
noun cannot refer to the share of the eldest or the youngest mentioned in the previous
verse, because that share is not meant to be divided by the brothers. I think that either
verse 211 is a parenthetical remark and "it" refers to the joint property mentioned in
verse 210; or these verses are taken from diverse sources and do not form part of a sin-
gle argument. The lost context is largely responsible for the lack of clarity and for the
various interpretations offered by the tradition. See BUhler's note to this verse for these
interpretations.
9.216 A son born ... with them: the context is a child born to the father after he has partition-
ed his estate among his sons. That child will inherit the father's portion of the divided
estate and any other property the father may have acquired after the partition.
9.219 A garment. . .from partition: Vijnänesvar a (on YDh 2.118-9) explains that garments,
vehicles/mounts, and ornaments that have been used are not subject to partition; they
are taken by the person who regularly used them. "Women" probably refers to slaves
or servants. Prepared foods are sweets, pickles and the like. Most manuscripts and
commentators read yogaksemam pracararn ca. Bühler , following Vijnänesvara , trans-
lates these as "property destined for pious uses or sacrifices, and a pasture-ground."
The critical edition has adopted a reading which restores the compound:
yogaksemapracäram, which is also the reading of Bhäruc i (for more detail, see my
note in the critical edition). Scharfe (1993, 195-200), in a close semantic study of the
term pracära, has clearly shown that it does not mean land or pasture but activities
(see 7.153 n.). One can think of watchmen, fences, and the like. These must be contin-
ued undisturbed by the partition.
9.220 ritual procedure for sons: Bühler , following Kulluka, translates: "the rules for allotting
(shares) to the (several) sons, those begotten on the wife and the rest." I think this
makes no sense; why would the natural son (aurasa) be left out if Manu wanted to
speak about the procedures for partitioning? I think Näräyan
a is right in taking this to
mean the ritual procedures for establishing these kinds of sons; then we can understand
why the natural son is left out, because he is not created by any ritual procedure as in
the case of leviratic or adopted sons.
9.221 The king . . . a kingdom: interestingly, Manu does not deal with disputes arising from
gambling and betting at all. He merely gives a moralistic disquisition about the evils of
gambling. See the very different way this section is constructed in NSm 17. Brhaspati
(cited by Mâdhav a in his Päräsäramädhavtya,
 3.393) perceptively says that Manu for-
bids gambling while others permit it. Variant reading: "vices of rulers that destroy
kings."


--- PAGE 343 ---
332 
Notes to the Translation : Chapter 9
9.225 entertainers: the critical edition has adopted the reading kerân. Its meaning is not alto-
gether clear. If we see it as related to the verb kridati, then a meaning such as a public
entertainer (jugglers, magicians, etc.) may be possible. Variant readings include kelän
(again with an unclear meaning), krürän
 (vicious persons), and caurän (thieves).
9.227 //; a former age: this may be a reference to the calamities that struck the epic heroes
Yudhisthira and Nala as a result of their addiction to gambling.
9.230 Variant reading omits "those without guardians."
9.231 inflamed by the heat of money: the image is of passion for money through bribes.
9.232 constituents of the realm (prakrti): see 9.292 for the six constituents. In the present
context, however, the reference may be more specifically to the ministers, as explained
by Räghavänand
a and Râmacandra .
9.233 adjudicated and a judgment issued(tïritam cänusistam) : different interpretations are
offered for these two terms. Asahäy a (on NSm Ma 1.56) takes tirita to mean a unani-
mous verdict of the court, and anusista to be the judgment and punishment ordered by
the court. Most commentators of Manu agree with this interpretation. Nandana, how-
ever, cites Kâtyâyan
a (495), according to whom tirita is a summary judgment issued
by the properly authorized official and anusista a judgment based on testimony.
not bring it back again (na tad bhuyo nivartayet): Bühle r translates: "and not annul it."
That, however, ignores bhüyas ("again"). I follow the understanding of most commen-
tators. The meaning appears to be that the king should not retry cases that have already
been settled; this may also refer to matters settled by the former administration in
newly conquered territories.
9.235 Variant reading: "should be punished individually."
9.240 Variant reading: "not brand all the classes."
9.242 to be executed (praväsanam) : the term could also mean exile or banishment. I think the
argument here goes something like this. A Brahmin should be given the middle fine of
500 Panas (if he does it thoughtlessly?) or sent into exile without the confiscation of
property (if done deliberately?). In the case of others, their property is confiscated if
done thoughtlessly (and then exile as in the case of the Brahmin?), and they are exe-
cuted, if they did it deliberately. The contrast between viväsa (exile) and praväsa
(execution) is also found in 8.123 (see the note to this). Bhâruc i and Medhätith i also
interpret praväsa here as vadha ("execution"), and the variant pramapanam ("killing")
in Devannabhatta also supports this meaning.
Additional verse: "When a king inflicts punishment in this manner, he gains merit and
obtains worlds won by good works—that is Manu's decree."
9.247 Variant reading: "the farmers' crops ripen in the prescribed manner."
9.251 Carrying out. . . been acquired: this verse takes us right back to the rajadharma sec-
tion of chapter 7. Manu has clearly embedded his section on legal procedure (vyava-
hära) squarely within this treatment of the duties of a king, which concludes at verse
9.324-
9.252 eradication of thorns (kantakoddharana): see the parallel kantakasodhana ("clearing
thorns") in verse 253. The word "thorns" here is a technical term for every type of
criminal and anti-social person (9.259-60) within the kingdom. Here Manu returns to
the theme of the general duties of the king, after the long disquisition on legal proce-
dure that occupied all of chapter 8 and much of chapter 9.
9.257 bandits of the wild (ätavy a or ätavika) : here terms are used with two different mean-
ings. At a positive level, they refer to tribes inhabiting forest and wild regions. In the
AS such people are used as spies (1.12.23, 13-15)> and the king makes alliances with
their chiefs (1.18.7) and settle such people in royal forest (2.2.5). The second meaning
is negative; such people are viewed as bandits who plunder the country (AS 2.1.36).


--- PAGE 344 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 
333
9.258 fortunetellers (bhadrapreksanika): the reading adopted by the critical edition is based
on the reading of Medhâtithi . Most mss. divide this compound: bhadräs ceksanikaih.
In either case the meaning is not altogether clear. Bühler , following Kullüka , takes
bhadra to be "sanctimonious hypocrites" and the second term to be "fortunetellers."
9.260 non-Äryas wearing Ärya marks: the reference clearly is to low-caste or tribal people
attempting to pass off as Aryas by assuming clothing or other marks normally associa-
ted with Aryas, e.g., the sacrificial cord. For a detailed study of the meaning of non-
Ärya , see Deshpande 1999.
9.266 patrolled by . . . mobile agents: mobile and stationary squads refer to regular police
and army units employed in internal security. Mobile agents work for the secret serv-
ice, which employs besides the mobile agents also agents resident in spy establish-
ments that are stationary. For a study of secret agents, see Scharfe 1993, 204-39.
9.269 suspicious of the source: the meaning of the expression mulapranihita is unclear. I
have taken muía to be the source of their invitation to attend the events listed earlier,
that is, former associates of the thieves and the like.
9.271 implements, or shelter: commentators and translators alike take the compound bhanda-
vakäsadäh
 to mean those who "grant them room for concealing their implements"
(Bühler) . See, however, the parallel expression sasträvakäsadän
 at 9.278, which is in-
terpreted by most to mean those who provide weapons and shelter. The two com-
pounds must be constructed alike. The parallel passage in AS 4.11.9 also include giving
them shelter (vasa).
9.272 provinces: for the meaning of rastra as incorporated states with a fair degree of auto-
nomy, see Scharfe 1993, 124.
9.273 When a man . . . specific to him: commentators explain this as referring especially to
Brahmins who function as priests or obtain gifts. It could also refer to royal officials
who act improperly (see 7.123-4; 9.259).
9.277 two fingers: Näräyana
, Kullüka , and Râghavânand
a take the two to be the thumb and
the index finger, while Nandana takes them to be the index and middle fingers. See
also the cutting of fingers in the case of sexual intimacy at 8.267.
9.278 Variant reading: "the king should execute."
9.279 clean execution (suddhavadha): this is another instance of Manu employing
Arthasästr a terminology. This expression is not found in any other Dharma text. It oc-
curs only in the AS: 4.9.2; 4.10.16; 4.11.2, 15, 26. At AS 4.11.1 we have the expression
citro ghätah, "colorful execution," that is, killing that involves various forms of tor-
ture. The very next sütra, 4.11.2, has the expression suddhavadha, which must, there-
fore, be contrasted with citravadha. A neat and clean execution is probably what is
meant. Several commentators of Manu interpret the expression to mean decapitation,
which is quite probable. At AS 4.11.26 suddhavadha is contrasted with klesadanda,
"painful punishment," which must mean something close to citravadha. See 9.291 n.
9.280 elephants, horses, or chariots: in all likelihood, the reference is to those owned by the
king. A parallel passage in AS 4.11.7 explicitly refers to king's elephants, horses, and
chariots.
9.282 Anyone who drops .. . that filth: for the royal highway (räjamärgä),
 see Scharfe 1993,
159; AS 2.4.1, 4. On the prohibition against throwing rubbish or filth on a royal high-
way, see AS 2.36.26-7.
9.286 For adulterating . . . lowest fine: I have followed the majority of commentators in
taking bhedane with ntantnani, "breaking of gems." The syntax, however, is not very
clear; the obvious way to take it is with dravyänäm
 (so Näräyana)
. But given the con-
text of business transactions, this seems unlikely.


--- PAGE 345 ---
334 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9
9.287 If a man deals . . . middle fine: as Derretí (trans, of Bhäruci , note on 9.287) observes,
this appears to be an arcane rule that has not been well understood. The meaning, as
explained by Medhätithi , appears to be that the man barters commodities that should
be bartered as equal (e.g., one measure of rice for one measure of sesame seeds; see
this principle articulate in 10.94) m an unequal manner either directly or in terms of
price. That is, he buys one commodity at one price and sells the other at a different
price. Bühler , following Näräyan
a and Kulluka, translates: "But the man who behaves
dishonestly to honest (customers) or cheats in his prices." This appears improbable.
9.291 jacks up the price of seed corn (bïjotkrastâ) : the meaning is unclear. Several commen-
tators explain that the man actually pulls up sprouting seed from the fields in order to
sell more corn! Others think that the man gathers up seeds already sown and sells it
again (so Bühler) . I wonder how this was possible. I follow the clear explanations of
Bhäruc i and Näräyana
; such price hikes may have been associated with sowing times
(Näräyana
: bijakäle) when there may be a shortage of seed corn.
executed with mutilation; the term vikrta appears to be a synonym of or a parallel to
cifra and klesa in the AS, all indicating that the execution of the criminal is preceded
by torture and mutilation (see 9.279 n.).
9.293 the time and the purpose: Medhätith i explains that stealing agricultural implements is
more serious during times of cultivation; likewise medicine when someone is sick and
weapons during a time of war. See also 8.324 n.
9.294 Variant reading: "are said to form a kingdom of seven constituents."
9.296 like a tripod: all translators take tridanda to mean "a triple staff," that is, three sticks
tied together; this is an emblem of certain kinds of ascetics. The commentators are not
altogether clear, but Medhätith i at least appears to understand that the simile is based
on the three components of the tridanda supporting each other. This is not the case in a
triple staff with three sticks tied together. What keeps the three together is not each
other but the binding. Manu is cleverly playing with the terms tridanda and vistabdha,
the latter being an old term for the tripod of a Brahmin. He carried his water pot tied to
it, and when the tripod was planted on the ground the pot hung from the middle. When
the tripod is thus standing on the ground, each foot supports the others; if you take off
one, the entire tripod would fall. This is the point of the simile. For a detailed discus-
sion of tridanda and the tripod in the ascetic history of India, see Olivelle 1986-87,1:
42-52.
9.303 The king . . . and Earth: these eight guardian deities of the directions are the gods from
whose particles the king was initially created (see 7.4); the only difference is that Earth
is here substituted for Kubera. The king must, therefore, imitate the activities of these
deities.
9.304-5 four months, eight months: the monsoon rains come during the summer season; ide-
ally the rainy season is depicted as lasting four months. Here, Indra, the god of rain, is
said to rule over these months. The remaining eight months constitute the dry season
when the sun shines and extracts water from the earth.
9.312 In this and. .. in others: clearly, this concluding verse is directly connected with verse
293 and what preceded it. The intervening sections had little to do with the eradication
of thorns. I suspect that they are an interpolation; so also, in all likelihood, the section
on Brahmins that follows (9.313-23).
9.314 They made the fire . . . wane and wax: these are well-known legends recorded in the
MBh concerning great Brahmin sages. Bhrgu cursed Fire to be an omnivore when he
claimed to have the right to take Bhrgu's wife (MBh 1.6; 12.329.43). When the Ocean
refused to come when called, Vadavamukha cursed him to become undrinkable and
made him salty with his sweat (MBh 12.329.48). Because Moon, to whom he had given


--- PAGE 346 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 
335
27 of his daughters in marriage (see 9.129), favored one and neglected the others,
Daksa cursed him to wane and wax (MBh 9.34.40-67, 12.329.45-6).
9.321 Ksatriya from Brahmin: this doctrine is articulated already in the BrU, 1.4.11, which
calls brahma (the priestly power) the womb of the ksatra (the ruling power).
C H A P T E R TEN
10.5 
in the direct order of class (anulomyena): given that the wife belongs to the same class
as the husband, this specification makes little sense within the context of this verse. It
may well be stated here, in the manner oîsûtra texts, so as to govern what is stated in
the verses that follow (6-10), namely the marriage of higher-class men to lower class
wives.
10.8 girl: the term kanya (lit., "virgin") may actually be a shorthand for a girl properly
given in marriage (kanyädäna).
 The reference then would be to sons born from a legal
marriage to these wives and not merely a son born from a liaison: so Govinda and
Kullüka , citing YDh 1.92. Medhätithi , on the other hand, takes kanyä as a mere
synecdoche (upalaksana) for any woman. For a detailed study of the development of
the mixed-caste systems through intermarriage, see Brinkhaus 1978. For a critical
study of mixed castes in the legal texts, see Aktor 1999.
10.13-4 When there . . . mother's defect: these two verses say nothing new and are probably
interpolations. Indeed, I think that the final word of verse 12, joyante varnasamkaräh
("so originate the intermixture of classes"), was meant as a fitting close to the discus-
sion. Also the name Anantara given to a son born from a wife of the next class is dif-
ferent from Sadrsa ("similar") given in verse 6.
10.16-7 From a Sudra . . . a Süta: these verses and this entire second discourse on mixed
classes is suspect. These verses basically repeat what has been stated in verses 11-2.
Further, the term apasada is defined here as sons born in the inverse order, whereas
earlier in verse 10 it is defined as sons born in the direct order. The last phrase here is
elliptical. From a Vaisya man by Ksatriya and Brahmin girls are born Mägadh a and
Vaideha; and from a Ksatriya man by a Brahmin girl is born a Süt a (see verse 11).
10.21-3 From a Vrätya ... Sätvata: many of these are ethnic and tribal names. This passage
appears to be an attempt to account for ethnic groups within the ideology of caste in-
termixture (see 10.43-5). See a similar attempt in GDh 4.21.
10.24 By adultery . . . classes: here we begin yet another discourse on mixed classes, a sec-
tion that is also quite suspect. Note the final päda of this verse: jäyate varnasamkaräh,
which parallels the final päda of the closing verse of the first discourse (10.12).
10.27 by women of their mother's caste . . . higher castes: this half verse is very obscure and
elliptical. The numerous variant readings testify to the attempts by the tradition to
understand it. See Blihler's note and Brinkhaus 1978, 38f for different explanations and
interpretations. Note the interesting use of varna with reference to mixed classes and
even outcastes. A similar usage is found at 10.31.
10.28 As from two . . . excluded men: once again we have an elliptical verse. The meaning
appears to be this. From a woman of two of the three upper classes (that is, from a
Brahmin and a Ksatriya woman), a Brahmin begets a son that is his own self (9.8 n.).
The phrase änantaryät
 svayonyäm is elliptical containing an argument supporting the
above claim. The meaning is that even a Ksatriya woman can be counted as "a woman


--- PAGE 347 ---
336 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 10
of his own class" because of her contiguity (see 10.6). The term bähya to indicate an
outcaste is quite unusual in the early Dharma vocabulary. In Manu, the term is found
only in these sections (10.28, 29, 30,31, 39, 62). It does not occur in any other Dharma
text, except ViDh 16.18 (which is merely a citation ofMDh 10.62), or in the AS.
10.35 By Äyogava . . . these three low-horns: the question here is whether "these" (ete) refers
to the three mentioned previously in verses 32-4, or the three listed in the very next
verse. Bhäruci , Govinda, and Kulluka, and possibly also Medhätith i and Räghavä
-
nanda, opt for the former; this interpretation is followed by Bühle r and Doniger. I fol-
low the latter interpretation, favored by Näräyan
a and Nandana. If we follow the
construction of these verses, we see that the lists contain one kind of woman and sev-
eral kinds of men (32, 35, 37). The mother of children listed in verses 32-4 is listed at
the beginning in verse 32 (äyogave). Further, if we do not take verse 35 as relating to
verse 36, then we have to supply within the latter verse all the mothers, which is ex-
actly what Bühle r (within parenthesis) and Doniger (in a footnote) do, following the
commentators who prefer the first option. Variant reading: "By Ayogava women, who
wear the clothes of the dead."
10.38 Sopâka . . . good people: the term Sopäk a may be a Prakrtic form of the Sanskrit
Svapâk a (10.19,51). The meaning of the expression mûlavyasana is unclear. Bhäruci ,
Medhätithi , Govinda, and Kulluka take it as referring to a public executioner.
Näräyana
, Nandana, and Rämacandr a (who also gives the other meaning) take it to
mean a man who digs for roots. Bühler , following B-R, translates: "who lives by the
occupation of his sire," which appears very unlikely. See also the equally difficult ex-
pression mulakarma at 11.64 n-
10.40 activities: Aktor (1999,272) appears to take the term karma to mean "work," i.e., oc-
cupation. That is clearly implicit. See, however, the use of the same term in the sense
of "what someone normally does" in verse 46. The activities that reveal a non-Äry a
man are listed in verse 58.
10.42 in each succeeding generation: the term yuge here is interpreted by Medhätithi ,
Näräyana
, Räghavänanda
, Nandana, and Rämacandr a as referring to the process of re-
birth; whereas Kulluka takes it literally as referring to world ages. The former is cor-
rect, because in verse 64 the term yugät is used unambiguously as referring to births.
10.43 Variant reading: "by trespassing against Brahmins."
10.44 Pundrakas . . . Daradas: these are clearly ethnic names. Codas and Dravidas were eth-
nic groups of the south (Dravidians). Kämboja s were a group in what is today north-
western Pakistan; Pahlavas (Parthian) = Persians; Yavana = Greeks; Cïn a = Chinese.
10.46 low-born (apasada), delinquent-born (apadhvamsaja): the distinction between these
two categories is not altogether clear. In this verse, the low-born appear to indicate
mixed-caste individuals born in the proper order of classes (higher man and lower
woman). This is also the meaning of the term in verse 10. In verse 17, however, those
born in the inverse order (lower man and higher woman) are designated low-born. The
delinquent-born here appear to indicate precisely such individuals born in the inverse
order.
10.50 well-recognizable (vijnatah): the meaning is that these people should wear certain
kinds of clothes and other marks that w_ould identify their castes. See the punishment
of low-caste men wearing the marks of Aryas at 9.260.
10.51 Apapätras: this is a term used frequently in_the Dharmasutras, especially by Äpas -
tamba (1.3.25; 1.16.30; 1.21.6,17; 2.17.20). Äpastamb a juxtaposes it with abhisasta
("heinous sinner") at 1.3.25, with patita ("one fallen from caste") at 1.21.6, and with
dogs at 1.6.30; 2.17.20. The BDh 2.2.13 and VaDh 20.16, in a very similar passage, also


--- PAGE 348 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 10 
337
juxtapose the term with outcastes; and BDh 1.21.15 with Südras . Äpastamb a (1.21.6)
appears to identify apapätra as people who have committed certain kinds of sins that
make a person sordid (asucikara). It appears that this term in its early usage referred to
certain individuals excluded from society because of some serious lapse. The term fell
into disuse in later Dharma vocabulary; it does not occur in the YDh, ViDh, or NSm;
and in Manu also this is the only verse where it occurs. Bühle r prefers Medhatithi's
interpretation of this word: when an apapätra eats food from someone in a vessel, that
vessel should be thrown away. See also the mention of broken vessels in verses 52 and
54. Another interpretation is that the food should not be placed in vessels that they hold
in their hands but either placed on the ground or held by someone else.
10.57 without the proper complexion (varnäpetam) : all the commentators and translators take
this compound to mean a man who is without or outside the social classes. This makes
little sense, because the question at issue is how to identify a man who looks more or
less like an Arya. I think varna here means color or complexion. That color of skin and
hair was used as an identifier of a Brahmin is evident from the interesting remarks of
the grammarian Patañjali (2nd cent., BCE), who describes a Brähman a as "white in
color, of pure conduct, with hair that is yellowish or reddish brown." See also 9.260 n.
10.62 -without artifice: see 3.257 n. for the other usages of the term aniipaskrtah by Manu. It
clearly refers to anything that is not overly crafted (in cooking, in embellishment, etc.);
and here it means that the man does this with a pure and simple heart, without expec-
tation of any reward.
10.63 Variant reading: "truthfulness, not stealing."
Additional verse after the first half of verse 63 and syntactically connected with it:
"ancestral offerings, hospitality, gift giving, honesty, fathering children by their own
wives, freedom from envy."
10.65 so does a Brahmin the rank of a Sudra: the meaning is not altogether clear. According
to Medhâtithi , the offspring of a Brahmin man from a Südr a woman (i.e., a Pärasava )
will become a pure SDdra in the seventh generation by marrying Südr a women.
10.74 that whose source is the Veda (brahmayonisthâh) : the meaning is quite uncertain.
Govinda and Kullüka : persons devoted to the contemplation of Brahman. Näräyan
a
and Räghavänanda
: persons born from a Brahmin father and mother. Bhäruc i thinks
that it means the same as svakarmany avasthitäh. Nandana offers, in my mind, the best
explanation, taking brahmayoni as a Bahuvrlhi compound ("that whose source is the
Veda") referring to dharma (see 2.25). So the compound refers to a man who is firmly
established in the Law.
10.83 dependence on others (parâdhînam) : commentators point to the dependence on plows
and animals. This may, however, refer to the condition of a tenant farmer. If a Brahmin
or a Ksatriya has fallen on hard times, it is unlikely that he has his own farm to culti-
vate.
10.88 bees-wax: the term madhu simply means honey, but given that honey (ksaudrà) is al-
ready mentioned, commentators interpret this to mean madhucchista or bees-wax.
Although the interpretation is labored, it may be correct; in a parallel passage, the YDh
3.37, in fact, lists bees-wax (madhucchista) right next to honey.
10.89 Additional verse giving further items: "tin, lead, copper, all kinds of metal articles,
tails, skin, bones, fat, tendons, and concrete bile."
10.90 pure (suddhän) : most commentators take this to mean unadulterated with other kinds
of seeds or refuse. Nandana, however, takes it to mean white sesame seeds, black ones
being implicitly prohibited.
10.94 Variant reading: "but never salt for sesame seeds."


--- PAGE 349 ---
338 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 10
10.103 like fire and water: water (specifically flowing water in rivers) and fire are viewed as
pure by definition. See 9.318 where fire is said to be undefiled by burning a corpse.
The VaDh 28.1 cites a proverb: "A woman is not polluted by a lover, a Brahmin by
vedic rites, water by urine and feces, and fire by the act of burning." Variant reading;
"for they are like fire and the sun."
10.105-8 Ajlgarta . .. hand of a Cándala: the story of Ajlgarta is told in the AB 7.13-6, al-
though there the father did not intend to eat the son. The plot must have changed over
time. The story of Vâmadev a eating dog's meat is told in the MBh 13.94-5. The story
of Bharadvaja is told in Sayana's commentary on $^6.45.31. Visvamitra's story is the
most famous and is told in the MBh 12.139.
10.116 fortitude: the meaning of the term dhrtih within the context of livelihood is unclear.
Commentators take it to mean being content with little; but that is hardly a way to ob-
tain a livelihood.
10.117 A Brahmin ... small interest: this appears to be a versification of VaDh 2.40, 43.
10.119 Variant reading: "he must not turn back in battle."
10.122 -when he has the name "Brahmin" attached to him (jätabrähmanasabdasya)
: the
meaning appears to be that when a Sudra serves a Brahmin, that name attaches to him;
e.g., "he is a Brahmin's servant." By some extension of the name, he can call himself a
Brahmin!
10.124 They: the antecedent of tail} is not certain, but it must refer to Brahmins who employ
Südras .
10.126 he is not prohibited . . . the Law (na dharmä t pratisedhanam): commentators explain
that Südra s are not prohibited from doing some acts prescribed by Law, such as bath-
ing, performing the five great sacrifices, and the like.
CHAPTER E L E V E N
11.1-2 A man seeking: Manu ended the last chapter saying: "Next, I will explain the
splendid rules pertaining to penance." Instead of penance, however, he spends 43
verses on unrelated topics, turning to the subject of penance only in verse 44.1 believe
that the first 43 verses are interpolations. Bhâruc i himself saw the problem. He begins
his commentary on Chapter 11 with the objection that after promising to deal with
penance we should have expected Manu to begin this chapter with verse 44. Bhâruci' s
defense of Manu is rather lame.
11.3 
sacrificial arena (vedi): technically this is the area measured out and consecrated for a
vedic sacrifice and containing the three vedic fires. The meaning appears to be that if
these individuals come to beg while a sacrifice is taking place, they should be given
food and a sacrificial fee, as if they were priests.
11.5 
Additional verse: "Aged parents, a virtuous wife, a son, and a pupil, Manu has pro-
claimed, should be supported even if they have committed a hundred transgressions."
The vulgate gives here the following as verse 6, which is eliminated in the critical edi-
tion: "A man should give wealth to Brahmins who know the Veda and live in solitude
according to his ability; he will thus attain heaven after death."
11.8 
even though . . . before: the critical edition (see note there) has adopted the negative
form apîtasornapûrvah. Most commentators accept the positive form, followed by
Bühle r and Doniger. The translation would then be: "though he may have drunk Soma
before." The commentators explain that the prohibition affects only Soma sacrifices


--- PAGE 350 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 
339
undertaken voluntarily and not the very first one, which is prescribed (Medhätithi : ane-
na prathamayajnasyâvasyakartavyatâm
 darsayati). Under the positive interpretation,
the final api ("even though") does not make much sense. One should have then expect-
ed a word such as cet ("if): the Soma sacrifice does not yield fruit if someone has
drunk Soma before. I think the negative is the original. The rule prohibits even a man
who has not drunk Soma before from performing a Soma sacrifice if he does not have
sufficient resources to maintain his family. A fortiori, of course, a man who has already
drunk Soma is forbidden to perform it also. My interpretation follows Bhäruci .
11.11-2 While a righteous ... complete the sacrifice: 
opinion is divided over who actually
takes the property from the Vaisya. Medhätithi , Govinda, and Kullüka , following the
syntax, say that it is the sacrificer himself. Nârâyana
, Nandana, and Rämacandra , how-
ever, taking a cue from the mention of the king, think that it is the king who should
confiscate the property. The term äharet (literally, "take") is also ambiguous; it can
mean either steal or take (perhaps by force). Medhätith i thinks that there is no restric-
tion as to the method of appropriation: it could be begged, stolen, or taken by force.
Kullüka : by theft or force. Govinda: by theft. Verse 17 appears to imply theft. For a
justification of such an act, see 1.100-1.
11.15 a man who is always a taker: Bharuci cites an opinion that takes âdânanitya
 as a tech-
nical term referring to a money lender.
11.16 the rule . . . next day (asvastanavidhäna) : the meaning is that he should take only suffi-
cient food to last just that day. This rule is often associated with certain types of ascet-
ics: see 4.7.
11.19 both: that is, the man from whom he takes and the man to whom he gives.
11.21 such a man: that is, the man referred in verses 16-7. This reference makes the authenti-
city of the intervening verses suspect.
11.23 one-sixth of his merits: this is viewed as the "tax" the king obtains from him, as from
other religious professionals, for providing protection. On the rates of taxation, see
7.127-39; on the king obtaining one-sixth of the merits of his subjects by protecting
them, see 8.304-5.
11.24 Variant reading: "Under no circumstances should a man beg money from a Sudra."
11.27 turn of the year: the new year begins on the first day of the bright fortnight of Caitra
(March-April).
11.28 Following the NT reading, Bühle r translates: "that is the opinion (of the sages)."
11.33 Additional verse: "For, doing that in accordance with the scriptural provisions, he ob-
tains the highest state. That is the most fierce of all weapons; it cannot be averted by
enemies."
11.40 Additional verse: "When the food is inadequate, it burns up the realm; when the ritual
formulas are inadequate, it burns up the officiating priests; and when the sacrificial
fees are inadequate, it burns up the man consecrated for the sacrifice—there is no
enemy equal to the sacrifice."
11.41 killing a hero (vïrahâ) : inGDh 15.6 and VaDh 1.18 a man who extinguishes his sacred
fires is called simply "a killer of a hero" (vïrahâ). The meaning clearly is that by extin-
guishing the fire he has killed a hero, fire being the hero among the gods. This is
spelled out in the TS 1.5.2: "Clearly, he is a slayer of the hero of gods who extinguishes
the fire." Manu, however, says that extinguishing the fire is equal to the killing of a
hero. Within this context, the hero may not be the fire itself but some other man. Most
commentators take it to be the son.
11.47 When a twice-born . . . that penance: this appears to be an introduction verses 48-53,
which deal with evil diseases and deformities believed to be caused by either fate or by


--- PAGE 351 ---
340 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11
sins committed in a past life. Such "sins" are different from the sins actually commit-
ted that were the subject of verses 45-6.
Additional verse giving a popular etymology of präyascitta, ("penance"): "präyas is
said to be ascetic toil, and citta is called the firm decision. Tradition says that
präyascitta consists of ascetic toil and a firm decision." The decision probably refers to
the resolution not to commit that sin again.
11.51 steals speech: this appears to be an early indictment of plagiarism. It is interpreted as
plagiarism by Nârâyana
, while Râghavânand
a appears to say that the man actually
writes his name as the author of a book authored by someone else. Râmacandr a takes it
to mean a man who steals books. BUhler says that Govinda and Kullük a interpret this
to mean a man who steals the Veda by eavesdropping on someone reciting it (see
2.116), but the editions of these two commentators do not contain a commentary on this
verse.
Additional verse given as 52 in Blihler's translation but omitted in the critical edition:
"A man who steals a lamp becomes blind; and a man who extinguishes one becomes
one-eyed. By causing injury, a man becomes frequently sick; and by not causing in-
jury, a man becomes free from sickness."
11.53 Variant reading: "as a result of the special property of their past deeds."
11.55 drinking liquor, stealing: it appears that drinking liquor becomes a grievous sin only
when done by Brahmins: see GDh 2.20. Stealing is also a grievous sin when it in-
volves the gold of Brahmins: see 11.57,100.
11.56 A lie concerning one's superiority: that is, falsely claiming a superior status either by
birth or with respect to other attributes such as learning and virtue.
11.57 killing a friend: the term vadha can mean both killing and causing physical harm (see
8.320 n.). As in verse 11.89,1 think the seriousness of the crime argues for taking the
term as killing.
unfit food or forbidden food: the compound garhitänädya,
 as Nârâyan
a points out,
must refer to the two well-known categories of food that should not be eaten: abhojya
("unfit food") and abhaksya ("forbidden food"): see 4.205 f., 5.4 f., 5.5 n., and Olivelle
2OO2a.
11.62 breaking the vow (vratalopanam): Medhâtith i and Nârâyan
a take this to mean the
breaking of any vow undertaken. Given the seriousness of the offense, however, 1
think Govinda, Kullüka , and Râghavânand
a are correct in taking this to be the breaking
of the vow of chastity by a vedic student. This is confirmed by its inclusion in the sec-
tion on penances for these sins (11.119 f.).
11.64 root-witchcraft: the meaning of expression mûlakarma is quite unclear. The commen-
tators are unanimous in taking it to mean some kind of witchcraft by which another
person is brought under one's power (vasïkarana): see 9.290 where the meaning is
clearly some form of witchcraft. In the Kama Sutra (4.1.9) a class of women is
designated as mülakärikä,
 and at 6.2.56 a reference is made to mûlakarma. The
reference appears to be to some form of magic potion made with roots to win the love
of a woman; this is the interpretation of the commentator Yasodhara. See also AV
4.28.6 where mülakrt ("root-cutter") is in apposition to krtyäkrt ("witchcraft-maker").
This is also the meaning ascribed to the expression in B-R.
11.66 acting like a woman (strainyam): all the NT mss. and editions read steyain ("stealing").
living a corrupt life; engaging in vices (kausïlya m vyasanakriyâ) : all the editions, in-
cluding Jolly's read kausilavyasya ca kriyä. Blihler translates this as "practicing (the
arts of) dancing and singing."
11.68 cause exclusion from caste (jâtibhramsakaram) : it is unclear how exactly this differs


--- PAGE 352 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter II 
341
from "falling from caste" (pataka). Clearly it is a lesser sin than the latter. The com-
mentators offer no help. It is possible that this sin did not result in the formal excom-
munication of the sinner (see 11.183-6); it may have resulted merely in social
ostracism within the caste.
11.76 one hundred leagues: a yojana is a distance of approximately 9 miles or 14.5 kilo-
meters. The total distance he walks comes to about 900 miles.
11.78 walk . . . Sarasvatt: Närayan a says that the penitent starts from Prabhasa and goes up
along the river bank to Plaksasravana.
11.81 Variant reading: "by fighting three times in defense of a Brahmin."
11.82 Thus . . . twelfth year: this verse is directly connected with verse 73 and appears to
ignore verses 74-81, casting doubt on their authenticity.
11.83 by proclaiming . . . horse sacrifice: "gods of earth" are Brahmins, and "gods of men"
are kings or, more generally, Ksatriyas. Medhâtithi , Govinda, Kulluka, and
Räghavänand
a think that the gathering is for the purpose of a horse sacrifice.
11.86 for their purification (tesâ m pävanäya)
: Näräyana
, Govinda, and Kulluka take "their"
as referring to the sinners. The syntax of the verse, however, suggests rather that the
antecedent is "sins." This verse appears to be a general statement about the efficacy of
penances for various sins determined by an assembly (parisad) of Brahmins: see
12.108-12.
11.88 One must. . . menstrual period: the implicit understanding here is that the fetus is that
of a Brahmin (see GDh 22.13). The argument is that a fetus without developed sexual
organs will turn out to be a male. The VaDh 20.24 says that the fetus can be turned into
a male through the power of pre-natal rites such as the pumsavana ("quickening a male
child"). Aborting such a fetus, therefore, is equivalent to murdering a Brahmin (always
assumed to be male, because the murder of a female does not carry the same sanction).
A Ksatriya or a Vaisya, when they have been consecrated for a sacrifice (dlksita) is
considered a Brahmin at least in some ritual traditions: see ÄpSr (10.11.5-6): brah-
mano va esa ¡ayate yo dîksate; tasmäd räjanyavaisyäv
 api brähmana ity evävedayati.
"A man who is consecrated for a sacrifice is indeed born from the Veda. Therefore,
even a Ksatriya or a Vaisya, it has been taught, is a Brahmin." The VaDh 20.34 speci-
fies that he is engaged in performing a Soma sacrifice. A woman soon after her men-
struation is called by the technical term âtreyï,
 which is given an interesting
etymological spin in VaDh 20.35-6. The woman is in her fertile period (3.46-50) and
killing her is tantamount to killing a future Brahmin. Here there is the added possibility
that the woman is pregnant. For a detailed study of this provision, see Jamison 1991,
213-23; Wezler 1994.
11.93 banner: in BDh 1.18.18 the banner is specified as suradhvaja, literally "liquor banner."
Commentators on Manu specify a drinking cup. It may well have been that liquor tav-
erns in ancient India advertised themselves with a special banner. See 9.237.
11.94 filth: Manu plays on the word mala, which can mean any filthy or putrid substance
(here fermentation being equated with putrefaction) and also the filth of sin (see 11.72,
102,107 for the latter meaning).
11.95 It should . . . so are all: the issue here appears to be whether all kinds of liquor are for-
bidden or only certain kinds. Liquor made from grain was explicitly forbidden in verse
94; this verse extends that prohibition to all three kinds. The VaDh 20.19 appears to
single out liquor called sura as particularly pernicious and prescribes a lighter penance
for drinking non-sura kinds of liquor (see next note). Commentators are divided about
the meaning of madhvl, the third type of liquor. Some take it as derived from honey (a
kind of mead), whereas others think that it is made from the flowers of the Madhuka
tree (see next note).


--- PAGE 353 ---
342 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11
11.96 Intoxicants, liquor, spirits: there appears to be a distinction made here between liquor
(sura) and intoxicant (madyd). The latter has probably a broader meaning, whereas
sura is more specific and viewed as more pernicious (see 11.95 n-)- KullOka cites a
verse from Pulastya that lists eleven types of rnadya, and calls the twelfth, sura, the
worst kind of intoxicant. Kullük a himself thinks that the three kinds listed in verse 95
are sura, whereas the other nine kinds are madya. The meaning of "spirit" (äsava, lit-
erally, pressing or distillation) is unclear; commentators call it a variety of madya;
given its name, it may refer to some type of wine or distilled liquor.
11.97 blabber vedic texts (vaidikam udâharet) : most commentators take this to mean that an
intoxicated Brahmin may not be able to pronounce vedic texts correctly or may recite
them when he is impure. I think Nandana is correct in thinking that an intoxicated
Brahmin would recite the Veda in the presence of people who are forbidden to hear it.
11.98 brahman: the term is used with a double entendre here. On the one hand, brahman is
the Veda residing in the Brahmin's memory; on the other hand and closely related to
the first meaning, it is his Brahmanical nature (brahmanya) that makes him a Brahmin
(see 1.93 n.).
11.100-01 A Brahmin . . . ascetic toil: there is something amiss in these two verses. The king
takes the pestle, which has not been introduced in the first verse. Traditionally, the
thief was supposed to take the pestle with him (see 8.315). Then, in the last half verse,
the thief is purified by being killed. Given that the thief is a Brahmin, we must assume
that the king kills him. But this would go against the general prohibition of the death
penalty in the case of Brahmins. Finally, a Brahmin is said to be freed from the sin by
ascetic toil alone. The verses are garbled; I assume that sections of these verses have
been taken from different sources and condensed here. See the parallel at 8.314-5. For
purification of sins through the death of the sinner, see Wezler 1995.
11.104 metal cylinder: the meaning of the term siïrmî is not altogether clear. It is certainly a
cylindrical object made of metal. Most commentators take it to be a metal image of a
woman (strlprakrti or pratimâ). At ÄpDh 1.28.15, however, the criminal is said to enter
it (pravisya), which points to something, such as a column, that is hollow. Only
Nandana identifies it as a column (sthünä).
 The recent study by Falk (2001) has cast
much light on the history of the term sûrmï. Falk demonstrates that originally the term
referred to a clay cylinder with openings at both ends for casting metal, that is, a primi-
tive furnace. Such a cylinder was about the size of a human being; it could be both em-
braced and entered. The obsolescence of this kind of metal casting and the subsequent
loss of the original meaning may have changed the term's meaning to that of a female
figure, especially within the context of this penance for sexual misconduct.
11.109 barley gruel: the statement yavän pibet means literally "he should drink barley."
Medhätith i observes that a secondary meaning must be intended, because it is not pos-
sible to drink barley seeds. Some take it to mean drinking barley mixed with water.
Others think "barley" is used figuratively to indicate a product made with barley,
namely, barley gruel. Medhätith i and most commentators prefer the latter.
11.no During two months: although the connection between this and the preceding verse is
not altogether clear, it appears that the two months mentioned here are in addition to
the one month mentioned in the previous verse. Thus, the entire penance lasts for three
months, as made clear in verse 116.
11.111 follow those cows: much is implied here. The vow consists of attending to cows during
three months. During the day the man follows the cows into the pasture or the forest;
brings them back to the cow-pen in the evening; attends to all their needs; and sits in
the cow-pen by their side during the night. For a literary description of this observance,
see Kälidäsa' s Raghuvainsa (1.88-95; 2.1-75). On the ascetic practice of standing
during the day and remaining seated at night, see 6.22 n.


--- PAGE 354 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 
343
11.112 free from rancor (vltamatsarah): the meaning of matsara in this context is unclear.
Narayana glosses with krodha ("anger"), Medhätith i with lobha ("greed"), and
KullDka with anudvignahrdayah ("with an unagitated heart"). Medhätith i further
explains that the term is merely illustrative; the man should free his mind from faults
such as passion.
11.113 Variant reading: "he should free her using every means."
11.119 cooked oblation: the procedure for cooked oblations (päkayajna) is given at the very
beginning of most Grhyasütras : see SänkhGr 1.1.
11.120-2 After offering . . . and Fire: "Teacher" is an epithet of Brhaspati, the teacher of the
gods, also identified with the planet Jupiter. See the parallel passage in GDh 25.1-2:
"So, they ask: "Into how many does a student who has broken his vow of chastity en-
ter?"—"Into the Maruts with his breaths; into Indra with his strength; into Brhaspati
with the splendor of his vedic learning; and into just the Fire with everything else."
11.127 virtuous (vrttasthe): commentators explain vrtta as the specific duties, especially the
proper means of livelihood, of each _class. Bühler , following Näräyan
a and Kullüka ,
takes the adjective as qualifying the Südra . This is unlikely, both because the term oc-
curs in the same päda as the Vaisya (pädas normally form syntactic units) and because
the same expression is used with clear reference to a Vaisya in verse 130. Medhätithi ,
Räghavänanda
, and Rämacandr a (possibly also Nandana) take it as qualifying all three
classes.
11.128 Variant reading: "he should give one thousand cows and a bull after performing the
vow properly."
11.134 castrate (sandha): the same provision occurs at GDh 22.23. Most commentators gloss
with napumsaka (9.79 n.). The term, however, is often distinguished from klfba and re-
fers specifically to an eunuch. Medhätith i gives four kinds of sandha: aretas (one who
is without seed), vätaretas (one who has windy seed, 9.79 n.), apravrttendriya (Jha:
one without an erection; could it mean one whose sexual organs are not fully devel-
oped?), and ubhayavyanjana (one with male and female sexual organs). Räghavänand
a
gives a different four: krtrima (artificially castrated), akrttima (natural, i.e., born with-
out the sexual organs), ubhayavyanjana (one with male and female sexual organs), and
sadrsendriya (one with organs that only resemble?). All the commentators appear to
take this provision as referring to humans. Haradatta, commenting on GDh 22.23,
however, cites an opinion according to which the reference is to castrated animals.
Coming, as it does, right in the middle of a list of animals, in this verse the term cer-
tainly could refer to a castrated ox.
11.139 Additional verse: "When someone kills unintentionally a woman belonging to one of
the three classes in the proper order [i.e., Brahmin, Ksatriya, or Vaisya], he should per-
form the observance for killing a Südr a irrespective of her class."
11.147 When someone .. . settled rule: commentators take Vârun ï to include liquor made from
honey (ntädhvi) and molasses (gaudi) and to exclude that made from grain: see 11.95
n., 96 n.). Bühle r (see his long note to this verse) thinks that the term is another name
for sura. Most commentators (except Medhätithi , Bhäruci , and Nandana) take the sec-
ond half of the verse to mean that even if someone drinks liquor intentionally a pen-
ance resulting in death should not be prescribed (see Wezler 1995). Bühler' s translation
follows this interpretation, although in his note he correctly disagrees with it. See the
very similar use of anirdesya and pranantika in the GDh 20.15 and 21.7 (the latter pas-
sage ascribing the view to Manu).
11.153 forbidden meat (mamsarn abhaksyam ca): most commentators and all translators take
abhaksyam ("forbidden") as qualifying meat. Only Räghavänand
a and, perhaps,
Rämacandr a take abhaksyam as a separate category, referring to forbidden foods (see
5.5 n.). The presence of ca ("and") after abhaksyam supports the view that we are


--- PAGE 355 ---
344 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11
dealing with two items here. Further, at 5.31 f. Manu condemns the eating of any kind
of meat. The parallel phrase in pada-a, on the other hand, supports taking abhaksyam
as qualifying mämsam; so also does the listing of forbidden animals in verses 155-6.
Under the latter interpretation, the ca would join the two phrases with the verbs
bhuktva andjagdhvä, even though it comes at the end of the phrase rather than after
the first word.
11.154 even though they may be pure (medhyani): that is, even though the substances in their
natural state may be fit for eating. Commentators explain medhyäni as apratisiddhäni
("not explicitly forbidden"). Nandana reads amedliyani, positing the sandhi
pitväinedhyäni.
 The translation would then be: "When a twice-born drinks anything
turned sour, pungent decoctions, or even impure substances...."
until it has been excreted: the GDh 23.23and VaDIt 23.30 use the term nispurisïbhâva
for the total evacuation of the bowels. According to GDh 23.24, this happens in three
days, whereas the VaDh implies seven days.
11.166 five products of the cow: milk, curd, ghee, urine, and dung.
11.172 If he has sex . . . lunar penance: the first half-verse is somewhat confusing. The next
verse makes it clear that we are dealing with three women closely related to a man; if
we take bhaginïm ("sister") as a separate category, there will be four. The likely expla-
nation is that "sister" here is used with reference to the first cousin, a common practice
in India; and this term is qualified by both paitrsvaseylm and mätur svasrlyam. The
next verse further shows that the context is marriage and not just a sexual encounter.
These two verses appear to be directed at cross-cousin marriages common in southern
India. For the meaning "close relative" for âpta, see 2.109; 5-ioi; 9.290. The difficulty
of the term may have been responsible for the variant tanayäm found in vulgate
editions and many mss.
11.174 If someone . . . on water: the sandhi of purusa udakyäyäm
 is ambiguous. It could be
the locative puruse or the nominative purusah. Only Bhäruc i prefers the former; all
other commentators (and translators) take it to be a nominative. I have followed
Bhäruci , because the context calls for illegitimate individuals and locations. Further,
the very next verse also mentions homosexual intercourse. If we follow the others, the
translation would be: "If a man ejaculates his semen in non-human females, in a men-
struating woman...." Most also take jale to mean in water. Bhäruc i takes this to mean
"on water," that is, in a boat or ship. I think Bhäruc i is right; in the very next verse the
connection between an ox cart and water clearly indicates that we are dealing with ve-
hicles. Commentators explain that this rule applies only to sex with female animals
other than cows, because sex with a cow is considered equal to violating an elder's bed
(gurutalpa): see GDh 22.36.
11.177 observance: adultery by a man is counted among the secondary sins causing loss of
caste (upapataka) in 11.60. The penance for such sins is given in 11.118: either the lunar
penance (11.217) or the cow-vow described in 11.109-17. For adultery as a crime, see
8.332-59.
11.178 Additional verse: "When wives of Brahmins, Ksatriyas, or Vaisyas have sex with a
Südra , they are purified if they do not bear any children, not otherwise."
11.180 / have . . .four kinds of sinners: Nandana and Râmacandr a take "four" as referring to
the four social classes. Govinda and Kulluka take the four to be the four kinds of sin-
ners listed immediately before: those guilty of killing, eating forbidden food, stealing,
and sexual offenses. This, however, excludes the major categories of sins that were
dealt with in the early sections of this chapter. If my hypothesis that the previous four
sections (11.127-79: which I have called "Excursus") are interpolations is right (see
Introduction, p. 59-60), then the four sinners refer to the categories mentioned in
11-55-71- The problem is how we come up with four. The grievous and secondary sins


--- PAGE 356 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 
345
causing loss of caste (mahäpätaka
 and upapataka) make two. I think the third is sins
that cause exclusion from caste (jätibhramsakara: 11.68). Three other sins are
enumerated in 11.69-71; but I think Manu thinks of these three as a single large
category, because when dealing with the penances for them he deals with them
together in a single verse (11.126).
11.181 When someone ... an outcaste: the syntax of this verse is not straightforward. Bhäruci ,
Medhätithi , Kullüka , Râghavânanda
, and Rämacandr a explain that one becomes an
outcaste when one associates with an outcaste for one year by using the same vehicle
or seat or by eating with him; if he establishes ritual or marriage connections, on the
other hand, he falls immediately. This is the view expressed also in ViDh 35.3-5. To
arrive at this meaning, one would have to syntactically connect na tu of pada-d with
pada-c; and further ignore the unnatural position of na tu at the end of the phrase
rather than at the beginning. Scharfe (1993, 44-6) rightly objects to this interpretation.
He takes the ablatives in the second half-verse to be connected with patati ("he falls"),
indicating the activities that he is barred from. Scharfe offers the following translation:
"A person having dealings with an outcast within a year loses the right to offer sacrifi-
ces [for others], teach the Veda, and enter into marital alliances, but not the right to
ride, sit, or eat [with others]." There are, however, several problems with Schärfe' s
translation. First, when the ablative is used with patati, the word in the ablative always
indicates the state from which he falls rather than some specific activity: MDh 10.97
patati jätitah ("falls from castes"); MBh 13.131.24-5 patati brahmayonitah ("falls from
the Brahmin birth"). I have found no example in the Dharma literature where patati is
used with an ablative in the way Scharfe assumes here. Second, Scharfe assumes that it
is permissible for people to associate with an outcaste in ordinary social dealings, such
as traveling in the same vehicle and sitting and eating together. But such interactions
are explicitly forbidden a few verses later at 11.185.
I think Näräyana
, Govinda, and Nandana are correct in reading the verse the way it
is written. A man falls within a year if he continues to maintain ritual or matrimonial
relations with a fallen man, but not if he maintains only casual contact. This interpre-
tation is supported by the context in which this verse is cited in VaDh 1.20-2. In sufras
20-1, Vasistha lists the five mahäpätakas,
 the last of which he describes as:
"associating with outcastes either through vedic instruction or through marriage"
(patitasamyogah brâhmena va yaunena vä). In the next sutra he cites this verse in
support of his position. Clearly, the words yäjanädhyäpanäd
 yaunät of the verse must
relate to and have the same meaning as brâhmena va yaunena va of the previous sutra.
For both Vasistha and, in his eyes, this proverbial saying, only connections of a serious
nature with an outcaste makes a man an outcaste, not ordinary day-to-day contact.
It appears that the author of ViDh was responsible for the new interpretation. It may
well be, as Scharfe notes, that customs had changed and that serious connections with
an outcaste was thought to bring about immediate exclusion from caste. The ViDh,
which appears to be a commentary on this verse, had the freedom to say exactly what
he wanted in his sufras. The commentators of the verse, however, had a more difficult
time, because the syntax of the verse clearly did not support such an interpretation.
11.183 Variant reading: "together with his relatives by marriage outside the village."
11.184 A slave woman: the term dasTmay refer simply to a Südr a woman: see 9.179 n.
Variant reading: "A slave woman should then (or always) overturn a pot filled with
water, as for a dead man."
11.190 No one . . . cleansed: this verse appears to conclude Manu's discussion of penance.
The excursus on miscellaneous matters relating to penance (verses 191-247) appears to
be an interpolation. Verse 208 is a repetition of 4.168. Indeed, the very first verse of
this excursus (verse 191) appears to be a commentary listing exceptions to the provi-
sions of verse 190.


--- PAGE 357 ---
346 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11
11.197 made holy by the cows: the verse is elliptical. The place is made holy only if the cows
actually eat the grass given by the penitent. The acceptance of the grass by the cows is
viewed as a sign that the man has freed himself from his sin.
11.199 misused: the term viplävya has a very broad meaning. Most commentators take it to
mean that the man has divulged the Veda to an inappropriate person. Medhätith i gives
several possibilities: reciting the Veda at a time when recitation is forbidden (see
4.ioif), interfering with someone who is properly reciting it, and reciting the Veda
uninvited for monetary gain.
11.203 without water or in water: "without water" means that the man did not have water with
him to perform the normal purification after voiding urine or excrement; and "in wa-
ter" means that he voided it into water.
11.205Hum, you (humkara, tvamkära) : it appears that "Hum" was an exclamation or curse
hurled at someone in anger. When addressing a superior one should not use the infor-
mal singular tvam but an honorific term such as bhavän or the plural yuyam (yusmad)
much like the tu/vous of French and other Romance languages.
11.208 Variant reading: "As many particles of dust the blood lumps together on earth."
11.213 Subsisting . . . one day: commentators point out two procedures. The man may subsist
on the listed substances during one day and fast the next; or he may subsist on one of
the six substance for a day during six days and fast on the seventh.
11.217-8 He should decrease ... bright fortnight: 
the standard lunar penance begins on the
full-moon day, when the penitent eats fourteen mouthfuls. He decreases the food by
one mouthful a day, fasting completely on the new moon day. The intake of food is
similarly increased by one mouthful a day during the fortnight of the waxing moon.
Here the month is shaped with the middle narrow (fasting on the new moon) and the
two ends are broad (fourteen mouthfuls at the beginning and the end). The alternate
procedure with the middle broad and ends lean (like a barley corn) begins on the new-
moon day with a total fast; the quantity of food is increased by one mouthful a day dur-
ing the first fortnight until the full moon, and then decreased during the second
fortnight. For a detailed description, see BDh 3.8.
11.226 purificatory texts: commentators identify these variously as the Aghamarsana, the
Pâvamân
l verses, the Purusa hymn, the Asyavâmlya , and the like (see App. III.2).
Clearly the term referred in general to vedic texts viewed as particularly purifying.
11.231 Variant reading: "He should never do so again."
11.234 If someone's mind... assuaged: the meaning is somewhat unclear. The commentators,
rightly I think, explain that if after someone has performed a penance for a particular
sin, he still has a heavy heart, he may continue to perform the same penance until his
mind is at ease.
11.238 Solely by . . . effective: the term vidyä can refer to any type of knowledge or learning;
but in this context, I think it must refer to charms or spells that are effective against
sicknesses, snakes, and the like. Medhätith i glosses bhütavisesädivisayä,
 which may
refer to knowledge of either elements (so Jha) or various ghosts and spirits. The ChU
(7.1.2) lists bhutavidya and sarpavidyä in a list of sciences. Medhätith i explains "divine
conditions" as the yogic powers to become very small and the like. Others take it to
mean becoming like the gods or reaching the world of various gods. I think Medhätith i
is on the right track; all these items refer to various medicines, spells, and the like em-
ployed in ritual settings. The point of the verse is that without tapas these means can-
not be properly acquired. The term prasidhyanti can mean "become effective" (so
Näräyan
a and Nandana) and "acquired" (other commentators and Bühler) . In the very
next verse (239) sâdhyam is used with reference to accomplishment. I think here also


--- PAGE 358 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 
347
the meaning must be that these means become effective, that is, accomplish the objec-
tive, only when those who employ them perform the appropriate austerities.
11.245 Additional verse: "Chastity, ascetic toil, burnt offering, eating a little pure food at the
proper time, and freedom from passion, hatred, and greed—the Self-existent One has
proclaimed these to be ascetic toil."
11.247 The vulgate editions and most manuscripts add here a verse, which is 248 in BUhler's
translation: "Thus I have described to you above penances for sins in accordance with
the rules. Listen next to the penances for secret sins." This verse is omitted in the criti-
cal edition.
11.2560 reprehensible act (aprasastam): most commentators take this as referring to voiding
urine or excrement in water. Medhâtithi , Bhâruci , and Govinda, correctly I think, take
it to mean sexual intercourse. This may be carried out in water or on water, i.e., in a
boat. See 11.174 n. and 11.175.
11.265 primary Yajus formulas: according to Bharuci, these are the formulas found in the
Yajurveda Samhita and not those given within the Brähmanas ; according to Medhâtith i
and Govinda, the "chief ones" (mukhyani). The alternate reading, supported by most
commentators and mss., is anyäni: "Yajus formulas that are different (from the Re)."
11.266 tri-syllabic Veda: that is, the syllable OM, which consists of the phonemes "a," "u,"
and "m." But see the different explanation in the additional half-verse below.
Additional verse: "I have described to you above all the set rules with regard to pen-
ance. Listen now to the rules of action that secure the supreme good" (cf. 12.82).
Two additional half-verses: "Next, I will describe the highest rules relating to cyclical
existence." And: "By taking the Brähmana s and the Kalpas separately, the Veda is
called by tradition threefold."
CHAPTER TWELVE
12.4 
One should . . . by the mind: the genitive dehinah has been understood differently by
commentators. Govinda and Kullüka , and following them Bühler , take it as an adjec-
tive qualifying tasya, just like the other genitives in the sentence. The meaning then is
that action is "connected to the body." The term dehin as meaning "he who possesses a
body," i.e., the embodied self, is so ingrained the Samkhya philosophical tradition
within which Manu operates, that it is unlikely to have a different meaning here; we
find the term used with this meaning at 12.13. Further, in the previous verse only one
kind of action is connected with deha, the other two are connected with speech and
mind. The confusion is created by the numerous genitives in the sentence with some-
what different syntactical functions. "Three kinds": highest, middling, and lowest;
"three bases": mind, speech, and body (although, Medhâtith i inverts these two lists);
"ten characteristics" are the three kinds of mental action, the four kinds of verbal ac-
tion, and the three kinds of bodily action listed in 5-7.
12.8 
Additional verse: "A man should abandon the path of ten actions—three kinds per-
formed with the body, four with speech, and three with the mind."
12.10 The rod of speech . . . triple-rodded: the critical edition has adopted the reading ni-
yatäh in place of the vulgate nihitah. If we follow the latter, the translation would be:
"a man in whose intellect these are firmly fixed." The rods then would have a positive
significance. But in the very next verse (12.11), rod is viewed as something that should
not be used, giving it a negative meaning; the same negative meaning is apparent in the
three verses added in several mss. I think this is correct; rod means the use of mental,


--- PAGE 359 ---
348 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 12
verbal, and physical actions to harm other creatures. "Triple-rodded" (tridandin), or
triple-staffed, is an allusion to a Brahmanical renouncer who carries a triple-staff or a
tripod (see 9.296 n.). If we take the three rods as tied together (restrained) to form the
triple-rod (or triple-staff), then we can see how niyata (restrained, controlled) makes
sense within this simile. This verse also occurs in ascetic literature and is probably bor-
rowed by Manu from such a source. Variant reading: "the rod of mind, and the rod of
body."
Two additional verses: "When they are not well guarded, the rod of speech destroys
the intelligence; the rod of mind, the highest state; and the rod of action, the three
worlds. One should practice silence with respect to the rod of speech, and fasting with
respect to the rod of action; but with respect to the rod of mind, the control of breath is
enjoined."
Third additional verse.: "A Yogin should carry the bodily triple staff and not the one of
bamboo: he should carry according to rule the one consisting of speech, body, and
mind."
12.12-3 The one who . . . succeeding births: these verses contain several technical terms:
ksetrajña refers to the spirit that observes the body and its activities as if they were a
field (ksetra); bhütätman
 is a term that is less clear (see also 5.109), but probably refers
to a self made of material elements but which acts as a center of consciousness; jïva
generally refers to the individual self within the body and identical with ksetrajña.
Here Manu appears to be making a distinction between the two.
12.14 Mahat: in Sâmkhy a philosophy this term refers to the intellect (buddhi).
Additional verse: "The highest Person, however, is another. He is called the Highest
Self, the Lord, who, entering the three worlds, bears the Unmanifest."
12.16 five elemental particles: earth, water, air, fire, and ether, which constitute the normal
earthly body of a human being.
12.17 After experiencing . . . corresponding particle: this verse is extremely unclear. Bühle r
admits that the interpretation of Medhätith i and others, which he follows, assumes that
the verse is ungrammatical. Given that verse 18 flows directly from verse 16, it is pos-
sible that this verse has been taken from a different source with a different context,
making it difficult to understand its original meaning. On the meaning of vibhägasah,
see bhägasah in verse 22.
12.18 two beings of great power: commentators identify these differently: Medhätithi ,
Räghavänanda
: Great One (mahat) and the Knower of the field (ksetrajña); Nârâyana
:
individual soul (jlva) and the Highest Self (paramätman); Bhâruci , Govinda, KullOka:
Great One and Highest Self. I favor the first interpretation, because they are mentioned
in verse 14.
12.24 body: I take ätman here to mean body, the same way as it did in verse 12. In the very
next verse (25), deha ("body") appears to be used as a synonym.
12.32 resolve (dhairyam): the sandhi ärainbharucitädhairyam
 makes it possible also to read
adhairyam, and this reading is preferred by all the commentators. Bühler , following
this reading, translates: "want of firmness." I have preferred to take dhairyam (without
sandhi coalescence with the previous word) because resolve and firmness is actually an
attribute of vigor. In verse 36, for example, seeking to win fame and not giving way to
disappointment are given as characteristics of vigor; and in verses 46 kings, royal
chaplains, and soldiers are said to possess the attribute of vigor, and these individuals
clearly have resolve and firmness. The virtue of dhairya here also contrasts nicely with
adhrti (lack of resolve) of Darkness in the very next verse.
12.45 Variant reading: "men who live by the use of arms."


--- PAGE 360 ---
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 12 
349
12.59 Variant reading: "those who eat impure food become worms."
12.61 goldsmiths: some, including Medhätithi , interpret the term hemakartr as referring to a
particular species of bird.
12.67 Variant reading: "by stealing fruits or roots."
12.70 Dasyu: this term can refer to a particular ethnic group (10.32), or barbarians ( (10.45),
or simply bandits (7.143).
Variant reading; "servants of their enemies."
12.76 Variant reading: "the dreadful tortures of being boiled in vats."
12.78 being wrapped . . .for others: Bühle r translates: "imprisonment in fetters hard to bear,
and the misery of being enslaved by others." I think the second half of this verse deals
with childhood, as the first half did with birth; the following two verses likewise deal
with various vicissitudes of life and finally with old age, sickness, and death. The
wrapping must refer to the swaddling of infants, and servile work to serving the
teacher during studentship.
12.84-5 Among all these . . . immortality: it could also be that verse 84 is a question to
which 85 provides the answer. I think that these two verses may be interpolated, be-
cause verse 86 directly flows from 83, and the rest of this section deals with the cen-
trality of the Veda and vedic rites.
12.88 advancing, arresting: this is a well-known division of activities enjoined by the Veda.
The advancing (pravrttd) acts prolong samsäri c existence by procuring heaven or bet-
ter births. These activities include all rituals and moral/immoral acts. The arresting
(nivrtta), on the other hand, are intended to suppress the advance of samsäri c existence
and to bring about liberation. These include pursuit of knowledge, meditation, and re-
nunciation. For a study of these two concepts, see Bailey 1985.
12.91-3 A man who . .. never otherwise: just like verses 84-5 (see note to them), these also
look suspicious. Verse 94 and the rest of this section dealing with the Veda quite natu-
rally connect with verses 88-90 dealing with vedic rites.
12.95-6 The scriptures . . . to recent times: the reference here must be to scriptural texts of
traditions such as Buddhism and Jainism, which were gaining in popularity and power
during the time when the MDh was composed. A common variant for "scriptures"
(srutayah) of the critical edition is smrtayah ("traditional texts") found in many manu-
scripts and editions.
12.97 established: Bhâruci , Nandana, and Räghavänand
a take the term prasidhyati to mean
"known from the Veda." This is followed by Bühler . Medhätithi , Govinda, and Kullü -
ka take it to mean receiving the authority from the Veda. See the similar use of prasi-
dhyati at 11.238 and my note to it.
12.98 Variant reading; "are born from the Veda alone."
their origin . . . and action: this pâda has numerous variants and the reading is uncer-
tain. Medhätith i says that he found a great many variants which he did not cite.
Medhätith i take gunakarma as a Karmadhäray a compound, and following this inter-
pretation BUhler translates: "(their) production (is) through the (Vedic rites, which in
this respect are) secondary rites." This is a labored interpretation. I think gunakarma is
a Dvandva compound. For the various interpretations offered by commentators, see
Bühler' s note to this verse.
12.106 record of the seers (ärsa) : the meaning is not altogether clear. Most commentators take
the term to mean the Veda. Näräyan
a thinks it refers to the smrtis.
12.109knowledgeable in scripture, perception, and inference (srutipratyaksahetavah): BUhler,
following Kulluka, translates: "are able to adduce proofs perceptible by the senses


--- PAGE 361 ---
350 
Notes to the Translation: Chapter 12
from the revealed texts." I think Medhätith i is right in taking this to be a Bahuvrlhi
compound, although admittedly somewhat unusual. For Dvandvas used as Bahuvrïhis ,
see Wackernagel 1957-78, II-i,28o. See verse 105 where these three sources of knowl-
edge are viewed as essential for a man who knows the Law.
12.111 A man who . . . ten members: the difference between hetuka and tarkin is unclear.
Commentators take the latter to mean a Mïmârnsika . The term nairukta refers to a spe-
cialist in the Nirukta, the science of explaining words that is much more than mere
etymology. The first three orders, according to most commentators, are student, house-
holder, and hermit. Some, however, think that they are student, householder, and wan-
dering ascetic, both because a hermit is not allowed to enter a village and because in
Gautama (GDh 3.2) the hermit is listed last.
12.120 spaces: the reference probably is to bodily cavities.
12.121 Hari: generally, this is an epithet of Visnu. Given that Visnu is already mentioned, the
epithet probably refer to Indra, as pointed out by several commentators. A common
variant reads "Hará," i.e., Siva.


--- PAGE 362 ---
CRITICAL EDITION


--- PAGE 363 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 364 ---
Introduction to the Critical
Edition
I. EDITORIAL HISTORY AND THE NEED FOR A CRITICAL EDITION
The MDh was the first Indian legal text to be introduced to the western world
through the translation of Sir William Jones in 1794. A few years later, 1813, the
first printed edition of the Sanskrit text was published in Calcutta, with a revised
edition appearing in 1830. The two early European editions were published by G. C.
Haughton in 1825 and by Loiseleur Deslongschamp in 1830. Three major events in
Manu scholarship followed each other in quick succession: the publication of the
text with eight commentaries by V. N. Mandlik in 1887, Jolly's edition the same
year, and BUhler's translation in 1886. The Sanskrit text of the MDh has been
published in various editions far more frequently than any other legal text. On the
whole, Jolly's (1887, v) assessment that most subsequent editions "are on the whole
nothing but reprints of the two earliest Calcutta editions" holds good even for those
published in more recent times.
All the editions of the MDh, except for Jolly's, reproduce the text as found in
the manuscripts containing the commentary of KullOka. I have called this the
"vulgate version." Indeed, Jolly (1887, xiv) distinguishes his work from the other
editions with the remark that "the fundamental difference between all previous
editions on the one hand and the present text on the other hand consists of its
independence of Kulluka." It was KullOka's version that has been translated
repeatedly: Jones (1794), Burnell (1884), BUhler (1886), and Doniger (1991). The
exceptions are the edition and translation by Jha (1920-39), which was based on
Medhatithi's commentary, and by Derrett (1975), which was based on Bhâruci' s
commentary. The belief in the authenticity of Kulluka's text was openly articulated
by Burnell (1884, xxix): "There is then no doubt that the textus receptus, viz., that of
KullOka Bhatta, as adopted in India and by European scholars, is very near on the
whole to the original text." This is far from the truth. Indeed, one of the great
surprises of my editorial work has been to discover how few of the over 50 mss. that
I collated actually follow the vulgate in key readings.
Derrett (1975,1:28) as he edited the commentary of Bhäruc i from a single ex-
tant manuscript expressed what I think was a collective wish of the scholarly com-
munity: "A critical edition of Manu is as much a desideratum as was that of the
Mahabharata or the Râmâyana,
 as Jolly's beginning was only a beginning." My
hope is that this edition will fill that desideratum.
353


--- PAGE 365 ---
354 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
II. SOURCES FOR THE CRITICAL EDITION
This critical edition of the MDh is based on a systematic search of manuscripts, the
collation of 53 manuscripts and of citations by 12 authors, the examination of 38
other manuscripts, and the close reading of 9 commentaries. Although the MDh
shares numerous verses in common with the Mahäbhärata
 and other Dharmasâstras ,
I have not used them in constituting the text. I wanted to remain strictly faithful to
the manuscript tradition of the MDh and to avoid a hybrid edition. The only
exception has been the section containing portions of the MDh in the Bhavisya
Puräna, because I consider the parallel passage in the Bhavisya to be a citation.
II.i Description of the Manuscripts
The following are the manuscripts used in the critically constituted text. They are
introduced by a siglum. The initial letter in small caps indicate the scripts: B = Ben-
gali; G = Grantha; M = Malayalam; N = Old Nâgarï ; s = Säradä
; T = Telugu; W =
Newari; no letter is appended when the script is Devanägari . The two following let-
ters identify the current location of the manuscript. A final superscript digit is added
if there are multiple manuscripts from the same location.
Be1 
Bañaras Hindu University. Ms. No. B 1843. Descriptive Catalogue
Samskrit Manuscripts in Gaekwada Library, Bhärat Kaläbhavana Library and
Samskrit Mahä-Vidyälaya
 Library, Bañaras Hindu University. Ed. Ramä Sarikar
Tripâthï . 1971, p. 384. Serial number 7/3916.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 26.7 x 13.2 cms; 155 folios; 10 lines on a page; 29
aksaras on a line; complete. Dated Samvat 1850 [= 1793 CE]. Verses are numbered.
Carefully written, but with frequent haplography. Occasional marginal comments
explaining words. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
»Be2 
Government Sanskrit College, Benares. Ms. No. 12846. A Descriptive
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts Acquired for and Deposited in the Govern-
ment Sanskrit College Library, Sarasvati Bhavana, Bañaras, during the years 1791-
1950. Ed. Kuberanath Shukla. Vol. III. Bañaras, 1956, pp. 100-01.
Palm leaf [written with ink]; Bengali script; 15.3 x 3.3 ins. 75 folios; 10 lines on
a page; 72 aksaras on a line; complete. Carefully written. A photocopy was used.
The colophon occupies two lines but is difficult to decipher.
Be3 
Bañaras Hindu University. Ms. No. B 1844.Descriptive Catalogue
Samskrit Manuscripts in Gaekwada Library, Bhärat Kaläbhavana Library and
Samskrit Mahä-Vidyälaya
 Library, Bañaras Hindu University. Ed. Rama Sañkar
Tripathî . Bañaras, 1971, p. 384. Serial number 7/3907.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 38.5 x 20 cms; 70 folios [but folios 1-10, 36,51 miss-
ing]; 10 lines on a page; 40-45 aksaras on a line; incomplete [contains only 2.70 —
8.347]. No date. Some pages damaged and torn; carefully written by several hands.
A photocopy was used.


--- PAGE 366 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
355
Bo 
Bombay University Library. Ms. No. 945. Descriptive Catalogue of the
Samskrta and Prakrta Manuscripts (Bhagvatsinghji Collection & H. M.
Bhadkamkar Collection) in the Library of the University of Bombay, Book I (Vol. I
& II: Parts I-III). Ed. G. V. Devasthale. Bombay, 1944, p. 343.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 8.25 x 4 ins; 152 folios; 9 lines on a page; 33 aksaras
on a line; complete [folio 93 missing containing 8.223-42]. Dated Saka 1672 [=
1750 CE]. Carefully written. A photocopy was used.Colophon:
uCa 
Asiatic Society of Bengal. Ms. No. 5218. A Descriptive Catalogue of
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Collection under the care of The Asiatic
Society of Bengal. Ed. Haraprasad Shâstrï . Vol. Ill: Smrti Manuscripts. Calcutta,
1925. Serial No. 1852.
Palm leaf [written with ink]; Bengali script; 36.25 x 4.4 cms; 142 folios; 5 lines
on a page; 56-61 aksaras on a line; complete [but the Chapter i is so torn that I was
unable to collate it]. Dated Saka 1462 [= 1540 CE]. Much damaged. A microfilm was
used. Colophon (as given in the catalog):
Ho 
Panjab University, Hoshiarpur. Ace. No. 799. Descriptive Catalogue of
Manuscripts of the WBISIS Collection, Panjab University. Ed. B. R. Sharma.
Hoshiarpur, 1975, p. 26. Serial No. 322.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 23.5 x 11.3 cms; 174 folios; between 9 and 12 lines on
a page; 29 aksaras on a line; complete [first folio torn containing 1.1-5]. Dated
Samvat 1763 [=1707 CE]. Carefully written; verses are numbered. A photocopy was
used.Colouhon:
Hy 
Osmania University, Hyderabad. Ace. No. B 23/7. A Catalogue of the
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Osmania University Library. Ed. A. Sharma et al. Hy-
derabad, 1964, p. 35.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 20 x 13 cms; 181 folios; 9 lines on a page; 25 aksaras
on a line; complete. No date [catalog assigns it to i8th century]. Neatly but some-
what carelessly written, with frequent omissions of vowel signs. A photocopy was
used. No colophon.
Jm 
Sri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute, Jammu. Ms. No. 636. Descrip-
tive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute.
1672
1462
937
1763
7
[3 letters unreadable]
[Several letters unreadable]


--- PAGE 367 ---
356 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
Ed. M. M. Patkar. Vol. 2. Jammu, 1973, p. 422. Serial nos. 373, 374, 379. Contains a
commentary in Hindi.
Paper; Devanägar i script; 34 x 21 cms; 565 folios; written with a broad pen and
having varying numbers of lines on a page and aksaras on a line; complete. No date.
Folios containing 8.54-94; 9-i4-i8; 9.283-85; 10.45-53 12.66-126 are missing. A
photocopy was used. No colophon because the last pages are lost.
Jo1 
Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Jodhpur. Ms. No. 8599.
A Catalogue of Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Rajasthan Oriental Re-
search Institute. Ed. Padmashri Muni Jinavijaya. Part II (A). Jodhpur, 1964, p. 32.
Paper; Devanägar i script; 28.8 x 15.6 cms; 138 folios; 10 lines on a page; 35
aksaras on a line. Carefully written; verses are numbered. A photocopy was used.
Colophon:
Jo2 
Maharaja Mansingh Pustak Prakash, Jodhpur. Ace. No. 898. Contains
the commentary of Räghavänand
a Sarasvatí .
Paper; Devanägar i script; 12 x 27 cms; 249 folios; 12-13 lines on a page; 42
aksaras on a line in the section containing the text. Dated Samvat 1595 [= 1538 CE].
Carefully written. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
wKt1 
National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 4.713.
Paper; Newari script; 121 folios; 29 x 9.5 cms; 9 lines on a page; 35 aksaras on
a line; new hand from folio sib (3.242); frequently "1" for "r" and vice versa; confu-
sion between dental and palatal sibilant (Nepali way of pronouncing?). No date. A
microfilm was used. Colophon:
Kt2 
National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Mss. No. 2.59. Contains the
commentary of Kullüka .
Paper; Devanägar i script; 290 folios; 40 x 16.5 cms; 11-14 lines on a page; 55
aksaras on a line; clearly written; complete. No date. First 11 folios contain an
anukramanikä up to the 7th adhyäya. A microfilm was used. No colophon.
wKt3 
National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 1.1266.
Palm leaf written with ink; Newari script, with occasional Devanägari ; no fo-
lios; 29.5 x 9 cms; 6 lines on a page; 60 aksaras on a line; Incomplete; ends at
12.118. No date. A microfilm was used. Frequent scribal errors, especially metathe-
sis and confusion between dental and palatal sibilants, dental and retroflex nasals;
"1" and "r."
isKt4 
National Archives, Katmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 411.
Palm leaf [written with ink]; Old Nâgar ï script; 206 folios; 25 x 5 cms; 5 lines
on a page; 45 aksaras on a line; first page [up to 1.40] missing; complete. Dated
 [last letters unclear]
1595
14


--- PAGE 368 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
357
Sarnvat 1239 [= June 10,1182]; written in Vârânasï
. Some lacunae, indicating that
the scribe's exemplar was defective. A microfilm was used. Colophon [very faint;
this is an approximation]:
uKt5 
National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 5.336.
Palm leaf; Bengali script with Newari influence; 36.5 X 5 cms; 130 folios; 5
lines on a page; 65-75 aksaras on a line; complete; frequent marginal additions and
corrections; many lacuna indicating that his exemplar was defective; frequently
writes "y" for "j"; "n" for "d". A microfilm was used. Closely related to wKt6. Colo-
phon:
wKt6 
National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 1.1283.
Palm leaf; Newari script; 64 folios; 7 lines on a page; 48-50 aksaras on a line.
First 6 folios not the MDh, which starts at 2.179C [so Chapters i and 2 up to I78b are
missing]; again 2.187-207 are omitted; incomplete [ends at 8.8]. A microfilm was
used. Closely related to wKt5.
La1 
Panjab University Library, Lahore. Ace. No. 5112. Catalogue of the
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Panjab University Library. Vol. i. Lahore, 1932, p. 97.
Cat. No. 466.
Paper; Devanägar i script; 24 x 10.3 cms; 111 folios; 10 lines on a page; 40
aksaras on a line; complete [folios 5, 14, and 109 missing]; numerous marginal
glosses and correction. The catalog and library card attached to the ms. give the date
as Sarnvat 1507 [= 1450-51 CE], even though I do not find a date in the ms. itself.
The last page, however, is now missing, and it may have contained the colophon
with the date. A photocopy was used.
La2 
Panjab University Library, Lahore. Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manu-
scripts in the Panjab University Library. Vol. i. Lahore, 1932, p. 97. Cat. No. 470.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 20.3 x 17 cms; 67 folios; 22 lines on a page; 19
aksaras on a line; incomplete [ends at 8.5]. No date. A photocopy was used.
Lo1 
Welcome Institute, MS Indie ß 1192
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 9.5 x 25 cms; 9 lines on a page; 25 aksaras on a line;
complete. A microfilm was used. No colophon.
Lo2 
British Library [India Office], Ms. No. IO 2337. Catalogue of the San-
skrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. J. Eggeling. Part I. Vedic
Manuscripts. London: 1887, p. 367. Cat. No. 1257.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script [Bengali influence]; 257 folios; 25 x 13.1 cms; 10 lines
on a page; 30 aksaras on a line; complete. A microfilm was used. No colophon.
Lo3 
British Library [India Office], Ms. No. Burnell 527. Catalogue of San-
skrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. A. B. Keith.
1239
7
388


--- PAGE 369 ---
358 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
Vol. II. Oxford, 1935, p. 360-61. Cat. No. 5285. Contains the commentary of
Râghavânand
a Sarasvatï .
European paper [watermarked Dorling & Gregory, London, 1875]; Devanagan
script [Ch. 12. in a different hand]; 355 + 20 folios; 124.4 x 8.8 cms; 20 lines on a
page; 23 aksaras on a line; complete. Date given in a note on the fly-leaf as A. B.
[AD?] 1876 in Tanjore. A microfilm was used. No colophon. This ms. was used by
Jolly with the siglum Ri. No colophon.
Lo4 
British Library [India Office], Ms. No. IO 1407-10. Catalogue of the
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. J. Eggeling. Part I.
Vedic Manuscripts. London: 1887, p. 367-68. Cat. No. 1264-67. Contains the com-
mentary of Medhâtithi .
Paper; Devanagan script; 31.3 x 13.2 cms; ms. in four parts with 253 [adhyäyas
1-3], 190 [adhyäyas 4-7], 186 [adhyäyas 8,10, n], and 55 [adhyäya 9] folios; 10
lines on a page; 45-50 aksaras on a line; incomplete [Ch. 12 is missing]. First three
parts dated Samvat 1845-46 [= 1789-90 CE], and the last part dated Samvat 1865 [=
1809 CE]. This ms. was used by Ganganath Jha in his edition of Medhâtithi . A mi-
crofilm was used. This ms. was used by Jolly with the siglum M4.
Lo5 
British Library [India Office], Ms. No. Burnell 522-23. Catalogue of
Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. A. B. Keith.
Vol. II. Oxford, 1935, p. 359; Cat. No. 5281. Contains the commentary of
Medhâtithi .
European paper [watermarked Charles & Thomas, London, 1879]; Devanagan
script; 26.3 x 20.i cms; ms. is in two parts with 246 and 196 folios; 23 lines on a
page; 26 aksaras on a line; incomplete [only chapters 1-8; verses 9.52-58 inserted
after 8.58]. According to a note on folio i, this is a copy of Lo4. A microfilm was
used.
oMd1 Adyar Library, Madras. Ms. No. VB 135. Descriptive Catalogue of
Sanskrit Manuscripts. Ed. E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma. Vol. 13: Visvabhârat ï Collec-
tion. Madras, 1976, p. 134. Cat. No. 73oE.
Palm leaf; Grantha script; 39.5 x 3.5 cms; 112 folios; 8 lines on a page; 48
aksaras on a line. Complete. Good handwriting with few mistakes [handwriting
changes at 3.21; then at 3.282; and goes back to original hand at 4.32]. Very small
letters sometimes difficult to read; ms. is broken at the ends and moth eaten; so
some letters missing. No date. A photocopy was used. Ms. belonged to one
Dharmasiväcärya
. Colophon [faint, letters broken and difficult to read; the follow-
ing is an approximation]:
oMd2 Adyar Library, Madras. Ms. No. 33A2O. A Catalogue of the Samskrit
Manuscripts in the Adyar Library. Madras, 1926, p. 102.
Palm leaf; Oriya script; 77 folios; approximately 37 x 3.6 cms; 4 lines on a
broken]
[several aksaras
[two aksaras broken]


--- PAGE 370 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
359
page; 60 aksaras on a line. Incomplete [ends at 4.258, after which are the words
bhrgusamhitSh samäptäh.
 A photocopy was used.
rMd3 Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ms. No. D 2664.
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental
Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ed. M. Rarigäcärya
. Vol. V: Dharma-sästra . Madras,
1909, p. 1957.
Paper; Telugu script; 31.3 x 20 cms; 122 folios [244 numbered pages]; 20 lines
on a page; 19 aksaras on a line; complete. No date [appears modern]. Subject head-
ings are placed at the top of pages; frequent glosses explaining words. A photocopy
was used. No colophon.
TMd4 Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ms. No. D 2665.
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental
Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ed. M. Rangäcärya
. Vol. V: Dharma-sästra . Madras,
1909, p. 1957.
Palm leaf; Telugu script; 42.5 x 3.5 cms; 8 lines on a page; 70 aksaras on a line;
complete. No date. This ms. begins on folio 83 of a larger composite ms., the first
82 folios containing another work [= Ms. No. 2616]. Several times the scribe leaves
lacunae showing break or illegibility of the scribe's exemplar; shows also his
faithfulness to the original, since often the break is just one syllable [cf. 2.108, m,
178; 3.114, 118, 194, 250, 265; 4.151]. At 1224, the scribe gives 10.109—11191,
indicating that his exemplar probably had folios mixed up and not in proper order. A
photocopy was used. Much of the colophon is torn. The end of the sloka is legible:
mama doso no vidyate [see under wKt1].
oMd5 Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ms. No. D 2670.
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental
Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ed. M. Rangâcârya
. Vol. V: Dharma-sästra . Madras,
1909, p. 1958.
Palm leaf; Grantha script; 42 x 3.5 cms; 133 folios; 7 lines on a page; 60
aksaras on a line; complete. No date. Carefully written by at least two scribes; in
good condition. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
c;My 
Government Oriental Library, Mysore. Ms. No. 3899. A Descriptive
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental Library, Mysore.
Ed. H. R. Rangaswami lyengar and T. T. Srinivasagopalachar. Vol. II:
Dharmasästra . Mysore, 1944, pp. 97-98. Cat, No. 82.
Palm leaf; Grantha script; 30.6 x 3 cms; 146 folios; 7 lines on a page; 43
aksaras on a line; complete. No date. The ms. is moth-eaten and, especially at the
beginning and end, torn; sometimes marginal glosses on words. A photocopy was
used.Colophon:
NNg 
Nagpur University Library, Ms. No. 1510. Catalogue of Sanskrit Manu-


--- PAGE 371 ---
360 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
scripts in the Nagpur University Library. Ed. V. W. Karambelkar. Nagpur, 1958, p.
325.
Paper; Old Nâgarï ; 22.5 x 12.5 cms; 133 folios [first folio containing 1.1-12
missing]; 11 lines on a page; 36 aksaras on a line; complete. Dated Sarnvat 1560 [=
1503 CE]. Carefully written by one Purusottamaka, but with numerous marginal cor-
rections in first and second hand. A photocopy was used. Colophon [partly torn]:
oOr 
Orissa State Museum, Ms. No. 0)1/785. An Alphabetical Catalogue of
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Collection of the Orissa State Museum. Ed. N. Mishra.
Part I. Bhubaneswar, 1973, p. 179. Cat. No. 1703.
Palm leaf; Oriya script; 157 folios; 4 lines on a page; 65 aksaras on a line; com-
plete. No date. Carelessly written with frequent scribal errors. A microfilm was
used. Colophon:
sOx1 
Bodleian Library, Oxford. Ms. No. Sanskrit e. 64. Catalogue of
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. Ed. M. Winternitz and A. B. Keith.
Vol. II. Oxford, 1905. Cat. No. 1484.
European paper; Särad ä script; 15 x 22 cms; 128 folios; 23 lines on a page; 21
aksaras on a line; complete. Date 1857 CE; different hand from folio 903. The manu-
script was bought by Bodleian from Eugen Hultzsch in 1887. This is a copy of ms.
sPu6 [Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 355 of i 875-76] and
was probably made for Hultzsch. Frequently sOx' gives the marginal corrections
found in sPu6 (see 5.850). At 8.85 there is a lacuna in sPu6 and filled msh incor-
rectly; this is replicated in sOx1. The ms. is still useful because it contains several
sections that are currently missing or torn in the original sPu6; the copy was, there-
fore, made before the original was damaged. A microfilm was used. Colophon:
Ox2 
Bodleian Library, Oxford. Ms. No. Sanskrit c. 32. Catalogue of
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. Ed. M. Winternitz and A. B. Keith.
Vol. II. Oxford, 1905. Cat. No. 1483.
European paper with watermark; Devanägar i script; 25.4 x 37 cms; 155 folios;
15 lines on a page; 22 aksaras on a line; complete. Dated November 27,1789; scribe
Lala Mahatab Rai. The copy was made for Sir William Jones and acquired by the
2685
1560
[broken]
[broken]
34
7
10


--- PAGE 372 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
361
Bodleian in 1833. Contains an interlinear translation by Jones partly into Latin and
partly into English. A microfilm was used.
Ox3 
Bodleian Library, Oxford. Ms. No. Max Mülle r memorial c. 33. A
Catalogue of the Manuscripts Purchased for the Administrators of the Max Müller
Memorial Fund. Ed. T. R. Gambier-Parry. Oxford, 1922, p. 55. Contains the com-
mentary of Medhâtithi .
Indian paper; Devanâgar ï script [with some Bengali influence]; 33.75 x 13.75
cms; 394 folios; 12 lines on a page; 46 aksaras on a line; incomplete; carelessly
written; verses of chapters 8 and 9 mixed up, the following being omitted: 8.1-14
47-9, 59-61,133-8,147-89,198-364, 384-420; 9-1-50, 60-137, 164-234, 247C-
336; and chapters 10-12. No date but appears not too old. A microfilm was used. No
colophon.
NPu1 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 237 of 1879-80.
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts Library De-
posited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. Sharma. Vol. VII,
Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 981.
Country paper; Old Nägarl ; 28.75 x 12 cms; 141 folios; 9 lines per page; 36
aksaras on a line; complete. Date Samvat 1646 [= 1589 CE]. A photocopy was used.
Colophon:
Pu2 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 208 of A/i88i-82.
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts Library
Deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. Sharma. Vol.
VII, Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 982.
Country paper; Devanâgar ï script; 28 x 12.5 cms; no folios; 10 lines on a page;
38 aksaras on a line; complete. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
Pu3 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 151 of 1895-
1902. Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts
Library Deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D.
Sharma. Vol. VII, Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 985.
Country paper; 26.25 x 11.25 cms; 118 folios; 12 lines on a page; 31 aksaras on a
line; complete. Date Samvat 1681 [= 1624 CE]. Colophon:
Pu4 
Jayakar Library, University of Poona. Ms. No. 1537. Descriptive Cata-
logue of Manuscripts Available in the Jayakar Library, University of Poona. Ed. S.
G. Mahajan. Poona, 1986. Vol. L Cat. No. 544.
1646
11
2709
1672


--- PAGE 373 ---
362 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
Paper; Devanâgar î script; 29 x 12.5 cms; 101 folios; 11 lines on a page; 35
aksaras on a line; complete. Appears to follow Pu2 closely, possibly a copy.
Pu5 
Bharatiya Itihäs a Samsodhana Mándala, Pune. Ms. No. 52/401.
Bharata-Itihäsa-Samsodhana-Mandalastha-Hastalikhitagranthänukramanikä.
 Ed.
H. G. Khare. Pune, 1960, p. 203. Contains the commentary of Govindaraja. Clearly
a copy of Pu7.
Paper; Devanâgar î script [but with many features of the Old Nâgarï] ; 28.5 x 13
cms; 10 lines on a page; 41 aksaras on a line; complete. No date. Very carelessly
written; from folio 2gb written by a different hand; numerous verses omitted. A
photocopy was used.Colophon:
sPu6 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 355 of 1875-76.
A Catalogue of the Collections of Manuscripts Deposited in the Deccan College
with an Index. Ed. S. R. Bhandarkar. Bombay, 1888, p. 93. Contains an anonymous
and brief commentary.
Birch Bark; Sârad â script; 106 folios; 22 lines on a page; 27'aksaras on a line;
complete [last page lost, ms. ends at 12.120; thus, any colophon that may have ex-
isted is lost]. No date. A photocopy was used.
This ms. was used by Jolly in his 1887 edition using the siglum K, and by
Bühle r in his 1886 translation (see p. cxxxv, note 2). Jolly comments: "The last por-
tion, from XI.218 onwards, has been partly lost." Although there are sections torn,
much of the last section can be read. It is unclear whether the last page with any
colophon was extant when Jolly examined this ms. Unfortunately, some of Jolly's
readings from this ms. listed in his variants are wrong when compared to the origi-
nal (e.g. 1.66, 80, 92; 5.60, 64,65, 67; 11.90; Jolly says 2.79 is omitted when it is
present); either Jolly or a collator of his has misread the Säradä
.
Pu7 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 239 of 1879-80.
A Catalogue of the Collections of Manuscripts Deposited in the Deccan College
with an Index. Ed. S. R. Bhandarkar. Bombay, 1888, p. 138. Contains the commen-
tary of Govindaraja.
Paper; Devanâgar î script [but with many features of the Old Nâgarï] ; 29 x 12.5
cms; 250 folios; 13 lines on a page; 42 aksaras on a line; complete; verses are num-
bered. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
The last page containing the rest of the colophon is lost. The last page of the
ms. contains some extraneous material; this page is probably from a different ms.,
the paper and handwriting do not match the rest of the ms.
Pu8 
Bharatiya Itihäs a Samsodhana Mándala. Ms. No. 46/78. Bhärata-Itihä-
sa-Samsodhana-Mandalastha-Hastalikhitagranthänukramanikä.
 Ed. H. G. Khare.
Pune, 1960, p. 202.
Paper; Devanâgar î script; 28 xn.5 cms; 71 folios; 14 lines on a page; 60 aksaras


--- PAGE 374 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
363
on a line; complete. Dated Samvat 1810 [= 1754 CE] Clear handwriting; very few
corrections. A photocopy was used.Colophon:
Pu9 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 650 of Visräma .
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts Library De-
posited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. Sharma. Vol. VII,
Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 9896. Contains the commentary of Govindaraja.
Clearly a copy of Pu7.
Country paper; Devanâgar ï script; 25.5 x 11.9 cms; 228 folios [but many folios
missing]; 10 lines on a page; 38 aksaras on a line; incomplete [first 13 folios miss-
ing; begins at 1.64 and ends at 7.56; folios containing verses 2.1780-194; 2.202-07;
3.02-224 4.1072-5.37 missing]. No date. A photocopy was used. No colophon.
Pu'° 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 105 of
Visräma(i) . Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts
Library Deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D.
Sharma. Vol. VII, Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 993. Contains the commentary of
Medhätithi .
Country paper; Devanâgar ï script; 28.5 x 12.5 cms; 453+8 folios; 12 lines on a
page; 40 aksaras on a line; incomplete [contains chapters 1-6 and 10-12]; 8 folios in
the beginning contains table of contents. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
Tj1 
Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ms. No. B. L. 270. A Descriptive
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati
Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ed. Vidyâsâgar
a P. P. S. Sastri. Vol. XVIII. Sriranjam: Sri
Vani Vilas Press, 1934. Cat. No. D 17880.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 26.5 x 10.4 cms; 225 folios; 7 lines on a page; 30
aksaras on a line; complete; verses are numbered with chapter headings; very
clearly and carefully written; chapters 4-6 written in a different hand without chap-
ter headings or verse numbers; Ch. 7 returns to the original scribe with chapter
headings and numbers. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
Tj2 
Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ms. No. B. L. 271. A Descriptive
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji's Sarasvati
Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ed. Vidyâsâgar
a P.P.S. Sastri. Vol. XVIII. Sriranjam: Sri
Vani Vilas Press, 1934. Cat. No. D 17881
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 30.7 x 11.5 cms; 83 folios; 11-13 lines on a page; 49
aksaras on a line; complete; verses are numbered; many scribal errors. Date Samvat
1858 [= 1801 CE]. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
Tr1 
University of Kerala Oriental Manuscript Library, Trivandrum. Ms. No.
1810
1858


--- PAGE 375 ---
364 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
7878. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manuscripts Li-
brary, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 215.
Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12504.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; approximately 26 x 11 cms; 124 folios; 9 lines of a
page; 40 aksaras on a line; incomplete [ms. ends at 12.98, final folios missing]; nu-
merous marginal corrections by a second hand probably using a NT ms [see 9.161,
162,166, 167, 205, 225, 251, 235, 243, 257]. No date. No colophon. A photocopy
was used.
Tr2 
University of Kerala Oriental Manuscript Library, Trivandrum. Ms. No.
9648. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manuscripts Li-
brary, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 215.
Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12511. Contains the commentary of Râmacandra .
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 256 folios; 10 lines on a page; 40 aksaras on a line;
complete; subject index at the end of ms. No date. No colophon. A photocopy was
used.
MTr3 
University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms.
No. L8g A. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manu-
scripts Library, Trivandrum Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series,
No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12502.
Palm leaf; Malayalam script; 90 folios; 10 lines on a page; 52 aksaras on a line;
incomplete fends at ii.i62a, although given as complete in the catalog]; neatly and
legibly written; verses numbered; written in several different hands; in margins the
topics treated in the corresponding verses are given. Date Malayalam era 1057 [=
1882 CE] according to the catalog. No colophon. A microfilm was used.
MTr4 
University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms.
No. 14704. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manu-
scripts Library, Trivandrum Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series,
No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12502.
Palm leaf; Malayalam script; 92 folios; 10 lines on a page; 55 aksaras on a line;
complete; good condition; neat and legibly written; verses unnumbered; chapters
unnumbered; complete. No date. A microfilm was used. Colophon has many verses
on a variety of topics and finally ends with:
MTr5 
University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms.
No. L32O. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 
University
Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit
Series, No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12509. Contains the commentary of
Bhäruci .
Palm leaf; Malayalam script; incomplete [the ms. begins at 6.9 and, although it
contains the last verse 12.126, the final page is lost and the commentary on the last
verse is incomplete]. No date.


--- PAGE 376 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
365
I have used a color photograph of the original Malayalam ms. Two Devanâgar ï
copies of the original appear to have been made in Trivandrum, one for Derretí and
used in his edition [now deposited in the Library of the School of Oriental and Afri-
can Studies, London] and the other probably for Dave's edition. I have examined
both copies, which often diverge from the original.
MTr6 
University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms.
No. 13002. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manu-
scripts Library, Trivandrum Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series,
No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12501.
Palm leaf; Malayalam script; 179 folios; 8 lines on a page; 39 aksaras on a line;
complete; carelessly written with numerous scribal errors; worm-eaten and dam-
aged; from verse 5.86 written by a different hand; complete. No date. No Colophon.
A microfilm was used. Colophon:
Wa 
Prajna Päthasäl
ä Mándala, Wai, Ms. No. 2840. Descriptive Catalogue
of Sanskrit Manuscripts. Ed. Laxmanshastri Joshi. Part I. Wai, 1970, p. 360.
Paper; Devanâgar ï script; 29.5 x 12.7 cms; 128 folios; 10 lines on a page; 36
aksaras on a line; complete. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon:
Other Manuscripts: In the course of preparing this edition, I examined manu-
scripts other than the ones used in critically constituting the text. To use all the mss.
I had obtained would have been unwieldy and unnecessary. Just as taking multiple
samples of the same puddle of blood from a crime scene does not provide better
evidence, so having more manuscripts of the same genealogical branch does not
enhance the edition. My method was then to collate a significant number of mss.
fully thus creating a reliable genealogy. Then I collated only the third chapter of all
the remaining mss. This gave me reliable clues with regard to the genealogy of each
ms. Thereafter, I collated fully only those mss. that I thought held out hope of giving
new data. I give below the 37 mss. that were not considered for the critical edition
after the collation of chapter three:
Benares: Bañaras Hindu University, Ms. No. C 5452. Bengali script with
KullOka's commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Benares: Bañaras Hindu University, Ms. No. B 1844. Devanâgar ï script. Fol-
lows NT-x.
Benares: Bañaras Hindu University, Ms. No. B 4403. Devanâgar ï script with
Kulluka's commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Benares: Government Sanskrit College Library, Sarasvati Bhavan, Ms. No.
12881. Bengali script. Follows NT-x.
Benares: Government Sanskrit College Library, Sarasvati Bhavan, Ms. No.
13545- Devanâgar ï script. Follows NT-x.
Jammu: Shri Raghunathji Temple, Dharmartha Trust Council. Ms. No. 2578.


--- PAGE 377 ---
366 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
Devanägar i script with KullQka's commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 23493. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-x.
Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 3038. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-x.
Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 36614. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-x.
Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 4519. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-x.
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. E 725/1. Newari script. Follows
NT-x.
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 3.575. Newari script. Follows NT-x.
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.2188. Newari script. Follows NT-x.
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 2.276. Devanagarï script with KullQka's
commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. missing; Reel No. £-1351/5. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 3.10. Devanagarï script. Follows
NT-x.
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.1876. Devanagarï script. Follows
NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.7757. Devanagarï script. Follows
NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 3.178. Devanagarï script with a Nepali
commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. missing; Reel No. G 23/3. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-x.
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. missing; Reel No. E 1430/36. De-
vanagarï script. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 2.159. Devanagarï script, with Nepali
commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.1514. Devanagarï script. Follows
NT-x.
London: British Library [India Office], Ms. No. OR 2151. Devanagarï script
with Kullüka' s commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
London: British Library [India Office], Ms. No. San Ms IO 236. Devanagarï
script with KullQka's commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate).
London: British Library [India Office], Ms. No. San Ms. 3235. Devanagarï
script. Follows NT-x.
Madras: Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Ms. No. 2672. Grantha
script. Follows NT-x.
Oxford: Bodleian Library, Chandra Shum Shere, Ms. No. b (87) (i). Bengali
script. Follows NT-x.
Oxford: Bodleian Library, Max Mülle r memorial, d. 45. Devanagarï script.
Follows NT-x.


--- PAGE 378 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
367
Oxford: Bodleian Library, Max Mülle r memorial, d. 46. Devanâgar ï script.
Follows NT-x.
Oxford: Bodleian Library, Sanskrit d. 134. Devanâgar ï script. Follows NT-x.
Paris: Bibliothèque Nationale, Ms. No. 810. Bengali script. Follows NT-x.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 53 of 1883-84. De-
vanâgar ï script. Follows NT-x.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 53 of 1883-84; New
No. 430. Devanâgar ï script, with Kullüka' s commentary. Follows NT-x.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 52 of 1883-84, New
No. 3. Devanâgar ï script. Follows NT-x.
Trivandrum: University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum.
Ms. No. 22039. Follows ST.
Wai: Präjn a Päthasäl
ä Mándala, Ms. No. 2841. Devanâgar ï script. Follows
NT-x.
Wai: Präjn a Päthasäl
ä Mándala, Ms. No. 2842. Devanâgar ï script. Follows
NT-x.
There were some other manuscripts that I tried every possible way to obtain but
without success. The most significant among them are four Sârad â manuscripts lo-
cated in the State Archives in Shrinagar, Kashmir: i. Ms-No. 2355, Ace. No. 914,
Kashmiri paper, 127 folios; 2. Ms-No. 2356, Ace. No. 1594, Kashmiri paper, 93 fo-
lios, with Kullüka' s commentary; 3. Ms-No. 2357, Ace. No. 1817, Kashmiri paper,
128 folios; 4. Ms-No. 2358, Ace. No. 2169,317 folios, with KullDka's commentary.
The unsettled situation in Kashmir made it impossible even for highly placed offi-
cials to acquire copies of these manuscripts. The ones with KullQka's commentary
are probably modern and not very significant. These mss. are listed in the Catalogue
of the Sanskrit Manuscripts published in 1989 as a Xerox copy publication by the
Research and Publication Depart, Jammu & Kashmir Government, in Shrinagar.1
II.2 Commentators
There are nine extant commentaries on MDh. They are, in approximately chronolo-
gical order: Bhâruci , Medhâtithi , Govindarâja , Nârâyana
, KullQka, Râghavânanda
,
Nandana, Râmacandra , and Manirâma . Many of these authors are older, some by
several centuries, than the oldest manuscripts we possess. Their readings, therefore,
are invaluable in establishing the critically constituted text.
Some of the commentators, especially Bhâruci , Medhâtithi , and Nârâyana
, are
especially useful, because they note variant readings they found either in manu-
scripts or in the oral tradition. I have noted these as [pâtha] .
Bhâruci , Rjumitâksarà
. He is the oldest commentator. Derretí (1975,1: 10)
places him 500-600 CE, whereas Kane (1962-75, i: 569) opts for 800-850. The
dates are educated guesses, although it is clear that Bhâruc i is earlier than
1. I want to thank Ernst Pretz for obtaining this information for me during one of his
visits to Shrinagar.


--- PAGE 379 ---
368 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
Medhätithi . Only a single incomplete and damaged ms. of the commentary in
Malayalam script is extant (see ms. wTr5). It was edited and translated on the basis
of a faulty Devanàgar ï transcript by Derretí (1975). I obtained a color photograph of
the original Malayalm ms. through the kindness of Professor Albrecht Wezler.
Medhätithi , Manubhäsya. His is the most celebrated and the longest commen-
tary. Kane (1962-75, i: 583) places him 825-900 CE. Medhätith i gives the most de-
tailed commentary and notes the largest number of variant readings he encountered.
The use of this commentary to constitute the critical edition is complicated by the
fact that all the mss. we have are derived from a "new edition" prepared by King
Madana. He is said to have gathered defective copies from various regions and pre-
pared a hybrid restoration (jïrnoddhâra; cf. Jha 1920-39,1: ix-ix). This edition is
clearly defective; several citations from Medhätith i found in later commentaries are
missing in it.
Govindaräja , Manutïka. Kane (1962-75, i: 663) places him looo-noocE.
The commentary is rather brief and was plagiarized by Kulluka. References to him
by JïmQtavâhan a and Laksmïdhar a indicate that he was held in high esteem. If the
recent dating of JïmOtavâhan a by Rocher (2002, 24) to the beginning of the I2th
century is accepted, then we may have to place Govindaräj a in the nth century.
Näräyana
, Manvarthavivrtti. Also called Sarvajña Näräyana
, little is known
about him. Kane (1962-75, i: 1190) places him prior to 1400 CE. Bühle r (1886,
cxxix) thinks that the order of the authorities listed by Râghavânand
a places
Näräyan
a after Kullüka . Näräyan
a gives numerous variant readings, and his
commentary has proved quite useful for the edition.
Kulluka, Manvarthamuktavalï. Kane's (1962-75,1:756) characterization as
"the most famous of all commentaries on Manu," I believe, is not due to its
antiquity or excellence but because it has had the good fortune of being printed
repeatedly and used by such influential translators as BUhler. The root text attached
to Kulluka's commentary has become the "standard" or the vulgate, also because of
repeated printings. The commentary of Kulluka would today be considered a
plagiary of Govindaräja , even though Kulluka has the temerity to criticize him on
numerous occasions. Bühle r places him in the isth century as does Jolly (1887, xii),
whereas Kane (1962-75,1: 759) dates him to about 1250 CE. I think BUhler and Jolly
are correct in their assessment of Kulluka as a relatively late commentator.
Râghavânanda
, Manvarthacandrikâ. Little is known about this author. He was
an ascetic belonging to the Samkarite Sarasvatï order. He states that he follows the
opinions of Medhätithi , Govindaräja , Kulluka, and Näräyana
. Kane (1962-75, i:
1210) says that he must be later than 1350 CE.
Nandana, Nandinl. This is a short commentary, and Nandana probably came
from the south. He is especially significant, because he generally follows the read-
ings of the Southern Transmission. Buhler's (1886, xxxiii-xxxv) identification of
Nandana with Nandapandita, the author of the commentary on Visnusmrti, is mis-
taken; Nandapandita lived in Benares, and Nandana is clearly from the south. He is
especially conversant with the Arthasâstra (see his correct interpretation of pravä-
sayet as execution atMDh 8.123) and cites Kautilya by name in his commentary on
MDh 7.119. See Derretí 1975,1: 33.


--- PAGE 380 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
369
Nothing more than the names are known of the last two commentators, Rarna-
candra and Maniräma . They must be rather recent authors. Dave assigns
Manirâm a to between 1630 and 1660 CE.
II.3 Testimonia
The MDh begins to be cited from Sabara onward more frequently than any other
Dharmasastra. These citations, for the most part much older than most of the extant
mss. and commentaries, constitute another significant body of evidence for consti-
tuting the text. In the early days of this project I envisaged these citations to be cru-
cial for decisions regarding original readings. At the end of the project, however, the
significance of the citations has diminished; they have been useful mostly as cor-
roborative evidence. The use of these sources is handicapped by the lack of criti-
cally edited texts of these works. It appears that frequently the modern editors have
simply substituted the vulgate version of Manu they knew for the readings they
found in the mss. See, for example, 11.249 where editions of Vij and Dev reproduce
the reading of the vulgate Manu, a reading found in just five mss. I have used 14
major writers spanning about 900 years, from the 5th to the 14th centuries, as well
as the citation of long sections of the MDh in the Bhavisya Purarta (see Laszlo 1971;
Sternbach 1974).
Sabara (sth cent. CE), commentary on the PMS.
Samkara (8th cent. CE), commentaries on the VeS^, BrU, TU, and BhG.
Kumäril a (gth cent. CE), Tantravärtika com. on Sabarabhäsya.
VisvarOpa (gth cent. CE), commentary on the YDh.
Vijnânesvar a (i2th cent. CE), commentary on the YDh.
Aparädity a (isth cent. CE), commentary on the YDh.
JîmQtavâhan a (i3th cent. CE), Dâyabhâga.
Haradatta (isth cent. CE), commentaries on ÂpDh, GDh.
Laksmïdhar a (isth cent. CE), Krtyakalpataru.
Hemâdr i (isth cent. CE), Caturvargacintämani,
Devannabhatta (isth cent. CE), Smrticandriká.
Mâdhav a (i4th cent. CE), Parâsaramâdhavïya.
II.4 Editions
Except for Jolly's (1887), all previous editions of MDh are based on either selected
mss. or on previous editions. Jolly (1887, v) comments that "the numerous Indian
editions are on the whole nothing but reprints from the two earliest Calcutta edition,
published in 1813 and 1830." Nevertheless, I have used five editions that are com-
monly used by scholars not so much to use them as evidence for the critical edition
but to distinguish its readings from those of previous editions. They are: Mandlik
(1886), Jolly (1887), Jha (1920-39), KSS (1970), Dave (1975-84).
The one exception is Jolly's edition (see IV.s). I have given the readings of the
mss. used by Jolly as supplementary to the manuscript evidence gathered by me


--- PAGE 381 ---
370 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
whenever I was not able to identify and make use of the manuscripts he used. These
mss. are given within brackets, e.g. [Jolly M R]. The following is the list of Jolly's
mss: M1 = India Office, Ms. Nos. 1551-52; M2 and M4 = Haug's collection; M3 =
my ms. Lo4; M5 = private ms. of Jolly; M6 = ms. in Royal Library, Berlin; M7 = pri-
vate ms. of Jolly; M8 = a ms. from Deccan College, Pune; M9 = a ms. from Deccan
College, Pune; M = siglum used for reading common to all mss. of Medhâtithi ; Me
= readings attested by the commentary of Medhatithi [these two ways of reference
are very confusing]; G or G1 = ms. from Deccan College, Pune; G2 = ms. from Dec-
can College Pune; Go = Govindaraja's commentary; N = ms. with Nârâyana' s
commentary discovered by Bühle r and dated Samvat 1544 (= 1497 CE); R1 = my ms.
Lo3; R2 = Anquetil's copy now in Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris; R3 = ms. from Dec-
can College, Pune; Rä = Räghavänanda' s commentary; Nd1 (Nd) = a private ms.;
Nd2 = modern ms. of chapters 8 and 9 in Grantha script from Burnell's collection in
the India Office; Ndd = Nandana's commentary; Gr = a Grantha ms. of Burnell.
Mandlik notes the mss. in which he found additional verses given in his edition.
These mss. are given the following alphabetical sigla, which are noted in the critical
apparatus: 
(Asiatic Society, Calcutta, with KullQka's commentary); 
(Ujjain);
(Ujjain, with Râmacandra' s commentary); 
(Prayäg) ; 
(Khandvä , with
Medhâtithi' s commentary); 
(Miraj); 
(Salara); 
(Pune);
(Ahmadabad); 
(Indore); 
(Calcutta, Asiatic Society); 
(London); 
(Calcutta
printed edition, with KullQka's commentary); 
(Miraj, with Räghavänanda' s com-
mentary); 
(Baroda, with Kulluka's commentary); 
(Jaipur, with Räghavä
-
nanda's commentary); 
(Madras, with Nandana's commentary); 
(Pune);
(Jaipur), 
(Mandlik's own ms., with Nârâyana' s commentary); 
or^~ (Äste) .
III. GENEALOGY OF MANUSCRIPTS
It is not possible to constitute a text such as the MDh purely through the classical
editorial methods dependent on isolating independent manuscript traditions. The
MDh was too widely known to permit the existence of totally isolated and inde-
pendent traditions. As Jolly (1887, xvi) observes: "The great celebrity of the Code
appears to have guarded it against sweeping alterations, so that the text has re-
mained essentially the same nearly in all Commentaries, however widely distant
from one another as to the time and locality of their composition." In the process of
collation it became apparent that all extant mss. of the MDh are at some level hy-
brid; over time readers and scribes appear to have changed the readings of one tra-
ditions according to those of another.2 It is, therefore, impossible to isolate different
2. Most, if not all, of our mss. have above-line or marginal corrections made by
subsequent readers. A good example is Ho at 11.208 where a reader has recorded the variant
maMtalat and noted va pâthah. The best example, however, is Tr1, which belongs to the ST.
A reader who was familliar with the NT has gone through this ms. and corrected the ST
readings to NT ones. If these mss. were later copied, then it is likely that the marginal and
above-line corrections would have been incorportaed into the copies, creating hybrid mss.
Indeed, in the colophon to ms. NPu1, the scribes explicitly exhorts the reader to consult other
mss. and to correct his copy accordingly: aparam pustakam vlksya sodhainyaiii sadä
budhaih.


--- PAGE 382 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition
371
recensions of the text, if we mean by "recension" versions that had a more or less
independent life.
Nevertheless, a close reading of the mss. makes it possible to establish clear ge-
nealogies. At the broadest level, the mss. divide into two groups: a Southern Trans-
mission [ST] consisting for the most part of southern mss. written in Grantha,
Telugu, and Malayalam scripts, and a Northern Transmission [NT] that comprehend
most mss. from other parts of India and in northern scripts. The following Stemma
Codicum, where Z* represents the hypothetical archetype of all extant mss., pres-
ents the genealogical tree of the mss. schematically. Given the large number of mss.
used in this edition, it is impractical to identify within the Stemma the mss. falling
within each genealogical branch; they will be listed in the following discussion of
those branches.
III.i Southern Transmission
The ST is represented by the following mss.: c.Md1 TMd3 TMd4 c¡Md5 oMy, Tr1
 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6. Most mss. written in the southern scripts of Grantha, Telugu, and
Malayalam appear to fall under ST, although there are exceptions. Tr1, which is
written in Devanâgarî , follows the ST; it is probably a Devanägar i copy of an origi-
nal in a southern script. The ms. MTr3, on the other hand, although written in the
Malayalam script, follows NT; it is probably a Malayalam copy of a northern origi-
nal.
A careful scrutiny of the critical apparatus shows the frequency and consistency
with which the mss. of the ST display unique readings. The following are a few ex-
amples: 3-44c-d 
3-77'a 
3-Wc
3.i8oa-b 
3.1890 
3.2iia
3.2i4a 
3.263: 
additional verses after 3.275;
omission of 4.44,46, 47; at 4-7oa 
7 . i 2 g b 8 . 7 9 3
8.82b 
additional verse after 8.100; 8.4O3b 
9-5od


--- PAGE 383 ---
372 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
g.299c-d 
io.6sd 
n.Sd
; I2.i6a 
I2.s6d 
A distinctive feature of the ST is the
use of mäsefor mäsi of the NT: cf. 2.34a, y.isSd, 8,245.
In many instances the ST has preserved older and better readings. For example,
the spurious verse 11.248, which is expunged in the critical edition, is omitted in all
the mss of ST. Likewise, the reading
perior to 
found in all but a handful of NT mss. At 3.39 ST has preserved the
older 
. 
and at 9.19 the reading 
, which is superior to 
_ 
of NT.
Again at 7.67 the superior reading and the lectio difficilior 
is found in all ST
mss. but in only a few NT ones. At 3.ii4b only the ST has preserved the older read-
ing 
attested to by all the older commentators, and at s.gsb the very rare word
Nevertheless, the ST has not been insulated from corruption and hybridization;
it is, therefore, not possible to follow its readings in all instances. I have already re-
ferred to its use of the more common locative mase(from masa), whereas most NT
mss. have preserved the older and less common mäsi (from mas). The ST has a ten-
dency to "correct" ambiguities, as when it changes 
("hand") to the more appro-
priate 
("arm") at 4.58, where a man has to raise his arm rather than simply the
hand (but see 2.193). At 7.129 also unanimously has corrected the more difficult
reaading to the more common 
with the thematic ending.
A limited number of readings are shared by ST and NT-y [i.e., the vulgate], in-
dicating some historical influence of NT-y on the ST. See, for example, 3.47, 234,
240, 2733.
III.2 Northern Transmission
Most mss. written in northern scripts belong to the NT. These scripts include Ben-
gali, various forms of Nâgarï , Newari, Oriya, and Sâradâ
. Examination of the read-
ings unique to the ST clearly points also to the distinct transmission of the NT mss.
The NT has two branches: NT-x, which is the older and the main branch, and
NT-y, which I call the "vulgate," because this is the version represented by most
printed editions of the MDh and the one accompanying the commentary of Kulluka
in most mss.
NT-x (Northern Traditional) : This branch of the NT constitutes the largest single
group of mss. covering all the northern scripts. It is represented by the following
mss.: Be'iiBe2 Be3 Bo »Ca Ho wKt1 wKt3
 NKf> »Kt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 NNgoOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 P7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa.
In the early chapters Jo2 follows the NT-x, but from about chapter seven it agrees
more with NT-y. Given the hybrid nature of most mss., especially of those
belonging to the NT, however, several of the above mss. show the influence of NT-
y. The examination of the readings unique to NT-y 
shows the distinctive
characteristics of NT-x.
The NT-x is followed by most major commentators: Medhätithi , Govindaräja ,
and Näräyana
. The exceptions are Kulluka and Manirâma , a very late commentator
at 7.164 recorded in all the ST mss. is su-


--- PAGE 384 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
373
known to us only from the flawed edition of Dave, and possibly Räghavänanda
3 and
Rämacandra .
The only modern printed edition of the MDh that follows the NT-x, as far as I
know, is that of Jolly (1887). The root texts contained in Jha's edition of Medhä -
tithi's commentary also by and large follows NT-x, because this is the text found in
all the extant mss. ofthat commentary.
NT-y (Northern Vulgate): Of the mss. used in this edition, the NT-y is repre-
sented by the smallest group of mss.: Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3. The only ms. in
a southern script to follow this tradition, indeed the NT as a whole, is inTr3. Given
its late date, it is likely that the ms. was copied either from a printed copy or a ms. of
the vulgate. From about chapter seven, Jo2 frequently follows the vulgate.
The transmission represented by NT-y is the least faithful and contains the
greatest number of corruptions and deviations from what must be presumed to be
the old readings based on the evidence of NT-x and ST. Although I cannot be
certain of this, it appears probable that this version arose in the late medieval period,
possibly under the influence of Kulluka himself or those under the influence of his
well-known commentary. The reason for this is that mss. of Kulluka's commentary
invariably contains the NT-y as the root text.
In numerous places the NT-y has unique readings different from either the
NT-x or the ST. Even more numerous are the instances where the NT-y has
readings shared by a few NT-x mss. (clear cases of hybridization) but different
from the majority of NT-x mss. The following is a sample: 2.11; transposition of
verses 2.225 and 226; 3.77, 81, 85,88,1633, 2&7c, 2780, 28sc; 9.147,169; 10.20, 28;
n.i28d.
Manirama follows the NT-y readings most times, although not consistently; he
probably commented on a hybrid ms. For example, at 3.77 he records the NT-y
reading variante, whereas at 3.81 he has the old reading sräddhena. Kulluka's case
is even more difficult. As I have noted, his commentary is nothing more than a pla-
giarized version of Govindarâja' s lesser known commentary. In many places, there-
fore, the root text presupposed by Kulluka is the NT-x, because that is the text on
which Govindaraja commented. Nevertheless, Kulluka frequently departs from that
and appears to be commenting on a text close to, if not identical with, the NT-y.
This may explain the reason why the NT-y is given as the root text in mss.
containing Kulluka's commentary.
The Vulgate and Printed Editions: The presence of Kulluka's commentary may
be the reason why the NT-y entered the printed tradition; many early printings of
the MDh, such as the first (1813) and the second (1830) Calcutta editions (the latter
reprinted by Jibananda in 1874), contained Kulluka's commentary as well. It is the
northern vulgate that is given also in the edition of Loiseleur Deslongchamps (Paris,
1830). I say "the printed tradition," because it appears that as mss. were copied from
each other and thus established genealogies, so the printed versions of the MDh
3. Considered by Jolly (1887, xv) to have followed Kulluka rather than the older
commentators.


--- PAGE 385 ---
374 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
were for the most part nothing but reprints of earlier versions. This is true of
editions that most Sanskritists use even today, such as that of Mandlik (1886), the
ones printed by the Nirnaya Säga r Press (Bombay, 1946 with many reprints), by the
Kâs i Sanskrit Series (Varanasi, 1970), and the latest edition with 9 commentaries by
Dave (Bombay, 1972-84). It is surprising how few mss. contain some readings
adopted by most printed versions: see 2.11, 96; 3.78, 85, 88,163, 253, 283; 8.172;
11.111,120,245, 249, 252; 12.10, 28,70, 76, 82, 98,104. In one instance (7.86) the
reading of these editions is not supported by a single manuscript I have used.
IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE TEXT
All the mss. and commentaries of the MDh contain basically the same text. The ad-
ditional verses found in some can easily be detected. There are no major recensions
of the MDh giving longer or shorter versions of the text, as, for example, in the case
of the two epics. The constitution of the text, therefore, boils down to the editorial
judgment as to which of two or three competing readings has great claimer to be ac-
cepted as the original.
IV.i Editorial Principles
I give below some general principles that have guided the constitution of the text
and the selection of reading:
1. At the most general level, a reading supported by the ST and NT is adopted in
the critical edition. Any variants restricted to a limited range of mss. must have been
introduced by a scribe or reader. Clearly the vast majority of the readings in the
critical edition fall under this rule.
2. Readings supported by the ST and NT-x are adopted in preference to those
supported only by NT-y. The superiority of the former transmissions is clearly es-
tablished by a close scrutiny of the critical apparatus. They are the ones, moreover,
that are recorded in the medieval literature used as external testimonia in this edi-
tion. They are also supported by the vast majority of the early commentators.
3. In cases where the ST and the NT have different readings, or where the ST
and the NT-y have readings different from NT-x, the determination of the original
reading becomes a lot more difficult. It is not possible to formulate a general and
rigid principle that can be applied in all these instances. I have analyzed each case
separately, taking into account the evidence provided by the commentaries and tes-
timonia, the general sense of the text, and parallel passages within the MDh.
4. The most significant editorial principle is that of lectio difficilior. It is easier
to explain how a more difficult reading is changed to an easier one than the other
way round. The difficulties may be of different sorts. Some are orthographic;
scribes often fail to comprehend a complex combinations of consonants or a strange
looking form created by sandhi. More frequently, however, the difficulty is either in
the term, which is unusual or obscure, or in the resultant meaning. Scribes and read-
ers generally tend to change these to easier and more comprehensible forms.


--- PAGE 386 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
375
5. In only a handful of instances have I rejected the nearly unanimous readings
of the mss. in favor of the reading attested by the commentators. For example, at
3.21yd, every genealogical branch of the mss. record mantravit. I have opted for
mantravat that has the support of all but one commentator.
Departing from normal editorial practice, I have articulated my reasons for
adopting a particular reading in the endnotes. Whenever I have selected a reading
supported by only a minority of mss., such as at 5.61-62 and 8.57,1 have explained
my reasons fully in an endnote. At 8.57, for example, the old commentaries of
Bhâruc i and Medhatithi clearly show that the reading should be iti, even though it
violates grammar. Precisely for this reason, it is also the lectio difficilior. I think
these notes will be useful to readers as they weigh the options themselves; they can
know, rather than guess at, the reasons why I have adopted a particular reading and
the kinds of mss., commentarial, and testimonial support it has.
IV.2 Testimonia and Commentaries
At the initial stages of this project I had hoped that the collation of citations of the
MDh in major medieval legal texts would provide a valuable source for determining
correct readings. Most of these texts, after all, are older by several centuries than the
extant mss. of the MDh. These testimonia, however, have proved much less useful
than I had anticipated. A major drawback is the very editions of these texts; they are
not critically edited and I can never be sure that the reading given in an edition goes
back to the author or has been introduced by the editor. The MDh is a well-known
text; some editors probably knew much of it by heart. They were thus prone to in-
troduce "correct" (i.e., vulgate) readings in place of what they perceived as corrupt
readings of their mss. Thus, for example, I found that the same verse of the MDh
cited in different places in the same text had different readings. Taken cumulatively,
nevertheless, these external testimonia did provide an external check on the read-
ings. It was also a welcome surprise to discover that many of the medieval legal di-
gests regularly followed the readings of the Southern Transmission.
The other non-manuscript evidence I have relied on are the commentaries, es-
pecially the older ones of Bhäruci , Medhatithi, Govindarâja , and Näräyana
. I will
deal below [IV.3] with Jolly's argument that commentaries alone can supply us with
the correct readings of the text. Taken together with the mss., however, the com-
mentaries provided the most significant check on the selection of readings. Several
problems, nevertheless, emerged. First, Bhäruci' s commentary exists only for
chapters 6-12 and in a single mutilated manuscript. Its edition by Derretí depended
on a Devanägar i transcript of the Malayalam original, a transcript which Derrett
himself acknowledges to be faulty. I have used a photocopy of the original Malaya-
lam ms. for this edition, but even then I cannot be sure that the readings preserved in
this ms. faithfully represent Bhäruci' s own readings.
Second, all the mss. of Medhätithi' s commentary go back to a reconstruction
made under the patronage of the 14th-century king Madana. This reconstruction was
based on fragmentary or defective originals. The absence of a verse in the current
mss. of Medhatithi, for example, cannot be taken as evidence that it was lacking


--- PAGE 387 ---
376 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
also in the original commentary. We see many instances where other commentators,
such as Govindarâj a and KullOka, refer to the commentary of Medhätith i on a par-
ticular verse which is lacking in the extant mss. For example, all the mss. of
Medhätith i omit his commentary on 9.182-201; yet Kullûka refers to his comments
on these verses showing that his ms. of Medhätith i contained comments on these
verses. Likewise, Räghavänand
a refers to a reading of Medhätith i on 7.132, although
his commentary on this verse has not survived. Thus, when the commentary on a
particular verse is lacking in the mss. or editions, we cannot assume that Medhätith i
did not recognize that verse as authentic. It may simply have been lost in the trans-
mission (BUhler 1886, cxxvi).
To complicate matters further, we do not have a reliable critical edition of this
commentary; even the one done by Jha is defective. I have found that in many cru-
cial readings the ones given by Jha differ from the ones I find in the original mss.
Indeed, sometimes the old versions given in Mandlik's edition are more faithful
than Jha's. To give just one example, the editions give Medhätithi' s reading at
3.iO4d as annädidäyinäm,
 whereas my ms. Pu'° reads annädyadäyinäm,
 the reading
adopted in the critical edition.
The only editions we have for the other commentaries are the very imperfect
one of Mandlik, and the even more flawed one produced recently by Dave.
IV.3 Jolly's Edition
Jolly (1887) raises a fundamental question regarding editorial principles for consti-
tuting the MDh. Explaining his dependence almost exclusively on mss. containing
commentaries and his reluctance to use mss. containing only the text of the MDh,
Jolly (1887, xi) notes: "It is sufficiently obvious that MSS. of the text alone are of
very inferior value generally for deciding questions of verbal criticism in a work of
established authority such as the Code of Manu, on which copious Commentaries
explaining nearly every word of the text were composed at an early period and care-
fully handed down to posterity." It is, of course, obvious that all our extant mss.
come from periods much later than those of the early commentators, such as
Bhäruci , Medhätithi , and Govindarâja . There are, however, problems with the prin-
ciple articulated by Jolly. First, it is not true that "nearly every word of the text" has
been explained by commentators; I estimate that up to 50% of the words are not
commented on or at the most simply listed. Given the fact that we do not have a
critical edition of a single commentary, it is difficult to know for certain the reading
of a term given in the commentary when there is no explanation attached. I have
found frequently that readings in my mss. of Medhätith i differ from those given in
the editions of Jha and Dave.
Second, it appears that Jolly often takes the reading found in the root text at-
tached to a commentary in the mss. as the reading of that commentator; this is mis-
leading, because frequently the root text in these mss. do not follow the readings
presupposed in the commentary. It is clear that scribes inserted readings into the
root text from their memory. At 3.ii4c, for example, Jolly records no variants and
takes the reading of the root texts to be that of Medhätith i and Govindarâja . Here he


--- PAGE 388 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
377
has failed to read the commentary itself, for both clearly record their reading as
anvak and gives agre, the reading in most mss. and adopted by Jolly, as an alternate
reading they found in their sources (pätha) . Likewise, at 3.i4oa Jolly reads
sräddhäni
 following the root text, which he ascribes to Medhatithi, whereas the
commentary itself clearly reads sräddhena. At3.22oc, my ms. Pu'° containing
Medhatithi's commentary reads sräddhe, whereas the commentator himself clearly
read smddham. At 8.314 likewise, the mss. Lo4 Lo5 give the reading dhävatä,
 while
Medhatithi's commentary clearly shows that his reading was dhïmatâ, and at 8.380
they read vyavasthitam whereas Medhâtithi' s explicit gloss shows that his reading
was api sthitam. Only those readings that can be supported by the explanations
given in a commentary, therefore, can be accepted as the readings of that commen-
tator.
My experience in editing this text has been that a large number of mss., in-
cluding those of the text alone, taken together with the commentarial evidence is the
best method to constitute the text.
The text constituted by Jolly was a great advance over the then extant editions.
His dependence on just 18 mss. containing commentaries,4 supplemented by five
mss. of the text only, however, makes his editorial decisions not always correct and,
even when correct, not supported fully by the evidence. Jolly does not present a
Stemma Codicum in his edition. The present edition, I believe, is an improvement
on Jolly's version, although not drastically different from it. My discovery of the
Southern Transmission, of which Jolly was unaware, has given me an important and
independent check on the readings presented in the northern mss.
Jolly also appears not to have read and noted down variants carefully even in
the manuscripts he collated. In numerous instances, I find that Jolly does not record
important variants found in numerous manuscripts, some found even in the manu-
scripts he had access to, such as the Säradä
: see, for example, 2.8oc, igSb-c, 220;
S.iioa, 228c; 5.64^, 64d, 6sb, 6sc, 6yb.
IV.4 Critical Edition and Critical Apparatus
In the post-modern and post-colonial rhetoric, the value and the rationale for criti-
cally editing texts have come under scrutiny. Some reject the entire enterprise as a
relic of the "indological" past; "indology" itself has become a dirty word associated
with colonial collaborators. For me, indology is nothing more and nothing less than
the study of India, just as biology is the study of life forms; it does not carry any
ideological baggage.5
Much of this criticism of critical editions is based, I believe, on ignorance,
4. Nine of these 18 are mss. of Medhatithi, all of which go back to the 14th-century
reconstruction and are, therefore, not independent sources.
5. This is not the place to defend indology. Others have done it better and more
extensively than I can within the confines of this introduction: see W. Halbfass, "Research
and Reflection: Responses to My Respondents," in Beyond Orientalism: The Work of
Wilhelm Halbfass and its Impact on Indian Cross-Cuttural Studies, ed. E. Franco and K.
Preisendanz (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1997), pp. 1—25.


--- PAGE 389 ---
378 
Introduction to the Critical Edition
misinformation, and misunderstanding of both the process and the aim of critically
constituting ancient texts. It is not true that the editor looks at the different readings
before him or her and selects one that he or she thinks is the original. Although it is
impossible to remove the subjective altogether and it is true that editing is more an
art than a science, yet a good editor abides by accepted principles in selecting read-
ings and constituting the text. What is even more important, unlike the reader of an
anthropological construction of native categories, societies, and value systems who
has no way of checking whether that is the only construction that can be made from
the data, the reader of a critical edition is provided with all the information that the
editor himself or herself used and, therefore, can come up with different conclu-
sions. This information concerning the variant readings found in the mss. is pro-
vided in perhaps the most important and also the most neglected element of a
critical edition: the critical apparatus.
The aim of a critical edition is, no doubt, to establish a text as close to the origi-
nal written by the author as the extant evidence permits.6 This is often merely the
editorial horizon towards which we march determinedly but which we never reach.
After it leaves the hand of the author a text begins a life of its own in the hands of
readers, commentators, and copyists. Over this after-life of a text the author has no
control; but it is, nevertheless, as much a part of the text as the labors of the author
that brought it into being. The richer a text is and the more it becomes part of a
culture and society, the richer its after-life will be. And the MDh has been a text that
has occupied a central position in the culture and intellectual life of India for close
to two millennia; it has had a rich after-life. The aim of a critical edition is not
merely to reconstruct the original text but also to document its after-life. Just as at
an archeological dig the archeologists do not throw aside all the earlier layers to get
at the oldest stratum, so the editor does not throw away all the changes and
accretions to get at the original text. The story both at the dig and of the text is told
not just in the oldest stratum but at every stratum. The documentation about the
after-life of the text is found in the critical apparatus, which provides information on
all the significant variant readings, additions, and omissions found in mss. and
citations and on the readings and the interpretations provided by the various
commentators. The critical apparatus provides the textual history of the MDh.
Unfortunately, most readers pay scant attention to the information found in the
critical apparatus. One reason for this is the very nature of such an apparatus: often
the significant variants and interpretations are buried among other less significant
ones and simple scribal errors. To remedy this at least partially, I have selected the
most important variants and translated them in the notes to my translation. The
reader of the translation, thus, will be able to see how the text would read if we fol-
low different versions.
A critical edition, however carefully and painstakingly carried out, is limited by
the available data: manuscripts, testimonia, commentaries. Any additions and
6. When there is no identifiable author, as in the case of the epics, then the goal is to
reconstruct the oldest version of the text that can be discovered on the basis of extant
evidence. See Sukthankar's comments in the introduction to the Ädiparvan of the MBh, pp.
iii, Ixxxvi.


--- PAGE 390 ---
Introduction to the Critical Edition 
379
emendations carried out between the author's original and the beginning of the ex-
tant manuscript tradition are beyond the scope of a critical edition. Thus, it has been
called "lower criticism" to distinguish it from "higher criticism," which depends on
a close reading of the text and the acumen of the scholar. Higher criticism aims at
disclosing different sources and layers within a text, layers that may be older and
younger. It is this sort of criticism that discovered the four sources of the Penta-
teuch: J (JHVH), E (Elohim), P (Priestly), and D (Deuteronomic). A critical edition
is not the place to undertake this sort of criticism. I have attempted to identify latter
additions to the MDh using higher criticism in my general introduction that precedes
the translation.


--- PAGE 391 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 392 ---
Note on the Critical Edition
Given the inevitable complexity of the critical apparatus to an edition involving
over 50 manuscripts, citations from medieval texts, and commentaries, it may be
helpful to spell out some of the conventions I have used.
1. 
The sigla that identify the mss. are given in the Introduction to the Edition
II.2: Description of the Manuscripts. The initial letter in small caps indicates
the script. A notation within brackets added after a siglum apply only to that
ms. The notation [cor to] indicates that the original reading of the ms. is the
same as that of the critical edition, but that it was subsequently corrected to
the variant reading recorded in the critical apparatus. The notation [but cor]
indicates that the original reading of the ms. is the variant recorded but that it
has been subsequently corrected to the reading in the critical edition.
Abbreviations: me = marginal correction; ma = marginal addition; fli = first
hand; sh = second hand.
2. 
In citations from medieval texts, the abbreviation vl (varia lectio) indicates a
variant reading in the mss. recorded by the editors. In the commentaries, the
notation [pätha ] indicates that the reading is given by a commentators as a
variant reading he had encountered in his sources.
3. 
I have added end notes to explain some of the editorial decisions I have made.
Such notes are signaled by an asterisk after the verse number in the critical
apparatus. The end notes normally refer to a specific päda . When the note
pertains to an additional verse found in some mss. after a particular verse, this
is indicated by an "x" after the verse number.
4. 
In order not to overload the critical apparatus thereby undermining its very
purpose, I have omitted obvious scribal errors, especially when these errors
are confined to a single ms. I have noted the absence of an anusvära only
when the absence affects the syntax; scribes often forget the anusvära dot of
the northern scripts. Unintentional omission of anusväras is less common is
southern scripts where the anusvära is written after the letter. Scribes also
omit the visarga frequently, especially when it occurs before a sibilant. This is
markedly so in southern mss. I have not noted these variants unless they affect
the syntax. Although I have noted avagrahas in the edition, they are
uniformly omitted in the variants given in the critical apparatus; mss. hardly
ever note avagrahas.
381


--- PAGE 393 ---
382 
Note on the Critical Edition
5. 
I have recorded the variants found in the mss. used by Jolly in his 1887 edi-
tion. These mss. are given within brackets with Jolly at the beginning. Thus
[Jolly Gr] refers to the ms. Or in Jolly's edition. The sigla of these mss. are
given in the Introduction to the Edition 11.4: Editions.
6. 
An asterisk after a word in the edition indicates that the reading is uncertain.


--- PAGE 394 ---
Initial folios are missing in the following mss: NKt4 containing verses i-4b; NNg con-
taining verses 1-12; Pu9 containing verses 1-64. The folios containing the first chapter is so
mutilated in sCa that I was not able to collate it.
Before verse i the following verse is added in Be1 ßBe2 Bo Ho wKt' wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo1
Lo3 oOrsOx1 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Ti1 Tr2 Go NäRn Rc:
a) La1
d)Ho
i.* Päda- b cited by Visi.z — a) Pu8 '
— c)oMd5
— d) Be1 Bo Jm
Pu'°Wa c
La2
2.* Padas b-d lacuna in Ho — c) Ox2
oOr
Two additional verses in Be1 Ho wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr2 MTr4
MTr6; both commented by Nd. The first half-verse of i and second half-verse of 2 in sOx1
sPu6, and the second verse in oOr:
i. a) La1
b) wKt1 wKt3
Lo2
Tr2
Ho
Lo2
oMd5 adds a further half-verse
r\
<")
MTr4 MTr6 \folly Nd\
d) Be1 Ho
MTr4 MTr6
;oMd5
Lo2
iMd' om
Nd Rc support
[but me]; Ho Tr2
2. a) wKt3
La1
wKt1
TMd3
cMy om
—
 b) Ho wKt1 wKt3 La1 [me to] Tr2
- c) wKt3
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly Nd] Rc
oOr;
;Lo 2
La'
wKt1 wKt3
sOx1
3. 
Omitted in Wa — a) Be1
TMd3
oMy
— b) NPu1
 •
c)Bo
— d)Hy
383


--- PAGE 395 ---
4. 
a) Pu8
Lo2 oMy Tj
— b) Lo2
sOx1 sPu6
— c)
Pu5 Pu7
MTr6 Me [pâtha ]
rMd3 TMd4
Wa
5. 
Omitted in oOr. Padas c-d cited by Sam on VeS 1.2.19— a-b) BhP 2.9^
— b) eKt5 [but me] Wa '
wKt1
—c) BhP 2.c
— d) BhP 2.9
NKt
6.* a-b) BhP 2.10
as qualifying
' — c) Me
La2 oMy BhP 2.10
Re
appears to read
[as adjective ol
sOx1 sPu1
- d) BhP 2.1'
7* Cited by Sam on BU 1.4.6 — a) NPu1
Be1 sBe2 Bo Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3
BKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Pu10 Ti2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
[this section torn in oMy] —
j
c) oMy
NKt4
wKt3
— d) oMrf
Bo Ho Hy Jm
lo1 Kt 2TMd 3TMd 4GMyNPu' Pu5 Pu7Tj2Tr' Mandlik Jolly KSS
Pu2
BhP
2.11
8. 
a) MTr6
BKt5
— b) Hy sOx1 sPu6 !
— d) ßBe2 Bo Hy Jo1 Lo1
Lo3 oMd2 Tj1 MTr3 K.t2Ku Rn
La2 Tj2
Me Go Na Rc support
oMd5
9. 
b) BhP 2.15
— c) NKt4 La1 BhP 2.16
BBe2 Ho Tj2
— d) TMd3
m* Omitted in Lo3 — a) sOx1
NKt4
•— c) Jo2 La1 Lo1 [me] Ox2oMd5 Tj1 MTr4
Wa
[La1
Wa
wKt1
om
Additional verse in Be1 [ma] xMd4 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6:
384
Chapter l
d)
— b) Me appears to prefer the reading


--- PAGE 396 ---
Chapter l 
385
d) sOx1 sPu6
A further verse in sOx' sPu6 [very faint and difficult to read]:
11. Be1 transposes 11 and 12 — a) eKt5
rMd3
•— a-b)wKt'
— c) Pu10
sOx1 sPu6
— b) Pu10
NKt4
— d) Ox2
Jo2Lo3Tj'
—
 C)BhP 2.22 S
12. a-b) BhP 2.21
13.* a) BhP 2.22
sOx1 sPu6
[this is Me's gloss];
TMd3
Tr2
La1
La1 Tj1
wKt1
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2
wKt3 oMd2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
Lo3
-b)Tj'
BKt5
— c) BhP 2.23
Be1
[unclear whether root or gloss]
oMy
Pu5 Pu7
Me
MTr3
Lo1
TMd4
— d) BhP 2.24
14. Omitted in Tr2 — a-d) BhP 2.23
— a) Kt2 Lo5 Jolly
Pu10
Be1 Bo
TMd4
Hy
NPU1
Lo2
oMy
Additional half-verse in Lo2 TMd4:
15. a) TMd3
— b) Ox3
Jo1
wKt1
— c) BhP 2.24
Lo5
Bo NKt4 NPu1
TMd4
Ho wKt1 Lo1 Lo4 [but cor} Pu5 Pu7
— d) NKt
4
BhP 2.25
Additional verse in TMd4 MTr4 MTr6;ma sh after 14 in Lo2:
b) MTr4
[rest of the verse omitted] — d) TMd4
Lo2 TMd4


--- PAGE 397 ---
Additional half-verse in Lo2 TMd4 oMd5:
16. a) BhPz.26
TMd3 TMd4
Mir6
Lo2
TMd3 om
Be1 sOx1 after
jump to
in 173 omitting i6b-d and iya [haplo]
—
 b)H>
Bo
NKt4
— c) Lo1
[but
me]; TMd3 TMd4
Me [patha preferred by Me]
— d) BhP 2.27 [gives here
two padas]
17. a) Be
Hy
; TMd4
— b) Pu10
; Lo4 Lo5 NNg
Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 MTr3 MeMandlik Jha Dave
oMy
BhP 2.28
— d) La1 TMd3
NKt4
; Be1 Bo
TMd'
18. a-d) BhP 2.29
— b) oMd2 Pu'°
— d)Bo
TMd4
19. a) Lo3
— c) wKt1
NNg
[but mcfli] —
 d) Kt2
; NKt4
Hy
Bo
Tj'
oMd5
20.* Before verse 20 TMd3 andoMd5 insert verse 27 — a) cMd5
; wKt1 Tr2
MTr6
— a-b) cMy
— b) oMd5
wKt1
c)BoTMd3Tj>
— d) oMy
Pu10
21. Cited in Sam on VeS 1.3.28 — a) Bo
^Lo'Tj1
Be1 wKt1 BKt5 NPu1
Pu5 Pu7
Tr2 o m
BBe2TMd3oMd5
— b) wKt1
oOr om
Tj<
-c)
TMd3 TMd4
— d) [Jolly G R]
; TMd4
22.* a) BhP 2.42
MTr4
TMd4
Be1 om
Lo2NPu'
sOx1 NNg
TMd3
— b) La1
Bo
BhP 2.43
TMd3 om
La2
—
 c) BhP 2.43
Ho om
; BBe2 Pu7 [but cor] Tr2
Tr2
386 
Chapter l


--- PAGE 398 ---
Chapter l 
387
TMd4
— d) Kt2
23. oMy omits päda s a-b — a) sOx sPu6
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 [me to] Kt2 NKt4
Lo3 oMd2 Ti1 Ti2 Tr2 Mir3 MandlikJha KSS Dave
— a-b) BhP 2.43
— b)Ho
— c) oMy
— d) Be1
oMy
Additional verses in TMd4 oMd5:
d) TMd4 
— e) TMd4 
— f) TMd4
24. a) TMd
; TMd3 TMd4 cMy
Jo2
Tr2
Ox2
— b) La2 Lo"
—
 c)Ho
La2
NPU1
25. a) TMd3 oMd5 oMy Mir4 Mir6
[MTr4MTr6
NKt4
Tr2
Kt2
— a-b) BhP 2.45
— b) oM d5
oMy Ox2 [but cor] MTr4 MTr6 
•—c) BhP 2.46 
HyTMd3
d) BhP 2.46
;TMd 3
26. Omitted in Wa — a-d) BhP 2.46'
— a) BBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 NK.14 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 Ox2 N?U'
Pu2 Tj1 Tj2 uTr^Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Hy Jo1 Kt2oMd2 oOr NPu1 MTr3
[A/a and
Re support this reading]; Me Re
supported also by the glosses of Go and Ku
—
 b) Kt2 wKt3 sKt5
TMd4
wKt1
Ox2
— c) Be1
Lo1
27. Cited by Sam on VeS 4.2.6— a) Kt2 om
La1
Hy
MTr4
TMd3
Ho
cor to
wKt1
oMy
Ox3
Hy
—
 b)Hy
MTr3
Ox3
TMd3
TMd4
— c) BhP 2.48
Be1 sOx1 sPu6
;MTr6
— d) Be1
wKt3
28. a)JmTj'
BKt5
wKt1 Lo1
Bo
La1
— a-b) BhP 2.48
—


--- PAGE 399 ---
388 
Chapter 1
— b) Lo1
K?
wKt3 ßKt5
— c)Tr2
— d) BhP 2.49
Additional half-verse in oMd5 [partly moth eaten]:
29. a) La1
— b) Lo3 NPu1 Tr2
oMy
BhP 2.49
— c) BhPz.50
TMd3
oOr
BBe2 wKt3 La1 Lo4
Ox3
Pu5 Pu7
TMd3
Wa
Pu10
— d) Ho GMd5 GMy Pu5 Tj1 Tr2
 MTr4
oMd5
La2
;MTr3
Hy Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 Pu10
MTr3 MTr4 MTr6
Wa
Jo2 NNg
cMy
30. a) Bo La1
MTr3
BhP 2.50
Pu10
Bo La1
Tr2
— b) wKt1 Dave
BhP 2.50
Pu10
wKt3
— d)Tj'
xMd4
NNg
31. a) BhP 2.51
BKt5 om
Lo2 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7
La2
— c-d) BhP2.52
— d) MTr3 om
La1
Tr2
Additional verse in wKt3:
32. a) NKt4
La2
— b)Tj' Wa
— c) NPu
1
TMd3
TMd4 oMy BhP 2.59
o Or sOx1 s Pu6
MTr6
— c-d) wKt1
33. a) oMy
MTr6
MTr4
TMd4 om
—
 c) La1
TMd4
Kt2
TMd3
MTr6
NKt4
— d) TMd4
TMd3
TMd4
Additional half-verse after 33b in oMd5:
torn
34. Cited by Hem 1.242 — b)uBe2 Bo TMd3 NPu1
Ox2 [Jolly Nd]
Lo1


--- PAGE 400 ---
Chapter l 
389
— c) Mir4
— d) Lo2
Lo1 TMd4
Wa
BhP 2.6o-62parallels
Manu 1.34-5 but with significant variants.
35. Cited by Hem 1.242 — a) Jo1
Jo2
Lo2 oMd2 Wa
NKt4 La1 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 N?U' Hem
—
 b) TMd4
Mir6
Tr2
— c)Tr2
— d) Be1 Hy
36. Padas c-d omitted in sBe2 — a) BhP 2.62
Lo4 Lo5
Be1
BBe2 Ho Kt2 NKt
4 Lo" Lo5 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly G M4]
NPu1
TMd3
Bo
Tr2
— b) oMy
TMd3 oMd5 Mir4 Mir6
BhP2.62
TMd3
— c) NKt4
TMd3
oMd5
— c-d) BhP
2.63
— d) Be1
sOx1 sPu6
La2
Lo2
37. a)NKt 4cMyTj'
Ox3
— d) MTr"
Tj'
Tr2
In place of padas c-d, BhP 2.64 gives four padas:
38. a) BhP 2.65 [does not have pada-b]
Bo after pada-a adds:
—b) MTr6
— c-d) BhP 2.65'
39. ma in Lo4 — a) BhP 2.66
TMd3
Lo3Tj'
— b) BhP 2.66
— c) oMyMTr4
— c-d) BhP 2.66
— d)Pu'°
40. a)NKt4TMd3oMd5Tj'
Wa
Hy lacuna at
BKt5 Pu5 Pu7
— b) Bo Ho Lo2 TMd4 Ox2 Pu8
Pu8
Bo Ho
TMd3
BhP 2.67
NKf Lo3 oMd5 sOx1 Tj1 Tr2 BhP 2.67
MTr4
— c) La2
Additional verse in TMd4 oMd5 Tr2; given after verse 42 in wKt1 La1, and after 44 in
wKt3:


--- PAGE 401 ---
390
Chapter l
a) oMd5
— b) wKt1 wKt3 La1 oMd5
wKt1
c) Tr2 om
wKt1 La1
wKt3
TMd4
oMd5
— d)
Tr2
iMd4
oMd5
wKt1 wKt3 La1
wKt3
41. b) TMd3
— c) wKt1
Tr2
— d) sKt5
42. a) Tr2
Lo1 Lo3 Lo5 oMd5 cMy Tj1
TMd3
— b)Tj'
TMd3
— c) BhP 2.69
TMd4
wKt1
wKt3
oMy
- d) Tr2
oMd5
43. a-d) BhP 2.69
— a) NNg
— b)TMd3
— c)Lo>TMd 4
— d) Hy TMd3
oMd5 oMy NNg MTr3 MTr4 Holly M'-2-4'7'8-9 Nd]
Tj2 [Jolly R]
TMd4
La2
44.* a) BhPz.jo
TMd4
oMy NNg
b) TMd4
wKt3 oMd1
Tr2
Lo3Tj'
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La2 Lo2 oMd2 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2
c) BhP 2.711
TMd4
— d) oOr
NKt4
45.* a) TMd3
TMd3
— b) BhP 2.71
;oOfTMd4
cMy
TMd3
cMd5
MTr4
— c)
TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4
Ti2
NKt4 cMy BhP 2.72
Be1 Ho NNg Pu5 Pu7 Wa Me Ku
Lo2
Pu10
— d) oOr
46.* a) Bo
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 oMy Tr1 Tr2 MTr3
 MTr4
 MTr6 BhP 2.72 No Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
TMd4
Hy
— b) MTr4 MTr6
Ho
— c) Tr2
NKt4
TMd3
— d) BhP 2.73
Md3
TMd4


--- PAGE 402 ---
Chapter l
391
47. Omitted in ßKt5; padas c-d omitted in Ox1 sPu6 — a) Tr2
cMy
— b)
Kt2om
wKt3
— c)NPu'
wKt1
Hy
— d) NKt4
Jo1
MTr4
rMd3
48. Cited by Laks 14.111 — a) Lo3 NNg Tj2
Tr2
Be1 Bo Ho La1 Lo1
Lo2 Lo3 NNg sOx1 NPu1 sPu0 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M4-7"9 Ku Nd]
Pu5 Pu7 Uolly G]
— a-b) Laks
— c) MTr4 MTr6
Lo5
oMd5
TMd4 sOx1 sPue
Pu5 Pu7
— c-d) Pu8
— d) Ox2
,NKf
TMd3
Additional half-verse in NKt4:
49. a) wKt1
oOr
TMd3
— b) wKt1 sKt5
— c) wKt1
Bo
-d)Jo2Lo3Tj'
SO. a) BhP 2.75
oOr Pu8
— b) BhP 2.75
TMd3 oMd5
cMy Pu'°MTr 4 MTr6
— c) BhP 2.77
wKt1 sKf sOx1 sPu6
— d)
Bo La2 Lo'TMd3 oMd5 cMy MTr4 N3
Tj2
Wa
Lo2 TMd3
Tr2
51. a) Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
BBe2
Pu5 Pu7
TJ1
NKt4
— b) BhP 2.78
rMd3
NPu1
oMy Tr2
Tj1
TMd4
— c) BhP 2.78
oMd2
Additional verse in La1:
52. b) Bo
Kt2 Tj1
wKt1
— cOTr2
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
Hy
Lo4
— d) NKt4
Tr2
Hy
oOrsOx1 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly G]


--- PAGE 403 ---
392
Chapter l
53. a)wKt3
Hy
Be1 Bo Ho wKt1 NKt
4 La2 TMd3 oMd5 Pu10
BhP 2.80;
La1
Ox2
NPu1
sOx1 sPu6 MTr3
wKt1
om
Hy Kt2 Jo2 oMd2 Jolly [who gives no variants]
BKt5
—
 b) BhP
2.80
— c) oMy
— d) TMd3
sOx1 sPu6
Lo1
54- a) Lo1
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
— b) Jo2 Lo4 Ti1 Tr2
— c) xMd4
—
 d) BhP 2.81
cMd5
55. a) La1 Lo2 NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly G] BhP 2.82 Go
oOr
NKt4 La2
— b) Kt2
Pu10
— c) BhP 2.82
sOx1 sPu6
56. Omitted in xMd3 — a) Lo4 Lo5 cí^ T ; wKt3 TMd4 NNg
BhP 2.83
Be1
wKt1 NKt4 BKt5
—- b) MTr4 MTr6
;TMd4
Wa
Lo3
NPu1
BoTj1
BKt5
sOx1 sPu6
Jo om
Be1
NKl4
TMd4 oMd5 oMy
—
 c)L(f
La2
oMd3 MTr6 \Jolly Nd]
sOx1 sPu6
— d) TMd4
BKt5
Tj2
57. a) TMd4
TMd3
— b) BhP 2.84
oMd2
Hy
d) wKt1
sOx1 sPu6
oMd1
58. Cited by Mädh 1.106 — a) oMd2
Wa
TMd4
TMd3
— c)
Ox2
TMd3
— d) oMd5
Lo1 TMd4 Mädh
Jo2
59. Cited by Apa 4 — c) TMd3
Bo
Tj'
— b)La
— c) cMd5
wKt1
TMd3
— d) wKt3 Lo2 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly M4 G
RNd]flc
Kt2 oMy
Bo
Additional half-verse in TMd4 oMd5:


--- PAGE 404 ---
Chapter l
393
a) TMd4
60. a) La2
— tyTr2
NKt4
Lo4
oMd5
wKt1 [but cor]
— c) Bo rTTW — d) La2
Lo1
61.* a)BhP2.w8
sOx'sPu6PuloTr2
Tr2
— b) La2
Be1
wKt1
— c) Tr2 om
oMd1 TMd4
— d) Be1 NKf La1 [cor to}
La2 Lo2 iMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Wa Rn Jolly
I)1
Ox3
Bo
62. a) Lo2
MTr6
wKt1 Kt2 La1 La2 Lo5 sOx1 NPu
1 sPu6
NKt4
wKt3
Lo1 Lo2 Pu2 Pu7
Bo Jo1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 oMy Ox3 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 VfaMandlik Jha KSS Dave
— WsBe2
Bo
Ox3
TMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr6
Hy
— c) oMd1
Hy Pu5
Be1
63. a) Hy TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Pu'°
TMd3
— a-b) cMy
— c) MTr6
— d) TMd4
INKt 4
Be1 NPu
1 MTr3
BoLo1
Additonal half-verse in Lo2 TMd4 oMd5 MTr6:
b) oMd5
MTr6
64.* Parallel in BhP 2.86-8but in a greatly expanded version. — a) NPu
1
La1
-b)Tj'
Lo3
TMd3
Bo Hv Kt2 NKt4 BKt5 La1 La2 Lo1
Lo5 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 MTr3
Lo3
— c) BBe2 Jm Jo1 Kt2oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tj1
Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
oMd5
Bo
Lo3
TMd4 cMd5 MTr6
Tr' [but cor]
—
 d)oMd1oMd5
MTr6
Ho La1 Lo2 oMd1 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Pu2 sPu6 Tr2 Na [patha] Re Jolly
Ho
65. a)Kt2
Lo3
Kt2
La2
— b)cMd'
sOx1 sPu6
Ho
NKt
4 Lo3
Hy
BKt5
" — c) Tr2
— d) NKf


--- PAGE 405 ---
394
Chapter 1
TMd3
66. a)oOr
TMd4
Pu9
oMd1
BKt5 TMd3
sOx1 sPu6
— b)
Lo4 Pu10 Wa
— c) Lo4
Jo1
Pu9
Jo1 Lo3
— c-d) oMd5
— d) Ox3
Pu10
wKt1
67. a) sOx1 sPu6
Wa
Lo4 Lo5
Pu10
ßBe2 Hy La1
— b) Jm
TMd3
oMd1
— d) Ox3
rMd3 '
68.* a) Jo1
Kt2
wKt3 TMd3
Lo2
TMd4
NPu
1 Pu2
Pu5 Pu7
Bo
— b) TMd4 cMd5 cMy MTr4
MTr6
Bo
BhP 2.92
— c) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 uKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3
 MTr4 [Jolly M4 R Nd] BhP 2.93 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
—
 d) Tr2
[seeogd]; La1
BhP 2.93
69. b)TMd3
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La2 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 Jolly
Ox2
— c) Ho Wa om
—
 d)Bo
iMd4
wKt3
Jo1
NNg[Z>Mi cor/7î ] Pu10
TMdJ
70. a) La1
— b) wKt1
sOx1
— c) Tj1
NKt4
oMy
— d) oOr om
71. a) wKt3 La2
Lo5
— b) TMd4
TMd3
— c) TMd3
— dl TMd3
72. a) Jo2 La2 Lo1 NPu1 Tj1
 MTr6 ^—
 b) Tj1 Tr2
Pu9
— c) sKt5
Lo1
oMd1
TMd3
— d) NPu
1
Jo1 KKS
JmJo1
^La'Lo'NPu'Tj'/irAS
BhP 2.99
oOr


--- PAGE 406 ---
Chapter 1
395
73. Padas c-d omitted in Pu9 — a) oMy
Lo2
Pu10
NPu1
Wa
Bo
Ho NNe Ox3
wKt1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 BhP 2.99
BKt5
—- b) wKt1 BKt5 La1
Lo2 Ox2
Tr2
— (OLo'Tj1
— d) Tr2
74. a) BhP 2.100
,oMd5
Lo4 Lo5
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
c)oOrßhP 2.10l
Lo2
TMd4
—
 d)oOr
75. a) Pu10
oOr
— b) Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly M'-2-7-8-9]:
sOx1
— c)Bo
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5
BhP 2.102
— d) wKt1
sOx1 sPu6
Tf
TMd3
76. a) TMd4
BhP 2.102
— b) sKt5
xMd4
— (f)
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Mir4 Mir6
[TMd3oMd5MTr6
cf. 75d]; Lo1
NNg
TMd4
Hy
Bo
Tr2
77. Padas c-d omitted in Wa — b) Hy
Lo2 TMd3 oMy
sKt5 TMd3
oMy Pu9
— c-d) BhP 2.104
—
 c)Hy
BKt5
78.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu9 — a) sBe2 Lo1 Lo3 Tj1 Tr2 No Re
sBe2
TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6
— a-b) BhP 2.104<
TMd4
— b) oMy
BKt5
oMd5 Pu8
sBe2 Bo wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 oMd2
oMd1 TMd3
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
NKt4 Lo2 Lo' Lo4 NNg sOx1 Ox3
NPu' Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha
KSSDave
Pu9
[rest om] —
 c) TMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr6 Nd
— d) TMd3
Additional verse in Tr2; commented by Re:
79. Folio containing verses 79-100 missing in La — a) Bo
Hy TMd3
—
—


--- PAGE 407 ---
396
Chapter l
b) BhP 2.106
NNg
TMd3
NKt4
BKt5
TMd4Tj'
— c) oMy
TMd3
Bo
80. a) TMd3
— b) Lo4 TMd3 NNg Ox3 Wa ÎPT; Jm
NKt4
TMd3
Wa
— c) TMd3
— d) Lo1
Wa
BhP 2.112
81.* Pâda s a-b cited by Apa 1012 — b) Lo4 Ox3
cMd1
— c) TMd4
Nd [patha]
Mir3
TMd3
oMd1
— d) La2 oOr
BhP 2.113
Pu10
Hy Kt2 Mir3 KKS
oMd2
wKt1
TMd4
[copy unclear]
82. Päda s c-d omitted in MTr3; a more extensive version in BhP 2.113-5. Cited by Apa
1012 — a) TMd4
TMd3 TMd4
cMy
— b) oMy
Ox2
Kt2
Tr2
Be1 Bo La2
TMd4 NKt4
— c) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3
TMd3
Bo
sOx1 sPu6
Hy
— d) wKt1
83. Omitted in oMy [haplo]. Cited by Apa 1012 — a) NNg Tj1
Bo
oMd1
Apa
—
 b) Pu9
— c) iMd3 TMd4 BhP 2.115
NKt4
Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 uT^MandlikJha KSS Dave
Pu2
Hy
Ku Co
gloss
supports
[others do not comment] — d) Hy Jo1 Kt2oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 KSS
TMd3
Jo1
NKtf lacuna at
84. A longer version given in BhP 2.116-7 — a) NKf
1 lacuna at
— b) oMy
— c) oMd5
MTr4 MTr6
oMy
BKt5
MTr
3 om
A\
U7
oMy
[cf. pâdabï.Tr
2
85. Cited by Dev 1.27 — b) TMd3
Hy
— c) Bo Tr2
Lo2
La2
sOx1 sPu6
— cHTr2
cMd1
MTr6
BhPz.nS
NKt 4'
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 408 ---
Chapter 1
397
86. Cited by Hem 3/3.657; Dev 1.27 —- a) Jm NKt4 sOx1
Dev [vl]
La2
oMd1
Hy
— b) Lo1
[but me]; o Or Dev
Hem
—
 c) Bo oOr sOx1 sPu6 BhP 2.119
TV
— d) NKt4 oMd1 TMd3
cMd5 oMy MTr4 Hem
Re omits verse 86 and comments on the following in its place:
Additional verse in Pu :
87. a) BhP 2.120
rMd3
oMd5 NNg NPu1
[cf. 93c];sOx' sPu6
Tr2
— b) Lo1
Tj1
BhP
2.12O
— c) oMy BhP 2.120
— d) Tr2
Tj2
Be1
Wa
88. Omitted in sKt5 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 1.8 — a) Lo3 cMd1 Tj ' Tr2
Pu9
— b) Ho Pu9 om
— c) NKt4 La2
— d)Wa
89. Cited by Laks 1.8; Mudh 1.396 — a)GMd'
— a-b) BhP 2.122
— c) wKt1 NKt4 TMd3 BhP 2.122
NKt4
Hy
Jm Jo1 oMd2 cMy MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
BBe2 Kt2 wKt3
— d) BhP
2.122
TMd3 Tr2 [Jolly Nd]
rMd4
sBe2 Bo Ho
Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly G Ku] Go Ku Mandlik KSS Dave
sOx1
oMd5 oMy
wKt3
90. Cited by Laks 1.8-9; Mädh 1.416 — a) wKt1
— c) TMd3 NPu1 Tr2
oMy
Hy
PiiPu'Tj1
— d) Tr2
91. Cited by Laks 1.9 — a) oMy
TMd4
Tr2
—
 b) BhP 2.124
NPu1
BKt5
— d)Bo
wKt3
BhP
2.124


--- PAGE 409 ---
398
Chapter l
92. a-d) BhP 2.125
— c) TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 NPu
1 sPu6
Be1 Ho Jo2wKt' NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu8 Tj1
Tr2 [Jolly M3-4 G] Re
;rMd3 cMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]:
— d) Lo4
Be1 Tr2 Re
Hy
93. a-b) 5A,P 2.126
— c) rMd3
NNe Mir4 Mir6
NKt4 lacuna at
Wa
BhP 2.126
-d)
oMy
94. a) BhP 2.127
—
 b) Jo1
BhP2.127
C) S/iP 2.127
Pu10
TMd3
MTr6
NNg
oMd5
G My
sOx1 sPu6
Bo
— d) BhP 2.127
TMd3
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
95. a) BhP 2.128
— b)TMd3
Jo2
NNg
-c)
wKt1
TMd4
— d) wKt3
NPu1
Lo3
NKt4 is torn
after this verse until the end of Ch. i
96. a) Bo
— b) cMy
TMd4
oMy
— c) oMy
TMd3
cMy
- d) oMd5
Lo3
TMd3
Tr2
97.* Padas c-d torn in NKr; pada-d omitted in Ox3 — a) Jo
Bo Ho NNg Pu10
— c) TMd3
— d) TMd3
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
TMd3 oMd5 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr2 MTr6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Tj1
(butcor);Pu]°
Additional half-verse in Lo2 cMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Mandlik
b)oMy
TMd4
Additional verse in Mandlik


--- PAGE 410 ---
Chapter l
399
98. Omitted in Pu9 — a-d) BhP 2.131
— a) Jo2 BKt5 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Ti1
— c)sOx' sPu6
— d) oMd5
99. Cited by Apa 281 — a) xMd4
wKt1
Ana
—
 a-b) BhP
2.132
•—b)Jo 2 Lo1
Lo3
•—c)
BhP 2.132
Ho
Apa
—
 d) Lo2
Mir3
ic». Cited by Apa 282 — a) Be1 Bo Ho Kt2 La2 Lo1 iMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Tj1 Tr2Apa[v\]
BhP 2.133
oMy
— b) BhP 2.133
Pu10
— c) BhP2.13?,
Be1 Jo1 wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Ox3oMy
NPu
1 Pu10
TMd4 Apa
—
 d) oOr
Be1
Tj2
TMd4
MTr3
101. a-d) BhP 2.134
— a) TMd4
NNg
[but corfli] —
 b) Kt2
Ho
Pu10
nBe2
— c)HyLo'Tj'
La1
[butmcsK\; sKt5
— d) Pu9
102. a) Tr1
1BK15
TMd4 oMd5 oMy
wKt3
— b)
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj^Tr3 [Jolly M^2-1-^}MandlikKSS
Bo
— c)
sOx1 sPu6 Pu10
— dlWa
103. Cited by Vij 1.3; Dev 1.10 — a)oOr
Tj1
— b) Tr2
MTr6
— c)Dev
wKt3
BhP 1.71-2
— d) BhP 1.71-2
Tr2
Additional verse in La NPu ; given after 104 in oMd oMd5 inTr , and after 105 in Tr2
viTr6; cited by Dev 1.9:
a) La1
Tr2
— b) La1
— c) La1


--- PAGE 411 ---
400
Chapter 1
ICH. P"7 ma. Cited by Dev 1.10 — b) Hy wKt3 sKt5 TMd3 cMd5 NNg sOx1 sPií £/¡P 1.75
Dev
Kt2
— c)Tj'
oMy
— d) SAP 1.75 [vl]
ICG. a) TMd4
cMy Tj1
oMy
BKt5
— a-b) BhP
1.78
— c) 5/iP 1.78
— d) TMd4
Jo2Tj'
Be1
NPu1
106 c) Ld"
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 oMd2 Ox2 Ti2 Tr2 MTr3 Rn Mandlik
Bühler KSS
—
 d) Jo2 La1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd3 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1
MTr6 [Jolly
RNd]
Bo TMd3
oOr
Additional verse in La1 Lo2 xMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6:
a) La1 Lo2
oMy
TMd4
— b) La1
La1
— c) TMd4
Lo2
La1
' — d) Lo2
oMy
Additional verse in Lo2 oMd5 MTr4 MTt^jpadas c-d in TMd4:
a) MTr6
a-b) oMd5
— b)
Lo2
\dditonal verses in Lo2; verses 1-2 given in oMd5 and verses i a-b and 3 a-b in TMd4:
i. a) TMd4
— a-b) oMd5
— c-d)
oMd5
2. a) oMd5
— b) oMd5
107. Omitted in Hy — a) wKt3
Lo2
Pu7
[èï/icor];Kt 2TMd4
Tr2
Lo3 Ti1 [Jolly R]
— b) oMd5
TMd4


--- PAGE 412 ---
Chapter l
401
[Jolly R]
'— c) cMy
— d)oOrBKtsß/iPi.8o
Tr2
108. a) Jo2 La2 Lo3 Lo4 oMy Tj1 Tj2 BhP 1.81
GMcf
— b) BhP 1.81
— c) oMy
oMd5 MTr4
TMd3
Lo2
MTr6
Pu8
Bo wKt3 La1 [but me sh] La2 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 N?U' Pu10 Tj2 Wa BhP 1.81
109. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in oOr — a) Tr2
— b) Pu10
-c)
xMd4
Lo5 om
La1
[but me sh]; BhP 1.81
— d) NKt4
La1
MTr6
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 oMy
Ox2 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 [JollyYM R] Mcmdlik KSS
no. a) Bo
— b)oMd5
m. a) BhP 1.85
— b) sOx1 sPu6
BhP 1.85
— c) BhP 1.86
Pu"
wKt1
MTr4
MTr6
TMd3
— d) BhP 1.86
Tj1
sOx ' sPu6 MTr4M7
Be1
[sic]; Pu10
Lo4
112. Padas b-d ma fli in NNg — a) oMy BhP 1.87
Hy Lo5 Tj2
-b)
oMy
Hy om
—
 c) La1 NNgsOx1 sPu6 Tr2 Re
TMd3
oMy
— d) sOx1 sPu6
BhP 1.88
TMd3 oMd5 oMy
TJ2
Pu10
Jo1 Kt2
113. Pada-a ma fh in NNg — a) sOx1 sPuf
Kt2
Hy
— c)!!2
Kt2
TM d4 om
—
 d) Pu5
Pu7 [but cor} Pu9
BhP 1.89 [vl]
oOrom
114. a) Kt2
BhP 1.90 [vl]
— b)aMd5 BhP 1.90 [vl]
Lo1
•—c)Be' Kt2TMd3
BhP 1.90 [vl]
Ox3
-d)


--- PAGE 413 ---
Chanter 1
402
sKt5 om
Tr2 BhP 1.90 [vl]
115. Pada b-d omitted in La2; verses 115 and 116 transposed in Kt2. Cited byBh at 9.2 —
a) BhP 1.91
— b) BhP 1.91 [vl]
— d) Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
116. Pada-a omitted in La' — a) cMy
— b) xMd4
— c) Mir4
-d)
TMd3
;oMd2
117. TMd4 ends the chapter after iiyb — b) Kt2 sKt5
wKt1
TMd3
— c)Lo'
La'oOrMTrSfiAPi.gs
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Mir4
118. a) Bo Ho Lo2 oMd1TMd3 cMd5 NNg MTr4 ufr6BhP 1.98
— a-b) Pu10
— b) Wa om
TMd3
Ho om
BhP 1.98
— c) BhP 1.99
oOr sOx1
sPu6
[sPu6 me sh to
]; Lo4 NNg Ox3 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M3^-1-9]
Bo Jo2
wKt3 BKt5 Lo1 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
[Jolly M'-2"8]
BBe2 sOx1 sPu6 [but me sh]
Tj2
— d) BhP 1.99
Tribut cor]
BKt5
119. b) oMy
Jo2
TMd 3
—
 C) BKt5
TMd3
Lo1
Lo4 Lo5
Colophon: Jo1
Be1 Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2
Lo3Tj'
oOr wKt3
Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Wa
Be1 BKt5 Lo1 TMd3 NPu1
om
wKt1 wKt3 La1 oMy oOr om
Tr2
La1
wKt1
Be1
Wa
NNg
wKt1
Pu1
NNg Pu2
Tr2


--- PAGE 414 ---
i. 
Verses i-iyb missing in Pu5. Cited by Hem2/i.io;Dev 1.13; Madh 1.80— a) Bo
Mir3
La2
TMd3
— b) Tr2
TMd3
— c) Be1
—
 d)
sKt5
TMd3
Tr1
Wa
Tr2
l TMd 3GMd 5GMy Tr1
NKt4'
2. 
Padas c-d omited in Tr2. Verses 2-4 referred to by Sain on BU 1.417:
'—a) La1
[but me sh]; Bo
TMd3
cMy
— b) BhP 7.49
Tr2
TMd3 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
— c) Mir4
— d) La1
[but me sh]; Kt2 TMd3
3. 
Omitted in Ti2. Padas a-b cited by Sam on BhG 6.4 — a) Tr'
TMd3 Nd
TMd3
— a-b) BhP 7.50
— b) La2
— c)
Lo1
— d) Pu9
4. 
Padas c-d cited by Sam on BU4.4.5 and BhG 64— a) BhP 7.51
— b) Ho La2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4
MTr6
— c) oMd' om
first
Be1 BBe? Bo oMd2 Pu8 Wa Sam on BUandBhG
[Sam on BhG
Srïranga m ed. reads;
Tr1 BhP7.5i
—
 d) BKt5
5- 
b) Bo
TMdJ
La1
— c) sKt5
NPu1
TMd4
oMd5
TMd3 TMd4 Pu10 Wa [Jolly '-"-^l
Tr1
Additional verses in Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik
KSS;
first verse only in La1:
403


--- PAGE 415 ---
404
Chapter 2
i. a) La1 :
MTr4
oMd5
— b) MTr4MTr6
La1
—
 a) Lo1 Mandlik KSS
La1
oMd1 oMy
2. a) TMd4 cMd5 KSS
— c) La oMd oMy
— d) TMd4
Lo2 oMd1 Mandlik KSS
6. 
Cited by Vis 1.7; Vij 1.254; Apa 82; Hem 2/1.17; Har-A. 1.1.3;Dev i.5;padas a-b
cited by Apa 7 — a) Bo
TMd3
GMd1
— a-b) BhP 7.52
— b) iMd3
La1 Vis
Tj1
Lo2
Bo
sOx1
— c) La2
La1
BhP 7.52
— d) Apa
La1
[but me sh]; Vij
7. 
Cited by Vis 1.7; Hem 3/1.207, 3/3.476 — c) Be1 Vis
oOr
Tr1
wltt3
oMd5
oMy
Wa
— d)Bo
Tr2
8. 
a) La1
[but me sh]; sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 ^; oMd5
BhP 7-53
TMd3
— b) oMy
BhP 7.53
GMd5
— c)Ho
eCa La1
cMd1 oMy NPu1
Tr2
BhP 7-53
— d) TMd4
Lo3 Tj1
BhP'7-53
9. 
Cited by Hem 2/1.14 — a) Lo4
Pu10
— b)Tr'
wKt3
BhP 7-54
NNg
— c-d) BhP 7-54
-d)Hy
TJ2
10.* Pada-d omitted in Ox3 — a) BhP 7.55 [vl]
— b) wKt3 oMy
TMd3
— c) Bo Ho wKt1 La1 La2 Lo1 [but me sh] Lo2 Lo4TMd3 Ox2 Tj1 Tf
MTr4 MTr6 BhPj.55 Rn
Tr1
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
— d) sKt5
TMd3
11. Cited by Vis 3.222;Dev 1.4; Madh 1.12, 2.424 — a) NKt4 Wa
Jm Jo1 Kt2
MTr3 Mandlik KSS Dave
BhP 7.56
Hy wKt1
TMd4
Ox2
Pu9
Pulc
[Jolly N]
— b) oMy
Lo1
GMd5
TMd4
Ox3
Lo2 oOr Pu10 uTr6BhP 7.56 [vl] Dev


--- PAGE 416 ---
Chapter 2
405
rMd3 Tr1
Bo oOr NPu1
— c) oMy
NKf
— d) Be1 me to
[cf. load] ;NKf
oOr
12. a) NNg MTr4 Mir6
TMd4
oOr
— b) sBe2
sKt5
— c) BhP 7.57
TMd4
Oii
Lo4
— d) oMd5
cMd1
13. a) La1 wKt1
La1
— a-b) BhP 7.58
— b) Hy Jo'
Pu9
BBe2 oMd1 TMd3 MTr4
— c) oMy
Lo1
— d) BhP 7-58
[Jolly M'-2-8-9]
Pu10
oMy
TMd4
oMd5
14. Cited by Dev 1.15-6 — a) TMd3 :
Wa
— c) rMd3 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
wKt1
BKt5
TMd4
— d) wKt3
TMd;
Tj'
15. Cited by Dev 2.426; MSdh 1.288 — a) TMd3 :
— b) oMd5
Tr1
TMd3
Lo1
rfCt1
— c) MTr3
'— d) NNg
Additional verses in La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik pF, T, Z] KSS;
first verse only in oMy Mädh 1.12; the second verse in Dev 1.7 [this is a versification of ÄpD h
2.13.7-9]=
i. a) La1
— b) TMd4
[lacuna]
GMdsMadh
KSS
La1 Mandlik
oMd1 oMy
MTr4 MTr6
— c) Lo2 oMd1
TMd4 KSS
— d) oMd5
Lo2 TMd4 Mandlik KSS
cMd5 oMv MTr4 MTr6
Tr1
oMd'
Mädh
oMy
2. a) La1 Mandlik
—
 b) La1 Lo2
 TMd4 Mandlik KSS
Tr1
— c) La1
Lo2 oMd ' Tr1
— d) Lo2 Mandlik KSS
[Mandlik KSS
];cMd'
Tr1
TMd4
Dev''
MTr4 MTr6


--- PAGE 417 ---
406
Chapter 2
16. Cited by Sam on BU 4.5.15 [pada-d also repeated at end of 4.5.15]; Viii.y,Apai4
Dev l.ii— a) Bo Ho Ana Dave
Ho
BhP 7.59 [vl] Dev [vl as in ex]
TMd4
oOr
— b)Hy
— c) TMd4
Tr1
Wa
BlCt
5 TMd3
— c-d) BhP 7-59
— d)
Vij
[vl as in ed]
17. Cited by Apa 5; Hem 2/1.24; ¿,«¿4-1.46; Dev 1.17 — b) Lo2
— c) Hy Jm NPu1
BhP 7.60
— d) Jm
oMy
Ana
La2
oMd2
Hy
sOx1 sPu6
NPU1
18. ma in Tj2. Cited by Apa 19; Laks 1.46; Atott 1.134 — a) NKt 4 oMd5 NNg Tr1
Lo3 TMd3 oMy Tj' Tr2 BhP 7.61 [vl] Apa
;Pu9
Bo
wKt1 Tr2
— b) Apa
Be1
Tr2
— c) TMd3
— c-d) NPu1
— d) TMd3 Laks
19. Cited by Apa 5; Laks 1.46; Hem 2/1.25; Dev 1.17 — a) Pu9
MTr4
Tj2
oMd1;
— W Be1 sBe2 Ho Jo2 La2 wKt1 oMd1 oMd2 rMd3 oMd5 sOx1 NPu1
sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly Go R Nd] Dev'
aKt5
sBe2
Hem
Jo2
NKt4 TMd3 cMy Tj1 Tr1 BhP 7.62
TMd4 oMd5
sKt5 La1 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa
Apa
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox2 Pu9 Dev [vi]
NPu
1
— c) Lo3 Tj1
[Jolly R]
wKt3
NNg
Lo2
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
— d) Jm
NPu1
Bo Lo3 oMd2 Ox2 BhP 7.62 Dev
MTr3
20. Cited by Laks 1.46 — b)cMy
— c)Bo
Hy
sKt5
Lo1
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMv Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
BhP 7.63
oMd1
— d) NKt4
21. Cited by Apa 5; Laks 1.46; Hem 2/1.25; Dev 1.18 — a) sCa Kt2 NKf Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
TMd4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Ti1 \Jolly G RI Hem
T^Nä
Me Ku Go
support
— b) BBe2
— ^Tr2
Be1
•— d) [Jolly G]'


--- PAGE 418 ---
Chapter 2
407
22. Cited by Apa 5; Laks 1.46; Hem 2/1.25; Dev 1.18 — a)wKr wKt3 oMd2 NNg Tj2
TMd4
— b)ßBe2 Jo2 wKt1 NKf Lo3 Lo4 oMd2 oOr Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly M G R ] Dev Jha Dave
oMy
Tr1
iMd4
— c) sOx1 sPu6
— d) La2
Kt2
oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 Laks
Apa
23. Cited by Ana $;Laks 1.46-7; Hem 2/1.25; Dev i.i8;padas c-d cited by Vis 1.2 —
a-b) BhP 7.66
La1
b)Bo
oMy
— c) Apa
Tr1
Lo3
Lo5
oMd5 oMy
MTr4
La2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] BhP 7.66
— d) Be1 wKt1 sKt5 Lo4 iMd3 Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Ac//e« Dev
cMd cMy Laks
Me Go Na Nd Mr suport
Additional verse in oMd5:
24. Cited by Apa 6; Laks 1.47; Hem 2A.25; Dev 1.21— a-d) BhP 7.67
[vl
— a) NPu1 cTTT% ; Lo4
[but me}; NKt4
Bo
— b) Jo2
— c) sBe2 [but cor] wKt3 NKt4
La1 Lo4 Lo5oOr Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Wa Apa Laks Jha Dave
La2 Lo2 Lo3 iMd3
Bo Ho sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly R Nd]
Tr2
— d) oMy
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 La1 sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Jolly
[see8.4iib note]
25. Cited by Hem 2/1.25 — a) oOr Hem
Lo1 me to
Jo2 om
wKt1 xMd3
sMd5 oMy Tr1
sOx1 sPu6
— a-b) BhP 7.68
— b)Hem
La2
Bo NNg Tj2
wKt3 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1
-c)
cMd5 oMy
Bo Jo2 Lo3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly R]
all commentators read
— d) BhP 7.68
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
NKt
4 Tr1
26. Cited by Dev 1.36 — b) cMy Tr1 MTr4 BhPs.i67Dev No
Be1 wKt1
NKt4
 BKt5 La2 Tr2
27. Cited by Vij 3.253; Apa 25; Dev 1.36; nadas c-d cited by Vis 1.13; cited with pratika
by Sam on BUs.i.i [intr.]; expanded version of padas a-b mBhP 3.2.3 — a) Tt2


--- PAGE 419 ---
408
Chapter 2
oMy
Lo5
Wa
— b) Be1 Bo Ho La2 rMd3 Ox2 Ti1 Tr1 Tr2
cMd5 oMy
Pu5 Pu7 [cor to] Pu9 Vij Dev
Pu10
wKt3
Tr1
— c) MTr3 MTr4
Kt2
NKt4;
Lo5
\\Kt3 Pu9
TMd3
wKt1
NNg [but cor ffí^
sOx1
— d) oOr
NKt4
oMd5
Dev
28. Padas c-d omitted in oOr. Padas c-d cited by Vis i.5O;Madh 1.346; pada-d cited by
Sam on BU 3.1.1 [intr.l — b) Pi?
Pu10
Bo
wKt1
oMd1
BKt5 BhP 3.3
— c) Hy Ox3 Pu 8 Tr2 Wa om
—
 c-d) BhP 3.4
— d) La2 '
Tr2
TJ2
29. Padas a-b cited by Hem 3/1.326; Dev 1.49 — a) BhPs.4
oMd5
Dev
—
 c) wKt1
Bo Ox3
- d) Tj1
HyNPu 1 BhP 3.5 [vl]
Tr2
30. Cited by Dev 1.52; Mach 1.440; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.12— a) xMd3
Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
NKt4
— b) BhP 3.5 expanded version:
Bo Vis
Tr1
Tr2
— c) oMy
Jo2 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [,/o/fy R]
[Me Re have
but unclear whether it is simply a gloss; N a Ku read
];Be'
BhP 3.6
— d) S/iP 3.6
31 
Cited by Apa 27; Dev 1.53-4; Madh 1.441; padas b-d omitted in NPu1 and pada-d in
aOx1 sPu6 [both haplo] — a) Bo La2 oMd2 oMd5 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 Apa [vl as in éd.]
Tr2
TMd3
Bo
La1
— a-b) BhP 3.8
— b)Wa
[cf. 3.3*]; Ox2 Pu8
— c)
Ho
Tr2
[cf. 3-32c] — d) sKt5 om
sBé Jo2 Pu10 Tj ' Wa BhP 3.9
oMd5
wKt1
[but cor] ; Lo3 ;
32. Omitted in Be1; padas a-c omitted in sOx1 sPu andpada-a NPu1; padas a-b and c-d
transposed in Ca. Cited by Vis 1.13; Devi.54;Madh 1.441 — b) Pu10
wKt1
MTr3
— c) GMy
La'Tr2
wKt1
[but cor]; sCa
— d) Hy wKt3
Ox2 Vis.folly
wKt1


--- PAGE 420 ---
Chapter 2
409
33. Cited by Apa 27;Dev 1.55;Madh 1.441 — a) oOr
— b) oOr
Tr2
Tr1
NNg5APs.il
— c) oMd5 oOr Tr2Apa
wKt1
TMd3
—
 d)Ho
TMd4
34. Pada-d omitted in Ox3 and ma in Lo4. Padas a-b cited by Dev 1.55; Madh 1.442;
pâda s c-d by Dev 1.57 — a) La1 oMd TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 \Jolly M1'2-
3-7-8-9 Me Nd]
TMd3
— b)BhP3.i2
oMd1 cMy
— c) oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6'
TMd3
— d) BKLf La1 NPu1 BhP 3.13
Ho
[Jolly G]
Additional verse in La1:
35. Cited by Hem 3/3.742; Dev 1.58; Madh 1.605— a) MTr4
cMd5 oMy
TMd4
oMd5
TMd4
— b) SAP 3.14
— c) Lo4
Ox3
— d) SAP 3.14
cMy
NNg Puio Tr2
36. Cited by Hem 3/1.112, 3/3.746; Madh 1.446 — a) Hem 3/1.112
MTr4 MTr6
oMd5
Hem 3/3-746
— b) Lo2 cMd1
c) TMd3
SAP 3.16
and adds a pada:
— d) SAP 3.17
and adds a pada:
37. Padas c-d omitted in Pu8. Cited by Hem 3/3.748-9; Dev 1.68-9; Madh 1.446; padas
a-b cited by Apa 31 — a) Pu10
 <
SAP 3.16
— c-d) SAP 3.17 with addtional
padas:
— d)TMd3cMd5
Tr1
oMy
38. Cited by Hem 3/3.751; Dev l.72.;Madh 1.446 — c) NKt4 SAP 3.18
[om
39. Cited by Madh 1.446; padas c-d cited by Madh 1.544 — a)SAP 3.19


--- PAGE 421 ---
Chapter 2
410
Lo1
TMd4 Tj2
• —c) oMd5
— d) BhP 3.19
TMd3
40.* Omitted in Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R Nd]. Cited by Apa 13, 68; Dev 1.73; Mädh 1.446 —
a) BhP 3.20
oMy
— b) TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6
oOr om
Tj2 Dev
—
 c) Tr2
Ho
Lo4
Ox3
BhP
3.20
Lo1
Bo
sOx1
oMy
wKt1
— d) Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 Pu5 Pu7 \cor to} Pu9 Tr2 Dev Mandlik Jha Dave
Kf
[Jolly also gives this reading but corrects it in the corrigenda]; La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5
TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy oOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1
 MTr4 MTr6 \Jolly M] Nä [pätha ]
Mandlik Jha Dave
NKt4 Tr2
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
41. Cited by Apa 57; Madh 1.446; padas c-d by Dev 1.75 — a) Ho
Tj1
Bo
wKt1
Tr2
TMd3
cMy
La1
Kt2
— b) BhP 3.21
oMy
— c) sOx1 sPu6
Kt2
Tj1
Lo2 Lo3 BhP 3.22
, NKf
Bo Jo2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 xMd4
oMd5 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Tj ' Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Apa Dev Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
—
 d) Kt2
42. Cited by Vis 1.29; Ana 58; Devi.yg; Madh 1.447 — a) Tr2 Vis
Be1 cMy
Pu9
— b) cMy
wKt3
: — c) sKt5 om
BhP 3.23
NPu1 Tj1
Lo3
sOx1 sPu6
Pu7
— d) sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 [Jolly Go}
Ana [vl]
Tj1
43. Cited by Apa 58; Devi.80; Madh 1.447; pada-c cited by Kum 1.3.9— a) Tr2
La1 TMd3 Pu10 Dev [Jolly M I-2-7-8-* ]
Be1 Bo Ho wKt1 NKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo4
oMy NNg sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 BhP 3.24 Apa Dev
TMd3
Me
clearly sees a plural here:
so also Go Ku Mr — b) La!
Jo1
[but cor] Kt2 Jolly
[the vast majority of my mss. have the reading adopted,
although Jolly gives no variants]; Dev [vl as in ed]
TMd3
sOx1 sPu6 Apa
[vl]
Bo
Lo4
Lo5
Ox3
— c) Tr2
Bo
Be1
— d) Bo La2 Tt2 Wa BhP 3.24
44.* Cited by Apa 58; Dev 1.80; padas a-b cited by Kum i.^.g;Har-A 1.15.1, and pada-a
by Vis 1.29— a) wKt3 Vis
—
 b) Be1 TMd3
Tr2
— c) Jo2 Lo3 TMd3
'Jolly R]Apa [vl]
Pu10
Tj1
BKt5
— d) sBe2 Bo Ho wKt1 La2


--- PAGE 422 ---
Chapter 2
411
Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj ' Tr1 MTr4 \Jolly G R Nd]
Ox2
sCa Hy Jm Jo1 La1 Lo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 oMd2 NNg oOr Tj2 BhP 3.2sflev Mr Mandlik
JhaKSSDave
— After verse 44 rMd- oMd5 insert 2.63.
45. Cited by Apa 57; Dev 1.77; Madh 1.447 — a) Pu9 Ti1
oMy
La1 [but
cor] NPu1
wKt1
TMd3
— b) BhP3.26'
[hypermetric]
and adds
oMd1
cMy
Bo eKt5 Lo2 TMd4 NNg Tr1
Ir1 Apa
Hy
TMd3
— c) Be1 wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7
Pu 9Pu 1 0Tj'Tr 2Wa
Ox2
oMd5 Tr1 Ana
cMy
Lo1
me to
NPu1
oMy Tr1
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
BhP 3.27 adds:
— d) BhP3.27
and adds:
Lo3
Bo Lo3 TMd
Tj1 uT^Apa
Lo4
46. Cited by Apa 57; Dev 1.78; Mactt 1.448 — a) Lo1 Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly Nd]
Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M]
[Me gives this as his first reading; but gives
as an
alternate; both forms recorded also by Rri\ — b) MTr MTr
oMd1 oOr CPTWcT: — c)
TMd3
— d) wKt1 NKt4
 •
Ox3 =
Wa
Ox3
47.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu2. Cited by Apa 5j;Madh 1.448— a) Pu9
— WKt2
Ox3
TMd3
sKÍ
BhP 3.2C
Tj1
Be1 Ox3
— c)Ho
Tr2
— d) oMy
Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2
 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3
MTr4 MTr6 BhP 3.30 Mädh NäRc Jolly
48. Cited by Apa 60; Dev 1.108; Madh 1.451; pada-a cited by Vis 1.2.9— a) Apa
BhP 3.30
Lo3
Tr2
— b) oMy
— c) BhP 3-31
— c-d) oMy
— d)Bo
sCasKt5
oMd2 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 BhP 3.31
Pu9
49. Cited by Dev 1.108; Mädh 1.453 — a) sCa oMd2 oOr Ox2 Pu10 BhP 3.31
Bo
sOx1 sPu6
-b)Tj' 1
BBe2 Tr2
— d)Wa
oMd5 Pu8
Tr2 BhP 3-32;
TMd4


--- PAGE 423 ---
412
Chapter 2
50.* Cited by Apa 59 [also Apa 6o but there ascribed to the BhP] Dev 1.109— b) iMd4
NKf
adds
— c) Ox2 Pu8
sCasKt5 Pu10
BhP 3-33
M
sCa
T^Dev
—
 d)Ho
Pu5
oMy
TMd4
Pu7 Pu9
oMy
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La2 Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9
Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G Ku] Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
51. Cited by Apa 61; Laks 1.119; Dev 1.113;Madh 1-454 — a) Pu'°
Mädh
BhP3-34
; sBe2 sCa Hy wKt1 uKt5 oMd2 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10
Go Ku Re
Bo
NKt4
wKt1
— b)oMd2oOr¿a/b
— d)
Be me to
52. Cited by Apa 61; Dev 1.115, 2.599; Madh 1.377 — a) Ox3
NKt4
cMy
— b) oMy
— c) TMd3
Pu8 Tr1
Lo2
— d) NKt4
oOr
Pu2
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 oMd2 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
oMy
TMd4
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Ac
Mandlik [
'] KSS; cited by Dev 2.609; Laks 3.224:
a) MTr4 omits pada-a; cMd5
— b) sOx1 sPu6
Tr2
Laks
— c) sOx1 sPu6
Tr2 Re Mandlik
oMd1 Laks
—
 d) Tr1
Additional verse in oMd5:
53- a) Jo1
BhP 3.36
•— b)cMd 5
— c) Lo4 NNg
Tj'
La1 [but me] oMy Ox2
oMd1
— d)Ho
54. Cited by Laks 3.225; pâda s a-b cited by Dev 1.114 — a) BhP 3.37
— b) oMd1
NKt4 TMd3 cMy sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M1-2-8-9]
Tr2
[Jolly Me]
oMy
TMd3 Pu8
— c) Tr1
oOr
— c-d) BhP 3.37-8 expanded reading:
— d) TMd3
TMd4
Pu9
aMéNd


--- PAGE 424 ---
Chapter 2
413
55. Cited by Dev 1.114 — a) Bo
Ox3
sOx1
Pu9
BhP 3.38
— b) Pu7
[but cor]; BhP 3.38 [vl]
Ho BKt5 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 cMy Pif Pu7 Pu9 Tr1
 MTr6
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
— c)Lo3 Tj1
BKt5 Lo3
Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Ox3sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa Re Dev
TMd4
oMy
— d) Dev
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10
56.* Päda s c-d omitted m Pu . Cited by Apa6i; Laks i.i23;padas c-d cited by Devi.iis
—
 b) TMd3
Apa
BKt5
La1 Ox3
[La1 me to
]; Bo Ho wKt1 La2 Lo1 oMd5 cMy [Jolly R Nd] BhP 3.39
sOx1 sPu6
Be1 Hy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 Wa Laks Mand-
lik Jolly KSS
Tr1 MTr4
; wKt3
BCa NKt4 Ox2
Pu5 Pu7
wKt1 TMd4
Lo2
— ciLo3!)1
Lo1
Bo
Kt2
Lo1
N a appears to read
for ;
— d) iMd3
MTr4 MTr6
57. Cited by Apa 156; Dev 1.115, 2.614 — a) wKt1
— b) TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 oMy Tr1
Ho
— c) Tr1
— d)Tj'
Ox3
58. Cited by Hem 3/2.991; Dev 2.253 — a) oMy
BKt5
NKt4 La1
Tr:
Pu9
— b) MTr4 MTr6
TMd3 sOx1
Lo1
oMy
— c) TMd3
Tj1
Ho NKf4 La2 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
NNg sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 Tr1
— d)Bo
sKt5 Lo4 TMd4 oOr Ox
Tr2
NKt4
59. b) Lo1 TMd3 oMy Tj2 Tr ' [Jolly R]
wKt'Lo 3Tj'
BBe^Ho
[Jolly R]
— c) NKt4
wKt1
La2 oOr
— d) Lo2
Pu5 Pu7
Pu9
NKt4
60. Cited by ^0040; Hem 3/2.992 — a) Hem
; wKt1 TMd4 oMy NPu1 Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 Apa
oMd1
— b) TMd4
cMd1
Hem
Tr2
— c)Ho
Be1 Bo Jo2 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj ' MTr4 Wa


--- PAGE 425 ---
414
Chapter 2
Apa Me
— <n La2
61. Cited by Hem 3/2.983; cited with pratlka
by Vis 1.20— a) Pu10
— b) oMd1 TMd4
//em
cMd5'
—c) oMd1
— d) NKt4
oMd1 Mir4 Mir6 //em
NPu1
62. Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Hem 3/2.985; Madh 1.221 — a) oMd1
NKt4
TMd4
Tr2
Ho
MTr4
— b) Be1
Mädh
c) Pu10
Ti2
TMd 3
wKt3
Ox3
Lo1 Lo4 cMd1 Tr2
— d) TMd4 oMd5 oMy
[sic]
63.* Placed after 2.45 in TMd3. Padas a-b cited by Har-\ 1.15.1 and pada-a by Vis 1.29
— a) NNg
- b)oOr BhP 3.78Har-\ [but vl as in ed]
; oMd1 cMy Mir4 MTr6;
oMd5
— c) La1 [but T struck off] BhP 3.78
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1
MTr4 MTr6
Be1 sBe2 Bo Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 LosoMd2 Pu8 Ti1
Ti2 [Jolly M3^1] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
BCa NKt4 sKt5 Lo2 Lo4 NNg
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 oOr N?U' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M'-2^9 G N R] Jolly
[Pu10
Wa
];oMd5
Ho wKt1
wKt1
] —
 d) NKf om
TMd3
Be1 sOx1 sPu6
cMd5 oMy Tr1
TMd4
Tr1
oMd5
Bo
BhP 3.78
TMd4
64. Cited by Apa 59; Dev 1.85; Mädh 1.451 — a)NKt4
— W NKt4
c)Lo3
Bo Ho La1 TMd3
Apa
TMd4
Lo4Tj'
— d) oOr
TMd4 Wa Dev
Be1 TMd3 MTr4
sBe2 wKt1 NKÍ Lo3
TMd3 oMy Ox2 [cor to] Tj1 Tj2 BhP 3.79 Apa [vl]
Lo5 Apa
TMd4
eCa
Me Rn Rc Go support
cf. similar range of variants at 3.2iyand the note to it.
65. Cited by Apa 67; Hem 3/3.778; Dev 1.167; Mädh 1.457-8 — a) MTr4 BhP 41 [vl]
— b) sPu6
sOx1
 <
Wa
— d) TMd3
BhP 4.1
Lo4
66. Cited by Apa 30;Dev 1.60 — a-d) BhP4.2
—
 a)cMd5
BKt5
sOx' [but me]


--- PAGE 426 ---
Chapter 2
415
sPu6 [but me] Tr2
— b)TMd4
— c) Kt2 La ' Ox3 Pu5 Wa KSS
-d)
Ox3 om
Tj2
Additional verse in cMd5:
67. Cited by Dev 1.61; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.15; Apa 908 — a) La2
Wa
— b) oMd1 TMd4 Apa Dev
[Ng gives this in margin with
cf. 2.68b];BhP 4-3
— c) SAP 4.3
LrfTr1
GMd1
Wa
— d) Lo5 TMd3 Ox3 NPu1
wKt3 Lo3 Tj1
cMy
Mir4
BhP4.3
Be1 BKt5 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly N R]
Bo
GMd1
Additional verses in GMd1 xMd4 Tr1 MTr4MTr6; second verse alone in Tr2 Mandlik
and commented by Re:
i. d) Tr1
MTr4
TMd4
2. b) Tr1
oMd1 TMd4
MTr4 MTr6
— cï oMd1
MTr4 MTr6
Tr'
— d)Tr2 Mandlik'
MTr6
om
Tr1
68. a) BhP 44 [with added päda ]
Tr1
— b) NKf
Bo NPu1 Tr2
Kt2
wKt3
— c) oMy
MTr4
NKf MTr4
Kt2
BhP 4.4
—
 d) BhP 4.5 [with added päda ]
Wa
Ox3
; 
NNg
69. Cited by Vis 1.15 pada-a cited by Vij 3.259— b) BhP 4,5
Ox3
— c) Hy Tj2
70. Cited by Apa34; Laks 1.244; Dev 1.136 — a-d) BhPa,&--j [with added padas]
— a) Tr1
Lo3
Tj1
r,a2
b) Apa
Tr2
— c) sOx1 sPu6
Me [patha]
— d) Lo5
NNg Ox3


--- PAGE 427 ---
Chapter 2
416
71. oMd1 TMd4 transpose padas a-b and c-d. Cited byDev 1.136;Laks 1.244; padas c-d
cited by Apa 34 — a) Lo3 Tj '
oMd1
— b) Ox3
BhPa.S
~\^)
Bo rMd4
oMv'
oMy
TMd3
— d) Tr1
72. Omitted in Pu5 Tj2. Cited by Vis 1.2(5 Apa 55; Laks 1.244; Har-A 1.5.22; Dev
1.103; Madh 1.300 — a) Kt2
;NKC
Me [pätha ]
— b) Lo2
TMd3
NKt4 oMd1
— c) Ho wKt1 sKt5 TMd3 oMd5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 Laks
Be1
wKt3 NKt4
Be3
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Har-AMädh MandlikJha KSS Dave
73.* Cited by Apa 34; Laks 1.244; Dev 1.142; Madh 1.136 — a) Tj2
Lo2
only sBe2 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox3 Tr1 Wa [Jolly N Nd] /Varead
others
read
[Na gives
as kvacit pathalr, for my conjectural reading see end-
notel ; sBe2
— b) TMd3
wKt3
— c)Be'
oMd1
Apa
—
 d) Tr1
Bo Madh
Lo5 oMd1
Tr2
Ho BhP 4.10
74. Cited by Laks 1.244; Dev 1.136; pada-c cited by Vis 1.15 — a) Lo4 oMd2 NPu1 MTr4
MTr6 BhP 411 [vl]
TMd4
NKÍ
Bo Lo4 Ox3
La2
TMd3
— b)Tj'
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
-—c)wKt3TMd4
TMd3
oMd1
TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
— d) Lo4 ¡but cor] Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
NNg
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La ' [but cor] oMd2 Ox2 Tj2 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave
NPu1
75.* Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 1.244; Dev 1.135 — a) Ox2
[Jolly M4]
Jolly [conjecture citing B-R sv and GDh 1.50]
NPu
1
Lo4 Ox3
G My
Kt2
— b) Laks
Ho
Tr2
Ox3
c)Be'
Bo
— d)5/!P4.i3
76. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Apa 33; Devz.yjl — a) Kt2
NKt4
Lo2 Ox3 Pu7 Pu9
Ho
— b) Kt2
— c) TMd3 Apa [vi]
[Jolly N]
wKt1 Tr1 Wa [Jolly Nd] Apa
G My
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MandlikJha KSS Dave
sOx1 sPu6
both cor to
BhP 414
cf. VaDh 55.10


--- PAGE 428 ---
Chapter 2
417
77. Omitted in Pu5; padas a-b and c-d transposed in TMd3. Cited by Ana34; Har-A.
i.i.lo;Z3ev2.377; Madh 2.52— a) sOx1 sPu6
Wa
Be3 Ho wKt3 Apa [vl]
-4pa [vl]
wKt1
— b) wKt3
Ti2
Tr2
— c) Apa [vl]
TMd3
— d)Pu'°W a
78. Cited by Vis i.22;Apa 50; Dev 2.392-3 — a) Tr2
Tj1
GMd5
Be3 Apa [vi]
Bo Lo2 Tj2
— b) Kt2 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Tr2
Apa
—
 c) Jo2
sKt5 La1 Lo3 NPu1 Tj1 BhP 4.16 Vis Apa
[NPu
1
79. Cited by /)pa 1220; Dev 2.400 — b) Tr
Jo2
NPu1
— c) Lo1
NNg
wKt1
 BKt5 La1 [me]
— d) cMy
TMd4
Tr1
BKt5
[Jolly Be]
80.* Pâda s a-c omitted in Pu9 — a) Ox3
,NPu'
Tr2
wKt1
Lo1
GMy
TMd4
Be3i
[but me]; TMd3
— b) Lo2 oOr
Tj1
oMd1
Lo1
;TMd3
— c) BBe2 Bo BCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 Tr1
MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
— d) Tj1
Lo3 [Jolly R]
oMd5
La1 Wa
MTr6
oMy MTr4
Pu7
[but me}; TMd4 Nä [pätha ]
Ho
oMd5
81. Cited by Vis 1.15; Apay$\ Laks 3.99; Dev 1.135, 2.361;padas a-b cited by Apaizqo
—
 a) Be1
oMd5
— b) NNg
-cjHowKt-'Tj1
Jo2 oMd2 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tj1 Wa [Jolly G R Nd] Dev 1.135 [vl], 2.361 LaksViDh
55-15
— d) TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 BhP 4.20 Vis Devi.135
1?
Lo4 Apa
[vl]
wKt3
Ho
82. Cited by Dev 2.378; Madh 1.286— b) wK.t3 TMd3 [but cor]
—
 c) Bh [ad
12.90]
TMd4
oMd5 Tr1 MTr6A« Dev Madh
Rc
Tr2
TMd3
— d)Tj'
TMd4
NNg
oMd1
NKt4 Madh
Hy
NPu1 Bo BhP 4.21 Dev


--- PAGE 429 ---
418
Chapter 2
83. a) TMd4
— b) uBe2 Be3 Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 Tj2 Ku
Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
TMd4 Mir4
— c)Lo2
TMd3
— dï Pu8
Additonal verses in La1; first verse in Dev 2.369; Madh 1.270; cf. BDh 4.1.28:
i. a) La1
— c-d) La1 omits all after
84, Cited by Laks 3.99 — a) La1 me to
BooMd5
oMy
Tr1
NPu
TMd3
— b) oMy
sBe2 Be3
— c) Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 Mandlik
KSS
[Jolly Ku Rl Go
Tj1
BBe2 oMy MTr4 MTr6 A«
Lo3
BhP4.23
TMd3
oMd2 Ox2
rMd4
— d) Lo2 Lo3 c,Md5 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6 [Jolly N Nd] BhP 4.23
85. Padas a-b cited bv Dev 2.497 — a") iMd3
 <
Lo4
;cMd5
Ho
— a-b) BhP 424
— c)Tj'
BhP 4.25
TMd
— d) Be1 Bo Ho Jm wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 oMd5 oMy
sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M'-2-8-' R] YaDhzb.g
Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 Ox3
[Jolly R]
iMd4
TMd3
Ho
NPU1
86. b) BhP 4.25
oMy
— c) TMd3
Pu10
d)La2
NPu1
87. Cited by Sam on VeS 3.4.38 and on BU 1.4.15; Laks 3.103; padas a-b cited by Dev
2.497 — a) Tr
La2 Tj1
BhPa.26
La1
[eMimc];NKt4Tj1
Hy
TMd3
Laks
NNg
— b) Ho oMd5
cMd5
c) oMd5
Tj'
Be1 Lrf
— d) TMd4
Tj2
88. a) Jo2 Lo3 oMy [Jolly R]
TMd3
Tj1
— b)NNg
— c) TMd4
NNg
•—dHMd3
Tr2
4


--- PAGE 430 ---
Chapter 2
419
89. b)Tj'
BKt5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy
Jo2 NNg
sOx1 sPu6
— c) Jo2
Lo3Tj'
90. ma sh in Ox2. Cited by ^0982 — a) TMd3 Tj ' Tr1
TMd3
•—b)Pu 1 0
[Jolly U^-*}
Jo2 Lo4 NNg Ox3 [Jolly M3^]
BKt5
— c) Kt2
Lo1
Lo3
sOx1 sPu6 Apa
Bo La2 :
NPu1
Kt2 NNg
Be1 sBe2 Ho
Jm Jo1 wKt1 NKt4 BKt5 Lo1 Lo2 TMd4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 \Jolly G Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave
— d) Be3 wKt3 NNg oOr
TMd3
91. Cited by Apa 982 — a) Apa
Jo2 Lo1 Lo2 A pa
— b)Lo2
— c) Pu2 Wa
Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
—
 d) Ho La2 Lo5 Hy
NPu1
Bo
La1
Ox3
BKt5
92. Cited by Apa 982 — b) La2 cMd1
Bo
La2
— c)
BCa
TMd3
— d) oMd1
 TMd4
Wa
Lo3oMd1GMd5GMy
sOx1 [but cor] Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 [but cor] Tj1 Tr2 Mir4 Apa
93. b) TMd3
cMy
BBe2wKt3Lo1GMyTMd4
— c) TMd3
— d) wKt3
Be3 NPu1
wKt1 Lo5 cMd1 oMy Tr1 MTr6 Jha
94. a) sBe2
— b) La2
Lo2'
La1
[but me] — c) sOx1
sPu6
Bo
La1
— d) NKt4
La1
95. a) [Jolly Nd]
Bo
MTr4
TMd3
— b) wKt1
NKt4
TMd4
sCa
Bo
Lo4 TMd3 sOx1
Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Be3
BKt5
— c) TMd4
d)La2Lo3Tj'[yo//yR]
BKt 5
96. Cited by Laks 14.97; pâda s a-b cited by Vi i 2.136 — a) Tr1
Tj1
[om
om


--- PAGE 431 ---
420
Chapter 2
TMd4
NKt4
Tj'
Pu9
TMd3
— b) TMd3
NKt4 om
—
 c) BBe2 Hy Jm Kt2 oMd2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Jo1
Tj1
Be1 [but cor] sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr1 Ku
wKt1
Lo3 [Jolly R]
— d) TMd4
oOr
97. a) La1
TMd 4'
Tj2
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Ox3
— b) Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa {Jolly R]
[oMd5
TMd3Tj'
Be3Hy
La1
— c) Tj2
— d) TMd3
cMd5
BKt5
sOx1
sPu6
98. Cited by Laks 14.97 — a) Ox3
Lo1
ßKl? NNg om first
Tr1 om second
Ox3 om
Lo4 ma
— b)Tj'
Laks
— c) wKt3
La1 La2
oOr
[om
];; Be1
wKt3
TMd4
Be3
— d)Wa
99.* Cited by Dev 1.122 — a) Be1 Ho Lo1 oMd2 oMd5
Pu10
— b) NKt4
cMy
BKt5
sOx1 sPu6
— c) Be1 Bo sCa Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 [Jolly M Gl
Jolly
Rn
—
 d) Pu10
;TMd4
TMd3
La1
Tr2
Jm [Jolly
Ku]
NNg
100. a) La1 sOx1 sPu6 [but cor] Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M1"2-8'9 R] Rn
BBe2
Tj1
[Jolly R]
wKt3 La2
— b) Be1 Be3 Ho Lo3 Ti1 Tr2 Re
sOx1
sPu6
TMd4
o My
MTr4 MTr6
oOr
— d) Bo
MTr4
MTr6
Jo1
Tj1
HyOx3
Be1
BKt5
wKt3
ira.* Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Hem 3/3.695; Dev 2.398— a) Tj2 Hem
Bo
oMy
oMd5 Dev
rMd4
— b) Kt2 :
Tcf. 2.io2bl;NPu' om
. [loaa]
sBe2 wKt1 La1
— c) Ox3
TMd4 om
Be3
but cor to
Me Jha Dave
NKt4 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M1'2-8-9]
Be1 sBe2 Bo
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 TMd3 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3
Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Ti1 Ti2 Tr2 BhP 4.28 Hern Dev Uolly M4 G Ku R Ndltfc Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS
Wa
cMy
Kt2
— d) wKt3
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Hem


--- PAGE 432 ---
Chapter 2
421
[Jolly M3-4]
oMd5 NNs MTr6 Nd Dev
ice. Cited by Laks 1.179; Madh 1.281; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.25— a) 5«F 4.29
Mädh
Ho
oMy
Be1 La2 Lo4 iMd3 Ox3 Tj1 sOx1
sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4
— a-b) Vis Mädh
[cf. a.ioibl; sKt5
— c) BhP 4.30
NKf
— d) LaksMädh
[cf. i.ioid];
TMd41
Pu9
103. Omitted in Ox3; ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 1.180; Dev 2.366 — a) Be3 Bo Ho La2
Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Ti2 Go Ku Mr
Lo3
 NNg Tj1 [Jolly R] BhP 430 Laks
oMy MTr4
La1
TMd4
Tr2
— b) BhP 4.30
La1 La2 NKt4 Lo2 xMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6
[NKt4 La2 Lo2 xMd4 Pu8
Bo Lo1 Wa
— cJTi2
TMd4
wKt3 La1
— d) wKt3
In NKt4 the folio containing verses 103-115 is missing.
104. Cited by Apa 70; Dev z.^o^-Madh 1.312 — a)ßCa oOrsOx sPu
[but sCa
sOx1 sPu6 cor] —
 b) Tj1
sBe2 sPu6
G My
sKt5 Tr2
Apa [vi as in
ed]
— c) TMd3
Tr1
Mädh
Tr2
sOx1
sPu6
— d) Apa [vi as in ex]
oMy
Ox3
Lo4
[but coi\
105. Cited by Apa 137; Hem 3/3.775; Dev 1.148,164; Madh 1.314 — a) iMd3
TMd4
BhP 4.32
Ho
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
— b) Colly R]
Lo4
[but cor] NNg NPu1 Pu7 [but cor] Pu9 Mädh
sBe2 wKt1 sOx1 [but cor] sPu6
Jo2
Be1 Pu10
oMd5 oMy
Tr2
— c) Bo Wa
; Me [patha]
BhP 4-33
Be1
Lo2
Lo1
sOx1
sPu6 [but cor]
BKt5
lTMd4
— d) TMd3
Lo3Tj'
BhP
4-33
Lo2 oMy Wa
106. Cited by Apa 137; Dev2.5o8; Madh i.3i4;padas a-b cited by Har-A. 1.12.8 — a)
BBe2 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
sKt5 Lo5
oMd5
cMy
NNg oOr
-b)
TMd4 oMy NPu'
Apa
—
 d) Ox2
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
La1
Tj1


--- PAGE 433 ---
422
Chapter 2
107. a) BhP4.34
oMy
— b) Be1 La2 Lo2 TMd4 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
MTr6 BhP4.34
commentators support
— c) Kt2 La2
Ho TMd3
BhP 435
Tr1
oMy
— d) oMd5
BhP 435
TMd3 [Jolly Nd]
Be3 Pu9
108. Omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apaj6; Madh 1.455 — a) BhP4.36
cMy
Pu10
Apa [vl as in ed]
— b) Pu10
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
TMd3
— c) sBe2 Tr2 ;
TMd4
Dev
109. Cited by Vis i.z8;Apa 57; Dev 1.140 — a) Pu5 Tj1
BKt5
BhP 4.36
— b) TMd3
Ti1
Pu9
— c) Lo5
Lo2
BhP 437
— c-d) oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6Wí Apa
[Apa
] —
 d) Be1 Hy wKt1 Lo1 Lo3 Ox3 Tj1 BhP 4.37
Kt2 BKt5
TMd3 sOx1 sPu6
Ox3
NNg
no. Cited by Laks 1.242 — a) Lo1
— b) Bo Pu5 Pu7 La/ti;
— c) Lo1 cMd5
MTr6 =ET— d) La1
[but me]; Tr1
BKt5
Be3 Ho wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Uolly Nd]
ni. a) Be3 La1 Lo3 oMd5 oMy Ti1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa
— c) BBe2 wKt1 oMd5
Be1 TMd4 oMy
sOx1
[but cor] —
 d) Ho La1 La2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Tj1 [Jolly R]
TMd4 Tr1 BhP 4.39
sCa
112. Cited by Apa 57; Har-A 1.13.10; Dev 1.140— a) Pu9 Wa
sBe2 sCa [but cor]
PuioTr2
jMy
— b) sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 BhP4.39
Apa
oMy
TMd4
Lo2
— c) Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 BhPd.40 Har-A
NNg
Wa
TMd3
NNg oOr Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 \7olly M1-2-8'9 R] Dev
Apa
—
 d) NNg
Dev [vl]
Apa
[vl as in ed]; MTr4
La1 oMd5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1
Jo2 Lo1
Bo
Lo3
TMd3
113. Hy transposes 113 and 114. Cited by ¿^¿£1.242 — a) Lo sOx1 sPu
Ox3


--- PAGE 434 ---
Chapter 2 
423
; Ho 
Tr1 
xMd3 
— b) wKt1 Lo2 Lo5 NPu1 Tr1
Tr2 
TMd3 
; TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— c) Bo 
La1 TMd3 cMd5 
Tr2
La2 
— d) xMd3 
; Ho La2 Tj2 
BhP'4.41 
Tj1 
sOx1
sPu6
114-* Verses 114 and 115 transposed in oMd2. Cited by Laks 1.242 — a) La2 
oMy
Jo2 La1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 [but cor] Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly M'-2-8"9 G R Nd] BhP^.v 
— b) Be1 Bo Ho
Jo1 wKt3 eKt5 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4
Mir6 Wa [Jolly Ku R] BhP 4.41 KSS 
sBe2 Hy Kt2 La1 oMd2 oOr 
wKt1
Bo 
eût5 
. cMy 
— c) BhP 4.41
Be'sKt5 Lo1TMd3GMd5Tr2Lafcv 
NPu1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be3
Ox3 
— d) wKt1 oMy 
; TMd4 
; Bo 
Be1 oMy 
oMd1
Lo4 
. oMd5
115.* Cited by Laks 1.242 — a) Tr1 
TMd3 
eCa 
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 La1 La2 Lo1 oMd2 oMd5 NNg NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [cor to] Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr3 uT^Rn
Nd Re Mandlik KSS BhP 4.43 
; oMd1 
— b) Jo1 oMd2 oMd5 KSS
; Bo 
— c) Jm 
— d) Lo5 °5nnf^ r
"; TMd4 
— b) oMy 
— c) Tj1 
; TMd3 oMd5 Tr1
- c-d) BhP 4.45 
— d)Be'
117. Cited by Apa 54; Devi.97; Mädh 1.296, 301; BhP 4.44-5 transposes 117 a-b and 116
c-d — a) Ox3 
TMd3 
Ho Lo5 Tr2 
— b) Ox3 
; TMd3
BhP4.44 [vl] 
Be3 Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1
Tr2 Wa [Jolly G R] BhP 4,44 Mandlik Jolly KSS 
—
 c) sOx1 sPu6 
Apa [vi]
Additional verse in Mandlik 
KSS:
118. Omitted in wKt3. Cited by Hem 3/1.444; Dev 4156 — a) Dev 
; Lo3 TMd4
oMy sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu 9 Tj ' [Jolly G R] BhP 447 
Hem 
NPu1
— b) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr' MTr4 MTr6 BhP 447 
" La1
wKt3
116.Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Vis 3.201-2; Mädh 1.301— a) cMy


--- PAGE 435 ---
424 
Chapter 2
TMd3 
La2 oMd5 
— c) Be3 TMd3 cMy Hem Dev
[Be3 
La1 
— d) Lo4
119. a) TMd3 rMd4 
Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 
oMd2 
— b) sBe2
Lo1 Tj2 
Ho TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
" — c) Lo2 Ox3
Be1 Be-'uKt^Kt5 
— d) TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6' 
; Ho
120. Cited by Dev 1.97— a) TMd3 
; MTr4 _ 
— b) sOx! sPu6 
Pu8
NKt
4 
; Kt2 
La2 Lo1 TMd4 oMy [but cor] oOr sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6 BhP 449
Dev Mr 
TMd3 
Go gloss 
may support 
—c)Lo 3Tj'
Tr1 
— d) wKt3 
Ho 
TMd4
121.* Cited by Dev 1.97 — a) Lo2 
— b) Dev 
—
 c) NKt4 
Tr1
BBe2 BCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 Pu10 Me Dave Jha 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Ox3
 • 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Be1 Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 oMd1 oMd2
TMd3 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 sPu6 Tr2 MTr3 Dev Re Mandlik KSS 
Jolly
— d)TMd3 
JmJo'Kf oMd2 uTr3Rn ¡pâûia] Mandlik K S S L o
4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10
Me Dave Jha 
[Pu10 
1; MTr4 
iMd3
122. Ox3 omits päda-d . Cited by Apa 52; Dev 1.96; Mädh 1.296— a) TMd3 TMd4 oMy
NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 
oMd1 
La1 La2 
wKt1 oMy 
BhP
4.51 
— b) Jo2 nKt5 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu9 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Re BhP 451 Apa [vi] 
— d) Be1 cMd1 TMd3 oMd5 cMy BhP
4.51 Apa 
NNg 
MTr4 MTr6
123. Verse 123 placed after 126 in iMd3 and after 128 in cMd5; päda s c-d omitted in
NKt4. Cited by Apa$a,\ Dev 1.98 — a) Ox3 om 
Lo4 ma % — b) Bo wKt3 La1 [but me] Hy
oMd1 TMd3 oMy 
— c) TMd4 
Bo 
TMd4 NNg 
— d) TMd4
Apa [vi]
124 Omitted in NKt4; päda s c-d omitted in Be1. Cited by Laks 1.185; päda s a-b cited by
Apa 52; Dev 1.96; Mädh 1.296— a) Ho wKt1 
Apa 
— b) Mädh


--- PAGE 436 ---
Chapter 2 
425
— c) TMd3 Tr1 BhP 4.53 
wKt1 
wKt3 Laks 
TMd4 oMy 
TMd3
— d)Lo3Tj' 
oMd1 
Wa 
oMyO^Mz 
A/afpatha]
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Wa 
Lo2
125.* Päda s a-b omitted in Kt4. Cited by Apa 53; Har-A \.5.vj\Dev 1.98; Mädh 1.297 —
a)Hy 
— biLa'GMd^Md4 
' 
— c) La1 NNg 
NKt
4
iMd4 
Apa 
— d) TMd4 
sOx1 [but cor] sPu6 
Ho Lo3 TMd3 cMy
NNg sOx1 [but meß] NPu
1 [but cor sh] sPu6 [but me sh] Pu10 Tj1 Mir4 [Jolly M R] A/ä (pä -
tha] Nd Jolly 
NKt
4 
Jo1 ßKt5 
all other mss. read
126. Cited by Dev i.g8;Mâdh 1.297 — c) Lo2 
Bo 
P u
1
0 — d) Bo
NPu1 Tr1
127.Cited by Dev 1.100; Mädh 1.298 — a) L a
2 W a 
— b) K t 2 O x 2
La2 
Ox3 
oMy 
— c ) o
M
y
P
u
5 Pu7
Pu9 
— d) wKt3 
Ho 
ßKt5 Lo2 TMd4 NNg NPu1 Tr1 BhP 4.58
Laks 
Be1
In NKt4 the folio containing the section 
until 1400 is missing.
128. a) Be3 Jo2 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Tj1 [¡oily M3"4 R] BhP 4.59 
[but cor in
sOx1 sPu6];TMd3 
TMd4 
Bo 
Pu7 
[but cor] —
 b) Lo2
Ox3 
Lo4: 
Pu10 
— c)MTr4' 
oMd5 
oMd5
Tr1 
TMd3 
— c-d) BhP 4.59 
TMd3
129.* Cited by Dev 1.101; Mädh 1.298— a) Be1 sBe2 Be3 sKt5 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy
sOx1 Ox3 NPu
1 sPu6 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly M3"4] 
BhP 4.60 
— b) La Tj1
[Jolly Ku R] Dev 
TMd4 
Tr2 BhP 4.60 J; Ho 
wKt1 
— c) BhP
4.60 
Tj1 
Be'Tj'Dev 
— d) ßCa Lo2 
Ox3 om 
Pu8
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt 2 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Mir3
Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave


--- PAGE 437 ---
130. a) BhP 4.61 
Be3 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 
Lo4 Pu9
— d)Lo' 
BhP 4.61
131. a) Ho 
— b) sBe2 
— c) TMd4 
Tj1 Pu8 La1 
Be1 Lo3
TMd3 Tr2 BhP 4.62 
'— d) wKt3 sKt5 Pu^Tj1 Tr2 
xMd3 
Bo
132. Cited by Dev 1.103; Mâdhi. 300 — a) BhP 4.63 
_ 
Tj1
TMd3 TMd4 MTr6 £>ev 
; Bo 
Hy 
— b) after this päd a BhP 4.63 adds:
— c) BhP 4.64 
Be3 
Bo
NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
TMd4 
— d) Kt2 rMd4 oMd5 Tj1 
Between the
first and the second half-verse TMd4 adds 3.2ioc-d.
133. Cited by Vis i.34;Dev 1.90; Mädh 1.304; an expanded version in two verses is
given in BhP 4.64-6 — a) oMy 
— b) ßKt5 om 
La1 Tr2 
Bo 
— c)
TMd3 
Dev 
— d) sKt5 Lo2 Lo3 NNg Ox3 [Jolly R] Dev
134. Omitted in Bo. Cited by Apa 53; Dev i.ioi;Madh 1.299— a) TMd4
La1 TMd3 Tr2 
Tr1 
Pu8 
— b) wKt1 wKt3 oMd5 oMy 
— c) Hy La2 Lo'
sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 BhP4.67 
— d) BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La2
Lo2 oMd2 oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj2
 MTr3 [Jolly Ku R]Me Rn Mr BhP 4.67 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
Ho NNg
135. Cited by Dev 1.101 — a) rMd4 
oMy 
MTr4 
Hy 
TMd4
oMy 
Be1 eBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 NNgsOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave J — b) BhP 4.68
TMd4 om 
Hy 
cMy 
Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5
NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
oMy " 
—c) La1 cor 
to 
Pu 5Pu9Wa 
Tj1 
; Bo
oMy 
oMd'îMd 4 
— d) TMd3 TMd4 oMy 
Be3
BKt5 La1 [but cor] sOx1 sPu6 
MTr4 MTr6
Chapter 2
426


--- PAGE 438 ---
136. Cited by Apa 159; Dev 1.106; päda- a cited by Vis 1.115 — a) TMd4 
Kt2
oMy Tr1 
Jo1 
— b) Hy 
— c) Jha Dave 
; Tr2 
— d) iMd4
137. Cited by Apa l59;Laks 1.203-4; Dev 1.106; päda- a cited by Vis 1.115; pada-d by
Har-A 1.133 — a) Kt2 
BhP 4.71 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 sOx1 [but cor] sPu6 [but cor} Tj1 Tr2
[JollyK] 
BhP'4.71 
BKt5 
Ox.2 Apa 
—
 d)Laks
Bo 
La2 
, Be1 
Me appears to read
Additional verse in La1 oMd5 oMyTr1:
a) La1
cMd5 
— d) La1
138. Cited by Dev 1.107 — a) Be1 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
La1
TMd3 
Pu10 om 
Be1 uBe2 Ho La1 Lo3 Lo4 cMy sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Tj1
MTr6 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
GMd1 Mir4 BhP 4.72 
La1
Mir6 
Pif Pu9 
— d) Lo4 Lo5 
cMcf oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
139. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Devi.107 — a) BhPq.js 
Lo1 oOr sOx1
sPu6 [me sh to]
sOx1 sPu6 
Tr1 Dev 
sBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2oMd2 oOr Pu8 Tj2 MTr3
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave' 
—
 d) oOr [but cor] Pu7 [but cor] Pu9
Additional verse in La1:
[sic]
140. Cited by Kum 1.3.13; Vis 1.33; Apa 65; Dev 1.90,5.38; Mädh 1.137, 304 — a) La2
Lo2 Apa 
cMy 
— a-b) BhP 4.74
— b) TMd3 
La2 
— c) Bo La1 Hy xMd3 
xMd4 Pu10
Kum 
— c-d) BhP 474 gives an expanded verse:
— d) Ox2
Chapter 2
427
— b)La'
— c) La1
GMy
Be3
— b) nKt5 Wa
BhP 4.73
— c) BhP 4.73


--- PAGE 439 ---
428 
Chapter 2
141. Cited by Vis i.34;Apa 65; Dev 1.91; Madhi.^o^—a) TMd3 
cMy 
— b )
wKt3 
Be1 Ho Jo2 Lo4 TMd3 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly M3 R] DevMädh
Me and Apa comment 
supporting the edition — d)cMd'
NNgom
142. Omitted in Bo. Cited by Vis 1.34, 3.222; Vij 3.259; Dev 1.88; Mäcffi 1.302, 2.259 —
a) BhP 4.76 
— b) BhP 4.76 
Ox3 
— c) BhP 4.76
Ho oMd5 
" 
Ho 
wKt1 
Lo1 
iMd3 NNg Ox2 
Me [patha]
143.Omitted in Tj2. Cited by Vwi.34; Apa66, 919; Dev5.66 — a) Lo' D
e
v
—
b)Pu10 
;NKf 
NKt4 
— c)sBe2 
Vis
144.Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 1.224; Dev 1-93— a) Ho L
o
2
; Pu10
W a
Tr1 MTr6 
oMd1 
_ 
cMy - 
'; NNg 
Laks 
—
 b)
Lo1 
La1 
oMy 
iMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be 
Laks
— c) xMd4 
BKt5 
TMd3 
— d) Lo1 
MTr4 
Ox2
oMd2 BhP 4.78
145.* Damaged unreadable in MTr6. Cited by Dev 1.92; Mädh 1.304; päda s a-b cited by
Vij 3.259; päda s c-d by Vis i.34;Dev 3.688— a) La2 BhP 4.79 
; ßBe2 Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Wa Dev Mâdh Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Davt 
w
K
t
1
B
o sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' W
a
— b ) H o
oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 
— c) La1 [but me sh to 
] BhP 4.79 
* 
Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 
sKt5 
Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 oMd2 NNg Pu2 Pu8 MTr6 WaDev i.gzMandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave
146. Cited by Apa 67;Dev i.c>3;Mädh i.3os;päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.259;Jmv 114.3 —
a) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
TMd4 
La1 
; Lo3 
oMd1 oMy NPu1 Tr1
[Jolly N Nd] 
MTr4
me] Ox3 
Ho Lo3 Tj ' 
— d) Bo
 T M d 3 M T r 4 [ J o l l y M 3 - 4 ]
 
M e [ p a t h a ] N ä [ c i t i n g s r u t i ]
 
G M d 5
—c)Lo4[but
NKt4


--- PAGE 440 ---
Chapter 2 
429
147. a) Lo5 
NKt4 
— b)Lo4
 
TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tj1 
Lo1
— ctwKt'Tj 1 
TMd4 
Tr2 
Hy 
— d) Lo1 
oMy Ox3 om
NPu
1 
Lo2 
oMd1 
;sOx'sPu6 
[Jolly R]
148. Cited by Laks 1.209-10 — a) uKt5 Lo5 TMd4 oMd 5 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 BhP 4.82 Laks
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor] 
Lo1 Pu10 BhP4.82 
— c) La' Lo2 sOx1 sPu6
MTr6 
— d) La1 :
149. Cited by Apa 65; Hem 3/1.353; Dev 1.89,5.43; Mädh 1.303, 2.259; päda s a-c cited
by Vij 3.259 — a) Vij 
Tj ' 
Lo4 
— b) NKt4 
— c) wKt1
— d)Lo3° 
Jo2wKt'La'NNgS/!P49i[vl]//em 
Lo1 
Tr2 
Pu10
150. Päda s a-b omitted in oMy Pu10 — a) Jo1 
ßBe2 wKt3 La2 
—b) oMd5
MTr4 MTr6 
Lo2 Tr2 om 
uBe2 
Be3 
eKt5 
NKf 
MTr6
— c) Lo4 ma 
Ox3 
Lo3 
— c-d) Tj1
— d) xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
151. Cited by Dev 1.93 — a-b) Bo La2 TMd3 NNg Jolly 
~ c) MTr6
Be1 La1 
Jo1 
TMd3 
Pu8 
— d)sOx'sPu6
[but both cor]
Lo2 
jBKÍNNg 
TMd4 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Tii; 
NKt
4
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu10 
;
N
P
u
'
B
e
1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
— d) MTr3 
BhP 4.94 
[vi
'];0x3 
;Lo3Tj' 
Be3
153.Laks 1.210; Dev 1.93— a) B o M T r 3 ; 
— b) wKt1 T r 2 o M d 1 
—
c) cMd1 
NNg 
Dev 
Laks 
— d) Laks
NPu
1 
La2 Lo2 Tj2 
Ox3 
sMy 
Be3 Bo
— b) Tj1 
Lo2
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
152.Cited by Dev 1.93 — a) Bo


--- PAGE 441 ---
430 
Chapter 2
sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 L<f oMd2
 NNg Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 BhP 4.95
MandlikJhaKSSDave 
xMd" 
nBe2 wKt1 oOr 
aBe2 Lo4 NNg
154. Päda s c-d omitted in Jo1. Cited by Dev 1.93 — b) Be1 Be3 Bo Ho La2 Lo1 Lo2 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 Dev 
BhP 
Ox3
— c)Wa 
T
M
d
3
— d ) w K t 3 o m B o 
wKt3
155. a) Mir3 
Mir4 
La1 Lo3 Tr2 
Hy La2 oOr Tj ' Mir6 
Be1 Bo
Kt2 
Wa 
Ho TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G N d ] — b) w K t 3 s C a J o ^ K t 5
oMd2Tj' [Jolly K\ 
NNg 
— c) Be3 
La1 
oMy '
— d) TMd3 oMd5 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
La1 oMd1 Tr1 
Ho Lo4 NNg Ox3 Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 [Jolly MG] Jolly 
NKé sOx1 sPu6
BhP 4.98-9 gives two verses in place of 155:
156.* Omitted in Pu' — a) Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 sKt5 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5oMd2 NNg oOr Ox3NPu' Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M G R Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
Be1 sOx1 sPu6 
o O r 
oMd1 O
x
2
— b ) T M d 4 N K t 4
— c)rMd3Ox2 
Ho 
rMd4 
— d) NKt4 
La2
157.a) O x
2 B o 
— b) O x
2 w K t
1 
— c) sCa La' xMd3 oOr
wKt1 Lo1 
Be3 
Bo oMd5 oMy 
Lo5
Ox3 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 
— d) o
M
y
. sCa La1 Lo4 [but cor} xMd3 oOr Ox3 Pu5
Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Wa [Jolly G M3"4] Jolly BDhi.i.io,¥aDh 3.11,MBh 12.37.39 
cMd1
xMd4 oMy Pu10 [Jolly M'-2-8'9]
Additional verse in wKt1:
158. In MTr61580 to I59b damaged and unreadable. Cited by Dev 1.129; Mädh 1.307 —
a) BhP 4102 
Ho 
Be3 Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Wa 
Kt2
— b) wKt1 
NNg 
Ho Ox2 
wKt1 sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 Tr2 
— c)
La1 
Ox3 
Tr1 
— d) Tr2 
oMy 
ßKt5 
MTr3
cMd1 TMd4


--- PAGE 442 ---
Chapter 2 
431
159. a) La1 
— b) La2 
xMd3 
— c) xMd3 
oMd1 xMd4 MTr6
oMy 
Wa 
— d) La2 xMd3 xMd4 oMy NNg Ox2 Tr1 BhP 4.124 
Be3
Bo Pu8 
: oMd1 
; Nd gloss 
supports 
all other commentators
support
160. a) Ho 
Be1 Bo Jo2 La2 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 xMd3 cMy Ox2 nPu1 Pu8 Tr1
—
 b)BhP 4.125 
Jo2 Tj1 
wKt1 
" 
— c) oOr
Lo1 
oMy 
— d)xMd4 
Lo4 Ox3 
;sBe2 wKt3
161.b) s B e 2 ; H o — 
c ) B
e
1
; ß K t
5 T r
2 
NPu1
Jo2 Lo3 iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 cMy Tj1 Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6 
oMy
cMd1 
BhP 4.126 
— d ) B h P 4.126
Kt2 
Lo1 
cMy 
NKf 
xMd3
162.a) o M d
1 O x
3 
B h P 4 . 1 2 9 " 
o M d 1 . 
. O x
3 L o
4 N N g
Ox3 Pu10 
— b) wKt3 
oOr 
— c) Bo sKt5 oMd1 oMd2 Tr '
Lo4 Lo5 ; 
Lo3 
— d) TMd3 
; Tr1 
Ho BhP 4.129
wKt1 
xMd4
163. oMy places 163 after i6ob — a) oMd5 
sOx1 
sPu6 
[corrected
with two dots over last 
which sOx1 read as 
Lo2 
wKt3 Lo5 
— b) Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
wKt3 
P u 9
B K t 5 x M d 3 
— d)NNg
164.a) B h P 4
.
1
3
1
;
— b ) T r
2 x M d
3 
xMd4
— c)Ox3 
oOr 
xMd3 
; sKt5 
;Lo3Tj' 
" 
xMd3 ' 
— d)wKt'
oMd5MTr4MTr6 
Tr1 
xMd4 
BhP 4.131 
xMd3 sOx1 sPu6
165. Pada-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa 76; Dev 1.132; pâda s c-d cited by Sam on TU


--- PAGE 443 ---
432 
Chapter 2
1.12 — a) Lo4 
— b) Be3 
sOx1 sPu6 BhP 4.132 
— c)
oMd5 
; NKt4
166.Cited by Dev 1.128; Mädh 1.307 — a)sCa oMd2 B h P 4 . 1 3 3 M ä d
h
La2 
HoLo'Tj 1 
Tr1 
— b) Lo3 Tj1 
[Jolly
R] 
BKt5 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 5A/>4.133 
wKt3 
NKt4
Tj1; 
Mai/A 
TMd3 
— c) TMd4 Dev
167. Pu10 places 169 before 167. Cited by Vis 1.48; Apa 69; Har-A 1.12.2; Dev 1.128 —
a) TMd4 î T 
cMy 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Apa 
— c) La1 
cMy
BKt5 
wKt3 
BhP4.134 
Wa 
'— d) sKt5
wKt3
Additional verse inoMd5:
168. Cited by Dev 1.129; Mädh 1.140— a) Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 inTr6 Dev Mädh
Tj1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
oMy 
BKt5
169.Cited by Laks 1.101 — a) T
r
1
o
M
y 
BhP 4.137 
— b)
BhP 
Jo2 wKt3 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 BhP 
oMd5 Laks 
Be1
— c) sKt5 om 
TMd4 oMy ' 
BhP 4.137 
TMd4 Ox3 
. TMd3
— d) BBe2 sOx1 sPu6 
[sPu6 cor to 
; La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr4
MTr6
Be3 
Ho Jo2 Tr2 
; Bo
170. Cited by Dev 1.69; Har-A 1.1.16; päda s c-d cited byVis 3.222 — a) Lo5 Tj1 Tr2
TMd4 
. TMd3 
— b) Hy 
oMd2 
— c) Har-A 
wKt1
BBe2 
TMd3 
— d)Tj!
In La' folios containing 2.1700 to 2.1950 are missing.
171. Päda s a-b cited by Dev 1.69; päda s c-d by Dev 1.66; Mädh 1.790 — a) Tr2
; Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
, S Ä P 4 . 1 3 9
— b) B h P 4 . 1 3 9 s C a
oOr
Tr1
NKt4 BhP
BhP [vl]


--- PAGE 444 ---
Chapter 2 
433
NNg 
— c) NKl4 TMd4 NNg sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly Nd] 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy
oOr Tr25/î P 4.140 
Be1 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6Ä c 
— d) Pu10 
NPu
1
172. Päda s a-b cited by Dev 1.66; Mädh 1.790 — a) Hy 
wKt1 NKt4 Lo1
oMy NNg [¿»«/ c0r./ft] 
rMd3 
— b) Be1 
sOx1 sPu6 
, Tr2
— c)BKt5 
BhP 4141 
— d)Lo' TMd3 Wa 5/¡P 4.141
NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Wa
173.c) Kt2
sPu6
174. Cited by Apa 58; Laks 1.236 — &-A)BhP 4.142
— a) rMd4 
oMd'
Bo NKt4 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 cMy Ox3 Tj1 Tr1 
Be3 Tr2 
— b) Ti2 
MTr6 
sKt5
— c) Laks 
—
 d) Ho Lo4 Ox3 [Jolly M] Jolly 
NNg 
Be1 [we to] sOx1
sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Lo1
175.Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Apa 62; Dev 1.122 — a) oOr
— b) Wa 
— d) oMy
176. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Apa62; Dev 1.117; päda s a-b cited by Vis 1.2.2. — a) Apa
[v/]
H o
177. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 1.229; Dev 1.125; Mädh 1.456; päda s a-b cited by
Apa 62— a) TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 uYr6Apa 
Hy Lo4 
Be3 
[AM/ cor
fh] — b) BhP4.146 
sOx1 sPu6 
Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2wKt3
Lo2 Ox2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2
 TMd3 oMd5
 TMd4 oMd5
Ox3 NPu' Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M3'4 Nd] Dev Apa
M" R] 
oMy 
— c) MTr4 
Tj1 
Lo' 
Be35/!P4.i46
Mandlik 
oMd1 
T M d
3 H y Jm Jo1 Kt2 Pu2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
— d) TMd3
Be1
Lo3
— d) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9[Jolly G]
sOx1
ßCa Tr2
sKt5
Tr2
— b) Pu8
— c) Be3
Dev
— d) ßBe2
N K t 4
O x 3
[GMd5
Pu10 [Jolly


--- PAGE 445 ---
434 
Chapter 2
178. Cited by Apa 62; Dev 1.125; MSdh 1.456 — a) sKt5 
— b) Pu8 
. 
—
c)wKt3BKt5TMd3GMd5Ox3Tj' 
wKt1 
xMd3 
— c-d) SAP 4.147
ßCa Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M3^]
Folios containing verses 1780 to 194 missing in Pu9
179.Päda s a-b and c-d transposed in oMd5. Cited by Apa 6z;Dev 1.125; Mädh 1.456 —
a) Lo1 
— a-b) BhP 4.148 
then adds
,; BKt5 oMd2 sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Be1 La2
Tj1 
Jo1 
— c) Mir4 Mir6 
; La2 Tr2 om ^T; Bo
MeJhaDave
Apa[\\\ 
Jo2 
wKt5
180. Pâda s a-b omitted in Be1 and pâda s c-d in Lo4. Cited by Apa 62;Dev 1.127; pâda s
a-b cited by Mädh 1.456 — a) sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] 
— b) Hy om 
. . . [i8oc]
[haplo]; oMd1 om 
— c) cMy 
MTr3 
sBe2 wKt6 oMd1 TMd3
sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6Dev 
wKt1 
— d)oMd'TMd4 
Be3
NKt4 Tr2 BhP 4.150 Apa 
TMd3 oMd5 cMy oOr MTr4 MTr6
181. Cited by Vij 3.z8o;Apa 1141; Dev 1.127; Mädh 2.394 — a) BhP 4151
TMd3 
TMd4 
— b) MTr3 MTr4 MTr6£>ev 
— c)Tj' 
Tr1
sBe2 BhP 4.151 Mädh 
; Dev 
Be1 
— d) Lo3 Tr1 [Jolly R] ;
182. Pâda s c-d omitted in Be1. Cited by Apa 59— a) Jo1 
Be3 
oMy
TMd3 TMd4 Tr ' MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
— b) sBe2 wKt6 
Lo4 Lo5 cMd5 Ox3 Tr1
[Jolly M3-4! 
_ _ 
Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oMd4 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sKt5 wKt6 MTr4
MTr6 
Wa 
Pu5 Pu7 
[Jolly G] 
'; Tj2
TMd3 
— c)oOr 
sOx'sPu6Tr2 
— d) £^4.152 '
Be1 Be3 Ho BKt
5 La2 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 
Bo 
NKt
4
183. Cited by Vis i.zg;Apa 59; Devi.109;Mäd h 1.453 — a) NKl4 
— a-b)
— d) Lo1
Be1 Lo2 Apa [vi]
NKt4 oOr Apa
Tr2
wKt3 Pu10
— d) BhP 4.149
TMd4Tj'
Pu10
[Jolly M1-2-8-9]
sOx'sPu6


--- PAGE 446 ---
BhP 4.153 longer version:
I I — b) Re 
NKt4 oMy 
MTr4 
— c) Be1 Bo Ox3
Tr2 
NKt4 GMy 
Be1 Be5 Ho sKt5 La2 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2
B h P 4.154 [vl] 
B o — 
d ) wKt3
184. Cited by Apa 59;pádas a-b cited by Dev 1.109—a) Ox3 
Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
Tr2
—
 b) BhP 4.154 
—
 c)cMd5 
Lo1 
BhP 4.155 
— d)
Hy om one 
Pu10
185. Omitted in sOx1 Pu6; mam Lo2. Cited by Dev 1.110; pâda s a-b cited by Vis 1.29;
/4/M59 — a)NNg 
wKt1 
.
L
a
3
ß
C
a Lo5 Pu5 BhP 4 . 1 5 5 B e 1
[me to] BBe2 Ho NKt
4 NNg Vis Dev 
Lo4 Lo5 xMd3 Ox3 
Ho 
— b)
NNg 
— c) wKt3 
. MTr6 
— c-d)BhP 4-155
— d) Bo 
sBe2 wKt3 Lo4 Ox3 Dev 
oOr T r
2 T r
1
186. Pada-d omitted in NKt
4 wKt6. Cited by ¿«¿4-1.183; Dev 1.86;Mäd h 1.451 — a) Tr1
BhP 4.157 
O
x
3
H
o 
— 
tyNKf'ï T 
BhP 4.157 Laks
—
 c) BCa Tr2 BhP 
—
 d) Ho 
Bo
187. wKt6 omits verses 187-207. Cited by Vij 3.281; Dev i.iir/Madh 2.438 — a) eKt5
Ox2 Pu7 
— a-b) BhP 4,158 
— b) wKt1
Be3 
Lo1 
oMy 
_ 
Pu8 
— d)NNg
HoLo2c,My 
T
j
1
L
a
2 °
188.Päda s c-d omitted in Be3. Cited by Dev i.in;Madh 1.455— a) BhP 4.163
Be1 Ox2 Pu7 
B o c M d l J h a D a v e 
T
j
1
— b )
wKt1 
s O x ' s P u 6 T j ' o M d 5 o M y T r ' 
— c) sKt5 O x
2 L o
4 Lo5
Pu10 ' 
Tj1 
" — d
)
r
M
d
3
H
o 
oOr
Additional verses in Ho wKt1 Lo2 [ma] Ox2 NPu
1 Tr2; also in 7 of Mandlik's mss [he
thinks these may be original]; Re comments on both; first verse found in TMd4 and second
verse in Be3:
Chapter 2
435


--- PAGE 447 ---
436 
Chapter 2
1. a) Ho Lo2 NPu1 Tr2 
Tr2 
Lo2 xMd4 
— b) Lo2
NPu1 
Ho Lo2 Tr2 
— c) Ho Lo2 NPu1 Tr2 
— d) xMd4
 •
Ho Lo2 NPu1 Tr2
2. a)Ti2 
HoLo^PJTr2 
Be3 
— c) Tr2
Lo2 
wKt1 
Be3 Ox2 Tr2
189. Cited by Vis i.y.',Hem 3/1.424; Mädh 1.455; päda s c-d cited by Devi.116 — a) BhP
4.160 
xMd4Wa 
NKt4 
Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 xMd3 Ox3 Pu7 Pu10
Hem Vis 
B
o
L
o
1 ' — 
b ) Be3 sKf o O r o M d 2 o M y ; V i s
— c)Lo' 
Tr1 
Pu5 Pu7 
—d)Hem
 
Tj1
190.* Päda s c-d cited by Laks 1.122 — a-d) BhP^.i6r.
- a) xMd3 
iMd4 
— b) oMy
NNg 
Ho 
— c) Be1 sBe2 Bo BCa Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La2 Lo1 Lo4
Lo5 oMd2 oMd5 sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be3 Ho
wKt3 xMd4 MTr4 Wa Laks ' 
T
r
2
, s K t
5 — c-d) N
K
l
4
— d )
eKt5 
sCa 
NNg 
MTr6 
Hy Jm Jo1 ¡3 Kt2 oMd1 oMd2 oOr Tj2
Tr2 MTr3 Laks Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
191.* Pada-c torn in MTr6. Cited byApa 64; Laks 1.215 — a) Be1 Jo2 ßKt5 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
Ox3 Pu5 Pu7Tj' Tr2 Wa [Jolly M* Me G R] Me Jolly 
Pu2 P u
4 B e
3 
Kt2
Ho 
— a-b) BhP 4.162 
aKt5
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj ' Tr2 Wa [Jolly M '-2-^-8-9 Me
G R] Jolly 
Pu2 P u
4 B e
3 
Be3 Ox2
 N P u ' — c)Bo 
xMd4
Tj 1' 
; Lo3 
; Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 Tr2 MTr3
No Ipatha] Mandlik K S S 
x
M
d
3
— d ) L
o
2
P
u
8
o
M
d
1
Pu10
192. Cited by Apa 55; Laks 1.215 — a) Ho 
xMd3 
; oOr 3Te5~ ^ —
a-b) BhP 4.163 
—- c) H y w K t
3 
Wa
Apa _
- d) Be3 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly R] 
sKt5 Pu5 Apa [vi]
Lo5 TMd4 
Be1
193.* ma in Be3 [last part of päda- d torn]. Cited by Apa 56; Laksi.zis — a) sKt5


--- PAGE 448 ---
Chapter 2 
437
Hy 
Ho Laks 
NPu1 
— b) Pu5 Pu7
[cf. i94b]; Ox3 ' 
Ho Hy Jo1 Lo3 NKt4 sOx1 NNg NPu1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2MTr3 Wa [Jolly
Go N] ApaNäRc MandlikKSS 
BhP 4.164 
T r 2 " 
Bo La2 Lo2 Ox2
oMd1TMd3TMd4oMd5Tr1MTr4MTr6 
— d) NPj 
; TMd3
Pu10 
; Be1 sBe2 Bo BCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo1 oMd2 oMd5 NNg oOr Ox2
NPu1 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 Mir3 [Jolly Ku N Nd]BhP [vi] Apa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu5 Pu7
BhP
104. Cited by Apa 56 — a) tsKt5 
Apa[\\]oMd5 
Lo1 oMd1
— a-b) B h P 4.165 
; - 
b ) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3
" 
[cf. 2.198)] —c) Jo1 
Apa[v\] 
—
 d ) S / z P 4 - i 6 5 T r 2
Ho 
after pada-b MTr4 adds 198 a-b.
195. Cited by Apa 56; Laksi.2is — a) Tf 
T
M
d
4
— b) iMd3 oMy
TMd4 
BhP 4.166 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— c) BhP 4.166 =T
MTr6
196. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1.215 — a) Lo4 Ox3 BhP 4.167 
— b) xMd4
Be1 Be3 sCa La1 oMd1 NNg sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] Apa [vi] 
Apa
; NKt4 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox2 Ox3 Tr1 MTr4 
xMd3 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 uTr6Apa
—
 c) BhP 4167 
GMy 
Ho 
Tr2 
Be1
sOx'sPu6 
;Tr' 
O x
3 L o
4 T M d
3 
—
d) Be3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] BhP 4.167 
Pu10
197. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1.215 — a) MTr4 
Tr ' 
sKt5 
Lo2
TMd3 
— b) Jo2 BKt5 oMy Laks 
TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6
TMd3 
— c) BhP 4 . 1 6 8 T M d
3 MTr4 MTr6 — d) BKt5
BhP 4.168 
La1 
L o 4 T M d 4 N N g O x 3 ^ a [ v l ] o O r o M d 1
GMd5Tr'AW^pa[vl] 
MTr4 MTr6 
; Tr 
_ T M d 4
198.* Pâda s c-d placed after I94b in MTr6. Cited by Apas6; Laks 1.215; Dev 1.120— a)
Bo TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Dev 
Ho 
Ti2 
ßKt5 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M 1' 2- 7- 8' 9]— b)
Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kf La2 Lo2 Ox2 Pu8 uVr^BhP 4.169 Nd Mandlik KSS
Lo3Tj'Tj2 
— c) Hy )m lol Kt2 oMd2 T}2 MTr* Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
NKt4 BKt5: 
oOr 
— d ) N P u ' T r
2


--- PAGE 449 ---
438
199- Omitted in Ho; padas c-d placed after 202d in TMd3. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1.215;
Har-A 1.8.15; Dev 1.121 — a) TMd3 
Har-A 
— a-b) BhP 4170
.oMd2 
Lo5 
BoLo'oOrPu8La/b 
TMd4
sOx1 sPu6 
BhP
200. Omitted in Tr2. Cited by Apa56; Laks 1.215 — a-b) BhP 4171
— b) BBe2 
wKt1 
Laks 
" 
" 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
— c) T M d 3 W a 
Apa [vl]¡ 
TMd3
oOr
201.* Pada-a omitted in Ox3 and päda s c-d in oMd5. Cited by Laks 1.216;Dev 1.120— a)
Pu2 
" 
Be3 
oMd5 
Tr2
Lo3 Tj1 
[Lo3 
;]; BBe2 Be3
 BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
rMd3
 TMd4
GMd5cMy 
Tr MTr4
 MTr6 M/ 
Pu10 Tj2 
Pu8 SRT; Be1 NKt4 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6
NPu1 Wa 
[Wa 
|; Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
_ Ox2 Tr2
; Lo3 [Jolly R] 
TMd3 
oMy 
NNg 
" 
— a-b) BhP
4.172 
—b) Bo 
wKt3 
—c) Wa
oMy 
oMy 
Be1 
Bo 
Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tj1 [folly
R] 
NKt4 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
NNg
202. Folio containing 202-207 missing in Pu9; pâda s c-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa
56; Laks 1.216 — a) Puio 
TMd4 
oMy 
; NPu1 
— b) Tj1
Me [pätha ] 
Go gloss 
supports 
Tr1 
MTr4
TMd3 
Bo Ho NKf La2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd5
 NPu' 
oMy 
Be3 Pu5 Pu7
oMd1 
— c) BhP 4.173 
. TMd3 
sCa Jo1 NKt4 oMy Pu10 Wa
— d) Be3 
La1
203. Päda s a-b omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 1.216 — a) Jha Dave 
BhP
4.1774 
oMy 
Ox3 
Be1 BoHooMd 5^ 1 Tr1 
— b)
TMd3 
, Wa 
" 
Jo1
 
• 
— c) BhP 
NNg 
Lo4 Lo5
cMd5 
s B e 2 - d) NNg
Chapter 2
— c) Bo
BhP 4.170
— d) cMd1


--- PAGE 450 ---
204. Cited by Laks 1.223; Dev 1.120 — a) Ho 
cMd1 NPu
1 JÍlt^^-MH ; oMd5
Pu5 Pu7 
Tr2 
— a-b)oMy 
— b) Ox2
Mir4 
Be1 
N3 Kit Nd Re Mr Mandlik KSS 
; NKf Tj ' Rn Laks
rMd3 
oMd1 oMd5 T
r
1
H
o 
— c) oMd5 Tr1 M T r 6 T r 2
Lo3 
— d) iMd4
205. Päda s c-d omitted in MTr6. Cited by Apas4\ Mädh 1.306 — a) Lo5 
Ox3 om
Lo4ma 
Apa[v\] 
oMy 
— b) NKt4 
— c) Ho 
La1
Be1 Be3 Bo La2 Lo4 
oMd1 Tj1
206.* ma in Lo1 — a) Be3 Bo Ho nKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7
Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 Wa [Jolly M] Me Go Jha Dave 
BCawKt3 La1 xMd3 
oMy
. 
Rc 
oOr 
— b) Ho oMy NNg 
xMd3 xMd4 
HocMy
Tj1 Tr1 
— c ) B o 
L
a
1
H
o P
u
8
J
m Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd2 Pu10
Tj2 Mandlik KSS 
iMd3 oMy 
Ox3 
Pu2
207.Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 1.225 — a) Be1 O x
3 L o
2 
wKt1
; Pu7 
NNg 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M R] Me Rc Jha
Dave 
La1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu7 Wa Me [pâthâ
] Jolly 
NNg Pu10
Ho Hy 
MTr4 
— d) Lo4 Ox3 Lo5 Pu7 
[cf. aosb]; Jo1
La1 
Bo
208. Ho places pâda s c-d after 2oyb — ai Tr1 
Bo 
Lo4 
TMd4
• — b) Be3 GMd5 
BhP4.177 
; Bo 
— c) Ho 
Tj1
209. Cited by Mädh 1.457-8 — a) Lo5 oMd' Ox3 Pu10 Tr1 
La1 
[but me];
BhP4.178 
Be1 Be5 NKt
4 Tr1 Tr2 
Tr1 
—b)BhP
4.178 
eCa
sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 [but cor] 
—
 c-d) BhP 4.178 
— d) La1
wKt6
Chapter 2
439


--- PAGE 451 ---
210. Cited by Dev 1.103; Madh 1.300; padas a-b cited by Dev 1.123 — a) Lo3oMd5
Tj1 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Wa5/¡P4.i79 
TMd3 
— b) TMd4 Dev 1.103 
— c)
TMd4 
; BKt5 NPu1 
oMy 
; TMd4 
- d) xMd' 
NPu1
BBe2
211.Cited by Mädh 1.301, 457-8 — a) L o
1 o M d
1 
BhP 4.180 [vl]
— b) Bo 
, La1 [but me] TMd3 TMd4 
Tj2 
oMd5 Pu5 Pu7
Tr1 
oMy MTr6 
, Pu5 
— c) Lo5 T M d
4 L o
3 Pu5 Tj1
— d) TMd3 oMd5 
BKt5 om 
La2 Lo3 oMd2 sOx1 [cor to] sPu6 Tr2
212. Cited by Dev 1.104 Mädh 1.301— a) BhP 4.181 
" 
" sOx1 sPu6 Pu10
[JollyMl-w]^f; 
Lo2 
Lo5 
Lo1 TMd4 Tr1 Tr2 
; TMd3 
—
b) TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6 
wKt1 oMy BhP^.lSi [vl] 
BhP4.l8l [vl] ' 
;
oMd1 
wKt6 
— c) Lo1 Tr1 
— d) La2 Tj2 
Bo Lo4 Ox3 Wa
wKt3 
; MTr3 
Be1
213. a) Be3 BCa [but cor] Jo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
all
commentators support 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
— c) aKt5 La1 [Jolly M'~2"8-9 Nd]
NKt4 wKt6 
oMy 
T; TMd4 
Jo1 TMd4 
- d) Hy sKt5 La2
Lo3 
La1 
Wa 
wKt6 
BhP 4.182 
Wa
oMd1
214. Cited by Dev 1.104 — a) TMd3 
— c) Be1 Be3 Bo La1 TMd4 Pu7 [but
cor]Tj' 
BKt5 
Ho
TMd 4*
216. Pada-b omitted in Ox3 — a) BhP 4.185 
- b) Lo4 ma_
Chapter 2
440
— d)
Ho
— b) Wa
Lo4
Wa
215. a) Tj2


--- PAGE 452 ---
Chapter 2
441
217.Omitted in Bo. Cited by Dev 1.104— a) BhP 4 . 1 8 6 s B e 2 £ ) e v [vl]
Dev 
oMd5 
— b)Tr2 
— d) Kt2 
oOrom 
Ox2
218. Cited by Har-A. 1.144; Dev 1.139 — a) TV 
— b) B hP 4.187
NKt4 
wKt6 
— c)BowKt6 
Be1 La2 Tj1 Wa [Jo//y R]Dev
[A/e Go Nd Kit have 
but it is unclear whether it is the root text or simply a gloss] ; [Jolly
R] 
— d) NKt
4
219.Cited b y A p a 6 4 ; D e v 1.126 — b)r M
d
3
T
r
2 o m s O x 1
sPu6 
BhP 4.188 
La2 
wKt1 
Lo2 
— c) Lo1
Lo5 TMd4 
Tr1 
NKt* oMd1 iMd3 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly
Nd] 
—d) SAP 4 . 1 8 8 ; B e 3 o M y 
, nKt5 ^ ... 
. Be1 Kt2 TMd4 NNg
Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' MTr4 Wa Apa [vi] 
Apa [vi] 
oMd1
220.* Cited by Laks 1.234; Mac//? 2.447 — a) Laks 
Ho
 ;
Lo4 ma 
Pu7 [but cor] 
sOx1 sPu6 T 
Kt2 P
u
9
T
M
d
4
— b) Ho 
sBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 Laks Me
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) NKt4 oMd1 xMd3 TMd4 cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Mâdh 
La'Tr1 
; w
K
t
1
T
M
d
3 oMd5 
; ßBe2 oMy
B h P 4.189 
— d)Tr2 
H
o
L
o
4
Additional verse in La1:
221.* Cited by Dev 1.126 — a) MTr4MTr6 
i sKl5 wKt6 
Pu2
[Jolly G] 
oMd1 
oMd5 oMy VaDh 1.18 " 
Be1 BBt? Be3 Bo ßCa
Ho'Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 wKt6 La ' La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 oOr sOx1
Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M N Ku R Nd] Dev Ku Rn Re Mandlik KSS
Ox3 
— b ) L
o
2
— d ) w K t 6 T r ' L o 2 oMy T r
2 K t
2
222. Päda s a-b omitted in Tr1. Cited by Dev2.391; Mädh 1.280 — a.) BhP 4.191
Pu'° 
oMd' 
— c) NKt4 
— d) B e
3 w K t
6 Lo4 Ox3


--- PAGE 453 ---
442
Chapter 2
Pu7 
sOx1 sPu6 
[but both cor]
223. b) Be3 
wKt3 
Tr2 
; oMy 
— d) BhP4.192
W a 
L
o
3
T
j
'
J
o
2 
~ 
TMd3
sCa Lo4 Lo5 oMy sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu10 [Jolly M] Jha Dave 
Be sBe2 Be3
Bo NKt4 ßKt5 Lo2 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 
La1 La2 Pu8 
Ox2 = 
cor to
sBe2
224.Pàda s c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 158 — a) L o ? J o
1 
Lo4
Ox3 
Be3 
Tj1 
— b)BoTj' 
BhP 4.193 
Be3 Ho Jm Jo1
Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 Ox2 Ox3 Tr2 Mir3 Wa [Jolly R] BhP Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
TMd3 
— c)Bo 
Pu10 
Lo1 
Lo4 Apa
— d)oMd1 
Tr1 
" 
o O r B h P L o
1
225. Omitted inTMd4 Ox3; ma in Lo4; verses 225 and 226 transposed in Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
Tj2 MTr3 \Jolly Ku]. Cited by Dev 1.94 — a) wKt3 
Lo1 
— a-b) BhP
4.194 
— b) La2 
Be3 çj ; NKt4 
—
c) Tr1 
TMd3 
oMd1 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Pu9 om
wKt6
226. Omitted in Ox3; ma in Lo4; päda s a-b omitted in ïMd 4 — a) eBe2 wKt3 NNg sPu6
[but cor in NNg sPu6] — b) Be3 wKt3 cMy 
— c) sCa wKt1 wKt3
BhP4.i<)5 
NKt
4 
TMd4 
Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9
Pu10 [Jolly M1"2-8-9 G] Jolly 
- d) Md4 
oMy 
cMd1 Tr1 [Jolly
Nd] 
NPu1 
BhP 4.195
227. Cited by Dev 1.95 — a) La1 Tr1 BhP 4.196 
oMy 
— b) Ho
Kt2 
La2 
oMd1 
'— c) Pu10 
sOx1 sPu6 
Ox3
oMd5 
— d)Be3 
Ho Lo2 TMd4 NNg 
sKt5 
wKt3 
NKt4 Ox2
228. Pâda s c-d ma in wKt6. Cited by Dev 1.95— a) Be3 
— b) TMd3
NKt4 om 
Be1 Be3 La2 
BhP4.197 . ..,.. — c) Ho wKt6 TMd3 cMy Tr1
[TMd3 Tr1 
oMy 
NKt4 TMd4 NNg Ox2 Pu8 MTr4MTr6 Mï BhP 
La1 oOr


--- PAGE 454 ---
Chapter 2
443
oMd5 
Bo 
La2 
— d) Hy om
229.Cited by Dev 1.95—3) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj ' T r
2 
— b) o
O
r
— c) oMy
Tr1 
sBe2 Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 oMd2 xMd4 Tj2 Dev 
_ 
— d) Be1
230. Pâda s a-b omitted in Ho. Cited by Dev 1.95— a) sCa oMy 
— c) Be3 La2
TMd3 oMd5 cMy NNg Ox2NPu' Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr1 Mir6 BhP 4.199 
Bo 
La1
— d) Tr1 Tr2 
aBe2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo5 
wKt3
231.Cited by Dev 1.95— a) BhP 4 . 2 0 0 s O x 1 s P u
6 T r
1 BhP 4.200 Dev
—
 b) Tr1 
_ 
Tr2 om 
La2 TMd3 iMd4 Ox3 MTr4
 MTr6
Lo4 
B h P 4
2
0
0
o
M
y oMd1
— c) wKt1 Lo1 TMd3 NPu
1 BhP 4.200 
Bo Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 xMd4 Ox2 Ox3
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Dev 
La1 
[but me sh] —
 d) La1 oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6
232.Pâda s c-d omitted in Ox3 Tj1 and ma in Lo4 — a) BhP 4
.
2
0
1
N
K
t
4
Bo 
— a-b) oMd1 
— b) oMy om
NNg 
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La2 rMd4 NPu1 Pu10 T
r
1
; Be1 Be1 Ho sOx1
Ox2 sPu6 
Bo 
Lo2 
Tr2 
oMy
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 BhP 4.201 
Ox3 om 
Lo4 ma 
- c) wKt3 
TMd3
oMdsTr' 
; L o
2 o M y w K t
6 
— d) Lo3 [Jolly R]
Jo2 
iTr2 
wKt6 
" 
TMd3
233. Pâda s c-d omitted in Ox3 and ma in Lo4.Cited by Dev 1.95— a) BhP 4.202
— b) La2 
Pu5 Pu9 om and Pu7 me 
Bh 
Lo4 Ox3
om 
Kf , JT — c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Jo2 wKt1 eKt5 wKt6 Lo3 TMd4 Tj ' Tr1
[Jolly R]BhP 4.202 Dev Mâdh 
, Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt3 La1 oMd2 TMd3 oOr Tj2 MTr3 MTr6
RcMandlikJhaKSSDave 
— d) oOi 
BhP 4.202
234. Cited by Dev 1.95; Mädh 1.336 — a) vKt6 
; sKl5 
Jo2
Lo3Tj' 
TMd4 
5/¡P4.203[vl] 
MTr4 
— b) Lo3 T]
W a 
— c ) L o ' H o 
L o 3 T j ' W a ; L o 4 O x 3 B h P


--- PAGE 455 ---
444
Chapter 2
4.203 [vi] 
— d) Lo1 
Be3 wKt6 Lo1 
Be1 Be3 Ox;
235. Pâda s c-d omitted ¡n eKt5 wKt6 [haplo]. Cited by Dev 1.95; Madhi.336 — a) TMd3
Ox3 
— b) Ho sOx1 sPu6 No BhP 4.204 
— c) Ho
oMd1
236. Päda s a-b omitted in sKt5 wKt6. Cited by Dev 1.95— b) Ho La2 Lo1 TMd3 sOx1
Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 
oMy 
Tj2 
TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 
.BhP 4.205 
— c) Tr2 
oMd1 
.Be 3 
rMd3
— d) La1 GMd1 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
 MTr4 Re 
[gloss of Go
appears to support the latter reading] ; MTr6
237. Pâda s c-d cited by Dev 1.95— a) oMd' 
; TMd3 
— c)
TMd4 
TMd3 
— d) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3
238. Päda s c-d omitted in wKt1 [haplo]. Cited by Dev 1.144 — a) MTr6 
Ho cMd1
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
— b) oMy 
Tr2 
Ho 
—
c) cMd1 
Dev 
La2
239. Jo1 replaces pâda s c-d with 240 c-d; päda s c-d omitted in MTr6. Cited by Dev 1.144;
pada-d cited by Vis 1.195 — b) Pu5 Pu7 
P u
9 L a
2 
T
r
1
— c)
oMy 
NKt4
Additional verse in La1:
240.* Omitted in Ox3 Rc and ma in Lo4;pâda s a-b omitted in MTr6;padas c-d placed
after 239b in Tr2 — a) La1 
oMd1 
Lo3Tj' 
TMd3 oMd5
TMd4
Lo4 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— c) Be1 eBe2 Bo Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M G N Ku K\Me Go Nä Rn Jolly
[Pu2 Wa 
NPu1 
Lo2 
Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 
ßCa Ho
Be3 
, La1 om 
—
 d) TMd4 
~ 
Ho
NKt4
BhP 4.209
— b) Be3 xMd3 Tr1 MTr4


--- PAGE 456 ---
Chapter 2
445
cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 BhP
241. Cited by Dev 1.14352.449; päda s c-d cited by Apa 160 — b) oMd5 oMy
Lo2 oOr Go [pâtha ] Me [pätha ] No 
—
 c) La1 N
K
t
4
O
x
3 
Be1
sBe2 Hy ßKt5 wKt6 TMd4 NNg Tj2 
— d) Tr2 
Kt2
242.* Päda s c-d omitted in cMd1. Cited by Apa 70; Laks 1.274; Dev 1.168 — a) sKt5
Be3 Ox3 
o M i B o P u 1 0 T M d 4 Wa 
— b) TMd4
TMd4Tj' 
NNg 
-—c) Ho Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu9 Pu10
Tj2 Mir4 MTr6 WaJte Dave
243. Omitted in oMd1. Cited by Apa 72; Dev 1.171;Mädh 1.458— a) Be1 ßBe2 Wa
sKt5 wKt6 La2 oMy 
xMd4 
TMd3 
BhP 4.212
Mädh 
. Be3 oMy NPu1 ^po 
— b) Lo3 [Jolly M1-2-8'9 R] 
[Jolly MM G
Nd]
— c) Ho TMd4 
NKt4 
sKt5 
BKt5 wKt6
244. Cited by Vis i.so;Dev 1.170; Mädh 1.459 — a) W* 
[cf. 6.310];
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be3 
— c) TMd4 
Lo1 
— d) sBe2 Kt2 wKt6 Pu9 Wa
245. Tj1 transposes pâda s a-b and c-d. Cited by Dev 1.179; Mädh 1.460-1 — a) oMd1
Be3 
Lo4 Lo5 [te; cor] Ox3 
-b)wKt'' 
wKt3 
TMd4
— c) Lo4 
,sKt5wKt6 
wKt1 
Lo2; 
SAP4.214
MTr4 MTr6 
— d) MTr4 MTr6 
NKt La2 cMd1 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Be]
246. Cited by Laks 1.275; Dev 1.178; Mädh 1.460-1;pâda s c-d cited by Apa 76 — a) Be3
BKt5 wKt6 
Tr1 
Ho 
— b) Lo1 
Be1 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 [but
me] La2 oMd2 Ox2 Tj2 uTr^Madh Mandlik KSS 
TMd3 
. Wa
BhP 4.214 
— c) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 Tj2 MTr3 Laks Mandlik KSS
Apa 5TT^" 
— d) MTr4 MTr6 
eCa [but cor] wKt1 NNg Laks Me Jha Dave
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 oMd2 TMd4 Tj2 MTr3Me [pathaj Mr 
Re Mandlik KSS
cf. similar variants at 3.82d.
Apa [vi]
— d) Wa
NKt4
rMd3
BhP 4.212
TMd4
La2
Madh


--- PAGE 457 ---
247- Omitted in La2. Cited by Vising; Dev 1.167— a~d) a longer version in BhP4.216
- a) Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] Pu9 
x M d 3 s K t 5 : w K t
1
Lo3rMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 MTr4 
- c) Tj2 
— d) Vis 
~ 
[cf. 2.2420];
Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3
248. Cited by Laks 1.274; Dev 1.167; Mai/A 1.458 — a) NKt4 Lo2 GMd1 xMd3 xMd4 cMy
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Mir4MTr6 [Jolly M'-2"8-9 G\LaksMädh 
_ 
Bo 
; La1
wKt1 wKt6 
— b ) H y s B e
2 
— d ) T r
1 N N g
; Pu10 [Jolly M1"2-8'9]
249. Cited by Laks 1.274 — a) SAP 4.218 
Lo3 Tj1 
Tr2
— b) BKt5 wKt6 MTr4 Laks 
Pu10 
— c-d) BhP 4.218
— c) sKt5 wKt6 
Lo5 
BBe2 Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo5 Tr2 MTr3 Me
Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) x
M
d
4
a
M
d
5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
Colophon: Be1 Bo Ho Lo1 cMy NNg Tj2 
Lo3 Tj1 
Ho
wKt3 La1 
Be3 BKl5 wKt6 Lo3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 om 
Hy Lo1
HowKt3 om 
La1 
Ho Lo1 
~ 
Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 
Be1 
, wKt1
NNg
Chapter 2
446


--- PAGE 458 ---
1. 
Cited by Apa 67; Hem 3/3.779; Har-A. 1.2.16; Devl.l66;Maclh 1.457-8; pada-d
cited by Vij 1.36— a) rMd4 [Jolly M1'2] 
Ho 
Ox2 
Hy 
cMd5
wKt6 
TMd3 
Tr1 
[but corfl] —
 b) NKt4 Lo2 Ox3 
cMy 
N^Tj1
Pu10 
HyoOr 
Har-A Hem Apa [vi as in ed] 
La2 
—c) Hem
Tj' 
oMy 
Apa[\\] 
~ 
—
 d)BhP5.l
2. 
Folios containing verses 3.2-224 missing in Pu9. Cited by Hem 1.680; päda s a-b
cited by Kum 2.1.1 \>ratlka also at Kum 2.4.9]; Ws 1.3651; Vij 1.36— a) sOx1
rMd3 
Lo2Wa 
cMy 
— b) BhP 5.2. 
Jo2 Lo3
Tj'[Jo//yR] 
— c)Lo' 
NKt4 
— d) oMd2 
Be3 Jm ßKt5 wKt6
La1 Lo1 Pu10 [Jolly M'-2"8-9] 
La2 Lo3 Tj1
3. 
b)BKt5 
wKt6 
oMy 
iMd3 
sOx1
sPu6 [but me sh] 
—
 c) wKt6 
Tj2 
uBe? Jo2 NNg iMd3 Tr2 
—
d) sBe2 
wKt6 
wKt1 Wa
4 . C i t e d by Apa 76; Hem 1.680; Mädh 1.462 — a) BhP 5.4 Dev
Pu10 
Lo1 
—b) NNg Pu5 Pu7 
oMd5 
oMd1
 
BBe2
 BCa oOr Pu7
— c)TMd4 
— d)TMd4 
Tj1 
;Tr2 
Dev 
[typo?]
Additional half-verse in Tr2:
5.* ma in Pu7. Cited by Vij 1.53; ApaSr, Dev 1.184, 189; Mädh 1.468-9 — a) Be1
Bo 
— b) Vij' 
[vl as in ed]; sOx1 om 
Bo 
— c) oMd1 xlVId
3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 Mir4 MÏr6 
wKt3 
T
j
2
" — d ) M e [pätha ] Tr1
TMd3 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5
447
Tr2
Lo1
sOx1 sPu6
NKt4
Tr2 om
La2 Lo1


--- PAGE 459 ---
448
Chapter 3
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 oMd2 rMd4 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Vij Apa Dev Mâdh GoNa Ku Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS
Ox3
6. 
Cited by Vis 1.54; Apa84; Dev 1.204;Mâd h 1.477 — a) Pu10 [Jolly M'-2"8-9]
— c) Pu10 
xMd4 
Lo2 
Jo2 NKt4 Lo4 iMd4 oMd5 Ox3 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 W a Apa Go Ku 
oOrom
7 . C i t e d by Vis 1.54; Apa 84;Dev 1.204; Mâdh 1.477—a) T j 1 s K t 5 
Jm
xMd3 
sOx'sPu6Pu10 
Lo1 
— b)Lo' 
Lo 4Pu l oTr'
Lo2 
B e 3 w K t ' L a ' L « Â ; ; v / l p a [ v l a s i n e d ] s B e 2 
T r
2 P u
5 Pu7
sCa Leí 
— c) Hy 
" " Lo1 jMd3 BhP 5.104 
. oMy Pu10
Lo4 
BKt5 w
K
t
6
. B o o
M
y
T
r
2
H
o 
—
d) Bo 
Ho 
Lo2 
BhP 5.104 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
MTr3 
Tr1
Bo Tr2 
Kt2 
cMy 
oMd1 sOx1 sPu6
8 . P â d a s c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 78; Laks2.2y;Dev 1.200 — a) rMd4
— b) MTr4 MTr6 
Jm 
oMy 
eKt5 
oMy 
—
c) La1 oMy Pu10 T 
Jo2 NNg Pu10 Tj1 Wa Apa 
Lo1 T 
BhP 5.100
— c-d) Tr1 
— d) Jm 
nBe2 Jm Jo1
Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2 oMd1 oMd2 îMd 4 oMd5 NNg oOr Ox2 [but cor] MTr3 Rn Re Mr BhP
5.100 Apa Dev Mandlik KSS 
Lo1 
Hy 
rMd3 
Pu2 
sOx1
sPu6 
NKt4 
Bo
9 
Pâda s b-c omitted in Lo2. Cited by Apa j&;Laks 2.2.7; Dev 1.201— a) NPu1
NKt4 
Lo1 : 
Lo2 
NNg 
[but cor]; Bo 
—- b) Be1 Bo
Lo1 
Tj2 
— c ) w K t
6 T j ' ' J m L o
1 B o La1 NPu1 MTr3
Apa ' 
; Jm 
— d) Lo2 T 
oOr 
Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3
Pu 2Pu 1 0Tj'H- 
Pu10 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 oMd2 Pu5
Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly G] BhP 5.101 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMd5
Additional verse in Be3 sCa Ho La1 oOr Ox2 [but in parenthèses s h] Mandlik [
KSS:
a) La1
KSS '• 
—
 c) Ho O
x
2
L
a
1 
— d) Be3 Mandlik
La1
— b) La1 Mandlik KSS
La1
Mandlik


--- PAGE 460 ---
KSS 
Ho Ox2
Additional verse in TMd4:
[rest illegible]
10.* Cited by Apa -j&;Dev 1.200; Mädh 1.462; pâda s a-b cited by W.v i.52;pada-c by Vij
[cf. i.8b]; T r 2 
L— c ) T
M
d
3
; cMd5 MÏr4 MÏr6 \Jolly
Nd] 
Kt2 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] •
N
N
g Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
Jolly 
Tr2 
Apa [vi as in ed.] 
— d) Apa 
iMd3
Pu10 
Wa 
Pu5 Pu7 M i r
3 B e
3 Lo5 '
Jm gives the verses in the following order: loab, lied, nab, locd.
11. Cited by Apa 79; Laks 2.27;Dev 1.181; Mädh 1.474 — a) sOx' sPu6 Tr2
MTr3 om T — a-b) BhP 7.2 
— b) T M d
3
L
a ' [cor
tosh] Lo3 Pu l oTj' Tr1 Wa [Jo/fy M'~2R] Jte Dave 
[Jolly M8] 
Me supports 
with
gloss 
— c)Be3 
Tr2 
oMy 
— d) Wa
12.* Cited by Vis 1.55; Vij 1.56; Jmv 92; Dev 1.205-6; Mädh 1.493; päda s c-d cited by
A p a 8 8 — a ) oMd5 
— a-b) B h P 7
.
3
— 
b ) TMd3
Tr2 
— d)oMyOx 3 
TMd3 
wKt6 
Lo5 
BhP 7.3 Vij Apa
Jmv Dev Mädh MandlikJhaKSS Dave 
P
u
5
B
o 
Tj1
13.* ma in Pu7; päda s c-d omitted in Pu10. Cited by Apa 87-8; Jmv 9.2; Laks 2.38; Dev
1.206; Mädh 1.494— a) Laks 
NK.1
4 w K t
6 — b) BhP 7.6
Tr2 
Tj2 
oMd1 
. sKt5 oMd1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly M'-2'8
G] Jolly 
Ho T M d 4 L a k s 
—
 c) M T r
6 H y B e
1 üB ¿ Be3 TMd3 oOr La1
Pu5 Pu7 Mir4 MTr6 Jmv Laks 
wKt3 
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd1 oMd2 Tj2
 MTr3
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— d) Bo 
oMy 
NKt4 Apa 
Tj1
14. Cited by Apa 87; Dev 1.206; Mädh 1.495 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
— b) TMd3 F; Tj2
sOx1 sPu6 
T
r
2
T
M
d
4
— c ) T
M
d
3
— d ) B o
wKt6 oMd5 Dev 
wKt6 
, TMd3
Chapter 3
449
1.52 — a) NKt4
GMy
Lo2
— b) TMd3
Apa[vl]


--- PAGE 461 ---
450 
Chapter 3
15. Cited by Apa 87; Jmvg.g; Dev 1.207; Mädh 1.495 — a) Be1 Bo Hy wKt1 NKt
4 Lo2
oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M'-2-8 R N] Jmv [vl] 
s
K
t
5
— b) NKf
Pu10 
TMd3 
wKt6 
— c)MTr3 
" 
H o P u
1
0
— d)Ho 
xMd3 
oMd1 
H o m e to
16. Cited by Apa88; Laks2.4i; Jmv 9.9; Dev i.2o8;Madh 1.495 — a-d) BhP-j.g gives
an expanded version:
Obviously the author of
the BhP misunderstood the verse — a) oMy 
xMd3 
TMd4
; wKt1 Lo1 
"; cMd1 
wKt6 
; Tr1
— a-b)TMd4 
— b) oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 cMy Tr1 
MTr4
Jo1 
NPu
1 ^T; wKt1 J — c) Jo1 
Laks
17.Cited by Vij 3.265; Apa87; Jmvg.q; Dev 1.208; Mädh 1.495 — a) Hy—
b) TMd3 
— c) Tr2 
wKt3 
Lo5 Pu10 
; TMd4 
— d) Lo3
oMd5
18.* Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Apa 88 —
 a) Bo Lo3 NPu
1 Tr2 Wa 
Tj1 
sOx1 sPu6
J m 
— b)Tj' 
L
a
1
w
K
t
3
B
o 
L a 1 — c )
Be1 sBe2 B¿ sCa Hy Jo1 Jo2wKt' Kt2 wKt3 ßKt5 wKt6 [but cor] Lo1 Lo4 [me to] Lo5 iMd4
NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 sPu6 Tj2 MTr3MTr4 MTr6Apa Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
~ 
Jm
Lo3 Tj ' 
MTr6 
Dev 
Me appears to read 
— c-d) Tr2
TMd4 
— d) Ho Lo3 BhP 7
.
1
2
B
o 
sKt5 wKt6
NKt
4 Lo3 TMd4 Tj
1 BhP 7.12 
Bo Pu8
19.Cited by Har-A 1.27.1; Mädh 1.495 — a) BKÍ wKt6 
Tf Me [pätha ]
— b) Bo wKt1 wKt4 Tj1 
— c) Ho 
Mädh 
TMd3 
— d) Hy
wKt1 
Ho
20. Cited by Mädh 1.485; pâda s c-d cited by Jmv 43.4; Dev 1.227— a) BhP 7.14
— b) Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo3 oMy Pu2 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [¡oily R] Mädh Mandlik
BhP7.12
Apa
sOx1 sPu6
Pu7 [Jolly G]
Pu10


--- PAGE 462 ---
Chapter 3 
451
Jha KSS Dave 
nKi om 
BhP 7.14 
—
 c-d) BhP 7.14
— c ) NPu1 Pu8 
sOx' s
P
u
6
; Mir3 ' — 
d)
Jm
21. Cited by Dev 1.227; Mädh 1.485; päda s a-b cited by Jmv4.3.4 — a) Tt2 
sKt5
wKt6 
NKt4 
TMd3 
Lo5 
; BhP 7.15 
oMy
wKt1
cor] Pu10 f^TT° ; sOx1 sPu6 [but cor] 
Bo
22. a) oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Mir4 Wa 
Be1 Pu10 
NKt4 
[om 
J; NKf Lo2
Wa 
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Mir4 BhPj.rt 
Bo sKt5 wKt6
 TMd4 
oMy 
Lo3
Tj1 
Hy 
— bjNKt 4 
rMd4 
Tr2 
NKt*
— c ) TMd3 
T r 2 . 
. B h P 7
.
1
6
H
y
Bo TMd4 
Tr1 
Jo2 
— d) oMd5 
iMd3 
Bo TMd4
La1 
BhP 7.16
23.* Cited by Apagr, Laks 2.72;Dev 1.231;Mäd h 1.487 — a) BhP 7.17 [vl]
Pu10 
G M d 5 T r ' M T r 4 A p a [
v
i
]
— b ) T M d
3 D e v
—
 c)Bo 
La1 
Tr2 
La1 
BhP 7 . 1 7 — d) TMd3
i 
L o 2 B o o M d 2 T M d 3 O x 2 T r 2 5 A / > 7 . i 7 
Be'sCaJmwKt 1
Kt2 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Ti ' \Jolly M3^4 R Nd] Re 
wKt6 Mir4
 
TMd4
Mir6 
; L
o
5
B
e
3
 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly M'-2-5'8-9 G N] Nâ
Jolly Jha 
NPu
1
24. Cited by Dev 1.231 — a) NKt4 
— b) Tr2 
— c) TMd4 
Tr2
NPu1 
T
M
d
3
— d)Tj'
25.* Cited by Mädh 1.488 — a) BhP 7.19 
Ho om 
Bé sCa 
Jm Lo4
Lo5 oMd2 sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 
Lo2 
— b) W
a
B
o Jm wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 sOx1
sPu6puio 
Tri 
GMy 
;BKÎwKt6 
Lo2 
— d)
Wa 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 eKt5 wKt6 La ' La2 Lo2 oMd2 NNg
oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 Ku Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
— b) NKt4
— c) wKt6 NPu1
— d) TMd4
Pu7 [but


--- PAGE 463 ---
452 
Chapter 3
26. Päda- d omitted in eBe2 — a) NPu1 
sKt5 om second 
— b) Tr2
— c) Bo Ho Jm 
K t
2 s O x
1 T r
1 o O r s B e
2 
— d) wKt6
TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Mir3 
oMd2 
TMd4
27.* Omitted in eBe2. Cited by Apa 87;Dev 1.227— a) rMd4 
Pu2
sBe2 sCa Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 Ox2 [cor to] Tj2 Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly
Jha KSS Dave 
Hy 
Pu'° om 
Lo5 Pu7 [Jolly G] BhPj.zi— b) Jm Jo1
Kt2 oMd2 oMd5 NPu 1 Mir4 Mir6 Re Mandlik KSS 
P u 1 0 o M y 
TMd4
MTr3 
Lo3Tj' 
— d)oMc? 
Bo 
Ho NKl4 
cMd5Pu7Tr'
28. Päda s a-c omitted insBe2. Cited by Hem 1.684; Dev 1.228 — a) cMy 
Jo2 Lo3
Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Wa [Jolly G] 
La1 
Tr2 
— a-b) BhP 7.22
— b) oOr Pu5 Pu7 Hem 
' ' [oOr 
]; La1
Tj1 
NNg 
— c)xMd3 
—a)
 BhP 
ßBe2 om 
Ho
TMd3 Tr1 
oMd5 
eKt5 oMy Pu7 MTr4 M T r 6 T r 1 
Bo 
H o P u 5
Be3 
BCa NNg
29. Päda s c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Hem 1.684; Dev 1.228; pâda s a-b cited by Vis
1.59—a) Ji 
T M d 4 N K . Í 
Tj1 
— b)sKt5sOx' 
rMd3 Pu5
Lo2 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
Jm 
— d) cMy
BhP 7.23 
Bo 
aMd1 T r 1 B e 1 He
After 29 wKt1 gives 3.32 and oMy 3.32 a-b up to
30.Päda s a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by Hem 1.685; Dev 1.228 — a) T r
2 o O r
.NPu 1 
wKt6 
JmKt 2 
Be3NKt4 
— b)NNg 
wKt6
TMd3 
sOx1 s P u 6 b o t h cor t o s B e
2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 La2 Lo3 Tj1
Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly M6 R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— c) Hem 
—
 d) Jo1
La1 
BhP 7.24
31. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Vis 1.61; Dev 1.229 — a) Dev 
— b) TMd3 oMd5
TMd4
Ox3
Tr1
GMyMTr6
BhP 7.25
GMd1
—a) Vis
rMd3


--- PAGE 464 ---
Chapter 3 
453
Tr2 BhP 7.25
32.Cited by VV.si.6i; Hem 1.32; Dev 1.229 — a) L c
2 L o
3 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6 \}olly
R] 
— b) Kt2 
cMd1 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 Wa [Jolly R] Hem 
NKt4
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 BhP 7.26 Vis ÏT 
— d) cMy sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu5
Pu7[yo//yM'-2~8G] 
Pu10 
oMy
33.Cited by Vis 1.61; Laks 2.92; Dev 1.229 — a) T M d 3 s O x 1 sPu6
NKt4 
Tr1 
— b)HyLo4Ox3 
Lo2 
Lo4 Ox3 Pu5
34. Cited by Visi.6r, Apa 91; Laks 2.94; Hem 1.685 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Tj2 om
TMd3 
wKt6 
//era 
Jm 
BhP 7.28 —
 b) Lo3
Tj1 Vf a. [Jolly R] 
[Wa 
];//em 
sOx1 [me to] sPu6 [me
to] Apa [vi as in ed] 
" o
M
d
5
J
o
2 
— c) L o
3 — d) Be3
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3AT55 
[cf. 3.2ld]; wKt6 
Tr2 
La1
; wKt1 oOr sOx1 sPu6 BhP 7.28 Apa 
Pu10 Mandlik Jha Dave
BKt5 wKt6 ;
35. Cited by Laks 2.68 — a) BhP 7.29 
ßBe2 Hy Jm wKt3 sKt5 wKt6
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— b) La2 
oMy 
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Pu10
Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly M1-2-3-8-'] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) oOr 
Ox2 
sKt5
wKt6 
— d) Lo3 Tj ' [Jolly R]
36. Cited by Hem 1.683; Laks 2.97 — a) Tr1 
[om 
]; oMy 
, Hem
— b) oMy 
TMd4 
BhP 7.30 
, Pu10 
TMd4 Laks
MTr6 
— c) BhP 7.30 cf 
Be3 H e M T r 4 
Bo
NKf 
TMd3 
oMd1 c M d
5 — d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2oMd2 MTr3 Ku Hem
Mandlik KSS 
Bo [but cor] Pu2
Jm 
' BBe2 Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 aKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
Chapter 3 
453
M T r 4
B o
— c ) G M d 1
W a
B K t 5 w K t 6
L o 1
B o
Tj1
— d) sOx1 sPu6
sOx1 sPu6 Laks
MTr6
La1
— a) Jm
37.Cited by Apa88; Hem 1.683; Laks 2.98;Dev 1.227


--- PAGE 465 ---
454 
Chapter 3
oMd2 oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 [folly M1-4'8^9 Ku Rl Hem Laks Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
B
e
1
w
K
t
1 o
M
y
; D e v 
—
 a-b) B h P
7.31 expanded version:
— b)Jm 
w K t
6 o M y 
L
o
2
L
o
3 TMd3 Ti1
MTr4 Apa [vl] 
oMd1 
MTr6 
— c) Be1 
Bo 
NPu1
o O r 
NKt
4 
; o
M
y
— d ) B h P 7.31
Hy Jm Jo1 oMd1 cMd5 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr3 Re Jolly KSS " 
, La2 
wKt1 MTr6
oMd2 
TMd3
38.* Cited by Vis 1.59; Hem 1.683; Laks 2.98; Dev 1.228 — a) Hy Tr2 
NNg
Hy Jo2 wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 oOr Ox2 [but cor sh] Tj1 Tf [Jolly R N] Dev 
cMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd] Vis 
MTr4 MTr6 
Be3 NKt4 La1 BhP 7.32 [vl] Laks
[Be3 
SAP 
— b)Lo4Ox3 
[but me Lo4 ] ; Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
[Jolly Go] 
- c) Be1 Bo Hy Jo2 wKt1 uKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oOr sOx1
Ox2 [but cor sh] NPu
1 sPu6 Tj1 Tf [Jolly R N] Dev 
NKt4 La/b 
B e 3 x M d 3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly tid]Vis 
MTr4
MTr6 
BhP 
[vl 
] —
d) BhP 
Hem 
Ho oMd2 Pu10 om oneLo4 ma oneNKt4
Ho MÍ- 
Wa 
MTr4
 M T r 6
T M d 3 [Jolly N d ] T r
1 B e
3 Laks
: NPu1 Pu10
Additional verse given in margin in Pu':
39.* Cited by Apa 117; Hem 1.683; Dev 1.230 — a) Be1 Bo sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 
Ho
oMd5 Ox2 
w K t
3 — b ) Pu5 P
u
7
T
r
2
O
x
3
cMy _ 
— c) Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 wKt6 La1 La2
Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 TMd4 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 N?U' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10
Tj1 Tj2Tr2MTr4 MTr6 W a Apa Hem Jolly KSS 
sKt5 
Jm 
— d) Hy
NPu
1 
MTr3
40. Cited by Apa 117, Hem 1.683; Dev 1.230 — a) NKt4 
xMd3 
"— b)
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— c)n/!/>7.34 
wKt6 TMd4 
wTr3 
—
d)Tr2 
Kt2 
Bo NKt
4 
Lo5
41. Cited by Apa 117; Hem 1.683; Dev 1.230 — a) BhP 7.35 
Lo3 xMd4
oOr [but cor] NPu1 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R] HemApa " 
wKt6 
TMd3
Pu10 [Jolly M1'2] 
Be1 Be3 Bo La2 Lo1 NNg Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Wa


--- PAGE 466 ---
Chapter 3 
455
[Jolly M8-9G]A« Jolly 
—
 b) cMd5 
Jm 
NKt
4 ' 
—
d) Apa
42. Cited by Apa 117; Hem 1.683— a) La1 
oOr 
— b) Jm
wKt6 
Kt2 Lo1 TMd4 NNg Pu5 Pu7 
— c) oMd2 
rMd4
Tr2 
La1 
— d) Bo 
wKt6 
TMd3
xMd4
43. Cited by Mädh 1.496 — a) Ho sOx1 
Pu5 
MTr3 
— a-b) BhP
7.37 
— b) Be-'sKt5 wKt6 oMy Ox2 [but cor sh] MTr
3
— c)Ho 
BKt5wKt6 
Lo1 
— d)HoJm
44. Cited by Mädh 1.496; päda s c-d cited by Vij i.6z;Apa 92 — a) BhP 7.38 
Bo
wKt3 Lo2 
TMd3 
— b) Bo Ho Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Tj1 
TMd3 
NKt
4
oMy 
sKt5 
wKt6 
NKt
4 
Jm Wa 
— c) Pu10 
Bo
— c-d) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Mädh
[oMy 
— d)Lo2 
B K ^ w K t 6 _ 
Bo
45.Cited by Hem 3/3.724; Dev 1.41; Mädh 1.497; päda- a cited by Vis 1.79; Apa 103 —
a)Tr' 
— b)MTr3 
NKt
4 
" 
oMy 
Hem 
— c)
oMd5 
Dev 
eKt5 wKt6 
— d) NKt4 
Hem =T
46. Cited by Dev 1.38; Mädh 1.437-8 — a) Bo Hy Tr2 
cMd5 
— b) Be1
wKt3 
; Jm 
Jm oMd5 sOx1 
Bo wKt; 
— d) oMy 
NKf
TMd3
47.* Cited by Apa 104; Hems/3.727; ¿«^3.339; Dev 1.38; Mädh 1.437-8 — a) TMd4
H e m 
Be'HoTr 1 
— b ) w
K
t
3
T
M
d
4
H
o A p a H e m D e v
oOrPu10 
sOx'o« 
Lo4ma 
Jo2 Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr2 Wa— 
c)
eKt5 wKt6 Lo3sOx'sPu6Tj' Tr2 
sKt5 
Hy Jm Jo' Kt2 NKf La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 oMy Ox2 [cor to sh] Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 MandlikJha KSS Dave


--- PAGE 467 ---
456 
Chapter 3
48. Omitted in Hy. Cited by Apa 103;Dev 1.37; Mädh 1.438— a) NKt" 
Jm
— c ) o M y 
— d ) NKl4 nKt5 wKt6 Lo2 O
x
3
, T
r
2
T
j
1
K
t
2
Ho 
Be3 Lo2 Tr2 
sPu6 [¿>af cor]
49. Cited by Dev 1.40; Mädh 1.499; päd a a-b cited by Vij 2.117; pada-a by Vis 1.79— a)
— b) oMy 
oOr 
. sOx1 sPu6 
Tr2 
rMd4
Bo oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Dev 
Lo2 iMd3 
— c) Me |patha| 
sBe2 Lo5 TMd3 oOr
NPu1 
sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Tj2 
'— d)Hy¡ 
Be3 om 
sBe2 Ho sKíwKt 6
Addition verse in oMd5 [JollyGr]:
a) [Jolly Gr] 
— b) [Jolly Gr] 
— c) [Jolly Gr] 
— d)
oMd5
50.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu10. Cited by Vis 1.79 — a) oMd2 sOx1 sPu6
wKt1
— b) Bo 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 [cor to] sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4
Lo5 oMd2 xMd3 Ox3 Pu8 Tr1
 MTr3 
— d) Tj2 
oM> 
" Wa
Additonal verse in Ho oOr; placed after 3.54 in TMd4:
51. Cited by Laks 2.88; Jmv 4.3.24; Dev 1.232 — a)sOx' sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7 Dev
Jo 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
Hy Jo1 Kt2 La1 oMd2 TMd3 Pu10 Tj2 [Jolly M'-2-8-
9
sBe2 
— d) La1 
TMd3 
oMd5 oMy [Jolly Gr] insert here 9.98 and
100; Tr1 inserts g.gSa-b, iooa-b, g8c-d, and iooc-d.
52. a) Pu5 Pu7 
Lo4 ma 
; Be3 wKt6 La1 oMy oOr [but corfli] Ox2 [but cor sh]
TMd3
Be1
Lo3 TMd3xMd4Tj1 Tr4 MTr4 Dev Vis
GMd5
[jolly Gr]
Tr2
NKt4
TMd3
Bo
a ) H o
o O r
— c) TMd4
— c-d) oOr
9] Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
 [La1
TMd3 ] Jm
Be1
sOx1sPu6Tr2
— b)iMd3
— c) Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1' [Jolly N Nd]
wKt1
GMy
oOr
TMd3 La1
wKt6
[om
]; Lo1


--- PAGE 468 ---
Chapter 3 
457
— d) Pu10 
rMd3
53.* Cited by Dev 1.231 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Lo5 
— c) wKt3 NNg 
Tj1
Jo2 
Tr 2 D
e
v
[
T
r
2 
Lo1 xMd3 oMy Ox2 BhP 7.41
NKt
4 Wa 
, Be3 Lo2 [cor to] 
sOx1 
— d) Be1 Jo2 eKt5 wKt6 La2
Lo3 Lo4 Lo5oMy sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M R] Me Re Jha
Dave 
[eKt5 Tr2 
wKt6 
wKt6 
NNg as in ed. but me to
with the comment
Additional verses in oMd1 xMd4 olVId
5 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [cf.9.42]:
1. a)oMd'oOrMTr4MTr6; 
oMy 
xMd4 
— c) MTr4
om
2.a-b) o M d 1 [ l a c u n a ] 
oMd; 
— b) MTr4
TMd4 
— c)oMd' 
xMd4MTr4
NKt4^ 
— c)rMd3 
Pu10[^o//yM'-2-8-9] 
— d) oMy
Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 oOr Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
Additional verse in xMd4: same as added verse after 3.50.
55. Cited by Dev 3.570;Mfli/A 1.505— a) Tr2 
ßBe2 
sKt5 wKt6
Lo1 Lo4Lo5xMd3NPu' 
Ox3 
— b) TMd3 
T—c)Tj 2
oMd1 
" 
Tr1 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Tr2
56. Cited by Apa 107; Laks 12.610; Dev 3.571; Mädh 1.505 — a) sKt5 wKt6 
Apa
— b)Pu10o/« 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] B e
1 
— c) sOx1 sPu6
wKt3 
Dev 
—
 d)Pu'° 
MTr3 
oMd1
57. Cited by Laks 12.610; Dev 3.571; Mâdh 1.506 — a) Pu10 
Tj1 Wa
Be1 ßBe2 uCa wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox2 Ox3 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 
" sOx1 sPu6
NKt4
oOr
TMd3
MTr6
— d) MTr6
Pu8
sOx1 sPu6
— b)GMd5
 — a) MTr4
54.Cited by Dev 1.233
GMy
TMd3 GMy
GMd5 Tr1 [Jolly Nd]


--- PAGE 469 ---
458 
Chapter 3
Lo1 
Dev 
— b)Kt2 
cMd1 
sKÍ wKt6 
— c)
Tr2 
L o ' T j 1 N K t 4 o m 
oOr ma 
uBe2 wKt1 La1 Lo4 Lo5 xMd3
Ox3Pu'° 
HowKt3 
— ^eKíwKt 6 
Lo'Tj1 
iMd4 Tr1 Dev
58. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Apa 107; Laks
12.610; Mädh 1.506 — a) Be1 aBe2 aCa wKt1 wKt3 wKt6 oMd2 Ox2 Tr2 
— b) Tr2
sOx1 sPu6 
w
K
t
6
J
m 
— c ) Lo1
— d) MTr6
59.* Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.610;Mäd h
1.506 —a) NNg 
w K t
3 B e
1 wKt1 ßKt5 wKt6 Lo 3oMd'TMd 3oMd 5cMy
sPu6 Tj1
 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly R] 
Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly K.U] Ku
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt3 
NfCt
4 Lo2 oMd1 rMd3 oMd5 NNg Ox2 [but cor sh] Tr1
Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly N Nd] Nä 
Nä gives reading of edition as a pätha .
60. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.613; Dev
3.581; Mädh 1.506 — a ) B o 
— b ) Kt2 '
o
M
d
5 T
r
2
B
o
— c )
Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd1 oMd2 oMd5 Tj2 MTr3 Mädh Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
—
 d) oMy
Bo 
oOr
61. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.613; Dev
3.581 —a) oMd5 
T r 2 H y Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 
Ho 
Tj1 
H
y
— b) Tr2
Wa 
xMd3 
— c) TMd3 Wa 
— d) sBe2 sCa wKt1 ßKt5 wKt6
Lo3Tj' 
w K t 3 H y o m 
H
o
w
K
t
6 
Lo3Tj"
Additional verse in Mandlik [ ] KSS Dave; placed after 3.6ob in oMd1 oMd5:
d) Mandlik KSS Dave
62. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu10; pâda s c-d omitted in
oMy. Cited by Laks 12.613; Dev 3.581 — a) Tr2 
— c) Ho NKt4 
M T r 6 D e v
Tr1 
Jm 
; sBe2 
" — d) oMd2 
Tr1 
Be1
Mandlik KSS Dave
— b) Lo3 Tj1 Mädh
— c) ßBe2
— d) Pu5


--- PAGE 470 ---
Chapter 3 
459
63.* Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Dev 1.232 — a)Dev
oMy 
B K Í w K t
6 B e 
L
o
1
— b ) L o 2
— c) Be1 eBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt3 wKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Dev Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave Rn 
— d) Dev
64. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Dev 1.208 — a)
sOx1 sPu6 
— c) TMd3 Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly Gr] 
— d) Tr2 
oMd5
Kt2 sKt5 
Be1
65.* Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Laks 2.333; Dev
1.208 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] L a k s 
TMd3 [Jolly Nd]
— b) uKt5 Lo1 
wKt6 
sOx1 sPu6 
Be wKt1 NKt4
Lo lTMd 3cMyNNgOx 2NPu lPu 5Pu 7Tj l 
c M d 1 L a 1 
— c) Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wK.t3 ßKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 oMd2 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 MTr3 Dev
Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
[Pu5 
I — d) eKt5 wKt6
oOr 
Bo
66. Not commented by Me;omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu'° . Cited by V/s 1.54— a) TMd3
sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Pu5 P u
7 w K t
3 
wKt1 wKt3 wKt6 TMd3 Tr1
— c) wKt6 
NNg 
oMy 
wKt1 
— d) Bo 
Lo1
Tr2 
Vis 
Ox2 [but cor sh]
67. Omitted in Lo5 Pu10. Cited lay Hem 3/2.1329; Laks2.ii4; Dev 2.571— a) wKt1 wKt6
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 BhP 164 
H
e
m
o
O
r 
— b) Lo2 sOx ' sPu6 Laks
Dev 
Jo2 La1 Lo1 Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox2 [but cor sh] Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Wa [Jolly N]
Be1 
Ho 
Tr2 
Bo 
Jm 
Be1 
Wa 
— c) Hem
sOx1 
BhP 16.4 
— d) Hem 
BhP 16.4
Jo2 wKt1 sKt5 Lo2oMd' TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
Tj1 
" 
Lo3
Laks 
¡La1 
Tr1 
Hy Tj 
Jm 
Wa 
T M d 3 N K t 4
Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 Ox3
68. Cited by Laks 3.143 — a) wKt1 
MTr3 
— b) BhP 16.5 
Tj1


--- PAGE 471 ---
460 
Chapter 3
wKt6 
NNg Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 
Lo2 
Mir6 
Tr1 
wKt6
oMd5 
M
T
r
6
— c) w K t
1 B e
1 [but cor] N Kl? xMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6
MTr4 MTr6 ; 
Tr1 
oMd5 
wKt6 
xMd3
 
MTr3 ; 
Tj2
NKt^ 
xMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 M T r
6 [ M T r
6 
o M d
5 ] ;
Kt2 Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 
xMd4 
— c-d) BhP 16.5
[vl 
] —d)xMd 3 
oMd5 
" oOr 
oMd1 oMy 
Laks
Pu10 
W a J o
2 Pu5 P u 7 w K t 1 NKt4 eKt5 w K t 6 B o Ho Lo1 Lo4
Ox3 
MTr4 
iNPii 
xMd3 
cMy 
xMd4
69.Cited by Laks 3.143 — a) oMy Tr1 MTr4 BhP 16.6 LakswKt6 
— a-b)
cMy 
_ 
— b)Ox3 
sPu6 
sOx1 
iMd3 BhP 16.6
— c) BhP 16.6 
iMd4 
cMy 
sOx1 sPu6
70. Cited by Dev 2.562-3 — a)xMd3 xMd4 MTr6 
T r
1 w K t
6 
—
b) BhP 16.7 
xMd4 
— c) cMy 
La1 
Jm 
sOx1 sPu6
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 
Tj1 
xMd3 
Pu10 
oOr
sKt5 
wKt6 
— c-d) BhP 167 
— d) Tr1
71. a)Lo' 
Tr1 
— b) cMy 
Lo1 
— c)
BoxMd3 
wKt6 
BooOrsOx1 sPu6MTr4MTr6 
o
M
d
5
— d )
Wa 
Pu10
72.Omitted in MTr3. Cited by Apa\äf>; Dev 2.595 — a) L o
5 x M d
3 [Jolly Nd]
— a-b) Me [pâtha ] 
— c) ßKt5
Me [pâtha ] 
— d) oMy 
xMd4 
BhP 16.9 
Bo
Lo1
73. The section 3.73-117 is omitted in [Jolly M5]; päda s c-d omitted in Lo3 Tj1. Cited
by Apa 142 — a) Pu10 
Bo Ho 
oMy 
NKf wKt6 : — b) Ho
Lo4 NNg [but cor] Ox3 
Lo' a f t e r j u m p s to verse 74b [haplo] — c) Be1
sCa wKt3 NKt
4 wKt6 Lo2 xMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 [folly M]'2~
5-8-9 Me N Nd] Apa 
; Bo 
La1 
oMd1 
Hy 
Lo1 
—
d)Tr' 
oMy 
MTr4 
Apa


--- PAGE 472 ---
Chapter 3 
461
74. Cited by Apa 142 — a) wKt6 
Ox3 
N?U' 
Hy om
H o 
w K t
6 — b ) B e
1 O x
3 
W a x M d
3 
— c ) Be1
eCa wKt3 NKt4 wKt6 TMd3 r,Md5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly M'-"-8-9
Me N Nd] Apa 
Ox3 
Lo 2 
o
M
d
1
w
K
t
6
o
M
y
N N g 
B e ! 
; Kt2 
e
K
t
5
w
K
t
6
x
M
d
3
Tj1 
Lo3
75. Cited by Laks 3.148-9 — a) Bo 
xMd3 oMy 
nKt5 wKt6 
—
b) Lo4 Lo5 Pu7 Laks Go 
[Lo4 Lo5 
] — c) Pu5 Pu7 Go
Wa 
Ho Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj1 Tr1
 MTr6 Mandlik Jha KSS D
a
v
e
B
o
Jo2Lo3Tj'Tj2 
[om 
];sKt5 wKt6 
— d) Lo4 Lo5 
Laks
76.Cited by Apa 994 — a) sOx1 Ox3 s P u
6 o O r 
oMy
MTr4 
—- b) La1 sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Pu10 Wa ' 
NKt4 Lo2 Lo5 oMd' xMd4
— d) Lo2
77.* a) cMd1 iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr] 
[cf.
VaDh 8.16]; NKf 
NK14 
— b) uCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 oMy oOr
NPu1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MrMandlik Bühler KSS 
— c) oMd5 
wKt1
— c-d) NKt4 TMd3
 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
: [Tr1 
] — d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Ku Mr Mandlik Bühler KSS
[MTr3 
L
a
1
— oMd5 next repeats verse 77 giving the vulgate
reading [of Mandlik etc.]
Additional verse in NPu
1 Mandlik p]; cf. 6.90:
d) NPu1
78. Cited by Laks 3.209 — a) Ho xMd4 MTr4 
oMy 
Tj1 
—
b)GMd' 
B o w K t 6 O x 2 P u 1 0 
L
a
1
H
y 
J m
wKt3 
Ho 
— c) BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 Mandlik Bühler Jha KSS Dave
BKt5 
- d) wKt1 Laks 
Lo3 Pu10 Tj ' [Jolly M'-2"8 R]
Me Dave Jha 
Me gives 
as a pâtha , saying that if the latter reading is
followed then the previous compound is a Bahuvrihi; if the former is followed it is a Karma-


--- PAGE 473 ---
462 
Chapter 3
dhäraya ; 
is supported by Go KM and Re.
79.* ma in Pu7 — a) Jo2 om 
wKt6 
NKt4 
oMd2 
[om ]; sOx1
sPu6
Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 oOr NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3
cMy
So. Cited by Laks 3.147-8; Dev 2.563 — a)NKt4 
Kt2 
NKt
4
— b)Tj' 
.
N
K
t
4
— c ) s K t 5 w K t 6 TMd3 cMd5 T r
1 o M y
Be1 
Jm 
Ho 
oMy 
• 
— d) Tr2 om 
Be3 
Jm
NKt4
81. Cited by Jmv 11.6.17; Laks 3.148; Dev 2.563 — a) Tr2 
ßBe2 Kt2
wKt3NPu' uTr3Jmv
oOr 
— c)cMds 
La1 
Jo2 Lo3
Tj1
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo1 
— d) TMd3 
cMy '
82.* Cited by Vij 1.217, Apa 145; Laks 3.169; Hem 3/1.208, 3/2.1564 3/3.477; Dev2.56s
—
 a) Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt
4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 oMy sOx1 [but me] Ox2 Pu2
Pu4 sPu6 [but me] Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Wa \Jolly Ku N] Vij Apa Mandlik KSS 
which is
supported by Ku Nd — b) Jm 
Lo1 oMd1 Ox2 Tr2 Laks ^ —
 c) Bo 
, NKt4
— d) cMd5 
Hem 3/2.1564 
wKt3 MTr6 
Be1 sBe2
Bo [but cor] Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 Ox2 Pu2 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2
MTr3 [Jolly R Nd] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
which is supported by Rn Re; cMy
Tj2 
[cf. the similar variants at 2.246d]
In Hy the folio containing 3.83-97 is missing.
83.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1565; Laks 3.169; Dev2.564 — a) Tr2 
Jm L
a
'
—
b) Be3 BCa Ho Kt2sKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Hem Dev Jha Dave
wKt6 
Lo4 
B K t 5 L o 5 L o 1 oMd5 
TMd4 Ox3 Pu10 
oMy
Ox2 Pu8 Tr2 Wa
Pu5
— c) TMd3
Lo4 Lo5
Ho
Lo4
Tj1Tr1
Lo1
— c)Ox3
sBe2 Be3
 (Jolly G R] Mandlik Jolly KSS
— d)Tr2om
oOr om
Tj1
NKt4
NNg
wKt1
Tj1
— b) Jm
Pu5Pu7
— b)Lo2
oOr
cMy
BKt5wKt6
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3


--- PAGE 474 ---
Chapter 3 
463
GMy 
Mir3 
sBe2 Be3 sCa [but cor] Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 K.t2 ßKt5 wKt6 La1 La2
Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMy oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 AW Co
[Jolly M R Nd] 
Tr1 
— d) o
M
d
1
                     i
M
3 
 Ox2 Tr1 Dev
TMd4
84. a) xMd4 
wKt6 ma 
—
 b) Ox3 MTr4 
; Lo4 Lo5 
wKt6 Lo1
TMd3oMd5Tr2 
oMy 
— c^K^oMd1 
— d) oMy 
Wa
85.Placed after 87 in Jm. Cited by Laks 3.154-5 — a) B e
1 H o 
Lo2xMd3
NPu
1 
MTr3 
Tj1 
— b)Bo 
Be1 
— c) Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 [but
me] Tj2 MTr3Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) Be1 MTr4 
Ox3
Pu'Vo/TyM1-2-8]
86. Päda s a-b omitted in MTr3 [haplo] ; verses 86 and 87 transposed in Jm — a) Lo3 Lo4
L o 5 
o O r 
wKt6 
w K t
1 L o
4 
P u
1
0 — b ) Pu5 Pu7
wKt3 
— c) TMd4 
; Jm 
oOr 
— d) sBe2 sKt5 wKt6 Ox2
 
Tr2 
iBooMd 1' 
Ho wKt1 ßKl5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 [but cor] Tr2
87. a) sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
NKt4 Ox3
 
TMd4 
TMd3
wKt6 
— b) Ho— 
d) wKt6 Pu10 [Jolly M1'2'8]
[Jolly Be]
88. Omitted in cMy [haplo] — a) TMd3 
wKt1 
oOr 
Bo 
— b)
Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2
 MTr3 \Jolly Nd]Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Tr2 ; 
wKt1
oMd2 
— c)TMd3 
— d)Bo 
Tj1 
Jo2 NKt4 nut5 wKt6 Lo4 Ox2
Pu5Pu7Tj2Tr2 
Ox3 
oMd2
 
TMd3 oOr 
TMd4 
Pu'°
NNg
89. Omitted in cMy Pu5. Cited by Laksz.157— a) MTr4 
Lo1
oOr Tj1 
Bo wKt3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 MTr6 
— b) Jo2 wKt1
Jm Jo ' Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
NNg 
— c) wKt6 Tj ' 
Be1
sKt5 
w K t
6 s O x
1 sPu6 
L o
2 T r
1 
sBe2 Lo4
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 [Jolly M]
Tj1
Pu5
 Pu7
[Jolly G]
GMy


--- PAGE 475 ---
464 
Chapter 3
go. Omitted in oOr; päda s c-d omitted in MTr4 Wa — b) Ho 
Be3 La1 xMd3 Tr2
91.* Omitted in oOr MTr4; päda s a-b omitted in Wa and ma in Lo4 — a) oMy
Be1
 BBe2
 BKt5 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 No Co Re
Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Ox2 Pu8 Tr1 [Jolly N Nd] 
;oMy 
NKt4
[Jolly M1'8] 
[Jolly M
2
]
P
u
1
0 [Jolly M
9
]
P
u
5
wKt3 
Be1 BBe2 Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Lo4 [ma] Lo5 oMd2 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
[Jolly M3'4 Ku R] NS Ku Rn Nd Mandlik KSS 
M
T
r
6
— c) P if Pu7
[Jolly G] 
— d) La1 
iMd3 oMd5 Ox2 Pu5
92.* Omitted in Tr2. Cited by Vij 1.103; Apa 143> Dev 2.584 — b) iMd3
MTr6 
Lo4 
— c) oMy Pu10 Tr1 Jha D
a
v
e
s
K
t
s
NKt4 NNg Tj1 Apa 
Lo5 
— d) oOr 
Be1 [me to] Be3 Bo
Jm Jo2 BKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 xMd4 sOx1 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly M G
R] Vij Apa Dev Me Go Re 
Ho wKt1 Me 
xMd3 inserts here 3.121.
93. Päda s a-b omitted in Pu10. Cited by Dev 2.s84;pada-d cited by Kum 3.1.13— b) Tj1
NKt? 
i
M
d
4
o
M
y T
r
2
— c ) K
t
2
L
o
1 <TC— d )
sBe2 Ho wKt1 NKt4 ßKt5 La1 Lo4 NNg NPu
1 [Jolly G Ku] Ku 
[Ku gives 
as pâtha ] ;
Kt2 
Ox2 Ox3 Pu1 °
o
M
d
2 
B o s O x ' s P u 6 B e 1 N P u
1 s P u
6
me to 
wKt6 TMd3 
Kt2
94.Päda s c-d cited by Laks 3.166; Dev 1.112 — a) wKt1 N
P
u
1
— b) Be1 Lo2
Jm 
— c) Ox3 
NNg om 
TMd4 
La1 
— d) Wa
oMd5
Additional half-verse inoMy:
95.* Päd a b-c omitted in Kt6 My1 and ma in Lo4; päda s a-b ma in Ox2; päda s b and d
TMd4
— c) wKt1 TMd3
 — d) GMy
NNg
Ho
NPu1
— b) [Jolly M5]
sOx1sPu6
Be3Bo Ho La1


--- PAGE 476 ---
Chapter 3 
465
transposed in Jm. Cited by Laks 3.167— a) TMd3 
Pu'° 
— b) iviTr4
MTr6 
A f e [ p a t h a | _ 
NKt^oMd1 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6
Be1 sBc? Be3 ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 eKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo3oMd2 NNg
Ox2
 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa \Jolly G Ku R] LaksMandlik Jolly
Jha KSS Dave 
[Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Lo1 
Bo wKLt
3 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2
oOr Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M]
Kt2 
Ox3Pu'° 
sCa 
Lo4 Lo5
96.Cited by Laks 3.167 — a) oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1
wKt1 
— b)Rn 
Tr2 
— c)wKt6 
Tj1
TMd4 adds here the additional verses given after 3.98 and after them inserts verse 3.84.
97. Omitted in Ho; verses 97 andgS transposed in NPu1. Cited by Laks 3.167— a) La1
— c) eKt5 wKt6 Lo2 TMd4 Ox3 Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M1'2-8 N] Me Na Jha Dave
98.Päda s a-b omitted in Ho and pâda s c-d in Pu10. Cited by Laks 3.167; Dev 2.598 —
a) Dev 
TMd4 
— b)Lo 3Tj' ; 
— c) D
e
v
B
e
1 Be3
cMy 
TMd4 
wKt6 
sKt5 
— d) Ox3 
Lo2
Additional verses in Be3 La' oMy oOr MTr4 MTr6;given after 3.99 in oMd1 [verse 99 is
repeated indicating that in fact these may have come after 98], after 3.96 in TMd4 [after which
is inserted 7.84], and after 3.100 in oMd5; first three verses cited in Mandlik [ 
] KSS; first
verse alone in Apa 287; Hem 1.37:
a) Be3
—
 d) Be3 Mandlik KSS 
La1
Be3 
o
M
y
2 . a ) o O r
3 . a - b ) B e 3
M T r 4
— c ) M a n d l i k K S S
G M y
T M d 4
Lo4 ma
— d) La1
Tr2
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor]
GMy
— b ) M a n d l i k K S S
G M y
— b) GMy
Be3
— c-d) Hem
wKt6
— d) Laks
TMd3


--- PAGE 477 ---
466 
Chapter 3
TMd4 
MTr6 
— d) oOr
four, five additional verses in TMd4 [some quite faint and unclear;
the sth verse in unreadable]:
99. Cited by Hem 3/1.433; Dev 2.590—a) Hy 
Ho 
Be3
TMd4
— d) Pu10 [Jolly M1-2"*] Me Dave Jha ' 
oOr 
oMy
Additional verse in Ho La1 oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 Mir4 Mir6 [Jolly Gr] Laks
3.175-6; given after verse 96 in xMd4 [Jolly Gr] and after verse 98 [at the end of the addition]
in Be3:
— c) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 Tr1 
" 
L
a
1
o
O
r
oMd5 
—
 a) [Jolly Gr]-' 
Ho La1 
oOr'
Additional verse in La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6;given after
verse 96 in TMd4:
La1
After this cMd1 TMd3 insert 7.84;oMd' inserts the four additional verses given in
several mss. after 3.98; and La1 inserts 3.99.
100.Verses 100 and 101 transposed in Tr2 — a) Hy T
r
2
o
M
y 
NPu1
oMd5Tj2 
Tr1 
Jm 
TMd4 " 
— b) Lo4 Los
wKt1 
— c ) L o ' G M d 5 f i s O x ' s P u 6 
" [but both cor] — d) oMd2 Tr2
TMd4 
TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 
Pu8 
wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 Lo2 
— oMd5 adds
here verse 7.84.
4 . a ) G M y
L a 1
— b ) L a 1
M T r 4 M T r 6
Pu10
— b)Tj1
Pu10
— c)wKt3
GMy
a)Be3 HoGMd1 MTr4 LaKs
— b) MTr6
Be3GMd1
 TMd4
b)La1
oMd1
GMd5
GMy
TMd3
—c) La1
oOrMTr4
— d)oMd5
GMy1
-c) La1
-d) La1
Following the above,
GMY


--- PAGE 478 ---
Chapter 3 
467
101. 
Cited by Vij 1.107 — b) Lo3 
Tj1 ' 
GMy
—- c) Tr1 
TMd4 
— d) Lo3 Pu10 Tj1 
[Pu10 om 
]; Lo5
sOx'sPu6 
Bo 
TMd3 
wKt3 
Tr2
102. 
Cited by Apa 155; Hem 3/1.427; Dev 2.589; padas a-b cited by Mädh 1.351 — a)
oMy 
T j 2 — b ) O
x
3
— c ) i
M
d
4
o
M
d
1 oMd5
Kt2 
cMy IT 
Lo2 cMd1 cMd5 o
O
r
— d) TMd3
103. 
Pàda s c-d omitted in wKt3. Cited by Mädh 1.353 — a) wTr4 
eKt5
Lo5 
TMd4 
— b)Tr2 
wKt6 
La1 
— c) wKt6
— d)Bo
104. 
Cited by Lakx 3.274; Hem 3/1.769 — a) ßKt5 
Jm 
Bo Jo2 Lo3 TMd4 Tj1
Laks 
TMd3 
— b) Bo 
Hem 
_ 
— c) NNg 
oMd1 
—
d) wKt1 MTr6 
oOr 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt6 oMd2 Tj2
 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ox2 
me to 
Lo1 iMd3 Pu2 Tj2
TMd4 
Jo1
Additional verse in Be3 Ho wKt1 wKt3 La1 oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu8 Tr2 Re Mandlik [
] KSS Dave [unnoticed by Jolly]:
a) Pu8 
— c) Tr2 
Mandlik KSS Dave 
— d)
La1 i 
wKt3
105. 
Cited by Apai^z; Hem 3/1.429; Devz.593-4; Mädh 1.351 — a) Tr1
oMd1 Wa 
wKt6 
oOr 
— b) Be1 Bo 
" 
wKt1 ßKt5 wKt6
Tj2 
Be3 Hy Lo2 Lo3 Lo5 oOr O?2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Mir4 [Jolly M3-4"9 R] Mädh
— d) sOx1 sPu6 Apa [vi as in ed] 
sBe2 Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 rMd4 Tj ' 
wKt6
106.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Mädh 1.356 — a) Ox3 om 
TMd4 oMy Ox2 Mädh
TMd3
— c) Lo4 Lo5
Tr2
Kt2
TMd4


--- PAGE 479 ---
468 
Chapter 3
oMy 
— b)Ox3 
oMy 
— d) eBe2 TMd4 Pu10 Tr2 
Jo1 NiTr3 Mandlik
Jha KSSDave 
; Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2wKt' NKf La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 oMy
NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M'-2~8 M G Ku R] Re Jolly
107. 
Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 156; Hem 3/1.435; Dev 2.592 — a) \\Kt6
— b) TMd4 Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
Jm Pu8 
Jm Jo1 wKt3 Tj1 Hem Dev
— c)Tj'' 
Jm 
oMd5 
— d)TMd3 
Jm oMd5
oMy 
La1
108.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 1.103; Laks 3.200 — a) Lo4 Lo5 
wKt1 Pu5
Pu7 
TMd3 
NKf Lo4 oMd5 [Jolly M3'4] 
Wa 
— b) Bo Tr1
Ox3 
T
M
d
4
H
y 
— c) Lo2oMd5 Pu8 Vij 
oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd] Laks 
Be1 uBe2 Be3 Bo ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 La2 oMd2 Ox3 Pu10 Tj2 iviTr3 [Jolly M6-9 Ku]Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
[Ox3
MTr6
 
NNg 
[Jolly M1'2-8] 
NKt4
109. 
Omitted in oOr. Cited by Mädh 1.358 — a) Be? Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly
M G N] Jolly 
TMd4 
wKt3 
TMd3 
Tj1 
Lo3
Be3 
— b)Ox3 
MNg 
[but cor]; Pu10 
— c) Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M G]
Jolly 
Lo4 Lo5 
sCa 
La1 
TMd3
no.* Omitted in oOr; päda s c-d omitted in Lo1. Cited by Hem 3/1.428; Dev 2.589;
Mädh 1.354 — a) sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oMd2 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 Tj2
 MTr3 Hem
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Ho 
" Tr2
in. 
Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 152; Hem 3/1.440; Dev z.594;Mädh 1.354 — a)
sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to] Tr2 
Bo 
wKt6 
— b) Jm oMd1 
— c) sBe2 Jo2
Lo3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly R] ' 
T
j
J
m Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 Dev 
_ , Hy
sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 cMd5 NNg Pu8 Tr1 MÎT*Apa 
Ho 
Ox3 Pu10 [folly Ml~2~
8] — d) Pu10 
Be1
Tr2
— 
d) 
wKt1
wKt6
sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] 
— c) Bo NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10


--- PAGE 480 ---
Chapter 3 
469
112. 
Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 152;Dev 2.595; Mädh 1.354 — b) cM> 
Tj2
MTr4 
iMd4 
— c) Bo oM d1 
Tj2 
; sKt5
Pu5 Pu7 ' 
w
K
t
3
O
x
2 T
r
2
— d ) iMd4 
Be1 B o
Ho Jm wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo4 Lo5 oMy NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 uT^Mâdh 
wKt6 
; TMd3
oMd5 
Tr1 
Be3 Lo1 sOx1 
[sOx1 cor to 
]; sPu6
cT^cJ
113. 
Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apai$4; Mädh 1.354 — a) La1 
oMy
wKt6 
" rMd4 
Tr1 
La1' 
— b) wKt6 Pu5 
üKt 5 
— c)
NKt4 
_
G
o
K
t
2 oMd2 Ox2 MTr3 Mädh N
ä
B
o H y J m Jo1 Tj2
MTr3 
—d) MTr3 ' 
^cf. U4d];Apa [vl]
114.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 147; Lakss.zn-z —
 a) Be1 Be3 NKf sKt5 Lo2 Pu8
[Jolly M9 Nd] 
wKt3 
Ho 
Bo Jo2 uKt5 Lo4 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 [but cor]
Pu7 
Jm Jo1 Kt 2oMd'TMd 4oMy Tj2 
Tr2 NPu1 
, sBe2 Bo uCa Ho
wKt3 NKf Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 cMy sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M3^~" Ku Nd] Nä
BKt5 wKt6 
TMd4 
oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 {Jolly G] 
— a-b) rMd3
— b) TMd4 oMy 
Ox3 Pu10 
Jo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMy
Tr2 
Bo Pu5 Pu7 
oMd2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
; Hy
Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 
Jin 
— c) Ail NT mss.. Apa 
[sOx1 V; Wa
NKt4 
Ho La1 
Ox2 ' 
] — d) Tr2
115. 
Omitted in oOr —a) TMd3 
a
M
y
~ 
— b) TMd4 
Be1
Additional verses in NPu1:
116.* Cited by Dev z.5<)8;Madh 1.364 — a) Bo HowKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4
Lo5 TMd4 oMy NNg Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [/oily M3^9] 
NPu1
Be1 Be3 ßCa oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly M8 G ] Dev Mädh ViDh
67.40 Jolly 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 eKÍ wKt6 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Dave
 MTr4MTr6
BBe2 Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 Wa [Jolly R]
Pu10 om
Tr2
— b) Dev
Bo
— c)Tj1
Tr2
Ho
g


--- PAGE 481 ---
470 
Chapter 3
TMd4 
Jo^o'Tj1 [Jolly K\ 
Lo4 mo 
Lo1 ' 
oMy
oMd'; 
NKt4 Lo2 
— c) oMd1 
— c-d) MTr6 
— d) Dev
sKt5 wKt6 
oMd5
117.Omitted in Be3. Cited by Madh 1.203— a) T
r
2
K
t
2 wKt6
BBe2 
— b ) T
M
d
3
T
i
2 
NKt4 Tj1 
Pu10 
oMd5
'_ 
—
 c) TMd3 [Jolly Gr]
118. 
Cited by Dev 2.5gg;Madh 1.203; pâda s a-b cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apa 146, 1050
— a) NKC 
Lo3 
Ox3 
Lo5 
oMy _ 
— b) Bo wKt6 TMd4 
Be3
cMy 
~ c ) T M d 4 ' o M y M T r 6 
Pu10
119. 
a) wKt6 
NPu1
 ' 
Be1 Bo Ho HywKt 1 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 NNg
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu]° [Jolly G] Go 
cMd1 
— b) Tr1 
Pu5 Pu7
; wKt6 Lo5 Ox3 
Bo Lo2 
_ 
— c) Hy Ox3 
Pu10
wKt6 
— d) Be3 NKf La1 La2 Lo1 oMy sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Re
Be3 La1 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 
siNg [Jolly M] Me Rn JhaDave 
_ 
La2 TMd3
Tr1
120.* a) sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 
— b) oMd1 Me [pätha ]
[oMd1 
]; TMd4 
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jtn Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1
La2 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 cMd5 oMy NNg oOr Ox2 sPu6 [but cor] Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Ku R Nd] Go No Kit Re Mandlik KSS ' 
sBe2 
P
u
2
— c)
BBe2Pu5Wa 
oMd5 
La1 
— d) TMd3 oMy 
wKt1 
Lo1
121. 
Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 145 — a) oMd5 
sBe2 wKt1
wKt3 TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Apa 
Tr2 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10
oMd1
122. 
Cited by Apa 418; Laks 410; Hem 3/1.72,171, 321, 3/2.1064,3/3.609; Dev 433,
83 — a) NNg oOi 
, Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt1 Lo2 Lo4 sOx1 Tj1 
o M d 5 w K t 6
— b) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Mandlik KSS 
Ho wKt6 " 
— c) Hem 3/1.72
Ox3 Pu5 
K
t
2
— d ) wKte


--- PAGE 482 ---
Chapter 3 
471
123.* Cited by Hem 3/1.573 — a) NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6
[Jolly G Nd] Go Nd Me [pâtha] Ku [pâtha]
— c) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jo//y Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Daved^lfíl^l ;
Tr1 
— d) oMd1 
Jm Jo1 Kt2
Additional verse in Tr2; commented by Re:
124. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.377; Dev 4.154— a) Tj1 
—b)sOx' sPu6 _
_
J
o
2 Lo3
Tj1 
wKt1 cMd1 oOr 
': — c) Ox3 
oMd1 
wKt1
Pu10 
GMd5 Ox3 H
e
m
o
M
y 
- d) Bo wKt1 Lo1
Ox2 [cor to] 
Kt2
125.* Omitted in Pu'° . Cited by Vis 1.225; Hem 3/1.159,3/2.1148; Apa 430, 463; Dev
4.192-3;Mäd h 1.699 — a) nBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt6 oMd1 cMd5 oMy sOx1 Pu5 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
MTr3 
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 oMd2 iMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4iviTr6 [folly
R Nd] Vis Apa [v\]BDh 2.15.10 Mädh Mandlik KSS 
;Apa[\\\ 
Be3 
—
b
)
O
x
2
T
r
2 
ßKt5 wKt6 O x 3 — c ) oMy 
Be1 wKt6
oMd1 
- d) Ho sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 iMd3 cMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1
sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly M Nd] Vis Apa HemDev Re 
Be1 Ox3 
Me Go Ku Jha Dave
Wa 
TMd4
126. 
Cited by Vis 1.225; Apa 463; Mädh 1.699— a) Lo1 Tr2 
Tj1
GMd5 
— tí ) oMd 
Ho NKt4 Lo2 La1 oMd5
 NNg MTr6 Vis Apa 
NPu1
— c) Pu10 
— d) Vis 
~ 
' 
La1 
Lo5 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7
Tr1 [Jolly G Gr Nd]
127.a) Bo La1 sOx1 Pu5 P u 7 w K t 1 xMd4 oMy sPu6 Tj1 ' 
Tr1 ' 
eBe2
Be3 
— b) Lo1 
Lo2NNg Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt6 oOr 
NKt4 ft^T; NKt4
Lo2 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Wa[./o//yG]GoMe|patha] 
Me [pâtha ] 
MTr4 
—
c ) TMd3 
_
P
n
1
0
w
K
t
1 
N N g 
H o wKt1 Kt2
Lo2 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1
 
, oMd1 ' 
— d) Tr2 La1 sOx1 
" 
Be1 eBe
Wa 
Bo BCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMy Tj1 Tr1 Nä Nd 
oMd5
oMd1 
Be3 
TMd3 
_ 
; wKt6 
_ 
Kt2
NKt4
— b) cMy
Bo


--- PAGE 483 ---
472 
Chapter 3
128.Cited by Apa 437; Hem 3/1.377; Mädh 1.679 — a) B
e
1
— c) TMd4
wKt1 
Bo 
— d)TMd4oM> 
TMd3 
Hy
129.Omitted in oOr Ox3; padas c-d ma in Pu7. Cited by Apa 437; Mädh 1.679 — b) Jm
wKt6 
nCa 
NNg 
[Jolly Nd] 
iMd4 
— c) NPu
1 ; 
sOx1
sPu6 [me sh to]
NKt4
130. 
Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 437; Hem 3/1.506; pâda s a-b cited by Dev 4154;
Mädh 1.356 — a) He 
wKt1 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 [me sh 
to] 
xMd4
131. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.377 — a) ßCa 
Be1 La1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy sOx1 sPu6
[me sh to] Tr1 MTr4 
Go pratlka
 ; 
NKt
4 
— b) cMd1 
wKt1 Pu5
Pu7 Me [pâthântara
 as nom. plu.] 
TMd4 
oMy 
wKt3 
Bo La1
[but cor] 
oMy 
— c) wKt6 
, iMd4 
Be3 sOx1 sPu6
— d)GMd'TMd4
132. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.378 — a) Be3 Bo Ho sOx ' Ox3 NPu
1 sPu6 Pu10 [Jolly M'-2-*-9
Me] Hem 
TMd3 oOr 
wKt6 
— b) wKt6 
Lo5 oOr
Lo 2 om first —c) oMy 
B
e
1
T
r
1 
Pu5 Pu7 Wa
TMd4
Tr1 
M
T
r
4
W
a 
; wKt3 "
133.* Cited by Apa 449; Laks^.js; Hem 3/1.461 — a) Pu'° [Jolly M'-2"8] 
MTr3
Be1 Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 NNg oOr Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly G Ku Nd R] Go Ku Rn Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
— b) Jm wKt6 sOx1 sPu6 P
u
1
0
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
oMd1
Me 
[but gives 
as pâthântara]
 — d) sKt5 wKt6 oMd1 TMd4 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6
Pu8 Tr2 
[ o M y O x 2 
]; Ho La1 NPu
1 Rc 
Hem
[Jolly Nd] 
, Tr1 
Lo1
wKt1 " 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Pu2 Pu4 MTr3Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
— d)TMd4 
Ox2 
TMd3
GMd5
— d) iMd4
Ho
Tr2
[Jolly Nd]
[sPu6 cor to ]
Tr1
GMd5
 [Jolly N]Na [possibly]
wKt3
MTr4
TMd4


--- PAGE 484 ---
NKt4 
Jo2 
Wa 
Lo2
134. 
Pâda s c-d omitted in MTr6 and main Ox2. Cited by Hem 3/1.416; Laks 4.59 — a)
Lo2 \but cor} Wa 
TMd3 
TMd" 
wKt6 Ox3 " 
oMy 
— b) Bo
 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 Laks
wKt6 
- d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt? oMd2 oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2
MTr3 [Jolly G Ku] MandlikJha KSS Dave
135. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.416; Laks 4.59 — a) Be1 Ho Jo2 Lo3 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2
[cf. 3.132]; NPu' 
w
K
t
6
— b ) Ox2 
La1
TMd3 
" 
— c) Hem 
[vl as in ed]; TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly Nd]
oMd2 
sCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 ßKt5 wKt6 Lo4 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj ' Tr2 [Jolly M G R] Re Jolly ^T; Tj2 
oMd1 TMd4 oMy Ox2 [but
cor sh] Laks 
N
N
g
- 
d ) L
a
1
B
e
3 O x 2 
B o Lo4
Lo5 TMd4 Pu8 Laks ' 
Lo2 oMd1 
oMy
136. 
Pâda s a-b omitted in Ho. Cited by Hem 3/1.443; Laks 4.59; Mädh 1.678 —a) Tr1
om 
Be' 
Laks 
— c) oMd1 om 
— c-d) Lo5 repeats päda s a-b in place
of c-d — d) wKt1 sKt5 wKt6.
137. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.443,461; päda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.678 — a) TMd4
wKt6 
— c) Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M ' - 2 - 5 - 8 - 9 ] s K t 5 
Jo2 Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M3'4]
— d) Lo3 TMd3
138.Cited by Apa 448; Dev4.162. —
 a) TMd3 T M d 4 B K t 5 
Tj1'
TMd3 
— b)Jm 
oMy 
TMd4 
— c)Tj' 
Lo1 ; 
oMd1 sOx1
sPu6 
Kt2 
— d) Kt2 
Be1 TMd4 oOr
139. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.462; Dev 4.162 — b) oMd5 Ox2 
Lo2 Tr1 om
first 
—
 c)Ho 
:Jm 
Be1 
— c-d)//em ' 
— d) Wa
[cf. 3.140 d]; TMd4 
Ox2 
Tr2 om 
first 
Bo 
; TMd4
iMd3 
wKt6 oMy.
Chapter 3
473
Lo2
Lo5
— c) oMd1 xMd3


--- PAGE 485 ---
474 
Chapter 3
140. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.462 — a) TMd4 
— b) Be1 [but me] Ho Jo2 La ' Lo3 sOx1 Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 sPu6 Ti1 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly R] 
wKt6 oMd1 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly M G]
Hem Jolly 
sKt5 
TMd3 
Me Go Ku Rn Re Mr support the
adopted reading — d) Hem 
oMd 5 oMy Tr' Mir4 MTr6 
xMd3
; 
Tr2 
B
e
B
e
3 sCa [but cor]
141.Cited by Hem 3/1.462 — a) Ho eKt5 wKt6 Lo3 T j
1 T M d
4 
wKt3
Be1 Lo3 Ox3 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Hem 
oMy 
— b) Ox3 
Tj2
sOx1 sPu6 _ 
— c) Lo1 
T M d 4 s O x 1 s P u
6 w K t
1 — d) Hem
Jo1 
; wKt1 Lo3 oMy Tj1
142.Päd a c-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Hem 3/1.465 — a) T r
1 W a
Tr2 
Ho O x
2 T M d
4 
o O r x M d 4 
Be3 
— b) TMd3
Tr2T 
— c ) L o 3 B e 3 w K t 3 
Hem ' 
— d) Bo Lo2
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M]
143. 
Päda s a-b omitted in oMd1. Cited by Laks 4.57; Hem 3/1.378 — a) Ho
sOx1 Ox 2Ox 3sPu 6Pu l oTr'Tr 2 
Ho aKt5 L a
1 N P u
1 
; wKt6
— b)MTr3 
K
t
2
— c) O x
2 B e
1 
oMd1 oMd5 L a k s W a
Jm Jo1 Kt2 ßKt5 wKt6 Lo5 oOr MTr3 MTr4MTr6 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
Tr2 
O x 2 [ b u t cor] —
 d) Pu5 P u 7 " 
NNg
144. 
Cited by Apa 448; Hem 34.447, 464; Dev 4.162; Maclh 1.684— a) xMd3 xMd4
GMd 5cMyMTr 4 
[
T M d
4 M T r
4 
]; [Jolly G
r
]
-
~ —
b)Lo' 
— c) xMd3 cMy Tr1 
wKt6 
PuloTj' 
[Jolly Gr]
_ 
— d) Be1 Lo3 Tj ' [Jolly R] 
oOr om
145.Cited by Laks 4.57; Hem 3/1.382 — c) Lo1 TMd3 P
u
'
°
T
M
d
4
Lo1 
w K t
6 T M d
4 ' 
B e
1 — d ) Pu10 
H e m
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 Be3 Bo sCa Ho La2 Lo1 Lo2
Lo3 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa No [patha| Rn Nd Re [Jolly R Nd M3]
BKt5 wKt6
Jo1
GMd1 TMd3 GMd 5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6


--- PAGE 486 ---
Chapter 3 
475
TMd4
146. 
Cited by Dev4.i6o — a) oMd1 
TMd3 
Bo 
— b) Tr1
Lo3 
— c)MTr4 
Tr1 
— d) TMd3 Tr1 Tr2 
Hy 
cMd1
Jo1 
TMd4
147. 
Cited by Vij i.22.o;Hem 3/1.441; Dev 4160; pâda s c-d cited by Mädh 1.683 — a)
TMd3 . 
— b)Jm 
B
K
^
T
r
1
— c ) w
K
t
6
o
M
y 
V i j 
— d )
oMy 
Vijj
148. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.447; Dev 4.160; Mädh 1.683— a) Be1 Jo2 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1
[Jolly K\ 
— b) Lo2 
o O r T M d 3 [but cor sh]sKt5wKt6; 
" 
Pu10
Jo2 
— c)Lo' 
T M d 3 B e 1 
Bo 
NKt4
— d) BKt5 wKt6 
Hem '
149.Cited by Laks 4.56; Hem 3/1.510 — a) H o o O r 
— b) NKt4 Tr1
oMy oOi 
oMd1 oOr 
Be3 
Lo4 
— c) Kt2 wKt6 
oOr 
TMd4
Tr2 
NPu'La/b 
NNg 
;Hem 
Lo3 [Jolly R] 
'— d) TMd4
TMd3
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd4 cMd5 NNg oOr Tr1 Tr2 Mir4 MTr6;commented by Re:
a) Tr1 
Tr2 
MTr4MTr6 
— a-b) oOr
— c)oOi- 
Tr2 
— d) Tr1
oMd'i 
Tr2
150. 
Cited by Apa 447; Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.480; Dev 4.166; Mädh 1.687 — a) eBe2
ßCa Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 oMd2 oOr MTr3Apa Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
oMy sOx1 sPu6 
MTr6
 
TMd3 
— b) Kt2 *T; sKt5 wKt6
151.* Cited by Apa 450; Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.480; Dev 4.166; Mädh 1.687 — a) Tf
Lo'sOx1 Ox3sPu6 Pu[° [Jolly M'-2-5'8 Nd] 
MÏr3 
NKt4 Lo2 
— b)
GMd1
— c) oOr
wKt3
- d) Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 487 ---
476 
Chapter 3
Be3HoNKftLa2Pu8Tr2//e»i 
Apa 
oMy 
Mir" 
Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jrn Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
oMd1 
— c)
TMd4; 
Dave[typo?]; sKt5 w K t
6 w K t
3 L o
4 ma 
iMd4 
sPu6
wKt1 Ox2 [but cor} 
; Ox3 Pu10 Tj ' 
Mädh 
~ —
 d) oMy
xMd3 
Ho 
Tj ' 
La1 Apa 
Be3
oMd5
152.* Cited by Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.480-1; Dev 4.167; Mädh 1.687 — a) sBe2 Be3 ßCa
[but cor] Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 NKt4 wKt6 La1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2
 TMd4 cMd5 oMy NNgoOr
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Hem Dev Nä Mädh
Mandlik Jolly KKS 
sKt5 ' 
— c) NNg
Tj1 
^ 
.TMd 4 
P u 1 0 B o w K t 6 L o 5 
— d)GMd5 
Hem
153. 
Verses 153 and 154 transposed in Ox2 Dave. Cited by Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.481;
Dev 4.167—
 a)wKt6 
NNg 
Ox3 
Be1 Wa 
Ho La1 NPu1 
TMd4
TMd3 
— b) Be1 
NKt4 Ox2 [but cor] Tr1 
Lo2 
Tj1
TMd3 
— c) Bo 
; Jm ' 
; NNg 
~ " 
Tr2 
Lo1 
oMy
TMd3 
— cO-k^Tr2' 
wKt3Tj' 
Tj1 
sOx1 sPu6
, Lo1
Additional verses in TMd3 [cf. VaDh 2.40]:
154. 
Cited by Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4.167; Mädh 1.687 — a)oOr
wKt6 
Lo1 
oMy 
Bo 
" ßBe2 
Bö 
T M d
4 — c)
Kt2 TMd3 NPu1 PuI0 
cMy Tr1 
La1 
sOx1 sPu6 
cMy Tj1
Tr1 
Pu5 Pu7' 
TMd3 
— d)TMd; 
Tr1
155. Pâda s a-b omitted in sKt5. Cited by Laks 4.85; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4.167; Mädh
1.687 —a) oMy 
oMd1 
TMd3 MTr3 
NKt4 Lo4
Lo5 
TMd4 
wKt6 
•— c)Wa 
wKt6 
Pu10 
Ox3
— d)Pu7Pu'° 
Jo1 
TMd4 
oMd2


--- PAGE 488 ---
Chapter 3 
477
156. 
MTr3 has the following order: is6a-b, 15/c-d, is6c-d, i57a-b. Cited by Laks 4.86;
Hem 3/1.481; Dev4.i6r, Mädh 1.687 — a)oMd' 
Ho wKt1 sOx1 sPu6 
Lo4
Ox3 
— b) oOr 
wKt3 Laks Hem [vl as in ed] 
*T:; oMd1
[ 
?] — d)oMy 
TMd3 
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu10 [Jolly M'-2"8! 
Lo5
La1 
Bo 
oMd5 
Tr1 
oMy 
Tr2
157. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.481; Laks 4.85; Dev 4.167; Mädh 1.687; päda s a-b cited by Apa
447 — a) La1 
eBe2 Be3 eCa Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2
TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Mädh Mandlik KSS Dave 
. NKt
4 
Ox2
cor to
-b)oOr 
N K f T r 1 B o N K f ' T j 1 
oOr ' 
sBe2 Lo1
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
NKt4 
" Be1 sCa Ho Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 Pu10 Wa
Lo1 o My 
oOr 
MTr6
 
TMd4 
— d) Bo
; sKt5 wKt6 La1 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3
158. 
Päda s c-d omitted in sKt5 and ma in wKt6. Cited by Laks 4.85; Hem 3/1.481; Dev
4.167; Mädh 1.687 — a) Be1 aBe2 Be3 Bo Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo4 oMd2
sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 Tr2 Jolly 
Ho iMd3 
TMd3 
— c) Tr2 
; Jo1
oMd1 MTr4 MTr6£>ev 
— d) Ho oMy Ox2 [but cor] 
oMd1
Tj1 
¡ N K t 4 T r 1 
w K t
6 T M d
3
159. 
Omitted in ßKt5 and ma in wKt6. Cited by Laks 4.85; Hem 3/1.481; Dev4.i67;
Mädh 1.687— a)TMd4 
Jm oMy Wa 
TMd4
 
TMd3 
— b)oMd'TMd4
sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 Dev Laks 
[given as päth a in Me No Go Ku Nd\, Ho 
Be3
— c) Ox2 [but cor} 
iMd4 
Tr1 
— d) oMd1 
Tr1
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
160. 
Cited by Laks 4.85-6; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4167; Mädh 1.688 — a) Bo 
Tj1
NNg 
— b) Bo 
cMy 
Lo3 
nBe2 Lo1 
— c)
~i
NNg
161. 
Päda s c-d omitted in Tr1. Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4167;
wKt1 Apa Laks Hem Na
Be1 
TMd3
TMd4


--- PAGE 489 ---
478 
Chapter 3
Madh 1.688 — a) Tr2 
oMd5 
Wa 
; Lo5 
— b) oOr
T r 2
Ox3 
uTr3 Mir4 
Be1 sBe2 Wa 
— c) Wa 
— c-d)
TMd4
162. 
Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.481-2; Dev 4.167-8; Mädh 1.688 — a) Pu5
Pu7 
— b) Pu8 
— c) Ox2 [but cor] 
Lo5 ' 
Hem [vi] 
Apa
[vl] 
Jo2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 NNg oOr sOx1 sPu6 MTr4MTr6 Wa 
[Jolly R]
Tj1 
Ho 
— d)wKt' 
nKt'wKt6., 
Tr1
 
163. 
Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev 4.168; Mädh 1.688 — a)wKt6
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2MTr3 [Jolly Nd] Dev Mandlih Jha KSS Dave 
MTr4
Na[\\\ 
—
 b)NNg 
Re 
Ho 
Apa>
wKt6
[vía s in e d ] 
w
K
t
1
H
o 
sOx1 sPu6 ; x M d
3 
— d)xMd3
cMd5Tr' 
Lo4Lo5
164. 
Omitted in Tr1; following sequence in NNg i64a-b, i6sc-d, 166, i64c-d, i6sa-b.
Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev 4168; Mädh 1.688 — a) Ho 
Tj' 
Ox3
Lo1 
GMy 
Tr2 
wKt6 
Be1 
Hy 
—
b) xMd3 
— c) H y M T r
4 
wKt1 NKt4 Ox2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly N Nd] Laks Dev
Madh [given as päth a in Me Go Ku Rn Mr] 
oMd1 MTr4 MTr6 
Lo5
oMy 
—d)HooMd 2 
oMd1 oMy ' 
Lo2 oMy
Ox3
165. 
Omitted in Tr1; päda s c-d omitted in Be3 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86;
Hem 3/i.482;Dev 4.168; Mädh 1.688 — a) Lo4 [but me] 
—
 b) xMd3 oMd5 oMy Apa
Lo1 : 
sCa [but cor] wKt1 cMd1 o
M
d
5
— c) NNg 
wKt1
GMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Gr] Madh 
— d) Be1 [me to] Bo Lo2
Pu10 
oMy
166. 
Päda s a-b omitted in Be3. Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev4.i68;
Mädh 1.688 — a) oMd1 oMd5 oMy Dev 
T r
1 N K t
4 La1 Lo2 Ox3 Pu7
NPu1 
Be1 
Tr1 Apa [v\]Dev 
— b) Be1 
Tj1 
Lo4
[but me] 
— c) K t 2 L o 4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M^^-S-S] Me Jha Dave
B o
P u 5 P u 7
L o 5
J o 2
P u 1 0
L o 2
— c)cMd5
Lo3Tj1
cMd1 xMd3
Tj2
Apa


--- PAGE 490 ---
Chapter 3 
479
sBe2 oMd1 Go Ku Apa Hem [vl] 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 Apa 
TMd4
167.Cited by Apa 453;Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev 4.168; Mädh 1.688 — a) Laks
oOr 
TMd3 
— b) Be1 Tr1
oMy
Mädh 
TMd3 
Laks ' 
: — c) Ho 
; La1 
Apa
[vl as in ed.] — d) Bo ' 
Be3 sOx1 sPu6 Mädh
168. 
Cited by Laks 4.74; Hem 3/1.465; Mädh 1.688 — a) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 oMd2 Tj2
Mir3 Mr Mandlik KSS 
. MTr4 
cMy 
oOr
— c)sOx'sPu6 
— d) sKt5 wKt6 TMd4
Additional verse in Be3 La1: the same as VaDh 11.20 and cited by Me.
169.* a) TMd 3- 
NKt4 Pu5 Pu7 Go JhaDave 
\Me gloss
supports this reading]; Jm Jo1 wKt1 (Ct2 oOr Nä Mandlik KSS 
;eBe2 
NKt4
Lo5 
— b)Tr2 
BoLo1 
Lo2 
Tr1 
— c) NPu1
Hy 
Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox3 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 tfolly M
G Nd Gr] Re Jolly Jha Dave 
o M d 2 N K t 4 sKt5 wKt6 Tr2 
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3
Ox3 Tr1 
— d) Bo Jm Jo1 Kt2 [but cor} sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Go Re Mandlik KSS
170. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.465, 493; Laks 4.95 — a) Kt2 oOr 
NKt4 
BBe2
— b)oMd' 
,NNg 
;BoHowKt 6GMy 
TMd4 
NKt4
 — cJTr2
 
TMd4
171. 
Cited by Vij 1.223; A pa 445,1050; Hem 3/1.371, 3/3.811; Mädh 1.690— a) Pu'°
Hem 3/3.811 
—b) Jo2
 NNg 
_ 
Vij 
Ho 
TMd3
Tr2 
Jo1 o m — 
c ) T M d
3 — d ) L o
2 s O x
1 sPu6 
oMy
Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 
o M d 2 O x 3 
Apa
172.* Cited by Vij 1.223 — a)sOx' sPu6 
N K t
4 L o
1 
TMd4 oMy Tr1
Hy Jm Jo1 TMd4 Tj ' Tj2 Tr1 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave
La1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg NPu1 [but cor} Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr ' Tr2 Wa 
— b) Ox3
Lo5
Ho wKt1
wKt6 TMd3 Laks
Pu8
oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Dev
oMy
— d) Be3
Laks


--- PAGE 491 ---
480 
Chapter 3
; Tj2 
— c)TMd4 
NNg 
— d)ßKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 N?U' 
Tj1
Bo"
173. 
TMd3 places 173 after 175; La1 ma sh 1730 to i74d. Cited by Apa 452; Hem 3/1.358
— a) TMd3
TMd3 
— d) oMd5 
^ 
[om 
]; iMd3 
NNg 
Lo1
According to an opinion cited by Me, this verse is spurious.
Additional verse in Be3 TMd4:
a) rMd4 
- b) Be3 
— c-d) Päda s c-d blurred in TMd4
174. 
Cited by Vis 1.219-21; Vij 1.222; Apa 445; Hem 3/1.174; Dev 4.179 — a) wKt1
oMd1 NNg Pu10 [Jolly M] 
— b) H
y
;
L
o
5 
" Tr2 
— c) Apa
Dev 
Wa 
Lo5 
; Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tj2
 MTr3
[Jolly R Nd] Dev Mandlik Jha KSSDave 
• 
—
 d) Hy 
uKf
Tr1
 
TMd3 
Tr2
Additional verse in Mandlik [5T] KSS; päda s c-d in oMd1 Dev 4.183, Apa 447:
d) Dev Apa [vi]< 
Apa
175.* In place of päda s a-b oMd1 gives päda s c-d of the additional verse above. Cited by
Hem 3/1.362 — a) Lo3 Tj1 Wa
NNg Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M G] Me Go Rn Rc [pâtha ] 
[La2 J; Lo2 Pu10
NPu
1 
NKt4BKt5wKt6 
sOx'sPu6 
oMd2oOrTj1 
. 
, NKt4
— b) BBe2 Ho Jo2 wKt3 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu10 Tj1 [folly M G] Me Rn Go Rc [pâtha ] 
Be3 Bo sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Pu8 TMd3 oOr TV
Hem
— d) Be3 
o
M
y
s
B
e
2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 sKl5 La2
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly M G] Me Rn Go 
Ox2
BKfwKt6 
oOrHem
176. 
Cited by Apa 454; Hem 3/1.498 — a) Hem 
NNg Ox3 Pu10
Jha Dave 
T r
2 w K t
6 
L o
4 L o
5 
T j
1 L o
3
Lo5 oMd5 NNg oOr Pu10 Tj' Tr2 Jha Dave 
Bo L
o
4
— b) NPu1
Tr1
oOr
BBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
— b)Tj
Lo4
BCa oMd2
MTr6
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
— c)NKt4
MTr4MTr6
wKt3
cMd1
wKt1
TMd4
Hem
Pu8 om 
— c) oMd1
Hem


--- PAGE 492 ---
Chapter 3 
481
Lo'oMd1 
oMy 
— c) NK.1
4 TMd3 
Lo1 
sPu6 [but
cor] 
sOx1 
oMy 
' Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2
Pu10 Tj1 Tf MTr3 Wa Jolty
GMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
wKt6
177. 
Pada-d omitted in La1. Cited by Apa 454; Hem 3/1.499; Dev 4.187 — a) Bo Ho
Ox3 Pu10 
L o
5 N P u
1 
N
K
t
4
— b) wKt1 sOx1 sPu6 [but cor]
Wa 
Tr1 
Tr2 
oMy 
, Jm Jo2 wKt1 isKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 oMd2 NNg sOx1
Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M R] Dev Jha Dave — d) oOr [but corfli]
178.* ma in La '. Cited by Apa 454; Hem 3/1.498; Dev 4.187 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Ox2
ircRfT; Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M N]; 
w K t
3 w K t
1 sKt5 Dev 
; wKt6
— b) NKt4
oMy 
— c) Ho o M y L o
1 
B e
3 o O r 
— d) Wa
sOx1 sPu6 
Be1 NKÍ 
; eKt5 wKt6 cMd5 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 [but cor]
Lo4
179. 
Pâda- a omitted in La1 — a) TMd4 
Ox2 [but cor]
oOrOx3 
Lo5 
Ho: 
Jm NKt4 
TMd3 
— b) Be1
wKt3 
— c) oOr 
' — d) oMy
180.sOx1 sPu6 place i8oa-b after i78d. Cited by Apa 454; Laks 4.95 — a) Pu8
BKt5 wKt6 
o M d 2 s O x 1 s
P
u
6
ß
B
e
2
. MTr4 
B o 
— b )
sOx1 sPu6 
" — c-d) Be3 NKf La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Apa Laks
ïft-cTjrMd 4 
; NKt4 
rMd4 
NKt4 
] — d)
HoHy 
NPu 
wKt6
Additional verse in oMd5:
181.Cited by Apa 454 — a) eBe2 Jo2 wKt1 J o l l y H y TMd3 Wa 
Jm
— c) Tr2 
Lo4 Lo5 
Ox3 
" Lo4 Ox3 
— d) Jm Lo5
Ox3 Pu10 
TMd3
 
TMd4 
Tr1 
Pu5 Pu7'[Jolly G] 
NNg
Hem
— d) ßKt5 wKt6 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMd5
Ho
T M d 3
T M d 4
TMd4
Tr2


--- PAGE 493 ---
482 
Chapter 3
182. 
Cited by Apa 454 — a) MTr4 
;oMd2 NNg Pu10 Me Jha Dave
Lo4 Ox3' 
rMd3 
TMd4 
; Lo2' 
— b) TMd4
oMy 
; Bo Jm wKt1 wKt6 Lo4 L
o
5
- c) Lo2 
Pu5 Pu7
183.Cited by De v 4.188 — a) sBe2 NKt4 T
M
d
3
L
o
4 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Me
Dave Jha 
Ox3 
Dev 
, 
. 
wKt1 
; La1 TMd3 N?U'
BKt5 La1 NPu1 
, 
— b) NNg 
Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly G] 
T Md3
 
MTr4
TMd4 
aMyDev 
— c) BOT Md4 cMy 
wKt1 
Tr1
Lo5 
sCaHo 
wKt1 
Lo4 
[but me]; BKt5 
w K t
6 — d)
BBe2 sKt5 wKt6 oMd1 Ox3 Pu10 
sOx1 om 
and jumps to end of i84d [haplo]; Kt2
wKt3 
Wa
184. 
Cited by Dev 4.188 — a) TMd3 
TMd4 
MTr6 
oMd1
Dev 
Bo wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 
— b) sPu6 
me sh to 
TMd4
— c) TMd3
 
TMd4 
oMy 
sKt5 wKt6
185. 
Cited by Laks 4.63; Dev 4.188 — a) sBe2 wKt1 nKf BKt5 wKt6 Lo2 oOr Ox2 MTr3
;oMd' 
w K t
1 o M y 
— b) ßBe2 oMy 
Lo4
Lo5Tr2 
Laks 
; Wa 
; sKt5 w
K
t
6
— c) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 oMd2 Tj1 Tr2 MTr3 Ku Rn Nd Re Mr Mandlik KSS 
Pu10
— d) oM d1 Ox3 Laks 
TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly Nd]
Dev 
[cMy 
TMd3 
:]; Pu7 
Lo2 
oOr 
oMy
NKl4 
wKt6
186. 
Cited by Dev 4.188 — a) sKt5 
wKt6 
TMd3 
— b) Lo1
— c) Tj2 Wa 
— d) Lo2 T j
2 N K t
4 Tj2
187.* Cited by Vij 1.225; Hem 3/2.1133, 1146; Dev 4.192; Mädh 1.697 — a) Dev
— b)Pu 5Pu 7 
wKt3 
— c) BBe 2BosCawKt'wKt 3 Lo1 NNgNPu1 Pu5
Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 [Jolly M'-2"8 G Nd] HemDevMâdh Jolly Jha Dave 
. Be3 
cor
to 
[Jolly M3^-^ R] either 
or 
Lo4 Lo5 
Tr2


--- PAGE 494 ---
Chapter 3 
483
TMd4 
wKt6 
sKt5 
wKt1 
— d) wKt1 \ 
[Jolly Be]
Ho'
188. 
Omitted in Wa; päda s c-d omitted in sOx1. Cited by Apa 456; Hem 3/2.1014 — a)
TMd4 oMd5 
TMd4 
wKt6 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Lo3 Tj1
[Jolly R] 
, oMy 
- c) NKt4 
Be1 sPu6 
— d) Bo wKt1
oOr 
cMy 
Ox2 [but cor] 
~ sKt5 wKt6 oMy 
NPu1
189. 
a)oMd' 
Pu10 
cMy 
TMd3 
— b)
Ho 
— c) NKt4 La1 oOr 
" Tr2 
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[oMd1 TMd4 
];cMds 
— d)Tr' 
sOx1
Tj1 sPu6 [cor to] 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3
Additional verse in oMy; given after 190 in cMd5 oOr:
a) oOr 
" 
oMd5 
— c) oMy 
oOr 
— d)
oMy
190. 
Omitted in oMd1. Cited by Apa 457; Laks 4.107; Hem 3/2.1002; Dev 4.198; Mädh
1.701 — a) TMd3
 
__ Pu5 Pu7 [cor t
o
]
L
a
1 
NNg 
oMd2
oMd5 
oMy MTr4 
sPif 
me sh to 
sOx1 Tr2
:
Tj1 Hem Me Jha Dave , 
, wKt3 
wKt6 
Lo1 
Wi 
— c) NPu1
Tj1 
Lo1 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 
wKt6 
— d) TMd3 
Ho
Hy Jm Kt2 oMd2 NNg Ox2 Ox3 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1
191. 
Päda s a-b omitted in oMd1. Cited by Apa 457; Hem 3/2.1006; Dev 4.200; Mädh
1.702 — a) Lo5
TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr NPu1 Tr1 uTr^Apa 
Ox3 
TMd3 MTr6 
—
b) Bo 
Tr1 
— c) wKt6 NNg Pu7 Pu10 
— c-d) Dev
— d) oOr om
192. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.61, 3/2.1005 — a) NNg Wa 
— b ) w K t
6 M T r
3
— c) Lo5 
wKt1 
Lo1 
— d) NNg sOx1 sPu6 : 
wKt1
L o 1
w K t 1
— 
b ) 
L a k s
J o 2 
L o 4 
o O r O x 3
sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to]
Be1 ßBe2 eCa TMd4 Ho NKt4 La1 Lo1 

--- PAGE 495 ---
484 
Chapter 3
193.a) Be3
[but cor] 
TMd4 
-c^Be1 
Ox3 
Wa
194. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.43; Laks 4.110 — a) Tt2 
eBe2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
xMd4 oMd5 Ox2 [but cor] Laks 
—
 b) TMd4 om 
Lo1 
Lo3!]1 
— d)
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Jm 
; oMy
195. 
ma sh in Be3; päda s a-b and c-d transposed in sOx1 sPu6. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 —
a) TMd4 sOx1 Tr2 
; s K t 5 w K t 6 
sOx1 [but cor] sPu6 
oMd1
xMd3 oMy Tr1 [Jolly M8 NdJ 
— b) NNg 
Tr2 
— c) Be1 sCa wKt1
NKt4 Lo1 oMd1 TMd4 NNg oOr 
Lo4 Lo5 
wKt1 
, TMd3 
— d) Bo Hy
Jm La1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 [cor to] 
Lo1 Lo4' 
wKt3 NNg Pu10
MeMandlikJhaKSSDave 
NKt4 
oOr
196. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — a) Lo5 Tj1 
, Pu5 P
u
7
— b) Tj2
Be1 Ho Lo4 sOx1 Pu5 Pu10 
— c) Lo1 
oMy 
- d) Lo4 Lo5
Lo3 Tj1 
cMd1 o
M
d
5
; c M y s K t
5 wKt6
B o 
o M d 5 T j ' w K t 1
197. 
Omitted in Hy; pâda s c-d omitted in Ng. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — b^Kt4
— c) Lo4 [but me] Lo5 oMd1 Ox3 
Tr2 
— d) Jo2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7
Wa 
;Tj' 
TMd' 
TMd3 
wKt6
198. 
Omitted in oMd' TMd4 Tj2 Wa [haplo]; pâda s a-b omitted in Ng. Cited by Hem
3/1-55',Laks4.no — a) Lo2 
—b)rMd3 
Lo2 
Jo2
Lo5Tr2 
, wKt1 
— c)oMd5 
Tr2 Lo2 
[Tr2 
J; Lo4 Lo5 NNg
NKf 
Laks ' 
— d) NKt4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
; wKt6 wKt1
Be-'Tr2^ 
" 
TMd3 ^
199.* Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — a) Lo4 Lo5 
ßKt5 wKt6
— b) Wa
— c) sPu6 \but me sh]
Ox2


--- PAGE 496 ---
Chapter 3 
485
Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly G]Jha Dave 
; eBe2 Be3 Bo aCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 BKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 oMy NNgoOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
\folfy
Ku N R Nd] Mandlik KSS 
. Be1 
La1 
oMd5 [defective
päda ] 
NPu'°cFSr: ; Pu2 
— b) cMy 
Lo1 Ox2 [but cor} Tj1
Be3NPu' Tr1 
Pu2 
NKf ßKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd5 Pu5
Pu7 MTr4 MTr 
TMd3 
Be1 Bo Pu8 Tr2 \Jolly NI " 
' 
sPu6
corto 
Jo2 Lo^McfsOx1 Tj1 [Jolly R
]
N
K
t
4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly
Nd] 
TMd4 
wKt3 
..cMd1 
; TMd3
BBe2
 NNg Wa [Jolly Me M1"2"8] 
P
u
1
0
— c)W a; 
Kt2 :
Be1 Bo wKt1 TMd4 oMd5 
Be1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt6
 TMd4 
Bo 
N
K
f
' —
d) Lo2 
TMd3 
wKt6 
xMd3 
Lo4 
Lo5
Additional verse in Mandlik KSS:
200.Cited by Hem 3/1.48 — a) Lo4 ma 
T M d 3 w K t 6 
— b) wKt3
— c) MTr4 
Tj ' 
vKt1 
Jm 
Hy 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
201. 
Cited by Laks 4.110 — b) Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Wa Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Jm 
BKt5 wKt6 
— c) Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 K.12 wKt3 oMd5 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik
K S S Dave" 
- d ) s O x ' s P u
6 T r
2 - o M d
5 o M y L a f c v
Tr1 
oMy 
MTr4 '
202.Cited by Apa 488; Hem 3/1.675 — b) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
, NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 oMy Tr1 Apa Hem 
Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 Ox3
[Jolly M4-5-6-"! Apa 
Lo4 
— c) oMd1
 __ 
' — d) TMd3
wKt3 
. sPu6 [but me sh] '
s
K
t
5 wKt6 cMd5 
wKt1 Lo1
203.Cited by Hem 3/1.135; Dev 4.281-2 — a) Be3 Bo Hy cMd1 cMd5 Hem 
, wKt3
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] ' 
— c)Pu'° 
TMd4 
_ — d) TMd3 
La1
oMysOx'sPu6 
sKt5 T M d
4 T j
1 
Lo3 ' 
, wKt6 
MTr4
NKt4 om 
Jo1


--- PAGE 497 ---
486
Chapter 3
204.* Cited by Apa 476; Hem 3/1.136; Dev 4.282 — a) wKt1 
^ . eKt5 Tj1
joOrPu 1 0 
wKt6 
TMd3 TMd4 NPu1 
— b) Jo1 Pu10 
NPu1
NNgflev"' 
" GMd1 oMd2 Tr2 
Jo1 
NKt4 
Pu5 Pu7
Apa 
—
 c) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr
MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Colly Nd] Hem [but vl as in ed] Mandlik KSS 
[oMy
oOr ];Tr'
205. 
Kt2 gives only the pratlka 
Cited by Apa 456; Hem 3/2.1045,1156 — a)
xMd3 
HyTfPu 1 0 
wKt6 
Apa 
Hem 3/2.1045 
— b)
Ho 
aMy 
Lo2 TMd3 Ox3 
— c) TMd4
oMd5 NPu1 
rMd3 Ox3 
; Ho 
o M y . 
—
d) Bo Lo2oOr [but cor] sOx1 sPu6 MTr4: 
" 
wKt1 ; 
; Be1 
oMy
TMd3 
Ox3
206. 
Cited by Apa 471; Hem 3/1.160, 3/2,1164;Dev 4.142 — a) Ho Lo1 Lo2 rMd4
sBe2 om 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tj2 
— b) Be3 
— c) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
wKt3
Lo1 
Jm 
Lo2
207.* Cited by Apa 471; Hem 3/1.160; Laks 4115 — a) Ox2 [but cor] Ox3 MTr4
Pu8 
Pu5 Pu7 Apa [vi] 
wKt1 
oMd1 
— b) Be uBe2 Be3 Bo uCa Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo3 oMd2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 MÏr3 Hem Mandlik Jolly
KSS 
Kt2 
Lo4 om 
NKt4 Lo2 cMd1 
Lo5 
— c) oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
Be3 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
w
K
t
1 
— c-d) Laks 
_ 
— d) Ho
BKt5 wKt6 oMds oMy NNg Tr1 MTr4 
rMd3
Additional verse in Be3 oMd1 cMd5 oOr Ox2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6:
a) oMd1 
.MTr4 
— b) Be3 
oMd5 
— c) oOr
— d)oMd5Tr' 
B
Prior to the previous verse cMd5 adds:
208. 
Cited by Mädh 1.726-7 — a) Be1 
NKt4 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1
uTr4Madh 
' 
Be3 
NNgsOx1 sPu6 
— b) oMy
e3


--- PAGE 498 ---
TMd3 
Lo1 
— c)Tj' 
* oMd'Ox- 
NKfoMd2 
. 
— d)
oMd5NNg 
a
M
d
1
o
M
d
2 
H o 
TMd3
Hy
209. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1306; päda s c-d cited by Apa 481 — a) oMd5
xMd3 
Be3 
oMy ^; MTr6c 
— b) Be1 Jm oMy Hem
Ox3 Tr2 
— d) Be3 sCa wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 Apa Jha Dave 
Wa
210. 
Päda s a-b omitted in oMy. Cited by Hem 3/2.1349; päda s c-d cited by Apa 489;
Dev 4.318 — a) oMd5 
— b) TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6
[Tr1 
];Bo 
;NNg 
sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 
— c) Lo2
— d)Tj2om 
T
j
1
N
K
t
4 T M d 4 o M d 1
211. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1353 — a)oMd' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6
Tj1 
Lo'oMd1 
— b)cMd' 
; sOx1 sPu6 
cMy
Lo2 
— c ) o
M
d
1
— d ) NKt
4
212. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1337; Dev4.333; Mädh i.y39;päda s a-b cited by Vij i.2.3j;Apa
491 — a) Be3 TMd3 
—b)Madh
 
oOrPu'OTi2 
; Ho
Dev 
— c) Be3 
" 
wKt6 
NKt4 
TMd3
oMy 
— d
)
w
K
t
3
_
_ 
M T r
4 N P u
1 Tj1
wKt6
oMd1 
— b) NKt4 
; oMd1 
" 
Be3 NKt4 eKt5 wKt6 oMd1
NNg oOr Pu10 [Jolly M Nd] Me Go [possibly] Jha Dave 
sOx1 
TMd4
Pu2
Tr2
MTr4 MTr6 [but cor] Me Mandlik Jha Dave 
Ho 
Lo2 
TMd3
Chapter 3
487
213.Omitted in Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tj1 — a) Ho oMd1
TMd4 Wa
TMd3
NKt4
GMd5oMy Tr1 MTr4
Lo2
Me gives
as pätha, saying:
— c) wKt3
H o
B o
— c ) H o
G M y
 — c-d) cMd1
[sic] — d) Bo sCa wKt3 Lo2 N?U'


--- PAGE 499 ---
488 
Chapter 3
214. 
Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Laks 4.207; Hem 3/2.1321, 1404; Dev 4.326;
päda s c-d cited by Hem 3/2.1423; Dev 4367 — a) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMd5 oMy Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
;oOr 
Lo1 
— bl Hv Jm Jo1 NKt4 La1
La2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
_ 
. wKt1 
Tj1 
xMd3
Tr2 
NPu' 
Hem 3/2.1404 [vl as in ed] 
i oMd1 MTr4
— c) oMy 
— d) Laks Hem 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 
Be1 [cor to]
sKt5 wKt6 sOx1 sPu6 Me [pâtha ] 
[but cor in sOx1 sPu6] ; MTr4 MTr6
215. 
Päda s a-b omitted in sOx1. Cited by Laks 4.207; Hem 3/2.1404,1427; Mädh 1.751
— a) oMy 
NNg 
Tr1 
; Bo Pu5 Pu7 
Laks 
—
 b) oOr
sPu6 [but cor sh] Tr1 
W
a
:
— c) Jm oMy 
Lo2 Lo5 Ox2
[but cor] Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 
— d) TMd3 oMd5 Tr1
216. 
Cited by Apa 507; Laks 4.207; Hem 3/2.1449; Dev 4.372, 375; Mädh 1.754 — a)
Hem 
sOx1 sPu6 
Ho _ 
Apa [ v l ] , sKt5 wKt6 
; Apa
De\ ~ 
NPu1 
Bo 
— b) oMy 
Wa 
— c) wK.t6
sOx1 sPu6 Apa 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
— d) sBe2 Be3 Bo eCa Ho wKt1 La2 Lo1 Lo2
NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Apa Laks Jha Dave 
; La1 
NNg
Pu10 
. . 
. s P u 6 c o r t o 
s O x
1 o O r ' 
N N g Tj2
TMd3
217.* Cited by Apa 507; Hem 3/2.1451, 1462; Laks 4.207; päda s c-d cited by Hem
3/2.1462 — a) Wa 
oMd1 
oMy 
; NPu1 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly
G] 
H
o
N
K
f 
— b) BBe2 [but cor] Be3 Hy Jo2 [cor to] Lo5 oMd1 NPu1
Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Laks 
o M y T M d
3 
— c) Be1 La1 oMd5 NPu1 Hem
3/2.1451 
[ L a 1 I j N K t 4 
cMd1 
oMy
Tr1 
TMd4 
Hem 3/2.1462
sOx'sPu6 
; M T r 6 w K t 1
 
T
M
d
3
— d) Jo1 
Lo2
Lo4 Lo5 sPu6 
Be1 sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3
Lo4 [but me sh] Lo5 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Wa ¡folly M8'9 G R]Apa Hem 3/2.1462Laks Rc
Mandlik Bühler 
oMd1
218. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1473; päda s a-b cited by Hem 3/2.1462; and päda s c-d by Apa
508 — a) oMd2 
NKf TMd3 oMd5 
[NKt4 om g]; La1


--- PAGE 500 ---
Chapter 3 
489
cMd1 TMd4 oMy =ET ' 
Tr2 
wKt6 
— b) oMd1 TMd4 oMy
oOr Tr1
oOr
oMy 
; sOx' sPu6 [me sh to] 
Ox2 [but cor]
219. 
Päda s a-c omitted in wKt3. Cited by Hem 3/2.1476 — a) oMd5
Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Mir4 Mir6 ^or to] Jolly Jha Dave
oMd1 
TMd3 
oMy Tr1 
— c) Bö 
; Hern 
NPii Tr1
TMd3 
T
r
1
— d ) TMd3
220.* Omitted in Pu2; verse220 placed after 222 in Bo. Cited by Vis 1.225; Dev 4.16 —
a)wKt1oMd1 
TMd3 
— b) oMd ^ 
— c) Dev 
oMy
TMd4 Tr1 Mir4: 
oMd5 
Be1 eBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd2 oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 [cor to] NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Pulo Tj i Tj2 Tr2 Vis- Go Rc Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Wa 
— d) Bo oMy 
TMd3
Jm " 
Lo2
221.* Cited by Vis 1.225; Laks 4.236; Dev 4.16; päda s a-b cited by Vij 1.254 — a)TMd4
Vij Nä KSS Mandlik 
Tr1 
sBt? 
Kt2
oMy Ox2 [cor to] Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 Mir4 Mir6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) TMd3
Dev 
Lo5 oMd5 cMy Ox2 [but cor} MTr4 MTr6 " ^ 
Lo2
oMd1 
— d) TMd3
222.Cited by Laks 4.236; päda s a-b cited by Dev 417 — a) TMd3 
NNg
Be1 Ho oOr
— d) oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly Gr] 
, sOx1 sPu6
223. 
Tr1 [Jolly Nd] place 223 after 119; päda s c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Laks
TMd3 oMy 
" L a 1 
; Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 oMy
NPu1 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly M4-g]Mandlik KSS 
w K t
1 P u
1
0 [Jolly M'~2-8] 
Rc
appears to read 
glossing it with
— c) TMd3
BBe2 Ho wKt1 oMd5 Ox2 Tr2 MTr6 Laks
BKt5
Bo
— b) wKt1
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 TMd3 cMd5
Hem 3/2.1476 — a) Jo2 Tj1 
BCa
Lo4 Ox3
— c) cMd1
— c-d) sKt5 wKt6
— d) oMd1
BKt5 wKt6
Hem 3/2.1473
TMd3
— c) Tj1


--- PAGE 501 ---
490 
Chapter 3
224. 
Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 492; Hem 3/2.1368; £>ev4.339; Mädh 1.742 — a)
Be3 Ho Apa Hem Dev Mädh 
Be1 
[Jolly Gr] 
— b) oMy
oMd1 
Ho 
^ 
Be1 Be3 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly G]
225. 
Cited by Apa 493; Laks 4.173; Hem 3/2.1368 — a) oMd' aMd5 oMy Tr1 Laks
[oMd5 
Tr1 
-];oMd2 
— b) Lo1 
. Tj1
oMy
226.* Cited by Apa 493; Hem 3/2.1372; Dev 4.342 — a) Bo ?Md4 
xMd3
 Ho oMd5
 NNg 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt 2 La1
oOr Tj2 Mir3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
NKt* oMd1
 TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Mir4
MTr6 
227. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1368; Dev4.342; Mädh 1.744 — a) Ho 
Lo2 P u 1 0 ; Kt2
Pu9 [Jolly G] 
; sPu6 [but me sh] 
— c) ßCa
— d)Lo' 
T M d 4 o M d 2 
Lo-'Tj'
228.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1368; Dev 4.342; Mädh 1.744 — a) Bo1 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2
Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 MÏr4 Me Co Kit Mr Hen
TMd3 
Mir4 
[Jolly M3] 
, oMd5 Dev 
Lo3 ' 
— a-b)
sKt5wKt6
 
Dev Mädh 
_ Lo1 Lo5 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
, Be1 Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd1 oMd2
oMy Pu2 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Nd Rc Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
, Lo4 
[ma]; 
oMd1
— d)Ho 
; Be3BoGMd'sOx1 s P u 6 M T r 6 L o 4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Tj2 ! 
Wa 
Hy
229. 
Pâda- a moth eaten in oOr. Cited by Hem 3/2.1029 — a) NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 oMy NNg Ox3 NPu ' Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 [Jolly M í -2-¡-^ Me G] Jolly 
; Be3 La ' Pu2
Wa 
Lo4 Lo5 
; sBe2 Lo1 Lo3oMd2 Ox2 [Jolly R]=r 
Be1 Ho Hy
°<raf^T; sBe2 wKt6 °ft":f^cr
Hem
— b)Tr2
[Jolly R]
Pu5 Pu7
Lo3 Tj1 
— c) GMy 
Laks 
— d) iMd3
sKt5 wKt6
Bo
— c)
— b)HoJo2Lo3Tj1
— c) TMd4
Lo1
Dev
— c) Ho
Lo1
— d) Dev


--- PAGE 502 ---
Chapter 3 
491
Jo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 =T 
[Be1 
]; wKt1 T 
; Pu8 
.. Tr1 Hem
— b)NPu1
—c) B e 3 " ' —
 d) Be3 sCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 cMd1 TMd3 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 
Tj1
230. 
Omitted in Pu9 — a) Tr2 
oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr6 ; 
sPu6
3î5T;TMd 3 
.Pu 2 
Be1 La1 
sBe2 W a B e 3 oOr Ox3 Pu7 
NKf NNg N?U' Pu5
Pu l o[Jo/fyM G] Jolly 
NPu1 
" 
Bo" 
; La1 
TMd3 
sOx1 
— b)
sOx1 sPu6 [both me to] 
; Pu5 Pu7 P u 1 0 x M d 3 
— c) nBe2
TMd3 
T r
2 o O r ' 
sKt5 wKt6 '
^ — d)Tj' 
Pu5 Pu7
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor]
231. Placed before 229 in TMd3 oMd5 [Jolly Gr Nd]. Cited by Hem 3/2.1027— b) oMy
¡TMd 4 
P
u
1
0
B
e
'
° 
' 
TMd4°
— c) Tr1 
HosOx'sPu6 
WaA/e[patha| 
Be3 
Pu5
Pu7 Pu' 
. 
, La1 
Be1 Bo 
oMd1 
sOx1 sPu6 
Kt2
— d)Lo4 
oMy
232. 
Apa 502; Hem 3/2.1069; Dev 4.351; Mäcih 1.746 — a) Lo4 Ox3 
TMd3
Lo4 Ox3 
Hem 
, nKt5 wKt6 TMd4 NPu1 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 Tr2 
— b) NKt4
Lo2 MTr4 
, BKt5 wKt6 
— c) TMd3 
" TMd4 
— d) Ho wKt1 sKt5
La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 Tr1 [Jolly G] Dev Apa [vi]
Tj1
233.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1026 — a) Tr2 
Hy 
sKt5 wKt6
Ox3 
^ 
- b) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 [me fh to] sPu6 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1
Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly R Nd] Re Mandlik Bühler Jha KSS Dave ' 
, MTr6
BKt swKt 6" 
Lo3oMy 
_ 
La1 Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 NNg NPu1 MTr6
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 ' 
B
o
— d ) oMd1 o M y Ox3 
W a " 
sCa Jo2
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
Be1 Pu10 
NNg 
Pu5 Pu7 Go {Jolly G] 
Ho
TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 Tr2 
; Bo °dRÍld ; Re
234.* Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa 475;päda s a-b cited by Dev 4.165; Mädh 1.685 —
a) Lo3 
— b)Ox2 
— c)TMd4 
sBe2 oMd1 MTr3
 
NPu' Tr2
Be1 [but me] La1cMy
Bo
Jm NKl4
GMy
NKt4
Bo
wKt3
— c) cMy
Tr2
Hem
sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to}
NKt4


--- PAGE 503 ---
492 
Chapter 3
Wa 
Hy Jm wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 cMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 MTr3
inTr4 MTr6 [folly M3 Nd Ku] Ku Mandlik Bühler KSS 
Jo1
 
~ — d) oMy 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M1"2-* G Nd] Apa Jolly 
Be3
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
T M d
4 B e
1 H o L o
5 " Tr2 
NPu
1
235- 
Cited by Apa 474; Hem 3/2.1175 — a) Ho Wa 
Lo4 
Lo5
— b) Be1 sCa Ho wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Wa Re
Ipâtha l 
wKt1 Tr1 
Lo5 
— c) oMy 
— d) oOr 
Ho
Jm Lo2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 Tr2 Wa 
cMd1 TMd3 oMd5 
o O r L o 4
Lo5
236.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1017; Laks 4187; Dev 4.355; Mâdh 1.748; päda s c-d cited by
Apa 497 — a) wKt6 
TMd3 Tr1 Wa Hem 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1
— b)iMd3 
Tr1 
wKt1 NKf
1
 
NPu' 
" La1
" B e 1 sBe2 Bo Ho Jm Jo2 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj ' Tj2 Wa [Jolly
G R] Laks _ 
Hy Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave _ 
DevMadh
wKt1 wKt6 oMy 
W a T r
1 
— c) Tj1 
— d) TMd4 Tj1
Lo3 
oOr 
wKt1 
Hy Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 Dev 
eKt5
wKt6 
B e
3 T M d
3 
sOx1 om 
and jumps to 237d
[haplo]
237.* Omitted in La1 oOr sOx1 Pu9 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 497; Laks 4.187; Hem 3/2.1019
— a) Ho Hem 
B
e
3
B
o Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 rMd3 TMd4
oMd5 Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4MTr6 Wa Mandlik KSS [cf. VaDh 11.32; ViDh 81.20]
oMd2 
Lo5 
Be1 Jm La2 
_ 
Pu7 
Pu5 
Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
wKt3 La2 oMd2 TMd3 oMd5 Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS
Be1 wKt1 Lo1 TMd4 
— b) ßBe3 
. Jm Kt2 
. 
; Wa 
^ 
TMd3
TMd3 Wa 
— c) NKt4 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
sCa Hy Jm
Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— d) MTr3 
Be3
•:; wKt3
Additional verse in oMd5:
238. 
Kt2 transposes 238 and 239. Cited by Hem 3^.1021; Dev 1.115 — a) sKt5
Jm 
wKt 6NPu' 
TMd4 NNg 
oMd1 
— b) sKt5 wKt6 NPu1
— c)HoLa' 
w K t
6 ; sKt5 wKt6 Lo5 TMd3 N
P
u
1
— d ) Dev


--- PAGE 504 ---
Chapter 3 
493
Ho
239. 
Cited by Apa 472; Hem 3/1.516; Dev 4.206 — a) Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Jm Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 BKt5 La1 Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Lo4
TMd3TMd4Tj'Trl[./o/(yRGr]£>ev 
" 
oMd1 
Tr1 
— c) Be1
..; Ox3 
; Kt2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Dev 
TMd4 _ 
— d) Be1 sOx1 sPu6
TMd4"
240.* Cited by Apa 472; Hem 1.108, 3/1.516; Laks 4.136; Dev 4.206 — a) Lo2 Apa [vi]
NKt4 
Lo2 
— b)Pu10 
rMd4 
. xMd3 
oMd5
Tr1 
Kt2 iMd4 MTr6 
oMd2 oMy [Jolly Be] Apa Laks Dev 
Hem
—
 c) TMd4 
. Tr1 
Be3 Hy Jin Jo1 Kt2 oMd1 oMd2
 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 cMy NNg
oOr Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]£>ev Mandlik KSS 
Be1 Be3 Ho «Kt1 Lo5
TMd3 oMy Ox3 Tr2 [Jolly M] Laks 
,Wa 
; Lo1 =TT — d) Jo1 
° ; wKt1 NNg Pu10 Laks
Lo1 Dev 
Be1 [me to} nBe2 Be3 ßCa Jm wKt1 TMd4 oOr Pu2
241. 
Cited by Apa 472; Hem 3/1.517 — a) Lo2 Pu9 om 
sBe2 Bo Ho Hy wKt1
wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 oMd2 NNg Ox2 Ox3 P if Pu7 Pu9 Jha Dave ^ 
—
 b) wKt1 NNg
, HowKt6TMd3oOrOx2[tocor] 
Pu" 
oMy T
r
1
— c) Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 \Jolly G] 
Hy 
— d) Be1 Tr1 
NNg 
Ox3 
Lo4
Lo5 
Tr2
242. 
Cited by Apa 472 ;Hem 3/1.517—a) wKt6 Pu5 Pu7 
'; Pu9 
HyJo2Lo 3Tj'
oMd1 
- — c ) B o H y w K t 6 
Ox3 ' 
— d) Lo1 
Hy Jm Jo1
Kt2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
243. 
Cited by Apa 500; Hem 3/1.439; Laks 4.134; Mädh 1.728 — a) Hy 
La
Laks 
oMd5 
— b) wKt6 ' 
TMd4 
Apa _ 
oMy '
— c) Lo1 oMy 
BKt5 w K t
6 B e
1 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
wKt1 
244. 
Cited by Apa 504; Hem 3/2.1396; Dev 4.358; Mädh 1.750 — a) Be1 
oMd5
Tj2
Wa
— b) wKt6 oMd2
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
GMy
NKt4 Lo4


--- PAGE 505 ---
494 
Chapter 3
—
 b)oMd' 
MTr4 
H o Lo1 
T
M
d
3
c) Bo 
wKt 1" 
- d) oMy 
Be1 Bo Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2
TMd4 
_ 
Tr2 
wKt6
245. 
Cited by Apa 504; Hem sA.iso, 3/2.1512; Mädh 1.750 — a) Lo1
Lo4 Lo5 
— c) Bo Jo2 Kt2 TMd4 
; eBe2 
— d ) T M d 3 o M y
Be1 Bo Lo2NNg Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 
Ho cMd5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Apa [vi]
; Tr1 
Ho TMd3 oMd5 MTr4
246.Cited by Apa 504; Hem 3/1.151, 3/2.1511 — a) A p a w K t
6 Apa [vi]
— b ) N N g o M d
1 
W a ; 
w K t 3 — c ) Tr2 
" 
H o
MTr4 
sBe2 Bo wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Ox3 
Tj1 \ 
Wa
A p a 
—d) Pu5 Pu7 P
u
9
s
C
a
w
K
t
6 
H y
247.* ma in Be3. Cited by Vis 1.225; Hem 3/2.1606 — a)oMy 
TMd4
oMd2 Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 [Jolly Ku R] Nd Rn Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— b)
wKt6 oMd1 Hem
La2 Lo1 Lc? oMd2 TMd3 NNg sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G K]JolIy
— c)oMd' 
Lo2 
Jo2 oMy Pu7 [but cor] 
—
 d) sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 Lo5 TMd3 cMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 MTr3 [Jolly G] Mandlik KSS <J; Hem
248. 
Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Vis 1.252 — a) sOx1 sPu6 Pu'°
— b) TMd3 oMy 
TMd3 
oMy 
— c) oMd1 TMd4 
wKt6 oMd5
— d) Pu9 MTr4 
; oMd1 '
o
M
y 
TMd3 
Lo2
249. 
Cited by Apa 498; Laks 4.192 — a) Be1 sOx1 sPu6 
Ho 
TMd4 cMy
MTr3 
oMd5 Tr1 Laks' 
Ho 
— b) Ho 
KÍ 
rMd3 
' —
c) TMd3 
Bo Lo5 NNg Tj1 
— d) Bo Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to] Tj1 
MTr3
NKt4 
O x
3 L o
5 
sPu6
250. 
c)rMd4. 
TMd4: 
G M y
T M d
3 
oMd2 
MTr6
Be1 BBe2 sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 ßKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo5
Tr2
sOx1 sPu6
Be1 sBe2 Jo2 wKt1 nKt5 wKt6
-


--- PAGE 506 ---
Chapter 3 
495
251* Omitted in sKt5 wKt6. Cited by Laks 4.211 — a) Lo4ma 
wKt1 wKt3 Wa
La1 
xMd3 
.NPu 1 
oMd5 
; oMd1 
La1 
wKt1
rMd4 
Tr1 
Be1 HooMy 
— b)oMd' 
. Be1 Jo1 xMd4 Ox2
[but cor] ' 
[Jolly Gr] 
_ 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo1 
wKt1
Mir4 
^ 
Lo'Tj1 
' —d)Jm 
[Jolly YM] Laks
[Jolly K]
252. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1486 — a) wKt1 
; MTr4 MTr6
Be1 Ho wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 Ox3 Tr1 [Jolly M3-4'5 Nd] 
sBe2
Be3 Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 [Jolly G] 
[ßBe2 Be3 Jo2 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Lo1
(Jolly G) ] ; Hem 
iMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 [but cor] Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 Mir4 Mir6 %
wKt6 
oOr 
Me Rn Re Go appear to omit 
— c) sBe2
MT^qtrMd3 
HoLo5 
oM> 
TMd4 
" — d) iMd4
253.Omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 504— a) T
M
d
3
— b) wKt1 
Tj2
— c)NK.f iMd3 
wKt6 
Lo5 
^ 
— d) wKt1 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
iNKt 4
254.* Cited by Laks 4.211 — a) sBe2 oMd2 iMd4 
oMd2 
La1
wKt1 
;wKt6 
;oMd' 
xMd4 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMyMTr3
Bo Ho wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 Go
Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 iMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly R Nd] Rc
Mir4 
B e
3 P u
5 Pu7 Pu9 G
o
[
P
u
9
]
; H y oMd2 Wa [Jolly
M 4 G N R K u N d ] 
NKfOx2 
Lo1 
oMd1 
" 
— c) Lo1 
_ 
— d) Lo4
Lo5 
; Lo3 
Tj1 
sBe2 Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Lo'oMd2 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3
[Jolly Ku] Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
NKt4 La ' oMd1 iMd3 rMd4 oMd3 oMy Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
wKt3
255. 
Cited by Apa 474; Laks 4.127; Hem 3/2.1172 — a)îMd 3
 
__ 
3My
Ho 
Hem 
cMd1 
— b) sKt5 wKt6 oMd5 
Laks Hem
—
 c)cMd' TMd4 Pu5 Pu7Pu9Tr: 
Hy Lo2 Ox3 
; Lo4
Jm
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 uTr^Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Laks
[me to]
BKt5 wKt6
GMd5
TMd3 oMy
Mandlik Jha Dave
— b) sOx1 sPu6
oMy
wKt1


--- PAGE 507 ---
496 
Chapter 3
wKt1 
MTr4 
Ho xMd3 îMd 4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
oMd1
GMd5Tr1
256. 
Omitted in Be3. Cited by Hem 3/2.1173 — a) TMd3 
[om 
];
[Jolly Nd] . ; Jm 
rMd4 
wKt1 NKf Lo3 oMd1 oMy sOx1 Pu5 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6
— b) TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr 
— c) BKt5 wKt6 
Tr2 
— d)
NNg
257. 
Päda s c-d omitted in Lo2. Cited by Apa 500, 551; Hem 3/1.541, 573 — a) wKt1
Lo5 
Jm 
Apa 500 
Apa 551 
—a-b) GMd1
[reading unclear] — b) xMd4 
sCa wKt1 oMy Tr2 
sKt5 wKt6
— c ) oMd1 
G M y B C a
258.* Päda s c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Hem 3/2.1483 — a) NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 La1 Ox3
DaveJha 
T M d
4 T j
1 
—
 b) Pu10 [Jolly M1'2-8-"] Jha Dave
sCa Jo2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox2 Ox3
 NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9
Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M1-2-3^-5^8-9 G N] N a Jolly Jha Dave 
Bo 
— c) NKt4 La1
GMd 5Pu 5Pu 7Pu 9Tj> 
K
t
2
— d)Jo2Lo3Tj' 
_ 
H o
TMd3
259. 
Omitted in iMd4. Cited by Hem 3/2.1483 — a) Jo1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 om
GMd1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 MTr4 
M T r
6 T M d
3 
— b) sBe2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
oMy MTr4 
Tj2 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
— c) oMd1 
NKt4 Lo2sOx' Ox3 sPu6 [Jolly
M5 G] 
oMd1 TMd3oMd5 o M y T r ' M T r 4 — d)oOr sOx1 sPu6 
cMd1
Jo2Lo3Tj' [Jolly R] 
[Jo2 om
Additional verse in Be3 Ho Jo2 sKt5 Lo3 oMd2 oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R] Mandlik
[ 
] KSS [cf. ViDh 73.30]:
c)Tj' 
— d)Ox2Tr^ 
Tj1
Additional verse in Mandlik pT] KSS; given after 249 in oOr;
MTr4
oMd2
— d) wKt1
Tr2
Be3


--- PAGE 508 ---
Chapter 3 
497
c)oOr
260. 
Päda s c-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Hem 3/2.1504 — a) oMd1 
cMd1 TMd3
oMd5 oMy MTr6 
— b) K
.
t
2
— c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Kt 2 
Lo3
TMd3 
— d) NKt4 La1 
. xMd4 
xMd3 
Tr1
Tr2
261.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1403; Laks 4.223; Dev 4.361; Mädh 1.752; päda s c-d cited by
Hem 3/2.1504 — a) ßCa 
xMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
— b) Bo sCa wKt1
eKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 xMd3 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj ' Rn Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
xMd3
oMy 
Pu10 
—c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Ox3 
xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1
cMy sOx1 sPu6 
Hem 
Ox3
262. 
Cited by Apa 550; Hem 3/2.1506; Dev 4.402; Mâdh 1.759 — b) oM d1
BCa[butcor]
263.* Cited by Apa 550; Hem 3/2.1506; Laks 4.223; Dev4.4O3; Mädh 1.759— a) xMd4
oMd' xMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [folly Nd] Dev Mädh 
Laks
— b) Bo
MTr3 Apa Jolly Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Apafor
264. 
Omitted in Tj2; päda s c-d omitted in Pu9. Cited by Apa 512; Laks 4.226; Hem
3/2.1515 — b) oOr 
NNg 
— c) Pu2 Tr1 MTr4 
_ 
, Lo4 NNg Ox3 Tj1 Wa
wKt6 
; GMd5 
oMy 
Apa 
eBe2 wKt1 Pu2 
Pu10
Apa[v\\ 
-d)Bo 
cMy' 
Be1 Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3
La2 Là Lo3 oMd ' oMd2 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 [Jolly Ku R]Ku Mr Mandlik Jha
KSS Dave
265. 
Cited by Hem 3/2.1062,1513, 3/3.606; päda s c-d cited by Apa 512 — a) wKt6
oMd1 xMd4 
Tr2
— d) Hem
Wa
Tj2
GMd1
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd5 Pu10 Tj2
La1
Ho rMd4
— c) Ho
Ox3
— d) ßCa
NKt4
w K t 1
L o 1
G M d 1
T M d 4
— b ) o O r
MTr4 MTr6 Laks
 NKf cMd1
— d)cMd1
Ho


--- PAGE 509 ---
498 
Chapter 3
266. 
Cited by Apa 500; Hem 3/1.540; Dev 4.252 — a) NKt4 TMd4 
wKt6
oMd1 aMyLaks 
oMd1 oMy MTr4 MTr6 L
a
k
s
— b) eKt5
oMd'oMy 
O x
3 o M y Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Ho 
— c) TMd3
wKt6
267.* Cited by Vij i.259;Apa 500, 552; Hem 3/1.541, s86;LaA:.y 4.41; Dev 4.252; Mädh
1.705 — a) oMd1 
— b) Ho oM d1 NNg Hem 3/1.541 — c) La1 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Tr1 
Wa 
Ho 
Tj1 
Pu2 
; Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku]
Vij [but vl as in ed] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave [cf. YDh 1.257] 
o M d
2 — d)
Apa 
Lo1 
TMd4 
Tr1 
oMd1
268.* Omitted in Pu9; pâda s c-d ma in sKt5. Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Laks4.41; Dev
4.255; Mädh 1.705 — a) Lo3 oMd2 
oMy 
— b) wKt6 
Ho wKt3 wKt6
cMy Tr2 
TMd3 
, oMy 
oMd1 
— c) Ho 
^ 
oMy
Ox3 
Bo NKt4 La1 Lo2 N P u 1 o M d 1 
sCa 
— d)oMd5
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 TMd3 TMd4 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
nKf Lo4 Lo5
oMd2 oOr Ox3 [Jolly M3"4-5] 
Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G] 
Be3 wKt3 NKt4
BKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 oOr Ox3 Pu2 Tr1 [Jolly M3^5] Hem 
oMy
TMd4
269. 
Omitted in TMd4 Pu9; ma in eKt5. Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Dev^.z^y, Mädh 1.706
— a) Dev 
c M d
5 L a
1 
— b) wKt1 wKt3 
Be1
Hy Jm Jo' Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMd' NNg Pu10 [Jolly M
>-2-8] Hem ' 
oMy 
Laks, Hem 
— c) wKt6 Lo1 Ox3 
Pu5
Pu7Hem 
Be1 ßBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKf oMd1 oMd2 oOr sOx1 Ox3
sPu6 Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
— d) Ox3 Tj2
270.* Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Dev4.255; Mädh 1.706 — a) Ho
oMd1 TMd3 
Ox2 T r
2 B e
1 
W a s P u
6 
[but cor]; TMd3 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
NKt4 
— b) Ho TMd3
 NNg Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 
— c) TMd3 Tr1 [Jolly
Ku Nd] 
B e
1 H y 
Be3 
Be1 sBe2 sCa La1
 NNg sOx1 Ox3
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 MTr4 MTr6 \Jolly M^~5 G] Jolly 
, Ho oMd5 [Jolly Gr]
Lo3 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R] 
— c-d) oOr 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
Pu9
A
cMd1
Be1
NNg


--- PAGE 510 ---
Chapter 3 
499
271. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Laks 4.41; Madh i.7o6;padas a-b cited by Vis 1.255; Apa
551; Dev 4.255; päda s c-d by Apa^z; Dev 4.256 — b) Be3 sKt5 wKt6 La2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2
[Jolly G] 3; Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd2 iMd3 oMd5 Pu2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Vij
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ^ — c) cMd1 
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Apa 
Jm
Pu9 
oMd5aMyTr' 
Pu10 
; xMd3 
Lo1 
Ox2
TMd4 
Jolly comments: "the term vârdhïnasasy a is spelt in many
various ways in the Mss." — d) oMy
Additional verse in Ho Mandlik \ 
] KSS; probably taken from Me's com:
a) Ho 
—b) Mandlik KSS 
—
 c-d) Mandlik KSS
272.* Cited by Hem 3/1.541, 586; Dev 4.257; Madh 1.706 — a) Lo2 
xMd3 oMy
Pu8 
wKt1 TMd3 Dev 
nCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Li Lo4 oMd2 oOr Ox3 Pu2 Tj2
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave [Jolly M4"5"9 Me Ku R] 
sBe2 Be3 Bo wKt3 Lo ' Lo2 Lo3 Lo5
sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' 
K t
2 s K t
5 wKt6 oMd5 Ox2 N?U' Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly G Nd] Madh 
Be1 
La1 
oMd1 TMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr6
rMd3 
NKt4 
— b)HooMd5 
Lo4 Ox3 Tr1 
; NNg Pu'°
TMd3 
Lo1 
— c) xMd4 
sOx1 sPu6
Ox2 
Lo4Lo5Tr' 
Bo Ho Jm Lo1 Tj1 Tr2 
; Jm Jo2
oMd1 oMd2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) Jo2 Lo3 Tj ' 
Lo1
273.* Päda s c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Apa 555;Hem 3/1.201 — a) Bo Jo2 NKt1 sKt5
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNgsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly M R] Jolly 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G Ku] Apa Go Ku 
—
 b) Ho
Lo1 cMy 
oMd1 Tj1 Tr1 
W
a
— c ) K
t
2
L
o
4 Lo5
TMd4 
— d) TMd4 om first 
oMd5
 
Additional verse in oMd5:
274.* Omitted in Pu5 Pu7 Pu9; ma in Be3 Pu8; päda s a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by Hem
3/1.66, 245; Laks 4.19; Dev 4.24 — a) Tj1 
_ 
Lo2 oMd1 Hem 3/1.66 
nB¿ Ho Hy
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 TMd4 oMd5 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 MTr3MTr4 [Jolly R] Hem 3/1.245 Rn
Mandlik KSS 
TMd3 Tr1 [Jolly Nd] 
— b) sBe2 TMd3 
— c) sOx1 
Hem


--- PAGE 511 ---
500 
Chapter 3
3/1.66 
BBe2 Hy wKt6 Lo2 rMd3 oMy Pu10 Tr1 
— d) Hem 3/1.66
[cf. 3.273d]; TMd3 Me [pätha ] 
; NKf 
xMd4 
Mir6 
Lo2
Tr1 
oMd1 
Tr2 
wKt1 
Bo NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 cMy oOr Ox2 Ox3 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4
Additional half-verse in TMd4 [cf. added verse 6 after 3.275]:
275.* Cited by Hem 3/1.153, 3/2.1031 — a) wKt3 om 
first 
— b) Lo2 oOr Tj1
Be3 Ox3 
Lo2 TMd3 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 T
r
1
— c) Hem 3/1.153 
^ 
Tr2
om one 
—
 d) Be3 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2ßKt5 wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 iMd4 sOx1 Ox2
sPu6 Pu'° Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 WaHem Mcmdlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
oMd1 oMd2
TMd3 TMd4 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 Wa
Additional verses in oMd1 TMd4 oMy NPu1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6; cited by Hem 3/1.263-4
3/3-5O9-1O; Mädh 1.661; verse 5 by Heñí 3/1.214; given after 276 in oOr; after 278 in TMd3
oMd5; after 3.277 in [Jolly Nd Gr]; and after 3.280 in Be Ho Ox2 Tr2 Mandlik [
Dave KSS; Re comments on verse 6:
1.a) TMd4
[Jolly Nd] 
[Jolly Gr] 
Ho TMd4 Ox2 Tr2 Tr1 
— c)
oMyoOrOx 2Tr' 
TMd4 
uTr6 Hem Mädh 
TMd3
oMd1 
Ho 
oMd5 Tr2 Hem 3/1.263-4 
— d)
TMd3 
NPu1 Hem 3/3.509-10 
oMy 
TMd4
2. a) Ox2 
NPu' 
oMd5 oOr Jolly 
— c) MTr4 
oMy
oMd5 
TMd4 
oMd' 
Be3 
Hem 3/3.509 
Mädh
Jolly ' 
—
 d) NPu1 
" 
Be3 Ho Ox2 Tr2 Mandlik KSS Dave
3. b) TMd4 Tr1 [Jolly Nd] " 
— c) NPu1 ; 
Ho
Ox2
TMd4
3/1.263-4 
_ 
[Jolly]
4 . a ) NPu1 
, TMd3 o M y H e m 3 / 3 . 5 1 0 T M d 4
' H e m 3 / 1 . 2 6 3 - 4
cMd1 
— c)HooMd5 
oMd5 N P u 1 — d) T r 1 O x 2 N P u '
Ox2 Tr2
Ho NPu1
oOr
Hem
M T r 4
- a - b ) B e 3
— b )
 Hem 3/1.263-4
Be3
— d)
— b) oMd1 NPu1Hem
Tr1
Ho Ox2 Tr2


--- PAGE 512 ---
Chapter 3 
501
Tr2 
Ho 
TMd4
5. a) TMd3 oOr N?U' 
oMd5 Tr2 
— b) [Jolly] 
xMd3
oMyMTr4MTr6 
\\oHemMadh 
NPu1 
TMd4 
— c) NPu1
Be? oOr MTr4 MTr6 Hem 3/1.214,3/3.492 
oMd1 Hem 3/3.510
— d) Tr2 Hem 3/1.214,263-4 
Tr1 
Ox2
6. Omitted in TMd4; päda s a-b omitted in Jolly Mädh — a) oMy
TMd3 Ox2 Mir4 
~ 
oMd5 
oOr 
Hem 3/1.214
— a-b) Be3 
- b) cMd1 
NPu1
Ho 
- c) MTr4 MTr6 Hem 3/1.214 
— d) oMd5 NPu1
Tr1 [Jolly]
276. 
Cited by Apa 42z;Dev 4.20; Mädh 1.666 — a) TMd4 
TMd3
oMd5 oMy Tr1 
oMd1 MTr4 
 
— b) Hy Tj2 
— c) oMd1 
Bo
Lo1 Lo2TMd3 oMd5 Ox2 Tr1 ' 
sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 
— d) cMd1
TMd3 
TMd4 
oOr
Additional verse in MTr6:
277.* Verses 277 and 288 are transposed in Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 La2
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 and in all editions. Cited by Apa 465;
Hem 3/3.568; Dev 4.81 — a) TMd3 oMd5 
Hy 
NNg 
TMd4
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo1 
— b) TMd4 
— c) oMy 
Hem
Lo1 
Wa:
278. 
Omitted in Lo5. Cited by Laks 4.27;Hem 3/1.266, 3/3.512 — a) Lo4 ma 
Tr2
TMd3 
TMd4 
; oMy 
 Pu8 
Ox3 
Lo1 
wKt1 
Pu2
wKt6 
La1 
MTr6" 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— c) Lo1
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
NKt4 
Tr1- 
Hem 
Bo Lo2 cMd5
Pu8 Tr1 
^ 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 MandlikJha KSS Dave ~ 
 
Pu10 om 
—
d)sCa J^Lo'Tj1 Wa 
cMd5 sOx1 sPu6  
Lo3 Tj1 Wa 
Ox3 
Lo4
279. 
Omitted in Ho; pâda s c-d omitted in TMd3. Cited by Hem 3/2.1107; Dev 4.269;
Mädh 1.725 — a ) D e v 
— b ) o M y — 
c ) oMd1
nBe2
 
T M d 4 T r 1 
Ho
Hem 3/3.510
NPu1


--- PAGE 513 ---
502 
Chapter 3
280. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.329 — b) Be1 
oMd1 
Ho; 
— c) Hem
oMd1 
Additional verses in Ho Ox2 Tr2 Mandlik [ 
] Dave KSS; Re comments on
verse 6 [these are the same as the addition after 3.275].
Additional verses in TMd3 cMy; first verse in oMd5:
1. a) oMy 
oMd5 
— b) oMd5
2. d) oMy
281. 
Cited by Vis 1.266; Apa 420 — b) wKt3 
iMd3 oMy Mir4 Apa 
—
d) GMd5 oMy Apa Re 
oMd5 oMy 
Be3 TMd4 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] '
Be1 [but me] sKt5 wKt6 Ox2 Pu5 Pu9 Tj ' Wa [Jolly R] Apa [vi] 
Lo3 Tr2 Re
282.* Cited by Vis 1.266; Hem 3/2.1679 — a) wKt1 
Be3 
Ho sKt5 wKt6 Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 
TMd3 oMy 
Lo4 Lo5 xMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 
oMd1 
Be1 [but
me} sBe2 Be3 Bo eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKl4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 Ox2
Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [folly R] Re Mr Hem Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Tr2 °mvT; Tj '
— b) NKt4 oOr Ox3 
" 
sBe2 xMd3 
Be3 oMd5 Tr2 
iMd4
— d) wKt1 sOx1 
oMd5
283. 
Cited by Vis 1.266; Laks 3.134; Hem 3/2.946 — a) Ho La' 
wKt1 NNg
Laks 
B e
1
: T M d
4 
Be3oMd5 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 
— b)
Lo2 
sKt5 wKt6 
oMd5 Vis [Jolly G] 
— c) Ox3 
wKt1
Tj2 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2
 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
284.* Cited by Apa 560-1; Hem 3/1.64 — a) TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6
wKt1 
Tr2om 
Ho Pu10 A pa 
wKt6 NNg 
Hem 
Jo2 
—b) Bo TMd4
NKt4 NNg Pu10 
wKt1 
cMd5 Tr1 MTr6 
TMd4 
— c) Hy
TMd3 
Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly M3"9 G
]
w
K
t
3 Hem
 Jo1
Tr2
Hy
Ox3
Lo2
oOr
Kt2
— c-d) TMd3 oMy
— d) Hem


--- PAGE 514 ---
Chapter 3 
503
oMy 
sOx'sPu6 
— d)Ho 
wKt3 
Pu8
Be1 Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt^Kt4 La1 La2 Lo1 TMd3 iMd4 cMd5 Ox2 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3
MTr4 MTr6 Hem Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave [Jolly Nd]
285. 
Cited by Laks 3.214 — a) Be1 Lo4 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
sCa 
oMy 
Md3 
oMd1 om one 
— b) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
NKt'Lo2^2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oOr 
MTr6: 
TMd3 TMd4 oMy
sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 
• — c) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 Kit Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
nKf
Ho NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 oMy oOr Ox2 Pu* Tj2 MTr4 MTr6 [folly Me N] Laks 
Be1
oMd2 
TMd4 
BCa 
Bo La1 Lo1 Lo2 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 MTr4 MTr6 [folly M
La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Wa Jolly [Jolly M G]
Tr2
286. 
Cited by Laks 2.167— a) NKt4 Laks 
Laks 
—
 b) TMd3 Ox2 Pu10
Lo4 oMd1 TMd4 Ox2 Pu9 Pu10 [Jplly MG] " 
oMy 
Lo3 Tr2 W a N K t
4
r — c) cMy 
Tr2 
Lo2 
— d) oMd1 :^
Laks 
Colophon: Jo2 Lo3
Jo2 wKt3 
BKt5 wKt6 Lo1 xMd3 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 om
Jo2 oOr wKt3 om 
Lo2 
Ox2 sOx1 sPu6
Lo1
G ]
— d ) B e 3 o M d 2
T M d 3 c M y
B o H o w K t 1 N K t 4 s K t 5 w K t 6
Be1 Lo1 Lo2 xMd3 NNgsOx1 Ox2 sPií
Tj1
Pu5
Be3 NNg
Tr2
eCa
NPu1
GMd1
Wa
Tr1


--- PAGE 515 ---
1. 
Cited by Laks 2.435 — b) Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo NKt4 Lo2 oMy
TMd4 
iMd'Tj'^ 
Pu7 cor 
to 
uBe2 Be3 ßKt5 Lo3 Lo4 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 Tj2
Mir4 Mir6 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Bo 
" Laks 
Tr2
Lo3 
NPu
1 
Pu2 
Lo3 TMd3 
wKt1
2. 
Pages containing verses 2-27 missing in oOr. Cited by Vij 1.127— a) Lo4
— c) Lo1 
oMd2
3. 
Päda s b-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Dev 2.448; Mädh 1.308 — a) Pu3 
; Ox2 Tr2
Pu4 
Lo1 TMd4 oMy 
. B o 
— b) MÏr4
TMd3 ' 
w K t 3 s K t 5 w K t
6 — c) Ho lacuna at 
Tj1
— d) Tr2 
NPu
1
4.* Cited by Laks 2.170; Dev 2.451; Mädh 1.309 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
TMd4
wKt1 
NKt4 
sBe2 Be3 Ho Lo1 Lo3 oMd' oMd2 TMd4 cMd5 NNg Ox2
NPu'Pu 2Pu 4Pu 5Pu 7Pu 9Tj'Tr 2[Jo//yGR] 
sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Pu9 o« 
Bo
sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 
Laks 
—
 c) Ox3 Tr2 
. 
NKt
4 
Ho Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
— d)sBe2 
Lo4 
wKt6 
Tr2
Be1 sBe? Be3 eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 WaMandlik Jolly Buhler Jha KSSDave
5. 
Cited by Dev 2.451; Mädh 1.309— a) La1 
NKt4 
TMd4 
Tr1
— a-b)TMd3 
o
M
y
— b
)
T
j
'
— c ) Be1 
Mädh
Be1 Ho La1 Lo5 Ox2 Pu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Tj1 
M T r 3 B o 
— d) Tr2 
Kt2
B o 
N K t 4 P u 8 
NPu1
504
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9  [Jolly G]
Lo4 Ox2
NKt4
Pu2 Pu4


--- PAGE 516 ---
Chapter 4 
505
6. 
ma in eKt5. Cited by Dev 2.451; Mädh 1.309-10 — a) wKt6 TMd3 
Lo4
Tj2 
wKt1 
Pu4 
Pu2 
— b) Ox2 
oMy
BKt5
NKt4 La1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 
Tr1
7. 
Cited by F/y 3.28-9; Apa i6g;päda s a-b cited by Vij 1.128— a) Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho
Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 oMd2 NNg Ox3
 NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr2 Me [pâtha ] Na Vij
wKt1 
, G M y P u
5 ;
; Pu4 om
—
 b ) O x 3 
J o 2 wKt« T r
1 — c ) L
a
1
P
u
5
s
O
x
1 sPu6
TMd3oMy 
. 
, Pu10 
 
.NKt4 Pu9 
Tr2 
MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
Tr1 
T M d 4 . 
. 
. T
j
1
-
H
o
o
m 
N K t
4 — d ) Pu2
Pu4 
. Be1 [but me] wKt1 
Pu5 
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 [Jolly M1-"]
Additional verse in Mandlik p] KSS:
8. 
Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa 169 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
ßKt5 wKt6
Tr2 
—b) Pu7 [but cor] Pu9 
NKt4 
— c) Ho 
Pu2
Be1 
P u
5 L o
2 
. B e
1 e K t
5 
— d ) Be3 Ox2
NPu
1 Apa [vi]
9 . C i t e d by Vij 1.128; Apa 169; Dev 2.452 — a) sPu6 [cor to] 
wKt1 oMd2 Apa
Lo1 
TMd3 oMy 
— c) wKt1 
Wa i 
TMd3 oMy
rMd3 oMy 
Lo3 NPu1 [Jolly R] 
Pu2 Pu4 
Ho ' ^ 
— d) oMd1
 TMd3
oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 Dev 
ßBe2 [but cor} ' 
, MTr3 
; Pu9
10.* a) sBe2 Bo ßCa Hy Jm Jo1 KÍ wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6
Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
sKt5 wKt6
 
__ oMd1 cMd5 Tr1
— b) oMd1 
— c ) T j ' N K t 4 
. cMy " 
Pu5 
TMd3 
TMd4
wKt6 
wKt1 
. Lo1 Pu10 
. sKt5 wKt6 
Pu5 Pu7 [me sh to]
H y 
P
u
9
w
K
t
1 
,oMy 
TMd3
[many mss. hâv e thé retroflex 
] — d) TMd3 
Tr2 
oMy
Pu10
TMd4
Lo1
Be3wkt1
La1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1Apa
Bo
Be1
TMd3
— c) cMd1
GMd1


--- PAGE 517 ---
506
Chapter 4
u. 
a) Ho La1 oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 [Jolly G] 
T j 1 . .., NKt4
NNg [but corfli] 
Pu10 
— b)Pu'° 
sBe2 
— c) Ox3 Pu10 Tr1
Lo4 
Ox3 
Hy 
Lo4 Lo5 o My 
Lo2 
— d) Lo1 me to
Hy 
TMd3 oMy
12. Cited by Apa 170; Dev 2.459; päda s a-b cited by Vij 1.129 — b)Apa 
Lo1
sOx'sPu6 
Ho 
— c)sOx'sPu6 
Pu10 
— d) Kt2 
Be3 
NPu1
Hy Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo1
13. Páda-d cited by Vij 3.219-20 — b) Ho Lo1 
iMd4 
Jm sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
Pu10 
— c)Tr2 
eBe2 wKt1 wKt6 Jo1 TMd4 
Tj1
Tr1 
;La> 
— d) sBe2
 
BKt5 wKt6
14. Cited by Apa 217, Dev 2.411; Mädh 1.52 — a) Pu5 Pu5 [but cor] Pu9 
Pu7
Pu9 
wKt6 
—a-b) La1 
— b) wKt3 
Hy 
— c)
Pu2 Pu4
 - 
Lo4 Lo5 
Tj2 
— d) Tj2 
. Mir3
15.Placed after 12 in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Hem 1.59; Laks 2.228 — a) iMd4
Lo4Laks 
oMd1 
Hy 
; cMy 
— b) xMd4 [om 
_ 
_ 
;
La1 [but corfh] 
Laks 
; TMd3 
Pu4 
Pu2 
— c) Be1 Jo2
wKt1 La1 Lo2xMd4 Ox3 NPu1 Pu3 Mir6 Laks 
' TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
oMd1
Pu2 Pu4 Mir4 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Ox2 Tj2 MÏr3 KM [but may simply be a gloss]
Mandlik KSS 
; Lo1 
— d) Be1 
Pu4 
; ßBe2 Lo1 Lo4 Pu8
wKt1 
Tr2 
NKt4 
TMd4 
sPu6 [but cor]
Tj1
 
TMd3 
Lo3 
oMy 
sPu6 [but cor]
16. Cited by Apa 217; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.219-20 — b) Pil Pu4 
sBe2 Be3
Ho Hy Lo1 [Jolly R] 
NPu1 
Lo4 
[ma 
] 
sOx1 
Tr2 
— c)
Kt2 
sKt5 wKt6 
" 
NKt4 
. Lo4 
wKt1 
Hy
TMd3 oMy 
Tj1 
Ox3 Pu'° 
— d) Ox2 Ox3 Pu10


--- PAGE 518 ---
Chapter 4
507
17.* c) Pu10
\pm
Pu9
Be1 BBe2 Be3 uCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1
Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo3 Lo5 oMd2 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 [but cor] Pu7 [me sh to] Pu8 Tr2 Mir3
Re Jolly KSS
Lo4
ma
Lo1
— d)Ho
Lo1
sKt5 wKt6
NPu1
Hy om
oMy
Pu10
18. a) Wa
oMd1 TMd3 Wa
— b) Pu4
Tr2
Be3 oMd5
— c) La1
Lo1
TMd3
: Pu'°
Pu4
Pu9
— d) oMd5
oMd' TMd3
Pu4
om
Kt2
19. Padas a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Dev 1.132, 2.448— a) TMd4
TMd3
sOx1 sPu6
TMd3 o My inTr3
— b)oMd' Ox3
TMd4
sB«? Jm sOx1 sPu6
Ti1 Tr1 Dev 1.132
Dev 2.448
TMd3 oMy
— c) Lo4 I
Bo
BBe2
Lo5
sOx1 sPu6
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
[Pu5
Ti'
Tr2
— d)Bo
oMd2
oMy MTr3
wKt6
20. a) oMd2
— c) Kt2
TMd4
Pu4 o m
— d)Tj'
TMd4
Pu2 Pu4
Bo
Additional verse in Ho Ox2 Mandlik
KSS:
c) Mandlik KSS
Ho
Ox2
— d)Ho
21. a) La1
and NKf
for
Pu4 om
wKt1 sKt5 wKt'Tj1
and wKt3
for
TMd3
— b) sOx1 sPu6 '
La1
— c) TMd3
Pu9 om
d)Bo
for
sPu6 [but cor]
22. Cited by Laks 3.150 — a) Pu5
Lo2
Pu9
Be3 TMd3 oMy
b) wKt3
Lo4
— c) TMd4
TMd3
oMy
d)Ho
NKt4 oMd5


--- PAGE 519 ---
508 
Chapter 4
23. Pâda s c-d omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 3.150-1 — a) oMy 
Pu2 om; 
Wa
Lo4Lo5 
— b)Pu4om 
...[233] 
[haplo]; Lo4 ma 
Be1 Lo2 Pu'° [Jolly M]
Bo 
— c) Lo5 
" 
Bo 
wKt1 
TMd4 
Lo4 
oMy
sKt5 
— d) Lo4 
NKt4 xMd3 
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
Ho NKt4
Lo3 Lo4 xMd4 NNg sOx1 Pu10 
oMy
24. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]; ma in Pu7; pâda s a-b omitted in Jm Pu'° ; päda s c-d omitted
in Tj1 and ma in Pu7. Cited by Laks 3.151 — a) Lo4 
cMd1 Tj ' 
; Lo2 Pu2 Pu4
[Pu4 
] — b) Ox3 
Bo Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 Re Jha Dave 
[Lo4 Lo5
]; Me gloss 
supports the latter reading; Kit Mr support 
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6
[sKt5 
]; T
j
1
; Lo2 Pu2 P
u
4
[
o
m 
\ — c ) sCa ßKt5 Lo3
sOx1 
Ho 
Laks 
La1 Mir4 
; Bo Ho " 
. Lo1 cMd1 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 
O x
2 — d ) s O x ' s P u 6 " 
TMd3 o M y L o
3
25. Pâda s a-b omitted in Tj1. Cited by Apa 217; Laks2.i2o; Dev 2.414 — a) Lo4 Lo5
Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
oMd5 
, wKt1
Tr1 
B e
3 - c) ApaNKt4 
Pu2 Tj1 cTlif; Tr1 
— d)
Ho TMd3 rMd4 NNg Pu3 MTr4MTr6 Laks 
Tr1 
Lo2 Pu7 
Pu5 
Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 
NKt4 MTr4 
MTr6
26.* Cited by Apa 217; Laks 2.120; Oev2.4l4 — a) Pu5om 
e B e
2 H o
T j 1 L o 2 P u 2 P u 4 
[Lo2 
;BKt 5Pu 5Pu 7Pu 9 
nBe2
Tr2 
Kt2 
— b)oMd' 
TMd3 
Hy 
Tj1
La1 
Tr2 
Lo1 
; Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
; sKt5 . 
, wK.t6
Apa [vi] 
Pu5 Pu9 
Lo3 ' 
. — c) La1
 TMd3 oMd1 oMy MÏr4 MTr6
[MTr6 damaged after 
]; Lo2 
, Jha Dave 
; Be3
uKt5 wKt6sOx' sPu6Tj' Tr2Apa
wKt1 La2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 ' 
[om 
|; sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd2 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 [folly
M3 N Ku] Mandlik KSS 
' [om 
]; Bo 
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
^; Ho Ox2 Pu8 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
" ., La1 NPu1 Tj1 Apa 
Ox2 ;
P u
4 L o
2 ~ 
" N
K
f
. Be1 B o [ B e 1 me 
J ; H o 
" ° ; NKt1
Lo4 
L o 5 ; T M d 3 o M y s O x ' sPu6[butcor]Jm NNg
27. Cited by Laks 2.120; £>ev2.4l6 — a) Bo Hlñk^l; Hy HlPlWI;wKt 3
Kt2 
Tr1 
BBe2 
Lo5 " 
- b) Pu2 Pu4
Pu2
Tj1
[om
]; TMd4 Laks Dev
[om
Be1


--- PAGE 520 ---
Chapter 4 
509
I
Lo2 
Ho NKt4 La1 cMd1 TMd4 cMd5 cMy Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4MTr6Wa
Tj1 
wKt1; 
NKt4 
oMy C 
xMd3 
oOr
om 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d)Be3 
«Kt6 
Be3Tj'
28. Padas c-d omitted in Tr2. Cited by Laksz.izi — a) Laks 
xMd3
oMd5 
Be1 
Lo5 
-b)TMd3 .„ 
. oMd5 Ox2 Tj1
Tr1 
. 
— c)Tj' 
xMd3 
„, 
— d)Tj' 
xMd3 oMy
Pu10 
Ho La1 Lo5 xMd3 Ox3 
_ 
oui "_ 
; wKt6 
;iMd4 
nKf
.Laks 
oMd'Tr1 
Pu4 
Lo2
29. Omitted in Lo3. Cited by Hem 1.677, 3/1-438 — a) ßKt5 NNg 
La1 oOr
Tj1 
. 
— b) M T r
3 H o 
— c) Jm 
NKt 4
— d) Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
. 
[Pu10
Lo4 
:]; wKt6 xMd3 Hem 3 / 1 . 4 3 8 » K l 4
30. Cited by Vij 1.130; Apa 170;päda s a and d cited by Vis 1.129 — a)NKt4
Be3 Bo Jo2 Kt2 BKt5 wKt6 Lo1 P 3 Ti ' Vij 
sOx1 sPu6 '. 
Lo2
— b) wKt6 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
GMy 
; o M d 5 x M d ;
Tr1 
Ho Lo1 Apa [ v i ] N K t
4 
Ho Kt2 Lo1 Lo4 xMd3 NNg
sPu6 Pu7 Apa 
Tr2 
.; xMd4 
; — c) sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Pu9 
" Be3 sKt5
Lo1 Lo4 ' 
o M d
1 N K t
4 ' x M d
4 
Bo 
— d) Pu5 
Bo
Apa'1
Hy gives the verses in the following order: 30, 32, 33, 31, 34.
31. Cited by Laks 4.61; Hem 3/1.382 — a) Lo2 
— b) oMd1 oMd5 MTr4 Mir6
[Jolly Nd Gr] N d Laks 
—
 c) Pu9 
  Pu4 om 
... [32)5] 
[haplo];
oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Laks 
—
 d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha
KSSDave 
sOx1 sPu6
32. Cited by Laks 3.208 — a)MTr6 
oMd1 
Tr2 
wKt1 [me
sOx1 sPu6 
oMy 
xMd4 Laks 
— c) xMd3 oMy 
oMd2
BBe2   
Bo 
Lo1 
oMd5Tr'MTr4MTr6Lafe 
—
xMd3 MTr3
xMd3 cMy
— c) Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
GMy
Lo1
Lo2
[Pu4
 Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
— b)sKt5wKt6
Tj1
Lo1
to]xMd3GMd5oMyoOrMTr4MTr6


--- PAGE 521 ---
510 
Chapter 4
d) Pu10 
. Mir6 
, wKt3 
Lo1 
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
; xMd3 
3 3 . Cited b y D e v 2.457— a ) NPu1 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
. o
O
r
L
o
2
— b) oMd1
HooMd'sOx1 Tj1 
— d)Pu 1 0 
oMd1 
o O r N P u
1
Tr2
34. Cited by Devz.^j; päda s c-d cited by Vij 1.131 — a)oMd' ; 
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4
[om |;Tj' 
Be1 
oMd1 
, Tj2 
Ho 
— b) ßKt5 wKt6 Lo4
OX3 Dev
35. a)oMd'TMd 3TMd 4oMd 5 
B o T j ' G o 
Be3 
; NNg
sKt5 wKt6 
" 
Mir3 
. Pu10 
— b) ^d3 oMy
;Lo3 
Tr1 
[Jolly Be] 
— c) Hy 
Be1 HosKt5 wKt6
aMd 5sOx'Pu'Pu 2Pu 3Pu 4sPu 6Pu 8[Jo//yN] 
_ 
Tj1^ 
— d)Tr'om
36. Cited by Vis 1.132; Vij 1.133; Apa 176 — a) wKl1 iMd4 
w K t
6 — b) Pu2
Pu4 
, T J 2 _ Pu5 
TMd3 
Pu4om 
. ..-[37b] 
— c)Tj'
[om ];wKt6 
Tr2 
— d ) M T r
4 P u
5 Pu7 Pu9 
Tj1 ; 
xMd3
oMd5 oMy
Additional verses in [7o//y Gr]:
Additonal verses in NPu1:
Wa
Lo2 Pu 2 Pu4
Pu5
— c) wKt3
Ho
Jo2
— c)Tj1
Bo
Lo4


--- PAGE 522 ---
37- Cited by Vij 1.135; Apa 180;Devi. 124— a)sOx'sPu6 
Pu10
Ho 
— b) TMd3 
Pu10 [Jolly M1'2] 
NKt4 Lo3 cMd ' oMd5 oMy Tj1
Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 KM Dave 
sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 
[Jolly M8"9] 
— c) sBe2 
iMd3
sPu6 [but cor] Tj ' Tr1 
Lo3 ; 
cMy 
xMd4 
oMd2 om 
wKt1
— d) Pu4 om 
TMd4 
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
Kt2 Dev 
Tj1
38.* Omitted in Tr1 ; placed after verse 57 in TMd3 oMy. Päda s c-d cited by Vij 1.135
—a) H
o
B
o 
wKt6Tj' 
Tr2 
Lo4 
Be1 
Pu7
Lo3 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 
. Lo2 TMd3 Ox3 Pu5 Pu9 
oMy 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
oOr
Lo3 
"" oMd5 
— c ) M T r
4 M T r
6 B B e
2 NKt4 oMd1 TMd3
oMd5 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4
oOr I 
Tr2 
— d) Be1 Bo HowKt1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo5
 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy NNg
oOr NPu1 Pu5 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M'-2'8-9 R] Me Rn Re Dave Jha 
MTr4 Mir6
oMy 
Ho cMy
39.Cited by Vij 1.133 ',Apa 1 7 6 — a ) T j ' T M d 3 o M y T M d
4 o M d
1
Lo1 
wKt1 
Vij 
Pu5 
Bo 
oMd1 
Kt2
— b)nKl?wKt6 
" 
Ox3 
Pu5 
T
r
2
—
c
)
A
p
a
—
d) TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
' 
TMd4 Tr1 
wKt1 wKt3 
" 
oMy Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
TMd4
40.Päda s a-b cited by Hem 3/3.726 — a) w K t
3 L o
4 sOx1 s P u
6 P u
5
TMd4 
Wa om 
— b) Bo TMd3 oMy 
— c) Pu4 
. MTr3
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Ox3 omPu5 Pu7 P u 9 " 
cMd1 sOx1 sPu6
41.Cited by Hem 3/3.726 — a) T r
1 w K t
1 Ox3 P u
1
0 — b) Bo Lo1
Tj2 
" NKt4 oMd1 TMd4 o
M
y
T
M
d
3 cMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
H o 
— c ) P u 2 P u 4 o M d 1 TMd3 oMy H
e
m
—
 d ) Tj1
Chapter 4
511
NPu1
NKt4
TMd3 oMy
Kt2
TMd4
Ox3
TMd4
[haplo]
[42d]
Ho Ox3 om
...
Be1
NPu1
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 523 ---
512 
Chapter 4
42.* Omitted by Nd; päda s a-c omitted in Ho Ox3. Cited by Laks 3.346;//em 3/3.726 —
a)sOx'sPu6 
NPu1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b)
oMd5 
_ 
-c) NKr4 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c,My Pif Pu4 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly M NdJLafa- Hem 
' [Lo5 
oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MÏr4
 MTr6
J; Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
sOx1 sPu6 
' " 
— d) Be1 sBe2 sCa Ho Jo2 Lo2 Lo5
oMd1 oMy Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr1 MÏr4MTr6 [Jolly G] 
NKt4 
, Hem
Lo4 
Pu10
43. Omitted by Nd. Cited by Vij 1.135; Apa 180; päda s a-b cited by WA 1.130 — b)
oMd'TMd3 oMyoOrTr'MTr4MTr6 
Ho Ox3 Tj1 
— c) TMd3 TMd4 Ox2 Tj1
Apa 
Lo4 
wKt6 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Jm ? 
oMy 
Laks 
Ho Jo2 La1 Lo3
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4
MTr6 Ox3 Wa Vij 
— d) sOx1 sPu6
MTr4 MTr6 
GMd5Tj' 
wKt6
44. Omitted by cMd1 xMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Nd. Cited by Apa 181 — a) NKt 4
Jo1 
Ox3 • 
Be1 Be3 Hy eKt5 wKt6 
Lo4 
Kt2 
— b)TMd4
NPu1
];Tjl;T 
Bo Apa 
Be31
 
__ 
and om 
Tr2 
Tj2
BKt5wKt6 
Hy 
Apa^Y—
 d) TMd4 [Jo//y Be]
Additional verse in Be1 Ho Tj ' Tr2 Mandlik \ 
J KSS:
a)Tr2 
Tj1 
— b) Ho
45. Omitted in Nd; placed after 46 in Bo; päda s a-b omitted in Pu'. Päda s c-d cited by
Dev 2.237; ApaiT) — a-b) TMd4 
—b) wKt1 sOx1 
Tr1
— c)Lo4 
— d ) B e ' i T M d 3 o M d 5 o O r M T r 3
Additonal half-verse in oMd5:
46. Omitted in oMd1 rMd3 cMy Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Nd; päda s c-d omitted inWa.
Cited by Apa 179;Dev 2.237—a) Tj2 
Ox3 
—b) Lo1 
TMd4
Lo2 
— c) Hy om 
Hy sKt5 wKt6 NNg 
Bo 
— d) Jo2 Lo3
— c) Lo3
 Jo2 Wa
[Wa


--- PAGE 524 ---
Chapter 4 
513
47. Omitted in oMd1 TMd3 cMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Nd; pâda s a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by
Apa 179; Dev 2.238 — a) xMd4 
Be3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— b) nKf eKt5
wKt6Ox3Pu104po 
Be3 
— c)sOx'sPu6' 
Pu10 
—
d) TMd4
Between pâda s a-b and c-d of verse 47 an additonal half-verse in oMd5:
[?]
48. ma in La1; omitted in Nd Re. Cited by Dev 2.238 — a) Bo NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 ;
MTr3 Dev 
—
 b) i
M
d
4
L
o
1 
oMd1 
Be1 Jm sKt5
wKt6 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 Wa [Jolly G] 
sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj '
Tr2 
NKf ' — 
c ) H
o
B
e
1
B
e
3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M ]
— d) TMd4
49.* Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 34 Laks 1.148; Dev 2.235 — a) Jm Jd Kt2
oMd2 MTr3 WaMandlik Jha KSS Dave 
P u
5 - b) NK.I4 om 
Jo1 K.t2 La3 oMd1
oMd2 Pu10 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
., Be1 Ho sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu8
Tr2 Dev Laks Apa 
oMd2 om 
Jm Jo1 Kt2 La3 Lo2 oMd1 oMd2 Tj1 MTr3Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
; oMd1 TMd3 cMy 
, TMd4 
Bo eCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 La2 Lo1 Lo3 NNg
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 Jolly _ 
.Lo2 cMd1 Laks 
Jha
Dave 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La2 La3 Lo5 oMd2 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
oMy has
only 
— c) sOx1 
w K t 1 T r 1 
B e
3 — d) MTr3 
NPu1
cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1 MTr3 Dev 
cMd5
50.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10; pâda- b omitted in Tr1. Cited by Dev2.236;Mâdh
1.210 —a) Tj1 
Pu2 
TMd4 
Bo 
B e
3 w K t
1
oMd1 _ 
— c) Pu4 om 
—
 d) Be3 La1 cMd1 
Dev
oOr' 
Pu3
51.* Me says that some omit this verse: 
Cited by Vis
1-133; Apa 34; Dev 2.236; Mädh 1.211 — a)sKt5 
, oOr 
" [om 
]; Kt2 om
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) TMd3 oMy 
oMd5 NNg Vis' 
—
 c)cMy
TMd3 
" 
" sCa o
m
P
u
1
0 
— d) Be1 Be3 Bo Ho Jm Jo2 wKt1
Kt2 BKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd ' oMd2 oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
Tr1 Tr2 Wa VaDh 6.13 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu10 
Be1 Be3 Bo Ho La1 La2
Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 Mandlik 
Wa 
Lo4 [Jolly M];


--- PAGE 525 ---
514 
Chapter 4
52.* Omitted in La2 Ox3 Pu 2 Pu10; placed after 48 in Lo1 Lo4 Là eKt5 wKt6 Pu4 Jha
possibly also by Me; päda s a-b omitted in Bo — a) Be1 ßBe2 Ho Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt> wKt6
La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5oMd' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2NPu' Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9
xMd3 sOx1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 Mir6 [folly G NI 
oMy
cMd1 TMd4 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G N] 
TMd3 
Lo4 
eBe2 Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt
4 Lo3 oMd2 oOr sPu6 Tj1 Mandlik KSS Dave [Jolly R]
wKt6
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 NPu
1 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M4 R Nd] Mandlik
KSS Dave 
sPu6 Tj1 
[sPu6co/-to 
]; Kt2 
Jo2 Wa 
NKt4
Lo4 oMd1 TMd4 oMy sPu6 [but cor] Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly Nd M'-2-8"9 ] 
[given as
päth a by Me Nâ and Ku, although rejected by Me; cf. VaDh 6.11]; TMd3 oMd5 oOr MTr6
oMd2 ' —
 d) sKt5 wKt6
53.Cited by Vij 1.137;Apa 181 — a) TMd3 oMy 
Pu9 _
_
— b) sOx1 sPu6
Pu9 
oMd!TMd3GMy 
cMd5 
oOr Pu8 
— c)wKt6
Ox3 
Lo1 
— d) Lo4 
Tj1 
wKt1 oOr 
Jo1
sBe2 
Pu10
54.Pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in MTr3. Cited by Vij \.\yj'Apa 181; Laks 2.407 — a)
Lo2 
N K t
4 — b) Lo4 Ox3 [Jolly M ] L a
1 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tj1
Tr1 MTr3
 MTr6' 
Wa 
Bo sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Nâ
c)Tj' 
Lo2 
;Laks 
—
 d) Lo1 Tj1 
wKt1 
; Tj2
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] Vij [vl as in ed] ! 
Jo2 
Tr2
55. Pâda- a cited by Vij 3.289— a) Be3 
oMd5 Tr1 
— b) NNg
;TMd 4 ; 
TMd3oMy 
T r
1 s K l
5 wKt6 
— c )
NKt
4 
Pu2 P u
4 B e
1 oMd2 T j 1 B e 1 Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 [folly R] 
ßKt5 ! B e
3 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
; NKt4
sOx1 sPu6 : 
sKt5 w K t 6 c M d 1 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tt4 
Pu5
Pu9 
Ox3 P u 1 0 , T M d 3 i s B e 2 
TMd4
56. a) wKt1 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 Tr1 
— b) Pu4 om 
oMd1 TMd3 
. oMy
Ho
— c) Be3
Pu4 om
BKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Tr2 [Jolly
ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jol J02 wKtl Kt2 wKt3 L()2 LQÎ Lo5 GM(Jl oM<f
  M 1-2-5-8-9]
Ho Lo1
 _ b)TMd4 ft5
Lo5 oMd2 NNg
Be3
Tji Tj2 Tri Tr2 MTr4


--- PAGE 526 ---
Chapter 4 
515
Tr2om 
— c)Tr' 
Pu4 
Pu10 
oMd5 
' — d) TMd3
oMy 
[TMd3 
La 1'" " 
Lo1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10 [Jolly MU2-g]
57.* Cited by Loks 2.4O5;pâda- b cited by Vij 1.136 — a) Jo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu™
 [Jolly M K] Jolly Dave Jha ' 
Wa 
xMd4
La1 r 
NNg 
; Ox3 
_ [broken]
TMd3 
; Be1 oOr sOx1 Pu5 Pu9 
Tr2 
Bo Ho wKt1 oMd1 Vij Mandlik
KSS 
Lo1 
Tj2 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2oMd2 rMd 3GMd 5 oMy Tr1
sCa Mir3 
Be1 ßBe2 Hy Jm Kt2 wKt3 oMd2 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Tj2 iviTr3
MTr4 Mandlik KSS 
—
 b) sCa Tr2 Vij Mandlik KSS 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Ho Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt^Kt4 La1 Lo1 oMd2 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2MTr3 [Jolly M3"4 G\Rn Nä
[pätha ] Rc Laks 
T; Jo2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 aMd' TMd4 NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6
Wa [Jolly Nd ] YDh 1.138T 
Bo— 
c) Be3 Bo NKt4 La1 oOr sOx1 sPu6
[La1 
];GMyPu 5Pu 7Pu 9 ; 
oOr 
TMd4
— d) TMd3 r,Md5 oMy Tr1 Mir4Mir6 T 
TMd4 
Jo1 
Ox3
Ho Lo4 Lo5
Additional verse in cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6; päda s a-b ¡n NPu1 [cf. GDh
9-53-5]:
a) oMd5 T
r
1
oMd 
. 
— d) MTr4
Additonal verse in Pu1; first verse in Be3 [after 58] Mandlik 
KSS:
58. a) Be3 Ho Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 TMd3 oMy Lo1 Lo4 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Rn
Jolly 
oOr 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' 
NKt4 
. .. wKt6 om 
. cMd5
cMd1 
- c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Pu5 
Tr2 
— d) wKt6 Tr2 
Pu2
Pu4 . , 
, oMd1 TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
; T j
1 ; oOr
59. a) Pu2 Pu4 
Lo3 
Tr1 
La1 
sBe2 Jo2
oOr 
oMd1 
NKt4 
Bo 
— b) Lo1 Lo4 Pu2 Tj1 
Bo
TMd3 
— c)BKt5wKt6 
Lo'corto 
TMd3 
MTr3
— c) NPu1
 — b) Be3
i. a-b) NPu1
— c ) T M d 3 M i r 6
— b ) T M d 4 
T M d 4


--- PAGE 527 ---
516 
Chapter 4
— d) sBe2 wKt3 Lo1 oOr 
oMd1 
MTr4 Mir6 
Jm '
60. Pâda s c-d omitted in cMd1; pada-d omitted in oMd2 — a) Bo NKt4 Lo1 xMd4
Be1 
Kt2 
BBe2
 BKt5 
— b) T j
1 o M d
5 T r 1 _
oMd1 
o M d 5 — c)Be 3HoTMd 3GMyPu 5Pu 7Pu 9 ] 
wKt6
MTr6 
" 
Wa 
— d)Tr2
61.* ma sh in La1; illegible in oMd1; päda s a-c omitted in oMd2; päda s c-d in Lo4. Cited
by Laks 2.338; Dev 1.20 — a) wKt6 Pu5 
ßKt5 
wKt6 
— b) wKt3
TMd4 
, sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] 
„ 
— c) Ho wKt3 xMd3 cMy oOr Tj2 MTr6 Laks
Be1 
sOx1 sPu6 
Jo2 wKt1 sKf wKt6 Lo1 Pu3 Tj1 
Wa
sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo5 xMd3 oMy Tf Tr1 [Jolly Nd] Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
O
x
3
B
e
3 
Ho Pu2 Pu4 
Dev
—
 d)nKt5 
Hy 
Tr2 
Tj1 
_ 
wKt3 
Ox3 Pu10 
sKt5
wKt6 
oMd5 Tr1 
oOr 
— oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 insert here verseyg ( MTr4 MTr6
give it also at its proper place).
62. Omitted in TMd4. Pada-c cited by Vij 3.289— a) La1 
Bo
Pu2 Pu4 
—
 b) wKt1 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
Tj1 Tr1 
Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 MTr4 [Jolly G] 
, Lo4 
— d) Ti2 
Be5
NKt4 
Lo4 
Pu2 Pu4
63. Omitted in xMd4. Cited by Apa 182 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 
rMd3 oMy
— c) Ho 
H y w K t
1 
Be1 Lo1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu9 Tr2 [Jolly R Nd] Apa
BBe2 
Ox3 Jolly 
Bo wKt1 oOr sOx1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly G] 
— d) Lo1
GMd5 Tr2 
64. Cited by Apa 182; Laks 2.400 — a) Bo Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4
sPu6 Pu10 Apa Dave Jha 
Jolly 
rMd4
Jo2 , 
Be3 
wKt3 
Tr2
oOr
 
BBe2 
_ 
— c) rMd4 
. Tr2 
Hy
om 
Ho 
Be3NPu' 
NKt4 
Tr 1. 
— d) iMd4
oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[Tr '
M
T
r
6 
; Ho Lo2 NPu1 Apa
Pu2 
, Tj1 
M/fpätha ] 
[ace. to J o l l y N d 
sOx1 [but
ßKt5
Apa [vi]
Apa
Laks
Tj1


--- PAGE 528 ---
Chapter 4 
517
me} 
sPu6 [but cor] 
NKt4 
Tj1 
Lo2 
Lo4
[Jolly M3-4] 
Ox3 Pu10 [70//V Me M4-8-9] 
[Jo//y M1] 
[Jolly M2"5]
[Jo//y Gr] 
K;£>/z 71.57 /1/ra '
65. a)Tj'=T 
TMd3 = H y K t
2 ' 
L o
3 T r
1 
. — b) Kt 2 Lo1
[but cor} NPu1 Mir6 
— c) oMy 
. oMd5 ' 
oOr 
— d) sBe2
NNg 
Ox2 
cMd5
Additional verse in oOr:
66. Pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in Jo2 Lo3NNg Pu2 Wa; päda s c-d omitted in Pu4 —
a)sOx'sPu6 
NNg 
oOrPu4ow 
Pu2 
La1 
Be3 Tj1 
— b) Kt2
Tr2 
MTr6; 
NPu1 
— d) Lo1 
meto 
Be3
NPu1
67.Cited by Apa 173; Laks 2.358 — a) T M d
4 w K t
1 Tj1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Lo1 
Tj2 
NKt4 
— b) Tr1 Apa 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Lo5 ' 
NPu1 om 
Lo4 ma 
NPu1 
Laks < 
— c) oMy
Pu10 
B
e
3
L
a
1 Pu2 P
u
4
; Lo1 
— d ) Laks
¡uBíLo 4 
¡Tj1 
•Mir"'Apa 
Tr2
 
•
Pu7 Pu9' 
P u
5 B e
1 ' 
L
o
1
w
K
t
1 wKt6
 
TMd3
oOr
6 8 . a ) T j 1
MTr6 
_ 
— c)sKt5 
sPu6corto 
oOr 
HowKt1 
—
d) Be3 TMd3 
sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Ox3 Pu10 Me Dave Jha [Jolly M] ! 
Mr
Tj ' 
— here oMd5 inserts verse 4.140.
69. Cited by Apa 183; Laks 2.40^2 —
 a) MTr6 
, At1 
T; Lo1 
Be3 Lo4
[cor to] Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Apa 
Pu4 om 
... [6gb] 
sOx1 
wKt1
wKt3 
BBe2 Be3 Lo4 [cor to] Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr6 Apa 
_ 
Tj1 
Lo1
— b) NKt4 La1 Lo2 ' 
Pu2 
. Be1 Bo Ho Lo4 Tr2 
wKt1 
Tj1 
— c) Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 om
Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Lo3'
Pu8
Hy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Ox3 Pu3 Pu4 MTr3 Wa
H o L a 1 P u 5 P u 7 P u 9
B e 3 B o
 W a
— b ) M T r 4


--- PAGE 529 ---
518 
Chapter 4
Additional half-verse after pada-b in La1 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS:
70.* Pâda s c-d omitted in oOr, and pada-d in wTr4 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 183; Laks 2.402
— a) Be3 
; oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
Jo1 Kt2 Tr2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Laks 
Jm 
Hy
Kt2 Apa ^ 
— b) cMy 
Ho NNg MTr4MTr6 
— c) Ho
[typo?]; TMd3 oMd5 oMyTr1 MTr6 
Tj1: 
sBe2 
Tr2 '
Kt2 
';wKt 6
71. Omitted in oOr MTr4. Cited by Apa 183, 253; Laksz.402—a) Laks 
Pu2
Pu4 
Pu8 
Jo1 
— b)Pu 4om : 
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu9
72. Omitted in oOr; päda- a omitted in MTr4. Pâda s c-d cited by Apa 173 — a) oMy
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 Wa KSS 
oMd5 
Jo2 wKt6 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Wa [Jolly R] 
Bo 
Hy— 
b) Tj1 
— c) Pu3 Pu8
Lo3 
Jo2 
La1 om 
wKt1 
Ox2 
sOx1
sPu6 
; x M d
4 — d)Ox2/ípaírft^ ; Ho Jo2 Lo3 sKl? wKt6 [Jo//y R] 
Ho
om 
'... [73d]
73. Pâda s c-d ma sh in Pu9. Cited by Laks 2.370; päda s a-b cited by Apa 184 — a) Lo4
Ox3 Pu10 
Tj2 
Be3 TMd4 om 
; sCa Lo4 Lo5 rMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
Tj1 
M T r
4 L o
4 L o
5 L a k s 
—
 b)
TMd3 
Bo sCa wKt' Tj1 Laks 
Apa 
; Mandlik Jha Dave 
[separated
without sandhi of 
K t
2 M e Ku Go s u p p o r t — c) NKt4 om 
TMd3 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
74.* Pada-d omitted in Tr1 [haplo] — a) Tj1 
TMd3 
Jha Dave
La1 
sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 sPu6 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly M] Mandlik Jha
KSS Dave 
— b ) H
y
— c ) sBe2 NKf
4 o O r T j
2 L o
4 
Lo5 
—
d)Bo 
r M d 4 . L o - ' P u 1 0 
— Pu9 repeats here 73c-d.
Laks
— d) Laks
Laks
Lo2
wKt6
Tj1
[haplo]; Pu5 Pu7 Pu9'
-d)Pu4om
— c)Tj1


--- PAGE 530 ---
Chapter 4 
519
75.* Omitted in Tr1 — a) La1 [Jolly N Nd] ViDh 68.29 
oMd5 
— b) NKt4
Tj1 
. Be1 sBe2 Bo eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 Pu8 Tj2
MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be3 
Lo" Los 
— d) La1
Bo 
L o
1 L o
4 
NKf oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy MTr4 [Jolly Gr] 
oOr
76. Päda s a-b ma in Lo4; pada-a omitted in Tr1 — a) wKt1 
iMd4 ... — b) Be1
Be3wKtITMd3oMd5oMyTj'Tr1[Jo/fyGr] 
Ox2 Tr2 
oMd1
xMd4 
— c)TMd4
 
NNgPu2Pu4 
— d)Hy 
Be1 Be3
Lo4 Lo5
77. Omitted in Pu5 — a) Ho 
Jm ' 
— a-b) oMy
— b)!]1 
— c)Lo3 
Jo2 
Ox2Wa 
—
78. Cited by Apa 183—a) Ox2 
oMy 
TMd3 oMyApa 
—b)
Ho 
Pu8 
La1 
NPu1 
; Lo2 Lo4 oM d1 Ox3
TMd4 
MTr' 
— c) Be1 Be3 Ho wKt3 wKt6 Lo1 Pu8 Tr2
[all except Ho om 
Be1 
, Ho T 
Tj1 
_
[
o
m
];NKt4BKt5 Lo4 NNg Ox3 Pu7 Pu10/fpa [vl] 
rMd4 
TMd3 
TMd4 
— d)
Lo1 
Be1 
Ho
79. Cited by Apa 182 — a) Jo2 wKt6 Lo4 Ox3 NPu1 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly M] 
oOr
Lo3 NNg Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Ho TMd4 [Jolly R] 
Wa Apa
—
 b) sKf wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 TMd4 oMd5 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Ox3 Tr1 MTr6 Apa 
; TMd3
oMy = 
_ 
Kt2 
Ho wKt1 wKt6 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G M3] 
sBe2 Lo4
oOr 
" [see io.i8b note] — c) Bo NKf 
; Be3 Ho La1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Pu9
wKt3 ' 
Pu2 P
u
4
T
r
2 
— d) oMy 
wKt3
; P u
2 P u
4 B e
1 
. NKt4 cMd1 oMy NNgTr1
Additional verse in NPu1 Mandlik p] KSS:
d) Mandlik KSS
Hy
Jo1
Jo1
wKt6
d)Be3wKt3


--- PAGE 531 ---
520 
Chapter 4
80. Pâda s c-d omitted by Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apaioqo; Laks 2.380; pâda s a-b cited by
Apa 187,220; pâda s c-d by Vij 3.262 — a) Pu4 
Pu2 
— b) Lo4 Lo5 °?fr%H~ ; wKt1
Lo4Lo5 
Tj1 
TMd4 
— c)Tj2; 
" La ' Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M3~
4~5] 
B o A p a 
—
 à) Laks''' N P u
1 s K t
5 wKt6 ej^HlR"; Vij
Bo 
wKt6
Additional half-verse in Be3 Lo1 Mandlik
81. Cited by Apa 220; Laks 2.380 — a) Pu4 o m 
Tr2
oOr 
La1 
Lo4 
— b) La1
Bo MTr4 
Lo3 [Jolly R
]
B
e
3 Tr1 • 
xMd3 cMy
oMd1 
BKt5 
— c) Tj2 
(om cW:); oOr
H o Ox3 
P u
2 [ o m 
] ; Pu4 
[om]; O
x
2
s
K
t
5 wKt6 
—
d) La1 NNg Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
Be3 Bo wKt3 NKf Lo1 Lo2 iMd3
TMd4 MTr6 Laks Apa
82. Cited by Apa 183 — a) oMd ' 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be1 nBe2 Be3
Ho Hy Jm Jo ' La1 NKt4 Tj ' Tj2 {Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— c) NKt4
[Pu4 
]; Kt2
83.* Cited by Apa 183; Laks 3.85; Hem 3/2.910 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
B e 1 . ^, oMd1
oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 
TMd3 
Tj1 
Tj2 
Kt2 
O x
3 L a
1
TMd3oMy 
Tr2 
" — b) Jo2 Lo3 Wa [Jolly R] 
TMd3
oMd5 cMy sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 Apa 
ßKt5 wKt6 
sCa [but
cor] 
— c) sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt
4 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 rMd4 oOr Ox2 Ox3
Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
— d) wKt6
Tj ' 
sOx1 
oOr 
Be3 Bo sCa Ho Lo2 TMd3 oMy NNg Ox2 NPu
1 Pu8
Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Apa ' 
NKt4 o
M
d
5
O
x
3
84. Cited by Laks 2.234 — b) Ho iMd3 oMy Tj1 Tj2 
La1 NPu
1 Tj1
NKf 
NKf'NPu'Tj1 
Lo4L(f 
H y ß K l
5 wKt6
Lo1 
B
e
1
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
TMd4 
TMd3
Apa
— c-d) TMd3
— d) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu4
Pu2
— c)BBe2Jo1wKt1BKt5oMd2
Tr2
oMy


--- PAGE 532 ---
Chapter 4 
521
wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 
Hy Tj2 
oOr 
eCa Ho oMd2 cMd5 Tr1 Tr2 
Lo4
wKt3 Tr2 
B e
3 B e
1
85.* Omitted in Pu8. Cited by Laks 2.234 — a) ßBt? Jo1 wKt1 sKl5 wKt6 oMd2 Tr2
Tj1 
Ho Lo3 TMd3 Tr1 T r
2 o M d
1 La1 
Be3 oMd5 oMy
MTr4 MTr6 
— b) Be3 La1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Tr2 
, Ho Tj1 MTr6 
Lo1
Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
o M y — c) xMd3 oMd 5 Tj1 Tr1
oMy MTr6 
; ßCa 
, Be1 ßBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 oMd2 oOr
MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
NPu1 
oMd5 
Pu7 MTr4MTr6
Tj2 
— d)Waom 
" 
[haplo] ; Bo MTr4 
Be1 aCa Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2
wKt3 Lo1 Lo5 oMd2 Tj2
 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sBe2
86.Omitted in oMy. Cited by Apa i8s;Laks 2.234 — a) Jo1 wKt1 eKt5 wKt6 oOr
rMd4 
;Ho 
— b)oOr 
Kt2
 BKt5 wKt6 
Ho oOr 
Tj1 
— c)
Tj1 Tr2 _ 
.Ho 
TMd3 
Be3 
Ho Jo2 Tj1 
— d)oMd'
TMd3 
"jNKfPu 1 0
Additional verse in oMd5 [Jolly Gr]:
b) [Jolly Gr] 
— d) oMd5
87.Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234;£>ev 2.461 — a) O x 3 o M d 1 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj1
— 
tyoMyMTr3 
Tr1 
Bo 
— c)Tj 2om 
Bo
[ o m t f ] ; H y
! 
¡Pu9 
Tj2 
Ho 
Tj1 
— d) Be1 Ox3
BoTMd4oOrTj' 
Hy
88. In place of 88 Jm repeats verse 87. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234; Dev 2.461 — a)
sBe2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo2 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
sBe2 Ho wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 La ' Lo2 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' Tr2 
— b) Wa
sOx1 sPu6 
T j
2 T M d
3 
— c ) o
M
y
— d ) NPu1
89. Pâda s c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234; Dev 2.461 — a) TMd4 Pu5
Pu9 
rMd3 oMy Ox3 
oMd5 
Hy 
Ho 
Lo3 Ox2 Tr1 MTr3
Wa 
TMd 4Tj'^pa" 
Lo4 
oMd1 
— b) Be3 Bo Ho oMd1 Pu3 Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Apa 
Lo1 
NKt4 
NNg 
Wa om 
wKt3


--- PAGE 533 ---
522 
Chapter 4
Ho 
Pu4 om 
— c) Be1 
Be3 Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 La ' oMd2 Tj '
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu7 Pu9 
Pu5 
Ox2 
Hy 
Jm
Pu2 Pu4 
Ho 
— d)oMd' 
wKt6 
Be1 
; wKt1
Pu'Tj2 
rMd3
90.* Pâda s a-b except 
omitted in Wa. Cited by Apa í8s;Laks 2.235; Dev 2.461 — a)
Tr2
La1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
MTr4 
[om 
}; Be1 Bo Lo1 NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7
Pu? [Jolly G]' 
[Jolly Na] 
Apa \Jolly M'-2-5'8-9] 
Lo2 
Tj1
 
o 
,
sKt5 
wKt6 
Be3 
similar variants in ViDh 43.17 — b) sPu6 
me sh
to 
sOx1 
MTr4 
oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 
NNg
wKt3 NlCf Lo2 Lo3 Tr2 
[Jolly R ] A p a 
[vUKHrií] ; Be3 
Hy
Jo1 
— c)BoTr2 
Be1 Bo Ho La2 Wa Dev [vi] 
— d)oMd2
Be1 Bo La2 Lo1 Ox2 Wa Laks 
T j
1 s K t
5 
wKt6 
NKf
TMd3 olvld5 olvly Tr1 MTr4 
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 oMd2 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3
[Jolly RJDev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
~ La1 o
O
r
H
o 
Ox3 Pu10
[Jo/fyM1^4-5-8-9] 
Dev [vi]
91. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234; Dev 2.461 — a) MTr4 MTr6 
, oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMyTr'Wa 
oMd5 
sOx1 sPu6 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
Be1
La1 
— c ) Pu4 o m , 
wKt3
Additional verse in Pu':
Additional verses in La1 [apparently many mistakes here]:
92. Cited by Apa 158; Dev 2.234 — a) Lo4 Ox3 
Dev 
Ox3
[but 5T deleted] — b) Tj ' Tr2 
W a T M d
4 i
w
K
t
3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Ox2
Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Dev Apa 
wKt6 Lo4 L o 5 _ 
Lo1 Pu2 Tr1 
— c) oMd5
 Be3 Bo
Hy Jo1 wKt1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
La1 N?U'Jm
sOx1 Tr2
Ho
Pu10
Hy
Tr1
rMd3
oMd5 oMy
Lo3
sOx1 sPu6
Apa[vI]
and
TMd3
Pu10
[Jolly G]
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
—
Lo1
Pu4 om
— d) sBe2
 c-d) La1


--- PAGE 534 ---
Chapter 4 
523
93. Omitted in Tj2 — a) sBe2 
— b) Be1 
— c) Ho 
NKt4 
Lo4
oMd5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Bo 
oMy 
— d) Be3 Bo NKt4 La1 sOx1
Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Wa Me 
sOx1 s P u 6 o M d 2 
Bo Lo1 oOr
NKt4 
ßBe2 
Tr1
94.* Omitted in Tj2 — a) xMd4 
NKt4 
La1 
— b) NNg
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 [Jolly G Nd] Jolly 
W
a
L
o
2 oMd1 xMd3 xMd4 MTr4
Mir6 
— c) Kt2 xMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
La1 
NPu1 Tj ' Wa 
xMd4 :
xMd3 
Be3 
La1
95. Cited by Vij 1.142; Apai86; Hem 3/3.396; Dev 1.147;Mäd h 1.517 — a) Pu7 ma
Pu9 om 
BosKt5 wKt6 oMd1 oMd5 oMy Hem 
Lo3 
H y L o
3
TMd3 oMy Tr1 
Be1 
NKt4 
. Wa 
Tr2 
xMd3 oMy
— d)Ho 
xMd4 
oMd5
96. Cited by Vij 1.143; Apa 186; Dev 1.147; M äd h 1.520— a) oOr 
sOx1 Ox2 Pu3
sPu6Pu8 
NKt4 
sOx'sPuf 
Be3 
— c) Lo1 
xMd4
oMd5 
Lo2Pu3 
— d)Pu5 
wKt1 
Tr2 
" Lo1 
Ho
97. Omitted in xMd3. Cited by Apa 187; Hem 3/3.761; Devi.i54 —
 a) Be1 Jo2 Tj1 Wa
—
 b) Wa 
Mir6 
Lo4 Ox3 
Apa 
Be3 
wKt1
Be1 
— c)Pu 2Pu 4 
x M d
4 O x
3 
T j
1 — d) Be3 xMd4 Pu8 D e v
Hem 
' Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd 2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMy NPu1
oOrTj2 
" wKt6
98. Omitted in sOx1 NKt 4 sPu6; päda s c-d omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa 186; Dev
1.148; Mädh 1.520— a) Apa Mädh 
— a-b) oMd1
— b) oMy 
Tr2 
" 
Be3 ßKt5 wKt6 
Tr1 
— c) Mädh •
Apa 
Be1 sBe2 (ma) Be3 Bo sCa Jo2 wKt1 La1 oMd1 NNg Ox3 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5Pu7Pu9Pul°Tj'Tr 2Wa[Jo//>'M1-2-9]Z)evCoA:K 
— d) xMd3 oMy 
— c) cMd1
La1
Be3
— b) BBe2
TMd3


--- PAGE 535 ---
524 
Chapter 4
Pu2 Pu" 
BBe2 Bo sCa Ho La1 Lo3 Lo5 oOr NPu' Pu9 Tr2 Go 
J; Ox2
oMd1 
Me Ku Rc support thé plural
09. Omitted in Pu9; ma in Pu7. Cited by Laks 1.158;Dev 1.137; Mädh 1.144 — a) Laks
Hy 
Pu2 P
u
4
T
r
2 
— b) Laks 
—
 c) NKt4
[ow; ];HoKt2Lo4Ox3 " 
tdCf 
— d)TMd4 
Hy
100. b)rMd3 
Pu2 P u
4 s K t
5 
TMd3Tr' 
_ 
xMd4 
Pu8
— c)Tj'Tr 2 
NNg 
wKt6 
Pu10 
_ 
— d) Bo 
Be1
Tr1 
101.sOx' sPu6 transpose päda s a-b and c-d. Cited by Hem 3/3.776 — a) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
TMd3 
Pu5 
— b) Tr1 
x M d
4 T r
2
wKt1 wKt3 
— c)TMd 3oMy 
" 
Pu4 o m r . . .
;wKt' om 
ßKt5 wKt6 sOx1 sPu6 
Pu8 =T; oMd1
102. Pâda s a-b cited by Har-A 1.11.8 — a) Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly GN]
NPu1 
Lo3 
. TMd4 
sKt5 wKt6 Mir3 
Be3 
— b) sBe2 Be3 Bo eCa Ho
Hy wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo4 oMd2 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
—
c)MTr4MTrÉ 
Pu10 
TMd4 
Tj1 
NKt4 
Lo3 
— d)
103. Cited by Hem 3/3.761; Dev 1.149 — a) Tj1 
Lo3 
T r 2 s K t 5
wKt6 
— b)Pu10 
Hem 
Tr2 ¡ 
sKt5 cMd1 Tr1 
— c) Ho
Lo1 NNg Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 [but cor] Tj ' Tr1 
wKt3
104. Cited by Dev 1.1491 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 Wa 
TMd3 o My Dev
Tj1 
Lo2 
TMd3 
wKt1 
Be3
Kt2oOr" 
.oMyom 
— b ) TMd3 oMd5 
L
o
1
—
c) Bo Lo4 Pu7 
TMd3 oMy M
i
r
6
— d) oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 [but cor} 
Kt2
Wa 
o M d 1 w K t 3 
. B e
3 ; Dev [vl] 
[but Dev's com. reads
TMd3 oMy 
_ 
La1 Lo4 
sOx1 sPu6 [but c
o
r
}
P
u
2 Pu4 
ßKt5
wKt6
Pu2 Pu4
Mir4 Mir6
BCa


--- PAGE 536 ---
Chapter 4 
525
105. Cited by Apai88; Dev 1.151 — a) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 
, NNg M i r
3 — b)
Apa 
TMd4 [but me] 
MTr3 : 
— c) Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 
Lo 3 
N N g c o r f l i to 
Lo2 
wKt1 Pu5 Pu7
TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) wKt6 
, wKt1 
Lo4
106. Pu9 omits the section 4.106-5.37 although the page sequence in the ms. continues.
Cited by Hem 3/3.763; Dev 1.150 — a) Ho isKt5 wKt6 oMd1 
— b) He 
Be1 Be3
Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 La1 La2 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj ' Tr2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
NKt4
MTr4 
— c) Bo 
— d) GMd1 oMd5 Tr1 MTr6Me [pâtha ] Nd Ku [pathaj
HyLo4Lo5oOrOx3Pu10 
Tj1 
Lo4 Lo5 
Jm 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy
107. Cited by Hem 3/3.770; Dev 1.161 — b) MTr3 
— c) TMd4 
Bo Ho Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 Lo5 oMd2 NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10
 MTr3 [Jolly M3 Ku ] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Pu2 Pu4 
— d)Tj' 
Tj2 
aMdsoOrHem 
; sKt5
wKt6 TMd4 Dev Hem 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS
108. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Dev 1.162 — a) TMd4 
Be3 wKt1 NKt 4 Lo2 Lo3
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu3 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
" L o
1 H y
wKt6 
— b) Lo2 
Tr1 
Lo5 
— c) NKt4 
. Wa 
oMy
sOx1 sPu6 
Lo1 
, Pu8 
NKt4 
Lo5 
Lo4 
— d) Tj2
Lo4 Lo5 ' 
; L a
1 s K t
5 wKt6 Lo1
109. Cited by Hem 3/3.773; Dev 1.163 — a) Me [pätha l 
Be3 Ho Lo1 
La1
NPu1 
Tj1
 
• 
Ox3 Pu10 
sKt5 wKt6 
Tr2 Hem 
NPu1
— b) La1 
wKt1 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 [cor to] Pu10
[sOx1 sPu6 (cor to) 
wKt3 nKl4 Lo2 NNg Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[Lo2
Tr1 
NKt4 
NNg MTr4 M T r 6 ] ; Hem 
TMd4 oOr
[oOr' 
JjBKt 5 
w
K
t
6
— c ) Dev 
Pu4 o m . . .
Bo NKt4 La1 Lo2 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 
TMd3 
Tj2 
Lo3 Wa
Hem 
— d) oOr
no. Cited by Vij 1.146,190; ^paigo; Hem 3/3.756; Devi. 153 — a) La1 
Hy


--- PAGE 537 ---
526 
Chapter 4
oMd5 
Bo 
Ho 
— b) Pu3 Pu8 Jha Dave ' 
Pu2 Pu4
[Pu2om 
];wKt6 
Lo" Lo5 [but cor] 
—
 c) Pu2 Pu4 
Ox2
111. Cited by Apa 190; Har-A 1.10.28; Hem 3/3.756 — a) Tr2 
; NPu'
Pu2Pu4Tj2 
La1 
Tj1 
Hem 
NKt4 
' —
b) sOx1 sPu6 
sBe2 Be3 Tj1 
Lo: " " 
aMd 5 Tr1
 MTr4 [Jolly Gr]
oMd1 
TMd4 MTr6 " " 
NKt4 
Be1 me to 
sPu6 [but
cor] 
—
 c) Lo5 
Lo4 
; TMd3 oMy 
Ho 
Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 
Mir4 Mir6 
-d)Be3 
wKt3 Tr2
112. Cited by Vij i.i5i;Hem 3/3.772; Dev 1.162 — a) Ho 
Bö Lo4 T j
1 — b)
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4 MTr6 
TMd3 
Ox3 
MTr3 
Lo4 Lo5
Bo Jo2cMy Pu l oTj' 
B
e
1
, H y 
TMd4 
" 
wKt1
Ox3 
Lo3 
NKr4 
;xMd3 
— c) Lo4 Lo5 ; 
Ho
Tj1 
; H o - d ) s O x ' s P u 6 
Hy 
ßBe2
Lo4sPu6Tj'
113. Cited by Dev 1.159; päda s a-b cited by Hem 3/3.769 — a) Lo3 
NPu1
ßBe2 Bo sCa Jm Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 iMd3 cMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6
Pu10 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Tj1 
MTr6 
, MTr4 
— b) oMd1 rMd3 rMd4
oMy Mir6Hem Dev '• 
—
 c) Be1 s O x
1 o M d
1 oOr 
— d) ßKt5
NNg 
Lo3 
Be1 wKt1 Lo4 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 
, ßCa sKt5 wKt6
114. Cited by Hem 3/3.755; Dev 1.152 — a) oMd1 
Hy TMd3
— c) Jo1 
Tr1 Hern 
sKt5 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 
Ox3 
Pu10
Jo2 
; L o
3 B K . t
5 wKt6 NNg 
Lo2 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
sPu6[co/-to]Tj' " 
Ho La1 TMd4 Ox3 Pu10 
Tr2 
M T r 6 N K l 4
TMd3 oMy Tr1 
— d) rMd4
115. Cited by Dev 1.163; pâda- a cited by Apa 191 — a) sBe2 Be3 ßCa Ho wKt1 Kt2 NKt4
tsKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 oMd2 oOr NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Jolly 
O x 3 N K t 4 
TMd3
Tr1 
— b)TMd4 
oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 
rMd3 cMy
Be1 
w K t 3 o M d 2 ' — 
c ) Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 o m 
sKt5 wKt6
Ho
—d)Hem


--- PAGE 538 ---
Chapter 4 
527
[sKt5 ma 
TMd3 oMy 
Bo 
Be3 xMd4 Ox2 Pu7 [me to] Tr1 Tr2 
NPu1
Tj1 
Pu10 
— d)wKt3 
, 
¡NKfOx3 
Lo3' 
oMd2 
Ox3 om
BK^wKt6 
Ho
116. Pu2 transposes päda s a-b and c-d. Cited by Hem 3/3.771; Dev 1.160 — a) cMy
Lo4 
— b) BCa wKt6 H
e
m
B
e
1 Jo2 La1 Lo3 oMd 2 TMd3 xMd4
oMd5 oMy oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [folly R] 
— c) Lo1 
TMd4
— d)Ho 
oOr 
[om ]; Lo4 Lo5 Pu10 [Jolly M]
117. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Hem 3/3.757 — a) Pu10 Tr1 
— c) wKt6
Pu5 Pu7 
. o M d
1 o O r 
T
r
1
L
a
1 
oMd5
sKt5 wKt6 om 
MTr4
118. Cited by Apa 188; Hem 3/3.762; Dev 1.150; Madh 1.148 — a) oOr
Lo1 
___ 
Lo 3oMd'iMd 3oMd sGMy : 
Tj1 
La1 
^ 
sBe2 Tr1
Hem 
xMd4 NNg 
TMd3 
Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 ^T — b) cMd1 
Hy
Hem 
, HoLo3Ox3[yo//yM'-2-9R]Maí á 
oMd2 
wKt1 
— c)
NPu1 Tj1 Tr2 
wKt1 ; 
Lo1 
— d) Be3 Hem 
MTr4 MTr6
Mädh
119. Päda s c-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Hem 3/3.760-1;Dev 1.154 — a) Lo1 Ox3
— b) Jm Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha Dave 
oMy Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
La1
— c) MTr6 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
, BKt5 wKt6 
Be1 Bo TMd3 oMd5
N N g 
T M d
4 c M y 
H o
120. Cited by Hem 3/3.772; Dev 1.162 — a) oMy oOr; 
La1 ; 
; Ho
NKf 
BBe2 [to cor] Hy 
Pu8 
— b) Pu2 Tj1 
MTr6 T 
—
c)Tj' 
oMd1 
cMd5 
T r
1 w K t
6 
— d) MTr6 
Ox3
Pu' 0; 
,wKt6 
¡BBe2 
Tj1 
Tr1 [but corfli] 
oMd1
Additional verse in La1:
Ho
 — d) Hem
oMd1
wKt1


--- PAGE 539 ---
528 
Chapter 4
g) La1 
and omits rest; the two verses are versions of BDh 4.1.18 20.
121. Päda s a-b omitted in MTr4. Cited by Hem3/3.773; Dev 1.163 — a) La'ora
Tj' : 
wKt3 Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
La1 
— b) Be1 
Be3 wKt3
sKt5 wKt6 La1 oOr [but mcfli] 
La1 om second 
— c) xMd3 
Lo2
oOr 
MTr6 
-d)wKt' 
" 
" wKt3 
Be1 
Be3 Bo Ho Kt2
BKt5 wKt6 Lo1 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly R] Dev 
' 
Jo1 
Lo3 Ox2 MTr3
sOx1
 __ 
me to 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M Me] 
Pu5 P u 7 [ J o l l y G]
122. Cited by Hem 3/3.774; Dev 1.164 — a) Tr1 
wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 Pu5 Tj1
_~;oM(f MTr4MTr6 
H o 
La1 
wKt3 P u
1
0 [ f o l l y
M] 
_ 
— b) GMd1 
, Lo2 xMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6Hem 
[Lo2 
oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Hem 
];
TMd 4oOrNPu'- 
Lo4 
Lo1 
" Bo 
nKf Tr2
Lo5 
_ — c) GMd1 
xMd3 
sBe2 Be3 wKt3
NKt4 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1 
Be3 Ho 
NKt4 Lo4 Lo5
Jm Ox3 
— c-d) Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 
__ 
Be3
— d) Ox3 Pu10 
; Lo4 
Lo5 
Ho Lo3 
sBe2
oOrom 
NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 
Hy 
Ox2 Pu8
123.* Cited by Dev 1.160; pâda s a-b cited by Hem 3/3.768 — a) Tj1 
sKt5
wKt6 Lo4 oMd1 oMd5 Ox3 
sKt5 wKt6 MTr4 
[wKt6 
]; Lo2 xMd3
Lo2NKf 
Lo3 
Dev 
xMd3 
Tr1 
;— b) sOx1 
La1
— c)Tr' 
L o
1 s K t
5 w K t
6 
cMd1
sOx1 sPu6 
NPu 1' 
Jm Jo1 Kt 2sKt 5 wKt6 oMd2 Tj2
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
< 
' Be1 sCa Hy wKt1 cMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg
oOrMTr4MTr6: 
Pu4 
P u
2 \ c o r to 
];NK.f 
Lo4
Lo5 
' — d)xMd 4
NNg'
124. Cited by Dev 1.160 — a) BKt5 
wKt6 oOr 
Be3 NKt4 Lo2 xMd3 xMd4
GMyNNgOx 3Pu 5Pu 7Pu 1 0Tj 1Tr'Tr 2 
Lo1 
— b) Be3 Lo3 Tj1 Wa 
oMd2
— c) xMd4 
Pu5 
. sOx1 sPu6 _ 
xMd3 xMd4
125. a) oMd' xMd3 xMd4 oMy 
cMd5 Tr1 
Tr2 
Bo


--- PAGE 540 ---
Chapter 4 
529
xMd3 
— c) Jm Jo1 Kt2 Mir3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu4
xMd4 
Be3 
, NKt4 
Pu10 
. Lo5
126.Omitted in Lo3. Cited by Hem 3/3.767; Dev 1.158 — a) La1 
Ho
Lo1 
xMd4 M
i
r
3
— b) NKt4 
oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1
cMd1 
— c) wKt1 Pu7 H e m s O x
1 sPu6 
cMd1 
— d) NKt4
Wa
127. Päda s b-d omitted in Tr1. Cited by Vis 1.145; Apa 193 — a)xMd3 oOr 
inTr3
— b) xMd4 Tj2 
Tr2 
— c) Tj ' 
wKt3 
— d) xMd3
; BBe2
128. Omitted in Ho; ma in La1; päda s a-c omitted in Tr1; pâda s a-b ma in Bo. Cited by
Vij 1.79; Apa 103; Hem 3/3.724; Mädh 1.498 — a) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Mädh
[Tr2 Atetó 
];Tj' 
" 
[om 
]; Lo1 
' — b) NNg 
sBe2
wKt1 
a M d 1 H y T r 2 
— d ) Tr1 
w K t
1 o M y
xMd3
Additional verse in Tr2 Mandlik KSS Dave; commented by Re:
129. Cited by Apa 135; Laks 3.35; Hem 3/2.8573/3.707— a) Bo 
Lo5 Tr1
Lo4 
— b) Pu4 OTO 
...[1290] 
; oOr 
Tr2 om 
wKt3 xMd3
Tr2 
O x
3 o O r 
— c) NNg [bur corß]
 NPu' 
x M d
4 L a k s
Ho 
— d) Lo4 Tr2 
Wa 
Be1 MTr4 T 
xMd3 T
130. Cited by Vij 1.152; Apa 193; Laks 2.372; Mädh 1.522 — a)xMd4 sOx1 sPu6
Laks 
Tj1 
.NKt 4 
— b) sOx1 
NKt 4' 
_ Laks
Mädh 
wKt6 
NKt4 
wKt6 cMd5 
Tr1 
Pu2 Pu4 
xMd3
GMy
Laks 2.372 adds a verse immediately after his citation of 130 clearly ascribing it to
Mir4 Dev
Ho
Pu10
TMd3GMy MTr6 [Jolly Gr]
— d) Laks
Pu5
GMy
Tr2
Tj1
wKt1
BKt5
wKt6
oOr
— c)oMd1
[broken]
wKt1


--- PAGE 541 ---
530 
Chapter 4
Manu:
131. Cited by Apa 193; Hem 3/3.699; Laks 2.373 — a) Apa 
. Tr1
wKt3 <f; Be3 uKt5 wKt6 Tj1 [Jotfy M'-2"9] 
— b) Hy 
" Bo Jm Lo4 Lo5 Tr1 
NNg
Be3Tj'Lafa-[Jo//yG] 
Pu2 Pu4 
" 
— c) MTr3 
— d)sKt5 NNg
wKt6 
T r
2 P u
2 Pu4
132.* Päda- d omitted in Lo4. Cited by Vij'1.152; Apa 183— a) Be1 Bo wKt1 Lo! Lo4 Ox3
Pu8 
NKt
4 oOr 
oMd1 
Pu3 
rMd3
Lo2 
, 4pa 
— b) xMd3 oMy 
Apa 
[vi 
]
. 
Be3 wKt1 oMd2 oMd5 NNg Tr1 MTr4 
Lo4 T
j
1
— c) Pu10
BBe2 H o 
W a N K t
4 
w K t
6 O x
2 
— d ) Be1 H o
wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 NPu
1 Pu10 Tj ' Tr2 [Jolly M] Vij 
; Be3 Bo Jo2 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2
Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo' Kt2 oMd1 oMd2 iMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 [Jolly
Nd] MandlikJha KSS Dave
133. Ho transposes verses 133 and 134; pâda- d nia in Lo4. Cited by Apa i<)4;Mâdh 1.522
— a) Lo4 Pu5 
xMd3 
Lo3 
Be3Tj' 
— b) La1 =T
Be3 
Pu10 
wKt3 
Lo1 Tj2 A p a ' 
sKt5 wKt6 
oMd1
oMy 
— c-d) Be3 
— d) Be1 Ho oMd5 
Tj2
134. a) Bo NNg sPu6 [but me s h] 
Be1 me t
o
n
K
t
5 
— b) sBe2
wK^La'TMd-'cMyNPu1 
Be3 
-d)GMd' 
Hy
135. Cited by Apa 194;¿a¿« 2.397; Mädln. 522 — a) ßKt5 wKt6 
MTr6
wKt3Tr2 
oMd2 
Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd5 
— b)oOrTr'
136.Cited by Apa 194; Laks 2.397 — a) Apa
sCa oMd1 
Jo2 Lo3 
wKt6 
Wa
— d) Ho
Laks
Pu4
Pu2
oMd2
— c) Lo5
— b) Tj1
Pu2 Pu4


--- PAGE 542 ---
Chapter 4 
531
ßBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 xMd3 oMd 5 oMy Pu3 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo4 
TMd4 
Ho
cMd5
Bo La1 
— d) Lo4
137. ma in Be3 Pu7. Cited by Laks 2.397; Mädh 1.522; pâda s a-b cited by Apa 194 — a)
Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 
— b) Tj1 Tr2 
Pu10 
TMd4
— c) Lo4 cMd1 Tr2 MTr4 
, Ho oMd5 NNg Pu5 Pu7 \Jolly G Nd]
— d) rMd3 Laks 
oOr 
Be1 
. TMd4 
. Jm
Lo4 
L
a
1
s
K
t
5 wKt6 Pu10 M T r 4 c M d 5
 
TMd3 
Tj1
138. ma in Be3. Cited by Apa 163; Dev 1.14; päda s a-b cited by Dev 3.49 — a) Hy
— a-b)Tj2om 
— c)TMd3oMy 
Lo4 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
Be3Tj' 
Kt2
139. Päda s a-b ma in Be3 — a) oMd5 
wKt3
 w x 
— b) sKt5 wKt6
oOr 
Pu2 Pu4 
Be1 Be3 Bo Ho oMd1 TMd3 oMy NNg
Tj'Tr'Tr2 
P u
1
0 L o
4 
— c ) o M d 5 L o 4 
T M d
4 L o
5
Tr2 
— d) TMd4
140. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 173; Mädh 1.522 — a) Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 NNg Ox3 Pu'°
Tr1 [Jolly M1"2-" Me N\Apa 
Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 Lo1 Tj1 
, ßCa NKt
4 Tj ' 
Lo1
— b) TMd4 Mädh 
Tr1 
wKt1 sOx1 
; Lo1 
— c)
Apa 
MTr3 
; oMd1 
L
o
4
— d) isKt5 wKt6
 
TMd4
. 
Tr1 
Mädh
141.* Cited by Apa 194; Mädh 1.522 — a)MTr4 MTr6 
— b) TMd3
Be3 aBe2 Bo wKt1 NKt4
 BKts wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly
M N] Apa Me Nä Dave Jha 
NNg 
— c) Jm Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 Nd
Mandlik KSS 
Tj2 
TMd3 
Lo1 
T
r
1
— d)
Be3HoTj' 
Pifom 
oMd2 
Lo'Pu4T
142* a) TMd3 
, La1 Tr1 
— b) Lo1 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
cMy
— c)cMd'
TMd4
Laks
MTr4 MTr6


--- PAGE 543 ---
532 
Chapter 4
TMd3 
Be3 
— c)Pu4 
Tj1 
oMd1 rMd3 cMy 
— d) Be3
Ho Tj1 
; rMd4 
eBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 K.t2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj2 MTr3
Mandlik KSS Jolly _ 
sOx1 sPu6 
Tj1 
" 
ßCa Jm Jo1 iMd3 xMd4 ;
Hy Lo1 Kt2 oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tj2 Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly Ku Nd]K» Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
wKt1
143. Cited by Vij 1.155; Apa 231— a) Tr1 
Vij 
ßBe2 wKt6 xMd4
Lo5 ; _ 
cMd5 _ 
Be1 
NNg A
p
a
P
u
5 Pu7 
_ 
Lo4
TMd3 
— b) Apa [vi] 
— c) Lo2 
" 
Lo4 
— d) Pu4
om 
oMd1 
then adds 
sK.f wKt6 oOr 
Ho oMd2
144.* a) sPu6 cor to 
o M d
2 T r
1 
TMd4 
Pu'°on i
TMd3 
— b)Be' 
" 
— c) Pu8 Tr2 om 
, Lo4 
, wKt6 
oMy
Tr2 
Dave 
—
 d)NK(4oMd2 
oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
sOx1 sPu6 
wKt1 
TMd3 
" 
Pu3 
NPu1
145. Cited by Apa 229 — a) ßKt5 wKt6 
— b) Pu3 Pu8 
Wa
— d)oMd2 
, NNgTr 2" 
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6
Wa 
Apa 
[cf4.i46d];wKt3 
Ox3 
Tj1
Hy
Additional verse in TMd3 oMd5 Tr1:
b)TMd3 
— c ) T M d 3 o M d 5 ! 
¡TMd3
146. Omitted in oMy — a) Pu8 
— b) Be3 Tj1 
— c) La1
Lo4
147. Pâda s a-b omitted in oMy and pâda s c-d in TMd4. Cited by Apa 69, 22<);Laks 3.94;
Dev 2.499 — a) sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Tj2 MTr3 Dev Mandlik KSS 
NKt4
La1 
— b) wKt1 NKf
4 sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to] 
sKt5 wKt6 
. 
—
c) Apa [vi] 
T M d 3 L o 1 
Be3 Ho Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 Wa [Jolly R] 
_ sOx1 sPu6
Tr2 
Tr1 
Tr2 
— d) Be1 í
L
o
1 
— Hy repeats
this verse with the following changes: a) 
c)


--- PAGE 544 ---
Chapter 4 
533
148. Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 229; Dev 2.499— b) MTr4 MTr6 
oOr Tj1
jo2 
— c) wKt6 Lo4 GMd5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 Jolly [folly M G Nd]
oOr 
— d ) T r ' L o 5 
Be1 wKt3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
Ho
Kt2 
MTr' 
Pli Pu7 [Jolly G]
149.* Pâda s a-b omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 229; Laks 3.94; Dev 2.500 — a) Laks
TMd3 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr 
[cMd 5 Tr1
Be1 
Pu7 
Pu5 [Jolly G] 
Tr2 
Bo Lo'; 
— b) Tr2
wKt6 
.o4 
Jm wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy sOx1
Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 NKt4 Lo2 cMd1 Tr '
MTr4 MTr6' 
Hy 
Bo 
eBe2 Be3 uCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 tiKt5
wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 NNg oOrsOx1 N?U' Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G R Ku] Apa
Mandlik Jolly KSS 3^: —
 c) Pu5 Pu7 
; Bo 
Tr1 
'; Lo4 
Laks
sOx1 sPu6 
— c-d)Apa 
" — d) Wa V
Lo3 
Be3 BCa Lo2 Lo4 Ox3 NPu1 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly M N]
o O r 
O
x
2
L
o
1 
N N g 
Tj1
Bo
150. Cited by Apa 229 — a) wKt1 wKt3 
; MTr6 
xMd3 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 Nd [Jolly Nd N] 
NKt 4 
. Tj1 
" xMd4
Apa 
Ox2 
; Be3 
rMd4 
— b) Lo4 
—
c) Apa 
_ 
__ 
NKt4 
Tj1 
; sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5
— d) GMd1 om
151. wK.t' places päda s issa-b after isia-b. Cited by Dev 2.237; Mäclh 1.211 — a) Lo4
Ti1 
, wKt6 
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Wa 
cMd5 oMy NNg Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 
w K t
1 T M d
3 
H o — 
c ) Pu10 
Lo1 
Jo1
Kt2 La1 Lo3 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
MTr6
Jm 
Na gloss 
assumes a Tatpurusa compound —
d)Be'
152. Päda s c-d omitted in TMd4 — a) TMd3 
T j
1 T j
2 
oMd1 
—b)
TMd3 oMd5 cMd1 oMy Tr1 
— c) La11 
Jo1 
[om 
] —
d)Ho


--- PAGE 545 ---
534 
Chapter 4
153.Not commented by A/e/omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Apa 127— a) Pu5
Pu7 
wKt6 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 
; NPu
1 
oMd5 
wKt1 Pu2 Pu4 Apa 
TMd3oMy 
oMd'oOrNPu1 
xMd4 
, - „ - , - , , .
— b) Lo1 oMd2 oMd5 
T r 2 " 
— c) T r
2 A p a [vi] 
— d) wKt6
oMd1 
NPu1
154. Not commented by Me Nd; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Apa 229 — a)
TMd4 
oMd1 
Tr2 
Be1 NPu1 Tr1 [Jolly Nd]
NKt
4 
wKt6 TMd3 NNg 
Ho 
; Lo1 Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Bo Jo2 Lo2 Lo3 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Apa [Jolly K\
W a 
B e ' s O x ' s P u 6 — b) o
M
d
1
P
u
5 Pu7 
Lo1
Pu8 
TMd3 c
M
y
— c ) N
P
u
1
- d ) iMd3 
TMd4
wKt3 
wICt'L^Tj'Tr2 
oMd5Tr'
155. Not commented by Me Re; omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu'° ; ma in Pu7. In oMy the
page containing verses 155-164 is missing — a) Tj1 
wKt3 
wKt' TMd3
oMd1 Tr1 
— b) T r 1 T M d 4 
— c) TMd4 
— c-d) Lo1
— d) Hy 
Lo2
156. Not commented by Nd; omitted in NKt4 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Apaz^i — a)
oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 
Wa 
Lo2 
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Pu7 Wa [Jolly G R] Jolly
— c)wKt' 
— d ) B o T M d
4
Additional verse in Tr1:
157. Not commented by Me Nd; omitted in NKf
1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Apa 231 —
a) Pu2 Pu4 
Lo3 oOr [Jolly R] ' 
— b) Pu3 
— d) Pu5
158. Not commented by Me Nd Re; omitted in NKf
1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Apa 231
— a) Ho 
— b) Bo wKt6 TMd3 oMd5 NNg NPu
1 Pu3 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Go 
Apa 
oMd1 
Tr2


--- PAGE 546 ---
Chapter 4 
535
[all the above omit
[Jolly R]iT: 
Ox2 
— c) Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
— d) olVld5
oOr 
NNg
159. Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Apa 224 — a)wKt3 
wKt1 Tr2 
Bo
oMd5 
— bJB^Jd'Tj 1 
— c) oOr 
^ L o
4 J o
2 om
— c-d) La1 
T
M
d
3
— d) A p a [vi a s i n e d ]
Ho 
oMd2
160. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 224 — a) Tf 
— b) Bo 
— c) Lo1
Pu5 Pu7 
Be3 
TMd4 
— d)cMd'
161. Omitted in Pli Pu4. Cited by Apa 223; Mädh 1.523 — a) sOx1 
Ho
Lo1 
Mädh 
— b) Lo1 
Tr1 Wa 
Bo " " 
"
Be1 
wKt3 oMd2 Tr2
162. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Vij 2.21; Apa 22y^aks 2.393-4 — a) Ox3 
sOx1
— b) sOx1 sPu6 Vij 
Tr1 
— c^Kt4 nKt5 Apa 
, MTr6
wKt 3BKt 5wKt 6GMd 1TMd 3TMd 4oMd sNNgsOx 1 Pu5 Pu7 sPu6 Tr1 
[sOx1
sPu6 
\; [Jolly C] 
T j
1 w K t
3 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 Pu10 
MTr4
— d) Be3
163. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 229 —a) Lo4 sOx1 
nBe2 
MTr3
TMd 3' 
— b)NKt 4om 
Tr2 
Lo2 ^ 
— c) Wa add at begin-
ning 
Lo4 Lo5 Tr2 
; xMd3 Pu3 
wKt1 
TMd4 
oMd5
Nd Mandlik KSS 
'; Tr2 om 
L
o
5
— d) Ho wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 TMd4 Lo1 Tj1
164. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4; päda s a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa231; Laks 2.396 — a)
Ho 
[me J 
wKt6 
Be1 sOx1 ^; L a
1 w K t
1 
_ 
Ho 
sOx1
sPu6 
Hy 
BBe7 
—a-b) rMd4' 
— b) Laks
]; Ox2 [but cor] Pu2 om
Be1
sOx1 sPu6
Ho Tj1
— d) TMd4
Be3 wKt1 Tj1 Tr2
— c) oMd2
sBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 oMd2 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 [but cor] Tj1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 
Lo2
Bo
wKt3
sPu6 om
BCa


--- PAGE 547 ---
Bo TMd3 
oMd1
 
• 
, MTr4 
; Jm id Kt2 oMd2 Mandlik KSS 
. Hy sOx1 sPu6
Laks 
—
 c)Lo4 
ttK.1? LakssOx'sP^Tj1 
Be3 Tr2 
oOr om
— d)Tj'l 
Laks 
La1 
. oMy 
iMd4
Bo Ho 
TMd3 N P u 1 o M d 5 Ox3 Tr1 ApasOx1 sPu6 [cor 
to] 
NKt4
o m 
w K t
6 T r
1 
W
a
_ 
sOx1 sPu6 
Be3
TMd3
165. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 223; Laks 2.394 — a) Tj1 
Be3 Tr2
sOx'sPu6 
Pu8 
;NKC 
;wKt' 
Jo1 oMd2 Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
sKt5 w K t
6 L a
1 
— b) Be1 Bo TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6
TMd4 
';BBe2 
sOx1 
Kt2 
Be1 Ho Tr1 [Jolly Nd]
— c) Lo4 
sBe2 Ho wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo4 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu3 Tr2 
TMd4 Tj1
- — d) Bo Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 
L o 2 . B e 3 T r 2 
oOr 
nBe2 wKt3
Tj1
 
TMd3oMy
166.Omitted in Pu2 Pu". Cited by Apa 223; Laks 2.394 — a)NKf 
; oOr
— b)!!2 
sKfwKt6 
oOr 
Ho TMd3 
— c) wKt1
HyOx3MTr3 
Tj1 
; Tr1 
Nd 
[with gloss 
Me and
Go comments that the particle an" of 3t M i cil : is without significance — Me:
Go:
167. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by ^0223; Laks 2.394 — a) sBe2 
Tr1
;JmwKt6Pu10 
" -d)Tj' 
oMd5 
Pu5 Pu7 [cor to]
! 
Ho ! 
cMd1
 
NNg 
TMd3
168. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4 Pu5. Päda s a-b cited by Apa 223; Laks 2.394 — a) Lo4
wKt1 om 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oOr Tr1 M T r
4 M T r
6 o M y 
sBe2
Be3BCawKt' Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Ox3 oMd2 NPu
1 Pu7 Jolly 
T M d 3 —
b) Ho oMd2 Tj ' 
Be3 
sBe2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1
 MTr4 MTr6 
— c)
oMd1 
; wKt6 
_ 
; L o
4 K t
2 
TMd4 
— c-d) NPu1
;oOr 
" 
[Jolly Gr]
[cf. 11.203] — d) oMd1 
Jo1 MTr3 " 
NKt4
Lo1 " 
Wa 
, Be3
536 
Chapter 4
B o
W a
w K t 3
L a k s
 — b ) s B e 2
Pu10
Kt2TMd3NNgTj1Tr2
— c) Hy
Pu10
TMd4
Tj1
Tr2
Be3MTr3Laks Re
Lo3
Bo


--- PAGE 548 ---
Chapter 4 
537
169. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 223;Laks 2.394 — a) NKt4 Laks 
Ho 
—
a-b) oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 =T 
• 
[oMd5
xMd4 oMd5 
oMd1 oMd5 Tr1 
^ 
J — b) Pu3 
Pu5 Pu7 [cor to]
Bo 
— d) NKt4 
Be3 Ho wKt1 Pu5 Pu7
Additional verses in oMd5; verses 1-3 after verse 170 in Tr1:
1. c) oMd5 
— d) oMd5
2. b) Tr1
3. a) Tr1 
— b) Tr1 
- c) oMd5
170.* Tr1 repeats this verse after the addition given above. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by
Apa 230 — a) Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 
Ho 
Tr1 
[but not in repetion] —
b) Jm 
Ox2 Tj1 
xMd4 
NPu1 
oOr 
NKt4 
sOx1 sPu6 [but
cor] ' 
— c) Hy Jrn Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3
 MTr4Mandlik Jolly Jha
KSSDave 
[Jolly G
r
]
; 
o M d
1 x M d
4 
— d ) Pu3
 
TMd4
;Bo 
" Be1 Ho
171. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4 Wa; not commented by Mr, Jm repeats 169 as 171. Cited by Apa
230 — a) xMd4 
wKt3 oOr 
Ho 
Lo1 cor to
—
 b)Tj' 
o O r w K t 6 
xMd4 
, — c) Be3
;Tj' 
_ 
— d)Lo5 
Jm 
" Tr1
172. Omitted in Hy Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 230 — a) wKt1 : 
; sOx1 sPu6 
Kt2
xMd4 
oMd5 
— b) N
K
f
" 
xMd4 
— c) NKt4
cMd5 Me Nä Rn Dave Jha 
wKt3 
sBe2 
; HosOx1 [but both
cor] 
. wKt1 
— d) xMd3 
w
K
t
3
H
o 
Be3 BKÍ
wKt6Lo4Ox3 
Tj1


--- PAGE 549 ---
538 
Chapter 4
173. Omitted in Hy Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 230 — a) Ho Tr1 
w K t
1 — b)
cMd5 
Apa [vl as in ed] 
BowKt3Tj' 
Jo2 Lo3 ; 
oMd2
TMd3cMy Tj1 MTr4MTr6/ipa [vl as ined] 
oMd1 
_ TMd4 
— c) oMd5
— d) Bo BKt5 wKt6 rMd4 sPu6 [but cor] 
NNg 
oMd1
174.Omitted in Hy Pu2 Pu4 — a) T r
1 w K t
1 
Tj ' 
; Lo1
Lo2 
oMd1 
— c) TMd4 
Lo5 
— d) sKt5 wKt6
Be3 Lo5 Ox2 Pu3 
NKt
4 Lo2 Lo3 Ox3 Tr2 
Jo2
175. Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu4; pâda s c-d omitted in oMd1 — a) Ho ; 
Lo3 Lo5 Pu5 Pu7
Lo1 
TMd4 
— b)Tj' 
Be1 Be3 BCa Tr1 Tr2 
^° ; oMd5
Lo
1^ 
TMd3 
TMd4 
-c)Jo21 
cMd5
Lo3 
Bo wKt3 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Wa 
Be3 
— d)
TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 
TMd3 
Ho Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
_ 
Pu7 
Pu10
176.* Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 159; pâda- a cited by Vis 1.114— a) oMd2
— b) Tj1 Apa [vl as in ed] 
[am 
J; Bo NNg 
Be3 
—c) La1
Jo2 
Pu5 
MTr3 Pu10 
Tj1 
— d)NPu'Pu 3
TMd3 TMd4 c 
Be3 TMd3 Ox2 NPu
1 [butmcsh]Tj] 
wKt6 Pu10
Be1 eBe2 eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Tj2 MTr3 MTr6 [Jolly Ku N K]Nä
Kit Rn Mr KSS Mandlik 
• 
_ 
oMd5 
; Pu8 
oMd2 oOr MTr4
177. Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu4 — a) Bo 
oMd1 
Wa 
— b) T M d 3 T r 2
wKt1 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[Jolly Gr] 
— d)
TMd3 
, La1 
Tj1
178.* Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tj2. Cited by Kum 1.3.7; Vis 1.7; Vij 1.254;Hem 3/2.1680;
Dev 1.9; Madh 1.523 — a) ßBe2 Ho wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1 oOr Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
—
b) Bo wKt1 wKt3 La1 oOr 
— c) L
a
1
P
u
3 
TMd4 
, Ho oMd5
Kt2
Ox1 sPu6 Tr2 
Apas
sCa oO
wKt6
NNg
Lo4 Lo5 Pu10 [Jolly M]


--- PAGE 550 ---
Chapter 4 
539
— d) Lo5 
Hem 
NPu1 MTr6 
. Pu8 
Pu10 
Tr1
; Jm 
Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
 NNg
Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 MTr3 NäKu Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
wKt1 f 
Hy 
Tj1
sBe2 BKt5 wKt6 oMd2 Wa Kum Vij Hem 
179. Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu*; päda s c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by ¿0^2.352; päda s
c-d cited by Apa 233 — a) Pu5 
; wKt1 
; Laks 
—b) La1
Lo2 
wKt3 
— c) oMd1 rMd3 oMd5 oOr Tr1 Laks 
; wKt1 
, . . . „ ,
Hy 
TMd3 
Tj1 Tr1 
Lo1 
La1 Laks
Tr2 
; Bo 
; NKt4 _ 
— d) wKt3 wKt6 [but cor] oMd5 '
180. Omitted in TMd4 cMy Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 233;Laks 2.352 — a) eBe2 ßCa Ho
Hy Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 oMd2 [Jolly Ku] 
Be1 
; wKt1 
Bo 
—
b ) H o — 
c ) P u
1
0 o M d
2 — d ) sBe2 
Ox3 
Pu10
181.* Omitted in oMy; päda s a-b omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 233; Laks 2.353 — a)
Tr2 
Apa 
Laks 
Pu2 
, Pu4
Be3 sCa eKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M R]
N N g 
— b ) Lo4 L
o
5
H
y 
w
K
t
3
P
u
5 Pu7 _ 
—
c) La1 
wKt3MTr3 
Tj1 
; Lo1 
_ ; Jm Tj2
Ho BKt5 wKt6 oOr Laks 
Hy Jo ' Jo2 Kt2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg sOx1
 NPu' Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Tr2 Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Be1 sBe2 wKt1 oMd2 Pu2 Pu4 
Pu10
Jo1 
[Jolly N] Nä [pätha l 
" 
— d) sBe2 ßCa wKt6 oOr Pu7 Pu8
Ho Lo4 TMd3 oMd5 Ox 3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 MTr4 
T
r
2
T
M
d
4
Tr1
182. Omitted in cMy Pu5; ma in Pu10. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — a)NKt4
Tj1 
" — b) TMd4 
NKt4 
. Be1 sOx1 sPu6 
wKt1 oMd1
Wa 
A p a [ v i ] — c ) Be3 T
j
1
T
M
d
3 
— d ) B o
Ho [me to] [Jolly G] 
. eKt5 
. wKt1 TMd3
183.* Omitted in cMy sKt5; not commented by Nd Mr; folio containing verses 183-206
missing in Be3. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — a) Be' 
sBe2 ßCa Ho Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
sPu6
GMd1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
Jm Kt2 wKt3
Bo


--- PAGE 551 ---
540 
Chapter 4
wKt3 NKt 4 oMd2 oOr sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly Ku] Rn [pätha ] 
wKt6 
. Bo
Lo1 
— b) Bo 
— c) L
a
1
ß
B
e
2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt 2
wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Pu8 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
; oMd2
Tj1 
T
M
d
3
L
a
k
s 
—
 d) Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 xMd4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS
Mir4 
Bo 
TMd3
184. Omitted in oMy sKt?; not commented by Nd Re. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 —
b) wKt3 
oMd1 T M d
3 T r
2 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 Pu7
TMd4 NPu1 Tr1 
Pu10 
— d) oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 • 
wKt1 wKt6 Lo1
Lo3 Apa 
Pu5 Pu7 
sOx1
185. Omitted in oMy; not commented by Nd. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — a) MTr4
MTr6 
oMd1 
Ox2 Pu3 
Jo1 Kt2 oMd2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly Go] Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
[supported by Go Ku]; Lo1 
eBe2 Tr1 MTr6 \Jolly Nd] 
; Jm 
wKt1
oOr 
uBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oMd2 TMd3 oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1
[Jolly G ] Mandlik Jolly J h a K S S Dave 
B o — 
b)îMd 4 
_ 
TMd3
Tj1 
Ox3 
L à 
T
r
1
— c ) Pu2 Pu4
Tr2 
sOx1 
wKt1 
Laks 
T
M
d
4
— d) Ox3 Tr1 :
Pu2 Pu4 
NPu1 NKt4 
La1 
Pu5 Pu7 
uKt5
cMd 5 
NNg 
T j 1 " 
MTr4 
wKt6
[om 
]; oOr
186. a)oMd2 
Lo3 [Jolly R] 
— b) TMd3 oMy 
TMd4
— c)Tj' 
Jo2Lo3oMd1GMd5oOr[l/o//)>R] 
— d) Be'îMd 4 Ox3 
sBe2 Bo
sCaHooMd2Pu5 Pu7 TJM 
MTr6 
MTr4 
oMd1
TMd3 cMd5 oMy Tr' 
oMd2 
. wKt1
187. Cited by Laks 2.248 — a) Lo4 Lo5 
oMd5 
Tj1 
— b) Ho
Lo5 oMy 
Be1 Ho wKt3 wKt6GMd' TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 
Lo1 
Lo3 
Pu2
Pu4 
, TMd4 
MTr4 
— c) cMy 
Lo2 
Laks 
—
 d) Lo1
;Bo
188* Cited by Laks 2.248; Hem 1.60 — a) Lo3oMd ' 
Pu4 om
•rMd3 
— b) Ho 
Be1 
. Lo1 
; TMd4 
— c) Hy Jo1 Kf NKt4 La1


--- PAGE 552 ---
Chapter 4 
541
Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 Pu4 Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly M] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
[oOrPi? 
Wa 
Jm 
Jo2 Lo3 Pu2 [Jolly R]
189.Päda s c-d omitted in oMy — a) L o 1 ^ 
— b) Wa ^ 
Tj1
GMy 
TMd3 
Tr1 
Pu5 Pu7 
Bo 
La1
Lo5 Ox2 sPu6 [but cor] Wa 
Lo4 ' 
Kt2 
Ho TMd3 
Hy 
—
d)wKt6 
sPu6[¿>tócor]Tj '
190. Cited by Hem 1.60 —a) Bo Lo2 NNg sOx ' Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 
NPu1
La1 Tr2 
N
K
t
4
T
j
1 
Lo1 
— b )
Tr1 
— c) Tj ' 
" Lo5 
; Pu5 Pu7 
wKt6 
Bo sCa Ho
La1 Lo2 Lo3oMd' iMd3 TMd4 aMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 
— d) La1
GMd1 
Pu2 Pu4
191. Omitted in Ox3; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu'° ; pada-b in Pu10. Cited by Hem i.6o;Laks
2.248 —a) Bo 
oMd5 
Tr1 
Tj1 
Tr2
— b)Lo 1TMd 3oMyTr 1
 MTr4MTr6 
Hem 
Tj1 
Bo 
— c)
wKt1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
" MT r 4 
La1 oOr Pu2 Pu4
Laks 
BKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 Wa 
Ho om
—
 d)0x2 
" " " 
TMd3 oMy
192. Omitted in Ox3; pâda s c-d omitted in oMd'. Cited by Apa 285; Hem i.$&;Mad.h
1.174— a) Pu7 Tj1 
Pu5 
ßCa wKt1 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly
G] Hem ViDh 93.7 
, Tr2 
— b) oMd1 
cMd5 Tr1 
wKt6
; 
Tr1 
Lo1 
Ho Tr2 
Jo1 
TMd' 
— c) TMd3 oMy
Lo1
 > 
MTr3 
wKt1 Le2 Pu3 
Pu5 Pu7 
_ 
. Pu8 
wKt6 L o
1 H y
Jm Jo ' Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly R] Mandlik KSS 
—
 d) Tj ' 
nBe2
193. Pâda s c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 285; Hem 1.38; Mädh 1.174— a) Ho
Tj1 ; 
eKt5 w f C t 6 [ o m 
] —
 b) Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 [Jolly G R] Hern
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt6 
oMd1 TMd 3oMy Tr 
TMd4
sKt5 
cor to 
—
 d)Ho 
oMd1
Lo2
Lo1
d)Ho


--- PAGE 553 ---
542 
Chapter 4
194. Omitted in iMd4 Ox3. Cited by Hem 1.38 — a) sOx ' sPu6 ; 
wKt6
Pu10 
Lo4 
Bo Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 cMy Pu5 Pu7 Tj2
BKt5 ' 
T
j
1
L
a
1 
. 
— b) BKt5 
wKt6 
Be1 Wa
Pu10 
Ho 
,Lo4sOx'sPu6 
, — c) BKt5 wKt6 sOx1 [but cor] 
Pu5
Pu7 
TMd3 
— c-d) oMd ' Hem
[Hem 
] — d ) T j ' 
; Tr1 
Pu2 
Pu4
 
TMd3
Bo MTr4 
. H o P u
1
0 
Me [pâtha ]
195.* Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Vij 1.130; Apa íjo;Hem 3/1.364 — a) Ox3 
Lo4
Tr1 
— b) sCa Lo4 
Bo 
oMd1 
Tj1
Be1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 TMd3 oMd5 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly Nd] ViDhgs.8 Nd Apa
oMd1 GMy 
Tr1 
sBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1
Lo3 oMd2 oOr sOx1 Ox2
 NPu' Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2
 MTr3 [folly N Ku R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Bo NNg 
He 
— c)Lo2Pu10 
GMdsTr' 
; wKt6
HoNKl4 
wKt3 Lo] Apa [vi] 
Lo5 
— d)NKt4 
Ox3 
wKt6 Lo4
oMd1 TMd3 oMy NNg Pi? Pu4 Pu10 Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly M Nd] 
" " 
Wa 
NKt4
H o 
o M d
5 x M d
3 MTr4 ApawKt1
Additional verse in Ho sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo4 NPu1 Tr2. Cited by Apa 170; Hem 3/1.364;
Mädh 1.174 According to Me some teachers recited the verse given in the edition, and some
the following additional verse. He takes both to be authoritative.
a) wKt6 
— a-b) Mädh 
- b) La1
eKt5 Apa 
BKt5 wKt6 
" 
Ho 
— c) Mädh 
—
d) Tr2 " 
wKt6
196.* Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Vij 1.130; Apaijo; Mädh 1.174; päda- a cited by Vis
1.129 — a) MTr3 
P u
7 T M d
3 _ 
Be1 Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 Mandlik Jha
KSS Dave 
MTr6 " 
— b) wKt6 
— c) Tr2 
— d) Vij Apa
oMd1 [Jolly G]' 
Lo'Pu5 P
u
7
; Pu3 " 
oOr
NNg ' 
wKt3 
Hy La1 Ox2 Tr2 
Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 [but cor] Pu8 : 
Lo3
197. Omitted in TMd4 —a) Lo1 
Pu10 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
TMd3
BKt5 wKt6 
o M d
1 O x
2 Pu3 P
u
8
— b ) N N g 
wKt6
BKt5 
.. 
— c) BBe2 
L o
3 B B e
2 Ho wKt3 NKl
4 La1 Lo1 oOr NPu
1 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2


--- PAGE 554 ---
Chapter 4 
543
198. MTr3 transposes päda s a-b and c-d; omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 230, 1229; Laks
2.331 — b) Tj1 
—c) Laks 
—d) wKt1 
corto 
Ho
Apa 1229 
199. Omitted in TMd4; ma sh in NNg. Cited by Laks 2.331 — c) Tj1
Hy 
NNg 
oMd1 
; Hy 
; Lo1 
Lo5 
Laks
sKt5 wKt6 Laks " BowKt3 
Lo3 
Be1 
wKt6 
Ho
— c) Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 oMd1 oMd2 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly
M6 Ku] ViDh 93.12 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oOr 
MTr4 
Me No Go support
200. Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 230 — a) wKt6 ; 
Be1 Bo sCa Ho wKt1 wKt3
NKt4 Lo4 oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Apa " 
Tj ' 
— b) Lo3
Pu10 
" T
r
2
; Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 [but cor] 
— c ) T r 2 T r 1
" H o 
— d) c M d
1 o M d
5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd] 
. sCa
Ho Lo1 Ox3 Pu10 Tj2 [Jolly M] 
Tr2 
Bo 
Pu8
201.* Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 234,Hem 3/2.874;Laks3.40-1;Dev 2.334 — a)
Bo NKt4 oMd2 
Lo4 Lo5 
— b) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo3 TMd3 Tj2
MTr3 Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
wKt3 La2 Wa 
Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 Ho La1 Lo '
oOi 
Laks H
e
m
o
M
d
1 
— c) Hem 
wKt1
sKt5 wKt6 NNg sOx1 Pu2 sPu6 Laks 
ßBe2 Ho Lo1
Additional verse in oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly Gr]; placed after 202 in NPu1 Tj1
Mandlik [ 
} KSS Dave [cf. YDh 1.159]:
a) oMd5 [Jolly Gr] ' 
— b) NPu1 
Tr2 [Jolly Gr]
Mandlik KSS Dave 
— c)NPu' 
. 
. oMd5 
Tr2
oMd5 [Jolly Gr] 
. . sOx1 sPu6 Mandlik Dave 
KSS—
 d) oMd5
Ox2 NPu1 Tr2 
. oMd5
Additonal verse in Ho:
202.* Omitted in TMd4; päda s c-d omitted in sBe2. Cited by Apa 237— a) Pu4
NKt4 Tr2 
TMd3 oMy 
Ho 
oMd1 
. Wa 
—
— b) Tr1


--- PAGE 555 ---
544 
Chapter 4
b) TMd3 
Ho 
Tj1 Tr2 
— c) Lo5 Tr2 
, Be1 Ho Hy Jm
Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo5 oMd2 NNgoOr sÖx
1 Ox2
NPu' Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 MTr^Tr4
Mandlik KSS Apa [vil 
Tj1 
— d) oMd1 
Tj1
203. Omitted in TMd4 ßBe2. Cited by Vij \.\y);Apa 234; Hem 3/2.867; Dev 2.333 — a)
oMyTr'oev 
wKt1 
— c) xMd3 
— d) Ho oOr Pif Pu7 
Apa
[om \
Additional verse in oOr:
Additional verse in Pu1:
204. Omitted in TMd4 Pu10. Cited by Apa 230— a) TMd3 
cMd1 oMy Tr2
; Tj1 
Tr2 
Wa 
;wKt6 
— b) oMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 om
Lo 4TMd 3NNgmö 
sOx'sPu6 
oMd5 
, Bo Tr4 
_ 
TMd3 oMy
oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 [cor to} 
— c) Lo3
[Jolly K\ 
Tt2 
oMd1 
— d) wKt1 Lo3 Tj1 Tr2 Wa
Two additonal verses in La1 oMd' TMd3 oOrTr1 Tr2 Mandlik KSS Dave; commented by
Ac; the two verses are transposed in TMd3 Tr1; they are placed after the next addition in Tr2.
These two verses appear to be taken from Medhâtithi' s commentary.
1. b) oMd1 
., La1 Tr1 Tr2 ' 
— c) Tr2 
— d)
oOr Mandlik KSS Dave 
. La1 
oMd1
2. a)oMd' 
Tr2; 
— a-b) TMd3
Two further additional verses in Be1 wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2 oMd5 oOr Ox2; given after
201 in sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 Mandlik KSS Dave. Cited by Apa 230:
i. b) Be1 sOx1 sPu6 
oOr 
wKt6 Apa
BKÍLa'cMd5 
Lo2 
— c) La'cMd5 
oOr
Tr2
Pu3
Mir4 MTr6
Tr1
wKt6
Lo2
[Jolly R]
— d)La1
— ciTr2


--- PAGE 556 ---
Chapter 4 
545
— d) oMd5 
Tr2 om
2. b-c) omitted in Be1 Lo2 — b) w Kt1 La1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj ' Tr2 
wKt6
oOr . .._ — c) sKt5 wKt6 cMd5 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
, oOr TJ
M Tr2
205. Omitted in xMd4; pâda s c-d ma in sKt5. Cited by Vij 3.z8<);Apa 1174; Laks 3.259;
H e m 3/1.770— a ) MTr4 =T • 
T
j
1
o
M
d ' T
L
o
1 
sBe2 wKt1
La1 Lo3 Pu3 [Jolly R] 
w K t
3 P u
1
0 
— b) wKt1 NKt? wKt6 NNg Ox3 Pu10
Tr1 Hem 
Lo2 Ox3 
La1 : 
, N?U' Tr2 
M T r
4 L o
5
Tj2 
sKt5 
Ox2 
. Tr1 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 ßKt5 MTr3
MandlikJhaKSSDave' 
Pu2 
T j 2 i M d 3 
— c) cMd1 
iMd3 oMy
Nâ Ipätha ] 
— d) Be1 Hy
206.* Omitted in rMd4; ma in sKt5. Cited by Apa 1174; Laks 3.259 — a) Tj2
sBe2 NKt4 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 [Jolly R] 
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3
Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 TMd3 oMd5 cMy NNg oOr Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa Apa [Jolly N] Jha
Dave 
La2< 
Pu 5Pu 7< 
— b) Be1 Ho 
Lo1 ma
Be3 
— c) Tr2 
o M d
1 ; ß B e
2 x M d
3 
— d)
Ho i 
.Be3 
aMd5
207. Päda s a-b omitted in xMd4. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1174; Hem3/i.6w, 771 — a)
aMd' 
. wKt1 [cor to] xMd3 
; Be3 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa
La1 Tr1 [Jolly R] 
NPu
1 
. Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M]~2~9]
208. Cited by Apa 1174; Hem 3/1.610— a) Apa [vi] 
sOx1 sPu6 
NKf
Tj1 
Lo4 
Lo2 
NPu1 
. 
, Jo2 Lo3 Pu2 Pu4
— b)Lo4 
T M d 3 _ 
T
j
1
— c ) s B e 2 L a 1 Pu10 
J m
;Tj' 
— d)wKt6
209.Cited by Apa \vj^;Laks 3.259; Hem 3/1.610; pâda s c-d cited by Fy'3.289 — a) Bo
Lo1 
;BCawKt6 La1 cMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 Tr1 
Be1 Lo4
Tj1 Tr2 
P u
4 M T r
4 
oMd1 ^ 
, — c) Ho 
Tr2 
Pu10
— d) Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Wa [Jolly M3N Nd] Vij Apa ~ 
oMd1 xMd3
[Jolly M] — c) Ho
Pu2 Pu4 MTr4
NKt4 NNg
Be3
— d) wKt3 NKt4
Bo cMd5 NPu1
Tr1
Ox2
— b) aKt5 wKt6
Ox3


--- PAGE 557 ---
546 
Chapter 4
oMd5 oMy Tr1
210. Cited by Vij 3.289; Laks 3.259; Hem 3/1.771; päda s a-b cited by Apa 1174 — a)
Bo NPu1 
Lo1 oMd2 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 cMy Tj1 Tr1 Vij ' 
wKt1 La1 xMd4 NNg
oOrWuApa 
, Laks ' 
NKf 
— b)Tj' 
; iMd3 
Be3 Ho wKt1 Kt2
wKt6 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 
Pu4 
sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to] 
—
 d) sOx1 sPu6
[corto] 
Tj1 
. 
Pu4 OTO 
wKt6 
Bo 
Ho
NKt4 oMd1 Pu3 [Jolly Gr] Nd [as sadhuh pâthah] 
oMd5 Tr1 
wKt6 [Jolly Nd]
sKt5 
Me [pätha ]
211. Lo4 gives only the pratika 
Cited by Apa 1174; Laks 3.260; päda s
a-b cited by Vis 3.257; ¥1/3.289; Hem 3/1.772 — a) Tr2 • 
Tj1 • 
Be ' Be3 Hy
Kt2 Ox3 Tj' Tr1 Tr2 
Ho sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Pu10 
Mir4 
— b) oMd1 oMy
BBe2 
~ ; T r ' 
— c) Ho Lo1 L o 2 T j 1 
o O r T M d 4 
— d)Me [pätha ]
NPu1 
Lo1
212. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 11745; Laks 3.260; Hem 3/1.772 — a) sOx1 sPue
Ho 
TMd4 _ 
— b) sKt5 wKt6 
Be1 wKt3 
; wKt1 TMd4
— c) NKt4 GMd1 Tr1 MTr6 Me | päth a | 
- d) Lo2 
; Be3 wKt1 ßKt5 La1
Lo2 GMd1 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox3 NPu1 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Vij Apa 
; Lo4 [but cor} Pu2
Pu4 
sBe2 Lo4 Lo5 
oOr 
Ho sKt5 Lo1 oMy 
; NKt4
Additional verse in oMd1 oMd5 NPu1 MTr4 MTr6 Lakx^.26o:
a) NPu1 
—b) MTr4 OTO 
oMd5 
— c) Laks 
oMd5
"
N
P
u
1
_
_ o M d
1 L a k s
213. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1175; Laks 3.260; Hem 3/1.773 — a) Tj1 
TMd3
oMy 
Pu8 
", ßKt5 wKt6 
— b) wKt6
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 MTr4 [Jolly G] 
; Hy 
— d) Pu4 om 
eKt5 wKt6
oMy 
Tr2 
Tr1 
wKt1 
oMd5 
Lo5 
Bo
214.* Päda s c-d ma sh in Be3; pada-d omitted in oMd5. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1175;
Be3 NKt4 cMd1 TMd3 NPu1
 Pu2 Tr1
— c) NKl4
oMy
Tr1


--- PAGE 558 ---
Chapter 4
547
Laks 3.260; Hem 3^.773 — a) NPu1 
; K.t2 
oMd1 TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Jo2 Lo3 
; V i j P u
7 
— b) Be1 Be3 Bo sCa Jo2 sKt5 wKt6
Lo1 TMd4 NNg Ox2 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly M'-2 G N Nd] Hem Jolly 
wKt3
Wa Vij Apa Mandlik KSS 
— c) NPu
1 
./ ; Pu2 Pu4 
, Bo 
Tj2
Be1 Ho Jo2 wKt1 Lo1 oMd1 oMd2 NNg Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Wa Vij
Apa 
sOx1 sPu6 
Lo3 
. Tr2 
; NPu
1 
La1 
Lo1
Tj1 
W a — 
d)oMy 
TMd3
215.* oMd2 transposes 215 and216; GMd1 xMd4 transpose215 c-d and 216 a-b; pâda s a-b
ma xh in Be3; pâda s a-c omitted in oMd5. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 175; Laks 3.260; Hem
3/1-773-4—a) Bo 
—b) Lo5 omTMd3 
Tr2 
; sBe2 Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Manklik Jolly KSS 
Lo1 Vij
Pu2 
— c ) T j ' : o M d 1 TMd3 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Hem Apa 
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
—
 à) Vij' 
Lo3
216.* Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa\vjs; Laks 3.260; Hem 3/1.774 — a) NKt45 
Pu5
wKt6 ; 
; oMd5 NPu1 Tr2 Re [gives 
aspätha ] 
" Lo1 
Apa [vi]
— b) BBe2 eCa Hy wKt1 Kt2 La1 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 cMy oOr Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 Wa [Jolly
M3"1] 
wKt3 
. NPu
1 
wKt6 
sOx1 sPu6 
wKt3 
— c) La1
Jo1 Jo2 Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Lo1 L o
3 T r
1 ^STCZT — d) Lo1 oOr
o M y 
B o ° T j
1
217. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apaii7s; Laks 3.260; Hem 3/1.774 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
Be3
TMd3 
;Tj' _ 
MTr4MTr6 
Hem 
Pu7 [but cor] 
— b) oMy oOr
TMd4 
Lo1 sOx1 s P u 6 H e m [vl] 
— c) Lo1
Lo2 
" sOx'sPu6 
— d)TMd3
218. Cited by Laks 3.270; Hem 3/1.782 — a) Be1 
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly G]
— c ) B K t 5 — d ) O
x
3
; B o s K t
5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Laks
Lo1 
N
N
g
o
M
d
5 
„ 
. wKt3 
TMd3 " 
Tr1
wKt1
Hy
Be3
NKt4
Bo
Pu5 Tj1 Tr2 Wa Nâ Rc
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 oMd2 oMd5 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
Pu2 Pu4
wKt3
Lo1 om
Tj1
wKt1
Bo
wKt6
NKt4
wKt1
Hem
Wa
Tr1
sBe2
sOx1 sPu6 
wKt6


--- PAGE 559 ---
548 
Chapter 4
219. Päda s a-b ma in Lo4; päda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Hem 3/1.782 — a) Lo3
sKt5 Lo1 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 
— b) sKt5 wKt6 
Kt2 
Pu8
Additional verse in Pu2; päda s c-d in Pu4:
220. Cited by Hem 3/1.782; Laks 3.270 — a) Tj1 
; TMd3 
; Pu2 Pu4 
; Tr1 
Kt2
oMy 
Tr2
 
TMd4' 
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4
MTr4' 
P u
1
0 — c) o
M
d
1
T
r
1
T
r
2 
iMd4
— d) Laks 
GMd1
221. Cited by Hem 3/1.782; Laks 3.270 — a) Bo 
;wKt' 
Tr1
Ox3 
sBe2 Lo1 . 
Be1 cMd1 Ox2 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly R] Laks Hem 
Lo4 V
[ma 
| ; Lo 5'. 
; L
o
3
s
B
e
2
 
NPu' 
TMd4
Be1 
La1 
Bo 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
— c)
After 
r Tj ' jumps to end of 223 pada-a: :— d) oMd1 ; 
Bo
Additional verse after päda s a-b in Pu ' :
Additional verse in sCa [but given in parentheses] Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
c-d) eCa
222. Omitted in Tj1; päda s b-d omitted in Pu8. Cited by Vis 1.175, 3.257; Vij 3.z8<);Apa
240, 1175; Mädh 2.300, 305 — a) Bo Tr1 
Tr2 
Ho 
Mädh 2.305
Be3 
-b)TMd3 
iMd4 Tr1 Vis Mädh 2.300
GMd1 GMd5 
[oMd5 
]; Apa240 [vl]
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
thus reading 
but Me and Re the only ones to
comment on this clearly read 
o O r _ _ 
—d) Lo4 Lo5 Pu'° [Jolly M]Vw 3.257
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd4 [after 222b] oOr NPu1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Gr] given
after 223 in Be3 Tj1 Tr2 Mandlik [ms. 
] KSS Dave; commented by Re; cited by Dev 2.619:
NNg
— d) Bo
Bo ßKt5 wKt6 Lo3 Pu3 Pu8
Tr1 om
Tj1
Bo Ho Lo4 Tr1
Pu2 Pu4
 — c) Pu5 Pu7
oOr


--- PAGE 560 ---
Chapter 4 
549
b) oOr 
cMd5 Dev 
_ 
— c)NPu'Tr 2;
Mandlik KSS Dave ' 
; Be3 ' 
; [Jolly Gr] 
— d) Dev
[Jo/fy Gr]
223.* Päda s a-c until 
omitted in Pu8. Cited by Apa 244; //em 3^.785 — b)
oMd5 
Lo1 sOx1 Pu5 s
P
u
6
; conjectural reading; all mss. except
ST and those listed later read 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Ho 
L o 4 M T r 4
— c) oMd1 La1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Lo4 Ox3 
— d) TMd3
Hy Lo2 Lo 3cMd' oMy oOr Ox2 Tr1 Hem 
aKt5 wKt6 
Be3
Tjl 
Lo5 
La1 
Lo1 
Tr2
224. Cited in Hem 3/1.768; Laks 3.271— b) TMd3 
NKt4 sOx1 sPu6
Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 
oMy om 
; Be1 Bo Ho 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
Tr1 
Lo1 W a 
Tj1 
— c ) Lo1 
T
j
1
; W a
Tj2 
. Be3 ^r: — d) O
x
3
,
. TMd3 cMy 
oMd5
Bo Lo1 oMd2 oOr
225. Cited by Hem 3/1.768; Laks 3.272; päda s c-d cited by //ar-A 1.19.5 — a) wKt1
oMd ' TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr" MTr6Lakx 
Hem
; sBe2 Bo NKt4 wKt6 Lo3 
Wa 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Be1 Jo1 Lo3
TMd3 NPu1 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly M4 Nd R] Laks Mandlik KSS 
Kt2 Lo5 o M d 2 T r 2
wKt'eK^wKt6 
TJ1 
Lo4 
oMd2 
Tr1 
— c)Lo4Tj' 
TMd3
cMy 
MTr3 
NKt4 sOx1 sPu6 
Tj1 
Lo5 
— d) sBe2
Lo5 
s K t 5 w K t 6 
NPu1 ' 
L a
1 P u
2 Pu4
,, 
Ho
226.* Omitted in Pu5 Pu7. Cited by Apa zgo;Hem 1.86,2/1.30 — a) Tj1 
Wa
Tj1 
, oOr 
— b) NKt4 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 \Jolly Gr] Hem Apa 
TMd3
corto 
—
 c ) L o ' _ 
oMyTj'Tr2 
— d)oMd5
Additional verses in Wa; the first two also in eKt5 wKt6 and the third in Lo5 [given after
225 ]. All three verses commented on by Me, and the first only by Re:
Be3 TMd4 Mandlik KSS Dave
oMd1
Wa
NPu1


--- PAGE 561 ---
550 
Chapter 4
2. c) BKt5 wKt6
3. a) Lo5 
Me [pâtha ] 
— b) Lo5
227. Pâda s a-b omitted in Pu5 Pu7. Cited by Apa 282; Mâdh 1.165 — a) Lo1 oMd2 oMd5
ApaMädh 
. sOx1 sPu6 
Tj1 
oMd1 
TMd3 
. BoH" 
Tj1 
—
b) Madli 
Ox3 
wKt3 NNg 
oOr Tr2 
cMd5
Bo 
Pu4 adds at end
Additional verses in MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Gr] Mandlik 
KSS Dave; cited by Hem 1.37;
verse i in oMd5:
1. a) oMd5 Mandlik KSS Dave 
— c) [Jolly Gr] 
— d) oMd5
Mandlik KSS Dave 
" 
Hem
2. a) Hem Jolly 
MTr4 
— c) Dave [Jolly Gr] 
Mandlik KSS Dave
Hem
228. Cited by Apa 282, 385 — a) sKt5 wKt6 
— b) Tr2 
Lo '
NNg ' 
Ho
 : 
Be1 Be3 wKt3 La1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu" Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
Ox3 
Pu10 
Lo4 Lo5 
_ _ _ 
NKC wKt6 sOx1 [cor to] sPu6 Apa
282 
Apa 385BKt5 
— c)Ox3Pu'° 
. GMd1 
Pu4
wKt1 
.NPu 1' 
T2 
Tj1 
;Pusom 
Tj2 
Ox3 
— d) oMd1
wKt1 
BCa wKt3 oOr Ox2
229. Pâda s c-d omitted in Ox2. Cited by Vij 1.210; Apa 38s;Hem 1.152; Mâdh 1.177 — a)
sOx1 La1 sPu6 Pu8 
Wa ' 
TMd3 
— b) Pulc ^ 
; Be1 wKt1
Lo1 NNg sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Tr1 Apa [vi] Jolly 
- c) rMd4 
- d) Tr1
230. Päda s a-b omitted in Ox2; not commented by Nd. Cited by Vij 1.210; Apas86; Hem
1.152; Mâdh 1.177; päda- a cited by Apayoj andpäda s a-b by Hem 3/1.664 — a) La1 NPu1 Pu2
Ho
TMd3 Lo3 Apa
wKt1 GMd1 Tr1
Pu4
— d)TMd4
1. a) Wa
 — c) wKt6
 — d) wKt6
Me
Wa


--- PAGE 562 ---
Chapter 4 
551
Pu4 Hem 
Apa 386 
— c) Bo Bo Ho NNg Hem 
Lo1
— d) Bo Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 NPu1 Wa; 
Be1 
oMy 
Pu2 Pu4
231. Not commented by Nd. Cited by Apa 386;Hem 1.152 — b) sOx ' sPu6
wKt1 Ox2 Tj1 Tr2 
; eBe2 
oMd1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
oMd2 
Bo Apa— c) L a
1 P u
5 Pu7 MandlikJha KSS Dave 
_ 
Bo
oMd5Wa 
wKt6 
Lo1 
cMy 
_ 
TMd3 
M T r 6 o M d 1
Lo3 
Lo4Ox3 • _ L o 2 
";Pu 1 0 
Pu2 Pu4 
.La1
Wa1 
~ 
Tr2 
GMd5 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 
' TMd3 ^ 
. Madl, _ 
oOr
— d) Pu10
Jo1 oOrMâdh 
Kt2
232. Omitted in Tj2. Cited by Apa 386;Hem 1.152; Mädh 1.177 — a) Pu2 Pu4
— c)iMd4
Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M]Madh Apa 
Lo4 
;oMd' 
Pu7
me to 
sKt5 wKt6
233. Cited by Dev 1.145; päda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.177 — a) NKt4 oMd1 oMd5 oOr Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
— b) oOr 
Be3 
Bo 
— c) cMd1 oMd5 oMy
Tj1 
oMd1 
,rMd 3 
; TMd 4 
— d) Bo sOx1 
Tj1
234. Cited by Hem 1.17 — a) TMd3 cMy Hem 
Lo3 
— b) NPu 1 
Pu2
oMy
235.* Omitted in Lo3 [Jolly R]; pâda- d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Apa 290 — a) oMd1
TMd3
NKt4 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 cMd5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1
Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M]Dave Jha 
TMd4 
. Apa 
—
 c) Ho
d) sPu6 
cor to 
Be1 Ho Lo1 NNg Tr1 Apa 
Pu5 Pu7 [but co r] Wa 
Pu8
TMd4"
Hem
— d) Bo
NPu1Pu4
TMd3
— b)Be1HoLo1
 Pu10
Be1 eBe2 Bo sCa Jo2 wKt3
Pu4
Lo3
— c) Pu8
 — c-d) Tr2
—
Tr2Wa
TMd3
Bo
Pu5 Pu7
wKt3
wKt1
Wa
TMd3GMy
— d) Be3 NKt4 La1 Lo5 Ox3


--- PAGE 563 ---
552 
Chapter 4
236. Omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 230;Hem 1.90 — a)sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6
Pu'° 
wKt1 
— b)Pu4om 
Bo 
MTr4 
MTr6 
Ox2
Apa 
Lo1 [but cor] 
sKt5 wKt6 NNg [Jolly M'-2"9] Hem 
Lo5 Ox3
[Jo/(y M3-4-5] 
— c)Tj' 
" 
Tr2 
Lo2 
Hem 
; Bo
La1 Tr2 
_ _ 
; Wa ' 
— d) wKt3 oMy " 
; wKt1 oMd2 Tj1
oOrApa [vl as in ed]
237.* Cited by Apa 230; Hem 1.90 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
—b) oOr 
—c)Apa
— d) Jo2 Lo3 [Jolly R] 
; Be3 ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2
oMd2 oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
NNg
[but me sh] Wa
238. Pada-d omitted in Be1 Lo3 Tj2. Cited by Apa 232 — b) Tj 
uBe2
Lo1 
BBe2Be3 
Pu3 
Kt2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo4 
; Ho ßKt5 wKt6
Pu5 Pu7 oMd5 MTr4 [Jolly G]: 
Apa[Jolly N ] w K t
1 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Tr1 
[wKt1 oMy 
]; Wa ~ 
oOr 
Ox2 
— c) Tj1 
Pu5 Pu7
Pu2 
-— d ) w K t 3 B o o O r M T r 6 ' 
rMd3
239. Pada-d omitted in Be1 Lo3 Tj2. Cited by Apa 232; Dev 2.459 — a) NNg ma sh
oMd'oOrPu4 
TMd4 
Lo1 Tj1 
; Pu5 
— b) Ho 
oMd2 
; TMd3 
oOr
— c) Be1 Be3 Ho TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu3 Tj1 Tr2 
MTr4 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6
wKt1 NKt4 TMd3 TMd4 oOr Tj 
. Lo4 
— d) Ho La1 Lo3
 TMd3
TMd4 oMy oOr Tr2 
NNg [but meß] M T r
3 , Jo1
240. Cited by Apa 232; Dev 2.459 — a) Tr2 
aKt5 wKt6 Lo3 oMd1 iMd3 oMd5 oMy
oOr Pu3 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr
6/V<7 
sKt5 wKt6 
_ — b)Tj' 
Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 rMd3 oMd5
oMy NNg NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 y oily G R] 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
; Ho Tj1
Tr2 
_ . Jo1 
— d) Bo Tj1 Tr2 
_ _ 
Be3
La1 Pu5 Pu7 WaJ; wKt1 
, oMy 
Pu10 om 
La1 [bu mesh}
241. Cited by Apa 232; Dev 2.259-60 — a) NKt4 Lo1 
Apa 
— b) MTr4
— d) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
[cf.23gd]


--- PAGE 564 ---
Chapter 4 
553
242. Päda s a-b cited by Hem 2/1.14; Dev 2.459-60; päda s a-b cited by Apa 232 — a)
oMd5 
; Kt2 rMd" 
. Pu4 ont 
' — b) Bo 
; Be3 Tj1 
—
c) wKt1 ! 
— d) oMd1
243. a) TMd4 Tr1 
iMd4 
oMd1 
oMd1 _ 
— b) Bo
Be3Tj' 
wKt6 
NKf BKt5 wKt6 GMd1 iMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tr1 MTr6
Lo3 [Jolly R] 
— c) TMd3 cMy 
Ox2 
Lo4 cMd5 Tj1 
wKt3
— d)TMd4 
' ~ T M d
3 L o ' s O x ' s P u
6 ' 
*.Tj 2 
oMd1
oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 
, L o
4 T r
1 
xMd3 
T
j
1
O
x
3
Pu10
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6:
a) MTr4 
oMd5 
"— c) MTr4 omits thepäda ; oMd1 Tr1 
oMd1
TMd4 
MTr4 MTr6
A further half-verse added in TMd4 Tr1:
b) TMd4
244.Cited by Mädh 1.478 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7 
— b)
BBe2*T: 
Tj1 
Tr2 
TMd3 oMy 
BKf wKt6 
cMd5
— c ) Tr2 
w K t
6 — d ) Tj1 '
o
M
d
1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
245.* Omitted in Bo; päda s a-b omitted in iMd3 oMy. Cited by Laks 2.276 — a) La1
 MTr3 Laks
Mandlik KSS 
—
 b) Be1 Be3 Ho sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5
sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 MTr4 Dave Jha \Jolly M] 
MTr6 
Be1 Be3 Ho wKt1 Kt2 sKt5
wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4oMd5 NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr6 Wa Laks 
NKt4 
— c) TMd4 
'— d)
NKt4
 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 Laks 
Tr1
246. a) NPu
1 
" 
"~ 
Bo lá^W ; Be1 
—b) Be1 
Ho
oMd2 
wKt1 
Jo2Pu10 
GMd5MTr3 
ßBe2 " 
— c)
Lo1 Lo3 
TMd3 oMy Tr2 
rMd3 oMy 
Tj2 
Lo1
— a-b) sBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 oMd2 Tj1 Tj2
Jo2 Lo2


--- PAGE 565 ---
554 
Chapter 4
Ox3 
'— d)Be' Be^oTj'Tr2 
sBe2 Lo2 
NKf 
Ox2
Lo4 
[Jolly N\' 
~ cMd1 _ 
oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
iMd3 
Bo
La'Pu2 Pu4 
sOx'sPu6 
Be'Tj'Ti2 
oOr
Additional verse in Be3 aCa La1 oOr Tj':
b) oOr 
" 
BCaoOr 
— c) sCa La' 
T
j
1
B
e
3
" 
Tj'
247. Cited by Vij 1.214; Apa 406; Hem 1.56; Mädh 1.190— a) Ox3 
Re
Ho 
— b ) T j '
r B e
1 La1 Lo2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 
xMd3
Apa 
— c) La1 
— d) ßKt5 wKt6 
Lo1
Mädh Hem °^TT ^ 
wKt1 
NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 Pu10 
T
j
1
, H o L o 4 " .
248. Cited by Apa 407;Hem 1.56 — a) wKt1 wKt6 sOx1 sPu6 
Tr2
 
__ 
Ho
Lo1 
La1 
[1/o//yM1-2-9GNd] K/D/157.11; _ 
Ho La1 NPu1 Pu2
Pu7 [mesh ío]oMd ' Tr1 Hem Apa 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 ; 
Apa [vis]
; 
and 
iMd3 oMd5 cMy 
MTr4 MTr6 
Lo3 Pu4
Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly M2"9] 
— b) T r
2 . A p a [ \ \ ] 
TMd3 oMd5 [Jolly
Nd] ApDh 1.19.14 
wKt' 
oMy 
Ho Ox2 Wa 
— ^Be'HoNKf
oMy 
MTr4MÏr6 
NPu1 
oMd1 
oMd1 oMd5 Tr{ [Jolly
Gr] 
Ox3 
— c-d)rMd3 
— d) oMd1
GMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
cMy
Additional verse in Tr1 [after this it adds the first verse given after 249]:
249. Cited by Apa 407; Hem 1.56; Dev 2.463 — a)oMd' cMd5 Tr' Dev
xMd3 
— b) Apa [vi]: — c) Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
NKt4 
— d)TMd3 oMy
La1 Tj1 
clvld5 
Apa
Additional verse in Be3 wKt' Lo2 oMd1 iMd4oMd5 oOr Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4
MTr6 Mandlik[ii mss.] KSS Dave; given after verse 248 in Tr1; commented by Re. Cited by
Apa 407, ¿0^-2.245:
a-b) cMd1 
_" " 
— b) iMd4 Tr2 Mandlik KSS Dave
Be3 wKt1 Apa [vl] 
Pu2 Pu4 Tj' Laks 
Apa
Ox2 
Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
_ 
wKt' " — c)Ox2 
Be3 Tr1 MTr6 Laks


--- PAGE 566 ---
Chapter 4 
555
Lo2 oMd5 oOr 
' — d) oMd1 MTr4 Mir6 
Tr1
Another additional verse in Be3 Pu3 Tj ' Tr2 Mandlik ( ) Dave KSS; commented by Re:
a) Be3 
— c) Mandlik KSS Dave 
Be3 Tj1 
Pu3 i 
— d)
Tj'
250. Cited by Vij i.2i4;Apa 406; Hem 1.56; Dev z.^6y,Madh 1.190 — a) Ho oM d5
MTr4 
Be1 Be3 HoNKt4 Lo2 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Mir6 Wa \folly R] Dev
wKt6 
wKt1 oMd1 Mädh 
Wa _ 
Pu10 
Tr1
iMd4 
—tí)
 Ox3 A
p
a
; 
wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Hem 
La1
 NPu'Tr 1
Be3 Bo Lo1 Tj1 
~ .Hem 
. 
—
 c) Mädh Hem Apa 
La1 Lo3 oMd5
sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly R] Dev [vl] 
cMd1
 '• 
TMd3 xMd4 
. Ho wKt1 MTr4
Tr1 
Kt2 
— c-d) Pu5 
— d) Tj1 
wKt3
wKt6 
Hem
251.Cited by Hem 1.56—a) Lo1 cor 
to_ 
sOx'sPu6 ^ 
^ 
, Tr2
oMd1 
xMd3 oMy 
oMd5 
— b) sOx1 sPu6
NKt4 
oMd1 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
Ho 
sKt5 w
K
t
6
— d)
Ox2 
_ _ 
Pu5 Pu7 
Tj1 
_ 
wKt3 wKt6 xMd4
Jo2Lo3 
Be1 
NPu
1
BKt5 
oMd5 
_ — b)Tj'i 
H
o
L
o
3
Lo2 
" " 
oMy 
wKt6 
xMd4 
Be3 HooMd1 oMd5 Ox3'
— clNKt4 
" oMd5 
Lo 4Lo 5oMd 2Pu l°[y 0//yM] 
sOx1 sPu6 MTr6
i Ox3 
[rest of verse om]
253. Cited by Hem 3/1.785 — a) Lo4 Ng Ox3 Pu1 Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M G N] Hem ViDh
57.16 Jolly 
w K t ' w K t 3 - P u 2 Pu4 Pu7 
o M d
5 T j
1 
Pu5
TMd3 " 
BKt5 
wKt6 " 
oMd1 
Ox2 
oMy MTr4
 MTr6 °
TMd3 
Be3 Tj1 ' 
— b) La1 
TMd4 
cMy
— c)TMd3oMy 
__ oOr 
sKt5 wKt6 . 
TMd3 oMy 
TMd4 
—
d) oMd5 
Lo4
cM y
wKt6
oMd1
252.a) TMd3


--- PAGE 567 ---
556 
Chapter 4
254. Omitted in Lo1 Pu8; ma in sKt5. Cited by Hem 3/1.785 — b) NPu
1 Tj1 
oMd1
TMd3 oMy 
_ 
Ox2 
" 
Wa om 
sKt5 wKt6 
TMd3 
wKt3 
—
c) sOx1 sPu6 
Lo4 Lo5 
Ho 
TMd3 cMy 
wKt1
Ox3 
wKt6 
— d) TMd3 cMy 
', Pu10
255. Page containing 4.255-5.2 missing in oMd5 — b) Ho 
Lo4 Tr1
— c) Be1 
_ 
— d) BKt5 wKt6 
. Lo4 
oMd2 oOr 
Pu10
256. a) Tj1 
— b)TMd4 
Lo1 
wKt1 
; Pu7
Lo4Ox3Tr2 
Lo2 
_ 
Lo1 
Tr1 
: — c) Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
, Be3 Jo1
MandlikKSS 
La1 
^_ 
' Ho om 
oMd1 
" Lo3 
Lo4 
—
 d)
BKt5wKt6om 
Bo B K t 5 W a 
Pu2 T j 1 s K t 5 wKt6
257.* Cited by Laks 2.434 — b) Ox2 
TMd3 oMy 
Bo oOr 
oMd1
oMd1 Mir6 Laks 
— c) TMd3 cMy _ " Ho 
". Tj1 
; Pi? Pu7 [but cor]
d) Tj1 
. BBe2 Jm cMd1 oOr Tj1 
Be1 Ho TMd4 oMy Pi? Pu7 Pu8 MTr4J/¡a
NNg 
Kt2 " 
Pu10 
Be1 sBe2 Bo aCa Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3
 BKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 cMy NPu
1 Pu2 Tj2 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 Wa
[Jolly R Ku] Ku Mr Mandlik KSS 
. Go appears to support
NKt4 Wa 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 \Jolly M] 
— c) wKt6 Pu2 
. Tr2
ft^WI; 
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 Tr1 Laks 
MTr4 MÏr6 
NKt4 
_ — d)
oMd2 
NKC 
sCa Lo2
oMd2 comes to an end after this verse with the colophon: '
259. a) wKt6 
" 
— b) oOr 
— c) TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
Lo1 
Ho
— d) Kt2 
_ 
oM d1 Pu2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4
MTr6 
; Lo3 
Jo2
Lo1 Vfr; Pu5 Pu7 
Lo1 
Pu10 
Pu5 Pu7 
oOr
—
ßCa
Bo
Ox3
Be1 Ho
wKt3La'TMd4NNgoOr
Pu4
Lo4
ivld3 cMy 
258. Cited by Laks 2.434 — b) Ox3


--- PAGE 568 ---
Chapter 4 
557
260. b) Ho La1 oMd1 TMd3 cMy NPu' Pu2 Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 
— d) oOr
Colophon: Be1 Lo1 TMd3 NNg 
Tj1 
L o
3 w K t
3
Be1 wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 sOx1 xMd3 oMy wNg sPif om 
Lo31
1 . 
, wKt3cMd' oOr Pu8 om 
Be1 3 
wKt1 
oOr 
Lo1 • 
NNg 
NNg


--- PAGE 569 ---
1 . a ) T r 2 " L o 3 : o M d ' T j ' l 
_ 
— c)Lo' 
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 _ 
— d) Ox3 VRW; Pu2 ° 
" Pu4 
TMd4 ' 
Be1
TMd3 oMy NNg Pu8
2 . a ) o O r L o 1 L o 4
T M d 3 
— b ) Ox3 
T M d
3 T r
2
—
 c) TMd4 
— d) Lo2 
Lo1 
. nKt5 wKt6 
Tr1
3. 
b)Tj' 
s O x
1 J i n 
— d)Tr'
4. 
Omitted in sOx1 Tr1. Cited by Mädh 2.8— a) Pu5 
, Pu7 
Mâdh
—
 b) sBe2 Ho cMd1 sPu6 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
oOr oMy 
NNg Pu2 Pu4 Wa Mädh 
—
 c) wKt6 ' 
oMy 
— d) Bo
-. ¡TMd3
5. 
Cited by Har-A 1.17.27— a)oMy 
Pu10 
H o i M d
3 
— b)
TMd'oMyTV 
Be1 Lo5 MTr6
 
NNg [Jolly R] Har-A 
NKt 4 
Tr2
TMd3 
" 
TMd4 
wKt6om 
— c) Be3 wKt1 NKt4 
— d) Tr2
Lo 5 TMd3 NNg Tr1 
L o
1 T M d
4 
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu10
6. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.567; Dev 4.232; Mädh 1.711; päda s a-b cited by Vis 1.170; Vij
1.171; Apa 247 — a)MTr6 
— b) Tr1 
Bo 
NPu1 : _ 
TMd3
TMd4 
NKC 
P
u
7
— c)wKt3 Lo1 Lo' 
Hem' 
eKt5 wKt6
TMd3 
Ho NKt4 oMd5 
wKt6 
ßBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt3 ßKt5 wKt6 oOr Ox2
558


--- PAGE 570 ---
Chapter 5 
559
^T]2Jr2VJ&MandlikJhaKSSDave 
La1 
Pu10 
wKt1 
Pu2 Pu4
Kt2 
— d) Lo3
7. 
Cited by Hem 3/1.610 — a) oMd5 
Tr1 
oOr 
NKt4 wKt6
La1 Lo1 NNg oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Hem 
_ 
NPu
1 
_ 
BBe 2sCawKt 3 < 
Lo5
wKt1 
Hem 
La1 
Ho 
— b) Be1 ^ 
sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
sPu6 
— c) wKt1 w K t
6 T M d
3 TMd4 oMy MTr4 Hem 
—
 d) iMd3
Lo1 
Hy
8. 
Cited by Vij 3.289; Har-Al. 17.23; Hem 3/1.567; Laks 3.294; Mâdln.jiz — a) Ho
wKt6 oMy 
[Ho 
]; x M d
3 T M d
4 
— b) Be1 Kt2 Tr1 
Ho
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 Vij Laks Dave 
. o M y T j
1 
Pu2 Pu4
— d) Tr1 
Lo1 
Be1 xMd4 Tj1 wTr6
Additional verse in Mandlik \ 
KSS Dave:
9. 
Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Vij z.28g;Har-A 1.17.23; Hemy,l\.^(fj; Dev^.2.y,5; Maclh
1.712; päda s a-b cited by Apa 246— a) TMd3 ; 
iMd3 oMy 
— b) Tj1
Be3 sOx1 sPu6 
Tr2 
~ 
aBe2 Vij Apa Har-A Dev 
oMd1 oMy
oOr 
~ 
TMd3 
Tr] M ä d h
o M d
5 
Mir4 MTr6 
— c)
oMy 
[omJ; 
sOx1 sPu6 dlsfl^aT; TMd3 
Lo1 
— d) Har-
A 
Be1 B
o
L
o
1 
H
o
P
u
2 P u
4 T j
1 
NKt4 Ox3
10. Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Hem sA.óió
; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.289— a) Bo Hy
wKt1 Kt2 Tj1 
Pu5 ' 
oOr 
wKt3 La1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [Jolly G R] 
Bo
Tj1 
H o T r
1 
Pu7 [Jolly G
]
— c ) oMd1 
sCa wKt1 wKt3
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor] 
O x 3 ^ 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3
11.* Before verse noMd1 places verse 5.24. Cited by Hem 3/1.582; Laks 3.298; Dev
4.246; Mâdh 1.717 — a) NNg NPu 1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2
 MTr4
 MTr6Go [Jolly G]
Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wK.t3 La2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
 TMd3 TMd4 cMy oOr
Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 [Jolly Ku R] Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Lo1 
Tr2 
Bo Ho
sKt5 oOr Tj1 KSS 
w K t
6 W a 
Be3 Ho sKt5 wKt6 oMd1 iMd3 oMy


--- PAGE 571 ---
560 
Chapter 5
oOr Tj1 Laks 
Lo2 
Hy om 
. — b) Lo1 
; Pu4
— c) Be3 Lo1 
TMd3 TMd4 Tj1 
ßCa Ho wKt6 Lo1 oMy sOx1 Pu5 sPu6
Pu 7Pu 8Tr' 
sBe2 Be3 TMd3 T j
1 T M d
4 
NKt4 
— d) Bo
La1 
Hem 
Be1 sCa wKt3 oMd1 [Jolly Nd] 
Lo4 Lo5
Ox3 [Jolly M] 
Be1 Bo wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NPu
1 Tj1 Tj2
Tr1
 MTr6 Wa Dev
12.* Pada-d omitted in Be3. Cited by Hem 3/1.583; Dev 4.246; Mädh 1.717 — a) Lo1
Pu8 
Tr1 
Be1 Hy 
TMd4 
— b) Be3 Bo Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
Tj1 MTr3 Hem [vl] Dev Jolly 
w K t
6 T j
2 
Hy 
— c) ßBe2 Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Mädh
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Tr2 Hem 
_ 
wKt6 
Ox: 
,oMd'
Tj1 
[oml;Pu8om 
— d) T j
1 M T r
4 
Lo1 
N^oMd1
rMd3 rMd4 oMd5 oMy 
MTr4 
Be1 
MTr6
13. Omitted in Be3; päda s c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Hem 3/1.583; Dev 4.247; Mädh
1.717 —a) Ho La1' 
Tj1 
NNg 
Lo1 
Pu2 Pu4 
T M d
4 T j
1
Ox3 
TMd4 
Me comments that some take 
to be a wrong
reading. — b) Lo1 
Tj1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) wKt3 
Pu8 Tr2
Lo3' 
T j
1 T j
2 
— d)Lo' 
La1 
sKt5
 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy
Be1: 
T r
2 T j
1 
wKt1
14. Pada-a omitted in Be3. Cited by Hem 3/1.583; Dev 4.247;Mäd h 1.717 — a) Hoom
wKt6 
rMd3 TMd4 oMd5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Be1 
sOx'sPu 6om 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
Tj1 
Be3 
TMd3
Kt2 
— c) sOx1 Tr2 
" ; Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M2'5'9]
15. Cited by Hem 3/1.583 — a) NKt4 
Pu'° 
— b) wKt3 NKt4
Ox3 
— c) Lo2 
sOx1 sPu6 ' 
Tr1 
— d) TMd4
; oMy 
TMd3
16.* Cited by Vij 1.177; Hem 3/1.577-8; Dev 4248; pada-a cited by Vis 1.177 — a) Ho
".La 1 
o M d 5 N N g , T M d 4 N P u ' 
Pu2 P
u
4
T
M
d
3
—
b)TMd 4MTr 6Wa 
r M d
3 N a [ p a t h a ] _ 
— c) MTr4 
Be'BBe2BCa
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKf sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5


--- PAGE 572 ---
Chapter 5 
561
oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6//em Mandlik Jolly KSS
Be3 Bo Tj1 
TMd3 
Be1 sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 cMd> TMd4cMd5 oMy oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8
Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 Hem Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Be3 Tj ' 
— d) Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo ßCa
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKf sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 xMd4 oMd5 oOr
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Hem Mandlik Jolly KSS
ÉcT ; Lo2 
wKt1 
MTr6 ^ . .. , Pif Pu7 [Jolly G]
17.Pâda s c - d omitted i n cMd1 — a ) Be3 '
K
t
2 
Pu8 Tj1
TMd3 ' 
— b) Lo1 
, 
Kt2 TMd4 ' 
wKt1 Lo3 [Jolly R]
— c) Be3 Ho NKt4 ' 
Lo2 Pu3 Pu8 ' 
; Tj1 
NKt4 
NPu1
— c-d) oMy 
[TMd3 gives this as an addition after
pada-d] —d)rMd 3
18. Cited by Vij 1.177-8; Hem 3/1.578; Dev4.249 — a) oMy 
w K t 6 r M d 4
Hem 
Tr1 
Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Ox3 Pu10 
NKt4
oMy 
Pu5 P
u
7
B
o 
H
e
m
H
o V i j [ v l a s i n e d ] 
Tr1
Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 ; 
— b) iMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Hem 
MTr3 
La1 Ox3 
Hem 
xMd3
— c) wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 
sOx1 sPu6 
Be3 
Pu2 Pu4
Hem 
— d) Lo1 
[but cor]
19. Cited by Vis 3.224; Vij 1.176, 3.229; Apa 1046, 1157; Mâdh 2.317— a) Apa 1046
iMd3 
Tj1 
—tyHoOjí 
TMd3 
Apa 1046
Mâdh Apa 1046 [vl] 
— c) TMd3 MTr6Vis 
Tr1 ' A p a 1046 
— d)
Be3 
Ho 
Hy 
MTr6 
MTr3 
Ho 
Lo4 Lo5 ^
Vij 3.229
20. Cited by Vij 3.229,289; Apa 1157; Mâdh 2.317; pâda s a-b cited by Vij 1.176; and
pada-d by K/y 1.175 — a) Bo 
Lo1 
cMd5 
sOx1 sPu6
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
' - c) MTr6 om ~ ßKt5 wKt6 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy
MTr3 
wKt1 Lo2 Lo3 Tj1
 
BCa La1 
— d) Tr2 
H o M T r
4
Bo 
TMd4 
Wa
21. Cited by Vij 3.289— a) Be3 Tj1 
Lo1 
TMd3
— b) Jo2 Lo3 
Tr2 
— c) Be1 Lo4 Lo5 
" Tr2 
Ox2 
oOr


--- PAGE 573 ---
562 
Chapter 5
—
 d) Be1 sKt5 wKt6 Lo5 
iMd4 
Lo1
22. Cited by Ky 1.179 — a) [Jolly G] 
Tj1 
— b)i TMd3 
wKt1
Lo2 Tr2 
- c) TMd3 
wKt6 
' MTr6 
" — d) iMd4
; Hy 
cMd1 oMd5 Tr1 
MTr4 MTr6 
, oOr
NKt4 
wKt6 
rMd3 TMd4 Tr1 
NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 rMd4 oMd5
oMy Tr1 MTr4 
, MTr6
23.* a) iMd4 
— b)Be 3wKt'wKt 3Pu 5Tj' 
oMd1 
o M d
5 P u
3
oMd1 C 
— c) MTr6. 
" ' rest omitted; Be1 Ho Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 »Kf tsKt5
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 oOrNPu' Pu2 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Jolly Bühler KSS
—
 d) MTr6 
Be1 Lo2 NNg Pu5 P
u
7
H
o 
wKt1
Pu10
24.oMd 1 places verse 24 after 5.10. Cited by Hem 3/1.616; Laks 3.292; Dev 4226 — b)
TMd3 
sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly G] DevPu5 
wKt1 
Jm
— c) oMy om 
Bo TMd4 
Lo2 
Pu2 Pu4 
wKt6 
— d) Dev
Laks Hem ^ 
wKt3 Ox3
25. Pada-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Hem 3/1.616; Dev 4.227 — a) Lo3 
Lo4
Bo 
Pu2 P u 4 o O r 
Pu2 Pu4 
u K t
5 N K t
4 
— b) Tr1
oMd5 
MTr4 
Tj2 
_ 
— c) NKt4 
oMd1
TMd3 o M y 
wKt1 P u 5 — d ) NKÍ '
" 
TMd3 oMy 
D e v
NNg 
MTr4 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Be1 Hy Jm Jo1 TMd3
oMd5 oMy Pu2 Tj2 Wa Mandlik KSS 
; B e
3 L o
5 NKt4
 NNg 
L a
2 B o
26. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5. Cited by Laks 3.311; Dev 4.244 — a) Tr2 
Bo 
—
b)Bo 
Be3 NKt4 
Ho TMd4 oMy 
— c)Tj'o/n
Be3 
— d ) r M d 4 ' P u 4
27. Cited by Laks 3.311; Hem 3/1.574; Dev 4.245 — a) Hem 
Pu10 MTr3
MTr4 
TMd3 cMy 
— b) Tj1 
oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy Tr1


--- PAGE 574 ---
Chapter 5 
563
t* 
—
Mir4 MTr6 [Jolly Gr]Oev 
Jo2 Lo3 — c) Tj ' 
Be1 \\Kt' wKt3 NlCt
4
Lo1 TMd4 oOr Wa Hern Dev 
_ 
— d) Tr2 
Ox2
Additonal half-verse in Lo2:
28.* Päda s c-d omitted in TMd3 and päda-di n Ox3. Cited by Laks 3.312 — a)wKt3 La1
sPu6om 
— b)Pu5Pu7 
oMd5Tj'Wa 
— c) oMy 
Be1
ßBe2 ßCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 iMd4 oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M] Go Ku Laks 
' 
— d) oMy 
Be3 oMd1
MTr6 
TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] o M d 5
29. Cited by Laks 3.312 — a) cMd5 
eBe2 
MTr6
=ErW;Pu10 
HoGMd'TMd 3TMd 4 
MTr4
 MTr6 
Tj1 
Tr1
— b) Be1 ßCa Jo2 sKl5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G]
Lo3 
B e
3 — d ) s K t s w K t 6 H o 
NPu
1
30. Päda s b-c omitted in Pu10. Cited by Laks 3.312—a) Tj1 
Tj2
Pu10 
wKt1 
Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 
Lo1 
Lo1 
cMy 
TMd3
TMd4 
B B e 2 ^ 1 T M d 3 
— b) Ox3 Pu5 MTr6
Tj2 
— c) TMd3 Wa 
oMy 
. wKt1 
sKt5 wKt6 
TMd4
Be3 Bo Tr1 
L a
1 o M d
1 
— d) Lo1
TMd3 
; oMd1
31.Päda s c-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 3.312;Hem 3/1.582 — a) Be1 
Lo1
Pu8 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo sOx1 sPu6 ; 
MTr4 MTr6 
Tr2
Be3 
oMd1 o
O
r
— b ) w K t 1 T r 1 
c o r f l i B o
La'oMyTj1 
TMd3 
ßKt5 wKt6 
— c) T r 1 o M d 5 
oOr 
TMd4
uKt5 wKt6 Tr2 
Lo4 L o
5 H e m
32. Cited by Laks 3.3iz;Hem 3/1.592;pâda s c-d cited by Hem 3/1.581 — a) Bo wKt6
Lo1 TMd4 oMy 
J
m
H
o 
Be5 wKt1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 
Tr2
— b) sBe2 sCa [but me] Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 oOr [folly Ku N] Nâ
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ho Ox2
 
TMd4 
. 
. Ho TMd4 NNg Tr2 MTr3
NNg TMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Hem 3/1.581 T 
[Jolly Gr] 
Tr1
— d) Jo2
Kt2
NNg Hem 3/1.581
sOx1 sPu6
— c) MTr6


--- PAGE 575 ---
564 
Chapter 5
33.* Päd a b-c omitted in Hy TMd4, and päda s b-d in Lo4. Cited by Laks 3.319; Hem
3/1.582 [ascribed to Visnu] — a) Lo4 
Ox3 
Tr1 
— b) Be 
— c)
oMd1 Tr1 
xMd'oMy 
; Mir4 MTr6 
Tr 2
Hem 
—
 d) oOr 
sBe2 Be3 Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 La1 La2 Lo5 oMd1
TMd4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu8 Tj' Tj2 Tr2 MTr6 [Jolly R] Rn Mandlik KSS 
H e m T M d
4
BKt5 
wKt6
34. Päda s c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 3.319 — a) Be1 
[but me]; La1
Pu10 
Pu10 
Ox3 
— b) TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 
[Jolly Nd]'
BKt5wKt6 
TMd3 
MTr4' 
— c) Jo2 
Bo 
Lo1
— d) Tr1 
Jo2 Lo2 Pu10
35. Cited by Vij 1.179; Apa 251; Hem 3/1.577; pada-a cited by V/'.v 1.179 — a) Vij
Lo'corto 
Pu10 
— b)Ho 
wKt1 
Pu10
Be1 Bo 
, Lo5 
La1 [but me sh] oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 
P
i
f
— c ) sCa H o oMd1 oMd5 T r
1 M T r
4 
TMd3
— d)Bo 
" L o ' o O r T j 1
TMd 4
36.Cited by Hem 3/1.580; Laks 3.316; padas a-b cited by Dev 4.246 — a) Tj1
— b) Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
 TMd4 Tj2
 MTr3Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
c) Bo [but cor] 
TMd3 
' — d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Hem
Be3 NKt4 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
37.* Päda s c-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Laks 3.329 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
TMd4
Ho oMd5 MTr6 
w K t 1 s B e 2 w K t 3 o M d 5 
Tj1 W^[—
 b) Bo
BBe 2HooMd 5oOr 
— c) T r 1 P u 1 0 
oMd1 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d)
Be1 sBe2 nCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2wKt3 ßKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oOrsOx1 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Watfc Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
38.* Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Laks 3.329— b) Be3 Ho wKt1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3
TMd 4GMyOx 3Pu 5Pu 7Pu 9Pu 1 0Tj 2Tr 1Tr 2MTr 6[/o//yMG]Dave 
Bo
Ox2 
o
M
d
5
W
a 
wKt;
 
BKÍ wKt6 
— c) TMd3 cMy rf^T


--- PAGE 576 ---
Chapter 5 
565
^c-d)Pu'° 
— d)cMd5 
Lo1
39. Päda s a-b omitted in NKt4. Cited by Laks 3.327— a) xMd4 
MTr4
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
— c) La1 
[but meß; cf. 5.413]; Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 oOr Tj1
MandlikDave 
sKt5 wKt6 
Lo1 
sCa Hy NKt4 Pu2 KSS 
xMd3 iMd4
oMd5cMy 
oMd1 
MTr4 MTr6 
Bo 
Tr1 
Pu2 Pu4 
ßKt5
NKé " 
Wa' 
Pu10 
Ho— 
d) Jo1 NKt4 MTr6 
NKt4
40. Cited by Laks 3.327 — a) Tr1 
L a
1 N K t
4 
Pu2 Pu4
oMd1 
Lo'corto 
Pu10 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
MTr6
Be3 oMd1 Tj1 
— c) iMd3 oMy Ox3 Pu10 
Lo4 [but me] 
—
 d) sBe2
Jm Jo1 KSS 
Lo4 Lo5 P u
5 L o
3 " 
wKt6 ' 
Pu2 Pu4
rMd3 
Tj1 
; L o
1 w K t
1 T j
2 
Ox2 
oMd5 '
MTr4. 
sOx1 sPu6 MTr6 Laks
41. Cited by Apa 154; Laks 3.328 — a) iMd4 
Ho sKt5 wKt6 Apa Laks
—
 b) Be1 Be3 Bo Tj1 
[ B o | ; Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Wa
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 C 
oMy '— 
c) Jm wKt3 
Tr1 
cMd5
Kt2 xMd4 Pu7 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 T
r
2
N
K
t
4
42. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me; pâda s c-d omitted
in La2. Cited by La/a-3.328— a) wKt3 
T j 1 w K t 1 Tj ' 
oMd5
TMd3oMy 
Jo1 ._., . — a-b)TMd4~ 
— b) NKt4
 
TMd4
-. 
. - 
; wKt3 
— c) B
o
s
C
a Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 cMd1 MTr3
[Jolly R Ku Nd] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[Jo1 
] ; Be3 NKt
4
43. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 3.328 — a) Hy " TMd4
Ox: 
Pu2 P u
4 o M d
1 
W a — 
b ) H o
Tr2 
W
a
" sKt5 w
K
t
6
"
— c ) oMd1 
Tr1
oMy ' 
— d ) H
o
o
M
d
1
44. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 3.328 — a) xMd4 
Tr1 
Bo 
—c)


--- PAGE 577 ---
566 
Chapter 5
Tr1 
— d) xMd4 Wa 
Bo 
sKt5 om 
wKt6
45. Pada-a omitted in Pu5. Cited by Vis 3.265; Laks 3.32<);Dev 4.251 — a) Lo1
oMd1 
— b) xMd3 
— c) NNg 
Be3 wKt3 oMv
Be1 
x M d
4 J m 
— d ) w
K
t
6
L
o
4 \but me]
Laks 
Jm
46. Cited by Lu«b3.329—a) cMy 
Tj2 
sOx1 sPu6 
HoNKt'oMd1
xMd3 TMd4oMd5 Ox2 Tr1 
Lo2 
ßKt5 
' — b) wKt3 iMd4 
Tj2
— c)GMd'Tj 2om 
cMd1 
[om ]; sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 
oMd1 oMd5
[Jolly Nd] 
TMd4 
-— d) Lo2 xMd3 oMy oOr Pu10 [Jo//y M] 
Lo4
Lo5' 
MTr6 
wKt3 
oMd5
47. Cited by Vij 1.181; Laks 3.330— a) Lo3 oMd5 sOx' sPu6 Vij 
xMd4
— b) Jo1 Kt2 Ox2 sPu6 [but cor] Tr2 MTr3 Kit Mandlik KSS 
Pu10 
Be3 Lo5
oOr cfT; Pu2 Pu4 f; La ' 
— c) wKt1 Lo5 MTr4 MTr6Laks 
" Be1 Ox2 Tr2 
wKt6
Ho
48. Päda s c-d omitted in oMy. Cited by Dev 4244 — a) Be1 Jm Lo3 Lo4 Ox3 Pu10
oMd1 
NKf T
M
d
3
M
T
r
6 
— b) Pu10 om 
Bo NKt4 Tr2
— c) MTr6 om 
Be1 
Bo xMd3 
wKt6 
— d) Tj1
eCa 
NKt4 Pu2 Pu4
49.Omitted in oMy. Cited by £>ev4.245 — a) xMd4 '
T
r
1 
Lo4 
—
b)oMd 5^ 
Lo1 
sBe2om 
Ox3 Pu10 
— c) Ho 
Kt2 
, Lo1
r^d)Ho 
MTr6
50.* Cited by Laks 3.322; Hem 3/1.581 — a) Laks Hem 
oMd1
Lo1 
w K t ' T j ' x M d 4 
— c)Tr 2o/w 
, Laks Hem
'• 
Lo1 Sfl^Trír ; BBe2 Be3 Bo Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 [Jolly G] 
o M d 1 " 
— d)
[Jolly ~Nd] 
T
M
d
3
o
M
y
o
M
d
1 Laks H e m
Lo1 Pu3 
Be1 MTr4
o M d 5
— d ) N P u 1
V i j
B o L a 1


--- PAGE 578 ---
Chapter 5 
567
51. Cited by Apa 25i;//or-A 1.17.39; pada-a cited by Vis 1.179— a) La1 Tj1
Tr2 
[Jolly G\ 
—
 b) Tj1 Tr2 
TMd4 
cMd1 
Lo1
-—c)Tj' 
" TMd3 TMd4 oMy M i r
6 — d)Tr'' 
Ho wKt3
NKt4 oOr Ox2 Tr2 
[ o O r ] ; oMd1 oMy 
oMd5
Jm Lo ' TMd3 oMy sOx1 Tr2 ' 
oMd1 :
Additional verses in sOx1 sPu6:
52. Cited by Laks 3.320 — b) Be3 Pu3 Pu5 Pu9 Tj1 
_ Pu7 
cor to
xMd3oMy 
— d)oMd' 
La1 
HyJmJo'Jo 2
Kt2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly Ku R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
cMd5 Tr1
MTr4MTr6 
xMd3 
wKt6 
wKt3
oMy 
rMd4 
Be1 
_ 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
53. Omitted in oMy. Cited by Vij 1.181 — a) Bo 
— b) La1 Tr2 
Pu4
Hy 
.xMd3 
wKt6 
Lo1 
La1 
MTr6 
— c) Be1 Wa
TMd4 
Be3 Ho Tj1 
La1 
Lo3
— d)Be3Tj' 
,nKt 5_ 
;La'oMd5^ 
[La1 
|; Ox3 
Lo2
Additional verse in Be1 oOr Mandlik \ 
\ KSS Dave:
a) oOr 
— b) oOr 
— c-d)oOr
— d) Be1


--- PAGE 579 ---
568 
Chapter 5
54. Omitted in oMy; päda s c-d omitted in Pu10 and pada-d in Pu8. Cited by Dev 4.245;
Mädh 1.719— a) sKt5 wKt6 
oOr MTr6 W
a
B
o TMd3 
— b)
wKt3 
— c) oMd1 T : 
Tr 2ow 
— d) wKt1 
Tj1
wKt6 TMd3 NPu1 
TMd3
55.Omitted in Wa; päda s a-b omitted in Pu'° . Cited by Har-A. 1.17.39; Laks 3.319-20
— a) Pu4 
N P u
1 T M d
3 T
M
d
4
— b ) TMd4 fW; La1 
NPu1
. 
, Pu2 Pu4 
— d) TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]
56. Cited by Kum 1.3.4; Har-K 1.17.39; Dev4.245, 246; Mädh 1.719;päda- a cited by Vis
1.180 —a)Lo 4Waom 
Tj2 
Jo1 
— b) Bo T 
— c) ßKt5 wKt6 MÏr4 
— d) Tr1
57. Cited by Dev 5.13—a) Bo Ho 
Be3 
— b) sKt5 wKt6 
MTr6
om
58. Cited by Mädh 1.570; päda- c cited by Vij 3.1 [intro] — a) Tj1 
NNg
[but cor f h ] cRi"; wKt3 
Be3 =TT — b) NKt4 
TMd4
oMd5 
o M y <£d^1<i; T r
1 " M
T
r
6
— c ) Tr1 
NKt 4
MTr4 
— d) Ho w K t 3 o M d 1
59. Cited by Vij 3.z8-g;Apa 893; päda s a-b cited by Vij 1.52; Dev 5.35— a) Pu2 Pu4
— b)MTr6 
L o
4 ß K t
5 
— c) Hy Jo1 oMd5
BBe2 
wKt1 : 
La1 Pu8 
, NKÍ sKt5 wKt6 Tr1 
A p a L o
2
NPu1 
M
T
r
6
' — d ) T M d 3 L o 1 
Tr2 
wKt1
Be1 Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 Ox3 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly M]
60. Cited by Vis 1.53; Apa 893;Jmv 111.42; Laks 10.66; Dev 5.37; Mädln.sgo; päda s
a-b cited by Vij 1.254; JOT v 11.6.17; Dev 1.181 — a) Tr2 
La1 
— b) Bo
TMd3 
— c) wKt1 
Be3 Bo wKt3 TMd4 oOr Tj1 Laks 
— d) La1
TMd4
oOr
BoGMd1Pu10
TMd4


--- PAGE 580 ---
Chapter 5 
569
61.* Most mss. and commentators, as well as all editions, read here the two following
verses. The single verse of the critical edition is expanded into two by adding two päda s
before and two after pada-a. In order to maintain the traditional numbering, I have omitted
verse number 62.1 give below the expanded version together with the variants:
Päda s a-b of verse i are omitted in sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 TMd3 oMd' oMy NNg Ox3 Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 [folly Nd] Me Go Laks 10.17; ma in wKt6; added after verse
58 in NPu
1 Tj1. First verse cited by Apa 896.
61.a) o O r A p a 
— b) NPu
1 
— c) xMd3 olvly
Bo; 
TMd4 
Hy NKt
4 sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
— d ) L a k s L a
1 Pu4 
B
e
1
T
r
2 
K t 2 o O r
La1'
62. a) Wa 
— b) o O r L a 1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 
wKt1 Tj1
After the first verse of the expanded version, two additional verses are given in oMd1
TMd4 Tr2 Laks 10.23; Madh 1.583; Apa 896; both are given after the 2nd verse in oMd5 MTr4
MTr6. The first additonal verse is given after verse 58 in Be3 oOr NPu
1 Tj1 and it is
commented by Nä Rc:
1. c) rMd4 oMd5 oOr MTr4 MTr6 ÏTfT ^R":
2. a-d) TMd4
— d) oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 Laks 
aMd1
TMd4 adds several verses, the first before verse i of the expanded version and the others
after 2. The first verse is given after verse 2 of the expanded version also in Be3 Ho wKt1 oOr
Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [the latter two transpose päda s a-b and c-d|;it is commented by Rc:
i. a)wKt' : 
Hoi 
TMd4 
— clTMd4 
MTr4
— d) oOr
Be3Tj1
Ho 
Tr2
wKt1
MTr6


--- PAGE 581 ---
570 
Chapter 5
63. Cited by Maclh 1.606— a) oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 
iMd3 TMd4 
Be1
Lo4Lo5oMd' 
" P
u
4
o
m
— b ) BKts 
wKt1
Lo2 
cMd5 Tr1 
— c) La1 MTr3 MTr6 
oMd1
Be1 [but me] oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 uT^Mâdh [vi] 
sOx1
NPu1
Folios containing 5.64-140 missing in La2. An additional verse in TMd4 is given below
after 5.83.
64.* Cited by Vij 3.18; Apa 883, 893; päda s a-c cited by Vis 1.252 — a) NKt4 La1 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Nd 
[oMy 
nKf
Bo 
Ho 
Tj1 
wKt3 
— b)TMd4 
" 
.Bo 
eKt5
wKt6 
Pu'°o m 
~c)sOx'sPu6 
" Vis 
TMd3 
— d) xMd4
sBe2 sCa Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oOr Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
wKt3 
; Kt2 
Tj1
65.* Cited by Vij 3.24; Apa <)i2;Laks 10.51; Dev 5.38-9; Maclh 1.610 — a) Apa [vi]
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Bo Apa [ v i ] — b) w K t
6 T j
1 
sBe2
Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu8 Pu10 Apa DevMädh Bh (ad
11.197) Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— c) Be1 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1
Lo3 Ox2 Tr2 Wa Laks Mandlik KSS Dave 
Bo 
oOt 
TMd4 
Bh [ad
11.197] 
Jo2 wKt1 [Jolly R] 
— d) Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Vij;
66. Päda s c-d omitted in oMd'. Cited by Vij 3.20; Dev$.4; päda s c-d cited by Apaioq;
Hem 3/3.726; Dev2.3o8; Mädh 1.504 — a) MTr6 
, wKt6 
— b) Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 
Ho Hy La1 oOr Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— c) Bo Pu2 Tj2 MTr6 
Ho
; Ox3 VcT:; Tj1 
Dev 5.4 
— d) Apa [vi] 
o
O
r
— After
this TMd3 oMy Tr2 Tr1 [Jolly Nd] give verse 78.
67.* Omitted in Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [because Go comments on 66-67 together]. Cited by Vij
3.23; Laks 10.36 — a) MTr4 
T M d 3 [ J o l l y Nd] Nd 
oMd5 oMy MTr6
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
— b) Lo2" 
" sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3
La1 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu10 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
oMd1
Bo 
Be3 T M d 3 o M y 
— c) NKt4 
_ 
Be1 sBe2
wKt3 La1 Lo1 TMd4 NPu
1 Pu4 
H o M T r
6 o M y T M d
3 oMd5 Tr1
sPu6
Be3
Tr2
Bo
— d) Lo1 Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 582 ---
Chapter 5 
571
AW 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] Me [but unclear whether root or gloss] Dave
Additional verses in Mandlik KSS Dave; first verse also in Ho; third verse added after
72 in La1 NPu1 Mandlik pT] KSS Dave:
i. a) Ho! 
—b)Ho 
— d)Ho
3. a) NPu ' 
— a-b) Mandlik KSS Dave [after 72]
— d)La' 
~ 
Mandlik KSS Dave [after 72] J 
.NPu1
68. Cited by Vis 3.1; Vij s.i-2;Apa 870; Dev 5.20 — a)oMd5 
wKt1
— b)Pu2Pu4 
" Pu4 
TMd4 
— c)TMd3 
— d)Pu2
69.* Pu9 give only pâda- a as prafikcr, pâda s c-d omitted in Jm Wa [haplo]. Cited by Vis
3.1; Vij 3.i~2;Apa 870, 911; Dev 5.20; päda s c-d cited by Vij 3.23— a) wKt3 
oMy
MTr6 
— b) o M d 5 B e 3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2eKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo4
Lo5 cMd1 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 Tj1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
wKt3 
— c) Hy La1 NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 
Bo Ho Lo3 NNg Tj1 Tr1 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
Apa 
.Be 3Tj' 
iMd4 
Jo2GMd1 TMd3 oMd5 cMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd R]
[Jolly G] 
Be1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 [cor to] Tr2 R
e
B
o Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2MTr3 [Jolly M3'4 Me4 Ku M]
Vis Dev Nâ Mr Jolly Mandlik KSS 
_ 
MTr6 
Lo3 
sBe2 Vij
wKt1 wKt3 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Apa 911 [folly G] 
Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Kt2 oMd1 sOx1
sPu6Tj'Tj2MTr3Jo//y
70.Päda s a-b omitted in Jm Wa. Cited by Vij 3.1-2; Apa&jr, Dev 5.23; Mädh 1.606 —
b) TMd3 
— c) T
M
d
4
s
O
x
1 s P u 6 B o Jo2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy NNg MTr4 MTr6 Vij Dev Mädh 
' 
~ - d) Bo
71.Päda s a-b cited by Dev 5.13 and päda s c-d by Dev 5.46 — a) Pu'°o m 
Lo1
— b)TMd4 
o M d ' T j
1 
Lo4Lo5 
cMd1
— c)TMd4 
L
o
1
P
u
5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]— 
d) Tj2
Ox3
wKt6
— d) GMd5
BoLo4Pu10
Jha
NNg


--- PAGE 583 ---
572 
Chapter 5
72. Cited by ^7/3.24; Apa 907; Dev 5.31; Mädh 1.608 — a) Be3 
;
Wa oMd5 [but me] om 
NNg — b) rMd4 
— c) inTr4 iviTr6 Dev Dave 
Pu7
me to 
Pu5 Pu9 addbefore 
— c-d) Me [as patha, but rejected by Me]
— d) Dev 
; NNg 
sKt5 wKt6 rMd4 Apa
oOr
For the added verse in La1 NPu1 Mandlik KSS Dave, see after 5.67.
73.Only p r a t ï k a i n Pu4. Cited by Vij 3.i6;Apa 885 — a) sKt5 wKt6 
Pu7
me to 
Pu5 
— b) Wa gives 74b instead; [Jolly M34]
BKt 5wKt 6" 
TMd3oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd]Nd [ p ä t h a ] — c) Lo3 
Lo4
Lo 5Ox 3Pu 2Pu l oWa 
B e
1 o O r 
— d) rMd4 
. Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Lo'oOr 
jNPu
1 
wKt6 
Be3BoTj' 
nKf
74. In Ho page containing 74 to 82b is missing, and in oMy page containing 74b to
84c; pada-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Dev 5.46 — a) Dev 
Lo1
Jo2 Lo3 
NPu1 " 
NNg 
Bo 
Tr1 
oMd '
wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu 9' 
Pu7 
corto 
Pu5 Pu9 
GMd1
Pu9 
NPu1 
sKt5 wKt6 P u 1 0 . L a 1
75. Pâda s a-b lacuna in NKt4. Cited by Vij3.18; Dev 5.46 — a) Be3 : 
Pu5 Wa
— c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
TMd4 
— d)
Lo1 Tj1
Additional verse in Mandlik [
76. Pâda s a-b omitted in oMd' [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.21; Laks io.33;Z)ev 5.50; pâda s
c-d cited by Mädh 1.598 — a) Lo2 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 Lo2 Tj2 uTr3Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave ' — c) Tr1 
wTr3 
— d) Dev 
uTr6
TMd4
NPu1
BBe2
Lo1 GMd1 Tj2
Lo2 NNg
oMd5 Wa
wKt6 Tj1
— b) Pu2 Pu9
Pu7
'— d)NKt4
NKt4
— c)Dev
TMd3
Be3 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
GMd5 MTr4 MTr6
— b) TMd3 Tj1
Pu4
] KSS Dave:


--- PAGE 584 ---
Chapter 5 
573
77. Omitted in NKt4 [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.21; Apagoq; Dev^.^S; Mädh 1.600; päda s a-
b cited by Vij 3.18 — a) Tt2 
Bo 
— b) TMd3 
\pm ]; Tj' 
V 
— c) Tj'
; 
Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] 
— d) Be1 NNg NPu1 Wa 
[cf. 78d]
78. Omitted in NKt4 oMd1; placed after verse 5.66 in TMd3 Tr1 Tr2. Cited by Apa 905,
909; Laks 10.35; Dev 5.47; Mädh 1.595— a) Be3 
, — b) TMd4 
Bo
NPu1 Dev 
—
 c) Be1 Wa 
— d) Be1 Wa 
[cf. 77d]; oOr
79. Cited by Dev 5.59; Madh 1.622 —
 a) Pu2 Pu4 
Kt; 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10
[Jolly M R] Dave Jha 
— b) Jo1 La1 Pu4 Pu10 Tr1 
NKt4 
— d) oOr
wKt3NPu' 
sKt5 wKt6 Ox2 Pu5 P u
7 N K t
4 
Tr2
NPU1
80. Päda s c-d omitted in Mir3. Cited by Vij 3.24; Apa 912 — a)^Kt6 Lo3
— b) wKt1 
— c) T j
1 W a 
— d) Jo1 
oOr
xMd4
81. Verses 81-82 given in La' in the following order: Sied, 82ab, Slab, 82cd. Cited by
Vij 3.24; Apa 912; Dev 5.13; päda s a-b cited by Dev^.^S; Mädh 1.610; and päda s c-d by Dev
5.42—a) oOr 
T M d
3 H y > 
Be1 Lo2 Lo5 Mir6 
.oMd1
— c) Bö wKt6 Lo1 oMd5 Tr2 Dev 5.13 
; Tr2 
Bö 
Dev 5.13,...-
82.* Päda s c-d omitted in Ox3. Päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.25;Apa 915; Dev 5.44; and päda s
c-d by Apa 913 — a) MTr6 
Tj1 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Lo3
NKt4 
Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo2
 TMd3 oMd5
 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu1
Pu2Pu8Pu10Tr' Vij Dev Mandlik Jolly JhaKSS Dave 
wKt3 
TMd4
83. Cited by Dev 5.35;Madh 1.579 — a) Be3 Kt2nKt5 TMd3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Bo _ 
Tr2 _ 
. Be1 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 om 
Lo4 ma 
~ 
Tr1


--- PAGE 585 ---
574 
Chapter 5
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
— c) Pu4 om 
—
 d) Jm
Four additional verses in Be1 iviTr4 MandlikKSS Dave; verses i, 2, and 4in oMd1 xMd4
oMd5 NPu1 MTr6; verses i and 3 in Ox2 Pu8 Tj1; verses 2 and 4 in La1; verses 2 and 4 placed
after 94 in Pu2 Pu4; verse i in Be3 Ho wKt1 wKt3 oOr Pu3; verse i placed after 84 in ßKt5
wKt6; verse 4 placed after 92 in Tr1 and after 104 in TMd3; verse 4 cited in Apa 906; Mädh
1.587:
1. a) NPu1 " 
Ox2 " 
— b) Be1 Mandlik KSS Dave
oMd5 
TMd4 
N
P
u
1
•
— c)Pu8 
Tj'MTr6
wKt1 MTr4 
w K t 3 T M d 4
2. a) La1 Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 oMd5 MTr4 Mir6 
NPu1
— b)NPu' 
— c)NPu' 
.Pu2 Pu4 
; Be1
Mandlik KSS Dave 
T M d 4 _ " — d) Be1 Mandlik KSS Dave
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
La1
3. a) Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 
— b)Ox2 
,Ox 2Tj'
4. a)La'GMd 5 
" MTr4 MTr6 
" Tr1 
Be1 Mandlik KSS Dave
—
 b) oMd5 Tr1 Apa Mädh 
[Apa 
]; TMd3
[...] 
TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 Apa 
Be1 
oMd1 MTr6
La1 
— c)oMd' 
MTr6 
Mandlik KSS Dave
La1 
Tr1 
— c-d) Pu2 Pu4 
[cf.
94cd] — d)oMd ' 
" 
NPu1 
La1 
Tr1 Apa
Mädh
Two additional verses in La1 oOr; verse 2 also in Be3 Pu3; verse i added after 5.63 in
TMd4:
1. d) La1 [lacuna] 
\ma 
; oOr '
2. c) La1
84. Omitted in Tr1. Cited by ApaSgi; Laks 10.25; pada-b cited by Vij 3.17 — a) Pu10
owT;Be' 
Tj1 
H y B e
3 Ho oOr Ox2 Tj1 
wKt3
NPu1 
Pu4 
o M d 5 . . 
— b) wKt1 Lo1 TMd4 
Tj1
Laks 
Be1 Ho sOx1 NPu1 s P u 6 s B e 2 wKt6 Lo1 TMd3 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 MTr6
— c) Pu4 Pu5 
— d) Pu2 P
u
4
o
M
d
1


--- PAGE 586 ---
Chapter 5 
575
85. Omitted in Tr1. Cited by Vij 3.3O;Apa 921; Hem 3/1.796; Dev 2.304; Mädh 1.228;
päda s a-b cited by Vis 3.257 — a) NKt4 Lo2 MTr6 Vis 
oMd5 
La1
— b)Lo2 
A
p
a
H
e
m 
BooOr 
; oMd5 M T r 4 T M d 3
sOx1 sPu6 [cor 
to] ; 
— c) wKt6 
sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 
N
N
g
—
d) oMd5 oMy Tr2 
rMd3
86. Cited by Apa 1198; //era 3/1.796; päda s a-b cited by Dev 2.262 — b) MTr6
— c)TMd3oMyMTr4MTr6//ew 
"to 1 cor 
t o 
i
M
d
4
— d )
sOx1 
" 
sPu6 
' [but cor}; Ho 
oMy 
TMd3
Jm 
Be3 s K t
5 J m oMd1 Tr1
87. Päda s a-b omitted in NKt4, placed here and before 86a in TMd3. Cited by Vij 3.30;
Apa 924; Hem 3/1.796; Dev 2.314 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
— b) O
x
2
— c)
Be3 iMd3 [both times] aMy Pu2 MTr6 
.wKt31%; sKt5 Lo1 La1 TMd3 [both times] Ox3
Pu3 Tr1 
— d) Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 [at 87] cMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 \Jolly
Gr] Vij Laks Hem 
_ 
[TMd3 
TMd3 [at 86] sOx1 [but cor]
[cf. 87b]; La1 
Be3 wKt6 La1 oMd1 TMd4 Ox2 Tj1 Tr2 Apa 
Ox3
88. Cited by Vij 3.5; Apa 876 — a) Pu5 Tr1 
Lo ' 
TMd3 M T r
4 N P u
1
oMd1 
TMd3 oMd1 cMy 
— c) Be3 
wKt1 
oMd5
BKt5 wKt6 
— d) TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Vij Apa 
; [cf. 76b]; Pu2
Pu4
89. Cited by Vis 1.225; Apa&jj; Dev 5.120 — a) NPu1 La1 
TMd3 oMy Tr1
wKt6 
NNgT^Wa 
— b) GMd' 
"" " 
oMd5
NPu1 
N N g _ _ w K t
3 H y o w 
— c) Ho Pu5 Pu7 [but cor}
T —d)TMd 4 ; 
o M d
1 T r
2 
After this, two verses are given in the
mss. that contain the commentary of Go. These are, in all likelihood, part of the commentary.
90. Cited by Dev 5.120 — a) oOr sOx1 sPu6 
. Be1 
Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 Kt2
BKt'Lo1 Pu 3Pu 8Tj h 
oMd1 
TMd4 
' — b) Tr2


--- PAGE 587 ---
576 
Chapter 5
—
 c) Be3 
Tj2 
wKt1 
— d)Pu10 
Bo Ho La1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be1 NKt4 Tj2 
Be1 nKt4 Pu5
91. Cited by Apa 884; Dev 5.97; Madh 1.633 — c) TMd4 
wKt3 
Lo5
TMd3 Tr1 
cMd1 
Apa 
sCa 
. Dev 
TMd4 
Bo
Lo2TMd4Ox2 
Lo5oMd' " 
TMd3 
— d) Tj1 
K t
2 B e
3
wKt'wKt3Tj' 
o M d
5 w K t
6
92.Cited by Apa 870; Dev 5.93; Mädh 1.634 — b)iMd3 Dev 
— c) Be3 Bo
oMd1 Tj1 
oOr Pu2 Pu4 Dev 
Jha Dave 
Lo1 
jT— d) wKt6 
Ho
3m Pu5 Pu7 Pu" Tr1 [Jolly G] 
TMd4 
Apa 
[vi 
JjHoTMd 3
cMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Pif P
u
4
J
m Ox2 Ox3 Pu8 [Jolly M] Apa
93. Cited by Mädh 1.616 — a) wKt6 
" 
Bo 
— b)cMd'TMd3
TMd4 oMy oOr MTr6 
[Jolly Gr] 
wKt6 
La1 ^T T
— c) sBe2 Ho Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Tr1 
oMd1 
Be3 Lo1
TMd4 
— d) Nä Ipâtha ]
94. Pâda s c-d omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Vij 3.2.7; Mädh 1.616 — a)îMd 4 
Be1
Bo wKt3 Lo1 TMd3 TMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1 [Jolly M'-2'8'9 R] Vij
Ho Pu5 Pu7 [cor to] Pu9 [Jolly G] 
oMy 
. 
. oMd5 
oMd1
— b) oMy 
cor to 
TMd3 
— c) wKt3 
— d) Bo Pu3
oOr 
Be1 
Pu3 MTr3 
Tj1
95. Cited by Apa 916 ; Laks 10.47; Mädh 1.626 — a) Tj ' 
Laks
Tr1 
Bo 
— b)Pu 3Wa 
— c)Lo2oOr' 
o O r — d)Tj'
oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Mädh ......
96. a) oOr 
TMd3 o
M
y
L
o
3 
Jo2 
— b) Be1 Bo
MTr6
MTr6 
" 
sOx1 sPu6
wKt6
Tr1
Lo2
TMd4
—d)oOr
Pu2 Pu4
NPu1
Tj1
wKt1


--- PAGE 588 ---
Chapter 5 
577
97. a)HoTMd 4oOr 
iMd4 
— b) iMd4 
sKt5 Lo1 cMd1
MTr6 
— c)TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6Tj1:^r; NNg 
— d) La1 Pu10
wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
La1 
Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] Rn
NPu
1 
Be3 Bo sKt5 Lo2 xMd3 NNg Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 y oily N Nd]
xMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
/ V ä l p ä t h a ] T j
2 
Ho 
Ox2 
oOr
98. Omitted in Ox*. Cited by Vij 3.2.1; Apa 916 — a) Pu2 Pü
4 
Lo2 MTr6
wKt3 
xMd3 
Lo5MTr3 
— b)xMd4 
" 
Lo2 
La1
oMd1 _ — c)Be' 
rMd4 " 
' oMd1 
Lo1 
sOx1 sPu6 
[but
both cor} —
 d) NPu
1 Wa 
[NPu
1 
" ]; xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6
, Pu2 
~ ~ 
oMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4 MTr6
99. Cited by Vij 3.z8-g;Laks 10.106 — a) jMd4 Laks 
— c) ßBe2 
rMd3
sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to] 
Tr2 
Pu9 
Be3 Bo sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Laks 
wKt1
GMd5 oMy 
—d)Tj' 
NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4
100.Pâda s c-d omitted in Bo Pu4 — a) x M d 4 T r 1 
oMd ' oOr NPu
1 Tr2
Tj1 
Bo [but cor] 
rMd3 oMy Pu4 MT^MTr6 
Pu2
— b ) oM> 
Lo5 x
M
d
3
— c ) o
M
d
1
— d ) xMd4
. 
Tj1 Tr1 
o
M
y
w
K
t
3
101. Cited by Vij 3.14; Apa88s, 913; Dev 5.95; Mâdh 1.631 — a)TMd3 
4pa 883
MTr6 
— b)NNg 
BBe2BoHoLo5 
Lo1 
— c) oOr 
—
d) wKt6 
cMd1
102. Verses 102 and 103 transposed in oMd1. Cited by Vij 3.14; Apa88y, Dev 5.95;
Mâdh 1.632 — a) Lo1 NNg 
— a-b) iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 DevMädh
[Dev % if] — b) oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 
Pu2 Pu4
" 
— c)Wa 
oMd5 oMy 
— c-d) oMd1 : 
—
d) ßKt5 wKt6 " 
" 
" 
[wKt6 
]; NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 ? 
NKt4
Be1 Lcf Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 PuloTr' Tr2 Wa [JoWy M G]
 Pu2 Pu4
TMd3


--- PAGE 589 ---
578 
Chapter 5
TMd4 
Lo' 
TMd3 cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Additional verse in Be3 sCa Ho cMd ' oMd4 cMd5 Pu3 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Gr]; given
after 104 in La1 TMd4:
a) oMd5 ; 
, TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
— a-b) [Jolly Gr] -
— b)oMd' 
MTr4MTr6 
TMd4
Be3 
.,oMd5 
" — c) La1 TMd4 
_ 
_ 
[iMd4
HoTj1 
Be3 
Pu3 
o
M
d
5
o
M
d
1
 •
MTr6 
H o T
j
1
B
e
3 
BCa^^il-^ílcia ^ — d )
Be3 GMd5
103. Cited by Vij 3.26; Apa 918; Laksw.$6 —
 b) Tr2 
Be1 Bo Jm Jo1 Kt2
Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 Ox3 NPu1 Pu3 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M Nd] Vij MandlikJha KSS Dave
— c) Jm om 
Be1 sBe2 Ho Jo2 NKt4 TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr2
Me Laks Apa Dave Jha 
sCa Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 oOr MTr6 
~ 
wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 oMd1 TMd4
GMd5cMyTr' 
, Ox3 
_ 
— d) wKt1 Tj1 Tr2 
Ox2
104. Cited by Vij3.1-2; Apa &jo;Dev 5.97; Mâdh 1.634 — a) Ox3NPu' 
Lo4 Lo5
— ^La'Lo'Tj 1 
w K t
1 B e
3 Bo Ho Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Pu3 Pu8
Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 Vij Mâdh 
oOr Dev 
H y M T r
4 MTr6 
— c) sOx1 sPu6
— d) TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 
Be3 Bo 
Vij 
wKt6
Additional verse in La1:
105.Pâda s c-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Hem 3/1.792; Bhad 11.235— a) Be? wKt1 TMd3
oMy 
M
T
r
3
B
o 
— b) Bo ßKt5 wKt6 TMd4 cMd5 Pu10 Tr2 Hem
; TMd3 
H
y
; wKt1 La1 T
r
1
P
u
2 Pu4 
eBe2
— c)wKt' 
o M y — a
) HemTMd3 
Tj1
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
Lo1 
"" sBe^oMy
Additional verse in Be1 Be3 HoTj1:
b)Ho 
— c ) B e ' — d)Be3Tj'
Tr2
Wa
La1 TMd4


--- PAGE 590 ---
Chapter 5 
579
106. Omitted in Pu9. Cited by //ems/i.792; Laks 10.114 — a) Laks 
sOx ' sPu6
[Jolly Nd] 
— b) Lo4 [cor to} Lo5 
MTr6 " 
Mir4 
wKt1
MTr4 MTr6 
— c) TMd4 
, Lo4 
Lo5 
o
M
y
B
o NNg
Be3 Jo2 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6Tj' 
[Tj1 '
]
; H
y
o
O
r 
Hoom
T r 2 om 
— d ) cMd1 
o
M
y
P
u
2 o m last
lay. Omitted in Pu9. Cited by Hem 3/1.792 — a) wKt1 
— c) MTr4 
Bo
Pu'° 
— d)NPu' L a
1 " Tr2
108.* Omitted in Pu9; päda s c-d omitted in Be3 oMd ' [haplo]. Cited by Hem 3/1.792;
Laks 10.114; Mad/i1.533, 2.116; pada-a cited by Vis 1.195,and pada-c by Apa 98 — a) Laks
H e m 
H
o
N
K
f Tj1 MTr4 MTr6 V
i
s
— b)BKt 5wKt 6
Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5
 TMd4 oMd5 cMy
Ox2 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr3 Laks Hem Mädh Mandlik Jolly KSS
109. Omitted in oMd1 Pu9; päda s a-b omitted in Be3. Cited by Hem 3/1.792; Bh (ad
11.235) —a) Be1 
N
P
u
1
P
u
5 Pu7 
— b) Tr1 
oMy
wKt 3^ 
— c)NNg 
cMd5 
" — d)0x3 
,Tj'
no. Omitted in TMd4; not commented by Nd; päda s a-b and c-d transposed in Lo4 Lo5
Ox3. Cited by Hem 3/1.805 — a) xMd3 
Tr1 
NKt4 
Be3 sCa Pu3 Pu8 Tr2
NKt4 GMd1T: — b) Be3 Hy wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox2
Ox3 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 MTr3
MTr4 
N K t
4 i M d
3 
[Jolly Gr] 
—
 d)
Tj1 
TMd3 
~ 
Bo 
Jm 
Hy Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Tj1
111. Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Viji82-y, Apa 255; Hem 3/1.805; Mäd/i2.i^4 — a) Pu4
Pu10Tr' 
N
K
f
— b
)
T
M
d
3
o
M
y
— c ) iMd3
— d)Bo 
w K t
6 o M d
5
112. Päda s a-b omitted in rMd4. Cited by Vis 1.181; Viji. 182-3; Apa 254; Hem 3/1.805;
Mâdh 2.134 — a) NKt4 
Pu2 P u
4 — c ) TMd3 P u
8 N K t
4 
Be3


--- PAGE 591 ---
580 
Chapter 5
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) cMd1 TMd4 
Ho ßKt5 wKt6 
rMd3 
: Tr1
113.* Cited by Hem 3/1.805; Laks 10.133 — a) La Lo4 Lo5 oMd l oMd5 Ox3
Be' BBe2 BCa wKt1 Lo1 iMd3 oMy NNg oOr [Jolly Nd] 
Be1 oMy 
Be3 Bo
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3
 BKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 TMd4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Laks
No Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) wKt3 NKt4 oMd1 iMd4 oMd5 Pu2 Tr1
 MTr4
MTr6 Wa 
, sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj2 Tr2 uTr^Rc Mandlik
Jha KSS 
. sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Rc Mandlik Jha KSS
Be'oOr WaTW; NKt4 La1 o O r 
— c ) B
o
" 
Lo2: 
M e [pâtha ]
TMd3 
— d) NKt4 TMd3 o M y N K t
4 
rMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Gr Nd]
114. Cited by Vij 1.190; Hem 31.805; pâda- c cited by Vis 1.195 — a) B K t
5 ; sOx'
sPu6 
T r
2 T M d
3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 ¡folly Nd] 
; oMy
[Jolly Gr] 
'• 
Bo NKt4 Lo5 cMd1 NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10 [Jolly M1-2'5-*-9] Hem 
— b)
Tr1 _ 
wKt6 
L o
1 B o 
w
K
t
3
. La1 
Be3
Pu2 Pu4 
H y " 
[Jolly G ] — c ) P i i ° B
o NKt4 
V i s —
 d )
TMd4
115. Päda s c-d omitted in wKt1. Cited by Hem 3/1.805; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.190— a)
Ho wKt1 NKt4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6 
Bo
— b) oMy 
H
o
B
B
e
2 
TMd3 
Be1 Be3 wKt1
wKt3 NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 [Jolly G] Rc Mr Go 
; Jo1 Kt2
Pu10 
— c ) N K f T M d
3 
Lo 2oMd'GMd 5 Pu3 Pu8Tr'MTr4
MTr6 
—c-d) NPu1 
— d)Pu 2Pu 4 
TMd3
TMd4 
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Pu5 Pu 7 Pu 9 
.BoLa'oMyTr1
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd3 Tr1 [this is cited by Nd and ascribed to Aftgiras):
a) TMd3
TMd3 places verse 121 here.
116. Omitted in wKt1. Cited by Hem 3/1.805; Mädh 2.114 — a) Lai 
TMd4
— b) wKt6 
. NKt4 
— c) Tj ' 
Ox3 
Pu2 P u
4 L o
1
sOx1 sPu6 
— d)oMy 
~" Tr1 
~ o O r " 
Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 La1 Lo3 TMd4
Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 [Jolly R] 
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 592 ---
Chapter 5 
581
Additional verse in [Jolly Gr]; placed after pada-b in oMd5:
c) oMd5 ;
117. Cited by Hem 3/1.806; Mädh 2.114 — a) Ho 
Bo 
rMd3
wKt1 NKt
4 La1 o O r Ox3 
O
x
2
" T r 2 — b ) Pu3 
—
c ) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
T r
2 o M d
1 M T r
4 s O x
1 sPu6 
NPu
1
Pu3 
" Ho 
w K t 6 e K t 5 La1 Lo1 o O r ; 
sKt5 wKt6 
Pu2 Pu4
; Tr1 
— d) sKt5 
Ho La1 oOr Ox3 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9
W a 
e C a w K t ' w K t 6 P u 5 Pu7 P u
9 N N g 
wKt6
118.* Cited by Vij 1.184; Hem 3/1.806; Mädh 2.136 — a) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo3
oOr 
— c) HemLo1 P u
1
0 o M y Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
— d)
oMd1 Hem 
, Lo3
*Additional verse in Be3 Bo Tj1 Mandlik 
KSS; added after 126 in oMd1 rMd4,
and after i28b in MTr4 MTr6:
a)Tj>; 
B e
3 ; " 
" 
Mandlik KSS 
MTr4
MTr6" 
TMd4 
— b)Be3 
'Bo Mandlik KSS 
— c)BoTj'
Mandlik KSS 
T M d
4 " — d)Be 3Tj' 
Mandlik KSS
Bo 
TMd4
119. Cited by Hem 3/1.806; Mädh 2.139 — a) ßCa Jo'aKt5 cMd1 xMd4 oMy NPu
1 Pu2
MTr6Wa[Jo//yNd]//em 
o O r 
-b)oMd5Tr' 
B o L o
3 B e
1
oMd1 NNg Pu2 Pu4 
wKt6 
wKt1 
— c) NKt
4 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 Puio
DaveJha 
—d) La1 
oMd1 
; Hern
120. Cited by Hem 3/1.806; Mädh 2.138 — a) Tj ' 
Lo5 Tr2
TMd3 
L o
1 M ä d
h 
— b ) T
r
2
T
j
1 
— c ) Jo1
wKt1 
Bo Ho Pu2 P
u
4
— d) wKt1
121. Placed after 115 in TMd3. Cited by Apa 260; Hem 3/1.806; Mädh 2.138 — a) oMy
Be3Tj" 
— tyNKt4— c ) L o 4 w K t 6 
— d) Be3


--- PAGE 593 ---
582 
Chapter 5
Ho NKt4 Pu2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Apa
122.* Cited by Hem 3/1.806 — a) Tj1 
HoNPu1 Tj1 Hem 
Be1 eBe2
Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 uKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
 NNg Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2
Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) Bo 
iMd3 
oOr 
sBe2 Be3
Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10
Tjj Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) NPu' 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
cMd1 
Be1 TMd3 o O r Tj1 ' — 
d ) H o 
Be1 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 wKt6 TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 
oMd5
*This spurious verse is found in all but the following mss.: NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 [but ma]
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox3 Pu10 Tr1 Mir4 Mir6 Wa \7olly Nd], and given in
editions [except Jha} as verse 123 [see endnote] and cited by Vij i.i87;Apa 263. Placed after
verse 126 in Bo, which omits päda s c-d. 1 have eliminated the number 123 from the edition to
maintain the traditional numbering of the verses:
a) TMd4 
La1 Lo1 oOr Vij [vl] 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3 cMd1 sOx1 sPu6
Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Dave 
oOr Vij 
[vl as in ed]
— b) Vij Apa 
oOr 
; TMd4 
— c) Tj1
Apa 
' 
— d)Jo 2Lo 3oOr 
; Tj1 
Be1 Ho
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6
124. Omitted in eKt5 Ox3; ma in wKt6. Cited by Laks 10.152; Hem 3/1.821; Mädh 2.147
— a) Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oOr sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 MTr3MM? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Ho 
T M d 4 [ f o r t h e p a d a J j N P u 1 
wKt1
— b) cMy 
" ; Be3 La1 oOr 
— d) Ho 
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 [cor to] Tr2
Laks Hem Mädh 
Tj2
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6;added after verse i22b in oMd5; cited by
Hem 3/1.823 [cf. BDh 1.10.1]:
b) Hem 
TMd4 "
M
T
r
4
M
T
r
6 
— c) oMd1
MT^om 
— d)oMd' 
MTr4 
TMd4
125. Päda s c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Mädh 2.105—b) Ox3 
NKt4
oOrom 
Pu2 Pu4 
La1 
N?U' 
Tr2 
wKt1 
wKt3
oMd1 
Hem 
— c) Be1 
eBe2 
-— d) oMd1 rMd3 Mädh
Lo1 
Pu2 P u 4


--- PAGE 594 ---
Chapter 5 
583
126. Cited by Vis 1.190; Vij 1.185; Apa 36;Hem 3/1.818; Dev 2.247; MSclh 2.148— a)
NKt4 Lo1 [cor to] 
N
P
u
1
" oMd1 
Tr 1" 
wKt1 iMd3
oMy MÏr6 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo1 
xMd4 sOx1 sPu6 [but cor} Hem Apa Mâdh
— b) Lo1 oMd1 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 ; 
Jo1 
e C a w K t
1
TMd3 
Pu5 
— c) Hem Mädh 
TMd3 oMd5 oOr sOx1 NPu1
Pu5sPu6Pu8Tj'Tr' [Jolly RM*'9] 
O
x
2
f
o
r added verse in cMd1 TMd4 MTr4
MTr6, see addition after verse 118.
127.Cited by Hem 3/1.818; Mädh 2.149 — b) B e 1 w K t 3 NKt4 
Bo oOr
[but cor] 
—
 c) rMd3 
sKt5 wKt6 
— d) MTr4 
Ho
MTr6 " 
Tj1
128. Cited by Apa 272; Har-A 1.15.2; Lakx 10.157; Hem 3/L.6i8; Mädh 2.119 — a) Ho
xMd4 
BKt5 wKt6 NNg oOr Pu3 
; rMd3 
Tj1 
— c)
TMd3 
L
a
1
T
j
2 
— d)oMy
129. Cited by Hem 3/1.838; Mädh 2.145; päda s c-d cited by Apa 263 — a) Hy Tj '
Lo4 [but cor] 
3
M
y
r
M
d
4 
— b) Tj2 ' 
Jo1 Tj1 Dave 
. Pu2 Pu4
Tr2 
TMd4 
' MTr
6MUlRdl:; TMd3 
— c) Ho 
.. 
, ßKt5 
, wKt6
Kt2 Lo1 oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg Pu4 Tr1 Apa Re Jolly 
— d) Hem 
Lo2
oMd5 NNg Pu3 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Hem
130. ma in Bo. Cited by Hem 3/1.835 — a) ßBe2 Be3 Bo La1 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6
Ox3 
—b) MTr4 M
T
r
6
T
j
1 
" T M d 3 " 
wKt3 
oMd1 cMd5
Tr1 
Hy 
—c) Be1 NPu1 
Lo2 oOr Ox3 Tr2 
oMy MTr4MTr6
B o 
La1 N
N
g
!
" T
r
1
P
u
1
0 
cMd5
 
TMd3
 TMd4
— d)TMd3 
NPu1 
Pu4 
oOr
131. Cited by Hem 3/1.836; Mädh 2.146 — a) MTr6 
La1 
— b) Lo2
oMd1 
Hy La1 cMd5 oOr sOx1 Pu2 s
P
u
6
T
r ' oMd1 
— c) Ho
TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 P
u
9
" sCa TMd3 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2
 
BBe2
Wa
Tj1
wKt1 oMy sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Laks Hem


--- PAGE 595 ---
584 
Chapter 5
Be3Tj' 
NPu1 
_ 
— djsBe2 Bo Ho Lo1 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu'Tj1
Jo2 Lo3 [Jolly R] 
Be3Tj' 
~ 
TMd3
Additional verse in Ho wKt1 wKt3 oOr Mandlik \_ 
] KSS Dave:
b) Mandlik KSS Dave ' 
Ho 
wKt1 
—
d)oOr
Additional verse in La1 rMd4oOr; placed after 142 in Mandlik 
KSS Dave; pâda s a
and c transposed in La1 oOr:
a) La1 oOr 
— b) Mandlik KSS Dave 
— d) Mandlik KSS
DaveiTEzmg"
Additonal verse in La1; placed after 133 in oOrNPu1, and after 142 in Mandlik 
KSS
Dave:
a) oOr 
: — b) Mandlik KSS Dave 
NPu
1
La1 
— c)NPu'
132. Cited by Hem 3/1.842; Dev 2.250; Mädh 2.148— b) La1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg Ox3
Pu10 
BKt5 w K t
6 o O r 
— c) sBe2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1
sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6 Mädh 
TMd4 
— d) oOr
TMd4 
B o L o
5 
La1 NPu1 T r
1 r M d
3 
H y
Ox2
 
BBe2Be3BoNNgTj1
133. Cited by Hem 3/1.838 — a) La1 
Ho 
— b) oMy 
; Tj1
TMd3 
xMd4 
— c) NKf
4 
— d) TMd3 
Be' 
cMd1 oOr
cMy 
corto 
TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G] Hem 
BKt 5wK.t 6
134. Päda s c-d omitted in Lo3 oMy. Cited by Apa 271; Hem 3/1.794; Dev 2.250; Mädh
2.148 —a) iMd4 
— b ) T r
2 o M d
1 Tj1 
— c) Bo TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
wKt6 
oOr 
oMd5 Tr1 
— d)Tj' 
Ho
Bo
135. Omitted in Pu5; placed after 131 in Tr2;padas a-b omitted in Lo3. Cited by Apa 271;
Hem 3/1.794; Laks 10.120; Dev 2.250— a) La' 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 
oMy


--- PAGE 596 ---
Chapter 5 
585
I
— b) Jo1 Kt2 Dev Mandlik Bühler Jha KSS Dave 
Jm
sBe2 
[for whole pâda] ; Be1 Ho wKt1 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo5 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu3
sPu6 [Jolly M]Apa 
Tr2 
Jo2 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
Apa 
oMy
cMd5 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 
o M d
1 L o
3 
iMd4 
— d) La1
Tr1 
Be1 
NKt4
Additional verse in La1 TMd4 cMd5 MTr4 MTr6:
a) La1 
— b)La'' 
— c) xMd4 
— d)oMd 5
;La'
Additonal verse in Be1 [cited by Me and Ku at 134]:
136. Omitted in Hy Kt2. Cited by Apa 36; Dev 2.244; MSdh 1.215; päda s a-b cited by Vis
1.17 —a)sOx'sPu6 
:rMd4 
wKt3 " Tj1 
— b)Tj' 
Be>BBe2Ho
sKt5 wKt6 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 Apa '
P
u
3
" 
Lo3 GMd1 xMd4 oMd5
oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Ku Rd R] Dev 
[ x M d 4 T M d 3 
—
c-d)Tj' 
_ 
_ 
— d ) s P u 6 T M d 3 
; MTr3 
wKt1
MSdh [vl] 
~ 
BBe2 Be3
 BKt5 wKt6 Lo4 oMd1
 TMd3
 NNg Ox3 Tr1 Wa Apa
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu8 T r
2 P u
4 
Jo2
Additional verse in oOr [the text is unclear]:
137.* Cited by Vij 3.250; Apa 36; Laks 1.157; Dev 2.246; Mädh 1.215 — a) TMd3 oMy
Dev 
— b) jMd3 aMy M
ä
d
h
. Pu7 P
u
9
— c) Tr2 
; Mädh
La11 
'; TMd3 cMd5 oMy La1 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Laks \
oMy 
— d) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 [cor tofh} sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 oMd1
oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Laks Mädh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
; Lo1
138.* Päda s c-d omitted in iMd4. Cited by Hem 3/2.957; Dev 2.260; Mädh 1.223 — a)
Be1 BBe2 Ho nKt5 wKt6 Lo4 TMd4 oMy oOr Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
Lo4 Lo5 Tr2
Be3 [but cor] Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Ox3 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4
MTr6 Na Dev MSdh
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Ho Jo2 Tr2 
Me Re support 
— b) NKt4 
, Mädh
TMd3 oMy Tj1 
H y — 
c ) B
o
B
e
3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 
—
c-d) oMd5 Mädh 
\—
 d) Be1 Bo Jo2 wKt1
wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 Wa
Hem 
Be3 Pu2 Pu4 T
j
1
s
B
e
2 
Ho 
Tr2 


--- PAGE 597 ---
586 
Chapter 5
for a similar hiatus see s.i4sc-d
Additional verse in Be3 [cf. 2.60]:
139.* Päda s c-d omitted in Pu2 — a) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1
[TMd4 
]; Be1 
— b) Ox3
 
NKt4 
MTr4 
— c) Tr1
La1 cMd1 
MTr4" 
wKt1 wKt6 Lo 3 cMy '
B
e
1 Lo4 Lo5 GMd1 Wa
— d) Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Wa [Jolly G N] 
eBe2 Be3 sCa Hy Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo4
Lo5 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Bo Jm Jo2 ßKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 NPu1
oMd5 Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 T
j
1
; TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]
xMd4 
w K t 1 T M d 3
140. Cited by Apa 906; Laks 2.269—a) Pu2 Pu4 
wKt3 
Lo5 Apa—
b) MTr6 
sKt5 wKt6 
Tj1 
— c) TMd3 " 
ßBe2 Be3 Bo sKt5 wKt6 Lo1
Lo2 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' Tr2 
; Be1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa 
— c-d) Ox2 Pu3 Pu8
— d) sKt5 wKt6 
Be1 Be3 Bo eCa La1 Lo1
 TMd3
oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Laks 
Ox3
141.Cited by Laks 1.141; Hem 3/2.972 — a) M T r 6 T M d 3 
oMd5 P u 1 0 —
b) Tj1 
Be1 BBe2 Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 La1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
 TMd3
oOr Ox2 Pu* MTr* Mandlik KSS 
oOr 
Tj2 
oMd1 
Lo1
 TMd3 cMd5 oMy
MTr4 uT^Hem 
. sBe2 sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 w Kt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox2 Pu8 Tj2
MTr3 [Jolly Ku R] Mandlik Dave KSS 
]pm ]; Ox3 
[ont J; TMd4 
Pu2 Pu4 
—
d) MTr4
MTr6 
oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
TMd3 
TMd4 
La1
Additional verse in oMd1 cMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Gr]; placed after 142 in La1 Mandlik
KSS Dave, placed after 143 in TMd4 oMd5 oOr;päda s a-b in TMd3. Cited by Hem
3/2.975; Dev2.267; Mädh 1.226 [cí.VaDh 3.41]:
b)TMd3 
MTr4 
oMd1 ' 
oMd5 Tr1 
La1
cMd1 o O r 
MTr4 MTr6 '
M
ä
d
h 
Mandlik
KSS Dave 
H e m _ . 
^ —c)
 Dev Mandlik
oMd5 
T
r
1
T
M
d
3 Hem 
oOr


--- PAGE 598 ---
Chapter 5 
587
142. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa 2.j(>;Hem 3/2.972; Dev 2.266; Mädh 1.228— a) wKt1
TMd4 <lt; Ox2 
— c) TMd4 Pu8 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Ho oMd1
 TMd3
cMd'Tr'MTr6 
M i r
4 L o
1 P
u
8
D
e
v
— d)Trl D e v
143. Omitted in NNg. Cited by Hem 3/2.964; Apa 264; Dev 2.274 — a) sOx1 sPu6
wKt1 Lo1 Wa 
BKt5 wKt6 
— b) w K t
1 — c) oMd1 TMd4
144. Cited by Vij 3.30;Apa 922,926; Hem 3/1.796; Mädh 2.364 — a)oMy 
MTr4
?Md3 
La1 TMd3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr2 Apa 922 [vi] 
, Jo2 Lo3 Apa 922
— b) wKt3 Lo1 
NKt4 
— c) Be1 Be3 wKt1 wKt3 
Bo Lo5 Tr1
Tj1 _ 
— d)Be'Tj' 
o M d 5 T r 2 ; T j
1 T M d
3
Additional verse in Be1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik KSS Dave;pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in Pu2
Pu4:
a) Pu2 Pu4
145.* Placed after is8b in TMd4. Cited by Vij 1.196,3.279; Apa 1139; Hem 3/2.957-8,
966; Mädh 1.224, 2.423 — a) Be) eBe2 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Vij 3.279 Apa 
^
NPu1 Tr2 g^T; wKt6 oOr 
BKt5 
HoTj'Tr1 
eBe2 oMd1 sBe2 Ho oMd1 om
last 
— b) Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Vij 1.196 
Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1
Jo2wKt' Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 sPu6 Pu9 Pu10 Tj2
MTr3 Wa Vij3.279 ApaHem Mädh 2.423 Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
— c) Lo1 sOx1 s P u
6 P u
1
0 
— c-d)oMd'
— d) Be1 Bo Ho sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Wa 
Tr1 
oMd5 
wKt1 •
Two additional verses in oOr; first is indeciferable; the second also is unclear:
146.* a) Pu2 Pu4 
sKt5wKt6 
— b)oMd 1 ; 
'— c) Hy 
NKt4
Bo 
— d)La2 
" wKt3Lo4oMd' 
TMd4 
Be1 sCa Ho
Pu2 Pu4
GMy
TMd4 Pu2 Pu4
MTr6
— b) Be1 Lo1
oMd5
Ox3
TMd4
La1


--- PAGE 599 ---
588 
Chapter 5
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo5 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 MTr3 VI& Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
TMd3
147. Cited by Laks 12.619; Dev 3.584; Mädh 2.31— a) wKt3 
Be1 oOr
Tj'Tr2 
— b) Be1 Lo4 Lo5 Tj1 
rMd3 
Ox3
 
NNg 
Ho
— c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
oMd1 MTr6 
Be1 [but
me] Be3wKt' Lo4 Lo5 iMd3 oMd5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 ' 
oMy 
— d) Me [cited at
8.163] 
NKt" cMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr6 Dev 
Be3
MTr4 MTr6
148. Omitted in Ox3 Pu'° . Cited by Laks 12.619; Dev 3.584; Mädh 2.286 — a) Lo1 Pu2
Pu4 
Jin 
; B e 3 ; T M d 3 o O r ' 
La1 
-b)TMd3 
wKt6
— c) Dev; 
H o w K . t
3 
— c-d) Mädh
[cf. 9.3] — d) Pu3 
B
o
H
o 
; Be1 sBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
La1
Laks
149. Omitted in Ox3 Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.619; Dev 3.585; Mädh 2.31 — a) Lo2
Bo 
Lo1 [cor to] T M d 3 c M d 1 oMy Pu2 P u 4 T r 1 
" O
x
2
— c) oMd1
TMd4 
w K t 6 • 
- - 
• 
Bei 
Lo2 
Tj2 
.
BBe2 Lo1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G ] w K t 1 [Jolly R]— 
d) TMd3 Tj1 
Pu2 Pu4
Tj2 
Tr1
150.* Cited by Laks 12.620 — a) wKt3 
; Hy 
wKt1 
Pu4
ïTTczrf ; Hy 
TMd4 
M T r 4 — b) P u
1
0 L o
1 
, Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 Ox3 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Tr2 
— c)
Pu8 
s B e
2 w K t
1 
— d)HoTj'
151. Cited by Laks 12.628; Dev 1.223, 3-589 — a) wKt1 wKt3 
Dev 
NPu1
— b)oOr 
oOr NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Dev 
' Lo5 
_ 
TMd4
BBe2 
— c)wKt' 
[om ]; Tr2 
Ho 
NKt4 
TMd3 
Jo2
Lo3 
B o , o O r 
MTr6 
Wa 
— à) Dev 
Tr2 : 
Dev
[vl] 
; Be1 Bo Jo2 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 [Jolly G]


--- PAGE 600 ---
Chapter 5 
589
152.* Omitted in Bo — b) Tj1 
. Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tr2 [Jolly M]
wKt1 sOx1 
Be3 wKt1 NNg !; 
TMd3 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
" 
[but cor in sOx1
sPu6 ]; Jm TMd4cMy NPu1 
oMd5 
— c) uBe2 
— d)oOr 
NlCt4
Be1 NKl4 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMy NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6
[Jolly M Nd] 
BKt5 w K t 6 " Be1 ßBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 MTr3
Wa Rn Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
153.Not commented by Re. Cited by Laks 12.627; Dev 3.590 — a) Lo1 
Lo1
TMd4 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly G] Laks 
oMd5 
— b) Hc 
— c) Dev
wKt1 
; Tj1 
Tt2 
NPu1 
— d) MTr6 
5Ox'sPu6
°c5t%tr ; Be1 Lo1 TMd3 oMy oMd5 MTr6 
T r
2 v K t
1
154. Omitted in iMd3 Tr1; after 
the rest omitted in oMy. Cited by Vis 1.76, 2.290;
Vij 2.290; Laks 12.627; Dev 3.590 — a)Tj' 
La1 Vij 
sOx1 sPu6 
[but
both cor}; Ho wKt3 
- b) wKt1 
— c) cMd1 TMd4 MTr6
MTr4 [Jolly Gr] 
Bo Lo5 Pu10 Jha 
oOr
Vij 
Lo5 
Be'Wa 
Bo Ho [cor to] L o
5 — d) Pu10 
Ox2
Additonal verse in oMd1 NPu1 Tr2 MTr4 Mandlik 
\ KSS Dave. Cited by Apa
109; Laks 12.629:
a) Mandlik KSS Dave 
Tr2 
— c) NPu ' Apa
Additional verse in La1; added after 155 in oOr:
155.* Cited by Vis 1.84; Apa 102; Laks 12627; Dev 3.590; päda s a-b cited by Hem
3/3.176 — a) Lo1 
Hy 
" 
oMd1 
iMd4 
T j 2 [ J o l l y G]
La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5oMd' NNg oOr Ox3sPu6 [but cor sh] Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M]Vis Apa Me
Rn Jha 
eBe2 
— c) Pu2 Pu3
 
TMd4 
TMd3
Bo Hy Dev 
Ho 
" 
Be1 NKt4 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd '
oMd5 oMy NNg Ox3 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Apa 
sKt5 
wKt3 
— d) Lo1
Additional verse in HowKt1 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS Dave;
added after 154 in La1; päda s c-d in TMd4:
Be3 Bo wKt1 Lo4 Lo5
Tr1 lacuna for
sKt5 om
wKt6
Pu10
Be1 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6
wKt3
— b) TMd4


--- PAGE 601 ---
590 
Chapter 5
a)Tj' 
La'wKt'Ho 
— a-b) sOx1 sPu6 
^, 
— b)
Ho 
La1 
wKt'Pu 2Pu 4 
' — c) TMd4 sOx1
sPu6 Mandlik KSS Dave 
Tr2 
wKt1 
— d) Ho La1 TMd4
[La1 
]
Additional verses in oMd5 Tr1; verses 2-3 given after verse 154 in TMd4:
1. a)oMd5 
— b)oMd5 
— c) oMd5
2. a) TMd4 
~ Tr1
3. a)Tr' 
— c)Tr'
156. Cited by Laks 12.628 — a) TMd4 oOr [but cor] 
Be1 Bo Jo1 TMd3 Tj1 Tr2
Wa 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 
Hy TMd3 
Bo 
La'sOx'sPu6
Tr2 
N P u
1 e C a O x
2 B e
1 Bo wKt3 La1 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 sPu6
— c) TMd3 
Wa 
Lo3 Jo2 
; Lo2
 
TMd4 
Tr2
— d) BKt5 wKt6 Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4
157.Cited by Vij 2.127, 29° ; Laks 12.636— a) T M d
3 — b) Jo1 
— c)
wKt1 
Be1 sBe2 Bo [but cor] sCa wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
MTr4MTr6Wa 
La1 Tr1
 MTr6' 
TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Ho 
wKt3 oOr
158. Päda s a-b omitted in oMy and päda s c-d in Tj2 [haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks
12.636 — a) TMd4 
N P u 1 s O x 1 s P u
6 w K t
3 T M d
3 TMd4 
— b)
Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4 
La1 
Tj2 
— c) NKt4 
— d) Lo1 Tj1
Be1 
BKt5 wKt6
159. Päda s a-b omitted in Tj2. Cited by Vij 2.i27;L«fcv 12.636; Dev 3.595; Mädh 2.45 —
a ) W a 
Lo2 O x
2 P u
8 
r
M
d
4
— b ) B o 
sCa wKt3 NKt4
Lo2 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly G Gr] Vij Nä Rc 
TMd4
wKt1 
T r
2
M T r
6 
T M d
3 B o 
— c ) TMd3


--- PAGE 602 ---
Chapter 5 
591
— d) oMd' 
He 
Wa
160. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks 12636; Dev 1.225, 3-595 — b) TMd4 MTr4 MTr6
Lo1 
TMd3 
— c)La' 
' TMd3 
/ o M d
1
N P u '
wKt1 " 
— d) oMd1 : 
O x 3 T M d 3 oMy 
T M d 4 D e v
161.* 
Cited by Vij2.127; Laks 12.636; Dev 3.596; Mädh 2.30 — a)T Md4
Lo2 
TMd3 
— c)Lo3 
Tr2 
TMd4Wa 
— d)wKt6
aBe2 Jm wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 Ox3 Pu10 MTr4 [Jolly M]Ku Jha Dave 
oOr
162. Cited by Laks 12.636; padas c-d cited by Vis 1.66; Vij 2.51— a) oMy
 TMd4 Pu8 [Jolly Gr] 
— b) MTr4
eCa La1 
. oMd1
 TMd4 Ox3
 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Wa Rn Dave Jha
Lo'oOrT 
NKt4sOx'sPu6T 
; Ho 
Jo2
wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
, Ho Lo" Lo5 oMy Tr ' Tr2 
wKt3 Ox2
163.* Pâda s a-b omitted in Bo. Cited by Laks 12.645; Mädh 2.30 — a) Jo' 
aBe2
Be3 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 nKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 cMd5 Ox2 oMy Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6
Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Laks ' 
' 
TMd4 
_ 
Lo5 
Hy TMd3
wKt3 
Ox2 om 
— a-b) BKt5 wKt6 
[wKt6 om ^TT] — b)
wKt3 
NNg omwKt3 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Or] Mädh
 • 
TMd3
MTr4 MTr6 
O
x
3
— c) Be1 La1 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt?
wKt3 Lo ' Ox2 Tj2 MTr3 \Jolly G Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
_. 
[wKt3
, Lo1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]— 
d) w K t 3 T r 1
164.* [= 9.30] Verses 164 and 165 transposed inoOr. Not commented by Nd. Cited by
Mädh 2.30 —
 a)NNg 
Kt2 
Tr1 [but corfli] 
TMd4 
Lo4 Lo5
Ox3" 
P u 1 0 i w K t 1 
Boom—
 b) Pu2 Pu4 
Lo1
Ox3 
Pu2 P
u
4
H
y 
'— c)Ox2 
nBe2 Be3 Bo
0Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt
4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg oOr
La1
Lo5 Tr1
TMd3 oMd5 Tr1
Pu10
Be1 Bo cMd5 cMy Wa
Tj1
— c)rMd3
wKt1
Lo2
GMy
— d)Jo2Lo1
cMy Mädh
Tj1
— b) Tr2
Tr1
TMd3oMy


--- PAGE 603 ---
592 
Chapter 5
Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Wa 
oMy 
Lo4 
Ho
Ox3 Wa 
sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo5 xMd4 oMd5 NNg sOx1 NPu
1 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Go {Jolly M5'9] Go Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) xMd3
[me 
) ; O x 3 J o 2
165. [= 9.29] Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M]; not commented by Nd /te;päda s
c-d omitted in Lo2 xMd3, and päda- d by Wa. Cited by Laks 12.629 — a) NKt4 oMd1 xMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg Tj1 Tr1 Mir4 Mir6 
Be3 : 
— b) Be1 Ho sKt5 wKt6
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 {Jolly G] 
NNg oOr Pi2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 Mir3
Be1 Ho 
— c ) B o L a 2 G M d ' ' ' [ o M d 1 
om]; 
Pu8
[cf. i66c]; {Jolly N] 
Be1 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt6
Lo1 TMd4 oOr Ox2
 NPu' Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj2 Wa {Jolly G R] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
[cf. 9.29] —d)Tr2 
Be1
166.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M];not commented by Nd; päda s a-b omitted
in xMd3 xMd4, and päda s a-c in Wa. Cited bv Laks 12.629; Dev 3.591 — b) Ho
Tj2 om 
. Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 Mir3 
_ 
— c) Laks 
wKt6 ff
MTr6 ; 
H o P u
5 Pu7 P u
9 — d) Tj1 KSS 
xMd4 oOr Pu2
167.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Vis 1.87; Dev 2.437— a) Bo Ho 
NPu1
Ox3 
L o
3 B e
3 Jo1 Lo1 Lo5 NPu
1 P u 3 J m 
— b) wKt1 
Jo1
wKt3xMd3 
Ho O x
3 o M d
1 
— c) xMd4 
— d) NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 
. NKt4
168.Not commented by Nd. Päda s a-c cited by Apa 77 — a) Pu10 
Be3
Pu7 
. Pu5 Pu9 
—b) Lo5 
— c) oOr 
Lo3
169. Cited by Laks 2.435 — a) Be1 
— b) o
M
d
1
T
j
1 
wKt1
Ox3 
Wa om 
Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 [Jolly G] 
' — c) xMd4 "w^TT — d) Lo2 oMd1
TMd3 oMy Ox2 Ox3 Pu3 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Laks< 
_ 
[NKt4 
Ox2
]; [Jolly Gr] 
[sic] [Nä g
l
o
s
s
s
u
p
p
o
r
t
s variant
reading]; wKt6 
Be3 
;oOr


--- PAGE 604 ---
Chapter 5 
593
Colophon: Be1 eKt5 wKt6 Lo1 oMd1 xMd4 nNg Tr 
L o
3 w K t
3
Be3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 cMy sOx1 sPu6 viTr6 om 
wKt3 Pu8 om
Be1 
;Kt2Lo' 
Bo
oOr
NNg
Ox2
BBe2


--- PAGE 605 ---
Additional verse at the beginning in TMd4 [reading not very clear]:
Additional verse in wKt1 wKt3 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6:
a) wKt3 
— b) Tr1 
wKt1 wKt3 
oOr 
— d) oMd5
oOr
1. 
c) Ho wKt1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 Ox3 Pu3 
wKt3 ; 
oOr 
M T r
6 B e
1
Bo
2 . C i t e d by Vij 3.45; Madh 1.525 — b) Pu2 Pu4 
^ 
Lo3 
Ho wKt6
sKt5 
' — c)TMd4 
JmPu 9 
Vij 
—
 d)
oOr1 
:[6.ib];TMd4 
H o o M y
P
u
3
3. 
Omitted in Ho Tj2; päda s c-d omitted in Tj1. Cited by Mädh 1.525; päda s a-b cited
by Pj/3.46 — a) TMd4 
Jm sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 
— b)
Tj1 
Lo1 
oOr 
Ho 
'— c) TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo3 
La1
Be1 
¡Kt5 wKt6 
, TMd4 
—- d) Be1 Lo1 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
Pu2 Pu4 
Ox3 Pu10 
Be1
4.* Päda s a-b omitted in Tj1. Cited by Laks 14.13 — a) sOx1 
TMd3 [Jolly Nd]
wKt6 
— b)GMd'Tr' 
aBe2 [Jolly Gr] 
TMd4 
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
[Jolly Gr] 
TMd4 
wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 
— c) Kt2 NPu1 Tr2
Be'Píf^T; Be3 Bo La2 Tj1 
; oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Laks
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M Nd] 
NNg 
— d) Jo2 
Pu5 Pu7
Pu9
594


--- PAGE 606 ---
Chapter 6 
595
5. 
Cited by Apa 941; Mädh 1.526 — a) Jm wKt1 
— b) Pu2 Pu4
BKt5wKt6Pu10 
— c)Jo'Tr2 
Mädh 
Tr2 
— d) Ho
wKt1 wKt3 place here the additional verses given after 6.45.
6. 
Omitted in Pu3. Cited by Apa<)4i; pâda s c-d cited by Vij 3.46 — a) Tr2 
Pu10
Be'sOx'sPu6 
— b) Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Pu9 
[then lacuna]¡TMd4
Lo1 ma 
TMd3 
— c) sBe2 
" 
wKt6 
; Pu4 
L o
2 —
d) wKt3 
Be1 Bo La2 Pu7 Pu9 Wa [Jolly M'-2-5"8^ G] Vij Jolly 
Ox3
7.* Cited by Vij 3.46; Apa 941 — a) Pu9 ms. torn at pada-a; Be1 Lo1 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
Wa 
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 La ' [cor to] Lo3 oMd1 xMd4 oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 VijRn Re
Mandlik Jolly KSS 
, Be3 Bo Jo2 La2 wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Ox3 T]1 
iMd4
oMd5 
Tj2 
— b ) i M d 4 — c) wKt3 
sBe2 
Be3
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
La l ; 
Bo NlCC wKt6 Ox3 
Tj1 
Lo1
Pu4 
— d) Hy 
TMd3 
Lo4 Lo5 oMd ' oMd5 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly
M4]"
8. 
a) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Wa [Jolly G] 
cMd1 Tr1
FTT^; Be1 TMd4 
Bo 
— b) Bo 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
[Jolly G 
Be3 
Bo 
NKt4 
Pu2 Pu4 
Tj1
3x3 
Pu'° 
- d) wKt6 oMd1 Pu7 Pu9 
Pu5
9. 
Placed before verse 6 in Jm; pâda s b-d torn in MTr5. Cited by VijzA5\ Apa 941;
Mädh 1.526 — a)wKt3 
P u
1
0 A p a [ v i ] . Lo1 J — c) Be1 sOx1 sPu6
T j 2 . 
, Be3Ho 
NKt4 
Apa 
Tj1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
wKt1
cMd1 Tr1 
O x 3 B e 1 
r M d 4 _ . 
oOr Apa [vi as in ed] 
— d)
NPu'^pa 
TMd3oMd5 
B o T r
1 
Madh 
TMd4 Vij Apa
10.* Omitted in Ox3; pâda s c-d torn in MTr5. Cited by Apaqqí; Laks 14.17; Mädh 1.526
— a)oMd' 
o
M
d
5
~ T
j
1
B
e
1 Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 [Jolly
M]MeDaveJha' 
Jo1 Kt2 
iMd4 cMd5 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 " 
rMd3 
Tr1
NPu1 
^ 
% — a-b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Go [Jolly G]


--- PAGE 607 ---
596 
Chapter 6
— b)HoOx2 
Pu3 
oMd1 
— c) Be3 
aBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 (me to) sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3
[Jolly G Ku] Re Mr Go Apa Laks Mädh 
[sOx1 sPu6 om ]; oMd1 
Ox2
[Jolly Gr] 
T
M
d
3
B
e
3 Tj ' Apa -~ d) Jo1 Kt2
 MTr3 Mandlik
Jha Dave 
B
e
1
; Ho Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 ; 
sBe2 sCa Ox2 NPu1
11. Pâda- c torn in MTr5. Cited by Vij 3.465^/7(7 941; Laks 14.17; Mädh 1.527— a) TMd4
oMyi 
' Tr1 M
ä
d
h
i
M
d
3 
oOr 
— b) wKt1
Tj1 
Tr2 
wKt3' 
" 
BoHo 
— c) Bo 
Ox3
GMy 
: rMd3 '
; wKt1 o O r 
Be3 wKt6 Ox3 Pu2
Pu4 
• — d ) o
M
d
1
; Be1 BoîMd 3 oMy W a Mädh 
Tr2
Apa Laks 
[Apa 
']; TMd4
12.* Pâda s a-b torn in MTr5;pâda- a torn in Pu9. Cited by Vij 3.46; Apa 941; Laks 14.18
— a) sBe2 Be3 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 MTr3 [Jolly M4] Apa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Kt2
La1 Apa 
Laks 
— b) TMd4 ; 
Tj'Tr 2' 
wKt6 oOr
Be1 Be3 Bo Ho PurTj' 
— c) L
a
k
s
M
T
r
5 
Be1 Ho
TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2 
— d) NKt4 
; Bo ' 
La1 " 
TMd3
13. Pâda s b-d omitted in Ox3; parts of pâda s a-c torn in MTr5. Cited by Apa <)42;Laks
14.18; pâda s c-d cited by Vij 3.49 — a) Ox2 
cMd'
Pu2 Pu4 
A
p
a
s
B
e
2 Bo wKt1 wKt6 oMy oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa 
— c) Lo3 
; eKt5 Tr2 Vij 
M
T
r
6
B
o
TMd 4oMd 5 o M y Tr1 
TMd3 
Apa L
a
k
s
T
j
1
— d) TMd3 
, TMd4 
TMd3
14. Padas c-d omitted in wKt1 and pada-a in Ox3; pâda s a-b ma sh in Pu'° . Cited by Apa
942; Laks 14.18 — a) Hy 
eBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Ox2 [cor to}
Tj1 Tj 2MTr 3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— b) oMy 
" 
TMd 3 
TMd4
oOr 
— c)Kt: 
Be'oMyNNgTj 1 
Lo1 
La1 
Lo3
NNg 
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu10 
Tj1 
Laks~ ~ 
—
 d) Be1 Kt2 wKt3 [Jolly
M1-2-5-8-9 Q] , 
Pu5 P
u
7
" G M y 
Pu10
15. Pâda- d torn in MTr5. Cited by Apa 942; Mädh 1.527 — a) Lo1 
oOr
Pu3
La1
[Jolly G] Go


--- PAGE 608 ---
Chapter 6 
597
NKt4 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 Mir5 Mir6 Mädh 
— b) wlCt
1 
wKt6
Tj1 
— c) La1 MTr4
16.* Omitted in Tj1 [haplo]; pada-d torn in Pu9 MTr5. Cited by Apa 942; Laks 1418 — a)
sKt5 wKt6 
H y o M d
1 O x
3 MTr6 
xMd3 
Pu4
Wa 
B
e
1
' — b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G] 
— c) Laks
TMd3 
TMd4 ' — 
d ) La1 
Be3 B o aCa H y
Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo3 NNg sOx1 [but me] Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 [but me} Pu8 Tj2 Tr1
MTr3 [Jolly Ku K)Apa Mandlik KSS Dave 
Pu5 om '
17.* Pâda s a-b in Pu9 lacuna; päda s c-d torn in MTr5. Cited by Apa 942; Laks 14.24;
päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.49 — b) wKt1 
NKt4 
, NPu1 '
L
o
5
iMd3 Pu'° 
— c) uCa Pu5 Pu7 ; 
L o 2 s C a o O r N P u 1 
— d) sBe2 Ho
TMd3 
Be1 Be3 Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg sOx1
Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G R ] Apa Jolly 
xMd4 :
18. Pada-d omitted in Tj2 |haplo]; padas c-d torn in Pu9 MTr5.Cited by Apa 942;Laks
14.24; Mädh 1.527 — a) oOr 
eBe2 sKt5 wKt6 wKt6 Lo3 Pu2 Pu4 
Lo1
oMd5 Tr1 
TMd3 
Be1
 
TMd4 
— b) MTr4
 MTr5
MTr6 
, Ho Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 Apa' 
P
u
1
0
— c) oMd5 Tj1 
Hy
wKt1 Apa 
, cMd1 xMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7
19.* Pâda s a-c omitted in Tj2; lacuna at päda- d in TMd4; päda s b-d torn in MTr5. Cited by
Vij 3.50; Apa 943; Laks 14.24 — a) Jo1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Kt2 
Be1 Bo Ho Jm Jo1
Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo5 oOr sOx1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly G R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
wKt1 
Apa 
[vi 
] — b) Tr2
oOr 
Be1 Bo sCa wKt1 P u
1
0 L o
5 
Ho 
— c) Ho Tr2
TMd3 
;TMd 4om 
— d) oMd 1 iMd3 oMd 5 oMy :
Laks; 
wKt3 
Be3 Vij 
Be1 Bo 
; Tr2
20. Päda s a-c torn in MTr5 and pâda- b in Pu9. Cited by Laks 14.24 — a) TMd3
wKt6 
T
j
2
— b) Hy Jo1 K.t2 TMd3 Tj1 Mandlik Jha Dave KSS
cMd1 
Pu5 P u 7 " " 
o M d
1 ' — d)MTr6 
wKt6 
rMd4
MTr6 
B e 3 " 
H y w K t
1 
TMd3 
Tj1 
B o
[¿>«icw]BK.t5wKt6Tjl


--- PAGE 609 ---
598 
Chapter 6
Additional verse in Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
21. Omitted in Jm; torn in MTr5; pada-c lacuna in TMd4. Pâda s a-b cited by Laks 14.24
— a) Ho wKt3 Tj1 
— b) Lo2 
Pu10 
— c) Laks
oOr om 
wKt1 
wKt6 oOr 
— d) Kt2
TMd3 
Be3 BKt5 wKt6 La1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 ' 
[wKt6 La ' 
] ; Pu10
oOr 
L o 2 P u 1 0 
Tr2
Additional verse in La1 oOr [cf. addition after 6.20]:
a-b) La1 
" 
: — c) La1 
" — La1
22. Cited by Apa 943; Laks 1424; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.51— a) Pu10
TMd3 
w
K
t
1
— b ) L
o
5
— c ) NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy A p a
o O r 
— d ) Lo1 
T
r
1
L
o
2
BKt5 wKt6 
Tj1 
sOx1 sPu6 " J m 
, TMd3
23. Cited by La/b 1424— a) sBe2 
Lo2 
iMd4 
;sOx'sPu6Tr2
Be3 
Tj1 
oMd1 
— b) oMd1
 
TMd4
Be1 Be3 Bo Ho eKÍ wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 oMd5 NNg Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly
M ] 
oMy [Jplly N d ] P u
2 Pu4 '
T
M
d
3 
— c ) sKt5 wKt6
Wa- 
TMd4 
" — d) sKt5 wKt6 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Laks 
' 
TMd3GMyTj'
24. Pâda- b torn in Pu9. Cited by Apa 944; Laks 14.24; pâd a c-d cited by Vij 3.52 — a)
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7 P
u
9
T
r
2 
Be3 wKt1 NPu1 Tj1 Apa Laks
BKt5wKt6 
Pu2 P
u
4
o
O
r 
„ 
— b) wKt1 oMd1 TMd3
oMy Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 
Be1 Be Bo W a " 
T j
1 J sBe2 sCa Ho BKt5 wKt6
Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd5 NNg Pu10 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M1"2-3"8-9] 
La1 Ox3 Wa 
— c) ßKt5
wKt6 
Pu2 Pu4 
— d)Hy 
" oMd1 ;
25.* Cited by Vij 3.54; Apa 944; Mädh 1.529 — a) wKt1 NKt4 oOrsOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6
Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd1
NPu1
Be3 Ho oMd5 Tj1


--- PAGE 610 ---
Chapter 6 
599
TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oOr
Lo' 
w K t
3
B K t
5 
— b) TV 
Lo1 
' — c) wKt3
; BKt5 wKt6 ' 
—
 c-d) H o — 
d ) Tr1 
Be3 B o sKt5
wKt6
26. Cited by Mädh 1.529 transposing päda s a-b and c-d— a) oMd ' Pu2 Pu3
TMd3 
— b)Bo 
Jo1 L o
1 L o
2 Ox3 
Pu10 
— c) wKt6
NNg 
w
K
t
1
o
M
d
1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Lo5 NPu1
.Tj2 
B K t
5 — d)Pu8
27.* Cited by Apa 945;päda s c-d cited by Mädh 1.529 — a)oMd' 
, sBe2
Apà' 
„ 
—
 b)Ho 
T r 1 : J o 2 
Ho Kt2 La1 Ox2
 NPu'Pu 5
Pu7 Pu9 
oOr' 
' 
" 
Be1 ßBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2wKt3 NKt4 BKt5
wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 xMd4 Ox2 Ox3
 NPu' Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2
 MTr3 Wa Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— c) B o o O r o m w K t
1 
Jo 2 La3 xMd3 Ox 3
NPu1 Apa 
— d)Tr'
28. Cited by Mädh 1.529 — a) wKt3 
Ho 
Lo1 
Be1
ßCa [toi cor] Ho wKt1 xMd4 Pu2 Pu4Tj' Tr2 : 
MTr3 
— b) wKt3 Ox3
Pu3Tr2 
o M d 1 — c ) w K t ' r M d
4 
Tr1 
, 
xMd3
Pu2 Pu" 
o
M
d
5
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] P u " " 
eBe2 wKt1 La1 Pu3 Tr2
oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4
29.* Cited by Apa 943; päda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.529 and päda s c-d by Vij 3.51— a)
La1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 MTr4 . 
xMd4 
; NKt4 oMd1 
Tr2
Wa 
P u 1 0 c M y 
— b) wKt6 oOr Tj ' T M d
3 
— c) Be1 sBe2 Bo
Ho wKt1 oMd1 oMd5 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 
xMd3 
Lo1
Apa 
— d) Be1 Jo2 La1 [cor tofh] aCa BKt5 wKt6 iMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly M1"9 G Nd] Rn 
oOr 
Be1
MTr4 
Be3 Lo4 L o 5 T r 1
30. Pàda- b torn in Pu9. Cited by Apa 943; Laks 14.28 — a) Laks
xMd4 
Tr 1_ 
Be1 B o s B e
2 " 
Lo2 
— b) Be1 Bo
Apa 
sBe2 
Be3 Ho Lo1 oOr Ox2 Tj1 : 
Pu5 Pu7 [but cor]
— d) cMy
Pu2
— c) wKt3
 Tj1
 sKt5 wKt6 MTr6


--- PAGE 611 ---
600 
Chapter 6
Pu4 
Ho oMd1 oMd5 Tr1 
sKt5 wKt6 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly Gr]
31. Cited by Apa 536, 945; Hem 3/2.1660; Laks 14.28; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.55 — a)
TMd4 
o
M
d
1
s
B
e
2 " 
xMd3
sOx'sPu6/4pa 
Tr2 
Lo1 Lo2 Pu4 Tj1 Apa Laks 
Lo3 Tr1
. 
. . — b) Tj 2 
V
i
j
N
P
u
1 T
j
1
— c) Ho NPu1 
wKt6
—
 à) Hem 
[cf. 32d];Laks~ 
H o u K t
5
32. Cited by Vij 3-55', Apa 945; //em 3/2.1661; Mädh 1.529-30 — a) Hem
Ox2 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
H
o 
— b ) H e m '
ü
j
; B o Tr1
oOr 
Pu7 
— c) wKt3 
eKt5 wKt6 Hem 
Tr1 
— d) Hem '
33. Cited by Laks 1430; Mädh 1.530— a) NPu1 
oOr 
sCa Ho Jo1 wKt1
wKt3 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ^T; Tr2 
oMy oOr Mir6 
^ 
T Md3
Bo Pu10 
— c)xMd3GMy 
" Pu2 Pu4 
; Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 [Jolly G] 
T
r
1
T
M
d
4 
oMd1
 NNg 
" oOr
Be1 sCa ßKt5 wKt6 xMd3 cMd5 sOx1 sPu6 '
34.Omitted in Pu8; pâda- d torn in Pu9 — a) o M d 5 s O x 1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2
— b)Lo5 
w K t
3 T M d
3 
, Ox3 
— c)Lo'
NKt4 
: — d) Pu5 P
u
7
o
O
r 
NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 cMd1 Tj1 Wa
Tj2 
" " 
Pu10
35. Pâda s c-d omitted in xMd4 MTr^päda- b torn in Pu9. Cited by Vij 3.56-7; Hem
3/3.808; Mädh 1.532 — a) wKt3 
— b) Lo2 Lo5 Tj1 
xMd3 
Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
— c)NNg- 
wKt'wKt3
 
__ 
NKt4 
Be3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj '
— c-d) Lo1 
— d) oOr 
sOx1 sPu6 both me to
NPu1
36. Omitted in xMd4 Tr2 inlV; verses 36 and 37 transposed in Lo3;in pâda s c-d after
' Tj2 jumps to 37 c-d omitting all in between. Cited by Mädh 1.532 — a) Lo5 
xMd3
— b) Lo4 Lo5 oMd5 Ox3 Mädh 
— c)xMd3 
Be1


--- PAGE 612 ---
Chapter 6
601
Jm 
NKt4
 
BCaPu2Pu4 
Bo 
— d) NKf 
Ho 
Bo
37.* Not commented by Nd; päda s a-b omitted in wKt6 Tj2. Cited by Laks 1430; Mädh
1.532 — a) NKt4 ; 
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 MSclh 
oMy 
Be eKt5 Lo4 Lp5
Ox3 NPu1 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 [Jolly M2-4-5] Laks 
Lo2 
— b) Ho
Be1 Wa 
Be3 Bo eKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M2^5]Jolly Jha Dave
• 
Tj1 [Jolly M9] 
, sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 Mir3 Mandlik KSS 
Pu 5 Pu7 Pu9 Go [Jolly G] 
— c) sCa
Be1 Lo5 oMy • 
Bo ; 
Pu2 Pu4 
Be3 Jo2 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2
Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 Tj ' Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
38. Cited by Sam on BU 4.5.15; Mädh i.536;pâda s c-d cited by Vij 3.56-7 — a) Ox3
ßKt5 wKt6 ! 
La1 T
r
1
B
o 
— b) Bo NKt4 Lo4 cMy NPu1 Pu3
Tj1 Tr2 Wa 
Hy wKt6 Lo4 
— c) wKt1 Lo1 
— d) Tr1 
wKt6
sOx1 sPu6
39. Omitted in sOx1 sPu6 — a) Bo 
— b) Pu10 
Hy 
Ho
Tr1 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
: rMd3 
N K t
4 — d) Bo
wKt3 
La1
40. a) sOx1 sPu6 
Lo1 : 
Lo5 
xMd3 
TMd4
— b)Tr' 
— c)oMd5 
TMd3 oMy 
La1
41. a) Be1 sBe2 Be3 eCa Ho Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 nKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 oOr
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha 
eKt5 wKt6 
— b) Bo
La1 Pu3 Pu4 
oMd1
 
TMd4 
' — c) Ho Pu2 Pu4
TMd3 
TMd4; 
, Tj1 
Bo 
La1 
wKt6 ;
w
K
t
1
;wKt6 
" 
Tj1 
— d)Lo2 
"
42. Omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Mädh 1.553 — a) wKt3
NPu1 
. Lo2 Pu10 Tj1 W a ; 
w K t
6 — b ) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G ]
Pu2 Pu4 
. 
„ TMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
cMd1 
— c) Be1 Lo1 Pu5
Pu7 Pu9' 
" 
oMy 
MTr5 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
TMd3 Tj1


--- PAGE 613 ---
602 
Chapter 6
MTr4 
Tr1 
— d)xMd4 
_ 
— After 42 xMd3 olVly insert 12.10-1.
43.* Päda s a-b omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43 — b) Tr1
— c) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Jha 
Ho N?U' 
wKt3 
me to
nKt5 wKt6 
wKt1 Kt2 sPu6 [me to] MTr3 KSS Dave 
Kt2 Jm Jo1 Mandlik
sCa Hy wKt1 Lo3 Lo5 [Jolly R] 
Be3 Bo 
ß B e
2 L o
4 Pu10
Jolly Bühler 
L
a
2
J
o
2 
„, 
Tj 2 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly G]
NNg 
[ 
deleted] — d) Tj ' 
oMd1 oMy Pu9 
xMd3
Lo2 
wKt1 ;
B
e
1 Lo1 Lo3 cMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2
Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Apa Laky
44. ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 1443; MSdh 1.564 — a) sOx1 sPu6 Laks
La1 
— b) c M y T _ 
Be1 Be3 Bo nKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu5
Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa Apa Jha Dave 
iMd4 
Lo2 " 
xMd3
Ho Pu8 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
— c) Laks 
~ - d) MTr4 MTr6
•&
45.* Pâda- a omitted in Pu9. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Mädh 1.564 — a) wKt1
Tj1 
Lo2Pu2Pu4 
La1 
oMd5 oOr 
Pu5 P
u
7
— b) Pu2
GMd5 o O r 
xMd4 ' , 
La1 Tj1 ' 
. Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
o M y W a
BBe2 
;BCaLo'xMd 4GMd 5 
— c)xMd4 
oMd1 
sOx1 sPu6
— d) sBe2 Be3 Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 xMd3 NNg oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5
sPu6 [but cor] Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 MTr3 [Jolly G Ku] Kii NdNä Mandlik KSS Dave 
Be1 Bo eCa
Hy Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo3 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly N] 
Tj1 
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
Hy
xMd3 cMd5 _ 
, Lo5 Tr2 
Jm
Additional verses in Be1 Be3 Ho NfCf oOr Tj1 Tr2 Mandlik [
c?T, T] KSS Dave; given after 6.46 in wKt6 and after 6.5 in wKt1 wKt3; first two verses after
6.45 and the last verse after 6.48 in sOx1 sPu6; first two verses in Mandlik ' ; first verse
alone given in Tr1 Mandlik [ ] and cited byApa; first verse given after 6.68 in xMd4 oMd5
MTr4 MTr6, after 652 in La1, and after6.69 in [Jolly Gr]; päda s a-b of first verse cited by Laks
14.44. All three verses commented by Re; first verse alone by Rn:
i. a) Be3 Ho sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' Mandlik KSS Dave 
Tr2 
oMd5 Tr1


--- PAGE 614 ---
Chapter 6 
603
Be1 La1 
NKt
4 
wKt6 
Tj1 om 
—
 b) oOr
Be1 
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd4 oMd5 Tr' MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Gr]Apa Laks 
' [Jolly Gr] 
— c) Be1
oMd; 
Tr1 
TMd4 MTr4 
La1 
iMd4 MTr4 MTr6
— d ) wKt1 wKt3 
o
O
r
o
M
d
5 
NKt
4
Be'Tj'Tr2 
La1
z. a) wKt6 
wKt1 wKt3 
NKt
4 
NKt
4 
wKt1
wKt3 
— b) wKt1 
Be1 Tr2 Mandlik ~ ' 
' w K t 6 
Be1
 
— b)wKt6 
Tj1 
NKt4
— c) Be1 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 wKt6 
Tr2 
Tj1
Ho 
Be1 NKt4 
— d) Tr2
46.Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Madh 1.564 — a) Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10
TMd4 
N P u
1 — b ) H y H o 
— c ) MTr5
Ho sKt5 wKt6 
Be1 Lo2 NNg Pi? Tj1 Wa 
sKt5 wKt6 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Apa
Laks 
— d) M T r 5 o M d 5
47. Lo2 transposes päda s a-b and c-d. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Mädh 1.564 — a)
wKt6; 
wKt1 La1 O x
3 o M d
1 
— b) La1 
Pu10
cMy Tr2 
— c) Pu8 
Lo1 " 
Bo Ho Jo2 La1 Lo3 iMd3 oMy oOr Tj1 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4MTr6Lafa- 
TMd4 
NKt4' 
— d) oOr
48. Päda s c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 954; Laks 14.43; Mädh 1.564 — a) Apa
Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 
MTr3^ 
,HowKt 3oOrow 
Ho
— b) NNg 
[me sh 
rMd3 
Pu8 Tr2 
wKt6
: 
Tj1
 • 
Ox3 
— c) BBe2 Ho sKt5 Ox3 Tj1 Apa [vi] 
TMd3 cMy Tr1
Lo1 
— d) Apa 
Be1 NNg Tr1 MTr4 Wa 
Ho 
TMd3 
oOr om
49. Cited by Apa 954; Laks 14.43-4; Madh 1.564 — a) sKt5 
, oMd ' Tj1
NKt4 
. Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 Pu10 Apa 
TMd3 
— b) Tr1
Apa 
Bo [but c o r ] H o Lo '
s
O
x
1 sPu6 
Be1 me to 
: —
d)Tj'
—c)wKt6
Be1 Ho Mandlik KSS Dave
Be3 NKt4
Tj1
- d) Be1


--- PAGE 615 ---
604 
Chapter 6
50. Cited by Vij 3.59; Apa 963 — a) MTr4 
— b) sKt5 wKt6
[oro ]; TMd3 
— c) sKt5 wKt6 c
M
y
— d) TMd3 
Pu8 Tj1
NKt4 
MTr4
 MTr6
51. Cited by Vij 3.59; Mädh 1.561 — a) Lo2 
sOx1 sPu6 
' — b) Lo1 oMd1
sOx1 sPu6 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Mädh 
nKt5 ' 
Ox3 Pu10 
— c) Be1
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Bo 
Ho 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 MTr6 
Jo2 Lo3 Vij
Be3 
TMd4 ' — 
d ) Lo1 '
B
e
1 sBe2 Be3 H o Jm Jo1 wKt1 K t 2 NKt4
La1 La2 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha 
uKt5 wKt6 
Be3
La1
 TMd4 oMd5 Pu5 sPu6 [but cor] Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 MTr5 [Jolly G ]
52. Cited by Apa 954; Laks 14.44; Mädh 1.564 — a) Apa fvll Mädh 
Ho TMd3
cMd5 Tj1 _ 
TMd4 
NKt4
 NNg Tr2 Wa Na- 
— b) Ox3 
Laks
w Kt1 
T
r
2
L
a
1 
A p a A p a [vi] 
[Jolly G r ]
TMd4 
— c ) L o 2 T M d 3 K t 2 
'; MTr3 
— d) cMd1
; MTr4 
oOr
53. Cited by Vij s.6o;Apa 964; Mädh 1.562 — b) Be3 wKt1 wKt3 sOx1 sPu6
— c ) oMd5 
N
P
u
1
— d ) uKt5
54- Cited by Mädh 1.562 — a) Pu5 Pu7 Pif 
_ 
[om 
]; Ho nKt5 wKt6
oMd1 TMd3sOx'Ox3sPu6Tr'Wa 
T M d 4 P u 2 P u
4 B o H o cMd5 Pu3 Pu8
[om 
]; Be3 oMd1 TMd3 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6 
— b>T Md3 
Be1 Jo1 Lo1
oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 
Tr1 
NKt4 
Lo1 
; sKt5 wKt6 
Be3 wKt1 oOr
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6 
.oMd1 
Lo2 
— c) Pu8 
NKt4 Tr1 MTr5
wKt6
55. Cited by Vij 3.59; Apa 963; Laks 14.57; Mädh 1.558 — a) Ho 
Be1 ßCa Ho
Kt2 La1 Lo5 oOr Ox2 
V i j P u
5 Pu7 P
u
9
L
o
3
— b) Be1 Vij
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
üKt 5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu10 
[wKt6
]
;
w
K
t
'
w
K
t
3
_ 
r
M
d
4
B
o oMd1 TMd3
oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly M] Apa 
Pu2 Pu4 
La1 
Tj1
NPu1 
Lo2 
Tr2 
— c) Lo1
 TMd4 
Be3 Ho La1


--- PAGE 616 ---
Chapter 6 
605
NPu1 
TMd3oMd5GMy Ox3Pu10Tr' MÏr4 uTr6Apa Dave 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Lo5
wKt1 NKt4 La1 
— d) Be3 wKt1 wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox 3 P
u
1
0
[
w
K
t
3
TMd4 Laks 
c
M
d
5
, Jo2 Lo2 Pu2 
A p a
56. Cited by Vij 3-59; Mädh 1.558 — a) iMd4 
Tr2 
NNg 
Ho wKt1
wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu" Tr2 _ 
ßBe2 eCa Tj2 
TMd3
— b)Ox3 
B o c M d ' c M y 
Be1 sCa La1 oOrsOx1 Tr1 
. ... wKt1
TMd4 oMd5 
TMd3 
— c) Pu9 
uKt5 wKt6 Ox3 Pu10 Tr2 
sBe2 
Ox3
MTr4 
— d ) V
i
j
T
M
d
4
57.* Omitted in Lo3. Cited by Apa 963; Mädh 1.558 — a) Pu10 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly
G] 
— b ) s O x ' s P u 6 L o 2 ' 
Lo1 
Be3 Tj1
wKt3 
[rest om]; O
x
3
B
e
2 aCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt 2 eKt5
wKt6 La2 oMd ' TMd4 cMd5 oMy Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr6 [Jolly G Nd Ku]
Mandlik Bühler Jha KSS Dave 
Ho N
N
g
T
M
d
3 
Lo2
Tr'MTr4 
oMd1 
TMd3 
— c)îMd 3
Be1 
NKt4 sOx1 sPu6 T
r
2
— d) oMd1 
Tj1
MTr4 MTr6
58. Omitted in Lo3; verses 58 and 59 transposed in Ho. Cited by Apa 963 — a) Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 Go 
[Jolly M'-2-4-5 N d ] L o
1 
ßBe2 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5
oMy oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 ulr6Apa 
—
 b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Co [Jolly G]
Be3 wKt3 oMd5 Tr2 
T M d 4 " " 
w
K
t
1
H
o 
Be1 La1
Wa 
sOx1 sPu6 T r
2 — c) wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 P
u
9
" Ox2 
wKt ' TMd4
Lo1 
Apa 
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave ' 
c M d
1 — d ) o
M
d
1
N
K
t
4 Tr1 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu10
Tj1 
. B e 3 T r
1
59. Omitted in Lo3 Pu5; pâda s c-d omitted in Ho Tr2. Cited by Apa 954; Mädh 1.564 —
a) oOr 
T
r
2
c
M
d
1 
sBe2 
, TMd4
Pu10 
" oMy 
— b)TMd4 
Bö 
T
r
2
H
o
.Apa 
— c)wKt' Tj1 [but cor]' 
o
M
d
5
T
M
d
3
T
r
1
Lo4 Lo5 
. o M y " 
— d) TMd4 
Tr1 
Lo1
BowKt 1" 
" 
wKt3
Tr1
TMd3 oMd5 oMy
Jo2TMd4
Lo2


--- PAGE 617 ---
606 
Chapter 6
60. Omitted in Lo3; päda s a-b omitted in Tr2. Cited by Apagsq; Madh 1.564 — b) Kt2
Jo1 
— d ) N K f " La1
61. Omitted in Lo3; in Tj' the sequence is 6ic, 62d, 63a-b, 6id, 62a-b, 620. Cited by
Apa 968 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 
Ho 
sOx1 sPu6 ift^lt; NKt4 Tcfr
La'Tr1 
cMd1 xMd" oMd5 oMy Pu2MÏr4 M T r
6 L o
5 TMd3 
. —
b) BBe2Be3NNg 
Jo1 
oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 " 
xMd3 
—
c)NKt4sOx' Ox 2Pu 5sPu 6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 [Jolly G] 
xMd4 
" 
— d) Pu8
BKt5 wKt6 
w K t
1 T M d
3 cMy Tr1
62.* Omitted in Pu8 Wa; päda s a-b up to 
omitted in Tj2. Cited by Apa 968 — a)
TMd4 Tr1 
— b) Be1 eBe2 Be3 sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 ßKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1
Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
T
M
d
4
—
c)TMd3 
Bo 
oMd'oOr 
Lo1 
Tj1 
Pu7 Pu9 
Pu5
NPu1 
" 
— d)NNgTj'Tr1MTr5 
, TMd3 cMy 
wKt6
TMd4 MTr3 
Jo1
63. Cited by Apa 968 — a) TMd3 
[Jolly M] 
oOr 
sOx1 sPu6
. 
.- — b)wKt 3oMd' 
[oMd1 C 
oMy 
"" TMd3 oMd5 
Jo2 La1
TMd3 
MTr6 '
•
H
y La1 
Tr2 
Lo2 
Tr1
64. Omitted in TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]; päda s b-c omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 968 —
a)eKtí wKt6 
L o
2 . wKt1 sOx1 s P u
6 s O x
1 
T j
1 — b ) Lo4 Lo5
^c)sKt 5wICt 6 
" " sCaoMd1 
T j 1 — d ) NPu1 
Kt2
GMd5Tj' 
sKt5 
BKÍwKt6
65. Omitted in TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] Nd. Cited by Apa 968 — a) wKt1 
Ho
oMd5 ,, . . — c) Lo1 
NPu1 
; BBe2 eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2
Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 [cor to sh] Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly R Ku] Mandlik KSS 
Lo4
Lo5 
Pu10
oMd1
wKt1
Jo2
MTr4
— c) Bo TMd3 Tr1
o M y T r 1
— d ) T M d 4
L o 5
— c ) W a
A p a


--- PAGE 618 ---
Chapter 6 
607
66.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Vij 3.65; Apa 971— a) Apa 
sBe2 Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Pu3 MTr3 MTr5 [fo/fy Ku R Nd] Vij Kit Rn Mr Mandlik KSS 
TMd3 oMd5
oMy Tr1 iviTr4MTr6 
Tr2 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tr1 
— b) xMd3 oMy Tr1
TMd4 
" Tr2 
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt
4 eKt5 wKt6 La1 [but cor] La2
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 NNg Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2
 MTr3 MTr5 Wa \Jolly M3-4"5] Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
wKt3 
ßCa Lo1 
— c) Ox3 MTr6 om 
— d) Tr2 omT;
Be3
67. a) TMd3 
NNg 
oMd1 
wKt1 
— b) wKt1
sOx'sPu6 
wKt6 
, Lo1 
BCaLa1 
TMd3 
oOr
— c) Lo5 xMd3 
— d) TMd4
68. Päda s c-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Apa g54;Laks 14.43; Mädh 1.564 — a) wKt6
Be3 Mädh 
—
 b ) Pu5 Pu7 P
u
9
o
M
d
1 
J o 2
Be1 Be3 La1 oOr sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] Tr2 Wa Rc [patha] 
— c) Tj1
Pu2 Pu4 "
w
K
t
6
B
o 
Be3 Jo2 NKt4 TMd3 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6
[Jolly G] 
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu3 
Tj1 
Lo2 TMd4 Wa
Tj2 
— d) Bo 
Tj1 
— Added verse in TMd4 MTr4 MTr6: see under 645.
69. Omitted in Tr2; not commented by Rc — a) Be1 NNg 
TMd3 
Bo
wKt3 
TMd4 
NNg 
TMd3 TMd4 
Jm 
Lo5 
— b) Bo NKt4
oMy 
eKt5 wKt6 
Lo5 
— c) Be1 Lo1 
Tr'MTr4MTr 6
M T r 
T M d
3 — d ) T j ' T M d 4 
NKt4 
oMd1
MTr4 MTr6 
;
P
u
2
— Added verse in [Jolly Gr]: see under6.45.
70. Päda s c-d omitted in oMd5; not commented by Rc. Cited by Dev 2.368— a) wKt6
MTr3 
— b) Kt2 wKt6 s
O
x
1
— c) sBe2 Lo1 
Kt2
TMd4 
^ 
TMd3 
B o M T r
3 
— d) NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
T M d
4 N N g
Additional verse in oMd1 TMd3 Tr1; this is cited in AW's commentary [= VaDh 25.13]
— c)TMd3
a) TMd3


--- PAGE 619 ---
608 
Chapter 6
71. Omitted in cMd5. Cited by Vij 3.62; Laks 14.63; Dev 2.368 — a) Bo 
Be1
wKt3Lo5Pu2Tj'La/b 
Bo TMd3 
wKt1 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
oMy
TMd3 
— c) Bo Lo1 [but cor]TMd4 
wKt6 
Pu10
Bo 
-A) Vij- 
TMd4 
Ox2 
TMd4 Pu10"
Additional verse in La1:
72. Päda s a-b omitted in oMd5 ; in MTr6 the scribe jumps from 
to 
(74a) —
a) Lo1 cor to 
. , Hy 
oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Bo Ho Pu8
Pu8 
Be3 
iMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 
NKf
Jo2; 
' rMd3 
— c J T r 1 " . o M d 1 o M d 5 
— d) Lo1
oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 WaAte Nd 
wKt6
73. Päda s a-c omitted in Pu9. Päda s a-b cited by Apa 968 — a) oMy 
— b) Be1
oMd5 
oMd1 Apa 
MTr5 
Ox3 Pu10 
NKt4
Pu5 Pu7 
T
r
2
— c)NKt4GMd' iMd3 oMd5 cMy Tr1 uTr4 uTr5 Bh Nd
oMd1 
sOx1 sPu6
7 4 . a ) wKt6 
— b ) xMd4 T
; B o Jo2 Lo3 
— c) TMd4
MTr4 MTr6 
— d) M T r 6 T r 2
75. Cited by Apa 960 — a) MTr4 MTr6
 • 
wKt6 
o
O
r
— - b)
HoLo2 
— c) sBe2 [but cor] 
oMd1 
: — d) sBe2 
oMd1
BoTMd 3Wa' 
c M y T r
1 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Pu2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [/oily
NNd]Apa 
BUhler says that No and Nd r e a d b u t I do not see this.
76.* a) NNg [but corfli} Pu2 Pu4 
MTr5 [not Dei] 
wKt6 oMy 
TMd3
MTr5 MTr6 
sBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 La2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
L a
1 T j
1 
— b) oMd1 
, oMy 
TMd3
oMd5 
— c) Tr 1" 
Be w K t 3 o M d 1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]


--- PAGE 620 ---
Chapter 6 
609
78.Cited by Laks 10.258 — a) Ox3 o m L o
2 
— d) Bo H
o
M
T
r
4
NKf oMd1 TMd3 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
wKt1
Be'Tr2 
oMd^Tr5. 
wKt3 Laks
79.a) J
o
1
L
o
5 O x
3 T r
2 
iMd3 
— b ) N N g
wKt'Tr1 
— c)Tr'~ 
Ox3 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
jNKt4 
— d)iMd4
TMd3 oMd5 GMy Tr1 MTr6 
Be1
80. a) Pu3 Pu4 
La1 TMd4 
xMd3 
— b) Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu3 Pu8
TMd4 
TMd3 
— c) TMd4 
TMd3 
— d) TMd3 oMy
Pu5 om 
nKt5 wKt6
81. a-b) Lo2 Tj1 
" [Tj1 
]; Be TMd4
cMd5 
— c) Be1 
Bo Ho Jo2 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
oMd1 oMd5 NNg oOr Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M] 
NKt 4
TMd3 " 
, MTr4 MTr5 
T
r
1
— d) Be3 NKt4
82. Omitted in Tr2; me in sKt5 — a) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
^ 
[MTr6 archín*];sOx 1 sPu6 
N
K
t
4
— b) TMd4 
TMd3 
o
M
y
— c ) c M d
1 o M d
1 cMy N?U' 
Pu2
.; TMd3 
— d) Ho
83. Päda s a-b me in eKt5 — a) Lo3 
M T r
4 T M d
3 
— b) Be1 oMd1
cMd5 oMy 
Pu2 
oMd5 NNg Pu2 Pu" 
— c) sBe2 Bo Ho Jo1 Kt2 wKt6 Lo3
Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 [Jolly W R] 
Ho— 
d) Bo
Ho 
Kt2
Be1 MTr5 Wa
— d) La1
— c) Bo Ho Lo3 Pu4
77. a) TMd3


--- PAGE 621 ---
610 
Chapter 6
84.Pädas c-d omitted in Tr1 — a) w K t
6 o O r 
Tj1 
TMd4
— b) Ho 
rMd3 
— c) TMd3 
, wKt3 wKt6 
— d)
Pu10 
o
M
d
5
T
M
d
3
85.a) T
r
1
— b ) aKt5 w K t
6 i M d
3 
Pu8 
— c ) oMd1
Pu10 
T
M
d
4
H
o T M d 3 " — d)oMd' 
" oMd5 oMy Tr1 MÏr4
MTr6 
TMd3 
NNg
86.Omitted in oMy. Cited by Laks 14.64 — a) N K t
4 w K t
6 
Lo1
Tr1 
M T r
4 T r
2 
Be1 NKt4 T M d 3 H o o M d 1 îMd 4 cMd5
Tr1 MTr4Laks ' - c) Pu10 
Be1 Bo Jo2 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 Wa — d) ßBe2 TMd4 [but
corfh] 
~ 
Be1 Be3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
wKt3
87. Cited by Laks 14.64; Dev i. 173; Madh 1.436 — a)wKt' wKt3 
Ho
, 
NKt4 TMd3 oOr 
Hy _ 
— b) TMd3 
oOr 
MTr5
— d)Tj'
88. In MTr6 after 
in pada-b scribe jumps to 
at 7.10 (haploj; Cited by Laks 14.65;
Dev 1.173 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
. T
r
1
B
e
1 NKt4 NPu1 Pu2 Wa 
Lo2 Pu4
— b)sOx'sPu6 
s K ^ w K t
6 , T j
l L a k s 
W a
— d)HooMy 
B o " . T M d 4 L o 2
89. Päda s c-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) MTr5 ; 
oMd '
NNg 
— b) Be1 Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 [ cor to] wKt1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 Tj2 MTr3 [folly
R] Mandlik KSS 
— c) Bo 
— d) Be1
90. Placed before 6.88 in sBe2; päda s c-d omitted in Ho ßKt5 wKt6 TMd3 TMd4 Ox3
Pu10 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.65; oev 1.175 — b) TMd4 Tj1 
NNg 
TMd3 oMd5 Ox3
TMd4 
— c) Be3 La1 NNg Tr2 
— d) Tr1 
Bo " 
oMd5
oMd1
[Jolly Gr]
Ho
sKt5wKt6
— c)0x3


--- PAGE 622 ---
Chapter 6 
611
91. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 
oMd5
NPu' Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be3 
". oMd1
Jo2 Lo3 Lo4 Pu10 Laks 
BoOx3' 
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4
NNg 
T r
2 B e
1 Wa 
MTr5 
Lo1 
rMd3
Tr1 
MTr4 
— b) oMd5 
— c) Be3 Jo Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5Pu7Pu8Pu9Pu'°[Jo//yG ] 
L o
2 M T r
5
92.* Cited by Apa 972; Laks 14.65; Dev 1.13—a) oMd1 
O x 3 P u ' °
wKt1 
NPu
1 
Be1 
— b) Bo 
Bh 
[MTr5 is torn here]
— c) Be3 Ho La1 La2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly N Nd] NäNd Rc
D e v 
T r
1 O x
3 P
u
1
0
— d ) O x
3 P u ' ° T M d
4
93.* Omitted in Pu5 Tr1; verses 93 and 94 transposed in Lo5 Wa. Cited by Apayjy, Laks
14.65 — a) Bo Jo2 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 iMd3 Ox3 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M4-5 R]Apa Jolly
[Pu10 
]; Lo2 cMy Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M1"2-8-' G Nd] 
[Lo2 Pu2
Pu4 
]; Be1 Be3 sOx1 s
P
u
6
T
r
2 
NKt4 O x 2
— b)TMd4 
Apa 
" ' 
JmxMd 3^ 
oMd1
Ox2 
— c) Ox3 
— d) TMd3
94.* Omitted in sKt5; ma in wKt6. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) oMd1
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 
Lo2 Pu2 P u
4 P u
1
0 
NKt4 
— b) sCa
[but cor] Lo2 GMd5 GMy oOr Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Tr1 MTr4 
TMd3 
—
c) oMd1 
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 TMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tj 2 Tr2 MTr3
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
N
K
t
4
L
o
4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M4]
— d) NNg
Additional verse in TMd3:
[=95 c-d]
95.* Omitted in sKt5 Pu9; ma in wKt6 ; pâda s b-d omitted in Be3 and pâda s c-d in Tr2.
Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) Be1 
Tr2 
— b) Be1 
oMd ' TMd4
TMd3 cMy 
Pu10 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
O x
3 T r
2 
—c) oMd1 TMd4 
Be1 sBe2 Bo
aCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMy NNg Ox2 Ox3 NPu '


--- PAGE 623 ---
612 
Chapter 6
Pu2 Pu10 Tj ' Mir5 Wa [Jolly M Ku] Re Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) Be1
Bo 
Tj1 
TMd3 
Ox3
Additional verse in xMd4 oOr MTr4 [Jolly Gr\Mandlik 
KSS; placed after verse 94 in
oMd5 [= VaDh 10.4]:
a ) [Jolly G r ] 
— b ) T
M
d
4
— This verse i n Mandlik
reads:
Additional verse in cMd1 cMd5 MTr4:
96. Omitted in eKt5 Tr2; ma in wKt6; pada-a omitted in Be3. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a)
N N g 
TMd4 
'—b)TMd 4 
n B e
2 N K t
4
rMd3 
— c) Tr1 
Bo H o O x
3 
TMd3 
NKt4 oMd1
Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 
— d)Tj'om
97. Omitted in MTr5. Pâda s a-b cited by Vij 3.56-7; Dev 1.176— a) wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Ox3
Lo4 Lo5 
P
u
1
0
— c) Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
" 
Wa
Lo3 
Ho Ox3 Pu10 
— d) sBe2 Be3 Bo Ho wKt1 La1 Lo1 oMd5 oMy NNg oOr
Pu3Tr'Tr2 
wKt3 oMd1 rMd3 
[Jolly M8'9] 
oMd1 oOr [Jolly Nd] 
Lo3
TMd3 
Be1 sBe2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo4 oMd5 Ox3 Tr1 Wa [Jolly M4"5 R] Jolly 
TMd3
BKt5 wKt6
Colophon: Be1 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 
Be3 wKt3 
sKt5
wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 TMd3 cMy NNg sOx1 sPu6 om _ 
Lo3 
Be3 wKt3
oOr 
NNg 
; NNg
Lo1
sBe2
Be1
oMd5 om


--- PAGE 624 ---
1 . C i t e d by Vij 1.368— a) Be3 iMd4 o O r w K t
1 wKt3 
— b) Pu8
TMd4 
Lo5 
Be1 [but me] 
oMd1 
— c) La1 
sKt5 wKt6 oMy
wKt1 cFTT—d)oMyNPu'
2 . 
a)BoBCaOx2
 
T M d
3 K t
2 P u 8 P u 5 Pu7 Puç 
T
j
2
— c )
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor]
3. 
Päda s a-b torn in Pu9. Cited by Laks 112; Mädh 1.391, 3.5 — a) Ho 
Tj1
Jo1 om 
—
 b) oMd1 
_ 
Laks 
_ 
\\Kt' NKt4 La1 Lo2 oOr Ox3
Pu 5Pu 7Tr 2 
eKt5 wKt6 
, TMd3 oMy 
TMd4 
— c) Ox3
— d) Lar
4 . N o t commented by Re. Cited by Mädh 3.5 — a ) T r ' M ä d h
' 
La1
Ho 
— c) M
ä
d
h
— d) Ox2 ^TT^t; Tr1 
oMd5
wKt1 Pu8 
Ho 
Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 
Mâdh 
Be3 Ho Pu5 Pu7
Pu'Tj1 
O x 2 T r ' T M d 3 
~ 
xMd4
5. 
Cited by Mâdh 3.5 —
 a)Mâdh 
TMd3 oMd5 
wKt3 
— b) Jo2
Lo3Tj' 
MTr4MTr6 
Wai 
; Lo1 
NKt4 
— c) oOr
TMd3
6.* Cited by Laks 11.2; Mädh 3.5 — a)wKt6 Ox2 
wKt3 
Lo1
sBe2 eCa Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3NPu' Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
W a o M d
5 
— c) wKt3 oMd5 Laks 
Pu3
NKt4 
• — d ) B e ' M Ï r
6 
sBe2 TMd4
613


--- PAGE 625 ---
614 
Chapter 7
7 . O m i t t e d in Pu9; not commented by Re. Cited by Laks 112; Mädh 3.5 — a) Laks
sPu6 
— c)sOx' om first —
 d) [Jolly M8] 
" 
iMd4
8. 
Not commented by /?c. Cited by M ad h 3.5 — a)oMy 
— b) Bo
TMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
— c) Ho 
Jo1 
sOx1 sPu6 
Ho Ox3 
— d)
Ho 
Tr1
9. 
Cited by Mädh 3.5 — a) Be1 wKt3 NKt4 
— b) Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3
cMd1 
TMd3 [but cor] 
Tr1 ' 
— c) TMd3 _ 
TMd4
— d ) Lo2 
H
o
W
a '
10. Cited by Laks 11.5; Mädh 3.5 — a) Lo1 
TMd4 
" 
NKt4 
Be3 Ho
La2 Lo4 L<? NNg sOx ' Ox3 sPu6 Pu8 [Jolly M R] Laks Jolly 
NNg 
uKt5 wKt6
— b) TMd4 
Be3 TMd3 TMd4 oMy N
P
u
1
— c) Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 [but cor]
Pu7 [but me] 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [me to]
n. 
a) sOx1 sPu6 places 
at the beginning; Be1 Ho NKt4 Lo2oMd' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr5MTr6/V¿ 
wKt6 Los T M d
3 T M d
4 
— b) Tj1
Pu4 
.Lo 2 
W a — 
c ) J o
2 w K t ' ^ T ; wKt6 
TMd4
Tj ' [Jolly R] 
Bo o M d
1 — d) ßBe2 om 
NKt4
12. Cited by Laks 11.5 — a) Bo wKt3 oMd1 TMd4oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6 
TMd3
Bo TMd4 
oMd5 
oMy 
— b) Lo1 
; wKt3 TMd3
13.* Päda s c-d ma in ßKt5 — a) Be1 
oMd1 
" oMd5
MTr5 
— b) MTr5 
Pu 5 Pu7 Pu9 
Be1 Bo Ho Jo1 Kt2
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 oOr Ox3 Tr2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Jm
La1 TMd3 oMy sOx1
Lo5
 — b) Jo2 Lo3Tj1
NKt4
 — d) Lo1
Be3
Laks
 — c) Be1
TMd4oMd5oMy


--- PAGE 626 ---
Chapter 7 
615
xMd4 
xMd3 
sBe2 
— c) oMd5 
Be3 Ho sOx1
Ox3 Pu3 sPu6 
— d) xMd4 Mir5 
wKt3 ßKt5 wKt6 La1 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMy sPu6
Tr2 MTr5
14. ma in sKt5. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) Lo2 
Wa 
sOx1 s P u 6 B e 1
Be3 Bo NKt4 eKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5
 NNg Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 [Jolly M G]
Laks Jolly Jha 
wKt6 
— b) Lo2 
Lo2 oMd ' xMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6
— c)wKt'; 
" wKt3 
" wKt1 
xMd3oMy 
— d) MTr1 
Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 
Be3 NNg
15. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) NNg 
xMd4 MTr6 
—
b)oMd5 
Pu8 OOT 
.Wa 
— c) Ho 
— d) T r
1 N K t
4
Bo 
. Jo2 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M]
16. Cited by Laks 11.6 — a) wKt3 cMd1 : 
Ox3 
Jm 
— b) Ox3
Kt2 Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
xMd4 
cMd1 TMd4 NNg Laks
[Jolly G}' 
— c)wKt3 
" sBe2 
".Lo 5 
iMd3 Pu5
Tr1 
— d ) B B e 2 H o M T r 5
17. Cited by Lafe 12.794 — a) Ho sKt5 xMd3 iMd4 oMy NPu1 Tr1 
cMy
ÎT—b)MTr
4: 
Pu2 Pu4 g- 
— c)cMd' 
NNg 
—
d)Lo2 " 
Lo5 
Laks
18. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) xMd4 
— b) Be1 
xMd3 
xMd4
— c) Pu8 
— d) Wa 
Be1 wKt3 xMd3 
xMd4 
xMd3 
wKt1
Bo
19. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) xMd4 
Be' Pu3 
Be3
xMd3 cMd5 Ox3 MTr6 [folly M4"5 Nd] Laks 
[Jolly M9] 
Lo2 
Bo
— b ) x M d 3 B e 1 
, o O r x M d
4 
wKt6 
— c) oMy Ox3
— dJwK^Tr2; ' 
Ho


--- PAGE 627 ---
616 
Chapter 7
20. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Hy 
Wa 
— b) Hy 
oMd1
wKt6 
. Ho Lo5 x M d
3 T r
2 
: — c) Kit [pätha ] 
Be3
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
NNg 
Be1 Lo5 
Ox3 
.; xMd3 Mir4
MTr6 
T r
1 o M d
5 
_ 
,,xMd4 
uTr5 [me to]
La 1' 
_ ' — c - d ) G M d ' " 
"" 
" 
: —d)Jo 2, 
Bo Tr2
MTr6' 
w K t
1 L o
2 
T j 2
21. Not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Bo 
x M d
3 L o
5
— a-b) sOx1 sPu6 
—b)Jolly
 
xMd4 
La1
wKt1 
— c)wKt' 
HocMd1 
xMd3 
Bo
— d)Be3¡ 
;Ox3 
; wKt6 
Pu8
22. Not commented by Re —
 a) xMd3 
H y s B e
2 NKt4 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tj1 MTr6
— b) Be1 
Wa 
NKC 
— c) Pu5 " 
, NKt4
23. a) sCa xMd3 oMy 
— a-b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
—
b) Lo1 Pu3 Pu8 
BoxMd 3Tj' 
wKt1 
Lo5 
Lo4 Ox3
— c)cMd' 
P
u
3
— d ) O x 3 T j ' M T r 6
2 4 . a ) xMd3 
o M d
1 H o L
a
1
— b ) Tj1 
Lo1 
xMd4
: —c)Wa 
sBe2 
, Bo 
'— d)xMd4 
Tr1
25. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) Ho oOr 
wKt6 
Tr2 
— c) MTr5
wKt'_ 
MTr4 
— d)oMd5
26. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) oMd1 
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
oMd5 
wKt1
sOx1 sPu6 
— c) Be3 Lo4 Lo5 xMd3 
Tr1 ' 
Pu4 Pu5 
xMd3
,sB6?La'xMd 4 
Pu7 [but m e ] — d) Tr1 
xMd3 NPu1
xMd4


--- PAGE 628 ---
Chapter 7 
617
27. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Be1 
Jo2 Lo1 TMd3 oMy 
— b) Pu5 Pu7
cMd1 
N
P
u
1
T
M
d
3 
. L o
5 — c ) TMd4 <
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
MTr3 
TMd" 
NNg Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Pif Pu4
MTr6 
Be1 Ho N N g L a
1 TMd3 o M y s O x
1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr 2
28.Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) TMd3 
Laks 
oMd1
TMd4 
— b)cMd' 
MTr4
 
TMd4. 
" MTr6_ 
Bo oMd1
— c) MTr5 MTr6 
' 
wKt1 wKt3 
Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 [Jolly M4]
Hy 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) oMd1
29. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) oMd1 
— b) sKt5 
wKt6 ma 
— c)
sKt5 
Ox3 
TMd4 Tj2 
— d) Be1 Tj2 
Laks
Lo5 
Pu5 Pu7 P u
9 T M d
3 
oOr_
30. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) NKt4 
Laks - 
[om; Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
Ku Go ^ 
—
 b) Be3 
oMy 
; Be1 
Pu2 P u
4 s K t
5
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
TMd4 
oMd5 
oMy 
. sKf ^TWT; wKt6
Be3 
; Kt2 
— d) Laks 
sBe2 wKt1 sKt5 
TMd3
31.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 12.794 — b) TMd3 
— c) Be1 Be3 Bo
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tj2 MTr3 Wa
[Jolly G] 
[NKt4 
Bo 
J; Ho 
TMd3
 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
" " 
[TMd' 
];GMd' 
Ox3 
[Jolly M R] Jolly
îTW : — d) Lo2
32.* Not commented by AW. Cited by Laks 11.21 — a) TMd4 
sBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Ho
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1
Tj2 Tr2 MTr5MTr6 Mandlik Dave Jha KSS [Jolly R] 
: — b) sCa TMd3 oMy
Be3wKt' wKt 3La'Lo lTMd 4Ox 3NPu 1 Pu3 Pu8 
oMd5 Tr1 
Be3 TMd3 TMd4 cMy
— c) La1 
" 
— d) TMd4
33. Omitted in Bo — a) eBe2 
" — b) oMd1 MTr5
 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]


--- PAGE 629 ---
618 
Chapter 7
oMd5 
Pu2 Pu4 
Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 cMy Tj1 Wa
— c) Ox3 
— d) Lo1
34. Omitted in uKt5 wKt6 sOx1; not commented by Nd. — a) TMd4 
— b) oMd1
— c)NPu> 
TMd3 
— d ) L o ' N N g W a
35. Not commented by Re. Cited by Laks 11.156 — a) {Jolly M4~5]
Lo2 
Be3 TMd4 
Me [pätha ] 
Bo 
Ox3 
— b) Pu2 Pu4
— c) oOr 
— d) BKt5 wKt6 
Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3
Lo1Lo3TMd3Pu3Pu8Tj'La;te 
Pu2 Pu4 
Jo1
36. Cited by La/b 11.156 — a) TMd3 oMy 
sBe2 
— b) TMd3
Kt2 BKt5 
wKt6 La1 o
O
r
, P
u
8
, TMd4 ' . , o M d 5 — c ) H o Pu5 Pu7 Pu9
[Jolly G ] 
[ H o • ] ; Pu2 P u
4 T M d
4 T r
2 B e
3 wKt1 La1 NPu1
37.Omitted in Ox3; lacuna at pâda s c-d in NKt4. Cited by Laks 11156 — a) oMd5
wKt1 
— a-b) oMd1 
— b) oMy
MTr3 
— c ) TMd3 
; sOx1 s P u
6 P u
2 P u
4 B e
1
La1 
— d)BCaJo 2Lo 3Tj'_ 
H
o
B
e
1 wKt1
TMd3 oMd5 oMy 
La1 Pu3 Pu8
38. Cited by Laks 11156 — a) Wa om 
— b) oOr 
— c) Be1 sKt5 wKt6 NNg Tj1
Tr1 Wa^T — d) Lo2 oMd1
 TMd3 oMd5 oOr Ox2 Tj1 Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6 WE
39.Pada-b omitted in Pu5 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 11.156 — a) TMd3 oMy
La1 Ox2 
B o " 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
— b ) N K t
4 o M d
1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy N N g MTr6 
; J
m
— c ) sBe2 o
O
r
B
o
— d) Bo 
; Ho 
oMy
40. Pada-d omitted in Be3. Cited by Laks 11.156-7 [with päda s a-b and c-d transposed]


--- PAGE 630 ---
Chapter 7 
619
— a) cMd5 
wKt3 TMd3 oMy 
— b) sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 [Jolly M] Me
MTr 
Bo xMd4 cMd5 N P u
1 B e
3 
— c) sCa Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3
MTr3 [Jolly G Ku] Laks Me Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
~ Pu5 Pu7 
Lo4
Lo5 Ox3
41. Verses 41 and 42 transposed in xMd3 oMy; pada-a omitted in Be3. Cited by Laks
11.157 — a) Ho wKt1 wKt3 nKf aKt5 wKt6 La1 Tr2 [Jolly Ku] 
TMd3 
Be3
Kt2 
— b ) B K t 5 P u ' P u 5 P u 7 P u 2 
Wa 
^ 
Pu4 
Lo2
oMd1 ' 
— c) Be1 sBe2 Ho Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 îMd 4 Pu2 Pu4 MTr3
sOx1 sPu6 Mir6 
T^MTr4 
oMy 
TMd3 
oMd5 
L o
4 B e
1 Pu8
oMd1 ; 
MTr4 Mir6 
sBe2 wKt1 ßKt5 wKt6 
L
o
5
H
o Jm
Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 
T M d
4 N K f 
— d) TMd4 
sBe2 
wKt1
cor to 
'• 
BKt5 wKt6 
NKt4 Pu3
42. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Lakf 11157 — a) Be1 Ho wKt1 NKt4 Tj2 
Lo4
TMd4 
Be1 
. . Lo4 
— b) TMd4 oMd5 
oMd ' 
Tj1
— c) TMd4 
— d) Lo1 MTr6 
wKt6 oOr 
K
l
2
T
r
2
MTr3 
Be1 
Pu4
43.Omitted in Tj2. Cited by Vij l.sn;Laks 11.157 — a) TMd4 
Be1 Bo wKt6 Lo4
Ox3 Tj1 
. Tr2 
BBe2 Bo NKt4 Ox3 
Kt2 
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 Jha 
— b) wKt1 La1 
sOx1 sPu6 Vij [vl] 
Tr2 
Ho
NKt4 
L o 4 L o 5 ^ T T r 1 
— c) NKt4 ; 
BoLo5Tj'
Lo4 
TMd3 
oMy" 
sKt5 wKt6 
Vij'' 
—
 d) Lo1 Lo5
oOr 
. T r
2 K t
2 
. MTr6 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 
Lo3
Tj1 
;Laks
44. Omitted in Pu9. Cited by Laks 11.143— a) oMd ' 
L o 2 — b) sKt5
• 
oMd5 
cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy 
wKt1
— c) NKt4 Lo4 Lo5 oMd5 Ox3 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 ¡folly M] 
TMd3 TMd4 cMy [Jolly
Nd] Laks 
wKt3 om
45. Omitted in Pu9. Päda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.413; Laks 11.143 — b) TMd4 
Lo4
Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
— d) NKt4 
Be3 sKÍ wKt6


--- PAGE 631 ---
620 
Chapter 7
46. Pâda s c-d cited by Laks 11.143; Mädh 1.413; folio containing verses 46b to 72 miss-
ing in Be3 — a) Ho 
oMy 
. ", Be1 Pu8 
sBe2 Kt2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4
Jo2 NKt4 La1 Lo3 NNg Tj1 Mir5 
— c) M T r 6 s B e 2 
BKt5 wKt6
La1 
B
e
N
N
g O x 2 M T r
4 x M d
3 oMy 
— d ) O x 3
wKt6 
oMd1 
Pu5 Pu7 P u 9 " \ L a k s 
cMd1
47. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Vij i.3ir,Laks 11.143-4; Mädh 1.413 — a) MTr4
BBe2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd ' Tr1 Wa [Jolly M4] Vij Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sCa
sKt5 wKt6 
L a
1 c o r s h t
o
i
M
d
4
N
P
u
1 _ 
wKt1
Kt2 
[lacuna]; Bo Ho Lo1 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 
, NKt4 
NNg °î^
; MTr5
— b)oMd' 
NKt4 
oMd1 
— c) iMd4 
Be1 NNg NPu
1
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 
Wa 
TMd3 
; NKt4 
Lo2 oMd5 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
Pu9 MTr5 Bh 
B e
1 N K t
4 
Lo1 Tr1 
sKt5 
TMd3
MTr4 
— d ) B e ' B o 
T j
1 N K r
1 ¡ 
xMd4
 < 
Be1
wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 TMd3 cMd1 cMy sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr1 Laks 
oMd5 
NKt4
48.Cited by Vij 1.311; Laks 11.144; Mädh 1.413 — a) Ox3 Pu2 MTr5 
NKt4
NNg 
Pu8 
wKt3 NKt4 Lo3 TMd3 oMd1 TMd4 oMy oOr Tj' Tr1 MTr4MTr6
—b) NKt4 pâd a r e a d s : T j
2 
Hy 
wKt6 
— c) TMd4
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
oMd1 
wKt3 
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
sBe2 Tr2
 • 
' 
Ho TMd3 cMy 
— d) TMd4 
oMd1 Tr1 
; oMy
NK14 
" 
Be1 
;wKt3
49. Cited by Laks 11.144; Mädh 1.413 — a) Jm 
wKt1 
Pu2
— b)Tj' 
Laks 
w K t 1 — c) w K t
3 w K t
3 
— d) TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5
GMyNNgTr'MTr4MTr5MTr6|7o//yNd]Mâi// ! 
[TMd3oMyTr'
wKt3 
Be1 BBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 eKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tj2 MTr3 WaLaks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
ßBe2 Bo Lo4 Lo5
oMd1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly R] 
wKt3
50.Cited by Vij 1.311; Laks 11144; Mädh 1.413 — a) TMd4 
Lo4 L o 5 L o 1
— b) Pu5 Pu7 
oMd5 
— c) oMd1 . 
, Tj1 
Jo2 Lo3
oMd5 NNg oOr MTr4 MTr6 Laks 
— d) c M y T M d
3 
sKt5 
Bo Lo3
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy oOr Ox2 Tj1 Tr1


--- PAGE 632 ---
Chapter 7 
621
51. Cited by Vij i.3ii;Laks 11.144; Mädh 1.413-4— a) TMd4 oMy Ox2 Wa 
Tr1
Tr2 
— b) uKt5 wKt6 TMd4 
(rMd4 
oOrNPu1 Pu3 Tr2
— c) TMd4 
Ox3 
cMd1 
oMd5 
oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 Ox2
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 3^; Pu7 
— d) Bo TMd4 oMd5 
sKt5 w K t
6 T M d
3 sOx1
sPu6 
oMd1
52. Cited by Laks 11.144 — a) Ox2 
— b) oMd ' 
— c) xMd4 
— d)
oMd5 
Bo 
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 xMd3 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 sPu6 Tr2 Mir4 MTr6 [Jolly M4"5 Nd] 
"
53. Cited by Mädh 1.414; Laks 11144 — a) TMd3 
oOr —c) oMd1 oMy MTr5
Mir6 Mädh 
TMd3 
— d) Lo5 
N K t
4 o M d
1
Pu8 Tr1 =jq~: — Wa adds here 7.32 a-b.
54.* Cited by Vij 1.312; Mädh 1.405 — a) wKt1 [cor 
to] 
xMd3 
— b)
NPu1 
Be1 N N g B e
1 Bo Ho wKt3
 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3
Pu 4sPu 6Pu 8Tj'Tj 2Tr 2MTr 4MTr 6 Vij Mandlik KSS 
—
 c)xMd3 oMy
Pu8 
T
M
d
4
H
o Lo4 NNg Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M2^-5"9 Nd]
TMd4 
oMd1 T r 2 — d) sCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo3 Tj1 Vij 
[Jolly M8]
Ä .... : 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]
55. Cited by Vis 1.307 — a) Bo 
— b) sKt5 
Tr1 
L o
1 — d)
Jm Jo1 Kt2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
wKt3 Dave Jha 
oMd1 
Hy Tj2
'. 
, Bo Ox3 
Bo
56. Omitted in TMd3 oMy. Cited by Laks 11.106; Mädh 1.405-6 — a) Bo 
TMd4
Hy 
—b)Madh'
 
[vl as in ed.]; Lo1 
MTr4
— c)HyLo4Lo5 
Tr1 MTr3 
'— d) MTr3 : 
Tr2
57. Verses 57 and 58 transposed in TMd3. Cited by Laks 1123, 105; Mädh 1.406 — a)
Bo Lo5 Ox3 Tj ' Tr'Lafa 11.105 
— c) Ho 
" 
sKt5 om 
NKt4 La1 
— d)


--- PAGE 633 ---
622 
Chapter 7
TMd3 
Pu8 
Lo2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly G] Laks Me Go
NKt4
58.* Omitted in oMy. Cited by Laks 11.23; Mâdh 1.406 — a) wKt3 
Ox3
Laks 
—
 b) oOr 
; xMd4 
— c) eBe2 uCa Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
La2 Lo3 TMd3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 Mir6Mandlik Jolly Jha KSSDave
[Hy 
|; wKt3 Lo1 
— d) TMd4 
Bo 
wKt1 '
Lo1 TMd3 " 
oMd1
59. Pâda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 11.23, 105; Mädh 1.406— a) Tr2
Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
w K t
6 L a k s 11.105 ' — 
b ) H o J m Jo1 Kt2
wKt3 Lo1 Tj2 Laks Mädh K S S 
w K t
6 — c ) Tr1 :
, Lo2 
— d )
oMd5 
;Laks 
; Be1 uBe2 wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 oMd5 sOx1
Ox2 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M'-2^5] Me 
Ho
60. Pâda s c-d omitted in MTr6 — a) Pu8 
wKt1 MTr6 Wa 
— b) Bo Ho
BKt5 TMd3 oOr 
, NKt4 
MTr4 Nâ[pâtha
] Wlstl-^ciKdH; Bo 
— c) oMd1
TMd4 cMd5 Tr1 MTr4 
Kf 
cMy 
TMd3 
Tr2
TMd4 
— d ) w
K
t
1
T
M
d
4 
B o
61. Omitted in oMy MTr6; pâda- d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Vis 1.307 — a) sBe2 sKt5
wKt6 Lo1 Lo5TMd4 oOr sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly M]Rn Go Dave 
Tr1 
Ox3
oMd1 
T
r
2
J
m 
— c ) TMd4 
NPu1
. 
wKt1 
' Pu2 
Pu4 
Ox2 ' 
d) ßCa [but cor] Ho
62.* Cited by Apa 581 — a) oMd1 TMd4 
Bo 
P u
3 L o
1 Tj2
oMd5 Tr1 MTr6 
o M d 5 _ 
s B e 2 _ 
— b) wKt6 
TMd3 cMy
Pu2 
o O r 
TMd4 M
T
r
4
o
M
d
5 Tr1 MTr6
oMd1 
, Ho Jo2 Lo2 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 Rc 
KSS
[cf. 7.54 note] — c) TMd3 
Ho TMd3 TMd4 NPu1 
oMd1 
—
d) TMd3 
" 
Tr1 
Apa 
Apa [vi] 
oMd5
cMywKt6" 
BKt?"
Additional verse in Be' Tr2:


--- PAGE 634 ---
Chapter 7 
623
a) Be1 
— b)Be' 
, — d) Be1
63.Omitted in Pu5 — b) Be1 W
a
s
B
e
2 
— c) oMd1
La1 oOr 
, wKt6 P
u
8
— d) wKt3 
L o 1 T r 2 
sBe2 wKt3 oMd5 sOx1
Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 _ 
[cf. 7.54 note]
64. Omitted in Lo3 Ox3; ma in Lo4 — a)iMd3 
— c) x M d
4 w K t
3 Lo5
sOx1 
Tj1 
xMd3
Additional verses in Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
65. Cited by Laks 11.33 — a) Hy wKt1 Lo1 oMy 
" O
x
3
W
a
W
a
Tj1 
— b)Tr2 
Jm 
xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 
Lo1 
Bo 
Wa
— c) xMd4 Tr2 
" Bo 
Tr2 
Be1 Bo sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 uKt5 wKt6 c,Md'
NPu ' Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Mir3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave^ — d) Bo 
Be1
66. a) Be1 sBe2 Ho wKt1 xMd4 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M8'9] '; oOr 
— b) oMd1
TMd3cMy 
cMd^Tr6 
,rMd4 
Bo eKt5 wKt6
Lo1 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 Wa 
[Jolly M5 R] 
Be 
NKf Ox2 NPu1 
oMd5 i 
— c)
Be1 nCa Ho La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
— d) MTr4 MTr6 
oOr sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly Nd]
Lo3 
. o
M
d
5
. Jo2 La1 oMd1 iMd3 xMd4 oMy Tr1 Tj1
sCa 
MTr6om 
Kt2 
. iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
. oOr
Tr1 
Be1 NKl4 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 ¡uTr4 Wa [folly G Ku] 
MTr5 
Ho Jm Jo2
wKt3 Lo2 Lo5 [cor to] Tj1 [Jolly R] 
sCa ßBe2 sKf wKt6 
Jo1 
Pu2 Pu4


--- PAGE 635 ---
624 
Chapter 7
67.* a) NKt4 
Pu3
 
, Pu5 Pu7 
wKt3 
Bo 
Tr2 Pu3
— b)Tr2 
— c)Lo' 
Tr2 
Kt2 
Lo5 
N K t 4 —
d) MTr5 
, Be1 NKt4 oMd1
 TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu3 Tr1 Tr2 Mir4 Mir6
NdNäRc 
' 
BKÍ 
w K t 6 o M d 5 
oMd1 
. wKt1
68. Päda s a-b omitted in in TMd3 oMy Pu4 [haplo] — a) wKt1 Pu3 
Lo2
Bo wKt1 wKt6 Lo1 oOr 
MTr3¡ 
NNg Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— b) Ho 
— c)
Ox3 
TMd4 
Tr2 
BBe2 
— d) oOr 
o M d
1 o M d
5
Tr1 
, TMd4 
Ho
69. a) Ox3 
Jha Dave 
Bo Lo1 Pu3 Pu8 
_
x
— b) Tr1
sOx1 sPu6 
oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Go [Jolly G] 
Jo1 
wKt6
— c)0x3 
Lo1 [cor t
o
]
T
r
1 
TMd3oMyoOr
BBe2 ' 
— d) Ox2 
; TMd3 
Bo Kt2 NKt4 eKt5 
wKt1 NNg Pu5
Pu7 
w K t 6 M T r 4 
NKfLo 2oOr 
HowKt6 La1 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3
sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly R] 
N P u
1 L o
5 
Bo
70.* Cited by Vis 1.317; Vij i.szr.Mädh 1.406— a) Lo1 
TMd4 
Hy Jo1 Kt2
La1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox2 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa [folly M4] 
oMd5 
inTr4 ; 
TMd3
Ox3 
. 
— b) NKt4 om 
Pu5 Pu7 
Wa 
MTr5 
H
o
N
K
t
4
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd ' TMd4
 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox3
sPu6 Pu8 Tj > Tj2 MTr5 VijMâdh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— c) Tf Wa 
Bo
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu8 Tj2 MTr5
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave*X—A)
 Mâdh 
N
K
t
4
B
K
ê Lo2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu3
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 
Pu8 
w K t
1 B e
1 oMd5
 NNg
71. Cited by Vis 1.317; Laks 1141; pâda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.406— a) cMd1 TMd4
oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] ! — 
b ) Tr2 W
a
— c ) H o
cMd1 TMd4 uTr6Laks 
[uYrbLaksrMd4 
]; NKf BKt5 wKt6
Lo1 . . wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 
" Vis 
BCa Jo2 La1 Lo3 oMd5 Tj1
 
TMd3
 
NKt4
— d) Tr2 Wa 
Lo1
 ' 
NKt4 TMd3 [but corfh} oOr Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] Vis


--- PAGE 636 ---
Chapter 7 
625
72. a)ßKt5wKt6 
T M d
4 w K t
1 
Be1 Bo Ho NKi La1 Lo1
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 NNg Ox3 
— b) Tr1 
[visarga deleted
sh]¡ Be1 wKt6 oMd1 NNg Ox3NPu' Pu5 Pu7 
Ho 
oMd5
Jo1 MTr3 
TMd3 
Ox2 
, NKt4 
sOx1 sPu6
Lo3Tj' 
Lo1 Lo2 
Lo5 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
Ho
Kt2 
oMy 
oMd1 
wKt1
73. Pâda s b-c omitted in Jo1 — a) Bo wKt' 
— a-b) Lo1
•— b)oOr 
— c)wKt' 
wKt6 
" oMd5 " 
" iMd4
— d)Lo 1TMd 4oMd 5oMyNNgMTr s 
iMd3 
oOr 
NKt4 rMd3 oMy Tj1
Tr1 MTr5 
Lo1
74.* Cited by Laks 11.41 — a) TMd3 om 
iMd4 
NKt4 
— c) Laks
TMd3 
" — d) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
Be1 sCa Hy Jo1 Kt2
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo2
 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2
 MTr5 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
eBe2
Additional verse in Be3 NPu1 Pu3 Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
b) Be3 
NPu1 Pu3
75. Pâda s c-d ma sh in Be3. Cited byMâclli 1.407 — a) Bo Ho wKt1 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3
oMy oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
Wa 
Bo 
— b) sBe2 Pu5 
Be3 Lo1
— c)MTr3 
,TMd 4 < 
— d)Be3 
Bo Ho Lo1 cMd5
sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 Madh 
cMd1 
. sKt5 wKt6 
wKt3 
oOr [but
corJh]
76. Cited by Mädli 1.407 — a) Lo5 
wKt1 La1 oOr 
_ 
Bo Mâdh
TMd3cMy 
Wa 
Hy 
— b) TMd4 
wKt6 . . . . . — c)
oMd5 
Ox3 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] A/e[pâtha ] 
w K t
1 o O r
NKt4 
PusPu7Mâf// î 
wKt1 
— d)Tr2
77. a) sBe2 cWOTT° ; Be3 
— b) T r
2
T M d
4 
wKt6 
ßKt5 wKt6


--- PAGE 637 ---
626 
Chapter 7
Lo5 Ox3 
— c) oMd1 
Bo 
— d) TMd3 oMy 
TMd4 sOx1
sPu6
78. Placed before 7.76 in TMd3 oMy — a) Pu5 om 
— b)Tj' 
xMd4
NNg 
Jo1 Kt2 [Jolly Ku] 
— c) Be ' Be3 Bo Lo2 TMd4
 NNg oOr Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2
MTr6 Wa [Jolly M8 G] 
wKt3 
TMd3 xMd4 cMy _ . 
Wa
Bo 
¡oMd'oMd5 
Ho¡ 
Tr1 
"" 
~ ~ — d)
TMd4 
oOr
79.a) TMd3 TJM ^3f; T r
2 — b ) Be1 W
a
w
K
t
6 
Be3
— c)Bo 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy M T r
4 — d) cMd1 
Pu5
Pu7 
Lo1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu8
80. Cited by Laks 11.32 — a) iMd3 
Lo2 Pu5 
w K t 1 T M d 4
— b)Be3 
Jo2 Tj1 
" sBe2 
oMd5 NNg Mir4 Mir6 
"
— c)Bo 
J o 2 L o 3 G M d 5 T j ' L a k s 
TMd4 
La1 oMd1
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 
— d)sOx'sPu6 
TMd3 
TMd4 
sOx1 
wKt1
;wKt6 
Tj1
81. Cited by Apa 581;Laks 11.32 — a) wKt1 
Be3 
—a-b) Apa
[vl] 
— c) Be3 TMd3 TMd4 oOr Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 [but cor] Pu7
Tr2MTr6 
Apa [vl] 
wKt3 
. Pu5 Pu7 
, oMd5 oMy 
Bo
sOx1 Laks ' 
Tr2 
. wKt1
 TMd4 
. 
— d) oMd1 oOr
82. Cited by Jmv 9.20; Laks 11167 — a) NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 TMd3 Tj1 
_ 
Tr1
NNg \biit corfli] 
O
x
3
B
e
1 Pu2 P u
4 s K t
5 wKt6 
_ 
Tr2
— c)Ox3 
— d) BKt5 wKt6 TMd3 TMd4 o M d
5 o M d
1 MTr4MTr6 Wa/mv
Tj1
 
T M d 3 T M d 4 
Be3 Jm Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly M^9]Mandlik Dave
J h a K S S 
H y M T r
4
83. Päda s c-d omitted in Ox3 and pada-d in MTr6 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 11.167 — a)
BKt5 wKt6 TMd4 Tr1 
Ox2 
Bo 
* 
O
x
3
— b)BooOr
Tr2 
. Ho Pu2 Pu4 ^ 
, wKt1 La1
 TMd3 oMd5 oOr NPu1 
— c) Tr1


--- PAGE 638 ---
Chapter 7 
627
Lo1TMd4sOx1NPu'sPu6 
wKt6 
Pu2 Pu4 
Ho wKt1 wKt3 wKt6
Pu5 Pu7 Laks 
— d) H
o
L
o
4 Lo5 [Jolly M4] 
xMd3 oMy
[Jolly Nd] 
Bo Lo1
84. Omitted in Ox3; pâda s a-c omitted in MTr6. Cited by Laks 11167 — a) Be ' Lo2
NNg NPu
1 [Jolly M5"8-9] 
Pu5 P u
7 w K t
6 
B e 1 w K t 1 
Lo2 Lo4
Lo5 Wa [Jolly M4-5 N] MeNä Dave Jha 
— b) sBe2 wKt3 Lo2 Mir5 
La1 ^ ^
— c)xMd3 
xMd4 
Laks 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
Wa 
wKt6
85.* Cited by Apa 286; päda- a cited by Vis 1.311 — a) rMd3 
— b) Ho oMd5
Tr1 : 
Lo3 
Be3 _ 
— c) Be1 sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5
wKt6 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly M] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
[Bo 
sBe2 w K t 3 L o 4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] Jha Dave 
]; oMd1 oMd5
MTr4MTr6 
[oMd1 om 
\; xMd3 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd]
Be3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 iMd4 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 MTr5 Wa [Jolly G N]
Apa Kii [pâtha ] Jolly 
~ d) xMd4 M Ï r 5 s K t 5
86.* Cited by Apa 303; Hem 1.27 — a) ßCa cMd1 Mir6 
xMd4 
oOr oMd5 Apa 
—
b) Be1 Be3 Bo Ho Jm uKt3 wKt6 La2 TMd3 oMy NNg oOr Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8
Tj'Tr2 
.
[
J
m 
La2 Ox3NPu' Pu8 T j
1 N N g T r 2 B e 3 wKt6 xMd3 oMy
oOr 
]
;
A
p
a
o
M
d
5 J — c) xMd3 oMy Mir4Mir6 
[rMd3
3TW]; Lo1 
— d) Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
cMd1 iMd4
MTr4 Hem
Additional verse in Be1 Hy Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Tj1 Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave; comment-
ed on by Me Rn:
a)HyTjr 
Ox3 
— d) Be1
Additonal verse in tsCa Ho NPu
1 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
a) Tr2 
— b) Tr2 
NPu1 
— c) NPu1
87. Pâda s c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 11.131 — a) iMd4 
NPu1
— a-b) BKt5 wKt6 
: [ßKt5 
]; Be3 
sOx1 sPu6
— b) oMd1 oMd5 Laks 
NPu
1 
NKt4 Tr2 
ßBe2


--- PAGE 639 ---
628 
Chapter 7
Ho 
Lo2 
Bo 
oMy 
TMd3 
wKt1 
B e 3 — c) Tr2
O x
3 P u
2 P
u
4
B
o
; w K t 1 N K f L o 5 TMd3 
— d ) L o 2
Lo4 TMd3 oMd1 oMy Pu8 Tr1 Mir5 
ßBe2 Pu5 
Ox3 om
88. Omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 11.154; M adln 1.413 — a)oMy 
TMd3
oMd1 Bh [ad 89] 
NNg 
Pu3 Mir4 _ 
— b) oMd5 Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] Laks 
ßKt5 
" 
Pu2 P u
4 T M d
4 
— c) oMd1 TMd3
TMd4oMd5GMyTia¿a/fcí 
[ o M y ] —
 d)Laks 
TMd4
Be3 
TMd3 oMy
89. a)Tj" 
TMd3oMy 
TMd4oMd5Tr' 
Pu5 Pu7 
— b)
TMd4 
Be1 Wa 
La1 Tr2 
TMd3 TMd4 
— c) TMd3 oMy
Ho 
'u2 Pu4 ' 
. Tr2 
oMd5 
— d) Bo 
wKt3 
NNg
Wa"
90.Omitted in Lo3 — a) Pu2 P u
4 P u
5 
— b) oMy _ 
Pu5 Pu7
Lo5Tj' 
BBe2 Be3 BKt5 wKt6 
Wa— 
c) TMd3 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7
Tr1 
Be3 Mir6 '
T
M
d
3 
oMy 
Be1
wKt1 sKt5 wKt6
 < 
— d) Hy 
oMd5 '
91. Cited by Laks 11.132 — a) oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 
Lo3 Tj1
NPu
1 
Mir3 
,— b)Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt3 
— c)
Mir3 
Be1 Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' Wa [Jolly G R] L
a
k
s
H
y
92. sOx1 omits 
t c [ 9 3 b ] — a) TMd3 o
M
y
— b) Lo5 Ox3 Me [pätha ]
— c) wKt3 
— d) Mir6 
oMd1
93.Päda s c-d omitted in Tr2 — a) B e 1 ß B e 2 B
o
H
o Lo1 TMd4 
Ho
Pu3 
Be3 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
Lo2
— b) Pu5 Pu7 
T M d 4 T M d 3 T
M
d
4
H
o wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Ox 3 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 ' 
T
r
1
— c) B o " 
Jo1 
— d) NNg ma sh
TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 640 ---
Chapter 7 
629
94. Cited by Laks 11.135 — a) cMd1 
Be3 
_ 
— b) TMd3 
Lo1 ' " —
c) Bo Ho Lo1 Pu3 Pu8 
TMd3 oMd5 
Tr1 
wKt1
— d) Laks 
TMd4
95.Cited by Laks 11.135 — a) N P u
1 n K f 
Laks 
o O r — b)
wKt1 
— c) Ho 
cMd5 
TMd 3Tr' 
Tr2
Ho 
sBe2 
TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) TMd3 oMd1 oMy
Bo 
Be1 BBe2 Bo Ho Jm wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo4 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1
Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly
96. a) TMd3 oMd5 oMy 
TMd4 
Be3 Lo1 
MTr3 
" — b) Pu5 om
Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr5 
TMd3 TMd4 oM>
Be3 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 
NKf TMd4 
P u
8 T r
1 
— c) TMd3 oMy
TMd4 
MTr4 MTr6 
Be3 
oMd1 _ 
~ 
" — d)TMd3oMd5 
Be1 Ho TMd4 Tr1
MTr4 MTr5 
Lo3Tj'
97.*a)oMd1TMd4Tr1 
Be3 eCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
; Bo Ho ßKt5 NKt6 Lo1 Lo" TMd3 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
sPu6 Pu8 TTr5 [Jolly M ] 
N
K
t
4
W
a 
B e
1 N o Re support 
Tr2
TMd3 MTr5 
— b ) T M d 3 o O r 
" 
T r
2 — c) Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2
TMd4oOrTr' 
iMd 3oMyTj' 
MTr5 [notDer] 
sOx1 sPu6
Bo 
N P u 1 _ 
— d ) B e ' o M d ' s B e 2 TMd4 
MTr5 [but me]
oMd1
Additonal verse in Be3 Ho Mandlik 
KSS; päda s a-b in Tr2:
c)Ho
98. Padas a-b omitted in Tr2 — a) TMd3 TMd4 
Be1 
Be3 
cMd1
TMd4 
NKf 
aCa 
— b) oMy 
TMd3
Tr1 MTr5 
oMd 5 MTr4 M T r
6 O x
3 
e B e 2 N N g " 
Lo4
ma 
' cMd1 
Be1 [but me]TMd4 
sCa 
— c)TMd4
sBe2 Bo Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa 
Jm ßKt5 wKt6 Ox3
 MTr6 
Ho
Be1 NKt4 
o M d 1 ß B e 2 
— d)oMd' 
Pu3 
Wa 
TMd3


--- PAGE 641 ---
630 
Chapter 7
comments:
99. Cited by Madh 1.413 — a) Lo' 
Pu8 
oMd5
TMd3 
— b) Lo1 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo3 Lo4
xMd4NNg Ox3 Pu4Tj' Tr2MTr5 [Jolly U ~K\ Madh 
. 
;Ho oOr Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
• 
Pancatantra 1.2
[cf. 7.101] — c) Be1 Ho Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
. Pu2 Pu4 Wa 
Pu3 
NKt 4
sOx'sPu'MTr5 
— d)xMd4 
cMd5 
Pu3 
ßBe2 HoaKt5 wKt6
Be1
100. Verses 100 andioi transposed in NKt4; pada-d omitted in oMy — a)iMd3 
—
b)TMd3cMy 
— cÍBK^wKt« 
— d) TMd3
101.* Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 — a) cMd1 
— b) sBe2 La1 oMd1 oMd5 Pu8
Tr1 
— c ) O
x
2
K
S
S 
a M d
5 B e
1 W a " 
oMd1
Tr1 
T j 2 M T r 4 M T r 6 L o 2 
- d) Lo1 Lo2 TMd3 cMd5
Tr1 MTr4 MTr< " 
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 [Jolly M4"5-' G Nd] Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
'' 
Be1 Wa 
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2
BBe2 sKt5 wKt6 
"
102. Omitted in TMd4; ma shin Be3; verses 102 and 103 transposed in Wa; päda s c-d
omitted in Lo2. Cited by Lais 11151 — a) oMd5 
Lo1 
— b) Ho
Laks 
_ 
La1 oOr P u 2 _ 
O x
2 L o
1 TMd3 cMy 
—
c) Be3 
w K t 1 _ 
Be1 Be3 Ho sKt5 wKt6 Lo5 O x
3 o M d ' TMd3 oMd5 oMy
sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr5 [folly Nd] 
. wKt3 oOr NPu' Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
NNg
Pu3 
K t
2 ' — d
)
T
r
'
H
o
" BKt5wKt6 
Jo 1' 
. wKt1
103. Pâda s a-b omitted in Lo2. Cited by Laks 11151 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5 Laks
—
 b) Be1 NNg 
oMd5 
aMy 
wKt1 
— d) oMd1 iMd3
TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Wa
104. Cited by Laks 11.151-2; Madh 1.413 — b) La1 
— c) Tj1


--- PAGE 642 ---
Chapter 7 
631
TMd4 
wKt1 
Jm 
Tr2 
Kt 2 
O x
3 M ä d
h
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Mir5 
— d) xMd4 
L o 3 s O x 1 Ox2
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS
Jo2 
Lo2
105. Cited by Laks 11.152 — a) Lo3 
wKt1 
Tr2 om 
La1 Pu7 
TMd4
—
 b)Laks 
Be1 La1 
Kt2 Lo1
 TMd4 
Be3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 L(f
cMy Ox3 [Jolly M Nd] Dave Jha ^ — c) iMd4 
La1 
Pu2 Pu4
 tN 
^ . Jm
HoNNg_. 
o
M
d
1
— d ) W a ß B e 2 
Ox3
Lo4 Lo5
Additional verse in sCa La1 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS:
b) Tr2 
— d) aCa
Additional verses in La1:
106.* Cited by Laks 11.152 — a) oMy 
TMd4 
— b) Be1 ßBe2 Be3 sCa Ho Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1
Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[oOr 
]; Be3
Bo La2 ßKt5 wKt6 
— c) wKt6 Laks ' 
' Be3 
NKt4
TMd4 MTr6 
— d) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M] 
[Lo4 
]; Be1
BBe2 Be3 eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wfit1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 NNg sOx1
Ox2 NPu
1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[wKt3
Lo3Tj' 
L
a
2
T
M
d
4
107. Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Laks 11.126 — b) oMd ' TMd3 oMy Tr1 
NNg
— c) Bo Ho Lo ' sOx1 Ox3 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 [Jolly M4'5] ' 
Tr2 
wKt3
— d)Ox3îmrf^°;Lo
lTj1
108. Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Laks 11126 — a) Be1 Wa 
wKt1
— a-b) [Jolly M9] 
— b) wKt3 
— c) oMd1
 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5oMy MTr4 MTr6 A« 
M T r
5 T i
1 
Be3! 
oOr
Pu5 Pu7 
Laks 
TMd3 
TMd4


--- PAGE 643 ---
632 
Chapter 7
109. Cited by Laks 11.126 — a) NKt4 wKt6 
TMd4 
— b) Ox3 
wKt1
: —c)BoHo 
wKt3 
o
M
d
5
— d) TMd4 
MTr4 MTr6 Lafo
' 
Be3 Bo Ho Lo1 Pu3 
[Lo1 
Be1
110. a)oMd' TMd4 oMd5^1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
" 
~ 
iMd4 
oMd5 Tr1
MTr5 : 
iMd3 
NKt4 
wKt1 
Be1 
Ox3 lacuna
at 
—
 b) Be1 Lo1 
Tr1 
. . xMd3 
— c) Bo 
" 
" Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly
G] 
Be3 
Jo1 
" 
" 
La1 sKt5 oOr MTr4 MTr6 
— d)
Bo i 
sBe2 Tr1
111. mafh Wa. Cited by Laks 11.83; Mädh 1.409— a) wKt6 
Wa
oMd5 
sKt5 w
K
t
6
— b ) M T r
5 o O r 
sKt5 wKt6 oMd5 Pu5
Pu7 MTr5 [Jolly G] 
— c) sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 
" xMd4 oOr
Pu5 Pu7 
o M d
1 B e
1 
w K t
3 H y 
Tr1 
MTr5 
oMd1
112. Not commented by Re, Nd. Cited by Mädh 1.409 — b) oOr 
Jo1 
— c)
NPu1 
— d)oOi 
TMd3 
NPu'Pu2 
Pu4
113.a) Be1 
Lo1 
— b ) o
M
d
5
c
M
d
1 
Lo2
— c) Hy wKt6 
Lo1 Tr2 
wKt1 ' 
Ox3 
— d) Ho
114.* Cited by Laks 11.79 — a) wKt6 
— b) Laks 
—
 d) oMd5
reading adopted: oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Nd Laks.
115. Cited by Laks 11.79 — b) wKt3 TMd3 
oMd5 Laks 
wKt1
— c) TMd3 
. o M y T r
2 
sOx1 sPu6
TMd4
— d)Tj1
MTr6 Laks
except the following, which have the
all mss. have the reading
Bo NNg [but cor fh] 


--- PAGE 644 ---
Chapter 7 
633
116. Päda s c-d omitted in Lo2 — a) eBe2 Be3 Ho Hy Jm NKt4 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 MTr5
Wa KM Go Jolly 
wKt3 Ox3 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) MTr5 
L o
3 H o
— c)Be3wKt6 
" w K t
3 — d ) T j ' J m Jo1 Kt2 
oMd1
oOr 
oMy
117. Päda s a-b omitted in Lo2 — a) wKt6 Wa 
Ho Pu5 Pu7 MTr3 
— b)
oOr 
NNg 
Jo'sKt5 wKt6 
— c) sKt5 wKt6 
Be1 
Be1 Ho
Wa 
— d)Tr2 
Lo3Tj' 
Pu8
118. a) TMd4 
iMd3 oMy 
O x
2 , NNg iMd3 oMy 
eBe2 MTr5 
Lo1
' — c) Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1 
— d) nKt5 
wKt6
Ox3 
Pu5 Pu7 
La'Lo1
119.a) Bo T M d 4 H o 
Bo 
Lo1 
Be1 NKt
4 Lo2 MTr4 Wa 
— b) sOx1
sPu6 
TMd4 
Pu8 
Be3 Bo Ho aKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 iMd3 cMy
NNg Ox2 Ox3 Pii Tr ' Tr2 MTr5 MTr6 \Jolly M Nd] 
— c) Ho oMd1 
. wKt1
Tj2 
. — d) oMd1 TMd3 oMy
120. a) Ho NNg Tj2 
— b) Be1 Wa „ 
, Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M]
wKt1 
NKt4 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
- c) Bo 
Lo1 
Be1
 
TMd 3
GMy
-d)HyTj2
121. Cited by Laks 11.80 — a) oOr Tr1 Laks 
Be3 TMd4 
— b) Lo1 
eBe2
\BKt5wKt6 
[BKt5 
];Tr2 
'— c)Ho :
 
TMd3 
—
d)Lo'
122. Cited by Laks 11.80 — a) Ho 
[om ]; Tr2 
Bo 
Tj2
oMd5 
J m P u
8 
— b)Lak: 
^ 
. o M d 5 — c)
rMd3 oMy 
Laks 
La1 NPu ' Tr1 
Lo2 
sKt5 wKt6
oMd5 
NPu
1 
,8e1 Pu2 Pu4 
* 
— d) Be1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M4]


--- PAGE 645 ---
634 
Chapter 7
[Be1 Ox3 
];BKt5wKt6 
oMd5 
.._ sCa wKt1 Pu2 Pu4
Tr1 
TMd3
123. Cited by Laks 12.568 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
Ox2 
Laks ' 
Tr2
oMd' 1 
rMd3 
Lo3 
oMy 
_ 
Bo 
Be1 
— b) NPu1
Ox3 
L o
3 — c ) B o ' — d) Pu2 Pu4 
Tj1 
oMd1 TMd4
MTr4 MTr6
124. a) sKt5 wKt6 [but me} 
Lo3 
Tr1 MTr5 
wKt1
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 
nCa Tr2 
Be1 Bo Ho wKt1
La1 Lo4 oMy Ox3 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr1
 MTr6 Wa 
NPu
1 
Hy 
— a-b) cMd1
TMd4 oOr 
" 
" 
"
[
o
O
r 
oMd1 
— d) Lo2
Tj1 
oMd5
125. a) Jo1 La1 cMd1 oMd5 Tr2 
P
u
8
— c) oMd1
 MTr4MTr6
 
NKt4
MTr3 
— d
)
o
M
d
'
B
o Jo1 La'oMd^Pu1 Pu3 Tr2
wKt6 
" wKt3 
Ho
126.* Cited by Laks 11.82 — a) Laks 
' 
Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 oMd1 Tj2
Be'[mc to] sKt5 wKt6 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
Be3 Tr1 
TMd3
TMd4 
— b ) T r ' ^ ^ 
.Lo 3Tj ! 
Laks
Be1 Be3 sKt5 TMd3 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 
TMd3 oOr 
oMd1 TMd4
BBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2wKt' Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 NNg
sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 O x
3 —
c) Hy NKt4 sKt5 wKt6
 TMd4 Ox3 Tj2 Tr1 MTr5 
oMd1 
Lo3 Tj1
 
TMd4
Pu5 Pu7 
Hy 
Pu2 Pu4 
— d) TMd4 
MTr5
Lo5 
; Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Tj2 MTr3Mandlik Jha KSS DaveTMd3 oMd5
oMy Tr1
127. Cited by Madh 1.404—a) Pu8 
Jm 
B e
1 w K t
1 
Lo1
— b) Jm wKt1 La1 Lo3 Tj1 
sOx ' s P u
6 o M y 
~ " 
TMd3
Lo1 
B e 3 o M d ' O x 2 o M d 5 
— c) Lo1 oOr Mädh Hy
wKt3 
NKt4
wKt6
— d) cMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6
wKt1
Tr2 om


--- PAGE 646 ---
Chapter 7 
635
128. Verses 128 and 129 transposed in sKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; not commented by Re;
pâda s c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.88; Madh 1.404 — a) TMd3 
Ox2
;aMy 
— b)TMd3 
Jo1 
" 
Tr2 
wKt6 Tr1 
— c) Be3 Kt2
NKt 4 Lo4 Lo5 Ox* Laks 
ßKt5 wKt6 La1 Tj1 
Be' 
— d) TMd4
rMd3 
" 
oMd1 
Ho
129.Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Mädh 1.404—a) xMd3 oMy 
TMd4
TMd3 
. 
— b) wKt1 
La1 oMd1 xMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Ox2 Tr1 Mir4
Mir5 MTr6 
Bo 
Ox3 
wKt3
 
< 
Lo3 Tj1 
NNg
Pu2 Pu4 
Hy— 
c) L o
5 B e
1 Ho La1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 MTr5
Be1 Be3 Bo wKt1 TMd3 oOr Pu7 Tj ' Tr1 MTr5 _ 
w Kt3 
' — d) iMd4
Pu7 
w K t
6 T j ' T M d
4 
HoLo3Pu7lTC;Lo2 
Tj1
130. Not commented by Re — a) Tr2 
NNg [but corfli\ 
w
K
t
1
— b)
Ho 
— c) sBe2 Pu5 Pu7 
Hy 
Ox3 
'— d) Kt2 
Be1 Bo wKt6 sOx1 Ox3
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Wa [Jolly M4~5 G]
131. Not commented by Nd; pada-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.88 — a) Laks
wKt1 La1 
oMy 
. iMd3 
. Ox3 
wKt1 
TMd3
—b) M
T
r
5
c
M
d
1 
Be1 Lo1 cMd 5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Wa
MTr4 
T
j
2
L
o
3 
. 
' — c) Jo2 oMd 5 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo2
[Jolly M8] 
Bo 
— c-d) ßKt5 wKt6
— d) sOx1 sPu6
132. Pâda s a-c omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.88 — a) iMd3 
Be3
[om 
Rn comments: 
[in place of 
] 
A/e'scom. on this
verse has not survived — b) xMd4 
La1 LaksNNg 
ßBe2
TMd3 
Tr '
B
e
1 Be3 NÍCt4 Lo2 oMd ' Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 Tr2 MTr4 MTr^Tr6 [Jolly
G] Laks 
T j
1 w K t
3 
T r 2 O x 3— c
)
Kt2 wKt3 wKt6 Lo1 TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 
Lo4 omWa 
— d) TMd4
Tr2
Ho
TMd4


--- PAGE 647 ---
636 
Chapter 7
133. Omitted in Pu4; not commented by Re Nd;after 
Ox3 omits up to
of verse is6a [haplo]. Cited by Mädh 1.408 — a) Hy 
Wa 
r M d
3 — b)
TMd4 
B e
3 ' T M d
3 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
TMd" 
' G
M
d
1
' — d)BoTr'
134.* Omitted in Ox3; not commented by Nd Äc;päda
s a-b omitted in oMd5. Cited by
Vij 3.44; Laks 11.171; Mädh 1.408 — a) Tr2 
Bo oMy 
—b) TMd3 
Laks
Wa 
T M d
3 — c ) x M d 4 s O x 1 sPu6 
MTr4 MTr6 
— c-d)
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] Vij 
[cf. 8.22] — d) nBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1
Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 TMd4 sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 LaksMandlik Jolly Jha
KSSDave 
Lo4 L
o
5
o
M
d
5
135. Omitted in Ox3; not commented by Nd Re. Cited by Laks 11.171; Mädh 1.408 — a)
wKt1 
" Hy 
Lo'Pu3Pu8 
T M d 3 o M y — b) Laks ' 
' sKt5 wKt6
Tj1 
Lo5 o M y T j 2 
Ho wKt1 wKt3 MTr3 
oOrSWRT; TMd4 
Pu5
Pu1 [Jolly G] 
N K t
4 T M d
3 
T
r
2
— c) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
TMd4 Wa 
L o
2 . Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M] 
NK14 
Be1
Pu2 Pu4
136. Not commented by Nd— a) Bo Lo1 
Be1 Bo wKt3 aKt5 wKt6 Lo1 NNg sOx1
NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 
wKt1 
Be1 Pu2 Pu4 
wKt3 
TMd3 o M d 5 . oMy
137. a)oMd' 
— b)TMd3oMy 
Be1 
NNg 
H o ' —
d) Pu3 Pu8 
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2
MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
wKt6 
NPu1
138. The sequence in Lo3 Tj1 is: 138, i4ocd, isgcd, I4oab, isgab, 141— a) Pu3
Hy 
M
T
r
5
o
M
d
5 
— b) sOx1 sPu6
TMd3 oMy 
Be1 
[Jolly M8] °
o
O
r 
w K t
1 c M y
wKt3 
— c) o M d 1 L o 1 
— d) Be3 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
wKt1
 — d) Pu5 Pu7
MTr6
Jm
— c) Ox3


--- PAGE 648 ---
Chapter 7 
637
139. Omitted in Tr1. Cited by Laks 11.93 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
— b) xMd3 oMy
Wa 
Be1 Tj1 
MTr4 MTr6 
e K t
5 w K t
6
— c)MTr6 
xMd3 
Ox2Wa 
oMy
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Laks ' 
Jo2 
NKt4 
— d)
Lo1 
wKt3xMd3NNgTj' 
rMd4
140. Pâda s a-b omitted in NKt4 La1 sOx1 Tr1 [haplo] and ma in Be3. Cited by Laks
11.152— a) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]; 
sKt5 wKt6 
Lo2 
Bo oOr
[om< 
] — b) oOr 
sCa Lo2 
. Pu2 Pu4 
Be1 
— c)NPu'
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] * 
xMd3 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Gr] 
oMd1
141. a) wKt1 
, L o
1 P u
5 Pu7 
NKt4 
Pu2 P u
4 — b) oMy
TMd4 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M4~5] 
Bo 
Lo1 
Pu2 Pu4
wKt1 wKt3 oMd5 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly M G Nd] Jolly 
[cf. 7.54 note] — c)
Tr1 MTr6 
— d) o M y T M d 3 
Lo2 
xMd4 
; T j
2 N K t
4
MTr5
142. Cited by Mädh 1.414 — a) Wa 
; Be3 
—c) Lo1 xMd4 oMy
; Pu8 
— d) Wa
143.* Pâda s a-b omitted in sBe2 [haplo], and pâda s c-d in NKt4. Cited by Laks 12.511 —
a) wKt1 MTr5 
xMd3 x M d
4 . uKt5 w K t
6 B o 
— a-b) xMd4 Ox3 MTr4
MTr6 
x M d
3 o M d
1 
c
M
d
5
— b)xMd4
Lo5 
Tr1 
Be-'ßKt5 wKt 6NNg 
^ 
NKt4 
Wa
— c)Bo 
_ 
Pu8 
LakswKt1 " 
— d) xMd3 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
W
a
P
u
5 Pu7 [Jolly G ]
NPu1 
cMd' NNg 
oOr Ox2 
Lo1 
sBe2
Be1 Ho xMd4 Pu8 Laks 
Be3 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
. Tr2
[Jolly Nd] 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly R] Ku Go
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Additional verse in wKt1 Pu3:
b) Pu3 
— c) w
K
t
1
- d) Pu3


--- PAGE 649 ---
638 
Chapter 7
144. Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Dev 2.450 — a) Lo5 TMd3 
— b) Dev
Ho TMd4 
— c)Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 
Pu3 
Be1 
Mir4 MTr6
— d) oMy
145.* Päda s a-b omitted in NKt
4 andpäda s c-d in xMd4; not commented by Re. Cited by
Laks 11.101; Dev 3.43— b) Lo5 Tj1 
— c) Be1 oOr sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr2 MTr5
\ 
[ B e 1 . "]; L a
2 s B e
2 Be3 Bo sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo4 Ox3 Pu3 Pu5
Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 [folly M G] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave. 
NKt4 wKt6 Lo5
; wKt1 La1 Ox2 
L
o
1
[
G
o
, Ku appear to support this reading];
Dev [vl] 
Be1 aCa wKt1 NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo ' Lo4 cMd5 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M G] Dev Jolly 
Be3 Jo2 wKt3 Lo2 Lo3 Tj1
La1 . 
[sic];Bo 
— d)Jo2Lo3Tj' 
Lo1 iMd3 oMy Ox3 Tr1
MTr5 
DevBCa Lo4 Lo5 oMd5 [Jolly M 4 ] " 
Jo1 Lo2 Tr2 
Be3
Ho Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tj1 MTr5 MTr6 Madh 
Lo1
146.* Omitted in TMd4; not commented by Re; päda s b and d transposed in Jm. Cited by
Mädh 1.410; päda s a-b cited by Latoi.ioi; Dev 3.61— a) Laks 
oOr
Be1 Ho oMd1 Ox3 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M4 Nd] 
— b)NKt4 
— c) Bö
NKt4 wKt6 Ox2 Pu8 MTr3 
T M d
3 — d) Be1 Be3 wKt1 La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 Pu2
Pu4 
[Pu2 Pu4 •
]
147. Päda s a-b omitted in TMd4. Cited by La¿.v 11.102; Mädh 1.410— a) sOx1 sPu6
Tr2 
e B e 2 O x 3 [Jolly M 5 " 8 - 9 ] M T r 4 
Pu2 Pu4 
—
b) NPu
1 W; Be3 Ho Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 MTr4 \Jolly R] 
— c) Wa 
P
u
2
N
N
g
TMd4 
— d) Be3 
[cf. 7.1460];uBe2 
sCa
Tr2 
_ 
La1 
TMd4 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
; Pu5 Pu7 Laks
wKt6
148. Cited by Laks 11.102 —- a) Ho 
Bo sKt5 wKt6 
— a-b) oMd5
— b) Be1 NKt4 Lo1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
T M d
3 B o
— c) TMd4 
La1 _ 
TMd4 
— d) MTr3 
NKt
4
T M d 3
G M y
W a


--- PAGE 650 ---
Chapter 7 
639
149.* Cited by Laks 11103 — a) TMd4 oMd5 MTr6 
sKt5 
, wKt6
eCa Ho NKt
4 La ' Lo1 iMd3 oOr Pu3 Tr1 MTr5 
oMd1 
— b) Be1 Be3
JolKt2TMd3GMyPu2Pu4Pu5Pu7Tj1MTr3,/o//y 
Lo4 Ox2 Tr2 
wKt3 Pu3
Mir3 
ßKt5 wKt6 oMd5 oMy Ox3 Pu4 Wa 
, Be1 sBe2 Bo ßCa [but me] Ho
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNgoOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
MTr5 Wa [Jolly M Gl Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
sMd1 
— c) NKf
4
sKt5 wKt6 Tr2 
TMd4 o
M
d
5
. oMd1 ' 
sOx1 sPu6
Tr1 
— d)MTr5 
Pu5 ' 
sOx1 sPu6 
Mir4Mir6
wKt3 wKt6 Tr2 " 
Ox3 ' 
Be3 
Pu3
Bo sCa [but cor] Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 xMd3 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu7 Pu8 Laks
Tr1 " 
BBe2NKf 
, Be1 Pu2 Pu4
 
TMd4 '
NPu1 W a 
s
K
t
5
H
o [cor t o ] 
M e gives
and 
unclear which is root; Go Nd Ku Rn Re Mr support edition.
150. Cited by Laks 11.103 — a) cMd1 Laks 
Hy 
Bo 
wKt1
TMd4 
TMd3 
oMy 
Tr1 
. oMd5
NNg 
sKt5 w K t
6 — b) Jo1 Lo2 Lo4rMd3 cMy Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1
Tr2 
eKt5 wKt6 TMd3 oMd5 oMy 
MTr6 
Lo4 Lo5
wKt1 
Be3 
— d) TMd3 oMy 
TMd4 
Ox3
Be3 
oMd'cMd 5 T r ' M T r
4 P u
5 
Be1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
MTr6 
Hy
151. Cited in Laks 11.106; Mädh 1.410—a) Tr2 
wKt1 
Laks
oMd5 NPu1 
wKt3 
TMd4 
NKt4 wKt6 TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4 
—
b)Lo2 
NKt4 
Tr2 
wKt1 Tj1 
wKt1 Lo4 TMd4 Ox3 
— c)
Tr2' 
;
T M d
4 — d ) cMd1 o
O
r
P
u
2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr2 
Be3
152. Pâda s c-d cited by Laks 11.106; Mädh 1.410 — a) Lo5 
Be3 
Pu5 Pu7
Bo 
— b) oMd1 
r M d 4 _ 
wKt6 
NNg 
Tr1
oMd5 
— c) o M d
5 T j
1 
MTr3 
Pu4 
wKt1
TMd4 
w K t 3 o M y 
— d) NNg 
TMd4
Additional verses in Lo1:


--- PAGE 651 ---
640 
Chapter 7
153. Omitted in Lo1. Cited by Laks 11106; Mädh 1.410— a) Mädh 
NKt4
Mir4 
oMy 
NPu1 
— b) NKt4 
" 
oMd1 ;
Tr1 
" 
Lo5 
— c ) T j ' G M y 
Mädh 
— d) cMd1
Ox3 
Tr2 ! N K t
4 omBo sPu6 [but cor}
154. ma in sKt5. Cited by Laks 11.107; Mädh 1.411 — a) xMd3 
oMd5 
Bo
Be1 
wKt1 
wKt6 
— b)Lo5 
Laks 
— d) Tr2 
wKt3
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
Additional verses in oMd1 iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr] Mandlik
KSS Dave; commented by Nd; given as citation (probably from AS 1.12.23-4) in Bh, from
which it probably entered the ST ms. tradition:
1.a) xMd3 x M d 4 — b) [Jolly Nd Gr] 
— c) xMd3 
xMd4
Bh AS 
—
 d) Mir4 Mir6 
xMd4 Mandlik KSS Dave
MTr6
2. a)TMd4 
— b)TMd4 
— c) Tr1 
xMd4 
—
d) MTr4 
" 
TMd4 
xMd3 [Jolly Nd Gr]
Mandlik KSS Dave
155. Päda s a-b ma in nKt5. Cited by Laks 11.107 — a) Bo Lo3 Tj1 
— b) Pu5 Pu7
Bo Ox3 NPu1 
— c)xMd3 
MTr4 MTr6
GMd1 
GMd5 GMy Tr1 MTr5 
" 
' 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
" 
Ho Lo4
Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M]
156. Cited by Laks 11.107 — a) oMd1 
Be1 
_ 
Kt2' 
— c) Ox3
Pu5 Pu7" 
— d)Ox3 
wKt1 
xMd4' 
Tr1 
wKt1
157. Omitted in oMy Ox3; ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 11.107 — a) MTr5 Bh
Lo1 Pu5 Tr2 
sBe2 
; Lo1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 
Tr2 
, GMd1
— b)wKt' 
,oOr 
;Tr' 
oMd5 
— c) Hy om
Pu5 Pu7 
Ho oMd1 
xMd4
oOr
wKt1
sCa Ho La1


--- PAGE 652 ---
Chapter 7 
641
158. Cited by Laks 11.107; Mädh 1.411 — a) Bd Be3 Bo La1 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 
— b)
oMy 
wKt1 sKt5 wKt6 sOx1 Tr2 
sPu6 
cor to 
. Be1 wKt3
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Mir6 
— c) wKt1 
Tr2 
Bo
— d)iMd4 
H o [ m a ]; Lo1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
oMyOTT
Ox3
Additional verse in TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd Gr] Mandlik 
KSS; cited in
Laks 11.107:
a) Mandlik 
KSS 
[ Jolly Nd Gr]
— b)Tr" 
— c) [Jolly NNg Gr] 
iMd4 Mandlik KSS
Laks 
[rMd4 
]; TMd3 cMy
159. Cited by Mädh 1.411 — a)cMd ' xMd3 oMd5 oMy NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Wa
[for the reading adopted, see 7.1803]; Pu3 
— b) Ho TMd3 Tr2
Lo1 
— c) TMd3 o M y " 
o
M
y
— d) NKt4 
. Jo2 Pu7 [Jolly G]
160. Not commented by Nd; päda s a-b ma in ßKt5; päda s c-d omitted in cMd5 Tr2. Cited
by Laks 11.111; Mädh 1.411 — a) uKt5 wKt6 Mir6 
sKt5 wKt6 Pu2 Pu4 
— b)
Lo5 Be1 
— c) Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Be3 
sOx1 sPu6 om 
Lo5 
— d) Be5 Pu5
Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly G R] 
Be ' Ho TMd3 TMd4 oOr 
oMd1 oMy
NPu1
161.* Omitted in oMd5; not commented by Nd; päda s a-b omitted in Tr2 and päda s c-d in
Bo. Cited by Laks 11.111; Mädh 1.411 — a) Pu5 om 
oMd1 
— b) sBe2 Be3 uCa Ho
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 ßKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2
 NPu' Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 Wa
[Jolly R M8] Nä Ku Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[Be3 Hy wKt3 NPu1 Tj '
TMd4 
— d)Pu 3Wa
162. Omitted in Be1 Lo4 Lo5oMd5 sOx1 Ox3; not commented by Me and Nä ; päda s a-b
omitted in Bo and päda s c-d in Pu4. Cited by Laks 11.111 — a) Tf 
Ho wKt1 sKt5
wKt6 TMd3 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 [Jolly Nd] 
MTr6 
wKt1 
La1 Tj1
TMd4 NNg Pu5 Pu7 
— b) BKt5 wKt6 Wa 
oMd1 Tr2 
— c)
Laks
TMd3
GMy
TMd4


--- PAGE 653 ---
642 
Chapter 7
TMd3 oMy 
— d) Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 [Jolly R] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave
BKt
5 wKt6 
[sKt5 
J; TMd3 oMy
163.* Pâda s a-b omitted in oMd5. Cited by Vis 1.343; Laks 11.111 — a) Ox3
Tr2 om 
.; Vis 
—
 c) oMd1 
xMd4 
e
B
e
2
" wKt3
NPu
1 Pu2 
B o 
oMy 
T M d
3 — d ) L o 1 ; x M d 3
cMy Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4 
Be3 [but me sh] rMd3 Tr2 ' 
oOr
164.* Pâda s c-d omitted in TMd3 oMy. Cited by Laks 11.111-2 — a) Pu5 Pu7
oMd1 
TMd4 N P u
1 L o
4 Lo5 
Laks 
Ox3
BKt5 
Ho 
— b)BoKt2 
Tj1 
wKt3 Lo1
Tr2 ' 
Be3 om. 
Bo wKt1 Lo1 oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Tr1Tr2MTr4MTr6[7o//yMNd] — c) Laks 
eBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 La1 [cor to sh] La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu3
sPu6Pu8Tj'Tj2Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
J
o
1
H
o Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
N
K
Í
B
o Lo5 O x
3 _ 
Lo1 
MTr6 
— d) sBe2
oMd5 
TMd4
165.Lacuna in NKt4 a f t e r o f pada-c until i66c. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) NPu1
Wa 
— b) NKt4 
LaksLo2 
w K t
3 s K t
5 wKt6
Laks 
—
 c) TMd3 cMd5 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6 
TMd4 
cMd5 <J; T r
2 — d)
Jo2 
Tr2
166. Omitted in oMy; ma in sKt5. Cited by Laks 11112 — a) TMd3 
TMd4
NPu
1 
— b)HooOr 
TMd3 ^ _ 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
— c)Lo3Tj'
BBe2 
Ho 
— d)wKt6 
sBe2 oMd1 sOx1 Tj1
H o 
T M d
3 w K t
1 
B e
1 T i
2
167.* Omitted in Tr2; päda s a-b ma in aKt5. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) TMd4 NNg [but
corfh] 
w K t
6 — b ) w K t
6 c M d
1 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 sCa H y J m
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 NNg Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha
KSS Dave Go Ku Rn Mr 
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1 BKÍ wKt6 
BKt5
— c)wKt6 
B e ' W a B K t 5 
oMd5 
— d) Ho La1
Bo 
P u 5 w K t 1 Lo4 [ma} Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 oMy oOr 
' Be1 Tr1 
wKt3
Lo1 ' 
PurPu4


--- PAGE 654 ---
Chapter 7 
643
168.* Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) TMd3 Pu5 
wKt6 
oMd5
oMd1 
L a
1 O x
3 
xMd3 oMy 
aCaoOr 
— b) oMd5 oOr
MTr5 
— c)0Md' TMd3 rMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 Nd 
MTr5 B h
La1 
wKt6 
NPu1 
sBe2 Bo sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo1
Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNgsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr^MTr4
W'a Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
B e
1 M T r
6 
o M d 1 [ b u t unclear and
cor] —d) Jo1 
Lo5sOx'sPu6 
NKt4 
sKt5 
wKt6 ÍRWT ÏÏ?T:
169. Pádas c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) MTr5 
Lo2
Pu5 Pu7 
H o . 
wKt6 Ox3 
wKt3 L
o
2
— b )
TMd4 
NPu1 
— c) oMd5 
Pu5 Pu7 
MTr4 
oMd1
wKt1 
Ho [but me] So2 T r
2
T M d
3 oMy NPu' Pu8
 • ' 
MTr6
wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 
MTr4 
Laks 
—
 d) Be5 Tj2 
wKt3
 BKt5 wKt6
170.* Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) TMd4 
Wa 
H o î M d
4 T j 1
Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt6 Pu3 Pu4 Laks 
— b) Pu2 MTr3 
Lo4 Lo5 O x
3 L o
5 xMd3
oMy 
oOr 
NKt4 
Ho 
w K t
6 — c) oMy
Lo1 
" 
TMd4 Tr1 
" 
TMd3 
MTr5 
~ 
" wKt6
TMd4 
H o " 
a
M
d
5
, sKt5 wKt6 Lo1
 TMd3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Pu8
Tj1 MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly R] 
oMd1 oMd5 
— d) TMd3 Pu3 
Be1
 BBe2 Be3 Ho
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3NNg Ox2NPu' Pu3 Pu8 Tj' Tj2
MTr3 WaMandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave
171. Omitted in NKt*; not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) TMd4 
ßKt5
wKt6 
— b ) T r ' L o 4 L o 5 O x 3 
Be1 sCa Jo2 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy
Pu5 Pu 7Tj'Tr 1 MTr5MTr6[yo//yGR] 
' 
" wKt1 
— c) oMy 
. Tr2 om 
Jo2
wKt1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
sCa 
— d) oMy 
Bo 
" 
TMd3 
Lo5
NNg 
__ O x
3 N N g Pu3 Tr2 
Be3 La1 Lo2
172.* Omitted in NKt4; not commented by Nd; päda s c-d omitted in Lo2; verses 172 and
173 transposed in Bo. Cited by Laks 11112— a) TMd4 
Wa 
Ox3 
— b)
Ox3 
T r 1
B B e 2 w K t ' o M d 5 
— c) oMy 
c M d
5 T r ' — d)
TMd3 oMy 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5


--- PAGE 655 ---
644 
Chapter 7
Ox3 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [folly M4^5 Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo3
oMy 
oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 
Bo La2 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 Rc
173. Pâda s a-b omitted in Lo2. Cited by Laks 11.112-3 — a) Pu5 Pu7 •_ 
Tr2
oMdsGMyTr' 
iMd4 
— b) xMd4 oMy Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
oMd1 
— c)
TMd3 
Be1 Bo sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
174. Cited by Laks 11.113 — a) Kt2 
Tr2 
wKt1 <Tt; MTr4 
; NKt4
Ld* Pu2 Pu" Tj1 
— b)sOx'sPu6 
TMd3 Tr1 
oOr
Kt2 
— c) M T r
4 B e
3 NKt4 rMd3 TMd4 P u
5 L o
5 Tr2 
NNg
Be1 
— d) Laks
175. Cited by Vis 1.343; Laks 11.113 — a) rMd3 oMy 
sKt5 
sOx1 sPu6 Wa
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 
nBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 Lo1
Lo2 GMd1 TMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G] 
— b) MTr4
Tj1 
x M d
4 O x
3 L a k s 
Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Ox2 Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] g- — c) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M4"5] 
— d) Ox3
 • 
Ho
Lo2
176.* Pâda s a-b omitted in Pu5; lacuna at päda- a in NKt4. Cited by Laks 11.113 — a) wKt1
Pu8 
" 
— b) oMd5 
Be1 
sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] Tr2
wKt3 W a Laks 
rMd3 o
M
y
— c ) N
K
t
4
H
o Jm sOx1 Pu5 Pu7
sPu6 [Jolly G] Jolly 
o
M
d
5
W
a " 
— d) oMd1 TMd3 Tr2
cMy 
[rest broken]; Lo4 L o
5 _ . Be1 Jo2 wKt6 Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa Go [Jolly
G] 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 ßKt5 La1 Lo1 NNg Ox2 Ox3
 NPu' Pu3 Pu8
 MTr3 [folly M5-8'9]
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave' 
Be3 
Jo2 
ßKt5
177.Päda- d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 11113 — a) oMd5 ' 
TMd4 
—
b) wKt6 
sKt5 
— c) oMd1 rMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Nd
oMd5 
L
a
k
s
~ 
Pu5 Pu7
178. Päda s a-b omitted in Ox3. Lacuna in NKt4 for all after 
Cited by Laks 11.113
— a) TMd3
 
TMd4 
[lacuna] 
Ho 
Be1 - 
Tr2


--- PAGE 656 ---
Chapter 7 
645
Lo1 
Be' NNg [but corfli} 
Ho 
— b) Be1 wKt3
wKt1 
— c) oMd5 
Mir4 MTr6 
— d) T j 2 i M d 4 
NKt
4
; Jo2
179.Cited by Laks 11.113 — a) O x
3 L o
1 
. Pu2 Pu4 
. 
. ' — b)
xMd4 
GMd1 
Tj1 
, wKt1 
Tr2 
Ho
— cjMTr5 
T M d 4 T r 1 
oMd1
 T M d
3 — d) Tr2
180. Omitted in Ox3; lacuna in NKt4; ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 11113; päda s a-b cited by
Vis 1.348 [intro] — a) Pu2 Pi/1 
.MTr6 
oMd5 
, Lo1 • " ' Pu3 Pu8 
Lo2
GMd1 Pu3 Vis 
—
 c) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
wKt6 oMy 
oMd5
MTr4 
TMd4 
Ho sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
oMd1 
TMd3 oMy
— d)!!2 
wKt1 
MTr3 
cMy 
TMd3
Ox2 
Wa
181. Omitted in TMd3 oMy; lacuna for päda s b-c in NKt4. Cited by Mädh 1.400 — a)
xMd4 
— b) TMd4 
Jo2 Tj1 
Bo 
— c) Lo3 Tj1 : 
— d) Lo'
Pu8 
oOr s P u
6 [ b u t both cor}
Additional verses in TMd4:
182. Cited by Laks 11.115; Mädh 1.400-1 — a) Tr2 . 
, TMd4 
M T r 5 o M d 5
Be3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy oOr Ox3 Pu3 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Laks 
—
 b)
wKt1 TMd3 oMy 
Tj2 
Lo1 
— c) Pu3 
. Be1 wKt1
wKt3 Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 
_ 
Hy 
T r
2 B e
1 Bo NKt
4 La1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMy oOr
Ox3 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M Nd] 
T Md4 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
Pu8 
' 
— d)
Be1 sCa Ho Jo2 NKt
4 Lo1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
NPu
1
183. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 11.115; Mädh 1.401 — a) oMd5 Mädh
Ho Lo1 oOr Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
»Kf 
ßKt? wKt6 
M T r
5 H o wKt1
— b) Jm MTr4 
TMd3 cMy 
Lo1 
_, 
oOr 
Be3 ^ 
. 
— c) Pu5
Pu7 
Ho La1 
BBe2 L o
1 N P u
1 T j 2 o M d 5 
— d) TMd3 Pu5


--- PAGE 657 ---
646 
Chapter 7
wKt3 
Laks 
Tr2 : 
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
TMd3 
TMd3 Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
NKf " 
oMy
184. Cited by Mädh 1.401— a) Ox3 MTr5 
TMd3 oMy 
NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
— b)Ox2 
Ho 
TMd4 
NKt
4 
sCaNNgnPu1 
— c)
oMd5 
— d) Bo wKt3 sOx1 Pu3 
oMd5 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 
.NKt 4 NPu
1 
Be1
Tr1
 
TMd3oMy 
Ox3 
TMd4 
" 
" 
oOr 
xMd3 Ho
185.Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 11.122; Mâdh 1.401— a) Be3 Ho Lo1 
NKt4
oMd5 
— b) Be3 
Be1 eCa La1 Lo1 oMd5 oOr Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5 Wa
— c)Ho' 
N K r » [ J o l l y M
*
]
— d)oMd5
TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
NKt
4 Pu3 P
u
8
L
a
1 Lo4 Lo5oMd' TMd4 oOr sPu6
[but cor] Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M] Laks
186. Pâda- d omitted in oMyfhaplo] —a) TMd4 Tj1 
Pu2 Pu4 
s B e 2 —
a-b) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
__ 
— b) Be1 oMy Tj1 
oMd1 Trgr; TMd4 
TMd3
NPu
1 
oMd5 
Tr2 
NKt4 
— c) NPu1 
Be1 
Lo2
Tr2 
— d) Be1 Ho Jo2 Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa Ku G
o
. Pu8 
.. [Jolly G]
oOi 
Be1 Jo2 Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa [Jolly G] Ku Go 
Ox3 Tr ' 
Be1 Jo2
Pu5 Pu7 Go Ku [Jolly G] 
Pu2 Pu4 
; Ho Lo' TMd4 Wa
187. Omitted in oMy. Cited by Mädh 1.401— a) Be3 MTr5 cf TTPÎ— b) La1 Pu8 Tj1
üKt 5 
ßKt5 wKt6 T r
2 w K t
1 N P u 1 — c) Bo NNg oOr [bur corfli} sOx1
sPu6 Tr2 
. oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 M
T
r
5
; Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
Pu5 Pu7 T r 2 — d)
oMd5 MTr5 
H o s B e 2 
O x 3 L o 3 sOx1 sPu6 [me to] Tj1 
oMd1
TMd4 oMd5 MTr5 
. Be1 Ox3
188. Omitted up to 
of päda- c in oMy; päda s b-d omitted in La1 [haplo]. Cited by
Laks 11.124; Mädh 1.402 — a) oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[rMd4
]; NNg Ox3 [Jolly M] 
[Ox3 
]; Laks 
„ . . T M d
3
[Jolly Nd] 
" 
Bo sCa Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 
wKt1 wKt3 
N K t
4 w K t
1
— b) Ox3 
. — c) Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 
Ox3 
sPu6 [but me]
B o 
w K t
3 " 
L o
1 " 
— d ) T M d
4 T T r
2
Ox3 sPu6 Tr1 Wa Laks Mädh
Ho wKt1 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1
Wa
oOr
wKt1 Tj1
TMd3


--- PAGE 658 ---
Chapter 7 
647
189. Päda s a-c omitted in La1. Cited by Laks 11.124; Mädh 1.402— a) Mädh
Wa 
NKt
4 wKt6 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
oMd1 xMd3 oMy
Bh 
appears to support the plural, but Me clearly points to the dual. — b) oMd1
ßKt5 
— c) TMd4 oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 
Tr1
NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 - 
Laks 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M]
[Lo4Lo: 
^ Jo 2LrfTj' 
B e 3 T M d 3 
NKf 
Lo1
Ho wKt6 
wKt3 
NKt
4 
— d) wKt6 
^
,
. ¿Kf
BBe2 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 Laks Mädh 
MTr5
Be1 
L
o
2
B
o
190. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.124; Mädh 1.402 — a) iMd4 Ox3 
xMd3
Kt2 
Be1 
La1 
wKt1 
— b) Laks 
Lo5
— a-b) Lo4 
— c) NKt4 
wKt1 
— d) Bo
Laks 
MTr4 
MTr5 
Be1 Be3 Lo2
sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6
191.Päda s a-b omitted in Pu5. Cited by Mädh 1.402 — a) TMd4 
— b) Lo2
xMd4 
— c) Ho wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 
sBe2 Ox2 
Bo 
Ho La1
BKt5 wKt6 
Kt2 oMd1 Pu7 Wa 
sCa sKt5 wKt6 Tr1 MTr6 
T M d
4 J o
2
Lo3Tj' 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 T
j
2
" 
H y o m ^ 
TMd3 TMd4 oOr Ox3
192. Cited by Laks 11.130; Mädh 1.402 — a) TMd4 oMd5 Ox3 Tr1 Laks
[Tr1 
o M d 5 T M d 4 
]; Ho 
o M d 1 B o 
wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7
Lo1 
NKt4 
wKt6 
— b)TMd3oMy 
oMd5
Laks 
T
r
1
T
M
d
4 
Ox3
MTr4 
B
e
1
J
o
2 
— c ) TMd3 o M y
cMd1 
T
M
d
4
' —d)TMd4 
Tr! 
oOr 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
B o 
M T r 5 o M d 5
193. Cited by Laks 11.130; Mädh 1.402— a) sBe2 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 
Bo Jm Jo1 Kt2
wKt6 Lo4Lo5TMd3 oMyOx 2Ox 3Tj' MTr3 [folly M
4] Mandlik KSS Dave 
TMd4
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1 
NNg Ox3 
— b) Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 K2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 Ox2 MTr3 [Jolly M4^-9]MandlikJha KSS Dave
Ox3 
" 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Lo4 
Hy 
TMd3 oMy


--- PAGE 659 ---
648 
Chapter 7
— d) wKt1 
Lo3 Tj1 
oMd5 MTr4MTr6; 
Lo1
Laks 
N
P
u
1
P
u
5
P
u
7
; 
T r
2 w K t
6
Ma¿ld; Be1 Jm Jo1 La1 Lo4 Leí xMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox3 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Go Nd Ku
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
NKt4
194. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11130; Mädh 1.402—a) TMd4 
MTr5
Ox3 Mir5 
Bo 
Lo5 
Lo1 
— b) Lo4 Lo5 xMd4 Ox3
 MTr4 MTr6
[Jolly M]Laks 
' " 
[Laks 
};Jha 
[Me reads 
]; Be3 Jo2 Lo3
Tj1 [Jolly R] 
B
e
1
[ — c) Bo Ho La1 Lo4 Lo5 oMy sOx1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7
MTr5 Me Go Re '• 
Be3 : 
; sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 xMd4 
xMd3 
Bh Ku
Rn support " 
— d) Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 
xMd4 
Laks
La1"
195. Not commented by Nd; pâda s c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Vij 1.343;Laks 11.125;
Mädh 1.402 — a) wKt1 
Be3 La1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
nKt5
wKt6 
cMd5 
Tr2 
Ox3 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 Laks 
rMd4
—- c) sOx1 sPu6 
— d) i
M
d
4
B
e
1 Lo2 Lo5
196. Cited by Laks 11.125; Mädh 1.402—a) Ho Pu5 Tr2 
xMd3 oMy
oMd5 " 
oOr 
. , sOx1 sPu6 
. L o
3 o M d
1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy
Tj'Tr'MTr5 
~ sKt5 
wKt6 
— b)BBe2xMd4 
oMd5 
". wKt1
HoHy 
Tr2 
Be3 Lo3 xMd4 NPu
1 Tj1 Tr1 
xMd3
oMy 
; Ho Kt2 Wa 
Lo2 
. La1 
— c) Lo2
Jo1 
— d)NPu' r 
Lo1 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly G] 
xMd3
oMy 
MTr5 MTr6 
cMd ' 
Jo1 
Mädh 
xMd4
197. Cited by Laks 11.125-6; Mädh 1.402 — a) Laks 
Pu8
wKt1 
_
O
x
3
„ 
. L o
1 x M d
3 ° 
— b)xMd4
' 
Ox3 
BKt5oMd5Tr2Mad/i 
" " ; wKt1 xMd3 NPu
1 Pu3
Bo 
" 
Laks 
' 
wKt6 ßKt5 Mädh 
NKt4 
_ ' — c) NNg 
wKt3
Be1 
Pu3 Pu8 
Tr1 
Lo3 Tj1 
" 
" 
Ho Tr2 
Lo' 
cMy
Be3 
— d) xMd3 oMy
198. ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 11.129; Mädh 1.403— a) Pu5 Pu7 
Be3 Jo2 Lo3


--- PAGE 660 ---
Chapter 7 
649
TMd4GMd5Ox3Tj'MTr6L«yb 
[Jolly M8 G] 
. 
. 
— b) nKf TMd4
oMd1 oMd5 NNg Tr1 MTr5MTr6Laks 
—
 c) TMd4 
ßBe2 
TMd4
Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Jha 
, Nd supports singular; others silent —
c-d) [Jolly M8) 
^
_
— d ) B o H o Lo2 TMd4 sOx1 Ox3 N?U' Pu4
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 MTr4 
TMd3oMd5MTr5MTr6 
Tr2 
Lo1 
La1 cMd1 NNg
Pu2
199. Omitted in TMd3 oMy. Cited by Mädh 1.403 — a) wKt3 
Ox3 
— c)
wKt3 
O x
3 — d ) T M d 4 L o 2
200.* Omitted in xMd3 cMy Ox3. Cited by Laks 11.129; Mädh 1.403— b) TMd4 oMd5
J h a K S S Dave 
—
 c ) Pu5 Pu7 ; 
, P
u
8
B
o 
MTr6 <
O
¿
La1 [but cor] 
sBe2 Be3 Lo4 Lo5
 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Tr1 [Jolly M] _ 
wKt6
 •
Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 wKt6 Lo2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 MTr3Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— d) NKt4
o O r 
La1 Pu2 P
u
4
H
o Pu5 P u
7 w K t
3
201. Omitted in TMd3 oMy; pâda s b-d omitted in cMd5. Cited by Mädh 1.403 — a) Lo4
Lo5 
— c) Pu2 P u
4 T M d
4 
Be3 slCt5 Pu5 
— d) wKt1
La1
202. Omitted in TMd3 oMd5 oMy. Cited by Mädh 1.403 — a) [Jolly M8] 
oOr
Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly G] 
— b) ßBe2 ; 
— c) Ho wKt3 Tj ' 
sBe2 
Lo4 Lo5
[both ma J — d) oOr 
s B e 2 B o 
Wa 
" [Jolly Nd]
Tr2 
TMd4 '
203. Omitted in TMd3 oMy; pâda s a-c omitted in oMd 5. Pâda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.403
— a) NKt
4 
s K t 5 — b ) wKt3 NKt
4 M T r 3 T r 1 '
O
x
3 
[Jolly
Nd] 
~~ 
" 
MTr5 
— c)Pu4 
TMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
NKt
4
•—d)Tj' 
wKt3
204. Omitted in TMd3 oMy — a) NKt4 La1 Pu5 MTr4 
— b) Pu4 J; Tr1 
—
c) Lo1 
Be3 
wKt6 Pu5 Pu7 
oOr 
— d) Be3 Ho
Be1 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 Tr' MTr3 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Mandlik  


--- PAGE 661 ---
650 
Chapter 7
Jo1 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3MTr5Me Co Na Ku Rn Mr Mandlik JollyKSSDave
' 
wKt1 
wKt6
205. Omitted in TMd3 oMy. Cited by Laks 11.139 — a) wKt6 Lo1 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo4
Ox3 
B e
1 T j
1 '
L
o
1
, cMd1 
TMd4 
o O r
— b)Tj' 
sKt5 
TMd4 
Ox3 
wKt6 
wKt6 Lo1
wKt3 Lo2 
Lo3 Tj1 T r
2 H o Wa— 
c) wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 TMd4 MTr6
Laks 
B B e 2 " H o NNg Pu5 Pu7 Laks— d) Ox Tr2 
Ox2 
oOr
, 
NNg
Fifty additional verses are given here in some mss. Because of their length, they are
given as an appendix at the end of this chapter.
206. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 11.142 — a) Tr1
NKt4 
— b ) o O r _ — c) o M y s O x 1 sPu6 Tr2 ' 
Ox2 o m
ßCa Lo2 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) sBe2 Be3
 
• 
Ho 
Lo3Tj'
Tr1 
Hy 
Be3 NKt4
207. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; not commented by Me;padas c-d omitted in Tr2. Cited by
Laks 11.142 — a) Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
TMd4 
Lo1 Ox2 
TMd3 
La1 Pu2
— b) TMd3 
TMd3 o M y " — c) TMd4 Ox2 Pu3 Tj1 
TMd3 oMy
sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
Lo2
208. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; not commented by A/e;padas c-d omitted in Tr2 and
placed after 209 in Bo — a) Ho sKt5 wKt6 Pu3 
La1 sOx1 sPu6 Pu8
Ox2 
Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 M i r 4 , T r 1 ^ 
, La1 NKt4 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7
Pu8#c 
L o ' s O x ' s P u 6 o M d " 1 TMd4 M T r
5 — b ) TMd4
.sOx'sPu 6 
T M d 3 c M y B e 3 
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 
L o
2 T j
1
sBe2BowKt3 
" 
— c) TMd4 
Tr1 
'— d)sBe2
TMd3 
TMd4
209. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; not commented by Me/padas c-d ma in sKt5 — a) Kt2
— b ) o O r 
L
o
1
M
T
r
5 
NKt4 '
BBe 2Wa C 
Hy wKt3 Lo2 TMd4 Tj2 MTr4 MTr6 
[MTr6 
1; NNg
— c)Lo' 
wKt1 
NKt4 
[sic] —d)oMd5


--- PAGE 662 ---
Chapter 7 
651
210. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; not commented by Me; päda s a-b ma in sKt5. Cited by
Laks 1L107 — a) Jo1 
; TMd3 oMy 
_ 
Bo wKt1 wKt3 
— a-b) cMd1
Laks 
— b) TMd3 oMy
— c)oMd' 
wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7 
BKt 5wKt 6 
Laks
—
 d) Jm 
T M d 4 " H o 
; Bo 
TMd3 oMy
211. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Laks 11.108 — a)NKt 4Lo' 
L o
1 H y
— b) La1 Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 [Jolly R] 
" Lo3 Wa 
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7
oMd1 Pu4 
Lo1 
w
K
t
1
s
B
e
2
— c)Tr2; 
Lo2
Jo1' 
sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7/?« Go LaksBe1 Be3 Bo Ho wKt1
NKt4 sKt5 wKt6 La1 NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Tj1 Tj2 
. . TMd3 oMy 
LaksHo
TMd4 
— d ) w K t
6 T r
1 
Be1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Wa
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
212. Verses 212 and 213 transposed in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; päda s c-d omitted in Pu5 Lo4. Cited
by Laks 11.142 —
 a) TMd4 oMd5 
Jm Lo1 Ox2 
Ox3 
TMd3 
wKt6 
Tr2
oMd ' cMy Tr1 Mir4 
MTrf 
TMd3 
Be1 Bo wKt6 wKt3 TMd4
oMd5Ox3 
Kt2 
H o 
— b)Hy 
P
u
7
— d) wKt3 '
w
K
t
1
wKt6'
213.* Päda s c-d omitted in Lo3 Tj1. Cited by Laks 11.142-3 — a) BBe2 Ho Hy La1 Lo1
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox3 NPu
1 Pu3 Tr2 [Jolly M] Me Go Jha Dave 
wKt3 
Lo2
NKt4 sKt5 cMd1 TMd4 Mir5 Wa 
' — b) NKt4 ßKt5 Lo3 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 [but cor] Tj! Tr1
MTr5 MTr6 Wa Me 
wKt6 
Lo2 
Lo2 
— c) Be1 NKt4
Lo2 oMd1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Laks 
[oMd1 MTr" 
M T r 6 T M d 4
MTr5 
o M d 5 c o r t o J ; TMd4 -
. 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly N
d
]
oMd5 
Pu5 Pu7Tr' [Jolly G\sKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly M9]
214. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.143 — a) MTr5: 
Bo 
TMd3 cMy
Lo5 
Tr1 
— b) w K t
3
T M d
4 
— c) TMd3
Lo4 Lo5 
Lo1 
TMd4 Tr1 
sKt5 ' 
Ox3 om
Ox3
Lo5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 [Jolly G]
TMd3
GMy


--- PAGE 663 ---
652 
Chapter 7
TMd4 
w
K
t
6
— d)wKt" 
NKt4 
Laks
Ho
215.* Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.143; Mädh 1.411 — a) Pu2 Pu 4 Tr2 
oOr
— b)TMd3 
oMd5NPu' 
— c)Be' 
Lo3Tj' 
" Tr2
NKt4 Ox3 
— d) BBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 Tj'
Mir3 Mädh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Me [pâtha ]
216.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.157 — a) TMd3 oMy 
— b) oMd5
NNg MTr6 
TMd4 
— c) Kt2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Wa Jolly 
' oMd5
TMd4 
L o ' N P u ' P u 4 T j 1 ' 
— diTr2
 
BKt5 w K t 6 P u 5 Pu7
Be1 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 KtfwKt3 sKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8
Tj ' Tr2 Mir3 Wa Go Ku Rn Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
217. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11157 — a) cMd1 
Ox3 
— b)
ßBe2 NKt4 La1 Lo1 
O
x
2
H
o Na [who g i v e s . 
as päthäntara
]
iMd4 
GMd1 
HoTr2 
. wKt3 ... 
— c) TMd3 oMy
BKt5 
NPu1 P
u
4
— d ) oMd5
218.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.1158 — a) wKt1 
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox3 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
 MTr6 [Jolly M Nd]Laks Dave Jha 
Lo1
Ox3 Pu3 Pu8 
TMd3 cMy MTr4 MTr6 
BKt5 wKt6 
NPu1 
corto 
—
b) BKt5 wKt6 
; Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1
NKt4 La2 Lo1 Lo5 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Mandlik KSS
NPu 1' 
Jo2La' Lo3Tj' [Jolly R]Rn Jha D a v e —
 c) ßBe2 om 
—
 d) Ox3
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Pu2 Pu4
219. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.1158 — a) Ox3 
Bo sKt5 La1 Lo4
Lo5 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 [Jolly M] 
Ox2 
— b)sBe2 
Ox3
wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
— c) Pu5 Tr2 
Hy 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy
; Tr1 
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd ' Ox3
 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 [Jolly M] Me Laks
—
 d)BBe 2Lo 4Lo 5 oMd ' TMd4 Ox3 [Jolly M] Laks 
Tj1 
oMd5
[but cor] Tj '


--- PAGE 664 ---
Chapter 7 
653
220. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.1158 — a) sBe2 wKt1 NPu
1 
Lo4 [ma
] 
—
 b) Pu5 Pu7 
ßCa wKt3 TMd3 oMy 
Lo2 
MTr5
MTr4 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M] 
Jo2 NPu
1 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly R Gr] 
sBe2
— c)oMd'Wa 
" BBe2sOx'sPií 
TMd4 
. Lo3 Tj1 
Pu5
Pu7 
— d) Mir5 
[torn]; üBe 2 Be3 sCa Hy NNgsOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1
Tr2 
o M d
5 _ o M d
1 L a k s ' w K t
1 
TMd3
oMy 
Ho
221. Omitted in Ox3 oOr. Cited by Vij 1.329; Laics 11.161 — a) MTr5 
Be3
— b) NKt4 
Ho 
NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo5 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy 
— c)
Ho Pu5 Pu7 " 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Ox3 NPu
1 Tj2 MTr3 Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
Laks 
Ho 
Be3 
— d) rMd3 
Tr2 
Wa
222. Omitted in Ox3 oOr; ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 11161 — a) xMd3 oMd5 Tr1
Laks 
;
B
e
3
— b ) cMy 
wKt3 
TMd4 
B o
Jo2 La1 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 wTr4 MTr6 
- c-d) TMd4
— d)Ho 
G M t f L a k s ' 
oMd1 oMd5
223. Omitted in oOr; päda s c-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Vij i.33O;Laks 11.162 — a)
Laks 
T M d
3 o M y — b ) Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
Pu2 P u
4 _ .—
c) TMd4 
. 
. wKt6 
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 
La1 oMy
Hy 
— d) Kt2 oMd1 Tr2 
wKt3 
wKt3
224. Omitted in oOr; not commented by Nd; päda s a-b omitted in MTr3. Cited by Vij
1.330; Lafcm.i62 — a) oMd1 
T
r
2
B
o 
TMd3 TMd4 oMy
Lo5o« 
Bo Ho Jo2 La2 Lo1 Lo3 iMd4 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 
Be3 
Tr2 
sOx1
sPu6 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr6 
oMd1 
— b) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
Ox3 
. La1 
Tr1 
Lo5 
— c) wKt6 
sKt5 Ox3
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 Tr1 MTr4 
T M d
4 P u
2 Pu4 
Be1 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2
wKt1 wKt3 NKt
4 La1 Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Wa [Jolly R]
Laks 
Ti2 / — d) Wa 
„ 
^ 
Be3 eCa wKt1 La1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1
Ox3 sPu6 Tr2 [Jolly R] Vij 
sKt5 wKt6 La1 
Jo2Lo3Tj' 
Vij


--- PAGE 665 ---
654 
Chapter 7
225. Omitted in oOr; not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 11.162 — a) wKt3 
Ho
Lo4 
TMd3 Tr1 
— b) TMd3 cMy 
. Hy " 
TMd4 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu5
Pu7 
— c) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 ßKt5 Lo5 TMd" Tj2 MTr3Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
wKt6Lo3 
NKt4 
Tj1 
Ox3 
Ox3owandLo4«a
— d ) Ox3 
Lo3 T
j
1
L
o
4 Lo5 xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1
MTr4 [Jolly M Nd] ' 
Pu5 P
u
7
L
o
2 
sKt5 
sBe2 wKt1
NPu1 .. .-
226.* Omitted in Lo4; not commented by AW. Cited by Vij 1.331;Laks 11.162 — a) Be1
sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 uKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo5 nNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1
Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
Ox3 
— b)TMd4 
— c)ßKt5 
Be3 
Hy 
wKt6
Kt2 La1 Lo2 TMd3 oOr Pu3 Pif 
Ox 3_ 
Lo5 oMd Ox3 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M]
Be1 Bo Ho Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu3 Pu 8 Wa [Jolly Nd] 
— c-d) Laks Vij
— d) Be1 Be3 Bo Jo2 NKf Lo3TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg Pu3 Pu8 Tj1
MTi^Wa
Colophon: Be1 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 NNgsOx1 sPu6 
Be3 wKt3 
Be1 BKt5
wKt sLo 2oMd'oMd 5sOx'TMd 3MTr 6om 
" 
" 
Lo1 Lo3 
Be3
wKt3 om 
Be1 N N g ' s B e
2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo3 oOr Tj1 
Lo1


--- PAGE 666 ---
Chapter 7
655
Appendix
The following additional verses are given after verse 205 in GMd1 MTr4MTr6; verses 2, 5, 6
given in Lo4; verse 2 in Lo5; verse 7 in wKt1; verses i, 7, 9,10 cited by Laks 11.140; verses 2,
5, 6 are cited in Me's commentary on verse 205:
b) MTr4 MTr6
a) Lo4 Lo5 
— b) oMd1 
— d) MTr4 MTr6 
Lo4 Lo5 Me
c) MTr4 MTr6
a-b) GMd1 
— c) MTr6
a)Lo4 
— b
)
L
o
4
W
e 
- 
- 
Ml¥,
a) Lo4 
" 
— c) oMd1
c) GMd1 
- d) oMd1
b) MTr4 
— c-d) GMd1
a) cMd1 
— b)MTr6 
— c)oMd! 
— d) MTr4 MTr6
a) MTr6 
; MTr4
 
MTr6' 
— b) oMd1 
— d) MTr4
 MTr6
c) MTr4 MTr6 
— d)oMd'
a) GMd1 
— b) MTr6 
oMd1 ' 
__ 
' —d) MTr6


--- PAGE 667 ---
656
Chapter 7
b) Mir4 Mir6
d) oMd1
c) oMd1
— d) oMd1
b) oMd1
MTr6
a) oMd1
a) MTr4
— b)cMd'
cMd1
a) oMd1
— d) oMd'
— c) oMd1
c) MTr4
a) MTr4 MTr6
a) MTr4
c) oMd1
b) MTr4
— d) MTr4 MTr6
b) MTr4 MTr6
— c) MTr4
a-b) oMd1
— c) MTr4 MTr6
oMd1
— c)oMd'
— b) oMd1


--- PAGE 668 ---
Chapter 7 
657
— d) cMd1
a) oMd1
Päda s c-d of 29 omitted in MTr4 MTr6
Päda s a-b 30 omitted in MTr4 MTr6 — d) MTr4 MTr6
a) oMd1
om
—
 b) MTr4MTr6
— d) MTr4 MTr6
— c) MTr6
oMd1
b) MTr6
a) oMd1
d) oMd1
c)MTr"
a) MTr6
d) MTr4 MTr6
a) MTr4
oMd1
MTr6
MTr6
b) oMd1
MTr4
— a-b) GMd1
MTr4
— c-d)


--- PAGE 669 ---
a) MTr4 MTr6
658
Chapter y
—
 d) Mir4
MTr6
a-b) MTr4 MTr6
cMd1
b) MTr4 MTr6
— c)oMd'
d) oMd1
a) cMd1
a) oMd';
a) oMd1
— d) oMd1
— c-d) oMd'
— c) oMd1
MTr6
oMd1
MTr4
ex conj. — b)
— d)GMd'


--- PAGE 670 ---
1. 
Omitted in Lo
4 Lo
5 Ox
3. Cited by Apa 600; Laks 12.7; Dev 3.31, 43; Madh 3.18 —
a) Lo
1 
oMd
1 Dev 
BKt
5 wKt
6 oOr 
Pu
5 Pu
7 
— b)
Pu
2 Pu
4 
Apa 
— с) wKt
3 
Во 
_ 
.. Laks
2. 
Omitted in Lo
4 Lo
5 Ox
3. Cited by Apa 600; Laks 12.7; Dev 3.52; Madh 3.18 — a)
wKt
3 Pu
5 Pu
7 
c M d
1 N K f
 ;
L
o
1
— b ) Н о 
вКЛ
5
— с)мТг
4 
— d ) B o T M d
4 c M d
1 
oMd
5 
oMy 
Tr
2
3. 
Omitted in Lo
4 Lo
4 Ox
3. Cited by Laks 12.7; Dev 3.57;Madh3.i8 — а) Ну
Pu
7 
Pu
5 
oMd
1 
— b) Но 
— d) Dev 
Madh
Additional verse in oOr:
[unclear]
4 . O m i t t e d in Lo
4 Lo
5 Ox
3. Cited by Vij z.5;Apa 5g6;pada-a cited by Vis 2.1 — a)
Pu
8 
wKt
1 
— b ) oMd
1 i M d
4 B K t
5 
K
t
2
B
o 
xMd
3
wKt
6 
•— c) o
M
d
1
x
M
d
4 
— d)wKt
6 
Ho
TMd
3 
,
T
r
2
B
K
t
5 
[от]
5. 
Omitted in Lo
4 Lo
5 Ox
3. Cited in Vij 2.5'Apa 596 — a) Lo
2 
Pu
2 Pu
4
oMd
1 
Wa 
Tr
2 
wKt
1 
[ma
:]; oOr
— b)Jo' 
" 
Bo 
— c ) G M d ' o M d
5 
Tr
1
NPu
1 
Lo
1 Pu
3 Pu
5 P
u
7
— d ) o M d ' c M d
1
659


--- PAGE 671 ---
660 
Chapter 8
6. 
Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Vij 2.5; Apa 596; päda s c-d cited by Dev 3.15—
a) Apa [vl]; 
w Kt3 sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
w K t 1 N K t 4
BKt5wKt6Tj'
7 . O m i t t e d in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Vij2.5; Apa596 — a) Pu8 
Tr2
wKt3 
cMdlApa 
MTr6 
La1 
— b) wKt1 
Hy
wKt3 wKt6 Jo2
 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] ' 
, Bo 
Be3 oMd' xMd3 xMd4
oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly R Nd]AW Apa 
M T r
4 L a
1
Pu8 
T j 1 / V â f p â t h a
] 
— c ) TMd3 
T r
2 w K t
6
— d) Lo1 
T M d
4 B e
1 "
8. 
Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMy Ox3 [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa $<)6;Laks 12.43; Dev
3.30 — a) wKt3 
Lo3 rMd4 Tj1 Dev 
oMd1 
wKt1 
Wa " 
— b) Kt2
Bo 
T j 1 N P u 1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] ~ M T r 4 
— c) Laks
NKt4 
— d ) D
e
v
A
p
a 
A p a [vi]
BCawKt3 
. . . . . . .
9. 
Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Dev3.36; Mädh 3.21 — a) sCa 
— b) Be1
sKt5 
oMd5 
— c) TMd3 cMy 
.BoHyLo'Tj 1 
NNg 
sKt5
. 
— d)ßKt5 
GMd5; 
wKt1
Additional verse in Ox2:
10. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Dev^.y?; Mädh 3.21— a) Tr2 
Ho sOx1 sPu6
Ox2Tr2 
B o — 
b ) s K t 5 P u 8 
clVld1
Ox2 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Bo
oMd1 
— d) La1 T M d
4 B e
1 Pu2 Tj '
11.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by DevzAd', Laks 12.27; päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.2
— a)oOr 
B o T M d
3 
T
M
d
4
— c)îMd 3 oMd5 oMy
Bo oMd1 
T
r
2
" Be1 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Tj2
 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Rn
 — d)
— c) Be3 Kt2
Pu2 Pu4
Ho [cor to] TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Apa [vi]


--- PAGE 672 ---
Chapter 8 
661
Go Mandlik Jha Dave KSS 
Lo1 Lo3 Tj1 
' 
wKt1 
; sKt5
oMd5 
cMy 
_ 
Pu2 Pu4 
NKt4 
— d) Bo Lo2 oMd5 Bh [as pätha , but
rejected] 
Ox2 
xMd3 oMy 
TMd3 Tr2
12. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Dev 3.48 — a) Pu8 Tr2 
Bo Pu8
Be3 
iMd3 M
T
r
6
— b) Wa 
wKt3 Tr2 
Wa
cMd1 
Be1 Be3 wKt1; NKt4 Lo2 oMd5 oOr NNg Pu2 Pu8 Tr1 Dev 
— c) Kt2
xMd3 
Be1 L o 2 N N g cor sh to 
NKt4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
BBe2 Be3 ßKt5 oMd ' TMd3 oMy NNg 
Hy 
— d) NPu1 
Be1 Lo3
•;La'Pu 4Tj' 
N N g o M d
1 
Dev'oMd5
Tj2
13.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Vij z.z^Apa 604; Laks 12.35; Öev3.34 , 49; pâda s
c-d cited by Vij 2.83— a) Be1 eBe2 Be3 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 TMd4 Pu3 MTr3
[Jolly Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave 
[Hy TMd4 
rMd4 J; Ox2 Laks
. 
wKt1 
then m a o M d
1 
— b)Hy 
w K t 3 T M d 4
— c) Lo2 om
14. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Dev 3.48 — a)oMy sOx1 sPu6 
, wKt3
— b)Pu3 
Pu4 
Dev 
Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Be3 
—
c) wKt1 Kt2 sKt5 sOx1 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
N K t
4 B o
15. Cited by Hem 2/1.15; Dev 3.48 — a)wKt' 
TMd4 
— b)
NKt4 
MTr6 
— d) [Jolly Nd] 
• 
NNg Lo2 
TMd3 oMy 
Pu8 
Ox2
Jo1 
Be3 
Tr2
16.* Cited by Apa 447; Laks 12.37; Hem 2/1.14; Dev 3.48, 4.184 — a) Bo 
ßKt5
om 
— b) Lo1 
Dev 4 . 1 8 4 [ t y p o ? ] ; TMd4 
Bo 
Be1
eBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 MTr3 [/oily Ku]
Tr'ma 
oMd ' TMd3 oMy MTr4 [Jolly Nd] 
NPu1 
oMd5 
— c) ßKt5
oMd1 
—d)Apa
 
Pu5 o m ¡ w K t
1 
ßKt5
Tr2
17. Cited by Laks 12.37 — a) Lo1 oMd1 Tr2 
T
M
d
3
— b) Lo5 TMd3 Tr1


--- PAGE 673 ---
662 
Chapter 8
Be3 Wa 
NNg 
, xMd3 oMy 
MTr4 
— d) oMd1 xMd4 oOr Tr2
Laks 
L a
1 M T r
6
18. Omitted in oOr; pâda s a-b omitted in Pu5. Cited by Ky 2.305; Apa866; Mädh 3.15
— a)Fy ] 
Bo Lo1 
— b) cMd1 Tr1 MTr4 uT^Madh
[Mädh 
~ 
]; Pu2 Pu4 
[cf. igd]; wKt3 
Tr2 
sBe2 Ho
— c) Pu2 P
u
4
T
r
2 
NKt4 
— d) Ho 
" Tr2 
Tj 2 MTr6
19. Cited by Apa 604; Laks 12.35; Dev s.w,Madh 3.26— a) oMd1 
NKt4
oMy 
— b) xMd4 sOx1 sPu6 
Dev 
Laks 
NKt4 
— c) wKt1
TMd3 
: — d) TMd3 
oMd5 
Apa 
NKf 
Lo1
20. Cited by Apa 601; Dev s.s8;Madh 3.22—a) Ho oMd1 xMd3 
eKt5 om
sCa 
— b) wKt3 
Apa 
ßBe2 
Be3 Ox3 
oOr
— c)Dev 
BoxMd3 
iMd4 
— d) O
x
3
O
x
2
Tr1 iMd3 oMd5 oOrApa om
21. Cited by Apa 601; Laks 12.29; Dev ^.yj;Madh 3.22— a) xMd4 
wKt1 
Bo
Be3 iMd3 oMy Apa LaksDev 
oMd1 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 
— b) Be3 iMd3
cMy Apa Laks Dev 
x
M
d
3
— c) Dev 
oOr 
— d) Wa
Bo 
La1
2 2 . a ) L o 3 L o 4 L o 5 O x 3 T j ' T j 2 x M d 4 
— b) wKt1 
cor
to 
Bo 
xMd3 xMd4 
— c) xMd3 oMy Wa [Jolly Nd]
La1 
— d) sOx1 s P u
6 ß C a Lo1 xMd4 
oMy 
Pu8 " 
Bo
Tr2'
23. Cited by Laks 12.7; Dev 3.70; Mädh 3.41 — a) xMd4 
— b) Tr2
cMy 
xMd3 ' 
— d) wKt3 Tr2 
NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Ox3 NPu1
Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Wa Go [Jolly G]


--- PAGE 674 ---
Chapter 8 
663
24. Omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apa6n; Dev 3.80; Mädh 3.46 — a) Tr2 inTr6
TMd3 
Jm A
p
a
—
 b ) T
M
d
3
. MTr4 
— c ) T
M
d
4
— c-d)
sOx'sPu6 
— d)uMd'TMd 4 
T r 2 i M d 3
; 
Bo 
oMd5 
cMy
25. Pâda s a-b omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apa 620; Laks 12.77; Dev 3.56, 72; Mädh 3.30
— a) Laks Mädh 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]— 
d) Hy Wa 
; Mädh
TMd3 
Dev 3 . 7 2 L o 5 Mädh
26. Pâda s a-b omitted in NKt4 eKt5. Cited by Apa 620; Laks 12.77; ¿>ev •¡.\i2.\Madh
3.43 — a) Tj 2 /Ipa 
T
M
d
4
— b) x M d
4 B o Jo2 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5
oMd5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
wKt1 iMd3 oMy MTr3 ' 
— c) Pu2 Pu4
TMd4 
La1 TMd4 L
a
k
s
— d) TMd3 
" Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Ti2
La1 Laks 
NNg 
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3
27.Pâda s c-d omitted in MTr5, and ma in Lo1. Cited by Laks 12.752.', Dev 3.310— a)
sKt5 
NKt4 Lo2 oMd ' TMd3 oMy MTr5 D e v w K t
3 
Laks
Be3sCaOx2 
Ho 
NKt4 
— b) Laks 
— c) sOx1
sPu6 
TMd3 oMy Dev 
TMd3 
— d) Hy Jo1 Mandlik KSS Dave
[Jolly Ku Nd] 
• 
TMd3 
; oMd1
28. Omitted in Jm; pâda s c-d omitted in oMd1; pâda s a-b ma in Lo1. Cited by Laks
12.685; Dev 3.310 — a) Bo 
NKt4 
TMd3 
Tr2 
NPu1 
NNgsOx'Pu2
Pu4 sPu6 [Jolly G] 
Pu5 Pu7 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Ho 
TMd3 
— c)
wKt1 
— d) BBe2
Additional verse in Mandlik KSS Dave, which is the same as 11.189.
29. Cited by Vij 2.147; Apa 752; Laks 12.685; Dev 3.311,659 — a) Be1 
Bo
uKl?oOr 
oMd5 
— a-b) Pu5 Pu7 
— b)
Ho sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 
[Tr2 
J; Wa 
; wKt3 
Lo5
oMd1 
— c)wKt' 
cMd'Tr2 
Ho
TMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 
NPu1 
Bo Jo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5
oMyTj'Tj^Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 Dev 
MTr4 
— d) xMd4


--- PAGE 675 ---
664 
Chapter 8
30.* Cited by Vij 2.33,173; Apa 778; Dev?,.311-2 — a) Lo5 
Bo 
Tj2
Pu5 ' 
Pu2 Pu4 " 
nCa Ox2 
Ho Lo2 oMd1 NNg Pu2 Pu4 sOx1 sPu6
MTr5 Fzya.173 /ipa 
— b) Be1 
— c) w
K
t
1
— d) Ho sOx1 sPu6
Tr2 
BKt5NPu' W a Vij Apa
31.* Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Oev 3.311 —a)NK.t4 
— b)wKt' 
Be1 sBe2 Bo
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La1 [cor to sh] Lo1 Lo2 Lo3NNg Ox2 Ox3 N?U' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8
Tj1 Tj2MTr3 WSL Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Lo4 
cortad
Be3 
Ho Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 s Pu6 Tr2 
Lo4 
Pu7 
^ 
but me to
—
 c) Ho La1 sOx1 sPu6 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
xMd3 " ; oMd1 MTr5
— d) TMd3 
Lo4 Lo5 om
32.* Omitted in ßKt5. Cited by Laks 12.555; Dev 3.312 — a) Tr2 
Be1 NKt4
NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Laks 
[Be1 
]; wKt1 
sBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 La1 [but cor} Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 MTr5 Dev
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) oMd1 
Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo3 TMd3
GMd5oMysOx' Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly K\Go Ku Re 
o M d 5 — c) Bo
wKt3 sOx1 NPu
1 Tr2 
, Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
33. Ox3 [Jolly M] transpose 33 and 34; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Vij 2.33,173;
Apa 778;Laks 12.555; Dev 3.313 — a) wKt1 
Tr2 
— b) oOr 
Tj1 Tr2
Lo1 TMd3 oMy Pu4 
— d) oMd1 MTr5 
Be3
34. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5; pâda s c-d omitted in sKt5. Cited by Laks 12.555; Dev 3.311;
päda s c-d cited by ¿Ipa 841— a) MTr6 
— b) Pu2 P
u
4
o
M
d
1 
— c)
Dev 
Lo1 
Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tr1 MTr4 MTr^Tr6
N K t 4 ' 
, Lo2 
Lo1 
; MTr4 uTr6Apa 
—á) Apa 
Pu2 Pu4
cMd1 
" 
" 
TMd4 
Lo1 deletes 
MTr5
oMd5 
H o c M d
1 B e
3 L o
1 o M d
1 
" 
sB¿
35.* Cited by Vij 2.34-5; Apa 641; Laks 12.791; Dev 3.313— a) sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
— b) Be1 wKt3 Lo5 
isBe2 oMd 5" 
, NKt4 oMd1 Laks 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5


--- PAGE 676 ---
Chapter 8 
665
oMy Tr1 [but me sh] MTr4 MTr6 \folly Nd Gr] 
Tr1 ma 
—
 c) sOx1 sPu6
Bo 
— d) Lo3 om 
Be1 Lo3 Tr2 Laks
36. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.791; Oevs.sis; pâda s a-b cited by Apa 641 — a)
GMd1 
; wKt1 
— b) Pu2 D
e
v
T
r
1
— c) xMd4
Ho Pu7 =5T; Ox2 
MTr6 
— d) Be1 Ho Jo1 Tj1 MTr5 Wa [ Jolly M8'9 G Ku R]
Tji
37. Cited by Apa 640; Dev 3.314 — a) cM d1 
sKt5
Ox3 
o O r — b ) A p a [ \ \
] 
" MTr3 
[Jolly M1'3-5-^9] 
— c) Tj1
TMd3 
Pu 2Pu 4Wa 
" 
MTr6
Additional verse in Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Mandlik 
Dave KSS:
d)Pu2
38. Omitted in GMd5. Cited by Apa 640; Laks 12.793; Dev 3.315 — a) Ho Lo4 Lo5
Be3 Lo3 MTr4 MTr6 
Apa 
. Dev 
Wa 
Hy om 
Be' NÏCt
4 
— b)
MTr5. 
o My 
iMd4 
oMd1 
— c) La1 
— d)
wKt3 
Lo2 
" wKt1 Lo1 Tr'MTr5 \1 & Apa Laks Dev 
wKt3Tj' 
Lo3
Jo2 
cMd1 iMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly Nd] Apa [vi]
39. Omitted in oMd5. Cited by Laks 12.793; Dev 3.314 — a) Ho 
sKt5 omBo
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo2 Lo4 oMd ' oOr Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G Nd]
g-; Pu2 Pu4 ^ —
 b) Laks 
_ 
oOr 
— c) cMd1 xMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 
Laks 
Pu2 Pu4 
. — d) oMd1
40. Cited by Vij 2.36; Apa 641 — b) iMd4 
oMd5 
Bo sCa wKt3 oMy sOx1 Pu2
sPu6 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 
cMd1 
NKt
4 Pu2 Pu4 Apa 
LrfTj1
La1 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 [Jolly M4] Me [pätha ] 
Lo2 Bh Ipätha ]
BosBe 2Ho 
Be3xMd4 
wKt1 
— c) Tj1 
Lo5
wKt1 
Lo2 Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 
Kt2 
— d) Lo3 cMd1
oMd5 NNg Tj ' Tr1 
. xMd3 oMy


--- PAGE 677 ---
666 
Chapter 8
41. Cited by Dev 3.65; Mädh 3.36— a) Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]; 
Lo5
sOx1 sPu6 
— b) HowKt3 sOx1 sPu6 
Tr 
cMd1 iMd4 "«RT^
iMd3 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [folly Nd] Dev Mädh 
—
 d) eBe2 Be3
Bo wKt1 Lo1 
Dev 
Mädh 
oMy 
Pu8
Be1 wKt1 oOr 
Jo2 Lo3 oMd1 oMd5
 NPu! Tj ' Tr1 Rn [Jolly R]
42. Omitted in Bel — a) Hy 
sKt5 
Lo2 TMd4 
" " — b) nKf 
—
c)Bo 
Tj1 
TMd3 cMd5 oMy MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
— d) cMd1 TMd3 TMd4
cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] NS 
prMd4 oMy 
]
43. Cited by Vij 2.5; Apa605; Dev 3.61—a) oMd 5 
T r
2 o O r 
—
b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
GMd1 TMd3 cMy 
[oMd1 
];
oOr 
Ho Ox2 sPu6 [but cor] Tr2 
N?U' 
— c) Lo2 Pu4 
NKr4 TMd4
Tj1 Tr2 MTr5 Dev T 
— d) Be1 sBe2 Be3 uCa Hy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 NKt4 Lo3 oMd5 oMy oOr
Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3
 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Ku R Nd]S/¡ Nä Rn Nd Re Mr Mandlik KSS Dave
TMd4 
. i M d 3 P u 2 P u
4 P u
5 
Tj2 o m
44. Lo3 Tj1 transpose päda s a-b and c-d. Cited by Dev 3.56; Mädh 3.30 — b) wKt3
Pu4 
— c)GMd!TMd4¡ 
[ T M d 4 ~ ] ; L a ' 
— d) TMd3 
Lo3
Tj1
45.* Päda s b-d omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 12.15 — a) Bh [pâtha ]
TMd3 Laks 
Ho La1 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
— b) Wa 
La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
NNg oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [folly M G] Bh Me Jolly Jha Dave 
sKt5
wKt1 
— c) L
a
1
T
r
2 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 viTr3Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
s
K
t
5
B
e
1 
— d) MTr6 " 
oMd1 oMd5 
Hy
Laks
46. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Dev 1.25—a) TMd3 Lo4 
N N g D e v
Ox2 
. — WLo 4Lo5 
T M d
3 P u
8 
M
T
r
5
— c)MTr6
— After this verse Lo4 inserts verses 9.235-46, and Lo5 verses 9.235-47b
Ho
 — d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Jo2
Ho
ßKt5


--- PAGE 678 ---
Chapter 8 
667
47. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3; pada-d ma sh in Tr1. Cited by Laks 12.331 — a) Be1 Ho
Tj1 
"
B
o
G
M
d
1 
TMd3 
— b) wKt1 
TMd3
TMd4 
sOx1 s P u
6 P u
7 Pu5 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G] Mr ' ' 
Be1
TMd4 Pu5 
Pu7 
TMd3 cMy NNg oOr MTr4 MTr6 NäGo Ku
wKt3 
Bh gives both readings: 
; Me supports the ablative;
for the accusative, see the similar expression at 8.48d.
48.Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Laks 12.324 — a) ßKt5 
oOr
Pu5 Pu7 
T
M
d
4
— b ) J
o
2
L
o
1 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 W a D e v 
Tj1
— c) Tr2 ' 
— d) o
M
d
1
[
c
f
. sod] ; TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr5
NdLaks 
Jo'TKÎR-0; Jo2Tj' 
Lo1
 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 
wKt1 sOx1 sPu6
BBe2'
49. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 Pu4; päda- d omitted in oMd5. Cited by Vij2.40; Apa645;
Laks 12.324; Dev 3.387; Mädh 3.191 — a) Apa [vl] 
— b) T Md4 cMy Pu2 Tr2 Apa [vi]
Dev 
B e
1 M T r
3 
wKt3 Lo1 TMd3 oMy Wa [Jolly R
Nd] 
cMd1 
— c)TMd4 
Or 
cMd1 TMd4 om 
... [soa]
[haplo] — d) Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
50. Pâda s a-b [up to 
] omitted in Pu4, and päda- a in oMd5. Cited by Laks 12.329;
Dev 3.386—a) Pu5 Pu7 
NPu1 Dev 
Ho 
NKt "
H
o sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
— b) Jm 
Ho TMd3 Pu7 Wa 
NKt4 sOx1 sPu6
 
%, Pu5
MTr4 
— c) Dev [in two mss of Laks] 
sBe2 
eKt5 if
Lo4 sOx1 sPu6 
W
a
B
o 
TMd3 MTr6 
oMd5 
— d)
oMd1 
BKt5 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1
 • 
Lo1 cor to
Be3 wKt3 NKt4 La1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 
M
T
r
4
H
o
TMd4 
Ox3
51.* Cited by Laks 12.264; Devs.287; Mädh 3.153 — a) Jo2 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly
G ] 
T
M
d
4
s
O
x
1 sPu6 
wKt1 NKt4 ;
o O r 
Lo4Lo5 
NPu1 
M
T
r
4
L
o
1 oMd1
; Lo1 
' — b) TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu1 [Jolly M^3-5-8-9Me N Nd]
DevJollv 
O x 2 B o w K t 3 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4 
— d)GMd'
Ho
— d)oMd1MTr5
— c-d)oMd5
— c)Pu2Pu4


--- PAGE 679 ---
668 
Chapter 8
Additional verse in Be3 Ho NKt4 Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 Wa [= 8.139]:
a) Lo2 ^WT; NKt4 
— c) Lo2 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c-d)NKt4
A further additional verse in sCa Mandlik 
KSS Dave; placed after 52 in
La1 [this is taken from Me who cites this verse with 
]:
a) La1 
Mandlik KSS Dave 
La1 Mandlik KSS Dave 
—
 b)Me
— c) La1 Mandlik KSS Dave 
—
 d) Me 
eCa
52.* Cited by Laks 12.88 — a) Kt2 TMd3 
sKt5 
Ho Tj1 
Kt2
TMd4 
— b) wKt1 
Bo 
— c) Be1 
Me [pätha ]
, BBe2 om 
Be1 ßBe2 Be3 sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 oOr
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr1 [cor to sh] Tr2
 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Laks Ku Rn Re Mr Mandlik KSS
GMd5 
— d) sBe2 »Kf TMd3 oMy Pu2 Pu" MTr4MTr5 [but me] \Jolly M1-3'8-
9 N Nd] Jolly Jha Dave 
TMd4 ^t; Ox2 
Be1 Bo ßCa Lo3 cMd5 sOx1 sPu6
Tj1 Tr1 Wa Re [Jolly R K] 
Ho TMd3 o M y B e
3 wKt3 cMd1 oOr
Lo4 
L o
5 T M d
4 
Lo2 NNg Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 [Jo/(y M'-3-8'9 G N Nd]
Me [pätha ] Bh Jolly Der 
[Jolly M4~5] 
Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6
53. Omitted in oMd1 TMd4 Ox3; verses 53 and 54 transposed in Lo4 Lo5; folios contain-
ing 8.53-94 missing in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.80; Dev 3.108 — a) Lo* Lo5 Pu2 Pu7 
Pu5
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 Lo1 Lo3 Ox2 Ox3 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
Tr1 [cor to sh] Tí MTr3 Wa [folly R] Ku Rn Re Mr Dev Mandlik KSS 
. Bo 
. wKt1
Nd 
L o 3 T r 2 L o 1 
Pu2 Pu4 
K t
2 — b) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
Bo" 
Lo3 BKt5 
Tj1 
TMd3 
Lo5
Ho ' 
- c) c M d 5 s O x 1 s P u
6 w K t
1 
Ho 
Bo
— d) wKt1 
, NNg 
Pu8 MTr4 M T r
6 D e v
oMy 
TMd3
54. Omitted in oMd1 TMd4. Cite by Laks 12.80; Dev%. 108 — a) Hy 
sKt5
Wa; 
Bo Lo4 Lo5TMd3 Pu7 Dev 
Laks 
sKt5 
— b) sBe2
Be1 sCa La1 Lo3 oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M1^8'9
G R ] 
B
K
t
5
B
o 
NKt4oMd 5 
Lo1
TMd3 " 
sOx1 sPu6 
MTr4 MTr6 
Be3 
— c)


--- PAGE 680 ---
Chapter 8 
669
Dev 
BBe2 
Tj1 
— d) ßKt5 Lo4 Lo5
55. Omitted in oMd1 — a) oOr 
w K t
1 m e to 
L a
1 T r
2
TMd3 MTr5 Nd 
cMy 
Lo1 
Ho 
sBe2 
— b)
sKt5 
La1 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
H
o 
* 
Be1 eBe2 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1
sPu6 Tr1 Wa 
TMd3 oMy 
— c) NKt4 
oOr Pu2 Pu4 
Tr1
TMd3 
— d) NNg Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
rMd3 
Lo5 Tr2 
Tj1
TMd4
56. 
a)wKt' ' 
[cf. 583]; MTr4 
MTr6
TMd4 
Kt2 
wKt3 
Be3 
Lo1 =TT; Hy 
— b) NKt4
TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6 
w
K
t
1
L
o
4
T
r
1 
— c) MTr4
oMds 
Ho L
a
1
— d) s B e
2 T r
2 T j
1 
;HooMd5
oMd' 
Pu8
57* Cited by Laks 12.80; Dev3.108; pada-a cited by Kum 1.3.24— a) oMd1 tMd3 cMd5
oMy Tr1 [Jolly M1-3-8-9 Nd] Dev LaksNSm [Ma] 1.52 [com; Jolly 1.61]
[Tr1 
o M d 5 ] ; B o P u
5 Pu7 
Be1 sBe2 Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo3
Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku R] Go Ku Rn Mr Mandlik KSS 
Bo Ho Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3
Tj1 
L r f O x 2 T M d 4 
- ~ b ) L o 5 c M d 5 c M d 1 
Tj2
BKt5 
— c) oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy Tr1 [but cor sh] [Jolly Nd]i
TMd4 
B o L o
1 
Be1 Tj1 
B o — 
d ) D e v 
; Be1
sBe2 Be3 Bo ßCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5
oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr1 [Jolly R Nd] Re Mandlik KSS
58.* Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; pada-a lacuna in TMd4. Cited by Laks 12.80 — a) Bo
wKt3 
N P u
1 L a k s 
— b) sKt5 
Be3 wKt1 Lo1 Lo4
Ox3 Pu3 MTr3 MTr4 Mandlik 
MTr5 
TMd3 Tr2 MTr6 
Jha 
N P u 1 L a 1
o O r 
— c ) Pu2 Pu4 T
T
M
d
3 
r M d 4 o M d 5
: 
M T r
6 L o
3 
— d)TMd3oMy 
wKt1 
oMd1 
Ox3
— After this verse Ox3 inserts 9.51-9; Lo4 Lo5 insert 9.52-9.
59. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M1"3"4]. Cited by Laks 12264; Dev 3.286; Mädh
Mädh 
N
N
g
?
" L
o
2
o
M
d 
wKt1
Dev
BKt5
sKt5 om
GMy
3.152 — a) TMd3


--- PAGE 681 ---
670 
Chapter 8
[Jolly M8] 
— b) Ho 
Mädh
Pu* 
TMd4 
Tj1 
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3oMy 
oMd5
; Be3 Tj2 
" 
" 
Be1 P
u
3
D
e
v 
Pii Pu7 
—
c)xMd3 
B
e
3
M
i
r
4 MTV* 
xMd4 
Kt2 Lo2
— d)TMd4 
o M d 1 T M d 3 
iMd4 sOx1 sPu6 
NPu1 f^T
60. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M1"3"4]; päda s c-d /oa in Tr1; pada-b omitted in
sOx1. Cited by Laks 12.102; päda s c-d cited by Dev 3.174— a) Tr2 
oOr
wKt1 
o M d 1 T j 1 
Lo'Pu2MTr4' 
, Kt2
— b)0Md> 
,Be3Tj' 
BKts 
wKt3 
H
o
B
e
1
TMd3 oMd5 oMy 
Laks 
Pu2 Pu4 
Ho 
— c) Pu5 Pu7
Lo1 
s K t
5 ; T r
2 
, oMd1 
NNgPu5Pu7 
— dJTj'^T
61. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M1'3^]; ma in Tr1. Cited by Laks 12.104 — a) Laks
Bo 
— b)NNg 
— c)Tr2 
uKl? 
— d)
sKt5 Tr2 
oMd5 
eKt5
62. Omitted in Pu5 [Jolly M1'3]. Cited by Apa 665 — a)wKt' 
H o o M d
5
sKt5 
o M d 1 — c ) L a ' N K t
4 
^pa 
sBe2 sOx1
sPu6 Mir5 
o M d 1 N P u 1 P u * L a k s 
o O r 
B o Lo5
BBe2La'oOr 
B
e
3
H
y "
63. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Lafc 12.104; Dev 3.177 — a)NPu'
, iMd3 oMy 
Lo1 Laks—
 b) Be1 Be3 wKt1 Lo1 Lo5 oOr
TMd3 oMd5 oMy [Jolly Nd]; 
Pu2 
— c) Tj2 
Be3 La1 
sKt5
La'Tr2 
— d ) B
e
3
B
o 
sCa wKt3 TMd4 oMd5 sOx1
NPu
1 sPu6 
TMd3
64. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Dev 3.Yjj;Mädh 3.66;päda- a cited by Vij 2.80
— a) Be1 
sKt5 
Tj1 Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 M i r 5
T M d 4 
oMd5 
Pu2
Lo4 Lo5 
Tr2 
o M y
: T M d
3 — b) Pu2 Pu4 
; Lo1
TMd3 oMd5 
T
j
1
: — c ) o
M
d
1
w
K
t
3 
—
d) oMy lacuna at 
s B e 2 e C a 
" wKt1 
Bo oMd1


--- PAGE 682 ---
Chapter 8 
671
65. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Laks 12.111; Dev 3.177; Mädh 3.66 — a) wKt1
rMd'HT^r:; Be3 
— b) Tr1 
_ 
TMd3 Tj1 
B
e
3
H
o
' — c) Hy 
TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
Ox2 
Pu2 Pu4 
.Laks
66. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Devzwi'Madh 3.66 — a)oOr 
" ~ TMd4
Pu5 Pu7 
W
a
o
M
y 
T
M
d
3
. NPu1 
cMd5
rMd4 
K
t
2
— b)oMd '
P
u
8 
— c ) wKt1
NNg 
wKt'Lo'Tj1 
TMd3 
— d) TMd3
67.Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Dev 3.177; Mädh 3.66 — a) Lo2 
— b) Tr1
— c ) xMd4 
o M y T r
2 o
m
L
o
1 
— d ) wKt3
68. Omitted in NNg [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 665; päda- a cited by Vij 2.69 — a)
oMd1 
o M y ; i M d 3 
— b) T M d 4 o M d 5 
Bo Lo5
TMd3 
— c)Wa 
Bo 
Mir4 
cMd1 
— d) Tj2 om
oMy Pu2 Pu4 
r
M
d
3
; B o
69.* Omitted in {Jolly M1"3]; päda s c-dma in Lo4. Cited by Apa 671; Laks 12.117; Dev
3.181 — a) TMd4 
B e
3 u C a 
Tr1 
— a-b) Pu5 Pu7
' — b)Be3 
L o 5 o M d 5 
TMd4 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Tr2
wKt1 
oMd1 
BKt5 
— c) TMd3 
— d) wKt3 
" 
" 
wKt1
Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
Wa [Jolly M5"8 G] Apa Laks Dev Me Re Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Apa Dev
BKt5
70. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Apa 671; Laks 12.117; Dev 3.181; Mädh 3.70— a)
uTr5Apa 
L
a
1
L
a
k
s 
T M d 4 . . .. — b) TMd3 cMy 
— c)
Tr2 
_ 
O x 2 — c - d ) M 3 d
h 
—
 d)
Tr2^ 
TMd4 
" 
NNg 
Be1 Pu3 [/o//y M5-8"9 Nd]


--- PAGE 683 ---
672 
Chapter 8
71. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited byLakx 12.117; Dev 3.196 — a) Be sBe2 Be3 Bo eCa
Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKf Lo2 Lo3 NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MÏr5MTr6
[Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) Tr1 
Be3 Kt2 
cMd1 oOr
MTr4 Mir6 
La1 Ox2 
iMd4 cMd5 
oMd1 xMd3 oMy MTr6
Mir4 
— c í T r
2 w i r
5 
Lo1 TMd3 
— d) TMd3
Bö 
ßKt6 
Lo3Tj'
72. Omitted in (7o//y M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.117; öe v 3.183— a) ßBe2 Be3 Bo Ho ßKt5
Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly M G] Dev Jolly' 
—
 b) Pu8
for 
sOx1 s P u
6 L o
1 
sKt5 lacuna at—
 
c) ßBe2 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo2
TMd4 
"—d) NNg mash 
Ho Pu5 Pu7 
Bo " 
sOx1 [but cor] sPu6
TMd4Wa 
^NPu'Tj'Tr'MTr6
73. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 677; Dev 3.211; Mädh 3.83 — a)Mädh
NPu1 Pu2 Mir5 
— b) T M d 3 o M d 1 
Lo5 
Tr2 
Bo 
—
c) oMy 
oMd5 Tj1 ^T; Kt2 
Lo5 
— d)slCt5 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Wa
Pu2 Pu4 
B o o M d ' T M d 3 o M d 5 G M y Tr'MTr4MTrsMTr6: 
wKt3
Pu3
74. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Dev3.198; päda s a-b cited by Laks 12.137; Vij
2.38 [intro.] — a) Hy Kt2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 
cMy
 ; 
" Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1
Be3BoNKtt 
BCaBKt5La' 
— b)oMy' 
oMd5 MTr6
Hy 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
Tr2 
Bo 
wKt1 
— d)
Pu2 Pu4 
sKt5 =T
75. Omitted in Pu5 [folly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.145; Dev 3.200 — a)TMd3 
Tr1
[but cor fh] 
NKt 4Tr 2oro; 
Bo [but cor] 
— c)Tj' 
Wa 
" 
rMd3
oMy 
sBe2 ßCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La ' Lo1 Lo3 NNg Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly R]A« Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Tr1 
Jolly 
Laks
— d)Bo 
BKt5
76. Omitted in [Jolly M*'3]. Cited by Laks 12.101— a) Ho 
MTr5 
TMd4


--- PAGE 684 ---
Chapter 8 
673
Be1 nBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 MÎT* Laks
NNg 
Pu5 Pu7 
— b) BKt5 
wKt1 TMd3 oMy
—c) L o 1 _ 
NPu
1 Pu2 P u
4 B B e
2 wKt3 cMd1 MTr5 
MTr4 MTr6
Lo1 TMd3 
P u
8 T r
2
77* Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks 12.118 — a) NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 oMd5 NNg NPu
1
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 [Jolly M8'9 G Nd] Me Go Ku [pâtha | Rn [pâtha l Jha
TMd3 TMd4 oMy 
sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2
Be3 
La1 
[om|; Bo
•' " 
MTr6 
TMd4 
— b)cMd' 
" 
T r
2 T j
1
Lo1 
NKt
4 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
— c) TMd4 
sBe2 Be3 Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox3
NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Wa 
Pu2 Pu4 
— d) oOr [but cor]
TMd3 oMy NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
cMd5 
wKt3 
wKt1
Pu2 Pu4
78. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Mâdh^ào
 —
 a) TMd4 
— b) sBe2 Bo
wKt 3TMd 3TMd 4oMd 5oMyTr 2MTr 4 
— c) oMd5 
^ 
Mâdh
TMd3 ' 
— d ) Lo4 L
o
5
B
o Lo1 
^ B e
1 L a
1
NNg 
B e 1 , P u 5 P u 7 
sKt5
79. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Vij 2.73;Laks 12.124;
Dev 3.198; Mâdh 3.75 — a) Md4 
Tr2 
wKt1 
oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy Tr1
 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Mî ] Vij Laks Dev Mâdh 
' Pu2 Pu4
— b) wKt1 
Pu5 om 
Hy 
— c) Hy 
L o
5 P u
2
Pu4 
wKt1 oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 MTr5 
Ho 
Kt2 
wKt3
Mâdh 
N K t
4 B K t
5 Pu2 Pu4 
Be? sCa Lo1 Pi1 Pu3
Tr1 V i ) 
—
 d ) T i
2 L a
1 
H o
T M d
3 oMy
80.* Omitted in Lo5 Pu5 [Jolly M'-3]; ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.124; Mâdh 3.75 — a)
wKt1 
TMd3*T; sBe2 
Pu2 
Bo TMd3 Pu3 Tj2
oMd'MT^MTr6
 
MTr4' 
T M d 4 o M d 5 Tr ' [but me] ' 
BBe2 Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 sKt5 Lo2 Lo3 NNg Ox2 Ox3 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly N] Rn Nd Laks Mâdh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Ho NPu
1 
Hy sOx1 sPu6 ' 
oOr 
Lo4 Pu7 
W a B e
3
Laks(vl) 
Pu2 P u
4 L o
1 
— b ) NNg 
N K t
4 — c)îMd 3
Pu3 Pu4 
Hy om tâ ; Kt2 NKt4 : 
Loi 
— d) oMy Pu7 
ßKt5


--- PAGE 685 ---
674 
Chapter 8
Be1 BoTMd 3oMd 5 Tj2 [Jolly N d ] 
iwTr4 
P
u
7
N
N
g N P u
1 M T r
6
81.* Omitted in Lo3 [Jolly M1'3]. Cited by ¿0/^12.124; Dev 3.i<)8;Madh 3.76 — a) Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Mädh 
—
 b) sKt5 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 Wa [Jolly Me M8'9 G] Jolly ' 
' 
Be1 sBe2 Bo aCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 [but cor}
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Mir3 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 \Jolly Ku N
Nd] Dev Rn Ku Mandlik KSS 
Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
Lo4 Lo5
Ox3 [Jolly M4-5] Me 
Dave Jha 
—
 c ) N P u ' P u 5
Pu7 [Jolly G ] 
Lo1 N
N
g
— d ) B e ? 
oMy 
M T r 5 T M d 3
NNg MTr5 
; Hy 
^
Additonal verse in MandlikKSS:
82. Omitted in Lo3 [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.199 — a) Be1 
Tr2
— a-b) Be3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Laks 
[Pu5 Pu7 
Pu2
Pu4 
] — b) Wa 
Tr2 
wKt1 
Lo4 Lo5 
NKt4 oMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMy Tr1 [but cor] MTr4MTr5 uTr^Dev 
— c) Pi? Pu4
TMd< 
T
r
2
B
B
e
2 
Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 
. ßCa
oMy 
— d) Be3 Hy Jo2 wKt1 oMd1 oMd5 NPu1 Tj2 Tr2 Dev 
Jo! Kt2
wKt3 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
, oMy M T r 4 o M d 1 
Pu8
Additional verses in TMd4 cMd5 Tr ' MTr4 MTr6 ]¡olly Gr] Mandlik _ 
KSS Dave;
second verse given after 8.101 in sCa La1. Both verses cited by Mädh 3.76; first verse cited
by Dev 3.198; second verse parallels NSm 1.206:
1. b) [Jolly Gr] ' 
Mandlik KSS Dave 
oMd5
; TMd4 
— c) oMd5 " 
— d) oMd5
2. c) Mädh Mandlik KSS Dave ' 
Tr1 [Jolly Gr]
TMd4 oMd5 
— d) sCa La ' 
Mädh
Additional verse in oMd1
 TMd4 Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly Gr] Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
a-b) omitted in Tr ' [Jolly Gr]; TMd4 ' 
Mandlik KSS
Dave 
-—
 c)TMd4 
cMd1 
Tr1 [Jolly Gr]
— d) TMd4 '
KSS:


--- PAGE 686 ---
Chapter 8 
675
83. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.ig8;Madh 3.76 — a) Pu5 Pu7
— 
tyNKl4 
TMd4 
— c)TMd4 
oMd5
Pu8Tr2g-;Be3 
. s O x ' s P u 6 - d) Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4~5]
84. Omitted in Hy [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.199 — a)oMd5
NPu
! 
— b
)
N
N
g
i
M
d
3 
—
 c)Laks 
xMd3
B o 
T r
2 e B e
2 B
o
D
e
v
— d ) Laks 
cMd
85.* Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Oev 3-199 — a) oMd1 iMd3
Pu5 Pu7' 
O x 3 o M y 
sBe2 L o
1 — b) GMy 
TMd3 ;
Lo3Tj'' 
Tj1 
— c) Be3 sCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 sût5 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2
Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj' Tj2 Tr2 Mir3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
wKt1
— d) sPu6 [lacuna] 
lacuna filled me sh to 
sOx1 ; 
Be1 Be3 Bo
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo4 [but cor] Lo5 MTr3 Me Go Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMd1
D e v 
T r
2 [ J o l l y M^]
86.Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev3.2OO — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Kt2
— b ) wKt1 
o
M
y
— c ) La1
D e v HW; MTr6 
i M d
4 — d
)
T
M
d
3
L
o
1 Lo2 
H o
87. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Vij 2.73 [but ascribed to Kätyäyana];/lp
a 673;
Laks 12.124; Dev 3.203;Mäd h 3.78 — a) Tr2 
wKt1 
— b) Ho Jo1 sOx1 sPu6
Lo1 
o
M
d
1
B
e
3 
Apa 
—
 c) MTr4 MTr6
Tr2 om 
N
P
u
1
— d ) oMd1 rMd3 xMd4 oMy Tr1
[cMd1 
];oMd3 
"
M
ä
d
h 
Jo2LrfTj'
MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
" 
Laks Apa 
W a o O r
88.* Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited byApa 674 — a) La1 
oMd1 TMd4 Tr1 Apa
— b) wKt1 
A p a ~ 
B e
1 — c) Pu2 Pu4 
Lo1
La1 
— d)Pu5Pu7 
[Jolly N] Na 
xMd3 
Be]BBe2Bo
eCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2


--- PAGE 687 ---
676 
Chapter 8
Tr2 Mir3 Mir4 MTr6 [Jolly M4~s R] 
Tr2
89. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; not commented by No. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204;
Mädh 3.78 — a) Tt2 
T M
d
4
P
u
5 Pu7 Go [Jolly G]
[Me supports plural whereas Ku Rn Nd Mr support singular]; Lo1 oMd1
GMd5 sOx1 sPu6 MTr6 
ApaLo3 T j
1 w K t
1 w K t
1 oMd1 MTr4 
— b)
Pu 5 Pu7 Tr2 Apa Go Jolly 
MTr6' 
Lo4 [but cor] 
. wKt1 '— 
c)
xMd3 
L o
1 T r
2 
sBe2 Lo1 M T r 4 M T r 6 — d) sOx1 sPu6
Tr2 
BKÍTj1 
J o
1 s C a Ho La1 oMy oOr Apa 
wKt1
^cK<rl; Mädh
90. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; not commented by Re. Cited by Apa 674; £>ev3.2O4; Mädh
3.78 —a) NNg 
_ 
P u
8 " — b) Be3 Bo Tj1 [Jolly RM] Apa [vl as in ed]
iMd3 [but c o r sh] oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Be3 Lo1 _
— c ) Be1 
wKt1
La1 
. oMd1 
" 
Be3 Tr2 g^; Lo2 
Ho 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
Be3TMd" ^
91. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204— b) cMd5 lacuna at
rMd4 
BBe2 Hy Tj ' T r 2 B e 3 Bo wKt1 NKt
4 sKt5 Lo" Lo5 iMd3 oMy Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M Nd] Dev Nd Go Jha Dave 
• 
Kt2 
A
p
a
o
O
r
— c) Lo1 
ApaíTjTMd 4 
Apa \\\}' 
Lo1
Ox2 
MTr5 
iMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6 T
r
2
— d) Pu5 Pu7
Tr2 
Pu3 P u
8 . 
, G M d
1 B e
3 
oMd5 
MTr3 
A p a
92. Omitted in {Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204— b) Apa
o O r 
w K t
3 L o
2 
— c)Tj' 
• — d )
wKt1 
Lo1 xMd3 xMd4 T j 1 o M d 1 
oOr 
MTr4
My' 
M T r 3 o M d 1 
Lo4 Lo5 Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly M4"5"9 G] Jolly 
Ox3
93.* Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204— a) Tr2 
Pu7 
Pu5
Pu8 
Pu5 P u
7 o M y 
sBe2 ßCa Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 MTr5 WaApa Dev Na Mandlik Jolly
KSS 
Wa 
La1 
[ c h a n g e d sh to ] — b) Ho Tj1 
iMd4
— c) TMd4 : 
M T r
5 o M d
1 
ßBe^ Bo sCa Hy Jo1


--- PAGE 688 ---
Chapter 8 
677
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 oOr MTr3 [Jolly Ku R] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sKt5 om
—
 (i)MTr4 
BKt5 
" Lo5 
wKt3
94. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; not commented by Re. Cited by Apa 674; £>ev 3.204— a)
Be1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Apa 
Hy 
nKt4 
Lo1 
NNg
wKt1 
TMd3 o M y 
T M d
4 O x
3 
Kt2"
— b) TMd3 
T M d
4 P u
5 P
u
7
J
o
2 oMd ' rMd3 TMd4 oMy Pu8
 MTr4
Mir6 [Jolly G] Go Rn 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Pu2 Pu4 
Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
Lo1 NNg Tf MTr3 tfolly Ku] Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
" 
— c) MTr6 
Dev 
—
 d)
wKt3 Tr1 [but me sh] Tr2 
NKt4 
Be3
95. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Dev 3.205 — a) wKt1 
Be1 TMd4 
— b)
Be1 Be3 Ho Jo 2wKt'NKt 4 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 NNgoOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1
Tr2 MTr5 Wa \Jolly M8 R G Nd] 
Bo 
oMy
TMd4 
, BCaoMd ' Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 lacuna until
TMd4 
Pu5 P u
7 w K t
3 
B
K
t
5
w
K
t
1
Bo 
Lo1 
o M d 1 ' - c - d ) o M d 5
— d) Ho 
BKt5 TMd3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6 
Bo
96. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa&iû,; Dev^.igS, 205 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1
MTr4 MTr6 
— b) Pu2 P u
4 n B e
2 
" oMd1 
Ho sKt5 oMd5 NNg
Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Wa Me Re Jha Dave • 
; Lal TMd4 oMy 
TMd3 sOx1 sPu6
Bo T 
o O r K t
2 
— c) Mandlik Jha Dave 
Bo
oMd1 
NNg 
TMd4 
— d) oOr 
oMd1 
D e v ~ ~ 
aBe2
TMd4
97. Omitted in Ox3 [Jolly M '~3]; pâda s a-d and g8a omitted in wKt1 [haplo]. Cited by
Apa 674; Dev 3.205;Mäd h 3.78-9 — a) Be1 Bo cMd1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 
Be1 TMd4 MTr5
Mâdh 
TMd4 
— a-b) Jo2 MTr6
— 
tyTt2 
L o 4 o M d 1 TMd3oMy TrlApaBKt5 oMd1 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6
Pu8 Tr2 " 
Kt2 
— c) Bo 
oOrsOx'sPu6 
N P u 1 o M d 1
TMd3 
Be3 
Be1 Tr1 Jolly 
—
 d) TMd4 
Tj2
Apa ' 
cMd5 
; TMd3 oMy 
Tr2
Additional verse in Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
KSS:
a) Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Pu2 
Pu4


--- PAGE 689 ---
678 
Chapter 8
98. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; pada-a omitted in wKt1 and pada-d in xMd4 Wa [haplo].
Cited by Apa 674; Dev 1.220, 3.205; Mäclh 3.79; pada-a cited by Apa68o — a) ßBe2
Kt2 
— b) sKt5 päd a reads: 
TMd4 
Tr2 
— c)
Lo1 ; 
Bo
99. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; pâda s a-c omitted in xMd4 Wa, and pada-d in Lo2; verse 99
placed after the addition following verse 100 in TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev
3.205; Mädh 3.79 — a) NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Bo Kt2 Lo1 oMd1 
—b)
Be3 Pu8 
wKt1 La1 oMd1 NNg
 ; 
— c) Lo1 
Ho wKt3 Lo1 Lo5 iMd3 oMy oOr Tr2
— d) Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3!]1 
wKt'om 
Bo 
oMd1 
NKt4 Tr2
Ox3 Mädh 
wKt1 
cortoBe3 Ho 
oMd1 TMd3 rMd4 cMy NNg^pa
Tr1 [but corflt] Apa [vi] 
oMd5
100.* Omitted in Lo2 [Jolly M~3]. Cited by Dev^-zos; Mädh 3.79— a) Mädh
— b)Wa 
Be3 
— c) Pu8 Mir3 
oMd 5oMy 
Mädh- 
cMd1
TMd3oMy 
— d)Bo 
_ Pu8 
TMd4
*Additional verse in ßCa cMd1 TMd3 oMy oOr MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [folly Nd] added after 99
in TMd4 Tr1; added after both 99 and 100 in Mandlik KSS Dave [parallel in GDh 13.20-22;
see endnote]; cited by Laks 12.133:
a) Tr1 
— b) TMd4 oMy Tr1 
— c) Tr1 
TMd4
oMy: 
M T r
4 , o O r 
— d) Mandlik KSS Dave
TMd4 oMy Tr1 
[this reading also after 99 in Mandlik KSS Dave]
Additional half-verse in oMy [Jolly Nd]; added after 99 in TMd4 Tr1 Mandlik KSS Dave:
Additional verse in TMd3 cMy [Jolly Nd] [all place verse 99 after this verse]:
a) [Jolly Nd] 
— c-d) [Jolly Nd]
ira..* Omitted in \Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 6j4;Dev 3.205; Madh^.jg — a) TMd3
Lo4 
uTr5Mädh oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMyNNg Tr1 [bul cor]
MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
w K t
1 o M d
1 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
— b)
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg Tr1 [but cor] MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
Be1
Apa 
H
o
W
a 
— c) sKt5 
TMd3 
_ — d) Be1 BBe2


--- PAGE 690 ---
Chapter 8 
679
Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2
MTr3 Go Ku Mâdh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
iMd3 oMy
Additional verse in sCa La1 [same as verse z after 8.82].
102. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Apa6?4; Laks 12.135; Hem 3/1.359; Dev 3.205 —
a) Hy
 : 
sBe2 Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Laks Hem Mandlik KSS 
Ho wKt3 ßKt5
Lo3 oMd1 TMd4 Ox2 Tj ' Tr2 " 
— b) Lo2 
Be3 TMd3 _ 
. TMd4
cW: — c)Ho 
Be1BoHyJo1BKt5La1Pu8Tj2Tr2//em./o//.y 
La1
— c-d) Hem 
[but vl as in ed] —
 d) wKt1 sOx1 sPu6
Bo 
NNg
Additional verse in oMd1 NPu
1 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Mandlik 
KSS Dave; given after
verse 106 in TMd4 and after added verse i below in La1; cited by Laks 12.135; Hem 1.35;
3/1.360; Dev 3.206:
a)oMd' 
NPu
1 
La1 Mandlik KSS Dave 
MTr4
MTr6 Mandlik 
Tr1 
iMd4 
oMd1 Mandlik
—
 b ) NPu1 Mandlik 
La1 '
T
M
d
4 
— c ) La1
NPu
1 Mandlik 
Tr1 
— d) La1
Mand
Additional verses in La1 [cf. NSm 1.192-3! verse 2 in Ca:
2. a) sCa^T— d)ßCa
103. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; ma in Tr1; verses 103 and 104 transposed iMd3 oMy [Jolly
Nd]. Cited by Laks 12.146 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
Be3 
— b) wKt3
 = 
rMd3
oMy( 
—c)Pu 2Pu 4 
NPu
1 
— d)sOx'sPu6 
wKt3
Pu5 Pu7 
Lo 3oMd lTMd 3cMd 5GMyNNgTj lA'í / 
xMd4 
Ho 
Tr2
TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
104.. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 682; Laks iz.i46;Dev z.zoj;Madh 3.80 —
a) BlCt
5 Pu3 Tr2 
TMd3 oMy 
— b) [Jolly Nd] 
NNg
Lo4 Lo5 oOr 
Tr ' 
[ma sh 
} La1 oMd1 TMd4 Ox3 • 
Wa:
MTr4MTrf 
sBe2 
; wKt3 
Kt2 
.NKt 4 
" Tj1
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
; Apa 
, Be1 
P
u
5
P
u
7 
cor to
Ho sOx1 sPu6 Dev '" 
Be3 
O x
2 M ä d
h 
Nd (pätha )


--- PAGE 691 ---
680 
Chapter 8
oMd5 
TMd3 ^ 
.. 
, aMd1 
. TMd3 oMd5 MTr" MTr6
— c) TMd4 JT5T; Pu2 P u
4 — d) M
ä
d
h
c
M
d
1 TMd3 oMy Mir5 [Jolly Nd]
,oMd5
105. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Apa 682; Laks 12.147; Dev Z-ZQ7;Madh 2.390 —
a) Ho Hy sKt5 NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 Ox3 Tj1 Wa/4pa 
TMd3 oMy 
cMd1
çj ; Be3 HysOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 Apa 
sBe2 sCa wKt3 La1 Lo4 Lo5
Tr1 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 \Jolly M] Dev 
Bo L o
l B e
3 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
. 
Tr2 
B
K
t
5
• oMd1 '
N
K
t
4 
TMd4
Be3 Bo Hy sKt5 
— c) o
M
d
1
i
M
d
3 oMy 
Ox3
sBe2 
.DevMâdh — d) TMd3 
"~ 
~ 
oMy
Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 
i M d
4 W a 
Bo 
oMd ' 
Be3
oMy Bo Pu5 Pu7 Tt
106.* Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Apa 682; Laks 12.147; Dev 3.207; Mädh 2.390
— a ) oui 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
T
M
d
4 
H o
Jo2Lo3sOx'sPu6Tj' 
Tj2 
Dev 
rMd3 oMy 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly
G] 
" ~ 
Be3 
(o2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo3 Tj1 
TMd4 
Hy NKt4
BKt5TMd3om 
La1 Laks 
Ho 
TMd4 
Ho 
Ox3 
Bo 
- d) NPu
1
Bo Ho wKt1 
Lo4 Apa Jolly Dave 
TMd3oMd5oMy 
MTr3
Be1 Lo1 cMd1 sOx1 sPu6
 '• 
La1 
Ho wKt1 Lo2 oMd1 Tj1 MTr6 Dev
Be1 Pu3 
Pu2 Pu4 
NPu1 
Lo5
107. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]; ma in Lo1. Cited by Vij 2.76; Apa 677; Laks 12.143; Dev
3.213 — a) Bo Tj1 
Be3 wKt1 NKt4 rMd4 oMd5 NNg Tr1 
TMd3 oMy
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu5 P
u
7
O
x
3 
— b) Pu2 Pu4
NKt
4 oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 
oMd1 ; T M d
3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
— d) Lo2 '
Kt2 
Ox3 om 
Lo4 ma . Bo Ho TMd3 oMy sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 MTr4 Vij Apa 
' 
NKf
cMd1 MTr5 Wa 
[Jolly M8]
108. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Vij 2.80; Dev 3.219; Mädh 3.82— a) oMy
[corto 
c M d
5 T M d
4 
La1 
Bo 
" 
Be3
Mädh 
sOx1 sPu6
 • 
Ho 
— a-b) îMd 3
— b ) o M y "
P
u
5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] — 
c ) Be3 oMd ' Ox3 Pu7
Tj1 
o
M
d
5
"
. T
M
d
4
o
M
y 
" TMd:
Mädh 
" Pu2 P
u
4
'
O
x
3 
— c-d) oMd1
— d) TMd4 oMd5 MTr5 
_ 
Ox3


--- PAGE 692 ---
Chapter 8 
681
109. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]; verses 109 and no transposed in Lo3 Tj1. Cited by Apa
694 —a) Pu2 Pu4 
u B e
2 i M d
4 '
o
M
d
1 
— c) Be3 iMd3 Tr 2
Apa 
Me [ p ä t h a ]
: — d) Bo Pu3 
sPu 6
[but meß] 
' 
Wa 
cMd5 
TMd3 oMy
no. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]; päda s c-d [after 
"] omitted in Pu5 — a) rMd4
— b)NPu' 
T M d 4 o M y H y i M d
3 : K t
2 H y TMd4 
— c ) Kt2
t3-°;Tj ' 
Lo3 
" 
" NPu
1 
— d) oMd1 5FT; Pu8 
iMd4 
Jo2 Pu2
Pu4 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Wa 
Jm Kt2 Mir3 
oMd5 
wKt3 sPu6 
Jo2
Be3GMd' 
Jo1 Ox2 
sOx1 sPu6 [me sh to] 
Tj1 
Ox: 
TMd4
in. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Laks 12259 — a) Ox3 om 
— b) La1 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Pu2 Tr1 MTr4Mir5 MTr6 Wa [lolly M Nd] 
o M y O x
3
Tj1 
H o s O x ' s P u 6 P u 5 P
u
7
o
M
d
1 
Tj2
— c)oMd5 
oMd1 Tr1 [but me sh}— d) wKt3 
wKt3 o O r h e r e
Wa inserts verses 156-9
112. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.259 — a) TMd3 oMy 
— b) wKt1
xMd3 
Lc? sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 [but cor] 
Be1 Ho Lo2NNg N?U ' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 MTr4MTr5 Mir6 Wa [Jolly G Nd] Bh 
TMd4 Laks 
' 
olVId5 
Lo3 Ox3
La1 
T M d
4 — c
)
T
M
d
4
P
u
5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] 
NPu 1
NNg TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr5 Wa 
— d) Be3 sOx1 sPu6
113. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Vij 2.j3;Dev 3.234;Mäc// j 3.78; päda- d cited by
Vij 2.75,113 — a) Ox2 
— d ) B o L o 5 
Ox3 
Be3 Wa 
wKt1
wKt3 
[Rn gloss 
supports 
cf. 8.88 and the note to it]
114.* Omitted in Ox3 [Jolly M'~3J päda s c-d ma in Lo4; pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in
TMd3 oMy. Cited in Apa 694; Laks 12.256 — a) oMd5 
sCasOx1 sPu6 
NKf
1 Pu7
Tj' 
L a
1 L o
1 
; o M d ' T M d
4 — b) NNg Tr1 [folly M G R]
Apa 
[Jolly M] Jolly 
MTr4MTr6 
La1 
— c)oMd' 
Lo1
TMd3 
Bo Ho Jo2 BKt5 La1 Tj1 LaksPu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
MTr4


--- PAGE 693 ---
682 
Chapter 8
—
 à) "fr
2 Apa 
Tj1 
Apa
115. Omitted in Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M1"3]; ma in Lo4. Cited in Laks 12.259; pâda s c-d cited
by f(/'2.113; Dev 3.274 —a) NKt
4 
Bo La1 
iMd4 
oMd1 
— b)
wKt3 
Wa 
Lo1 
— c) Hy 
Tr1 
oMd5 
Be1 Ho
wKt1 BKt5 Lo2 Pu8 
— d)BKt5 
Lo2 
Tj1
116.Omitted in Pu5 [Jolly M'~3] — a) Be T r
2 s B e
2 
La1 
iMd3
cMy 
Ho 
Be3 
wKt1 sOx1 sPu6 ' 
— b) Bo JHT; oMd5
Ho TMd4 Pu4 
NPu1 Tr2 
sKt5 TMd3 
NPu
1 
Be3 
— c) Hy
MTr3 
w K t 3 ' o O r M T r 6 
Pu7 [Jolly G] • 
aSt? Bo [but cor] wKt1
NKt4 La1 oOr Pu2 Pu8 
— c-d) sOx1 sPu6 
[lacuna] 
— d) BKt5.
Pu1 [Jolly G] 
" 
xMd4 Mir4 Mir6 ; 
sOx1 s P u
6 . Pu2 Pu4
Wa 
oMd5 
Be1
 BBe2 Kt2 Lo1 Lo4 TMd4
 NNg NPu1 MTr6
[Jolly M Nd] Dave 
TMd3 oMy 
La1 Ox2 
Pu8 
Be3 sOx1 sPu6
117. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M1"3]; päda s c-d omitted in sBe2. Cited by Vij2.77;
Dev 3.217-8 — a) TMd3 oMd5 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
sBe2 wKt1 Lo3 cMd1 NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 
— b) eCa 
" 
" 
Be1 Jo2 NPu1 [Jolly G
Nd] 
_ _ 
Pu2 Pu4 ^ 
o ,wKt' 
; La1 MTr5 
Be3" 
MTr5
TMd4 
— c)TMd 3Tj 1omo«e 
Pu5 Pu7 
" MTr4
 MTr6 
La1
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
[lacuna] " [lacuna] 
Bo 
' La1
 TMd4 Wa 
wKt1
wKt3 
Ho Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R] 
MTr5.8/r 
; Jo1
118. Omitted in Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M'~3]; ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa68o; Laks 12.141; Dev
3.215; Mädh 3.81 — a) wKt1 
Be1 Bo Ho NKt4 Lo2 TMd4 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 Tr2
wKt3" " 
TMd3 NNg 
— b)wKt'om 
Be3 
— c) oMy
Lo3Tj' 
— d)Pu2Pu4
119. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.141; Dev 3.215\Madh 3.82
— a) TMd4 Dev 
oMd1 Laks' 
Pu8 T r
1 M ä d
h 
: —- b) Ho ;
Lo1 
Be3 
Ho 
wKt3 
wKt3 TMd3 
— c) [Jolly N]
wKt1 
".oMd 1 
_TMd 3sOx' sPu6 
La1 
[Jolly M]
oMd5'


--- PAGE 694 ---
Chapter 8 
683
120. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 MTr5 [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Vij 2.81; Apa 68o; Laks 12.141;
D e v 3.215; Mad/i 3.82 — a ) Tr ' "
T
j
1 T j 2 
rMd* [Jolly Nd sh]
[Jolly Nd./A] 
o M y r M d
3 
Jo2 Lo3 Pu7 Tj1 
[Jolly R]
Be ' wKt3 Lo2 oMd ' oOr Ox2 MTr4 MTr6 Vij Apa 
—
 b) La1 
— c)
oMd1 
Oev 
Apa' 
oMd5 wNg Wa 
Be1 Be3 Bo
BCa wKt1 wKt3 oMy sOx1 NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 Tj ' 
NNg '< 
oMd1 oMd5 Wa Dev Apa
—
 d) Be1 Ho NKt
4 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMy Ox2 Pu3 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 Vij 
w K t 3 w K t 3
Laks 
L a
1 e B e
2 
wKt1 [e«i me]
121. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M'~3];padas a-b omitted in MTr5. Cited by Vij 2.81;
Apa 68o; La/b 12.141; Dev 3.215; Mac//? 3.82 — a) Kt2 
Be3 
sCa La1 Lafa- 
—b)
oMd5: 
— c ) o M d ' s O x 1 s P u 6 P u 5 T j 2 
Pu5 
— d) xMd4
oMd5 GMy 
wKt1 Pu2 Pu4 ' 
Pu5 Pu7 
NKt4
üBe 2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 oMd1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tr2
Apa Co 
Be3
122. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Laks 12.141; pâda s a-b cited by Dev 3.51, 215;
Mädh 3.82 — a) Be3 
O x
3 i M d
4 
Bo iMd3 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly M9 G Nd] __ 
Lo2 
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
. Laks 
NKt4
Pu2 Pu4 
Be3 BCa [but cor] wKt3 NKf La ' Lo3 oMd1 oMd5 oOr NPu1
Tj ' MTr4 MTr6 W a Dev 
; x M d 3 . 
— c) Ho iMd3 oMy Tr2 
wKt1
Bo 
— d) w
K
t
1
o
M
d
1 oMd5 
TMd3 iMd4 oMy Tt4
[Jolly Nd] 
Tj1
123. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Vij 2.81; Apa 68o; Laks 12.142; Mädh 3.82 — a)
BovPu]Pu5Pu1[JollyM*-gNdG]LaksMädh 
Kt2 
wKt1 =ET; Be3 TMd3
TMd4; 
O
x
3
" — b) Apa [vi as in e
d
]
L
o
1 
— c ) iMd3
oMy 
— d ) B o ä ß e
2 MTr4 MTr6 [fo//yNd] L a f c v B e
1 
wKt3
124.* Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Vij 2.2.6; Devg.29O-i; Mädh 1.399; pâda s a-b
cited by Mädh 3.155 — a) oMd1 TMd4 
— b) N
N
g
— c) Be1 sBe2 Be3 sCa Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox3 N?U' Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa
Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
L
o
1
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [cor to 
, NKt4


--- PAGE 695 ---
684 
Chapter 8
Lo1 
o M y T M d 4 T j '
125. Omitted in [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Laks 12.782;Dev 3.290; Mädh 1.399. 3.156 — a)
D e v 
H y w K t
1 
T M d
4 T j 1 
TMd4 
_. 
— b)NPu> 
Tj2
oMd1 
sKt5 
Lo5 Ox3 
— c) uBe2 wKt1 Pu2 Pu4 
H y M ä d
h
1.399 
TMd3 M i r 6 o O r 
N K t 4 x M d 3 
— d) Mädh 3.156
wtcT; TMd4 
. 
. oMd1 
" 
cMy
126. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Dev 3.297; Mai//! 1.398— a) oMd1 TMd3 cMd5
oMy MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Cr}Nd NSm 19.45 
Tr1 3f[ma _ 
]' 
TMd4 
[Spreads
here < 
but in a reference at 8.285 reads 
]; Wa 
Jm wKt3 
, Mädh
—
 c) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy [Jolly Nd] Nd 
[ N d c M d 5
]; Tr1 
mesh 
Mir6 
oOr
NSm 19.45 
sBe2 
, Mäit t 
ßCa sOx1 sPu6
Dev 
Pu2 
Ox2 Ox3 
; Ho wKt3 MTr5 
NNg 
Jo2
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
— d)Waom 
Ox3' 
TMd3 
TMd4
sBe2 Be3 Bo TMd4 
La1 [but me sh] < 
oMd5
127. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3] — a) oMd1 
Ox3 
* 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
MTr4 MTr6 [folly Nd] 
Tr1 '[ma 
f 
—
 c) TMd4 
sBe2
- 
Lo3 
[Jolly M] 
Ox3 
- d) Ox3 
, TMd3 MTr4
wKt3 
Be3
128. Omitted in MTr5 [Jolly M1"3]. Cited by Vij z.i;Laks 12.796; Devs.33; Mädh 1.391,
3.25 — a ) B o 
L
a
k
s
L
a
1 L
o
1
— b ) Pu5 Pu7 
Laks
—
 d) Tr2 
Kt2 
. oMd1
 
TMd3 
Pu2
129. Omitted in [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Vij 1.367, 2.26; Laks 12.781; Dev 3.295; Mädh
3.156 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
Tj1 
Tr1 [but me sh] 
— a-b) Vij
— c) Be3 sCa cMd1 NNg Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 [/oily G] 
— c-d) Lo3 Tj1
— d) La1 
Tr1
 
TMd4 
oMd5 MTr6
130. Omitted in TMd3 oMy [Jolly M'~3]; päda s c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.781;


--- PAGE 696 ---
Chapter 8 
685
£>ev3.295 —a)oMd' 
Bo 
. eKt5 Lo4 TMd4 
K t
2 O x
3
Be1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo4 L(f MTr6 
eKt5 
Laks 
—
 b) Be1 Be5 wKt1 NKt4
Lo4 Tr2 
; sOx1 sPu6 
La1 Mir4 MTr6 
Tr1 
T M d
4 H o
sOx1 sPu6 ' 
— c) Be1 sBe? Bo NKt4 La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu4 Tr1
MTr5 MTr6CTÍJ; Lo1 
Be3 
; oMd5 
Pu7 [Jolly G ] i M d 4 
Lo1
— d)NNg~
131. Omitted in Pu 5 [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laksl2.8o7; Hem 1.115, 2/1.53; Dev 3.229;
Mädh 3.115 — a) iMd4 
Pu2 P u
4 — b) P u
7 x M d
4 Mädh ^ É^fY;
Jo2 
— c) wKt3 Jo2 La1 TMd4 Ox2 Tj1 Wa Laks °^°;
 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Lo4 Lo5
Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 
; Bo 
Be3
132.* Omitted in oMd1 oMd 5 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M1'3] Bh. Cited by Laks 12.807;
Hem 1.115,2/1.53; Mai/A3.115 — a) Ho 
Tj1 
, Wa 
— b) Kt2 
Pu5 Pu7
wKt3 _ 
— c)Ox3 
T M d 3 o M y / / e m ' — d) La1
 
• 
Lo1 Lo3 iMd4
Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr2 W a H e m 1.115 
Lo1 Lo4 L
o
5
H
y 
N N g L a
1
Lo3 Tj ' 
— Ox3 inserts here 9.137-63
133.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M'~3]. Cited by Laks 12.807; Hem 1.115, aA.53; Dev
3.229; Mädh 3.115 — a) TMd3 cMy [Jolly Nd] Hem 1.115 
[TMd3 Hem 1.115
(Jolly Nd) 
I; La1 
.Jo 1 
D a v e i M d 4 
oMd5
b ) Tr2 
. o M d
5 B e
3 
N K t
4 L o
1 
oMd1 
eKt5
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 fô^*! ; Hy 
T f N P u
1 
; sOx1 sPu6
oMd5 
H e m 1.115 
H o — 
c ) xMd4 
MTr6¡
ßKt5 [but cor] La1 TMd3 oMd5 cMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
— d) Be3 Bo TMd3 TMd4
oMy 
L
a
k
s
o
M
d
1 
Be3 La1
 TMd3 oMd5 cMy
134.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M'~3]; päda s c-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Laks
12.808; Hem 1.115, 2/1.54; Dev 3.229; Mädh 3.116 — a) TMd4 
wKt1 om
Kt2 
N P u
1 H e m 2
/
1
.
5
4
B
e
1 NKt4 Tj2 
— b ) TMd3
oMy' 
_
; B
e
1
N
N
g W a o M d
5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1
[but cor to 
] MTr6 Wa 
sBe2 Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
TMd4 oOr Ox2 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Rn RcLaks Hem Dev Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Hem 1.115 
o
M
d
1
— c) Be1 NKt4 Lo2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 MTr6
—
—a-b) Hem 2/1.53.
Pu2 Pu4
NKt4 BKt5 Wa
[ b u t M e n o t e s :
W a [ J o l l y M G ] M e D a v e J h a 


--- PAGE 697 ---
686 
Chapter 8
Pu2 Pu4 
. M T r 3 B e 1 
wKt1 
TMd4 
— d) Pu2 Pu4
 • 
Md4
sOx1 sPu6 
L a k s B o o M d
; B e
3 N N g
135. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 oMd 1 Ox3 [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks 12.808;Hem 1.115,
2/1.54; Dev 3.230; Mädh 3.116 — a) Ho 
La1 
w K t 1 L o 1 Lo3 xMd4 oMd 5 Tj1
— b)Jo' 
c M d 5 T M d 3 o M y 
TMd4 
Be3 wKt1 TMd'
— c) Pu5 Pu7 : 
NNg [but me s h]—
 
d) Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1
Pu3 sPu6 MTr3 Mandlik KSS' 
' Bo rMd4 ; 
, sOx1 sPu6 
s B e ? M T r 3
136. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 [Jolly M1"3]; pâda s c-d omitted in MTr3. Cited by Vij 1.364-
5; Laks 12.808; Hem 1.115,2/1.54; Dev^.z^o; Mädh 3.116 — a) Lo1 
— b) TMd3 TMd4
GMyMTr6Dev; 
TMd3 cMd5 oMy Dev 
— c) Tj ' 
; Jo1 
: Kt2
oMd1 oOr 
— d) TMd3 oMy Wa 
Laks 
Bo
sOx'sPu 6' 
Bo sOx1 Pu4 s P u
6 T M d
4 Tj1 
oMd1 -
L
a
'
TMd4
137. Omitted in Ho Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Lak$ 12.808; Hem 1.115, 2/1.54; Dev 3.230;
Mädh 3.116 — a)sOx' sPu6 
L o
1 i M d
4 
eKt5 oMd5 
— b) oOr
BKt5 
sBe2 B e 3 w K t 1 T M d 3 o M d 5 L a £ v w K t 1 ßKt5 
— c)
Be3 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Pu8 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly M] Laks 
Be1 sBe2 Bo ßCa Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt 4 BKt5 La1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr5
[Jolly R] Rn Mr Hem Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) TM d4
138. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 Ox3. Cited by Vij 1.366;Apa 5gz;Laks 12.807; Dev 3.299— a)
H y o O r Pu2 P
u
4
K
f 
sKf T M d
4 H o H y 
— b)îMd 4 
. ;
Hy 
— c) TMd4 
Tr21 
oMd5 
— d) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
wKt1 
" oMd5 Ox2 Tr1 Wa Vij Dev 
Apa 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
eCa
oOr 
Ho Jo2 La1 Lo3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1
 
TMd4
oMd1
139.* Omitted by Nä . Cited by Laks 12.333 — a) Lo1 
oMd5 NPu1 
cMd1
TMd3 TMd4 
.TMd 4 
Hy 
TMd4 
T
r
2
— b) sKt5 La1 
wKt1
oOr 
T M d
4 " — c) wKt3 Lo2 NNg NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M G Nd]
Jolly


--- PAGE 698 ---
Chapter 8 
687
140. Päda s a-b omitted in oMd1. Cited by Laks 12.279; päda s c-d cited by Dev 3.361;
Mâdh 3.167— a ) H o Kt2 
P u
3 o M y T
j
1
— b ) Jtn 
H o H y
La1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg NPu
1 MTr6 
wKt3 NKt4 Ox3 Tr1 
— d) Bo
wKt3 
; J
o
1
B
e
3 M
â
d
h
e
K
t
5 
Jo1
Lo4 Lo5
 '• 
oMy MTr4 MTr6 
,TMd3
141. Cited by Laks 2.218, 12.280; Madh 3.167— a) sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
Laks 2.218
MTr^Tr5 MTr6 
oMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMy Tr1 Wa [Jolly Nd Gr] _ 
— b)
xMd4 
— c) sKt5 om 
xMd3 
ßCa Ho sOx1 sPu6 
cMd5 oOr Tr1 
Kt2 Lo5
Tj1 
MTr5
142. Cited by Laks 12.280; Dev 3.361; Madh 3.167—a) Ox3 
xMd3 
xMd4 cfT
— b) Ox2 
oOr om 
Be3 
; Bh [pâtha ] 
sOx1 sPu6 
oMd ' 
— c) Tj1
oMd1 
x
M
d
4
— d ) T r
2 o M d
1 xMd4 
Pu2
Pu4
143. Päda s a-b cited by Apa 659; Dev 3.325; päda s c-d cited by Vij2.58; Laks 2.219,
12.298; Dev 3.332 — a)xMd3 
[Jolly M 8 " 9 ] s K t 5 
. Lo3 
— b) Lo4
Lo5 
BooOr 
Tr1 [but cor sh] 
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1 
xMd4
GMd1 
x M d 3 ; T j 2 
r M d 4 ' _ 
— c) oMd5 
, oMd1
Pu2 Pu4 
NPu
1 
TMd4 
Be1 Ox2 Laks 2.2.19 
Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 
Bo
Hy 
wKt1 BKt5 xMd3 x M d
4 w K t
3 
— - d) Jo2
MTr4 MTr6 
Bo N K t 4 o M d 5 
xMd3
144. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Madh 3.i78-9;padas a-b cited by Vij 2.58;Dev 3.324;
päda s c-d cited by Dev 3.328— a) sBe2 Be3 wKt1 wKt3 Lo5 xMd3 xMd4 oMy
NPu1 Pu2 
B o — 
b ) o O i x M d
4 
Be3 
—
c) Be1 [but me] Be3 sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] Dev Mâdh
Lo2 
NPu
1 M T r
6 M T r
5 
wKt3 
NKt4
xMd3 
o
M
y
. sOx1 s
P
u
6
— d ) xMd3 
xMd4
oMd5 
oMd1
145. Omitted in Ox3 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
— b) xMd4 
Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 699 ---
688 
Chapter 8
wKt'Lo1 
T M d 4 w K t 3 
— c)MTr3 
oMd'Ox2^1
L o 2 
N
P
u
1
— d ) o M y
T M d
3 
NPu1
: 
Pu2 Pu4
146. Cited by Dev 3.157 Mädh 3.109-10 — a) TMd4 
" 
TMd3 MTr6 
— b) Pu5
Pu7 
Kt2 sOx1 sPu6 [but me sh] 
~ 
— c) oMd5 
MTr5
oMd1 Ox2 
Mâdh 
— d) Ox2 
Pu2 Pu4 *T: I 
wKt3 NKt"
sBe2 
o
M
d
5
M
ä
d
h 
c
M
d
1
— I n Lo3 Tj1 t h e sequence i s :
146,148cd, 147, i48ab.
147. ma in Ho; in Ox3 the sections 8.147-89 and 198-364 are omitted — a) TMd4
— b) Hy Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 MTr5 
T M d 3 L o 5 
— c)BCaGMd' 
iMd4
MTr6 
Ti2 
—-d)wKt3om 
nKf Tr2
148. Pâda s a-b ma in Ho; pada-a omitted in MTr5. Cited by Vij 2.24; Apabyi; Dev3.156
—
 a) oMd1 
s K t
5 L o
2 
Hy Jo2 Pu3 Pu5 MTr3 Vij ApaDev
wKt3 
oOr 
— b) NPu
1 
Lo1 Vij 
Ho sOx1 NPu' sPu6 
Pu5
Pu7 
o M y o M d 5 
Lo1 oMd1 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 ^ 
— d) wKt1
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku R]Mr Mandlik KSS
After 148 Lo4 Lo5 place verses 365-90.
149.* Cited by Laks 12.190; Dev3.158; Mädh 3.109 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
eKt5
NKt4 
T r 2 c M d 1 
— b ) ß
K
t
5
B
o
J
o
2 [Jolly K u R N d ]
NSm 1.73 LaksJha 
, Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 VaDh 16.18 Mandlik KSS
Dave 
— c) Be1 Be3 Bo HosKt5 Lo1 Lo2 oOr Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8
Tr2 [Jolly M G]Dev Me VaDh 16.18 NSm i^Jolly 
[om ;, sOx1 sPu6
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
— d) NNg Ox2 Pu8 Dev Mädh 
Wa
Be1 Lo2 oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M G K]NSm 1.73 Jolly
Be3 Bo Jo2 sKt5 Lo3 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 
s
C
a
" 
Lo4
oMd1
150. Cited by Apa 659; Dev 3.32.4;Madh 3.179— a) oMd1 
Bo
Pu5Pu7Tj' 
Lo3 
— b)BBe2 
Ho 
Hy 
T M d
4 —
c ) TMd3 cMy ' 
A p a [vi] i
_ 
M
T
r
3
" Kt2 
; Kt2 La1 Lo1
Lo3 oMd1 sOx1 [cor to] Pu4 Tr2 Apa Dave 
.
6
0
°
— d) oMd'


--- PAGE 700 ---
Chapter 8 
689
T r 2 s O x 1 sPu6 
wKt1 
oOr Mir5 
NKf 
TMd3
La1
151.* Lo4 Lo5 omit verses 151-88. Cited by Vij 2.39; Apa 643-4^«^ 12.288; Dev
3.374; Mad/i 3.17^2 — a) ßCa wKt1 
T j 2 _ 
Tj 2 
N
N
g
L
a
1
GMd1 
_ 
„ 
— b) Be3 La1 Apa [vi] 
Hy; 
TMd 4 
; NPu1
oMd1 
wKt1 Ox2 
Be1 uBe2 Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3
NNg oOrsOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mir3 Rn Nd Re Co Mandlik Jolly KSS
BCarMd4 
La 
— c) TMd4 
La1
MTr4' 
Be1 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 w Kt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oOr sOx1
Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 sPu6 Tj ' Tr2 Wa [Jolly Ku N R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMy 
BÎCt5
Tr2 
TMd3 qt; Be' NNg Apa 
—
 d) Pu5 Pu7 
NKt4 oOr Tj1 Tr2 MTr3
152. Cited by Laks 12.286; Dev3.364; pâda s a-b cited by Dev 3.368— a) TMd3
— b)TMd3 
_ . 
— c)Tj2 
oOr 
Bo Lo3 oMd5
oMyPu2Pu4 
G M d
1 T M d
3 
oMy 
— d) s K t 5 T j 1
153.* Pâda s a-b omitted in NKt4 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.281; Dev^.yó'j — a) MTr5
Wa 
— b) T r
2 u C a NKt4 La1 oMd5 MTr6 T 
. Pu8
TMd4 
oMd1 
Be1 Be3 Bo wKt1 wKt5 Lo1 Lo2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3
Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 [Jolly M G N] DevMe Go Nâ Jolly Jha Dave " " " 
La1 
— c)
Dev 
TMd4 
— d) Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 Tj1 
, Tj2
Pu5 Pu7 
T
M
d
4
M
T
r
6 
wKt3 
; B o
sBe2 
L o
2 o M d
5 
N N g 
TMd4 
La1
NPu'Tr2 
[Jolly M]
Additonal verse in TMd3 oMy (= BrSm 10.10):
a) oMy adds at beginning: 
^ _ 
: — b) TMd3
154.* Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Laks 12.328; Dev 3.378;Mâdh 3.193 — a) Be3
Tr2 
— cOTr2 
TMd4 
Bo 
— d) Ho [cor to] TMd3 oMy
[Jolly M Nd] Bh Jolly 
' cMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 MTr4 " 
Lo1 
sKt5
Be3
Lo1
— b) TMd4 
Pu4 
Pu2


--- PAGE 701 ---
690 
Chapter 8
155. Omitted in NKt*; päda s a-b omitted in cMd'. Cited by Laks 12.328; Dev 3.378 — a)
Hy om 
oMd5 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr2 
— c) Ho 
iMd3
B o 
o M d
1 o M y 
s
K
t
5
— d) sKt5 xMd4 
B o
156. Cited by Laks 12.328; Dev 3.370 — a) nKi 
Be sKt5 Lo1 TMd4 
— b)
Lo1 TMd3 
— c) wKt3 
; Tj ' 
Lo1 
Tr2 
Hy
Be3 
Be3 s K t
5 — d) Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2
157. Cited by Laks 12.283; Dev 3.471— a) TMd3 xMd4 
T
M
d
4
W
a
Mir6 
— b)TMd3 . 
— c)Wa 
Tr2 
oMd1 
La1
Lo1 
TMd3 
Jm NKt4 eKt5 oMd1 M T r 4 T M d 4 _ 
oOr 
— c-d) Dev
~ d)oOrsOx' 
, NPu1
158.* Cited by Dev s.348;MSdh 3.185 — a) Pif 
Be3 
oMd1
— c ) cMd1 
_ 
BBe2 wKt1 Lo1 ;
o
M
d
5 
T r
2 M ä d
h
TMd3 
T M d
4 — d ) Be3 W
a
B
e
1 eBe2 B o Ho wKt3 NKt4
 BKt5
La1 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly M G Ku] Me Go Ku Jolly
Jha Dave 
sCa Lo1 Pu8
159. Cited by Laks 12.315; Dev 3.397; Mädh 3.198— a) Bö 
Ho ßKl?
B C a 
s B e
2 N K t
4 ' 
K
t
2
— b ) Be3 wKt1 K t 2 Pu2 Pu3
Pu4 
Be1 o
M
d
1
. TMd4 [lacuna] •
ß
K
t
5 
Mädh
— c) Hy 
Ox 2
 
__ 
o
M
y
T
M
d
3 
[Jolly Nd] Laks
Dev VaDh 16.31 
— d) W a T M d
4
160. Pâda- d omitted in oMds [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.315; päda s a-b cited by Dev
3-397; pâda s c-d cited by Laks 12.305; Dev 3.355— a) TMd4 
Tr2 
Bo La1 Lo2
Lo3
 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 
wKt3 Lo1 
Pu5 Pu7 
, TMd3 cMy 
— b)
Laks1 
TMd3 
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
Hy 
La1 Pu2 Pu4
— c)Lo' [but cor] Pu2 Pu4' 
— d) sOx1
[but cor]
sOx1
wKt1 Tj1
TMd4
— tywKt3"
TMd4Tj1


--- PAGE 702 ---
Chapter 8 
691
161. Omitted in wKt1; päda s a-c omitted in oMd5. Cited by Dev 3.353 — a) Bo ßKt5 Lo3
T r 2 
— b
)
o
O
r
T
r
2 
Lo1 
xMd3
TMd4 oMy 
B e
3 M T r
5
 
BKt 5 
— c) Jo2
MTr5 
— d) BKt5 
MTr3 
Lo1 
, Bo
162. Omitted in wKt1. Cited by Laks iz.^o6;Dev 3.353 — a) Lo1 
T Md4
cMd1 
P u
3 K t
2 
Jo2Lo3Tj' 
— b )
MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
Bo 
La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Pu3 MTr4 
— c)
La1 TMd3 
— d) Ho ' 
Lo1 iMd4
163. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Devrai; Mâdhs.i62 — a)oMd'
oMd5 
D e v 
Mädh "
; Be1 B o Lo1 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6
Pu8 Tj2 Wa 
[Lo1 sPu6 
Wa 
]; Be3
Tr2 
BBe2 
Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1
— a-b) NKt4 
GMy 
[lacuna] 
xMd3
— b)Wa 
H o N P u ' T j 1 — c) La1 Lo1 rMd3 sOx1 sPu6
Tr1 MTr3 
Kt2
164. Cited by Laks 12.270; Dev 3.90 — a)Dev 
cMd1 
wKt3
TMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
. oMy 
MTr6' 
— W Pu5
Be3 
— c ) r M d 4 . . , Be3 Ox2 T r
2 M T r
6 °^RT^ ; Bo 
'; TMd4
Tr1 
— d) Be3 TMd3 o
M
y
. Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Nd
Be3 oMy
165. Cited by Vij 2.176; Laks 12.271; Dev 3.305 454; Mädh 3.162, 229-30— a) MTr4
MTr6< 
o
M
d
1
T
M
d
4 
Lo1 
Pu2 Pu4
Hy 
N
P
u
1
W
a 
. oMd5 ° " " 
Ho 
—a-b)
oMy 
[ l a c u n a ] " 
— b) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 ' 
— c) Vij
Bo eKt5 Lo2oMd ' Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly M G] Vij 
oMd1 
La1
wKt1 
T M d 4 T M d 3 
— d) ßKt5 oMd1 Pu8
MTr4 MTr6
TMd4
NPu1


--- PAGE 703 ---
692 
Chapter 8
166.* Päda s a-b omitted in Ca. Cited by Apa 647; Laks 12.313; Dev 3.411 — a) Bo
Hy Jm La1 Lo3 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Mir6 
sOx1 sPu6 T r
2 L o
1 
Lo1
Tr2 
— b)TMd3oMy 
Apa [vi] 
sBe2 nCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2 oMd5 Ox2 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly Ku R Nd] NäRn Re Dave Mandlik KSS '•
La1 
Lo1 omBo 
BBe2 Hy Apa—
 c) Be oMd1 TMd3 cMy
: 
Apa 
,, sKt5 
— d) Jo2 
Apa
Tr2 
oOr 
NPu1 
NNg 
, DevApa [vi]
wKt1 :_
167. Pada-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.314; Dev 3.308, 410; Mâdh 3.164 — a) Tj1
oMy ' 
Mâdh wKt1 cMd1 N P u 1 M T r 4 M T r 6 
oMd5
Dev' 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
—
 b ) Pu5 P u
7 w K t
3 La1 TMd3 TMd4 NPu1
Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Gr]DevMâdh 
' 
[Jolly G] 
— c) NPu1
oMd' 
iMd4 
— d) Pu7 [Jolly G] 
oMd1 oMd 5 oMy
Dev 
T
M
d
4
B
o 
Laks 
; BBe2 Be3 wKt1 NKt 4 La1
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NPu1 Tr1 [but meß] MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [ Jolly Nd]Nd Rc Bh
oMd5
168. Omitted in Pu5; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.271— b) [Jolly M]
TMd4 
— c ) T M d
4 o M d
1 
_ 
— c-d) La1
— d) wKt1 BKt5 [Jolly M]
169.a) T M d
3 B o 
Lo1 TMd3 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Wa [Jolly G] " 
Tr2
— c) TMd3 
sCa NKt 4 Jo2 Lo3 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Wa 
. Be3
•— d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Tr2 
Ho 
Hy 
Lo1 
TMd3
TMd4 MTr
5'_
170. Omitted in Lo3. Cited by Laks 11.93 — a) Tr2 
Be1 
, uBe2
TMd3 
sOx1 sPu6
 • 
TMd4 
— b) oMy 
— c) Bo
Pu3 cTT^"; MTr6
171. Cited by Laks 11.94 — a) NPu
1 
; Lo1 
— b) sOx1 sPu6
Bo [me to} wKt1 NPu1 Tr1 
Ox2 
MTr5 om 
TMd3


--- PAGE 704 ---
Chapter 8 
693
— c) Mir6 
Be3 Ho La1 
oMd1 
TMd3 xMd4 cMd5 
xMd4
— d) La1 Tr1 
Laks 
Lo2 Pu4 T
172. Omitted in oMd1. Cited by Laks 1194 — a) Be1 Be3 
, Tr2 
TMd4
sBe2 Jc?Pu 8Tj 1Mz/?nM/- 
La1 
Be3 Ho Hy Jo2 Lo3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly M] Rn~ 
Nd 
; Bh Me Ipätha ]
wKt1 
— b) Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
wKt1
sCa 
Bo w K t
3 T M d
4 
— c) Be1 Lo1 Pu5 Pu7
Lo2 
" 
w K t ' P u 2 P u 4 W a 
— d) Tr1 
La1
Wa 
rMd4 
, Bo
173. a)sOx'sPu6 
[ l a c u n a ] L a 1
 
TMd3 
— b) iMd4
Be1 Bo 
La1 
Tr2 
Ho 
TMd3 
— c) TMd3 
Tr2
TMd4
174. Päda s c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.17 — a) TMd4 NPu1 
Pu2 Pu4
La1 
L
o
1
W
a 
" 
MTr5 
- b) Be3 Ho Jo2
BKt5 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly M G R ] Jolly 
Be1
Bo Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
— c) BBe2 oMd5 
— d) Pu7 [Jolly G] 
' oOr
Be1 La1 Lo3 Tj1 
oMd5 
Jo1 Tr1 
TMd3 
uKt5 
Laks
175. Cited by Laks 12.11; Dev 3.289— a) Be3 Ho Jo2 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMy
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly G] 
—
 b) TMd3 oMy Tr'Dev 
TMd4 Wa
Laks 
— c ) N K t 4 _ 
— d)TMd3
Tj'om 
BK.t5 
" 
oMd5 
Mädh 
wKt3 
Jo2 Lo3
— a-b) Bh Ipätha ] 
— b) La1 
oMy
Hy TMd3 
MTr5 
wKt1 Lo3 _ , Pu8 
TMd' 
— c) Tr1
TMd4 
Be1
 '' 
BKt5 o
M
d
1
H
y Jo2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1
sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly R]' 
oMd5NPu1MTr6 
oOr 
Be3
oMy ? 
TMd3 ' 
Hy 
La1 
Bo NKt4
NNg Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G] Bh Ipätha ] Dev Mädh 
Lo2 « 
—
d)Lo'i 
oMd1 
Jc^^Tj'Tr 1 
Pu5 Pu7 ; 
Tr2
Pu5 Pu7 om
Pu5
176. Cited by Laks 12.330; Dev 3.286; Mädh 3.152 — a) TMd4


--- PAGE 705 ---
694 
Chapter 8
177. Omitted in Wa. Cited by Vij 2.43; Apa64j; Laks 12.326 — a) Tj1 
Lo3
TMd4 
— b) Tr2 
Lo1 Lo2 Tr1 Laks Apa 
. Tj2
V i j 
L
a
1
r
M
d
4 
— c ) B e
3 w K t
1 wKt3
Lo2Tr' uTrsVij 
_ 
Apa [\\\ 
; Hy Jtn Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2ßKt5 Lo3 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2
Mir3 [Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave' 
Ox2 
— d) Be1 
Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
o M d
1 H o
178. Padasb-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.769 — a) NNg 
—b) Kt2 
sBe?
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Laks 
Kt2 Tj1 
Bo 
, Be1 Be3 NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 Tr1 MTr6 Go [Jolly G Nd] 
[om 
| — c)
oMy 
— d) Ho 
Bo 
oMy
179. Cited by Laks 12.339; Dev 3.415; Mädh -3.204—a) Ho 
TV 
Be1
Lo1 
w
K
t
1
— b) cMy t h e päd a reads: [lacuna] 
M T r
6 — c)
TMd3 oMy 
Tr2 
Be1 Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 
T
r
1
H
y
Dev 
NNg 
Pu2 Pu4 
— d)NKt4om 
; slit5
180. Cited by Laks 12.341; Dev 3.422; Mädh 3.205 — a) TMd3 if; Bo 
Jo1
Laks 
w
K
t
1
— b ) o M y T M d 3 
".sOx'sPu6 
cMd1
— c) ßCa Bo Ho Jm wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo3 TMd3 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1
Tr2 
; H y L o ' w T r
6 
— d) oMy 
Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G Nd] 
M T r
6 s M y oOr 
TMd3 
Tr1
181.* For the varying sequences of verses 181-199 see endnote. Cited by Apa 664;Laks
12.346 — a) NKt4 
sKt5 " 
. oMd5 
Apa 
— b) sKt5 
Be1
Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 
~ T r
2 ' u B e
2 H o ~ 
" 
— d) La1
 NPu' Pu2 Pu4
Lo3'
182. Omitted in ßKt5; placed after 184 in Be1 Be3 Bo sCa NKt4 La1 Lo2 oMd5 NNg oOr
sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5 Go|in the pratlkas], and after 183 in Wa. Cited by Laks 12.346
— a)3o2Tr2 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr5 
" La1 
— b) Lo2
— c) oMd5 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Apa [vi]
Pu4 
Apa
TMd4
BBe2


--- PAGE 706 ---
Chapter 8 
695
oMd'îMd 3 oMd5oMy MTr-'MT^MTr6 
TMd4 
— c) oMd5 
; Be1 Be1
Lo1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
B B e ? o M d 1 
x M d
4 P u
5 Pu7
Wa 
[Jolly N d ] B e
3 
Bé N?U' Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Bo sCa Jo2
wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tr2 Wa [Jolly G] Rn 
uBe2 Ho
Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 Tr1 MTr6 W*;Laks
183. Omitted in Pu5 Pu7. Cited by Apa 664; Laks 12.347 — a) rMd4 
oMd1
TMd3GMd5oMy [ Jo//y Nd Gr] 
_
T
r
'
— a-b) MTr4 MTr6
— b) oMd5 
TMd4 
; Lo1 
oMd1
Apa 
, Apa [vi] 
—c) La1 
^ — d) Apa [vi]
sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5Tr' 
iMd3 oMy 
oMd1
Mir4 Mir6 
' 
" B e 3
184. Omitted in TMd3 Pu5 Pu7. Cited by Apa 664; Laks 12.347; Dev 3.423; Mädh 3.209
— a) oMd5 MTr4MTr6 
Tr1 ma 
Mädh 
Be 
—a-b) oMd1
o O r 
- b ) s K t
5 —
c) sKt5 Lo2 Wa [Jolly M N] Nä Jolly 
Dave Jha
oMd1 
_ 
N K t
4 o M d
5 
DevLaks~ 
A p a
Mädh 
rMd4 
Be ' Be3 Ho La1 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 [Jolly Nd]
sCa 
w K t 1 m e 
Dev 
MTr4 MTr6 
; Lo1 
— d) Lo1
OTOTT; Tr1 
rMd4
185. Päda s c-d ma sh in Be3. Cited by Laks 12.342 — a) Tr2 
Lo1 oMd5
; Bo 
; P u 2 P u 4 " 
— b) Be1 sBe2 TMd3 NPu1 
TMd 4" 
Bo
Pu4 ' 
, Lo3 Tj1 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 
N?U'
TMd3 oOr 
T M d
4 w K t
3 
La1 
" — c-d) MTr4 MTr6
 
Wa om 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
[ l a c u n a ] T r 2 
wKt1
wKt3 
TMd4 
" Tj'1 
Pu5 P u
7 c M d
5 
Pu4
TMd3 :
186. Pâda s a-b ma sh in Be3. Cited by Laks i2.342;£)ev 3.424— a) Bo 
sKt5
— b) Tr2 
Lo1 
— c) cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr6
[MTr4 
v i T r
6 ] ; Lo1 
W a 
" Tr1 
[ m a s h ]
Hy Jm Jo1 Ki2 Ox2 uTr1 Mandlik KSS 
' ' 
— d) T Md" 
; Be1
TMd3 
sKt5 
; uBe2 Be3 Bo sCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1
Lo3 NNg sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' 
Pu5 Pu7
TMd3
Be3
GMd1


--- PAGE 707 ---
696 
Chapter 8
187. Not commented by Me. Cited by Laks i2.346;Z)ev 3.424—a) TMd4 
La1
, 
Tr2 
o
M
d
1
L
a
1 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 
Be1
— b)TMd4 
— c)Pu 2Pu 4 
Pu5 Pu7 
Be1
 & , iMd3 
" — d) oMd1 Tj1
sOx1 sPu6 
P
u
7
P
u
5 
L o
2 L a k s
188.* Omitted in MTr5;padas c-d omitted in îMd 4; i88a-b placed after iSya-b in Be1.
Cited by Laks 12.341; Dev3.4l8;padas c-d cited by Mädh 3.206— a) rMd3
La1 
Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 oMd5 Ox2 sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly M R3] 
Be1 NPu1 Wa
Tj1 ^T^^MTr^uTr6 [Jolly R Nd]MandlikJhaKSSDave 
sKt5 
Pu2
Pu4 
— 
tyTr2cMd1 
w K t 3 H o s O x ' s P u 6 
— c) MTr4
D e v 
B B e 2 s K t 5
189.* Omitted in iMd4; pâda s c-d omitted in Be3 Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 663; Laks
12.342; Dev3.418; Mädh 3.206— a) Lo3 oMd1 TMd3oMd5 oMy Tr'MTr6£>ev 
Tj1
Be3 
La1 
— b) wKt1 
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2
oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2
 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) oMd1
[o/n if]; MTr4
 MTr5MTr6 
L o ^ P u ' T j 1 W a 
— c-d) iMd3
oMd5 
— d) sKt5
190. Omitted in TMd3; pâda s a-b omitted in Be3 Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Dev 3.423; Mädh
3.208 — a) Ox3 . 
— b) Tr2 
eBe2 
; Hy ' 
— c) Be1
— d) Ho sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
Lo2 ' 
; oMd1 " 
xMd4 
oMd5
NPu1
191. Omitted in TMd3. Cited by Apaiqi; Laks 12.345; Dev 3.423 — a) Be1 3"; Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
sKÍ 
Hy 
wKt1 Lo1 
Wa " oOr 
— b)
sBe2 wKt1 
[Jolly M]< 
sKt5 
, Bo MTr4 MTr6 
Be1 
— c)
BoPu3Tr 
" 
~ Lo4Lo5Ox3 
Lo3oMd' oMd5 oMy Tj1 MTr6 Laks 
, Lo3 Pu8 Wa
Jo1 
L
a
k
s
D
e
v 
aKt5
 BBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 aKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 oMy oOr Pu5 Pu
MTr6
GMd1
— d) Apa
GMd5
Tr2
Lo2
Be1
MTr6
NKt4
[jollyMNd]
GMd1


--- PAGE 708 ---
Chapter 8 
697
192. Pâda s a-b omitted in TMd4; pada-c ma in Tr1. Cited by Laks 12.345; Dev 3.421;
Mädh 3.208 — a) eKt5 
ß B e
2 w K t
3 
J o
1 . 
— b) Ox2
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 P u
7 B e
1 Be3 
— c) oMd1 rMd3 xMd4
cMy MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
.. 
[cMd1 
TMd4 
]; Wa
193. Cited by Laks 12.345 — a) oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 
c M d
1 T r
2
eBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 sKt5 Lo2 Tj2 uT^Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be1
BKt5 om 
TMd3 cMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 [Jolly G] 
Tr1 ma sh
- —
 b) TMd4 
— c) x M d
4 B K I
5 
Ho 
. Lo1
oMd1 
— d) Bo 
, Lo3 T
j
1
; sOx1 sPu6 
. Lo1
TMd3 
P u
7 L a
1
194. Cited by Apa 664; Laks 12.346; Dev 3.422; Mädh 3.208 — a) Mädh
GMd 5 
Apa . 
TMd3 
L a 1 ^ 
— b) Apa 
s K t
5 M ä d
h
—
 c)TMd3Tj' 
B e 3 " " Lo1 ;
195.Cited by Laks 12.341 — a) O x 3 w K t 1 L o 1 o M d ' 
— b) TMd4
Pu2 Pu4 
sBe2 
; La'oMd1 Ox2NPu'Tr1 
— c) Tr1 [ma sh ] 
' La'oMd1
MTr4 MTr6 
— d) TMd3 
oOr
196. Cited by Laks 12.347; Dev 3.423; Mädh 3.209—a) TMd4 
;
BKt5 
oMd1 
Tj1 " " 
" 
NPu
1 
Be3BoLo5 
— b) sBe2
Lo1 
;oOr 
sOx1 sPu6 " 
B e ' B K t 5 — c)sBe2
sCa wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
_
Pu2 Pu4 
. — c-d) Mädh 
—
 d) TMd4 
oMd '
MTr4 MTr6 ^ 
. 
[cMd 1' 
]; cMd5 
" 
" 
TMd3 oMy
T; Tr1 ^
,
. Be3 
wKt3
Lo4 Lo5 [but cor sh]
197. Cited by Laks 12.351; Dev 3.498—a) Hy 
Wa 
wKt1 
[me
] — a-b) Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 ' 
— b) oMd1 
oOr 
" TMd3 oMy
[Lo4 Lo5
— d) Lo4 Lo5 Dev Mädh
 La1
sOx1 sPu6Tj'Tr2
Be1
wKt1
Lo1


--- PAGE 709 ---
698 
Chapter 8
wKt3Pu4Tj' 
— ciPu2 
cMd1 
Lo1 
Tr2
NNg 
Be3 
Be3 o M d 1 . o O r J o
2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 
— d)
Lo3 Tj1 
B
e
3
T
M
d
4 
Pu2
oMd1
198. Cited by Laks 12.352 — a) oMd1 iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
[oMd1 oMy 
]; Jo1 
Mir5 
sCa Jrn Jo1 Kt2 sOx1 sPu6 MTr3
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
La1 
" — b) Be1 
uBe2 
oMd >
— c)
oMy 
T
M
d
3
L
o
2 
Be3 La1 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 Wa No
NdRc 
c M d
1 o M d
5 
.Ox 2 
—a)Laks[\\]
NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 oMd ' GMd5 NNg Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 
wKt3
" 
G
M
d
1
; N N g
199.* oMy Tr1 place 199-200 after2O2. Cited by Laks 12.352 — a) TMd3 
Lo1
; wKt1 
Be3 Tj2 W a s K t 5 N P u 1 — b) sBe2 Bo Ho wKt3 NKt4 sKt5
TMd3 oMy La1 Lo1 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly R Nd] Bh Rn Nd Mandlik
[Bh's gloss 
"probably supports this reading]; Pu2 Pu4
oMd5 
Me Go Ku s u p p o r t " NPu1 Pu2 P
u
4
— c) TMd3 
Pu2 • 
;
Pu4 
La1 
~ 
o M d 5 _ 
_ 
•— d ) T j ' o M y 
Lo1 Lo2 NNg Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
[Pu2 
Pu4 
]; oOr 
Bo
»Additional verse in Be1 Be3 Bo sCa Ho NKt4 Lo2 TMd4 Ox2 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly Nd N Gr]
Nâ Nd Rc Mandlik [ 
] Dave KSS; placed after 198
in La1 oOrnPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 oMd1 TMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr6;cited by Laks 12.352:
a) Pu2 Pu4 
NKt4 NPu1 
TMd4 5TTW; Be1 Bo Lo2 TMd3 Pu3
La1 
Tr2 MadlikTMd3 [folly Nd N Gr] 
o M y o M d 1
Be3 
— b)oMd' 
Tr2 
— c) oMd1 
—
d) Ho Lo2 Ox2 Tr1 [Jolly Nd N Gr] Mandlik 
'; La1 
TMd4
GMd1 TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr6 
Bo
200. Cited by Apa 635 — a) TMd4 NNg " 
Pu5 Pu7 
W a w K t
1 Lo2 Ox2
Pu5 Tr2 Wa 
Be1 BBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3
[Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) wKt1 Lo4 Lo5 
o O r : — d) Lo2
Ho"
Additional verse in sCa La1:


--- PAGE 710 ---
Chapter 8 
699
201. Cited by Laks 12.352; Dev 3.505 — a) Pu5 Pu7 Go 
sKt5 
oOr
wKt1 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Lo3 Tj1 
T M d
4 — c)
sKt5 oMd5 [Jolly G M8] " 
Pu2 Pu4 Mir5 Laks 
rMd3 TMd4 oMy 
oMd1
oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 
the reading adopted is supported by Me Co No Ku Rn Re Mr.
202. * Omitted in Be1 oMd5 [haplo]; 202 and 203 transposed in Lo1. Cited by Apa 776;
Laks 12.352; Dev 3.504; Mädh 3.215 — a)oOr NPu1 
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy inTr5 MTr6
[Jolly Nd] 
_ 
" NNg ^ 
oOi 
" eKt5 o
m
; Lo1 
— b) sKt5
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Tj2
 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) sKt5 Lo2 TMd4 Pu4 Apa
iMd4 
T M d
3 — d) eBe2 wKt1 Hy nKt5 La1 oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 Apa
TMd4 
. T r
2 T M d
3 
L o
2 o M d
1 TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]
cRT[TMd3oMy 
]
203.* Cited by Laks 12.437; Dev 3.520; Mädh 3.262 — a) MTr4 ; 
oOr
wKt1 : 
Ho Tj1 T r
2 : Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 MTr3 No Mr Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha
KSS Dave 
—
 b) wKt3 La1 c M d 5 a M d 5 
— c) Hy 
oMd1 [om ]
TMd3 
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku Nd]Mandlik KSS 
[supported by
Ku Mr]; NKt4 
sOx1 sPu6 lacuna at; 
o
M
y
— d) Lo4 Lo5
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 cMd5 oMy DevMandlik KSSBo
204. a) sOx1 NPu1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Tj2 
La1- 
Pu8 T r
2 w K t
1
Lo1 oMd5 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 ' 
; TMd3 oMy 
B
o
s
B
e
2
[but cor] Wa' 
'— b) TMd3 
^
J
o
2 TMd4 Tr1 MTr6 
oMy
Bo 
sKt5 
Lo3 _ ; oMd1 oMd5 
f— c) TMd4 ' 
TMd3
Wa- 
" Mandlik KSS r T B e
3 La1 P u
3 " Pu8ct^°;oMd 5 
" 
oOr
— d) La1
205. a) sBe2 sOx1 sPu6 Wa 
cMd5 ; 
La1 Pu5 MTr6 
Lo3 TMd3
Tj1 
La'MTr6 
_ " 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 Be3 [Jolly G];
Lo4Lo5 
' 
La1 
Tr 2 ;^ 
— c) sBe2 Bo Ho wKt1 La1 Lo1 oMd5 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6
Tj1 
. sOx1 sPu6 
La1 
wKt1 
. B
e
1
H
o
Lo4 Tr2 
J
o
2
P
u
5 Pu7
Additional verses in oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6;first two cited by Apa 821;Laks 12.564;
third verse cited by Apa 818; Mädh 3.291:


--- PAGE 711 ---
700 
Chapter 8
1.a) Laks;— b ) T M d 4 M T r 4 
Late ^ 
A
p
a
—
 c )
Apa 
— d) Laks Apa
2. a) xMd4 ° 
MlVMTr'Mpa , 
^ — c) MTr6 
oMd'iMd4
cït ; oMd1 î^ — d) oMd1 xMd4
3. a-b) Apa Mädh
206. Päda s c-d [after 
] omitted in wKt1. Cited by Apa 836; Laks 12.364; Dev3.438;
Mädh 3.222 — a) BBe? 
oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) La1 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] Tr2
..,_..„ oMd5 Dev 
—
 c) NKt4 ßKt5 NNg MTr6 _ 
Bo Pu2 Pu4 " 
— d)
oMd1 
J o 2 T r 2 1 
Pu2 Pu4
207. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5; päda s c-d omitted in Pu5 wKt1, and placed after 2o6b in Wa.
Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Mädh 3.222 — a) Mädh 
Be1 Bo NKt4 sKt5
oMd1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa [Jolly M]J — b) NKt4 NNg
Be3 [but cor} Jo1 wKt3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2NPu' Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4MTr6
Apa Laks 
oMd1 T r
2 D e v 
Ku Nd Go support the present participle —
d) Tr1 
oMd5 om 
Ho NNg Tj1 [Jolly M R]
208. Cited by Apa 837;Laks 12.364; Dev 3.437— a) Wa 
Apa Laks Dev
La'Tr2 
oMy 
— b) Lo1 
Be1 Be3 
Hy oMy NNg 
— c)
HosOx'sPu6 
B o " 
— d)Ox2'
209. Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Dev 3.437, Mädh 3.221 — a) Bo 
MTr6 W; wKt1
, 
BBe2 sCa Ho La1 Lo1 NPu1 MTr5 utr6Apa 
wKt3 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
GMd1 
. Lo3 oMd5 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 
— b)NKt4 Lo1 
iMd3 
oMy
— c) Dev 
T
M
d
4
T
M
d
3 oMy 
BBe2
Bo aCa Hy wKt1 wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 oMd5 NNg sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr2
 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 Apa
Me supports 
; Go Ku support 
— d) Be1 Ho NNg Tj1 
La1 Pu2 Pu4 ' _ 
Lo2 Tj1
sKt5 
T M d
4 T M d
3 
o M y , Hy 
" Be1 Lo5 Ox2 Tj1
[Jolly Nd] 
" sCa [but coi\ 
L a 1 " " sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 712 ---
Chapter 8 
701
210. Cited by Vij 2.265; Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Dev 3.437; Madh^.222 — a) Lo4 Lo5
MTr3 ' 
T j 1 _ 
w
K
t
1
— b ) B
e
1
, Ox2 
N N g NPu'
TMd3 
; Bo 
; Ox2 
" Be1 Be3 Jo2 wKt1
La1 Lo1 Lo3NPu' Tj1 Tr2 Wa 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd5 
MTr6
Pu5 Pu7 
NNg 
' — d)Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2ßKt5 Pu5 Pu'Tj2
MTr3 [Jolly G N Nd] Vij Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
sBe2 
Tr2
MTr4 MTr6 
iMd4
211. Cited by Laks 12.365; Dev 3.436; Mädh 3.221 — a) Hy 
—b) BKt5
— c) Lo1
Tj1 [Jolly R]Dev 
Be3 La1 Tr1 [me sh to~] Laks •
—
 d) Lo4 Lo5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
MTr5
212. Pâda s a-b omitted in Lo4 Lo5. Cited by ApajBz; Laks 12.380; Dev 3.453 — a-b)
sKt5 [Jolly M] Apa 
.[sKt5 
] — b) xMd4
NKt4 ¡ 
Bo 
— c) Lo1 NPu
1 ' 
; Pu2 Pu4 
" , Dev 
' 
La1
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Tr1 
Dev
MTr4 
Bo 
, Laks 
ßKt5 om
213. Cited by Apa 782; Laks 12.380; Dev 3.453 — a)oMd' 
TMd4
Be3 La1 TMd3 TMd4 NNg NPu
1 
Pu2 Pu4 
.Be1 
Bo 
Pu5 Pu7
— b)Pu2Pu4 
" " 
TMd4 
La1 iMd3 oMd5 cMy NNg [Jo//y Nd]
— d) eCa 
TMd4 
Hy Tr2
 MTr4 MTr6 
T r
2 ß B e
2
wKt1Lo2Pu5Pu7[Jo//yG]1
214. Cited by Dev 3.470; pâda s a-b cited by £>ev3.454 — a) La1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' [Jolly G]
,Lo' 
L a ' N P u ' W a " w K t ' N K l 4 ' 
.La 1TMd 4NPu l 
— b)
La1 
_ 
oMyi 
L o
1 . o M d
1 
; MTr4 
Jm TMd3 TMd4
— c) BBe2 NKt4 La1 Lo2 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Ox2 NPu1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Dev
 Pu2 Pu4
TMd4
;Apa :
— c) TMd4
 NKt4
Pu2 Pu4,
 MTr6
 wKt1 wKt3
Pu7
wKt3
Mädh
 MTr6
 Kt2
Pu3BKt5
Apa
Bo
— d) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
— c) Jo2oMd'cMy
TMd3
NNg
 Lo1 Pu7 Tr1 [cor sh to] wKt1
Lo2
Lo5
sKt5
—d)Tj'
[om]
oMd5


--- PAGE 713 ---
702 
Chapter 8
GMd1 
oMy Tr2
215. Cited by Vij 2.198; Apajqj; Laks 12.404; Dev 3.473; Ma://! 3.215 — a) Apa
Vij 
; cMy 
sKt5
 
__ 
Jolly 
all com. support 
" — b) wKt3 NKt4
;NPu' 
V i j - c ) B o 
oMd5Pu5Pu7Tr2[Jo/fyG]£)ev=i 
-
d) [Jotfy G] 
sCa Ho Jo2 eKt5 Lo2 Lo3 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tr2 Vij 
Ape, 
Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt3 
Jo2Lo3Tj' 
Hy " 
Lo2 Lo5
216. Cited by Vij 2.198; Apa 797; Laks 12.404; Dev 3.474; Mädh 3.234-5 — a) Bo
.La' 
; B
e
3
H
y _ 
: — b ) T
M
d
4
A
p
a [vi]
— c ) Mir4 Mir6 
Tr2 ^
H
y J m Jo1 La1 Lo1
oMd5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly Ku] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
; Be3 
Me's gloss
appears to support the instrumental. — d) Pu4 
oMd5 
NKt4
Vij 
Apa 
Bo 
NKt4 Lo2
217. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5. Cited by Vij 2.198; Apa 797; Laks 12.404; Dev 3.474; Mädh
3.233 — a) sBe2 Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 MTr3Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— b) Bo Lo3 Tj '
MTr6 
, wKt3 T
r
2
H
o sOx1 sPu6 V : A p a [vi] 
— c) Ox2 ^
; Be3 La1 oMd5 
oMd1 
Ho 
Ox2
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
, s
K
t
5
, oMd1 ' 
Pu2 
Tr1 [but cor]
218. Padas a-b omitted in Ho iMd4 and ma sh in Tr1 [haplo] — a) cMd5
Pu5 Pu7 
Pu8 
• — b ) o M d
5 M T r
6 
Lo2
Pu7 [but cor] 
—
 c) La1 ; 
, L o 4 . 
— d) xMd3 
" MTr6 flW; Be1
; Bo 
'; o M y s K t 5 La1 Pu3
219. Omitted in Be1. Cited by Vij z.Y&T,Apa 793; La/a-12.424; Dev 3.530; Mädh 3.253
— a)oMd 5 
w K t
1 D e v 
— b) ß B e 2 . NNg 
sOx1 sPu6
— c) TMd4 " 
BCa ' 
— d) NPu1 
xMd4 
" Tr1 [but me sh]
~;HyMTr 6
220. Päda s a-b omitted in Be1; päda s c-d omitted in oMd' andma sh in Tr1. Cited by Vij
. oMd' 
— d) Lo1 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6
Tj2 
Bo


--- PAGE 714 ---
Chapter 8 
703
2.187; Apa 793; Laks 12.424; Devß.ssi; Mädh 3.253 — a) Lo4 iMd3 
_ 
Be3 MTr4 MTr6
Apa [v\] 
ü K t
5 M ä d
h 
_ 
Mr Dev Mädh Vij , . . . , . , MTr6Bh [pâtha ]
Be3 
— b)Hy 
Pu2 
TMd4 Pu4 
Be3 w K t
1 — c)
Mädh 
V
i
¡
; 
TMd3 ' 
T M d 4 _ 
D e v
oMd5
 
BBe2 * 
" — d) wKt1
Be1 eBe2 Bo wKt3 La1
 NNg Pu8 
Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo
221. Omitted in oMd1 and ma sh in TV. Cited by Laks 12.424; Mädh 3.253 — a) sCa Jo2
wKt1 Lo2 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly Ku R Nd] Rn 
Jo1 Jo2 La1 
Jm Kt2 Lo3 Pu2 Pu4 MTr3 uTrsKu
Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
TMd3 
TMd4 
— c) Bo 
oOr
NPu
1 
— d) Bo Kt2 wKt3 Lo2 oMy NNg Pu8 MTr6 
TMd4
222* Päda s c-d |up to 228bJ omitted in Lo2 [haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.177;Apa 831; Laks
12.430; £>ev3.5i2; Mädh 3.257; päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.254 — a) B° HonNg 
Lo1
oMd5 
N P u
1 o M d
1 
Pu2 Pu4 
iMd3 =TT 
— c)
Bo 
Bh ' 
Lo1 
La1 Apa 
oMd1 
TMd4 oMd5
oMy MTr4 MTr6 Bh [in root text, but he rejects it] 
sCa 
— d) sBe2 Bo
Ho Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo3 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 [cor to] Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly R] Dave Mandlik Jha
KSS
223. Omitted in Lo2; verses 223 and 224 transposed in Bo; folio containing 223d-242c
missing in Bo. Cited by Vij 2.258; Apa 831; Laks 12.430; Dev 3.512 — a) TMd3
oMd5NNg 
— b)NKt?TMd3GMdscMy[./o//yNd] 
[ o M y N K t 4
]; oOr 
HoNNgsOx1 sPu6 
; Be3 Laks; 
, A
p
a
— c) Bo
oMd5 
BtCt
5 
Be1 T j
2 T M d
3 L o
1 
— d) w K t 3 T j 1
cMd1 
TMd4 
Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M] 
Tr2 
Lo1 
MTr5 Apa
Additional verses in Mandlik [ , 
'; first verse only in 
] KSS Dave:
224. Omitted in Lo2; order of verses in Pu8: 2243, 22sb, 226, 225c-d, 227 (224b, 2253
omitted) — a) Pu2 Pu4 
; Jo1 wKt3 Lo4 " 
— b)wKt3 
.TMd4
c)TMd3 
Be3 
—d) Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 
Tr1 [but cor] ' 
oMd5


--- PAGE 715 ---
704 
Chapter 8
Be3 
Jo1 
Tr2 
Lo1
 
Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4-5]^ — a-b) oMd1 
" 
oMd5
— b) Kt2 sOx1 sPu6 
. La1 Pu2 
— d) Tr2
[cf. 224d] ; Be3 TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 
; wKt3 
Lo5
 TMd4
226.Omitted in Be1 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6; päda s c-d omitted in GMd5 — a) oOr 
Tr2
— b)Be3 
;
J
o
'
— c ) M T r 4 ^ : Tr1 
— d ) Pu2 Pu4
; iMd4 
wKt1 
me to 
Lo4 Lo; 
" Be3 Pu5 
Wa
227. Omitted in Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 cMd5 Pu5; verse 227 placed after 234 in oMy. Cited by Dev
1.222; Mädh 1.492— a) Dev [vl] ' 
TMd4 Mädh 
oMd1
Jo^^MTr6 
.TMd3 
Lo3 
,— b) sOx1
 
TMd3 
, Jo1 
TMd3
oMy 
wKt3 
— c) wKt3 P^5T g; MTr3 
;wKt3 
— c-d) TMd4
— d) Wa 
oMd1 om
228.* Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]; not commented by Nd; päda s a-b
omitted in Lo2, päda s b-d in NPu1, and padas c-d in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.430; Dev 3.513 —
a) Lo1 
Pu2 Pu4 om 
first~ 
—
 d) Pu2 Pu4 
„, üBe 2 Be3 Ho Kt2
wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2
 MTr5 KSS 
La1 oMd1 
Hy
cMd1 
Wa
229. Päda s a-c omitted in N?U'. Cited by Laks 12.413; Dev 3.482; Mädh 3.263 — a)wKt'
Tr2 
— b)NNg 
TMd3 MTr6 
nKl? 
oMd1 
oMd1
TMd4 Laks 
- c) Pu2 
; oOr 
— d) Pu5 Pu7
230. Cited by Apa 772; Laks 12.415 — a) oMy 
Tj1 
Tr2 
Lo3
oMd1 
sOx1 sPu6 [cor to} 
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
Tr2 
TMd4
Be1 Lo1
 ' 
sBe2 Be3 Jo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg oOrNPu1 Tj1 Wa Apa 
TMd4 Pu2
MTr6
Pu5 Pu7
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 Tr1
sKt5
GMd5
 Be1 
wKt'om
— d) Pu2
;wKt3
Be3
Mir6
MTr4 
225. Omitted in Lo2 Pu5 — a) Pu2 Pu4
Jo1 Tr2
— c) La1
 Be1
cMy
Jo1
— b) TMd4


--- PAGE 716 ---
Chapter 8 
705
231. Placed after 244 in TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] and after2s6 in sKt5 [Jolly M]. Cited by
Apa 772; Laks 12.413; Dev 3.483; Mâdh 3.263 — a) Be3 
; wKt3 
, MTr6 
Mad/i
wKt1 
— b) W a L a
1 
Pu2 Pu4 
MTr5 
Ho
Be3 
wKt1 ; 
Ho Ox2 sPu6 Wa 
TMd3 oMy Tj1 <=rt;
rMd4 
Be3 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Be1 
sKt5 
xMd3
oMd1 
N P u 1 c M y Mâdh Apa [vi as in ed.] 
MTr5 
MTr6
Lo2 
Pu2 P
u
4
— d j N K f
1 ' 
/ 
.TMd3
Be1 oMd1 
Be3 
Pu5 Pu7 : 
Hy WI ^ Iril ; ßCa [but cor] 
Pu2 Pu4
Apa [vi] 
; Lo1 NNg ' 
oMd1 '
232. Cited by Vij 2.164; Apa 773; Laks 12.416; Dev 3.485; Mâdh 3.264 — a) Vij
 ;
Lo5 
N N g ; L a / b - 
Be1 NKfiMd3 NNg Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 
eBe2
Apa [vi] • 
— b)ßKt5 
;wKt3oOrTr2 . , Lo4 Pu2 Pu4 
NPu
1
Pu5 Pu7 
sOx1 s P u 6 w K t 1 
, Lo3 Tj1 
MTr4 
,MTr6 
— c)
NKt4 
—a)Laks 
' 
o
M
d
5
j iMd4 " 
k^Lo3^1 
oMd'^pa
233. Cited by Vij 2.164; Apa 772> Dev 3.484; Mâdh 3.264— a) oOr Tr2 
Lo2
TMd3 
Jm 
^ 
Mâdh 
Vij 
MTr6 
wKt1 La1 ~ 
Ho
Tj1 
L
o
3
N
K
f 
BKt5 " 
Pu2 Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 
__ 
oMd5 
Hy 
; Kt2 
" MTr5 
Lo2 Lo3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy MTr6 Dev: 
— b) Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M] Apa ' 
, Jm 
" — c) Pu5
Pu7 
_ 
_ Ho om second 
—
 d) oMd1 
rMd4 oOr
234.* Omitted in Lo5 Wa; pâda s a-b ma sh in Tr1. Cited by Laks 12.418; Dev 3.487;
Mâf//î3.265~-a)cMd
lTMd3GMd5TrlMTr6 
iMd4 
oMy
[Jolly Nd] 
oOrMTr5 
" 
Hyom 
Be'Lo2' 
Hy Kt2
rMd3 
Madh'< 
;oMd5 
Be3
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Laks Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
[wKt1 Lo4 
* Be3 
]; Be1 Jo2
 NNg NPu ' 
M T r
6 ; Tr2
— c) Be1 Be3 Ho xvKt
1 NKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg
oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Mâdh
_ 
[sKt5 
om 
TMd3 oMy 
]; Laks 
TMd4
Jo2' 
L o ' T j 1 — d
)
B
e
'
M
â
d
h 
Lo4
Laks 
L
o
2
P
u
2 P u
4 r M d
4 
eBe2 Be3 eCa H o H y
xMd4
— tyoMd1
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
Tr1
NPu1


--- PAGE 717 ---
706 
Chapter 8
3m Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo' cMd1
 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3
MTr4 Mir6 [Jolly R Nd]£>ev Rn Nd Mandlik KSS _ 
.. 
sOx1 sPu6 
; Pu3 Tr2
sKt5 
No appears to r
e
a
d
b
u
t gives 
as path a; Lo3
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tj1 MTr4 
MTr6 Hy 
'— After this verse oMy inserts 227.
235. Omitted in Lo5; päda s a-b omitted in cMy and pada-d in Lo1 [haplo]; placed after
verse 237 in Be1. Cited by Apa 773; Dev 3.486; Mädh 3.265 — a) Pu2 Pu4 Tr2
— b) Be1 adds 
before 
T M d 4 _ 
MTr6_ " M T r
4 
w K t 3 . Lo1
TMd4 
BKt5 Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
La1 
TMd3
Apa[v\] 
—
 c ) T M d 4 P u 2 P u 4 q T ; N P u ' A p a 
TMd4 
—
 d) Lo1
236. Omitted in Lo5; pàda s a-c omitted Lo1; following sequence in Be': 237a-b, 236,
237c-d. Cited by Apa 773; Dev 3.486; Mädh 3.265 — a) TMd4 
Ox2 
ßKt5
TMd3 
Pu3 Pu8 T
r
2
M
T
r
4 
NKt4 
TMd3
nBe2 sCa Ho Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 [but cor] Pu7 MTr6 [Jolly M G]Jolfy 
—
 b) TMd4 om
—
 c) Ho wKt1
 BKt5 La1 Lo4 oMd5
 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly M G R] Go NSm6.i7 Jolly
Dev 
oOrApaBe3 
K t
2 — d) Be3 
cMy
237. Padas a-b placed after verse 235 in Be1. Cited by Apa 774; Laks 12462 — a) Ho
NKt4 
TMd3 cMy ApaoMy 
[Jolly Nd] 
oMd5 
TMd3
Tr2 
[Jolly N Gr] YDh 2.167 
Lo1 Pu8 
Wa 
— b) NKt4
TMd3 
La1 Pu2 Pu4 
Lo3 
T
t
2
— c )
Be1 Tj2 
,BKt 5 
BBe2wKtl 
" oMd1 TMd3 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6 [cor to]
oMd5 
— d) Be1 TMd 3oMd 5oMy Tr1 
Tr2 
MTr6 
Be1
Tj2 
; Pu2 Pu4 
La1 Pu2 Pu4
238. Cited by Vij 2.i62;Laks 12.462; Dev 3.4Ç)r,Madh 3.266 — a) wKt1 
Pu5
Pu7 
Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 
, La1 
— b) oMy 
" 
Be3 Pu5 Pu7
La1 
_; TMd 3 
_ ; Mädh 
_ 
Pu3
 
TMd4 
L o
1 — c)
wKt3 . . . . " — d) MTr4 MTr6 
Wa 
Be1 oMd ' oMy 
Pu5 P u
7 B e
3
cMd5 
"
239. Cited by Vij 2.162 —
 a) Be3 La1 Lo1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr2 
sBe2
Tr2
Lo4 Wa
TMd3
NKt4
Lo1 Tj1
Be3
La1
Tr2


--- PAGE 718 ---
Chapter 8 
707
Lo1 Lo5 oMd1 NPu1 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 Be3 Mir6 
Be'ßCa Ho wKt3 TMd4 oMd5
oOr sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Vij 
'[Vij 
wKt3 < J ] ; s K t 5 
Tr1 [ma
NKf 
— b) TMd4 
Be1 
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 ßKt5 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3
Ku Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c) wKt3 ' N K t
4 Lo2 NPu1 Pu3 Tr2
Lo5 xMd3 Pu7 Tj2 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M Nd] 
w
K
t
1
; NNg 
Pu2
xMd4 
B e 3 ; D e v 
Pu4 
H y ' — 
d ) T r
2 B B e
2 Be3 ßCa H o
Hy Kt2 wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 
Pu8 ° - 
sBe2 '
P
u
5
Pu7
240.* Cited by Apa 771;Laits 12.463; Dev 3.490; MSdh 3.266 — a) wKt1 
Lo1 Wa
Ho Pu2 Pu4 
_ ; oMd1 TMd4 
o O r " " — b) oOr [but me sh]
Pu8 
, Be1 
B
e
3
T
M
d
4
. A p a 
;oMy
Wa 
— c) Tr2 
Lo2 
Tj2 
TMd3 
NPu1
— d) [Jolly M] 
" oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Apa Dev
=TR"° ; TMd3 
oMd1 
sPu6 [but cor] 
Ho Jm
TMd4 
T r 1 [ m a s h 
] ; wKt3 
o
M
y
x
K
f
Lo2 
,Ox2
 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly Nd] De\
241. Cited by Apa 769; £^3.489-90; pâda s a-b cited by Laks 12.464 — a) oMd1 Tr1
— b)cMd' 
. Lo2 
. T M d 3 T M d 4 
_ 
Laks Apa 
—
 c) Be3
o O r 
La1 
H
o
T
j
2
N
N
g 
[Jolly G ]
Pu5 Pu7 ; 
Lo1 
" 
Be1 BBe2 Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5
La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Ox2 Pu2 Tj1 Tr1 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
TMd3 oMy MTr4
MTr6 : 
oMd1 
Ho Hy 
; Lo2 
TMd4 
— d) TMd4 
Pu8
, 
BBe2 
La1 ¡
s
K
t
5 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6Dev
A p a 
K t 2 A p a [ v \ ] 
Jo1
242. Cited by Apa 771; Laks 12.468; Dev 3.496; Mädh 3.268 — a) Tr1 [but cor}
sOx'sPu6 
La1 Lo4 Lo5 T M d 3 B e 3 H o — 
b ) TMd3 cMd5 oMy
Jo1 NNg [but me sh] '< 
; Pu5 Pu7 
Kt2 Pu4 
cMy 
TMd3
; TMd4 
_ 
— c) Dev 
Apa 
~ 
NKt4
-; Be3 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5 
Lo3 T j
1
T M d
4 
— d)
oMyTj2 
Tr2 
" WaApa
243.Cited by Laks 12.532 — a) Lo1 oMd 5. 
. Hy Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 TMd4 Ox2 MTr6 Mand-
lik KSS 
NKt4 
.wKt'La'oMd 1 
TMd4 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
Lo1
— b)Be'oMd' 
Bo 
oMd5 Pu4 Tr1 [but cor] 
oOr 
TMd4


--- PAGE 719 ---
708
— c) Be1 NNg Wa ; 
sOx1 sPu6 
Lo1 
" — d) oMd1 
Be3
La1 
Pu4 
JmJo'Kt2 
xMd3 MTr6 
Lo4 Lo5
244. Cited by Laks 12.418; Dev 3.497 — a)xMd3 oMd5 oMy
[oMd5 
"];TMd4 
~ — c) xMd3 
Jm 
" 
wKt1 
'—d)
oMd1 
w K t 1 T M d 4 
xMd3 oMy 
xMd3 oMy inserts here verse 8.231.
245.* Cited by Apa 758; Laks 12.439; Dev 3.544;Mac//j 3.276 — a) xMd4 Tr1 [but cor
sh] 
^ 
L
a
1
B
e
3 
— b ) N
N
g
— c ) BBe2 J m Jo1 Mädh
Jolly 
, Be1 
oMd1 xMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Mir5 Dev 
x M d 3 L a 1
cMd1 xMd3 xMd4 cMd5 cMy sOx1
 NPu' Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr4MTr5
 MTr6 Wa
Mädh 
oMd1 Laks 
A p a x M d
4 
— d) Lo5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2
Mädh 
Bo NKt4 uKt5 Lo1 Lo2NNg Pu3 Pu7 Wa 
Be1 Pu5 
sBe2 Jo2
Lo3Tj' 
o
M
y
L
o
4 Lo5 [Jolly M 4 ' 5 ] T M d 4
246. Päda s c-d omitted in Be1. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.439; Dev 3.535; Mädh
3.270 — a) Be1 
NKt4 
_ Be3 Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo2 xMd3 oMy Pu5 Pu7
MTr3 Vij Laks [Jolly G Nd] " 
Tj2 
Laks 
—
 b) wKt1 
me to
N N g 
T
r
2
— c ) M T r
5 " 
oMy 
Ox2
Lo5 NPu1 Wa 
Hy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3 Tj2 Tr1
 MTr3 MTr4Dev
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sCa wKt1 uKt5
 NNg NPu' 
'• 
cMd1 oM d 5
Jm Pu8 
; MTr6 
T—
 d) Kt2 
; Hy
247.* Päda s a-b omitted in Be1. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.439-40 — a) Tr1
;xMd3 
— 
tyaBe2oMd1 
" Pu7 Wa 
Lo1
oMy 
Lo5 
— c) oMd1 xMd3 
NKf1
wKt3 
x M d
4 _ 
T r
2 _ 
xMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
_ 
Kt2
Lo2 
ß
C
a
N
N
g 
— d) wKt3 Lo4 oMd5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
xMd4 ^TT; Ho La1 
, Ho La1 Lo1 oMd5
The order of verses in Me appears to be: 247,250, 249, 248; Jolly says that the order in
Me is 247ab, 25ocd, 249ab, 247cd, 248 [with 249cd and asoab missing]; the order in Lo4 is
247ab, 2socd, 24gab, 25oab, 248. The commentary, however, contains explanations of
25oab. There is no commentary on 249cd.
Chapter 8
Dev
cMy
La1 Lo4 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Mädh
xMd4


--- PAGE 720 ---
Chapter 8 
709
II
248. Cited by F/y 2.150-1; Laks 12.440 — a) NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 sOx1 MTr6 
oMd5 Tj1
Tr1 \but cor sh] MTr5 
TMd4 
TMd3 oMy 
La1 
TMd3
— b)La' 
B e 3 M T r 5 
xMd3 
Laks< 
Pu4
sBe2 Bo2 Ho wKt3 La1 oOr Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
" 
Pu8 om 
—
 c) xMd4 
Tj1
Pu2 Pu4 
; Pu3 Pu4
249. Omitted in Lo4; päda s a-b placed before 248 and päda s c-d omitted in ßKt5. Cited
by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.440; Dev 3.535— a) Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 om 
nKf
— b) TMd4 
— c) TMd3 
NKf ' w K t
1 
w K t
3 : — d) Pu2
sBe2 Be3 Bo sCa wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo2 oMd1 NNg NPu1 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr^Tr6
Wa Laks Dev 
TMd4 o M d 5 o M d 1 
Pu8
Additonal verse in La1 oOr [cf. added verse after8.26s]:
b) La1 
corto 
oOr 
(unclear)
250. Omitted in sKt5 Lo4; päda s c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Vij2.150-1; Laks 12.440 —
a ) La1 N N g 
P
u
7
_
" H o o
M
d
5
T M d 3 
wKt^Kt4
oMd1 
_ — b ) W a L a J b - J o
2 Pu2 Pu4 
_ B e
3
Pu8 ' 
Be1 oMd1 TMd3 oMy MTr4 M
T
r
6
; TMd4 
— c) Pu3
Tr2 
; Pu2 P
u
4
; NKt4 o O r P
u
7
T
M
d
3 oMd5 N N g
Be3Lo5Ky 
— d) o M d 1 „ . 
^ 
.. NKfLo3!)'1 
La1
Lo5GMd5cMyMTr4 
[La1 M T r 4 L o 5 G M d 5 ' 
]; TMd3 
Wa
MTr6
251. Omitted in Pu5 Wa. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.441; Dev 3.535— a) Be1 Hy Jo1
Lo'oMd'Tr2 
w K t
3 — b ) o
M
y
T
r
2 
oMd1
Be1 NKt
4 
Pu2 P u
4 — c
) TMd4 *
. Be1 
— c-d) Be1
NPu
1 
T r
2 B e
3 
Lo4 Lo5 
oMd1
• 
NKt 4 
— d) MTr6 
TMd3 oMd 5 oMy Tr1
TMd4 
oMd1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
252. Päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.441; Dev3.537; Mädh 3.271— a) TMd3
— a-b) TMd4 
— b) oMy 
" ; H y " . Laks
- c) Be ' wKt1 MTr6 
; Be3 Ho w Kt3
 NKt4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 
Ho NKt4 sKt5


--- PAGE 721 ---
710 
Chapter 8
Lo1 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
— d)BCaxMd3GMy 
oMd1
 
NNg
253. Cited by Laks 12.441; Mädh 3.271; päda s c-d cited by Vij 2.152 — a)TMd3
Tr2 
oMy 
— b) xMd3 
Be3 Ho Lo1 ^T— c) Pu4 Tr2 ' Tr2
xMd4 
]; oMd5 
Be3 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 oOr Tj1
 MTr5 Wa 
Lo3
Be1 xMd3 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 [Jolly Nd] Vij 
Be3 
oMy 
Bo
wKt1 NKt4 BKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Pu4 Pu8 [Jolly M] Me Kit Dave Jha ' 
La1 NPu'
Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 Dev
254. Cited by Vij 2.152; Apa 759; Laks 12.442; Dev 3.541; Mädh 3.273 — a) sCa Jm Jo1
wfCt
1 Kt2 La1 Tj 2 MTr3 \Iolly Ku] Apa Nd Mr Mandlik KSS 
' H
y
B
e
1
Tr2 
o
O
r
P
u
2 Pu4 Wa 
Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2
wKt3 Lo3 Lo4 Ox2 Tj ' MTr3 Me Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ^ —
 b) Bo [but cor} 
' Be3
Ho La1 Lo3 oMd1 iMd4 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 Mir4 MTr5 WaApa Laks DevMädh
Lo1 
s K t
5 T M d
3 
Tribut cor] 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
255. Päda s c-d nia in Tr1. Cited by Vij 2.15; Apa 760; Laks 12.442; Mädh 3.273— a)
oOr 
Lo5 
T r
1 N K t
4 
Tr2 
— b) iMd3 oMd5
oMy 
-Madh 
_ 
[cf. 8.26id];oOr 
" ~ 
La1
Tr2Apa 
Ho wKt1 La1 Lo3 xMd4 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Apa 
oMd ' MTr6 
Pu5
Pu7 Go 
sBe2 Be3 Lo3 Tj1 Vij Apa 
—
 c) oMd1 iMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but
cor sh] uTr4MTr6 Apa Laks 
[rMd3 oMd5 oMy 
xMd4 Tr1 Laks 
J;
Tr2 
Lo5 
— d) Apa 
Lo5 xMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 Laks
oMd1
256. Cited by Vij 2.152; Apa 762; Laks 12.445; Dev 3.542; Mädh 3.274 — a) Dev
Ho; 
o M d ' x M d 4 B e 1 
N K t
4 , J o
1 
Pu5
Pu7 
H y 
" 
' D
a
v
e
' —
 b ) Lo1 L
o
5
L
o
3
— c ) J m A p a
Pu2 Pu4 
~ 
BBe2wKt1 
Tr2 
L
a
1
T
j
1
— c-d) oMd '
TMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr4
 MTr6 
[xMd3 _ 
xMd4
] — d) La1 
Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
NNgoOrsOx'sPuOTj'ATw 
W a ß C a D e v 
H o
MTr6
 Jo1
GMy
iMd3
— d) Lo3 Tr1
Mädh
[oMd1
— d)oMd1 xMd4 Tr1 [but cor sh ] MTr4 mTr6
sKt5 oMy 


--- PAGE 722 ---
Chapter 8 
711
257. After 
rest omitted in »Kl4. Cited by Vij 2.153; Laks 12.446; Dev3.54& — a)
oOr 
Be1 
Be3 
— b) oOr 
oMd5 oOr 
Hy 
—
c) Be3 NNg MTr5 
o
O
r
— d) Wa 
Lo1 oMy Dev 
_ 
MTr6
Lo2iMd3¡
258.* Päda s a-c up tc 
omitted in NKt4. Cited by Vij 2.152; Apa 760; Devais/;
Mädh 3.271—a)JniNNg 
Hy 
wKt3 
La1 om 
HosOx1 sPu6 Wa ^T—
b) MTr3 
sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly G R] Fy Go Mr Der
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Ox2 wPu1 Pu2 Wa [Jolly Nd M] Dev Jolly Jha Dave 
Tr2
Bo 
Bo [Jolly Nd R ] ß B e
2 Be3 Ho wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg
oOr sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 MTr4 Wa [Jolly G M N] Co Nä Vij Apa Dev
Mädh Jolly Jha Dave 
Ox2 Tr2
 M T r
6 B o 
— c)TMd3 xMd4 cMd5 Tr1
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
cMd1 o
M
y
w
K
t
1 
; Be1 wKt3 Lo2 xMd3 oMy
NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
[Me gloss 
supports this]; Pu4 
— d) TMd3
Lo4 Lo5
259. Päda s c-d omitted in Be1. Cited by Laics 12.444; £>ev3.54O; Mäd A 3.272— a) ßBe2
La1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Wa 
— b) H
o
H
y Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
MTr3 [Jolly G R] Rc Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
TMd3 xMd4 
— c) Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
BKÎsOx'sPu6 
Ho 
MTr4 MTr6
260. Omitted in Be1 sKt5 Pu8; pâda s a-c omitted in MTr6. Cited by Vij z. 150-1; Laks
12.444;Dev 3.540; Mädh 3.260—a) TMd3 
T r 2 T M d 4 
—b) TMd4 cor to
oMy 
TMd3 
NKt4 Lo5 oMy oOr Vij 
Tr1 [but cor
sh] 
T M d
3 o M d
5 
— d) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly
R] Rn Mandlik Jha Dave KSS 
~ 
Be3 La1 Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M]
261. Päda s a-b omitted in Be1. Cited by Laks i2.44s;£>ev 3.541 — a)ßBe2 Be3
Tr2 
T
M
d
4
— b ) T M d 4 — c ) TMd4 
La1 
J m
Lo1 TMd3 
— d) NKt4 :
262. Cited by Laks 12.452 — a) Hy 
oMy 
Lo3 
cMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr1 MTr4
MTr5 
. MTr6 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
— c)


--- PAGE 723 ---
712 
Chapter 8
La1 Mir6 
Pu8 
TMd3 
üBe 2 oOr Pu2 Pu4 
NNg' 
— d)
oMd1 
iMd'oMy 
[TMd3 
|; TMd4 
; Laks
Pu2 
Be1 La1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 W
a
B
ö Lo1 NNgNPu1 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly M]
; uKt5 Lo4 Lo5 Pu2 Pu4
263. Cited by Laks 12.446 — a) Bo 
Pu2 Pu4 Wa 
T
r
2
B
o
Lo2 
Lo1 
— b) oMy 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 
Pu2 Pu4
TMd3 
TMd4 
oMd1 
_ 
— c) Pu3 Laks 
sBe2
Lo3 
— d)BBe2 
TMd4oOrPu2 
Pu2
264. Cited by Vij 2.155; Apa jbb-Laks 12.456; Dev 3.554— a) Be1 NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 Mir6
Apa 
oMd1 iMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Mir4 Mir5 Dev 
N
P
u
1
P
u
2
Pu4 
— b)Pu2Pu4 
Pu3Pu8Tr2 
NKt4 
oMd1
Lo1 
TMd3cMy 
— c) Be1 
Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
TMd4 
" oMd1 
and
jumps to 266d; oMd5 
— d) Be1 
" 
nK£ 
wKt1
Pu5 Pu7 
Ho 
TMd3 oMy 
TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6
265. Omitted in oMd1. Cited by Vij 2.i53;Apa 764; Laks 12.450; Dev 3.544;Mäd h 3.275
— a ) TMd4 
T
r
2
B
o K t
2 w K t
1 wKt3 
Lo1
La1 " 
sBe2 
H
y
B
e
3 
— b) wKt1 La1 TMd4 oMd5
Wa 
Be3 Bo 
" 
TMd3 
' — c) MTr4 MTr6 Apa 
Tj2 
TMd3
La1 
Lo1 cor to 
Ho NKt4 sKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg NPu ' Pu5 Pu7 Dev
Apa 
— d) TMd3 oMy 
NNg 
TMd3
Additional verse in Mandlik [<T, 5] KSS Dave [cf. added verse after 8.249]:
266.Padas a-c omitted in oMd1 andpäda s c-d in TMd3 — a) La1 
oMy
TMd3 
; Lo1 
— b) Be1 wKt3 Lo2 
Tr1 
me
sh 
TMd3 o M y T M d
4 
. ; Be1 sBe2 Ho Jo2 wKt1 NKt
4 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oOr
Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu8 Tj ' Tr2 Wa Re Go 
TMd3 
Bo 
— d) NKt4 MTr5
TMd4 
Pu2 P
u
4
T
r
2 
Pu5 Pu7
267. Omitted in Be1. Cited by Vij 2.207; Apa 808; Mädh 3.296 — a) Tr2 
TMd3


--- PAGE 724 ---
Chapter 8 
713
wKt1 
oMy 
— b)oMyoOr 
— c) Be3 
JmJo'Kt 2Lo 2
[Jolly M3] Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[Jolly M8"9] 
Lo4 Lo5 oOr [Jolly
MeM4-5] 
[ o O r ] ; Mädh 
—
 d) wKt3 
sBe2
268. Cited by Laks 12.478; Mädh 3.296—3) wKt1 Lo4 Lo5 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Laks
[Lo4Lo5NNg 
];BKt5 
rMd3 
oMd1
BBe2 
— b) Mir3 
Be3 s K t
5 D a v e "PTï ^ — c) NNg Pu5 Pu7 
Bo
sKt5 TMd3 oMy MTr6 
Tj1 
Jo1 
cMd1 xMd4 
NKt4 
Laks
— d)Tj' 
o M d 1 o M y 
__ 
W a 
o M d
5 3 M d '
oOr MTr4 MTr6
Additional verses in Be3 oMd1 iMd4 MTr4 MTr6;added after 269 in La1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Mandlik pr, 5", ^} KSS Dave:
1. Päda s c-d omitted in MTr6 — a) Be' La1 
— b) La1 
iMd4 
— c)
La1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— d) TMd4 
Be3 
NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik Dave KSS
2. a) Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
Mandlik Dave KSS
—
 c-d) Be3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik KSS Dave ' 
La1
— d) iMd4
269. Cited by Laks 12.476; Dev 3.758 — a) Laks 
oMy 
Dev
TMd4 
MTr6 _ 
— b) TMd4 
oMd5 
- c) wKt1
oMd1 
Wa 
Pu3 
— d)TMd4 
L o 2 T M d 3
Pu5 Pu7 fày uî ï
270. Cited by Apa Sog;Mädh 3.297 — a) TMd4 [päd a reads! 
oOr Apa [vi]
cMd5 
NKt4BKt5TMd3 
Be'wKt1 . 
' MTr4
Ho Kt2 
Lo1 Pu3 
Be1 NKt4 uKt5 TMd3 oMy NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1
MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly M8~9 Nd] Apa 
_ [Jolly M - v s ] L a 1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
Apa [vi] 
Be3 
w
K
t
1
O
x
2
M
e Go Ku Re support the plural
— b ) La1 
o M d
1 T M d
3 
A
p
a
—
 c ) Lo1 
NKl4 o O r
N N g 
s K t 5 — d ) o O r L a
1
271.* Päda s c-d omitted in MTr6 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 8og;Mädh 3.297 — a) Lo3 Tr2


--- PAGE 725 ---
714 
Chapter 8
Apa 
oMd1 
oMy 
Be3 TMd3 cMd5 Tr1 
, Mir5
Jm Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 Lo1 Tj1 NSm 15-16.23 
— b) Hy Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 
La1
Lo1 " 
Be3 Lo4 Lo5 
— c) G
M
y
L
o ' 
sBe2 Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1
La1 Lo4 La Ox2 Tj2 MTr3 WaMandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Kt2 
. 
. Be1 sCa
sKt5 
\\Kt3 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
sOx1 sPu6 
oOr T r
2 w K t
3 Pu7
— c-d)TMd3 
— d)BB^wKt' 
iMd3 oMy
272. Verses 272 and 273 transposed in Kt2; päda s a-b omitted in MTr6. Cited by Apa 809
— a) oMd5 
NKt4 Pu2 Pu4 
T M d
3 — b) oOr 
— c) Lo1
Be1 W a 
w
K
t
3
o
M
y 
La1 TMd3 NPu1
TMd4 
P
u
5
— d)Lo2 
Ox2 
Be1
273. Cited by Laks 12.481 — a) Lo ' 
Be1 Ho NNg Pu5 Pu7 
N P u 1 x M d 3
TMd4 oMd5 
. wKt1 
add 
—
 c) Pu5 Pu7 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo
oMy 
NKt4 La1 Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
wKt1 
TMd4
Bo; 
— d)TMd3
274. Omitted in oMy BKf oOr; päda s c-d omitted in eKt5. Cited by Vij 2.204; Apa8o6;
Laks 12.475; Mâdh 3.295 — a) rMd4 
Be1 Tr2 
iMd4 Apa '< 
MTr3
Tr2 
— a-b) Lo1 
— b) Lo3 Tj1 '
s
O
x
1 sPu6 ' 
Ho
Ox2 
HoTr2 
" 
TMd4 
"" 
NNg 
— c) Lo2 
\pm 
~];
NPu1 
" 
~ oMd1' 
TMd3 
oMy 
La1 
—à)
 Mâdh
Bo NKt4 TMd3 
Be1 
, La1 
oMd1 TMd4 Tr1 MTr4MTr6 z$; Bé TMd3 Wa
GMy Apa 
cMd1 
wKt3 
Tj1 
TMd4
275. Omitted in oOr; pâda s a-b omitted in ßKt5. Cited by Vij2.204; Apa 853; Laks
12.477; Mädh 3.295 — M)MädhVij' 
T M d
4 — c) oMd1 
Bo
NKt4 La1 
sKt5 
Hy 
wKt1 
ßBe2 
Pu2
Pu4 
NPu1 
Lo2 
. T M d 4 — d)Lo2 
Laks
Pu7 
Ho T M d
3 L o
1 
_ 
La1' 
Jo1
276. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 12.482 — a) BeJ 
La1 oMd1 oMy
La1 
_ TMd4 MTr6 " 
Lo2 " 
sBe2 
sOx1
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly G] 
— b) Ho 
MTr5 
Kt 2 
.Pu 8


--- PAGE 726 ---
Chapter 8 
715
Bo 
— c)Bo 
BKt5 
Be1 
aKt5 La1 TMd4 oMd 5 oMy
cMy 
BKt5 TMd4 oMd5 La1 
Pu3 
NKt4 
— d) Be3 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
GMd5 oMy Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 í 
[xMd4 
L a ' T M d 4 G M d 5 ] ; Wa
HoNKt 4sOx'Ox 2sPu6 " 
wKt1 
Lo4 Lo5 
NNg [but corfh}
277. Omitted in oOr; päda s c-d omitted in Be1 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.482; päda s a-b
cited bv F//2.207 — a) Tj 2 
a
B
e
2
, Be3 NKt4 Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) T M d
4 T M d
3 
oMy [Jolly Nd]
oMd1 
— c ) o M d ' ; o M d 5 
— d) Bo oMd5 N?U' 
" ~ 
Be3 HowKt1 sKt5
Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 sOx' Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 '
Additional verse in Tr2 Mandlik 
Dave KSS; placed after 288 in La1; commented
by No Re; cited by Har-A. 1.19.15 [= VaDh 20.30]:
b)Har-A 
— c) La1 
:•— d) La1 
Har-A
278. Omitted in oOr; päda s a-b omitted in Be1. Cited by Dev 3.761— a) NKt4
TMd3 
Ho sOx1 s
P
u
6
T
M
d
3 TMd4 
— b) cMd1
oMd5 
TMd3 TMd4 oMy Pu5 P
u
7
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Tj ' 
— d) wKt1 
Bo; 
Tj1 [cor to] TMd4
279.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 2.2l5;Apa8l3; Laks 12.491; Dev^.jbs; Madhs.zSS
—
 a) Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[ M T r 4 ; " ] — b) sBe2 La1 oMd1
 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Vij Apa Laks Dev Mädh Nd 
Wa
TMd4 
— c )
M T r
6 — d)TMd4 
" wKt1
280. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5oOr; päda s c-d omitted inoMd' TMd3 TMd4 [haplo]. Cited by
Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Dev^-l^', päda s a-b cited by Ky 2.215; Mädh 3.288 — a) Bo
TMd4 
L o
2 w K t
3 omBo— c) Ho BKt5 cMy Laks 
Tj1
Be1 . 
—d) sKt5 NNg
281.* Omitted in oMy oOr. Cited by Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Mädh 3.289 — a) Jo2 :
Lo3 
— b) w
K
t
3
B
e
3 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Lo2 oMd1 cMd5
Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Laks Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
MTr5


--- PAGE 727 ---
716 
Chapter 8
Wa 
iMd3 
^ 
— c)wKt3 
Be1 
TMd3 
Ho sOx1
sPu6 
" Pu2 Pu4 
L o 1 s O x 1 sPu6 
[lacuna] 
for 
— d) Apa
Be3 
NKt4 
TMd4
Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 oMd ' oMd5 sOx1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3
Co 
;MTr6 
NNg 
Hy 
uBe2 
Tj2 
wKt1 
iMd3
Bo 
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 P
u
7
G
M
d
1 
Lo4 Lo5 Laks
Tj1 
oMd5 Tr1 Mädh 
' 
' 
MTr6 
xMd3
Wa 
Ho 
Lo3 
Jo2
Jo1 r 
; eBe2
282. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 2.215; Apa 8i¿[;Laks 12.491; Dev 3.764; Mädh 3.288-
9 — a) oMy 
Kt2 
TMd4 
NKt4 
— b) L
o
2
— c)
oMy 
sCa wKt3 sKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly M G] Jolly NSin 15-16.27
Be1 
TMd3 
NKt4 . . 
—à)
 Mädh . . _
, 
Be3
Tr2 ' 
Lo1 
wKt1 wKt3
283. Cited by Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Dev 3.764; Mädh 3.289 — a) Wa 
Tr1 [but
corsh] 
NPu1 
La1 
xMd4 Pu7 [Jolly G] . 
— b) uKt5 
Pu2
Tr2 
w K t
3 — c) oMd1 ' 
La1 Pu2 Pu4
 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly
Nd] 
Be3 w Kt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 [folly M8'9] Apa 
* Kt1 oOr Tj1 
— d)
Ho _ 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1
 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 _ 
[ oMd5 
]; cMy
Jo1 om 
Be3 wKt1 ßKt5 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 
Apa [Jolly G]
284. Omitted in Tr2. Cited by Vij 2.218; Apcßis; Laks 12.488; Dev 3.761; Mädh 3.287
— a) oMd1 
oOr 
B o T M d
4 
oMy 
TMd4
— b)Tj' 
T M d 4 — c ) M a d
h 
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy
MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly N d ] 
T r
1 m e s h t
o
L
o
3 Tj1
 
BKt5 Pu5
Pu7 [Jo/(y M4-5 G] Vij Jolly 
, wKt1 La1 
L
o
1
, sBe2 " 
TMd3
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
T M d 3 B B e 2 
Ho Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4
oMd1 
TMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
285. Cited by Apa 819; Laks 12.503; Dev 3.767; Mädh 3.292 — b) Be1 sOxsPu6 MTr6
NKt4 
Jo1 Kt2 Mandlik KSSNPu1 Pu5 P
u
7
— c) oMd1 
TMd3
NKt4 
— d)TMd4 
oMd5 
B B ^ M T r 6
GMd1
xMd3
xMd3 cMy MTr6
 iMd4
 Ox2 
Be1
wKt3
TMd3 TMd4 oMd 5 oMy Tr1 [but cor sh]Laks


--- PAGE 728 ---
Chapter 8 
717
286. Cited by Laks 12.489; £^3.763 — a) NKt4 
— b) Jo1 
Bo Ho
Be1 BBe2 wKt1 La1 
o M d 1 — c) Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
MTr6
xMd3
287.* Cited by Laks 12.493 — a) Hy Lo1 Lo2 
oMy 
[om '];
Be1 Pu5 
NKt4 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
 TMd4 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Me Jolly
sKt5 La'NNgNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Be3 
Lo2 Pu3 
NNgNPu1
— b) oMd1 
Jm Jo1 Kt2BKt5 La1 xMd4 Ox2 MTr3MTr4 MTr6 NäKu Nd Mandlik KSS
[•/otfyKuN] 
T
r
2
— c ) T
M
d
4
o
M
d
5 
TMd3
Be1 
oMy 
Ox2 
wKt1 Tr2 
oMd1
oOrNPu1 
— d)Pu2Pu3 
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt3
288.* Pâda s a-b omitted in NKt4. Cited by Vij 3.263-4 Apa 820,1094; Laks 12.558 —
TMd3 TMd41 
T M d 4 — b ) w K t
3 — c ) Ox2 
B o
— d) Be1 Bo Ho Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd5 oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5 [Jolly
MG] Vij Apa Me Go Nd Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
wKt3 Laks 
; Jm 
" Be1 sBe2
Laks 
Hy
289. Pâda s c-d omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apa82O; Laks 12.559 — a) wKt1
Jo1 
T
M
d
4
— b ) T M d
3 " nCa 
T M d 4 c M d 1
—c) Kt2 Pu5 P u
7 s O x
1 sPu6 
Be3 La1 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 MTr6 
oMy
~d)Tj2
Additional verse in La1 [cf. added verse 3 after 8.205]:
290. Cited by Laks 12.501 — a) sBe2 Bo Ho La1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
TMd3
Lo2 
Pu5 Pu7 Laks[Jolly G] 
— b) oMd5 oOr sOx1
sPu6 . 
—c) Bo NKt4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 
sOx1 sPu6 
M T r
6 w K t
1
TMd4 
— d) T M d 4 T M d 3 Tr2 
Pu3 
oOr 
Tj2
a) Vij
Apa 1094
Pu5 Vu1  [Jolly G]
 cMd5


--- PAGE 729 ---
718 
Chapter 8
291. Cited by Vij 2.zgg;Apa 86s;Laks 12.501; Dev3.j66; Mädh 3.290— a) DevMädh
[Mädh 
|; oMy 
Lo5 
Pu8 Vij Apa 
NNg
Tr2 °
BKt5 
NPu1 
Pu3 Pu8 
• — c)Apa 
' Tr2Apa[v\]'
292. Omitted in Lo4 Pu5 Pu7; pâda s a-b omitted in Be1 Lo5 and ma sh in Be3 [haplo].
Cited by Vij 2.299; Apa86s; Laks 12.501; Dev 3.766; Mädh 3.290 — a) oMd5 oMy MTr4
Mir6 Mädh 
L
o
2
o
O
r 
—b)
 V i j A p a B o 
sKt 5
Dev 
—
 c) iMd4 
Pu8 
xMd3 
; Be1 
Be1 Be3
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo2 Lo3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 [but cor]
Apa [cor in brackets] Dev Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
cMy 
TMd3
TMd4 
L
o
1
T
r
2 
Vij 
— d) Ho Lo1 Pu3 Pu8
Tr2 
oMy 
La1 
Be3 iMd3 Ox2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
o O r w K t 1
293. Cited by Apa 863; Laks 12.502; Dev 3.766 — a)ïMd 4 
Ho <
sKt5 
o O r " " o M y w K t
3 
Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 A p a
[vl] 
TMd3 
s K t 5 B e 3 Bo Ho Kt2 sOx1 sPu6 MTr3 
— b) Lo2oMy
oMd1 
Be1 sCa wKt1 La1 NNg Wa— 
c) MTr4 
T M d
4 — d)
MTr4 MTr6
 ~ 
Tí 
sKt5 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu8
Tr1 [but cor] [Jolly M Nd] Laks 
oMy 
Jo2
BKt5 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 TMd3 oMy
NNg oOr Tj1 NPu1 Pu3 [Jolly M Nd] Laks
294. Cited by Apa 863; Laks 12.502; päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.300; Dev 3.766; Mädh
3.290 — a) Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 [cor to] 
wKt1 NKt4 L
a
k
s
; oMd5 oMy
Tr1 
. 
— c) TMd3 
w K t
3 o M d '
T
M
d
3 oMy Pu2 Pu4 
. Lo2
oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but cor] Wa ' 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu" MTr6 
T M d 3 T M d 4
— d) MTr6 
Pu8 
TMd3
295.* Cited by Apa86s; Laks 12.502 — a) Tr2 
cMd' Apa 
T Md3 oMy
MTr4 MTr6 
_ 
— b) Lo3 Tj1 
, L o 3 T M d 3 
Bo 
B
e
1
— c) ßKt5
TMd3 
L a 1 ; T M d 4 
Lo4 
Be1 
—A)
 Laks'
Jolly 
[without avagraha]
BBe2
 Be1
wKt1 Laks
Lo3 Tj1
 La1
— b) Tr2
Be1
Pu2'
TMd
 —d) Apa
[vl]
GMd1 MTr6
 Lo5
sOx1 sPu6[but me sh]
BBe2 Lo1 TMd4 MTr6 Wa Apa


--- PAGE 730 ---
Chapter 8 
719
296. Cited by Vij 2.300; Apa 863; Laks 12.502; Mädh 3.291 — a) Lo3 Tj1 
Wa
NPu
1 Pu2 
Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 
sOx1 sPu6 
— b) NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 cMd5 oMy Tj1
Tr1 MTr5MTr6^"; Be1 sBe2 wKt1 wKt3 oMy NPu
1 Vij ' 
' —
 c) TMd3 
Apa [vi]
c 
.. „ ,sOx'sPu6 
Mädh Lo3 
— d) Jo2 [but me] Lo3 Tj1
;[Lo3 
] ; P u 2 P u 4 T M d 3 o M y 
_ 
'
297. Omitted in Pu5 NNg; pada-d omitted in Lo1 [haplo]. Cited by Vij z.3OO;Apa 864;
Laks 12.502; Mädh 3.291 — a) Hy _ 
; xMd4 
Be1 
Vij
Be3 BCa wKt1 wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo1 cMd1 iMd3 oMy oOr Pu8 Tr2 MTr4 Laks 
—
 b) oOr om
TMd4 
M
ä
d
h
T
M
d
3 TMd4 cMy 
Pu4 
TMd4 
— c)
BKt5 
; sBe2 eKt5 oOr
298. Päda s a-c omitted in Lo1. Cited by Vij 2.3005^0864; Laks 12.502; Mädh 3.291 —
a) Tj ' 
BCa Jo2 sKt5 TMd3 oMy oOr Pu8 Tj ' Tr2 
— b) oM d ' 
Lo5
Jha Dave 
Jm Lo1 oMd5 wir1 Apa Mädh 
sBe2 Bo sCa La1 oOr 
—
c) Hy Kt2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj ' Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly R] Vij Apa Mädh 
Be3 
sBe2 Bo
oOr[Jo//yNd] 
eCa 
cMy 
BBe2oOr' 
wKt3 . 
— d) oMy
oMd1 
" BBe2 Bo BCa Ho Hy sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 NNg NPu
1
Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 : 
wKt1 
,^ 
.NKt4
299. Cited by Apa 610, 815; Laks 12.494 — a) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Bo
— b) Jo1 Dev Mandlik Jha KSSDave 
nKt5 
Kt2 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
La1 iMd3 TMd4 oMy oOr Apa 
Me gives pâtha : 
and comments:
' 
— c) oOr 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7
cMd5 Tr1 
Pu5 Pu7
300. Cited by Apa 610, 815; Laks 12.494; Dev 1.142; päda s a-b cited by Vij 1.155 and
pada-b by Vij 2.32— b) oMd5 
.. B
e
1
s
B
e
2 Be3 wKt1 wKt3 oMd1 NNg
oOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa Apa 
—
 c) sOx1 s P u
6 [ o m 
J; oOr 
TMd4
Lo3Tj' 
MTr4 
T M d 4 ' — d)NPu' 
_ 
" 
Be3 
NKt4
^GMd'oMd^MyTj'Tr'MTräßADev : 
Be1 
Hy "
— d)cMd'
TMd3 om
Lo1
1rl mesh to


--- PAGE 731 ---
720 
Chapter 8
301.Cited b y Laks 12.505 — a ) x M d
4 P u
2 Pu4 
B
o
B
e
1
Mir3" 
— 
tywKt'oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) oMd5 Tr1 Laks
Jo 2Tj'' 
L a
1 o M d
1 
— d) NKt4 
, Be'oMd'oMd 5
Pu5 Pu7 \Jolly G] 
Lo5 oMy 
sCa La1 TMd3 cMy Ox2
NPu1 MT^MTr'Wa
Here TMd3 oMy Tr1 insert 8.332; iMd3 omits it at its proper place while oMy Tr' give it
in both places.
302. Päda s b-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Laks 12.511 — a) oMd1 
— b) Pu2
Tr2 
BBe2 
wKt3 
Pu4 
oOr 
— c) Jo2 NNg Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
HyNPu1 Pu 2Pu 4Tj 2 
Lo3Ti' 
Ho 
Bo
TMd4 
w K t
3 B K t
5 
— d)La' 
TMd3 TMd4
Lo4Lo5La/b 
B
e
3
; W a
303. Pada-a omitted in cMd1. Cited by Laks 12.511 — a) iMd4 
Tj2
sCaoOr 
Bo 
— b) cMy sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5 
— c) La1 
Be3 NPu1
wKt3 oOr 
sBe2 sCa wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 oMd ' oMd5 cMy Mir4 Mir5 Mir6
TMd4 
— d)TMd4 
Wa 
oMd1 
wKt3 
NKt4
BKt5 " 
Hy
304.Pâda s c-d omitted in wKt1 [haploj. Cited by Laks 11.86; Mädh 1.397— a) TMd4
Bo 
— b) T M d 4 B e 1
 BCa oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 
P u 3 w K t 3 Pu2
Pu4 
Jo2 La1 Lo3 Tj1 Laks 
—
 c) NNg 
— d) TMd3 
oMy
Madh 
Lo2 Pu7 
Pu3 
~ 
Pu8 
wKt3
305. a) wKt1 
Lo2 
Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 
o M d
1 o O r
Tr2î T 
BKt5 
— b)BKf 
" 
" 
Tj1 
odr^Rd; wKt1
Bo 
"" — c)NKt4 
B
o
s
O
x
1 sPu6 om— 
d) NPu1 
; Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly
M]
306. Cited by Mädh 1.397— a) Bo 
Jo1 Wa 
s K t
5 — b)
TMd4 oMy 
Hy 
Be3 Bo wKt1 wKt3 eKt5 Lo4 [but cor] oMd1 oMd5 MTr4MTr6 Wa


--- PAGE 732 ---
Chapter 8 
721
Be1 
— c)Ox2 
. ,Jo 2Lo 3Tj'Wa 
.Be 1 
Ho sOx1
sPu6' 
— d ) o O r [ l a c u n a ] 
" 
TMd4
307. Cited by Mädh 1.397— a) N?U' 
"— b) Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] 
Bo Lo1
Tj1 
Be3 
oMy 
" Pu5 Pu7 
— c) Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 Pu2 Pu4
Mir3 [Jolly M4"5 Ku] Me Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but cor] MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Nd Rc Rn 
xMd3 
Mâdh 
TMd4 " " 
Pu5
Pu7 Co [Jolly G] 
[Jolly M9] • 
— d) Be3
308. Päda s c-d omitted in Lo3 — a) sKt5 Lo4 Lo5 Wa [Jolly M N] Me Nâ [but gives the
accepted reading as pätha ] Dave Jha 
Be3 
— b) Be3
MTr6
 
_ 
— c) Pu2 
_ GMy 
Pu5 Pu7 
— d) Be1 
M T r
4 P u
5
Pu7 
.GMd1 
Jo2GMd1TMd3TMd4oMd5Pu5Pu7Tj!Tr1 [Jolly G]
309. a) BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M4
G Ku R a] Rn Go Mandlik KSS 
Bo[lacuna] 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) xMd4
Be1 
Kt2 
wKt1 
Jo2 
Be3 nKf Lo2 oMd1 TMd3
GMy oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 [but cor] MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [folly Nd] 
Pu7 
cor to
Pu5 
— c) TMd3 
Be1 Be3 Bo 
MTr4MTr6
cMd5 
— d) cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy inTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]Me [pätha |
[cMd1 
]; Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
NKt4 
La1 Pu2 
Be3
Lo4 Lo5 
Bo 
eKt5
310. Cited by Laks 12.782 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
oMy 
TMd3 oMd5
Tr1 MTr4MTr6 
— b) Laks 
oMd5 
— c) eCa NNg MTr5
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
oOr 
Pu5 Pu7 [cor to] . . , . - . . ;
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd] 
— d) Lo1 
; t s B e 2 T M d 3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy 
T r
2 B e
1 La1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
[Jolly M9]
311.* a) Ho 
, oMd5 Tr1 
Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo2 Pu7 MTr3
 MTr6
ulr6 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) oMd1 
_ " 
oOr om 
Tr2
oMd5MTr6 
" 
TMd3 cMy Pu3 
NKt4 P
u
4
B
e
3 
— c) La1 
— d)
TMd3 TMd4 MTr4oOr 
sOx1 sPu6 
N K t 4 w K t 3 Pu5 
TMd3 oMy NNg MTr4


--- PAGE 733 ---
722 
Chapter 8
312. Folios containing verses 312-28 missing in the microfilm of Mir6. Cited by Laks
12.47; Devs.66 —
 b) TMd3 
NKl
4 
sOx1 sPu6 
N?U' Pu2 Pu4 
TMd4
GMd5 
T M d 4 " 
xMd3 
o M y N K t 4 
Lo1 
— c)
Bo" 
Lo*L(fLaks—
 
d) Be1 Be3 La1 Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 Wa [Jolly M G Nd R] Rn Go 
Ho 
NNg 
Lo2 oMd1
Pu5 Pu7 
Pu4
313.* Päda s c-d ma sh in Tr1. Cited by Dev 3.66 — a) Bd sBe2 Bö Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 LoscMd' oOr Ox2 sPu6 [me to] Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Mir3 Wa
[Jolly R Ku M4] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave *T: 
sOx1 
Pu2 Pu4 
MTr4
rMd4' 
o M d
5 _ 
— b ) T M d 4 — c) oOr [Jolly M5~9 G Me]
Jolly 
Be1 Bße2 Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMy sOx1 Ox2
sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M4 Nd Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Jo2 wKt1
sKt5 Lo3 cMd1 oOr Tr1 [ma sh] [Jolly R] 
rMd3 
La1 
— d)
oMy 
TMd3
314.* ma in Tr1. Cited by Vis 3.252; pâda s a-b cited by Apa 1078 — a) Tr2 
— b)
NPu
1 
Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 [ma sh] Tr2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M4 G N R Ku] Apa Me [pätha ] Bh
[pathal Go Na Ku Mr Mandlik Bühler Jolly KSS Doniger 
—
 c) Be1 wKt3 TMd4 Pu8
oMd5 
. HosOx ' s P u
6 " L
a
1
" siKt4 
Pu2 Pu4
V i s 
—
 c-d) o
M
d
5
— d ) O x
2 K t
2 
Pu5 Pu7
Lo2 
, Vis 
Hy TMd4
315. Cited by Vis 3.252; Vij 3.257; Apa 1078 — a)oMd5 
, sBe2 Be3 Ho wKt1
NKt
4 Lo1 Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Dave Jha 
BCa Hy sKt5 oOr 
La1 
w K t 3 T r 2
— b) Tr2 Wa 
Bo NKt
4 Lo2 Pu3 Vij Der 
Tr1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu8
Bo Ho Ox2 
[Jolly M] 
— c) Apa 
~ 
Vij 
La ' 
sCa Jo2
wKt1 Lo2oMd5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 MTr4MTr5 Vis Apa^wf-^Md3
Be1 oMy Vij Apa 
—
 d) La1 Lo1 Ox2 Pu7 Puf
Additional verse in sCa wKt3 La1 oOr Mandlik 
Dave KSS, which is identical with
il.loi.
316. Cited by Ws 3.252; Apa 1078 — a) sBe 2 
eKt5 Apa


--- PAGE 734 ---
Chapter 8 
723
— b) TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 
Lo3 TMd4 Tj' 
Tj1 
— c) La1 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but me sh] MTr4 AW 
Be3 L(f Tj1
oOr 
Ho 
Pu5 Pu7 
" 
wKt1 
Lo1 
Pu8 om
—
 d) Apa 
Pu8
317. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5. Cited by Hem 3/1.781; prafika by Sam on BU 1.5.2 — a) Lo1
TMd3 Pu7
 
N N g T M d 4
 
TMd3 
— b) oMd1
o M y 
Jo2 W a 
" B
e
1
B
B
e
2 o
O
r
— c ) Lo2
 
TMd3
TMd3 Pu8 
L t f o M d
1 r ; T j ' 
H e m
Pu7 [but me] 
— d)sKt5
318. Cited by Vij 3.259 — a) [lolly M3-4'5] 
Kt2 
MTr3
Be1 TMd3 GMyMTr3Wa [Jolly Nd]Go Mandlik KSS 
Be1 
sBe2 oMd1 Pu3
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 
— b)NNg 
sOx'sPu6 
Be; 
_ 
Lo1 
— c) ßBe2
frífe ; Bo 
— d) oOr 
wKt1 
cMy
319. Cited by Apa 848 — a) Hy 
wKt1 om 
' Be3 Hy NKt4 Lo5 TMd3
sOx1 sPu6 
; BBe2 ^ 
.; wKt1 
NKt4 
— b) oMd5 MTr5 
Be3
Tj1 
— c) Apa 
BBe2 La1 o
O
r
— d) wKt1 om 
TMd3 ?T
TMd4 
Be3 
w K t
3 o M d
1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
Ox2
320. Päda s a-b omitted in Pu5, and pâda s c-d in sOx' [haplo], and pada-d in oMd5 sKt5
[haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 846; Laks i2.5Z2.-JJevz.739; Mâdh 3.303— a) TMd3 oMy
wKt1 _ 
— b)TMd4 
Jo2 La1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
~;Tr'
corfli to 
TMd3 
. Laks 
NKt 4 Lo2 oMy Pu7 [Jolly G Nd] 
Lo4
cor to 
.La' sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
; oMd5 
oOr ' 
— c) Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly
M5-9]Ki>; 
NKt4 sKt5 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Tj2 [Jolly M4] 5 t t L o 1 
TMd3
oMy 
— d
)
T
M
d
4
[
c
f
. 8.322d];TMd3 
T
oMd1 Tr1 [but me sh] 
M T r
4 w K t
1 
Pu3
321. Omitted in Jo2 sKf cMd 5; päda s a-b omitted in sOx1. Cited by Vij 2.275; ApaSw,
Laks 12.533; Mâdh 3.303;päda s c-d cited by Dev 3.739;Vij transposes päda s a-b and c-d and
gives 
as pâda s c-d — a) Pu2 P u 4 N S m 1 9 . 3 2 P u 5 Pu7 TMd4 
NPu1
.Pu 2 Pu4 
T M d 3 : L o 1 
— a-b) Vij Mâdh NSm 19.34


--- PAGE 735 ---
724 
Chapter 8
—
 b) Tj2 Tr2 
, La1 Pu5 Pu7 
Ox2 
— c) oMy
NNg 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Ho
322.* Päda s a-c omitted in Jo2 sKt5 oMd5. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa847; Laks 12.533;
Dev 3.739;padas a-b cited by Madh 3.303— a) Ho 
Bo 
TMd3
— b) Pu8 
Be3 
Lo4 Lo5 NNg [Jolly M Gr] 
— c) Bo
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 uT^Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Be1
Be3 NNg NPu
1 Pu3 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M5~9] VijDe\ 
[Jolly G] 
— d) TMd4
TMd3
323. Omitted in Ca. Cited by Vij 2.275; ApaSw, Laks 12.528; Mädh 3.303; päda s c-d
cited b y Laks 12.534 — b ) oMy 
Be1 ;
V
i
j 
— c ) Mädh
Vij 
s P u
6 w K t
1 
' — d) GMd1 TMd3
324.* Omitted in Ca; päda s c-d omitted in Be1. Cited by Apa &4j;Laks 12.530 — a)
TMd3 oMy 
. — b) TMd4 
La1 sOx1 s P u 6 " wKt1 
— c)
wKt3 La1
 • 
— d) Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg NPu' Pu2
Pu 3Pu 4Pu 8Tj 1Tj 2Tr 2SAAW 
[sOx1 sPu6 
cM> 
]
325.* Omitted in Be1. Cited by Laks 12.530— a) Hy 
— b)Tj' 
TMd4
N N g 
o M d 5
P
u
4 
Lo4 Lo5 Tr2 [Jolly M3"4'5]
Be3 
~ 
Hy 
* 
uCa Tr1 [but cor} Laks KSS 
~ 
Kt2 Mand-
l i k 
Jo1 • " 
T
M
d
3
H
o Pu8 G o [Jolly G ] 
Pu5 Pu7
Bo Lo1 
; Me Dave Jha 
wKt1 
Re reads
reading adopted, 
ex conjectura; all mss. (except Wa) and all commentators read
the locative 
N N g ' . T M d 4 
B h [path a ] — c ) Tj2 
[cf.
8.2243]; Laks 
T M d 3 ' — d) Be3 Pu3 Pu8 T
r
2
; TMd3 
Jo2 Lo1 Pu5
Pu7 
P u 8 ° T M d
4 
B
o
P
u
2 Pu4 
NKf
326. Päda s a-b omitted in Be1 Lo4 Lo5 and päda s c-d in Pu8. Cited by Apa 847; Laks
12.535; Mädh 3.303-4 — a) Ho wKt3 La1 NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Bo sKt5
Apa [vi] ' 
Lo1 
Be* 
— b) TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]
wKt3 
M T r 5
B B e 2 
— c) eBe2 " 
TMd4 
TMd3
N N g 
— d ) T M d
4 , NKt
4


--- PAGE 736 ---
Chapter 8 
725
327. Omitted in Be3 Lo4 Lo5 Pu8. Cited by Apa 847; Laks 12.535; Mädh 3.304 — a)
TMd4 
La1 aMtf MT^Mfr5 Apa Mädh _ 
Pu2 Pu4 
_ 
— b) La1
NKt4 om 
—
 c) Ho Jm TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' Tj2 Tr1
Jha Dave _ 
; sBe2 
— d) L a 1 o M d 1
328. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 oMd5; pâda s a-b omitted in Be3 and padas c-d in oMd1. Cited
by Apa 847;Laks 12.535; Mädh 3.304—a) Mädh 
NKt4 
iMd3
— b) Kt2 
B o T M d
4 _ 
— c) TMd3 oMy NNg 
— d) Pu2 Pu4
TMd3' 
_ 
B e
3 w K t
3
329.* Folios containing verses 329-45 badly microfilmed and only parts are visible in
MTr6. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 cMd '; päda s a-b omitted in oMd 5. Cited by Laks 12.535; Mädh
3.304 — b) La1 oMd4 oOr Ti2 Wa 
; Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2
Lo3 NNg [but cor fh] Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Ti2 Tr1 Laks Mädh Jolly KSS 
NKt4
Pu7 
s
P
u
6
c
o
r t o s O x
1
Ox2 
TMd3 
; MTr4 
^ 
. Be3 
wKt3
. 
La1 
— c) o M y T M d
3 
— d) TMd3 oMy
[TMd3 
]; Pu5 Pu7 
oMd5
330. ma in Ho; päda s a-b omitted in oMd '; päda s c-d omitted in Pu8. Cited by Laks
12.534 — a) TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6 
sKt5 
L o
2 — b) TMd3
;oMd5 
Pu2 Pu4 
sOx1 sPu6 
NNg om— 
c) Lo2
, sBe2 Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 [Jolly Ku K\Ku Mr Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave ; 
Jm La1 oOr N P u
1 B e
3 Pu2 Pu4 
La1 
— d) cMd5
La1 sOx1 sPu6 
_ 
cMy oOr
331.Päda s a-b omitted in Pu8 — a) B
e
1
; La1 Pu3 
— b) oMd1 om ^— c)
Jo1 
TMd3 oMd5 
Be1 Jo2 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMy sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj ' Tr1
Wa [Jolly M R] Ku 
< 
; Lo4 Lo5 
oOr 
; Ho oMé 
— d) oMd5
¡vR-jTMd
3 
Tr1 
[1 deleted]; Be3 Tr2 
Lo5
332. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5; from pada-b until 8.359 omitted in Pu5; placed after 8.301 in


--- PAGE 737 ---
726 
Chapter 8
TMd3; pâda s c-d ma sh in Tr1; pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in NNg; verses 332 and 333
transposed in sKt5 Wa [Jolly M N]. Cited by Vij 2.266 [intr]; Laks 12.505; Mädh 3.298;
pâda s a-b cited by Laks 12.557 — a) TMd3 
Pu2 . 
; La1 
Pu2 Pu4
Be1 
Kt2 W a — 
b ) sOx1 sPu6 [cor 
t o ] 
s K t 5 o O r
- c) sCa La1 Tr2 
; Tj2 
Tr2 
La1 
. 
— d) Vij
oMd; _ 
; Bo 
cMd1 _ 
"; Jm Jo1 Kf Mir3 Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
; wKt1 
Tr2 
Mädh ' 
. Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3
Pu8 
sKt5 
wKt5 
. La1
333.* Cited by Apa 848; Laks 12.536 — a) Be1 Pu7 Wa [Jolly G] 
Apa
' 
. NKt
4 
La1 P u
4 w K t
1 
GMd5 
'— b) TMd3
— c) MTr4 omu; sBi Be3 Bo eCa Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOr
sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 [cor to sh] Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly G R N Ku] Bh Me
[pätha} Nä Kit Rn Re Mr Go Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Hy Dave 
T j
2 c M d
5
.iMd3 
— d ) x M d 3 s K t 5 
" L o 3 T
j
1
w
K
t
1
o
O
r
xMd3 
B e
3 B o sKt5 sOx1 '
334. a) Pu7 
— b) Lo3 
, cMd5 
Be1 
Kt2 
Be3 [cor
to} Lo1 TMd4 NPu
1 Tr1 [but cor} 
—
 c) TMd4 Tj1 
" sCa wKt1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1
MTr5 MTr6 
- d) TMd4 
TMd3
335. Pâda s c-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.779; Dev 3.2g6;Madh 1.391, 3.158 — a) Tj1
TMd4 
w K t 3 w K t 1 
— b) Kt2 TMd3 _ — c) TMd3 [Jolly
Nd] 
— d) eKt5 Lo2 NNg [ma as pätha] Dev Mädh 2.158 
[ßKt5
Lo2 
] ; H
e
. T j
1 [ J o l l y R ] 
. Be1 B o wKt3 La1 Lo1
 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 cMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 Mädh 1.391 
Jm om
Lo3
336. Cited by Apa%cj\ Laks 12.799; Dev 3.298— a) Tj ' 
Wa 
Be1 Be3
La1 sOx1 sPu6 MTr5 Apa 
, 
— b) Tr2 
sBe2 
oMd5 
T Md3
— c) Be3 TMd4 
Dev 
, Laks 
oMd5
 
TMd3 
Apa 
[vi ' 
];
sBe2 Dev Laks 
—d) N P u 1 T M d 4 
La1
337. Pâda s b-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 84jLaks 12.551; Mädh 3.302— a)
oMy Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
Ho Jo 2 NKt4 Lo5 ßKt5 NNg Pu7 Pu8 
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 738 ---
Chapter 8 
727
TMd3 
Mädh 
— 
tyLrfTj1 
cMy 
— c) Lo2 
Pu8 
—
d)sOx'sPu6 " 
Be1 BKt5 La1 Ox2 Pu2 
Pu4 
; iMd3 oMy 
Be1 sBe2 Hy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 La1 NNg oOr Ox2 N?U' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu7 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly G] MandlikJha KSS
Dave
338. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 848;Laks 12.551; Mädh 3.303— a) Tr2 
Lo5
Ho 
Be1 NNg 
— b)Jo2 
N K . Í B e 1 Ho Ox2 
— c) La1 
Be3 TMd4
oMd5 
o O r _ 
w K t
1 T M d
3 "
o
M
y 
xMd4 o M y . — d ) o O r
cMy 
Mädh 
Be1 Apa 
Lo2 Pu7
Vij Mädh _ 
Tr2 
o
M
d
1
B
o 
NPu1
Laks" 
TMd4
339. Omitted in Kt2. Cited by Apa 848; Laks 2.321; Dev 2.467 — b) Mir4 
TMd3
xMd4 
— c)oMd' 
Mir4 
wKt1 
Laks' 
TMd4
wKt1
340. Padas-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Ky 2.114 [intro.];^pa 850; Laks 12.549-50— a) Pu7
A p a 
\pm]; TMd3 o
M
y
N
P
u
1 
c M d
1 B e
3
— b)K.t2NNg 
_ 
oMd1 
Lo1 
— c) oMy MTr3 
ßKt5
wKt1 
— d)oMy 
P u 4 w K t 3 oOi
341. Cited by Vij 2.275; //ar-A 1.28.3;Märf/ i 3.304 — b) NPu' 
Be1 
ßKl5 om
TMd3 
Hy 
— c)oMd' 
NPu1
 
TMd3 
— d) Mädh
Additional verses in sCa oOr; verses i and 3 in La1:
i. c) oOr ' 
— d) oOr 
eCa
3. d) La1
342. Cited by Laks 12.529 — a) Kt2 Lo3 Lo5 Tj1 [Jolly M] 
' [Kt2
J;sOx'sPu 6 
J o 
TMd3 
— b ) Pu4 
L
o
5
H
o


--- PAGE 739 ---
728 
Chapter 8
ont 
Lo1 
Jm 
Lo5 
Be' 
— c) Ho 
; NPu1 
sOx1
sPu6 
W a . 
. P u 7 [ o r o J — d ) oMd5 
sOx1
sPu6 
P u 3 _ 
wKt1 NKt 4 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 oMy NNg Tj1 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr5
MandlikJhaKSS
343. Omitted in Wa — b) oMd1 
iMd4 
oOr 
Bo oOr 
Be3
— d)TMd3 
Bo 
oMd'oMd5
.NNg 
— c ) K t ? L o 2 " 
rMd4 
— d)Bo 
eBe2
oMd5 
Hy> 
Lo4 Lo5 
" 
Lo1 
Bo 
sOx1 sPu6
345. a) wKt1 
oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 cMd5 cMy NPu1 Tj1 MTr5 Wa
Be1 
oOr Ox2 Pu2 
^ 
Be3 La1 Tr2 
Be3
Be1 Lo3 oMd ' TMd3 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu2 Tj ' MTr5 Wa 
oOr Pu4 Pu7
Be3 La1 Ox2 Tr2 
N
P
u
1
— b ) T M d
3 L a
1 
Lo4 Lo5
Be1 wKt1 oOr Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
Be1 Jo2 T Md3 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Wa
[Jo//yRNd] 
La1 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 [Jolly G RâNd ] Jolly 
Be3
— d)BKt5om 
Wa 
" wKt1 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
iMd3
346.a) Tr2 
cMd5 o O r L o
4 Lo5 
— a-b) Jo2 
sKt5
— b)Tj' 
" x M d
3 " — d) Tj1 
Lo 2oMd'oMy
^ftPT^jtcT; iMd4 ' 
" 
Tr1 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 
. wKt1 ^T 
NKt4 La1
Lo3^1 
* 
" 
oMd5
347- a) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
[om ^]; T M d
3 e K t
5 MTr4 MTr6
sOx1 sPu6 ' 
— b) T M d
3 s K t
5 
— c) Be1 Bo Lo1 
wKt3
sKt5 
— d ) oMd '
P
u
4 ' ; 
Pu2 
s
K
t
5
B
o
Lo1 
TMd4 Pu3
348. Cited by Dev 3.725; pâda s a-b cited by Vijz.zi, 286; Apa 1043 — a)rMd3
Be1 NKt4 La1 oMd1 Fy 2.2l 
oMy 
— b) iMd4 Pu7 
Be1
— c)MTr6 
" 
" ,oMd5 
Ho La1 sOx1 sPu6 
Pu1 [Jolly G]
344. a)Be1 Lo1 iMd3 oMd5 NNg Tj1
TMd4 
— b) cMd1
 Be1


--- PAGE 740 ---
Chapter 8 
729
— d) Ho 
Bo 
TMd4 
NPu1 
La1 oOr 
TMd3
349. Cited by Vij 2.21; Dev 3.725; pâda s a-b cited by Apa 1043 — a) K?t 
Tj1
[om 
J; Li1 Pu2 Pu4 
NPu1
 
TMd3 
Lo2 
— c)
BKt5 
, Be1 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 Tr1 Wa [Jolly M5-8"9 Nd] Dev Bh
oMy 
xMd3 
La1 
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
— d)
La1 NNg [but ma sh] oOr NPu' om 
oMd' 
Vij '
350. Päda s c-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Vij 2..2\\Apa 627,1043; Dev 3.726 — a) cMy
the first —
 b) Be1 Hy 
" oMd5 Apa 627 
TMd4 om ' 
—
 d) Lo4 Lo5
Pu7
Additional verse in wKt3 NKt4:
Additional half-verse in oMy [= 8.353 c-d].
Additional verses in NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
Dave KSS:
1.a) Mandlik KSS D
a
v
e
— c) Pu2 Pu4 : 
— d) NPu1 Pu2
[Pu4 
]
2. a) Mandlik KSS Dave 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c)
Mandlik KSS Dave 
—
 d) NPu1
Additional verses in sBe2 [placed after 35ib] TMd3 [placed after verse 35id] Mandlik
Dave KSS:
c) eBe2 
— d) Mandlik KSS Dave
351.* Omitted in NKt4 Lo4 Lo5; päda s a-b and c-d transposed in TMd3. Cited by Vij 2.21,
286; £>ev3.728 — a) Be1 Pu2 Pu4 
[om J; Ho Lo3 
Hy; 
TMd4
La1 
— b) Kt 2 
— c) Vij 2
.
2
1
' 
— d) NPu1 
" sKt5
Pu2 Pu4 
[sKt5 
];Be' Jo2 Lo1 Lo2TMd4 oMd5 NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7
Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M] Vij Dev Bh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave • 
Jm oMd1 TMd3
oMy MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
Pu7 '. [Jolly G] i
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr2 
[oMy] 
Be1 
mc sh 
Ho
 Be1
andLo5
Lo4 om second
oOr
Pu2 Pu4
 Lo'GMd5Pu7[Jo/fyG] 


--- PAGE 741 ---
730 
Chapter 8
Additional verse in oOr:
352. ma in Lo4; päda s c-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Apa 853;Laks 12.584 — a) TMd3
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
; o
M
d
5
L
o
4 Lo5 Ox2 Pu8 Jolly 
Pu2 Pu" Tj' Tr2
wKt1 wKt1 
— b) GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMy Tr1 [ma] MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
oMd5 
" 
Apa 
" sOx1 sPu6 
T r
2 — c)
Lo2 
Ho ' 
' — d) TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [ma sh] [Jolly Nd]
^T°;cMd 1 
; Mir4 Mir6
353. Omitted in NKt4. Cited by Apa 854; Laks 12.584 — a) TMd3 
^ 
, Be1
Pu8 
T
j
1
L
a
1 
— a-b) Pu7 [Jolly Nd] 
[Nd
] —b)oMy 
T M d 4 P u 2 P u
4 H o La1 P u 4 M T r
6
TMd3 
— c) Kt2 
wKt3 
Pu2 Pu4 
Be1 
— c-d) oMy
[= 8.355 a-b] — d) La1 
TMd4
354.* Päda s a-b omitted in NKf*. Cited by Apa 854; Laks 12.581 — a) Lo1 eCa
oMd1 TMd4 
H o o M d 1 — a-b) A
p
a
— b ) Be1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 MTr5 MTr6 Go 
Me appears to support the masculine; TMd4 
Jo1
Lo2 
o
O
r
" oMd1 
Lo1 Lo2
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]
Be1 wKt1 BKt5 oMd5 NNg oOr Ox2 Wa [Jolly M Me] Apa Jolly 
MTr5
TMd4 
La1 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 Go[Jolly G] 
NPu1
Ho 
Tr2 
Hy 
Bo 
Kt2 
— c) aKt5
NPu1 
L
a
1
P
u
2 P
u
4
T
M
d
3 
— d ) Pu2 Pu4 ÎT^TT-
NKt4 " 
MTr6
355. Omitted in wKt1 [haplo]. Cited by Ky 2.284; Apa 854; Laks 12.581 — a) \Kf La1
Tr1 
_ 
TMd4 
TMd3 
BKt5 Lo4 Lo5 Apa 
NKt4
• 
— b)Ho 
TMd4 
— c)NNg 
— d) oMd1 TMd3 cMd5
oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
356. Omitted in wKt1; placed after 358 in TMd3 oMy Tr1 [folly Nd] — a) oMd
 l TMd3
TMd4 GMd 5 oMy Tr2 [but cor sh] MTr6 
Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 
Lo2
— b) BBe2 Ho wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4


--- PAGE 742 ---
Chapter 8 
731
MTr6 [Jolly m]Rn [pätha ] _ 
Ho 
— c) TMd4 
Lo1 Ox2 Pu7 T r 2 s B e 2
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) wKt3 om 
TMd3 
oMd1
Tr2' 
Lo4Lo5
357. Pâda s a-b omitted in wKt1 — a) Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt3 La1 Ox2 Pu3 Tj1 MTr3 Wa
[Jolly N KuR] GoNäKu Rn Re Mr Mandlik KSS 
sBe2 
Lo1 Tt2
sOx1 sPu6 
J m " 
r M d
3 — b ) TMd4 
e
K
t
5
— c ) B o Pu7
TMd3 
Pu2 P
u
4
— d) wKt1 Kt2 oMd1 sOx1 
MTr6 
Tj2
358. Pâda s c-d omitted in oMd5. Cited by Vij 2.284; Madhs.sij— a) Lo2 
NKt4
La1 ' 
Be1 NKt4 cMd1 
. Bo Kt2 sKt5 Lo2 Lo3 oOrNPu1 Tj1 Vij 
— c)
Pu7 [Jolly G] " 
Tj2 
add 
—
 d) Hy om 
Be1 Bo Kt2 NKt
4 Lo1 
NNg
TMd3
Additional verse in Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
Dave KSS:
a) Pu2 
— c) Pu2
359. Pâda s c-d omitted in Lo2 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.584; pâda s c-d cited by Apa 855
— a) sOx1 sPu6 
. L a
1 T M d
3 
B e 1 T M d 4 
— d) Kt2 ßKt5
Lo1 NNg sOx1 sPu6 
.TMd4 
Be1 Jo2 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu7
Tr1 [but me sh] Tt2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G Nd] Go Laks 
Wa 
oOr
360. Omitted in Lo2; pâda s c-d omitted in MTr6. Cited by Apa&55; Laks 12.582 — a) Tr1
MTr5 
[asthefullpadajjTj1 
TMd3Jo/(y 
. 
— b) Kt1
— c) oMd1
 - 
oMd1 TMd4 MTr5 LakswKt1 La1 
— d) Tj1
rMd3 MTr4 '
361. Omitted in Lo2; padas a-b omitted in MTr6;padas a-b and c-d transposed in MTr4.
Cited by Apa 855; Laks 12.582 — a) oMd1 
[cf. 3600]; Laks =1" 
TMd4
NKt
4 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu4 Pu7 Go 
ßKt5 T r
2 s C a Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1
Lo3 TMd4 Tj ' Tj2 Laks Bh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) Ox2 NPu
1 
oMd5
— c) TMd4 
wKt3
 xMd4
NKt4
— b) sOx1 sPu6
— a-b) oMy


--- PAGE 743 ---
732 
Chapter 8
362. Cited by Vij 2.285;Apa 856; Laks 12.583 — a) Ho Pi? • 
La ' Pu2 Pu4
o M y 
T M d
3 — b
)
P
u
7
B
e
1 wKt1 
Tr2
oMy Í 
, Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
Ox2 
Laks [vl]
— c) MTr3 ; 
" 
Be1 
rMd4 
Bo 
Jo2 
La1 TMd4 MTr 3_ ,
NKt4 
Be1 Ho NKt4 TMd4 Tj ' ¡ 
Jo2 La1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg oOrsOx1 Pu2 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1
Vij Apa 
TMd 3' 
cMy [Jolly mi 
— d) NPu1 
^ B e
1
TMd4sOx'sPu6 
" TMd3 
Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 
Hy
Jo^Kt^Pu'Tj1
363. Cited by Apa 856; Laks 12.583 — a) La1 ' 
Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 Tj1 Apa
TMd4 
Bo 
TMd3 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
cMd1
TMd4 
Be1 NKf sKt5 Lo4
TMd3 oMd5 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Mir6 Apa Na 
; nBe2 La1 
NPu1 
~ 
Bo 
WaMTr6 
— c) Jo1
La1 Lo'Pu3 Jolly'' 
T M d
4 T j
2 
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu8
 
BBe2 La1 oMd5
NNg = 
sKt5 : 
oMy 
TMd3 
NNg 
A p a o O r
— d) Tr2 
w
K
t
1
H
o 
" 
Lo2 TMd3 ~ 
TMd4
364.Cited by Vij 2.288;Apa 858;Madh 3.321 — a) o M y T M d
4 
oMd1 *T:
oMd5 it 
viTr«' 
— b) oMd1 if înfr ; TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7
— c f o M d 1 T M d 4 P
u
7
H
y
o
O
r 
" 
" Lo1 
Pu5
TMd3 
w
K
t
1
•
— c-d)Be' 
[cf.
368 a-b] — d) Tr2 
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr ' MTr4 MTr6 \/olly M Nd Gr] çnjm -
365. Pâda- d omitted in wKt1; [Jolly M3"4] place verses 36s-39oafter verse 148. Cited by
Apa 858; Laks 12.597 — a) Be1 La1 Lo4 
H
y
o
M
d
1 
Lo5 TMd3
Be1 BBe2oMd5 sOx1 _ _ 
; MTr4 
— b) oMd1 
Tj '
oMy 
[lacuna]; B e 1 T M d 4 
Lo: 
Ho 
" 
TMd3
— c) Be1 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 
Bo N K t 4 N K t 4 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 
wKt1 La1 TMd3
oOr Tr2 
sCa 
rMd4 
Ho 
— d) NKf Lo1 
Be1
oMd5 
Jo2 
cMd1 
Jo2 Lo?TMd4Tj1 " 
Ho MTr4MTr6 
Tr1
' [ma ']
366. Pâda- a omitted in wKt1. Cited by Vij 2.288;Apa 859; Laks 12.595; Mâdh 3.321 —


--- PAGE 744 ---
Chapter 8 
733
a)wKt 3Pu 4 
Lo1 
oMyoOr 
— W Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Ox3 
Bo
Lo5 Tj1 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
N
K
t
4
; sBe2 
Apa [vi] 
.; — d)
wKt1 
sKt5 La1 oMd5 
Be1 
TMd4 
; TMd3
367. Cited by Vij 2.288; Apa 858; Laks 12.597; A/adA 3.321 — a)oMy 
Trl
mcsh 
. Lo1 Tj1 
oMd5
 
TMd3
 MTr6 
AW 5/¡ [patha]
[Nd gloss: 
|; Ox3 
Lato 
wKt1
 
TMd4
Pu7 
, 
, TMd 3~ 
L o 3 T j ' : — c) TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
oMd5
NPu1 
;cMd' 
wir4 Mir6
Tr1 
_ 
[butmcs^La.{\ 
' wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 
Kt2 
"
Tr2/Vä [with gloss 
-]Laks 
; NNg 
sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 
_ 
Mir5
BKt5 
Lo4 Lo5 
oOr 
Me Jha Dave
TMd4 
— d)"jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
Ox3 Pu2 [Jolly M] 
TMd3
xMd4 
La1
368. Cited by Vij 2.288; Apa 858; Laks 12.597; Màdh 3.321 — a) wKt1 La1 Tj1 MTr6
Nà 
L
a
1
L
o
1 
T
j
2
B
e
1 H o N N g Ox3 Ox2 Pu7
Mir5 Wa Laks 
Tr2 
sKt5 
nKf oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy La1 Pu2 Pu3
Pu4 Tr1 MTr6 \Jolly N Gr] 
V i j w K t
1 
Lo2 
Go Rn Ku
—
 b) sBe2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly N Gr] Vij Apa
Mädh 
—
 c)oMd5 
sBe2 
oOr 
. La1 Lo3 Tj1
 
TMd4
— d)BCawKt' La'sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
c M y L o 3 
Tr2 
; uKt5
Lo1 TMd3
369.* Cited by Apa 859; Laks 12.597; Mädh 3.321; päda s a-b cited by F;y'2.288 — a)
cMd1 TMd4 Ox3 MTr6 ' 
Be1 oMd T M d
3 T M d
4
 '<• 
Jm oMd1 TMd3
oMyMTr4 
sKt5 
— b) TMd3
 TMd4 Pu7
 MTr6 
Vij 
' Tj2 
sKt5
TMd3 TMd4 Tr1 [me to] 
T M d 4 o M d 5 
— cOBolxfTj 1 
oMd5
; Be1 Ox2 Wa 
Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 Pu8
Tj1 Tj2 MTr5 Bh Ku Mr Re Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave 
Pu4 
— c-d) TMd4 f^ =er
— d) oMd1 cMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Go Nd
La1 
, T M d
3 ' P u
2 
MTr
5 Laks 
TMd4Tj'
La1'
370. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Vij2.z88;Apa 859; Laks 12.597; Mädh 3.321 — a) Lo4
Lo5 NNg [Jolly M] 
'; BKt5 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G}Jolly
GMd1
La1
TMd3 
.  — b)oMd5
 Tr1
 NKt4


--- PAGE 745 ---
734 
Chapter 8
TMd3 
wKt1 
La1 
^ 
— b) Be1 oMd ' 
xMd4 
La1 
oOr
— c) Lo1 sOx1 Pu' sPu6 Pu8 Tr 2 • _
O
x
2 
sCa Hy Tj2
Wa [Jo//y K.U] 
uBe2 
Bo 
oOr 
Ho 
aKt5 Lo4 Lo5 Tj ' MTr6 
— d) oMd1
Pu2 Pu4 
. ßKt5 o O r M i r 6 w K t 3 
o M y T M d
3
oOr
371.* Cited by Vis 3.264; Laks 12.593; £^3.749; Maclli 1.119 — a) Ox3 
T Md3
oMy 
G
M
d
1
: Pu8 o m — b ) MTr6 
Mädh ;
TMd4 
Bo 
Be1 eCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Pu8
Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly Ku] Laks 
T
M
d
3
L
o
2 
sBe2 Ho Jo2 wKt1
aKt5 La1 sOx1 oOrNPu1 sPu6Tj' Tr1 [me s h to] [Jolly RT< 
Nä 
as pätha ; wKt3
xMd3 oMy " 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
Lo4 [AHÍ me] 
—
 d) TMd3 oMy
- 
oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd5 _ 
Mädh 
; NPu1
Pu8 
Jo1 
; W a f
372. Cited by Apa 857; Laks 12.587 — a) Pu5 Pu'jW; Be1 oOr 
— b) oOr
TMd4 
ßBe2 
Ox3 
Pu5 Pu7 armf^T; Jo2cMd' 
TMd4 NPu1
MTr4 MTr6
 
' — c) Pu5 Pu7 
Bo Pu2 Pu4 
_ 
Apa 
Kt2 
NNg
Hy 
: [om J — d) sKt5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M4"5'9] 
, Ho Lo2
NNgTj2 
Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 
;oOr 
wKt3 
~ 
ßBe2 La1 Ox2 Tj1
Be'Wai 
Tr2 
" 
Apa[v\]
373. Cited by Laks 12.589 — a) sKt5 NNg MTr4 MTr6 Me 
Me recognizes the
compounded form: 
Ox3 
— b) Tr2 
oOr 
Ox3
— c)oMd' 
. L o
5 N N g 
wKt3 
La1 
— d) Be1 Bo wKt3
NKr4 BK15 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 
Pu2
Pu4 
Pu5 Pu7
374.* Cited by Vij 2.286; Apda^j; Laks 12.590; De v 3.74 6; Mädh 3.318— a) Lo1
TMd4 
Lo2 
— b) TMd3 o M y N P u
1 
. Lo2 
TMd4 
Bo
NKt4 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
P
u
3
„ Tr2 ' 
Lo1 
; — c) rMd4
; ^ 
w K t 3 _ 
Pu5 Pu7[Jo//y GNd]Jo/(y 
wKt1 BKt5 Lo2
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Apa Mädh
sKt5 
sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 nKf Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1
sPa6T}í Tí 2Wa[JolfyMR]yijLaksDevMandlikJhaKSSDave 
B
e
1
" La1
NPu1 
" Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 cMy sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly M G R Nd]
wKt3 °íráW ; Be1 Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo" Lrf Pu5 Pu7 NNg Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS


--- PAGE 746 ---
Chapter 8 
735
NKt4 
— d)Mädh 
sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKt
4 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mir3 Vij Dev \Jolly MGR] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ox3
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1 BKt5
375. Omitted in MTr3; pada-d omitted in Tj2. Cited by Laks 12.591; Dev 3.747— a) Lo4
Lo5 
TMd4 
Lo1 TMd3 o M d
5 T j
1 
Be1 sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
TMd3 oMd5 Ox3 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— b) sBe2 La1 sPu6 Dev
NKf 
oMd1 
oMd 5oMy 
TMd4 
Be1 Wa
TMd3 
sKt5 
— c)cMy 
i M d 4 r M d 3
oOr 
— d) wKt1 
o O r B e
1 Hy Kt2 
sBe2 Lo5 Pu2 Pu4 
Ox3 Pu2 Pu4
MTr4 MTr6
376. Omitted in Ox3 Tj2; päda s a-b omitted in MTr3. Cited by Vij 2.z86-¿4pa 857; Laks
12.591; Dev 3.747; Mädh 3.318—a) Dev 
iMd3 
w K t
1 s B e
2
Lo4 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
' — b ) Laks 
Mädh
Vij 
K t 2 N K t 4 
— c) Be1 
. TMd3 TMd4
¡ 
Tr2 
— d)TMd4 
Lo3oOrTj' 
HoLo2cMd' 
Pu8
377. Cited by Vij 2.286; ApaSsj; Laks 12.591; Dev 3.747; Madh^.yiS, — a) wKt3
MTr5 Mädh Vij . Apa 
Pu2 P i f w K t 3 
— b) Bo 
La1 
— c)
TMd4 
_ 
Kt2 
MTr6; 
— d)wKt'oMy 
, oMd1
 •
378.* Päda s b-d omitted in Lo1 [haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.286; Laks i2.588;Madh 3.317;
päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.8i;Dev 3.741; andpâda s c-d by Dev 3.745 — a) NKt4 MTr3
wKt3 
Jo2 om 
TMd4 
— b) Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo ' Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo2
Lo3 NNgsOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave
Ho 
Tj2 
oMd5 
Be1 Wa 
Ox3 Ti2 MTr6 
TMd4
— c) Pu4 
La1 T r
2 — c-d) TMd4 
— d) Tr2
La1
379. Pâda- a omitted in Lo1. Cited by Apa 681; Laks 12.588; Dev 3.2.<)3-fl4âdh 1.399 —
a) TMd3 oOr 
w K t
3 B K t
5 Me Jha Dave 
La1 
Me gives
y|u||Pb*l aspäfhäntara
; sBe2 Bo [but cor] Jm wKt1 oMd1 TMd4 cMd5 
Tr2 
Pu2


--- PAGE 747 ---
736 
Chapter 8
Pu4 
Mir3 
— c-d)Mädh gives instead 8.3233-0 — d) oOrJha Dave 
oMd5
380.* Cited by Apa 842; Laks 12.783; Dev 3.291; päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.81, 3.257; Apa
1079 — a) TMd3 
_ TMd4 
Pu2 P
u
4
— b) Ox2 
Be1 Bo Ho Jo2
nKt5 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 iMd4 cMd5 oOr sOx1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 uT^Apa
1079 Laks D e v 
x
M
d
3
W
a 
cMy 
t h e reading
; 
is supported by Me Nd Go Ku —
 c) Ho sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly M] 
sKt5 TMd3
oMd5 NNg MTr5 [Jolly Nd Gr] 
NKt4 
Lo1 
oMd ' 
Pu5
sPu6 
; MTr6 
; Tr2
381. Cited by Vij 2.81; Laks 12.783; Dev 3.294 — a) Pu8 
TMd3 oMy
MTr5 
Bo 
— a-b) Dev 
oMd1 NNg Lo1
BBe2 Kt2wKt3 ~ 
Hy 
O x
3 L a ' oMd'TMd 3 TMd4oMd5 oMy Pu3
Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr
6''[Jolly Nd] Dev 
eKt5 Laks 
w
K
t
3
— c)
382. Cited by Vij 2.286; ApaSsj; Laks 12.588; Dev 3.747; Mädh 3.319 — a) La1
TMd4 
Be1 
— b)La' 
NPu
1 
TMd4 
wKt3 
La1 
oMd1
— c) NKt4 Pu5 Pu7 om 
: Hy 
— d) Bo 
" Laks 
~ wKt1 La1 Wa
Additional verse in Be1 NKt4 La1 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Mandlik [
] KSS Dave; commented by Nä Rc; päda s a-b in Wa:
a) NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa 
Be1 Pu8 
— b) La1 om 
Be1 Ox2
— c)Pu2Pu4 
Ox2 
Be1
383. Verses 383 and 384 transposed in Lo' oOr; päda s a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by Vij
2.286; Apa 856; Laks 12.588; Mädh 3.318; päda s a-b cited by Dev 3.746 — a)rMd4
NKt4 
oMy 
La1 
Lo3cMd' oOr T j
1 — a-b) Ho sOx'sPu6 
— b)
Pu2 Pu4 
Be1 N K t
4 T M d
4 
c M d 5 T r 1 [but me sh} 
sBe2
om 
Bo Lo5 oMd5 MTr4 
Lrf
 ; 
— c) Jha 
Dave 
Ox2 
" NKt4
• 
~ NNgNPu' Pu2 Pu4 
NNg 
TMd4 
.Pu 7 
— d)ßBe2
oMd1 oMd5 oOr sOx' Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
wKt' 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] Vij Mädh
Tr2 
T M d
4 V i j Mädh 
Tj2 
iMd3 oMy
wKt3
Bo
— d)xMd3
Wa
  Pu5 Pu7
Ho Lo2 sOx1
oMd5 Dev
 — d)oOr
NKt4
 TMd4
Be1
Pu5 Pu7
La1 Ox2
TMd4 
— b)


--- PAGE 748 ---
Chapter 8 
737
384.* Omitted ¡n NKt4 Lo2 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Mir5 Wa; the verse is not commented by Nä
Bh — a) cMd5 
T M d
3 — b) Be1 sCa Jo2 oMy oOr Tj ' Tr! Mir3
La1 
TMd4 
Pu2 
sBe2 
La1 
Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3oOr Tji uTr^Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Pu2 Pu4 Tr ' MTr6 
Jo2oOrTj' 
Pu8 
— c) La1 
.Be1
sBe2 wKt1 ^T; NPu1 
o
O
r
B
o Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Lo4 Lo5
oMd1 oMd5 oOr Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly KSS ' 
_ sCa 
Be1 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' Rn
TMd4 
[om 
\ —
 d) cMd1 ^f%PT; Lo5 
~ " Pu3 Pu4 
NPu1
TMd4 
La1 
Bo Lo5 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 
Ho 
Be1 
oMy
385. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Apa 856; Laks 12.589; Dev 3.745; pada-d cited in Vij
2.294 —a) wKt1 
Bo Lo1 Tr1 Apa [v\]sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 oOr Tj2 MTr3
Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave KSS 
oOr sOx1 sPu6 
— a-b) oMd1 TMd4
[Jolly M] 
[TMd4 
.] — b)Bo 
O\2Apa[v\]
Jo2 wKt1 NKt
4 sKt5 La1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa 
sCa
Ho oOr sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 oMy 
TMd3 oMy Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Dev 
— c)Tj'
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 MTr6 
sCa NKt4 La1 Lo1 NNg Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5 Apa
oMd ' 
: — d) D
e
v
o
O
r 
' oMd5 
. La1 Pu3 Tr2
Lo1 Pu4 
"
o
M
d
1
; T
M
d
4
B
o 
Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Tj2
Between päda s a-b and c-d, sKt5 adds: ' 
' [see above
variant for 385 päda s a-b].
Additional verses in Pu2 [omits last half verse] Pu4 Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
1. b) KSS ' 
— c) Pu2 Pu4
2. C)
386. Cited by Laks 12.600 — a) oOr 
Be1 Ox2 
, Tr2
 
, Wa 
Bo
sCaLa'MTr6 
— b)oMy 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 oMd5 
MTr4 MTr6
oOr 
— c) oMy lacuna for whole päda ; xMd3 T 
oMd '
oMd 5 : 
Lo1 sOx1 Pu4 Wa Jha DaveoMd5 
MTr6 
TMd4
— d) uKt5 
TMd4 
, oMy 
wKt3


--- PAGE 749 ---
738 
Chapter 8
387. Päda s c-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.600 — a) oMd1 TMd4 
ßBe2 La1
oMdsoOr 
Ox2 
Ho sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 
Tj1 
. MT^MTr6
— b) Bo 
, P u
3 — c) La1 T
r
2
_ 
Pu3 
" sBe2
sKt5 
oMy 
Hy 
" 
sKt5 Wa 
Bo sOx1 sPu6 Tj1
Lo5 
_ oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy [Jolly Nd G r ] e , B ¿ Pu8 
Mir4 mir6
Tr1 
Be1 
— d) Ho La1
388. Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.368 — a) cMy 
wKt1 
wKt3 om
— b ) TMd3 
Mir5 •
L
a
1 
Pu3
eBe2 wKt3 Lo5 oMd1 [Jolly M] 
" 
váCt
1 : 
Tj1 [Jolly R
]
c
M
y
[Jolly Nd]Jolfy 
Pu7 
HoTr1 
" 
Pu5 Pu7 om 
— c) oMd5
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
[ o M y ] ; T M d 4 ' ; wKt1 
— d) oMy Mir6
sBe2 oOr 
wKt1 
final 
om in sKt5 and ma in Lo4 NNg
389.Cited by Apa 823 — b) TMd4 om— 
c) Tj ' 
TMd3
TMd4 
— d ) P u
5 P u
7 s B e
2 B o N N g T j
1 
sBe2 
Bo Tr2
^S": ; Laks Apa 
, TMd3 oMy
390. b) Be1 Bo ßKt5 cMy Tj2 
NKt4 oMd5 MeoOr 
oMd5
— c ) TMd4 
sOx1 s P u
6 N K t
4 
"
s
K
t
5 
Lo4 Lo5
Tr1 
T M d 3 o M d 5 o M y — d) Pu7 [Jolly G] 
TMd3
sBe2 T 
. oMy 
Ho 
NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 Wa
Addtional verse in Lo4 Lo5:
d)Lo5
391. a) Jo1 
TMd4 
Lo2 
Lo5' 
— c)Be'
BCawKt3 
La1 
Jo2 Lo3 
Tj1 
NKf NPu1 
' TMd4
Tr2 
MTr4MTr6 
;TMd3 oMy 
oMd5 
— d) Lo5
392.* Cited by Apa 835; Laks 12.562 — a) Ho wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 cMd1 TMd4 oMd5 Ox2


--- PAGE 750 ---
Chapter 8 
739
Pu8!]1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Me J¿a £>ave 
oOr 
oMy
BKt5 La1 Lo3 
Lo2 
TMd4 ^ 
'; oMd5 _ 
sBé 
— b) Pu7 
TMd4
oMd1 
NPu1 
Pu3 Tr2 
Bo 
NNg 
—
c) Be1 
Lo1 
Lo4 
, TMd4 
Pu2
TMd3 oMy 
oMd1 
. Tr2 
, BKt5 
[Jolly M8'9 G
¥M\Jollyr 
Ox2 
— d)NNg' 
oOr 
La1 ;
393. Omitted in sOx1 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.562 — a) Lo1 
Bo
— b) oMy om 
Bo Ho 
NKt4 Pu2 
" TMd3 
oMy 
wKt1 NKt4
La1 Lo1 TMd3 oMy 
wKt3 
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1
Mir5 
; Bo NNg 
' — c) wKt3 ' Lo5 
La1 
Be 
TMd3
Lo3 Tj1 
— d) TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
MTr5 . 
.sCa Hy Jo1
wKt1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 NNg oOr Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 MTr3 [folly M G] 
Lo2 
Kt2 
uBe2
La1
394.Pada-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 1191 — a) o M y T r ' MTr5 
sKt5
oMd1
 
__ 
Be1 
iMd3 
nKf 
, ßBe2 
— b) Pu3 
Laks
Kt2 
. wKt1 i
T
M
d
3 
Pu5 Pu7 
oOr 
Tr2 om 
—
 c)
oMd1 
Laks 
TMd3 
wKt1 
,, _ 
Bo
• — d) oMd1 
Be1 eCa Jo2 NKt4 Lo1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1
MTr5 MTr6 
Tr2 
T
M
d
4
M
e Ku Nd Re support the plural; Rn Mr
Go support the singular; TMd3 cMy [Jolly Nd] 
oMd5 
B
o
w
K
t
3
BBe2
395. a) BKt5 
wKt3 
; [Jolly M G] 
Pu5 Pu7
TMd4 
— b ) [Jolly M
8
"
9
]
T
r
2 
oMd5 ,
T
M
d
3
wKt1 sKt5 Lo1 TMd4 oMd5 NPu1 
Pu2 Pu4 "fërcFT: ; oMy 
— c) Tr2
• 
H y L o
1 
L a
1 " T M d
3 
— d ) B o
396.* Omitted in Tj2. Cited by Vij 2.238; Apa 823; Laks 12.526; Mädh 3.311 — a) oMy
TMd3 
Pu2 P
u
4
; Be ' Bo Ho NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Wa [Jolly M G] Apa Laks Mädh 
sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 " M T r
4
MTr6 
H
o
" — a-b) Lo1 
— b)
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy La1 Ox2NPu' Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4
MTr5
 MTr6 [Jolly M Gr Nd] Vij Apa
Mädh 
: [ o M d ' N P u
1 
MTr4 MTr6 
" TMd3 ;
]
;
sBe2 Pu2 Pu4 W a 
B o . 
T j 1 . N K t ^ P T O T 0 ; Pu3 
H y
— c)Jo2Tj' 
B e 1 — d) La1 oOr Pu2 Pu4 
oMd5 " 
Tr2


--- PAGE 751 ---
740 
Chapter 8
; Lo2 
cMd1 TMd4 Laks 
Ox2
397. Päda s c-d omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apa 785; Laks 12.524 — a) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
[Jolly G 
]; Bo om 
La1 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
La1 Lo1 [but
cor] TMd4 oMy MTr3 [Jolly Nd] 
. T M d
3 . B o 
— b) Pu5 Pu7
TMd3 
TMd3 oMy oOrsOx1 sPu6 MTr3 Nd 
Lo1 TMd4
[Jolly Nd] " 
wKt3 
— c) oOr 
TMd4 
Lo5 
— d) T r
2 , Lo3
Tj1 
Pu2 Pu" 
Pu5 Pu7 
oMd1 
Bo
398. Päda s a-b omitted in ßKt5. Cited by Apa 833; Laks 12.518 — a) Bo Lo5 Tj1
Lo1 
T
r
2
B
e
1 
— b ) T
M
d
3
, TMd4 
TMd4 W a
Pu8 
Tj2 
Jo2 L
a
k
s
— c) Be1 Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 Tj1
Ho 
L o
2 P u
8 - o M d
5 
— d) TMd4 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
399. Omitted in oMy Pu8. Cited by Laks 12.516 — a) Be1 oMd1 
wKt1 
Lo1
Bo 
— b) TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 om 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
— c) sOx1
sPu6c 
. 
,TMd3oMd5 
La1 TMd4 
. 
, sBe2 sKt5 
oOr 
— d)
TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
Tr1 [but me sh] 
' 
wKt1 ' 
Be1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly G] 
Pu7 
_
400. Omitted in Pu5; päda s c-d omitted in oMd1 [haplo] — a) Bo Lo5 Tj1 
oMd5
Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
•; La1 
TMd3 
— b) TMd4 oMd5 oMy 
'; oMd1 om
[jumps to 4Oid, haplo]; Be1 
, NNg 
; sKt5 
TMd3 
— c) sKt5
: 
oMd5
401.Omitted in oMd1 [up t
o
]
. 
Cited by Apa Bzj;Laks 12.516 — a) sKt5
oMy om 
Lo1 oMd5 
BBe2 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Apa ' 
— b) Ho _ 
— c) Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G]~ 
oOr 
— d)eBe2Tr2 
wKt1 Tj2 
; TMd3
402. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4~5]. Cited by ¥1/2.251; Apa 827; Laks 12.517; Mädh
3.315 — a) ApaMädh 
T
M
d
3
— b) VijApa Mädh
wKt1
— d) Be1 sBe2 TMd3
v
 'oOr
 Pu2 Pu4


--- PAGE 752 ---
Chapter 8 
741
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
TMd4 
eBe2 Bo wKt1 ßKt5 TMd3 xMd4 oMy NNg oOr
Ox2 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Mir5 Mir6 [Jolly M Nd] ' 
; Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
Laks—
 c)
La1 ^ 
. oMd1 
M T r 5 T M d 3 
NNg ' • w K t 1 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [me to}
Tr 2 
Tj1 
MTr4 MTr6 
O x
2 T M d
3
cMy 
sKt5 
. cMd5
403. *Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4"5]. Cited by Apa Sz^-Laks 12.517 — a) xMd3
Be1 NKt4 oMd1 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 
La1 
NKt4 NPu1 
—
b) Lo2 cMd1 rMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr^Tr5 MTr6 [folly Nd] Nâ 
. 
[TMd3
Tj2 [Jolly R] 
oOr [Jolly M8] 
Be' Ho ßK.15 sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2
Pu4 sPu6 
, ßBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 NNg Pu8 Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha
KSS Dave 
Lo1 
La1 
Apa Laks 
sOx1 sPu6
Lo1' 
H y — 
c ) T r 2 o m — d ) oMd5 
Pu5 Pu7
sBe2 Ho wKt1 NKt
4 La1 sOx1 sPu6 MTr5
404. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4~5]. Cited by Vij 2.263; Apa 834; Laks 12.789 — a) Bo
H o NKt4 Lo1 
Be1 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 
Pu8 ;
i sBe2 oMd1 oMy 
B e 1 s O x 1
sPu6 
Hy Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 
Be1 Ho NKt
4 La1 oMd1 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 sPu6 MTr6
Re 
MTr3 
TMd3 
— b) Lo1 
_ 
TMd4 
.. Be1 wKt1
oMd1 VijApa 
' Pu5 Pu7 
sBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo3 TMd3 cMy sOx1 sPu6
Tj1 Wa [Jolly R N Nd] Re Jolly 
TMd3 
Ox2 Pu7 
Bo Jo2 uKt5 La1 Lo2 Lo3
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 [Jolly G\Laks Apa 
oOr Pu3 Tr2 Wa 
; oMd1 MTr5 
oMy ; " MTr4
 MTr6
TMd3 
Be'[yo//yM]= 
Ho NKt 4 
, sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5 
Pu2 Pu4
[Jolly Nd1] 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
; Pu3 Tr2 
" 
Jha Dave
Pu4 
.La 1 
K t 2 , o O r 
rMd3 o
M
y
— d)BooMd 5 
oMd1
; NPu
1 Pu4 
Tr1 
TMd4 _ 
Apa I
405.Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4~5]. Cited by Vij 2.263; Laks 12.789 — a) Lo1
Pu5owi 
~ TMd3 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b)TMd4 
sOx1
sPu6 
" 
" 
Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 Tj1 
La1 
sBe2 
wKt1 
cMd1 
Ho
oOr 
B K t 5 ' * 
o M y T M d 3 
— c ) T j 2 T r 2 " sBe2 
TMd4 
—
d)oOt 
3Md'TMd4 Ox2 Pu3 T
r
2
B
e
1 Hy Lo1
406. Omitted in Lo4 Lo5 [Jolly M4~5]. Cited by Laks 12.789 — a) KÍ Lo1 Pu4
La1 MTr5 
Lo2 
TMd4 
TMd3 oMy 
Bo— 
a-b) MTr5
— b) Ho La1 Lo1 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4
supports this reading; Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
gloss of Bh
oMdscMy
 TMd4


--- PAGE 753 ---
742 
Chapter 8
Pu
5 sPu
6 Pu
7 мТг
4 
мТг
6 
вК1
5оОг 
Pu
2 P u
4 B e
1
— с) NNg 
wKt
1 o M d
1 s K t
5 
wKt
3 La
1 oMd
5 Pu
5 Pu
7 Tr
2
мТг
6 
— d)oOr 
T M d
4 " 
oMd
5
407. ma in Lo
4. Cited by Vij 2.263; Laks 12.789 — a) NPu
1 _ 
Be
1 Bo La
1 Lo
4 Lo
5
cMd
1 TMd
3 TMd
4 oMd
5 cMy PiiPu
4^
1 
Pu
7 
[
т
с
]
; Tr
1
oOr 
— b ) o M d ' T M d
3 o M d
5 ' 
Tr
2 
— c)
xMd
4 
" — d) Be
1 TMd
4 Pu
4 
cMd
1 TMd
3 Tr
2 
wKt
1 
Bo
NKt
4 
мТг
5" 
Pu
7 
„Pu
5 [Jolly G] 
Vij
408. Cited by Laks 12.790 — a) TMd
4
 
• 
; oOr 
вВе
2 
мТг
4 мТг
6
TMd
3 cMd
5 oMy 
Be
1 [but тс] вСа Ho Jo
1 Kt
2 вК1
5 La
1 Lo
1 cMd
5 NNg
sOx
1 NPu
1 Pu
3 Pu
4 Pu
5 sPu
6 Pu
7 [Jolly M
8-
9 Nd] 
cMd
1 
T M d
4 — b)
wKt
1 
. s K t
5 T M d
3 
Tr
2 
TMd
3 
— c) Pu
7 [Jolly
G]
 : 
Be
1 вСа Ho Kt
2 sKt
5 La
1 NNg NPu
1 Pu
2 Pu
4 [Jolly M
8~
9 Nd]
мТг
5 
T M d
4 " 
s O x ' s P u
6 T r
2 o O r 
— d ) oMd
5
wKt
3 
" 
wKt
1 La
1 
"" 
Be
1 
" 
TMd
3
409.Cited by Laks 12.790 — a) L o
5 w K t
3 Lo
1 NPu
1 
oMy
TMd
4 
— b) B o L a k
s 
; Wa 
— с) вСа Но Jo
1
 BKt
5
La
1 Lo
2 NNgsOx
1 NPu
1 Pu
5 sPu
6 Pu
7 [Jolly M
8"
9 Nd] 
вВе
2 TMd
3 
T M d
4 P u
2
Pu" 
L
a
1
P
u
2 '
c
M
d
1 TMd
3 oMy 
K t
2 T M d
4
— d) wKt
3 Lo
2 
r M d
4 T j
2 i B e
1 Bo Ho wKt
1 Kt
2 TMd
4
410. Päda s c-d omitted in BKt5. Cited by Laks 12.776 — a) cMd1 мТг
6 
— b) Ho
wKt
1 Kt
2 La
1 Pu
5 Pu
7 
вВе
2 
NPu
1 
Be
1 
Pu
5 Pu
7 
~ " 
sKt
5 sOx
1
sPu
6 Tr
2 
— c) Tr
2 
oMd
1 
' — d) La
1 
wKt
1 
TMd
3 oMd
5
oMy Tr
1 Lak, 
мТг
4 мТг
6 
Ну wKt
3 Pu
5 
oMd
1 TMd
4 
Be
1
411.* Omitted in вК-t
5. Cited by Apa 789; Laks 12.397; Dev 3.462; Mädh 3.244 — a)
sPu6 от 
— b) Mädh 
c M d
1 B e
1 вВе
2 Во Но Ну Jm Jo
1 wKt
1 Kt
2
wKt
3 oOr sOx
1 Pu
3 sPu
6 Pu
8 Laks Mädh Jolly 
La'TMd4oMds 
— c) oMd1 Tj2
Tr2 
— d) oMd1 Pu2 P u 4 o M d 5 
Bo Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo2 Lo4 [cor to}
Lo5 oMd1 oMd5 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly Go M4 Ku R] Ku Ш Mandlik KSS Dave 
Tf
,. 
мТг
5


--- PAGE 754 ---
Chapter 8 
743
412. Omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apa 789; Laks 12.397; Dev 3.463; Mädh 3.244 — a) Pu5
Pu1 [Jolly G] 
wKt1 
Tr2 
Mir3 
Tj1 
Be1 Kt2
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo2 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo5 xMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1
Tr2 Wa 
TMd3 cMd5 oMy Dev Laks Mädh Apa 
MTr5 
Bo
MTr3"" 
— b)xMd3 
Wa 
— c) La1 
sOx1
sPu6 ~ 
PuJ 
M z [ p a t h a ] ; oMd1 T
j
1
o
M
y 
Pu5
Pu7' 
. M i r 5 o M d 5 M i r 6 N P u 1 Pu2 P u 4 i M d 3 
xMd4 Tr1
Be1 
" 
sBe2 Ho wKt1 NKt4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Tr2 Nâ 
Wa
— d) NNg Tr1 [but cor s h] ' 
Tj1 
Bö Mir6 
wKt1 NKt4 Lo1 oMd' NNg Pu8 iviTr5
Laks Dev 
Tr2
413. Omitted in Tj2; pâda s a-b omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apa 789; Laks 12.397; Dev
3.463; Mädh 3.244 — a) eBe2 Mir4 
cMd5 omTj ' 
MTr4 
— b) TMd3
Be1 Bo 
— c) TMd3 
La1 om 
oMy 
MTr3
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Be1 uKt5 La1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd5 NNg Ox2 Wa [Jolly M] Laks Dev
Mädh 
~ 
Jo2 wKt1 Lo3
414. Cited by Apa 786; Laks 12.389—a) oMd1 
. 
[om ]; Tr2
Pu4 Apa 
ß
K
t
5
; Be1 ßCa wKt1 wKt3 La1 oOr Pu5 Pu7 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly G] 
x M d
3 T j
1 
; Lo1 
" ~ - — b) sKt5 
; La1
oOr 
— c) sCa Ho NKt
4 sOx1 sPu6 " 
" 
sKt5 
Tr2 om~ 
Be1
Pu3 Tr2 
Tj1 
P u
8 — d)oMd'TMd 3iMd 4 cMdsoMy MTr4MTr6
•< 
M
T
r
5
o
O
r 
Laks 
NKfLa'sOx 1
sPu6 
N
P
u
1
A
p
a
415. Cited by Vij 2.181; Apa 78g;Mädh 3.240— a) wKt1 Lo4 
wKt3
B o Pu5 Pu7 
o M y T M d
3 
sOx1 sPu6 
L o
1 N K t
4
wKt1 
B e 1 ß K t 5 °iTFTT — a-b) oMd1
— b)Pu 5Pu 7Tj' 
T M d 3 s K t 5 
wKt3 
Lo2 !
r
M
d
4
oMd5 NPu1 Pu4 
Pu5 P u
7 B o Lo1 xMd3 
— c) eBe2 Bo Jo2 wKt1 wKt3
Lo1 TMd3 NNg NPu
1 Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 Vij Apa 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
B e 1 B K t 5
oOr 
wKt1 La 1" 
. A p a s K t
5 
'—c-d)oMd' ;
— d)BosOx'sPu6^a; ~ 
NKt4


--- PAGE 755 ---
744 
Chapter 8
416. Omitted in Lo5. Cited by Safe 6.1.12—a) wKt1 
^ 
. sOx1 sPu6
Jo2Lo3Tj'Sae: 
_ 
—b)Sab
 
Lo1 
Be1 xMd4 
La1
oMy Pu2 Pu3 
wKt3 
NNg [but corfh] 
—
 c) Lo1 
Be1
Lo3 
~ -d)Jo 2Lo 3GMd'xMd 3xMd 4GMd 5GMy Tj'Tr1 MTr6 
" 
Hy
xMd3
417. Cited by Laks 12.393 — a) xMd4 
; Be1 Bo Ho Jo1 Kt 2 wKt3 Lo3
oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 MTr5 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but cor sh]
MTr4
 MTr6 [folly Nd] 
Pu3 
uKt5 oMd ' xMd3 
Lo3 
M T r 6 — b)
TMd3 
Jo2 Lo3 Ox2 Tj1 
Wa 
— c) xMd4 
— d) wKt1
NKt4 MTr4 MTr6 
xMd3 c M d
5 o M d
1
418. Cited by Laks 12.776 — a) Bo Lo2 Wa 
wKt3 
xMd4 
; NNg
— b)Lo5oMy 
— c ) L o
3 T j ' T r
2 
Bo 
rMd4 sOx1
! 
w K t
1 M T r
4 
" 
— d)Jo[ 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
xMd4
419. a)Tr2 
_ 
— b) Lo4 Lo5 xMd3 xMd4 oMy 
Tr2
Be 
wKt1 
— c) Tj ' 
" Be1 sKt5 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Wa
[BKt5 
]; La1 
Tj2 
; xMd" 
" Tr2 
— d) La1
oMy 
; oMd1 M
T
r
6
, La1 Tr2 
N N g
420. Not commented by Re. Cited by Mâdh 3.396 — a) Jo1 íT^T T — b) Bo NPu1
Lo4 Leí xMd3 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 ' 
BKt5 
sBe2 
sCa
oMyMTr4MTr6 
x M d
4 , ' — c ) La1 
Be1 L o
1 w K t
3
BKt5 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 NNg Ox2
 NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Go
oMy 
— d) xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but me s h] MTr4 MTr6 folly Nd Gr]
La1


--- PAGE 756 ---
Chapter 8 
745
Colophon: Be1 Lo1 Lo3 xMd3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPií 
w K t 3 s K t 5 oMd1
xMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr6 om 
Lo1 
wKt3 o
m
w
K
t
1 Lo1
NNg
Be1 
"


--- PAGE 757 ---
i.* Cited by Laks 12.601; Dev 3.561 — a) Lo1 iMd4 oOr N?U' Pu2 Pu4. 
; ßKf Tr2
La1 Lo3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 MTr6 
Lo2 
— b) Ho wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 BKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj ' Tr1 Tr2
MTr4 MTr5MTr6 KSS Sft; NKt4 oMd1 oMy Tj2 
Wa 
sOx1 sPu6 
xMd4
o O r 
— c
)
B
C
a
w
K
t
'
, T
r
2
o
M
d
1 
[ o m ] — d ) Lo4
TMd4 NNg [Jolly M]
2.* Cited by Vij 2.295 [intro.]; Laksi2.6oi; Dev^.562; Mâdh 3.322 — a)iviTr6
Tj1 
— b) L o 2 T M d 4 
T
M
d
3
— c) Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
Kt 2 BKt5 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Vij Laks Mandlik Jolly
Jha K S S Dave 
^
[
B
K
t
5
J
o
2 Lo3 Tj1 
: ] ; w K t 3
M T r 4
wKt3 " 
oMd1 
oMd5 o
M
y
, Ox2 
— d ) L o
1 s B e
2
Ho Jo2 La1 sOx1 sPu6 Laks 
[Jolly Nd] - 
Hy K? NNg Pu5 Pu7 MTr3 Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
P i / T M d 4
3. 
Cited by Laks 12.602; Dev 3.564; Mâdh 2.286; pâda s a-b cited by Dev 3.574, and
pâda- d by Vij 2.136 — a) Lo2 Wa 
T
M
d
4
— c) Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 cMy
Tj1 Tr1
 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly R Nd] Laks Mâdh 
[MTr5 
wKt3
TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr6 
MTr4 
]; Kt2 Lo2 Lo4 Wa 
La1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
NKt4
4.* Cited by Laks 12.604 — a) Kt2 
" 
wKt3 
sKt5 
Hy om 
Be1
BBe2 Bo nCa Ho Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 Wa Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
o O r L a
1 
—
b) Be1 
. L
o
4
. ßBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave
•
w
K
t
1
o
O
r 
_ " ; L o
2 w K t
1 
Pu8 
TMd3
wKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Ti2 Wa Laks Mandlik
746
— d)Be
 La1
sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3


--- PAGE 758 ---
Chapter 9 
747
Jolly KSS Dave 
oOr 
Lo1 
oMd1 oOr 
Mir6 
Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 
TMd3 
TMd4 
[?]
5. 
Cited by Laks 12.603; Dev 3.562; Mädh 3.323 — a) iMd4 
sKt5 La1
Jo1 om 
— b) Jm Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo2 NNg Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
BKt5 
sCa Laks
—
 c) Lo3 Tj1 
— d) oMd1 sOx1 s P u
6 T j
2 
TMd4 
oMd5
Hy 
ioMd'NPu'Pi^Tj 1'
Additional verse in Bo sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS:
a)BosPu6 
— b)Tr 2'" 
— c) Bo sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Tr2
6. 
Cited by Laks 12.603; Dev 3.562; Mâdh 3.323 — a) Ho 
oMd' 
MTr6 
—
cOsBe2 
Pu3 
TMd3 
oOr . , wKt3 
Pu5 Pu7 
— d) Pu2
Pu4 ; 
BKt5 La1 
TMd3 sOx1 sPu6
7. 
Cited by W.v 1.80; Laks 12.603; Dev 3.563; Mâdh 3.323 — a) Là cMd 5 
Tr2
B o 
B K t 5 w K t 1 
o
M
y
K
t
2 
TMd4 o m
— b) MTr3 çROTT 0; cMy 
— c) L o
4 P u
3 Pu8 Tr2 
wKt1 Lo3 Tj1 Laks
[Laks 
]; wKt1 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr4MTr6 
TMd4
[Jolly Nd] 
— d) TMd3 cMd5 
Jm wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 
D e v T r
2
Pu8
8. 
Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly G]
[iMd3 
]; Hy Kt2 Lo2 Tj1 [corto] 
— b) TMd3 
Bo Tr2
oMd1 
" 
K t
2 o M y 
T
M
d
4
T
r
1 
Tr2
— c)NPu' 
; Tj1 
TMd4 
cMy " 
La1 Pu2
Jo1 Lo1 TMd3 
— d) BKt5
9 . C i t e d by Laks 12.607; Dev 3.565—a) oMd1 
Ox2 
—tí)Lak s
Lo4c 
NPu'MTr6 
~c)oMy 
* cMd1 
— d) wKt3 TMd3
La1 oMy MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Laks 
BBe2 sKt5


--- PAGE 759 ---
748 
Chapter 9
10. Placed after verse 12 in Bo; pâda s c-d omitted in Be1 wKt1 [haplo]. Cited by Laks
12.608; Dev 3.565 Mädh 3.323 — a)oMd5 
xMd4 
— b) oMy
NNg oOr Mir6 
Pu2 P
u
4
— c) Lo1 oOr Pu2 Pif Wa 
" 
[oOr
]; TMd4 
w K t
3 w K t
3 TMd3 oMy sOx1 NPu1 Pu4 sPu6 Wa
•— d)xMd3 
HoLo1 
Dev 
oMd1 rMd4 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr5 
sBt? NNg 
T M d
4 :
11. Cited by Laks 12.608; Dev 3.566; Mädh 3.323 — a)sOx' sPu6 MTr5 
oMy
NPu1 Pu3 
Pu2 Pu4 
Vu1 [but cor] 
—
 b) Lo4 [Jolly M ]
MNg 
; Lo1 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 cMd5 Ox2 " 
Hy 
; Lo1
La1 " 
- d) oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr6 Dev 
HorMd4 NNg [Jolly
M ] 
sKt5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
B
o 
Hy Lo1 
s B e
2 [ J o l l y R
N] Nä Mädh 
w
K
t
3
T
r
2 " 
Pu3 Pu4 Nä [pätha ] 
. 
. Lo4
NKt4' 
x M d 3 ~ 
BosOx'sPu6 
. wKt3 
Be1 Hy Lo1 oOr
Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2 Ku Jha KSS Dave 
NPu ' " 
oMy Ox2 Mädh 
P u 7 m e s h to
TMd4
12. Cited by Laks 12.608; pâda s a-b cited by Dev3.567, 745 and päda s c-d by Dev
3.566 —a) Jo1 
L a ' c M d
1 
oMy 
NNg Tr1 
oMd1 Pu5 Pu7
cMy 
La1 
— b) Ho1 
" Jo2Tj'. 
NKt4 _ 
Bo 
— c) oMy
TMd4Tr' 
—c-d) MTr6 
" 
— d) oMd1 TMd4 oMd5
13. Cited by Vis 1.83; Apa 108; Laks 12.622; Dev 3.567— a) Tr2 
TMd3 
sOx1
sPu6 
o M d ' T M d 4 M T r 6 — b
)
c
M
d
5
B
e
1 
Apa[\\]
Lo2" 
T M d
3 T M d
4 ' 
wKt1 
— c) La1 
NPu1
Pu4 
Be1 HoTMd3GMd5GMyTr1/ípa£)e v 
sOx1 sPu6 
sKt5 " 
Lo4
— d) Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Hy wKt1 La1
 TMd3 oOr NPu' Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6 Wa [Jolly
G ] Re D e v 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
M
T
r
3
14. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.604; Dev 3.563 — a) Lo4 
Bo 
La1
sOx1 sPu6
 
TMd3 
— b) La1 NPu1 : 
Ho 
sOx1 sPu6 
" ßKt5 Lo4
oMd1 TMd4 
sBe2 Jo2 La1 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] Laks 
: — c) NKt
4 La1 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr5 Laks 
cMy \Jolly Nd] 
MTr4
 MTr6
sBe2 Lo4 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
" 
[supported by Go and Ku] —
 d)


--- PAGE 760 ---
Chapter 9 
749
sKt5 
Hy
Additional verses in La1 :
15. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.604; Dev 3.563 — a) Tf 
Ho
Hy wKt3 
Be1 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 
" Lo3 
MTr6
Lo1 Ox2 Pu3 
L o
4 T r
2 B e
1 
wKt1 BKt5 NPu1
sOx1 sPu6 ' 
oMy 
Pu2 
eBe2
Hy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 cMd ' iMd4 MTr3 MTr4 \folly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
. Tj2
Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G Me] Me Go Rn Dev Laks Jolly
—
 tOcMd5 
BBe2 
_ 
Lo3Tj' 
L
a
1
: Be1
HoTMd3 
o M y N P u ' r ß K t 5 
T
j
1
— c) Pu2 Pu4
Tj1 
oMy om 
—
 d) J o
2 L a
1 
_ 
xMd4 " 
Pu5 Pu7 [but
cor]
16. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.605; Dev 3.563 — a) NKt4 _
L
a
1
GMy 
— b) TMd4 
wKt1 " 
La1 
Wa 
Bo 
— c) cMd5
1 
— d) wKt1
17. Omitted in Jm cMy. Cited by Laks 12.604; Dev 3.563 — a) La! 
— b)
cMd1 TMd4 GMd5 
oMd1 TMd4 " 
NKt4 
; Lo1 
Tj2 
Be1 Bo
Ho Hy Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo4NNg MTr3 [Jolly M Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
— c) Wa 
La1 
oMd1 
— d) NPu1 Pu2 
; Wa
18. Omitted in Jm; päda s c-d omitted in sKf xMd4 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.605 — a)
sKt5 
Pu5 P u 7 w K t 3 
. TMd4 
M T r 4 — a-b) oMy
— b)TMd4 
wKt3 
Jo1Kt2BK.t5GMd5Tr2MTr4MTr5Ma«rf/*1//¡a^5'5'£)ave
ßKt5 xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ho 
— c) NlCt
4
Tj1 
o
M
d
1
— d) Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4 
Lo4 
Bo
19.* Cited by Laks 12.605 — a) Lo1 
cor to :ffcT]; Bo Jo2 Lo3


--- PAGE 761 ---
750 
Chapter 9
Lo-'oMd'Tj1/?« 
NNg 
TMd3 
" 
BBe2 Laks 
La1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Be1 
w K t
1 — b
) Lo1 •
. Be1 La1 oMd1 rMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
Mir5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr]Nd 
. T M d
4 M e [pâtha ] 
[explained as 
]
— c) Be1 Jo2 Lo4: 
Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] 
TMd4 
MTr6 
Be' Ho BKt5
La'Lo4 
w K t 1 . w K t 3 s K t 5 
, cMd1 
— d) cMy
TMd3 
" TMd4 _ _Hy 
Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg oOr Pif Pu7 Wa [Jolly M G
N Na] NäLaks Jollyï 
wKt1 ÍHy 
Jo1 
_ 
]; Be1 sBe2 Bo
Ho Jm Kt2 wKt3 NKt 4 BKt5 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
[Jolly R Ku] Kit Re Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[Lo1 ;
B
K
t
5 NPu1
Pu2 Tr2 
]
20. Omitted in oMy; verses 20 and2i transposed in [Jolly N]. Cited by Laks 12.605 —
a) sOx1 sPu6 
wKt3 
La1 
La1 Pu2 Pu4 _ 
Be1 Tr1 [but cor] 
; oMd1
TMd3TMd4oMd5 
_ 
Tr2 
wKt1
 
MTr4 
_ 
MTr6 
— b)cMd'
Tr'MTr-'MTr6
 
TMd4
 
TMd3 
_ 
cMd5
Be1 
— c)Be' 
[but me]; Tr2 
'; Bo [Jolly M^-^] 
N P u
1 " wKt1
oMd5'
21.Cited by Laks 12.605 — a) TMd3 c
M
y
J
o
2 Lo3 Tj1 Tr1 [me to]
[Jolly K\ 
[Jo2 
]; La1 
Be1 Ho Pu4 Pu8
oMd1 Tr2 
w
K
t
3
. T r
2 j o M d ' o m . . . 
— b ) Bo TMd4
, 
oMy ' 
; TMd4 
' — c) oMy Wa 
BBe2 sKt5 Lo3 Pu2 Tj2
TMd4 
H o î
— d ) L a
1 N N g , 
T M d 4 „ 
wKt3 
wKt1
22.Cited by Laks 12.609; Dev 3.567— a) sOx1 sPu6 M T r 6 _ 
Be1 
TMd3
TMd4 
— b)cMd' 
siNg 
Lo4 
— c) rMd4 _ 
. BBe2
Pu4 
- d) TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 
.Be'Tr'Tr2 
" 
oOrNPu'Pu4 Pu7
23. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) cMd1 
wKt1 
TMd3
oMd5 oOr Tr2 Wa 
, Pu4 
sBe2 wKt1 Pu5 P
u
7
— b) Tj2 om 
Bo La1 cMd1
oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 MTr3 
[Pi? P u
4 ] ; rMd3 
H o — 
c )
Ho 
sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
, Lo2 
Ox2 
.." . TMd3 " 
Lo4
cMd1 
•; sBe2 om 
: Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 LaksMandlik KSS Jha
Dave 
. J o
2 T j ' N a A » — d) Tr1 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Tj 1" 
. H y '
Pu5 Pu7
La1
— d) Lo1
 Be1


--- PAGE 762 ---
Chapter 9 
751
24.* Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) Ho 
— b) Bo Hy Jm Jo ' Jo2 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1
oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tj2 Tr1
 MTr3
MTr4 MTr5 Re Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave ' 
' La1
rMd4 ' 
_ 
wKt1 
oMd1" 
M i r 6 _ 
— c) Ho 
Tr1
;oMd' 
\Laks 
oOr 
— d) Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
" Lo4
NKt4 
;BoHo' 
;Tr2
sPu6MTr3 
Pu5 Pu7 
;NNg
; 
— c) Lo4 cMd1 oMy Pu7 
; Lo1 
La1 Lo3 sOx1
Ox 2sPu6Tjr 
H
o
w
K
t
1 
L o 4 L a 1
 TMd4 " 
— d ) Lo2
La1 
Jo'Wa
2.6. Cited by Laks 12.609; Dev 3.570 — a) Ho La'xMd4 NNg Pu2 Pu4 
Laks
Lo2 oMy 
; BKt5 NPu1 Pu2 P
u
4
— c) [Jolly R] 
. Tfom '
Lo1 
; L
a
1
P
u
2 Pu4 
^.ßKt5 
— d) Be1 NNg oOr
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa 
~ 
oMd5 Tj1
27. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) iMd3 
— b) Tr2 
oMd1 [Jolly Nd]
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 Lo2 Lo4 NNg MTr6 \folly M N] Me Nä [pätha ] Jolly Jha
MTr5 
, BKt5 NNg [cor to sh] NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G] Nä Go Re 
MTr4
oMd1 !TrW; oMd5 " 
MTr6 
— d) Be1 NNg Pu5 Pu7 
oMd1 
Lo4
28. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) wKt1 xMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
oOr 
" TMd3
— b) Bo Pu5 Pu7 
o M d
1 — c) oMd5 
, wKt3
oMd1 
Wa 
Bo 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 Go [Jolly C] 
oMd1 TMd3
cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 %; Be1 '; Ho
29. [= 5.165] Pada-d omitted in Bo Pu2 Pu4 and ma in Lo4. Cited by Dev 3.567— a)
NNg! 
Ho 
Tr2 
Pu8
NKt4 Lo4oMd'TMd3GMd5oMy Tr1 uTr4 uTr6 Dev 
— b) Tr 2 
Be1
Bo Ho NKt
4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 TMd" NNg oOr Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 [Jolly M N] Dev
oMd1
 La1 TMd3
Lo4 ^
Bo Lo4 
— b) TMd3
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NPu1
Pu4
'— b)wKt1
Lo4
25. a)Jo2Tj1


--- PAGE 763 ---
752 
Chapter 9
Ox2 Pu3 
MTr4MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Bo 
Wa 
—
c) Bo sOx1 sPu6 ÎT; Jo2 La1 Lo4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Wa 
Lo1 
— d) Pu7
La1:
30. Verses 30 and31 transposed in Ho. Omitted in Bo aKt5 Pu2 Pu4; pâda s a-b ma in
Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.630; Dev 3.568— a) iMd4 
xMd3 
— b) Ho Lo4
; oMd1 
Be1 
.NPu 1 
La1 
" " 
Be1 
— c)
sBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 Mir4 Wa
Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave _ 
oMy 
Be1 Lo1 Lo4 rMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oOr
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2 Laks Dev 
L
a
1
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
. sBe2
31. a) Be1 
— b) Ho— 
c) wKt3 
Be1 
Ho Lo4 iMd4
oMd^Tr6 
xMd4 
— d) TMd3 
Hy1
32.* a) BKÍ 
— b) Tj2 
Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 [cor to sh] Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly
G Ku] Ku Nd Mr Mandlik KSS Dave 
— c) iMd4 
xMd4 oOr 
— d)
sKt5 0(Tt; GMd5 
N N g ; o O r . 
, T r 2 ~ 
Ho
33. Pâda s a-b omitted in xMd4 — a) Ho 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
: — d) Jo2
34. a) oMd ' rMd" Mir5 Mir6 
— b) Ho wKt1 wKt3
xMd4 Mlr4MTr6 
;; oMd ' 
; sBe2 Bo eCa Jo2 sKt5 Lo1
Lo3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Wa ' 
Lo4 
La1
oMd5 
— c) oMy 
TMd4 Tr2 
— d) Ho Lo4 
oMd1 MTr5
35. Omitted in Tr2; pâda s a-b ma in Lo4. Cited by Jmv 1:3.3; Laks 12.737 — a) oOr
aBê ' 
' 
;Jmv 
; Wa 
— c) «Kt4 
, Jm NKt4 
oMd1
— d) NKt4


--- PAGE 764 ---
Chapter 9 
753
36. Cited by Laks 12.737 — a) Lo4 [folly M4~5] 
Ho 
NKt4 
'; sBe2
Pu2 Pu" 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
. BKt5 Ox2 
— b) NNg 
TMd4 oMy
Laks 
Lo2 
Tr2 
— c) oMy 
Wa 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
— d) Lo1 
T M d 3 B e 1 
oMd1 
Bo 
, oMy
rMd3! 
i s O x ' s P u 6 w K t 1 
La1Lo3Pu5Pu7Tj'[yo/fyG]
37. Pâda s a-b omitted in Lo1 — a) oMd5 
Tr2 om 
— c) Tj1
Bo Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Mir4 Mir6 
oMy 
; TMd3 
Tr2
— d) MTr6 
oMd1 _ 
La1 ^ 
sOx1 sPu6 Pu8
38. a) Lo4 
BKt5 
— b) Be1 wKt1 
. Jo2 Tj1 Tr1 [cor to}
TMd3 
" " . Lo3 : 
NNg Pu5 Pu7 
BKt5 " 
— d) Wa
39. a) BKt5 
_ 
T j
1 W a " 
oMd1 
— a-b) oMy
[Jolly m] 
,TMd3 
_ 
— b)oMd5
MTr4 MTr6 
TMd4 Tr1 _ 
La1
sCa Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 Tj ' 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 MTr6
 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
. Tr2
40. a)TMd3TMd4oMd5oMyMTr6< 
NNg 
^ . wKt1 ; 
Kt2
„ 
— b) Bo 
Tr1 
. 
— c) wKt3 oOr Tr1 [cor to s h] 
MTr6 
" 
Pu5 Pu7 
Tj1 
Pu3 
TMd3 TMd4 
" 
— d) TMd3
41. Cited by Laks 12.737 — a) sKt5 
; T M d
4 o M y 
Lo1
Ho 
— b) oMd5 " 
~ ~ 
Lo2 om 
Lo4 
oMy
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) oMd1 : o M d
5 
Bo Lo2 TMd4 
' — d) Lo1 oOr Pu3
Bo'
42. a) Be1 sBe2 oMd1 oMd5 oOr sOx1 N?U' Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 Wa: 
sKt5
La1 
P u
8 M T r
5 
c M d
1 , Be1 sBe2 o O r sOx1 NPu1


--- PAGE 765 ---
754 
Chapter 9
Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 
Lo1 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 
cMd5 
— b) N?U'. 
— c)
cMd5 Tr2 
, xMd4 
— d) La1 Lo4 cMd5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly M4"5-9 R G Nd] Jolly
wKt3 
x M d 4 .
43.* Omitted in Be1 eKt5 oMy [haplo]; versess 43 and 44 transposed in Wa — a) La '
Lo1 
oOr Wa 
aBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKf Lo2 Lo3 cMd1 TMd4
cMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Tr ' [but cor sh] MTr3 Mir4
 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Ku Nd] Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
TMd3 
— b) eBe2 ; 
oOr 
L
o
4
— c) sOx1 sPu6 ; 
BBe2
Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 NNg Tr1 [Jolly M] 
wKt1 MTr3 [Jolly Go Ku] Mandlik KSS
Dave 
— d) sPu6
4 4 . a ) Tr2 
w K t 1 w K t 3 '
; Ho 
— b ) H o 
oMd1 adds a t
end:
 : 
— c) Lo1 
— d) wKt1 " 
Pu2 Pu4 
Tj1
45. Cited by Laks 12.738 — a) TMd3 oMd5 
Lo3 
TMd4 
oMd '
TMd4 
— b) Be1 
, Tr2 om 
rMd4 
NKt4
oMy[Jo//yNd] 
TMd3 c M d 5 " ~ 
Jo1 
sBe2 Bo Lo1 oOr Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 uT^Laks
Ho =T — c) Be1 Bo " 
MTr6 
L o
1 . _ 
. TMd4
 
TMd3
MTr4 
o
O
r
w
K
t
1 '
'
; NPu1 
Lo4 Laks— c-d)
Lo1 
— d)TMd3 
; Ho wKt1 Lo'oMd'cMd 5 oOrMTr4MTr6 
TMd3
oMy 
r
46. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.738 — a) Be1 Tj1 Tr1 
; Tr2 
uBe2
Jo2Lo3 
MTr4 
— 
tyNKt4 
wKt1 
; Lo3 Tj ' Tr1 [me
t o ] MTr6 
__ 
H o 
— ^ N K t 4 , . . , 
o M y s C a H y sKt5 La1 Lo4 Tj2
Bh 
H
o
L
a
1 f^Ml-%; Pu7 [Jolly G ] . 
Tr1 [Jolly G r ] 
Lo4
oMd1 
" 
; Ox2 NPu'Pu2 Pu4 T
r
2
N
N
g 
— d) Ho TMd4
[om 
}; Tr2 
[om]; 
Lo3 T j
1 L a
1
47.* Omitted in Pu5; ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 2.56; Dev 1.218, 3.720; Mädh 1.490— a)
Kt2 f^TufcT — b) Tr2 
H
y
— c) L a 1
c 
"~ 
„, Lo1 
Tj1
Lo1 Tr1 
" " 
oMy 
Jo2 Kt2 NNg [cor to] Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 sPií [but
cor] Pu7 [cor to] MTr3 Wa [folly M '-5-^9 G R2] Jolly Jha 
' ~ —
 d) Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
NKt4 BKt5 Lo2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
 MTr5 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave


--- PAGE 766 ---
Chapter g 
755
[supported by Bh Co Ku] ; Pu4 
NNg 
ma sh
48. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.738; Mädh 2.37 — a) Tr2 
— b) MTr5 Laks
Mâdh 
Ho Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 Lo4 oMd5 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6 
; NKt4 oMd1 TMd4 
Bo 
" — c) TMd4
NPu1 " 
'— d) sKt5 
; L
a
1
B
e
1 nBe2 wKt3 Lo2 Ox2
49. Cited by Laks 12.738; Mädh 2.37 — a) Jm 
; Ho oOr 
, N
P
u
1
—
b) Ho Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Mädh 
. , Be1 
cMd1 °^ T <J ¿rffcr.; Lo1 
— c)
TMd3 oMd5 
Jm 
rMd4 
aCa wKt1 sKt5
NPu1 
Be1 Ox2 
Lo4 
NKt4 
— d) Lo1
Pu5 Pu7 cJïrf^T ; Tr2 î
50. Päda s a-b omitted in Bo; verse50 is placed after 52 in oMd1 oMd5 TMd4. Cited by
Laks 12.738; Mädh 2.37 — a) Be1 ßBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 oOr Ox2 NPu1 [Jolly Ku]
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMd1 TMd3 cMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd] 
Mädh Pu2
Pu4 
sOx'sPu6 
— b)wKt3 
Be1 
— c) TMd3
' 
NKt4 NPu1 
Ho C o ~ 
" 
L a 1 ' " 
iMd4 
MTr5 
— d)
La1 ^ 
oMd ' TMd3 rMd4 cMd5 oMy Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly G
N d ] 
sOx1 s P u
6 B K t
5 ' 
NKt 4oOr 
. H o 
.MTr3
Lo3 Tj1 '
51. Cited by Laks 12.738 — a) TMd3 oMy Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr4 MTr6 Nd
[MTr4 
]; Be1 Lo4 oMd1 oMd5 Ox2 Ox3 
MTr5 
. Kt2 oOr Tj1
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd 5" 
s K t
5 — b) Ox3 <TT; oMd1 NNg Tr1 [cor to sh]
oMy 
; Be1 Ox2 
Lo4 
oMd5 
, Bo—
c)Bo 
TMd4 M T r 5 K t 2 
— d ) c
M
d
5
T
M
d
4
[cf. 8.52d]; NKt4 BKt5 Lo1 TMd3 NNgsOx ! Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 [but cor sh] Tr2
MTr6 ' 
=T; oMy
52.* Omitted in TMd4; verses 52 and 53 are transposed in oMd ' TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 Mädh. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks 12.738; Mâdh 3.350 — b) Kt2 
Bo Tj1
oMd1 
B o " 
T j
1 P u
7 P
u
5
— c)ßKt5 
TMd3
Pu5 Pu7 
; Be'ÇRW ; Pu2 P u
4 . K t 2 . N P u 1 
B e 1 N K t 4 La1 oMd5
GMyMTr6 
, TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 " 
— d) Be1 ßBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2


--- PAGE 767 ---
756 
Chapter 9
wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 NNgoOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly R1]
Ncl Rn Re Mandlik KSS Dave
53. Omitted in xMd4. Cited by Vlj 2.127; Laks 12.722; Mädli 3.350 — a) La1
Ox3 " 
NKt4 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr5 Wa 
oMd5 NPu1 
Laks
wKt1 La1 oMd1 
Ho 
Lo4 [Jolly Ml '
L
o
1 Lo? Tj1 
sKt5
MTr4 
, M T r
6 o O r ' ; 
TMd3 " 
V i j 
. 
—
 b )
oMd1 ; "
" " 
w K t 3 M T r 5 
iMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
Laks
—
 c) Be1 
Lo4 Lo5 oMd' Ox3 
T r
2 N K C sKt5 
T M d
3 e K t
5
Lo'Pu 5 ; 
— d)oMd' 
_ 
, TMd3 oMy NNg oOr 
BKt 5oMd 5Tj'
. 
Hy cfötf ; Kt2 
Ho wKt1 NKt4 T j
2 ß C a
54.* Päda s c-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.739 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
Lo1
Ox2 
sOx1 s P u
6 " N
K
t
4
L
a
1
B
o H o Kt2 Pu5 Pu7 
—
t y N K r 4 
TMd4 
— c ) B e ' O x
2 î P u
5 Pu7 
ßCa
wKt1
 
• 
ßBe2 Bö Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 ßKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oOr sOx1 Ox3
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
[Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
Tj1 
NKt4 
TMd4 
— d) Be1 Bo eCa Jo2
wKt1 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5NNg oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2
Wa [Jolly M G R ] Laks Me Jolly Jha
55. Cited by Laks 12.739 — a) MTr4 MTr6 
—b) wKt1 
Pu3
Be1 TMd3 
B
o
J
o
2 Lo3 T j 1 — c ) wKt1 wKt3 ßKt5 Lo2oMd'
TMd4 oMy Tr1 MTr5
 MTr6 
oMd5 '
L
o
1 om— 
d) oMy 
TMd4
sKt5 La1
56.Omitted in Pu5 — a) sPu6 [but c o r ] T M d
4 
Ho 
— b)
La1 
Pu4 
Lo3 oMd5 
" * 
oMy 
Ox2 
— c) sCa 
Tj2
— d) TMd4
57. Pâda s c-d omitted in Lo5 Ox3; pâda s b-d ma xh in Tr1 — a) Be1 Ho 
wKt3
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4 iMd3 Ox2 Ox3 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Wa
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— b ) o M d
5 P u
7 N N g maß 
TMd3 
;
Pu 5Pu 7Tj'En-; La'sOx'sP^MT^MTr6 
- c) TMd3 
La1 
Wa
TMd4 
o M d
1 s C a L a
1 Lo1 o O r N P u 1 N N g o m


--- PAGE 768 ---
Chapter 9 
757
58. Pâda- a ma in Tr1. Pâda s c-d cited by Vis 1.69 — a) sBe2 
Jo1 Lo4 Lo5 '—
b) BBe2 
Be1 Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
Pu5 
Pu7 
. oMy oOr Tr1
TMd3: 
Lo5Bo 
— c)GMd5 
Lo4
Be'oMyMTr6 
— d) P i i o M y T r
2 
" [Tr2 ' ]
59. Pâda s a-b omitted in Lo4. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 2.127; Laks 12.639; Dev 1.224;
Mädh 3.350—b)Mâcl h 
— c)rMd4 
oMd1
La1 
Tj2 
Be1 
oMy 
Mädh 
oOr
wKt3 
T M d 3 < ~ - d ) G M d '
60. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Vij 2.127; Devi.22$;Madh 3.350; päda s a-b cited by Vis
1.69 — a) Mädh 
oMd5 
Lo3 
N
N
g
— b)
Tj1; 
^c)Tr2 
— d)sCaPu8Tr2
 
TMd4
61. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Dev 1.225 — a)oOr 
La1 
. TMd3 oMd5
loMd'oMy 
— b)TMd4 
_ 
Be1 
Pu2 Pu4 
oOr 
— c)
La1 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 NNg Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr5 ^N&MandlikJha KSS Dave
Ho ~ " 
wKt5 TMd3 Dev 
MTr6 
MTr
4^ 
— d) Ho 
MTr3
Kt2 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3
62. NKt
4 gives an additional half-verse at the beginning:
— a) Lo1 ! 
olvld5 
Kt2 
Lo4 rlvld4 
J m o M y
— b) Ho TMd3 Pu3 Pu4Tj' Mandlik KSS Dave 
_ 
Be1 
wKt1 
; Pu5 om
La1 
GMy Be1 
:; M T r
6 — d) TMd3 o O r s B e 2
63. a)oOr 
T M d
4 _ _ 
. BBe2 Pu2 Pu4 om 
La1 
Bo O x
2 —
b) oMd1 TMd 3TMd 4oMd 5 
oMy 
MTr4
 MTr6 
" TMd4 
— c)
Wa 
Bo 
' — d) Pu2 Pu4
64. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 2.127, 136; Devi.226; Mädh 3.351 — b) NPu' 
_ 
Pu5


--- PAGE 769 ---
758 
Chapter 9
Pu7 
— c) Jo2 Lo3oOr Tj'öe v 
_ 
MTr3
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) MTr6 
; Ho oMd5 Tr1
65.* Cited by Vij 2.i27;Madh 3.351; pâda s c-d cited by Vis 1.66 — a) sBe? Hy NNg oOr
Tj2WaJo//y _ , Ho ~ 
iMd4 
— b) Hy 
TMd3 
T M d
4 —
c)TMd4 
oMy 
Mädh 
—
 d) NPu1 
oOr M T r 4 V i s
.., TMd3
66.Verses 66-75 placed after 84b in TMd4. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 2.127; Madh^-ZS1 —
a) ßKt5 
T M d
3 W a 
oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 
Me supports
and he give 
as a pätha ; Nd and Mr support 
— b) TMd3 
— c) Pu2 Pu4
oOr 
— d) Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly Ku] 
La1 
oMd5 
Jo1
Be1 
Tr2: 
. H o 
TMd4 
sKt5 La1 NNg
67. Cited by Vij 2.i27;Madh 3.351 — a) Hy om F; Tr2 
— b) Tr2 
Jm
STf—d)Lo3 
. Tr2 
cMy .._ ."
68. Cited by Vij2.127; Mädh 3.351 — a)rMd3 
ßBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
Lo1 Tj2 MTr3 Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo1 Ox2 
- b) Lo1 
oMy
wKt1 
. L a
1 L o
4 [Jolly M ] — 
c ) wKt1 Ox2 
" sKt5 La1
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2BK.t5 La1 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 uTr3Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
—
 d) Lo1 
[om 
; eBe2 Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 Vij 
Be '
Be1 Pu5 Pu7
69. Pâda s b-d omitted in sKt5. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 1.68-9, 2.i27;Apa j&;Madh 3.351
— a) Bo 
TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 
N K t
4 L a
1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 
Pu2 Pu4
cMd5 
BKt5 
— b) cMd1 
oMy 
Lo1 
— d) MTr6
A p a [vi] 
, o M d
1 , W a T r
2
70.Pâda s a-b omitted in sKt5. Cited by Vij z.i27;Jmv 9.28; Mädh 3.351 — a) NPu1
Tr2 
Tj1 
oMd5 T r
1 ^ 
, Jmv 
w K t 3 •
NPu1 
- b ) T r 2 T r 2 
o M d 1 _ " " 
Pu5 Pu7 
— c) Bo
BBe2oMd' 
BKt5 Lo1 Lo3 oOr T j
1 s O x
1 sPu6 
T r 2 B K t 5 T j '


--- PAGE 770 ---
Chapter 9 
759
xMd4 
Lo1 
oMd5 
— d) Pu2 om first 
Lo1 
Jo1 La1
71. Päda s c-d omitted in Ho Lo4. Cited \)yLaks 2.57; Dev 1.220— a) Be1 xMd4
— b) sOx1 sPu6 _ 
Wa 
— c) sBe2 sCa La1 oOr 
oMd1
Laks 
Dev 
Bo 
— d) NPu1 
" 
Be1 Lo2 xMd3 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6
[Jolly M9]
72. Go's commentary on the rest of Ch. 9 is missing. Cited by Apa 95; Dev 1.221;
MOdh 1.492 — b) Pu4 
_ 
; Apa 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
— c)MTr6 
Mir4 Mir6 
^ 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 xMd4 Apa 
—
 d)
HyxMd 3 
Bo 
oMd1 
Pu8 Mir6 
" 
" 
Lo1 Tj ' 
sOx1 sPu6
73.* Verses 73 and 75 transposed in Jm — b) sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 cMd1 xMd4 Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 MTr3 \Jolly M] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ' 
La1 
—
c) [Jolly Nd G R] 
" 
La1 
Ho Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 La1 Lo3 NNg oOrsOx1
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj' Tr1 [cor to] [Jolly G R] 
". xMd3 
— d) Lo2 oMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMd5
cMy Pu8 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
T
r
2
N
P
u
'
74.* xMd3 [Jolly Nd] inserts verses 95-6 after 74. Cited by Laks 12.611; Dev 3.571— a)
xMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
B o . 
— b ) B
e
1
B
o wKt1 La1 oMd1 o O r
oMd5 
GMy [Jolly Nd] 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
olvld1 
" 
Be1 sBe2
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly KSS
—
 d) xMd4 ^ ^ 
. oMd1 
, Pu4 
Ho
75. Cited by Laks 12.631; Dev 3.592—a)oMd5 
NKt 4 
Jo1 
MTr6
xMd3 
oMy 
Lo2 
— b) La1 xMd4 
; Lo1 
Bo oMd5
oMy oOr Pu4 
Lo1 
— c) xMd3 
wKt1 
~ ' 
wKt3
xMd3 
" 
" 
— d)oOr 
oMd5
76. a) xMd4 Tr2 
NKt4 
MTr6 
Hy 
NPu' 
oMd5 Tr1 [Jolly


--- PAGE 771 ---
760
Chapter 9
Gr] 
oMd1 
_ xMd4 
_ 
Lo3Tj' 
— b) Mir3 
; Ld
Lo'o/w 
, Be1 
xMd4 
Bo Hy 
: —c)oMd' 
Ho 
Lo1 NPu
1
— d) sKt5 Lo4 
Lo1 xMd3 oMy Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 
; MTr4 " 
iMd4
77. Cited by Laks 12.615; Dev 3.571 — a) Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo2 oMy
Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Mir3 [Jolly G R Nd Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 '
xMd4 
— b) L
o
3
B
e
1 wKt1 xMd4 
Bo Hy sOx1 sPu6
sBe'Tr2 
wKt3 
N^wKt5 Lo4 NNg [Jolly M] Me Jolly Jha 
[cf.
9.79]; Be1 
T M d 4 " ~ 
L o
2 x M d
3 
oOrNPu1 
— c) Lo1 
, NNg
Ho wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 
Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 Lo4 Ox2 Tj1
La1' 
, N P u
1 . M T r
6 
B
e
1
— d) xMd4 
Tj1 
W a
Bo Ho 
NKt4 
wKt1 La1 Tj1 Laks _ 
; sCa Jo2 Pu2 Pu4
78.* Päda s a-b and c-d transposed in MTr6. Cited by Laks 12.615 — a) oOr
SIT; oMy 
; wKt1 Lo4 [Jolly M] 
L o 1 s B e 2 sKt5 Lo4 oMy sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr2
MTr3MTr4 MTr6 [folly M] 
Wa 
— a-b) cMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr5
[xMd3 
x M d 3 ] ; N K f o m 
— b) Be1
Kt2 Lo4 [Jolly M] 
— c) oOr 
cMy 
xMd3 ' 
. MTr5
NKt4 
cMd1 xMd4 
— d) cMd1 xMd4 sOx1 sPu6
79. Cited by Laks 12.615; Dev 3.572— a) MTr5 
— b) Pu5 Pu7
HoxMd3 
x
M
d
3
D
e
v •
— c ) oMd5 Laks
'; oMd1 Tr1 [but cor] 
~ 
~~ 
sBe2 . [lacuna] 
. Tj1
xMd4 Be1 
L
a
1
H
o Hy Jm Kf Jo1 Tj2 MTr3 \Jolly Ku N] No Re
Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
; wKt1 
Lo2 Pu3 Pu8 
— c-d) oMy
[sic] — d) Tr2^ =tr; wKt3 
Pu8; 
sMd5
Bo 
s O x ' s P u 6 ' J o 2 w K t 3 L o 3 T j ' 
Wa
So. Cited by Apa 100; Laks 2.102; Dev 3.572; Mädh 1.507; päda s a-c cited by Apa 77
— a) xMd4 päd a illegible; xMd3 
o
M
y
_ 
ßBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3
Tj1 Tj2 Tr! [mesh to] uTr^ [Jolly KuR] Mädh Ku Mandlik KSS 
[ s B e 2 ] ;
[Jolly M4'5"9] Rn Jolly 
D
e
v
^ 
, Be1 L o , 
wKt1
 < 
[ o m ] ;
wKt3^-—b)Bo 
Apa77[v\]_ 
T r
2 H y 
Tj'zfrjMTr3 
—
c) Laks 
. Jm Jo ' Kt2 w Kt3 Pu2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Ho Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
w K t 1 o M d 1 
" 
wKt3 
— d) oMy
 Wa
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7
sOx1 sPu6
 Lo3 xMd3
Bo Tr2 MTr6


--- PAGE 772 ---
Chapter 9 
761
Pu4 Mir3 
wKt1 
Lo4 
TMd3 " 
" 
ßBe2
BKt5
81. Cited by Apa ioo;Dev 3.574; Mädh 1.508 — a) oMd ' 
Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 
BCa Ho Jo2 Lo3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 [cor sh to] Tj ' Apa ° 
Wa
NNg 
, wKt1 
— b) ßBe2 Ho sOx1 Ox2 
oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 
P u
8 — c)
Be1' 
wKt1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Apa [vi]' 
—
 d) Tj2
82. Cited by Apa loojDev 3.573 — a) wKt1 
Kt2 Tr2 
o M y e K t
5
wKt1 Lo3 
cMd1 
; sOx1 sPu6 
— b) BKt5 
xMd3
Lo3Tj' ' ~ 
TMd4 
— c ) M
T
r
6
B
K
f 
[cf. g.Sia];
Tj1 
" w
K
t
3
— d ) A
p
a
B
e
1 aBe? Bö ßCa NKt4 La1 oMd1 oMy
sOx 1NPu'Pu 2Pu 4Pu 5sPu 6Pu 7Tj 1MTr 6 
wKt1 
BBe2 wKt1 oMd1
83. Cited by Apa 101; £>ev3.574; Mädh 2.288 — a) NKt4 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6
wKt1 
.La 1 
Lo4 
Be1BBe2oMd1NPu1 MTr4MTr6 
— b) Lo4 
; Tr1
[but cor sh] 
W
a
L
o
4
 
TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr2
Ho Kt2 Pu3 
Mädh" 
•—
 c) o M d
1 — d) La1 
cMd1 
";
Hy 
^ 
,Madh
84. Cited by Laks 12.630 — a) TMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 
cMd1 TMd4
MeJhaDave 
Lo3 Tj1' 
; NPu1 
; [Jolly R] 
Jm
Jo1 oMy Ox2 Pu3 MTr3 MTr5 Mandlik KSS [Jolly Nd] ' 
ßKt5 
ßCa NKt4
Ho 
• — b ) L a ' — c)GMyTj' 
BKt5 
Ho rMd3 
", Tj2
Lo4 
Tr1 [but cor sh] 
, NNg La** 
; NNg 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
Lo3 Pu3 Tj' MTr3 [Jolly R] Mr Mandlik Jha Dave KSS ~ 
, oMd1 
— d) oMd5 sOx1
wKt1 MTr4 MTr6
85. Cited by Jmv 111.47; Laks 12.611; Mädh 1.509 — a) Tr1 
, Bo Ho wKt1
Lo1 Lo2 NNg Pu3 Nâ 
Hy Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Jmv 
Be1
i 
; sKt5 Laks 
sOx1 sPu6 
, Pu5 Pu7 
MTr6
; 
— b) Bo 
rMd4 
, MTr6 
Ho 
TMd3 
aMy 
— c)
oMy 
Jmv Laks 
— d) wKt3 Pu2 
NKt4 MTr5 
oMy
Bo ' 
La1 
, wKt1 Pu3 
" oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 Wa {Jolly Nd] Mädh 
~ 
oOr


--- PAGE 773 ---
762 
Chapter 9
86. mafli in NNg. Cited by Jmv 11.1.47; Laks 12.611; Mädh 1.509— a) xMd3 
^ 
— b)
Pu3 
Tr2 
BBe2 Ho K
t
2
— c) Be1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
Lo3
äße
2 Bo Hy Jo1 wKt1 sKt5 Lo1 xMd3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 MTr3 Wa LaksJmv [vl as in ed]
Mandlik KSS Dave 
'" 
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
Be1 sKt5 xMd3 Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
Ho
Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M G] 
xMd3 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 [Jolly Nd] Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
sOx1 sPu6 M Ï r
6 ~ , oMy 
N?U' 
Ox2
87.* Cited by Jmv 11.1.47; Laks 12.611 — a) Wa om 
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu2 Pu4
La1 
; Be1 Lo1 
Tj1 
— b) iMd3 
Pu2 Pu4
Bo Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 BKt5 Lo2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Me Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
Tr2 
Hy Lo1 NNg Tr2 Laks 
Be1 
Ox2
wKt1 
, P
u
«
— c ) H
o
B
o H o H y J m Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1
Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo4 oMd1 oMd5
oMy ' 
; r M d
3 [ J o l l y G K
u
]
— d ) Lo2
 
N K t 4 " Lo'
ïfT ° ; xMd3 
; Lo1 Lo2 xMd4 oMy Wa"
88. Cited by Wai//! 1.481— a) Ho 
_ 
wK^oMd'Tj 1 
oMd1
— b) NKt4 
; sKt5 
NKt4 xMd3 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
— c)x Md3
. T r
1 - B e
1 
" — c-d) ß
B
e
2
— d ) wKt3 
sKt5om 
; r M d
4 x M d
3 M
ä
d
h
N
N
g
After the first half-verse an additional verse in Be' N?U' Pu2 Pu4 Wa; it is given after
verse 88 in La1 Mandlik 
KSS Dave [= VaDh 17.70];
a)Be'Wa r 
— b) La1 
F; NPu' Pu2 Pu4 
Be1
•—c)NPu' 
Pu2 Pu4
Further additional verses in La1:
 La1
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
— d) xMd3
cMd1 NNg
 wKt3 La1
 Bo Lo1 uTr4Jmv Laks Mad/r
wKt
Tr1
, wKt1 oOr


--- PAGE 774 ---
Chapter 9 
763
89. Cited by Apa <)3;Laks 2.33; Hem 3/3.804; Dev 1.216 — a) oMd1 
Tr2
— b)Ho 
— c)wKt' 
GMd1 
T M d 3 N N g . Bo Lo3
NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Wa Apa Laks Dev 
Lo4 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Laks
Hem Dev Jolly 
— d) P u
4 L a
1
90. Omitted in MTr3. Cited by Laks2.48; Hem 3/3.805; Dev i.2i7;Madh 1.484— a) Ku
Mr 
; NKt
4
 BKt5 o O r ^ 
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 [cor to sir] Tr2 Wa Nâ Rn Rc Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Tj2 
— b) Pu8 Tr2 D
e
v
" Pu5 P
u
7
T
M
d
3 
— c) wKt3 La1 om
3"; Pu5 Pu7
91. Pâda s a-c nia in Lo4; pâda s b-d omitted in wKt1. Cited by Laks 2.48; Hem 3/3.805;
Dev i. 217; Mâdh 1.484— a) sOx1 sPu6 3Tsfrq-° ; wKt1
 • 
Be1 Tj1 
— b) GMd1
Ho La1 NNg 
L
a
k
s
s
K
t
5 
— c) NNg
TMd4 
wKt3 
— d) oMd1 oMd5 Tr1 MTr6 
sBe2 NKt
4 Tr2 
Lo3
Ox2 
Lo1 
" Tribut cor]oMd1
92.* Omitted in wKt1. Cited by Apa 93; Laks 2.48; Dev 1.217— a) iMd4
MTr6 
La1 
Lo1 
; TMd3 
—b)Laks
 
Pu5
Pu7 
Jm 
Hy 
—c)Laks'
 
B e
1 H o oMd5
 MTr4MTr6 
[om
];\Ng 
" TMd4 
— d)HyNKt" 
; Tr1 
[ma sh ]; Be1 sBe2 Bo eCa Ho
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 \\Kt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku R]Dev
Rn Rc Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Bh [pâtha ] Me [ p â t h a ] o M y 
oMd1
oMd5 
M T r
5 x M d
3 
BBe2 
wKt3
93.* Omitted in wKt1 Pu4. Cited by Apaw, Laks 2.48 —
 a)NKt4 Lo4 Pu2 
Tr2
oOrsOx'sPu6 
L o 2 e K t 5 L a 1 " o M d 5 Pu3 omeCa 
BKt5 om
BBe2 sOx1 sPu6 
Ho La1 NNg — b) Tr2 
s K t 5 w K t 3 La1 MTr4 Wa 
—
 c)
Pu2 
Be1 Lo4 
BBe2 ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt3 La1 Tj2 Tr1 [me sh to]
MTr3 Wa [Jolly Ku] Apa Laks Rn Mr Jolly 
oOr 
TMd3 
Bo
, sOx1 sPu6 
— d ) c
M
y
; sKt5 ' , 
Tj1
 
%.. Pu5 Pu7
TMd3


--- PAGE 775 ---
764 
Chapter 9
94. Omitted in wK.t' Kt2 Pu4. Cited by Jmv \.y)\Hem 3/3.802; Dev 1.212, 213; Mädh
1.474, 2.121 — a) Hy Lo3NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Mandlik KSS 
[supported by Bh
KuMr];Lal 
oMd1 
Jmv[v\] 
—
 b) NPu1 
Kt2 
. ßBe2
— c ) B o N N g Tj1 
N
N
g
s
B
e
2 
T M d 3 — d ) NNg
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6 
BBe2oMd1 
Jmv [vl]
TMd3
95. Omitted in wKt' Pu4; placed after 9.74 in TMd3 oMy. Cited by Laks 12,611; Dev
3.568 —a) Lo1 
T M d 3 T j 2 P u 5 Pu7 
— b) Be1 Lo4 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5
Pu7 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly 
sOx1 sPu6 cMy 
N N g o M d
5
, 
TMd3 
— d) Ox2 
La1 oMd1 TMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6
96. Omitted in wKt1; placed after 9.74 in TMd3 oMy. Cited by Laks 12.611 — a) Hy Pu5
Pu7 [but cor} 
B o r M d
3 T j
1 — b) TMd4 
ßKt5 oMy NPu1 
— d)
GMd5^cr.;NKC; 
oMysOx'sPu6 
., oMd1 
iMd3 Wa 
TMd4
97. Omitted in wKt1 Pu4; pada-b omitted in Pu5. Cited by Vis i.6g;Laks 2.61; Dev 1.219
— a) Be1 Bo BKt5 Lo4 oMy Ox2 [Jolly M4'5'9 Nd] _ 
' — b) Be1 Ho Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1
oMd^NgoOrNPu'Pu7^1 
Lo1 
NKt4 sKt5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 [but cor sh] _ 
; La1
TMd3 
' — d) w
K
t
3
B
e
1
 TMd3 Laks 
oMd5
. 
. . . , Lo1 
_ 
Jo2
98. Omitted in wKt1; Ndhas the following sequence of verses: 98,100, 99, 101 — a)
Ho 
.. 
— b) Jo1 NKt" La'oMd'TMd-'oMy Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 MTr5 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Be1 
— c) La1 
Tr1 [in addition after 3.51]
oMd5 om 
— d) Ho 
Ho 
, Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2
99. Omitted in wKt1 oOr;padas c-d omitted in eKt5; verses 99 andioo transposed in
oMy. Cited by Laks 2.57-8; Dev 1.218 — a) NNg 
Pu5 Pu7 
L a k s ; oMy
Lo2 
Pu5 Pu7 
NPu1 
— a-b) Lo4 
— b)
oMy 
" 
sOx' sPu6 
oMd5 : 
; NPu1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) TMd4 oMd5
oMd5 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj2 MÏr3 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) T
r
2
" " oMd1


--- PAGE 776 ---
Chapter 9 
765
100. Omitted in wKt1 ßKt5 oOr. Cited by Dev 1.232 — a) TMd3 
Be1
'• 
TMd4 
,Bo 
wKt3 
Lo1 
Bo 
— a-b) oMd5
— b)oMd' 
H o N K t 4 c M d 5 o M y 
- c) Ho
Pu4 
oMd5 [in add after 3 . 5 1 ] , Wa— 
d) Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1 [in addition after
3.51] TPT; Ho 
rMd3
Additional half-verse in TMd3:
101. Omitted in wKt1; päda s c-d omitted in eKt5, and pada-d in Lo3. Cited by Apa 101;
Laks 12.613; Dev 3.581 — a) TMd4 
La1 
Lo3 
oMd1
Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
Be1 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt5 Lo1 [but cor] Lo4
 TMd3 oMy NPu1 Tr2
Wa [Jolly M Nd] Apa KSS 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Ho 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
Pu8 
— c) wKt3 TMd4 
— d) oMd5 om 
; Be1 
T Md3 Mir4 MTr5
MTr6 
oMy
102.* Omitted in wKt1; päda s a-b omitted in Pu4 and pada-a in Lo3. Cited by Laks
12.613; Dev 3.581 — a)oOr 
uKt5 
Tr2 
— b) nBe2
TMd4 
_ _ 
i L o 2 ¡ e C a H o w K t 3 ' 
sKt5 
Tj1 <f
La1 
— c) Pu4 
Be1 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8Tj' Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jo/fy G Ku R] Ma«c///Jt AT55 
" 
Ho
sOx1 sPu6 
[om 
]; Dev 
- d) Ho NKt4 Lo2 Lo4
TMd3 NNg oOrsOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M] Me Rc 
' sBe2 Hy Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
Tj2 
MTr4 MTr6 
ßKt5 oMd'
103. Omitted in wKt1; pada-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Jmv 1.3; Dev^-597— a) Lo3
— b)Be' BoTMd4Pu2Pu45TT; Pu2 Pu4 
Tj: 
oMd5 . 
_ 
:;TMd3 
. .NNg
Wa Jmv [vil 
;Jmv[\\\ 
Be1 Ox2 
— c) TMd3 iMd4 
MTr6
Pu4 
B
e
1
— d ) B
e
1
u
B
e
2 Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik
KSS Dave . 
[supported by Kit Rn Mr] ; Pu2 om ' 
Tr2 
Tj1 
sOx1 
Hy
Jo2 Pu8 Na Rc 
wKt3
104. Omitted in wKt1; pada-a omitted in NKt4. Cited by Apa 718; Jmv 1.14; Laks 12.648;
Dev 3.599; pada-a cited by Vij2.117 and pada-d by Jmv 2.7 — a) Lo2 om and Lo4 ma
Lo3 Tj1 
^ 
— b) sKt5 
Wa 
; Pu5 Pu7 
NKt4 oMd1 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tr1


--- PAGE 777 ---
766 
Chapter 9
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 \Jolfy Nd Gr] 
rMd3 
— c) Tj1 
. sKt5 La1 Lo4 NPu1 
oMd1
Ox2 
Be1 
Wa 
La 1. 
, Hy 
— d) Hy 
xMd4
oMd1 
B
K
t
5
s
O
x
1 
Lo1 
Lo2 
H y :
105. Omitted in wKt' Pu5; padas c-d omitted in Pu8. Cited by Vij z.ivj;Apa 722; Jmv
1-36, 3.15; ¿«¿512.649; Dev 3.615; Mädh 3.334 — a)sKt5 
Be1 Hv Jo2 Lo3 NNg Tj1
— b ) O x
2 ; H y o M y 
— c ) N P u 1 _ 
_ 
T r 2 
— d ) B o
BK15 La1
106. Omitted in wKt1. Cited by Jmv 1.36, n.i.32;Laks 12.650; Dev 1.43; Mädh 1.502;
padas a-b cited by Vij 2.i3oand padas c-d by Jmv 11.6.31 — b) oMy 
— c) BKt5
— d) Ho 
Jmv 1.36 
Jmv 11.1.32,11.6.31
107. Omitted in wKt1; päda s c-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Jmv 1.36; Laksi2.6so; Dev
1.48; Mädh 1.502 — a) Tj1 
L
o
1
— b) o
O
r
L
a
1 NNg 
Hy
Lo2cMd' xMd3 xMd4 oMd5 GMy MTr4MTr6 
_ 
__ 
Jo2 Tj1 
Bo Tr1
Jmv 
' — c) Tj' trcf; Lo1 Lo4 oOr Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M4-5"9 G] Jolly 
oMd1 [Jolly M8 R
Ku Nd] 
— d) NPu1
108.* Omitted in wKt1 NKt*; verses 108 and 109 transposed in oMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by
Jmv 6.1.54; Laks 12.650; padas a-b cited by Apa 433 — a) Apa 
Tr2
oMy 
MTr4 M T r 6 _ 
— b) wKt3 '
B
e
1 Bo Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4
oMy oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 uTr3Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Ho
Pu3 
_ — 
c ) H o wKt3 N N g P u
8 T M d
3 
J m v [vl a s i n e d ] 
MTr5 
— d ) L a ' T j 2 B o o M d
5 ; MTr3 '
109. Omitted in wKt1 NKt4. Cited by Laks 12.650 — a) oMy 
Pu3 Tr2 
— b)
o M y 
— c ) s K t
5 T j
1 
— d)Tj'
no. Omitted in NKt4; pâda s a-c omitted in wKt1. Cited by Laks 12.650 — a) Wa o m
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
oMy 
Pu2 
— d)
o O r 
sBe2 
W
a
ß
K
t
5
 — c) La1
oMy MTr5 Laks
 — b) Be1 Lo4 oM
 — b) Be1 Lo4 oM
NPu1


--- PAGE 778 ---
Chapter 9 
767
in. Cited by Apa 719, 722; Jmv i.yj;Laks 12.651; päda s a-b cited by Jmv 1.27 — b)
TMd3 
A
p
a
— c) o M d
1 o M d
5 
Apajzz[\\\^
— d ) B
e
1
; W a s K t
5 Pu5 P u 7 r M d 3 oMd5 " 
o O r 
H o wKt3 T r 2
Apa 719 
; L o 2 T r 2 M T r 3 
—NPu 1 inserts here 9.213.
112. Cited by Vij 2.114, \vj\Jmv 2.yj;Laks 12.655; Dev 3.619; Mädh 3.334 — a) Pi? Pu7
[Jolly G] 
L a
1 B e
1 xMd3 oMy sOx1
 M T r 4 T Md 4 
_ 
wKt1
Lo1 [cor to] 
— b) Bh [pätha ] 
Me [pätha ] 
Be1
sKt5 " 
Hy 
; Pu2 Pu4 " 
oMd1 cMy 
; Lo1
— c) Be1 La1 Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [but cor s h] MTr4 
" Pu8
Wa 
Ox2 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
'— d) Hy 
[cf. 8.ii2b]; Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
" 
TMd4 MTr6 
" 
BKt5 TMd3 
eBe2 
Ho sOx1 sPu6
113. Cited by Laks 12.656 — a) NPu1 
Lo4 [ma 
J 
sOx1 sPu6
Pu2 Pu4 
_ oOr 
— b) Lo3 
Hy 
" ~ 
oOr 
. oMy
[Jolly Nd] 
— c) Tr1 îfr ; Lo3 T j
1 . T M d 3 J m 
Lo1 
HyxMd4 
—
d) Laks 
Wa 
t; Lo2 
. Lo1 
r
114.Omitted in sOx'. Cited by Laks 12.656 — a ) o M y L a
1 
Ho
— b) wKt1 sKt5 La1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly
Kt2 ' 
; Tr1 [but c o r s
h
]
— d ) Pu5 P
u
7
H
y J o 2 Lo3 TMd3 Pu3 Tj'
Tr2La/b 
BKt5 
B e ' w K t
1 L o
1 B h [pauta] 
comment-
ing: 
_
115. Cited by Jmv 2.45;Laks 12.659; Dev 3.619 — a) sOx1 sPu6 ;
[metathesis]; oMd1 
oMy 
" ~ ~b)TMd4 
La1 Tr2
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
—
 c) L
o
2
; Pu5 Pu7 Jmv Laks Dev 
—
 d)
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu2 Pu4
116. Cited by Jmv 2.37; Laks 12.660; Dev 3.620; päda s c-d cited by Vij 2..\ij;Mâdh
3-334 —
 a) wKt1 
; P
u
4
B
o La1 oMd5 
— b) Bo
BBe 2oMd' 
. TMd 3 
— c) Lo1 
oMy _ 
_ 
Tj2


--- PAGE 779 ---
768 
Chapter 9
Lo4 
; Ho 
Be! 
, wKt1 
Be1 Ho Hy Jm
Jo2 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 [Jolly M G Nd] RcMâdh Jolly 
Tr1
— d ) Lo1 
o
O
r
L
o
1
117. Cited by Vij 2.117; Laks 12.661; Dev 3.620; Mädh 3.334 — a)sKt5 
Bo
MTr6 
— a-b)rMd4 
— b) Tr2 
; Hy
Tj1 
TMd3 
— (OTr2 
Lo'TMd4 
" 
oOr Tr1 [but me sh]
— d) Lo4 
Lo1
118.* Cited by Vij 2.i24;Apa73i; Jmv 3.36; Laks 12.671; Dev 3.626; Mädh 3.345 — a)
BKt5 
La1 
" ; Mädh 
Lo4 iMd4 Wa [Jolly M] Me
Laks ' 
Tr2 
Be1 Pu5 Pu7 
' — ti) Mädh
xMd4 
— c) 7Md3 om 
first 
MTr4 
; Pu7 
— d) Lo1
119. Cited by VU 2.118-9; Apa 723; Laks 12.674 — a) Bo 
NPu
1 
wKt1
Be1 
Jm Jo1 Jo2 NKt4 Lo2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Vij Rn Mandlik KSS Dave
[supported by Ku] ; Hy 
Kt2 
nKt5 
Apa 
wKt3 " 
—
b) sCa BKt5 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 NPu1 Tj2 
" 
oMy MTr4MTr6 
wKt1 
" — c) Vij
Hy
120. Cited by Vij 2.i36;Laks 12.708; Mädh 3.357 — a) Vif Mädh 
; cMd5
— b)ßKt5 
— c) Bo oMd5 NNg 
Tr2 
— d) TMd3
121.Omitted in eKt5. Cited by Laks 12.709 — a) L o
4 w K t
3 
xMd4 MTr6
Ho 
— b) Be1 _ 
— c)MTr4 
rMd3 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr5
MTr65A 
Lo4 
w K t
1 H o " oMd 5' 
— d) Bh [patha] 
rMd3
Lo4 
sOx'sPu 6Tj 2 
T r
2 o M d
5 
Ox 2 MTr3 
Me
[pâtha ; rejected by Me]
122. Pâda s a-b omitted in BKt5. Cited by Laks 12.658 — a) Lo4 
L o 3 o M d 5
oMy MTr4 MTr6 
Lo2 
— b) NKt4 Tj2 ont 
~ 
oMy MTr4 MTr6
sCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 La1 NNg Pu3 Pu7 
— c) oMd1 
— d) wKt3


--- PAGE 780 ---
Chapter 9 
769
123.* Cited by Laks 12.658 — a) Tj2 
wKt1 La1 
— b) wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
[wKt1 
]; aCa 
Lo2 
wKt3 Pu8 
sKt5
— c)Be' 
" MTr6 
Ho 
TMd3 ' 
oMd5
— c-d)wKt' 
oMy 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
Pu2 Pu4
BBe2 
'; TMd3 
BBe2 MTr3
124. Omitted in oOr; pâda s c-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.658, 782— a) Jo1
oMy ; 
— b ) T
r
2
T
j ' ' B
e
1 oMy N N g Pu4 MTr5" 
H o Jo1 Kt2
NKt
4 sKt5 Lo1 oMd1 TMd4 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 " 
, sBe2 La1 Lo4 TMd3 NPu
1 Pu2 Wa [Jolly
M Nd] 
MTr6 " 
— c) Lo4 ont 
BBe2 
MTr6 
Ho
Wa 
— d) NKt4 La1 Lo4 cMd5
 NNg Tr1 [but me sh] 
TMd4
oMd1 TMd3 MTr4 MTr6 
_ 
, Lo4 
T M d 3 T M d 4
125. a) Be1 
s K t
5 B h [ad 8.126] gives a pâtha , 
which he rejects —
b)cMd' 
Tj1 
NKt4 
— c)oOr 
TMd3
NKt4 
" TMd4 
Tj1 
Lo3 Pu2 W a s B e
2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 TMd3 TMd4
oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr: 
". L
o
4
" — d) TMd3 
wKt3 Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2
BBe2 NKt
4 sOx1 sPu6
126.* a) Ox2
 
N K f B e
1 Ho oMd1 Pu2 Pu4
 MTr6 Wa
Bo oMd5 NNg Pu8 
: rMd3" 
w K t
1 - b) eBe2 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 [folly R Ku]
Jo1 
" Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
: oMd5 
oMd1 TMd4
NNg Wa 
La1 
— c) TMd3 
sBe2 Hy Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo2 Lo3 oOr Pu2 Pu4
Pu8 Tj1 
" 
" 
oMd5 
Be1 Bo sCa Ho Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 eKt5 Lo1
Lo4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
[Be1 
] —d)oMd' 
Be1 M T r 6 T M d 3 
oOr
La1 oMd1 
Wa
127. Pâda s a-c omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Jm v 10.2; Laks 12.726 — a) oMd5
TMd3 _ 
— b)Pu 5Pu 7^ . wKt1 
TMd4 
: — c) TMd3 
oOrJmv[vl]
Be1 Ho N N g MTr6
 
TMd4 '
' — d ) Lo3 Tj1 
Lo1
, oMd1 
" Be1 oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 NPu
1 MTr4 
Ho 
Lo2
Additional verse in NPu
1 Pu3 Tr2 Mandlik 
Dave KSS; pâda s c-d cited by Apa


--- PAGE 781 ---
770 
Chapter ç
80 [cf. VaDh 17.17]:
d) Apa
128.* Päda s a-b omitted in Hy. Cited by Laks 12.726 — a) TMd3 oMy 
cMd5 
—
b) Mir6 
Ho 
Bo 
xMd3 
cMd5 
Mir4 M T r
6 . iMd4
[Jolly m]Jolly 
cMyTr1 
Lo4 N?U' Pu2 Pu4 Wa [Jolly M] 
Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G]; 
T
j
2
B
o [cor to] wKt1 La1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Laks 
: sKt5 oMd1 Pu5 Pu7, 
— c) wKt1
Lo4 [ma iff 
— d) nBe2 Pu5 Pu7 ^T; Tr2
129. a) Tr2 
oMy Tr1 
TMd3 tâ g^f ; Pu2 Pu4 
— b)
oMd1 oMd5 oMy MTr5 MTr6 
; TMd3 
'— c) Hy 
' — d) TMd4
Be1 Hy wKt1 La1 Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 
oMyNPu1 "f^TÍrT:; xMd3
130. Cited by Jmv 11.2.1; Laks 12.708, 747; Dev 3.683 — a) TMd3 Tj1 Tt — b) Hy La1
— c)Jo 2Tj' 
L o
3 M T r
4 MTr6 
J
m
v
— d ) Pu8
• 
Wa 
Ho 
HyJo^K^LoSpu'Pi^Tj1 Jmv
131. Cited by Mâdh 3.372;pâda s a-b cited by Apa j2i;Jmv 4.2.13; Laks 12.689 and
päda s c-d by Laks 12.724 — a) Pu2 Pu4 Jmv [vl] 
Ho Bo La1 Lo4NNg Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly
M^G] Jolly 
[but at 9.214 Jolly adopts 
Pu2 MTr6 
H y P u
8
— b) Bo 
H
y
T
M
d
3 
— c) La1 
Be1 Hy sKt5 La1 Lo2
oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 MTr5 Laks 
B o o M d
1 
— d) wKt1
TMd3 
Hy Jo2 Lo3 Tj ' [Jolly R]
132. Cited by Jmv 11.2.19; Hem 3/1.87; Dev 4.14; päda s c-d cited by Laks 12.724 — a)
oMd1 TMd4 aMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
uCa Ox2 
L o
2 T M d
4
— b)Pu3 
Tr2 
oOr 
Jmv[v\] 
~ 
sBe2 eKt5 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5
[Jolly G] Bh Me [pâtha] ; 
— c) oMd1 
rMd3 oMy MTr5 [Jolly Nd] 
" 
NKt4
Lo2 
La1 Pu2 Pu4 
cMd1 Tr1 [but me íA]MTr 6
TMd4Tr2ow 
oOr 
— d) TMd3


--- PAGE 782 ---
Chapter 9 
771
133.* Päda s c-d omitted in oMy oOr. Cited by Jmv 11.2.19— a) Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 
oMd5
oMd1 Tr1 [but me sh] 
MTr5 
, x M d
4 M T r
4 MTr6 Ncf
—
 b) Jm Jo1 Kt2 cMd1
 TMd4 oMy Ox2 Tj2
 MTr3
 MTr4
 MTr5
 MTr6 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
Pu2 Pu4 
[cf. 9.139] —d) wKt3 
Tr2 
Bo
134. Omitted in Hy oOr. Cited by Vij 2.132.;Apa739; Jmv2.3g, io.2;Madh 3.347— a)
BBeVmv 2.39 
— b) Lo3 Tj1 
N
N
g
B
e
1 NKt4 Lo1 sOx1 T
 ; 
TMd3
Tj2 Tr2 
— c) Be1 oMd1 oMd5 oMy NNg 
xMd3 
— d)
NNgTr2 
HoNKt4La'Lo3cMd5sOx 1NPu1Pu2Pu3Pu4Pu5sPu6Pu 7 
Lo1
135. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 754; Jmv 11.2.16; Laks 12.691; Mädh 3.374— a) Kt2
wKt3 
A
p
a
L
o
4 
H o — 
b ) MTr6 
— d ) oMy
Lo4 TMd4
 _ 
, aKt5 
wKt3 TMd3 Apa 
Bo wKt1 Mädh
Pu7 
Tr2
Additional verse in TMd3:
136. Päda s a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 2.i36;Apa435; Jmv 10.3,11.2.20 — a) Pu4
TMd4 
cMd1 
Tr2îfr;NKt 4 
— a-b) oMy ;
— b) NKt4 q-; wKt3 
oMd1 
Ho Lo4 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 Mir4 Mir6 Wa [folly M G Nd]Jo//y 
_ 
eût5
TMd3 
MTr4 M
T
r
6
— c) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy 
Apa 
' —
 d)
Jmv 10.3 [vl]
137. Omitted in oMy. Cited by Apa 103; Jmv 11.1.31; Laks 2.432 — a) Pu8 MTr5
— b) Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Laks 
TMd4 
— c) Pu2 
Bo
La'Lo 2^ 
[Bo L a 1 ] ; Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Wa [Jolly M G] 
NKf
Pu3 " 
Be1 [cor to] nCa wKt3 
for 
Be1 eCa Apa [vi]
— d)sKt5 
Jmv 
Hy 
MKt
4 
aB^Jmv'
138. Päda s a-b omitted in oMy. Cited by Jmv 11.1.31; Laks 12.741; pada-a cited by Jmv
5.6 — b) Hy Jm Jo1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Kt2


--- PAGE 783 ---
772 
Chapter 9
HosOx'sPu6 
NPu1 
— c)Lo'Lo 3Tj' 
: — d) Kt2 om
139. Päda s c-d cited by Jmv 4.2.10, 11.6.9, 31— a) uKt5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr2
g^%" —
 b) La1 
Lo2 
Bo Lo2 Pu8 
— c) O
x
3
P
u
8
; 
Jmv 
cMd1 
~" ' TMd3 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 
" 
oOr 
NKt4
TMd4 
— d) w K t
3 " L o 1 " 
wKt1 Lo4 oMy NNg Tr2. 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
140. Pâda s c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 435; Laks 12.728; Hem 3/1.123; Dev 4.14 —
a) xMd3 • 
T r ' — c) sOx1 sPu6 
Be1 TMd3 Me [pâtha ]
sKt5 Bh [pâtha ] 
— d)Pu 2Pu 4o/w 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3 Ox2 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3
Mandlik Jolly JhaKSS Dave 
~ 
~ 
; oMy
141. Cited by Laks 12.731; Dev 3.671 — a) oMy 
— a-b) TMd4 gives instead
i92a-b — b) Wa _ 
Bo Lo2 NNg 
Ox3 Pu5 oMd s MTr4 MTr6 
Bo Lo ' MTr3
Lo2 
Wa 
NPu1 
— c) Be'cMyNNgTj 1 Tr2 
îMd 3
eBe2 
wKt1 ë^dRw ; ßße2 La1 Ox2NPu' Pu2 Pu7 Wa 
— d) oMy \Jolfy Nd]
sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5 MTr4 . 
. Jo2 
oMd1
sKt5 
wKt3 
oOr Pu7 MTr4 MTr6 
Tr1
142. Cited by Vij '¿.\y2.\Laks 12.731; Dev 3.671; Mädh 3.351 — a) oMd 
Be1
La1 
wKt1 TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 
, Lo2 
sCa Ox2 Ti2 
La1 Tr2 
wKt1
Tr1 
— tyNKt4
 
__ 
Hy 
TMd4 Vij Mädh 
oMd1 NNg Pu5 Pu7 MTr4
MTr6 
.Ho 
Lo2 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 ' 
;BoLo !MTr 3
NKt4 
Jm Jo2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr5 \Jolly Nd Gr] Vij Dev Mädh
—
 c) sBe2 Ox2 
TMd4 
Ho 
NKt4 " 
; Be1 
— d) MTr5
cMd1 
oMd5 
sOx'sPu6 
TMd4
143. Cited by Laks 12.744; Dev 3.630; Mädh 3.368—a) oMy 
__ 
_ 
sKt5 La1
MTr6 
__ 
oMd1 
Lo1; 
TMd4 NNg ; 
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly
G] : 
NKt4 
TMd3 " 
— b) TMd4 
sOx1
TMd3 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
NNg" 
. — c) Jo2 La1 oOr 
" 
wKt3
oMd1 
Tj1 Tr2 
" Pu7 
TMd4 
" 
\ TMd3 
— d)oMd5
TMd4
Tr2
oOr
TMd3
Be1
, Hyom


--- PAGE 784 ---
Chapter 9 
773
144. Omitted in oMy [Jolly Nd1 Nd2]. Cited by Laks 12.744 — a) TMd4 _
— b)
Pu7 
L a 1 T M d 4 
— c)Tr2=T 
wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 
Ho
NKt4 sKt5 Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 
La1 sOx1 sPu6 
sCa Hy oOr O x
2 B e
1
— d) Bo oMd1 
"
145.* Omitted in oMy [Jolly Nd1 Nd2] — a) oMd1 TMd3 rMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr^Tr5 MTr6
wKt3 La1 Lo1 Pu8 
Pu3 Tr2 
wKt1 
Tr1 M T r 5 w K t 3 o M d '
— b)TMd4. 
" 
oOr 
T M d
3 B e
1 sBe2 Ho Hy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 Ox2
NPu' Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
sOx1 sPu6 
^ 
, wKt3 
s K t
5 — c) wKt1 oOr 
Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 Tj1 Tr1 MTr6
[Jolly R] 
Wa 
Be1 ßBe2 oMd1 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] fê; oMd 5 
TMd4
— d)oMd5 
L o 4 ' ' 
Pu5 P
u
7
P
u
8 
MTr3
146. Omitted in oMy MTr5 [Jolly Nd1]. Cited by Vij 2.136; Apa 742; Laks 12.709; Madh
3-357—a) TMd4 
— b) ßKt5 iMd4 
Be1 sCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 iMd4
oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu* Tj ' Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M R Nd Gr] Vij Apa^\ — c) TMd4 Wa
Ho 
— d) NPu1
147.* Omitted in oMy [Jolly Nd1 Nd2]; placed after 91144 in Tr1 — b) Lo1
— c ) o O r 
T
M
d
3
H
o 
oMd5 Tr1
 MTr4 MTr6
Lo1" 
TMd4 
•— d) Be1 sKt5 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa 
TMd4 
Tr1
WTÍ?T?r; Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly G}Mandlik KSS Dave 
Hy NNg
148. Omitted in [Jolly Nd2]. Cited by Laks 12.696— a) oMd5 Laks 
—
 c) NKt4
sKt5 Lo1 Pu3 Pu5 
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Lo4 Pu4 [Jolly M] 
— d) üBe 2
149. Cited by Laks 12.696; Mädh 3.343 — a) Pu5 Wa 
Be sBe2 Ho wKt' wKt3
NKt4 eKt5 La1 Lo1 cMy NNg sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj' Tr1 
— b) \^Ct' Tr]
Lo4 
— c)NPu' 
N
N
g
H
o 
Ti2 
— d) Be1 aBe2 NKt4
La1 Lo4 TMd4 cMy oOr Tr2 MTr6 
Hy


--- PAGE 785 ---
774 
Chapter ç
150. Cited by Laks 12.697 — a) NPu1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Lo1 
iMd4
Pu2 
wKt1 
Ox2 
— b) Be1 TMd4 Ox2 
Pu5 Pu7 " 
TMd3
TMd4 oMd1 
NNg 
— c) Be1 Ho wKt1 Lo2 Lo4 cMd1 xMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Mir6 Wa 
Pu3 
Pu2 Pu4 
La1
sKt5 
c M d 5 L o 1 
— d)Pu 5Pu 7 
BoLo'Tj1
Wa 
Mir3 
[Jolly G]'
151. Pâda s c-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Jmvg.12; Laks 12.697 — a) Pu3 Pu8
wKt1 
N P u 1 s O x 1 s
P
u
6
— b) Jo1 wKt1 Wa 
" " La1
NPu'Tj'Tr'tèi/imcA/i] 
; oMd' 
Lo2 Pu7 [but cor] 
' ßKt5
 '• 
NKl4
— c) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 uT^Ku MandlikJha Dave KSS 
; ßBe2
wKt3 Lo3 TMd3 Tj'J/wv 
oOr 
^ 
, Lo1
NKt4 oMd5 
Bo wKt1 wKt3 iMd3 Ox2 oMy Ti2 
oMd1 
Bé
MTr4 Mir6 
Lo4 
wKt1 wKt3 
Ox2 
— d) oMd1 TMd4
MTr5 
iMd3 oMy M
T
r
6
c
M
d
5 NPu
1
Wa 
NNg [but corfli]
152.* Cited by Jmv 9.12; Laks 12.697; Mâdh 3.343 — a) Lo4 [folly M4'5"9]
oMd1 
" 
sBe2 sCa Hy Lo4 Ox2 
Lo3 Jo2 Tj1 [Jolly R]
Be1 uBe2 nCa Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo3TMd4 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly R]
Jmv Laks Mädh 
— b) Ho sOx1 s
P
u
6
N
K
t
4 
La1
Jo2 La1 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
uCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 Ox2 Tj2 MTr3 Wa
[Jolly ¥iu\Jmv MandlikJha KSS Dave 
'[ßCaWa 
\*t3 
Jmv 
]; oMd1 TMd4
oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Gr Nd] Laks Mädh 
~ 
[MTr4 om 5T; TMd4 
];
TMd3 
M
T
r
5
— c)wKt3 sKt5 L o 1 w K t 1 '• " — d) oMy 
ßKt5
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2 Wa 
[cf. 8.i54d]; Be1 Ho sOx1 sPu6 
Lo4
153. Omitted in eKt5 [haplo]. Cited by Jmv 9.12; Laks 12.697; Mädh 3.343; pâda- a cited
by Vij2.124 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
Lo3 N
N
g
W
a 
Be1 
— b)
oMy 
— c) Be1 wKt1 NPu1 
Bo 
TMd3 
— d) oMd5 Mädh
B o 
T M d 3 ' w K t 3
154. Omitted in sKt5. Cited by Vij 2.i33;Apa 740; Jmv9.2.7; Laks 12.703; Mädh 3.344
— a) TMd4 
Tr1 [but me s
h
]
[
N
d calls this samyakpäthah] ; TMd3 
Be'


--- PAGE 786 ---
Chapter 9 
775
La1 TMd4 oMd5 oOr 
Ho 
— b) Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku]Laks MandlihJha
KSSDave 
[KSS 
]; TMd4 
_ 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt3
' L o 1 
~ 
BBe 2wKt 1_ 
P
u
3
o
M
d
1
—
c ) TMd3 ; 
N
P
u
1
— c-d) A p a 
—
 d )
rMd3 
oOr Tr1 '
155. Cited by Vij 2.125; Jmv 9-27; Laks 12.704; Mâdh 3.343; päda s a-b cited by Dev
3.614 —a) sKt5 
T M d 4 N N g B o 
Pu2 P
u
4
—
b) oMd5 "
o
M
y om T; oMd1 
" 
ßBe2 Jo1 ßKt5 Ox2 
Lo 3 Tj1
[Jolly K\ 
Ho 
— c)Be' 
wKt1 
— d) cMd1
156.* Päda s c-d omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Jmv 2.43; Laks 12.701 — a) Tr2
Jo2Lo3Tj' 
NKt
4 
NPu
1 
BBe2HyJmJo 1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3
La1 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 Mir4Mir6 Jmv Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave
Bo Lo2 Pu8 
TMd4 
— b) NPu
1 flf wf; sKt5 
MTr5 
Ho
— c)wKt' 
Lo1 
L o 3 T j ' — d)NKf
157. Padas a-b omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.701 — a) sOx1 s P u
6 ; oMd1
wKt1 
sKr5 
oMd1 
MTr4 MTr6 
Bo 
— a-b)
La1 
" 
" " " 
— b) Lo1 oMd5 Pu5 
wKt1 
'— c) Wa
Laks 
wKt1 
— d) TMd3
158. Cited by Apa 734; Laks 12.714 — a) eKt5 Wa Tr1 [but me sh] 
cMy
TMd3 
wKt1 TMd3 
sBe2 
TMd4 
MTr4 MTr6 
NPu1 Pu4
— b) Laks 
—
 c) Pu5 P
u
7
— d) oMy
wKt1 
L
o
1
L
o
3 T
j
1
B
e
1 
sOx1
sPu6
159. Verses 159 and 160 transposed in Jm. Cited by Vij 2.132; Apa 734; Laks 12.714;
MÔÎ// Î 2.37,3.349 — a) Le? NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
o M y — b) Be1 "
" 
La" oMd5
sOx'sPu6 
— c) Lo3 
,NPu ]Tr 2 
TMd4 
Tr2 
— d) ßKt5
lacuna for the päda ; sOx1 sPu6 
Tj1 
TMd4


--- PAGE 787 ---
776 
Chapter 9
160. Cited by Vij 2.132; Apa 734; Laks 12.714 [transposes päda s a-b and c-d|; Mädh
2.37,3-349 — a) sOx1 
Pu7 
TMd4 
— b) Lo1 
— c) TMd4
La1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly G] 
sKt5 " o M d
5 Apa [vi]
— d) wKt1 
cMy 
Lo3 Tj1 
oOr
161. Päda s b-c omitted in TMd3 oMd5 [haplo] — a) Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Tj1
Tj2 Tr1 [me sh to] MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Rn Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b) iMd4
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor] 
o
O
r
L
o
4 
— c) Bo
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 [me sh to] MTr3 [Jolly R Nd1 Ku] Ku Rn Nd
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) TMd4
oOr
162.* Cited by Apa 739; Jwvio.is; Laks 12.709 — a) Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 
sBe2 ßCa Jo1
Ox2 
Pu2 P u
4 T M d
4 
s
K
t
5
— b ) rMd3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 
; oMy 
— c) La1 
oMd1 
oMd5 Apa Jmv
sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 
NKt4 sKt5 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
sBe2 eCa Jo1 ßKt5 Ox2
-— d)MTr4MTr6 
_/ 
Bo ßCa wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 oMd1 ïMd 3 TMd4 cMy NPu1
Pu2 Tr2 
Be1 nBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 sKt5 La1 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 MTr5 Wa
Jmv [vl] Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
' 
sO^ sPu6 
TMd4
163. Cited by Jmv 10.13; Laks 12.708; Mädh 3.348; päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.132; Dev
3.667 — a) wKt3 
wKt1 
— b) Ho sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3
oMy 
NPu1 
— c) wKt3 
Bo Tr2 
TMd4 
Pu3
Pu4 
— d )
T M d
3 M ä d
h 
N P u
1 L o
1
164. Cited by Vij 2.i32;Apa 733; Jmvio.n; Laks 12.710 — a) Be1 
Ho 
wKt'
Pu5 om 
La1 NNg 
— b) wKt3 uKt5 La1 NPu1 sPu6 
TMd3 MTr4 MTr6
— c ) Tr1 
s C a " 
T r
2 L a
1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
J o
1 o M y
sKf 
Bo 
H
o
w
K
t
1
— d) Bo Ho Pu3 Pu5 Pu7
Pu8 Tr2 Wa
165. Omitted in sKt5. Cited by Apajys; Laks 12.710 — a) Bo Lo1 oOr Pu5 Pu7 :


--- PAGE 788 ---
Chapter 9 
777
Pu2 Pu4 
La ' 
— b) Pu3 NNg Tr2 
Lo4 [Jolly M]
BBe2Jo'Ox2 
L
a
1
— c ) x M d
4 H o 
- d ) Lo1
sBe2 ßCa Jo1 Ox2 
o
O
r
L
o
4
166. Cited by Laks 12.719; Madhz.sS —
 a) Be1 Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 Lo2 Lo4 iMd3 NNg Ox2
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M4~8] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
T M d 4 M T r 6
cMd5 
TMd3 
— b ) w
K
t
3
L
o
4 [Jolly M], 
Tr1
Mädh [Jolly Gr] 
ßBe2 La1 cMd1 oMy P u
8 w K t
1 
Jo2 Lo3 NNg
Tj1 
L o
1 N K I
4 Lo4 Tr2 [Jolly M
]
—
 c ) sKt5 
" 
Lo1
rMd4 
— d) T
M
d
4
B
B
e
2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt 2
NKt4 BKt5 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 [but me s h] Tr2 Miroir4 MTr6
[Jolly Nd] Nd Rc Mandlik KSS Dave 
Pu2 P u
4 B e
1 ßBe2 Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 ßKt5
La1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Pu8 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Nd Rc Mandlik KSS Dave
167. Cited by Laks 12.721; Dev 3.667; Mädh 2.38 — a)wKt' Pu5 Pu7 
sKt5
Be1 Lo2 
Pu4 
Tj1 
oMd5
 
TMd3 oMy Tr1
TMd4 
sBe2 
— b) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 Tr1 Dev Mädh
Ho wKt3 Ox2 Pu8 Wa 
— c) La1 ' 
Pu2 P
u
4
B
e
1 
— d) oOr
; NPu1
168. Omitted in Tr2. Cited by Fj 2.130; Apa 736; Laks 12.731; Dev 3.667-8; Madh2.^8
— a) Pu2 Pu4 cMd1 TMd3 cMy Wa [Jolly M Nd] Bh 
commentators prefer the copula: Bh
and Me 
Be1 
oMd5
Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr4MTr6 
— b) o
O
r
— c) oMd5 
Ho NKt4 oOr sOx1
NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu7 [but cor] Pu8 Wa Apa ' 
oMd1 
— d) T M d 3 w K t 3 sKt5
NPu1 
Pu2 P u 4 H y w K t ' N N g
169. Cited by Apa 738; Laks 12.734; Dev 3.668; Madhz.^B — a) Laks
Apa[\\} 
B
e
1
— a-b) Pu2 Pu4 
— b) oOr 
wKt1 
wKt1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Na [pâtha ] 
Hy ' 
— c) Lo1
oMd5 ; 
sKt5 
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Pu3 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
TMd4 
" 
sBe2
L A 1
wKt1
 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6
Lo2
Bo Lo1 MTr3


--- PAGE 789 ---
778 
Chapter 9
170.* Cited by Laks 12.730; Dev 3.668; Maclh 2.38 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
La1 oMd1
oMy Tr1 MTr6 
TMd3 
Tr1 
sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKl4 BKt5
La1 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTrWTr6 Wa
[Jolly Nd Ku R] Ku Mr Mandlik KSS 
w Kt3 
cMy torn here — b) Ho
TMd4 
sBe2 Bo Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 aKt5 Lo1 Lo3 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8Tj' Tr2 [Jolly G K¡ Dev^ 
Pu4 
" 
NNg 
[bul corfli] sKt5 
Be1
[corto 
]; BCaLo 4oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6[Jo/(y MNd]Oev 
Lo2 
— c)
TMd4 
Lo4 TMd3 Pu4 [Jolly M ] B e
1 Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1
oMd1 TMd3 oMy oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Rn 
—
 d) sBe2
BKt5 oMy TMd3 TMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
. Lo3
171.Cited by Apa 739; Oev3.668; Maclh 2.38 — a) Lo4 oMy 
La1
— b) Be1 Ho NKt4 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
Pu7 
— c) sCa oOr
Apa 
— d) w K t
1 T M d
3 cMy Dev '
172. Cited by Vij 2.i2g;Apa 736;Dev 3.668; Madli 2.38 — a-b) Dev
—
 b)Tr2 
BKt5 
w
K
t
1
, TMd3 
— c) MSdh
La'oMd1 
T r 2 B o L o 1 
— d) oMd1 
Tj1 
Ho
TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6
173. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; padas c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Apa 738; Laks 3.731;
Dev 3.668; Maclh 2.38 — a) Pu4 
Bo 
" 
Tr2 
Ho sKt5 TMd3 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 
_ 
— b) Mädh 
~ oMy om first 
La1 
Pu7 ; 
Pu5 ^Tf
Lo3 Tr1 [but cor} 
— c) TMd4 
Be1 NKl4 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 
w K t 1 c M d 1
oMd5 
— d)Tj2 
e
K
t
5
L
a
1 
Be1
174. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.131; Apa 738; Laks 12.732; Dev 3.668;
Mädh 2.38 — a) Tj1 
L
a
1
o
M
d
1 
Tr ' [but me sh]
oMd5 
Bo Hy wKt1 La1 oMy NNg oOr Tr1 MTr5 Apa 
— b) sOx1
sPu6 
TMd4 
La1 
Pu5 Pu7 
Pu2 Pu4 
—
c)TMd3 
"
L
o
1
L
a
1 
o O r 
— d ) J o 2 Lo3wKt3 Tj1
[wKt3 
]


--- PAGE 790 ---
Chapter 9 
779
175. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.728; Dev 3.668; Mädh 2.38 — a) Ho
Lo1 Pu3 Tj2 Tr2 Laks 
i M d 4 — b) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr5
MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Dev 
[MTr5
TMd4 Mir6 
(Jolly Nd) 
]; NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
; Hy om 5TT;
BKt5 lacuna for 
sOx1 sPu6 [but cor} 
sBe2 wKt1 Ox2 
Lo1 
" " 
Ho
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) oOr
176. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vis 1.66 ;A pa 96 — b) Bo xMd4 MTr6
Ho sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 
— c) Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 
Lo3 T j
1 o O r
Apa 
' ' — d)Pu3
Additional half-verse in NPu
1:
177. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 738; Laks 12.733; Dev 3.668; Mädh 2.38
— a)oMd5 
B
e
1
— b) oMd1 oMy Tr1 MTr5 
— c)oOrLaks
TMd3 
Be1 oOr NPu1 Pu2 Wa 
TMd4 
— d) sOx1 sPu6
NPu1 Pu2 Wa ' 
; Lo2 
Bo NKt4 Lo3 oMd5 MTr6
178. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Jmvg.zS; Dev 3.668; Mädh 2.38; päda s c-d
cited by Vis' 1.90 — a) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
La1 
Be1 
oMd5 
—
b)Tr' 
_ 
— c)Lo' 
TMd3 
oMd5 
oOr 
TMd4
— d)Ho 
oOrPiiPu7 
TMd4 
wKt1 
T M d 3 o M d 5
BKt5
179. Cited by Jmv 9.29; Laks 12.704 — a) Be 
oMd1
wKt1 
T
j
2
L
o
1 
' 
— b)MTr5
oMd1 
J o 1 T r 2 
— c ) W a N K t
4 ' — 
d ) oMd1 
Be1 [me
sh to]
180. Cited by Vij 3.25g;Apa 97, 735; Laks 12.735; Dev 3.668 — a) Apa 735
TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
— b ) wKt3 T
r
2
P
u
5 Pu7 
P
u
8
H
o
[Jolly G] 
, La1 V
i
j
— c) oMd1 oMy 
" wKt1 Tr2
— d) TMd3 
Bo


--- PAGE 791 ---
780 
Chapter 9
181. Cited by Apa 97; Laks 12.735; päda s c-d cited by Apa 81 — a) [Jolly Nd]
oMd5 
wKt1 Lo 4 [Jolly M
]
T
M
d
3 TMd4 
— b) oMd1
wKt1 
K
t
2
— c ) wKt1 cMy Tr1 Mir4 Mir6 
" 
Tr2 
A
p
a
—
d) wKt1 Lo1 MTr6 
H o o m ^ j L o 3 T M d 4 
NKt4sOx'sPu6 
Lo4
[Jolly M]
182. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; päda s c-d omitted in Be1 [haplo]. Cited by Kum 1.3.7; Vis
1.69; Vij z.l32;Apa 433; Laks 12.740; Hem 3/1.99; pada-c cited by Jmv 115.7 — a) Ho
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] Vis ' 
' eKt5 
, — c) Ox2 Kum
NKt4 
L
o
1
s
K
t
5 
_ 
NPu1
sBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 Lo3 cMd1 TMd4 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3MTr5 Mandlik Jolly
JhaKSSDave 
' 
Kt2
183. Omitted in Lo4 xMd4 [Jolly M];päda s a-b omitted in Be1 Pu4. Cited by Apa 433;
Jmv4.3.32; Laks 12.740; Hem 3/1.97, 101 — a) Tj2 
Bo La1 
cMd1 oMd5
oMy MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
TMd3 
Bo 
— b) wKt1 oOr
TMd3 
— c) Be1 
•— d) Jo2 sKt5 La1 Lo3 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tj1
[Jolly G R Ndl Jolly 
[Pu5 P u
7 ] ; i M d 3 W a 
TMd3
Be1 Tj2
184. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.717— a) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
Tr1
 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 \Jolly Nd] 
w
K
t
1
— b) oMd ' oMd5 NNg 
Bo
La1 
s K t
5 — c ) w K t 1 s B e 2 om 
N
N
g
— d ) TMd4 N N g
HosOx'sPu 6 
eBe2 sCa Jo1 Ox2 Laks 
TMd3 
oOr
185. Omitted in Lo4 oOr [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 653; Laks 12.717; Dev 3.672, 691;
päda s a-b cited by Vij 2.132; Jm v 11.1.40; Dev 3.667; Mädh 3.349,356; päda s c-d by Vij
2.136; Jmv 11.5.5;Laks 12-748; and pada-c by K//2.136 — b) oMy 
Bo
Apa'. 
o M d 1 s B e 2 Jo1 O x 2 L a / b w K . t 3 L a f c v 
cMd5
— c) Ho 
' N
K
t
4
— d) sBe2 sCa Jo1 ßKt5 Ox2 
Lo3
Be1 Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 NNg Pu3 Pu8 MTr3 MTr5 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Rn [pätha ]
Pu5 Pu7
sBe2 uCa Jo1 sKt5 oMy Ox2 Laks
Lo2


--- PAGE 792 ---
Chapter 9 
781
Additional verse in NPu
1:
186. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 744; Jmv 11.1.40,11.6.7, 17; Laks 12.748;
päda s a-b cited by Jmv 43.36—a) Tr1 
r M d
3 — b) Ho 
Pu5 Pu7
TMd3 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
Ho Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 oMd5 sOx1 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1
A p a 
Tj1 
- d ) o M d 5 o M d 1 A p a [ v \ ]
Additional verse in Mandlik 
Dave KSS:
187. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136; Dev 3.696; Mädh 3-354; päda s a-b
cited by Apa 744; Jmv 116.17, and pâda s c-d by Laks 12.748; Jmv 11.6.14, 21 — a) wKt1
oMd1 
Dev Mädh 
oOr
[rest damaged}; Be1 
La1 
. Ox2 Pu3 MTr6 
~ 
" 
Pu2
Tr2 
— b) Be sKt5 NNg T j
2 — c) Jmv 11.6.21
NKt4 
Lo1 
oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu
1 Tr1 Mir4 NiTr5MTr6 Dev
— d) Be1 Ho Pu3 Pu8
Additional half-verse in Tr2 Mandlik pT, <T] KSS Dave:
188. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.i36;Jmv 11.6.26; Dev 3.698; Mädh 3.355
— a) wKt1 
T
r
2
— b) uBe2 sCa Jo1 eKt5 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 
" Jmv [vl]
— c) Lo1 oMd1 
Tr2 
TMd4 
— d) cMy 
TMd4
Tj2 
J
m
v
B
o 
. oMd5 Tr1
189. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136; Jmv 11.6.34; Dev 3.698; Mädh 3.355
—
 a) Be1 Ho La1 Tj1 
o M d
5 — b) Ho 
Be1 [bul cor] Ho
190. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 742; Laks 12.745 — a) oMy
— b) Ho TMd3 TMd4 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Mir4 MTr6 \Jolly G Nd] Laks 
oMd1
oMd; 
Apa 
Tf 
NKt4
BKt5 Ox2^ 
G
M
y
B
e
1 
NPu1 Pu4 Pu8
Pu3* 
La1 
" 
Tr2 
oOr


--- PAGE 793 ---
782 
Chapter 9
—
 c) Be1 BCa oOr Tj2 MTr4 
Tr1 
sBe2 Jo1 eKt5 Ox2 
Apa
Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Ho NNg om 
Apa 
Be1 Bo wKt3 La1 Lo1 oMd1 iMd3 oMy
oOr Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 MTr4 Mir6 Laks Apa 
[Jolly Nd] 
oMd5
191. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Jmvw.io; Laks 12.745 — a) Jmv 
sBe2
La1 
_ 
oOr 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
sKt5 oMy 
NNg 
[mash ] 
Wa
— b) Be1 
Tr2 
" La1 Pu3 Tr2 Laks 
TMd3 
oMd5 
Be1 
—
c) oMd1 
MTr4 MTr6 
oMd5 
— d) MTr4 
sBe2 
sBe2 eCa
Ho wKt1 BKt5 La1 oMd1 oMd5 oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 MTr5 
, xMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1
MTr6 Jmv [vl] 
Be1 
oOr sPif [but cor] MTr5 Wa 
La1 
[cf. 9.162]
Additional verse in N?U' Pu2; truncated citation in Pu4; cited by Vij 2.136:
a) Vij 
— a-b) Pu4 [half-verse reads] 
_ 
~ . — b) Vij
— c-d) Vij 
' 
—
 d) Pu2
192. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.145;Apa 721; Jmv4.2.r,Laks 12.688;
Mai/A 3.371— b) oOr 
oMd1 
— c) L
o
2
B
e
1 
sCa Jo1 sKt5 Ox2
— d) GMd5 sOx1 [but cor] sPu6 [but cor] MTr4 
Tr
193. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.145; Laks 12.688; Dev 3.661; Mädh 3.371
— a ) La1 MTr6 
sBe2 w
K
t
3
— b ) H
y
B
e
1 
TMd3
— c)oOr' 
oMd1 
Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 
; xMd4
Be1 TMd3 oMd5 NPu
1 
— d) Be1 TMd4
194. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136, i43;Jmv 4.1.4; Hem 1.51; Devs.651
— a) sKt5 
Be1 Bo Ho Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 Wa Vij Dev 
L a
1 P u
2 
Lo1 
?Md4
Jo2 oMd1 Ox2 Tr1 "ë^n ^ — b) Jmv 
TMd3 TMd4 
Be1 
— c)
Lo1 
" " 
Jo2 oMd1 oMy Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
195. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.688; Dev 3.660 — a) La1
oMd1 
Be1 M T r
6 N K t
1 
TMd4 
Bo 
— b)
Be1 TMd3 
Pu2 
NPu
1 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Lo1 
— c) Be1
NNg 
P u
4 s K t
5 
Bo wKt1 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMy MTr4
 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly


--- PAGE 794 ---
Chapter 9 
783
Nd] Dev 
—
 d) sKt5 
Be1 La1 Pu2 Pu4
 MTr6 
.
196.* Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; padas-d omitted in NKt4 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 753;Jmv
4.2.27;Laks 12.690; Dev 3.664; Mädh 3.373— a) Tj1 
Pu2 
eKt5 Lo3 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oOr 
— b) oMd1 M T r
6 w K t
3 Lo1 TMd4 
' Be1 Hy Jm
Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Apa 
— c) Be1 oMd ' Jmv
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La1 Lo3 TMd3 xMd4 cMd5 oMy NNg
Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Via Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
—
 d ) La1 oMd1 P
u
4
w
K
t
1
197.* Omitted in La1 Lo4 oMd1 Pu4 [Jolly M]; pâda s a-c omitted in NKt4. Cited by Apa
753; Jmv 4.2.27; Laks 12.690; Mädh 3.373— a) cMd 5 
Tr1 
Be1 Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
TMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Apa Mädh 
MTr5 
Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly
G] ' _ 
NPu
1 
s O x ' s P u 6 B B e 2
 BCa wKt1 Lo2 Pu2 
—
c) sBe2 TMd3 oMd5 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 MTr6 Wa \Jolly G] Jmv Mädh
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 TMd4 oMy oOr Tj1 Tj2 MTr3MTr4 Mr5Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave
198. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.145; Apa 721, 753; Jwv4.2.i6; Laks
12.689; Dev 3.666; Mädh 3.372 — a) sBe2 Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
oMd ' TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7
Tj2 
sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 Ox2 MTr3 [Jolly Ku]KSS 
Kt2 Mandlik
Jha Dave 
NNg 
Be1 
Jo2 
. 
. Pu5 Pu7 
— b) Lo1 
—
c) La1 
" Apa [vi] 
Ho La1 Wa 
— d) La1 MTr4
Ox2
199. Omitted in Lo4 [folly M]. Cited by Laks 12.683; Dev 3.654 — a) oOrom 
NKt4
TMd3 
o M d 5 w K t 3 
P u 5 P u 7 T r 2 H o 
— b) wKt1
MTr5 
oMd1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
Ho 
— c) La1
— d) Ho Dev 
- 
. Be1 MTr6 
oMd1 
La1 Tr1 Tr2
200. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.118-9,147; Apa752; Laics 12.683; Dev
3.659 —a)oMd ! Tr2 
TMd3oMyMTr6 
— b)La'Tj' 
_ 
TMd3 
— c)
NKt4 OTO 
sBe2 
Tj1 
Lo3 
Bo 
— d) Ho 
wKt3
Dev


--- PAGE 795 ---
784 
Chapter 9
201. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.140; Apa 750; Jmv 5.j;Laks 12.666; Dev
3.629; Madh 3.201, 366 — a) oMd1 
Lo1 
— b) cMd5 Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1
MTr6 
oMd1 Tr1 [but me s h ] A p a 
'—
 c) Tr1 
Be1
;Laks' 
— d)TMd4om 
wKt1 T
r
2
; P u
2 N P u
1
202. Päda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by K;)'2.140; Laks 12.666; Dev 3.631; Mädh 3.366
— a) Lo4 [Jo/(y M] 
¿a/fes 
T r
1 B e
1 Bo P u 2 o M y 
— b) Bo sOx1
Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 
wKt1 
NKl4 
; Lo1 oMd5 
£>ev 
Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3
Pu8Tr2Wa 
HoTMd4Môit t 
, Be1 NNg 
oMd1 
— c)Jo2Tj'
[Jolly R] 
oMd1 TMd 3oMd 5oM y Tr1 [but me s/¡] Mir4
 MTr6 [Jo/fy Nd]
— d)oMd'î 
T r
2 H y 
oMy
203. Cited by Apa 75o;Jmv 5.17; Lafcv 12.667 — a) La1 
': — b) Kt2 
— c)
Be1 
" Lo4GMd5Ox 2Pu2Pu 4Tj'Tr'Wa 
— d) oMy [Jolly Nd]
204. Cited by Vij 2.118-9; Jmv 6.1.54; Laks 12.682 — a) Be1 Ho 
Lo3 T j 1 —
b)Tr2Lo' 
La1 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
. Lo1 [cor to] 
sBe2 
-—d)
Be1 
sKt5 oMd5 Tj1 Mandlik KSS 
; [Jolly Nd]/?« [patha] Dave 
wKt1
205. Verses 205-25 are placed after 9.247 in iMd3. Cited by Apa 727; Laks 12.682 — a)
BBe2 Lo1 Lo4 Pu8 
— b) NPu1 
Be1 eBe2 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 Pu7
oMd1 
TMd4 
Apa[v\] 
Lo4 
Tj1 Wa
Lo3 Tj' Tr1 
w
K
t
1
— c ) Lo3 T j '
B
o oMd5 oMy N N g o O r
— d)Apa[v\] 
L o
1 i M d
4 
sOx1 sPu6 
Lo4
206. Lacuna for pâda s a-b in wKt1. Cited by ^0724; Jmv 6.1.9, 31; Laks 12.674 — a)
xMd4 
Tr2_ 
— b) L
o
1
s
K
t
5 om 
sKt5 
—
c) Jo1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[for 
' see 8.118, 120] ; Tj '
La1 
L o 1 K t 2 T M d 3 
— d)oMd 5GMy 
TMd3 
xMd4
Jmv 
Jo2 wKt1 La1 TMd3 oMd5 Ox2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 796 ---
Chapter 9 
785
207. Cited by Jmvß.aS; Laks 12.665 — a) Bo NKt4 
NNg 
TMd4 
Bo
NKt4 
— b) cM d1 
sKt5 
Tr1 
wKt3 MTr4 MTr6 
— c) Pu2
wKt1 
. La1 
TMd4 
Lo2 
L o
3 T M d
3
'— d)La" Lo'xMd4 
T M d
3 s B e
2 wKt3 sKt5 MTr6
208. Cited by Vij z.u8-9;Apa 723; Jmv 6.1.3, 31; Laks iz.ejo-JMadh 3.377 — a)NPu'
Bo 
L o
4 j w K t
1 
sKt5 
Be1 NKt4
sKt5 Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 sOx1 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [Jo/(y G] 
_ 
. Pu8 MTr3 MTr6 
— b)
sKt5 
ßBe2 uCa wKt1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr5 Wa
Apa Jmv [vl as in ex] 
M T r
5 w K t
3 _ 
Bo 
— c) oMd1
TMd3 
Lo1 Lo3oMd5 T j
1 w K t
1 
iMd4 
NKf* Pu8 ;
Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
La1 Apa Laks 
Lo2 
" — c-d) Vij Mädh
209. Cited by Vij 2.i2i;Jmv 2.21, 6.2.32— a) eKt5 
Lo4 xMd3 MTr4 [Jolly M]
JT^T—b) Tj1 
rMd3 
Be1 Jmv [pâtha l 
Jmv [pâtha ] 
[both
rejected by Jmv]; NKt4 
, Lo4 [Jolly M] 
oMy 
— c) oMd5
— d) Ho 
Lo4 
TMd3 oMd5 
sKt5
210. Cited by Apa 748; Jmv 12.1; Laks 12.754; Dev 3.700; Mädh 3.360; päda s a-b cited
by Vij 2.139 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
T
r
2
— b ) w K . t ' J m v [vl] 
— c) MTr6
oMd1 
w K t 1 ~ " 
o
M
y
M
T
r
6
— d ) K t 2 
wKt3
La1 TMd4 NPu1 
NKt4 '
L
o
4 [Jolly M ] 
, TMd3
Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
211. Cited by Laks 12.754; Dev 3.703; Mädh 3.362 — a) NPu1 
TMd3 TMd4 
Ho
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
wKt1 
cMd5 
Be1
MTr6 
— c ) O x 2 T M d 3 
wKt1 
Ho 
sOx1 sPu6
oOr 
— d)Wa 
MTr4 MTr6 
" 
La1
212. Cited by Vij 2.139;Jmv 11.5.32;^«^ 12.754; Dev z.joy,Madh 3.362 — a) Bo
 La1 Lo2 GMd1
 La1 Lo2 GMd1 rMd3 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1
wKt1
Lo3
Pu2 Pu4a


--- PAGE 797 ---
786 
Chapter 9
Pu 5Pu 7Tr 2Wa 
Ho 
Hy 
, xMd4 
' Vij Jmv 
ßBe2 La1
rMd4 Tr2 
TMd3 aMd5 oMy NNg M T r 6 s K t 5 Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [cor to sh]
— b)wKt' 
Pu5 Pu7 
:oMd1; 
— c) oMy 
Lo1
Be1 
Lo2 
— d)oMd5sOx' 
Lo3
213. Cited by Vij 2.126; Laks 12.660; Mädh 3.383—a)Lo3Tj' 
T
r
2
—
b)Tj' 
GMd5 
— c)Bo 
Be1 
Be1 
Laks
, sKt5 Pu5 Pu7 
' —
 c-d) w
K
t
1
" " 
" — d )
Kt2i
214. Pada-d omitted in oMd1. Cited by Laks 12.666; Dev 3.621; päda s a-b cited by Apa
720, 749; Jmv 5.6— a) TMd3 
— b) Be1 Bo 
Jo' 
Lo2 
Ho 
— c)
La1 
Bo Ho sOx' sPu6 
wKt1 
xMd3 
TMd4
— d) NNg oOr [Jolly G] 
HoTj1 
Pu2 MTr6 : 
; TMd4 
Bo
215. Omitted in oMd1. Cited by Apa 727; Jmv z.86;Laks 12.655—a) Ox2 
Pu8
— b) oMy 
wKt3 
— c) rMd4 Jmv [vl] Laks^ cTT 
Lo2
xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 MTr5 Apa Jmv 
Bo Lo1 
Be1 Bo
216. Päda s a-b omitted in oMd1. Cited by Vij 2.i22;Apa 729; Jmv j.i;Dev 3.711; Mädh
3-340 — a) wKt1 
TMd4 
La1 Pu4 
NNg oOr
Pu2 
— 
tyßBe2Pu5 
Pu7 
W a J o
2 wKt1 Lo3 Lo4 Pu2 Pu4 Tj'
Laks 
—
 c)MTr6' _ ' " 
wKt1 sKt5 Lo3 N P u
1 ; Bo 
Lo4 [Jolly M]
" 
— d)Pu5Pu7 
T r
2 T M d
217. Cited by Vij 2.i^6;Apa 744; Jmv 11.3.2; Laks 12.748; Dev3.691; pâda s c-d cited by
Jmv 11.4.4 — a) Tj2 
— b) wKt1 NKt4 oMd1 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 MTr5 MTr6 Wa
Laks 
— c)TMd4 
Ho 
— d) Tr2 
Lo4 Apa Dev
218. Omitted in oMy Pu2 Pu4; pâda s c-d omitted inoMd5 [haplo]; verses 218 and 219
transposed in [Jolly Nd], Cited by Jmv 13.1; Laks 12.695; Dev 3.jiy,Madh 3.382— a) oMd1
Lo4 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
— b ) T
M
d
3
o
M
d
1 
— c )


--- PAGE 798 ---
Chapter 9 
787
219.* Omitted in oMd5. Cited by Vij2.118-9; Apa 725; Jmv6.2.Z3\ Laks 12.678; Dev
3.643; Mädh 3.380 — a) Lo1 NNg 
xMd4 
oMd1 TMd3 oMy Ox2 MTr6 [Jolly
Nd] Nd 
, H y s K t
5 L a k s : — a-b) Jmv [vl as in ed] 
_ 
— b) oMd1
TMd3 
oMy 
— c) Be1 eBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Kt^Kt4 wKt5 Lo1 Lo2NNg
sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Vij Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave '• 
[in Tr1 the anusvära is given and crossed out]; La1 
wKt1
'.•rMd 3 rMd4 
[TMd4 
] —d)Lo 3Tj' 
A
p
a
L
a
1
oMd1 Ox2 MTr6 
oOr " 
wKt1 Tr2 
Lo4
220. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; päda s a-b omitted in aMd5 — a) La1 
MTr5 T/T
\Jolly Nd] 
T M d 4
T M d 4 sOx1 P u 3 i M d 3 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 
— b)
BKt5 
— c) Be1 wKt3 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7
 MTr4 MTr6' 
oMd5
 
¡ 
R n
appears to read 
—d) oMd5 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj'Tr2
221.* Omitted in NKt4 [haplo] in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.762; Mädh 3.393 — a)
wKt1 
K
t
2
— b )
T M d
3 W a T j
1 
: B o
Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt5 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
Laks [but vl as in ed.] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
; Laks [but vl as in ed.|
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
— c) o
M
d
5
" Be1 sBe2 Jm Jo1 Kt2 [but
cor} Lo1 Lo3 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS 
sOx1 sPu6 
" T
j
2
, Hy
oMd1 
T M d 4 M T r 4 M T r 6 . 
— d) TMd4
TMd3
222.Omitted in Lo4 NKt4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Mädh 3.393 — a) TMd4
wKt3 
— b
)
T
M
d
4
i
T
M
d
3 
" wKt3 
wKt1
BKt5 
— c)Hy 
Be1 
Tj1 
Pu8 
Hy 
Pu2 Pu4
— c-d) Tr1 [but cor}
223. Omitted in Lo4 NKf* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.199 [mlro.];Apa 804; Laks 12.761;
Dev 3.19; Madh3.388 — a) Ti2 
TMd4 
— c) Jm Vij Dev
eCa 
NNg 
— d) wKt1
Additional verse in La1:


--- PAGE 799 ---
788 
Chapter 9
224. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.202; Apa 804; Laks 12.762; Madh 3.392;
päda s c-d cited by Apa 865 — a) wKt1 
— b) cMd1 iMd3 cMy Tr1 Mir6 [Jolly Nd] Apa
Laks 
[ T M d 3 G M d 1 T r
1 ( J o l l y Nd) ^ " 
J; wKt3 MTr4
oMd5 
Lo1 NPu
1 Pu2 P u
4 w K t
3 
iMd4 
— - c)
TMd? 
T M d
4 — d ) B o w K t 1 Mir6 Wa
225.* Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly Ml. Cited by Laks 12.527; Madh 3.393 — a) Pu2 Pu4
TMd3 
sOx1 s P u
6 [ J o l l y N
d
]
'
c
M
d
1
Jm 
Be1 OTO 
NKt4 iMd3 TMd4 [Jolly Gr] Bh [pâtha ] Nd 
,. oMd1 oMd5 oMy
[Jolly Nd]< 
MadhJm Jo1 Kt2 Ox2 Pu 5 Pu7 [Jolly G Ku] /V«5/i Mandlik Jolly
Jha KSS 
HoßKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2 Rc 
sOx1 sPu6 Tj2
Bo 
— b) NKt4 sKt5 sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3 sPu6 P u
8 w K t
3 Lo3 oMd5 cMy oOr Tj1
Tr1 
L
o
1
B
o 
M a d h J o
2 
H y 
— c )
Pu7 
o M d 5 s K l 5 
T
M
d
4
• — d ) H y sOx1 sPu6 
eKt5
cMd'oMd51 
Ox2 
BowKt3 
T j 2 o M d 5 NNg 
sOx1 sPu6
226. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; päda s b-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.527— a) La1
NPu
1 
" 
" P u 4 
T r 1 T j 1 
— b) Hy 
BooMy
— c)oMy 
; M
T
r
4
— d) oMd5 Pu5 
Ho 
Be1 rMd4
Lo1 
x M d 3 _ 
wKt1
227. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; pada-a omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.762 — a) Hy
TMd4 
— b ) H y N K t 4 
oMy 
ßKt5 
— d) Be1
228. Cited by Laks 12.762 — b) Pu5 Pu7 
— c) Tr1 
Lo1 Pu5 Pu7
[but cor} 
sOx1 sPu6 
cMd1 ' 
oOr 
— d) Pu2 Pu4
Lo4 
Be1
229. Cited by Laks 12.802; Dev 3.2g2;Mädh 3.159 — b)T Md4 
oOr 
Bo
sOx1 sPu6 
B o H o P u
7 — c) Lo1 Tj1 
w K t 3 L o ' M Ï r 6 
— d)
TMd3oOrDev 
[îMd 3 
]; Lo2 
" 
"': [om 
]


--- PAGE 800 ---
Chapter 9 
789
230.* Cited by Laks 12.802; De v 3.292; Mâdh 3.159 — a) Lo4 
— b) Tr2
Be1 Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt
4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3TMd4 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 MTr3 [Jolly G Ku K\Laks M âdh MandlikJha KSS Dave
—
 c) BKt5 ' 
NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 D e v J o
1 
La1 oOr
Lo2ô 
r M d ' f M â d
h 
Tr1 
Pu2 P
u
4
— d )
wKt1 
; Lo4
231. a) Lo1 
Ho Pu4 
Me [pâtha ] 
[Me comments:
];oMd' 
— b ) B o o M d 1 xMd3 oMd5 Tr1 [but me sh]
MTr6 
Be1 
oMy 
— c) TMd3 
MTr3 
cMy 
Pu2
Pu" 
BCaLo'TMd4GMyOx2 
Tj1 Tr1 
Bo TMd3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
cTT° — d) Be1 Bo Hy Kt2 wKt3 nKt5 Lo1 Pu7
 
TMd3 
oOr Pu2 Pu4
232. Cited by Apa 862; Laks 12.570; Dev 3.752— a) NPu
1 
Bo Pu2 Pu4
— b)Be'Ho'Wai 
— d) Lo1
233. Cited by Vij 2.306; Laksi2.z66; M âdh 3.161 — a) Tr2 
wKt1 oMd1 Tj '
[Jolly Nd] 
MTr4 
rMd3 
xMd4 
NPu
1 
oMd1 
oOrom
La1 m-— \i)Vij 
rMd3 
Kt2oMd' 
— c) Kt2 
oMy
iMd4 
; Dev 
Be1 
f; TMd3 
. Vij 
— d) Pu2 Pu4
Í 
VijMâdh
 
Lo4 TMd3 Tj ' [Jolly M] 
Lo3NPu'T
Additional verse in NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
Dave KSS:
a) Pu4 
Pu2 Pu4
234.* Omitted in ßKt5. Cited by Lak$ 12.269; Dev 3.304— a) ßCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu8 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Nd]La/b Nâ Ku
Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
Lo3 
oMd1 TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd]ßA 
" 
Pu7
[but cor] Pu5 
— b) T
M
d
3
B
e
1 Bo Ho Jo2 La ' Lo4 NNg NPu ' Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu 7Tj' Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Dev 
oMd1 oMd5 Pu8 Laks
sCa wKt3 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3
, Lo4 [Jolly M]


--- PAGE 801 ---
790 
Chapter 9
Mir4 MTr5 MTr6 Mandlik KSS Jha Dave [Jolly Ku] _ 
— c) oMy 
oOr
—- d ) cMy 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
B
e
1 sBe2 sCa H y Jm Jo1
oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 sOx1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Bh Ku Mandlik KSS
Dave 
oOr 
NKt
4 
Lo1 
iMd4 
Be1
235.* Omitted in La1. Cited by Laks 12.784; Dev 3.753— a-d) for this verse Bh gives
the following as a pätha :
_ a) Hy 
— b) Hy Jm Jo ' Kt2 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly G]Rc Mandlik
KSS 
—
 c) NPu' 
Lo2 
Dev _ 
uBe2 
Jo2 Lo1 Lo3
Lo4 NNg Ox2 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 K.t2 sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8
Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Lo2 
— d) wKt3
xMd3 
Lo2
236.* Omitted in La1. Cited by Vij 2.81; Apa 843; ¿«¿«12.784; Dev 3.291 — a) Lo3 Tj1
olvld1 Vij Dev 
—
 b) Hy— 
c) Be1 Lo1 xMd3 oOr Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
üBe 2
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Vij Laks Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
wKt3
Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) oMy 
oMd5 
Lo5
sCawKt1 Lo3 Pu7 Tj1 Laks 
' 
oOr 
Pu2 Pu4 
Be1 Bo wKt3 
". Tr2
A p a 
r
M
d
3
; Be1
237. Cited by Vij z.27o;Apa 842; Laks 12.784; Mädh 3.304 — a) La1 
eKÍ
wKt1 
T M d 4 ; « K t 1 T M d
4 — b ) H o o M d
5 
x M d
3 w K t
1
— c) GMd5 
TMd4 Jha 
Be Hy Jm Joi wKt1 Kt2 Lo3 Tj2 MTr3 MTr5 Vij
Mandlik KSS Dave 
Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 
wKt1 
— d) No 
and
gives the reading of ed. as kvacit päthah; Be1 wKt3 BlCt
5 Lo1 
[ s K t 5 ] ; Ox2
Pu5 Pu7 
Ho
238.* Päda- c omitted in Pu4. Cited by Apa 843; Laks 12.784; Dev 3.753— a) TMd3
sKt5 
Lo5oMd' Ox3 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 
TMd4
; Lo1 Apa 
L
a
1
H
y wKt3 Lo4 NNg Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 Wa
Lo4 TMd4 Ox3 Tj1 MTr5 ¡folly M] 
Lo5 
B o M T r
4 MTr6
' — b) Dev 
, TMd3 oMy [Jolly R Nd] 
B
e
!
" . Lo5
sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 
T
j
1
" , O x
2 N P u
1 Pu2 Pu4 
Pu3
TMd4 
Tr2 
Bo 
Lo1 ; 
Apa 
Pu2
TMd3' 
P u
4 M T r
4 
Lo4 Me Jha' 
—
 c) Lo5 Tj1 Tr2
Tr2 
Dev—
 d) N P u 1 ; Bo


--- PAGE 802 ---
Chapter 9 
791
239. Cited by Laks 12.785; Dev 3.753— a) Pu2 Pu4 
; Lo4 Dev 
-Ma5
, 
ßCa Tr2 
Lo2 
. [Jolly M] ' 
TMd4 Pu4
Pu 2' 
—b}De\
BoPu3Wa 
. : — c) Bo 
xMd4 
wKt1
Be1 
o O r D e v 
B o . 
NPu
1 
— d ) wKt1
240. Cited by Vij 2.270, 3.259;Apa 843; ¿0^12.785; Dev 3.7$4;Mädh 3.305 — a)
sBe2 TMd3 rMd4 oMy Mâdh 
Bo sKt5 Lo5 Ox2 
— b) TMd4 MTr6
Mir4 
Be1 sBè sCa Ho Jm Jo2 wKt1 Kt2wKt3 La1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 N?U' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 [Jolly R Ku] Vij Mâdh 
Jo1 w Kt1 sKt5 MTr3 Mandlik KS& 
Apa
Kt2 
Pu5 Pu7 M T r 5 " 
.Pu2 P u
4
B K t
s Apa- 
— c) wKt1
NKt
4 
Mâdh rMd3 :
; Tj1 : 
L o
3 o M y 
jMd3 
oMd1
La1 Lo4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M Nd] Laks 
' sCa Jo2
Lo1 TMd3 oOr Tj1 [Jolly R] Vij Dev 
'— d) Mâdh oMd1
 TMd3 Tr2
oOr
241. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.785; Dev 3.754—a) Pu5 Pu7 
Lo3
Tj1 
Lo1 
Lo4 Ox3 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo 
NKt4 
wKt1
oMd1 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 " 
Be1 La1 oMy [Jolly Nd R] 
; Wa 
Bo TMd4
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Tj2 MTr3 Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
NPu
1
— b)TMd4 
oMd1 
TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Tr2 
sBe2 Bo sCa Ho
wKt1 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 
Jo2sOx' sPu6 [me sh]TMd4 
wKt3 oOr om
Bo 
— d ) T M d 4 T M d 3 
Lo1
242. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Laks 12.785; Dev 3.754 — a) wKt3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa
— b)ßBe? 
Be1 TMd3 
Laks 
— c) oMd1 ^
, Bo 
" NKt
4 oMy Pu3 M T r
6 T M d
4 
. 
. Lo4 
Laks
Be1 Pu5 Pu7 
— d)Tj' 
oMd5 
NKt
4 
Dev
Additional verse in sCa La' TMd4 Tr2:
a)sCa 
La1' 
TMd4 
Tr2 
— c)TMd4.
243. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) Pu4 Tr2 
TMd3 
; Lo4
Bo 
— b) Lo3 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTrVTr6 \Jolly Nd R] 
HyoMd1
— c)Tf 
Hyom 
— c-d) Lo4 Ox3 
" 
[Ox3 
]


--- PAGE 803 ---
792 
Chapter 9
—
 d) Be1 Bo Ho Lo1 Laks ' 
ßCa wKt1 sKt5 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tr2 [Jolly M R] Jo//y 
Mir5
244. Päda s c-d omitted in oMd1 TMd4 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) Lo4
TMd4 
Pu5 P
u
7
L
o
4 Lo5 [6i« cor sh] Ox3 
La1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
Laks 
' — c) Laks _ 
Tr2 
" Pu5 Pu7 
xMd3 ' 
. Mir4 MTr5 MTr6
wtCt3 La1 oMy oOr Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly Nd] 
Be1 
oMd 5 
— c-d) Lo4
:f. 9.243] — d) Mir4Mir6 
MTr5 
La'Pu 2 Pu4
245.Omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.787—a) c M d 1 T M d 4 
sPu6 
sOx1
Lo4 
— b) Be1 Lo4 Lo5 aMd5 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Laks 
Bo TMd3 
sKt5 Lo1
rMd4 
— c) Pu2
246. Pâda- a omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) Lo4 [Jolly M] 
oMd1
— b)wKt' 
_ 
TMd4 
Pu5 P u
7 — c)Lo' 
oOr 
Be1 oMd5
Pu2 Pu4 
oMy [Jotfy Nd] 
Lo4 Lo5 Ox3 
Wa 
— d) cMd1
247.* Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) NNg 
B
e
1
; Jc2 wKt1 Lo3 TMd3 Tj1
Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] 
Tr1 
— b) oOr 
Jo2Lo3Tj' 
Be1
Ho wKt1 NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 oMy Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 [but cor] MTr4MTr5 ul^Laks
—
c ) T M d 4 N K t 4 T
j
1
B
K
t
5
— d ) o O r 
P u
8 T M d
3
Tr1 
; Be1 sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Tj2 MTr3 [lolly K] Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
BKt5 Lo1 Lo4 [Jolly M] 
Bo Ho Pu2 Pu4
Be1
Additional half-verse in TMd3:
248. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Dev Z-75^',Madh 3.396 — a) Ho Lo1 TMd4
MTr6 
Mädh 
Tr1 [but cor] "
B
o oMd1 sOx1 sPu6
— b) oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 
— c) aBe2 wKt1 c
M
d
5
; cMd1 Dev
wKt1


--- PAGE 804 ---
Chapter 9 
793
249. Cited by Laks 12.796 — a) Lo1 
Tr2 
oMy
FT; BKt5 
Pu5 Pu7 
— c) TMd3 
oMy 
— d) BKt5 Pu2
250. Cited by Laks 12.770 — a) Tr2 
L o 4 [ m a 
] 
Be1 ^3>T T:; Pu5 Pu7
cMd1 GOT 
Lo1 Lo4 NNg GMd5 Ox2 Wa 
— c) oMd1 
— d)
Laks 
Be1 oMd1
251. Cited by Laks 12.770 — a) NNg [but corfli] 
BKt5 iMd4 Pu2 Pu4 sBe2
Be1 Bo eCa Ho Jo2wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4oOr sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 [Jolly M]
[Ho Pu8 
] ; c
M
y
M
T
r
5 Laks 
oMd5
BKt5 OTO 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b)rMd4 
Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2
Lo1 Lo4 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj2 Tr2 uTr}Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 c)
La1 
, o M y T j
2 O
T
O
" 
Lo1 
— d ) o O r
Wa
252. a) Be1 
; TMd4 
Tj2 
Lo4 [Jolly M] ' 
_ — b) Ho
TMd3 
Be1 sCa wKt1 Lo4 TMd4 oMd5 oOr Tr1
 MTr6 [Jolly M Nd] 
Bo
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Lo2 
— c ) o M d 5 T r ' T M d 4 
— c-d) Wa
Be1 NNg Pu5 Pu7 
[Be1 
]; Jm Pu2 Pu4
253.a) T
M
d
3
; Tr2 '
'
— b ) B o w K t
3 
— c ) B o 
— d )
Bo 
Jm
Additional verse in La1 [quite illegibly written]:
254. a)cMd'; 
Tr1 
Be1 Lo1 Lo4 
Lo4
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
 TMd4
Lo4'
wKt3
TMd4 
•wKt1 
TMd3 
 — b) TMd4


--- PAGE 805 ---
794 
Chapter 9
cMd1 
— c) Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Lo4
[Jolly M]' 
oMd ' 
iwKt 3 
T
r
2
— d) ßKt5 
Lo4 [Jolly M]
cMy' 
TMd4
255. Cited by Laks 12.511 — a) oMd1 xMd3 MTr4 MTr6 
Lo3
sBe2 sCa NKt4 Lo1 Lo4 oMd 5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly Nd R] f^NNgLato 
— b) Lo1
MTr4 MTr6
 
__ 
[MTr4 M T r
6 ] ; N
P
u
1
o
M
d
5 
B o
Ox2 
uCa Lo4 
— c) Lo4 [Jolly M] 
cMd1 NNg oOr
— d)Ho 
K t 2 ~ , L o 4 [Jolly M] 
TMd3 
T j 1 T r 2
256. Cited by Laks 12.256; De v 3.735 — a) La' TMd3 
Be1 Lo4
; Be1 Bo La1 Pu2 Pu7 Tr1 
— b) Tr2 
Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Pu8
MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa [Jo/fy Nd] LafeMSm 19.1 
— c) TMd4 
wKt3 Lo4
Lo5 TMd3 
Tj2om 
— d) NKt 4 
Be1 
; MTr6
257.* a) oMy Tj1 
Bo oMy sOx1 sPu6 MTr5 [Jolly M Nd] 
— b) Tr2
— c) Be1 BBe2 sCa Ho wKt3 NKr4 La1 oMd5 pOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu8 MTr4
nKt5 sOx1 sPu6 
Pu2 P
u
4
L
o
1 
Jo2 [maß] wKt1 Lo3 Tj1
[Jolly R] 
Bo NNg Pu5 Pu7 W
a
L
o
4 yolly M G] Jolly 
Laks 
— d) Jo2wKt' Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]< 
[Tj1 
"]; oMd5
Tr1 
\\Kt3 
sBe? Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 sOx ' Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8
Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Rn [pätha ] Rc Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo1
TMd3 
oMd1
258.* Cited by Laks 12508 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
MTr5
Lo1 ; " 
"
B
o
H
o sOx1 s
P
u
6
W
a 
MTr4
La1 Lo4 
Be1 [Jolly M
]
N
P
u
1 Pu2 Pu4
• 
oMd5 Tr1
 MTr5 
NKt4 
L
a
k
i
J
o
1 Jo2 Lo3
oMd1 oOr Tj1 MTr6 Wa 
; Lo4 
MTr3 
L
a
1
— b) Lo4
NPu'Pu2Pu4[Jo//yM] 
,Laks 
Be1 Pu5 Pu7
[Pu5 Pu7 
J; sOx1 sPu6 
" 
Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr21 
eKt5
om 
— c) oMd' •> 
; w P u
1 B e
1 La1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo4
oMd1 
— d) oMy [folly Nd] 
" 
oM d5 
Lo4 Rc
oOr Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4MTr5 Wa [Jolly G Ku K\MandlikJha KSS Dave
Be1 Pu5 Pu7 
Pu2 P
u
4
L
a
1 
NPu'Tr 2MTr 6' 
oMd1
Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 ßKt5 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4
Jo2
Pu2 Pu4 


--- PAGE 806 ---
Chapter 9 
795
Ho Tj2 Lo1 NNg sOx! sPu6 
wKt1 
sBe2 '
259.Cited by Laks 12.508 — a) L
a
k
s
P
u
2 
— b) sOx' sPu6
wKt1 wKt3 
La1 Lo4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
xMd3 
La1 Lo4
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 ° 
;
H
y
— c) L
o
4
T
M
d
3 oMd5 [Jolly N Nd]
Be1 La1 Lo4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 
— d) TMd4 MTr6 " 
TMd3 
Bo
wKt1 Pu8 
, NNg
260. After pâda- b Lo1 places verse 262. Cited by ¿0^12.509 — a) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2
MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly N N
d
]
. 
— b) wKt1 
— c)
Be1 Lo2 oMd1 xMd3 iMd4 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Wa N a 
, MTr6 
NPu1
NPu
1 
oOr 
. sKt5 
— c) Pu3 
, Tr2
Lo4 
" 3 M d ' T M d
4 
— d) La1 Lo4 [Jolly M] 
'
Tr2 
BKt
5 oMy [Jolly N d ] W a 
M T r
6 H y Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2
Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 MTr3 Ku Mandlik KSSJha Dave [Jolly Ku]
262.a) Pu5 P u
7 " ; oMd5 sOx1 s
P
u
6
P
u
8
; Lo4 
— b ) Lo2
omone 
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt3 
— d) rMd4 
sKt5 
; sOx1
sPu6
263. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Laksi2.5ii — a) rMd3
BKt5 
— b) LaksTMd3 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 wKt3 Ox2
oMd5oMy 
— d
)
T
M
d
"
o
M
d
1 
TMd3 cMy Tr1
[Jolly Nd] 
\ v K t 3 H o
264. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841; Laks 12.545
— a) NKf* La1 
Lo3 M T r
5 c M d
1 
NPu
1 
. oMd5 MTr5
Bo Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
NNg "
T
M
d
4 " 
NKt
4 
Ox2
Hy 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
as a compound — b) Jo2 Pu7
Ox2NPu' 
L a
1 P u
2 P u
4 W a 
Lo1 TMd3 
La1
261. a) TMd3
wtCt3
GMd5 MTr4 MTr6
— b) wKt1 MTr6


--- PAGE 807 ---
796 
Chapter 9
Bo La1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj2 
wKt1 
o M y L o
1 Pu5 Pu7 [but cor]
MTr6 ' 
; NPu1 
oMd' 
— c) TMd3 cMd5 oMy 
— d) TMd3
TMd4 cMd5 oMy oOr
265. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me; ma in Lo1. Cited by Apa 841;
Laks 12.545—a) A p a 
— b ) w K t
1 , Be' 
H
o
o
O
r 
—
c)La' 
Bo Apa 
Pu3
Additional half-verse in 
NPu1:
266. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841; Latoa.546 —
a)oMd5 
BKt5 
TMd3 TMd4 
Tj1 
— b) TMd3 _, 
oMd' 
—
c) Ho 
wKt1 
— d) La1 oMd1 
Apa 
oOr 
oMd1
Lo1 
eKt5 
oMy
267. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841— a) Lo1
NKt4 
uTrsApal' 
Be1 T M d
3 T j
1 
ßKt5 oMy Pu5 Pu7
MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
wKt1 
NNg 
; Bo Ho Pu Pu3 Pu8
sBe2 NKt4 La1 Lo1 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 Ox2 Pu4 MTr5 Wa ' 
Tr2
Wa 
— b ) o
M
y
H
y sCa sKt5 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 Tj2 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Apa 
Be1 Lo2 W
a
s
O
x
1 sPu6 
sBe2 wKt1 NNg
Tr2A/e[patha] 
O x
2 o M d
5 
: — c) Tr2 
wKt1
Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[cf.
9.261]; TMd4 
— d) sBe2
268. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me; pádas a-b and c-d transposed in
Lo3 Tj1; padas b-c omitted in TMd4 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 841 — a) sBe2 Bo Ho wKt3
cMd5 
sOx1 s P u
6 s B e
2 Jm Jo ' Kt2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Jha
La1 
— c) wKt3 La1 Pu2 Pu3 P u 4 T M d 3 cMy T r
1 L a
1 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6
. La1 
— d ) TMd3 o M d
5 M T r
5 ;
w
K
t
1 Lo1 
N N g
269.Omitted in Lo4 \Jolly Ml; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841— a) Tr2
cMd1 
— b ) A p a _ _ 
[ v l ] ; Tr1 
T
r
2
— c) A p a
— d)TMd4 
Jo2 Lo3 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu5 Pu'Tj1 Tr1 [but cor]


--- PAGE 808 ---
Chapter 9 
797
Wa [Jolly Nd R] 
Apa
270. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M];not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 849— a) Lo3 NPu1
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
BoNKf 
Lo2 
Pu8 
TMd3 
Lo2 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr1
MTr5MTr6 
oMd1 TMd4 : 
— b)TMd4 
— c) Tj2 
Lo1 
TMd4
BKt5 
Pu5 P u
7 — d ) Lo1 M
T
r
5
W
a 
H y 
A p a [vi]
271. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 849; Laks 12.548
— a)ßK(?om 
NK.Í 
Ho om 
Bo Ox2 
T M d
4 — b) Lo1 oMd5 oMd1 oMy
NNgTj'Tr 1 MTr5MTr6 
Hy ° _ 
Bo Ho 
, TMd4 
Bo 
MTr5
—
 c) Jo2 Lo1 xMd3 
•; sOx1 sPu6 
' — d) oMd5
sOx1 sPu6 MTr4
 MTr6 Laks 
oMd1" 
TMd4
272. Omitted in Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa Sso-Juiks
12.550 — a) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
wKt1 
La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 oMd5
oOr NPu1 Tj ' Tr1 Apa 
' 
TMd4 
" 
TMd3 
~ 
— b) wKt3 Pu8
Pu3 
T M d 4 N N g N P u l ; 
oMd1 
—c)
Tr2 
B e
1 T M d
4 - 
o
M
d
1
— d ) MTr6 
Lo3
TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tj ' Tr1 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6
273. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 12.776 — a) Pu2
Pu4 
" — b) TMd4 
sOx1 s P u
6 s C a [but cor] Ho wKt1 NKt4 La1 TMd4 oOr
Ox2 NPu
1 Pu 2Pu 4Tr 2Wa 
sKt5 
; oMd1 
; — c) wKt1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
[wKt1 " 
" ] ; wKt3 • 
L
a
1
B
e
1
TMd3 
Ox2 
~ 
— c-d)oOr 
— d) ßBe? sOx1 Ox2
sPu6 
wKt'wKt 3La' 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
Jo2 Lo3
Tj1 
.
274.* Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 850; Laks 12.550 — a) Ho La1 
^Pu1
TMd3 TMd4 
Lo3 Tj1 
oMy Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G Nd] Jolly 
Laks
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt5 oOr [Jolly Ku] N3 fpâtha l Ku Rn Re Mr Mandlik KSS Jha
Dave 
Apa [ v i ] N a 
TMd3 
Pu3 
, sOx1 sPu6 Wa Nd 
oMd1
Pu2 
[Jolly N] 
" . MTr6 ' 
— b) TMd4 
. Tj2 Wa Laks 
• 
Lo1
NKt4 ^mrPí- 0; eBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 La1 TMd3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 MTr4 
Lo3 cMd5


--- PAGE 809 ---
798 
Chapter 9
oMy Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 
wKt1 w K t
3 c M d
1 M T r 5 M T r 3 
; Ho Jo^Kt4
Lo3 TMd3 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Na Re 
; Wa— 
c) oMd1 TMd4 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6
Be'BCaHoBlCt5oMd5NNg 
NKf 
" B o w K t
3
Lo1 
corto 
TMd4 
— d) sKt5 
Bo La1 ;
TMd4
275.* Cited by Vij2.302; Apa864; Laks 12.568; Mädh 3.395 — a) La'cMd5 
oMd1
, Be1 rMd3 TMd4 cMy MTr5 
La1 Pu3 P u 4 ß B e 2 
Pu5 Pu7
TMd4 
— b) eBe2 Ho Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 
Bo wKt1 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 sOx1
sPu6 Pu8 Wa Rn Laks ! 
[ B o ] ; Jo2 wKt3 oMd1 Tj ' [Jolly Nd R] Jolly Jha
TMd4 
; [?]; oOr 
oMd 5 cMy MTr5
TMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G
]
r
— c)Lo' c 
— c-d) oMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 \Jolly Nd] 
[oMy " 
MTr4
MTr5 
TMd4 
\Jolly Nd] 
'] — d) Mädh ' 
Ox2
La1 
Be1 
wKt1 sOx1 sPu6 Vij '
276. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 845; ¿0^*12.527; Dev 3.738 — a) Pli Pu7 Vij Dev
wKt3 BKt5 Lo3 oOr Tj1 [Jolly R] Laks 
MTr4 M T r
6 H y 
TMd3 oOr Wa
sKt5 
,TMd4 
La1 
TMd4 
sKt5 
— a-b) oOr 
— b) TMd4 
— c)
Apa 
Wa 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4 
Tr1 
— d) Ti2 
oMy 
La1
Lo4 cMd1 Wa [Jolly Nd] Vij 
TMd3 
NKt4 
La1 
Lo3
277. Cited by Vij z.274;Apa 845; Laks 12.532; Dev 3.738;Mäd h 3.302 — a) cMy NNg
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo Lo3 TMd3 Ox2 ^ 
sKt5 
^ 
Jm Jo1 Ox2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
sCaOx2 
L a
1 , ß K t 5 ~ NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
; TMd4 
. , 
. — b)
TMd4 
c M d 1 s O x 1 
o
O
r
B
o TMd3 MTr6 
" — c) Bo Wa 
Lo4
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
" 
oMd1 
MTr6 '— 
d) Ho 
; NNg 
oMd1 MTr4
MTr6
278. Cited by Apa 849; Laks 12.548 — a) Wa 
ßBe2 Bo 
Bo 
—
b)NPu' 
; oMd1 oMd5 oMy oOr 
Be1 
cMd1 
— c) Bo
; wKt3 
TMd4 
Wa 
wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7
TMd4 
; MTr3 
Pu2 Pu4 
sBe2 
; oMd5 Lo4 [Jolly M Nd] 
— d) Tr2
TMd3 
T M d " B e
1 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4sOx' Ox2 sPu6 Tj2
MTr3 Apa Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
oMd5 Tr1 
Lo3 oM d1 TMd3
oMy NNg Tj1 MTr4 MTr5 
. 
, Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave [Jolly G]
. 
Lo2 oMd5 
; MTr6


--- PAGE 810 ---
Chapter 9 
799
279.* Päda- d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.566; Dev3.757 — a) nKf Lo3 MTr6 [folly
Nd R] 
oMd1 TMd3 rMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr1 MTr5 Dev 
Tr2 ' 
TMd3
sCaoMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly Nd] 
sOx1 sPu6 
oMd5 Tr1 
— b)
Lo1 Pu8 
Tj2 
;Tj' 
NPu1 
Lo2 
Ho Lo4 Tr2 [folly
M Nd] 
— c) Ho La1 Lo1 sOx ' NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 Dev Nä Re 
Jo1 wKt1 Ku
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
.. 
, Ox2 
o M d
5 L o
4 [Jolly M] 
; Pu2 Pu4
Bo 
,RnMTr5; 
" NK.1
4 
— d) Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 NKt4 Lo1
Lo3 Lo4 NNg oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Wa Jolly [Jolly M G R Nd] 
sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
wKt5 Ox2 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
' Lo2 
Dev
wKt3
280. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Vij2.2.73; Apa 845;
Laks i2.530 — a) Lo3 
xMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr6 
, o O r A p a
Be1 
— b) T r
2 o M d
1 TMd3 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 Laks 
— c) Lo1
A p a 
— d ) W
a
N
N
g
281. Omitted in Lo4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 12.566; Dev^.j^j
— a) Pu3 
Be1 
r M d
3 w K t 
— b) NKt4 sOx1 sPu6 MTr6 [folly Nd]
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj ' Tr1 MTr5 Dev 
—
 c) NNg 
sKt5 NPu' Pu4
Laks 
D
e
v
B
o Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Tj2 Tr1 Nâ [pâtha ] Rn Mandlik Jha
KSS Dave 
B K t 5 T M d 3 
; sCa Jo2 La1 wKt1 Wa No 
Lo3 Tj1
BBe2 
_ — d) sOx1 sPu6
282. Cited by Apa 765; Laks 12.455; Dev 3.552; MSdh 3.279 — a) Wa 
— b) Tr2
— c) wKt 3omÇT ; Tr2^; La1 oMd1 
' 
Lo3 Tj1 c 
Wa 
Tr1
— c-d) Be1 Bo Ho Lo1 sfCt5 Ox2 Tr2 
[Be1
sKt5 
] — d) Pu3 
sOx1 sPu6 
. wKt1
Lo2 
L
a
k
s
P
u
2 P
u
4
L
o
4 [Jolly M ] 
; J m
283. Omitted in Jm La1. Cited by Apa 765; Laks 12.455; Dev 3.553; Mädh 3.279 — a)
Lo3 Lo4 TMd4 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M R] 
sCa Jo2
Lo2 
o O r T M d
3 
sKÍ 
Apa Laks
Dev Mädh 
MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave—
 b) TMd3 
Be1 Bo Ho TMd4
sOx1 sPu6:Er— d)sOx' sPu6 
Apa_ 
oMy 
Apa[\\]


--- PAGE 811 ---
800 
Chapter 9
284. Omitted in Jm cMd1 — b) Bo Ho Pu8 
Lo1 
TMd3
wKt3 
.Pu5 P u
7 L a
1 
Pu5 Pu' 
— c ) Be1 
P u
4 P u
2
: 
Pu5 Pu7 
B e
1 r M d
4 — d) Pu5 Pu7 
oMy
La1 Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 Pu3 Tr1 Tr2
285. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Apa8z2; Laks 12.565 — a) GMd1 
_ 
TMd4
NPu
1 
Pu2 
Tr2
286. Folio containing verses 286-99 ¡s missing in Ho; pâda- d omitted insKt5. Cited by
Apa 821; Laks 12.565 — a) TMd3 
- c) TMd4 Apa [vl] 
oMd1 oMy Tj1 [Jolly
MNd] 
, NKt4 La1 oMd5 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr5 WaS/¡ 
TMd4
Apa [vi] 
.; Be1 
, sOx1 sPu6 ' 
eCa wKt1 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 
. MTr6
NPu1 " 
Laks 
^ 
, oOr " 
iMd3
Apa&oMd1 
— d)oMd!TMd4 
Bo 
Lo4 oMd1 TMd4
287. Omitted in sKt5; pâda s c-d omitted in wKt1. Cited by Laks 12.513; Apa 825 — a)
oMd1 TMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
TMd3 M T r 5 L o 1 
Pu2 Pu4 
MTr5
oMd5 
Lo2 
oMd1 TMd4 MTr5
 MTr6 Wa ir^-; TMd3 
— b) Wa
oMd1 TMd4 oMy MTr6 
MTr5 
TMd3 
Jo2 Lo3
Tj ' 
Lo2 '— 
c) Jo2 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 T r
2 ß B e
2 Jo1 MTr3 Mandlik Jha
KSS Dave 
Hy 
— d) oM d5 
NKt4 WTftcT; La1 TMd4 NNg [folly M]
133-; wKt3
288. Omitted in Tr2; pâda- a omitted in sKt5. Cited by Laks 12.782 — a) oMd1 <ui-*HiPi;
NKt4 
c M d
5 P u
2 P u 4 T M d 3 oMy MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
— b) Jo1
Tr1 
;MTr4MTre 
— c) wKt1 
oMy [Jolly Nd] _ 
oMd1
NPu1 : 
,wKt3 
" 
cMd1 
^d)Tj ! 
o M d
1 o M d 5 TiT-
289.ma in Lo1. Cited by Apa 853; Laks 12.567— a) ßKt5 TMd3 
. Tr1
Laks 
Pu5 Pu7 ontwKt1 TMd3 
— b) Bo La1 Lo 2NPu'Pu 2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
 — d) oMy
— c) Bo
Lo2
rMd4
— b) TMd3


--- PAGE 812 ---
Chapter 9 
801
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr1 
Lo3 
oMd1 
— c) Be1
Bo wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 
La1 iMd3 TMd4 oMy oOr sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Tj1 Apa Laks 
—
 d)
o O r Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 
o M y c o r t
o
A
p
a Laks 
ßBe2 NKt4
TMd3
290. Cited by Apa 821; Laks 12.565 — a)oMd' 
— c) Lo4 
Be1 wKt1
Lo1 oMd1 
Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 La' MTr3Mandlik KSS =ETFnfr ; xMd3 TMd4 oMy MTr4MTr6
[Jolly Nd] 
" sOx1 sPu6 
[Nä Nd support the locative]; Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly Ku R2] Jolly
NPu1 
[Jolly M9] 
Apa 
NKt4 
Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Pu2 Pu4
TMd4 oMd5 oMy 
NKt4
291. Cited by Apa 825; Laks 12.513 — a) La1 
oMd1 • 
MTr6 
wKt1
oMy 
TMd3 
MTr5 Apa Laks 
wKt' om 
—b) oMd1
oOr 
TMd3 ' 
" 
Be1 ßBe7 Bo Hy wKt3 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2
Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 MTr3 [Jolly Kul KSS ~ 
oMd5 
_ 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
sKt5
Pu2 Pu4 
[Jolly M1]E/o/fyM4] 
Apa[v\] 
and 
Jo2
Lo1 Lo4 TMd4 oMy Pu5 Pu7 
_ 
wKt1 La1 [Jolly G Nd2] . 
Pu8
— c ) sOx1 sPu6 
T M d
3 w K t
1 
, Lo4 NPu1 "
A
p
a
— d )
Apa [vi] 
TMd3 TMd4 oMy [Jolly Nd] 
oMy wKt1 ' 
wKt3 ßKt5 iMd3
Apa
292. Cited by Vij 2.2975/1/70 862; Laksiz.^zz — a) wKt3 
B e
1 o M d
1
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
wKt3 
La1 
wKt1 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2
—c) TMd4 Pu2 P u
4 T M d
3 
NPu1 
Lo3 
La1 
NNg
— d)NPu' 
.DaveJha 
[supported by Me AT«]; Be1
293. Pâda s c-d omitted in Pu5 — a) Be1 La1 
Be1 wKt1 oMd5 oMy 
—
b) La1 TMd4 oMy 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
cMd1 
— d) TMd4 oMy
Be1 Bo wKt1 wKt3 NKÍ sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr2 Wa 
MTr6
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
after this verse oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd Gr] insert 9.312
294. a)Lo3Tj' 
Be1' 
Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 
Tr2 ^ 
... oMd1 
— b) La1
Lo4 
Wa 
Ox2 
, TMd3 
; eKt5 TMd4 Tr2 
sKt5 
wKt3
cMd1 TMd4 oMy MTr5MTr6 
T
M
d
3
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
—c-d)
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
[oMd1 
] — d) Jo2 Lo3


--- PAGE 813 ---
802 
Chapter 9
Tj1 [Jolly R Nd] 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd5 oOr Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Lo4 
oOr
295. Cited by Laks 11.97 — a) Be1 La1 oMy Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Laks 
— b) TMd4
Lo'îMd 3 Pu3 Tr1 Tr2 
wKt1 
Lo4 
o M y L o
4
cMd1 
— c ) P u 3 P u 4 
L a
1 — d)wKt' 
Bo 
. NiKt4 
Laks
oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr5 Mir6
296. Cited by Laks 11.97 — a) oMd1 iMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1 Mir4 MTr5 Mir6 [folly Nd]
Laks 
.. 
.TMd3 
Hy— 
b) Lo4 Ox2 [Jolly M] 
Be1
— ciBe'wKt1 
wKt3 Lo1 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [but cor] Tr2 
T
j
1
—
d) Jo1
 
BKt5 cMy 
wKt1
297. Cited by Laks 11.97 — a) NNg Tj2 MTr4AW =ET¡ Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2
MTr3 M.Jr6Mandlik Jha KSS Dave <J; oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy MTr5 MTr6 
— b) Tr2
cMd1 
— (OcMd1 
Be1 
sOx1 sPu6 
L o
1 o M d
1
Laks 
TMd3 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
^ 
. oMd1 
oMy
Lo4 
[Jolly M]' 
Be1 
; wKt1
298. Omitted in MTr5. Cited by Laks 11.113-4 — a) wKt1 
sCa 
. Hy
TMd4Tj! 
' Lo1 
TMd3 
NNg 
~ Tj2 
NKt4 
Lo2
Jo2 Lo3 Ox2 Tj1 Tr1 [but cor] 
— b) wKt3
 TMd3 oMy 
; NPu1
wKt1 oMd1 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 oMy [Jolly N d ] — 
c) Tj2 
— d) oMy
La1 Lo4 TMd4 Pu2 
Lo4 Pu8 [Jolly M Gr] 
sBe2 Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly R Ku]Mandlik Jolly KSS
299. Päda s a-b and c-d transposed in Be1. Cited by Laks 11.114 — a) Tr1 
ßCa
— b) TMd3 oMy 
— c-d) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
Bh\ 
[oMy 
. GMd1 oMy 
oMy (Jolly Nd)
TMd3 
] —d)Be' 
Lo4ma
300. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Laks 11114 — a) TMd4 
" 
sKt5 sOx1 sPu6
— b) TMd4 
— c) sKt5 T M d
4 o M y sOx1 sPu6 
oMd1


--- PAGE 814 ---
Chapter 9 
803
TMd4 
Be1 
Jc^wK^Lo'oMd'NPu'Pi^Pu 4 
cMy 
— d) Bo 
xMd4
oMd1 
L o
3 o M d
5 :
301. Päda s a-b omitted in oMd1 — a) TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 
NPu1 
o M y —
b) Ho wKt3 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 
sMd5 
— c) Lo4 
xMd4 
wKt1 La1
—-d)xMd3 
' cMd1
302. Päda s c-d omitted in wKt1 [haplo] — b) Be1 
Lo4 
Pu2 Pu4
BKt5 La1 NPu1 
O x 2 L o 4 
Hy Tj2 Mir4 
— c) Pu5 Pu7
Tr1 
; Lo4 NPu1 [Jolly M] 
Be1 uCa Jo2 NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4
xMd3 oMd5 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly M] 
_ 
La1 
xMd4
G M y 
M
T
r
6
L
o
2 '
. Pu2 Pu4 
_ .. 
Tr2
oMd1 
r — d) Lo4 [Jolly M] ~ 
Tr1 [but cor] 
BKt5
xMd4 
W
a
o
M
d
1
303.* Cited by Laks 11.3 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
Wa 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4
Lo4 xMd3 xMd4 oMy NNg Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Mir3 WaMandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— b) Jo2
Lo3Tj' 
TMd3 
— c) xMd4 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Mir5 
sKt5
Laks 
— d)sKfxMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 
Lo2
304. Cited by Laks 11.3 — a) cMy 
e
K
t
5
— b) Jo2 Lo1 Tj1
sBe2 
Lo2 
Bo Ho Lo1 wKt1 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8 Tr1 
[wKt1 
']; cMd5 
xMd3 
NNg
Be1 oMd1 
xMd3 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
BKt5 
xMd4
— c) Bo NPu1 
oMd1 
cMy 
xMd3 
La1 cfqr
BBe2 
wKt1 
Ho 
NKt4 
Lo4
sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 
Lo1 
ßCa 
Laks 
—
 d) xMd3
Be1 Ho Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo3 Lo4 oMd5 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M R Nd2]
305. ma in Lo4 — a) cMd1 
— b) Bo 
oMy 
Lo2 cMy 
Pu2 Pu4
— c)Pu 2Pu 4 
NPu1 
xMd4 
wKt1 
sKt5
om 
La1 
Lo4 [Jolly M] 
— d) oMd1 xMd3 xMd4 oMy MTr4
 MTr5 MTr6
[JollyNd]' 
Jo1 Lo3 Tj1 Tr2 
MTr4 
xMd4 Ox2 Pu3 Tr2
oMd1 NNg Pu2 Pu4 MTr5 
,. NKt4 
. Tr1


--- PAGE 815 ---
804 
Chapter 9
306. b) oMy 
" 
— c) Bo 
Lo4 oMy 
sOx1 sPu6 
MTr6
Lo2 Lo3 
— d) rMd3 
Be1
307. Omitted in Be1 ; verses 307 and 308 transposed in Pu5 Pu7, and 3oya-b and 3o8a-b
in Bo — a) oOr 
NPu1 
. ßKt5 
L a
1 T r
2 
Lo1 [but cor} 
wKt1
oMy sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Jo1 oMy NNg Pu3
 
TMd4 
" — c) sKt5
 
• 
Pu2 
Pu5
Pu7 
— d) nBe2 
. oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [but me sh] MTr4 Mir6
[Jolly NdGr] 
Pu5 Pu7 ; 
oMy 
oMd': 
BBe2 
TMd3
308. Pada-d omitted in iMd3 [haplo] — a) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
" [Jolly Nd
|; Ox2 
Jo2Tj' 
La1 
oOr 
'— a-b) rMd4 
— b)
TMd3 oMd5 cMy MTr4 [Jolly Nd] ' 
; Tr1 
Lo1 '
Pu5 Pu7 Mir6 
Bo sOx1 sPu6 
Tr2 
Be1 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
wKt3 oMd1 TMd4 Pu3 Tj2
 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
MTr5^; Jo2 Lo3
Tj1 3" — c) Bo sKt5 
TMd3 
Bo Pu3 ' 
Be1 wKt1 
MTr5
Pu3 Tr2
309. Omitted in TMd3; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu4 — b) Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 oMy
TMd4; 
Pu5 P u 7 B o o M y s O x 1 s P u
6 — c) Bo isKt5 NPu1 
Lo2
sOx1 sPu6 
Kt2 
, — d) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Ox2 Pu4 MTr3 Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave
310. Omitted in TMd3 — a) Pu7 
Pu5 
— c) oMy 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
TMd4 
BKt5 Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Lo1 Lo4 oMd5 Pu8
 
TMd4
Tj2 om
311. Omitted in TMd3; pâda s b-c omitted in oMd1 — a) Lo4 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M]
— 
tyHoNKCTj1 
T M d
4 W a 
— c) eKt5 
— d) Ox2 
oMd1
La1 
Lo1 T j 1 T M d 4


--- PAGE 816 ---
Chapter 9 
805
312. Omitted in oMy; pâda s a-c omitted in xMd3 — a) Lo4 
— b) sKt5
oMd5 
[Jolly M]] 
Tj2 
P
u
8
— c) Be1
Lo1 
x
M
d
4
B
e
1 
s
K
t
5
— d ) Be1 H o Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1
Tr1 Wa 
sKt5 Lo2 oMd5 cMy oOr Ox2
 NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Tj' Tr2 MTr4 iviTr6 [Jolly R]
313. Omitted in oMy; verses 313-4 placed after 319 in [Jolly Nd] — a) oMd1 
, Pu2
Pu4 
Lo4om 
;oMd5 
oOr Ox2 Tj1 Tr2 
— b)rMd 4. 
_ .
Pu5 MTr6 
o
M
d
5
— c) wKt1 
— d) Lo4 [Jolly M]
wKt3
314.* Omitted in oMy; pâda s c-d omitted in ßKt5 Pu4 — a) oOr cu"; sBe1 Ho Hy Jm Jo1
Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj ' Tr2 Wa [Jolly M4 R Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave 
[Jolly
M9] 
— b ) sOx1 s
P
u
6
— c ) L o 4 [ m a 
] 
B o
TMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 
BCawKt1 La1 Lo'NNgoOrsOx 1 sPu6 Wa
Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2 Ox2
 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 Re Mandlik
J h a K S S Dave 
— d ) Pu5 P
u
7
, H o o m 
Lo4 
, Be1
[om 
];Lo3Tj' 
Bo L
a
1
; iMd3 ' 
, iMd4
Additional verse in TlVId
4:
315. Padas a-b ma sh in Tr1; pada-a omitted in sKt5. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) Laks
Bo 
. oMy 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
" 
Lo3 Tj ' 
, Pu8
Kt2 wKt3 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 
NNg 
" Wa
316. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd5 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 MTr3 [folly G Ku] Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
NKt 4
— b) Be1 
Pu5 Pu7 
ßCa La1 oMd1 iMd3
TMd4 Pu3 MTr5 MTr6 Laks 
oMy 
sBe2 
sKt5 oMd5 
oOr
— c) TMd4 
Be1 
Laks 
Bo 
oMy 
wKt1 [Jolly
M] " 
Pu5 Pu7 
— d) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Kt2NPu'
— b)ßKfom
GMd5
Lo1
Pu8


--- PAGE 817 ---
806 
Chapter 9
317. Päda s a-b and c-d transposed in Be' Laks. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) Laks
TMd4 
; Be1 
B o " ~ 
W a — 
c ) TMd4 
— d ) NPu
1
Be1 BKt5 sOx1 sPu6 ' 
Tr1 
sKt5
318. Omitted in MTr5. Cited by Laks 11174 — a) MTr4MTr6 
wKt3
o O r 
Lo3Tj'Tr'[cor sh t
o
]
J
o
2 
TMd 3" ~ — b)sOx'
sPu6 
TMd4 
— c) Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 
TMd3 
sBe2 La1 NPu
1
319. Omitted in MTr5. Cited by Laks 11.174 — b) LO'T Md3 TMd4 oMd5 sOx1 Pu7 Tr1
MTr6 
T j
2 B e
1 
— c) BKt5 T r
2 o M d
1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy NPu
1 Tr1 MTr6
NNg 
N K t 4 — a
) Laks'' 
'; La1 oOr Pu5 Pu7 
Tj2 
Be1 sCa La1 Lo1 Lo4oMd' sOx1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 [Jolly M G] Jolly
wKt3 
BKt5 Ox2 Pu3 Tr 2, 
; TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
320. Pâda s c-d omitted in Tr1. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) Jo2 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tj1
Lo4 
Tj2 
NNg 
_ 
BBe2 Wa
; Hy La1 oMy Pif Tr2 Laks 
o
M
d
5
" TMd3 oMy 
—
b)Tr' 
Lo4 
" Be1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5
oMy NNg MTr4MTr5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly Nd M] Laks 
—
 c) oMd5 
NKt4 
iMd3
— d)Wa
321. Omitted in oMy — a) HyîMd 3 oMd5 
ßBe2 Hy Wa : 
sOx1 sPu6 [but
ma sh] lacuna for 
—b)oOr' 
TMd3 
Lo1 
oMd1
K t 2 
B
B
e
2
!
" T
M
d
3
— ^Be'wKt 1 
Hy 
Lo1
TMd3 N N g 
— d ) B K t 5 " 
s B e
2 L o
4 
Be1
322. Omitted in oMy. Cited by Laks 11.173— a) Lo4 
oMd1 
Lo4 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4
Tr2 
— b) Lo4 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 
— c) Tr2 
, , Be1 
Lo2
 TMd4
oMd5Tr'MTr5 
oMd1 TMd3 MTr" MTr6 • " 
sOx1 sPu6 
La1 
Bo ET; ßCa
sKt5 NNg oOr ' , Lo4 [Jolly M] ^ ; oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr6 
MTr5
 NNg
 Be1 
TMd4 
— b) TMd3 oMd5
 Be1
Tr1
— d) oMd ' iMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr6 Laks [lolly Nd] 
BKt5


--- PAGE 818 ---
Chapter 9 
807
[Jolly R] 
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 
sKt5 NNg MTr6 
" 
Wa 
MTr5 
Tr1
TMd4
323.Omitted in oMy — a) w K t 3 T r 2 
Lo2 
— b) Pu5 
sBe? NKt4 MTr6
Jolly 
Pu2 Pu4 
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd4 '
T
r
2 
Pu8
Ox2 
—a)
 [Jolly Nd] 
Lo1 
" MTr5 
*Lc?oMd 5 
Lo4
Pu2 Pu4 Me Jha [Jolly M] 
Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 Ox2 Pu3 MTr3Mandlik KSS Dave
La1 
— d) Be1 O x
2 R n [pâtha ]
324. Omitted in cMy — a) TMd4 
' 
Ox2 Pu2 
" 
Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 oMd1
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly G R2] 
— b) slCt5 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 
. NPu1
MTr5 Wa!
325.Omitted in oMy — a) K t
2 s C a wKt1 Lo3 iMd3 oMd5 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1
oMd1 
Tj2 
— a-b)Pu2Pu4 
. . .. 
_
: — b) Lo2 
— c) oOr 
; wKt1 Lo4 oMd1 
, NNg 
Be1 La1 NPu1
oOr 
wKt3
326. Cited by Laks 2.255 Mädh 1.417—a) TMd4 
—b)Lo 3Tj' : 
Jo2
wKt1 Lo3Tj'
327. Päda s c-d ma s/i in Pu7. Cited by Laks 2.255 päda s a-b cited by Mädh 1.417— a)
oMy 
T M d
4 P u
5 
P u
7 — b) c M y _ 
Lo2 TMd3 Tr1 ~ " NNg [but
cor} 
, — c) Be1 
— d) B e 1 N N g 
TMd4 
Lo2 TMd3 Pu2 Pu4
Tr1 
Lo3
328. Päda s c-d ma sh in Pu7. Cited by Laks 2.2s6;Mäclh 1.417— a) Lo1 oMy 
; NPu1
Pu2 
wKt3 Lo4 [Jolly M ] c M y 
" T M d 4 — b) Be1 
Tr1
— c) oMy 
L
a
1
T
M
d
3 
' MTr5 
Pu5 Pu7 
Lo1
— d) oMd1 " 
. TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6
 Ox2NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Laks
 
sKt5 
_d TMd3
Lo3 Yj1
Be ' Lo4 NNg
— d) TMd3
 — c) Be1
Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 819 ---
808 
Chapter 9
329. Bo places 32gc-d and ssoa-b after 332b. Cited by Laks 2.256; Mädh 1.417— a)
Be1 TMd4 
T r ' M T r 5 B K t 5 
—
 b)Laks 
T M d 3 P u 2 Pu4
oMd1 oMy 
T M d
4 ' — c) oMy 
" ' 
' — d) Bo La1 Lo4 NPu
1
Tj1 
" NKt4 " 
Be1 Ox2 " 
TMd4 Pu3 
La1 Pu5 Pu7
oMy
330. Päda s c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 2.256; A/af//! 1.417— a) Pu5 Pu7
Lo1 
oMd5 
Pu3 
Ox2 
— b)
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 [but me sh] MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Nd Laks 
' —
 c) oMy
[Jolly Nd] 
MTr5 
Jm Jo1 Kt2 wl^Mandlik Jha KSSDave 
wKt1 La1
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) rMd4 
wKt3 i 
: NPu' 
oMd1
Be1 Jo2 Lo3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 
:
331. Cited by Laks 2.256;Mädh 1.417—a) Bo sKt5 
La1 
eBe2 '
— b) TMd4 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 NNg Ox2 Pu8 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
c) TMd4 
Be1 
eKt5 La1 sOx1 sPu6 
Wa om 
TMd3
— d) Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Ox2
 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
TMd3
332. Päda s c-d omitted in Bo. Cited by Laks 2.256; Mädh 1.417— a) NKt4 oMd1 TMd4
•Md3 
o M y T r
2 
M T r 6 T M d 3 
oMy 
La1 
Bo Pu3
La1 Lo1 Lo4 
NPu1 Pu2 P u
4 , — b) BKt5 [but cor] La1 Lo1 
. TMd3
ïTTTW ; La1 Tr2 
; NKt4 
' — c) Lo4 
TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 
La1
— d) MTr5 Mädh 
sKt5 TMd3 Pu2 Pu4
333. Cited by Laks 2.256;Mäd h 1.417— a) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
TMd4
oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 om 
oMd1 
TMd4 ' 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Be1
oMy oOr 
o
O
r
T
M
d
3 
TMd4 
— c)
wKt1 
— d ) T M d
3 " o M d
1
 
BKt5
334. Pad- d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Laks 2.265; Mädh 1.417— a) sOx1 sPu6
— b) sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
NKt4 
— c) TMd3 Tj2 
Be1 
" 
NKt4 :


--- PAGE 820 ---
Chapter 9 
809
La1 
Bo ' 
sBe2 wKt3 Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 . — d) La1 oOr sOx1 sPu6
Bo Pu5 
. Be1 BKt5 Lo4 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Wa 
ßBe2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo2
Lo3 cMd1 NNg Tj ' 
N K 1
4 c M d
5 Dave Jha
335* Omitted in Lo4 xMd4; pada-d too faint to read in wKt5. Cited byLaks 2.265; Mädh
1.417-- a) Hy 
_ 
Laks 
Jo1 s K t
5 K t
2 
Tj1
— b) sBe2 
; Pu8 '
w
K
t
1 °3" : ^j.eWHI° ; NKt4 sKt5 
Mädh
cMy 
w K t
3 — c)BoHoHyJo' Kt2 sKt5 Lo2 Lo3 Tr2 [Jo/fy R1]
Tj2 
; sOx1 sPu6 
eBe2 oMy 
[Jolly Nd]
[Nd 2 ^T:]; Ox2 
Be1 Jm wKt1 Pu3
 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Dave
La1 Tj1 
o M y ' — d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd1 xMd3 cMd5 oMy Tj2
Mir3 Mir4 MTr6 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 
Bo wKt' wKt3
Lo 3Ox 2NPu'Pu 2Pu 4Tj'Tr 2 _ 
Nâ \ 
. wKt1 wKt3 
Pu5 Pu7 
MTr5
Lo2 
N K t 4 N N g s O x ' sPu6 Wa" 
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
Ox2:
336. Päda s a-b omitted in xMd4 — a) sKt5 Pu2 
— b) oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu2
Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
B e 1 " 
NNg 
; NPu1 
w K t 3 " ßBe2
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
— c) sCa 
" 
xMd4 om 
wKt3 
oMd1 om
oMdsoOrPu2Pi/1Pu5 Pu7Tr'MTr5 , Be1 eBe2 NÍCt4 La1 Lo4 xMd3 oMy MTr6 
Lo4
; NKt4 Lo'oMd1 NNgsOx1 NPu1 sPu6Tj'MTr5 MTr6 
La1 Ox2 
— d)Lo3Tj'
[Tj1 
]; BBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKÍ Lo1 Lo4 wKt5 xMd3 oMd5
oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr2 MTr3
 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Colophon: Be1 Lo1 xMd3 NNg Ox2 Tr1 
Lo3 
Be1 eKt5 oMd1
oMy sOx1 MTr6 om 
oOr


--- PAGE 821 ---
Before the first verse [Jolly M] adds:
1. 
Päda s c-d omitted in Pu4 [haplo]. Cited by Dev 1.143 — a) Lo1 
— a-b)
TMd3 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 
. sOx1 sPu6 
— c) oMd1
Be1 eBe2 wKt1 ßKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 iMd4 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu10 Tr2 Dev
— d)oMy 
oOr 
, Lo2 olVld1 TMd4 Pu3 MTr4 Mir6
In place of verse i MTr5 gives the following verse:
2. 
Päda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Vw 1.197—a) wKt1 
oMd1 
Bo
La1 Pu2 
— b) TMd3 
Mir6 
— c) NlCt4 
— d) sKt5 iMd3
olvld5 Tr1
3 . C i t e d by Laks 12.811 — a) wKt1 oMd1 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Pu4
La1 
Ox2 
Be1 eBe2 Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 TMd4 NNg Pu8 Tr2
 MTr6
wKt1 
— b)oMy" 
TMd3 
uKl5 
HoNNgom 
„ sOx1 sPu6
wKt1 
— c)La' T M d 4 o M y N P u ' T j 2 
— d)oMd' rMd4 oMd5 Tr1
MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly Gr] 
Tj2
4. 
Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.811; Dev 2.407; pâda s c-d referred to by Sain on
V e S 1.3.36— a ) La1 
Jo1 sKt5 ;
— c ) o M d 1 P u 2 Pu4 
wKt1
oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
PIT Pu4 
Be1 
o M d
5 — d)
Be1 
Ox2 
Pu2 om
5*. Päda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Dev 4.180; Madh 1.511 — a) wKt1
Pu3 
r M d 3 — b ) B K t 5 
La1 oMyNPu1 
päth a
810


--- PAGE 822 ---
Chapter 10 
811
in Bh and Me 
Pu4 om 
; Hy 
— c) sKt5 sOx1 sPu6
HyTMd 3Tj'; 
oMd1 T
r
2
— d) Be1 Jo2 BKt5 TMd4 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Wa
Dev
6. 
Omitted in Pu'° ; päda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.812; Mädli 1.511 — a)
oMd5 
NPu1 P
u
3
— b ) B o T M d
3 
; NPu1 
'—c)
Tr2 
Pu4 om 
TMd3 
; Be1 
wKt1 
— d)
Tj 1' 
Jo2Lo3 
sNg
oMy inserts verses 10.14 and then 10.9, Tr1 inserts verses 10.14-5, ar>d TMd3 verse 10.14
[TMd3 also gives it at the proper place]
7.Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.812 — b) Tj1 
u K t
5 P u
2 Pu4
— c) Tr2 
cM d
1
J
o
1 
w Kt1 TMd3 
Ox2
[om 
J; Be1 NKt4 sKt5 La1 TMd4 oMy oMd5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr1 Mir4 Mir6 Wa
[La1 Pu2 Pu3 om 
NKt4 oMd5 NPu1 Pu4 
omitting of 
supported by Nd Re];
reading of edition supported by Bh Me Go Ku Rn — d) oMd1 
Bo wKt1 eKt5 Lo1 Ox2
Pu8 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 
Tr1 
La1 NPu1 Tr1 
cMd1 
Be1 
NNg
Wa om 
' " sOx1 Pu2 Pu4
8. 
Omitted in TMd3; ma in Lo1; päda s b-c omitted in TMd4, and pada-d in La1 sOx1
[haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.812 — a) sKt5 
— b) eBe2 
Lo2 
— c)
BBe2 
— d)Lo' 
Pu10 
Be1 TKRTT; wKt1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2
9. 
Omitted inîMd 3; ma in Lo1; päda s b-d omitted in oMd5 oOr. Cited by Laks 12.812
— a) Ho 
Lo3 
:; Be1 
— b) TMd4 
oMd1 
Lo2
— c) Pu2 Pu4 ¡H° ; Wa 
— d) Pu2 P u 4 ^ 
oMd1
10. Omitted in oMd5 oOr. Cited by Laks 12.812; Madh 1.512 — a) eCa 
— b) Kt2
Pu 5Tj'Tj 2Tr 2 
cMd1 
- c) Pu3 Pu4
 • 
wKt1 " 
NKf
Bo ßCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo3 TMd3 oMy Ox2 Pu3 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6 Mädh ^
—
 d) Lo1 
cMd1 oMy Pu3 Tr1 MTr5 Bh 
N N g T M d
3
11. Pada-a omitted in oMd5 oOr. Cited by Mädh 1.513 — c) wKt1 
NNg Tj2


--- PAGE 823 ---
a12
Pu10 
oOr 
— cTlNKt
4 
La1 
iMd4 
Hy Pu'°
12. Padas c-d omitted in Tr1. Cited \syMadh 1.513 — a) [Jolly N] 
Ho sOx1
sPu6 
B
K
t
5
B
o 
rMd4 
o O r Pu5 P
u
7
, Tr2
Tj'Tr1 
sKt5TMd4 
— b) wKt3 La1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Tr2 [Jolly
Ku] 
B o T j
1 T M d
4 
NKÍ 
, Hy 
— d) cMd5 
Ho
NKt4 
, Be1 oMd5 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly N d ] P u
5 Pu7 
La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 NNg
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly 
oOr
13.* Omitted in Pu5 Tr1 — a) NPu1 
T M d 4 s C a Jo2 Lo3 oMy Tj1 Wa
— b)Jo 2Lo 3Tj' 
MTr"oOr 
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
TMd4 
Mir4 
La1
— c) Be1 BCa wKt1 NKt4 Lo4 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu7 Mir6 Wa 
sBe2 Pu8
sBe2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 W a 
L
o
2
; T M d
4 — d ) Tr2 
Pu8
NPu1 
Ho 
sCa Lo4 oMy oOr Pu7 Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Jolly
Pulc 
_ sKl5 Pu2 Pu4 M T r
5 B B e
2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt3 Kt2 Lo2 Tj2 Mir3 Mir4
MTr6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
~ 
Lo1 
, Bo Pu3 NKt4 
Be1
NNg 1
14. Cited by Ws i.i;pada-a cited by Vis 1.14— a) oOr Wa 
TMd4
sBe2 Tr1 
, sOx1 sPu6 T r
2 a B e
2 TMd3 [at 14 but not in addition after 6] Tr1
MTr4 
— b) T r 2 s K t 5 
. Ho 
TMd3 [at 14 but not in addition
after 6] 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
_ Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 [at 14 but not in
addition after 6] Tj1 
T M d 4 . . . — d) Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 [at 14] rMd4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5
TMd3 [ a t 6 ] 
sCa ' B o 
oMy
15. Verses 15 and 16 transposed in cMy Pu2; [Jolly Nd] places verse 15 after 17; not
commented by Me; päda s c-d omitted in sKt5. Cited by Laks 12.820 — b) Pu2 Pu4
oMd5 
o M y L o 3 T j ' 
_ 
, T
r
1
— c ) B o H o 
. T M d 3 M T r 6
Lo1 
— d) s B e
2 L o
1 
, P u 1 0 T M d 4 
. Bo
oOr 
BBe2oMd' rMd3 oMy " 
Bo 
Ox2 
N P u
1 P u
1
0
Tr1 
B e
1 T j
1 
La 
TMd4
16. Omitted in sKt5; not commented by Me. Cited by MSdh 1.513 — a) Pu4 
Bo
TMd4 
Tj1 
Pu10 
— b)JmJo1wKt3Lo1Lo4oOrOx2Pu5Pu7Pul°Tr 2
— c ) Pu2 Pu4 
T
j
2
— d ) N
P
u
1
o
M
y Pu3 MTr3 MTr4


--- PAGE 824 ---
Chapter 10 
813
MTr5 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
cMd1 
Tr1 
, TMd3
17. Omitted in Lo3 cMy Tj1 [haplo] ; not commented by Me; päda s c-d omitted in wKt' ;
sequence of verses in Jin is 19, 18, 17. Pâda s a-b cited by Mädh 2.56 — a) Tr1
TMd3 
B o N K t f L o ' W a — b ) T M d 3 B B e 2 Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo1 Lo4
 NNg
oOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Wa 
[Jolly M] 
— c) BBe2 
Be1 Ho nKf
GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6MÏr5 
Pu3 Pu4 
— d) Jm Kt2
TMd4 
NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Pu3 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6
18* Omitted in oMy. Cited by Laks 12.820 — a) Tr1 
oOr 
—
b) sOx1 sPu6 
T r 2 w K t 3 
B e
1 s B é BCa Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 La1
 NNg
oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj2 [Jolly Ku]Mandlik Jha KSS 
wKt1 wKt3 
Bo Jo2 Lo2
Lo4 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] 
H y
B K t
5
— c)Pu2Pu4 
_ 
La1 
BKt5 oMd1 
[om ];
NKt4 TMd4 NPu1 MTr4 MTr6 
: — d) Tr< 
Pu2 Pu4 
Tj1
19 
Cited by Laks 12.820; Mädh 2.248 — a) TMd3 oMy oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 \Jolly Nd]
• 
_
T
M
d
4
o
O
r 
wKt1 
NKt4
BBe2 ' 
; Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 [Jolly R Ku] Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
[om 
]; Be1 sOx1 sPu6 om 
—
 b) Ho 
Tj1 
— c) NPu1 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1
Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Bo Ho Lo4 oMd1 oMy NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Tr'MT^MT^tJo/TyGNdJ^TiTr2 
Be1 
TMd4 
Pu10
20. Cited by Laks 12.826 — a) TMd4 
TMd3 
oOr
Be1 
Tr2 
— b)TMd4 
sKt5 
Lo3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [Jolly G N] ' 
Bo 
Be1 sBe2 sKts
— c) oM d5 
— c-d) Me [pâth a rejected by him] ;
TMd3 ' 
— d) Hy Jm Jo ' Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mr Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
w
K
t
3
L
o
3 
MTr6
21* Pâda s c-d omitted in Tr1. Cited by Laksi2.8z6 — a) Wa 
La1
Tr1 
, B e ' o O r 
Pu2 Pu4 
T M d
4 N P u
1 
Be1
oMd1 
— b) P u
8 T j
2 
B e 1 o M y 
NKt4 
oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6


--- PAGE 825 ---
814 
Chapter W
oMd1 TMd4 
[Jolly Nd Gr] 
MTr5 
sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 Lo4 oOr Pu3 Tj ' Tr2 Mir3 [7o//y Ku R] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
Lo3 „ 
; TMd3
— c) NKt4 Pu5 
s B e
2 ; . B K t
5 B e
1 
Jo2 
Lo2
Pu2 Pu4 
sOx1 s P u
6 L a
1 
H o "
" TMd3 '
— d) Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jo//y G] 
[Jolly G 
]; sOx1 sPu6
[lacuna] 
Ho 
" 
Be1 La1 NPu
1 
oOr 
Pu2 Pu4 ; 
MTr4
MTr6 
o M d 1 s K t 5 
sBe2 ' 
TMd3 
" 
Lo4 [Jolly M4]
Jolly _ 
'" 
[Jolly M1-2-5] 
[Jolly M3] 
[Jolly M9] 
NKt4 .
[Jolly Nd], 
N N g W a " 
sBe2 Pu8 P u 1 0 L a 1 
Kt2wKt3 NPu1 Pu3
22. Omitted in oMd1 Pu5 Tr1; not commented by Me; pâda s b-d omitted in Lo2. Cited
by Laks 12.826 — a) Jo2 
Lo3Tj' 
.NKt
4 La'MÏr4 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo 
Lo1 Ox2
NPu1 
B e
1 c M d
5 
x M d 3 ~ 
La1 Tr2 
Tj1 
— b)
La1 
Be1 Ho NKt4 sPu6 Pu7 MTr5 
MTr4
MTr6
 
TMd3
sBe2 aCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 eKt5 Lo3 Lo4 Pu8 Tj1 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Dave
;sOx' sPu'Tr2 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
— c) MTr6
oMy 
L
a
1
T
M
d
3 
B
o
w
K
t
3 
" ' 
Tj2
— d) Be1 sCa wKt1 wKt3 oMd5 
NKt4 oMy MTr4 
NPu1 Pu4 
Bo
BKt5 
,TMd3 
O x 2 L a 1 
oMd5 " 
NKt4 M T r 4 " 
TMd3 
Be1 NNg
Pu'Tj1 " 
Pu7
23* Omitted in oMd1 NNg; pada-a omitted in Lo2. Cited by Laks 12.826 — a) Wa
BKt5 
NKt4" 
Pu2 P
u
4
; L
a
1
. NKt
4 
Be1 NPu1
Bo cMy Pu2 Pu4 MTr6 
'— b) Jolly 
s C a — c) La1 :
TMd3 î 
_ 
Pu8 
. ; sBe2 
oMy [folly Nd] 
Lo3
TMd4sOx'sPu6 
s K t
5 N K t
4 Tr2 MTr5 Wa 
NKt
4 
cMy
NPu1 sPu6 Wa 
Ho cMy MTr6 
NKt4 
Lo2 
wKt1 ; 
sKl5 ;
Be1 
TMd3
24. Omitted in Pu5 [Jolly Nd] — a) Tr2 
oMd5 
— b) Tr1
TMd4 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
Ho P u
7 N K t
4 
' — c) Bo 
'—
d) Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 BKt5 TMd4 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr3 MTr4Ac
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
25. Cited by Laks 12.820 — a) rMd4 
sCa Pu4 Tr1 
, sKt5 
PuK
Lo2
wKt1
NPu1  Pu2 Pu4 
for
wKt1
. TMd4 GMd5 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
 Tr1 
— d) Pu2 Pu4
 sOx1


--- PAGE 826 ---
Chapter 1O 
815
—
 b) Be1 
TMd3 
— c) NPu1 
_ 
Be1 
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5
Pu5 Pu7 Mir6' 
sBe2
 
BKt5 ' 
; w K t
3 , Lo1 
Tr2 
—
d)sBe2 
sKt5;
26. Cited by Lajb 12.821 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
" sBe? Pu7 Wa— 
b) Jm Lo1 oOr Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G R] 
Bo oMd1 Tr1 
L
a
k
s
B
o oMd1 Tr2 
— c)
Be1 La1 
" 
[Be1 
]; oMd5 
L o 2 s C a sKl5 Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
Tj ' Tr2 MTr6 fT5T° ; Bo 
Hy Lo3 iMd3 Tr1 
sBe2 
Bo Jo2 Lo3 TMd4 Ox2 Tj '
— d) Bo 
Lo2 om 
La1
27* Pâda s c-d omitted in sKt5 Tj1. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Lo3 Tj1 
Tr1
NKt4 
_ 
. NNgom 
r
M
d
4
— b) oMd5 Tr1 {folly Gr]
Tj2 
~ 
Be1 
"~ 
—-c)Pu4 
MeJha 
ßBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1
Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 cMd1 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 Tr1 MTr5 Wa [Jolly N Ku R] Laks Go Nâ
Nd 
. L o
1 L o
2 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Bh Me [pâtha ] RcJolly 
oOr 
Tr2
—c-d) Be1 NKt4 Lo2 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
_ 
_ 
[Be1
NKt4 
;Lo2 ]
28. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Lo' iMd4 
— b) oMy 
Pu3 Tr2
NPu1 
xMd3 oMd5 Ox2 Pu8 Tr1 
— c) Bo La1 Tj1 
Tr2
wKt'oMy 
T
M
d
3
n
B
e
2 
P u
3
T M d
3
TMd4 oMd5 
^.; Be1 Lo1 Lo4 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr ' Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Go Laks
Jolly 
—
 d)Tj' 
, Be1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt1 
sKt5 
Lo1
MTr4 MTr6 
o M y T M d 4 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS
Dave
29. Pâda s c-d omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) oMd1
Pu7 [but me] 
TMd3 o
M
y
— b ) J o 1 L o 2 
H o Lo4 sOx! Ox2
sPu6 Pu10 Tr2 MTr5 Bh 
¡ s B e
2 T M d
3 
. 
, — c) Be1 
NNg
Kt2 
— d) sBe2
30. Omitted in Pu10; pâda s a-b omitted in Bo and pâda s c-d in TMd4. Cited by Laks
12.821 — a) oMd1 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 
Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo3 Tj1 
oMd1 
Tj1
...„-. . . — b ) T M d 3 
oMcPcMyPu4 
Ox2 
Tj1 
BKt5 La1
NPu1 Pu4 
Pu8 
— c)BBe2 
Tr'Tr2 
Tj1 
rMd3 
. 
sOx1


--- PAGE 827 ---
816 
Chapter lo
sPu6 
wKt3 BKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
Ho NNg 
La1 Tj '
sBe2 oOr 
— c-d) Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Go 
—
 d) NKf sOx1
sPu6 
NPu1 
Ho 
NNg 
sOx1 sPu6 
Bo wKt1 NKt4 Pu4 Tr1
La1 
a K t 5 P u 3 T r 2 
oMd1
31. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 ' 
cMd1 ° 
" sBe2 Tr1 
Tr2
TMd4 
" 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b)Tj' 
Be1 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1
Ho NKf sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
TMd4 
Bo La1 oMd5 
Pu2 Pu4
sKt5 Ox2 NPu
1 
c
M
d
1
— c) cMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Mir4 MTr6 Wa
wKt'Tj1 
Ox2 
oMy sKt5 Lo4'" 
" 
oOr 
" 
TMd3
La1 
Mir4 
Tr2 
Lo2; .. 
Lo4 
TMd4
oMd5 GMy MTr4 
— d) N
K
t
4
H
o
T
j
1 
La1 oMy NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 
ßKt5 
sOx1 sPu6 '
32. Cited by Laks 12.821 —
 a) Be1 Lo3 
— a-b) Pu2 Pu4 
[Pu4 
]
— b)TMd3 
Tr1 
. Be1 ßCa wKt3 Lo1 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 
Jo2 
Hy
Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 oOr Pu3 Mir3 Mandlik KSS 
Lo1 
Lo2
sCa Jm Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Mir3 MTr4MTr6 
N K t
4 ' —
c) TMd3 ! 
„ 
_ 
. sOx1 s P u 6 H o 
T r
2 J m Jo ' Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Ox2 MTr3
[Jolly Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave 
Hy 
wKt1 
sKt5 
Pu3 
— d) Pu2
Pu4 
Be1 La' oMd 5_ " cMd1 xMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy MTr4 MTr6
[oMd'MTr6 
M T r 4 i M d 4 ¡ 
" cMd5 
o M y M T r 6 
]; Wa
33. Päda s c-d ma in Lo1. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Pu4 
s K t
5 ; B h
Ipätha ] 
rMd4 
oMd5 
sBe2 om 
Bo 
sBe2 
oOr 
—
a-b) BKt5 
— b) Be1 Bo La1 Lo3 oMd1 oMy Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6 
cMd1 xMd3
TMd4 ^ .Pu10 
Tr1 
Nd 
; Jm 
Ox2; 
— c) La1
sBe2 Pu2 Pu3 
; Pu2 Pu4 
M T r
6 w K t
3 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
Ox2
Pu5 Pu7 
BoPu3 
s K t 5 M T r 4 MTr6 
TMd3 cMd5 
Tr1
34* Päda s a-b ma in Lo1 ; lacuna for whole verse after 
in oMy; pâda s c-d omitted
in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a) oMd5 oMy 
La1 
H o o M d
1 cMd5
Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Bh 
T M d 3 N P u 1 
BKt5 
sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6
Pu1 [Jolly G] 
Tr2 
La1 Tr1 
— b) Tr1 
oMd1 
Bel sBé Bo Ho Jo1 Kt2
Lo1 Lo4 [but cor] NNgoOrsOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu10 Tr2 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Lo2 
s K t 5 P u 5 P u 7 T M d 4 
. B e
1 B o 
TMd4 
; NPu1
Be1 BBe2 Bo Hy wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 Tj1 Tr2 
MTr4 
N K t
4 — c) Be1


--- PAGE 828 ---
Chapter 10 
817
Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3xMd3 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Wa 
NNg
MTr4
35. Päda s a-b omitted in Pu2 Pu4; päda s c-d omitted in cMd1. Cited by Laks 12.822 —
a) Hypermetric päda ; Jo2 xMd3 cMd5 [Jolly R2] 
Bo Pu5 Pu7
[Bo 
]; Tr2 
Be1 
s B e
2 L o
1 
Tj2
NPu1 " 
Hy wKt1 Lo1 Mir3 
; KSS 
Kt2 
"
; 
Jo1 Mandlik" 
—- b) L
a
1
B
o " 
sKt5 Lo4
NNg" 
-—c)Bo 
; T r ' ~ 
xMd3 
— d) Pu4 
B o P u
1
0
Tr2 Wa 
NKt4 sKt5 oMd5 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
TMd3 NPu1 f^-
La'oOrOx2 
Be1
36. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a)xMd 4 : 
Be1 La1 NPu1 
Jo2
Pu2 Pu4 
Tr2 
Tj1 
Bo 
cMd1 
rMd3
wKt1 
[mcshto 
]; Lo1
 
__ La1 oMd5 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
sKt5
TMd3 
~ [ o m ] —
 b) sKt5 La1 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu3 Pu[0Jha Dave °^rt ; sOx1 sPu6
Lo1' 
J o ^ o ' T j 1 T r 2 
— c) Be1 Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3
Lo4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 [Jolly M] Bh Go Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu10
Tj1 
N K t
4 o M d
5 W a 
xMd4 
sBe2 
— d) MTr4
MTr6 
o M y M T r
4 N P u
1 
Jm 
xMd4 
NPu1
37. Pâda s a-b omitted in Pu10; pâda s b-d omitted in Pu4 [haplo]; pâda s a-b and c-d
transposed in oMy Tr1. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a) sCa Ho La1 oMd5 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2
xMd3 
P
u
4
N
K
t
4 
w
K
t
1
B
o Pu3 
, xMd3
Tr1 
, oMd5 
BK15 
sBe2 
. oMd1
— c) xMd3 Pu3 Tr2 
" sOx1 sPu6 
Lo4 ; 
Be1 me to 
Lo2
Tj1 
Tr1 MTr6 
.La1 
~ / 
" Tr1 
— c-d) oMd1
— d) Pu2 
Jo2 
Tr1 
Tj1
38.Omitted in Pu5; pâda- a omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a) La1
, eKt5 
[ m a ] 
Ho Jm wKt1 Lo1 Ox2 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly MG] Jolly
Tj1 
La1 om 
oMd1 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu3 " . . . " . — b)
NKt4 
oMd1 xMd4 MTr4 MTr6 Wa" 
o
O
r
— c) Bo Jo2 sKt5 Lo2 Pu2 Pu4
Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M]^, 
. H o Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 La1 oOr sOx1 Ox2sPu6
MTr3 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik KSS 
[seeio.iSb note]; Lo4 
wKt3 
' Be1


--- PAGE 829 ---
818 
Chapter 10
NKÍ1; 
NNg 
Lo1 
wKt1 
TMd3 
— d)TMd3 
NPu1
39. Cited by Laks 12.822 — а) вВе
2 
Pu
2 Pu
10 
sKt
5 от 
вВе
2 Во вСа
Но Jm wKt
3 BKt
5 Lo
1 oOr Ox
2 NPu
1 Pu
3 Pu
4 Pu
5 Pu
7 Tr
2 
— b) Pu
7 
TMd
3
оМумТг
6 
GMd
1 
Be
1 [but cor] 
cMd
5 
wKt
1 
—
c) TMd
4 
wKt
1 
. wKt
3 r 
Ho 
— c-d) oMd
1
— d) sOx
1 sPu
6 
. 
. TMd
4 мТг
4 мТг
6
Pu
4 replaces pada-d with 9.142 c-d; thereafter Pu
4 replaces 40-47 with 9.143-150, verse
48 with 9.151 a-b, 152 c-d; verses 49-51 with 9.153-155; verse 52 with 9.156 a-b; and omits
verses 53 and 54 a-b.
40. Pâda s a-b omitted in La1; pâda- d lacuna in мТг
6. Cited by Laksi2,8z2 — a) Be
1
wKt'Tj
1 
,BKt
5 
TMd
3 
—b)GMd'
Tr
2 
Ну отoMd5 
oOr Tr
1 
— c) Ox
2
Tr
2 
w
K
t
1
— d ) B e ' ; B o T M d
4 B e
1
41. Omitted in Tj
2 мТг
6. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) Be
1 .. 
, вВе
2 Ну Jm Jo
1 Kt
2
мТг
3 [Jolly G Ku]Mandlik KSS Dave 
~ B o T M d
3 oMd
5 
— b) Pu
10
мТг
3 
wKt
1 
; oMd
5 sOx
1 sPu
6 
; oOr Be
1 [but cor] 
— c)
NKt
4 La
1 Lo
3 Tj
1 мТг
55А 
wKt
1 P u
8 . , вВе
2
 BKt
5 мТг
4
 
TMd
4 
' — d)
NKt
4 
Ox
2 
. NNg от 
La
1
42 
Pada-a omitted in мТг
6. Cited by Laks 12.824 —
 a) La
1 Tr
2 
мТг
4
Be
1 вВе
2 Ну Jm Jo
1 Jo
2 Kt
2 La
1 Lo
3oMd' NNg Ox
2 Pu
2 Pu
4 Tj
1 Т]
2мТг
3 [Jolly R] Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
_ NKt
4 oOr Pu
5 Pu
7 Wa [Jolly G Nd] Nä Go 
Pu8 " 
—
b) cMy Tr1 мТг
4 
_ 
_ 
T
M
d
3
N
K
t
4 
— с) мТг
4
Tr
1 
" 
La
1 
Hoi 
;oMd' 
' Ox
2 — d)
oMd
1 TMd
4 мТг
6 ' 
вВе
2 sOx
1 Ox
2 s P u
6 ; Lo
1 Pu
2 Pu
3 Pu
8 Tr
1 Tr
2
; Pu
8
43 Cited by Laks \ 2.828 — a) wKt
1 
Ho 
—b) oMd
1
TMd
4 
N
K
I
4
K
t
2 
: — c) NNg 
— d)
cMd
1 
La
1 NNg NPu
1 Pu
2 Pu
5 Pu
7 Wa [Jolly G] Me Jolly Jha
Bo Ho oMd5 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1
 Be1 wKt3 Lo1 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu


--- PAGE 830 ---
Chapter 10 
819
44* Omitted in Pu5; päda s c-d omitted in MTr6. Cited by Laks 12.828 — a) cMd'
Lo2 
BBe2 Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La ' Lo1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2
MTr3 Co Kit Rn Nd Re Mandlik Bühler KSS 
im Pu2 Pu3 
wKt1 '
P
u
5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
T r
2 B e
1 
" NPu' 
TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 MTr5
[Jolly Gr] 
; [Jolly Nd] 
Ho NNg Pu2 Tj1 [Jolly M2~3] 
NKt4 La1
Lo4 sOx1 sPu6 Wa [Jolly MM] 
aBe2 ßCa Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Ox2 Tj2 Mandlik KSS Dave
Be1 Hy Pu8 
, [Jolly M
9 ] B o 
LaksTr2 
wKt1
Jo2 ' 
T j
1 L o
1 Lo3 Pu7 [Jolly M8 R ] N K t
4 MTr4 
wKt3
MTr5 
oMd 5Tr ]MTr 5 
— b) TMd3 Tj1 
Hy 
Tj2 
uBe2
La1 
B K t 5 T r 2 
TMd3 TMd3 
— c) TMd4
wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 cMy Ti2 
Ho Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave 
oOr' 
Pu7 MTr5 Laks 
TMd3 
Tj1 
" 
Tr2
wKt3 Lo1 [me t o ] Lo4 
o M d 5
B
o Lo3 
NKt4
La1 
NNg 
NPu
1 
BKt5 
— d)Bo 
Wa
TMd3 
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Tj1
Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sCa Ox2 
BBe7
Pu2 
Pu8 
Ho
45. Omitted in Jm MTr6. padas a-b omitted in Pu10 — a) oMd1 
— b) TMd4 Ox2
wKt3 Pu3 
oMd'TMd 4sOx' sPu6 
— c) cMy 
oOr
BCa wKt1 aKt5 TMd4 
oMd1 TMd3 Tr1 Wa 
[Wa
oMd1 
TMd3 
]; Jo1 Kt2
 MTr3MTr5 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
NKt4
46. Omitted in Jm oMy. Cited by Laks 12.829 — a) oMd1 
eKt5
TMd3 oMd5 Pu2 Pu3 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 
NKt4 
— b) BKt5
TMd3 
Ho 
cMd1
 ' 
Tj2 
Lo2 
— c) oOr
TMd3 
— d) Be1 ' 
. oOr
47. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Apa 119; Laks 12.829 — a) Lo2 
— b) sOx1 sPu6
wKt1 sKt5 
La1 oOr Pu2 
Be1 oMd1 TMd3 
Hy Jo1
Kt2 oMy Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— c) sBe2 TMd4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7
Ox2 
sKt5 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) TMd3 
Jo2 La1 TMd3 oOr NPu
1
Pu2Tj' 
oMd1 
wKt3


--- PAGE 831 ---
820 
Chapter 1O
48. Omitted in Jm; pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in Pu8. Cited by Laks 12.829; päda s
a-b cited by Apa 119 — a) Ox2 
Bo 
Pu10 
Ho 
s B e
2 —
b)Apa 
[vl 
];MTr4MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 
La1
NNg Pu10 Wa 
c
M
y
. MTr5 
Laks 
sOx1
sPu6 
Lo1 
TMd3oMd5 
Tr1 
xMd4 oMd5
Lo3 
T
j
1
B
o sCa wKt1 NKt4 Lo2 rMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu3
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr ' Tr2 MTr5 Wa [Jolly G] J — c) Be ' 
ßBe2
NPu1 
L
a
1
P
u
2 
cMd1 
oMy
wKt1 
" Tr1 
Jo1 Tj1 " 
" Pu10 
Bo Jo2 Lo2
MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly G N Nd] Jolly 
Lo1 MTr6 
Tr2 Wa 
Pu3 
[Jolly M 4's-
9] 
Lo4 [Jolly M
5 ] O x
2 
— d) NKt4 Ox2 Tj1 MTr6" 
" TMd3
wKt1
49. Omitted in Jm oMy Pu5 [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Laks 12.829 — a) TMd4 
Tj1
TMd3 aMd5 Ox2 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Be1 
oMd1 
Lo1 
Ho
Jo2 Lo2 Lo4NPu' Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] 
3e1 Bo 
äße
2 Hy
Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 BKt5 La1 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[see io.i8b
note]; wKt3 
Lo1 om 
wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 NPu
1 Tr2 
— b) wKt1 
[cf.
5ib]; Kt2NKf Lo1 Lo2 Pu10 Wa 
MTr6 
Bo La1 Pu2 Pu7 
MTr5 
Be1
La1 oMd1 MTr4 
TMd3 
xMd4 
sKt5 ' 
NPu
1 
cMd5
— c) TMd3 Tr1 
Lo3 
Be1 ßBe2 oMd1 TMd4 MTr5 
Tj1
NKt
4 
L a
1 L o
2 
; Tr2 
oMd5 MTr5 
La1
— d) Be1 BBe2 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 NNg Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 ¡" 
sOx1
sPu6 
Ho 
-Md4 
NKt
4 
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
50. Omitted in Jm MTr6; placed after verse 52 in oMd' TMd4 oMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by
Laks 12.829, 832 — a) sKt5 Lo2 TMd3 
Tr2 
La1 
MTr4 
— b) Lo1
MTr4 
Jo2 Lo3 Pu2 Pu3 Tj1 
— c) oMd5 
Pu5 Pu7
Wa 
sBe2 
Jo1Kt2NNgOx2MTr3Ma«i//rtÄ:5 l5röav e
51. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) oOr 
Ho BK1
5 La1 Lo1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu8
La1 
wKt1 
NPu1 
Tj1 
NKf" 
wKt1 Ho
BKt5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
— a-b) oMd1 
— b) NKt4 Lo4
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4
 MTr5 MTr6 
[MTr6 
|; oOr 
wKt1
BKt5 La1
 
TMd4 
Bo 
BKt5 
— c) Lo2 Lo4 Pu10 Tj1
[Jolly M N R Nd] Nä Jolly 
[editions of Me give both 
and 
J; Ox2 Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Tr2 
La1 NPu
1 
Be1 
Bo TMd4 °q?=ra- ;


--- PAGE 832 ---
Chapter 10 
821
oMy 
xMd3 
Lo1 
Wa 
Be1 TMd3 
NKt 4oMy
— d)0x2 
o M d 5 " 
sOx'sPu6o/« 
Pu5 Pu7 
Ho Lo2 oMd1 Ox2
NPu1 MTr4 
Lo1 T r 2 B K t 5 O x
2 J o
2 " 
Pu'° 
. TMd3 '
52.* Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) oMd1 
oMy 
Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 La1 Lo1
Lo2 Lo4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly Jha
Dave 
—
 b) L a
1 T M d
3 
Be1 sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 oM d1 oMd5
oMy Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 [Jolly G Ku Nd] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
—
 c)
Lo1 
[cor t o } 
H o ß
K
t
5
L
o
2
ß
B
e
? 
Be1 La1
Lo3 TMd4 oOr NPu
1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
— d ) B e ' T j 1 ~ 
Tr2 
sPif
Bo 
Pu5 Pu7 
BBe2 sOx1 T r
1 o O r a f t e r this verse MTr4
MTr6 insert verse 10.50.
53. Omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) Bo 
Jo2 Lo3 
— c)
BKt5 
uK^Lo'Tj1 [Jolly K\ 
— d)oOr 
Lo3Tj' 
TMd3
54. Omitted in Pu10; pâda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) NPu1
NKt4 
TMd4 T r 1 o M d 1 
oOr 
, Bo o M y — b) c M d 1 T M d 3
TMd4 
s B e
2 — c ) L
o
4
o
O
r
B
o Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 Lo3
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy oOr NPu
1 Pu3 Tj ' Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 
La1 om— 
d) NKt4
55. Cited by Laks 12.832 — b) Pu4 Tj1 
oMy 
Ho 
— c) Tr1
Tj1 
. o M d 1 T M d 3 o M y r 
oMd5 " 
Ox2
Kt2
 BKt5 TMd4 
O x
2 " 
w K t 3 — d)Bo
56. oMy places pâda s c-dafter verse 58. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) ßKt5 
Kt2
Tr2 
Bo 
eCa 
Pu10 
o M d1 
— c) oMd1 MTr6
MTr4 
— d ) o M y M T r 6 L a k s 
cMd1
Hy^ 
Jo2 wKt3 Tj1 [Jolly R
]
:
L
o
1 
oMd5 
Pu4 om
57. Pâda s c-d omitted in wKt1 [haplogaphy] — a) Pu10 Tj1 
MTr6 
— b)


--- PAGE 833 ---
822 
Chapter W
cMd1 Pu4 
3Md> cMd5 
Tr2 
TMd3 
— c) sOx1 sPu6
T j 2 
w
K
t
3
— d)rMd4
58. Omitted in wKt1 — a) rMd4 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
La1
59. Cited by Laks 12.828; Mädh 1.478 — a)cMd' TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4
uTi6 Laks MSdh 
—b) Be1 o M y — c) w
K
t
1
[
o
m ]; sKt5 om 
TMd3
— d) TMd4 
cMd1 :
T
M
d
3 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
oMd5 
Mädh
60. a) oMd1 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 
NKt
4 
c M d
1 - b) TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5
oMy Tr1 [Jolly Grj 
oMy 
sBe2 wKt3 sKt5 La1 
— c) Lo1
TMd3 
— d ) w K t 3 B o 
wKt1 
s K t
5 o M d
5 
Be1
oMd5 
cMd1
61 Cited by Laks 12.828 — a) oMd5 Tr1 
Pu2 
Pu4 
Ox2
Bo La1 
T r
2 w K t
1 
Ho Jm Jo1 NKt4 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 MTr3 Laks
Mandlik Jha KSS t 
' — b) Bo sOx1 sPu6 
Pu10 
Tr1 T r
2 w K t
1
sKt5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 No Kit Mr 
MTr6 
oOr
NPu
1 
— c) Lo3 Tj1 J h a H y Jm Jo1 Kt2MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
oMd1 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
TMd3 
TMd4 
Pu10
 
BKt5 
Pu2 Pu4
TMd3 
— d) La1 oOr
62.* Cited by Apa 119;Laks 12.833 — a) Ho 
Be1 
NNg Wa [Jolly M]
— b)TMd4 
[ l a c u n a ] T j 1 
Apa fvl as in ed] 
—c)BBe2BoHo
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 [cor to] oMd' oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tf
Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
[Jolly M'-2^9] 
Lo2 
MTr6
oMd1 
— d)NKt4 
.TMd3 
' La1 
oMd5 
wKt3 
"
63* Cited by Vis 1.8; Laks 12.834 — a) sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly G Ku R]Vis [vlj Laks Go Na Kit Mandlik Jolly Jha
NPu1
 Pu4
— c) BKt5
GMd5
— d) Ox2 Be1
Be1


--- PAGE 834 ---
Chapter 1O 
823
KSS Dave 
—
 a-b) cMd1 TMd4 MTr6 
_ 
; NKt4 Lo2 Pu8
— c) Lo1 
ßBe2 ßCa wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 La1 cMd5 oOr Tr1 . 
,. Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2
Pu3 
Be1 Lo4oMy Pu8 Tj2 [Jo/fy M Nd] 
sOx1 sPu6 . .Pu 1 0 
wKt1
Be1 oMd1 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 MTr4 MTr6 
iMd3 ; 
Pu10 [Jolly M]
Bo 
Kt2 oOr 
oMd5 M T r 6 — c-d) Vis 
—
d) Be1 BBe2 Bo wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 La1 oMd1 xMd4 NPu1 Tj ' 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Lo1
Tr1
Between päda s a-b and c-d the following verse is added in Be' oMd1 TMd4 NNg NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik 
\ KSS, the second half-verse is added in oMd3 cMy; this
verse is given by Go at the beginning of his commentary on verse 63:
a) MTr6 
— a-b) MTr4 
_ 
— b)oMd'
TMd4 MTr6 
— d) olVld1 olVld5 oMy MTr4
MTr6
64.Omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 12.825 — a) La1 
NNg 
— b)
La1 
Pu10 
TMd4 
. Pu4 
Lo4 5TraW° ; NNg 
wKt1
. 
oMd5 
o
O
r
— c) TMd4 
aKt5 Pu5 Pu7
sBe2 
r—c-d) cMd1 [half-verse reads] 
—d) Hy La1
Tr2 
oOr 
Lo1 
wKt1 TMd3 
L a
1 T M d
3 oMd5
MTr4 
aCa [bul cor]
65. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Laks 12.825 — a) Bo 
— b) NPu1
wKt1 
" 
Jo2 Lo3 T
j
1
B
e
1 Kt 2 La1 Lo1 oOr Tr1 MTr6 
oMd1
BBe2 Bo wKt1 wKt3 Ox2 Tr2 ' 
— c) NKt4 Pu4 
Tr1 
Jo2
cMd1 Lo3 Tj1 MTr6 
[Tj1 
]; TMd4 
fejT° ; 
La1 TMd3 oMd5
oMy oOrMTr5=ET;wKt' 
— d)oMd' TMd3 TMd4 oMd 5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
La1 
oOrNPu1 
Jo2 Lo3 
Tj1 
Lo4
[Jolly M]
66. Päda s c-d omitted in Pu4 and ma in Lo1. Cited by Laks 12.823 — a) oMy
TMd4 
T j
1 B K t
5 P u
1
0 — b)NKt 4 
MTr4 MTr6 
TMd4
_ 
— c) La1 TMd4 MTr6
 
N
P
u
'
" Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3
Pu2 
Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo3 Tj1 
oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4
Lo'oOr' 
_ eBe2 
— c-d)oMd'< 
— d) oMy
La1 
oOr 
Hy Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 Tj][Jo//y R]
[wKt3 ' 
[Jolly R
]
]
; 
[Jolly Nd] om 
" 
Be1 wKt1 Lo4
; 
[Jolly M
4
]
N
P
u
' P
u
2
P
u
5 Pu7 [Jolly G ] 
TMd3 Tr1
 Pu2 Pu4


--- PAGE 835 ---
824 
Chapter 10
MTr4 
oMd5 
Ox2 [Jolly M9]
67. Omitted in Pu'° ; ma in Lo1; omitted up to 
in Pu4; pâda s b-c omitted in sKt5;
pâda s a-b and c-d transposed in MTr4. Cited by Laks 12.824— a) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
TMd4 Tr1 
BBe2 oMd5 Pu7 MTr6 
Lo1 
— b) wKt3
aMy 
Pu8 
— c) Lo2 
Be1 
Ox2 Tr1 [but cor]
—
 d) wKt1
68.Omitted in wKt1; ma sh in sPu6. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) oMd1 MTr6 Laks
— b) oMd1 
wKt3 Tr2 «TÍ; Tr2 
— c) Lo3 TMd3
oMy sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 Laks Me Jha Dave 
; sBe2 Bo Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 NPu1 Pu5
Pu7MTr6Wa 
B K t
5 — c
-
d
)
c
M
d
'
" 
" 
— d)TMd3
sBe2 
N P u
1 ; e C a o O r
69. Omitted in wKt1; ma in sPu6. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) sBe2 eKt5 
TMd3
oMd5 oMy Tr' uTrsBh [ad 10.70] _ 
oMd1 
La1 
TMd4 «d«^^;
Laks 
Be1 Ho TMd3 
TMd4 
eBe2 sKf 
— b) TMd3 
oMd1
Tr1 
T j
1 L o
1 
— c)MTr5 
Pu8 
oMd5
eKt5 
T M d
4 s B e
2 Jo2 La1 Lo3 oOr NPu ' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj '
Wa 
— d) ßCa Ho sKt5 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
oMy 
oMd1
Boî T
70. Pâda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) NiKt
4 cMy 
Pu4
oMd1 
— b) BCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly
Jha KSS Dave . 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 T M d
4 L o
1 
oMy
— d)Tr' 
oMd5 
oMy 
J
o
2
w
K
t
1 me to 
Tj1 
BKt5
La1"
71. Pâda s c-d up to 
omitted in Pu4; pâda s a-b omitted in Pu10. Cited by Laks
12.824 — a) oOr sOx1 sPu6 
La1 
Lo3Tj' 
oMd1 Pu7 Pu8 
—
b) Be1 Hy wKt3 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 Pu8 Tr1 
BKt5 
La1 oOr NPu
1 Pu2
wKt1 
— c) o
M
y
— d) cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1


--- PAGE 836 ---
Chapter 10 
825
72. Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) oMd1 
TMd4 NNg oOr Pu5
Pu'Tr1 
— b)cMd'TMd 3 
ßKt5 
NKfTj 1 
Be'BowKt3Lo2
Pu10 
Tr1 
— c)xMd3 
_ 
— d)BoNKf
73. Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Laksz.zjz, 826 — b) Be1 I-n1 
Lo2 xMd4 MTr4
, oOr 
, Laks 2.272 
— c) Wa 
TMd3 .... . . . . — d) sKt5
oMyWa 
" TMd3 
oMd1 oMy Tj1 
J o
1 P u
1
0
[Jolly M] 
Tr2
74.Omitted in NPu1 Pu10 — a) Lo2 omTMd4 
MTr6 
oMd1
TMd3Tr' 
— b) La1 
wKt1 
Bo Lo3
Tj1 MTr4 Bh 
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Mir3
MandlikJha KSS Dave 
[Ho om 
TMd3 
wKt1 
]; Ox2
— d) sKt5 Wa 
. eBe2 
Pu3
75. Omitted in NPu1; pada-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 2.168; Dev 2.449; Mädh
1.135 — a) oMd1 TMd4 Tr1 Dev Mädh 
— b) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly G R]
—
c) Ho Jo2 Lo3 oMy T j
1 s K t
5 La1 TMd3 TMd4 Tr1 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6 '
— d) oMd1 
"
76. Omitted in Pu1; pâda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Vij 1.117; Laks2.\67;Madh 1.140
— a) oMd1 
TMd3 T
M
d
4
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
ßBe2 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4
TMd3 
— c) oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
oMd5 
sBe2 Tj1
— d) wKt1 
sBe2 cMy sOx1 sPu6 
Laks 
Dev
TMd4 
NKC
77. Omitted in Hy Pu1. Cited by Laks 2.251; Dev 2.449; Mädh 1.308 — a)sKt5
wKt1 
Be1 Ho Pu10 
[ P u 1 0 ] ; Jo2 Tj1 [Jolly R] Mädh 
—
 b) [Jolly
N] 
. 
. TMd4 Tr2 
Lo4 
Lo1 
Laks 
oMd1 
MTr4
MTr6 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Tr1 
Ho sOx1 sPu6
— c)wKt'oTO 
— d) Kt2 aKt5 Tr1 
Be1


--- PAGE 837 ---
826 
Chapter 10
78. Omitted in Pu'. Cited byLaks 2.251; pâda s a-b cited by Dev 2.449; Mädh 1.308 —
a) Pu5 Pu7 
nKÍ Lo1 oMy N N g s B e
2 Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
— a-b) Pu2
— c)oMy 
Lo2 
" oMd5 
MTr6
sKt5 om 
cMy
79.* Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Dev 2.^4<);Madh 1.397;pâda s a~b cited by Vij 1.119; Mädh
1.308 — a ) Pu10 
N
N
g
— b ) Pu5 P
u
7
K
t
2 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 
Be1
sBe2 Bo wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 TMd4 NNg oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Nà 
Ho Jm Jo1
wKt1 NKt4 La1 Lo4 oMd5 Ox2 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oMy
Tj1 Tr2 
— c)Tj' 
. L o
4 o M y P u
1
0 
wKt3 
sKt5
oOr 
—d)Pu 1 0 
Mädh oMy
80. Omitted in NPu' MTr5; pâda- b from 
until the end of pâda- c omitted in Tj1 — a)
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo3 Lo4 sOx1 sPu6 Pulo Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Ho 
, wKt3 
NNg 
Lo4 
— c) wKt1 
; cMd '
TMd4 Pu8 
Tr1 Pu4 
— d) wKt3 
iMd4
81. Omitted in Pu1; verses 81 and 82 transposed in Wa. Cited by Dev 2.469 — a) Be1
Bo cMd5 cMy Ox2 MTr3 
sKt5 T M d
3 r M d
4 
" — b) sKt5 La1
— d)Tr2 
" GMy
82. Omitted in Pu1; päda- b omitted in Pu'° ; padas b-d ma Lo' fhaplo]. Cited by Vij
3.35; Dev2.470 — a) Vij 
Be1 _ 
_ , B o o M d 5 
Tr2
Hy 
— b) xMd4 
— c) wKt3 Pu5 P u 7 w K t 3 oMd1 TMd4 oMy NNg Dev
BBe2 
— d) Bo NKt4 Lo1 Lo4 oMd5 oOr Pu3 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6
[MTr5 
|
;
T
j
'
J
o
2 L o
3 O x
2 
Pu4
TMd3
83.Omitted in sKt5 NPu 1 MTr5. Cited by Apa 936; Dev2.47<3; Mädh 1.426 — a) TMd4
Mädh 
c
M
d
5
L
a
' 
T M d
3 w K t ' Tr2 
_ Tr'
— b) Jo1 om cIT — c) o
O
r
T
r
2
L
o
1 
NNg
— d)Be' 
oMy


--- PAGE 838 ---
Chapter 1O 
827
84. Omitted in NPu1 Pu5. Cited by Apa 936; Dev 2.470; Mädh 1.426 — a) Ox2 Pu2 Pu4
Pu7 Co 
B K t 5 s K t 5 Pu2 Tj1 W
a
L
o
1 
corto 
— b)
Bo 
Tr2 
oOr 
cM d1 TMd3 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
— c)Pu'°o m
Bo 
— d) Tr1 MTr3
Additional verse in Be1 TMd4:
b) TMd4
85. Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Laks 2.199 — a)oOr 
Lo2 
oOr Tr2
NKf oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 NNg MTr4MTr5 MTr6 Wa 
Laks 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) sOx1
sPu6 
TMd4 Pu3 
Pu10Tr' 
wKt3 
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu10 
—
c) Pu2 
.. 
Lo2 
La1 Lo1 
Pu4 
_[rest om\, Lo1 oMy
Pu10 
— d)TMd4sOx' P u 1 0 o M y P u 2 
La1 
Lo3Tj'
86. Omitted in Pu1; päda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Har-A 1.20.12; Laks 2.199 — a)
Pu2 
sOx1 s P u
6 ; s K t
5 — b)Laks 
— c)Be'Lo 4 
TMd4
— d) Ox2 
; Bo 
sBe2 Laks
87. Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Vij 3.36-8; Har-A 1.20.12 — a) sKt5 ; 
Pu2 
Bo
rMd4 
— b)Bo 
H o P u 4 T j ' T M d 4 
H y s K t
5 Lo4 Pu10 MTr5
— c ) sKt5 Lo1 
; H
y
P
u
5 Pu7 ' — 
d ) Tj1 
La1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu2 Pu4 
La1
88. Omitted in Pu1. Cited by Har-A. 1.20.12; päda s c-d cited by ¥1/3.36-8; Dev 2.479
— a) Hy Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
P u 4 — b ) T M d 4 o O r o M y 
Wa 
wKt3
Tj1 
sBe2 
Wa: 
— c) Nä 
and as päth a 
P u
4 P u
1
0
Tr1 
" 
" 
Kt2 
oMd 5oMy wTr5 MTr6 [Jo//y Nd] 
Hy Tr1
BKt5 _ — c-d) oMd1 
_ 
_ 
_ 
— d) sKt5 
Pu3
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 JST; M T r 5 T M d 4
89. Cited by Har-A 1.20.12; päda s a-b cited by ^(73.36-8; Apa 931 — a)ßCa La1 oMd1
Tj1 Tr1 
— b)Be' 
— c)oMd5 
[Jolly Nd] 
Hy 
Bo NKt4 sKt5


--- PAGE 839 ---
828 
Chapter 10
TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 sOx1 Ox2 Tj1 MTr6 
If 
. Tr1 fcR?; La1 Pu5 Pu7 om 
first rMd3
cMd5 Tr1 MTr6 
La1 Lo1 oOr sOx1 
L
o
4
— d) Hy 
, Ho Jo2 Lo2 Lo3
oMd1 TMd3TMd4sOx' Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 MTr6 [/c/fy G R] 
, sBe2 ; 
. oMy
Bo 
Kt2 w K t
3 o M d
1 MTr4 MTr6 Bh [pâtha]M e [pâtha ]
TMd3 oMd5 cMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd] Har-A
Additional verse in Be1 BCaoMd1 xMd4 oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Colly Gr Nd] Mandlik
KSS Dave; cited by Laks 
2.199:
a) Be1 
a C a o M y 
Laks 
Tr1 
— b) TMd3
— c)oMy 
"" 
"" 
Tr1 [Jolly Gr^à] 
Be1
— d) Be1 
oOr
go* Cited by Vij 3.39; Apa 933; Har-A 1.20.13; Dev z.48o;Madh 1.431 — a) TMd3
[Jolly M*-5] 
Pu10 
Tr2 
Jo1 
L o 1 c o r t o
Bo Jm eKt5 La1 Lo3 oMd1 NNg oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2
 MTr3 Apa Har-A Dev
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 
Wa 
HooMd 5Fy
K.\?M3dhNd 
j M d
: ; B K t 5 — c ) L o
1 o O r NPu1 Tr1 
La1
Pu8 
O
x
2
— d ) T
r
2
H
o 
NKt4
Lo3 
„ GMd1 
„Pu 2 Pu4
91. Omitted in Pu10 [Jolly M8"9]. Cited by Vijz.y); Apa^y, Dev 2.480; Mädh 1.431-2
— b) NKt4 GMd1 MTr6 
[MTr6 
]; Hy Wa 
_" NNg
Lo2 
— c) BKt5 TMd3 oMy Ti1 [Jolly Nd] 
~ 
Tr2 
NNg Apa
Hy wKt1 
TMd3 
Be1 sKt5 NPu1 
NKt4 " " 
Ho Jo2 Lo3 TMd4
oMd5 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly R] VijDevMâdh 
[Lo3oMd5 Tj1 _ 
]; Be1 ßBe2
wKt1 NNg oOrsOx1 sPu6 [Jolly M4 sh] DevMâdh 
[Jolly M5] 
— c-d)
oMd1 „ 
^ 
^ 
— d)La' 
Lo1
92. Omitted in Pu10 [Jolly M8~9]. Cited by VijZA^',Apa 934,1046; Dev 2.48o;Madh
1.422— a) La1 MTr6 
B e 1 s K t 5 
— b) Bo La1 oMd1 MTr6 c 
TMd4
BBe2 
Tr2 
— c) TMd3 
Lo1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
—d)
 [Jolly Gr]
Tr2 
oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
 MTr6
 
TMd3
93* Omitted in Pu10 [Jolly M 8~9]. Cited by Vij 3.40; Apa 934;Dev 2.480 — a) TMd4
cMy Vij Apa Dev [v\] 
Lo4 
NNg Tr1 W
a
T
j
1 
—d) Bo oMy
.. GMd1 Vij sBe2 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2wKt' Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 La1
GMd1vij


--- PAGE 840 ---
Chapter 1O 
829
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3sOx' Ox2NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Dev Mandlik
JhaKSSDave 
Be1 Apa
94. Omitted in Pu10 [Jolly M8~9]; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Vij 3.39; Apa
932-3; Dev 2.48i;//ar-A 1.20.15; Mädh 1.431 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
MTr6
Tr2 
B
o
L
a
1 
Be1 Apa 
sBe2 
TMd4 
— b)
oMd1 
La1 
wKt1 
sKt5 
Tj2 
NÍÍÍ La1 oMd1 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr] Me [patha| Bh 
—
 c) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
Ho wKt1 NKt4 NPu1 sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 [see GDh 7.21] 
Be1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 [cor to] MTr3
[Jolly M Nd] Jha 
[}o2om]; w
K
t
1
— d) Be1 Bo NKt4 Lo1 MTr5
oMd1 
MTr5 
NKt4 
oMd1
95. Päda s a-b omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apa 934; Dev 2.473— a) TMd3
oOr 
— b
)
L
a
'
o
M
d
1 TMd4 Ox2 Tj1 Apa [vi] 
Pu10 
Tr1
Lo3ßBc2 
sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 
— c) BBe2 oMd5 
Ox2 
sKt5 Pu5 Pu7
— d) Be1 
NPu1 Pu"
96. Omitted in Pu10; pâda s c-d omitted in sBe2; the following sequence of verses in
[Jolly M'~2~8]g6, 105-109, 114, 97-104, 115. Cited by Apa&22, 865; Laks 12.565 — a) La1
TMd3 
wKt3 
o M y o M d
1 cMd5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 [Jolly G]
Apa822[v\] 
L
o
4
— b) wKt1 
— c) xMd4 oOr
— d) oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Apa 822 
TMd4
97.* Omitted in sBe2 Pu10 [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Vij3.41;Apagas; Devz.466, 475 — a)
TMd3
 
TMd4 
oMy 
. oMd1
 TMd4 cMd5 Tr1
 MTr4 [Jolly
Gr] 
c M d 5 T r ' N K t 4 
— b) sKt5 oMd1
 TMd3
 TMd4 oMd5
 NNg Ox2 Pu3
Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 Wa 
[Tr2 
]; [Jolly M]JollyJha Dave
cMy 
Lo4 maMTr3 
La1 
— c) TMd4 Vij
wKt1 
Be1 
o
M
y
— djTj'MTr6
98. Omitted in Pu'° ; päda s a-b omitted in sBe2. Cited by Apa 934; Dev 2.473 — a)
MTr3 
N K t
4 P u
7 
o
O
r
— b) oMd1 
" 
B o oMd5
— c) MTr6
 
BKt5 oMd1 cMy Tr1 
[oMy 
]; Bo TMd3
NKt4 
[om 
; wKt1 La1 
oMy 
oMd1 
Be1
sOx1
Be1 GMd5 Pu5 Pu7
 — d) TMd3


--- PAGE 841 ---
830 
Chapter 1O
99. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Apaiez; Mailh 1.423 — a) oOr Pu3 Tr2 
NPu1
' — b) Lo3 Tj' 
B
o
— c) TMd4 
. Lo4 [Jolly M]Apa 
—
d)NKt*TMd3 
sKt5 
sBe2 
Bo
NKt4" 
H o " O x
2 
. . 
,.
100. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Vij 3.35; Dev 2.456,474; MSdh 1.423 — a) La1
BCaoMd'rMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly ^Gr\MOdh 
L
o
3
— b)
sOx'sP^Tj1 
— c)TMd4
iQL* Omitted in Pu'° ; päda s a-b omitted in Pu4. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.464 — a) NPu1
Pu 2" 
" B
K
t
5
o
M
d
5 
TMd4 
— b ) i M d
4 H o
sKt5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Apa 
L o
1 — c) L a
1 A p a 
Be1 uBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La1 oOr Ox2 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ' 
MÏr6 
— d)
oMd1 TMd3 Ox2 NPu1 Pu4 Tr1 
wKt1 
Be1 
Ox2
102. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Apagas; Dev 2.464;Mäd h 2.326;päda s a-b cited by Dev
2.457 — a) Apa 
—b) Bo 
Tj2 
MTr4 iviTr6
Be1 
N P u
1 L c ^ o M d ' T j
1 
Tr1 
—
c)TMd4 
oMd1 
Pu3 
Tr2 
sBe2 
— d) wKt1
103. Omitted in Pu'°MTr s. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.464; Madhz.Z26 — d) TMd4
Nd]RnRc 
Hy 
;oOrTj2 
oMy
104.* Omitted in Pu10 Wa. Cited by Apa 935; fiar-AÍ 1.213; Mädh 2.326 — a)oMd'
TMd3 
Mir5 
—b)
 Me Jha Dave 
—
 c) oMy
— d)oMd' 
Apa 
sCa 
Tj'omïi;al l
NT mss. and all editions read 
N?U'
. Be1 Bo Jo2 \\lCt1 wKt3 La1 Lo3 TMd3 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' Tr2 [Jolly G R


--- PAGE 842 ---
Chapter 1O 
831
105* Omitted in Pu'° ; päda s a-b ma in Lo4; päda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Apa 935;
Dev 2.465;Mäd h 2.326 — a)oMy 
Tr1 
TMd4 
— b) Be1
wKt3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 " 
NKt4 
^, oMd 1" 
Lo4' 
N
P
u
1
T
r
1
— c) NPu1 
oMy Tr2 
Lo1 [but cor] TMd3 oMd5 oOr 
TMd4
Be1 sBe2 Bo ßCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 uKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg sOx ' Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M] Go Ku Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
—
 d) Ox2 
wKt1
Wa 
Ho wKt3 sKt5 Ox2 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2
106 Omitted in Pu4 [Jolly M9]. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.465; Mädh 2.326 — a) La'
Lo2 TMd3 NPu1 
w K t 1 . M T r 5 ' 
Be1 Tj1 
B o 
L
o
2
—
b)Hy 
— c)oMd1TMd3oMd5oMyTr1 
rMd4
107* Omitted in [Jolly M9]. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.465; Mädh 2.326 — a) Bo Hy
wKt1 La1 Lo3 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr5 Apa 
Bo sCa Ho La1 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 
O x
2 A p a 
— b) oMd ' oMd5 oOr Tr1 
TMd3 oMy
TMd4 
— c)oMyPu'° 
Pu3' 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
ßCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2wKt'
Kt2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 TMd4 NNg Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M3"4'5 Ku R] Rn Mr
Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
' BKt5 La1 oMd1 oMy Pu2 Pu3 Tr1
 MTr4 MTr5
 MTr6 [Jolly N Nd]
Nä Re 
' Ox2Wa 
Tr2 
NPu1 
Be1 
sBe2 [folly M1^8]
sOx1 
w
K
t
3
B
o 
D e v o O r 
Tj1 
A p a
. 
Mädh 
oMd5 
' 
Pu10 
; Ho 
TMd3 
Hy La1
NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 Go Mr 
. oMd1 T r
1 P u
2 
NKt4 sKt5 Lo2
rMd4 NNg Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 MTr4
 MTr6 Go 
Tr2 Apa
108. Omitted in [Jolly M9]. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.465; Mädh 2.326 — a) Tj1 Tr1
wKt1 
N
N
g
— b ) sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3
Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1 
T r
1 K t
2 s K t
5 NPu1 
— c) Bo Ho
La1 Lo1 Ox2 
— d) La1 MTr4 MTr6
After 
TMd4 jumps to 11.190 and gives the omitted verses after 12.24; probably
the exemplar the scribe was using had folios misplaced.
109. Omitted in [Jolly M9]; päda s a-b omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Apagz5', Oev2.476
— a)oMd' 
Ho NKt4 NNg sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa 
—
b) TMd3 cMd5 
Apa 
oMy 
— c) MTr6 
Bo
Apa[\\] 
— d)Lo3Tj' 
Dev 
~ 
La1


--- PAGE 843 ---
832 
Chapter 1O
no. Omitted in [Jolly M9]; päda s b-d omitted in NKt4. Cited by Apa 936; Dev 2.476 —
a) Bo NKt4 
T r
2 — b) Lo1
 < 
Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy sKt5 La ' oMd1
TMd3 oMy NNg sOx1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 [¿>«f me sh\ Pu7 Tr2 
; wKt3 Lo1 Tr2 
— c) nKt5
TMd3 
; o M d 1 M T r 6 
— c-d) L
a
1
—
d) Bo ßCa Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 iMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr5
[Jolly Ku] Apa Me Go Ku Nä Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ho sKt5 Pu10 Tj2
Jo1 Kt2 
Pu2
ni. Omitted in [Jolly M9]; päda s a-b omitted in NKt4 and päda s c-d in Wa. Cited by Vij
3-35;Apa 936;Dev 2.476; Mädh 1.183-4 — a) wKt1 La1 oMd1 TMd3 Ox2 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2
sOx1 sPu6 
H
o
N
P
u
1 
— b) ßKt5 
Ho sOx1 sPu6
Bo 
Apa 
—
 c) oMy 
sKt5 NPu1 Tj2 
— d) Pu10
BBe2 Hy Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo3 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj1 Vij 
oOr Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4
112. Omitted in [Jolly M9]; päda s a-b omitted in Wa and päda s c-d in oOr — a) TMd3
Pu5 Pu7 
— b)TMd3oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 
—
 c) oMd'
Tr'NKf 
TMd3 
La1 
: Tr2 
oMd1
oMyPu 7Tj' 
T
r
1
— d) T r 2 _ 
• TMd3
113. Omitted in oOr [Jo//y M9] — a) Kt2 
Lo2 ifre%:; Tr1 
Pu4
— b) TMd3 oMy 
TMd3 
" — c) sOx1 
wKt1 
; oMd5 MTr3
Lo1 
— d ) Jo2 Lo3 T j '
T
M
d
4 
, oMd1
 
TMd4
114. Omitted in cMy oOr [Jolly M']. Cited by Dev 2.477 — a) La1 
Jo2
Lo3 Tj1 
oMd ' ' 
aKt5 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 
" — b) La1 TMd4 NPu1 Dev
sKt5 
BCa wKt1 sKt5 Lo1 P u 8 — c) Ho sOx1 sPu6 
La1
oMd1 TMd4 
Ox2 Vïmg - — d) Hy Lo4 T j
1 T M d
3 
Pu10
TMd4 
Lo3 T
j
1
B
e
1 Ox2 T j
2 o M d
1 oMd5 Tr1 
Pu8
115. Omitted in [Jolly M9]; päda s c-d omitted in rMd4. Cited by Vij 2.114 [intro.]; Hem


--- PAGE 844 ---
Chapter 1O 
833
*-A
1.41, 3/l.525;Dev 2.45O;Mailh 1.309, 3.330— a) Bo 
Lo1 
wKt3 TMd4
Ox2 
— b)Lo3 
TMd 3 
MTr6 
Jm 
" 
MTr4MTr6 
K t
2 — c) La1
Pu7 
oOr 
Kt2 
— (OMlV
116. Cited by Vij 3.42; Apa 93ó;La¿. v 2.222; Dev 2.475— a) oMy 
Tj1 
Pu10
cMd1 
— b) Hy Lo2 Tj2 Apa 
. La1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 MTr3 Laks 
TMd3
[but cor] 
sKt5 VijiMd4 
w K t 1 c M d 1 Pu3 
Pu7 
— c)
Ho Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Wa 
" 
Pu3 
; Tr2 
; TMd4 Vij Apa
TMd3 MTr3 
BBe2 wKt1 Kt2 NNg ; B K t
5 
'— d) MTr3
117.Cited by Dev 2.472 — b) MTr4 M T r 6 ; T
j
2
O
x
2 
— c)
Pu 1 0om 
Lo 3xMd 4Tj' 
. oMy 
— d) Tr1 
iMd4 
Pu10
Jo2 NKt4 BKt5 La1 oOr Ox2 NPu1 [Jolly G N] 
wKt3 
Be1 sOx1 sPu6
Bo Ho NNg Pu7 Tr2
118. Omitted in MTr3. Cited by Laks 11.89 — a) Pu5 Pu7 Laks 
—
 a-b) Tr2
— b ) wKt1 
TMd3 
sOx1 sPu6 
L
a
1
—
c)wKt' 
Jo2BKt5oMd' Pu10 
oMd1 
L a
1 o M d
5
oOr 
— d)La' 
TMd3 
Pu4
TMd4
119.* Cited by Laks 11.89 — a) Be1 Ox2 
oMd1 
Pu10 
Laks
—
 b)Pu2 
e K t 5 B B e 2 H y J m J o l Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5 La1 Lo3 Lo4 [OTC to] Pu10
Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly M R] Nd Mandjik Jha KSS Dave 
o M d 1 [ J o l l y
N d ] 
TMd4 
oMd5 
T
M
d
3
" sOx1 s P u
6 T r
1 
— c ) cMy
rMd3 
a K t 5 T r 2 
Lo1 
TMd4 
— d) Bo oMy Tr1
sKt5 
cMd 1oMd 5Pu 5Pu 7Pu 1 0 
Bo BKt5 Lo1 TMd3 sOx1 
Pu2
Pu4 
, oMy '
120. a) Ho VR-; oOr 
Tj1 
wKt3 
TMd4 
Lo1 
— b) Tr1
oMy 
P u 1 0 B B e 2 sKt5 La1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly N Nd]
TMd4Ox2 
J o 2 L o 3 T ] M 
[Jolly Nd] 
Pu 3" 
Jo2
Lo2 
Pu7 MU|l«a<H — c ) w K t
1 , L o
4 P u
1
0 
; oMd5
NKt4 " 
" 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) wKt1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tr1
Tr2 Nâ [pâtha]
GMd1
La1
TMd3
BKt5TMd3


--- PAGE 845 ---
834 
Chapter 1O
Jo2 Lo3 
Tj1
121.* Omitted in oMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.266; Maclh 1.421 — a) Pu5
Pu7 
L
a
1
J
o
2 
M Ï r
s _ _ . . H o 
— b ) T r 2
Lo1 
La1 ' 
cMd1 Tr1 [Jolly Gr] N
d
L
o
4 TMd 3 Pu l o [Jolly M]-2~5-
z-*} Jolly 
NKf TMd4 MTr4 M T r
6 — c) Pu2 Pu4 
Apa 
Tr2
Jo2 
, oMd5 
— d)Be' 
Ho 
\\Kt3 La1 
oMd1 
HoNKt4 La1 sOx1
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 [Jolly M] Apa Jolly 
i
M
d
4
M
e Co Ku support the
active verb.
122. Omitted in oMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.266; Madhi.qzi — a) oMd1
; Laks 
—
 b) Tr2 Apa 
NKt4 La1 oMd1 rlvld3 xMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4
uTr6 Laks 
' 
' 
[ N K t
4 L a
1 
^ J; MTr5 
NS [pâtha ]
— c) TMd4 
MTr4 M T r
6 A p a 
NNg
[om 
]; TMd 3GMd 5 
Pu8 
B o Laks 
M
a
c
l
h
—
 d )
Pu3 ÎT; Bo 
L a
1 T M d
4
123. Päda s c-d omitted in Pu4 MTr3. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.266; Mai//; i.42i;padas
a-b cited by Vij 1.120; £>ev 2.455— a) sKt5 
Bo— 
b) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
sBe2 
Tr2 
sBe2 wKt3 
NPu1 
— c) oMd5 
T M d 4 " 
" 
Pu10
Pu5 Pu7 
o
O
r
" 
LrfTj 1 
cMd1 
— d) Be1
eBe2 Lo1 oOr 
wKt3 
Ho sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 sPu6 Apa
124. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.267; Maclh 1.420— a) Ox2 
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Ho Pu2 
cMy Apa 
NPu1 
Laks 
wK.t'
Ho BKt5 sOx1 sPu6 Maclh 
T r
1 — b) oMd5 
NKt4 
oMy
; TMd3 
oOr " 
; NKt4 
P u
1
0 H o sOx1 Ox2
sPu6 
— c ) T j 2 . L o 1 
" 
Wa 
Jo2 NKt4 La1 Lo3 Lo4 Pu10 Tj1 
" 
Bo
BKt5 La1 Pu10 
Ho 
" Lo1 
[am 
]; oMd1
 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1
 MTr4 MT^
TMd4 
— d)BBe2 
Wa 
[cf. i2sd]; NNg
125. Verses 125 and 126 transposed in Wa. Cited by Apa i6z;Lak.s 2.266; Dev 2.456;
Maclh 1.420— a ) Pu2 Pu4 
w
K
t
1
— c ) Lo4
TMd3 
NKt4 Lo1 oMd'oMy Ox2 Tj1 M T r
6 " 
Ho 
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 846 ---
Chapter 1O 
835
Pu2 Pu4 
— d)cMd' 
TMd3 
uKt5 
B o " 
oOr
12.6. Cited by Sam on VeS 1.3.36 — a)sBe2 
oOr 
—b) oMd5 
—c)
sKt5 
NfCt
4 
BBe2 Bo iMd'oMd5 NPu
1 Tj1
TMd4 om 
Wa om—
 
d) La1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 ^PTT° ; cMd1 rMd" 
oOr
127.* Päda s b-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Laks 2.271— a) La1 
oMd1
Tr1 
wKt1 Pu2 Pu4 
Bo 
Lo4 
— b) sBe2 Jo2
wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu
1 Tjl Tr'.MÏr5 
P u
2 i s C a
wKt1BKt5Lo4NNgOx2Pu10Tr2[yo//yM]Lfl/t.v/We/e«J/îaDflv e 
oOr 
—
cIcMd'oMd5 
, Tr1 
, oMd1 
oMd5 
— d) oOr 
" ' Mir6
oMy
128. Omitted in Lo1; pada-a omitted in Pu4 — a) Jo1 
sKt5
TMd3 
o M d 1 o M d 5 G M y T r ' 
Tr2 
— b) ßBe2 
sCa
La'Tj 1 
Lo1 
o M d ' M T r 4 — c ) oMd' 
NKt4 
T r
1 H o
La'TMd 3oOr- 
Tj1 om 
— d) oOr 
Be1 
oMd1
sKt5 
H o H y N N g P u 2 P u 3 
o M d
5 :
129. a) NPu
1 
Pu10 om 
oMd1 
, TMd4 
ßKt5 [but cor] cMd1 
— b) Lo4
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [cor to} Tr2 Wa 
— d) NKt4 
MTr4 
T Md3
Ho " 
Ox2 
Ti2
130. In wKt3 folio missing containing lo.ißb to 11.190 — a) MTr6 
Pu10
[Jolly M] 
sOx'sPu6 
sKt5 
— b) oMd1 
— c) Tr2
TMd3 
; MTr4 M
T
r
6
— d) Ox2 [but cor] Pu3 Tr2
1 3 1 . a ) L o 4 B B ^ T M d 3 
— b) sBe2 Ho Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 _
L
o
4 [Jolly
M4~5] 
Pu3 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly M2^9] 
[M8 
]; TMd4
La1 
, T
r
1
— c) wKt1 Pu3 Tr2 
[Pu3 Tr2 
];
sKt5 
— d ) N P u ' " 
La1


--- PAGE 847 ---
836 
Chapter 1O
Colophon: Lo1 xMd3 NNg sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
Lo3 
" 
' 
Be1 eKt5 Lo1
Lo2 GMd1 iMd3 oMy NNg Tr1 MTr6om 
; wKt1 
oOr
NNg 
Pu5 Pu7
.Tji


--- PAGE 848 ---
i.* Cited by Apa 77, 263, 294; Hem 1.30, 3/1.354; Madh 1.429 — a) Hy wKt1 eKt5 Lo1
Pu8 
T j 1 K t 2 B K t 5 4 w j 
* P u 1 0 . T M d 4 
— b) BBe2 Bo sCa Jm
Jo1 La1 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 oOr sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly G R K.U Nd]Mädh Mandlik
Jolly KSS 
TMd3 iMd4 
— c) MTr^Tr5 inTre 
Apa 294 _ 
Be1
eKt5 Lo2 Apa 263, 294 [vl] jW; Pu5 
; TMd3 
oOr 
" 
Be1 sKt5 Pu10 Apa 77, 263,
294 [vl] 
Pu10 Apa 2 94 
. T M d
3 — d) oM d1 
Be1
Ho sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 
sBe2 Lo3 oOr Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly R]
NNg 
uKt5 ' 
Tr1 
"; sBe2 Bo Lo1 oOr 
oMd5 NNg
Pu2 Pu10 Wa Hem Mâdh 
Lo4
2. 
Cited by Apa 294; Hem i.3o;padas a-b cited by Apa77, 263 — a) MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
Tr2 
Be1 T j
1 e K t
5 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 
Be1 
Kt2
Pu5 Pu7 
— b) H y o M d
1 
Be1 Apa 
_ 
Apa [vl] 
Mir6
— c)NKt 4BKt 5La'Lo'Pu 3 
Tr2 
L o
2 — d) Hy TMd4 
NPu1
BBe2 oMd1
3.* Päda s c-d omitted in Pu4. Cited by Apa 294; Hemi.^o — a) cMd1 oMd5 Tr1 [Jolly
N d ] 
o M y T M d
3 
oMd'Wa^pa 
TMd4 
Lo1
Lo3TMd4oOrTj'//e») 
[La1 
TMd4 
' 
]; oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
[
T M d
3 ] ; Apa 
_
4. 
Omitted in Pu5 TMd4; pâda s a-b omitted in Pu4 — a) oOr 
—b) Pu2 
—c)
Lo2 Lo4 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
[Lo4 Pu10 (Jolly M) 
|; Ho sOx ' Ox2
sPu6 
w
K
t
1
N
N
g 
" NPu1 
— d ) Pu2
TMd3 
Be1 Bo Ho NKt4 La1 Lo2 oMy NNg sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr6 Wa
Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly M1-2-3-5-9] 
wKt1 
oMd1
837
 Ox2 
— b)
— c) Lo1
TMd4
— d) Jo2NKt4 La!


--- PAGE 849 ---
838 
Chapter 11
5.* Omitted in TMd4; päda s a-b omitted in Pu5 — a) TMd3 
oOr
W a 
T
r
1
B
o 
L o
3 L o
1 Lo2 
— b ) oMd1 oMd5
GMyTr1 
[
o
M
d
1
]
; ß B e
2 L o
4 
. 
.Lo1
— c) Mir4 
o M d ' i M d ' T r 1 o O r 
MTr6 
— d) sOx1 sPu6
Be1 wKt1 oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 NNg Tj2 Tr1 Wa
An additional verse is given in the vulgate editions and Bühle r as verse 6; it is found in
the following mss: Be1 Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 NKt4 La1 cMd1 TMd3 oOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj2 Tr1
MTr3 MTr4 MTr6; päda s c-d in Md4. Verse number 6 is eliminated from the critical edition.
a) HoMTr4 MTr6 
cMd1 TMd3 oOr Tr1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
[cMd1 ' 
NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 
]; La1 
~ 
NKt4 
Tj2 
" — b) TMd3 
— c)
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
_ 
J— d)oMd1 
; Ho GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6
Additional verse: oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 [Jolly Gr]; given after 1110 in Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3
[but erased] Pu4 Mandlik 
KSS Dave; cited by Mädh 2.384; Vij 1.224, 2.175:
b) Ox2 Vij 2.175 
— c) [Jolly Gr]
7. 
Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Apa 165; Laks 2.132-3; Dev 2.418; Mädh 1.157— a) Bo
oMd1 
L ö
4 O x
2 Mädh La1 oMd1 MTr4 M T r
6 — b ) La1
cMd1 
cMy 
A p a ' B e
1 — c) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Be1
Bo Lo2 Pu2 Pu7
8.* Päda s a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 165; Laks 2.133; Dev 2.418; päda s a-b cited
by Vij 1.124 — a) TMd3 TMd4 Ox2 Pu3 ApaLaks 
Bo 
, c M y — b)
TMd4 
GMd1 
T
M
d
3
N
K
t
4 ' _ 
[cf n.7d] — c) Be1 Be2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1
Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Ng oOr Ox1 Ox2 Pu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Vl&Apa Laks
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
. T j
2 H o NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Dev
BhRc 
[ont];BKt5 
— d ) L
a
1
; NKt4 oMd1
 TMd3 oMd5 c,My
D e v 
[Dev]; T
r
1
B
o ^Tc^; Pu5 Pu7
9. 
Päda s c-d omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa 283; Hem 1.44 — a) Tr2 
La1
cMyPu2Pu4 
MTr5 
, T M d 3 W a ~ — a-b)oMd' 
— b) Lo3
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
oMd1 T
r
1
H
o 
wKt1 
— c) Bh [ad
11.10 as päth a of some] 
O
x
2
, W
a
B
e
1 sKt5 Lo1 TMd3


--- PAGE 850 ---
Chapter 11 
839
Tr1 MTr4MTr6 Hem 
rMd4 
oOr 
; Lo3 Tj1 
— d)
sBe2 Lo1 oMd1 xMd3 TMd4 Tr1 
oOr 
Tj1 [Jolly M'-8'9 R] 
sOx1
. 
Mir4 
c M d > M T r
3
10. Omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa z83;Dev 2.596 — a) oMy 
Lo2
— b) Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Tj2
 MTr3
 MTr4MTr5
 MTr6 Colly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
[Bh gloss 
supports 
]; NKt4 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 
Lo3 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
MTr6 Wa [Jolly R] Dev 
— c) i
M
d
3
— d) Jm Jo1 La1 Lo4 oOr; 
nCa
TMd3 TMd4 NPu1 Pu10 MTr6 
" ~ 
Hy Kt2 oMy Pu3 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 Tí MTr6 DevMan-
dlik Jha KSS Dave 
o M d 1 * 
N
K
t
4
L
a
1 Tr2
11.Omitted in oMd5. Cited by Laks 2.162; Dev 2.422 — a) Lo3 iMd4 Tj1
Bo 
B K t
5 . NKt4 TMd4 MTr4 MTr5 
MTr6 
— b) MTr6 
Tr2
12. Cited by Laks 2.162-3; Dev 2.422 — a) oMy 
Tj1 
Ox2
Wa 
— b) B
K
t
5
o
M
y 
xMd4 
— c) oMd5
Be1 
L a k s ' 
o
M
d
1
— d ) wKt1 
; ßKt5
13. Cited by Dev 2.422 — b)sKt5 
sKt5 xMd4 NNg Pu3 
— c) Lo1
wKt1 
— d) BKt5 
TMd4
14. Cited by Laks 2.162; Dev 2.422 — b) Me Jha Dave 
iMd4
oMd1 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R ] " oMd 5 o M y — d) Bo 
Tr2
15.Cited by Laks 2.162 —
 a) Hy Lo? oMd ' Tj1 
oMy 
Be1 sBe2
; Pu10 
— b) Tr1 
oMd5 
Pu5 Pu7
Pu10 
— c) Tr2 
Ho Lo4 TMd3 Ox2 MTr4 [Jolly M4-5-"]La/b
TMd4 
Pu2 
sOx1 sPu6 MTr3 ! 
Kt2 
Jo1 
.Pu 1 0 
— d)ßKt5
Tr1 
" 
. sBe2 
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy MTr4 MTr6 
cMd5
BCa
 sOx ' sPu6
NPu1
 Tj1
 Lo2
— d) GMy


--- PAGE 851 ---
840 
Chapter 11
Be1 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd5 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 wir3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sBe2
sOx' sPu6
16.Cited by Vij Z-43',Apa 938;Dev 2.466; Mädh 3.304— a) Apa 
— b) Pu8
Tr1 
— c) oMd5 cMy Tr1 
Mir4 
oMd1 TMd3 MTr5MTr6 Bh
— d) Be1 oOr Tr2 
K t
2 r M d
4
17. Cited by Vij 3.43; ^0938; Dev 2.467 — a) Wa 
ßKt5 
T r 2 s O x 1
sPu6 
TMd4 
sBe2 La1 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
'— b) iMd3
Tj1' 
GMy M T r 4 M T r 6 — c ) B
o
s
K
t
5
; TMd4
NNg oOr Pu10 
Lo2
18. Omitted in Tj1 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 938;¿a/b 2.225; Dev 2.467 — a) Ox2
Laks 
B K t 5 o m L a ' o O r T r 2 
— b ) s B e 2 — c)TMd4
BKt5 La1 TMd3 oMd5 Pu2 
A p a c M y 
oMd1 
^d)Pu'°
wKt1 TMd3 
L
a
1
J
o
2 A p a (vi)
19.Omitted in oMy; päda s a-b omitted in Tj1; not commented by Nd — a) oMd1
wKt1 
— b) H
y
T
M
d
4 
— c) Lo1 
—
 d) Pu10
,Tj' 
" Lo1 
wKt1
20. Omitted in oMy; not commented by Nd; in place of verse 20, Jo1 gives 10.125.
Cited by W.V3.252 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
Bo Ho Lo2 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2
[Jolly G] Vis 
Lo1 
TMd3 
— b) Bo 
— c) Be1
Jo2 
Bo Ho Lo 4oMd 5 Pu2 P u
4 L o
2 
Tr2 
Lo3oOrTj'
oMd1 
wKt1 MTr4 M
T
r
6
— d) Bo Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 Lo2 TMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 Pu2
Pu3sPu6Tr'Wí 
O x
2 T j ' w K t
3 
Tr2
21. Omitted in oMy; päda s c-d omitted in TMd3 NPu1; not commented by Nd — a) MTr6
, 
., — c) Lo4 
Jo2 wKt3 Lo4 Lo3 oMd5 Pu10
 MTr6 
Be1 
cMd5
 MTr3
NNg [but cor s/i\ 
TMd4 ;


--- PAGE 852 ---
Chapter n 
841
22.Päda s a-b omitted in TMd3 NPu1 — a) Pu3 
Pu10 [Jolly M2~8-9] 
— b)
oMd5 
oMy 
_ 
мТг
4мТг
6 
La
1 
__ 
Ox
2 
wKt
1
Pu
7 [Jolly G]
23. a)Be'Lo
1 sOx'sPu
6 
вК.1
5 
. rMd
3 
Lo
1 
^ 
вВе
2
Jo
2 wKt
3 Lo
4 Tj
1 
— с) Lo
1 
Lo
4 Pu
10 
TMd
3 rMd
4 oMd
5 oMy Tr" 
—
d) wKt
1 oMd
1 TMd
3 oMy oOr Tr
1 мТг
5 
sOx
1 sPu
6 
Во wKt
3 NKt
4 La
1 Pu
2
Pu
4 
вСа wKt
1 Wa 
rMd
3 TMd
4
24. Cited by Apa 168; Нет i.6o; Dev 2.421; Mädh 1.185 — а) Но 
—b)oMy
Нет 
вВе
2 
Lo
1 
вВе
2 Во Ну Jm Jo
1 Kt
2 Tj
2 мТг
3 Нет Mandlik Jolly
Jha KSS Dave 
— с) Нет 
Dev 
oMd
5 
— d) Во
Но Jm La
1 Lo
1 Ox
2 Pu
10 Mädh
25. Omitted in вК.1
5. Cited by Vij i.i27;Apa 168; Dev2.421 — a) Ho wKt
3 
Bo
— b) Vij 
' 
— c) oMd
1 
K t
2 " 
вВе
2 
sOx
1 sPu
6
BBe
2wKt'wKt
3 
L a
1 — c-d) oMd
1 TMd
3 oMd
5 Tr
1 
— d) вВе
2
oMy
26.Omitted in Pu'°; pada-a omitted in sKt
5. Cited by Hem 3/2.1035 — a) wKt
3
Tj
2 
Be
1 Во Ну Jm Jo
1 Kt
2 NK.f La
1 Lo
2 Lo
4 oOr Ox
2 Pu
3 Pu
5 Pu
7 Pu
8 Tj
2
Tr
2 мТг
3 \Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— b) NNg 
Jo
2 Tj
1 
вВе
2 вСа
Lo
3[Jo//yR] 
— c ) T r
2 B e
1 
~-d)Bo
27.Cited by Vij 3.265; Apa 167; Dev 2.415 — a) Ну 
Pu
10 
Bo 
Vij
Lo
2 от 
— b) Tj
1 
sOx
1 sPu
6 
Lo
2 
в В е
2 ы Р и
1
— с) TMd
3 
TMd
4 
Tj
2 
P u
1
0 V i j 
oMy 
oOr
— d ) oMd
1 
BKt
5 '
B
o oMd
5
= c) Tr2
TMD4
WKT3pu2pu4
Lo3tmd4
P u 5
M T r 6
P u 1 0 
T M d 4
 - d ) B e 1 L a 1 L o 4 P u 2 P u 4
L o 4


--- PAGE 853 ---
842 
Chapter 11
28.* Cited by Apa 167;Dev 2.415 — a) Be1 Apa [vi] 
f s B e 2 N K t 4 
— c)
NKt4 Lo4 
Tr1 Apa [
v
l
]
— d) all NT mss. [except Pu2] Apa Dev Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave
29. Cited by Apa 167; Dev 2.415 — a) Ld Tr2 
Lo1 
Ho [Jolly
M 2-8-9] 
p
u 1 0 p
u 1 0 y0iiy M 2 - 8 - 9 ] B
K
t 5 
[om 
) _ b ) o M d '
Be1 
MTr4 M
T
r
6
W
a 
: — d) Ho Lo4 TMd3 sOx1
sPu6 MTr5 
. oMy Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu7 Pu10 Apa [vi] " 
wKt3 
Lo4
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 Pu7 
Wa 
Lo2 
GMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4
30. Cited by Apa l68;Hem 1.88, 2/132, 3/1.452; Dev4.160; Mâdh 1.684; pâda s a-b
cited by Vis 1.38 —
 a)TMd4 
Hy _ Lo4 
— b) MTr4' 
Lo4
oMd1 
A
p
a
T
M
d
3 
" 
— c) TMd3 
Tj1 
Lo4
Bo 
NNg Pu2 
Tr2 
— d) Be1 oOrsOx1 sPu6 Tj1
Pu5 Pu7
31.* a) Lo4 
" TMd4 
TMd3 Tr1 
sCa 
B e
1 J o
1 Kt2
sKt5 
iMd4 
Jm wKt1 NKt4 wKt3 Lo1 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik
Jolly J h a K S S Dave 
— b ) L
o
1
L
o
3 Tj1 
TMd4
Jo1 
— c ) s O x ' s P u 6 o M y 
Pu5 Pu7 
Bo
32. Cited by Apa 232 — a) oMy 
— d) TMd3 NPu1
33.* Omitted in Lo4 Tj2; verses 33 and 34 transposed in Bo — a) TMd3 oMy Tr1
[rMd3 cMy 
o M y ' ] ; sKt5 W a " 
MTr6 
H o
wKt1 BKt5 Tj1 
K t 2 T M d 4 o O r Pu10 " 
— b ) J m ' , 
eBe2 
Lo2
Be1 BBe2 Bo ßCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 wKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Pu3
Pu4 
wKt1 
o
M
y
L
o
1
.
B
e
1 
Lo3 Ox2 om
ßKt5 
— c-d) Tr2 
^ 
[see added verse] — d)
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu10 
rMd3
Additional verse in La1 [repeated after 34a-b] oMd1 TMd4 Ox2 [päda s c-d given after
— c) Be1 oOr
NâNd reads
 [Jolly N]
wKt1 Wa
 Ho


--- PAGE 854 ---
Chapter 11 
843
34d] Mandlik 
KSS; given after 33 a-b in Tr1 MTr4 MTr6:
a) Ox2 
— a-b) Omitted in iMd4; Mandlik KSS Dave\
—
 c) Ox2 : 
— c-d) Omitted in La1; Mandlik KSS Dave
—
 d) Tr1 
La1 oMd1
Half-verse added in xMd4:
34. Cited by Apa 232 — a) Lo4 
iMd3 
— b) wKt1 
sOx1
sPu6 
— c) oMd1 oMd5 Tr1 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 Pu10
 MTr4 Wa [Jolly M2-9] 
Lo3
[Jolly R] '
35. a)Hy 
— b) [Jolly Ku] 
sKÍ 
— c) o M d
5 o M y
wKt1 
Ho Tj2 
Jo2 w Kt1 Lo3 xMd4 oMd5 Tj ' Tr1
 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly R N]
Bh 
N K t
4 P u
5 P u 7 — c - d ) La1 
— d) oOr 
[Jolly N]
Tj2 
Pu2 
Be1 Bo Lo2 [Jolly M3"5] 
Tr2 
Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2
BKt5 Lo1 Lo4
Ox2 Pu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave g^f; Tr2
36.* Pâda- d omitted in Pu8. Cited by Apa 125; Laks 2.126; Dev 1.66, 2.423 — a) Laks T
Be1 sBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 EtKt
5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
c M y P u
5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2
BBe2 
o
M
y
— a-b) B o 
— b ) oMd1
Ox2 
—- d) oMd' 
M T r
3 D e v i . 6 6 '
37. Päda s a-b omitted in Pu8 andpäda s c-d in oMy. Cited by Dev2.423 — a) Ho Jm
Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 rMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 MTr3Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
' 
Bo
Lo1 
L
o
4
— b
)
w
K
t
'
L
a
1 Pu2 Dev 
P u
1
0 L o
2
^c)TMd 4' 
— d)La'
38. Cited by Dev 2.420— a) La ' Lo4 
Be1 
Pu10 
Lo1
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
— b) xMd4 
wKt3 
Bo wKt1
HoTMd4NPu' 
— d)MTr6 
Jo2 
sKt5
After verse 38 Wa inserts 11.48-9


--- PAGE 855 ---
844 
Chapter 11
39. Cited by Oev2.4i9;A/áí//í 1.158 — a)NKt4 
oOr 
Pu'°
— c)wKt' 
oMd1 
^ 
— d)Tj'Wa 
Lo1 
Lo2 Pu10
NPu 1 " 
¡oMd'Tr 1 
oOr 
Madh 
wKt1
Tr2 
sBe2 wKt1 La1
40.* Cited by Dev 2.419 — a) Tr1 
Lo4 
— b) Be1 
Hy NKt4 La1
Lo4 sOx1 Pu10 
BBe2 Jm Jo2 wKt1 K_t
2 wKt3 sK.t5 Lo1 Lo4 oOr MTr3 Dev Mandlik Jolly
Jha KSS Dave 
Hy Jo1 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 
Pu5 Pu7 
— c) BBe2 oMd1 
oMd1
NNg 
L o
1 B B e
2 
— d) xMd3 oMy MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
[MTr4MTr5
 MTr6 " 
]; Lo4 "gRT; Pu5 Pu7 
sKt5 Lo4 MTr3 
Tr2
sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 sPu6
Additional verse in Be1 La1 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
a) La1 
T M d 4 ! ' — b) La1 r M d
4 — c) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
— d) TMd4
41.Cited by Apa 1154; Madh 2.425 — a)îMd 4 
Be1 Jo1 
; Tr1
sKt5 
wKt1 
. NPu1 ' 
Be1 Bo oMd1 
Ho
La'sOx'sPu6 
. T
r
2
— b ) o M d ' T j
1 
N N g NPu1 
.Be1
BBe2 oOr Pu5 Pu7 
— c) H y : L o 1 
Bo 
— d) wKt1 
Bo
TMd4
42. Cited by Apa 168; Hem 1.60;Dev 2.420— a) Pu2 Pu4 W. ; Hy *f; TMd4 
Kt2
"wKt'/i/w 
Tr1 
— b)Apa 
— c) TMd4 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
H e m 
o
M
y
L
o
3 Tj1 
o O r
oMd'oMy Tr1 Apa 
; T M d
3 o M d
5 — d) oMy
Pu I O : 
wKt1
43. Cited by Apa 168; Dev 2.420—a) Tr1 
LolApa 
Tj1 
aBe2
' — a-b) oMy MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
[Tr1 adds this half-verse
after the regular 43a-b] — b) oMd1 
wKt1 
Ox2 Apa
[vl as in ed] 
T M d
4 N N g 
; TMd3 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
La1
— d)Kt2 
Lo'Tr1 
MTr4 M T r
6 L o
1


--- PAGE 856 ---
Chapter 11 
845
44.* Cited by V7.v 3.210; Vij 3.219-20;Mäd h 2.6;päda- a cited as prattka by Kum 3.6.43;
Sam onTU 1.1.1 [intro.] — a) Pu10- 
sPu6 
— b) Kt2 Mir6 
Jo2
Lo3Tj' 
H o ~ c ) P u 3 T j 2 
Pu8 
BKt5Lo'oOr
Tr 2 
wKt3 T
M
d
4
P
u
5 Pu7 Go 
MÏr5 
JAa
Dave 
.im Jo1 Kt2 Kt4 Lo2 Lo3 Ox2 Pu2 Pif Pu10 Tj1 Wa Fy Mandlik Jolly KSS
Jo2 
m
e
t
o
T
M
d
3 
wKt1 
— d ) Lo1
TMd3
45. Omitted in Wa; verses 45 and 46 transposed in Hy. Cited by Vij 3.226; Mädh 2.152
— c) NNg [6ui me sh] 
oOr Pu5 P u
7 w K t
1 NK.1
4 
— d) Be1 Pu5
oMd1 oMd5 " 
TMd3 
Lo 1" 
sKt5
46. Cited by Vis 3.212, 226;Apa 1040 — b) Pu4 
sCa A
p
a
— c) sK.t5
Bo 
oOrApa 
—
 d) sKt5
47. a) Hy Lo1 
iMd4 "
s
O
x
1 
TMd3 
— b) nKt5
oMd1 Pu5 Pu'c 
päth a in both Bh Me 
[ad 11.90 Bh gives this as his own read-
ing] ;oMd5 
[Jolly R] 
Ho 
— c)wKt' 
TMd4 
—
d) Be1 sBe2 wKt3 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Wa Bh [ad 11.189] 
Tj2
Additional verse in Ox2 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS 
Dave:
c)Ox2
4 8 . a ) s B e
2 — a
-
b
)
L
o
'
— b ) Be1 Jm 
[cf. u.47b];
Wa 
r 
— c) Pu4 
Lo2 
MTr4 
Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
— d)
Ox2 
TMd3
49. a) Lo3 oMd1 xMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Mir5 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6 Tj1
TMd4 " 
— b) oMy 
Be1 
rMd4* 
Bo Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1
wKt1 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— c) ßKt5 
TMd3 
— d) TMd4
Pu4


--- PAGE 857 ---
846 
Chapter 11
50.* a) Be1 
[Jolly M2"5-8"9 Nd] ^ 
, NKt4 La1 
oMd5
TMd3 
TMd4 
Lo2 
Be1 Bo ßCa Ho Lo3 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 [Jolly M4 R] 
Kt2 Tr2 
NNg 
" 
oOr
Be2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Tj2 MTr3 [folly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Pu5 Pu7 
— b) NNg 
sOx1 sPu6 
NKt
4 BKt5 
TMd4
Be1 
. Tr2 
'— c) Bo Ho Lo3 cMd1 TMd4 cMy Tj1 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6
Lo4 Pu5 Pu10 Wa 
L o
2 P u
4 
— d) iMd4 
sBe2 Ho Jo2
Lo2 TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 
oMd1 M T r
6 ' W a 
o
M
y
H
y '
wKt1 Tr2 TT; MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7
51. Pâda s c-d omitted in wKt1 TMd4 [haplo]. Cited by Maclh 2.251 — a) sKt5
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) iMd3 „
. 
. oMd5 
sBe2 
— c) NKt4
. 
Pu8 
Ho 
Be1 
; Bo 
ßBe2 nCa
Lo3 TMd3 Tr1 
— d) oMd1 oMd5 oMy 
Ho
Additional verse in Be1 sCa wKt3 La1 TMd4 NNg oOr Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly M R Ku]
Mandlik KSS Dave; päda s a-b in Tr2; given within brackets by Jolly [cf. ViDh 45.20-1]; Rn
gives this as 
commented by Re:
a) NPu
1 
La1 
— b) NPu
1 
La1 
NNg Ox2 Tr2
[Jolly M R] Mandlik Jolly KSS 
TMd4 
— c) wKt3 La1
[Jolly K\Rn 
[La1 
]; Ox2 
Pu2 P u
4 N N g [Jolly
M] Mandlik Jolly KSS 
—
 d) Rn 
' 
[Jolly R]
La1 
Bühle r reads: 
eCa wKt3
[sCa 
]; Ox2 
' 
NPu1 
Pu2 Pu4
The above verse is given as verse 52 in Buhler's translation. To maintain the tradi-
tional numbering, I have eliminated the verse number 52.
53.* Omitted in Tr2 — a) Jm 
w Kt3 
Ox2 
cor to 
Bo sCa
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 oOr NPu
1 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8
Pu10 Tj ' Tj2 MTr3 [folly M G] ViDh 45.32 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu2
— b)Lo4TMd3 
TMd4 
Pu5 P u 7 s K t 5 
' oOr 
— c) TMd3 oMd5
Tr'MTr5 
c M y T M d
4 oMd5
54. Omitted in Ox2. Cited by Vij 3.2i<)-2o;Mädh 2.3 — a) TMd3 
; Be1


--- PAGE 858 ---
Chapter 11 
847
— b)Tr' 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c)BBe2 
Ho 
Bo Jo2 Lo3 oMy oOr
Tj1
 
MTr4MTr6 
La 1" 
— d) NNg Pu5 Pu7 
xMd4
NKt4 
T
r
1
w
K
t
3 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 oMy
55.* Only pratTka in Lo4. Cited by Apa 1044 — a) Lo2 oMy MTr6 
TMd4 oMd5
— b) sKt5 Lo1 Lc?GMd5GMy oOr Tr2 Apa 
—
 c)BoTr' 
— d) Be1
HT; Lo1 [but cor illegibly] 
L
o
3
T
r
1 
sBe2 Hy Jo1
Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 [folly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Bo Lo2
TMd3 TMd4 oOr NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 inTr5 Mir6 Wa [Jolly M G]: 
Ho sOx1 sPu6
Apa 
Jm
56. Cited by Apa 1047; Har-A. 1.24.23; Mädh 2.419 — a)oMy [Jolly Nd]
oMd1 
Tj1 W a T M d
4 " 
— b) NKt4 
TMd3 
Tr1
oMy 
Pu10 
Be1 
Lo: 
— c) oMd5 Tr1 
L o
1 B e
1
BKt5 
— d) oMy
57. Cited by Sam on BU 1.5.1; Vis 3.223; Vij3.231; Apa 1047, 1157; Mädh 2.293; 2.419
— a) oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu2 TV MTr4 MTr6 Sam Vis Apa 
[Vis
MTr4 MTr6 
. oMd1 
];TMd3 
" 
Be1 
eBe2 
Bo
Kt2 
. „, 
, NKt4 
— b) BKt5 Lo4 oMd1
 TMd3
 NPu'Pu 2 Pu4 Pu10^« 
Kt2
wKt3 
cMd1 
— c)Lo' 
Tj1 
Bo 
wKt3
La1 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Lo4 cMd1 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Tr1 [Jolly M] Apa 1157 
TMd3 Vij
, BKt5
58.Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Vis 3.225; Vij 3.26s;Apa 1048, mo; Mädh 2.419 — a)
B o 
Vij— b ) B o " 
o M d
5 — c ) wKt 1^ 
. TMd4 
V i s
[but vl as ed]; Pu5 Pu7 
— d) T
M
d
4
s
O
x
1 MTr4 MTr6
NKt4 
TMd3 
o M d 1 w K t 1 T r 2 L a 1 s B e 2 "
59.* Omitted in sBe2; päda s c-d omitted in oMy. Cited by F//3.231; Apa 1048 — a) Hy
MTr6 
La1 P
u
8
H
o Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oMd1 Ox2 Tr2 MTr3 [folly G M3 Nd]
Apa Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
_ Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] Apa [vi] 
TMd3 Tr1
T
M
d
4
— b)HoTj'"


--- PAGE 859 ---
848 
Chapter n
60.* Omitted in oMy. Cited by Mädh 2.13 — a) Pu'° 
oMd1 
nKi
sBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 oMd1
 TMd4 MTr3
MTr5 [Jolly M2] Mandlik KSS 
'
—
 b) Me Ipâtha ] 
NPu
1 Pu2 
Be1 Pu 4MTr 4MTr 6 
La1
wKt1 
oOr 
Bo 
Lo4 Pu10MTr3[./o//yM2-M-5-8-9]
Be1 nBe2 Ho sKt5 La1 Lo2 oMd1 oMd5 sOx1 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G Nd]Mârf/ ; Na 
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Md4 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
—
 c) Bo 
NPu
1 Tr2 
Tr1 
— d) MTr6
oOr
6l. Pâda s a-b omitted in oMy. Cited by Mädh 2.13—a) Pu2 Pu4 
NPu
1
Ho Lo1 TMd 3cMd 5 Tj2 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 [/o/fy Nd Gr] ' 
[Tr1
TMd3 oMd5 
J; sOx1 s
P
u
6
[
s
O
x
1 
]; Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
Lo2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
. . [JmJo'Kt2 
J o 1 ] ; Lo4
— d)rMd3 
Pu10 
TMd4 
Lo4
62.* Cited by Mädh 2.13 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
' — b) oMd1 
sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1
Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
Be1 P u 3 s O x 1 s P u 6 ~ 
eKt5 
Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tj1 Tr1
La' 
Ho wKt1 NKt4 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly R Nd] Me Mädh 
oMd1
MTr4MTr6 
Be1 aBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg sOx1 Ox2
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa/V<7 Rn |pâtha|fl c Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
—
c) oMd ' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj1 Tr ' MTr5 MTr6 Mädh 
L o
3 s O x
1
sPu6 
— d) sBe2 om 
cMd5 
sOx1 
La1 NPu1
63. Omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Mädh 2.13— a) Lo1 
c M d
1 T M d
4
sBe2 
— b) sBe2 sCa Ho Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly R]fl« ViDh 37.20
[wKt3 
J; oMd5 
Be1 Jo1 Kt2 La1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2
oOr 
sBe2 Ho Lo1 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 
Ho Lo4 Ox2 Pu10
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
" cMd5 
K
t
2
B
o 
— d) La1
Kt2
64. Cited by Mädh 2.13; päda s c-d cited by^lpa 15— a) Bo 
TMd3
Be1
 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10
 TMd3
GMy
 sOx1
 Be1 oMd1 oMd5 sOx1 Pu5sPu6Pu7 
jm
1
MTr3 [folly M G Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
jm
Lo1
_c


--- PAGE 860 ---
Chapter 11 
849
— b) Tr1 
TMd3 
Pu10 
— c) oMd1 oMd5 oMy MTr4 Trl Nd
[cMd5 
]
;
i
M
d
3
T
M
d
4 
Pu10 Tj1
Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 
— c
-
d
)
M
T
r
6
— d)Pu'° 
oMd1
sKt5 om 
Be1 
[ o m ]
65. Cited by Mädh 2.13; pâda s c-d cited byMädh 2.293 — b) Ho sOx1 sPu6
Jo2Tj' 
B o L o
1 s C a L a
1 
sKt5 
'— c) Hy
oMd5 
— d) MTr4 MTr6 
Ox2
xMd3 
Pu5 Pu7
66.* Päda- c omitted in oMd1. Cited by Mädh 2.13— a) Tr1 
B
o
J
o
2 Lo3
Tj' [Jolly R Nd] 
all other NT mss., Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
. — b) Hy Jm
Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ho NKt4 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Nd
• 
NPu
1 :
— c) uBe2 sCa Jo 2 La1 Lo1 Lo3 xMd3 oMd5 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6
Ox2 
— d) BBe2 Bo eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NK.t
4 sKt5 Lo2
Lo3 NNg sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa \Jolly Me Go R Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
[Bo_ 
N N g ] ; L
o
1
i
M
d
4
TMd3' 
Be1 La1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 [Jolly M]^lW; [Jolly Nd] 
L o
4 M T r
5
oMd5 
" 
cMy [lolly Nd] 
Pu2 Pu4
67. Cited by Mädh 2.13 — a) Lo ' 
rMd3 oMy Tr1
 MTr4 MTrs
MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr]
— b) Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 
" Bo 
— c)MTr4MTre 
Jo2
NNgmash' 
M
T
r
3
— d ) TMd3 
Tj1
68.* Cited by F//'3.234-42; ApanSs; Mädh 2.14— a) Be1 
NPu
1 
wKt' wKt3
MTr5 
Be1 Bo sCa Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La ' Lo2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj ' Wa Vij Apa
Mädh Nâ Re Mr Mandlik 
sBe2 Jm NKt4 sKt5 Lo3 Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly K]KSS
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
Ho O x
2 M T r
4 
— c) Be1 ßBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
wKt3 sKt5 Lo4 NNg sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
'
TMd3Ox2 
Tj1 
—d) La1 NPu
1
69. Pada-d nia in B e1. Cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apa 1183; Mädh 2.14— a) Apa
Pu5 Pu7 
Jo2 Lo4 TMd3 oMd5oMy Pu10 Tj2 MTr6 
Lo1
Ox2s 
MTr5 
— b) La1 
Hy 
Tj1
TMd3 
— c) MTr5 
BKt5 
MTr3 
oMd1 TMd3


--- PAGE 861 ---
850 
Chapter 11
oMd5 GMy TV Mir4 Mir6 
Lo1 
— d) Tr2 
[cf. yod]; xMd4
Tr1 
Be1
70. Pâda s a-c ma in Be1. Cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apa il83;Mädh 2.14 — a) TMd4
MTr6 Apa
71. Cited by Vij 3.234-42; ^01129,1183; Mädh 2.14— a) Lo3 iMd3 TMd4 oMd5 NNg
Tr1 Tr2 A p a 
H y x M d
3 
wKt1 Lo1 
Pu'° 
— b ) B o —
c) wKt3 sKt5 oM d5 NNg Apa 
Kt2 
Tr1 
Bo 
TMd4
Lo1 
— d ) w
K
t
1
. , TMd3 
G M y P u
5 Pu7
cMd' 
Mir6
72. c) La1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Lo3 om 
first 
oMd1 
sBe2
73. Cited by Apa 1060; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.243, andpäda- a by Ws 3.244— a)
sBe2 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 eKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Ox2 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M] Me Mr
MandlikJha KSS Dave 
— c) Jo2 Lo3 Lo4 
TMd3 
. Ho La1
sOx1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
[La1 
J; Pu10 
MTr5 " 
— d)
oOr 
Lo3 ' 
Be1 
. TMd3 
oMd5
74. Cited by Vis 3.243; Mädh 2.155, 405; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.248;Apa 1060; päda s
a and c by Vij 3.244; and päda s c-d by Vij 3.247; Apa 1059 — a) Bo wKt1 NKt4 Lo2 cMd5 NNg
Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 
, Tr1 
TMd3 
— b) oMd5 
wKt1
MTr4 
o
M
y
o
O
r 
— c) uBe2 sKt5 
* 
" Lo1 
sOx1
— d) Tr2 
oMy 
sKe 
M
ä
d
h
L
o
2
Pu5 Pu7 
sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 
MTr4 MTr6
75.Cited by Vij 3.248; Mädh 2.405; pâda- a cited by W* 3.237— a) sOx1 
sBe2
La1 
Lo2 
" TMd4 OTO 
Bo Pu10 
— b) TMd3 
TMd4
oMd1 Vij ^c)oMd 5 
— d) Tr2 
oMd1 
La1
Lo4 
TMd3 Pu10
 Kt2
— d) GMd1
 NKt4
Be1 xMd3 Tr1 Mir5


--- PAGE 862 ---
Chapter 11 
851
76. Cited by Mädh 2.406; pâda s a-b cited byVij 3.279 — a) Vij 
Lo4
Tr2 
— b)wKt' 
,wKt 3 
— c)wKt' 
Bo 
— d) Be1
BBe2 Lo4 Pu'°
77. Cited by Vij 3.250; Apa 294, 1061; Mäd/u.^g, 406 — a) oMd5
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
TMd4 
— c) TMd4
sBe2 HoNKt4 BKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Jha Dave 
TMd4 f; oMy 
Pu10 
— d) Pu'°
TMd4 
Lo4 cMy Pu10 Me Rn Jha Dave
78. Päda s c-d omitted in Lo4. Cited by Apa 1060; Mädh 2.406; pâda s a-b cited by Vij
3.249; padas c-d by Vis 3.242;and pada-c by Ws3.244 — a) Lo2 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Vij [Jolly Nd]
, oMd1 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 
TMd3 
Lo3 [Jolly R]
Lo1 
Tj1 
— b) sCa wKt1 oOr Tr2 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
"
GMd1 
— c) Pu2 P u 4 L a 1 
— c-d) iMd4 MTr6
[Tr1 add this after pada-b| — d) Bo Ho Jo2 Lo3 oMd5 Ox2 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2
[Jolly R] 
[Lo3Tj! 
sOx'sPu6 
]; oMy
La1 
BKt5
Additional verse in Pu2; cited by Mädh 2.402:
b) Mädh 
— c) Mädh 
— d) om in Pu2
79. Cited by Ws 3.239, 244; Vij 3.2435^^01053; pada-a cited by Vij 3.244— a) MTr6
A p a 
Jo2 
cMd1 
L o
3 P u
1
0
Tj1 _ 
wKt1 NNg 
oMy 
sOx1 sPu6 
; xMd3
oMd5 
Lo1 
corto 
Kt2 
[Jolly M^^9} 
BE¿
BCa Ho rMd4 Pu2 Vis Vij Mädh 
Jm ' 
NPu' 
La1
oOr " 
Pu3 
oMy 
— b) Pu10 
Lo3 Tj1
Jo2 TMd3 
-c)BKt5 
— á) Apa 
Pu10[./0//yM1-2-5-9]
Pu2 Pu4
80.* After 
in päda- c tviKt
4 jumps to 82d 
[haplo]. Cited by Vw 3.239, 244;
Vij 3.244 [twice]; Apa 1058 — a) Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 
Lo3 NPu1 
Tj1
Ho om 
Lo3 Tj1 
Wa 
[om 
]; Be1 om 
sOx1 
— b) sBe2 Bo Ho


--- PAGE 863 ---
852 
Chapter 11
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 TMd4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 PuI0 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
MTr5 Vis Vij Nä Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Bo La1 Lo4 Vis Vij 
—
 c) Lo1 
—
d) MTr6 om 
Kt2 NNg Ox2 Go Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Vis
81.* Omitted in uKfoMy. Cited by Vis 3.244;Vij 3.245-6— a) Lo2 
Jo1 MTr3
Mandlik KSS 
[supported by AT«]; L a 1 x M d 4 
Be1 Lo1 Pu8 
Ox2 
Lo3
Tr1 VY.V [vl as in ed] 
MTr4 M T r 6 K t 2 
. Lo4 
oMd5 
[Jolly R
K u ] ' 
— b ) o M d 5 O x 2 " , G
M
d
1
, Pu10 
Lo4 TMd3 [Jolly M ]
TMd4 
Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1 
— c) Ox2 
" " 
Lo2 
Tr2 
— d)
sBe2 Bo Lo4 iMd3 MTr6 Vij 
[supported by Rn Nd\; oMd1 
; Mandlik Jha Dave
Be1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
; Lo2
82. Omitted in MTr5. Cited by Vis 3.244; Vij 3.244—a) Bo wKt3 
—c) Lo1
MTr4 MTr6 
w
K
t
1
— d) TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
Lo' 
"
Tj2 " 
Be1
83. Cited by Vij 3.244; Apa\oyj — a) Lo1 MTr4 MTr6 
oMd1 iMd3 cMd5
Pu101 
Hy 
TMd4 
Ox2 
TMd3 
— b) Tr2 
— c)
BBe2 
Tr1 
Bo Lo1 
Ho sOx1 Pu2 sPu6 Tj1 [Jolly G R] Vij Apa
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] Vij Apa 
TMd4 
— d) sBe2 
Wa
Lo1 
s C a L a 1 N K t 4 oMd1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Lo2
84. a) La1 
— b)TMd3 
BBe2 Hy. 
BCa Lo2
Lo1 
oMd1 
La1 
; Bo Lo3 Pu5 
' — c) wKt1 
oOr
— d) Wa 
Tr1 
Ho 
_
85. ma in Lo1 — a) wKt1 
K f M T r
3 
oMd5 
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 
— b)aK.t? 
— c)Pu2 
" 
Pu4 
" 
— d)Lo3
Tr2 
sCa 
" 
wKt'NKt 4Tj' 
" 
" [NKt4 
];BBe2cMd5
Wa om
8 6 . a ) Tr1 
MTr4 M T r 6 T M d 4 ~
T
r
1 [but cor] 
— b ) Tr2
oOr_ 
" . B e
1 o M y " 
" 
Be1 NNg T Md4 
oMd5 
" — c)


--- PAGE 864 ---
Chapter 11 
853
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly G R] 
Pulo 
oMd1 
— d) Be1 wKt1 Lo1 Lo2 Pu2
Pu3 qfrsrr; Lo1 
Lo4
87.Cited by Vij 3.244— a) L
o
1
M
i
r
3 
Jm 
. Lo2
— b)Lo4 
MTr4MTr6 
— c) Wa om 
— d)oOr 
. La1
MTr4 MTr6 
aBe2 oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Be1 
; NNg
Tr2 
; Lo1 
üKt 5 
Vij
88. Cited by Apa 1063; Mädh 2.32; päda- a cited by Vij 3.251, päda s a-b by Wi 3.244
[twice], and päda- c by Wí 3.245 — a) wKt1 
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3
NNg {but me sh] • 
Bo 
L
o
1
— b)GMd' 
sKt5 
, nKt4
— c) Tr2 
, wKt3 Lo2 Pu10 
. Lo1 i M d 3 A p a
; NNg 
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
TMd4 M T r
6 " ;
Be1 
; Lo2 
", cMd 
Ox2
 = 
L
o
1
— d)
Bo 
Jo2
Additional verse in Be1 Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
c-d) Mandlik KSS Dave
89. Cited by Vis 3.246; Vij 3.zsr,Apa 1063 — a) Bo Lo4 Tj1 Tr1 
MTr4 
Pu2
TMd4 
— b) Be1 NKr4 Tr2 Apa 
oOr Tr1 Rn Nd 
La1 
wKt1
Lo2 
Lo4 
BBe 2HyJmJo 1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo' Lo3 TMd3 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2
MTr3 MTr6 Ky !\<u Re Mandlik Jolly KSS 
wKt3 
— c) La1 
Bo
Hy 
oMd1 
Be1 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 sK.t5 La1 Tj2 Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
—
 d)
Ho om 
wKt3 om 
' oMd1 
La1 
sBe2
90. Cited by Vis 3.212; Vij 2.2.1, 3.226, 243;M3dh 2.11, 402; päda s a-b cited by Vij
3.254, 258 — a) Lo2 Lo4 [Jolly M] 
— b) L
o
2
w
K
t
1 
MTr6
— c) Bo 
; NNg [but me sh] 
Tf 
—
 d) sKt5 
, Pu10
91. Päda s a-b cited by Vis 3.247; Vij 3.253 — a) MTr6 
Nd prefers to read
with the comment: 
— b) Pu2 
—
c)oMy 
NPu1 
NKt 4oMd 5 Pu4 
Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly R2] 
Bo
cMd1 TMd3 Tr1 [Jolly G R1] 
Be1 eBe2 
" — d) Ho sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 865 ---
854 
Chapter il
; Lo2 
TMd3
92. Omitted in oMy; päda s c-d omitted in ßKt5 sOx1 [haplo]. Cited by Mädh 2.412 —
a) La1 Lo1 [but cor] 
Be1 
Kt2 
— b) sCa Pu3 
— d) sBe2 oOr 
; Pu2
Pu4 
" oMd5 
wKt1 
Ho
93. Pâda s a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis3.248; ¥1/3.254; Mädh 2.412 — a) Bo
=TT; Hy Lo4 
Ho sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 
Be '
P
u
4 
Lo1 
Lo2
— b) Lo2 oMd ' 
— c) Be1 Lo4 NNg Pu5 Pu7 
Mädh
cMd1 
— d ) w K t ' " 
WaoTO 
La1 
Ox2
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
Kt2 
Vis 
TMd3 
sOx1 sPu6
94. Verses 94 and 95 transposed by some according to Bh, but he prefers the normal
sequence. Cited by Vis 3.247, 253; Apa 1044; Laks 3.330; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.253; päda s
c-d by Kum 1.3.7 — a) La1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
Pu10 
TMd3 
— b) oMd1
NPu'Pu 2Pu 4 
Hyom 
sKt5 
— c) Lo2 
;Tj' 
— d) Kt2
BKt 5oMd'TMd 4oMyT 
[cMy' 
; sKt5 
]; Hy
95. 
Cited by Kum 1.3.7; Vij 3.253 [twice} Apa 1044; Laks 3.330; Har-A 1.17.21,1.21.8;
Mädh 2.411; päda s a-b cited by Har-A. 1.25.3 — a) TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 
T M d 4 B o
eBe2 sOx1 sPu6 
o M d 1 s P u 6 om f i r s t ß K t 5 rMd4 oMd5 NPu1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Vij
-—b)sOx'sPu 6 
L a
1 L a ' Pu2 Pu4 MTr6 
— c) uBe2
Apa 
. oMd' " 
La1 
'— c-d) TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr* Har-A Mädh
[TMd3 
i M d 4 ] ~ - d ) L o 2 N P u ' P u 2 P u 4 W a / l J D a
[vl] 
Kum
96. Cited by Vis 3.250; VijS.253; Apa 1069; Laks 3.330-1 — a)sOx' 
Ho NKt4
oMd5 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Apa [vl] 
Ox2 
La1
— b) Lo1 oMd5 NNg 
NKt4 
nB^Tj'Tr 1 
cMy 
Tr 2_ 
wKt1
Lo2îMd 4 
—c) Ox2 
" 
Lo1 
corto 
oMd1
Tj2 
sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Be1 cMd5 Apa 
sBe2 Bo Lo4
97. Cited by Laks 3.331; päda s a-b cited by Vis 3.250, and päda s c-d by Kum 1.3.7 — a)


--- PAGE 866 ---
Chapter 11 
855
Ho 
NKt4 
wKt1 
Lo 2 
Ho 
" iMd3 
O
x
2
—
b) Rn appears to read 
:ommenting 
rMd3 
; Bo sKt5 NNg sOx1
Pu 2Pu 4sPu 6 
Pu10 
Lo2NPu'/Vâ 
Pu2 
Pu4 
— c)
Bo sOx1 sPu6 
Kum 
Mir4 MÏr6 
Tj2 om
98. Omitted in Lo4. Cited by Vis 3.250; Laks 3.331 — a)c,Md5 
Be1
La1 
•— b)oMd' 
V i s ' P u
8 
NNg 
— c) sBe2 Tr2
GMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
— d) Pu5 Pu7 
._ 
Ho 
oMy
Mir6 
La1 GMd1 TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 Vis 
Ho Jo2 w Kt1 NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 oOr
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Wa 
[sOx1 sPu6 " ]
99. Päda s a-b omitted in oOr — a) sKt5 
Pu10 
Ho La1 Lo2 Lo4
xMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M] 
— c) eKt5 oMd1 cMd5 Tr1 
sKt5
— d) wKt1 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 
[Pu5 Pu7 
]; Bo"
100.Cited by Vis 3.2.si;Apa 1079; M5dhz.w, pada-a cited by Vij 3.257^/1« 1082 —
a) oMd5 ; 
' — b) rMd3 cMy Wa 
Ho Jo2 wKt3 Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6
Tj'Tr2 [Jolly R] 
—
 c) MTr6 
Apa 
' Tr2
Mir4 
" Ho La1 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1
 
TMd3 
— d) Lo1 iMd3
Tr1 V i s 
T r
2 w K t
1
101. Cited by Vis3.251; Vij3.257 (twice); Mädh 2.414;pâda s a-b cited by Apa 1079 —
a) Vis Vij (once) < 
L
a
1
H
o Jo2
 NKt4 uKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Ox2
NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 Wa 
Be1 
sCa Hy wKt1 wKt3 
— b) Vis
oMd1 pâd a reads: 
Mädh 
_ 
— c) NNg 
sOx1 Ox2
sPu6 
Ho 
— d) Tr1 
ßBe2 
Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10
Mir3 [Jolly M Me]MandlikJha KSSDave 
Bo La1 NPu1 Pu3 
oMd1
102. Pâda- d omitted in Pu10 and ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa 1080; Mädh 2.415 — a) Lo1
oMd1 
Pu5 P
u
7
B
o 
Tr1
wKt3 ' 
'—b)oMy 
— c)Bo 
oOr 
. oMd5 Mädh '< 
Lo3
— d) oOr 
La1 MTr6 
" 
xMd4 
Mädh
Bo Ho Hy Jo2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 NNg Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Wa [Jolly G R] Me Go N a Ku 
[cf.
11.128]; sOx1 sPu6 
Ox2 Tr2 
Tj2
Be1
wKt3
NKt4
iMd3 oMd5
Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 867 ---
856 
Chapter il
103. Omited in Pu10; päda s a-b omitted in oMy — a) Tr1 
— b) Lo1
BBe2 
s O x 1 B o 
Mir5 
—0)80' 
; oMd1
iMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— d) sCa Ho xMd3 oOr sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Tj2 MTr6 
[cf. n. 170]; oMd5
104.* Cited by Vij 3.259; Apa 1083; Mâdh 2.255 — a) Wa 
cMd' TMd3 oMy
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Bh 
o M d
5 s B e
2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt 2 sKt5 Lo1
Lo4 TMd4 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly G] Vij Mädh Me [pätha ] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
—
 b) Bo Tr2 Re Jha Dave 
Lo3 Tj1 
sKt5 
B e
1 B e
1
Bo wKt1 wKt3 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMy NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly M G R ] Jolly
oOr 
" NPu
1 _ 
Ox2 
Lo1 
Tr1 
— c) Ho sKt5
oOr; 
wKt1 
W a L o
2 
Hy Tj2 Tr1 
Lo3 
Lo4 xMd3 [Jolly M3~
4-5 Me] " 
[Jolly M8] ' 
Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 
" Hy MTr5 Vij
BoTj1 
N
K
t
4
" Ox2 
[Jolly M1-2-9]
— d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] ' 
MTr4 
wKt3
105. Pâda- d omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by Vij 3.2.sg;Apa 1083; Mâdh 2.253,255 — a)
TMd3 
Pu5 Pu7 
. Tj1 
— b ) T r ' ~ 
iMd4 
^ 
Be1
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Apa 
xMd3 oMd5 
Tr1 
— c) La1 xMd3 Tr1
Be1 
Pu10 
Be1 La1 
TMd3
106.* Omitted in ßKt5; pâda- a omitted in Pu2 Pu4. Cited by V/s 3.254; Vij 3.260— a) Bo
Kt2 
Lo2 Pu10 
Be1 
NPu
1 
Lo1 oMy 
oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 om
Be1 Bo Lo1 sOx1 sPu6 
— b) Be1 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 NNg oOr
Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 MTr3 Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— c)MTr4 MTr6
107. Cited by Mädh 2.264; päda s a-b cited by F;y'3.26o — a) Hy 
T r
2 — b)
TMd3 
sCa 
wKt1 
cMd5NNg
MTr4 MTr6 
B
o
— c ) N
K
t
4
T
M
d
4 
La1 
—
d) cMy 
wKt1
Additional verse in TMd4:


--- PAGE 868 ---
Chapter n 
857
108.Cited b y V i s 3.262 — a ) L
o
1
B
o NKt4 TMd4 Pu10 
—
b) oMd1 
wKt3 NKt4 Lo4oMd' oMd5 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MÏr5MTr6
V i s 
Lo2 TMd3 
T M d
4 — c ) T
r
1
— c-d) Lo2 sOx1 sPu6
[sOx1 sPu6 
] ; H
o
P
u
8
sCa NKt4 La1 oOr Ox2 N?U' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 [Jolly G]Nä 
— d)
cMd1 
oMy
109. Padas c-d placed after nob in oOr. Cited by Vix 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa 1101;
Mädh 2.191 — b) Hy 
Tj2 
M
T
r
4
— c) Oj? Tr ' Tr2 
oMd'
Lo2 Vis „ 
. oOr Wa 
L o
1 T M d
4 
NKt4 
sKl5
Lo2 
— d ) T j " " 
V i j ß B e
2 
xMd4
no.* Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa 1101; Mädh 2.191 — a) Tf MTr6 
oMd5
NNg 
P
u
1
0
P
u
5 Pu7 " 
" BKt5 Lo4
— b) Pu5 Pu7 MTr6 
, Pu10 
oOr 
oMd1 
' sKt5 Lo2 
—
c) BKt5 oMd1 iMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1 
sBe2 sCa Jm wKt1 Lo1 Lo3 oOr Tj ' Vij
NKt4 
H o B e
1 BoHy Jd Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo4
 NNg Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2
MTr3 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly R Ku] Vij Apa Mädh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) Ox2
Apa [vi]
ni. Omitted in Pu10; Jm gives 107-9 again in place of 111-3; päda- d omitted in Ho.
Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa noi; Mädh 2.191 — a) Bo 
ßKf
Lo2 
— b)Pu 5Pu 7 
— c)Tr2 
B B e 2 " 
Tj1
Pu2 Pu4 
Ho 
" wKt3TMd4oMy~ 
NKt4 sBe2 ßCa Lo3 oMd1 Tj1 Tr1 MTr5 Vis
—
 d) TMd3 TMd4 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Vis Mädh 
Lo4 Me Jha Dave 
[folly
M] 
sOx1 s P u
6 T M d
3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 sPu6 MTr4MTr5
 MTr6 Vis' [vl] Mädh
Lo1 
Lo2
112.* Omitted in Pu10 MTr5. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa íior, Mädh 2.191; cf.
Raghuvamsa 1.89 — a)oMd ' TMd4 MTr6 Vis Mädh 
[MTr6 
. Mädh
]; Lo1 oMy Pu5 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
N
K
t
4 sKt5 La1 Lo2 oOr Pu2 Pli1 Tr1
TMd3 
oMy 
— b)TMd4: 
TMd3 
'— c) MSdh
sBe2 Bo sCa oMd5 
Hy Jo1 Kf La1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3
MTr3
 Hy Jo1 Kt2 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave


--- PAGE 869 ---
858 
Chapter 11
[Jolly M1-2-3-5-8-9 Râ | vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) Tj ' 
"
113.* Omitted in MTr5; pâda s c-d omitted in La1. Cited by Vis3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa
1101; Mädh 2.191 — a) La1 
Bo ßKt5 Lo2 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly G Nd] ' 
isBe2 Hy Jo1 Jo2wKt' Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3
[Jolly R Ku] Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Mädh 
Pu10 
. Be1 NKt
4
sKt5 Lo4 cMd1 rMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Vis 
Wa 
— b) Lo2 Lo3GMd'
oMy NNg Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 Vis 
—
 c) oMy 
Be1 wKt1 NNg Ox2 Tj1 [Jolly R]
oMd5 
Be1 oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Vis 
— d) Jo1 Kl2 MTr3 [Jolly G] Vij Nä
Mandlik KSS' 
H y :
. N
N
g
s
B
e
2 H o H y Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 eKt5
Lo4 TMd3 oMd4 cMd5 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
114. Omitted in La1. Cited by Vis3.262; Vij 3.z63~4;Apa iioi;Madh 2.191 — a) Pu'°
Pu10 
. wKt3 
— b) Pu10 
Lo2 
Pu10 Tr2 
Pu2 Pu4
— c) MTr4 MTr6 =T 
Be1 P
u
1
0
— d) Lo2 Pu10 
wKt3 '
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [Jolly Nd]
115. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa nor,Mädh 2.191 — a) eKt5 
— b) Jo2
La1 cMd ' rMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy Pu5 Tj1 MTr6 
Vis 
. sBe2 Bo sKt5 oMy
NNg 
NKt4 Wa Mädh. 
, Apa 
— c) NKt4
— d) wKt1 BKt5 Tj1 [Jolly M^~9 Nd R] 
oMy 
Jm 
Apa 
Ho
Jo2sOx'sPu6 
Lo3Tj' 
wKt'Pu8
116.* Pâda s c-d omitted in sKt5 Tr2. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apaiioi; Mädh
2.191 — b) sBe7 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 La1 Lo1 oOrsOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5sPu6Pu7Tj2Tr2MTr3WaMa«i/MJ/!öA:
>S'5Dave 
Lo2 
ßBe2 
— c)
TMd4 
T
r
1
— d ) Bh [pâth a which h e rejects]
117. Cited by Vij 3.263^; Apa 1101; Mädh 2.191 — a) NKt4 TMd4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
oMd5 
TMd3 
Tr1 
cMy 
Tr2 
Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3
eKt5 Lo1 Lo4 oOr sOx1 Ox2
 NPu' Pu3 sPu6 Pu10 Tr2 Jolly 
Tj2 
— b) Be1
Pu3Tr2 
— c)Tr2 
— d) NNg


--- PAGE 870 ---
Chapter 11 
859
118. Cited by Vij 3.26s;Apa 1105 — b) Jo1 Pu10 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
— c) hyper-
metric pâda ; Lo1 TMd3 rMd4 sOx1 Tr1
 MTr4 
[sOx1 
xMd4
Ox2 
Lo1 
]; Pu5 Pu1 [Jolly G] 
Lo2 s 
La1 NPu1
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Bh Vij ~ 
W a 
MTr6 
MTr5
119. Cited by Vij 3.280; Apa 1140; Har-A 1.26.8; Mâdh 2.436 — a) Ti1 
NKt4 Lo2
sOx1 
La1 
Ho 
sBe2 oOr 
, Hy NKt4 Ox2 NPu1 
oMy
Jo1 
L
a
1
— b ) s B e 2 " 
V i j 
o
O
r
— c ) cMd1 rMd4
 MTr4
 MTr6
[Jolly Gr] Mâdh 
cMy 
" 
" 
rMd3 
~ 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 MTr6
Pu2 Pu3 
r M d
3 B e
1 
P u
1
0 A p a 
ßBe2
Hy wKt3 La1 oOr 
. L o 4 N K t 4 
o M d
5 s B e
2 NKt4 La1 oMd1
TMd4 Tr1 
Be1 Lo2 oOr
120.* Cited by Apa 1140; Mâdh 2.436 — a) Tr2 
sBe2 wKt3 Lo4 [Jolly M]
NKt4 La1 Lo2 Pu2 
TMd3 Tr1 [Jolly M1"2-*-9 Nd] 
' — a-b) TMd4
[?]; oMd1 oMy " 
. oMd5 MTr6 
. Tr1
wKt1 
— b) N
K
t
4
s
B
e
2 Ho wKt3 sOx1 sPu6 ' 
La1 
Tr1
sBe2 
w
K
t
1
, Jm Jo1 Kt 2 Lo2 Ox2 MTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
Pu10 [Jo//y M2-8-9] 
sKt5 
— c) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
— d) Lo2
121.ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa 1140 — a) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
sBe2 
sKt5 
— b)
cMd5 
— c) wKt1 
— d) Pu10 
oMd1 Wa 
rMd4 
NNg
[but me sh]
122. ma in Lo4 [Jolly M8] — a) wKt1 La1 Pu3 
. Lo2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj2 Wa
Bo Ho NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly M G] Jolly 
H y N K t
4
Lo2 
— b ) o M d ' T M d 4 M T r 4 M T r 6 ~ 
sBe2 wKt1 oOr 
Bo 
—
c) Pu10 
T r 1 " 
H o M T r 5 s O x 1 s P u 6 o M y 
Pu2 
— d) sCa
H o 
TMd4 Tr2 
s
B
e
2
o
M
y 
Tr2 
NKt4
Pu 10
123. ma in Lo4 [Jolly M8]. Cited by Vij3.280; Apa 1141; Mâdh 2.436 — a)îMd 4
— b) sOx1 sPu6 
BBe2 
. Pu5 Pu7 
wKt3 Tj ' 
— c) sKt5


--- PAGE 871 ---
860 
Chapter il
sBe2 eCa Hy Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj2 iviTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo4
Mudh 
Be1 Bo sCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKf Lo3 NNg oOr Ox2 sPu6 Pu7 
— d) NKt4
Be1 
TMd4
124. ma in Lo4 [lolly M8]; pada-d omitted in Pu10. Cited by Vij 3.280; Apa 1141; Mac/A
2.436 —a) oMd1 
Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 Lo3 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 
— b) Be1
TMd3 ^pa 
Tj2 
sOx1 sPu6 
Be1 wKt3 Lo4 N
N
g
— c)
sOx'sPu6 
L o
3 T j ' — d) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 
_ 
[oOr 
]; Jo1 [Jolly G]
125. ma in Lo4; pàda s c-d omitted in Tj '. Cited by Vij 3.254, 28q;Apa 1183; Mâdh 2.441
— a) BKt5 
— b) T
r
2
N
P
u
1 Pu2 Pu4 
. oMd1 TMd3
cMd5 oMy Tr ' MTr6 
. TMd4 MTr4 [Jolly Gr] 
Pu10
wKt3 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) BKt5
126.* ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.289;Apa 1183; päda s c-d cited by Vij 3.269; Apali28 —
a) xMd4 
L o
3 B e
1 
sOx1 sPu6 
TMd3 
oMd1
NKf 
BBe2 
Ho 
_ — b)oMd' 
" 
" 
NNg
Ho wKt1 NKt4 BKt5 La1 Lo2 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Wa Apa Me 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
MTr6 
Ho wKt1 NKt4 sKt5 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 Wa Apa Me Jha Dave 
—
 c) MTr4
MTr6! 
L
a
1
T
M
d
4 
sOx1 Pu10 
Lo1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2
Bo 
Apa [vl]k 
— d) wKt1 
Jo2 oMy Tj1
 MTr6 [Jolly R
Nd] Nd 
' sKt5 
Jo2 
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 MTr3 N a Jha KSS Dave
Mandlik 
BKt5 
" La1 
Jo2 Lo3
 TMd4 oMy Tj '
[Jolly R N d ] N d 
B
o
o
M
d
1
127. ma in Lo4; pâda s c-d omitted in eKt5. Cited by Vis3.244; Vij 3.266-7; Apa 1105;
pâda s a-b cited by Vij 3.285 — a)NKt4 sKt5 sOx1 
Tr2 
oMd5 
— b) Jm
TMd4 Tr2 
La1 Lo1 
Be1 Tr1 
BKt5 
oMy 
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
— c)
BBe2 Lo2 
Hy TMd3 TMd4 NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 MTr5 Vis Apa 
Tr1 
oMy
oMd5 
Be1 NNg [but corfli]TMd4 
Rn appears to read; 
—
d) sBe2 
Pu10 
N N g w K t 1 Kt2cMd' TMd3 cMy NNg Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo1
128. Omitted in sKt5; pâda s c-d omitted in BBe2 TMd3. Cited by Vis 3.244, 263-4;
Har-A 1.244; Mâdh 2.73; pâda s a-b cited by Vij3.266-7; Apa 1105 — a) Bo 
La1


--- PAGE 872 ---
Chapter 11 
861
Pu10 
Tj2 
T^Wa 
— b)Be' 
Wa 
oMy
Pu10[/o//yM] 
P
u
2
T
r
1 
—c)Vis
 
oMd5 oMy
TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
[ont 
-]; oMd5 '"— d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2wTr3
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[cf. ll.llod]
129. Omitted in sKt5 Lo2iMd3. Cited by VIA 3.244; //ar-Ai.24-4; Mädh 2.73 — a)
[Jolly Nd] 
Be1 [but cor} wKt1 Lo1 Lo4 
Bh [ad 11.131 as päth a of some] 
La1
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd5 
— b)oMd'TMd 4oOrMTr 4MTr 5MTr 6V/¿
[TMd4 MTr4 MTr6 
o O r . 
]; B
e
1
P
u
1
0 
Tr2
sOx1 sPu6 
Bo NNg Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Wa Ku 
oMy 
— c) Pu5 Pu7
HoJo2sOx'sPu6Tj1[Jo//yR] 
, NKt4 
Jo2 Lo4 Pu10 Tj2 
Mädh
— d)oMy:
130. Päda s a-b omitted in Lo2 TMd3 oOr. Cited by Har-A. 1.24.4; Mädh 2.73; pâda s c-d
cited by Apa 1105 — a) oMd1 
— b) P
u
8
s
K
t
5 
— c) sBe2
TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr2 
wKt1 
oMd5 
Pu3 Pu4 
îMd 4
TMd3 
Pu2 P u
4 B e 
— d) La1 Tj ' Nâ \ pâtha ] Bh [ad 11.131 as päth a of
somel 
" Pu10 [Jolly M] 
Lo1
 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
oOr
131. Pâda s c-d omitted in sOx1 sPu6 [haplo]. Cited by Vis 3.262; Apa 1105;Har-A.
1.24.4; Mädh 2.72 — ajNKt4 
sKt5 
aCa TMd3 _ — a-b) Ho La1 oMd '
TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 MTr5 MTr6 Mädh ! 
"
[
s
O
x 
' sPu6 
Ho
1 — b) Lo1 oMy ' 
wKt3 
NKt4 
— c) TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Vis'' 
T M d 3 W a " 
L
a
1
— d ) Pu10 
, Tr1
oMd1 TMd3 
wKt1
132. Omitted in sOx1 sPu6. Cited by Vis 3.266; Vij 3.27o;Apa 1130; Mädh 2.68 — a)
BKt5 
; Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly M ] — 
b ) sBe2 w K t 1 P u 2 Pu4 
Pu10
 
MTr3
Lo1 
e K t
5 B e
1 Kt2 Lo2 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 P u 4 — c) MTr4 MTr6
TMd4 
; T
r
1
o
O
r 
— d ) s
K
t
5
o
M
d
1
MTr4 MTr6
133. Cited by Vis 3.266; Vij 3.27O;Apa 1131; Mädh 2.68 — a) Ho 
— b) Lo'
oOr 
. NPu' Pu10 
wKt1 
Lo2 
ßCa 
Pu5 Pu7
— c) Lo3 
Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly M] Vij 
Lo2 
Lo1 Tr1


--- PAGE 873 ---
862 
Chapter 11
Pu8' 
Be1 
— c-d)wKt' 
. 
— d) Pu2
NKf 
Be1 Bo sKt5 sOx1 Mâdh 
' 
La1 
T r
1 P u
3
Lo2 
oOi
134. Cited by F//3.273; Apaivyi; Mädh 2.67— a) TMd3 
Jo2 Lo2
Lo3 Pu3 Pu5 Tr2 
oMd5 
Bo oMy 
wKt1 
" Pu2 Pu4 
ßBe2
Tr1 
Tj2 
oOr 
— b) wKt1 Lo1 Tj2 
— c) La1 
Tr2
Lo2TMd4 
TMd3 Tr1 
Kt2 TMd4 oMd5 oMy 
Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1
TMd3oOrTr'' 
Lo1 
o M d
1 — c-d) Pu2 Pu4 
" 
— d)
Apa 
BoßCa Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4oMd5 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1
 MTr4
\JollyG\KuGo 
x M d 3 T r 2 
s K t 5 o M d 1 
oOt 
Hy Jo1 Kt2
Lo3 Lo4 NNg Tj2 Ml^MandlikJha KSS Dave 
NKt4 
Hy La1 Tj2 
;
TMd3
135. Cited by Mädh 2.64 — a)NNg 
T
j
2
o
M
d
1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 ^— b) oMd5 
sKt5 La1 
NKt
4 NNg sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Pu8 
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr5 
MTr4 MTr6 
— c) oMd1
La1 iMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 
MTr5 
— d) sBe2 
; wKt3 Lo4
Bo La1
 TMd3 Pu4
136. Cited by Yij 3.272; Apaiw, MSdh 2.62— a) Pu2 Tj1 
Be1 
NKt4 sKt5
TMd3 oMy oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr6 
MTr5 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
wKt1 sOx1
sPu6 
— b) Kt2 
. Pu2 Pu4 
Bo 
wKt1 
— c) nBe2 wKt3 
TMd3
— d ) Lo1 
. 
T
M
d
4
T
r
2
137. Cited by Vij 3.271; Mädh 2.69 — a)oMd5 
Mädh 
Bo
BBe2La1NNg 
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Lo4 
Pu2 Pu4 
NNg 
Pu10
MTr4 [Jolly M1-2-9] 
— c) TMd4 Tr2 ; 
Pu10 
Lo2 
Lo3 TMd3
TMd4 
NKt
4 La1 Pu2 Pu4 
— d) Pu8 
TMd4 
Lo3 Pu10
wKt3 
TMd4
138. Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Vij 3.272; Apa 1132— a) Be ' sBe2 
Vij Apa
[vl as in ed] 
sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 
wKt1 
— b) eCa 
sOx1
sPu6¡ 
Puio 
Wa 
Lo4 
- —c)wKt' Lo 4Pu 1 0oMd 5GMy TtJ
MTr6 Vij Apa- 
Tr2 
sBe2 wKt3 
oMd'NNgWa 
Lo2


--- PAGE 874 ---
Chapter 11 
863
iMd3 
Lo1 
La1 
— d) Be1 
. Be1 Pu5 Tr2 Apa 
Apa [vi]
139.* Omitted in TMd4. Cited by Apa 1128; Mädli 2.76— a) Tr1 
wKt3
NNg Pu10 Wa [Jolly M Nd] Jolly 
Ho 
oMy 
" i M d 3 
Be2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 La1 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly G Ku R] Jha KSS Dave 
Lo3 Mandlik 
" sKt5 
Bo
Lo1 Pu3 Pu8 Apa 
O x 2 s O x 1 s P u 6 o M d 1 
o M d 5 , Be1 Pu2 Pu4 4tc5° ;
Lo2 
T j 2 w K t 1 
Be'NKt4 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 MlYMpa 
Tj2 Tr2
TMd3 
oMd5" 
Jo 2Lo 3La' sOx'sPu6^'1 [Jolly R] 
oMd1
—
 b)Madh 
oOr 
— d) Be1 NKt4 Pu5 Tj1 Tj2 
ßCa
Ho wKt1 wKt3 nKt5 oOr sOx ' Pu2 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly M G] 
Lo1 ^Rt
nPu1 
Me [patha which he rejects] 
sKt5 
Lo' Tr1
sCa Ho wKt3 La1 oOr sOx1 Ox2
 NPu' Pu2 sPu6 [Jolly M G] 
Tr2
Additional verse in Be1 sKt5 La1 NNg oOr Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
a) ßKt5 oOr 
— c) La1 
, NNg
140. Cited by Vis 3.270 — a) Lo4 
iMd3 
Pu2 Pu4 
iMd4
.
B
K
t
5
'
o
M
d
1
— b
)
e
K
t
5
L
o
3
T
j
'
" Lo1
Bo Ho NPu
1 
NKt
4 
— c) GMd1 oMy 
Tr2
Lo4TMd4oOrPulo[^o//yM] 
[TMd4 
"]; rMd3 
Tr1
NKt4 
Pu5 P
u
7
— d)W.í 
Tr1
141* Cited by Mädh 2.66;padas c-d cited by Vij 3.243, and pada-c by Wi3.26s — a)
Be1 Jo2 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] Go- 
[îMd 4 om 
J; oMy
NNg Pu10 [Jolly M] 
" 
Pu4 
ßBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 eKt5
La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2NPu' Pu2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mir3 Wa [Jolly Ku R]5/¡ [ad
11.131] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu2 om 
sKt5 Lo2 oMd ' 
L
o
2
— b)NNg
Tr2 
w K t
1 H o 
P u
4 N N g 
— c ) MTr5 
oMd5 
sKt5
NNgMTr4: 
x M d 4 T r ' " . Be1 iMd3 x l V l d 4 w K t 1 
, NKt
4 
GMd1
Tr1 
— d ) T M d
4 T j
2
142. Cited by Mädh 2.66-7 — b) Pu10 
o
O
r
H
y 
sOx1
— c)TMd3 
,NKt4 Pu5 P u 7 ; w K t 3 
' Ho 
Pu10


--- PAGE 875 ---
864 
Chapter 11
143. Omitted in Pu10 Tj2. Cited by K//3.276; Apa 1134; Mädh 2.434 — a)wKt3 NKt4 Lo2
oMy 
NPu1 
— b)wKt' 
Ho cMd5 
xMd3 Pu5 Pu7 
sKt5
— c)NKf 
T M d 4 t t y o m 
— d)Tr2
144.Cited b y A p a 1138 — a ) oMd1 ;
L
a
1 
wKt1 
— b )
Tr2 
oOr Tr1 [Jolly Gr] 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
sCa wKt1 La1
Ox2 
— d)oOrÀpa Pu10 [Jolly M2-8'9] 
Apa
145.* Omitted in Lo2. Cited by Apa 1138;Mac//! 2.434-5 — a) oMd5
Be1 wKt3 
Be1 Bo Ho Lo1 NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 sPu6 Wa 
Tr1
Pu8 
— b)Tr2OOT 
;Tj2 
Pu10 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
NNg
TMd3 
B K t 5 o M y T r 1 
sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kl2 wKt3 La1 Lo1
Lo3 Ox2 Lo3 oMd5 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 [Jolly G R] MandlikJha KSS Dave
sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 GMd1 NNg Tj ' [Jolly M R] 
Be1 NKt4 TMd3
 NNg 
TMd4
wKt1 
— d) oMy 
Ox2 
Be1 sBe2 sCa La1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 NNg
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1
146. Pâda s c-d omited in uKt5 — a) oMd5 
Lo1 
— b) Tj1 
Pu10
TMd3 
oMd1 
Pu4 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
eBe2 Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly M]
oMy NPu1 [Jolly Nd] 
Jo2 wKt1 Lo3 TMd4 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
— c-d) oOr
— d)Pu8 
sBe2La1 
Be1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 [Jolly G] 
[Pu7 (Jolly G ) P u
5 
]; Lo1 NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tj ' [Jolly M2'8-9
R] 
„
147. Omitted in sKt5; pâda s c-d omitted in Pu10 and ma in Lo4. Cited by Vis 3.2495/4/70
1074; pâda s a-b cited by Vij 3.255,and pâda s c-d by Apa 1069, 1210 — a) wKt3 
—
b)oMyF(/ 
oOrApa 
" oMd5 
— c) TMd3 
oMd5
Pu5 Pu7 
— d) MTr6 
[?] 
TMd4 
Tr2
NKt4
148. ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.254; Apa 1074, 1160; Mädh 2.349 — a) B h [ad 11.97]
appears to read: 
sKt 5 om 
Be1 eBe2 sCa Hy La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oOr


--- PAGE 876 ---
Chapter 11 
865
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Apa 1074 [vl] 
BKt5 om 
— b) xMd4 
Kt2 
Bo
cMy 
Be1 
La1 
sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 
oOr
sCa 
Hoow 
— c))<?Lal Lo3 Tj1 [7o//y R] 
iMd4
— d ) sBe2 
T M d
3 T r
1 MTr4 M T r
6 o M d
5 
O x 2
TMd4 "sTiRfcT; oMd1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10
149. ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa 1164; Mâdh 2.313 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
Tr1
oMy 
ApaTj2 
" — b) L o 2 — c) Tr2 
' 
Pu10 
Lo1
Tr1 
. BKt5 
TMd4 Mâdh ' 
. Ox2 
TMd3 Apa [vi]
Apa 
Bo Lo1 
Mâdh 
—
 d) La1
150. ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.2545/1/70 1164;Mâdh 2.349 — a) JmeKt5 TMd3 Pu10 Tr2
[Jolly M] 
—b)Mâdh
BKt5 oMd1 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 
— c) Tr2
TMd4 
Be1 sBe2 Bo NPu' oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 
Tj2
— d) BKt5 Pu5 
Bo
151. Omitted in oMy [Jolly Nd]; ma in Lo4. Cited by Vis 3.249; Vij 3.254; Apa 1074,
1164; Mâdh 2.298— a) wKt1 
o
M
d
1
T
r
2 
Bo 
— b)oOr
Tr1 
wKt1 wKt3 T M d
3 o M d
5 " 
sBe2 sCa Jo2 Lo3 Pu10 Tj1
Tr2 [Jolly M2-8"9 R] 
•
152. ma in Lo4. Cited by ApaiO75 — a) Lo2 
sKt5 Ox2 
Pu4 
TMd4
Pu2 Pu4 
, H y B K ^ N N g P u 1 0 
. P u 1 0 — b ) N N g ' P u 1 0 
Be1 sBe2
Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha
KSSDave 
sBe2 
wKt1 Kt2 
Pu8 
— cJoMd'Tj 1 
— d) La1 oMd1
TMd4Tr2
 
BKt5
153. ma in Lo4. Cited by Mâdh 2.313; Apa ll67;pâda s c-d cited by Vij 3.289— a) Jm
oOrPu8 
Bo 
HoTj1 
Bo Pu5 P
u
7
— b) Tr2 
— c) cMd5 
. wKt1
NKt4 BKt5 TMd3 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 
Bo 
La1 
Vij 
— d) Be1
154. Cited by Vij 3.289— a) Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr2 
Bo 
w K t
1 M T r
3
Pu2 
Lo1 
oMy 
BKt5 
Pu10 
TMd3


--- PAGE 877 ---
866 
Chapter il
TMd4 
— b)Vij[sd] 
[Nd reads 
]; TMd3 
Tr1
Lo3 Tj ' 
— d) Pu10 
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 
oOr TV
TMd4 
NNg
155. ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa 1164; Mädh 2.296 — a) Lo1 
— b) sBe2
Pu5 
o O r s K t 5 
T
r
1
T
M
d
3 
— c ) Pu5 Pu10
Mädh
156.* Omitted in sBe2 sKt5; verses 156 and 157 transposed in Tj2; verse 156 placed after
162 in Bo. Cited by Apa 1166 — a) TMd3 TMd4 Mir4 Mir6 
" [MTr4 MTr6
; Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr5
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
L o 4 P u 1 0 
— b) TMd3
 
• 
TMd4
; Lo2 om 
MTr6 : 
Be ' 
Hy 
— c) cMd1
TMd4 
La1 
oMd1 sOx1 
wKt1 Kt2 oOr 
wKt3 
oMy
TMd3 
T M d
4 M T r
4 
" La1 Pu10 
~ — d) Apa
157. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1166—a) Tr2 
wKt1 Vij Apa 
[wKt1
a^KlV]; BBe2 Bo eCa Ho Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 
— b)
La1 
T M d
4 — c ) Pu2 P
u
4
L
a
1 o O r W a
Vij 
wKt1 
— d) Lo1 
; Lo2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 WaApa 
[cf. note to 11.2090]; La1
158.* Omitted in [Jolly M];ma in Lo1. Cited by Apa 1144 — a) Pu2 Pu4 
NKt4
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Na Re Go 
Bo La1 omsBe2
sCa Jm Jo2 wKt1 sKt5 Lo3 oMd1 NNg oOr Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 
— b) Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1
TMd4 
[Jolly M
8 ] J o
2 BtCt
5 Lo2 [Jolly R2] Jolly 
~
sBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 oMd1 oMy Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly
M3] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo3 TMd3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj ' [Jolly R2] 
B
o
— d)
Pu3 
Ox2 T
r
2
o
M
d
1
159.* Cited by Vis 3.278 — a) üBe 2 Bo isCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 [ma]
Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 PuI0 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Mandlik KSS 
Lo2 ^— b)
Pu10 
oOr 
— c) La1 
Pu10 
L o
1 H o
Pu2 Pu4 
— d)Ox2 
.La1 
BCaLaloOrPu'°Tr 2 
Lo1


--- PAGE 878 ---
Chapter il 
867
160. ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1167 — a) Lo2 
NNg
oMd5 
Tr1 
— c) Ho 
eBe2 MTr4 MTr6 
sOx1 sPu6
Jo2 NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd ' NNg N?U' Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Vij 
sOx1 sPu6 [Jolly
M ] 
W a M T r
4 MTr6
161.* ma in Lo4; pâda s c-d omitted in oMy — b) Lo1 
Lo2 
o O r B e
1
; Tr2 
K t
2 o M y 
— c) isCa Ho Jm Jo1 sOx ' NPu
1 sPu6 Tj1 Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
s K t
5 . Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
TMd3oMd5 T r
1 [ J o l l y G
r
]
o
M
d
1 TMd3 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 
sOx1 s P u
6 [ J o l l y N
d
]
N
P
u
1 W a 
Lo2
NNg' 
N K t
4 P u
5 P u
7 [ J o l l y G ] 
O x 2 Pu2
Pu4 Pu10 
Tj1 
— d)sBe2 
TMd4 " 
Pu2 Pu4 
Be1
wKt1 Lo1 Lo2 NNg Pif Pu4 
s O x 1 L a 1 
sKt5 
wKt1
162.ma in Lo4 — a) oMd1 rnT; T
r
1
B
o La1 Lo1 Lo2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2
Lo4 MTr4 MTr6 " 
sBe2 " 
. Be1 sOx1 sPu6 
Lo2
Tr2 
H o L a
1 
— b ) Pu2 Pu4 
T
r
1
— c ) Pu10
La1 
. sOx1 s P u
6 r M d
3 
— d) Pu10 
—After
verse 162 Bo adds verse 11.155
163. ma in Lo4; pâda s c-d omitted in Lo2; the ms of MTr3 ends after 
Cited by
Vij 3.265; Apa 1109; Mädh 2.427 — a) Pi? Pu4 
NPu
1 
Ho
Tj1 
— b ) o M d ' P u
2 P
u
4
K
t
2 
Tr1 
— cJBe'sBe2
Lo4 TMd4 sOx1 [Jolly M3-4] Vij 
—- d) o O r T j
1 
Be1 Lo1 NNg Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Vij 
xMd4 
Bo 
BBe2
164. Omitted in Lo2. Cited by ^'3.265; Apa 1110; Mädh 2.427 — a) Hy om 
Be Ho
sKt5 Lo4 NNg sOx1 NPu
1 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 [Jolly M R] Apa 
xMd4 Tj ' 
— b) sKt5 
Lo1
— c) NPu1 Wa 
sBe2 Jm wKt1 wKt3 L o 1 — d) Bo oOr Tr1 
" Pu5 Pu7
[Jolly G] 
J m T r
2 " 
oMd5 
Tr1 
Vij
Apa
La1
 Lo4 om— d)
.  GMd5
HY
Pu5 [jolly}


--- PAGE 879 ---
868 
Chapter 11
165.* Cited by K;)'3.235; Apa 1110; Madh 2.427; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.257— a) wKt3
me 
to ^ 
— b) Lo3 Tj1 
TMd4 cMd5 Tr1 Me Jha Dave 
Bo sCa
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Kt4 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Ng oOr Ox2 Pu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Tr5
Wa Vij Mandlik Jolly KSS 
: — c) o M d
5 P u
1
0 
— d) La1
sOx1 sPu6 
oMd1
166.Cited by Vij 3.235;Apa 1110; Madh 2.427 — a) sBe2 wKt1 
Apa
Pu5 Pu7 
Lo' [but cor] oMd1 
— b) NKt4 Pu10 
— c) Apa [vi]
NNg om 
oMd5 Tr1 
— d) La1
167. Omitted in Ho; pâda s b-d omitted in sBe2, and pâda s c-d in Tr2. Cited by Vij 3.235;
Apa mo; Mädh 2.427 — a) Lo3 Tj ' 
Bo nKt4 TMd4 oMd5 Tr1 MTr4 
— b) TMd3
Bo 
o
O
r
N
K
t
4 3^FT; P u 4 — c) Hy Jo2 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4
Ng Ox1 Ox2 Pu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu6 Pu7 Pu8 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly 
w
K
t
3
L
o
3
Tj1
168. Pâda s a-b omitted in Tr2 and pâda s a-c in sBe2. Cited by Vij 3.265; Apa un; Mädh
2.427 — a) Be1 oOr 
oMd5 Tr1 
— c) TMd4 
— c-d) Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R]
— d)oOr 
o M y o M d
1 
eKt5
wKt1 
T r
2 V i j
169.* Cited by Vij 3.2655^/70 1110; Mâdh 2.427 — a) NKt4 
NPu1 Pu2
Pu4Tr2 
". w K t
1 " L o
2 N N g W a F y O x
2 B e
1 wKt1 
Pu10
— b) Be1 Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2ßKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 NNg oOr Ox2 Pu? Pu7
Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Apa Mädh Go Na Ku Rn Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Me Dave Jha
— c)nKt? 
L o 4 P u 5 P u ' ° e C a 
— d) Bo 
oMd5
TMd3 Tr1 
w K t
1 T M d
4
170. a) Bo NKt4 
Lo2 
NKt4 om 
— b) Lo1 
oMd1
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
— c)Bo 
sOx1 s
P
u
6
, wKt1 eKt5 Ox2 Pu10 
— d)
wKt3 Lo2 cMd1 NNg oOrsOx1 sPu6 Tr1 Wa 
^ . P
u
1
0
L
o
2


--- PAGE 880 ---
Chapter 11 
869
171.Cited by Apa 1118; Mädh 2.252, 264 — a) oMd1 
— b) Bo Tj1 Tr1
BKt5 
— c)TMd3 
TMd4 
Tr1 
oOr 
—
d) BKt5
172. Omitted in Hy; päda s a-b omitted in sBe2. Cited by Vis 3.254; Apa 1118; Laks 2.10;
Dev 1.187,189; Mädh 1.470 — a) La/to 
T r 2 N K t 4 
sOx1 
sPu6
sCa 
B
o
L
a
1 
Lo'NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo2
oOrPu2Pu4' 
Be1 
NKt4 
— b) Bo 
Tr1 
Tr2
L o 2 o O r 
Be1 N N g " w K t 3 M T r 4 
Pu5 Pu7 
O x 2 o M d 5
oMy 
" 
wKt1 
Lo2 
—
 c) MTr6 ; 
TMd3 
NKf oOr
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
TMd3 cMy Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly Nd Gr]Apa Nd 
La1
Jm Jo1 Kt2 Mandlik KSS
173. Omitted in oMd1 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 1118; Laks 2.10; Dev 1.187,189, 190; päda s
a-b cited by Mädh 1.470, and päda s c-d by Apa 79 — a) Be' Pu10 
iMd3
Be1 sBe2 aCa wKt1 wKt3 La1 xMd4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 ' 
— b) Be1
Tr2 
Hy Jm Jo ' Kt2 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ' 
sKt5
BBe2 La1 
oOr 
— c) Be1 sBe2 wKt1 Lo3 Tj1 
wKt3 
Tr1
oMy 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd3 
MTr^Tr6 
ßKt5
Apa 79 
_ 
.Lo 1 
Apa 79 [vi] 
— d) oMy
Tj1 
sKt5 Lo2 Ox2 
Lo1 
NNg 
Lo3
Be1' 
Laks 
Pu10'
174. Omitted in GMd1. Cited by Apa 1149; Mädhz.zjz — a) NNg Pu5 Pu7
A/e[pätha | 
Be1 TMd4 
oMd5
 
TMd4 _ 
Tr1 
Mädh
—
 a-b) Bh Ipätha ] 
— b) Lo3 
— c) Wa
BoHoTj'Tr 1 
oOr 
[Jolly M] 
Bh [patha] Me Ipätha ] 
[cf. ViDh
53.4]; wKt3 
— d)oMd5 
c M y L a 1
175. Omitted in NNg Tr2 [haplo]. Cited by Mädh 2.276 — a) Be1 Lo2 
wKt1
H o 
. L o
2 r M d
4 
Mädh 
B
e
1
— b ) Pu5 Pu7 
B o
Pu10 
TMd4 
— c)Pu10 
oOr 
Be1 
oMd1
— d)Hy 
Bo La1
oMd1 MTr6 omit päda s b and d making a half-verse of päda s a and c and gives the
following as the second half-verse:


--- PAGE 881 ---
870 
Chapter n
176. Cited by Vis 3.257; Vij s.26o;Apa 1046,1121; i/ar-A 1.28.11; Madhz.88 — a) eBe2
Bo Hy Jm Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oOr Ox2 Pu3 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly MM~5 G R] VU
Tr2 
Ho 
Pu sPu 7 : 
Tr1 
Wa 
—
b)BoHosOx'Tj' Tr1 
T M d
3 B o ' 
— c) cMd1 
— d)oMd5
oMy 
Ho Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 =ET; Lo2
177. Verses 177 and 178 placed afer 179 in cMy; pada-d omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis
3.254; Apag8, 1124; päda s a-b cited by Dev 3.56g;Madh 2.176, and päda s c-d by Vis 3.256;
Vij 1.70, 3.275— a) Pu2 Pu4
 
__ 
— b) Be1 Bo Tj1 
W
a
T
M
d
4
— d)Lo' 
" 
oMy 
BBe2wKt3Lo4 
Pu10 
Hy
Two additonal verses in NPu1 [for first verse see under 178]:
178. Pada-a omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis 3.250, 2$4;Apa 1125— a) La1 TT; Be1 Hy Jm
Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo4 Ox2 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly Nd M4] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sBe2
T M d 3 G M d 5 c M y Tr'MTr4 
— b) Be1 
„ 
, Pu10 
Pu10 [Jolly M'-2^9]
MTr4 
T M d
3 A p a 
sBe2 Bo eCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2wKt'
Kt2 La1 Lo3 Lo4 \but cor} oMy sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly M4 Nd R] Nd Rn Re
Mandlik KSS 
L o
1 " s K f " 
— c) Bo w K t 3 L o 2 
— d)xMd3
oMd1
Additional verse in Be1 Mandlik 
KSS Dave; given after 176 in NPu1; cited by
Vij 1.72:
b) NPu1 Mandlik KSS Dave 
Mandlik KSS Dave 
—
 c) Vij
Additional verses in Pu1:
179. Cited by Madh 2.251 — a) sBe2 Bo cMd1 rMd3 MTr4MTr6 
— b) sKt5 Lo1
oMd1 rMd3 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2 MTr4 Mir6 Mädh 
oMd 5 
oMy ' 
Tr1
" TMd3 — c) 
— c) Bo TMd3
sOx1 sPu6


--- PAGE 882 ---
Chapter 11 
871
Pu3 
— c) Be1 BKt5 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr2 
Bo Pu10 
rMd3
Mâdh 
Wa 
Pu10 
GMd1 iviTr4 MTr6 
oMy
— d)Tj25/i|pâtha | 
cMd1 
Mâdh
180. Verses 180 and 181 transposed in Wa — a) Jo1 Kt2 
Lo2NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7MTr4MTr6Wa[Jo//yM3-4-5] 
cMd1 [but cor] Tr2 
NKt4 
Lo1 
sBe2
NKt^NgNPu1 Pu 5Pu 7Pu<°MTr 4MTr 6Wa 
— b) sOx1 sPu6
TMd3 
_ 
Bo NKt4 Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
nNg 
T r
2 P u
1
0
— d) BBe2 oMd1 iMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Tr1
 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
TMd4 
Be1 Pu10 Wa
181. Cited by Vis 3.257; Vij3.z6i; Apa 1087; Har-A. 1.21.5; pâda s a-b cited by Vis 3.257
—
 b) NNg 
Bo oMd1 oMd5 sOx1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 ¡Jolly Gr Nd] VisGDh 21.3
BDh 2.2.35 
BKt5 
oMy 
— c) sOx1 sPu6 
TMd4
T; Be1 Pu5 Wa 
— d
)
B
B
e
2
O
x
2 
Be1 Bo Ho sOx1 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 MTr5 MTr6 
wKt1 NKt4 Lo1 
Lo4 
Tr2
Jo2 Lo3 TMd3 Ox2 Tj1 Tr1 
[ î M d
3 ]
182. Cited by Vis 3.257 [twice]; Vij3.261; Mâdh 2.23 — a) wKt3 
TMd4
— c) TMd3 
, Tr2 
— d) Bo Lo4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M4^5]
BKt5TMd3TMd4GMyTr' 
o
M
d
5
T
j
1
183.* Pâda s b-d omitted in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.294; Apa 1206 — a)iviTr6
— b) oMy 
Be1 eBe2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3
Pu" Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Wa Vij Apa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
wKt1 
Lo2
— c)îMd 3 
^ 
— a) Apa
184. Cited by Vij 3.294 — a) wKt3 
— b) sCa 
NKt 4 
oMd5 Tr1 MTr4
TMd3 MTr6 
Lo2 Na[Na pâth a as in éd.]; Be1 Ho Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 oMy
oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R] 
Jm ßKt5 oMd1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly M2"8-']
N a 
B o — 
c ) B o T r
2 ' — c-d) sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 Lo3 Tj1
[Lo3 
] — d) La1 oMd5 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Wa Vij


--- PAGE 883 ---
872 
Chapter 11
185.* Omitted in Tr2; päda s a-b omitted in oMy. Cited by Vij 3.294; Laks 2.424— a) Ho
TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 Vij 
[preferred by Bühler ] ; xMd3 
[Jolly M8~9]
Nä Ipätha ] 
for 
, Be1 sKt5 Lo3 Lo4 oMd5 NNg oOr Tj1 [Jolly M4~5]
BKt5 
Lo4 [Jolly M4"5] 
Ox2 Pu10 
[om ^J — b) Ox2 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu8
Pu'°W a 
s O x ' s P u 6 — c ) N N g w K t 1 o O r 
w K t 1 —
d) Be1 Bo Ho sKt5 La1 Lo4 xMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MÏr4 Mir6 Wa
[7o//y M G N Nd] Vij Jolly 
[Wa 
xMd3 cMy 
Pu10 
J; Laks
o O r 
w K t
3 " 
L o 1 o M d 1 
xMd4 
Tj1
oMd1
186. Folios containing 11.186-229 missing in Tr1. Omitted in Bö Pu10 — a) TMd3 
sKt5
Tr2 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
" xMd4 
. NPu' Pu4 
; Kt2 oMy 
NKf
— b)Pu3 
L
o
1
P
u
5 P u
7 c M d
1 
Mir6 
Be1
Tr2 
Ox2 
Lo1 Tr2 
La1 Mir6 
Be1 wKt3 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2
Pu3sPu6 Pu8Tr2 [Jolly M G] Me Jolly Jha Dave 
Pu5 Pu7 
xMd3 
— c) Pu3
Ox2 
o
M
d
1
" T r
2 ß B e
2 wKt3 
BKt5 
";Jo 2
Lo3 xMd3 GMy Tj1 [Jolly M2 Nd R Gr] Jolly 
xMd4 
Ox2 
Pu3 Tr2
— d ) wKt1 
o O r o M y
187. Cited by Vis3.291; Vij3.zg&Laks2.424 — a) Vis' 
Pu2
oOr 
— b) wKt1 
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Vij 
La1 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) sBe2 La1
Lo1 Lo4 Tj1
 
TMd; 
Laks 
Be1 
Bo 
— d) Bo sCa Jo2 Lo1
Lo2 Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 
Pu5 Pu7
188. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Laks 2.424 — a) wKt3 
_ 
Ox2
La1 
BBéora 
sBe1 sKt5 La1 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
— b) Pu2 Pu4 
Bo
Ox2 
sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
Jm 
ßBe2 
— c) cMd5
GMd
1 
" Lo1 
" Laks
189. Omitted in BKt5 [haplo]. Cited by Vis 3.250, 292; Apa 9g;Laks 2.424; Dev 3.579,
680 — a) Vis 
Be1 eCa Ho Lo1 Lo4 N?U ' Wa [Jolly M3"4-5 Ku] Dev
Jm Jo1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly G] Vis Z-^oVij 
Jm xMd3
xMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Ptf Pu7 MTr4 Vis 3.250 Vij 
' 
Vij3.z6o 
— b) Laks
NPu
1 
Ox2 " 
— c)oMd5 oMy MÏr4 MTr6 Vis Apa Laks Dev
• 
Lo2 N
N
g
x
M
d
4 
oMd1 xMd3 
La1


--- PAGE 884 ---
Chapter 11 
873
Pu2 Pu4 
Pu5 Pu7 
sOx1 sPu6 
Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 
— d) NNg
„ ~ 
~ 
" >"; Apa 
L o
4 O x
2
190.* Pâda s a-b omitted ¡n ßKt5. Cited by Laks 2.424; pâda s a-b cited by Ky 3.261 — a)
oMy 
Tr2 
Lo'corto 
BoLo'Tj1 
xMd4 
wKt1
sBe2 
; P
u
4
— b) Pu5 Pu7 
Lo3 
. oOr 
Be1 Lo1
NNg sOx1 Pu4 sPu6 Wa [Jolly G R M4] Vij ViDhs^i 
oMy 
oMd ' MTr6 '
Hy Jo1 Kt2 NPu1 Pu3 Tj2 [Jolly Nd Ku] Go AT« ¿aJts MandlikJha KSS Dave
Ox2 " 
— c) Pu4 
P
u
2
B
e
1 Bo Ho Jo2 Lo' NNg sOx1 Ox2
Pu3 sPu6 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M R Nd] Jolly Jha Dave ViDh 54.32 
NKt4 Lo4 Pu10 oMd5
oMy MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
c
M
d
1
L
a
k
s 
sCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 oOr Pi? Pu7 Tj2 [Jolly G] Mandlik KSS 
— c-d)Tj'" 
sKt5
•—d)Jm 
TMd4
191. Cited by Apa 1209; Mädh 2.155— a) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
oMd5
TMd3 TMd4 
MTr4 MTr6 
Pu5 Tr2 om 
— b) La'
TMd4 oMd5 [Jolly Nd] 
xMd3 
— c) xMd3 oMy 
— d)NNg
ma sh 
c M y x M d
3 
wKt1 
Lo2 
Apa [vi]
192. Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.265; Apa iW7;Mädh 2.433 —
a) Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tj1 
Tj1 
— b) Lo1 Ox2 
sKt5 
Bo NKt4
Apa[v\] 
sBe2 
Pu2 Pu4 
Lo2 
wKt1 
~ 
rMd3 
—
c) Lo1 
TMd3 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
NKt4 Lo1 
Lo4 oOr Tj1
Bo 
, T
r
2
— TMd4 jumps here to 12.25, and 11.193 to 12.24 are omitted
193. Cited by Vis 3.262; Apa 1107— a) Tr2 
— b) Be1 sBe? sKt5 La1 Lo1 oOr Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Apa 
oMy 
TMd3 
sKf 
— c) Bo La1 Lo2
TMd3 NPu1 
Mir4 Mir6 
Tr2 
oOr 
o M d 5 , 
. Pu5 Pu7
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
Pu10 
— d) Pu2 Pu4 
TMd4
BBe2 TMd3 oOr 
MTr6
194.Cited by Ky 3.289; Apa 929, 1150— a) Wa T 
Ox2 
Ox2 NPu 1
Lo1 
.TMd 4 
Jo1 
B o c M y — a-b) Tr2
— b) La1 
HosOx'sPu 6
wKt3 ?ll^l
ull d l ^ u i l ; ßKt5 Lo4 
w K t
1 N K l
4 
— c) Apa 1150 
— d)


--- PAGE 885 ---
874 
Chapter 11
NKt4 Pu5 Pu7 
Lo2 NNg Pu4 Mir4 Apa [vi at 92935 in ed] 
TMd3 
eBe2
oOr 
BKt5 oMd1 o O r s C a wKt1 Pu8
195. Cited by Vis 3.284; Vij 3.289;Mac//) 2.430 — a) Vis 
— b) La1
— c)Pu2Pu4 
Be1 
Jm 
— d) Wa 
Be1 TMd3
196.a) Lo1 W
a
L
o
1 xMd3 sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu10 
o M y x M d
4
TMd'oOT 
— b)Pu 5Pu 7 
oMy 
. Lo3 : 
Tj!
MTr5 
" T
M
d
4
B
e
1 oOr 
Ho 
— c) Pu10
; Kt2 
o
O
r
s
B
e
2 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Mandlik KSS Jha Dave
— d) Pu4 
T
r
2
. 
Bo oOr Ox 2 
TMd4 
NNg [but
corfli] 
N K t
4 L o
2 
o M d
1 " oMd1 Tj1
197. Omitted in Be1; pâda s a-b omitted in Tj1 — a) La1 
Ho Pii 
sBe2
Lo4cMd5oMy Pii4 Pu10 
BKt5 
— a-b) Jo2 
— b) La1
sOx1 
" T M d
3 x M d
4 
Tr2 
Ho
Tr2^— c)wKt'TMd4 
o M d
5 P u
1
0 
oMy 
NNg 
— d)Tj'
[Jolly R] 
Lo3 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]* 
oMd5 oMy MTr4
198. Cited by Vij 3.288; Apa 1152; Mädh 2.429— a) TMd4 
TMd3
BKt5 
. Pu10 
BKt5 om 
— b) sBe2 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
" TMd3
TMd4oOr 
Tj1 " 
Lo3 
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 oMd1 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10
[Jolly M1"2-8-9 G] Vij Mâdh ViDh 54.25 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
sOx1 o m
199. Cited by Apa 1152; Mädh 2.442 — a) Pu5 Pu7 
Ox2 
TMd4
— b) NKt4 om 
Ho Ox2 Apa 
sOx1 $T; cMd5 
— c) Ho 
Hy
MTr4 MTr6 
" — d) w
K
t
1
'
'
P
u
5 Pu7 
ßBe2 
Be1
Lo 3Ox2Tj"Wa 
;BCa 
sKt5 NPu1
 
NKt4 
Pu2 Pu4 
. .
Apa
200.Cited by Vij 3.277; Apa 1135; Mädfa..54 — a) wKt3 
Ox2NPu' MTr4 MTr6
Wa 
La1 
— b) [Jo/(y Nd] 
[supported by Nä\; Lo2 
— c) Be1 Ho


--- PAGE 886 ---
Chapter 11 
875
Lo4oMd' TMd3oMd5 oMy NNg Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Wa 
Bo 
Tr2
— d^Lo-'Tj1
Additional verse in NNg Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
d) NNg
201. Omitted in sBe2 sKt5 oMd 5 [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.286, 288; Apai\53 — a) Bo
TMd4 
T j
1 L a
1 
La1 NNg 
Tr7 
— b) sOx1 
Hy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj2 Vij3.286 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ^ —
 c) Pu7 Pu10
MTr6 
T Md3 T r
2 T M d
4 M T r
6 T j
1 
L
o
3
H
o
La1 
Hy wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 oOr MandlikJo1 KSS 
. Mir" 
Pu2 Pu4
H y 
— d ) La1 iMd3 W
a
V
i
j 3.286 
; xMd4
MTr4 MTr6 
Lo1
202. Omitted in sBe2 BKt5 oMd5. Cited by Vij 3.2go;Apa 1184; Mädh 2.443 — a) Tí
oMd1 
— b)wKt' 
Pu5 Pu7 . .", sOx1 sPu6 
i M d
3 o O r
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— c) Lo3 Tj1 
MTr4
MTr6 
VijApaMädh 
[Apa 
]; wKt3 
Bo Hy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Wa Mandlik Jha 'KSS Dave 
rMd4 
— d)
Lo3 oMd1 MTr6
 
TMd4 
Lo3
203.* Omitted in wKt3 Lo2; page containing verses 2O2b-2O5c missing in sPu6. Cited by
Vij 3.292; Apa 1188;Mäd h 2.443 — a) Pu10 [Jolly M] 
ßKt5 
Bo
oOr 
MTr4 
MTr5MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 Apa 
, NNg
oMd1 
T M d 3 _ 
— b) sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Slftt; MTr6 
ßCa Jm Jo1 Jo2
Kt2 Lo3 Tj1 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Hy 
Tr2 
N K t
4 B e
1 Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 [Jolly R] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave f— c) Hy wKt1 sKt5
La1 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Tj ' Tj2 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly R] Mädh 
Wa
Apa 
Mädh TMd4 
MTr5 
— d) oMy 
TMd3
TMd4
204. Omitted in Pu10. Cited byVij 3.292; Apa 1188; Mädh 2.443; päda s c-d cited by
Har-\ 1.11.17; Vij3.234-42—a)Tj' 
wKt1 
—a-b) cMd1 
—b)
H y 
o
M
d
1
— c ) H o r M d
3 o M d
5 
HyTj2


--- PAGE 887 ---
876 
Chapter 11
205. Verses 205 and 206 transposed in Lo1; pada-d omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa 1185;
Mädh 2.355 — a) ßKt5 Lo1 
Hy 
oMd5 
oMd1 ' 
sBe2 Bo Ho
— b)Bo 
L o ' o O r ^ T j 1 L o 3 
Mir6 
— cJaBe2
206. Pâda. s a-c omitted in oMd5. Cited by Apa 1185 — b) Be1 Lo1
Pu10 
[om 
];cMysOx' 
Ho 
Bo oMd5 
Ox2
sBe2 
[Jolly Nd]' 
TMd3 TMd4 
sCa Pu8 
Tr2 
xMd3 
—
c) Be1 Pu5 Pu7 Go 
Lo4 
wKt1 ; 
Tj2 
sCa
HosOx1Ox2sPu6Pu10 
[sCa 
Ox2 
Pu10 
) — d) sBe2 
Jo2
Lo1
207. Omitted in sKt5 cMd5 Tr2; pädasa- b and c-d transposed in TMd4. Cited by Apa
223; Laks 2.394;Mäd h 2.358 — a) La1 
T M d 3 L a k s 
Pu2 Pu4
•—b)wKt" wKt3 La1 Lo1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu7/íp a 
Lo2 
'[om|;Be'HyJm
Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
— c) Be1
208. Verses 208 and 209 transposed in TMd3 TMd4 Mir4 MTr6; päda s a-b omitted in
sKt5. Cited by Apa 223; Laks 2.394-5; MSdh 2.358 — a) Ld 
MTr4 MTr6
TMd4 
BBe2 üC a Ho wKt1 Kt2 wKt3
 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo4 oOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 Mädh Jolly 
—
 b) oMy Mädh 
Wa 
[Jolly Gr] 
Ox2
BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Bo sCa Ho ma [as pâtha ]
wKt1 La1 Lo1 oOr Pu8 Apa 
—
 c) B o J o
2 Lo3 
L a k s L o
1
TMd4 
— d) sCa Ho wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 oMd ' TMd4 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 Tr2 Wa 
Lo1 TMd4 oMy NPu1 Wa Me Jha Dave
209.* Päda s a-c omitted in oMd5 and päda s c-d in Be1. Cited by Vijs.zSo; Mädh 2.358
— b) Bo Lo1 TMd3 
MTr4 M T r
6 P u
1
0 
— c) Wa 
uBe2
Bö sCa Ho Jo2 nKf ßKt5 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 [ma] oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly M G R ] Jolly
ViDh 54.30 
Pu2 Tr2 
— c-d) Vij
210. Cited by Mädh 2.360 — a) NNg 
TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 
— b) cMy
— c)wKt' 
Jo2 La1 NKt4 NPu1 Pu2 P u
4 T ^ om last 
— d) eBe2
Ox2 Bh [ad 11.85] 
Bh [ad 11.209] reads


--- PAGE 888 ---
Chapter 11 
877
211. Omitted in Lo2 — a) Jo2 Lo1 Lo4 oOr Pu10 Tj1
 MTr5 
c,Md5 
Pu10
TMd3 
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
_ 
Tr2 
MTr6
oOr> 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
Pu3 
— c) Pu10 
TMd4 
MTrs¡
oMd5 
Be1 
— d)Lo' 
Be1
212. Cited by Vij 3.319; Apa 1236; Mâdh 2.25— c) Vij 
MTr4
. 
Lo2 om =ET; Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 iMd4 oMy Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 MTr6 Mâdh 
—
 d) 
[but me} 
_ 
Lo1 TMd4 oMd5 NPu1 [Jolly Nd]
213. b) Be'TMd 3sPu 6Tj' 
TMd4 
— c) oMd5 
T
M
d
3
— d)
Be1 NKt4 Lo2 NNg NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M'-2-8-9 G] Go BDh 4.5.11
oMd5 
Ox2 Pu3 Tr2
214.Cited by Vij 3.319; Apa 1238; päda- a cited by Vis 3.315 — a) BKt5 Lo1 TMd3
Lo3 
, T M d
3 — b) w
K
t
1
T
M
d
3
L
a
1 
" 
— c) Be1 Pu3 Tr2
wKt1 " 
" BKt5 
cMy P
u
8
' — c-d) MTr4 
—
d)Tr2 
r M d
4 T M d
3 
; Pu3
215. ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.3175^/70 1235 — a) oMy 
— b) Lo4
Lo3TMd3Tj' 
Pu4 
Tr2" 
— c) Ho 
Pu10 
MTr6
— d) TMd4 
Jo2 sOx1 sPu6 
oMd1 
Pu4
Additional verse in NPu1 Mandlik 
KSS Dave [taken from A/e's com., where it has the
ascription 
]:
216. Omitted in Pu'° ; bottom of folio containing verses 2160 to 223d torn insPu6. Cited
by Vij 3.326; Mâdh 2.26— a) TMd4 
Be1 sKt3 Pu5 Pu7 
oOr
TMd3 
Pu5 P u
7 s K t
5 N N g 
[uNg ma sh^]; eBe2
Lo2 
— c) oMd5 NNg Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 P u
7 L a
1 
— d) TMd4 oMd5
wKt1 NKt4 Pu2 Pu4 
w
K
t
3
N
P
u
1 
oMd1 TMd3 MTr4 MTr6
oMy [Jolly Nd Gr] Mâdh BDh 4.5.15 
"


--- PAGE 889 ---
878 
Chapter 11
217. ma in Lo4. Cited by Apa \2.^;Mädh 2.240— a) NKt4 
Lo2 
Tj1
sBe2 TMd3 TMd4 sOx1 sPu 6 Pu8 MTr4 \Jolly Nd] 
Pu3 
oMd ' 
— b) NNg
ma sh 
TMd4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 A p a T M d
3 
Lo2 
Apa Ml 
— c)
TMd4 
s O x
1 O x
2 Pu3 Pu7 
wKt1 Lo4 iMd3 cMd5 
_ 
— d)
Apa 
Mûdh 
Lo3 
La1 TMd4 
sKt5
218. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Mädh 2.241 — a) ßKt5 
Lo1 [Jolly N d ] B e
1
Ho Jo2 wKt3 Lo3 Lo4 xMd3 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M R G] 
TMd4 Tr2
TMd3 
— b) Pu5 P u
7 w K t
1 La1 " 
[La1 
|; TMd4
— c ) L o 3 T j 1 _ 
wKt1 Vnf^w"; Ho 
. BCa wKt3 sKt5 La1 MTr6
oMd5 ' 
" — d) [Jolly Nd] 
. Bo wKt3 Tj1
BBe2 BKt5 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M G] Jolly 
Lo4 P
u
1
0
K
t
2
La1 NNg Mâdh ' 
oMy 
Ho Lo1 TMd3 Tr2
219. Omitted in oOr; the following order in Lo1 22ia-b, 22oa-b, 219, 22oc-d, 22ic-d;
verses 218 and 219 transposed in NKt4; päda s c-d omitted in sKt5. Cited by Vij 3.324; Apa
1243 — a) TMd3 
La1 Lo1 
oMy 
Mir4 MTr6
— b) BKt5 MTr5 [haplo] after f^K jumps to 
in 22ob; Tj1 
oMd1
— c) cMy 
Lo1
 • 
TMd3 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NäMandlikJha KSS
Dave 
Tj2 
[for reading adopted see 11.2210] — d) iMd3
oMd5NNgNPu' 
HowKt1 La'TMd 4Pu 1 0 Wa Vij 
Be1 Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu8 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6
220. Omitted in oOr MTr4 MTr6; päda s a-b omitted in Pu4, and päda s c-d in BBe2. Cited
by Vij 3.324; Apai243 — b) oMd1 TMd3 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Wa ' 
TMd4
La1 
w K t 3 o / w — c)NKf 
— d) TMd3 oMd5
NPu1 
oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G2] Vij BDh 4.5.18 
La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
cMy Pu3 Tr2 [Jolly G1 Nd] 
wKt3
221. Päda s a-b omitted in BBe2. Cited by Vij 3.324; Hem 3/3.23 — a) Bo
oMd1 
—
 b) Ox2 Pu10 Tr2 
Bo 
Hem 
wKt1 
Tj2
Pu5 Pu7 
— c) La1 
— d) MTr6 î T 
sBe2 wKt1
NKt4 oMd1 TMd3 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' Tr2


--- PAGE 890 ---
Chapter il 
879
222. b) oMy 
eKt5 Tr2 
iMd4 
Mir6
Jo2 
— c) TMd4 ' 
Lo1 oMd5 Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 
Bo Pu2 Pu4
Pu 7' 
Pu5 
Pu2 Pu4 
TMd3 
— d)NPu' 
Be'HooMd 1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 cMy Ox2 
Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr6
223. Cited by Apa 1230; päda s a-b cited by Vij 3.325; Apa 1246, and päda s c-d by Vij
3.313; Madh 2.459 — a) Ho 
oOr MTr6 
TMd3 
— b) M T r
6 —
c) BKt5 Pu5 Wa Madh 
wKt'fmc to] oMd5 Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 
— d) Ox2
NKt4 
TMd4 [Jolly G] 
Tr2
224.* Cited by Apa 1230; Mädh 2.459 — a)TMd4 
cMd' oMd5 oMy Pu8MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Ku Apa Mädh 
Jo1 Kt2 Ox2 Mandlik KSS 
La1
Ho Pu3 
Be1 sCa Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt^Kt4 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Le? Lo4 cMd1
TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1
 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M R Nd] Apa
Mädh Me Rn Rc Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
oOr 
— b) oOr
Tj1 
BoNKt4 
TMd 4" 
sOx1 
„; s
B
e
2
— c)
BKt5 Pu2 Pu4 
sOx1 s P u
6 T M d
4 
rMd3 
— d) sOx1
sPu6 
Tr2 
Jo2 
BKt5
225.Cited by Apa 1230;Mäd h 2.459 — a) ß K t
5 o M d
1 
oOr 
—b)
NKt4 
La1 
Pu8 
Lo1 
corto 
Mädh
ßKt5 
Lo2 
BoTr2 
— c)Tj' 
oOr 
— d)
Lo4 
Pu5 P
u
7
T
j
1 
MTr4 MTr6 
; o
O
r
P
u
2
Pu4 
:
226. Päda s c-d omitted in Tj'. Cited by Apa 1231; Mädh 2.459; päda s a-b cited by Vij
3.325 — a) wKt3 NKt4 Tr2 
Pu3 Tr2 <J; TMd4 o
M
y
— b) Tr2 
oMd1
TMd3 
B
C
a
— c)TMd4 
[lacuna rest of päda] ; cMd1
NNgOx 2NPu'Pu 2Wa 
s B e
2 w K t
1 TMd3
 NNg NPu1 Pu2 
Lo2 
; Bo
wKt3 
— d) oMd5 Mädh 
NKt4 
Pu2
227. Cited by Vis 3.296; Mädh 2.451 — b) NKt4 oMd1 
: — c) wKt1 NKt4 BKt5


--- PAGE 891 ---
880 
Chapter 11
[Jolly Nd] 
TMd4 
Be1 Lo2 oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 
i M d
3 — d) MTr5
sKt5 
Lo1 Lo2 NNg Pu3 
NKt4 sKt5 La1 [Jo/fy Nd] Vis
228. Omitted in Hy. Cited by Vis 3.296; Apaiz^i; Mädh 2.336 — a) sKl5
xMd3 
Lo1 [cor to] 
Ho 
— b) Ho oOr Ox2
TMd3oMy 
Lo2NNgoOr 
— c) TMd4 
— d) sKt5 
oMy
229. Omitted in Hy; verses 229 and 230 transposed in Ho. Cited by Apa 1231— a) TMd3
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Bo 
wKt3
oOr Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Bo cMy Wa 
Pu10 
T
M
d
4
— d)
oMd1 oOr
230. Omitted in sCa Hy sKt5 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2 MTr5 [haplo]; placed before 227 in MTr4 MTr6.
Cited by Apa 1231 — a) Apa 
Lo4 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
— b) H
o
P
u 8
•rMd4 
MTr6 
wKt'TMd 3TMd 4oMd 5 oMy [Jolly Na] Apa 
Lo2 
— c)
im NKt4 
BBe2 Bo Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La' TMd4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 
oMd5
TMd3 
oMy 
Lo2 
— d) sOx1 sPu6 
oOr Tr1
wKt3
231.* Omitted in Hy; pâda s a-b omitted in ßKt5. Cited by Apa 1231— a) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
TMd4 
Be1 Lo2NNg sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Wa Go Ku
Jo2 La1 Tj1 
Tr2 
Ox2
 
NKt4 
sBe2 
— b) wKt1
— c) Be2 Jm 
sOx1 sPu6 
Tr2 
[Jolly N]^T:; Be1 wKt3 sKt5 La1 cMd1
oMy oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 MTr4MTr6 \Jolly M'-2-5-8-' G Nd] Apa Jolly 
L o 3 B e 1 wKt1
NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1
 MTr4 Miroir6 [Jolly M'-2-5-8-9 G Nd] Jolly
La1 
o O r s O x 1 
Be1 
— d) oMd ' TMd4 MTr4
 MTr6
[TMd4 
MTr4OM 
]; MTr5 
NKt4 
Tj1 
wKt1
Tr1
 
TMd3 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Tr1 [Jolly Nd] 
MTr5 
Bo Ho Jm
Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Be1 sKt5 Lo1 Pu4 Apa
Wa
232. Verses 232 and 233 transposed in oMy — a) Jm 
TMd3 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7
— c)Ox2Pu10[yo//yM'-2-8-9R]yo//y 
[for 
see parallel at 11.242]—
d) TMd4 
sKt5


--- PAGE 892 ---
Chapter n 
881
233. Omitted in sCa oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Pu'° Wa [haplo]; Kt2 repeats 23ic-d in place of
233c-d — b) Kt2 _ 
[cf. 11.2320] — c) Lo1 iMd4 
Bo Ho sKt5 La1
MTr4MTr6 
Pu5 Pu7 " 
wKt1 Lo1 MTr4 
La1 Pu4 om =T;
oOr 
Pu2
234. a) MTr6 
wKt1 sOx1 s P u
6 B e
1 Lo2 Ox2 N?U' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2
GoRc' 
Tj2 
— c)wKt' 
Tr1 
— d) wKt3 
oMd1
BKt5
235. Pâda s a-b omitted in Ç a and pâda- d in wKt1 — a) Bo 
B e 1 — b)
MTr4 MTr6 
oMy Tr1 Wa 
wKt1 oMd ' oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1
[Jolly G M'-8-9] 
Be1 Bo wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 sPu6
Pu 8Tj'Wa 
Jo2Pu5Pu7 
— c)Lo2Wa 
— d) Lo4 
Wa
NKt
4 La1 oMd1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 
oMy
236. Omitted in Pu5; pàda- a omitted in wKt' — b) NNg [but corfli] 
TMd3
— c) Ho La1 om 
sBe2 Bo wKt3 sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly G]
237. * ma in NPu
1 — a) sCa 
Lo2 T Md4 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj ' Wa
NPu
1 
wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo3 sOx1 s
P
u
6
B
e
1 sBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2
Lo1 Lo4 cMy Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 b)
oMd1 
T
r
2
T
M
d
4 
Ho N N g Pu3 Tr1 
Lo2
— c) BKt5 
wKt1 eKt5 sOx1 sPu6 
NKt4 
oMd5
238.* a) sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4iMd4 sOx1 Ox2sPu'
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 [Jolly R Ku] Kit Rn Nd Mr Mandlik KSS 
iMd3
Pu2 Pu4 
— b) sOx1 
NKt4 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
" ßBe2 
oMd5 
ß K t 5 —
c) TMd3 
T M d
3 w K t
1 
" 
" 
NNg Tr1 
Kt2 Tj1 
— d)
Tj'[Jb//vR] 
B K t 5 o M d 1 
wKt1


--- PAGE 893 ---
882 
Chapter 11
239. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]; bottom of folio containing verses 239-430 torn off in sPu6
— a)aKÍ 
B
e
1
T
M
d
4 
— a-b) wKt1
— 
tyNKt4 
NPu'Pu 2 
TMd3 
Wa 
oMd1 
sKt5
sOx1 
Lo1 TMd3 
— c) Bo La1 Lo' Lo4 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 [Jolly M G
Ku] Jolly Jha Dave ViDh 95.17 
Tr2
 
BCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 nKt5 Lo4 Ox2
Tj2 Mandlik KSS 
oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 T r
1 — d) TMd3 
La1 Pu5 Pu7
Tr1
240. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Vis 3.27O;Mädh 2.454 — b) wKt3 sOx1
[wKt3 
];BKt5 
" Lo'oMy 
TMd3 oMy " 
— d) Bo eCa
NKt4 TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
TMd4 
oMd1 Pu2
241.Omitted in [Jolly Nd] — a) T M d
3 w K t
1 
TMd3 
Be1
oMd5 ; 
[Jolly Nd] 
oMy 
" Ho
sOx1 
. MTr5 
— b) Bo 
sKt5 
Tr1 
— c)
MTr4 MTr6 
— d) sOx1
242. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Mädh 2.454 — a)ßBe2 
— b) sKt5 oMd5
oMy [Jolly Nd] Jolly Jha Dave 
[cf.ii.232]; Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 Ox2 Pu10 Tr1
[Jolly M Gr] 
[om 
|; Pu3 
Bo 
— c) NKt4 Pu5
Pu7 
Be1 Pu4 
Bo " 
TMd4 
MTr4 
Tr1
La1^
243. Omitted in Kt2 [Jolly Nd] — a) Ho Tr2 
oMd5 
s O x
1 — c)
Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 
Pu10
 
TMd3 
Lo4 [but me] 
oOr 
NKt4
— d) wKt1 : 
Bo 
NKf» : 
w K t
3 s O x
1 sPu6
Bo"
244. a) oMy 
— b) Tr1 
TMd3 
N
P
u
1
— c)
Ho 
oMd5 Pu4 Tj2 
TMd3 
— d) Lo3 TMd3 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tj1
TJ2


--- PAGE 894 ---
Chapter 11 
883
245. a) TMd3 Tr1 Mir5 [Jolly G] 
NKt4 
H
o
P
u
5
MeJhaDave 
TMd4; 
Lo1 oMy Pu5 Pu7 
— b) Ho La1
NPu1 
— c)oOr 
Ox2 
Bo 
eKt5 
Hy
NNg 
[NNg 
]; BBe2 La1 
— d) Bo oMd5 
sKt5 La1
Ox2 Tr2 
wKt1 Lo3 Tj1 
TMd3 
Bo 
sBe2 Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5
Mandlik KSS
Additional verse in Be1 eCa La1 Pu3 Tr2 Mandlik 
KSS Dave; given after verse
246 in sKt5 oOr; commented by 
a)sCa 
— b)La' 
Be1 
— cJBe'sCaoOr
246. Cited by Mädh 2.172, 379, 451 — b)oMd' 
oMy 
Ho
Lo4 TMd3 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 [Jolly M] 
Lo1 
wKt3 Lo1 Lo4 TMd3 sOx1 Pu2 sPu6
[Jolly M] 
BKt5TMd4MTr4MTr6 
— c) TMd4 
Tr2 
Ox2
BKt5 
— d) Lo1 
Be1 
Jm
247.* Cited by Mädh 2.172, 451 — a) Bo NKt4 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Wa
eBe2 Jo2 wKt1 Lo1 Lo3 Pu8 oOr Tj1 Tj2 
Hy 
Be1 Ho wKt3 Lo2
Lo4 [ma] oMd1 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Re Go 
Tr2
 
3Kt5
Pu10 [Jolly M ] 
T
M
d
3
P
u
3
' 
w K t
3 T r
1
TMd3 NNg 
— b) Ox2 Tr1
 
BBe2 Hy wKt3 Tr2 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
 
BCa
Be1 Bo oMd1 rMd3 cMd5 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 
NNg 
Ho Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 sKt5
Lo1 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 
W
a
s
B
e
2 
T r
1 — c )
Mädh 
— c-d) Lo4 Pu10 
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 [Jolly G]
Go Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Jo1 om 
Jo2
*Additional verse in most mss. and all editions [see note] as verse 248, which number is
omitted in the edition:
a)/?« Ipätha' l 
sKt5 
wKt1 
— a-b) Jo2 Lo3 Tj '
[Jo2" 
] — b) Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 
— c)ßKt5 
oOr
Verse numer 248 has been eliminated from the critical edition.
249.* Cited by Vij 3.301; Apa 1216; £>ev2.s68 — a) Hypermetric päda ; ßBe2 Hy wKt1
wKt3 sKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 Mir4 Wa [Jolly R] Nä
RE


--- PAGE 895 ---
884 
Chapter 11
[sBe2 Hy La1 Lo3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
eKt5 Wa 
|; Jm Jo1 Kt2 oOr Pu8 Vij Dev
Mandlik Jolly JhaKSS Dave 
" 
[ o O r ] ; Pu10 
Be1 NKt4
Tr2 _ 
Lo2 
TMd4 
oMy 
Bo Ox2 Re 
—
 b) Ho
GMd 5GMyNPu'Tr' 
H y s B e
2 " T M d
4 
H o Tr1 
— c ) Ox2
Tj2 
iMd3 oMy Tj1 Tr1 ' 
Lo1 
rMd4
 
BBe2 Bo 
Lo3 [Jolly R]
Ox2 
— d)Bo 
T j 1 B B e 2
250.* Päda s c-d omitted in Tj2. Cited by Vij 3.303; Apa 1216; Mädh 2.457— a) TMd3
Wa 
Pu2 
oMy 
Pu4 
La1 
Tr1 
Mädh
Jo2 Pu5 Pu7 
L a
1 — b)TMd4
Be1 NKt4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
[Be1 (Jolly G) 
NKt 4
];HoTj" 
M
ä
d
h
W
a 
Pu10 
sKf om ^; Ho Jolly
Bo Tr2 
oMd1 oMd5 oMy Tr1 [folly Nd] 
Lo1 O x
2 s C a
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Lo3 Lo4 [Jolly R Ku] Vij Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo2
wKt3 
J
o
2
P
u
8 Tj1 T j
2 s O x
1 sPu6 
Pu2 srfrT
Lo2 
sKt5 
La1 
Pu3 
* sBe2 
— c) Tr2
Bo 
~ 
Apa 
wKt1 Lo2 Lo4oMd' oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 [Jolly
MGN]BhMe Ipätha ] Go Nä 
P u 1 0 L a 1
 
TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr6
MTr4 
~ 
cMd5 
L
a
1
H
o Ox 2 
sOx1 sPu6 
wKt1
— d) Lo1 cor to 
wKt3
251. Päda s a-b omitted in Tj2; too blurred to be read in oMd5. Cited by Vij 3.303; Apa
1216 — a) sOx1 sPu6 
T
M
d
3
— b) Lo1 T r 1 P u ' ° [Jolly M] 
— c) NKt4
TMd3 oMy Vij 
TMd4 T
r
1
w
K
t
3 La1 
Bo sCa Ho sKt5
La1 Lo2oMd' NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 MTr4MTr6 Wa 
Bo sCa Ho La1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5
Pu7Tr2 
Hy 
— d) NNg 
Pi? P u 4 e K t 5
252.* Cited by Vij 3.304; Apa 1216; Madh 2.458 — a) wKt1 wKt3 Lo1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr2
Jo2 NKt4 TMd3 sOx1 sPu6 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 
Be1 
NNg
Ox2
 
T
M
d
4
B
e
2 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 WaMädh Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave ' 
L
a
1
L
o
2 
oOr 
— b)
sKt5 
T r
1 H o 
s
B
e
2
P
u
3 
o O r — c ) TMd4 MTr4
MTr6 
[MTr6 
|; Be1 Bo uCa Ho wKt1 sKt5 La1 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu3
Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 [Jolly Nd] Vij 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1
 
M T r 4 H y Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo4
cMy NPu
1 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 [Jolly M]Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
NPu1 MTr4
— d) Wa 
TMd4 MTr4 MTr6


--- PAGE 896 ---
Chapter il 
885
253. Päda s c-d ma in Lo4. Cited by Vij 3.305; Apa \2\7;Mädh 2.459 — a) TMd4
— b) BBe2 
Bo Pu10 
TMd4 
— c) oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 
Pu10
Be1 
Tr2 
Lo2 
TMd3 
Tr1 
" 
La1 
Pu4 Pu5
Lo1 
— d) oOr 
; Hy' 
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 nKt4 Lo1 Lo2
Lo4 oMy Ox2 Tr2 [Jolly M G] 
sCa Pu10 
,Be' Pu5 Pu7
[Be1
 ' 
]; xMd4 
Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 NMd3 oMy NNg Vij Ku Rn Nd Mr
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
254. Cited by Vij 3.306; Apa \zvj;Mâdh 2.174— a) B° 
L
a
1
— b) Bo
HoTj'Tr 1 
NKt4 
vKt3 
La1 
Pu5 
Tr1 
— c) wKt1
Bo 
MTr6 
BKÍ 
Be1 
; sKt5 
— d) Apa
Lo1 
B o H o wKt1 La1 Lo4 P u
1
0 B o 
L
a
1
T
r
1 [toi
corfli\ ' 
Wa
255. Päda s b-d torn in oMy. Cited by Apaizij— a) Apa [vi] 
Pu10
Be1 La1 Lo2 rMd3 Apa 
T r 2 N P u 1 
oMy 
Pu2 Pu4
Ox2 
Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Bo 
oMd1 
Pu2 Pu4 
Bo Lo4 NNg Ox2 Tj1
TMd3 
rMd4 T r
1 P u
2 P u
4 P u
5 Pu7 
ßKt5 
wKt1 
— b )
NNg Me Jha Dave 
NKt4 
eBe2 
— c) wKt1 NKi4 Lo2 Tr2
sBe2 
Mir4 M
T
r
6
B
e
1 oOr sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Wa 
Bo wKt'
. 
— d) NKt4 Lo1 Pu8 
Be1 
oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 
wKt3
MTr4 
Tr1 Apa ' 
; TMd4 TMd3 
sBe2 om 
. Be1 wKt3
Lo3 Lo4 oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 MTr5 Wa [/o/fy M Nd] 
Lo2 
sKt5
cMd' MTr4MTr6 
La1 oMd5 Tr1 A p a T r
2 
Hy Kt2 Lo4 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6
Jolly 
Be1 Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 NPu
1 Pu5 Pu7
256. Omitted in sKt5 oMd1; page containing 2ssd to 26od damaged in sPu6. Cited by
Apa 12.17; päda s c-d cited by Vij 3.306 — a) Hy 
Lo2 ; 
Bo Lo3 Jha Dave
— b) cMd5 
, B e 1 T r 2 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
NNg sOx1 Ox2
sPu6 Tr2 
iMd3 
TMd4 
eBe2 
NNg Ox2 Pu3 Tr2 
" 
— d) Lo1
Bo 
Ho Lo4 TMd3 NNg Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Vij
257. Omitted in sKt5 oMd1. Cited by Vij 3.303; Apa iz\j;Mädh 2.457 — a) TMd3
wKt3 
L a
1 o M y 
— b) TMd3 oMd5 MTr6 
MTr6
— c)Lo' 
TMd3 
NNg Pu3 Tj1 ï^°
; La1 Ox2 Tj2 Vij


--- PAGE 897 ---
886 
Chapter n
Pu2 Pu4 
— d)Pu 5Pu 7
 
MTr4MTr6 
w K t 1 x M d 3 xMd4 Pu2 Wa
SA|pâtha | 
Lo2 
Lo4 
Tr2 
Màdh
258. Pâda s a-b omitted in cMd1, and pâda s c-d in MTr6. Cited by Apa i2i8;Mädh 2.458
— a) Be1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 
— b) xMd3 
Lo1 
NNg Pu10 [Jolly
M9] 
. 
Lo2 
Be1 sKt5 
— c) oMd1 
xMd4
Pu2 Pu4 
Be1 Bo wKt1 NKt4 xMd" Pu5 Tj1 
eBe2 sCa wKt3 
Ox2
— d) Be1 Bo Ho La1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 
wKt1 r 
; xMd4
259. Padas a-b omitted in MTr6, pâda s b-c in Ho, and pada-d in sKt5; 257c-d given in
place of 259c-d in Jm. Cited by Vij 3.301; Apai2i8; Maclh 2.456 — a) Lo4 
L o 1 —
b)Jo' 
Apa 
Be1 
eBe2 
— d) La' Lo2 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7
sBe2 
" 
rMd4 Tr1
260. Pâda s a-c omitted in Ho sKt5. Cited by Apa 1218 — a) oMy 
MTr4
Jo2 Lo1 NPu1 MTr6 
B o x M d
4 Tr1 
MTr6 
— b) xMd4
oMd1 
xMd3 
La1 
Lo3 
T
r
1
— c ) Tr1
—d) Be1 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo4 xMd3 Ox2 Pu10 Tj2 [Jolly M] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave
iMd4
261. Verse 261 placed after 263 in oMy — a) Bo 
— b) oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMd5
oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 
[Jolly Nd] 
wKt3 " 
Pu2 Pu4 
[Jolly R]
ViDh 55.7 
— c) sKt5 
— d) cMd1 xMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6
[oMy" 
];La 1oOrPu 2Pu 4 
s K t 5 J o 2 T j '
262. Cited by Laks 1.174; M5i//i2.174— a) Lo4 
";oOi 
xMd3
— a-b) MTr4
 MTr6 
— b) xMd3 
Laks
— c) Lo1 oMd5 Tr2 
., sBe2 
— d) Tr1
263. Cited by Apa 1218 — c) Ho 
T r 2 x M d 4 
— d) Tj '


--- PAGE 898 ---
Chapter 11 
887
264.* Cited by Apa 1218 — a) iMd4 om 
Ho 
cMy 
— b) wKt1
Lo1 Tj1 
Hy 
Jo1 Kt2 w Kt3 Lo3 Lo4 NNg sOx ' sPu6 [me sh to] Pu10
[Jolly M R] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
wKt3 
sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 uKt5
Lo1 Lo4 [cor to] oMd1 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
L o
1 T r
1 
— c ) H y — d ) Tr1 
TMd3 TMd4
oMy Pu5 
Apa 
iMd4
265.* Cited by Apa 1218 — a) sKt5 
" , Apa [vi] 
Be1 ßCa Ho Jm Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo3TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOrsOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly
R Ku Nd] Afe Ipätha ] M7 Kit Rn Nd Mr Mandlik KSS 
' 
Hy 
Lo1 cMd1 [but cor]
A p a 
B o — 
a-b) n
B
e
2
L
o
1 Tr2 ;
[Lo1 
]— b) TMd3 
— c) TMd4 om 
sKt5 
— d) Kt2 Lo2 NNg Pu2
Pu4 Tr1 Wa 
sOx1 s P u
6 w K t
1 
wKt3 
Hy om
La1
266. Omitted in Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 — a) TMd3 oMd5 Tr1 
Be1 Lo1 
Ho wKt1
wKt3 
L
a
1
— b ) M T r 4 M T r 6 w K t 1 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 
Lo3
TMd3 
• — c)MTr4 
wKt3 
— d) MTr4
 MTr6 
La1 : e K t 5
Be1 Bo Jo2 wKt1 Lo4 oMd5 My oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Go Na Nd Jolly
[Jolly Gr] 
sBe2 
Tr2 om
Additional verse in Ho La' Lo3 rMd4 oMd5 oOr sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 MTr4 MTr6
[Jolly Nd R] Mandlik 
KSS Dave; commented by Rn; päda s a-b given in TMd3
oMy:
a)Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly N R] Mandlik KSS Dave 
sOx1 sPu6
— b) Ho TMd3 Mandlik KSS Dave 
[ r M d 3 ] ; oMy
— c) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 KSS Dave 
Mandlik. MTr6
. 
TMd4 Mandlik KSS Dave 
—
 d) Ho 
sOx ' sPu6
La1 
[Jolly Nd R]
Additional half-verse in TMd3 oMy sOx1 sPu6:
b) TMd3
Additional half-verse in La1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
\ 
KSS Dave:


--- PAGE 899 ---
888 
Chapter 11
Colophon: Be1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 iMd3 NNg oOrsOx1 sPu6 Tr1 
" 
wKt3
Be1 BKt5. GMd1 xMd3 sOx1 sPu6 om 
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 
wKt3 om
Lo1
sOx1 sPu6
 wKt1
Ho


--- PAGE 900 ---
Before verse i oMd5 oOr add
1. 
Cited by Mädh 2.484-5 — a) La1 
wKt1 wKt3 eKt5 La1 oMd1 oOr NPu1
Pu 2Pu 4Tr 2 
Ho 
Be1 
NKt4 
— b)xMd3 
— c) wKt1
Tr2 
BBe2 wKt1 sKt5 
— d) Tr1 
oMd1 
Be1 Bo Ho Lo1 xMd3
oMd5 NNg NPu
1 Pu3 Pu'°Tr 2 Wa 
aKt5 
here oMd5 adds
2. 
Omitted in Wa. Cited by Mädh 2.485 — b) oMd ' 
" 
Tr2 
— c) wKt3
— d)wKt3 
cMd1 
TMd4 
BBe2
3. 
Cited by Mädh 2.485 — a) oMy 
" — b) sOx1 sPu6 
, Mir4 Mir6
— c)xMd3 
Tr1 
TMd4 
- d) Tr2 
H o T M d
4
4. 
Cited by Mädh 2.485 — a) Lo3 
MTr4 Mir6 
Hy Lo' Tj1 
— b)
Ho Jm wKt1 Mir5 
\pm 
J; Mädh 
oOr 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
La1
MTr4 MTr6 
— c) oMd5
 
TMd3 
— d) La1 Lo1 oMd1 xMd4
; La1 
a K t
5 L o
2 oOr*
Additional verse in Pu2; päda s a-b given after verse 5 in NKt4 [cf. addition at 12.8]:
a-b) NKt4
5. 
Cited by Apa 997; Mädh 2.485 — a) Tj2 
L o
2 T M d
3 
— b)
Bo 
— c) TMd4 
Ox2 Tr1 
Be1 iMd4 
— d) Lo3 
. Ho
889


--- PAGE 901 ---
890 
Chapter 12
6.* Page containing verses 50 to i2b torn in sPu6. Cited by Apa 998; Hem 3/3.632;
Mädh 2.485 — b) Lo2 om 
A p a B B e
2 Hy Jtn Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 La1 Lo1 Lo3
oMd1 TMd4 Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Mir6 [Jolly R Nd]Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
s O x 1 P u 5
Pu7 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M] Apa 
T r
2 — c) c M d
5 T M d
3 
Be1 Pu2 Pu4
Hy 
B o H o w K t 1 e B e 2 Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 Ox2 Tj1 Tj2 Laks
Mandlik J h a K S S Dave • 
Tr1 "
— d ) wKt1 
w
K
t
3
L
a
1
7. 
Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Hem 3/3.632; Mädh 2.485 — b) Be1 TMd4 oMy Tj1
La1 
T
r
2
— c ) H o " o O r 
— d ) P u
4 J o
2
wKt1 Lo3Ox2Tj'//em
8 . C i t e d by Mädh 2.485 — a) T
j
1
T
r
1 
oOr 
— - b ) o M y
[Jolly M]' 
— c)NKf 
Ox2 
GMdsGMyTrlMTr4MTr6Maí// ¡
TMd3 
J o 2 P u 3 T j ' _ T r 2 o m 
— d) wKt1 
oMd1
Tj2 
Be1 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tj^Tr5 Mand-
lik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Pu8 
Lo2
After pâda- b additional half-verse in TMd3:
Additional verse in NNg oOr Ox2 Mandlik 
_ Dave KSS; pâda. s c-d in NKt4 [see 12.5]:
a) oOr Ox2 
— c) NNg Ox2 
NKt4 oOr 
— d) Ox2
9. 
Cited by Apa 9<)6;Mâdh 2.485; pâda s c-d cited by Vij 3.68 — a) Tr2
Be1 oMd1 Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1 
— b) wKt1 
— c) oOr 
Ho
sOx1 Pu10 
,MTr 6 
— d) Bo 
sOx1 
NKt4 
rMd3
Additional verses in NNg Mandlik [numerous mss.] Dave KSS:
NNg adds two more verse [same as 1-2 after verse 10]; Mandlik Dave KSS add three
more verses [same as 1-3 after verse 10]
10. Verses 10 and 11 transposed in TMd3. Cited by Apa 951;Laks 14.42; Mädh 1.549 —


--- PAGE 902 ---
Chapter 12 
891
a) Jo2 Lo5 Tj1 Apa 
BKt5 
— b) nBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3
Pu3 Tj ' Tj2 [Jolly Ku] Go A"M fln MrMandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Bo Jo2 La1 Lo3 oMd1
TMd4 oMy Tj1 Tr1 Mir4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd R]Apa 
[Apa 
J — c) Bo
TMd4 
Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 P if Tj2 Me Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS
Dave 
Be1 NPu
1 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly M]Apa Re 
rMd4 
La1
sOx1 Ox2 
M K f — d ) T
r
2
J
o
2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2
 NPu'
Pu4 Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M] 
~ 
" 
~ 
Rn 
,Apa
BKt5 
Ho om
Additional verses in Be1 La1; they are given after 12.9 in NPu1 Mandlik KSS Dave, and
after 12.12 in Pu2 Pu4; first two verse given after 12.9 in NNg; the second only after 12.10 and
the first after 12.11 in Ox2; all three cited after 12.11 by Go; verse 2 cited by Apa 951:
1. a) Ox2 
- c) La1
2. a) NNg NPu1 Mandlik KSS' 
Ox2 Dave 
—
 b) NPu1
Apa 
Be1 
La1 Pu2 Pu4 Dave 
Ox2
— c) Ox2
 
NNg NPu1 Mandlik KSS 
Be1
— d) Ox2
3. b) Be1 Pu4 
— c-d) La1
11.* Verses 11 and 12 transposed in Jm. Cited by Laks 14.43; Mâdh 1.549 — a) La1
TMd3 
T
r
1
— b ) T j '
— c ) s K t 5 x M d 3
La1 
; Laks 
uBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 oMd1 TMd3 oMy sOx1
NPu1 Pu2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Mâdh Mandlik Jolly KSS 
Dave Jha 
- d) Kt2oMd' TMd3
rMd4 oMy Tr1 MTr5 Mâdh Bh Me Rn Re Jolly Jha Dave
12. Cited by Laks 14.113 — a) Lo2 Tj1 
Laks 
Tr1 
Ho
sOx'sPu6 
oMd1 
' 
— 
tyBK^Lo1 
;TMd4 
— d)wKt'
Jo2 
Pu5 Pu7
13.Cited by Laks 14.113 — a) Pu5 Pu7 : 
TMd3 MTr6 
Be1 NNg
Lo2Ox2 
— b)Hyom 
TMd4 
— c) TMd3 
Pu10 
oOrsOx1
sPu6 
— d) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 
MTrVlr6 
" 
Ho sOx1
sPu6 
NNg


--- PAGE 903 ---
892 
Chapter 12
H. 
a) TMd3 
sBe2 
NNg 
_ 
Tr1 
— b) Be1 sKt5 TMd4 NNg
sKt5 [Jolly M] 
Pu5 Pu7 
Ho La1 Lo2 MTr4
 MTr6
Additional verse in NPu' Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik \ 
KSS; given after i4b in Be1:
d) NPu1 Pu2 
Pu4 
Mandlik
15. a) NNg; 
T M d
4 o M d
1 
— b) NKÍ* 
s K t
5 T r
2
Ho " 
— d)oMy^ 
^oMd1 
Ho ÏÏT; Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 V.; MTr6
Pu8
16.* a) wKt1 
Ho 
oMd ' TMd3 oMd5 oMy Mir4 Mir5 MTr6
H ^ M i A q ; iMd4 
Ho Lo3 
Me Kit Dave Jha 
— b) TMd3
cMd1 
— c O s B e
2 , cMd1 
Pu5 P
u
7
[
J
o
l
l
y
Nd] 
— d)La'oMy 
Be1 sBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NÍCt4 sKt5
La1 Lo1 Lo3 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2
 MTr5 [Jolly M Nd R1 Ra1"3] Mandlik
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Pu5
17. a) Pu3 
oMd1 ^ 
;Tj 2 : 
NNg 
Lo1 
HooOr 
rMd4
wKt1 
— b)MTr5 
;oMd' 
— c) wKt1 ' 
P u
4 c M d
1
NKt4 
sBe2 
TMd4 
Tr2 
— d) oMd1 MTr4 MTr6
18. Pâda s b-d omitted in Tr1 — a) HowKt3 TMd4 oMy NNgoOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1
MTr6 [Jolly Go R] 
ßKt5 L
o
1
w
K
t
1 
TMd3
Pu10 
— 
tyNKt4 
Lo3Tj' 
Lo3' 
„ Be1 Hy Lo1 oOr Tj1 Tj2
Tr2 
TMd3 
— c) oMy 
Tr2 
wKt1 
Be1 
TMd3
— d) Jo2 La1 oOr Pu8 Tj2 
oMy NPu1
19. Pâda- a omitted in Tr1; page containing verses 19-21 missing in Pu10 — a) Pu5 Pu7
 sPu6 
.TMd4 NNg
Ox2 
— d) wKt1
 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4


--- PAGE 904 ---
Chapter 12 
893
TMd3 
BKt5 
— b)Bo 
NKf 
Tr1 
T
M
d
3
— c)
Ho NNg 
Lo3 T j
1 B o Ho Jo2 Lo3 iMd3 Tj ' T r
2 — d) La1 Lo2 oOr sOx1 Pu3
sPu6Tr2 
oMd1 rMd3 rMd4 oMy T
r
1
B
o HosKt5 La1 Lo3 oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 MTr5 [Jolly R Nd] 
[Bo Ho O x
2 ]
20. Päda s c-d omitted in sKt5 — a) Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly M G R ] Nd Jolly Jha Dave
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 
B e
1 M T r
4 
— b) TMd4 
— c) Tr2
Pu5 Pu7 
H o w K t
3 
Tfom— 
d) wKt1 
Ho
La1 
Ox2
21. Päda s a-b omitted in sKt5, and päda s c-d in Pu2 Pu4 — a) TMd3 
oOr
— b ) H o 
o M y P u
2 P
u
4
— c ) J o
1 J o
2 oMd5 N N g Pu5 Pu7 Tr1
Tr2 [Jolly G R Nd M3] 
cMd1 o M y N K t
4 
— d) ßBe2 Ho Pu5 Pu7
TMd3 
N K t 4 T M d 4 
TMd3 
Tr2
22.* Päda s a-b omitted in Pu2 Pu4 — a) La1 Lo1 Ox2 [Jolly M] 
Wa 
TMd4
Tj2 
— b) w
K
t
1
B
o 
Be1 [but cor] 
: — c) TMd4
; MTr5 
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 cMd1 TMd3
 TMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G Nd] GoRn Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
23. Page containing verses 23c-28d torn in sPu6 — a) Ox2 
NKt*
sKt5 La1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 
MTr4 
wKt1 
Lo3 Pu3 Tj1
TMd3 
NNg om—
 
b) La1 cMd1 TMd3 cMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr4MTr5 MTr6
NKf 
Tj2 
Lo3 
Ho 
Pu5 Pu7 
TMd4 
H o P u
5 Pu7
oMy: 
P u
2 T M d
3 
Be lBBe 2HooMd'Ox 2Tr 1 
— d)sBe2BoHy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt 4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 [Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oM d1
sOx1 
Bo MTr4 
La1
24. ma in Pu7. Cited by Laks 14126; Mädh 2.487 — a)oMd' TMd3 cMd5 TMd4
oMy Mädh 
— b) Bo La1 O x
2 w K t
3 
La1 
TMd4 
Ho 
cor
to 
—
 c)Tr2 
wKt1 
Ho 
La1 
— d) Lo3


--- PAGE 905 ---
894 
Chapter 12
25. Omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 14.126; Mädh 2.487 — a) Ho 
Be1 eBe2 Lo2
Lo3 TMd3 NNg oOr sOx1 Pu10 Tj ' Tr2 
eKt5 
wKt1 
Lo3 
Hy 
— b) ßKt5
— c) Lo2 
— d) äße
2 wKt3
 TMd3 oMd5 Pu4 Pu7 
wKt1
26. Cited by Laks 14.126; Mädh 2.487 — a) oOr 
Tr2 
sKt5 
L a 1 B o
Ho 
— b) Lo3 GMd1 Wa " 
Pu10 
xMd4 
Lo3 Tj1
La1 Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1 o O r L o 3 
— c) Lo2 
Ox2
Pu2*T 
s
O
x
1
— d) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Lo1
27. ma in wKt1; pâda s c-d omitted in eKt5 oMd1 [haplo]. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14.126
— a) Bo 
TMd3 
Be1 
N P u
1 s B e
2 
— b) Lo3 
— c)Apa
Wa 
oMy 
Tr2 
xMd3 
— d) Lo3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1
Jo2 
c M y B B e 2 B o H o J o 2 L o 3 O x 2 T j 1 
" 
Pu8 
wKt1
28 Omitted in oMd1 TMd4; pada-a ma in wKt1 ; pâda s a-b omitted in Pu2. Cited by Laks
14.126 — a) Bo Lo1 ïftr ; Jo2 Lo3 Tj ' Laks 
Pu10 [Jolly M] f.^T; sKt5 
— a-b) Pu4
— b) Lo2 
TMd3
Ho 
L o
3 T j ' P u
5 Pu7' 
oMy 
— c) TMd3
Be1 
NPu1 
sOx1 
NNg 
wKt1 
" 
La1
sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 
[Jolly M] Me Mandlik Jha KSS Dave "irfrit; Pu5 Pu7 "çrfcRT ; NPu1
Jo1 
HoOx2 
Lo2 
Tr2 
Lo1 
Ho Ox2 
— d) Wa
Me Jha Dave 
Ho 
Ti2 
Ox2
29.* Omitted in oMd1 TMd4; Cited by Laks 14.126 — a) NNg 
Tr1 
— b) Tr2
Laks 
Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 sKt5 Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 cMy oOr Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr1 Mir4 Mir5 Mir6 [folly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu5 Pu7
— c) wKt3 
— d) Bö 
ßBe2 Jo2 Lo3 Tj ' 
"
30. Cited by Laks 14.127—a) Lo1 
—b)Pu'° 
c M y " ' —
c) sBe2 wKt1 sKt5 
Tr2 
L o
1 ß K t
5 
— d) Pu5 Pu7


--- PAGE 906 ---
Chapter 12 
895
31. Päda s c-d omitted in Lo1 Pu5. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14127 — a) MTr4 MTr6
Ho TMd4 
W
a
o
M
y T r
1 s B e
2 
— b) Ox2
oMy 
— c)Tr2 
sOx1 
La1 
[om ];
W a 
T
M
d
3
— d ) B K . f w K t
3
32 * Omitted in wKt3 Tj2; päda s a-b omitted in Lo1 sOx1 sPu6; verses 32 and 33 trans-
posed in Lo2. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kf Lo3 Pu3 Tj1 [Jolly R] Rn Nd Re
Mandlik J h a KSS Dave 
[ w K t 1 ] ; o O r L a k s 
xMd3
o O r 
T M d
4 — b ) H
o
o
O
r 
Lo3
— c) hypermetric päda ; iMd3 
Lo' [cor to] oMy 
TMd4
, Be1 oMd5 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 
e
K
t
5
. Tr2
33. Omitted in oMd1 MÏr6 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a)cMy [Jolly Nd]
— b)Tr' 
_ 
'— c) wKt1 
Bo 
~ 
oOr 
Ho
sOx1 sPu6 
[om ]
34. ma in Lo1. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) TMd4 
— b) Lo2
La1 
TMd 3_ 
L o
3 T j '
T M d
4 Ox2 Tr1 MTr4 MÏr6
[Jolly Nd] 
— c ) P i ? P u 4 " 
T
M
d
3
H
o 
" 
-Md4
cMd1 
— d) TMd4 Mir6
35. Omitted in sKt5 Lo2 Tr2 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) Bo 
— b) Lo3
La1 
wKt3 
Ox2 
— c) Be1 Bo Ho Pu3 
, oMd1
TMd4 
TMd3 oMy sOx1 Tr1 
Tj1 
sBe2
36. Omitted in Tj1 [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) oMd1 
TMd3
Lo2 
— b) La1 Lo1 [Jolly Nd] 
_ 
Laks 
sBe2
BBe2 Kt2 NKt
4 Lo1 
— c ) T
M
d
4
„ ". wKt1 
o M d 1 . sOx1 sPu 6"
Lo2 
T r
1 B e
1 
ßKt5 
MTr6 ' — 
d ) cMd5
Lo2
 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 Pu3 Pu10 Tj2 [Jolly M]Nâ Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
wKt1


--- PAGE 907 ---
896 
Chapter 12
37. Omitted in Tj1. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14.126-7 — a) oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
Tr1 MTr4 [Jolly Nd] 
[xMd4 oMy oMd5 
TMd3 
]; Lo2
NPu1 
sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 [Jolly M] * T : H o Laks 
—
 b)Laks
MTr6 Apa 
' 
ßKt5 
Lo1 
Lo3 
T M d
4 w K t
1
La1 Lo3 
Tr2 
MTr4 
eKt5 
— c) rMd4
TMd3 Pu2 Pu10 
o M d
1 s O x
1 
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Pu8 Tj2
[Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Ox2 
— d) TMd4
oMd5 
Tr2 
BoTMd3oOr
38. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14.127— a) MTr6 
Tr1 
Pu5 P u
7 — b) MTr6
wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7 
— c) TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 
— d) Jo1 Lo2
oMd1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6 
Ho wKt3 La ' TMd4 
Pu3 
w K t
1 A p a
Wa 
L o
3 H o Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS
Dave
39. Omitted in Tj1 Tr2 [haplo] — a) cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1
[Jolly Nd] 
Be1 Pu2 P u 4 o O r 
Pu5 Pu7 
— b)oMd5
Ho NNg Pu2 
N K t
4 T M d
3 
— c) sOx1 sPu6
oMd1 
w K t
3 " — d ) M T r 4 T M d 3
40. Pádas c-d omitted in TMd4. Cited by Mädh 2.488 — a) wKt3 
s i K t 4 —
b) Lo2 
Tr2 
sOx1 sPu6 
Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 ßKt5 La1 Lo3 NNg oOr Ox2
Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' Tj2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
Ho 
Lo1 
— c) NNg
oMy Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tr2 
[ T r 2 | ; oMd1 oMd5 Tr1
 MTr4
MTr6 
— d) Bo Lo1 TMd3 sOx1 s P u 6 J o 1 
Ox2
41.* Omitted in TMd4; päda s a-b omitted in sOx1 [haplo]; page containing verses 410 to
46b torn in sPu6. Cited by Mädh 2.488 — a) Lo2 
Bo oMd5 
Be1
sBe2 Jo2 BKt5 La1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOr O?? NPu1 Pu7 [but cor} Tj1 wTr5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M1 G
Na] Jolly' 
Pu2 P u
4 o M y 
wKt3 ^ — b) Pu3 
Be1
oMd1 N N g Tr2 
L
a
1
— c ) Pu7 •
B
B
e
2 wKt1 
Pu8
— d) TMd3 
MTr4 M
T
r
6
s
B
e
2 
; Lo1 Tr1
42.* Cited by Apa 1000; Mädh 2.488 — a) Lo3 TMd3 NNg Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 
Bo Ho oOr


--- PAGE 908 ---
Chapter 12 
897
I
Ox2 
[oOr 
] —b)Pu 3Tr 2 
Ox2 
sBe2
oOr 
sOx1 om 
ßKt5 
Lo1 
TMd3 oMy
NKt4 irtt^T; Be1 sBe2 Bo2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOr Pu5 Pu7 Pu8
Tj2 [Jolly G Ku R] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
— c) Be1 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 NNg
Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Go Ku Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
' 
—
 d) Pu5 Pu7 
sKt5 xMd3
TMd4 
" Pu5 Pu7
43. Verse 43 placed after 45 in sBe2. Cited by Apa \ooo;Mädh 2.488 — a) Bo
— b ) Be1 
w
K
t
1
T
M
d
4 
wKt3 
A p a
Lo3 
c M y T M d
3 
— c) eBe2 Bo Ho wKt3 La1 Lo1 oMd1 TMd4
cMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 Tj1 [Jolly M Nd R G] Jolly 
ßKt5 Tr1 
TMd3
Pu « 
TMd3
44 * Cited by Apa 1000; Madh 2.488 — a) Ho 
Bo 
Jo1
Bo^ 
— b)wKt' 
B o o M y 
TMd3 Tr1 
— c) Lo1 Tj1
— d) Be1 Bo NKt4 eKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Mir4 Mir5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly G] Apa Mädha Co 
' 
uBe2
TMd4
45. Omitted in Lo1. Cited by Apaiooo; Mädh 2.488 — a)oMd5 oOr MÏr6 
Lo3 Ox2
MTr5 
H
o
A
p
a 
L
a
1
— b ) ßBe2 H o H y J m Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 La3 Pu3 Tj2 [Jolly Ku] Mädh Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave.
NKt^Ox1 
Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
NKt4 oMy _
_ 
oMd1
— c)BBe2 
oMy 
Lo2 
'; sBe2 NKl
4 La1 
Ho Pu10
[Jolly M] " 
Be1 
— d) Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
sKt5 
Tj1 
Lo2
46. Omitted in Pu10 Tj1 [haplo]; pada-c omitted in Pu5. Cited by^wz 1000; Mädh 2.488
— a ) sOx1 A p a 
M
T
r
5
— b ) o O r 
Tr2 o m w K t
1
Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly Nd] 
Bo La1 TMd4 
— c) eKt5 '< 
La1 TMd4
oMyPu3Tr1Tr2MTr4MTr6^c[Jo/(yNd] 
oOr 
TMd3 
NPu
1
Hy Jo2 wKt1 oOr sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 [Jolly R] Rn 
La1 
— d) Pu5
Apa 
sPu6
47. Päda- d omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 1000; Madh 2.488 — a) sKt5 sOx1 sPu6 ;


--- PAGE 909 ---
898 
Chapter 12
Apa 
~ 
oOr 
wKt3 
— b) TMd3 
" sBe2 wKt3 sKl5 oMd1 Pu10
sOx1 sPu6 
"
T
M
d
4
B
e
1 Lo2 Pu8 
o
M
y
, 
sBe2 oMd5 Mir6
— d) sBe2 
;NNg 
Be1 Bo NKt4 eKt5 La1 Lo2 oMd1
TMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4
MTr6 Wa Apa Mädh Go 
[see
i2.44d note]; TMd4
48.Pada-a omitted in oOr. Cited by Mädh 2.488 — a) TMd3 
TMd4
—
 b) oMy om 
Be1 wKt1 
Pu2 Pu4 
oOr M i r 5 — c)
TMd3 
H o 
ßKt5 A/ä Ipätha ] \ ; 
Mir6 
— d ) eKt5 
Lo1
Ox2 
Ho
49. Omitted in Lo2 TMd4 sOx1 sPu6 [haplo]; päda s c-d omitted in oOr. Cited by Mädh
2.488 —a) Tr2 
T j
1 L a
1 Lo1 TMd3 oMy oOr 
NKt4 
— a-b)wKt'
Bo oMd1 oMd5 oOr Tr1 Mädh 
—
 b) La1 
Wa
— d) Be1 BBe2 Ho [cor to] Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 sKt5 La1 Lo1 NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R] Co
Ku ' 
oMy
50. Cited by Sam on B U 1.4.6, s.i.ifintro.]; Mädh 2.488 — a) Lo3 cMd1 
sBe2
Pu8 
— b) Be1 sBe2 La1 oOr sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Go
[Jolly M G] Jolly^ 
Mädh 
ßKt5 
wKt1 ^T — c) Ho
wKt3 
TMd4 
BKt5 
o O r 
Pu2 P
u
4
—
c-d) TMd3 
— d) NNg [but cor]
51. Cited by Mädh 2.488 — a) Bo 
wKt1 oOr Tr2 
Ho [cor to] sKt5 La1 Lo1
oMd1 TMd4 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu10 MTr4MTr6 Wa [Jolly M] 
— b) NNg 
" — c)
TMd3 TMd4 
oOr 
: — d) TMd4 
La1
TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] places vers 12.81 after verse 51
5 2 . a ) s O x
1 — b ) Pu3 T
r
2
O
x
2 
— c ) TMd3 oMd5 oMy MTr5
NPu1 Pu2 Tr1 
Tr2 
Ho Kt2 TMd4 sOx' sPu6 
Bo La1 Lo1 oMy
 Tj2 
BBe2 Tr2
wKt1
— d) Be1
 — c-d)TMd4
Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1
— c)
Apa
[lacuna] 
sOx1 sPu6
[Jolly M] Mädh


--- PAGE 910 ---
Chapter 12 
899
53. Cited by MSdh 2.502 — a) oMy 
NKt 4om 
— b) oOr Pu3 Tr2 Wa
wKt1 
— c ) o M y T M d 3 TMd4 sOx1 T r 2 " 
Tj1 
—c-d)Madh
—
 d) Ox2 
TMd4 
sOx1 sPu6
Tr1
54. Cited by Ate/A 2.502 — a) Lo1 
— b) Tr1 
La1 O x 2 L o 3
Tj1 [Jolly G R] 
Bo 
Be1 Lo1 oMd1 iMd4 oOr Ox2 [Jolly M]
sOx1 sPu6 
BKt5 
— c) TMd4 
Ho 
wKt3 oMy
Tj2 
- d) rMd3 oMd5"
55. Cited by Vij 3.207-8; Mädh 2.502 — b) TMd3 oMd 5 Pu3 
_ 
NKr4
TMd4 
— c) sBe2 Bo Ho im wKt1 La1 Lo1 Ox2 Pu3 Vij 
Jo1 wKt3
NKt4 oOr Ox2 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
[see io.i8b note]; Hy Kt2
Be1 
Ho Jm Jo2 La1 Lo2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly G]
BKt5" 
B
o
w
K
t
1 
wKt3 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oOr — d)
HooOr'
56. Pâda s c-d ma in Lo' [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.207-8; Mädh 2.510— a) TMd3 NNg
sOx1 Tj ' Tr1 Tr2 
B e
1 P u
5 om~ ' 
L a
1
P u
1
0 [Jolly M] 
—
b)ïMd 3 
_ 
cMy 
TMd4 
oMd1 
Pu8 
" 
— c) La1
TMd4 
Pu2 Pu4 
MTr6 
Ho sOx1 sPu6 
— d) Ti2
BKt5 TMd4 ; 
oMd1 TMd3 cMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
Hy 
Lo3 
Be1 Lo2 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 
NPu1
57. Omitted in sOx1 sPu6; pâda s a-b ma in Lo1. Cited by Vij 3.207-8; Mädh 2.511 — a)
Lo3 Tj1 [folly R] 
M T r 6 ß K t 5 
'; Vij 
sBe2 wKt1 wKt3 La1
Ox 2Pu 2Pu 4Tj 2 
oMd1 
MTr5 
— b)cMd' 
oOr
cMd5 
w
K
t
1
N
N
g 
Pulo[Jo//yM]
Ho Pu2 
— c ) L a ' J o ' o w 
MSdh' 
— d) MTr6 
TMd4
58. Folios containing s8b to 84a missing in La1 — b) oMy 
[om
•]; wKt1 Tj1 
oOr 
Bo 
— c) Ho Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 MTr4
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 
Bo— 
d) oOr Tr1 MTr4


--- PAGE 911 ---
900 
Chapter 12
59 * Verses 59 and 60 transposed in wKt3 oMy — a) Bo 
Be' 
Ho wKt1
BKt5Lo'sOx' 
— b)NKl 4Lo 3TMd 3NNgPu 1 0Tj 1 Tr1 
Be1 Bo Tj2 
" wKt1
Tj1 
oMd1 cMd5 Pu2 P u
4 o O r 
— c)Lo' 
sBe2 
MTr4
Mir6 
Be1 ßBe2 Lo1 N N g " 
T r
1 — c-d) oMd1 MTr5
[cMd1 
] —díTr
2 
NKt^Kt5
Ho Pu3 
Be'Tr1 
xMd3 
Tj2 
NNg
Hy 
Pu2 Pu4 
oMd5 
NKt
4 TMd3 oMy Tr1 MTr4 
Lo1
60. Omitted in sOx1 sPu6. Cited by Mädh 2.492, 511— a) sKt5 
TMd4
— b) BKt5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 
sBe2 ßKt5 
Ho oMd1 oOr Tr1 
— c) cMd1
TMd3 oMd5 MTr6 
[oMd5 
iMd3 ' 
; MTr6 
|; Pu4
oMy Pu5 Pu7 [folly G] 
Tr2 T; Ho Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Wa [Jolly M] YDh 3.212 
Lo1
[but cor] 
— d)Be' Hy sKt5 Lo1 oMd ' xMd3 oMd5 cMy Tr1 MTr5 
Be1 BowKt1
BKt5 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NPu
1 Tr1 MTr5
61. Pâda s a-b omitted in Pu5; section containing verses 6ic to 66c torn in sPu6. Cited by
Vis 3.204;Vij 3.213;Mädh 2.511— a) oMy 
NKf
4 Tr1 [Jolly M Nd] 
—b)
Be1 
wKt1 
sKt5 TMd3 oMd5 Pu4 Vis 
Tr1 
— c) Pu5 Pu7
BBe2ow 
cMd1 
. Lo2 
— d) wKt1 wKt3 BKt5 xMd4 cMd5 Tj1
Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
TMd3 oMd5 Mädh
62.Cited by Mädh 2.511 — a) s O x 1 T M d 4 
H y w K t
1 Pu8 
sBe2
wKt^Kt5 
oMd1 
— 
tyßBe2 
oMd1 
ßKt5 
Lo2
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy 
MTr4 MTr6 
Bo 
o O r — c) Lo2 
TMd3
— d)MTr6 
_ 
L o
2 L o
1 
sKt5
63 Cited by Mädh 2.511-2 — a) Bo 
Tr ' sp¿T; sKt5 WT; ßBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 TMd4 NNg Pu8 Tj2 [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Lo3
Tj ' [Jolly R] 
^ Lo2 ' 
— b) NNg sOx1 NPu
1 Pu2 Wa 
[Pu2 
"
sOx1 
•]; cM~d' Pu10 MTr5 [Jolly M Ku] Jolly ViDh 44.23 
[MTr5
oMd1 
]; Ho MTr4 MTr6' 
. Kt2 
oOr " 
Ox2 
wKt1
TMd4
Hy Lo3 Pu10 Tj2
Bo
 Me Dave Jha


--- PAGE 912 ---
Chapter 12 
901
cMd^T^MTr6 
rMd3 
, iMd4 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 
Bo Ho
Jo 2Lo'Pu 3 
T j
2 B e
1 
NKf L o 3 Tj ' [Jolly R ] 
T i
2 B K t
5
Pu5 Pu7 
Tr1 
Lo2 
— c) NKt4 Mir4 Nä 
Bo
BKt5' 
wKt3 
L
o
1
o
M
d
1 
MTr6 
N N g
xMd3 GMy oOr Ox2 [Jolly Nd]: 
A/ac/A 
" Tr1 
, [Jolly Ral]
TJoWyRa3] 
o
M
d
5
— d) Tr2 «raw; sKf 
i M d 3 o M d 5
Tr1
64. Cited by Mädh 2.512 — a) Be1 
Be1 sBe2 iMd3 Tj1 
Tr2
Pu10 Tr1 
sBe2 L
o
3
— b ) Pu5 Pu7 
wKt3 
L o
2 J o
2
wKt3 Lo3oOrsOx'NPu1 Pu 4Pu 7Tj' 
Ho 
cMy 
Be1 sBe2 
Lo2 
Jo2 Lo3
NPu1 Pu4 
— c) BBe2 BKt5 Lo2 oMd1 rMd3 rMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr5
uTr6Mâdh 
NKt 4 ; 
oMy 
Ho 
rMd3 
oMd1 
sOx1
— d) GMy [folly Nd] 
[Jolly M] 
oMd5
Tr1 
Lo2 
BKt5»« 
Lo'Lo'Tj1 
wKt1 
BKt5 c] 
Tr1 
Wa
oMd1
65. Placed after 66b in oMd1; pâda s 6sc-d and 66a-b transposed in Tr1 MTr4 MTr6. Cited
by Mädh 2.512 — a) BoMädh 
' Pu10 Jha Dave 
' 
; Lo3 
NKt4 Tr2
Tj1 
o M d
5 W a 
T M d 3 i M d 4 o M d 5 
—\i)Madh
Be1 HoLo 2oOrNPu' 
cMy Pu5
 
> 
Pu7 
— c)iMd3MTr5 
oOr
^T;Ho 
B e ' s B e
2 — d ) P u
1
0 s B e
2 wKt1 
o O r Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 
Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
wKt'Pu3Tr2 
Lo1 
MTr6 
Tr1
66. Folios containing verses 66-126 missing in Jm. Cited by Mädh 2.512 — a)TMd3
cMd5 
— b) P
u
1
0
H
o NKt4 sKt5 oOr Pu5 Pu7 " 
Lo1 Ox2
Pu 3Pu 4Tr' 
; BocMd1 xMd3 oMd5 cMy Pu2 Pu8 MTr6 
ßBe2 wKt1 wKt3
sOx1 Wa 
x M d
4 K t
2 
— c) Lo2 
wKt1
, Be1 
— d
)
o
M
d
'
i
M
d
3
oMd5 Tr1 
: [Tr1 
]; sOx1 om 
Ho
67.Cited by Mädh 2.512 — a ) H y T j
1 
oMd1 
T M d
3 o M d
5
Lo3 
o
O
r
— b) sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6
 
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 oMd1 oOr Ox2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 MTr^Tr5 MTr6 [Jolly G Ku] Go Ku MandlikJha
KSS DaveNNg 
Be1 wKt1 Lo2 Ox2 Pu2 
Ho wKt1 
x M d
3 — c)
sOx1 sPu6 i 
Ox2 
Lo3 Tj ' Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 
cMd1 
rMd4


--- PAGE 913 ---
902 
Chapter 12
TMd3 
Bo 
NPu1 
Tr1 
Pu5 P u
7 u K t
4
Ho Jo2 Lo1 [me to] Lo3 Tj1 Tr2 Wa 
" wKt1 
" 
" 
MTr4 MTr6 
" — d) Tr1
wKt3oOr 
Lo1 
Tr2 
sKt5 
Lo2
68. Cited by Vis 3.221; Vij 3.210-1; Mädh 2.512 — a) Ti2 
TMd3
— b)Ho 
MTr4 M T r
6 — c ) o
M
d
5
H
o TMd4 
sOx1
sPu6 
T r
2 L o
1 
— d)TMd4
69. Omitted in xMd3 oMd5. Cited by Vij 3.216; Mädh 2.512 — b)oMd ' TMd4 MTr5
•[TMd4 
JioOrFy 
sOx1 s P u 6 B o 
^ 
.— c) Bo oOr
— d) oMy [Jolly Nd] 
T r
1 T r
2 
oMd1 sOx1 sPu6
MTr4
70. Omitted in wKt1 — a) Ho Jo2 Lo1 [me to] Lo3 Tj1 Tr1 Í^W; Lo3 cMd1 oOr [but
cor} 
TMd4 MTr4 M T r
6 — b ) s
K
t
5
o
O
r mc5T; oMd5 
H o
TMd4 cMy Tr1 
sKt5 
oMd1 
— c) oMd5
sKt5 
NKÍ Ox2 
sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1 [Jolly Nd]
oMd1 
H o N P u
1 
w K t
3 M T r
4 MTr6 ' 
Pu10
TMd4' 
_ 
Tj2om 
Bo NKt4 O
x
2
— d) Lo1 
Tr ' MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
oMd5 
Pu10 [Jolly M] 
nKt5 Lo2oMd' 
sBe2 Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kf Tj2 Ku Co
Mandlik KSS
71. Omitted in Hy. Cited by Vij 3.219-20—a) Lo1 
oMd1 TMd3 
—
b) eBe2 Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 Tj2 [Jolly Nd R] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
_ 
[cf.
72d]; Lo1 
— c) wKt1 
Be1 sBe2 Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Kt2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo2 Lo3
Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
—
 d) eKt5 
" MTr6
NKf lacuna for 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Pu10 MTr4 MTr6
 
TMd3 Tr1
MTr5 Me Jha Dave [folly M] 
; Tr2 
TMd4
72. Cited by Vij 3.219-20 — a) oMd1 MTr5 MTr6 
NKt4 [lacuna] 
, sOx1 sPu6
[Jolly M] 
' nBe2 
Hy Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa 
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
wKt1
oOr 
T
r
1
N
P
u
1 
Be1 
oMd5
— b)TMd 3" 
sOx1 
" 
Bo 
— c)GMd'oMd 5NKt 4 Lo2Tr!MTr4MTr5
 TMd3
 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Pu3 Tr2 Wa 
jo2
[Jolly Nd]


--- PAGE 914 ---
Chapter 12 
903
MTr6 [Jolly G N Nd] 
NNg 
; Hy Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 
Tr2 
Pu8
sKt5 
Pu10 [Jolly M
]
s
B
e
2 
B
e
1
N
P
u
1 Pu2
Pu4 
T M d
4 T M d
3 
— d)oMd5 
sBe2
Tr1
7 3 . a ) Be1 M i r
5 W a 
" — b) Pu5 P
u
7
s
K
t
5 cMy
wKt1 
TMd4 
Pu10 [Jolly M] 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
oOr
— d)oMd' 
TMd4 
TMd3cMy
74. Päda s c-d omitted in oOr—a) TMd4 oMy 
[om ]; oMd5 
Pu5
Pu7 
oOr 
cMy 
sBe2 
" — b)sOx'sPu6 
—c)
sBe2 
sOx1 sPu6 
" 
oMd1 
— d)oMd 5
^; MTr6 
" 
BBe2
75. a) Ho Lo1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr2
 
TMd3 
rMd4 
Jo2
sOx1 sPu6 
Pu5 Pu7 
— b) NKf om 
oMd1 
" 
sKt5 
ßBe2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTrÉ 
Pulo[Jo//yM] 
; Bo 
NKf 
— c) Bo 
, Tj1
— d)Tr' 
Tr2 
Lo2 
oOr
7 6 . Omitted i n oMd1 — a ) Tr1 
TMd4 '
T
r
2
sKt5 TMd3 Pu5 Pu7 
— b)Bo 
sBe2 
— c) oMd5 
Ho 
wKt1
Be1 
TMd3 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 [Jolly M] 
_
s
K
t
5
oMd5 
T r
1 . — d ) H y _ T j
1 
TMd4'
Hy Jo1 Kt2 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 MandlikJha KSS Dave
77.Omitted in oMd1 — a) Kt2 ßKt5 Pu5 P u
7 T j
1 
Tr1 
TMd3
oMd5 
BKt5 
Lo1 
— b) Lo1 
TMd4 
sKt5
oOr 
TMd4 oMd5 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
sOx1 sPu6
TMd3 
— c ) M T r
6 T r
1
 
BKt5 oMy 
Ho
wKt1 
BBe2 °?ncfra " — d) TMd4
78. Omitted in Pu5 Wa; folio containing 78 to 8sa torn in sPu6 — a) TMd4
NPu 1 Pu2 Pu4 
— b) NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
[om 
|; TMd4


--- PAGE 915 ---
904 
Chapter 12
Ox2 
Pu10 
BKt5 om 
—
 c) Pu8 
Ho Pu10 Tr2 
NKt4 sOx1
MandlikKSS 
Jo1 P u
7 B o 
s B e 2 B e 1 L o 2 
— d)Pu7tTR-° ;
Lo1 
Ho 
. 
, wKt3
79. Omitted in Wa — a) TMd3 TMd4 oOr sOx1 
_ 
MTr6
oMy 
NKt4 oMd5 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
wKt1 
— b) xMd3
oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 
[Tr1 
]; Ox2 
Tj2
[=i2.77d]; Bo 
wKt1 
Pu7 
sKt5 E for ' 
— c) oMd1 inTr5
— d)xMd3 
Tj1 
Lo1 
— NKt
4 adds here a half-
verse which is nearly identical to 12.77 a-b
80. Verses 80 and 81 transposed in Lo3 Tj1 — a) [Jolly Nd] 
; Pu10
[Jolly M] 
[Pu10 
J; Bo Ho NKt4 
Tj1 WT; NKt4 TMd4oMy oOr Tj1
Tr2 
. wKt1 BKt5 cMd1
 ' 
Pu2 Pu4 
— c) Ho 
Be1 
Lo2
NKÍ 
s K t
5 — d ) P u 2 P u 4 T j 1 
sKt5 ÎT; Jo2 L o 3 w K t 3
MTr5
81. Placed after 12.51 in TMd3 oMy — a) Be1 wKt3 Lo2 oOr Pu5 Pu7
xMd3GMd 5: 
O
x
2
o
M
d
1 
wKt1 
rMd3 oMy Tr1
— b) Pu5 Pu7 [but cor] 
—
 c) x M d
3 — d) Pu10 [Jolly M]
NKt
4 om one 
Ho wKt1 sOx1
82. a) Bo 
oOr 
Jo2 wKt3 sKt5 Lo3 Tj1 [Jolly R] 
" 
NNg Pu10 [Jolly M]
— b) Kt2 wKt3 
" 
cMd1 oOr 
sKt5 
sOx1 
Ho Lo1 NNg Ox2 Pu10 Wa 
— c) Hy
Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
NNg Pu10 
— d) Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Tj2
MandlikJhaKSSDave 
NNg 
[Jolly M] 
oMd1
83. a) MTr4MTr6 
Bo Bh [pâtha ] 
oMd1 Bh |patha| 
— b)
Bo 
wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
Lo1
 TMd3 cMd5 Tr1 [Jolly Gr] 
— c) wKt1
NKt4 
P u
1
0 L o
3
 
BKt5 
—d)BBe 2NKt 4Lo l
NNg Tj ' 
; BKt5 TMd3 oMd5 oMy 
Pu8


--- PAGE 916 ---
Chapter 12 
905
84. Omitted in sKt5 rMd3 oMd5 Pu10 [Jolly M]; pâda s a-b omitted in Lo2, and päda s b-c
in Be1 — a) Pu8 
T r
1 N K t
4 
— b) wKt1 Pu3 °^m^; Pu8 %TÍtcT
— c) NKt4 oMd1 Pu3 Pu8 
oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 Mir6 Wa ^ WT^f ; wKt1
La1 oOr 
Lo3 Tj1 
NKt4 Lo1 •MWXrH; Pu8 T?^t ^T; MTr6 4)W>< 3^
— d)Ho
Additional verses in Ox2 Pu1:
1. c) Ox
2 
r
2. Päda s a-b omitted in NPu1 — c) Ox2
85. Pada-a omitted in Be1. Pâda s c-d cited by Sam on B U 1.4.7 — b) ßKt5 
— c)
sKt5 
La1 TMd3 
sBe2 
Be1 Jo2 sOx1 sPu6 Tr2
 
i oOr
Lo1- 
Wa 
— d)wKtl 
Ho 
MTr6
86.* a) BKt5 
Lo1 iMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Wa 
sOx1 om 
aBe2 Hy Jo" Kt2
wKt3 La1 sOx1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly G] Go Re Mandlik KSS 
— b) sKt5
NPu1 Pu2 
Pu4 
— c) Pu5 Pu7 : 
GMy 
. Be1 NKt4 Lo1
NNg 
Wa— 
d) wKt3 B K t 5 [ J o l l y M] 
" 
" Lo2 om 
Ho
Lo3
87. a)TMd 3oMd 5 
[oMd5 
J; sKt5 om 
c M y o M d 1
. 
wKt3 om 
Ho oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 MTr4MTr6 
wKt1 La1 Pu3 Tr2 
— b) sKt5
Tr1 [Jolly N d ] 
xMd3 o
M
d
5
; wKt1 Tr2 o m
sOx1 sPu6
88. Cited by Vij 3.58; Apa 1033; Laks 14.146-7; pada-d cited by Sam on B U 1.1.1 — a)
TMd3 oMd5 
[om\; H o . 
w K t
3 L o
2 
wKt1 
A p a
Wa 
Tj2 
— c) cMd1 oMd5 Pu5 Pu7 
NKf om 
'
—
 d) Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G]
., — b) NKt4 BKt5 TMd3 La1 Lo1 MTr5 Vij 
sBe2 Pu4 Tj1
Ox2 Pu2
GMy
— c) sOx1
oor
wKt
G
_df)


--- PAGE 917 ---
906 
Chapter 12
89.* Päda s a-b torn in oMy. Cited by Vij 3.58; Apa 1033; Laks 14,147 — a) La1
wKt1
 • 
Be1 BBe2 Hy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 sKt5 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 PuI0 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M] Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
oOr
BoHo: 
T M d
3 N P u ' P u
2 P u
4 
— 
t y H o J o 1 
Pu10
Ho [cor 
to] 
— c) Jo2 sKt5 Lo1 Lo3 T
j
1
T
M
d
4 Pu7 
Pu10 om
BBe2 wKt1 Lo2 sOx1 sPu6 
— d) oOr 
Lo3 Tj ' [Jo//y R] 
La1 sOx1
sPu6 Tr2
Additional verse in NKt4 MTr4MTr6 Mandlik\ 
KSS Dave; commented on by Rn; päda s
a-b given after verse 88 in Pu2 Pu4:
a) Pu2 Pu4 
— b) Mandlik KSS Dave
90.* Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Apa 1033; Laks 14.147 — a) Pu8 ! 
Lo1
Ox2 
TMd4 
Ho wKt1 Lo1 Ox2 Mir6 Jha Dave 
s K t 5 " 
oMd5
Pu5 Pu7 
T M d 3 T r 1 
o O r — b ) o O r 
Lo2
Lo3 
Kt2 
cMy 
TMd4 
Ho Lo2 Pu5 Pu7
Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly K] Me Rn [patha] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Pu3 [Jolly
M] Apa 
Jo2 La1 NNg L a k s H y 
BKt5 
— c) Pu8
sOx1 sPu6 
o M d
1 B B e
2 sKt5 La1 T M d
4 w K t
1 
N N g
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
— d) cMd 1,_ 
T
M
d
3
" 
Be1 sKt5 La1 Lo2 Ox2 NPu'
Pu4 Wa [Jolly M] Me [patha] Na 
aMd ' Tr2 [Jolly G] Me [patha but rejected]
Tr1 
Lo1 
Apa 
TMd3 oMd5 
Bo
Laks 
sKt5 
91. Verses 91 and 92 transposed in Pu7. Sam on 5t/3.i.i[intro.] refers to this verse,
cited by Laks 14.147 — a) Pu3 Pu8 Tr2 
sKt5 
— b) oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu10
— c) wKt1 oMd! cMy Pu2 Pu4 
[Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
wKt1 
];TMd3
oMd5 Tr1 
L
a
1
L
o
1 
P u 1 0 T M d 4
oMd5 
; P u
5 P u
7 H o Pu10 [Jolly M]
92. Cited by Laks 14.147 — b) wKt3 
P u
2 P u
4 
sBe2 Hy Jo1 Kt2
NNg Ox2 Tr2 Me Rn Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
Mir6 
TMd4 
— c) Pu10
 Bo
tMd3 Tr1
. Be1 
wKt1 
Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1
— d)Be'BKt5Lo' Pu10
Ho
BBe2
wKt
Tmd


--- PAGE 918 ---
Chapter 12 
907
[Jolly M] 
Be1 
Lo1 
sBe2 Ho wKt1 sKt5 Lo3 NNg
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3sPu6 Tj1 
Wa 
Be1 Lo2 
sB^oOr 
wKt1 
Bo Lo2 TMd3
oMd5 
Tr1 
BKt5 
— d) Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 
oMd1
Ho 
Pu2 Pu4 Pu10
93. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Sam on BhG \5.2o;Laks 14.147 — a) Be1 NPu1
Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 [Jolly R] Go Kit MandlikJha KSS Dave
BKt5 Pu5 Pu7 
— b ) r M d
3 o M d
5 — c) H o 
L
a
1
B
o Ox2
94.* Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Apaiz; päda s a-b cited by Dev 1.129 — a) Dev [vl]
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 
s K t 5 ß B e 2 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
 NNg
Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Go Ku Rn Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
xMd4 
NKt4
Be1 
TMd3
95.* Folio containing verses 950 to lood torn in sPu6. Cited by Kum 1.3.5; Apa i4;Laks
1.262 — a) TMd3 Tr1 [but cor] Wa 
oMd5 
Mir4
 MTr6 
. BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2
 MTr6 [Jolly Nd]Kum Bh Ku Re
Mandlik KSS 
M T r 4 — b) B
e
1
s
B
e
2 Ho NKt4 Lo1 Lo3 oOr sOx1 Pu5
sPu6Pu7Pu8PuloWa/ara/4pa 
T
j
1
P
u
2 Pu4 
cMd1 
TMd3
— c) oOr 
B
o
o
M
y 
Kum Apa Laks 
— d) Lo3 Tj1
A p a 
T M d 3 " " 
w
K
t
3
; oMd1 
MTr6 
Pü 4
96. Cited by Apa 12; Laks 1.262 — a) Bo 
" wKt3 
oMd1 MTr4
Hy wKt3 Lo2 TMd4 NNg NPu' Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Apa 
' Be' oOr 
" Tr1 
sBe2 Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 Lo3 Pu8 Ti1 MTr5 Wa [Jolly R] Laks Mandlik KSS 
La1 
. Jha
Dave 
TMd3 oMd5 
Ox2 Re 
" — a-b) Tr2 
— b)Pu7 
oMd5 
— c)sKt5
La1
 ' 
~ 
NPu1 
Ox2 
oMd5 Tr2
— d) oMd1
 NPu'
97. Verses 97-112 illegible in TMd4. Cited by Dev 1.128 — a) Pu4 
sBe2 BKt5
. TMd4
NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tr2 
 eBe2 Bo Ho
— b) TMd4 oOr
La1
BKt5
 rMd4 Pu5 Pu7 Dev 
— c)


--- PAGE 919 ---
908 
Chapter 12
oMd5 
oMd1 
Mir6 
— b) Pu10 [Jolly M]
wKt1 BKt5 Lo1 sOx1 
oOr 
— c) Ho 
Bo
sBe2 NKt4 oOr Tr1 
oMd sOx1 Jha Dave 
sB«? Hy NKt4 Lo3
oMd5 NNg Tj ' Tr1 [Jolly R1 Nd] Dev 
—
 d) Lo3 oOr
98.* Ms of Tr1 ends at pada-c — a) TMd3 
Lo1 Tj1 5Tc?; Hy 
Bo Ho
NKt4 La1 MTr6 
Hy om— 
b) wKt1 
Pu5 Pu7 
xMd3
oMd1 
— c) Hy wKt3 Pu8 " 
" Jo1 Kt2 Tj2 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
—
d) Be1 Lo2 
L o
2 B o 
ßBe2 Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo3
oMd ' TMd3 oMy oOrsOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 \folly Ku R N]5A Ku Rn
Rc Mandlik KSS 
Pu2 P u
4 P u
5 Pu7 G o e K t
5 ! 
oMy 
. wKt1
MTr4 MTr6 
O x
2 s K t
5 rMd3 oMd5 sOx1 Pu3 Tr2 Wa [Jolly N] Me
[patha| Nä
99. Päda s c-d omitted ¡n wKt3. Arrangement of verses in [Jolly M] is 99,106-8, 100-5,
109-122,126 — a) TMd3 Pu3 Tr2 
— b) O x 2 — d) Pu10 
Bo
NNg Wa 
[om]; Lo1 o M d
5 W a 
NKt4 NPu1 
TMd3
100. Omitted in Pu5 Pu10 — a) Jo2 Lo3 Tj1 
Hy wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4
Pu* Tr2 W a Jolly Jha Dave 
sBe2 
cMd5 
— b) Pu7 
HoîMd 3
BBe2 
^ 
— d)Bo 
Tr2
101. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Dev 1.129; Mädh 2.172 — a) Be1 Lo2 
Tr2
—
 b) Pu2 Pu4 
BKt5 
Be1 
oOr
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
Lo2
Additional verse in NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
b)Pu2Pu4 
— c) Mandlik KSS Dave 
Pu4
102. Omitted in Pu10; pâda s c-d omitted in cMd1. Cited by Dev 1.132 — a) Ti2 
—
b) Tr2 
Bo TMd3 Dev 
Be1 
Bo oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 Dev 
Wa 
— c)
Dev 
wKt3 NKt4 
oMy 
— d) BKt5 
NKt4 oMy


--- PAGE 920 ---
Chapter 12 
909
103. Omitted in Pu10 — a) sKt5 La1 Tj1 
NNg 
Kt2 
ßße2
— b)TMd3 
NKt4 
— d)Be'; 
Pu45/T
104. Omitted in Pu10. Cited by Apa g6o;Dev 1.144 — a) Lo1 
DevsKt5
— b)BBe2NKt4Tj1 
wKt1 wKt3 La1 sOx1 s P u 6 o M y NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8
TMd3 oMd5 
— c) oOr 
sKt5 
Hy Jo1 Kt2 sOx1 sPu6 Tj 2 Mandlik Jha
KSSDave 
—
 d) nKt5 
Pu8 
oOr
105. Omitted in Pu'° ; verses 105-26 omitted in wKt1. Cited by Sam on VeS 2.1.11; Kum
1.3.2; Laks 1.32; Hem 2Í.22 — a) La1 oMd ' Pu8 S ant Kum Laks Hem 
Be1
—b) Bo Tr2 Laks 
NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Kum 
Be1 
MTr6
oMd5 
— c)Lo 2om 
Ho 
aKt5 
~ " . , Lo1
 NPu' 
— d)oMd5
Bo cMy NNg Pu2 Pu4 Tr2 [Jolly Nd] ' 
uBe2 MTr4 MTr6
wKt3 Pu3 
[Jolly M
]
T
M
d
3 
" H o o M d ' T r 2 
Pu2 Pu4
Kum [Jolly M] 
Bo
106. Cited by Sam on VeS2.1.11; Apa 22; Laksl.^z; Hem 2.Í.22; päda s c-d cited by Kum
1.3.2— a) HoNKt4 Lo1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 [/oWy M]; 
oMd1 
Ho Pu10 [Jolly M]
[om 
Pu10 
"]; GMd1 " 
— b) Bo Hy iMd3 oMd5 NNg 
Pu2 Pu4
Wa 
, NNg O x
2 i M d
3 
wKt3 
— c) Hem
— d)TMd3cMd5 
NPu
1 
; La1 
Ho 
.Laks
107. Päda s c-d omitted in oOr — a) eKt5 La1 Lo1 sOx1 sPu( 
NNg Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3
Tr2 
; NKt4 
; Be1 Pu3 Tr2 
— c) Pu2 Pu4 
sKt5 La1
— d)Pu 5Pu 7' 
wKt3 cMd1 NNgsOx1 sPu6 Pu10 MTr6 [Jolly M G] 
Lo2
Tr2
108. Cited by Laks 1.35; Dev 1.7 — a) La1 
Laks 
T M d 3 s K t 5
oMy 
— a-b)Pu2Pu4; 
_ 
, — b) TMd3 oMd5
— c) Hy TMd3 
cMd1 
sKt5


--- PAGE 921 ---
910 
Chapter 12
109. Cited by Apa 82; Dev 1.6 — a) iMd3 
Apa 
Be '
o
O
r
Wa 
sKt5 
eBe2 
— b) MTr4 MTr6 
La1 
Pu'°
oMd1 
. 
. sKt5 
— c) Lo3 
Tr2 
sKt5 Ox2 
— d) sBe2 
Be1 La2
110. a)BBe2 
o M d
1 L a
1 MTr5 5/î[a d 11.85] 
Pu10
Be1 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 om 
Pu5 Pu7 
NNg NPu1 Pu2 
Pu4 Tr2 cT; Wa 
Lo1
NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 
" 
sOx'sPu6 
H o L o
2 o m 
— a-b) Lo3 Tj1
— b) Lo1 
xMd3 
cMd5
NNg Pu3 
—
 c) s B e 2 s K t 5 
x M d
3 L o
1 Tr2 
[Lo1 ];
Pu3 
NNg sOx1 sPu6 
Bo 
oMd5 
Be1 
w K t 3 e K t 5
sOx1 sPu6 
Ho o O r L a
1 oMy Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 
Tr2
Lo1 
— d)ßBe 2 BoHy Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 cMy oOr sOx1 Ox2NPu'
Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 [Jolly R Nd] Rn Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave
Additional verse in NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Mandlik _ 
KSS Dave:
b) Mandlik KSS Dave
111. Cited by Apa 22; folio containing verses me to upe torn in sPu6 — a) Be1 Bo
oMd1 TMd3 GMd5 MTr6 
s B e 2 H o Jo2 La1 Lo1 Lo3 NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7
Pu8Tj',/o//y 
TMd3 
NPu
1 
sPu6 
sOx1 P u
5 s B e
2
oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 
— b) oOr 
sPu6 
— c) TMd3 
Pu8
Be1 
Pu10 
sKt5 
— d) BoTMd3oMd5 GMy NNgNPu
1 Pu2Pu3 Pu 4Pu l oTr 2MTr 4
MTr6 Wa/4pa 
[ r M d 3 ] ; e B e
2 B e
1 
. oMd1
112.Cited by Vij 3.299; Apa 21; Dev 1.8 — a) Ho 
TMd4 Ox2 Pu5 Pu7
ßKt5 
— a-b) Wa 
— c) wKt3 La1
oMd1 Pu2 Pu4 
BK.1
5 oMd5 
Apa 
Vij 
NPu
1 V
i
j
P
u
2 Pu4 Wa
TMd4 
La1 
" 
oMd1 
— d) Ho
113. Cited by Vij 3.299; pâda s a-b cited by Vis 1.9— a) Lo2 
— b) Vij
BKt5 oOrîfr ; oMy 
.BBe 2oMd 1 
NNg 
Lo3 
Lo1
oMd1 sOx1 
äße
2 La1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr MTr4 MTr6 
— c) La1
Be1 Lo2 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Vij 
—
 d) TMd3 MTr6 
Tr2
 • 
Lo1


--- PAGE 922 ---
Chapter 12 
911
BBe2' 
Lo'sOx1 
Lo3Tj' 
Ho 
Mir4
114. a) Lo1 
— b) B B e 2
T M d 3 ~ 
— c) Lo2 Tr2 
— d)cMd'
TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 MTr6 Wa 
[MTr6 
; Lo2 
ßKt5
115. Omitted in oMd1 — a) Pu8 ^T; Ho NKt4 La1 TMd3 TMd4 NNgNPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Tj1
Tr2 Wa [Jolly R Nd Gr] BDhi.i.n; VaDh 3.6 
L
o
2
L
à Wa 
ßBe2
wKt3 La1 TMd4 cMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 [Jolly Nd] 
., 
— b) sKt5 
TMd4
rMd3 oMd5 
T r 2 B o Ho NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10
Bo 
NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 MTr4 MTr6 Wa 
Pu10 
— c) TMd3 
Lo1
NNg [but corfli] 
wKt3 _ 
— d) TMd3 
oMd5
oMy Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 [Jolly G] 
MTr4 M T r
6 N P u
1 
NNg
La1 
wKt3
116.Omitted in oMd". Cited by Apa 1027—a) e B e
2 B e
1 
sOx1
NKt4 
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 
— b) NKt4 sKt5 sOx1 T j 1 s B e 2 oMy NPu1 Pu3 Pu8 Tr2
TMd3oMd5 
— c)TMd 3TMd 4oMd 5oOr [Jolly K\ 
oMy [Jolly Nd]
Lo3 
Hy 
_ 
BBe2wK.t3 
oOr
117. Cited by Apa 1027—a) oMy 
TMd4 Wa 
—d) oOr
118. Omitted in Pu5; pâda- d omitted in oMd1; ms. of wKt3 ends after päda-b . Cited by
Apa W27;Laks 14.201 — b) Pu2 Pu4 
aKt5 
— c) oMd1 cMy Laks
Apa 
~ TMd4 
HoJo 2Lo 3Tj' 
La1 
Lo2
OMd'TMd4
 MTr4
MTr6
 
TMd3oMd5 
— d) Pu8
 
BKt5 Wa 
. TMd4
TMd3 oMd5 Wa 
BBe2
119. Pada-a omitted in cMd1. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201 — b) TMd4 Wa
BBe2 Tr2 
— c ) H
o
B
e
1 Lo1 Lo2 Pu5 Pu7 
Pu5 Pu7
— diLo'Tj1
Additional verse in Ox2:


--- PAGE 923 ---
912 
Chapter 12
izo. Omitted in Ho; mss. of sOx1 sPu6 end after pada-a. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201
— a)BBe2MTr6 
[MTr6 
]; NKt4 
Ox2' 
TMd3
Bo 
Apa ' 
BKt5 àj ; NNg 
— b) nBe2 
Pu10 ' 
ßKt5 
— c)
sBe2 oMy Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Wa Apa 
' TMd3 
sKt5 
. Tr2 
NKt4
BBe2Pu'° 
oMd1 
Apa 
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 _ 
. La' °1<^ ; uKt4 
Lo1
[but cor] 
—d) Mir4 MTr6 
Be1 Lo2 Pu2 Pu4 ApaoMd ' 
Bo
La1 Ox2 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Ti
f Laks 
[La1 NPu1 Pu8 
Ox2 Pu5 Pu7
Pu10 
J;oMd' 
Lo3 
Lo2 Wa 
La1
121 * Omitted in NKt4 TMd4; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa iO2.7;Laks 14.201 —
a) Bo 
P u
3 A p a 
TMd3 
oMd1 
— b) Hy 
ßKt5
B o 
rMd3 
oMd5 
O x 2 L a k s 
T r
2 M T r
6
TMd3 
" Pu5 Pu7 
La1 
Pu'°?ft:;BBe 2BoHy Jo1 Kt2 Lo1 Lo3 sKt5 oMd1 oMd5
NNg NPu
1 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Ku] Apa LaksMandlik Jha KSS Dave 
Wa
oMd1 
'— c)oMyTr2 
Ho 
Pu10 
Pu3 Wa 
— d) Tj1
Lo2 Pu2 Pu4
122. Omitted in NKt4 TMd4; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201 —
a) Ho 
L o 1 o O r T r 2 
Laks Apa 
— b) Bo
oMy 
— c) B o M T r 4 M T r 6 
P
u
1
0
— d) Pu7 
Be1 Lo 2
oMd1 TMd3 NNg NPu
1 Pu2 Pu4 MTr6 Wa 
n K t
5 L a k s
123 * Omitted in NKt? TMd4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa lozj-Laks
14.201; päda s a-b cited by Sam on BU 1.4.6 — a) Pu7 
La1 Lo2 oOr Pu4 MTr4
MTr6
 
NNg P u 2 s K t 5 
" 
TMd3 
L a
1 — b ) oMd1
. 
sBe2 Hy Lo3 NNg oOrNPu ' Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Laks 
Wa 
Tr2 
Lo1
oMy TMd3 oMd5 MTr4 MTr6 
— c) Hy Jo2 Lo3 Tj '
T
M
d
3 
sKt5
124. Omitted in NKt4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201
— b ) Tr2 
T
M
d
3
— c ) o M y T M d
4 
Lo1
oMd'Pu7/lpa 
— d ) H
o
o
M
y 
sKt5 
" H y
NNg 
_ 
La1


--- PAGE 924 ---
Chapter 12 
913
125. Omitted in NilCt
4 [Jolly M]; not commented by Co. Cited by Apa 1028; Laks 14.201
— a) Apa 
TMd 4NNg 
— b) Hy NNg Tr 2 
o
O
r
— c)oMd'
Tj2 
" 
" 
.BBe2 
— d)oMd 1TMd 3GMd 5GMyPu 5Pu 7
Jo2 BKt5 Lo1 Lo3 tMd3 oMd5 cMy Ox2 Pu3 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly R Nd Gr] Laks
Additional verse in Hy Lo3 Tj ' Mandlik 
' 
Dave KSS:
126. Omitted in NKt4 Lo2 Pu5; not commented by Go — a) Lo1 
Hy Jo2 eKt5
La1 Lo3 cMd5 Tj ' MTr4MTr6 
— b) Lo3 oOr Ox2 Tj1 
nKt5 
': — c)
Be1 Pu2 Pu4 
oMd1 
ßfCt5 
— d) TMd4 oMy MTr6
TMd3 
cMd' oMy MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] 
Lo1
Additional verses in Mandlik 
KSS Dave:
Colophon: Lo1 Lo2 TMd3 NNg sOx1 sPu6 
Lo3 
oMd1
L o 3 o m
L o 1 L o 2
a n d o m


--- PAGE 925 ---
NOTES TO THE CRITICAL EDITION
CHAPTER ONE
1.1 
The initial invocatory verse before the first verse must be quite old, because it is com-
mented by Govinda and found in 18 northern mss. It is, however, clearly spurious. The
verse is not recorded in any ST ms., making it likely that it was a northern interpola-
tion Medhätith i commenting on 1.2 calls it dvitlyah slokah ("the second verse"); if he
accepted the invocatory verse, 1.2 would have been the third verse. The invocatory
verse must have been inserted into the text, therefore, sometime after Medhätithi .
1.2 
The additional verses were probably interpolated at an early date, because they are
found in several mss. of the ST (both Malayalam and Grantha), in the Kashmiri Särad ä
ms., in Nd, and in many NT mss. They are ignored by Me, however, and missing is
most ST and NT mss.
i.6c 
Me, RH and Net take pada-c as a single Bahuvrihi compound mahäbhütädivrttaujäh
qualifying svayambhuh. The explanation of Go could go both ways, although Bühler ,
in his note to this verse, thinks that he takes mahäbhütadi
 as a separate compound
qualifying idam of pada-b. This is also the interpretation of Ku and Mr. On the other
hand, Re appears to read mahäbhütädih
 in the masculine qualifying svayambhuh. It is
difficult to determine who is right. Converting the entire päda into a single compound
makes it clumsy but keeps the päda as a meaningful unit. My inclination is to go with
Ku, because his interpretation makes a more natural division of the compound.
1.73 
I have adopted the reading atmdriyo ' grähyah, although it is supported by only a few
mss.: Ho Jo2 NKt4 La1 Ox2 Ox3 Tj1 Tr2 Wa. The reading is, therefore, somewhat con-
jectural. It is supported, moreover, by BhP 2.11 and the citation in Samkara's com-
mentary on BU 1.4.6; it is also so understood by Änandagir i in his sub-commentary on
Samkara. My reading is also supported by Nä . Most mss. and commentators, however,
compound the two expressions: atîndriyagrâhyah. Medhätith i interprets atîndriya
("what is beyond the senses") as the mind (manas), and takes the compound to mean
that the creator is to be grasped by the mind. This interpretation is accepted by most
other commentators. A slightly different interpretation is given by Go, who reads
atîndriyagrâhyah: he cannot be grasped by the mind (atïndriyena manasä grahîtum
asakyah). I think the traditional reading and interpretation is awkward and forced. The
word agrähyah at the end of pada-a nicely parallels the other negative with a similar
meaning, acintyah, at the same final position in pada-c; note the parallel -ndriyo and
-mayo in both with the elision of the initial a of the following word.
i.7d 
Although mss. are divided over the two readings esa and eva, it is clear that the former
is far superior; it is represented in the broadest spectrum of ST and NT mss. and paral-
914


--- PAGE 926 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter l 
915
lels nicely the correlative yo 'sau in pada-'a.. The particle eva, furthermore, is pleonas-
tic in conjunction with svayani. The adopted reading is found in: Be1 uBe2 Jo2 wKt1
wKt3 NKt4 uKt5 La ' La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Los oMd1 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu8 PuI0 Tj1 Tr2
inTr4 MTr6 Wa5AP 2.11 NdSam [vl in 6 mss; but edition gives eva] Jha Dave.
i.ioa There is some question as to whether the reading is näräh
 or naräh. Ku says that Go
reads naräh and offers an explanation of it. Ku may have made a mistake here. It is Me
(and not Go) who explains the term, saying that children are given the name of the fa-
ther: thus children of Vasistha are called vasisthäh and the children of Bhrgu
bhrgavah. In both we see that the initial letter does not take vrddhi. The preponderance
of mss. evidence, however, supports näräh.
1.133 There is strong manuscript support for both tu and ca. I have adopted tu, which is
found in Be1 Bo Ho wKt1 NKt4 isKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4 oMd1 xMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox3 Pu2
Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4MTr6. My choice is based on the unanimous support fortu in the
mss. of ST, with strong support from many NT-x mss., whereas ca has the unanimous
support of NT-y vulgate mss.
1.20 
Nd places verse 27 before 20 and comments: "If some read it later on, it is due to the
error of scribes." See Bühle r 1886, n; Jolly 1885-89, 17.
1.223 Me says that the particle ca is misplaced; its proper position should be after devänäm
 at
the end of the päda: karmätmanäm
 ca ity ay am adese cah pathitah. tasya deso
devänäm
 ity ato ' nantaram.
i.44b There is strong manuscript support for both readings: ca kacchapäh and sakacchapäh.
Commentaries do not offer any help. The latter is supported by nBe2 Jo2 NKt4 La1 Lo1
Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa
[Jolly M G R Nd] BhP 2.70 Jolly. I have adopted it because of support from most ST
mss. However, some ST mss. also support the latter, and the reading here is clearly un-
certain. For sakacchapäh at the end of a pada-b, see 12.42 [critical apparatus], al-
though there I have adopted the reading sans/pah.
1.45C Me, Ku, and Re give the verb in the singular: upajäyate. With reference to the plural
verb, upajayante,Me observes: upajayante iti päthe "ye cänye kecid Idrsah" iti pathi-
tavyam. He appears to connect padas c-d syntactically, separating them from pädas a-
b. I think the plural is justified without such textual emendation; along with 5« and Re,
I take pada-c as syntactically connected to pädas a-b, with päda-a forming a separate
clause.
1.463 All the ST mss. contain the reading sthävarä
 in place of taravah. The reading is com-
plicated by the sandhi with the previous word. Here, I think, the ST is wrong; I have
adopted the latter reading, which is found in: Be1 nBe2 Ho Jo2 wKt1 uKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo2
Lo3 Lo4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Wa [Jolly M G
R K] Jolly.
i.ói d Both arnitaujasah (preferred by Jolly) and mahaujasah have strong manuscript sup-
port. The commentators, except for Rn, are silent. I have adopted the latter principally
because it is the near unanimous reading of the ST and in addition has backing from
both NT-x and NT-y. It is found in: isBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 uKt5 La1
Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 xMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6.
1.64C Jolly has preferred the instrumental singular tâvatâ,
 but the vast majority of the mss.
have the accusative plural tävatah, and the commentators also support this reading.


--- PAGE 927 ---
916 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 1
The commentators, however, noticed the problem with the accusative in a nominal
sentence and solved the problem by implying the verb viclyat. Thus, Ku comments;
tävata iti dvifiyänirdesät
 vidyäd ity adhyähärah.
 The reading adopted is found in: Be'
BBe2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 xMd3 TMd4 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 WaMandlikJha KSS Dave.
i.68c The particles ça andf« have strong manuscript support. I have adopted ca because it
gives a better meaning connecting pada-c with padas a-b. Here the ST mss. go with
the vulgate NT-y. It is found in Be1 Bo Ho wKt1 «Kr4 La ' La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2
NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 MTr6 Wa [Jolly
]y|i-2-7-8-9j. ¡t js ajso supposed in Me, Go, and Ku.
1.78 
All editions have the redoing rasagunäh smrtäh; Jolly does not even give any variants
here. The manuscript support for this reading is limited; none of the ST mss. have
smrtäh. The adopted reading, rasagunätmikäh
 (supported also by mss. that have the
readings anvitäh and äsrayäh)
 is found in Be' Ho La' La2 iMd4 oMy Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8
Tr'T^MT^MT^AKflc.
i.Sid Me, Nä , and Nd support upavartate. The readings prativartate etc. may originate from
commentarial glosses: Re Go: manusyan prati nopavartate [or na varíate}; Ku:
manusyan prati sampadyate.
i.97d The vulgate editions and many NT mss. read brahmavedinah. All the ST mss. and the
vast majority of the NT ones, however, have the correct reading brahmavädinah. This
term is used frequently by Manu with reference to persons with extraordinary knowl-
edge (of either the Vedas or Brahman): see 2.113; 4-91. !99! 6.39; 11.42,120. The form
brahmavedin is found only here.
CHAPTER TWO
a.ioc Although the preponderance of evidence favors annmamsye, the positive alternative
numanisye is noteworthy. It is found in both NT and ST mss. and is strongly supported
by Rn, who argues against Ku on this point: srutismrtl sarvärthesu jñatavyesu aim-
nmmsye pratikülatarkena na vicärayitavye iti kuHukah. tan na. sarvärthesu tnïmatnsye
eva iti päthah. The adopted reading, however, is supported by Me, Go, Na, Ku, ^?c,and
Mr.
2.4od The reading adopted, brähmanah saha, is both the lectio difficilior and has the support
of most mss. In the reading brähmaiiaih saha, the instrumental was clearly influenced
by the proximity of saha, which actually governs the two words at the very beginning
of the verse: naitair apütaih. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 sBe2 Bo ßCa Ho Hy
Jm' Jo' wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 liKt5 Lo2 c,Md' oMd2 oOr sOx' Ox2 Ox3 s Pu6 MTr4 Wa \Jolly G
N Ku | Apa Dev Mädh Na Ku Re Go Jolly KSS.
2.44d The adopted reading, sütrikam, is supported by Be' Jo2 uKt5 Lo4 oMd1 TMd4 c;Md5 Ox3
Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M N\Apa Me Nd Jolly, with numerous other mss.
having the variant sûtrakam.
2.47d The mss. are evenly divided between anagnidüsitäh
 and nâgnidûsitâh.
 It is difficult to
decide on the original; I have preferred the former, principally because it is the lectio


--- PAGE 928 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 
917
difficilior with elision of the negative a, which many have prompted scribes to read the
initial na as na + a, giving the reading nägni-. The adopted reading, coming at the end
of the second line, nicely parallels anudvegakarah occurring at the beginning. This
reading is favored also by Me and Re, and appears to be supported also by the glosses
of Go and Kit. The adopted reading is found in: i)Ca Jo1 nKt5 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4
NNg NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa/lpa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave.
2.5od The reading nävamänayet
 is adopted by all editors, including Jolly's and has the sup-
port of Go, Ku, and Mr. The overwhelming majority of the mss., including all the ST
ones, however, have the reading na vimänayet, which is also the lectio difficilior. This
reading is supported by Me, who glosses vimänanä
 avajnäiiain, as also by Rn andJVc/.
It is found in: Be1 »Ç a Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKl4 »Kt5 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5oMd' oMd2 TMd3
TMd4 c,Md5 NNg Ox3 NPu
1 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M R Nd\Apa.
2.s6b I have adopted the reading nSdySd état over nadyadeva both because of manuscript
evidence and because it is the lectio difficilior. The referent of the pronoun état is un-
clear, and this may have caused the emendation to eva. Most commentators do not
comment on état, and those who do are divided over the referent. Na takes it to be
annain, and Nd, with great probability, refers it to ucchistam of pada-a and says that
the student should not eat the leftovers given by his teacher between meals. I think that
taking ucchista as the referent is justified especially because this topic recurs in päda-
d, although the over-eating of pada-c appears not to have anything to with ucchista.
2.63C The reading of this päda is quite uncertain, most mss. being divided over prâctna âvltï
and pracïnam âvîti. Three commentators, Me, Go, and Ku, note that the correct form is
prâcînâvïtî.
 This compound has been dissolved for the sake of meter. The question is
what the uncompounded form is. Me is silent; Go and Ku give it as pracîna avlfí. My
better mss., however, prefer pracïnam àvïti,
 with the first member in the adverbial
form. 1 have adopted this. The ST mss. have preserved the compounded form (also
found in Nd) by inserting the particle tu, but this must be seen as a later innovation; it
also violates the standard metrical form for the final four syllables of the päda (all be-
ing long).
2.73 
The reading I have adopted in pada-a is supported by only a few mss. mostly from ST:
»Be2 cMd1 TMd3 cMd5 Tr1 MTr4 Wa [Jolly N Nd|. It is clearly conjectural. The com-
monly accepted reading has the teacher as the subject of the verb bruyat and the stu-
dent intent on receiving instruction is the one to whom the teacher says these words.
Medhätith i clearly states that it is the teacher who at the beginning of the lesson says
"Recite" and at its conclusion (pada-c) says "Stop" (viramo 'stu). His interpretation is
followed by Go, Ku, Rn, Re, and Mr. The only commentators to dissent are No and Nd;
both of them follow the reading 1 have adopted and take the pupil to be the subject.
Several reasons prompt me to adopt this reading. First, the GDh (1.46) reads adhthi
bho ity ämanfrayed gurum, where the subject is clearly the pupil and the words are ad-
dressed to the teacher. Now, Manu, as I have shown in the Introduction (p. 44), fre-
quently follows Gautama and this verse, I think, is no exception, because none of the
other Dhannasutras says anything about the rites associated with the beginning and
conclusion of instruction. We have an ambiguity similar to Manu's in SänkGr 2.5.10
and 4.8.12. Oldenberg (1886, 67) is correct in taking the words to be spoken by the pu-
pil; this is confirmed by Prätisäkya
 Sütra cited there by Oldenberg and GobhGr
2.10.38. In the TU (3.1-6) also these words are put in the mouth of the pupil. The
request adhlhi (changed to the middle voice adhîsva in Manu) is made by the pupil to


--- PAGE 929 ---
918 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2
the teacher in all these sources. Second, all the surrounding verses deal with things that
the pupil must do; and the expression adhyesyantanas tu occurs at the very beginning
of this section (verse 70). Third, if we take the teacher as the subject of the first
sentence with bruyat, then we have to abruptly change the subject in the sentence
within pada-d if, with most translators, we take the pupil to be the subject of äramet. I
think the subject of bruyat and äramet should be the same. With regard to the iti clause
in pada-d, Na thinks that it is the pupil himself who says viramo 'stu and then stops his
recitation. I think this is erroneous, even though the natural reading of the text (with iti
and then iti ca) suggests it. I think that this ca connects the two verbs rather than the iti
clauses. Bühle r is correct in taking the last quoted words as being said by the teacher,
and this is supported by SaAkGr 4.8.17.
2.753 Jolly adopts the conjectural reading präktülän
 in place of präkkülän
 against the evi-
dence of all his mss. His conjecture is based on B-R, which takes präkküla
 as a wrong
form of präktüla,
 and on GDh 1.50. It may, indeed, be true that the former is an incor-
rect rendering; präktüla
 is attested in several sütra texts: BauSr 2.1; JaiGr 2.8.
Böhtling k refers to ÄsGr 3.2.5 andGobhGr 4.5.11 [it should be 4.5.15; I have not been
able to trace Böhtlingk' s reference to the Kausika Sutra 11.25 in Whiney's edition].
The ÄsGr editions of Änandäsram
a Sanskrit Series 105 (Poona, 1936) and Adyar Li-
brary (Adyar, 1980), however, give the reading präkküla.
 In GDh 1.50, the reading
präktüla
 in given in Stenzler's edition. Unfortunately, he provides no manuscript evi-
dence or variant readings; it is thus unclear whether this reading was merely a
"philological emendation" on the part of Stenzler or whether there was manuscript
evidence for it. In the editions published subsequently with the commentaries of Hara-
datta and Maskarin, the reading is uniformly präkküla
 (see my notes on this sütr a in
Olivelle 2000). The conclusion one can draw from all this is that these two forms were
used in the tradition probably from a very early date. It is difficult to decide which
form was used by the author of the MDh. I have, therefore, retained the form präkküla,
attested to by all the mss. and the commentaries; "philological emendations" should be
generally avoided in critical editions unless there is at least a modicum of manuscript
support (see Olivelle 19883 and 19993). Indeed, it is evident that Me read küla, because
he comments: külasabdo darbhSgravacanah; so also Nä: külam agram. Likewise, De-
vannabhatta (1.135) comments: präkkülän
 prägagrän
 ity arthah.
2.8oc All editions, including Jolly, read brahma for vipra. Surprisingly, Jolly does not give
any variants, even though his own K ms. f= sPu6] has vipra. The reading I have
adopted is supported by all the ST mss. [except Tr1] and by the vast majority of NT-x
mss., as also by Me, Nd, and Re. The gloss brähmana mGo and Ku may refer to either
reading.
2.99C Me and Ku read tato ' sya, but it is unclear whether fatal} is part of the commentary or a
citation of the root text. The reading adopted, tenäsya, is supported by all the ST mss.
and most NT ones.
2.1O1C Most NT mss. have the reading samâsînah. Only Me appears to read sadäslnah; and
sadä here is certain, because he comments: sadäsabdo nityatam aha, ubhaya-
samdhyasesah. Only Nä clearly reads samasita, glossing it with upaviset. Others,
however, also support a finite verb here: Ku: upavistah syät; and Rn: adhyäsfta
upavisya japed ity arthah. See the two finite verbs in verse 103. The original reading
here is clearly uncertain. I have adopted samasita. The prefix sam— is supported by all,
whereas sadä is found only in Me. I have opted for the finite verb both because it is


--- PAGE 930 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 
919
found in almost all ST mss., as well as in a few NT ones, and because it fits the syntax
better paralleling tisthet of pada-n. It is found, however, in only: La1 oMd1 TMd4 c,Md5
sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly N]M7, and, therefore, should be considered conjectural.
2.ioid Some mss. and Nd have the reading samyagarksa-, with "a" inserted before rksa. That
there should be an ä here is clear, but its absence was already noted by Me, who
explains that this particle is implicitly taken over from päda-b: ärkadarsanäd
 iti ya
äkärah
 sä ihänusaktavyah.
2.ii4a Quite a number of mss., including all of the ST, read ityäha. Because of the ambiguity
of sandhi, this could be iti aha or itya aha. The latter would be an ungrammatical for-
mation of the gerund, although such a formation from uncompounded verbs is occa-
sionally encountered. Nevertheless, I think the original reading was etyäha. The
parallel passages in Nirukta (2.4), VaDh(2.8), and ViDh (29.9) read äjagäma,
 and Me,
Go, and Ku have the gloss ägatya. The adopted reading is found in: Be1 sBe2 Bo Ho
Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 isKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 [me to] Ox3 sPu6 [me to] Tj2
MTr3 Wa [Jolly M3~4] Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave.
2.1153 Several mss. and editions have the reading vidyän niyata-, with the verb in the third
person. The context of vidyä speaking to the Brahmin clearly calls for a verb in the
2nd person; and vidyäh (vidyä with the elision of the visarga through sandhi) parallels
nicely vidyä personified who is speaking in the second person: brühi (pada-c) and
raksa and dâh in the previous verse. The glosses of Me (jânîthâh)
 and Ku (janasi) are
also in the second person, while Go hasjânîyât
 both in the editions and in my mss. The
reading adopted is found in: nBe2 liCa Hy Kt2wKt3 sKt5 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 xMd4
oMy sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 oOr Pu2 Pu7 [but cor] Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 WaDave Jha Jolly.
2.121C The reading tasya vardhante found in Jolly and other editions is attested by only a few
mss. The vast majority has vardhante preceded by a word or prefix beginning with
sain. The reading of Me appears to have beensampravardhante. Of the other com-
mentators, only Ku notices this, and he reads samyak vardhante. Most ST mss., as well
as the very old NKt4, also have that reading, which I have adopted. The reading here,
however, is uncertain. Jolly applies sandhi to the end of this päda with the reading
vardhanta. All but a few the mss., however, dispense with sandhi at the end of the
päda and read vardhante. The reading adopted is found in: La2 Lo2 iMd4 oMd5 c,My
Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Ku BhP 4.50, supported by other mss. with variants of
this reading.
2.i2sd Jolly, following BUhler (see his long note to this verse), has adopted the reading
pürväksaraplutah
 as a Bahuvrihi compound. This reading is supported only by very
few mss.; and even then we cannot be sure that this is not simply a scribal error, be-
cause visargas are often omitted in the mss. This reading is adopted only by AW (who
also explains the compound as Bahuvrihi), and it is given as a variant by Nä .
According to this reading, the letter "a" is added at the end of the name and the syllable
preceding this addition is prolated. Thus, we have Devadatta(3)a. The majority of mss.
and commentators read pürväksarah
 platal). This causes some grammatical problems,
because aksara is a neuter noun and the reading should be pürväksaram
 plutam (a
reading suggested by some medieval authors of Nibandhas; see Jha 1999, Vol. 9, p.
100). Nä calls the masculine ending a vedic peculiarity: lingavyatyayas chandasali. Me
avoids this problem by giving the meaning of consonant to aksara, thus taking
pürväksarah
 as a Bahuvrihi. He gives this rather complex and lengthy explanation:
"The term pürväksarah
 qualifies the vowel 'a', which is to be lengthened; and aksara


--- PAGE 931 ---
920 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2
here stands for the consonant, and the compound means 'that vowel of which the pre-
ceding syllable is a consonant,' i.e., the vowel occurring along with the consonant.
What is meant is that it is the vowel 'a' already there that is to be lengthened, and not
any such vowel as might be added." The interpretation offered by Me and others fol-
lows Pänin i 8.2.83 and agrees broadly with ÄpDh 1.5.17; VaDh 13.46. I have provi-
sionally adopted this reading. See the lengthy note to this verse given by Jha (1999,
Vol. 9, pp. 100-05). According to this reading, the name is pronounced Devadatta(3).
2.i2gd Mss. are evenly divided over the two readings: vä and ca. I have opted for the former
both because it make better sense within the context of an option between two forms of
address and because most of the ST mss., including all the Malayalam ones, support it:
Be1 Be3 Bo nCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 liKt5 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5r,Md' oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2
NPu1 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Dev. It is also found in some mss. of the Mädh and sup-
ported by Ku and Re.
2.i35a-b The mss. are divided over the two reading in both padas: ca and tu. I have opted for
the former both because it fits the context better and because it is found in all but one
of the ST mss. and a good number of NT-x ones: Be3 Bo isCa Jo2 nKt5 La2 Lo2 Lo3
c.Md1 TMd3 oMd5 ciMy oOr Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly R Nd|S/¡P 4.68. This
reading is also found in the parallel passage in ViDh 32.17.
2.145 This is a problematic verse. The tradition is of many minds with regard to the gram-
matical case of the names for persons vis-à-vi s whom others are more eminent: these
are placed in the ablative singular (upädhyäyät,
 äcäryät,
 pituh), in the accusative plural
(upädhyäyän,
 pitm), and in the genitive plural (äcäryänäm).
 The ST mss. generally
prefer the ablative, and it is clear from the manuscript evidence that this was the origi-
nal reading in the case of pituh. In the case of äcärya,
 on the other hand, the ST mss.
may have been seeking uniformity; the genitive plural is the best attested. In the case
of upädhyäya,
 on the other hand, there is strong support for both the ablative and the
accusative. I have adopted the former because it parallels the other ablative in pada-c
and is supported by all ST mss. and a good number of NT ones as well. Although the
accusative and the ablative can be used with the verb atiricyate, I think the undisputed
ablative of pituh in pada-c supports a similar ablative in poY/a-a. In pada-c, the reading
of Me is uncertain. Jha and Dave read sahasram pitm iti vacanam, whereas Mandlik
and my ms. Pu'° read instead pitur iti vacanam. In päcla-a, upädhyäyät
 is found in: Be1
Be3 Bo Ho NKt4 i¡Kt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Tr1
Tr2 MTr6 Re Vij. In pada-c, pituhis found in: Be1 «Be2 Be3 Bo «Ç a Ho Hy Jo2 wKt1
NKt4 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 ciMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 No Nd Ipatha] Ku Re Mr Vis Dev 3.688 Mädh,
and this reading is supported by Go.
2.1563 The reading sthavirah, which I have adopted, in recorded in Be1 nBe2 Be3 Bo i¡Ca Ho
Hy wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2c;Md' TMd3 TMd4 (¡Md5 (¡My sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8
Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 BhP 4.ioo\Jolly Nd|. The commentators Me, Go, Ku, Re, and Mr
give vrddhah, although it is not altogether clear whether it is the reading of the root
text or a gloss. I had adopted sthavirah because it is the lectio difficilior and because it
is found in all ST mss. and in quite a spectrum of NT ones; it also parallels the word in
pada-d. It is the lectio difficilior because it makes Ihspada hypermetric with nine syl-
lables. The way to make it scan is to read bhavati with the Prakrit pronunciation of
bhoti, which is required also in other verses; for example, in 2.201 padas a and c. It ap-
pears that vrddhah was substituted to restore the meter. However, bhavati does not


--- PAGE 932 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 
921
give the regular cadence of the last four syllables, where as the reading sthaviro bhoti
gives the regular cadence. Indeed, other scribes attempted other strategies, substituting
jneyah and bhüyät
 for bhavati. As in verse 201, this is probably a proverbial saying
taken over by Manu; hence the Prakritic pronunciation.
2.19OC Both the readings eva and evam have strong manuscript support. I have opted for the
former because of strong manuscript evidence from both ST and NT: Hy Lo2 Lo3 oMd1
TMd3 c,My NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 MTr6 [folly M G Ku R Nd] Jolly. See also
other variant readings with eva. This reading also fits the context better.
2.i9od The reading adopted, pracaksate, is supported by most ST and NT mss: Be1 isBe2 Be3
Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 uKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy sOx1 Ox2
Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa \tolly M G Ku R Nd] Jolly.
2.i9ia-b Clearly, the reading noditalpranodita is the lectio difficilior. I have refrained from
adopting it, however, because the overwhelming evidence of the mss., including all the
ST ones and the citations of Apa and Laks, support codita: NBe2 Bo nCa Ho Hy Jm1
Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La2 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNgoOr sOx1
Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr' MTr4 MTr6. In Re1 pada-a has nodito and pada-b
apracodita.
2.i9ic The vulgate has the reading yatnam. The source of this may be Me, who glosses
yogain with yatnam, followed by Go.
2.193d Both readings, abhimukhah and abhimukham, have strong manuscript support. I have
chosen the former because it is the near unanimous reading of the ST and has strong
support from NT mss. including the two Sârad â ones. My reading is supported by Ho
Jo2 NKf uKt5 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy sOx1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10
Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa (Jolly MGR] BhP 4.164 [vl] Laks Jolly.
2.ig8b The reading adopted, nityam syät, has overwhelming support: Be1 isße2 ßCa wKt1
wKt3 NKt4 wKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Leí oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox3
NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Me Ku Re. Surprisingly,
however, Jolly, who adopts this reading, gives no variants.
2.1980 It is surprising that the reading guros tu, which has so little manuscript support, has
been adopted by all the editions, including Jolly's, who gives no variants for this also.
2.2Oiac The podas a and c of the verse are hypermetric, with nine syllables. As in verse
2.156, here also the word bhavati has to be pronounced as the Prakritic bhoti, which
rectifies the meter and restores the proper cadence to the final four syllables of the
päda. Again like verse 2.156, this must have been a common proverb taken over by
Manu; hence the Prakritic influence.
2.2o6a The mss. and commentators are divided over the two readings evam and état. The
former is supported by Me and Go, which lends it weight. I have gone with the latter,
however, principally because it is found in all the ST mss. and a substantial number of
NT-x and NT-y ones. According to Sanskrit grammar, the pronoun should agree with
the noun to which it refers within the same sentence and not to its antecedent (Brereton
1986). Thus, the correct form should have been esa corresponding to vrttih. Yet, we
must make allowances for later Sanskrit where this rule may not have been adhered to
consistently. The adopted reading is found in: Be1 »Be2 sCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 La1 La2 Lo3 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6
NäKu Mandlik Jolly KSS.


--- PAGE 933 ---
922 
Notes to the Edition : Chapter 2
2.22ob Surprisingly all editions, including Jolly's, have the reading kamacaratah even
though it is supported by so few mss. The reading I have adopted, kämakäratah,
 is
supported by Be1 Bo nCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 NKt
4 liKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1
Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa |Jolly M G R Nd| BhP4.189 Nä Rn Rc. Cf. ViDh 28.53. See the
same form at 11.41, 45.
2.22ia I have adopted the reading abhinimluktah. It has only limited support: TMd3 TMd4 NNg
Pu2 SAP4.190 Me Go Jolly Jha Dave; but see the parallelabhinitnlocet at 2.219. This
word has been subject to many spellings, including abhinimrukta found in ÄpDh
2.12.22; VaDh 1.18. The most common form found in the mss., abhiiiirinuktah, is
clearly an error.
2.24OC The mss. are divided between the two readings. The reading adopted, vividhâni ca
silpani, is supported by Be3 Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NiKl
4 La1 Lo1 c;Md' oMd2 TMd3 c;Md5 oMy
NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4MTr6 [folly Nd] BhP
4.209 MandlikJha KSS Dave. I have chosen this because it is supported by almost all
ST mss., all NT-y mss., and a good number of NT-x ones, including the old NKt4 and
the Särad ä mss. I also think it is the lectio difficilior in the sense that it would have
been easier to change this general text (probably a well-known proverb) into the
"theologically correct" alternative, rather than the other way round. Yet, the authority
of Me and Go is behind the alternative, and the reading here must remain uncertain.
2.242C The reading ca is found in most mss., including all the NT-y mss. and most of the ST
and NT-x ones.. The alternative reading va, however, is the lectio difficilior 
and at-
tested by both Me and Go. In fact, Me found the reading vä problematic and explained
that it is used here with a copulative meaning: väsabdo 'py arthe. Nevertheless, given
the overwhelming manuscript support, I have gone with ca, which is found in: Be1
liBe2 liCa Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 liKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3oMd2 TMd3 c,Md5
oMy Ox2 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 BhP 4.211 Laks Apa Mandlik Jolly KSS.
C H A P T E R THREE
3-5d The preponderance of manuscript evidence supports the reading darakarmani
niaithune. However, I have adopted the reading darakarmany aniaithum. This reading
is supported by Me and Mi and is found in TMd3 oMd5 c;My Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Nd]
Jha Dave. I take the reading maithum in the sense of relationship by marriage as found
in PärGr 3.10.13 and Pänin i 4.3.125. Thus, aniaithum would mean "a woman unrelated
by marriage." Given the context, this reading makes the best sense, and failure to de-
tect this meaning may have led scribes and commentators to emend the text. Nd inter-
prets amaithunï to mean a woman who is a virgin (aksatayoni). Me, on the other hand,
has an elaborate and unconvincing explanation, connecting the term with pituh and
taking it to mean a girl who has not been born through the father's sexual union, i.e., a
girl born from a leviratic union (niyoga). The meaning of the reading niaithune is not
altogether clear. Blihler, following most commentators, translates: "is recommended to
twice-born men for wedlock and conjugal union." Why Manu should add that she is
recommended for sex on top of marriage is unclear to me.


--- PAGE 934 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 
923
3-ioc This päda is hypermetric, containing nine syllables. A few mss. have attempted to cor-
rect this with the reading -dantäm in place of -dasanSm, and this is adopted by Jolly. It
is clearly the lectio facilior and should be rejected.
3.i2d Because of the ambiguous sandhi, it is unclear whether the reading is varâh or avaräh;
most mss. do not write avagrahas. All editions, except Jolly's, adopt avaräh indicated
by an avagraha, and so do the editors of Vij Apa J/nv DevMädh. Devannabhatta com-
ments avara jaghanyä ity arthah. The commentators Nd, Rn, and Re also support
avaräh with their glosses: Mitait and hlnavarnah. However, Me, Go, No, Kit, and Mr
support varäh, which I have adopted, with their gloss: sresthSh.
3.13C Although there is support in the mss. for both readings räjnas tu and räjnas ca, the
prepondence of evidence supports the reading I have adopted: Bo isCa Ho Jo2 wKt3
NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 iMd4 oMd5 c,My NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2
sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa Apa Jmv fvlj Dev Mädh.
3.i8c The mss. are deeply divided over the two readings adanti and asnanti. I have opted for
the former, because it is found in almost all the ST mss. and a substantial number of
NT-x ones: Bo Ho NKt4 wKt6 \cor to\ La1 La2 Lo2 cMd1 TMd3 ciMd5 c;My Ox3 Pu2 Pu7
Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 Tr1 Wa [Jolly M G Nd| BhP y.izNa Nd Re Jolly. The reading of Me is
unclear; the editions of Mandlik, Jha, and Dave read asnanti, whereas in all my ms.
(Lo4 Ox3 Pu'° ; while Lo5 has the defective näti) the reading is nädanti. The reading,
however, remains uncertain.
3.23d There is uncertainty regarding the reading na räksa- and aräksa-. The confusion is
compounded because of the preceding word dharmyan; mss. sometimes tend to double
a "n" before a vowel even though the doubling is supposed to take place only when the
preceding vowel is short. Such a doubling would give rise to the form
dharmyännaräksa-.
 I have adopted the reading aräksasän
 because it has strong manu-
script support and the Bahuvrihi is syntactically more appropriate as qualifying tan.
This reading is supported by uBe2 Ho Hy wKt3 NKt
4 wKt5 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
oMd1 t;Md5 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa Me Ku Mr Apa Laks Dev Man-
dlik KSS Dave, as well as by the variant reading in Bo oMd2 TMd3 Ox2 Tr2 BhP.
3.2sd The two readings, kathanicana and kadacana, have good manuscript support. Only
two commentators, Ku and Nd, note the word, and they are divided. I have opted for
the former reading because it has the unanimous support of the ST mss., as well as
substantial support from mss. of NT-x. This reading is found in Ho Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c,My Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Wa [Jolly R] BhP
7.19 Mädh Nd.
3.273 All editions, including Jolly's, read arcayitvä, even though it has very weak manu-
script support. The reading adopted, arhayitvä, is found in Be1 Be3 Ho wKt3 NKt4 liKt5
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3c;Md' TMd3
 TMd4 c;Md5 oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3NPu'
sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [folly G\Go Na Re Nd Dev Apa. The editions
of Jha and Dave give the reading of Medhätithi' s commentary as cärcayitvä,
 whereas
Mandlik and some of my mss. read cärhayitvä.
3_38d The short "a" in käyodhajah instead of käyodhäjah
 is clearly due to metrical reasons.
Me, however, and following him Ku, refers to Pânin i 6.3.63, which permits the substi-
tution of a short final "a" for the feminine long "a" in the vedic language.


--- PAGE 935 ---
924 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3
3.390 Most mss. record the usual form varcasvinah, which is clearly the lectio facilior. The
older and probably the original form varcasinah is preserved mostly in the mss. of the
ST. Using the principle of lectio difficilior, I have opted here to go with the minority
reading with the strong and clear support of Me:brahmavarcas tadvanto brahmavar-
casinah innanto 'yam. The reading adopted is found in: Lo2 oMd1 iMd3 oMy oMd5 Tr1
Dev Me Rn Re Mandlik Jha Dave.
3-47b Note the double sandhi at ninditaikâdasï (for ninditä ekädasi) clearly for metrical rea-
sons. The only commentator to note this is Rn, who ascribes it to a vedic peculiarity:
sandhir ârsah.
3_5ob The reading varjayet is supported by most ST and NT-x mss. I have opted to go with
the manuscript evidence, even though the participle varjayan fits the context better,
coordinating with the other present participle vasan and leaving a single main clause
with the finite verb bhavati. The participle varjayan is supported by Me and Go (both
glossing with pariharan), Nä (glossing with upgacchan), Kit, Rn, and Mr, and has been
adopted by all editions. The finite verb varjayet, which I have adopted, is found in: Be3
Bo Ho wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd4 c;Md5 oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 [but cor
sh\ NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 WaVîsRc.
3.53d The alternative reading, tävän
 eva sa vikrayah, has strong manuscript support and is
the reading preferred by Me. The reading adopted, however, is supported by uBe2 Be3
Bo uCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 c.Md1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 oOr
NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6Div Go Ku Mandlik Jolly KSS. The support of
the Malayalam and the Grantha mss. tilts the decision in favor of this reading, although
the original is clearly uncertain.
3.59 
Mss. give three readings: sadäbhyarcyäh,
 samabhyarcyäh, and sadä püjyäh.
 Most ST
mss. record the second, while the NT-y vulgate has the third. I have opted for the first,
with its two parts getting support from the other two readings. It is found in: »Be2 Bo
uCa Ho Jo2wKt3 NKt4 La2 Lo1 Lo2 TMd4 NNgoOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2
Wa [Jolly G Nd] Laks Go Mâdh Jolly.
3.630, 650 There is much confusion on which of these pacías should read kuläny âsu
vinasyanti and which kuläny akulatäm yänti. All the editions, including Jolly's, as well
as Bühle r in his translation, have the latter in 6sc and the former in 6sc. I have inverted
this order. That 650 should have the latter is clear from the manuscript evidence. All
the ST mss. plus numerous NT-x ones have this reading: Be3 Bo uCa Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 La1
Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 rMd3 TMd4 c;Md5 o My NNg oOr Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa
[Jolly R N Nd] Nd Devi.2o8[vl|, Laks 2.333; it is also supported by the parallel verse
in BDh 1.10.28. It also fits nicely with the very next verse, which speaks of ku-
lasamkhyäm gacclianti. The original reading of 630, however, is not as certain. Here
also I have gone with the unanimous ST reading, supported by several NT-x mss. in-
cluding the important NKt4 and the Sârad â mss.: Be3 Kt2 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Nä Nd. The parallel
verse in BDh 1.10.26, however, reads kuläny akulatäm yänti.
3-77b The reading I have adopted, sarve jlvanti jantavah, has overwhelming manuscript sup-
port: Be1 nBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 nKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 TMd3
TMd4 c;Md5 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [folly
M G R Nd] Me Go Ku Jolly Jha Dave.


--- PAGE 936 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 
925
3.790 Although the alternate reading adopted by Jolly and other editors has substantial
manuscript support, the adopted reading, atyantam, is found in all ST mss. and in a
majority of NT-x ones: Be1 NKt4 nKt5 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 CiMd
1 xMd3 TMd4 oMd5
c,My NNgsOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 Mir4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M Nd]Me Re
Dave Jha.
3.823, d The reading cladyat in pada-a, which I have adopted, has the overwhelming support
of mss., commentators, and citations: Be1 sBe2 Bo isCa Ho Jo2 MKt
1 üKt 5 MKt
6 La1 La2
Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oOr sOx1 [we to] Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 [me to] Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M G Nd R] Me Go Re Rn LaksHem Dev Jolly Jha Dave. The support
for the adopted reading äharan in pada-d is not as overwhelming but still very strong:
Be3 nCa HoMKt4 La1 Lo1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 MNgoOr sOx1 Ox3 MPu1 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa \folly M GJ Apa Hem Dev Jolly.
3.830 It is unclear whether the original reading was kamcit, as all editions have it, or kiincit.
The former has the support of only one ST ms., whereas all others read kiincit. How-
ever, the important and old NKt4, as well as the Sarada mss., also read kamcit. I have
opted for kamcit mostly because it makes better sense, qualifying as it does dvijam, the
former concluding pada-c and the latter pada-d. Because it is thus separated from its
referent, kamcit is also the lectio difficilior; scribes may have been wanted to find a di-
rect object for the adjacent verb. The reading of Me is unclear: Jha and Dave read
kamcit, while Mandlik and my ms. Pu'° read kiincit; his explanation, however, indi-
cates that his reading was indeed kamcit. Of the other commentators, Nd is the most
clear, glossing kimcid apy annam, while Go's gloss anyain brähmanam na kimcid
bhojayet also appears to support kimcid. Ku, on the other hand, supports the reading
adopted: na kamcid vaisvadevärthani brähmanam atra bhojayet, a reading found in
Be1 Bo liCa [cor to] wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 oMd5 NNg sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 MTr3 Wa
[Jolly G Ku] Hem Dev Ku Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave.
3.gib Most mss. are in error with regard to the unusual word sarvannabhutaye. It is found
only in nKt5 wKt6 Lo2 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu7. It is unambiguously supported, however,
by Me, Go, and Re, and it is given as an alternate reading byNä. See also SankhGr
2.14.15, which gives the mantra to be recited on this occasion: namah sarvanna-
bhutaye. See Gopal 1962 for Manu's indebtedness to the SankhGr in this passage.
3-92d It is difficult to decide which of the reading, niksipet or nirvapet, is the original. The
former has broad support among both branches of the NT; it is also found in all the ci-
tations. I have opted for the latter principally because all but one of the ST mss. record
it and it also has substantial support from the NT mss: isBe2 isCa Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1
La2 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox2 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [folly Nd] Re
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave. The reading, however, remains uncertain.
3.95b The traditional reading found in most mss. and all editions is gain dattva vidhivad
guroh. Several mss., including the oldNKl4, as well as the Grantha and Särad ä mss.,
read gäm dattvä tu yathävidhi. I think this is a variant of the original reading preserved
in only the Malayalam and Telugu mss. gain dattvägor yathävidhi; scribes probably
did not understand gor (= agor) and changed it to tu. The word agoh (genitive of aguh,
"a poor man") is somewhat rare and is clearly the lectio difficilior. This reading is sup-
ported by Nd, who glosses agoh gohinaya, and by Go, who cites a prafika from
Yajnavalkya alpaguh (possibly a variant reading of YDh 1.204). It is easier to see how
this difficult päda was changed into the very common motif of giving a cow to a guru


--- PAGE 937 ---
926 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3
rather than the other way round. The adopted reading occurs in TMd3 xMd4 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Nd|; it is also found in the Trivandrum ms. 22039, which was partially
collated. A reading with the nominative aguh is given as a päth a by Me.
3.io6d The alternate reading atithibhojanam has strong support. The verb püjayet, however,
with the meaning of feeding is found also at 3.243; 4.31. See also 3.117.1 have adopted
the reading atithpujanam, because it is found in all but one of the ST mss. and a sub-
stantial number of NT ones: oCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 uKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5oMd' TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1
 MTr4
MTr6 [JollyM^-6'9] Mädh NdMandlikJha KSS
Dave. Although Me, Go, and Ku have bhojana in their commentaries, it is unclear
whether this reflects the reading of their root text or is simply a gloss.
3.1080 The reading I have adopted, tasmai cannant, occurs in Jo2 nKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo' Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Wa [Jolly G R M3"4] Me
Go. The reading is further supported by NKt4 Lo2 oMd5 Pu8 Vij, which also have
tasmai, and by ST mss., which have tasmäd. It is also partially supported by oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1 which had tasmäd and by Lo2 oMd5 Pu8 Vij that read (asma [=
tasmai] annam.
3-iioa All editions, including Jolly's, have the reading na brähmanasya tv atithih; indeed,
Jolly does not record any variants! The commentaries use the expression na atithih, but
it is unclear whether this is merely a gloss or reflects on the particle na in their root
text. The vast majority of the mss., however, including all the ST ones, support the
reading I have adopted: Be1 uBe2 Be3 Bo Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 »Kt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1
Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c¡Md5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 WaDev [vl in 2 of 3 mss.] Mâdh.
3.1140 It is remarkable that the original reading, anvag eva, attested by Me, Go, and Na, is
preserved only in the mss. of ST: c,Md' TMd3 TMd4oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr6.
Me glosses anvag evaitän anugatan eva bhojayet. The gloss of Go also contains
aimgatan, clearly showing his dependence on Me; and Nä glosses anvag agre. It may
well be that such a gloss that lies at the root of the NT reading agre. This reading is
given by Me, Go, and Nä as an alternate reading preferred by some. Me says: anye tv
agrá iti pathanti. In this case Jolly does not follow the principle he himself articulated
of adopting the reading of the old commentators such as Me and Go.
3.n6a It is difficult to decide between the two readings tu and ca, both having equally strong
mss. support. The commentators offer no help. I have gone with tu, because it is repre-
sented in Malayalam, Grantha, Telugu, and Old Nàgar ï mss. The reading, however,
remains uncertain.
3.i2ob The adopted reading, upasthite, is supported by Be3ßCa NKt4 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 sOx1
Ox3 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 [cor to] Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly Jha Dave. This pada ap-
pears to have had several alternate readings even during the time of Me, who con-
fesses: ilia dvitïye päde ' nekadhä päthapratipattih. And he states in the clearest terms
that the reading I have adopted is the correct one: ato 'yam eva pätho yuktah yajna-
karmany upasthita iti. The alternate reading, however, has the strong support of the ST
mss., as well as a broad range of NT-x and NT-y mss.; it is also supported by Go, Ku,
Na, and Re, who gloss pmptau. Yet, I think upasthite is the correct reading, especially
in view of the identical reading at 3.i8yb, where this reading has unanimous support.
3.1233 The reading pindänäm
 for pitfnam must be very old. It is attested in most ST mss., by
Go and Nd, and given as an alternate reading by Me.


--- PAGE 938 ---
Notes to the Edition : Chapter 3 
927
3.1253 Although the alternate reading, pitrkärye, has considerable manuscript support, I think
the correct reading is pitrkrtye, which is supported by most commentators. It is found
in: Be1 liBe2 Bo liCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
TMd4 oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G] Me GoKu
Ru Rc Dev Hein Apa Jolly Dave Jha; cf. VaDh 11.27. See also pretakrtya in 3.127.
3.1333 The majority of the NT mss. and the commentators have the reading grasan, as do all
the editions. I have opted for pinclan, first because it is found in all ST mss. as well as a
substantial number of NT-x ones (including the old NKt4 and the Sârad â mss.), and
second because pimía ("rice ball") makes a nice parallel to ayoguda ("iron ball") at the
end of the verse. The reading adopted is found in ßBe2 nCa wKt1 NKt4 wKt6 La1 Lo4
Lo5 GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 [me to sh] Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6
[Jolly M Gr] Apa Laks Hem .
3.i5ib Several readings are found in the mss.: durvalam, durvalam, durbalam, etc. The
commentators gloss the word with duscarma, a man with bad skin or a skin disease.
Me is the only commentator to give an alternate explanation: skhalitalohitakeso vika-
lendriyo va. The reading adopted in found only in Jo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 oMd5 Ox3 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6[/o/(y M4 Me Nd| Dev Mädh; hence it is conjectural. The parallel passage
in GDh 15.18, however, also reads durväla. The list contains classes of people who are
viewed as outside "good society"; within such a list, people who are weak or with bad
skin seem incongruous. I think the term durväla refers to "bald men" in the sense of
heretical ascetics, parallel tojati/a.
3.1523 Numerous mss. read cikitsakän devalakän in the accusative plural; this is followed by
Jolly. Then, we would have to connect pädas a-b syntactically with the preceding verse
and the verb na bhojayet. It is more natural to take these pädas as forming a syntactic
unit with the rest of this verse governed by varjyäh syuh, which would demand nomi-
natives. Words in the nominative are also supported by Me, Go, Ku, Rn, Rc, and Mr,
that is, all the commentators except Na. The reading cikitsakä devalakäh, which I have
adopted, is found in: Be1 Bo wKt1 wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 rMd3 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Jha Dave.
3.1690 The reading daive karmani has strong support from the ST mss. and those containing
the commentary of Me; the latter must have been the reason for its adoption by Jolly.
Yet, I think daive havisi is the correct reading because it has overwhelming manuscript
support: Be1 isBe2 Be3 Bo uCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 liKt5 wKt6 La1 La2
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 cMd1 oMd2 TMd4 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly R Ku] Go Ku Mandlk KSS. For the same expression where havisi has even
greater manuscript and commentarial support, see 3.2400.
3.1723 The reading parivettä has the broadest manuscript support, even though the short "i"
violates the normal Pathyâ form of the sloka. It appears that scribes attempted to cor-
rect this by either reading parivettä, also adopted by Mandlik, Jolly, Jha, and Dave, or
by adding a final ca, which, however, makes the päda hypermetric.
3.175 The alternate reading in the plural, as opposed to the dual that I have opted for, is de-
liberately adopted by Me, who cites Pänin i 1.2.58 (that a class name denoting the sin-
gular may optionally be used in the plural) in support: jätyäkhyäyäm
 iti bahuvacanam
pränina iti. The dual, however, has strong support from both NT and ST mss.: Be1 Be3
BCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 c;Md5 oMy oOr
sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik Jolly KSS Nä Rc.


--- PAGE 939 ---
928 
Notes to the Edition : Chapter 3
3.1783 Although the alternate reading scunsprsati has strong manuscript support, I have
adopted samsprset. It is found in all ST mss. and a significant number of NT ones:
nBe2 Be3 uCa Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 NKt4 Lo1 Lo3 cMd1 TMd3 xMd4 c,Md5 c,My oOr Ox2 NPu1
Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 and all editions. In the printed versions,Me, Go, Ku, and Re read
samprasati, but these readings cannot be trusted without critical editions of these
commentaries.
3.187C The alternate reading nimantrayita must be very old; it is clearly the lectio difficilior.
Nevertheless, I do not think it has the kind of manuscript support that would justify its
adoption, as, for instance, vâcayïta at 11.31. All the ST mss., for example, read niman-
trayeta. Regarding the form nimantrayita in ihe D harinas utras, see Bharadwaj 1982,
119-22. The adopted reading is found in Be1 Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kl2 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo2
Lo3 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6
Wa Mandlik KSS; see also YDh 1.225.The commentators Me, Go, Ku, and Re have the
reading nimantrayet. Even though there may be some orthographic confusion regard-
ing "ï " and "e" in Devanâgarl , the two signs are quite distinct in the southern scripts
and in old Nagarl, Bengali, and Newari.
3.1993 The reading of pada-'A is somewhat uncertain; mss. are divided between the two
readings. The reading adopted, anagiiidagdhägnidagdhän,
 is found in NKt4 Lo2 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 [Jolly M] Hem\\\ as in ed] Me Go Jolly, and
has the support of isKt5 wKt6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 [Jolly G| Jha Dave.
3.2040 The alternate reading is strongly supported by the ST mss.; the reading must, there-
fore, remain uncertain. The vast majority of the mss., however, have the reading I have
adopted and it is supported also by Me and Re: Be1 Be3 Bo nCa Ho Jo2 nKt5 wKt6 La1
La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tf
Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G K] Me Re Dev Apa Jolly Jha Dave.
3.2O7b The reading I have adopted, jalatïresu, has the overwhelming support of the mss.,
including all the ST one: Ho NKt4 isKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
c,Md5 oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Wa [Jolly
G| Me Re Apa Laks Jha Dave.
3.2r/d Most mss. of both the ST and NT have the reading mantravit, and this is followed by
Mandlik and Bühler . All commentators, except Re, support the reading I have adopted
mantravat. Even when the editions read mantravit, as in the case of Rn, it is clear from
the commentary itself that the commentator read mantravat, because they give the
rnantra that should be used in the rite. One possible reason for the alternate reading
may be the frequent occurrence of dharmavit as the last word of a half-verse: 2.61,128,
245; 3.149; 4.192; 5.167; 8.41, 265; 9.152; 11.31. The only occurrences of mantravit are
at 3.131,133, where the term appropriately refers to a learned man in general and not to
the performer of a rite. The adopted reading is found in Be3 wKt1 Lo1 c,Md5 Tr1 and
must be considered conjectural.
3.22OC There is considerable manuscript support for the alternate reading sraddhe, including
several ST mss. BUhler also follows this reading. I have adopted sraddham because it
has the strong support of commentators. Me, for example, glosses: sräddhärtham
annum sraddham. Further, sraddham is frequently used in the MDh as the direct object
of eating: 3.146, 222, 247, 249 4.131; see also sräddhabhuk at 3.250; 4.109. It is clearly
the lectio difficilior here with the indirect object (one's own father) also in the accusa-
tive. In these usages, as Me notes, the term sräddha refers specifically to the meal it-


--- PAGE 940 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 
929
self. The accusative reading is supported by Be3 ßCa BKt5 wKt6 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3
TMd4 Ox3 Tr1 Mir4 MTr6 Dave Jha.
3.22ib The reading jlvec capi has the support of most ST mss. Nevertheless, I think väpi is
the original reading. Nä , for example, saw the problem of reading va here and com-
ments: väsabdas cärthe. Further, Go and Ku also have the gloss: pitrjlvanapaksäpekso
väsabdah. This reading is found in Be1 sBe2 Be1 Bo isCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt
4 BKt5
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 oMd2 TMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj ' Tr2 Wa Vis Vij Laks Dev Nä Go Re Jolly.
3.2260 The mss. of NT-y vulgate has the reading pürvam, while those of the ST read sarvam.
I have followed the reading of NT-x in this case, because it receives strong support
from several commentators and from citations: Be1 »Be2 Be3 Bo isCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3
BKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G Ku Nd R] Dev Hem Apa Go Ku Mr Jolly.
3.228c The reading adopted, parivesayet, is found insBe2 Be3 Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo2 sKt5 wKt6
La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 Wa Me Go Nä
Ku Jolly. Most mss., however, have either parivesayeta or parivesayec ca. Both these
would make the päda hypermetric with 9 syllables. Jolly does not give any variants for
this päda. Given the divergence of the mss., the reading is uncertain.
3.233b The reading adopted has the support of mss. of ST and NT-x: Be1 ßBe2 Be3 sCa Ho
Jo2 wKt1 BKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 cMd5 c;My NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu1
Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 MTr4 Wa [Jolly M G Ku] Hem Go Jolly.
3.2340 The alternate reading äsane has the unanimous support of the ST. The adopted read-
ing, however, is the lectio difficilior and has the support of Me, Go, and Re, who con-
sider äsanam to be apposition to kutapam. The adopted reading is found in Be1 nBe2
Be3 Bo BCa Ho Jo2 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Wa [Jolly M'-2-4'5-8-9 Me G Ku R] Apa Me Go Re Jolly Jha
Dave.
3.236b The original reading here is quite uncertain. The mss. of NT-y vulgate read te ça, a
reading followed by most editions. Many mss. of NT-x have the reading te 'pi. The
reading I have adopted, caiva, is found in the mss. of ST and NT-x: BCa wKt3 aKt5 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 rMd4 c,Md5 oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6[ Jolly
M Nd] Hem Jolly. It is also supported by the variants in: TMd3 Tr1 Dev Mädh. The
commentators offer no help on this.
3.2373 The alternate reading umam bhavaty a/mam has the support of some ST mss. The
reading with usina, however, has the support of Me, Go, and Re and, I feel, is also the
lectio difficilior. It is found iniiBe2 BCa Jo NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 c,Md' oMy
NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M G N R] Apa Me Go Re Jolly
Jha Dave.
3.24OC Here the ST appears to go with the NT-y vulgate in reading kartnani, a reading not
found in any commentary. The reading havisi, which I have adopted, has the support of
most commentators and is found in Be1 aBe2 Bo BCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6
La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2
Wa [Jolly MGR\MeNäKu Rn Re Hem Jolly Jha Dave.
3.2473 The reading adopted, asapindakriyäkarma, has the strong support of Me, who glosses:


--- PAGE 941 ---
930 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3
prathamamrtasya asapindakaranakhyam karma kartavyarn / sahapindadanam
pürväbhyäm
 na kartavyam. The reading also has the support of Go, No, and Re. This
reading is found in Bo NKt4 La1 Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 GMd5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M O N Nd]Vis Hem Go NâNdRc
Jolly. For the problems of interpretation of this verse, see my note to the translation.
3.25id Ku Rn Re Mr appear to read bho abhiramyatäm iti. However, Me glosses abhitah with
ubhayatah, and explains: ihaiva svagrhe vä yathestam äsyatäm
 ity arthah, and Nä and
Nd have similar explanations of the term. Go's explanation mirrors that of Me, while
Ku gives abhito as apatha.
3.2543 Me takes the correct reading to be svadadhvam and rejects the reading svaditam. He
also gives the alternate reading svadatu. Likewise, Nä gives the alternate reading
svadata.
3.254d The reading adopted, rocitam, is found in Be1 nCa Ho Jo2 uKf wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 NNgoOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu" Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M R G
Nd] Go NâRc Laks Jolly. The reading of the ST rocata also supports this reading over
rucitam. However, Me appears to have had both readings in his sources, because he
comments: rucitam rocitam iti vä .
3.2s8b I have chosen niyatah over prayatah; the former is found in all ST mss., as well as in
a substantial number of NT-x and NT-y ones, including the old NKt4 and the Sarada
mss. The adopted reading is found in: Be1 nBe2 Be3 nCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4
La1 Lo1 GMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNgoOr sOx1 sPu6 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly Ku R Nd] Hem Rn Re Mandlik KSS.
3.26ib Most editions, following the interpretation of most commentators, opt for the reading
parastät. They take the meaning to be that some prescribe the offering of the rice balls
after the Brahmins have taken their meal. This stands in contrast to the provision at
3.215, where the balls are placed before the meal. The manuscript evidence for
parastät, however, is scant, as acknowledged by Bühler . I have adopted purastät, be-
cause it is attested in mss. of ST and NT, as well as in all the citations: Be1 BBe2 Be3
Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 G My NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Polly M G N Nd] Hem Dev
Mâdh Mandlik. The editions of Me give his reading as parastät, but all my mss. have
the reading purastät. For my interpretation of the term, see my note to the translation.
3.263d Even though all the editions read sättvikain dhärmikam, it is found in very few mss.
Most mss. record the reading I have adopted: Be1 sBe2 Be3 Bo uCa Ho Jo2 wKt3 NKt4
sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 GMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg oOr sOx1
Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly G K\Hem
Laks Dev Mâdh. This sequence is supported also by Go, Ku, and Rn.
3-2Ó7 C All editions read trpyanti. The reading I have adopted, prïyante, however, is found in
most mss. and in all citations: Be1 BBe2 Be3 Bo ßCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 isKt5 wKt6 La1
La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c;My NNgoOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4
 MTr6 [Jolly M G R Nd] Me Dev Laks
Mâdh Hem Apa', cf. ViDh 80.1. Both Go and Ku read pitaras trpyanti, but this may
well be a gloss, because, in commenting on the following verse, both refer to the syn-
tactic connection of that verse (268) with this, saying: pitarah prlyanta ity pürvena
sambandhah.


--- PAGE 942 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 
931
3.268b Both the readings, iha and atha, have strong manuscript support; the latter is found in
most ST mss. including all the Malayalam ones. I have adopted the former, however,
which is supported by all the medieval citations and found in Bo isCa Jo2 La1 La2 Lo1
Lo2 Lo3 c,Md' oMd2 c,My Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M1-2'8'9 RJ Rn
[iha srâddhe} Laks Hem Dev Mâdh Jolly. This reading parallels pârsateneha of 2ó9b .
The reading, nevertheless, remains uncertain.
3.2700 The päda is hypermetric, and this may have been the reason for scribes to attempt to
correct it as reflected in the several variant readings, all restoring the meter. The read-
ing adopted is found in a broad spectrum of mss. and is supported by all the medieval
citations: Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 uKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5c,Md'
oMd2 oMy Ox2 NPu1 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 MTr3 Wa [Jolly M'"2~8-9J Hem Dev Mâdh Mandlik
Jha KSS Dave.
3.272a The reading mahasalkah is found in only a few mss: Jo2 NNg sPu6 Pu10 [Jolly M2'8],
and in Hem 3/1.586 Jolly. However, the singular is attested in more mss. than the plu-
ral mahasalkah, and the other items in this list are all in the singular..
3.2733 The mss. are divided over the two readings, madhunä misram and madhusammisram.
I have opted for the former because it is represented in all but one of the ST mss., as
well as in all the NT-y mss. and good number of NT-x ones. It is found in: Be1 sBe2
BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo2 cMd1 oMd2 xMd3 c,Md5 c;My oOr Tj2 Tr1 MTr6
[Jolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave.
3.2743 The reading bhüyät
 is found in Be1 uBe3 Bo nCa Jo2 NKf isKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 oMy NNg Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4mTr6 [Jolly
M R Ku] Me Ku Go Laïc? Hem Dev Jolly Jha Dave.
3.27sd The mss. are deeply divided over the two readings: anantam and anantyam I have
opted for the latter mostly because it is represented by the largest number of ST mss.
and a substantial number of ST-x ones. This reading is found in: Be1 isBe2 ßCa Jo2
wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2 rlvld3 oMd5 c,My NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8
Pu9 Tr1 Tr2 MTr6 [Jolly N Nd RJ. The fact that aksaya can be both an adjective and a
substantive makes the choice harder, and the reading remains uncertain.
3.277 Verses 278 is placed before 277 in all editions, including Jolly's. I have followed the
order of these verses found in all the ST mss., as well as in substantial number of NT-x
mss., including the old NKt4 and the Sârad â mss. This order is found in Be1 liBe2 Be3
sCa Ho Jo2 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 c.Md1 xMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c.My NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa. In this order, verse 277concerning the two fort-
nights nicely connects with the matter dealt with in the preceding verse.
3.2823 Both the readings, paittyajñikah and paitryajniyah, have strong support. I have opted
for the former because all the ST mss. have a form with "k." It is also supported by
Me, Go, and Nä . See the parallel pañcayajñika at 3.83, 281, 286.
3.284d There is strong manuscript support for both readings: purâtanï
 and sanâtanî.
 The
latter is the reading of all but two ST mss. I have chosen the former, however, because
it is found the most NT-x mss. and is the reading of Me and No, whereas the latter is
supported by only Re. The original reading, nevertheless, remains uncertain. The
reading adopted is found in: isBe2 nCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 nKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
oMd2 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Wa [Jolly M G N R| Apa
Me Nä Jolly.


--- PAGE 943 ---
932 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4
CHAPTE R FOUR
44d The alternate reading, kadacana, is well represented in the mss. and appears to be sup-
ported by the glosses of Go [kadacid api] and Kit [kadäpi]. I have opted for katham-
cana, however, which is found in all ST mss. and in most NT-x: Bo NKt4 isKt5 wKt6
Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6
Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4 MTr6 Re [Jolly M Nd|.
4-ioa I have adopted vartayarns tu because it is found in all the ST mss. as well and in sev-
eral NT-x ones. All editions opt for ca, which is found only in the NT-y vulgate and in
some NY-x ones, including the old NKt4 and the Särad ä mss. The reading adopted is
found in Be1 Be3 Ho Jo2 wKt1 La2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 WaAW [Jolly R].
4.170 The original reading here is clearly yäpayan, which is also the lectio difficilior. It was
easy for a scribe to change this somewhat unusual word, meaning to support or make
someone subsist, to the orthographically similar (in Devanägari ) dhyäpayan, which
when combined with the preceding yathä gives adhyäpayan, influenced no doubt by
the svädhyäya
 mentioned in pada-b. Significantly, this reading is absent in the mss.
with southern scripts. The reading adopted is found in Bo wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 isKt5 wKt6
La2 Lo2oMd' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu7 [but cor] Tj1 Tf Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 Wa Nâ Nd Go Dave Mandlik Jha. This reading is also supported by the com-
ments of Me: kutumbakam jlvayati, and similar comments by Ku, Rn, and Mr.
4.2.6e This päda has numerous variants. It is clear that that the original reading had hy ayana-
rather than tv ayana-. The manuscripts and other sources are divided on the rest of the
päda. It is clear, however, that ante is the original reading, rather than ädau. The for-
mer is attested by Me and Re, and found in most mss. including those of the ST. The
latter is supported by Nä , Go and Ku. The reading adopted is found in isCa Jo2 NKt4 Lo3
c;Md5 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tr1 Wa [Jolly Me M'-2-5-8'9 R Nd] Me Re Laks Jolly
Jha Dave.
4-38d There is little to choose between svam rüpatn and svarupam. I have chosen the former
because it is found in most mss.: «Be2 BCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 wKt6 La1 La2
Lo4 oMd1 oMd2 sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Vij
Mandlik .lolly KSS.
4-42C The alternate reading prajnä laksmï yasas caksuh has much to commend itself; it is
found in all the ST mss. and in several NT-x ones. I have, however, opted for the tra-
ditional reading; it is clearly possible that the change in the alternate reading was made
deliberately so this päda would not be identical to pada-c of the previous verse.
4.49b There are quite a lot of variant readings here. It is clear that the original had kästham
lostam patram as separate words; the compounded form is found mostly in NT-y vul-
gate. The last two words, however, are less certain. I have opted for tmäni vä because
it has the best manuscript support, including most of the ST mss.: Be1 ßBe2 Be3 wKt3
NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5oMd' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1
MTr4 MTr6 WnDev Apa.
4.50 
All the mss. containing Me's commentary omit this verse. Yet, there is a brief com-
ment: mütrotsargasamutsargam tyagani, which appears to be a comment on the first
words of this verse.


--- PAGE 944 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 
933
4.5id The reading pränäbädha
 is found in «Be2 isCa Hy Jo1 wKt3 NKl4 rMd3 rMd4 oMd5
oMy NNg sOx1 Pu2 sPu6 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 MTr4 MTr6/»//y, and is supported by the parallel
reading at verse 54d. In the Devanâgar l it is easy to drop the stroke for the long "a"
after a retroflex "n".
4.523, c Most mss. have the readings pratyagnim and pratigäm, using the accusative with the
particle prati. These forms may have been influenced by the a-stem neuters in the three
other compounds: pratisüryam, pratisomodakadvijam, and prativätam. The original
forms, however, were clearly the adverbial compounds pratyagni and pratigu. The
former is found in Be3 Hy Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 Lo3 NNg Wa [Jolly M G N Nd R] Jolly, and
the latter in Bo NKt4 wKt6 NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Wa [Jolly G N] Jolly.Ilia, also
supported by the mss. with the form prati gum. The reading pratigu is supported by Nä
and Re.
4.570. This pada has a large number of variants, possibly because this was a well-known
proverb with multiple readings. In attempting to come up with a plausible reading, I
have tried to figure out first the form of the verb and second the position of the verb.
The form svapyät is the form found in most mss.; unfortunately the commentators do
not bother with this päda. The alternate formsupyat is found only in Bo Ho wKt1 La1
Lo1 Lo2 oMd1. The position is less certain, but I think it should come at the third posi-
tion, as in pädas b and c; that is, the verb comes after the initial "no" and the following
word. The mss. also support this position; the verb in the last position is found only in
La1 Jo Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 iMd4 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Wa.
4-57b The reading sreyänisam is clearly the original and the older reading attested by MS
3.4.5 and KS 22.2 (see the study by Jamison 2000). This reading is also presupposed
by the comments of Me, Go, No, Ku, and Re. It is found in Bo La2 Lo2 TMd3 c.Md5
oMy Ox3 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6. There is some doubt as to the position ofna,
some placing it in the second position. The parallel with pädas a and c [see also the
surrounding verses], as well as the manuscript evidence, makes it clear that its original
position is at the beginning of the pâda.
4.61C The reading -janäkränte
 is supported by Me and is found in: Be1 BBe2 Bo Jo2 wKt3
sKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 TMd4 c.Md5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu 3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr6 [Jolly MGR] Laks Me Re Jolly.
47oa The editions of Go has the reading grhnïyât, but all three of my mss. with Go's com-
mentary read mrdmyat. The gloss vimardanam by Me supports the adopted reading
found in the vast majority of the mss.
4.74a Jha and Dave adopt the reading dlvyet following Me; but I think the viotadlvyet is
used by Me as a gloss on krïdet, because dlvyet is not found in any ms. including those
with Me's commentary. It is difficult to choose between the alternate readings kadacic
ca and kadacit tu. I have adopted the former, because it is found in most of the ST mss.
and a good number of NT-x ones: Be1 Be3 sCa Jo2 NKt4 La2 Lo3 TMd3 oMd5 oMy oOr
Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Tr1 MTr4
 MTr6 WaJolly.
4-75b The alternative reading, astam ite ravau, is supported by the comments of Go, Ku, Rn,
and Re. It is clear, however, that Me had the reading withprari, because he explains the
accusative ending of astamayam with a reference to Pänin i 1.4.90: pratilaksane karma-
pravacamyatväd dvitlyä. The technical term karmapravacamya (Pänin i 1.4.83) refers
to verbal prepositions that govern substantives. Here prati govern the accusative. The


--- PAGE 945 ---
934 
Notes to the Edition : Chapter 4
translation of Jha of this statement of Me is misleading; he appears to think that the ex-
planation confirms the reading astam ite ravau. The reading adopted is found in nKt5
wKt6 La2 Lo2oMd' TMd3 TMd4 c;Md5 aMy NNgoOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2 Mir4 MTr6 Wa [folly M'-2'8-9 G N Ndl No Jolly.
4.830 The reading adopted suatas tu is supported by most ST mss. and occurs in Be1 isBe?
Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 iiKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo3 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 c,Md5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 RnLaks Hem.
4.8scd 
The uncertainty of the reading—vesa or vesyä —is noted by Ku, who ascribes the
former to Me and others and the latter to Go. govindaräjas tu dasavesyäsamo nrpa iti
pathati I medhatithiprabhrlayah pränco dasavesasamo nrpa iti pathanti. The com-
mentary of Me as we have it, however, does not contain this reading; his comments are
very brief on this verse. The vast majority of mss., including almost all the ST ones,
however, support the adopted reading: Be3 Bo Ho wKt1 NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2 Lo3
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5
sPu6 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 Wa Go Laks Jolly. The reading vesyä is also supported by
YDh 1.141.
4.9OC The reading lohacäraka is quite uncertain; there are numerous variants in the mss. and
the commentators generally ignore the term. Competing readings are: lohakäraka
found in most ST mss. (the reading of TMd4 is unclear); lohäfigäraka;
 and lohadäraka,
which is the reading of most editions. The adopted reading is found in: Be3 sCa wKt1
Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tr2 MTr6 [folly M3'4 G N
Nd] Apa Na Jolly; see also ViDh 43.22.
4.94 
It is clear that the sense of the verse requires the verb to be in the past tense rather than
in the optative. For this reason Jolly has adopted the reading avapnuvan. It is, however,
found in a very small number of mss. Even the ST mss. give the optative, but quite ir-
regularly in the singular for a sentence with the subject in the plural. I have maintained
the optative reading aväpnuyuh found in most mss., even though I am troubled by this
reading.
4.1230 It is surprising that all editions have adopted the reading väpy antam when it has so
little manuscript support. It is true that the distinction between "v" and "c" in northern
scripts is often blurred. But mss. in southern scripts also favor "ca." The reading
adopted in found in: uBe2 Be3 Bo Ho wKt3 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6
pu7pu8pu10TjlTr2Wa
4.i32d There are four alternate readings: adhitisthec ca, adhitisted dhi, adhitisthet tu, and
adhitistheta, all with considerable manuscript support. Somewhat hesitantly I have
gone with the first, mostly because it is strongly supported by most ST mss.: wKt1 NKt4
BKt5 wKt6 Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly G K R]Jolly. The reading,
however, remains uncertain.
4.i4ib The adopted reading, vayo'dhikän, has the unanimous support of the ST and NT-y
mss., as well as a substantial number of NT-x ones: Be1 uCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt3
La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4 MTr6 Mandlik Jolly KSS. The reading, nevertheless, is uncertain. In the southern
mss. "g" may have been pronounced as "k" through Dravidian influence and then
compensated by changing "ti" to "dhi." See the parallel at 7.149 where the reading is
unmistakably vayo'tigän.


--- PAGE 946 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 
935
4.i42d The plural reading jyotirganan is supported by several ST mss. The reading adopted,
jyotirganam, however, has broader support: Be1 nBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 »Kt5
wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 iMd4 NNg Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8
Pu10 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G R\Me Re Jolly. Likewise, Go's gloss samûham also supports
the singular.
4.1440 All mss. read rahasyani. The printed editions, however, give the reading rahahsthani
in several commentaries. Without critical editions of these commentaries it is impossi-
ble to determine the original readings. For example, in Mandlik and Dave Me reads
rahahsthani, but in Jha and my mss. rahasyani. In Mandlik Nä and Rn (as also my
ms.) read rahasyani, but in Dave rahahsthani. With either reading, however, the term
refers to the "hidden" or the private parts of the body.
4.i49b Although both readings, dvijah and puñal), have substantial manuscript support, I
have adopted the former because it is found in all the ST mss., as well as in a large
number of NT-x ones and all the citations: Be1 Bo Ho NKt4 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 rMd3
c,Md5 oMy Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M NdJLflJto Dev Dave Jha.
4.iyoc It is surprising that all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading himsäratah
when so few mss. record that reading. The reading of the commentators given in the
editions cannot be trusted, because the stroke for "i" can be easily dropped.
4.i76d The reading adopted, lokasanikrustam, is found in Be3 Bo NKt4 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Me Go Re Jolly Jha Dave. The
prefix "sum," however, also has the support of a large number of other mss. with
variant readings.
4.iy8d The reading adopted, risyati, is found in Be ' Be3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oOr
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 sPu6 Tr2 MTr4 ufr6Dev Me Nd Rn Re Jha. The Parasmaipada "ti" end-
ing is also supported by other mss. with alternate readings. The reading dusyati is
clearly a very old variant, because it is found already in Kumärila .
4.l8ic The reading of thepäda, as also the meaning of the entire verse, is less than clear. The
attempt to clarify the meaning may be the reason for many of the variant readings in
this päda, as also in pada-a. The commentators Me, Go, Ku, and Re appear to support
the reading etair jitaih. They appear to take the pronoun e taifa, however, as referring to
the disputes rather than to the persons engaged in the dispute. This may be the reason
why several mss. change ebhifa in pada-a to etan referring to vivädän.
 I think the
pronoun here and in pada-a refer to the individuals listed in the previous verse. Within
this context, I think the nominative jitah makes much better sense. The parallel etair
adhiksiptah in verse 185 also supports the nominative. Bühle r (1886, 157) also thought
that "this reading, though less well attested than the vulgata, is perhaps preferable." In
fact, however, this reading is better attested and is the reading found in all the ST mss.:
Be3 Bo ßCa Ho Jm wKt3 NKt4 wKt5 La2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oOr Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4
MTr6 Wa [lolly Nd] No Rn LaksDave.
4.1830 All the editors have adopted the reading apäm lake, although it is found in only a few
manuscripts. The reading adopted has broad manuscript support: Be1 Bo isCa wKt1
NKt4 wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 iMd4 oMd5 oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Apa. The commentators do not comment on this
expression.
4.i8sd The genitive lokasya inpada-c supports thé adoption of prthivyâh, which becomes


--- PAGE 947 ---
936 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4
prthivyä due to sandhi. The orthographic distinction between that and the locative
prthivyam is slight. The reading adopted is found in Bo Jm La2 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5
sbx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr6 W-dApa Jha Dave.
4.i88c The reading adopted has the strong support of both ST and NT-x mss.: Be1 nBe2 Bo
uCa Ho wKt1 wKt3 «Kt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 oMd2 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2
NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [lolly G Nd] Re LaksHem; cf. VaDh
6.32 . Surprisingly all the editions adopt the alternate reading.
4.i95b All three alternate readings have good manuscript support: dambhikah, dambhikah,
and dambhakah. The readings of the commentators are suspect, because it is unclear
whether the editors have emended the text. In the editions, Me Go Nä Ku and Mr read
dambhakah. The reading adopted, dambhikah, is found in Jo2 NKl4 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 TMd3
c,Md5 Ox3 Pu2 Pu" Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 MTr4 MTr6 |Jolly M G Nd\Jolly. The original readings
is uncertain.
4.1963 Here again we have a problem with the readings found in the editions of the com-
mentaries, which all read naiskrtikah. The overwhelming evidence of the mss. and all
the medieval citations indicate that the editions are probably wrong and that the com-
mentators also had the reading adopted: naikitikah.
4.2Oib Again it is surprising that all editors (except Jha), including Jolly, adopt the reading
snäyäc
 ca when it is found in so few mss. mostly belonging to NT-y vulgate. The
reading adopted is found in Bo wKt1 NKf »Kt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd2 c,Md5 c,My NNg
sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [folly M Nd| Apa
Jha. The commentaries offer no help.
4.2O2C The reading adopted upayuñjana has overwhelming manuscript support: Bo iiCa Jo2
wKt3 NKl4 sKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 ciMd1 TMd3 c.Md5 (My Ox3 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2
Tr1 fTr6 Wa [Jolly M G R Ku Nd] Apa Me Ku Dave Jha Jolly. Manuscripts frequently
confuse formations from yuj and hhuj.
4.2063 The three variant readings, aslîkam, asrîkam, and aslîlam, have good manuscript
support. It is clear that Ku and Mr read aslîkam, because they comment on the change
of "r" to "1." It is simply a variant form oí asrîkam, and one or the other form is found
in Go, Ku, Re, and Nd. The reading of Me and MJis unclear; the editions of these com-
mentaries have aslilani. The gloss of Me is aslaghyam, and that of Nä is päpakaram.
The glosses can support either readings. I have adopted aslîkam because it, and the
variant asrîkam, have the broadest manuscript support. The reading adopted is found in
Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jo1 Kt2 nKt5 La1 Lo1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu8 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Laks Jolly
Mandlik KSS.
4.2i4b There are three alternate readings: -vikrayikasya, -vikrayakasya, and -vikrayinah. All
have substantial manuscript support. At least in the printed editions, the first is sup-
ported by Nä and Ku; the second by Me; and the third by Rn, Re and Mr. Given the
slight difference between the first and the second, however, the editions cannot be
trusted completely. Here even the ST mss. are divided. I have gone with the second,
because it has the broadest manuscript support, including most of the ST ones: Ho NKl4
Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 c;Md' TMd3 oMy Ox3 Pu3 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [folly M 4'5-9 R]
Dave Jha.
4.2isb The reading -avatärakasya adopted by Jolly and others is found in only a small num-
ber of mss. Surprisingly, Jolly gives no variants even though his own Särad ä ms. has


--- PAGE 948 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 
937
the reading I have adopted. This form has also entered into the Sanskrit dictionaries,
probably via the previous editions of the MDh. The readings of the commentators are
suspect because we have to depend on the imperfect editions. In them the above read-
ing is found only in N3. The reading adopted is found in Be ' Be3 Bo isCa Ho Hy Jo2
wKt3 NKt4 isKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 ciMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu8 Pu10
Tj ' Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 WaApa Hem Me Rn Re Mr Dave Jha.
4.21Ó C Mandlik, Jolly, and KSS give the reading ranjakasya, meaning a dyer. This appears to
be a silent editorial emendation; Jolly gives no variants when his own Särad ä ms. has
the alternate reading. All but three of my mss. have the reading adopted, rajakasya; it
is also the reading in Vij, Apa, and Hem. The problem is that this word generally means
a washerman, who was already listed as cailanirnejaka mpäda-b. It is evident that the
meaning dyer was also attached to rajaka, for Me glosses it with väsasäm
iiîladiragakârakah.
 The various readings of the commentators for this word in the edi-
tions cannot be trusted.
4.223b All NT mss. have the reading asmddhinal) (with a few asräddikah). It has been
adopted in all editions. I have chosen to go with the ST and adopted the reading
asraddhinah found in oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Tr1 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly Nd]. It is given by
Me as a päthäntara
 with the following gloss: asraddhina iti vä päthah / asraddhävän
ity arthah / tathä cottarasloke sraddhäyäh
 prädhänyam
 eväha vadänyasyeti. I think
Me is perceptive in pointing out the broader context in which this verse is placed, and
that context deals with the importance of sraddhâ (see verses 224-6). The same
päthäntara
 is given by Hem (3/1.785) with the same explanation. If we interpret the
particle vä of Me as showing a preference ("or rather"; see note to the translation of
9.111), then I think we can assume that Me himself preferred this reading, which is also
supported by his further remarks. This meaning of the expression is also supported by
the comments of Nä , Nd, and Re, although the latter also gives the alternate interpreta-
tion: a man who does not perform srâddhas, which is the interpretation of Go, Ku, and
Rn. In this case, I think, the ST has preserved the better and possibly original reading.
4.226 The additional three verses are commented by Me. It is probable that he took them to
be authentic verse of the MDh. The fact that they are absent in almost all mss. indicates
a) that Me's influence on the establishment of the text was not as great as may be as-
sumed, and b) that the mss. sometimes give better readings of the text than the com-
mentators.
4.23sb The mss. are equally divided between the two readings eva ca and eva va. I have
opted for the former both because the copulative makes better sense with tav ubhau in
pada-c. It is found in Be3 Ho Hy Jo1 wKt1 Kt2 nKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 oMy Pu2
Pu3 Tr2 MTr3 WaMandlik Jolly KSS.
4.237d Even though all editors have adopted the reading ca, most mss. including all the ST
ones, as well as the citations, read tu, which I have adopted: Be1 ßBe2 Bo wKt1 wKt3
NKt4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 ciMy Ox3 Pu3 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Wa Hem Apa.
4.24sb Even though the preponderance of manuscript evidence supports varjayet, I have
adopted the minority reading varjayan, because the participle is clearly required by the
syntax. The only commentator to note the word is Go, who clearly presupposes the
participle. The reading adopted is found in nBe2 liCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La2
oOr Ox2 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 Go Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave.


--- PAGE 949 ---
938 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4
4.2570 Both the alternate readings, âsthitah and asrilah, have strong manuscript support.
Even the ST mss. are divided; so are the commentators. I have adopted the former, be-
cause its support is somewhat stronger both in the mss. and among commentators. It is
found in Be3 Ho wKt1 NKt4 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 rMd4 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu3 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 [Jolly M G Ndj Me No Re Laks Jolly Jha Dave.
CHAPTER FIVE
5.na The reading adopted, kravyadah, with the consonant ending is the lectio difficilior and
is found in Be3 uCa NKt
4 isKt5 La ' Lo2 c.Md1 oMd5 sOx1 Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 Tr ' Wa [Jolly M
N Nd] Hem Jha Dave. This reading is supported by Me No and Nd. The alternate
reading with the thematic ending, kravyädän,
 appears to have the support of Ku, Kn
and Re, although all give the nominative kravyadah and we cannot trust the editions to
be accurate here and the reading could as well be kravyadah. The mss. that have the
reading kravyäda may also support the reading adopted, because it is common to drop
the visarga before a sibilant. It could also be the thematic stem form, however, com-
pounding with sakunlu.
5.12C The two readings, rajjuvalam and rajjudalam, have strong manuscript support. I have
gone with the latter because it is found in almost all NT-x mss., as well as in ViDh
51.29 and YDh 1.174. The former, nevertheless, has strong support and is found in al-
most all ST mss. The reading is clearly uncertain. The reading adopted is found in Be1
(me to) Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 nKf BKt5 La2 Lo1 Lo4 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10
Tj2 Wa [Jolly M G N R| Dev Jolly. According to the printed editions,Me, Go, No, Ku,
Re, and Mr have rajjuvalam, although such readings are not very trustworthy. My mss.
of Me, for example, have the reading rajjudalam in the commentary. Further, an ani-
mal name such as this may have had several regional variations.
5.i6c-d In pädasc-d, most mss. give the accusative plural. This causes a problem of syntax.
We have to either understand a finite verb or connect these accusatives with na
bhaksayet that begins the next verse. The latter alternative is given only by Nd and is
unlikely, because verse 16 is meant to give exceptions to the blanket prohibition of fish
in verse 14. The former is given by Re. The best alternative, I think, is to take the
words in pädas c-d as nominative, which is the reading of most commentators: Me,
Go, Nä , Ku, Rn, and Mr. Although still problematic, then we can extend the past parti-
ciple adyau in the dual to these pädas by understanding it as plural, which appears to
be the solution of the commentators. Although the edition has the accusatives, Hem
also appears to read nominatives, because of his comment: rajîvâdyâh
 sarvaso 'niyuk-
tenäpi bhaksyäh. A similar explanation is given by Dev. The reading adopted is found
in Jo2 Lo5 NNg NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Wa [Jolly G] VijDev, whilexMd3 has the nominatives in
all but the first (râjïvâm),
 and MTr4 inTr6 have the nominative simhatundäs ca.
5.23C The reading rsiyajnesu has the support of Me, Nä , Ku, Rn, and Mr; others do not com-
ment. It is clearly the lectio difficilior; the change from puränesv rsi to puränesv api
requires only a slight emendation. The reading adopted is found in BBe2 Be3 Bo uCa
Hy Jo2 wKt3 Lo2 Lo3GMd' TMd3 oMd5 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1
MTr4 Me Nä Ku Rn Mr Dave Jha Mandlik. Quite surprisingly, Jolly adopts the alternate
reading without giving any variants.


--- PAGE 950 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 
939
5-28c Both readings, sthâvaram jangamam and jangamam sthävaram, have strong manu-
script support. The word order of the reading adopted is supported by Me, Re, and Mr,
and it is found in Be3 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 La1 Lo2 oMd1 oMd5 c,My NNg sOx1 Ox3 sPu6
Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6, as also in all the editions. Although the original reading
is uncertain, my selection is influenced by the near unanimous reading of the ST mss.
5-33d The past participle pretah, which I have adopted, is supported by Me, Go, and Ku. It is
found in Be1 Lo1 Lo2 xMd3 c,Md5 oMy NNgsOx1 Ox3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 Wa
[Jolly M G Nd| Me Jolly Jha Dave.
5-37d The reading adopted, kathamcana, is found in Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 livid3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly R Nd\Laks.
5.38b The alternate reading, tävatkrtvehe, found in most ST mss. is probably derived from a
different version of the verse found also in ViDh 51.60. In this version, pada-d reads:
pretya ceha ca niskrtim. Thus, the object of the verb präpnoti is niskrtim. Then we can
have the reading krtvä iha with the object märanam. The reading of the second half of
the verse in the MDh makes it clear that the object of präpnoti is märanam, making it
certain that the reading should be tavatkrtvo ha.
5.50 
It appears that some took this statement to be a negative one with reference to a per-
sons who does eat meat, and not as a positive statement about someone who does not
eat meat. Thus, Laks, Hem, and several mss., especially ST ones, appear to read an
avagraha before priyatäm, thus making it a negative, and eliminate na in pada-d.
5.61 
Most mss. and commentators, as well as all editions, read here the two verses given in
the critical apparatus. Pädas a-b of the first verse is clearly spurious. They are not
commented by Me and Go and are absent in all ST mss. The citations by Vij 3.18, Laks
10.17, and Dev 5.26 also omit these pädas. This causes the anomaly of a verse with six
pädas. It is apparent that pada-d of the first verse and pada-'a of the second verse are
also later additions. The reading adopted in the critical edition follows isKt5 wKt6 Lo4
NNg Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 [Jolly M G Gr] Me Go. Jolly also saw these pädas as spurious
and placed them within brackets. He notes that the reading with a single verse is
"probably the original reading." For further arguments in favor of the reading adopted
in the critical edition, see the Introduction, pp. 44-46.
5.64a The alternate reading rajanyahnaiva caikena has much to recommend it. All the ST
mss. have it, as do the old NKt4. It is also the lectio difficilior with the uncommon word
rajam for day. I have refrained from adopting it, however, because all the commenta-
tors (except for Nd), including Me and Go, have the other reading. Surprisingly, Jolly
does not give any variants for this päda.
5.64d All the editions have the reading tryatiad udakadayinah, and Jolly does not record any
variants here. The vast majority of the mss. and the citations, however, support the
reading adopted, which is found in Be1 Be3 Bo Ho wKt3 nKt5 NKÍ La1 Lo1 Lo2TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 N?U' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tr1
Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Vij Apa.
5.6sb All the editions have the participle sainäcaran in place of the finite verb; Jolly gives no
variants. Within the syntax of the verse, the participle makes better sense, which also
makes it the lectio facilior. The commentators Me, Go, Na, Ku, and Rn imply a partici-
ple with their glosses kurvan and krtvä. However, it is unclear whether their root texts
also had a participle or whether they were merely explaining the passage. The over-


--- PAGE 951 ---
940 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5
whelming majority of the mss., including all the ST ones, however has the reading
adopted: Be1 Be3 wKt3 nKt5 wKt6 c.Md1 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa VijLaks Re. According to this
reading, we have to understand either a correlative (yah and sah) or a particle such as
yadi.
5.650 The reading adopted, pretähäraih,
 is found in uBe2 Be3 nCa NKl
4 nKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 c;Md5 c,My NNg sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9
Pu10 Tj' Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6Vij Apa Dev Mâdh Bh (ad 11.197 in Derretí ) Jolly Jha. Jolly
gives no variants. It is unclear whether ähära
 here is merely a variant of hará found in
the alternate reading. Devannabhatta in his gloss takes ähära
 to mean food: preta-
dravyopajlvinah pretakutumbantargatah sapindä in yavat. In any case, both forms im-
ply a close relationship to the deceased and most commentators take the expression as
referring to a sapinda.
S.oyb All the editions read visuddhi, and this reading appears to have the support of Ku and
Nd. The vast majority of mss., including all the ST ones and the citations, however,
support the negative asuddhi, the reading adopted: Be1 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 NKt4 iiKt5 wKt6
Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 c;My NNgsOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Vij Laks.
This reading is also supported by c.Md1 and Bo. Jolly, once again, gives no variants.
5.6gb Even though all the editions read na ca, most mss. record the reading adopted: Be'
sBe2 iiCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 c.My NNg oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7
Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 Wa [Jolly GJ Vis Vij Apa Dev Go Ku. However, Me appears to support
the reading with ca.
5.6gd There are diverse readings for ksapeta in the mss., and it is difficult to discern the
original form. I have opted for the singular both because it is represented in the best
mss. and because the singular is supported by Me, Go, Ku, and Nd. The reading
adopted is found in: oCa NKt
4 uKt5 Lo2 Ox3 sPu6 Pu10 MTr4 MTr6 [folly M'-2'5-8-9; Me '-
2-5-8-9] Dave Jha. This reading, however, is quite uncertain. Mss. using the singular
have other forms as well: ksapet tu, ksapayet. The final particle also has many variants:
tu, va, and ca. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 nBe2 Jo2iiKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2
Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy Ox2 Pu2 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2
 MTr4
 MTr6 Vis Vij Apa.
5.82b All the editions read sthitah. It has considerable manuscript support, and Me and Ku
also have that reading, although we cannot trust the editions given the minor ortho-
graphic difference. I have adopted sthitih, because the verb syät would be somewhat
superfluous with the participle sthitah. The reading adopted is found in Be1 »Be2 Be3
Bo iiCa Jm Jo2 »Kt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa
Apa Re Nd.
5.io8d The grammar of the verse with the anuvrtti of sudhyati would require dvijottamah to
be in the singular. The mss. are divided. I have opted for the plural, first because it is
the lectio difficilior (given the grammar of the verse); second because the plural is
clearly the reading of both Me and Go; and third because a large plurality of the mss
favor it. Me clearly states the plural: tena dvijottamah suddhä bhavanti; and Go:
brähmaims ca sasthädhyäyavaksyamänena
 sudhyanti. The singular is supported by Na
Ku Rn. The reading adopted in found in: Be1 nBe2 BCa Ho Jo2wKt! isKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2
Lo3 TMd3 NNg oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu
1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 MTr4 MTr6
Wa [Jolly M R] Hem Me Go Jha Dave, as well as in ViDh 22.91.


--- PAGE 952 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 
941
5.1133 All the editions have the reading apani agues ca. The reading adopted is found in NKt4
La1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 oMd5 Ox3 NPu1 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 \folly M Gr| Hem. This reading
is further supported by many other mss. that have variants of it and begin with agneh.
Most commentators do not provide any clue as to the order of the two words. How-
ever, they refer to the vedic story about Agni copulating with water (Varuna) as the
underlying myth behind Manu's statement. In the myth it is Agni who united with wa-
ter, and having Agni first in this verse agrees with it.
5.n8x The reading of the added verse is quite uncertain especially in pada-'d. For the most
part I have followed the reading of the Malayalam mss., except that I have given the
genitive plural conjecturally, following the majority of the mss. that have saucänäm.
5.122a The reading adopted, -kästhäni,
 is found in uCa wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3
rMd4 c,Md5 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [lolly NdJ. The commentators offer
no help. The alternate reading has the strong support of NT mss. and is adopted by all
editors. I have opted for the former because it is found in all the ST mss. with the sup-
port of several very old NT-x mss., including the old NKt* and the Särad ä mss.
5.i22b The reading adopted is found in Be1 isCa Ho wKt1 NKt4 isKt5 wKt6 La1 cMd1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg NPu1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa//e/;¡. Again the commentators offer
no help. All the editors have chosen the alternate reading, which is found in most NT
mss. Once again my decision to go with the former is based on the fact that it is found
in all ST mss. and several significant and old NT-x ones, including all three Old Nägar i
mss. and several Newari ones.
5.122X The verse excluded from the critical edition but included in all other editions is found
in all but the following mss.: NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 [but ma] Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 xMd3 c,Md5 oMy
NNg Ox3 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [folly Nd]. The reasons for its exclusion are the fol-
lowing. At the manuscript level, it is omitted in all but one of the ST mss., as well in
several NT-x ones, including the old NKt4. It is not commented by Me, Go, Na, Nd, and
Mr; the only ones to comment on it are Ku, Rn, and Re. The way this verse entered into
the manuscript tradition is very clear. It is given at the very end of Me's commentary
on verse 122 with the introduction yathoktam and concluding with iti, clearly demar-
cating it as a citation. Go also gives it at the end of his commentary on verse 122 with
the introduction yathä ca vasisthah and concluding with iti. This verse is VaDh 3.59.
Because the verse came at the very end of the commentary and right before the next
MDh verse (124 in the critical edition), it was easy for copyists to mistake it for a verse
of the MDh. In order to preserve the traditional verse numbering, I have eliminated the
number 123 from my verse count. The inclusion of this verse in MDh mss. must have
occurred early, because it is cited as a verse of Manu by both Vij and Apa.
5.i37d I have opted for the reading ca, because most ST and NY-x mss. have this reading:
Be1 Be3 Bo sCa Ho wKt3 La ' Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 TMd4 oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 sPu6
Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tj' Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 Wa \folly M] Vij ApaDev. The reading, however,
is uncertain.
5.1383 Here also I have opted for ca for the same reasons as in I37d. The adopted reading is
found in: Be1 nBe2 Bo uCa wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5oMd'
oMd5 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu 10 Tj1 Tr1 Wa [Jolly
G] Hem Me.
5.i39d The mss. have widely different readings of this poda. Along with Jolly, I have opted
for the neuter strîsudram as a collective Dvandva; this is the lectio difficilior. It is sup-


--- PAGE 953 ---
942 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5
ported by Go and No. Obviously the scribes had difficulty with this formation. The ST
mss. along with the Särad ä and Nd have resolved the difficulty by using the dual. Oth-
ers have split the compound into two nominatives: strï and sudrali, many adding ca to
connect the two. The reading adopted is found in: NKt4 NNg oOr Ox2 Lo2 Ox3 Pu10
[Jolly M'-2'5-9] Jolly.
5.i45b The reading adopted is found in Bo NKÍ Lo1 TMd3 oMd5 c,My NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Tj1
Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6l/y 1.196 Mädh 1.224. I nave opted for this reading, because it is
found all the ST mss. and in several significant NT-x ones, including the three in Old
Nagari, NKt4 NNg NPu1. The reading, however, is uncertain.
5.i46d I have adopted the singular dharmam, which is found in BBe2 Bo wKt' NKl4 liKt5 wKt6
Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 oMy NNgoOr Ox2 Ox3 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M1-2'5-8'9 Me R Ku
Nd] Jolly. This reading is found in some form in all the ST mss., as well as in several
significant NT-x mss including the Old Nâgar ï ones. The reading, once again, is
uncertain. Me and Go appear to support the plural, whereas Na, Ku, and Rn support the
singular, although all these are glosses, and it is unclear what the readings of their root
texts were.
S.isob I have adopted the singular reading grhakarye ca, which is supported by Me, Go, and
Ku. Others do not comment. The reading adopted is found in Be1 isBe2 Be3 Bo uCa Ho
wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 c;My NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 Wa \Jolly G] Laks Jha Dave.
5.i52d Several important mss., including most ST ones, have the reading svämi in place of
svämya. I have, however, opted for the latter; it is the preferred reading of all the
commentators and is clearly the lectio difficilior.
5.i55b The support for both readings, uposanam and upositam, is strong. I have opted for the
former, which is found in Be3 wKt1 La2 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox2 NPu1
Pu2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 [cor to] Pu7 Pu8 Tr! Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [lolly G R Nd N] Laks Hem Dev
Nâ Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave. This reading has the support of all but one ST mss. The
alternate reading is found in Me and Rn; most commentators simply gloss upaväsam,
making it difficult to know the reading of their root text.
S.ioid Although most mss. support the reading adopted, several commentators appear to
presuppose the alternate reading paralokät. This reading appears to be presupposed by
Me's gloss: svargani na präpnoti, and possibly also by Go's gloss: bharträ sahärjitam
svargädilokam na präpnoti. See the parallel at 5.i66d.
5.1630 The reading adopted has the overwhelming support of ST and NT-x mss. and is found
in: BBe2 Be3 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 isKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
c,My NNgoOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4
MTr6 [Jolly M R Nd]Wa Laks Mädh. All the editions, however, adopt the alternate
reading, probably because it restores the regular meter.
5.1643 It is difficult to decide on the alternate spellings ofsrgala and srgäla. See 9.30,11.200
for similar confusion in the mss. I have adopted the former, which is found in: Be1
oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr1 MTr6 Jolly.
5.1640 Although the alternate reading präpnoti has considerable manuscript support, I think
that the correct reading is câpnoti, both because it provides a better sense and because
it is the reading of most mss. in the parallel verse at 9.30.


--- PAGE 954 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 
943
5.166-7 These two verses are omitted in the mss. containing Me's commentary. Jolly com-
ments that they are superfluous, because they are also found at 9.29-30. They are,
however, found in all other mss., including those of the ST. Medhätith i himself com-
ments: strîdharmopasainharasloka rjavas ça strldharmä ity ato mayätra vyâkhyânâ-
darah krtah. It appears, then, that these verses were known to Me, although he did not
think it necessary to comment on them.
C H A P T E R SIX
6.4C The reading niskramya is found in all the ST mss., as well as in several NT-x ones,
especially those containing the commentary of Me. Nevertheless, I have adopted the
alternate reading found in most NT mss.; it is supported by the commentaries of Go,
Ku, Rn, Nd, and Re. The reading, however, is uncertain, with a third variant nirgatya.
6.73 I have adopted the reading yadbhaksah as a Bahuvrihi. This is the reading in Me and
Go, and it is also the lectio difficilior found in Ho NKt4 Lo4 Lo5 xMd3 c.My NNg NPu1
Pu2 Pu3 Pu" Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M G NdjMe Go Dave Jha. This
reading is further supported by mss. that read yadbhaiksyah, as well as by those that
read either yadbhaksa or yadbhaiksa, because manuscripts frequently drop the visarga
before a sibilant. With regard to two correlatives, where the relative pronoun in the
subordinate clause is within a compound, see Wackernagel II, i: 32-3.
6.1OC Many mss. have the reading uttaräyanam in place of turayaiiam. That is clearly a
mistake; possibly a commentarial gloss was taken over into the text. With this reading
the päda does not scan. The reading adopted is supported by Me, Su, Ku, Rn, and Nd.
The only commentators who appear to support the alternate reading are Go and Mr.
6.12'd The mss. are divided over the readings tu and ca. I have opted for the latter, which is
found in Be1 Bo üC a Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 La1 La2 Lo3 c.Md1 xMd3 c,Mds c,My NNg Pu5 Pu7
Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa \folly M'-2-5'8'9 G Nd R] Go Vij Laks Jolly. This reading is
supported by most ST mss., as well as significant NT-x ones, including the old NKt4
and NNg. The commentators are silent, except for Re, who clearly has the reading
adopted and glosses: ca punah.
6.i6d The reading adopted, puspäni, has the support of all but one of the ST mss., as well as
of many NT-x ones, including the old NKt4. This reading is also supported by Me, Go,
and Rn, whereas the alternate reading is given only by Ku and possibly by Rn, who
says: puspämti medhätithih, indicating that he read otherwise. The adopted reading is
found in: Be1 uBe2 Ho NKÍ4 isKt5 wKt6 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 iMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox3
NPu ' Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [lolly M G Gr Nd] Laks Me Go Jolly.
6.i7d The reading dantolûkhalikas tathâ has the support of the vast majority of NT-x mss.
The commentators are silent on this reading. I have adopted the alternate reading, be-
cause it is found in all the ST and NT-y mss., as well as in a substantive minority of
NT-x ones. The adopted reading is found in: nBe2 Bo isCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1 wKt3
La2 Lo3 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 rMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1
 MTr3
MTr4
MTr6.
6.193 The reading adopted, vannant, has the support of all ST mss. and numerous NT ones,


--- PAGE 955 ---
944 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 6
including the old NKt4 and NNg. It is found in isBe? Be3 BCa Hy NKC isKt5 Lo4 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 c.Md5 oMy NNg Ox2 NPu1 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 \Jolly M Nd]W/ Jolly.
6.2.5'd The manuscripts are divided here with several readings: cätmani, tvätmani, svatmani,
and simply atrnani. In this case, most ST mss. go with the NT-x vulgate. The com-
mentators are silent. It is evident that some cluster of consonants preceded ätmani;
thus the vulgate reading is erroneous. The reading I have adopted is found in: Be1 sBe2
Bo BCa Jo2 wKt3 BKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 NNg Ox2 Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 Tr2
Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly.
6.270 There is strong support for both readings: äcaret and äharet. The latter is given in all
the editions. It also appears to be the readings of Me, Go, and Ku. However, these
commentators give the persons from whom one begs in the ablative: e.g. täpasebhyah,
grhamedhibhyo vanaväsibhyah. It could well be, therefore, that äharet in the com-
mentaries is merely a gloss and not the root. However, äharet is in one sense the lectio
difficilior, because bhaiksam äcaret is the more common expression. Nevertheless, I
have opted for äcaret, because it is found in almost all ST mss. and a substantial num-
ber of NT ones: wKt1 La1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg [but me] sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2
Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 y oily R Nd Gr] Apa. Further, äcaret is grammatically better
with the locatives then äharet. The reading, however, is less than certain.
6.2gd The two alternate readings have strong manuscript support. I have, however, opted for
samsiddaye, because it is clearly supported by Me, Nä , Ku, and Mr. It is found in: isBe2
Be3 Bo Ho Hy Jm wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKr4 La1 [but corfli] La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 cMd1
TMd4 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 Wa Vy Apa and all the editions.
6.37b The mss. give three readings: ätmajän,
 prajäm, and sutän. The commentators are silent
on this word. I have adopted ätmajän
 because it is found in all but one ST mss. and in
several NT-x ones, including the old NKt4 and the Särad ä mss. The reading, however,
remains uncertain. The reading adopted is found in: Ho NKt4 Lo1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
oMy NNg oOrsOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd| Laks Mädh.
6.43C The reading adopted, asamcayikah, is attested in all the ST mss., as well as in a large
number of NT-x ones and in the citations: Be1 NKl4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 o My oOr sOx1 Ox2 Ox3 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
Wa [Jolly N Nd Ku vl]Rc Bh Laks Apa. This reading is supported also by Bh, Nä , and
Re. In addition, Me remarks that the alternate reading is preferred by some: anye tv
asamkusuka iti pathanti, and gives the meaning of this unusual term. It is clear this
was not Me's own reading, which must have been asamcayikah. The meaning of this
word was so obvious that Me did not think it necessary to comment. Rn, likewise, as-
cribes the alternate reading to others: kvacid samkusuka iti päthah. Only Go, Ku, and
Mr give the alternate reading; Ku gives the reading adopted as an alternate reading:
asamcayika ity anye pathante. Even though I have adopted asamcayika, the alternate
reading is clearly the lectio difficilior. It is easier to explain how the unusual
asamkusuka was changed to the clear asamcayika than the other way round. Never-
theless, in this instance I think the manuscript and commentarial evidence outweighs
the latter criterion.
6.43d The alternate reading has the unanimous support of all ST mss., plus several NY-x
ones. Nevertheless, I think this is a later emendation from the more difficult
bhävasamähitah.
 This reading is given and explained by all the commentators, except
Nd; both Bh and Me have the reading adopted.


--- PAGE 956 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 6 
945
6.45d The mss. are divided over the two readings nirvesa and nirdesa (or nidesa). Only No
clearly reads nirdesa with the gloss a/fía; but he gives nirvesa as apatha. All others,
explain the word as bhrti ("wages"), which would presuppose nirvesa. The old
Kashmiri com. attached to sPu6 also contain the gloss dhanakalam bhrter upabhoga-
kalain ity arthah. The reading nirvesa is attested in all but one of the ST mss. It is
found in: Ho Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4 c,Md5 «My Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 [cor to] Pu10 Tr1
MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [folly M] Apa Me Jolly Bühler Jha. See the parallel verse in MBh
12.237.15, where the Poona edition has nidesam, but it is given as doubtful; the South-
ern Recension of Telugu, Grantha, and Malayalam mss. all have nirvesa.
6.5/b Even though all ST mss., except significantly MTr5 with Bhâruci' s commentary, sup-
port the vulgate reading, I have adopted the alternate reading with the nominative
läbhas cainam. The latter is the lectio difficilior, because läbhe here may have been in-
fluenced by aläbhe at the opening of pada-b. The nominative also agrees better with
the causative harsayet, although dictionaries give also a non-causative meaning for it
possibly depending on this verse of the MDh. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 Bo
Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo4 Lo5 oOr sOx1 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu9 Pu10 MTr5 Wa [Jolly
M R ] Apa Go Rn Jolly. It is also supported by the parallel reading in Be3 Lo1 sOx1
sPu6 Tj1. The parallel verse in MBh 12.269.10 also has the reading adopted; and the
editors do not give any variants for this päda. Although FUhrer's edition of VaDh 10.22
reads läbhe caiva (which I followed in Olivelle 2000), I now think that the alternate
reading läbhas cainam found in the Anandasrama Sanskrit Series (48) Edition and
some mss. (see my note to this verse) is preferable.
6.62b All the editions follow the alternative reading samyogam ca. The commentators offer
no help. I have adopted samprayogam, which parallels viprayogamof pada-a, because
it is found in all the ST mss., as well as several NT-x ones, including the old NKt4 and
NNg. This reading is found in: Bo Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo2 Lo3 Ox2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 ciMd5
c¡My NNg oOrNPu1 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 MTr5 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Nd| Apa.
6.66a The reading adopted, bhüsito, is attested in most NT-x mss., as well as a couple ST
ones. It is also supported by the glosses of Me and No. This reading is found in: Be'
Be3 (but cor sh) Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 uKt5 wKt6 La ' La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 TMd4
NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Wa [Jolly M G
N] Me Go Nä Dave Jha Jolly.
6.66b The two alternative readings, vasaii and ratah, have strong manuscript support. The
commentators are by and large silent on this word, except for Go and Ku, and their
gloss sthitah appears to support the former. I have also gone with the former, because
it is found in all but two ST mss., as well as in many NT-x ones and in the citations. It
is found in: [¡Be2 Be3 Jo2 wKt1 La1 [cor to sh\ Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 (iMd5 (¡My oOr sOx1 Ox2
Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 [but cor] Pu7 Pu9 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M'-2"9 G R Ku NdJ Go Vij Apa.
6-76a It is very difficult to choose between the two readings: snäyubaddham and snäyu-
yutam. The latter appears to be the lectio difficilior, and it violates the meter; the Sloka
does not permit short the sixth and seventh syllables. The parallel in MBh 12.316.42
also has this reading, although Telugu and Grantha mss. have the alternate reading.
Nevertheless, I have adopted the former, principally because it is found in all the ST
mss. and is presupposed by the glosses of Me, Go, and Ku. Even though Me's com-
ment snäyunä
 baddham may be simply a gloss on yutant, yet the parallel comment on
päda-c dehacarmana avanaddham indicates that Me probably read baddham. The


--- PAGE 957 ---
946 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 6
reading adopted is found in: Be1 Jo2 oMd1 iMd4 oMd5 c;My sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu9
Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5, and also supported by the variant in TMd3 MTr6.
6-92C There is strong support for the alternate reading hrlr vidyä especially by the ST mss.
and several commentators. Nevertheless, I think the correct reading is dhir vidyä, be-
cause it is presupposed by the glosses of both Bh and Me and has the broadest manu-
script support.
6.933 There are several variant readings of this päda caused, I believe, by the fact that in the
original reading the päda is hypermetric. The most common correction is
dasalaksanakam dharmam, which is the lectio facilior and influenced by the reading
of pada-'d in the preceding and following verses. It is hard to see how such a reading
would have been changed into the hypermetric dasalaksanäni dharmasya. The other
attempt at correction kept the plural and the genitive in place but changed laksanäni to
cihnäni, thus restoring the meter. Two scribes appear to have restored the meter simply
by omitting the plural ending and using dasalaksaiia, creating a grammatically impos-
sible formation. The three mss. of Go, Pu5 Pu7 Pu9, show the confusion created by the
two readings; the scribes give both readings almost superimposed on each other:
dasalaksanäni dharmasya nikani dharmam. The scribe of Pu7 attempted to improve on
this without much success: dasalakanikam dharmasya, with a marginal notation giving
the patha: laksanäni dharmasya. The reading adopted is found in: uBe2 Ho Hy Jm Jo1
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 »Kl5 wKt6 Lo2 oMd1 xMd4 oMd5 NNg sOx' NPu1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 MTr3 MTr4
MTr5. The reading is supported by the glosses of Go and Kit; others are silent.
6.94C It is surprising that all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the singular vedäntam
when the overwhelming manuscript evidence and the commentators support the plural.
The glosses of Me, Go, Nä , and Rn presuppose the plural. The reading adopted is
found in: Be1 uBe2 Bo ßCa Ho Jo2 wKt3 NKf wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4
oMd5 NNg oOr Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu9 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4MTr5 Wa
[Jolly M] Laks.
6.95C This is one instance that I have rejected the reading supported by a majority of the
mss., including ST ones. I have adopted the present participle abhyasyan in preference
to the gerund abhyasya. It makes better sense in the context and has the support of
most commentators: Me, Go, No, and/VW. It appears that the source Me was using had
the reading abhyasya. His gloss indicates that his preference was for the participle:
abhyasyann iti satrpratyayäntapätho
 vä . Jha also interprets va here as indicating Me's
preference. The reading adopted is found in: Jo2 Lo3 cMd5 oOr sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Tj2 Tr1 [Jolly G N Nd R] Jolly.
CHAPTER SEVEN
7.6a 
The orthographic difference between eva and esa, especially in the northern scripts, is
slight. Yet, I think the overwhelming manuscript evidence supports eva, even though
all the editors opt for esa. Jolly gives no variants, and Go appears to support esa. The
reading adopted is found in: Be1 Be3 Bo Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Laks Mädh.
7.l3b The reading samvyavasyetis attested in: Be3 isCa Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3
c,Md5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Jolly.


--- PAGE 958 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 
947
7.310 Three major readings are found in the mss.: (a) dandah pranayituin sakyah, (b) dandah
pranetum sakyas tu, and (c) pranetum sakyate dandah. The second is a variant of the
first and is found in all the ST mss. I have adopted the first, which is found in: «Be2 Ho
Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo3 Lo4 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox3 NPu1 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 MTr5 Re Laks Jolly.
7.32.a There is strong manuscript support for both readings: nyäyavrttih and nyäyavrttah. I
have adopted the former, however, because it is found in all the ST mss., as well as in
many NT-x ones. The adopted reading is found in: Be1 wKt3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 iMd3 TMd4
c,Mds c,My NNg Ox3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 Wa [Jolly M Me G Na] Laks Me Jolly. In his
notes, Jolly indicates that this reading is found in Me and that the alternate reading is
given as a pätha by Me. The editions of Jha and Dave give just the opposite. My own
mss., however, support Jolly. The commentary of Bh also clearly supports vrttih, even
though the root text gives vrttah.
7.54b The mss. are divided over the two readings kulodgata and kulodbhava, something en-
countered also at 7.62, 63,141. In this verse, there is strong manuscript support for the
latter reading also, but in the parallel verses the support is much less. I have opted for
kulodgata in all the occurrences.
7.580 The mss. are divided over the readings mantrayeta param and mantrayet paramam.
Although this verb generally takes the Ätmanepada , see the clearly Parasmaipada
ending at 7.146. Commentators offer no help. Me hasparam, but it is unclear whether
it is the root or a gloss. Although the reading is uncertain and editors have generally
opted for the latter, I have gone with the former because it is found in the best and the
widest array of mss., including most ST ones: Be1 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo1 Lo2
Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 rMd4 c;Md5 NNg Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 MTr5 Wa.
7.62ab There appears to be something amiss in this verse. See my note to the translation for a
detailed analysis.
7-67d It is unclear whether the original reading in this pacía also was krtyesu as in pada-a. It
has the support of all the ST mss. and of several NT-x ones. I have decided to keep
bhrtyesu in this päda, because of the broad manuscript support and because krtyesu
here may have been influenced by the same word in pada-a, and because the ca in this
päda calls for something different from krtyesu. The reading, however, is somewhat
uncertain. See the note to the translation regarding the meaning of this verse.
7.7oa, c In pada-a the reading ca is found in: Be1 Bo iiCa Ho Jo2 wKt3 La1 La2 Lo1 TMd3
oMd5 oMy Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Wa Vis Volly G]; and in
pada-c it is found in: Be1 Bo isCa Ho Jo2 NKf liKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo1 Lo3 TMd3 oMy NNg
sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 WaV7¿ Vij Mädh.
7-74d Even though all editions read vidhiyate, all the ST mss. and most NT ones record the
reading visisyate, which has been adopted. See the parallel use of visisyate in verse 71.
The use of this term is most appropriate if, as attested by several commentators, this
verse is not a prescription of a fortress in general but a recommendation of a particular
type of fortress, either one built with an earthen rampart [Bhâruci ] or a hill fortress
[Räghavänanda]
. See my comment in the note to the translation. The reading adopted
is found in: Be3 Bo Ho Jm Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 La2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy oOr
sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [folly R Nd] Laks.
7.850 I have constructed a conjectural reading for this päda. I think the scribes and com-
mentators tried to clarify and correct two problems with the original reading: the un-


--- PAGE 959 ---
948 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7
usual word prâdhïta and the final four syllables of the päda which are all long and thus
does not scan. For prâdhïta there are two variants: äcärya
 and srotriya. In the parallel
passage of the GDh 5.20 the term is srotriya. The term äcärya
 in this position is un-
likely, both because Manu normally follows Gautama and because all the other terms
indicate personal qualities rather than a relationship to the donor. I think prâdhïta was
the original in Manu, a term very rare and used only two other times in the Dharma lit-
erature, once in the GDh itself at 16.44 and once in ViDh 93.3, which is a citation of
this very päda and reads: sahasragunam prädhlte, just as my conjectural reading. An-
other reason for the alterations may have been to restore the cadence to the päda. This
is especially true for the reading prädhlte satasähasram. Manu, however, has numer-
ous verses which violate metrical principles, including hypermetric pädas (see Intro-
duction, p. 37). Another reason favoring the conjectural reading is that all the other
pädas open with a number, the second and third containing the word guna and
bracketed by the first and the last having sania and ananta. The reading äcärya
 is
supported by Me and/V«, and prâdhîte by Go, Ku, and Mr. The reading sahasragunam
has the support of Na, all ST mss. and a substantial number of NT-x ones, whereas Go
and Ku support satasähasram.
7.86b Even though a large group of mss. have the reading tathaiva, nevertheless it is evident
that the correct reading should be the instrumental sraddadhänatayaiva paralleling
visesena of pada-a. The former is also the lectio facilior, and it is easy in the northern
scripts to mistake tha for ya. The reading adopted is found in: isBe2 isCa Hy Jo1 Jo2
wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKf La ' Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 ciMd1 rMd4 ciMd5 sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj2 Tr1
MTr3 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa.
7-86x The additional verse dése käle is accepted as part of the MDh by Jha and given within
brackets after verse 85 by Jolly. It is clearly a spurious verse recorded in only three
mss. Its claim to authenticity is the fact that Me comments on it. However, it appears
that this verse is actually a citation by Me in his commentary on verse 86. This is dem-
onstrated by the fact that, after he comments on this additional verse, Me returns to his
commentary on 86 and completes it with his comments on the wordprefya. Nowhere
else does Me return to the previous verse after commenting on a subsequent verse of
the MDh. Thus, the added verse must be an extraneous verse cited by Me in his eluci-
dation of verse 86.
7.973 The reading here is uncertain. I have opted for rajne, because it is attested in the best
mss., including all but two of the ST and the old NKt4 and NNg. Further, the dative is
supported by Me, Go, and Ku.
7-ioic Scharfe (1993, 47, n. 20) suggests reading buddhyä for vrddhyâ. Although this reading
is appealing, eliminating as it does the tautology (yardhayed vrddhyâ), it is found in
very few mss. The reading vrddhyâ appears also to be the lectio difficilior because the
commentators had to explain it. Bhâruci , for example, says: atra vrddhyartham upäyo
vrddhisabdenocyate.prakaranasämarthyät.
7.ioid Even though all the editions have the reading pätresu niksipet (same as pâda-â
 of 99),
the overwhelming majority of the mss. records the reading dänena, which I have
adopted: uBe2 Be3 Bo isCa Jo1 Jo2 Ho Hy wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 iiKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo3 oMd1
xMd3 iMd4 CiMd5 oOr Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M8] Mr. I also think that
this was the reading of most commentators. Bhâruci , for example, glosses: dänena
pätresu niksipet. Here Derretí has taken pätresu as the root (so also the root in MTr5),


--- PAGE 960 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 
949
but I think Bhäruc i saw dänena as the root and gave pätresu as a gloss because the
object of the giving is left unstated in the root. At 99, for example, Bhäruc i did not feel
the need for a gloss because there the root was pätresu. Likewise, Kullüka : vrddham
sästriyavibhägena
 pätrebhyo dadyät. Here sâstrîyavibhagena appears to gloss dänena
with the addition, once again, of the object of the giving with pätrebhyah. Kullük a also
did not feel the need for such an explanation at 99 where the root is pätresu.
7.106 The vast majority of the mss., including several ST ones, transpose pada-b and pada-d.
This order is supported by Nä , Ku, Rn, Rd, and Re, and found also in the parallel verse
of the MBh 12.138.25; the critical edition notes no variants, indicating that the MBh and
the MDh traditions diverge markedly on this point. The commentators are of immense
help here. All the ancient one—Eh, Me, and Go—support the order I have adopted,
which is also found in the following mss.: Lo4 Lo5 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy Ox3 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5 Pu7 MTr5 MTr4 MTr6. Note that most ST mss. and the ones with Medhâtithi' s
commentary follow the order I have adopted. I think that this order also makes better
sense. Running away goes well with the brooding mentioned in the first line, and
attacking like a lion fits the tearing to pieces like a wolf in the second line.
7.ii4d All the NT mss., as well as two ST ones, read samgram in place of guptaye. I have
conjecturally adopted the latter, a reading found in most ST mss. This also appears to
have been the reading of Bh, who, in commenting on verses 113 and 114, makes a clear
distinction between civil administration addressed in the 113 and public safety ad-
dressed in 114: räjabhävyasamgrahärtham
 raksärtham ca. The distinction between
samgraha and gupti is also clearly made in the parallel passage of MBh 12.88.1:
rastraguptim ca me räjan rästrasyaiva ca samgraham / sainyag jijnänamänäya
prabriïhi bharatarsabha / The use of samgraham in verse 114 makes the syntax of the
sentence impossible, with two separate objects (gulmam and samgraham) of the verb
kuryät. The commentators try to explain this with limited success. Several take
samgraha to be a kind of a police station (raksästhäna),
 but that is the meaning of
gulma as attested in the AS 2.16.18 (with Kangle's note); 2.35.12; 3.20.14. We have
parallel constructions with guptaye at the end of pada-d in the MDh 1.94 99. We also
have frequently a dative of purpose at the end of the verse or half-verse: 6.30; 7.109,
167, 215; 8.368; 11.12, 53, 106, 138, 139, 164, 181, 209. The use of samgraham here
may have been influenced by its use in the previous verse and the close presence of
kuryät in the same päda. The reading adopted in supported by Bh and Nd and found in:
oMd1 TMd4 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6AW Laks. The dative is also supported by the variant
reading in c;Md5. The reading of the päda, nevertheless, remains uncertain. For a study
of this verse, see Numata 1999. For the construction with guptaye at the end of the
verse, see YDh 1.198, 32i;BrSm 1.28; MBh 12.69.24; 12.73.6, 7.
7.i26b Most mss. and all editions have the reading vetaiiam, which is clearly the lectio fa-
cilior. All the ancient commentators support the reading bhaktakam. So, Bh comments
on the two verses 126 and 127: bhaktapraklptih slokadvayena. Likewise Me comments:
bhaktärtham paño deyah; and Go: paño vaksyamänah sa jaghanyabhrtakasya
bhaktärtham pratyaham dätavyah. Similarly, Nä and Re also support this reading with
the gloss : bhaktakam bhrtih. See also the parallel term bhakta in verse 127. See Intro-
duction, p. 36 for further comments. The reading adopted has the unanimous support
of the ST mss. and of several NT-x ones and is found in: Be3 NKt4 Lo2 oMd1 xMd3
rMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa folly G Nd] Laks.
7.l34d Even though all the editions have adopted the reading acirenaiva, the overwhelming


--- PAGE 961 ---
950 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7
manuscript evidence, including most ST mss., is in favor of adrad eva. It is supported
by Go, the only commentator to note the term. The adopted reading is found in: Be1
Be3 isCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NÜf
4 La1 \but cor sh\ Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 c;Mds oMy oOr Pu2
Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
 MTr6 Wa Madh.
7.143d The mss. record a variety of readings, possibly because the scribes failed to under-
stand the two pithy sentences within this päda. I take mrtah sah as one sentence; and
na sa jîvati as a second. The reading adopted is supported in various ways by several
mss., especially the ST ones. It is found in Jo2 wKt1 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Ox3 Tj1 MTr5 [Jolly
M] Jolly.
7.145C All editions have the Bahuvrihi hutägnih. The best mss., including all the ST ones,
however, give the gerund hutvä, a reading I have adopted. It also accords well with the
ca at cärcya. The reading adopted with the singular agnim is found in: Ho Jo2 wKt3
BKt5 Lo3 oMd1 jMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa (¡oily R NdJ Rn Dev.
7.1463 Several mss. have the plural sthitäh qualifying prajäh. Professor Wezler (personal
communication) finds this quite an attractive interpretation. See, however, the similar
expression at 8,2, where the one standing is clearly the king.
7.i49b The reading adopted, vayo'dhikan, is found in: Be3 Hy Jo2 NKl4 isKt5 wKt6 Lo1 Lo3
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Ox2 Pu3 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly R NdJÄ « Mr. See
the note to 4.141 for further comments.
7.i6ib The reading adopted is found in all but one of the ST mss. and in most NT-x ones. It is
supported by Bh, Me, and Go. It is also the lectio difficilior, the gerunds being changed
to the substantives in imitation of the other terms of the sixfold strategy. See the usage
of the gerunds in the parallel passage in AS 7.4.4. The reading adopted in found in: Be1
Bo »Ca NKl4 La1 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5oMd' TMd3 oMy NNg Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M^^G Nd Ku] Nâ (pâtha ) Laks Jolly.
7.1630 Mandlik, Jolly, Jha, and KSS take fada as a separate word: toda tväyatisamyuktah.
This is clearly an error. Bühle r translates tadâtva correctly: "An alliance which yields
present and future advantages." This is also the clear understanding of Bh, Go, Nâ , Rn,
Nd, and Mr. Only Re takes tadâ as a separate word. See tadâtva used again at 7.169.
7.1&4C I have adopted the reading mitrena even though the majority of the mss. and all the
editions record mitrasya. The reading adopted is clearly the lectio difficilior, and it is
attested by the all ST mss. plus a sizable number of NT-x ones. Even more impor-
tantly, it is the reading of Bh, Go, and Nd, and is given as an alternate reading by Me. It
appears that the reading mitrasya gained popularity because of its adoption by Me; for
example, Ku and Rn says that Go has the reading mitrena, but that they follow Me in
reading mitrasya. We have a clear explanation of mitrena given by Bh: yasya
parasyamitras tadvijigisor rnitram. tena yoda parasyäpakriyate tadvijigisor mitrenä-
pakrte vyasanini pare viparlto vigrahah. This explanation is paraphrased by Go. See
the construction with mitrena in the very next verse dealing with the two kinds of
march into battle. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 NKt4 La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5
oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly G].
7.i67b Although all the editions read käryärthasiddhaye,
 the reading adopted is supported by
all the ST mss., plus a large number of NT-x ones. The gloss of Bh also supports drop-
ping artha: svakäryasiddhim kuryät. The reading adopted is found in: Bo Ho NKÍ La1
La2 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 fiMd1 TMd3 rMd4 c;Md5 oMy oOr sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
Laks [Jolly M4].


--- PAGE 962 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 
951
7.1680 I have adopted the reading vyapadesas ca even though it is found in a minority of mss.
The major reason for adopting it is that it was probably the reading of the two oldest
commentators, Bh and Me. The clearest isMe, who gives the reading of the majority as
an alternate reading: päthäntaram
 vyapadesärtham iti. In the commentary, Me
explains: vyapadesas capldite 'pi ägämipidäparihäräya
 vyapadesärtham anyain
sanisrayet. Here we have vyapadesärtham used in explaining vyapadesah. This, I
think, is true also of Bh, who comments: sädhusv avyapadesärtham. Here also -artham
is used in the gloss to explain the root text, which in Bh also is in the nominative. Bh's
use of the negative avyapadesa is noteworthy, even though with just one extant ms. it
is impossible to say whether this is merely a scribal error. I think that the reading of the
glosses in these two ancient commentators may have influenced the alteration of the
root text also to vyapadesärtham, with the added influence of the parallel
arthasampädanärtham
 in pada-a. The reading adopted is found in: Be3 Ho wKt3 NKt4
wKt5 TMd3 rMd4 cMd5 oMy Laks, and is supported by La1 wKt6 NPu
1 MTr5.
7.i7od All ST mss. and a large number of NT-x ones support mányela, the reading adopted.
The commentators gloss with äsrayet and adhyavasyet, but it is unclear what term they
are glossing. The adopted reading is found in: Bo nCa nKl4 uKt5 wKt6 La2 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5
cMd1 TMd3 TMd4oMd5 oMy sOx1 Ox3 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
(Jolly M G] Re Laks.
7.1720 The reading of the last word is quite unclear; the mss. are divided over the singular
and the plural, as well as the word: art or ripu. Both the early commentators, Bh and
Me, prefer the singular arim. The gloss satrdn of Go and Ku supports the plural, leav-
ing the term in the root unspecified. The evidence points in the direction of both the
singular and the term ari. This is supported by arim in the very next verse; the sur-
rounding verses also use the singular. The reading adopted is found in: nCa Jo2 Lo2 Lo5
GMd1 TMd3 TMd4 NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M8~9 Me R Nd]/o/(y.
7.iy6d Among the three major variants recorded in the mss., nirvitarkah has the broadest
support, including that of Bh, Rn, and Re and of all ST mss. It is unclear what reading
is supported by the gloss of Me: nirvikärah. The reading adopted is found in: isBe2 Bo
Ho wKt1 wKt3 La2 Lo3 ciMd5 sOx1 sPu6 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 (Jolly M1 R Nd] Bh
Rn Re Jolly.
7.2OOC The reading adopted, samyatto, is clearly the lectio difficilior and is found in: Be1 Bo
uCa Ho Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt
4 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo3oMd> NNg sOx1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Tj1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 [Jolly G R Nd]Go Rc Mädh Jolly. Note also the orthographic simi-
larity between "p" and "y" and between "tt" and "nn" in northern scripts. Thus, sam-
yatta can easily be read as sampanna.
7.213 Many mss., especially the ST ones, have gerundives in place of the finite verbs in
pädas a-c. Derretí (1975, II: 83) supports the gerundive reading, referring among others
to the ST reading of MBh 5.37.17 with the same reading. Although there is much to
commend the gerundive readings, I have opted to keep the finite verbs. The main rea-
son is that even the ST mss. are divided on this, TMd3, oMd5, and oMy giving the finite
verbs always, while MTr4 has the finite verb in pädas a-b, and MTr6 in pada-a. The
overwhelming majority of the mss. support the reading adopted.
7.2isd Even though all the editions read arthasiddaye (and Jolly surprisingly records no
variants), the reading adopted has the overwhelming support of the ST and NT-x mss.,
as well as that of Go and Rn. The fragmentary gloss of Bh also appears to support it.


--- PAGE 963 ---
952 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7
The adopted reading is found in: Be1 Be3 BCa Ho NKt4 aKt5 wKt6 La1 La2 Lo1 Lo2
r.Md1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNgsOx1 Ox2 Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Lafa.
/.2i6d All editions read viset. However, all the ST mss. and a substantial number of NT-x
ones have the reading vrajet: uBe2 Be3 nCa NKt4 La1 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1 iMd3 TMd4 c,Md5
oMy NNg Ox3 NPu1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Laks. The gloss of Me, yäyäd,
 is somewhat
ambiguous, but probably supports vrajet more than viset.
7.2i8a The reading udakaih is found in all ST mss. It appears to be supported by Me, al-
though the mss. simply give the päda without comment; hence, it is unclear whether
this is merely a scribal insertion or whether it was the reading of Me. The reading
adopted is supported by Go, Ku (both with gloss ausadhaih), Rn, and Re, and is found
in almost all the NT mss.
7.2i8b Mss. are divided over the verb. I have adopted nejayet, which fits the context of
sprinkling a liquid antidote better and is also supported by both ST and NT-x mss:
wKt1 uKt5 wKt6 La1 Lo2 Lo4c,Md' TMd3 oMd5 c,My Ox3 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M O N
NdJ No Nd Re Laks Jolly.
7.2263 The reading adopted, vrttain, is supported by Me and N3, as well as all the ST mss.
and a number of NT-x ones, including the old NK(*. I also think that is fits the context
better than vidhanam. The reading adopted in found in: Be3 NKt4 La1 Lo2 c.Md1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Vij Laks.
C H A P T E R EIGHT
8.HC The reading adopted is supported by Bh, Me, and Ata. The two latter commentators
gloss prakrtah with adhikrtah, and this may have been the source of the reading intro-
duced into the text. For the unusual term prakrta found in the vocabulary of the AS, see
my note to the translation of this verse. The adopted reading is found in: ßBe2 Bo »Ç a
Ho La1 Lo2 Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 NNgsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 WaLafa Dev.
8.133 The reading adopted is supported by Me and Go. The alternate is given by Ku and Rn,
but Ku acknowledges the correctness of Me's reading: medhätithinä
 tu sabhä vä na
pravestavyä iti rjv eva pathitam. This reading is found in: Bo Ho Hy Jo2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo3
oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj! Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 inT^MTr5
MTr6 Wa [Jolly M G N R Nd] Vij Apa Dev Jha Jolly. Cf. NSm Ma 3.9.
8.i6b Most mss., including all NT ones, hsve the reading alani This is also the reading in
MBhiz.gi.i^. Several ST mss., however, as well as many southern mss. of the MBh,
record the reading layam. This reading fits nicely with the phonetic etymology of
vrsala. Yet, I think, alam here is the lectio difficilior precisely because layam is more
easily connected to the "la" of vrsala. All the commentators take the reading to be
alam.
8.3oa All the manuscripts have the compound pranastasvamikam, and most commentators,
including Bh and Me, explain it as a Bahuvrihi compound. It is odd, however, to call
the owneT pranasta; this term is usually applied to lost property and not to a lost or ab-


--- PAGE 964 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 
953
sent owner (see the note to the translation of this verse for further details). Following
the parallel passage in GO/î 10.36, I propose that the original reading was pranastani
asvamikam riktham, with a hypermetricpar/a; or, perhaps, pranastäsvämikam
 riktham.
This interpretation, where pranasta refers to lost property and asvamikam to such
property whose owner is unknown, appears to be supported by the commentary of Go
(which is reproduced almost verbatim by Ku): ajnäyamänasvämikam
 [Ku
ajnätasvämikam]
 dhanam raja kasya him pranastam ity evam patahädinäkhyäya
dvârâdau
 varsatrayam sthäpayet.
8.3ib The alternate reading, anuyojyah, is found in most mss.; it is also the reading of Me,
Go, Ku, and Rn. Only Nd supports the reading I have adopted; Bh, unfortunately, does
not comment. The adopted reading is found mostly in the ST mss., but with the support
of the old NKt4 and several other NT ones: wKt1 NKt4 La1 [but cor sh\ oMd1 rMd3 TMd4
oMd5 c,My oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6, and the partial support of Pu7. I think this is the
correct reading. It fits the syntax better, with the main clause of the correlative con-
struction containing a single verb arhati. With the gerundive anuyojyah, which has to
be taken as a verb substitute, we have to insert another pronoun as the subject of
sarnvadya and arhati. As it is, the sentence moves smoothly: "He" — after he has been
interrogated and identified the objects properly — "is (judged to be) the owner and de-
serves to get the article."
8.323 Although the reading avedayäno nastasya is adopted in all the editions, the reading of
the critical edition is supported by all the ST mss. and a considerable number of NT-x
ones. The reading pranastasya, moreover, fits with the use of the same word in the sur-
rounding verses and is supported by the presence of avedayan in other variant read-
ings. The reading adopted is found in: Ho La1 [cor to] Lo2 oMd1 rMd3 iMd4 cMd5
oMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa y oily Nd].
8.3sb All the ST mss. have the reading he tuna or hetutah. Even though MTr5 has mänavah,
the commentary of Bh has the gloss karanatah, which may at first sight support the
southern reading. However, I think that the word hetunä/hetutah may have entered the
manuscript tradition precisely through such a gloss explaining satyena. We have in Me
a similar gloss: satyena pramänena.
8.4sb Both Bh and Me read säksinam in apposition to ätmanam. Bh comments: pasyed ätma-
nam säksinam krtvä. Likewise, Me using very similar words: etac cätmänam
 säksinam
krtvä gavesanïyam. But Me recognizes the other reading taking ätmanam as a separate
item, and comments: asmin pakse saksina iti svatantram padam. All other commenta-
tors opt for säksinah, which is supported by the majority of both ST and NT mss.
8.5ib, 52d In both these places karana is clearly the correct reading and not karana, which
was adopted by Jolly. For karana as a legal instrument, see NSm 1.83, 117, 122, and
MDh 8.57 (where most mss. read karana), 154. This reading is also recorded in the B-R
under MDh 8.51,154.
8.52C Here and in the following verses, the reading des'a is clearly superior. It is found in the
parallel passage in AS 3.1.19. For the meaning of desa as documentary evidence, see
my note to the translation of this verse. The change to desya probably occurred be-
cause the original Arthasästri c meaning of desa had become obsolete. In this verse, the
reading desa is found in: Bo wKt3 NKt
4 La1 Lo2 Lo4 Lo5 ciMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c.My NNg
Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [but cor sh] MTr4MTr6 Wa [Jolly M G N Nd] Me Bh Na Go
Nd Jolly Jha Der [not MTr5].


--- PAGE 965 ---
954 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8
8.573 The reading säksinah is found in some NT mss. and is used in the vulgate editions. The
overwhelming majority of mss. and all ancient commentators, however, have the
reading jnätärah,
 which is also the lectio difficilior. Medhätith i glosses jnätärah
 with
säksinah, and that may have been the source of the vulgate reading. The reading mety
uktvä contains a double sandhi [?ne+iti = ma iti»nety\. Kumâril a (on PMS 1.3.24)
notes this irregularity: santi ma ity uktveti vaktavye vyakaranam anepeksyaiva sainhita
krtä.
8.57d Most mss. of both the NT and the ST record the reading hínam tarn api. Nevertheless, I
think the correct reading is hínam tarn iti. The grammatical problem in this construc-
tion was already noted by Medhâtithi , who explains the irregularity of an accusative
with iti by saying that iti here refers to the manner in which the decision should be
made and is not used to mark a direct quote: hlnain tain iti dvitîyântah päthah /
itisabdah prakärärtho
 drastavyah / ebhir uktaih prakarair anyais caivamvidhair
hínam tain nirdiset. He notes that if iti is taken in the normal sense, then the reading
should have been hîno 'sav iti, which is the reading of Dev. Bhäruc i likewise reads iti
and explains it as having the meaning of evam. I think scribes and reader may have
changed iti to api to "correct" the grammar of the sentence. The reading iti is sup-
ported by: liKt5 Lo2 ciMd1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa \Jolly M G\Bh Me
Go Jolly Jha Dave.
8.s8b I have followed the reading of the overwhelming majority of mss. The orthographic
distinction between "b" and "v," especially in northern scripts, is slight, however, and
there appears to have been a confusion in the tradition as to the precise word and its
meaning. Both Bh and Me gloss the word with bandhana, that is, imprisonment. They
appear to assume the reading bandhyah. The reading is uncertain, although the mss. in
southern scripts, where the distinction between the two letters is clearer, support
vadhya.
8.6gd Even though all editions have sarïrasyâpi, the reading adopted, sarîrasyaiva, has broad
support of both ST and NT-x mss.: Be1 »Be2 nCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La ' Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 c,Mds «My sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4MTr5 MTr6 \folly M4
R Nd|.
8.773 The main question here is whether the readings should be (a)lubdha and asâksî. One
reading found in most NT mss. and several ST ones is (d)lubdha with the positive
säksi. I have adopted this reading, which is also supported by Bhäruci . However,
Medhâtith i and Govinda prefer the positive reading lubdha and the negative asàksî.
Kulluka, who prefers the former, clearly states the position of his two predecessors:
medhätithigoviiularäjäbhäm
 eko lubdhas tv asâksî syäd iti pathitam vyäkhyätain
 ca.
According to their interpretation, the prohibition of a single greedy individual implic-
itly permits a single individual free from greed to be a witness. This is a round about
way of stating the obvious. The whole purpose of the verse is to contrast the preference
of males over females when it comes to judicial testimony. Clearly, the thrust of the
verse was lost on some readers. In pada-b also, some mss. convert the negative to a
positive: sucyo 'pi ca striyah, implying that even women can testify if they are pure
and honest.
8.8oa I have adopted the reading vittha, which is obviously the correct one. The manuscript
tradition, however, appears to have had a lot of trouble with this word; hence the nu-
merous variants. See the parallel at 1.33. Besides being supported by many of the vari-
ants, the adopted reading is found in Be1 wKt3 Jo2 NKt
4 La1 oMy Pu8 Tj1 Dev Jolly.


--- PAGE 966 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 
955
8.8ib The original reading of this päda is quite unclear. I have opted for präpnoti over
äpnoti, mostly because the Grantha and Telugu mss. (Be'oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5
c,My) as well as several NT ones have this reading. The alternate reading, however,
also has strong support, including the Malayam mss. With regard to puskalän, which I
have adopted, and anuttaniän, on the other hand, there is stronger support for the for-
mer. The latter is confined to some NT mss.
8.85C Although all the editions have adopted the reading tarns tu, all the ST mss. and a sub-
stantial number of NT-x ones record the reading adopted tarns ca: Be1 uBe2 Bo wKt3
NKt4 La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 oMy NNg Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 WaGo Laks.
8.88d Even though a plurality of the mss. have the reading sarvais tu pätakaih, I think the ST
mss. have retained the original reading ebhis tu pätakaih. This reading is also sup-
ported by many important NT mss. such as the old NKt4 and NNg. A very similar verse
is found at 8.113 where the reading is sarvais tu. In that verse (= NSm 1.181) this read-
ing is appropriate and is supported by almost all the mss. It is possible that that reading
may have influenced the reading in this verse. Here ebhih is appropriate, because the
consequences of perjury are enumerated in the subsequent verses. Medhätithi' s gloss
vaksyamänaih pätakaih also supports the adopted reading, which is found in: Be3 NKt4
nKt5 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 c,My NNg Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [but me sh\ MTr5 Wa
[Jolly Me M8"9 G NdJ Apa Me Go Jolly. Medhätith i also cites this päda in his com-
mentary to 8.99 with precisely this reading.
8.93a There is strong manuscript support for both readings: kapâlï ca andkapälena. I have
opted for the latter, because it is found in most ST mss. and in the parallel passage at
VaDh 16.33, and it fits with the surrounding adjectives describing the sinner. This
reading appears to be supported by Go with the gloss karparena yuktah and by Ku with
karparenopaliksitah. It is recorded in Be1 Be3 Bo Ho nKt5 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 oMd5 Ox3
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 [but me sh] Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M4~5] Re Jha Dave. The
original reading, however, remains uncertain. Lariviere's critical edition of the parallel
at NSm 1.183 has kapälena, although two mss. read kapall ca.
S.ioox The additional verse pasuvat ksaudra- is found in all the ST mss., although only one
NT ms. records it. Bhäruc i apparently read this verse as an authentic part of his root
text, because he comments aim pañca slokäh, and we get fiveslokas only by including
this additional verse.
S.ioid Although all editions give the reading sarvam, all the ST mss. and a large number of
NT ones have the reading adopted satyam: Bo liCa Ho wKt3 ßKt5 La' Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c,My sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa [Jolly Nd]
Apa Dev.
8.io6d Jolly opts for the reading tryrcena. See the Värttika on Pânin i 6.1.37 for the formation
trca.
8.1143 I follow Jolly in reading vä härayet. All other editions read vähärayet
 with sandhi
[= ähärayet].
 Only KullOka has a comment showing that he accepted ähärayet.
8.124C All editions have the reading yam, which is found in most NT mss. I have, however,
adopted tant, the reading in all the ST mss. and in several NT ones. I think täni fits the
syntax better; I take pädas a-b, pada-c, and pada-d as separate sentences. This reading
is found in: Bo Ho La1 Lo2GMd! TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 aMy sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8 Tr1 [but cor] Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd Gr] Dev Mädh.


--- PAGE 967 ---
956 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8
8.132 This verse is omitted in all but two of the ST mss., including all the Malayalam ones. It
is omitted also in the ms. of Bhäruci' s commentary. Medhätith i comments that this
verse is omitted by some: imam slokam kecin nâdhîyante trasarenau vipratipattya-
bhävät.
 The authenticity of this verse is thus doubtful. Evidence, however, is insuffi-
cient to remove it from the critical edition. It is cited in several medieval sources.
8.1333 This pacía is hypermetric, and several scribes have attempted to correct this by re-
sorting to various strategies.
8.i34b The alternate reading eka is found in all the citations and in many mss. The reading
adopted, eva, however, is supported by all the ST mss., plus many NT ones, including
the old NKt4 andNNg. The reading tv eva krmalam is found only in Be1 NKt4 La1 sOx1
sPu6 Pu8 MTr5 Jolly, although?« here (as opposed to cd) has the support of all the mss.
with the reading eka.
8.139 Jolly places this verse within brackets and doubts its authenticity. N3 also questions its
authenticity with the comment: me deye pratijñata iti slokam atra kecit pathanti. The
context does make the verse suspect. However, it is found in all the mss. and both
Bhâruc i and Medhätith i comment on it.
8.i49d Most mss. of NT-x have the reading nopabhogena jlryati [orjîryate], which is fol-
lowed by Jolly. The reading adopted, however, is found in all the ST and NT-y mss., as
well as in several NT-x ones.
S.isib The reading ahila is supported by all ST mss. and a number of NT-x ones, as well as
by Bharuci and Medhätithi : Ho NKt4 isKt5 Lo2 c.Md1 TMd3 oMd5 oMy Tr1 Tr2 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 WaBh Me Na Vij Apa Dev Jha Dave.
8.i53b The mss. are deeply divided over the reading vinirharet andpunar haret. I have opted
for the latter principally because it is found in all the ST mss. The reading, however, is
uncertain, especially because Medhätith i records the former. The adopted reading is
found in: isBe2 uCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 c,My
oOr Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly Ku R Nd]tfn Re Nd Laks Mandlik KSS.
8.i54d The correct reading is karanam, i.e., a legal instrument or document. See note to 8.51.
S.isSd The alternate reading, yateta, has broad but not unanimous support among the NT-x
mss. I have adopted the reading prayacchet, which is found in all ST and NT-y mss.,
as well as in some NT-x ones: Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5
oMy Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly R NdJDev Mädh Nâ Re Mandlik KSS. The
reading, however, remains uncertain, especially because yateta is found in Medhätith i
and is also the lectio difficilior.
8.i66b The reading adopted, kutumbe ca, is found in Be1 Be3 BCa Ho NKé uKt5 Lo3 oMd1
TMd4 NNg oOrsOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly
M G| Me Nd Apa Laks Dev Jolly Jha. Although some ST mss. have the alternate
reading, the adopted reading is favored by most ST mss. and our best NT-x mss.
8.181 The sequence of verses 181-99, but especially 181-4 'n various mss. and commentaries
is diverse. Bh and Go give the sequence 181, 183, 184, 182; the same sequence is found
in Be1 Bo uCa NKt4 Lo2 NNg sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tr2 MTr5, whereas Wa transposes 182
and 183. The order in Nä is: 181, 183,182, 184; in Nd: 180,195, i88b, 185, 186,189,
194,187, l88a, 181-4, 196, 190-3,197, 198. Medhätithi , however, makes it clear that
the sequence should be iSiab, 182, and iSicd, and Bharuci appears to agree with this. I
have followed the latter sequence in the translation.


--- PAGE 968 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 
957
8.l88a Most mss. support the alternate reading esu. The locative may have been influenced
by the two surrounding locatives; scribes may have overlooked the syntactic connec-
tion of esa to vidhih in the ne\tpada. I have, however, opted for the lectio 
difficilior,
which is esa. This reading is supported by the glosses of Medhätith i (anantaroktali), of
Kulluka and Nandana (pürvoktah), and less clearly of Govinda. It is also supported by
the mss. with the reading eva. The reading «a is found in only a small number of the
mss.: wKt3 NNg [Jolly G Me Ku] Jolly.
S.iSgb Even though all the editions have adopted the reading vä , the vast majority of both ST
and NT mss. record ca: Be1 uBe2 Be3 Bo isCa Jo2 NKt4 nKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 oMd1
xMd3 c,Md5 c-.My NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 Wa Apa Laks
Dev. This reading is also found in the vulgate of NSm (2.12; under 2.6 in Lariviere's
critical edition).
S.iggb The reading krayo vikrayah is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of NT
ones. However, the reading kraya may have been influenced by the following vikraya.
I have adopted the lectio difficilior, which is supported by the commentators. Bhäruci' s
gloss krayavikrayau appears to support the alternate reading, but this may merely be a
gloss on vikaraya which he sees as standing for both buying and selling. Further, it is
difficult to see how a non-owner of an item can sell it!
8.199X The additional verse is found in all the ST mss. and many NT ones. This verse must
have entered the manuscript tradition rather early. I have not adopted it, however, be-
cause it is ignored by all the ancient commentators, Bhäruci , Medhätithi , and Govinda.
8.202b The reading adopted, -sodhitam, is found in most mss.: »Be2 Be3 Bo isCa Ho Jo2 wKt3
NKt4 liKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNgoOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 [but cor sh] Tr2 MTr4
 MTr5MTr6 Wa [ Jolly M G Nd ]Apa
Laks Dev Mâdh Jolly. The alternate reading, -sodhitah, however, appears to be
supported by Bh, Me, and Go. Under this interpretation, it is the person who is cleared
of any wrongdoing by the public purchase of the article. But see visuddham in the
previous verse where the term refers to the clear legal title to the property purchased.
8.2O3ab All editions read samsrstarûpam as a compound. This is supported only by the NT-y
(vulgate) mss. The commentators explain rüpam as a separate word referring to any
article that is sold. Nâ glosses: rupapadam vikrïtamâtropalaksanam.
8.222cd Bh appears to have had the reading so ' ntar dasähät
 tat sämnä,
 as in several other
ST mss. He, however, rejects this reading as apàtha and proposes the emendation: so
'yam dasähät
 tad dravyam. He also gives an alternate reading that he found in his
sources: dänädäne
 dasähani tu syätäm
 api nipätini.
8.228d Numerous mss., including several ST ones, have the reading dharme or dharmme.
The doubling of "m" may have contributed to the omission of "y" of dharmye, which I
think is the correct reading. It is found in the following: Be1 Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 NKt4
»Kt5 Lo2 Pu3 Pu7 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr6 Wa Laks Dev Me Rn Mandlik Jolly [without giving
any variants] Jha Dave.
8.234C Here I have adopted the reading pasusu sväiniiiäm
 dadyät against the testimony of the
majority of mss. of both NT and ST. The adopted reading is found only in isCa Hy Jm
Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 Tj2, with partial support from Lo3 Tj1. This reading, however, is clearly
the lectio difficilior; the locative plural pasusu going with mrtesu of pada-d to form a
locative absolute. This connection, coming after the active verb dadyät, may have been
missed by scribes; hence, the "correction" found in most mss. The accepted reading is


--- PAGE 969 ---
958 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8
supported by the commentaries of Me, Go, Ku, and Nd, and by the reading of Dev.
This reading has been adopted also by Mandlik, Jolly, Jha, KSS, and Dave.
8.234d I have adopted the reading ankanis ca against the testimony of the majority of mss. of
both NT and ST. The reading adopted is found only in NKt4 NNg NPu1 Pu7 MTr5 [lolly
M G Kul Jolly Jha, with some support from Lo2 Lo4 TMd4 Pu2 Pu4 [here the mark for
"e" may have been a mistake for the aitusvara\. The reading angäni in this context
makes little sense; what should be shown to the owner are not the limbs but the
distinguishing marks of the dead animal. The reading anka is supported by the old
commentators: Medhätithi : afikäh karnädayah svämivisesajnänärtham
 cihnäni; Gov-
inda: cihnäni vadatä karnatvagädini; Kullüka : anyäni ca cihnäni srngakhurädini.
Medhätithi' s comment appears to indicate that owners branded their cattle with a
marking on the ear, possibly a particular cut; by showing the ear the herdsman would
be able to demonstrate to which owner the animal belonged, especially in the likely
event that he herded cattle of more than one owner.
8.2403 There is an ambiguity in the sandhi at ksetre parivrte; it could also be aparivrte with
the elision of "a." Derretí and Dave record an avagraha: ksetre 'parivrte. For reasons
why I have adopted the positive parivrte, see my note to the translation.
8.245C All but three mss. have the reading jyestha. Jolly has corrected this to the standard
jyaistha. I see no reason to standardize this pronunciation against the near unanimous
testimony of both ST and NT mss.
8.2s8b Although the mss. are evenly divided, I have opted for grämäh
 because it is clearly
the lectio difficilior. It is found in: Be1 BBe2 Be3 Bo isCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2wKt' Kt2
wKt3 La1 Lo2 NNg oOrsOx1 Ox3 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Ku NJ
Rn Apa Mädh Mandlik KSS. The difficulty of this unusual word with an older meaning
may have caused scribes to change it to either the more usual grämyäh
 or to compound
it with the following with the result that samanta was changed to slmanta: thus
grämasimäntaväsinah.
 Given the nature of the glosses, it is unclear which of these was
the root reading of the ancient commentators. For samanta, see also verses 258, 262,
and 263.
8.271C The adopted reading, nikheyah, is supported by the parallel passages in ViDh 5.25 and
NSm 15-16.23, as well as by a majority of the mss: Bo Ho Jo2 NKl4 isKt5 Lo2 Lo3 GMd1
TMd4 oMd5 NNg oOr Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly Me G R Nd].
8.279b The NT and ST are divided over the reading here. Only two NT mss. record the ST
reading himsyäc chreyamsam. I have followed here the NT reading; it is supported by
the glosses of Bhäruci , Medhätithi , and Râmacandra . The reading, however, remains
somewhat uncertain.
8.28lb Manuscripts are split over the readings avakrsta and apakrsta. Most ST mss. record
the latter readings, although in xMd3 iMd4 the Telugu distinction between "v" and "p"
being slight, the reading could be either. I have adopted avakrsta because most mss.
have that reading: Be1 nBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 NKfuKt 5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3
xMd4
 NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr2 \Jolly M G RJ Apa Me Re Jolly;
it is also supported by the reading in NSm 15-16.26. The reading, however, remains
uncertain.
8.2873 There is strong manuscript support for both major readings: the genitive pîdananâm
and the locative pïdanâyâm.
 The locative, however, is derived from the feminine noun


--- PAGE 970 ---
Notes t<> the Edition: Chapter 8 
959
pîdanâ,
 which is not attested in the dictionaries; the normal form is the neuter
pidanain. I have, nevertheless, opted for the latter because the majority of the ST and
NT mss., including all the Malayalam ones, support it. The genitive may have been
created by scribes attempting the correct the grammatical irregularity. The locative is
supported by: »Be2 Bo uCa Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo3 xMd3 c,Md5 sOx1
sPu6 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Me Ku R Nd|; this reading is supported
by Ku Nd. Neuter verbal abstracts in -ana occur alongside feminine in -ana (see Wak-
ernagel II.2, pp. igof) especially in the early language. Manu may here be using an old
form for the word that later scribes may have considered erroneous.
8.288d The mss. are divided over the genitive rajnah and the dative rajne. I have adopted the
former principally because it is recorded in most ST mss., including all Malayalam
ones, and in numerous NT mss.: isBe2 Be3 Hy Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 isKt5 La ' Lo1
Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4 wTr6 Wa [Jolly Ku Nd K]Ku Rn.
Even though the printed editions of Me and Go show the dative, it is unclear whether
these old commentators themselves had that reading; they do not comment on the case.
Manu uses both the dative (see 3.94, 99, 231; 4.80; 5.151 etc.) and the genitive (see
3.108; 8.184, 234, 275; 9.71,155 etc.) with the verb Vi/â . The only other time the verb is
used with the noun rajan, however, it is used in the genitive (7.97).
8.295d Opinion among commentators is divided over whether there is an elided "a" (= avi-
caritam) or if the term is the positive vicaritam. Mss. are of little help because they
generally do not include avagrahas for elided "a." Bhâruc i and Govinda take it to be
the positive vicäritah, which is given as an opinion by Medhätith i also. According to
Bhäruci' s explanation, vicärita here means that the punishment is determined accord-
ing to the provisions of the following verses. All other commentators, however, follow
Medhätith i in taking the term to be the negative avicäritah (Blihler's comment on this
verse erroneously takes Rn, Nä , and Nd as supporting the positive). Manu has similar
constructions with avicärayan occupying the last place in a half-verse at 3.114; 7.212;
8.283; 8.250; 9.135,170, 280; 11.14. In two other places Manu has avicäritam at the
end of a half-verse: 11.29, 33- These parallels support my assumption that here also the
negative is meant; nowhere else do we have the positive vicaritam in a similar context.
8.3iia Even though all the editions read hi, it is found in only a small number of mss. The
adopted reading ca is found in: Be1 nBe2 liCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 nKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5
oMd1 TMd3 xMd4 aMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 Wa
Bh [ad 8.306].
8.3133, c The mss. are divided over the appropriate relative pronoun at the beginning of the
two pädas: yat or yah. The grammar of the verse supports yat, which corresponds to
tena of the main clauses. The change to yah may have been prompted by mistaking
tena for a masculine rather than a neuter instrumental. Kullüka , who reads yah, is thus
forced to add a second pronoun in the main clause: duhkhitair äksiptah sahate yah sa
tena svargaloke püjäm
 labhate. The older commentators Medhätith i and Govinda have
correctly adopted the reading yai(Bharuci does not comment on the term). Some mss.
have yat inpäda-a and yah in pada-c, although the latter reading is sometimes unclear
because of the triple conjunct. The reading yat in pada-a is found in: Be3 NKt4 »Kt5 La1
xMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 c;My NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu" Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 [but cor sh\ MTr4MTr5 [Jolly M
5~9 G Nd MeJ Me Rn Nd Go Dev Jolly.
8.3i4b The vast majority of NT mss. and all editions have the reading dhävatä.
 However, all


--- PAGE 971 ---
960 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8
the ST mss., as well as NT ones in old Nâgar l script, read dhlmatä, a reading supported
by the two oldest commentators, Bhäruc i and Medhâtithi . The parallel passages in the
Dharmasutras (GDh 12.43; BDh 2.1.16) make no mention of running; only VaDh 20.41
has the reading abhidhävet, which is also uncertain because several medieval citations
(Vij 3.257; Mädh 2.416) give the reading abhiyäcet (both Jolly and Bühle r depend too
heavily on the VaDh reading for their decision to adopt dhävatä).
 The repetition of this
provision by Manu at 11.100-1 also makes no reference to running. Bhäruc i comments
on the term: dhîmatâ "vividhena vadhena ca" (MDh 8.310) suddhihetur idain präyas-
cittasästrasämarthyäd
 ity evam jânatânena.
 Medhâtith i is more succinct: dhlmatä
dhairyavatä. In the parallel passage of NSm (19.93) Lariviere has adopted the reading
dhävatä;
 however he used only northern mss. for the edition and the Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series (no. 97 1929) edition of the NSm reads dhlmatä. In this case the
southern mss. of the MDh and the NSm have preserved the original reading. The
adopted reading is found in: NKt4 isKt5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly M Nd]5/z Me Vis'Jha Dave.
8.3220 Even though all the editions have the reading sese tv ekä-, it is clear the reading
should be sese 'py ekä-. The latter reading is found in most mss., including all the ST
ones. None of the commentators comment on the reading. The reading adopted is
found in: nBe2 Be3 uCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 nKl4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5
cMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 [Jolly Nd R]Laks.
8.324d The sequence of raja dandam is unclear. All editions and some NT mss. read dandam
raja. I have adopted the sequence supported by the vast majority of mss. of both ST
and NT: eBe2 Bo isCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c,My oOr
sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 WaLafcv Apa. This sequence is supported
by Go, Ku, and Re.
8.32sd The reading of this päda is very uncertain. Most commentators did not quite under-
stand the meaning oïsthûrikâ; hence the numerous readings of this word. Medhâtith i
gives no less than three opinions: goad, back side of the food, and a cow in the habit of
running away. Bhäruc i gives two meanings: barren cow and the area three inches
above the heel. The correct meaning is clearly the second given by Bhäruci , i.e., the
Achilles tendon. This meaning is also attested to by Medhâtith i and Nandana (see my
note to the translation of this verse). Mayrhofer (1999, III: 526) considers the term to
be obscure, but accepts the meaning of ox and barren cow and refers to R. Hiersche,
Untersuchungen zur Frage der Tenues aspiratae im Indogermanischen (Wiesbaden,
1964), p. 129 and note 44.
The last word of the päda is even more problematic. All but one ms. (Wa) and all
commentators read the locative bhedane. Given the history of interpretation of this
verse, it is understandable that the tradition has preferred the locative bhedane, because
this was thought to be a reference to one more crime. The NSm 19.40 points us in the
right direction: gosu brähmanasamsthäsu
 sthüräyäs
 chedanam bhavet, "in the case of
cows belonging to Brahmins, there should be the cleaving of the Achilles tendon." I
have conjecturally adopted the accusative reading bhedanam. It is quite out of place
for injury to an animal to occur here, given that the entire section deals with theft. It is
clear that both punishments indicated in this verse—cleaving the heel and cutting half
the foot—are for stealing livestock of Brahmins, the first for cows and the other for
goats and the like.
8.32gb The difference in the two readings caivamädJnäm
 adyänäm,
 which I have adopted,


--- PAGE 972 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 
961
and caivamädlnäm
 madyänäm
 is slight, simply the presence or the absence of the
anusvara. I think the term evamädmäm
 more properly relates to food items rather than
to liquor. The adopted reading is found in: Be3 isCa Ho Jm Jo1 Kt2 sKt5 cMy NPu1 Pu2
Pu4 MTr3 MTr5 Mandlik Jha Dave.
8.333C Most NT mss. have the reading tarn ädyam. I have adopted the reading tarn satam,
however, because it is recorded in all the ST mss. and a substantial number of NT
ones. Further, this reading is supported by Medhätithi , who gives the alternate reading
as a pätha. The reading is, nevertheless, uncertain, especially because Bhâruci' s com-
mentary is damaged at this crucial point; but later he mentions ädyo dandah, which
supports the alternate reading.
8.35id For the reading tan manyum (as opposed to tain manyuni), see parallels at BDh
1.18.13; VaDh 3.18; ViDh 5.191.
8-354b There is strong manuscript support for both rahah and saha. The latter, indeed, could
be seen as the lectio difficilior, because it is syntactically connected to patnyä occur-
ring in the previous päda. Nevertheless, I have adopted rahah both because it fits the
context better (secret conversation with a woman) and because it is supported by
Medhätith i (Jolly is incorrect in assuming that Me reads saha). The reading adopted is
found in: isBe2 Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt3 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3oMd' TMd3 oMy Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr5
[Jolly Nd R] Me Re Mr.
8.3690 Manuscripts are divided over the readings triguiiam and dvigunam. Among the older
commentators, Bhâruc i has dvigunam and Medhätith i trigunam. Neither, however,
comment on the term, and given that we have a single ms. of Bhâruc i and no critical
edition of Medhätithi , it is difficult to know whether these were their own readings or
later emendations. I have opted for trigunam because it is recorded in most ST mss.
and numerous NT-x ones: Be1 uBe2 Ho NKt
4 Lo2 aMd1 TMd4 oMy NNgsOx1 Ox2 Ox3
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [folly Nd2] Laks Apa Me Nd.
8.37ib It is unclear which sequence is original: jnâtistrïguna or strïjnâtiguna. It is further
unclear whether the latter is a compound or if strî should be construed separately with
yä tu or the previous päda. The commentators Me, Nä , and Nd gloss with jnatiguna
and strlguna indicating that they read it as a Tatpurusa compound and Üiatjnäti
 came
before strí. Most of the medieval citations also support this sequence, which is found
in: Bo NKt
4 Lo2 oMd1 rMd4 oMd5 NNg Ox3 Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly
M G N Nd] Dev Mâdh Vis Nd Jolly.
8.374c-d This half-verse appears to have caused a lot of problems for commentators and
scribes alike; hence the numerous variants. The uncertainties center around three
times: agupta, angasarvasva, and gupta. For the first, I have adopted conjecturally
agupta añga-; this reading is not found in any ms. The problems here, I think, derive
from this hiatus created by sandhi. Scribes appear to have resolved this in two ways:
first, by adopting the accusative aguptam añga-, and second, by adding eka and
adopting a double sandhi aguptaikanga-. A few mss. add a ca to eliminate the hiatus:
agupte canga-, which was adopted by Jolly. The reading ekänga is supported by Bh,
Nä , and Nd. The unusual double sandi is explained by Nd thus: aguptaikangety atra
säkalyamatena yakäralope krte chandonusäräd
 yakäralopasya asiddhatvam anädrtya
vrddhividhänam. The addition of eka is probably a later formation; Me, Go, Ku, and Re
clearly state that the bodily part cut off is the part that was used to commit the crime,
namely, the penis.


--- PAGE 973 ---
962 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8
In the second compound there are three major readings: angasarvasvaih, aiiga-
sarvasvani and aiigasarvasvL There is scant manuscript support for the first; its intro-
duction may have been influenced by the instrumental sarvena ofpada-d. The second
is also represented by only a few mss.; the accusative also does not fit the syntax. The
third appears to be an elliptical compound; Me and Nä clearly have this reading and
have long explanations of its meaning. The meaning appears to be that a SDdra who
has sex with a guarded woman becomes "one having his penis and all his wealth (taken
away)." I have adopted this reading, which is found also in all the medieval citations:
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy La1 Lo1 Lo2 wKt1 nKt5 oMd5 oOr Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 Apa Laks Mâdh Me NäJha Dave.
Finally, in pada-d there are two readings: gupte and guptam. The former is clearly
the correct reading; the latter may have been influenced by the "correction" introduced
in pada-c by some scribes. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 Ho La1 Lo2 GMd1
TMd3 TMd4 GMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa[7o//v N
Nd] Apa Laks Bh Nd Re Jolly.
8.378b I have adopted the reading vipräm guptam first because it is found in all the ST mss.
and a substantial number of NT-x ones, including the old NKt4. Secondly, we see that
guptä almost always follows the class name in all the surrounding verses (374-84).
The only exception is verse 384, but the inversion of the order there may well be de-
termined by the meter. The reading adopted in found in: liCa NKt4 liKt5 Lo4 Lo5 GMd1
TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 c.My oOr Ox2 Ox3 MTr5 MTr6.
8.38ob The mss. are divided over the two readings api sthitam and vyavasthitam. The context
clearly favors api, and it is supported by the explicit statement of Medhâtithi : apisabdo
yugapatsarvapäpakärye
 'pi brahmano najätu kadacid dhantavyah. Similar support for
api is given by Go, Nd, and Ku. The reading adopted is found in: BBe2 Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1
Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo2 Lo3 oMy NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 MTr4 Vij Apa.
8.s84b Even though all the editions read pancasatam, this reading is supported by very few
mss. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 BBe2 Bo ßCa Ho Hy wKt1 wKt3 nKt5 Lo1 Lo4
Lo5 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 ciMy NNgsOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 [Jolly M Nd]. The
nominative masculine is also supported by other mss. that read pañcadasah and by the
parallels at 8.264, 268, 297, 329, 369, 373. Only once is the accusative used: 8.331.
8.3840 Although there is strong manuscript support for the reading icchet, it is clear that the
original reading is rechet. This reading is found in Me, who glosses it with präpnuyät,
an explanation repeated by Go and Ku. No commentator permits the guilty Ksatriya to
exercise an option regarding his punishment. The reading adopted is found in: isBe2 Jo2
wKt3 La1 Lo1 TMd3 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Me Re Jha Dave.
8.3923 The reading with a short "a" prati- is explicitly given by Medhâtithi ; he gives prâti as
an alternative: ädidtrghapäthe
 svärthiko 'n. The former reading is found in most ST
mss. I have, however, adopted präti, because it has the broadest manuscript support.
The proper reading in the parallel passage in YDh 2.263 (the short form is found in Apa
and the long form in Vij) and in Vidh 5.94 is unclear. The reading adopted is found in:
Be1 »Be2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKf La1 Lo2 Lo4 TMd3 NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3
Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj2 MTr3 Me fpâtha ] Go Nä Ku Rn Nd Re Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS. The
reading, however, remains uncertain.
8.396b We have two distinct readings, the one in NT and the other in ST (also followed by 3
NT mss.). Bh, Me, and Nd do not comment on this päda; all others support the NT
reading, which I have adopted. The reading, however, is uncertain.


--- PAGE 974 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 
963
8.4033 Jolly writes tulämänam
 as a compound. This is incorrect. Bhäruc i clearly indicates
three items in this list: trayani apy etad räjamudräftkitam.
8.4030 The manuscripts have very divergent readings here: ça syât, tu syât, and tat syät.
Although the manuscript evidence is scant, I have adopted the last reading; it is found
in the medieval citations and is attested by most commentators: Me, Go, Ku, Rn, and
Mr.
8-4iib Manuscripts and editions provide two readings: karsitau and karsitau. Confusion
between the palatal and retroflex sibilants is a common feature in mss., but here the
palatal and the retroflex derive from two different roots V krs and \ krs. In this com-
pound, both makes sense. I have adopted the palatal form principally because it is at-
tested to in most of the ST mss. and in numerous NT ones. It is found in: Jo2 NKt4 Lo1
Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 Lo5 TMd3 cMd5 üM y NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave [in eiMd1 the palmleaf is damaged at
this point]. See also 2.24d, 9.740, lo.ioic.
CHAPTER N I N E
9.ib 
Most mss. of both ST and NT read dharme. Nevertheless, I have adopted what I be-
lieve is the correct form dharmye, which is found only in Be1 »Be2 Bo Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2
La1 NNg Pu8 MTr5 Laks Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave. The common form dharme is
the lectio facilior, and the doubling of "m" (EPÎ) found in many mss. is very similar in
Devanagan to (ETsf).
9.2C The mss. are deeply divided over the reading of this verse. All the editions have the
alternate reading, which is also supported by Me, Nâ, Ru, and Re. Even though there is
uncertainly regarding the original reading, I have adopted the reading found in all the
ST mss. and a large number of NT ones, including the old NKt4. This reading is found
in: »Ç a Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 c.Md1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Tr1
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Dev Mädh.
9.4 
Most NT mss. have the reading väcya in pädas a, b, and d. This is the reading adopted
in all the editions. I have adopted the reading yäpya, however, which is the lectio diffi-
cilior and the reading found in all but one ST mss., as well as in several NT ones: NKl4
Lo4 oMd1 TMd4 ciMd5 c;My NNg NPu1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M N Nd] A«. This
reading is also supported by the corrupt readings in Be1 La1. Bhäruc i is the only
commentator to gloss this term (yäpya vacamyäh). Derretí here has emended the
commentary to read väcyä,
 even though it would have been pointless for Bhäruc i to
gloss this term with vacamyäh. For the meaning of the term yäpya, see Introduction, p.
36. For other occurrences of this term, see GDh 13.23; 19.2; BDh 3.w.z;VaDh 15.19.
g.igd The ST and NT diverge radically in the reading of this päda. All the ST mss. have the
reading I have adopted. I think äkrti not only is the lectio difficilior but also makes far
better sense and parallels nidarsana in the same position in the very next verse. Here
the text is not dealing with expiatory rites or formulas but with the perverse nature of
women. To prove this, Manu adduces a vedic text in verse 18, and goes on to say in the
first half of verse 19 that there are numerous such texts in the Vedas. In the second
half, he says that he will produce a sampling of these. The term äkrti with the meaning


--- PAGE 975 ---
964 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9
of sample or specimen (cf. Skrtigana in grammar) is somewhat unusual, which may
have led scribes and commentators to change it to niskrti, especially in view of verse 21
that mentions an expiation (nihnava). I take täsäin
 in this päda as referring to the vedic
texts (sruti), here following Medhätithi ; Bhäruc i takes it as referring to women. Only
Bhäruc i and Nandana read äkrti. It appears, however, that Bhäruci' s commentary has
been emended to read vyabhicaraniskrtim, as pointed out by Derretí .
g.24b The reading apakrsta is found in most ST mss. and several NT ones and, therefore,
should be a strong contender for adoption. I have adopted avakrsta, however, for sev-
eral reasons. First, it is supported by Medhätithi ; and, second, the parallel passages at
5.163; 7.126; 8.177, 281 all have avakrsta. The readings in several of these places, how-
ever, are somewhat uncertain, especially because of the confusion between "p" and "v"
in many southern scripts.
9.32b Here we have a classic case of a lectio difficilior, in this case kartari, being changed to
the easier bhartari, even though the latter reading causes a tautology. We see this
process happening in sPu6, where the original kartari has been corrected above the line
by a later reader to bhartari, which reading is then reproduced in sOx1, which is a copy
of sPu6. This päda is also an example of the usual superiority of the ST; only a few NT
mss. have preserved this original reading, which is supported by the clear gloss of
Medhätithi . This reading is found in: NKt4 isKt5 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy sPu6
Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly Nd M N] Me Nd (pStha) Jolly Jha.
9.433 Normally I would have adopted the reading viddhah, because it has the unanimous
support of the ST mss. and is found in several NT ones. Yet, I think the original read-
ing was ksiptah; it is supported by Me, Go, No, and Ku. The reading viddhah may have
been influenced by the repeated viddham and vidhyatah of the very next päda. The
reading ksiptah at the end of pada-'a nicely corresponds to ksiptam in pada-c; it also
parallels uptam used with reference to the seed in earlier verses. The reading, however,
is uncertain. The reading adopted is found in: Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo4 NNg sOx1
Ox2 NPu1 Pu3 NPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 \ntc sh to\ Tr2 \Jolly M G N R] Me Go Na Ku Re
Mr Jolly.
9-47d The reading adopted, saht sakrt, is found in: Be1 nBe2 nCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 La1 Lo1 Lo3
Lo" oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly
M G R Nd] Dev Laks Mädh Rc Jolly.
9.52d Manuscripts are divided over the two readings ballyasl and garlyasJ; all ST mss., how-
ever, record the former. It is also supported by Me, Go, Ku, and Nd. This reading is
found in: Jo2 Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 c,Md5 (¡My Ox3 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
Wa [Jolly M G Ku Rd R2) Vij Mädh Jolly Jha.
9-54C The reading of this päda that has been adopted is found in all ST mss., and it is either
found in or supported by several NT mss.: wKt3 NKl4 La1 oMd1 rMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy
NNg Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly Nd] Laks. The meaning of the päda also supports this
reading; it is not the seed (bija) that belongs to the owner of the field but the crop.
Commentators have wrongly interpreted tat in this päda as referring to the seed; it re-
fers instead to what has grown from the seed implied in the verb prarohati of the pre-
vious päda.
9.54d The reading adopted, vaptä, is found in all the ST and several NT mss.: nBe2 Ho Hy
Jm Jo1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4c,Md5 oMy Ox2Tj2Tr'MTr3 MTr4MTr5


--- PAGE 976 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 
965
MTr6. This reading also suits the context of a sower (probably of rice) whose seeds are
carried to an adjoining farm by wind or water. The alternate reading may also be influ-
enced by the identical reading of verse 5id.
9.653 Jolly has adopted the reading naudvahikesu, and this parallels the form of the word at
9.206 f= YDh 2.118]. Only a few mss., however, support the vrddhi for audvâhika here,
although they adopt it at 9.206. Apparently, we have here two forms of the term with a
very similar meaning.
9.73d The ST and the NT have two very different readings here: kanyädänain
 and kanyä-
dätur. The former is at one level the easier reading, because the compound kanyädäna
is so common. On the other hand, the genitive kanyädätuh
 may have been influenced
by the other genitive compound in the same päda. The reading kanyädänain
 has the
advantage of providing a clear reference to the tat of the previous päda.
9-74C On -karsitä, see note to 8.411. The palatal form karsitä is found in: Bo Jo2 NKt4 ßKt5
Lo2 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 rJVId5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr6 Wa/Aa
Dave.
9.y8d Mandlik, Jha, KSS, and Derretí do not recognize the sandhi between pacías c and d,
writing: parityâjyâ
 vibhüsanaparicchadä.
 It is clear from both the context and the
commentaries of Me, Nä , Ku, Nd, and Rn that the last compound is a negative one:
avibhüsanaparicchadä.
9.87b I have adopted svajätyä
 here, even though at 86d I adopted näsajätih.
 Numerous mss.
that used sajäti in the previous verse give svajäti here. Both forms are correct and I see
no reason to be consistent as to the spelling when the mss. are not. The reading
svajätyä
 here has overwhelming manuscript support: Be1 BBe2 Ho wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1
Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 GMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 WaJmv Laks Ku Nd.
9.92d The mss. are divided over the readings steyam and stenä. I have adopted the former
found in all the ST and numerous NT mss.: nKt5 La1 Lo4 oMd1 rMd3 TMd4 c.Md5 c.My
NNg oOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M G Nd Gr] Apa Laks
Jolly. Bhâruc i and Medhâtith i also gives as a päth a thé masculine stenah. In this case,
the one prohibited from taking the jewelry is the husband, as explained by Bharuci:
evam capathe purusavisayah iiloko bliavati.
9.93 
Bhâruc i comments that this verse belongs to some other smrti and not to Manu: smrty-
antaresv ay am sloko na tv atra sainämnäyate.
 Medhâtith i also records such a view:
kecid ähuh amänavo 'yam slokah.
9.1O2C Most NT mss. have the reading abhicaretam; this is, however, the easier reading be-
cause the term vyabhicära for sexual transgression is a common term in the text.
Medhâtith i clearly reads aticaretäm, because he comments: aticäro 'tikramah dharmä-
rthakamesv asahabhävah. The reading adopted is found in all the ST mss. (c.Md' is
torn at this point) and in a few NT one: BBe2 wKt3 NKt4 wKt5 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 c;Md5
oMy oOr Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa[/o//y M N Nd] Laks Me Nä Mr Jolly Jha Dave.
9.io8b All editions have adopted the reading bhrätfn. The majority of the mss., especially the
ST ones, clearly support bhrätä:
 ßBe2 Hy Jo2 wKt3 La1 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c.Md5
NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Tj ' Tr1 MTr6 WaApa Jmv [vl] Ku. This read-
ing also parallels nicely bhartari in the same position in pada-d.


--- PAGE 977 ---
966 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter g
g.iiSa Medhätith i appears to read: sväbhyah sväbhyah kanyäbhyah. This reading has con-
siderable merit, because otherwise this päda is simply repeating what is said in pada-c;
but it is supported by only a few mss. According to Medhâtithi' s reading, each brother
is obliged to give a portion of his inheritance only to the sisters belonging to his own
caste, that is, born to the same mother as he. This is also the interpretation of Näräyan
a
and Räghavänanda
.
9.123C Editions are inconsistent with regard to the avagraha beforejyestha. Mandlik, Jolly,
and Jha put an avagraha, while KSS and Dave do not. Manuscripts usually omit all
avagrahas; therefore, it is impossible to determine if a negative or a positive is in-
tended. I follow Bhäruc i and Medhätith i in reading here (a)jyesthavrsah.
9.12Ó C Once again the ST mss. give us a superior reading, ekagarbhe 'pi, which has been
adopted. All but one of the ST mss. have this reading, and they are supported with re-
gard to eka by n NT mss. The reading adopted is supported by Me and Nd with respect
to both eka and api, and by Bh and Kit with respect to eka.
g.i28b The mss. are deeply divided over the word that comes after cakre. I have adopted
cakre 'tha, which is found in the majority of mss.: Be1 uBe2 Bo Ho Jm Jo' Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
wKt3 NKt4 uKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 NNg sOx1 Ox2 sPu6 Pu8 Tj! Tr2 MTr3 uTrsMan-
dlik Jha KSS Dave. No manuscript supports the reading cakre sa adopted by Jolly.
9-i33b The reading is uncertain. Several ST mss. and a few NT ones have the reading
adopted by all editions. The reading I have adopted, however, is found in three ST mss.
and the vast majority of the NT ones. See also the parallel in verse isgb. The differ-
ence in the readings does not affect the meaning at all.
9-i45b Although all editions read jatah putrah, the sequence in inverted in all the ST and
most of the NT mss.: BoisCa Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 BKt5 La1 Lo2 Lo4oMd' TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 NNg oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6. This appears to be the se-
quence also of Bhäruci .
9.1473 Mandlik, Derretí , and Dave give the positive reading yä niyuktänyatah. This reading is
supported by the comments of Ku and Nd. I take the form to be aniyuktä and see a
sandhi here as explicitly stated by Me: aniyukteti prasleso drastavyah. The negative
meaning is supported also by Nä , Ru, and Re.
9.i52b The mss. present three major readings: parikalpayet, parikalpya ca, and pravibhajya
tu. The two latter readings have the gerund, making the whole verse a syntactic unit;
the first of these two is given in the NT-y [vulgate] mss., while the second is limited to
the ST mss. I think that the gerund may have been introduced precisely to make the
verse a single sentence; the reading adopted, which I think is the original, gives the
verse two finite verbs. This reading is found in: Be1 uBe2 Bo wKt1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 oOr
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tr2 [Jolly M G] Jolly. I think the first half-verse ending
with parikalpayet is an independent sentence providing an alternative to the compli-
cated methods of partition given in the previous two verses. Then the second half-verse
and verse 153 go on to state how the division is to be carried out among the sons from
wives of different classes.
9.1563 The mss. of both ST and NT are divided over va and ye. I have adopted the former
principally because it is attested to by Bh and Me; it is also found in a wide variety of
mss., including the old NKt4. This reading also makes better sense as this verse gives a
simple alternative to the rather complex rules of partition outlined above (see the par-


--- PAGE 978 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter g 
967
allel in verse 152). Medhâtith i is somewhat confused about this reading, because he
apparently takes va here as providing an alternative to the verse immediately preceding
and feels that such an alternative is not possible: väsabdo dvitlyain vikalpam anta-
renänupapadyamänali
 prakrtam apeksya niräkänkso
 bhavati (Jha's translation of this
is inaccurate). The reading adopted is found in: Be1 Ho NKt4 isKt5 Lo4 oMd1 TMd4 NNg
oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 MTr5 Wa {folly M G] Bh Me Laks Jha.
9.i62d The reading adopted here is found in Ho wKt1 Lo2 Lo4 c.Md5 NNg Ox2 Pu3 Pu7 Pu8
Apa Jinv, but is also supported by the many mss. that read tat samgrhnlta. See, more-
over, g.igid where the same expression occurs; there the reading adopted here has
greater manuscript support and is also adopted by all editions.
9.1/oa Here the majority of the mss. in both ST and NT have erred in reading yasya for yas
tu. The latter reading is found in: Be1 Jo2 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 [Jolly M
G R] Dev Jolly Jha Dave. The person to whom the child belongs is not the person who
owns the house but the person (i.e., the husband) to whom the mother of the child be-
longs. In a joint household, the owner of the house may be different from the husband
of the woman who gives birth. Further, we would also expect a correlative for the sah
of pada-c, as we have in the surrounding verses.
9.1960 The mss. are quite confused about the reading of this päda and of igyb. Many have
different readings here and in the parallel päda at igyb. I have adopted the reading
atltäyäm
 aprajasi, which is clearly the lectio difficilior both because aprajas is a rare
word in classical Sanskrit and because its adoption goes against the requirements of the
standard Pathyâ form of the sloka. These considerations may well have promoted
scribes and commentators to change aprajasi to the more standard aprajäyäm.
 Occur-
ring at the end of the päda, even this violates the normal sloka, which may have
prompted others to move it to the beginning of the päda, giving the reading found in
the vulgate: aprajäyäm
 afitäyäm.
 The reading adopted is found in: Bo Ho NKt4 Lo1 Lo2
oOr sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr2, as well as in the citations of Apa, Laks, and Dev. It is also
supported by the reading in the parallel verse in YDh 2.144. The only commentator to
note the term is Nä , who reads aprajäyäm.
9.1970 See the previous note for the reading adopted, atftäyäm
 aprajasi, which is found in:
Be1 Bo Ho HKt5 Lo2 sOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 Apa Laks.
9.2190 Most mss. take yogaksema andpracära as two separate items. Only Bh and Rn take
the three words as a single compound. Others take pracära as a separate word, gener-
ally taking it to mean a pasture or a path. I have opted to see the three words as form-
ing a single Tatpurusa compound, but this reading is found only in Jm Jo2 wKt3 Lo3
oMd1 xMd3 oMy Tj2 MTr5 Jmv Laks Dev Mädh. Brhaspati (1.26.52) and Kätyäyan
a
(884), who can be regarded as early commentators of Manu, also divide the two terms,
and Kätyäyan
a explicitly uses the expression gopracära. Clearly, the older meaning of
pracära as "activities" became obsolete at an early date. Scharfe (1993, 195-200), in a
close semantic study of the term pracära, has clearly shown that it does not mean land
or pasture but activities (see 7.153 n.). He says that this verse of Manu (9.219) may be
the best candidate for the meaning of pasture. I think that even here the term refers to
activity. The confusion is created by the fact that the term has been separated from the
preceding word yogaksema. The separation is created merely by the addition of an
anusvära at the end. At every other place in Manu, pracära refers to some form of ac-
tivity either within a Tatpurusa compound (antahpurapracäram 7.153; udaslna-
pracäram 7.155) or with a genitive (mandalasya pracaramj.i^^madhyamasya


--- PAGE 979 ---
968 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9
pracäram 7.155). It is, thus, always the pracära of some place or person. I think the
same is true here, and pracära here refers to activities or measure taken to ensure
safety. One can think of watchmen, fences, and the like. These must be continued un-
disturbed by the partition.
g.22ib I have adopted the reading rastre in preference to rästrät,
 which is found in all edi-
tions and most NT mss. The former, I think, makes better sense; the object is to sup-
press gambling activities within the kingdom, not to banish them from the kingdom
(verse 224 tells him to execute gamblers; see the locatives in the additional verse in
La1 after verse 223). This sense is made clear in the very next verse with the word
pratighäta. This reading is also found in most ST mss. and is a good number of NT-x
ones: La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
Mädh (also vl in Laks). Commentators offer no help with this reading.
9.225a The last word of this päda is quite unclear; mss. give four major variants: kera, kela,
krüra, and caitra. I have adopted the first. The two last ones are probably attempts to
find easier words for an obscure one; the "k" in krüra supports one of the first two,
while the "r" of these two support kera over kela. The latter also may be an attempt to
find an easier word; Bh explains it as kelijîvinah and Nd as kelisilan. The reading adop-
ted is found in: »Be2 nCa Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 Lo3 oOr Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa [Jolly
N R] Nä Rn Mr Laks Dave.
9.23ob The mss. are deeply divided over the reading of this päda. I have gone with daridrä-
nätharoginäm
 both because it is probably the lectio difficilior and because the three-
word compound nicely parallel päda-a.. This reading is found in: »Be2 Bo Hy La1 Lo4
oMd1 TMd3 oMy NNg oOrNPu1 Pu3 Pu8 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa [Jolly M Nd| Dev
Jolly. This is supported by No, the only one to comment on this poda.
9.234 The mss. and the commentators are deeply divided over whether the nouns, pronouns,
and verbs are in the plural or the singular; several even give singulars in some and plu-
rals in others. The central verb kuryät inpada-b is in the singular in most mss.; only
the ST and vulgate mss. give the plural. I have opted for the singular throughout.
9.235C The reading adopted, prthag vedyä, is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of
NT-x ones: wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 nKt5 Lo4 [after 8.461 c.Md1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 c,My Ox3 Tr1
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M NdJ.
9.2360 Even though all the editions have adopted the reading sarfram, the overwhelming
manuscript evidence points to the compound sarlradhanasamyuktam. This reading is
supported by almost all ST mss., and it appears likely that the reading sariram in sev-
eral medieval texts is due to their modern editors using the vulgate MDh reading of this
passage in their texts. The reading adopted is found in: Bo Ho wKt1 NKt4 »Kt5 Lo2 Lo4
Lo5 ciMd1 TMd4 (¡Md5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox3 Pu3 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4MTr5
MTr6 Apa Me Nä Re, with support from mss. with the reading sariram.
9.238b The sandhi between the two words has caused much difficulty to both scribes and
commentators. Me tries to explain this by reading \igarhita and seeing the ensuing
compound as a Dvandva [asampäthyäh
 + vigarhitäh]. The most probable explanation
is that here we have a case of double sandhi: asampäthyä
 avivähinah being further
combined to give asampäthyavivähinah.
9.247b Numerous mss., including most ST ones, have the reading yathoktäni. This is clearly
a mistake; this expression is so frequent that the scribes may have unconsciously read


--- PAGE 980 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 
969
it in place of the less common yathoptäni. The latter reading is found in: Bo Hy Jm Jo1
Kt2 wKt3 BKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4 Lo5 TMd4 NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj2 Tr2 MTr3 Wa,
and supported by Jo2 Lo3 Tj1.
9.2570 The reading here is quite uncertain with no less than eight different versions. There is
broadest support for tv ete, which is found in: Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4
oMy Pu3 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr3 MTr5 [Jolly Nd] MandlikJha KSS Dave.
9.2s8d The reading here is quite unclear, and so is the meaning. I have followed Jolly is
adopting the reading bhadrapreksanika, although it has very little manuscript support
and must, therefore, be considered a conjecture. The only real support for this is pro-
vided by Medhâtithi , whose root text clearly contained this reading and who provides
the gloss: sarvasya karavardhane bhadrapreksanikäh prasamsipurusalaksanah.
Bhäruc i does not comment on this verse; all others give some form of ïksanika.
9.2743 The reading here is very confused; scribes were clearly attempting to make sense of a
very obscure word. Broadly we have three forms: hidä, ida, and hita. None of these is
a well-known term for a dike or dam. B-R and M-W give this meaning for hita, but
solely on the basis of its single occurrence in this verse. Other scribes have attempted
to come up with easier terms, such as tadä/tatä
 [probably derived from tadäga] and
setu. Mainly on the basis of its frequency in the mss, I have chosen hiela, although with
little certainty: Be1 »Be2 Bo nCa Ho Jo2 NKt
4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd3 c;Md5 NNg Ox2
NPu1 Pu8 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 \Jolly R| Apa.ln Tr1 the letter after hi has been erased
and da is written in the margin; it is impossible to make out the original letter, but it is
probably ta, making its reading hita.
9-275b The mss. are divided over the reading of this päda. The reading adopted is found in
uCa Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKf BKt5 Lo2 NNgoOr NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr1 MTr3 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 Vij Apa Mâdh Mandlik KSS Dave.
9.279d The reading adopted, dadyäc cottamasähasam, is found in wKt1 wKt3 La1 c.Md1 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 oMy sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Laks. The finite verb is
supported by Na.
9.3033 All the editions read vayas ca, and this reading is found in an interesting group of
mss. which normally do not contain identical readings, namely, several ST ones, the
old NKt4 and NNg, and the vulgate group of mss. Nevertheless, the manuscript support
for the reading adopted is very strong: Be1 uBe2 Bo ßCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 BKt5 La1
Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 c,Md5 oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 sPu6 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 [Jolly G R] Laks.
9.3140 Mss. give three readings: indu, coudra, ssiâsoma. I have adopted the first, especially
because, given the sandhi (cenduh), readings with candra also approximate it. The
adopted reading is found in: Jo2 NKl4 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6
[Jolly M G Nd R] Jolly.
9.335d Here all ST and NT-y (vulgate) mss. have the same reading, which is adopted by all
editions. The reading utkrstam jatiin appears to be supported by Me, although it is un-
clear whether it is the original reading or merely a commentarial gloss. The reading
jätito 'smite is supported by all the NT-x mss., and it is also the lectio difficilior found
in: Be1 BBe2 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8
Tj1 Tr1 [me sh to] Tr2 Wa. The first word of this päda is also unclear, the mss. giving
several variants: ucchritim, ucchritam, utsrtim, utkarsam, and utkrstam. I have gone


--- PAGE 981 ---
970 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9
with the first even though it is found only in a few mss.: isBe2 Ho Jo2 Lo1 Pu8 and sup-
ported by Rn. It makes better grammatical sense than ucchritam and is supported by
several variants ending in "i." The original reading of this pacía, however, remains un-
certain.
C H A P T ER TEN
lo.sd The reading tathaiva te appears to have been the reading preferred by Me, who com-
ments: ye 'pi "ta eva te" iti pathanti tesam apt sä evärthas tajjâtïyâ
 iti. The adopted
reading, however, has the support of Bhâruci .
lo.isd The original reading here is quite uncertain. Most mss. have the locative reading for
prätilomya [or pratiloma] with the addition of the particle tu or (a)pi. The locative ap-
pears to be supported by Eh. This locative, however, may have been influenced by the
proximity of jatimani. I think Nd and R n are correct in connecting janmani with
ekäntare, the very first of the verse; these two locative thus bracket the entire state-
ment. If that is the case, then the original reading probably was the instrumental
prätilomyena, paralleling änulomyät
 of pada-a. The reading adopted is found in: Jo2
wKt1 La1 Lo3 oMd1 rMd3 rMd4 oMd5 sOx1 Ox2sPu6 Tj1 {Jolly R|; but the "n" of the
instrumental is supported by variants in several mss.
lo.iSb The original reading of this caste name is unclear, and it is made more problematic
because of the difficult orthography of the conjunct consonant. Jolly has preferred
pulkasa, whereas the vulgate appears to read pukkasa. The same name occurs at 4.79;
10.38, 49; 12.55, and I have attempted to give consistency by adopting the form pul-
kasa everywhere. I think there is better evidence overall for this form than for the
others, even though the reading remains uncertain. The adopted reading here is found
in: Ho Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 cMd5 Tj1 Tr1 MT^MTr6 [Jolly R Nd Gr] LaksJolly Dave.
The readings found in the printed versions of the commentaries are unreliable, because
each editor appears to have used his own preferred spelling.
io.2ib, c As in verse 18, here also the spelling and pronunciation of the name is inconsistent.
The reading I have adopted, bhrjjakantaka, is found in: nKt5 La1 Lo' Lo2 NNg sOx'
Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10. This reading is supported by variants found in
several mss., including ST ones. Likewise, the reading of pada-c is quite unclear with
regard to both puspadhah and saikha.
io.2sb The sandhi here is unclear. Bühle r takes the two words as sudhanvä + äcärya.
 This
division with the sandhi of two a's is supported by Go, who also reads äcärya.
 Jolly,
on the other hand, takes the two words to be sudhanvä and cärya without any sandhi,
but he gives no reason for taking the latter term to be cärya rather than äcärya.
 From
Go's commentary it appears that both the Sálvala and the Äcäry
a earned their liveli-
hood by functioning as temple or shrine priests (devapüjana). Although Bh, Go, Re,
and Mr take these as two separate names, Nä appears to take sudhanväcärya
 as a sin-
gle term, because he sees only five names in the verse.
io.27cd Both the reading and the meaning of the second half-verse are quite unclear. There
are four readings: mätrjätyäm
 (locative), mätrjätyäh
 (nominative plural), mätrjätyä
(instrumental), or mätrjätau
 (locative). Most commentators support the locative. Only


--- PAGE 982 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 10 
971
Me prefers the nominative. Of the four forms, I think the least probable is the last; it
must be construed as a Bahuvrihi to obtain the masculine ending; I am unclear as to
how that would fit with the syntax of the verse. I have also rejected the locative
mätrjStyäin.
 This would force us to assume that the verse is speaking about three kinds
of women; the clear parallel between svayonisu and pravaräsu yonisu makes it un-
likely that a third category would be introduced withjäti in place of yoni. Further, this
reading would also imply thatpratiloma sexual unions as envisaged here would beget
children who belong to the same class as the father. The reading preferred by Me is the
nominative, but his explanation is labored with the introduction of a correlative ye and
the assumption that prasiïyante is passive (contrary to its use as an indicative in verses
30-1): ye ca mätrjätyäh
 prasüyante 'nulomä mätrjätlyä
 . . . te 'pi svayonisu sadrían
janayanti. The parallel verse in MBh 13.48.14 reads: mâtrjâtyâm
 prasüyante pravarä
hînayonisu, but this is clearly a lectio facilior and an attempt to resolve the difficulties
of the original. I have adopted the instrumental mätrjätyä,
 connecting it syntactically
with pravaräsu: "in wombs that are higher by reason of the mother's caste." This cor-
responds to what will be said in the very next verse, namely, that a person begets chil-
dren similar to him also from women of the class immediately below theirs also in the
case of outcastes. Thus, a Vaidehika male (Vaisya father and Ksatriya mother) is one
grade above a Mâgadh a female (Vaisya father and Brahmin mother). In terms of the
mother's jäti, hower, the Mâgadh a with a Brahmin mother is superior to the Vaidehika
with a Ksatriya mother. So, a Vaidehika begets children belonging to his own caste
through a Magadha woman. Granted, this is a somewhat elaborate explanation; but it
appears to be the only plausible one, given the reading we have. The reading I have
adopted is found in Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10 Tr2 MTr6 [folly
M].
io.34b Although many mss. read dosa, the correct spelling is clearly däsa. The connection of
this class of people with navigation is deadly indicated in MDh 8.408-9. There is
overwhelming manuscript support for the reading -jlvinam, but see io.32b where the
reading clearly is -jivanam.
10.44 The ethnic names contained in this verse have a variety of readings, and it is impossi-
ble to determine the original forms. The readings given in the edition, therefore, are
uncertain. In pada-'d the reading pundraka is found in: Jo2 NKf1 Lo3 Lo4 TMd3 rMd4
c.Md5 c,My NNgsOx1 sPu6 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa. In the last päda, the read-
ing adopted, claradas tathâ is found in: Be' Bo NKt4 isKt5 Lo2 oMd1 TMd4 c.Md5 NNg
sOx1 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly M G Nd Gr], a reading adopted also by
Jolly and BUhler.
io.52b The mss. are deeply divided over the reading. Even in the ST, the Grantha mss. read
bhaiidesu, while the Telugu and Malayalam ones read bhände ca, which I have adopt-
ed. This reading is found in: Bo isCa Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 liKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 TMd3
TMd4 NNg oOrsOx1 Pu3 sPu6 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa | Jolly M Gr| Jolly.
1O.62C The adopted the reading, abhyavapattau, is found in most of the ST mss. and a good
number of NT-x ones: Be1 NKt4 isKt5 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 c.Md5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5
Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 \folly M5 G Nd| Apa Me GoJha. In Laksthe editor has adopted
upapattau even though at least two mss. record the reading avapattau. The reading
avapatti is also supported by the parallel in ViDh 16.18, which reads strîbâlâdyava-
pattau. The word abhyavapatti or the verb abhi-ava Vparf is not recorded in B-R or
M-W dictionaries; Apte gives the verb as meaning "to protect."


--- PAGE 983 ---
972 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 10
10.633 I have adopted akrodhah in place of asteyam, because it is found in most of the ST
mss. and a large number of NT-x ones: Be1 Bo Ho NKt4 uKt5 La1 Lo4 xMd3 oMy NNg
sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 MTr5 Wa {Jolly M Nd| Vis. See also the parallel at
11.223. The reading asteyam, however, is found in the parallel verse in YDh 1.122. The
reading here is clearly uncertain.
lo./gb The mss. are divided over the three readings: km, krsih, and krsih. The second is im-
possible as a feminine nominative plural; Na is obliged to call it a Vedic form! I have
opted for the first; the dual is the lectio difficilior, and I think vanik here stands outside
the compound as a separate word for trade. The adopted reading is found in: Hy Jo2
Lo2 Lo3 GMd1 TMd3 Tj1 Tr2 Wa {.lolly M G R Nd] Vij Jolly.
lo.goa Most mss. and editions have the reading krsyäm; a few mss. record krsyät. This is
clearly an error; scribes were influenced by the adjacent utpädya requiring an object in
the accusative. There is no word krsyä (fern.) or krsya (mas./neuter). The term is krsi
and the correct reading here is krsyä in the instrumental. This reading is found in uBe2
Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo2 Lo4 TMd4 oMy Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6./o/(y. The
commentators Me, Go, Ku, No, and Rn support the instrumental.
io.93d All but two of the NT mss. have the reading niyacchati. Jolly appears to have adopted
nigacchati conjecturally; all the mss. available to him read niyacchati. I also have
adopted nigacchati, which gives a much better sense and is found, with a single
variant, in all the ST mss.: Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 c;Md5 G My NNg Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Jolly.
See the similar variants at 12.11.
lo.gyb The alternate reading, paradharniät svanusthitat, has strong manuscript support and is
found in most ST mss. The ablative here, however, may have been influenced by
varam of pada-'A. I have adopted the NT reading both because it is the lectio difficilior
and because it is in several ways supported by many commentators. Me, Go, Ku, and
Rn support the presence of the negative particle na, and Go, Ku, and Rn specifically
comment on the term pärakyah. This reading is also found in all the medieval cita-
tions. The original reading here, however, remains somewhat uncertain.
lo.ioic The reading adopted, karsitah, is found in Ho Jo2NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 c;Md' TMd3
TMd4 ciMd5 c,My NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 Wa.
For this reading, see 8.4iib note.
io.iO4d The reading adopted, dosena, is found in all the ST mss.: TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c,My Tr1
MTr4 MTr6Har-A Mädh. Although the reading remains uncertain, I think the parallel in
lose favors dosena here also; see also dosa in verse 103.
1O.1O5C The reading adopted, dosena, is found in: Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo3 c;Md' TMd3 c;Md5
(¡My oOr Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 \Jolly G R Nd| Apa Mädh Rc Jolly.
lo.ioyd I have adopted the reading brboh conjecturally. The mss. present a wide variety of
readings, a clear indication that the scribes did not know what to make of this word.
Säyan a in his commentary on R V 6.45.31 cites this verse with the reading brboh and
gives the story behind the saying; interestingly, however, Mädhava , reputedly his
brother, has a very different reading in his citation of this verse.
lo.ngb The adopted reading is found in: Be1 Bo Ho NKf Lo1 Lo2 TMd1 ciMy NNg sOx1 Ox2
NPu1 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Tr1 MTr5 Wa \Jolly G KujGo Ku Laks Jolly. The
reading of Me is unclear: tathä cähave na syät paränmukhah l bhaye upasthite
paränmukho yuddlie na syäd ity arthah. It is unclear whether cähave is merely a gloss


--- PAGE 984 ---
Notes to the Edition : Chapter l o 
973
and bhaye is from the root text or vice versa. The fact that the text required such an
explanation favors bhaye as the root; if it was ähave the text would have been clear. In
Go, on the other hand, it is clear that his root had bhaye, for he comments:
prajäraksanapravrttasya ca yadi kutascid bhayam syät tadä na yuddhaparänmukhah
syät. The same explanation is given by Ku.
io.i2ia-b The syntax of the first half-verse is turbid; yadi does not make much sense with the
present participle äkänksan.
 The commentators Me, Ku, Nd, and Mr appear to read
äkänkset,
 although it is unclear whether this is the root or a gloss. A finite verb would
make better sense with yadi. On the other hand, Go, reading the present participle,
provides the following explanation: südro brähmanasusrüsayä
 ajïvan yadi
vrttyäkänksl
 syät tadä ksatriyain paricaret Jolly follows Me in substituting iti for yadi.
This reading, however, has almost no manuscript support.
io.i27b Mss. give three readings here: vrtta, vrtti, and dharma. The last has little support.
There is little to choose between the other two. I have gone with the first principally
because it parallels sadvrttam of the very next verse, a reading supported by most mss.
The reading adopted is found in : Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Kt2 NKt4 sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Tj2 MTr4 MTr6 WaMz Re Mandlik Jolly KSS.
C H A P T E R E L E V E N
n.ib The reading sarvavedasam, which I have adopted, is found in: Be' Ho Hy Jo2 wKt1 Kt2
NKt4 BKt5 Lo4 c,Md5 otvly NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu* Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa \Jolly Ml
Apa Laks Me Go Nä N cl Mr Jha Dave.
11.3d Even though an alternate reading with vidhîyate is found in several significant mss.,
including all the ST ones, all the commentators favor the adopted reading.
11.5X The additional verse given as verse 6 in the vulgate editions is omitted in isBe2 Bo Hy
wKt1 BKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 iMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1
Tr2 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M G N RJ. This verse is also not commented by any commentator
other than Ku. It is not notices by Bh, Me, and Go. Jolly gives the verse within brack-
ets. This verse must have entered the text at a relatively early date, because it is found
in several ST mss. and in the old NKt4.
ii.Sc Two diametrically opposed interpretations of this päda have produced two different
readings: sa pltasomapûrvah and apltasoinapurvah. According to the first interpreta-
tion, even a man who has already performed a Soma sacrifice is deprived of the fruits
of a Soma sacrifice he performs without the minimum wealth specified in the previous
verse. Some, such as Me and, following him, Vij (on FDA 1.124), consequently permit a
man with lesser wealth to perform the sacrifice if it is the first time he is doing so. The
implication is that the first Soma sacrifice is obligatory (nitya, hence the exception),
whereas subsequent ones are optional (kainya). This is unconvincing; if this were the
case why would Manu put the particle api "even"? Others, such as Ku, draws an oppo-
site conclusion: a fortiori, a person who has never performed a Soma sacrifice should
not perform one without the minimum wealth. According to the second interpretation,
even a man who has never performed a Soma sacrifice is forbidden to perform one
without the minimum wealth; a fortiori, those who have already performed one are
also forbidden, because such sacrifices are optional. The reading with the negative


--- PAGE 985 ---
974 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter n
apïta is favored by Bh, Go, Nd, and Re. I favor this interpretation, because it highlights
the significance of the particle api. I think the original reading was so (a)pftasoma-
purvah, a reading that was misunderstood and changed to sa pltasomapûrvah by some
and to apltasomapürvah by others. The adopted reading is found, however, only in
TMd4 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Bh and must, therefore, be considered somewhat conjectural.
n.28d I have followed here the reading of the ST mss., all of which give the reading
avicaritam. Of the NT mss., only Pu2 has this reading. For a detailed discussion of this
reading, see note to 8.295.
11.313 The usual optative form vedayeta has been adopted by all the editions, even though it
is found in a minority of mss. all belonging to NT. A broad range of mss., including
most ST ones, have the adopted reading, vedaylta: uBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo2 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
cMd1 oMd5 c,My oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly R]. The
latter is clearly the lectio difficilior, a form of the optative that emerges in late Vedic
texts and sutra literature. It is easy to see how this unusual optative could have been
changed to the more normal vedayeta, and very difficult to see how the latter could
have been changed into the former in so many mss.
n.33b The presence of iti here makes it most probable that the term is avicaritam and not
avicarayan. The former is found in all ST mss. but only in two NT ones. Here also the
ST has proved to contain the superior reading. For iti avicaritam, see 11.28. The read-
ing adopted is found in: nKf La1 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6
[Jolly G}.
11.363 The reading adopted, naiva, is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of NT-x
ones: Jo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 NNg oOr Ox2 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly
Rl Apa Dev.
ii.4Ob All the editions read prajah. The singular prajam, however, has broader manuscript
support, including most mss. of the ST: Be1 Bo Ho NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4
oMd5 r,My NNg sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 Wa.
11.440 The reading prasajan, possibly due to the sandhi creating prasajams, has created
problems for the scribes; hence the simplification to prasaktas found in many mss. and
adopted by some editors, including Jolly. The present participle here makes much bet-
ter sense paralleling the participles in pacías a and b. The reading adopted is found in:
Bo BCa Ho La1 Lo4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx' NPu1 sPu6 MTr4 MTr6Vis Mädh. Derretí gives
the reading prasaktas both in the root and in the commentary of Bh without any note.
11.503 There are numerous variant readings, the three major ones being pütinäsatva,
pütinäsikya,
 and pautinäsikya. The last is found in only a few mss. mostly of NT-y and
can be rejected. It is unclear whether the original was näsatva or näsikya. I have
adopted the former both because it is represented (with many variants) of both the ST
and the NT-x, and because the abstract noun parallels pütivakratäm
 of the nextpada.
The adopted reading is found in: oMd1 oMy Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Jolly [but see its
many variants given in the critical apparatus]. The reading with näsikya, however, is
supported by the parallel in YDh 3.211 with pütinäsikah.
11.533 Mss. of both ST and NT sre deeply divided over the two readings, karmavasesa and
karmavisesa. I think both the manuscript evidence and the probable meaning of the
verse favors the former, which is found in: Be1 öBe 2 Ho wKt3 uKt4 oMd1 cMd5 oMy


--- PAGE 986 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter n 
975
NNg sOx1 sPu6 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Jolly. This reading is also supported by the
commentaries of Bh [here and ad 8.66] Me, Go, Ku, and Nä .
ii.55d The syntax calls for the nominative samyogah rather than the accusative samyogam.
The reading adopted is found in: NKt4 isKt5 oMd1 oMd5 oMy Ox2 NPu' Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8
MTr4 [Jolly R Nd] Me Jolly.
11.593 The adopted reading, svayonyäsu, is attested (if we include the variants) in a large
spectrum of mss. of both ST and NT. It is found in: Be1 Bo Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4
BKt5 Lo1 Lo4 oMd5 oMy NNg sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 Tj2 MTr4 MTr5 Wa
[Jolly M1"2"4"5"9] Nd Go. The grammatical form yonyä, however, is unusual, especially
as a noun [see RV 8.45.30 for the adjective]. The form may also be influenced by the
Prakrit formations in -ya, such as in sriyä and striyä. See Edgerton 1953,1:10.6.
n.6ob Although the majority of the mss. read vikrayah and vikrayäh, it is clear that the dual
is required here. The scribal confusion may have been created by the perception that
paradora is a separate word and not part of the compound. The commentator Nä notes
the abnormality of the singular masculine and ascribes it to a vedic peculiarity:
pSradSryatinavikraya ity ekavacanam chändhasam. The adopted reading is found in:
wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo3 NNg Ox2 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Wa [Jolly R] Jolly.
n.62b Two quite divergent readings are found in the mss. The reading vardhusitvam is sup-
ported by all the ST mss. and a considerable number of NT ones. The exact form of the
last portion of the päda is, however, uncertain. Many have the compound vratacyutih,
while others have vratacuytih. I think the latter must be actually vratäc cyutih; scribes
often fail to double the "c" especially before a conjunct consonant. The form vratäc
cyutih is found only in Jo2 MTr5 Rn.
ii.66a All the NT mss., as well as Me, Nä , Ku, Rn and Mr, have the reading steyam, with the
exception of a few that read stainyam. The NT reading is clearly the lectio facilior. All
the ST mss. contain the more difficult strainyam, which I have adopted. This appears
to be reading of Bh's root text. Derretí (1975,1: 33) notes that Pandit Aithal examined
13 Malayalam manuscripts and found them all to read strainyam. It is also unclear why
steya here should be mentioned without reference to the objects stolen, when specific
forms of theft are referred to in verses 58, 67, and 71. Moreover, the three points in this
half-verse go together: not establishing the fires, acting like a woman (perhaps homo-
sexuality], and not paying the debts all imply refusal to get married.
n.66d The reading vyasanakriyä has broad mss. support, including all ST ones. It is found in:
Be1 La1 Lo4 c.Md' TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 \folly
M]. This reading is supported by Nd and Re. The previous word originally was some
form of hausllya, because it is found in all the transmission lines. The reading kaulilya,
which Derretí (1975, I: 33) adopts, is clearly the lectio facilior and must have been
introduced precisely because of the difficulty of kausîlya.
11.68e The reading adopted, pumsi ca maithunyam, is found in: Bo Jo2 wKt1 NKt4 La1 Lo1
Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 rMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy oOr Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu5 Pu7 Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5
MTr6 Wa [Jolly R Nd] Go Vij Apa.
n.Sob I have adopted samyak over sadyah principally because it is represented in a wider
range of mss., including all but two of the ST: Be1 NKt4 ßKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo4 oMd1 iMd3
oMd5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa \tolly M4'5 Nd] Apa Me Dave Jha.


--- PAGE 987 ---
976 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter n
ii.Sia In the parallel passages at ApDh 1.24.21; GDh 22.8; VaDhzo.2.8, the term used is
pratiräddha. Manu appears to prefer pratiroddha: see also 3.153 and 9.93. In the par-
allel verse at YDh 3.246 the term is not used.
11.1043 The reading adopted, gurutalpo, is found in Be1 Ho Jo2 wKt3 NKt? La1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg
sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 [Jolly M R Nd] Apa Na Jolly. Most ST
mss. have the reading gurutalpago, which would make the päda hypermetric. Me also
appears to have the latter reading, giving the vulgate version as a patha. The commen-
tary of Bh also has gurutalpagah, but in both cases it is unclear whether this reflects
the reading of the root text or is simply a gloss.
li.ioob The reading here is somewhat uncertain, but I have adopted nirjane because it is
found in all but one ST mss., as well as in a number of NT ones: isCa Ho wKt1 wKt3
NKt4 TMd3 TMd4 üMd 5 oMy sOx1 sPu6 Pu10 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Vis.
11.iioc I think the participle acaran is better with the syntax. The participial form is also
found in most ST mss. and a good number of NT ones. The reading adopted is found in
Jo2 liKt5 Lo2 oMd5 sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu10 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M G Nd Rà ]
Vis Jolly. See also all the mss. that read caran.
11.H2C Even though all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading âstnah, it is found
in only a few mss. The adopted reading, ästta, is found in: Be1 Ho Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4
wKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8
Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 [Jolly M4 R Nd Ku Gr] Vis Apa.
11.1133 The reading adopted, abhisaktam, is found in Be' Ho NKf
1 Lo1 Lo4 oMd1 sOx1 Ox2
Pu8 MTr4 MTr6 Vis Apa Nä\Jolly M Me]. It is also supported, however, by the many
mss. with the impossible reading abhisiktäm. Even though the printed editions of Me
has abhisastam, the gloss grhttam goes better with abhisaktam; so also do the glosses
of Nä: paräkrtäm,
 of Nd: pïditâm, and of Re: äkräntäm.
H.iiSd The mss. are evenly divided between the equally possible readings: vimoksayet and
vimocayet. I have gone with the former principally because many ST mss. (especially
the Malayalam ones) and significant NT-x ones, as well as three medieval citations
support it: Be1 Bo uCa wKt1 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 iMd4 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu8
Tj1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Vis Apa Mädh.The reading, however, remains uncertain.
li.ilob Most NT mss. have the reading gam in the singular. This reading was probably influ-
enced by the cow in the singular in the preceding verses 113-5. But this and the fol-
lowing verse conclude the description of the vow and picks up the theme of following
cows (in the plural) that was the subject of the earlier verses 111-2. The reading
adopted is found in: Be1 NKt4 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy NNg NPu1 Pu8 Pu10
Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly M G Nd Ku R] Vis Vij Apa Mädh Jolly.
n.i2ob Even though all editors have adopted the reading samety rca, it is supported by very
few mss. Me clearly indicates that the pratfka intended here is simply sam: "sam ity
anayä." The formula is TÄ 2.1.8: sam nía siñcantu marutah. The pratlka then should
be either sam iti or sam mety. The reading adopted is found in: Be1 Bo Ho Hy Jo2 wKt3
NKt4 La1 Lo1 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 oMd5 ciMy NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr6 [Jolly M34'5 G R Nd] Apa Mädh Me Rn.
ii.iaob Me gives the reading in the nominative aiiidavo mäsah. This makes good sense, as it
refers to the "lunsr month," namely, the Cändräyan
a fast. It appears that the presence


--- PAGE 988 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 
977
of the neuter sodhanam has influenced the other two words. However, the manuscript
evidence for the accusative endings is strong and I have retained them in the edition.
11.1393 The original reading of the word is quite unclear, mss. giving jila, jala, ¡ma, and the
like. Clearly this was a term that the scribes were unfamiliar with. The commentators
unanimously explain the term as a "leather bag" (carmaputa), but it is unclear what the
reading of their root text was; most editors use jiña, whose choice may have been in-
fluenced by the vulgate reading of Manu. The only other Dharmasästra to use the term
is the GDh (22.26) in a parallel text giving the penance for killing a wanton Brahmin
woman. In all likelihood, the term in the GDh reads jila, which is Maskarin's reading.
Haradatta, however, reads nfla both in the GDh and in MDh 11.139 that he cites. I think
the evidence favors jila, which is, however, found only in Be' NKt4 Lo4 oOr NPu1 Pu5
Pu7 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Bh. The mss. with jfna supports the long "I," while the "1" has the
support of most ST mss. That this term, which may have been originally from a
regional dialect, was obscure even by the time of Yajñavalkya is demonstrated by the
fact that in the parallel verse (YDh 3.268) he substitutes the more common term for a
leather bag, drti. Sanskrit dictionaries (B-R, M-W, Apte) depend solely on this verse of
Manu to give the meaning of leather bag to the term jlna.
11.1413 Most NT mss. have the reading asthimatäm. I think this must have been a scribal
change of the more difficult asthanvatam, which is retained in all the ST mss. and a
few NT ones: oMd1 oMd5 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [folly Nd Gr] Jolly. See also the
variant asthinvatäm. Only Na clearly supports this reading, glossing: asthanvatam
asthimatäm. See, however, asthimatäm in i4ib.
H.145C The "r" and "1" in the two readings ärambe and alarnbe are clearly regional or dial-
ectical variations. Although älamba is viewed as the "correct" form, I have gone with
the former because it is represented in a broad spectrum of mss.: Be1 Ho NKl4 Lo4
oMd1 TMd4 sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu10 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Wa [Jolly M Nd] Bh fad 11.143 in
inTr5] Apa Jolly.
11.1563 All the ST mss., as well as quite a number of NT-x ones, read jagdhva, which I have
adopted: Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 oMy NNg oOrNPu1
Pu2 Pu4 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr6 Wa. See also the use of jagdhva in preference to bhuktvä
with regard to meat at 5.31,33; 11.153. The term appears to have somewhat of a nega-
tive sense, similar to the English devour, and it is often used with reference to eating
deplorable things: 4.112; 5.19, 20; 11.57, 160; 12.68.
ii.iSSb There are widely different readings in the mss. I have opted for samavrttakah, which
is found in Be1 NKt4 La1 Lo4oMd5 NNg oOr sOx1 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 [Jolly M'-2'5'9!
Apa. The reading here, however, is uncertain.
11.1593 The mss. are evenly divided over the two readings, vratacäri and brahmacarî. I have
opted for the former both because it is the lectio diffidlior and because it is found in all
the ST mss., as well as in a cross section of NT-x ones, especially the old NKt4 and
NNg. This reading is found in: Be1 NKt4 isKt5 La1 Lo2 Lo4 c,Md' TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy
NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [folly M4-5~9G N Nd] Vis Me Go No Nd Re
Jolly Jha Dave.
n.ioia Even though all the editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading ajnana, it is
found in only few mss. The reading adopted ajnäta is found in: Be1 BBe2 Bo Hy Jo2
wKt3 NKt4 La1 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 NNg oOr Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2
MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa.


--- PAGE 989 ---
978 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11
n.iosb Mss. are divided over the two major readings: vesmanah and vesmatah. I have gone
vesman principally because all the ST rnss., as well as several NT-y ones, support it.
The reading adopted is found in Be1 »Be2 liKt5 Lo2 Lo3 oMd1 oMy sOx1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6
Tj1 MTr4 MTr6 [ Jolly Nd R[Apa Mädh. This reading with "n" in place of "t" is sup-
ported by the mss. with the reading vesmani, a reading also supported by Me.
n.iogb The reading adopted with khura in place of sapha has the broadest manuscript sup-
port, including all the ST mss.: aBe2 Jo2 wKt3 NKf La1 Lo3 ciMd1 iMd3 c;Md5 oMy
sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [ Jolly G R Nd] Vij.
ii.iSsb One may argue that bahih is the lectio difficilior, because saha may have been influ-
enced by the instrumental. See also the parallel bändhavaih saha at i84d. Yet, I have
opted for saha because of the overwhelming manuscript support from both the ST and
the NT-x: Bo Ho NKt4 liKt5 La1 TMd3 TMd4 oMd5 c,My NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7
PuI0 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 [Jolly MGR] Jolly.
n.iSsd All but two ST mss. and numerous NT-x ones have the accusative reading yäträm
laukikïm. This, 1 think, goes against the grammar, the intransitive verb nivarteran re-
quiring the nominative. The accusative may have been influenced by the presence of
the neuter pradänam in pada-c. The nominative reading that I have adopted is found
in: nBe2 BCa Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 TMd4 NNg oOr NPu1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu8 Tj ' Tj2 MTr5 [Jolly Ku K[Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. oMd1 gives the nomina-
tive of the first word and the accusative of the second.
H.19OC Of the three major readings, cainän, caitân, and caiva, I think, the manuscript evi-
dence supports the first. It is found in »Be2 wKt3 La1 Lo2 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4
Pu8 and is also supported by others with the variant cainäm.
n.2O3b Although several editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading samnivesya, the
vast majority of the mss. record the reading adopted samnisevya: Be1 fiBe2 Bo Ho
wKt1 NKt4 BKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo4 cMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c.Md5 c.My NNg oOrsOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2
Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Me Re Dave Jha.
H.2O9C The question is whether Manu uses krcchra as a masculine or a neuter noun. Mss. are
divided over this here and at verses 157 and 213. At verses 192 and 216, however, mss.
are in agreement that the term is masculine. In several other verses where the term
occurs in the nominative, it is placed in the neuter; but this may be because it is used
adjectivally to qualify a neuter word such as cändräyana
 and santapana: 11.178, 216.
In all other occasions, krcchram is used in the accusative making it impossible to de-
termine the gender. I think Manu generally uses krcchra as a masculine word.
n.224a The mss. are divided over the case of ahar and nisä. Most give the genitive ahnah,
and this is clearly the correct reading. With regard to nisä, on the other hand, most
mss. of both ST and NT prefer the locative nisäyäm
 and this is also given by Me, al-
though it is unclear whether it is the root or a gloss. I have opted for the genitive in
both cases; it is somewhat anomalous for there to be a shift in the case between the two
words, and orthographically ÏÏT^Tand TRfin the mss. can be confusing. Some scribes,
and even commentators, may have forgotten that the genitive is the preferred case with
multiplicative numerals. The form ahnah [see parallel at 11.260] is found in: Be1 «Be2
Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo2 wKt1 wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4
TMd3 rMd4
 NNg oOrsOx1 NPu1
Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa [Jolly M G R] Me Go Nâ Rn Re Mr Jolly Jha
Dave. The form nisäyäh
 is found in: Bo nBe2 Bo Hy wKt3 Lo2 NNg Pu5 Pu7 Tj2 Tr2 Wa
[Jolly G] Go Nä Mr Jolly.


--- PAGE 990 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 
979
11.2310 Mss. have differing readings of the two words here: evam and état, and kuryarn and
kuryät. In the case of the former, I think the preponderance of manuscript evidence
supports evam, which is found in: Bo Ho Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 TMd3
TMd4 oMd5 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 {Jolly M3~4 Ku R] No Ku Man-
dlik Jha KSS Dave. The decision is more difficult in the case of the latter, both read-
ings having strong manuscript support from both ST and NT. I think we are here
dealing not with an external prohibition: "Don't do this again!" implied by the third
person kuryät, but with an internal determination "I will not do this again!", which is
supported by the very first statement of the next verse: evam samcintya. The first per-
son reading kuryam is found in: Bo Ho Jm Jo1 Jo2 Kt2 wKt3 isKt5 Lo1 Lo4 TMd3 TMd4
oMy NNg oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 sPu6 Pu8 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 Wa {Jolly M3~4 Ku R N] Ku Rit Rc
Go MandlikJha KSS Dave. The reading, however, is uncertain.
n.23id Me appears to prefer the gerund nivrtya. He comments: kriyäbhedam ca darsayati
ktväpratyayena samtapya nivrtyeti.
11.2373 All editions read samyata. The correct reading is clearly samsita, which is found in
the vast majority of the mss, especially the ST ones. Besides the ones with variants of
the term recorded in the critical apparatus, the adopted reading is found in: liKt5 La1
cJVId1 TMd3 oMd5 NNg oOrsPu6 Tr1 inTr4 MTr5 MTr6.
n.238a There is broad manuscript support for both the plural agadäh and the singular
agadah. The overwhelming support for the plural in most ST mss. prompts me to
adopt it, although the reading remains uncertain. The adopted reading is found in: Be1
Ho Jo2 Lo2 c,Md' oMd5 oMy NNg Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M G N Nd|
Me Go Na Jolly Jha Dave.
11.247 After verse 247 most NT mss. add the verse given in the critical apparatus. Jolly also
suspected this verse to be spurious and placed it within brackets in his edition. This
verse in missing in all the ST mss., showing once again the general superiority of this
line of transmission. It is also missing in Lo2 Pu10, and placed after 248 in Lo4. This
verse is not commented by Bh, Go, and Nd. It is given by Me with this introductory
comment, which indicates that he himself did not accept the authenticity of this verse:
kecid atremam slokam purvam adMyate (this comment is found in my ms. Pu10, but
omitted in the editions of Mandlik, Jha, and Dave).
11.2493 This päda has been subject to numerous emendations, probably because the original
was hypermetric with nine syllables. This, I think, is the correct reading adopted in the
edition and found in: Bo Ho Jo2 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 TMd4 c,Md5 oMy NNg sOx1 Ox2 Pu5
sPu6 Pu7 Tr1 MTr5 MTr6 [ Jolly M G Nd] Apa flc.This verse was probably a proverbial
saying [hence the possibility of hypermeter] and found also in BDh 4.1.29 and VaDh
26.4 with the same reading. Several mss. attempt to restore the proper meter by delet-
ing "ka" and reading savyahrfih.
il.25ob Mss. present widely varying readings of the final portion of this päda. I think the
preponderance of evidence suggests thatprati is the final word of the päda. I also think
that the correct form of the other word is trca (a set of three verses) and not tryrca (tri
+ rea) as assumed by Jolly (see n.assd), or trica as found in several ST mss. The
reading adopted is found in: TMd3 TMd4 NNg MTr4 MTr5MTr6 Apa. The reading,
however, is uncertain.
11.2523 The correct reading here must be havispanttyam [RV 10.88] The letter "p" after "s" in
Devanâgar i can look very much like "y," with several mss. reading havisyanttyam. The


--- PAGE 991 ---
980 
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11
adopted reading is found in: Bo Ho isKt5 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 ciMd5 oMy Pu5 Pu8 Pu10 MTr4
MTr5 MTr6 Bh Vij Apa, with the support of mss. reading havispantlyarn.
11.2520 The reading adopted, japtvä ca, is found in: isBe2 wKt3 NKl4 Lo1 Lo2 c,Md' TMd3 oOr
sOx1 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 MTr5 Wa [Jolly G] Apa (see VaDh 26.7). The reading is
uncertain.
11.2640 Even though all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading ksiptam, it is found
in only a very small number of mss. Although in Devanâgar l "pt" and "pr" can be
orthographically confusing, in the southern scripts the two are quite distinct. The
reading adopted, ksipram, was also the reading preferred by Bühler . The noun losta
can be either masculine or neuter. I have adopted the masculine, which is found in
most ST mss.: Be1 Ho wKt3 NKl4 La1 Lo2 Lo3 Lo4 oMd1 TMd3 oMd5 NNg Pu2 Pu3 Pu4
Tj1 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa Apa.
ii.265a All the ST mss. and a considerably number of NT ones have the reading anyäni. In
spite of this strong manuscript support, 1 have opted for the reading ädyäni,
 principally
because it is the preferred reading both of Bh, who comments: yajuinsy ädyäni
 sam-
hitägatäni
 na tu brähmanamadhye 'dhltäni padakramänvitäni
 [which is repeated al-
most verbatim by Go], and of Me, who glosses ädyäni
 mukhyanïty arthah. The adopted
reading is found in: Jo2 NKl4 ßKt5 Lo2 Lo4 NNg NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 MTr5
[Jolly M G] Bh Me Go Jolly Jha Dave.
CHAPTER 
TWELVE
i2.6c The reading adopted, anibaddha, is found in: NKl4 nKt5 Lo2 oMd1 jMd4 cMy oOr NPu1
Pu3 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tr ' Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M G Nd] ApaMâdh Jolly. This
is also the reading at YDh 3.135.
12.nd The reading nigacchati has the support of the old commentators Bh and Me. It has,
however, weak manuscript support. The reading adopted niyacchati is found in: Be1
BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 NKt4 uKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 oMd5 NNg oOr
sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tj2 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 WaLa/b Man-
dlikKSS.
I2.i6d There is strong manuscript support for the two readings, drdham and dhruvam. I have
opted for the former because it is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of NT
ones: Ho Jo2 Lo2 oMd1 iMd3 iMd" oMd5 oMy NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu7 Tr1 MTr4 Wa
[,/o//yGGoR2Ra2].
i2.22d There is good manuscript support for both readings abhyeti andapyeti. I have opted
for the former, because it is found in a large number of reliable NT mss. and is sup-
ported by the reading in Bh: Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt3 BKt5 La1 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3 c.Md5 cMy NNg
oOr sOx1 Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 sPu6 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr2 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M R]Bh Re Jolly.
The reading, however, is uncertain.
I2.29b All the ST mss. have the reading avyaktam, and this also appears to be the reading of
Me. He explains visayâtmaka as a separate compound. The meaning, however, sug-
gests that the entire pada-b is a single compound with avyakta in the stem form; at-
tachment to senses is more a characteristic of rajas as indicated in verse 32. This is
also the way Go, Ku, No, and Rn understand the verse. The adopted reading is found


--- PAGE 992 ---
Notes to the Edition: Chapter 12 
981
in: Be1 BBe2 Bo Ho Hy Jo2 wKt3 NKt4 La1 Lo2 Lo3 NNg sOx1 Pu5 sPu6 Pu7 Pu8 Pulo Tj1
Tj2 Wa [Jolly M G N Ku R] Jolly. The compound form is found also in the parallel
verse at MBh 12.239.22.
I2.32a On the basis of the mss. it is impossible to decide whether the reading is (a)dhairyam
in the negative or the positive dhairyam. All the commentators who note the term (Me,
Na, Rn, Nd, Re) take it to be adhairyam. So do all the editors, who place an avagraha
before dhairyam or simply connect it to the final -ta of the previous word. I have opted
for the positive dhairyam mainly because in the context of rajas we should expect for-
titude rather than its lack. Indeed, the lack of fortitude (adhrti) is given in the very next
verse as a characteristic of tamas. See also verses 36 and 46, where seeking fame and
fortune and individuals such as kings, Ksatriyas, soldiers, and debaters are connected
to rajas, and verse 38 that relates artha to rajas.
12.413 Jolly has adopted the partitive genitive esarn, but this reading has little manuscript
support. No commentator notes it, and Me, Nä , and Re explicitly presents esa as quali-
fying gatih. The reading esa in the nominative is found in: Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo1 wKt1
wKt3 NKt4 Lo1 oMd1 TMd3 c,Md5 Pu5 Pu7 [cor to] Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 [Jolly M2~
3~8-9 R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave.
i2.42b All the editions have adopted the reading sakacchapah, and it has good manuscript
support. I have, however, opted for sarlsrpah, which is found in all the ST mss. and a
large number of NT-x ones, as well as in the two medieval citations. The only other
place that kacchapa occurs is at 1.44 and the reading of that päda appears to have ex-
erted influence on this verse; see, for example, the variant nakra in several mss. Only
Go and Ku comment on this term and they gloss kiïrma, which would support the al-
ternate reading. The reading adopted is found in: nKt5 La1 GMd1 xMd4 c,Md5 sOx1 Ox2
NPu1 Pu2 Pu3 Pu4 Pu10 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [folly M Nd Gr] Apa Mâdh.
i2.44d The reading tâmasesu in thé masculine locative plural has overwhelming manuscript
support. According to this understanding, the reference is to the tarnasa kinds of spe-
cies listed here; Go thus glosses tâmasesu manusyesv uttanm gatih. I think, however,
that this is a mistaken reading influenced by the several masculine nominatives in the
list. These species rather constitute the highest gati among the gatis that are tämasa;
thus, I think, tämaslsu is the correct reading with the implied gatlsu. The same is true
of verse 4yd where the correct reading should be räjaslsu. The correctness of this
reading is demonstrated by the parallel with reference to sättvika in verse 50, where
sattivikl here in the singular qualifies gati. The reading tämaslsu is found in: Ho Hy Jm
Jo1 Jo2 wKt1 Kt2 wKt3 oMy Pu8 Pu10 Tj2 Ku Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave.
12-sgd Commentators note the irregular double sandhi here [pretyä + antya> pretyantya],
some calling this a vedic peculiarity.
i2.86a The reading adopted, piïrvesam, is found in all the ST mss. and a large number of
NT-x one: Be1 Bo Ho Jo2 wKt1 NKr» nKt5 Lo1 Lo2 Lo3oMd> TMd3 oMd5 oMy NNg oOr
Ox2 NPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu8 Pu10 Tj1 Tr1 MTr4 MTr5 MTr6 Wa [Jolly M R Nd Ku] Me Bh Nd
Jolly Jha Dave.
12.893 Even though most NT mss. read cämutra, I think the context calls for va. The reading
adopted is found in: Lo3 TMd4 oMd5 NPu1 Pu5 Pu7 Pu8 Tj ' Tr1 MTr4 MTr5MTr6 [Jolly Gr
Nd] Vij Apa Jolly.
i2.gob The lectio difficiliorhere is clearly sarstitam, which is supported by several variants


--- PAGE 993 ---
982 
Notes ta the Edition: Chapter 12
and found in: isBe2 NKt4 Lo1 Lo3 oMd1 c,Mds Tj1
 MTr4
 MTr5
 MTr6 Wa [ Jolly G R Nd]
Go Na Rn Re Jolly.
12.940 The reading adopted, atarkyam, is found in all the ST mss. and in a number NT-x
ones. r.Md1 TMd3 c,Md5 oMy oOr sOx1 Ox2 Pu3 sPu6 Tr1 Tr2 MTr4 MTr6 Wa Na Nd Re
Bh [Jolly Nd] Apa.
12.953 The adopted reading, srutayah, is found in: Be1 NKl4 BKt5 La1 Lo2 oMd1 TMd3 xMd4
c,My NNg oOrNPu1 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 Pu10 Tr1 MTr5 Wa [Jolly M G] Me Nâ ApaLaks
Jolly Dave Jha. The variant reading smrtayah, however, must have been very old,
because it is found in Rumania's citation.
I2.g8d Although the majority of the mss. gives the stem prasuti, thus forming a compound
with the two next words, I think the correct reading is the nominative prasutih. The
commentators Me, No, Nd, and Re explain the päda by taking prasûtih as a nomina-
tive. Although Bh appears to base his first explanation on prasuti as forming a com-
pound, his second explanation clearly takes it to be in the nominative. The nominative
form is found in: Ho La1 cMd5 NNg Ox2 NPu1 Pu10 Tj1 [Jolly M\Me Nâ Nd Re Jolly
Jha Dave.
I2.i2ib I have adopted the reading harim, even though the alternate reading haram also has
considerably manuscript support. The latter may have been, however, influenced by
the proximity of visiium, scribes desiring to bring Siva into the picture. This reading is
supported by Na, who glosses harim îsvaram. The adopted reading is found in: Be ' Ho
Jo2 Lo2 TMd3 oMy oOr Ox2 Pu2 Pu4 Pu5 Pu7 MTr4 [folly M G R Nd] Rn Nd Jolly. This
reading is supported by Nd and Rn, both of whom interpret the term to mean Indra. Rn
remarks on the alternate reading: haram iti pramädapäthah.
12.1230 The editions of Mandlik, Jha, KSS, and Dave read pare after eke, without an ava-
graha. It is impossible determine whether the reading should be pare or (a)pare, be-
cause the mss. almost never use avagrahas. Both Ku and Re, however, explicitly give
apare as the reading, and I have followed it. Jolly also gives the avagraha, whereas the
editors of Apa and Laks omit it and read pare.


--- PAGE 994 ---
APPENDICES


--- PAGE 995 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 996 ---
A P P E N D I X I
Fauna and Flora
Common fauna and flora that can be readily translated are not listed here; they are
found in the Index. For further information on flora, see K. M. Nadkarni, Indian
Materia Medica. Revised edition; 2 vols. Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1976. For
animals, see S. H. Prater, The Book of Indian Animals. Bombay Natural History
Society. Reprint. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1997. For birds, see K. N. Dave,
Birds in Sanskrit Literature. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985.
Asmantaka. The plant Bauhinia tomentosa, whose fibers were used to make the
girdle of a student.
Baka. This term is applied to a wide variety of water fowl, including heron, ibis, stork
and the common flamingo.
Balâka . Flamingo; the term is sometimes applied to other water fowl, such as the
egret.
Balvaja. A type of coarse grass: Eleusine indica.
Bel (Bilva). The tree Aegle marmelos, as also the fruits of this tree.
Bhasa. The bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus), but often the term may refer to other
kinds of vultures.
Bhustrna. The plant Andropogon schoenanthus; geranilum grass; ruaghas in Hindi.
A fragrant grass native to central India.
Cakra. The ruddy sheldrake called the Brahmani Duck. The fidelity of a mated pair to
each other and their grief when separated is celebrated in Indian poetry and
folklore.
Darbha. A type of grass used for ritual purposes, most commonly the same as Kusa;
specifically the grass Saccharum cylindricum.
DatyQha. The hawk cuckoo.
Ena. The Blackbuck (also called Krsnasara: MDh 2.23), an antelope with black hair on
the back and sides and white under the belly: Antilope cervicapra. About 32 inches
at the shoulder and weighing about 90 Ibs., with horns 20-5 inches long.
Hamsa. The ruddy goose, the most celebrated species of Indian goose. The term is
often applied to other large geese and swans.
Kâkola . A kind of raven, although the term may have been used more widely for
various species of ravens and crows.
Kälasäka
. The plant Ocimum sanctum, commonly referred to as holy basil or Tulasî
plant.
Kalaviñka. A species of sparrow, identified as the "village sparrow" by Vijnänesvar a
on YDh 1.174. According to Dave (1985), the word is used for blackbirds,
magpies, and finches.
985


--- PAGE 997 ---
986 
Appendices
Kataka. The fruit of the tree Stiychnos potatorum, called "clearing nut tree"; Hindi
nirmalî.
Khadira. The tree Acacia catechu, called "cutch tree"; Hindi khair.
Khanjarïtaka . The yellow wagtail.
Kimsuka. The tree Butea frondosa; called "bastard teak"; Hindi palas.
Koyasthi. The lapwing, also called the paddy-bird. Dave (1985, 358) identifies these
as "the smaller crested Herons and Bitterns which keep standing in shallow waters
for hours for prey to come to them."
Krauñca. A species of large water bird, probably the common crane. Haradatta (on
ÄpDh 1.17.36) says that they travel in pairs, and Bühle r identifies the bird as the
red-crested crane now called Saras.
Kubjaka. The shrub Rosa moschata; called "musk-scented rose"; Hindi kujai.
Kusa. The most common of the sacred grasses (see Darbha) used for rituals purposes.
Poa cynosuroides.
Madgu. The snake fish or a cormorant.
Mahâsalka . A kind of large prawn.
Muñja. A species of rush belonging to the sugar-cane family and reaching about i o
feet in height and used for basket weaving: Saccharum munja. Its principal ritual
use is in the manufacture of the girdle given to a Brahmin boy at his vedic
initiation.
Mürvä
. A species of hemp used in the manufacture of bow strings and of the ritual
girdle given to a Ksatriya boy at his vedic initiation: Sanseviera roxburghiana.
Palâsa . A variety of fig tree called dhak with a beautiful trunk and abundant leaves:
Butea frondosa. Incisions produce a red juice used as an astringent. The tree was
viewed as sacred in ancient India and its wood used to make ritual implements.
Pathma. A kind of sheat-fish, Silurus pelorius or boalis.
Pllu. The tree Careya arbórea; Hindi kumbi.
Plava. A coot or cormorant.
Rajïva . Said to be a kind of lotus-colored fish, or one with stripes.
Rajjuvâla . A species of wild fowl.
Rohita. A kind of red fish said to feed on moss.
Ruru. A species of spotted antelope.
Sala. The tree Shorea robusta, called the "Sal tree"; Hindi: sakhu, but in other
languages sal.
Sali. A variety of rice. Commentators call this red winter rice.
Samï . The name covers two plants. First, Mimosa suma (Hindi: chikkur), a thorny
shrub. Second, Prosopis spidgera.
Sankhapusp!. The plant Canscora decussata.
Sarasa. A species of crane, Árdea sibirica.
Sasalka. Lit. "with scales," a kind of fish.
Selu. The tree Cordia myxa.
Sigruka. The tree Moringa oleífera or pterygosperma, commonly called "drumstick"
tree (Murunga), whose long pods are widely used as a vegetable.
Simhatunda. Lit. "lion-faced," a kind of fish.


--- PAGE 998 ---
F auna and Flora 
987
Slesmätaka . Also called slesmala and selu, the fruit of this small tree is about the
size of a cherry. Called bhokar in Marathi, it is used today for making pickles.
Syena. A kind of hawk or falcon, although the term is used for any large bird of prey.
Udumbara. A type of fig tree whose wood is used for ritual purposes: Ficus
glomerata.
Vârdhrïnas
a lit., "leather-snouted." This sometimes refers to the rhinoceros, but in
these texts it refers to a type of bird, probably a hornbill. At BDh 1.12.6, however,
it is classified as a bird that scratches with its feet in searching for food, which
would argue against a waterbird.
Vrïhi . A variety of long-grained rice different from soli and ripening, according to
commentators, in 60 days.


--- PAGE 999 ---
A P P E N D I X II
Names of Gods, People, and Places
Ädityas . Literally the son(s) of Aditi, the term in the plural refers to a group of gods,
including some prominent ones such as Varuna, Mitra, and Indra. Early texts give
their number as eight, but the Brâhmana s already show their number as twelve,
which has remained the norm ever since. Together with the Vasus and the Rudras,
they constitute the three major classes of gods. In the singular, the term Ädity a
refers to the sun.
Agastya. The name of an ancient sage, said to be the son of Mitra and Varuna. In a
later myth he is said to have instructed the Vindhya mountains to remain bowed
(not to grow taller) until he turns from southern India.
Agni. Fire and the god of Fire.
Agnidagdha. The common designation of a class of ancestors (pitf) who maintained
sacred fires while they were on earth.
Agnisvätta. The common designation of a class of ancestors who maintained sacred
fires but performed only domestic rites and not vedic sacrifices.
Ajïgarta . A sage famous for his story told in the AitB 7.13-16. He wanted to
sacrifice his son, Sunahsepa, to appease the wrath of the god Varuna.
Ajyapa. Literally, "ghee drinkers," the name of a class of ancestors descendant from
Pulastya. They are viewed as the ancestors of Vaisyas.
All-gods (visvedeva). The name of a class of gods. In the later Dharma texts they are
listed as ten in five pairs: Kratu and Daksa, Vasu and Satya, Dhuri and Locana,
Kâl a and Kama, and Purürava s and Ärdrava . See Kane 1962-75, IV. 457.
Anagnidagdha. The common designation of a class of ancestors distinguished from
the agnidagdha; hence, possibly ancestors who did not maintin sacred fires on
earth.
Andha-Tämisra . One of the 21 hells. No light of the sun falls into this region.
Suicides and adulterers are consigned to this hell.
Añgiras. Name of a sage. In later mythology, he is viewed as one of the ten mind-
born sons of Brahma.
Añgirasa. The name of a class of priests closely associated with another group called
Atharvan. The name is also used with reference to a group of sundry divine beings
and is an epithet of several gods, especially the fire god Agni.
Antyävasäyin
. A very low-caste person, even lower than a Cándala. Explained as
the offspring of a Nisäd a woman and a Cándala man (MDh 10.39).
Apsaras. A class of female deities connected with water and often regarded as the
wives of the Gandharvas.
Asamvrta. A name of a hell.
Asipatravana. A hell where tree have leaves as sharp as knives. For further Puräni c
descriptions, see Mani 1975, 58.
988


--- PAGE 1000 ---
Names of Gods, People, and Places 
989
Asura. Although in early Indo-Iranian mythology it was a divine epithet, in Indian
myth asuras are viewed as demons and opponents of gods.
Asvin. Twin deities described as young, beautiful, fond of honey, and expert in
medical knowledge. They are the physicians of the gods.
Atri. A famous sage and author of many vedic hymns. Later mythology sees him as
one of the ten mind-born sons of Brahma.
Barhisad. Sons of Atri, they are the ancestors of various demonic classes of beings.
For later descriptions, see Mani 1975,108.
Bharadvâja . An ancient seer to whom the composition of the sixth book of the
Rgveda is ascribed.
Cailäsaka . An evil class of ghosts that feed on moths.
Cándala. An outcaste person whose mere touch polutes. He is considered the
offspring of a Sudra father and a Brahmin mother.
Cärana . This term can apply to bards, singers, and the like, and also to mythological
beings connected with singing.
Daitya. A class of demons often associated with Dànavas .
Daksa. Name of a divine being associated with creation and one of the ten sons of
Brahma. For myths associated with him, see Mani 1975,192.
Dänava . A class of demons often associated with the Daityas.
Dasyu. A generic name for degraded persons and outcastes. The name is also applied
to ethinic groups outside the four major classes of society (see MDh 10.45).
Dhanvantari. A god produced at the cosmogonie churning of the ocean, he is the
physician of the gods and the divine author of medical science.
Drsadvatï . Name of a river flowing into the Sarasvatï from the east.
Gandharva. In the early vedic literature Gandharvas appear as a class of divine beings
alongside the gods and the forefathers. They are associated with the Soma drink
and are said to be fond of females. They are often associated with the celestial
nymphs, Apsarases. In later literature, especially the epics, the Gandharvas are
depicted as celestial singers and are associated with music.
Guhyaka. A class of divine beings; attendants fo Kubera.
Havirbhuj. Lit. "eaters of oblations," this class beings are regarded as the ancestors
of Ksatriyas.
Hiranyagarbha. Lit. "golden egg or foetus." In cosmology, the initial state of the
cosmos in the form of an egg (MDh 1.9).
Indra. The most famous of the vedic gods, Indra is called the king of the gods. He is
powerful and loves to drink Soma. His claim to fame is his victory over Vrtra, a
combat that is given cosmogonie significance. Indra is closely associated with
rain, and prominence is given to his weapon, the Vajra, conceived of as the
thunderbolt in later tradition.
KalasQtra. A hell depicted in the Puräna s as extremely hot.
Kasyapa. The name of an ancient sage.
Ka tap lit ana. An evil class of deceased persons (prêta) or demons.
Kavi. An epithet of Bhrgu.
Kävya . The name of a class of ancestors.
Kratu. One of the mind-born sons of Brahma.


--- PAGE 1001 ---
990 
Appendices
Kubera. God of riches and guardian of the northern quarter.
Kuru. Name of a tribe inhabiting the region of between the upper reaches of the Indus
and Ganges rivers during vedic times. This tribe became allied with the Pañcalas,
who occupied the land to the south-east of the Kurus.
Kuruksetra. The land of the Kurus. In later times, this referred to a stretch of sacred
land situated south of the river Sarasvatî and north of Drsadvatï where the epic
battle of the Mahäbhärata
 took place.
Marlci. The first of the mind-born sons of Brahma.
Maruts. A group of gods connected with the wind and the thunderstorm, and thus
associated with Indra's exploits.
Matsya. Name of a region located to the west of the Pañcalas and south of the Kurus
and of the people of that region.
Mitra. Name of a vedic god closely associated with Varuna.
Naga. Serpent, especially mythical beings viewed as serpents.
Närada . Well known in later literature as a famous sage, he is one of the sons of
Brahma. See Mani 1975, 526.
Nirrti. Goddess personifying death, destruction, and adversity.
Nisada. A mixed caste considered to be the offspring of a Brahmin father and a Vaisya
mother.
Pañcala. The name of a region in the upper reaches of the Ganges, to the south-east of
the Kurus; also refers the people of this region.
Pisäca . An evil supernatural being; a goblin.
Pracetas. One of the sons of Brahma.
Prajâpati . Literally "lord of creatures," he is the creator god par excellence in the
Brähmana s and the Upanisads. He is the father of the gods and the demons
(asura), as well as of all creatures.
Prayâga . The sacred city at the confluence of the rivers Ganges and Yamuna; present-
day Allahabad.
Pulkasa. An outcaste individual viewed as particularly impure; the son of a Nisäd a
man and a Südr a woman (MDh 10.38).
Rudra. Generally regarded as a storm god, Rudra has an ambivalent personality. He
is fierce and feared. He is also a healer, the one who averts the anger of gods. In
his benign aspect he is referred to as siva, "the benign one," an epithet that
becomes the name of the later god Siva, with whom Rudra is identified.
Rudras. In the plural, the term refers to a group of eleven gods, who, together with
the Äditya s and the Vasus, constitute the three classes of gods. The Rudras are
associated with the Maruts; both of these groups are ruled by Rudra.
Sâdhya . A group of somewhat ill-defined deities, said to occupy a region above that
of the gods.
Sarasvatï . The most celebrated river of the vedic age, it is personified as a goddess.
In the Brähmana s she becomes identified with speech and the goddess of speech,
and in later mythology Sarasvatï is the goddess of eloquence and wisdom. This
river flowed between the Indus and Ganges river systems. Its disappearance in the
desert became the focus of myths and folk tales.
Sarpa. A serpent; also mythical beings in the shape of serpents.


--- PAGE 1002 ---
Names of Gods, People, and Places 
991
Saumya. A class of ancestors.
Saunaka. A famous vedic sage to whom various vedic texts, as also works on Law,
are ascribed.
Soma. A sacrificial drink pressed from a plant with apparently mind-altering
qualities, it was personified as a god and later identified with the moon. Thus the
term often simply means the moon.
Somapa. Lit. "Soma-drinker," a class of ancestors.
Somasad. A class of ancestors.
Sukälin . A class of ancestors.
Suparna. Generally referring to any large bird, the term is used with references to
bird-shaped mythical beings.
Surasena(ka). The name of a region somewhat to the south of the Matya; also the
appellation of the inhabitants of this region.
Ugra. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya father and a Sudra
mother.
Utathya. Name of an authority on Law.
Varuna. One of the great gods in the early vedic literature, he is viewed as the grand
sovereign and upholder of the natural and moral order. He becomes increasingly
associated with the waters and the west, and his residence comes to be located
within the ocean.
Vasistha. One of the most important seers of the Rgveda. May stories surround his
personality, and he is credited with the authorship of numerous texts, including
the seventh book of the Rgveda and a treatise on Law. His hostility to Visvämitr a
is a recurrent theme in the stories.
Vasus. A group of eight gods distinguished from the Äditya s and Rudras, although
their general character and specific identities remain rather vague.
Vinasana. The place where the river Sarasvatï is believed to disapper into the ground.
Vindhya. The major mountain range in north-central India dividing north India from
the Deccan.
Viräj . Literally "the wide-ruling one," he is presented as the first creature in the
Rgvedic creation story in the Purusa hymn (RV 10.90). In the MDh (1.32) also he
is presented as the first creature to emerge from the union of the primeval pair.
Visnu. The great god of later Hinduism. He is a somewhat minor solar deity in the
vedic literature and is especially celebrated in his two human incarnations, Rama
and Krsna.
Visvämitra . An important seer of the Rgveda. Stories depict his hostility towards
Vasistha. In later legend, he is viewed as a Ksatriya who transformed himself into
a Brahmin by means of austerities.
Vrätya . The term is used in ancient literature to refer to groups of people, at least
some of whom appear to have led a wandering or a nomadic life. Already in some
vedic texts, however, the Vräty a is presented as a mysterious, powerful, and even
divine person. In later times the term is used to refer to either mixed-caste people
or to Brahmins who have not undergone vedic initiation.
Yama. The Indian god of death from the most ancient period of vedic mythology until
contemporary times. In ancient myths he is called king and divine characteristics


--- PAGE 1003 ---
992 
Appendices
are ascribed to him, but he comes to be identified with death itself and many of the
negative aspects of death become associated with Yama. Later myths associate
him with judgment and punishment of the dead.
Yavana. The Indian designation of Greeks and Greek-speaking peoples in the north-
western parts of the subcontinent. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of
a Ksatriya father and a Sudra mother.


--- PAGE 1004 ---
A P P E N D I X I I I
Ritual Vocabulary
i. Names of Rites, Priests, and Ritual Objects
Abhijit. A particular sacrifice that is a component part of the major sacrificial session
(sátira) lasting 12 months known as Gavamayana.
Adhvaryu. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice. He belongs to the
Yajurveda and is responsible for most of the sacrificial actions, including the
offerings made in the sacred fire.
Agnistut. A particular form of Soma sacrifice lasting a single day.
Ahina. A particular kind of Soma sacrifice at which the pressing lasts between two
and twelve days.
Bali. The offering of cooked food to various deities, spirits, and animals.
Brahman. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice.
Camasa. A square ladle made of banyan wood and used for a variety of purposes in a
sacrifice, including serving as a container or a drinking vessel for Soma.
Caru. A porridge prepared from rice or barley and cooked in water with butter or milk.
Gosava. A one-day Soma sacrifice. It is recommended for people aspiring to
sovereignty. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 1213.
Graha. A ladle used to take Soma out of a larger container.
Horse Sacrifice (asvamedha). One of the most important vedic sacrifices, it is
perfomed by a king to demonstrate his sovereignty and ritually to enhance his
dominion. A horse is set free to roam at will for a whole year, during which time it
is guarded by the king's troops. At the end of the year it is brought back and
sacrificed.
Hotr. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice. He belongs to the Rgveda
and is responsible for all the recitations during a sacrifice.
Sacrifice of first fruits. An oblation consisting of the first fruits of the harvest
offered at the end of the rainy season.
Sacrificial cake (purodäsä).
 A cake made with rice or barley flour and baked in
potsherds.
Säkalä
. An oblation accompanied by the eight verses of VS 8.13.
Sakata. A cart used to carry Soma plants and for other ritual purposes.
Sävitra . Commentators take this to be an oblation offered to the god Savitr or an
oblation using the Sâvitr î verse.
Seasonal sacrifice. Four sacrifices, each performed at the end of the four seasons.
Sphya. A wooden sword made of Khadira wood and used within the vedic ritual for a
variety of ritual purposes.
993


--- PAGE 1005 ---
994 
Appendices
Sruc. The common name for ladles (including Juhu, Upabhrt, and Dhruvä ) used for
pouring ghee into the sacred fire.
Sruva. Distinguished from the Sruc-type ladles, this is a smaller spoon used mainly
for spooning out ghee or milk into the Sruc. The Sruva has a long handle at the
end of which there is a small globular spoon without a spout. It is made of Khadira
wood.
Surpa. A winnowing basket made of bamboo or reed and used to winnow grain for the
ritual.
Trivrt. An oblation with the chanting in "triplicated" form of three verses, especially
the verses of RV 9.11.
Udgätr . One of the four major priests in a vedic ritual. He Helongs to the Sämaved a
and performs the chanting of Sämans .
Vaisvänara . A sacrifice to the "Fire present in all men" generally cooked on twelve
potsherds.
Visvajit. A sacrifice at which one gives away all one's possessions. It is also a
particular sacrifice that is a component part of the major sacrificial session (sattrd)
lasting 12 months known as Gavamayana.
2. Names of Ritual Formulas and Texts
Aghamarsana. This is the hymn R V 10.190 used in a particular ritual to efface sins
Asyavamïya . This the rather long hymn RV 1.164.
Calls, (vyâhrti). These are the names of the seven worlds in ascending order: bhur
(earth), bhuvah (mid-space), svar (sky), mahar (great), jams (people), tapas
(austerity), satya (truth). These names are considered sacred and powerful. The
first three are generally referred to as simply Calls, whereas all seven are called
Great Calls (mahävyährti).
Gayatrï . Another name for Savitrl.
Great Calls. See Calls.
Havispantiya. This is the hymn RV 10.88.
Jyestha Sämans . Haradatta (onÄpDh 2.17.22; GDh 15.28) identifies this as SV
1.31 (= RV 1.24.15), while Govinda (on BDh 2.14.2) identifies it as SV 1.67 (=
RV 6.7.1) and (on BDh 3.10.10) as SV 1.33 (= RV 10.9.4) and RV 1.115.1.
Commentators of the MDh identify these as Säman s sung in the wilderness.
Obviously, there is a lot of confusion regarding these Sämans .
KOsmanda. The four formulas TÄ 2.3; sometimes identified with the formulas at TÄ
2.6. '
Kutsa's hymn. The hymn with eight verses RV 1.97.
Mahitra. The hymn RV 10.185.
Pavavmanï . Opinions are divided about the identity of these verses. Some identify
them as RV 9.67.21-27. Medhätith i (on MDh 11.258) takes them to be RV 9.1-
114 (that is, the entire ninth Mándala), whereas Bhäruc i identifies them as R V
9.14—67.
Purusa hymn. The creation hymn R V 10.90.


--- PAGE 1006 ---
Ritual Vocabulary 
995
Re. The sacred verses found in the Rgveda.
Sakalahomïya . These are the eight verses of VS 8.13 = TS 3.2.5.7.
Saman. A verse generally taken from the R V and sung to a particular melody. The
S amans are contained in the Sämaveda .
Savitrî . Also called Gayatrï , this is the most sacred of ritual formulas: RV 3.62.10
(see App. Ш.з: "That excellent...." Sometimes the term is used with reference to
vedic initiation, because teaching this verse to the initiated boy forms a central
part of that rite.
Sir as formula. "OM the Waters, the Light, the Taste, the Immortal, Brahman!
Earth, Atmosphere, Sky! OM!" Mahänäräyana
 Upanisad 342.
Sivasamkalpa. The first six verses of VS 34.
Solar formulas. According to Medhätith i (on MDh 5.86), they are the verses
beginning withRV 1.50.1. According to Govinda (on BDh 3.8.14), RV 1.50.10;
1.50.1; 1.115.1.
Somäraudra . This is the hymn with four verses RV 6.74. Bhäruc i (on MDh 11.255),
however, identifies them as the verses to Rudra at R V 2.33.4 and to Soma at R V
9-9б.5-
Suddhavatî . The three verses RV 8.95.7-9.
Svadhä . The exclamation accompanying the offering of an oblation to ancestors.
Svähä
. The exclamation accompanying the offering of an oblation to gods.
Taratsamandl. The hymn RV 9.58.
Vasat. A ritual exclamation uttered by the Hotr priest at the conclusion of the
sacrificial verse as the Adhvaryu priest puts the oblation into the sacred fire.
Yajus. A ritual formula in prose contained in the Yajurveda. These formulas
accompany the ritual offerings into the fire.
3. Formulas Cited in the Translations by the First Words
"Adoration ...". Commentators identify this variously. Medhätith i and Bhäruc i take
it to be "Adoration to Rudra, to the strong one, to the one with braided hair. ..." I
have not been able to identify this verse.
"Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra, Indra and Visnu among these, Maruts and Asvins. . . ."
This is RV 4.2.4. Some commentators think that the three or two verses beginning
with this are meant.
"Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, the host of Maruts, and Aditi—we invoke for assistance.
. ." The seven verses beginning with this are RV 1.106.1-7. Bhäruc i (on MDh
256), however, take this to be RV 1.7.1.
"May the Maruts pour upon me, may Indra and Brhaspati; and may this fire pour upon
me long life and strength. May they make me live long." TÄ 2.18.
"May the virile strength return again to me, may long life and prosperity. May goods
return to me again, may the Brähmanica l state." ÄsGr 3.6.8. Variants of this verse
are found in AV 7.67; BrU 6.4.5.
"No anxiety, no danger,..." This is the hymn RV 10.126.


--- PAGE 1007 ---
996 
Appendices
"That excellent glory of Savitr, the god, we meditate, that he may stimulate our
thoughts." RV 3.62.10.
"This, yes, this is my inclination...." This is the hymn RV 10.119.
"To welcome the Dawn the inspired Vasisthas did first awaken with songs and praises.
..." This is the hymn RV 7.80, containing three verses.
"Untie, Varuna, from us the bond at the top, at the middle, and at the bottom, so that in
your commandment, Äditya , we may remain sinless for Aditi." RV 1.24.15.
"Waters, you are refreshing. Further us to strength, to see great joy. The auspicious
flavor that is yours, accord to us here, like eager mothers. To him may we come
with satisfaction, to whose dwelling you quicken us, О waters, and propagate us."
TS 4.1.5.1. These are the Abliftga formulas.
"We placate your anger, Varuna, with obeisances, sacrifices, and oblations. Wise Lord,
ruling king, loosen from us the sins we have committed." RV 1.24.14. Bhäruci ,
however, identifies this as RV 10.59.9.
"Whatever offense that we humans commit against the race of gods, Varuna, if by
inattention we have violated your institutes, О god, may you not punish us
because of that evil." RV 7.89.5.


--- PAGE 1008 ---
A P P E N D I X IV
Weights, Measures, and Currency
NB: weights, measures, and coins have varied over time in India. The values given
below are approximations. In coins the weight of each measurement differed for
gold, silver, and copper. See MDh 8.132-37.
Angula. A measurement of length (lit., a finger) approximately 2 cm.
Bow. A measurement of length; approximately 6 feet or 1.82 meters.
Dharana. A measure of weight; approximately 377.6 grams; a silver 
dfiarana,
however, is said to weight only 3.776 grams.
Drona. A measurement of capacity especially of gains: probably about 5 liters. When
it is a measure of weight, it is approximately 9.6 kg.
Finger. See Angula.
Gaurasarsapa. "White mustard seed"; a minute measure of weight equal to three
Rajasarsapas.
Kärsäpana
. Also known as Pana, this basic copper coin weighed approximately 9.33
grams. A silver Kärsäpan
a weighed 3.76 grams.
Kärsika . A copper coin, the same as Kärsäpan
a or Pana.
Krsnala. A measure of weight appliximately 0.118 grams.
Kumbha. A measure of capacity: about 105 liters.
Liksä . "Egg of a louse"; a very minute measure of weight equal to eight Trasarenus.
Mäsa . "A bean"; a measure of weight; approximately 0.59 grams.
Mäsaka . A silver Mäsak a weighed approximately 0.25 grams; a gold coin of this
name is mentioned at 8.393.
Niska. A measurement of weight said to be four Suvarnas, i.e., 37.76 grams.
Pala. A measure of weight; approximately 37.76 grams.
Pana. Same as Kärsäpana
.
Puräna . A silver weight said to be sixteen silver Mäsakas , i.e., 3.776 grams.
Räjasarsapa . "Black mustard seed"; a minute measure of weight equal to three
Liksäs .
Rod's throw. It is unclear whether this is an actual measurement or the distance that
a rod can be thrown.
Satamäna . A silver Satamän a weighed approximately 11.66 grams.
Suvarna. A measure of weight; approximately 9.44 grams.
Trasarenu. A particle of dust seen in a sunbeam; smallest measure of weight.
Yava. A measurement of weight: 0.039 grams
997


--- PAGE 1009 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 1010 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRIMARY LITERATURE
Aparärka , Aparäditya, commentary on the YDh. 2 vols. Anandasrama Sanskrit Series, 46.
Pune, 1903-04.
Äpastamba-Dharmasutra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000.
Äpastamba-Grhyasütra.
 Ed. by M. Winternitz. Vienna: Alfred Holder, 1887. Tr. in
Oldenberg 1886-92.
Baudhayana-Dharmasutra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000.
Brhaspati-Smrti (Reconstructed). Ed. K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. Gaekwad's Oriental
Series, 85. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1941. Translated in Jolly 1889.
Devanabhatta, Smtticandrika. Government Oriental Library Series, 43, 44, 45, 48,52, 56.
Mysore: Government Oriental Library. Vol. i, Samskärakända
, 1914; Vo. 2, Ähanika -
kända , 1914; Vol. 3, Vyavahärakända
, 1914-16; Vol. 4, Sräddhakända
, 1918; Vol. 5,
Äsaucakända
, 1921.
Gautama-Dharmasutra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000.
Gobhila-Grhyasutra. Ed. with Bhattanäräyana' s commentary by C. Bhattacharya. Delhi:
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1982. Tr. in Oldenberg 1886-92.
JImutivahana, Däyabhäga.
 Ed. and tr. by L. Rocher. New York: Oxford University Press,
2OO2.
Kämandaka , Nltisära with Sankarärya' s commentary. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastrl. Trivandrum
Sanskrit Series, 14. Trivandrum: 1912.
KStyäyana-Smrti. Ed. P. V. Kane. Poona: Oriental Book Agency, n.d. Aiyangar, Rangaswami
K. V. n.d. "Additional Verses of Kätyäyan
a on Vyavahara." In A Volume of Studies in
Indology (presented to P. V. Kane on his 6ist birthday), ed. S. M. Katre and P. K. Goode
(Poona: Oriental Book Agency), pp. 7-11.
Kautalya, Arthasästra. Ed. and tr. in Kangle 1965-72.
Laksmldhara, Krtyakalpataru. Ed. by K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. Gaekwad's Oriental
Series. 14 vols. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1942-79.
Mädhava , Paräsara-Mädhava.
 3 vols. Reprint. Calcutta: Asiatic Society, 1973-74.
Närada-Smrti. Ed. and tr. in Lariviere 2003.
Pañcatantra. Ed. and tr. by F. Edgerton. American Oriental Series 2-3. New Haven:
American Oriental Society. Tr. by P. Olivelle. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997.
Päraskara-Grhyasutra. Ed. with five commentaries by M. G. Bakre. Bombay: Gujarati
Printing Press, 1917. Tr. in Oldenberg 1886-92.
Patañjali, Mahäbhäsya
 on Pänini' s AstadhyäyL Ed. F. Kielhorn. 3rd revised .edition by K. V.
Abhyankar. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1962-72.
Vaikhanasa-Dharmasutra. Ed. by W. Caland. Calcutta: Asiactic Society, 1927. Tr. in Caland
1929.
Vaikhanasa-Grhyasutra. Ed. by W. Caland. Calcutta: Asiactic Society, 1927. Tr. in Caland
1929.
999


--- PAGE 1011 ---
1000 
Bibliography
Vasistha-Dharmasutra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000.
Vijnänesvara , Mitäksarä,
 commentary on YDh. Ed. U. C. Pandey. Kashi Sanskrit Series, 178.
Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 1967. Translated with Mitramisra's Víramitro-
daya and Sulapäni' s DIpakalikä by J. R. Gharpure. 3 vols. Bombay: 1936-38.
Visnu-Dharmasutra. Ed. with Nandapandita's commentary Kesavavaijayantiby V. Krishna-
macharya. 2 vols. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1964. Tr. in Jolly 1880.
Visvarupa, Balakrïda, commentary on YDh. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri. 1921-22. Reprint. New
Delhi: Mushiram Manoharlal, 1982.
Yâska , Nirukta. Ed. V. K. Rajavade. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1940.
EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS OF MANU
BUhler, G. Tr. The Laws of Manu. SBE 25. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1886.
Burnell, A. C. Tr. The Ordinances of Manu. Completed and edited by E. W. Hopkins. 1884.
Reprint. Delhi: Mushiram Manoharlal, 1995.
Dave, J. H. Ed. Manu-Smrti with Nine Commentaries by Medhätithi, Sarvajnanäräyana,
Kulluka, Räghavänanda,
 Nandana, Rämacandra, Maniräma, Govindaräja, and Bhäruci.
6 volumes. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1972-84.
Derretí , J. D. M. Ed. and Tr. Bhäruci's Commentary on the Manusmrti (The Manu-Sästra -
Vivarana, Books 6-12). 2 vols. Wiesbaden, 1975.
Deslongschamps, A. L. Ed. Lois de Малой publié en Sanscrit avec des notes contenant un
choix de variantes et de scholies. Paris: Levrault, 1830.
. Tr. Lois de Manou comprenant les institutions religieuses et civiles des Indiens. Paris:
de Crapelet, 1833.
Doniger, W. Tr. The Laws of Manu. London: Penguin, 1991.
Jha, G. Ed. and tr. Manusmrti with the 'Manubhäsya' of Medhätithi. 10 volumes. 1920-39.
Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999.
Jolly, J. Ed. Mä/iava Dharma-sästra: The Code of Manu. Original Sanskrit Text Critically
Edited according to the Standard Sanskrit Commentaries. London: Trübner , 1887.
Jones, W. Tr. Institutes of Hindu Law or the Ordinences of Menu according to the Gloss of
Culluca. Calcutta: 1794.
Kâvyatïrtha , N. R. A. Ed. The Manusmrti with the Commentary Manvarthamuktävall of
Kulluka. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1946.
Mandlik, V. N. Ed. Mänava-Dharma Sastra with the Commentaries of Medhätithi, Sarvajna-
näräyana,
 Kulluka, Räghavänanda,
 Nandana, and Rämachandra. 2 volumes and a sup-
plement containing the commentary of Govindaräja . Bombay: Ganpat Krishnaji's Press,
1886.
Menu Sanhita: the Institutes of Menu with the Commentary of Kulluka Bhatta. Calcutta:
1830.
Nene, G. S. Ed. The Manusmrti with the 'Manvartha-muktävali' Commentary of Kulluka
Bhatta. Kashi Sanskrit Series 114. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1970.
Strehly, G. Tr. Les Lois de Manou. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1893.
SECONDARY LITERATURE AND TRANSLATIONS
Aktor, M. 1999. "Smrtis and Jätis: The Ritualisation of Time and the Continuity of the Past."
In Invoking the Past: The Uses of History in South Asia, ed. D. Ali, pp. 258-79. Delhi:
Oxford University Press.


--- PAGE 1012 ---
Bibliography 
1001
Altekar, A. S. 1952. Sources of Hindu Dharma in its Socio-Religious Aspects. Sholapur:
Institute of Public Administration.
Ayyar, A. S. Nataraja. 1952. Mlmänisä
 Jurispurdence: The Sources of Hindu Law.
Ganganatha Jha Research Institute Series, No. 2. Allahabad: Ganganatha Jha Research
Institute.
Bailey, G. 1985. Materials for the Study of Ancient Indian ideologies: Pravrtti and Nirtti.
Pubblicazioni di "Indologica Taurinensia". Turin.
Bandyopadhyaya, N. C. 1980. Development of Hindu Polity and Political Theories. New
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Banerjee, N. V. 1980. Studies in the Dharmasastra of Manu. New Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.
Banerji, S. C. 1972. Smrti Material in the Mahäbhärata.
 Calcutta: D. P. Mitra.
. 1999. A Brief History of Dharmasastra. Delhi: Abhinav Publications.
Beaman, G. B. 1895. On the Sources of the Dharma-Sästras of Manu and Yäjnavalkya.
Leipzig: Harrassowitz.
Betai, R. S. 1962. "Textual Problems of the Manusmrti." Journal of the Gujarat Research
.Society 24: 271-76.
. 1963. "Widowhood and Niyoga in the Arthasâstr a and the Manusmrti." Our Heritage
11: i-ii.
. 1965-66. Revisions of the Manusmrti and the Background of These—A Fresh
Study." Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research Institute 22: 193-201.
. 1968. "State of Criminal Law in Manusmrti." ibid. 24: 279-300.
. 1970. A Reconstruction of the Original Interpretations of the Manusmrti. Gujarat
University Theses Publication Series, 9. Ahmedabad: Gujarat University.
. 1973. "Criminal Law from Manu to Yäjnavalky a to Närada—
A Positive Transition."
Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda) 22: 265-89.
. 2003. Evolution of Law of Crimes in Ancient India. Delhi: Bharatiya Kala Prakashan.
Bharadwaj, S. K. 1982. Linguistic Study of Dharmasutras. Rohtak (Haryana): Manthan
Publications.
Bodewitz, H. W. 1973. Jaimimya Brähmana I, 1-65: Translation and Commentary with a
Study Agnihotra and Pränägnihotra.
 Orientalia Rheno-Traiectina 17. Leiden: E. J. Brill.
. 1985. "Yama's Second Boon in the Katha Upanisad." WZKS 29: 5-26.
Bongert, Y. 1963. "Réflexions sur le problème de l'esclavage dans l'Inde ancienne à propos
de quelques ouvrages récents." Bulletin de l'École Française a" extrâne-orient, LI: 143-
94.
Bosch, L. P. van den. 1991. "The Marriage of the Dead in Ancient India: On the Interpretation
of Vaikhänasasmärtasutr
a V.g." In Leslie 1991, pp. 62-79.
Brereton, J. 1986. '"Tat Tvam Asi' in Context." ZDMG 136:98-109.
Brinkhaus, H. 1978. Die altindischen Mischkastensysteme. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 19.
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.
. 1980. "Zu J. D. M. Derretí s Textausgabe und Übersetzun g von Bhäruci s Manusastra-
vivarana-fragment." WZKS 24: 147-80.
Bühler , G. (tr.) 1879-82. Sacred Laws of the Äryas [containing the Dharmasutras of
Äpastamba , Gautama, Vasistha, and Baudhäyana] . 2 vols. SBE 2, 14. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
. 1888. "Lexicographical Notes. 5. Bhruna, bhrunahan, bhrunahatyä, bhrunahanana."
WZKM 2:182-85.
Burrow, T. 1975. "Two Saka Loanwords in Manusmrti." Ural-Altaische Jahrbücher 47: 30-
34-


--- PAGE 1013 ---
1002 
Bibliography
Caland, W. (tr.) 1929. Vaikhänasasmärtasütram.
 Calcutta: Asiatic Society.
Chatterjee, H. 1971. The Law of Debt in Ancient India. Calcutta: Sanskrit College.
Chatterjee, H. 1972-74. Forms of Marriage in Ancient India. 2 vols. Calcutta: Sanskrit Pustak
Bhandar.
Dallapiccola, A. L., and S. Zingel-Avé Lallemant, eds. 1989. The Sastric Tradition in the
Indian Arts. Beiträg e zur SUdasienforschung. Wiesbaden: Steiner.
Das, R. M. 1962. Women in Manu and His Seven Commentators. Bodh Gaya: Kanchana
Publications.
Das, S. 1977. Crime and Punishment in Ancient India. New Delhi: Abinav Publications.
Day, T. 1982. The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature. Waterloo (Canada):
Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Derretí , J. D. M. 1964. "Bhäruc i on the Royal Regulative Power in India." JAOS 84: 392-95.
. 1965. "A Newly-discovered Contact between Arthasästr a and Dharmasâstra. " ZDMG
115: 134-52.
. 19673. "A Jurist and His Sources: Medhätithi' s Use of Bhäruci. " Adyar Library
Bulletin 30:1-22.
. i9o7b. "The Concept of Law according to Medhatithi, a Pre-Islamic Indian Jurist." In
Der Orient in der Forschung. Feslitschrift Otto Spies, ed. W. Hoenerbach, pp. 18-41.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
. 1968. Religion, Law, and the State in India. New York: Free Press.
. 1973. Dharmasâstra and Juridical Literature. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
. 1976-78. Essays in Classical and Modern Hindu Law. 4 vols. Leiden: Brill.
. 1976. "Rajadharma." Journal of Asian Studies 35: 597-609.
Deshpande, M. M. 1999. "What to Do with the Anäryas ? Dharmic Discourses of Inclusion
and Exclusion." In Aryan and Non-Aryan in South Asia: Evidence, Interpretation and
Ideology, ed. J. Bronkhorst and M. M. Deshpande, pp. 107-27. Harvard Oriental Series,
Opera Minora, 3. Columbia, Missouri: South Asia Books.
Dirks, N. B. 2OO1. Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Drekmeier, C. 1962. Kingship and Community in Early India. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press.
Dutt, M. N. 1907. The Dharma Sastras. Calcutta: Des Elysium Press.
Edgerton, F. 1953. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. 2 vols. Reprint 1972.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Emeneau, M. B. 1962. "Barkcloth in India—Sanskrit valkala." JAOS 82:167-70.
Falk, H. 2OO1. "Suicidal Self-scorching in Ancient India." In Vidyarnavavandanam: Essays
in Honour of Asko Parpóla, ed. K. Karttunen and P. Koskikallio, pp. 131-46. Studia
Orientalia, 94. Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society.
Fezas, J. 1996. "susriïsa dans l'Arthasâstra : obéissance, devoir conjugal ou maison du beau-
père?" In Langue, style et structure dans le monde indien: Centenaire de Louis Renou, ed.
N. Balbir and G-J. Pinault, pp. 385-412. Paris: Librairie Honoré Champion.
Fitzgerald, J. L. (tr.) 2004. The Mahabharata: Book n: The Book of the Women; Book 12:
The Book of Peace, Part i. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gharpure, J. R. 1943. Sapinda or the Law of Sapinda Relationship. Collection of Hindu Law
Texts, 27. Bombay.
Ghosh, A. 1973. The City in Early Historical India. Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced
Study.
Glucklich, A. 1982. "Karma and Social Justice in the Criminal Code of Manu." Contributions
to Indian Sociology id: 59-78.
. 1984. "Karma and Pollution in the Dharmasâstra. " Ibid., 18: 25-43.


--- PAGE 1014 ---
Bibliography 
1003
. 19883. Religious Jurisprudence in the Dharmasastras. New York: Macmillan.
. ig88b. "The Royal Scepter (Danda) as Legal Punishment and Sacred Symbol."
History of Religions 28: 97-122.
. 1990. "Images and Symbols in the Phenomenology of Dharma." History of Religions,
29: 259-85.
Gonda, J. 1965. Continuity and Change in Indian Religion. The Hague: Mouton.
. 1966. Ancient Indian Kingship from the Religius Viewpoint. Leiden: Brill.
Gopal, R. 1962. "Manu's Indebtedness to Sänkhäyana.
" Poona Orientalist 27: 39-44.
Gupta, P. L. 1969. Coins. New Delhi: National Book Trust.
Hacker, P. 1959. "Two Accounts of Cosmogony." In JnanamuktSvali: Commemoration
Volume in Honour of .loh. Nobel, ed. C. Vogel, pp. 77-91. Sarasbati vihara series, v. 38.
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture.
. 1961. "The Saiikhyization of the Emanation Doctrine, Shown in a Critical Analysis of
Texts." WZKS 5: 75-112.
Halbfass, W. 1991. "Homo Hierarchicus: The Conceptualization of the Varna System in
Indian Thought." In Tradition and Reflection, ch. 10, pp. 347-405. Albany: State Univer-
sity of New York Press.
Hará, M. 1979. "Sraddhävivesa" Indologica Taurinensia 7: 261-73.
. 1992. "Sraddhä in the Sense of Desire." Asiatische Studien 46:180-94.
. 1994-95. "Bhartr-Pinda-Niskraya—The Hindu Concept of Loyalty to the Kings."
Bulletin of the Deccan College Post-Graduate ¿¿Research Institute 54-55: 299-311.
. 1997. "A Note on the grhasthasrama" In Lienhard and Piovano 1997, 221-35.
Hazra, R. C. 1935. "Puräna s in the History of Smrti." Indian Culture 1:587-614.
Heesterman, J. C. 1968. "The Return of the Veda Scholar (samävartana). " In Pratidänam:
Indian, Iranian and Indo-European Studies presented to Franciscas Bernardas Jacobus
Kuiper on his Sixtieth Birthday, ed. J. C. Heesterman et al., pp. 436-47. The Hague:
Mouton.
Hiltebeitel, A. 2001. Rethinking the Mahäbhärata:
 A Reader's Guide to the Education of the
Dharma King. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hopkins, E. 1881. The Mutual Relation of the Four Castes According to the
Munavadhamaçâstram.
 Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hartell.
. 1885. "On the Professed Quotations from Manu Found in the Mahäbhärata.
" JAOS 11:
239-75-
Huxley, A. 1996. "When Manu met Mahâsammata. " .IIP 24: 593-621.
Jain, M. P. 1966. Outlines of Indian Legal History. Bombay: Tripathi.
Jamison, S. W. 1986. "Brähman a Syllable Counting, VedicTvac 'Skin', and the Sanskrit
Expression for the Canoncial Creature." Indo-Iranian Jouranl 29: 161-81.
. 1991. The Ravenous Hyenas and the Wounded Sun: Myth and Ritual in Ancient India.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
. 1996. Sacrificed WifelSacrificer's 
Wife: Women, Ritual, and Hospitality in Ancient
India. New York: Oxford University Press.
. 1997. "Sanskrit pärinähy
a 'household goods': Semantic Evolution in Cultural
Context." In Festschrift Eric Натр, ed. D. Q. Adams. Vol. I. Journal of Indo-European
Studies Monograph 23: 139-45.
. 1998. "Rhinoceros Toes: Manu 5.17-18 and the Development of the Dharma
System." JAOS 118: 249-56.
. 2OOO. "A Sanskrit Maxim and Its Ritual and Legal Applications." In Anusantatyai:
Festschrift fü r Johanna Marten zum 70. Geburtstag, ed. A. Hintze and E. Tichy, pp. 111-
25. Münchene r Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft, Beiheft 19.


--- PAGE 1015 ---
1004 
Bibliography
Jayaswal, К. P. 1930. Manu and Yäjnavalkya: A Comparison and a Contrast, A Treatise on
the Basic Hindu Law. Calcutta: Butterworth.
Jha, Ganganatha. 1922-27. Studies in Hindu Law. The Princes of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana
Series. 6 vols. Benares: Sarasvati Bhavana.
. 1930. Hindu Law and Its Sources. Delhi: Indian Press.
Jolly, J. (tr.) 1880. The Institutes of Vishnu. SBE 7. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
. 1885. Outlines of an History of the Hindu Law of Partition, Inheritance, and
Adoption. Tagore Law Lectures 1883. Calcutta: Thacker, Spink, and Co.
. 1885-89. ManutJkäsangraha: Being a Series of Copious Extracts from Six Unpub-
lished Commentaries of the Code of Manu. Calcutta: Asiatic Society.
. 1887. "Manu and Brhaspati." WZKM i: 275-80 [expanded version in Jolly 1889].
. 1889. The Minor Law-Books: Närada, Brihaspati. SBE 33. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
. 1913. "Arthasästr a und Dharmasästra, " ZDMG 67: 49-96.
Jong, J. W. de. 1988. "Buddhism and the Equality of the Four Castes." In A Green Leaf:
Papers in Honour of Professor Jes P. Asmussen. Acta Iranica, 2nd Series, Vol. XII, pp.
424-31. Leiden: Brille.
Joshi, A. R. 1987-88. "Medhatithi and Other Commentators of Manusmrti." Journal of
Manuscript Studies 17-18: 153-71.
Kane, P. V. 1925. "The Tantravärttik a and the Dharmasästr a Literature," Journal of the
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, N. S. i: 95-102.
. 1962-75. History of Dharmasästra. 5 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute.
Kangle, R. P. 1964. "Manu and Kautilya." Indian Antiquary (Third Series) I: 48-54.
. 1965-72. The Kautillya Arthasästra 3 vols. Bombay: University of Bombay.
Köhler , H. W. 1973. Srad-dhä in der vedischen und altbuddhistischen Literature. Thesis
Göttingen , 1948. Ed. K. L. Janert. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.
Konow, S. 1945. Kautalya Studies. Reprint. Delhi: Oriental Publishers.
Krishna, D. 1992. "The varnäsrama Syndrome of Indian Sociology." Contributions to Indian
Sociology 26, 2: 282-98.
Lane, J. W. 1981. "The Creation Account of Manusmrti." Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 62: 157-68.
Lariviere, R. W. 1982. "Coins in the Näradasmrti. " Journal of the Numismatic Society of
India 44:108-13.
. 1983. "More Equine Lexicography: the Hamstring Is Not Connected to the Nose."
JAOS 103: 421-22.
. 1989. "Justices and Panditas: Some Ironies in Contemporary Readings of the Hindu
Legal Past." Journal of Asian Studies 48: 757-69.
. 1991. "Matrimonial Remedies for Women in Classical Hindu Law: Alternatives to
Divorce." In Leslie 1991, pp. 37-45.
. 19973. "Power and Authority: On the Interpretation of Indian Kingship from Sanskrit
Sources." In Lienhard and Piovano 1997, pp. 313-27.
. I997b. "Dharmasästra , Custom, 'Real Law' and 'Aprocryphal' Smrtis." In Recht,
Staat, und Verwaltung im klassichen indien, ed. B. Koelver, pp. 97-110. Wiesbaden:
Franz Steiner.
. (ed. and tr.) 2003. The Näradasmrti. 2nd ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Laszlo, F. 1971. Die Parallelversion der Manusmrti im Bhavisyapuräna. Abhandlungen fü r
die Kunde des Morgenlandes, XL, 2. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.
Leslie, J. 1991. Rules and Remedies in Classical Indian Law. Panels of the Vllth World
Sanskrit Conference. Leiden: Brill.


--- PAGE 1016 ---
Bibliography 
1005
Lienhard, S. and Piovano, I. ed. 1977, Lex et Litterrae: Studies in Honour of Professor Oscar
Botto. Turin: Edizioni dell'Orso.
Lingat, R. 19623. "Les quatre pieds du procès." Journal Asiatique 250: 489-503.
. I9o2b. "Time and Dharma." Contributions to Indian Sociology 6:7-16.
. 1973. The Classical Law of India. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Losch, H. 1927. Die Yäjnavalkyasmrti: Ein Beitrag zur Quellenkunde des indischen Rechts.
Leipzig: Harrassowitz.
Malamoud, C. 1972. "Obervations sur la notion de 'reste' dans le brahmanisme." WZKS 16:
5-26.
. 1982. "On the Rhetoric and Semantics of purusärtha. " In Way of Life: King, House-
holder, Renouncer. Essays in Honour of Louis Dumont, ed. T. N. Madan, pp. 33-54. New
Delhi: Vikas.
Maxwell, T. S. 1989. "Silpa versus Sastra." In Dallapiccola 1989, pp. 5-15.
Mayrhofer, M. 1956-80. Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindoaríschen. 4
Vols. Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Meyer, J. J. 1927. Über das Wesen der Altindischen Rechtsschriften und ihr Verhältnis zu
einander und zu Kautilya. Leipzig: Harrassowitz.
Mishra, S. C. 1993. Evolution of Kautilya's Arthashastra: An Inscriptional Approach. Delhi:
Anamika Prakashan.
Numata, I. 1999. "Manusmrti 7.114." Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies (Indogaku
Bukkyogaku Kenkyu) 47-2: 
30-4.
O'Flaherty, W. (ed.) 1980. Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Oldenberg, H. 1886-92. The Grhya-Sutras: Rules of Vedic Domestic Ceremonies. 2 parts.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olivelle, P. 1981. "Contributions to the Semantic History of Samnyasa." JАОS 101: 265-74.
. 1986-87. Renunciation in Hinduism: A Medieval Debate. 2 vols. Vienna: Institute for
Indology, University of Vienna.
. 19983. "Unfaithful Transmitters: Philological Criticism and Critical Editions of the
Upanisads." JIP 26: 173-87.
. iggSb. "Caste and Purity: A Study in the Language of the Dharma Literature."
Contributions to Indian Sociology 32: 189-216.
. 19980. The Early Upanisads. New York: Oxford University Press.
. 1993. The Äsrama System: The History and Hermeneutics of a Religious Institution.
New York: Oxford University Press.
. 19993. "Sanskrit Commentators and the Transmission of Texts: Haradatta on
Äpastamb a Dharmasutra." JIP 27:551-74.
. (tr.) igggb. Dharmasutras: The Law Codes of Ancient India. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
. (ed. and tr.) 2000. Dharmasutras: The Law Codes of Äpastamba, Gautama,
Baudhäyana, and Vasisfha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
. 2OO2a. "Ahhaksya and abhojya: An Exploration in Dietary Language." JAOS 122:
345-54-
. 2OO2b. "Food for Thought: Dietary Regulations and Social Organization in Ancient
India." 2OO1 Gonda Lecture. Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences.
. 2004. The Law Code of Manu. Oxford World's Classics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
. forthcoming-a. "Power of Words: The Ascetic Appropriation and the Semantic


--- PAGE 1017 ---
1006 
Bibliography
Evolution of dharma." In Asceticism and Power, ed. Peter Flligel and Gustaaf Houtman.
London: Curzon.
Olivelle, P. forthcoming-b. "Manu and Gautama: A Study in Sästri c Intertextuality." In
Wilhelm Halbfass Commemoration Volume, ed. K. Preisendanz and E. Franco. Vienna:
Verlag der Österreichische n Akademie der Wissenschaften.
. forthcoming-c. "Semantic History of dharma: The Middle and Late Vedic Periods."
.IIP.
Parasher, A. 1991. Mlecchas in Early India: A Study in Attitudes towards Outsiders up to AD
600. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Patkar, M. M, 1978. Närada, Brhaspati and Kätyäyana:
 A Comparative Study in Judicial
Procedure. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.
Pollock, S. 1985. "The Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory in Indian Intellectual
H i story.". ¡A OS 105: 499-519.
. 19893. "The Idea of Sastra in Traditional India." In Dallapiccola and Lallemant 1989,
pp. 17-26.
. igSgb. "Playing by the Rules: Sastra and Sanskrit Literature." In Dallapiccola and
Lallemant 1989, pp. 301-12.
. 1990. "From Discoure of Ritual to Discourse of Power in Sanskrit Culture." Journal
of Ritual Studies 4: 316-45.
. 1997. "The «Revelations» of «Tradition»: sruti, smrti, and the Sanskrit Discourse of
Power." In Lienhard and Piovano 1997, pp. 295-417.
Rau, W. 1957. Staat und Gesellschaft im alten Indien nach den Brähmana-Texten dargestellt.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Rocher, L. 1954. "The Technical Term 'anubandha' in Sanskrit Legal Literature." Annals of
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 35: 221-28.
. 1955. "Ancient Indian Criminal Law." Journal of Oriental Research 24: 15-34.
. 1964. "The Theory of Proof in Ancient Hindu Law." Recueils de la Société Jean
Bodi/i, vol. XVIII, pp. 325-71. Brussells: Les Editions de la Librairie Encyclopédique.
. 1965. Droit hindou ancient. Introduction Bibliographique à l'Histoire du Droit et à
l'Ethnologie Juridique, ed. J. Gilissen, vol. E/6. Brussels: Éditio n de l'Institut de
Sociologie, Université Libre de Bruxelles.
. 1969. '"Lawyers' in Classical Hindu Law." Law and Society Review 3: 383-402.
. 19763. "The Introduction of the Gautamadharmasutra." Adyar Library Bulletin^:
90-100.
. i976b. "Notes on the Technical Term Sähasa 'Fine, Pecuniary Penalgy'." In V.
Raghavan Commemoration Volume, pp. 515-31. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
. 1977-78. "The Purân a of Fate and Human Effort." Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute 58-59: 271-78.
. 1980. "Karma and Rebirth in the Dharmasästras. " In O'Flaherty 1980, pp. 61-89.
. 1993. "Law Books in an Oral Culture: The Indian Dharmasästras." Proceedings of
the American Philosophical Society 137: 254-67.
. 2OO2. "Däsadäsi."
 JAOS122: 374-80.
Samozvantsev, A. M. 1980-81. "Arthasästr a and Dharmasastra—Two Traditions." ¡ndo-
logica Taurinensia 8-9: 353-63.
Sandahl, S. 2001. "Women One Should Not Marry—Some Comments on Maiiusmrti 3.6-9,
11." Acta Orientalia 62: 166-76.
Sarkar, U. C. 1958. Epochs in Hindu Legal History. Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vedic
Research Institute.


--- PAGE 1018 ---
Bibliography 
1007
Scharfe, H. 1993. Investigations in Kautalya' s Manual of Political Science. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Schlingloff, D. 1965. "Arthasästra-Studien . Teil I: Kautilya und Medhätithi. " WZKS 9: 1-38.
Schmidt, H.-P. 1987. Some Women's Rites and Rights in the Veda. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental
Research Institute.
Schmithausen, L. 1991. The Problem of the Sentience of Plants in Earliest Buddhism. Studia
Philologica Buddhica, Monograph Series IV. Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist
Studies.
Sen, P. N. 1980. Hindu Jurisprudence. University of Calcutta Tagore Law Lectures, 1909.
Calcutta: Saraswat Library.
Sen-Gupta, N. C. 1953. Evolution of Ancient Indian Law. University of Calcutta Tagore Law
Lectures, 1950. London: Arthur Probsthain.
Sharma, R. S. 1990 (1958). Sudras in Ancient India: A Social History of the Lower Order
Down to circa A. D. 600. 3rd. ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Shastri, H. C. 1972-74. Forms of Marriage in Ancient India.2 vols. Calcutta: Sanskrit Pustak
Bhandar.
Shastri, S. R. 1959. Women in the Sacred Laws. Bomay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
Silk, J. 1992. "A Bibligraphy of Ancient Indian Slavery." Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik,
16/17: 277-85.
Sircar, D. С. 1968. Studies in Indian Coins. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Smith, B. K. 1994. Classifying the Universe: The Ancient Indian Varna System and the
Origins of Caste. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sprockhoff, J. F. 1987. "Kathasruti und Mänavasrautasütra
: eine Nachlese zur Resignation."
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, 13/14: 235-57.
Sternback, L. 1972. "Place and Time of King's Counsel with Ministers according to the
Dharmasastra-s, Arthasastra-s and Subhasita-Samgraha-s." In India Maior: Congratula-
tory Volume Presented to J. G onda, ed. J. Ensink and P. Gaeffke, pp. 200-7. Leiden:
Brill.
. 1974. The Mänava Dharmasästra l-lll and the Bhavisya Puräna. Varanasi: All India
Kashi Raj Trust.
Stietencron, H. von 1997. "The Non-Existence of Impurity and the Legitimation of Kings." In
Lienhard and Piovano 1997, pp. 487-508.
Thakur, A. 1933. Hindu Law of Evidence; or, A Comparative Study of the Law of Evidence
According to the Simtis. Calcutta: University of Calcutta.
Thieme, P. 1931. "Grammatik und Sprache: eine Problem der altindischen Sprachwissen-
schaft," Zeitschrift fü r Indologie und Iranistik 8:23-32. Kleine Schriften 2:514-23.
.1939- "Indische Wörte r und Sitten," ZDMG 95: 219-221. Kleine Schriften 2: 343-70
[the section of Puja translated in Journal of Oriental Research 28(1960): 1-16].
. 1958. "Sanskrit edhate." Indian Linguistics 19:149-58. Kleine Schriften 2:160-69.
. 1963. '"Jungfrauengatte': Sanskrit kaumärah patih." Zeitschrift fü r vergleichende
Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete der indogermanischen Sprachen 78:161-248. Kleine
Schriften 2: 426-512.
. 1984. Kleine Schriften. Vol. 2. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner.
Turner, R. L. 1966. A Comparative Dictionary of Indo-Aryan Languages. 4 vols. Reprint.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999.
Wackernagel, J. 1957-78. Altindische Grammatick. 3 vols. Göttingen : Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.
Watkins, C. 19943. "Studies in Indo-European Legal Language, Institutions, and Mythology."


--- PAGE 1019 ---
1008 
Bibliography
In Selected Writings, Vol. II, pp. 422-55. Innsbruck: Innsbrucker Beiträg e zur
Sprachwissenschaft.
. i994b. '"In the Interstices of Procedure': Indo-European Legal Language and
Comparative Law." Ibid., pp. 718-27.
Wezler, A. 1982. "Manu's Omniscience: On the Interpretation of Manusmrti 11.7." In
Indology and Law: Studies in Honour of Professor J. Duncan M. Derretí, ed. G. D.
Sontheimer and P. K. Aithal, pp. 79-105. Wiesbaden: Steiner.
. 1986. "Cattle, Field and Barley: A Note on Mahäbhäsy
a 1.337.24-27. Adyar Library
Bulletin 50:431-77.
. 1987. "On the Term antahsamjna-." Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 58:
112-31.
. 1994. "A Note on Sanskrit bruna and bhruiiahatyS." In Festschrift Klaus Bruhn, ed.
N. Balbir and J. Bautze, pp. 623-46. Reinbek: Verlag fü r Orientalistische
Fachpublikationen.
. 1995. "Der Tod als Mittel der Entsühnung. " In Im Tod gewinnt der Mensch sein
Selbst: Das Phänomenon des Todes in asiatscher und abendländischer Religionstradition,
ed. G. Oberhammer, pp. 97-140. Vienna: Österreichische n Akademie der Wissenschaften.
. iggSa. "Medhätith i on the Role of Manu, the Prayojana of the Manusmrti and the
Inventive of the Brahmins to Study It." In Suryacandräya: Essays in Honour of Akira
Yuyama on the Occasion of His 6gth Birthday, ed. P. Harrison and G. Schopen, pp. 216-
40. Göttingen : Swisttal-Odendorf.
. I998b. "Should the Adopted Son Be a Close Relative? On the Interpretation of
VasDhS 15.6 and 7." Indologica Taurinensia 17-18: 359-81.
. 19993. "Methâtith i on sämänyato
 drstam [anumanam¡."J¡P 27:139-57.
. I999b. "Übe r den sakramentalen Charakter des dharma nachsinnend." In Raum-
zeitliche Vermittlung der Transzendenz, ed. G. Oberhammer and M. Schmücker , pp. 63-
113. Wien: Österreichische n Akademie der Wissenschaften.
. 2OOO. "Some Remarks on the 135th Adhikarana of the 'Kautilîya ' Artha-sästra
Entitled 'Policy towards Sarfighas'." On the Understanding of Other Cultures, ed. P.
Balcerowicz and M. Mejor, pp. 489-503. Studia Indologiczne 7. Warsaw: Instytut
Orientalistyczny.
Witzel, M. 1984. "Sur le chemin du ciel." Bulletin D'Études Indiennes 2: 213-79.


--- PAGE 1020 ---
DHARMASASTRA PARALLELS
1009
CHAPTER ONE 
24
10 
MBh 12.328.35
18 
MBh 12.224.43
29
20 
MBh 12.224.31
30
28 
MBh 12.224.47
31
29 
M5/f 12.224.47
64 
MS/г 12.224.12-3 
35
65 
M5A 12.224.14 
36
66 
MSA 12.224.15
67 
MBh 12.224.16
69 
MSA 12.224.19 
37
70 
MSA 12.224.20 
3°
73 
MS/г 12.224.30
39
75 
MBh 12.224.35
76 
A/SA 12.224.36
77 
MSA 12.224.37
78 
MBh 12.224.38
81 
MBh 12.224.22
82 
MBh 12.224.23 
42
83 
MBh 12.224.24
84 
MSA 12.224.25
44
85 
MSA 12.224.26
45
86 
MBh 12.224.27
94 ГО/г 1.198-9
46
CHAPTER Two
6 
Др£>А i .i.i-з; GDh 1.1-3; 5DA 
47
1.1.1-6; FaDA 1.4-6 
48
12 
ГОА 
1.7 
49
14 
ÄpDh 1.30.9; GDh 1.4
22 
SOA 1.2.9-10, FaDA i.8-g
23 
BDh 1.2.12; FaOA 1.13-5; KDA 1.2
ApDh 1.32.18; S£>A 1.2.13-5; ViDh
84.2,4
ГОА i.io
MBh 3.177.29; F;£>A 27.4
F/OA 27.5
ViDh 27.6-9
F/OA 27.10-1; YDh 1.12
Fi£>A 27.12; ГОА 1.12
ÄpDh 1.19; GDA 1.5-11; SDA 1.3.7-
9; KaDA 11.49-51; ViDh 27.15-7;
ГОА 1.14
ÄpD A 1.1.20-6; GDh 1.6
ЛрОА 1.1.27; GDh 1.12-4; 5OA
1.3.12; Кг'ОА 27.26
GDh 21.11; KaDA 11.74-5; ViDh
27.27; ГОА 1.38
FaZ)A 11.75
ÄpDh 1.2.39; 1.3.10; GDA 1.16-9;
BDh 1.3.14; Fa£>A 11.61-7; ViDh
27.19-20; ГОА 1.29
ЛрОА 1.2.33-7; GDA 1.15; BDh
1.3.13; VaDh 11.58-60; ViDh 27.18;
ГОА 1.29
BDh 1.8.5; F/D/г 27.19; ГОА 1.29
ÄpDh 1.2.38; GDA 1.22-4; BDh
1.3.15; KaDA 11.52-4; ViDh 27.21-3;
ГО/г 1.29
G£>A 1.26; BDh 1.3.15; FaDA
11.55-7; ViDh 27.22
GOA 1.25; K/DA 27.24
ÄpDh 1.3.25; GD/г 2.8, 5; ГОА 1.29
ÄpD A 1.3.28-30; GDA 2.36; BDh
1.3.16-7; FaDA 11.68-70; ViDh
27.25; KDA 1.30
ÄpDh 1.3.31-42; GDA 2.39-40;
ViDh 68.40-1; ГОА 1.31
51
40
41


--- PAGE 1021 ---
1010
Dharinasastra Parallels
52 
MBh 13.107.25
53 
CDh 2.41; BDh 2.5.21; 2.12.7; VaDh
3.28; ViDh 68.34-5
54 
BDh 2.12.7; VaDh 3.69; ViDh
68.42-3; YDh 1.31
56 
ÄpDh 2.1.2-3; BDh 2.12.9; ViDh
68.48; YDh 1.112
58 
BDh 1.8.14; FaDA 3.26; F/DA 62.6;
YDh 1.18
59 
SDA 1.8.15-6; VaDh 3.26; F/DA
62.1-4; W3A 1.19
60 
ApDA 1.16.2-ю; G/JA 1.36; ADA
1.8.19-21; FaDA 3.27-9; ViDh
62.6-8; KDA 1.20
61 
ÄpDh 1.15.4-7; BDh 1.8.17; VaDh
3.31; F/DA 62.5; KDA 1.18,20
62 
GDh 1.36; SDA 1.8.23; VaDh 3.31;
F/DA 62.9; YDh 1.21
63 
ApDA 1.6.18-9; BDh 1.8.5-10
64 
BDh 1.6.6-9; ViDh 27.29
65 
GDA 2.9; YDh 1.36
66 
F/DA 27.13; YDh 1.13
67 
F/DA 22.32; 27.14; YDh 1.13
69 
GDA 2.6-10; YDh 1.15
71 
Л/?ОА 1.5.18-23; BDh 1.3.25-8;
F;DA 30.32; FDA 1.26
72 
ÄpDh 1.5.22; GDA 1.46; BDh 1.3.25;
ViDh 30.32
73 
GDA 1.46
74 
ÄpDh 1.13.6-7; GDA 1.57; F/DA
30.33
75 
GDA 1.48-51; BDh 2.7.5-7
76 
ViDh 55.10
77 
F/DA 55.11
78 
F/DA 55.12
79 
FaDA 26.4; F/DA 55.13
80 
ViDh 55.14
81 
F/DA 55-15
82 
F/DA 55.16
83 
FaDA 10.5; 25.11; F/DA 55.17
84 
ViDh 55.18
85 
FaDA 26.9; F/DA 55.19
86 
FaDA 26.10; F/DA 55.20
87 
FaDA 26.11; F/DA 55.21
101 
ÄpD A 1.30.8; GDA 2.11; 5DA
2.7.12-3; FaDA 7.16; F/DA 28.2-3;
YDh 1.23-5
102 
ADA 2.7.18-20; FaDA 26.2-3
103 
ßDA 2.7.15
105 
ÄpDh 1.12.9
106 
ÄpDh 1.12. 3-5
107 
F/DA 30.34-8; KDA 1.41-6
108 
ÄpDh 1.4.16, 23; 1.5.25; GDA 2.8,30;
5DA 1.4. 4-8; FaDA 7.9,15; F/DA
28.4, 7, 9,12; YDh 1.25
109 
KDA 1.28
no 
ADA 1.4.2; FaDA 2.12
in 
F/DA 29.7
112 
SDA 1.4.1; F/DA 29.8
113 
ßDA 1.4.1
114 
Nirukta 2.4; FaDA 2.8; F/DA 29.8
115 
Nirukta 2.4; FaDA 29.9; F/DA 29.10
116 
F/DA 30.41-2
117 
ÄpDh 1.5.19-20; 1.14.7-9; GDA
6.1-3,5; BDh 1.3.25-8; FaDA
1341-3; F/DA 30.43
119 
ApDA 1.8.11; GDA 2.21, 25
120 
MBh 13.107.32
121 
ÄpDh 1.5.15; BDh 1.3.26; MBh
5.39.6o
122 
ÄpDh 1.5.12; GDA 6.5; SDA 1.3.27;
FaDA 13.44; F/DA 28.17; KDA 1.26
123 
FaDA 13.45
124 
F/DA 28.17
125 
ÄpDh 1.5.17; FaDA 13.46
127 
ÄpDh 1.14.26-9; GDA 5.41-2
128 
GDA 6.19
129 
F/DA 32.7
130 
ÄpDh 1.14.11; GDA 6.9; 5DA 1.3.45;
FaDA 13.41; F/DA 32.4
131 
GDA 6.7; F/DA 32.2-3
132 
GDA 6.7-8; F/DA 32.2


--- PAGE 1022 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1011
1.3-23-4; ГОА 1.33
178 
ÄpDh 1.3.11, 7-24; 1.7.5; GDA 2.13;
BDh 1.3.24; VaDh 7.15; F/DA 28.11;
ГОА 1.33
179 
ÄpDh 1.3.12-3; 1.7.3, 8-10; GDh
2.13,16-7; BDh 1.3.20; ViDh 28.11;
YDh 1.33
180 
ViDh 28.48
181 
FiDA 28.51
182 
ÄpDh 1.4.13-4; BDh 1.3.19
183 
ÄpDh 1.3.25; СО/г 2.35; BDh 1.3.18;
F/DA 28.9; YDh 1.29
184 
GDA 2.37-8
186 
ÄpDh 1.4.16; 5DA 1.3.19; ViDh 28.4
187 
F/ö/ i 28.52; YDh 3.281
188 ГО/г 1.32
189 ГО/г 1.32
igo ГО/г 1.32
igi 
GDh 2.29—30; VaDh 7.13; ViDh
28.6-7; ГОЛ 1.27
192 
GDh 2.22
193 
Д/jDA 1.6.2О
194 
ÄpDh 1.4.22, 28; GDh 2.21; 5DA
1.3.21; F/DA 28.13
195 
ÄpDh 1.6.5; Со/г 2.25; ViDh 28.18
196 
ДрО/г 1.6.5-9; GDh 2.28; 5DA
1.3.38; VaDh 7.12; F/DA 28.19
197 
ViDh 28.20-2
198 
Др£>/г 1.2.2l; 1.6.14-7; ViDh 28.23
199 
ÄpD A 1.8.15; GDh 2.18; F/DA
28.24-5
200 
ViDh 28.26
203 
ДрО/г 1.6.15, 23
204 
ÄpDh 1.8.12-3; BDh 1.3.34; ViDh
28.27-8
205 
GDh 6.3-4; FaDA 13.54; F/DA
28.29-30
206 
ÄpDh 1.7.28-9
207 
ÄpDh 1.7.30; GDA 2.31; ADA 1.3.44;
VaDh 13.54; F/DA 32.1
208 
ViDh 28.31
133 
F/DA 32.3
134 
ÄpDh 1.14.13; GDh 6.14-7
135 
ÄpDh 1.14.25; MBh 13.8.20; ViDh
32.17
136 
GDh 6.20; FaDA 13.56-7; ViDh
32.16; ГОА 1.116
137 
GDh 6.10; YDh 1.116
138 
GDA 6.24; BDh 2.6.30; FaDA
13.58-60; F/DA 63.50; ГОА 1.117
139 
GDA 6.25; FaDA 13.59; ГОА 1.117
140 
ÄpDh 1.1.14; GDA 1.9-10; VaDh
3.21; ViDh 29.1; ГОА 1.34
141 
FaDA 3.22-3; ViDh 29.2; ГОА 1.35
142 ГОА 1.34
143 
ViDh 29.3; ГОА 1.35
144 
ÄpDh 1.1.15; Nirukta 2.4; FaDA
2.10; ViDh 30.47
145 
FaDA 13.48; ГОА 1.35
146 
FaDA 2.3-5; ViDh 30.44
147 
ÄpDh 1.1.18; ViDh 30.45
148 
ÄpDh 1.1.16-7; GDA 1.8; ViDh
30.46
151 
5DA 1.3.47
154 
MBh 3.133-12
155 
ViDh 32.18
156 
MBh 3.133.11
157 
5DA 1.1.10; FaDA 3.11; MBh
12.37-39
158 
MBh 12.37.40
159 
GDA 2.42
166 
ÄpDh 1.12.1-2; ГОА 1.40
168 
FaDA 3.2; ViDh 28.36
169 
FaDA 2.3; ViDh 28.37; YDh 1.39
170 
FaDA 2.3; MBh 3.177.29; ViDh
28.38
171 
GDA 1.10; 5DA 1.3.6; FaDA 2.4-6
172 
GDA 2.4-5; BDh 1.3.6; FaDA 2.6;
MBh 3.177.30
174 
ViDh 27.28
176 
GDA 2.8; VaDh 7.17; YDh 1.22
177 
ÄpDh 1.2.23—6; GDh 2.13-20; ßDA


--- PAGE 1023 ---
1012
Dharmasastra Parallels
209 
ApDh 1.7.30; GDh 2.32; BDh 1.3.36;
ViDh 28.32-3
210 
ÄpDh 1.7.27; GDh 2.31; ViDh 32.2.5
211 
ÄpDh 1.7.27; G£>A 2.32; SDA 1.3.37;
ViDh 32.6
212 
GDA 2.34; BDh 1.3.33; K/DA 32.13
213 
MBh 1348-37
214 
MBh 13.48.36
215 
MBh 13-48.37
216 
ViDh 32.14
217 
ÄpDh 1.14.8; GDh 2.33; 6.2-3;
ViDh 32.15
219 
ÄpDh 1.2.31-2; 1.30.8; GDh 1.27;
VaDh 7.11; F/DA 28.41
220 
ÄpDh 2.12.13-4; G-DA 23.21; ADA
2.7.16; VaDh 20.4; Fi'DA 28.53
221 
ÄpDh 2.12.22; FaDA 1.18
222 
GDh 2.11; SDA 2.7.2; ViDh 28.2
223 
ÄpD A 2.29.1l; М?/г 13.108.13
225 
.4/70/г 1.14.6; GDh 21.15; K/DA
31-1-3
228 
ViDh 31.5
229 
AffiA 12.109.5; ViDh 31.3,6
230 
M5A 12.109.6; ViDh 31.7
231 
ÄjoD A 1.3.44; MBh 12.109.7; ViDh
31-8
232 
MBh 12.109.8
233 
MBh 12.109.8; ViDh 31.10
234 
MBh 12.109.11; ViDh 31.9
235 
ViDh 31.6
238 
ÄpDh 2.29.11; M?A 12.159.29-30
239 
MBh 12.159.29-30
241 
ÄpDh 2.4.25; GDh 7.1-3; 5DA
1.3.41-2
243 
ÄpDh 2.21.6; GW; 3.5-6; BDh
2.11.13; KaDA 7-4; F/DA 28.43; YDh
1-49
244 
GDA 3.9; YDh 1.50
245 
-VDA 1.7.19; GDh 2.48-9; ViDh
28.42; YDh 1.51
247 
GDA 3.7; ViDh 28.44-5; YDh 1.49
248 
GDh 3.8; FaDA 7.5-6; F/DA 28.46;
YDh 1.49
249 
F/DA 28.47
CHAPTER THREE
1 
ÄpDh 1.2.12-6; GDh 2.45-7; SDA
1.3.1-4; УОА 1.36
2 
FaDA 8л; УО/г 1.52
4 
GDA 4.i; FaDA 8.i; YDh 1.52
5 
GDA 4.2-5; BDh 2.1.37-8; FaDA
8.1-2; MBh 13.44.17; ViDh 24.9-10;
ГОЛ 1.53
7 
TOA 
1.54
8 
ViDh 24.12-6; УОА 1.53
u 
YDh 1.53
13 
5DA 1.16.2-5; VaDh 1.24-5; K/OA
24.1-4; УОА 1.57
14 
FaDA 1.26; УОА 1.56
15 
VaDh 1.27; K/DA 26.6
16 
BDh 2.2.7
17 
VaDh 1.27
18 
KeD/г 14.11; ViDh 26.7
20 
M5A 1.67.8
21 
BDh 1.20.1; FoDA 1.29; MBh 1.67.8-
9; F;DA 24.18
23 
GDA 4.15; Л/5А 1.67.10
24 
ÄpDh 2.12.3; CDA 4.14; SDA
1.20.10; MBh 1.67.10-1; ViDh
24.27-8
25 
MBh 1.67.11—2
26' 
BDh 1.20.12; MBh 1.67.13
27 
ÄpDh 2.11.17; GDh 4.6; BDh 1.20.2;
VaDh 1.30; КША 24.19; У£>А 1.58
28 
ÄpDh 2.11.19; GDh 4.9; BDh 1.20.5;
FaDA 1.31; ViDh 24.20; УОА 1.59
29 
ÄpDh 2.11.18; GDA 4.8; BDh 1.20.4;
FaDA 1.32; FiDA 24.21; YDh 1.59
30 
G£>A 4.7; BDh 1.20.3; Kz'DA 24.22;
УОЛ 1.60
31 
ÄpDh 2.12.1; GDh 4.11; SDA 1.20.6;
FaDA 1.35; ViDh 24.24; У£>А i.6i


--- PAGE 1024 ---
Dhannasastra Parallels
1013
32 
ApDh 2.11.20; GDh 4.10; BDh
1.20.7; VaDh 1.33; ViDh 24.23; ГОА
1.61
33 
ÄpDh 2.12.2; СО/г 4.12; BDh 1.20.8;
KaDA 1.34; ViDh 24.25; 7DA i.6l
34 
GDh 4.13; SDA 1.20.9; K/DA 24.26;
YDh 1.61
37 
GDA 4-33; ViDh 24.29; ГОА 1.58
38 
GDh 4.29-32; K/DA 24.30-2; YDh
1.59-60
42 
A/?DA 2.12.4; BDh 1.21.1
43 
K/DA 24.5; ГОЛ 1.62
44 
K/DA 24.6-8; YDh 1.62
45 
ApDA 2.1.17-8; GDh 5.1-2; 5DA
4.1.18-9; KaDA 12.21-4; K/DA 6g.i;
ГОЛ 1.79-81
46 
YDh 1.79
47 ГОЛ 1.79
48 
YDh 1.79
50 
YDh 1.79
51 
ApDA 2.13.1l; BDh 1.21.2-3; 2.2.27;
VaDh 1.37-8
53 
ÄpDh 2.13.11; KaDA 1.36; MB h
1345-21
54 
MS/¡ 13.46.1-2
55 
MBh 13.46.3; ГО/г 1.82
56 
MBh 13-46.5
57 
АШг 13.46.5-6
58 
MBh 13.46.6
61 
MBh 13.46.4
63 
5DA 1.10.26
64 
BDh 1.10.28
65 
5DA 1.10.28
66 
BDh 1.10.29
67 
GDh 5.7-8; 5DA 2.4.22; F/D/г
59.1-2; ГО/г 1.97
68 
K/DA 59.19
69 
K/DA 59.19-20
70 
GDA 5.3-4, 9; ADA 2.5.11; 2.11.1;
ViDh 59.20-4; ГОА 1.102
72 
ViDh 59.26
76 
MBh 12.255.11
78 
KczDA 8.14-6; ViDh 59.27-8
80 
ViDh 59.29
81 ГОА 
1.104
82 
MBh 13.100.8; K/DA 67.23-5
83-6 ÄpDh 2.3.12, 16-7; GDh 5.10; BDh
2.5.11-2; KaDA 11.3; ViDh
87-91 ÄpDh 2.3.12,15, 18-23; 2.4.1-8;
CDA 5.11-7; KaDA 11.4; ViDh
67.4-22
92 
ÄpDh 2.9.5-6; K/DA 67.26; ГОА
1.103
93 
ÄpDh 2.4.9; K/DA 67.28, 32, 44,46
94 
ÄpDh 2.4.10-1; 5DA 2.5.12-5;
KaDA 11.5; K/DA 59.14; 67.27; ГОЛ
i.ioS
96 
CDA 5.18; ГОЛ i.ioS
97 
KaDA 3.8
99 
ÄpDh 2.4.13,16; 2.6.7—15; CDA
5.31-4; KaDA 8.12; K/DA 67.45; YDh
1.107
100 
K/DA 67.33
101 
ÄpDh 2.4.14; CDA 5.35-6; ГОЛ
1.1O7
102 
CDA 5.40; KaDA 8.7; K/DA 67.34
103 
SänkhGrz.i6.3; ÄpDh 2.6.5; GDh
5.40; VaDh 8.8; K/DA 67.35
104 ГОА 1.112
105 
KaDA 8.4-5, 8; K/DA 67.29-30;
ГОЛ 1.107
106 
ÄpDh 2.8.2-4; GDh 5.38-9; ГОЛ
1.1O4
107 ГОЛ 1.1О7
108 
ÄpD A 2.6.16-7; VaDh 11.12
110 
SänkhGrz.i6.2; GDh 5.43
111 
CDA 5.44; K/DA 67.36
112 
ÄpDh 2.4.18-20; CDA 5.45; 5DA
2.5.14; K/DA 67.37
113 
K/DA 67.38; ГОА 1.108
114 
Sänkh Gr 2.14.21; ÄpDh 2.4.11-2;
GDh 5.25; ßDA 2.13.5; K/DA 67.39;
7DA 1.105
115 
5DA 2.5.18; 2.13.5; ViDh 67.40
116 
ÄpDh 2.8.2; K/DA 67.41; ГОЛ LÍOS


--- PAGE 1025 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1014
117 
BDh 2.13.6; ViDh 67.42
118 
BDh 2.13.2; ViDh 67.43
119 
ÄpDh 2.8.5-9; GDh 5.27-8; BDh
2.6.36-8; VaDh 11.1-2; YDh
1.109-10
120 
GDh 5.29-30; ADA 2.6.37; ГОЛ
1.11O
122 
GDh 15.2; 7DA 1.217
125 
GDh 15.21; 5£>A 2.15.10; VaDh
11.27; F/'DA 73.3-4; YDh 1.228
126 
SÖ A 2.15.11; VaDh 11.28
128 
Fa£>A 3.8
129 
GDh 15.21; FoDA 11.29
130 
MBh 13.90.46; ViDh 82.2
134 
VaDh 6.26; A/5A 13.90.43; ViDh
83.9-13; YDh 1.221
135 
MBh 13-90.44
138 
ÄpDh 2.17.4; GDh 15.12; 5£>A
2.14.6; FizDA 11.17; MBh 13.90.36
139 
MBh 13.90.34
140 
MBh 13.90.35
141 
ÄpDh 2.17.8; MBh 13.90.39
142 
MBh 13.90.37
144 
ÄpDh 2.17.5-6; BDh 2.14.4; VaDh
11.18
145 
BDh 2.14.4
148 
GDh 15.20; ViDh 83.17-8; YDh
1.22O
149 
ViDh 82.1-2
150 
GDh 15.16; VaDh 11.19; ГОА
1.223-4
151 
GDh 15.16-8; ViDh 82.13
152 
GDh 15.18; F/O/J 82.8-9
153 
GDh 15.16-8; VaDh 11.19; F/DA
82.26; YDh 
1.222
154 
GZ)A 15.16-8; VaDh 11.19; ГОА
1.223
155 
GDh 15.17-8; YDh 1.222
156 
ViDh 82.20-1; YDh 1.222-3
157 
ViDh 82.23, 29; ГОА 1.22
158 
GDh 15.18; Л/5А 13.90.7; YDh
1.223-4
159 
GÖ A 15.19; MBh 13.90.8; ViDh 82.5,
28; YDh 1.222-3
160 
GO/г 15.18; ViDh 82.18; ГОА 1.223
loi 
ÄpDh 2.17.21; GDA 15.18; VaDh
11.19; F/DA 82.19; ГО/г 1.222
1б2 
ÄpDh 2.17.21; F/£)A 82.7
104 
GDh 15.18; КШ/г 82.22; YDh 1.223
165 ГО/г 1.223
166 
GDh 15.16; ГОА 1.224
172 
BDh 2.1.39; MBh 12.159.63
184 
ÄpDh 2.17.22; GDh 15.28; MBh
13.90.19; ViDh 83.1-5; YDh 1.219
185 
ÄpDh 2.17.22; GDh 15.28; SDA
2.14.2; MBA 13.90.20; F/DA 83.2-4,
15-6; ГО/г 1.219—21
186 ГО/г 1.219
187 
ÄpDh 2.17.11-5; BDh 2.14.6; FaDA
11.17; ViDh 73.2; ГОА 1.225
188 
GDh 15.23; ГОА 1.225
191 
GDh 15.22
202 
ÄpDh 2.19.3-4; ViDh 79.24; ГОА
1.236
206 
ÄpDh 2.18.6; GDA 15.25; ГОА 1.227;
ViDh 85.66
207 
ViDh 85.54-65
208 
ViDh 73.2; ГОА 1.226
209 
BDh 2.14.7; ViDh 73.12; ГОА 1.231
210 
ÄpDh 2.17.17-9; SDA 2.14.7; ^¿D/г
73.12; YDh 1.235
211 
5DA 2.14.7
215 
ViDh 73.17-9; ГО/г 1.24l
216 
ViDh 73.22
218 
ViDh 73.23
220 
F/DA 75.1
221 
ViDh 75.4
224 
FaDA 11.26
225 
BDh 2.15.3; VaDh 11.25
226-7 ÄpDh 2.16.23-4; 2.19.19-22; ViDh
73.21, 23-4
228 
/4/?DA 2.17.4


--- PAGE 1026 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1015
229 
ApDh 2.18.3; ViDh 79.19-21, 81.2
231 
BDh 2.14.5; ViDh 79.5-15; YDh
1-239
232 
ViDh 73.16
234 
ViDh 79.16; 83.18
235 
VaDh 11.35; YDh 1.235, 240
236 
ViDh 81.11, 20
237 
FaDA 11.32; ViDh 81.11, 20
238 
MBh 13.90.13; ViDh 81.12-3
239 
ÄpDh 2.17.20; GDh 15.24; F/DA
81.6-9
242 
ViDh 81.15
243 
ViDh 81.19
244 
F/DA 81.22; YDh 1.241
245 
FaDA 11.23; ViDh 81.23
246 
FaDA 11.24; ViDh 81.24
247 
F/DA 21.3
250 
VaDh 11.37
251 
F/DA 73.26; YDh 1.240
252 TOA 1.244-5
253 
YDh 1.240
254 
VaDh 3.69-71
258 
ViDh 73.27
259 
ViDh 73.28; ГО/г 1.246
260 
YDh 1.257
261 
SDA 2.14.9
265 
VaDh 11.21-2; FDA 1.256-7
267 
GDh 15.15; A/SA 13.88.3; ViDh 80.1;
ГО/г 1.258
268 
GDh 15.15; A/SA 13.88.5; ViDh
80.2-5; YDh 1.259
269 
GDh 15.15; A/SA 13.88.7; F/DA
80.6-9; YDh 1.259
270 
ÄpD A 2.16.27; GDh 15.15; F/DA
So.io; YDh 1.259
271 
ApDA 2.16.26; GDh 15.15; A/SA
13.88.9; F/DA 80.11-2; YDh 1.260
272 
ÄpD A 2.17.1-3; GDh 15.15; F/DA
80.14; YDh 1.260
273 
ApDA 2.19.20; MBh 13.88.15; YDh
1.261
274 
VaDh 11.39-40; MBh 13.88.12;
ViDh 78.52-3
276 
ÄpDh 2.16.5-6; GDA 15.3; VaDh
11.16
277 
ApDA 2.16.8-22; GDh 15.2-4; F/DA
78.8-49; YDh 1.261-8
278 
ÄpD A 2.16.5; VaDh 11.36; F/DA 73.2
279 
YDh 1.232
280 
ApDA 2.17.23; ViDh 77.8
283 
ÄpD A 1.13.1; BDh 2.11.3
284 
FDA 1.269
285 
MBh 3.2.58; 12.235.11
CHAPTER FOUR
1 
A/SA 12.234.29, 235.1
2 
MSA 12.254.6
7 
FDA 1.128
8 
FDA 1.128
12 
YDh 1.129
14 
FaDA 27.8
15 
YDh 1.129
17 
SDA 1.10.30; ViDh 71.4; FDA 1.129
18 
ViDh 71.5-6; FDA 1.123
19 
F/DA 71.8; YDh 1.99
21 
GDh 5.3
25 
SDA 2.4.23; FaDA 11.46; F/DA 59.4;
YDh 1.124
26 
SOA 2.4.23; VaDh 11.46; F*£>A
59-5-7, 9; YDh 1.125
30 
УОА 1.130
32 
ÄpDh 2.4.13; G£>A 5.22; SDA
2.5.19-20
33 
GDA 9.63-4; FaDA 12.2; Fi'DA 63.1;
YDh 1.130
34 
ÄpDh 1.30.13; GDA 9-3; FaDA 12.4;
ViDh 71.9
35 
ÄpDh 1.30.10-2; GDA 9.4, 6-7,
71-2; SDA 1.5.7; YDh 1.131
36 
A>DA 1.8.2; SDA 1.5.3-5; 1.6.1;
2.6.7; VaDh 12.14, 37-8; ViDh
71.13-6; FDA 1.133


--- PAGE 1027 ---
1016
Dharmasastra Parallels
37 
ApDh 1.31.18; BDh 2.6.10; VaDh
12.10; MBh 13.107.17; ViDh
71.17-21; YDh 1.135
38 
ÄpDh 1.31.13; COA 9.52; 5£>A
2.6.15; KaOA 12.9; ViDh 63.42; 71.23
39 
СОЛ 9-66; ViDh 63.25-30; YDh
1.133
40 
GDh 9.29-30; VaDh 12.5; ViDh
69.11
43 
COA 9.32; VaDh 12.31; Кг'ОА 68.46;
71.25; YDh 1.131
44 
СО/г 9.32, 48; ViDh 71.26; КОЛ
1.135
45 
ÄpDh 1.30.18; СОЛ 940, 6i; 5ОЛ
2.6.24; VaDh 6.12; 12.11; Кг'ОА 6о.il,
16,19; 64.5; 68.14; YDh 1.131,134
46 
ÄpDh 1.30.18; GDh 9.40; VaDh
6.12; K/OA 60.4,10, 21; YDh 1.134
47 
Кг'ОА 60.8-9, 15; YDh 1.134
48 
ÄpDh 1.30.20; СОЛ 9.12; ViDh
60.22; YDh 1.134
49 
ApDA 1.30.14-5; COA 9.37-8; BDh
1.10.10; KaOA 12.13; Кг'ОЛ 6o.i, 3,
23; YDh 1.16
50 
ÄpDh 1.31.1; СОЛ 9.41-3; ADA
1.10.10; КаОЛ б.ю; 12.13; ViDh
(,0.2; YDh 1.16
51 
КаОЛ 6.13
52 
КаО/? 6.1l
53 
ÄpDh 1.15.20; 1.30.22; GDh 9.32;
VaDh 12.27; Кг'ОЛ 71.26,32-34,37;
ГОЛ 1.135,137
54 
ÄpDh 1.15.21; СОЛ 973; ViDh
71.36; ГОЛ 1.137
55 
ViDh 63.8; 68.12; 7141,55
56 
ÄpDh 1.30.19; K;'OA 71.32-5; ГОА
1-137
57 
GDh 9.54-5; VaDh 12.42; ViDh
70.13; 71.56, 58; YDh 1.138
58 
BDh 2.6.38; MBh 12.186.19;
13.148.24; ViDh 71.60
59 
ÄpDh 1.31.10, 16; GDh 9.22-4; BDh
2.6.1l, 17; VaDh 12.32-3; Кг'ОЛ
71.62; YDh 1.140
60-1 ApDh 1.15.22; 1.32.18; GDh 9.65;
BDh 2.6.21; ViDh 63.2; 71.64-8
62 
GDh 9.58; ViDh 68.27
63 
СОЛ 9.9, 56; BDh 2.6.5; ViDh 68.21;
71.69
64 
ÄpDh 2.20.13; GDh 9.51; Кг'О/г
71.70-1
6s 
ViDh 68.20; 71.39
66 
GDh 9.4; Кг'ОЛ 71.47
67 
ViDh 63.13-4
69 
Кг'ОЛ 71.44,46; YDh 1.139
70 
ÄpDh 1.32.28; СО/г 9-5i; Кг'О/г
71-42-3
71 
MBh 13.107.15
72 
ÄpDh 1.32.5; СОЛ 9.32; BDh 2.6.9;
ViDh 63.15
73 
СОЛ 9.32; ADA 2.6.13; ГОА 1.140
74 
СОЛ 9.32; J3OA 2.6.6; KaOA 12.36;
ViDh 68.19, 23; 71.45; ГОА 1.38
75 
СОЛ 9.60; Кг'О/г 68.29; 70.3
76 
Кг'ОЛ 68.34; 7O.1
77 
CDA 9.32; ВОЛ 2.6.26; KaOA 12.45;
Кг'ОА 63.45; YDh 1.135
78 
ÄpDh 2.20.11; COA 9.15; SOA
2.6.16; Кг'ОЛ 63.23-4; ГОА 1.139
80 
ÄpDh 1.31.22; KaOA 18.14; Кг'ОЛ
7148-52
81 
KaOA 18.15
82 
Кг'ОА 68.38; 71.53
83 
ViDh 64.12
?? ??? ????
?? ??? ???? 
88 
ViDh 43.1-7
89 
Кг'ОЛ 43-8-15
90 
Кг'ОА 43-16-22
92 
КаОА 12.47; MBh 13.107.16; Кг'ОА
бол
93 
ViDh 71.77
94 
MBh 13.107.18
??  ??? ???? 


--- PAGE 1028 ---
Dharniasastra Parallels
1017
95 
ApDh 1.9.1, 3; GDh 16.1-2; BDh
1.12.16; VaDh 13.1-5; ViDh 30.1;
YDh 1.142
96 
ÄpDh 1.9.2; BDh 1.12.16; ViDh 30.2;
ГОЛ 1.143
97 
GDA i6.4o; F/DA 30.4
98 
VaDh 13.6-7; ViDh 30.3
99 
ÄpDh 1.9.9-11; GDh 16.19; BDh
1.21.15; VaDh 18.12-3; ViDh 30.14,
27; YDh 1.148
101 
VaDh 13.8
102 
GDA 16.5-6
103 
GDh 16.22; SDA 1.21.6; VaDh
13-36-7; ViDh 30.8-9; YDh 1.145,
149
104 
ÄpDh 1.11.8, 27-8, 31; GDh 16.10,
23
105 
ÄpD A 1.11.30-1; GDA 16.15-6, 22;
BDh 1.21.4; FaDA 13-32-3,35; F/DA
30.9; FDA 1.145
106 
ÄpDh 1.9.20-4; 1.11.29; BDh 1.21.7;
FaDA 13.9; Го/г 1.145
107 
ApDA 1.1O.24; 1.11.31; GDh 16.19,
45; 5DA 1.21.4; VaDh 13.17; FDA
1.150
108 
ÄpDh 1.9.14; 1.10.19; GDA 16.7,19;
BDh 1.21.5; FaDA 13.11; F;£>/! зо.ю;
TOA 1.148
109 
ÄpDh 1.10.22; 1.11.17, 25-6; 1.32.12;
GDh 16.11-2,18,34,46; BDh 1.21.8,
21; ViDh 30.16; YDh 1.149
но 
ApDA 1.11.3О; GDh 16.22; FaDA
13-34; F/DA 30.5; YDh 1.146
111 
ApDA 1.10.26; 1.11.25; YDh 1.146
112 
GDh 16.17, 34; FaDA 13.14, 23; ViDh
13-17
113 
ÄpD A 1.9.28; 1.11.15, 25,31; GDh
16.7,12, 35; BDh 1.21.4-5,17, 22;
VaDh 13.10, 21-2; ViDh 30.4; YDh
1.146,148,150
114 
BDh 1.21.22
115 
ÄpDh 1.10.19; 1.11.33; GDh 16.8;
BDh 1.21.16; FaDA 13.35; F/DA 30.9,
12; YDh 1.148,150
116 
ApDh 1.9.6; 1.11.9; GDA 1.61; 16.18;
BDh 1.21.8; FaDA 13.13, 26-7; F/DA
30.15; YDh 1.146,148
117 
GDh 16.48; VaDh 13.16; 5DA
1.21.1O-1
118 
GDh 16.34; ßOA 1.21.20
119 
ÄpDh 1.10.1-2; GDh 16.36, 38;
ViDh 30.5, 24-5; УОА 1.144,146
120 
ÄpDh 1.9.27; 1.11.16; GDh 16.17;
FaDA 13.17-9; F/DA 30.18-21; YDh
1.151
121 
ÄpDh 1.1O.2O; GDh 16.20,34; FaDA
13.20, 28, 31; F/DA 30.11,19—21;
YDh 1.149
122 
ÄpDh 1.11.8; ViDh 30.7; YDh 1.149
123 
ÄpDh 1.10.17-8; GDh 16.21; BDh
1.21.5; VaDh 13.30; ViDh 30.26;
YDh 1.145,148
126 
GDh 1.59; F/DA 30.22; YDh 1.147
127 
YDh 1.149
128 
ÄpDh 1.31.19; 5DA 1.21.18; FaDA
12.21; MBh 13.107.54; F/DA 69.1;
ГОА 1.79
129 
ÄpDh 1.32.8; 5DA 2.6.25; ViDh
64.3-4, 6
130 
Fr'DA 63.39; YDh 1.152
131 
MBh 13.107.52; F/DA 63.19
132 
ViDh 63.40; FDA 1.152
134 
MBh 13.107.20
135 
YDh 1.153
137 
ViDh 71.76; YDh 1.153
138 
(7DA 9.68; F/DA 71.73-4; YDh 1.132
139 
ÄpDh 1.31.12,15; CDA 9.20, 32;
F/DA 71.57; YDh 1.132
140 
5DA 2.6.21-3; FaDA 12.43; F/DA
63.2, 4, 6-7, 9
141 
F/DA 71.2
142 
ÄpD A 1.15.18; YDh 1.155
143 
ApDA 1.16.14
144 
F/DA 71.79
146 
FaDA 26.14
150 
F/DA 71.86; 76.1; FDA 1.217


--- PAGE 1029 ---
1018
Dharmasastra Parallels
151 
ApDh 1.31.2; GDh 9.39; MBh
13.10748; YDh 1.154
152 
MBh 13.107.21
154 
BDh 2.6.35; MBh 13.107.33
155 
ViDh 71.90; YDh 1.154
156 
VaDh 6.7; A/S/z 13.107.6; ViDh 71.91
157 
KaZ)/! 6.6; MBh 13.107.7
158 
FaZ)A 6.8; MBh 13.107.13; ViDh
71.92
162 
ÄpDh 1.1.15; СО/г 21.15
163 
ÄpDh 1.31.23; VaDh 12.41; F/'OA
71.83
164 
ViDh 71.80-2
165 
GDh 21.20
166 
GDh 21.21
167-8 GDh 21.22
172 
А/5/г 12.92.2O
173 
MBh 12.92.20
174 
MBh 3.92.4
175 
Со/г 9-50, 68-70
176 
GDh 9.73; ra>A 71.84-5; YDh 1.156
177 
КаО/г 6.42
179 
MBh 12.235.12-3; YDh 1.157
180 
MBh 12.235.13-4; YDh 1.158
181-5 MBh 12.235.14-9
186 
ViDh 57.6-7
187 
ViDh 57.8
188 
VaDh 6.32; KD/г 1.201-2
191 
YDh 2.202
192 
K/'DA 93.7
195-200 ViDh 93.8-13
201 
BDh 2.5.6; ViDh 64.1; КО/г 1.159
202 
BDh 2.6.29; КО/г i.ió o
203 
ViDh 64.16; КО/г 1.159
204 
YDh 3.312-3
205 
ÄpDh 1.18.27; GDh 17.17
207 
ÄpDh 1.16.23-7; 1.19.1; GDh 17.9-
10; КаО/г 14.3, 22-3; F/0/г 51.19;
YDh 1.162,167-8
208 
ÄpDh 1.16.30; СО/г 17.10-1; КгО/i
51.17-8; YDh 1.167-8
209 
ÄpDh 1.18.16-7; GDh 17.12,17;
VaDh 14.9-10; ViDh 51.7, 9,17; YDh
1.161,168
210 
ДрО/г i.iS.iS, 22-6; GDh 17.17-8;
VaDh 14.2-3; MBh 12.37.22; ViDh
51.7-9; YDh 1.161
211 
АрО/г 1.17.17-20; 1.18.13; 1.19.14;
GDh 17.14,16-7; VaDh 14.2, 4, 20,
28-9; ViDh 51.9-10; YDh 1.161-2,
167
212 
ÄpDh 1.16.19; i- 7-3; 1.18.21; 1.19.14;
GDh 17.17, 19; VaDh 14.2,19; ViDh
51.10; YDh 1.162
213 
Др£>/г 1.174; 2.6.19-20; GDh 17.17-
21; КаО/г 14.2; Кг'О/г 51.11, i8, 20;
YDh 1.162-4,167
214 
ДрО/г 1.18.30; GDh 17.18; Faö/ г
14.3; ViDh 51.12; KD/г l.iól , 164-5
215 
ÄpDh 1.18.19; FaO/г 14.5; ViDh
51.14; KOA 1.161,163
216 
GDh 17.18; FtfDA 14.3, il; ViDh
51.15-6; КО/г 1.163-4
217 
ÄpDh 1.16.18; Со/г 17.18; VaDh
14.6, ii; Л/5/г 12.37-21; YDh 1.163
218 
Fß£>A 14.2; ViDh 51.8
222 
СО/г 23.23-4
223 
ÄpDh 1.18.3-8,14
224 
BDh 1.10.5; VaDh 14.17; ША
12.256.9
225 
BDh 1.10.5; ^«£>A 14-17; MBh
12.256.10
227 
КО/г 1.2О1
228 
YDh 1.203
229 
VaDh 29.8; Fi'DA 91.3,15-6; 92.21,
23; КО/г 1.21О
230 
ViDh 92.13-4; КО/г i.2io
231 
ViDh 92.5,11-2; КО/г 1.204-6, 2io
232 
VaDh 29.12; КШ/г 92.22, 27; YDh
1.211
233 
VaDh 29.19; КО/г 1.212
240 
MBh 13.112.11
241 
MBh 13.112.10,13


--- PAGE 1030 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1019
1.12.5; VaDh 14-39, 44; ViDh 51.6,
27; YDh 1.174
18 
ApD/! 1.17.37; GDh 17.27; 5DA
1.12.4-5; PaDA 14.39-40, 47; ViDh
51.6, 26; YDh 1.177
19 
GD/! 23.5; ViDh 51.3-4; ГО/г 1.176
20 
YDh 1.176
22 
FaD/г 14.15
24-5 ViDh 51.35; ГО/г 1.169
26 
YDh 1.178
27 ГО/г 1.179
28 
MB h 12.1O.6
29 
MBh 12.100.15
34 
ViDh 51.62
35 
VaDh 11.34
36 
ViDh 51.59
38 
ViDh 51.60; ГО/11.180
39 
ViDh 51.61
40 
ViDh 51.63
41 
SankhGr 2.16.1; KaD/г 4.6; WD/г
51.64
42 
ViDh 51.65
43 
K/D/г 51.66
44 
ViDh 51.67
45 
K/D/г 51.68
46 
ViDh 51.69
47 
ViDh 51.70; 7D/z i.lSi
48 
VaDh 4.7; КШ/г 51.71
49 
ViDh 51.72
50 
Л/5/г 13.116.12; ViDh 51.73
51 
F/D/г 51.74
52 
MBh 13.116.14,34; 13.117.10; ViDh
51.75
53 
MBh 13.116.10,16; ViDh 51.76; ГО/г
i8l
54 
ViDh 51.77
55 
FíD/ г 51.78
58 
ÄpDh 2.15.2-4; КгО/г 22.26-7; ГО/г
3-i8, 23
59 
GDh 14.1; 5DA 1.11.1; KaD/г 4.16;
242 
MBh 13.112.15
247 
ÄpDh 1.18.1; GDh 17.3; FöD/ г 14.12;
ViDh 57.10; ГО/г 1.214
248 
ÄpDh 1.19.13; FaD/г 14.16; ViDh
57.11; ГО/г 1.215
249 
ÄpDh 1.19.14; FaD/г 14.18; Кг'О/г
57-12
250 
ÄpDh 1.18.1; GD/г 17.3; BDh 1.9.8;
KaD/г 14.12; ViDh 57.10; ГО/г 1.214
251 
ÄpDh 1.7.20; GD/7 17.4; FaD/г 14.13;
ViDh 57.13; ГО/г 1.216
252 
ViDh 57-15
253 
Со/г 17.5-6; ViDh 57.16; ГО/г i.i66
260 
GDh 9.74; ßD/г 2.3.1; VaDh 8.17
CHAPTER FIVE
5 
ÄpDh 1.17.26, 28; GD/г 17.32; VaDh
14.33; КЮ/г 51.3, 34, зб; YDh 1.171
6 
GD/г 17.32-3; VaDh 14.33; F/D/г
51.36; ГО/г 1.17l
7 
GD/г 17.31; ViDh 51.37; ГО/г 1.171,
173
8 
ApD/г 1.17.22-4; GD/г 17.22-6; BDh
1.12.9-11; VaDh 14.34-5; ViDh
51.38-40; ГО/г 1.17О
9 
ÀpD/ г 1.17.18; GDh 17.14; ßö/
j
1.12.15; VaDh 14.37-8; ViDh 51.38,
42; YDh 1.167,170
10 
A>DA 1.17.19; GDh 17.14; SD/г
1.12.14; ViDh 51.42; ГО/г 1.16g
11 
ÄpDh 1.17.29, 34; GD/г 17.28-29;
BDh 1.12.1-2; КаО/г 14.48; F/D/г
51.28-30; YDh 1.172
12 
ApD/г 1.17.32-3; GDh 17.28-9; BDh
1.12.3; VaDh 14.48; K/DA 51.3, 29;
YDh 1.172-4
13 
GD/г 17.35; VaDh 14.48; K/D/г 51.27;
ГО/г 1.172,174-5
14 
GD/г 17.29, 34; BDh 1.12.3, 8; FtfD/г
14.48; ViDh 51.21, 29; ГО/г 1.173-5
16 
GD/г 17.36-7; SD/г 1.12.8; ViDh
1.51.21; ГО/г 1.177-8
17 
ÄpDh 1.17.37; GD/г 17.27; BDh


--- PAGE 1031 ---
1020
Dharmasastra Parallels
95 
GDh 14.9-11; ViDh 22.47, 52; YDh
3.21, 27
98 
YDh 3.2.9
101 
BDh 1.11.33
102 
F/D/г 22.8; YDh 3.15
103 
GD/г 14.31; ViDh 22.63-4; ГОЛ 3-26
ios 
BDh 1.8.52; Fí,D/ z 22.88; YDh 1.194;
3-31
106 
F/£>/¡ 22.89
107 
ViDh 22.90; ГО/г 3.32-3
108 
VaDh 3.58; F/0/г 22.91; YDh 3.32
109 
SD/г 1.8.2; 3.1.27; VaDh 3.60; Fr'D/г
22.92; YDh 3.33-4
no 
F¿£>/¡ 22.93
111 
ÄpDh 1.17.11; GDh 1.29-30; BDh
1.8.32,44; 1.14.4; VaDh 349-50
112 
BDh 1.8.33; VaDh 3.61-2; ViDh
2.3.7; YDh 1.182-3
114 
BDh 1.8.33; VaDh 3.58; ViDh
23.25-6; КО/г i.igo
115 
ÄpDh 1.17.12; СО/г 1.29; BDh 1.8.35;
1.13.26-7; 1.14.16-7; FoD/г 3.49;
ViDh 23.27, 29-30; ГО/г Ligo
116 
ÄpDh 1.17.13; BDh 1.8.50-1; 1.13.26,
29—32; VaDh 12.15-6; ViDh 23.8,
10; ГО/г 1.182-3
117 
ViDh 23.9, и; ГО/г 1.183-4
n8 
GDh 1.29; 50Л 1.8.42; 1.13.11;
1.14.11-2; VaDh 3.49; ViDh 23.13-
4,18; ГО/г 1.184
119 
GDh 1.33; 5£>/г 1.8.36, 38, 43;
1.13.13; VaDh 3.53; ViDh 23.14-5,
18; YDh 1.182
120 
BDh 1.8.39-42; VaDh 3.55; ViDh
23.19-22; YDh 1.186—7
121 
GDh 1.30-1; BDh 1.8.45-7; VaDh
3.51-2; ViDh 23.23; YDh 1.185
122 
ÄpDh 1.17.10; Со/г 1.29; BDh
1.8.34; 1.13.21-5; 1.14.1-2; VaDh
3.49; ViDh 23.16,18, 33, 56; ГО/г
1.187-8
123 
ViDh 23.5
124 
GD/г 1.31-2; BDh 1.9.11; 1.13.16—20;
VaDh 3.56-7; YDh 1.188
F/D/г 22.1; ГО/г 3.18
60 
ÄpDh 2.15.2-3; GDh 14.13; BDh
1.11.2; VaDh 4.17-8; ViDh 22.5
61 
GDh 14.14-6; BDh i.ii.i, 19-23;
VaDh 14.20-3; YDh 3.19
64 
GDh 14.23-7
65 
ViDh 22.85
66 
GD/г 14.17; BDh 1.11.31; FaD/г 4-34;
ViDh 22.72; ГО/г 3.2О
67 
ViDh 22.29-30; ГО/г 3.23
68 
BDh 1.11.4; ГО/г 3.1
69 
ÄpDh 2.15.3-4; ЯОА 1.11.4; FaD/г
4.34; ViDh 22.28; ГО/г 3.1
71 
GDh 14.20; 5DA 1.11.30
72 
BDh 1.11.8
73 
AjsDA 2.15.7-8; GDh 14.37-9; BDh
1.11.24; YDh 3.16
75 
GDh 14.44; ViDh 22.39; ГО/г 3.21
76 
GDh 14.19, 44; FaD/г 4.36; ViDh
22.40-1; ГО/г 3.2l
77 
YDh 3.21
78 
GD/г 14.19, 44
79 
GDh 14.6; SD/г 1.11.17-8; VaDh
4.24; F/D/г 22.35; YDh 3.20
80 
GD/г 14.28; BDh 1.11.28; F/D/г
22.42-4; ГО/г 3.24
81 
GD/г 14.20, 22; BDh 1.11.29-30;
ViDh 22.44; ГО/г 3.24
82 
ViDh 22.45-6; ГО/г 3.24-5
83 
GDh 14.2-5; FaD/i 4.27-30; ViDh
22.1-4; ГО/г 3.22
8s 
GDh 14.30; SD/г 1.9.5; 1.11.36; VaDh
4.38; F/D/г 22.69; YDh 3.30
86 
ßD/г 1.15.31
88 
ViDh 22.87; ГО/г 3.5
8g 
ViDh 22.56; ГО/г 3.6
go ГО/г 3.6
9l 
F/D/г 22.86; ГО/г 3.15
93 
GD/г 14.1, 45-6; BDh i.n.i; FaD/г
19.48; ViDh 22.48-50; ГО/г 3.27-8
94 
VaDh 19.47


--- PAGE 1032 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1021
151 
ViDh 25.13-4; YDh 1.75, 83
154 
YDh 1.77
155 
ViDh 25.15; YDh 1.77
156-7 YDh 1.75
159 
ÄpDh 2.23.5
160 
ViDh 25.17; YDh 1.75
164 
FaDA 21.14
166 
YDh 1.87
167-8 FDA 1.89
CHAPTER Six
1-2 
ApDA 2.21.1-5,19; 2.22.6-7; GDA
3.i; ADA 2.17.2-5; ViDh 94.1-2;
YDh 3.45
3 
ÄpDh 2.21.9-10; GDh 3.26, 28;
BDh 2.11.15; Wo/i 94-3; YDh 3.45
4 
GDA 3.26-7; BDh 2.11.15; FaDA
9.10; F/.DA 94.4; YDh 3.45
5 
G£>A 3.26, 29; BDh 2.11.15; FaDA
9.4, 7,12; F/DA 94.5; YDh 3.46
6 
ApDA 2.22.1,13-4,17; GDh 3.34;
SDA 2.11.15; 3-3-19; VaDh 9.1; F/DA
94.8-10; YDh 3.46
7 
/4pDA 2.22.7; GDh 3.29-30; BDh
2.11.15; 3-3-5-7, 20; VaDh 9.7
8 
ÄpDh 2.21.21; 2.22.11; ADA 3.3.19;
VaDh 9.8; F/DA 94.6; FDA 3.48
9 
ApDA 2.22.12; SDA 3.3.5-7, 20;
FaDA 9.10
11 
ÄpDh 2.22.17-8
13 
ApDA 2.22.2,17; 2.23.2; GD/i 3.26;
BDh 2.11.15; FaDA 9.4; ViDh
95.7-11; TOA 3.49
15 
ÄpDh 2.22.24; ViDh 94.12; YDh
3-47
16 
FaDA 9.4; YDh 3.46
17 
BDh 3.3.2, 9-12; ViDh 95.13-4;
YDh 349
18 
ÄpDh 2.23.1; GDA 3.35; BDh
2.11.15; 3.2.11; ViDh 94.11; YDh 3.47
19 
F/DA 95-5-6; YDh 3.50
20 
F/DA 95.11-2; YDh 3.50
125 
FaDA 14.23; F/DA 23.38; FDA 1.189
126 
GDA 1.42; FaDA 3.48; YDh 1.191
127 
BDh 1.9.9; FaDA 14.24; F/DA 23.47;
FDA 1.191
128 
5DA 1.9.10; FaDA 3.35-6, 47; F/DA
2343; YDh 1.192
129 
SDA 1.9.1; FaDA 3.46; F/DA 23.48;
YDh 1.187
130 
BDh 1.9.2; Faö A 3.45-6; 28.8; ViDh
23.49; TOA 1.187, 193
131 
FaDA 3.45; F/DA 23.50; FDA 1.192
132 
F/DA 23.51; YDh 1.194
133 
F/DA 23.52; FDA 1.193
134 
GDA 1.43; SDA 1.10.11-5; F/DA
60.24; YDh 1.17
135 
F/DA 22.81
136 
SDA 1.10.11-3; VaDh 6.18; ViDh
60.25
137 
FaDA 6.19; F/DA 60.26
138 
ÄpD A 1.16.7; GDA 1.36, 43-5; BDh
1.8.26; FaDA 3.26-9; F/DA 22.75;
62.8
139 
ÄpDh 1.16.2-8; GDA 1.36; BDh
1.8.18-22; FaDA 3.26-34; F/DA
62.6-7; FDA 1.20,
140 
ÄpDh 2.3.4-8
141 
ÄpDh 1.16.11-3; GDA 1.38-41; SDA
1.8.24-5; FaDA 3-37; ViDh 23.53;
FDA 1.195
142 
ADA 1.10.34; VaDh 3.42; F/DA
23.54; FDA 1.195
143 
GDA 1.28; SDA 1.8.27-9; VaDh
3.43; F/DA 23.55
144 
ÄpDh 2.1.23; ViDh 22.67
145 
ApDA 1.16.14; GDA 1.37; FaDA 3.38;
F/DA 22.75; FDA 1.196
147 
GDA 18.1; SDA 2.3.44; FaDA 5.1;
F/DA 25.12
148 
BDh 2.3.45; VaDh 5.3; ViDh 25.13;
FDA 1.85
149 
YDh 1.86
150 
F/DA 25.4-6; FDA 1.83


--- PAGE 1033 ---
1022
Dhariiiasastra Parallels
21 
ApDh 2.23.2; BDh 3.2.9, 11
22 
BDh 2.11.15; VaDh 9.9; ViDh 94.10;
YDh 348, 51
23 
ViDh 95-1-4; YDh 3.52
25 
ÄpDh 2.21.21; VaDh 9.11; ГОА 3.54
26 
FaDA 9.5, ll; ViDh 94.7; УШ 3.45,
51,54
27 
7DA 3.54
28 
F/Ö A 94.13; YDh 3.55
31 
Äpö/
i 2.23.2,4; SDA 3.3.9,13-4;
YDh 3.55
33 
/9£>A 2.17.1-6; ViDh 96.1
34 
SDA 2.17.15-6
35-7 ÄpDh 2.24.8; SDA 2.11.34; YDh 3.57
38 
ÄD/ г 2.17.18-28; ViDh 96.1-2; 7DA
3-56
39 
BDh 2.17.29; FaDA 10.1; MSA
12.236.27; 12.269.20
40 
BDh 2.17.30; VaDh 10.2-3
41 
CDh 3.16; BDh 2.11.24; 2.17.31;
VaDh 10.12, 28
42 
MBh 12.237.4-5
43 
ÄpDh 2.21.10; GDh 3.11,14; BDh
2.11.16; VaDh 10.6; MSA 12.237.5;
ViDh 96.2
44 
ApD/г 2.21.11; GDh 3.18-9, 24; BD/г
2.11.19, 21; 2.17.44; FaD/г 10.9-10,
13, 29; MBh 12.237.7; ^'DA 96.10-11
45 
MBh 12.237.15; ViDh 96.18
46 
BDh 2.11.25; 2.17.43; 2.18.2; ViDh
96.14-7
47 
GDA 3.24; BDh 2.11.23; VaDh 10.29;
MBh 12.269.6; F/DA
96.19-20, 23
48 
BDh 2.18.3; MS/г 12.269.6
49 
A/?DA 2.21.13; FaD/¡ 10.17, 20; MBh
12.317.25
50 
FaDA 10.21
51 
ViDh 96.5; ГОА 3-59
52 
GDh 3.22; SO/! 2.11.18; 2.17.10-1;
VaDh 10.6; ГОЛ 3.58
53 
ViDh 96.8; ГО/г з.бо
54 
ViDh 96.7; ГО/1 3.60
55 
BDh 2.18.12; FaDA 10.24-5; ViDh
96.3; ГО/г 3-59
56 
GDh 3.15; SDA 2.11.22; 2.18.4-6;
VaDh 10.7-8; F/DA 96.6; YDh 3.59
57 
FaDA 10.22; MBh 12.269.10; ViDh
96.4
58 
MBh 12.269.11; F/DA 96.9
59 
ADA 2.18.10-3; FaDA 10.25
60 
BDh 2.18.2-3; YDh 3.61
61 
F/DA 96.36, 38; ГОА 3-63-4
62 
ViDh 96.27-9, 37; ГОА 3.63-4
63 
F/DA 96.39; ГОА 3.63-4
64 
ViDh 96.40-2; YDh 3.63-4
65 
VaDh 10.14; YDh 3.63-4
66 
FaDA 10.18; ГОА 3.65
70 
FaDA 10.5
71 
BDh 4.1.24; VaDh 25.6
72 
ViDh 96.24
73 
ViDh 96.25
75 
ÄpDh 2.21.14-6
76 
MBh 12.316.42; ViDh 96.43-53
77 
MBh 12.316.43; ViDh 96.43~53
8з 
ÄpDh 2.21.4; BDh 2.18.20-7; VaDh
10.4
87 
ÄpDh 2.21.1; GDh 3.2-3; BDh
2.11.12
88 
/4/?DA 2.21.2; GDh 3.1
89 
GDft 3.36; ViDh 59.27-9
90 
FaD/z 8.14-6
92 
VaDh 10.30; ГОА 3.66
95 
VaDh 10.26
CHAPTERSEVEN
8 
MBh 12.68.40
14 
ГОА 
1.353
16 
GDh 12.51; FaDA 19.9; ViDh 3.91;
ГОА 1.367
18 
MBh 12.15.2
?? ??? ?????


--- PAGE 1034 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1023
22 
MBh 12.15.34
25 
MBh 12.15.11; ViDh 3.95
26 
GDh 11.2-3; КО/г 1.308-9
31 
GDh 11.2-4
32 
ViDh 3.96; YDh 1.333
33 
ViDh 3.97
37 
Кг'О/г 376
38 
AS 8.3.66; КгЛ/г 3.76-7; YDh 1.309
43 
Gß/г 11.3; YDh 1.310
44 
GD/г 11.4
45-7 
ViDh 3.50
48 
КгО/г 3.51-2
54 
ViDh 3.71; КО/г 1.312
56 
YDh 1.312
58 
YDh 1.312
61-2 
КШ/г 3.16-21
63 
AS 1.15-7-9
69 
ViDh 3.4-5; YDh 1.321
70 
AS 2.2.1-35; MBh 12.87.5; ViDh 3.6;
YDh 1.321
76 
ДрО/г 2.25.2-3
78 
GDh 11.12-8; SO/г 1.18.7-8; VaDh
19-3-6; ViDh 3.70; КО/г 1.312-3
79 
ÄpDh 2.26.1; P/DA 3.78, 8l, 84; YDh
1.313
80 
КО/г 1.322
82-3 
KD/г 1.314
84 
VaDh 30.7; КО/г 1.315
8s 
GDh 5.20; Кг£>/г 93-1-4
87 
GDh 10.13-6; BDh 1.18.9; ViDh
343
88 
Кго/г 3.44; YDh 1.323
89 
ÄpO/ г 2.26.2-3; ViDh 3.45; KD/¡
1.324
90 
BDh 1.18.10; КО/г 1.324
91-3 ÄpDh 2.10.11; G/i/i 10.18; BDh
1.18.11; Ко/г 1.325
94-5 
YDh 1.325
96-8 СО/г 10.20-3
99 
VaDh 16.6; КО/г 1.317; Pañcatantra
1.2; Л5 1.4-3
101 
YDh 1.317; Л5
1 1.4.3
102 
AS 1.15.60; MBh 12.139.7
103 
MBh 12.139.8
105 
MBh 12.84.46; 12.139.24; AS 1.15.60
106 
MBh 12.139.25
114 
AS 2.1.4
115 
ÄpDh 2.26.4-5; MBh 12.188.3;
ViDh 3.7—10
116 
MBh 12.88.4; ViDh 3.11-12
117 
MBh 12.88.5; ViDh 3.13-5
118 
MBh 12.88.6
119 
MBh 12.88.6-8
120 
MBh 12.88.9
121 
ÄpDh 2.26.4; MBh 12.88.10
122 
MBh 12.88.10; YDh 1.338
123 
YDh 1.338
124 
YDh 1.339
127 
MBh 12.88.11
128 
ÄpDh 2.26.9; BDh 1.18.15; <W5/i
12.88.15
130 
GDh 10.24-5; BDh 1.18.1; VaDh
1.42; Кг'О/г 3.22, 24
131 
GDh 10.27; ^оО/г 1.42; ViDh 3.25
132 
GD/г 1O.27; ViDh 3.23, 25
133 
ÄpDh 2.26.10; GDh 10.11; КаО/г
1.43; 19-23; Кг'О/г 3.26
134 
ÄpDh 2.25.11; GDh 10.9; F/O/г 3.79
135 
YDh 3.44
136 
VaDh 1.44; КЮ/г 3.27
137 
VaDh 19.26-7
138 
СО/г 10.31-2; VaDh 19.28; F/D/г
3-32
141 
ViDh 3.73; КО/г 2.3
142 
ÄpDh 2.10.6; GO/г 10.7-8; ÄD/ г
1.18.1; VaDh 19.1; КШ/г 3.2; КО/г
1.335
147-8 КО/г 1.344
155-8 ViDh 3.38; КО/г 1.345
159 
ViDh 3.39; КО/г 1.346
loo 
ViDh 3.39; КО/г 1.347


--- PAGE 1035 ---
1024
Dharmasastra Parallels
39 
CDh 10.45; VaDh 3.13; ViDh
3.58-62; YDh 2.35
40 
ÄpDh 2.26.8; GDh 10.46-7; ViDh
3.66-7; ГОА 2.36
41 
ÄpDh 2.15.1; GD/г 11.11, 20; BDh
1.2.1-8; VaDh 1.17; 19.7; ViDh 3.3;
ГО/г 1.36o
43 
GDh 13.27
44 
ÄpDh 2.29.6; GOA 11.23-4; FaDA
16.4-5
46 
ÄpDh 2.15.1; GO/г il.го; VaDh 1.17
50 
F/ОЛ 6.18; ГО/г 2.40
52-7 AS 3.1.19
53-6 ГО/г 2.i6
59 ГО/г 2.11
61 
GDA 13.1
62 
BDh 1.19.13; ^'ОА 8.8; YDh 2.68
63 
Др£>А 2.29.7; GDh 13.2; FaDA
16.28; ViDh 8.8; ГО/г 2.68
64 
GDh 13-2; FíD A 8.з; ГО/г 2.70-1
65 
BDh 1.19-13; H/DA 8.2; ГО/г 2.70
66 
SDA 1.19.13; ViDh 8.2-3; ГО/г
2.7О-1
67 
BDh 1.19-13; И'оЛ 8.2; ГО/г 2.70
68 
Faû/г 16.30
69 
VaDh 16.29; ГО/г 2.6g
72 
GDh 13.9; F/DA 8.6; ГО/г 2.72
73 
F;Z>A 8.39; ГО/г 2.78, 8o
74 
5О/г 1.19.7; ViDh 8.13-4
75 
ЛрО/г 2.29.9-10; GDh 13.7; ADA
1.19.14-5
76 
ViDh 8.12
77 ГО/г 2.72
79 
ÄpDh 2.29.7; Gö/ г 13.5; ViDh 8.24;
ГО/г 2.73
87 
ÄpDh 2.29.7; ИОА 8.ig
87-101 AS 3.11.34-7
88 
ViDh 8.20-3
89 
ViDh 8.25; ГО/г 2.73-4
90 
BDh 1.19.10; ra)A 8.26; YDh 2.75
93 
FaDA 16.33; NSm 1.183
171 ГО/г 1.347
179 
MBh 5-39-41
182 
ViDh 3.40; ГО/г 1-347
183 
ViDh 3.41
191 
А/5Л 12.101.44
202 
ViDh 3.47
203 га>Л 342; ГОА 1.343
204 
AS 6.2.6-12
205 
YDh 1.349
208 ГОА 1.352
213 
MBh 5.37.17
216 ГОА 1.327
218 
ViDh 3.87
219 
ViDh 3.88
221-2 YDh 1.329
223-4 ГОА 1.330
225 ГОА 1.331
CHAPTER EIGHT
i 
GDh 13.26; VaDh 16.2; ViDh 3.72;
ГОА 1.359; 2.1
3 
GDh 11.19-24; VaDh 1.17; 16.4-5
9 
GDA 13.26; Fa£>A 16.2; ViDh 3.73;
ГО/г 2.3
13 
NSm Mä 3.9
16 
NSm Mä 1.35; М5Л 12.91.13
18 
GDA 13.11; BDh 1.19.8
19 
BDh 1.19.8
25-6 ГОА 2.13-5
27 
GDA 10.48; VaDh 16.8-9; ViDh
3-65
28 гаэл 3.6s
30 
GDh 10.36-8; VaDh 16.19-20; ГОЛ
1-355; 2.33
31-2 YDh 2.33
35-6 ViDh 3.63-4; ГОА 2.35
37 
GDh 10.44; VaDh 3.14; K/DA 3.58;
ГО/г 2.34
38 
GDA 10.43; ViDh 3.56-7; ГОА 2.34


--- PAGE 1036 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1025
160 
YDh 2.54
163 
YDh 2.32
164 
ViDh 7.11
165 
ViDh 7.7; YDh 2.89
166 
ViDh 6.39; 7£>A 2.45
168 
ViDh 7.6; УО/г 2.89
176 
ViDh 6.19; ГО/г 2.40
i8o 
YDh 2.65
189 
YDh 2.66
191 
F/D/г 5.169-71
199 
YDh 2.168
200 
ASm 1.76
202 
YDh 2.170
204 
YDh 1.66
207 ГО/г 2.26s
211 ГО/г 2.259
215-7 ApjD/г 2.28.2-3; ViDh 5.153-4; YDh
2.193
219 
ViDh 5.168; ГО/г 2.187
222 
YDh 2.177
224 ГО/г 1.66; NSm 12.33; ^S 3-15-H
225 
YDh 1.66; Ло)и 12.34
230 
ViDh 5.138; ГО/г 2.164
231 
ViDh 5.140
232 
F/DA 5.138-9; ГО/г 2.164
233 
ASm 6.18
235 
ViDh 5.138-9; NSm 6.16
236 
NSm 6.17
237 
YDh 2.167
239 
ASm 11.36
240 
ÄpDh 2.28.5; GDh 12.19-21; ViDh
5.140-5; ГО/г 2.i62
241 
GDh 12.21-6; ViDh 5.146-7; ГО/г
2.l6i
242 
ViDh 5.151; ГО/г 2.163; AS 3.10.24
243 
ÄpDh 2.28.1
246-jYDh 2.151
251 ГО/г 2.151
256 ГО/г 2.152
97 
NSm 1.188
98 
GO/г 13.14-5; BDh 1.19.12; FaD/г
16.34; AŒw 1.189
99 
GDh 13.16; АО/г 1.19.12; NSm 1.90
100 
GD/г 13.18-9
102 
BDh 1.10.24
104 
GDh 13.24-5; VaDh 16.36; ViDh
8.15; YDh 2.83
105 ГО/г 2.8з
106 
BDh 1.19.16; F/D/г 8.i6
107 
GDh 13.6; ГО/г 2.76
ю8 
YDh 2.113
109 
GDh 13.12-3; ViDh 8.19
112 
GDh 23.29; FaD/г 16.36
113 
ViDh 8.22-3
114-5 ViDh ch. 11-12; ГО/г 2.103-9
117 
FïD A 8.40
119-23 ГО/г 2.8l
124 
GDh 12.46-7; F;£>A 5-2-8
126 
GDh 12.51; ГО/г 1.367
127-8 VaDh 19.43; ГО/г 1.356
129-30 ГО/г 1.366
131-7 f'íOA 4-1-13; YDh 1.361-4
138 
ViDh 4.14; ГО/г 1.365
139 
Fz'DA 4.20-1; ГО/г 2.42
НО 
<7£>/г 12.29; VaDh 2.50-1; ГО/г 2.37
141 
YDh 2.37
142 
FaD/г 2.48; ViDh 6.2; ГО/г 2.37
143 
GDh 12.32; F/D/г 6.5
144 
ViDh 6.6; ГО/г 2.59
145 
ViDh 6.7-8; FD/г 2.58
147-8 GDh 12.37; FaD/г 16.16-7; ГО/г 2.24
149 
GDh 12.38-9; VaDh 16.18; YDh
2.25
151 
GD/712.31, 36; ViDh 6.11-7; ГО/г
2-39
153 
GDh 12.30, 34-5
158 
ViDh 6.41; ГО/г 2.53
159 
GDh 12.41; FaD/г 16.31; ViDh 6.41;
ГО/г 2.47, 53; AS 3.16.9


--- PAGE 1037 ---
1026
Dhannasastra Parallels
257 
YDh 2.253
262 
VaDh 16.13-5; YDh 2.154
263 
YDh 2.153
265 
YDh 2.153
267 
GDh 12.1, 8,10; YDh 2.207
268 
GDh 12.11-4; YDh 2.207
269 га>Л 5.35-9; YDh 2.205-6
270 
ÄpDh 2.27.14; GDh 12.1; К//ЭЛ 5.23
271 
ViDh 5.25; №>m 15-16.23
272 
ViDh 5.24; jVSm 15-16.24
273 
ViDh 5.26
274 
ViDh 5.27; УОЛ 2.204
279 
GDh 12.1; га>Л 5.19; ТОЛ 2.215;
NSm 15-16.25; AS 3-19-8
280 
YDh 2.215
281 
Äjp/ ЭЛ 2.27.15; GDh 12.7; F/DA 5.20;
NSm 15-16.26
282 
Кг'£>Л 5.21-2; Лот 15-16. 27
283 гаэЛ 5-65; YDh 2.217; WSm
15-16.28
284 
ViDh 5.66-72; У/Эй 2.218-20
28s 
ViDh 5-55-9
286 
К/£>Л 5-75-6
287 
ViDh 5.75-6; УОЛ 2.222
2gi 
УОЛ 2.299
292 
YDh 2.298-9
297-8 гаэл 5.50-4
299-300 ÄpDh 1.8.28-9; GDh 2.42-4;
AS 3-3-8-9
302 
ÄpDh 2.25.15; YDh 1.336
304 
УОЛ 1.335
305 
VaDh 1.44; MBh 12.76.7
306 ТОЛ 1.335
308 ТОЛ 1.337
314-5 ДрОЛ1.25.4; GDh 12.43; BDh
2.1.16-7; ^оОЛ 2О.41; ViDh 52.1;
УОЛ 3.257
316 
ÄpDh 1.25.4-5; GDh 12.44-5; BDh
2.1.17; ^я£>Л 20.4l; гаэЛ 52.2; УОЛ
3-257
317 
ÄpDh 1.19.16; VaDh 19.44
318 
VaDh 19.45
320 
ViDh 5.12; Лояг 19.33
321 
ViDh 5.13; MSVn 19.32,34
322 
ViDh 5.81-2
324-5 ViDh 5.77-8
326-1 ViDh 5.83-6
332 
YDh 2.230; Л5 3.17.1-1
335 
MBh 12.121.57; YDh 1.358
337-8СОЛ 12.15-7
339 
ÄpDh 1.28.3; GDh 12.28; YDh 2.166
340 
GDh 12.49-50
348 
BDh 2.4.18; VaDh 3.24
349 
С/ЭЛ 7.25; BDh 2.4.18; КаОЛ 3.24
350 
BDh 1.18.12-3; VaDh 3.15-7; ViDh
5.190
351 
5/ЭЛ 1.18.13; VaDh 3.17-8; MBh
12.15-55; 12.35-19; 12.56.30; ViDh
5-191
354 
ÄpDh 2.26.19; YDh 2.285
355 
Д/>£>Л 2.26.18
357-8 YDh 2.284
359 
ÄpDh 2.26.20; АОЛ 2.4.1-2
361 
У/ЭЛ 2.285
362 
5/ЭЛ 2.4.3
363 
YDh 2.293
364-7 УОЛ 2.287-8
367 
AS 4.12.3
371 
GDh 23.14; М5Л 12.159.59; PÜß
A
5.18
372 
GDh 23.15; Ка£>Л 21.1-3; MBh
12.159.60
373 
М5Л 12.159.61
374 
ÄpDh 2.27.9; СОЛ 12.2; BDh 2.3.52;
КвОЛ 21.1, s; УОЛ 2.286, 294
377 
ÄpDh 2.26.20; КаОЛ 21.2-3; УОЛ
2.286
378 
ViDh 5.40; УОЛ 2.286
38o 
GDh 8.13; АОЛ 1.18.17; ViDh 5.2
385 гаЭЛ 54l, 43; YDh 2.294
386 
ViDh 5.197


--- PAGE 1038 ---
Dharniasastra Parallels
1027
389 
ViDh 5.163; YDh 2.237
392 
ViDh 5.94; YDh 2.263
394 
ÄpDh 2.26.16
396 
YDh 2.238
397 
YDh 2.179
398 ТОЙ 2.26l
399 
ViDh 5.130; ГО/г 2.26l
400 
YDh 2.262
401 ГО/г 2.252
402 ГО/г 2.251
403 
VaDh 19.13
404-5 AS' 2.28.21-21
407 
AS 2.28.18; ViDh 5.132-3
416 
MBh 1.77.22
CHAPTER NINE
2 
GDh 18.1; SD/i 2.3.44; ^яо/г 5.1;
ViDh 25.12; ГО/г 1.85
3 
BDh 2.3.45; РаЛй 5.з; MBh
13.20.21; 13.46.13; ViDh 25.13; YDh
1.85; Л/5>и 13.31
4 
GDh 18.22; SDA 4.1.12,17-9; VaDh
17.69-70; ГОА 1.64
6 
MBh 3.13.60
8 ГО/г 1.56
9 ГО/г l.8i
17 
MSA 13.40.12
18 
BDh 1.11.7; M5A 13.40.11
27 
MSA 13.46.10
30 
VaDh 21.14
32 
ÄpD/ г 2.13.5-6; GDh 18.9-14;
VaDh 17.6—9, 63-4
45 
ÄpDh 2.14.16-20
47 
ViDh 5.161; YDh 1.65
50 
Faö A 17.8
59 
GDh 18.4-5; SÖ A 2.4.9-10; VaDh
17.56; ГО/г 1.68
60 
VaDh 17.61; ГОА 1.68
61 
GDh 18.8
62-3 ГО/г 1.69
71 
ViDh 5.160-1; ГОА 1.65
72-3 ViDh 5.162; ГОА 1.66
75 
ViDh 25.9-10; YDh 1.84
76 
GDh 18.15-7; VaDh 17.75-80
80 ГО/г 1.73
81 
BDh 2.4.6
86 
ViDh 26.1; YDh 1.88
87 
MBh 13-47.36; ViDh 26.2-3
88 
GDh 18.21; BDh 4.1.11; Кд£>/г 17.70
go 
G£>A 18.20; ß£>A 4.1.14; КдОА
17.67-8; MBh 13.44.15; ViDh 24.40;
YDh 1.64
92 
GDA 18.20
93 
ViDh 24.41
94 
MSA 13-44-13
95 
MBh 13.44.26
98 
ÄpDh 2.13.11
104 
GDh 28.1; BDh 2.3.3, 8; ViDh 18.36;
YDh 2.117
105 
Д/?£>А 2.14.6; GDh 28.3; SDA 2.3.13
1O7 
VaDh 17.1; F/flA 15.45
109 
MBh 13.108.6
111 
GDh 28.4
112 
GDh 28.5-7; 5Ö A 2.3.4; ViDh
18.37; ТО/г 2.114
114 
GDh 28.11-3; BDh 2.3.6; KaDA
17.43; TOA 2.114
115 
ÄpDh 2.13.13
116 
GDh 28.8
117 
GDh 28.9-10; VaDh 17.42
118 
ViDh 18.35; TOA 2.124
119 
BDh 2.3.9
123-5 GDA 28.14-6
127 
GDh 28.18; BDh 2.3.15; VaDh
17-15-7; F/D/! 15-5
130 
BDh 2.3.14; MBh 13.45.12
131 
GDA 28.24; BDh 2.3.43; VaDh
17.46; MBh 13.45.13; ViDh 17.21
133 
MBh 13.45.14; ГОА 2.128
136 
GDA 28.19


--- PAGE 1039 ---
1028
Dharmasästra Parallels
15-7-9; YDh 2.130
176 
BDh 4.1.16; VaDh 17.74; ViDh 15.8
177 
BDh 2.3.28; VaDh 17.33-5; PÏOA
15.22-3; YDh 2.131
178 
ßD/г 2.3.30; VaDh 17.38; F/D/z 15.27
179 
YDh 2.133
181 
ЛроА 2.13.6-10; BDh 2.3.33-5
182' 
VaDh 17.10; ViDh 15.42
183 
FöO/ г 17.11; ViDh 15.41
184 
FöD/ г 17.39, 81; ViDh 15.28-9
185 
ViDh 17.6-8; YDh 2.135
186 
SD/г 1.11.9
187 
ÄpDh 2.14.2-3; COA 28.21; BDh
1.11.10-3; VaDh 17.81-2; ViDh
17.11; ТО/г 2.135
188 
GDh 28.41; ADA 1.11.14; FaDA
17.84-6; Кг'ЛА 17.14
i8g 
ДрО/г 2.14-5; GDh 28.42; SDA
1.11.15-6; VaDh 17.83; Кг'£>А 17.13
192-3 YDh 2.117
194 
F/DA 17.18; YDh 2.143
196 
F/DA 17.19; YDh 2.145
197 
F/Ö A 17.20; YDh 2.145
198 
A/5A 13.47.25
199 
AíS/ г 13.47.24
200 
F/DA 17.22
201 
ДрО/г 2.14.1; ODA 28.43; BDh
2.3.37-40; VaDh 17.52-3; ViDh
15.32; YDh 2.140
202 
GDh 28.43; 5DA 2.3.37-40; FoDA
17.54; ViDh 15.33; ГО/г 2.140
203 
GDh 28.44; F/£>A 15.34-6; YDh
2.141
205 
GDA 28.31
206 
GDh 28.30; ГО/г 2.118-9
207 
YDh 2.116
208 
Л/5А 13.108.11; ViDh 18.42
209 
Кг'£>А i8-43; YDh 2.119
210 
F/DA 18.41; YDh 2.120
212 
F/£>A 17.17; YDh 2.138
213 
M5A 13.108.7
137 
BDh 2.16.6; FoDA 17.5; ViDh 15.46;
ГО/г 1.78
138 
ViDh 15.44
139 
Fr'OA1547
140 
BDh 2.3.16
141 
VaDh 15.9-10
143-4 Со/г 28.23
149 
VaDh 17.47
150 
M?A 13.47.11
152 
ViDh 18.1
153 
BDh 2.3.10; FoDA 17.48-50; F/DA
18.2-5; YDh 2.125; AS 3.6.17
154 
ViDh 18.32
155 
GDA 28.39
156 
ViDh 18.28-30, 36-7
157 
MBh 13.47.56; ViDh 18.31
158 
ViDh 15.1
159 
GDh 28.33; BDh 2.3.32; Fa£>A 17.38
162 
ViDh 17.23
163 
F/£>A 15.28-30
164 
BDh 2.3.11
165 
GDh 28.34; ГОЛ 2.132
166 
ÄpDh 2.13.1; 5ОЛ 2.3.14; КаО/г
17.13; MBh 1.111.31; КгО/г 15.2; YDh
2.128
167 
5О/г 2.3.17-8; VaDh 17.14; К/О/г
15-3; ГО/г i.6g; 2.127-8
168 
BDh 2.3.20; VaDh 17.29; КШ/г
15.18-9; ГО/г 2.130
log 
BDh 2.3.21; ГО/г 2.131
170 
BDh 2.3.22; FaZ)/i 17.24; ViDh
15-13-4; YDh 2.129
171 
BDh 2.3.23; KaO/i 17.37; ViDh
15.24-5; YDh 2.132
172 
BDh 2.3.24; VaDh 17.22-3; Кг'О/г
15.1O-1; YDh 2.129
173 
5£>/г 2.3.25; VaDh 17.26-7; Кг'О/г
15.15-6; ГО/г 2.13l
174 
BDh 2.3.26; VaDh 17.30-2; ViDh
15.20-1; ГО/г 1.131
175 
BDh 2.3.27; Ка£>/г 17.18-9; ViDh


--- PAGE 1040 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1029
214 
ApDh 2.14.15; GDh 28.40; BDh
2.3.38; MBh 13.108.10
215 
MBh 13.108.12; YDh 2.120
216 
GDh 28.29; ViDh 17.3; YDh 2.122
217 
ViDh 17.7; YDh 2.135; AS 4.11.9
218 
YDh 2.126
219 
GDh 28.46-7; ViDh 18.44
224 
YDh 2.304
229 
УО/г 2.43
231 
ViDh 5.180
232 
K/DA 5.9, 11; YDh 2.240
234 
YDh 2.305
237 
5Ö A 1.18.18; ViDh 5.3-7
274 
K/DA 5-74
276 
YDh 2.273
277 
FÍ.DA 5.136; AS 4.10.1
278 
XDA 2.276
279 
YDh 2.279; AS 4.11.17
280 
YDh 2.273
282 
ViDh 5.106-7; AS 2.36.16-7
284 
ViDh 5.175-7
285 
K/OA 5-174
286 
ViDh 5.124; ГОА 2.245-6
292 
YDh 2.297
294 ГОЛ 1.352
294-5 
AS 8.1.19
315 
MBh 13.136.16
317 
MBh 13.136.21
318 
MBh 13.136.22
319 
MBh 13-136.23
320 
MBh 12.79.21
321 
MBh 12.56.24; 12.79.22
322 
GDh 11.14; VaDh 19.4
327 
MBh 12.60.23
328' MBh 12.60.26
CHARTERTEN
4 
Д/70А 1.1.3-5; 5Ö A l.l6.l; VaDh
2.1-2; MSA 13.10.63; 13.47.7; YDh
i.io
5 
Др£>А 1.13.1; ViDh 16.1; ГОА 1.90
6 
ApDA 2.13.4-5; S£>A1.16.6
7 
GDh 4.16; 5DA 1.16.7; ^e£>A i8.8
8 
GDh 4.16; 5DA 1.16.7; 1.17.3; VaDh
18.8; ГОА 1.91
9 
GDh 4.16; BDA 1.16.7; 1-17-4; ^я£>А
18.8; ГОА 1.92
11 
GOA 4.17; 5£>A 1.16.8; 1.17.7-8;
VaDh 18.6; ra>A 16.5-6; YDh 1.93-
4
12 
GDh 4.17; 5Ö A 1.16.8; F/D/i 16.4, 6;
ГОА 1.93-4
16 
BDh 1.17.7; f'aOA 18.1-3; tt'OA 16.4;
YDh 1.93-4
17 
5£>A 1.17.8; ViDh 16.5-6; ГОА 1.93-
4
18 
GDA 4.19; 5DA 1.16.8, 11-2;
1.17.13-4; VaDh 18.5; ViDh 16.5
19 
Bß/г 1.16.8-10; 1.17.11-2; VaDh 18.2
20 
5DA 1.16.16
21 
GDh 4.20
22 
GDh 4.21
24 
YDh 1.96
27 
MBh 13.48.14
28 
MBh 13.48.15
29 
MBh 13.48.16; ViDh 16.7
30 
MBh 13.48.17
31 
MBh 13.48.18
32 
MBh 13.48.19-20
33 
MBh 13.48.20
34 
MBh 13.48.21
35 
MBh 13.48.24-5
36 
MBh 13.48.25-6
37 
MBh 13.48.26-7
38 
MBh 13.48.27
39 
VaDh 18.3; MBh 13.48.28
40 
MBh 13.48.29; ViDh 16.17
43 
MBh 13.33.20-1; 13.35.17
44 
MBh 13.35-18


--- PAGE 1041 ---
1030
Dharmasastra Parallels
47 
ViDh 16.10-3
48 
ViDh 16.8
49 
ViDh 16.9
50 
MBh 13.48.32
51 
ViDh 16.14
52 
MBh 13.48.32; ViDh 16.14
56 
ViDh 16.11
57 
FaDA 18.7; F/DA 16.17
58 
MBh 13.48.40
59 
MBh 13.48.41
60 
MBh 13.48.43
62 
MBh 13.48.34; ViDh 16.18
63 
ÄpDh 1.23.6; GDh 8.23; ViDh
2.16-7; TOA 1-122
64 
GDh 4.22; 7DA 1.96
74 
VaDh 2.13
75 
ÄpD A 2.10.4; GDh 10.1-2; SDA
1.18.2; F«DA 2.13-4; ViDh 2.5, 9,11;
YDh 1.118
76 
газ/г 2.11
77 
ÄpDh 2.10.6; GDA 10.1; BDh 1.18.3;
FaDA 2.15-6; F/DA 2.9; YDh 1.118
78 
A/>DA 2.10.7; GDh юл; 5DA 1.18.4;
VaDh 2.18; F/DA 2.9
79 
ÄpDh 2.10.6-7; GDA 10.7, 15, 49;
BDh 1.18.3-4; VaDh 2.17-9; ViDh
2.6-7,12-3; TO/i 1.119
81 
GDh 7.6; ADA 2.4.16; VaDh 2.22;
F¿DA 2.15; 7DA 3-35
82 
GDh 7.7; SDA 2.4.19-21; VaDh
2.24,32-6; ГОА 3.35
84 
BDh 2.4.20-1; VaDh 2.32-6; MBh
3.199.19; 12.254.44
85 
ÄpDh 1.20.10-1; GDh 7.8; FDA 3.39
86 
ÄpDh 1.20.12-3; GDA 7.9, 14-5;
BDh 2.2.27; FaDA 2.24, 26, 29;
ViDh 54-18, 21; FDA з-зб, з8
87 
GDA 7.9-ю; FaDA 2.24-6; F/DA
54.18, 20; YDh 3.36-8
88 
ÄpDh 1.20.12-3; GDh 7.9-12;
VaDh 2.26; ViDh 54.18-21; YDh
3.36-8
89 
ApDh 1.20.12; GDA 7.13-5; VaDh
2.2.8; ViDh 54.21; FDA 3.37-8
go 
VaDh 2.31; FDA 3.39
gi 
BDh 2.2.26; FaDA 2-ЗО
92 
VaDh 2.27; FDA 3.40
93 
YDh 3.40
94 
ÄpDh 1.20.15; GDh 7.16-7, 21;
VaDh 2.37-9
95 
GDA 7.26; ViDh 2.15
96 
FaDA 2.23
98 
VaDh 2.23; F/DA 2.15
99—100 GDh 10.57, 60; F/OA 2.14; YDh
1.12O
102 
ЛрО/г 1.18.5-8,14-5; GDh 7.4
103 
VaDh 27.9
104 
FDA 3.41
ill 
ÄpDh 1.28.11; FaDA 20.45-6; ViDh
54.28
114 
FaDA 12.3
115 
GDh 10.39-42
116 
YDh 3.42
117 
FaDA 2.40-3
119 
GDA 10.16, 41
120 
FaDA 19.37
121 
GDA 10.56; 7DA 1.120
124 
GDA 10.61
125 
GDA 10.58-9
126-7 GDh 10.64-5; KDA 1.121, 262
129 
GDA 10.63
CHAPTER ELEVEN
1 
ÄpD A 2.10.1-2; GDA 5.21; 5DA
2.5.19; MBh 12.159.1
2 
MBh 12.159.2
3 
GDA 5.22; 5DA 2.5.20; MBh
12.159-3
4 
MBh 12.159.4
5 
ÄpDh 2.10.3
7 
FaDA 8.10; MBh 12.159.5; ViDh
59.8-9; YDh 1.124


--- PAGE 1042 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1031
11 
MBh 12.159.6
12 
GDh 18.25; MBh 12.159.7
13 
GDh 18.24; MBh 12.159.8
14 
GDh 18.26-7; MBh 159.9; AS
3-И-37
15 
A/fiA 12.159.10
16 
GDh 18.28-9; MBh 12.159.11; YDh
3-43
17 
GDh 18.30; MBh 12.159.11-2; YDh
3-43
21 
GDh 18.32; M?A 12.159.12-3
22 
GDh 18.31; A/5A 12.159.13; YDh 3.44
24 
K;DA 59.11; YDh 1.127
25 ГО/г 1.127
27 
MBh 12.159.14; ViDh 59.10; YDh
1.126
29 
MBh 12.159.15
30 
MBh 12.159.16
31 
MBh 12.159.17
34 
VaDh 26.16; MBh 12.159.19
35 
MBh 12.159.18
36 
ÄpDh 2.15.18-9; GDh 2.4; VaDh
2.6; MBh 12.159.20
37 
MBh 12.159.20
38 
MBh 12.159.21
39 
MBh 12.159.22
40 
MBh 12.159.23
41 
GDh 22.34; VaDh 1.18; 21.27; ViDh
54-13
44 
GDh 19.2; BDh 3.10.2; VaDh 22.1;
MBh 12.35.2; YDh 3.219-20
45' 
GDh 19.3-6; 5DA 3.10.3-5; KaDA
2O.1-2; 22-3-s; WA 3.226
46 ГО/г 3.226
48 
KaDA 20.43; ViDh 44-1
49 
KaDA 1.18; 2O.6, 44; ViDh 45.3-6;
ГО/г 3.2О9
50 
ViDh 45.7-10; ГО/г з.2п
51 
ViDh 45.11-4; ГО/г 3.210
52 
ViDh 45.20-1, 31
53 
ViDh 44.32
54 
YDh 3.220
55 
ÄpDh 1.21.8; GDA 21.1; KaDA
1.19-21; K/DA 35.1-2; ГО/г 3.227
56 
GO/г 21.10; ViDh 36.1; 37-1-3; ГОЛ
3.228
57 
ÄpDh 1.21.8; GO/г 21.1; ViDh 36.2;
37-4-5; ГО/г 3-228-9
58 
BDh 2.2.3-4; K/DA 36.3; YDh 3.230
59 
ÄpD A 1.21.8-9,17-8; GDh 21.1;
ßDA 2.2.13; ViDh 36.4-7; ГО/г 3.231
60 
ÄpDh 1.21.9-10; GDh 21.1,11; VaDh
1.23; K/DA 37.6, 9-10,13; YDh
3-234-5, 237, 239-40
61 
GDh 21.11; ViDh 37-15-8; ГОА
3-234-5, 238
62 
GDh 21.11; BDh 2.2.13; ГОА
3.236-8
63 
GDh 21.11; SDA 2.2.5; K/DA 37.14,
19-21; ГО/г 3-234-5
64 
GDA 21.11; ViDh 37.22-6; YDh
3.240, 242
65 
ÄpD A 1.21.14-5; GDA 21.11; ViDh
37.7, 24, 27; ГОА 3.239-40
66 
GDA 21.11; 5DA 2.2.13; ViDh 37.28-
30,32; ГОА 3.234, 242
67 
GDh 21.1,11; VaDh 1.23; ViDh 37.13,
31,33; ГОА 3-236-7, 239
68 
K/DA 38.1-6
69 
ViDh 39.1
70 
ßDA 2.2.6; ViDh 40.1
71 
ÄpDh 1.21.12-7; -ÖD A 2.2.15-6;
K/DA 41.1-4
72 
GDA 22.1; SDA 2.1.1
73 
ÄpDh 1.24.11-20; 1.28.21-9; GDA
22.4-6; SDA 2.1.2-3; ViDh 50.1-6,
15; ГОА 3.243
74 
ÄpDh 1.25.11; GDA 22.2-3; ГОА
3-248
75 
GDA 22.10; SDA 2.1.4
77 ГОА 3.250
78 ГОА 3.249
79 
ÄpDh 1.24.18


--- PAGE 1043 ---
1032
Dharmasastra Parallels
124 
GDh 23.19; ViDh 28.50
125 
ViDh 2.8.7
126 
ViDh 29.2; 40.2; 41.5
127 
GDh 22.14-6; BDh 2.1.8-10; VaDh
20.31-3; ViDh 50.12-5; YDh
3.266-7
128 
ÄpDh 1.24.14; GDh 22.14; BDh
1.19.1; Уо/г 3.266
129 
YDh 3.266
130 
ÄpDh 1.24.2, 4; GO/I 22.15; BDh
1.19.2; YDh 3.267
131 
ÄpDh 1.24.3-4; СО/г 22.16; SD/г
i.ig.2; YDh 3.267
132 
ApD/г 1.25.13; GDh 22.19; АО/г
1.19.6; VaDh 21.24; F/D/г 50.30-2;
ГО/г 3.27О
133 
YDh 3.270
134 
GDh 22.23, 25; Fi'D/г 50.34-5; YDh
3-273
135 
GO/г 22.24; ViDh 50.36-9; YDh
3.271, 273-4
136 
BDh 1.19.6; F/D/г 50.33; YDh 3.272
137 
SD/г 1.19.4; ViDh 50.25-8; YDh
3.271
138 
ViDh 50.29,40-1; УОА 3.272-3
139 
GDh 22.26; ГО/г 3.268
140 
VaDh 21.26; ГО/г 3.274
141 
ÄpDh 1.26.2; GD/г 22.2O-1; FaD/г
21.25; Fí'D/г 5О.46; ГО/г 3.269
142 
GDh 22.22; FíD/ г 5О.47; YDh 3-275
143 
PÏOA 50.48; ГО/г 3-276
144 
^'ö/ г 50.49; YDh 3.275
145 
F/D/г 50.50; YDh 3.276
147 
GD/г 23.2; BDh 2.1.19-21; VaDh
20.19; ViDh 51.4; ГО/г 3.255
148 
BDh 2.1.22; FaD/г 20.21; F/D/г
51-23-4
150 
GDh 23.6; yW/3A 12.159.71; ViDh
51-25
151 
GD/г 23.3; VaDh 20.20; F/D/г 51.2;
YDh 3.255
152 
5D/¡ 2.1.20; VaDh 20.18; F/D/г 51.5
80 
GDh 22.7; FaD/г 20.27; ГО/г
3-244-5
81 
ÄpDh 1.24.21; GD/г 22.8; VaDh
20.28; ГО/г 3.246
8з 
ÄpDh 1.24.22; GD/г 22.9; BDh 2.1.5;
F/D/г 35.6; ГО/г 3.244
88 
ÄpDh 1.24.6-9; GDh 22.12-3; BDh
2.1.12; FaD/г 20.23-4, 34-6; F/D/г
50.7-9! ГО/г 3.251
8g 
F/D/г 50.10
90 
GD/г 21.7; BDh 2.1.6
91 
ÄpD/ г 1.25.3; GDh 23.1; SD/г 2.1.18;
VaDh 20.22; Л/5/г 12.159.45; ГО/г
3-253
92 ГО/г 3.253
93 
ViDh 51.1; ГОА 3.254
95 
ViDh 22.82
102 
ÄpD/ г 1.25.10; ViDh 52.3; ГО/i 3.258
104 
ÄpDh 1.25.2; GD/г 23.8-9; SD/г
2.1.13-4; VaDh 20.14; ViDh 34.2;
YDh 3-259
105 
/ïjDD/ г 1.25.1; GDh 23.10-1; BDh
2.1.15; FaD/г 20.13; MBh 12.159.47;
YDh 3.259
106 
ViDh 53.1; ГО/г з.2бо
107 
ViDh 53.6; УО/г з.2бо
log 
ÄpDh 1.26.1; GD/г 22.18; VaDh
21.18; K/D/z 50.16; yD/г 3.263
по 
ViDh 50.22
111 
ViDh 50.16; УО/г 3.263
112 
ViDh 50.17-8
113 
ViDh 50.19-20
114 
ViDh 50.21
116 
КШ/г so.24
117 
YDh 3.263
118 
ViDh 37-35
119 
Л/70/î 1.26.8-9; GDh 23.17; 5DA
2.1.31—3; FaD/г 23.1-3; YDh 3.280
120 
GD/г 25.4; BDh 2.1.35
121 
5DA 2.1.30; VaDh 23.4; F/DA 28.48
122 
GD/г 25.1—2
123 
GD/г 23.18; ViDh 28.49


--- PAGE 1044 ---
Dharmasastra Parallels
1033
153 
VaDh 14.33; ViDh 51.50, 54-6
156 
ViDh 51-27.34
157 
GDh 23.4-5; VaDh 23.30; ViDh
51.3-4
158 
VaDh 23.12; ViDh 51.43-4
159 
VaDh 23.11; ViDh 51.45; YDh 3.282
160 
VaDh 23.11; Кг'£>/г 51.46-7
161 
GDh 23.26
163 
ÄpDh 1.25.10; ViDh 52.5
164 
ViDh 52.6
165 
Fí'O/г 52.7
166 
ViDh 52.8
167 
КлО/г 52.9
168 
ViDh 52.10
169 
ViDh 52.11,13
171 
GÖ/ I 23.12-3, 32; BDh 2.2.13-4;
FaDA 20.15-6; ViDh 34.2; 53.1;
УОА 3.233
173 
BDh 2.1.37-8
174 
ÄpDh 1.26.7; GDh 22.36, 23.34;
ViDh 53.4, 7; ГОА 3.288
175 
ViDh 53.4; ГО/г 3.291
176 
BDh 2.4.13-4; VaDh 23.41; ViDh
53-5-6
177 
MB/! 12.159.58; ViDh 53.8
179 
Ap£>A 1.27.11; BDh 2.2.11; КЮА 53.9
181 
GDh 21.3; BDA 2.2.35; FaDA 1.22;
MBh 12.159.35; ViDh 35-3-5; YDh
3.261
182 
Кг'оА 54.1
183 
GDh 20.4-6; ßß/г 2.1.36; VaDh
15.12-3; YDh 3.295
184 
GDh 20.4, 7; КаО/г 15.12, 14; ViDh
22.57
185 
CD/; 20.8-9; VaDh 15.15-6; ГОЛ
3-295
187 
GDh 20.10; Во/г 2.1.36; VaDh
15.17-21; КО/г 3.296
188 
GDh 20.11-4; SOA 2.1.36; ГО/г
3-296
189 ГО/г 3.297
190 
ViDh 54-31
191 
Кг'ОА 54.32; ГО/г 3.299
192 
FaOA 11.76-9; ViDh 54.26
193 
^ША 54.27
194 
ViDh 54.28
195 
Кг'Д/г 54.24; ГО/г 3.290
196-7 BOA 2.1.36; ГО/г З-ЗОО
198 
Лр£>А 1.26.7; ViDh 54.25; ГО/г
3-289
199 
YDh 3.289
200 
GZ)A 23.7; VaDh 23.31; ^'DA 54-12;
YDh 3-277
202 ГО/г 3-291
2О4 
ViDh 54.29
205-6 ГО/г 3-292
208 
А/ВА 12.159-43
209 
ÄD/ г 2.1.7; ViDh 54-3O; ГО/г 3-293
210 
ViDh 54-34; ГО/г 3-294
212 
ÄpDh 1.27.7; GO/г 26.2-s; BDh
2.2.38; 4.5-6-7; FaDA 21.20; ViDh
46.10; ГО/г 3-32О
213 
BDh 4.5-11; FflßA 27.13; Кг'ОА 54.19;
ГО/г 3-315
214 
G£>A 26.18-9; BDh 2.2.40; 4.5.8;
KaZ)/f 24.1-2; ГО/г 3-32О
215 
BDA 2.2.37; 4-5-Ю; VaDh 21.21;
К;£>А 46.ii; ГО/г 3-3i8
216 
BOA 4.5-15; ViDh 46.18; ГО/г 3.321
217 
GDh 27.12-3; BDA 3.8.lo, 19—23;
VaDh 23.45; 27.21; K/DA 47.4-5;
YDh 3.324
218 
GDA 27.14; BDh 3.8.26; 4.5.17;
КйЛА 27.21; ViDh 47.3, 6
219 
BDh 4.5.19; ViDh 47.7
220 
BDh 4.5.18; F/O/г 47.8
221 
GDh 27.18; АО/г 3.8.31; 4-5.20;
ViDh 47-9; ГО/г 3.325, 327
222 
BDh 3.8.30; ViDh 47.10
223 
GDh 26.1-6; 27.2; BD/г 3.8.3, 7-9,
12-3
224 
BDh 3.8.17; YDh 3.326


--- PAGE 1045 ---
1034
Dharmasastra Parallels
33 
YDh 3.139
40 
YDh 3-137-9
52 
YDh 3.219
55-6 YDh 3.207
57-8 YDh 3.208
60 
YDh 3.212
61 
YDh 3.213
62 
ViDh 44.14-20; ГО/г 3.214-5
63 
ViDh 44.21-5; ГО/г 3.21l, 215
64 
Кг'О/г 44.26-30; FDA 3.215
65 
ViDh 44-31-4; YDh 3.213
66 
ViDh 44-35-7; YDh 3.214-5
67 
ViDh 24.38-43; YDh 3.214
68 
ViDh 44.44; ГО/г 3.217
6g 
MBh 13.112.110; ViDh 44.45
75-6 YDh 3.206
83 ГОЛ 3.190
91 
ÄpDh 1.23.1
101 
КйО/г 27.2
108 
СО/г 28.48; VaDh 1.5
109 
ÄpDh 2.29.13-4; 50/г 1.1.5—6;
КяО/г 1.6; 6.43
no 
GDh 28.49; #£>A 1.1-7, 9
in 
BDh 1.1.8; КаО/г 3.20
112 
YDh 1.9
113 
СО/г 28.50
114 
5О/г 1.1.16; VaDh 3.5
115 
5О/г 1.1.11; VaDh 3.6
225 
ВО/г 3.8.14-6
226 
VaDh 24.46; ГО/г 3.309
227 
VaDh 25.3
239 
F/O/г 95.17
246 
VaDh 27.7; ГО/г 3.311
247 
VaDh 27.1-2
249 
BDh 4.1.29; FaO/z 26.4; Кг'О/г 55.2
250 
VaDh 26.5; Кг'О/г 55.4; ГО/г 3.304
251 
Fö/
г 26.6; ГО/г 3.304
252 
FaO/г 26.7; ViDh 55.6; ГО/г 3.305
254 
GDh 24.2-3; ВО/г 4-2.4-5
260 
GO/г 24.10-2; ВО/г 3.5.2-5; VaDh
2.6.8; MBh 12.148.26; 12.207.13; ГО/г
3-302
261 
BDh 4.2.15; MBh 12.148.26; ViDh
55-7
262 
VaDh 27.3
263 
5О/г 3.9.1-21; 4.5.29
CHAPTER TWELVE
5 
ГО/г 
3.134
6 
ГО/г 
3-135
7 
ГО/г 
3-136
9 
ГО/г 
3-131, 134-6
24 ГО/г 3-182
27 
Л/5А 12.l87.3O; 12.212.29; 12.239-2О
28 
MBh 12.187.31; 12.212.30; 12.239.21
29 
МВ/г 12.l87.32; 12.212.31; 12.239-22
31 
ГО/г 
3.137
32 ГО/г 3-138


--- PAGE 1046 ---
PADA INDEX
Note : The + sign indicates that the päd a is found in an additional verse given in the
critial apparatus.
1035
9.117
8.225
11.128
11.46
11-45
2.4
12.89
2.76
3-157
2.125
11.97
11-44
10.114
8.199
9.136
7.64
2.187
11-138
3-213
3.192
4.204
4-3
7-205
8.291
9-23
2.84
3-257
5-73
10.71
11.170
3-158
6.41
8.374
8.385
8.114
3-99
9.278
8.350
6.17
1.23
3.199
3-195
3-199
6.4
4.25
2.67
11.41
6.25
2.108
5-113
3.211
3.85
3.210
3-76
4-58
3-212
2.143
3-184
12.30
3-118
8.287
9-277
8.370
2-59


--- PAGE 1047 ---
1036 
Päda Index
477
1-3
8.174
7.205
8.187
8.148
11.137
9.119
9.119
8.235
5.13l
4.1l
10.105
5-145
10.81
2.153
11.156
11.161
5-21
8.199
12.101
11.151
8.121
8.118
11.233
11.147
12.103
2.153
9.110
1.44
i.io
1.27
11.247
9.187
4.98
2.39
8.278
8.218
8.266
8.214
11-99
8.35l
4.190
12.94
7-34
1O.1
6.1
10.131
9-56
11.266
11.8
11.121
5-76
8.156
9.78
4.122
З.П4
4.182
4.16
4.169
6.47
7.178
9.196
9.197
7.179
6.53
11.87
4.13
8.300
5-31
8.397
8.78
2.213
7.170
3.236
9.42
3-53
5-41
9-137
8.202
8.128
8.202
3.341
12.7


--- PAGE 1048 ---
Päda Index 
1037
4.202
3-115
8.158
8.155
8.161
9.91
9.286
5-127
8.53
3-247
3-35
5.109
5-118
11.200
1.78
9-321
7.21
4.148
4.2
4-73
8.47
12.41
8.127
6.64
8.304
2.111
4.174
9.249
4-54
4-133
8.310
4-171
4.170
И-7
4.78
6.83
9-83
6-93
6.36
юл
2-73
4.196
7.81
9.194
6.49
10-77
4.101
1.88,10.75
3-70
2.208
2.151
1.103,106
2.73
2.70
9.201
3-199
6-43
6.25
4-231
5-102
6-37
4.108
7-158
9.187
10.7
9.217
6-35
5-52
5-4
3.248
4-213
9.14
3.98
8.309
11.142
10.98
2.187
4.144
2.234
8.170
8.171
12.108
2.57
10.58


--- PAGE 1049 ---
1038
Pada Index
10.73
10.66
11.227
11.66
11.38
8.412
3.102
7.199
5-143
3.42
12.6
7.205
9-143
4.217
5.8
8.242
5-11
9.61
7-13
0-37
7.205
4.22
3-147
11.210
5-104
5-103
2.47
9.208
5-7
8.126
8.69
5.5l; +5-51
7.209
7.64
7.154
2.241
2.6l
11.56
8.36
8.105
5.153
5-144
7.6O
8.2O4
9.64
9.40
4.164
3-233
11.144
8.317
11.40
11.51
10.54
7.118
3-99
3-259
8-95
8-394
8.93
2.238
1-49
7-153
8.69
12.87
5-79
4.108
7.29
4.80
4.126
1.2
4.26O
8.211
6.8l
3.281
8.199
8.178
8.343
11.116
5.169
5.166
9.128
2.164
6.85
5.159


--- PAGE 1050 ---
Päda Index 
1039
1.85
1.85
8.329
7-183
9.296
10.25
9.101
9.195
1.8
9.28
5.161
6.2
8.54
8.182
10.51
6.31
3.255
3.214
3-214
11.89
12.60
11.251
8.139; +8.51
8.52
10.88
11.148
2.104
3-149
3.170
3.169
3.183
3.176
11.70
11.215
10.87
9.14
3.274
11.249
7-55
2.57
9-135
9.191
9.127
1.47
2.55
11-5
11.178
3-105
12.29
1.5
4.204
3.6l
6.26
11.256
9.223
9.88
9-244
2.64
8.1OO
7-205
10.55
10.71
9.291
5-112
8. loo
11.256
8.359
2.241
8.13
8.205
5-5
8.303
11.198
9.290
11-75
6.58
6.58
8.52
8.58
3-173
2.121
4-154
2.122
4.211


--- PAGE 1051 ---
1040 
Pacía Index
8.367
7.204
11.161
11-153
2.178
2.211
11.258
9.272
8-372
9.127
11.134
5.20
11.139
2.66
7-141
7.157
9-234
7-65
11.174
9.284
7.104
4.114
4-113
4.128
2.239
4.222
4-221
2.102
12.71
4.56
11-97
4.190
6.7
11.20
9.66
Q.22O
g.lOO
8.128
11.168
8.385
3-65
3.278
4.167
9.12
8.308
8.309
5.69
7.147
11.259
11.245
7-3
7.158
1-83
3-98
2.224
2.13
7.168
9.11
7.205
8.24
8.51
8.62
8.39
1.32
4.86
8.30
5-59
3-54
3-128
3-119
1.106
3-9É
8.392
9.92
7.222
5-68
3.28
7-99
7.101
4.169
6-54
2.184
6.57
4.200


--- PAGE 1052 ---
Pada Index
1041
7.86
2.149
6-59
8.330
3-53
3-207
11.118
11.119
11.209
11.207
3.218
8.282
8.282
5.102
12.68
8.198
8.145
8.94
8.75
2.128
11.117
9.205
9.317
2.214
4.188
8.1O9
3.2
8.2OO
1.15
10.101
9-74
6.61
11-253
8.32
3.10
5-128
12.114
3.170
10.99
6.71
9.254
8.316
8.140
5-155
5.58
12.9
8.37
6.17
10.86
8.250
10.64
3-136
5-82
3.136
4.206
8.102
8.102
8.1OO
4.189
11.16
4.119
8.9
8-3
9.250
5-96
8-337
11.219
3-20
3.269
7.156
9.305
3.275
2.2O3
3-245
5-36
12.78
12.15
11.66
4.227
3.98
2.5
8.342
5-74
3-247


--- PAGE 1053 ---
1042 
Päda Index
5.101
3-5
5.100
7.19
8.163
8.55
9.238
9-259
2.21O
343
8.109
2.130
4-90
12.75
9.186
2.114
2.122
4.204
7-205
11.141
6.76
12.116
7.98
1.1O7
7.1OO
12.2
9.127
3.230
8.127
5.104
9.2
7.226
8.199
5-118
8.419
1-34
1.67
5.29
5-75
9.189
6.6o
6-75
2.159
12.83
5-44
11.223
10.63
4.204
4.246
3-73
11.184
1.65
5-64
6.69
7.67
8.26
4.118
4.103
1-75
10.104
1.76
4.184
6.51
8.292
8.275
11.17
3.232
9.28l
8.4O1
8.2OO
8.2OO
9.241
8.314
5.86
2.222
5.87
3.217
3.115
3.251
5.144
2.6g


--- PAGE 1054 ---
2.6
3-165
1.108
1.2
4.156
4-156
1.109
4-156
1.1О9
4-156
5-91
4.102
2.1О9
2.225
2.148
2.247
2.220
4.182
3.27
10.79
12.НО
8-350
8.350
11.113
12.92
8.349
5.89
7.105
fvAO
11.115
4.252
6.38
1.51
7.205
7.205
7.213
9.177
5.42
9.12
11.05
12.119
12.119
Pacía Index
1043
8.84
8.350
9-243
8-341
8.223
9.98
5-135
6.21
2.117
7-131
8-33
4-223
5.67
11.15
7.204
7.152
3-7
5-88
11.266
1.2O
2.38
8.145
8.149
6.83
10.28
3.272
5.31
10.5
9.229
4.204
1.101
8.9
7-43
11.28
11.29
7.213
9-283
1.116
9.103
2.113
9-336
5-128


--- PAGE 1055 ---
1044
Pada Index
i.io
2.109
8.63
10.1
10.15
3.84
3-191
4.137
7.178
7.179
7.64
8.419
4-237
9.41
3.263
2.125
2.52
2.34
5-155
4.218
10.16
10.89
5-9
9.299
9.300
12.32
8.216
4.76
4.76
4-36
6.23
4-253
7.211
10-57
12.106
3-38
3-53
3.38
5-4
4.91
10.21
5.8
7.82
3-8o
5-102
6.34
11.79
8.390
2.38
7.161
3.107
4.29
3.208
2.244
2.108
2.22
6.32
2.204.
5-158
1-5
2.196
11.112
2.193
1.31
6.21
11.13
2.182
7.89
10.37
9.32
3-27
4.248
2.167
7-63
3-32
11-243
3-113
Э.242
11.3
10.93
9.189


--- PAGE 1056 ---
Pacía Index
1045
8-379
3-35
3-41
3-182
1.70
1.82
11.245
11.247
12.126
11.266
1.106
6.84
1.58
1.104
1.106
12.34
1.106
10.85
6.84
5.1
1.106
3.123
12.123
9.303
7-4
3-87
2.88
1.14
7-44
2-99
6.6o
2.93
12.52
11.40
4.16
11.65
2.233
9-6
9-325
8.259
4.101
11.90
?-37
3.1O4
11.27
4.1O
6.36
2.9
8.8l
11.48
7.205
12.89
5-166
12.1O2
3.141
9-245
9.24Я
4-153
1.99
5.146
11.89
4.212
12.15
6-73
12.14
7.121
7-139
10.125
3-245
4.109
4-151
5-143
3-89
3-265
3.246
6-95
9.24
10.42
9.88


--- PAGE 1057 ---
1046
Pada Index
9.258
12.14
12.50
8.366
1-93
4.245
3.107
4-244
5.135
2.194
7-145
4-93
1.98
2.68
4.228
9.170
12.96
3-174
2.146
9.27
2.148
9.175
2.209
7.205
3-115
3-218
2.182
4.109
8.87
4.201
7.155
2.15
9.250
8.106
9.156
9.116
9-115
2.63
4.201
4.203
1.14
1.46
7-215
3.104
6.43
4.66
2.145
4.119
2.85
2.53
3.208
11-133
6.24
11.217
11.124
3.103
8.125
7-175
9.121
3.209
4.66
2.52
11.196
7-195
11.108
11.109
9.141
2.140
3.228
1.69
8.193
7.197
8.249
5-154
7.184
8.357
3.161
9-79
9.201
8.352
3-4
4.132
5.98
8.350


--- PAGE 1058 ---
Pada Index
1047
4-44
9.40
5.6l
9-34
3.225
5-136
7.205
10.82
8.377
2.14
8.204
7.162
9-143
8.184
1.31
1.38
11.114
11.202
5-68
9.90
1.92
5.132
9.104
2.12O
9.2l6
9-77
1-45
6.1O
11.263
11.262
12.112
4.124
11.265
2.47
8.154
6.35
8.139; +8.51
9.218
4-5
4-4
3-45
3-50
9.88
4.120
3.46
5-144
4.179
8.206
8.388
11.42
2.154
3.80
11.237
4-94
6.30
3-201
4.21
6.42
7-205
4.65
8.17
9-163
9.123
6.55
3.29
8.270
2.83
2.141
3.83
9.60
1.91
1.15
7-9
8.82
3.102
11.213


--- PAGE 1059 ---
1048
Pada Index
4.166
3.13l
4.240
7-74
2.180
4-57
7.165
4.258
4.258
2.83
2.02
2.89
9.81
3-275
9.117
10.13
1.70
5.136
5.83
10.84
11.217
7.138
11.214
3.129
11.14O
1.68
4-57
4.240
12.113
8.77
8.91
10.63
7.100
2.12
5-137
7-50
9-99
7-215
4.136
2.78
1.50
5.26
11.130
11.118
11.131
2.2O
1.71
12.93
1-59
11.222
9.5б
4.125
4-91
4.160
9.148
8.244
7.226
5-100
3-286
12.116
1.59
12.26
5-55
12.123
ll.lSg
11.218
2.80
11.123
4-104
12.23
4.105
8.122
4.91
2.136
6.54
4.22
6-5
8.10l
2.24
З-ioi
11.72
3-167
9-45
9-24


--- PAGE 1060 ---
Pada Index
1049
6.29
11.173
7-156
6.87
10.130
11-3
1.36
9.226
4.253
10.27
8.341
8.387
12.69
1.91
2.248
9.235
o.io
9.312
4.181
3-9
11.227
8.252
4.181
11.103,170
11.108
11.146
4.102
4.247
11-253
11.190
8.19
5-2
9.319
3-93
12.125
7.107
9.242
9.266
7-33
5-167
1-57
11.232
5.146
6.97
3.147
2.19
2.68
8.409
6.86
9-55
8.218
9.101
2.237
10.131
8.278
11.265
7.86
1-41
3-77
9.260
8.350
1.11O
7.220
3.260
9-251
9-46
7.205
11.82
8.221
9.324
2.249
6.1
11-53
Q.l6
9.111
8.420
7.216
1.51
7.142
3.87
8.97
9.116
12.117
6.96


--- PAGE 1061 ---
1050
Pacía Index
5.110
12.51
12.82
12.124
9.103
7.71
5-149
2.25
11.180
8.119
3.146
11.99
8.8
9-325
8.301
8.266
4-259
9-25
11.162
9.336
7.98
3-273
542
8.344
5-93
2.81
9.54
5-40
1.46
3-215
3.166
3-268
9-165
9-159
9.164
11.238
1.51
8.281
11.93
9.252
3.68
3.190
9.122
5.2
3-275
7-152
3-29
3-31
З.ЗО
8.365
11.62
9-97
8.369
6.44
4.36
5.116
12.76
8.250
4-36
4.102
8.234
2.2OO
1.66
12.3
1.26
8.177
246
12.1
7.64
12.1O
9.302
9-300
1.22


--- PAGE 1062 ---
Pacía Index
1051
4-215
2.91
10.120
5-12
9.302
6.45
11.23
1.95
7.152
3-Й
7-205
7.205
8.274
9.160
3.222
3-144
11-45
12.11
8.175
2.178
7.46
12.89
11.46
3.12
ll.gO
11.121
5-157
10.117
2.216
2.189
9.89
10.90
2.2
7.27
8.121
2.180
2.147
8.358
8.112
2.5
6.94
2.2
4.92
2.58
2-59
8.153
10.36
7.138
4.219
10.23
ll.ló g
12.64
2-44
7.64
7.l6l
7.10
2.67
2.26
8.336
8.136
10.52
1.24
6.21
1.63
8.324; 9.293
6-45
3.272
7.205
9-4
3.98
3.105
2.41
12.84
7-205
8.363
11.142
9.225
1.39
11.241
9.150
11.12
8.1б7
3-234
742


--- PAGE 1063 ---
1052
Pada Index
2.19
7.1O
2.191
2.87
7.64
5-37
4.36
8.3Q8
9-51
3.275
8.402
9.262
8.179
7-9
3-66
4-57
3.65
3-63
3-15
7.62
7.64
7-77
10.60
3.63
3-155
4.226
8.152
8.151
4-7
3-86
9.232
11.164
8.106
11.178
11.209
7.205
7.210
11-5
11.190
9-233
9.301
1.97
11.79
11.109
4-154
8.152
10.94
1.83
1.86
4.226
2-173
11.231
5-138
7.184
3-94
7-154
8.207
7.205
1.40
12.56
11.71
10.91
10.84
10.82
3.165
11.145
3.276
2.23
7.205
3.190
4.207
11.160
4.83
2.65
2.46
8.283
10.34
9.280
8.123
11.250
7-193
12.64
5-120
9.220


--- PAGE 1064 ---
Pada Index
1053
4.125
12.53
8.81
7.127
8.5
8.2O1
11.157
5-11
11.138
5.131
9-253
7-205
9-53
1.80
9.174
8.222
8.223
5-32
6.48
12.58
5-51
7-51
4-35
6.52
11.27
12.80
10.19
10.13
10-49
5.83
9.229
10.9
9-320
8.411
4.135
2.42
7.144
11.21
1O.9
10.65
8.382
1O.11
8.384
7.l8l
11-34
8.312
9.3H
3-7
2.84
5-107
7.166
10.88
5.8
8.297
10.108
443
2.246
8.262
9.180
8.350
9-33
9-33
9-145
8.243
8.241
7.212
5.121
12.120
3.242
11.106
11.69
11.17
5-51
5-51
2.60; +5.138
11.228
4.219
4.209
7.186


--- PAGE 1065 ---
Pada Index
1054
7.224
3.209
12.47
9.329
7-131
8.298
5-90
7.205
2.36
2.36
8.407
11.88
11-57
4.209
5-124
4-72
3.260
4-143
3.32
3.26
3.21
2.27
7-147
5.61
1.48
1.78
3.280
3.226
7.76
8.350
3-4
11.171
9-237
11.104
2.217
2.247
2.212
2.211
2.2O7
11.6O
2.231
2.239
9.62
2.21O
2.233
1.1OÓ
4.252
11.103
4.251
2.205
2.2OO
2.198
11.56
2.184
5-65
2.164
8.317
11.1
11.143
7.190
8.247
9-159
7-105
8.264
4.230
6.27
3-163
6.89
6.2
3.78
8.62
11.1O1
Ч.4Ч
3.5Î
8.2O5, 289
5-124
9.142
9.142
8.231
8.113
8.88
5-95
3-64
11.197


--- PAGE 1066 ---
1055
Pacía Index
9-50
11.213
11.92
11.110
11-175
8.102
8. loo
11.60
2.204
8.325
3.207
8.231
5.131
11-95
5-131
3.273
8.205
1.106
8.341
8.166
9-274
7.119
8.221
7.116
2.157
7-115
6.4
6.28
8.254
9.271
9.202
6.23
6.45
5-51
5-51
9.275
11.135
1.50
3.241
8.156
8.153
2.138
8.125
12.55
3-239
10.51
1O.1O8
10.37
11.176
10.38
11.22O
9.153
3.24
11.122
11.22O
4.8
9.236
5-57
8.359
11.139
1.107
3.20
7.17
1O.4
11.110
6.19
10.118
6.33
4.1
9.186
2.34
6.91
3-46
3-207
12.1
12.125
9.264
1.81
8.137


--- PAGE 1067 ---
8.22O
8.109
4.65
2.121
i.6g
7-4
4.222
9-303
7.205
5.116
5-29
11.54
5-117
11.125
11.165
9.238
8.289
6.76
1.62
4.130
2.23
12.97
11.1O7
11.41
6.2O
12.44
7-154
9.298
9.261
4.249
4.212
3.152
9.284
7-151
5.25
11.102
12.63
2.35
11.167
7.194
10.50
5-119
12.72
2.191
8.390
1.82
4.118
8.189
5-19
4.199
4-51
4-185
8.239
8.291
12.65
8.279
8.292
8.277
LUI
11-153
5-33
8.365
8.205
6.6
3-151
И-53
7.149
5.61; +5.61
9.192
3-17
9.126
5-71
2.117
8.90
11.88
12.124
11.254
4.146
11.76
1056


--- PAGE 1068 ---
Pada Index
1057
10.111
11.195
' 4-145
11.78
374
11.252
2.87
6.62
12.80
1.2
6.77
5.131
4.36
4-36
7.69
5-70
10.122
8.41
11.125
8.20
5.61
10.67
10.18
10.67
2.HO
8.71
4-183
3-58
3-41
7-205
9-8
8.132
8-350
11.207
7-44
7.86
7.201
8.270
6.15
9.265
11.139
8.29
12.13
10.104
10.81
10.95
11.68
8.57
11.173
3.264
3-31
3.275
9-239
3-134
3.135
5-105
4-24
11.146
4.24
3.132
3-137
4-8
9.105
11.186
9-113
9-124
9.112
9-109
9.109
11.186
9.106
8.245
9.58
1-77
1.78
12.45
10.22
5-95


--- PAGE 1069 ---
1058
Pacía Index
2.230
2.230
749
7.12
10.96
7.27
8.333
5.151
1.94
4.147
9.172
9-147
11-33
12.35
9-54
2.22O
9-279
8.248
11.62
7-105
1.6O
4.174
5.61
9.124
1.6
3.265
7.29
9-123
3.253
4.86
8.243
9.112
8.117
4-234
3-275
1.42
8.261
8.334
3.98
7.36
2.236
8.90
5-24
12.115
3-223
3-95
4.161
3-99
9.246
4-243
7.225
12.27
2.170
9.190
3.124
8.336
8.104
2.112
8.74
7.146
8.293
7.217
8.238
8.2
2.170
9.41
8.353
2.117
11.239
11.242
2.223
9.267
9.185
7-75
9-234
2.218
3-77
7.114
11.261
9.19
9.306
11.247


--- PAGE 1070 ---
Pacía Index
1059
12.73
11.229
8.285
4.20
11.230
10.128
6.78
12.101
11.264
8.321
9.43
9.102
4.194
3.142
9-308
9-309
7.68
10.30
9-304
11.15
7.200
7.110
7-73
9-307
7.112
10.69
7.129
7.128
3.277; +3.276
7.180
9-311
9-265
9.305
1.119
6.71
7.205
11.244
11.16
7.205
7.205
9-51
12-47
6.90
8.192
8.274
1.9
7-77
8-393
3.189
2-15
3-273
4.246
3-1
5-47
7-205
7.174
7-163
7.169
7.173
3-61
8.9
7.181
9.68
3-123
1-54
7.183
4.117
4-104
1.18
7.172
6.8o
7.205
2-77
8.107
1-79
4.120
8.130
2.167
8.408
8.46
4.14
11-33
12.85
11.96


--- PAGE 1071 ---
Pacía Index
1060
8.8o
11.lO
11.179
12.28
8.103
5.83
3-22
9.279
3.225
1.11
1-73
' 3-ю
8-397
2.17
7.16
9.20
7.6
6.24
6.75
12.104
11.102
11.237
11.238
11.243
11.240
1-33
1.86
3-134
11.47
10.42
11.235
11-235
1-25
12.104
1.96
2.165
11.215
8.272
8.228
2.149
1-49
12.38
8.308
1-55
0.166
3.3
1.33
11.91
2.111
11.14
3.280
2.22
11.6l
7.205
9.222
2.228
g.igi
9-133
3.98
7.205
9-266
1.17
3-49
5.6l
5-113
9.138
9-9
2-15
7.205
9.88
2.5
8.83
11.84
7.103
9.96
11.32
7-5
4.191
1.108
8.381
7.205
4-136
12-99
3-59


--- PAGE 1072 ---
1061
Pacía Index
4.185
7.205
7.205
9.227
8.38
7-13
4.242
4-243
8.15
11.94
8.173
3.48
4.36
7.83
11.233
11.37
9.88
8.96
1.92
11.234
1-9
2.18
1.12
3-127
1-53
3-108
11-35
2.115
3.168
1.1O2
8.206
8.224
9-73
1.69
6.39
9.228
3.119
6.40
2.1O7
8.1OO
5.80
9-254
3.139
11.22
7.76
3-53
7-205
11.98
2.16
8.305
7-15
8.21
1-74
7.12
3.19
9-157
9.176
8.35
3.62
7-134
7.205
9.130
7-14
8.367
12.126
7.26
3.250
3-50
12.4
9-53
8.36
9.21
11.194
4.42
8.85
11.192
8.37l
9-95
4.120
8.29
11.206
4.166
9.22


--- PAGE 1073 ---
Pada Index
1062
9.36
9.161
8.61
12.81
10.14
1.60
7.107
1C.lOO
3.58
8.399
8.251
2.89
3.219
4.256
3.183
4.225
9.269
2.123
12.96
12.22
9.26l
11.211
12.39
7-159
9.224
1O.2O
3.150
12.48
6.27
1.27
1.13
9-69
4-88
12.75
2.129
8.131
5.114
1.1O
8.133
8.97
3.176
3.178
3.133
7.61
4.168
4.91
5.79
3.237
11.154
11.208
5.126
8.194
10.68
4.235
8.191
9.63
12.14
9.85
3-69
8.236
9-149
3.47
12.17
4-49
12.40
4.229
3-267
11.112
7.140
7.140
9-233
9.233
3.130
6.1O
11.127
8.403
5.154
11.167
12.58
8.339
3.101
8.12Q
2.169
8.210


--- PAGE 1074 ---
Pacía Index
1063
11.78
12.126
3-13
10.29
2.152
8.92
3-99
4.86
3.104
8.37
7-3°
4.178
4-36
7-59
12.17
7.136
8.150
2.99
1О.46
3.283
11.187
4-197
7-23
8.255
8.26l
12.74
8.385
7-39
11.124
9-49
12.109
7.122
11.86
9.158
11.43
Q.421
7.124
6.69
7-57
7.120
9-276
2.139
2.229
4.221
1.16
3-223
9-2б2
8.184
1.97
8.227
6.53
2.236
3-149
3.200
1.23
7.62
5-83
8.4
3.204
1-19
9.203
3-210
3.194
5.51
9.297
3.216
2-5
8.136
2.228
2.2.45
10.74
2.10
7-78
7.8l
9.313
5-111
12.20
12.21
8.48
7-56
3-17Ï
12.19
8.59
7-47


--- PAGE 1075 ---
Pacía Index
1064
8.418
8.389
6.15
10.89
12.105
12.111
8.1Ó Q
12.30
12.34
7.2OO
9.186
347
10.77
8.133
1.64
9-94
5-137
3-185
12.10
12.11
8.107
2.8l
3.271
4-36
2-77
11.224
2.60; 5.139
5-67
5-8o
5-67
12.4
12.8
5-51
12.51
12.41
2.43
8.124
4-193
2.232
2.237
2.83; 6.70
3-215
3-235
5-127
9.90
3-235
7.72
7.72
5-61
7-37
9.188
7-43
12.111
9-151
11.129
2.134
11.81
12.112
12.11O
8.6o
9-94
11.214
11.260
4.110
11.212
11.212
5-83
1O.92
4-7
8.284
1-3
3-258
3.206
4-50
8.207
5-92
7.187
7-152
8.159
7-51
7.22


--- PAGE 1076 ---
Pacía Index
1065
7.3l
7.18
7.18
9.273
7.108
7.28
8.214
3-175
3.267
9-323
9.71
9.129
9-333
3.82
5.10
8.326
5.58
5.14l
6.45
3-256
8.160
6.74
6.9
4.25
7-45
4.85
3-37
8.33
3.270
6.94
6.91
12.4
6.93
4-85
4.86
8.124
8.290
9.165
2.134
12.110
5-59
5.83
7.119
11.18
6.71
8.166
8.40
6.8
3-259
4-193
3.19l
3.143
4.227
8.160
1.88
10.75
5.6i
5-154
5.155
11.14O
8.51
8.47
11.185
3.171
1.112
9-28
8.409
3.246
8.342
11.184
8.412
9.179
8.41-
5.167
5-159
5.85
3-90
10.55
11.111
8.230
11.4O
4-21O
11.51
7-193


--- PAGE 1077 ---
Pacía Index
1066
8.406
2.232
1.23
4.157
4.221
9.310
7.24
11.178
4.180
4.167
4.157
9.288
5-145
7.66
7-63
7.1ЯЧ
7.66
2.2O2
7-105
4.151
2.186
3.130
7.195
5.125
4.246
6.46
2.54
3-203
3.72
4.130
2.176
6.12
7.205
12.4O
9-95
7-23
8.87
9-59
9-97
11.26
З.П7
9.315
1.36
3.180
5.32
2.152
3.201
7.205
8.45
1.118
9.251
7.86
6.63
6.65
3.196
7.205
3-203
4.36
4-153
7.205
7.205
3.18
7.205
7.205
7.205
7.205
7.205
7.205
7-205
3-205
1.72
3-75
7.205
3-38
7.205
7.205
1.67
3.240
3.169
3.38
7-205
5-134
10.103
8.171


--- PAGE 1078 ---
Paila Index
1067
9-131
3-148
9-139
9.132
9.224
9.221
2-179
12.45
9.227
9.223
8.86
5-115
9-332
11.165
8.288
12.79
9-17
1.26
7-49
9-5
7.114
3-275
1.86
1.86
4-9
9.289
4.127
8.142
8.141
8.141
3-233
8.338
8.1O2
8.311
10.20
3.107
3.286
8.348
8.341
9.140
4.1; 5-169
9.61
9.277
1.32
7.167
9.256
8.368
3.144
4.213
8.135
4.163
7.160
9.191
3.125
3.268
9.135
10.7
9.146
11.77
4.226
9-135
3-263
11-5
1O.121
8.237
3-l6o
5-51
11-34
9.231
1.106
3.106
7.70
8.137
8.15
4-238
8.8
12.31
7.209
4-176
2.13
12.23


--- PAGE 1079 ---
Pada Index
1068
4-195
4.107
4-243
8.20
4-155
4.169
2.15
1.106
8.57
12.117
11.84
8.122
7.28
8.212
7-79
3-98
4.227
6.64
2.224
2.112
8.23
9-333
8-49
4.242
12.109
3.173
10.127
8.272
8.12
9-152
5-30
4.250
2.246
12.62
11.67
11.50
4.232
8.320
7.130
11.163
8.151
10.120
1.106
12.103
6.Q2
1O.116
6.92
8.146
4-204
6.73
6.82
9.21
10.49
3.22O
8.415
8.249
8.265
10.59
4.48
4.169
3-51
7.90
4.70
4.15
o in
4.78
2.2О9
4-63
11.114
7.90
4-79
8.1ОО
5.19
4.169
12.48
7.205
7.205
7.121
4.169
8.93
6.16


--- PAGE 1080 ---
Pada Index
1069
7-133
3-188
5.84
4-45
3.236
4-75
8.56
Q.88
5.48
8.43
9-37
8.396
9-328
12.36
1-55
7-91
4-249
7.205
9.214
8.170
8.143
2.205
4.169
4.142
8.115
4.36
10.105
4.80
8.58
6.47
4-54
7.6
4-55
2.56
3.83
2.199
9.89
6.50
4.38
8.51
4.69
2.94
8.380
4.46
4-34
10.22
7.83
9.209
5-54
8.238
3.183
2.96
8.197
9.200
11.21
2.227
8.217
4.169
5-34
6.51
2.103
7.205
5-157
Q.88
2.156
2.229
1O.53
10.78
9-79
11.39
10.95
4-173
5-37
4.248
8.143
9.71
8.189
3.282
4-79
4-59
6.78
8.406
8.35É
4-203


--- PAGE 1081 ---
1070
Pada Index
8.64
8.355
4.187
R. 102
4.198
4-47
6.67
4.12O
7-205
372
3.123
9.199
7.87
4-99
9-46
4-64
3-9
4-44
4.177
3-229
4-65
4.6l
4-239
Q.215
7.205
2.245
3.282
6.1б
4-46
4.192
3-14
3-149
8.38l
11.31
5-50
5-17
4.65
4.67
7-93
4.121
4.62
2.188
8.144
3.109
9.185
4-57
5-56
8.389
9-125
8.347
7.91
8.381
4-45
4-79
4.70
11.24
8.44
2-5
И-37
4.88
11.157
4.9l
4.84
5-93
11.200
9-25Í
3-9
4.38
4.11
5-84
4.27
4-59
4.192
4.129
4.72
4-77
4-249
5.104
2.97
8.390
4.12l
9-65
7-105
4.236


--- PAGE 1082 ---
1071
Pacía Index
8.111
8.66
12.101
4.28
11.2
3.106
7.30
4-2O
4.61
4.80
10.126
3-57
5-141
9-43
8.185
3-97
8.67
8.65
8.232
3-i8o
4-79
11.47
4.82
447
8.361
8.186
8.50
4-47
8.65
11..ЧО
8.203
8.386
4-171
4-34
7.92
7.84
4.129
4.82
4.142
4-177
8.103
5-147
8.414
2.154
4.162
8.417
9.263
7.205
4-243
11.13
3-132
4-134
2.98
9.270
6.82
2.171
8.226
5.48
4-130
4-74
1.37
4-53
8.116
9.240
4.140
4-44
8.351
4.140
4.62
8.153
3-9
5-30
4-137
5-70
8.335
9-243
3-18
4-223
5-33
4.172
1.81
4.60
9.154
4.116


--- PAGE 1083 ---
1072
Pada Index
4.112
4.120
8.66
10.103
9.38
5.110
4.27
2.10Я
6.ЯО
9.1OO
2.52
445
8.203
9.64
5.162
2.11O
4-56
9-322
2.242
6-45
2.120
2.172
8.271
2.30
2.123
7-97
4-239
4-53
2.124
2.11»
7-93
7.92
5.87
i.io
3-138
7.205
3-52
2.161
2.225
8.67
4.236
8.64
3-8
4-135
4.67
4-99
5-43
11.246
4.249
4-55
4-43
4.205
2-195
6.45
4-163
8.82
9.18
5-155
4.64
3.229
4.29
5-69
7-105
10.126
8.196
11-58
8.192
8.190
8.188
8.18e;
8.194
8.271
9.260
8.22O
7-175
8.311
4.19
5.129
7.102
8.91
2.176
7.59
5.130
7.103


--- PAGE 1084 ---
Pada Index
1073
7.102
2.193
4.107
5-51
8.39
4.244
11.70
11.183
3-42
3.50
11.54
5-163
4.201
8.255
5.13
3.187
3.189
3.188
6.95
1.64
2.22O
11.219
6.95; +6.94
4-49
2.185
2.192
5-35
9-144
3-ЬЗ
9.68
7.64
8.332
8.331
8.198
6.6l
5.63
8.162
9.18
8-55
8.310
4.105
9.239
5-77
7-144
7.205
9-255
8.318
5.112
7.61
5.67
5.9l
11.152
11.185
12.90
4-219
2.51
10.39
10.8
10.34
8.361
2.16
2.142
12.84
12.89
7.205
9-247
7.205
7-205
8.414
3.98
1.117
11.2
2.198
1.1O6
4.113
5.67
7-70
7-65
7-82
1.28
4.21
10.33
4-37
8.26


--- PAGE 1085 ---
1074
Pada Index
4-15
3.103
4.60
4-57
9.14
2.40
2.106
2.219
9-91
11.105
11.36
11.231
9.144
8.362
12.82; +11.266
12.107
7-139
2.56
5.14l
9.48
8.43
д.бя
4-57
2.199
3.8
Э-б5
8.205
4-40
3-и
4-37
8-344
3-192
3-216
12.12О
8.329
3-275
6.2О
11.109
5.125
3-162
1.1О6
8.134
3-69
8.98
12.16
3-4
7-152
3-67
11.148
8.4О2
3.68
3-25
2.137
8-322
8.2Q7
8.268
7.130
3-71
3.126
8.4О4
8.223
8.223
8.223
8.138
8.205
7-126
5-136
11.176
4.2О8
5.165; 9-29
5-155
5.103
8.277
11.183
11.113
ll.lSo
9.58
9.8
5-156
3.262
5-155


--- PAGE 1086 ---
Pacía Index
1075
8.28
2.67
1-34
7.132
9.185
3-174
9.2OO
5-155
9.195
8.240
8.7
11.43
7.188
11.215
11.133
11.92
3-82
4.2O1
8.352
3.174
12.7
12.5
10.97
2.129
3.104
5-67
7-154
9.16
8.302
4.238
4-243
9.88
8.356
7-152
10.29
8.358
12.59
1.78
7.154
4.164
8.354
7.171
11.216
2.197
7.199
9.313
7.205
5.14l
4.227
4.176
7.212
6-45
8.33l
9-309
9.283
2.2O1
2.2O1
11.6l
3.172
3.171
3.228
7.219
8.223
7.64
3.40
5.118
3-45
8.135
5.19
11.134
3.256
1O.1O2
1-43
12.42
4.26
1.23
4.126
8. loo
8.229
8.234
8.410
1.90
8.325
8.223


--- PAGE 1087 ---
Pada Index
1076
3-275
8.97
1-39
8.212
8.161
9.218
2.1O1
2.1O2
5-92
4.115
11.119
5.16
3-43
8.227
8.226
5.156
3.224
8.280
4-227
3.98
7.86
7.86
8.404
8.283
3.230
8.18
8.280
8.18
9-13
7-50
4-36
11.228
3-177
3-159
12.52
12.70
3.274
1.90
10.44
12.6
7.207
4.226
4-57
1.118
5.90
4.30
3.26l
3.122
3.219
3.199
12-49
8.335
2.135
9.12]
3.222
9.186
3.221
9-3
2.231
9.185
2.133
3-221
12.94
3.55
3-237
3-91
3-266
4.36
3.122
9.172
11.178
4.150
3.8l
3.146
9.106
3-123
9.108
3.205
5.149
3-159
9-93
10.59
3-279
3-149


--- PAGE 1088 ---
Pacía Index
1077
1.66
3-254
11.ЯО
4.214
9.299
5-145
10.44
1.106
7.205
H-39
2.30
6.97
2.151
8.114
Ю-99
9.180
9-169
9-31
9.108
9.122
5.148
9-158
10.14
9-134
9-137
9-323
6-3
4-257
5-168
11.151
1.105
9-138
8.372
3-49
12.110
5-23
3.115
4.169
10.58
7.205
9.1
8.323
7-205
7-205
9.223
6.1l
7.78
3.198
10.125
10.38
3.129
11.166
6.21
1.47
8.330
4.96
3-117
2.54
4.3l
4.212
2.55
3.98
3-55
10.72
4.220
2.212
11.141
8.205
8.252
8-354
7.52
9-295
2.1O2
2.1O1
4-93
4.152
3-187
3.26
11.266
9.111
1.105
7-42
944
8.76


--- PAGE 1089 ---
Pacía Index
1078
8.6o
3.251
8.300
3-91
9.209
11.172
8.415
2-45
3-25
7.48
9.15
9.133
9.139
9.136
3-155
9.176
4.149
10.124
8.351
9.222
9-257
9.2Я6
3-113
5.118
3.264
4.91
1-35
9.228
5-107
9-257
4.195
10.40
10.63
9.96
9.26
1.89
5-94
11.244
9.327
7-143
1-51
9-5
10.118
7.25
8.175
9-59
4-94
4-41
4.42
11.196
2.197
8.23
9.317
1.48
9.310
7.205
9.285
10.31
4-52
4.11O
6.28
11.254
2.48
1O.111
4.186
10.11O
10.109
10.112
10.109
3.98
4.186
11.215
1.1
1.74
8.307
3-153
2.22O
2.2O3
9.84
2.2O6
2.195
4.206
1O.17
5-13


--- PAGE 1090 ---
Pada Index
1079
9-52
12.10S
2.21
4.52
9.27
7-125
8-3
6.72
2.12O
2.196
1-4
7-157
8.132
2.35
3.127
2.48
4-39
7.201
8.265
2.66
8.30
8.34
3.284
1O.2
1O.1
7-205
11.30
7.205
2.214
11.85
7.203
8.295
11.130
9.88
3-259
8.49
5-152
2.248
10.115
9.292
8.123
7.224
9-306
12.90
12.88
5-56
12.27
12.122
8.254
11.44
5-49
3-33
10.32
5.130
7.194
9.289
2-75
5.67
2.29
3-279
8.294
11.1OÓ
11-38
2.66
6.38
7.210
4.187
8.79
8.296
6.57
5-28
11.150
10.106
4.28
6.70
6.72
2.75
9.223
4.117
8.159
10.16
8-392
9.88
4.106


--- PAGE 1091 ---
1080
Pada Index
2.95
8.299
11.48
12.93
11.193
9.240
2.221
11.177
11.47
11.187
11.47
7.205
5-155
11-155
И-74
4-145
4.138
8.42
6.79
3-275
9-84
3.166
5-57
5.65
5.82
9-25
4.1Q9
8.102
8.363
3-153
5.115
5.122
5-27
9-75
9.76
6.67
11.143
1.84
9-52
3.98
11.144
5-54
11.71
7.182
5.14
7.106
12.66
12.78
9.288
12.79
5-23
8.172
1.76
2.215
7-167
8.168
9.184
7.40
8.164
8.73
12.54
LO.1O7
9.148
11.191
8.27
5-147
8.312
8.71
4-179
2.2O8
4.69
9.247
11.177
5.78
7.8
2.150
5.148
8.25


--- PAGE 1092 ---
Pacía índex
1081
11.160
12.99
8.411
1.48
10.70
10.70
9-35
9.330
1.96
4.19
2.91
7.68
7.104
2.27
5-63
4.195
9.322
8.89
11.245
5-129
6.87
4.128
11.225
2.183
3-50
9-316
4.100
2.146
2.74
11.193
4-36
2.173
7.14
3.185
3-154
2.116
2-37
3-39
3.89
1.97
11.87
11.76
11-55
11.49
9.235
11-73
2.70
i.io
4-149
2.71
12.50
4-114
2.106
9-320
11.57
3.231
1.86
2.127
9.155
5.138
11.178
8.276
1.31
3.189
2.135
3-243
2.157
8.37
11.150
11.1O7
8-338
11.236
Я.11О
11.68
11.11
9-149
2.1QO
11.18
1O.117
1O.4
4-245
Ю.93
11.85
10.15


--- PAGE 1093 ---
1082
Pacía Index
11.33
Ю.8
9-314
7-37
9.248
11.4
9-335
10.74
8.112
9-327
4.165
10.62
11.80
8.407
9.247
5.131
4-36
8.376
9.198
2.242
1.97
8.276
3.243
7-75
1-99
9.314
2-45
8.82
3.168
10.66
9.196
1.72
7-2
2.150
1.68
3-39
2.40
3-37
2.58
4.92
3-157
3-21
3-74
3-73
8.88
8.56
8.148
11.115
5.6l
9.268
11.166
3.227
5.18
1-113
5-17
1.2
9.104
9.192
4-139
8.120
7-15
10.1O7
7-95
8.371
7-94
4.120
9.32
9.86
5.154
2-49
12.126
10-35
2.49
5-111
3-1Ы
5-154
3.97
9.204
8.405
9.271
8-350


--- PAGE 1094 ---
Pada Index
1083
8.416
8.299
8.385
9-5
5.168
7.205
3-94
6.34
3-94
3.96
8.360
2.50
7-150
7.196
3.111
3.116
7.221
2-53
4.222
9.191
3.116
8.147
1.2
12.97
1.96
3.59
9.38
4-23C
10.84
11.5»
6.22
12.125
6.66
6.14
3.156
11.63
8.215
9-332
5-22
11. lO
7.123
7-97
2.188
11.73
2.188
2.188
6-55
8.390
10.91
3.109
3-112
3-125
2.128
2.124
5.142
9.212
4.184
9-57
3.173
2.132
3-173
9.194
9.2O7
9.215
9.182
3-i6i
4.208
5.133
4.145
4.146
9.258
5.152
2.33
2.31
9.329
11.168
12.61
9.286
11.147
4.207
8.163


--- PAGE 1095 ---
Pada Index
1084
4.222
10.48
5-15
5.14
8.328
10.89
9.80
5.122
12.62
5-41
5-2?
3.120
4.13l
7.15l
3-262
7.155
8.138
1.13
11.9
1.18
1.14
12.8
12.8
12.121
1-75
1.1
1.1
1-59
7-74
8.296
11.164
9.66
8.286
12.126
3-194
1.104
11.232
3-99
8.1
3.66
7.205
7.58
2.29
10.127
3-137
2.34
R.36
4-203
11.257
7-74
8.85
7.173
1.80
8.35
8.31
1-35
3.88
7.181
9-291
9.14
11.126
7.8
1-79
4.257
8.110
8.395
1-15
11-55
3-6
8.179
8.324
11.258
11.240
1.6
1.112
2.28
11.223
12.63
5-55
8.284
8.328
5-26
5-53
5-73


--- PAGE 1096 ---
Pada Index
1085
10.26
4.96
2.50
8.275
9.217
9.168
4.180
Q.171
9.177
2.226
3-148
5.67
9-193
11.178
2.169
2.130
5-81
11.172
9-131
9.140
9.92
1O.27
2.1,33
2.131
2.215
9.330
12.107
12.4
12.8
12.10
11.122
7.182
5-110
5-122
11.132
8.84
8.298
11.195
5-75
8.142
11.158
11.221
11.250
7.2O6
8.89
3.160
7.166
7.207
7.164
8.195
8.195
9.70
8.400
4.224
10.45
1.87
8.323
11.260
11.259
11.80
2.43
2.214
3-257
6-5
8.384
4.50
9.29O
8.289
8.144
7-47
4.241
4-5
10.35
94
5.160
5-108
5-105
5-135
7.11
4-39
5-136
7.132
8.327
4-217


--- PAGE 1097 ---
1086
Pacía Index
2.64
10.48
3.182
6.13
4.248
9.206
4-152
12.72
10-33
11-175
7.111
2.42
8.379
7-54
1.106
7-133
9.211
10.45
12.115
12.108
2.144
3.200
4.221
9.181
12.119
1-37
11.96
3-154
9.114
7.205
7-95
5-75
8.306
11.24
7-79
Ц-75
3-118
il.ii
5-31
5-40
11.25
5-39
5.22
3.28
4-237
4-36
5.39
12.49
9-6
7.188
7.189
6.2O
6.2O
L1.216
5-20
П-179
4.l6l
12-35
9-204
5-24
4.228
7-137
11.242
9-115
8.147
3-273
7-205
8.313
l.il
12.28
3.181
12.29
8.416
9.197
8-313
3-145
11.177
3-95
1.79
10.61
7.205


--- PAGE 1098 ---
Pada Index
1087
8.14
8.51
3.56
9-246
8.165
7-25
2.137
8.?6
8.293
3.56
12.37
1.30
11.221
1.41
1.4О
1.2
2.157
3-9»
2.218
9.48
2.1^8
3.277
4-254
12.1О1
4-17
10.28
8.385
7-73
6-90; +3-77
8.44
9-1О2
3-53
4-194
7-128
9-42
9-39
9.87
3.253
3.6l
11.204
7.2О8
11.229
12.73
11.23О
8.286
4-2О
1О.128
9-307
1.4О
7.16
8.391
7.129
7-205
3.77
5-27
9-70
4-97
8.101
11.201
2.158
2-5
9-311
4-51
7-177
7-205
7-205
5-61
i.lig
3-142
11.247
7-i8o
3.276
1.103, ю6
10.30
9.130
11-95
6.88
8.217
12.92
8.257
5-72
4.100
7.110
10.123


--- PAGE 1099 ---
1088
Pacía Index
8.305
9-99
9.127
1.56
7.181
7.172
7.174
7.170
6.8o
7.171
7.169
1.52
1.52
8.9
5-51
7.176
12.21
7.108
3.111
2.243
8.233
7.20
4-173
8.2ЧЧ
8.213
2.223
9.85
3.6l
1.71
3.283
9.155
11.194
11.239
8.8o
11.20
5-47
6.7
4-159
4.169
4-159
3.98
3-275
2.4
3-231
5-102
9.50
9.154
9-203
2.174
1.29
12.20
9.162
8.22
12.68
3.238
1.28
8.38
8.408
1-17
9.2O
9.126
4.204
4-204
8.115
2.115
8.92
9.171
9.178
2.227
2.161
5-25
8-341
9-57
9.120
8.343
3-153
2.157
8-53
9-273
2.95
3-174
12.106
9.167
9-87


--- PAGE 1100 ---
Pacía Index
1089
8.224; 9-73
9.281
5.104
7-94
8.319
8.174
8.355
8.333
3.78
6.40
3-193
7-5
10.72
8.208
11.234
2.92
8.1l
1O.1
9.107
3-6o
8.228
8.117
5-151
11.98
9.181
11.7
8.108
4-195
9.88
7.11
7-148
3-139
9.162
7-134
2.160
8.96
8.21
8.386
9.69
3-и
1-95
12.10
2.239
12.12
2.143
2.7
8-94
3.140
8.176
2.167
8.50
2.107
8.150
12 .Я.Ч
8-34
2.188
9-173
3-259
12.33
10.113
li.lSi
10.76
8-340
10.110
4.91
3.15l
4-33
8.370
4-3
9.22
9.161
9-36
4-134
9-9
5-34
8.6l
12.81
4-254
4.232
4.202
8.290
2.2O2
8.251
1.44


--- PAGE 1101 ---
1090
Pada Index
5-Ю
9.147
7.118
5-132
9.316
10.130
9-175
12.19
4.91
12.22
8.236
8.235
9.82
3-178
8.155
3-133
8-97
2.235
8.27
3-237
4.111
3.124
5-38
5.126
9.249
4-2
12.95
5-44
3-54
9-193
9.14
7.142
4-95
2-243
7.197
3.278
1.54
3.48
8.294
7-89
7.124
9-49
3-193
9.269
10.46
8.279
12.37
8.353
9.297
12.39
4.234
8.334
12.13
12.36
4.178
9.231
9-113
12.126
2.86
4-197
8.102
11.42
9.211
1.42
11.192
3-150
11.211
8.48
11.72
12.24
1O.1OO
9.314
8.364
7.127
9.219
8.230
8.165
8.219
9.11O
9-213
2-174
8.340
6.39
6.1


--- PAGE 1102 ---
Pada Index
1091
5.158
2.82
2.141
2.168
2.126
11.14
6.63
8.18l
8.191
4.255
546
8.382
8.95
3-53
8.180
12.25
3.22
8.158
5.15
4.221
3.36
8.59
11.182
1.2O
8.307
4.87
4-235
5-106
12.14
LO.96
2.11
2.156
11.12
11.19
1-7
12.12
5-45
3.212
4.81
12.66
9-253
9-3
8.306
12.44
1.43
3.204
7-3
7-99
7.101
9-15
7.181
4.216
4.41
5-108
5-66
6.77
3.239
5-133
11.5
7-203
8.209
7.96
7.69
10.94
7-223
3-24
7-125
3.202
4-33
7.1
2.65
5.83
2.190
8.268
11.88
8.318
3-119
8.249, 265
2.139
8.149
3-120
8.40


--- PAGE 1103 ---
1092
Pada Index
12.46
4.218
8.19
8.196
8.314
П.23
5-16
1.114
8.1l
9-275
8-399
7-НЗ
7-97
8.213
8.358
11.178
7-97
7.120
2..Ч7
5-94
9.301
7.123
9.221
1-73
5-66
8.86
1-65
4-73
2.22C
10-54
3.280
7-113
8.380
10.61
9.272
3.280
8.405
9.135
12.122
4.122
4.141
3-40
11.174
П-59
8.108
4.144
11.74
3-49
2.46
5-5
9-331
12-57
8.131
3-213
9.242
9.315
1-31
5.97
12-33
8.120
8.118
4-71
4.90
5.6
2.117
8.277
7.205
1.90
8.116
11.101
8.130
10.56
10.56
7.40
3.88
8.285
7-154
6.1
6-33


--- PAGE 1104 ---
Pada Index
1093
9.81
6.1
11.152
7.64
4.18
3-9
3-201
10.97
8.102
8.102
7.187
7.84
9-308
4.128
2.177
6.14
8.32
8.24
4.68
9.67
2.18
11.139
7-35
10.57
4.10
8.173
5.53
8.28
2.1OO
3-44
11.129
5-135
4.116
8.140
8.110
6.6
2.41
3-284
10.50
9.219
5-115
11.189
11.51
2.159
11-33
7.48
8.129
8.72
12.10
12.10
12.10
8.345
8.105
12.8
12.10
12.9
4-23
12.121
4.256
4-23
8.41O
11.12O
12.46
8.269
11.136
8-339
12.71
5-144
3-92
3.189
5-105
1-77
4.48
4.229
10.80
9.326
3.271
3.271
4-233
3.202
9-304
10.89
6.11
10.52


--- PAGE 1105 ---
1094
Pada Index
11.137
4.231
7.222
8.205, 289
7-115
7.117
9.226
9.225
4.249
7-158
8.201; +8.81
5-51
10.90
8.197
7-143
5-75
3-285
3-285
8.233
6.52
8.187
8.401
7-158
7.198
10.85
8.277
3-23
11-155
5-134
12.5
8.273
2.136
1.103
3-143
2.113
2.206
3.98
5.109
6.30
9.267
9.206
2.114
9.76
10.116
1.38
4.103
2.1
8.37
9.60
9.62
11-35
Q.75
9-74
12.84
2.85
9.72
1.58
2.216
12.84
6.56
11.78
8.22
11.2O3
7.205
3-179
8.2
7-39
4.68
3.226
3.152
8.257
8.268
2.80
11.177
6.62
3.220
10.123
11.81
10.10
4.111
9-150
5.99
5.83
9-334


--- PAGE 1106 ---
Pada Index
1095
2.155
11.107
3-224
9-45
2.132
2.217
8.377
9.210
1.115
4.241
7.46
4-97
3-195
8.82
8.229
11.2OÓ
9.241
3-207
12.6l
2.240
6.29
12.76
9-128
9-34
5-154
5-101
7-55
8.417
9.3l
7.105
7-105
3-90
3.85
11.29
7.218
7.218
7.205
1-15
2.96
1.89
9.2
12.32
2.239
4.220
8.219
7.146
6.79
3.258
7-33
9-55
7.221
3.177
6..4 2
7.1O6
12.07
7.192
8.239
1.113
6.56
3.180
5-7
5-38
11.145
5-89
8.11l
7.38
7.38
8.153
11.5
11.128
11.117
11.131
10.43
8.16
3-19
8.16
8.327
8.5
4.91
3.96
2.76
2.171
5.138
4.147


--- PAGE 1107 ---
Pacía Index
1096
2.166
2.83
3.179
11-5
12.119
4.3l
1.21
2.139
12.1O2
6.95
6.86
4.123
2.167
2.165
2.12
4-91
2.139
4.98
12.Q8
3-2
6.94
12.31
12.83
4.148
11.246
1O.8O
2.166
.4.186
2.97
1.84
2.6
4.14
11.204
2.1OS
741
4.18
7.219
1.15
10.68
4.36
6.9
12.87
2.26
10.36
9-253
10.47
10.19
4-133
3-67
2.67
10.3
2.127
9-253
8.376
10.78
8.268
10.12
5.140
10.101
10.83
3-112
1.116
8.418
3.110
8.382
9.326
11.236
2.32
10.10
5.83
5-99
8-375
9-151
10.23
2.155
3-197
4.221
1O.17
1O.11
9-153
9.328
11.127
8.268
10.98


--- PAGE 1108 ---
Pada Index
1097
2.62
1.86
8.267
3.121
3.84
3.108
9-173
3.207
2.72
4.260
12.18
8.420
5.164; 9.30
10.24
8.1
7.137
10.53
7-53
7-45
7-53
7-159
4.226
8.260
972
9.80
7.216
8.260
6.70
7.205
9.253
t.iii
11.159
2.189
3-234
2.3
4.198
4.204
11.63
8.373
10.21
11.198
9-39
7.116
7.117
8.388
11.9
10.124
11.210
8.315
9-274
4.32
10.129
4.196
2.44
4.165
7-74
8.98
8.267
8.38s
8.264
8.378
3.186
7.186
10.43
4.172
12.98; +6.71
8.237
4-74
5.115
4.112
4.250
9.17
2.119
2.119
4-57
11.199
11.191
6.26
3-44
8.247
12.16
7.112


--- PAGE 1109 ---
1098
Pacía Index
12.9
2.192
9.236
6.68
8.17
8.12
5.85
5.64
3.270
8.348
7.205
10.79
10.119
8.341
5-119
3-145
4.219
5-139
9-23
8.34l
8.396
8.246
8.316
4.20
9.230
4-83
8.256
8.82
3.100
10.112
3-64
9-259
11.83
4-175
8.70
1.103
12.77
11.135
4.211
11.154
2.177
11.218
8.374
3-13
2.172
8.68
3-16
10.64
8.383
10.12
5.140
10.41
10.18
3-17
9-157
10.121
2.24
2.137
3.156
8.413
8.104
11.156
4-139
9-334
li.lil
7.88
8.398
8.400
9.100
8.366
8.369
9.98
12.9
12.3
3.92
11.200
5.83
5-121
2.222
7.62
9-335
5-131
3.206
7-31


--- PAGE 1110 ---
Pacía Index
1099
11.149
8.385
10.65
10.129
9.265
7.20
5-6
6.12
9.163
9.105
8.320
8.322
4.214
3-57
11.208
4.168
5.П4
4.204
5-97
9.11
2.61
3.16
9.268
10.39
9.318
4.248
2.238
4.158
4.226
4.226
3-259
4.225
10.63
3-275
3-259
3-250
3-249
3.276
4-95
2.52
3.241
12.65
11.200
12-55
4.216
10.106
5.131
11.132
4.115
3.164
4.132
5-135
5.8l
8.394
3.184
3-128
8.393
4.224
8.395
2.90
i.ioo
9.88
2.207
12.86
9.184
5.3
5.1
2.98
11-33
4-155
2.9
2.1O
2.15
2.8
2.14
4.226
11.22
9.244
7-135
8.273
5.120
4.69


--- PAGE 1111 ---
1100
Pacía índex
5.18
4-9
3-1
8.403
3-23
3.217
5-83 [bis]
4.249
10.76
12.86
4-7
6.18
3.269
4.128
3.275
9.164
11.201
2-34
7.126
8.337
2.88
7.205
7.214
7-205
7.205
7.205
12.60
9.1
6.68
7-135
7.130
11.199
3.271
9-77
5-21
8.373
11.181
10.84
5.76
8.31
4-32
7.225
3-98
7.185
1O.6O
1.117
12-54
9.216
5-51
7.205
10.3
2.66
9.190
7.165
7.191
2.71
8.208
9.132
9.107
2.14O
8.364
8.368
7-7
11.251
11.159
11.19
7.148
9-47
9-47
9.174
11.171
11.59
3-93
2.244
2.249
9.170
3-71
11.116
11.126


--- PAGE 1112 ---
Pada Index
1101
11.69
10.40
2.3
10.25
9.285
7-34
7.88
4.89
3-153
9-93
7-54
8.295
11.203
5-45
2.168
8.362
2.23
4.106
4.227
4-89
1-57
8.180
12.25
1.28
5.53
11.182
8.288
7.122
5.3; 12.2
1-4
3.126
8.303
6.61
12.26
12.24
12.38
8.81
8.82
4-175
6.46
8.45
11.197
4.138
6-45
8.164
4-6
4-4
8.83
8.113
11.158
11.188
8.319
8.215
8.154
5-150
5-53
9.169
9.168
9-125
1O.6
8.46
10.92
6.18; +4.7
5.98
9.282
11.28
9.207
3.60
4.12
4.12
6.3
7.160
9.276
7.162
7.64
4.131
3.280
2.78
7-223
3.280
9.278
5-74
2.93
2.175


--- PAGE 1113 ---
1102
Pada Index
1.16
6.95
6.95
6.96
4.87
4-255
11.26
3-34
9.178
8.240
8.242
5.6o
7-52
6.48
9.294
5.8
10.115
11.123
9.296
9-295
4.201
9.287
5-35
5-71
2.82
2.116
8.79
9.264
8.10
8.13
3-115
8.74
6.44
9-253
7-85
12.91
3-153
9.156
8.269
7.196
9.134
9.210
9.120
9.205
7-57
9.67
6.66
2.144
7-163
4.40
5-60
r- Ö
O
5.00
11.82
1.Я6
3.98; 
4.212
7.62,64
2.51
7.26
8.41
7.19
8.268
8.287
5-49
8.347
3-244
9.282
8.157
3.158
8.188
6.41
5-124
3-249
3-49
8.73
9-287
7.87
8.177
3-254
7-143
2.131
10.73
3-99
12.74
8.146


--- PAGE 1114 ---
Pada Index
1103
4.183
7-1
2.25
12.77
2.142
8.360
2.147
8.4
8.211
8.200
3-141
2.162
5-124
8-54
7.60
6.74
9.252
2.23
8.183
8.18l
11.25
2.17
4-44
7.17
8.176
1.24
2.185
9.152
3-36
3-100
i.ioo
12.118
9.214
9.292
7.205
10.87
4-75
1.40
7.205
10.102
4-251
4.247
8.304
8.241
9.319
7-205
2-15
7.96
2.8
6.81
8.63
9-35
1-7
12.91
12.118
4.160
8.99
11.4
4.158
7-24
7.205
12.100
10.5
7.64
1.11O
11.245
1.87
7.2
1.93
11.77
9.242
11.64
11.222
11.188
7.205
7.205
4-17
8.168
10.86
2.1OO
9.183
12.95
9.183
7.71


--- PAGE 1115 ---
1104
Pada Index
2.234
5.83
2.86
9.182
3.172
6.88
8.263
5.6l
7.202
7.58
1.21
9.114
6.89
12.84
12.85
9-2O2
9.188
8.210
4-233
5.106
1O.2
11.226
8.190
2.137
7.22
7.177
7.205
8.134
4.2OO
5-50
3.12
5-77
5.78
12.113
7.67
6.85
8.346
4.71
3-153
2.1бО
2.83
6.70
11.249
2.72
2.63
8.225
2.103
3-79
12.125
5.46
2.7
8.193
2.11
6.1
4.26
3.140
3.357
3-86
3-248
2.67
2.67
9.141
7.206
7.214
3-131
2.79
7-85
8.375
2.145
8.383
8.378
12.114
i.io
8.281
1.98
9.270
3-30
7.80
8.253
8.178
1.115
8.75
8.258
8.182


--- PAGE 1116 ---
Päda Index
1105
8.82
11.178
9.176
11.86
9.78
7.168
1.22
5.155
9.82
11.1
8.391
3-5
5.155
5.165; 9.29
7.109
4.123
8.262
8.259
8.263
4.124
7.109
11.263
7.198
7.185
8.387
3.121
2.52
2.186
5-12
8.126
9.331
3.244
4.150
2.83
11.226
2.39
2.104
2.118
2.83
9.83
8.351
8-345
8.346
8.72
12.43
12.84
9-253
6.42
9-293
10.113
8-249
8.245
8.265
8.258
8.6
8.246
8.248
8.256
2.163
2.163
3-79
5-153
12.88
4.257
7.41
8.216
7.217
3.196
3-34
5-145
10.69
7.176
H-93
11.91
11.94
9.14
4-215
11.49
4.145
8.321
11.100
3.114
5.150
7.113


--- PAGE 1117 ---
7-32
6.6s
1.19
9-5
7.19l
5.6l; +5.61
10.47
10.26
8.326
4.84
11.104
2.221
5.164; 9-3°
1.6l
1.19
3.255
1.23
7.189
12.1OO
4-6
2.175
5.161
10.32
11.266
7-7
7.111
9.213
9.212
9.179
12.18
8.222
9.146
3.238
11.8
1.8
2.188
3-197
3.198
3.180
5.9б
9.129
11.255
4.81
7.30
8.10
7.205
5-86
8.315
4.210
8.301
8.302
9.312
9-263
8.6
11.162
9-237
8.358
7.150
9.26
4.205
3-62
8.70
9.198
12.69
2.240
5.9
8.68
2.33
2.179
5-72
3-52
1.114
8.7
9-232
10.62
9.230
8.77
12.67
7.149
8.349
11.224
11.67
1O.6
3.6
1106
Pada Index


--- PAGE 1118 ---
Pacía Index
1107
6.13
9-44
7.56
6.22
11.225
8.3
7.205
7.190
8.157
7.202
7.14l
3.207
5.28
11.241
12.42
8.82
7.211
4-259
11.204
2.138
4.201
11.202
11.205
4.203
2.181
11-175
5-103
4.203
4-203
7.220
2.245
5.105
5-122
5.142
11.149
4-143
5-117
7.192
8.223
7.80
8.332
3.275
3-3
2-74
11.255
3-163
7.181
2.2O
11.lOO
10.24
1-53
9.199
10.41
11.163
9.7
8.167
8.162
9.167
10.119
3.252
3.252
2.181
9.13
2.214
8.78
5-52
11.83
1.101
5.83
11.105
7.164
9.160
9.2O8
8.186
1.12
1.1
8.25
7.32
5-ibo
10.122
4-13
4.191
11.32
11.31


--- PAGE 1119 ---
1108 
Pacía Index
q.298
4-36
9.118
8.172
3-232
4.127
4-35
2.28
3-81
6.8
3-75
4.58
8.42
1.30
4.130
8.244
97
7.21
9-294
1.61
1.63
1.1O2
1.62
9.19
9.86
9.166
1-45
12.7O
9.118
7-35
1.63
11.88
3-33
11.262
11.136
5-51
8.99
11.40
8.14
9.248
9-45
9.187
3-233
3-237
3.211
3.266
2.94
11.252
11.78
2.52
11.107
1.94
3.135
5.135
3.162
12.43
9.280
11.51
8.3
10.83
4.170
11.64
12-57
12.56
12.59
1.29
3.164
9.324
2.21
5.61 [bis]
1O.114
7.208
4.188
4.189
3.7
3.15
8.232
7.205
4.141
3.242
2.194


--- PAGE 1120 ---
Pacía índex
1109
10.31
11.205
5.116
7-145
11.12C
9.318
2.1
2.62
3.227
3.28l
4-30
8.2O9
11.36
11.2O1
3.240
3-70
6.59


--- PAGE 1121 ---
This page intentionally left blank 


--- PAGE 1122 ---
INDEX TO THE TRANSLATION
abattoir 4.84-6
abortion 5.90; 11.88
abduction 8.323
Abhïr a 10.15
abuse 7.48, 51
Acäry a 10.23
acid 5.114
action (activity) 1.18, 21, 22, 26, 28, 30,
41, 42, 49, 53,55, 65, 66, 87,91,102,
107, 117; 2.4; 6.74; 7-205; 10. 74,
76, 80-1, 96, 99-100,117; 11.44,
65-6, 100,126,188,194, 232-5,
246, 256; 12.2-116
mental 1.104; 12.5, 8,9
oral 1.104; 12.6, 8, 9
physical 1.104; 12.7, 8,9
actor 4.214
Adhvaryu 3.145; 8.209
Adityas 3.284; 11.222
adoption 9.141-2,159-60,168
adornment 3.55, 59; 4.152; 9.129
adulteration 11.50
adultery 3.156,158,174; 8.356-9,371-
86; 10.24; 11.60,177-8
adversity, time of 1.116; 2.40, 113, 241;
3.14; 4.100; 5-33; 7.213-4; 966, 58,
103, 168, 313, 336; 10.1-131; 11.27-
30, 34, 228; 12.70
afternoon 3.277
Agastya 5.22
age 2.136, 154-5; 4-18; 9-14
old 6.62, 77
Age 1.68, 70, 71,72, 73, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85
Dvapara 1.85, 86; 9.301-2
Kali 1.85, 86; 9.301-2
Krta 1.69, 81, 83, 85, 86; 9.301-2
Treta 1.83, 85, 86; 9.301-2
Aghamarsana 11.260-1
Agnidagdha 3.199
Agnistoma 2.143
Agnisvâtt a 3.195,199
agriculture 1.90; 3.64; 4.5; 8.410; 10.79,
82-4, 90, 116
Ahindika 10.37
air 3-77, 90; 6.31; 11.215, 237
Ajlgarta 10.105
Ajyapa_3.197-8
Aksamala 9.23
alkali 5.114
alliance 7.160-3,169, 206
All-gods 3.83-5, 90, 108,121
alligator 6.78
ally 7.158, 164-6,177,180,186,206-9;
9.294
almsfood 2.51, 108,183,188; 3.94-6;
4.5, 248-9; 5-129; 6.7, 27-8, 34, 50,
55; 8.93; 11.73,124, 256, 258
ambassador 7.153
Ambastha 10.8,13,15,19, 47
ambrosia 2.162, 239
amnesty 7.201
Anagnidagdha 3.199
ancestors 1.37, 66; 2.58-9,176; 3-37-8,
74, 80-1, 91; 3-146; 4-124, 249, 257;
8.37; 9.28,106; 10.91; 11.211;
12.49, 94
classes of 3.192-202
worship of 4.150
ancestral offering 1.94-5, 112; 2.189;
3.18, 70, 72, 81-3, 97,122-284;
4.31, 109-11,116-7,131; 5-i6, 32,
41, 52; 6.24; 9.127
food 3.266-72
invitees 3.150-91, 187-191; 4.110
time for 3.273-81
ancestry 2.247; 3-5; 5-59-6o, 78,100-1;
9-59, 187; 11.183
Andha-Tamisra 4.88
Andhra 10.36, 48
anger 1.25; 2.214; 3-192, 213, 229-30,
235; 4-163- 4,166; 6.92; 7.11;
8.118,121, 173, 280; 10.63; 11.223;
12.11
Ahgiras 1.35; 2.151; 3-198
animals 7.72,149; 8.44,146, 242, 286,
296-7, 328, 404; 943; 10.32, 49,
72; 11.12, 132-42, 157, 2OO, 241;
12.9, 40, 68
aquatic 1.44; 12.57
carnivorous 12.58-9
classification 1.43-45
creeping 12.42
domestic 5.39-40
double-hoofed 11.169
draft 4.67; 8.146, 151
fanged 10.89; 12.58
farm animal 1.39, 43; 4.126; 8.229,
232-4, 238, 240-1, 244, 295, 297,
324-5; 9.326-8, 331; 10.86; 12.42,
67
incisors in both jaws 1.39, 43
land 1.44
looking after 1.90; 10.47
predatory 1.39, 43
1111


--- PAGE 1123 ---
1112
Index to the Translation
single-hoofed 5.9,11; 9.119; 10.89;
11.169
skin of 2.41
vicious 12.56
unknown 11.156
wild animal 1.39, 43; 5.9; 10.48, 89;
11.138
antelope 2.64
anthill 4.46, 238
antidote 7.218; 11.238
Antyävasäyi
n 4.79; 10.39
Anumati 3.86
anus 2.90-1; 5.136; 8.282
Apapätra s 10.51
Apsaras 1.37; 4.183; 12.47
Aranyaka 4.123
archer 7.74
architect 3.163
argument 4.139, 179-85; 8.390; 11.206;
12.29
Arista 5.120
arm 1.31, 87; 3-279; 4.58; 10.45
armor 7.92
armory 9.280
army 4.121; 7.65,157, 167, 171,173,182,
184-5,188-90, 194, 222; 9.294,
313; 12.100
arrow 3.44; 4.113; 9.43-4
maker of 3.160
arsonist 3.158
artisan 2.134; 5-129; 7-75,138; 8.65,102,
360; 9.265; 10.99-100,120
Arya 2.39, 207; 4.175; 7.69, 211; 8.75,
179, 395; 9.17, 253, 258; 10.45,57,
_67, 69, 73
Aryavarta 2.22; 10.34
Asamvrta 4.81
ascetics 5.137; 6.1-97; 8.407; 11.219
female 8.363
heretical 4.30, 61
ascetic toil 1.33, 34, 41, 86, 94, 110; 283,
97, 164-7, 175, 228-9; 3-98; 4-148,
190, 243; 5.107; 6.23-4, 30, 70;
10.111; 11.1O1-2,194, 228, 234-45;
12.31, 48, 83,104
ash 3.97, 168,181; 4.45, 78,188; 5.111;
8.250, 327
Asipatravana 4.90; 12.75
Asmantaka 2.43
assault 7.51,196; 11.89
physical 8.6, 69, 72, 278-301, 345,
386
verbal 8.6, 72, 266-73, 345, 386
sexual 8.72, 352-85, 367; 11.62
assembly hall 9.264
assessor 8.Ю, 140
asterisms 12.48
astrologer 3.162
astrology 6.50
Asura 1.37
Asvayuja 6.15
Asyavâmïy a 11.251
asylum 7.160-2, 168, 174, 176
Atikrcchra 11.214
atom 1.27; 12.122
Atri 1.35; 3.16,196
attachment 1.89, 93; 3.104; 4.16; 6.33,
49, 55, 57, 72,75, 80-1, 96; 8.65
freedom from 2.13
attributes, three 1.15; 12.24-56, 99
Darkness 12.24-5, 29, 33-4, 38, 40,
42-4
Goodness 12.24-5, 27, 31, 37-8, 40,
48-50
Vigor 12.24-5, 28, 32, 36, 38, 40,45-
7
aunt 2.130-33
auspicious 2.30, 33; 7.182
inauspicious 11.183
austerity 1.25, 31; 4.236-7; 5.105,109;
6.22-4, 75; 10.42
Auttami 1.62
autumn 6.11
Avantya 10.21
Avrta 10.15
axle 8.291
Ayogava 10.12,15-6, 26, 32, 35,47
Baka 5.14; 11.136; 12.66
Baläk a 5.14; 11.136
balances 8.403
bald-headed 3.151
Baläk a 12.63
Bali 3.70, 74, 81, 87-94,108,121,265;
6.7
Balvaja 2.43
bamboo 4.36; 8.247, 299,327; 10.37
bandits 7.143; 8.66; 9.257
banner 11.93
banyan 2.45; 8,246
barber 4-253
bard 8.360
Barhisad 3.196, 199
bark 2.47, 76; 6.6
barley 3.267; 5.25; 6.20; 9.39; 11.107,
109,126, 153,199, 218
barren 9.81
barter 10.94
bath 2.1209, 211; 3.283; 4.45, 82-3,129,
152, 201; 5.144; 6.6, 24, 69; 7.216,
22O; 11.83,110,124, 133,187, 205,
215, 217, 255, 260
bath-powder 4.132
naked 11.202
with clothes on 4.129; 11.175, 203
bath-graduate 1.111,113; 2.138-9, 245;
3.4, 119; 4.1-260; 5.1; 6.1; 10.113;
11.2, 204
battle 4.121; 5.95,98; 7.88-90, 94,160-
3, 165, 171,185,187,191,194, 199;


--- PAGE 1124 ---
Index to the Translation
1113
9.323
bean 3.267; 9.39
beard 4.35; 5.141; 6.6, 52; 8.283; 11.106
beauty 3.40, 144; 4.141, 230; 7.69, 77;
9.14
bed 2.119, 194; 3.89,107; 4.29, 40, 54,
74, 202, 232, 250; 7.220, 225; 8.357,
372; 9.17, 63; 10.56,104; 11.166
bed-post 11.106
bee 7.129
bees-wax 10.88
begging 2.48-51, 108,182-90; 4.5; 6.27,
50-60; 8.93; 10.116; 11.1-26,123,
152; 12.33
Bel 5.120
belching 4.121
betrothal 9.69,71-73
betting 8.7; 9.221-8
Bhadrakäl l 3.89
Bharadväj a 10.107
Bhäs a 11.25,136
Bhauma 6.14; 11.156
Bhrgu 1.35, 59, 60; 3.16; 5.1,3; 12.2, 126
Bhrjjakantaka 10.21
Bhustrna 6.14
Bhutätma n 12.12
Big Dipper 2.101
bile 8.234
bird 1.39, 44; 3.9, 261, 268; 4.208; 5.11,
22, 40, 125,130; 651, 78; 7.23;
8.297, 328; 9.55; 10.89; 11.71,169,
241; 12.9, 55-6
breeder of 3.162
birth 1.42, 99,100; 2.30,146-50,169-
72, 227; 444; 5.58, 60-1, 70; 663;
8.20, 242; 9.30,125-6,172; 12.124
impurity 4.110,112; 5.61, 77, 79
birth rite 2.27, 29
black buck 2.23, 41
blacksmith 4.215
bladder 8.234
blind 3.161, 177; 7-149; 8.93, 95,394;
9.201; 11.53
bliss 1.106,117; 4.149, 258; 5.46
blood 3.180, 182; 4.56, 122, 132, 167-9;
5.135; 6.76; 8.44,284,287; 11.173,
183, 208-9
see also menstruation
blue jay 11.132
boar 3.270; 7.187; 11.135; 12.43
boat 2.204; 7-192, 8.408-9; 9.161
body 1.8,12,14,16, 17,32, 51,54, 55, 56,
93, 98; 2.26, 28, 60,66,100,164,
192, 232; 3.4, 7,10; 4-184,189, 243;
5.109, 132,141,157,165-6; 6.24,
30-2, 40, 47, 63, 78; 7.77, 112,218;
8.17, 23,125; 9.29,133; 10.91;
11.91, 230,232, 242; 12.3, 8,12, 15-
7, 24-5
bone 3.182; 4.78, 221; 5.59,68, 87,121;
6.76; 8.95, 250, 284; 11.141-2
boneless 11.141-2
boundaries 7.24; 8.6,149, 245-66; 9.291
bow 7.192; 8.237; 11.139
maker of 3.160
bowstring 2.42
Brahma 1.9, 11, 50, 68, 72,73; 2.58-9;
12.50
Brahman 1.98; 2.28, 82-4, 226, 233,
244; 3.21, 27, 37, 39, 89; 4.182, 232;
5.93; 6.32, 79, 81, 85; 7.14, 42; 8.11,
81,209; 11.98, 1O2; 12J23,125
time sacred to 4.92
Brähmana s 4.100
Brahmasuvarcalä 11.160
Brahmavarta 2.17-8
Brahmin 1.31, 88, 93, 96-101,103,104,
109; 2.2O, 31-2, 36-40, 42-6, 49,
62, 65, 80, 114, 125-7,135,155, 190,
225; 3-13-9, 23-4, 35, 63, 74,116,
197,199; 4-39, 48, 58,135,142,162,
197,199, 208, 236-7,245, 259-60;
5.2-4, 21-23, 27,36, 77, 83, 87,95,
99-101, 104,108, 127, 159; 6.30, 51,
70, 93, 97; 7-32, 37-8,58, 75, 79,
82-6, 88, 145, 201; 8.1,9, n, 20,
37-8, 60, 73, 87-9, 102,104, 112-3,
123-4,169, 267-8, 272, 276, 317,
325, 338, 340, 349-50, 359, 376-83,
385, 391-2, 407, 411-3, 417; 945,
149-51,153, 155,178,188-9,198,
229, 232, 235, 237, 241,244-5, 248,
268, 313-23, 327, 334,335; 10.1-4,
8,10-12, 15, 21, 30, 43, 62, 64-6,
74, 77, 80-94, 101-14,122-3,129;
11.2-4, 11, 18, 21, 25,29, 31-5, 38,
41, 49, 55-6, 68, 73-90, 94-8,100-
2, 127-30, 134, 136, 142, 150,163,
176,194,197, 202, 205, 207, 209,
215, 220, 225, 236,243, 249, 
262;
12.48, 55-7,60, 71, 82-109, 113,116
Brahmin seers, land of 2.19
branding 8.281; 9.237, 239-40
brass 4.65; 5.114; 11.168
Brbu 10.107
breath(s) 1.22; 2.120; 3.19, 241; 4.23, 28;
5.28; 12.123
control of 2.75, 83; 3.217; 6.69-72;
11.142,150, 200, 202, 249
smelly 11.51
brick 8.250
bridegroom 2.138; 3.29; 8.209
bride-price 3-51-4; 8.366, 369; 9.93,
97-8, 100
bridge 9.285
bronze 12.62
broom 3.68; 4.36
brothel 4.84-5; 9.264
brother 3.11, 55; 4.180; 5.83,15; 8.275,


--- PAGE 1125 ---
1114
Index to the Translation
299; 9.92,104,118,182,185,192,
194, 207, 211, 214-6 ; 11.172,186
deceased 3.173; 9.146
older 2.225-6; 3.154,170-2; 4.184;
9.57-8,105-6, 108-10,112-5, il?,
119-20,122-4,126, 204, 211, 213-4;
11.61
wife of 2.132; 9.57-8
younger 3.154,171-2; 8.116; 9.57-8,
1O8, 112-5, 117, 12O, 122, 2O4, 211,
213-4; 11.61,186
brother-in-law 3.55; 9.59, 69, 97,143,
147
bucket 8.319
buffalo 3.166, 270; 5. 9; 948, 55; 11.69
bull 3.29, 53; 8.16, 24259.50,123-4,
150; 11.117,128,130,137
butcher 4.86
butter 5.37
butter-milk 8.326
buttocks 8.281
Cailasaka 12.72
Caitra 7.182
Cakra 5.12
Caksusa 1.62
calf 4.38, 59; 5-8,130; 7-129; 9.50;
11.115,135,137
Calls 2.78, 81; 6.70; 11.223,249
Camasa 5.116; 6.53
camel 2.204; 3.162; 4.115,120; 5. 8,18;
8.146, 239, 296; 9-48, 55, 69;
11.138,155,157, 200, 202; 1255, 67
Cándala 4.79; 5.131; 8.373; 9.87; 10.12,
16, 26, 37-9, 51-6,108; 11.24,176;
12.55
Candräyan a 11.217
cane 7.132; 8.327; 9-230
capital 8.140; 9.294
Cärana s 12.44
carnivorous 11.138,157, 200
carpenter 4.210; 10.48
cart 2.204; 8.209; 11.175,202
Caru 5.117
caste 8.221, 271, 273; 9.148-57; 10.27,
40, 44, 64; 11.163
falling from 3.16-7,150,157; 8.88,
113; 10.92, 97,126; 11.55-67,108-
24, 176
low-caste 2.238; 3.9, 15, 241; 8.177;
9.23-4; 11.59,17i> 176; 12.9
castrate 11.134
cat 4.30,126,197; 11.132,160
cat-vow 4.192,195
cattle, see cow
celibate 3.50; 5.158-60; 6.26
cemetery 4.116; 9.318; 10.39, 50
chaff 4.78; 8.250
chariot 7.96,192; 8.209; 9.280; 10.47;
12.48
charioteer 2.88
chastity 3.2, 192; 4.128; 11.82,118-24,
225
children 2.168, 239; 3.15-7, 42, 61, 64,
76, 205, 259, 263, 278; 4-156,179,
184,189; 5.68-70,78; 5.159,161-2;
6.2; 7.8; 8.27, 66, 70-1, 89,163,
275, 311, 350,395; 9-7, 9, 25-8, 34-
5, 45,48, 55,59, 68, 70, 81, 96, 103,
146, 172-4,195,198,203, 230, 232,
247, 283; 10.5,10,19-20, 27-31, 62,
64-9, 72; 11.5, 40,191, 220
Ciñas 10.44
clockwise 3.87; 4.39
cloth 5.119; 6.41, 44, 46; 10.87; 11.206;
12.64
clothes 2.174,194, 246; 3-44, 52, 59;
4.18, 34-5, 45,66,116,129, 188-9,
231, 233; 5-77-8,103,118; 6.6, 15,
23; 7.126, 219; 8.2, 256, 321, 357,
396; 9.202, 219; 10.35, 46-50, 52,
56,125; 11.51,93,137,167, 224;
12.66
cloud 1.38; 4.104
coal 8.250
cock 3.241; 11.157
cockroach 12.63
Codas 10.44
coliyrium 2.178; 4.44,152
colostrum 5.6
comet 1.38
conception 2.36; 3.49
conch 5.121
conciliation 7.107,109,159,198; 8.187
condiment 7.131; 9.329; 10.86, 94;
11.144
conduct, proper 1.107-10; 2.6, 12,18, 69;
4.156-8; 5.4; 6.66-9; 7-122,135,
153,194, 201-5, 211; 8.86; 9.17, 25;
12.23, 33
consecratory rites 1.111; 2.16, 26-35;
3-43; 5.69
constellations 1.24; 2.30; 3.9, 278; 6.10
consumption 3.154; 11.49
contract 8.5, 219-21
conveyance 7.75, 222; 8.113, 419; 9-313,
copper 5.114; 8.131,136; 11.168
coral 9.329; 11.168; 12.61
com 7.110
corporate body 3.164; 8.219
corpse 3.166; 4.108; 5.64-5, 67, 85,101,
103-4; 9-178; 10.55; 11.73; 12.71
cotton 2.44; 8.326; 11.169; 12.64
seeds 4.78
tree 8.246
wood 8.396
couch 2.198; 3.3
counsel 6.50; 7.58


--- PAGE 1126 ---
Index to the Translation
1115
Counselors 7.54-9, 146-55, 216; 8.1
Court 8.1-3,10-4,18, 60,75, 79,95
cow 2.158, 246; 3.3, 6, 29, 53, 64, 95,
104, 141, 260; 4.39, 48, 52,59, 72,
130, 142, 162, 188-9,191, 209, 231,
233; 5-6; 5-8,87, 95,121, 124-5,
128, 133; 8.88, 98,112-3, 46,231,
242, 296, 325, 339; 9.48, 50, 55,
124; 10.107, 114; 11.14, 79-8o, 92,
109-17, 128, 130,136, 138, 145, 197,
203, 213, 258; 12.55, 64
hair 8.250
herd 4.253; 8.410; 10.82,116
killing 11.60
pen 4.45, 58,116
five products of 11.166
cowdung 2.183; 3.206; 5.105,122-4;
8.250, 326; 11.92, 213
cow-pen 11.109,195-6
cow-pen offering 3.254
cowshed 11.79
craft 3.64; 9.75; 10.100,116
craftsman 7.138; 10.120
crane 11.135
creation 1.25, 29, 52, 75, 78, So, 87, 93;
7.22; 9.16
creator 1.33; 5.30; 10.73; 11.35; 12.50
creature(s) 1.8, 25, 26, 28, 29, 33,41, 42,
65, 95, 96, 99; 4-238, 240; 5.45-7,
49, 56; 6.8, 39-40, 52, 60, 68, 73,
75; 7-72,103; 8.295, 306, 347; 935,
37, 306, 311, 327, 333; 10.84;
11.141-2, 144, 237, 241; 12.9, 11,14-
5, 42, 58, 69, 99
creditor 8.47-8, 50-1, 60-1, 143-4, 161,
176-7
creeper 1.48; 8.247, 330; 11.143512.58
crime 8.126, 334, 380; 9.262-3
sexual 8.6; 11.104
criminal 8.66,126; 9.288, 308
crippled 7.149; 8.66, 394
crocodile 1.44; 7.187
crop 8.237-44, 49; 9.247
crossroads 4.39,131; 9.264; 11.119
crow 3.92; 7.21; 11.25,132,155,157,160;
12.62, 76
cruelty 1.29; 10.9,58; 12.33, 58
cuckoo 12.67
Cuñcus 10.48
curd 2.107; 3-226; 4.250; 5.10; 8.326;
10.88; 11.213; 12.63
Daitya 3.196; 12.48
Daksa 9.128
Däksäyan
a 6.10
Dänav a 3.196
dancing 2.178, 4.64; 7.47
Daradas 10.44
Darbha grass 3.255-6, 279
darkness 1.5, 6, 49, 55; 9.161; 12.95, H5
Däs a 10.34
Dasyus 10.32, 45; 11.18, 70
Datyüh a 5.12
daughter 2.215; 3-28, 51, 234; 4. 180,
185; 9.88-102, 127,130-2,136, 193,
198; 11.172
daughter-in-law 9.57, 62-3
female-son 3.11; 9.34, 127-40
son of 3.148, 235
dawn see day: daybreak
day 1.64, 65,66, 67, 68, 72, 73, 74; 2.102;
3.90; 4.25, 50-1,102,106; 6.19, 22,
55-6, 59, 68-9; 7.44, 47; 8-230;
9.2; 10.55; 11.111,175,184, 224-5
daybreak 2.15; 6.22, 24; 10.33;
11.250
midday 4.131,140; 6.22, 24; 7.151
deaf 7.149; 9.201; 11.53
death 1.9; 2.111,148; 3.87,104,139; 4.91,
137, 167; 5-2-4, 38, 45,57-ioo;
6.34, 45, 97! 7-и, 53,86,133; 8.17,
108, 234, 306, 343; 9.97, 101,195,
204, 323; 11.104, H7,184; 12Л.6,
80, 95,124
rites 3.247-8
debates 4.72; 6.50; 12.46
debtor 8.47-8, 50, 52,139,176-7; 12.46
debts 6.35, 94; 8.4,107, 108,139,154,
158-9,161-2,176-7; 9.106-7, 218,
229; 11.66
deer 2.157; 3.268-9; 5.130; 944, 69;
12.55, 67
demon 3.201, 225; 7.23; 11.20,96
dependents 3.72, 116; 4.179, 251; 5.22;
9.105; 11.7,10,22
deposit 8.4,145,149,179-96; 11.58, 89;
12.120
desire 1.8, 25, 34, 75; 2.2-5, 94-5; 12.89
Dhanvantari 3.85
Dharana 8.134-6
Dhigvana 10.15, 49
diamonds 11.58
dice 4.74
Didhisupati 3.173
dike 9-274
disease, see sickness
document 8.52-5,168
dog 2.201; 3.92,164, 230, 241; 4.4, 6,
115,126, 208, 216; 5.130-1; 6.51;
7.21; 8.90, 232, 239, 298, 371;
9.237; 10.51,91,106,108; 11.132,
160, 200; 12.55, 62
dog-cookers 3.92
donkey 2.201; 4.115,120; 8.298,370;
10.51; 11.69,119,123,137, 155,157,
200, 202; 12.55
Dravida 10.22, 44
drinking 7.50; 9.13, 78, 80, 84, 235, 237;
11-49, 55,57, 67,91-9,147-50, 153-
4, 250; 12.45, 56


--- PAGE 1127 ---
1116
Index to the Translation
Drona 7.126; 11.135
Drsadvatï 2.17
drum 10.49
dumb 7.149
dusk 6.22, 24
dust 4.102,115; 5.133; 6.77; 8.132; 11.111,
208
duties 1.3; 7.127-139; 8.159, 390
dyer 4.216, 219
dyspepsia 3.7; 11.51
eagle 7.187
ear 2.90-1; 8.125, 234> 272; 12.121
earrings 4.36
earth 1.13, 78, 99, loo, 105; 2.20, 76, 226;
3.86; 4.183; 5.105-06,108;5.111,
120,125-6,133-6; 7.6,148; 8.39,
86, 256, 327, 381; 937, 44, 67, 238,
303, 311; 11.83; 12.120
vow 9.311
earthenware 5.122; 7.132; 8.289,327
earthquake 4.105
ear-wax 5.135
east 2.22, 51-2, 61, 75; 3.261; 8.87
eating i.ioi, 105; 2.51-7,118,195; 3.106,
176-9, 236-42; 4.43, 45, 55, 58, 62-
3, 65, 74-6,121,129; 5-145; 9-238,
201
those alongside whom it is unfit to eat
3.167-82; 11.181, 201
men who purify a row of eaters
3-183-6
eclipse 4.37, no
edict 9.232
egg 1.44
golden 1.9, 12
ejaculation 2.180-1; 11.121,174
elders 2.120-2, 130,142,149, 203; 3.110,
119; 4-130,154,160, 251-2; 5.82, 91;
8.275, 350; 9.57, 62-3, 235, 237;
11.56,89
wife of 11.49, 55,59, 103-7, 171, 252;
12.58
eldest 1.93; 4.153; 11.186
element(s) 1.6, 18, 20, 27; 12.14, 20-2,
90
elephant 2.157; 3-ю, 1б2; 4.120; 7.96,
192; 8.34, 296; 9.280; 11.69,137;
12.43, 67
embodied 1.30, 53,84; 12.119
Ena deer 3.269
enemy 2.111, 239; 3.138, 144, 230; 4.133,
213; 7.32, 73, 83, 90, 94, 98,102,
105, no, 154,158,168,171-5,177,
179-81,183,185-6,194-5,197-8,
200, 202, 207, 210; 8.64, 93,174;
9.232, 275, 277, 298, 307; 11.32-3;
12.79
energy 4.42, 44,189; 7.28
entertainers 9.225
envy 7.48; 10.128
epics 3-232
epilepsy 3.7,161
Epoch 1.63, 79, 80
ether 1.75, 76
etymologist 12.111
eunuch 2.158; 4.211
even 3.48, 278
evening 3.105, 121; 4.62, 140; 6.6; 11.212
evidence 8.52-3,103,178, 200, 263
evil 8.345; 9-5, 30, 73,295, 299,3io;
11.48, 222,230; 12.16, 70, 77, 79
ewe 9.48, 55
excommunication 11.183-6
excrement 3.180, 250; 445~52, 77, 92,
109,132, 152, 220, 222; 5.134,138;
6.76; 10.91; 11.151, 154-5,203;
12.56
executioner 10.38
existent i.n, 14, 74
exile 7.124; 8.123, 281, 284; 9.225, 241,
274; 10.96
expedition 7.182-4
expiation 3.19; 11.90,99,140,180, 210,
228-66
export 8.399
eye 2.7, 90; 4.42, 44, 67,177; 7.6, 25;
8.25-6, 125; 9.256; 12.120
one-eyed 3.155, 177, 242; 8.274;
11.119
factory 7.62
fairs 9.84, 264
falconer 3.164
fame 1.106; 2.9, 121; 3.40, 66,106, 263;
4.13, 94; 7.33-4; 8.81,127, 302,
343-4, 387; 9-76; 11-15,40; 12.36
family 3.15, 57, 60,109, 245; 4.18; 7.9,
77; 7.119, 210; 8.28,166-7,169,179,
323, 395; 9-7, 82,109, 187,199
famine 8.22
farm 10.79
farmer 3.165; 9.38, 247
farmland 9.330
fast 2.188, 220, 4.222; 5.20,155; 11.158,
196, 204, 213, 260
fat 3.182; 12.63
father 2.133,135,144-53,170-1, 225-37;
3.5, n, 51,55,136-7, 157,159, 220-
i, 28454.162, 178,180, 182,184, 239;
5.61, 91,148-9,151; 7-8o, 135;
8.275, 335, 366,389; 9-3-4, 20, 32,
48, 50, 92-3,104-5,108, 110,120,
132-3,138,142, 155,168,170-2,
174, 177,179, 182,185, 191, 194, 197-
8, 204, 209, 215; 10.40, 59; ил, 60,
172
father-in-law 2.130; 3.119,148
faults 1.104; 5-4,56; 6.72; 8.351, 388
feet 1.31, 81, 82, 87,90; 3.229-30; 4.53-


--- PAGE 1128 ---
Index to the Translation
1117
4, 65, 76,112,177, 207; 5.13,142;
8.125, 283; 9.278; 10.45
fence 8.239
ferry 8.404-9
festival 8.392; 9.84
fetus 2.27; 9.8; 11.88
field 8.237, 240-1, 243, 262, 264, 341;
9-32-3, 36, 44, 49, 51-4,145;
1O.69-71; 11.17, 115, 164; 12.12, 14
fiend 3.21-6, 33,170, 204, 230; 4.199;
5.31; 7.23, 38; 11.96; 12.44, 60
fight 4.121; 7.191,192
fine 8.32, 35-6, 51,58-9,107-8, 120-1,
123,129,138-9,159,191,198, 213,
220, 223-5, 240, 243, 257, 267-9,
274, 276, 284-5, 287, 289,293-4,
297, 307, 322, 329, 333, 336, 354,
36i, 363, 365, 367-9,373, 375, 376,
378, 383-5, 388-9,400, 412; 9.84,
229, 234, 236, 240-1, 244, 246, 279,
281-2, 286-7, 290
finger 2.59; 8.367-8, 370; 9.277
fire 1.23; 2.47-8, 67, 94,108,143,176,
248; 3.74, 76, 85, 98,103,122, 210-
4, 260-1, 282; 4.28, 48, 52-4,58,
104,106,118,142; 5.1,69, 83, 96,
103, 105,113, 133; 6.4, 9, 17, 23, 25,
35, 43; 7-4,7, 9, 78, 90; 8.86,106,
108,114-6, 176,189,191-2, 209,
264, 275, 319, 330-1, 333, 339,377,
392, 397; 9.278, 284-5, 303,ЗЮ,
314, 317-8, 321, 323; 10.103; 11.43,
74, 12O, 122, 247; 12.66, 1O1, 12O-1,
123
abandoning 3.153; 11.41
establishment 4.27
domestic 3.84
five 3.100,185
three 2.230-1; 3.282
householder's 2.231
nuptial 3.67; 9.194
offertorial 2.231
sacred 11.14, 38, 4l, 6o,66
southern 2.231
vow 9.310
fire offering 2.27-8, 69,105,186; 3.240,
282; 4.10, 25,145-6; 6.9; 7-84,145;
11.36-7, 42
fireplace 3.68
firewood 2.176,186-7; 4-247; 7-118;
8.112; 11.65,7
1
fish 1.39, 44; 3.267; 4.250; 5.13; 7.20,
72; 8.95, 328; 11.69; 12.42
fisherman 8.260; 10.48
flag 9.285
flamingo 11.136
flax 2.41; 10.87
flesh 3.i82;s.52; 6.76; 8.284
flies 1.40, 45; 5.133
flood 8.189; 9-54
flower 1.46, 47; 2.182; 4.250; 5.10,157;
6.13,16, 21; 7.131; 8.289, 33O; 11-71,
144, 166; 12.67
fodder 7.75,195; 8.112
fog 4.113
food 2.49-57, n8,142, 177,194; 3-59, 76,
78, 81-3, 99,104-18,124,236-7,
243-6; 4-29, 188-9, 205-25, 229,
233, 247-56; 5-28-9, 73,102,105,
138, 140,144; 6.3, 7,17-9, 43, 50-
60; 7.118,129, 195, 217, 220, 317,
329, 393, 415; 9-11, 202, 219, 271,
278, 333; 10.35, 54, 86, 94, 114,125;
11.3, 51, 78, 96, no, 123, 144,153,
158, 163, 166-7,176, 212, 216-7,
254, 262; 12.65
forbidden 1.113; 5.4- 26; 11.57,147-
62,153, 162; 12.59
of sages 3.257, 272; 6.5, 11, 15
side dishes 3.226, 228, 233
sour 2.177
unfit 11.57, 65,161
fool 4.79; 7.30; 11.21, 30, 36; 12U15
foot 8.280; 9.237; 11.43,184
footwear, see shoes
force 8.49
military 7.101-03,108-09
ford, sacred 8.356
forefather, see ancestor
foreigner 2.23; 7.149; 12.43
forehead 2.46, 9.240
forenoon 3.256, 277; 4.96
forest 6.1, 3, 27-9, 33; 7.40,70; 8.259-
60, 356; 10.107; 11-73,106, 145;
12.48
forest hermit 1.114; 5-137; 6.87
forgery 9.232; 12.60
fort 7.29, 69- 76,157,181,185; 9.252
fortnight 1.66; 4.25, 113,119,128, 150;
6.20; 8.58,107
bright 1.66; 4.96, 98; 6.2o;ii.2i7-8
dark 1.66; 3.276-7; 4.98; 6.20; 11.217
fortune 3.55; 5.152; 9.26, 300
fowler 8.260
fox 12.64
fraud 1.82; 8.165,193, 203-5; 9.258
friend 2.134; 3.113,138-41,144, 160;
4-133, 253; 7-32; 8.17, 89,118,120,
335, 347; 9-206, 269, 307; 11.57, 89;
12.79
wife of 11.59,171
frog 4.126; 11.132; 12.64
fruit 1.46, 47; 3.82, 227, 267; 4.29, 247;
5.6,10, 54,119, 130; 5.157; 6JO, 13,
15-6, 21, 25; 7.131; 8.151, 289,331,
339; 9-51-2, 54; 10.87; 11.71,143-4,
166, 237; 12.67
funeral 2.16; 5.168; 11.198
furnace 6.71
furniture 11.77


--- PAGE 1129 ---
1118
Index to the Translation
Gadhi 7.42
gambling 1.115; 2.179; 3-151, i59-6o;
4-74; 7-47, 50,159; 8.7, 9-220-8,
258; 12.45
Gandharva 1.37; 3.21, 26, 33,196; 7.23;
12.47
Ganges 8.92
garden 4.202, 262, 264
garland 2.167,177; 3-3> 209; 4.55, 66, 72;
8.256
garlic 5.5,19; 939
garment see clothes
gate 9.289
Gaurasarsapa 8.133-4
gem 2.240; 4.250; 7.218; 8.1OO, 323;
9.286, 329; 11.58,168; 12.61
generosity 3.202, 259, 275; 4.158, 225-6;
7.86, 211; 11.39
gentleness 1.29; 7.140
ghee 2.29, 84, 94, 107;3-226, 274; 4.39,
188-9, 233; 5-103,144; 7-34,131;
8.106, 328; 9.60; 10.88; 11.92,120,
135, 144, 150, 213, 215, 257; 12JÖ 2
ghost 3.230, 6.77; 12.71
ghoul 3.21, 25, 34,141; 12.44, 57
gift 1.86, 88, 89, 90,101; 2.97, 158; 3.59,
240; 4.186-95, 226-37, 246-56;
5.107; 7.101,198, 203; 8.4,159,165,
199, 212-4, 305; 9-206; 10.75, 79,
91; 11.1-26,140,228
receiving 1.88; 4.84-91; 6.8; 10.75-
7, 102-3, 109-12,115; 11.70,126,
195, 254
girdle 2.27, 42-3, 64,169-71, 174; 11.152
girl 2.33; 3-48-9; 7.152; 8.204-5, 224-
6; 9.81,118,127, 172; 10.8-9, ll, 15;
11.36, 59,61,171
gleaning 3.99; 4.5,10; 8.260
gnat 12.62
goad 3.44; 5.99
goat 2.41; 3.6, 260, 269, 272; 5.120;
8.235, 298; 948, 55,119; 10.114;
11.69,137, 139; 12.55, 67
wool 3-234-5
god(s) 1.22, 36, 52, 67, 71; 2.17, 58-9,
152,156,176, 232;3.21, 28, 38, 56,
72, 80-1, 201; 4.39,124,130, 153,
163, 182, 224, 251, 257; 5.31,127,
154; 6.83; 7.5, 23, 29, 72,201; 8.16,
23, 85, 87,96, no, 248, 409; 9.95,
315-7, 319; 11.20, 26, 29, 83, 85, 96,
211, 225, 245; 12.40, 49, 90, 94,117
offering to 2.189; 3-18, 70, 75, 84-6,
97, 125,128-33,139, 147, 149-50,
152,167-9,175, 203-5, 209, 240,
247, 254, 256; 4.31, 80,152, 206;
5.16, 32, 41, 52; 6Д2, 24; 8.242
Golaka 3.174
gold 2.29, 246; 4.36,188-9, 230, 233;
5.112-3; 7.130,206, 208; 8.88, 99,
113,131,181-2,184,321, 393;
10.114, 49, 58, 99-103, 251; 12.122
goldsmith 4.215, 218; 12.61
goose 3.10; 11.136; 12.62
gourd 6.54
Graha 5.116
grain 2.155, 246; 3-6; 4-7, 232, 250;
5.118-9; 7.69, 75, 96,130; 8.151,
320, 330-1; 10.94,112,114, 120,
125; 11.50, 67,93-5,163,168; 12.62
granary 4.7
grandfather 1.9; 3.148, 221-2, 284;
4.178; 9.132,136,140
grandmother 9.193, 217
grass 1.48; 2.75, 204, 216; 4.70-1,166,
169; 5-122; 7.132; 8.326, 339;
11.167,197, 206; 1258
purificatory blades 2.75
sacred 3.208, 245; 4.36
great-grandfather 3.221; 9.140
great self 1.15
greed 2.178; 3.179; 4.87,195; 7-30, 49;
8.118, 120, 213, 219, 412; 9.213, 243;
11.26; 12.33
greeting, see salutation
grindstone 3.68; 6.17
guest 3.70, 72, 80, 94-120,130; 4.29-32,
122, 179,182,251
Guhyakas 12.47
guild 1.118; 3.154
hair 2.46, 211; 3.7-8,10; 4.78, 83,144,
207, 220; 5.125, 141; 7.91; 8.116,
250, 283, 314; 11.79, 93,109,160.
See also bald-headed; head, shaving
body 6.6
cutting 2.27, 35; 4-35, 69; 5.58, 67
gray 2.154-6; 6.2
matted 2.219; 3.151; 6.6; 11.93,129
topknot 2.219
halo 4.105
hand 2.72, 90; 3.212, 223-5; 4-74, 82,
117,142, 175,177; 5.116,129,136,
143; 6.28; 8.125, 280, 283,322;
9.277
cupped 4.63; 11.105
left 2.63, 72
right 2.63, 72; 3.214; 8.2
happiness 2.9, 32; 3.79; 4.12,160,170,
232; 5-45; 6.64, 80; 7.88; 9.25;
11.235; 12.19-20, 88
Hari 12.121
harvest 4.26; 9.49
hatred 2.1, 178; 4.163; 6.60-1; 7.12;
8.175, 346; 9-17; 12.25
Havirbhuj 3.197
Havismat 3.198
Havispantlya 11.252
hawk 11.136
head 2.60; 4.49, 82-3; 8.114, 239, 256,


--- PAGE 1130 ---
Index to the Translation
1119
300; 11.43, 73
shaving 2.219; 5-140; 652; 8.93, 370,
375, 379, 384
health 2.57; 4.142; 7.69, 226
heart 2.1, 62, 97; 8.86
heaven 1.95; 2.5, 57, 76,232; 3.18, 79,
86, 106; 4.8,13, 235-46, 260; 5.48,
104,156,159-60; 6.84; 7.53, 89;
8.75, 86, 127, 313, 318; 928, 253-4;
10.122; 11.40, 241, 243; 12.20
heavenly light 1.38; 4.105-6,142
hedgehog 5.18; 12.65
heel 8.325
heifer 11.138
heir 9.158-60,162,186-91, 200
hell 2.116, 3-172, 249; 4.87, 197, 235;
6.61; 8.75, 94,128,307, 313; 9-138,
11.37, 207-8; 12.54, 75
hemp 2.41-30; 10.87
hemorrhoids 3.7
herb 7.131
medicinal 11.169
herdsman 3.154; 8.5, 229-44, 260
heretics 1.118; 5.90; 9.225
hermaphrodite 3.49
hermeneut 12.111
hermit, see forest hermit
hermitage 6.7; 8.390; 11.79
heron 4.30; 7.106; 11.136; 12.66
heron-vow 4.192, 196-7
hill 4.46-7; 7.70-1, 147; 10.50
Himalaya 2.21
Hiranyagarbha 3.194
home 5.43; 6.26, 38-9, 41; 9.26
homeless 6.25
honesty, 9.80; 11.223
honey 2.29, 107, 177; 3.226, 272-4; 4.39,
247; 5.41; 6.14; 7.131; 8.328; 10.88;
11-9, 95,159; 12.62
honey-mixture 3.119-20; 9.206
honor 9.26, 72,109-10; 10.72; 11.40
horn 4.67; 5.121
horse 2.88, 204, 246; 3.64,162; 4.120,
188-9; 5-53,133; 7-96,192; 8.98,
146, 209, 296, 342; 9.280; 10.47;
11.38, 51,58, 69,137, 200; 12.42, 67
hospitality 3.18, 70, 94-120,126
Hotr 8.209
house 3.58, 62, 89, 101,105; 4-2O2, 230,
250; 5-102,122; 6.25, 43; 7-75-6,
82; 8.69, 93, 230,262, 264, 333,
392, 415; 9-12-3, 150,170, 172, 265;
11.13-4,17, 22, 77, 115,123,163-5,
188
householder 2.232; 3.1, 67-285; 4.8, 31-
2; 5.137; 6.1-2, 27, 30, 87-90; 8.62;
9-334
human 1.39, 43, 65,96; 7.8, 72, 205;
8.98, 286,296; 9.66, 71, 284;
10.86; 11.157, 235; 12-40, 94
hunger 4-33-4, 67; 7-133-4; 8.67,93;
10.105, 107-8; 11.21
hunter 4.212; 7.47, 50; 8.44, 260; 10.48
husband 1.115; 2.67; 3-45-5O, 55, 60-1,
116, 174, 262; 5.90,148-9, 153-8,
160-6; 8.6, 28, 317, 371; 9Д, 3-4,
7-8, 13,15, 20-3, 29-30, 32, 45-6,
68, 69, 74-9, 86, 90-2, 95,101-3,
135,175,183, 195-6, 199-200;
11.177
hypocrite 3.159; 4.30, 211; 12.44
idiot 2.110; 7.149; 8.394
ignorance 2.158, 214; 3.97; 4.191; 6.84;
8.32,118, 121, 249; 11.43; 12-25, 52,
103,113, 115
immobile 1.40, 41, 56,57, 63; 5.28-9, 44;
7.15, 29; 11.237, 241512.9, 42
immortal 2.5; 6.60; 9.107; 12.85,104
imperishable 1.18,19, 57; 6.64, 97
impermanence 6.77
impotency 3.150,165; 9.79, 167, 201, 203
impregnation rite 2.16, 26,142
impurity 2.27; 4.124, 142-3, 212; 5.59,
67, 79-80, 134-5,142; 6.71; 9.72;
11.71,126, 154,160,184
from remnants 4.82, 109,142
indigestion 4.121
indigo 10.89
Indra 3.87; 4.182; 5.93, 96; 7.4, 7; 8.344,
386; 9.303-4; 11.120,122, 256;
12.123
Indra-vow 9.304
infantry 7.172
infidel 2.11; 3.150; 8.22, 309; 9.21;
11.67; 12.33
informant 11.50
ingrates 4.214; 8.89; 11.191
inheritance 8.27; 9.47, 77, 79; 10.115;
11.185
partition of 1.115; 8.7; 9.103-220
initiation 2.26-64, 68,108,173-4; 3245;
6.38-41, 8.412; 9.326; 10.68;
11.36,147,151-2
observances 2.173-81
time for 2.36-40
injury 2.177, 179; 4-170; 8.279, 285, 293;
10.63; 11.64, 127-46, 223;12.8з
insane 8.67, 71, 148,163, 205; 9.78, 201,
230
insect 1.40, 201; 4.207; 5.125; 11.71,160,
241; 12.42, 56
insignia 4.200; 8.65, 407
intellect 1.96,106; 5.109; 12.10, 23
interest 8.140-4, 142-4,150-7; 10.116-7
contractual 8.153
cyclical 8.153,156
manual labor 8.153
periodic 8.153
intoxication 3.34; 8.67; 11.96-7,148-9


--- PAGE 1131 ---
1120
Index to the Translation
iron 5.114; 8.315, 372; 10.52,84; 11.104,
134,168
ivory 5.121
jackal 4.115; 5.164; 9.30; 11.155, 200;
12.42
jewels 5.111; 7.219
Jhalla 10.22; 12.45
Jïv a 12.13, 22-3, 53
judge 8.9-11, 57, 79,87,109,181-2,190;
9-234
judgment 7.211; 8.117,196; 9.233
judicial conduct 8.23-6, 41-6
justice 8.12-9, 23, 44,122
injustice 8.12,18,122
justice system 8.1-420; 9.1-231
Jyestha 8.245
Kaivarta 10.34
Kakola 5.14
КаШ 1.64
Kälasäk
a herb 3.272
Kälasutr a 3.249; 4.88
Kalaviñka 5.12
Kämboj a 10.44
Karana 10.22
Kärävar
a 10.36
Kärsapan a 8.136, 274, 336; 9.282;
10.120
Kärsik a 8.136
Kärus a 10.23
Käst a 1.64
Kasyapa 9.129
Kataka 6.67
Kataputana 12.71
Kavi 3.198
Kävy a 3.199
Khadira 2.45; 8.315
Khañjaritaka 5.14
Khasa 10.22
Kimsuka 8.246
king 1.114; 2.135,138-9; 3-119-20; 4.33,
84-91, no, 130, 218; 5.82, 93-7;
6.97; 7.1-226; 8.1, 8-11,18-21, 27-
8, 30, 33-5, 38-40,43-4, 47, 50,
59-60, 73,123,128,149, 169-75,
176, 178, 186,192, 196, 213, 219, 221,
223, 224, 228, 238, 245, 252, 258,
263, 265, 272, 276, 281-3, 286,288,
302-9,311-2, 316-8,322,324,
333-6, 343-4, 346-7, 352, 37l,
380-1, 386, 389-91, 395, 399, 410,
412, 4l8-2O; 9.189, 213, 221, 224,
226, 228, 230-1, 234, 236, 240, 243,
245-6, 248-9, 253-4,256,262,
266, 269-70, 273, 275-6, 278, 292-
4, 301-12, 323-5, 327; 10.55-6, 96,
113; 11.4,11, 21-3, 31-2, 56, loo-l;
12.46,100
chaplain of 7.78-9; 12.46
daily routine 7.145-226
servant of 3.153; 9.324
service of 3.64
Sudra king 4.61
kingdom 4.61; 7.40,42, 55; 7.111,154;
8.380; 9.221, 323
constituents of 9.294-7
limbs of 9.296-7
Kinnara 3.196
Kiräta s 10.44
knee 4.112
knowledge 1.86; 2.7, 8, 37, 112-5, n/,
136, 155, 218; 3.39, 78, 98,128-37;
4.24; 5-105,109; 7-217; 94i; 11-85,
236, 247; 12.25, 31, 41, 83, 85, 89,
92,104
Koyasthi 5.13
Kratu 1.35
Krauñca 11.135; 12.64
Krsara 5.6
Krsnala 8.134-5, 215, 33o; 9-84; 11-138
Ksatriya 1.31, 89; 2.31-2, 36-8, 42-6,
49, 62, 65,80,127, 155, 190; 3-13-4,
23-6, 44, iio-i, 197; 4-135; 5-23,
83, 98-9; 7.2,87, 98,144; 8.62, 88,
104,113, 267-8, 276, 337, 375-7,
382-5, 411; 9.151,153,155, 229,
320-2; 10.4, 9-12, 17, 22, 43, 65,77,
79-81, 83, 95-7, 117-8,121; 11.18,
21, 34, 67, 84, 88,94, 127-8,236;
12.46, 71
Ksattr 10.12-3,16,19, 26, 49
Ksetrajña 8.96; 12.12,14
Kubera 7.7, 42
Kubjaka 8.247
Kudmala 4.89
Kuliu 3.86
Kukkuta 10.18
Kumbha 8.320
Kunda 3.174
Kuru 7.193; 8.92
Kuruksetra 2.19
Kuiia grass 2.43,182; 3.210, 223; 4.250;
10.88; 11.149, 213
Kusmanda 8.106
Kutsa 11.250
lac 10.89
seller of 10.92
lame 3.242; 8.274; 11.51
land 2.246; 4.188-9, 230, 233; 5.124;
6.13; 7.192, 206, 208, 21258.99-
100; 11.58
languages 9.332; 10.45
Law(s) 1.2, 81, 82, 93, 98, 99,107-10,
113-4; 2.1, 13, 25, 61, 224, 237-40;
4.92, 147, i87;5.i,44,146; 6.64, 66,
97; 7.7, 10,13-5,17-8, 26, 28, 35,
46, 87, 93, 98,135-6,141, 144,151,
203, 209; 8.6,8, 20-1, 24, 33,49,


--- PAGE 1132 ---
Index to the Translation
1121
58-9, 63, 78,86,103,141, 164, 174-
5, 179,184,212, 214, 218, 228-9,
261, 265-6, 272, 306, 348-9,352,
381, 390-1; 9.1, 6-7,18, 25, 28, 46,
56, 61, 64, 66, 76,86, 94, 96,101,
103,107-8,117,120-1,145,152,154,
167, 179, 188, 220, 233, 236,238,
250, 273, 324, 333-4; 10.53,63, 68,
78-9, 8l, 85, 90, 97-8, 1O1-2, 106,
1O8, 115, 117, 119, 126-7, 130-1; 11.2,
9, 24, 28, 31, 84,121,191, 229; 12.1-
2, 38, 50, 52,72, Ю5-6, Ю8-9, 112-
3, 115,117-8
contradictions 2.14-5
in times of adversity 1.116
of castes 8.41, 46
of families 1.118; 8.41, 46
of guilds 8.41
proper to one 2.8,150; 3.3; 7.15;
8.335; 10.92; 12.72
of regions 1.118; 8.41, 46
sources of 2.6-12, 25, 4.155
study of 2.16
ten point 6.91-94
treatise of 2.10, 16; 3.232. See also
Treatise
lawsuits 1.114; 7.140-1; 8.1-3, 9-ю, 24,
43, 54, 56, 58, 61, 63-4,69, 76, 78,
80, 97,103, no, 117,178; 200;
9.231, 233, 250
lazy 2.73; 5.4
learning 1.96, 97; 2.1, 8, 214-5, 238-40;
3.143, 4-18, 91; 6.84, 92; 7.16, 37-
53, 135; 8.273; 9.76, 206, 244;
10.116; 11.22, 86
leather 2.157; 8.289; 10.36, 49; 11.139
leeches 7.129
leeks 5.5,19
leftovers 2.56, 209; 3.116-8, 216, 245-6,
249, 253, 285; 4.75, So
legal assembly 12.110-2, 114
legal interpreter 8.20-2
legal procedure 8.9-46,199
leprosy 3.7; 8.205
leukoderma 3.7,161, 177; 11.51
levirate 3.173; 9-57-70,120-1,143-7,
167
libations 2.176; 3.70, 74; 5.60,64, 70-1,
88-91; 6.24
Licchivi 10.22
lice 1.40, 45
lies 1.82; 2.179; 3.229-30; 9.71; 11.56,
70; 12.6
life 4.134, 260; 5-27:6.33, 45, 57; 7-17,
46, ill
long life 2.52; 3.106, 263; 4.13, 27,
76, 78, 94, 230
lifebreaths, see breath(s)
life span 1.83, 84; 2.57, 121; 4.157-8;
7.136; 11.40
lightning 1.38; 4-103,106; 5.95
Liksä 8.133
limb 2.209, 211; 3.8,10, 178, 242; 4.141,
143; 7.105; 8.279, 287, 334,374;
11.50
lineage 1.105; 3-5,109; 9.128,141-2,165,
190
linen 5.120-1; 12.64
lion 7.106; 12.43
lips 2.62; 3.19; 8.282
liquor 3.159; 5.56,90; 7-47; 8.159, 163;
9.80, 84, 225, 235, 237; 11.49, 55,
57, 68, 71,91-9,147-8,150-1, 250;
12.56
litigants 8.252, 254, 311; 9.231, 250
litigation 8.3, 24, 49
grounds for 8.4~42o;9.i-23O
livelihood 2.24; 3.286; 4.2-12; 10.76,
79, 85,101,112, 116, 121-9; 11.22-3
livestock 7.9, 96,130,212; 8.98; 11.40,
67
living beings 1.9б;з-77; 5.48, 155; 7.112;
10.83; 11.127-46
lizard 5.18; 11.132; 12.57, 64
loan 8.49, 51,143, 151, 166
logic 2.11; 7.43; 12.94, 106
logician 12.111
Lohacärak a 4.90
Lohasanku 4.90
lord 1.2, 6, 12, 22, 28, 32, 34, 80,91, 93;
7-14
lotus 7.188
love 2.1; 3.32, 35; 6.60-1, 175; 9.103,
194
low-born 2.223; 4-79,141
loyal 7.209, 217
lucky 4.139, 158
unlucky 4.156
lunar fast 6.20; 11.41,107,118,126,155,
164, 172,178, 217-20
lust 2.147, 178, 214; 3.12,173; 5.154;
7.27; 8.118, 121; 9.17, 63, 67,107,
143, 147,178; 12.11
machine 7.75
mad 3.34,161; 9-79
Madgus 10.48; 12.63
Mägadh a 10.11, 17, 26, 47
Magha 3.273
Mâgh a 4.96
magic 9.290
Mahä-Narak a 4.88
Mahâ-Raurav a 4.88
Mahaíalk a crustacean 3.272
Mahat 12.14, 24, 50
Maha-Vïc i 4,89
Mähitr a 11.250
Maitra 2.87; 10.23
Maiträksajyotik a 12.72
Maitreyaka 10.33


--- PAGE 1133 ---
1122
Index to the Translation
male 1.11,19; 3.7; 5.67; 7.17; 9.144
Malla 10.22; 1244
man 1.32, 33, 92; 4.124, 205, 210, 212,
216; 5.32, 35,47, 50- 54,98,107,
121, 135-6,139, 143, 151,157,162-3;
7.91; 8.62, 77, 179; 92, 9-10,12, 33,
41, 44-5, 49, 51, 60, 91,172; 11.36,
58, 68, 70, 83,164,174-5, 200;
12.44
Mandapala 9.23
Manu l.l, 36, 60, 61, 63, 79,80,102,118-
9; 2.7; 3.36, 150; 3.194; 4.103; 5.3,
41, 131; 6.54; 7.42; 8.124,135,168,
204, 242, 279, 292, 339; 9.17, 158,
182-3, 239; 10.63, 78; 12.2, 107,
123,126
manual labor 8.177
mare 9.48, 55
Margasïrs a 7.182
Märgav a 10.34
Marïc i 1.35, 57; 3-194-5
marriage 1.112; 2.40, 67; 3.4-66,157,
171-2; 4.1; 7.77,152; 8.112, 226;
9.65, 85, 88-102,160,172-3,175,
179,195-7, 238, 326; 10.24, 53;
11.61,173, 181,183-4
bride 3.4-19
kinds of 1.112; 3.20-44; 9.196-7
remarriage 9.65, 176
supersession 9.80-3; 11.5
marrow 3.182; 5.135
marshes 7.192
Maruts 3.88; 11.120,222
Mäs a (Mäsaka ) 8.134-5, 298, 319, 392-
3; 11-134
massage 2.209, 211
Matsya 2.19; 7.193
mealtime 6.19,56; 7.216, 221, 224; 11.16,
no, 201
measures 8.403; 9.330
meat 2.177; 3-123, 227, 257; 427-8, 112,
131, 250; 5-6,13, 23, 26-56, 73,131;
6.14; 7.131; 8.328; 10.106; 11.96,
153,156-7,159,167; 12.63
sellers 3.152; 10.88, 92
Meda 10.36, 48
medicine 8.324; 9.293; 10.47, 87; 11.238
meditation 1.1; 6.61-86
mendicant 3.94, 243; 8.360
menstruation 4.40-2, 57; 5.66,108; 9.93;
11.88
mental retardation 9.201; 11.53. See also
idiot, mad
merchant 2.118; 4.215-6, 220; 8.169
merit 2.57,112; 3.95; 4.238-46; 7.79;
8-74, 83, 304; 9-111, 249; 11.4,15,
23; 12.19
messenger 3.163
metal 5.111; 6.53, 71; 7.96; 9-321, 329;
11.67,104
meteor 1.38; 4.103
mid-space 1.13; 2.21, 76; 7.29
milk 2.107; 3-82, 226, 257, 271; 4.250;
5.8, 25,130; 8.231, 326; 10.88, 92;
11.92,115,133,145,148,169, 195,
213, 215; 12.62
milk-rice 3.371, 274; 5.8-9; 6.11; 8.105
mind 1.14,18, 53,74, 75, 92,160,192;
4.16,18-9; 5.105,109,165-6; 646,
73; 7-6; 9-29, 67; 11.230,232, 234,
242, 258; 12.3-5, 8, 1O, 121-2
collected 2.53; 3.226, 228, 258; 4.93;
6.94; 7.145; 8.23; 11.82, 87,106,
195, 215, 218,22O-1, 263; 12.118
mineral 8.39
mines 8.419; 11.64
minor 8.27-9,148-9
miser 4.210; 11.9
Mitra 12.121
moat 9.289
mobile 1.41, 56, 57, 63; 5-28-9, 44; 7-15,
29; 11.237
molasses 8.326; 10.88; 11.95,167; 12.64
money 2.109, 112; 3-6, 31; 4-33; 7-75, 79,
96; 7-124; 8.47-8, 50,141,155,162,
176, 212; 9.231, 323; 10.113; 11.19,
24-5, 42,163
moneylending 1.90; 8.102,140, 169, 410;
10.116-7
mongoose 4.126; 11.132,160; I2j62
monkey 1.39; 7.72; 11.136,155; 12.67
month 1.66; 6.18; 7.126, 138,182; 8.140,
142
moon 3.87; 4.52, 231; 7.4, 7; 8.86, 303,
314; 11.221; 12.121
change of 3.45; 4.150, 153
full 3.86; 4.10, 95,113-4,128; 9.309
new 3.86, 122,127, 282; 4.10, 113-4,
128
vow 9.309
morning 3.121; 4.62, 69,140,152; 6.6;
7.37; 8.87; 11.212,220
mortal 1.84, 88; 5.97
mortar 3.68, 88; 5.117; 617
mortgage 8.165
moth 1.40; 11.241; 12.56
mother 2.50,133,144-7,169-70, 225-
37; 3-5,157; 4-162, 180,183, 239;
5.61, 91,101; 8.275,335, 389; 94,
20, 92,104, no, 123-5,131,133,
140,168,171,174,177,192, 194,197,
217; 1O.6,14, 27, 40, 59; ил, 60,
172
mother-in-law 2.131
mother's sister 2.50, 4.163
mound 4.39, 46; 8.247
mountain 1.24; 2.22; 3.9; 4.60
mouth 1.31, 87, 92, 94, 95; 2.60, 62;
3.98; 4.53,117; 5-130,139; 5-141;
7.84; 8.271-2; 10.45; 11.160


--- PAGE 1134 ---
Index to the Translation
1123
smelly 11.50
mud 10.10; 11.113
Muhurta 1.64
mung bean 9.39
Muñja grass 2.27, 42-3,169-71
murder 8.89, 317; 9.235; 11.49, 55-7,67,
69, 71, 73-90,102,109-17,127-42,
144, 191, 249; 12.7, 55
Murva hemp 2.42
mushrooms 5. 5,19; 614; 11.156
music 2.178; 4.64; 7.47, 225
musician 4.210
musk rat 12.65
mustard 5.120
mute 9.201; 11.53
mynah 5.12
Näciket a 3.185
NadI 4.90
Naga 1,37
Nahusa 7.41
nails 2.167; 3.153; 4-35, 69-71; 5-135;
6.6, 52; 8.271; 11.49
naked 4.45, 53, 75; 7.92; 8.93,
name 1.21; 2.30-3,122-8; 3.9-10; 5.60;
8.271, 274
naming ceremony 2.30
Nara l.io
När ä l.io
Närad a 1.35
Närayan a l.io
Nata 10.22; 1245
navel 1.92; 4-143; 5-132
neck 8.283; 11.206
needle 7.187,191
neighbor 8.262-3, 392
neutral 7.180, 211
night 1.64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72,73, 74;
2.102; 3.46-50, 90,102, 280; 4.50-
i, 73, 99,102,106,109,118-9,129;
6.19, 59Í 7-44,145,195; 8.86, 230;
9.2, 60, 276; 10.54; 11.93, т, 119,
184, 224-5
midnight 4.131; 7.151
Nimesa 1.64
Nimi 7.41
Nirrti 11.119
Nisäd a 10.8,18, 34, 36-7, 48
Niska 8.137, 220, 284
noon, see day
north 2.52, 61, 70; 3.217; 4.50; 8.87
north-east 6.31
nose 2.46, 90; 8.125
smelly 11.50
oath 8.109-16,190
oblations 1.94, 95; 2.84, 86,143; 3.81,
98,100; 4.206; 6.34; 8.105-6;
9.318; 10.111; 11.27, 96,119-20,
201, 223, 257; 12.68
observances 2.3, 28; 3.1; 4.80-1; 5.69,
71; 6.29
occupations 1.113; 4-i8; 8.273, 410-20;
10.46-50, 74-130; 11.193; 12.45, 70
ocean 1.24; 6.90; 8.175; 9-22, 314
odd 3.48
odor 1.76; 5.128; 11.150
official 7.157, 203, 226; 8.12,18, 34, 43;
9.234, 258, 272, 294
offspring, see children
oil 4.62, 83; 5-24-5; 7-33; 8.272, 328;
10.88; 12.63
oil-cake 11.93
oil-miller 3.58
oil-press 4.84-5
old age 2.148; 4.141, 179,184; 7.38,149;
8.66, 70-1,163, 312, 394-5; 9-3,
230, 283; 12.80
ioo-year-old 3.186
oldest, see eldest
OM 2.74-84; 6.70; 11.249
omen 6.50; 7.197
once-born 8.270; 10.4
onions 5.5,19
ordeal 8.109-16
orders of life 2.230; 3.2, 50, 77-9; 4.1;
7-35
organs 2.89-90, 215; 4.22, 143; 6.71;
11.40
control of 2.70, 88-100,175,192; 6.1,
4, 59-60, 75, 92; 7.44;8.173; ю.бз;
11.39, 76,1O7, lio; 12.31
of action 2.91
of perception 2.91,192
orifice 2.53, 60; 4.144; 5-132,138; 8.11
ornament 4.6; 7.220; 8.2,357; 9.17, 78,
92,150, 200, 219; 10.52,56
outcaste 3.92; 4.79, 213; 5.85; 8.389;
9-58, 63, 79,118,144, 200-2, 235-
49; 11.125,180-90,224, 240, 246,
258-60; 12.54, 60
owl 11.132; 12.76
owner 8.5,197-9, 229-44, 290, 293,
320, 331; 9.145
ownership 7.21; 8.4,30-1,144,146-7,
150, 197-205, 252; 9.93
ox 2.204; 3-162; 4.231; 11.137,175
Padrna 7.11
Pahlavas 10.44
Paijavana 8.110
pain 1.26, 49; 6.64, 77; 8.286; 12.28
Pala 8.134, 397
Paläs a 2.45
palm 4.143
joining of 2.70-1, 192; 4.154; 7.91
parts of (tlrtha) 2.58-61
palm tree 8.246
Pana 8.136, 138, 224, 241, 404
Pañcala 2.19; 7.193


--- PAGE 1135 ---
1124
Index to the Translation
Pändusopak a 10.37
panegyrist 3.158
Paradas 10.44
Paräk a 11.216, 259
Pärasav a 9.178; 10.8
parasol 7.96
Parivettr 3.171
Parivitti 3.171
park 9.265; 11.62
parrot 5.12; 11.135
partition, see inheritance, partition of
partnership 8.4, 206-11
partridge 11.135; 12.64, 66
Pathin 4.90
Pâthïn a 5.16
PavamanI 11.258
peacock 11.136; 12.65
pearl 9.329; 11.168; 12.61
penance 1.116; 2,221; 5.20-21; 8.105;
9.236, 240; 10.131; 11.1-266
arduous 11.157, 159, 163,178,192,198,
209, 214-5
penis 5.135; 8.282; 11.105
performer 8.65,102, 362; 9.225
perfume 2.177; 3-209; 4.250; 7.131, 219;
9.329; 10.88; 11.169; 12.65
perishable 1.19, 27; 7.83-4
perjury 3.158; 8.120-3
pestilence 8.22
pestle 3.68, 88; 5.117; 656; 8.315; 11.101
pewter 5.114
Phälgun a 7.182
phlegm 4.132; 5.135
physician 3.152,180; 4.179, 212, 220;
9.258, 284
pickpocket 9.277
pig 3-190, 241; 8.239, 298; 11.155,157,
200; 12.55
PIlu 2.45
pipal 8.246
Pisäc a 1.37, 43
placenta 1.43
plaintiff 8.2, 53, 56-8, 62, 79
planet 1.24; 7.121
plant 1.46; 5.40; 11.64,143,145
Plava 5.12; 12.62
pleasure 1.26, 49; 2.13, 224; 4.176; 7.26,
45-7, 50,151; 9-2, 76; 12.38
pledge 8.143-50, 212
plovers 5.11
plow 10.84
plowed land 4.46; 6.16; 10.114
unplowed 10.114
plowman 9.150;
plunder 7.48, 51
poison 2.162, 239; 4.56; 7.90, 217-8
seller of 3.159; 10.88; 11.9
poisoner 3.158
pole 9.285
policy 7.159; 8.1
polity 8.24
poor 3.95; 8.395; 9.74, 230
porcupine 5.18; 12.65
portent 6.50
porter 8.404-5
pot 6.28; 11.184,187-8
unbaked 3.179
potsherd 8.250
Pracetas 1.35
Prajäpat i 2.58-9, 76-7, 84, 22653.21, 30,
38, 86; 4.182, 225, 248; 5.28,152;
6.38; 9.16, 46, 327; 10.78; 11.38,
244; 12.121-1, 123
Präjäpaty
a 11.106,125, 212
Prausthapada 4.95
Prayuga 2.21
precedence 2.134-9
pride 8.213, 215
priest 2.130,143; 3.28,119,148,151,172,
179; 4.182; 5.81; 7.78-9; 8.206-10,
335
officiating 11.183
temple 3.152,180
primogeniture 9.105-10,134, 210; 11.186
prison 8.310, 375; 9.288
procreation 3.22; 12.121
property 1.81, 82; 7.123-24, 204; 8.27-
4O, 166, 193, 196-7, 2O1-2, 
288,
320, 322, 329, 375, 380, 399,416-7;
9.78,114, 130-1, 136, 141-2,144,
146-7, 150, 152,155,162,165,184-
5,187-200, 204-9, 231, 241-2, 243,
256, 333; 10.51,115-20; 11.20,77,
81,117,186; 12.5
ancestral 9.209
confiscation of 9.232; 10.96
lost 8.30-40
prosperity 2.32, 52; 4.231; 7.11,171, 208;
9.109
prostitute 4.209, 219; 9.143, 258
protection 1.87, 89; 2.32; 7.18, 88, no,
142-4,152; 8.27-8, 39,112, 304-6,
349; 10.80; 11.23, 191,199, 236
Prthu 7.42; 9.44
puberty 9.89-90, 93
Pulaha 1.35
Pulastya 1.35; 3.198
Pulkasas 4.79; 10.18, 38, 49; 12.55
Pundraka 10.44
punishment 6.24; 7.14-31; 8.58,119-30,
191, 194, 205, 221, 242, 276-8, 286,
290, 292, 295, 301,314-43, 382-3,
409, 415; 9.213, 228, 245, 262-3,
272-3, 278, 286,293; 11.21, 32,100;
12.100
capital 8.104,123,193, Зоб, 321, 323,
352, 359, 364,366, 371-2, 377, 379-
81; 9.224, 232, 242, 248-9, 269-71,
275-7, 279-80, 289, 291, 292;
10.56; 11.101


--- PAGE 1136 ---
Index to the Translation
1125
corporal 8.129-30, 267, 299-300,
310, 320, 322, 325, 334, 352, 367-
70, 374; 9-230, 236, 276, 101
pupil, see student
Purän a 3.232; 8.136
purchase 8-5, 222-8; 9.174, 332
pure 1.76, 92; 2.61,183; 3.216, 226, 228,
235, 258; 4.35; 5.129-31, 145; 6.5,
11-3; 9-335! 11.154,161
purging 5.144
purification 1.113; 2-40, 51, 69, 222, 240;
3.126,192, 235; 4.93,127,148;
5.57-102,105-27,134-146; 6.92;
7.145; 8.83,87,311; 10.63; 11.54,
73, 84, 86, 90,101,104,118,124,
126, 142, 144, 147,150,157,161, 163-
6, 178,182,191,194, 200-3, 231,
243, 249-50, 254-5, 258; 12.31
purifier 3.256
Purusa 11.252
pus 3.180; 4.220; 12.72
Puspadha 10.21
Pusya 4.96
PQtimrttika 4.89
pyre 4.69
rabbit 3.270; 5.18; 7.106
raft 11.19
rain 3.76, 273; 4.38,103; 9-304; 11.114
rainbow 1.38; 4.59
Raivata 1.62
Rajasarsapa 8.133
Rajïv a 5.16,
Rajjuväl a 5.12
Räksas a 1.37, 43; 3.196
rampart 7.70, 74,195; 9.289
rape 3.32,164
rat 4.126; 11.160; 12.62
Raurava 4.88
realm 7.109-13,114,128-9, 133-4,136-7,
143, 157,181,195; 8.21-2, 219, 302;
9.221, 226, 232, 241, 254-5, 294,
304-5, 312; 10.61
rebirth 1.50,117; 2.249; 4.148-9, 166;
6.74; 11.48; 12.16-23, 54-82
relatives 2.129-33, 134, 136, 154,184,
206; 3.31, 52, 54, 57-8, no, 148,
264; 4.179,183, 239, 241; 5.58, 70,
74, 77, 81,101,103; 7.28, ill, 202;
8.29, 70, 97,108,166,185-6, 371;
9.59, lio, 158-60,187, 239,269;
10.55; 11-63,173,183-4,188; 1279
renunciation 1.114; 5-io8; 6.35-7
reservoir 7.196; 8.248, 262, 264; 9.279,
281; 11.62
restaurant 9.264
retirement 1.114; 6.94-6
revenue 7.55-6, 60
revolt 7.24
reward 7.85-6,128,144, 206-7; n-5, 8,
28,30
rhinoceros 3.272; 5.18
rice 2.34; 3.267, 329
rice-balls 9.132,136,140,142,186;
11.217-21
righteousness (dharma) 1.29; 3.40; 4.195;
7.174, 201; 11.11, 21-2; 12.20-1, 23,
31
unrighteous 12.20-1, 23
riot 5.95
rites 1.84; 2.2, 26, 28, 84,103,136,171,
234; 3-7, 56, 65,154; 4-145-6; 5-99,
105; 6.75, 82, 95-6; 8.208, 226-7,
388, 393; 9-18-9, 28, 86, 180, 220;
1O.43, 69, 110,126; 11.12, 16, 18,
37-8, 119,152,183,198, 204
domestic 3.67; 7.78
funerary 5.65; 9.142
river 1.24; 447, 77, 202; 5.108; 6.78,
90; 8.175, 356, 406; 9.22; 11.133,
255
Rjlsa 4.90
road 4.45; 7.185,187, 240, 341
royal highway 9.282, 288
rod 8.237, 345; 12.10
Rohita 5.16
roots 3.82, 227, 267; 4.29, 247; 5.10, 54,
119,157; 6.7,13,15, 21, 25; 7.131;
8.260, 289, 331, 339,341; 10.87;
11.166, 237
rope 4.38; 8.299, 319; 9-230; 11.169
Rudras 3.284; 11.222
ruler 1.99; 4.153,184; 7.17,167, 203;
12.122
Ruru deer 2.41
sacrifice 1.22, 23, 86, 88,89, 90; 2.3, 15,
23, 28, 97,143; 3.28,118,120,171;
4.57, 236-7; 5.22-23, 31, 39-41, 98,
155; 6.35, 53, 83; 7-79; 8.206, 305-
6, 311; 9-238, 318; 10.75, 79; 11-1,
11-4, 20, 24-5, 34, 36-43, 88;
12.49, 91
Abhijit 11.75
Agnistut 11.75
Ahina 11.198
animal 4.26-8; 5.39, 53; 11.27
cake 6.11; 7.21
consecrated for 2.128,169; 4.130;
8.360
constellation 6.10
food 3.256-7, 266; 4.205; 11.78,107
Gosava 11.75
great sacrifices 1.112; 2.28; 3.67-286;
4.21-4; 6.5, 7-11; 11.246
horse 11.75, 83, 261
new- and full-moon 4.10, 25; 6.9
new-harvest 4.26-8
officiating at 1.88; 3.65; 4.33; 8.340,
388; 10.75-7, ЮЗ, 109-11; 11.37,42,


--- PAGE 1137 ---
1126
Index to the Translation
60-1,181,198
patron 8.317, 388; 11.24
seasonal 4.26; 6.10
Soma 4.26; 11.27
Svarjit 11.75
Trivrt 11.75
Visvajit 11.75
sacrificial arena 11.3
sacrificial cord 2.44, 63-4,174; 3.279;
4-36, 66
sacrificial fee 8.207-8, 303,306, 349;
11-3-4. 38-40
sacrificial gift 3.141, 143; 6.38; 7.79
sacrificial offering 4.226-7; 5.104; 6.34,
36-7; 7.21; 11.219,221
sacrificial session 2.106; 4.9; 5.93; 8.303
sacrificial vessels 5.116; 6.4
Sädhya s 1.22; 3.195; 11.29; 1249
safety 7.70-3; 8.230, 303
sage 1.36, 58, 59, lio; 6.25, 41, 43; 7.29;
8.91, no, 407; 9.31, 67; 11.29
Saikha 10.21
Sairandra 10.32
Sakäkol a 4.89
Sakalä 11.201
Sâkalahomïy a 11.257
Sakas 10.44
Sakata 5.117
Sala 8.246
Sala rice 9.39
sale 8.165,199, 201, 203-5, 222-8; 9.46,
98,100, 332
sali va 3,19
Sälmal i 4.90
salt 3.257; 5.73; 6.12; 8.327; 10.86, 94;
il.lio; 12.63
seller of 10.92
salutation 2.117-33, 216-7
Saman 1.23; 4.123-4; 11.265
Jyestha 3.186
Samghät a 4.89
Samï 8.246
Samjïvan a 4.89
Sampratäpan a 4.89
Samyäv a 5.6
Sankhapuspï 11.148
Säntapan a 5.20; 11.125,165,174, 213
Sapindana rite 3.247-8
Sarasa 5.12
Sarasvatï 2.17; 8.105; 11.78
Sanigï 9.23
Sarvännabhüt
i 3.91
Sasalka 5.16
Satamän a 8.137, 220
Sätvat a 10.23
Saumya 3.199
Sävitr a 4.150
Sävitr i 2.38-9, 77-83, 101,104,118,148,
170; 10.20; 11.192,195, 226
scriptures 2.8, 10, 13-5, 35; 4.155; 9-19,
32, 96; 12.95, 109
scrofula 3.161
sea 2.22; 8.157,406
seafaring 3.158; 8.157, 406
season 1.30; 4.194-5, 119, 128
rainy 3.273, 281; 4.102; 6.23
six 3.217
seat 2.119, 198, 202; 3.99,107, 208-9,
234; 4-29, 69, 74,154, 202; 7.91,
220; 8.281,344; 9.17; 11.166,181,
225
secret texts 2.140,165
security 4.232; 7.56,127; 8.303; 9.219
seed 2.112; 3.142; 5.63; 8.88,113; 9.20,
33-40, 42-3, 49, 51-4, 56,145,181,
291, 330; 10.69-72
seer(s) i.i, 4, 34, 60, 9; 2.176,189; 3.21,
29, 38, 53,69, 80-1,19454.94, 257;
5.1, 23; 6.32; 1O.72; 11.211, 222,
237, 244; 12.2, 49, 106
self 2.117; 6.29, 49, 63, 65,73, 82-3;
7.43; 8.84-5; 945,130; 12.4, 12-
15, 22-3, 25, 31, 53, 85, 92,118-9,
125
self-control 1.108; 2.222; 4.12,145-6;
6.8, 92, 95; 11.87,112, 219, 260
Self-existent One 1.3, 6, 61, 63, 92, 94,
102; 5.39; 8.124,412; 9.138, 158
selu 5.6
semen 1.8, 56; 2.27,180-1; 3.49; 4.220,
222; 5-135; 9-50,79; 10.42; 11.121,
174
seniority 2.155-6; 9.85-7,111-9,122-6
sense control 4.145; 12.83
sense objects 1.15, 89; 2.88, 96; 4.16;
6.59; 7-30; 9-28; 11.5, 44; 12.18, 32,
73
senses 1.7,15, 55; 2.215; 6.34, 72; 12.52
servant 3.9,112,116,153, 242, 246; 6.45;
7.67,125, 217; 8.70,102,215-7, 243;
9.332; 12.70
service 1.91, in; 2.32,109,112, 218, 229,
233-5, 241-4, 248; 46; 7.88; 7.125;
8.410; 9.28, 334; 10.116,120,122;
11.70, 236; 12.78
sesame 3.223, 234-5, 255, 267; 4.75,
188-9, 229, 232; 9.39; 10.86, 90-1,
94; 11-135
sex 1.25; 3.32, 45-50; 4.40-2, 64,116;
5.56,144; 8.100, 362,365-6, 368,
371, 374, 376-8, 382-5; 9.4, 14, 58,
70, 235, 237; 10.31, 49, 55,59, 67-8,
88, 103-7,170-9, 252; 12.7, 58-60
sexual organs 2.90; 4.144. 8.125
shadow 4.51,185; 5.133
sharecropper 4.253
shaving 2.65, 219; 11.79,1O9,152
sheep 3.6, 166, 268; 5.8; 8.235, 298;
9.119; 10.114; 11.69,137,139512.55
shelter 9.271, 278; 11.114


--- PAGE 1138 ---
Index to the Translation
1127
shield 7.192
ship 4.120; 10.34
shoes 2.178, 246; 4.66, 74
shrubs 7.192; 8.330; 11.143; 12.58
sick 2.138,187; 3.8,114; 4.67,129,144,
179,184, 207; 7.149; 8.64, 71,107,
163, 216-7,312,395; 9-78,80,82,
167, 230; ll.l, 113
sickness 1.83; 4.60, 157; 5.50; 6.62, 77;
8.108; 9.30, 72; 12.80
, evil 3.92,159,177; 5-164; 9.79
Sigruka 6.14
silence 2.83; 3.236-7; 6.43; 9.60
silk 5.120; 11.169; 12.64
silver 3.202; 4.230; 5-112-3; 8.131,135-
7, 321; 11.58,168
Sirnhatunda 5.16
sin 2.79,102, 221; 3.191; 4.198, 202, 243,
260; 5.34,107:6.85, 96; 8.13, 40,
88, 105,112-3, 317-8,420; 9-249;
10.103-5, ill, 127; 11.46, 48, 53-
126, 210, 216, 227-8, 231, 240, 242,
246-7, 253, 255-64; 12.18-9, 54-
82, 115
grievous 3.98; 9-235-49; 12.54
heinous 2.185; 3-159; 4.211
singing 2.178; 4.64
sipping 2.51, 58-62, 70, 222; 3.217, 251,
264; 5-138-9,142-5
sister 2.50, 133; 4.180,183; 9.192-3, 211;
11.59,171-2
son of 3.148
sister-in-law 3.160,173
Sivasamkalpa 11.251
skin 2.41, 64, 90, 99,174; 4.189, 221;
5.119; 6.2, 6, 76; 7-132; 8.234, 284;
11.109,123,167
disease of 11.49
sky 1.13; 4.59, 105, 142; 10.104
slander 2.179; 3-i6l;7-48; 11.50, 56; I2j6
slaughter-house 3.68, 71; 11.156, 262
slave 4.180,185, 253; 8.70, 299, 342,
412-6; 9.179; 10.32
women 3.52; 8.363; 9.48, 55,179;
11.184
sleep 1.5, 52,53, 54, 57, 65,66, 74; 2.108,
163, 181,194, 219-21; 3.34; 4.55, 57,
75-6, 99; 5.73,145; 7.47, 92; 9.13
Slesmataka 6.14
slough 2.79; 11.229
smell 1.78; 4.107, ill; 5.126; 6.76; 11.68,
150; 12.98
smoke 4.69; 6.56
snake 1.44; 2.79; 3.9, 196; 4.126, 135;
7.23; 8.260; 11.69,134Д4О, 229,
241; 12.42, 57
sneeze 4.43, 213; 5.125,145
social class 1.2, 91, 102; 2.18, 25,132;
7.35; 8.24,142, 269, 277, 359, 385,
410-20; 9.6, 85,156,168-9,174,
189, 240, 248,335-6; 10.61-73;
11.139,151; 12.1, 70, 97
born in between 1.2; 2.18
mixed 1.116; 8.352; 9.67; 10.1-73;
11.69,126
soft recitation 2.78, 85-7,181,220, 222;
3.74; 4.93,145-7; 5-107; 6.83;
10.111; 11.34, 78,133,143,194-5,
226, 250-7
soil 2.112; 3.142; 8.251
soldier 7.70, 97,190; 12.46
solitude 6.59; 7.147
solstice 4.10
Soma 3.85, 211, 257; 5.23, 96; 8.209;
9.129; 11.7-8,12,150
seller of 3.158, 180; 10.88
Somapa 3-197-8
Somäraudr a 11.252
Somasad 3.195
son 2.28,135; 3.16-7, 37-41,48-9,136,
160, 234, 262; 4.180,184,239, 257;
5.77,148-956.3, 36-7, 95; 7.14,
135; 8.28, 62, 114,159, 299, 335,
389, 416; 9.3-4, 9, 31-56, 60-1,
1O6-8, 12O-84, 2O9, 215-7, 220,
323; 10.6, 8-9, 14-5,18, 39, 41, 99,
105, 107; 11.59-60, 62, 171
female-son 3.11; 9.34,127-40
Sopäk a 10.38
sorcery 9.290; 11.64,198
south 2.52; 3.206, 214-5, 258, 279; 4.50
sowing 3.142; 9.36, 38, 40,42, 49, 51,53,
247, 330
spade 2.218; 11.134
spear 8.315
speech 1.25; 2.90,160,185,192; 4.18, 23,
177, 256; 5-165-6; 8.105,345; 11.33,
51, 86, 232; 12.4, 8,10, 121
control of 3.258; 4.175; 9.29
Sphya 5.117
spider 12.57
spies 7.153,184,223; 8.116,181-2;
9.256, 261, 266, 298, 306
spit 4.132; 5.145; 8.282
sprout 1.46; 9.36, 39-40, 54
sputum 4.56
Srävan a 4.95
Sri 3.89; 9.26
Sruk 5.117
Srava 5.117
staff 2,45-8, 64,174; 4.36; 5.99; 6.5;
7.187; n.i52;i2.lo
stationary 7.160-2,166-7,172,195
statue 9.285
steadfast 7.209-10; 9.74; 11.71, 82
stealing, see theft
stomach 4.175; 8.125
stone 5.111-2, 7.132; 8.250; 9.321;
10.86; 11.168
strategy 7.160-2, 167,177, 200, 214-5;


--- PAGE 1139 ---
1128
Index to the Translation
8.49
political 7.160-80, 206-15
six-fold 7.160, 167
straw 3.100; 5.122; 8.377; 11.134
strength 2.31, 55; 4.42; 7.10,16, 89,175;
9.201, 298; 11.113; 12.101,121
student 1.103; 2.69-249; 3.94; 3.186,
234; 4-33, H4, 175; 5-71,81,129,
137; 6.87; 8.27, 70, 299, 317; 9.187;
ii.l, 118-24
breaking vow 2.187; 3-155
insignia 2.41-7
life-long 2.243-9
return home 3.3-4; 11.158
vow 11.159
subjects (of king) 1.89; 7.18-9, 36, 44,
80, 88,123,142-4,146,170, 175,
209; 8.175, 226; 9.307, 309; 10.61,
118
Subrahmanyu 9.126
Sudas Paijavana 7.41
Suddhavatï 11.250
Sudhanvan 10.23
Sudra 1.31, 91,116; 2.24, 31-2, 62,103,
127,137,155,168,172; 3.12-19, 23-
4, 44, 64,110-2,156,164,197, 249;
4.80, 99,108,140,198,211, 218,
223, 245, 253; 5.83, 92, 99,104,
139-40; 7.138; 8.2O-2, 62, 68, 88,
102,104,113, 267-8, 277,337, 374,
377, 383, 4Ю, 413-4, 417-8; 9-98,
151,153-5,157, 160,178-9, 224,
229, 325; 10.4, 8-9, 12,16,18, 30,
41, 43, 64-5, 92, 98-100, no, 120-
9; 11.13, 24, 34, 42-3,67, 70, 98,
127,130,132,141,149,153, 224, 236;
12.42, 72
king 4.61
officiating at sacrifices of 3.178
sex with 3.191, 250
woman 3.155
sugarcane 8.341; 9.39
suicide 3.245
Sukäli n 3.197-8
summer 3.281; 6.23
Sumukha 7.41
sun 1.9, 23, 65,101; 3.76, 105; 4.48, 52,
69, 231; 5.87,105,133; 7-4-5, 7;
8.86; 9-137, 303, 305
eclipse 4.37
northward passage 1.67
southward passage 1.67
vow 9.305
worship 2.48,181
sunrise 2.15, 219-21; 3.280; 4.37
sunset 2.219-21; 4.37, 75; 11.220
Suparna 1.37; 3.196; 12.44
Surasenaka 2.19; 7.193
surety 8.158-62,169
Surpa 5.117
Suta 10.11, 17, 26, 47
Suvarna 8.134, 137, 213, 220, 361
Svadhä 3.223, 252
Svapacas 10.51-6
Svapäk a 10.19
Svärocis a 1.62
Svistakrt 3.86
sweat 5.135
swimming 4.77
sword 7.192
Syena 11.136
tail 4.67; 8.234
tailor 4.214
Tarnasa 1.62
Tamisra 4.88,165,197; 12.75
Tápana 4.89
Taratsamandï 11.254
taste 1.78; 5.128; 11.9; 1299
tavern 4.84-5; 9.237, 264
tax 7.80,127-139, 307-8; 8.394, 398,
400, 404-9; 9.254, 305; 10.119-20
teacher 2.51, 67, 69-75,108-16,140-63,
191-249; 3.1, 148,153,156-7; 4-114,
130,162, 179,182; 5.43, 65,80, 91;
7.82,175; 8.317, 335; 9-187; 10-75-
7, 103,109-11; 11.1,35, 60, 63,120,
122, l8l, 183, 225; 
12.83
family of 2.184, 243
gift to 2.245-6
relatives of 2.207
son of 2.109, 207-9, 247; 5.80
teacher of 2.205
wives of 2.131, 210-7, 247; 5.80
tears 3.229-30; 5.135
teeth 3.10; 4.69,152; 5.141; 6.17
black 3.153; 11-49
temple 4.46; 8.248; 9.280
tendons 6.76; 8.234
termites 4.238
terrace 7.147
testicles 8.283; 11.105
testimony 8.62, 68-71, 73-8, 87, 89-90,
93, 95-101,1O2-8,117-9,120,122-
3,194,197; 11.57, 89
theater 9.264
theft 1.82; 2.116; 6.92; 7.83; 8.6, 30-40,
72,189,198, 213, 300-43, 345;
9.92, 222, 237, 256, 270,274, 276,
278, 280-1, 293; 11.49-51, 55,58,
67, 71, 89, 99-103,163-70,251;
12.57, 60-70
thief 3.150; 4.118, 133, 210,255; 7.83;
8.29, 34, 40, 67,191, 197, 233, 296,
302-3, 314-43, 386; 9-226, 235,
254, 256-7, 263, 266-7, 270-1, 272,
276-8, 312; 11.101,113; 12.59
thigh 1.31, 87; 10.45
thorns, eradication of 1.115; 9.252-93
thread 2.44; 8.326, 397; 9.329


--- PAGE 1140 ---
Index to the Translation
1129
threshing 11.17,115
throne 8.23
thunder 1.38; 4.103,106
thunderbolt 7.191
tiger, 11.113; 12.43, 67
tin 5.114
tongue 2.90; 8.125, 270, 277
tortoise 5.18; 7.105
touch 1.76; 3.241; 5.133; 12.98,120
town 4.107; 7.119; 8.237; 10.54
trade 1.90; 3.64,152; 4.6; 8.102,398-
403, 410; 9-257, 326; 10.47, 79-80;
11.70, 236
trader 3.181; 8.401
tradition 1.27, 47, 77, 78,96,108-09; 2.3,
6- 12,14, 90, 4-155; 7-8o; 957,126,
194; 10.41, 45; 11.58,164,178, 213,
217, 220; 12.7, 25, 85, 95
trapping 7.222; 10.32, 49
Trasarenu 8.132-3
travel 4.55, 60, 67-8, 140; 7.47; 8.408-
9; 9.13; ил
treasure-trove 8.35-9
treasury 7.148,157; 8.38, 419; 9.275,
280, 294
treatise 1.58, 59,102-08,118-9; 4
Л9-
20; 7-31, 54, 6з; 11.66, 244; 12ДО5,
1O7, 126
treaty 7.202
tree 1.47, 48; 4.39,120; 5-6,40; 6.13, 78;
7.131,192; 8.246, 285, 330, 339;
9.254; 11.65,143, 167; 12.101
foot of 4.73; 6.26, 44; 11.79,129
memorial 9.264; 10.50
planter of 3.163
with milky sap 8.246
tree bark 11.102,106
triple set 2.224; 7.27
tripod 9.296
Trisuparna 3.185
truth 1.29, 81; 2.52, 83; 4.138, 170;
5.109; 646, 92; 7.26; 8.14, 35,45,
61, 74, 80-1, 83, 87,101,103-4, ИЗ,
116, 179, 257; 10.63; 11.223
untruth 8.14, 35-6, 82; 9.18
tuberculosis 3.7
Turâyan a 6.10
turtle 1.44; 3.270
tutor 2.141, 145; 5.91
twice-born 1.33,108; 2.11, 24, 26-7, 35,
53, 103; 4.165,190,192,196, 223;
5.5, 19, 25-6,33, 42-3, 92,101,140,
167; 6.1, 37, 40, 85, 91, 94; 8.22, 68,
87, 269-70, 311, 341, 348, 374, 390,
410-1; 9.64, 66, 85,156, 224;lo.l,
4, 6, 14, 20, 41, 46, 99-100; 11.8,28,
32-3, 47, 91, 102-3,118,121, 140,
151-2, 154-5, 158, 170, 175,192-3,
199, 2O8, 212, 214, 227, 257; 12.93,
126
twilight 1.69, 70; 2.78,101-3; 3-280;
4-50, 55, 93-4, ИЗ, 131; 8.86
worship 2.69,101-3, 222; 4.93-4;
7.223
twins 9.126
Udgät r 8.209
Udumbara 2.45
Ugras 4.212; 10.9,13,15,19, 49
Ulkamukha 12.71
umbilical cord 2.29
umbrella 2.178, 246
uncle 2.130-1; 3.119, 148; 4.179,183;
5-81
unmanifest 1.6, 7,11; 12.50
Upanisads 6.29
urine 4.45-52, 77, 93,109, 132,151, 222;
5.121, 134-5,138; 6.76; 8.282, 375,
384; 11.92, no, 151,155, 213
usurer 3.153,180; 4.210, 220, 224; 8.152;
11.62
Utathya 3.16
vagina 9.237; 11.174
Vaideha(ka) 10.11,13,17,19, 26, 33,36-
7,47
Vaikhanasa 6.21
Vaisvänar a 11.27
Vaisya 1.31, 90, 116; 2.31-2, 36-8, 42-6,
49, 62, 65,80,127,155,190; 3.13,
23-4, 44,110-2,197; 5.83, 99, 140;
8.62, 88,104,113, 267-8, 277,337,
375-7, 382-5, 410-1, 418; 9.151,
153,155, 229, 325-33; 10.4, 8,10-2,
17, 23, 65, 78-80, 82-3, 85, 93, 98,
101, 119-21; 11.12, 34, 67,88, 94,
127,130, 236; 12.72
valor 2.155; 7-159, 211
Vämadev a 10.106
Vardhrmasa horn-bill 3.271
Varuna 3.87; 7.4, 7; 8.82,106; 9.244-5,
303, 308
vow 9.308
Varum 11.147
Vasat 2.106
Vasistha 1.35; 3.198; 8.110,140; 9.23;
11.250
Vasus 3.284; 11.222
Vätadhän
a 10.21
Vatsa 8.116
Veda 1.21, 23, 84, 93,108-09; 2,6-12,
78, 81, 97,117; 3-41, 70, 154,161;
4.92, 114, 163, 192, 95,232-3; 5.4,
42-4, 107; 6.83, 89, 95; 7.38, 43,
85, 97; 9.316, 334; 10.74, 80, ll.l,
33, 37, 57, 78,85-6, 97, 193, 199,
204, 244, 259; 12.49, 86-8, 94-102,
105-6,109,114
abandoning 11.57
annual course of study 4.119


--- PAGE 1141 ---
изо
índex to the Translation
end of 2.160; 4.123
expository texts 3.184
knowledge of 2.149-58; 3.7, 65-6,
184-5; 4-31, 94; 8.11; 11.2,4, 77,
117, 247, 265-6
recitation 1.88, 89, 90; 2.28, 70-87,
104-7,166-7,191; 3-75, 81,151, 168,
188, 232; 4.17, 35, 58, 95-127,147-
9, 190; 5.138,145; 6.8; 9-238; 11.46,
60, 76, 201, 228, 235, 246, 255, 258,
260, 263; 12.31, 83, 92, 113
Rgveda 3.145; 4.124; 11.262-3;
12.112
Sämaved a 3.145; 4.124; 11.263;
12.112
suspension of recitation 2.105-6;
4.97, 101-27
Study 2.2, 28, 164-72; 4.95-10O;
6.36-7; 7-85; юл
teaching 2.108-16,140-63; 4260;
5.2; 10.1; 12.94
triple 2.28, 76-7,118, 230; 3.1-2;
4.12; 7.37, 43; 9.188; 11.264-6;
12.111
Yajurveda 4.124; 11.263; 12.112
Vedänt a 6.83, 94
vedic consecration 7.2
vedic disputations 3.231
vedic formulas 2.16, 29, 66; 3.121
vedic retiree 6.86-97
vedic savant 1.97; 2.113,154; 3-136-7;
4.91,199; 5.82; 6.39; 11.42,121
vedic scholar 2.134, 242; 3.120,184;
4.31, 205, 224; 5.81, 82; 7.133-4;
8.65,149, 393-5; 9-245
Vedic Supplements 2.105,141. 185; 4.19,
98
vedic vow 4.31
vegetables 2.246; 3.226; 4.250; 5.119;
6.13, 15; 7-132; 8.331
vehicle 2.138, 202; 3.52, 64; 4.120, 202,
232; 7.220; 8.290-8,342, 404-5;
9.150, 219; 11.166,181; 12.67
Vena 7.41; 9.66; 10.19, 49
victory 7.11,183, 199, 201-5
Vijanman 10.23
village 2.79, 185, 219; 3.103, 153; 4.60,
73, 96-7, 107-8, 116,118; 5.11, 68;
6.3, 4, 16, 43; 7.114-20; 8.219,221,
237, 240, 245, 254, 258-9, 261,274;
10.36, 51, 54! 11-79,129, 200, 203
Vinasana 2.21
Vindhya 2.21
violence 1.29; 7.48; 8.6, 72, 332, 344-51,
386
Viraj 1.32, 33; 3.195
virginity 8.205, 226, 364-5, 367, 369-
70; 9.47, 69, 71-3; 10.5; 11.62
virtue 2.1; 3.40; 5.154; 7-37-53; 8.311,
318; 9.244; 11.22
VisnU 12.121
Visvamitra 10.108
Visvedeva 4.183
Vivasvat 1.62; 8.92
vomit 3.109; 4.121, 132; 5.144
votary 5.88,91, 93; 11.121-2
vow 1.104, m; 5.155; 11.62, 82, 118-24,
130, 152,159, 204, 225
Vrâty a 2.39; 8.373; 10.20-3; 11-63,198
Vrihi 9.39
vulture 3.115; 11.25-6,136; 12.63
wages 7.125-26; 8.5, 214-8; 9.332
wagon 7.187
waist 2.43; 4.112
waking 1.52, 57, 74; 2.163, 194! 4-47, 93;
6.31; 11.78,133
war 7.56, 87-98,160-2,164,170, 176,
181-200; 8.415
washerman 4.216; 8.396
wasp 12.66
water 1.8, 10, 13, 78; 2.51, 53, 58-62, 99,
104, 218; 3.35, 82, 99,101,214-8,
223, 260-1, 267, 283; 4.29, 46, 48,
52,109,143,183, 229, 233, 247, 250;
5.69-70, 77-8, 86, 96,105-06,
108-O9, 111-5, H8, 121-2, 126-8,
133-4, 138-9, 142-5,7; 6.13, 31,
41,46, 53, 67; 7-33-4, 70, 75,195,
219; 8.86,100, 106,114-5,248, 319,
326, 408; 9.161, 168,186, 219, 244,
281, 305, 321; 10.88,103; 11.92,
133, 148-50, 158,164, 174-5, 184,
187-8, 203,213, 215, 224,256;
12.62, 67
water-booth 9.264
watercourse 8.252
water pot 2.64; 3.68, 88, 96; 4.36, 66;
6.52
wealth 2.13, 31, 136, 154-5, 224; 3.40,
106, 263; 4.3, 15,18-9, 92,141,156,
170, 176, 226; 5.96,106; 7.4,9, 26,
42, 46,136,151, 213; 8.36, 74,125,
179; 9.11,163, 316; 10.85,115,129;
11.20, 34, 70, 77,194,242; 12.79
weapon 3.192; 4.122; 5.98-9; 7-75, 90,
92, 222; 8.113, 324; 9.278, 293;
10.79, 88,119; 11.33-4
weaver 8.397
weights 8.132-7, 321, 403; 9-330
well 4.202; 7.226; 8.248, 262, 319;
11.164
west 2.22, 52
wheat 5.25
wheel 8.291
whip 4.68
whistling 4.64
wicker 5.119
widow 8.28; 9.60, 62, 64-5,175
son of 3.156,174; 9.175


--- PAGE 1142 ---
Index to the Translation
1131
wife 1.115,129-33; 3-4-19, 45-50, 60-2,
64, 103,113,116,121, 173-4, 262;
4.1, 40-4,128,180,184, 232, 239;
5.162,167-9; 6.3; 7.77, 213; 8.6,
114, 227, 275, 299, 317, 335, 352,
362, 389, 416; 9-1-31, 41-6, 57, 59,
74,76-87, 95-6, 1O1-3, 12O, 122-6,
146, 148-57, 159-6O, 162,164-7,
170, 183, 191, 203, 220, 235, 237;
10.5-6, 29, 99; 11.59,62, 64, 171,
173,177-8; 12.7, 60, 69
another man's 4.133-4
paramour of 3.155
wilderness 2.104; 5-69; 6.2, 4; 7.147;
8.69,356; 9-265; 11.259
wind 1.23, 76, 77, 203; 3.189; 4.48, 52,
102, 122 5.96, 105,133; 7.4, 7; 8.86,
282; 9.42, 54, 303, 306; 11.114,120,
122; 12.120
vow 9.306
winter 3.281; 6.23
wisdom 2.121, 239-40; 442, 52, 94; 7.31
witchcraft 3.58; 9.290; 11.64
witness 1.115; 8.18, 45,55, 60-72-102,
108-9, 169, 178,181-2, 252-3,257-
9
wolf 7.106, 8.235-6; 12.67
womb 2.27, 147; 4.200, 200; 5.164;
6.63; 9.30, 34-5, 37,52, 56,126,
173; 10.57-9; 12.53, 55-8, 77-8
women 1.32,114; 2.66-7,123,129,138,
158,177,179, 202, 213-4, 223,238-
40; 3-50, 55-9; 4-40-4, 53,198,
2O5, 2O8, 211, 212-3, 22O; 5-9,66,
72,108,130,139,146-150; 7.47,50,
96, 125, 149-50,153, 219, 221, 224;
8.6, 27-9, 68, 70, 77, 89,100, 149,
323, 349, 352-85, 366,370-1, 373-
4, 376-8, 382-5, 404; 9-2-3, 5> 10,
13,17-9, 21, 23-4, 29-30, 33, 48,
56, 61, 68, 91,134,143-5,147,175,
183, 192-200, 219, 230, 232; 10.7,
11-2, 14, 18, 2O, 24, 27-8, 3O, 32,
35, 37-9, 41, 47,62; 11.59,66-7, 89,
139, 153,164,170-9,191, 224; 12.59,
67,69
barren 8.28
menstruating 11.174
pregnant 3.114; 8.407; 9-173, 283
remarried 3.155,181
season 3.45-50; 9.70; 11.88
wealth of 3.52
young 3-245; 11-36
wood 2.157; 4.188; 5.69,115, 122;8.236,
339, 372; 11.167
wooden 8.289
wood-apple 2.45
wool 2.41, 44; 5.120; 8.151; 10.87;
11.169
world 1.5, 6, 9, 19, 27, 31, 33,41, 51, 52,
57, 63, 84, 94,100,11152.4, 5, 9, 25,
230-3; 4-238-9, 243; 5-39, 55,96-
7; 7.2, 22; 8.89, 96, 343J9-29-30,
109,137, 245, 315-6; 11.85, 245,
262; 12.53, 97, 100,102
worm 1.40, 201; 3.92; 8.232; 10.91;
11.71; 12.42, 56, 59
wound 4.122; 7.93
wrath 7.45-8, 51; 8.351
Yajus 1.23; 4.123-4; 11.265
Yaksa 1.37; 3.196; 12.47
Yama 3.211; 5.96; 61; 7.4,7; 8.86, 92,
173; 9-303, 307; 12.17, 21-2
vow 9.307
Yava 8.134
Yavana 10.44
year 1.12; 4.26; 6.18; 8.30, 373, 375;
12.49
Yoga 2.100; 6.61-86
younger 2.120,128
