--- PAGE 1 ---
Dharma Pātañjala. A Śaiva scripture from ancient Java studied in the
light of related old Javanese and Sanskrit texts
Acri, A.
Citation
Acri, A. (2011, February 3). Dharma Pātañjala. A Śaiva scripture from ancient Java studied
in the light of related old Javanese and Sanskrit texts. Retrieved from
https://hdl.handle.net/1887/16438
 
Version:
Not Applicable (or Unknown)
License:
Licence agreement concerning inclusion of doctoral thesis in the
Institutional Repository of the University of Leiden
Downloaded from:
https://hdl.handle.net/1887/16438
 
Note: To cite this publication please use the final published version (if applicable).


--- PAGE 2 ---
Dharma Pātañjala
A Śaiva Scripture from Ancient Java
Studied in the Light of Related Old Javanese
and Sanskrit Texts
PROEFSCHRIFT
ter verkrijging van
de graad van Doctor aan de Universiteit Leiden,
op gezag van Rector Magniﬁcus Prof. Mr. P.F. van der Heijden,
volgens besluit van het College voor Promoties
te verdedigen op donderdag 3 februari 2011
klokke 16.15 uur
door
Andrea Acri
geboren te Parma (Italië)
in 1981


--- PAGE 3 ---
Promotor: Prof. Dr. A. Grifﬁths
Overige Leden van de Promotiecommissie:
Prof. Dr. B. Arps
Prof. Dr. P. Bisschop
Prof. Dr. M.J. Klokke
Prof. A.G.J.S. Sanderson (Oxford University)
Typeset by the author in ‘Adobe Minion Pro’ using X
E
LATEX and LEDMAC.
Cover photo: Īśāna (Lokapāla of the North-Western direction), Caṇḍi Loro
Jonggrang, Prambanan (photo Andrea Acri 2004).


--- PAGE 4 ---
Ai miei genitori


--- PAGE 5 ---


--- PAGE 6 ---
Wahrscheinlich darf man ganz allgemein sagen, daß sich in der
Geschichte des menschlichen Denkens of die fruchtbarsten En-
twicklungen dort ergeben haben, wo zwei verschiedene Arten des
Denkens sich getroffen haben. Diese verschiedenen Arten des Den-
kens mögen ihre Wurzeln in verschiedenen Gebieten der men-
schlichen Kultur haben, oder in verschiedenen Zeiten, in verschie-
denen kulturellen Umgebungen oder verschiedenen religiösen Tra-
ditionen. Wenn sie sich nur wirklich treffen, das heißt, wenn sie
wenigstens soweit zueinander in Beziehung treten, daß eine echte
Wechselwirkung stattﬁndet, dann kann man darauf hoffen, daß
neue und interessante Entwicklungen folgen.
Werner Heisenberg, Physik und Philosophie (1959), p. 181.


--- PAGE 7 ---


--- PAGE 8 ---
Preface
I
became aware of the existence of the Dharma Pātañjala when, as a be-
ginning graduate student of Śaivism with an interest in its Javano-Balinese
developments, I read Ensink’s article ‘Sutasoma’s Teachings to Gajavaktra,
the Snake and the Tigress’ (1974). In presenting the Śaiva Ṣaḍaṅgayoga found
in Old Javanese sources, the author makes the following remark (p. 198):
We may note, as Mrs. Soebadio (1971:30) has done, that the yoga course of
eight stages (aṣṭāṅga-yoga) as taught in Patañjali’s Yogasūtra’s (YS 2.29–3.5)
is hardly known in Javano-Balinese literature. So far only one text discussing
it is known. Tis is the Dharma Pātañjala (Dh.Pāt. 68R–76v, where the or-
der of prāṇāyāma and pratyāhāra has been inverted). It has been handed
down only in Java.
Tis short remark by Ensink aroused my interest in the text; however, given
the Dutch scholar’s silence as to the details and whereabouts of his source,
I had to wait some time before I could satisfy my curiosity. Tat time ar-
rived when, going through Cosmogony and Creation in Balinese Tradition
by Hooykaas (1974), I came across the two folios of the Dharma Pātañjala
edited and translated by the author, who included them in his book on ac-
count of their interesting account of the incarnation of the Lord as Pātañjala,
the eldest among the ﬁve Kuśika-siblings. Te section was introduced and
concluded by the following considerations (pp. 166 and 170):
Tough I do not as a rule believe in work with a single MS because of the
possibility of errors, when one particular single MS promises to be the plum
in the pudding of one’s book, one may be excused for causing one’s readers
the inconvenience of having to put up with the imperfections of such a MS.
[p. 170:] As is so ofen the case when one has only a single MS at one’s dis-
posal, some words and sentences remain obscure. However, as far as I know
there is no other source available from which we can draw any more deﬁnite
conclusions, on the basis of more direct evidence, as to the existence of the
terrifying ash-smearing Pāśupatas in Java. […] Again as fas as I remember
there is no other Javanese source available, moreover, that informs us so di-
rectly about the existence of old of different methods of care for the dead
in that island; […] I would once more like to urge my friend and younger
colleague Ensink, who generously placed his transliteration at my disposal,


--- PAGE 9 ---
viii
Preface
to try and complete his work on the Dharma Pātañjala; my comments are
meant to act only as an appetiser. In conclusion I might direct the attention
of those who are in search of a suitable subject for a Ph.D. thesis to the possi-
bilities offered by an investigation of the other 399 volumes entrusted to the
care of Dr. R. Friederich and his successors by an inspection of the wealth
of MSS present in the Musium & Perpustakaan Pusat, Jakarta.
Tantalized by the contents of the two folios and by these remarks, I made
further investigations about the manuscript of the text and its whereabouts.
I soon found out that the codex, formerly belonging to the Schoemann col-
lection, was now to be found in the Berlin Staatsbibliothek, and also real-
ized that Ensink’s work had never been committed to the print, while none
seemed to have worked on the text afer him. Tis was sufﬁcient reason to
take up Hooykaas’ challenge to undertake serious philological work on the
text, however corrupt it might be, in the form of a PhD dissertation. With the
crucial intermediation of Ensink’s former pupil and successor in Gronin-
gen, Prof. Hans Bakker, I was most kindly entrusted by the widow of the
late scholar—whom I never had the pleasure to meet as he had just died a
few months before—with his hand-written annotated transliteration of the
codex.1 Tese materials constituted for me an invaluable guide to the text
in the early stages of my research. As I proceeded with the study of its con-
tents, my initial impressions about the importance of the Dharma Pātañjala
were conﬁrmed beyond my expectations. It became clear to me that the text
documented an hitherto unknown commentarial tradition to the Sanskrit
Yogasūtra that is related, albeit by no means identical, to that of the Bhāṣya;
and that it yielded precious data that not only ﬁlled a gap in our knowledge
of Śaiva theology and philosophy in pre-Islamic Indonesia, but also cast light
on the origin and development of Śaivism in the Indian Subcontinent.
* * *
Tis work is the result of four tremendously educative years spent between
the Netherlands, Indonesia, India and Australia, during which I have had
the opportunity to learn at the feet of many remarkable gurus of different
backgrounds, whose teachings have constituted a constant example to be
striven afer.
1.
Tese original materials, including an unpublished annotated edition of the Buddhist
Kakavin Sutasoma, are now deposited at the Leiden University Library.


--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface
ix
First and foremost, I would like to thank Prof. Dr. Arlo Grifﬁths, who
has been the best Promotor and academic supervisor I could ever have hoped
for. His continuous and untiring moral support, scholarly rigor and intellec-
tual stimulus, not to speak about his contagious enthusiasm, have positively
inﬂuenced anything good that may be found in this book.
I thank Dr. Willem van der Molen, my former teacher of Old Javanese as
well as Co-Promotor and supervisor during the two years prior to his depar-
ture from Leiden University following a ‘re-organization’, with whom I went
through the ﬁrst draf of my edition and translation of the Dharma Pātañja-
la. Other scholars who were involved, to varying degrees, in the preparation
and revision of the same part of my dissertation are the Balinese man of let-
ters Ida Dewa Gede Catra (Amlapura, Karangasem), Dr. I. Kuntara Wirya-
martana (Giri Sonta, Central Java), Dr. Suryo Supomo (ANU, Canberra). I
am deeply grateful to them all for their valuable help as well as for the won-
derful time they have allowed me to enjoy while in their company.
I express my gratitude to Prof. Alexis Sanderson (All Souls College, Ox-
ford) and Dr. Dominic Goodall (EFEO, Pondicherry), with whom I greatly
enjoyed reading Śaiva scriptures during my stay of ﬁve months in Pondi-
cherry and during the international workshops on early Tantric texts that
were held there and in Kathmandu. Without their magisterial works on
Śaivism this book could never have been written in the ﬁrst place. Dr. Goodall
is also to be credited for having kindly shared with me his unpublished edi-
tions in progress of (parts of) the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā and of the Sarvajñā-
nottara (with Aghoraśiva’s commentary).
I am indebted to Prof. Dr. Hans Bakker (University of Groningen), who
helped me to retrieve the transliteration of the Dharma Pātañjala made by
Prof. Ensink; and to Prof. Dr. Peter Bisschop (Leiden University), who was
never short of useful suggestions to improve my writings, which have found
in him a most diligent and attentive reader.
Tanks are due to the following mentors: Drs. Undang A. Darsa (Univer-
sitas Padjadjaran, Bandung), who introduced me to Old Sundanese codicol-
ogy and joined me in a project involving the photographing of the palm-leaf
manuscripts of the Ciburuy scriptorium; Prof. Raffaele Torella (Università
di Roma ‘Sapienza’), under whom I studied Sanskrit and became interested
in Śaivism; and Dr. Tomas M. Hunter (CSA Bali, Denpasar), who has sup-
ported me since I was an undergraduate student.
Very special thanks are due to Prof. Em. Andries Teeuw and Dr. Roy


--- PAGE 11 ---
x
Notes on Conventions
Jordaan, whose friendship I have cherished during my stay in Leiden, and
who have entertained me respectively with reading sessions of Old Javanese
texts and stimulating discussions about ancient Javanese cultural matters.
Te latter scholar is also to be the credited for the proofreading of this book.
Last but not least, I wish to express my gratitude to my parents for their
love and support. It is to them that I dedicate this book.
Notes on Conventions
Transliteration
No consensus has been reached yet among scholars about
the adoption of a standard orthographic system for the roman translitera-
tion of the varieties of in origin Indic scripts in which Old Javanese texts are
written. Previous generations of editors have used different systems, either
adopting the conventions used by early Dutch scholars, by Zoetmulder’s
monumental Old Javanese-English Dictionary (OJED), or introducing their
own codiﬁcations—ofen with little or no success in drawing further follow-
ers.2 Te majority of those systems, and notably those implemented in OJED
and in several post-OJED philological works, are to a large extent based on
the transliteration conventions used by Sanskritists, but with a few relevant
differences. One ﬁnds no less than three renderings for the velar nasal graph-
eme, viz. ṅ, ng and ŋ, and two for the multipurpose nasal anusvāra, viz. ṅand
ng; the visarga is almost universally represented as h, just like the fricative
h; the grapheme representing the phoneme /w/ is represented either as w or,
less frequently, as v; the vocalic ṛand ḷare rendered by their Old Javanese
phonetic counterparts, viz. the clusters rĕ (r + neutral vowel pepet) and lĕ (l
+ neutral vowel pepet).
In editions of Old Javanese texts which also contain Sanskrit verses, such
as Parvas or Tuturs, there has been the tendency to transliterate the two lan-
guages with different systems. Whereas this convention conceals the impor-
tant fact that the script used in the manuscripts does not make any distinc-
2.
Tink, for example, of the system used by van der Molen (1983) to transliterate
the three Javanese codices of the prose Kuñjarakarṇa, which was subsequently used only by
Wiryamartana (1990:490–492) and by Sedyawati, Wiryamartana and van der Molen
(2002). In spite of being by far the most analytic one—to the extent of introducing speciﬁc
diacritics in order to avoid the use of more than one Roman grapheme to transliterate, for
example, the single aspirated grapheme bh of the Old Javanese—it has the drawback of being
of not immediate intelligibility even to the specialist in both Sanskrit and Old Javanese,
requiring instead a signiﬁcant amount of familiarization.


--- PAGE 12 ---
Notes on Conventions
xi
tion as to their orthography, I have chosen to adopt this convention in the
critical edition and throughout the book;3 that is, whenever the attention
was on words as abstract entities constituting a language (≈langue) rather
than on words as time-and-place-bound phenomena (≈parole). Tus, I have
rendered anusvāras in Sanskrit words ‘quoted’ within the Old Javanese prose
or appearing in the ślokas with ṃ, while I have standardized those appearing
in Old Javanese words to ṅ, without differentiating the anusvāra in this con-
text from the akṣara rendering the velar nasal.4 Similarly, I have maintained
the visarga (ḥ), the vocalic ṛand ḷin the Sanskrit while in the Old Javanese I
have collapsed them, respectively, into the fricative h and the clusters rĕ and
lĕ. Contrarily to this principle, and in opposition to the dominant conven-
tion, I have maintained the transliteration for the Indic v (instead of w) for
both languages.5 Te two signs that are not represented in the Sanskrit syl-
labary, i.e. the short and long pepet, I have rendered as ә and ә¯ (instead of ĕ
and ö), thus appropriating the (never widely adopted) convention advocated
by Damais (1958:10, 1970:11–19).
Te aspect of words as time-and-place-bound phenomena being the fo-
cus of the diplomatic edition, there—as well as in other parts of this work
dealing with palaeographic aspects of the codex—I have implemented a uni-
ﬁed system of transliteration that aims at rendering the (one) script of the
document with a 1:1 correspondence between original and representation.
Tus I have consistently respected the manuscript’s use of the anusvāra (ṃ)
3.
Tus, also the Old Javanese passages I quote from printed editions as well as from
secondary sources have been standardized according to my policy.
4.
Tus in harmony with the convention implemented in OJED (xiv–xv), except that
OJED collapses the two into ŋ. It is likely that the two graphemes represented in Old Ja-
vanese one and the same (velar nasal) phoneme, a fact that can be inferred from the ‘re-
inforcement’ of the ṃinto ṃṅin intervocalic position, and also from the outcome of ṃas
ṅin intervocalic position (e.g. saṃhyaṃbhaṭāra vs. saṃhyaṅātmā). Furthermore, even
though the general tendency to write anusvāras at word boundaries is observed, not only
do different manuscripts implement different policies, but even within the same manuscript
the distribution of ṃand ṅmay be quite arbitrary.
5.
Indeed the two signs conventionally represent the same grapheme in the script. To
defend my choice I point out that a separation between the level of transliteration and
phonological transcription is methodologically desirable, and that no claim of preference
of w over v can be made on ground of the argument that the former grapheme of the Roman
alphabet corresponds more closely to the sound of the Old Javanese language it has conven-
tionally come to represent. An exhaustive discussion of this transliteration problem may be
found in Damais (1958:10 n. 3 and 1970:19 n. 1).


--- PAGE 13 ---
xii
Notes on Conventions
vs. the nasal guttural (ṅ), the visarga (ḥ) vs. the fricative (h), and the vocalic
ṛand ḷvs. the clusters rә and lә. I have also reproduced virāmas, rendering
them with the raised dot (·).6
Te adherence to the Indic (i.e. Sanskrit) system of transliteration im-
plemented in this book does not aim at ‘Sanskritizing’ the Old Javanese but
rather to rationalize and simplify the present situation by favouring a sys-
tem that both Sanskritists and Old Javanists are acquainted with. Te San-
skrit system has also the obvious advantages of being fully standardized and
internationally established, and of being in use to transliterate a variety of
Indic (languages and) scripts.7
Grammatical terminology
In harmony with the adherence to the interna-
tional and interdisciplinary system in matters of transliteration, I employ
throughout the book a metalinguistic and metagraphic terminology—espe-
cially to refer to graphemes of the Old Javanese syllabary—that is in part
Sanskrit-derived, and in part of Western origin. In doing so I go against
the established practice in philological works of using the terminology com-
monly employed in the later Javanese tradition, which make use of the Ja-
vanese or Balinese terms employed up to modern times. Tus, I refer to
graphemes as akṣaras either to indicate a consonant or a vowel written as a
self-standing grapheme (and not in ligature); to ligatures or clusters (either
CC, CCC or CV, CCV, CCCV) rather than to pasangan (CC, CCC) or sand-
hangan (CV, CCV); to anusvāra, repha, ā-, (superscript) i-, (subscript) u-,
e- vocalization instead of cĕcak, layar, tarung, ulu, suku and taling; to virāma
rather than pangkon/paten. Whenever speciﬁc Sanskrit terminology is lack-
ing I use local denominations, e.g. in the case of the neutral vowels ә and ә¯ (=
6.
Adopted from Grifﬁths (2005) and following publications in Southeast Asian epig-
raphy.
7.
I am aware of only one editor who has previously called for a reconsideration of the
Old Javanese spelling system in a way that more closely conforms to the Sanskrit standard,
i.e. Soebadio (1971:67). Regrettably (and curiously) enough, Soebadio’s attempt remained
a mere declaration of intents without materializing into real practice, for, in spite of her
claim to ‘have chosen to transliterate the Old Javanese according to the Sanskrit system’ in
her edition of the Tutur Jñānasiddhānta, no real correspondence is found apart from the
rendering of w as v. On the other hand, a completely consistent Sanskrit spelling (including
the rendering of anusvāra as ṃ) was adopted by Sukanda-Tessier (1977) to render (Old)
Sundanese and (Old/Modern) Javanese words throughout her book (even including the
modern place-names, the titles of texts, etc.); the author however, disappointingly enough,
discusses or justiﬁes her choice nowhere in her book.


--- PAGE 14 ---
Notes on Conventions
xiii
short and long pepet), and for punctuation (pada lungsi instead of the San-
skrit daṇḍa). Rather than seeing the issue in terms of an opposition between
‘indigenous’ and ‘Sanskritic’, I have implemented this set of conventions in
order to be historically more accurate and escape, if only partially, the risk
of being anachronistic. It is in fact apparent that the majority of the Javanese
and Balinese terminology is not attested in OJED, unlike its Sanskritic coun-
terpart. Te latter terminology is also generally attested in such (rare) Old
Javanese grammatical texts treating matters of spelling as the Svaravyañjana
(cf. Rubinstein 2000:257–262).
Referencing
For the references to Old Javanese texts the following prin-
ciples apply: portions of edited Tuturs and Tattvas are indicated by means
of verse, chapter or paragraph number followed, whenever required, by the
line number of the corresponding portion of text in either the romanized
edition (e.g. in the case of the Vṛhaspatitattva) or the Balinese edition when
a romanized one is not available (e.g. Tattvajñāna, Vratiśāsana, etc.); in the
case of all the other edited Old Javanese texts, the references may be either
to sarga/canto numbers (in the case of Kakavins) or page numbers of the
edition, followed by line numbers if the case requires it. Te latter conven-
tion has also been followed to refer to passages of the Dharma Pātañjala it-
self, which does not present any obvious original subdivisions into sections.8
Edited Sanskrit sources follow both principles according to the different na-
tures of the texts (i.e. their prose or verse form) and the published editions.
Portions of text in manuscript sources are referred to by means of folio
‘f(f).’ numbers, followed by the sigla r (recto) or v (verso) and line numbers.
Te same principle has been applied to both typed romanized / Devanāgarī
transliterations and palm-leaf manuscripts. Whenever the division into fo-
lios could not be arrived at, the reference is to page numbers and, depending
on the case, verse numbers or line numbers.
Symbols
Besides the speciﬁc series of brackets and signs appearing in the
Diplomatic and Critical Edition,9 I have made use of the following symbols
throughout the book:
8.
In order to further facilitate and simplify referencing, I have also numbered each of
Kumāra’s thirty-nine questions to the Lord.
9.
Explained respectively on pp. 86–87 and pp. 93–94.


--- PAGE 15 ---
xiv
Notes on Conventions
=
‘equivalent to’; in the Introduction: ‘orthographically equiva-
lent to’
≈
‘almost equivalent to’; in the Introduction: ‘orthographically al-
most equivalent to’
>
‘standardized to’
→
‘emended to’
<
‘from’
« »
enclose Sanskrit portions of text embedded in Old Javanese pas-
sages quoted in footnotes in Part iii.
† †
the enclosed text is corrupted and/or lacunous.
▷
in Part iii, indicates a parallel passage in the critical apparatus
appended to quoted original sources
•
in Part iii, precedes an emendation or variant reading anno-
tated within quoted original sources (whenever the verse/line
number is not indicated)
x ←y
‘x originates from y’
x →y
‘x gives rise to y’
x*
indicates an unattested word


--- PAGE 16 ---
CONTENTS
Preface
vii
Notes on Conventions
x
i Introduction
Te Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
3
Te West Javanese Tutur Tradition
3
Tuturs vis-à-vis Tattvas
8
Relative Chronology of Tuturs and Tattvas
10
Tuturs and Tattvas vis-à-vis Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras
11
Title of the Text
16
Structure
17
Dialogic Framework
20
Śāstric Style
23
Résumé
29
Manuscript
43
History
44
Script
47
Colophon
50
Language
53
Spelling
53
Non-standard Old Javanese forms
61
Non-standard Sanskrit tadbhavas
62
Scribal Errors
65
Omission
65
Addition
69
Substitution
72
Transposition
79
Other Sources of Corruption
79
Editorial Policies
81
Why Two Editions?
81
Diplomatic Edition
83
Critical Edition
88
Treatment of Sanskrit
95
Notes on the Translation
97


--- PAGE 17 ---
xvi
Contents
ii Text & Translation
Facsimile Reproductions & Parallel Diplomatic Edition
101
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
193
iii Doctrine
Te Lord
343
As the Absolute
343
As Personal God
355
As an Incarnated Being
365
As the Same as or Different from His Creation
378
As the Material or Instrumental Cause of the Universe
387
Te Soul
391
Vis-à-vis the Lord
392
Losing its Divine Status
398
At Liberation
410
Obtaining the Lord’s Powers during Life
418
Cosmos
421
Lord, Soul, Māyā
422
Te Tirty Principles of the Universe
424
Cosmography and Geography
429
Man
437
Citta and Buddhi
437
Bhāvas and Pratyayas
441
Ahaṅkāra, Manas and the Lower Constituents
450
Physiology
458
Subtle Body
462
Karma
465
Yoga
477
Samādhi and the stages of Yoga
481


--- PAGE 18 ---
Contents
xvii
Te Eight Ancillaries
510
Te Yogic Powers
528
Prayogasandhi
544
Right Knowledge
551
As Salviﬁc Knowledge
551
As the Tree Valid Means of Knowledge
552
Wrong Knowledge
557
Te Materialist Doctrine
559
Admitting only Direct Perception
564
Denying the Lord and Summum Bonum
570
Upholding Non-Existence as Origin and End of the Universe
584
Denying Causation
592
Denying Karma
595
Denying Heaven and Hell
599
Denying Soul and Liberation
602
Upholding Hedonism
612
appendices
617
A: Parallel Synopses of Tree Tattvas
619
B: Parallel Synopses of the Yogapāda of the DhPāt and the YS[Bh]
633
C: Transliteration Tables
637
sigla
639
bibliography
643
index of selected words
669
samenvatting
676
summary
677
curriculum vitae
678


--- PAGE 19 ---


--- PAGE 20 ---
i
Introduction


--- PAGE 21 ---


--- PAGE 22 ---
Te Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
T
he Dharma Pātañjala has been preserved in a single complete codex,
now held at the Staatsbibliothek in Berlin, belonging to an old (<16th
century ad) and little-documented tradition of manuscripts originating from
West Java. Some of these manuscripts, including our codex, contain Old Ja-
vanese Śaiva scriptures known as Tuturs or Tattvas. Tis fact is in itself re-
markable, for the overwhelming majority of such scriptures have been pre-
served only on (much later) Balinese manuscripts.1
Te West
Javanese Tutur
Tradition
Collections preserving manuscripts of Old Javanese Tu-
turs (some with occasional Sanskrit quotations) were
found in the course of the 19th century in the Merapi-
Merbabu area in Central Java2 and in few locations in
West Java.3 While the identiﬁcation and study of such
texts is still very much at a pioneering stage, editions and Indonesian trans-
lations of some Śaiva Tuturs from manuscripts recovered in West Javanese
locations and now kept in Jakarta have appeared in recent years. Tese in-
clude the texts published as (Serat) Catur Bhumi (ms. PNRI 16 L 634) and
(Serat) Devabuda (ms. PNRI 16 L 638)—which have been shown by Darsa
(1998:32–34) to be different redactions of one text, whose original title was
SaṅHyaṅHayu;4 the Bhuvana Pitu (PNRI 636, Darsa and Ekadjati 2005).
1.
As is the case for the majority of Old Javanese literature tout court: cf. Zoetmulder
(1974:21, 41). For a survey of the Javano-Balinese Tutur literature, cf. Acri (2006).
2.
On this large collection, preserving texts of various literary genres, cf. van der
Molen and Wiryamartana (2001) and below, pp. 44–47.
3.
Te largest West Javanese (Sundanese) collection originates from the pre-Islamic
scriptorium of Ciburuy in the Garut regency; the other signiﬁcant amount of such texts are
part of what is known as the ‘Bandung collection’, originally found in the village of Cilegon
(cf. Netscher 1853), and the Raden Saleh legacy (NBG 1867:155). Apart from twenty-
seven manuscripts (twenty-three Lontars and four Nipahs) still to be found in Ciburuy, the
bulk of those West and Central Javanese collections is now kept at the National Library of
Indonesia in Jakarta. Rare manuscripts of Tuturs originating from East Java are also known
to exist (cf., e.g., LOr 14.492, described in Pigeaud 1980:210–212).
4.
Tis on account of their incipits, all beginning with the words ndah saṅhyaṅhayu;
cf. Pigeaud (1967:55, 1968: 219), who, on account of previous catalogues, names SaṅHyaṅ
Hayu the fragment LOr 4463—an autograph copy by Holle of ms. BG 1094. As pointed
out by Darsa, another version of the same text is preserved on the Nipah PNRI 16 L 637,
referred to as Serat Sevaka Darma. Former editors appear to have attributed titles to the
above texts in an arbitrary manner: in the case of ms. 634, on account of the last two words
of the chronogram, i.e. caturbumi; in the case of ms. 637, on account of the last sentence of


--- PAGE 23 ---
4
i Introduction
Many more manuscripts are to be found in public collections in Jakarta,5
Europe6 and in the scriptorium of Ciburuy.7
Te largest part of the above-mentioned manuscripts, including the co-
dex of the Dharma Pātañjala, can be regarded as belonging to the same tra-
dition insofar as they bear similar physical features, being written in black
ink with a brush on leaves of the Nipah (i.e. thatch palm) in a peculiar kind
of Old Javanese script and bearing colophons with dates spanning from the
14th to the late 16th century. Te use of Nipah as a writing support is in-
dicative of the area of provenance of the manuscripts: the thatch-palm, gen-
erally growing only in a humid climate, has a predilection for muddy coasts,
beaches and lagoons—a type of environment that can be found mostly in
West Java and that gradually disappears in the central and eastern regions of
the island as well as in Bali and Lombok, where the climate becomes drier.8
Tis might explain why the number of Nipahs that has survived until to-
day is very small compared to the number of Lontars, and none of them has
been recovered from East Javanese or Balinese collections. Further, as noted
the text, i.e. nahan śabdopadeśa, ṅa, kayatnakna saṅsevaka dharma; as for ms. 638, nothing
in the text justiﬁes the title Serat Devabuda. Whereas the two former manuscripts present
an almost identical text, a signiﬁcant degree of variation exists between them and the latter
(cf. Darsa 1998:65–92, who prepared an edition on the basis of mss. 634 and 637). Te
text and its various versions apparently enjoyed a certain popularity in the 16th century
Sundanese milieu.
5.
Such as the Bhimasorga (PNRI 16 L 623, written in Old Sundanese script but con-
taining an Old Javanese text—if somewhat inﬂuenced by Old Sundanese), the Siksa Guru
(PNRI 16 L 628), etc. (cf. Behrend 1998:347–350 and 383–384).
6.
Such as the Tiga Jñāna (LOr 2267), ms. Mal. Pol. 161 in the Bibliothéque Nationale
de France in Paris (cf. Cabaton 1903:254) and the Rasa Carita (thus Pigeaud 1980:206–
208 named Ms. Jav. b.1 from the Oxford Bodleian Library, which was donated by Andrew
James as early as 1627—cf. Noorduyn 1985); the last two manuscripts actually contain very
similar versions of the text edited as SaṅHyaṅHayu.
7.
Tese are a two fragments of leaves (Kropak 23) that I have identiﬁed with a version
of the Tattvajñāna (cf. Acri 2010); Kropak 22 and 24, containing a version of the SaṅHy-
aṅHayu; Kropak 1, seemingly containing a longer version of the SaṅHyaṅHayu referred
to as Bhuvana Pitu. Te latter text ends with the words nihan śabdopadeśānugraha; even
though a Nipah referred to as Śabdopadeśānugraha was described by Netscher (1853:471)
as ms. ix of the Bandung collection, I have found no trace of this title in the Jakarta mss.
that were accessible to me (compare PNRI 637, reading only śabdopadeśa), apart from in
a 19th-century transliteration into Modern Javanese script (PNRI 89 L 155) labeled as ‘ms.
Ciburuy i, which apparently corresponds to the original Nipah (Kropak 1) still found in the
scriptorium.
8.
Cf. van Lennep (1969:16–17) and van der Molen (1983:88).


--- PAGE 24 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
5
by van Lennep (1969:29–38), apart from sharing the same support, writing
technique and script, the manuscripts bear other uniform features: they have
four lines to a page, one single binding hole for which a deﬁnite space oc-
cupying two lines of text is lef blank,9 and are usually kept in wooden cases
(kropak) lacquered in red and with black and yellow ﬂoral designs—probably
derived from China—that are only found in association with Nipahs from
the Sundanese area. According to van Lennep, the consistent occurrence of
such ﬁxed features during a period of over two centuries suggests that these
codices were produced by one and the same school sustained by a central
political authority, i.e. the late kingdom of Padjadjaran (ca. 1333–1579 ad).
Also part of the same West Javanese collections described above are sev-
eral non-Islamic religious texts in Old Sundanese language, most of which
were engraved on Lontar leaves in Old Sundanese script.10 Although their
colophons bear dates more or less contemporary to those of the Nipah man-
uscripts containing Old Javanese scriptures, it is arguable that these texts are
younger than the latter, for they mention a series of geographical names that
show their awareness of Islam (e.g. Mecca, Madinah, Mesir) (cf. Noorduyn
and Teeuw 2006:142–143). Titles include the prose SaṅHyaṅSiksa Kandaṅ
Karĕsian dated 1518 ad, the SaṅHyaṅRaga Devata,11 Sevaka Dharma,12 and
the metrical works known as Jati Niskala (or Jati Raga) and Sri Ajnyana.13
Both the Old Javanese and Old Sundanese texts originating from West
9.
Except in the Nipahs of the Old Sundanese Siksa KandaṅKarәsian (PNRI 16 L 630)
and of the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Caṇḍakiraṇa (PNRI 16 L 631), where the blank space
occupies all four lines.
10.
Reproductions of this kind of script may be found in Holle (1877:8, 17, 26 [columns
89–92]) and Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:433–435); the latter publication contains a very
informative introduction to the corpus of (published) Old Sundanese texts (cf. especially
pp. 2–10) and editions and English translations of three unpublished texts, viz. Sri Ajnyana,
Bhujaṅga Manik and Carita ageung piripiri Mandodari manakmanak saṅRavana ‘Te great
story of the offspring of Mandodari, of the children of Ravana’.
11.
Tis one is in fact a Nipah written in ink (Coll. Museum Sri Baduga Bandung, ms.
07.106).
12.
Tis is Kropak PNRI 16 L 408, not to be confused with the Old Javanese Nipah re-
ferred to with the same title. Another version of the Old Sundanese text may be found
in a Lontar kept in Ciburuy (cf. Sardjono, Ekadjati and Kalsum 1987); preliminary re-
marks on the relation between the two manuscripts may be found in Noorduyn and Teeuw
(2006:24–28).
13.
On the similarities between the latter two, describing the journey of the Soul through
the heavens, cf. Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:24–25).


--- PAGE 25 ---
6
i Introduction
Javanese manuscripts—with the exception of the Dharma Pātañjala—are
characterized by a great degree of intertextuality, which is evident not only
with respect of their formal structures but also in terms of largely analo-
gous doctrinal contents.14 Te prose texts are usually shaped in the form
of lessons given by a guru to a disciple, consistently called sevaka dharma
‘servant of of the Truth’ or ‘[one] fulﬁlling the duty of serving or worship-
ping’ (OJED 1754). Contentwise, they feature a ‘localized’ form of Śaivism,
where the elements that can be found in the Sanskritic tradition are only
superﬁcial.15 For instance, well-known technical terms of philosophy and
yoga belonging to lists originally found in Sanskrit sources appear there in a
remarkably corrupt or Javanized/Sundanized fashion, decontextualized and
reconﬁgured along local lines that show a concern for mystical, moralistic
and didactic purposes. As far as the Old Javanese texts of the corpus are
concerned, the fulcrum of their doctrine is constituted by lengthy specula-
tions on the paramount principle referred to either as ajñāna,16 i.e. the es-
sential or holy knowledge, also called ajñāna nirmala, ajñāna śūnya, ajñāna
saṅviśeṣa (cf. Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:137–138), or as the triad called
14.
Although the mutual inﬂuences between the two traditions of scriptures are still wait-
ing to be investigated, it is arguable that Old Sundanese texts drew upon (earlier) scriptures
belonging to the Old Javanese tradition. For instance, the SaṅHyaṅSiksa KandaṅKarәsian
refers to titles of late Old Javanese texts, such as the Koravāśrama, Raṅga Lave, Bhoma (i.e.
Bhomāntaka or KiduṅBhoma?) and Sumana(sāntaka?) (cf. Holle 1867:459); the text itself
was regarded by Pleyte (1907:18 and 1914) as a copy of an Old Javanese text dated 1518
ad, which has later been identiﬁed on speculative grounds by van Lennep (1969:19) with
the Tiga Jñāna from West Java (LOr 2267). Tis is very unlikely, for the contents of the two
texts appear to be different. Pleyte’s hypothesis remains, however, likely, for the SaṅHyaṅ
Siksa KandaṅKarәsian (PNRI 16 L 630) features a great number of Old Javanese words
and is written, unlike the overwhelming majority of Old Sundanese texts, in Western Old
Javanese quadratic script on a Nipah (cf. below, Table 1, p. 49).
15.
I use the term ‘localized’ following Wolter’s (1982:52) famous deﬁnition: ‘Indian
materials tended to be fractured and restated and therefore drained of their original signif-
icance by a process which I shall refer to as ‘‘localization’’ ’. A deﬁnition of the word ‘local’
that is relevant to mention here is the one formulated by Noorduyn and Teeuw (2000:295):
‘Te word local […] refers to non-Indian cultural elements, words and concepts. In some
cases these may be typically Sundanese, in others they may be common to the medieval Ja-
vanese and Sundanese cultural heritage. Ofen it is difﬁcult to decide whether we have to do
with the former or the latter, as insufﬁcient information is available for such a distinction’.
16.
Ofen spelled ajnyana, as in Old Sundanese texts. Note that the initial a- is not a
Sanskrit alpha privans but the Old Javanese stative preﬁx.


--- PAGE 26 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
7
trikāya paramārtha or tiga jñāna, consisting of bāyu, śabda, hiḍәp;17 whereas
the triad is also given a great importance in the late Balinese Tutur tradi-
tion, in the texts from West Java it is by far more pervasive. Other features
that we also ﬁnd in the Balinese Tutur corpus, such as cosmology, micro-
macrocosmic correspondences and supernatural powers, are illustrated in
the texts belonging to the West Javanese tradition by means of concrete ex-
amples relating to everyday Sundanese life. Furthermore, one notes a pro-
liferation of names of God in His various aspects that are unknown to the
Sanskrit tradition, namely SaṅHyaṅHayu, SaṅHyaṅTuṅgal, SaṅHyaṅ
Dharma, SaṅManon, SaṅHyaṅPramāṇa, Bhaṭāra Viśeṣa, etc., and the pres-
ence of a Śaiva-Buddhist coalition evidenced by the references to Bhaṭāra
Śiva-Buddha.
A comparable degree of doctrinal ‘localization’ is detectable in relatively
late (>16th century) Old Javanese texts such as the Koravāśrama, the Na-
varuci and the Tantu Paṅgәlaran.18 Certain non-Indic features of these texts
are also detectable in Balinese Tuturs, whether the ones which were arguably
compiled during (and even well afer) the period of cultural inﬂuence from
Majapahit (late 13th to early 16th century ad) on the basis of older tex-
tual materials, such as the Jñānasiddhānta and the Gaṇapatitattva, or—to
a lesser degree—the earlier (and more Indicized) ones, composed mainly in
the form of Sanskrit-Old Javanese translation dyads, such as the Bhuvana-
kośa, the Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa, the Tutur Kamokṣan and the Śaiva version of
the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan. Te best part of what has remained of the
Śaiva scriptural corpora from both geographical areas19 thus bears witness
to a ‘popular’ and embedded variety of Śaivism that is the expression of cul-
tural milieus far removed from the cosmopolitan and deeply Indicized ones
17.
Which corresponds to the ‘bodily’ (kāyika), ‘verbal’ (vācika) and ‘mental’ (mānasika)
qualifying a given aspect of worship in both Brahmanical and Buddhist Sanskrit sources.
18.
Given the peculiarity of their language, these texts are ofen referred to as ‘Middle
Javanese’. It is, however, difﬁcult to apply a clear demarcation between Old and Middle
Javanese in a consistent manner: cf. Zoetmulder (1974:24–36).
19.
Te lack of research in this direction prevents us to make any deﬁnitive statement
as to whether the two traditions developed in an independent way along similar lines or
mutually inﬂuenced each other (at least until the 16th century, in the case of West Java). As
a matter of fact no Tuturs have survived in the same form in both areas. Although a few
titles of scriptures are identical, i.e. Sevaka Dharma (West Jav. PNRI 637 and 408, vs. Bal.
LOr 9644, 9697, 9699) and Tiga Jñāna (West Jav. LOr 2267, vs. Bal. LOr 9401, 10.084), my
preliminary readings suggest that these manuscripts contain different texts, even though
they feature comparable motifs.


--- PAGE 27 ---
8
i Introduction
that seem to have been a common reality during the early Indo-Javanese
kingdoms.20
Tuturs vis-à-vis
Tattvas
Tis ‘popular’ and embedded character is conspicuously
absent from the Dharma Pātañjala. Te text indeed is
characterized by a speculative and argumentative per-
spective that we only ﬁnd in rare Old Javanese scrip-
tures, viz. the Vṛhaspatitattva (survived on Bali) and—to a relatively lesser
extent—the Tattvajñāna (survived on both Bali and Java).21 Both texts have
proved to be doctrinally very close to the Dharma Pātañjala, sharing paral-
lel passages and treating the same set of doctrinal topics following a similar
sequence.22 It is evident that the three texts—which I shall refer to as ‘Tat-
tvas’ rather than ‘Tuturs’—share a similar agenda of ‘translation’ of Sanskrit
elements into a local linguistic and intellectual framework; in doing so, they
display a similar degree of faithfulness to what appears to be a common and
prototypical Sanskrit canon. Tis state of affairs constitutes evidence of the
fact that they belonged to a scriptural corpus that should not be regarded as
a uniquely local (i.e. Javanese or Balinese) phenomenon, but rather as the
relic of a once pan-Archipelago corpus that, just as happened with the cor-
pus of Śaiva scriptures in the Indian Subcontinent, has suffered major losses
over the last several centuries.23 Just as the early Śaiva scriptures in Sanskrit
20.
Of course, I intend in no way to imply the cultural superiority of the latter over the
former, but simply point out a historical fact. Compare Noorduyn and Teeuw’s (2000:296)
remarks on the Old Sundanese (pseudo-)Śaiva poem Sri Ajnyana: ‘Tis poem indeed is a
far cry from the systematic philosophical and theological Old Javanese texts which were
the main topic of Dr. Sudarshana’s researches [i.e. the Vṛh and the TJ]. It is an expression
of popular religion as it developed in Java in the Middle Ages in patapans and mandalas,
hermitages and abodes of religious community, which were widespread especially in the
mountainous areas of Java’.
21.
In a recent article (Acri 2010) I have documented the survival of versions of this
scripture, previously known only from Balinese manuscripts, in a complete Lontar from
the Central Javanese collection of Merapi-Merbabu and in a short fragment of a Nipah from
the West Javanese collection of Ciburuy. Te Tattvajñāna, besides being characterized by a
less argumentative register of language, it features a more indigenous approach to religious
experience as it merges the speculative themes found in the Dharma Pātañjala and the Vṛ-
haspatitattva with the kind of esoteric and mystical themes thriving in later Tuturs.
22.
Te various parallelisms can be appreciated in the comparison of the three texts ar-
ranged in tabular form in Appendix B (pp. 619–631).
23.
By pan-Archipelago I mean the geographically extended area, stretching westwards
from Sumatra to Kalimantan (Borneo) and even Sulawesi, where evidence of Śaiva worship
has been found in the form of artifacts, temples, manuscripts and inscriptions from the 5th


--- PAGE 28 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
9
called Siddhāntatantras, once spread over the whole Indian Subcontinent,
have survived in manuscripts from Nepal and/or South India only, so Old
Javanese scriptures like the Dharma Pātañjala, the Vṛhaspatitattva and the
Tattvajñāna have survived only in a handful of remote Javanese locations
and/or in Bali.
Te term Tutur is used in secondary literature and among the modern
Balinese as a general label referring to the genre of Śaiva (and, to a much
lesser extent, Buddhist) scriptures bearing either the one or the other de-
nomination in their titles—or even none of them. But there are reasons to
believe that Tattvas originally formed a separate, and probably earlier, class
of scriptures, which can be distinguished from Tuturs on account of their
contents rather than their titles.24 Whereas the treatment of yoga and so-
teriology is strongly represented in both categories of texts, Tuturs devote
considerable attention to such distinctively Tantric elements of practice as
to the early 16th century.
24.
It is arguable that in the course of time their denominations came to largely overlap
so as to be regarded as identical—a fact conﬁrmed by the occurrence of the label tattva in
texts that do not show features attributable to Tattvas (and vice-versa). Evidence suggesting
that the word tattva may have been used to refer to a speculative religious text and not only
to ‘reality, truth’ or ‘knowledge of truth, knowledge of the (highest) reality’ (OJED 1963) is
found in Old Javanese literature. For instance, the Old Javanese commentary to śloka 2 of
the Vṛhaspatitattva glosses the word tattvaṃsarvaṃas ‘the totality of scriptures’ saṅhyaṅ
aji kabeh (Vṛhaspati laments the fact that ‘there are indeed many kinds of scriptures’ ikaṅ
śāstra vih akveh ata prakāranya); the Dharma Pātañjala (258.4), when discussing one who
possesses the supernatural ability to master the scriptures, mentions a Tattvajñāna along
with the Śāstras and Purāṇas; the Koravāśrama (42.13) mentions, among the means of re-
ligious instruction (paṅopadeśa), ‘any kinds of holy scriptures on Dharma’ salvira niṅsaṅ
hyaṅdharmatattva. Besides -tattva, also -jñāna appears in titles of scriptures, viz. Tattva-
jñāna, Mahājñāna and Jñānasiddhānta. Examples of the use of both tattva and jñāna in the
sense of ‘text’ or ‘revealed scripture’ are found in early Sanskrit Śaiva literature from the Sub-
continent. For the former there is the testimony of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, a compilation
of in origin separate textual units called tattvas (cf. Niśvāsamukha 8.10b, referring to itself
as tattvasaṃhitam uttamam); for the latter, cf., as pointed out by Goodall (1998:xxxvi and
2004:139 fn. 5), Kiraṇavṛtti 3.20.7–8 and 3.27.8–9; Kiraṇatantra VP 7.11a; Parākhyatantra
1.5, Svacchandatantra 11.188a, Sarvajñānottara VP 1.2–5, Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 5.6d
and Mālinīvijayottaratantra 4.8 (cf. Vasudeva 2004:237); furthermore, in Saṃskāravidhi 54
(cf. Acharya 2007:42–43, fn. 95), Ratnaṭīkā on 1.1ab and 1.5ab and Niśvāsaguhya 12.5b
the term pañcārthajñāna/pañcārthavidyā appears to refer to the Pāśupatasūtra (probably
along with Kauṇḍinya's commentary). Te element -jñāna in the title of various Siddhān-
tatantras, e.g. Kālajñāna, Candrajñāna, Sarvajñāna(-uttara), may also be explained in this
manner.


--- PAGE 29 ---
10
i Introduction
interiorized ritual, visualizations and the elaboration of micro-macrocosmic
correlations, especially in the form of meditative techniques that link the
body of the meditator with the cosmos, viz. ontological principles or levels
of reality, deities, geographical features, syllables. Mantric or syllabic mys-
ticism is very prominent, as well as syncretism in the form of incorporation
of elements from non-Śaiva traditions, such as the Buddhist-ﬂavoured deﬁ-
nition of the supreme reality as Void (śūnya), or the equation of the Lord to
the universal Brahman or Puruṣa through such distinctively (illusionistic)
Vedāntic images as the reﬂection of sun/moon in the water of many pots.
Tattvas, on the other hand, are more concerned with the systematic and
exhaustive exposition of theological, epistemological and ontological mat-
ters. Unlike Tuturs, their teachings were not explicitly considered esoteric by
their authors, for appeals to secretiveness are found nowhere in them. Te
two categories of scripture also display different textual structures. Many
Tuturs can be regarded as heterogeneous compilations of materials of dis-
parate provenance, while Tattvas are characterized by a more unitary and
coherent textual structure.
Relative
Chronology of
Tuturs and
Tattvas
Whereas a precise dating of the corpus can not be estab-
lished given the general absence of compelling internal
evidence, such as references to geographical localities or
historical personalities,25 one may at least try to propose
a relative chronology of Old Javanese Tuturs and Tat-
tvas on the basis of doctrinal arguments.26 One crite-
rion suggesting the priority of a given scripture over another is, I believe,
the close reliance on Sanskrit models or speciﬁc doctrinal themes and the
exhibition of signs of relatively little localization. It is reasonable to suppose
that the more strongly Indicized texts date back to a historical period during
25.
Te only internal evidence of a certain relevance in the Dharma Pātañjala is the ref-
erence to the ethnonyms Nambi (208.14) and Parasi (210.1), terms which by themselves,
however, do not point at a speciﬁc date since they are attested in Javanese charters from the
9th to the 15th century (cf. my notes to the translation, p. 209 and 211).
26.
Elsewhere (Acri 2006:111–113) I have also advanced an argument focusing on the
formal and linguistic characteristics of the texts, which could be divided (in chronological
order from the earlier to the later) into the three following categories: 1) texts arranged in
the form of ‘translation dyads’, i.e. Sanskrit ślokas followed by an Old Javanese paraphrase
and/or commentary (on which term cf. Hunter forthcoming); 2) Old Javanese Tuturs with
traces of ślokas; 3) works entirely in Old Javanese. On how the Dharma Pātañjala ﬁts into
this categorization, cf. below, p. 17.


--- PAGE 30 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
11
which the socio-cultural and religious ideologies carried through Sanskrit
texts were widespread in many regions of the Indonesian Archipelago.
Te Dharma Pātañjala presents stylistic and doctrinal features that are
remarkably close to those found in related Sanskrit sources. Its prose is in-
formed by the techniques of exegesis and dialectic exposition that charac-
terize philosophical Śāstras,27 while its doctrines closely echo those enun-
ciated in early Śaiva Siddhāntatantras, showing only minimal local devel-
opments. It stands apart from all other Javano-Balinese scriptures in that
it paraphrases (and re-elaborates) in Old Javanese a Sanskrit source that is
traceable to a version of the Yogasūtra with a commentary. It aims at il-
lustrating in a clear way, by means of a dialogue, a coherent Śaiva doctrine
and at providing persuasive answers to important theological questions and
problems. It attempts to justify its doctrines against the criticism of oppo-
nents belonging to rival schools through logical argumentation that follows
the conventions of Sanskrit commentarial literature based on a debate be-
tween a pūrvapakṣin and an uttarapakṣin. It interprets heterogeneous San-
skrit materials belonging to different—albeit related—religious and philo-
sophical traditions and blends them to form a coherent Śaiva theological
system. Even though one may argue that these features have been achieved
by the author of the Dharma Pātañjala with varying degrees of success, there
is little doubt that the work is one stemming from a learned scholar who was
conversant with the Sanskritic scriptural tradition.
Tuturs and
Tattvas vis-à-vis
Sanskrit
Siddhāntatantras
In order to distinguish the originally Indic elements
from the ‘localized’ developments in (Sanskrit)-Old Ja-
vanese Śaiva Tuturs and Tattvas it is imperative to study
those texts in comparison with the Sanskrit tradition of
Śaiva scriptures. It is to the vast corpus of scriptures tra-
ditionally referred to as Āgamas or (Siddhānta)Tantras28
that the sources from the Archipelago bear the closest similarities, and
with which they sometimes even share portions of Sanskrit verses (cf. Acri
2006:118–131). Tese texts, such as the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, Rauravasū-
trasaṅgraha, Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, Sarvajñānottara, Sārdhatriśatikā-
lottarāgama, Niśvāsakārikā, Kiraṇatantra, Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama, Pa-
27.
Te term Śāstra deﬁnes a class of Sanskrit texts of philosophical or technical contents,
whose style and register of language are strictly ﬁxed (cf. below, pp. 23–28).
28.
I accept the latter usage on the basis of the observations made by Goodall
(1998:xxxvi–xxxvii) and Watson (2006:71–72).


--- PAGE 31 ---
12
i Introduction
rākhyatantra, and Mṛgendratantra, form the textual basis of the mainstream
(i.e. mildly Tantric) Śaivasiddhānta widespread in the whole Indian Subcon-
tinent from the 6th to the 10th century ad.29 Another Śaiva textual corpus
that is relevant for the study of Tuturs and Tattvas is formed by the earlier
(prob. <5th century ad), and unfortunately scant, scriptures bearing witness
to the more ancient form of Śaivism of the Pāśupata stream, such as the Pā-
śupatasūtra with the commentary Pañcārthabhāṣya by Kauṇḍinya, the Ga-
ṇakārikā with the commentary Ratnaṭīkā, the Saṃskāravidhi and Pāśūpata-
inﬂuenced sections that have survived in what is now thought to be the ear-
liest Siddhāntatantra, i.e. the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā.30 As shown by Sander-
son (1988, 2006a), especially on the basis of data drawn from the latter scrip-
ture, the Pāśupata and Saiddhāntika forms of Śaivism were part of, respec-
tively, the Atimārga (‘Outer Path’) and Mantramārga (‘Path of Mantras’),
which formed two distinct religious ideologies on account of their different
emphasis on gnosis and salvation (Atimārga) or initiation, ritualism and the
quest for supernatural powers (Mantramārga); and of the different social
categories they were targeting, i.e. male initiated Brahmins (Atimārga) or
householders and rulers (Mantramārga).31
What makes Tuturs and Tattvas a fascinating and important object of
study is the fact that they have retained a remarkably archaic doctrinal char-
acter, which points to the possibility that these sources from the Archipelago
drew their doctrines in part from the scantly preserved corpus of Pāśupata
scriptures, and in part from Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras, not in the form as
we know them now but rather when they were still in their formative stage,
i.e. prior to the activity of systematization they were submitted to during
the still little-known period of gestation and emergence of the fully-ﬂedged
Śaivasiddhānta.32 In describing the temporal gap detectable between the
29.
An increasing amount of evidence indicates that the beginning of Śaiva Tantric lit-
erature may be pushed back to the 5th or 6th century. Sanderson (2006b) has tentatively
suggested that the earliest commentators of Saiddhāntika scriptures known to us, i.e. Sad-
yojyotis and Bṛhaspati, were active in, respectively, 675–725 and 650–750 ad. For a relative
chronology of Siddhāntatantras, cf. Goodall (1998:xxxix–xlvi and 2004:xiii–xxxiv).
30.
Cf. Sanderson (2001:29–31 and 2006a:163–169, 202–209).
31.
As outlined in Sanderson 1988, the textual corpus that can be ascribed to the Man-
tramārga stream of Śaivism is vast and characterized by scriptures of very unequal persua-
sion, spanning from the mildly Tantric, dualist and non-transgressive Śaivasiddhānta to the
deeply Tantric, non-dualist and transgressive canon of the Vidyāpīṭha.
32.
For the view that the Archipelago texts may be regarded as a sort of ‘missing link’ be-


--- PAGE 32 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
13
manifestation of Mantramārga Śaivism and the earlier Atimārga, Sander-
son (2006a:151) points out that ‘given the very different character of the two
kinds of Śaivism that are known to us through surviving texts and the evi-
dence that there might be as many as four or ﬁve centuries separating their
emergence, one is bound to wonder whether there were not intermediate
developments of which all evidence is lost or the evidence for which has not
yet been examined and correctly evaluated’. My investigation suggests that
Old Javanese sources may provide us with materials to ﬁll this gap, being the
only places of attestation of otherwise lost stages in the history of the Śaiva
religion.
Te doctrinal arguments indicative of relative archaicness that I have un-
covered previously (Acri 2006:125–129) are either positive, viz. the presence
of Sāṅkhya and Pāśupata doctrines,33 the speciﬁc form of yoga,34 the men-
tion of thirty principles of the universe (tattva) instead of the more com-
mon thirty-six; or ex silentio, viz. the absence of terminology or doctrines
that are only found in the latest among the relatively early Siddhāntatan-
tras and in the works of Śaiva exhegetes afer Sadyojyotis, such as the six-
fold division of the cosmos (i.e. the six paths or adhvans), the threefold divi-
sion of stain (āṇava, kārma, māyīya), the division of beings into six classes
(i.e. pralayākalas, vijñānākalas, etc.). Additional archaic themes found in
the sources are the important role played by the triad of principles (ātman,
śiva and vidyā/māyā) in cosmology, and the reliance upon examples and
theologemes commonly found in the early Upaniṣads and not well-attested
in Siddhāntatantras. Similarly, the stress on analogies and examples rather
than abstract logical demonstrations to explain or justify doctrinal concepts
ﬁnds a counterpart in Sanskrit Śastras composed before the Buddhist logi-
cian Dignāga (c. 480–550), whose work set the standard of philosophical
argumentation for many centuries to come.35 But the most important piece
of evidence is that one fundamental and deﬁning characteristic of the Śaiva-
siddhānta, e.g. the stress on the salviﬁc role of initiation (dīkṣā), is entirely
tween the pre-Classic (Upaniṣadic) Śaivism and the Śaivasiddhānta, cf. Zieseniss (1956:14–
15) and Gonda (1970, 1975:16); similar considerations on the antiquity of the Old Javanese
Śaiva literature were made by Brunner (1992:13–14).
33.
Whereas these will be amply discussed in Part iii.
34.
Tis aspect is evidenced by the use of the early technical terminology widespread
in Siddhāntatantras and the absence of elaborate models of subtle bodily centres (cakra)
described in later texts.
35.
More on this point below, pp. 567–570.


--- PAGE 33 ---
14
i Introduction
absent from the Old Javanese sources,36 which rather adhere to the Pāśupata
view seeing initiation as a mere rite of passage (saṃskāra) on the one hand
and yoga-cum-knowledge as valid means of salvation on the other.
It is interesting to note that the same archaic doctrinal outlook has been
described by Sanderson (2001:22–23, fn. 28) with respect to the variety of
Śaivism followed by the ancient Khmers, where the Saiddhāntikas ‘remained
cut off from the mainstream once their tradition had taken root’. According
to Sanderson (2006a:155–156), ‘that the Niśvāsa continued in Cambodia
to enjoy the central position revealed by its evidence afer its marginaliza-
tion in India may be seen as an example of the tendency of regions cut off
from metropolitan developments to preserve traditions in a relatively archaic
form’.37 Similar conclusions have been drawn with regard to the form of
Tantric Buddhism documented in Old Javanese sources38 and other Tantric
(or Tantricized) religious traditions that have survived in Central, East and
Southeast Asia.39
36.
If not openly denied, as in an interesting passage of the Dharma Pātañjala (320.3–10,
cf. Part iii, pp. 526–527).
37.
According to Sanderson (2003-04:361), Kashmir, Nepal and Bali were ‘cultural
zones which received their Śaivism independently. Features that they share are therefore
very unlikely not to have been found in their common source and, moreover, in other zones
that received the religion, such as Kambujadeśa [i.e. Cambodia]’.
38.
Cf. Nihom (1994:189) who, having pointed at textual evidence documenting the vir-
tual absence of the vajradhātumaṇḍala in Old Javanese sources from the Archipelago, has
argued that the theological framework of Indonesian Tantric Buddhism appears to go back
to an earlier period, i.e. before the codiﬁcation that took place in the Subcontinent at a later
stage of its history, and that the introduction of Buddhist materials from the Subcontinent
into the Archipelago is likely to have taken place before the codiﬁcation of the Tattvasaṅ-
graha at the beginning of the 8th century ad. Nihom (1994:15) also noted that ‘data re-
tained in Indonesia may greatly aid us in attempting to reconstruct the intellectual history
of the Tantras in India itself by providing a control relative to the much better known, pre-
served and studied traditions of Central and East Asia. In fact, […] similar conclusions may
be reached for the history of Śaivism’.
39.
Cf. White (2000:21): ‘What we ﬁnd, in fact, is that the historical time frame in which
the transmission (to China, Tibet, Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia) of various Indian tantric
paradigms occurred has invariably proven deﬁnitive for the structure and content of the ‘ex-
port’ Tantric tradition in question. It is as if the original revelation remained fossilized, like
an insect in a block of amber, in the export tradition. Tis is manifestly the case, for exam-
ple, with Japanese Shingon—founded by Kūkai (774–835 c.e.)—whose core revelations are
the seventh-century c.e. Mahāvairocana-sūtra and the Tattvasaṅgraha-sūtra. […] Shingon
practice remains, in many respects, a preserved specimen of those enshrined in seventh-
century Indian paradigms, but with a Japanese overlay. […] Similarly, Tibetan Buddhism,


--- PAGE 34 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
15
Of course, the situation described above does not necessarily imply that
the composition of the Tuturs and Tattvas was contemporary to the Sanskrit
scriptures that were introduced in the Archipelago at an early date,40 but
may mean that most Old Javanese texts, even when they were composed at
relatively later dates, e.g. afer the 10th century ad, still adhered to archaic
models even though they were aware of new developments from the Sub-
continent.41 Tus, certain theologemes of the Atimārga were incorporated
in the scriptures of the Mantramārga, surviving side by side to create the pe-
culiar Pāśupata-Saiddhāntika coalition that Tuturs and Tattvas document.
Tis view ﬁnds a persuasive illustration in the Dharma Pātañjala, which
exhibits both archaic and innovative elements. For instance, it presents what
is by far the most pervasive and ‘mature’ treatment of maculation found in
an Old Javanese source, understanding it as an innate (sahaja) entity bind-
ing the Soul alongside karma; but at the same time it gives equal importance
to the deﬁlements and the three qualities (viz. sattva, rajas and tamas) as
factors of bondage—an archaic view documented in some early Siddhānta-
tantras and non-Śaiva Brahmanical sources, as well as in most Tuturs and
Tattvas. Furthermore, its prose is informed by the same ‘Śāstric’ style and
interest for doctrinal matters and philosophical argumentation character-
izing the latest among the demonstrably early Siddhāntatantras, but at the
same time relies upon naive syllogisms and examples rather than complex
logical demonstrations to prove its theological dogmas, in just the same way
with its preponderance of Vajrayāna practice based on revelations found in what would later
be classiﬁed as the Tantras of Yoga and Supreme Yoga, preserves the Tantric status quo of
eighth-century India’.
40.
Nor must it be necessarily assumed that the absence of a certain doctrine in a given
Old Javanese text implies a date of composition prior to the ﬁrst record of that doctrine
in Sanskrit texts. Cf., for example, Nihom’s (to my mind unjustiﬁed) assumption that, on
account of the fact that Vṛhaspatitattva 60–61 holds a view of the ten rules of conduct of
yoga (yamas and niyamas) that is intermediate between the one of the Sāṅkhyavṛtti (<5th
century ad) and that of the Pañcārthabhāṣya (<7th century ad, probably <5th), ‘the Sanskrit
verses of the VT [i.e. Vṛhaspatitattva] are substantially older than the PABh [i.e. Pañcārtha-
bhāṣya]’ (1995a:218).
41.
It is only natural that many different streams of Śaivism were followed in the Archi-
pelago, as documented by signiﬁcant, although sparse, evidence found in textual and artistic
documents. Cf., for example, Sanderson (2003–04:376–377) on evidence of the (earlier)
cults of Tumburu and Khaḍgarāvaṇa, two Rudras venerated in the Tantras belonging re-
spectively to the Vāma- and Paścimasrota division of the Śaiva corpus; and Santiko (1995)
and Hunter (2007) on evidence of Śākta and Bhairavika cults in 13th century Java.


--- PAGE 35 ---
16
i Introduction
that pre-Dignāga Sanskrit sources do.
Title of the
Text
Te Dharma Pātañjala was referred to as ‘Lehre des
Patañjali’ by its discoverer, the German Sanskritist
Friederich.42 Although OJED (367–368) does not list
‘book’ among the possible meanings of the term dharma
‘sacred teaching’, it is only natural that both meanings converged when ap-
plied to a title of a text—hence, akin to either the Old Javanese aji, which can
also refer to a system of doctrines or a written sacred book, and the Sanskrit
word śāstra. Dharma is not a very prominent designation for Śaiva scrip-
tures of the Tutur/Tattva genre, but nonetheless features in a number of Old
Javanese texts, mostly religious, legalistic or didactic in contents.43
Tat the title means ‘Sacred teaching of Patañjali’, in connection with the
legendary author of the Yogasūtra, is a possibility suggested by the fact that
almost one third of the text is devoted to the exposition of yogic doctrine
found in the Sanskrit texts and its commentaries. But the narration in the
text dealing with the legend of the incarnation of the Lord as Pātañjala,44 a
prominent ﬁgure in Javanese literature from as early as the 9th century ad,
suggests the alternative possibility that the title was intended to mean ‘Sacred
teaching of Pātañjala’, being the incarnation of the Lord and the foremost of
the series of ﬁve masters known in Java as Pañcakuśikas or Pañcaṛṣis. It is
also not to be excluded that the name of the latter mythical character and
the (semi-)historical author converged into a single denomination.45 A pos-
sible explanation of this convergence may be that the section narrating the
myth of Pātañjala, which is likely to have originally belonged to a different
source,46 was compiled together with the rest of the text by the author. Te
insertion of this fundamental, and foundational, Javanized Pāśupata narra-
tion might have happened as a way to either give sense to the original title
42.
Cf. Pigeaud (1975:112) and below, p. 44.
43.
Such as, e.g., the Śaiva poem Dharma Śūnya; cf. also the entries in Pigeaud
(1970:219–221 and 1980:288–289).
44.
More on this ﬁgure below, pp. 371–373.
45.
In support of this hypothesis I have referred to the analogous convergence of a his-
torical author and a divine character occurring in the Vṛhaspatitattva, where the early his-
torical Śaiva commentator Bṛhaspati has coalesced in the ﬁgure of the preceptor of the gods
(cf. Acri 2011).
46.
Tat this section is probably earlier than the rest of the text is suggested to me, besides
its contents, by its heavily corrupted state, which sets it apart from the rest of the text and
suggests a more complex chain of transmission.


--- PAGE 36 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
17
of the text, supposing the author was not aware of Patañjali’s authorship of
the Yogasūtra, or to authorize and enhance the status of his text to the eyes
of a local audience, who was also ignorant about the historical Patañjali.
Structure
Containing only three complete ślokas, one half-śloka
and one loose pāda quoted within its Old Javanese prose,
the Dharma Pātañjala belongs to the category of ‘Old Ja-
vanese Tuturs with traces of ślokas’.47 I have previously stated in print (Acri
2006:112–113) that
this type of arrangement, although not as a rule, may be taken as evidence
of relative lateness, for works of this kind were probably composed at a
time when Sanskrit scholarship was already fading away and the Old Ja-
vanese language, beside being the preferred language for literature, acquired
a higher status also in the religious sphere. Although the arrangement is not
dyadic anymore, a small number of Sanskrit verses, ofen incomplete, are in-
terspersed within the Old Javanese prose. Te Sanskrit seems to be quoted
as a proof of authoritativeness, sometimes in a corrupted or Javanized form
which makes it scarcely distinguishable from Old Javanese. Tese treatises
in origin were probably shaped in the form of ślokas with paraphrases, which
in the course of time underwent various enlargements until they acquired
the status of longer chapters or even short independent treatises. It is not ex-
cluded that these compilations were directly inspired by some kind of San-
skrit sources, now lost or still untraced.
Te features of the Dharma Pātañjala correspond with those outlined above.
In spite of the fact that Sanskrit ślokas are rare, the text displays a high de-
gree of scholarliness; at least one-third of it closely follows a Sanskrit treatise,
namely a version of the Yogasūtra provided with a commentary. I also stress
that the ‘relative lateness’ of the text concerns the category of Tutur consist-
ing in translation dyads, which is likely to have preserved an archaic struc-
ture of text-building. Tat there is a chronological priority of the former over
the latter class of scriptures is suggested to me by the comparable develop-
ment of Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras in a more Śāstric direction, which ﬁnds a
counterpart in the stylistic features and contents of Tattvas. Te agenda of
the Dharma Pātañjala is not to make the rare Sanskrit quotes accessible to
47.
To this category belong the Tattvajñāna and the ﬁrst three chapters of the Jñānasi-
ddhānta, written in Old Javanese prose occasionally interspersed with ślokas or half-ślokas;
these chapters are evidently later additions since they do not appear in the original core-text
constituted by Tutur Kamokṣan (cf. Hooykaas 1962, Soebadio 1971:4–7).


--- PAGE 37 ---
18
i Introduction
readers through a translation or paraphrase, but rather to provide a higher
level of doctrinal exegesis.48
Te Dharma Pātañjala shows no explicit subdivision into sections. How-
ever, it treats the topics that are usually covered in the Section of Doctrine
(jñānapāda/vidyāpāda) and Yoga (yogapāda) of Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras.
Te doctrinal part precedes the one on Yoga, even though there are occa-
sional overlaps. Tis arrangement is mirrored in both the Tattvajñāna and
Vṛhaspatitattva. Te latter text, whose contents, as already noted by Ziesen-
iss (1958:13–14), also correspond to those found in the Jñānapāda and Yo-
gapāda of Siddhāntatantras,49 do not show any sign of a division between the
speculative and yogic section into Pādas either. But, in the Dharma Pātañ-
jala, traces of attempts at indicating such a division are detectable in two in-
ternal references, where the Lord anticipates to Kumāra the imminent treat-
ment of the Yogapāda—a feature which I have found nowhere else in Old
Javanese scriptures.50 Notwithstanding the absence of any explicit indica-
tion marking the beginning of the Yogapāda, which starts rather abruptly in
correspondence with the introduction to śloka 2, these internal references
might be taken as evidence of the author’s awareness of this theoretical divi-
sion.51
48.
As it is the case in the longer Old Javanese portions of the Vṛhaspatitattva, which
display stylistic and doctrinal features similar to those of the Dharma Pātañjala.
49.
Both texts treat none of the topics that normally characterize the sections of Ritual
(kriyāpāda) and Conduct (caryāpāda). Tese matters are treated in two separate classes
of (Sanskrit-)Old Javanese texts, ofen bearing in their titles the words -śāsana and -kalpa
respectively (cf., e.g., Vratiśāsana, Ṛṣiśāsana, Kalpabuddha, etc.).
50.
For instance, in 250.10–12 Kumāra impatiently asks about the means to perform
absorption and the Lord replies that He will soon be teaching the yoga section (yoga-
pada/yogapāda), but not before the explanation of the products of the intellect has been
ﬁnished. In the following question (260.8–10), Kumāra enquires about the means to ex-
tinguish the three kinds of pain just explained by the Lord, who again assures him that the
exposition of the section of yoga will start immediately afer the termination of the descrip-
tion of the conditions of the intellect. Te end of the treatment of this topic in 268.2 is
clearly marked with the sentence ‘thus far about the conditions of the intellect’ ṅke ri vṛtti
niṅbuddhi, followed by a section-ending punctuation mark. Compare the passage where
the author coherently refers to a previous passage in the text by placing in the Lord’s mouth
an exhortation to Kumāra to recall the beginning of the narrative, where He had explained
why a lord of yogins does not achieve perfection immediately (226.12).
51.
Of course, these textual stratagems also serve the purpose of retaining the attention
of the reader afer a long and rather pedantic classiﬁcatory section. Tis remarkable feature,
I believe, supports my conviction that the text was composed by a single author.


--- PAGE 38 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
19
Tis state of affairs is mirrored in the Śaiva literature of the Subcontinent.
A division into Pādas is indeed generally absent in the earliest among the
scriptures belonging to the corpus of early Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras. Most
of these scriptures are articulated as one continuum of subsequent Paṭalas
ofen—though by no means as a rule—showing a logical sequence in the
treatment of topics but nothing like a clear division into the four sections of
Vidyāpāda, Yogapāda, Kriyāpāda and Caryāpāda. Such a fourfold classiﬁca-
tion has been shown by Brunner (1986–92, 1992) to be a later, and largely
artiﬁcial, development that arose to comply with theoretical and prescriptive
reasons regarding the ideal structure and contents coverage of a ‘complete’,
hence authoritative, Siddhāntatantra. Tis division does not indeed appear
anywhere before the latest among the early scriptures, namely the Mataṅga
and the Mṛgendra, where it seems to be authorial. However, as Goodall
(1998:lviii–lix; TĀK ii 281–282) notes, the names of the four sections are
already found in early scriptural literature (such as the Parākhya and the Ki-
raṇa), if only occurring either as a group of basic topics of discussion—and
not yet as text divisions. It appears that this situation has been preserved in
the Dharma Pātañjala.
While the Dharma Pātañjala appears to be a unitary text, it displays ev-
idence of a complex process of composition. According to the nature of the
topics treated, the text can be divided in at least four thematic blocks, each of
them traceable back to different doctrinal and scriptural traditions. Tese,
I believe, have been put together by a single mastermind who drew upon
materials of different provenance and merged them to form a single and co-
herent scripture.
Te ﬁrst section (194.2–274.18), conforming to the structure and con-
tents presented in the Vidyāpāda of Siddhāntatantras, expounds the main
epistemological, ontological and soteriological tenets of the Śaiva school,
including cosmology, gross and subtle human physiology, and the theory of
karma. Ten, in reply to Kumāra’s question about the presence of the Lord in
the cycle of existence and His previous incarnations, the Lord exposes an ex-
cursus, containing motifs of Purāṇic mythology and Pāśupata lore, narrating
His previous embodiments (276.1–280.20). Although, as I have suggested
above (p. 16, fn. 46), this archaic-ﬂavoured section seems to be of a different
provenance, the excursus is fully functional in the economy of the text and
partly paralleled in the Vṛhaspatitattva;52 yet it constitutes a thematic break,
52.
Indeed the Vṛhaspatitattva only mentions the mythological episodes surrounding the


--- PAGE 39 ---
20
i Introduction
roughly dividing (the ﬁrst part of) the Vidyāpāda from the Yogapāda. Having
narrated the vicissitudes connected with His ﬁrst incarnation as Nīlalohita,
the Lord goes on to narrate the ritual of His (re-)incarnation in Pātañjala,
one of the ﬁve Ṛṣis, in the form of Śrīkaṇṭha. Te story of the battle between
the Daityas and the Dānavas, the burning of Kāma and the marriage with
Umā follows. Afer this excursus the last part of Vidyāpāda ends with the
description of the powers of the Lord, their manifestation in the yogin and
the means to salvation (280.21–288.10).
Te section on yoga opens in 288.11 with a description of the technique
of prayogasandhi, followed upon by a śloka giving a deﬁnition of yoga as in
Yogasūtra 1.2 (yogaś cittavṛttinirodhaḥ). Te text then closely follows more
or less in parallel the topics treated in a version of the sūtras with a com-
mentary until 332.15, afer which it gradually rejoins the teachings of the
Vidyāpāda and ends in a long debate between the Lord and the opponent that
takes up once again the matters of metaphysics and ontology discussed by
the two characters at the beginning of the work. As the debate ends abruptly
afer a sentence in which the Lord exposed His siddhānta, one may get the
impression that the debate is still incomplete and, therefore, that the text was
not ﬁnished or copied in its entirety. Tis, however, might only be an im-
pression, for there is nothing that undermines the logical coherence of such
a (abrupt) conclusion. On the other hand, by comparing the ending section
of the Dharma Pātañjala with those of the Vṛhaspatitattva and Tattvajñāna,
one may note that the three texts, having treated the main topics they share,
end in a similarly ‘abrupt’ manner, without an apparent conclusion.
Dialogic
Framework
Te Dharma Pātañjala is articulated in the form of a di-
alogue of questions and answers between the Lord (bha-
ṭāra) and his son Kumāra.
Such a dialogic arrange-
ment is fairly widespread in Tuturs and Tattvas, where,
besides Kumāra (Mahājñāna, Kumāratattva i, Kumāratattva ii, Jñānasi-
ddhānta ch. 26), the interlocutors of Śiva are Vṛhaspati53 (Vṛhaspatitattva),
life of Śrīkaṇṭha, the burning of Kāma and the begetting of Kumāra, without mentioning the
pañcakuśīkas.
53.
Although the identiﬁcation of Vṛhaspati as the teacher of the Gods results clearly
from the text, the Lord in 14.31–32 incoherently addresses him as the son of Bhaṭārī Umā,
who gave birth to Sanatkumāra. Tis may either suggest that the passage in question is the
result of a careless copy-and-paste operation; or that in the author/compiler’s mind Vṛhas-
pati really assumed the role of Śiva’s son. His being addressed by the Lord throughout the
text with the appellative anaku ‘my son’ is in itself not conclusive evidence, for such an


--- PAGE 40 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
21
Gaṇapati (Gaṇapatitattva/Īśvara Uvāca Gaṇapati Matakvan),54 Bhārgava-
Paraśurāma (Bhuvanakośa) and the Goddess (devī, bhaṭārī) (Bhuvanako-
śa, Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa, Jñānasiddhānta 25–27). Tis narrative framework
and the characters of the Śaiva ‘Holy Family’ are widespread motifs in the
Sanskrit, including the Tantric, tradition. As pointed out by Goudriaan
(1981:26):
Te literary framework of most Tantras is the time-honoured device of the
dialogue, or rather the record of oral instruction. In the Tantras, this instruc-
tion is given by Śiva to Devī, his spouse and Śakti, or occasionally by the lat-
ter to the former. In the oldest period, however, the ṛṣis or Śiva’s son Skanda
(Kumāra) still play a role in it. […] It seems therefore probable that the Śiva-
Devī dialogue emancipated itself, so to say, from Epic-Purāṇic structures.
Tat the Dharma Pātañjala has preserved an archaic situation, where the
Purāṇic universe meets the Tantric, is suggested by the fact that Skanda/-
Kumāra/Kārtikeya is a relatively unimportant ﬁgure in the Tantras, and one
who never appears, for example, in their cosmological accounts. Apart from
Purāṇic sources, Kumāra achieved a wide popularity as interlocutor of Śiva
only in certain Tantric scriptures from the North of the Subcontinent, being
absent from those composed in the South.55
In both Sanskrit and Old Javanese sources,56 the usual setting of the di-
alogue is the summit of mount Kailāsa, where Śiva, usually in the form of
Śrīkaṇṭha, is approached while performing asceticism by an interlocutor
asking for spiritual instruction.57 In the Dharma Pātañjala and Vṛhaspa-
titattva this dialogue shows a degree of liveliness and articulation that sets
appellative may generally be used by a religious teacher to address his pupil.
54.
Te naming of a text afer the main interlocutor ﬁnds a counterpart in early Sanskrit
Śaiva scriptures: cf., e.g., Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (named afer the Ṛṣi Mataṅga); Rau-
ravāgama (Ruru); Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha (Brahmā), etc. Unlike Old Javanese texts,
however, Sanskrit scriptures usually specify a third-party ‘hearer’ of the sacred conversa-
tion and identify in him the one who transmitted it to mankind.
55.
Tantric texts framed in a dialogue between the Lord and Kumāra are the scriptures
belonging to the Vāthula or Āgneya corpus, i.e. the various recensions of the Kālottara,
the Sarvajñānottara, the Kālajñāna and the Jñānatilaka; the Kriyākālaguṇottara, a text be-
longing to the Garuḍatantra class; the Sāṅkhyāyanatantra (cf. Goudriaan 1981:89); the
Saurasaṃhitā, in which sages and other characters also feature as speakers.
56.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala (194.2–194.8); Vṛhaspatitattva śloka 1 and exegesis; Svacchan-
datantra 8.34–38; Tantrāloka 1.9 ; Śivapurāṇa 7.31.24; Liṅgapurāṇa 50.18; Rauravāgama
KP 1; Kiraṇa VP 1; etc.
57.
Śiva appears in the form of Śrīkaṇṭha already in the Mahābhārata (12.337.62), in


--- PAGE 41 ---
22
i Introduction
them apart from the rigid structure that characterizes Tuturs arranged in the
form of Sanskrit-Old Javanese translation dyads embedded in a superﬁcial
narrative framework. Tis textual structure too has a counterpart in early
non-Śāstric Sanskrit Tantras, in which there is no real interaction among the
speakers besides the hearer’s merely ‘perfunctory requests for knowledge pe-
riodically required by the genre’ (Goodall 2004:xliv). Watson (2006:74–
75), having observed that in the early tradition ‘a form of Śiva himself is
asked questions and responds with sermons whose validity is assured sim-
ply through being spoken by him’, points out that it is not until the Kiraṇa
that
we ﬁnd at least that the questioner, Garuḍa, points to what he perceives as
inconsistencies in the sermon he is hearing from the Lord, prompting him to
clarify. Ten in the Parākhya, the Mataṅga and the Mṛgendra the dialectical
dimension becomes more pronounced, and we ﬁnd the questioners putting
objections from the point of view of non-Śaiva traditions […]; the question-
ers in these three Tantras challenge fundamentals such as the existence of
God and the Self. […] Te mere fact that something is stated to be the case
in these texts is thus not always enough: assertions must be judged through
connection with the promulgation of the Pāśupata doctrine; in Tantric scriptures He is the
Guru who was responsible for the diffusion of the Śaiva knowledge down to earth (thus in
most Siddhāntatantras as well as the Yāmalatantras, cf. Goudriaan and Gupta 1981:26).
Aghoraśiva while commenting upon Sarvajñānottara KP 1.10ab describes a ﬁvefold mode
of transmission of the Śaiva knowledge from Śiva to Śrīkaṇṭḥa, from the latter to Kārtikeya
(e.g. Kumāra), who hands it over to the Ṛṣis, who in their turn divulge it to the human be-
ings. Other accounts of the transmission of the twenty-eight Siddhāntatantras, mentioning
Kumāra and Bṛhaspati in the line of transmission, are found in Dīkṣottara and Pauṣkara (cf.,
respectively, Goodall 1998:406 and 410); for a discussion of the transmission according
to Rāmakaṇṭha’s commentary on the Kiraṇa, cf. Goodall 1998:163–164, fn. 10. Although
the incipits of the Dharma Pātañjala and Vṛhaspatitattva do not make it clear, the idea that
Śrīkaṇṭḥa is also the form of the Lord appearing as teacher in the Old Javanese sources may
be gathered from other passages in both texts, viz. Dharma Pātañjala 278.19–280.4: ‘Te
venerable Ananta arrived, inviting me to go back into the plain of non-being. I was not
unwilling to be placed in the heaven of the one who is my superior form, that is in the world
of Śrīkaṇṭha. Above Śrīkaṇṭha, I spent a long time in the plain of non-being. Ten I was
ordered to take place in the Egg of Brahmā. I eventually became the teacher of the whole
world. Tat is the reason why I taught all the gods here in the Egg of Brahmā’; and Vṛhas-
patitattva 14.26–27: ‘Śrīkaṇṭha is myself here. Śrīkaṇṭha was my name when I received the
orders to impart doctrine in the Egg of Brahmā’ śrīkaṇṭhāku teki / śrīkaṇṭha ṅaraṅku kinon
maveh aji riṅbrahmāṇḍa /.


--- PAGE 42 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
23
logically respectable means.58
Yet, as Watson (p. 77) points out, the nature of the argumentation in di-
alectic Siddhāntatantras like the Parākhya, Mataṅga and Mṛgendra appears
to be superﬁcial and naive in comparison with the sophisticated dialectics of
Śaiva commentators post-dating Sadyojyotis, such as Nārāyaṇakaṇtha and
Rāmakaṇṭha. Te impression is that these treatises were meant for the sake
of strengthening the convictions of Śaivas rather than casting real dialectical
attacks to challenge the convictions of the followers of other schools.
Śāstric Style
Te features found in the more Śāstric among the early
Siddhāntatantras are mirrored in the Tattva genre of
scriptures, of which the Dharma Pātañjala and the Vṛ-
haspatitattva constitute the most signiﬁcant representatives. In both texts
the questioner expresses doubts and asks for evidence, being in his turn re-
proached by his teacher either for asking again and again the same question,
for having failed to understand properly his words or for having entertained
wrong doctrines. Similarly, the Lord expounds the views of rival schools and
anticipates their possible objections.
Te Dharma Pātañjala defends its theistic standpoint and crucial tenets
such as the existence of karma, the valid means of knowledge etc., against its
most radical deniers but is not interested in providing an elaborate philo-
sophical justiﬁcation of them against the views of rival systems. Tough
it ofen strives to reply to the opponent’s objections by providing explana-
tions based on syllogisms, the arguments sometimes appear to be formulated
through apodictic statements and naive demonstrations. As in the case of the
mentioned group of Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras, the degree of naiveté and as-
sertiveness ofen characterizing the arguments put forward by the Lord be-
trays edifying and soteriological intents rather than properly philosophical
aims.
Te Dharma Pātañjala appears to use the basic argumentative struc-
ture implemented in Śāstric Siddhāntatantras as its main text-building tech-
nique. Tis structure has been divided by Sanskrit exegetes59 into the cate-
gories of praśna ‘question’, which may also articulate a doubt arisen in the
mind of the listener from a previous statement, uddeśa ‘label’ or ‘prelimi-
nary listing’ of basic notions that are put on the agenda for explanation, and
58.
For similar observations, cf. Goodall (1998:lxv; 2004:xliv).
59.
Cf., e.g., Abhinavagupta’s Tantrāloka 1.252 and Jayaratha’s commentary thereon.


--- PAGE 43 ---
24
i Introduction
lakṣaṇa ‘deﬁnition’ or parīkṣā ‘investigation from all sides’, which ofen end
in ‘determination’ (nirṇaya). An example of this arrangement is provided
by the following passage (308.14–19), in which the Lord, asked by Kumāra,
ﬁrst enunciates the eight ancillaries of yoga and subsequently explains them
one by one:
Kumāra spoke:
[32] If you please, o Lord, what are the characteristics of the means of real-
praśna
ization of yoga, and of the observances?
[Te Lord]
Te characteristics of the means of realization of yoga are as follows. You
uddeśa
should know them, my son. Tere are the eight ancillaries: general com-
mandments, particular commandments, postures, withdrawal, breath-control,
ﬁxation, visualization, absorption. Tus is the number of the means of real-
ization of yoga.
General commandments are: non-violence, truth, non-thef, continence, re-
lakṣaṇa /
parīkṣā
nounciation.
Non-violence means: not killing … [each item is explained].
Further, the Old Javanese prose of the text is informed by characteristics and
intents that are comparable to those of a commentary according to the San-
skrit scholastic tradition (cf. Tubb and Boose 2007:1–5). Te function of
paraphrasing (padārthokti) is implemented in the Old Javanese commen-
tary, with the fundamental difference that it paraphrases a source written in
a different language. As in Sanskrit texts, the function of the paraphrase is
not only to reveal the meaning of technical terms through the use of syn-
onyms, but also to make the syntactical structure plain and more transpar-
ent. Hence, the functions of word-division (padaccheda), the analysis of
compounds (vigraha) and the rendering of the various elements of a sen-
tence into a straightforward syntactical order (vākyayojanā) are subsumed
also in the Old Javanese paraphrase. Of course, this operation ofen in-
volves a more complex operation of exegesis, which is unfolded through
the answering of objections (ākṣepasamādhāna), a key element of Sanskrit
philosophical commentaries. In Old Javanese Tattvas the Lord builds his
arguments through the dialectic structure of pūrvapakṣa (prior view) and
siddhānta (demonstrated conclusion), which is frequently implemented in


--- PAGE 44 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
25
Sanskrit Śāstras (cf. Tubb and Boose 2007:239–240). In so doing He di-
rectly replies to the objections of a single opponent (unlike in fully devel-
oped Śāstras, which may admit several others), ﬁctively raised by himself
or by his interlocutor.60 Notwithstanding the still rather simple structure
of the debate, the degree of importance and articulation it achieves in the
Dharma Pātañjala is not matched in any other Old Javanese source.61 For
instance, the text contains a number of technical terms, either unattested
or scantly documented in Old Javanese, which are borrowed from the San-
skrit argumentative and philosophical register, such as viruddha ‘contra-
dictory’ applied to the opponent’s view (334.12; 334.13);62 (OJ a-)vyāhata
‘contradictory, raising objections’ (OJED 2346);63 dharma ‘entity’ (338.3;
338.3; 338.3; 338.5); prasiddha ‘to recognize as real, acknowledge as being
indeed’ (OJED 1404, for the passive form pinrasiddha).64 Tere are several
verbal forms which are evidently used in a special sense that does not ﬁnd a
counterpart in the range of meanings indicated by OJED, e.g. sumiddhākәn
60.
It is ofen the case that in both Sanskrit and Old Javanese sources the speakers
are unmarked, their objections being recognizable only through certain dialectic particles
(cf. Tubb and Boose 2007:240). In the Dharma Pātañjala, the exact circumstances of the
verbal debate become unclear, for example when the opponent’s questions are reported by
the narrator as a matter of fact and not with the expression yan kva liṅa saṅpara ‘if the
opponent would say/think so’. Tis makes it difﬁcult to establish whether the opponent is a
real or ﬁctitious character.
61.
As our knowledge of the argumentative register and style of Old Javanese is still poor,
such a level of sophistication and technicality poses many problems of interpretation and
translation, not to mention the retrieving of the correct text of such passages, which have
proven to be particularly prone to corruption.
62.
Te term belongs to the Nyāya stock of technical terminology, and ofen applied to
the middle-term of a syllogism (hetu), when it is never found where the major term is.
63.
Cf. 204.6, conjecturally emended from cod. abyavahāta; since in the passage it is re-
ferred by an opponent to a statement of the Lord, I translated the sentence where it appears
as ‘Your statement is not a response to my question’.
64.
What counts as prasiddha in Sanskrit Śāstras is something that can be generally ac-
cepted between disputants without requiring additional proof. In Dharma Pātañjala 238.16
the form prasiddha appears to be used in a transitive sense (e.g. akin to amrasiddhākәn):
ya mataṅnyan hana pramāṇa ṅaranya, anuṅprasiddha ri kahiḍәpan ikaṅvastu tuhutuhu
‘Tis being so is the reason why there are the valid means of knowledge, which can give cer-
tainty with regard to the experiencing of entities that veritably exist’; cf. also 238.3, where
prasiddha + anumāna appear to form a tatpuruṣa compound: anumānaprasiddha irikaṅ
karmaphalān bhinukti ‘the fruits of karma are determined by inference, as far as their being
experienced is concerned’.


--- PAGE 45 ---
26
i Introduction
‘prove, demonstrate’ applied by the opponent to the Lord’s view;65 panid-
dhānta (<siddhānta) ‘deﬁnitively ascertain’;66 amramāṇa (<pramāṇa) ‘use
as valid means of knowledge’.67
Te inﬂuence of Sanskrit on Old Javanese syntax is an as yet unexplored
terrain. In spite of this, it can be assumed that the Sanskrit inﬂuence was not
limited to the lexical sphere but that it intervened also in shaping the syn-
tax and style of the argumentative literature represented by the Tattva genre.
If studies in this domain are totally lacking it is also because the amount
of the material available is small. Te Dharma Pātañjala ﬁlls a gap in this
panorama, presenting some evidence that the kind of Old Javanese syntax
used in these treatises owes much to the Sanskrit commentarial style. In par-
ticular, the technique of debate makes use of the technicalities of the Śāstric
tradition of dialectics, from which it may have ultimately derived.
Direct or indirect address of an opponent or his view (cf. Tubb and Boose
2007:241–251):
liṅnya ≈āha/ucyate — ‘he says/said, his words are, it is said’.
liṅsaṅpara ≈apara āha/kecid āhuḥ— ‘the opponent(s) spoke’.
maṅkana liṅsaṅpara ≈evaṃucyate paraiḥ— ‘thus spoke the oppo-
nent(s)’.
yan kva liṅanta/yan maṅkana liṅanta/nyapan tahan kva liṅanta ≈ity
evam ucyate ced — ‘If you would say so, [I reply:]’ …68
65.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 204.10: apa pramāṇanta sumiddhākәn ika pakṣanta ‘What is
your authoritative means of knowledge in order to prove this position of yours?’ Here, as
in Vṛhaspatitattva (cf., e.g., 49.4–5), sumiddhākәn is used in a more technical sense than
the one found in Parvas and Kakavins, according to OJED 1756 ‘accomplished, successful’
etc. Te meaning applying in Tattvas is akin to that current in Sanskrit argumentative texts:
‘proved, substantiated, demonstrated; settled, established; admitted to be true’, etc.
66.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 238.19: ya ta mataṅnyan anumānapramāṇa paniddhānta ri
hananya ‘this is the reason why the valid means of knowledge of inference is the means to
deﬁnitively ascertain their existence (i.e. of the fruits of karma)’. Tis form is not attested in
OJED, where the only meaning indicated for siddhānta is ‘= Śaivasiddhānta’; here it is likely
to have the technical meaning current in Sanskrit literature, i.e. ‘established truth’.
67.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 238.14: adva kitānyat amramāṇa pratyakṣa juga ‘you are wrong
in using only direct perception as a valid means of knowledge’ (said by the Lord to the
materialist opponent). Te form amramāṇa is glossed in OJED (1392–1393) only as ‘to
have authority or power over’.
68.
Numerous instances of this construction are attested in Tuturs. Te introduction of


--- PAGE 46 ---
The Text and its Place in the Tutur/Tattva Genre
27
sugyan maṅkana [liṅsaṅpara], taham pih/tan maṅkana ≈iti cet, na
tathā/tan na/tad asat — ‘if [the opponent speaks] thus, it is not so’.
tuhu(n)/takarin ≈nanu (at the beginning of a sentence afer the pūrva-
pakṣa) — ‘truly, indeed, is it not so that’/‘objection, but then’ (cf. 196.20).69
yan maṅkana, … tan … ≈yady evam/evaṃced, … na … — (referring
to the pūrvapakṣa) ‘if so, … not …’ (cf. 288.3).
ṅaranya ≈iti (afer the word/sentence to which it refers):
1) ‘what is called’ — both single out a speciﬁc term, roughly correspond-
ing to quotation marks;
2) ‘means/is’ — both follow the word explained and precede the expla-
nation;
3) ‘that is to say, i.e.’ (akin to kaliṅanya) — in this case ṅaranya some-
what resembles the function of the Sanskrit iti when used to explain a
sentence.70
Particles connecting or introducing sentences:
nihan ≈atha — ‘now, next, as follows’ (introducing a topic or a concept,
at the beginning of a sentence).
nihan / kunaṅ≈atha — ‘now, further’ (introducing a work or a section
of a work).
the Lord’s reply, which I consistently added in the translation within square brackets, is
always understood (except in one instance in Siksa Guru, folio 16r.2: nyapan tahan kva
liṅanta, nihan kami mavarahakәna ri kita ‘If you would say so, we could reply as follows’).
Te reply is also lef unintroduced in the corresponding Sanskrit construction (cf. above,
fn. 60).
69.
Te Sanskrit nanu, which has as its primary meaning ‘not, never’, in philosophical
argument it is used to imply doubt or objection (‘now it may be said, well, but then’, MW
526). However, this particle has also acquired the meaning of ‘certainly, surely, indeed, no
doubt’, especially in rhetorical or afﬁrmative questions (i.e. ‘is it not?’). A comparable ‘shif’,
although going in the reverse direction, seems to have been undergone by the Old Javanese
tuhu, glossed by OJED (2048) as ‘true, right, sincere; really, in fact, indeed, in the real sense’,
and which in argument is used in statements that rhetorically (and temporarily) afﬁrm the
pūrvapakṣa in a tendentious manner, thereby negating it. Tis possibility is also supported
by the fact that the word tuhun, which obviously derives from the same base, is glossed by
OJED as (1) ‘but, even so; even if, although’ and also (2) ‘indeed, truly’.
70.
For these usages of the Sanskrit iti, cf. Tubb and Boose (2007:215–220).


--- PAGE 47 ---
28
i Introduction
kunaṅ≈atha — ‘but’ (in front of a word or sentence).
nāhan ≈iti / evam / tathā — ‘thus, as such, in this way’ (referring to the
clause that precedes).
ya ta mataṅnyan ≈tasmāt eva, tena eva, ata eva — ‘this is the reason why,
because of the preceding, for this reason, therefore’ (commonly referring
to what precedes, but also to what follows when in combination with the
correlative apan).
Other particles, pronouns and expressions:
kadi … (+ apan) ≈katham, kva, kim, kaḥ… (+ abl.) — ‘how would be
possible that …, for …’71
tuvi ≈api — ‘also, too, as well; even [though]’ (cf. OJED 2087, and 113
apituvi); ‘even though’ corresponds to the Sanskrit api + loc. abs.
tathāpi = tathāpi — ‘even so, still, nevertheless’.
ityevamādi = ity evam ādi — ‘and so on’.
yāvat … tāvat = yāvat … tāvat — ‘as long as, as soon as, as far as’.
apa lvirnya niṅ… / ikaṅ… ndya ta lvirnya ≈kiṃrūpam + gen. — ‘what
is the form/appearance/characteristic of … ?’
71.
Te standard translation of kadi according to OJED (763) is ‘as, like, as if (passim in all
texts)’. Te hypothetical force of this particle is however admitted (in some unspeciﬁed Par-
vas) by OJED only in the presence of an irrealis verbal or nominal form, to be translated as
‘how would it be possible that …; certainly not …’. On account of several instances attested
in Tuturs it is possible to demonstrate beyond any doubt that kadi assumes the meaning
of ‘how is it (or would it be) possible that’ also in the absence of any irrealis; cf. Dharma
Pātañjala 200.6, 236.13, 338.1; Vṛhaspatitattva 49.13–14.


--- PAGE 48 ---
Résumé
Kumāra appears before the Lord on the peak of the Kailāsa mountain, pays the cus-
tomary worship and salutation, and takes a seat.
[1] Kumāra enquires about the Supreme Doctrine (tattva viśeṣa), and the right knowl-
edge (samyajñāna/samyagjñāna) (194.2–8).
Te Lord explains that the right knowledge is difﬁcult to obtain. Without absorption
(samādhi) there is no right knowledge, in which case it is impossible to know the
Summum Bonum (paramārtha) (194.9–14).
[2] Kumāra enquires about the characteristics of the Summum Bonum (194.15–17).
Te Lord enumerates the qualities of the Summum Bonum by means of a śloka
(1). He goes on explaining that it is beyond the grasp of the human mind, perva-
sive (vibhu), omniscient (sarvajña) and omnipotent (sarvakāryakartā). Evidence of
these qualities is provided. To put an end to the latent impressions in the mind and
obtain release it is necessary to practice absorption. Tat is called right knowledge,
as opposed to wrong knowledge (mithyājñāna) (194.18–196.14).
[3] Kumāra asks about the characteristics of wrong knowledge (196.15–17).
Te Lord explains that wrong knowledge is to use direct perception as the only au-
thoritative means of knowledge. Te views of a materialist opponent are introduced:
the Summum Bonum is non-existence, for it cannot be perceived; non-existence is
the cause and effect of the world; good and bad actions have no consequence, as
heaven and hell do not exist (196.18–198.11).
[4] Kumāra asks if such views are correct (198.12–14).
Te Lord replies that they are not, for the universe and the living beings could not
exist if the Summum Bonum would be non-existence. Arguments for this state-
ment are given, and the opponent’s objections countered. Tere follows a long and
sophisticated debate about the concepts of causality and effect of the universe, cre-
atorship, sentience and insentience, at the end of which the opponent’s views are
characterized as wrong knowledge (198.15–206.11).
[5] Kumāra asks why such wrong knowledge is wrong (206.12–13).
Te Lord explains that it is the knowledge of Kāla, who embodies the Lord at the
time of the great destruction. It will come when men of religion will teach false
doctrines of this kind (206.14–2).
[6] Kumāra asks what are the means of human beings to prevent being carried away
by wrong knowledge (208.3–6).
Te Lord introduces the three valid means of knowledge: direct perception (pra-
tyakṣapramāṇa), inference (anumānapramāṇa), testimony of scripture (āgamapra-
māṇa) (208.7–210.7).


--- PAGE 49 ---
30
i Introduction
[7] Kumāra asks about the distinctive qualities of a master (paṇḍita), and why such
a man does not become one with the Lord at once (210.8–11).
Te Lord mentions the existence of maculation (mala) that, adhering to the Soul
already mixed with the mind, covers its omniscience. As soon as maculation disap-
pears, union (sātmaka) with the Lord is achieved (210.12–4).
[8] Kumāra asks what is the Soul, and enquires about the origin of maculation
(212.5).
Te Lord explains that the Soul is the Lord-Summum Bonum, i.e. Śiva Parameśvara.
He is to be considered as comparable to the Sun spreading its light over the universe.
A list of the constituent principles of the universe follows. Below the principle of
Śiva (śivatattva) is the principle of Māyā (māyātattva), just as subtle but uncon-
scious. Te coarse principles are: activation (kalātattva), attachment (rāgatattva),
awareness (vidyātattva), unevolved matter (pradhānatattva), the three constituents
(triguṇatatva), intellect (buddhitattva), self-identity (ahaṅkāratattva), mind-stuff
(manaḥtattva), the ten faculties of sense and action (daśendriyatattva), the ﬁve sub-
tle elements (pañcatanmātratattva), atmosphere (ākāśatattva), wind (vāyutattva),
ﬁre (tejastattva), water (āpyatattva), earth (pṛthivītattva) (212.8–25). All of these
are pervaded by the Soul. Te Power of Pervasion of the Lord is different from the
distinctive characteristics of the Soul; the pervasion is explained as woven crosswise-
and-lengthwise (ūtaprota): woven crosswise is like the butter within milk, while
woven lengthwise is like a string with pearls. Te principle of Soul has the power
of omniscience, omnipotence, pervading the principle of Māyā; then, because of
its closeness to Māyā the Soul looses all its powers and becomes ignorant about its
true nature, stained by maculation. At this point, it pervades activation, becoming
like a young bee; attachment, desiring to be conscious; awareness, becoming able
to perceive the external reality, i.e. unevolved matter, coarse and insentient. Te
Soul and unevolved matter are caused to meet by the Lord’s will. Te sentient is re-
membering, unevolved matter is forgetting. From this union, the three constituents
originate, in their turn followed by intellect and self-identity (212.25–216.6). Te
latter is of three kinds: modiﬁed (vaikṛta), consisting of passion (taijasa), the origin
of the gross elements (bhūtādi); these are characterized by sattva, rajas and tamas
respectively. From the modiﬁed self-identity the ten faculties (of sense and action)
come forth, and ﬁnally the mind-stuff (216.7–14).
[9] Kumāra asks whether mind-stuff, intellect and self-identity are identical (216.15–
16).
Te Lord solves this dilemma by asserting their differences, for they possess different
characteristics and activities. Prerogative of the intellect are the faculties of ascer-
tainment (adhyavasāya) and determination (niścaya). Te self-identity maintains
life and individuality. Te mind deliberates (mamikalpa <vikalpa) (216.17–218.8).


--- PAGE 50 ---
Résumé
31
Te Lord continues: when the three organs are pervaded with consciousness by the
Soul, they grasp the external reality through the ﬁve faculties of perception. Tere
follow the ﬁve faculties of action. Tese together are called the ten faculties. When
they are provided with intellect, self-identity and mind, they are called the thirteen-
fold instrument (trayodaśakaraṇa). All these are effects of the modiﬁed self-identity
(218.8–220.3). From the self-identity which is the origin of the gross elements orig-
inate the ﬁve subtle elements. While performing a task, the three kinds of self-
identity join. Tere follows a description of the ﬁve subtle elements with respective
examples. Finally, the ﬁve gross elements are listed and their respective character-
istics and qualities speciﬁed. Te elements below are pervaded by those above and
combine their qualities, which are described in detail (220.3–224.1).
Tere follows a description of the Egg-World (aṇḍabhuvana). Within it are the
Seven Worlds ending with the Earth, where the Seven Islands and the Seven Oceans
are located. Below are the Seven Subterranean Paradises, the thirty-two Great Hells,
the hell Tāmragardabha and ﬁnally Kālāgnirudra. Te One-hundred Rudras sur-
round the Egg-World. Above the Earth, all the principles are piled up and the subtler
ones pervade the coarser according to the following hierarchy: Lord, Soul, Māyā,
unevolved matter, intellect, self-identity, mind, ten faculties of sense and action,
ﬁve subtle elements, ﬁve gross elements (224.1–226.11).
Te Lord exhorts Kumāra to recall the beginning of the narrative, where He had
explained why a lord of yogins does not achieve perfection immediately: the Soul is
completely immersed in perceiving consciously because it suffers maculation, hence
its nature is ignorance. Te Lord desires that the Soul knows about its true na-
ture, hence it causes it to incarnate in a human body, male or female. Te six tastes
(ṣaḍrasa), enjoyed by male and female human beings, turn into sperm and female
blood, and these produce a seed through copulation. According to the preponder-
ance of the male or female element, individuals of different sexes are born. Sperm
and blood produce the six sheaths (ṣaṭkośa) in the body. Te different kind of liv-
ing beings are listed, and the Lord concludes explaining how the ﬁve subtle elements
form the senses in the body (226.12–228.10).
[10] Kumāra raises the question as to whether the faculties of sense-perception are
the same as the organs (golaka) (228.11–13).
Te Lord dispells Kumāra’s doubt by stating that they are different, for the former
are subtle while the latter are coarse. Te proof is that one who sleep is not able
to grasp the external reality, as long as his senses do not carry out their functions
(228.14–230.2).
[11] Kumāra asks why one who sleeps still lives in spite of the fact that the nature of
sleep is forgetting, hence, unconsciousness (230.3–5).
Te Lord explains that the ﬁve winds (pañcabāyu) serve as means to live. Tey


--- PAGE 51 ---
32
i Introduction
circulate through three main vessels (nāḍī), which are: iḍā, piṅgalā, suṣumnā. Tey
spread in the body via several other branches. Te functions of prāṇa, apāṇa, sa-
māna, udāna, byāna are explained in detail. Another series of ﬁve winds is listed,
i.e. nāga, kūrmāra, kṛkāra, devadatta, dhanañjaya, whose respective functions are
explained. If the Soul ceases to perceive consciously the winds, or the vessels are
damaged, death occurs (230.6–234.9).
[12] Kumāra asks what is the cause of the Soul ceasing to perceive the winds in a
conscious manner, and what is the cause of suffering (234.10–12).
Te Soul ceases to perceive the winds in a conscious manner because of right-and-
wrong (dharmādharma). According to their balance, the good and bad actions may
result in causing the experience of either pain or pleasure or both in incarnated
beings. Te fruits of right and wrong may come into effect immediately or in the
future. Te Lord illustrates this by means of an example: the actions of farmers, ser-
vants and traders will produce, respectively, paddy, a landgrant and a retribution as
fruits. When the fruits of right-and-wrong, which shape the body, are ﬁnished, a
man dies. Indeed, there is nothing lef to be experienced by the Soul, just as in the
case of a piece of wood being completely consumed by ﬁre (234.13–236.12). An
opponent may question the validity of such a state of affairs, for the fruits of karma
are not seen by means of direct perception. To such a proposition the Lord replies
that the coarse is within the reach of direct perception, while the subtle is within the
reach of inference, which recognizes the existence of the fruits of karma (through
the recognition of their effects) (236.13–238.3). As to the opponent’s objection that,
still, only direct perception is to be recognized as a valid means of knowledge, the
Lord replies by using the example of the movement of the sun in the sky: although its
course is not seen during the night, its existence may be inferred. Likewise, one may
establish through inference the existence of things which are not seen. Tere exist
different kinds of human beings and different kinds of living creatures (low, mid-
dle and superior); therefore, though invisible, there must necessarily exist a karmic
cause to justify their states. If such a cause is not accepted, it follows that everything
may turn into everything just randomly, like a eunuch begetting children, or like
extracting milk out of excrement (238.3–240.12).
[13] Kumāra asks for the reason why beings engage in right-and-wrong (240.13–
14).
Te Lord explains that the Soul is ﬁrmly connected to the body, and it enjoys ex-
periencing pleasures through the intellect; from the intellect originates the mind
(jñāna), which has ﬁfy conditions (vṛtti); these in turn give rise to an indeter-
minable number of other conditions, which explains why there exists a huge variety
of beings, all of them different. Te Lord enunciates the Four Sovereign Powers
(caturaiśvarya) along with their opposites, which characterize the intellect. From


--- PAGE 52 ---
Résumé
33
the intellect arise the ﬁfy conditions of the mind, viz. the ﬁve kinds of error (pa-
ñcaviparyaya); the twenty-eight disabilities (aśakti); the nine contentments (tuṣṭi);
the eight perfections (aṣṭasiddhi) (240.15–242.8). Te Four Sovereign Powers, i.e.
Righteousness, Knowledge, Dispassion and Sovereignty are explained one by one
(242.9–244.6). Te Four Soevereign Powers arise in an intellect that is dominated
by sattva. However, if it is dominated by tamaḥ, their four opposites arise: Unrigh-
teousness, Ignorance, Passion, Non-sovereignty (244.7–16). Having explained the
characteristics of the four opposites, the Lord goes on to enunciate in detail the fruits
of the Four Sovereign Powers (246.1–15) and of their opposites (246.16–250.9).
[14] Kumāra asks the Lord about the means to perform absorption (250.10–12).
Te Lord replies that He will soon be teaching the yoga section (yogapāda), but the
explanation of the products of the intellect should be ﬁnished ﬁrst. Te ﬁve kinds
of errors are listed: dullness (tamaḥ), delusion (moha), great delusion (mahāmoha),
darkness (tamisra), blind darkness (andhatāmisra) (250.13–252.16). Te Lord goes
on to explain in detail, by way of practical examples, the nine contentments, which
are divided into two categories: the internal contentments (ādhyātmikatuṣṭi), com-
prising the contentments concerning natural constitution (pradhānaka), acquisi-
tion (upādānaka), time (kāla), and fortune (bhāgya); and the external contentments
(vāhyatuṣṭi) (252.17–256.9). Tere follows the description, again by means of ex-
amples, of the Eight Perfections (aṣṭasiddhi), which are: generosity (dāna), study
(adhyāyana), verbal instruction (śabda), reasoning (tarka), friendship (sauhṛdaya),
eradication of the threefold pain (trayo duḥkhavighāta). Te threefold pain consists
of inner pain (ādhyātmikaduḥkha), pain due to supernatural agencies (ādhidaivika-
duḥkha), material pain (ādhibhautikaduḥkha). Inner pain is of two kinds: mental
(mānasa)—consisting of desire (kāma), anger (krodha), greed (lobha), fear (bha-
ya), envy (asūyā)—and bodily (śārīra), consisting of various kinds of diseases. Pain
due to supernatural agencies is, e.g., being struck by a thunderbolt; becoming mad;
being possessed by demons (256.10–260.7).
[15] Kumāra enquires about the means to extinguish the three kinds of pain (260.8–
10).
Te Lord, again, assures Kumāra that the exposition of the section of yoga (being the
means to extinguish the three kinds of pain) will start soon, but not before the re-
maining conditions of the mind have been described. Te twenty-eight disabilities
are characterized, by way of examples, as the ten faculties not being capable of ex-
periencing their objects, in addition to the opposites of both the nine contentments
and the eight perfections (260.12–268.11).
[16] Kumāra objects that the resulting number of inabilities is twenty-seven, and
not twenty-eight (268.12–13).
Te Lord answers that, in order to make them complete, the opposite of the mind


--- PAGE 53 ---
34
i Introduction
should be added to the list: since the characteristic of the mind is to deliberate, not
being able to deliberate means to be insane, which qualiﬁes as a disability. Te dis-
abilities meet with the innumerable latent impressions (vāsanā) of the mind. One
should avoid the troubles of afﬂictions and pains by practicing the paramount three-
fold body (trikāya paramārtha): good action, good speech, good heart. One should
not accept the teachings of a master who does not put into practices his teachings,
but, unconcerned by worldly activities, one should constantly strive afer devotion
toward the Lord, who annihilates sin and causes man to meet supreme bliss, to be-
come a creator and ceasing being created, knowing without being known. Te life of
incarnated beings is miserable: afer they die, they enter a limbo for a long time be-
fore they incarnate again. A proof of the fact that the Soul incarnates is the number
of the deaths and births , and the existence of men who can remember their previous
lives. If one happens to be born again as an abnormal being, or as an animal, there
is no chance of learning about the path leading to liberation; therefore one must act
quickly in that direction, for the time of death is not known (268.14–272.14).
[17] Kumāra asks of what sort are the latent impressions (272.15–16).
Te Lord explains that the karmas are innumerable, hence innumerable are the
kinds of rebirth. Te fruits of karma are inevitably experienced: if good, one will
be reborn as a god; if bad, one will become an animal, and then—once the fruits
are expired—a human being. Te karma which has already been enjoyed produces
as lef-over latent impressions in the mind. Tese impressions are compared to the
perfume that still sticks to an earthen pot even afer it has been emptied of its con-
tent and carefully washed. Whatever is imagined by the mind, that is followed by
the karma in determining one’s next incarnation (272.17–274.18).
[18] Kumāra asks who is the subject who experiences such incarnations (276.1).
Te Lord answers that He Himself has experienced the cycle of rebirth. In a long
excursus, the Lord narrates His previous incarnations. First He was a pious man
who studied the scriptures on dharma (dharmaśāstra) with a master. A series of
other similar incarnations follows, in which He—having remembered his previous
lives—seeks for instruction in the system of yoga (yogadharma) by a master, until
He ﬁnally becomes a lord of yogins. Having spent a thousand years in that state,
He is transferred to heaven and given the name of Nīlalohita. He marries Satī, the
daughter of Dakṣa; Satī dies, and He again becomes a lord of yogins, fervid in his
practice. He dies and is reborn as an incarnation of the Lord, not from sperm and
blood but from the yoga of the Lord (276.2–13).
Te Lord in His incarnation is Pātañjala (who happens to remember about his
previous state of lord of yogins), the youngest one among ﬁve brothers. His elder
brothers are: Kuśika, Garga, Maitri, Kuruṣya. All together, they are called the ﬁve
sages (pañcaṛṣi). Each one of them is ordered by the Lord to perform a different


--- PAGE 54 ---
Résumé
35
task: Kuśika has to bury the corpse of the Lord afer He dies; Garga has to perform
the funerary rites; Maitri has to cremate the corpse; Kuruṣya has to build a tower
for the cremation ceremony; Pātañjala has to rub the ashes on himself. Te Lord
dies, and the ﬁve brothers come to perform their tasks, witnessed by the ten regents
of the directions. Finally Pātañjala is lef alone, he rubs the ashes of the Lord’s body
on his body and suddenly takes the appearance of the Lord when He was still alive,
three-eyed and four armed. He is worshiped by the gods, and Ananta transports
Him to the heaven of Śrīkaṇṭha. Having spent some time in an even higher plain,
i.e. the plain of non-being, He takes his place in the Egg of Brahmā and becomes a
universal teacher, instructing all the gods (276.13–280.4).
Te Lord narrates about the Daitya Nīlarudraka, who subdued the Egg of Bra-
hmā and menaced the gods. By way of a stratagem involving the goddess Sarasvatī,
the gods manage to make Nīlarudraka confess that he could not be killed by a god,
a Daitya or a Dānava, but only by the son of the Lord born from sperm and blood.
Te gods ask Kāma to shoot the Lord with his arrow, so that He falls in love with
Umā. Kāma is reduced to ashes by the Lord’s third eye, and the gods in fright plead
Him to be favourable to them and marry Umā. Te Lord consents, and Umā begets
Gaṇapati, Bhṛṅgiriṭi and Kumāra. Te Lord concludes by saying that, having re-
membered the sequence of His former incarnations, His knowledge of the fruits of
karma in leaving behind impressions in the mind is clear (280.4–20).
[19] Kumāra asks how could it be that there is pleasure in becoming any kind of
incarnated being (280.21–23).
Te Lord replies that there is no pleasure whatsoever in all the incarnated beings,
for pleasure is nothing else than liberation. Tat is the supreme pleasure, consisting
in being one with the Lord Supreme Cause (282.1–4).
[20] Kumāra asks about the identity of the Lord Supreme Cause (282.5–6).
Te Lord replies that the Lord Supreme Cause is permanently subtle, pure without
being effected by maculation, and without an incarnated being as antecedent—un-
like other divine beings, such as the Eight Vidyeśas, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and the Loka-
pālas, who had as antecedent the cycle of incarnation, until they eventually be-
came gods because of their outstanding merits. Te Lord cannot be born as an
incarnated being, for He is omniscient and knows about the cause of the cycle
of existence and of suffering. And furthermore, the four powers (caduśakti) are
present in Him (282.7–17). Tey are: the Power of Pervasion (vibhuśakti), i.e. not
being subjected (avaśya), impenetrability (anāvaśyaḥ); the Power of Knowledge
(jñānaśakti), i.e. seeing from afar (dūradarśana), hearing from afar (dūraśravaṇa),
thinking from afar (dūrāt manana]), knowing everything from afar (dūrāt masarva-
jñatā); the Power of Action (kriyāśakti), i.e. swifness as of thought (manojavitva),
acting without physical organs (vikaraṇadharmitva), ability to assume any form at


--- PAGE 55 ---
36
i Introduction
will (kāmarūpitva); the Power of Lordship (prabhuśakti), i.e. fearlessness (abhītaḥ),
undecaying (akṣayaḥ), unaging (ajaraḥ), undying (amaraḥ), going anywhere with-
out hindrance (apratihatagatiḥ) (282.18–284.16).
[21] Kumāra points out that the Summum Bonum has been taught above as having
no body, yet possessing powers. He wonders what will be, then, that which the
powers of the Lord Summum Bonum stick to, and who is the one in whom His state
of sovereignty is seen (286.1–4).
Te Lord replies that the lord of yogins is the visible manifestation of the powers of
the Lord, for he has already attained perfection and is dear to the Lord (286.5–7).
[22] Kumāra objects that, in this way, the Powers of the Lord can only be seen in
the realized sage, and not in the Lord. Te consequence of this is that the Lord does
not exist, for only His Powers are the evidence of His existence. Terefore, one may
maintain that the Supreme Reality is non-existence (286.8–12).
Te Lord explains that the Supreme Reality is not non-existence, for His Powers are
not given by the Lord to a master. If Kumāra would ask what is then the origin of
the Powers of a master, the reply would be that the Powers in his body are just the
Powers of a realized one (286.13–16).
[23] Kumāra asks what is the reason why such Powers are ﬁnally made visible (kā-
bhibyaktā) in the master (286.17–18).
Te Lord explains that He has affection for the yogin who exerts himself in per-
forming absorption. Te impurities in his body and his afﬂictions will be destroyed
and his suffering made visible at last, for maculation covers the former Powers of
the Soul. It is not possible that—as an opponent may object—the Soul alone causes
maculation to disappear, because the characteristics of maculation are not known
by the Soul, mixed up with the body. Te Soul is not able to cause its maculation to
disappear, otherwise all the beings would eventually be released. Only the affection
of the Lord toward the yogin is able to cause maculation to disappear. In the end,
the Powers of a perfect one are just like the Powers of the Lord (286.19–288.8).
[24] Kumāra objects that from the above it follows that the Lord is involved in the
cycle of rebirths (which was previously denied by the Lord) (288.9–10).
Te Lord explains that, if the absorption of the yogin is perfect and he knows about
the prayogasandhi, the Lord is only made manifest in that incarnated being. Like
the ﬁre which is in the wood, as it brings forth its body. Te occasion for the ﬁre
which is in the wood to come out is the activity of the burning. Likewise, butter
is not produced if it is not churned. One who does not have prayogasandhi, even
though he knows about the prayogasandhi, he will not succeed in meeting the Lord
Supreme Cause (288.11–18).
A śloka (2) gives the deﬁnition of yoga as cittavṛttinirodha (290.1–2). Te Lord


--- PAGE 56 ---
Résumé
37
explains: the difﬁculty of practicing such yoga is extreme, for the man dislikes hard
work by nature. Only the one who is passionless and already full of the suffering of
life desires yoga, for he wishes the supreme bliss. Tat is the obtainment of the true
nature of the Soul, which is only attainable through yoga (290.3–8).
[25] Kumāra observes that, even though yoga is not performed, the Soul is experi-
enced by him, hence it must follow that that which is experienced is not the Soul
but just the mind (290.9–13).
Te Lord indirectly replies to the objection by listing and explaining the functions of
the mind: perception (grahaṇa), error (viparyaya), deliberation (vikalpa), sleeping
(nidrā), remembering (smṛti). All of these should not be allowed to be in func-
tion during the practice of yoga, lest it be hindered (290.13–292.12). If the yogin
is successful in suppressing them, absorption comes about. Absorption is of two
kinds: cognitive (samprajñāta) and non-cognitive (asamprajñāta). Te cognitive
kind is constituted by reﬂective absorption (savitarkasamādhi), reﬁned reﬂective
absorption (vicārasamādhi), egoic absorption (asmitāsamādhi), blissful absorption
(ānandasamādhi). If none of these states is present, it is non-cognitive absorp-
tion (which is, still, invariably preceded by cognitive absorption). Te character-
istics of the mind are now listed and brieﬂy explained one by one: it is scattered
(kṣipta), distracted (vikṣipta), infatuated (vimūḍha), restricted (nirodha), single-
minded (ekagraha/ekāgra). Only the states of single-mindedness and restrictedness
are regarded to be stages of absorption (292.13–294.13). As to the opponent’s ob-
jection that whenever the mind is still, that has to be regarded as yoga of absorption,
the Lord replies that there are lords of yogins disembodied (videha), i.e. possessing
only the subtle body (sūkṣmaśarīra), and others who are dissolved into unevolved
matter (prakṛtilīna), i.e. even without subtle body, but only constituted by the prin-
ciple of unevolved matter, whose characteristics are explained. To obtain a pure
mind and hence differ from the previous categories of yogins one has to be zeal-
ous in performing yoga at all times (294.14–296.7). Te Lord goes on to list and
brieﬂy explain one by one the marks connected with the purity, i.e. the cessation,
of mind: friendliness (maitrī), compassion (karuṇā), joy (muditā), equanimity (up-
ekṣā). Te pure mind of the yogin brings about the following process of generation:
energy (vīrya), remembering (tutur), insight (prajñā) and absorption, which results
in unity of the yogin with the Lord (296.8–298.1). A śloka-quarter (3) introduces
further elaborations on the characteristics of absorption: the mind is lef behind,
and the Soul closely adheres to the Lord. Tis leads to the obtainment of the state
of supernatural prowess by the yogin. Tis state of supernatural prowess is divided
into three categories, viz. low (kaniṣṭha), middle (madhyama) and high (uttama),
according to the intensity of the practice of the yogin, be it gentle (mṛdusambega),
moderate (madhyasambega) or intense (tībrasambega) (298.2–12).


--- PAGE 57 ---
38
i Introduction
[26] Kumāra asks what the superiority of the yogin intensely performing yoga con-
sists of, and why he obtains the supernatural powers in his present life (298.13–15).
Te Lord replies that ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord (īśvarapraṇidhāna), meaning
the obtainment of the body of the Lord, is the factor which allows him to directly
obtain the supernatural powers derived from yoga (298.16–18).
[27] Kumāra asks about the characteristics of the obtainment of the body of the Lord
(298.19–20).
Te Lord replies by means of a śloka (4), in which it is declared that the Lord is
always untouched by afﬂictions, karma, fruition or latent deposits (kleśakarma-
vipākāśāya). Te afﬂictions are ignorance (avidyā), egoicity (asmitā), attachment
(rāga), aversion (dveṣa), obsession (abhiniveśa). Karma is doing bad and doing
good. Fruition means that the fruits of yoga enjoyed by the body arise willy-nilly.
Te latent deposits are the lefovers of the fruits of karma that has been already ex-
perienced. As soon as the yogin is freed from the above hindrances, he becomes
omniscient, omnipotent and sovereign, just as the Lord (298.21–300.12).
Te Lord raises the question of an opponent as to what is the evidence of the Soul
being freed from the afﬂictions, karma, fruitions or latent deposits (300.15–19). Te
Lord indicates the evidence of this in the fact that the Soul consciously perceives. A
debate about the state of the Soul and the universe follows (300.16–19).
[28] Kumāra points out that the obtainment of the Lord’s body by an incarnated
being who is captivated and inattentive is bound to be unsuccessful, wherefore he
asks the Lord to teach him something easy to be practiced that would lead to the
obtainment of knowledge (302.1–4).
Te Lord replies that the syllable oṂ, which is the name of the Lord as taught in
all the scriptures, is to be murmured day and night. In this way, all the hindrances
(sarvavighna) vanish, and the body of the Lord is obtained (302.5–8).
[29] Kumāra asks for an explanation about the hindrances that have just been men-
tioned by the Lord (302.9–10).
Te Lord introduces the hindrances by means of a śloka (5), listing illness, inatten-
tiveness, idleness, doubt, apathy, erroneous perception, intemperance in knowl-
edge, inability to attain any stage of absorption and lack of control. Tese hin-
drances are explained one by one. Murmuring causes them to vanish, the knowl-
edge is unhindered and the yogin wishes to perform yoga with constance. By means
of it, the impressions (saṅaskāra/saṃskāra) are lef behind; yet, on the other hand,
new impressions (which are ﬁvefold) are caused by the yoga. In their turn, they
cause the yogin to remember, and remembering brings into existence yoga. Still,
these impressions cause pain in the yogin. (302.11–304.15).
[30] Kumāra asks about number and characteristics of the afﬂictions (kleśa) (304.16).


--- PAGE 58 ---
Résumé
39
Te Lord lists, once again,1 the names of the afﬂictions: ignorance, egoicity, attach-
ment, aversion, obsession. Tese are then explained one by one. All of them ulti-
mately reside in the state of ignorance, for they go together with wrong knowledge
(304.17–306.10).
[31] Kumāra asks what the cure for the afﬂictions is (306.11–12).
Te Lord indicates as a cure for the afﬂictions which are gross the performance
of observances (brata) and of the yoga of breath-control (prāṇāyāmayoga). Te
afﬂictions which are subtle can be eliminated through non-cognitive absorption.
Te following process of causation is outlined: non-cognitive absorption is caused
by cognitive absorption, which is caused by withdrawal etc. (pratyāhārādi), which is
brought about by observances (brata), which are a consequence of dispassion (vairā-
gya), which arise when one is fed up with the suffering without end. Te painfulness
and repetitiveness of the cycle of existence are stressed once again, and the practice
of absorption and non-inattentiveness is suggested as the remedy to escape from it
and to get a body as the one of the Lord. Observances are then said to burn macu-
lation, just as ﬁre burns a piece of dry wood: if the wood is wet, the ﬁre will not be
successful. If the observances are followed with full attention, maculation is burnt
by the breath (306.13–308.12).
[32] Kumāra enquires about the means to realize yoga and observances (308.13–14).
Te Lord introduces the yoga of the eight ancillaries (aṣṭāṅga), consisting in gen-
eral commandments (yama), particular commandments (niyama), postures (āsa-
na), withdrawal (pratyāhāra), breath-control (prāṇāyāma), ﬁxation (dhāraṇa), vi-
sualization (dhyāna), absorption (samādhi) (308.15–17). A detailed explanation
of the ﬁrst two ancillaries follows. Te general commandments are constituted by
non-violence (ahiṅsā), truth (satya), non-thef (astainya), continence (brahmacāri),
renunciation (aparigraha) (308.18–310.9). Te particular commandments are con-
stituted by purity (śauca), contentedness (santoṣa), penance (tapaḥ), self-study (svā-
dhyāya), ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord (īśvarapraṇidhāna). (310.10–312.3).
[33] Kumāra asks about the purpose of the observance of the particular command-
ments, if the observance of the general commandments has already been steadfastly
performed by the yogin (312.4–6).
Te Lord replies to Kumāra’s doubt by characterising the observance of the general
commandments and of the particular commandments as one. Further the obser-
vance of the particular commandments should be performed in order that the fruits
of the general commandments be brought about. Te fruits of each one of the gen-
eral commandment are listed (312.7–17). Tere follows a list of the fruits of the
observance of the particular commandments (312.18–314.2).
1.
Cf. above, 298.21–300.12.


--- PAGE 59 ---
40
i Introduction
Having indicated the suitable places to be chosen for the practice of yoga, the
Lord gives further practical instructions. Having washed himself and murmured the
mantras aghora or tatpuruṢa, the practitioner, standing either on the Southern
or Western side of (the image of) the Lord, should pronounce the mantra bhava
siddha and take a seat in a cave. Tere he should start with the postures: pad-
māsana, bhadrāsana and svastikāsana. Ten he should move to the yoga of with-
drawal, which consists in drawing out the senses, as well as the intellect, mind-stuff
and self-awareness, from their domains. When the mind is quiet and characterized
by oneness (ekatva), the yogin should perform the yoga of breath-control, which
consists in recaka, kumbhaka and pūraka. Tis dissipates both the darkness of the
heart and the mind altogether, for it is devoid of thought. Te yoga of ﬁxation fol-
lows. Te mind in the state of singleness is stable in its own place, yet ﬁxed upon one
single object, such as the heart, or the oneness of the Lord. Te yoga of visualization
is mentioned, but not explained (due to a textual corruption). Te last ancillary, i.e.
the yoga of absorption, is the means to obtain release. All the eight serve as external
ancillaries (bahiraṅga) of the cognitive absorption. In this stage, the yogin obtains
the supernatural powers, which are in their turn used as means to perform yoga
once again. As soon as innate maculation (sahajamala) disappears, the practitioner
can obtain whatever is his desire, and he becomes equal to the Lord (314.3–320.3).
As an answer to the opponent’s objection that, as it is commonly seen, the prac-
tice of yoga will not bring about liberation, the Lord asks what, then, brings about
liberation. An opponent enters the debate and points out that initiation only is
the cause of liberation, for the Soul is absolutely devoid of omniscience. Te Lord
replies that the unwanted corollary of such a proposition will be that the Soul, when
not omniscient, would be already liberated: in fact, (as everyone can see) the state of
omniscience of the Soul is not brought about by initiation alone. From this it follows
that only constant practice, yoga and absorption bestow liberation (320.3–10).
[34] Kumāra asks what are the characteristics of the state of supernatural prowess
obtained by the yogin (320.11–12).
Te Lord exhorts Kumāra to keep in mind that ﬁxation, visualization and absorp-
tion bring about the state of supernatural prowess of the yogin. When they are
joined together toward a single entity, this is designated as restraint (saṅyama).
Such a technique can only be applied to the lower principles, and not to the higher
ones. Te various objects of restraint, comprising the ﬁve elements and the fruits
brought forward by them are described in detail (322.1–326.7). Te Lord points out
that the obtainment of such a state of supernatural prowess should be striven for in
view of the coming of the obstacles (upasarga), i.e. the latent impressions (vāsanā)
of sattva, rajas and tamas, which are not yet extinguished. Tey are characterized,
respectively, by wisdom, quickness, heaviness. Wisdom causes the yogin to super-


--- PAGE 60 ---
Résumé
41
naturally master the sacred scriptures. Te obstacle of rajas causes the yogin to think
(with pride) that the powers are in his body, for now he can accomplish things that
were impossible before. Te obstacle of tamas causes his eyes suddenly to become
dark and his mind to become bewildered and devoid of self-consciousness. In this
case, the yogin should perform prayogasandhi, or apply ﬁre. If he suffers from a
greatly distorted sight, or madness, he should be seized and pressed down, his eyes
should be given lime and onion as a medicine, and he should be ordered to regain
consciousness (326.8–328.3).
[35] Kumāra points out that the procedure described above is feasible only if the
yogin has some companions around him; however, if he happens to be all alone in
his place of hermitage, what is the procedure? (328.4–6).
Te Lord replies that there indeed exists a means to eliminate his suffering and be-
stow long life (328.7–8).
[36] Kumāra asks to teach him such a means to eliminate the suffering (328.9–10).
Te Lord explains: whenever the principle of unevolved matter is separated from
the Soul, and also when the Soul is separated from the mind, the yogin is not affected
by pain anymore (328.11–12).
[37] Kumāra asks what is the way to separate the Soul, the unevolved matter, etc.
(328.13–14).
Te Lord answers that, when the yogin wishes to enter into another man, he should
use prayogasandhi. When the right-and-wrong are cut off by him, but a little bit of
their rests remains, he does not die; he could enter into another man. If he wishes
to obtain the Eight Sovereign Powers (aṣṭaiśvarya), he should apply restraint to-
wards the eleven faculties. Te Eight Sovereign Powers are characterized as: minia-
turization (aṇiman), weightlessness (laghiman), enlargement (mahiman), attain-
ment of anything at will (prāpti), production of multiple bodies at will (prākāmya),
sovereignty (īśitva), control of the elements (vaśitva), ability to satisfy one’s own
desires (yatrakāmāvasāyitva) (328.15–330.15).
Te Lord warns that, at this point, the obstacles (upasarga) come to the yogin,
e.g. in the form of gods bringing pleasures and beautiful women inviting the yogin
to follow them to heaven. He should not consent to that deception, for its purpose
is to cause the failure of his yoga; he should rather think that those pleasures are
impermanent and will bind him to the cycle of existence in the form of animals,
while the obtainment of the supreme bliss will last forever. He should not linger any
more in the state of supernatural prowess or relax, but rather continue to perform
observances and absorption with determination (332.1–15).
At this point the Lord anticipates the objection of a materialist, according to
whom non-existence is the origin of all actions and the dissolution of the universe,
which is why one has to take this state of things as the Summum Bonum, and should


--- PAGE 61 ---
42
i Introduction
not bother about the results of one’s own actions. In any case, if one enjoys plea-
sure in his life, one will incarnate again as an animal, then return to non-existence.
Te debate goes on touching upon the ontological state of non-existence and its
connection with the creation and dissolution of the universe (332.16–334.16).
[38] Kumāra asks for an elucidation of the opponent’s statement that there is no
cause and effect for the universe (334.17–19).
Te Lord explains that non-existence is indeed characterized by darkness without
consciousness, in which the mind does not meet with the three constituents. Con-
sciousness is the effect of the universe, for it is the Power of Action of the Lord
Supreme Cause. As soon as the Soul is aware of the principle of unevolved matter,
the universe arises; when the Soul ceases to be aware of the principle of unevolved
matter, the universe dissolves, dissolving into unevolved matter (334.20–336.5).
[39] Kumāra asks for what reason the principle of unevolved matter has been des-
ignated as non-existence by the opponent (336.6–7).
Te Lord answers that this is because there is no conception of it, and it has no
characteristics. It is not the case that the Summum Bonum is non-existence; and
also the cause and the effect of the universe, and the producing as an effect the
non-existence, the yogin does know that Summum Bonum is not non-existence,
therefore the yogin should not make it his object of absorption. To a hypothetical
question of Kumāra as to the characteristics of the Summum Bonum to be aimed at
through absorption, the Lord replies that it is the consciousness—omniscient, om-
nipotent, and having its whereabouts in the whole universe. However, it is not seen,
being without distinctive marks, without form, without a notion. Tat is deemed
to be impossible by the opponent, who asks for the evidence of the existence of
such an entity. Te lords asserts that the evidence of it lies in the creation, main-
tenance and dissolution (utpattisthitilīna) of the universe, which is the wish of the
Lord. Te principle of unevolved matter is unmanifest; it wishes to create the uni-
verse, therefore the Soul consciously perceives it. Te stages of creation are listed as
the following sequence: unmanifest (niṣkala), nāda, bindu, ardhacandra, oṂ-kāra,
the three-syllables (tryakṣara), the ﬁve-syllables (pañcākṣara) and ﬁnally the whole
universe. Te opponent objects that the bindu and nāda cannot come from the un-
evolved matter, for they come forth from the Lord. Te Lord replies by means of
an elaborate, and for the most part obscure, logical argument that seeks to demon-
strate the instrumental—and not material—causality of the Lord in relationship to
the universe, upholding the equivalence of the Lord Supreme Cause with the sen-
tient on the one hand and of unevolved matter with the insentient on the other. Te
text ends with a series of objections by the opponent and answers of the Lord about
ontological matters (336.8–338.13).


--- PAGE 62 ---
Manuscript
T
he codex of the Dharma Pātañjala, formerly belonging to the private
collection of Schoemann, is now accessible at the Staatsbibliothek in
Berlin (MS Schoemann i-21, cf. Pigeaud 1975:111–112).1 Te manuscript,
stored in a wooden box (kropak), consists of 89 leaves of thatch palm Nipa
Fructicans (locally called nipah), each one measuring ca. 35 × 3 cm. As it
is usual with Nipahs—and unlike Lontars, whose leaves are engraved and
then anointed with black powder—the text was written in black ink, across
four lines per side, starting from the verso of the ﬁrst leave and ending on
the verso of the last one. A supplementary empty leaf is inserted, as a fur-
ther protection, afer the last one. Numeration is implemented by means of
cyphers, whose writing direction is perpendicular (90° clockwise) to that of
the lines of writing, starting on the recto side of the second folio and end-
ing on the recto side of the last one.2 Te script is a variant of Old Javanese
quadratic script (cf. below, p. 47).
I ﬁrst inspected the codex in August 2006 and noted that, in spite of
Pigeaud’s somewhat alarming remarks about its state of conservation,3 its
overall condition was good. In fact, by merely looking at its thin leaves in-
scribed with black characters neatly contrasting on a brownish background,
I could hardly imagine that this artifact was already in existence at least ﬁve
centuries ago. Time, however, has caused a few (initial and ﬁnal) leaves to
break in two halves, and has caused others to loose some small fragments
here and there.
1.
Te manuscript has been microﬁlmed at my request in July 2006, and subsequently
digitally photographed by myself in May 2008.
2.
Tus, the ﬁrst folio is not numbered. Tis is also the case in the majority of the Old
Javanese manuscripts from West Java that I have perused. Te reason why this system was
implemented might be that numeration follows ‘pages’ consisting of eight written lines lo-
cated across the verso and recto sides of two folios (cf. Brandes 1900). Another possible
reason might be that, as numbers were written on the leaves for the sake of recognizability in
case they got unbound (either inadvertently or during an operation of manutention), there
was no need to mark the ﬁrst one, which was immediately recognizable for having its recto
side unwritten.
3.
Cf. Pigeaud (1975:112): ‘Te Nipah leaves of the manuscript are very thin and frag-
ile, several leaves are already broken. It is very much to be desired that the manuscript is
edited as soon as possible’.


--- PAGE 63 ---
44
i Introduction
History
Te history of the discovery of the codex is interesting.
As reported by Pigeaud (1975:111–112), somewhere in
the second half of the 19th century the manuscript was
donated to the German collector Schoemann by his fellow countryman the
Sanskritist Friederich, who was at the time in charge of cataloguing the
manuscript collection of the Batavian Society of Arts and Sciences. Unlike
the other similar Nipahs, which were acquired by the Society from collec-
tions or private individuals from the Sundanese area of West Java, this co-
dex was reported to have been recovered in the Central Javanese Merapi-
Merbabu collection. It is no doubt worthwhile to quote verbatim the original
description of the manuscript as originally made by Schoemann (arguably
on the basis of a report by Friederich)—as quoted, translated and some-
what abridged, by Pigeaud (1975:112):
Tis ﬁne codex was originally part of a collection of old manuscripts which
was preserved in a village called Kĕḍakan, situated in the Residency of Kĕḍu,
on the Western slope of mount Mĕrbabu. At the time that Brahmanism and
Buddhism in Central Java were being superseded by Islam, a priest, called
panĕmbahan Windu Sona, found refuge in this village for himself, his fam-
ily and his holy books, originally to the number of 1000, according to oral
tradition. Te collection remained in the possession of his descendants un-
til 1851 ad. In that year the remaining books, about 400 (the rest having
got lost in the course of time) were purchased by the Netherlands East India
Government on behalf of the library of the Society of Arts and Sciences of
Batavia. Te assistant librarian Dr. Friederich was commissioned to make
a catalogue of the collection. Te spread of Islam in Java began in the sec-
ond half of the 15th century. So the manuscript referred to would be at least
400 years old. Perhaps it is even older, for its script is the old Kawi script,
written on the Nipah palmleaves with pen and ink. Most of the manuscripts
belonging to the Kĕḍakan collection are made of lontar palmleaves; the let-
ters are scratched on the leaves with the point of a small knife, and the script
resembles modern Javanese writing.
Pigeaud, having dismissed Schoemann’s descriptions of the various In-
donesian manuscripts in his collection as generally uninteresting and oc-
casionally ﬂawed, considered the present one to be, by way of exception,
‘valuable and trustworthy’. If correct, this report is indeed valuable insofar
as it provides us with evidence that this kind of Nipah manuscripts, to which


--- PAGE 64 ---
Manuscript
45
a West Javanese provenance is generally attributed,4 exist also in the Merapi-
Merbabu collection. Te problem of the real extent of this Central Javanese
collection, whose manuscripts were only partly acquired afer 1851 by the
Batavian Society, has been tackled by van der Molen (1983:114–117),5
who did not challenge Schoemann’s report on the origin of the codex and
pointed to the fact that, according to Pigeaud (1975:229–230), at least two
other Lontars in Buda script6 belonging to his collection are likely to come
from the Merapi-Merbabu, probably as personal gifs from Friederich.
Now, there is evidence that the Dharma Pātañjala is not the only Nipah
codex of West Javanese origin to have been part of the Merapi-Merbabu col-
lection. As observed by Holle (1877:16),
It is remarkable that many Sundanese manuscripts from this time [15th–
16th century],—also that of 1334 [i.e. the Arjunavivāha, cod. 641],—are
written with ink on nipah-leaves, whereas, as far as is known to me, from
Java [i.e. Central or East Java] only engraved manuscripts have come to
light. Manuscripts written with ink in Kawi-quadratic-script have come to
light also from the Merbabu; however, as already said, afer inspection it
appeared to me that their provenance is from the Sundanese area, for in
them are found not only single Sundanese words, but also whole sentences
in Sundanese.7
Holle’s remarks about the existence of West Javanese Nipahs among the
manuscripts of the Merapi-Merbabu collection seems to ﬁnd a conﬁrma-
tion in the existence, in the collection of the National Library in Jakarta, of
ms. PNRI 16 L 455, a Nipah containing the Old Javanese Bhimasorga, a text
which displays a marked Sundanese inﬂuence.8 In fact, the archival research
4.
Cf. above, p. 4.
5.
For a report on this collection, cf. van der Molen and Wiryamartana (2001); for
a catalogue, cf. Sedyawati, Wiryamartana and van der Molen (2002).
6.
Cf. below, fn. 15.
7.
‘Opmerkelijk is, dat vele Soendasche mss. uit dien tijd,—ook dat van 1334,—zijn
geschreven met inkt op nipah-blad, terwijl, zoover mij bekend is, van Java slechts gegriffelde
mss. zijn voor den dag gekomen. Ook van de Mĕrbaboe zijn met inkt in Kawi-kwadraat-
letter geschreven mss. voor den dag gekomen, doch, zoo als gezegd, bij inzage bleek mij, dat
ze uit de Soenda-landen afomstig zijn, kenbaar niet alleen aan enkele Soendasche woor-
den, maar ook aan Soendasche volzinnen, die er in voorkomen’.
8.
Another copy of this text has been preserved on a Lontar written in Old Sundanese
script: cf. above, fn. 5.


--- PAGE 65 ---
46
i Introduction
carried out by van der Molen (1983:117) has shown that all the manu-
scripts kept at the National Library in Jakarta with a number between 427
and 455 must have been originally part of the Merapi-Merbabu collection.9
During one of my visits to the National Library of Indonesia, I found addi-
tional evidence suggesting that other Nipahs may be traceable to this Cen-
tral Javanese collection as well. Tis includes: an undated, apparently 19th
century handwritten roman transliteration (PNRI 89 no. 262) of manuscript
628 (Siksa Guru), a Nipah that was not described by Poerbatjaraka (1933)
in his list of the manuscripts of the Batavian Society collection and that may
now be traced to the Merapi-Merbabu repository thanks to a note reported
in the above transliteration explicitly referring to its provenance from that
collection;10 Nipah 69 L 629, to whose Kropak was stuck the hand-written
catalogue mark ‘Merbaboe 3’;11 the existence, among the loose fragments
of several Lontars from the Merapi-Merbabu collection (catalogued as 30 L
501), of two fragmentary pieces of a Nipah.12
Since it is very likely that all the Nipahs that have survived to us originate
from West Java, it seems safe to conclude that the above-mentioned com-
plete codices, among which the Dharma Pātañjala, and presumably also the
9.
Van der Molen, though, did not describe the features of this particular manuscript.
At a later date, in their catalogue of the Merapi-Merbabu manuscripts kept at the National
Library, Sedyawati, Wiryamartana and van der Molen (2002:255) express the follow-
ing concerns over the provenance of codex 455, i.e. its inclusion in the above-mentioned
collection: ‘Judging from the material it has been written upon (Nipah, not Lontar), it is
possible that this is not a Merapi-Merbabu manuscript’ (‘melihat bahan tulis (nipah, bukan
lontar) mungkin bukan naskah Merapi-Merbabu’). While the authors are right in asso-
ciating this particular writing support (Nipah) with a different, i.e. non-Central Javanese,
tradition, their conclusion that the manuscript might have been mistakenly attributed to the
Merapi-Merbabu collection seems to be unjustiﬁed, as the ﬁndings presented here suggest.
10.
Te notes, written in the lef margin of the ﬁrst page of text, run as follows: ‘Ms.
Mĕrbaboe no. 3 = 628 BG [a few lines below:] Kopie van kropak no. 628 Siksa Guru
Mĕrbaboe 3’. Another manuscript containing the text of the Siksa Guru is Nipah PNRI 88 L
642, whose colophon, according to Pigeaud (1980:247), indicates a dating of 1479 ad. In
the Bhujaṅga Manik (lines 860–868, Teeuw and Noorduyn 2006:259–260) the protagonist
quotes a sentence from a text bearing the same name; however, since the quoted passage is
in Old Sundanese, it is unlikely that the work can be identiﬁed with the above-mentioned
Siksa Guru, which is written in Old Javanese.
11.
Te manuscript, of which only ten leaves have survived, apparently contains the frag-
ment of an as of yet unidentiﬁed Tutur.
12.
In spite of the small size of the two fragments, the lines of text they preserve are still
legible and suggest that the text was a Tutur.


--- PAGE 66 ---
Manuscript
47
fragmentary ones, found their way from West Java to the Merapi-Merbabu
scriptorium before 1759, the year of death of the priest Windu Sona.13
Te bearing of the above ﬁndings on the cultural, religious and literary
history of pre-Islamic Java is signiﬁcant, for they provide evidence of the link
existing among West and Central Javanese Kabuyutans. Tat such scripto-
ria and hermitages were in existence in the area of Sunda is conﬁrmed by
the survival of one such site up to the present, i.e. the Ciburuy repository,
where some thirty Old Sundanese and Old Javanese manuscripts plus some
ancient metal artefacts can be found. Furthermore, the report of Pleyte
(1914:366–374) documents the ﬁgure of Kai Raga, a teacher and ascetic liv-
ing in a hermitage near Gunung Larang Srimanganti (now Gunung Cikurai)
in the beginning of the 18th century (cf. also van der Molen 1983:113). Te
existence of contacts among Kabuyutans at an even earlier time is supported
by the early 16th-century Old Sundanese chronicle of Bhujaṅga Manik.14
Tat such contacts might have also involved the exchange of manuscripts
is suggested by the existence of Nipah codices in the Merapi-Merbabu col-
lection, and also by the fact that copies of Old Javanese texts such as the
Arjunavivāha (Wiryamartana 1990:16) and the Tattvajñāna (Acri 2010)
have been found, besides in the Central Javanese collection, also in West Java
and on Bali.
Script
Te script of the Dharma Pātañjala belongs to the type
of Old Javanese script usually found in Nipahs from
West Java, dating from the 14th to the early 16th cen-
tury. Tis has, confusingly enough, been deﬁned as Old Javanese quadratic
script (Holle 1877:14–16), as bold semi-cursive ancient West Javanese
script (Pigeaud 1968:94, 1980:247) and again as Buda or Gunung script
(1970:53–54).15 De Casparis (1975:53–56), failing to give a speciﬁc name
13.
Cf. van der Molen (1983:113).
14.
In this text the main character, a Hindu-Sundanese hermit, describes his journeys
throughout the island of Java in search of Hindu remains. He also mentions to have visited
the learning centre of Pamrihan near Gunung Damalung, which has been identiﬁed as the
Merbabu mountain: cf. Noorduyn (1982:416), van der Molen (1983:78), Wiryamar-
tana (1993:503–505).
15.
Te label Buda is derived from the expression jaman buda, ‘the Buddhist era’, with
which people in the Islamic period referred to the preceding period (irrespective of the
fact that Buddhist vestiges are disproportionately fewer than Śaiva ones, cf. Pigeaud
1967:54), while Gunung ‘mountain’ is the appellative with which people referred to such
old-fashioned script, because it hails from remote mountainous areas where Hindu her-


--- PAGE 67 ---
48
i Introduction
to this kind of script, pointed out its close similarity with the one found in
some Majapahit copper plates from East Java. Tis led van der Molen
(1983:96) to wonder whether this script was once diffused on the whole of
the island but, for unknown reasons, survived only in West Javanese man-
uscripts. Pointing at the imperfect palaeographic knowledge available, he
then referred to the types of Old Javanese script found in West and Cen-
tral Javanese (i.e. Merapi-Merbabu) manuscripts simply as Buda (van der
Molen 1983:115–116). Tis denomination, however, seems to me too gen-
eral and potentially misleading, for the script that survived on West Javanese
Nipahs forms a variant distinct from other kinds of ‘Buda’ scripts found in
Lontars of both West Javanese (e.g. Ciburuy) and Central Javanese prove-
nance.16 A distinction, therefore, between Western Old Javanese quadratic
script and Central Old Javanese script may be more appropriate.
Although the script of the Dharma Pātañjala codex bears a very strong
resemblance with the script of the Nipahs depicted by Holle (1877:7, 17,
25–26 columns 82–88), e.g. from Tĕlaga, Cirebon and Ciburuy, it is not
completely identical to any of them. It does not entirely conform to the
script found in other Nipahs known to me either. Tis might be due either
to local mannerisms connected with different scriptoria, or to the stylistic
idiosyncrasies of scribes. Tough a systematic and comprehensive palaeo-
graphic characterization of the manuscripts written in Western Old Javanese
quadratic script is beyond the scope of this work, certain macroscopic pecu-
liarities documented in a set of signiﬁcant (although ofen undated) man-
uscripts that are likely to date from the 14th to the 16th century may be
discussed here. De Casparis (1975:53–54) attempted to sketch a historical
development of this script on the basis of the change over the time of the
shape of the grapheme na, which he considered the most interesting one for
this purpose. His attempt was later reﬁned by van der Molen (1983:95),
who compared various forms of the grapheme found in inscriptions from
875–1296 ad with the manuscript of the prose Kuñjarakarṇa.17 Te devel-
mitages still survived in Islamic times.
16.
To the two variants described above must be added a third one, i.e. the ‘rustic’ type
of Buda/Gunung script to which Pigeaud (cf. the corresponding index entry, 1970:367)
referred when describing 16th–17th century mss. from both Central and East Java.
17.
Tis has been assigned to as early as the second half of the 14th century by Kern
(1922:3–5), later supported by the more analytic (albeit by no means deﬁnitive) analysis by
de Casparis (1975:52–54). Contrast Pigeaud (1970:21, 1980:207), describing the codex
as dating back to ca. 1500 ad.


--- PAGE 68 ---
Manuscript
49
opment seems to start from a form with the bottom stroke attached to the
vertical either without a loop or with a loop connected just above the bottom
end of the vertical stroke; in the Kuñjarakarṇa codex, as well as in few other
West Javanese Nipahs, the connection between the vertical stroke and the
one running down to the right is made much closer to the top stroke of the
grapheme, which ofen presents a thicker stroke (or a loop) in its bottom-lef
part; this makes it almost indistinguishable from the grapheme ca as docu-
mented in the Dharma Pātañjala. As can be observed in table 1, this feature
of the bottom-lef part of the grapheme na is not found in our codex. Other
distinguishing features are the shape of the grapheme sa, written as two par-
allel vertical lines either with or without a central stroke linking them, and of
the grapheme da, whose bottom-right part consists of either a simple right-
ward stroke (as in our codex and in that of the Bhuvana Pitu) or a more elab-
orated (rightward or lefward) curl. Te shape of the u as a vocalic ligature
is also interesting in that it is rendered in Nipahs with two distinct forms:
either a simple, short subscript lefward curl (as in the Dharma Pātañjala)
or a longer, and more elaborate, undulated serif (as in its colophon). What
is remarkable is that the latter form does not seem to reﬂect a distinction
in quantity, for both forms are used indiscriminately in Old Javanese words
and the ū is obtained by adding one of the allographs of the ā to either one or
the other sign. However, it is likely that the simple, i.e. non curled, u and the
curled one were in origin distinguished and indicated respectively the short
and long u, but then this distinction was forgotten and the uniform use of ā
as lengthmark was introduced.
Table 1: Te graphemess u, da, na, sa in the DhPāt and other Nipahs
DhPāt
DhPāt
Col.
SKK
RCar
TigaJñ
KK
BhPitu
CK
u18
da
na
sa
18.
Note that the mss. (or parts thereof) documenting the undulated form of the u also
attest the shorter form, but not vice-versa. Te only exception to this rule is the KK codex,
which only attests the undulated form.


--- PAGE 69 ---
50
i Introduction
At the present stage of palaeographic knowledge it is simply not possible
to extrapolate from the above data any conclusion as to the chronological
priority of one set of variants over another. On the contrary, it seems likely
that these differences coexisted and would have been mostly dependent on
scribal traditions or ‘schools’ from different geographical locations.
Colophon
Te fact that a slightly different variety of script than
in the rest of the codex has been used in the colophon
might be of some relevance for the dating of the for-
mer. When inspecting the original I noted that even the ink used was of
a different, lighter, tonality, a fact further strengthening my impression that
this portion was added afer the copying of the text itself by a different hand.
It is, therefore, probable that the dating reported in the colophon does not
correspond exactly with the time of copying, which could be older. Te
‘added’ piece of text (in italics) begins afer the standard phrase indicating
the conclusion of a work, the place where it was copied and its title:
tәlas sinurat iṅantiraga pun, iti dharma pātañjala samāpta. titi māsa padūp-
f. 88v
van vulan kasapuluh, pañcavara, u, trivara, dva, saptavara, a, aṣṭavara, yama,
vuku vuyai, i śaka, parab iṅsakala lavaṅgajah guṇa vvaṅ.19
Tus the Dharma Pātañjala is completed, copied in Antiraga. On the lunar
day of the month padupvan, tenth moon, (day) umanis of the ﬁve-day week,
(day) dvara of the three-day week, (day) aṅgāra of the seven-day week, (day)
yama of the eight-day week, day vuku vuyai, of the Śāka year named afer
the chronogram ‘doors, elephants, constituents, man’ (i.e. 1389).
pañcavara ] em. ; pacāvara cod. • sakala lavaṅ] em. ; sakalavaṃcod.
My transliteration as well as interpretation of the colophon differs from that
of Pigeaud (1975:111), which is ﬂawed by several misreadings.20 Nothing is
known about the toponym Antiraga. Schoemann’s (or Friedrich’s) guess
concerning the date of the codex, namely that it would be contemporary with
or older than the second half of the 15th century (when, according to him,
the spread of Islam in Java begun) is conﬁrmed by the chronogram reported
19.
I have standardized the spelling but reproduced the original in the diplomatic edition.
20.
Such as ṛin place of subscript u. Pigeaud also misinterpreted gajah ‘elephant’ in the
chronogram as the cypher 2 instead of 8, resulting in a dating of 1329 Śaka (1407 ad). In
decoding the chronogram I have followed Damais (cf. fn. 22) and I.D.G. Catra (p.c., June
2007), who arrived at the same dating independently.


--- PAGE 70 ---
Manuscript
51
in the colophon, indicating 1389 Śaka.21 Damais, in a letter addressed to
Ensink dated 30 September 1964, tentatively dated it to 17 March 1467 ad,
even though a high level of uncertainty remained.22 A slightly different date,
i.e. 26 March 1467 ad, results from the calculation done with a modiﬁed
version of the sofware Takwim: Javanese and Malay date conversions.23
21.
I have emended the sequence sakalavaṅof the codex into sakala lavaṅon the ba-
sis of the observations made by Damais (1958:51) about the occurrence of the technical
term sakala (from śakakala, ‘the Śaka era’, by haplography) in colophons of Old Javanese
manuscripts in the sense of ‘chronogram’, preceded by the particle iṅand followed by the
terms constituting the chronogram itself. It appears that the scribe inadvertently failed to
write the akṣara la, belonging to the word lavaṅ‘doors, openings’ (= 9), which followed
sakala. Another possibility is that the mistake might have rather involved the incorrect
spelling of vvaṅ‘man’ (= 1) as vaṅ, in which case the chronogram would yield a diﬀerent
dating, namely 1381. Since the presence of a corruption could hardly have gone unnoticed
by Damais, who suggested a dating of 1389 rather than 1381, I have emended the text ac-
cording to the former hypothesis (i.e. sakalavaṃ→sakala lavaṅ) rather than the latter (i.e.
sakalavaṁ→sakala vvaṅ).
22.
In the letter, attached to the manuscript of Ensink’s transliteration of the Dharma
Pātañjala, Damais noted: ‘Pas de vériﬁcation possible. Il faut admettre décalage du mois et
supposer 12 (ou 11) śukla. C’est possible, sans plus’.
23.
Te sofware, created by Proudfoot (cf. id. 2006), has been modiﬁed by its author,
at the request of Dr. Supomo, in order to deal with the calculation of dates reported in pre-
Islamic Javanese documents. I thank Dr. Supomo and Dr. Proudfoot for having shared
with me this modiﬁed version of the sofware.


--- PAGE 71 ---


--- PAGE 72 ---
Language
Spelling
T
he codex of the Dharma Pātañjala shares most of its spelling features
with the Old Javanese manuscripts preserved on Bali. But it differs from
the latter in the greater occurrence of certain idiosyncrasies, which can be
also detected in other early Old Javanese Nipahs from West Java. Since these
manuscripts are written in distinct varieties of script and language, it is pos-
sible that common spelling features may be attributable to inﬂuence of the
same linguistic background shared by the scribes. A few of the orthographic
features of the Sanskrit are found also in Sanskrit manuscripts from other
traditions of writing Sanskrit elsewhere in Asia, and may thus have been
imported from Sanskrit manuscripts from the Subcontinent and further de-
veloped in the Archipelago. Several of the features listed below have been
tacitly standardized in the critical edition, following the standardization of
spelling effected in OJED.1
Long vs. short vowels. Although in Old Javanese as in other Austronesian
languages vowel quantity was probably not a phonemic distinction,
certain words are usually spelled with long vowels, such as the neg-
ative particle tā, the pronoun ikā, the verbal form tūt, etc. In prose
Tuturs this distinction is generally not applied with great care and
one has the impression that different ways of spelling were consid-
ered equally acceptable variants.2 Besides actual mistakes, the codex
presents a signiﬁcant degree of variation in the spelling of certain par-
ticles and pronouns, e.g. between (n)ikaṃand (n)ikāṃ(with a higher
frequency of the latter), ikā and ika, tā (as an emphatic particle) and
ta, ya and yā (more ofen the latter); furthermore, no consistent dis-
tinction between long and short pepet is discernible (e.g. agәṅ= agә¯ṅ).3
Vowel quantity in Sanskrit words is not respected in a consistent man-
ner. It appears that a certain regularity in vowel quantity was sought
1.
Cf. my discussion of the editorial policies below, pp. 88–95.
2.
On the contrary, the length of syllables was observed, or sometimes even introduced
ad hoc, only in Kakavins, where it was vital to the creation and preservation of the correct
metrical patterns.
3.
According to Teeuw and Robson (2005:29), the spelling of short and long pepet does
not reﬂect a phonemic opposition but is mostly implemented to suit metres.


--- PAGE 73 ---
54
i Introduction
afer by the last copyist of the codex, but rarely achieved as in sev-
eral words long and short vowels are misplaced. It may be supposed
that he was not conﬁdent enough with the spelling of unusual San-
skrit words, while, on the other hand, he appears to have ‘Javanized’
the spelling of common loan-words, such as e.g. sūkṣma, which is al-
ways spelled with short u. It is interesting to note the tendency to use
certain words in the feminine form (be it genuine or resulting from hy-
percorrection or some other such process), e.g. śonitā (5×) vs. śonita
(1×);4 cetanā (27×) vs. cetana (3×);5 lakṣaṇā (17×) vs. lakṣaṇa (41×),
par(a/ā)mārthā (29×) vs. paramārtha (11×); sukṣmā (7×) vs. sukṣma
(5×); pratyakṣa (8×) vs. pratyakṣā (8×). Although only a detailed sta-
tistical study of all the occurrences could shed more light on the mat-
ter and help us to separate errors from spelling habits and real gram-
matical distinctions, it is arguable that in this kind of prose literature
the determination of quantity was partly governed by factors such as
rhythm, hypercorrection (so as to give a word a ‘more Sanskrit’ ap-
pearance) and scribal idiosyncrasies rather than by ﬁxed grammatical
standards (cf. Uhlenbeck 2003:311).
Aspirated vs. unaspirated consonants. Consonant signs belonging to the as-
pirated series of the Indic writing system are generally rare in Old
Javanese (cf. Uhlenbeck 2003:311), and all the more so in this co-
dex. Te graphemes kh, ch, jh, ṭh, ḍh and dh are indeed not found
in the West Javanese variety of Old Javanese script (Holle 1877:7,
17; van der Molen 1983:293–294). Hence, to render aspirated con-
sonants, especially in Sanskrit words, the corresponding unaspirated
stops are generally used (e.g. duḥkha becomes duka, etc.). Te graph-
eme gh is found only twice in Old Javanese words where its unaspi-
rated counterpart would be expected, i.e. in gighil (f. 38r.3–4), ghave-
yaknā (f. 42v.3) and ghnānavayakәn (f. 64v.4, which I have emended
into ginavayakәn, 304.11), while it is used quite consistently in San-
skrit words, e.g. ghrāṇa, vighna, vighāta, etc. Te grapheme th is rarely
4.
And not śoṇita, as in standard Sanskrit (cf. below, p. 63).
5.
Given the striking prevalence of the spelling with ā in the forms śonitā and cetanā, I
have chosen to preserve the ending with long vowel throughout this book, notwithstanding
the fact that other Old Javanese texts, e.g. the Vṛhaspatitattva and the Tattvajñāna, employ
the forms śonita/śvanita and cetana (which, however, may be the result of a silent standard-
ization implemented by the editor).


--- PAGE 74 ---
Language
55
and inconsistently used in Old Javanese words, e.g. tha > ta (242.15,
244.13); thaṃ> taṅ(218.12, 220.6, 16, 17); liṅantha > liṅanta (228.17);
tan thaya > tan taya (286.14), as well as in Sanskrit words, e.g. asthitya
(f. 75v.1) vs. stitya (f. 56r.4), astityana (f. 70r.4), etc.; parāmārtha (f.
2r.1), otherwise consistently spelled paramārta; sthāvara (f. 19v.2) vs.
stāvāra (f. 31v.4, 32r.2); prasthāvānya (f. 76r.1), otherwise consistently
spelled prastāvā°. Furthermore: devadattha > devadatta (232.15); ṣa-
sthra > śāstra (258.3); astham > astam (264.3); asthenya > astainya
(310.6); svasthikāśanā > svastikāsana (314.18). Te grapheme bh is
used consistently in certain Old Javanese words, viz. ambhәk, kәbho,
tambhayan, neither of which are attested as such in OJED, which rather
gives ambәk, kәbo, tambayan; and in words of Sanskrit origin, e.g. bha-
ṭāra, bhukti/bhinukti, bhuvana, prabhu, vibhu, etc.6 Tis fact could
point to the existence of a phonetic differentiation between this aspi-
rated sound and its unaspirated counterpart in the ancient Sundanese
linguistic milieu, but other explanations are imaginable.
Retroﬂexes vs. dentals. Unlike in most Javanese manuscripts, retroﬂex d (ḍ),
the only retroﬂex phoneme in Old Javanese, is not indicated with any
speciﬁc grapheme in the codex. Instead, d is used.7 Even when they
retain a graphic distinction between the two graphemes, most Old
Javanese Nipahs from West Java use both of them indiscriminately.8
Kern (1922:7) explained this feature, as he found it in the codex of the
Kuñjarakarṇa, as a possible inﬂuence from the pronunciation of Old
Sundanese, which indeed did not recognize such a phoneme/graph-
eme. As the script of the codex only recognizes three retroﬂex graph-
emes, i.e. ṇ, ṭand ṣ, there is a general tendency to represent retroﬂex
consonants of Sanskrit words by their corresponding dentals, e.g. ka-
niṣtha > kaniṣṭha (240.2). However, the shif from ṭto d is ofen ob-
served, e.g. tusdi > tuṣṭi (264.2); navatusdi > navatuṣṭi (262.6); as-
dasiddi > aṣṭasiddhi (264.3, 256.10); bhraṅgiridi > bhṛṅgiriṭi (280.18),
6.
Contrast bhāyadarśaṇa →bāhyadarśana (216.1), a cased of metathesis; and one case
of bhāliknya > bāliknya (242.6).
7.
Tis is also the case in the Nipah of the Rasa Carita: cf. Pigeaud (1980:207), who
took this characteristic as indicative of the West Javanese origin of the scribe.
8.
Cf. Pigeaud (1980:247), referring to the Siksa Guru (ms. PNRI 88 L 642). For a
statistical overview of all the occurrences of d and ḍin the prose Kuñjarakarṇa manuscript,
cf. van der Molen (1983:100–101).


--- PAGE 75 ---
56
i Introduction
etc. On the other hand, ṭis used with a certain degree of consistency,
to the extent that it generally appears where it is expected but not else-
where.9 Still, the parallel occurrence of odd ligatures such as śṭand sṭ,
or, vice-versa, ṇt and ṣt, is striking.
Treatment of sibilants. Te graphemes ś, ṣ, s tend to be mistaken for one an-
other in a quite random manner in Sanskrit words and, somewhat less
frequently, in Old Javanese ones.10 Tis feature, which is commonly
attested in Old Javanese manuscripts and inscriptions (cf. Pigeaud
1924:11), is partly due to the fact that the phonological system of the
language already in ancient times did not differentiate the three sibi-
lants and possessed only the dental stop, i.e. s (cf. OJED xiv–xv; Uh-
lenbeck 2003:311). Cf. rāsa (f. 15r.3) vs. rāśa (f. 70r.2); ṣonitā (1×)
vs. sonita(/ā) (8×); °śvara° (5×) vs. °svara° (21×); °śva(/ā)ryya (6×)
vs. °sva(/ā)ryya (20×); °kṣ° (105×) vs. °ks° (41×),11 etc. Te high fre-
quency or even prevalence of non-standard forms suggests that these
are to be viewed as variants rather than simple ‘mistakes’.
o = ua/va/vā/ve/vo. Te phonetically rather obvious equivalence of o and
ua/va/vā is a well attested feature in Old Javanese manuscripts from
both West Java (cf. Kern 1922:5–6) and Bali (cf. Pigeaud 1924:9;
9.
It should be pointed out that the grapheme ṭ
followed by a short vowel is found
only in ligature as a subscript, except for only one instance, when it appears in the word bha-
ṭara (f. 48r.3). Te grapheme
, which has been consistently transliterated as ṭa by previ-
ous scholars (Holle 1882:7–8; Darsa 1998:135; van der Molen 1983:249), is likely—at
least in our codex—to have corresponded to ṭā, for it invariably occurs in the word bhaṭāra,
whose spelling is generally consistent in Old Javanese literature. A relevant example can be
observed in the Nipah of the Rasa Carita, which widely documents the grapheme
as a
form of the allograph of ā, paired with different kinds of consonants, which is clearly iden-
tical to the upper-right curl paired to the grapheme ṭā in the Dharma Pātañjala and other
West Javanese Nipahs. Similar examples of the use of this particular kind of allograph,
limited to the combination with consonants ṅ, ṭand l, may be found in Old Javanese in-
scriptions: cf., e.g., the 10th-century Sangsang copper plate (856-i, line ﬁve, van Naerssen
1937:441–446).
10.
Cf. van der Molen’s (1983:103–105) statistical ﬁgures regarding the occurrence and
degree of variation of the three sibilants in the prose Kuñjarakarṇa manuscript. Regrettably,
van der Molen’s confusion, occurring throughout his book, of the grapheme ś and ṣin
the script (cf. his table of transliteration, p. 294) partially invalidates the above-mentioned
ﬁgures.
11.
One notes the total absence of the cluster kṣm, which is spelled ksm instead.


--- PAGE 76 ---
Language
57
Gonda 1973:377–378). Te phenomenon, however, appears to as-
sume greater proportions in the Dharma Pātañjala as well as in Old
Sundanese manuscripts (cf. Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006:21), includ-
ing, albeit less frequently, also o = ve/vo. Examples: hado > adva
(198.2); i svar > i sor (224.4); maṅvab > maṅob (234.2); kulven > kulon
(238.11); irispveḥ> irispoh (248.2); dvedvet > dodot (256.2); svevaṃs-
vavaṃ> sovaṅsovaṅ(274.9); hayo > hayva (318.14), etc. In Sanskrit
words: mahālvekā > mahāloka (224.3); tapvālvekā > tapoloka (224.3);
bhuḥlvāka > bhūḥloka (224.6); adibvetika > ādhibhautika (260.6); gu-
nādvāsa > guṇadoṣa (270.7); dvosa > doṣa (270.7); mveha > moha
(282.21); yvagisvara > yogīśvara (286.6); mvākṣa > mokṣa (334.6), etc.
u = va. Te spelling of post-consonantal u as vā is ofen found in the word
(u)muṅgu: mvaṃva ruhur →muṅgv i ruhur (222.10); mvaṃṅgvā >
muṅgva (314.10); and vice-versa: umuṅgū > umuṅgva (314.17).12 A
variability in the writing of the cluster uy/vay13 is found in such cases
as: malvayā > maluya (238.12); apuy (f. 79r.1, 80v.3–4) vs. apvay (f.
25r.1, 26r.2).
au > o. Tis is commonly observed in Sanskrit words, e.g. adibvetika = adi-
botika > ādhibhautika (260.6); sadāsoccā > sadāśauca (282.8) (cf. Gon-
da 1973:369–370).
ai = e. Variation between the two graphemes occurs in the Old Javanese
words gave/gavai and kabeh/kabaih. In Sanskrit words ai usually ﬁg-
ures as e: kevalya > kaivalya, metri > maitrī, etc. Tere are, however,
words appearing in both forms, e.g. eśvaryya and aiśvaryya.14
Non-standard usage of v and b. Tis phenomenon, which occurs exclusive-
ly in Sanskrit words, is commonly encountered in Javanese as well as
Balinese manuscripts.15 It also occurs in the South Asian Subconti-
nent, especially in manuscripts produced in areas where the difference
between the two sounds in the spoken language is minimal or absent
12.
Tis feature is also attested in the prose Kuñjarakarṇa codex: cf., e.g., kuvera = kvavera
(line 3236, van der Molen 1983:264); pūrvvatisti = pvarvvatisti (line 3442, p. 272).
13.
On the status of the dipthong uy in Indonesian languages, cf. Gonda (1973:369).
14.
But contrast Gonda (1973:369), according to whom aiśvarya almost always retains
the ai, thus going against the commonly observed shif ai > e.
15.
Cf. Soebadio (1971:66); Gonda (1973:383–385).


--- PAGE 77 ---
58
i Introduction
(e.g. in the North-East and in Nepal),16 as well as in ancient Cambodia
(cf. Jenner 2009:xii). In the Indonesian Archipelago, however, this
process assumes new intriguing aspects for we do not see a (near) ex-
clusive use of one of the two signs, nor do we see them in random dis-
tribution, but we observe that their usage is bound to speciﬁc words,
i.e. lexically based. For instance, the codex consistently spells bahir,
sarvva,17 vighna, vikṣipta, etc., while it invariably shifs from v to b
in brata, bāyu, abyavahāta, byakta, byakti, etc. On the other hand, b
nearly always becomes v in vindu and vāhya.
Gemination. Tis is generally applied—although by no means with abso-
lute consistency—to nasals (ṅ, ṃ, n) and spirants (h, ḥ) in intervo-
calic position, at word boundary or, somewhat less frequently, within
a word: ṃto ṃṅ(ivәṃivәṃṅikāṃ; liṃṅa, etc.); n to nn (lāvann āditya,
etc.); ḥto ḥh (ākveḥh ikaṃ;18 kāpaṅguḥhan; etc.).19 Although this
kind of gemination is widely attested also in Balinese manuscripts, in
Old Sundanese manuscripts it achieves greater proportions.20 Gem-
ination of most consonants occurs in Sanskrit words afer r-, giving
rise to the clusters rmm, rṇn, ryy, rvv, rtt, rkk, rgg. Tis phenomenon
is a common feature of great frequency in most South Asian manu-
script traditions, as well as in Sanskrit and Old Khmer inscriptions
from Cambodia (cf. Jenner 2009:xii).
Degemination. Homorganic consonants sometimes undergo this phenom-
enon at word boundaries: vuvusaṃpāra > vuvus saṅpara (238.2);
16.
For example, Nepalese manuscripts very ofen give v instead of b: cf. Goudriaan and
Schoterman (1988:44).
17.
Which, however, is written sarbva° thrice on one folio (51v.2–4).
18.
Contrast the following exceptions: akveḥinapekṣanya (f. 24v.2), ākveḥikaṃ(f. 32r.4),
makveḥinaṅәnāṅәn (f. 75r.1).
19.
Tis feature was already noted and discussed by Kern (1920:23–24).
20.
Cf. Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:22), who note the occurrence of reduplication at
a word or a morpheme boundary. Instances of such phenomenon are also attested in Old
Javanese inscriptions from as early as the 9th century (for a discussion of several cases, in-
cluding -nn-, -kk- and -ḥh-, cf. de Casparis 1950:80–81), and in the Old Malay codex of the
Nītisārasamuccaya (seemingly linked with morpheme boundaries, cf. Grifﬁths 2010:137).
A similar phenomenon of reinforcement of visarga by h (resulting in the sequence -ḥh-) has
been described as a characterizing feature of the spelling of Old Khmer in Pre-Angkorian
inscriptions from Cambodia by Jenner (2009:xii). Te same author also refers to the (by
far less common) occurrence of reinforcement of anusvāra (ṃ), quoting no examples.


--- PAGE 78 ---
Language
59
pinetāku > pinet tāku (278.4); hinañutāsira > hinañut ta sira (278.11);
lavaniroda > lavan nirodha (294.12); cāmpurāsikā > campur rasikā
(304.23); abyәtan > abyәt tan (326.20); tlasinurat > tәlas sinurat (col-
ophon, cf. p. 50). As already noted by Kern (1920:24), this kind of
degemination is a distinct scribal habit, probably triggered by pho-
netic reasons, rather than a mere scribal mistake. Degemination of tt
before the semivowel v in Sanskrit words occurs throughout the co-
dex, e.g. tattva to tatva; sattva to satva, etc. Tis feature of Sanskrit
spelling is attested in nearly all traditions of writing in manuscripts
and inscriptions from both South and Southeast Asia, to the extent
Indic scripts are involved.
Aspiration. Addition of h at the beginning of a word with initial vowel (oc-
curring afer punctuation) is sporadically observed, e.g. hi sor (f. 9v.3–
4); hatutur (f. 46v.2); huliḥ(f. 54v.1).21 In the codex, h is ofen, but not
constantly, inserted between two adjacent vowels as a hyatus breaker,
e.g. kita hulahanta (f. 3v.1); matәmahanā hampru (f. 22r.3); vtu hi (f.
27v.3); sira humyapāra (f. 52v.3), etc.22 In rare instances, such aspira-
tion may occur afer a consonant: ikaṃhulaḥ(f. 3r.1); tvas hәnthi (f.
30r.2); āpan hamәtvakәn (f. 54v.1).
ø = ә. Te omission of ә in interconsonantal position is a common feature
of Old Javanese manuscripts and inscriptions. A remarkable fact is
that in this codex such omission occurs also between two identical
consonants in inﬁxed words, e.g. tummu > tumәmu (<tәmu) (262.11);
hinnaḥ> hinәnaḥ(<hәnaḥ) (280.1).
ә = a. Tis equivalence is widespread in Old Javanese manuscripts, no doubt
on account of the fundamental similarity of pronunciation and the
initial non-availability of a means to distinguish the two sounds in
writing.23 It usually occurs in penultimate syllables, e.g. ptaṃ> pәtәṃ
21.
Tis occurs at a signiﬁcantly smaller scale than in Balinese manuscripts, where h as a
rule appears at the beginning of any word with initial vowel at the beginning of a period as
well as in intervocalic position.
22.
Contrast, e.g., hayu iku (f. 0v.3) and lituhayu ike (f. 35v.1), where sandhi involving
the use of the semivowel v has also been avoided.
23.
According to Gonda (1973:375), this phenomenon may in part be connected with
a possible Indic inﬂuence since in Sanskrit the short a is pronounced as a neutral vowel
(saṃvṛta) and not as an open a.


--- PAGE 79 ---
60
i Introduction
(214.16, 224.10); mataguḥ> matәguh (230.4), etc.24 In several San-
skrit words, occurring both in the ślokas or being singled out for ex-
planation within the Old Javanese prose, the ending aṃ/am is ofen
represented by әṃ/әm.25 As far as I am aware this phenomenon does
not occur with any degree of signiﬁcance in Balinese manuscripts, but
is paralleled in West Javanese Nipahs.26
ṛ/rә vs. ra. In the codex the grapheme ṛis consistently used in Old Javanese
words, kept distinct from rә27 and ra.28 On the other hand, expected
ṛis as a rule spelled ra in Sanskrit words, e.g. vratti > vṛtti (242.2),
prakratiloka > prakṛtiloka (246.12), prativi > pṛthivī (304.21), etc.29
Te spelling rә is attested in two cases only, e.g. smrәti (f. 56v.2) and
rәsa →ṛṣi (286.9), contrast pañcaṛsi (f. 47r.4)—the only instance in the
codex where ṛhas been preserved in a Sanskrit word.
ḷvs. la. Whereas ḷand lә are used interchangeably in the codex without a
discernible pattern, the pair of phonemes they represent is rendered
with the grapheme la in only one instance: mlas > mlәs (222.5).
Denasalization. Although our codex shows a strong tendency to omit anu-
svāras, the omission of either the latter grapheme or the (expected) ṅ
in pre-consonantal position within a word may be regarded as a dis-
tinct phenomenon. Omission of nasals in the same position has been
24.
Conversely, the writing of pepet where one would expect a is rare and hence I have
considered such cases scribal mistakes involving the unwanted addition of a grapheme
(cf. below, p. 76).
25.
Cf. kāmarapitvәṃ, manovijñāvitvәṃ(f. 52r.1); darmmatvәṃ(f. 52r.1, 51v.4); mano-
jñāvitvәṃ, vikarādarmmatvәṃ(f. 51v.4). Te corrupt endings i, iṃand ә of several words
in śloka 1 (f. 1r.3–4) may be explained as secondary mistakes (e.g. from әṃto iṃ/i/ә):
cf. 194.21.
26.
Cf., e.g., Siksa Guru f. 4v: trakayamandalәm →trikāyamaṇḍalam; nirmalәṃradayәṃ
citәm →nirmalaṃhṛdayaṃcittam, etc.; Bhimasorga (Nipah) f. 1v: oṃawignәm astu nama
sidәm →oṃavighnam astu namaḥsiddham. Cf. also ms. Merapi-Merbabu PNRI 11 L 256
(catalogued under the title ‘Mantras & Aksaras’), where in the incipit we ﬁnd (oṃavighnam
[…]) siḍәm for siddham.
27.
Which, given the similarity between ә and i, is ofen mistakenly used where we would
expect ri.
28.
Contrast adras > adrәs (284.8).
29.
For a discussion of the full set of possible phonetic and graphic outcomes of the San-
skrit phoneme ṛin Old Javanese as well as in Middle Indo-Arian languages, cf. Gonda
(1973:374).


--- PAGE 80 ---
Language
61
described as widespread in Old Sundanese manuscripts and inscrip-
tions by Noorduyn and Teeuw (2006:20–21). Te authors’ state-
ment that the phenomenon also ‘occurs in manuscript from West Java
containing Old Javanese texts, if probably not on the same scale’ turns
out to be true in the case of our codex, where it ofen occurs before g:
maluguḥ> maluṅguh (194.4); apuguṃ> apuṅguṅ(214.9, 20; 244.13);30
ugvan > uṅgvan (222.2; 228.10); vukuk > vuṅkuk (248.12); mupuṅ>
muṅpuṅ(266.6); umaguhakәn > umaṅguhakәn (308.1); ubhvānanira
→ugvānanira > uṅgvananira (314.4). Te dropping of the (optional)
nasal between a preposition or a preﬁx and the base that follows can
perhaps be regarded as a different phenomenon: pagrahita →paṅgṛhīta
(218.10); deku →deṅku (252.11); kapirva →kapiṅrva (258.3), etc.
Prenasalization. Addition of a nasal homorganic to the consonant that fol-
lows, at preﬁx or inﬁx boundary, is observed in the following cases:
humimbhәṅ→humibәkiṅ(196.4); pakaṃpūrbvakaṅ→pakapūrvakaṅ
(202.9); maṃgave →magave (234.1, 2; 296.15); pikaṃvijā →pinakavī-
ja (248.3); paṃnon →panon (310.18), etc. A similar phenomenon oc-
curring in Sanskrit loan-words in Old Javanese has been described by
Gonda (1973:360–364) as ‘spontaneous nasalization’: andyavasaya →
adhyavasāya (218.2);31 pinakasaṃdānanya →pinakasādhananya (242.
17);32 campāla →capala (304.7);33 incā →icchā (330.13, 336.17).
Non-standard Old Javanese Forms
• praniddā = amrasiddhā (irrealis) < prasiddha (f. 25v.3), where nasal-
ization has occurred afer the Sanskrit preverb pra.
• Sanskrit alpha privans (a[n]-) preﬁxed to a stative verbal form in a-:
an-aśabda (264.5); an-atarkka (264.6).34
30.
Contrast apuṅguṃ(f. 67v.1).
31.
Contrast adyavasaya in f. 13r.1 (2×).
32.
Seemingly by analogy with saṃdhāna.
33.
Tis has perhaps occurred by inﬂuence of the (Middle) Javanese cәmpala (cf. Gonda
1973:405).
34.
A similar case of ‘contamination’ is the preﬁxation of the Sanskrit privative nir- to the
Old Javanese verbal form huniṅa attested in Tattvajñāna 3.7 (according to OJED 651, the
form is ofen preceded by the Old Javanese negative particle tan).


--- PAGE 81 ---
62
i Introduction
• dudū saṅke ‘different from’: dudū, unlike len (of identical meaning)
does not require the preposition saṅke (cf. the instances in OJED 420
s.v. dudū). Tis usage is found in three out of twelve occurrences of
the use of dudū (196.14; 228.15; 230.2).
• Te polite formula sājñā bhaṭāra ‘according to the Lord’s command’ is
sometimes found at the end of a question rather than at the beginning
(cf. 198.13; 216.16; 230.4; 234.11; 260.10), where it normally occurs
in Old Javanese texts, including Tuturs (cf. OJED 35).35
Non-standard Sanskrit tadbhavas
Tose Sanskrit loan-words whose non-standard outward form or syntacti-
cal value occur with persistence in the codex, and for which no single ‘cor-
rect’ instance is found, I have refrained from standardazing or emending,
presuming rather that they are the result of a cultural as much as linguistic
process of modiﬁcation that occurred in the Archipelago. Since such forms
are also attested in other Old Javanese texts of different genres and listed in
OJED (either as standard forms or as spelling variants), they preserve what
are likely to be genuine features transcending the boundaries of changes in-
troduced by single copyists.
• Te following words are compounded in a manner that violates the
rules of Sanskrit sandhi: bhūh-, bhuvah-, svah-, maha-loka instead of
bhūr-, bhuvar-, svar-, mahar-loka.
• tejatattva instead of tejastattva (-as stem becoming -a stem).
• caduśakti instead of catuḥśakti (both unattested in Sanskrit dictionar-
ies).
samyajñāna instead of samyagjñāna (cf. Gonda 1973:386; OJED 1646).
• duka/dukha instead of duḥkha.
• śrota instead of śrotra.
• triyak (246.17, 248.3, 248.4) alongside tiryak (204.8, 206.1, 224.2, etc.).
35.
Except in Vṛhaspatitattva 52.22, where it is also used at the end of a the sentence
uttered by Vṛhaspati (one out of seven instances).


--- PAGE 82 ---
Language
63
• śonita(/ā) (usually spelled śvanita) instead of śoṇita (cf. OJED 1804;
Damais 1958:44).
• saṅaskāra instead of saṅskāra (i.e. saṃskāra), where the complex clus-
ter ṅsk is consistently avoided through epenthesis (cf. Gonda 1973:
270, 358, 394).
• asṭavidyesanā > aṣṭavidyeśāna (282.10) instead of aṣṭavidyeśa, which
in the codex indicates the heptad of Rudras mentioned in Sanskrit Sid-
dhāntatantras as vidyeśas or vidyeśvaras, beginning with Ananta and
ending with Śikhaṇḍin. Tat this is not an accidental mistake is proved
by the occurrence, in identical context, of aṣṭavidyāśaṇa in Vṛhaspa-
titattva 14.19.36 Zieseniss (1958:87–88) noted that this compound
could be interpreted as a bahuvrīhi meaning ‘those, whose seat is in
vidyā’ or rather considered as a variant of vidyeśvara, i.e. vidyeśāna,
probably derived from an original genitive plural vidyeśānām which
was misunderstood by a scribe. Sudarshana Devi (1957:99) ignored
the arguments of her predecessor37 and explained the word as a re-
placement of īśvara by āsana ‘seat’ and hence, by implication, ‘the
presiding ofﬁcer or authority itself’. Te same reasoning was perpet-
uated, and somewhat distorted, by Zoetmulder, who in OJED (146
s.v.) translated ‘the eight seats of learning’. Zieseniss’ hypothesis is
now corroborated by the present new occurrence of the word, sug-
gesting that both forms may have originated from aṣṭavidyeśāḥ‘the
eight Lords of Knowledge’ through the use of -īśānāḥinstead of -īśāḥ,
both being synonyms meaning ‘Lords’.38
36.
Tus the edition, on the basis of hāṣṭavidyāśaṇa ACG; haṣṭavidyāśaṇa D;
hāṣṭavidyaśaṇa F.
37.
Zieseniss’ study on the Vṛhaspatitattva, although completed before the end of the
Second World War (which the author did not survive), was committed to the print posthu-
mously by the International Academy of Indian Culture, just one year afer the appearance
of the ﬁrst edition of the Vṛhaspatitattva, also published by the Academy. It seems to me
highly improbable that Sudarshana Devi did not have access to the manuscript of the
study by Zieseniss before the completion of her work.
38.
Tat this precise form may have occurred already in the Sanskrit tradition is sug-
gested by an analogous instance in the manuscripts of the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, edited
as the ‘Rauravāgama’ by Bhatt (1961:15), where the reading vidyeśānā refers to the
eight Vidyeśas.
Te half-verse 4.27cd of the Vidyāpāda runs: parataś ca mahāmāyā
vidyeśānā vyavasthitāḥ(mahāmāyo C; vidyeśāna A; vyavasthitā C). Te half-line 27d has


--- PAGE 83 ---
64
i Introduction
• sarvajña and sarvakāryakartā = sarvajñatva and sarvakartṛtva: in sev-
eral (but by no means all) instances in the Dharma Pātañjala, Vṛ-
haspatitattva and Tattvajñāna it appears that the two Sanskrit agent
nouns, meaning respectively ‘omniscient’ and ‘omnipotent’, have been
used as if they were abstract substantives, meaning ‘omniscience’ and
‘omnipotence’.39
been emended by Goodall (forthcoming:20) on the basis of the reading of the new man-
uscript B776 to vidyeśānī vyavasthitā. Tough the latter reading is grammatically more
correct (vidyeśānī as an adjective designating mahāmāyā), there is some space for suspicion
that it might be a secondary ‘improvement’ of an original aiśa construction.
39.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 212.3; Vṛhaspatitattva 14.44 (cf. below, p. 399); Tattvajñāna
4.1–5 (cf. below, p. 357).


--- PAGE 84 ---
Scribal Errors
O
ur codex, with its regular and accurate calligraphy, is likely to be the
product of a scribe who had no particular difﬁculty in deciphering the
exemplar, or exemplars, in front of him. Although he certainly enjoyed a
great freedom in matters of spelling, he seemingly had a good proﬁciency
in the Old Javanese language. Nevertheless, the codex is characterized by a
fairly large amount of trivial mistakes, and by a considerable number of im-
portant ones. Such mistakes, as the sometimes inconsistent corrections and
the rather frequent eye-skips would suggest, might have originated from the
fact that he was prioritizing speed of copying over exactitude. Since next to
nothing is known about the role played by orality in the transmission of Old
Javanese manuscripts, I hesitate—in agreement with Dain (1964:20–22)—to
explain scribal inconsistencies as having mostly, if not uniquely, originated
from a process of dictation.1
As fas as the Sanskrit is concerned, it seems to me that the scribes who
copied the codex introduced certain mistakes. Such mistakes can ofen be
explained in terms of palaeography or phonetics, and sometimes are con-
nected with more complex ‘psychological’ phenomena.2
In categorizing the scribal mistakes I have individuated the classes de-
scribed by Reynolds and Wilson (1974:200–213), including the factors of
omission, addition, substitution, transposition of graphemes, words, or even
short sentences.
Omission
Vowels
a:
CCV →CaCV: riṅlas →riṅalas (246.19); kbho ṣpi →kәbho sapi
(256.8); umguṃ→umaguṅ→umaṅguṅ(278.12); ikāṃvaknya →
ikaṅavaknya (334.3).
CVC →CCaC: maṃdadikәn →maṅdadyakәn (296.16).
1.
According to Dain (1964:43–46), the copying of a manuscript in pre-modern times
involved at least four stages, namely the reading of the model, its ‘retention’ for a few in-
stants, the ‘internal dictation’ (dictée interieure), and ﬁnally the writing itself (jeu de main).
While the above variables might or might not have applied to the copying of Old Javanese
manuscripts, they certainly suggest that the matter is complex and too little known to let us
draw any certain conclusion.
2.
On which, cf. below, p. 76–79.


--- PAGE 85 ---
66
i Introduction
ā:
Ought to have been attached to an akṣara preceded by an e vocal-
ization: teṅgvan →toṅgvan (224.11); kreda →kroda (258.132×).
i:
Inherent vowel a →i vocalization: lvaḥ→lvih (196.3); kalvaḥhan
→kalvihan (196.3); nda →ndi (202.6); sanaṃguḥ→sinaṅguh
(202.5); iraya →iriya (208.122×); °indrayā →°indriya (216.11,2×
218.10,2× 228.16, 316.5); āpva →apvi (224.11); hәnta →hәnti
(236.7); lvaha →lәviha (252.5); pinatuk aṃulā →pinatuk iṅulā
(260.5); salvarānya →salvirānya (262.11); prahatin →prihatin
(264.6); nimatta →nimitta (268.16); danuduk →dinuduk (278.
11); vikāradarmmatvәṃ→vikāradharmitvaṃ(284.7, 9); rәsa →
ṛṣi (286.9); kasaddyan →kasiddhyan (296.4); prahәn →prihәn
(310.17); panakāsadyana →pinakasādhana (318.17); lvarnya →
lvirnya, katabān →katibān (332.12); maṃhadәpā →maṅhiḍәpa
(332.17).
CCV →CiC: knavruhan →kinavruhan (272.13).
In akṣara-form: apuguṃkahanān lvir →apuṅguṅika nāhan lvir
(214.20); juga kātaḥ→juga ikātah (240.4).
u/ū:
Inherent vowel a →u vocalization: hamilaṃṅakәn →humilaṅakәn
(202.10); vraha →vruha (226.14); parvvāka →pūrvaka (236.17);
rapanya →rūpanya (238.20); skal →sәkul (244.11); kāmarapitvәṃ
→kāmarūpitvaṃ(284.7); kamāra →kumāra (290.9); mahyan →
mahyun (304.9); samahur →sumahur (304.17); havusan →hu-
vusan (306.20); umaṅkus →umuṅkus (318.7); garada →garuḍa
(322.9); tras →trus (330.5); haliḥ→hulih (332.8).
e:
Inherent vowel a →e vocalization: jihvandriyā →jihvendriya (218.
11) yakā →yekā (224.3); ityavamādi →ityevamādi (246.20); he-
yopadaya →heyopadeya (272.10).
Ought to have preceded a consonant or a consonantal ligature
followed by ā: kbā →kәbo (246.18); pālaḥ→polah (292.1).
Consonants
ṃ:
Omission of anusvāra, both within or at the end of a word, is one
of the commonest errors in our codex, as in the majority of Old
Javanese manuscripts. It occurs very frequently, as, for exam-
ple, in the following instances: sa →saṅ(194.15, 196.15, 200.6,


--- PAGE 86 ---
Scribal Errors
67
204.7); li →liṅ(198.13, 202.6, 206.13, 210.11, 212.7, 228.12);
matanyan →mataṅnyan (212.26, 236.15, 240.18), etc.3
r:
[repha] Omission of superscript r in ligature commonly occurs
in both old Javanese and Sanskrit words, although it assumes
greater proportions in the latter: [OJ] sumahu →sumahur (198.15,
216.15, 336.6); salvi →salvir (228.5); lvi →lvir (228.5); vvalu-
liku →vvalulikur (260.13); tutunya →tuturnya (270.14). [Skt]
paramāt(a/ā) →paramārtha (194.19, 24, 286.14); sarvakāryya-
kāttā →sarvakāryakartā (214.8); pañcak(a/ā)mendriyā →pañca-
karmendriya (218.14, 16); kammendriyā →karmendriya (218.17);
kummara →kūrmāra (232.15, 234.1); catuaisvaryya →caturaiśva-
rya (242.9, 244.8); svagga →svarga (244.1, 246.2); dūrādāśana →
dūradarśana (284.1, 2); addācandra →ardhacandra (336.21).
[Subscript r in ligature] Tis kind of omission is of rarer occur-
rence: asvāhadayaḥ→asvāhradayaḥ→asauhṛdayaḥ(264.7); ty-
antaḥkāraṇa →tryantaḥkaraṇa (316.10);
ḥ:
lvi →lәvih (196.3); vrunya →vruhnya (198.4); vru ya →vruh ya
(216.3); vinenya →vinehnya (232.8); tamola riṃ→tamolah riṅ
(246.19).4
A grapheme:
Omitted where a consonantal ligature is expected:5 vuvunan →
vunvunan (230.15); yan ka →yan kva (236.16); mataṃnya akveḥ
→mataṅnyan akveh (242.3); tumo hala →tumon hala (252.19);
ndāta vnaṅ→ndātan vәnaṅ(282.16); paṅavruhana →paṅavru-
hanya (296.10); akdi denya →akәdik denya (298.7); matra →ma-
ntra (310.21); mataṃnya sinaṅguḥ→mataṅnyan sinaṅguh (334.
13); hyun pa sira →hyun pva sira (336.18).
A CV cluster:
humimbhәṃ→humibәkiṅ(196.4); ṅanya →ṅaranya (196.13);
mataṅnyan yā →mataṅnyan tayā (196.23); parārtā →paramārtha
(198.1, 332.22); tikā meḥ→tikā dumeh (206.6); udәgi →umadәgi
(232.1); ya vnaṃ→ya kavәnaṅ(238.2); hannira →havannira
3.
Te representation of anusvāra as ṅin the examples is, of course, merely the result of
the standardization implemented in the critical edition (cf. p. xi).
4.
Te representation of visarga as h in the examples is, of course, merely the result of
the standardization implemented in the critical edition (cf. p. xi).
5.
Although some of the examples referred to here might actually have involved omis-
sion of C· (hence, an akṣara), I have regarded the consonantal ligature form as the standard
manner these cluster ought to be written.


--- PAGE 87 ---
68
i Introduction
(238.11); kahyun· →kahyunya (242.4); kadi kaddyan →kadi ka-
siddhyan (246.7); pikaṃvijā →pinakavīja (248.3); adideviduḥka
(258.11), adideviduk(a/ā) (260.3, 4) →ādhidaivikaduḥkha; pā →
pāti (270.13); ri yogisvaran →ri kayogīśvaran (276.16); paveṃ
kami →paveh iṅkami (278.7); pamakāraṇa →paramakāraṇa (282.
6); ginayāknәkaṃ→ginavayakәn ikaṅ(290.7); kva li saṃpara
→kva liṅa saṅpara (300.17); akbi →anakәbi (306.2); maradin
aṅan →maradin amaṅgan (310.13); soliḥnira nanәm →solihnira
tinanәm (310.16); paniṃsātya →phala niṅsatya (312.12); maca-
man· rā →macamanā sira (314.8); kaliḥnumpaṃṅakәn →kalih
tinumpaṅakәn (314.16); inabhya →inabhyāsa (316.16); maṅka
ta →maṅkana ta (316.21); śarī kunaṅ→śarīra kunaṅ(318.10);
jat →jagat (334.18).
virāma:
pәhāna →pә¯han (214.2); lāvana manaḥ→lāvan manah (216.13).
Two or more graphemes:
[VC] yayā →abyaya (196.1); [CVC] yan kāna →yan
maṅkana (228.17), lā bhaṭara →lāvan bhaṭāra (268.9), sinasargga
→sinasar mārga (312.18); [CCV] luḥnya →luṅguhnya (230.9),
tryara →tryakṣara (336.22); [CVCV] tibra ni panira →tībra ni
paṅrәṅә¯nira (258.6); nikaṃdyan →nikaṅkasiddhyan (258.9).
Haplography:
mityajñānāku →mithyājñānānaku (206.10); pinaṅan inum →pin-
aṅan ininum (232.7); ndātambhān →ndātan tambhān (262.15);
pvāku mavaiyākәn →pvāku gumavaiyakәn (276.5);6 mabhyakta-
kvānnakna →mabyakta takvanakna (278.1); hasira →hasih sira
(286.19); kleśarira →kleśa ri śarīra (286.21); yokābhibyaktan →
yekā kābhi° (288.12); pala niṃyamābrata →phala niṅniyama-
brata (312.18, 314.2); utpāptistiliṇa →utpattisthitilīna (336.17).
One lexeme:
saṅpara, <tan> katon tah (204.7); tumambhәh pvekaṅ<buddhi>
ahaṅkāra lāvan manah (220.1); gave hayu satartālvi →gave ha-
lahayu satatālvir (234.21); turuṅ<hәnti> rumakәt rikā (274.15);
phala ni dharma ya →phala ni dharmādharma ya (322.12).
One syntagma:
(ofen because of saut du même au même) mithyājñānānaku saṅ
kumāra, <sumahur saṅkumāra,> kevala salah (206.11); ikaṅah-
6.
Although, properly speaking, this is not a haplography since the two involved akṣaras
(i.e. ku and gu) are not identical, I think it may still be categorized as that kind of mistake by
virtue of the phonetic similarity of those two akṣaras (this mistake might thus have occurred
during the phase of ‘internal dictation’: cf. p. 65).


--- PAGE 88 ---
Scribal Errors
69
aṅkāra si vaikṛta, ya tekā sattva svabhāvanya, <ikaṅahaṅkāra
si taijasa, ya tekā rajah svabhāvanya,> ikaṅahaṅkāra si bhūtādi
tamah svabhāvanya (216.9); byāna, <ikaṅbāyu si prāṇa, ya ta>
mataṅnyan (232.1); yan <mahala karma,> mahala śarīra, yan
mahayva karma, mahayva śarīra (274.3); hana kṣipta ṅaranya,
<hana vikṣipta ṅaranya,> hana vimūḍha ṅaranya (294.5); ikaṅta
citta malilaṅri yogi, ya maṅdadyakәn vīrya<, ikaṅvīrya> maṅ-
dadyakәn tutur, ikaṅtutur ya maṅdadyakәn prajñā (296.16); nā-
han lakṣaṇa niṃyamabrata, <niyama ṅaranya,> śauca (310.10);
yekā sinaṅguh śauca ṅaranya, <santoṣa ṅaranya,> solihanira na-
si atah santosaknanira (310.15); ya santosaknanira, <tapaḥṅa-
ranya,> ikaṅindriya kabeh prihәn sakitana, ri brata lāvan samā-
dhi (310.16); hana padmāsana, <hana bhadrāsana,> hana svasti-
kāsana (314.15); yeka laghiman ṅaranya, <mahiman ṅaranya,>
tar kalәvihan gә¯ṅnira (330.8); saṅkeṅoṂkāra mәtu taṅtryakṣara,
<saṅkeṅtryakṣara> mәtu taṅpañcākṣara (336.22).
Addition
Vowels
Added to an akṣara where the inherent vowel a is required, or (less fre-
quently) occurrence of a where it is not wanted:
a:
srotendriyā, aya →srotendriya, ya (218.10); ikaṃagave hayu →
ikaṅgave hayu (234.18).
i:
hulihanta →hulahanta (198.8); ahisәm →ahasәm (222.6); miṅ-
dapākәn →maṅәdapakәn (232.11); kuniṃ→kunaṅ(252.20); i
hivak →i havak (274.11); vinariḥ→vinarah (276.4); inarinān →
inaranan (276.10); maṃdadyikәn →maṅdadyakәn (296.17); yo-
gasadinā →yogasādhana (308.14); adyin →adyan (312.10); ginive
→ginave (312.18); prastāvinya →prastāvanya (320.1).
u:
aṅlupi° →aṅәlapi° (232.11); muṅābhyasāmbhәk →maṅabhyāsām-
bhәk (268.22); ahәṅsu (308.19), ahiṅṣu (310.4), ahәṃṣu (312.10)
→ahiṅsā;7 ahәṃṣubrata →ahiṅsābrata (312.12); umsut →umәsat
(318.4).
7.
Te spelling ahiṅsa occurs only once in the codex (f. 68v.1 / 308.18).


--- PAGE 89 ---
70
i Introduction
e:
As an akṣara: niṃeyoga →niṅyoga (292.6).
As vocalization: tahiṅkera →tāhaṅkāra (212.19); yen mahyun →
yan mahyun (208.8); jenma →janma (240.3); ye mataṃnyan →
ya mataṅnyan (298.11).
Wrongly attached to an akṣara with a following ā to make o: ahә-
ṅkoratatva →ahaṅkāratattva (212.20); de nikoṃṅ→de nikāṃṅ>
de nikaṅ(222.10); tomolaḥ→tāmolaḥ> tamolah (234.5); kovuvus
→kāvuvus > kavuvus (238.2); hayvo →hayvā > hayva (310.132×);
saṃyomaṃnira →saṃyāmanira > saṅyamanira (326.3); teko →
tekā (334.12).
ā:
Wrongly attached to an akṣara preceded by a vocalization e: saṃ-
ṅko buddi →saṅkeṃbuddhi (216.10); daṣondrayā →daśendriya
(216.112×); pvokaṃ→pvekaṅ(288.4); yok(a/ā) →yek(a/ā) (288.12,
290.16, 336.17).
Consonants
ṃ:
Unwanted additions of anusvāra are found in abundance through-
out the codex. Just a few examples: niṃk(ā/a)ṃ→nikaṅ(200.9,
226.4); īṃkaṃ→ikaṅ(236.15); saṃyomaṃnira →saṅyamanira
(326.3); aṃṣṭesvaryya →aṣṭaiśvarya (328.19), etc.
r:
[repha] svarbhava →svabhāva (214.8; 216.8); tārku →tāku (278.
5); airśānya →aiśānya (278.9);8 kurmbhaka →kumbhaka (316.
13); marri →mari (336.4).
Others:
mapvekaṃ→mapekaṅ(206.9); andyavasaya →adhyavasāya (218.
2); vaki,ḥndriyā →vakindriya (218.14); tan· karin →takarin (228.
12); punyaskavnaṃ→puṇya kavәnaṅ(242.12); mahoman, →ma-
homa, (244.12); yataṅnyan →yatanyan (246.8); ndyatan →nda-
tan (276.13); sadānvanya →sādhananya (296.19); apandon →apa
don (312.5); pinakāsadyana →pinakasādhana (318.17); dāranya
dyana →dhāraṇā dhyāna (322.3); siddya →siddha (322.15); ṅaran-
pikā →ṅaranikā (334.6); inapekṣānyan, →inapekṣānya, (338.13).
8.
Note that the form airsanya is frequently attested in literary Javanese and in Bali-
nese (cf. Gonda 1973:363); still, this usage might derive from an original, and particularly
frequent, spelling mistake.


--- PAGE 90 ---
Scribal Errors
71
Punctuation:
vaki,ḥndriyā →vakindriya (218.14); ginra,hita →ginṛhīta (242.1);
si,ta prabhu →sira ta prabhu (246.14); ika,ta sakti →ika ta śakti
(284.15); videha lāvan, prākratilinā →videha lāvan prakṛtilīna
(294.17); ci,tta →citta (306.4); yātrakā,ma,vāśayītva →yatrakā-
māvasāyitva (328.22), etc.
A full akṣara:
paramesaśvara →parameśvara (212.9); mahātuha →matuha (232.
12); grahananya →grahaṇa (290;14),9 tan maṅkana →tan ṅkāna
(294.2); hidәpnyara →hiḍәpnya (294.22); lvirra ni →lvir ni (306.3);
prāṇayāsamādiṃ→prāṇāyāmādi (308.11);10 lakṣamaṇanira →
lakṣaṇanira (314.14);11 kututuk →tutuk (316.7).
Multiple akṣaras:
yan tayantaka saṃhyaṃ→yan taya saṅhyaṅ(200.2).
Dittography:
sira tika kālvi →sira tika lәvih (196.3); rārat →rāt (200.4); tapi-
tapi →tathāpi (204.7); ṅararanya →ṅaranya (206.4); lalāvan →
lāvan (218.5); pinakasadānan panpagrahita →pinakasādhanān
paṅgṛhīta (218.10); ikā kata kabeḥ→ikā ta kabeh (218.18); apani
ikaṃ→apan ikaṅ(222.9); saptāvarṇnava →saptārṇava (224.6);
vastu tutuhutuhu →vastu tuhutuhu (238.17); sakikit →sakit (256.
7); tvas jiji →tvas āji (264.4); ya ta kala lavasan →ya ta kala-
vasan (272.1); tamatatan →tamatan (282.15); manusuṃśuṃ→
manuṅsuṅ(332.3).
One or more lexeme:
avyāhata tañaṅkva vuvusta, [sumahur saṃpārāmartā]12
sakāmakāma (204.6); i sor ni vidyātattva, hana ta [i sver niṃ] pra-
dhānatattva, i sor niṅpradhānatattva (212.17); vikṣipta, vimū-
ḍha, [vimudā,] (294.11) (occurring at a line change); maṅkana
lakṣaṇa bhaṭāra, [sumahur saṅkumāra,] maṅkana taṅātmā […]
yan kva liṅa saṅpara (300.12); yan kva liṅta, aparan ya pva ma-
dadyakәn kamokṣan, [yan kva liṅtana,] sumahur saṅsevaka (320.
6); athavā tibeṅkaraṅjuga sira, [ikaṅkaruṅjuga sira] ikaṅkaraṅ
juga rәmәk (324.11).
9.
In this passage grahaṇa appears as an item in a list of Sanskrit technical terms, and
the addition of the sufﬁx -nya does not suit the context.
10.
Middling between prāṇāyāma and samādhi.
11.
Arguably a tertiary correction of a secondary corruption of lakṣaṇa, by analogy with
the name of the popular character Lakṣmaṇa (Rāma’s brother) plus epenthesis (kṣma >
kṣama).
12.
Te square brackets in the examples enclose the redundant lexemes that I have ex-
punged from the constituted text (cf. below, p. 93).


--- PAGE 91 ---
72
i Introduction
Substitution
Similar akṣaras
eṃ≈
ai
catureṃsvāryya →caturaiśvarya (244.16); aneṃśvār-
yya →anaiśvarya (248.13); gaveṃnya →gavainya
(248.15); gumaveṃikaṃ→gumavai ikaṅ(302.16);
kagaveṃyanya →kagavaiyanya (304.2); magaveṃya
→magavaiya (304.6); magaveṃduhkha →magavai
duhkha (304.14); °nireṃkaṃ→nira ikaṅ(324.14);
gaveṃnira →gavainira (326.16).13
ā
≈
·
(Ofen difﬁcult to distinguish) ik·tan →ikā tan
(194.12); sak·liniskāli (<sakā°) →sakalaniṣkalaṃ
(194.21); lavan·hәṅkāra (<lavan āhәṅ°) →lavan
ahaṅ° (216.16); lāvan· kāṣa →lāvan ākāśa (222.2,
324.7); mālvayā →malvy· (238.12); lin· (<linā) →līna
(246.11); tvas·ji →tvas āji (264.4); kit·taḥ→kitātaḥ
(266.2); matmahan· vu →matәmahan āvu (280.12);
yogәk·liṅanya →yogә kāliṅanya > yogi kaliṅanya
(286.19); amәtvakәn·vaknya →amәtvakәn āvaknya
(288.13); lāvan āprakratiliṇa →lāvan· prakṛtilīna
(294.20); kārmmapalan āhuvus →karmaphalān· hu-
vus (300.8); lāvan·pa (<lāvan āpa) →lāvan apa
(304.16); macaman·rā →mācamanā sira (314.8); an
āvtu →an· vtu (334.15).14
13.
Te occurrence of this mistake may be attributable to phonetic factors as well, i.e.
the insertion of an euphonic nasal glide described as ‘spontaneous nasalization’ by Gonda
(cf. above, p. 61).
14.
In the following instances we ﬁnd also ā where we expect a virāma, but the allograph is
, which leaves no room for confusion with virāma. Tis presupposes a two-step mistake,
i.e.
becoming
then
: avakānya →avak·nya (200.7); namāprakāra →nәm· prakāra
(222.6); i sorā yā →i sor ya (222.9); malitā →malit· (230.16); tanā dadi →tan· dadi (338.6);
maṅaṅәnāṅәnā →maṅaṅәnaṅәn· (316.9); karmmapalān ābhinukti →karmaphalān bhinukti
(238.3); mataṃnyan āhayu ataḥ→mataṅnyan hayvātah (270.6).


--- PAGE 92 ---
Scribal Errors
73
t
≈
k
tavruhnya →kavruhnya (196.20); tari →kari (206.6);
kan →tan (210.1, 248.13, 238.15, 288.16); tahanan-
tānaku →kahanantānaku (224.5); sutra →śukra
(226.18; 228.2, 3); ya ka dadi →ya ta dadi (228.8);
materuṃ→makeruṅ(228.18); yetā →yekā (230.15);
kraktara →kṛkāra (232.15, 234.2);15 anyak →anyat
(238.14); manat →mānak (242.3); uksaha →ut-
sāha (242.13); bhinuttinya →bhinuktinya (246.2);
tapanasān →kapanasan (248.14); mahabәk →ma-
habәt (248.15); itāṅ→ikaṅ(258.7); vārktamana
→vartamāna (258.8); tahanan →kahanan (266.3);
tapasuk →kapasuk (270.14); pinukәran →pinutәran
(288.15); tagavaiya →kagavaiya (290.10); vrakti →
vṛtti (292.11); titsṇa →tīkṣṇa (292.21); ka →ta
(294.21); kārākkaṇ→karaktan (300.7); hayvākā →
hayvāta (310.11); tadadi →kadadi (312.9); talalārān
→kalalaran (312.16);
kahan →tahan (318.16);
r(a/ә)mәt →rәmәk (324.10, 11).
i
≈
ә
[OJ] hinti →hәnti (236.11); viṅī →vәṅi (238.6);
tinanim →tinanәm (240.6); vik →vәk > vә¯k (272.10);
әkāṃ→ikaṅ(300.11); meviḥ→mevәh (332.12).
[Skt] bhutādә →bhūtādi (216.7); nәlarudrākṣā →
nīlarudraka (280.5); samādә →samādhi (294.11);
metrә →maitri (296.8); krәya →kriya (336.2), and
many more cases.16
h
≈
y
yānak →[h]anak (214.11); pāhvindriyā →pāyvindriya
(218.15); heka →yeka (234.1); tan hogya →tan yo-
gya (240.12); han →yan (248.3, 286.9, 334.12); tan
yan apa →tan hanāpa (266.6); śaṃṣāra, hi kāruṇa
→saṅsāra, ya karuṇā (296.13); nhapan →nyapan
(300.18); hekāna →yekāna (334.20).
15.
Compare Vṛhaspatitattva śloka 46c, where mss. CG read kraktara for kṛkāra.
16.
An analogous phenomenon, occurring in both Sanskrit and Old Javanese words, is ī
≈ә¯: gīnika →gә¯ṅnikaṅ(282.11); agīṃ→agә¯ṅ(312.20); ikә¯ṃ(<ikīṃ) →ikiṅ(338.9); nadә¯ →
nāḍī (230.16).


--- PAGE 93 ---
74
i Introduction
h
≈
l
lavān →havan (230.12); kāharan →kalaran (308.5);
hakṣamā →lakṣaṇa (320.12).
np
≈
ns
ndanpidda →ndan siddha (208.11); yanpi →yan si
(240.5); tanpalah →tan salah (272.4); mataṃnyan-
palah →mataṅnyan salah (280.7); anpatmāja →an
sātmaka (298.1); ndānparbvajñā° →ndān sarvajñā°
(300.17, 19); kamokṣanpaṃ→kamokṣan saṅ(320.6);
mahyunpira →mahyun sira (322.14, 18; 324.1, 2);
tonpaṃsiddā →ton saṅsiddha (322.17).
ś
≈
g
pamuṅgu →pamuṅśu > pamuṅsu (276.15); yośis-
varan →kayogīśvaran (276.16); śaṇapāti →gaṇapati
(280.17); abhiṇivega →abhiniveśa (304.18).
p
≈
m
marāmārtā →paramārtha (268.21); tamaḥ→tapaḥ
(310.10).
t
≈
n
ānmā →ātmā (234.11); ndya na →ndya ta (338.4).
n
≈
r
patakvanaṅkvan sa pāra →patakvanaṅkva ri saṅpara
(202.2); āturu →atunu (220.13); i ruhurn →i ruhur
(232.3); i ruhun· →i ruhur· (232.4); marәki niṅ→
marәki riṅ(266.1); katuru →katunu (324.14).
n
≈
v
mnaṃ→mvaṅ(200.3); yav inabhyaśā →yan inabhy-
āsa (312.24).
d
≈
ph
nāpi (via nādi) →nāḍī (230.8);17 naphi (via nadi) →
nāḍī (234.7, 9).
ā
≈
i
hintā →hәnti (220.15); nihan →nāhan (248.7);
sadisuka →sadāsuka (282.13); hi (<hā <yā) →ya
(296.13); kapaṅgāḥ→kapaṅgih (326.6).18
17.
Tis presupposes a two-step mistake, in which the ph has lost its aspiration. A similar
mistake may have taken place in the case of nabi (via naphi and nadi) →nāḍī (230.17, 18).
18.
In nāhan →nihan (224.7), pānakaugvān →pinakauṅgvan (228.10), muṅgvāṃ→
muṅgv iṅ(232.12) the substitution has occurred between
and
, which are less similar.
Tis may presuppose a three-step process, i.e.
becoming
and then
(cf. fn. 14).


--- PAGE 94 ---
Scribal Errors
75
t
≈
v
prastātā →prastāva (206.15); pinakatija →pinakavīja
(256.9); atatā →athavā (310.2).
g
≈
bh
tan pabhati →tan pagati (200.10); ubhvānanira (via
ugvananira) →uṅgvananira (314.4).
a/ā ≈
s(ā) āriṣrapa →sarīsṛpa (246.17); aṅka →saṅka (286.19).
np
≈
ny
hurip·npa sajñā →huripnya sājñā (230.4).
v
≈
c
ciruddā →viruddha (334.12).
v
≈
d
manunvi →manundi (236.9).
v
≈
e
cumetavanā kaṃ→cumetanekaṅ(236.8).
ḷ
≈
i
ḷbunta →ibunta (280.17).
l
≈
gh
°vilāta →°vighāta (256.11).
u
≈
dd
taddapaya →ta upāya (208.4).
Non-similar akṣaras
Te following substitutions are less easy to explain on graphic grounds:
In OJ lexemes:
savkas →savәlas (216.13); maveṃ→maveḥ> maveh (236.4); aṃ-
tān →aṅgān (240.10); amti →amәtu (240.10); yapvan →tapvan
(240.12); ake →ṅke (246.14); vulavun →vulaṅun (262.2); humo-
rākәn →sumorakәn (262.9); hmәm →hәlәm (270.6); ta sargga ta
gārga (276.15); kunaṃyenpu →kunaṅdeyanmu (278.1); deyan-
pupasa →deyanmūsapa (278.5);19 māmaṅguḥhakәnnya →kapaṅ-
guhakәnnya (294.21); halaḥdenya →salah denya (304.1); °n· pu-
puta →°n· luputa (306.23); soliranira →solihanira (310.15); gutā
19.
Te two latter cases do not involve a confusion between m and p (on which cf. p. 74),
for the clusters -np- and -nm- are written in a very different manner (the m in the former
being generally written as an entirely distinct subscript and not in parallel, as the p in np).


--- PAGE 95 ---
76
i Introduction
→guhā (314.9); laliḥ→kalih (314.16); pasaṃhniṃcitta →pasaṅan
iṅcitta (334.21).
In Sanskrit(ic) lexemes:
niskāta sira →niṣkala sira (194.22); lumaknaṇe →luma-
kṣaṇe (206.6); śatvajñāta →sarvajñāta, sarvakāryyakākta →sar-
vakāryakartā (300.11); lataṇānya →lakṣaṇānya (304.16); prasti
→prāpti (328.21).
Te following substitutions may have originated during ‘self-recitation’ of
the text during the process of copying on account of the similar sound of the
akṣaras (especially in the case of anusvāra and other nasals):20
Nasals:
yaṅkva →yan kva (202.12); nyan tiryyak →nyaṅtiryak (204.8);
panetanā →pañetanā (206.9); tuntun →tuṅtun (214.4); ghraneṃ-
driyā →ghrāṇendriya (218.12); tan dāsendriyā →taṅdaśendriya
(218.18); mataṅṃyan →mataṅnyan (226.15); aṅәlupiñna →aṅәl-
apinya (232.11); lavaṇ→lavan (240.6); taṇ→tan (262.2); anhiṃ
→aṅhiṅ(286.10); ikaṃnānetanā →ikaṅmañetanā (300.2); ala-
vaṃlavaṃ→alavanlavan (304.9); tanya →taña (326.14).
ә:
tәn tayā →tan tayā (200.5); matyәb →matvab (234.1); hujarāknә
riṅ→hujarakna riṅ(260.12).
Other akṣaras:
tuṅgvan →toṅgvan (226.2); matyәb →matvab (234.1); pamuku-
tvananta →pamuktyananta (252.4); lāvan kumālaṃṇa →°n hum-
ālaṅa (252.15); apalәg tutuk →apalәh tutuk (262.2); pasikaban →
pasikәpan (272.13); rәmәṅә¯ →rumәṅә¯ (284.2);21 smutә →smṛti
(290.14); halaḥ→salah (304.1); mgu →mәtu (308.9); tәmәṃgә¯ →
tumәṅgә¯ (314.20); vinitvāknәka →vinitvākneka (316.14).
Exchange of a word for another
Here are intended such cases where, out of confusion or through analogy of
meaning and/or form, or shif from the unfamiliar to the familiar, a word
20.
Of course, many such substitutions constitute natural cases of euphonic adjustment;
yet, Zoetmulder (1983:7) seems to have regarded the phenomenon as remarkable as in his
grammar of Old Javanese he dedicated a note referring to the frequent substitution of -n-
by -ṅ- (i.e. anusvāra) before the clitic second person pronoun -ku in the Ādiparva.
21.
Confusion in the pronunciation of the two sounds u and ә is commonly attested in
Old Javanese as well as in Balinese (cf. Gonda 1973:358–360).


--- PAGE 96 ---
Scribal Errors
77
has been substituted for another, which however does not ﬁt the context.
Tis is especially evident in the case of the Sanskrit technical philosophical
terms conveying ideas the copyists were not familiar with. Such mistakes
ofen involve variables that cannot be univocally reduced to the domain of
palaeography or phonetics but are connected with complex phenomena such
as analogy, contamination and hypercorrection.
Old Javanese:
nihan →nahan (196.7, 248.7, 326.15); tuvin →tuhun (200.2); nā-
han →nihan (208.12, 224.7); vvaṃ→vvai (230.12, 330.3); nīhan
→nāhan (232.5); magave →paṅhiḍәp (234.18); yapvan →tapvan
(240.12); hanātaḥ→hana ta (256.7); kahana →nahan (312.19);
tlas →nihan (316.13); sakavaṃ→salavas (316.15).
Sanskrit:
aveyave (OJ) ‘beckon, wave, signal’ →avayavi (Skt) ‘having mem-
bers or parts, a whole; body’ (202.5); kāmacetanā →makacetanā
(216.22×); sutra →śukra (226.18, 228.1, 2, 3, 5);22 prativiya →
pratyaya ‘concurrent occasion of an event’ (236.9); pinakasaṅdā-
nanya →pinakasādhananya (242.17); nandātami(s/ś)ra →andha-
tāmisra (252.2, 14), perhaps by analogy with the familiar nan-
dā ‘delight’; mabhyaya →mabhaya (254.8, 262.16); anopradāna-
ka →anupādānaka (262.8), by analogy with apradānaka occur-
ring before; saṃpurusya →saṅkuruṣya (276.15, 278.4); n(i/ә)-
larudrākṣā →nīlarudraka (280.5, 15), by analogy with rudrākṣa
‘rosary-beads’; durātmasarbvagata →dūrāt masarvajñatā (284.2,
5); durātma ṅaranya →dūrāt manana ṅaranya (284.4); mano-
jñāvitvәṃ/ manovijñāvitvәṃ→manojavitvaṃ(284.7, 8); stri →
sūtra (290.18, 292.10); darmmasaya →karmāśaya (296.1); tavat
→yāvat (308.11, 336.3);23 sakṣaṇā →āsana (314.14, 316.3).24
22.
All instances appear on the same folio, as well as the only correct attestation of sukra
(>śukra) ‘male semen’ (226.18); in Old Javanese texts this word is also spelled śukla. Al-
though the mere graphic substitution of k for t may certainly have played a role, this mis-
take may also have involved analogy between sutra and suta ‘son’ (the synonymity of the
two words has been documented in literary Javanese, cf. Gonda 1973:430).
23.
Cf. OJED (1966) s.v. tāvat: ‘Occasionally tāvat is found where yāvat might be ex-
pected (a graphical error?)’.
24.
Tere is no doubt that in the context the required word in both instances is āsana,
which also appears in the correct form in the same folio. One may attribute this mistake to
a misunderstanding (of either a written or oral version of the document) having occurred
once in the chain of transmission, or to an hypercorrective operation.


--- PAGE 97 ---
78
i Introduction
Remarkable cases are:
• ukta / prokta ‘enunciated’ →ūta / prota ‘sewn crosswise’ / ‘sewn
lengthwise’: uttaprokta →ūtaprota,25 utta →ūta (214.2); prokta
→prota (214.3, 5). Te same mistake has taken place also in the
Vṛhaspatitattva26 and in the Tattvajñāna.27
• kummara →kūrmāra ‘the kūrmāra breath’ (232.15, 234.1), ei-
ther by way of analogy with the familiar kumāra or due to an
incertitude between the rare form kūrmāra and the other com-
monly attested name of this bodily breath, i.e. kūrma. Tis kind
of mistake is widely attested in Old Javanese texts, e.g. Vṛhaspati-
tattva,28 Tattvajñāna,29 Jñānasiddhānta30 and Navaruci.31 Note
that the form kūrmāra (instead of kūrma) has apparently been
borrowed from certain Sanskrit sources, for it is attested in two
Śaiva Tantras, e.g. Trayodaśaśatikakālottara f. 36v.1, 37r.4–5 and
Brahmayāmala f. 314r.4, and in the Pāśupata Yoga section of the
Ur-Skandapurāṇa (181.41d, 182.35a, 182.39c).
• saṃtmāja (210.10), satmāja (212.3), sāttāja (282.4), patmāja
(298.1) →sātmaka. Tis form is followed by the phrase ri/lavan
bhaṭāra ‘with the Lord’, Te original form sātmaka ‘to be one
with the Lord’32 appears to have suffered contamination from
the cliché ātmaja ‘born from the same Self’.
25.
Te form ūtaprota is attested in Skt alongside otaprota: cf. MW s.v. ūta, ota, prota.
26.
Cf. Ed. • ūtaprota: śloka 14a (ūtaprokte ACG; utaprokta° BE; hutaprokta° DF); Old
Javanese commentary 14.6 (uttaprokta A; utaprokta ABCEG; hutaprokta DF); 14.37 (ut-
taprokta A; utaprokta BCEG; hutaprokta DF); • ūta: śloka 14c (uto A; ukto BCEG; hukto
DF); commentary 14.4 (hukta A; uta CDEG; huta B); 14.37 (uta CG; utta A; hutta D; ukta
BE; hukta F); • prota: śloka 14d; commentary 14.4, 38 (prokta all mss.).
27.
Cf. Ed. • ūtaprota:
5.2 (utaprokta KaKhaGaṄa); 29.4 (ūtaprokta KaKhaGha;
utaprokta GaṄa); • ūta: 5.2 (uta KaKhaGa); 29.5 (huta KaKha; ota Ga; uta GhaṄa); • prota:
5.5, 30.13 (prokta all mss.).
28.
Cf. Ed. • kūrmma śloka 40a (kūrmmara ADEF; kūrmmāra BCG); commentary 40.2
(kumara AB; kūrmmāra CG; kūrmmara DEF); śloka 46b (kumāra A; kurmmara BE; kūrm-
māra CDFG); comm. 46.1 (kumara A; kūrmmāra B; kūrmmara CDFG; kurmmara E).
29.
Te original form kūrmmara in 39.10, attested as such in all manuscripts, has been
emended to kūrmma by the editor Sudarshana Devi.
30.
Cf. śloka 12.7c (kūrmāra), commentary (kūrmara D; kurmara K); śloka 12.26a (kūr-
māras em., DK kūrmmare).
31.
Cf. p. 44.12–13 (kumāra 2×).
32.
For attestations of this word, implying a certain Śaiva doctrinal view of liberation, in
similar contexts of Old Javanese and Sanskrit scriptures, cf. below, pp. 413–418.


--- PAGE 98 ---
Scribal Errors
79
Transposition
repha:
satartālvi →satatālvir (234.21); ta kartaman →tar kataman (282.
21).
ṃ:
riṃkā →rikaṅ(214.13); niṃk(a/ā) →nikaṅ(218.7, 262.6, 274.2,
290.19, 300.8, 316.13, 336.23); haneṃkā →hanekaṅ(220.9); iṃkā
→ikaṅ(312.5, 332.18, 334.18), etc.
Other akṣaras:
ikaṃnā →ikanaṅ(196.19); apuguṃkahanān →apuṅguṅika nā-
han (214.20); kapanakuṃna →kapan kunaṅ(218.5); rāṣanmis →
rasāmanis (222.6); yā tikāṅajarakәn →ya kitāṅajarakәn (238.14);
sniṇdaṃ→sinaṇḍaṅ(242.20); vāṣakan ikāṃ→vәkasan ikaṅ(246.
5); karttā →tarka (256.10); humilaṃṅaknә →humilaṅakәn (260.
9); viyasanya →viṣayanya (262.5); na ibhyasāṅku →inabhyāsā-
ṅku (276.5); deyanpupasa →deyanmūsapa (278.5); ginhә →gәni
(278.13); śrakandi →śrikanda > śrīkaṇṭha (280.2); arājaḥ→aja-
raḥ(284.12, 13); ṣadenaha →sandeha (304.1); nebyasā →inabh-
yāsa (320.5); liṅtana →liṅanta (320.6); ṅara cetanya →ṅaranya
cetanā (338.4).
Inverted sequence of words:
asthitya yan ekatva bhaṭāra kunaṅ→yan asthitya e-
katva bhaṭāra kunaṅ(318.11).
A clause mistakenly copied in the wrong folio:
mataṅnyan maṅkana hulun apan
bhaṭāra paramārtha rakva pinakahurip niṅrat kabeh (210.8–9),
which apparently does not ﬁt with the rest of the passage; judging
from the context, it might have belonged originally to the portion
of text containing a debate between the Lord and an opponent
about the existence and sentience of the Summum Bonum (cf. p.
201).
Other sources of corruption
Te following corruptions do not easily ﬁt in any of the above categories but
involve a more complex chain of mistakes. Tis state of affairs may betray
an imperfect familiarity of the scribes with the language but in any event a
complex chain of transmission.
Old Javanese:
mapātaya →māpaṅatata (230.10), on account of a parallel in Vṛ-
haspatitattva (36.2); gavenya umasarikāṃpinaṅaninum →gave-


--- PAGE 99 ---
80
i Introduction
nya umava sari ikaṅpinaṅan ininum (232.7); gavenyakaṃbāyu →
gave nikaṅbāyu (232.10), reﬂecting an incertitude between gave-
nya ikaṅand gave nikaṅ; kunaṃyenpupāṇdim →kunaṅdeyanmu
pәṇḍәm (278.1): da ≈e vocalization, np ≈nm, hence ye° →deya°,
np →nm; ghnānavayakәn →ginavayakәn (304.11); ikāṃjñāna
mabalakaḥālinya, →ikaṅjñāna mabalik, liṅnya, (304.20); nāhan
sinpaṃasṭeśvaryya →nāhan sinaṅguh aṣṭaiśvarya (330.15).
Sanskrit:
abyavahātañakovuvusta →abyavahāta taña kavuvusta (204.6); k-
veḥninirindriyā →kveh niṅindriya (216.13), reﬂecting an incerti-
tude whether to write -nira or -niṃ; nāyā →bāyu (222.10); saṅke-
ṃṇaṅaranya →saṭkoṣa ṅaranya (228.5): perhaps originally trig-
gered by ṅ≈ṭ; svatradaya →sauhṛdaya (256.10): hra ≈tra, au ≈
va;33 nikāṃtye →nikaṅdetya (280.15): omission of d plus trans-
position of e vocalization (e vocalization and d are very simi-
lar in shape); naṅavesyaḥ→aṅavaśyaḥ, aṅavesyaḥ→aṅavaśyaḥ
(282.20); aṅavesa →aṅavaśya (282.21); anevesyaḥ→anāveśyaḥ
(282.21, 22); apārakṣәtilinā →prakṛtilīna (294.17): epenthesis
(pāra →pra), kṣә →kra (by contamination with kṣәti > kṣiti =
‘earth’?); vratatajñāna →aviratijñāna (302.14); camacalī →cañ-
calaḥ(302.14), by epenthesis (metri causa?); yogasamādinā →yo-
gasādhana (308.15): an attempt to make sense of a previously
written yogasadinā? (occurring also in 308.14); ndyakahakṣamā
→ndya ta lakṣaṇā (320.12): ta ≈ka, la ≈ha, ṇa having become ma
by analogy with kṣamā ‘endurance’; upātpәtinya →upapāttinya
(326.14);34 prakrativakna (post corr. ; prakratikna ante corr.) →
prakṛtilīna (334.20): t ≈k and v ≈n, therefore prakratikna →
prakratitva (the scribal addition of va instead of the ta required
to retrieve the correct form °tatva is explainable on account of
the similar shape of the two akṣaras).
33.
Compare asvāhadaya →asauhṛdaya, described on p. 67.
34.
Compare the spelling of utpātti° in utpāptistiliṇa →utpāttisthitilīna (336.17).


--- PAGE 100 ---
Editorial Policies
T
he presentation of both a diplomatic and critical edition of the text
seemed the most effective means to achieve a neat separation between
the theoretical categories of ‘text of document’ and ‘text of work’.1 Tese
two aspects prioritize, respectively, the text as an immaterial and ‘mental’
entity and the text as a physical object, which, in the present case, happens
to take the form of a ca. ﬁve centuries old palm-leaf manuscript from the
Western part of Java. Te need to keep the two aspects of the text separated
was apparent at every step of the editorial work. It is indeed not possible to
have both at once, for in order to have the work we must be ready to ‘lose
part of the historical evidence that supported its reconstruction’ (Tanselle
Why
Two Editions?
1989:29).
As a matter of fact, the two types of edi-
tion require different treatments because they deal with
different kinds of problems and aim at different results.
Te primary aim of a diplomatic edition is to present
a reproduction of the text as close as possible to the state in which it has
been preserved on its material support. In doing so, it renders the presented
materials accessible to the scholar with a speciﬁc interest in codicology as
much as to the philologist whose primary interest is the content of the text.
If documenting what an early 15th-century Old Javanese manuscript looks
like is the task of the diplomatic edition, retrieving an argumentatively co-
herent text in a form as close as possible to that which it had in the mind
of the author, and one that can be meaningfully compared to related texts
from the Indonesian Archipelago and the Indian Subcontinent, is the task of
the critical edition.2 To give precedence to one aspect over the other, or to
try to represent both at once, would result in a hybrid product which would
certainly not be user-friendly, let alone theoretically well-grounded. For in-
stance, the inclusion of all kind of data that are not vital to the retrieval of
meaning, e.g. palaeographic remarks or the annotation of signs like virā-
mas and line-ﬁllers, would be detrimental to readability and tremendously
increase the size of the critical apparatus.3 On the other hand, a reader or
1.
On which, cf. Tanselle (1989, in particular chapter 1).
2.
Useful theoretical considerations on the different standpoints, methodologies and
aims governing the two kinds of editions may be found in Jones (1980) (applied to Clas-
sical Malay texts), de Haan (1973:76–77) (applied to European Medieval texts), Robson
(1988:17–21) (applied, among others, to Old Javanese texts).
3.
Te information reported in the diplomatic edition that is not of primary concern in


--- PAGE 101 ---
82
i Introduction
potential editor wishing to access the text directly as it has been transmitted,
without having to reconstruct it from the apparatus of the critical edition,
might ﬁnd a diplomatic edition preferable. An abundance of heterogeneous
information may in fact impede a reader to focus on the aspects of the text
he is primarily interested in (i.e. the ‘work’ or the ‘document’). Te mere fact
that a text has survived in only one manuscript would by itself constitute a
sufﬁcient reason to justify presenting a diplomatic edition.4 All the more so
in the case of the Dharma Pātañjala, belonging to a still little known manu-
script tradition.5
Of course, critics may raise objections about the actual usefulness of such
an unsynthetic and bulky arrangement, arguing that both editions could
have been merged into one without signiﬁcant loss of information. And fur-
thermore, they may ask how many of the readers will be interested and able
to consult a diplomatic edition. To these objections I reply that in a philolog-
ical work it is less dangerous to err by redundancy than by omission. Afer
view of the restitution of the text of work include, e.g., the description of the different means
through which deletions or insertions were implemented by the scribe; the description, by
means of brackets, of the portions of the text which have been incorporated from loose
fragments of the manuscript; the indication of the gaps lef in correspondence with the
binding holes.
4.
Cf. Hahn’s (2001:52) remarks on the editing of Sanskrit and Tibetan codices unici:
‘Te general procedure of dealing with old and important codices unici is that which has been
applied by many responsible editors in the past: it ideally consists of the facsimile reproduc-
tion of the codex unicus accompanied by a so-called ‘‘diplomatic’’ transcript of the text which
represents the text ‘‘as it is’’, with no changes, and corrections, meticulously recording all its
peculiarities like insertions, deletions, glosses, gaps (lacunae), haplographies, dittographies,
etc. Only this enables the future critical reader to form his own, independent opinion and
perhaps see something which the ﬁrst editor of the work failed to see’.
5.
Insofar as they stress the importance of philological transparency and completeness
when dealing with rare manuscripts belonging to little-known traditions, I ﬁnd the follow-
ing considerations of Kratz (1981:238), though primarily addressed to the critical editing
of Malay manuscripts, to be also appropriate to justify the diplomatic editing of (Old Ja-
vanese) codices unici: ‘Malay studies would be well served if texts were prepared on the
basis of chosen manuscripts, i.e., if manuscripts were edited critically under preservation of
all those peculiarities which may not seem of much signiﬁcance within the limited frame-
work of the particular textual tradition, but which may well be important within a larger
context. Afer all, we do not yet know what is important or what we should look for, nor
will we know until many more manuscripts have been studied and analyzed. If, on the other
hand, editions are produced from which future scholars can only reconstruct the reading
of the manuscript with great difﬁculty, or which may even oblige them to go back to the
manuscript itself, then the whole work of editing will have been self-defeating’.


--- PAGE 102 ---
Editorial Policies
83
all, philology aims at making texts from the past more accessible, not only
to transmit the concepts carried by their words, but also to document the
shapes in which they have come to be written, which may tell us something
meaningful about the scribe who was copying them, about the supports they
were written on, and in this way about the socio-economic background and
even the aesthetic values of a civilization. I expect that the inclusion, within
the diplomatic edition, of facsimile reproductions may enlighten us on such
issues, and in some way even to appeal the more casual readers and draw
their attention to the beautiful objects that Old Javanese manuscripts actu-
ally are.
Diplomatic
Edition
Although a handful of editors of Old Javanese texts have
edited their sources following the diplomatic method in
the past,6 very little attention has been given so far to
the details of methodological issues to be tackled while
preparing this kind of edition.7 According to van der Molen (1981:6),
Tis type of edition requires an unambiguous relationship between exem-
plar and reproduction. Te distinctive features of the exemplars (at the level
of writing, spelling, and linguistic material), as far as they convey informa-
tion, are expressed in the reproduction too. In the same way the distinctions
within the reproduction have their antecedents in the copied text. Changes
remain within this boundary, and are categorical. […] What is important
for diplomatic editions, is that the information lost in the process of translit-
eration should be preserved by other means: descriptions, facsimile, and the
like.
Tere is no doubt that, even when the editor has worked meticulously, a
diplomatic edition still discloses little of the single manuscript as an object,
including the character of the script and its nuances. Te inclusion in this
work of facsimile reproductions, running in parallel with the diplomatic edi-
tion, provided with an apparatus of palaeographical and codicological notes,
6.
For an appraisal of their work, cf. van der Molen (1983:5–6).
7.
I use the term ‘diplomatic edition’ rather than ‘diplomatic transcription’ or ‘diplo-
matic transliteration’, for it conveys in a more explicit manner the element of interpretation
and intervention by the editor that is inherent in both operations of ‘transcription’ (i.e., to
transcribe the text from one support to another, without or without changing the kind of
script) and ‘transliteration’ (i.e., to adapt a text into a different script); cf. below, p. 84.


--- PAGE 103 ---
84
i Introduction
aims at ﬁlling this gap.8 Furthermore, since this editorial arrangement has
never been attempted in previous editions of Old Javanese texts, not to men-
tion texts written on West Javanese manuscripts, my approach aims at ﬁlling
a lacuna for those who want to learn about these neglected materials of sure
codicological interest.9 Tis arrangement also has the merit of rendering my
working methodology intelligible to the readers and potential editors of this
or other Old Javanese texts, who can follow the editorial process that I have
applied in its various stages, and, on this basis, form their opinion.
Although a diplomatic and a critical edition of a text involve fundamen-
tally different aims and procedures, it goes without saying that the working
of a diplomatic edition ‘requires knowledge, insight, and discretion on the
part of the editor’ (Tanselle 1989:59). Far from being a mechanical pro-
cess, the very transliteration of the text is indeed already a product of the ed-
itor’s judgment, ingenuity and interpretive endeavour. Tis is especially true
when it aims at transferring a text from a script displaying very different fea-
tures into a Latin-based system, for the process of decipherment and render-
ing implies intellectual efforts and editorial decisions (cf. Robson 1988:19;
Tanselle 1989:60). Being faced with the impossibility of transcribing the
text into custom-developed computer fonts—if just for reasons of general ac-
cessibility—even though I have tried to keep a 1:1 correspondence between
most of the signs, the result can be no more than an approximation of the
original. Tere are cases, of course, where such a correspondence cannot be
maintained. One example is the impossibility of rendering the vowel <o> of
the original script with two separate signs, one occurring before and one afer
the consonant to which they are attached (respectively, a vocalization e and
the combination of that with the vocalization ā). Tis limitation becomes
an issue in the cases where the graphemes involved are separated by gaps, in
correspondence with binding holes, or occur over two lines. Another prob-
lematic case is the rendering of rephas, which in the codex are consistently
written either above the akṣara before which they should be read in inter-
8.
Tese reproductions, although by themselves nothing but ‘new documents’ that can-
not fully substitute the original (cf. Tanselle 1989:54, 58, 61), constitute at least a useful
guide for the readers who may want to consult the original manuscript (as far as it lasts),
enabling them to do so in a comfortable way. Once the manuscript will be irretrievably
ruined or lost because of catastrophes or the ravages of time, they will preserve its evidence.
9.
Te edition of the prose Kuñjarakarṇa, preserved on a West Javanese Nipah, by Kern
(1922) presents the facsimile reproductions of only four folio sides, while the one by van
der Molen (1983) lacks facsimiles altogether.


--- PAGE 104 ---
Editorial Policies
85
nal position (e.g. -rC-, as in the case of the repha in Devanāgarī script) or
above the akṣara afer which they should be read in ﬁnal position (-r). It
is clear that the choice to render one or the other sequence depends on the
identiﬁcation of word-boundaries. I have taken the freedom to ‘interpret’
the correct sequence in such occurrences since the instances of -r are lim-
ited to just a few Old Javanese words (e.g. sumahur; lvir; sor; tar), in any
case reproducing them in italic.10 It should be pointed out that this feature
conforms to the usage implemented in other manuscripts from West Java as
well as in the Modern Javanese writing system; by contrast, in Old Javanese
manuscripts from Bali the repha in both the positions -rC- and -r is written
above the akṣara afer which it should be read.
I have reproduced line-ﬁller sign
as §. Tis sign is used to ﬁll any
extra space before the gap reserved around the binding hole or before the
right margin of a leaf. Te other special punctuation marks indicating the
opening/closing point of the text and/or the end of a section or the beginning
and end of a śloka, have been represented by ◉and ◆respectively. Other
non-standard, infrequent signs (such as crosses, etc.) have been marked in
palaeographical notes in the apparatus, which also contains remarks on signs
whose shape is irregular, or whose interpretation is not sure because of their
similarity with other signs.11
A drastic editorial decision has been to reproduce the scriptio continua,
which is implemented in the manuscript to a surprising degree of faithful-
ness.12 As a matter of fact, the division of the scriptio continua into words
is already an invasive critical operation, involving the editor’s interpretation
and judgment on the basis of his knowledge of the language in which the
text is written and of the application of certain conventions. Since the aim
10.
Of course, there are several exceptions to this rule, such as in the case of Sanskrit
words in which the repha appears, in certain instances only, to be written according to the
Javanese usage (e.g. purbva, sarbva, etc.). I have not considered these cases as mistakes of
transposition, but rather interpreted them as scribal ‘inconsistencies’ that in any case yield
the intended authorial form.
11.
For instance, the virāma
is ofen difﬁcult to distinguish from one of the allographs
used for the ā, i.e.
(cf. above, p. 72). Te only differentiating feature between the two is
the more pronounced rightwards loop of the virāma, which descends below the line. It is
natural that such signs were ofen confused as a result of copying mistakes.
12.
For instance, when needed, even virāmas are split from the akṣaras they are attached
to, appearing one line below. In such cases too an element of interpretation is implied in
the transliteration, which does not read the a that ought to be considered inherent to the
akṣara as long as the virāma at the beginning of the next line has not yet been read.


--- PAGE 105 ---
86
i Introduction
of my diplomatic edition is to reproduce as faithfully as possible the evidence
of the text of document, I saw no convincing reasons for separating words
according to their meaning and grammatical function;13 for that, I believe,
is a task to be dealt with in the critical edition. Terefore, the criterion that
I have adopted for separating certain clusters of text or graphemes obeys
uniquely to rules of sandhi and punctuation. Tus, I have applied the cri-
terion of dividing with a space the clusters formed by two vowels (e.g. °a i°
vs. °ai°, °a u° vs. °au°) to avoid any possible confusion as to their status of
separate akṣaras or unitary akṣaras indicating diphthongs. I have extended
this convention to non-diphthongal vowels in sequence, as well as to vowels
in their akṣara-form, such as those following an anusvāra or a visarga.
Te graphic presentation of the text in a diplomatic edition is an impor-
tant aspect of the work, and one that should be informed by the methodolog-
ical principles adhered to. Being unsatisﬁed by the arrangement of most of
the existing models, in which the division of the lines/chapters and the in-
troduction of numbering are elements that are organized in a way that does
not help to reveal the original evidence of the text of document, I decided
to produce an edition whose layout aims, if not fully to reproduce, at least
to follow the original as closely as possible. Tus, such relevant features as
the original division of leaves, with their number of lines, the gaps reserved
around the binding holes (indicated with two em-dashes ——), as well as
the original numbering of the palm-leaves, have been represented as in the
manuscript.14 Te features of the support, and of the script written on it, that
I deemed to be worthy of attention I have represented through the following
types of brackets:
( )
enclose graphemes that are only partly readable, though still in-
ferable with a signiﬁcant degree of certainty, because of lacunae
in the manuscript caused by physical damage.
13.
All the more so in view of the fact that, when it comes to the division of words—es-
pecially pronouns and clitics—adopted in editions of Old Javanese texts, there has never
been a unique and widely accepted standard (cf. Damais 1970:28, Uhlenbeck 1986).
14.
Te ‘numbering-of-document’ is represented by old-style arabic numerals to the lef
of the verso side of folios. Te material numbering, which follows the commonest system in
use among philologists to number manuscript folios, is represented by arabic numerals plus
the speciﬁers v (verso) or r (recto) enclosed within square brackets [ ] to the right of the page
area. For the sake of usability, the notes in the apparatus refer to the material numbering; the
indication of the line in which lemmas occur is provided by the numerals 1 to 4, referring,
respectively, to the ﬁrst up to the fourth line of the folio side in question.


--- PAGE 106 ---
Editorial Policies
87
{ }
enclose a series of graphemes written on fragments that have come
to be detached from the manuscript because of physical damage,
and have now been restored in their original position so as to ﬁll
the lacunae.15
A variable number of underscores _ _ indicate lacunae for which no ﬁt-
ting fragments have been found. Each one of them conjecturally indicates
the original presence of a single akṣara, or a consonantal ligature (occasion-
ally, conjectures on the identity of such graphemes have been indicated in
the apparatus). Superscript, smaller sized, letters reproduce graphemes that
have been added to the text, in all probability by the same scribe who copied
it, as suggested by the same ink tonality and calligraphic style.
Such additions consist of graphemes added below the baseline
of the script, and are usually indicated by a sign that graphi-
cally resembles a = written above the grapheme before which
Figure 1
they are to be read (ﬁg. 1); more rarely, especially in the case of single akṣaras
or C+V clusters, they are inserted without any mark (ﬁg. 2: āpan·yo°).
Figure 2
An anusvāra belonging to a string of added graphemes is writ-
ten above the baseline, in correspondence to the point where
they have to be read (ﬁg. 1: °niṃtanhireṃ,kapi°).
Letters cancelled by way of a single horizontal strikethrough reproduce gra-
phemes that were cancelled by the scribe in the way that I have seen imple-
mented in several Old Javanese manuscripts, namely by adding to each of
them both a superscript i vocalization and a subscript u vocalization, which
Figure 3
result in an uninterpretable sequence that is therefore not to be
read (ﬁg. 3: nhn). Te rare graphemes that have been cancelled
by ﬁlling them with ink or by placing a cross have also been
indicated through this convention, as well as any grapheme or sequence of
graphemes that show clear traces of elements that appear to have been (in-
tentionally) scratched away.
All the above cases have been described in the apparatus. However, the
shapes of cancelled graphemes that are recognizable with difﬁculty, such as
those that, having been scratched away, were covered by a new string of text,
I have mentioned only in the apparatus without any indication in the text.16
15.
Tese small fragments are kept in numbered plastic cases inside the manuscript box.
16.
It is ofen the case that such corrections can only be spotted by looking at the original


--- PAGE 107 ---
88
i Introduction
It is not clear at which stage such portions of text were cancelled, but they
are likely to be the result of errors that the scribe realized he had committed,
and (presumably) immediately corrected before continuing his task.
Critical
Edition
In order to retrieve the text of work, it is necessary to
establish a critical edition. Tere has been a tendency
among scholars of Old Javanese to distinguish, at least
in theory, critical editions of codices unici from critical
editions of texts based on one single or ‘best’ manuscript (cf. van der Molen
1983:10–11).17 In the section dealing with Old Javanese codices unici of his
Principles of Indonesian Philology, Robson (1988:18) quotes verbatim (and
translates) the synthetic set of basic working principles formulated by de
Haan (1973:77–78) for critically editing European Medieval codices unici.18
Tis kind of edition differs from reconstructed-critical editions (based on
more sources) insofar as it requires a distinct methodology. According to de
Haan, the critical edition based on a single manuscript ‘attempts to make an
extant source available in as pure a form as possible; is based on one man-
uscript; has no variants; errors are corrected only to the extent caused by
errors in writing; and normalization is not needed’.
Now, de Haan’s principles appear to be somewhat indeterminate and
rather unsuitable for the editing of Old Javanese single manuscripts. It is, in
fact, most of the time impossible to make an extant source accessible ‘in as
pure a form as possible’ by only correcting errors in the process of writing. To
me, the correction of trivial ﬂaws of execution undermining the meaningful-
ness of a word, or the coherence of a series of words, in a given context may
be regarded as obvious an operation as a conjectural emendation aiming at
restoring the meaningfulness and logical coherence of a series of corrupted
manuscript, being too dimly visible in the reproductions.
17.
Te latter has so far been the preferred method for editing Old Javanese texts (cf. van
der Molen 1981:8).
18.
An alternative method for editing Old Javanese texts that draws inspiration from the
practices of European Medievalists such as de Haan may be traced back to the new perspec-
tives introduced by van der Molen in his Javaanse Tekstkritiek, in which he showed that
the Archipelago sources and their study share important features and problematics with the
European Medieval ones. Old Javanese prose texts would seem to be particularly unsuitable
for the application of the method of Lachmanian stemmatics, mostly because of the high
degree of textual variation displayed by different manuscripts (belonging to different tradi-
tions) of the same text; and because of the widespread occurrence of contamination. Tese
features can be observed, besides in the prose version of the Kuñjarakarṇa, also in the West
Javanese, Central Javanese and Balinese versions of the Tattvajñāna (cf. Acri 2010).


--- PAGE 108 ---
Editorial Policies
89
words. What are the criteria to determine the difference, in terms of both
admissibility and usefulness, of a ‘cosmetic’ correction from a more signiﬁ-
cant emendation, such as for example the insertion of a whole sentence that
the editor deems to have been dropped? Tis seems to amount to the ques-
tion where the boundary between text of document and text of work lies, and
where the responsibility of the author ends and that of the scribe(s) begins.
Te fact that the evidence documenting a manuscript happens to have
been preserved only in one copy does not necessarily justify, I believe, the
limitations that editors dealing with codices unici have ofen imposed upon
themselves. Indeed it may be argued that critical editions of codices unici
and of texts documented through several manuscripts differ only with re-
gard to the amount of evidence and of the inferential process leading from
evidence to constituted text. In the latter case the editor is informed by a
certain amount of evidence preserved in different sources, whose readings
he may try to reconstruct on the basis of the textual evidence at his disposal;
in the former the editor, having no other sources but one, has to rely almost
exclusively upon his interpretive endeavour or divinatio, guided by the inter-
nal evidence found in the whole text and, when possible, by parallel passages
from closely related literature that may help him to reconstruct, or clarify,
the content—and context—of a given portion of his text.
Different genres, insofar as they are governed by different constraints,
entail the adoption of different criteria guiding the editorial work (cf. Rob-
son 1988:25). For instance, the very form in which these texts have been pre-
served, i.e. prose or verses (or both), entails different effects on their trans-
mission. Whereas in Kakavins textual problems may be detected through
irregularities in the metre, and restored accordingly,19 in prose Tuturs one
has to rely upon the ﬁxed patterns represented by the (highly formulaic) syn-
tactic patterns of philosophical texts, upon which the internal coherence of
the arguments ultimately depends.
Now, as we have seen above, the Dharma Pātañjala is a complete and
coherent speculative work, characterized by a formulaic Śāstric style. Given
these features, the ﬁrst priority of the edition had to be the retrieval of a text
which is as close as possible to the form intended by its author. However
unfashionable it may appear nowadays, I dare to speak about an author, be-
19.
Te methodological problem here is that it is ofen difﬁcult to determine whether
a suspicious syntactic construction is the result of poetic licence or ‘improvements’ that
occurred in transmission.


--- PAGE 109 ---
90
i Introduction
cause the largely innovative doctrinal standpoint presented by the text, at
least in its ﬁnal shape, is, I believe, the result of a conscious operation of
textual compilation and doctrinal synthesis made by one single person. On
the basis of my analysis of the contents of the texts, I conclude that this au-
thor, far from being a late epigone, was a learned master conversant with
a wide genre of Indic scriptures, from which he drew the doctrinal themes
important to him. Tis consideration has led me to assume that the ma-
jority of the inconsistencies, including lacunae, which are widespread in the
text, are caused not by insufﬁcient command of language(s) and doctrine by
the author, not to speak of insufﬁcient skills in composition, but rather by
lapses and mistakes that occurred during the process of subsequent repro-
ductions.20 Te occurrence of scribal inconsistencies is also observed in the
manuscripts of the related speculative Tattvas preserved on Balinese man-
uscripts, namely the Tattvajñāna and Vṛhaspatitattva, which also seem to
have suffered a heavy impact of transmission. Now, it is a matter of fact that
many Sanskrit Śaiva doctrinal texts, and especially the early Siddhāntatan-
tras characterized by a Śāstric character, such as the Kiraṇatantra and the
Parākhyatantra, have survived in most cases through badly corrupt manu-
scripts. As noted by Goodall (1998:cxx), these ‘works of śāstra are espe-
cially prone to misconstruction, not because they are inherently full of am-
biguity, but because their correct interpretation depends on the familiarity
of the reader with a corpus of related scriptural and śāstric literature’. Tis
is equally true in the case of Old Javanese texts, which have been copied by
20.
Tat the codex is the only extant evidence of a series of successive documents all lost
except for the last stage of transmission can be inferred from several facts, such as (just to
mention a few): a) the obvious misplacement of a complete sentence in folio 9, which con-
textually belongs to folio 5r; b) the not infrequent mistakes involving missing words (e.g.
items in lists) or sentences, which are indispensable to the proper unfolding of the logical
argumentation of the text; c) the presence of errors indicating a two-stage process, i.e. the
frequent miswriting of ā in akṣara-form in place of a virāma, which involves two passages
(only one allograph of the vocalization ā is graphically very similar to a virāma; cf. above,
fn. 18 and p. 72.); d) the generally dilapidated state of the ślokas and of several Sanskrit
technical terms in the text, to such a degree that ofen precludes intelligibility, while the
appropriateness of the context in which they are inserted suggests the occurrence of textual
corruptions rather than authorial ignorance of Sanskrit; e) the presence of original anno-
tations adding parts of texts that the scribe failed to copy, which are not always consistent
and therefore likely stem from the process of copying rather than composing the text; f) the
presence of inappropriate ‘scribal’ corrections of words that became (or deemed to be) cor-
rupted (e.g. sakṣaṇā →lakṣana (twice); lakṣamaṇa →lakṣaṇa, etc.).


--- PAGE 110 ---
Editorial Policies
91
scribes belonging to a milieu far removed from Indic sources, and whose fa-
miliarity with Sanskrit language and doctrines may have suffered from the
disappearance of the religious and intellectual context thriving at the time
the original texts were composed.21 Tat the majority of the scribes was ac-
tive in contexts where the practice-oriented or mystical aspects of religious
life, rather than philosophical ones, were deemed to be most important, is
suggested by the rarity of speculative Tattvas that have survived to us in com-
parison with the great number of other Tuturs from both Bali and Java. Te
very survival of the Dharma Pātañjala only through a single manuscript is,
I believe, indicative of this fact.
I have deemed standardization of spelling to be an important aspect of
the critical edition. In standardizing the spelling I have followed OJED,
and preserved different variant spellings whenever they were attested there.
I have been conservative in maintaining variant forms of certain Old Ja-
vanese words or particles, e.g. saṅke alongside sakeṅ, tan alongside tar, ni
and ri alongside niṅand riṅ(i.e. with or without the deﬁnite article),22 for
their different outward forms had no import at the level of translation. Te
same principle I have followed for the variable spellings of certain words
borrowed from Sanskrit that, being attested in a variety of other Old Ja-
vanese sources, appeared to be perfectly acceptable time-and-place-bound
idiosyncrasies throughout South and Southeast Asian traditions of writing,
such as the retention of the b in place of v (like tībrasambega instead of
tīvrasaṃvega). But there are also certain forms found in the codex that prob-
ably never existed in the practice of manuscript writing even in the South
Asian Subcontinent.23 Furthermore, I have intervened on punctuation only
in rare instances, when an emendation was necessary in order to retrieve
21.
Tough now qualiﬁed in view of the discovery of the Dharma Pātañjala and the Tat-
tvajñāna in Java, the following considerations by Pigeaud (1967:49) still deserve to be
quoted: ‘[In Java, the] people who preserved the old manuscripts did not belong to the
class of cultured ecclesiastics. […] So, as a rule, Old Javanese religious texts preserved in
Java only contain rather popular speculations, apparently of a relatively recent date, and no
learned treatises with commentaries of Sanskrit ślokas’. Notwithstanding Pigeaud’s seem-
ingly prejudicial evaluation of ‘learned treatises’ at the expenses of ‘popular speculations’,
some of the above considerations may retain a relative validity in that the author was mak-
ing them on the basis of his extensive ﬁrst-hand knowledge of Old Javanese manuscripts
and texts from both Java and Bali.
22.
Te form without article of both niṅand riṅis attested to such an extent that makes
it unlikely to be a mere scribal mistake involving the omission of anusvāra.
23.
Cf. above, pp. 62–64.


--- PAGE 111 ---
92
i Introduction
what I deemed to be the correct interpretation of a sentence. I have ev-
erywhere rendered with a comma the main punctuation mark (pada lingsa)
used in the codex.24 Te other two relatively rare special signs of punctua-
tion represented by ◉and ◆in the diplomatic edition (cf. above, p. 85) I have
reproduced as such in the critical edition too, but choosing either one or the
other when both were used simultaneously.
Since the fundamental requirement of argumentative works is the need
of internal coherence, lest the argumentation become meaningless, I have
not hesitated to make emendations whenever I felt that leaving certain pas-
sages as corrupt as they were would have undermined the meaningfulness
and coherence that according to my fundamental working hypothesis origi-
nally belonged to the text.25 Such emendations are not limited to the correc-
tion of single corrupted words, but extend to the addition of missing words
and sentences. In reconstructing certain problematic portions of the text I
have made use of internal evidence and, whenever possible, of parallel pas-
sages found in Old Javanese Tattvas and Tuturs preserved on Bali and, more
rarely, on Java. Tese parallel passages, which have been reported in the
second register of the apparatus, are ofen close enough to be of great text-
critical importance. For the emendation of lists of doctrinal elements lack-
ing one or more items or showing corruptions I have relied upon evidence
drawn from related Sanskrit sources.
I have aimed at presenting a fairly readable text in which the details of
the manuscript that are not essential to the retrieval of the text of work are
disregarded even in the critical apparatus, having been fully documented
in the diplomatic edition.26 Tus, the original numbering of the leaves and
24.
On the risk of ‘domesticating’ to an unwanted degree texts from the past by intro-
ducing modern conventions of punctuation, with the consequent loss of important infor-
mation, cf. Cerquiglini (1989:48).
25.
I fully subscribe to the statement that ‘an editor’s not challenging bad manu-
script readings can do more damage to the text than offering unsatisfactory conjectures’
(Goodall 1998:cxiv, synthesizing the views expressed earlier by Kane in defence of conjec-
tural emendation), and believe that an excessively reticent, i.e. uncritical editorial approach
ofen observed in Old Javanese studies results from an insufﬁcient distinction between the
text of work and the text of document. Cf. also Tanselle (1989:34–35): ‘Holding that the
meaning of literature emerges from a knowledge of its historical context, […] the risk is not
recognizing that artifacts may be less reliable witnesses to the past than their own imag-
inative reconstructions. […] Anyone accepting a text uncritically—without making such
decisions—is focusing not on a work but only on the text of a document’.
26.
Readability and, at the same time, faithfulness to the original writing system has de-


--- PAGE 112 ---
Editorial Policies
93
‘meaningless’ signs such as line ﬁllers have not been reproduced. Virāmas
have been also lef out, and noted in the critical apparatus (ﬁrst register from
above) with the same sign (the raised dot ·) used in the diplomatic edition
only in cases where awareness of their presence is vital for evaluating emen-
dations.
Any corrections by the copyist of the codex, such as addition or dele-
tion of akṣaras, have been incorporated in the text without editorial marks
and noted in the fourth register of the apparatus, which is also devoted to
paleographic or philological comments, with the respective sigla post corr.
(post correctionem) and ante corr. (ante correctionem). Any editorial inter-
vention, be it an emendation (em.)27 or a conjecture (conj.),28 which involves
the substantive intervention in the shape of one or more words (i.e. tran-
scends the level of spelling issues), I have treated in the same way, noting
them in the ﬁrst register of the apparatus. Additions or deletions of punc-
tuation signs or of one or more lexemes I have not noted in the apparatus
but—for the sake of an easier and more immediate recognizability of the ed-
itor’s hand—incorporated directly in the text, enclosed within the following
types of brackets:29
≤≥
enclose an estimated number of akṣaras supplied (by way of con-
jecture) to ﬁll up lacunae due to manuscript damage (i.e. detached
fragments of leaves that are now missing). Tis type of suppletion
aims at restoring portions that were originally part of the text of
document.
termined my reticence in multiplying strictly editorial signs in the text: thus, I have re-
frained from using such marks indicating the occurrence of external sandhi as â, ê or ô,
even though they are commonly found in editions of Old Javanese texts; I have also made
no use of hyphens to mark the boundaries of certain morphological elements (e.g. the par-
ticle -n) or of reduplicated forms), as well as of capital letters to indicate proper names.
27.
Tis may involve either a correction of trivial and widespread copying mistakes (such
as unwanted additions or omissions of anusvāras, rephas and other vocalic signs, or of one
or more akṣaras), or a more complex, but still fairly obvious, correction to the text.
28.
Tis represents an intervention of a more uncertain character, arrived at through a
more complex inferential process that in the case of ‘emendations’.
29.
Te ﬁrst and last type of brackets were already used by Gonda in his editions of the
Old Javanese Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa, Bhīṣmaparva and Agastyaparva; the same convention, al-
beit with minor modiﬁcations, was followed by Wiryamartana (1990:33) in his edition of
the Arjunavivāha.


--- PAGE 113 ---
94
i Introduction
< >
enclose any editorial additions to the text of work ﬁlling up what
I have judged to be important lacunae in the text, due to omission
of single words or even whole sentences, which are attributable to
mistakes in the transmission.
[ ]
enclose words or short sentences that I have deemed to be the re-
sult of scribal insertion and hence omitted from the text.
Corrupt passages, for whose restoration I am not able to offer a solution, I
have enclosed within cruxes, as follows:
†x
marks an uninterpretable sequence of akṣaras no more extensive
than a single corrupt lexeme.
† x y †
enclose a sequence of corrupt akṣaras.
†…†
indicates that one or more lexemes have been mistakenly lef out
at a certain stage from the transmitted text, an omission for which
no speciﬁc conjectural restoration is possible.
All the original readings are, of course, based on the single codex, indicated
by the siglum cod. To establish the constituted text I have also consulted the
following sources:
E
Handwritten roman transliteration of the complete text of the
Dharma Pātañjala codex by Ensink (s.d., < 1974). Unpublished.30
Te words have been divided until the ﬁrst half of the fourth line
in folio 28v (27b according to Ensink’s enumeration), afer which
the scriptio continua of the manuscript is maintained. Te spelling
has been tacitly standardized. Some emendations are suggested
throughout the text. At the end of the transliteration there are
copious notes mainly consisting in references to lexical entries in
KBNW or published editions of Old Javanese texts, but these ex-
tend only up to folio 23v of the manuscript.
30.
Now available for consultation in the Leiden Univeristy Library.


--- PAGE 114 ---
Editorial Policies
95
H
Edition and translation by Hooykaas (1974:166–170), based
on Ensink’s transliteration, of folios 47v–49v of the codex. As
stated by Hooykaas in his introduction to the edited section, the
spelling of the text has been standardized and minor emendations
tacitly introduced in the text. Conjectures appear in footnotes.
Because of the unﬁnished character of E, I have refrained from indicating
each one of its readings in the apparatus, limiting myself to the acknowl-
edgement to him of non-trivial, meaningful emendations or conjectures.31
I have also reported a conjecture by E when it happens to be different from
the one I propose, but may be taken into account as a plausible second pos-
sibility. As for H, I have noted in the apparatus only the relevant deviations
from the manuscript, ignoring differences caused by standardization. Any
non-trivial emendations have been recorded.
Treatment of
Sanskrit
Sanskrit loan-words and quotations of Sanskrit words
are prominent in the text, but ślokas are rare. As illus-
trated by the examples quoted throughout the section
on Language of the Introduction, Sanskrit loan-words,
besides displaying idiosyncratic features of spelling, have certainly suffered
corruption in the course of transmission; however, they appear to have re-
ceived a somewhat better treatment than in the other rare manuscripts of
Javanese origin known to me, where Sanskrit tends to be corrupt almost
beyond recognition.32 Tis suggests that a varying degree of faithfulness
exists among Javanese manuscripts themselves, probably depending on the
strength of scholarly tradition in the milieu where they were copied.33
On the basis of the evidence preserved solely in the codex, it is difﬁcult
to establish whether certain matters of grammar, which were evidently not
a concern for the copyist(s), were equally unimportant for the author of the
31.
Regrettably enough, in no case the transliteration has been helpful in retrieving the
original text where the manuscript is damaged, for those portions were apparently already
illegible when Ensink transliterated the text.
32.
As to the judgement of early scholars on the quality of the Sanskrit (and even of the
Old Javanese) found in the few manuscripts from Java vis-à-vis the many more manuscripts
originating from Bali, there is consensus as to the better treatment that it has enjoyed in Bali.
Although corrupt Sanskrit also characterizes many Balinese manuscripts, texts tend to have
been preserved in a reasonable shape in spite of the continuous activity of copying.
33.
On the denomination of ‘rustic script’ in connection with the milieu of composition,
cf. the corresponding index entry in Pigeaud (1970:367).


--- PAGE 115 ---
96
i Introduction
Dharma Pātañjala. We do not even know whether the portions of Sanskrit
verses were composed in the Subcontinent or in the Archipelago—that is,
whether the versiﬁcation of sūtra 1.2, 1.24 and 1.30 of the Yogasūtra into
śloka 2, 4ab and 5 of the Dharma Pātañjala occurred in Java or the author
simply drew from an already versiﬁed version of the Sanskrit text. What one
can rule out is that the Sanskrit found in the text, as well as in the majority
of Tattvas and Tuturs known to me, shares any characteristics of what has
been called Archipelago Sanskrit, a kind of hybrid language featuring a sig-
niﬁcant morphological inﬂuence from Old Javanese that is attested mostly
in Balinese Sanskrit hymns (cf. Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971:11–12).
On the contrary, as already observed by Schoterman (1979), the kind of
‘incorrect’, i.e. non-Pāṇinian, Sanskrit found in Tuturs and Tattvas is also
attested in the majority of Śaiva and Buddhist Tantric scriptures from the
Subcontinent, upon which the ancient authors from the Archipelago prob-
ably drew.34 As I have argued previously (Acri 2006:118–124, 2008:236),
I consider the possibility that a signiﬁcant part of the Sanskrit verses pre-
served in Tuturs and Tattvas were actually composed in the Subcontinent to
be very likely, also on account of the fact that speciﬁc counterparts of those
verses have been found in Sanskrit sources.35
Te non-standard forms and the words that have evidently undergone
corruption are interesting not only for the history of language but also for
the history of ideas insofar as they tell us something about the cultural mi-
lieu of the scribes who handed down the text in the Archipelago. Tat said,
34.
A treatment of the peculiarities of this kind of ‘Tantric grammar’ or Aiśa Sanskrit
may be found in Goudriaan and Schoterman (1988:44–109) and Goodall (1998:lxv–
lxxi; 2004:lxxviii–lxxxv). One must also keep in mind that the Sanskrit of most Śaiva texts
received a generally unfaithful treatment (that is, apart from its intrinsic non-Pāṇinian fea-
tures) also in manuscripts from Nepal and South India.
35.
Contrast, however, Sanderson (2009:122, fn. 280), who regards the majority of the
Sanskrit verses featured in those works as being Javanese creations. Sanderson acknowl-
edges that a few of those verses can be found in South Asian Śaiva sources, but also points
out that many among the remaining verses present deviations from strict Sanskrit usage in
a way that differs from the so-called Aiśa register of language attested in Tantric texts, es-
pecially with respect to the deviations from the correct form of the Anuṣṭubh in the second
and fourth quarters. Whereas I concur with Sanderson that the verses quoted from San-
skrit scriptures probably constitute a minority, I believe that several of the above-mentioned
metrical inconsistencies might be still due to corruptions that have occurred in the course of
transmission—not to mention the fact that the editions of Old Javanese Tuturs and Tattvas
that we have to rely upon cannot in any sense be called critical.


--- PAGE 116 ---
Editorial Policies
97
in order to retrieve the text of work I did not hesitate to emend certain forms
that too much hindered comprehension of the meaning. Tere certainly are
instances where the risk of restoring a non-authorial form by emendation
is far outweighed by the danger of not intervening, and in so doing con-
sciously keeping the intention of the author concealed. In intervening on
single words or ślokas I have tried carefully to weigh the internal evidence
provided by instances of the same words in the Old Javanese exegesis or in
other passages of the text, the external evidence provided by similar occur-
rences in other Old Javanese texts and, as a last step, compare them to similar
arguments found in Sanskrit sources.36 It goes without saying that this di-
alectic operation is bound to remain provisional until more sources, both in
Sanskrit and Old Javanese, will be documented and critically edited.
Notes on the
Translation
Te presentation of a translation running parallel to the
critically edited text aims at making the comparison be-
tween portions of the two texts, and between the philo-
logical notes on the translation and the annotations in
the critical apparatus, immediate and easy. Te italicization of single San-
skrit terms or ślokas appearing in the original text is paralleled in the trans-
lation, thereby rendering the indication within parentheses of remarkable
Sanskrit or Old Javanese words in the latter unnecessary. I have kept the
exegetical notes on the translation to a minimum, referring the reader to a
more detailed discussion of the doctrinal or interpretive issues in Part iii.
In translating the Old Javanese into English I have tried as far as possile
to be faithful to the original both on the syntactic and the semantic level,
except in those cases where a too literal translation would have resulted in
an unacceptably awkward English sentence. Yet in most cases I have tried
to maintain the ﬂavour of the Old Javanese style—which is at times exacting
or elliptical, at times pleonastic, repetitive and characterized by a frequent
use of pronouns—without trying to ‘improve’ it, even though it may sound
odd to a modern reader. Additions and clariﬁcation that I have deemed to be
vital to achieve a correct understanding of certain sentences, especially those
presenting complex arguments, I have inserted within square brackets.
36.
Objections against the practice of restoring ślokas appearing in Old Javanese texts
by comparing them to the form they assume in original Sanskrit works have been voiced
by Gonda (1932:46; 1933:viii) and Soebadio (1971:65). Although these objections are
theoretically sound, I believe they are not practically valid in each and every instance; thus,
judgement on a case by case basis is desirable.


--- PAGE 117 ---
98
i Introduction
In principle, I have tried to translate everything, retaining the original
for terms that are notoriously difﬁcult to translate as, for example, the qual-
ities of sattva ‘lightness, stillness, luminosity’, rajas ‘movement, activity’ and
tamas ‘heaviness, dullness, darkness’, etc. I have rendered certain terms dif-
ferently according to the context, without applying one and the same trans-
lation throughout the book; e.g., avak ‘body’ or ‘nature’; janma ‘human be-
ing(s)’ or ‘human birth(s)’ or ‘incarnated being(s)’ or ‘birth’; lakṣaṇa ‘charac-
teristics, features’ or ‘external/distinctive marks’. I have also allowed myself
a great liberty in the translation of ṅaran/ṅaranya: roughly corresponding,
as I have argued above (p. 27), to the Sanskrit iti, the term has been trans-
lated either as ‘is’, ‘means’, ‘what is called’, ‘so-called’, or has been avoided in
translation.


--- PAGE 118 ---
ii
Text & Translation


--- PAGE 119 ---


--- PAGE 120 ---
Facsimile Reproductions
&
Parallel Diplomatic Edition


--- PAGE 121 ---


--- PAGE 122 ---
◉◆siddirāstu, ◆, ◉saṃkumāra ikāmanaṅkil·ribhaṭāra, kālanirahana(ri)puñcakniṃgunuṃkelāsa, dad(i)sa(ṃ)kumāramamujā, maṃhanakәn·pañco
[0v]
pacāra, rihuvusniramamujā, manambhaḥtasiraribhaṭāra, rihuvusnira——manambhaḥ, maluguḥtasira, tumañākәnikaṃtatvavisesa, liṃnira, sajñ(a)
bhaṭāra, kasihanāranak·bhaṭāra, varahәnikaṃsāmyajñana, ya§——tānyanhilaṅasandeharānak·bhaṭāra, sumahurbhaṭārahayu iku(ta)
kvantanaku, ikaṃsāmyajñanaṅaranya, hevәḥkapaṅguhanya, apadumeḥyamevәha, yankvaliṅanta, tātan·vnaṃsāmyajñana, yatanhana(§)
samādi, ikaṃsamāditan·dadi ik·tan·kinavruḥhan·saṃhyaṃparamārta, āpankapaṃguḥhan·saṃhyaṃparamārtadoniṃsamādiginava
[1r]
yākәn·maṅkanaliṃbhaṭāra, sumahursakumārasajñabhaṭārakāsi——ḥhanahulun·varahәn·rilaksaṇasaṃhyaṃparamārta, maṅkanaliṃsaṃkum
āra, sumahurbhaṭāra, nihan·laksaṇāsaṃhyaṃparamātānakuka——vruhanta, ◆, acintyanislālasānti, druvamābyayamәśariṃ, āsān·suk·
smәpārisānti, śivisak·liniskāli, ◆, āpan·sirasinaṅguḥacin(tya), āpatarkavnaṃinaṅәnnaṅәn·, niskātasiratarpavak·, tanpavārṇna, ta(§)
n·baṃ, tanaputiḥ, tarkuniṃ, tanhiṛṃ, kapiladu āvarṇnadi, tanhana ikākabeḥrisa(ṃ)hya(ṃ)paramātā, tātan·knarituhapāti, tanpalvaṃta(npa)
[1v]
1
tambhәḥ, yayājugaya, nityahumidә¯, siratasukatarpahuvusa——n·, inak·tarpabaliklāra, hurip·tarpabalikpati, siratalvaḥsa
ṅkeṃrātkabeḥ, siratikakālvitarkalvaḥhan·, vibuḥtasira——, vibhuḥṅaranya, humimbhәṃratkabeḥ, ndatankaton·, siraktaḥmanon·,
tankinavruhan·, sirattamaṅavruhi, āpan·sarvvajñāsira, sirakumavruhiṃratkabeḥ, sarvvākāyyarkārttāsiragumavayikaṃratkabeḥ, a
pan·byaktinyanihan·, kitakabeḥmahurip·, molahumāmbhәk·, vruḥriṃṅabhәprayā, nihan·byaktisaṃhyaṃparāmārtha anhanarikita§
[2r]
lāvaniṃrātkabeḥ, ikaṃhidәptarisaṃhyaṃparāmart(ā), yata i——naṅәnaṅәntarirahineṃvṅi, viḥpvaṅaraniṃprajñā, samapadalaksaṇanyalā§
van·saṃhyaṃparāmartā, yatamataṃnyan·samādiṅaranikaṃina——bhyasāsaṃmahyun·risukavisesa, apan·yekāsinaṅguḥkalpasә
n·ṅaranya, hanapvekaṃsamādәrisaṃhyaṃparamārthā, yātamamkasakәn·saṅāskārariṃcitta, yatasinaṅguḥsāmyajñānaṅanya, dudusaṅke
0v.1 hana(ri)puñcak ] the i vocalization is not visible because of the loss of a fragment of the folio, replaced by a piece of wood used to restore it. It was read by E
0v.1 dad(i) ] idem as in note to 0v.1
1r.3 suk· ]
virāma represented by a dot below the k
1v.1 sa(ṃ)hya(ṃ) ] anusvāras are not very clear, the ink fading away
1v.1–2 ta(npa)-tambhәḥ] only the lower part of the cluster npa is visible, for a small piece of leaf
is missing (the one that has been attached by a restorer does not ﬁt)


--- PAGE 123 ---


--- PAGE 124 ---
mityajñāna, maṅkanaliṃbhaṭāra, sumahursakumāra, āparānikaṃmityajñānaṅaranyasajñābhaṭāra, kasihanaṅhulun·varahәniṃlaksaṇani
[2v]
2
kāṅmityajñāna, maṅkanaliṃsaṃkumāra, sumahurbaṭāra, nihan——·laksaṇānikaṃmityajñānānaku, ikaṃnāhumidәp·humādikā§
rakәn·sahiṅanitavruḥnya, makasadanāpratyaksajuga, liṃ§——nya, tuhu ikāsaṃhyaṃparāmartātanpavak·, tanpāvarṇna, āpan·
tayasira, āpabyaktānyantayāsirasaṃhyaṃparāmartā, āpantayāsaṅkantaṅuni, mityapvākitahlәm·, tayātaḥparanta, yatamataṃnyan
n·yāparāmartā, tayāpvasaṃhyaṃparārtā, yatamataṃnyantan·_ _(ā)_ā ikaṃhulaḥkabeḥ, āpan·yatayāta ikihavak·,
[3r]
ikāṃṅagavehayuṅaranya, hado ikā, syapatumo(n)——{·pala}(n)iṃgavehayu, syapasaṅkeṃsvārgga, syapapratyaksavruhiṃ§
kahyaṃṅan·, maṅkanaliṃnya, tapvan·pratyaksāvrunyariṃ§——{kahya}ṅan·, mvaṃsaṅkesvargga, yāmataṃnyanādva ikākabeḥ, ma§
ṅkanatāṃmagavehalasinaṅguḥpāpha, syapasaṅkenārakā, (s)_{byakt}āvruḥnyariṃmahārorava, mataṃnyan·pāpphaṅvaṃmagaveha
la, tapvanhanapratyaksāvruḥnyariyāmāṇi, yamataṃnyan·sa_{(m)anak}arikitahulahanta, apan·yāyahulihantarisaṃhyaṃta
[3v]
3
(y)ā, maṅkanaliṃnya, yatamataṃnyantan·pavatәsikāhu§——{laḥnya}, arokmajmur, ikaṃhalahayu iriyā, lāvanhidәpnya, i
kaṅambhәk·maṅkana, yatamityajñānaṅaranya, maṅkanaliṃbhaṭā——{ra, sum}ahursaṅkumāra, takarintuhupakṣanikāmaṅkana, sajñābhaṭāra, ma
ṅkanalisaṃkumāra, sumahubhaṭāra, yatamataṃnyan·mityajñānaṅa_ _ _(a)mbhәk·maṅkana, āpanādva ikā, byaktānyanadva ikā, tuvinta
nhana ikāṃrātkabaiḥ, yantayantakasaṃhyaṃparāmartā, mnaṃtātanahuripākitakabeḥ, yantayāsaṃhyaṃparāmartā, kato§
[4r]
n·pvekiṃhuripta, mvaṃhananikaṃrāratkabeḥ, yātapaṅavr(u)——hanantaritәntayāsaṃhyaṃparāmartā, nihan·sahursāmityajñāna
, kadisahyaṃparāmartataḥpinakahuripniṃrātkabeḥ, āpa——n·dudu ikaṃhuripavakānya, yankvaliṃṅasaṃpāra, apamataṃnyanpa
ramartāpanaṅguḥisirayatakariḥ, yan·lenasaṅkecetanā, apan·cetanāpvamulaniṃkaṃhurip·anhana, ikaṃceta
2v.3 sahiṅan ] I interpret this as the only instance where the i vocalization is rendered by two short strokes, here inserted above ha (this usage is found in other West Javanese Nipahs, e.g. the Siksa Guru, PNRI 628).
Alternatively, the sign represents indeed a sign = indicating that an i vocalization had to be inserted but was then forgotten.
3r.1 _ _(ā)_ā ] lacuna allowing space for three consonant signs; the traces of ink visible
at the upper edge of the lacuna suggest the sequence sanāyā
3r.2 svārgga ] traces of a repha above the cluster svā, deliberately scratched away
3r.4 (s)_ ] lacuna allowing space for one or two akṣaras
3v.4
ṅa_ _ _(a)mbhәk ] lacuna with space for 2 or 3 akṣaras; the traces visible at the bottom edge permit the reading ranya a given by E
4r.2 paṅavr(u)––hananta ] the shape of the u vocalization is inferred from a trace
of ink on the edge of a small lacuna


--- PAGE 125 ---


--- PAGE 126 ---
nāṅaranya, tanpalakṣaṇā ikā, tanpabhati, tuh(u)n·ma{(bo)tanā}kaso_nyasaṅkeṃparāmartā, lāvantan·sarvvajñā, ikātaṃ
[4v]
4
cetanāmaṅkana, yatekāmaṃhanakәnhurip·, tan·le——na ikāyanlenasaṅkeparāmartā, lāvannihanpatakvanaṅkvansapāra§
, ikaṃparamartāliṃta, anpakalakṣaṇatayā, cetanā——tan·pacetanakunaṃ, karisira, sumahursaṃpāra, vāhyaṅaranikātaḥ, yan·cetanāsaṃhyaṃ
parāmartā, tayāpisaniṅujugasira, aḷṅis·tanaveyāve, yātasanaṅguḥsunyaṅaranya, yātaśnaṅguḥniskalaṅaranyalisaṃpa§
ramaṅkana, ndatadeśanikaṃtayāmaṅkana, kapan·tikiṃratkabeḥtkatanhana, sumahursaṃpāra, hilaṃtkekiṃrat·dlāha, apan·tay
[5r]
āsaṅkanyaṅuni, apadumehikarat·hanavkasan·hanajuga——tanpakanimitta, hanahanatanpakaṃpūrbvākaṃguṇaveḥ, maṅkanaya
nhilaṃtanhanahamilaṃṅakәn·ya, maṅkanaliṃsaṃpāra, tama——tandadivastutanpacetanā, gumaveyāvaknyahanalāvantayā,
kadyaṅgāniṃkaṃlmaḥ, tandadi ikaṃgumaveyāvaknya, saṃapagumavehananyamvaṃhilaṃnya, yāṅkvaliṃṅasaṃpāra, bhaṭārasaṃhyaṃparāmart
āṅaraniraliṃmami, siravnaṃmaṃhilaṅakәn·maṃhanakәn·, apansiraprabhu, vna(ṃ)makeccā ikaṃratkabeḥ, siravicitran·tmәn·, vnaṃmaṃhilaṃ
[5v]
5
ṅakәnpāpalāvanlāra, nāhankadibyan·bhaṭārakinabhaktyan——·, sumahursaṃpāra, hanakapvasaṃhyaṃparāmartāliṃta, hanasira, ndā
tanpalakṣaṇā, tanpavak·, tan·katon·, tan·kaga——mәl·, tan·vnaṃinaṅәnaṅәn·, yāsinaṅguḥsuksmaṅaranya, sumahursaṃ
pāra, abyavahātañakovuvusta, sumahursaṃpārāmartāsakamakāma, tapitapilakṣaṇā, yan·kvāliṃṅasaṃpāra, katon·ta
ḥsahyaṃparāmartā, ndānkaryyanirayakaton·, ndyagavenira, nyantiryyak·lāvanikiṃaṇdabhuvaṇa, tlaskaruhun·janmamānuśa,§
[6r]
yekigavenira, sumahursaṃpāra, apāpramāṇāntasumiddakә——nikopakṣanta, āpatan·pratyakṣākaton·bhaṭāra, gumave
ikiṃaṇdabhuvaṇa, mvaṃtiryyak·lāvan·janmamānusa, ya——nkvāliṃṅasaṃpāra, nihan·śaktibhaṭāranhanekita, ndyatayanihan·
, yadumeḥkitavruhiṃheyopadeya, ikiṃsaṃdumeḥkitamaṅhidәp·, sukaduḥkariśarira, yatekājñānaśaktibhaṭāraṅara§
4v.1 tuh(u)n· ] faint trace of an u vocalization under h
4v.1 ma{(bo)tanā}kaso_nya ] upper half (up to kaso) illegible because of a lacuna
4v.3 saṃpāra ] It appears that the sign = above the sa indicates that the
(very small) anusvāra appearing below it, though originally belonging to the word kunaṃin the sentence inserted afer the preceding sign =, is to be read again with sa
4v.4 śnaṅguḥ] this may also be interpreted
as an attempt to delete the cluster śi by adding u vocalization to it
5v.1 vna(ṃ) ] ṃis legible with diﬃculty for a small piece of the leaf is missing
6r.1 lāvanikiṃ] trace of u vocalization cancelled under va


--- PAGE 127 ---


--- PAGE 128 ---
ranya, cetanāmayādumeḥnikaṃratmahuripakabeḥrāśetarihatinta, hanakarisira, tayātarisira, saṅguḥtayāvruḥlu
[6v]
6
maknaṇesira, yātikāmeḥṅaranya, nihan·sahursaṃp——āra, kadiśaktibhaṭāracetanā, āpan·papupulniṃśarira ikāmaga
vehidәp·, yatasinaṅguḥcetanāṅaranya, yanmaṃkana§——liṃṅasapāra, mapvekaṃvvaṃmatimaṅipihanasariranyatan·vikara,
apekātanpanetanā, mavāśanaṃavukajuga, nahan·byaktānikaṃmityajñānākusaṃkumāra, kevalāsalaḥpvekami§
tyajñānāsajñābhaṭāra, apādumeḥikāmaṅkana, kasihanavarahәn·rānak·bhaṭāra, maṅkanalisaṃkumāra, sumahursaṃhyaṃ, nihan
[7r]
·prastātānikāmataṃnyanmakana, jñānabhaṭārakāla ik——ā, saṃpinakāvak·bhaṭārayan·pāmralāyākәn·rat·, naha
nahan·mulanikāṃmityajñāna, yāpvanhanavikumaṅka——najñānanyadlāha, yekāpaṅavruhanantatkāmahapralāyā, ma
ṅkanaliṃbhaṭāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, apataddapayaniṃjanmayanmaṃkana, yatanyantankavavariṃmityajñānasajñābhaṭāra, kasihanava
rahәn·rānakbhaṭāra, maṅkanāliṃsaṃkumara, sumahurbhaṭāra, nihandeyanijanmayenmahyun·samyajñāna, tlukveḥnya, pratyaksāpra§
[7v]
7
māna, anumāṇāpramāṇā, agamapramaṇa, nāhansaṃpra——manātluṅaranya, pratyaksāpramaṇaṅaranya, īkaṃvastutanpara
kva, yekāpratyaksapramaṇaṅaranya, anumānapramanaṅa——ranya, hanavastutankaton·, ndanpiddahәdәpniṅvaṅiraya, apanha
nacihnapaṅavruhiraya, nāhanpadanya, kadyaṅgāniṃdeśarisabraṃ, dadihidәp·niṃṅvaṃriṃhananya, apanhanakaton·ikāvvaṃduduru
panyakadyaṅgāniṃbrahmaṇālāvan·pujut·nambhi, parasi, yatikātinonta, atavāhanaktavastukan·katon·, ridesa
[8r]
rinusakahananya, kadyaṅgāniṃmaṇik·, kasturi, kupuku——naṃ, yekābyaktānyanhananuśarisabraṃ, ikātajñānahumidә§
p·hananikā, yekānumāṇapramāṇa, agamapramāna——ṅaranya, varaḥvaraḥniṃvvaṃsaṅkedesāntara, ndānyanpacihna ikā, y
āpvantanpacihna adva ikā, yapvanhanacihna, yatasinaṅguḥagamapramāṇaṅaranya, nāhanyaṃpramāṇatluṅaranya, yatānyantan·
7r.1 kasihana ] the ﬁrst of the only three instances (cf. 28r for the other one) where the s is written without its central stroke, a variant fairly widespread in other manuscripts written in this kind of script (cf. Holle’s
Tabel p. 17)
7v.1 nihandeya ] insertion unmarked


--- PAGE 129 ---


--- PAGE 130 ---
kasaśārijñāna, tinutsaṃviku, saṃsinaṃṅguḥpaṇdita, tatan·vruhulun·rilakṣaṇanira, matanyanmaṃkanahulun·apan·bhaṭāra
[8v]
8
parāmartārakvāpinakahuripniṃratkabeḥ, lāvansaṃpaṇdita——, apamataṃnyantan·vavaṃsaṃtmājaribhaṭāra, maṅkanalisaṃkumāra, suma
hurbhaṭāra, hanaktaḥmalaṅaranya, anuṃrumakәtriatmā, yate——kātan·vavaṃhilaṃ, apanivәṃivәṃṅikāṃcittalāvanatmā, yate§
kātguḥsumaputarisarvvajñāniṅātmā, yāpvanhilaṃṅikā, niyatasaṃyogisvaran·satmājaribhaṭāra, maṅkanaliṃbhaṭāra, sumahursaṃpā
kumāra, aparanikusinaṅguḥatmaṅaranya, nditasaṅkanikāṃmala, kasihanaṅhulun·varahәn·maṅkanalisaṃkumāra, nihanpava
[9r]
rahaṃkvārikita, ikāṃsinaṅguḥatmāṅaranya, bhaṭārasaṃhyaṃ——parāmartā, sirasinaṅguḥsivaparamesaśvara, siratakaharan·na§
ditya, padāniralāvannaditya, ikānaṃcetanā, yakā——harantejanirayaraditya, luṅhāpvatejasaṃhyaṃaditya, lumrari
daśadesa, maṅkanatekāṃcetanā, apansavibhuḥbhaṭārahumibkәṃrātkabeḥ, hanatamayātatvaṅaranya, suksmāpadālitnya§
lavan·śivatatva, ṇdānacetanākasornyasaṅkeṃṣivatatva, deṣanya isorṣaṅkeṃṣivatatva, yekatambhaynimamuvus·
[9v]
9
tatvamaganal·, isornikā, hanatakalatatvaṅara——nya, isornikāṃkalatatva, hanataragatatva, isorniragata
tva, hanatavidyatatva, isornividyatatva, hanata i——sverniṃpradaṇatatva, isorniṃpradanatatva, hanatatrigunata
tva, hisorniṃtriguṇatatva, hanatabudditatva, isornibudditatva, hanatahiṃkeratatva, isorniṃahәṅkoratatva, §
hanatamanaḥtatva, isornimanaḥtatva, hanatadasend(r)iyātatva, isorniṃdasendriyātatva, hanatapañcatanmatrata
[10r]
tva, isorniṃpañcatanmatratatva, hanata ākāsata(tva)——, isorniṃakasātatva, hanatabayūtatva, isornibāyu
tatva, hanatatejatatva, isorniṃtejatatva, ha——nata āpyatatva, isorniṃapyatatva, hanataprativitatva, ye
kavkasniṃmamuvus·tatva, maganal·, ikatakabaiḥ, yabinyapakan·saṃhyaṃatmā, astābhaṭāraparamakāraṇa, yamatanyan·§
8v.4 pā ] here the scribe started to write pāra but then shifed to kumāra on the next folio; I interpret the insertion of u vocalization as intended to cancel the ligature pā (normally one would expect a cancellation to
be eﬀected by combining an u vocalization with an i vocalization, but the ā vocalization leaves no space for the latter sign)
10r.1 dasend(r)iyā ] the r of the cluster ndri is only partly visible because of damage at the
binding hole
10r.2 ākāsata(tva) ] tva only partially readable because of damage at the binding hole


--- PAGE 131 ---


--- PAGE 132 ---
vibuḥṣaktibhaṭāravaneḥndan·lakṣāṇanikaṃsaṃhyaṃṅatma, an·byapaka irikaṃtatvasamaṅkana, uttaprokta, uttaṅaranya, kadyaṅgāniṃmi§
[10v]
0*
ñak·haneṃpәhāna, maṅkanalakṣaṇasaṃhyaṃatmā an·bya——paka irikaṃtatvakabeḥ, proktaṅaranya, kadyaṅgāniṃtuṃtuniṃmanik
·maṃekādeṣa, maṅkanalvirnikaṃatmā anhaneṃratkabaiḥ, i——kaṃatmāproktayatekācaritantānaku, prayatnātakitarumә
ṅәvaraḥvaraḥku, ikāṃatmātatva, sarvvajñāsarvvakayyarka(r)tt(ā) pinakaṣaktinikā, vibhuḥpvayarikāmayātatva, hilaṃtaṣaktinikaṃ
atmavkasan·, marisarvvajñā, marisarvvakāryyakāttā, apan·mālāsvarbhavanikāṃmāya, rumakәt·pvekāṃmalāriṅatmā, yatamataṃ
[11r]
nyan·mapuguṃsvabhāvanya, tuhun·cetanāmātrājuga(ya)——, vibhuḥpvayarikāṃkalatatva, mapalenantāyalavan·bavanya, ka
dyaṅganiṃyānakniṃtavvan·anhanariṃsalyaṃ, maṅkanatekāṅ——ātmā anpapalenan·saṅkeṃbavaṃnya, makasarira ikaṃkalatatva
, byapakapvayariṃkārāgatatva, mahyuntayamañetannā, byapakapvarikāṃvidyatatva, manontayaviṣayavkasan·, apanikāṃvi
dyatatvapinakasuluḥnya, yamataṃnyanpanonviṣaya, ndyavisayatinonya, yekāpradāṇatatva, lakṣanānikaṃpradanāta
[11v]
11
tva, ptaṃtanpacetanālupapinakajatinya, yatekāpi——napaṅguḥhakәn·debhaṭāra, cetanāṅaranya, tutur, pradānaṅara§
nya, lupa,tuturmatәmulāvan·lupa, yatekāmaṅhana——kәn·triguna, satvarājatamaḥ, lakṣaṇanisatva, prajñāmahaṅa
n·, lakṣaṇaniṃrājaḥ, adras·molaḥ, lakṣaṇaniṃtamaḥ, abyәtapuguṃkahanān·lvirnitrigunatatva, saṅkāritriguṇamtu
tāṃbuddi, lakṣaṇanya, ndabhāyadārśanāṅaranya, tanpacetanā ikāṃbuddi, ndan·kāmacetanāya, kāmacetanāṅaranya,,
[12r]
tan·vruḥikaṃbuddi, ndankadivruya, tanpahidәp·ikaṃbu——ddi, ndankadimaṃhidәp·ya, apan·mtusaṅketatvarvatatvārvaṅaranya, a§
tmālāvan·pradāna, saṅkebuddimtutahәṅkāra, lakṣaṇanya——lāvanmaṅaku, ndan·lakṣaṇaniṅahәṅkāraya, ṅaranyatlu, sivekra§
tā, sitejasa, sibhutādә, ikāṃṅahәṅkārasivekratā, yatekāsatvasvarbhavanya, ikāṃṅahәṅkārasibhutāditamaḥsvabhavanya
10v 0* ] Instead of the expected 10, only a 0 has been written here (by mistake?)
10v.4 sarvvakayyarka(r)tt(ā) ] because of damage below the binding hole, only the lef tip of the third repha is visible, and the
brace of the ā is only partly visible above the cluster tt
11r.2 (ya)––, ] only the ﬁrst half of the akṣara is visible
11r.2 bavanya ] the ba is written in a way that seems middling between normal ba and normal o
11r.3 bavaṃnya ] the ba is written in a way that seems middling between normal ba and normal o
11r.4 byapakapvayariṃkārāga ] the cluster bya is written in a slightly unusual manner, and this fact is probably
connected with the unusual shape of ba twice elsewhere on this folio
11r.4 manontaya ] faint traces of a cancelled virāma are visible behind ya (this can be seen only in the original)
12r.1 ,, ] a double pada
lingsa ﬁlls the extra space at the end of the line


--- PAGE 133 ---


--- PAGE 134 ---
, nāhan·lakṣaṇaniṅāhәṅkāra, anmijilsaṃṅkobuddi, tluprakāranya, ikāṃahәṅkārasivekratā, yekāsaṅkaniṃmanaḥmtul
[12v]
12
āvan·daṣondrayā, dāṣondrayāṅaranya, śrota, tvak——·, caksuḥ, jihvā, ghraṇa, vak·, pāṇi, payu, upasta, padānāha
n·kveḥninirindriyāsapuluḥ, savkas·lāvanamanaḥ, la——kṣaṇaniṃmanaḥmamikalpa, sumahusaṃkumāra, takarintuṅgal·i
kaṃmanaḥlāvan·buddilavan·hәṅkāra, sajñābhaṭāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, dudu ikā, āpan·lakṣaṇanyatanpada, byaktānyantanpa
da, yan·kvaliṅanta, nihanikāṃbuddi adyavasayalakṣaṇanya, andyavasayaṅaranya, vruḥniṅahalalāvanāhayu, lāvanniscayata
[13r]
ya, ikāṅāhәṅkārayekāmagavehurip·, lāvan·——prayatnāmaṅakujñānanya, kunaṃikaṃmanaḥmamikalpagavenya
, liṃnya, kapanakuṃnapapaṅguhalalāvankahyunku, mvaṃsyapama——paṅguḥhaknāku, apakaranaṅkvākunaṃ, ndideṣakapaṅgūhanaṃkvā, n
āhan·lakṣaṇaniṃkāmanaḥanpamikalpa, lāvan·umahastayāriṃdasadesa, nāhanpapalenānimanaḥsakeṃahәṃkāra
lāvanbhuddi, ikāṃtakatlu, yatekācinetanāsaṃhyaṃṅātmā, anәhәrpinakasadānanpanpagrahitāvisaya, ikāṃsro
[13v]
13
tendrayā, ayahaneṃtaliṅa, ikāṃtvakindrayā, yaha——neṃkulit·, ikāṃcaksuḥindriya, yahaneṃmata, ikāṃjihva
ndriyāyahaneṃilat·, ikāṃghraneṃndriyāyahaneṃ——hiruṃ, nāhanthaṃpañcabuddindriyāṅaranya, ridenyanpakasahayabu
ddinpaṃgrahit· vāstuvisaya, pañcakāmendriyāṅaranya, ikāṃvaki,ḥndriyāyahaneṃtutuk·, ikāṃpahәndriyāyahaneṃtaṅa
n·, ikāṃpadendriyāyahaneṃsuku, ikāṃpāhvindriyāyahaneṃḷt·, ikāṃupāstendriyāyahaneṃbhagapurusa, nāha
[14r]
ntaṃpañcakāmendriyāṅaranya, mataṃnyan·kammendriyā——ṅaranya, apan·makapurvvāvekāmmenimittaniṃatmānpaṃgrahit·vi
saya ikā, ikākatakabeḥ, yatan·dāsendriy——āṅaranya, tumambhәḥpvekāṃahәṅkāralāvan·manaḥ, yatasinaṅguḥ
trayodāsakaranaṅaranya, yatasadānaniṃṅātmanpaṃgrahit·visaya ikā, kāryyanikāṅāhәṅkārasivekratā ikāka
12v.2 caksuḥ] traces of a sign, probably an i vocalization, deliberately scratched away above the akṣara ca
14r.2 pañcakāmendriyā ] the i vocalization of endriyā is represented by the small loop at the end of the
subscript r


--- PAGE 135 ---


--- PAGE 136 ---
beḥ, huvus·ikāta, nihantagavenikā ahәṅkārasibutādi, hanapañcatanmatrāṅaranya, sabdatanmatra, sparsatanmatra, ru
[14v]
14
patanmatra, rāsatanmatra, gandatanmātrā, nahanthaṃpañcata——nmatrāṅaranya, amijilsaṅke ahәṅkārasibhutadi, ikāṅāhәṅkāra
sitejasa, yekātumulusivekratālāvan·sibhu§——tādә, anpagavekaryya, nihanlakṣananikaṃṣabdatanmātrā, tutu
pītaliṅantā, haneṃkāṣabdakaṛṅә¯, yātekāsabdatanmatraṅaranya, sparsatanmatraṅaranya, hanābāyumadras·kahidә
p·denta, huvus·pvekāṃbāyumirirākahidәp·tatisnyarikulit·, yātekāsparṣatanmatraṅaranya, nihantaṃrupatanma
[15r]
traṅaranya, ṣampunsumurup·saṃhyaṃaditya, hanateja——nirakavkasāturu, yatekārupatanmatraṅaranya, rasātanmatra
, ṅa, kādyaṅgāniṅvaṃmamaṅan·rāsamamanismapahit·, hu——vuspvayāhintā, hanatarāsanyakavkas·riṃtutuk·, yatek
ārāsatanmatraṅaranya, nihanthaṃgandatanmatraṅaranya, kadyaṅgāniṃhasәpcandanā, agarūkunaṃ, huvus·luṅhākukusnya, kavkasthaṃ
gandariya, yatekāgandatanmatrāṅaranya, nahantaṃpañcatanmatraṅaranya, saṅkepañcatanmatra, mtutapañcamahabuta
[15v]
15
, nihan·kramanya, ikāsabdatanmatrāpamtvākәn·k——āṣa, guṇanyaṣabda, lakṣaṇanyamagave ugvan·, sakeṃspa
rṣatanmatra, mtutābāyu, lakṣaṇanyamaṅulahakәn·——, guṇanyasparṣa, sakeṃrupātanmatra, mtutāṃteja, lakṣana
nyaprakāṣapanas·, guṇanyarupa, sakeṃrāśatanmatrā, mtutaṃapaḥ, lakṣaṇanyamlas·, gunanyarāṣa, namāprakāra
niṃrāṣanmis·, apāhit·, apadәs·, aspәt·, ahisәm·, ahasin·, yekāṣadrāsaṅaranya, saṅkegandatanmatrā,
[16r]
mtutāṃprativi, lakṣaṇanya, maganal·makakaya, gu——nanyaganda, nahanlakṣaṇanikāṃpañcamahabutākavruhanā, ku
naṃikāmaraṅkәpana ikāṃvaneḥ, apāni ikāṃsorāyākabyapaka——n·denikoṃṅiruhur·, ikāṅākasamvaṃgvaruhur·, tumutta
nāyāmataṃnyan·rvaguṇanya, sabda, sparṣa, ikābāyumvaṃakāṣabyapakariṃteja, mataṃnyan·tluguṇaniṃteja, sabda, sparṣa, ru
15r.2 kavkasāturu ] the ā seems to have been previously written as a virāma, whose bottom-right loop has been scratched away
15v.4 gunanyarāṣa ] the ṣa has been obtained by closing with a stroke the bottom
part of a sa, as can be inferred from its wider than usual shape and from the serif in the bottom-lef
16r.4 nāyāmataṃnyan· ] the anusvāra above the yā must be read as if attached to the ta added just below (this
might have happened due to lack of space
16r.4 bāyu ] a stroke below the bā has been scratched away (if not, the akṣara would have been i
16r.4 mataṃnyan· ] here two attempts at writing anusvāra are found
in immediate succession, the ﬁrst one seemingly abandoned because it was too close to an u vocalization in the line above


--- PAGE 137 ---


--- PAGE 138 ---
pa, ikāṃtejalāvan·bhayu akāṣa, byapakariṅāpaḥ, mataṃnyanpat·guṇaniṃapaḥ, ṣabda, sparṣa, rupa, rāṣa, ikāṃtaṃāpaḥ, the
[16v]
16
ja, bhāyu, ākasā, byapakariṃprativi, mataṃnyan·lima§——guṇaniṃprativi, sabda, sparṣa,rupa, rāṣa, ganda, nāhan·lakṣaṇāniṃk
ānpavorguṇa ikāṃpañcamahābhutā, yataginavebha——ṭārabhuvaṇa, āgәṅākasāmiṇduhur·, yatasinaṅguḥāṇdabhuvaṇa
ṅaranya, devamānuṣatiryyak·, nāhanpinakesiniṅaṇdābhuvaṇa, ikāṃiruhursatyalokā, ikāṃṅisor, yakā§
mahālvekā, isorniṃmahālokā, tapvālvekā, isorniṃtapaulvakā, janalvāka, isvarniṃjanalvekā, svaḥlve
[17r]
ka, isorniṃsvaḥloka, bhuvaḥloka, isorniṃbhu——vaḥlveka, yekitahanantānaku, riṃbhuḥloka, ṅaranyikә,
saptādv(i)pa, saptāvarṇnava, isorniṃbhuḥlvāka, yatek——āsaptapatalaṅaranya, patuṅgal·tuṅgal·niṅaranyanāhan·pa
ṅavruhana, āpātāla, hana isornikā, vetala, nitāla, netāla, gabhastitāla, vāratāla, rāṣatāla, nahan·pa
tiṅ(k)aḥnikāṃpātala, isornikā, yekāmahānāraka, kveḥnikāyekatlupuluḥrvapatapnya, mahārorava, isor
[17v]
17
niṃmahānāraka, yekitimirāgarndama, tan·vāptaṃkatu§——nanteja, isornikāṃtәmiragarddama, yateṅgvan·saṃhyaṃkā§
larudrāgni, āpvadumilaḥsadākala, isornikāṃkuli——tniṃaṇdabhuvaṇa, kumaluṃisor iruhur iriṅan·, isorniṃ
kulitniṃaṇdabhuvaṇa, yatuṅgvan·saṃhyaṃsatarudrākumuliliṃikeṃaṇdabhuvaṇa, ikeṃkahanantayātāpatimbhuniani
tatvakabeḥ, ndan·lakṣaṇaniṃkāṃtatvahanaṅke, kapva umyāpakerikaṃtatvamaganāl·saṅkeṃriya, nihan·krama§
[18r]
nya, bhaṭāramahulun·, byapakarikaṃatmā, iykāṃṅātm——ābyapakarimaya, ikāṃmayābyapakaripradāna, ikaṃpradā
nabyapakariṃbudditatva, ikāṃbhudditatva, byapakariṅa——hәṅkāra, ikāṃahәṅkāra, byapakarimanaḥ, ikāṃmanaḥ, bya§
pakariṃdasendriyā, ikāṃdāsendriyābyapakariṃpañcatanmatrā, ikāṃpañcatanmatra, byapakaripañcamahābhuta, na
17r.1 tapaulvakā ] the reading au is uncertain, as the ā could perhaps be interpreted as a mistake, in which case read tapo[ā]lvakā
17r.2 yeki ] this could be also read yekā
17r.3 saptādvi(i)pa ] e vocalization
faded away but still discernible
17r.4 rāṣatāla ] the ṣa has been obtained by closing with a stroke the bottom part of a sa, as can be inferred from its woder than usual shape and from the serif in the bottom-lef
17v.3 ruhur ] traces of cancelled akṣaras above the sequence
17v.4 patimbhunia ] trace of an i vocalization scratched away above na
18r.2 iykāṃṅātm–– ] a subscript y appears to have been scratched away
between the akṣara i and the cluster kāṃ


--- PAGE 139 ---


--- PAGE 140 ---
han·lvirnya, yatamataṃnyanpinakapatimbhunāniṃtatvakabeḥ, ikāṃbhuḥlokakahanāntamaṅke, huvusmaṃkana, iṅәtiṅәtmu
[18v]
18
laniṃcarita, prastāvānikāṃcetanāsaṃpara, dumeḥsaṃ§——yogiṣvaratanvaṃvaṃsiddi, ikāṃatmajnәk·mañetanā, makanimi
ttāmala, yādumeḥyatan·vruharijātinya, mahyun·§——pvabhaṭāravraharijatinira, yamataṃṅyan·vehyamavaka, huvusnya
nmavak·, mabedatayarva, lakilakilāvanānakbhi, yatekāmamuktisadrāṣa, sadrāṣaṅaranya, amanis·, āpahit·,
aṣapәt·, ahasin·, ahāsәm·, hapadә¯ṣ·, yekāṣadrāṣaṅaranya, yatapinaṅanya ininumnya, matmahan·sukrariṃṅana
[19r]
k·laki, sonitāniṅanakbhi, ikaṃtaṃsutraṣoni——tāpinapaṅguhakәniralāvanikāṃkama, ikaṃsutrasonit
āhanarigarbhāvāśa, yatamavija, yanākveḥhikāṃsu§——trasaṅkeṃsonita, yekādadilanāṃ, yapvanākveḥikāṃ
sonitāsaṅkeṃsutra, yekādadivadvan·, yapvan·padakveḥnya, yatādadikdi, valavadi, ikāṃsutrayadaditahulan·, otva
tsumsum·, ikāṃsonitāyadadiraḥdagiṃpuhun·vulu, yasinaṅguḥsaṅkeṃṇaṅaranya, salviniṃmakasutrasonitāya, ma
[19v]
19
ṅkanalvinījanma, yan·devatā, yanmānuṣa, yanpāsu, ya——npākṣi, sarisrapa, sthāvara, maṅkanātaḥtitaḥnyankatonmamaṅun
·ṣarira, ikaṃṣabdatanmatrāyadaditaliṅa, ikaṃsparṣata——nmatra, yakadadikulit·, ikāṃrupatanmatrayatadadimatā,
ikāṃrasatanmatra, yekādadi ilat·, ikāṃgandatanmatrayadadi iruṃ, yatekāpānaka ugvāniṅindriyā, sumahursaṃkuma§
rā, tan·karinikāṃgolakasinaṅguḥindriyāsājñābhaṭāra, maṅkanalisaṃkumāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, dudutekaṃgolakasaṅkeṃ
[20r]
ṅindriyā, aganāl·ikāṃgolakā, ikaṃindriyāsu——ksma ika, nahan·lakṣaṇānyandudu, tahapiḥtuṅgal·ikā i
ndrayālāvān·golaka, yankānaliṅantha, mapekaṃmatu——rutanpaṃgrahit·visayā apanhanamātanyatanpanon·, ha
nataliṅanyatanpaṃṛṅә, mataṅanmasukumateruṃ, yamataṃnyansavisayariṃsuksmā, apanikaṃmanaḥyatinutniṃindriya, naha
19v.1 sonitā ] from the position of the n and the i vocalization, respectively below and above the ā that is part of the cluster so, is clear that the resulting cluster ni counts as an (unmarked) addition to sotā
19v.2
pākṣi ] the ṣin kṣ, normally a special ligature, is here written in a diﬀerent way, more similar to its akṣara form


--- PAGE 141 ---


--- PAGE 142 ---
n·byaktānyandudu ikaṃindriyāsaṅkegolaka, sumahursaṃkumarā, apadumeḥikāṃmaturumataguḥhurip·npasajñābhaṭā
[20v]
20
ra, apanhilaṃtuturnya, kevalalupajugasvabhāvaniṃtu——ru, maṅkanaliṃsaṃkumarā, sumahurbhaṭāra, ikaṃpañcabāyuyek
ānuṃpinakāhurip·, apan·ya ikamamāṅunsarira, niha——n·kramanya, hananāpiṅaranya, otvatniṣarira, hanahagәṃhanadmә
t·, buṅkaḥluḥnyarihәyәḥhәyәḥhan·, miṇduhurtkaripusәr, mapātayamareṃsuku, hanamareṃvalakaṃhanamareṃtaṃṅan·, hana§
miṇduhurmareṃguruṃguruṃṅan·tluprakārani(ṃ)guruṃguruṃṅan·, idāṅaranikaṃitṅan·, yekādalaniskul·, piṅgāla ikaṃikiva
[21r]
n·yekahavān·nivvaṃ, suṣumnә ikaṃitṅaḥ, yekāha——vānibayu, nāhan·lakṣaṇānikanpinakaguruṃguruṃṅan·, han
ātāpaṃnyavaneḥmiṇduhurtkarimata, lāvaniṃtaliṅa, ikaṃ——dudugāteruhurmiṇduhur, yetātkarivuvunan·, yasinaṅguḥsi§
vadvāraṅaranya, yekātumuluy·tkeṃgәgәrivalakaṃ, ikāṃnādә¯malitākabeḥ, yekāmamnuhәṃkulit·manuvuhakәn·
vulu, nāhan·lvirnikānabiriṃṣarira, ikaṃtaṃnabikabeḥ, yekāpinakoṅgvānipañcabāyuṅaranya, ridadinyan·limaga
[21v]
21
venya, (ma)taṃnyan·limakveḥniṃbāyu, nihan·ṅaranya,——praṇā, apāṇā, samāṇa, udāna, byana, mataṃnyan·udәgi i
kaṃpañcabāyukabeḥprayatnarumәgәp·gavenya, mvaṃ§——pinakosvaṣagavenyavaneḥ, uṅgvānikaridadā, rihiruṃhiṅa§
nya iruhurn·, ikaṃbāyusiyāpāṇa, yekamuṃgurisilit·, ripusәrhiṅanyavaneḥ, iruhun·, humisortkeṃsuku
, gavenya asorākәnpinaṅan·, matmahantahi, ika(ṃ) ininum·matmahannәyәḥ, nīhangavenikaṃbāyusiyapāna, ni
[22r]
hangavenikaṃbāyusiṣamana, yekahanarihati, ga——venya umaṣa irikāṃpinaṅaninum·, risarvvasandikabeḥ, sari
nikaṃpinaṅan·vineḥnyamātmahanāhampru, sarinikaṃ——ininum·, yavinenyamatmahanaraḥ, sarinikāṃinambhuṃvineḥ
nyamatmahanāṛhak·, nāhangavenikaṃbāyusiṣamāna, nihan·gavenyakaṃbāyusi udāna, sakveḥnibyapāramiṇdu
21v.4 pusәrhiṅanya ] the repha of pusәr has been written at the top between the ligatures sә and hi (rather than above the former) because of lack of space


--- PAGE 143 ---


--- PAGE 144 ---
hur·, miṅdapākәn·mātalāvanaṅlupiñnag·gavenya, ikaṃbāyusibyanā, yekamuṅgvāṃsarvvasandikabaiḥ, gavenyaye§
[22v]
22
kāmavamahātuha, lāvanmaṃhilaṃṅakәn·hinakāmbhәk——·, nahan·bedanigavenibāyu, yamatanyanpañcabhāyupa§
naṅguḥsaṃpandita, hanatapratyakṣanyavaneḥṅaranya, nag——ā, kummara, kraktāra, devadattha, danañjaya, ikaṃbāyusinagā
hekamatyәb·, sikummarā, yekamaṃgavektәg·ktәg·ri avakkabeḥ, sikraktarayekamaṃgavevahin·, sidevada
ttayekamaṅvab·, sidanañjayayekamaṣabda, lāvantan·hilaṃikasaṃkeṃṣarira, yan·tkaṃpāti, yekamaṅheriva
[23r]
ṅkay·, nahanlakṣaṇānikaṃbhayu anpinakahurip·, ya——dumeḥikaṃmaturutanmāti, apanikaṃbhāyutomolaḥci
netanāniṅātma, yapvan·māri ikaṃatmacumetaneṃ——ya, ikāṃbhāyuyānmaṃkanā, yasinaṅguḥmātiṅaranya, len·sa
ṅkeṃrika, ikānaphikahanānikaṃbhāyukunaṃvikārā, mati ataḥṅaranya, kadyaṅgāniṃpinrāṃrinacun·, atavātibraniṃlara
kunaṃ, nimittanināphivikāra, yanimittaniṃpātivaneḥ, sumahursaṃkumāra, apadumeḥniṃānmārinumetanerikaṃbāyusajñābhaṭā
[23v]
23
ra, lāvanāpadumeḥniṃkalaratka, sumahurbhaṭāra, nihan·§——prastāvānikaṃatma anmāricumetanekabhāyu, hanadarmmādarmmaṅa
ranya, darmmaṅaranikaṃgavehayu, adarmmaṅaranikaṃgavehal——ā ikaṃtaṃdarmmadarmma, yatekaṃginaveniṃjanma, yatekāmapāla,
yanāgәṃgavenyahalasaṅkeṃgavehayu, yanimittanyanpaṃhidәplara, yapvan·agәṃikaṃagavehayusaṅkegavehala, ya
nimittanyanpagavesuka, yapvan·padāgavenyahalamvaṃhayu, yahetunikaṃsukādukānkapaṅgiḥdeniṃjanma, sdaṃpvayāmamukti
[24r]
kārmmapala, sumambhitayamamāṅun·karmmapalamuvaḥapan·——gavehayusatartālvinikāṃkārmmapala, hanatakarmmamnegina
vesadananya, mnekabhuktipalanya, hanatakarmmapalama——ṅkeginavesadānanya, hlam·rijanmasovaḥyankabhuktipalanya, ā
pabyaktinyanihan·, kadyaṅgāniṃmaṣavaḥ, vadvā, masāmbhevāra, pāripalaniṃmasavaḥ, dmak·palanivadvā, tvas·palanisāmbhevāra, na
22v.3 pratyakṣanya ] a cross is written above the kṣa, probably to indicate a mistake, to be omitted from the reading
24r.3–4 ā-pa ] the two elements forming the akṣara ā are split between the end of line 3 and
the beginning of line 4


--- PAGE 145 ---


--- PAGE 146 ---
ha(n·)byaktinikaṃkarmmapalamne, ndyakarmmapalahlam·palanya, hanakarmmaginavemaṅkendatan·vnaṃmaveḥpalamaṅke, apa
[24v]
24
dumeḥyanmaṃkana, tan·vnaṃmaveṃpalamaṅke, āpanna——kveḥinapekṣanya, yatekamapaṇijanmasovaḥ, ikaṃka
bhuktimaṅke, yekapalanikākarmmaṅuni, rijanmantara, §——ikāṃpalabinuktimaṅke, yatekāhintabhinuktimaṅke, yanm
āhala, yanmahayu, padekahәntapalanyakabeḥ, yatahetuniṃatmāmāricumetavanākaṃbhāyurisarira, padānya
kadyaṅgāniṃapvaymanundikayu, yapvanhәnti ikaṃkayu, pjaḥprativiyatanikaṅāpvay·, maṅkanatekā atmā, anpalaniṃdā(r)mma
[25r]
darmmayamamaṅun·ṣarira, lavānurip·, hintipva ikāṃka§——rmmaphala, yatahetuniṃpāti apantanhanabhinuktiniṃatma, ni
han·sahursaṃpāra, kadikarmmapalaktaḥmamāṅunhurip·——, mvaṃtanikāhetuniṃsukadūkabhinuktideniṃjanma, mataṃnyanmaṃ
kana, apantan·katonīṃkaṃkarmmapalariṃjanma, yamatanyantanhanākarmmapalaṅaranya, apantan·byaktaya, yankaliṅasaṃp
āra, (ya)donikaṃpramāṇatlupinintonākәn·ṅuniparvvākapratyaksapramāṇa, anumānapramāna, agamāpramāṇa, i§
[25v]
25
kāṃaganal·, yakaṃvnaṃdenikaṃpratyaksapramāṇa——, ikaṃsuksmayakavnaṃdeniṃanumanāpramāṇa, kadyaṅgāniṃ§
kovuvusaṃpāra, anumāṇāpraniddā irikāṃkarmmapalā——nābhinuktideniṃjanma, sumahursaṃpara, tan·byaktāṅaranika§
taḥ, āpantan·vārttamānāriratkabaiḥ, āpan·pratyaksapramāṇajugarikami, yan·kvaliṅasaṃpāra, nihansaṃhyaṃṅāditya
, vārttamanākatondeniṃratkabeḥ, samtuviṅikarisiramtumaṅke, atavādudukunaṃ, yāpvan·dudusamtuviṅilāvan·samtumaṅke
[26r]
, āpapvayanmaṅkemaṅke, tanpapalenan·pvarupanira, āpa——nivәṅivәrupaniranālitāniratuvipada, lāvanpadāpanasnira, te
janira, sumahursaṃpāra, tuṅgāl·ktasaṃhyaṃaditya, samtuvә——ṅi, siramtumaṅke, yanmaṃkanaliṅasaṃpāra, nditahan·niramaṅa§
vetan·, āpansumurup·kulvensiravṅi, sumahursaṃpāra, sumurupīsorīlmaḥ, havānirayanmālvayāmaṅavetan·, yanmaṃ§
24v.2–3 ka-bhu ] traces of cancelled akṣaras beneath the sequence split between line 2 and 3
24v.3 hintabhinukti ] trace of a cancelled u vocalization below the cluster bhi
25v.1 pratyaksapramāṇa ] the ksa
is written irregularly, with a closed loop at the bottom-right (perhaps the result of hesitation between ksa and kṣa)
25v.2 kaṃvnaṃ] traces of a anusvāra scratched away above ka


--- PAGE 147 ---


--- PAGE 148 ---
kanaliṅasaṃpāra, nditakitanton·siramaluy·ṅavetan·, lumaku isorīṃlmaḥ, yātikāṅajarākәntan·tinonyaṅa
[26v]
26
ranya, advakitānyakamramāṇāpratyaksajuga, apānka——n·katonsaṃhyaṃṅāditya, maluyaṅāvetan·, maṅkanapvaya§
, yamataṃnyanhanapramāṇāṅaranya, anuprasiddārikahi——dәpanikaṃvastututuhutuhu, huvus·rumuhunikāṃsuksmā, i
keṃpva ikāṃkarmmapala, atyantasuksmanya, yatamataṃnyan·anumānāpramāṇapaniddāntarihananya, apan·byaktānyanhana, ni§
han·kasukadukakapāṅguḥdenijanma, lāvan·rapanyatanpada, hanaratu, hanavadvā uma, hanasugihanadukahanavaras·,
[27r]
hanalara, nihantaṃtiryyak·, magәṃmadmit·, kanisṭamādya——mottama, karmmapalanimittanikaṃkabeḥ, sumahursaṃpāra, n
ohan·vvaganikātaḥ, lāvanijenmatanpāda, kahadaṃṅa——daṃjugakātaḥ, yankvāliṅaṣaṃpāra, dadyan·kupvāṃmamaṅantan·kneṃ
vaṛg·, ikaṃtanpamaṅan·yāvaṛg·, yanpikahadaṅadaṃyāpaksakna, lavaṇtaṃvijatinanim·, kadyaṅgāniṃparipinaka§
viniḥ, kahadaṅādaṃpvekanpavvahajāhli, jahlitinānәmākahadaṅādaṃpvekānpavvahapāri, maṅkanahamṅānikāṃratkabeḥ, yan·sika
[27v]
27
hadaṅādaṃpaksakna, yāpvan·sinohan·sivvaganpakṣa——kna, dadyaṃvaṣtutanpakanimittayanmaṃkana, kadyaṅtāniṃkdi amtiṅā
nakānaka, kadyaṅgāniṃmamәḥsusuvtuhitahi, maṅkāna——hamṅānikaṃratkabeḥ, yan·sinohan·sivvagan·paksakna
, yapvandadivastumaṅkana, yāmataṃnyan·tanhogyapaksankasaṃpāra, āpadumeḥikāṃjanmagumave ikādarmmadarmmasajñābhaṭā
ra, kasihanavarahәn·rānakbhaṭāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, nihan·kavruhanantanaku, prastavānikāṃdarmmadarmma, kadadideniṃjanma, enak·vepahidәpnīkāṃṅātmārivisaya
, atguḥpasāmbhaddānyalāvanikaṃsarira, yatekāsukaliṃnya, yamata——nyanpametṣuka, ikāṃsukasadāna, yātaginra, hitaniṃbuddi ikaṃbuddiyātama
[28r]
nakājñana, ikāṃjñana, yātamavrattilimaṃpuluḥkveḥnya, ikaṃvratti——limaṃpuluḥyatekāmanatakveḥtankavnaṃvinilaṃ, yamataṃnya akveḥprabeda
niṃjanma, akveḥtakāhyun·, akveḥtalāranya, akveḥtasukanya, vrattinikāṃbuddilimaṃpuluḥ, yatekā ujarakna, nihan·prakāranyahanacaturaisva
26v.3 kahi––dәpanikaṃ] the cluster ni has been written on an erased virāma following p
27v.4 ikādarmmadarmma ] the ﬁrst repha is written above the second akṣara da because of lack of space above mma
28r.1 kasihana ] s written without the connecting stroke in the middle (this is the second occurrence of this variant that is attested also in other manuscripts written in this kind of script, cf. folio 7r.1)
28r.4
caturaisva ] the vowel ai is written in its akṣara form, provided with a repha on the top
28r.1–4 ra· … caturaisva ] this folio (as well as the ﬁrst two lines of the one that follows, 28v) has a much higher density of
akṣaras (without any discernible reasons)


--- PAGE 149 ---


--- PAGE 150 ---
ryya, vvalukveḥnikālāvan·bhāliknya, hanapañcavipāryyayaṅaranya ana aṣaktivvalulikurkveḥnya, hanatatusṭisaṅakveḥnya, hanata asṭasiddiṅaranya, ndya
[28v]
28
talakṣaṇanikāṃcatu aisvaryya, anuṃpinakavijaniṃbuddi, yansatvama——gә¯ṃiriya, darmmaṅaranyanihan·, hanajñānamahyunrahayu, ikāṃdārmmamaṃ
dadyakәn·hayu, yekā inabhyasanya, ṣilarahayu aglәm·——tāyamayajñā, manaḥrahayu, aglәm·tayamabrata, manaḥpu§
ṇyaskavnaṃnya, uksahatarisāmyajñānadikratātaya, aglәm·tayamayoga, nāhaninabhyasānya, ikāṃtagaveka
beḥ, atavāsalaḥtuṅgal·rvatlukunaṃgaveyakna, darmmata, ṅaranya, nihanthaṃjñānaṅaranya, ikāṃjñānamaṅabyasākapaṅguḥhasaṃhyaṃ
[29r]
parāmarta, ndanpramaṇatlupinakasuluḥnya, ikaṃsamāddi——pinakasaṃdānanya, yāsinaṅguḥsāmyajñānaṅaranya, verāgyaṅara
nya, ikaṃjñānatanāṛp·risuka, tan·trasṇārihurip·,——ndyasukaṅaranya, nyaṃbhogā upāboga, pāriboga, bhogaṅara
nya, ikaṃpinaṅan·, upābhoga ikāṃsniṇdaṃ, pāribhoga ikāṃkavulavnaṃvna, ikaṃtakabeḥ, tanāhaṛpirika, hanatabho§
gakaṛṅә¯, kadyaṅgāniṃsvaggakahyaṅan·, tanāhyunātaḥirikākabeḥ, pārimānadrabyanya, drabyanyaṅaranya, huripnya, tanāha
[29v]
29
ṛpātaḥirikakābeḥ, yātasinaṅguḥverāgyaṅaranya,——nihantaṃaisvaryyaṅaranya, ikaṃkәnahanandenibhoga upābho§
gapāribhoga, kinatvaṅāndenipadanyajanma, ya aisvaryya——ṅaranya, ikaṃtakapat·, ikaṃdarmma, jñāna, verāgya, aisvaryya,
vijanibuddikakabeḥ, ndan·yanāgә¯ṃsatvaniṃbuddi ika, yanpakavijācaturaisvāryya, yapvan·tamahagә¯ṃbaliknicatu aisva
ryya, pinakāvijanya, ndyabaliknyanihan·, adarmma, ajñanā, averāgya, anesvāryya, adarmmaṅaranya, ikāṅāmbhәk·manayākә
[30r]
n·gavehayu, liṃnya, ṅradān·ikāṃvvaṃmapuṇya, ma§——bojanāmaveḥskal·tvas·hәnthidrabyanya, taniyātamapa§
lasvargga, maṅkanāmāmaṅun·prasāda, maṅulurliṅga, ma§——homan·, maṅkānaliṃnyaribuddinya, manāyākәn·darmmanāgәṃta§
maḥnya, nihanthaṃajñāna, ikāṃṅatmāpuguṃapantanhanatinutnya, luput·saṅkeṃpratyakṣapramāṇā, anumānāpramāna, a
29v.4–28r.1 ka-beḥ] e vocalization of beḥis written in folio 28v.4; however, there seems to be a trace of another e vocalization written below the ba in 28r.1 and then carefully scratched away
29v.4 caturaisvāryya ]
the vowel ai is written in its akṣara form, provided with a repha on the top (cf. folio 28r.4)


--- PAGE 151 ---


--- PAGE 152 ---
nesvāryyaṅaranya, duḥkasadākala, nahan·kabaliknikāṃṃcatureṃsvāryya, yatekāpinakavijanibuddi, yantamasa, ◆
[30v]
30
, apabyaktiniṃpalanya, ndya, palanyanihan·, ikājanmaya——npaṅabhyasādarmma, yekānimittanyankavaveṃsvāgga, salvirni
bhogabhinuttinya, hәntipvapalanikāṃgavehayu, maṃja——nmatayāriṃdevatā, alavas·yadadidevatā, maṃjanmat
āyemānusa, yatekādadiratu, atavāvvaṃsugiḥkratapunyakunaṃdadinya, āpan·vāṣakanikāṃbhogarisvārggayātu§
mut·rimanusa, nihan·tapalaniṃsāmyajñāna, yandadisamādinyaribhaṭāra, makasadānāpramāṇātlu, siratapaṅastulān·bha
[31r]
ṭāra, kadikaddyan·bhaṭārakasiddyanira, lavān·kasṭesva——ryyan·bhaṭāra, yataṅnyan·valuyajanma, apan·sakamakamasi
ra, āsisakahyuniradadi, sakahaṛpniratka, nahan·ka——dibyannisāmyajñānayanpinakavijaniṃbuddi, nihantapalanive
rāgya, yekilin·riṃprakratiloka, kadisukaniṃmaturulvirnikaṃsukabhinuktinyaṅkana, salavasnyahanariprakrati
loka, maṃjanmatayādevata, nahan·palaniṃveragyayanpinakāvijaniṃbuddi, nihantapalaniṃaisvāryya, si, taprabhuriṃsvargga, a
[31v]
31
ke ikāṃbhogabinuktinya, rivkas·maṃjanmatayādevatā——, nahan·tāpalaniṃṅeśvaryyayanpinakavijaniṃbhuddi, nihantapala
nibaliknya, ikaṃṅāmbhәk·manāyakәn·gavehayu, mā——tipvayādlāha, yekādaditriyyak·, pāśu, mragapākṣi, āriṣra
pa, stāvāra, pāśuṅaranya, kadyaṅgāniṃsatvatamolaḥriṃṅāryya, kbā, sapi, asu, vәk·, prakāra, mragaṅaranya, ikāṃsatvatamo§
lariṅlas·, kadyaṅgāniṃkidaṃ, mañjaṅan·, ityavamādi, pākṣiṅaranyasaprakāraniṃmәr·, kadyaṅgāniṃmānuksariṣrapāṅaranya, ikaṃ
[32r]
praṃlāmakapaṃlakudadānya, kadyaṅgāniṃulā, lintaḥ, vdә——t·, irispveḥtәktak·lituḥ, stāvāraṅaranya, kayukayu, o
dvād·, dukut·, nahan·pratyekāniṃtriyyak·, ya§——yatikātmahaniṃjanmahanpiṃkaṃvijā adarmma, nihan·palaniṃajñā
na, yātekimaputrān·ridevamānusatriyyak·, lāvan·svargganaraka, āpanākveḥikaṃgavehalahayukavaṅunde
30v.1 nikāṃṃ] two anusvāras have been written adjacently, although it is likely that only one is to be read; the scribe might have felt that the ﬁrst one was too close to the preceding cluster, and hence added a
second one without erasing the former
31r.4 lvirnikaṃ] faint traces of an erased sign appear above the cluster ni (probably a repha)
32r.3 piṃkaṃvijā ] the anusvāra above pi appears to have been intentionally
scratched away


--- PAGE 153 ---


--- PAGE 154 ---
nya, ṅunipunāvvaṃjanmanya, palaniṃgavenyahalamvaṃhayutandaditankabhukti, yamataṃnyan·kapaṅguḥhikāṃcakrabhavadenya, nihan
[32v]
32
·palaniṃajñāna, yanpinakavijaniṃbuddi, nihan·palaniṃṅā——verāgya, yekāmnәrmarenāraka, salvirniṃlārabhinuktinya, yanā
kveḥpāpanya, alavas·yahaneṃyāmāṇi, yāpvanākdik——·gavenyahala, yātavineḥmadadyajanmamānuṣamuvaḥ, yekāda
divvaṃvikara, tanyapadalāvassasaṃsārajanma, vudug·, vuta, vukuk·, tuli, edān·, ayān·, vikәt·siṅkәl·, bisu, nāhan·tma
hanya, nihantapalani aneṃśvāryya, yekākinasampayān·, lāvankanyamaṅguḥsakahaṛpnya, mataṃnyantapanasān·sadākāla
[33r]
, momopvekāmanaḥnya, kadaditaṃṣilamahalade——nya, dadiyāmahabәk·, manismanumya, palaniṃgaveṃnyamaṅkana, ya
mataṃṅyan·tibārināraka, hәntipvapalanigavenyahala——, sinavurākәntayārimādyapādadesaṃyāmabala, yatadadipipi§
likā, nahan·palani anesvāryya, yanpinakavijanibuddi, ikāṃtakabeḥyatekāpusniṃjanma, anuṃdumeḥyāhidәp·
duḥkasātatā, yasinaṅguḥsaptabandānāṅaranya, pitu apūsāpuspituṅaranya, nihan·ikāṃinājarākәnkabeḥ, ndya inā
[33v]
33
jarākәn·, yankvaliṅanta, yeki adarmma, ajñāna, averāgya——, anesvāryya, nāhanyaṃsaptabandānaṅaranya, yanapayanәntisaṣaṃ
keṃcakrabhāva, yātakāriḥ, yanmaṃkanaliṅanta, yanpa——ṅguḥhikāṃsāmyajñānajuga, apandumeḥhikaṃātmāmaluyaribha
ṭāraparamakāraṇa, maṅkanaliṃbaṭāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, kāsihanarānakbhaṭāra, varahәn·risadānaniṃmagavesāmadi, maṅkana
lisaṃkumāra, sumahurbaṭāra, mne ikājarāknakaliniṃyogapāda, kunaṃvijanikaṃbuddivuvusәntimuvaḥ,◆, hanapañcavipāryya
[34r]
yaṅaranya, lvirnya, tamaḥ, moha, mahāmoha, tamisra——, nandātamisratamaḥṅaranya, ikaṅāmbhәkmahyunmamukti, ikaṃbho
gavisaya, apanikiyapamuk·tvanantavisayāsuka, ya——mataṃnyan·priḥtaṃkasugiḥhan·, mahmāsa, manaṇdaṅa, mahulu
n·mas·trirahayu, apantan·hanalvahasakeṃsukaniṃdadivvaṃ, maṅkanaliṃnya, yatamataṃnyanparmni amet·bhogasakā u
33r.3 sinavurākәn ] na has been written on top of an original vu, whose traces are still dimly visible
33v.2 yeki adarmma ] y added between the e vocalization and the cluster ki
34r.3 pamuk·tvananta ] the
sign written below the k, found in the present instance, in folio 54v.1 and 59v.2, appears to have the function of killing the vowel (i.e. instead of a virāma)
34r.4 lvaha ] the v forming the cluster lva is written below
the l as if it were an independent akṣara rather than in its usual subscript variant
34r.4 u ] an akṣara u (invisible on facsimile) was carefully scratched away so as to cancel it


--- PAGE 155 ---


--- PAGE 156 ---
la, yekātamaḥṅaranya, ◆, nihantaṃmohaṅaranya, hanarakvāḷviḥsaṅkeṃmavak·, siddirakvāṅaranya, dadimavak·daditanpa
[34v]
34
vak·, yekākahaṛp·kutmunaṅku, marapvan·vnaṃhuma——lapsakaṛp·ku, yamohaṅaranya, ◆, mahāmohaṅaranya, i
kaṃāmbhәkmahyun·maṅgihaknakaṃsiddyan·, donanyakapa——ṅgihaniṃasṭesvāryyadeku, muktyatakuriṃsvārggamvaṃmānusalveka
, yekāmāhāmohaṅaranya, ◆, tamisrāṅaranya, ikāṅambhәkmāhaṛp·rumaṅkәpānaṃdvesavisaya, lāvanāsṭesvāryyayata§
misrāṅaranya, ◆, nandātamiśraṅaranya, ikaṃāmbhәk·humalaṃhākәnikaṃsukānaghata , lāvankumālaṃṇahuvus·hilaṃ, ikā
[35r]
takaliḥ, yatekāpinakavijaniṃbuddiyanagәṃtamaḥ——nya, mamuhārasaṃśāra ikaṃkabeḥ, ◆, hanatanāvatusdiṅara
nya, ikaṃambhәkmatiṣ·, pradānaka, upādānaka, akalā——, abhāgya, nahantāṅādyatmikatusdiṅaranya, pradānakatusdiṅara
nya, hanavvaṃtumohalaniśariranya, ndātanpaṃlarerimanaḥnya, paran·kunaṃmahalasariraṅku, mahalakuniṃgaveṅkuṅuni, yā
ttamapalasariraṅkumaṅke, kunaṃyātanyan·lituhayu ikejanmaṅkusovaḥ, ndākamriḥmagavehayumaṅke, salvir·
35
niṃmakapalālituhayurijanmaṅkusovaḥ, yagavaya§——knākvamaṅke, maṅkanaliṃnya, lumkastāyamagavehayu, brata,
[35v]
yan·yajñā, yan·jñānakunaṃ, yekapradānakatusdiṅa——ranya, hanata upādānakatusdiṅaranya, ikaṅāmbhәk·tanmalara
kavkasān·hutaṃdenikavvatanya, atavāsvabhāvanikaṃvvatanya, kunaṃikaṃgumavekaluputāknanikavvatanyarisaṃśāra, ya
taginaveyākәnyatanarusuḥ, yekā upādanakatusdiṅaranya, hanata akalatusdiṅaranya, hanavvaṃmanomaḥnoma
[36r]
ḥ, ndaninaṅgiḥtayadeniraranya, ika ambhәk·mabhyaya——pinadәmnyariṅāmbhәkmatis·, yeka akalatusdiṅaranya, aba
gyatusdiṅaranya, ikāṃvvaṃmandabagya, tanpamaṅguhinaka——mbhәk·salavasnidadinya, saṃkarilaranyambhәknya, umgil·taya
risaṃvruḥmaṅajisaṃpāṇditaguruniratkabeḥ, siratapanambhahanya, patakvananyaripraya, vinaraḥtayadesaṃpāṇdita, kino


--- PAGE 157 ---


--- PAGE 158 ---
ntayamaṅabhyasāvidi, enaktāmbhәknyanpaṅabhyasā, yatekā abhagyatusdiṅaranya, nihantaṃvāhyatusdiṅaranya, hanavvaṃluput·saṃ
[36v]
36
ṅkeviṣayā, kadyaṅgānivvaṃmahaṛp·marabyahayu, mama——ṅana enak·, manaṇdaṅadvedvet·rahayukunaṃ, huvus·pvakapa
ṅguḥdenya, tusdihataḥṅaranya, hanatavvaṃmatmulāvan·ka——siḥnya, tusdihataḥṅaranya, hanavvaṃmamet·drabya, atavāmame
t·guṇakunaṃhuvus·kapaṅguḥhikaṃpinetnya, tusdihataḥṅaranya, hanatavvaṃhuvussiddikaryyanya ikaṃṣapinetnya, tusdi§
hataḥṅaranya, hanataḥvvaṃmalārasakikit·, halvaṃpvalāranya, tusdihataḥṅaranya, hanatavvaṃmamunuḥkbhoṣpipaṅanәnya, tu
[37r]
sdihataḥṅaranya, nahantaṃnavatusdiṅaranyapinakatijaniṃ——buddi ikakabeḥ,◆, nihantaṃasdasiddiṅaranya, dāna, adyayana,
śabda, karttā, svatradaya, trayoduḥkavilāta, naha§——ntaṃasdasiddiṅaranya, dāna, ṅaranya, saṃvnaṃumehakәn·kayanirariṃ
saṃpāṇdita, lāvan·risaṃṣarajanmākunaṃ, lvirnivinehakәn·, tluprakāranya, kāya, ṣabda, ambhәk·rahayu, nihantakapirvanikasidya
n·, saṃvnaṃmaṅājiṣasthrapuraṇa, tatvajñānakunaṃ, siddihataḥṅaranika, hanataḥhuvusmaṃṅabyasājinira, dadisirasidāvākyasavu§
[37v]
37
vusnirasiddi, atavāsiradadimaṃṛṅә¯ṣabdasakeṃsuksmā——, saṅkāritibranipanira, siddihataḥṅaranikā, hanatārkkāsiddi§
ṅaranya, ikaṃjñānatonitāṅatitānagatavārktamana,——siddihataḥṅaranikāhanatahuvus·manmuguruviṣesa, siddiha
taḥṅaranikā, hanatavkasnikaṃdyan·ṣaṅviku, saṃyogiśvarajuga, apan·siravnaṃhumilaṅakәnikaṃduḥkatluṅaranya, hanadyatmi
kādukaṅaranikā, hanādideviduḥkaṅaranya, hanatibhotikādukaṅaranya, rvaprakaranikā adyatmikādukaṅaranya, manaṣa, lāvan·ṣarira, manaṣa
[38r]
ṅaranya, kāma, kreda, lobhā, bhāyā, suyā, kāmaṅaranyahyun——·, kredaṅaranya, galak·, lobāṅaranya, tanpahuvusan·maṅarjanādra
vya, bhāyaṅaranya, takut·, suyāṅaranya, ikaṃglәtan·vnaṃmaḷ——s·, nahantaṃduḥkasaṃkeṃmanaḥ, nihantaṃdukasaṃkeṃśarira, (o)ṛm·, gighi
l·, śulān·lārahatәn·, puyә¯, kuris·, saprakāraniṃlāranpasaṅkān·, yekādyatmikāduḥka, yatikāhinilaṅakәn·saṃyogisvara,
36v.1 bhyasā, yatekā abhagya ] a piece of wood or bark has been attached below this string of text by the restorer in order to connect the two disjointed parts of the folio
38r.3 (o)ṛm· ] the initial akṣara resembles
an o, except for its lower part. A parallel in Vṛhaspatitattva 33.10 reads uṛm.
38r.3 saṃyogi ] the short straight line above the y of the cluster yo appears to be meanigless


--- PAGE 159 ---


--- PAGE 160 ---
adidevidukāṅaranya, sinambhәriglap·, hedān·, kapasuki(ṃ)gaṇabhuta, lāvan·pisāca, yeki adidevidukaṅaranya, kunaṃikāṃpinraṃ, pi
[38v]
38
nalu, rinacun·, tinluḥpinatukaṃulā, pināṅaniṃvuhaya, saprakā——raniṃlārasaṃkeṃhavak·, yekatibvetikādukaṅaranya, ikātakabe
ḥ, yātahilaṃdesaṃyogisvāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, ikunapata——deniṃrasaṃyogisvāranhumilaṃṅaknәkālārasamaṅkanasājñābhaṭā
ra, maṃkanaliṃsaṃkumāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, hlәm·ikāhujarāknәriṃyogapāda, apan·tanhәntivrattinikāṃbuddivaneḥ, ndyavratti
nibuddivaneḥ, yankvaliṅanta, hana asaktiṅaranya, vvalulikukveḥnya, lakṣaṇanyayekākavruhananta, ndyaya, yekiṃda
[39r]
sendriyā, tan·vnaṃhumidәp·riṃvisayanya, taliṅatu——li, kulit·vudug·, mātatanpanon·, ilat·bisu, i
ruṅapāḷg·, tutuk·vulavun·, taṇahaṛp·maṅkana——kunaṃ, taṅankiṃkisukulumpuḥ, silit·mdu, tan·vnaṃṅaṅisiṃku
naṃ, plāt·kdi, nahan·lakṣaṇānikāṃdāsendriyā, antan·vnaṃriviyasanya, asaktihataḥṅaranya, hanatabalikniṃkānavatu
sdilāvan·asdasiddi, nihan·lakṣaṇanya, halanisariranya, prastāvānyanpaṅimpuluniṃmagavehala, anopradānakaṅaranya
[39v]
39
, hutaṃnyahidәpnyahutaṃnikavvatanya, dadiyāmiṅgat·, a——kālaṅaranya, tan·vnaṃhumorākәn·taṅgiḥniraranya, dadiyamuṃ§
paṃ, tan·vnaṃtumambhānasakahinanyavaknya, mohatayā,——tanapiliḥsalvarānya, visayanurāsa, hanavvaṃtummukahaṛpnya, nda
n·laubātayā, tanpatambhānikāṃhuvus·kapaṅguḥdenya, hanamaṅajanāsuka, aḷmәḥmagaveya, hanatan·vnaṃrumakṣaha
yunya, mvaṃkalituhayunya, arabilaraṅan·, mahmas·tinotohakәnyarisavuṃjudinita, mahurip·anpamuk·pva, hanakṣayā
[40r]
rāga, hanavvaṃmalārandātambhān·, avdimaṅinumamapyak·ma§——pahit·, matakut·mabyayarisaṃmanambhā, hanavvaṃtanpatmulāva
nkasiḥnya, anaṅis·tan·vnaṃmuktidrabyanya, nahan·bali§——knikāṃnavatusdi, asaktihataḥṅaranikā, hanatabalikni asdasi
ddi, adana, tardadimaveveḥ, asthamāgaveyadarmma, anadyayana, tanpaṅaji, tvas·jijimotaniṃṅva, tan·byaktāvruḥhariviṣe
39r.4 viyasa ] traces of a canceled akṣara visible behind the ya


--- PAGE 161 ---


--- PAGE 162 ---
śa, anaśabda, tanpaṅabyasākasadakan·, anhakuhyaṃ, āpatagaveyaniṃmamriḥ, tvas·prahatin·ṅvadenya anatarkka, ta
[40v]
40
nkatonikāṅatitānagatavārttamānā, asvāhadayaḥ, ta——npaguruviseṣa, magurumatәkā, ndānkadiparahuvatu, vvādәs·maṅә
ntasāknārisaṃśārasāmudrā, yamataṅyan·paṅlәmākәn·riṃ——mahanāraka, ndyagurumaṅkanamrākiniṃmahānaraka, nihanpaṅavruha§
na, liṃnya, kit·taḥkahanān·bhaṭārasakāla, apan·yekimagaveliṅgamamaṅun·prasāda, maṅanakәn·pvayā, maṅhanakә
n·pinaṅanininum·, yekitahanan·saṃhyaṃparāmārtā, mamāṅan·maturusaṃhyaṃikā, lumaku, maluṅguḥ, asiṅātaḥ, tu
[41r]
laḥsaṃhyaṃikākabeḥ, norasalaḥikākabeḥ§——maṅkanalinya, yamatanyandadihumulahakәnāpacāra, apantanya
napaliṃnya, dadiyamupuṃ, dadinpaṅahalādravyaniṃvaneḥ,——tanapa ikāyān·tuhutukita, apan·tuhutuṅaranya, ha
yvāvdipati, apan·yekāmahabūtan·ṅaranya, asi{mārgga}niṃpatitapva, apan·sipāti ikāṃsinaṅguḥkamokṣan·ṅa
ranya, maṅkanalinigurunya, yekāgurumanәbākәninaraka{ṅara}nya, asaktiṅaranya, ṅkerivrattini(ṃ)buddi,◆, nihan·taṃdukātra§
[41v]
41
yavighataḥikātan·vnaṃhumilaṅakәn·dukatraya——, apantanpaṅabhyaṣāsamadi, mataṃnyantan·paṅabhyaśāsamadi, apa
ntanmaṅkānarakvāparamartāliṃnya, tuhumatasaṃhyaṃparamārta——luput·saṃkeṃyogalāvan·samadi, apan·buddisira, huvu
ṣ·karuhun·ikaṃrāgadvesamohalāvan·sariratan·hana ikāribhaṭāra, apadeniṃsamādirisira, apansirapvadenisamā
dinirasaṃvikumvaṃsaṃyogiśvara, yatanyanpadalāvan·bhaṭāra, inakunyapvāvaknyapadalābhaṭāra, tan·vnaṃhumilaṅakәn·dukā
[42r]
nyatlu, yatamataṃnyan·asaktiṅaraniṃbuddiyanmaṃkana, suma——hursaṃkumāra, kuraṃtuṅgal·tavkasikāṃaṣaktiyan·tkavvaluli§
kur, ndyagnәpanya, nihanyaṃmanaḥmabalik·, apan·lakṣaṇa——niṃmanaḥmamikalpā, tapvan·vnaṃmamikalpā, yatasinaṅguḥmedān
·ṅaranya, nāhan·gnәpnikāṃasaktivvalulikur, ikātakabeḥ, nimattaniṅātmāsaṃṣāra apanmamaṅguḥvasānā ikākabeḥriṃcitta
41r.4 mahabūtan ] the cluster bū, which makes a better reading in the present context, may be read instead as a ñu; the vertical stroke attached to the right, in that case, should not be regarded as an ā written too
close to the preceding akṣara but as one of its components (against this interpretation cf., however, note to folio 41v.1)
41v.1 manәbākәn ] as in line 4 of the preceding folio, bā very much resembles a ña


--- PAGE 163 ---


--- PAGE 164 ---
, vruḥpvasaṃpāṇdita, anmakveḥvāsanānikāṃpapārumakәt·, riṃcitta, yatamātaṃnyan·saṃviku, matakut·risaṃśāralāvanduka, ha
[42v]
42
yvājnәk·ribyapārariṃsarira, huvuskāruhun·ikaṃśilaha——lāhayvātagināvayākәn·, āpan·yekamamuḥhāralaralā
van·saṃśāra, apāran·yogyaghaveyaknātakariḥ,——nyaṃtrikāyamarāmārtā, ulaḥrahayu, sabdarahayu, ambhәk·raha
yu, donikāsadānāniṅmuṅābhyasāmbhәkibhaṭāra, nihan·varaḥvaraḥbhaṭārayekidәḷn·iṅәtәṅәtәn·tmәn·tmәn·, rāsanariha
ti, apanikimārggabnәr·, yapvan·hanamaraḥrikitariṃhayu, ndānapasalahan·lavan·lokamaṃruddālāvan·vvaṃkabeḥtalāp
[43r]
·hayvāvinahil·, ndan·hayvātaginavayakәn·, yanpa§——ropaghatāgumavayakәn·dukāniṃvaneḥapan·jātiniṃma§
gavehala, halātkәsarira, yapvanpagavehayu, ha§——yutkeṃsarirahayupvākahyuniṃrat·, yamataṃnyanāhayu ata
ḥgaveyaknantahalahmәm·, ikāṃluput·saṃkeṃgunādvāsa, maryyadapārilobhāmvaṃdvosa, yavat·kitaluput·saṃkeṃ
lokabyapāra, tamriḥtagavebhaktiriṃbhaṭāra, apan·sirasaraṇānivnaṃmaṅhilaṅakәnpapa, siradumeḥṅvaṅamaṅguhāsukavi
[43v]
43
seśa, ikāṃhinak·tanpabaliklara, hurip·tanpabali——k·pati, milvāgavetaniluginave, vruḥtankinavruhan·, ya§
palanibhaktiribhaṭāra, kunaṃtkapniṃmagavebhakti, yatakvā§——naknantariṃsaṃguru, kāṅәnaṅәnātaḥsaṃṣāraniṃdadijanma, sihurip·ma§
kavāṣanāṃpā, ikәpātiṅaranya, viparitatanhanatutunya, apan·tapasuk·ritamaḥ, vṅitanpakanimitta, tayāriṅāditya
, yātakalalavasan·ṅaranya, baliknihurip·lalutanhinaknya, maṅkanatәhәrāyvāṃhidәp·sukaduka, kunaṃtāpanpa
[44r]
vārtejanma, kadikveḥniṃhilaṃkveḥnimtu, yatapanәṅә——rānta anpajanmamuvaḥikaṃatmā, huvus·rumuhun·tayānhana
vvaṃjatismāra, meṅәt·ridadinyaṅuni, tanpalaḥdenya——tumuduḥkavitanyaṅunipurbvakaḥlāvan·ṅaranyadravyanya, naha
n·hnanyanatutur·apatanhanaṃtuduḥnya ikākabeḥ, ḷhәṃmarekan·rahayujanmanyamuvaḥ, maluyādadivvaṃgumavaya
42v.1 lāvanduka ] traces of a cancelled subscript du under va


--- PAGE 165 ---


--- PAGE 166 ---
knābhaktiribhaṭāra, mārgganijanmakahvatarihayu, yanyaṃdadikitarisaṃśārātaḥniyātakadyaṅgāniṃvikarā, tanpadalāvan·saṃśā
[44v]
44
rajanma, atavāyanpaṃdadyanakbhosapi asuvik·, ye——kakaptәk·tmәn·, apatanhanagamānanikavruḥhariṃheyo
padaya, vnaṃṅatarakvāyamareṃsaṃpāṇdita, tumakvānakna——kaliṅanijanmanya, mvaṃkalpasәn·nijanmanya, yanapatekan·vru
ha, apan·huvusikaṃjanmanya, tanpasikaban·, lkas·tamneṃglәk·, apatan·knavruhan·tkaniṃpāti, sumahursaṃkumāra,§
aparanikāṃvāsanaṅaranya, sājñābhaṭāra, varāhәntaranakbhaṭāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, ikāṃkarmmatandaditan·kabhuktipalanya, akveḥpvakāṃka
[45r]
rmma, yatamataṃnyanmakveḥlvirniṃjanma, apan·palaniṃkaka——rmmayamamaṅun·śarira, yānmahalaśarira, yanmahayvakarmma, maha§
yvaśarira, mahalamayupvekaṃkarmma, vinaṅunijanmatuṅga——l·, yamataṃnyanāsilisilihikāṃjanmariya, havus·dadideva
tāpalanigavenyahayu, tkapvapalaniṃgavenyahala, matmahantayatiryyak·, hәntipvapalanikaṃtiryyak·, tkatapalani
kāṃmānusa, muvaḥtapalanikākarmmaṅuni, yatabhinuktinyanpamaṅun·karmmamuvaḥ, maṅkanatajātinijanmakabeḥ, ikaṃ§
[45v]
45
karmmahuvus·bhinuktiyekāmamkasākәn·saṅaskāra——ricittasvevaṃsvavaṃ, yatamatanyan·kadisinurāt·ikāṃka
rmmarumakәtiriya, kadyaṅganiṃsiṃsikihivak·yatama——gavetuturnicitta ikāṃhuvus·bhinuktinyaṅuni, yandevatā
, yanmanusa, yantiryyak·, ikāṃkarmmapalatinutnya, yatabhinuktinya, kapvātekāmamkasākәn·saṅaskāraricitta, nihanpada
nya, kadyaṅgānidyun·anpinakāvavān·vaṅivaṅi, iṅgukunaṃ, huvus·hintihisinikaṃdyun·, vinasәhan·tayāpinahālilaṃndā
[46r]
nhanātaḥambhәnya, turuṃrumakәtrikādyun·, maṅkana§——tekāṃvāśanā, anpamkasākәn·saṅaskarāricitta, asiṅagәṃvā
sanāricitta, yāpinakarupaniṃjanma, apānāsikinalpa§——ṇaniṃmanaḥyatinutniṃkārmmanyamaṅun·janmamuvaḥ, saṅapasirakuma
vruḥhijanmamaṅkanasājñābhaṭāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, akuhuvus·maṃhidәp·saṃśāra, anekā ikaṃjanmabhinuktikuvkasan·, tkaniga


--- PAGE 167 ---


--- PAGE 168 ---
veṃṅkuhayu, kavāvatakurisaṃpāṇdita, vinariḥtakuriṃdarmmaśaṣtra, yatana ibhyasāṅku, alāvas·pvākumavaiyākәnikaṃda
[46v]
46
rmmasāṣtra, matitaku, muvaḥtaku, muvaḥtakumaṃjanmamanu——sā, hatuturtakurijanmaṅku, muvaḥtākuhumulunakәn·sarira
ṅkurisaṃpāṇdita, vinaraḥtākuriyogadarmma, yata ina——bhyaṣāṅkurirahineṃvṅi, yataginavaiyākәnku, alavasākuy
ogisvara, sevutahun·lavaskuyogisvara, vinavatakuriṃsvargga, inarināntakusaṃnilalohitā, tinarimāntakuhanakdara,
hanakbhagavandākṣā, saṃśātiṅaranira, mātipvasaṃśāti, kavkastaku, maluyātakuyogisvara, tiksṇāpvadeṅkvāgavesama
[47r]
ddī, mātitakumaṃjanmatākuribhaṭāra, ndyatan·vtusaṅke——suklasonita, mtusaṅkeyogabhaṭārakami, apan·limakve
ḥmamisanak·, pātuṅgālaniṅaranmami, kusikāsaṃmatu——ha, tumuttasargga, lāvan·metri, saṃpurusya, akusaṃpātañja
laṅaranku, hanak·pamuṅgu, risaṃpañcaṛsi, atuturtakuriyośisvaran, yamataṃnyan·manambhaḥribhaṭāra, sakavvatan·ma§
midadisiragavaisaṃkrәman·, anakusaṃkusika, mabhyaktakvānakna, kunaṃyenpupāṇdim·taku, maṅkanaliṃnirarisaṃkusikapi
[47v]
47
net·saṃgarggasirakinonmaṃhañuta, luṅhārasikā, pi——net·saṃmetri, sirakinonmaṃnunvā, luṅhārasika, pinettāsaṃ
purusya, sirakinonmamaṅguṅa, luṅhārasika, pinetāku,——mavkas·tābhaṭāra, mabhyaktinaku, kunaṃdeyanpupasatārku, maṅka
naliṃbhaṭāra, tanāsovemātitasiratkatasaṃkusika, matuturpavkas·bhaṭāra, inalapniṃratekāṃsava, piniṇdim·nira, ndāta
npaveṃkamikabeḥ, āpan·kamipinakapamkasan·rideyamamitkatasaṃhyaṃbrahmāvisnu, indra, yāma, baruna, kuvera, agneyā, neriti, bāya
[48r]
bya, airsānya, sirasumambhәsāmbhәrikamikalima, dadisaṃkusikā——kinonmamiṇdәmaśavabhaṭāra, sāmpun·piniṇdәmnira, danuduk·siradesaṃ
garggā, hinañutāsirahinalap·siradesaṃkurusya, sira umguṃ——savabhaṭara, tanasovehinalaptasiradesaṃmetri, siratanunusavabha
ṭāra, sāmpun·ginhәmatmahanāvu, luṅhātasirakabeḥ, akujugakavkas·kumukup·havubhaṭāra, inalapkutāvunira, saṅkaribhaktikumagu
ru, yatamataṃnyan· husapākәn·ikāṃ§
46v.2 muvaḥtakumaṃjanma ] traces of a cancelled u vocalization below ta
47v.1 kusikapi ] traces of a cancelled cluster, most probably pi, visible beneath the ka followed by a pi
47v.3 deyanpupasa ] traces of
an akṣara cancelled beneath the cluster npu
48r.4–5 havubhaṭāra… husapakәn· ikāṃ§ ] the sequence reproduces the one in the manuscript, where an insertion mark is put above the -ra, and an extra line continuing
the text in the line afer its end runs in the bottom-right margin


--- PAGE 169 ---


--- PAGE 170 ---
havuryyavaku, vaneḥpinaṅkuku, tan·sovehilaṃtarupaṅkupātañjala, sarupabhaṭāraṅunikālanirahurip·, trinayānācaturbhujā, spadikāpakaṃjanmā
[48v]
48
stāna, samaṅkana ikāṃrupapinaṅguḥku, tkakadevatākabeḥmamujārigandākṣāta——dipādi, lāvan·kәmbhaṃsaṃkirṇna, tkatasaṃhyaṃṅānantahumundaṅaku,mulihariṅābhavā
vihaṃhinnaḥtākurikāhyaṃṅanikavvatanku, yekiriśrikaṇdabhuvaṇaṅa——ranya, iruhurnisaṃhyaṃśrakaṇdi, alāvas·akuriṅābhāvapāda, kin
[padā, ta§
ontakumuṅgvārikebrahmāṇda, yātmākvāgurūriratkabeḥ, yamataṃnyanpaṅaji ikāṃdevatākabeḥṅkeriṃbrahmāṇda, hanapva§
detyasinәlarudrākṣāṅaranya, yatakumavāsakәnikeṃbrahmāṇda, glәṃtekāṃdevatakabeḥ, denibhaṭārisarasvatәmaṇdәm·
[49r]
rilidaḥnya, yatamataṃnyanpalahujar·, tanmatyadeni——devatādetyadanava, ānumatyanāku, yanhānānak·bhaṭāramtu
saṅkesuklasonitāya umatyana, maṅkanaliṃnya, dadi i——kāṃdevatākabeḥ, mәntakāsiḥrisaṃhyaṃk(ā)ma, umanahaku
riragivāsa, yatanyanātmeṃhyun·, tavihaṃtasaṃhyaṃkamā, pinānaḥniratakuriṃragā, dinәḷṅkutasaṃhyaṃkāma, rikatiga
nimātaṅku, yamataṃnyan·gsәṅavak·saṃhyaṃkāmamatmahan·vu, huvusmaṅkana, tumuttādevatākabeḥ, kapvatayahumaṇdә
[49v]
49
mānambhaḥ, apan·giṃrigirinan·tumonisaṃhyaṃkāmanpatma——hanāvu, yatamataṃnyan·panambhaḥumajarākәn·vuvusnikāṃtyesi
nilarudrākṣā, pjaḥhadenitanayankumtusaṅkeṃsuklasve——nitā, tan·vihaṃpinintakasihan·kabeḥ, kinontayasu
momahaḷbuntabhaṭāri uma, yamataṃnyanpakanak·saṃhyaṃ, śaṇapāti, lāvan·saṃbhraṅgiridi, katigānakusaṃkumāra, nāha
n·kramanidadiṅkuṅuni, mataṃnyanavas·deṅkvāṅavruha ika(ṃ)kā(r)mmāpalanpamkāsākәn·saṅaskararicitta, maṅkanali(ṃ)bhaṭāra, su§
[50r]
mahursaṃkumāra, ndyatāmenaka irikiṃdadijanmakabeḥ——sajñābhaṭāra, maṅkanaliṃsaṃkumāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, noraktaḥme
nakirikiṃjanmakabeḥanaku, apapvānuṃsukaṅaranya, nya——pantahankvaliṅanta, aṅhiṃikāṃkamokṣan·juga, yekisuka
viśeṣaṅaranya, apanhuvus·sāttājalāvan·bhaṭāraparamakaraṇa, maṅkanaliṃbhaṭāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, saṅapatasirasinaṅguḥ


--- PAGE 171 ---


--- PAGE 172 ---
bhaṭārapamakāraṇaṅaranira, sumahurbhaṭāra, saṃlaṅgәṃkasuksmānira, sirasadāsoccā, alilaṃtakneṃmāla, sadāsukatarpakapurbva§
[50v]
50
kāṃjanmapisaniṅu, tankadikamikabeḥ, sakveḥsaṃhyaṃa——sṭavidyesanā, huvus·karuhun·saṃhyaṃbrahmāvisnulāvanvatәk
·lvekapala, makapurbvakaṃsasārarasikākabeḥ, kunaṃsa——ṅkarigīnikabhaktiniraribhaṭāra, lāvan·tiksṇānisamādinira, naha
n·mataṃyanīnalap·mulihamareṃkahyaṃṅan·, tatanmaṃkanabhaṭāraparamakāraṇa, sadisukajugasira, ndān·makavāsanāsaṃ
sarasira, maṃjanmamānusasirahlәm·, nyapantahankvaliṅantanaku, tamatatanhanagamāṇanirajanmanaku, apān·sarvvajñāsira, sira
[51r]
kumavruḥhiratkabeḥvruḥsirarimaṅdesaṃsāra, lāvan——·lāra, ndātavnaṃmilagiyā, tan·vruḥrideyanya, denimaṃhil
āṃṅakәn·lāra, lāvan·hanatācaduṣaktirisira, ndyaca——duṣaktiṅaranya, naṅavesyaḥ, aṅavesyaḥṅaranya, takneṃrāga,
dvesa, mveha, aṅavesaṅaranikā, anevesyaḥṅaranya, takartaman·, tardadipinakavak·sirātaḥmakāvaksarvvabhāva,
yeka anevesyaḥṅaranya, ikatakabaiḥ, yekāvibhusaktiṅaranya, nihantaṃjñānaṣaktiṅaranya, dūrādāśana, durāśravāṇa, durā
[51v]
51
tmānāna, durātmāsarbvagata, śravāṇaṅaranya, ṛmәṅә¯ha——dohapaṛk·, durādāśanāṅaranya, tumonādohapaṛk·, a§
tāvātatutupan·kunaṃikāvastu, katonātaḥdenira——, durātmāṅaranya, vruḥrijñānaniṅadohapaṛk·, durātmāsarbvagata
ṅaranya, vruḥrikrәyākabaiḥ, lāvan·sarbvavastu, nahantaṃjñānasaktiṅaranya, krәyāśaktiṅaranya, manojñāvitvәṃ, vikarādarmmatvәṃ,
kāmarapitvәṃ, manovijñāvitvә(ṃ)ṅaranya, adrasirasaṅkeṃmanaḥ, apānhanasirariratkabeḥ, ndātankaton·, vikāradarmmatvәṃṅaranya
[52r]
, targinave, sirātaḥmagave, kāmarupitvәṃṅaranya, saka——haṛpniratmahananira, yapinakarupānira, nahanyakrәyāsaktiṅara
nya, prabhusaktiṅaranya, abitaḥ, akṣayaḥ, arājaḥ, amāraḥ——, abhitaḥṅaranya, tarmatakut·, akṣayaḥṅaranya, tarpakalvaṅan·,
arajaḥṅaranya, takneṃtuha, amarāḥṅaranya, tarkneṃpāti, apratihatagatiḥ, tankatahәnan·, nāhanyaṃprabhuśaktiṅaranya, ika, ta
51r.2–3 maṃhil-āṃṅakәn· ] ā of lāṃin line 3, while the anusvāra is attached to the l in line 2


--- PAGE 173 ---


--- PAGE 174 ---
saktibhaṭāra ika, yākabeḥ, yātapinakapanәddariśaktibhaṭāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, liṃbhaṭāra, ṅuni, tarpāvak·saṃhyaṃparāmarta
[52v]
52
, tatāpivinuvus·saktinira, ndyatarākәtaniśaktibhaṭāra——paramarta, sajñābhaṭāra, saṃṅapakatonanikesvaryyanirasājñābhaṭā
ra, maṅkanaliṃsaṃkumāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, saṃyvagisvarasampun——·siddātaḥ, sirakatonaniśaktibhaṭāra, apan·sirahumyapāra i
keṃrātkabeḥ, sumahursaṃkumāra, tanhanapvabhaṭāra, hanrәsaśiddājugakatonanisaktibhaṭāra, mataṃnyantanhanasira, anhiṃsa
ktinirapanәṅәrān·nihananira, muṅgvāsaṃpāṇditapvaśaktibhaṭāra, yamataṃnyantayāsaṃhyaṃparamartāyanmaṃkana, sumahurbhaṭāra, tahapi
[53r]
ḥtanthayasaṃhyaṃparāmāta, apantan·saktiniravinehakә——nirasaṃpāṇdita, ndyasaṅkanisaktisaṃpaṇditakariḥ, yanmaṃkanaliṅa
nta, saktiṅkārihavaknirajugaśaktisaṃsiddā, sumahursaṃkumāra——, āpadumeḥnyakabhibyaktāvkasan·sājñābhaṭāra, hasirabaṭārari§
saṃyogәk·liṅanya, apadumeḥsirasiharisaṃyogi, aṅkaripamriḥniragavesamādi, satatāriṃrahinevṅi, yamataṃnyanāsiḥ
bhaṭārarisaṃyogi, hinilaṅakәniratakleśariralāvanlāranira, kabhibyaktākalārasayogivkasan·, āpanikaṃmālatumutu§
[53v]
53
piśaktiniṃatmāṅuni, hilaṃmarekāmāla, yankvaliṅāsaṃpā——ra, tan·vnaṃṅātāṅatmāhumilaṅakәnmalanyajuga, āpantanavruḥla
kṣaṇāniṃmāla, mataṃnyantan·vruḥikaṃatmārilakṣaṇa§——nimāla, apanivәṃivәṃavaknyalāvanikāṃmāla, ndyavakāniṃatmā
yankvaliṅanta, yekāsinaṅguḥatmāliṃsavruḥrisaṃhyaṃṣastra, ikātaṃcitta ivәṃivәṃlāvan·malā, tahapiḥvnaṃātāṅātmāhumil
āṅākәn·mālanya, yankvaliṅantasaṃpāra, tanoramataṃdadyanadevatātiryyak·yanmaṃkana, mokṣa ikāṃjanmakabeḥyanmaṃkana, tinontapvokaṃjanmasaṃ
[54r]
śara, yatapaṅavruhananta antan·vnaṃikāṃatmahumīlaṅakәnmalanya,——yapvan·vnaṃhumilaṅakәn·mālanya, yamataṃnyan·siḥbhaṭārariyogi, apansi
ravnaṃhumilaṅakәnmālanira, kadiśaktibhaṭāra, maṅkanasaktisaṃśidda, yamataṃnya§——npadaśaktiniralāvanbhaṭāravkasan·, sumahursaṃkumāra, hanatakāribaṭāra, rijanma
saṃśāra, mataṃnyanmaṅkana, apān·siddāsamādisaṃyogi, āpan·yokābhibyaktan·bhaṭārarijanma, kapaṅguhaniradesaṃyogi, yan·vruḥriṃprayogasandipadanira, kadyaṅgani
[apva
55r.1 mokṣa ] e vocalization of the cluster mo added below the m, unmarked
54r.1 tinon ] e vocalization of the cluster no added below, between ti and nā unmarked
54r.2 humīlaṅ] note the unique shape of
the ī, which otherwise is usually obtained by adding one of the allographs for ā to the right of the cluster
54r.2 riyogi ] e vocalization of yo written below, between ri and yā, unmarked
54r.4 yogi ] e vocalization
of yo added below, between saṃand yā
54r.4 prayogasandi ] e vocalization of yo written below yā (unmarked)


--- PAGE 175 ---


--- PAGE 176 ---
yāneṃkayu, āpanhamәtvakәn·vaknya, ikāṅāpvayāneṃkayu, huliḥniṅāṅәsә¯ ataḥprastāvānyan·mtu, maṅkanatekaṃmiñak·, tan·vtu ikāyantan·pinukәran
[54v]
54
·, ikapvavastumaganal·tatāpitan·vtu ikāyāntaninupāya§——risandi, bhaṭāraparamākaraṇakarikankapaṅguha, yatanhanāprayoga
sandi, yādyapin·vruhariprayogasandi, yatan·gavaya——kna, tankapaṅguḥataḥbhaṭāradenya, ◉◆◉, cittavrattiniroda§
kyaḥ, yogaḥparamadurlabhaḥ, tasmәyogasamarābde, svayaṃṅātmāprakāśatekakatuturicittavratti, yasinaṅguḥyogaṅara
nya, ndānatyanta ivәḥnyaninābhyaśā, apantan·haṛp·jatiniṃṅvariṃgavemakas·, kunaṃsaṃverāgya, saṃhuvus·vaṛg·rilāranijanma, si
[55r]
ramahyun·riyoga, apanmahaṛp·risukaviśesaṅaranya§——ikāpaṅguḥhanijātisaṃhyaṃṅātmāyasinaṅguḥsukaviseṣaṅaranya,
yanāpayankapaṅguḥjātisaṃhyaṃṅātmā, yanginayāknәkāṃyo——gātaḥ, sumahursaṃkamāra, tantagavaiya ikāṃyogakahidәp·§
taḥsahyaṃatmādemami, tamatanātmā ikāliṃta, yekiṃcittaṅaranya, matanyansinaṅguḥcitta, apan·nekāviśayanya, yamataṃnya
n·cittajugakahidәpdenya, sumahursaṃpāra, ndyavrattinya, mataṃnyan·cittaṅaranya, nihan·grahananya, vipāryyaya, vikalpa, nidrā, smu
[55v]
55
tә, grahanaṅaranya, ikāṃcittamanut·pramāṇatlu, pramā––ṇatluṅaranya, pratyakṣa, ānumāṇa, agama, yokāgrahanaṅa§
ranya, hayvātavineḥmaṅkanakālaniyoga, nihantaṃvika——lpaṅaranya, ikāṃjñānāmaṅaliṅavaraḥnistri, yaḥpuruśakumvaliṃniṃ
aji, nihanārtanya, tarpolaḥsaṃhyaṃṅātmā, maṅkanaliṃniṃkāvaraḥ, yatekānaliṅaranya, liṃnyanihan·, kaliṅaniṃtanpālaḥ,
kadyaṅgāniṃhruhanaritaṃkulaknya, humnaṃṅataya, inalap·pvayasaṅketaṃkulaknya, kinnākәnitalinilaras·, tumañcәb·kka
[56r]
yarikinnānya, humnaṃṅātaya, maṅkanatahnaṃnikā atmā, nāha——n·liṃnivikalpaṅaliṅavaraḥ, hayvātavineḥmaṅkanarikālaniyoga,
nihantaṃnidrāṅaranya, ikājñānakadihilaṃlvirnyan·kahi——dәp·, ndān·tәhәryamalupaviparitatanhanatuturnya, hayvātama
ṅkanarikālaniṃyoga, vehәn·tikāṃjñānadumliṅarihati, stityahayvācañcala, hayvāmaṅaṅәnāṅәn·, apanhanasvapnājñānaṅa
54v.1 āpvayāneṃkayu ] e vocalization added below, between yā and naṃ(unmarked)
54v.1 maṅkanatekaṃ] e vocalization added below, between na and ta (unmarked)
54v.1 miñak· ] the dot below the k
is to be interpreted as a virāma (cf. folio 34r3)
56r.4 niṃyoga ] an extra e vocalization before the one belonging to the cluster yo appears, probably written in place of a ṅa; the string cannot properly be transliterated


--- PAGE 177 ---


--- PAGE 178 ---
ranya, paraninaṅәnāṅәn·vaneḥ, ikāṃjñānamatutur ikāhәpyanya, yekāsvapnājñānaṅaranya, hayvātavineḥmaṅkanarikalaniyo
[56v]
56
ga, nihantaṃstrismrәtiṅaranya, ikāṃjñānatuturikāṃvastubhi——nuktinyaṅuni, hayvātavineḥmaṅkanarikālaniṃyoga, nahan·vra§
ktinikāṃcittalimakveḥnya, yapvān·katutupanikāṃka——beḥ, yatekāsinaṅguḥsamādiṅaranyayasinaṅguḥsāmprajñāta,
lāvanasamprajñāta, samprajñātataḥṅaranya, ikāṃsamādәtәnahәnāndenipāt·lvirnyanpāt·nihan·, hanasavitārkkāsamā
di, hanatavicārasāmādi ikāṃjñānamaṅekāgraharisuksmā, yāvicārasamādiṅaranya, asmitāsamādiṅaranya, iṅkanasaṃpuruśa
[57r]
kevalya, vinotan·viśayadeniṃcitta, ndātan·ce——taneya, āpāvruḥsirānlāra, yavat·cumetanepavo§
t·niṃcitta, yamataṃnyan·hnaṃjugahumidәp·svaceta——nanira ikāsaṃhyaṃṅātmā, anandāsamādiṅaranya, ikāṅātmāti
tsṇadenyahumidәpāvaknyajuga, yatamataṃnyankapaṅguḥikāṃsukaviśeṣa, ikāṃpāt·yasinaṅguḥsamprajñātaṅaranya, ya§
ntuṅgal·yan·rva, yan·tlu, yan·pāt·, sāmprajñātātaḥṅaranya, yapvān·tanmaṃkana īkakabeḥ, yasinaṅguḥasamprajñāt
[57v]
57
āsāmādiṅaranya, ikātaṃasamprajñātasamādipurbvak——ā, ikātasāmprajñātasamādi, yatekādarmmanicitta, hanakṣә
ptaṅaranya, hanavimudaṅaranya, hananiṃrodaṅaranya, hana e——kāgrahaṅaranya, kṣәptaṅaranya, ikāṅāmbhәk·abvaṅumsat·ma
reṃkadohan·, vikṣәptaṅaranya, ikā ambhәk·ṅunikunik·vimudāṅaranya, ikāṅāmbhәk·ḷṅәḷṅә, nirodaṅaranya, ikā
ṅāmbhәkaṃhrat·, ekāgrahaṅaranya, īṅāmbhәk·laknārituṅgal·, nāhan·kveḥnidarmmaniṃcitta, ikāṃkṣәpta, vikṣәpta, vimudā,
[58r]
vimudā, tanpinakabhumi ikādeniṃsamādә, āpapinaka——bhuminiṃsamāditakāriḥ, piliḥekāgrahalāvaniroda, sala
ḥtuṅgal·kunaṃyehiṅamaniṃsamādi, atavākarvakunaṃ,——sumahursapāra, vruḥtakami ikāṃsinaṅguḥyogaṅaranya, apan
·sabarinyan·hnaṃikāṃcitta, yatasamādiṅaranya, yankvaliṅasaṃpāra, tan·yogya ikāṃhnaṃnicitta, saṅguhәn·yoga, ā


--- PAGE 179 ---


--- PAGE 180 ---
pan·hanasirayogiśvaravidehalāvan·, apārakṣәtilinā, videhaṅaranya, ikāsaṃyogisvarahnaṃluput·saṅkeṃsarira
[58v]
58
, mārimakāvakәkāṅaganāl·, kevala ikāsuksma§——sarirapinakāvaknira, prakratilināṅaranya, mārimakāvakikaṃ
śarirasuksmā, apārānpinākāvaknira, yekiṃpradāṇata——tvajuga, asikatasaṃvidehalāvanāprakratiliṇa, sirakama§
haṛp·māmaṅguḥhakәnnyakamokṣan·, apān·huvustan·hana ikāṃcittarihidәpnyara, tan·vruḥyarpaṅherkāla, ikāṃdarmma
saya, lāvanikaṃcittasaṅaskāra, maṅkanapvaya, mataṃnyantan·pramaṇahnaṃnikāṃcittajuga, āpantanhәnti ikāṃanekāviśayabhi
[59r]
nuktinya, tuturruṃ, āpāpaṅavruḥhanānta, antan·hәnti, ni§——han·simaṅherripradāna, ṅuniveḥikāvideha, yapvan·jnәk
āmuktikasaddyan·, dadisirasaṃśaramaṃhidәp·muvaḥ, yagā——vecakraṅaranya, āpantanhanāsraddādirisira, āpasinaṅguḥsraddā
diṅaranya, nihanlilaṃnicitta, matanyan·paṅguḥikāṃcittamaliṃlaṃ, saṅkepamriḥniramaṅabhyaśāyaugāsatatārirahineṃvṅi,§
ndyapaṅavruharililaṃnicitta, nihanyametrә, karuṇā, muditā, upekṣā, yapaṅavruharililaṃnicitta, āpasinaṅguḥmetriṅaranya
[59v]
59
, nihan·paṅavruḥhana, ikāṃambhәk·prāyojanākәn·§——davāniṃsukasamanmusuka, yametriṅaranya, kāruṇaṅaranya, ikāṃ
ṅāmbhәk·mrayojanākәn·ikāṃmalarramamaṅguḥhasuka——, lāvan·luputariśaṃṣāra, hikāruṇaṅaranya, muditaṅaranya, i§
kāṃṅambhәk·kanumoda isaṃgumaṃvehayu, yamuditāṅaranya, upekṣāṅaranya ikāṃṅāmbhәkumnaṃirikāṃmaṃgavehala, nāhan·
byaktānya ikāṃlilaṃrisaṃyogi, ikāṃtacittamalilaṃriyogi, yamaṃdadikәn·viryyamaṃdadyikәn·tutur·, ikaṃtuturyā
[60r]
maṃdadyakәn·prajñā, ikāṃprajñāyamadadyakәn·samādi,——apasinaṅguḥviryyaṅaranya, glәmnәṃmaṅabhyaśāyogalāvan·sadānva
nya, tuturṅaranya, vruḥnirarikayogisvarān·, tambhāniṃsaṃ——śarā, āpan·yamargganimaṅguḥhaknabhaṭāra, enakpvatuturniraribha§
ṭāra, yamaṃdadyaknaprajñā, āpataṣinaṅguḥprajñā,tpәtnirarikasāmyajñānan·tumuduhākәn·bhaṭāra, yamataṃnyansiratambhāraṅara
58v.1 apārakṣәtilinā ] the ﬁnal ā results from the correction of an original virāma, whose lower loop, albeit erased, is still dimly visible
59v.2 ambhәk· ] virāma written as a curved stroke below the k (cf. 34r.3 and
54v.1 and
60r.2 sadānva ] the va in the cluster nva is written as a subscript akṣara and not with the shape it usually assumes in ligature


--- PAGE 181 ---


--- PAGE 182 ---
niprajñāsaṃyogi, mataṃnyansiratambhāraṅaranya, āpanābnәrtkanyaribhaṭāra, kadyaṅganiṃhru abnәrlakunyadenihlār, maṅkanataprajñā
[60v]
60
saṃyogisvara ibhaṭāra, apatalvirnisamādisaṃyogi,——anpatmājaribhaṭāra, nihan· ◉◆◉, ātmānacetanastita
ḥhiliṃikāṃcitta, kavkas·tekaṃcittarisaṃhyaṃātm——ā, yatekārumakәt·ribhaṭāra, lanapvekāṃsamādimaṅkanaka
paṅguḥhanyadesaṃyogi, yamatanyankapaṅguḥhikāṃkasiddyan·denira, lvirnyakasiddyan·kanisṭa, madya,mottama, mataṃnyan·
tlu ikāṃkasiddyan·, apan·tlulakṣaṇasaṃyogi, hanamradusambhega, hanamadyasambhega, hanatibrasambhega, mradusa
[61r]
mbhegaṅaranya, akdidenyaṅabhyaśāyoga, lāvan·sadā——nanya, amaṅguḥtasirakasiddyan·ndānmālāvas·yakapaṅguḥ, ma
ṅkanatasaṃmādyasambhega, amaṅguḥsirakasiddyan·, ndān——·rijanmanirasovaḥikānpamaṅguḥ, kunaṃsaṃtibrasāmbhega, ti
bratkapniragaveyoga, lāvan·pramānanya, yemataṃnyanpaṅguḥ, ikāṃyogasiddi ijanmaniramaṅke, sumahursaṃkumāra,
āpatakaḷviḥnikāsaṃtibra, mataṃnyan·maṅguḥikāṃyogasiddirijanmaniramaṅkesājñābhaṭāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, hanәṃnikāṃi
[61v]
61
svaraprāṇīdānarisirayekāhetuniran·vavaṃpaṅgu——ḥikāṃyogasiddi, isvarapraṇidānaṅaranya, kapaṅguḥhanha§
vak·bhaṭāradesaṃyogi, sumahursaṃkumāra, āpalakṣa——ṇanyapaṅguḥhikāvakbhaṭārasājñāhyaṃmami, sumahurbhaṭāra, nihan
·lakṣaṇanhavakbhaṭāra ankapaṅguḥdesaṃyogi, kleśakārmmāvipakaśayaḥ, aparamraśṭasadevesvaraḥ, ikāṃnānetanāsaṃ
yogi, tan·karāktān·denikleśakārmmavipakaśaya, maṅkanalakṣaṇabhaṭāra, arpaṅguḥdesaṃyogi, kleṣaṅaranya, avidya
[62r]
, asmita, rāga,dvesa, abhinive(śa), kārmmaṅaranya, gavehala——, gavehayu, vipakaṅaranya, tasaktipalanyabhinuktiniṃsarira, a
panikeṃśarira, yekipalaniṃkārmmalāvan·sukaduḥka,——yekātankahidәp·kālaniṃyoga, yakāliṅaniṃtankārākka
ṇdeniṃklesakārmmāvipakāśayā, hanataseśaniṃkakārmmapalanāhuvus·kabhukti, yatasinaṅguḥasayaṅaranya, yatik
62r.2 abhinive(śa) ] ś written as an akṣara middling a ka and a śa, probably a minor mistake that was not deemed to be in need of correction


--- PAGE 183 ---


--- PAGE 184 ---
āmagavetuturniṃcitta, yanmahala, yanmahayu, yatekātanhanarisaṃyogi, yakaliṅanitankarāktāndeni asaya, lāvan·śatva
[62v]
62
jñātasira, kumavruḥhirātkabeḥ, sarvvakāryyakāktasira§––gumavayәkāṃrātkabeḥ, tātankalvihan·keśvaryyanira, maṅkana
lakṣaṇābhaṭāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, maṅkanataṃatmātan·——karāktāndeniklesakārmmavipakasaya, mvaṃsarvvajñātayalāvan
·sarvvakāryyakārtta, tatankalvihan·kesvaryyanya, yankvaliṅasaṃpāra, kārāttānmaraṅātmādeniṃkleśakārmmāvipākaśaya, ā
pabhyaktānya, hananyaṃmañetaṇa, kadimañetanāmarāṅātmā, yankvalisaṃpāra, tanhana ikāṃrātkabeḥ, yatanhanaṅā
[63r]
tmā, ndānparbvajñāya, nhapantahanakvaliṅasaṃpāra, tandadyi——yagumaveyadukanyavaknya, yanparbvajñāya, kāliṅanya, duduju
ga ikāṃcetanāniṅātmāsaṅelanabhaṭāra, mevәḥ§——takarikapaṅguḥhanyavaknyabhaṭāra, tanpaveḥjugakapaṅguḥha§
deniṃjanmayanhinlaṃlāvan·pramāda, kunaṃpavarahabhaṭārarihulun·, anuṃmeman·kagaveyanya, ikāṃṅābhyaśanamaṅkana
, tumuntunajñānasaṃyogi, maṅkanalisaṃkumāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, hanaṃnya oṃ,kāra, yatekәnamadeyabhaṭāra, iṇajarākәn
[63v]
63
·, risarvvasāstvakabeḥ, sirajapakneṃrahinavṅi, apata§——palaniṃoṃ,kāra, yan·lanajinapākәn·, hilaṃsarvvavighnade
nira, lāvan·kapaṅguḥtāvakbhaṭāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, ā——palvirnivighnasājñābhaṭāra, sumahurbaṭāra, nihan·lakṣaṇanivi§
ghna,◉, bhyadәḥpramādalasya, sandehastyanamevaca, bhrantijñānavratatajñāna, bhumyalābhāscamacali,◉,◉, bhyadәṅara§
nya, kadyaṅganiṃlāradyatmikā, vighna atekāṃpramadaṅa_ _(ya), tan·gumaveṃikāṃyogalāvan·sadānanya, aḷmәḥ
[64r]
magaveyoga, ṣadenahaṅaranya, halaḥdenyamaṃhi——(dә)p·, kunaṃtan·ḷpas·ṅvaṃmaṅabhyasāyoga, lāvan·dadi
nhanamārggāvaneḥ, ānuṃmeman·kagaveṃyanya, sa——keṃrikāṃyoga, maṅkanaliṃnisandehanya, vighnā ataḥṅarani
kā, styanaṅaranya, tan·vnaṃmagaveyoga, makanimittaṅlәḥnyamvaṃluhyanhambhәknya, bhrantajñānaṅaranya, vulaṅun·vratājñā
64r.1 ṅa_ _(ya) ] lacuna with space for two akṣaras, the second being a cluster whose ﬁnal ya is visible
64r.2 maṃhi––(dә)p· ] lacuna around the binding hole, where the borders of a cluster dә can be inferred


--- PAGE 185 ---


--- PAGE 186 ---
naṅaranya, vuruṃmagaveṃyayoga, bhamyalabhāṅaranya, tanhanaṃkahaṛpnya, tanpagaveyoga, caṃpalaṅaranya, ikisadāk
[64v]
64
āla, tanhanakālanyanpagaveyayoga, nāhantaṃvi§——ghnaṅaranya, yatәkāhilaṃdeniṃjapa, huvusnyanhilaṃikāṃvighna
, alavaṃlavaṃjñānanta, mahyantakitamagaveyayoga, ya——(du)meḥsaṃyogimaṅabhyasā, apan·palaniṃjapayavnaṃmaṅabhyasā
yoga, lanapvekāyogaghnānavayakәn·, yamataṃn(ya)_ _mkasākәn·saṅaskāra, ikāṃsaṅaskāraniṃyoga, yatamagave
tuturrisaṃyogi, ikāṃtuturyāmāmaṅun·yoga, muvaḥ,ikāṃyogayāmamkasākәn·saṅaskāramuvaḥricittasaṃyogi, lvir
[65r]
nyan·tkahanagә¯ṃhanaṛtṛt·lvirnya, hanalimat·——tkanya, ndātan·vuruṃmagaveṃduḥkaḥrisaṃyogi, piratakveḥ
nikāklesa, lavan·patalataṇānya, samahurbhaṭā——ra, nihan·lakṣaṇānya ikāṃkleśa, asmitā, rāga, dvesa
, abhiṇivega, samaṅkanalvirnikleśa, avidyaṅaranya, ikāṃjñānamabalakāḥlinya, ikāṃatmāyekәtan·lana, ha
hnanapatahilaṃsvabāvanya, kunaṃikāṃprativi apaḥtejabāyu akāsa, yekālaṅgә¯, maṅkanatekāṃsinaṅguḥpa§
[65v]
65
vitra, saṃvikumabratayogisvara, yekāsinaṅguḥ§——pavitra, hadva ateka, āpan·cāmpurāsikā, āpanimitta
nyan·campurā, apankasakitan·manaḥniradenibrata——, tan·panoliḥrivāhyasuka, nāhanmataṃnyan·campurāsi
kā, anuṃpavitra, akbhirahayu, yekāpavitra, nahan·lvirraniklesa, avidyamabalikәdәpnya, nihanta asmitā, ikāṃ
jñānatan·vruḥipāpalenānici,ttalāvanātmā, apanivәṃivә(ṃ)hidәpnyarikarva, rāgakleśaṅaranya, hyun·, dveśaklesaṅa
[66r]
ranya, melik·, abiṇәveśaṅaranya, ikāṃrāgalāva——n·dveśa, saṛmaṅadәg·, yekābhiṇәveṣaṅaranya, saṃpāṇdi
tapva, kahanantan·tu abәṇәveśa, byaktānyaṃnihan——·, melikāsirariṃgavemamuharālāralavan·saṃśara, mahyunta
sirarikalpasәn·mahaṛp·rihinak·tanpabalik·lāra, nahan·kabhәṇәvesan·saṃpāṇdita, ikātakabeḥ, a
64v.2 kālanyanpa ] traces of a cancelled ya visible beneath the cluster npa
64v.3 ya––(du)meḥ] the shape of a d with u vocalization is visible at the border of the lacuna around the binding hole
64v.4
_ _mkasākәn· ] lacuna allowing space for two akṣaras, before which half of a ya forming the cluster nya is visible
65r.4 mabalakāḥlinya ] the ākāra is written afer a visarga by metathesis, resulting in an unpermitted
sequence. I presume that °kāḥwas intended, though the whole word appears to be still corrupt


--- PAGE 187 ---


--- PAGE 188 ---
vidya anuṃbhuminikā, apan·yekāpupulānimityajñāna, sumahursaṃkumāra, apatatambhāniklesaśamaṅkanasājñābhaṭāra, suma
[66v]
66
hurbhaṭāra, yaktaḥprastāvāniṃbrataginavayākәn·desaṃ——yogi, apan·nikāṃkleśamakandil·akveḥtaya, ikāṃ
klesamagә¯ṃaganāl·tkanya, yekīhilaṃdeniṃbrata——, lāvan·prānayamayoga, ikāhalit·tkanya, yekā§
hilaṃdenisāmprajñātasāmādi, ikaṃsāmprajñātasamādi, yapalaniṃsāmprajñātasamādi, yapalaniṃpratyahāradi, yekā
palaniṃbrata, ikāṃbratayapalaniṃverāgya, yapalaniṃvaṛg·lāra, ikāṃlaraṅaranya, yekātanyahavusan, apan
[67r]
·jātiniṃmavakjugāhanāṃlāra, ikāṃmavak·yekāma——valuyvaluyarisvārgganarakālāvanmanusa, maputәran·ataḥta
n·pgat·, vruḥpvasaṃyogisvarānmakanājātiniṃmāvak·——yamataṃnyanpamriḥmagavesamādi, yatanyan·puputasaṃṅkeca
krābhāva, maṅguhaknakalpasәn·ṅaranya, luput·saṅkebhāvacakra, umguhakәnpavakbhaṭāra, nāhan·mataṃnyantanpaḷḥpaḷ
ḥ, apan·tṅitṅin·riṃlārajātisaṃyogi, ikāṅvaṃṅapuṅguṃbtaḥriṃlāra, padanya, kadyaṅgāniṃvvaṃknaṃriṃsavaṃnigarāgati, tanalāraya§
[67v]
67
navakniṃvvaṃkunaṃyanmataṅvaṃknādenya, alāra ikā, saṃyo——gikāharanmata, apantannenak·panoniṅvaṃyan·knāriṃsaṃvaṃ
nigarāgati, matakut·pvariṃlārajātisaṃyogi, ya——mataṃnyanpagaveṃsamādi, sahasadānānya, yekāpinriḥni§
ra, lāvan·brata, apānikābratayekāmagsәṅәmāla, nyaṃvvaṃmāṅәsә¯ apvay·riṃkayu, tan·poliḥikā apvay·
, yan·mlәsikāṃkayu, yapvanhakiṃikāṃinәsә¯, irikāmgutāṅāpvay·, maṅkanatekāṃsariralāvan·indriyā, ṅu
[68r]
niveḥikāṃcitta, bratayapamahakәṃiriya, inәsә¯——tayaniprāṇayāsamādiṃ, yamataṃnyan·hidәp·avakbhaṭā
ra, tavat·kapaṅguḥpavakbhaṭāra, tavat·sakāmayo——gi, sumahursaṃkumāra, ndyatalakṣaṇānikāṃyogasadinālā
van·bratasājñābhaṭāra, nihanlaksaṇanikāṃyogasamādinā, anuṃpaṅavruhantānāku, hana asṭaṅgāṅaranya, yāma
67v.2 saṃvaṃ] a anusvāra, whose traces are still dimly visible, was erased
67v.3 sadānānya ] traces of a cancelled akṣara beneath the cluster dā, and of a subscript ya between dā and nā
68r.3 yoga ] traces
of a cancelled i vocalization above ga


--- PAGE 189 ---


--- PAGE 190 ---
niyāma, aśanāprātyahāra, prāṇayama, dārana, dyanā, samādi, samaṅkanakveḥniṃyogasadāna, yāmaṅaranya, ahiṅsa, satya,§
[68v]
68
astenya, brahmācāri, aparigraha, ahәṅsuṅaranya, tanpa——matīmati, sahananiprāṇәtanpātyana ikākabeh, lāvan
·patyantatakutnimāvakpati, mataṃnyanmahābrataṅara——nsaṃvikutanpāmātimāti, hanatavuvusniṃvaneḥ, tanaparakvaṅvaṃ
mātimātisatva, yan·carvarisaṃhyaṃ, atatābhojanakunaṃ, maṅkanapaknānya, tātanmaṅkanasaṃyogi, nihan·vaneḥtanpa§
matyanasatvayan·parvvāṇikāla, tatānmaṅkanasaṃyogi, pisaniṅusirānpamātyanasarvvāsatva, yatasinaṅguḥahiṅsuṅaranya, sa
[69r]
tyaṅaranya, tanmadvaribratanya, tanmadvamovus·, tanpa§——ṅahalaṅuniveḥmaliṅamas·, yekāṣatyaṅaranya, yasina§
ṅguḥasthenyaṅaranya, brahmācāriṅaranya, yatanyantan·ka——lalaranāsamādi, yadoniṃtanparabi, yekābrāhmācariṅa
ranya, apārigrahaṅaranya, tarpaṅakusarvvādravya, nāhan·lakṣaṇaniṃyamābrata, soca, santosa, tamaḥsvadyaya, isva§
rapraṇidāna, socaṅaranya, māradinavak·, lāvanāmbhәk·hayvākākavasadeniṃrāgadveṣamoha, maradinamovus·, hayv
[69v]
69
āmuvusakәn·maṃlarerivaneḥ, maradinamolaḥ, hayvo——makolaḥdurbhyasāna, maradinaṅan·, hayvopinaṅanikaṃsenuhu
takәn·paṅanәn·saṃviku, lāvaninumәnirajñāna, yekā——sinaṅguḥśocaṅaranya, soliraniranasi ataḥsantosaknani
ra, atavāsoliḥnirananәmәpatapānira, yasantosaknanira, ikāṃṅindriyākabeḥprahәn·sakәtana, ribratalāvan·sa
mādi, yatanyan·tanpadadyaknarāgayanpaṃnon·viśayakāliṅanya, tan·garjitayanpaṃṛṅә¯kiduṃmenak·, athapaṃṅśalaku
[70r]
naṃ, ilatnyamuhārametpināṅan·, yanpamaṅan·rāśa§——menak·, nahanlacalacaniṃtapaṃṅaranya, svadyayaṅaranya aglәmā
ṅunyakәn·matra, astāvāribhaṭāra, isvaraprānidānaṅa——ranya, umaṅәnāṅәn·kasuksman·bhaṭārariratkabeḥ, ṅuniveḥryya
vaknira astityanabhaṭāra, yatanyan·siddisamādi, yekā isvarapranidānaṅaranya, sumahursaṃkumāra, apandoniṃkā
69v.3 paṅanәn· … śocaṅaranya ] traces of cancelled akṣaras beneath this portion of text
70r.1 paṃṅśala ] this reading is problematic, for the śu written below the cluster ṅә as if in ligature results in an unpermitted
sequence, and therefore the whole might be interpreted as a way to cancel the cluster. Te exact placement below, and close to, the cluster ṅә makes it less likely that śu would be an unmarked addition.


--- PAGE 191 ---


--- PAGE 192 ---
niyāmabratanhinānakәn·, apanhuvusikāṃyāmabratamapagәḥpinakābratasaṃyogi, sumahurbhaṭāramekastekaṃyā
[70v]
70
mabrata, kunaṃyatanyantadadyadesaṃyogi, yatāma§——taṃnyan·gavayakna, ikāṃniyāmabrata, nihanpalanikāti§
nonta, antadadi ikāṃahәṅsudesaṃyogi, tātanha——natukārpalanya, vvaṃṅadyintan·papra, vvaṃvanvaitanpataṇdiṅan·
, lāvanasiḥtekāṃsarvvasatvakabeḥrisira, nāhan·palanikāṃahәṅsubrata, nihan·tapaniṃsātya, jātismāravruḥrija
nmaniraṅuni, nāhanpalanisātyayanginaveyakәn·, nihan·palaniṅastenya, tkajuga ikāṃdravyarisira, tanuliḥniṅaṅela, n
[71r]
āhan·palanitanpaṅahalāhalā, nihantapalaniṃtanpa——rābi, utsahariyogasira, āpantantalalārān·samādinira, nāha
ntapalaniṃbrahmācariyanginaveyākәn·, nihantāpala——nijñānatanpaṅaku, sidda asikāryyanya, nihantapalaniṃyāmabrata
ginive, palaniśoca, tan·sinasarggadesamanyajanma, mvaṃkahidәptasaṃhyaṃviseśadenya, kahanapalaniśocayan·gi
naveyākәn·, nihantapalaniṃsantosa, agīṃsukanyatanpavorlāra, nihantapalaniṃtapa, ilaṅikāṃragādvesamoha, mvaṃi
[71v]
71
kāṃkleśakabeḥ, nāhan·palaniṃtapaginaveyakәn·,——nihan·tapalaniṃsvadyaya, papaṅguḥsiralāvansaṃhyaṃ, saṅinastāvā
nirapratidina, nāhan·palaniṃsvadyayāyavinabhyaśā, niha——n·palaniṅisvara, praṇidānā, siddiyogisira, nāhantapalaniṃyā
mabratayaninabhyaśā, lumkasapvāṅabhyaśāyogamvaṃsadānanya, ametatasiradeśarahayū ubhvānanira, anusalaḥnivurahan
·, tātanavalanaridurjanā, pavitratamaradin·, yatanyansidyajñānanira, yan·guhāyan·gunuṃ, yan·halas·yan·sapiṅgirilvaḥ,§
[72r]
yan·rinuśakunaṃ, asiṃkahyunirahuṅgvananira ikākabe——ḥ, yapvan·huvusiranma uṅvān·, madyusataśira, masocātasira
rumuhun·macaman·rā, mantranira, aghora, tatpurusa——kunaṃhuvusmāṃkana, tumamatasiraripagavayanirayoga, yanpa§
deherān·, yangutā, yanumaḥkunaṃ, mavasuhāsuku, mvaṃṅgvākulvan·bhaṭāra atavākidul·bhaṭāratakunaṃ, manambhahatasiraru§
70v.4 palani ] the codex presents a small hole in correspondence with the i vocalization, which is, nonetheless, still partly visible
71v.3 nāhan ] the ā appears to have been corrected from an original virāma,
which retains a trace of its elongated stroke
72r.1 durjanā ] repha written above the cluster du, leaning toward the ja; it is diﬃcult to determine whether the scratch on the lef of the repha is accidental or represents
a trace of an original anusvāra which has now faded away (in which case read: riṃdurjanā). I consider the former case more likely


--- PAGE 193 ---


--- PAGE 194 ---
muhun·, liṅanirabhāvasiddāsaṃyogi, maṅkanaliṅanirayarpanambhaḥribhaṭāra, huvusmaṃkana, maluṅguḥhatasira, riṅgvānuṅgvananira, yan·pṭa
[72v]
72
, yan·saṇdi, yatanyantanagaliṅapaluṅguḥnira, makapala——soveniraluṅguḥ, yanpagaveyoga, nihan·lakṣamaṇanirasakṣa
ṇā, hanapādmāśanā, hanasvastikāśanā, nihan·lakṣaṇa§——niṃpadmāśanā, ikātalapakankaliḥnumpaṃṅakәn·ripupulaliḥ, ya
pādmāsanāṅaranya, ikāṃtalapakankaliḥ, umuṅgū isoriṃpupukaliḥ, yabhādrāsanāṅaranya, svasthikāśanāṅaranya, ikātala
pakankaliḥ, umuṅgvarislāpupukaliḥ, ikālpalpaniṃtaṅankivatumumpaṃrikәsapvan·, tumumpaṃtekāṃṅatәṅәn·lumahātaḥ, ikāṃvalakāṃma
[73r]
bnә¯rapaṅadәgnya, tәmәṅgә¯tekāgulu, hayvātumṅā, hayvā——tumuṅkul·, mabnәrājuga, ikāmātadәḷtuṃtuniṃiruṃ, atavāmrama
jugakunaṃ, ikāṅilat·yahumlәtana ikāṃhuntu isor§——iruhurmāgolambhemidәma, nāhan·lakṣaṇānirasakṣaṇā, huvu
snyanmenakpaluṅguḥnira, gavayāniratekāṃpratyahārayoga, ikāṃindrayāvatәkәn·saṅkeṃviśayanya, mātahayvāvineḥ
manona, taliṅahayvāvineḥmaṛṅhә, iruṃhayvāvineḥmaṅambhuṅa, kulit·hayvāvineḥmahidәpāpanastis·, kututuk·hayvāvi
[73v]
73
neḥmaṃsabda, taṅan·hayvāvineḥmaṃgamәlasukuhayvāvine——ḥlumakvā, nāhandeniṅamatәk·indriyā, manahayvāvineḥmamika§
lpa, buddihayvāvineḥmaṅaṅәnāṅәnā, ahaṅkārahayvāvine——ḥṅakva, nāhandeniṅamatәk·tyantaḥkāraṇa, huvusnyanasәm·pәnә
kākabeḥ, yatamataṃnyan·hnaṃikāṃcittahumidәṃ, tankvatan·kva, ekātvacitta, saṃhyaṃātmāyatasinaṅguḥyogaṅaranya, hu
vusnyanekātva, gavayәnirataprāṇayamayoga, tlas·lakṣaṇaniṃkāprāṇayāmayoga, recaka, kurmbhaka, puraka, vinitvāknә
[74r]
kabāyusaṅkeriruṃ, saneḥsaneḥhayvādras·sahiṅaniṃ——maṃṅәsәp·bhāyuriṅiruṃ, kuñcitamuvaḥ, ekātvajñānanira, sakavaṃni
makuñci, sabhagyanmasoveya, āpanānyasvajātiniya——taninabhya, ◉, ikāṃkuñci uttamā, tan·pamәtvakәn·bāyuhu
mnājugatanpambhәkan·, apan·cetanāsaṃhya atmā, yekāhinidәpnira, tanpantara, yatamataṃnyanhilaṃikābāyurisa§
72v.1 nanira, ] some traces of cancelled signs are very dimly visible beneath the sequence (the only clearly decipherable one is an i vocalization above na)
72v.4 umuṅgū ] this perhaps may also be read as umuṅguā
(umuṅgvā would have been the correct form)
73r.1 vatumumpaṃrikәsa ] a string of wood has been attached below the line in order to connect the two broken parts of the folio
73r.4 hārayoga, ikāṃindra ] a
string of wood has been attached below the line in order to connect the two broken parts of the folio


--- PAGE 195 ---


--- PAGE 196 ---
ṅkanya, apantan·cittacetanādesaṃhya atmā, padanya, kadyaṅgānivvetumitisivatutinunvanmapāṇdesdaṃmabāṃhilaṃjuga ini
[74v]
74
sәpnivatumapanas·, maṅkatāṃbāyuhilaṃdenicittaniṅā§——tmā, yamataṃnyan·viseśa ikā ekātvakuñci, ndan·yanhuvu
s·ikāṃrecaka, kumvāka, puraka, apatapalanikāṃpr——āṇayāmayoga, yan·kvaliṅanta, hilaṃtamaḥniṅatilavanikāṃ
cittadenya, yamataṃnyan·hilaṃcittasaṃyogidenya, apānikāṃmanaḥ·lavānāṅәnāṅәn·anekāparanya, umsut·makalis
·tankavnaṃtinimpәl·, yavat·makveḥinaṅәnāṅәn·rikālaniyoga, tavat·vuruṃsamādisaṃyogi, matakut·pvasaṃyogi
[75r]
vuruṃṅasamādinira, yamataṃnyanpinriḥginaveyākәnik——āpraṇayāma, apanikāṃumaṅkusikaṃcittameṅhā, apanikāṃpra
ṇayāma ataḥdumeḥnyahumnaṃṅa ikāṃṅaṅәnanāṅәnmakve——ḥ, lāvanәsәtekādāraṇayogadeniprāṇayāma, apasi§
ṇaṅguḥdāraṇayogaṅaranya, ikāṃcitta ekātva atguḥrisvadeśanya, yan·rihati, yan·riṃyāvāniṃsarikunaṃ, yanicittaniṅātmaku
naṃ, asthityayan·ekatvabhaṭārakunaṃ, ikāṃtapaṅekagrahanikāṃcittasalaḥtuṅgal·yasinaṅguḥdāranadyanayogaṅaranya, ◉
[75v]
75
, nihantasamādiyogaṅaranyahayocittahilaṃpraya§——tnanyarivvahniṃhatmāhanapa, taharācittanyasenāribhaṭārasi§
rakatkәnikadyanasaṃyogiṅkaṃtayasinaṅguḥsamādikaha——n·pihnihasdagayapanakāsadyanasaṃyogi anpaṅguḥikāṃka
mokṣan·, ikātaṃasṭaṅgā, yapinakabāhiraṅgadeniṃsamprajñāta, nāhan·desaṃyogimaṅābhyasāprastāvinyan·kapaṅguḥi
kāṃkasiddyan·, yapinakasadānaniranpagaveyogamuvaḥ, prasthāvānyan·vnaṃsakāmakama, yapvanhilaṃikāṃsahajamāla, i
[76r]
rikeṃtasirānpadalāvan·bhaṭāra, sumahursaṃpāra, aṅe——l·dāhattaṅaranikātaḥ, apan·tanpaṃdadyaknakamokṣan·i
kaṃyoganebyasā, yankvaliṅta, aparanyapvamadadyaknaṃka——mokṣan·, yankvaliṅtana, sumahursaṃśevaka, dikṣajugamadadyakә
n·kamokṣan·paṃtamataṃnsarvvajñātakaṃatmā, yan·dikṣajugapaṃhidәpasaṃpara, ikāṃtaṅātmāyantinpartvajñātan·sinaṅgu
74v.3 lavanikāṃ] ā in the following line
75v.3 yogi ] e vocalization of yo added below, between saṃand yā, unmarked


--- PAGE 197 ---


--- PAGE 198 ---
ḥikākamokṣan·, tapvankadadi ikākasarvvājñāniṅātmādenidikṣājuga, yamatanyan·bhyasānātaḥ, ikāṃyogasa
[76v]
76
mādimneglәk·, sumahursaṃkumāra, ndyakahakṣamānikaṃka——siddyan·, kapaṅguḥdesaṃyogi, nihan·niṅәtākәnanta, ikāṃ§
madadyaknakasiddyanisaṃyogi, ikaṃdāranā, dyana, samā——di, rumakәt·tariṅkana, yatanyanilusaṃyogimatmahan·prati
vi, apanikāṃdāranya, dyana, samādirumākәtritatvatuṅgal·, yasinaṅguḥsaṃyāmaṅaranya, anuṃpinakasadanāsaṃyogimagave
kasiddyan·, ndān·denirānaṃyāma, saṅkesordeniṃrānaṃyāma, apantan·dadi ikāṃtatva iruhursināṃyāma, hanyatapa ikāṃ
[77r]
tatva iruhūr, yatamataṃnyan·saṅkesora ataḥde——nirānāṃyāmarumuhun·, yapvanmahyun·siratumirvāśaktinisiṅhā
, ikāṃsiṅhasināṃyāmaśaktinya, yāpvan·mahyun·sira——tumirvāśaktinigarada, sināṃyāmāniraśaktinya, yapvan·mahyun·
siravruḥharitkanipātinira, ikāṃdarmmadarmmasināṃyāmanira, aparānikaṃdarmmadarmmaṅaranya, ikaṃgavehalamvaṃgavehayu, a
pan·palanidarmmayamagavehurip·mvaṃsarira, yapvanhәntipalanikāṃdarmmadarmmasināṃyāmanira, tkapātinirayanmaṅkana, yapvanmāhyu
[77v]
n·piratan·knelapāvlikāṃ, hanāmrata isorniṅguruṃ——guruṃṅan·, yekāsaṃyāmanira, yapvān·mahyunpiratumonasaṃ§
siddyalāvandevatā, ikāṃbāyusi udānasaṃyāmanira, ha——natajotiḥmtusaṅkeṃvunvūn·yapinakasuluḥnira antonpaṃsi§
ddālāvan·devatā, yāpvan·mahyunsirakatonadumilahavaknira, ikāṃbhāyusiśamānayāśayāmanira, yapvanmahyunpira
gumsәṅanāvaknira, kadyaṅgāniṃbhasmāśeṣa, mamkasāknāvvajugāvaknira, ikāṃbāyusisamāṇayāsaṃyamānira, yapvānmahyunpira
[78r]
tankapәtәkariṃlāvan·vvaṃ, ikābāyusi udānāyasaṃyā——manira, yapvan·mahyunpiratankatona, saṃyāmanirapanonivvaṃva
neḥ, mvaṃsaṃyāmanirāvakniratankatona, yāpvanmāhyun·§——siramaṃlayāṅariṅākāṣa, saṃyāmaniravakniramahaṅanakadikapu§
k·, huvusiramahaṅan·vnaṃtasiramamapahipunti, atavāmuṅgvaṃsavaṃniṃgarāgatikunaṃ, yatapaṅavruhanirahaṅanhavaknira, huvu
77r.1 tapa ikāṃ] ā in the following line
78r.4 paṅavruha ] ṅa has been written as a v with a dot to the top-right so as to form the shape of a ṅa (cf. 84r3)


--- PAGE 199 ---


--- PAGE 200 ---
smaṃkana, saṃyāmaniratapasamandānhavakniralāvan·kāṣa,yanahaṛp·sirasadāyovana, ikāṃpañcamahābhutasaṃyāmanira
[78v]
78
sakatuṅgal·, ikāṃprativisayamānirarumuhun·, ya——pvanhuvusikāṃprativisaṃyāmadenira, bhyaktāsirālvat·tanka
nindeniṃkadgā, tanramәtāvaknirayantibeṃvataṃ, atavā——tibeṃkaraṃjugasira, ikāṃkaruṃjugasira ikāṃkaraṃjugaṛmәt·
, avaknirasrada, nahanpaṅavruhan·riṃhalaḥniṃpratividenira, saṃyāmaniratekaṃvve, tankapәtәk·sirayankaḷburiṃbāñu,§
sināyamānirāteja, paṅavruhaninirayanalaḥikāṃtejadenira, tan·gsәsirayankatururiṃṅapuy·, sināṃyāmanireṃkaṃbā
[79r]
yu, paṅavruhanirannalaḥikāṃbāyudenira, halaḥikāṃ——bāyuyanmaṃkana, lāvan·tankatub·siradeniṅaṅin·, ṅuni
veḥhuripniratan·vikarā, yamataṃnyan·dirghayuśa saṃ§——yogi, piratalavasnirahurip·, salavasniprativitkaniṃmahāpralā
yādlāha, irikānhilaṃśarirasayogi, ndātan·vikārajñānanira, apantan·knepātisaṃhyaṃatmā, lāvan·prajñāsiratan·
knelupa, saṃyomaṃniratekaṃakāśa, yapvanalaḥdenirāṅākāśa, tantībājugasiradeniṅavaṅava, mvaṃlituhayutekā
[79v]
79
vaknira, kahyunhyun·vinulatan·tarknetuha, nāhan——·byaktānyanalaḥikāṃpañcamahābhutadesaṃyogi, mantalvirni
kāṃkasiddyankapaṅgāḥdesaṃyogi, prastāvāniprayatnā——nira, apanhana upāsarggaṅaranya, anuṃkapaṅguḥdesaṃyogi§
, apasinaṅguḥupasarggaṅaranya, ikāṃpinakādagideniṃpradānatatva, yatamaṅgūḥricitta, karipvekāṃcittadesaṃyo
gi, hanatavāśanānikāṃsatvarajaḥtamaḥ, turuṃtapvanihilaṃ, yasinaṅguḥupasarggaṅaranya, lvirnya, prajñā, madras·, mabyәt·,
[80r]
upasargganikāṃsatva ikāṃprajñā, yatamavak·risaṃ——yogi, yatamataṃnyan·panurun·prajñāsaṃyogi, apabyaktā
niprajñāsaṃyogi, ikāṃṅajitapvan·denira, vrusi——reryyatanya, mvaṃupātpәtinya, nihanta upasargganiṃsatva, lāva
n·gaveniraṅambhuṃgandāvaṃṅi, atavāgaveṃniramanon·devatārupamaṅanugrahanalvirnya, upasargganisatva ikāṃ, niha§
78v.3 tibeṃkaraṃ] traces of a cancelled i vocalization above the akṣara ra


--- PAGE 201 ---


--- PAGE 202 ---
ntaṃupasargganirājaḥ, śaktihidәpniraryyavaknira, apanikāṃvastutankavnaṃridaṅudenira, yekā upasarggarājaḥ, nihan·upasargga§
[80v]
80
niṃtamaḥ, mogaptaṃpanonira, mvaṃjñānanira, vulaṅuntanatu——turijñānānira, maṅkanatāvakniramalupakabeḥ, abyәtan·vnaṃ
molaḥupasargganitamaḥikāṃ, yāpvan·maṅkana ikāṃu——pasarggakapaṅguḥdenira, magaveyatasiraprayogisandi, apu
yāpuya, yanpamaṅanasarvvāpyak·, yapvan·agәṃsalaḥpanon·lāranira, edān·kunaṃ, sikpәnāṇdihәn·, tambhānahә
hanalimolāvan·bavamatanira, yapvan·atuturkdikdik·, konәn·tasiratuturarijñānanira, sumahursaṃkumāra, ena
[81r]
kikāyānparovaṅasira, yapvan·tuṅgal·tuṅgal·si——repatapānira, apata upayanira, sumahurbhaṭāra, hanaktapaṃhilaṃ
lāra, prastāvānyan·dirghayuśasaṃyogi, sumahursaṃku——māra, kasihanahulun·varahәnikāpaṅhilaṃlāra, sabarinyan
·papasaḥikāṃpradānatatvajugalāvan·atmā, ṅuniveḥyanyapasahasaṃhyaṃṅātmālāvan·citta, yatahetusaṃyogi
takneṃlāra, sumahursaṃkumāra, umapadeniṃamasahaknasaṃhyaṃatmālāvan·pradānadi, sumahurbhaṭāra, yadonikāṃprayo§
[81v]
81
gasanditinakonakәnisaṃguruyapvanan·mahyun·sira——saṃyogi umasuka irikāṃvvaṃvaneḥ, ikāṃdārmmadārmmayatapga
tinira, hanataseśanyakdikdik·, matanyan·tanmāti——, yapvanhuvus·pgat·siddāsiramasukanāṃvvaṃvaneḥ, yapvan·ma
hyunsiramaṅguḥha aṃśṭesvaryya, ikāṃekādaśendriyāyāsaṃyamanira, yapvanālaḥikāṃ, kapaṅguḥikāṃaśṭeśvaryyadeni
ra, apatalvirnyanihan·, animan·laghiman·mahiman·, prasti, prākamya, isitva, vāsitva, yātrakā, ma, vāśayәtva, nāha
[82r]
nyaṃasṭeśvaryyaṅaranya, animan·ṅaranya, māgaṇal·a§——vakniratambhayan·vkasanmalittaya, apasinaṅguḥhalit·, vnaṃsira
masuk·mturiprativi, kadyaṅgāniṃvvaṃmasilurup·rivvaṃ, maṅka——natasaṃyogi, vnaṃmasuk·mturiṃprativi, maṅkanayān·paṅlakula
ku, tankavadādeniṃgunuṃkarsiśepinurug·nira, ikāvatutrasikādenira, ndātan·vikāra ikāvaknira, yatakāli§


--- PAGE 203 ---


--- PAGE 204 ---
ṅaniṅalit·, laghiman·ṅaranya, abyә¯tāvakniratambhayan·vkasanmahaṅankadikapuk·, yātamatanyanpaṃlayaṃri akāśa, mvaṃ
[82v]
82
madrastalakunirasaṅkemanaḥyekālaghiman·ṅaranya——, tarkalvihan·gәṃnirayarṣāhaṛp·gәṃṅa, atavāpinujātasira
saparanira, prāptiḥṅaranya, sakahaṛpirātәka, saka§——hyun·nirahana, nihan·artaniṃpraptivaneḥ, dadisiragumamәl·§
saṃhyaṃvulān·saṅkeṃpaliṅgihanira, prakamyaṅaranya, sakahaṛpnirarupanira, isitvaṅaranya, maṅakarkadiḥvāsayitvaṅaranya,§
maṅutus·, yatrakāmavāsayitvaṅaranya, sakāmakāma ikāsaṃhyaṃincā, yatrakatahalitandenira, ṅkān·n·vāsa§
[83r]
yәtvapramāṇasira, vnaṃtasiramadaṇdayantan·kapintuhu——ikāṅinutusnira, nāhansinpaṃasṭeśvaryyaṅaranya, anmaṃkanaka
siddyan·saṃpāṇdita, tkakavighnarisira, lvirnya, ikā——devatāmāmava upābhogamvaṃanakbhirahayu, mahaḷp·sina§
ṇdaṃnya, kapvāmalviḥlviḥhyun·, yatamanusuṃśuṃyogi, syaṃmulihariṃsvargga, ndānhayvasiramaṅguḥ, apan·bañcana ikā, guma
veḥvuruṅaniyogasaṃyogiśvaradonikā, yatamataṃnyanpaṃhuliḥhuliḥharihati, akuyātaḥtutakneṃkvāpasyaṃniṃt
[83v]
83
ādevatābyaktākumahidәp·śāṃṣaramuvaḥ, apan·jati——niṃśaktiniṃviśaya, luputikāṃsukaviśeṣadenya, ikāṃlārata
n·vuruṃkabhuktideku, ikāṃkasiddyanhuvus·kabhukti——deku, tanuliḥkvāṅinakinak·, haliḥkvāgavebratalāva§
nsamādi, sajivaniṃrāttikā, hilaṃṅapvāyadeniṃviṣayasakaṛṃ, lalukasmālaṃku, pakṣanikāhananikā, indrajalasadra§
sya, kadikilat·kabhuktinya, yadyan·malavasibhinukti, ndātan·vurumaveḥlāra, ikāṃlāra, anekālvarnya, tavat·pve
[84r]
kāṃjanmākatabānlāra, kavatkadasyatanayā, meviḥma§——luy·janmamuvaḥ, aṅhiṃkbhosapi asuvәk·tmahanya, yekāka
takutkukamumanaḥ, yanaṅgānan·pasyaṃnikāṃvatәkdeva——tā, maṅkanaliṃniravaraḥvaraḥryyavaknira, nihansahursaṃpāra, satus
·kveḥhanikāṃviśayakabhuktideniṃṅva, tan·yamaṃhadәpālārayan·vruḥrikatatvan·bhaṭāra, mataṃnyanmaṃkana, apantanhanatu§
84r.3 aṅgānan· ] ṅa has been written as a v with a dot to the top-right so as to form the shape of a ṅa (cf. 78r.4)


--- PAGE 205 ---


--- PAGE 206 ---
hutuhuniṃkā ulaḥkabeḥ, mataṃnyantanhanatuhu, anhilaṅadonikākabeḥ, maluyarisaṅkanya, ndisaṅkanya, saṅkesaṃhyaṃta
[84v]
84
yā, malilaṃtankavaranaṇ·, sirasinaṅguḥniskālaṅaranya, a——nuṃkaliṇaniṃrātkabeḥ, niyatatan·salaḥparān·, maṅkanapvaka
tatvaniṃjanma, mvaṃkavruḥhan·saṃhyaṃparārtā, ndyatamātaṃ§——nyan·saṃśayāriṅulaḥkabeḥ, apamataṃnyanpamuhāralāra, kabhu
ktyaniṃviśayā, maṅkanatakbhosapi asuvәk·, sabarinyanmatimuliḥritayā, tamatandinaliḥmuliḥriṃtayā, apankatonhilaṃ§
ikāṃvaknya, yekā inakuntamokṣa, jñānanyalāvan·cittanyatanavruḥhirikā, lāvanikāṃtayā ansinaṅguḥparāmartā, apata
[85r]
paṅupākārānya, ndyakasiddyankadadidenya, sumahursaṃpāra——, tan·mvākṣataṅaranpikā, yanpamaṅguḥhakasiddyan·, kunaṃyan
·hilaṃjuga, yamokṣaṅaranya, yankvaliṅasaṃpāra, kapanta§——katayan·tka, apan·dudu ikāṅahurip·, kadilaṅgә¯ṃnikāṃha
na, kapan·tekāṃtayāyantapratyakṣā, sumahursaṃpāra, dlāharidakanipralaya, yantayā ikaṃrātkabeḥ, maṅkanaliṃsaṃpāra,§
apayan·mtu ikāratkabeḥmuvaḥ, yekāmajarākәn·yanliṇaritaya ikāṃrāt·, apansaṅkeṃtayāsaṅkānyamtuṅuni, yanmaṃka§
[85v]
85
naliṅasaṃpāra, ciruddātekopakṣantahanmaṃkana, mataṃnya§——sinaṅguḥviruddā, apanliṇariṃtayā ikāṃjagat·lita, mtupvayamne
sinaṅguḥtamtusaṅkeṃtayā ikāṃjagat·, advatan·tayā——ṅaranikā, yantaliṇanijagat·anāvtu, yankvaliṅasaṃpāra, tandadi§
taṃparamartāmaṅkana, sumahursaṃkumāra, aparāniṃkāsinaṅguḥsaṃpāratayā ulihaniṃjagat·, lāvan·saṅkeṃniṃjat·mtu, kasiha
navarāhәnhulun·bhaṭāra, ikāṃsinaṅguḥsaṃpāratayāparāmartā, hekānasinaṅguḥprakrativakna, tayāpasaṃhniṃcittasatvarā
[86r]
jatamaḥ, lakṣaṇanyaptaṃtanpacetanā, apantan·hana——kaprajñāniriya, ṅuniveḥikācetanā, apamaṃtaṃnyansinaṅgu
ulihaniṃjagat·apan·ya ikākrәyasaktibhaṭāraṅa——ranya, mayāmayā ikā atmāyātakattibhaṭāraparāmakāraṇa§
, tavat·pvekāṅātmācumetanekāṃprakratitatva, tavat·mtu ikāṃjagat·, yāpvan·marri ikāṃprakratitatvaci
85r.2 ṅaranpikā ] the ligature np is not sure; the second element strongly resembles a hastily written p, but perhaps it could also be read as a y


--- PAGE 207 ---


--- PAGE 208 ---
netanādenirāṃatmā, liṇa ikāṃjagat·malvirisaṅkanyariprakratitatva, maṅkānastitinikāṃrāt·saṅkanyaṅuni, sumahu§
[86v]
86
saṃkumāra, apādumeḥnikāprakratitatvasaṅguḥhin——·tayādesaṃpāra, sumahurbhaṭāra, apantan·hidәpnya, ṅuniveḥ§
ikāṃṅlaksaṇa, tanparāmartāpvekāṃtayāsinaṅguḥ§——saṃpāraviśeṣa, tahatanparāmartā ikāṃ, apansaṅkanijaga§
t·lāvanuliḥhanya, mvaṃinuliḥhakәntaya, vruḥpvasaṃyogi, antan·paramarta ikāṃtayā, yatamataṃnyantanikāpalani§
samādisaṃyogi, ndyatalakṣaṇāsaṃhyaṃparamartā, anuṃ{tujuni}samādisaṃyogi, yankvaliṅanta, ikāṃcetanāsarvvajñasaṃku§
[87r]
mavruḥhi ikārātkabeḥ, sarvvākaryyakarttā, saṃguma——v{e} ikāṃrātkabeḥ, nditakahanānira, yankvaliṅanta, kahanā
nira ikāṃrātkabeḥ, ndātankaton·, apantan·pala——kṣaṇa, tanparupa, tanpahidәp·, pisaniṅu, apabyaktānyanha§
na, yankvaliṅanta, nihan·utpāptistiliṇanәjagat·, {yoka i}ncābhaṭāra, ikāṃprakratitatva, yasinaṅguḥniskālaṅaranya, a§
hyun·pasiragumavayājagat·yamataṃnyan·tāṃatmā{cume}tanekāṃprakratitatva, mataṃnyan·mtunādasaṅkeṃniskāla, sa
[87v]
87
ṅkenādāmtutāṃvindu, saṅkeṃvindumtutāṃaddācandra, saṅke a——rddācandra, mtutā oṃ, kāra, saṅkeṃoṃ, kāramtutāṃtryaramtutāṃpañca§
kṣara, saṅkeṃpañcakṣara, mtutāṃjagat·kabeḥ, nāhanlakṣa——ṇaniṃkāniskalatatvanpamtuknajagat·, sumahursaṃpāra, kadisaṅkeṃ
prakrati ikāṃvindunāda, apan·saṅkeṃbhaṭāra ikāṃvindu{nādamt}u, yanmaṃkanaliṅasaṃpāra, yandadihatāṃdarmmātuṅgal·sumañdāṅāda
rmmarva, ndyadarmmarvaṅaranya, nyaṃcetanālāvān·acetanā, _dyanaṅaracetanya, bhaṭāraparamakāraṇa, ndya acetanāṅaranya, nyaṃpra§
[88r]
kratitatva, yekātandadipinakādarmmanatuṅgal·, padan(y)a——, kadyaṅgāniṃtṅaḥṅveṃ, sәṅgūḥhәn·tatṅaḥvṅә, apamataṃnyantanādadima
ṅkanabhaṭāra, apan·siravnaṃmakeccā ikāṃratkabeḥ, yanmaṃ(§)——kanaliṅasaṃpāra, saśārakapvabhaṭārayanmakana, sadenyan·saṃśāra
bhaṭāra, yan·kvaliṅasaṃpārā, tanpalvir·kapva ikә¯ṃrātkabeḥ, denyantan·palvir ikejagat·, apayan·kasaṃśayaknā, yanmaṃ§
86v.1 ṅuni ] traces of an akṣara previously written beneath the n, along with a cancelled i vocalization
86v.2 pnya ] traces of a cancelled cluster, probably si, written beneath
87v.3 lakṣa ] lacuna around the
binding hole, which has not caused any loss of text (the bottom of the cluster kṣa is preserved in the loose fragment)
88r.2 padan(y)a ] the lower part of y is missing because of a lacuna


--- PAGE 209 ---


--- PAGE 210 ---
kanaliṅasaṃpāra, ndyajagat·tanpalvirtinonta, apantapv(ā)pratyakṣāya, tavat·tanpalvir ikāṃjagat·, tavat·pralayā, pra
[88v]
88
layāṅaranya, matvәgataḥtālanyan·tka, apan·iccā(§)——bhaṭāra inapekṣānyan·, ◉◆◉, tlasinurattiṅantiragapun·,, iti
darmmapātañjalasamapta,, ◆titimasapadupvan·vulankasāpulu——ḥ, pacāvara, u, trivara, dva, saptavara, a, asṭavara, yama, vukuvuyai, isaka
, parabiṃsakalavaṃgajaḥgunavvaṃ, ◆:::,,
88v.3 titimasa ] a minute trace of ink afer the ◆reveals that an original pada lingsa was cancelled and covered with the new text starting with ti
88v.3–4 titimasa … vvaṃ, ◆:::,, ] written in an ink of a lighter tone,
in a slightly diﬀerent, more slanted script


--- PAGE 211 ---


--- PAGE 212 ---
Critical Edition
&
Parallel Translation


--- PAGE 213 ---
194
ii Text & Translation
◉siddhir astu ◉
0v
saṅkumāra ikā manaṅkil ri bhaṭāra, kālanira hana ri puñcak niṅgunuṅ
kelāsa, dadi saṅkumāra mamūjā, maṅhanākәn pañcopacāra, ri huvusnira
mamūjā, manambhah ta sira ri bhaṭāra, ri huvusnira manambhah, maluṅguh
5
ta sira, tumañākәn ikaṅtattvaviśeṣa,
liṅnira,
[1] sājñā bhaṭāra, kasihana rānak bhaṭāra, varahәn ikaṅsamyajñāna, yatānya-
n hilaṅa sandeha rānak bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra
10
hayu iku takvantānaku, ikaṅsamyajñāna ṅaranya, evәh kapaṅguhanya, apa
dumeh ya mevәha, yan kva liṅanta, tātan vәnaṅsamyajñāna, yatan hana
/ samādhi, ikaṅsamādhi tan dadi ikā tan kinavruhan saṅhyaṅparamār-
1r
tha, apan kapaṅguhan saṅhyaṅparamārtha don iṅsamādhi ginavayakәn<,>
maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
15
sumahur saṅkumāra
[2] sājñā bhaṭāra kāsihana ṅhulun varahәn ri lakṣaṇa saṅhyaṅparamārtha,
maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan lakṣaṇa saṅhyaṅparamārthānaku kavruhanta ◆
20
acintyo niṣkalaḥśāntaḥ, dhruva-m abyaya-m īśvaraḥ,
asau sūkṣmaḥparaḥśāntaḥ, śivaḥsakalaniṣkalaḥ◆
apan sira sinaṅguh acintya, apa tar kavәnaṅinaṅәnaṅәn, niṣkala sira tar
pāvak, tan pavarṇa, ta/n baṅ, tan aputih, tar kuniṅ, tan hirәṅ, kapila dvi-
1v
varṇādi, tan hana ikā kabeh ri saṅhyaṅparamārtha,
12 ikā tan ] em. ; ik· tan cod. 15 saṅ] em. ; sa cod. 16 kāsihana ṅhulun ] em. ; kāsiḥhana
hulun cod.
19 paramārthānaku ] em. ; paramātānaku cod.
20 acintyo niṣkalaḥśāntaḥ]
em. ; acintya nislāla sānti cod.
20 īśvaraḥ] conj. ; әśariṅcod.
21 asau sūkṣmaḥparaḥ
śāntaḥ] conj. ; āsān suksmә pāri sānti cod. 21 śivaḥsakalaniṣkalaḥ] em. ; śivi sak·liniskāli
cod. 22 niṣkala sira ] em. ; niskāta sira cod. 23–24 dvivarṇādi ] conj. ; duāvarṇnadi cod.
24 paramārtha ] em. ; paramātā cod.
3–5 dadi saṅkumāra mamūjā … ikaṅtattva viśeṣa ] Cf. Vṛh 1: sira ta masә¯ mamūjā ri bha-
ṭāra / saha pañcopacāra / ri huvusnirān pamūjā / manәmbah ta sira / ri huvusnirān manәm-
bah / maluṅguh ta sira / tumakvanakәn sāri saṅhyaṅaji kabeh /
20 dhruva-m abyaya-m
īśvaraḥ] cf. SBhSS VP 4.7d and Vṛh 7d: dhruvam avyayam īśvaram
14 maṅkana ] post corr. ; maṅka ante corr.
23 kuniṅ, tan hiṛṅ, kapila ] post corr. ; kuniṅ,
kapila ante corr.


--- PAGE 214 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
195
Let there be success!
Kumāra appeared in the presence of the Lord, when He was staying on the
peak of the Kelāsa mountain. Ten Kumāra paid worship, performing the
ﬁve offerings; having ﬁnished his worship, he respectfully saluted the Lord.
Having ﬁnished his salutation, he sat down and enquired about the supreme
doctrine.
He spoke thus:
[1] If you please, Lord, be kind to your son! Teach me the right knowledge,
in order that your son’s doubts will vanish.
Te Lord spoke:
Good is your request, my son. What is called right knowledge is difﬁcult to
obtain. If you ask why it is so difﬁcult, [the answer is]: right knowledge is
not within reach if there is no absorption. Te absorption not coming into
being, the Summum Bonum is not known, for the obtainment of the Sum-
mum Bonum is the result of performing absorption. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[2] If you please, Lord, be kind to me, teach me about the characteristics of
the Summum Bonum! Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Te characteristics of the Summum Bonum, my son, should be known by
you as follows:
Te Lord—unfathomable, formless, appeased, constant, immutable—
Śloka 1
that is Śiva, subtle, supreme, appeased, with form as well as formless.
Because it is designated as unfathomable, for it is not capable of being made
object of thinking. It is formless, it does not have a body, nor a colour. It is
not red, not white, not yellow, not black, brown, bi-coloured, and so on; all
of these do not exist in the Summum Bonum.1
1.
Te sentence might refer to the idea, common in Śaiva literature, that the Lord in
His personalized aspect as Sadāśiva possesses a mantric body and has ﬁve faces made up of
the ﬁve brahmamantras (the addition of one more colour, dvivarṇa, may be a mere redun-
dancy). For instance, the Pūrvaka Bhūmi (Hooykaas 1974:11–13; 40–41) homologizes the
ﬁve Kuśikas with the ﬁve faces of Śiva and links them to the colours white, yellow, red, black
and ‘ﬁve coloured’ (pañcavarṇa); similarly, the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (52.11–12) links
the pañcatathāgatas forming the body of the Buddha with white, blue, yellow, red and ‘mul-
ticoloured’ viśvavarṇa (whereas in b11 it characterizes the Mahāyāna-path and Supreme
Reality simply as ‘not black, not white’ tan hirәṅ, tan putih). For similar examples in San-


--- PAGE 215 ---
196
ii Text & Translation
tātan kәna ri tuha pati, tan palvaṅtan patambhәh, abyaya juga ya, nitya
humidә¯ṅ, sira ta suka tar pahuvusan, inak tar pabalik lāra, hurip tar pabalik
pati, sira ta lәvih saṅkeṅrāt kabeh, sira tika lәvih tar kalәvihan, vibhuḥta
sira, vibhuḥṅaranya, humibәkiṅrat kabeh, ndātan katon, sira kәtah manon,
5
tan kinavruhan, sira ta maṅavruhi, apan sarvajña sira, sira kumavruhīṅrat
kabeh, sarvakāryakartā sira gumavay ikaṅrat kabeh, a/pan byaktinya nihan,
2r
kita kabeh mahurip, molah<,> umambhәk, vruh riṅabhiprāya, nahan byakti
saṅhyaṅparamārtha an hana ri kita lāvan iṅrāt kabeh, ikaṅhiḍәpta ri saṅ
hyaṅparamārtha, ya ta inaṅәnaṅәnta ri rahineṅvәṅi, kavih pva ṅaran iṅ
10
prājñā, samapada lakṣaṇanya lāvan saṅhyaṅparamārtha, ya ta mataṅnyan
samādhi ṅaran ikaṅinabhyāsa saṅmahyun ri suka viśeṣa, apan yekā sinaṅ-
guh kalәpasәn ṅaranya, hana pvekaṅsamādhi ri saṅhyaṅparamārtha, ya ta
mamәkasakәn saṅaskāra riṅcitta, ya ta sinaṅguh samyajñāna ṅaranya, dudū
saṅke / mithyājñāna, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
2v
15
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[3] aparan ikaṅmithyājñāna ṅaranya sājñā bhaṭāra, kasihana ṅhulun varah-
әn iṅlakṣaṇa nikaṅmithyājñāna, maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan lakṣaṇa nikaṅmithyājñānānaku, ikānaṅhumiḍәp humadikārākәn sa-
20
hiṅan i kavruhnya, makasādhana pratyakṣa juga, liṅnya, tuhu ikā saṅhyaṅ
paramārtha tan pāvak, tan pavarṇa, apan tayā sira, apa byaktanyan tayā sira
saṅhyaṅparamārtha, apan tayā saṅkanta ṅuni, mithya pva kita hәlәm, tayā-
tah paranta, ya ta mataṅnya/n tayā paramārtha,
3r
skrit sources, cf., e.g., Vāmanapurāṇa 2.34–35, Mṛgendravṛtti YP 7a (= KP 3.50) describing
the four faces of Śiva as yellow, black, white and red, Pañcāvaraṇastava (cf. Goodall et al.
2005:33–42).
1 abyaya ] em. ; yayā cod.
2 humidә¯ṅ] em. ; humidә¯ cod.
3 lәvih ] em. ; lvah cod.
3 lәvih ] em. ; kālvi cod.
3 kalәvihan ] em. ; kalvahhan cod.
4 humibәkiṅ] em. ; hu-
mimbhәṅcod. 7 abhiprāya ] em. ; abhәprayā cod. 7 nahan ] em. ; nihan cod. 9 kavih ]
conj. ; vih cod.
12 samādhi ] em. ; samādә cod.
13 ṅaranya ] em. ; ṅanya cod.
15 saṅ]
em. ; sa cod.
19 ikānaṅ] conj. ; ikaṅmithyājñāna conj. E ; ikaṅnā cod.
20 kavruhnya ]
em. E ; tavruhnya cod.
23 tayā ] conj. ; yā cod.
19–20 sahiṅan ] post corr. ; sahaṅan ante corr. 23 mataṅnya/n ] post corr. ; mataṅnyan/n
ante corr.


--- PAGE 216 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
197
It is not affected by old age and death. It does not diminish, it does not
increase. It is entirely immutable, it constantly remains still. It is pleasure
without end, enjoyment that does not turn into pain, life that does not turn
into death. It is more extensive than the whole universe. It surpasses, not
being surpassed.2 It is pervasive. Pervasive means: it ﬁlls the whole universe.
It is not perceived: it itself perceives. It is not known: it itself knows, for it
is omniscient, it knows the whole universe. It is omnipotent: it creates the
whole universe. For the evidence of this is as follows: all of you live, act,
desire, know intentions. Tus is the evidence3 that the Summum Bonum is
within you as well as in the whole universe. Your thought about the Summum
Bonum, that is what you [should] reﬂect upon during day and night. One
who has wisdom is one who has knowledge, his characteristics are of one
level with the Summum Bonum. Tis is the reason why absorption is what
is constantly practiced by him who desires the supreme pleasure, for that is
what is designated as release. Furthermore, there is the absorption toward
the Summum Bonum: that leaves behind the latent impressions in the mind.
Tat is called right knowledge, as distinct from the wrong knowledge. Tus
spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[3] If you please, Lord, what is the wrong knowledge? Be kind to me, teach
me the characteristics of the wrong knowledge. Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Te characteristics of the wrong knowledge are as follows, my son: one who
experiences while giving authority to what is within the boundaries of his
knowledge, using direct perception only. Te words of those [upholding this
view] are: ‘Indeed the Summum Bonum does not have a body, does not have
a colour, for it is non-existence. What is the evidence of the Summum Bon-
um being non-existence? Because non-existence was your cause in the past,
and without an effect4 you will be in the future; mere non-existence will be
your end. Tis is the reason why the Summum Bonum is non-existence.
2.
Emending kālvi tar kalvaḥhan into lәvih tar kalәvihan; cf. Navaruci (p. 52, line 8):
lәvih tan kalәvihan (referred to the Lord), translated by Prijohoetomo (1934:109) as ‘uit-
muntend, niet te overtreffen’.
3.
In the DhPāt byakta is an alternative form of byakti (Skt vyakti): cf. OJED (284, 2347).
4.
Tus I have rendered mithya, which in Old Javanese, besides ‘false, deceitful’, can also
mean ‘without effect, not to come about’ (OJED 1144). My translation is justiﬁed by the
hәlәm ‘in the future’ at the end of the clause, which makes the translation of mithya pva kita
as ‘you are wrong’ unlikely.


--- PAGE 217 ---
198
ii Text & Translation
tayā pva saṅhyaṅparamārtha, ya ta mataṅnyan tan ≤suv≥a≤l≥a ikaṅhulah
kabeh, apan yātāyāta iki havak, ikaṅagave hayu ṅaranya, adva ikā, syapa
tumon phala niṅgave hayu, syapa saṅkeṅsvarga, syapa pratyakṣa vruh iṅ
kahyaṅan, maṅkana liṅnya, tapvan pratyakṣa vruhnya riṅkahyaṅan, mvaṅ
5
saṅke svarga, ya mataṅnyan adva ikā kabeh, maṅkana taṅmagave hala sin-
aṅguh pāpa, syapa saṅke naraka, sa≤ṅa≥byaktā vruhnya riṅmahāraurava,
mataṅnyan pāpaṅvaṅmagave ha/la, tapvan hana pratyakṣa vruhnya ri ya-
3v
mani, ya mataṅnyan sam≤e≥nakari kita hulahanta, apan yāya hulahanta ri
saṅhyaṅtayā, maṅkana liṅnya, ya ta mataṅnyan tan pavatәs ikā hulahnya,
10
arok majәmur, ikaṅhala hayu iriyā, lāvan hiḍәpnya, ikaṅambhәk maṅkana,
ya ta mithyājñāna ṅaranya, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[4] takarin tuhu pakṣa nikā maṅkana, sājñā bhaṭāra, maṅkana liṅsaṅku-
māra,
15
sumahur bhaṭāra,
1 paramārtha ] em. ; parārtā cod.
1 ≤suv≥a≤l≥a ] conj. ; subā yā conj. E ; _ _ā_ā cod.
4 vruhnya ] em. ; vrunya cod.
7 pāpaṅ] em. ; pāpphaṅcod.
8 yāya hulahanta ] em. ;
yāya hulihanta cod.
13 liṅ] em. ; li cod.
15 sumahur ] em. ; sumahu cod.
3–4 syapa saṅkeṅsvarga, syapa pratyakṣa vruh iṅkahyaṅan ] Cf. Vṛh 28.7: syapa karih
vruh riṅsvarga ṅaranya / [syapa saṅkanya /]
5–6 maṅkana taṅmagave hala sinaṅguh
pāpa, syapa saṅke naraka ] Cf. Vṛh 28.7–8: syapa saṅka niṅnaraka / pāpa magave hala /
1 ≤suv≥a≤l≥a ] lacuna in the middle of the folio with space for three akṣaras; the traces of
ink appearing at the borders of the lacuna are compatible with the conjectured sequence
6 sa≤ṅa≥byaktā ] lacuna with space for one or two graphemes; the absence of any trace
of ink below the visible part of the sa, as well as the protruding serif preceding the cluster
bya, make no room for the possibility of ﬁlling the lacuna with syapa (as in the preceding
sentence); ṅa ﬁts well in the available space
7 ha/la ta° ] post corr. ; ha / ta° ante corr.
8 sam≤e≥naka ] the lacuna between the akṣaras sa and ma can nicely be ﬁlled by an e vo-
calization


--- PAGE 218 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
199
Te Summum Bonum5 is non-existence: this is the reason why all the ac-
tions will not have any consequence,6 for this body comes [to exist from
nothing] and goes away [into nothing].7 One who is said to do good deeds,
he is wrong. Who sees the fruits of doing good deeds? Who [has come]
from heaven?8 Who knows about the abode of the gods by means of direct
perception?’ So he says. ‘His knowledge of the abode of the gods, and of the
cause of [going to] heaven, is by no means based on direct perception. Tis is
the reason why all of that is wrong. Likewise [it is wrong that] one who does
bad deeds is regarded to be a sinner.9 Who [has come] from hell?—whose
knowledge of the Great Raurava[-hell] was based on evidence? [And who
knows] the reason why the man who does bad is a sinner? Tere is no direct
evidence whatsoever for one’s knowledge of hell. Tis is the reason why your
acts should aim at pleasing yourself, for in any case your acts are with regard
to the Holy Non-Existence’. Such are his words. Tis is why his actions are
unrestrained—good and bad are mixed up indistinguishably in him—and
his thoughts, as well as his heart. Such a disposition is called wrong knowl-
edge. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[4] If you please, o Lord, is such a view really correct? Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
5.
I have emended parārtha into paramārtha, which ﬁts better with the context. In any
event, it is possible that the author here might have been playing with words, interpreting
paramārtha as ‘the Supreme Effect’ (= parārtha).
6.
I have conjecturally reconstructed the word suvala from a lacunose sequence of
akṣaras, taking it to be the irrealis of suval i, ‘reply, return, repayment’ (OJED 1877).
7.
I have interpreted the sequence yatayāta as the Sanskrit compound yātāyāta (yāta +
āyāta) ‘come and passed by’, which would hint at the materialist view that the body just
comes to exist from nothing and disappears into nothing when it dies. Another, less likely,
possibility could be to divide ya tayāta iki hawak ‘this body, it will just not exist’, which
presupposes the reading of tayā as an irrealis.
8.
An alternative translation, following the interpretation of saṅka as ‘cause’ instead of
‘from’, may be: ‘Who [sees] the cause of [going to] heaven?
9.
Although I cannot escape the impression that here (as well as in line 7) pāpa, instead
of ‘sinner’ or ‘evil’, might have been intended to mean ‘bound to punishment in hell’; cf. the
use of naraka in the parallel passage in Vṛhaspatitattva 28.8 in the sense of ‘marked out for
hell’ (OJED 1175), and OJED (1271) s.v. pāpa 2, ‘punishable for sin’. Te point here seems
to be not so much that one who has committed bad deeds is evil as that he will go to hell
because of his actions, and hell does not exist because nobody has ever come back from
there.


--- PAGE 219 ---
200
ii Text & Translation
ya ta mataṅnyan mithyājñāna ṅa≤ranya≥ambhәk maṅkana, apan adva ikā,
byaktānyān adva ikā, tuhun ta/n hana ikaṅrāt kabeh, yan taya saṅhyaṅ
4r
paramārtha, mvaṅtātan ahuripa kita kabeh, yan tayā saṅhyaṅparamārtha,
katon pvekiṅhuripta, mvaṅhana nikaṅrāt kabeh, ya ta paṅavruhananta ri
5
tan tayā saṅhyaṅparamārtha,
nihan sahur samithyājñāna, kadi saṅhyaṅparamārthātah pinakahurip
niṅrāt kabeh, apan dudū ikaṅhurip avaknya, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, apa ma-
taṅnyan paramārtha panaṅguh i sira ya ta karih, yan lena saṅke cetanā, apan
cetanā pva mūla nikaṅhurip an hana, ikaṅceta/nā ṅaranya, tan palakṣaṇā
4v
10
ikā, tan pagati, tuhun mabvat hanā kasornya saṅkeṅparamārtha, lāvan tan
sarvajña,
1 ṅa≤ranya≥] conj. E ; ṅa_ _ cod.
2 tuhun ] conj. ; tuvin cod.
2 yan taya ] conj. ; yan
tayantaka cod.
3 mvaṅ] em. ; mnaṅcod.
4 rāt ] em. ; rārat cod.
5 tan ] em. ; tәn
cod.
6 saṅ] em. ; sa cod.
7 avaknya ] em. ; avakānya cod.
9 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkāṅcod.
10 pagati ] em. E ; pabhati cod.
10 kasornya ] em. ; kaso_nya cod.
2–5 yan taya … tan tayā saṅhyaṅparamārtha ] Cf. Vṛh 49.12–14: yan saṅguhan tayā kadi
pakṣanta / kadi hana tekaṅrāt kabeh / nihan huripta tuvi / ndah kadi hana teki yan taya
bhaṭāra
1 ṅa≤ranya≥] conj. ; lacuna with space for 2 or 3 akṣaras; the provided reading is inferable
from the traces of graphemes at the borders of the lacuna
8 saṅke cetanā ] saṅke cetanā
post corr. ; saṅke catanā ante corr.
10 kasornya ] the repha is illegible because of a lacuna
in the codex due to physical damage


--- PAGE 220 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
201
Te reason that such an attitude is called wrong knowledge is that it is wrong.
Te evidence that it is wrong [is]: indeed10 the whole universe does not exist,
if the Summum Bonum is non-existence, and all of you could not live, if the
Summum Bonum would be non-existence. Tis life of yours is visible, as is
the existence of the whole universe: from this you can infer11 that the Sum-
mum Bonum is not non-existence.12
One possessing wrong knowledge speaks as follows: ‘How is it possible13
that the Summum Bonum is what serves as life for the whole universe? For
the life of its body does not exist!’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would
reply]: What is, then, the reason why Summum Bonum is the designation of
it? If it were something else than sentient—for sentient is the origin for life’s
existence—what is called sentience would be without distinctive characteris-
tics, without a [deﬁnite] state,14 really it would be heavy, it would be standing
lower15 than the Summum Bonum, and not omniscient.
10.
Te meaning of tuvin, ‘and furthermore’, does not ﬁt here, where the reason adduced
as evidence is expected to be enunciated. I interpret tuvin as a scribal confusion for tuhun
‘indeed, truly’; both words cover the same syntactical and semantical role in sentences enun-
ciating the factuality of a previous statement. OJED (2088 s.v. tuvi* ii) suggests that confu-
sion with tuhu ‘true, right, sincere, in fact, indeed’ occurred in the form tinuvi-tuvi, ‘to do
in earnest, take seriously’.
11.
Literally: ‘this is the means through which you can know’ (ya ta paṅavruhananta).
12.
Te sentence ‘Te reason why I am in this way, for the Lord Summum Bonum, it
is said, serves as life for the whole universe’ (mataṅnyan maṅkana hulun apan bhaṭāra
paramārtha rakva pinakahurip niṅrat kabeh) has been apparently copied in the wrong place
by mistake in 210.8–9 and seems to ﬁt in the present discussion. However, I do not feel con-
ﬁdent enough to insert it in a deﬁnite place of the text.
13.
For a justiﬁcation of the translation of kadi as ‘how is it possible’, cf. Introduction, p.
28.
14.
Tat is tan pagati, following Ensink’s emendation of bhati, not attested in OJED and
of uncertain meaning, into gati (cf. p. 75). Te form (m)agati is glossed in OJED (501) as
‘having the position or condition of, being in a state of; to be in motion; to go, succeed,
be successful (tan pagati: useless)’; I ﬁnd the translation of tan pagati as ‘useless’ not ap-
propriate in the present philosophical context and understand it as referring to a logically
inadmissible entity lacking distinctive characteristics and defying the possibility of being
described. In Bhuvanakośa 2.14 the form tar pagati glosses the Sanskrit word anirgata ‘in-
visible’ (?) referring to the Lord and Summum Bonum.
15.
I take mabvat anā kasornya as mabvat hanā kasornya; the interpretation of the form
mabvatanā as the irrealis of the transitive ambvati (where am- = ma-, which is frequently
attested in the codex) ‘to burden, press hard, overwhelm’ is made unlikely by the fact that
kasornya does not constitute a proper object of the verb.


--- PAGE 221 ---
202
ii Text & Translation
ika taṅcetanā maṅkana, ya tekā maṅhanākәn hurip, tan lena ikā yan lena
saṅke paramārtha, lāvan nihan patakvanaṅkva ri saṅpara, ikaṅparamārtha
liṅta, an pakalakṣaṇa tayā, cetanā tan pacetana kunaṅ, kari sira, sumahur
saṅpara, vāhya ṅaranikātah, yan cetanā saṅhyaṅparamārtha, tayā pisaniṅu
5
juga sira, alәṅis tan avayavi, ya ta sinaṅguh śūnya ṅaranya, ya ta sinaṅguh
niṣkala ṅaranya liṅsaṅpa/ra maṅkana, ndi ta deśa nikaṅtayā maṅkana,
5r
kapan tikiṅrat kabeh tәka tan hana, sumahur saṅpara, hilaṅtәkekiṅrat
dlāha, apan tayā saṅkanya ṅūni, apa dumeh ika rat hana vәkasan hana juga
tan pakanimitta, hana hana tan pakapūrvakaṅginave, maṅkana yan hilaṅ
10
tan hana humilaṅakәn ya, maṅkana liṅsaṅpara, tamatan dadi vastu tan
pacetanā, gumaveyāvaknya hana lāvan tayā, kady aṅgān iṅlәmah, tan dadi
ikaṅgumaveyāvaknya, saṅapa gumave hananya mvaṅhilaṅnya, yan kva liṅa
saṅpara, bhaṭāra saṅhyaṅparamārth/a ṅaranira liṅmami,
5v
2 patakvanaṅkva ri ] conj. ; patakvanaṅkvan cod. 2 saṅ] em. ; sa cod. 5 avayavi ] em. ;
aveyāve cod. 5 sinaṅguh śūnya ] em. ; sanaṅguh sunya cod. 5–6 sinaṅguh niṣkala ] em. ;
naṅguh niskala cod. 6 liṅ] em. ; li cod. 6 ndi ] em. ; nda cod. 9 ginave ] em. ; guṇaveḥ
cod.
10 humilaṅakәn ] em. ; hamilaṅṅakәn cod.
11 iṅlәmah ] em. ; iṅkaṅlәmah cod.
12 yan ] em. ; yāṅcod.
3 cetanā tan pacetanā kunaṅ, kari ] cetanā kari post corr. ; cetana kari ante corr.
4 saṅ
para ] saṅpāra post corr. ; sa pāra ante corr.
5–6 sinaṅguh niṣkala ] naṅguh niskala post
corr. ; śanaṅguh niskala ante corr.


--- PAGE 222 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
203
Te sentient in such a way is what brings life into existence. Could that be
anything different from the Summum Bonum? Moreover, as follows could
be my question to the opponent:16 the Summum Bonum, which you deﬁned
as having non-existence as distinctive characteristic, is it actually sentient
or insentient? Te opponent answers: ‘Te explanation of that is outwordly
visible:17 if the Summum Bonum is sentient, it is non-existent, just impos-
sible, [like] gleaming without a body.18 Tat is designated as void; that is
designated as formless’. Tus answers the opponent. [I reply:] where is the
place of such a non-existence? At what moment will this whole universe
suddenly cease to exist? Te opponent answers: ‘Tis universe will disap-
pear suddenly in the future, for non-existence was its former cause. What
is the reason why the universe exists in the end? It just exists without hav-
ing a cause; existence exists without using as a former state something that
has been created. Similarly, if it vanishes, there is nothing that causes it to
disappear’; thus speaks the opponent. [I reply:] it is not possible at all that
insentient matter creates the body of what exists and does not exist. ‘Take,
for example, the earth: there is no one that creates its body. Who is the one
who creates its existence and disappearance?’ If the opponent would speak
thus, [I would reply:] according to me He is the Lord Summum Bonum.
16.
Te particle an implied by the reading of the cod. does not make sense here as we
would rather expect a ri, indicating the recipient of the question; my emendation presup-
poses a multi-step mistake involving the confusion of the grapheme r with n (cf. p. 74).
17.
Cf. OJED (2172) s.v. vāhya: ‘(being) outside, outward, external, outwardly visible,
pertaining to the world of the senses’. It is possible that the word must be here understood
in the ﬁgurative sense of ‘apparent, easily recognizable’.
18.
Having emended aveyāve (avayavay) ‘beckon, wave, signal’ into avayavi ‘having
members or parts, a whole; body’ (cf. Introduction, p. 77). Since the adjective alәṅis ‘shin-
ing, gleaming, sleek, glossy, shiny, smooth’ is sometimes associated in Old Javanese texts
with the outward appearance of human beings and with bodily hairs, as in Rāmāyaṇa Ka-
kavin 5.40 (vulu ny avaknya malәṅis ‘the hairs of his body gleamed’) and 7.86 (parambut
malәṅis avak nikā ‘his body was hairy and gleamed’), I understand the sentence as depicting
an example of something impossible, like the gleaming of a body without the body actually
being there. A passage of the Navaruci (p. 48 line 26) presents this simile to characterize the
paradoxical essence of the Lord creator of the universe (kaṅagave rat), called anantaviśeṣa,
deﬁning Him as follows: ‘He is ‘‘the Holy One without a body’’, He is ‘‘the Holy One who
gleams’’ ’ sira saṅhyaṅtan paśarīra ṅa, sira saṅhyaṅalәṅis ṅa; compare also the mention
of the heaven of SaṅHyaṅLәṅis in the Old Sundanese poem Sri Ajnyana (p. 236, line 923).
Although the import of this passage of the Dharma Pātañjala is not completely clear to me,
it apparently intends to avail the position that the Summum Bonum is insentient.


--- PAGE 223 ---
204
ii Text & Translation
sira vәnaṅmaṅhilaṅakәn maṅhanākәn, apan sira prabhu, vәnaṅmakechā
ikaṅrat kabeh, sira vicitrān tәmәn, vәnaṅmaṅhilaṅakәn pāpa lāvan lāra,
nāhan kadibyan bhaṭāra kinabhaktyan, sumahur saṅpara, hana kapva saṅ
hyaṅparamārtha liṅta, hana sira, ndātan palakṣaṇa, tan pāvak, tan katon,
5
tan kagamәl, tan vәnaṅinaṅәnaṅәn, ya sinaṅguh sūkṣma ṅaranya, suma-
hur saṅpara, avyāhata tañaṅkva vuvusta, [sumahur saṅparamārtha] sakā-
makāma, tathāpi lakṣaṇā, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, <tan> katon ta/h saṅhyaṅ
6r
paramārtha, ndān kāryanira ya katon, ndya gavenira, nyaṅtiryak lāvan ikiṅ
aṇḍabhuvana, tәlas karuhun janma mānuṣa, yeki gavenira, sumahur saṅpa-
10
ra, apa pramāṇanta sumiddhākәn ikā pakṣanta,
6 avyāhata tañaṅkva vuvusta ] conj. ; abyavahā taña ko vuvusta cod.
7 tathāpi ] em. ;
tapitapi cod.
7 saṅ] em. ; sa cod.
8 nyaṅ] em. ; nyan cod.
10 ikā ] conj. ; iko cod.
1 sira ] post corr. ; si ante corr.


--- PAGE 224 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
205
He can destroy and create, for He is the Almighty, being able to will into ex-
istence the whole universe. He is of manifold qualities to the highest degree,
able to destroy sin and suffering. Tus is the Lord’s divine quality, which
is worthy of being worshiped. Te opponent replies: ‘According to you,
the Summum Bonum exists. It exists, without any distinctive characteris-
tics whatsoever. It has no body. It is not visible. It is ungraspable. It cannot
be fathomed!’ [I reply:] that [entity] is designated as subtle. Te opponent
replies: ‘Your statement is not a response to my question’.19 [I reply:]20 ‘Let
it be as you wish’. ‘Nevertheless,21 there would be a characteristic’.22 If the
opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:] Not visible23 is the Summum
Bonum, but what is visible is its creation. What is its creation? Here it is: the
animals as well as this world, not to speak of the human beings. Tese are
its creation. Te opponent replies: ‘What is your valid means of knowledge
in order to prove this position of yours?
19.
I am not conﬁdent about the translation of this sentence, which I suspect to be cor-
rupted and perhaps incomplete. Te sequence abyavahā taña kva vuvusta is problematic.
I propose to emend abyavahā taña ko into avyāhata tañaṅkva: avyāhata means ‘contradic-
tory, rising objections’ (lit. ‘not hitting’; OJED 2346) and this ﬁts in the context, referring
to the Lord’s deﬁnition of the Summum Bonum as subtle; but taña ‘question’ does not as no
apparent question is being asked either before or afer this sentence. For the ko I offer two
possible interpretations: either the particle kva ‘thus, so, like this’ or the irrealis of the clitic
ﬁrst person pronoun ku (tañaṅkva).
20.
Te indication that the Lord is speaking through the clause sumahur saṅparamārtha
instead of sumahur bhaṭāra is unusual and unneeded in the present instance, where the sub-
ject (i.e. the Lord) has to be understood; therefore I have expunged it from the constituted
text; it is arguable that the scribe made a mistake, probably inﬂuenced by the sequence saṅ
para occurring further down. Te sentences uttered by the Lord and the opponent, how-
ever, make perfectly sense as they are, thereby rendering further emendations unnecessary.
21.
OJED 1948 glosses tapi iii as ‘even (= tathāpi q.v.)’; since the reduplicated form is
attested nowhere, I emend the dittography tapitapi into tathāpi.
22.
Te opponent’s point here seems to be that the Summum Bonum, which was pre-
viously deﬁned as having no characteristics whatsoever (cf. also Vṛhaspatitattva, śloka 8b
anirdeśyam alakṣaṇam, and 50.10–15), is described by the Lord as subtle (sūkṣma) in order
to escape the criticism of the opponent who stresses the absurdity of positing an invisible
and unfathomable Summum Bonum. Since subtlety itself is a characteristic, the Lord’s view
is shown to be inconsistent.
23.
Te addition of the negation tan, which may have been dropped by eyeskip under the
inﬂuence of the following ka (ta and ka are very similar in the script) is vital to the internal
logic of the sentence. On the invisibility of the Lord in the world, compare below, 336.15:
kahananira ikaṅrāt kabeh, ndātan katon.


--- PAGE 225 ---
206
ii Text & Translation
apa tan pratyakṣa katon bhaṭāra, gumave ikiṅaṇḍabhuvana, mvaṅtiryak
lāvan janmamānuṣa, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, nihan śakti bhaṭārān hane kita,
ndya ta ya nihan, ya dumeh kita vruh iṅheyopadeya, ikiṅsaṅdumeh kita
maṅhiḍәp[,] suka duhka ri śarīra, ya tekā jñānaśakti bhaṭāra ṅara/nya, cetanā- 6v
5
maya dumeh nikaṅrat mahuripa kabeh rasekā ri hatinta, hana kari sira,
tayā kari sira, saṅguh tayā vruh lumakṣaṇe sira, ya tikā dumeh ṅaranya, ni-
han sahur saṅpara, kadi śakti bhaṭāra cetanā, apan papupul niṅśarīra ikā
magave hiḍәp, ya ta sinaṅguh cetanā ṅaranya, yan maṅkana liṅa saṅpara,
mapekaṅvvaṅmati maṅipi hana śarīranya tan vikāra, apekā tan pañetanā,
10
māvasānaṅavuka juga, nahan byakta nikaṅmithyājñānānaku,
<sumahur> saṅkumāra,
[5] kevala salah pveka mi/thyājñāna sājñā bhaṭāra, apa dumeh ikā maṅkana,
7r
kasihana varahәn rānak bhaṭāra, maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
sumahur saṅhyaṅ,
15
nihan prastāva nikā mataṅnyan maṅkana, jñāna bhaṭāra kāla ikā, saṅpina-
kāvak bhaṭāra yan pamralayākәn rat, nahan mūla nikaṅmithyājñāna,
4 ṅara/nya ] em. ; ṅara/ranya cod.
5 rasekā ] conj. ; rāśeta cod.
6 tayā kari ] em. ; tayā
tari cod. 6 lumakṣaṇe ] em. ; lumaknaṇe cod. 6 dumeh ] em. ; meh cod. 8 saṅ] em. ; sa
cod. 9 mapekaṅ] em. ; mapvekaṅcod. 9 pañetanā ] em. ; panetanā cod. 10 mithyājñā-
nānaku, ] em. ; mityajñānāku cod.
13 liṅ] em. ; li cod.
15 prastāva ] em. E ; prastātā
cod.
15 maṅkana ] em. ; makana cod.
16 nahan ] em. ; nahanahan· cod.
12 dumeh ] post corr. ; meh ante corr.
16 nahan ] naha post corr. ; nahanahan· ante corr. ;
along with the superﬂuous akṣaras, the scribe mistakenly cancelled also the last n·, whose
presence would have yielded the correct form nahan·


--- PAGE 226 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
207
Because the Lord is not visible through direct perception—He who has cre-
ated this world, along with the animals and the human beings’. If the oppo-
nent would speak thus, [I would reply:] that is the power of the Lord, which
is within you. How is it? As follows: it causes you to know about what is
to be avoided and what is to be done. It is that which causes you to experi-
ence pleasure and pain within the body. Tat is the power of knowledge of
the Lord, made of sentience, the cause of the whole universe to live; it is a
feeling within your heart. Does He exist? Does He not exist? Truly, a knowl-
edge to characterize24 Him does not exist. Tat is what is called cause.25 Te
reply of the opponent is as follows: ‘How could it be that the sentient is the
power of the Lord, for the coming together [of elements] of the body creates
awareness. Tat is designated as sentient’. If the opponent would speak thus,
[I would reply]: how could it be that the man dies while dreaming? His body
exists without damage! How could he not be aware of [anything]?26 Only
when [the body] will be rotten it will have an end. Tus is the evidence of
the wrong knowledge, my son.
Kumāra spoke:27
[5] Nothing but wrong is this wrong knowledge. If you please, o Lord, what
is the reason that this is so? Please be kind, teach me! Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Venerable [Lord]28 spoke:
As follows is the reason why it is so: Tat is the knowledge of the Lord Kāla,
whose body the Lord takes on when he destroys the universe. Tus is the
origin of the wrong knowledge.
24.
Te meaning of lumakṣaṇa here is in harmony with those provided by OJED (959)
under the passive voice linakṣaṇan ‘to distinguish clearly, describe accurately, deﬁne’ rather
than with those provided s.v. lumakṣaṇa itself, i.e. ‘to act, start acting, take action, achieve
st., efﬁcient’.
25.
Having emended the nonsensical meh into dumeh, ‘cause’. Te point here seems to
be that what causes human beings to have any experience, and the whole universe to live,
cannot be deﬁned by means of intellectual knowledge (vruh), which is itself the result of
that cause (cf. Part iii, p. 344).
26.
According to the Lord, not being aware of anything (tan pañetanā) amounts to death;
cf. 234.9, where it is said that when the Soul ceases to be aware of the breaths, death occurs.
27.
Unlike several other instances in the text, where I feel that an explicit indication of the
speaker was not necessary but simply understood, here I have emended the text by inserting
the clause sumahur saṅkumāra, which is likely to have been missed out by way of eyeskip
with the saṅkumāra immediately preceding it.
28.
It is possible that the word bhaṭāra was lef out by mistake, since this is the only place
in the text where the Lord is referred to by means of saṅhyaṅonly.


--- PAGE 227 ---
208
ii Text & Translation
yapvan hana viku maṅkana jñānanya dlāha, yekā paṅavruhananta tәka ma-
hāpralaya, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[6] apa ta upāya niṅjanma yan maṅkana, yatanyan tan kavava riṅmithyā-
5
jñāna sājñā bhaṭāra, kasihana va/rahәn rānak bhaṭāra, maṅkanā liṅsaṅku-
7v
māra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan deya ni janma yan mahyun samyajñāna, tәlu kvehnya, pratyakṣapra-
māṇa, anumānapramāṇa, āgamapramāṇa, nāhan saṅpramāṇa tәlu ṅaranya,
10
pratyakṣapramāṇa ṅaranya, ikaṅvastu tan parakva, yekā pratyakṣapramāṇa
ṅaranya, anumānapramāṇa ṅaranya, hana vastu tan katon, ndan siddha hi-
ḍәp niṅvvaṅiriya, apan hana cihna paṅavruh iriya, nihan padanya, kady
aṅgān iṅdeśa ri sabraṅ, dadi hiḍәp niṅvvaṅriṅhananya, apan hana katon
ikā vvaṅdudū rū/panya kady aṅgān iṅbrāhmaṇa lāvan pujut<,> nambi,
8r
4 ta upāya ] em. ; taddapaya cod.
8 yan ] em. ; yen cod.
11 siddha ] em. E ; pidda cod.
11–12 hiḍәp ] em. ; hәdәp cod.
12 iriya ] em. E ; iraya cod.
12 iriya ] em. ; iraya cod.
12 nihan ] em. ; nāhan cod.
8 nihan deya ] post corr. ; nihanaya ante corr. (unmarked)


--- PAGE 228 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
209
If there is a man of religion whose doctrine is like that in the future, that is the
sign by means of which you may know that the time of the great destruction
has come. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[6] If it is so, what are the means of the human beings, in order not to be
carried away by false knowledge? My lord, if you please, be kind, teach me!
Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
As follows is what should be done by the human beings if they desire the
right knowledge. Treefold is its number: the valid means of knowledge of
direct perception, the authoritative means of knowledge of inference, the
valid means of knowledge of testimony of scripture. Tus are the three valid
means of knowledge. Te valid means of knowledge of direct perception means:
the entity that is not a matter of guess.29 Tat is the valid means of knowledge
of direct perception. Te valid means of knowledge of inference means: there
is an entity which is not visible, but the thought of men about it is sure, for
there is a sign by means of which one can recognize it. For example:30 like
the foreign countries across the sea, it is possible that men know about their
existence, for one sees thus, namely that there are men of different appear-
ance, like the Brahmans and the Pujut,31 the Nambi,32
29.
Supposing that marakva (for which we have regularly denasalized parakva) is the
equivalent of aṅrakva, translated in OJED 1494 as ‘to rely on someone else’s words, still
be unsure about, guess?’. Te base-word rakva is glossed in OJED as ‘an emphatic parti-
cle suggesting the opinion of others (‘‘so they say’’, ‘‘as you know’’, ‘‘naturally’’), but by no
means always’. Pigeaud (1960:5) refers to it as an ‘uncertainty form’ meaning ‘so it is said;
uncertain’ (cf. also Pigeaud 1980:207).
30.
My translation of padanya is not attested in OJED, which s.v. paḍa v (1223) gives
‘equal; the equal of’, but is justiﬁed by the occurrence of the word throughout the text to in-
troduce examples and by the existence of the Modern Javanese form padané (from padanya),
which means precisely ‘for example’. Compare also the Modern Javanese upamané and In-
donesian umpamanya ‘for example’ (from the Sanskrit upamā, ‘comparison, resemblance,
equality, similarity).
31.
Cf. OJED (1434): ‘a part. group of people (dark-skinned, Negrito?), as slaves or vatәk
i jro (pāmәṅamәṅan)’. Te pāmәṅamәṅan group of the Kraton inmates (vatәk i jro) denoted
persons of abnormal physical appearance like dwarfs, albinos and suchlike.
32.
Cf. OJED (1171) s.v. nambi: tuha(n) nambi, juru nambi ‘among the vatәk i jro (maṅi-
lala dravya haji) … It is not clear which group (socially inferior? foreigners?) is meant’. Te
word appears in Old Javanese inscriptions from the 9th to the 15th century alongside the
names of what are likely to be categories of merchants of foreign origin, such as juru cina,
juru/tuha dagaṅand juru/tuha huñjaman (probably Persians; cf. Abraham 1988:25).


--- PAGE 229 ---
210
ii Text & Translation
parasi, ya tikā tinonta, athavā hana kәta vastu tan katon, ri deśa ri nūsa ka-
hananya, kady aṅgān iṅmaṇik, kasturi, kapur kunaṅ, yekā byaktanyān hana
nūsa ri sabraṅ, ikā ta jñāna humiḍәp hana nikā, yekānumānapramāṇa, āga-
mapramāṇa ṅaranya, varahvarah niṅvvaṅsaṅke deśāntara, ndān yan paci-
5
hna ikā, yāpvan tan pacihna adva ikā, yapvan hana cihna, ya ta sinaṅguh
āgamapramāṇa ṅaranya, nāhan yaṅpramāṇa tәlu ṅaranya, yatānyan tan /
kasasar i jñāna, tinut saṅviku,
8v
[7] saṅsinaṅguh paṇḍita, tatan vruh ulun ri lakṣaṇanira, [matanyan
maṅkana hulun apan bhaṭāra paramārtha rakva pinakahurip niṅrat kabeh],
10
lāvan saṅpaṇḍita, apa mataṅnyan tan vavaṅsātmaka ri bhaṭāra, maṅkana
liṅsaṅkumāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
1 tan katon ] em. E ; kan katon cod.
2 kapur ] conj. ; kupu cod.
10 sātmaka ] em. ;
saṅtmāja cod.
11 liṅ] em. ; li cod.
4 varahvarah ] post corr. ; varavarah ante corr.
8–9 matanyan … kabeh, ] the sentence is
out of place here, mistakenly copied between the two questions uttered by Kumāra


--- PAGE 230 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
211
the Persians.33 Tese are seen by you. And further, there still are entities
which are not seen, they originate in [foreign] lands, in [other] islands, such
as gems, musk, camphor.34 Tese constitute the evidence that the islands
across the sea exist; it is the mind that infers that they exist. Tat is the valid
means of knowledge of inference. Te valid means of knowledge of testimony
of scripture means: the teachings of the people from the foreign lands, but
[only] if there is a proof; if there is no proof, they are [to be considered]
false. If there is a proof, that is designated as the valid means of knowledge
of testimony of scripture. Tus are the three valid means of knowledge, so that
there is no going wrong of the knowledge according to the men of religion.
[Kumāra:]
[7] Te reverend one who is regarded to be a master,35 I do not know about
his distinctive characteristics. And also, a master, what is the reason why
he does not become one (sātmaka)36 with the Lord at once? Tus spoke
Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
33.
Te word parasi, not listed in OJED as an ethnonym, is attested in four Old Ja-
vanese inscriptions (cf. Damais 1970:758) and one Old Sundanese manuscript (cf. Holle
1867:459). Even when, in India, Parsi denotes Zoroastrians, this is only by extension of the
basic meaning, which is ‘Persian’. On the ‘Persian trade’ across Africa, Southeast Asia and
China, cf. Wolters (1967:130–138).
34.
Conjecturally emending kupu into kapur (the change of ka° into ku° might have been
triggered by the following kunaṅ, while the loss of repha is a trivial mistake). Whereas
kupu (which, according to OJED 929, is attested only as kupu-kupu or kukupu) ‘butterﬂy’
hardly makes sense in the present list, kapur ‘camphor’ ﬁts well in the context as it was one
of the products commonly traded by (Tamil and Persians) merchants in the Sumatranese
outposts, such as Kota Kapur and Barus (cf. Wolters 1967:122, 185). Te fragrance of
the musk-deer (kasturi) mentioned in the present list was a much-sought product from the
Indian Subcontinent, which is mentioned, among the others, in a Tamil inscription from
Barus (cf. Subbarayalu 2002:22).
35.
Te term paṇḍita in Old Javanese sources denotes more than ‘a learned person’, being
also connected with proﬁciency in yoga: cf. Nihom (1994:36–37), who notes that ‘a well
disciplined intellectual function is closely related to erudition’.
36.
saṅtmāja in the codex (cf. satmāja in 212.3 and sāttāja in 282.4). From the context in
which the word occurs there is no doubt that it refers to the relation between the liberated
Soul (ātmā) and the Lord (bhaṭāra), and therefore must be emended into sātmaka ‘identical
with’ (cf. Introduction, p. 78); the corruptions are likely to have occurred through contam-
ination with the cliché ātmaja ‘son’. Compare Vṛhaspatitattva 30.4: sātmaka lāvan bhaṭāra
(sātmaka AE; sātmā CG; sātma G). For additional instances of sātmaka in Old Javanese
sources, cf. Part iii, pp. 413–418.


--- PAGE 231 ---
212
ii Text & Translation
hana kәtah mala ṅaranya, anuṅrumakәt ri ātmā, ya tekā tan vavaṅhilaṅ,
apan ivәṅivәṅikaṅcitta lāvan ātmā, ya tekātәguh sumaputa ri sarvajñā niṅ
ātmā, yapvan hilaṅikā, niyata saṅyogīśvarān sātmaka ri bhaṭāra, maṅkana
liṅbhaṭāra,
5
sumahur saṅ/ kumāra,
9r
[8] aparan iku sinaṅguh ātmā ṅaranya, ndi ta saṅka nikaṅmala, kasihana
ṅhulun varahәn maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
nihan pavarahaṅkva ri kita, ikaṅsinaṅguh ātmā ṅaranya, bhaṭāra saṅ
hyaṅparamārtha, sira sinaṅguh śiva parameśvara, sira ta kaharan āditya,
10
padanira lāvan āditya, ikanaṅcetanā, ya kaharan tejanira yar āditya, luṅhā
pva teja saṅhyaṅāditya, lumrā ri daśadeśa, maṅkana tekaṅcetanā, apan
savibhuḥbhaṭāra humibәkiṅrāt kabeh,
hana ta māyātattva ṅaranya, sūkṣma padālitnya / lavan śivatattva, ndān
9v
acetanā kasornya saṅkeṅśivatattva, deśanya i sor saṅkeṅśivatattva, yeka
15
tambhay ni mamuvus tattva maganal, i sor nikā, hana ta kalātattva ṅara-
nya, i sor nikaṅkalātattva, hana ta rāgatattva, i sor ni rāgatattva, hana ta
vidyātattva, i sor ni vidyātattva, hana ta [i sver niṅ] pradhānatattva, i sor
niṅpradhānatattva, hana ta triguṇatattva, i sor niṅtriguṇatattva, hana ta
buddhitattva, i sor ni buddhitattva, hana tāhaṅkāratattva, i sor niṅahaṅkā-
20
ratattva, / hana ta manahtattva, i sor ni manahtattva, hana ta daśendriyatat-
10r
tva, i sor niṅdaśendriyatattva, hana ta pañcatanmātratattva, i sor niṅpañca-
tanmātratattva, hana ta ākāśatattva, i sor niṅākāśātattva, hana ta bāyutattva,
i sor ni bāyutattva, hana ta tejatattva, i sor niṅtejatattva, hana ta āpyatattva,
i sor niṅāpyatattva, hana ta pṛthivītattva, yeka vәkas niṅmamuvus tattva,
25
maganal, ika ta kabeh, ya binyāpakan saṅhyaṅātmā, astam bhaṭāra para-
makāraṇa, ya mataṅnyan / vibhuḥśakti bhaṭāra vaneh
10v
3 sātmaka ] em. ; satmāja cod.
7 liṅ] em. ; li cod.
9 parameśvara ] em. ; paramesaś-
vara cod.
12 humibәkiṅ] em. ; humibkәṅcod.
19 tāhaṅkāratattva ] em. E ; ta hiṅker-
atatva cod.
19–20 ahaṅkāratattva ] em. ; ahәṅkoratatva cod.
25 astam ] em. ; astā cod.
26 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod.
1 hana ] post corr. ; ha ante corr.
5 saṅ/ kumāra ] post corr. ; saṅpā / kumāra ante corr.
(seemingly a confusion of the speakers para and kumāra, promptly rectiﬁed by the scribe)
14 saṅkeṅ] ṣaṅkeṅpost corr. ; ṣaṅam ante corr.
22 ākāśatattva ] ākāsatatva post corr. ;
ākātatva ante corr. 22 i sor niṅākāśātattva ] i sor niṅakasātatva post corr. ; i sor akasātatva
ante corr.
23 hana ta āpyatattva ] post corr. ; hana āpyatattva ante corr.


--- PAGE 232 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
213
Tere is maculation, something that adheres to the Soul. Tat is what does
not disappear at once, for the mind is inextricably intertwined with the Soul.
Tat ends up in tightly covering the omniscience of the Soul. If that disap-
pears, it is certain that the leader among yogins will be one in nature with
the Lord. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[8] What is that which is designated as Soul? What is the origin of macula-
tion? Please be kind to me, teach me. Tus spoke Kumāra.
[Te Lord:]
As follows I shall teach you: what is designated as Soul is the Lord Summum
Bonum. Tat is designated as Śiva Parameśvara. He is to be considered as the
sun. He is like the sun. Te sentient is to be considered as His splendor when
[He is] the sun. Te splendor of the sun goes, spreading over the ten quarters
of the sky. Such is the sentient, for, endowed with the Power of Pervasion of
the Lord, it ﬁlls the whole universe.
Tere is the principle of Māyā, subtle, just as ﬁne as the principle of Śiva.
Yet, it is insentient, its position is below the principle of Śiva. Tat is the
beginning of what they call the coarse principles. Below that there is the
principle of activation. Below the principle of activation, there is the princi-
ple of attachment. Below the principle of attachment, there is the principle
of awareness. Below the principle of awareness, there is the principle of un-
evolved matter. Below the principle of unevolved matter, there is the prin-
ciple of the three constituents. Below the principle of the three constituents,
there is the principle of intellect. Below the principle of intellect, there is
the principle of self-identity. Below the principle of self-identity, there is the
principle of mind-stuff. Below the principle of mind-stuff, there is the prin-
ciple of the ten faculties (of sense and action). Below the principle of the ten
faculties, there is the principle of the ﬁve subtle elements. Below the princi-
ple of the ﬁve subtle elements, there is the principle of atmosphere. Below
the principle of atmosphere, there is the principle of wind. Below the prin-
ciple of wind, there is the principle of ﬁre. Below the principle of ﬁre, there
is the principle of water. Below the principle of water, there is the principle
of earth. Tis is the last of what they call the coarse principles. All of them
are pervaded by the Soul, and also by the Lord Supreme Cause. Tat is why
pervasion is another power of the Lord.


--- PAGE 233 ---
214
ii Text & Translation
ndan lakṣaṇa nikaṅsaṅhyaṅātmā, an byāpaka irikaṅtattva samaṅkana,
ūtaprota, ūta ṅaranya, kady aṅgān iṅmiñak haneṅpә¯han, maṅkana lakṣaṇa
saṅhyaṅātmā an byāpaka irikaṅtattva kabeh, prota ṅaranya, kady aṅgān iṅ
tuntun iṅmaṇik maṅekadeśa, maṅkana lvir nikaṅātmā an haneṅrat kabeh,
5
ikaṅātma prota ya tekā caritaknānaku, prayatnā ta kita rumәṅә varah-
varahku, ikaṅātmatattva, sarvajña sarvakāryakartā pinakaśakti nikā, vibhuḥ
pva ya rikā māyātattva, hilaṅta śakti nikaṅ/ ātmā vәkasan, mari sarva-
11r
jña, mari sarvakāryakartā, apan mala svabhāva nikaṅmāyā, rumakәt pvekaṅ
mala riṅātmā, ya ta mataṅnyan mapuṅguṅsvabhāvanya, tuhun cetanāmā-
10
tra juga ya, vibhuḥpva ya rikaṅkalātattva, mapalenan ta ya lavan bhāvanya,
kady aṅgān iṅanak niṅtavvan an hana riṅsalyaṅ, maṅkana tekāṅātmā
an papalenan saṅkeṅbhāvanya, makaśarīra ikaṅkalātattva, byāpaka pva ya
rikaṅrāgatattva, mahyun ta ya mañetanā, byāpaka pva rikaṅvidyātattva,
manon ta ya viṣaya vәkasan, apan ikaṅvi/dyātattva pinakasuluhnya, ya ma-
11v
15
taṅnyan panon viṣaya, ndya viṣaya tinonya, yekā pradhānatattva, lakṣaṇa
nikaṅpradhānatattva, pәtaṅtan pacetanā lupa pinakajātinya, ya tekā pina-
paṅguhakәn de bhaṭāra, cetanā ṅaranya, tutur, pradhāna ṅaranya, lupa, tu-
tur matәmu lāvan lupa, ya tekā maṅhanākәn triguṇa, sattva rajah tamah,
lakṣaṇa ni sattva, prājñā mahaṅan, lakṣaṇa niṅrajah, adrәs molah, lakṣaṇa
20
niṅtamah, abyәt apuṅguṅikā nāhan lvir ni triguṇatattva,
2 ūtaprota, ūta ṅaranya ] em. ; uttaprokta, utta ṅaranya cod.
2 pә¯han ] em. ; pәhāna cod.
3 prota ] em. ; prokta cod. 4 tuntun ] em. ; tuṅtun cod. 5 ātma prota ] em. ; atmā prokta
cod. 5 caritaknānaku ] em. ; caritantānaku cod. 7–8 hilaṅta śakti nikaṅ/ ātmā vәkasan,
mari sarvajña, mari sarvakāryakartā ] em. ; sarvvakāryyakāttā cod.
8 svabhāva ] em. ;
svarbhava cod. 11 anak ] em. ; yānak cod. 12 bhāvanya ] conj. ; bavaṅnya cod. 13 rikaṅ
rāgatattva ] em. E ; riṅkā rāgatatva cod.
18 rajah ] em. ; raja cod.
20 ikā nāhan ] conj. ;
kahanān cod.
3–4 prota ṅaranya … maṅekadeśa ] Cf. Vṛh 14.3–4: prota ṅaranya / maṇisūtravat / kady
aṅgān iṅmaṇi maṅekadeśa gatinya /
7–8 hilaṅta śakti nikaṅ/ ātmā vәkasan, mari sarva-
jña, mari sarvakāryakartā ] Cf. TJ 5.16–17: kavәkas taṅcetanā lәṅәlәṅә / mari sarvajña mari
sarvakāryakartā / 11 kady aṅgān iṅanak niṅtavvan an hana riṅsalyaṅ] Cf. TJ 35.16–18:
kadi tala niṅtavvan lakṣaṇa saṅhyaṅātmā / hana riṅsapadapada / ātmā ya ta inaranan
hanak niṅtavon / ; Vṛh 14.47–49: kady aṅgān iṅumah niṅtavvan / matap matumpaṅ-
tumpaṅan / ikaṅmāyā yāṅkәna umah niṅtavvan / ikaṅātmā yāṅkәn anak niṅtavvan /
2 ūtaprota, ūta ṅaranya ] uttaprokta, utta ṅaranya post corr. ; uttaprokta ṅaranya ante corr.
3 kabeh ] post corr. ; beh ante corr. 13 mañetanā ] mañetannā post corr. ; mañatannā ante
corr.
17 lupa, ] post corr. ; lupa ante corr.


--- PAGE 234 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
215
Te distinctive characteristic of the Soul in pervading the principles thus
[enumerated] is woven crosswise-and-lengthwise. Woven crosswise means:
like the butter that is within milk, such is the characteristic of the Soul in
pervading all the principles. Woven lengthwise is like the string of the pearls
that stand in a row. Such is the nature of the Soul in being in the whole uni-
verse. Te Soul being woven lengthwise, that I shall explain to you, my son.
Listen carefully to my teachings: Te principle of Soul is omniscient and om-
nipotent; it pervades the principle of Māyā. Eventually the power of the Soul
disappears, it ceases to be omniscient and omnipotent, for maculation is the
nature of Māyā. Maculation sticks tightly to the Soul: this is the reason why
its nature is being ignorant; in reality it is only sentience. It pervades the level
of the principle of activation, and it becomes differentiated from its [true]
nature. Like the children of the bees that are in the holes [of a hive]: thus
is the Soul while being differentiated from its [true] nature, having as body
the principle of activation. It pervades the principle of attachment: it desires
to be sentient of [the external reality].37 It pervades the principle of aware-
ness: ﬁnally it perceives the external reality, for the principles of awareness
serves as a light for it. Tat is the reason why it perceives the external real-
ity. What is the external reality that is perceived by it? It is the principle of
unevolved matter. Te characteristic of unevolved matter is darkness with-
out sentience, unconsciousness is its original condition. Tey are caused by
the Lord to meet. Sentience is consciousness, and unevolved matter is un-
consciousness.38 Te consciousness meets with the unconsciousness: that
brings about the three constituents, sattva, rajas and tamas. Te character-
istics of sattva are insight and lightness. Te characteristics of rajas are force
and movement. Te characteristics of tamas are heaviness and ignorance.
Tis is the nature of the principles of the three constituents.
37.
Te verbal form mañetanā, ‘to perceive in a conscious manner, to be aware of’ nec-
essarily needs an object, which here must be understood.
38.
Te words tutur and lupa, besides ‘conscious(ness)’ and ‘unconscious(ness)’ can also
mean, respectively, ‘memory, recollection’ and ‘forgetting, loss of memory or consciousness’.


--- PAGE 235 ---
216
ii Text & Translation
saṅka ri triguṇa mәtu / taṅbuddhi, lakṣaṇanya, nda bāhyadarśana ṅaranya,
12r
tan pacetana ikaṅbuddhi, ndan makacetanā ya, makacetanā ṅaranya, tan
vruh ikaṅbuddhi, ndan kadi vruh ya, tan pahiḍәp ikaṅbuddhi, ndan kadi
maṅhiḍәp ya, apan mәtu saṅke tattva rva tattva rva ṅaranya, ātmā lāvan
5
pradhāna,
saṅke buddhi mәtu tāhaṅkāra, lakṣaṇanya <magave hurip> lāvan maṅaku,
ndan lakṣaṇa niṅahaṅkāra ya, ṅaranya tәlu, si vaikṛta, si taijasa, si bhūtādi,
ikaṅahaṅkāra si vaikṛta, ya tekā sattva svabhāvanya, <ikaṅahaṅkāra si tai-
jasa, ya tekā rajah svabhāvanya,> ikaṅahaṅkāra si bhūtādi tamah svabhāva-
10
nya/, nāhan lakṣaṇa niṅahaṅkāra, an mijil saṅkeṅbuddhi, tәlu prakāranya,
12v
ikaṅahaṅkāra si vaikṛta, yekā saṅka niṅmanah mәtu lāvan daśendriya, da-
śendriya ṅaranya, śrota, tvak, cakṣuh, jihvā, ghrāṇa, vāk, pāṇi, pāyu, up-
astha, pada nāhan kveh niṅindriya sapuluh, savәlas lāvan manah, lakṣaṇa
niṅmanah mamikalpa,
15
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[9] takarin tuṅgal ikaṅmanah lāvan buddhi lavan ahaṅkāra, sājñā bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
1 bāhyadarśana ] em. ; bhāyadārśanā cod.
2 makacetanā ya ] conj. ; kāmacetanā ya cod.
2 makacetanā ṅaranya ] conj. ; kāmacetanā ṅaranya cod.
3 vruh ya ] em. ; vruya cod.
7 bhūtādi ] em. ; bhutādә cod.
8 svabhāvanya ] em. ; svarbhavanya cod.
10 saṅkeṅ]
em. ; saṅṅko cod.
11 daśendriya ] em. E ; daṣondrayā cod.
11–12 daśendriya ] em. E ;
dāṣondrayā cod.
13 niṅindriya ] em. ; ni nirindriyā cod.
13 savәlas ] em. ; savkas cod.
13 lāvan ] em. ; lāvana cod. 15 sumahur ] em. ; sumahu cod. 16 lavan ahaṅkāra ] em. ;
lavan· hәṅkāra cod.
2–4 tan vruh ikaṅbuddhi … kadi maṅhiḍәp ya ] Cf. TJ 10.16–17: buddhi tan pahiḍәp /
ikaṅbuddhi ndan ahiḍәp ya / kadi tan vruh ikaṅbuddhi / ndan vruh ya kadi tan pacetanekaṅ
buddhi /
6–10 saṅke buddhi mәtu tāhaṅkāra … si bhūtādi tamah svabhāvanya ] Cf. TJ
12.7–8: tuhun pinakaparanti jugeka hananya de niṅahaṅkāra tri bhedanya / lvirnya / si
vaikṛta si taijasa si bhūtādi / nahan ya ahaṅkāra // ahaṅkāra si vaikṛta yeka buddhi sattva /
ahaṅkāra si taijasa yeka buddhi rajah / ahaṅkāra si bhūtādi yeka buddhi tamah // ; Vṛh
33.21–23: saṅka riṅbuddhi mәtu taṅahaṅkāra / tәlu prakāranya / lvirnya / sāttvika / rā-
jasa / tāmasa / nahan bhedanya / si vaikṛta yeka sāttvika / si taijasa yeka rajah / si bhūtādi
yeka tamah /
11–13 yekā saṅka niṅmanah … upastha ] Cf. TJ 12.9–11: ahaṅkāra si
vaikṛta yeka magave manah mvaṅdaśendriya / lvirnya / cakṣu śrotra ghrāṇa jihvā tvak /
nahan taṅsinaṅgah pañcendriya ṅaranya / vāk pāṇi pāda upastha pāyu yeka sinaṅgah pañ-
cakarmendriya ṅaranya / ; Vṛh 33.23–25: saṅka riṅahaṅkāra <si vaikṛta> mәtu taṅmanah
lavan daśendriya / lvirnya / śrotra / tvak / cakṣuh / jihvā / ghrāṇa / vāk / pāṇi / pāda / pāyu /
upastha /


--- PAGE 236 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
217
From the three constituents comes forth the intellect. Its characteristic is
the perception of the external reality. Te intellect is without sentience, and
yet it serves the purpose of sentience.39 To serve the purpose of sentience
means that the intellect does not know, yet it is as if capable of knowing. Te
intellect is without thinking faculty, yet it is as if it thinks, for it came forth
from the two principles. Te two principles are: Soul and unevolved matter.
From the intellect comes forth the self-identity, its characteristic is to
preserve life40 and to relate [everything] to the own I. Further, the charac-
teristics of the self-identity are three: the one modiﬁed, the one consisting
of passion, and the one which is the origin of the gross elements. Te nature
of the modiﬁed self-identity is sattva. Te nature of the self-identity consist-
ing of passion is rajas.41 Te nature of the self-identity which is the origin of
the gross elements is tamas. Such are the characteristics of the self-identity
in originating from the intellect. Teir types are three. Te modiﬁed self-
identity is the origin from which the mind-stuff comes forth, together with
the ten faculties. Te ten faculties are: ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose, mouth,
hands, anus, reproductive organs, and feet. Such is the enumeration of the
ten faculties. Tey are eleven with the mind-stuff. Te characteristic of the
mind-stuff is to ideate.
Kumāra spoke:
[9] If you please, o Lord, is it not so that the mind-stuff, the intellect and the
self-identity are identical?
Te Lord spoke:
39.
Afer emending the reading kāmacetanā, attested twice in the line, into makacetanā,
i.e. cetanā provided with the preﬁx maka- ‘to have as’ or ‘to serve the purpose of’ (this lat-
ter meaning of maka- is attested more rarely and corresponds to the passive form pinaka-,
cf. Zoetmulder 1983:57–58). Te corruption of makacetanā into kāmacetanā could have
been caused by a copyist having thought of kāmacetanā, and to have imputed to it a mean-
ing such as ‘sentient due to desire’ (?). In support of my emendation I point at the form
makacetanā attested in the Tattvajñāna in a similar context and meaning: bhaṭāra mahu-
lun makacetana saṅhyaṅātmā / saṅhyaṅātmā makacetana ikaṅcitta / ika citta makacetana
ikaṅahaṅkāra ‘Te Supreme Lord serves as sentience for the Holy Soul, the Holy Soul serves
as sentience for the mind, the mind serves as sentience for the self-identity’.
40.
A word has apparently been omitted between lakṣaṇanya and lāvan; I have conjec-
turally ﬁlled the lacuna with the sequence magave hurip, which I have drawn from a parallel
in 218.3 deﬁning self-identity as follows: yekā magave hurip, lāvan prayatna maṅaku jñā-
nanya.
41.
I conjecturally inserted this sentence in the text, which is required in order to make
the series of three items complete, supposing it was dropped due to scribal error.


--- PAGE 237 ---
218
ii Text & Translation
dudū ikā, apan lakṣaṇanya tan pada, byaktānyan tan pa/da, yan kva liṅanta,
13r
nihan ikaṅbuddhi adhyavasāya lakṣaṇanya, adhyavasāya ṅaranya, vruh niṅ
ahala lāvan ahayu, lāvan niścaya ta ya, ikaṅahaṅkāra yekā magave hurip,
lāvan prayatna maṅaku jñānanya, kunaṅikaṅmanah mamikalpa gavenya,
5
liṅnya, kapan kunaṅpapaṅguha lāvan kahyunku, mvaṅsyapa mapaṅguh-
aknāku, apa karaṇaṅkvā kunaṅ, ndi deśa kapaṅguhanaṅkvā, nāhan lakṣaṇa
nikaṅmanah an pamikalpa, lāvan umahas ta ya riṅdaśadeśa, nāhan papale-
nan i manah sakeṅahaṅkāra / lāvan buddhi,
13v
ikaṅta katәlu, ya tekā cinetanā saṅhyaṅātmā, anәhәr pinakasādhanān
10
paṅgṛhīta viṣaya, ikaṅśrotendriya ya, haneṅtaliṅa, ikaṅtvakindriya, ya ha-
neṅkulit, ikaṅcaksuhindriya, ya haneṅmata, ikaṅjihvendriya ya haneṅ
ilat, ikaṅghrāṇendriya ya haneṅhiruṅ, nāhan taṅpañcabuddhīndriya ṅa-
ranya, ri denyan pakasahāya buddhin paṅgṛhīta vastuviṣaya, pañcakarmen-
driya ṅaranya, ikaṅvakindriya ya haneṅtutuk, ikaṅpaṇīndriya ya haneṅ
15
taṅa/n, ikaṅpadendriya ya haneṅsuku, ikaṅpāyvindriya ya haneṅlәt, ikaṅ
14r
upāsthendriya ya haneṅbhaga puruṣa, nāhan taṅpañcakarmendriya ṅara-
nya, mataṅnyan karmendriya ṅaranya, apan makapūrva karmekā nimitta
niṅātmān paṅgṛhīta viṣaya ikā, ikā ta kabeh, ya ta daśendriya ṅaranya,
2 adhyavasāya ] em. ; andyavasaya cod. 5 kapan kunaṅ] conj. ; kapanakuṅna cod. 5 lā-
van ] em. ; lalāvan cod.
7 nikaṅ] em. E ; niṅkā cod.
10 paṅgṛhīta ] em. ; panpagṛhīta
cod.
10 śrotendriya ya ] em. ; srotendrayā aya cod.
10 tvakindriya ] em. ; tvakindrayā
cod.
11 jihvendriya ] em. ; jihvandriyā cod.
13 paṅgṛhīta ] em. ; paṅgrahit· cod.
13–
14 pañcakarmendriya ] em. ; pañcakamendriyā cod.
14 vakindriya ] em. ; vaki,hndriyā
cod.
14 paṇīndriya ] em. ; pahәndriyā cod.
15 pāyvindriya ] em. E ; pāhvindriyā cod.
16 pañcakarmendriya ] em. ; pañcakāmendriyā cod.
17 karmendriya ] em. ; kammen-
driyā cod. 17 makapūrva karmekā ] conj. ; makapurvvāvekāmme cod. (post corr.) 18 pa-
ṅgṛhīta ] em. ; paṅgrahit· cod.
18 ikā ta ] em. ; ikā kata cod.
18 ya ta ] em. ; ya tan cod.
17–18 mataṅnyan … viṣaya ikā ] Cf. Vṛh 33.88–90: umapa teki rva de bhaṭāra majarakәn
indriya / umuṅguh lavan inuṅgvan / apan ri hana nikaṅgolaka ya ta nimitta niṅātmān
paṅgṛhītaṅviṣaya //
2–3 niṅahala ] post corr. ; ni hala ante corr.
17 makapūrva karmekā ] makapurvvāve-
kāmme post corr. ; makapurvvākāmme ante corr.


--- PAGE 238 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
219
Tey are different, for their distinctive characteristics are not the same. Te
evidence that they are not the same—if you would ask—is as follows: the
characteristic of the intellect is the faculty of decision. Faculty of decision
means: the knowledge of what is bad and what is good, and determination.
Te self-identity is what maintains life, and its knowledge is engaged in re-
lating [everything] to the own I. Further, the activity of the mind-stuff is to
imagine, [as when] one thinks: ‘When will I be united in wedlock with my
beloved? And who will cause me to be united in wedlock with her? What
will be my stratagem? Where is the place where I will obtain her?’42 Such is
the characteristic of the mind-stuff as it imagines. And also: it roams about
in the ten quarters of the space. Tus is the difference of the mind-stuff from
the self-identity and the intellect.
Tose three are perceived in a conscious manner by the Soul and con-
sequently they serve as means to grasp the external objects. Te faculty of
hearing, it resides in the ears. Te faculty of touch, it resides in the skin. Te
faculty of sight, it resides in the eyes. Te faculty of taste, it resides in the
tongue. Te faculty of smell, it resides in the nose. Tus are the ﬁve faculties
of perception, [they are called thus] because they have the intellect as helper
in grasping the physical sense objects. Te ﬁve faculties of action are [as fol-
lows]: the faculty of speech, it resides in the mouth; the faculty of grasping, it
resides in the hands; the faculty of motion, it resides in the legs; the faculty of
defecation, it resides in the anus; the faculty of reproduction, it resides in the
female and male genital organs. Tus are the ﬁve faculties of action. Te rea-
son why they are called the ﬁve faculties of action is that they have action as
prominent factor. It is the cause of the Soul in grasping the external objects.
Tose ones together are called the ten faculties.
42.
I interpret the sentence in direct speech as referring to the thoughts of a man about
his future partner, although the absence of a discernible context and the ambiguity inherent
to the lexicon makes this translation somewhat uncertain. For instance, the form papaṅguh
derives from the base paṅguh (OJED 1259) ‘to come together, meet, live together, be united
in wedlock’; but amaṅguh, kapaṅguh and pamaṅguh are glossed in OJED as passive verbal
forms meaning ‘to ﬁnd, meet with, obtain, meet, encounter, come upon’; kahyunku, from
hyun ‘wish, desire, love’, can mean both ‘desire, wish; what one desires or wishes’ and ‘the
beloved’ (OJED 663); karaṇa (OJED 802) means ‘cause, reason’ but also ‘stratagem’ or ‘trick’
(comparable to upāya). Even though a more general translation of the passage is possible, I
ﬁnd the context of courtship the most probable.


--- PAGE 239 ---
220
ii Text & Translation
tumambhәh pvekaṅ<buddhi> ahaṅkāra lāvan manah, ya ta sinaṅguh tra-
yodaśakaraṇa ṅaranya, ya ta sādhana niṅātmān paṅgṛhīta viṣaya ikā, kārya
nikaṅahaṅkāra si vaikṛta ikā ka/beh, huvus ikāta,
14v
nihan ta gave nikā ahaṅkāra si bhūtādi, hana pañcatanmātra ṅaranya,
5
śabdatanmātra, sparśatanmātra, rūpatanmātra, rasatanmātra, gandhatan-
mātra, nahan taṅpañcatanmātra ṅaranya, amijil saṅke ahaṅkāra si bhūtādi,
ikaṅahaṅkāra si taijasa, yekā tumuluṅsi vaikṛta lāvan si bhūtādi, an pagave
kārya,
nihan lakṣaṇa nikaṅśabdatanmātra, tutupi taliṅanta, hanekaṅśabda ka-
10
rәṅә¯, yā tekā śabdatanmātra ṅaranya, sparśatanmātra ṅaranya, hana bāyu
madrәs kahiḍә/p denta, huvus pvekaṅbāyūmirira kahiḍәpta tisnya ri kulit,
15r
ya tekā sparśatanmātra ṅaranya, nihan taṅrūpatanmātra ṅaranya, sampun
sumurup saṅhyaṅāditya, hana tejanira kavәkas atunu, ya tekā rūpatanmā-
tra ṅaranya, rasatanmātra, ṅa, kady aṅgān iṅvvaṅmamaṅan rasa mamanis
15
mapahit, huvus pva ya hәnti, hana ta rasanya kavәkas riṅtutuk, ya tekā rasa-
tanmātra ṅaranya, nihan taṅgandhatanmātra ṅaranya, kady aṅgān iṅhasәp
caṇḍana, agaru kunaṅ, huvus luṅhā kukusnya, kavәkas taṅ/ gandha riya, ya
15v
tekā gandhatanmātra ṅaranya, nahan taṅpañcatanmātra ṅaranya,
2 paṅgṛhīta ] em. ; paṅgrahit· cod.
7 tumuluṅ] em. ; tumulu cod.
7 bhūtādi ] em. ;
bhutādә cod.
9 hanekaṅ] em. ; haneṅkā cod.
13 atunu ] conj. ; āturu cod.
15 hәnti ]
em. ; hintā cod.
7–8 ikaṅahaṅkāra … kārya ] Cf. TJ 15.1–3: kunaṅlakṣaṇa nikaṅahaṅkāra si taijasa / yeka
kadi vayuh lakṣaṇanya / tumuluṅsi vaikṛta lavan si bhūtādi / milu magave ekādaśendriya /
lavan pañcatanmātra // ; Vṛh 33.26–27: ikaṅahaṅkāra si taijasa // yeka umilu mamәtvakәn
kārya nikaṅahaṅkāra si vaikṛta lavan si bhūtādi /
9–10 tutupi … śabdatanmātra ṅara-
nya ] Cf. TJ 12.7–8: śabdatanmātra ṅaranya tutupi taliṅanta kalih / hana śabda karәṅә¯ / lit
nikaṅśabda yeka śabdatanmātra ṅaranya // ; Vṛh 33.9–11: tutupana taliṅanta / hana śabda
karәṅә¯ / litlit nikaṅśabda karәṅә¯ / yeka śabdatanmātra ṅaranya /
12–14 sampun sumu-
rup … rūpatanmātra ṅaranya ] Cf. TJ 12.9–11: rūpatanmātra ṅaranya duvәgi kālasandhyā
sumurup saṅhyaṅāditya kulvan / hana ta tejanira kavәkas mātramātra / lit nikaṅteja yeka
rūpatanmātra ṅaranya / ; Vṛh 33.34–35: huvus sumurup saṅhyaṅāditya / hana ta tejanira
kavәkas / litlit nikaṅteja katon / yeka rūpatanmātra ṅaranya /


--- PAGE 240 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
221
Adding intellect,43 self-identity and mind-stuff, they are designated as the
thirteenfold organ. Tat is the means of the Soul to grasp the objects. All of
them are the effects of the modiﬁed self-identity. Tus far about that.
As follows is the activity of the self-identity which is the origin of the
gross elements. Tere are the ﬁve subtle elements: sound, touch, form, taste,
smell. Tus are the ﬁve subtle elements, originating from the self-identity
which is the origin of the gross elements. Te self-identity consisting of pas-
sion, that helps the modiﬁed one and the one which is the origin of the gross
elements in performing a task.
Te characteristics of the subtle element of sound are as follows. Close
your ears. Tere is that sound which is heard. Tat is the subtle element of
sound.44 Te subtle element of touch: imagine that there is a strong wind;
imagine its coolness on your skin afer it has stopped blowing. Tat is the
subtle element of touch. Te subtle element of form is as follows: the Sun has
already set. Tere is the remaining part of its light that is ablaze.45 Tat is
called the subtle element of form. Te subtle element of taste: like when a
man tastes either a sweet or a bitter ﬂavour. When it is ﬁnished, the lef-over
of its taste is in the mouth. Tat is the subtle element of taste. Te subtle
element of smell is as follows: as when there is the smoke of sandal-wood,
or of aloe; when their smoke has dissipated, their scent remains. Tat is the
subtle element of smell. Tus are the ﬁve subtle elements.
43.
Te addition of buddhi, presumably lef out by mistake, is required to make the sen-
tence logically and doctrinally coherent.
44.
Tat is to say, a very subtle and almost unperceptible sound: compare Vṛhaspatitat-
tva 33.9–11, deﬁning śabdatanmātra as the ﬁnest part of the sound that is heard (litlit nikaṅ
śabda karәṅә¯) when the ears are closed.
45.
Te points seems to be that light is still dimly visible when the sun has just set below
the horizon: compare the parallels in Vṛhaspatitattva 33.34–35 and Tattvajñāna 12.9–11.
I have emended āturu ‘sleeping, dormant’ into atunu ‘ablaze, on ﬁre’ (compare katuru →
katunu: 324.14). Te former word would make sense only if interpreted as a ﬁgurative
description of the dormant (light of the) sun, but would still be somewhat redundant in the
clause.


--- PAGE 241 ---
222
ii Text & Translation
saṅke pañcatanmātra, mәtu taṅpañcamahābhūta, nihan kramanya, ikā śab-
datanmātra pamәtvakәn ākāśa, guṇanya śabda, lakṣaṇanya magave ugvan,
sakeṅsparśatanmātra, mәtu taṅbāyu, lakṣaṇanya maṅulahakәn, guṇanya
sparśa, sakeṅrūpatanmātra, mәtu taṅteja, lakṣaṇanya prakāśa panas, guṇa-
5
nya rūpa, sakeṅrasatanmātra, mәtu taṅāpah, lakṣaṇanya mәlәs, guṇanya
rasa, nәm prakāra / niṅrasāmanis, apahit, apәdәs, asәpәt, ahasәm, ahasin,
16r
yekā ṣaḍrasa ṅaranya, saṅke gandhatanmātra, mәtu taṅpṛthivī, lakṣaṇanya,
maganal makakāya, guṇanya ganda, nahan lakṣaṇa nikaṅpañcamahābhūta
kavruhana, kunaṅikā maraṅkәpana ikaṅvaneh, apan ikaṅi sor ya kabya-
10
pakan de nikaṅi ruhur, ikaṅākāśa muṅgv i ruhur, tumut ta bāyu mataṅnyan
rva guṇanya, śabda, sparśa, ikā bāyu mvaṅākāśa byāpaka riṅteja, mataṅ-
nyan tәlu guṇa niṅteja, śabda, sparśa, rū/pa, ikaṅteja lāvan bāyu ākāśa,
16v
byāpaka riṅāpah, mataṅnyan pat guṇa niṅāpah, śabda, sparśa, rūpa, rasa,
ikaṅtaṅāpah, teja, bāyu, ākāśa, byāpaka riṅpṛthivī, mataṅnyan lima guṇa
15
niṅpṛthivī, śabda, sparśa, rūpa, rasa, gandha, nāhan lakṣaṇa nikān pavor
guṇa ikaṅpañcamahābhūta, ya ta ginave bhaṭāra bhuvana,
1 mәtu taṅ] em. ; mtu ta cod. 2 pamәtvakәn ākāśa ] em. ; pamtvākәn kāṣa cod. 3 mәtu
taṅbāyu ] em. ; mtu tā bāyu cod. 6 nәm prakāra ] em. E ; namāprakāra cod. 6 rasāmanis ]
em. ; rasa manis em. E; rāṣanmis cod.
6 ahasәm ] em. E ; ahisәm cod.
9 apan ikaṅi sor ]
em. ; apani ikaṅsorā cod.
10 nikaṅ] em. ; nikoṅṅcod.
10 muṅgv i ] em. E ; mvaṅgva
cod.
10 bāyu ] em. E ; nāyā cod.
15 nikān ] em. ; niṅkān cod.
10–16 ikaṅākāśa muṅgv i ruhur … ya ta ginave bhaṭāra bhuvana ] Cf. TJ 13.13–14.2: ikaṅ
ākāśa muṅgv iṅruhur / tumūt taṅvāyu / ya ta mataṅnyan rva guṇa niṅvāyu śabda sparśa //
ākāśa vāyu teja / ya ta mataṅnyan tiga guṇa niṅteja śabda sparśa rūpa // ākāśa vāyu teja
āpah / ya ta mataṅnyan pāt guṇa niṅāpah śabda sparśa rūpa ṣaḍrasa // ākāśa vāyu teja āpah
pṛthivī / ya ta mataṅnyan lima guṇa niṅpṛthivī śabda sparśa rūpa ṣaḍrasa gandha //13//
nahan lakṣaṇa nikaṅpañcamahābhūta an pavor guṇa / ginave aṇḍabhuvana de bhaṭāra /
9 ikā maraṅkәpana ikaṅvaneh ] ikā maraṅkәpana ikāṅvaneh post corr. ; ikā vaneh ante
corr.
10–11 mataṅnyan rva ] post corr. ; rva ante corr.
13 śabda, sparśa, rūpa, ] ṣabda,
sparṣa, rupa, post corr. ; ṣabda, rupa, ante corr.
15 sparśa, rūpa, ] sparṣa, rupa, post corr. ;
sparṣa, ante corr.


--- PAGE 242 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
223
From the ﬁve subtle elements come forth the ﬁve gross elements. Teir suc-
cession is as follows: the subtle element of sound brings forth the atmo-
sphere. Its quality is sound; its distinctive characteristic is to create space.46
From the subtle element of touch comes forth the wind. Its distinctive char-
acteristic is to set in motion; its quality is touch. From the subtle element of
form comes forth the ﬁre. Its distinctive characteristic is shining and heat;
its quality is form. From the subtle element of taste comes forth the water.
Its distinctive characteristic is wetness; its quality is taste. Te kinds of tastes
are six: sweet, bitter, hot, tart, sour, salty. Tus are the six tastes. From the
subtle element of smell comes forth the earth. Its distinctive characteristic
is coarseness and bodily concreteness; its quality is smell. Tus the char-
acteristics of the ﬁve gross elements should be known. Furthermore, they
come together matching one another, for those below are pervaded by those
above. Te atmosphere positions itself above. Te wind follows. For this
reason, their qualities are two: sound and touch. Te wind and atmosphere
pervade the ﬁre. For this reason, the qualities of ﬁre are three: sound, touch
and form. Te ﬁre along with the wind and the atmosphere pervades the
water. For this reason, the qualities of the water are four: sound, touch,
form and taste. Te water, the ﬁre, the wind and the atmosphere pervade
the earth. For this reason, the qualities of the earth are ﬁve: sound, touch,
form, taste and smell. Tus are the characteristics of the ﬁve gross elements
in combining with the qualities. Tese are caused to create the World by the
Lord.47
46.
I translate uṅgvan as ‘space’ instead of ‘place, position’ (OJED 2125), for the expres-
sion magave uṅgvan appears to be based on the idea, found in Sanskrit sources, that ākāśa
(‘atmosphere’ or ‘ether’) creates the space where the other elements are located; cf., e.g.,
Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 19.6; Mṛgendratantra VP 10.21; Parākhyatantra 4.110cd–
111ab, etc. Note that the sources invariably use the term avakāśa, which can mean both
‘place’ and ‘space’; the passage of the latter source is translated by Goodall (2004:264)
as follows: ‘And the arising of ether is necessarily preceded by [that of] the subtle ele-
ment ‘‘sound’’. It is different from all four [other] elements because of its [providing] space
(avakāśataḥ)’ ākāśasyāpi yotpattiḥśabdatanmātrapūrvikā // caturṇām api bhūtānāṃbhin-
naṃtadavakāśataḥ.
47.
Tis clause appears to have two subjects, i.e. the pronoun ya (referring to what pre-
cedes) and bhuvana. However, that the construction is not the result of a corruption is
suggested by a parallel construction in the Tattvajñāna (13.11): ikaṅpṛthivī āpah teja vāyu
ākāśa / ya ta ginave bhuvana de bhaṭāra. In both texts the passive verbal form ginave ‘to be
made’ makes sense only if understood as a passive causative, i.e. ‘to be caused to make’.


--- PAGE 243 ---
224
ii Text & Translation
† agәṅākāśa miṇduhur, † ya ta sinaṅguh aṇḍabhuvana ṅaranya, devamā-
nuṣatiryak, nāhan pinakesi niṅaṇḍabhuvana, ikaṅi ruhur satyaloka, ikaṅ
i sor, yekā / mahālokā, i sor niṅmahāloka, tapoloka, i sor niṅtapoloka,
17r
janaloka, i sor niṅjanaloka, svahloka, i sor niṅsvahloka, bhuvahloka, i sor
5
niṅbhuvahloka, yeki kahanantānaku, riṅbhūhloka, ṅaran ikā saptadvīpa,
saptārṇava, i sor niṅbhūhloka, ya tekā saptapātāla ṅaranya, patuṅgaltuṅgal
ni ṅaranya nihan paṅavruhana, apatāla, hana i sor nikā, vetāla, nitāla, netāla,
gabhastitāla, vāratāla, rāsatāla, nahan pa/tiṅkah nikaṅpātāla, i sor nikā, yekā
17v
mahānaraka, kveh nikā yeka tәlu puluh rva<,> patapnya[,] mahāraurava, i
10
sor niṅmahānaraka, yeki tāmragardabha, tan vā pәtaṅkatunan teja, i sor
nikaṅtāmragardabha, ya toṅgvan saṅhyaṅkālarudrāgni, āpuy dumilah sa-
dākāla,
3 yekā ] em. E ; yakā cod.
5 kahanantānaku ] em. ; tahanantānaku cod.
5 ikā ] em. ;
yikә cod. 6 saptārṇava ] em. ; saptāvarṇnava cod. 7 nihan ] em. ; nāhan cod. 10 tāmra-
gardabha ] conj. ; timirāgarndama cod.
11 tāmragardabha ] em. ; tәmiragarddama cod.
11 toṅgvan ] em. E ; teṅgvan cod.
11 āpuy ] conj. ; āpva cod.
2–5 ikaṅi ruhur satyaloka … kahanantānaku riṅbhūhloka ] Cf. SHH 2.2–7: bhūhloka
ṅaran ikaṅbhuvana kahananta, i ruhur nikaṅmuvah bhuvahloka i ruhur nikaṅbhuvahloka
suvahloka, i ruhur nikaṅsuvahloka janahloka, i ruhur nikaṅjanahloka tapoloka, i ruhur
nikaṅtapoloka satyaloka, i ruhur satyaloka mahāloka, i ruhur nikaṅmahāloka atyanta an-
taloka,
11–12 saṅhyaṅkālarudrāgni, āpuy dumilah sadākāla ] Cf. TJ 14.14–15: saṅ
kālāgnirudra apuy dumilah sadākāla /


--- PAGE 244 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
225
† Extensive, space rises upwards. †48 Tat is designated as the Cosmic Egg.
Gods, human beings and animals: these are the inhabitants of the Cosmic
Egg. Te one above is the Satyaloka. One step lower, there is the Mahāloka.
Below the Mahāloka, there is the Tapoloka. Below the Tapoloka, the Janaloka.
Below the Janaloka, the Svaḥloka. Below the Svaḥloka, the Bhuvaḥloka. Be-
low the Bhuvaḥloka, that is your abode, my son, in the Earth. Tat means
the Seven Continents and the Seven Oceans. Below the Earth are the Seven
Underworlds. Teir names should be known as follows, one by one: Āpātāla
is below [all of] them, the Vetāla, Nitāla, Netāla, Gabhastitāla, Vāratāla, Rā-
satāla. Tus are the levels of the underworlds. Below them there are the
Great Hells; their number is thirty-two, the Mahāraurava is their roof.49 Be-
low the Great Hells is the Tāmragardabha,50 not clear, dark and lacking in
light. Below the Tāmragardabha is the place of the Fire of Kālarudra,51 a ﬁre
eternally blazing.
48.
Te clause within cruxes (āgәṅākasā miṇḍuhur in the codex) seems to be corrupt as
it is incomplete and can hardly be the subject of what follows, picked up by ya ta. It might
be the result of the mistake of a scribe inﬂuenced by the clause ikaṅākāśa muṅgv i ruhur
occurring above (222.10). A parallel passage in the Tattvajñāna, just afer the sentence
quoted in the preceding footnote, reads arddha ruhur sumiṇḍuhur matumpaṅtumpaṅan
lakṣaṇanya / ikaṅtattva i ruhur pinakaguṇa de niṅtattva i sor // nihan lakṣaṇanya / ikaṅ
ākāśa muṅgv iṅruhur / [from here to 14.2 the text corresponds to DhPāt 222.10–16, cf. my
apparatus]. I suspect the reading arddha ruhur sumiṇḍuhur to be corrupted; arddha (arddhā
Kha and adha Ga) might be conjecturally emended to urddha (= ūrdhva, cf. OJED 2142),
and the morphologically impossible sumiṇḍuhur into samiṇḍuhur. Te whole clause from
urddha to lakṣaṇanya would thus translate ‘the zenith [is] above, along with everything
that raises upwards; its characteristic is [to be ordered] in layers’ (taking lakṣaṇanya to be a
qualiﬁer of samiṇḍuhur rather than of bhuvana in the preceding sentence). Although this
passage provides us with some hints of the context, it does not enable one to reconstrue the
original clause of the DhPāt with any degree of certainty.
49.
I translate the substantive patap, provided with the clitic third person pronoun -nya,
as ‘roof’ (cf. Modern Javanese atap, which, according to JED (57), is a regional, dialec-
tal or non-standard form) rather than ‘proper arrangement, right order’ (OJED 1945), for
mahāraurava can hardly be taken as an adjective, being a well-attested name for (a partic-
ular) hell in Old Javanese (cf. OJED 1086) as well as Sanskrit sources. My translation has
rendered a slight emendation of the original punctuation necessary (e.g. from tlu puluḥrva
patapnya, māhāraurava into tәlu puluh rva, patapnya mahāraurava).
50.
For my emendation of tәmiragarddabha (and tәmiragaddarma occurring below) into
tāmragardabha, cf. Part iii, p. 430.
51.
Here kālarudrāgni obviously corresponds to the Kālāgnirudra well-known in San-
skrit and Old Javanese sources. But that the word is not a corruption is suggested by the
occurrence of a similar form in Sutasoma 117.3c: mahākālarudrāgnirūpa.


--- PAGE 245 ---
226
ii Text & Translation
i sor nikā kulit niṅaṇḍabhuvana, kumaluṅi sor i ruhur iriṅan, i sor niṅkulit
niṅaṇḍabhuvana, ya toṅgvan saṅhyaṅśatarudra kumuliliṅikeṅaṇḍabhu-
vana, ikeṅkahananta ya ta patimbunan i / tattva kabeh,
18r
ndan lakṣaṇa nikaṅtattva hana ṅke, kapva umyāpakerikaṅtattva ma-
5
ganal saṅkeṅriya, nihan kramanya, bhaṭāra mahulun, byāpaka rikaṅātmā,
ikaṅātmā byāpaka ri māyā, ikaṅmāyā byāpaka ri pradhāna, ikaṅpradhāna
byāpaka riṅbuddhitattva, ikaṅbuddhitattva, byāpaka riṅahaṅkāra, ikaṅah-
aṅkāra, byāpaka ri manah, ikaṅmanah, byapaka riṅdaśendriya, ikaṅda-
śendriya byāpaka riṅpañcatanmātra, ikaṅpañcatanmātra, byāpaka ri pañ-
10
camahābhūta, na/han lvirnya, ya ta mataṅnyan pinakapatimbhunan iṅtat-
18v
tva kabeh, ikaṅbhūhloka kahananta maṅke, huvus maṅkana,
iṅәtiṅәt mūla niṅcarita, prastāva nikaṅcetanā saṅpara, dumeh saṅyo-
gīśvara tan vaṅvaṅsiddhi, ikaṅātmā jәnәk mañetanā, makanimitta mala, ya
dumeh ya tan vruha ri jātinya, mahyun pva bhaṭāra vruha ri jātinira, ya ma-
15
taṅnyan veh ya māvaka, huvusnyan māvak, mabheda ta ya rva, lakilaki lāvan
anakәbi, ya tekā mamukti ṣaḍrasa, ṣaḍrasa ṅaranya, amanis, apahit, / asәpәt,
19r
ahasin, ahasәm, apәdәs, yekā ṣaḍrasa ṅaranya, ya ta pinaṅanya ininumnya,
matәmahan śukra riṅanak laki, śvanita niṅanakәbi, ikaṅtaṅśukraśonitā
pinapaṅguhakәnira lāvan ikaṅkāma,
1 nikā ] em. ; nikāṅcod.
2 toṅgvan ] em. ; tuṅgvan cod.
4 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkāṅcod.
14 vruha ] em. ; vraha cod. 14–15 mataṅnyan ] em. ; mataṅṅyan cod. 18 śukraśonitā ]
em. ; sutraṣonitā cod.
3 ikeṅkahananta ya ta patimbunan i / tattva kabeh ] Cf. TJ 14.5–6: ndan ikaṅbhūrloka pa-
timbunan iṅtattva kabeh / ; Vṛh 33.48: ikaṅpṛthivītattva ya patimbunan iṅtattva kabeh /
17–18 matәmahan … śukraśonitā ] Cf. TJ 37.7–8: ikaṅṣaḍrasa pinaṅan ininum de niṅ
lakilaki / hanakәbi / sāri nikaṅpinaṅan ininum / yeka matәmahan rah dagiṅgajih / ; Vṛh
33.56–59: ikaṅṣaḍrasa / ya teka pinaṅan ininum de niṅlakilaki lavan anakbi / ya ta maṅ-
dadyakәn hurip lavan śarīra / sāri nikaṅśarīra / ya ta matәmahan kāma riṅlakilaki / śukla
ṅaranya vaneh / śonita riṅanakәbi / matәmu pvekaṅśuklaśonita
3 patimbunan ] patimbhunan post corr. ; patimbhunin ante corr.
6 ikaṅātmā ] ikāṅṅ
ātmā post corr. ; iykāṅṅante corr.


--- PAGE 246 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
227
Below it [there is] the external shell of the World, which surrounds below
and above as well as on the borders. Below the shell of the world is the place
of the Hundred Rudras, surrounding this Cosmic Egg. Here, the place where
you are, it is where all the principles are piled up.
Further, the characteristic of the principles that are here is that all of
them pervade the principles coarser than them. Teir order is as follows:
the Sovereign Lord pervades the Soul; the Soul pervades the Māyā; the Māyā
pervades the unevolved matter; the unevolved matter pervades the princi-
ple of intellect; the principle of intellect pervades the self-identity; the self-
identity pervades the mind-stuff; the mind-stuff pervades the ten faculties;
the ten faculties pervade the ﬁve subtle elements; the ﬁve subtle elements
pervade the ﬁve gross elements. Such is their nature. Tis is the reason why
the earth, the place where you are now, serves as the place where all the prin-
ciples are piled up. Enough about this.
Now, remember the beginning of the exposition, the argument of the
opponent concerning the sentient: the reason why the leader among yogins
does not achieve perfection immediately52 is that the Soul is engrossed in
being aware [of the external objects], because it has maculation. Tis is why
it does not know about its true nature. Te Lord desires that it may know
about its own nature. Tis is why He causes it to take a body. Once it has
taken a body, its distinctions are two, male and female. Tey enjoy the six
tastes. Te six tastes are: sweet, bitter, tart, salty, sour, hot; these are called
the six tastes. Tey are eaten and drunk by them, and turn into the sperm of
the man and the blood of the woman. Te sperm and the blood are caused
by them to come together during love-making.53
52.
Here the text coherently refers to a portion of the text occurring above (198.15–
206.11), where the Lord and an opponent expound their views about the sentience or in-
sentience of the Summum Bonum; and to Kumāra’s question as to why the realized yogin
does not achieve oneness with Śiva at once (212.1). Te relevance of the former passage to
the present context escapes me.
53.
Understanding kāma ‘desire, love, affection, pleasure of the senses’ as an euphemism
for the sexual act; otherwise, the translation may be ‘… come together with passion’. It is also
possible, albeit less likely, that kāma was understood by the author in a more technical sense
as a substance indispensable for reproduction existing in the male. For instance, among the
meanings listed by OJED (781), there is that of ‘semen virile’; this is supported by a passage
of the Vṛhaspatitattva (33.58): ‘the essence of the body (i.e. the digested food) mixes with
the sperm (kāma) of man—its other name is śukla—and with the blood of the female’ sāri
nikaṅśarīra ya ta matәmahan kāma riṅlakilaki, śukla ṅaranya vaneh, śonita riṅanakәbi.
Te problem in the Dharma Pātañjala is that kāma, if understood to mean ‘sperm’, will be


--- PAGE 247 ---
228
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅśukraśonitā hana ri garbhāvāsa, ya ta mavīja, yan akveh ikaṅśukra
saṅkeṅśonitā, yekā dadi lanaṅ, yapvan akveh ikaṅśonitā saṅkeṅśukra, yekā
dadi vadvan, yapvan pada kvehnya, ya ta dadi kәdi, valavadi, ikaṅśukra
ya dadi tahulan, otva/t sumsum, ikaṅśonitā ya dadi rah dagiṅpuhun vulu,
19v
5
ya sinaṅguh ṣaṭkośa ṅaranya, salvir niṅmakaśukraśonitā ya, maṅkana lvir
ni janma, yan devatā, yan mānuṣa, yan paśu, yan pakṣi, sarīsṛpa, sthāvara,
maṅkanātah titahnyān katon mamaṅun śarīra, ikaṅśabdatanmātra ya dadi
taliṅa, ikaṅsparśatanmātra, ya ta dadi kulit, ikaṅrūpatanmātra ya ta dadi
mata, ikaṅrasatanmātra, yekā dadi ilat, ikaṅgandhatanmātra ya dadi iruṅ,
10
ya tekā pinakoṅgvan iṅindriya,
sumahur saṅkumā/ra,
20r
[10] takarin ikaṅgolaka sinaṅguh indriya sājñā bhaṭāra, maṅkana liṅsaṅ
kumāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
15
dudū tekaṅgolaka saṅkeṅindriya, aganal ikaṅgolaka, ikaṅindriya sūkṣma
ika, nahan lakṣaṇanyān dudū, taha pih tuṅgal ikā indriya lāvan golaka, yan
maṅkana liṅanta, mapekaṅmaturu tan paṅgṛhīta viṣaya apan hana matanya
tan panon, hana taliṅanya tan paṅrәṅә¯, mataṅan masuku makeruṅ,
redundant with the śukra mentioned in the same sentence. On the other hand, in the Tat-
tvajñāna (37.13–14, cf. my apparatus) the pair śukra and śonita has been replaced by the
pair kāma and ratiḥ, a grammatically masc. + a gramm. fem. word for ‘love’ or ‘passion’.
1 śukraśonitā ] em. ; sutrasonitā cod.
1 śukra ] em. ; sutra cod.
2 śukra ] em. ; sutra
cod.
3 śukra ] em. ; sutra cod.
5 ṣaṭkośa ] conj. ; saṅkeṅṇa cod.
5 salvir ] em. ; salvi
cod. 5 makaśukraśonitā ] em. ; makasutrasonitā cod. 5 lvir ] em. ; lvi cod. 8 ya ta dadi
kulit ] em. ; ya ka dadi kulit cod. 10 pinakoṅgvan ] em. ; pānakaugvān cod. 12 takarin ]
em. ; tankarin cod.
12 liṅ] em. ; li cod.
16 indriya ] em. ; indrayā cod.
17 maṅkana ]
em. ; kana cod.
17 paṅgṛhīta ] em. ; paṅgrahit· cod.
18 makeruṅ] em. ; materuṅcod.
1–3 yan akveh … valavadi ] Cf. TJ 37.10–13: yekākveh ikaṅkāma sakeṅratih / yeka dadi
lanaṅ/ yan akveh ikaṅratih sakeṅkāma / yeka dadi vadon / yapvan samākveh ikaṅkāma
lavan ratih / yeka dadi kәḍi / valavadi kunaṅ/ ; Vṛh 33.61–64: yan makveh ikaṅśukla saṅkeṅ
śonita / lanaṅtәmahanya / yan makveh ikaṅśonita saṅke śukla / yeka tәmahan vadvan /
kunaṅya paḍa kvehnya ikaṅśuklaśonita / yatika janmāntarapuruṣa ṅaranya kәḍi valavadi
hara tmahanya
3–5 ikaṅśukra ya dadi tahulan … ṣaṭkośa ṅaranya ] Cf. TJ 37.13–14:
kunaṅikaṅkāma / yeka dadi tahulan / hotot / puhun vulu / ikaṅratih / yeka matәmahan
rah dagiṅgajih / ; Vṛh 33.64–67: ikaṅśuklātәmahan ya tahulan / odvad / sumsum / ikaṅ
śonita dadi dagiṅ/ rudhira / carma / tәlu sakeṅlakilaki / tәlu sakeṅanakәbi / yeka sinaṅguh
ṣaṭkośa ṅaranya
2 akveh ] ākveh post corr. ; ākvah ante corr.
3 kәdi, valavadi, ikaṅ] kdi, valavadi, ikāṅ
post corr. ; kdi, ikāṅante corr.
4 śonitā ] sonitā post corr. ; sotā ante corr.


--- PAGE 248 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
229
Sperm and blood are in the womb. It (the womb) has a seed. If the sperm is
more abundant than the blood, it becomes male; if the blood is more abun-
dant than the sperm, it becomes female; if their quantity is the same, it be-
comes an emasculated man or an unfeminine woman.54 Te sperm becomes
bones, muscles, marrow. Te [female] blood becomes blood, ﬂesh, body
hair. Tese are designated as the six sheats, they form everything consist-
ing of sperm and blood. Tus is the nature of the incarnated beings, either
deities, human beings, domestic animals, birds, creeping animals or immov-
able beings. And thus is their condition as [their] body is seen to take shape.
Te subtle element of sound becomes the ear; the subtle element of touch
becomes the skin; the subtle element of form becomes the eye; the subtle
element of taste becomes the tongue; the subtle element of smell becomes
the nose. Tese are the things that serve as places for the senses.
Kumāra spoke:
[10] If you please, o Lord, is it not so that the organs55 are called faculties?
Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te organs are different from the faculties. Te organs are coarse; the
faculties are subtle. Tus is the characteristic of their difference. If you would
speak thus: ‘No! Te organs and the faculties are one in kind’, how could it
be that one who sleeps does not grasp the objects, for there are his eyes which
do not see, there are his ears which do not hear, and he has hands, feet and
a nose [even though they do not carry out their tasks].
54.
OJED (838) glosses kәḍi as ‘emasculated, eunuch’ and valavadi (2180) as ‘explained:
‘‘a woman and not yet a woman’’. Prob. Skt abala, impotent, and vadhri, castrated’. Te
sequence kәḍi valavadi is used in an identical context in the Vṛhaspatitattva, the Tattvajñā-
na and the Ślokāntara (cf. my apparatus); the last text employs the two words to explain
the Sanskrit sequence klīvo ’balo vadhriḥ, as follows: ṅaranya kәḍi, valavadi ṅaranya strī
tan strī—‘klīva (from klība, emasculated) means eunuch, valavadi means a woman and yet
not a woman’. Vṛhaspatitattva 34 explains kәdi and valavadi as janmāntarapuruṣa, which
would translates as ‘transsexual’. Tis is the way the Balinese man of letters I.D.G. Catra
(p.c., June 2007) understands valavadi, translating it into Bahasa Indonesia waria. I believe
that the ancient authors might have wanted to describe a hermaphrodite, and yet used Old
Javanese words denoting a male and female being who underwent modiﬁcations of his or
her sexual organ.
55.
For a discussion of the translation of golaka as ‘organ’, in contrast to the original San-
skrit meaning ‘ball, globe’, cf. Part iii, pp. 455–458.


--- PAGE 249 ---
230
ii Text & Translation
ya mataṅnyan saviṣaya riṅsūkṣma, apan ikaṅmanah ya tinut niṅindriya,
naha/n byaktanyān dudū ikaṅindriya saṅke golaka,
20v
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[11] apa dumeh ikaṅmaturu matәguh huripnya sājñā bhaṭāra, apan hilaṅ
5
tuturnya, kevala lupa juga svabhāva niṅturū, maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
ikaṅpañcabāyu yekānuṅpinakahurip, apan ya ika mamaṅun śarīra, nihan
kramanya, hana nāḍī ṅaranya, otvat ni śarīra, hana hagә¯ṅhana dәmit, buṅ-
kah luṅguhnya ri hәyәhәyәhan, miṇḍuhur tәka ri pusәr, mapaṅta ya mare-
10
ṅsuku, hana mareṅvalakaṅhana mareṅtaṅan, hana / miṇḍuhur mareṅ
21r
guruṅguruṅan<,> tәlu prakāra niṅguruṅguruṅan, iḍā ṅaran ikaṅi tәṅәn,
yekā dalan i sәkul, piṅgalā ikaṅi kivan<,> yeka havan ni vvay, suṣumnā ikaṅ
i tәṅah, yekā havān i bāyu, nāhan lakṣaṇa nikān pinakaguruṅguruṅan, hana
ta paṅnya vaneh miṇḍuhur tәka ri mata, lāvan riṅtaliṅa, ikaṅdudū gāte
15
ruhur miṇḍuhur, yekā tәka ri vunvunan, ya sinaṅguh śivadvāra ṅaranya,
yekā tumuluy tәkeṅgәgәr i valakaṅ, ikaṅnāḍī malit kabeh, yekā mamәnuhiṅ
kulit manuvuhakәn / vulu, nāhan lvir nikā nāḍī riṅśarīra,
21v
ikaṅtaṅnāḍī kabeh, yekā pinakoṅgvan i pañcabāyu ṅaranya, ri dadinyan
lima gavenya, mataṅnyan lima kveh niṅbāyu, nihan ṅaranya, prāṇa, apāna,
20
samāna, udāna, byāna,
4 huripnya sājñā ] em. ; hurip·npa sajñā cod.
8 nāḍī ] em. E ; nāpi cod.
8 dәmit ] em. ;
dmәt cod.
9 luṅguhnya ] em. ; luhnya cod.
9 mapaṅ] em. ; mapa cod.
12 havan ]
em. ; lavān cod.
12 vvay ] em. E ; vvaṅcod.
14 lāvan riṅ] em. ; lāvan iṅcod.
15 yekā ]
em. ; yetā cod.
15 vunvunan ] em. ; vuvunan cod.
16 nāḍī ] em. ; nādә¯ cod.
16 malit ]
em. ; malitā cod.
16 mamәnuhiṅ] em. ; mamnuhәṅcod.
17 nāḍī ] em. E ; nabi cod.
18 nāḍī ] em. E ; nabi cod.
8–11 hana nāḍī … tәlu prakāra niṅguruṅguruṅan ] Cf. Vṛh 36: hana ta nāḍī ṅaranya riṅ
śarīra / odvad magә¯ṅadәmit / i sor niṅpusәr buṅkah luṅguhnya / uminruhur ta yeṅpusәr /
ṅkāna ta yan mapaṅatata umiṅruhur / yeka vit niṅguruṅguruṅan / tәlu prakāranya //
11–12 iḍā ṅaran ikaṅi tәṅәn, yekā dalan i sәkul ] Cf. SHK (Śaiva) p. 43, line 1: iḍā ha-
van iṅsәkul hulam / ; TJ 38.15–16: iḍā ṅaranya ikaṅnāḍī tәṅәn / avan iṅsәkul vruh sma
luṅlaṅan tәkeṅlәt / ; KBNW ii .702 (Vd. 8): annavaha ṅaranikaṅguruṅguruṅan iṅtәṅәn /
yeka havan iṅsәkul / ; KBNW ii.702 (fragm. Wariga): iḍā nāḍī tәṅәn mārga niṅsәkul /
12 piṅgalā ikaṅi kivan<,> yeka havan ni vvay ] Cf. SHK (Śaiva) p. 43, line 1: piṅgalā avan
iṅbañu / ; TJ 38.16–17: piṅgalā ṅaranya ikaṅnāḍī kiva / avan iṅvvay vruh sma luṅlaṅan
tәkeṅhuyuhuyuhan / ; KBNW ii.702 (Vd. 8): piṅgalā / ṅa / guruṅguruṅan iṅkiva / ; KBNW
ii.702 (fragm. Wariga): piṅgalā nāḍī kiva / mārga niṅtoya lāvan tvak /
12–13 suṣumnā
ikaṅi tәṅah, yekā havān i bāyu ] Cf. TJ 38.17: suṣumnā ṅaranya ikaṅtәṅah / havan iṅvāyu
matәlu / ; KBNW ii.702 (fr. Wariga): suṣumnā / ṅa / nāḍī tәṅah / mārga niṅbāyu


--- PAGE 250 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
231
Te reason why they have the same object in the subtle is that the mind is
followed by the faculties. Tus is the evidence that the faculties are different
from the organs.
Kumāra spoke:
[11] If you please, o Lord, for what reason does one who sleeps adhere ﬁrmly
to life? For his consciousness is vanished and the nature of sleep is uncon-
sciousness only. Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Te ﬁve breaths, they serve as means to live, for they make up the body. Teir
order is as follows: there are the vessels—the veins of the body. Tere are the
big and there are the small. Teir location is the lower parts, in the bladder,56
rising in the navel and branching down to the feet. Tere are some going in
the back, there are others going in the hands; there are yet others rising to
the throat-vessels.57 Te throat-arteries are of three kinds: idā, the one to
the right, that is the way of cooked rice;58 piṅgalā, the one to the lef, that is
the course of water; suṣumnā is in the middle, that is the way of the air. Tus
are the characteristics of the throat-vessels. Tere are some other branches
of them, rising up to the eyes and ears. Te others are going above, rising up.
Tey go up to the crown of the head; that is designated as the door of Śiva.
It goes straight on to the spinal column. Te vessels, all of them are subtle.
Tey ﬁll the skin and make the hairs grow. Tus is the form of the vessels in
the body.
All the vessels serve as places for the ﬁve breaths. Because their tasks
are ﬁvefold, therefore the number of the breaths is ﬁve. Teir names are as
follows: prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, byāna.
56.
OJED (426) lists only әyәh ‘urine’ and uyuh (2158), of identical meaning, from which
poyuhoyuhan = ‘bladder’; in KBNW i.344b uyuhuyuhan is linked to әyәhәyәhan and glossed
as ‘bladder’ (with a question mark).
57.
Tus I translate guruṅguruṅan, which here, as well as in Vṛhaspatitattva 36.3, is ap-
parently to be understood in the plural; contrast OJED (562) s.v., which translates ‘throat,
gullet’.
58.
Tat is, the way through which food is conveyed to the stomach.


--- PAGE 251 ---
232
ii Text & Translation
<ikaṅbāyu si prāṇa, ya ta> mataṅnyan umadәgi ikaṅpañcabāyu kabeh pra-
yatna rumәgәp gavenya, mvaṅpinakośvāsa gavenya vaneh, uṅgvan ika ri
dada, ri hiruṅhiṅanya i ruhur, ikaṅbāyu sy apāna, yeka muṅgu ri silit,
ri pusәr hiṅanya vaneh, i ruhur, umiṅsor tәkeṅsuku/, gavenya asorakәn
22r
5
pinaṅan, matәmahan tahi, ikaṅininum matәmahan әyәh, nāhan gave nikaṅ
bāyu sy apāna, nihan gave nikaṅbāyu si samāna, yeka hana ri hati, ga-
venya umava sāri nikaṅpinaṅan ininum, ri sarvasandhi kabeh, sāri nikaṅ
pinaṅan vinehnya matәmahana hampru, sāri nikaṅininum, ya vinehnya
matәmahana rah, sāri nikaṅinambuṅvinehnya matәmahana rәhak, nāhan
10
gave nikaṅbāyu si samāna, nihan gave nikaṅbāyu si udāna, sakveh ni byā-
pāra miṇḍu/hur, maṅәdapakәn mata lāvan aṅәlapinya nahan gavenya, ikaṅ
22v
bāyu si byāna, yeka muṅgv iṅsarvasandhi kabeh, gavenya yekāmava matuha,
lāvan maṅhilaṅakәn inak ambhәk, nahan bheda ni gave ni bāyu, ya mataṅ-
nyan pañcabāyu panaṅguh saṅpaṇḍita,
15
hana ta pratyekanya vaneh ṅaranya, nāga, kūrmāra, kṛkara, devadatta,
dhanañjaya,
1 umadәgi ] em. ; udәgi cod.
3 ruhur ] em. ; ruhurn cod.
4 ruhur ] em. ; ruhun cod.
4 umiṅsor ] em. ; umisor cod.
5 nāhan ] em. ; nīhan cod.
7 umava sāri nikaṅ] conj. ;
umasā irikaṅcod. 7 ininum ] em. ; inum cod. 8 vinehnya ] em. ; vinenya cod. 10 gave
nikaṅ] em. ; gavenyakaṅcod. 11 maṅәdapakәn ] em. ; miṅdapakәn cod. 11 aṅәlapinya ]
conj. ; aṅlupiñ cod.
11 nahan ] conj. ; nag cod.
12 muṅgv iṅ] em. ; muṅgvāṅcod.
12 matuha ] conj. ; mahātuha cod. 13–14 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod. 15 pratye-
kanya ] conj. ; pratyanya cod. post corr. ; pratyakṣanya cod. ante corr.
15 kūrmāra ] em. ;
kummara cod.
15 kṛkara ] em. ; kraktāra cod.
1–3 <ikaṅbāyu si prāṇa, ya ta> … hiṅanya i ruhur ] Cf. TJ 39.1–3: vāyu si prāṇa haneṅ
pusuhpusuh i ḍaḍa hiṅanya / umadi maṅlakvan vāyu kabeh / pinakajīva / pinakośvāsa pak-
nanya // ; Vṛh 41.1–2: ikaṅvāyu si prāṇa / yeka haneṅtutuk lavan riṅiruṅpinakośvāsa ga-
venya / ri ḍaḍa hiṅanya i sor
7–9 sāri nikaṅpinaṅan … rәhak ] Cf. Vṛh 43.1–3: sāri niṅ
pinaṅan / yeka vinehnya matәmahan ampru / sāri nikaṅininum / yeka vinehnya matәma-
han rah / sāri nikaṅinambuṅ/ yeka vinehnya matәmahan rәhak
11 nihan gavenya kaṅ
bāyu si udāna … nahan gavenya ] Cf. TJ 39.1–3: udāna ṅaranya / ikaṅvāyu haneṅvun-
vunan / aṅulahakәn mata / lavan tutuk pakәnanya // ; Vṛh 44.1–2: kunaṅsi udānavāyu
haneṅvunvunan / gavenya ṅkāna / magave kәlap niṅmata
11–13 ikaṅbāyu si byāna …
inak ambhәk ] Cf. TJ 39.7–8: vyāna ṅaranya / ikaṅvāyu haneṅsarvasandhi / aṅulahakәn
śarīra mvaṅhumavas tuha pati pakәnanya // ; Vṛh 45.1–3: ikaṅvāyu si vyāna haneṅsarvāṅ-
gasandhi / gavenya ṅkāna / lumaku / lumimbay / maṅgamәl / saprakāra niṅmaṅgulahakәn
sarvasandhi niṅavak lavan magave lupa kopa mvaṅvṛddha //


--- PAGE 252 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
233
Te prāṇa breath,59 that is the cause for all the ﬁve breaths to be in function,
performing with great care their tasks; and its other task is to serve as a means
of breathing out. Its place is in the chest, its upper limit is in the nose. Te
apāna breath resides in the anus. In the navel is its other limit, the upper
one, going down as far as the feet. Its function is to push down what is eaten,
which turns into excrement, or what is drunk, which turns into urine. Such
is the task of the apāna breath. Te task of the samāna breath is as follows: it
is in the liver, its task is to bring the essence of what is eaten and drunk to all
the limbs of the body. Te essence of what is eaten is transformed by it into
gall, the essence of what is drunk is transformed by it into blood, and the
essence of what is smelt is transformed by it into phlegm. Tus is the task of
the samāna breath. Te task of the udāna breath are as follows: [to cause]
all the bodily activities to move upwards, to make the eyes wink and blink;60
thus are its tasks.61 Te byāna breath resides in the whole body. Its task is
to bring about aging, and also to annihilate the pleasant feelings. Tus is the
division of tasks of the breaths. Tat is the reason why they are designated
as the ﬁve breaths by the masters.
Tere is also another enumeration,62 namely: nāga, kūrmāra, kṛkara, de-
vadatta, dhanañjaya.
59.
Te addition of this clause is required in order to provide the context and satisfy the
requirements of grammar; otherwise, mataṅnyan would have no referent.
60.
Te form aṅәlapi, which I have emended from aṅlupi, may be traced to the base kәlap,
attested in a parallel passage of the Vṛhaspatitattva (44.1–2): magave kәlap niṅmata ‘[Te
udāna breath] causes the movement of the eyes’; the base-word kәlap, however, is not found
in OJED, which lists kәlab (841) instead and glosses it as ‘a rapid ﬂapping movement, ﬂut-
tering, undulating, ﬂickering, weaving, ﬂying (hair)’.
61.
Te rationale behind the conjectural emendation of °lapiñ nag gavenya into °lapinya
nahan gavenya is that ñ is phonetically close to nya; and that the grapheme g may be easily
confused with n (hence, nag →nan →nahan).
62.
None of the meanings of pratyakṣa listed by OJED makes sense here. I emend the
word into pratyekanya ‘one by one, each one; enumeration one by one, speciﬁcation, dis-
tinction’ (OJED 1413), also on account of the fact that a ‘cross’ appears above the cluster
kṣa, apparently to cancel it. For a similar use of pratyeka, cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 6.9 and 25.5.


--- PAGE 253 ---
234
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅbāyu si nāga yeka matvab, si kūrmāra, yeka maṅgave kәtәgkәtәg ri avak
kabeh, si kṛkara yeka maṅgave vahin, si devada/tta yeka maṅvab, si dhanañ-
23r
jaya yeka maśabda, lāvan tan hilaṅika saṅkeṅśarīra, yan tәkaṅpāti, yeka
maṅher i vaṅkay, nahan lakṣaṇa nikaṅbāyu an pinakahurip, ya dumeh ikaṅ
5
maturū tan māti, apan ikaṅbāyu tamolah cinetanā niṅātmā, yapvan māri
ikaṅātmā cumetaneṅya, ikaṅbāyu yan maṅkana, ya sinaṅguh māti ṅa-
ranya, len saṅkeṅrikā, ikaṅnāḍī kahanan ikaṅbāyu kunaṅvikāra, mati
atah ṅaranya, kady aṅgān iṅpinәraṅrinacun, athavā tībra niṅlara / kunaṅ,
23v
nimitta ni nāḍī vikāra, ya nimitta niṅpāti vaneh,
10
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[12] apa dumeh niṅātmā māri cumetanerikaṅbāyu sājñā bhaṭāra, lāvan apa
dumeh niṅkalara tәka,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan prastāva nikaṅātmā an māri cumetanekaṅbāyu, hana dharmādharma
15
ṅaranya, dharma ṅaran ikaṅgave hayu, adharma ṅaran ikaṅgave hala ikaṅ
taṅdharmādharma, ya tekaṅginave niṅjanma, ya tekā maphala, yan agә¯ṅ
gavenya hala saṅkeṅgave hayu, ya nimittanyān paṅhiḍәp lara, yapvan agә¯ṅ
ikaṅgave hayu saṅke gave hala, ya / nimittanyān paṅhiḍәp suka, yapvan
24r
pada gavenya hala mvaṅhayu, ya hetu nikaṅsukadukān kapaṅgih de niṅ
20
janma, sәḍәṅpva ya mamukti karmaphala, sumambi ta ya mamaṅun kar-
maphala muvah apan gave halahayu satatālvir nikaṅkarmaphala, hana ta
karma mәne ginave sādhananya, mәne kabhukti phalanya, hana ta karma-
phala maṅke ginave sādhananya, hәlәm ri janma sovah yan kabhukti pha-
lanya, apa byaktinya nihan, kady aṅgān iṅmasavah, vadvā, masambevara,
1 yeka ] em. ; heka cod.
1 matvab ] em. ; matyәb cod.
1 kūrmāra ] em. ; kummarā
cod.
2 kṛkara ] em. ; ktaktara cod.
5 tamolah ] em. ; tomolah cod.
7 ikaṅ] em. ; ika
cod.
7 nāḍī ] em. ; naphi cod.
9 nāḍī ] em. ; nāphi cod.
11 ātmā māri ] em. ; ānmā ri
cod. 11 cumetanerikaṅ] em. ; numetanerikaṅcod. 14 cumetanekaṅ] em. ; cumetaneka
cod.
18 ikaṅgave hayu ] em. ; ikaṃagave hayu cod.
18 paṅhiḍәp ] conj. ; pagave cod.
21 halahayu ] conj. ; hayu cod.
21 satatālvir ] em. ; satartālvi cod.
1–4 si kṛkara … maṅher i vaṅkay ] Cf. Vṛh 46.2–4: ikaṅvāyu si kṛkara magave vahin /
ikaṅvāyu si devadatta maṅhvab gavenya / ikaṅvāyu si dhanañjaya yeka magave śabda / ri
kāla niṅpati tan molah ri vaṅkay ikaṅvāyu si dhanañjaya /
2–3 ikaṅbāyu si nāga … si
dhanañjaya yeka maśabda ] Cf. TJ 39.11–13: vāyu si nāga / magave matә¯b [Ed. vatәb] / ikaṅ
vāyu si kūrma / magave kәtәr / klut iṅśarīra / ikaṅvāyu si devadatta / magave ṅob pakә-
nanya / ikaṅvāyu si kṛkara / magave vahin pakәnanya / ikaṅvāyu si dhanañjaya pinakaśabda
pakәnanya //
11 cumetanerikaṅ] numetanerikaṅpost corr. ; nutanarikaṅante corr. 24 masavah, vadvā ]
maṣavah, vadvā post corr. ; maṣavah vadvā ante corr.


--- PAGE 254 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
235
Te nāga breath belches. Te kūrmāra causes the movements in the whole
body. Te kṛkara causes sneezing. Te devadatta breath yawns. Te dhanañ-
jaya emits sounds, and it does not vanish from the body when death comes;
it remains in the corpse. Tus are the characteristics of the breaths in serv-
ing as the means to live. Te reason why one who is sleeping does not die is
that the Soul is constantly conscious of the breaths. If the Soul ceases to be
aware of them, the breaths as such, that is designated as dying. And also if
the vessels, the places where the breaths reside, are damaged, that means to
die, like when one is hit by a weapon, poisoned, or afﬂicted by intense pain.
Te cause of damage for the vessels, that is also the cause of death.
Kumāra spoke:
[12] If you please, o Lord, what is the cause for the Soul to cease being aware
of the breaths? And what is the cause that suffering occurs?
Te Lord spoke:
Te cause of the Soul’s ceasing to be aware of the breaths is as follows: there is
right-and-wrong. Right means doing good, wrong means doing bad. Right-
and-wrong, that is what is done by the human beings. Tat is what bears
fruit. If their bad deeds are greater than the good deeds, that is the cause of
experiencing pain. If the good deeds are greater than the bad deeds, that is
the cause of experiencing63 pleasure. If their good and bad deeds are equal,
that is the cause for pleasure and pain to be met by the human beings. It is
while one experiences the fruits of karma that one accumulates at the same
time karmic fruits again, for always doing good and bad takes the form of
the fruits of karma.64 Tere is the karma whose realization65 is effected in
the present: its fruits are experienced in the present. Tere are the fruits of
karma whose realization is effected in the present, [but] it is in the future, in
another birth, that its fruits are experienced. What is the evidence of this?
As follows: like in the case of cultivating a rice-ﬁeld, [being a] troop,66 being
engaged in trade.
63.
I replace pagave, which is likely to have been written by mistake, with paṅhiḍәp, which
is required by the context and was also found in the preceding line.
64.
Te emendation of hayu into halahayu is required in order to make the statement
more general, for both bad and good deeds (and not only the latter) result in karmic fruits.
65.
Here, as well as in several other instances in the text, sādhana appears to have retained
its Sanskrit primary meaning of ‘accomplishment, fulﬁllment’ or ‘fruit, result’; contrast
OJED (1586), which glosses ‘means, religious practices’; ‘master, conqueror’ etc.; ‘wealth,
money’.
66.
Or, simply, a ‘subject’ or ‘follower’ (of the King?).


--- PAGE 255 ---
236
ii Text & Translation
pāri phala niṅmasavah, dәmak phala ni vadvā, tәvas phala ni sambevara,
na/han byakti nikaṅkarmaphala mәne, ndya karmaphala hәlәm phalanya,
24v
hana karma ginave maṅke ndatan vәnaṅmaveh phala maṅke, apa dumeh
yan maṅkana, tan vәnaṅmaveh phala maṅke, apan akveh inapekṣanya, ya
5
teka mapan i janma sovah, ikaṅkabhukti maṅke, yeka phala nikaṅkarma
ṅūni, ri janmāntara, ikaṅphala bhinukti maṅke, ya tekā hәnti bhinukti maṅ-
ke, yan mahala, yan mahayu, padeka hәnti phalanya kabeh, ya ta hetu niṅ
ātmā māri cumetanekaṅkaṅbāyu ri śarīra, padanya / kady aṅgān iṅapuy
25r
manunvi kayu, yapvan hәnti ikaṅkayu, pәjah ta pratyaya nikaṅapuy, maṅ-
10
kana tekā ātmā, an phala niṅdharmādharma ya mamaṅun śarīra, lavan urip,
hәnti pva ikaṅkarmaphala, ya ta hetu niṅpāti apan tan hanaṅbhinukti niṅ
ātmā,
nihan sahur saṅpara, kadi karmaphala kәtah mamaṅun hurip, mvaṅtan
ikā hetu niṅsukaduka bhinukti de niṅjanma, mataṅnyan maṅkana, apan
15
tan katon ikaṅkarmaphala riṅjanma, ya mataṅnyan tan hana karmaphala
ṅaranya, apan tan byakta ya, yan kva liṅa saṅp/āra, ya don ikaṅpramāṇa
25v
tәlu pinintonakәn ṅūni pūrvaka pratyakṣapramāṇa, anumānapramāṇa, āga-
mapramāṇa,
4 maveh ] em. ; maveṅcod. 5 nikaṅ] em. ; nika cod. 6 hәnti ] em. ; hinta cod. 7 hәnti ]
em. ; hәnta cod.
8 cumetanekaṅ] em. ; cumetavanākaṅcod.
9 manunvi ] em. ; ma-
nundi cod.
9 pәjah ta pratyaya ] conj. ; pjah prativiya ta cod.
11 hәnti ] em. ; hinti cod.
11 hanaṅbhinukti ] em. ; hana bhinukti cod. 15 ikaṅ] em. ; iṅkāṅcod. 15 mataṅnyan ]
em. ; matanyan cod.
16 kva ] em. ; ka cod.
17 pūrvaka ] em. ; parvvāka cod.
1 phala ni ] pala ni post corr. ; pa ni ante corr.


--- PAGE 256 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
237
Paddy is the fruit of cultivating a rice ﬁeld; an apanage is the fruit of the
troop;67 a gain68 is the fruit of the trade. Tus is the evidence of the fruits of
karma in the present. What are the fruits of karma whose fruits are in the
future? Tere is karma which is effected in the present, but it is not able to
produce fruits in the present. For what reason is this so? It is not able to
produce fruits in the present, for a great number [of fruits] has to be taken
into account by it. Tat is the cause69 of another birth. Tose that are ex-
perienced now, they are the fruits of the past karma, [produced] in another
human birth. Te fruits which are experienced now, they are experienced
now in a complete manner; whether bad or good, all their fruits are equally
used up. Tis is why the Soul ceases to be aware of the breaths in the body.
For example: like the ﬁre burning wood. If the wood is consumed, the con-
current occasion70 of the ﬁre is dead. Te Soul is likewise. Te fruits of
right-and-wrong shape body and life. Te fruits of karma being ﬁnished,
that is the cause of the death, for there is nothing that is experienced by the
Soul.
Te reply of the opponent is as follows: ‘How is it possible that the fruits
of karma themselves bring into existence life? And furthermore, they are
surely not the cause of pleasure and pain experienced by human beings. Te
reason for this being the case is that the fruits of karma are not seen in the in-
carnated beings. Te reason why the so-called fruits of karma do not exist is
that they are not proved’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:]
that is the purpose of the three valid means of knowledge which have been
pointed out before, above: the valid means of knowledge of direct percep-
tion, the valid means of knowledge of inference, the valid means of knowl-
edge of reliable testimony.
67.
OJED (387), s.v. dәmak ii, gives ‘gif, piece of land given by the king, apanage’.
68.
Tis seems to be the more appropriate translation of tәvas here; OJED (1998) gives
‘reward, compensation, result […]’.
69.
Tus I translate mapan, which is regarded by OJED (1115) as identical to apan and
pan ‘for, as, because’.
70.
Emending prativiya ta into ta pratyaya; the latter word, denoting a ‘cooperating cause’
or ‘concurrent occasion’ (OJED 1413 s.v. pratyaya 2), perfectly ﬁts in the context. Te point
is that without wood ﬁre cannot arise, for in order to be produced a concomitance of wood
and an instigating cause (e.g. the rubbing of a ﬁre-drill) is needed. Te relevance of this
example (on which, cf. Part iii, p. 546–550) to the present argument is that, without the
fruits of karma, the Soul ceases to be aware of the body (that is to say, of the breaths) and
life ceases to exist, just like a ﬁre ceases to exist when the wood has been completely burnt.


--- PAGE 257 ---
238
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅaganal, ya kavәnaṅde nikaṅpratyakṣapramāṇa, ikaṅsūkṣma ya ka-
vәnaṅde niṅanumānapramāṇa, kady aṅgān iṅkavuvus saṅpara, anumā-
naprasiddhā irikaṅkarmaphalān bhinukti de niṅjanma, sumahur saṅpara,
tan byakta ṅaranikātah, apan tan vartamāna ri rāt kabeh, apan pratyakṣapra-
5
māṇa juga ri kami, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, nihan saṅhyaṅāditya/, vartamāna
26r
katon de niṅrat kabeh, saṅmәtu vәṅi kari sira mәtu maṅke, athavā dudū ku-
naṅ, yāpvan dudū saṅmәtu vәṅi lāvan saṅmәtu maṅke, apa pva yan maṅke
maṅke, tan papalenan pva rūpanira, apan ivәṅivәṅrūpanira nālitānira tuvi
pada, lāvan pada panasnira, tejanira, sumahur saṅpara, tuṅgal kәta saṅhyaṅ
10
āditya, saṅmәtu vәṅi, sira mәtu maṅke, yan maṅkana liṅa saṅpara, ndi ta
havannira maṅavetan, apan sumurup kulvan sira vәṅi, sumahur saṅpara,
sumurup i sor i lәmah, havanira yan maluy maṅavetan, yan maṅ/kana liṅa
26v
saṅpara, ndi ta kitān ton sira maluy aṅavetan, lumaku i sor iṅlәmah, ya
kitāṅajarakәn tan tinonya ṅaranya, adva kitān yat amramāṇapratyakṣa juga,
15
apan tan katon saṅhyaṅāditya, maluy aṅavetan,
maṅkana pva ya, ya mataṅnyan hana pramāṇa ṅaranya, anuṅprasiddhā
ri kahiḍәpan nikaṅvastu tuhutuhu, huvus rumuhun ikaṅsūkṣma, ikeṅpva
ikaṅkarmaphala, atyanta sūkṣmanya, ya ta mataṅnyan anumānapramāṇa
paniddhānta ri hananya, apan byaktanyan hana, ni/han kaṅsukaduka ka-
27r
20
paṅguh de ni janma, lāvan rūpanya tan pada,
1–2 kavәnaṅ] em. ; vnaṃcod. 2 kavuvus ] em. ; kovuvus cod. 2–3 anumānaprasiddhā ]
em. ; anumāṇāpraniddā cod. 3 karmaphalān bhinukti ] em. ; karmmapalānābhinukti cod.
6 saṅmәtu vәṅi ] em. ; samtu viṅi cod.
7 saṅmәtu vәṅi ] em. ; samtu viṅi cod.
7 saṅ
mәtu maṅke ] em. ; samtu maṅke cod. 8 ivәṅivәṅ] em. ; ivәṅvә cod. 10 saṅmәtu vәṅi ]
em. ; samtu vәṅi cod.
11 havannira ] em. ; hannira cod.
12 maluy ] em. ; mālvayā cod.
13 maluy aṅavetan ] em. ; maluy· ṅavetan cod.
13–14 ya kitāṅajarakәn ] em. ; yā tikāṅa-
jarākәn cod.
14 kitān yat ] em. ; kitānyak cod.
15 tan ] em. ; kan cod.
16 anuṅprasid-
dhā ] em. ; anuprasiddā cod. 17 tuhutuhu ] em. ; tutuhutuhu cod. 19 kaṅ] em. ; ka cod.
20 rūpanya ] em. ; rapanya cod.
5–6 nihan saṅhyaṅāditya … mәtu maṅke ] Cf. Vṛh 52.27–29: nihan saṅhyaṅāditya anuṅ
pratyakṣa katon / vruh kita ri saṅka nira lavan surupan ira / vetan saṅkanira / kulvan suru-
panira / yapvan kva liṅanta vih / rasika saṅmәtu vәṅī / karika saṅmәtu maṅke /
7 yāpvan
dudū saṅmәtu vәṅi lāvan saṅmәtu maṅke ] Cf. Vṛh 52.31–32: taha dudū saṅmәtu vәṅi /
dudū saṅmәtu maṅke
1 kavәnaṅ] kavnaṅpost corr. ; kaṅvnaṅante corr.


--- PAGE 258 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
239
Te coarse is within the scope of the valid means of knowledge of direct
perception. Te subtle is within the scope of the valid means of knowledge
of inference. As in the case of the utterance of the opponent, the fruits of
karma are determined71 by inference, as far as their being experienced by
the human beings is concerned. Te opponent speaks as follows: ‘Tat is
not called evidence, for it is not present in the whole world, for only the valid
means of direct perception is [admitted] among us’. If the opponent would
speak thus, [I would reply] as follows: the Sun is present, being seen by the
whole world. Is the one that rose yesterday the same as that that rises now,
or is it different? If the one that rose yesterday is different from the one that
rises now, what is then [the sun that] is [rising] just now here? Teir forms
are not different, for their forms are hardly distinguishable; their nālitā72
is really the same, and the same are their warmth and their shining power.
Te opponent speaks: ‘One and only is the Sun: the one that rose yesterday
is the one rising now’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:]
where is its course while it moves to the east? For last night it set in the west.
Te opponent says: ‘It sets. Below the earth is its course when it returns to
the east’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply]: where are you
when you see it going back to the east, moving below the earth? You teach
something that is not seen, therefore you are wrong if you use only direct
perception as a valid means of knowledge,73 for the Sun is not seen when it
goes back to the east.
Tis circumstance is the reason why there are the valid means of knowl-
edge, which can give certainty with regard to the experiencing of entities
that veritably exist, in the ﬁrst place the subtle ones. Tese fruits of karma,
extreme is their subtleness; this is the reason why the valid means of knowl-
edge of inference is the means to deﬁnitively ascertain74 their existence, for
the evidence that they exist is as follows: pleasure and pain are met by the
incarnated beings, and their forms are not the same.
71.
For the justiﬁcation of my translation of prasiddha, cf. Introduction, p. 25.
72.
I am not sure about the interpretation and cannot conﬁdently propose any emenda-
tion for nālitā; it may derive in some way from nala ‘glow, ﬁre’ (OJED 1170), or be a cor-
ruption for nālika ‘time, moment, hour, period’ (OJED 1171), referring to the movement
of the sun in the sky.
73.
For the justiﬁcation of my translation of amramāṇa, cf. Introduction, p. 26.
74.
For the justiﬁcation of my translation of paniddhānta, cf. introduction, p. 26.


--- PAGE 259 ---
240
ii Text & Translation
hana ratu, hana vadvā uma, hana sugi hana duka hana varas, hana lara, nihan
taṅtiryak, magә¯ṅmadәmit, kaniṣṭhamadhyamottama, karmaphala nimitta
nikaṅkabeh, sumahur saṅpara, nohan vvāgan ikātah, lāvan i janma tan
pāda, kahadaṅadaṅjuga ikātah, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, dadyanku pvaṅma-
5
maṅan tan kәneṅvarәg, ikaṅtan pamaṅan ya varәg, yan si kahadaṅadaṅ
ya pakṣakna, lavan taṅvīja tinanәm, kady aṅgān iṅpari pinaka/vinih, ka-
27v
hadaṅadaṅpvekan pavvaha jahli, jahli tinanәma kahadaṅadaṅpvekān pa-
vvaha pari, maṅkana hamәṅan ikaṅrat kabeh, yan si kahadaṅadaṅpakṣakna,
yāpvan si nohan si vvāgan pakṣakna, dadyaṅvәtu tan pakanimitta yan maṅ-
10
kana, kady aṅgān iṅkәdi amәtәṅānakanaka, kady aṅgān iṅmamәh susu vәtu
i tahi, maṅkana hamәṅan ikaṅrat kabeh, yan si nohan si vvāgan pakṣakna,
tapvan dadi vastu maṅkana, ya mataṅnyan tan yogya pakṣakna saṅpara,
[13] apa dumeh ikaṅjanma gumave ikā dharmādharma sājñā bhaṭā/ra, kasi-
28r
hana varahәn rānak bhaṭāra,
15
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan kavruhanantānaku, prastāva nikaṅdharmādharma, kadadi de niṅjan-
ma, enak kva pahiḍәp nikaṅātmā ri viṣaya, atәguh pasambaddhānya lāvan
ikaṅśarīra, ya tekā suka liṅnya, ya mataṅnyan pamet suka,
3 janma ] em. ; jenma cod.
4 ikātah ] em. ; kātah cod.
5 yan si ] conj. ; yan pi cod.
6 tinanәm ] em. ; tinanim cod.
10 aṅgān ] em. ; aṅtān cod.
10 amәtәṅānakanaka ]
em. ; amtiṅānakanaka cod.
12 tapvan ] conj. ; yapvan cod.
12 yogya ] em. ; hogya cod.
17 enak kva ] em. ; enak ve cod.
18 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod.


--- PAGE 260 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
241
Tere are kings; there are householders; there are wealthy ones; there are
miserable ones; there are healthy ones; there are ones afﬂicted by pain. Te
animals are as follows: big and small; low, middle and superior. Te fruits of
karma are the cause of them all. Te opponent says: ‘Tose ones happen to
be just fortunate or unfortunate. And as for the fact that the incarnated be-
ings are not similar, they are [so] just accidentally’.75 If the opponent would
speak thus, [I would reply:] then it may well be the case that I eat with-
out being satiated, while another one is satiated without having eaten, if the
doctrine of accidentality is subscribed to. Moreover, the seed that is planted,
such as the paddy which is used as a seed, just randomly it may give millet as
crop; millet may be planted and randomly it may give paddy as crop. In this
way the whole world will transform, if one subscribes to the view of acciden-
tality, [and] if [the view of the human beings being randomly] fortunate or
unfortunate is subscribed to. If so, it may be possible for a thing to come into
existence without a cause, like a hermaphrodite76 who may become pregnant
and give birth to a child, like extracting milk out of excrements. If one sub-
scribes to the doctrine of the [randomly] being fortunate or unfortunate, the
whole world will transform likewise. By no means any certain fact come
about; that is the reason why [that which is] subscribed to by the opponent
is not right.
[Kumāra:]
[13] What is the reason why the human beings commit right-and-wrong? O
Lord, be kind, teach your son.
Te Lord spoke:
My son, you should know the cause of right-and-wrong being committed by
the human beings as follows. Te experience of the Soul with regard to the
objects of senses is pleasant; its connection with the body is ﬁrm. According
to it, that is agreeable. Tat is the reason why it strives afer pleasure.
75.
I discuss my translation of kahadaṅadaṅjuga as ‘just accidentally’, referring to the
materialist doctrine of accidental or random origination, in Part iii, pp. 592–595.
76.
Te meaning of kәdi cited as ‘emasculated, eunuch’ in OJED (838) does not seem to
be what was intended here, for the pregnancy of any male being could have already provided
a suitable example of something impossible; the word, as I have suggested above (fn. 54),
might have rather denoted a hermaphrodite or a sterile woman; note that one of the com-
monest examples illustrating an absurdity commonly encountered in Sanskrit sources is
that of the son of a sterile woman (cf. p. 593).


--- PAGE 261 ---
242
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅsukasādhana, ya ta ginṛhīta niṅbuddhi, ikaṅbuddhi ya ta mānaka
jñāna, ikaṅjñāna, ya ta mavṛtti limaṅpuluh kvehnya, ikaṅvṛtti limaṅpuluh
ya tekā mānak akveh tan kavәnaṅvinilaṅ, ya mataṅnyan akveh prabheda
niṅjanma, akveh ta kahyunya, akveh ta lāranya, akveh ta sukanya,
5
vṛtti nikaṅbuddhi limaṅpuluh, ya tekā ujarakna, nihan prakāranya hana
caturaiśva/rya, vvalu kveh nikā lāvan baliknya, hana pañcaviparyaya ṅara-
28v
nya hana aśakti vvalu likur kvehnya, hana ta tuṣṭi saṅa kvehnya, hana ta
aṣṭasiddhi ṅaranya,
ndya ta lakṣaṇa nikaṅcaturaiśvarya, anuṅpinakavīja niṅbuddhi, yan
10
sattva magә¯ṅiriya, dharma ṅaranya nihan, hana jñāna mahyun rahayu, ikaṅ
dharma maṅdadyakәn hayu, yekā inabhyāsanya, śīla rahayu agәlәm ta ya
mayajña, manah rahayu, agәlәm ta ya mabrata, manah puṇya kavәnaṅnya,
utsāha ta ri samyajñānādhikṛtā ta ya, agәlәm ta ya mayoga, nāhan inabhyā-
sanya, ikaṅta gave ka/beh, athavā salah tuṅgal rva tәlu kunaṅgaveyakna,
29r
15
dharma ta, ṅaranya, nihan taṅjñāna ṅaranya, ikaṅjñāna maṅabhyāsa ka-
paṅguha saṅhyaṅparamārtha, ndan pramāṇa tәlu pinakasuluhnya, ikaṅ
samādhi pinakasādhananya, ya sinaṅguh samyajñāna ṅaranya, vairāgya ṅa-
ranya, ikaṅjñāna tan aharәp ri suka, tan tṛṣṇa ri hurip, ndya suka ṅaranya,
nyaṅbhoga upabhoga, paribhoga, bhoga ṅaranya, ikaṅpinaṅan, upabhoga
20
ikaṅsinaṇḍaṅ, paribhoga ikaṅkavula vәnaṅvәnaṅ, ikaṅta kabeh, tan aharәp
irika,
1 ginṛhīta ] em. ; ginra,hita cod.
3 mānak ] em. ; manat cod.
3 mataṅnyan ] em. ;
mataṅnya cod.
4 kahyunya ] em. ; kahyun· cod.
9 caturaiśvarya ] em. ; catu aisvaryya
cod. 12 puṇya ] em. ; puṇyas cod. 13 utsāha ] em. ; uksaha cod. 17 pinakasādhananya ]
em. ; pinakasaṅdānanya cod.
18 aharәp ] em. ; arәp cod.
20 sinaṇḍaṅ] em. ; sniṇdaṅ
cod.
20 vәnaṅvәnaṅ] em. ; vәnaṅvәna cod.
19–20 upabhoga ikaṅsinaṇḍaṅ] Cf. Vṛh 28: upabhoga ṅaranya salvir iṅsinaṇḍaṅ
19 pinaṅan, ] post corr. ; pinaṅa, ante corr.


--- PAGE 262 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
243
Te means of enjoyment are grasped by the intellect. Te intellect has as
offspring the mind (jñāna). Te mind has conditions (vṛtti), ﬁfy in number.
Te ﬁfy conditions have as offspring a great number—it cannot be counted.
Tat is the reason why the differences of the incarnated beings are many.
Many are their desires, many are their pains, many are their pleasures.
Te ﬁfy conditions of the intellect: those are going to be discussed. Teir
kinds are as follows: there are the four sovereign powers, their number is
eight with their opposites. Tere are the ﬁve kinds of errors. Tere are the
disabilities, their number is twenty-eight. Tere are the contentments, their
number is nine. Tere are the eight perfections.77
What are the characteristics of the four sovereign powers, which are pro-
duced by the intellect if the sattva is prevalent in it? Righteousness is as fol-
lows: there is a mind that desires goodness. Te Righteousness that gen-
erates goodness, that is constantly put into practice by it. A good virtuous
conduct, it constantly performs sacriﬁces; a good mind, it constantly per-
forms observances. A mind which has within its reach meritorious acts, it
exerts itself towards putting in the ﬁrst place the right knowledge.78 It con-
stantly performs yoga. Tus is [what is] constantly practiced by it. If all
those actions, or just one, two or three will be performed, they are Righ-
teousness. Knowledge is as follows: the mind constantly practicing will meet
the Summum Bonum. Further, the three means of knowledge are used as
its torches, and absorption is used as its means of realization. Tat is des-
ignated as right knowledge.79 Dispassion means: the mind which does not
desire pleasure, which is not deeply attached to life. What is pleasure? Here
it is: bhoga, upabhoga, paribhoga. Bhoga is what is eaten; upabhoga is what
is worn; paribhoga are the servants and domestic animals. Do not desire any
of them!
77.
Te resulting number of conditions is thus ﬁfy-eight and not ﬁfy. Unlike related
Sanskrit accounts, the present exposition does not specify that the ﬁfy conditions are the
products of the eight states of intellect (i.e. the four sovereign powers along with their op-
posites); cf. Part iii, p. 448.
78.
Tus I render samyajñānādhikṛtā (irrealis?); although adhikṛta (from the Sanskrit
adhikṛta ‘placed at the head’) is unattested, I understand it to be similar to adhikāra, which
as a passive form (e.g. inadhikāra, kādhikāra, kādhikāran) is translated by OJED (16) as ‘to
give the ﬁrst (principal) place to’.
79.
Here the item jñāna appears to have conﬂated with samyajñāna. Cf. below, 246.6.


--- PAGE 263 ---
244
ii Text & Translation
hana ta bho/ga karәṅә¯, kady aṅgān iṅsvarga kahyaṅan, tan ahyunātah irikā
29v
kabeh, parimāṇa drabyanya, drabyanya ṅaranya, huripnya, tan aharәpātah
irika kabeh, ya ta sinaṅguh vairāgya ṅaranya, nihan taṅaiśvarya ṅaranya,
ikaṅkinahanan de ni bhoga upabhoga paribhoga, kinatvaṅan de ni padanya
5
janma, ya aiśvarya ṅaranya, ikaṅta kapat, ikaṅdharma, jñāna, vairāgya,
aiśvarya, vīja ni buddhīka kabeh,
ndan yan agә¯ṅsattva niṅbuddhi ika, yan pakavīja caturaiśvarya, ya-
pvan tamah agә¯ṅbalik ni caturaiśva/rya, pinakavījanya, ndya baliknya ni-
30r
han, adharma, ajñāna, avairāgya, anaiśvarya, adharma ṅaranya, ikaṅam-
10
bhәk manayākәn gave hayu, liṅnya, pradāna nikaṅvvaṅmapuṇya, mabho-
jana maveh sәkul tәvas hәnti drabyanya, tan iya ta maphala svarga, maṅkana
mamaṅun prāsāda, maṅulur liṅga, mahoma, maṅkana liṅnya ri buddhinya,
manayākәn dharmān āgәṅtamahnya, nihan taṅajñāna, ikaṅātmāpuguṅ
apan tan hana tinutnya, luput saṅkeṅpratyakṣapramāṇa, anumānapramā-
15
ṇa, † … † a/naiśvarya ṅaranya, duhka sadākāla, nahan kabalik nikaṅcatur-
30v
aiśvarya, ya tekā pinakavīja ni buddhi, yan tāmasa ◆
1 svarga ] em. ; svagga cod.
4 kinahanan ] em. ; kәnahanan cod.
8 caturaiśva/rya ]
em. ; catu aisvaryya cod.
10 pradāna nikaṅ] conj. ; ṅradānikāṃcod.
11 sәkul ] em. ;
skal cod. 12 mahoma ] em. ; mahoman cod. 15–16 caturaiśvarya ] em. ; catureṅsvāryya
cod.


--- PAGE 264 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
245
Tere are bhoga that are heard about, like [in] heaven, the abode of the
gods:80 do not desire any of them! Teir substance is limited.81 Teir sub-
stance means: their life. Do not desire them all! Tat is designated as Dis-
passion. Sovereignty is as follows: those endowed with bhoga, upabhoga and
paribhoga are respected by the fellow incarnated beings. Tat is Sovereignty.
Te four, i.e. Righteousness, Knowledge, Dispassion and Sovereignty, all of
them are offspring of the intellect. But it is when the sattva of the intellect
is prevalent that it has as offspring the Four Sovereign Powers; if tamas is
prevalent, the opposites of the Four Sovereign Powers are its offspring.
What are their opposites? As follows: Unrighteousness, Ignorance, Pas-
sion, Non-Sovereignty. Unrighteousness means: the mind that considers righ-
teousness as non-existent. It thinks: ‘Te gifs of82 the liberal men, to orga-
nize food-feasts,83 to give away as alms rice and wealth [until] all of one’s pos-
sessions are ﬁnished, it is not true that have heaven as result. Likewise, build-
ing temples, erecting liṅgas and performing sacriﬁces [is fruitless]’. Tus
are its words in its mind. It considers Righteousness as non-existent, for its
tamas is great. Ignorance is as follows: the Soul is ignorant, for there is noth-
ing that is followed by it that is out of the scope of the valid means of knowl-
edge of direct perception and inference. † … †84 Non-Sovereignty means:
perpetual pain. Tus are the opposites of the Four Sovereign Powers. Tey
are produced by the intellect, when affected by tamas.
80.
Te point here is that everyone has heard about those pleasures but never actually
seen them; Compare Vṛhaspatitattva 27.1–2, mentioning the pleasures that are seen (bhoga
katon), like those of a rich king, and the pleasures that are heard about or ‘famous’ (karәṅә¯):
‘Tere are pleasures that are heard about, like in the abode of divine beings, heaven and the
abode of the gods’ hana bhoga karәṅә¯ / kady aṅgān iṅkahyaṅan svarga kadevatan (katon
and karәṅә¯ gloss the compound dṣṛṭānuśrāvita in the śloka).
81.
parimāṇa, which OJED (1301) glosses as ‘measure, size, weight, number’, here seems
to have a meaning akin to parimita ‘measured, limited’; this semantic shif was perhaps
triggered out by the Skt aparimāṇa ‘without measure’ (hence parimāṇa = ‘limited’).
82.
Having conjecturally emended the corrupt sequence ṅrādanikāṃinto pradāna nikaṅ,
where pradāna means ‘giving, presentation, gif’; cf. the form kapradānan, glossed by OJED
(1380) as ‘the virtue of liberality?’.
83.
Tis seems to be the most appropriate meaning of mabhojana in this context; contrast
OJED (250) bhojana ‘food, meal’ and abhojana ‘having food, eating’, but compare bhino-
janan ‘to give food to, treat, regale’; JED (107) glosses bojana as ‘feast, banquet’, a meaning
that is also found in earlier dictionaries of Javanese (cf., e.g., Bausastra Jawa ‘pista maṅan
enak’ and jnw ‘feestelijke of defige maaltijd’).
84.
Te item Passion (avairāgya) is missing from the list, apparently lef out by a scribe’s
failure to copy the relevant sentence.


--- PAGE 265 ---
246
ii Text & Translation
apa byakti niṅphalanya, ndya, phalanya nihan, ikā janma yan paṅabhyā-
sa dharma, yekā nimittanyān kavaveṅsvarga, salvir ni bhoga bhinuktinya,
hәnti pva phala nikaṅgave hayu, maṅjanma ta ya riṅdevatā, alavas ya dadi
devatā, maṅjanma ta ye mānuṣa, ya tekā dadi ratu, athavā vvaṅsugih kṛ-
5
tapuṇya kunaṅdadinya, apan vәkas nikaṅbhoga ri svarga ya tu/mut ri
31r
mānuṣa, nihan ta phala niṅsamyajñāna, yan dadi samādhinya ri bhaṭāra,
makasādhana pramāṇa tәlu, sira ta paṅasthūlan bhaṭāra, kadi kasiddhyan
bhaṭāra kasiddhyanira, lavan kāṣṭaiśvaryan bhaṭāra, yatanyan valuya janma,
apan sakāmakāma sira, asiṅsakahyunira dadi, sakaharәpnira tәka, nahan
10
kadibyan ni samyajñāna yan pinakavīja niṅbuddhi, nihan ta phala ni vairā-
gya, yeki līna riṅprakṛtiloka, kadi suka niṅmaturū lvir nikaṅsuka bhinuk-
tinya ṅkāna, salavasnya hana ri prakṛti/loka, maṅjanma ta ya devatā, nahan
31v
phala niṅvairāgya yan pinakavīja niṅbuddhi, nihan ta phala niṅaiśvarya,
sira ta prabhu riṅsvarga, ṅke ikaṅbhoga binuktinya, ri vәkas maṅjanma ta
15
ya devatā, nahan ta phala niṅaiśvarya yan pinakavīja niṅbuddhi,
nihan ta phala ni baliknya, ikaṅambhәk manayākәn gave hayu, māti pva
ya dlāha, yekā dadi triyak, paśu, mṛga<,> pakṣi, sarīsṛpa, sthāvara, paśu ṅa-
ranya, kady aṅgān iṅsattva tamolah riṅārya, kәbho, sapi, asu, vәk, prakāra,
mṛga ṅaranya, ikaṅsattva tamo/lah riṅalas, kady aṅgān iṅkidaṅ, mañjaṅan,
32r
20
ityevamādi, pakṣi ṅaranya saprakāra niṅmәr, kady aṅgān iṅmanuk<,>
2 svarga ] em. ; svagga cod.
2 bhinuktinya ] em. ; bhinuttinya cod.
5 vәkas nikaṅ]
conj. ; vāṣaka nikāṅcod. 7 kasiddhyan ] em. ; kaddyan cod. 8 yatanyan ] em. ; yataṅnyan
cod.
9 asiṅ] em. ; asi cod.
11 līna ] conj. ; lin· cod.
14 sira ] conj. ; si, cod.
14 ṅke ]
conj. ; ake cod. 17 sarīsṛpa ] em. ; āriṣrapa cod. 18 kәbho ] em. ; kbā cod. 19 tamo/lah ]
em. ; tamola cod.
19 riṅalas ] em. ; riṅlas cod.
20 ityevamādi ] em. ; ityavamādi cod.
2–5 yekā nimittanyān kavaveṅ… kṛtapuṇya kunaṅdadinya ] Cf. TJ 42.28–30: tәlas pva
phala niṅbrata bhinukti de niṅātmā riṅsvarga / tumurun ta saṅhyaṅātmā muvah / maṅ-
janma ta sira riṅmānuṣaloka / yeka dadi ratu / mvaṅsugih / kṛtapuṇya janma sira / ; Vṛh
3.22–24: ya dumehnya dumadya riṅsvarga / salvir niṅbhoga bhinuktinya / hәnti pva phala
niṅgavenya hayu / vineh pva ya dumadya ratu pamәgәt sugih /
11–12 yeki līna … maṅ-
janma ta ya devatā ] Cf. Vṛh 31.1–3: sira umulih riṅprakṛtiloka / kadi enak iṅaturū tan
paṅipi / maṅkana ta enak niṅsukha kapaṅgih denira / vәkasan maṅdadi ta sira devatā /
1 phalanya ] palanya post corr. ; lanya ante corr.


--- PAGE 266 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
247
What is the evidence of their fruits? Here it is, as follows are their fruits: It is
a human being, when he constantly practices Righteousness, that is the rea-
son of his being carried to heaven. All manner of pleasures are experienced
by him. Te fruits of doing good disappear and he is reborn as a god. A long
time afer becoming a god, he is reborn as a human being. He becomes a
king, or he becomes a rich man who has accomplished meritorious acts, for
the lefovers of the pleasures in heaven go along with the human being. Te
fruit of right Knowledge85 is as follows: if his absorption toward the Lord
comes into being, and he uses as means of realization the three valid means
of knowledge, he is the place where the Lord incarnates. His supernatural
prowess86 is like the supernatural prowess of the Lord, and [like] the eight-
fold sovereign prowess of the Lord. So he is reborn once again, for [it] is as
he wishes, everything becomes according to his desire; whatever he hopes
for, (indeed) comes about. Tus is the excellence of right Knowledge, when
it is produced by the intellect. Te fruits of Dispassion are as follows: he is
dissolved in the world of unevolved matter. Te pleasure that is enjoyed by
him in that state is like the pleasure of one who sleeps. As long as he stays
in the world of unevolved matter he is born as a god. Tus are the fruits of
Dispassion, when it is produced by the intellect. Te fruits of Sovereignty
are as follows: he is sovereign in the heaven. Te pleasures are enjoyed by
him now. At last he is born as a god. Tus are the fruits of Sovereignty, when
it is produced by the intellect.
Te fruits of their opposites are as follows: the mind that denies good
actions, when it dies, it will become an animal: cattle, wild animals, winged
creatures, creeping creatures, immovable beings. Cattle means: like the an-
imals which abide with the noble people: water-buffaloes, ox, dogs, pigs,
and suchlike. Wild animals means: the animals which abide in the forest,
like barking-deers, deers, and so forth. Winged creatures means: everything
which ﬂies, like birds.
85.
As above (242.17), the item jñāna in the list of Sovereign Powers has been conﬂated
with samyajñāna.
86.
In spite of the meaning ‘supernatural power, magic power’ given by OJED (1758), the
form kasiddhyan, an abstract noun from the base siddhi, may be better rendered as the ‘state
of being endowed with supernatural powers’ or simply ‘supernatural prowess’ (cf. Zoet-
mulder 1983:73–74). Similarly, I render kāṣṭaiśvaryan as ‘eightfold sovereign prowess’.


--- PAGE 267 ---
248
ii Text & Translation
sarīsṛpa ṅaranya, ikaṅpvāṅlāh makapaṅlaku dadanya, kady aṅgān iṅulā,
lintah, vәdit, irispoh tәktәk lәtuh, sthāvara ṅaranya, kayukayu, odvad, dukut,
nahan pratyeka niṅtriyak, ya tikā tәmahan iṅjanma yan pinakavīja adhar-
ma, nihan phala niṅajñāna, ya teki maputәran ri devamānuṣatriyak, lā-
5
van svarganaraka, apan akveh ikaṅgave halahayu kavaṅun de/nya, ṅūni<,>
32v
punah vvaṅjanmanya, phala niṅgavenya hala mvaṅhayu tan dadi tan kab-
hukti, ya mataṅnyan kapaṅguh ikaṅcakra bhāva denya, nahan phala niṅ
ajñāna, yan pinakavīja niṅbuddhi, nihan phala niṅavairāgya, yekā mәnәr
mare naraka, salvir niṅlāra bhinuktinya, yan akveh pāpanya, alavas ya haneṅ
10
yamani, yāpvan akәdik gavenya hala, ya ta vineh madadya janma mānuṣa
muvah, yekā dadi vvaṅvikāra, tan ya pada lāvan saṅsārajanma, vudug, vuta,
vuṅkuk, tuli, rudan, ayan, vikәt<,> siṅkәl, bisu, nāhan tәma/hanya, nihan ta
33r
phala ni anaiśvarya, yekā kinasampayan, lāvan tan ya maṅguh sakaharәp-
nya, mataṅnyan kapanasan sadākāla, momo pvekā manahnya, kadadi taṅ
15
śīla mahala denya, dadi ya mahabәt, maliṅmanumpu, phala niṅgavenya
maṅkana, ya mataṅnyan tibā ri naraka,
1 pvāṅlāh ] conj. ; praṅlā cod. 2 vәdit ] em. ; vdәt cod. 2 lәtuh ] em. ; lituh cod. 3 yan ]
em. ; han cod.
3 pinakavīja ] em. ; pikaṅvijā cod.
6 punah ] em. ; punā cod.
7 nahan ]
em. ; nihan cod. 11 lāvan ] em. ; lāvas cod. 12 vuṅkuk ] em. ; vukuk cod. 13 anaiśvarya ]
em. ; aneṅśvāryya cod.
13 tan ] conj. ; kan cod.
14 kapanasan ] em. ; tapanasān cod.
15 mahabәt ] conj. ; mahabәk cod.
15 maliṅmanumpu ] conj. ; manis manumya cod.
15 gavenya ] em. ; gaveṃnya cod.
16 mataṅnyan ] em. ; mataṅṅyan cod.
1–2 sarīsṛpa ṅaranya … tәktәk lituh ] Cf. NR 74.21: dadya tәtәk lintah irisirispoh dadi-
amu ; OJO xliii.c 21–11: taktak lintah lakay vḍit ; SiGu 18r: mati pva kita tәmahan tәtәk
ubyur vdәt, lintah lantaya, hirispveh lake әlur, salvir niṅjanma kinaririsan ; TJ 20.6–7: kady
aṅgān iṅtәtәk lintah / vidat / varayaṅ/ hirispoh / ; TanKām 160.11: ana tamolah irika lvirnya
caciṅ, vәḍit, kulir, kuricak, tәtәk, lintah mvaṅirisirispvah ; Vṛh 24.6–7: sarīṣṛpa ṅaranya
salvir iṅalakulaku ḍaḍanya / vәdit / lintah / ulā / vәlut saprakāra //
11–12 vudug, vuta …
bisu, ] Cf. SiGu 17v.3–4: vutā, tuli, vuḍug vikәt kikәṅ(?), vuṅkuk, sәkәl, vutā salaya,
3 ya tikā ] ya tikā post corr. ; yaya tikā ante corr.
3 pinakavīja ] pikaṅvijā post corr. ;
piṅkaṅvijā ante corr.
11 saṅsārajanma ] post corr. ; ṣasaṅsārajanma ante corr.


--- PAGE 268 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
249
Creeping creatures means: those which lie ﬂat, using their chest as a means
to move, like snakes, leeches, small snakes, worms, mud larvae.87 Immov-
able beings mean: trees, creepers, grass. Such are the distinctions of the
animals. Tey are the embodiments of the human beings when [their in-
tellects] have Unrighteousness as offspring. Te fruits of Ignorance are as
follows: these [minds] keep (re)turning [as] gods, human beings or animals,
and [in] heaven or hell, for a great number of bad and good deeds have been
committed by them formerly. Again they are reincarnated as humans. It
cannot be that the fruits of their bad and good deeds are not experienced.
Tis is the reason why the cycle of rebirth is met by them. Such are the
fruits of Ignorance, when it is produced by the intellect. Te fruits of Non-
Dispassion are as follows: they go straight to hell, [where] all kinds of pains
are experienced by them. If their sins are many, the stay in hell is long. If
their bad deeds are few, they are conceded to become human beings once
again. Tey become men who are abnormal—they are not the same as the
[other] creatures in the cycle of existence: leprous, blind, hunchbacked, deaf,
mad, epileptic, scarred, siṅkәl,88 dumb: such are their embodiments. Te
fruits of Non-Sovereignty are as follows: they are treated scornfully, and do
not obtain what they hope for, therefore they are irritated all the time. Teir
minds are wild. Because of that, the practice of doing wrong comes about:
they commit armed robberies, steal and plunder.89 Te fruit of their acting
in this way, that is the reason of falling into hell.
87.
Tus I conjecturally translate tәktәk, here qualiﬁed by the substantive lәtuh ‘dirt, im-
purity, pollution’. Te form may be a variant of tәtәk i ‘some repulsive creature or other
(mentioned with leeches, worms, etc.)’ (OJED 1997); cf. the hapax itәkitәk in Rāmāyaṇa
Kakavin 24:117a and conjecturally rendered by OJED (707) as ‘to live (play, wallow) in the
mud’. kbnw i.184b s.v. itәk, lef undeﬁned, refers to untәkuntәk (I.61a), in its turn glossed
as tәmbiluk (ii.785b) ‘een soort waterwormpje’.
88.
Cf. OJED 1781: ‘a particular disease (but which?)’.
89.
Considering the sequence mahabәk, manis manumya (where manis is the only at-
tested form, meaning ‘sweet, gentle’) as a corruption for mahabәt, maliṅ, manumpu. Te
conjectural emendation of the sequence has been arrived at by comparing it to closely re-
lated sequences of words listing crimes involving stealing in Old Javanese sources (quoted
in OJED 568 s.v. habәt 3):
362.1 maliṅanumpuṅmaṅabәt (describing men of bad conduct—durśīla janmanya);
Pūrvādhigama 7a.11 aṅabәt, manumpu; Prasasti Bali p. 105 (1040) iva.6 maliṅanumpv
aṅabәt. Cf. also the prose Kuñjarakarṇa 61.3 aṅambәk anumpu; Ślokāntara 68.13 amaliṅ
maṅrañcab manumpu mamumpaṅ.


--- PAGE 269 ---
250
ii Text & Translation
hәnti pva phala ni gavenya hala, sinavurakәn ta ya ri madhyapada de saṅ
yamabala, ya ta dadi pipīlika, nahan phala ni anaiśvarya, yan pinakavīja ni
buddhi, ikaṅta kabeh ya tekāpus niṅjanma, anuṅdumeh yāhiḍәp / duhka
33v
satatā, ya sinaṅguh saptabandhana ṅaranya, pitu apus apus pitu ṅaranya, ni-
5
han ikaṅinajarakәn kabeh, ndya inajarakәn, yan kva liṅanta, yeki <dharma,
vairāgya, aiśvarya,> adharma, ajñāna, avairāgya, anaiśvarya, nāhan yaṅsapt-
abandhana ṅaranya, yan apa yan hәnti sasaṅkeṅcakra bhāva, ya ta karih,
yan maṅkana liṅanta, yan paṅguh ikaṅsamyajñāna juga, apan dumeh ikaṅ
ātmā maluya ri bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
10
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[14] kāsihana rānak bhaṭāra, varahәn ri sādhana niṅmagave samādhi, maṅ-
kana / liṅsaṅkumāra,
34r
sumahur bhaṭāra,
mәne ikājarakna kaliṅniṅyogapāda, kunaṅvīja nikaṅbuddhi vuvus hәnti
15
muvah ◆
12 liṅ] em. ; li cod.
14 kaliṅ] em. ; kali cod.
5 yeki ] post corr. ; kei ante corr. (y added between the e vocalization and the k with vocal-
ization i)


--- PAGE 270 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
251
Te fruits of their bad deeds being expired, they are spread over the Middle-
World90 by the army of Yama.91 Tey become ants. Such are the fruits of
Non-Sovereignty, when it is produced by the intellect. All of them, they are
the bonds of the human beings, which cause them to experience pain at all
times. Tey are designated as saptabandhana, the seven fetters (pitu apus).
Te seven fetters (apus pitu),92 all [of them] are taught as follows. How are
they taught? If you might say thus, [I would reply]: Righteousness, Dis-
passion, Sovereignty, Unrighteousness, Ignorance, Non-Dispassion, Non-
Sovereignty: those are the saptabandhana.93 ‘When is it, then, that the causes
of the cycle of rebirth expire?’ If you would say so, [I would reply:] only when
one meets the right knowledge, for that is the reason for the Soul to return
to the Lord Supreme Cause. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[14] Be kind to your son, teach me the means of performing absorption.
Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Te explanation of the section of Yoga (yogapāda) will soon be taught. But
[in order that the topic of] the products of the intellect is completely ﬁnished,
[let us continue] again.
90.
madhyapada, i.e. the earth (not attested in Sanskrit); cf. OJED (1077, s.v.).
91.
I hesitantly adopt the gloss of OJED (2356) s.v. yamabala, although I cannot escape the
impression that Yamabala in this and other Old Javanese texts might have been understood
as a name of the infernal god Yama; besides the fact that yamabala is, as far as I know, not
attested in Sanskrit, the word is preceded in the text by the honoriﬁc particle saṅ, which
qualiﬁes a person rather than a class of beings and can hardly be attributed to demons. Te
expression saṅyamabala occurs three times in the Tattvajñāna, in a context where it may
refer, as here, to a single infernal god, whose duty is to decide about the destiny of the souls
afer they ﬁnish their period in the hell, causing them to become either human beings or
animals. Such a view is clearly implied in Agastyaparva 27.10–17, which regards Yama,
also called Bhaṭṭāra Dharma, as carefully handling (kumayatnākәn, i.e. judge?) the bad and
good conduct of human beings and causing the sinful ones to be reincarnated as ants or
other animals.
92.
It appears that the author quoted ﬁrst the Sanskrit compound, rendered it into an ‘Old
Javanese compound’ and then resolved it into a regular Old Javanese expression, where the
modiﬁer appears afer the modiﬁed.
93.
Te items listed in the codex are only four; to make the list of seven complete I
have added the three positive counterparts of Unrighteousness, Non-Dispassion and Non-
Sovereignty, supposing that a part of text has been skipped due to an error of a copyist. Tis
reconstruction is supported by the attestation of the term saptabandhana as denoting the
same list of seven in Sanskrit Śaiva sources (cf. Part iii, p. 449).


--- PAGE 271 ---
252
ii Text & Translation
hana pañcaviparyaya ṅaranya, lvirnya, tamah, moha, mahāmoha, tāmisra,
andhatāmisra
tamah ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk mahyun mamukti[,] ikaṅbhogaviṣaya, ap-
an iki ya pamuktyananta viṣayasuka, ya mataṅnyan prihtaṅkasugihan, ma-
5
hәmāsa, manaṇḍaṅa, mahulun mastrī rahayu, apan tan hana lәviha sakeṅ
suka niṅdadi vvaṅ, maṅkana liṅnya, ya ta mataṅnyan parәmәni amet bhoga
saka/la, yekā tamah ṅaranya ◆nihan taṅmoha ṅaranya, hana rakva lәvih
34v
saṅkeṅmāvak, siddhi rakva ṅaranya, dadi māvak dadi tan pāvak, yekā ka-
harәpku tәmunәṅku, marapvan vәnaṅhumalap sakaharәpku, ya moha ṅa-
10
ranya ◆mahāmoha ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk mahyun maṅgihakәna kasiddhy-
an, donanya kapaṅgihan iṅaṣṭaiśvarya deku, muktya tāku riṅsvarga mvaṅ
mānuṣaloka, yekā mahāmoha ṅaranya ◆tāmisra ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk ma-
harәp rumaṅkәpanaṅdveṣaviṣaya, lavan aṣṭaiśvarya ya tā/misra ṅaranya ◆
35r
andhatāmisra ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk humalaṅakәn ikaṅsukānāgata, lavan
15
humālaṅya huvus hilaṅ, ikā ta kalih, ya tekā pinakavīja niṅbuddhi yan agә¯ṅ
tamahnya, mamuhāra saṅsāra ika kabeh ◆
hana ta navatuṣṭi ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk matis, pradhānaka, upādānaka,
akāla, abhāgya, nahan taṅādhyātmikatuṣṭi ṅaranya,
pradhānakatuṣṭi ṅaranya, hana vvaṅtumon hala ni śarīranya, ndātan
20
paṅlare ri manahnya, paran kunaṅmahala śarīraṅku, mahala kunaṅgaveṅku
ṅūni, ya / ta maphala śarīraṅku maṅke, kunaṅyatanyan lituhayu ike jan-
35v
maṅku sovah, ndāk amrih magave hayu maṅke,
2 andhatāmisra ] em. ; nandātamisra cod.
4 pamuktyananta ] em. ; pamuktvananta cod.
5 lәviha ] em. ; lvaha cod.
9 sakaharәpku ] em. ; sakarәpku cod.
10–11 kasiddhyan ]
em. ; kaṅsiddyan cod.
14 andhatāmisra ] em. ; nandātamiśra cod.
15 humālaṅya ]
conj. ; kumālaṅṇa cod. 16 ika ] em. ; ikaṅcod. 19 tumon ] em. ; tumo cod. 20 kunaṅ]
em. ; kuniṅcod.
21–22 mahala kunaṅ… magave hayu maṅke ] Cf. Vṛh 32.29–31: i harah tan hana kunaṅ
gaveṅku rahayu ṅūni / mataṅnyan tan panәmu sukha maṅke / ya ta mataṅnyan koṅavak
pamrih ta pagave hayu / maran tan meṅkene dlāha riṅjanma sovah /
6–7 bhoga saka ] post corr. ; bhoga sakā u ante corr.


--- PAGE 272 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
253
Tere are the ﬁve kinds of errors: they are dullness, delusion, great delusion,
darkness, blind darkness.
Dullness means: the mind that desires to enjoy the objects of enjoyment.
[It thinks:] ‘Since you will ﬁnd enjoyment in the objects of pleasure, that is
the reason why you should strive for wealth in the form of gold, vestments,
slaves and beautiful women, for there is nothing which is superior to the
pleasure of becoming a human being!’ Tus are its thoughts. Tis is the rea-
son why it ﬁnds pleasure in obtaining all pleasures. Tat is dullness. Delusion
is [a mind that thinks] as follows: ‘Tere is [something] superior to [just]
having a body. Tat is the supernatural power of being embodied and being
disembodied. Tat is what I wish, and I shall get it in order to be able to steal
as much as I desire’. Tat is delusion. Great delusion is the mind desiring to
obtain the state of supernatural prowess. [It thinks:] ‘Te aim of my obtain-
ment of the eight sovereign powers is that I will enjoy myself in heaven and
in the world of human beings’. Tat is great delusion. Darkness means: the
mind desiring to match the objects of dislike with the eight sovereign pow-
ers. Tat is darkness. Blind darkness means: the mind that hinders both the
future pleasures and hinders those that have already vanished.94 All of these
[elements] are the products of the intellect, when its tamah is great. All of
them bring about pain (saṅsāra).95
Tere are the nine contentments: the mind is pleasant. [Concerning] nat-
ural constitution, acquisition, time,96 fortune:97 thus are the internal content-
ments.
Contentment concerning natural constitution means: there is a man who
sees the ugliness of his body, but he does not suffer in his mind. ‘How comes
that my body is so ugly? My acts were bad in the past; that had as fruit my
body in the present. In order that my next incarnation will be nice, I shall
do my best to do good now.
94.
Te point here seems to be that one who is effected by blind darkness is incapable of
enjoying pleasures because he is concerned with the pleasures that he has already enjoyed
and are now lost to him; cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 32.18: andhatāmisra ṅaranya vvaṅtumaṅisakәn
ikaṅvastu huvus hilaṅ‘blind darkness means: a man who weeps about something that
has already disappeared’. Similar deﬁnitions of blind darkness may be found in Sanskrit
commentaries to Sāṅkhyakārikā 48.
95.
Or: ‘[rebirth in] the cycle of existence’.
96.
Te initial a in akāla° is not an alpha privans but the Old Javanese preﬁx a-.
97.
Te initial a in abhāgya° is not an alpha privans but the Old Javanese preﬁx a-.


--- PAGE 273 ---
254
ii Text & Translation
salvir niṅmakaphala lituhayu ri janmaṅku sovah, ya gavayaknaṅkva maṅke,
maṅkana liṅnya, lumәkas ta ya magave hayu, brata, yan yajña, yan jñāna
kunaṅ, yeka pradhānakatuṣṭi ṅaranya, hana ta upādānakatuṣṭi ṅaranya, ikaṅ
ambhәk tan malara kavәkasan hutaṅde ni kavvatanya, athavā svabhāva ni
5
kavvatanya, kunaṅikaṅgumave kaluputakna ni kavvatanya ri saṅsāra, ya / ta
36r
ginavayakәn ya tan arusuh, yekā upādānakatuṣṭi ṅaranya, hana ta akālatuṣṭi
ṅaranya, hana vvaṅmanomahnomah, ndan inaṅgәh ta ya de ni raranya, ikaṅ
ambhәk mabhaya pinadәmnya riṅambhәk matis, yeka akālatuṣṭi ṅaranya,
abhāgyatuṣṭi ṅaranya, ikaṅvvaṅmandabhāgya, tan pamaṅguh inak ambhәk
10
salavas ni dadinya, saṅka ri lara ny ambhәknya, umәgil ta ya ri saṅvruh
maṅaji saṅpaṇḍita guru ni rat kabeh, sira ta panambhahanya, patakvananya
ri prāya, vinarah ta ya de saṅpaṇḍita, kino/n ta ya maṅabhyāsa vidhi, enak
36v
tāmbhәknyān paṅabhyāsa, ya tekā abhāgyatuṣṭi ṅaranya,
1 gavayaknaṅkva ] em. ; gavayaknakva cod. 5 kavvatanya ] em. ; kaṅvvatanya cod. 7 in-
aṅgәh ] em. ; inaṅgih cod.
7 ikaṅ] em. ; ika cod.
8 mabhaya ] em. ; mabhyaya cod.


--- PAGE 274 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
255
Everything which brings about handsomeness in my next human birth, I
will do that right now!’ Tus are their thoughts. Tey start to perform good
deeds, [such as] observances, as sacriﬁces, as knowledge.98 Tat is content-
ment concerning natural constitution. Tere is contentment concerning ac-
quisition: the mind that does not suffer if a debt is lef due to his actions;
or [due to] the nature of his actions; or that causes his actions to be out of
the reach of suffering.99 Tat will cause him to be without burdens. Tat
is the meaning of contentment concerning acquisition. Tere is contentment
concerning an appropriate occasion: there is a man who asks [a girl] in mar-
riage, and is accepted by his lady. Te feeling of worry is replaced by him
with a pleasant feeling. Tat is the meaning of contentment concerning time.
Contentment concerning fortune means: the ill-fated man, who does not en-
counter pleasure of mind for the entire span of his existence because of the
pain in his mind. He takes refuge with one who knows how to study the
holy texts, a master and teacher of the whole world. He becomes his object
of worship, his oracles for [all of his] intentions. He is taught by the mas-
ter, and ordered to constantly practice the prescribed rules of conduct. His
mind becomes relieved as he constantly practices. Tat is the meaning of
contentment concerning fortune.
98.
Here jñāna is apparently to be intended as the pursuit of gnosis or right knowledge,
which constitutes a ‘good deed’ (gave hayu).
99.
Te translation of this sentence is tentative, for the exact meaning of kavvatan in this
context is uncertain. OJED, s.v. vvat* ii (2343), translates kavvat as ‘carried along by, under
the impulse of, as a result of’ as well as ‘to present, offer, bring before; load, put on’. If
this interpretation is followed, the passage may refer to one’s own possessions (i.e. what is
‘carried along’), which have been acquired through payment, which has ultimately led to
the accumulation of debts (cf. the deﬁnition of the opposite of upādānakatuṣṭi given below,
262.8). A more likely possibility may be to take kavvataṅin the sense of ‘deed’, as in Old
Malay: cf. the form kavuatanāña attested in line 7 of the Talang Tuwo inscription (Coedes
1930:39), which was translated by Coedes as ‘leurs entreprises’ (cf. also the form vuatāña
in lines 6–7, translated as ‘quoi qu’ils fassent’). Te construction luput riṅsaṅsāra (instead
of, as one would expect, luput saṅkeṅsaṅsāra) in the third and last clause is ambiguous and
may lead to different interpretations of the entire passage. If we take kavvataṅin the sense
of ‘possession’, the clause may translate ‘or that causes his possessions to be released (i.e.
given?) to [those who] suffer’ (where saṅsāra may stand for saṅsārajanma, cf. 248.11); my
translation presupposes riṅ= saṅkeṅ‘from’, hence refers to one’s capacity to perform actions
that will not lead to painful consequences.


--- PAGE 275 ---
256
ii Text & Translation
nihan taṅvāhyatuṣṭi ṅaranya, hana vvaṅluput saṅke viṣaya, kady aṅgān i
vvaṅmaharәp maraby ahayu, mamaṅana enak, manaṇḍaṅa dodot rahayu
kunaṅ, huvus pva kapaṅguh denya, tuṣṭi hatah ṅaranya, hana ta vvaṅma-
tәmu lāvan kasihnya, tuṣṭi hatah ṅaranya, hana vvaṅmamet drabya, athavā
5
mamet guṇa kunaṅhuvus kapaṅguh ikaṅpinetnya, tuṣṭi hatah ṅaranya, hana
ta vvaṅhuvus siddhikāryanya ikaṅsapinetnya, tuṣṭi / hatah ṅaranya, hana
37r
ta vvaṅmalāra sakit, halvaṅpva lāranya, tuṣṭi hatah ṅaranya, hana ta vvaṅ
mamunuh kәbho sapi paṅanәnya, tuṣṭi hatah ṅaranya, nahan taṅnavatuṣṭi
ṅaranya<,> pinakavīja niṅbuddhi ika kabeh ◆
10
nihan taṅaṣṭasiddhi ṅaranya, dāna, adhyayana, śabda, tarka, sauhṛdaya,
trayo duhkavighāta, nahan taṅaṣṭasiddhi ṅaranya,
6–7 hana ta ] em. ; hanātah cod.
7 sakit ] em. ; sakikit cod.
8 sapi ] em. ; ṣpi cod.
9 pinakavīja ] em. ; pinakatija cod.
10 tarka ] em. ; karttā cod.
10 sauhṛdaya ] em. ;
svatradaya cod.
11 trayo duhkavighāta ] em. ; trayo duhkavilāta cod.


--- PAGE 276 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
257
Te external contentments are as follows: there is a man who is out of reach
of the objects of the senses, like [those enjoyed by] men who wish to take
beautiful women, eat well, or wear beautiful dodot-garments.100 When those
[objects of the senses] are met by him, that is called contentment. Tere is a
man who meets with his love:101 that is called contentment. Tere is a man
who strives afer wealth, or strives afer a supernatural ability:102 when that
which is strived for by him is obtained, that is called contentment. Tere is a
man who has successfully achieved everything that was strived afer by him:
that is called contentment. Tere is a man who suffers pain. His suffering
has diminished: that is called contentment. Tere is a man who slaughters
a buffalo and an ox, in order to be eaten by him: that is called contentment.
Tus are the nine contentments, all of them are produced by the intellect.
Te eight perfections103 are as follows: generosity, study, verbal instruc-
tion, reasoning, friendship,104 eradication of the threefold pain.105 Such are
the eight perfections.
100.
Te addition within brackets is necessary in order to restitute the apparently intended
meaning of the sentence, where the expression luput saṅkeṅdoes not refer to one who is
‘free from’ objects of enjoyment, but rather to one who has no access to them and when he
suddenly obtains them, becomes content. According to OJED (411), the dodot is a ‘garment
worn around the lower part of the body’.
101.
Or, more generally: ‘Tere is a man who obtains what he wishes’.
102.
Understanding guṇa in this sense rather than in the more general sense of ‘virtue’,
which seems to me less appropriate in this context; cf. aṣṭaguṇa (OJED 143–144 ‘the eight
preternatural qualities of a yogi’, and 553 s.v. guṇa 2 ‘magic?’).
103.
Tus I have translated aṣṭasiddhi, which in Sanskrit sources are usually differentiated
from aṣṭaguṇa or aṣṭaiśvarya ‘the eight supernatural powers’; contrast OJED (146), which
translates aṣṭasiddhi attested in Vṛhaspatitattva 24.18 precisely as the eight supernatural
powers.
104.
Emending svatradaya into sauhṛdaya, which is easy to justify palaeographically (sva =
metathesis of sau; tra = hra →hṛ; cf. Introduction, p. 80). Sāṅkhyakārikā 52 has suhṛtprāpti
(‘acquisition of friends’), whereas śloka 33 of the Vṛhaspatitattva has sauhṛda ‘relating to
friend’ (i.e. friendship). All the sources explain the item as relating to the acquisition of lib-
erating knowledge through excellent friends or teachers (cf. Sāṅkhyakārikā 51: yathā kaścit
suhṛjjñānam adhigamya mokṣam gacchati). Te text, when explaining the opposites of the
eight perfections, has asvāhadayah, where a subscript r has been dropped—perhaps not ac-
cidentally, for the word might have been a scribal attempt to ‘correct’ the form asvahradaya
(i.e. asauhṛdaya) into asvādhyāya on the basis of the Old Javanese gloss; cf. below, 264.7,
and the table listing the pratyayas in Part iii, pp. 445–447.
105.
Te non-standard form trayo duḥkhavighāta, attested also in Vṛhaspatitattva śloka
33c as trayo duḥkhavighātāḥ, corresponds to the proper Sanskrit duḥkhavighātās trayaḥ
(cf., e.g., Sāṅkhyakārikā 51).


--- PAGE 277 ---
258
ii Text & Translation
dāna, ṅaranya, saṅvәnaṅumehakәn kāyanira riṅsaṅpaṇḍita, lavan ri saṅ-
sārajanma kunaṅ, lvir ni vinehakәn, tәlu prakāranya, kāya, śabda, ambhәk
rahayu, nihan ta kapirvan i kasiddhya/n, saṅvәnaṅmaṅāji śāstra purāṇa,
37v
tattvajñāna kunaṅ, siddhi hatah ṅaranika, <śabda ṅaranya,> hanātah hu-
5
vus maṅabhyāsājinira, dadi sira siddhavākya savuvusnira siddhi, athavā sira
dadi maṅrәṅә¯ śabda sakeṅsūkṣma, saṅka ri tibra ni paṅrәṅә¯nira, siddhi
hatah ṅaran ikā, hana tarkasiddhi ṅaranya, ikaṅjñāna ton ikaṅatītānāga-
tavartamāna, siddhi hatah ṅaran ikā<,> hana ta huvus manәmu guru viśeṣa,
siddhi hatah ṅaranikā, hana ta vәkas nikaṅkasiddhyan saṅviku, saṅyogī-
10
śvara juga, apan sira vәnaṅhumilaṅakәn ikaṅduhka tәlu ṅaranya, hanādhy-
ātmi/kaduka ṅaran ikā, hanādhidaivikaduhka ṅaranya, hanādhibhautikadu-
38r
ka ṅaranya, rva prakāra nikādhyātmikaduka ṅaranya, mānasa, lāvan śārīra,
mānasa ṅaranya, kāma, krodha, lobha, bhaya, asūyā, kāma ṅaranya hyun,
krodha ṅaranya, galak, lobha ṅaranya, tan pahuvusan maṅarjana dravya,
15
bhaya ṅaranya, takut, asūyā ṅaranya, ikaṅgәlәm tan vәnaṅmalәs, nahan
taṅduhka saṅkeṅmanah,
6 paṅrәṅә¯nira ] conj. ; panira cod.
7–8 ikaṅatītānāgatavartamāna ] em. ; itāṅatitāna-
gatavārktamana cod. 9 nikaṅkasiddhyan ] em. ; nikaṃdyan cod. 11 hanādhidaivikaduh-
ka ] em. ; hanādideviduhka cod.
11–12 hanādhibhautikaduka ] em. ; hanatibhotikāduka
cod.
13 krodha ] em. ; kreda cod.
13 asūyā ] em. ; suyā cod.
14 krodha ] em. ; kreda
cod.
15 asūyā ] em. ; suyā cod.
15 gәlәm ] conj. ; glә cod.
2 prakāranya, kāya, śabda ] post corr. ; prakāranya, ṣabda ante corr.


--- PAGE 278 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
259
Generosity means: one who is able to offer his body106 to a learned man, or
also to human beings who suffer.107 Te form of what is offered is threefold:
good body, speech, heart. Te second in the list of perfections (i.e. study) is
as follows: one who is able to study the learned treatises and the Purāṇas,
or the sacred philosophical texts;108 that is a perfection. Verbal instruction
means:109 there is one who has already mastered his sacred texts: he becomes
a siddhavākya, whatever he say is accomplished. Or, he becomes able to hear
sounds from the invisible [level of reality], because of the intensity of his
hearing;110 those are perfections. Tere is the perfection in reasoning: the
knowledge of seeing into past, future and present. Tat is a perfection. Tere
is one who has managed to attain an excellent teacher; that is a perfection.
Tere is the highest state of perfection of a religious man: he is indeed a
leader among yogins, for he is able to extinguish the three pains. Tere is the
inner pain; there is the pain due to supernatural agencies; there is the material
pain. Te forms of the inner pain are two: the mental and the bodily. Men-
tal means: eros, rage, greed, apprehension, envy. Eros means: desire. Rage
means: enraged. Greed means: not stopping to acquire wealth. Apprehen-
sion means: fear. Envy means: one who accepts willingly without being able
to give back. Such is the pain that comes from the mind.
106.
Te most obvious translation of kāya (ii) is ‘body’ (1), but the substantive can also
mean ‘effort, strength; strong’ (2); cf. makāya (2), ‘to exert os. for, devote one’s strength to,
help’, which may also ﬁts the present context.
107.
Or: ‘to human beings who are in the cycle of transmigration’ (saṅsārajanma).
108.
Tus I render tattvajñāna; cf. Introduction, p. 3.
109.
Inserted in the text by way of emendation.
110.
Conjecturally emending the meaningless (saṅka ni) panira to (saṅka ni) paṅrәṅә¯-
nira. Another possibility could be saṅka ni tapahnira ‘because of his austerity’: compare
the explanation of this siddhi given by the commentary to śloka 33 of the Vṛhaspatitattva:
‘Because of the intensity of his yogic practice, he hears subtle sounds’ saṅka ri tīkṣṇa niṅ
kasādhakan, aṅrәṅә¯ ta sira śabda sūkṣma.


--- PAGE 279 ---
260
ii Text & Translation
nihan taṅduka saṅkeṅśarīra, orәm, gigil, śūlān<,> lārahatin, puyәṅ, kuris,
saprakāra niṅlārān pasaṅkan, yekādhyātmikaduhka, ya tikā hinilaṅakәn saṅ
yogīśvara, / ādhidaivikaduka ṅaranya, sinambhәr i gәlap, edan, kapasuk iṅ
38v
gaṇa bhūta, lāvan piśāca, yeki ādhidaivikaduka ṅaranya, kunaṅikaṅpinәraṅ,
5
pinalu, rinacun, tinәluh<,> pinatuk iṅulā, pinaṅan iṅvuhaya, saprakāra niṅ
lāra saṅkeṅhavak, yekādibhautikaduka ṅaranya, ikā ta kabeh, ya ta hilaṅde
saṅyogīśvara,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[15] kunaṅapa ta denira saṅyogīśvārān humilaṅakәn kalāra samaṅkana
10
sājñā bhaṭāra, maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
hәlәm ikā hujarakna riṅyogapāda, apan tan hәnti vṛtti nikaṅbuddhi vaneh,
ndya vṛtti / ni buddhi vaneh, yan kva liṅanta, hana aśakti ṅaranya, vvalulikur
39r
kvehnya, lakṣaṇanya yekā kavruhananta,
1 lārahatin ] em. ; lārahatәn cod.
1 puyәṅ] em. ; puyә cod.
3 ādhidaivikaduka ] em. ;
adidevidukā cod. 4 ādhidaivikaduka ] em. ; adideviduka cod. 5 pinatuk iṅ] em. ; pinatu-
kaṅcod.
6 yekādibhautikaduka ] em. ; yekātibautikāduka cod.
9 kunaṅ] conj. ; ikun
cod. 9 denira ] em. ; deniṅra cod. 9 humilaṅakәn ] em. ; humilaṅṅaknә cod. 12 hujara-
kna ] em. ; hujarāknә cod.
13 vvalulikur ] em. ; vvaluliku cod.
1 orәm, gigil, śūlān<,> lārahatin, puyәṅ, kuris ] Cf. Vṛh 33.10: urәm bhāra gigil / puru /
kuris / vāta / pitta / śleṣma / śūla / larahatin
3–4 ādhidaivikaduka ṅaranya … yeki ā-
dhidaivikaduka ṅaranya ] Cf. Vṛh 33.11–13: ādhidaivikaduhkha ṅaranya ikaṅinalap iṅgә-
lap / edan / ayan / kāveśa graha / saprakāra niṅduhkha saṅkeṅdeva / yeka ādhidaivikaduhkha
ṅaranya //
4–6 kunaṅikaṅpinәraṅ… yādhibhautikaduka ṅaranya ] Cf. Vṛh 33.14–17:
ādhibhautikaduhkha ṅaranya pinәraṅ/ rinacun / jinarәm / kәneṅupas / kesyan / inabhicari /
tinәluh / tinuju khala ulā lalataṅ/ saprakāra niṅlara duhkha saṅkeṅbhūta / bhūta ṅaran ika
māvak kabeh / yekaṅādhibhautikaduhkha ṅaranya //


--- PAGE 280 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
261
Te pain that comes from the body is as follows: suffering from chronic
diseases,111 ague, stomachache,112 melancholy,113 dizziness,114 pox,115 and
other pains having a similar origin. Tat is inner pain. It is extinguished
by the leader among yogins. Pain due to supernatural agencies means: being
struck by a thunderclap, madness, being possessed by [demons such as] the
gaṇa, bhūta and piśāca. Tat is pain due to supernatural agencies. Te being
stabbed, hit with a hammer, poisoned, bewitched, bitten by a snake, eaten by
a crocodile, and similar pains deriving from the body, that is material pain.
All of them, they are extinguished by the leader among yogins.
Kumāra spoke:
[15] If you please, o Lord, what is then the way of the leader among yogins
to extinguish such kind of pains? Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Te Yogapāda will be taught later on, for [the exposition of] the other ac-
tivities of the mind is not ﬁnished yet. ‘What are the other activities of the
mind?’ If you would speak thus, [I would reply:] there are the disabilities,
their number is twenty-eight. You should know their characteristics.
111.
OJED (2143) glosses urәm (which I suppose to be the same as the orәm of the codex)
as ‘lingering disease (of a part kind?)’; I.D.G. Catra (p.c. June 2007) understands the word
to refer to a kind of disease affecting the skin of the face.
112.
Contrast OJED (1845) s.v. śūla ii.2, which, on the basis of the occurrence in Vṛhas-
patitattva 33.10, gives ‘stabbing (shooting) pain’. MW, among the meanings of the Sanskrit
śūla, gives ‘any sharp or acute pain (esp. that of colic or gout)’, which is close to the un-
derstanding of the word as ‘stomachache’ by I.D.G. Catra (p.c. June 2007)—contrast BED
(457) s.v. sula 1: ‘a disease of the navel’.
113.
larahatin (lara ‘pain’ + hati ‘liver, heart’) is not found in OJED, but occurs in Vṛhaspa-
titattva 33.10 and was translated by Sudarshana Devi as ‘melancholy’; the form is perhaps
a calque of prihati or prihatin ‘sadness, sorrow, dejected mood’ etc. (OJED 1423), arguably
formed by combining prih ii ‘pain grief’ and hati.
114.
Emending puyә¯ into puyәṅ; cf. OJED (1467) s.v. puyәṅ*, which translates apuyәṅ
as ‘dizzy, giddy, drowsy, overcome with sleep; spinning round’. Note that the similar list
of diseases appearing in Vṛhaspatitattva 33.10 reads puru, a hapax meaning (as the Malay
puru) ‘sore, ulcer’ (OJED 1456); cf. also the hapax puruh (OJED 1457), which in Balinese
means ‘headache’ (cf. BED 408).
115.
Cf. OJED (932) s.v. kuris (from Vṛhaspatitattva 33.10): ‘name of a certain disease
(KBNW: ‘‘the pox’’; van Eck, s.v. kores, ‘‘a kind of scabious cutaneous eruption’’)’. Te word
is attested in the Nglawang inscription (Krom 1911:412, 415), in a Sanskrit verse enumer-
ating diseases such as epilepsy (apasmāra), deafness and blindness (vadhirāndha); since,
however, kuris is not attested in Sanskrit, it was emended by Krom into kuṇi(s tathā) ‘hav-
ing a crooked or withered arm or an arm without a hand or ﬁnger; a whitlow’.


--- PAGE 281 ---
262
ii Text & Translation
ndya ya, yekiṅdaśendriya, tan vәnaṅhumiḍәp riṅviṣayanya, taliṅa tuli, kulit
vudug, mata tan panon, ilat bisu, iruṅapalәh, tutuk vulaṅun, tan aharәp
maṅkana kunaṅ, taṅan kiṅkiṅ, suku lumpuh, silit mәdu, tan vәnaṅaṅisiṅ
kunaṅ, pәlāt kәdi, nahan lakṣaṇa nikaṅdaśendriya, an tan vәnaṅri viṣaya-
5
nya, aśakti hatah ṅaranya,
hana ta balik nikaṅnavatu/ṣṭi lāvan aṣṭasiddhi, nihan lakṣaṇanya, <a-
39v
pradhānaka ṅaranya> hala ni śarīranya, prastāvanyān paṅimpulu niṅma-
gave hala, anupādānaka ṅaranya, hutaṅnya hiḍәpnya hutaṅni kavvatanya,
dadi ya miṅgat, akāla ṅaranya, tan vәnaṅsumorakәn taṅgih ni raranya, dadi
10
ya muṅpaṅ, tan vәnaṅtumambhāni sakahinan y avaknya, moha ta ya, tan
apilih salviranya, viṣayānurasa, hana vvaṅtumәmu kaharәpnya, ndan lobha
ta ya, tan patambhān ikaṅhuvus kapaṅguh denya, hana †maṅajanāsuka,
alәmәh magave ya, hana tan vәnaṅrumakṣa ha/yunya, mvaṅkalituhayunya,
40r
arabi laraṅan, mahәmas tinotohakәnya ri savuṅjudi nita, mahurip an pa-
15
muk pva, hana kṣayarāga, hana vvaṅmalāra ndātan tambhān, avәdi maṅin-
uma mapyak mapahit, matakut mabhaya ri saṅmanambhā,
2 apalәh ] em. ; apālәg cod.
2 vulaṅun ] em. ; vulavun cod.
3 kiṅkiṅ, ] em. ; kiṅki
cod.
4–5 viṣayanya ] em. ; viyasanya cod.
6 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkā cod.
8 anupādānaka ]
em. ; anopradānaka cod.
9 sumorakәn ] em. ; humorākәn cod.
11 salviranya ] em. ; sal-
varānya cod. 15 ndātan tambhān ] em. ; ndātambhān cod. 16 mabhaya ] em. ; mabhyaya
cod.


--- PAGE 282 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
263
Here they are: the ten faculties not being capable of experiencing their do-
mains: deaf ears, skin affected by disease, eyes incapable of seeing, a mute
tongue, an unperceptive nose, a dazed mouth, or [a mouth] which is likewise
undesirable, withered hands, lame legs, an anus which is mәdu,116 or which
is not able to defecate, and emasculated male attributes. Tus are the char-
acteristics of the ten faculties when they are not capable of reaching their
domains; they are disabilities.
Tere are the opposites of the nine contentments and the eight perfec-
tions. Teir characteristics are as follows. Concerning natural constitution
means:117 the misfortune of his body is the cause of persistently118 doing
bad. Concerning acquisition means: one whose realizes that his debt is the
debt of what has been done by him, thus he runs away.119 Concerning what is
an inappropriate occasion means: he is not able to overcome the refusal of his
[beloved] girl, then he takes her by force. Not being able to cure all the deﬁ-
ciencies of his body, he is deluded, not discriminating anything. One whose
taste follows the objects of enjoyment: there is a man who has met that which
was desired by him, but he is greedy, incurable of what has already been ob-
tained by him. Tere is †maṅajanāsuka, he is reluctant to work. Tere is
one who is not able to guard his beauty, and his handsome appearance: he
has women who are forbidden [to him], and he has gold which is gambled
away in gatherings for gambling and stake-playing, living as a drunkard.120
Tere is one who looses passion. Tere is one who suffers without cure, he
is afraid to drink [medicines] which are strong121 and bitter, he is afraid of
and worried by the [man of medicine] who could cure him.
116.
Tis word is not attested in dictionaries of Old or Modern Javanese.
117.
Added by conjecture; the mistaken drop of apradhānaka is suggested by the corrup-
tion of the following item from upādānaka to anopradānaka.
118.
Deriving the unattested paṅimpulu from kimulu* (or kipulu) ‘to persist, insistently,
strenuously’ (OJED 870).
119.
Te word kavvatanya instead of ‘what has been done by him’ may be translated instead
as ‘what has been offered by him’; cf. above, fn. 99.
120.
Te translation of pamuk given in OJED (2322 s.v. vuk iii) ‘to attack furiously’ does
not make sense here; however, under vuk ii the dictionary attests the expression vuk turū
‘addicted to sleep, sleepy-head’. In Modern Javanese (as well as Indonesian) we ﬁnd the
common form mabuk ‘intoxicated, drunk’, which is likely to derive from the Old Javanese
vuk ii, having the same meaning (hence, vuk turū = ‘intoxicated with sleep’).
121.
OJED (1469) translates apyak as ‘ﬁerce, loud, harsh, rude’. In this context the word
appears to refer to some kind of medicament; cf. tapyaktapyak in Vṛhaspatitattva 74.30
(OJED 1950) and the form sarvāpyak occurring below, 328.1.


--- PAGE 283 ---
264
ii Text & Translation
hana vvaṅtan patәmu lāvan kasihnya, anaṅis tan vәnaṅmukti drabyanya,
nahan balik nikaṅnavatuṣṭi, aśakti hatah ṅaranikā,
hana ta balik ni aṣṭasiddhi, adāna, tar dadi maveveh, astham agaveya
dharma, anadhyayana, tan paṅaji, tvas āji svatah niṅṅva, tan byakta vruha
5
ri viśe/ṣa, anaśabda, tan paṅabhyāsa kasādhakan, an aku hyaṅ, apa ta gaveya
40v
niṅmamrih, tvas prihatin ṅva denya<,> anatarka, tan katon ikaṅatītānā-
gatavartamāna, asauhṛdayaḥ, tan paguru viśeṣa, maguru matәka, ndān kadi
parahu vatu, vvādәs maṅәntasakna ri saṅsārasamudra, ya mataṅyan paṅәlә-
makәn riṅmahānaraka,
4 tvas āji svatah ] conj. ; tvas· jiji mota cod.
6 prihatin ] em. ; prahatin cod.
7 asauhṛ-
dayaḥ] em. ; asvāhadayah cod.


--- PAGE 284 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
265
Tere is a man who does not obtain what he desires: he cries and is not able
to enjoy his wealth.122 Tus are the opposites of the nine contentments, they
are called disabilities.
Tere are the opposites of the eight perfections: non-generosity: not giv-
ing alms, let alone practicing righteousness. Non-study: not studying the
sacred texts. Te essence of the sacred texts [is] from himself,123 [therefore]
he will not know the sacred doctrines through evidence. Without verbal in-
struction:124 not performing [the religious duties proper to] the state of sād-
haka, [like when one thinks:] ‘As I am God, what is the purpose of exerting
myself? My heart feels sad because of that’.125 Without reasoning:126 past,
present and future are not seen. Without friendliness:127 he does not have an
excellent guru; he has gurus at random. Like a boat made of stone, it is not
possible that he will cross the ocean of transmigration.128 Tis is the reason
why he sinks into hell.
122.
Note that kasihnya instead of ‘what he desires’ can also be translated as ‘the beloved
one’; the sentence would thus refer to somebody whose heartache prevents him from en-
joying his wealth.
123.
Conjecturally emending mota into svatah (m and s are easily confused; o is a spelling
variant of va). Te sentence may refer to the cliché regarding the acquisition of the sacred
doctrine through masters (gurutaḥ), treatises (śāstrataḥ), or oneself (svataḥ): cf. Vṛhaspa-
titattva 32.36 and 52.82 and, among the Sanskrit sources, Tantrāloka 4.41 and 4.78. Te
point here seems to be that the svataḥmethod is negatively evaluated if carried out alone,
i.e. without the other two. I have translated tvas as ‘essence’ (cf. OJED 2090: ‘core, heart’),
but it is likely that here it is to be understood as ‘meaning’, not only on account of the context
but also because tvas (3), according to OJED, could probably mean ‘to have in mind, to want
(cf. ati)’.
124.
Te form anaśabda is to be analyzed as Sanskrit alpha privans an- + Old Javanese
preﬁx a- + śabda.
125.
Tis sentence is not clear. It might refer to a monist who deems religious and medita-
tive practices that have to be followed by a Śaiva practitioner (sādhaka) to be useless in view
of the fact that everyone already is God—a statement reﬂecting an utterly monistic stand-
point. Alternatively, one may interpret it as a direct speech of the Lord to his son Kumāra
(an aku hyaṅ= anaku hyaṅ): ‘My divine son, what is [then] the purpose of exerting oneself?
I am sorrowful in the heart because of that’.
126.
Te form anatarka is to be analyzed as Sanskrit alpha privans an- + Old Javanese
preﬁx a- + tarka.
127.
Emending asvāhadayaḥinto asauhṛdayaḥ; cf. above, fn. 104.
128.
Te depiction of release from the cycle of rebirth through a metaphor related to ship-
ping is nicely conveyed in the sentence by the -akәn verbal form of the base әntas (OJED
458–459), ‘to set on land, carry across … rescue, free from’ (compare mәntas ‘to come out
from the water, onto dry land; to have crossed over; to overcome … be freed from, released’).


--- PAGE 285 ---
266
ii Text & Translation
ndya guru maṅkana marәki riṅmahānaraka, nihan paṅavruhana, liṅnya,
kitātah kahanan bhaṭāra sakala, apan yeki magave liṅga mamaṅun prāsāda,
maṅanākәn poya, maṅhanākә/n pinaṅan ininum, yeki kahanan saṅhyaṅ
41r
paramārtha, mamaṅan maturū saṅhyaṅikā, lumaku, maluṅguh, asiṅatah,
5
tulah saṅhyaṅikā kabeh, nora salah ikā kabeh maṅkana liṅnya, ya mataṅ-
nyan dadi humulahakәn apacāra, apan tan hanāpa liṅnya, dadi ya muṅpaṅ,
dadin paṅahala dravya niṅvaneh, tan apa ikā yan tuhutu kita, apan tuhutu
ṅaranya, hayva vәdi pati, apan yekā mahañutan ṅaranya, asiṅmārga niṅpati
ta pva, apan si pati ikaṅsinaṅguh kamokṣan ṅa/ranya,
41v
1 marәki riṅ] em. ; mraki niṅcod.
2 kitātah ] em. ; kit·tah cod.
3 kahanan ] em. ;
tahanan cod. 5 liṅnya, ] em. ; linya cod. 5–6 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod. 6 hanā-
pa ] conj. ; yan apa cod.
6 muṅpaṅ, ] conj. ; mupuṅcod.
8 asiṅ] em. ; asi cod.


--- PAGE 286 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
267
What is such a teacher who draws the Great hell near like? He should be
known as follows. His words are: ‘Yourself are the place where the Lord in his
manifest form resides, for those who fabricate liṅgas, build temples, organize
assemblies,129 organize food- and drinking-feasts, those ones are the place
where the Summum Bonum resides! Tose Gods eat and sleep, walk and sit,
just [do] whatever [they want!]. All of those Gods are hit by punishment,130
[but] there is no fault in all of them’. Tus are his words. Tis is the reason
why he performs bad conduct, i.e. because it does not matter, according to
him, thus he transgresses,131 thus he steals the wealth of others. ‘It does not
matter if you are tuhutu,132 for tuhutu means, do not be scared of dying, for
that is called killing oneself;133 whatever way of death, for death is that which
is designated as liberation’.
129.
I understand pvaya in the codex to be a spelling variant of the substantive poya instead
of the stress particles pva ya, for the transitive verb maṅanākәn preceding it requires an
object. Te meaning of the word is, however, unclear, and my translation merely conjectural.
OJED (1376) s.v. only lists the form apopoyan ‘to talk (together)’; cf. also poyah*, apoyah ‘to
eat? (or: to ask; cf. poya?’). Given the context, the word here might refer to some kind of
gathering or assembly.
130.
Te translation of this sentence is not sure. OJED (2053) glosses tulah as ‘a curse
or punishment resulting from sacrilege or the breaking of a taboo; to be stricken by such’.
Alternatively, emending tulah into tulya, read: ‘All of them are the same as God’. For the
interpretation of this obscure passage, cf. Part iii, pp. 378–379.
131.
Emending mupuṅinto mumpaṅ‘to seize illegally, rob, take by force (esp. a woman),
transgress’. I have preferred this solution to muṅpuṅsince that form does not occur as a
self-standing verb, as must be the case here; cf. OJED (1446) s.v. puṅpuṅ* ‘to use the right
moment to do st., while it is still possible; with the utmost exertion, as intensively as pos-
sible’. External evidence in support of my emendation may be found in Parākhyatantra
4.85, characterizing one who, as in the Old Javanese passage, has abandoned dharma and
embraced materialist (nāstika) views as becoming a thief (taskaro) and murdering living
beings (vadhaṃca kurute ’ṅginām); cf. Goodall (2004:257).
132.
Te word tuhutu is not attested in the dictionaries. Te fact that it occurs twice and
that none of the possible emendations is really satisfactory suggests to me that it may be
a correct, albeit unknown, form. Otherwise, directions to look for an emendation may
be tuhutuhu ‘right, sincere, in the real sense’ (OJED 2048), which however in the present
contexts makes little sense; or tutuh ii ‘to blame, reprove, reprimand, reproach’ (OJED 2083);
or uhut i ‘restraining, preventing, forbidding’ (OJED 2105).
133.
According to OJED (589), the form ahañutan means ‘intending to take one’s life
(plunge into death)’; compare ahañut, hinañut, kahañut, pahañut: 1 ‘to throw st. into the
river (sea) to let it be carried away by the current (tide), esp. of the ashes afer cremation,
to perform the funeral rites for; to plunge st. into, throw into, let st. go down into, let st. be
carried away; 2 to plunge into (intr.), let os. be carried away (by), yield completely (to), give
one’s life, kill os.’


--- PAGE 287 ---
268
ii Text & Translation
maṅkana liṅni gurunya, yekā guru manәbakәn i naraka ṅaranya, aśakti ṅa-
ranya, ṅke ri vṛtti niṅbuddhi ◆
nihan taṅdukatrayavighatah ikā tan vәnaṅhumilaṅakәn dukatraya, apan
tan paṅabhyāsa samādhi, mataṅnyan tan paṅabhyāsa samādhi, apan tan
5
maṅkana rakva paramārtha liṅnya, tuhu mata saṅhyaṅparamārtha luput
saṅkeṅyoga lāvan samādhi, apan buddhi sira, huvus karuhun ikaṅrāga
dveṣa moha lāvan śarīra tan hana ikā ri bhaṭāra, apa de niṅsamādhi ri sira,
apan sira pva de ni samā/dhinira saṅviku mvaṅsaṅyogīśvara, yatanyan
42r
pada lāvan bhaṭāra, inakunya pvāvaknya pada lāvan bhaṭāra, tan vәnaṅhu-
10
milaṅakәn dukanya tәlu, ya ta mataṅnyan aśakti ṅaran iṅbuddhi yan maṅ-
kana,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[16] kuraṅtuṅgal ta vәkas ikaṅaśakti yan tәka vvalulikur, ndya gәnәpanya,
nihan yaṅmanah mabalik, apan lakṣaṇa niṅmanah mamikalpa, tap-
15
van vәnaṅmamikalpa, ya ta sinaṅguh medan ṅaranya, nāhan gәnәp nikaṅ
aśakti vvalulikur, ikā ta kabeh, nimitta niṅātmasaṅsāra apan mamaṅguh
vāsanā ikā kabeh riṅcitta/, vruh pva saṅpaṇḍita, an makveh vāsanā nikaṅ
42v
pāpa rumakәt[,] riṅcitta, ya ta mataṅnyan saṅviku, matakut ri saṅsāra lā-
van duka, hayva jәnәk ri byāpāra riṅśarīra, huvus karuhun ikaṅśīla hala
20
hayva ta ginavayakәn, apan yeka mamuhāra lara lāvan saṅsāra, aparan yo-
gya gaveyakna takarih, nyaṅtrikāya paramārtha, ulah rahayu, śabda rahayu,
ambhәk rahayu, don ikā sādhana niṅmaṅabhyāsāmbhәki bhaṭāra,
1 liṅ] em. ; li cod. 9 lāvan ] em. ; lā cod. 16 nimitta ] em. ; nimatta cod. 21 paramārtha ]
em. ; marāmārtā cod.
22 maṅabhyāsāmbhәki ] em. ; muṅābhyasāmbhәki


--- PAGE 288 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
269
Tus are the words of his teacher; that is designated as a teacher who makes
one fall into hell—a so-called disability. Tus far about the conditions of the
intellect.
Incapable of eliminating the threefold pain is as follows: those who are not
capable of extinguishing the threefold pain, for they do not constantly prac-
tice absorption. Te reason why they do not constantly practice absorption
is that they think: ‘Certainly not in this way is the Summum Bonum. Truly
the Summum Bonum is out of the reach of yoga and absorption, for it is a
notion.134 Most of all, passion, dispassion, delusion and a body do not ex-
ist in the Lord. What is [thus] the reason of [practicing] absorption toward
Him? Since He is the reason of the absorption of a man of religion and of a
leader among yogins, in order to become the same as the Lord their bodies
are claimed to be135 the same as the Lord’. [Tinking thus,] they are not able
to eliminate the three kinds of pain: this is the reason why disability is the
appellation of such an attitude.
Kumāra spoke:
[16] Deﬁcient by one are the resulting disabilities, if [they] are up to twenty-
eight. What is it that will make them complete?
[Te Lord:]
It is the altered mind-stuff. Since the characteristic of the mind-stuff is to de-
liberate, not being able to deliberate, that is designated as being insane. Tus
is what completes the twenty-eight disabilities. All of them are the cause of
the afﬂiction of the Soul, for they meet with the latent impressions, all of
them, in the mind. Te master knows that the latent impressions of the sins
are innumerable, adhering to the mind. Tat is why the religious men are
afraid of the afﬂictions and of the pains. Do not be preoccupied with the
activities in the body! Most of all, do not carry out bad conduct, for it brings
about suffering and afﬂiction. What is then ﬁtting to carry out? Here it is:
the paramount threefold body, i.e. good action, good speech, good heart.
Teir purpose is the realization of being constantly practising devotion to-
ward the Lord.
134.
Tat is, the Lord is just an idea, so any practices aiming at reaching Him are useless.
For the translation of buddhi as ‘notion, opinion, idea’ (= hiḍәp), cf. OJED (266).
135.
Te verb inaku, which among the other meanings has those of ‘claim, acknowledge,
be sure of, guarantee, declare that one is able to (ofen boastfully)’ (OJED 39), bears here a
particular force as it implies that, according to the (materialist) opponent, the practitioners
of yoga merely pretend or unrightfully claim that their bodies are the same as the one of the
Lord.


--- PAGE 289 ---
270
ii Text & Translation
nihan varahvarah bhaṭāra yeki dәlәn iṅәtiṅәtәn tәmәntәmәn, rāsāna ri ha/ti,
43r
apan iki mārga bәnәr, yapvan hana marah ri kita riṅhayu, ndān apasalahan
lavan loka maṅruddha lāvan vvaṅkabeh tālap hayva vinahil, ndan hayva
ta ginavayakәn, yan paropaghāta gumavayakәn duka niṅvaneh apan jāti
5
niṅmagave hala, hala tәkeṅśarīra, yapvan pagave hayu, hayu tәkeṅśarīra
hayu pva kahyun iṅrat, ya mataṅnyan hayvātah gaveyaknanta hala hәlәm,
ikaṅluput saṅkeṅguṇadoṣa, maryada parilobha mvaṅdoṣa, yāvat kita luput
saṅkeṅ/ lokabyāpāra, tāmrih ta gave bhakti riṅbhaṭāra, apan sira śaraṇa ni
43v
vәnaṅmaṅhilaṅakәn pāpa, sira dumeh ṅvvaṅamaṅguha suka viśeṣa, ikaṅ
10
inak tan pabalik lara, hurip tan pabalik pati, milv agave tan ilu ginave, vruh
tan kinavruhan, ya phala ni bhakti ri bhaṭāra,
kunaṅtәkap niṅmagave bhakti, ya takvānaknanta riṅsaṅguru, kāṅә-
naṅәnātah saṅsāra niṅdadi janma, si hurip makāvasānaṅpati, iki pati ṅa-
ranya, viparīta tan hana tuturnya, apan kapasuk ri tamah, vәṅi tan paka-
15
nimitta[,] tayā riṅāditya/,
44r
1 iṅәtiṅәtәn ] em. ; iṅәtәṅәtәn cod.
5 tәkeṅ] em. ; tkә cod.
6 mataṅnyan hayvātah ]
em. ; mataṅnyan āhayu atah cod.
6 hәlәm ] em. ; hmәm cod.
13 pati, iki ] em. ; pa, ikә
cod.
14 tuturnya, ] em. ; tutunya cod.
14 kapasuk ] em. ; tapasuk cod.
7 guṇadoṣa ] gunādvāsa post corr. ; nādvāsa ante corr.


--- PAGE 290 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
271
Te teaching of the Lord is as follows—that should be observed carefully and
seriously remembered: a feeling that is in the heart, for that is the true path.
If there is one who teaches you about the good, and yet he goes against public
opinion, differing from everybody,136 take [that doctrine] and do not make
objections, but do not practice it if it damages others or causes the suffering
of others, for the nature of doing bad is that the body will become bad. When
doing good, good comes into body, good is the wish of the world. Tis is the
reason why you should not do bad in the future. As long as you are out of
the reach of worldly activities, [you will be] out of the reach of both virtue
and fault, bounds of morality and propriety, excessive greed137 and sinful
behaviour. Do strive afer performing devotion toward the Lord, for He is
the resort, being able to eliminate sin. He causes the man to eventually meet
the supreme bliss, the pleasure that does not change into pain, the life that
does not change into dying, to become a creator and ceasing being created,
knowing without being known. Tese are the fruits of devotion toward the
Lord.
Further, the way to perform devotion, that should be asked by you to the
teacher. You should ponder over the suffering of becoming a human being,
the life which ends in death. Death means viparīta, there is no conscious-
ness,138 for one is made to enter into darkness, a night that is not caused by
the absence of the sun.
136.
I consider the expression apasalahan lavan loka as having identical meaning with the
Sanskrit lokaviruddha ‘contrary to (forbidden by) public opinion’ (OJED 1044), the gloss
of which seems to be given in the clause immediately following, i.e. maṅruddha lāvan vvaṅ
kabeh (where ruddha, also on account of the presence of lāvan, must then be understood as
standing for viruddha—contrast OJED’s (1564) gloss of the transitive aṅruddha: ‘to stop,
impede, hinder, obstruct, disturb; to hold, hold back, restrain, detain’). Te form apasala-
han is attested as apasalahan ujar ‘to exchange words; or: to differ in, quarrel?’ in Tantri Kā-
maṇḍaka 4.231a (OJED 1612: hayva virudāpasalahan ujar), where it is coupled with virud-
dha ‘hindering, obstructing; conﬂicting, contrary; conﬂict, quarrel’ (OJED 2293). Te form
presumably derives from salah i (OJED 1610) ‘changing into something different (cf. silih),
deviating from what is right (normal, intended, expected, etc.); wrong, at fault, mistaken,
missing (the target); missed, not attained, escaped from’.
137.
Although the word parilobha (i.e. lobha with the preverb pari) is unattested in both
Sanskrit and Old Javanese, I take it to have the same meaning as (ati)lobha.
138.
Compare the similar characterization of viparīta, here ‘obscured, occluded, confused,
blinded’, in Virāṭaparva 80.8: ‘not being conscious is viparīta, like dead is its look’ norātutur
ṅaranya viparīta sākṣāt mati pakatonan ikā.


--- PAGE 291 ---
272
ii Text & Translation
ya ta kalavasan ṅaranya, balik ni hurip lalu tan hinaknya, maṅkana tәhәr
hayvāṅhiḍәp sukaduka, kunaṅtāpan pavārte janma, kadi kveh niṅhilaṅ
kveh ni mәtu, ya ta panәṅәranta an pajanma muvah ikaṅātmā, huvus ru-
muhun ta yan hana vvaṅjātismara, meṅәt ri dadinya ṅūni, tan salah denya
5
tumuduh kavitanya ṅūni pūrvakah lāvan ṅaranya dravyanya, nahan hәnaṅ-
nyān atutur apa tan hanaṅtuduhnya ikā kabeh, lәhәṅmarekān rahayu jan-
manya muvah, maluya dadi vvaṅgumavaya/kәna bhakti ri bhaṭāra, mārga ni
44v
janma kahvata ri hayu, yan [yaṅ] dadi kita ri saṅsārātah niyata kady aṅgān iṅ
vikāra, tan pada lāvan saṅsārajanma, athavā yan paṅdadyana kәbho sapi asu
10
vәk, yeka kapәtәk tәmәn, apa tan hana gamana ni kavruha riṅheyopadeya,
vәnaṅa ta rakva ya mareṅsaṅpaṇḍita, tumakvanakәna kaliṅa ni janmanya,
mvaṅkalәpasәn ni janmanya, yan apa tekān vruha, apan huvus ikaṅjan-
manya, tan pasikәban, lәkas ta mәneṅgәlәk, apa tan kinavruhan tәka niṅ
pati,
15
sumahur saṅkumāra, /
45r
[17] aparan ikaṅvāsanā ṅaranya, sājñā bhaṭāra, varahәn ta rānak bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
1 kalavasan ] em. ; kalalavasan cod.
4 tan salah ] em. ; tan palah cod.
5–6 hәnaṅnyān ]
conj. ; hnanyan cod.
10 vәk ] em. ; vik cod.
10 heyopadeya ] em. ; heyopadaya cod.
13 pasikәban ] em. ; pasikapan cod.
13 kinavruhan ] em. ; knavruhan cod.


--- PAGE 292 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
273
Having passed through that for a long time, one goes back to life, whose un-
pleasantness is extreme. Tus, without delay, do not pay attention to plea-
sure and pain! Because of the motion of the human births, the number of
the deaths is like the number of the births; that is a proof for you that the
Soul is born again. All the more so [the fact that] there exist men endowed
with the ability of recollection of previous lives: they remember about their
past existences. Teir indications of their former origin, in a previous state
[of incarnation], and the explanation of its properties, are not wrong. Teir
silence when they remember is because there are not the instructions of all
of them.139 Te quality of their next human birth is better: they will be born
again, becoming men who will carry out devotion toward the Lord—the path
of human incarnations that will be raised to a superior quality. [But, unlike
them,] if you become in the cycle of existence [you will be] restricted,140 like
disﬁgured persons, not the same as the [other] human beings in the cycle of
existence. Or you may become a water buffalo, a cow, a dog, a pig. Tose
[beings] are really held back, for there is no chance of getting to know about
what is to be done and what is to be avoided. Suppose they would be able
to go to a master and ask for the explanation of their incarnations, and the
liberation from their incarnations. How could it be that they will under-
stand? For their human incarnations is already over, without a way to catch
it [again]. Start acting now, without hesitation!141 For the coming of death
is not known.
Kumāra spoke:
[17] Of what sort are the latent impressions? If you please, o Lord, teach your
son!
Te Lord spoke:
139.
Te meaning of this clause is unclear and my translation only tentative.
140.
Te only way to make sense of this (syntactically odd) sentence is to take niyata as
having the meaning it has in Sanskrit, i.e. ‘restrained, checked, controlled; ﬁxed, established,
sure, regular, deﬁnite’ (cf. OJED 1201) rather than in Old Javanese, i.e. ‘certain, evident,
obvious; certainly, evidently, indeed, really, in truth, sure’. Te continuation of thje passahe
makes clear that the births of disﬁgured persons and especially animals are ‘ﬁxed’, with no
possibility to improve their conditions.
141.
‘Without hesitation’ is a free translation of gәlәk, which, according to OJED (510), is
only attested as gumәlәk ‘to move in uninterrupted succession (row on row, wave on wave)’.


--- PAGE 293 ---
274
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅkarma tan dadi tan kabhukti phalanya, akveh pva kaṅkarma, ya ta
mataṅnyan makveh lvir niṅjanma, apan phala nikaṅkarma ya mamaṅun
śarīra, yan <mahala karma,> mahala śarīra, yan mahayva karma, mahayva
śarīra, mahala māyu pvekaṅkarma, vinaṅun i janma tuṅgal, ya mataṅnyan
5
asilisilih ikaṅjanma riya, huvus dadi devatā phala ni gavenya hayu, tәka
pva phala niṅgavenya hala, matәmahan ta ya tiryak, hәnti pva phala nikaṅ
tiryak, tәka ta phala ni/kaṅmānuṣa, muvah ta phala nikaṅkarma ṅūni, ya ta
45v
bhinuktinyān pamaṅun karma muvah, maṅkana ta jāti ni janma kabeh, ikaṅ
karma huvus bhinukti yekā mamәkasakәn saṅaskāra ri citta sovaṅsovaṅ, ya
10
ta mataṅnyan kadi sinurat ikaṅkarma rumakәt iriya, kady aṅgān iṅsiṅsәt i
havak ya ta magave tutur ni citta ikaṅhuvus bhinuktinya ṅūni, yan devatā,
yan mānuṣa, yan tiryak, ikaṅkarmaphala tinutnya, ya ta bhinuktinya, kapva
tekā mamәkasakәn saṅaskāra ri citta, nihan pada/nya, kady aṅgān i dyun an
46r
pinakavavan vaṅivaṅi, iṅgu kunaṅ, huvus hәnti hisi nikaṅdyun, vinasәhan
15
ta ya pinahalilaṅndān hanātah ambhә¯nya, turuṅ<hәnti> rumakәt rikā dyun,
maṅkana tekaṅvāsanā, an pamәkasakәn saṅaskāra ri citta, asiṅagә¯ṅvāsanā
ri citta, ya pinakarūpa niṅjanma, apan asiṅkinalpana niṅmanah ya tinut
niṅkarmanya maṅun janma muvah,
2 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅka cod. 5 huvus ] em. ; havus cod. 7 nikaṅ] em. ; nika cod. 10 ma-
taṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod. 10–11 siṅsәt i havak ] conj. ; siṅsik i hivak cod. 14 hәnti ]
em. ; hinti cod.
17 asiṅ] em. ; asi cod.
13–16 kady aṅgān i dyun … maṅkana tekaṅvāsanā ] Cf. Vṛh 3.6–9: kady aṅgān iṅdyun
vavadah niṅhiṅgu / huvus hilaṅhiṅgunya / ikaṅdyun inasahan pinahalilaṅ/ kavәkas ta ya
ambә¯nya / gandhanya rumakәt irikaṅdyun / ndah ya tika vāsanā ṅaranya /


--- PAGE 294 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
275
Te karma, it is impossible that its fruits are not experienced. Numerous are
the karmas, that is why the kinds of incarnated beings are numerous, for the
fruits of karma shape the body. If the karma is bad,142 the body is bad. If the
karma will be good, the body will be good. Te karma being produced by
an individual being is good or bad; that is the reason why the incarnations
succeed one another through it. Becoming a god is the fruit of one’s good
actions. As soon as the fruits of one’s doing bad arrive, one becomes an
animal. Once the fruits of the animal are ﬁnished, the fruits of a human being
arrive. Again, the fruits of the past karma, they are experienced by him as he
produces karma again. Tus is the nature of all the incarnations. Te karma
which has already been experienced produces as lef-overs impressions in
the mind, one by one. Tat is the reason why as if being written the karma
adheres ﬁrmly to it, like tightly [attached] to the body.143 Tat causes the
remembering in the mind. What has already been experienced in the past,
either as a god, a human being or an animal, the fruits of karma which go
along with it, those are experienced by him. Tose all together leave behind
impressions in the mind. For example like an earthen pot, as it was used to
contain perfumes or asafoetida. Te content of the pot is already ﬁnished.
It is thoroughly washed and puriﬁed, but its fragrance is still there, not yet
ﬁnished;144 it sticks to the pot. Likewise are the latent impressions as they
leave behind impressions in the mind. However great are the impressions
in the mind, they constitute the form of the human being, for whatever is
imagined by the mind-stuff, that is followed by its karma in shaping the next
human birth.
142.
Te addition of this clause is required to make the sentence logically sound and sym-
metrical with the one that follows. I suppose that a portion of text was lef out by mistake.
143.
Te form siṅsәt, which is the result of my emendation of siṅsik, is translated by OJED
(1781) as ‘tightness’; cf. asiṅsәt ‘tight, taut’. As for the idea of karma being ‘written’ on the
human mind or body, compare Vṛhaspatitattva 52.48–49, where the latent karmic impres-
sions karmavāsanā are said to be ‘written on the body of the Soul’ (sinuratakәn iṅavak
iṅātmā). I.D.G. Catra (p.c. June 2007) connected this concept to the Balinese expression
surat iṅlalata, referring to the fact that the destiny (or karma) of every human being is writ-
ten on his or her forefront. Tis idea is already commonly encountered in Sanskrit texts as
well as South Asian folktales (cf. Kent 2009).
144.
As turuṅ‘not yet’ does not make sense connected with the following verbal form
rumakәt, I supply the word hәnti ‘ﬁnished’ before isi nikaṅdyun ‘the content of the pot’,
which is required in order to restore the proper meaning of the sentence, referring to the
classic example of the lef-overs of the perfume adhering to the pot (cf. Part iii, pp. 470–472).


--- PAGE 295 ---
276
ii Text & Translation
[18] saṅapa sira kumavruhi janma maṅkana sājñā bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
aku huvus maṅhiḍәp saṅsāra, aneka ikaṅjanma bhinuktiku<,< vәkasan[,]
tәka ni ga/veṅku hayu, kavava tāku ri saṅpaṇḍita, vinarah tāku riṅdhar-
46v
5
maśāstra, ya ta inabhyāsaṅku, alavas pvāku gumavayakәn ikaṅdharmaśās-
tra, mati tāku, [muvah taku,] muvah tāku maṅjanma mānuṣa, atutur tāku ri
janmaṅku, muvah tāku humulunakәn śarīraṅku ri saṅpaṇḍita, vinarah tāku
ri yogadharma, ya ta inabhyāsaṅku ri rahineṅvәṅi, ya ta ginavayakәnku,
alavas aku yogīśvara, sevu tahun lavasku yogīśvara, vinava tāku riṅsvarga,
10
inaranan tāku saṅnīlalohita, tinariman tāku hanak dara, / anak bhagavān
47r
dakṣa, saṅsatī ṅaranira, māti pva saṅsatī, kavәkas tāku, maluya tāku yogī-
śvara, tīkṣṇa pva deṅkv agave samādhi, māti tāku maṅjanma tāku ri bhaṭāra,
ndatan vәtu saṅke śuklaśonita, mәtu saṅke yoga bhaṭāra kami, apan lima
kveh mami sānak, patuṅgalan i ṅaran mami, kuśika saṅmatuha, tumut ta
15
garga, lāvan maitri, saṅkuruṣya, aku saṅpātañjala ṅaranku, anak pamuṅsu,
ri saṅpañcaṛṣi, atutur tāku ri kayogīśvaran, ya mataṅnyan manambhah ri
bhaṭāra, sakahvatan ma/mi dadi sira gave caramakārya,
47v
4 vinarah ] em. ; vinarih cod. 5 inabhyāsaṅku ] em. ; na ibhyasāṅku cod. 5 gumavayak-
әn ] em. H ; mavaiyākәn cod.
6 [muvah taku,] ] em. H (silent)
10 inaranan ] em. H ;
inarinān cod. 13 ndatan ] conj. ; ndya tan H, cod. 14–15 ta garga ] em. ; kaṅGargga em.
H ; kasargga cod.
15 kuruṣya ] em. H ; purusya cod.
15 pamuṅsu ] em. H ; pamuṅgu
cod.
16 kayogīśvaran ] em. ; yogīśvaran em. H ; yośisvaran cod.
16 ya ] cod. ; yo H
(typo) 17 sakahvatan ] em. ; sakavvatan cod. 17 caramakārya ] conj. ; saṃkrәman cod. ;
caṅkriman em. H
15 anak ] hanak post corr. ; hanaka ante corr.


--- PAGE 296 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
277
[Kumāra:]
[18] O Lord, if you please, who is the Holy One who experiences such incar-
nations?
Te Lord spoke:
I myself have already experienced the cycle of existence. Te human births
that I have already experienced are many. At last, [when the fruit of] my
doing good came, I was conducted to a master. I was instructed about the
scriptures on dharma. I constantly put them into practice. I practiced the
scriptures on dharma for a long time. I died. Again I incarnated as a human
being. I remembered about my human births and again I made my body
the servant of a master. I was instructed in the scriptures on Yoga. Tose I
constantly studied, day and night; those I put into practice. I became a leader
among yogins for a long time: a thousand years was the duration of my being
a leader among yogins. I was brought to the heaven and given the name of
Nīlalohita. I was given in marriage a virgin, the daughter of the reverend
Dakṣa, whose name was Satī. Satī died. I was lef alone. I again became a
leader among yogins. My practice of absorption was fervent. I died and I
was reborn as the Lord. But [we] were not born from sperm and blood: we
were born from the yoga of our Lord,145 for we were ﬁve brothers. Each of
our names [are] one by one: Kuśika was the eldest, then followed Garga and
Maitri, Kuruṣya, [then] me, Pātañjala is my name, the youngest son among
the Five Sages. I had a recollection of the state of leader among yogins, that
is the reason why I worshiped the Lord, who was also my higher form.146
Ten He [ordered] to perform a funeral ceremony.147
145.
Te change of subject from the singular to the plural of the ﬁrst person sounds clumsy,
and suggests that a pre-existing other narrative element has been inserted in the text. Al-
though the expression bhaṭāra mami ‘our Lord’ uttered by a single speaker is a cliché in Old
Javanese literature, here kami cannot be a possessive pronoun.
146.
Tus my rendering of the abstract noun (sa)kahvatan, conjecturally emended from
sakavvatan; cf. OJED (659) s.v. hvat ‘rising to a higher state, increase, improvement’.
147.
Conjecturally emending saṅkrәman into caramakārya (cf. OJED 306 s.v.: ‘Skt carama,
ultimate, ﬁnal; caramā kriyā, ﬁnal, i.e. funeral, ceremony) ﬁnal ceremony’). Tis word, or
perhaps the equally plausible alternative caramakramaṇa*, better ﬁts in the context than the
original reading, which could be only explained as a corruption of saṅkramaṇa, a Sanskrit
word not attested in OJED meaning ‘going or coming together’ (compare caṅkrama* in
OJED 303, ‘(Skt going about, walk)’). Te form caṅkriman ‘riddle’ adopted by Hooykaas
is, to my mind, a much less convincing solution—although the word might have been the
origin of the scribe's confusion.


--- PAGE 297 ---
278
ii Text & Translation
anaku saṅkuśika, mabyakta takvanakna, kunaṅdeyanmu pәṇḍәm tāku, ma-
ṅkana liṅnira ri saṅkuśika pinet saṅgarga sira kinon maṅhañuta, luṅhā ra-
sikā, pinet saṅmaitri, sira kinon manunva, luṅhā rasikā, pinet ta saṅku-
ruṣya, sira kinon mamaṅguṅa, luṅhā rasikā, pinet tāku, mavәkas ta bha-
5
ṭāra, mabhakti anaku, kunaṅdeyanmūsapa tāku, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra, tan
asove māti ta sira<,> tәka ta saṅkuśika, matutur pavәkas bhaṭāra, inalapnira
tekaṅśava, pinәṇḍәmnira, ndāta/n paveh iṅkami kabeh, apan kami pina-
48r
kapamәkasan ri deya mami tәka ta saṅhyaṅbrahmā<,> viṣṇu, indra, yama,
baruṇa, kuvera, āgneya, nairiti, bāyabya, aiśānya, sira sumambhәsambhәr
10
i kami kalima, dadi saṅkuśika kinon mamәṇḍәma śava bhaṭāra, sampun
pinәṇḍәmnira, dinuduk sira de saṅgarga, hinañut ta sira hinalap sira de
saṅkuruṣya, sira umaṅguṅśava bhaṭāra, tan asove hinalap ta sira de saṅ
maitri, sira tānunu śava bhaṭāra, sampun gәni matәmahan avu, luṅhā ta sira
kabeh, aku juga kavәkas kumukup havu bhaṭāra, inalapku tāvunira, saṅka ri
15
bhaktiku maguru, ya ta mataṅnyan husapakәn ikaṅ/ havu ry avaku, vaneh
48v
pinaṅkuku, tan sove hilaṅta rūpaṅku pātañjala, sarūpa bhaṭāra ṅūni kālanira
hurip, trinayana caturbhuja, sphaṭika pakajanmasthāna, samaṅkana ikaṅ
rūpa pinaṅguhku, tәka kaṅdevatā kabeh mamūja ri gandhākṣatadīpādi, lā-
van kәmbhaṅsaṅkīrṇa, tәka ta saṅhyaṅananta humundaṅaku, muliha riṅ
20
abhavapāda,
1 mabyakta takvanakna ] em. ; mabhyaktakvānnakna H ; mabhyaktakvānakna cod. 1 ku-
naṅdeyanmu pәṇḍәm ] em. H ; kunaṅyenpu pāṇdim cod.
3 manunva ] em. ; maṁ-
nunvā cod.
3–4 kuruṣya ] em. ; kurusya em. H ; purusya cod.
5 mabhakti anaku ]
conj. ; missing in H ; mabhyaktin aku cod.
5 deyanmūsapa tāku ] em. H ; deyanpupasa
tārku cod.
6 inalapnira ] em. ; inalapniṅra cod.
7 pinәṇḍәmnira ] em. ; piniṇdimnira
cod.
7 paveh iṅ] em. H ; paveṅcod.
9 aiśānya ] em. ; airsānya cod.
10 mamәṇḍәma ]
em. ; mamәṇḍәm em. H ; mamiṇdәma cod.
11 pinәṇḍәmnira ] em. ; piniṇdәmnira cod.
11 dinuduk ] em. H ; danuduk cod. 12 umaṅguṅ] em. H; umguṅcod. 13 gәni ] conj. ;
ginәhә em. H ; ginhә cod. 16 kālanira ] cod. ; kālamanira em. H (sic) 17 pakajanmasthā-
na ] em. ; pakaṅjanmāstāna cod.
18 kaṅdevatā ] em. H; kadevatā cod.
18 rūpa ] rupa post corr. ; pa ante corr.
18 kaṅdevatā ] kadevatā post corr. ; kavatā ante
corr.
18 kabeh ] post corr. ; kabah ante corr.
18 mamūja ] mamujā post corr. ; mujā
ante corr.
18 gandhākṣatadīpādi ] gandākṣātadipādi post corr. ; gandākṣātadidi ante corr.
18–19 lāvan ] post corr. ; lāva ante corr.
19 ta saṅ] post corr. ; ta ante corr.
19 muliha ]
post corr. ; liha ante corr.


--- PAGE 298 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
279
‘My son Kuśika, I shall ask clearly: your task is to bury Me’. Tus were His
words to Kuśika. Garga was called. He was ordered to throw it into a river.148
He lef. Maitri was called. He was ordered to cremate. He lef. Kuruṣya was
called. He was ordered to put [the Lord’s corpse] on the funeral pyre. He
lef. I was called. Te Lord gave me instructions: ‘My son, who are devoted,
your task is to rub Me [against your body in the form of ashes]’.149 Tus
were the words of the Lord. Not long aferwards He died. Kuśika arrived.
He remembered the instructions of the Lord. Te dead body was taken by
him and buried. But he did not give [the same task] to all of us. Since we
were given instructions concerning our tasks, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Indra, Yama,
Baruṇa, Kuvera, Āgneya, Nairiti, Bāyabya and Aiśānya150 came, swooping
down on the ﬁve of us. Ten Kuśika was ordered to bury the corpse of the
Lord. Once it had been buried by him, it was extracted by Garga. It was
thrown into a river. It was taken by Kuruṣya; he made a funeral pyre for
the corpse of the Lord. Not long aferwards, it was taken by Maitri. He cre-
mated the corpse of the Lord. When it had already been burnt down, turned
into ashes, all of them lef. I was lef behind alone,151 to gather up the ashes
of the Lord. His ashes were taken by me, because of my devotion toward
the teacher. Tat is the reason why I rubbed the ashes on my body, and I
carried the remainder in my hands.152 Not long aferwards, my appearance
as Pātañjala vanished: [I assumed] the same aspect which the Lord had in
the past, when He was alive, three eyed and four armed. A jewel served as
womb. Likewise was the form that I obtained. All the divine beings came to
worship me with incense, rice-grains, lamps and so forth, as well as a mul-
titude of ﬂowers. Te venerable Ananta arrived, inviting me to go back into
the plain of non-being.
148.
For the range of meanings of the base-word hañut, cf. the relevant footnote on p. 267.
149.
Te form mabhyaktin aku, which I have emended to mabhakti anaku, is problematic.
Compare mabhyaktakvānakna occurring above (278.1), which I have emended to mabyakta
takvanakna ‘I shall ask clearly’. As for the emendation of deyanpupasa tārku to deyanmūsapa
tāku ‘your task is to rub Me [on your body in the form of ashes]’, compare 278.15, where
Pātañjala rubs the ashes of the Lord on his body (husapākәn ikaṅhavu ry avaku).
150.
Te last four items are the names of directions of space; whereas in other Old Javanese
as also in Sanskrit sources they are associated with a particular deity, here they appear to
denote the name of the deities themselves.
151.
Contrast Hooykaas (1974:169), who takes vәkas in the meaning of ‘instruction’ and
translates ‘I too had received the ﬁnal message’.
152.
Cf. OJED (1261) s.v. paṅku* (amaṅku, maṅku, pinaṅku, kapaṅku) ‘to hold or receive
on the lap (also ﬁg.: to support); to carry in both hands or arms in front of the chest’.


--- PAGE 299 ---
280
ii Text & Translation
tā vihaṅhinәnah tāku ri kahyaṅan i kahvatanku, yeki ri śrīkaṇṭhabhuvana
ṅaranya, i ruhur ni saṅhyaṅśrīkaṇṭha, alavas aku riṅabhavapāda, kinon
tāku muṅgva rike brahmāṇḍa, ya tәmahankva guru ri rat kabeh, ya mataṅ-
nyan paṅaji ikaṅdevatā kabeh ṅke riṅbrahmāṇḍa,
5
hana pva / daitya si nīlarudraka ṅaranya, ya ta kumavāśākәn ikeṅbrah-
49r
māṇḍa, gәlәṅtekaṅdevatā kabeh, de ni bhaṭārī sarasvatī maṇḍәm ri lidah-
nya, ya ta mataṅnyan salah ujar, tan matya de ni devatā daitya dānava, an
umatyanāku, yan hanānak bhaṭāra mәtu saṅke śuklaśonita ya umatyana,
maṅkana liṅnya, dadi ikaṅdevatā kabeh, mintakāsih ri saṅhyaṅkāma, um-
10
anah aku ri rāgivaśa, yatanyan atәmaheṅhyun, tā vihaṅta saṅhyaṅkāma, p-
inanahnira tāku riṅrāga, dinәlәṅku ta saṅhyaṅkāma, ri katiga / ni mataṅku,
49v
ya mataṅnyan gәsәṅavak saṅhyaṅkāma matәmahan āvu, huvus maṅkana,
tumut ta devatā kabeh, kapva ta ya humaṇḍәm anambhah, apan girigirin
an tumon i saṅhyaṅkāmān patәmahan āvu, ya ta mataṅnyan panambhah
15
umajarakәn vuvus nikaṅdaitya si nīlarudraka, pәjaha de ni tanayanku mәtu
saṅkeṅśuklaśonita, tan vihaṅpinintakasihan kabeh, kinon ta ya sumom-
aha ibunta bhaṭārī umā, ya mataṅnyan pakānak saṅhyaṅ[,] gaṇapati, lāvan
saṅbhṛṅgiriṭi, katigānaku saṅkumāra, nāha/n krama ni dadiṅku ṅūni, ma-
50r
taṅnyan avas deṅkv aṅavruha ikaṅkarmaphalān pamәkasakәn saṅaskāra ri
20
citta, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[19] ndya ta menaka irikiṅdadi janma kabeh sājñā bhaṭāra, maṅkana liṅsaṅ
kumāra,
1 kahvatanku ] em. ; kavvatanku cod. 2 śrīkaṇṭha ] em. ; śrakaṇdi cod. 3 tәmahankva ]
em. ; tәmakva cod.
5 nīlarudraka ] em. ; nәlarudrākṣā cod.
6 sarasvatī ] em. ; sarasvatә
cod.
7 salah ] em. ; palah cod.
9 mintakāsih ] em. ; mәntakāsih cod.
10 atәmaheṅ]
em. ; atәmeṅcod. 12 matәmahan āvu ] em. ; matmahan· vu cod. 13 girigirin ] em. ; giṅ-
rigirin cod.
15 nikaṅdaitya ] conj. ; nikāṅtye cod.
15 nīlarudraka ] em. ; nilarudrākṣā
cod.
17 ibunta ] em. ; lәbunta cod.
17 gaṇapati ] em. ; śaṇapāti cod.


--- PAGE 300 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
281
I was not unwilling to be placed in the heaven of the one who is my superior
form, that is in the world of Śrīkaṇṭha. Above Śrīkaṇṭha, I spent a long time
in the plain of non-being. Ten I was ordered to take place in the Egg of
Brahmā. I eventually became the teacher of the whole world. Tat is the
reason why I taught all the gods here in the Egg of Brahmā.
Tere was a Daitya, Nīlarudraka153 by name. He brought the Egg of
Brahmā under his control, and all the gods were angry. Because of the com-
ing of the goddess Sarasvatī upon his tongue, that is the reason why he spoke
by mistake:154 ‘I will not die because of a God, a Daitya or a Dānava; he who
will kill me is the son of the Lord born from sperm and blood; he will kill
me’. Tus he spoke. Ten all the gods humbly asked to Kāma the favour
of striking Me with the force of passion, so that I would fall in love. Kāma
was not unwilling, so I was shot by him with the passion. Kāma was looked
at by Me, with the third of My eyes.155 Tat is why the body of Kāma was
burnt by ﬁre and reduced to ashes. Afer this happened, all the gods came,
bowing down to the ground to pay homage, because they had been seized
with fear seeing that Kāma was reduced to ashes. Tat is the reason why they
revered [Me]. Tey reported the speech of the Daitya Nīlarudraka, that he
will die by the hand of My son born from sperm and blood. I was not un-
willing to be humbly beseeched by all [of them]. I was requested to marry
your mother, the goddess Umā. For that reason, she begot Gaṇapati and
Bhṛṅgiriṭi;156 my third son was Kumāra. Tus is the sequence of my former
incarnations, therefore my knowledge of the fruits of karma as they have lef
behind impressions in the mind is clear. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[19] If you please, o Lord, how could it be that there will be pleasure in be-
coming any kind of incarnated being? Tus spoke Kumāra.
153.
I emend the two instances of n(ә/i)larudrākṣā in the codex into Nīlarudraka, which
is the form attested in related passages of Kakavin Smaradahana. Te readings n(ә/i)larud-
rākṣā are likely to be corruptions caused by analogy with the word rudrākṣa ‘Śaiva rosary’,
which must have cam easily to the mind of a scribe of Śaiva background. Note that a Rudra
of a Great Hell bearing a similar name, Nīlasūtraka, is mentioned in Kiraṇatantra VP 8.8b.
154.
A similar event is depicted in the Old Javanese Uttarakāṇḍa (Sarga 10, p. 19), where
Sarasvatī takes place on the tongue of Kumbhakarṇa, prompting him to ask Brahmā for the
wrong boon of sleeping for a thousand years.
155.
An alternative rendering of ri katiga ni mataṅku may be ‘with my three eyes’.
156.
On the identity of Bhṛṅgiriṭi, cf. p. 370.


--- PAGE 301 ---
282
ii Text & Translation
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nora kәtah menak irikiṅjanma kabeh anaku, apa pvānuṅsuka ṅaranya, nya-
pan tahan kva liṅanta, aṅhiṅikaṅkamokṣan juga, yeki suka viśeṣa ṅaranya,
apan huvus sātmaka lāvan bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa, maṅkana liṅbhaṭāra,
5
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[20] saṅapa ta sira sinaṅguh / bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa ṅaranira,
50v
sumahur bhaṭāra,
saṅlaṅgәṅkasūkṣmanira, sira sadāśauca, alilaṅta kәneṅmala, sadāsuka
tar pakapūrvakaṅjanma pisaniṅu, tan kadi kami kabeh, sakveh saṅhyaṅ
10
aṣṭavidyeśāna, huvus karuhun saṅhyaṅbrahmā viṣṇu lāvan vatәk lokapāla,
makapūrvakaṅsaṅsāra rasikā kabeh, kunaṅsaṅka ri gә¯ṅnikaṅbhaktinira ri
bhaṭāra, lāvan tīkṣṇa ni samādhinira, nahan mataṅyan inalap muliha mareṅ
kahyaṅan, tatan maṅkana bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa, sadāsuka juga sira, ndān
makāvasāna saṅ/sāra sira, maṅjanma mānuṣa sira hәlәm, nyapan tahan kva
51r
15
liṅantānaku, tamatan hana gamananira janmānaku, apan sarvajña sira, sira
kumavruhi rat kabeh vruh sira ri maṅde saṅsāra, lāvan lāra, ndātan vәnaṅ
milagi ya, tan vruh ri deyanya, de ni maṅhilaṅakәn lāra,
lāvan hana ta caduśakti ri sira, ndya caduśakti ṅaranya, <vibhuśakti, jñā-
naśakti, kriyāśakti, prabhuśakti,
20
vibhuśakti ṅaranya, aṅavaśyaḥ,> anāveśyaḥ, aṅavaśyaḥṅaranya, tā kәneṅ
rāga, dveṣa, moha, aṅavaśyaḥṅaran ikā, anāveśyaḥṅaranya, tar kataman, tar
dadi pinakāvak sirātah makāvak sarvabhāva, / yeka anāveśyaḥṅaranya, ika
51v
ta kabeh, yekā vibhuśakti ṅaranya,
4 sātmaka ] em. ; sāttāja cod.
6 paramakāraṇa ] em. ; pamakāraṇa cod.
11 saṅsāra ]
em. ; sasāra cod.
11 gә¯ṅnikaṅ] em. ; gīnika cod.
13 sadāsuka ] em. ; sadisuka cod.
15 tamatan ] em. ; tamatatan cod.
16 ndātan ] em. ; ndāta cod.
20 anāveśyaḥ] em. ;
naṅaveśyaḥcod. 20 aṅavaśyaḥ] em. ; aṅavesyaḥcod. 21 aṅavaśyaḥ] em. ; aṅavesa cod.
21 anāveśyaḥ] em. ; anevesyaḥcod.
21 tar kataman ] em. ; takartaman cod.
22 anāve-
śyaḥ] em. ; anevesyaḥcod.


--- PAGE 302 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
283
Te Lord spoke:
Tere is no pleasure whatsoever in all the incarnated beings, my son. ‘What
is then such a thing called pleasure?’ If thus were possibly your words, [I
would reply:] nothing but liberation alone. Tat is called the supreme plea-
sure, for it is oneness with the Lord Supreme Cause. Tus spoke the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[20] Who is the one designated as the Lord Supreme Cause?
Te Lord spoke:
He whose subtlety is permanent. He is sadāśauca, pure without being ef-
fected by maculation. Constantly blissful, He does not have a former state
as a human being, unlike all of us.157 All the Eight Vidyeśas and above all
Brahmā, Viṣṇu along with the group of the Lokapālas, they had as former
existence the cycle of incarnation, all of them. And because of the greatness
of their devotion toward the Lord, and of the sharpness of their absorption,
for that reason they were taken back to the abode of the gods. Te Lord
Supreme Cause is not so: He just is eternally blissful. ‘But He ends up in the
cycle of existence:158 He will incarnate in a human being in the future’. If,
possibly, thus would be your words, my son, [I would reply:] it is not possi-
ble for Him to be born as an incarnated being, my son, for He is omniscient:
He knows the whole universe. He knows about the cause of the cycle of exis-
tence, and the suffering. It is not possible to escape that, without knowledge
about its cause, and about the way of extinguishing suffering.
And furthermore, the four powers are present in Him. What are the four
powers? Power of Ubiquity, power of Knowledge, power of Action, power of
Lordship.159
Power of Ubiquity means: not being subjected, impenetrability.160 Not be-
ing subjected means, not being affected by passion, aversion, delusion. Tat
is not being subjected. Impenetrability means: not penetrated, it is not possi-
ble that He is used as a body [by somebody else]; it is He himself that assumes
the body of all the beings. Tat is impenetrability. All of them are the power
of Ubiquity.
157.
Note that the Lord in His form embodied as Śrīkaṇṭha/Pātañjala is speaking here.
158.
Reading makāvasāna (from avasāna, OJED 168); alternatively, read makavāsana
(from vāsa, ‘abode’, OJED 2215): ‘But He has an abode in the cycle of existence’.
159.
I have added the sentence enunciating the four powers, constituting the uddeśa (cf. In-
tro., p. 23), which seems to have been skipped in the course of transmission.
160.
In emending the list of powers detailed hereafer I have relied on the parallel lists
found in related sources (cf. the following footnote).


--- PAGE 303 ---
284
ii Text & Translation
nihan taṅjñānaśakti ṅaranya, dūradarśana, dūraśravaṇa, dūrāt manana,
dūrāt masarvajñatā, śravaṇa ṅaranya, rumәṅә¯ hadoh aparәk, dūradarśana
ṅaranya, tumon adoh aparәk, athavā tā tutupan kunaṅikaṅvastu, katonā-
tah denira, dūrāt manana ṅaranya, vruh ri jñāna niṅadoh aparәk, dūrāt ma-
5
sarvajñatā ṅaranya, vruh ri kriyā kabeh, lāvan sarvavastu, nahan taṅjñāna-
śakti ṅaranya,
kriyāśakti ṅaranya, manojavitvaṃ, vikaradharmitvaṃ, / kāmarūpitvaṃ,
52r
manojavitvaṃṅaranya, adrәs ira saṅkeṅmanah, apan hana sira ri rat kabeh,
ndātan katon, vikaradharmitvaṃṅaranya, tar ginave, sirātah magave, kāma-
10
rūpitvaṃṅaranya, sakaharәpnira tәmahananira, ya pinakarūpanira, nahan
ya kriyāśakti ṅaranya,
prabhuśakti ṅaranya, abhītaḥ, akṣayaḥ, ajaraḥ, amaraḥ, <apratihataga-
tiḥ,> abhītaḥṅaranya, tar matakut, akṣayaḥṅaranya, tar pakalvaṅan, ajaraḥ
ṅaranya, tā kәneṅtuha, amaraḥṅaranya, tar kәneṅpāti, apratihatagatiḥ, tan
15
katahәnan, nāhan yaṅprabhuśakti ṅaranya, ika[,] ta / śakti bhaṭāra ika, ya
52v
kabeh, ya ta pinakapaniddha ri śakti bhaṭāra,
1 dūradarśana ] em. ; dūrādāśana cod. 2 masarvajñatā, ] em. ; masarbvagata cod. 2 ru-
mәṅә¯ ] em. ; rәmәṅә¯ cod. 2 dūradarśana ] em. ; durādāśanā cod. 3 ikaṅvastu ] em. ; ikā
vastu cod. 4 dūrāt manana ] em. ; durātmā cod. 4–5 masarvajñatā ] em. ; masarbvagata
cod.
7 manojavitvaṃ] em. ; manojñāvitvәṃcod.
7 vikaradharmitvaṃ] em. ; vikarā-
darmmatvәṃcod.
7 kāmarūpitvaṃ] em. ; kāmarapitvәṃcod.
8 manojavitvaṃ] em. ;
manovijñāvitvәṃcod.
9 vikaradharmitvaṃ] em. ; vikāradarmmatvәṃcod.
12 ajaraḥ]
em. ; arājaḥcod. 13 ajaraḥ] em. ; arajaḥcod. 16 pinakapaniddha ] em. ; pinakapanәdda
cod.
2 śravaṇa ṅaranya … hadoh aparәk ] Cf. TJ 4.6–7: dūraśravaṇa ṅaranya rumәṅә¯ śabda
hadoh aparәk / ; Vṛh 14.13–14: dūraśravaṇa ṅaranya rumәṅә¯ i śabda madoh aparәk /
2–
3 dūradarśana ṅaranya, tumon adoh aparәk ] Cf. TJ 4.6: dūradarśana ṅaranya tumon iṅ
adoh aparәk / ; Vṛh 14.15: dūradarśana ṅaranya tumon iṅadoh aparәk /
4 dūrāt manana
ṅaranya, vruh ri jñāna niṅadoh aparәk ] Cf. TJ 4.7–8: dūrātmaka ṅaranya vruh riṅambhәk
niṅadoh aparәk / ; Vṛh 14.14: dūrasarvajñā ṅaranya vruh ry ambhәk niṅmadoh aparәk /
3 athavā tā tutupan ] atāvā ta tutupan post corr. ; atāvā tutupan ante corr.
15 katahәnan ]
post corr. ; kahәnan ante corr.


--- PAGE 304 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
285
Te power of knowledge is as follows: seeing from afar, hearing from afar,
thinking from afar, being omniscient from afar.161 Hearing means: to hear
what is far and near. Seeing from afar means: to see what is far and near;
or: the objects are not covered, but can be seen by Him. Tinking from afar
means: to know (i.e. read) in the mind of [people who are] far and near.
Knowing from afar means: to know all the actions, and all the objects. Tus
is the power of knowledge.
Power of action means: swifness as of the mind-stuff, acting without phys-
ical organs, ability to assume any form at will. Swifness as of the mind-stuff
means: he is more swif than the mind-stuff, for He is in the whole universe,
but invisible. Acting without physical organs means: not being acted upon,
he is the one who acts. Ability to assume any form at will means: whatever
He desires to transform into, that will be assumed as His form. Tus is the
power of action.
Power of lordship means: fearless, undecaying, unaging, undying, going
anywhere without hindrance.Fearless means: not being afraid. Undecaying
means: without decreasing. Unaging means: not being effected by old age.
Undying means: not being effected by death. Going anywhere without hin-
drance means: [being] without resistance. Tus is the power of lordship.
Tese are the powers of the Lord. All of them serve as means to recognize162
the powers of the Lord.
161.
Tis list of powers is apparently based on the compound dūradarśanaśravaṇamana-
navijñānāni, attested in Pāśupatasūtra 1.21 and Pañcārthabhāṣya 5.46, and including Pā-
śupatasūtra 1.22: sarvajñatā. In the ‘paraphrase’ of those two sūtras found in Niśvāsamūla
7.20ab the compound is analyzed as dūrāc chravaṇavijñānaṃdarśanaṃmananaṃtathā,
which also seems to be the way the author of the Dharma Pātañjala analyzed it; the form
dūrāt masarvajñatā could be the result of the addition of the Old Javanese preﬁx ma- to
the Sanskrit base, in which the originally separate sequence °āt ma° was eventually taken
to mean ātma (note that I have emended masarbvagata occurring here and in 284.5 into
masarvajñatā, a homologization between °vijñāna of Pāśupatasūtra 1.21 and sarvajñatā of
Pāśupatasūtra 1.22). Whereas śloka 11 of the Jñānasiddhānta and the commentary thereon
separate vijñāna from mahāsarvajñatā, other Old Javanese sources agree with the Dharma
Pātañjala in that they homologize them, presenting a great deal of different readings: Saṅ
HyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 28 line 25 and Tattvajñāna 4.6–7 read dūrātmaka, while
SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 51 line 21 has dūrasarvajña; Vṛhaspatitattva 4.12–14
reads dūrasarvajña, based on the readings of mss. BD (dūrasarvajñā); AEF (durasarvvajñā);
CG (dūrāt masarvajñā); Agastyaparva p. 48.14 has dūrajñāna.
162.
Neither paniddha nor pinakapaniddha are attested in OJED s.v. siddha (1756–1757);
cf. paniddhan ‘where perfection is obtained’. For my translation of verbal forms of the roots
siddha/prasiddha as ‘ascertain, establish as true, recognize’, cf. Introduction, p. 25.


--- PAGE 305 ---
286
ii Text & Translation
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[21] liṅbhaṭāra, ṅūni, tar pāvak saṅhyaṅparamārtha, tathāpi vinuvus śak-
tinira, ndya ta rakәta ni śakti bhaṭāra paramārtha, sājñā bhaṭāra, saṅapa
katonan i kaiśvaryanira sājñā bhaṭāra, maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
5
sumahur bhaṭāra,
saṅyogīśvara sampun siddhātah, sira katonan i śakti bhaṭāra, apan sira hum-
yāpāra ikeṅrāt kabeh,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[22] tan hana pva bhaṭāra, yan ṛṣi siddha juga katonan i śakti bhaṭāra, ma-
10
taṅnyan tan hana sira, aṅhiṅśa/ktinira panәṅәran ni hananira, muṅgva <ri>
53r
saṅpaṇḍita pva śakti bhaṭāra, ya mataṅnyan tayā saṅhyaṅparamārtha yan
maṅkana,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
taha pih tan tayā saṅhyaṅparamārtha, apan tan śaktinira vinehakәnira saṅ
15
paṇḍita, ndya saṅka ni śakti saṅpaṇḍita karih, yan maṅkana liṅanta, śakti
ṅkā ri havaknira juga śakti saṅsiddha,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[23] apa dumehnya kābhibyaktā vәkasan sājñā bhaṭāra,
hasih sira bhaṭāra ri saṅyogi kaliṅanya, apa dumeh sirāsiha ri saṅyogi, saṅka
20
ri pamrihnira gave samādhi, satatā riṅrahine vәṅi, ya mataṅnyan asih / bha-
53v
ṭāra ri saṅyogi, hinilaṅakәnira ta kleśa ri śarīra lāvan lāranira, kābhibyaktā
kalāra saṅyogi vәkasan, apan ikaṅmala tumutupi śakti niṅātmā ṅūni, hi-
laṅmarekā mala, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, tan vәnaṅa taṅātmā humilaṅakәn
malanya juga, apan tan avruh lakṣaṇa niṅmala, mataṅnyan tan vruh ikaṅ
25
ātmā ri lakṣaṇa ni mala, apan ivәṅivәṅavaknya lāvan ikaṅmala,
9 yan ] em. ; han cod.
9 ṛṣi ] em. ; rәsa cod.
10 aṅhiṅ] em. ; anhiṅcod.
14 paramār-
tha, ] em. ; parāmāta cod.
19 hasih sira ] em. ; hasira cod.
19 yogi kaliṅanya ] em. ;
yogәk·liṅanya cod.
19 saṅka ] em. ; aṅka cod.
21 kleśa ri śarīra ] em. ; kleśarira cod.
22 saṅ] em. ; sa cod.


--- PAGE 306 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
287
Kumāra spoke:
[21] According to your words, earlier, the Summum Bonum does not have
a body, but nevertheless its powers are spoken about. If you please, o Lord,
what will then be that which is adhered to by the powers of the Lord Sum-
mum Bonum? With your permission, o Lord, who is the visible form of His
state of sovereignty? Tus spoke Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Te leader among yogins who has already attained perfection: he is the vis-
ible form of the powers of the Lord, for He manages this whole world.
Kumāra spoke:
[22] Ten the Lord does not exist, if only a perfect one is the visible form of
the powers of the Lord. Te reason why He does not exist is that only His
powers are the evidence of His existence. Te powers of the Lord will take
place in the master. Tat is the reason why the Summum Bonum is non-
existence, if it is so.
Te Lord spoke:
No, the Summum Bonum is not non-existence, for it is not the case that His
powers are given by Him to the master. ‘What is then the origin of the powers
of the master?’ If you would speak thus, [I would reply:] the powers there in
his body are only the powers of the realized one.
Kumāra spoke:
[23] If you please, o Lord, what is the reason why [the powers] are ﬁnally
made manifest?
[Te Lord:]
Te explanation is: the Lord has affection for the yogin. For what reason
would He have affection? Because of his exertion in performing absorption
at all times during day and night. Tat is the reason of the affection of the
Lord toward the yogin. Te impurities in his body and his suffering will be
annihilated by Him. At last, the suffering of the yogin will be made visible,
for the maculation obstructs the former powers of the Soul. ‘[In this case]
maculation has already disappeared’; if the opponent would speak thus, [I
would reply:] it is not possible that the Soul alone causes its maculation to
disappear, for it does not know the characteristics of the maculation. Te
reason why the Soul does not know about the characteristics of the macula-
tion is that its body is mixed up with the maculation.


--- PAGE 307 ---
288
ii Text & Translation
ndyāvaka niṅātmā yan kva liṅanta, yekā sinaṅguh ātmā liṅsaṅvruh ri saṅ
hyaṅśāstra, ikā taṅcitta ivәṅivәṅlāvan mala, taha pih vәnaṅa taṅātmā hu-
mila/ṅakәn malanya, yan kva liṅanta saṅpara, tanora mataṅdadyana devatā
54r
tiryak yan maṅkana, mokṣa ikaṅjanma kabeh yan maṅkana, tinonta pvekaṅ
5
janmasaṅsāra, ya ta paṅavruhananta an tan vәnaṅikaṅātmā humilaṅakәn
malanya, yapvan vәnaṅhumilaṅakәn malanya, ya mataṅnyan sih bhaṭāra ri
yogi, apan sira vәnaṅhumilaṅakәn malanira, kadi śakti bhaṭāra, maṅkana
śakti saṅsiddha, ya mataṅnyan pada śaktinira lāvan bhaṭāra vәkasan, /
sumahur saṅkumāra,
10
[24] hana ta kāri bhaṭāra, ri janmasaṅsāra,
mataṅnyan maṅkana, apan siddha samādhi saṅyogi, apan yekā kābhibya-
ktan bhaṭāra ri janma, kapaṅguhanira de saṅyogi, yan vruh riṅprayoga-
sandhi padanira, kady aṅgān i apv/y aneṅkayu, apan hamәtvakәn āvaknya,
54v
ikaṅapvy aneṅkayu, ulih niṅaṅәsә¯ atah prastāvanyān mәtu, maṅkana tekaṅ
15
miñak, tan vәtu ikā yan tan pinutәran, ika pva vastu maganal tathāpi tan vәtu
ikā yan tan inupāya ri sandhi, bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa kari tan kapaṅguha, ya
tan hanā prayogasandhi, yadyapin vruha ri prayogasandhi, ya tan gavayakna,
tan kapaṅguh atah bhaṭāra denya, ◉
1 saṅvruh ] em. ; savruh cod.
4 pvekaṅ] em. ; pvokaṅcod.
11–12 apan yekā kā-
bhibyaktan ] em. ; apan yokābhibyaktan
13 hamәtvakәn āvaknya ] em. ; hamәtvakәn·
vaknya cod.
15 pinutәran ] em. ; pinukәran cod.
16 tan ] em. ; kan cod.
4 mokṣa ] post corr. ; mākṣa ante corr.
4 tinonta ] post corr. ; tinānta ante corr.
7 yogi ]
post corr. ; yāgi ante corr.
7 malanira ] mālanira post corr. ; mālani ante corr.
7 kadi
śakti ] post corr. ; kadi kti ante corr.
7 maṅkana ] post corr. ; ṅkāna ante corr.
8 ya
mataṅnyan ] post corr. ; yataṅnyan ante corr.
8 śaktinira ] post corr. ; ktinira ante corr.
11 mataṅnyan ] post corr. ; nyan ante corr.
11 apan siddha ] apān siddā post corr. ; apā
siddā ante corr.
11–12 apan yekā kābhibyaktan ] āpan yokābhi° post corr. ; āpa yokābhi°
ante corr.
12 kapaṅguhanira de ] post corr. ; kapaṅguhani de ante corr.
12 yogi ] post
corr. ; yāgi ante corr.
12 yan vruh ] post corr. ; ya vruh ante corr.
12–13 prayogasandhi ]
prayogasandi post corr. ; prayāgasandi ante corr.
13 kady aṅgān ] kady aṅgan post corr. ;
dy aṅgan ante corr.
14 ikaṅapvy aneṅ] ikāṅāpvay āneṅpost corr. ; ikāṅāpvay ānaṃante
corr.
14 tekaṅ] post corr. ; takaṅante corr.


--- PAGE 308 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
289
‘What would be the body of the Soul?’ If you would speak thus, [I would
reply:] that which is designated as the [body of the] Soul, according to the
words of those who know the treatises, that one is the mind, mixed up with
maculation. ‘No! Te Soul is [deﬁnitely] able to cause its maculation to
disappear’. If you would speak thus, o opponent, [I would reply:] if it is so, no
one will become a god or an animal. All the beings [would be] released, if it is
so. Te cycle of rebirth is seen by you: that is the means from which you can
infer that the Soul is not able to cause its maculation to disappear. If it is able
to cause its maculation to disappear, that is because of the affection of the
Lord towards the yogin, for He is able to cause his maculation to disappear.
Te powers of the perfect one are like the powers of the Lord. Tat is the
reason why his powers are the same as [those] of the Lord in the end.163
Kumāra spoke:
[24] [If so,] the Lord is in the cycle of rebirths there is.
[Te Lord:]
Te reason why it is so is that the absorption of the yogin is perfect, for the
Lord is made manifest in a human being. It will be obtained by the yogin if
he knows about the prayogasandhi. To exemplify it: like the ﬁre which is in
the wood, for it brings forth its body. Te ﬁre which is in the wood is the
consequence of the rubbing—the cause for it to come out. Likewise, the but-
ter is not produced if it is not churned.164 Tat is a coarse substance, and yet
it is not produced if no working procedure is applied with a tool.165 Te Lord
Supreme Cause will not be met by him, if there will not be prayogasandhi.
Even though one may know about the prayogasandhi, if one does not put it
into practice, one will deﬁnitely not meet the Lord.
163.
Perhaps vәkasan ‘in the end, ﬁnally’ here refers to the time of the yogin’s death.
164.
Te form pinutәran is not attested in OJED: cf. amutәr putәran (1465) ‘a particular
kind of weapon? or: any weapon that can be ‘‘pinutәr’’?’; aputәran ‘to go around, circulate,
go in a circle; to move in all directions, travel about’. Supomo (p.c. January 2010) has sug-
gested me that the form putәran could denote a churning tool, and pinutәran would thus
mean ‘to be [worked with] a churning-tool’; this is in fact comparable to usvan ‘ﬁre drill’
and aṅusvan ‘to make ﬁre with a ﬁre drill’; according to OJED (462), usu is equal to әsә,
occurring in the preceding line as aṅәsә ‘to rub’.
165.
I translate sandhi as ‘tool’ following OJED (1650 s.v. sandhi ii) ‘a part. kind of tool?’
cf. the preceding footnote.


--- PAGE 309 ---
290
ii Text & Translation
cittavṛttinirodhākhyaḥ, yogaḥparamadurlabhaḥ,
tasmin yoge samārabdhe, svayam ātmā prakāśate
kaṅkatutur i cittavṛtti, ya sinaṅguh yoga ṅara/nya, ndān atyanta ivәhnyān
55r
inabhyāsa, apan tan harәp jāti niṅvaṅriṅgave makas, kunaṅsaṅvairāgya,
5
saṅhuvus varәg ri lāra ni janma, sira mahyun ri yoga, apan maharәp ri suka
viśeṣa ṅaranya<,> ikaṅpaṅguhan i jāti saṅhyaṅātmā ya sinaṅguh suka viśeṣa
ṅaranya, yan apa yan kapaṅguh jāti saṅhyaṅātmā, yan ginavayakәn ikaṅ
yogātah,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
10
[25] tan kagavaya ikaṅyoga kahiḍәp tah saṅhyaṅātmā de mami, tamatan
ātmā ikā liṅta, yekiṅcitta ṅaranya,
mataṅnyan sinaṅguh citta, apan ekaviṣayanya, ya mataṅnya/n citta juga ka-
55v
hiḍәp denya, sumahur saṅpāra, ndya vṛttinya, mataṅnyan citta ṅaranya, ni-
han grahaṇa, viparyaya, vikalpa, nidrā, smṛti,
15
grahaṇa ṅaranya, ikaṅcitta manut pramāṇa tәlu, pramāṇa tәlu ṅaranya,
pratyakṣa, anumāna, āgama, yekā grahaṇa ṅaranya, hayva ta vineh maṅkana
kāla ni yoga, † … † nihan taṅvikalpa ṅaranya, ikaṅjñāna maṅaliṅa varah ni
sūtra, yaḥpuruṣa kumva liṅniṅaji, nihan arthanya, tar polah saṅhyaṅātmā,
maṅkana liṅnikaṅvarah, ya tekāna liṅṅaranya, liṅnya nihan,
2 tasmin yoge ] em. ; tasmәyoga cod.
2 svayam ] em. ; svayaṃṅcod.
3 kaṅ] em. ; ka
cod.
4 vaṅ] em. ; va cod.
6 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā cod.
7 ginavayakәn ikaṅ] em. ; gi-
nayāknәkaṅcod.
9 kumāra ] em. ; kamāra cod.
10 kagavaya ] em. ; tagavaiya cod.
10 saṅ] em. ; sa cod.
12 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod.
14 grahaṇa ] em. ; gra-
hananya cod.
14 smṛti ] em. ; smutә cod.
16 yekā ] em. ; yokā cod.
18 sūtra ] conj. ;
stri cod.
19 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkā cod.
1 cittavṛttinirodhākhyaḥ] Cf. YS 1.2: yogaś cittavṛttinirodhaḥ
3 cittavratti, ya sinaṅguh
yoga ṅara/nya ] Cf. SāSam 415.6: yoga ṅaranya cittavṛttinirodha
10 tah saṅhyaṅātmā ] tah sa hyaṅatmā post corr. ; tah atmā ante corr.


--- PAGE 310 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
291
What is called the cessation of the functions of the mind is the yoga,
Śloka 2
extremely difﬁcult to achieve. Having undertaken that yoga, the Soul
itself [alone] shines forth.
What is taught about the [cessation of the] functions of the mind, that is
designated as yoga, and its difﬁculty in being practiced is extreme, for not
to want it is the nature of the man toward hard work. But the one who is
passionless, who is already full of the suffering of birth, he desires the yoga,
for he wishes the supreme pleasure. Te obtainment of the true nature of
the Soul, that is designated as the supreme pleasure. In what case is the true
nature of the Soul met? Only when yoga is performed.
Kumāra spoke:
[25] Whether yoga be performed or not, the Soul is still experienced by us.166
Tat, according to your words, is by no means the Soul: that is the mind.
[Te Lord:]
Te reason why it is designated as mind is because of its having the same
object [of perception as the Soul]. Tat is the reason why only the mind
is experienced by him. Te opponent spoke: What are its functions, from
which it is called mind? [I reply:] As follows: right perception, misconception,
imagination, sleep, remembering.
Right perception means: the mind that follows the three valid means of
knowledge. Te three valid means of knowledge are: direct perception, infer-
ence, reliable testimony of scripture. Tis is perception. Do not let it be in this
way during the time of yoga. † … †167 Imagination is as follows: the cogni-
tion explained by the teaching of the sūtra yaḥpuruṣa—thus are the words
of the treatise.168 Its meaning is as follows: the Holy Soul does not move,
thus is the content of the teaching. Tat is what is said. Its explanation is as
follows.
166.
Te ﬁrst person plural pron. mami may be here intended either as a pluralia maiestatis
or as an indication of the fact that Kumāra’s statement relates the view of a rival school
(elsewhere the opponent also refers to his view by means of the pronoun mami).
167.
Te explanation of misconception has been mistakenly lef out from the list.
168.
Te portion of text from 290.17 to 292.4 is not very clear to me. It appears that the
author was referring to Sanskrit words appearing in the commentary to the Yogasūtra he had
before his eyes, in particular to sūtra 1.9 on vikalpa. Te word puruṣa ‘man’ appears four
times in the respective section of the Bhāṣya, but never preceded by the relative pronoun
yaḥ. Here sūtra (emended from strī, a mistake that occurs also below, 292.10) might refer
to the commentary and not to the sūtra itself, where the word puruṣa does not occur.


--- PAGE 311 ---
292
ii Text & Translation
kaliṅa niṅtan polah, / kady aṅgān iṅhru hana ri taṅkulaknya, humәnaṅa ta
56r
ya, inalap pva ya saṅke taṅkulaknya, kinәnākәn i tali ni laras, tumañcәbәka
ya ri kinәnanya, humәnaṅa ta ya, maṅkana ta hәnaṅnikaṅātmā, nāhan liṅ
ni vikalpa ṅaliṅa varah, hayva ta vineh maṅkana ri kāla ni yoga, nihan taṅ
5
nidrā ṅaranya, ikā jñāna kadi hilaṅlvirnyān kahiḍәp, ndān tәhәr ya malupa
viparīta tan hana tuturnya, hayva ta maṅkana ri kāla niṅyoga, vehәn tikaṅ
jñāna dumәliṅa ri hati, sthitya hayva cañcala, hayva maṅaṅәnaṅәn, apan
hana svapnajñāna ṅa/ranya, paran inaṅәnaṅәn vaneh, ikaṅjñāna matutur i
56v
kahiḍәpanya, yekā svapnajñāna ṅaranya, hayva ta vineh maṅkana ri kāla ni
10
yoga, nihan taṅsūtra smṛti ṅaranya, ikaṅjñāna tutur ikaṅvastu bhinuktinya
ṅūni, hayva ta vineh maṅkana ri kāla niṅyoga, nahan vṛtti nikaṅcitta lima
kvehnya,
yapvan katutupan ikaṅkabeh, ya tekā sinaṅguh samādhi ṅaranya ya sin-
aṅguh samprajñāta, lāvan asamprajñāta, samprajñātātah ṅaranya, ikaṅsamā-
15
dhi tinahәnan de ni pāt lvirnyān pāt nihan, hana savitarkasamā/dhi, hana ta
57r
vicārasamādhi<, hana asmitāsamādhi, hana ānandasamādhi,>
† … † ikaṅjñāna maṅekagraha ri sūkṣma, ya vicārasamādhi ṅaranya, as-
mitāsamādhi ṅaranya, i ṅkana saṅpuruṣa kaivalya, vinotan viṣaya de niṅ
citta, ndātan cetaneya, apa vruh sirān lāra, yāvat cumetane pavot niṅcitta, ya
20
mataṅnyan hәnaṅjuga humiḍәp svacetanānira ikā saṅhyaṅātmā, ānanda-
samādhi ṅaranya, ikaṅātmā tīkṣṇa denya humiḍәp avaknya juga, ya ta ma-
taṅnyan kapaṅguh ikaṅsuka viśeṣa,
1 polah ] em. ; pālah cod.
3 nikaṅ] em. ; nikā cod.
6 yoga ] em. ; eyoga cod.
9 kahi-
ḍәpanya ] em. ; kahәpyanya cod.
10 sūtra ] conj. ; stri cod.
11 vṛtti ] em. ; vrakti cod.
14–15 samādhi ] em. ; samādә cod.
15 tinahәnan ] em. ; tәnahәnān cod.
21 tīkṣṇa ]
em. ; titsṇa cod.
4 kāla ni ] post corr. ; kā ni ante corr.
17–18 asmitāsamādhi ] asmitasamādi post corr. ;
asmitasamā ante corr.


--- PAGE 312 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
293
Te meaning of ‘not moving’ is: like an arrow that is in its quiver. It is quiet.
It is taken from its quiver. It is shot with the string of a bow. It penetrates into
that which has been hit by it. It (the arrow) becomes quiet [again]. In this
way is the quietness of the Soul. Tus is the meaning of imagination, accord-
ing to the interpretation of the teaching. Do not let it be in this way during
the time of yoga. Sleep is as follows: the form of the mind when it thinks
is as though vanished, and thereupon it becomes unconscious—viparīta, its
consciousness is not there. Do not let it be in this way during the time of
yoga. Let the mind be fully conscious in the heart. It should be ﬁxed, do not
let it be quivering, do not let it imagine, for there is the perception in a dream:
the object being thought of is another; the mind remembers experiencing it.
Tat is perception in a dream. Do not let it be in this way during the time of
yoga. Te sūtra169 remembering means: the mind that remembers the ob-
jects that were enjoyed formerly. Do not let it be in this way during the time
of yoga. Tus are the functions of the mind, ﬁve is their number.
When all of them are covered, that [state] is designated as absorption. It is
regarded to be cognitive and non-cognitive. Cognitive means: the absorption
is restrained by four. Te characteristics of the four are as follows: there is
the reﬂective absorption, there is the reﬁned reﬂective absorption, there is the
egoic absorption, there is the blissful absorption.170
† … †171 Te mind that has the subtle as its only object of perception,172
that is the reﬁned reﬂective absorption. Egoic absorption means: in that [stage]
the Soul is isolated; the external objects are carried by the mind, but they are
not sentient. Does it know about suffering? [Only] as long as it is aware of the
content of the mind. Tat is the reason why the Soul is only still, experienc-
ing its own consciousness. Blissful absorption means: sharp is the thinking
of the Soul about its body alone. Tat is the reason why the supreme bliss
will be met.
169.
Emending strī into sūtra; cf. above, fn. 167.
170.
I have added the last two items of the list by way of emendation.
171.
Te explanation of the reﬂective absorption (vitarkasamādhi) has been mistakenly
lef out from the list.
172.
I have refrained from emending ekagraha (maṅekagraha, where graha = ‘to seize’ in
the sense of ‘to perceive’) into ekāgra, as attested in the Yogasūtra. Apart from the fact that
its meaning is almost identical to ekāgra ‘ﬁxing one’s attention upon one point’, the form
ekagraha appears several times in the codex (cf. 294.6, 294.9, 294.12, 318.11) and is also
attested, as part of a similar list of characteristics of the mind, in the SaṅHyaṅHayu and
Sevaka Dharma (West Java): cf. Part iii, p. 491.


--- PAGE 313 ---
294
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅpāt ya sinaṅguh samprajñāta ṅaranya, ya/n tuṅgal yan rva, yan tәlu,
57v
yan pāt, samprajñātātah ṅaranya, yapvan tan ṅkāna ika kabeh, ya sinaṅguh
asamprajñātasamādhi ṅaranya, ikā taṅasamprajñātasamādhi pūrvaka, ikā
ta samprajñātasamādhi,
5
ya tekā dharma ni citta, hana kṣipta ṅaranya, <hana vikṣipta ṅaranya,>
hana vimūḍha ṅaranya, hana nirodha ṅaranya, hana ekagraha ṅaranya,
kṣipta ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk abvaṅumәsat mareṅkadohan, vikṣipta ṅa-
ranya, ikā ambhәk ṅunikunik<,> vimūḍha ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk lәṅәlәṅә,
nirodha ṅaranya, ika/ṅambhәk aṅhәrәt, ekagraha ṅaranya, inambhәkakna
58r
10
ri tuṅgal, nāhan kveh ni dharma niṅcitta, ikaṅkṣipta, vikṣipta, vimūḍḥa,
[vimudā,] tan pinakabhūmi ikā de niṅsamādhi, apa pinakabhūmi niṅsam-
ādhi takārih, pilih ekagraha lāvan nirodha, salah tuṅgal kunaṅya mahīṅan
iṅsamādhi, athavā karva kunaṅ,
sumahur saṅpara, vruh ta kami ikaṅsinaṅguh yoga ṅaranya, apan sa-
15
barinyān hәnaṅikaṅcitta, ya ta samādhi ṅaranya, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, tan
yogya ikaṅhәnaṅni citta, saṅguhәn yoga, a/pan hana sira yogīśvara videha
58v
lāvan[,] prakṛtilīna, videha ṅaranya, ikā saṅyogīśvara hanaṅluput saṅkeṅ
śarīra, māri makāvak ikaṅaganal, kevala ikā sūkṣmaśarīra pinakāvaknira,
prakṛtilīna ṅaranya, māri makāvak ikaṅśarīra sūkṣma, aparan pinakāvak-
20
nira, yekiṅpradhānatattva juga, rasikā ta saṅvideha lāvan prakṛtilīna, sira
ta maharәp kapaṅguhakәnnya kamokṣan, apan huvus tan hana ikaṅcitta ri
hiḍәpnya, tan vruh yar paṅher kāla,
2 ṅkāna ] em. ; maṅkana cod.
5 kṣipta ] em. ; kṣәpta cod.
6 nirodha ] em. ; niṅroda
cod. 7 kṣipta ] em. ; kṣәpta cod. 7 vikṣipta ] em. ; vikṣәpta cod. 9 inambhәkakna ] em. ;
iṅambhәklaknā cod.
10 kṣipta, vikṣipta ] em. ; kṣәpta, vikṣәpta cod.
11 samādhi ] em. ;
samādә cod. 12 ya mahīṅan ] conj. ; yehiṅaman cod. 14 saṅ] em. ; sa cod. 17 prakṛtilī-
na ] em. ; apārakṣәtilinā cod.
18 ikaṅ] em. ; әkāṅcod.
20 rasikā ] em. ; asika cod.
20 lāvan prakṛtilīna ] em. ; lāvan āprakratiliṇa cod. 21 ta ] em. ; ka cod. 21 kapaṅguha-
kәnnya ] em. ; māmaṅguḥhakәnnya cod.
22 hiḍәpnya ] em. ; hidәpnyara cod.
5–6 hana kṣipta … ekagraha ṅaranya ] Cf. SevDh (Bal.) f. 1.4–5: kasipta / muda / vikṣipta /
ekāgratā / niroda /
2 ika kabeh ] īka kabeh post corr. ; īkabeh ante corr.


--- PAGE 314 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
295
Tese four, they are designated as cognitive. When either one, two, three
or four [are present], [that state] is cognitive. If none of them is there, that
[state] is designated as non-cognitive. Te non-cognitive absorption, that is
preceded by the cognitive absorption.
Tese are the properties of the mind: there is the scattered, there is the
distracted, there is the infatuated, there is the restricted, there is the single-
minded.
Scattered is the mind that hurls about and ﬂies away into the distance.
Distracted is the perplexed mind.173 Infatuated is the bewildered mind. Re-
stricted is the restrained mind. Single-minded is to be minded on one [thing].
Tus is the number of the properties of the mind. Te scattered, distracted,
infatuated, they do not constitute stages of absorption. What do constitute
the stages of absorption, then? Tey may be the single-minded or the re-
stricted; just one of them is the boundary174 of absorption; or both of them.
Te opponent replies: ‘We [in our system] also know that which is des-
ignated as yoga, for whenever the mind is still, that is absorption’. If the op-
ponent would speak thus, [I would reply:] it is not right to designate the
stillness of the mind as yoga, for there are the lords of yogins disembodied
and those dissolved into unevolved matter. Tose disembodied are the lead-
ers among yogins who abide free from the body. Tey cease to have as body
something coarse; only the subtle body serves as their embodiment. Tose
dissolved into unevolved matter have ceased to have as embodiment the sub-
tle body. What constitutes their body? It is just the principle of unevolved
matter. Tose are the [yogins] disembodied and [the yogins] dissolved into
unevolved matter. Tey desire to obtain release, for they think that the mind
is no more. Tey do not know that they wait for Kāla.175
173.
Deriving unikunik from unәk* (OJED 2121), attested only as onәk, ‘downhearted, de-
pressed, perplexed’.
174.
Conjecturally emending yehiṅaman into ya mahīṅan; cf. OJED (631) s.v. hīṅan (1)
‘limit, ﬁxed span of time, as far as one can go, the whole distance, the end; (2) delimitation,
ordinance; (3) as far as’; nahan hīṅan iṅ‘so much, this is the whole (the content of)’; hīṅan
iṅ‘the end (conclusion) of it is […], in short, and thus, and so, and then certainly’; mahīṅan
‘to have a limit, have as limit’.
175.
Here I take kāla to mean ‘Kāla as the god of death and annihilation’ (OJED 768, s.v.
kāla 3) rather than ‘time’; another possibility may be kāla 2 ‘time as inescapable fate’. Te
point seems to be that the entities disembodied and dissolved into unevolved matter wait
in a state on unconsciousness (i.e. not being aware of the passage of time) for the end of the
current cosmic cycle, afer which a new one begins and they obtain release.


--- PAGE 315 ---
296
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅkarmā/śaya, lāvan ikaṅcittasaṅaskāra, maṅkana pva ya, mataṅnyan tan
59r
pramāṇa hәnaṅnikaṅcitta juga, apan tan hәnti ikaṅanekaviṣaya bhinuk-
tinya, tuturuṅ, apa paṅavruhananta, an tan hәnti, nihan si maṅher ri pradhā-
na, ṅuniveh ikaṅvideha, yapvan jәnәk amukti kasiddhyan, dadi sira saṅsāra
5
maṅhiḍәp muvah, yāgave cakra ṅaranya, apan tan hana śraddhādi ri sira, apa
sinaṅguh śraddhādi ṅaranya, nihan lilaṅni citta, mataṅnyan paṅguh ikaṅ
citta malilaṅ, saṅke pamrihnira maṅabhyāsā yoga satatā ri rahineṅvәṅi, /
ndya paṅavruha ri lilaṅni citta, nihan ya maitrī, karuṇā, muditā, upekṣā,
59v
ya paṅavruha ri lilaṅni citta,
10
apa sinaṅguh maitrī ṅaranya, nihan paṅavruhanya, ikaṅambhәk prayo-
janākәn davā niṅsuka saṅmanәmu suka, ya maitrī ṅaranya, karuṇā ṅara-
nya, ikaṅambhәk mrayojanākәn ikaṅmalara mamaṅguha suka, lāvan luputa
ri saṅsāra, ya karuṇā ṅaranya, muditā ṅaranya, ikaṅambhәk anumoda i saṅ
gumave hayu, ya muditā ṅaranya, upekṣā ṅaranya ikaṅambhәk humәnәṅ
15
irikaṅmaṅgave hala, nāhan / byaktanya ikaṅlilaṅri saṅyogi,
60r
ikaṅta citta malilaṅri yogi, ya maṅdadyakәn vīrya<, ikaṅvīrya ya> maṅ-
dadyakәn tutur, ikaṅtutur ya maṅdadyakәn prajñā, ikaṅprajñā ya maṅdady-
akәn samādhi, apa sinaṅguh vīrya ṅaranya, gәlәm niṅmaṅabhyāsā yoga lā-
van sādhananya, tutur ṅaranya, vruhnira ri kayogīśvaran, tambhā niṅsaṅ-
20
sāra, apan ya mārga niṅmaṅguhakәna bhaṭāra, enak pva tuturnira ri bha-
ṭāra, ya maṅdadyakәna prajñā, apa ta sinaṅguh prajñā, tәpәtnira ri kasamya-
jñānan tumuduhakәn bhaṭāra, ya mataṅnyan sira tambhāra ṅara/n i prajñā
60v
saṅyogi, mataṅnyan sira tambhāra ṅaranya, apan abәnәr tәkānya ri bha-
ṭāra, kady aṅgān iṅhru abәnәr lakunya de ni hәlār, maṅkana ta prajñā saṅ
25
yogīśvara i bhaṭāra,
1 karmāśaya ] em. ; darmmasaya cod. 3 tuturuṅ] em. ; tuturruṅcod. 4 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā
cod. 4 kasiddhyan ] em. ; kasaddyan cod. 6 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod. 7 mali-
laṅ] em. ; maliṅlaṅcod.
8 maitrī ] em. ; metrә cod.
10 paṅavruhanya ] em. ; paṅavru-
hana cod.
11 saṅ] em. ; sa cod.
12 malara ] em. ; malarra cod.
13 ya ] em. ; hi cod.
14 gumave ] em. ; gumaṅve cod.
14 humәnәṅ] em. ; umnaṁcod.
16 maṅdadyakәn ]
em. ; maṅdadikәn cod. 16–17 maṅdadyakәn ] em. ; maṅdadyikәn cod. 17–18 maṅdady-
akәn ] em. ; madadyakәn cod. 18 niṅ] em. ; nәṅcod. 19 sādhananya ] em. ; sadānvanya
cod.
20 niṅ] em. ; ni cod.
21 prajñā, tәpәtnira ] prajñā, tpәtnira post corr. ; prajñā tpәtnira ante corr.


--- PAGE 316 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
297
Te latent karmic deposits and the impressions of the mind, they are like-
wise. Te reason why the stillness of the mind alone is not evident is that
the various objects of pleasure have not ceased to be experienced, not yet.
What is that from which you can infer that they have not ceased [to be expe-
rienced]? Tey are the ones who wait in the unevolved matter, and the ones
disembodied. When they become addicted to the enjoying of supernatural
powers, they become troubled, conscious again. Tat causes the so-called
cycle [of existence], for faith and so on are not present in them. What is that
which is designated as faith and so on? Clarity of mind. Te reason why one
obtains a clear mind [is] because of one’s zealousness in performing yoga at
all times, during day and night.
What are the marks connected with the clarity of the mind? As follows:
friendliness, compassion, joy, equanimity. Tose are the marks connected
with the clarity of the mind.
What is that which is designated as friendliness? Its marks are as follows:
the mind that aims at making the pleasure of one who has [already] obtained
pleasure to last. Tat is friendliness. Compassion means: the mind that causes
one who suffers to meet pleasure, and release from the cycle of existence.
Tat is compassion. Joy means: the mind that is pleased with the one who
does good. Tat is joy. Equanimity means: the mind that can tolerate one
who does bad. Tus is the evidence that the pureness is within the yogin.
Te pure mind in the yogin, that will generate energy; energy176 will gen-
erate awareness; awareness will generate insight; insight will generate ab-
sorption. What is that which is designated as energy? Te ﬁnding constant
pleasure in performing yoga and its means of realization. Awareness means:
his knowledge about the state of leader among yogins, the cure for the cycle
of existence, for that is the path of he who meets with the Lord. His aware-
ness directed toward the Lord is smooth; that will generate insight. What is
that which is designated as insight? It is his steadfastness with regard to the
possession of the true knowledge guiding to the Lord. Tat is the reason why
the insight of the yogin is said to be simple. Te reason why it is said to be
simple is that its coming to the Lord is straight, like an arrow whose course
is straight thanks to the wings.177 Such is the insight of the leader among
yogins with regard to the Lord.
176.
Added by way of emendation.
177.
Te ‘wings’ (hәlār) here seem to refer to the stabilizers made of feathers usually put
at the ends of arrows.


--- PAGE 317 ---
298
ii Text & Translation
apa ta lvir ni samādhi saṅyogi, an sātmaka ri bhaṭāra, nihan, ◉
ātmani cetanaḥsthitaḥhiliṅikaṅcitta, kavәkas tekaṅcitta ri saṅhyaṅ
ātmā, ya tekā rumakәt ri bhaṭāra, lana pvekaṅsamādhi maṅkana kapaṅguh-
anya de saṅyogi, ya mataṅnyan kapaṅguh ikaṅkasiddhyan denira,
5
lvirnya kasiddhyan kaniṣṭha, madhya, mottama, mataṅnyan / tәlu ikaṅ
61r
kasiddhyan, apan tәlu lakṣaṇa saṅyogi, hana mṛdusambega, hana madhya-
sambega, hana tībrasambega, mṛdusambega ṅaranya, akedik denyāṅabhyāsa
yoga, lāvan sādhananya, amaṅguh ta sira kasiddhyan ndān malavas ya ka-
paṅguh, maṅkana ta saṅmadhyasambega, amaṅguh sira kasiddhyan, ndān
10
ri janmanira sovah ikān pamaṅguh, kunaṅsaṅtībrasambega, tībra tәkap-
nira gave yoga, lāvan pramāṇanya, ya mataṅnyan paṅguh, ikaṅyogasiddhi
i janmanira maṅke,
sumahur saṅkumāra, /
[26] apa ta kalәvih nikā saṅtībra, mataṅnyan maṅguh ikaṅyogasiddhi ri
61v
15
janmanira maṅke sājñā bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
hana nikaṅīśvarapraṇidhāna ri sira yekā hetunirān vavaṅpaṅguh ikaṅyo-
gasiddhi, īśvarapraṇidhāna ṅaranya, kapaṅguhan avak bhaṭāra de saṅyogi,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
20
[27] apa lakṣaṇanya paṅguh ikāvak bhaṭāra sājñā hyaṅmami,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan lakṣaṇa ni havak bhaṭāra an kapaṅguh de saṅyogi,
1 an sātmaka ] em. ; an satmāja cod. 2 ātmani cetanaḥ] em. ; ātmāna cetana cod. 4 ma-
taṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod. 7 akedik ] em. ; akdi cod. 11 ya ] em. ; ye cod. 17 hana ]
conj. ; hanәṅcod.
22 ni ] em. ; n cod.
5 kaniṣṭha, madhya, mottama, ] kaniṣṭa, madya, mottama, post corr. ; kaniṣṭa, mottama,
ante corr.


--- PAGE 318 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
299
What is the absorption of the yogin like, in order to become one with the
Lord? As follows:
Te sentience abides within the Soul—Te mind is conscious. Te mind
is lef behind by the Holy Soul. It closely adheres to the Lord. Tis kind of
absorption will be met by the yogin endlessly. Tat is the reason why the
state of supernatural prowess is met by him.
Te categories of the state of supernatural prowess are: low, middle and
superior. Te reason why the condition of supernatural prowess is threefold
is that the characteristics of the yogins are three: there is the one [practicing]
with gentle intensity; there is the one [practicing] with moderate intensity;
there is the one [practicing] with keen intensity. [Practicing] with gentle in-
tensity means: his practice of yoga and its means is little. He meets the state
of supernatural prowess, but it is met afer a long time. Te one [practic-
ing] with moderate intensity is as follows: he meets the state of supernatural
prowess, but the obtainment is in his next birth. Te one [practicing] with
keen intensity is as follows: his way of performing yoga, as well as the correct
understanding of it, is intense; that is the reason why he meets the supernat-
ural powers deriving from yoga in his present human birth.
Kumāra spoke:
[26] If you please, o Lord, what is the superiority of the one who is intense [in
performing yoga], the reason why he meets the supernatural powers origi-
nating from yoga in his present human birth?
Te Lord spoke:
Te existence in him of ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord, that is the reason
why he directly obtains the supernatural powers derived from yoga. Fixing
one’s mind upon the Lord means: the obtainment of the body of the Lord by
the yogin.
Kumāra spoke:
[27] If you please, o my Godhead, what are the characteristics of the obtain-
ment of the body of the Lord?
Te Lord spoke:
Te characteristics of the body of the Lord as it is obtained by the yogin are
as follows:


--- PAGE 319 ---
300
ii Text & Translation
kleśakarmavipākāśayaḥ, aparāmṛṣṭaḥsadaiveśvaraḥ,
ikaṅmañetanā saṅ/ yogi, tan karakәtan de ni kleśakarmavipākāśaya, maṅ-
62r
kana lakṣaṇa bhaṭāra, ar paṅguh de saṅyogi, kleśa ṅaranya, avidyā, asmitā,
rāga, dveṣa, abhiniveśa,
5
karma ṅaranya, gave hala, gave hayu, vipāka ṅaranya, tāśakti phalanya
bhinukti niṅśarīra, apan ikeṅśarīra, yeki phala niṅkarma lāvan sukaduhka,
yekā tan kahiḍәp kāla niṅyoga, ya kaliṅan iṅtan karakәtan de niṅkleśakar-
mavipākāśaya, hana ta śeṣa nikaṅkarmaphalān huvus kabhukti, ya ta sinaṅ-
guh āśaya ṅaranya, ya tik/ā magave tutur niṅcitta, yan mahala, yan mahayu,
62v
10
ya tekā tan hana ri saṅyogi, ya kaliṅan i tan karakәtan de ni āśaya, lāvan sar-
vajña ta sira, kumavruhi rāt kabeh, sarvakāryakartā sira gumavay ikaṅrāt
kabeh, tātan kalәvihan kaiśvaryanira, maṅkana lakṣaṇa bhaṭāra, [sumahur
saṅkumāra,] maṅkana taṅātmā tan karakәtan de ni kleśakarmavipākāśaya,
mvaṅsarvajña ta ya lāvan sarvakāryakartā, tatan kalәvihan kaiśvaryanya,
15
yan kva liṅa saṅpara, karakәtan maraṅātmā de niṅkleśakarmavipākāśaya,
a/pa bhyaktanya, hananyaṅmañetanā, kadi mañetanā maraṅātmā, yan kva
63r
liṅa saṅpara, tan hana ikaṅrāt kabeh, yatan hanaṅātmā, ndān sarvajña ya,
nyapan tahana kva liṅa saṅpara, tan dadi ya gumaveya duka ny avaknya,
yan sarvajña ya, kaliṅanya, dudū juga ikaṅcetanā niṅātmā
1 aparāmṛṣṭaḥ] em. ; aparamraśṭa cod. 2 mañetanā ] em. ; nānetanā cod. 7 karakәtan ]
em. ; kārākkaṇcod.
8 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkā cod.
8 karmaphalān huvus ] em. ; karmma-
palānā huvus cod.
10–11 sarvajña ] em. ; śatvajñā cod.
11 sarvakāryakartā ] em. ; sarv-
vakāryyakākta cod.
11 ikaṅ] em. ; әkāṅcod.
15 karakәtan ] em. ; kārāttān cod.
17 li-
ṅa ] em. ; li cod.
17 sarvajña ] em. ; parbvajñā cod.
18 nyapan ] em. ; nhapan cod.
19 sarvajña ] em. ; parbvajñā cod.
1 kleśa° … sadaiveśvaraḥ] Cf. YS 1.24: kleśakarmavipākāśayair aparāmṛṣṭaḥpuruṣaviśeṣa
īśvaraḥ
5–6 karma ṅaranya … bhinukti niṅśarīra ] Cf. TJ 48.4–5: karma ṅaraniṅgave
halahayu / vipāka ṅaranya / ratәṅphalanya bhinukti riṅśarīra /
8–9 hana ta śeṣa nikaṅ
karmaphalān huvus kabhukti ] Cf. TJ 48.5: āśaya ṅaranya / śeṣanya bhinukti /
3–4 asmitā, rāga, dveṣa, ] asmita, rāga, dvesa, post corr. ; asmita, dvesa, ante corr.


--- PAGE 320 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
301
Te Lord is eternally untouched by afﬂictions, karma, fruitions or la-
śloka 3ab
tent deposits.
Te yogin’s awareness [of something] is not adhered to by afﬂictions, karma,
fruitions or latent deposits. Tus are the characteristics of the Lord as they
are obtained by the yogin.
Afﬂictions means: ignorance, egoicity, attachment, aversion, strong desire.
Karma means: bad deeds, good deeds. Fruitions means: its (i.e. the karma’s)
fruits being experienced by the body are without power, for the body is the
fruit of karma along with pleasure and pain. Tose are not experienced dur-
ing the time of yoga. Tis is the explanation of the not being adhered to by
afﬂictions, karma, fruitions or latent deposits. Tere are lefovers of the fruits
of karma that have already been experienced: those are designated as latent
deposits. Tey cause the awareness of the mind. Whether bad or good, those
are not in the yogin. Tis is the explanation of not being adhered to by the
latent deposits. Further, He is omniscient: He knows the whole universe. He
is omnipotent: He creates the whole universe. His condition of sovereignty
is absolutely unsurpassed. Tus are the characteristics of the Lord.
‘Similarly, the Soul is not adhered to by afﬂictions, karma, fruitions or
latent deposits, and it is also omniscient and omnipotent; his sovereignty is
absolutely unsurpassed’. If the opponent would speak thus,178 [I would re-
ply:] Te Soul is adhered to by afﬂictions, karma, fruitions or latent deposits.
What is the evidence of this? Te existence of [the Soul’s] being aware [of
something]. ‘How could it be that the Soul is aware [of something]?’ If the
opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:] the whole universe does not
exist, if the Soul does not exist. ‘And yet, it is omniscient’. If possibly the op-
ponent were to speak thus, [I would reply:] it cannot be that it would cause
the pain of its body, if omniscient. Tat means that [in the state of omni-
science] there is certainly not the Soul’s awareness [of something] certainly
does not exist.
178.
It is apparent that the preceding sentence is uttered by the Lord, reporting the pūr-
vapakṣin’s view, and not by Kumāra. I have therefore emended the text by expunging the
sentence sumahur saṅkumāra, found in the codex, from the constituted text.


--- PAGE 321 ---
302
ii Text & Translation
[28] sājñā bhaṭāra, mevәh takari kapaṅguhan y avaknya bhaṭāra, tan paveh
juga kapaṅguha de niṅjanma yan sinәlaṅlāvan pramāda, kunaṅpavaraha
bhaṭāra ri hulun, anuṅmeman kagaveyanya, ikaṅinabhyāsanya maṅkana/,
63v
tumuntun ajñāna saṅyogi, maṅkana liṅsaṅkumāra,
5
sumahur bhaṭāra,
hananyaṅoṂkāra, ya teki nāmadheya bhaṭāra, inajarakәn[,] ri sarvaśāstra
kabeh, sira japakneṅrahina vәṅi, apa ta phala niṅoṂkāra, yan lana jinapāk-
әn, hilaṅsarvavighna denira, lāvan kapaṅguh tāvak bhaṭāra,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
10
[29] apa lvir ni vighna sājñā bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan lakṣaṇa ni vighna, ◉
byādhiḥpramādālasyaḥ, sandehaḥstyāna-m eva ca,
bhrāntijñānāviratijñānaḥ, bhūmyalābhaś ca cañcalaḥ, ◉
15
byādhi ṅara/nya, kady aṅgān iṅlārādhyātmika, vighna atekā, pramāda ṅa-
64r
ranya, tan gumavay ikaṅyoga lāvan sādhananya, alәmәh magave yoga,
1 sājñā ] conj. ; saṅelana cod.
2 sinәlaṅ] em. ; hinlaṅcod.
3 inabhyāsanya ] conj. ; in-
abhyāsana cod. 4 liṅ] em. ; li cod. 6 hananyaṅ] em. ; hanaṃnya cod. 6 teki ] em. ; tekә
cod.
6 sarvaśāstra ] em. ; sarvvasāstva cod.
13 byādhiḥpramādālasyaḥ] em. ; bhyadәh
pramādalasya cod.
13 sandehaḥ] em. ; sandeha cod.
14 bhrāntijñānāviratijñānaḥ]
conj. (unmetrical); bhrāntijñānavratatajñāna cod. (unmetrical)
14 ca cañcalaḥ] conj. ;
camacali cod. 15 byādhi ] em. ; bhyadә cod. 15 atekā, ] em. ; atekāṅcod. 15–16 ṅaran-
ya, ] em. ; ṅanya cod.
13–14 byādhiḥ… ca cañcalaḥ] Cf. YS 1.30: vyādhistyānasaṃśayapramādālasyāviratibhrān-
tidarśanālabdhabhūmikatvānavasthitatvāni cittavikṣepās te ’ntarāyāḥ


--- PAGE 322 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
303
[Kumāra:]
[28] With your permission, o Lord, the obtainment of the body of the Lord
is difﬁcult, isn’t it? [Te Lord] does not allow that a human being may obtain
[His body] if [he is] intermittently distracted and inattentivene. O Lord, may
you teach me something that is easy179 to be performed, whose continuous
practice is likewise [easy], leading to the knowledge of the yogin! Tus spoke
Kumāra.
Te Lord spoke:
Tere is: it is the syllable oṂ. Tat is the name attributed to the Lord, taught
in all the scriptures. Tat is to be murmured during day and night. What
is the fruit of the syllable oṂ, when it is murmured at all times? All the
hindrances vanish because of it, and the body of the Lord is obtained.
Kumāra spoke:
[29] With your permission, o Lord, what are the hindrances like?
Te Lord spoke:
Te characteristics of the hindrances are as follows:
Illness, inattentiveness, idleness, doubt, apathy, erroneous perception,
Śloka 5
intemperance in knowledge, inability to attain any stage [of absorp-
tion] and lack of control.
Illness is like an internal pain: that is a hindrance. Inattentiveness means not
performing yoga and its means of realization, being unwilling to perform
yoga.
179.
Te word meman in both of its occurrences in our text (cf. also 304.2) apparently
means ‘easy’. Although this is not reported among the primary meanings of the word in
OJED (675), which translates it as ‘achieving nothing, without success, in vain, not worth
the effort, of little value, without much force’, Zoetmulder has already hinted at this pos-
sibility, for on the occurrence of the word in Sutasoma 436.2 he added the remark ‘(without
much signiﬁcance > easy)’. Tat meman means ‘easy, effortless’ is conﬁrmed by the occur-
rence of meman-a (irrealis) in Jñānasiddhānta, Old Javanese commentary ad śloka 19.3, as
a translation of the Sanskrit sulabham (‘easily, without effort’) appearing in the verse (the
editor Soebadio lef the word untranslated, mistakenly deriving it from heman). A similar
case of semantic shif is evident also in Vṛhaspatitattva 47.43, where meman means ‘easy
to answer’ (cf. OJED 619, according to which heman/eman = meman). Te occurrence of
meman in a context similar to the present passage of the Dharma Pātañjala is in Rāmāya-
ṇa Kakavin 8.126, where the edition by Santoso has menak ‘easy’ against all manuscripts,
which in fact support the reading ativāhya meman ari yan ya kahyuna [Rāvaṇa speaking to
Sītā:] ‘It will be very easy to achieve, if that should be your wish’.


--- PAGE 323 ---
304
ii Text & Translation
sandeha ṅaranya, salah denya maṅhiḍәp, kunaṅtan lәpas ṅvvaṅmaṅabh-
yāsa yoga, lāvan dadin hana mārga vaneh, anuṅmeman kagavayanya, sa-
keṅrikaṅyoga, maṅkana liṅni sandehanya, vighna atah ṅaran ikā, styāna
ṅaranya, tan vәnaṅmagave yoga, makanimittaṅlәhnya mvaṅluhyan am-
5
bhәknya, bhrāntijñāna ṅaranya, vulaṅun aviratijñā/na/ṅaranya, vuruṅma-
64v
gaveya yoga, bhūmyalābha ṅaranya, tan hanaṅkaharәpnya, tan pagave yoga,
cañcala ṅaranya, iki sadākāla, tan hana kālanyān pagaveya yoga, nāhan taṅ
vighna ṅaranya, ya tikā hilaṅde niṅjapa, huvusnyān hilaṅikaṅvighna, ala-
vanlavan jñānanta, mahyun ta kita magaveya yoga, ya d≤u≥meh saṅyogi
10
maṅabhyāsa, apan phala niṅjapa ya vәnaṅmaṅabhyāsa yoga, lanā pvekā
yoga ginavayakәn, ya mataṅnya≤n pa≥mәkasakәn saṅaskāra, ikaṅsaṅaskāra
niṅyoga, ya ta magave / tutur ri saṅyogi, ikaṅtutur ya mamaṅun yoga, mu-
65r
vah, ikaṅyoga ya mamәkasakәn saṅaskāra muvah ri citta saṅyogi, lvirnyān
tәka hana gә¯ṅhana rәtrәt lvirnya, hana lima tәkanya, ndātan vuruṅmagavai
15
duhkah ri saṅyogi,
[30] pira ta kveh nikaṅkleśa, lavan apa ta lakṣaṇanya,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
nihan lakṣaṇanya ikaṅkleśa, <avidyā,> asmitā, rāga, dveṣa, abhiniveśa, sa-
maṅkana lvir ni kleśa,
20
avidyā ṅaranya, ikaṅjñāna mabalik, liṅnya, ikaṅātmā yeki tan lanā, ta/n
65v
hānāpa ta hilaṅsvabhāvanya, kunaṅikaṅpṛthivī āpah teja bāyu ākāśa, yekā
laṅgә¯, maṅkana tekaṅsinaṅguh pavitra, saṅviku mabrata yogīśvara, yekā
sinaṅguh pavitra, adva ateka, apan campur rasikā,
1 sandeha ] em. ; ṣadenaha cod. 1 salah ] em. ; halaḥcod. 5 bhrāntijñāna ] em. ; bhran-
tajñāna cod.
5 aviratijñā/na ] em. ; vratājñā/na cod.
5–6 magaveya ] em. ; magaveṅya
cod.
6 bhūmyalābha ] em. ; bhamyalabhā cod.
7 cañcala ] em. ; caṅpala cod.
8 tikā ]
em. ; tәkā cod.
8–9 alavanlavan ] em. ; alavaṅlavaṅcod.
9 mahyun ] em. ; mahyan
cod.
11 ginavayakәn ] conj. ; ghnānavayakәn cod.
16 nikaṅ] em. ; nikā cod.
16 lavan
apa ta lakṣaṇanya ] em. ; lavan· pa ta lataṇānya cod.
17 sumahur ] em. ; samahur cod.
18 abhiniveśa ] em. ; abhiṇivega cod.
20 mabalik, liṅnya ] conj. ; mabalakāh linya cod.
20 yeki ] em. ; yekә cod.
20 ta/n hānāpa ] conj. ; ha/nān apa cod.
12–13 yoga, muvah, ikaṅ] yoga, muvah, ikāṅpost corr. ; yoga, ikāṅante corr.
20 ta/n
hānāpa ] ha/nān apa post corr. ; hahanān ante corr.


--- PAGE 324 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
305
Doubt is [when] one, because of that, thinks wrongly: ‘men are not released
through constantly performing yoga, and it is possible that there is another
path, the practice of which is easy compared to yoga’. Tus are his doubts.
Tey are real hindrances. Idleness means not being able to perform yoga
because of one’s weakness and indolence of character. Erroneous percep-
tion means bewildered. Intemperance in knowledge means failing to perform
yoga. Inability to attain any stage [of yoga] means: there is nothing that his
desired by him; he does not perform yoga. Lack of control180 means: at all
times, there is no time for performing yoga. Tus are the hindrances, they
vanish because of the murmuring. Once the hindrances, which disturb your
mind, have vanished, you do wish to perform yoga! Te reason why the yo-
gin constantly practices is that the fruit of murmuring is being able to con-
stantly perform yoga. Te yoga is performed by him at all times: that is the
reason why he leaves behind the impressions. Te impressions of the yoga,
they cause the awareness within the yogin. Te awareness, it brings into ex-
istence yoga. Te yoga again causes impressions in the mind of the yogin.
As they come, they are large or restrained in their manifestation. Tere are
ﬁve kinds, they do not fail to cause pain in the yogin.
[Kumāra:]
[30] If you please, o Lord, what is the number of the afﬂictions, and what are
their characteristics?
Te Lord spoke:
As follows are the characteristics of the afﬂictions: ignorance,181 egoicity, at-
tachment, aversion, obsession. Tus are the categories of the afﬂictions.
Ignorance means: the mind is altered. It thinks: ‘Te Soul, that is not
lasting, it is good for nothing that its true nature has vanished. But the earth,
water, ﬁre, wind, space, those are beautiful! Tus, they are designated as
pure. A man of religion performing the observance of a leader among yogins,
he is designated as pure. Tat is just wrong, for he is impure.
180.
Whereas in the codex the śloka reads camacali, which I have taken to be the corrup-
tion of cañcala, the commentary reads caṅpāla. Te latter form is likely to be the result
of the substitution of ca by pa, perhaps triggered by homology with the synonym capala
‘ﬁckle, inconstant, mischievous, imprudent’ (Gonda 1973:405), ‘moving to and fro, quick,
restless, rash, uncontrolled’ (OJED 304), ‘moving to and fro, shaking, unsteady, wanton, in-
consistent; quick, swif, momentary’ (MW); compare the Javanese/Malay cәmpala ‘to show
temper, to wrangle’ (Gonda 1973:405).
181.
Added to the text by way of emendation.


--- PAGE 325 ---
306
ii Text & Translation
apa nimittanyān campur, apan kasakitan manahnira de ni brata, tan pano-
lih ri vāhyasuka, nāhan mataṅnyan campur rasikā, anuṅpavitra, anakәbi
rahayu, yekā pavitra, nahan lvir ni kleśa[,] avidyā mabalik hiḍәpnya, nihan
ta asmitā, ikaṅ/ jñāna tan vruh i papalenan i citta lāvan ātmā, apan ivәṅivәṅ
66r
5
hiḍәpnya ri karva, rāgakleśa ṅaranya, hyun, dveṣakleśa ṅaranya, melik, a-
bhiniveśa ṅaranya, ikaṅrāga lāvan dveṣa, sarәṅmaṅadәg, yekābhiniveśa ṅa-
ranya, saṅpaṇḍita pva, kahanan tantu abhiniveśa, byaktanya nihan, me-
lika sira riṅgave mamuhāra lāra lavan saṅsāra, mahyun ta sira ri kalәpasәn
maharәp ri hinak tan pabalik lāra, nahan kābhiniveśan saṅpaṇḍita, ikā ta
10
kabeh, a/vidyā anuṅbhūmi nikā, apan yekāpupulan i mithyājñāna,
66v
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[31] apa ta tambhā ni kleśa samaṅkana sājñā bhaṭāra,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
ya kәtah prastāva niṅbrata ginavayakәn de saṅyogi, apan ikaṅkleśa ma-
15
kәndil akveh ta ya, ikaṅkleśa magә¯ṅaganal tәkanya, yeki hilaṅde niṅbrata,
lāvan prāṇāyāmayoga, ikaṅhalit tәkanya, yekā hilaṅde niṅasamprajñā-
tasamādhi, ikaṅasamprajñātasamādhi, ya phala niṅsamprajñātasamādhi,
ya phala niṅpratyāhārādi, yekā / phala niṅbrata, ikaṅbrata ya phala niṅ
67r
vairāgya, ya phala niṅvarәg lāra, ikaṅlāra ṅaranya, yekā tan [ya] huvus-
20
an, apan jāti niṅmāvak juga hanaṅlāra, ikaṅmāvak yekā mavaluyvaluya ri
svarga naraka lāvan mānuṣa, maputәran atah tan pәgat, vruh pva saṅyogīś-
varān maṅkana jāti niṅmāvak<,> ya mataṅnyan pamrih magave samādhi,
yatanyan luputa saṅke cakrabhāva, maṅguhakәna kalәpasәn ṅaranya,
1 campur ] em. ; campurā cod.
2 anakәbi ] em. ; akbi cod.
3 lvir ] em. ; lvirra cod.
3 hiḍәpnya ] em. ; әdәpnya cod. 4 citta ] em. ; ci,tta cod. 5–6 abhiniveśa ] em. ; abiṇәveśa
cod. 6 sarәṅ] em. ; sarә cod. 6 yekābhiniveśa ] em. ; yekābhiṇәveṣa cod. 7 abhiniveśa ]
em. ; abәṇәveśa cod.
7 byaktanya ] em. ; byaktānyaṅcod.
9 kābhiniveśan ] em. ; ka-
bhәṇәvesan cod.
16 ikaṅ] em. ; ika cod.
16–17 niṅasamprajñātasamādhi ] conj. ; ni
sāmprajñātasāmādi cod.
17 asamprajñātasamādhi ] conj. ; sāmprajñātasamādi cod.
19–
20 huvusan ] em. ; havusan cod. 22 maṅkana ] em. ; makana cod. 23 yatanyan luputa ]
em. ; yatanyan· puputa cod.


--- PAGE 326 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
307
What is the cause of his being impure? Because his mind-stuff is suffering
because of the observances; he does not notice the worldly pleasures. Tus
is the reason why he is impure. A beautiful woman—she is pure!’. Tus
is the manifestation of the afﬂiction of ignorance; his reasoning is topsy-
turvy. Egoicity is as follows: the mind does not know about the difference
between the mind and the Soul, for its experience of the two is not clearly
distinguished.182 Te Afﬂiction of attachment means: desire. Te Afﬂiction
of aversion means: to hate. Obsession means: attachment and aversion arise
at the same time. Tis is Obsession. Te master is occupied by a constant ob-
session. Te evidence of this is as follows: he will hate the actions bringing
about suffering and tribulation. He desires release, longing for the pleasure
that does not turn into suffering. Tus is the state of obsession of the mas-
ter.183 Ignorance is the basis of all of them, for they are brought together with
the wrong knowledge.
Kumāra spoke:
[31] If you please, o Lords, what is the cure for such kind of afﬂictions?
Te Lord spoke:
Tey are the occasion for the observances to be performed by the yogin, for
the afﬂictions are thick and numerous. Te afﬂictions that are large and
coarse in their arising, those vanish by way of the observances and by the
yoga of breath-control. Tose [afﬂictions] which are subtle in their arising,
they vanish by way of the non-cognitive absorption. Te non-cognitive ab-
sorption, that is the fruit of cognitive absorption, which is the fruit of with-
drawal and so on, which are the fruit of observances. Te observances, they
are the fruits of dispassion, which is the fruit of being fed up with suffering.
Te so-called suffering, that does not have an end, for the nature of having
a body is only the fact that there is suffering. Tat which has a body, it will
come back endlessly in heaven, hell or as a human being, incessantly revolv-
ing. Te leader among yogins does know that the nature of having a body is
thus. Tat is the reason why he strives to perform absorption, so that he will
escape from the cycle of existence and obtain what is called release.
182.
Or, alternatively, emend apan ivәṅivәṅhiḍәpnya ri karva into apan ivәṅivәṅri hiḍәp-
nya karva: ‘for it thinks that the two are not distinguished’.
183.
My translation of abhiniveśa as ‘obsession’ instead of ‘will-to-live’ or ‘tenacity of mun-
dane existence’, as it is usually rendered in the translations of the Yogasūtra, is justiﬁed by
this very sentence, which appears to convey the idea that the master (paṇḍita), insofar as
he strive afer release, maintains a lower position than a lord among yogins (yogīśvara) or a
perfect one (siddha), who do not have any desire whatsoever; cf. Part iii, pp. 506–507.


--- PAGE 327 ---
308
ii Text & Translation
luput saṅke bhāvacakra, umaṅguhakәn pāvak bhaṭāra, nāhan mataṅnyan
tan palәhpalә/h, apan tәṅitәṅin riṅlāra jāti saṅyogi, ikaṅvaṅapuṅguṅbә-
67v
tah riṅlāra, padanya, kady aṅgān iṅvvaṅkәna riṅsavaṅni garagatī, tan
alāra yan avak niṅvvaṅkunaṅyan mataṅvaṅkәnā denya, alāra ikā, saṅ
5
yogi kalaran mata, apan tan enak panon iṅvaṅyan kәnā riṅsavaṅni gara-
gatī, matakut pva riṅlāra jāti saṅyogi, ya mataṅnyan pagaveṅsamādhi, saha
sādhananya, yekā pinrihnira, lāvan brata, apan ikaṅbrata yekā magәsәṅi
mala, nyaṅvvaṅmaṅәsә¯ apuy riṅkayu, tan polih ikā apuy/, yan mәlәs ikaṅ
68r
kayu, yapvan akiṅikaṅinәsә¯, irikā mәtu taṅapuy, maṅkana tekaṅśarīra
10
lāvan indriya, ṅuniveh ikaṅcitta, brata ya pamahakәṅiriya, inәsә¯ ta ya ni
prāṇāyāmādi, ya mataṅnyan hiḍәp avak bhaṭāra, yāvat kapaṅguh pāvak bha-
ṭāra, tāvat sakāma yogi,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[32] ndya ta lakṣaṇa nikaṅyogasādhana lāvan brata sājñā bhaṭāra,
15
nihan lakṣaṇa nikaṅyogasādhana, anuṅpaṅavruhantānaku, hana aṣṭāṅ-
ga ṅaranya, yama<,> / niyama, āsana<,> pratyāhāra, prāṇāyāma, dhāraṇā,
68v
dhyāna, samādhi, samaṅkana kveh niṅyogasādhana,
yama ṅaranya, ahiṅsā, satya, astainya, brahmacāri, aparigraha,
ahiṅsā ṅaranya, tan pamatimati, sahana ni prāṇi tan pātyana ikā kabeh,
20
lāvan patyanta takut ni māvak pati, mataṅnyan māhābrata ṅaran saṅviku
tan pamātimāti,
1 umaṅguhakәn ] em. ; umguhakәn cod.
3 kәna ] em. ; knaṅcod.
5 kalaran ] em. ;
kāharan cod.
7 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā cod.
7 magәsәṅi ] em. ; magsәṅә cod.
9 mәtu ] em. ;
mgu cod.
11 prāṇāyāmādi ] conj. ; prāṇayāsamādiṅcod.
11 yāvat ] em. ; tavat cod.
14 yogasādhana ] em. ; yogasadinā cod.
15 yogasādhana ] em. ; yogasamādinā cod.
19
ahiṅsā ] em. ; ahәṅsu cod.
19 prāṇi ] em. ; prāṇә cod.
19 ahiṅsā ṅaranya, tan pamatimati ] Cf. Vṛh 60-61.1: ahiṅsā ṅaranya tan pamātimāti /
3 savaṅ] post corr. ; saṅvaṅante corr. 16–17 dhāraṇā, dhyāna, samādhi ] dārana, dyanā,
samādi post corr. ; dārana, samādi ante corr.


--- PAGE 328 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
309
To escape from the cycle of existence and obtain possession of the body of the
Lord: such is the reason why [you] should not be inattentive, for the nature
of the yogin is to pay close attention to suffering. Te stupid man is tolerant
with suffering. For example: like the man who is touched by the web of a
spider; it is not painful if the body of the man [is touched], but if the eyes of
the man are touched by it, it is painful. Te yogin suffers from pain in the
eyes, for the eyes of the man that have been touched by the web of a spider
are not comfortable.184 To be afraid of suffering is the nature of the yogin.
Tat is the reason why he performs the absorption, along with its means
of realization. Tose are strived afer by him, and also the observances, for
the observances are what burns maculation. Look at the man who rubs [in
order to produce] the ﬁre with wood: the ﬁre is unsuccessful if the wood is
wet. If what is rubbed is dry, the ﬁre will come out. Likewise are the body
and the senses. And how much more the mind: observances are the means
that cause it to be dry, it is rubbed by the [yoga of] breath retention and so
on. Tat is the reason of experiencing the body of the Lord. Inasmuch as the
possession of the body of the Lord is obtained, the yogin’s desires become
fulﬁlled.
Kumāra spoke:
[32] If you please, o Lord, what are the characteristics of the means of real-
ization of yoga, and of the observances?
[Te Lord:]
Te characteristics of the means of realization of yoga are as follows. You
should know them, my son. Tere are the eight ancillaries: general com-
mandments, particular commandments, postures, withdrawal, breath-control,
ﬁxation, visualization, absorption. Tus is the number of the means of real-
ization of yoga.
General commandments are: non-violence, truth, non-thef, continence,
renunciation.
Non-violence means: not killing. Te whole of the living creatures, all of
them, they should not be killed. Further, you should kill the fear of having a
body and dying. [Tat is] the reason that the appellation of a man of religion
who does not kill is [one who carries out the] great observance (māhābrata).
184.
Te clause ‘tolerant with suffering’ renders bәtah riṅlāra, where bәtah = ‘tenacious,
stubborn, persistent, tireless; possessing staying-power, endurance, tolerance, stamina’
(OJED 238).


--- PAGE 329 ---
310
ii Text & Translation
hana ta vuvus niṅvaneh, tan apa rakvaṅvaṅmātimāti sattva, yan carva ri
saṅhyaṅ, athavā bhojana kunaṅ, maṅkana pakәnanya, tātan maṅkana saṅ
yogi, nihan vaneh tan pa/matyana sattva yan parvaṇi kāla, tatān maṅkana
69r
saṅyogi, pisaniṅu sirān pamatyana sarvasattva, ya ta sinaṅguh ahiṅsā ṅara-
5
nya, satya ṅaranya, tan madva ri bratanya, tan madva movus, tan paṅahala
ṅuniveh maliṅa mas, ya sinaṅguh astainya ṅaranya, brahmacāri ṅaranya,
yatanyan tan kalalarana samādhi, ya don iṅtan parabi, yekā brahmacāri ṅa-
ranya, aparigraha ṅaranya, tar paṅaku sarvadravya, nāhan lakṣaṇa niṅya-
mabrata,
10
<niyama ṅaranya,> śauca, santoṣa, tapa, svādhyāya, īśva/rapraṇidhāna,
69v
śauca ṅaranya, maradināvak, lāvan ambhәk hayva ta kavaśa de niṅrāga
dveṣa moha, maradina movus, hayva muvusakәn maṅlareri vaneh, mara-
dina molah, hayva makolah durbhyāsana, maradin amaṅan, hayva pinaṅ-
an ikaṅsenuhutakәn paṅanәn saṅviku, lāvan inumәnirājñāna, yekā sinaṅ-
15
guh śauca ṅaranya, <santoṣa ṅaranya,> solihanira nasi atah santoṣaknanira,
athavā solihnira tinanәm i patapanira, ya santoṣaknanira, <tapa ṅaranya,>
ikaṅindriya kabeh prihәn sakitana, ri brata lāvan sa/mādhi, yatanyan tan
70r
padadyakәn arāga yan panon viṣaya kaliṅanya, tan garjita yan paṅrәṅә¯ kiduṅ
menak, athavā paṅgәla kunaṅ, ilatnya muhārāmet pinaṅan, yan pamaṅan
20
rasa menak, nahan lacalaca niṅtapa ṅaranya, svādhyāya ṅaranya agәlәm
aṅunyakәn mantra, astāva ri bhaṭāra,
2 athavā ] em. ; atatā cod.
4 ahiṅsā ] em. ; ahiṅsu cod.
10 tapa, ] em. ; tamaḥcod.
11 hayva ta ] em. ; hayvā kā cod.
13 hayva ] em. ; hayvo cod.
13 maradin amaṅan ]
em. ; maradinaṅan cod.
13 hayva ] em. ; hayvo cod.
15 solihanira ] em. ; soliranira cod.
16 tinanәm i ] em. ; nanәm ә cod.
17 prihәn ] em. ; prahәn cod.
17 sakitana ] em. ;
saketana cod.
18 panon ] em. ; paṅnon cod.
19 athavā paṅgәla ] conj. ; atha paṅla cod.
21 mantra ] em. ; matra cod.
19 athavā paṅgәla ] atha paṅla post corr. ; atha paṅṅәśala ante corr.. Te reading is prob-
lematic, for the śu is written below the cluster ṅә as if in ligature, thus resulting in an unper-
mitted sequence. I have considered the whole cluster as an attempt to correct a mistakenly
written ṅś; if my conjecture is correct, the right sequence should have been ṅg (ś and g are
easily confused in this script)


--- PAGE 330 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
311
Tere are the words of others: ‘It does not matter that the men kill animals,
if they are to be sacriﬁced to the gods; or simply for food: such is their use’.
Te yogin should not [act] like that. [Te words of] others are as follows:
‘Animals should not be killed during the period of a change of the moon’.
Te yogin should not [act] like that: he will never kill any kind of animals.
Tat is designated as non-violence. Truth means: he is not lying about his
observances, he does not speak falsely. He does not take away [anything],
let alone eventually steal gold. Tat is designated as non-thef. Continence
means: in order that absorption will not be disturbed, that is the aim of not
having a mate. Tat is continence. Renunciation means: he does not claim
for himself material goods of any kind. Tus are the characteristics of the
general commandments.
Particular commandments are:185 purity, contentedness, penance, self-rec-
itation, ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord.
Purity means: one should have a pure body and heart—do not let it be
dominated by attachment, aversion, delusion. One should speak with purity:
do not speak words causing pain to others. One should cultivate purity: do
not be engaged in bad behaviour. One should eat purely: do not eat what is
forbidden to be eaten by the religious men, and what is to be drunk by those
who have knowledge. Tat is purity. Contentedness means:186 whatever shall
be obtained by him through begging, it will make him satisﬁed. Or, what
is obtained through that which is planted in his hermitage, that will make
him satisﬁed. Penance means:187 he should strive to inﬂict pain upon all the
senses with observances and absorption, so that he will not become full of
passion when he sees the objects of the senses. Tat is to say: he is not elated
if he listens to a pleasant song, or to an orchestra,188 [or if] his tongue causes
him to strive afer food, if the food tastes good. Tus is the beginning of the
stage of penance. Self-recitation means, never ceasing to recite mantras, and
chant hymns to the Lord.
185.
Added to the text by way of emendation.
186.
Added to the text by way of emendation.
187.
Added to the text by way of emendation.
188.
I read paṅgәla, attested in OJED (1258) as paṅgәl*, papaṅgәlan ‘(musical term) prob.:
leading? Melody played on the gamәlan, esp. when analukat’. Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 33, which
characterizes manas as experiencing pleasures such as food and drink, women, and listening
to percussion musical instruments (tabәhtabәhan), kiduṅand gupit-gupitan poems.


--- PAGE 331 ---
312
ii Text & Translation
īśvarapraṇidhāna ṅaranya, umaṅәnaṅәn kasūkṣman bhaṭāra ri rat kabeh,
ṅuniveh ry avaknira asthityana bhaṭāra, yatanyan siddhi samādhi, yekā īś-
varapraṇidhāna ṅaranya,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
5
[33] apa don ikaṅ/ niyamabratān hinanākәn, apan huvus ikaṅyamabrata
70v
mapagәh pinakabrata saṅyogi,
sumahur bhaṭāra
mekasthekaṅyamabrata, kunaṅyatanyan ta dadya de saṅyogi, ya ta ma-
taṅnyan gavayakna, ikaṅniyamabrata, nihan phala nikā tinonta, an kadadi
10
ikaṅahiṅsā de saṅyogi, tātan hana tukar phalanya, vvaṅadyan tan papraṅ[,]
vvaṅvanva i tan pataṇḍiṅan, lāvan asih tekaṅsarvasattva kabeh ri sira, nā-
han phala nikaṅahiṅsābrata, nihan ta phala niṅsatya, jātismara vruh ri
ja/nmanira ṅūni, nāhan phala ni satya yan ginaveyakәn, nihan phala niṅ
71r
astainya, tәka juga ikaṅdravya ri sira, tan ulih niṅaṅela, nāhan phala ni
15
tan paṅahalāhala, nihan ta phala niṅtan parabi, utsāha ri yoga sira, apan
tan kalalaran samādhinira, nāhan ta phala niṅbrahmacāri yan ginaveyakәn,
nihan ta phala ni jñāna tan paṅaku, siddha asiṅkāryanya,
nihan ta phala niṅniyamabrata ginave, phala ni śauca, tan sinasar mārga
de samānyajanma, mvaṅkahiḍәp ta saṅhyaṅviśeṣa denya, nahan phala ni
20
śauca yan gi/naveyakәn, nihan ta phala niṅsantoṣa, agә¯ṅsukanya tan pavor
71v
lāra, nihan ta phala niṅtapa, ilaṅikaṅrāga dveṣa moha, mvaṅikaṅkleśa
kabeh, nāhan phala niṅtapa ginaveyakәn, nihan ta phala niṅsvādhyāya,
papaṅguh sira lāvan saṅhyaṅ, saṅinastāvanira pratidina, nāhan phala niṅ
svādhyāya yan inabhyāsa,
5 apa ] em. ; apan cod. 5 ikaṅ] em. ; iṅkā cod. 9 kadadi ] em. ; tadadi cod. 10 ahiṅsā ]
em. ; ahәṅṣu cod.
10 adyan ] em. ; adyin cod.
10 papraṅ] em. ; papra cod.
12 ahiṅsā-
brata ] em. ; ahәṅsubrata cod.
12 ta phala ] em. ; ta pa cod.
16 kalalaran ] em. ; ta-
lalārān cod.
17 asiṅ] em. ; asi cod.
18 niyamabrata ginave ] em. ; yāmabrata ginive
cod.
18 sinasar mārga ] em. ; sinasargga cod.
19 nahan ] conj. ; kahana cod.
20 agә¯ṅ]
em. ; agīṅcod.
24 yan ] em. ; yav cod.


--- PAGE 332 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
313
Fixing one’s mind upon the Lord means: to visualize the invisible essence of
the Lord in the whole universe, in the ﬁrst place [to imagine] that the Lord
resides in his (i.e. the yogin’s) body,189 so that absorption is perfect. Tat is
ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord.
Kumāra spoke:
[33] What is the purpose of performing the observance of the particular
commandments? For the observance of the general commandments has
been already practiced by the yogin with ﬁrmness.
Te Lord spoke:
Te observance of the general commandments is standing in one place [with
the observance of the particular commandments]. Further, in order that [the
fruits of the general commandments] will be brought about by the yogin,
that is the reason why the particular commandments should be performed.
Teir fruits are seen by you, as follows: as non-violence is effected by the
yogin, its fruit is that there is not any quarrel. A nobleman does not ﬁght
village-dwellers who are no match for him, and all the living beings love
him. Tus are the fruits of the observance of non-violence. Te fruit of
truth is as follows: jātismara—knowledge of previous births. Tus is the
fruit of truth, when it is performed. Te fruit of non-thef is as follows: the
possessions just come to him, without being the result of [his] efforts. Tus
is the fruit of not stealing. Te fruit of not having a mate is as follows: he
exerts himself towards yoga, for his absorption is not spoiled. Tus is the
fruit of continence when it is performed. Te fruit of a mind not claiming
for oneself is as follows: whatever is carried out by him is successful.
Te fruits of the observance of the particular commandments being per-
formed are as follows. Te fruit of purity is: he is not led astray from the
proper path by people of common birth, and the holy viśeṣa is experienced
in this way. Tus is the fruit of purity, when it is performed. Te fruit of
contentedness is as follows: his pleasure is great, not mingled with pain.
Te fruit of penance is as follows: attachment, aversion and delusion are
extinguished, and also all the deﬁlements. Tus is the fruit of penance be-
ing performed. Te fruit of self-recitation is as follows: he meets with God,
the one who is praised by him with hymns everyday. Tus is the fruit of
self-recitation, when constantly practiced.
189.
It seems to me that in the present context asthityana means something like ‘to cause to
reside, to ﬁx’; cf. OJED (1823), which tentatively glosses the single occurrence of sthityana
in Harivijaya 7.5 as ‘to stabilize? take a ﬁrm stand on?’.


--- PAGE 333 ---
314
ii Text & Translation
nihan phala niṅīśvarapraṇidhāna, siddhi yogi sira, nāhan ta phala niṅniya-
mabrata yan inabhyāsa,
lumәkasa pvāṅabhyāsa yoga mvaṅsādhananya, ameta ta sira deśa ra-
hayu uṅgvananira, anuṅsalah ni vurahan/, tātan avalana ri durjana, pavitra
72r
5
ta maradin, yatanyan siddhya jñānanira, yan guhā yan gunuṅ, yan alas yan
sapiṅgir i lvah, yan ri nūsa kunaṅ, asiṅkahyunira huṅgvananira ikā kabeh,
yapvan huvusirān moṅgvan, madyusa ta sira, maśocā ta sira rumuhun mā-
camanā sira, mantranira, aghora, tatpuruṢa kunaṅhuvus maṅkana, tu-
mama ta sira ri pagavayanira yoga, yan paṅheran, yan guhā, yan umah ku-
10
naṅ, mavasuha suku, muṅgva kulvan bhaṭāra athavā kidul bhaṭāra ta kunaṅ,
manambhaha ta sira ru/muhun, liṅanira bhāva siddha saṅyogi, maṅkana
72v
liṅanira yar panambhah ri bhaṭāra, huvus maṅkana, maluṅguha ta sira, riṅ
uṅgvan uṅgvananira, yan pәtaṅ, yan sandhi, yatanyan tan agaliṅa paluṅguh-
nira, makaphala sovenirāluṅguh, yan pagave yoga, nihan lakṣaṇanira āsana,
15
hana padmāsana, <hana bhadrāsana,> hana svastikāsana, nihan lakṣaṇa niṅ
padmāsana, ikā talapakan kalih tinumpaṅakәn ri pupu kalih, ya padmāsana
ṅaranya, ikaṅtalapakan kalih, umuṅgva i sor iṅpupu kalih, ya bhadrāsana
ṅaranya, svastikāsana ṅaranya, ikā tala/pakan kalih, umuṅgva ri sәla pupu
73r
kalih, ikā lәpalәpa niṅtaṅan kiva tumumpaṅri kisapvan, tumumpaṅtekaṅ
20
atәṅәn lumahātah, ikaṅvalakaṅmabәnәra paṅadәgnya, tumәṅgә¯ tekā gulū,
hayva tumәṅa, hayva tumuṅkul, mabәnәra juga,
1–2 niṅniyamabrata ] em. ; niṅyāmabrata cod.
4 uṅgvananira ] em. ; ubhvānanira cod.
4 anuṅ] em. ; anu cod. 5 siddhya ] em. ; sidya cod. 7 moṅgvan ] em. ; moṅvan cod. 7–
8 mācamanā sira, ] conj. ; macaman·rā cod. 9 paṅheran ] em. ; padeheran cod. 9 guhā ]
em. ; gutā cod.
13 uṅgvan ] conj. ; gvān cod.
13 pәtaṅ] em. ; pṭa cod.
14 lakṣaṇanira
āsana ] em. ; lakṣamaṇanira sakṣaṇā cod.
16 tinumpaṅakәn ] em. ; numpaṅakәn cod.
16 kalih ] em. ; lalih cod.
17 umuṅgva ] em. ; umuṅgū cod.
19 kisapvan ] em. ; kәsap-
van cod.
20 tumәṅgә¯ ] em. ; tәmәṅgә¯ cod.
1 īśvarapraṇidhāna ] isvara,praṇidānā cod. 19–20 tumumpaṅtekaṅatәṅәn ] tumumpaṅ
tekāṅṅatәṅәn post corr. ; tumumpaṅṅatәṅәn ante corr.


--- PAGE 334 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
315
Te fruit of ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord is as follows: he is a perfect yo-
gin. Such are the fruits of the observance of the particular commandments,
when constantly practiced.
Desiring to start constantly practicing yoga and its means of realization,
he (the yogin) should look for a good place. His place should be somewhere
far from confusion. It should not be a place for evil people, pure and neat.
In order that his mind will become perfect, his abode should be any of these
places: either a cave, or a mountain, or a forest, or close to a river-bank,
or on an island, whatever is his desire. When he has already settled down,
he should take a bath, ﬁrst purifying himself and then rinsing his mouth.
His mantra is: aghora, or: tatpuruṢa. Having ﬁnished [to mutter] thus,
he enters the place to perform yoga, either at a penance-grove,190 a cave or
a house. He should wash the feet and take position to the west or to the
south of the Lord.191 At ﬁrst he shall worship. Te words of the yogin will
be: bhāva siddha. In this way should be his words when worshipping the
Lord. Having ﬁnished thus, he should take a seat. He should position him-
self in what will be his place either when it is dark or at twilight. In order
that his posture will not be wobbly and result in a long time of sitting when
performing yoga, the characteristics of his postures are as follows: there is
the padmāsana, there is the bhadrāsana,192 there is the svastikāsana.
Te characteristics of the padmāsana are as follows: both of the foot-
soles should be laid on the two thighs. Tat is the padmāsana. Both of the
foot-soles will take place below the two thighs: that is the bhadrāsana. Te
svastikāsana means: both of the foot-soles will take place in the space be-
tween the two thighs; the palm of the lef hand lies on the lap, the right
should lie facing upwards. Te back should stand straight. Te neck stands
immovable. Do not let it look up, do not let it bend down. It should be just
straight.
190.
Having emended the nonsensical padeheran into paṅheran, glossed in OJED (620)
as ‘waiting-place, dwelling-place’, which is easy easy to justify on account of the similarity
between e, d and ṅ. I believe that this expression does not simply refer to an usual dwelling-
place (note that a house is mentioned just mentioned below) but is connected to the base
er (also attested as air haji, her haji), ‘a category of persons in the service of the king (vatĕk
i jro), prob. of a religious character’ (OJED 468). In Nāgarakṛtāgama 75.2 (OJED 1545) it
occurs besides the word karәṣyan, a penance-grove for ascetics of the Ṛṣi group.
191.
For a discussion of the import of the term bhaṭāra in this context, cf. Part iii, p. 518.
192.
Added to the text by way of emendation.


--- PAGE 335 ---
316
ii Text & Translation
ikaṅmata dәlәṅtuṅtuṅniṅiruṅ, athavā mәrama juga kunaṅ, ikaṅilat ya
humәlәtana ikaṅhuntu i sor i ruhur moga lambe midәma, nāhan lakṣaṇanira
āsana,
huvusnyan menak paluṅguhnira, gavayanira tekaṅpratyāhārayoga, ikaṅ
5
indriya vatәkәn saṅkeṅviṣayanya, mata hayva vineh / manona, taliṅa hayva
73v
vineh marәṅә¯, iruṅhayva vineh maṅambuṅa, kulit hayva vineh mahiḍәpa
panas tis, tutuk hayva vineh maṅśabda, taṅan hayva vineh maṅgamәla<,>
suku hayva vineh lumakva, nāhan de niṅamatәk indriya, manah hayva vineh
mamikalpa, buddhi hayva vineh maṅaṅәnaṅәn, ahaṅkāra hayva vineh ṅakva,
10
nāhan de niṅamatәk tryantahkaraṇa, huvusnyān asimpәn ikā kabeh, ya ta
mataṅnyan hәnaṅikaṅcitta humidәṅ, tan kva tan kva, ekatva citta[,] saṅ
hyaṅātmā ya ta sinaṅguh yoga ṅaranya, hu/vusnyān ekatva, gavayәnira ta
74r
prāṇāyāmayoga, nihan lakṣaṇa nikaṅprāṇāyāmayoga, recaka, kumbhaka,
pūraka, vinәtvaknekaṅbāyu saṅke rīruṅ, sanehsaneh hayva drәs sahiṅan iṅ
15
maṅisәp bāyu riṅiruṅ, kuñci ta muvah, ekatva jñānanira, salavas ni makuñci,
sabhāgyān masove ya, apan anya svajātinira yatan inabhyāsa, ◉
ikaṅkuñci uttama, tan pamәtvakәn bāyu humәnaṅjuga tan pāmbhәk-
an, apan cetanā saṅhyaṅātmā, yekā hiniḍәpnira, tan pāntara, ya ta mataṅ-
nyan hilaṅikā bāyu ri sa/ṅkanya, apan tan cinitta cetanā de saṅhyaṅātmā,
74v
20
padanya, kady aṅgān i vve tumitisi vatu tinunvan mapaṇḍe sәdәṅmabaṅ
hilaṅjuga inisәp ni vatu mapanas, maṅkana taṅbāyu hilaṅde ni citta niṅ
ātmā, ya mataṅnyan viśeṣa ikā ekatvakuñci,
1 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā cod.
1 dәlәṅ] em. ; dәlә cod.
1 tuṅtuṅ] em. ; tuṅtu cod.
2 moga ]
conj. ; māgo cod. 3 āsana ] em. ; sakṣaṇā cod. 5 indriya ] em. ; indrayā cod. 6 marәṅә¯ ]
em. ; marәṅhә cod.
7 tutuk ] em. ; kututuk cod.
9 maṅaṅәnaṅәn ] em. ; maṅaṅәnāṅәnā
cod.
10 tryantahkaraṇa ] em. ; tyantahkāraṇa cod.
10 asimpәn ikā ] em. ; asәmpәn әkā
cod. 13 nihan ] em. ; tlas cod. 13 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkā cod. 13 kumbhaka ] em. ; kurm-
bhaka cod. 14 vinәtvaknekaṅ] em. ; vinitvāknәka cod. 15 maṅisәp ] em. ; maṅәsәp cod.
15 salavas ] conj. ; sakavaṅcod.
16 svajātinira ] conj. ; svajātini cod.
16 inabhyāsa ]
em. ; inabhya cod. 17 humәnaṅ] em. ; humәna cod. 18 hyaṅ] em. ; hya cod. 19 cinit-
ta ] conj. ; citta cod.
19 hyaṅ] em. ; hya cod.
21 maṅkana ] em. ; maṅka cod.
17–18 ikaṅkuñci uttama … pāmbhәkan ] cf. NR 43.1: muvah ana ta kuñci len saṅkerika,
umәnәṅtan pāmbәkan juga ; TJ 44.22: muvah hana ta kuñcī lyan sakerika / tan pamәtvakәn
vāyu


--- PAGE 336 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
317
Te eyes look attentively at the tip of the nose, or they should be just closed.
Te tongue should separate the teeth below and above; hence, the lips will
be half closed. Tus are the characteristics of the postures.
His posture being already comfortable, the yoga of withdrawal should be
his task. Te faculties should be drawn away from their domains. Do not
let the eyes see. Te ears, do not let them hear. Te nose, do not let it smell.
Te skin, do not let it perceive hot and cool. Te mouth, do not let it speak.
Te hands, do not let them touch. Te legs, do not let them walk. Tus is the
way to drawing out the faculties. Te mind-stuff, do not let it deliberate. Te
intellect, do not let it reﬂect. Te self-awareness, do not let it relate [things]
to one’s I. Tus is the way of drawing out the threefold internal organ. When
he has already put all of them away, that is the reason why the mind is quiet,
standing still, not like this and not like that.193 Te oneness of mind and
Soul, that is designated as yoga. When unity has been accomplished, the
yoga of breath-control becomes his task. Te characteristics of the yoga of
breath-control are as follows: recaka, kumbhaka, pūraka. Te breath should
be brought forth from the nose, gently, do not let the whole extent of in-
haling the breath in the nose be quick. Ten there is the key [that stops the
breath].194 His mind is [in a state of] oneness. As long as [the breath] is
locked, it is fortunate that it lasts for a long time, for its nature if [it is] not
mastered is different.195
Te supreme key [that stops the breath] does not expel the breath. It
is only quiet, without breathing. For the sentience of the Soul, that is what
should be reﬂected upon by him, without interruptions. Te reason why the
breath disappears to where it came from is that the sentience of the Soul is
not reﬂected upon. For example, like the water that is dropped on a heated
stone when working on metal while it is red: it just disappears, sucked out
by the hot stone. Likewise the breath disappears by way of the sentience196
of the Soul. Tat is the reason why the key [that stops the breath and leads
to] oneness is special.
193.
OJED (945) glosses tan kva as ‘(prob.) uncertain, in two minds (‘‘not so’’, ‘‘different’’,
cf. hade)’. A mind that is ‘not thus, not thus’ or ‘not this way or that way’ seems to mean a
mind that is is not ﬁlled by dichotomizing thoughts or sensations.
194.
kuñci ‘key’ in the text; cf. OJED (972) ‘(Skt kuñcikā, key) key; (a term in yoga, prob.:)
the stopping of breathing’; cf. below, p. 522.
195.
Te translation of the sentence is tentative.
196.
Tus I translate citta here, for the usual meaning of ‘mind’ does not make sense in
this context.


--- PAGE 337 ---
318
ii Text & Translation
ndan yan huvus ikaṅrecaka, kumbhaka, pūraka, apa ta phala nikaṅprāṇāyā-
mayoga, yan kva liṅanta, hilaṅtamah niṅati lavan ikaṅcitta denya, ya ma-
taṅnyan hilaṅcitta saṅyogi denya, apan ikaṅmanah lavan aṅәnaṅәn aneka-
paranya, umәsat makalis / tan kavәnaṅtinimpal, yāvat makveh inaṅәnaṅәn
75r
5
ri kāla ni yoga, tāvat vuruṅsamādhi saṅyogi, matakut pva saṅyogi vuruṅa
samādhinira, ya mataṅnyan pinrih ginaveyakәn ikā prāṇāyāma, apan ikaṅ
umuṅkus ikaṅcitta humәnaṅ, apan ikaṅprāṇāyāma atah dumehnya humә-
naṅa ikaṅaṅәnaṅәn makveh, lāvan әsә¯ tekā dhāraṇayoga de ni prāṇāyāma,
apa sinaṅguh dhāraṇayoga ṅaranya, ikaṅcitta ekatva atәguh ri svadeśa-
10
nya, yan ri hati, yan riṅyava niṅśarīra kunaṅ, yan i citta niṅātmā ku/naṅ,
75v
yan asthitya ekatva bhaṭāra kunaṅ, ikaṅta paṅekagraha nikaṅcitta salah
tuṅgal ya sinaṅguh dhāraṇā<,>
dhyānayoga ṅaranya, † … † ◉
nihan ta samādhiyoga ṅaranya † hayva citta hilaṅprayatnanya ri vvah
15
niṅhatәmāhan apa, tәhәr cittanya senā ri bhaṭāra sira katәkәn ika dhyāna
saṅyogi ṅkāna † ta ya sinaṅguh samādhi<,> tahan pih ni aṣṭāṅga ya pinaka-
sādhana saṅyogi an paṅguh ikaṅkamokṣan, ikā taṅaṣṭāṅga, ya pinakaba-
hiraṅga de niṅasamprajñāta,
1 kumbhaka ] em. ; kumvāka cod.
4 umәsat ] em. ; umsut cod.
7 umuṅkus ] em. ;
umaṅkus cod.
7 humәnaṅ] conj. ; meṅhā cod.
10 śarīra ] em. ; sari cod.
11 yan
asthitya ] conj. ; asthitya yan cod.
15 tәhәr ] conj. ; taharā cod.
16 ṅkāna ] conj. ; ṅkāṅ
cod.
16 tahan ] em. ; kahan cod.
16 aṣṭāṅga ] em. ; hasdaga cod.
16–17 pinakasādha-
na ] em. ; panakāsadyana cod.
18 asamprajñāta ] conj. ; samprajñāta cod.
8 aṅәnaṅәn ] post corr. ; aṅәnanaṅәn ante corr.
10 citta niṅātmā ku/naṅ] post corr. ;
citta ku/naṅante corr.
11 paṅekagraha ] post corr. ; paṅakagraha ante corr.
16 yogi ]
post corr. ; yāgi ante corr.


--- PAGE 338 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
319
‘But, when the recaka, kumbhaka and pūraka have been completed, what is
the fruit of the yoga of breath-control?’ If you would speak thus, [I would
reply:] Te darkness of the heart and the mind vanish by way of that. Te
reason why the mind of the yogin vanishes by way of that, it is that the mind
and the thoughts have various targets. Tey ﬂy away unscathed, they cannot
be cut off. As long as many thoughts are produced during the time of yoga, so
long the absorption of the yogin remains unsuccessful. Te yogin is afraid
that his absorption could fail. Te reason why the performing of breath-
control is strived for, is that it wraps up the mind [so that] it becomes still,
for precisely the breath-control is the reason why the many thoughts will
become still. Furthermore, the yoga of ﬁxation ripens due to breath-control.
What is designated as yoga of ﬁxation? Te mind [in the state] of oneness
is stable in its own place; whether in the heart, outside of the body,197 or in
the thought198 of the Soul. Or the oneness of [everything with] the Lord will
become ﬁxed. One of the instruments of the single attention199 of the mind
is designated as ﬁxation.
Te yoga of visualization means † … †.200
Te yoga of absorption is as follows: do not let the mind lose its effort
toward vvah of transforming into something; thereupon its mind † senā to-
ward the Lord is what the visualization of the yogin reaches, †201 that state is
designated as absorption. It is not the case that the eight ancillaries are used
by the yogin as means to obtain liberation. Te eight ancillaries, they are
used as external ancillaries by the non-cognitive [absorption].202
197.
Emending riṅyava niṅsari into riṅyava niṅśarīra; compare Kakavin Dharma Śūnya
61b: tan siddhāṅvikva yan tan vruh i kahanan ikā mvaṅsarāt lan śarīra / tattvanyan sāra
śarīra ri yava ri dalәm niṅavak yeka tonton ‘Te man of religion will not become perfect
if he does not know about the state of him, the whole universe and the body; he should
visualize the elements of the essence of the body outside or inside of the body’.
198.
Tus I render citta, as per OJED (332, s.v. citta 2), which in this context makes better
sense than ‘mind’.
199.
ekagraha in the text, which I consider to be the same as ekāgra: cf. above, fn. 171.
200.
Te explanation of this item has apparently been lost in the course of transmission.
201.
Tis passage appears to be corrupted; furthermore, it is likely that in deﬁning ab-
sorption it refers to something contained in the deﬁnition of the preceding ancillary (visu-
alization), which is irretrievable. Te nonsensical senā as well as vvah (which in the present
context cannot mean ‘fruit’ as it denotes, unlike phala, a physical object only) are likely to
be corruptions.
202.
I have emended samprajñāta into asamprajñāta by comparison with the Yogasūtra,
on purely doctrinal grounds.


--- PAGE 339 ---
320
ii Text & Translation
nāhan de saṅyogi maṅabhyāsa prastāvanyān kapaṅguh i/kaṅkasiddhyan, ya
76r
pinakasādhananirān pagave yoga muvah, prastāvanyan vәnaṅsakāmakāma,
yapvan hilaṅikaṅsahajamala, irikeṅta sirān pada lāvan bhaṭāra, sumahur
saṅpara, aṅel dahat ta ṅaran ikātah, apan tan paṅdadyakәna kamokṣan ikaṅ
5
yoga inabhyāsa, yan kva liṅta, aparan ya pva madadyakәnaṅkamokṣan, [yan
kva liṅtana,] sumahur saṅśaivaka, dīkṣā juga madadyakәn kamokṣan saṅ
tamatan sarvajña ta kaṅātmā, yan dīkṣā juga paṅhiḍәpa saṅpara, ikaṅtaṅ
ātmā yan tan sarvajña tan sinaṅgu/h ikā kamokṣan, tapvan kadadi ikā ka-
76v
sarvajñan iṅātmā de ni dīkṣā juga, ya mataṅnyan bhyāsanātah, ikaṅyoga
10
samādhi mәne gәlәk,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[34] ndya ta lakṣaṇa nikaṅkasiddhyan, kapaṅguh de saṅyogi,
1 prastāvanyān ] em. ; prastāvinyan cod.
5 inabhyāsa ] em. ; nebyasā cod.
6–7 kamo-
kṣan saṅtamatan ] em. ; kamokṣan· paṅtamataṃn cod.
8 tan sarvajña ] em. ; tin part-
vajñā cod.
9 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod.
12 ta lakṣaṇa ] em. ; kahakṣamā cod.


--- PAGE 340 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
321
Tus is the way of the yogin to constantly practice the cause of obtaining
the supernatural powers. Tose are then used by him as means to perform
yoga. Te cause of being able to [obtain anything] according to one’s desire is
when innate maculation has vanished: it is in that [state] that he is the same
as the Lord. Te opponent replies: ‘Te explanation of that is very problem-
atic, for the yoga, if constantly practiced, will not bring about liberation’. If
you speak thus, [I reply:] what is that which can bring about liberation? A
[Saiddhāntika] Śaiva203 replies: ‘Only initiation brings about liberation’. [I
answer:] Te Soul is one who is absolutely not omniscient. If the opinion
of the opponent would be that initiation only [brings about liberation], the
Soul, when not omniscient, is not regarded as [being in the state of] libera-
tion. Te state of omniscience of the Soul is by no means coming into being
by means of initiation alone. Tat is the reason why yoga and absorption
should be constantly practiced, now and continuously.204
Kumāra spoke:
[34] What are the characteristics of the state of supernatural powefulness
obtained by the yogin?
[Te Lord:]
203.
I understand saṅśevaka (as spelled in the manuscript) to correspond to saṅśaivaka,
denoting a follower of (Saiddhāntika) Śaivism. On the other hand, one may read saṅse-
vaka, which OJED (1753) glosses as ‘(Skt dwelling in; using; revering; worshipping; servant,
attendant, follower; worshipper) service, audience; serving, attending; servant, attendant’.
Whereas the Sanskrit meaning of ‘worshipper, follower’ might be acceptable here, the word
sevaka is, to the best of my knowledge, only attested in Old Javanese Tuturs and Tattvas
as part of the compound sevakadharma ‘(Skt) fulﬁlling the duty of serving or worship-
ping’ (OJED 1754); cf. Tattvajñāna 1.1; Jñānasiddhānta 22.1 (which Soebadio 1971:221
translates as ‘him who serves according to his duty’, in the sense of dharmasevaka); several
instances in SaṅHyaṅHayu; cf. also the West Javanese and Balinese Tuturs titled Sevaka
Dharma (a Balinese version of which is, intriguingly enough, spelled Śevaka Dharma in
Weck 1976:94–95). Te fact that the position maintained by the speaker, namely that only
initiation (dīkṣā) bestows liberation, is too reminiscent of that of an ‘orthodox’ Śaivasid-
dhāntin to be attributed to an unspeciﬁed ‘worshipper’. Indeed the term Śaiva (or Śeva) in
Old Javanese sources usually refers to a follower of mainstream Śaivasiddhānta, as opposed
to other sects of Śaivism such as the Pāśupatas, Bhairavas, etc. It is possible that the form
śevaka is the result of a conﬂation between śeva and sevaka caused by scribal confusion; in
Sanskrit the sufﬁx -ka, besides functioning as a diminutive or pejorative, is ofen used as a
mere expletive.
204.
For this translation of gәlәk, cf. above, fn. 141.


--- PAGE 341 ---
322
ii Text & Translation
nihan iṅәtaknanta, ikaṅmadadyakәna kasiddhyan i saṅyogi, ikaṅdhāra-
ṇa, dhyāna, samādhi, rumakәt ta ri ṅkāna, yatanyan ilu saṅyogi matәma-
han pṛthivī, apan ikaṅdhāraṇā, dhyāna, samādhi rumakәt ri tattva tuṅ-
gal, ya sinaṅguh saṅyama ṅaranya, anuṅpinakasādhana saṅyogi magave
5
/ kasiddhyan, ndān denirānaṅyama, saṅke sor denirānaṅyama, apan tan
77r
dadi ikaṅtattva i ruhur sinaṅyama, † hanya tapa † ikaṅtattva i ruhur<,> ya
ta mataṅnyan saṅke sora atah denirānaṅyama rumuhun, yapvan mahyun
sira tumirva śakti ni siṅha, ikaṅsiṅha sinaṅyama śaktinya, yāpvan mahyun
sira tumirva śakti ni garuḍa, sinaṅyamanira śaktinya, yapvan mahyun sira
10
vruha ri tәka ni pātinira, ikaṅdharmādharma sinaṅyamanira, aparan ikaṅ
dharmādharma ṅaranya, ikaṅgave hala mvaṅgave hayu, a/pan phala ni
77v
dharmā<dharma> ya magave hurip mvaṅśarīra, yapvan hәnti phala nikaṅ
dharmādharma sinaṅyamanira, tәka pātinira yan maṅkana, yapvan mahyun
sira tan kәne lapa vәlәkaṅ, hanāmṛta i sor niṅguruṅguruṅan, yekā saṅya-
15
manira, yapvan mahyun sira tumona saṅsiddha lāvan devatā, ikaṅbāyu
si udāna saṅyamanira, hana ta jyotih mәtu saṅkeṅvunvunan ya pinaka-
suluhnira an ton saṅsiddha lāvan devatā, yapvan mahyun sira katona du-
milah avaknira, ikaṅbāyu si samāna ya saṅyamanira, yapvan mahyun sira
/ gumәsәṅanāvaknira, kady aṅgān iṅbhasmaśeṣa, mamәkasaknāvva jugā-
78r
20
vaknira, ikaṅbāyu si samāna ya saṅyamanira,
3 dhāraṇā ] em. ; dāranya cod.
5 denirānaṅyama ] em. ; deniṅrānaṅyāma cod.
9 garu-
ḍa ] em. ; garada cod.
13–14 mahyun sira ] em. ; māhyun· pira cod.
14 vәlәkaṅ] em. ;
vlikaṅcod.
15 mahyun sira ] em. ; māhyun pira cod.
15 siddha ] em. ; siddya cod.
16 jyotih ] em. ; jotih cod.
16 vunvunan ] em. ; vunvun cod.
17 ton saṅ] em. ; ton paṅ
cod.
18 saṅyamanira ] em. ; śayāmanira cod.
18 mahyun sira ] em. ; māhyun pira cod.


--- PAGE 342 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
323
You should keep in mind the following, that which will bring about the state
of supernatural prowess of the yogin. Fixation, visualization and absorp-
tion, are joined together in that state, so that also the yogin transforms into
earth,205 for ﬁxation, visualization and absorption are joined together in a
single principle. Tat is designated as restraint, which is used as a means of
realization by the yogin to cause the state of supernatural prowess. As for his
way of effecting restrain, from below is his way of effecting restrain, for it is
not possible for the upper principles to be restrained. † hanya tapa †206 the
upper principles, that is the reason why his way of effecting restrain will at
ﬁrst be from below. If he wishes to imitate the power of a lion, the power of
the lion is taken as the object of restraint. If he wishes to imitate the power
of Garuḍa, its power is taken by him as the object of restraint. If he wishes
to know about the moment of his death, the right-and-wrong are taken by
him as an object of restraint. What is the right-and-wrong? Te bad deeds
and the good deeds, for the fruits of right-and-wrong, those shape the life
and the body. If the fruits of right-and-wrong stop being taken as an object
of restraint by him, if so, his death comes. If he wishes not to be affected by
hunger and thirst, there is the nectar of immortality below the throat-veins:
that is his object of restraint. If he wishes to see the Siddhas and the Gods,
the udāna breath is his object of restraint. Tere is a light which comes out
from the top of the cranium: that is used as his torch for seeing the Siddhas
and the Gods. If he wishes that his body assumes the appearance of a blazing
ﬁre, the samāna breath is his object of restraint. If he wishes to destroy his
body by ﬁre, like bhasmaśeṣa207—his body will have as rests ashes only—the
samāna breath is the object of his restraint.
205.
Te meaning of this clause is not completely clear to me. It may refer to the fact
that the yogin by way of restraint (saṅyama) can become of the same substance as the earth
(pṛthivī); however, we do not expect the treatment of such a possibility at this point but later
on, when the application of saṅyama to the ﬁve elements is treated (cf. below, 324.8–326.7).
206.
I have not found any plausible interpretation or emendation of this sequence of words.
To read anya (or anyat) ‘other, and, furthermore’ + tapa ‘penance’ does not help us to retrieve
a meaning that ﬁts in the context.
207.
OJED, on the basis of the single occurrence in Agastyaparva 376.23, provides the
meaning of ‘the supernatural power to remain in the form of ashes only?’; I think that here
the term has a more general meaning, which is in fact glossed in the Old Javanese clause
following it.


--- PAGE 343 ---
324
ii Text & Translation
yapvan mahyun sira tan kapәtәka riṅ† … † lāvan vvai, ikā bāyu si udāna
ya saṅyamanira, yapvan mahyun sira tan katona, saṅyamanira panon i vvaṅ
vaneh, mvaṅsaṅyamanirāvaknira tan katona, yapvan mahyun sira maṅlaya-
ṅa riṅākāśa, saṅyamanirāvaknira mahaṅana kadi kapuk, huvusira mahaṅan
5
vәnaṅta sira mamapah i punti, athavā muṅgvaṅsavaṅniṅgaragati kunaṅ,
ya ta paṅavruhanira haṅan havaknira, huvu/s maṅkana, saṅyamanira ta pa-
78v
sāmānyan havaknira lāvan ākāśa, yan aharәp sira sadāyauvana, ikaṅpañ-
camahābhūta saṅyamanira sakatuṅgal, ikaṅpṛthivī saṅyamanira rumuhun,
yapvan huvus ikaṅpṛthivī sinaṅyama denira, byakta sirālvat tan kanin de
10
niṅkhaḍga, tan rәmәk avaknira yan tibeṅvataṅ, athavā tibeṅkaraṅjuga sira,
[ikāṅkaruṅjuga sira] ikaṅkaraṅjuga rәmәk, avaknira dṛḍha, nahan paṅ-
avruhan riṅhalah niṅpṛthivī denira, saṅyamanira tekaṅvve, tan kapәtәk
sira yan kalәbu riṅbañu, / sinaṅyamanira teja, paṅavruhan i nira yan alah
79r
ikaṅteja denira, tan gәsәṅsira yan katunu riṅapuy, sinaṅyamanira ikaṅ
15
bāyu, paṅavruhanirān alah ikaṅbāyu denira, † … † halah ikaṅbāyu yan
maṅkana, lāvan tan katub sira de niṅaṅin, ṅuniveh huripnira tan vikāra,
ya mataṅnyan dīrghāyuṣa saṅyogi,
1 mahyun sira ] em. ; mahyun pira cod.
1 vvai ] em. ; vvaṃcod.
2 mahyun sira ] em. ;
mahyun pira cod.
6–7 pasāmānyan ] conj. ; pasamandān cod.
7 lāvan ākāśa ] em. ;
lāvan· kāṣa cod.
8 saṅyamanira ] em. ; sayamānira cod.
9 sinaṅyama ] em. ; saṅyāma
cod.
10 rәmәk ] em. ; ramәt cod.
11 rәmәk ] em. ; rәmәt cod.
11 dṛḍha ] conj. ; srada
cod. 13 sinaṅyamanira ] em. ; sināyamānirā cod. 14 gәsәṅ] em. ; gsә cod. 14 katunu ]
em. ; katuru cod.


--- PAGE 344 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
325
If he desires not to be pressed down by † … † and water,208 the udāna breath
is the object of his restraint. If he wishes not to be seen, his object of restraint
are the eyes of other men, and also, his object of restraint is his body as if not
being seen. If he wishes to ﬂy in the sky, his object of restraint is his body
becoming light like kapok. Having obtained lightness, he perches on the long
stalk of a banana-leaf,209 or sits in a spider-web. Tose are the ways through
which he can ascertain his body to be light. Having done thus, his object of
restraint are the characteristics shared by his body and the atmosphere.210 If
he wishes eternal youth, the ﬁve gross elements are his object of restraint, one
by one. First the earth is made his object of restraint. When the earth has
already been made his object of restraint, it is evident that he has become
tough: he is not wounded by swords. If he falls on logs, or [if] he falls on
rocks, his body is not broken. Only the rocks are broken, his body is ﬁrm.
Tus are the signs that the earth has been conquered by him. Te water is
the object of his restraint: he is not pressed down if submerged in the water.
Te ﬁre is taken as object of restraint by him. Te sign that the ﬁre has been
conquered by him is that he is not burnt if he is set on ﬁre.211 Te wind
is taken as the object of restraint by him. Te sign that the wind has been
conquered by him † … † if it is so, the wind has been conquered.212 Further,
he is not hit by the wind, and moreover his life is without damage. Tat is
the reason why the yogin will become long-living.
208.
Grammar requires that a word must have been present between riṅand lavan ‘with,
together with’ or ‘and, furthermore’. A comparison between this passage and Yogasūtra 3.39
suggests that the word vvaṅ‘men’ at the end of the clause is a corruption of vvai/vve ‘water’
(compare also 330.3); the other elements mentioned in the sūtra as being ‘conquered’ by
the yogin are mud and thorns. I do not feel, however, conﬁdent enough to reconstrue the
missing Old Javanese portion of text on the basis of the Yogasūtra only.
209.
According to Supomo (p.c., January 2010), the unattested form mamapah, from pa-
pah ‘the long stalk of a palm- or banana-leaf’ (OJED 1272), may here refer to somebody’s
ability to stand or perch on the stalk itself.
210.
Conjecturally emending the meaningless pasamandān into pasāmānyan ‘(things
which are) shared by others, joint’ (OJED 1622; cf. also pasāmānya ‘the common (char-
acteristics)?’). Te point is perhaps that the yogin should meditate upon the hollow parts
of the body as being ﬁlled by atmosphere?
211.
Emending katuru into katunu, which is easily explainable from the point of view of
palaeography; otherwise, the translation would be ‘if he has fallen asleep into ﬁre’, which is
possible yet improbable.
212.
Te portion of text explaining the signs indicating that the yogin has conquered the
wind is apparently missing.


--- PAGE 345 ---
326
ii Text & Translation
pira ta lavasnira hurip, salavas ni pṛthivī tәkā niṅmahāpralaya dlāha, irikān
hilaṅśarīra saṅyogi, ndātan vikāra jñānanira, apan tan kәne pāti saṅhyaṅ
ātmā, lāvan prajñā sira tan / kәne lupa, saṅyamanira tekaṅākāśa, yapvan
79v
alah deniraṅākāśa, tan tibā juga sira de niṅavaṅavaṅ, mvaṅlituhayu tekā-
5
vaknira, kahyunhyun vinulat an tar kәne tuha, nāhan byaktanyān alah ikaṅ
pañcamahābhūta de saṅyogi, mantaṅlvir nikaṅkasiddhyan kapaṅgih de
saṅyogi,
prastāva ni prayatnanira, apan hana upasarga ṅaranya, anuṅkapaṅguh
de saṅyogi, apa sinaṅguh upasarga ṅaranya, ikaṅpinakadәgi de niṅpradhā-
10
natattva, ya ta maṅguh ri citta, kari pvekaṅcitta de saṅyo/gi, hana ta vāsanā
80r
nikaṅsattva rajah tamah, turuṅtapvan [i] hilaṅ, ya sinaṅguh upasarga ṅara-
nya, lvirnya, prajñā, madrәs, mabyәt, upasarga nikaṅsattva ikaṅprajñā, ya
ta māvak ri saṅyogi, ya ta mataṅnyan panurun prajñā saṅyogi, apa byakta ni
prajñā saṅyogi, ikaṅaji tapvan denira, vruh sirerya taña, mvaṅupapāttinya,
15
nahan ta upasarga niṅsattva, lāvan gavenira ṅambhuṅgandha vaṅi, athavā
gavaynira manon devatārūpa maṅanugrahana lvirnya, upasarga ni sattva
ikā, niha/n taṅupasarga ni rajah, śakti hiḍәpnira ry avaknira, apan ikaṅ
80v
vastu tan kavәnaṅri daṅu denira, yekā upasarga rājah, nihan upasarga niṅ
tamah, moga pәtaṅpanonira, mvaṅjñānanira, vulaṅun tan atutur i jñāna-
20
nira, maṅkana tāvaknira malupa kabeh, abyәt tan vәnaṅmolah upasarga ni
tamah ikā, yapvan maṅkana ikaṅupasarga kapaṅguh denira, magaveya ta
sira prayogasandhi, apuyapuya,
2 saṅ] em. ; sa cod.
3 saṅyamanira ] em. ; saṅyomaṅnira cod.
4 avaṅavaṅ] em. ;
avaṅava cod. 6 mantaṅ] em. ; manta cod. 6 kapaṅgih ] em. ; kapaṅgāh cod. 14 vruh ]
em. ; vru cod.
14 taña ] conj. ; tanya cod.
14 upapāttinya ] conj. ; upātpәtinya cod.
15 nahan ] em. ; nihan cod.
16 gavaynira ] em. ; gaveṅnira cod.
17 ikā ] em. ; ikāṅ
cod.
21 ikā ] em. ; ikāṅcod.
22 prayogasandhi ] em. ; prayogisandi cod.


--- PAGE 346 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
327
For how long does he live? Until the earth will be hit by the great destruction
in the future. It is on that occasion that the body of the yogin vanishes, but his
mind is not damaged, for the Soul is not affected by death. And his insight, it
is not affected by unconsciousness. Te atmosphere is his object of restraint.
If the atmosphere is conquered by him, he does not fall due to the air, and
his body is of beautiful appearance, attractive to be seen as he is not affected
by old age. Tus is the evidence of the defeat of the ﬁve gross elements by
the yogin. Terefore, the external appearance of the state of supernatural
prowess is met by the yogin.
Te reason why he should be alert is that there are the obstacles, which are
met by the yogin. What things are designated as obstacles? Tose which are
used by the principle of unevolved matter as means to oppose [the yogin].
He meets them in the mind. Te mind having been lef behind by the yo-
gin, there [still] are the latent impressions of sattva, rajas and tamas, not yet
extinguished. Tose which are designated as obstacles, their categories are:
insight, quickness, heaviness. Insight is the obstacle of sattva; it assumes the
body of the yogin. Tat is the reason why the insight of the yogin descends.
What is the evidence of of the insight of the yogin? Te holy scriptures not
being yet [known] to him, he knows about the questions concerning them,
and their explanation. Tus are the obstacles of sattva. Also, their outcome
is to smell fragrances and perfumes, or their outcome is to see a godly form,
in their manifestation while bestowing a boon. Tose are the obstacles of
sattva. Te obstacle of rajas is as follows: power, he thinks, is in his body,
for these things were not possible [to be accomplished] by him before. Tat
is the obstacle of rajas. Te obstacle of tamas is as follows: his eyes become
suddenly dark, and also his mind—[he is] bewildered without remembering
about his mind. In this way his body forgets about everything, being heavy
and incapable of moving. Tat is the obstacle of tamas. When in this way
the obstacle are met by him, he should perform prayogasandhi; he should
apply ﬁre.213
213.
Tat is, apuyapuya, translated by OJED (117, s.v., apuyapuy) ‘to light a ﬁre (sit near
the ﬁre?)’; compare māpuyapuy ‘to apply ﬁre (heating) as a way of healing’, attested only
in a closely related passage of the Vṛhaspatitattva (74.29). If the application of ﬁre is to
be connected to the execution of prayogasandhi, it may refer to a kind of ‘inner’ yogic ﬁre;
cf. Part iii, p. 546.


--- PAGE 347 ---
328
ii Text & Translation
yan pamaṅana sarvāpyak, yapvan agә¯ṅsalah panon lāranira, edan kunaṅ,
sikәpәn aṇḍihәn, tambhana/na limo lāvan bavaṅmatanira, yapvan atutur
81r
kәdikәdik, konәn ta sira tutura ri jñānanira,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
5
[35] enak ikā yan parovaṅa sira, yapvan tuṅgaltuṅgal sire patapanira, apa ta
upāyanira,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
hana kәta paṅhilaṅlāra, prastāvanyān dīrghāyuṣa saṅyogi,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
10
[36] kasihana ṅhulun varahәn ikā paṅhilaṅlāra,
sabarinyān papasah ikaṅpradhānatattva juga lāvan ātmā, ṅuniveh yan ya
pasaha saṅhyaṅātmā lāvan citta, ya ta hetu saṅyogi / tā kәneṅlāra,
81v
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[37] umapa de niṅamasahakәna saṅhyaṅātmā lāvan pradhānādi,
15
sumahur bhaṭāra,
ya don ikaṅprayogasandhi tinakonakәn i saṅguru yapvan an mahyun sira
saṅyogi umasuka irikaṅvvaṅvaneh, ikaṅdharmādharma ya ta pәgat inira,
hana ta śeṣanya kәdikәdik, mataṅnyan tan māti, yapvan huvus pәgat siddhā
sira pasukaneṅvvaṅvaneh, yapvan mahyun sira maṅguha aṣṭaiśvarya, ikaṅ
20
ekādaśendriya ya saṅyamanira, yapvan alah ikā, kapaṅguh ikaṅaṣṭaiśvarya
deni/ra, apa ta lvirnya nihan, aṇiman laghiman mahiman, prāpti, prākāmya,
82r
īśitva, vaśitva, yatrakāmāvasāyitva, nāhan yaṅaṣṭaiśvarya ṅaranya,
2 tambhana/na ] conj. ; tambhānahә/hana cod.
2 bavaṅ] em. ; bava cod.
10 ṅhulun ]
em. ; hulun cod. 18 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod. 19 pasukaneṅ] conj. ; masukanāṃ
cod.
19 aṣṭaiśvarya ] em. ; aṅśṭesvaryya cod.
20 ikā ] em. ; ikāṅcod.
21 prāpti ] em. ;
prasti cod.
22 yatrakāmāvasāyitva ] em. ; yātrakā,ma,vāśayәtva, cod.
21–22 aṇiman … yatrakāmāvasāyitva ] Cf. TJ 49.4–5; TSap f. 53r; Vṛh 14.16–17: aṇimā /
laghimā / mahimā / prāpti / prākāmya / īśitva / vaśitva / yatrakāmāvasāyitva //


--- PAGE 348 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
329
If he eats everything that has a strong [ﬂavour],214 if his suffering is a greatly
distorted sight, or madness, he should be seized and pressed down, his eyes
should be cured with lime and onion. If he regains a bit of consciousness, he
should be ordered to become conscious in his mind.
Kumāra spoke:
[35] Tis is good if he has companions. If he is all alone in his hermitage,
what is his procedure?
Te Lord spoke:
Tere is indeed a means to eliminate the suffering, the cause of the long life
of the yogin.
Kumāra spoke:
[36] Be kind to me, teach me that means to eliminate the suffering!
[Te Lord:]
Whenever only the principle of unevolved matter is separated from the Soul,
and all the more so when those which are separated are the Soul and the
mind, that is the cause of the yogin not being affected by suffering.
Kumāra spoke:
[37] What is the way to separate the Soul and the unevolved matter and so
on?215
Te Lord spoke:
Tat is the goal of the prayogasandhi to be enquired about when facing the
guru, if he wishes that the yogin enters in another man. Te right-and-
wrong, that is cut off by him. Tere is a little bit of what remains, which is
why he does not die. When the cutting-off is ﬁnished, he will be successful
in entering the other man. If he wishes to obtain the eight sovereign pow-
ers, the eleven faculties are the object of his restraint. If they are conquered,
the eight sovereign powers will be obtained by him. What are they like? As
follows: miniaturization, weightlessness, enlargement, attainment, ability to
produce multiple bodies at will, sovereignty, control of the elements, ability to
satisfy one’s own desires. Tus are the eight sovereign powers.
214.
Te compound sarvāpyak is not attested in OJED; as above (262.16), I take pyak as re-
ferring to a strong (i.e. bitter) kind of food. A similar passage of the Vṛhaspatitattva (74.30),
describing the obstacle or tamas, mentions, along with the application of heat, tapyaktapyak
as something to eat by way of medicine; in the present passage, however, sarvapyak does
not seem to refer to a remedy but rather to a condition of the practitioner, which causes him
to eat bitter food.
215.
Namely, its lower products beginning with ahaṅkāra and so on.


--- PAGE 349 ---
330
ii Text & Translation
aṇiman ṅaranya, maganal avaknira tambhayan vәkasan malit ta ya, apa sin-
aṅguh alit, vәnaṅsira masuk mәtu ri pṛthivī, kady aṅgān iṅvvaṅmasil-
urup ri vvai, maṅkana ta saṅyogi, vәnaṅmasuk mәtu riṅpṛthivī, maṅ-
kana yan paṅlakulaku, tan kavādha de niṅgunuṅkarәs [iśe] pinurugnira,
5
ikā vatu trus ikā denira, ndātan vikāra ikāvaknira, ya ta kali/ṅan iṅalit,
82v
laghiman ṅaranya, abyә¯t avaknira tambhayan vәkasan mahaṅan kadi kapuk,
ya ta mataṅnyan paṅlayaṅri ākāśa, mvaṅmadrәs ta lakunira saṅke manah
yekā laghiman ṅaranya, <mahiman ṅaranya,> tar kalәvihan gә¯ṅnira yar sa-
harәp gә¯ṅa, athavā pinūjā ta sira saparanira, prāptiḥṅaranya, sakaharәpira
10
tәka, sakahyunnira hana, nihan artha niṅprāpti vaneh, dadi sira gumamәl
saṅhyaṅvulan saṅkeṅpaliṅgihanira, prākāmya ṅaranya, sakaharәpnira rū-
panira, īśitva ṅaranya, maṅadәh tar kādәh vaśitva ṅaranya, / maṅutus, yatra-
83r
kāmavāsāyitva ṅaranya, sakāmakāma ikā saṅhyaṅincā, yatrakāma ta hal-
itan denira, ṅkānāvasāyitva pramāṇa sira, vәnaṅta sira madaṇḍa yan tan
15
kapintuhu ikaṅinutusnira, nāhan sinaṅguh aṣṭaiśvarya ṅaranya,
3 vvai ] em. ; vvaṅcod.
5 trus ] em. ; tras cod.
7 mataṅnyan ] em. ; matanyan cod.
12 īśitva ṅaranya, maṅadәh tar kādәh ] conj. ; maṅarka kadih cod.
12 vaśitva ] em. ;
vāsayitva cod.
13 yatrakāma ] em. ; yatraka cod.
14 ṅkānāvasāyitva ] em. ; ṅkān·n·
vāsayәtva cod.
15 sinaṅguh ] conj. ; sinpaṅcod.
1–4 aṇiman ṅaranya … pinurugnira ] Cf. TJ 49.5–8: aṇimā ṅaranya / ikāvak saṅyogī-
śvara / gaṇal tambayan / vәkasan alit / sūkṣma / ya ta mataṅnyan saṅyogīśvara vәnaṅsapara-
nira / tan katahan sira de niṅgunuṅvatu / vәnaṅta sirāsilurup iṅlәmah / tan hana maḍana
kaiśvaryanira / yeka sinaṅguh aṇimā ṅaranya // ; Vṛh 67.1–4: avaknira ikaṅaganal / yateka
matәmahan malit / alit ṅaranya / vәnaṅumajñānani ikaṅajñāna / masuk mәtu kadi raray
masilurup iṅvvai / maṅkanātah saṅyogīśvarān pasuk mәtv iṅpṛthivī / tan kāvaraṇan
laku nira / yan pamaṅguh gunuṅvatu magә¯ṅtәrus denira tan pavuri /
6–8 laghiman
ṅaranya … yekā laghiman ṅaranya ] Cf. TJ 49.8–11: laghimā ṅaranya / ikāvak saṅyogī-
śvara / abyәt tambayan / vәkasan aḍaṅan kadi kapuk / ya ta mataṅnyan saṅyogīśvara am-
bara mārga / anampak gagana / majalāntara / vәnaṅmanampak vvai / yeka laghimā ṅara-
nya // ; Vṛh 68.1: abvat nikāvaknira ri tambayanya / vәkasan haḍaṅan kadi kapuk / ya ta
mataṅyan svecchā ika saṅyogīśvara / asiṅsaparanira dadi / yan mariṅsvarga / mareṅsap-
tadvīpa / mareṅsaptapātāla / dadi kumuliliṅi heṅniṅaṇḍabhuvana / vaśitā sakahyun ira
pinaranira / yeka laghimā ṅaranya //
9–11 prāptiḥṅaranya … paliṅgihanira ] Cf. TSap
f. 53r: prāpti ṅa / vәnaṅsakahyun teka / vәnaṅmaṅgamala rāditya ulan sakeṅsakna /
12 īśitva ṅaranya, maṅadәh tar kādәh ] Cf. TSap 53r: īśitva ṅa / vәnaṅmaṅadali tan kade-
lan /
12–13 yatrakāmavāsāyitva … incā ] Cf. TSap f. 53r: yatrakāmavāsāyitva ṅa / vәnaṅ
sakāmakāma ika hyaṅmami ica /


--- PAGE 350 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
331
Miniaturization means: ﬁrst his body is gross, then it becomes small. What
is meant by small? He is able to go inside and come out of the earth, like
a man who dives into water—in such a way is the yogin, he is able to go in
and come out of the earth. In this way he is when he moves, not obstructed
by the awe-inspiring mountains encountered by him. Te rocks are pene-
trated by him; his body is without any damage. Tat is what is meant by
small. Weightlessness means: ﬁrst his body is heavy, then it is light like kapok;
that is the reason why he ﬂies in the sky, and his movement is swifer than
thought. Tis is the weightlessness. Enlargement means:216 his largeness is
unsurpassed, he can become as large as he wishes; or, he is praised wherever
he goes. Attainment means: whatever he wishes, it comes about; whatever
may be his desire, exists. Another meaning of attainment is as follows: he
becomes able to touch the moon from his seat. Ability to produce multiple
bodies at will means: his appearance is as he wishes. Sovereignty means: to
subdue without being subdued.217 Control of the elements218 means: to com-
mand. Ability to satisfy one’s own desires means: [everything is] according to
the wish of the Holy one [who acts] in sovereign freedom; yatrakāma, [he]
is subtle by way of it; in that state [there is] avasāyitva, he is the ruler, he is
able to punish if what has been ordered by him is not obeyed. Tus the eight
sovereign powers are designated.
216.
I have added this item to the text by way of emendation.
217.
Te emendation of the corrupt sequence maṅarkakadih into maṅadәh tar kādәh can
be convincingly justiﬁed on paleaographical grounds (i.e. maṅ<adәh> + [arka →arta →] tar
+ [kādih →kādәh]); furthermore, cf. the gloss of īśitva in Vṛhaspatitattva 72.1, vәnaṅsirān
umadәh saṅhyaṅbrahma ‘he is able to subdue Brahmā’, and Tutur Saptati f. 53r, vәnaṅ
maṅadali tan kadelan →vәnaṅmaṅadәhi tan kadәhan ‘he is able to subdue without being
subdued’.
218.
Having emended vāsayitva into vaśitva; the former has apparently been anticipated
from the following line.


--- PAGE 351 ---
332
ii Text & Translation
an maṅkana kasiddhyan saṅpaṇḍita, tәka kavighna ri sira, lvirnya, ikaṅde-
vatā mamava upabhoga mvaṅanakәbi rahayu, mahalәp sinaṇḍaṅnya, kapva
malәvihlәvih hyun, ya ta manuṅsuṅyogi, syaṅmuliha riṅsvarga, ndān hayva
sira maṅguh, apan bañcana ikā, guma/veh vuruṅan i yoga saṅyogīśvara don
83v
5
ikā, ya ta mataṅnyan paṅhulihuliha ri hati, aku ahāta tutakneṅkva pasyaṅ
nikaṅdevatā byaktāku mahiḍәp saṅsāra muvah, apan jāti niṅśakti niṅvi-
ṣaya, luput ikaṅsuka viśeṣa denya, ikaṅlāra tan vuruṅkabhukti deku, ikaṅ
kasiddhyan huvus kabhukti deku, tan ulihkv aṅinakinak, hulihkv agave brata
lāvan samādhi, sajīva niṅrāt ikā, hilaṅa pva ya de niṅviṣaya sakarәṅ, lalu
10
kaśmalaṅku, pakṣa ni kahanan ikā, indrajālasādṛ/śya, kadi kilat kabhuktinya,
84r
yadyan malavas i bhinukti, ndātan vuruṅmaveh lāra, ikaṅlāra, aneka lvir-
nya, yāvat pvekaṅjanma katibān lāra, tāvat †kadasyatanayā, mevәh maluy
janma muvah, aṅhiṅkәbho sapi asu vәk tәmahanya, yekā katakutku kamu
manah, yan aṅgānәn pasyaṅnikaṅvatәk devatā, maṅkana liṅnira varah-
15
varah ry avaknira,
nihan sahur saṅpara, satus kveha nikaṅviṣaya kabhukti de niṅvvaṅ,
tan ya maṅhiḍәpa lāra yan vruh ri katattvan bhaṭāra, mataṅnyan maṅkana,
apan tan hana tu/hutuhun ikaṅulah kabeh, mataṅnyan tan hana tuhu, an
84v
hilaṅa don ikā kabeh, maluya ri saṅkanya, ndi saṅkanya, saṅke saṅhyaṅ
20
tayā, malilaṅtan kāvaraṇan, sira sinaṅguh niṣkala ṅaranya, anuṅkalīnan iṅ
rāt kabeh, niyata tan salah paran, maṅkana pva katattvan iṅjanma, mvaṅ
kavruhan saṅhyaṅparamārtha,
1 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā cod. 3 manuṅsuṅ] em. ; manusuṅsuṅcod. 5 ahāta ] conj. ; yātah cod.
6 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅtā cod. 8 hulihkv ] em. ; halihkv cod. 11 vuruṅ] em. ; vuru cod. 11–
12 lvirnya ] em. ; lvarnya cod.
12 yāvat ] em. ; kavat cod.
12 katibān ] em. ; katabān
cod. 12 mevәh ] em. ; mevih cod. 16 de niṅvvaṅ] em. ; de ni ṅva cod. 17 maṅhiḍәpa ]
em. ; maṅhadәpā cod.
18 ikaṅ] em. ; iṅkā cod.
22 paramārtha ] em. ; parārtā cod.


--- PAGE 352 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
333
Te state of supernatural prowess of the master being such, the hindrances
come to him. Teir manifestations are: the gods bring objects of enjoyment
and beautiful women, dressed in a charming way and at the same time ex-
ceedingly wanton. Tey greet the yogin, inviting him to come to the heaven.
However, he should not consent, for that is a deception, its purpose being to
cause the failure of the yoga of the leader among yogins. Tat is the reason
why he should deliberate in the heart: ‘I should be concerned that, should
I follow the invitation of the gods, I will certainly experience again the cy-
cle of rebirth, for the nature of the power of the objects of pleasure is that
the supreme bliss is out of reach because of it. Te suffering has been un-
remittingly experienced by me. Te state of supernatural prowess has been
experienced by me already. It was not the result of my relaxing; it was the
result of my practicing observances and absorption. Tat [state] lasts for as
long as the life of the universe. It will vanish in only a moment because of
the sensual objects. Tereupon I shall be impure. Te likeness of the feel-
ing of those [sensual objects] is like an illusion; the enjoyment of them is
like a lightning. Even if they are enjoyed for a long time, they cause no less
suffering. Te sorts of the suffering are various. As soon as the human beings
are stricken by suffering, †kadasyatanayā.219 It is difﬁcult to return to a hu-
man birth: only water-buffaloes, cows, dogs or pigs will be their outcomes.
Tat is my object of fear, if the invitation of the gods will be accepted’. Tus
are his thoughts in his body.
Te opponent replies as follows: ‘A hundred shall be the number of plea-
sures enjoyed by the man; he will not experience suffering if he knows about
the true state of the Lord. Te reason why it is so is that all the actions do not
actually exist. Te reason why they do not exist in the real sense is that their
effects will all disappear, going back to their origin. Where is their origin?
From the Holy Non-Existence, pure without obstructions. It is designated
as unmanifest, which is the place of dissolution of the whole universe. It is
evident that [this view] is not going in the wrong direction.220 Such is the
true state of human beings, and the knowledge about the Summum Bonum.
219.
I have found no satisfying solution to emend this corrupt sequence of akṣaras. Tis
notwithstanding, I have emended tavat into kavat in order to preserve the parallelism with
the kavat occurring in the preceding clause.
220.
Te expression tan salah paran seems to refer to the view that has been just expounded
by the opponent; cf. OJED (1610) s.v. salah paran (= salah pakṣa) ‘in the wrong direction,
striving afer the wrong object, missing its target’.


--- PAGE 353 ---
334
ii Text & Translation
ndya ta mataṅnyan saṅśaya riṅulah kabeh, apa mataṅnyan pamuhāra lāra,
kabhuktya niṅviṣaya, maṅkana ta kәbho sapi asu vәk, sabarinyān mati mulih
ri tayā, tamatan dinalih mulih riṅtayā, apan katon hilaṅ/ ikaṅavaknya, yekā
85r
inakunta mokṣa, jñānanya lāvan cittanya tan avruh irikā, lāvan ikaṅtayā
5
an sinaṅguh paramārtha, apa ta paṅupakāranya, ndya kasiddhyan kadadi
denya, sumahur saṅpara, tan mokṣa ta ṅaran ikā, yan pamaṅguha kasid-
dhyan, kunaṅyan hilaṅjuga, ya mokṣa ṅaranya, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, ka-
pan ta kәta yan tәka, apan dudū ikaṅahurip, kadi laṅgә¯ṅnikaṅhana, kapan
tekaṅtayā yan ta pratyakṣa, sumahur saṅpara, dlāha ri tәka ni pralaya, yan
10
tayā ikaṅrāt kabeh, maṅkana liṅsaṅpara, / apa yan mәtu ikā rat kabeh mu-
85v
vah, yekā mājarakәn yan līna ri tayā ikaṅrāt, apan saṅkeṅtayā saṅkanya
mәtu ṅūni, yan maṅkana liṅa saṅpara, viruddha tekā pakṣanta yan maṅ-
kana, mataṅnyan sinaṅguh viruddha, apan līna riṅtayā ikaṅjagat liṅta,
mәtu pva ya mәne sinaṅguh ta mәtu saṅkeṅtayā ikaṅjagat, adva tan tayā
15
ṅaran ikā, yan ta līna ni jagat an vәtu, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, tan dadi taṅ
paramārtha maṅkana,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[38] aparan ikaṅsinaṅguh saṅpara tayā uliha niṅjagat, lāvan saṅka niṅjagat
mәtu, kasiha/na varahәn ṅhulun bhaṭāra,
86r
20
ikaṅsinaṅguh saṅpara tayā paramārtha, yekāna sinaṅguh prakṛtilīna, tayā
pasaṅgan iṅcitta sattva rajah tamah,lakṣaṇanya pәtaṅtan pacetanā, apan
tan hana kaprajñān iriya,
3 avaknya, ] em. ; vaknya cod.
6 ṅaran ikā ] em. ; ṅaranpikā cod.
9 tәka ] em. ; daka
cod.
12 viruddha ] em. ; ciruddā cod.
12 tekā ] em. ; teko cod.
12 pakṣanta yan ]
em. ; pakṣanta han cod.
13 mataṅnyan ] em. ; mataṅnya cod.
13 liṅta, ] em. ; lita cod.
15 an vәtu ] em. ; anā vtu cod.
18 ikaṅ] em. ; iṅkā cod.
18 saṅka ] em. ; saṅkeṅcod.
18 jagat ] em. ; jat cod.
19 ṅhulun ] em. ; hulun cod.
20 yekāna ] em. ; hekāna cod.
20 prakṛtilīna ] em. ; prakrativakna cod.
21 pasaṅgan ] conj. ; pasaṅh cod.
21 rajah ]
em. ; rāja cod.
4 lāvan ] post corr. ; lān ante corr.
20 prakṛtilīna ] prakrativakna post corr. ; prakratikna
ante corr.


--- PAGE 354 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
335
What is the reason of doubting about all the acts? What is the reason of
causing suffering [to oneself]? Let there be the enjoyment of the objects of
pleasure! Similarly, water-buffaloes, cows, dogs, pigs, as soon as they die
they return to non-existence. Te returning to non-existence is by no means
a guess, for visibly their bodies disappear’. [I reply:] Tat which you claim
to be liberation, the heart and mind do not know about it. And as for the
non-existence being called Summum Bonum, what is the favour granted by
it?221 How is the state of supernatural prowess brought about by it? Te op-
ponent replies: ‘When one obtains the state of supernatural prowess, that is
not liberation. Only when one vanishes, that is liberation’. If the opponent
would speak thus, [I would reply:] When, then, does it (i.e. liberation) come?
For there is not one who lives [afer one is liberated]. How could what exists
be permanent? When is the non-existence directly perceived? Te oppo-
nent replies: ‘It is in the future, at the time that dissolution comes about,
when the whole universe will be non-existence’. Tus speaks the opponent.
[I reply:] What if the whole universe will arise once again? ‘Tat explains
why the universe is dissolved into non-existence, for from non-existence is
the origin from which it came forth formerly’. If the opponent would speak
thus, [I would reply:] If it is so, your view is contradictory. Te reason why
it is regarded as contradictory is that, as you say, the universe is dissolved in
the non-existence. Te universe arising now, it is regarded as arising from
non-existence. ‘Wrong, non-existence does not mean the dissolution of the
universe while it arises’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:]
it is not possible that the Summum Bonum is like this.
Kumāra spoke:
[38] What is that which has been designated by the opponent as non-exist-
ence and destination of the universe, and the origin of the universe’s arising?’
Please be kind, teach me, o Lord!
[Te Lord:]
What has been designated by the opponent as non-existence and Summum
Bonum, that is designated as [being] dissolved into unevolved matter:222
there is no union of the mind [and] the sattva, rajas, tamas. Its characteristic
is darkness without sentience, for the state of insight is not found in it.
221.
Tis argument is a common rhetorical device in Sanskrit Śāstras (cf. Part iii, p. 606).
222.
My emendations of prakrativakna (itself a scribal correction of prakratikna), into
prakṛtilīna, and of pasaṃhniṃinto pasaṅgan iṅ, are justiﬁed by the doctrinal context of
the passage (cf. Part iii, p. 606).


--- PAGE 355 ---
336
ii Text & Translation
ṅuniveh ikaṅcetanā, apa mataṅnyan sinaṅguh uliha niṅjagat apan ya ikā
kriyāśakti bhaṭāra ṅaranya, māyāmāyā ikā ātmā<,> ya ta khyāti bhaṭāra para-
makāraṇa, yāvat pvekaṅātmā cumetanekaṅprakṛtitattva, tāvat mәtu ikaṅ
jagat, yapvan mari ikaṅprakṛtitattva ci/netanā deniraṅātmā, līna ikaṅjagat
86v
5
maluy ri saṅkanya ri prakṛtitattva, maṅkana sthiti nikaṅrāt saṅkanya ṅūni,
sumahur saṅkumāra,
[39] apa dumeh nikaṅprakṛtitattva sәṅguhәn tayā de saṅpara,
sumahur bhaṭāra,
apan tan hiḍәpnya, ṅuniveh ikaṅlakṣaṇa, tan paramārtha pvekaṅtayā sin-
10
aṅguh saṅpara viśeṣa, taha tan paramārtha ikā, apan saṅka ni jagat lāvan
ulihanya, mvaṅinulihakәn taya, vruh pva saṅyogi, an tan paramārtha ikaṅ
tayā, ya ta mataṅnyan tan ikā phala ni / samādhi saṅyogi, ndya ta lakṣaṇa
87r
saṅhyaṅparamārtha, anuṅtuju ni samādhi saṅyogi, yan kva liṅanta, ikaṅ
cetanā sarvajña saṅkumavruhi ikaṅrāt kabeh, sarvakāryakartā, saṅgumave
15
ikaṅrāt kabeh, ndi ta kahananira, yan kva liṅanta, kahananira ikaṅrāt kabeh,
ndātan katon, apan tan palakṣaṇa, tan parūpa, tan pahiḍәp, pisaniṅu, apa
byaktanyān hana, yan kva liṅanta, nihan utpattisthitilīna ni jagat, yeka incā
bhaṭāra, ikaṅprakṛtitattva, ya sinaṅguh niṣkala ṅaranya, a/hyun pva sira
87v
gumavaya jagat ya mataṅnyan taṅātmā cumetanekaṅprakṛtitattva, mataṅ-
20
nyan mәtu nāda saṅkeṅniṣkala, saṅke nāda mәtu taṅvindu, saṅkeṅvindu
mәtu taṅardhacandra, saṅke ardhacandra, mәtu ta oṂkāra, saṅkeṅoṂkāra
mәtu taṅtryakṣara, <saṅkeṅtryakṣara> mәtu taṅpañcākṣara, saṅkeṅpañ-
cākṣara, mәtu taṅjagat kabeh, nāhan lakṣaṇa nikaṅniṣkalatattvān pamәt-
vakәna jagat,
1 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā cod. 1 mataṅnyan sinaṅguh ] em. ; maṅtaṅnyan sinaṅgu cod. 2 kriyā-
śakti ] em. ; krәyasakti cod. 2 khyāti ] conj. ; katti cod. 3 yāvat ] em. ; tavat cod. 4 ma-
ri ] em. ; marri cod. 6 sumahur ] em. ; sumahu cod. 7 nikaṅ] em. ; nikā cod. 7 sәṅguh-
әn ] em. ; saṅguhhin cod.
10 ikā ] em. ; ikāṅcod.
14 ikaṅ] em. ; ikā cod.
17 utpatti-
sthitilīna ni ] em. ; utpāptistiliṇa nә cod.
17 yeka ] em. ; yoka cod.
18 pva ] em. ; pa
cod.
21 taṅardhacandra ] em. ; taṃaddācandra cod.
22 tryakṣara ] em. ; tryara cod.
23 nikaṅ] em. ; niṅkā cod.
23–24 pamәtvakәna ] em. ; pamtukna cod.


--- PAGE 356 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
337
Furthermore for what reason is the sentient designated as the destination of
the universe? Because it is the power of action of the Lord. Te Soul is like an
illusory image; it is a denomination223 of the Lord Supreme Cause. As soon
as the Soul becomes aware of the principle of unevolved matter, the universe
arises. When the Soul ceases to be aware of the principle of unevolved matter,
the universe dissolves, going back to its origin, in the principle of unevolved
matter. Tus is the ﬁxed order of the universe, its former origin.
Kumāra spoke:
[39] For what reason has the principle of unevolved matter been designated
as non-existence by the opponent?
Te Lord spoke:
For [there is] no conception of it, all the less so any distinctive mark. It is
not the case that the Summum Bonum is the non-existence that has been
designated as Supreme by the opponent. No, it is not the Summum Bonum,
for [it is] the origin of the universe, and its destination. As for the being
brought back [to] non-existence, the yogin knows that the Summum Bonum
is not the non-existence; that is the reason why that [non-existence] is not
the fruit of the absorption of the yogin. ‘What is the distinctive mark of the
Summum Bonum, which is the direct aim of the absorption of the yogin?’ If
you would speak thus, [I would reply:] Te sentient: omniscient, who knows
the whole universe; omnipotent, who is the author of the entire universe.
‘Where are His whereabouts?’ If you would speak thus, [I would reply:] His
whereabouts are the whole universe, although he is not seen, for He is with-
out distinctive marks, without form, without a notion. ‘Impossible. What is
the evidence of its existence?’ If you would speak thus, [I would reply:] As
follows: the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the universe. Tat is
the wish of the Lord. Te principle of unevolved matter, that is designated as
unmanifest. He desires to create the universe; that is the reason why the Soul
becomes aware of the principle of unevolved matter. Terefore, the nāda
comes forth from the unmanifest. From the nāda comes forth the bindu.
From the bindu comes forth the ardhacandra. From the ardhacandra comes
forth the oṂ-kāra. From the oṂ-kāra come forth the three-syllables. From
the three-syllables224 come forth the ﬁve-syllables. From the ﬁve-syllables
comes forth the whole universe. Tus are the characteristics of the unmani-
fest principle in generating the universe.
223.
Conjecturally emending katti into khyāti.
224.
I have added this clause by way of emendation.


--- PAGE 357 ---
338
ii Text & Translation
sumahur saṅpara, kadi saṅkeṅprakṛti ikaṅvindu nāda, apan saṅkeṅbhaṭāra
ikaṅvindu nāda mәtu, yan maṅkana liṅa saṅpara, yan dadya taṅdharma
tuṅgal sumaṇḍaṅa dha/rma rva, ndya dharma rva ṅaranya, nyaṅcetanā lā-
88r
van acetanā, ≤n≥dya ṅaranya cetanā, bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa, ndya acetanā
5
ṅaranya, nyaṅprakṛtitattva, yekā tan dadi pinakadharmān atuṅgal, padanya,
kady aṅgān iṅtәṅah ṅve, sәṅguhәn ta tәṅah vәṅi, apa mataṅnyan tan dadi
maṅkana bhaṭāra, apan sira vәnaṅmakecchā ikaṅrat kabeh, yan maṅkana
liṅa saṅpara, saṅsāra kapva bhaṭāra yan maṅkana, sadenyan saṅsāra bha-
ṭāra, yan kva liṅa saṅpara, tan palvir kapva ikiṅrāt kabeh, denyan tan palvir
10
ike jagat, apa yan kasaṅsayakna, yan maṅ/kana liṅa saṅpara, ndya jagat tan
88v
palvir tinonta, apan ta pva pratyakṣa ya, yāvat tan palvir ikaṅjagat, tāvat
pralaya, pralaya ṅaranya, mәtv † әgatah tālan † yan tәkā, apan icchā bhaṭāra
inapekṣānya, ◉
2 dadya ] em. ; dadiha cod.
4 ≤n≥dya ṅaranya cetanā ] conj. ; _dya na ṅara cetanya cod.
6 ṅve ] em. ; ṅveṅcod. 6 vәṅi ] em. ; vṅә cod. 6 tan ] em. ; tanā cod. 8 saṅsāra ] em. ;
saśāra cod.
8 maṅkana ] em. ; makana cod.
9 ikiṅ] em. ; ikә¯ṅcod.
11 yāvat ] em. ;
tavat cod.
13 inapekṣānya ] em. ; inapekṣānyan cod.


--- PAGE 358 ---
Critical Edition & Parallel Translation
339
Te opponent replies: ‘How could the bindu and nāda [come] from the un-
evolved matter? For the nāda and bindu come forth from the Lord’. If the
opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:] If it happens that the single
entity will be in two entities, what are the two entities called? Tus: sentient
and insentient. What is the meaning of sentient? Te Lord Supreme Cause.
What is the meaning of insentient? Tus: the principle of unevolved mat-
ter. It is not possible that they constitute a single entity. For example: like if
midday will be called midnight. ‘What is the reason why it is impossible that
the Lord is in this way, as He is able to conjure up at the whole universe?’ If
the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:] If it would be so, the Lord
is one who experiences suffering. ‘Let there be the suffering of the Lord’. If
the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:] Ten, this whole universe
is without form. ‘What does it matter if we call into question the very fact
that the universe has a form?’ If the opponent would speak thus, [I would
reply]: How come that the universe, which [according to you] does not have
a form, is seen by you? For it is indeed directly perceptible.225 As soon as
the universe does not have a form, it is the ﬁnal dissolution. Final dissolution
means: when it comes, the † ә gatah tālan † arises,226 for it is required by the
wish of the Lord.
225.
Or, reading tā pva (stressed negative particle) instead of ta pva (stress particles): ‘For
[the universe without form] is not directly perceptible’.
226.
I have found no convincing emendation for this sequence of akṣaras, which is appar-
ently corrupt. I have discarded the possibility of emending/reading this clause into mәtv i
gatakālanyān tәkā ‘the time of the past has come, when it arrives’, for it does not make any
sense to me. I rather think that (ә)gatah tālan might be a corruption for a word denoting the
supernatural agent through which the universe is destroyed by the Lord, which may be ﬁre
(e.g. bāḍavanala, kālabahni) or water. In the latter case, one may consider the emendation
ghaṭakāla, ‘the time of the [water-]jar’ (perhaps in connection with the jar-bearer Agastya,
who once saved the world from deluge?); the same compound can also be intended as ‘the
time of the constellation Aquarius’, which implies an astronomical calculation for the com-
ing of the pralaya.


--- PAGE 359 ---


--- PAGE 360 ---
iii
Doctrine


--- PAGE 361 ---


--- PAGE 362 ---
Te Lord
T
he deﬁnition of the Lord plays an important role in Old Javanese
Tutur and Tattvas. It is usually Śiva Himself who, at the beginning of
the treatises, describes His utterly transcendent aspect as Supreme Reality or
Summum Bonum (paramārtha).
As the
Absolute
Tis paramount aspect is deﬁned in most sources as
formless and devoid of parts; incomparable, pure, one
without a second. Te Old Javanese passages are in har-
mony with the Sanskrit Śaiva sources, from the ones of
the Atimārga through the Siddhāntatantras of the Mantramārga, where a
section is invariably devoted to the characterization of the Lord (pati) in
both His transcendent and personal aspects. One observes in the sources
from both South and Southeast Asia a continuity with earlier speculations
on God as the Absolute found in the Upaniṣads, most notably in the Śvetāś-
vatara.
Te ﬁrst śloka of the Dharma Pātañjala, uttered by the Lord in reply to
Kumāra’s question regarding the nature of the Supreme Reality, describes
that entity as follows:
Te Lord—unfathomable, formless, appeased, constant, immutable—
DhPāt
194.20–196.7
that is Śiva, subtle, supreme, appeased, with form as well as formless.
Because it is designated as unfathomable, for it is not capable of being made
object of thinking. It is formless, it does not have a body, nor a colour. It is
not red, not white, not yellow, not black, brown, bi-coloured, and so on; all
of these do not exist in the Summum Bonum. It is not affected by old age and
death. It does not diminish, it does not increase. It is entirely immutable, it
constantly remains still. It is pleasure without end, enjoyment that does not
turn into pain, life that does not turn into death. It is more extensive than the


--- PAGE 363 ---
344
iii Doctrine
whole universe. It surpasses, not being surpassed. It is pervasive. Pervasive
means: it ﬁlls the whole universe. It is not perceived: it itself perceives. It is
not known: it itself knows, for it is omniscient, it knows the whole universe.
It is omnipotent: it creates the whole universe. For the evidence of this is as
follows: all of you live, act, desire, know intentions.
Te passage describes the Summum Bonum as devoid of any form and rela-
tion and thus impossible to be characterized according to the conventional
human categories; but, at the same time, it attributes to that Absolute the
name and attributes of the Lord Śiva.
As we read at the very outset of the Dharma Pātañjala (194.11–13), Śiva
as the Summum Bonum can be known only through absorption (samādhi),1
and hence not through the normal means of perception. Te Lord Himself
is indeed the Perceiver par excellence, in whom every kind of perception is
grounded.2 As is explained further (206.2–4), it is His Power3 that makes ex-
perience of pleasure and pain possible, and which causes one to know about
what is to be avoided and what is to be done. Not only experience but also life
itself would be impossible without having the Lord as its ultimate ground:
Indeed the whole universe does not exist, if the Summum Bonum is non-
DhPāt
200.2–5
1.
Cf. below, p. 481.
2.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 206.2–6. Te view that what makes knowledge possible cannot
be made object of cognition itself is a common philosophical view in Śaiva texts. On the in-
accessibility to human perception of the Lord as the Absolute, cf. Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 4.20b:
‘No one can see Him with the eyes’ na cakṣuṣā paśyati kaś canainam; Niśvāsakārikā (T17 A,
p. 549) 39–40ab: ‘Unfathomable, indiscernible, omniscient, unlimited; free from the qual-
ities of good and bad and not joined with anything. It cannot be illuminated by the means
of knowledge such as direct perception, etc.’ aprameyam avijñeyaṃsarvajñaṃsarvato-
mukham / dharmādharmaguṇair hīnaṃsaṃśritaṃna ca kenacit // pratyakṣādipramāṇais
tu na ca śakyaṃprakāśitum /; Pauṣkaraparameśvara 115.7: ‘Te means of knowledge are
taught to be just for the sake of the realization of the objects of perception; given the fact
that God is unfathomable, which means of knowledge can demonstrate Him?’ prameyasād-
hanāyaiva pramāṇāny uditāni tu / aprameyasya devasya kiṃpramāṇair prasādhyate //; etc.
Te early Śaiva author Sadyojyotis in his commentary ad Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, VP
4.3–6 (cf. below, p. 348), explains that Śiva as Supreme Reality is not expressible and cannot
be known or characterized as a ‘reiﬁed’ entity (evaṃbhūtam etad) through direct experience
or inference, for ‘it is beyond the means of knowledge of bound souls’ (paśupramāṇānām
agocaraṃtat, quoted from an untraced source). Sadyojyotis further argues that the Lord is
subtle because He is not perceptible; He can be known only by Himself, and knowledge of
Him consists of self-experience (svasaṃvedyaṃsvānubhūtilakṣaṇaṃsyāt).
3.
I.e. śakti, presumably to be understood as jñānaśakti (Power of Knowledge), cf. p. 356.


--- PAGE 364 ---
The Lord
345
existence, and all of you could not live, if the Summum Bonum would be
non-existence. Tis life of yours is visible, as is the existence of the whole
universe: from this you can infer that the Summum Bonum is not non-ex-
istence.
Dharma Pātañjala 210.8–9 states that the whole world uses the Summum
Bonum as a means to live; a similar view is found in the Tattvajñāna (5.20):
‘He serves as life for the whole universe and all creatures’ sira ta pinakahurip
iṅrāt kabeh / sarvajanma kabeh, and in the Bhuvanakośa (1.9d): ‘[He is] the
life of the creatures […] He serves as life of everything that exists’ bhūtānāñ
jīva / […] sira pinakajīva niṅdadi kabeh.
Te transcendent aspect of the Supreme Reality is characterized else-
where in the Dharma Pātañjala, for instance in the course of the debate with
a nihilist opponent as to the existence of the Lord and the deﬁnition of Sum-
mum Bonum (200.6–204.3). Besides lacking a form, body or colour, the Lord
is described as utterly devoid of any kind of distinguishing marks or char-
acteristics on account of His subtlety.4 Such a negative theology is further
developed in the Vṛhaspatitattva (48) to such an extent that, paradoxically,
the Supreme Reality (viśeṣa) cannot even be said to exist, for that would be
an unwanted attribution of a condition or characteristic which would put it
at the same level with other existing (or non-existing) entities:
[Te Summum Bonum is] devoid of existence and free of non-exist-
ence; being without existence and not-existence, it is unmanifest and
without distinctive marks.
If you (Vṛhaspati) would think that viśeṣa is being and not non-being [I
would reply] that, ﬁrst of all, its body is both being and not-being.5
4.
In Dharma Pātañjala 204.3–6, to the pūrvapakṣin’s objection that the Supreme Reality
does not exist on account of His being—according to the Lord’s words—without distinctive
marks, bodiless, invisible and unfathomable, the Lord replies that such a reality is designated
as subtle (and yet existing). For references to the Lord’s lack of body or colour, cf. Dharma
Pātañjala 336.15, Navaruci p. 55.2–3, Bhuvanakośa 2.14, Gaṇapatitattva exegesis ad śloka
52–53, Jñānasiddhānta śloka 8.5 and exegesis. Among the Sanskrit sources, cf. Śvetāśvata-
ropaniṣad 4.1a and the examples in Siddhāntatantras referred to below, p. 576. For the lack
of distinguishing marks, cf. Kaṭhopaniṣad 6.8.
5.
Vṛhaspatitattva, śloka 48 and commentary thereon (1–2):
sadbhāvena parityaktam asadbhāvavivarjitam /
sadasadbhāvarahitaṃniṣkalan tam alakṣaṇam //


--- PAGE 365 ---
346
iii Doctrine
A similar view is expressed in Jñānasiddhānta 8.6:
[It is] also subtle and without limitations, difﬁcult to perceive, neither
existence nor non-existence. Tere is nothing higher than Itself, per-
manent, eternally ruling—It is the Lord.
And also, absolute imperceptibility is the characteristic of the Lord, for He
is subtle, ﬁne without limits; [being] the very end of the ﬁne, He escapes
perception. Tere are neither existence nor non-existence in Him. For non-
existence is [His] own nature, that is why He is greater than the greatest,
higher than the highest. Tere is none who is able to defeat Him. For He is
Sadāśiva, ruling over the manifest and unmanifest [worlds].6
Te implication is: that which is Existence itself, i.e. that which makes both
existence and non-existence themselves possible, is deemed to be beyond
both categories.7 Elsewhere, such as in Bhuvanakośa 3.78, the Supreme Re-
ality, also denoted by the name Śiva, is deﬁned as Void (śūnya) and without
48d niṣkalan tam ] A ; niskalanta CG ; niṣkālāntam DE ; niṣkalāntam F Ed.
tan taya ta saṃhyaṃviśeṣa / hana kapva sira / nyapan  tahan kva liṅanta / huvus rumuhun
ika hana taya kapvāvaknira /.
6.
Jñānasiddhānta 8, śloka 6 and commentary thereon:
sūkṣmānantāpi durgrāhyaṃna bhāvaṃna ca nirbhāvam /
paramo nāpi tad dhruvaṃsadādhikāram īśvaram //
6b na bhāvaṃna ] conj. ; na taye na Ed.
lavan ta muvah, tan kagrahita kәta lakṣaṇa bhaṭṭāra. apan sūkṣma, alit tan pakahiṅan,
vәkas niṅalit sumilib tan hana bhāvābhāva ri sira. apan taya svabhāva, ya ta mataṅnyan
lәvih sakeṅlәvih, uttama sakeṅuttama sira. ndatan hana vәnaṅsumorakәna sira. apan sira
sadāśiva, vaśavaśitva riṅsakalaniṣkala. • bhāvābhāva ] em. ; bhāva-bhāva Ed.
7.
Tis view is traceable to Sanskrit sources: cf., e.g., Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 5.14a: ‘Author
of existence and non-existence’ bhāvābhāvakaram; Bhagavadgītā 13.12cd: ‘Te Supreme
Brahman has no beginning; it is said to be neither existing nor non-existing’ anādimat
paraṃbrahma na sat tan nāsad ucyate, and a similar version in the Vaiṣṇava Jayākhya-
saṃhitā 4.63ab: ‘Tat [Supreme Reality] is beginningless and inﬁnite; it is said to be nei-
ther existing nor non-existing’ anādi tad anantaṃca na sat tan nāsad ucyate; the Buddhist
Guhyasiddhi 3.45c (on the Supreme reality): ‘devoid of both existence and non-existence’
bhāvābhāvavinirmuktaṃ(compare SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan p. 19 line 27: astināstivyati-
krāntam, referring to the supreme Mahāyāna-path). Among the Śaiva sources, cf. Niśvāsa-
kārikā 49.33cd: ‘It is not the case that He does exist, it is not the case that He does not exist;
standing everywhere, † kiṃavīṣṭhitam †’ na cāsti na ca vā nāsti sarvasthaṃkim avīṣṭhitam;
49.41ab: ‘free from both existence and non-existence, devoid of what has the nature of illu-
sion and what does not’ (or māyā-mayin, ‘devoid of illusion and that which has the nature
of illusion’) bhāvābhāvavinirmuktaṃmāyāmāyivivarjitam.


--- PAGE 366 ---
The Lord
347
a Self (nirātmaka).8 However nihilistic they may appear, these deﬁnitions
are probably not to be taken as technical terms conveying a sharp doctrinal
standpoint, for they were formulated in a yogic milieu where visualization
and meditative techniques were more important than philosophical specu-
lation.9
Tese paradoxical characterizations notwithstanding, from a theologi-
cal point of view the Lord who is the Summum Bonum, being the Cause
of the universe (jagatkāraṇa; bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa), is by deﬁnition exis-
tent. While He is transcendent and hence not capable of being described
by positive attributes, His existence can be nonetheless logically determined
through inference from His effects, i.e. His creation. Te syllogistic demon-
stration of the Lord’s existence is present in nuce in the early Siddhāntatan-
8.
Here Śiva is deﬁned as Void because it is difﬁcult to perceive (durvijñeya); compare
Bhuvanakośa 1.9, where it is deﬁned as Void and as being beyond the means of perception
(nirindriya). In Bhuvanakośa 4.35–36 the stress on the Lord as Void is evidently to be un-
derstood in the meditative and mantric context forming the main focus of the chapter. Still,
the deﬁnition of Śiva in 3.78 as having no Self calls to mind the arguments of the Buddhists.
As pointed out by Gonda (1971:407), analogous deﬁnitions of Śiva as Void are widespread
in Balinese Sanskrit Stutis, where the Lord is ofen compared to a spotless sky (ākāśaṃnir-
malam). As noted by Soebadio (1971:48) with respect to the ﬁrst six prose chapters of the
Jñānasiddhānta, śūnya is equated to both Śiva and the Supreme Reality and represents the
last and highest goal in the practitioner’s meditative practice. On the basis of the inclusion
of such ‘Buddhist’ terms as śūnya and śūnyatā among those used to describe the Supreme
reality in Old Javanese Tuturs and Tattvas (e.g. Jñānasiddhānta 3.2–3, 8.3; Gaṇapatitattva 2,
23; Mahājñāna 62, 83), Sanderson (2009:122) envisages in those works a direct Buddhist
inﬂuence that would have affected Śaivism in the Archipelago. Be this as it may, it needs
to be pointed out that among the interpretations of the term śūnya, according to an earlier
Buddhist text like the Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya by Vasubandhu (1.14c), there is that of be-
ing neither existence (bhāva) nor non-existence (abhāva)—a characterization that occurs
ofen in Old Javanese sources as applied to Śiva as Supreme Reality.
9.
Tat the attribution of the predicate Void came easily to the minds of the
philosophically-minded Śaiva authors as a potential issue is suggested by the question of
Pratoda to the Lord that opens the section on pati of such a speculative scripture as the Ki-
raṇa (VP 9, ślokas 1, 3ab and 5): ‘How can the principle of Śiva be void? Tat which is void
is not within the domain of the senses. Direct perception is the knowledge of the senses;
what is beyond it is not at all. […] [Śiva] is designated as void not because He does not exist,
but because He is not dependent upon anything else […] He is beyond the senses because of
subtleness. He is dissolved into the subtle Power. Tat is regarded as the Power of Knowl-
edge; it is through that Knowledge only that He is known’ śivatattvaṃkathaṃśūnyaṃyac
chūnyaṃnākṣagocaram / pratyakṣam ākṣavijñānaṃtadatītaṃna kiṃcana // […] nābhāvāc
chūnyam ity uktam anyāpekṣatayātra tu // […] atīndriyaḥsusūkṣmatvāt sūkṣmaśaktilayaṃ
gataḥ/ jñānaśaktir matā sāpi tajjñānāj jñāta eva saḥ//.


--- PAGE 367 ---
348
iii Doctrine
tras and eventually becomes a well-established cliché in the later Śāstric Śaiva
scriptures as in the commentaries thereon, where the arguments of the athe-
ists are refuted.10 It should be pointed out, however, that for the Śaiva the
primary and only ‘real’ means for establishing the existence of such an un-
fathomable reality as the Supreme Being remains revelation (āgama).
Several Tuturs and Tattvas characterize the paradoxical nature of the
Lord as transcendent yet immanent in His creation, thereby continuing the
speculative trend documented in Siddhāntatantras whose oldest known man-
ifestation is in the Śvetāśvataropaniṣad.11 In the Old Javanese sources, how-
ever, this characterization is not problematized in terms of monism or du-
alism, an issue which was considered important especially by the Sanskrit
Śaiva commentators. Tus, in Tuturs and Tattvas, His being hidden in every-
thing is illustrated not with elaborate logical arguments, but simply through
well-established analogies, which are attested in the Upaniṣads and in some
early Siddhāntatantras. Tese analogies, namely the presence of ﬁre in wood
and butter in milk, bore the force of proof to establish the existence of the
Lord, invisible and yet existent, One and yet omnipresent in the manifest
world.12
A series of attributes of the transcendent aspect of the Supreme Real-
ity that closely resembles those appearing in the Old Javanese passage afer
the opening śloka of the Dharma Pātañjala is found in Vṛhaspatitattva 7–10,
which ﬁnds a parallel in Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP 4.3-6.13 All the four
verses are commented upon as a unit in the Vṛhaspatitattva—an arrange-
ment which reﬂects the one in the Vṛtti on the Svāyambhuva by Sadyojyotis,
according to whom the last three are the explanation of the ﬁrst one:
10.
For a discussion of this philosophical topos in Old Javanese and Sanskrit sources,
cf. below, pp. 570–584.
11.
Cf. Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 6.11 (trans. Olivelle 1998:431): ‘Te one God hidden in all
beings, pervading the universe, the inner self of all beings, the overseer of the work [i.e. cre-
ation], dwelling in all beings, the witness, the avenger, alone, devoid of qualities’ eko devaḥ
sarvabhūteṣu gūḍhaḥsarvavyāpī sarvabhūtāntarātmā / karmādhyakṣaḥsarvabhūtādhivāsaḥ
sākṣī cetā kevalo nirguṇaś ca //.
12.
I shall discuss these analogies in detail below (pp. 381–383), in connection with the
issue of monism vs. dualism in Old Javanese Śaiva sources, and in connection with prayo-
gasandhi (pp. 544–550).
13.
Tis series of verses indeed ﬁnds parallels in several Siddhāntatantras, which deﬁne
the Lord using similar attributes: cf., e.g., Sarvajñānottara VP 1.45–47; Rauravasūtrasaṅ-
graha VP 10.10–20; Niśvāsakārikā VP 49; Netratantra 21.20–31.


--- PAGE 368 ---
The Lord
349
Unfathomable, undeﬁnable, incomparable, without stain, subtle, u-
biquitous, eternal, unchangeable, undecaying—He is the Lord.
He is immeasurable, because He is inﬁnite. He is undeﬁnable and
without distinguishing marks. He is incomparable and one-in-His-
kind. He is without stain, because He is spotless.
He is subtle, because He is not perceived. He is ubiquitous, by virtue of
His pervasiveness. He is eternal, by virtue of His being devoid of cause.
He is unchangeable, by virtue of His being immovable.
He is undecaying, by virtue of His being a perfect whole, and He has
an auspicious nature. Tis principle of Śiva has been [thus] told. He
is present within everything.14
Te Lord is unfathomable, He cannot be made object of thought. For what
reason? Because He is endless, without boundaries. Undeﬁnable, without
indication as to His existence, because of His being without distinguishing
marks. Incomparable, without an equal, because there is absolutely noth-
ing similar to Him. Without disease, without being effected by suffering
because of His being pure. He is subtle, because of His being incapable of
being perceived. He is pervasive and omnipresent, the universe along with
its whole content is ﬁlled by Him. He is eternal, constantly still, because of
being without origin. Unchangeable, He is steadfast because of His being
without change, constantly still. Undecaying, without diminishing, because
of being full. He is the Lord. He is called the Lord because He is power-
ful. He is the ruler, without being ruled upon [by anything]. Tus is the
Principle of the Supreme Śiva.15
14.
Te ﬁnal half-line 10d, reading sarvataḥparisaṃsthitaḥ, has been translated by
Zieseniss (1958:27) as ‘überall ringsum beﬁndlich’ (cf. a similar expression, characteriz-
ing the Lord, in Netratantra 21.25: sarvabhūteṣu saṃsthitam). As I have pointed out pre-
viously (Acri 2006:119–120), the reading of the Vṛhaspatitattva, which differs from the
sarvādhvoparisaṃsthitaḥ(i.e. sarva-adhva-upari-saṃsthitaḥ‘standing above the ensemble
of the paths’) of the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, is remarkable insofar as it may suggest a
lack of familiarity with the Śaiva doctrine of the initiatory cosmic ‘paths’ (adhvan) on the
part of the Javanese author(s). Te term sarvādhvan is indeed commented upon by Sad-
yojyotis as referring to the sixfold path of phonemes, worlds, kalās, principles, words and
mantras. I have searched in vain for any precise references to this systematization (as well as
to the twofold pure and impure path, śuddha- and aśuddhādhvan) in Old Javanese sources.
Cf. below, p. 421.
15.
Vṛhaspatitattva, ślokas 7–10 and exegesis:
aprameyam anirdeśyam anaupamyam anāmayam /
sūkṣmaṃsarvagataṃnityaṃdhruvam avyayam īśvaram // 7
aprameyam anantatvād anirdeśyam alakṣaṇam /


--- PAGE 369 ---
350
iii Doctrine
Unlike the Dharma Pātañjala, the Vṛhaspatitattva characterizes the Lord ac-
cording to three aspects or manifestations, namely the highest principle of
the Supreme Śiva (paramaśivatattva), followed by the principle of Sadāśiva
(sadāśivatattva) and of Śiva (śivatattva or śivātmatattva). Tese three forms
of the Lord are but three aspects of the principle of sentience (cetanā).16 Al-
though a similar threefold systematization is attested in Siddhāntatantras, I
have found no exact correspondences; as a matter of fact, these three prin-
anaupamyam asādṛśyaṃvimalatvād anāmayam // 8
sūkṣmaṃcānupalabhyatvād vyāpakatvāc ca sarvagam /
nityaṃkāraṇaśūnyatvam acalatvāc ca tad dhruvam // 9
avyayaṃparipūrṇatvāt saumyabhāvaṃtathaiva ca /
śivatattvam idam uktaṃsarvataḥparisaṃsthitaḥ// 10
▷Vṛh 7–10 ≈SBSS vp 4.3–6 ▷Vṛh 7ab = NT 21.20cd, NiKār 49.11ab ▷Vṛh
7c = RSS VP 15a ▷Vṛh 7d = DhPāt 1b
8b alakṣaṇam ] Vṛh Ed. ; alakṣyataḥSBSS
8c asādṛśyaṃ] SBSS ; anādṛśyaṃ
Vṛh Ed., BDEF ; mahādṛśyaṃA ; mahadṛśyaṃCG
8d vimalatvād ] Vṛh Ed.,
SBSS ; viphalatvam A ; viphalatvād BDEF (CG om.)
9a cānupalabhyatvād ]
Vṛh Ed., SBSS ; cānuphalabdhatvat A ; cānupalabdha tat CG ; cānupalabyan tat
B ; cānupalabhyan taṃDEF 9b vyāpakatvāc ca sarvagam ] Vṛh Ed., SBSS ; vya-
pakatvañ ca sarvaṅgaṃA ; sarvāṅgaṃCG ; vyāpakaṃsarvvatatvañ ca BDE ; vya-
pakaṃsarvvasarvvaṅgaṃF 9c nityaṃkāraṇaśūnyatvam ] SBSS ; nityākāreṇa
śūnyatvam Vṛh Ed. ; nityakareṇa śūnyasya ACG ; nityākāreṇā śūnyasya BDEF
9d acalatvāc ca tad dhruvam ] Vṛh Ed., SBSS ; avalanoccha tan dravaṃA ;
avalano ca tad dravam B ; °tadravam D ; °tan dravam E ; avalanoñ ca tad ravavaṃ
CG ; acaleno ca tad ravan F 10b saumyabhāvaṃtathaiva ca ] Vṛh Ed. ; sora° A ;
soma° BEF ; somabhava ta° CG ; somabhavam ta° D ; svāmibhāvāt tatheśvaram
SBSS
10d sarvataḥ] Vṛh Ed. ; sarvatva AF ; sarvatvā BDE ; sarvata CG ; sar-
vādhvo° SBSS
• parisaṃsthitaḥ] Vṛh Ed., F ; pariṃsastatha A ; °saṃstathā B ;
°sastato CG ; °saṃstada D ; parisaṃstatha E
aprameya bhaṭāra / tan pāṅәnaṅәnan / apa hetu / ri kadadinyan ananta / tan pahiṅan / a-
nirdeśyam / tan patuduhan / ri kadadinyan tan palakṣaṇa / anaupamyam / tatan papaḍa / ri
kadadinyan tan hana paḍanira juga / anāmayam / tatan kәneṅlara / ri kadadinyan alilaṅ/
sūkṣma ta sira / ri kadadinyan tan vәnaṅinupalabdhi / vyāpaka ta sira sarvagata / kahibәkan
tikaṅrāt denira / sahananya kabeh / nityomiḍәṅsadākāla / ri kadadinyan tan pasaṅkan /
dhruvam / meṅәt ta sira / ri kadadinyan tan polah / umiḍәṅsadākāla / avyayam / tatan pa-
lvaṅ/ ri kadadinyan paripūrṇa / īśvara ta sira / īśvara ṅaranya ri kadadinyan prabhu ta sira /
sira ta pramāṇa tan kapramāṇan / nahan yaṅparamaśivatattva ṅaranya //.
16.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 6.9–10; 14.36–45; 50.18–21. Te last passage deﬁnes the triad as
follows, in an evidently hierarchical way: śivatattva is ‘pleasure that does not turn into pain’
sukha tan pabalik duhkha; sadāśivatattva is ‘pleasure without beginning nor end’ vvit tan
patuṅtuṅikaṅsukha; paramaśivatattva is ‘pleasure without parts, which is not capable of
being characterized’ niṣkala tan vәnaṅvinastvan ikaṅsukha.


--- PAGE 370 ---
The Lord
351
ciples differ in their denominations from source to source.17 Te common-
est triad encountered in the Sanskrit scriptures is Śiva, Sadāśiva and Īśvara,
in their turn corresponding to His aspects of ‘endowed with parts’ (sakala),
‘both endowed with and devoid of parts’ (sakalaniṣkala) and ‘devoid of parts’
(niṣkala).18 It is evident that this kind of arrangement is an attempt to justify
on doctrinal gounds the paradoxical character of the Supreme reality, which
is transcendent yet immanent in creation, invisible yet inferable, impersonal
yet embodied in the Lord, unfathomable yet not totally inaccessible to the
human mind.
A threefold systematization of the Supreme Reality similar to the one
expounded in the Vṛhaspatitattva is found in the Tattvajñāna. Te text (ch.
2–5) divides the śivatattva into the three categories of paramaśivatattva, sa-
dāśivatattva and ātmikatattva.19 Ch. 3 describes the supreme principle as
follows:
Te principle of the Supreme Śiva is the place of existence of the Lord in the
unmanifest (niṣkala). Without activity, without oscillation, without move-
ment, without ﬂow, without cause, without result, without origin, without
end. He is only continuous existence, unchanging, still, permanent. Te
whole universe is completely ﬁlled by Him. All the seven worlds are com-
17.
On the different systematizations found in the Saiddhāntika literature, cf. Goodall
(2004:192–193, fn. 80).
18.
As pointed out by Hadiwijono (1967:22–23), the Bhuvanakośa (9.31–33) relates this
threefold categorization in the context of akṣara mysticism, equating the praṇava (syllable
oṂ), which can be written with one, two or three vindus (diacritic signs indicating nasal-
ization) to, respectively, the Lord embodied as sakala, sakalaniṣkala and niṣkala. Note that
in Sanskrit Śaivatantras the words sakala and niṣkala can be translated, according to the
context, as ‘with parts’ and ‘without parts’, ‘gross’ and ‘subtle’, ‘manifest’ and ‘unmanifest’;
while in the (later) Javano-Balinese tradition the terms sakala and niṣkala eventually came
to mean primarily ‘visible/invisible worlds’ (cf. Rubinstein 2000:49), I ﬁnd the usage in
Old Javanese Tattvas and Tuturs to be mostly in harmony with the Sanskrit sources.
19.
Te discrepancy between the Vṛhaspatitattva and the Tattvajñāna with regard to the
last member of the triad can be explained by the fact that in the former text (14.44–46) the
śivatattva, when its powers of omniscience and omnipotence are obliterated because of the
intervention of Māyā, is said to correspond to ātmatattva. On the other hand, Tattvajñāna
5 further characterizes the ātmikatattva as the principle of Sadāśiva (and not Śiva) when it
pervades the principle of Māyā, being thereby woven crosswise and lengthwise (ūtaprota)
and ceasing to be perceived by His creation. A counterpart of both characterizations of Śiva
and Sadāśiva appears to be expounded in Kumāratattva ii (folios 19r–19v), which deﬁnes
Śiva as He whose body serves as the life for the Soul (pinakahurip ātmāvaknira) and Sadāśiva
as ūtaprota (cf. below, p. 382).


--- PAGE 371 ---
352
iii Doctrine
pletely covered, kept together and pervaded by Him. [He] completely ﬁlls
[them] reaching up to the seven underworlds. Te whole universe is entirely
ﬁlled and covered by Him. He cannot be made to decrease, He cannot be
made to increase. He is absolutely without a purpose, without an end. [He]
does not aim to be engaged in bad and good. He does not care about them
at all. Furthermore, there is no past, future and present in Him. He is not
divided by time. He is always just daylight.20 He is without end, just con-
stant. Tus are the distinguishing marks of the Lord [who is in the] level of
the Supreme Śiva.21
Te triad Paramaśiva, Sadāśiva and Śiva is occasionally found in other (pos-
sibly later) Tuturs, which appear to be drawing this doctrine from the Vṛhas-
patitattva and Tattvajñāna. For instance, the Kumāratattva ii (folio 19a–
19b) characterizes Paramaśiva as unfathomable and undeﬁnable (acintya
tan kavastvan), Sadāśiva as pervaded and pervasive (vyāpivyāpaka),22 omni-
scient (sarvajña) and omnipotent (sarvakāryakartā), Śiva as having a body
that serves as the life for the Soul (pinakahurip ātmāvaknira). Similarly, Ga-
ṇapatitattva 52–53 5b refers to the ‘reabsorption’ of Śiva into Sadāśiva and
ﬁnally Paramaśiva, who is without form and colour. Śloka 104 of the Bhuva-
20.
It is possible that the word rahina, instead of ‘day, daylight’ (as opposed to night,
cf. OJED 1480) here means ‘today’, for the sense required to comply with the metaphor
must refer to the concept of time rather than light. For a similar image, cf. Kaṭhopaniṣad
4.13cd, according to which the Supreme Reality is the ‘Lord of the past and future. He is
the same today and tomorrow’ īśāno bhūtabhavyasya sa evādya sa u śvaḥ(trans. Olivelle
1998:395).
21.
Tattvajñāna 3.1–10: paramaśivatattva ṅaranya kasthityan bhaṭāra riṅniṣkala / tan
polah tan limbak tan laku tan hili tan pasaṅkan tan paparan tan pavitan tan pavәkasan /
kevala sthiti umidәṅhumәnәṅlaṅgәṅjuga sira / ibәk taṅrāt kabeh denira / kakasut kahәma
kavyāpaka kabeh kaṅsaptabhuvana denira / saptapātāla suṇḍul vuntu / sasәk pәnuh lyab
kaṅjagat denira / tan kavәnaṅlinoṅan tan kavәnaṅtinambәhan / niṣkārya niṣprayojana juga
sira / tan para vyāpāra riṅhalahayu / nirhuniṅa ta sira ika kabeh / mvaṅtan hanaṅatītānā-
gatavartamāna ri sira / tan kahәlәtan sira de niṅkāla / rahina sadā juga sira / tan pakahilaṅan
lanā juga sira / nahan lakṣaṇa bhaṭāra paramaśivatattva /.
22.
OJED (2349) explains the compound as ‘probably a reinforcement of vyāpaka, but
it could also possibly be ‘‘including the including’’ ’; another possibility could be ‘pervasive
and pervaded’, cf. the usage in Arjunavivāha 10.1. A similar compound (vyāpyavyāpaka),
which might have been the original Sanskrit form, appears in a passage of Pañcārthabhāṣya
(on Pāśupatasūtra 2.5) describing the principle of Soul as pervaded by the Lord (presumably
Sadāśiva, for the sūtra kalitāsana refers to Sadāśiva’s seat—cf. below, p. 360) and pervading
all the lower principles. cf. the analogous description of Sadāśiva in Tattvajñāna 33 and 50,
SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 70 lines 9–10.


--- PAGE 372 ---
The Lord
353
nasaṅkṣepa equates, in hierarchical manner, Śiva with the mind-knowledge
(cittajñāna), Sadāśiva with the isolation (kevala) and Para (glossed in the Old
Javanese exegesis as Paramaśiva) with supreme isolation (paramakaivalya).
But most of the sources do not know about this division and present their
own set of speculations. Te eighth chapter of the Jñānasiddhānta, labelled
Naiṣṭhikajñāna, is almost entirely devoted to the characterization of the śi-
vatattva as impersonal absolute, which is non-cognisable and difﬁcult to be
grasped (avijñeyātidurgrāhya), the supreme secret (para guhya), bodiless (na
śarīraṃ—tātan hana śarīranira), incomparable (anopama) and perfect (pa-
ripūrṇa); a similar series of attributes of Paramaśiva is found in chapter 25
(SaṅHyaṅŚaivasiddhānta).23
Unlike other Old Javanese sources (including the speculative Tattvas),
which are remarkably reticent on the subject and at most touch upon it
through elliptic references, the eighth chapter of the Jñānasiddhānta features
what looks like an elaboration on the issue of the oneness of the Lord:
He, the Holy Śarva, is One. He is the Primary Cause of the Primary
Cause that is Śiva. [But] Śarva is [also] regarded as Not-One, for He
is the cause of the fourfold.
Te explanation is: the inherent nature of the Lord is Oneness-and-Non-
Oneness. Oneness is to conceive the characteristic of the Principle of Śiva
as being One. Tat is, He is considered as only One, not two or three. He
has only the Primal Cause that is Śiva as His unique characteristic, without
differentiation. Non-One means to conceive the Lord as having a fourfold
characterization. Fourfold means His characteristics: gross, subtle, supreme
and Void.24
Te fourfold division of the Supreme Reality is further detailed in śloka 3 of
23.
Verse 6 of which has a parallel in the Mūlasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (6.8) as
well as in Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 19.4 (cf. Acri 2006:122).
24.
Jñānasiddhānta 8.2:
sa eko bhagavān śarvaḥśivakāraṇakāraṇam /
aneko viditaḥśarvaḥcaturvidhasya kāraṇam //
kaliṅanya: ekatvānekatva svalakṣaṇa bhaṭṭāra. ekatva ṅaranya, kahiḍәp maṅekalakṣaṇaṅ
śivatattva. ndan tuṅgal, tan rva tiga kahiḍәpanira. maṅekalakṣaṇa śivakāraṇa juga, tan
paprabheda. aneka ṅaranya kahiḍәpan bhaṭṭāra makalakṣaṇa caturdhā. caturdhā ṅaranya,
lakṣaṇanirān sthūla, sūkṣma, para, śūnya.


--- PAGE 373 ---
354
iii Doctrine
the Jñānasiddhānta and the elaborate commentary thereon.25 Gross (sthūla)
corresponds to the level of audible sound (śabda), in which the Lord ‘is ut-
tered as embodied in mantras’ inuccāraṇa makāvak mantra, in which case
His names are Gaurīpati, Īśvara and Paśupati-Śiva. On the level of the subtle
(sūkṣma) He is made of conceptualization (cittamaya) and ‘reﬂected upon as
embodied in the sacred scriptures’ inanusmaraṇa makāvak jñāna, in which
case His names are Sadāśiva26 and Gāyatrī.27 On the level of the Supreme
(para), He is beyond conceptualization (cittavirahita), as in the Fourth State
(tūryapada): He is Paramaśiva. On the level of Void (śūnya) He is utterly
devoid of conceptualization (cittarahitāntya): He is without distinguishing
marks (nirlakṣaṇa), isolated (kevalya), having the form of Voidness (śūnyā-
kāra). He is called Śiva and Mahānātha, residing in the level of the kalā
beyond the paciﬁed (śāntyatīta) at the top of the cosmic hierarchy. In this
level, we are told in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese dyad 8.4, the distinction be-
tween sakala and niṣkala makes no more sense, for ‘the seat of that reality
has no real existence’ tan kavastvan uṅgvanira, and lacks the dichotomy of
near and far, beginning, middle and end.
Te longest deﬁnition of the Lord is found between the 13th and 15th
śloka of the second chapter of the Bhuvanakośa (Brahmarahasya), whose
twenty ślokas are entirely devoted to characterize the Supreme Reality. A
long portion of Sanskrit prose (14) describes the Lord—in the rather formu-
25.
Tat verse runs (almost) parallel to Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 1.8, which itself con-
stitutes just one of the several variants in which it is attested in Sanskrit sources, includ-
ing commentaries written by both Śaiva and Buddhist authors (cf. Acri 2006:121; Sferra
2007:444 fn. 3; Torella 2001:860). Te verse describes the three levels of the word or of
the bindu, being gross, subtle and supreme; the addition of Void to the series appears to be
an original Javanese development.
26.
Śivasāda in the text, which might be an inverted compound (on this phenomenon,
cf. Gonda 1973:463–464) or simply a corruption.
27.
Tis sentence seems to refer to Sadāśiva as being the embodiment of Śaiva sacred
scriptures: as I have pointed out above (p. 9), besides meaning ‘knowledge’, jñāna in Sanskrit
and Old Javanese texts can also (simultaneously) refer to a scripture. One may argue that
jñāna here stands for the Vedas—for Gāyatrī is the essence of the Vedas, and veda = jñāna;
however, since the only Gāyatri that was known in the Archipelago appears to have been
its ‘Tantric’ version (cf. StSt 360), which is attested in the Kṛṣṇayajurveda, the Pāśupata-
sūtra and a variety of Śaiva Tantric texts, it is more likely that here jñāna refers to Śaiva
scriptures. Sadāśiva is indeed regarded as the author of sacred, philosophical and other kind
of texts in Tattvajñāna 4.16–17 (saṅhyaṅśāstra āgama aji vaidya tarka vyākaraṇa gaṇita),
and is usually associated with the level of both sakala and niṣkala (with here corresponds to
sūkṣma; cf. also p. 351).


--- PAGE 374 ---
The Lord
355
laic manner that is typical of a hymn—as having no less than seventy-nine at-
tributes. Each Sanskrit terms is then embedded in an Old Javanese commen-
tary and provided with a brief gloss. Te Lord, who is called Paramārtha,
Maheśvara, Paramātma and Mahādeva, is characterized through the nega-
tive attributes that we have come across in other Old Javanese and Sanskrit
texts, such as unfathomable (acintyaṃ, tar kәneṅhiḍәp), without form (na
rūpam, tan parūpa sira), color (na varṇam, tan pavarṇa sira), body (agātraṃ,
tar pāvak; vitanuḥ, sira tan pāvak), etc.; beyond perception of the senses
(atīndriyaḥ, sira lәvih ikaṅkaton); emptier than the empty (śūnyātiśūnya);
not touched by afﬂiction (aśokaṃ, tar kәneṅkiṅkiṅ), etc.
As
Personal God
A decidedly ‘humanized’ deﬁnition of the paramount
reality is given at the end of the passage, where God is
said to be the Mother, Father, Kinsman, Kindred, Friend
and Teacher.28 Tis probably amounts to an attempt at
distinguishing the impersonal and personal aspects of God. Various other
passages of the Bhuvanakośa present attempts at subdividing these aspects
of the Lord in a hierarchical way, for instance by characterizing Him as
manifested as the pentad of Paramaśiva, Sadāśiva, Śivatara, Śivatama and
Śiva, corresponding to, respectively, the ‘lower’ deities called Parameśvara,
Sadāśiva, Rudra, Viṣṇu and Śiva.29
Speculations about the distinction between the personal and impersonal
aspects of the Supreme Reality are found in Tattvas. According to the Vṛhas-
patitattva (ślokas 11–13), the paramaśivatattva, which is described as an im-
personal absolute, omnipervasive and hidden within everything, is nonethe-
less capable of being conceptualized as a personal God in His Sadāśiva-form,
which is engaged in activity (savyāpāraḥ):
Śiva engaged in activity is the Sun, the principle of the sentient [that is]
Sadāśiva. Provided with an abode, qualities, pervasive, He appears out of
the state of formlessness.
He is the creator, not the efﬁcient agent [of the Universe]. Terefore He is
28.
Bhuvanakośa 2.14: sa evam mātā / sira ibu / sira bapa / saḥvandhuḥ/ sira kadaṅ/ saḥ
svajanaḥ/ sira varga / saḥmitra / sira mitra / saḥguruḥ/ sira guru / saḥdevaḥ/ sira deva /.
Compare Vṛhaspatitattva 13, quoted hereafer. Tis motif is common in Sanskrit sources:
cf., e.g., the stotra in Nyāyamañjarī 1.684.15–16: ‘For instance, in the world only you are my
mother, only you are my father, only you are my sister, only you are my brother’ tad yathā
loke tvam eva me mātā tvam eva me pitā tvam eva me bhaginī tvam eva bhrāteti //.
29.
Cf. Zieseniss (1939:149–151) and Hadiwijono (1967:24–25).


--- PAGE 375 ---
356
iii Doctrine
intent upon its maintenance,30 constantly shining, omniscient, omnipotent,
pervasive.
He is regarded to be the brother, the mother, the father of him who is without
refuge; He is the one who liberates from all suffering, from birth to birth.31
Here we see that such attributes of the Lord as brother, mother and father,
which are similar to those encountered at the end of Bhuvanakośa 2.14,
characterize the personal God and saviour Sadāśiva. Te exegesis deﬁnes
the term savyāpāraḥas Sadāśiva, which is equated to the Sun (saṅhyaṅ
āditya).32 In the Old Javanese exegesis to śloka 13 He is further described
as enthroned on a lotus formed by His Four Powers (caduśakti), i.e. Per-
vasion (vibhuśakti), Sovereignty (prabhuśakti), Knowledge (jñānaśakti) and
Action (kriyāśakti). Further on, in the exegesis to śloka 15, a mantric body
is attributed to Sadāśiva:
In the middle of that [lotus], there is the seat of the Lord when He takes a
body. He is mantrātmā: the mantras serve as His body. Īśāna is the head.
Tatpuruṣa is the face. Aghora is the heart. Bāmadeva is the genital organ.
Sadyojāta is the aspect. aum. Such is that which serves as the body of the
Lord. He is shining, having the color of crystal.33
30.
Tat is, anugraha. I entirely subscribe to Nihom’s (1995b:660–661, fn. 30) observa-
tion that ‘in the Pañcārthabhāṣya anugraha [‘maintenance’] must be distinguished from
prāsāda [‘grace’]. I have the impression that the former appears to supplant what in other
Śaivite schools is called sthiti [‘maintenance’] and that the term tirobhāva [‘delusion’] sub-
stitutes for saṃhāra [‘resorption’]. Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya 7.6–11; 14.21–23; 54.2–18; 55.6–8;
56.8–13; 60.20–61.4; 147.14–17’ (words within square brackets are my additions). Śloka 13
of the Vṛhaspatitattva appears to be related to the issue of the Lord as being the material or
efﬁcient cause of the universe (cf. below, p. 389).
31.
Vṛhaspatitattva 11–13: savyāpāraḥśivaḥsūryaḥcaittatattvaḥsadāśivaḥ/ sapadaḥ
saguṇo vyāpī arūpatvāt pracaryate // utpādako na sādhakaḥtattasyānugrahaparaḥ/ viro-
canakaro nityaḥsarvajñaḥsarvakṛd vibhuḥ// aśaraṇasya sa bhrātā sa mātā sa pitā mataḥ/
sa mocakaḥsarvaduḥkhād yathā janmani janmani //.
32.
As in Tattvajñāna 5 and 35. Tough not speciﬁcally ascribed to Sadāśiva but rather to
Śiva Parameśvara, the luminous and solar aspect of the Lord pervading the whole universe
is encountered also in the Dharma Pātañjala (212.9–12); cf. further Bhuvanakośa 1.12 and
1.23, Kumāratattva ii f. 19r. For the same characterization of Śiva in a Sanskrit source,
cf. Liṅgapurāṇa 2.19.28–29.
33.
Vṛhaspatitattva 14.7–11: ri madhya nikā / ṅkāna ta paluṅguhan bhaṭāra ri kālaniran
maśarīra / mantrātmā ta sira / mantra pinakaśarīranira / īśāna mūrdha ya / tatpuruṣa vaktra
ya / aghora hṛdaya ya / bāmadeva guhya ya / sadyojāta mūrti ya / aum / nahan pinakaśarīra
bhaṭāra / bhāsvara sphaṭikavarṇa //. As noted by Sudarshana Devi (1957:78), the sen-


--- PAGE 376 ---
The Lord
357
Te image of Sadāśiva provided with a ﬁve-fold mantric body (pañcamantra-
tanu) corresponds to the standard inconography of that deity met in Sanskrit
Siddhāntatantras.34 Te ﬁve faces of Sadāśiva are those invoked in the pañ-
cabrahmamantra, the mantra at the basis of the Śaiva cult of the Atimārga.35
A description of Sadāśiva that is almost identical to the one in Vṛhaspa-
titattva is found in Tattvajñāna 4.1–5:
Te Principle of Sadāśiva is as follows: the Lord [who is the] Principle of
Sadāśiva is [engaged in] action. [Being engaged in] action means that He
is endowed with Omniscience and Omnipotence. Omniscience and Om-
nipotence, they are [together with the supernatural powers they carry with
them] six. Tere is a lotus-throne, the seat of the Lord, its name is ‘the Four
Powers’. Its constituents are the Power of Knowledge, the Power of Perva-
sion, the Power of Lordship, the Power of Action. Tus are designated the
Four Powers.36
Te term vyāpāra here indicates that the Lord is omniscient (sarvajña) and
omnipotent sarvakāryakartā.37 Te two are said to be six(fold), which prob-
ably refers to a categorization of the supernatural abilities they are further
tence from īśāna mūrdha to sadyojāta mūrti ya / aum is probably to be intended as (being
originally) a mantra, i.e. the pañcabrahmamantra. Te original form could be restored to:
īśānamūrdhāya / tatpuruṣavaktrāya / aghorahṛdayāya / bāmadevaguhyāya / sadyojātamūr-
taye / oṂ//.
34.
Cf., e.g. Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 4.9; Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 3.18, 4.14–
15, 39, 5.10; Mṛgendratantra VP 13.197; etc.
35.
As attested in the Pāśupatasūtra and Ratnaṭīkā. Although it is no longer predom-
inant, meditation upon this ﬁvefold mantra is retained in later Śaiva sources of the Sid-
dhānta, for example in the Guhyasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (chapter 12). In the
same source (Niśvāsamukha 3.191cd; 4.40c–12b; 4.130; 4.133c–134b; Guhyasūtra 12.14–
21) as well as in the Svacchandatantra (11.43e–45b) and the Mṛgendratantra (KP 8.73–79
with Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha’s vṛtti) the ﬁve faces of Sadāśiva are equated to the ﬁve streams into
which the Śaiva revelation is traditionally divided (the precise denominations varying from
source to source).
36.
Tattvajñāna 4.1–5: nihan sadāśivatattva ṅaranira / vyāpāra ta bhaṭāra sadāśivatat-
tva / vyāpāra ṅaranya kinahanan sira de niṅsarvajña mvaṅsarvakāryakartā sira / sarvajña
sarvakāryakartā ṅaranya / anam pih / hana padmāsana paluṅgahan bhaṭāra caduśakti ṅara-
nya / lvirnya // jñānaśakti vibhuśakti prabhuśakti kriyāśakti / nahan taṅsinaṅgah caduśakti
ṅaranya //.
37.
Because of their construction with kinahanan ‘inhabited by, occupied by; possessed
by, possessing, feeling, full of, endowed with’ (OJED 584), referring to the Lord, the Sanskrit
agent nouns sarvajña and sarvakāryakartā are used in this passage as if they were abstract
substantives, i.e. sarvajñatva and sarvakartṛtva (cf. above, p. 64).


--- PAGE 377 ---
358
iii Doctrine
subdivided into (cf. below, table 3).38 Another possibility is that the two
faculties were regarded as different from the Power of Knowledge and Ac-
tion, which are part of the caduśakti; sarvajña and sarvakāryakartā plus the
caduśakti amounts to six. Te Tattvajñāna deviates from the Vṛhaspatitattva
insofar as it explicitly divides the sphere of action of Sadāśiva into manifest
(sakala) and unmanifest (niṣkala), thereby making this deity an intermedi-
ary ﬁgure possessing the characteristics both of the transcendent and of the
personal aspect of the Godhead.39 Te activity of Sadāśīva in the unmanifest
is the creation of the Gods, the Ṛṣis and other celestial or demonic beings, as
well as of the natural elements, the earth and the heavenly bodies (4.11–15).
Te things created by Sadāśiva in the manifest are the Śāstras, the Āgamas
and the treatises on medicine, logic, grammar and mathematics (4.16–17).
Te passage concludes:
While He governs the whole universe He has as His property both the Man-
ifest and the Unmanifest. He is the Lord Ādipramāṇa. He is the Lord Jagan-
nātha. He is the Lord who is the ‘Cause’. He is the Lord Parameśvara. He
is the Lord who is the Teacher. He is the Paramount Lord. He is called the
Lord [possessing the power of] not being subjected [to anybody’s will] and
subjecting [others to His will] (vaśavaśitva).40 [As for] the whole [world]:
He makes [it], without being made [by it]. He has the power to create and the
power to destroy [it]. Tere is none who can surpass his state of Sovereign
Prowess. He is the Lord Teacher of Teachers. Tus are the distinctive marks
of the Lord sadāśivatattva.41
38.
However, whereas the text explicitly attributes to jñānaśakti (= sarvajñatva) a subset
of three powers, the other three powers usually attributed to kriyāśakti (= sarvakartṛtva) by
related sources are passed over in silence by the text.
39.
Te transcendent aspect of the Lord (Paramaśiva) was in fact already described
as abiding in the niṣkala in section 3 (quoted above, p. 351).
According to Hadiwi-
jono (1967:23), Bhuvanakośa 11.23–25 characterizes Sadāśiva as being both sakala and
niṣkala—albeit in an obscure and seemingly contradictory way. Cf. also the ﬁrst śloka of
Dharma Pātañjala. A twofold characterization of Śiva as sakala and niṣkala is found in Pa-
rākhyatantra 97ab, while the Kiraṇa (3.14c and 3.21a) refers to Sadāśiva in these terms by
using the expression dvisvabhāva ‘having two natures’ (cf. Goodall 2004:196, fn. 189).
40.
OJED s.v. (2216) notes: ‘(bahuvrīhi? not in Skt?) ruling (over). Also baśabaśitva’.
Since both vaśa (‘power/dominion/mastery’) and vaśitva (‘having power or control over’)
are attested in Old Javanese, I propose to consider the compound vaśavaśitva as an
Old Javanese tadbhava originating from, and having the meaning of, avaśa+avaśitva (or
avaśya+vaśitva) ‘the supernatural power of being not subjected to others’ will while sub-
jecting others to one’s own will’. On these two supernatural powers, cf. below, pp. 359–363.
41.
Tattvajñāna 4.18–24: an sira pramāṇa irikaṅrāt kabeh sira makadravya irikaṅsa-


--- PAGE 378 ---
The Lord
359
Te above passage characterizes the Lord Sadāśiva as the Cause (bhaṭāra ma-
kāraṇa), having power over powerless subjects (vaśavaśitva), provided with
the four Powers of Knowledge, Action, Pervasion and Lordship, and being
both immanent (sakala) and transcendent (niṣkala). Apart from the last sub-
division into two aspects, the characterization of Sadāśiva is substantially in
harmony with that of Vṛhaspatitattva.
Although Sadāśiva is the main deity of the Mantramārgic Śaivasiddhānta,
this characterization closely reﬂects the one of the Lord according to the Ati-
mārga Pāśupata Śaivism. In fact, in the seminal scriptures of that system, i.e.
the Pāśupatasūtra (with Kauṇḍinya’s Pañcārthabhāṣya) and the Gaṇakārikā
(with Bhāsarvajña’s Ratnaṭīkā), the Lord is deﬁned as the Cause (kāraṇa),42
i.e. the creator, destroyer and supporter of the universe and whatever abides
in it;43 not subjected to anybody’s will (avaśya), He, possesses the supernat-
ural ability of vaśitva, thanks to which everything becomes subject to His
will;44 He is characterized by the aspects of immanence (sakala) and tran-
scendence (niṣkala),45 and by the two dyads formed by the Power of Knowl-
edge and Action and by the Power of Pervasion and Lordship.46
A description of the Powers of the Lord is found in Pañcārthabhāṣya 1.1
where, to the question as to why He is called the Lord (patiḥkasmāt), the
commentator answers:
kalaniṣkala / sira ta bhaṭāra ādipramāṇa ṅaranira / sira ta bhaṭāra jagannātha ṅaranira /
sira ta bhaṭāra makāraṇa ṅaranira / sira ta bhaṭāra parameśvara ṅaranira / sira ta bhaṭāra
guru ṅaranira / sira ta bhaṭāra mahulun ṅaranira / sira ta maṅaran bhaṭāra vaśavaśitva /
ika ta kabeh / sirāgave tan ginave / sira ta vәnaṅmaṅhanākәn vәnaṅmaṅhilaṅakәn / tan
hana lumәvihana kaiśvaryanira / sira ta bhaṭāra guru niṅguru / nahan ta lakṣaṇa bhaṭāra
sadāśivatattva //.
42.
Te use of the word kāraṇa to designate Śiva is probably of Pāśupata origin (cf. tak
ii:91 [Goodall], listing various occurrences of this term in Siddhāntatantras).
43.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 1.1, p. 5.22–23; Ratnaṭīkā 1.6ab (also in Sarvadarśanasaṅ-
graha, Pāśupatadarśana 84): ‘Cause is that which creates and retracts the universe, and
maintains it’ samastasṛṣṭisaṃhārānugrahakāri kāraṇaṃ(for my translation of anugrāha,
cf. above, p. edpagerefanugrahafnpage fn. 30).
44.
Cf. Pāśupatasūtra 1.27–28: ‘And all become subject to Him. And He becomes not
subjected to all’ sarve cāsya vaśyā bhavanti // sarveṣāṃcāvaśyo bhavati //; Pañcārthabhāṣya
ad 2.12, listing the superhuman power of vaśitva.
45.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 2.26.
46.
Cf., besides Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 1.1 and 1.26, the commentary to the following sū-
tras: 1.24, 1.32 (vibhuśakti); (jñānaśakti) 1.29, 5.26, 5.46; 1.9, 1.26, 1.32, 2.23, 5.41, 5.42
(prabhuśakti); 1.29, 5.46 (kriyāśakti).


--- PAGE 379 ---
360
iii Doctrine
He is the Lord (pati) because He pervades (āpti) and because He protects
(pāti) the cattle. By what means does He pervade and protect them? He
pervades by means of the Power of Pervasion (vibhuśakti). Because no one
anywhere can surpass His endless power. His Power of Knowledge (jñā-
naśakti) is endless and unlimited, because [in PS 5.26 it is said that] He is
a sage (vipra). By means of this unlimited [Power] He pervades the cattle
who are unlimited as present to His eyes, therefore [He is called] the Lord.
Similarly He has the power of Lordship (prabhuśakti) because He protects.47
With the exception of the Power of Action (kriyāśakti), three of the four Pow-
ers attributed to the Lord by the Old Javanese sources are mentioned, in the
same sequence, in the Sanskrit passage. Another textual portion enumerat-
ing all four Powers is the commentary on sūtra 1.26 ‘And the possession of
a property’ dharmitvaṃca, where they are attributed to the accomplished
master (siddha):
Te word ‘and’ is used in order to add this [quality of supernatural prowess]
to the Powers of Knowledge (jñāna-) and Action (kriyāśakti). Tus, it has
been shown from the scriptural statement of His possessing all forms He
wishes and His also being without instruments that the Siddha has Lord-
ship over (prabhutva) and Pervasiveness in (vibhutva) the forms which He
creates, and is endowed with a property.48
Te similarities appear to go further, for the description of the Lord as pos-
sessing Four Powers in the form of a lotus-seat (padmāsana) found in the Vṛ-
haspatitattva (exegesis to śloka 13) and the Tattvajñāna (ch. 4) ﬁnds an echo
in the following passage of the Pañcārthabhāṣya, where sūtra 2.5 kalitāsanam
‘A formed seat’ is quoted by Kauṇḍinya as an answer to the question what
sort of property the Lord Rudra possesses:
47.
Pañcārthabhāṣya on 1.1 (p. 5.17–21): āpti pāti ca tān paśūn ity ataḥpatir bha-
vati / tān kenāpnoti kena rakṣati / āpnoti vibhuśaktyā / yasmāt kutrāpi śaktim asyānantāṃ
nātivartante / vipratvāc cāsyānantā jñānaśaktiḥaparimitā / tayā aparimitayā aparimitān
eva pratyakṣān paśūn āpnotīti patiḥ/ tathā pālayatīti prabhuśaktiḥ/ • āpnoti vibhuśaktyā ]
conj. Sanderson (cf. PBh (2)); tato vibhuśaktyā Ed. • kutrāpi ] conj. Sanderson (cf. PBh
(2)); tatrāpi Ed.
48.
Pañcārthabhāṣya on 1.26 (p. 46.5–7): caśabdo ’tra jñānakriyāśaktisamāropaṇār-
thaḥ// evam atrāsya siddhasya kāmarūpivikaraṇavacanāt svakṛteṣu rūpeṣu prabhutva-
vibhutvaṃguṇadharmitvaṃca vyākhyātam / • prabhutvavibhutvaṃ] em.
Bisschop
(cf. PBh (2)); brabhutvaṃvibhutvaṃEd.


--- PAGE 380 ---
The Lord
361
Te seat (āsana) is God’s Lordship (patitva), Power (śakti), Capability (sā-
marthya) or Sovereignty (aiśvarya), which is His very nature and real state
of being, and is truly His essential property; it is not a posture of sitting such
as the lotus-posture.49
Even though there is no direct correspondence between the Pañcārthabhāṣ-
ya and the Old Javanese passages quoted above, the similarity of context is
apparent and conveys the same image of the Lord having a seat constituted
by His Powers. It is also possible that some of the terms used by Kauṇḍinya
may be considered as being alternative, and technical, designations of the
‘standard’ set of four Powers. In this respect, I may point to the fact that,
for example, Ratnaṭīkā 1.6ab.47 explains the Power of Lordship (patitva) at-
tributed to the Lord as ‘being His incomparable Power of Knowledge and
Action’ niratiśayadṛkkriyāśaktiḥpatitvaṃ.50
Tat the fourfold pattern expounded in the Vṛhaspatitattva and Tattva-
jñāna was a constitutive doctrinal tenet of Śaivism in the Archipelago is sup-
ported by the fact that the same arrangement is found also in several Tu-
turs,51 as well as in the Dharma Pātañjala. In 282.7–17 we read that the
Lord Supreme Cause (paramakāraṇa) possesses the Four Powers of Perva-
sion, Knowledge, Action and Lordship. In 282.18–284.16, each one of the
four is characterized as comprising a set of subsidiary supernatural faculties
obtained by the Siddha when he reaches unity with the Lord.
49.
Pañcārthabhāṣya on 2.5 (p. 58.3–5): yad etat patyuḥpatitvaṃśaktiḥsāmarthyam aiś-
varyaṃsvaguṇaḥsadbhāvaḥsatattvaṃtattvadharmaḥtad āsanam // na tu padmāsanavad
upaveśanalakṣaṇam ity arthaḥ[…] //.
50.
Cf. also Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha, Pāśupatadarśana, lines 75–76. Tat a variety of alter-
native technical designations of the same concepts existed is suggested by the attestation of
such glosses in both the Pañcārthabhāṣya and the Ratnaṭīkā. For instance, in the latter text
(1.6ab:14–15) Bhāsarvajña glosses aiśvarya as indicating the Powers of Knowledge and Ac-
tion (maheśvaraiśvaryalakṣaṇā siddhiḥ// sā dvirūpā jñānaśaktiḥkriyāśaktiś ceti), while in
1.6ab:51 the term ṛṣitvaṃ‘the state of a ṛṣi’ and vipratvam ‘the state of sage’ are said to stand
for, respectively, kriyāśakti and jñānaśakti (ṛṣitvaṃkriyāśaktir jñānaśaktis tu vipratvam).
51.
Cf., e.g., Kumāratattva ii folio 35r–35v, glossing caduśakti, in connection with the
body of the Lord (sadāvak bhaṭāra), as vibhuśakti, jñānaśakti, kriyāśakti and prabhuśakti.
Tutur Saptati, folio 52v–53r, deﬁnes the Four Powers as forming the nature of the Lord (ika
canduśakti [sic] pinakasvabhāva bhaṭāra lvirnya), listing them in the same sequence as in
Kumāratattva ii; in Tutur Cadhu Śakti folio 5r the list inverts the position of jñāna- and
kriyāśakti. On the basis of their doctrinal contents and linguistic features, my impression
is that these texts constitute in all probability late (post 15th-century) specimens composed
on Bali, which have borrowed this speciﬁc doctrinal motif from the two Tattvas.


--- PAGE 381 ---
362
iii Doctrine
Table 2: Te Lord’s Powers according to the DhPāt
Not being subjected
[to others’ will]
Impenetrability
} vibhuśakti
Swifness as of
thought
Acting without
physical organs
Ability to assume any
form at will
} kriyāśakti
Seeing from afar
Hearing from afar
Tinking from afar
Knowing from afar
} jñānaśakti
Fearlessness
Undecaying
Unaging
Immortal
Going anywhere
without hindrance
} prabhuśakti
A similar arrangement is outlined in the Pañcārthabhāṣya and the Ratnaṭī-
kā52 with respect to the state of perfection and lordship corresponding to the
goal of personal end of sorrow attained by the Pāśupata practitioner, with the
difference that the attribution of a set of subsidiary faculties to the power of
Pervasion and Lordship is not made explicit in the Sanskrit sources.53 Tis
feature also characterizes other Old Javanese sources, such as the Vṛhaspa-
titattva and the Tattvajñāna. Verses 5, 11 and 18 of chapter 11 of the Jñā-
nasiddhānta paraphrase Pāśupatasūtra 1.21–37, but divide the powers into
three series, viz. triśakti, pañcaśakti and aṣṭaśakti.54 Te different accounts
are compared in table 3.
52.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya on sūtra 5.47 and Ratnaṭīkā on kārikā 6ab (pp. 9.28–10.2); com-
pare also the Pāśupatadarśana of the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha (Hara 2002:208–210).
53.
Te explanation of the terms by the Dharma Pātañjala is generally the same as the
explanation given in the Pañcārthabhāṣya, with one interesting exception: the power of ‘not
being subjected’ (avaśyaḥ/aṅavaśyah) is interpreted in the latter sources as ‘not being sub-
jected to the power of all other beings’, denoted as cattle (paśu), whereas the Old Javanese
source glosses it as ‘not being subjected to attachment, hate, delusion’ (i.e. the three deﬁle-
ments of rāga, dveṣa, moha).
54.
Whereas the paraphrase is nowhere as detailed and close to the Pāśupatasūtra as
the one found in the Jñānasiddhānta, the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā also mentions some of
these powers, e.g. in Mukhasūtra 4.85cd–86ab (sarvajñātā ca bhavate śravaṇaṃdarśanaṃ
tathā / mananaṃca śodhanaṃcaiva vijñānaṃca ya †…† ) and in Niśvāsamūla 7.18cd–
19 (aṇimādiguṇaiśvaryaṃsarvajñatvaṃprajāyate / dūrāc chravaṇavijñānadarśanaṃman-
anaṃtathā // jāyate sarvakāmitvaṃdehenānena sādhakaḥ).


--- PAGE 382 ---
The Lord
363
Table 3: Systematization of the Lord’s Powers according to various Old Javanese and Sanskrit Sources
Jñānasiddhānta ch. 11
Pāśupatasūtra ch. 1
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
avaśyānāveśya ucyate* (18d)
sarveṣāṃcāvaśyo bhavati (28)
sarveṣāṃcānāveśyo bhavati (30)
Vibhuśakti {
aṅ-avaśyah
anāveśyah
Pervasive (as if woven
crosswise and lengthwise)
He is short of nothing
in the whole universe
darśanaṃyugapac caiva
śravaṇaṃmananaṃtathā
yugapad vijñānaṃcāpi
mahāsarvajñātā smṛtāḥ(11)
dūradarśanaśravaṇamananavi-
jñānāni cāsya pravartante (21)
sarvajñātā (22)
} Jñānaśakti {
dūradarśana
dūraśravaṇa
dūrāt manana
dūrāt masarvajñatā
dūraśravaṇa
dūrasarvajña
dūradarśana
dūradarśana
dūraśravaṇa
dūrātmaka
yugapad manojavitvaṃ
kāmarūpitvam eva ca
avikāradharmitvaṃtu
triśakti etad ucyate (5)
manojavitvam (23)
kāmarūpitvam (24)
vikaraṇaḥ(25) dharmitvaṃ
ca (26)
} Kriyāśakti {
manojavitvaṃ
vikaradharmitvaṃ
kāmarūpitvaṃ
He is the origin of the
universe, the gods, the
natural elements, etc.
ajaraḥamaraś caiva
akṣayaś cāpratihata
vadhyam avadhyaṃ**
ca proktā (18abc)
sarve cāsya vadhyā bhavanti (31)
sarveṣāṃcāvadhyo bhavati (32)
abhītaḥ(33) akṣayaḥ(34)
ajaraḥ(35) amaraḥ(36) sarvatra
cāpratihatagatir bhavati (37)
Prabhuśakti {
abhītaḥ
akṣayaḥ
ajaraḥ
amaraḥ
apratihatagatiḥ
Te actions of the creator
of the universe are not
resisted [by anybody] in
the whole universe
Whatever he desires
cannot be opposed
* Tis pāda is metrically problematic. Te edition reads vaśyār avaśyām ucyate (?) (sic; note that Soebadio did not recognize the parallel with the powers described in
the Pāśupatasūtra and lef the whole śloka untranslated), based on mss. vasar avaśyam ucyate (metrical). As the Old Javanese commentary has vaśyā, anavaśyā (which,
regrettably, are lef unexplained), I have opted to restore the pāda in accordance with the Sanskrit parallel(s), even though the result is still a hypermetrical pāda.
** As a result of my emendation of bandhām abandhāṃof the edition, based on the readings bandham abandhata (TĀdh), bandam abadata (TK).


--- PAGE 383 ---
364
iii Doctrine
Te arrangement of Sadāśiva’s powers into the tetrad of jñānaśakti, kri-
yāśakti, vibhuśakti and prabhuśakti was already ascribed to the Pāśupata sys-
tem by Zieseniss (1939:144–145; 1958:69–73), on the basis of his study of
the Pāśupatadarśana of the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha and of the Ratnaṭīkā.55
Tis arrangement differs from the characterization we come across in the
Sanskrit Śaiva Tantras, which mention either the dyad of Knowledge (jñāna)
and Action (kriyā)56 or the triad formed by those two plus the Power of Will
(icchāśakti).57
Te idea of a throne (āsana or siṃhāsana), formed by four elements,
seated on which the Lord (Śiva or Sadāśiva) is to be visualized by the prac-
titioner is a common doctrine of the early Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras too.58
But there the four elements are the mantras bearing the same names of the
four qualities (bhāva) of the buddhi that were inherited from the Sāṅkhya
system, viz. Knowledge (jñāna), Righteousness (dharma), Detachment (vairā-
gya) and Sovereignty (aiśvarya). Although in Tattvas the four items (plus
their opposites) along with their properties are described, they are never
mentioned in connection with the Lord’s seat.59
Zieseniss (1939:145–146) attributed the doctrinal standpoint of the In-
donesian sources to the development of a Sadāśiva-theism, characteristic of
the Śaivasiddhānta, out of a pre-existing Pāśupata core. It is evident that this
innovation was carried out—unlike in the Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras that
55.
In fact, when Zieseniss was writing his treatises, the Pañcārthabhāṣya was necessarily
unknown to him as it had not yet been published.
56.
Cf., e.g., Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 4.10, Kiraṇatantra 8.139, etc.
57.
However, as Goodall (TĀK i:284) notes, ‘although icchāśakti is sometimes spoken
of, e.g., in Mokṣakārikā 16, it does not form a third member of this essential group except
in later South Indian Siddhāntatantras, e.g. Pūrvakāmika 4.90 and 4.334; Rauravāgama KP
65.57; [etc.]’; in addition to these sources, the works of post-9th century non-Saiddhāntika
authors of the Trika, Krama and Pratyabhijñā schools could also be mentioned (e.g. Īśvara-
pratyabhijñā, Tantrāloka, Tantrasāra, etc.).
58.
Such as Guhyasūtra, Sarvajñānottara, Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, Mataṅgapāra-
meśvarāgama, etc.; cf. the references given in TĀK ii:278 [Goodall].
59.
As noted by Goodall (TĀK ii:278), the eight elements together are described as
forming the Lord’s throne only in later Śaiva sources. Te only Old Javanese sources I am
aware of mentioning the eight in connection with the Lord’s seat are the ritualistic manu-
scripts collected by Hooykaas (1963:130–132), containing descriptions of the pūjā of Śiva.
Te items are there characterized as having the form of lions and therefore, presumably, are
to be connected (as in the South Asian Sanskrit sources) with the siṅhāsana. Tis is con-
ﬁrmed by the speciﬁcation, found in the same sources, that the padmāsana is higher than
caturaiśvārya, and the caturaiśvārya (also called siṅhāsana) higher than anantāsana.


--- PAGE 384 ---
The Lord
365
have been transmitted to us—by accretion and inclusivism, for the previ-
ous fourfold pattern comprising the dyad formed by the Powers of vibhu
and prabhu was retained.
As an
Incarnated
Being
A crucial tenet of Śaiva religion is the theophany of the
Lord as a supernatural, and yet incarnated and visible,
being. Te scriptures of the Atimārga describe Him as
incarnated on earth in the ﬁrst Pāśupata guru; the Sid-
dhāntatantras and other scriptures of the Mantramārga
also posit the past existence of a bodily form of the Lord as universal mas-
ter, through which He transmitted the Śaiva teachings to celestial as well as
human beings. Since the Śaiva Tantras are almost invariably arranged in the
form of dialogues between the Lord and superhuman interlocutors, it fol-
lows that He must be provided with a visible body and with the organ of
speech in order to teach His doctrine.
Te positing of an incarnated Lord does, however, entail a series of philo-
sophical issues that, if not properly addressed, may provide the imaginary
opponent with an easy argument to disprove the Śaiva characterization of
the Lord as both impersonal and personal—yet supreme—God.60 Tat this
was felt to be the case is clear in a doctrinally minded treatise as the Dha-
rma Pātañjala from Kumāra’s polemic questions on this topic. For instance,
in question 18 Kumāra expresses difﬁculty concerning the embodiment of
the Lord. Afer the Lord has explained the mechanism of reincarnation, His
son asks who is the Holy One (saṅapa) who experiences the incarnations
(276.1). Te Lord’s reply to this question is that He Himself has already ex-
perienced the cycle of existence, and that various were His incarnations (aku
huvus maṅhiḍәp saṅsāra, aneka ikaṅjanma bhinuktiku). Having detailed
such incarnations in the long passage that I will present further below (pp.
367–374), He concludes that, by virtue of that experience, His knowledge of
the fruits of karma leaving behind impressions in the mind is clear (280.19–
20). Further on (question 20), Kumāra asks for a clariﬁcation: who is the
one designated as Lord Supreme Cause (bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa)? Te Lord
replies:
He whose subtlety is permanent. He is sadāśauca, pure without being effect-
DhPāt
282.8–17
60.
In fact, as we have seen above, the Lord in His impersonal aspect as Summum Bonum
was described as omnipervasive and devoid of body, while the personal God Sadāśiva was
characterized as having a mantric body.


--- PAGE 385 ---
366
iii Doctrine
ed by maculation. Constantly blissful, He does not have a former state as a
human being, unlike all of us. All the Eight Vidyeśas and above all Brahmā,
Viṣṇu along with the group of the Lokapālas, they had as former existence
the cycle of incarnation, all of them. And because of the greatness of their
devotion toward the Lord, and of the sharpness of their absorption, for that
reason they were taken back to the abode of the gods. Te Lord Supreme
Cause is not so: He just is eternally blissful. ‘But He ends up in the cycle
of existence: He will incarnate in a human being in the future’. If, possibly,
thus would be your words, my son, [I would reply:] it is not possible for Him
to be born as an incarnated being, my son, for He is omniscient: He knows
the whole universe. He knows about the cause of the cycle of existence, and
the suffering. It is not possible to escape that, without knowledge about its
cause, and about the way of extinguishing suffering.
It would seem that the above passage is in contradiction with what has previ-
ously been declared by the Lord, i.e. that He has already experienced a series
of incarnations. However, the point here may be that He who takes a body
is the Lord in his sakalaniṣkala (or Sadāśiva) aspect, and not the Supreme
Cause, which amounts to the aspect that is the Summum Bonum, and hence
niṣkala. On the other hand, it might be that the relationship between the
Lord and His ‘manifestation’ is one of non-direct identity, which would al-
low Him to remain untainted as the highest principle. A sketch of an ex-
planation in this direction seems to follow a few lines later, when Śiva de-
tails the relation between Him and the perfect yogin. Te latter is said to
attain His Powers and glorious body, thus becoming in every respect sim-
ilar to Him. Kumāra (question 24) replies that, if so, the Lord would be in
the cycle of rebirths—which contradicts the previous characterization of the
Supreme Cause. Te Lord replies that thanks to the yogin’s perfect absorp-
tion and prayogasandhi, the Lord is made manifest (abhivyakta) in an incar-
nated creature. Te nature of this manifestation is then explained through
the simile of ﬁre in wood: like the ﬁre that is in wood ‘manifests’ its body
when the wood burns, so the Lord only ‘manifests’ His body in the perfect
yogin, without a full identity being implied.
A similar concern about the status of the Lord as incarnated or mani-
fested on earth is detectable in the Pañcārthabhāṣya. Kauṇḍinya, while com-
menting on sūtra 1.40, sadyo ’jātaṃprapadyāmi ‘I bow to the ever unborn’,
justiﬁes the scriptural authority stating that the Lord, despite His being eter-
nal and beginningless, is not born like a human soul; for such a birth implies
having stain (añjana), and God is free from it. To him, the fact that the Lord


--- PAGE 386 ---
The Lord
367
is taught to have assumed earthly incarnations constitutes no contradiction,
for in Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 1.1 he states that ‘on account of the authority of
the sūtra that God is ‘‘not born’’ (ajāta) we know that God, whek he took
a human form, entered the [dead] body of a brahmin, descending on this
earth at Kāyāvataraṇa’ ajātatvāc ca manuṣyarūpī bhagavān brāhmaṇakāyam
āsthāya kāyāvataraṇe avatīrṇa iti (p. 3.16–17). Te crucial point is thus that
the Lord is not born from a female womb like a common human being—a
point that will also be made by the Dharma Pātañjala (276.13), which asserts
that Śiva’s incarnation (i.e. Pātañjala), along with His four brothers, was not
born from sperm and blood, but from the yoga of the Lord (ndatan vәtu
saṅke śuklaśonita, mәtu saṅke yoga bhaṭāra). Te section about the Lord’s
incarnations begins as follows:
At last, [when the fruit of] my doing good came, I was conducted to a master.
DhPāt
276.4–12
I was instructed about the scriptures on dharma. I constantly put them into
practice. I practiced the scriptures on dharma for a long time. I died. Again
I incarnated as a human being. I remembered about my human births and
again I made my body the servant of a master. I was instructed in the scrip-
tures on Yoga. Tose I constantly studied, day and night; those I put into
practice. I became a leader among yogins for a long time: a thousand years
was the duration of my being a leader among yogins. I was brought to the
heaven and given the name of Nīlalohita. I was given in marriage a virgin,
the daughter of the reverend Dakṣa, whose name was Satī. Satī died. I was
lef alone. I again became a leader among yogins. My practice of absorption
was fervent. I died and I was reborn as the Lord.
Te initial part of the account discloses nothing about the identity and mode
of incarnation of the Lord; however, since He is speaking in the ﬁrst person,
He is probably referring to the form He assumed as teacher of the scriptures
in the world, having His abode on the mount Kailāsa. It follows that the
passage is about former incarnations, i.e. the ones that occurred prior to the
one He is ﬁctitiously attributed in the temporal dimension of the text. An
incarnation into a human being is mentioned, but that he was not a usual
being is made clear by the fact that he was a leader among yogins (yogīśvara)
and that he lived for one thousand years. We indeed read that he was brought
to heaven as Nīlalohita and was given Satī in marriage.
Nīlalohita, already appearing in the Vedic Brāhmaṇa texts as a Rudra,
ﬁgures in the Purāṇas as one among Śiva’s gaṇas or as the very ‘ﬁrst’ form of


--- PAGE 387 ---
368
iii Doctrine
Śiva born from Brahmā; in certain accounts, he is also depicted as the hus-
band of Satī.61 But what the text is here referring to in a few terse sentences
is the ‘classic’ version of the Purāṇic myth of the marriage of Śiva (and not
Nīlalohita) and the genesis of the Śaiva holy family. At the beginning of the
Treta Yuga, the ‘lord of yogins’ Śiva meditates on the Kailāsa. His detach-
ment constitutes a hindrance to the process of creation of the universe, so
Brahmā prays Dakṣa’s daughter Satī, an incarnation of the Goddess, to at-
tract his attention. She is successful in her task, but the menage of the divine
couple is bound to come to an unhappy end: as a result of Dakṣa’s failing to
invite her spouse to the great sacriﬁce he was preparing, Satī burnt herself to
death. Śiva then turned to severe asceticism and meditation, but only afer
his rage had caused much trouble to the gods and put at risk the existence of
the universe.
Having thus related His death and ‘second incarnation’, in the immedi-
ate continuation of this passage the Lord reveals that He is the last of ﬁve
brothers, the pañcaṛṣi, bearing the name Pātañjala; the detailed account of
His incarnation follows up to 280.4. Te motif of the pañcaṛṣi does not ﬁgure
in the Purāṇic accounts of the legend of Satī and Śiva, where the common
sequel to the story is the burning of Kāma, the marriage with Pārvatī and
the killing of the demon Tāraka. A version of this legend is narrated in the
Dharma Pātañjala afer the conclusion of the pañcaṛṣi section, in 280.5–16.
Although the names of the characters mentioned in the Old Javanese text
do not completely correspond to those featuring in the Sanskrit accounts,
the main elements of the myth are largely overlapping: a Daitya, Nīlaru-
draka62 (Tāraka in the Epics and Purāṇas), was threatening the universe and
the gods; the latter beg for the help of Śiva, who is however deeply immersed
in meditation. Te gods come to know through the mouth of Nīlarudraka
61.
Although the accounts vary as to the plot as well as to the number of details provided,
a common motif is the narration of the cutting of Brahmā’s ﬁfh head by Nīlalohita. Accord-
ing to another story, Brahmā asks his son Nīlalohita to beget progeny; the latter copulates
with his wife Satī, who gives birth to the one-thousand Rudras. For both motifs, cf. Brah-
māṇḍapurāṇa ch. 6; Bhāgavatapurāṇa 4.6.41; Kūrmapurāṇa 1.15.15 and 1.21.20; Matsya-
purāṇa 133; Ur-Skandapurāṇa chapter 5 and 6. Whereas the Epics and the Purāṇic sources
generally identify Nīlalohita as one of the physical forms through which the transcendent
Śiva acts in the world, thereby implying a relation of relative identity between the two ﬁg-
ures, the Brāhmaṇas describe him as a separate ﬁgure. Te development of the mythology
of the enigmatic ﬁgure of Nīlalohita has been discussed by Granoff (2006).
62.
Consistently spelled Nīlarudrākṣa in the text; cf. p. 281, fn. 152.


--- PAGE 388 ---
The Lord
369
himself, who is deceived by the goddess of speech Sarasvatī, that he will only
die at the hands of a son of Śiva who is born from sperm and blood. Te Gods
order Kāma to shoot Śiva with his arrow, so that he will fall in love with Pār-
vatī and procreate. Kāma, having shot at Śiva, is reduced to ashes by His
third eye. Te gods then humbly beg Śiva for help, which He favourably be-
stows. Te Lord concludes His account to Kumāra with the following words:
‘I was requested to marry your mother, the goddess Umā. For that reason,
she begot Gaṇapati and Bhṛṅgiriṭi; my third son was Kumāra’ (280.16–18).
Te most closely related version of this myth is narrated in the Old Ja-
vanese Kakavin Smaradahana. Te ﬁrst canto outlines the antecedent action
and the main features of the plot of the story narrated in the Kakavin, i.e. the
solitary meditation of Śiva, Umā’s unsuccessful attempts to arouse his de-
sire, the unfortunate attempt of Kāma and the killing of Nīlarudraka, the
demon warring against the Gods, by Gaṇa(pati). Except for a few details,63
the story appears to be the same, and the fact that, to the best of my knowl-
edge, the demon’s name Nīlarudraka appears nowhere else in both Old Ja-
vanese and Sanskrit sources strongly suggests that the Dharma Pātañjala and
the Smaradahana borrowed their version of the myth from tradition that is
otherwise lost to us.
Although this story is commonly narrated in the Purāṇas, it is not found
in Sanskrit Śaiva Tantras, which are generally sparing in incorporating mytho-
logical excursuses. But the motif seems to have been considered important
by the authors of Tattvas, for it is mentioned, albeit only brieﬂy, also in the
Vṛhaspatitattva. According to this text, the form of Śiva whose vicissitudes
are described in the legend is Śrīkaṇṭha:
Śrīkaṇṭha was my name. I was ordered to promulgate the sacred scriptures
in the Egg of Brahmā. I was shot by Kāma with [the arrow] of passion. Be-
cause of my anger at Kāma, I stared at him with [my] poisonous look and
the body of the venerable Kāmadeva was suddenly destroyed, bhasmībhūta,
reduced to ashes. But the passion remained in me. Terefore I married your
mother, the Goddess Umā; she gave birth to Sanatkumāra.64
63.
For example, in the Smaradahana it is Bṛhaspati (and not Nīlarudraka himself) who
relates how, as a consequence of a boon granted by Śiva, only a son of the latter born from
sperm (putra sukraja) will be able to kill the demon.
64.
Vṛhaspatitattva 14.27–32:
śrīkaṇṭha ṅaranku kinon maveh aji riṅbrahmāṇḍa /
pinanah pvāku riṅrāgi de bhaṭāra kāma / gәlәṅku ri saṅhyaṅkāma / mataṅyan dinәlәṅya
riṅdṛṣṭiviṣa / syuh pvekāvak saṅhyaṅkāmadeva / bhasmībhūta / matәmahan avu / ndan


--- PAGE 389 ---
370
iii Doctrine
A remarkable point in the Dharma Pātañjala’s account is the addition of
Bhṛṅgiriṭi to the customary Purāṇic list of Śiva’s sons, i.e. Skanda (also Ku-
māra or Sanatkumāra) and/or Gaṇapati (also Vināyaka, Gaṇeśa or Gaṇa).65
Tis may correspond to Bhṛṅgin, a somewhat elusive ﬁgure appearing in
Sanskrit Śaiva Tantras as a member of the extended Śaiva ‘holy family’, i.e.
a gaṇa in the circuit of deities outside the Vidyeśvaras, between the latter
and the Lokapālas—the others being Nandin, Mahākāla, Caṇḍeśa, Gaṇeśa,
Skanda and Umā.66 Te variant Bhṛṅgiriṭi is rare, not being attested in any
of the edited Śaiva Tantric sources available to me. However, a Bhṛṅgiriṭi
is enumerated among the Rudras belonging to the retinue of Śiva (gaṇapa)
in the Ur-Skandapurāṇa (23.68b) and, as shown by Bisschop (2010:243),
in the Śivadharmaśāstra,67 where both Vināyaka and Bhṛṅgiriṭi are men-
tioned as sons of Rudra.68 Te Śivadharmaśāstra’s inclusion in the Purāṇic
Śaiva family of Bhṛṅgiriṭi, who in the later Śaivasiddhānta traditions rather
represents—along with Caṇḍeśa—the quintessential Śaiva devotee, may be
relevant to our understanding of the lines of transmission of Śaivism in the
Archipelago. Besides suggesting that the author of the Dharma Pātañja-
la might have borrowed this character from a source belonging to the Śi-
vadharma corpus, this parallel also supports the hypothesis that the Old Ja-
vanese text, insofar as it attributes to Bhṛṅgiriṭi a role that can be traced in a
pre-Saiddhāntika milieu, might have preserved an archaic status quo.69
ikaṅrāga kavәkas iry aku / ya ta mataṅyan makrabi ibunta bhaṭārī umā an pakānak saṅ
sanatkumāra /.
65.
Various lists of sons of the divine couple are found in Old Javanese sources, which also
present varying versions of the events leading to their conception and birth. A common one
enumerates Gaṇa, Kumāra and Kāla—a demonic form born from a wrong kind of erotic
feeling. Te vicissitudes of the brothers are narrated in the Old Javanese Kālapurāṇa and
Kālatattva, handily summarized by Stephen (2002).
66.
Cf. Sanderson 2003–04:437 (fn. 317) and 442 (fn. 343), who in both places refers to
the ‘skeletal devotee’ Bhṛṅgin/Bhṛṅgīśa/Bhṛṅgiriṭi.
67.
Tis is an early (ca. 3rd–6th century ad) non-Tantric Śaiva text belonging to the lay
Śivadharma corpus.
68.
Cf. Śivadharmaśāstra 6.18: rudrasya tanayo, and 6.26a: rudrātmajo (quoted in Biss-
chop 2010:244). Rudra is the appellation of the Lord Śiva that is most frequently found in
Atimārga sources.
69.
However, from textual evidence gathered by Bisschop, it appears that this tradition
existed also aferwards. For instance, the Vāmanapurāṇa (44.49, 72) identiﬁes Bhṛṅgiriṭi
with Śiva’s demon-son Andhaka; the same applies to the late Haracaritacintāmaṇi, 5.99cd–
100ab (cf. Bisschop 2010:245–246).


--- PAGE 390 ---
The Lord
371
Let us now turn to the motif of the incarnation of Śiva as the Lord and
leader among yogins treated in the continuation of the passage of the Dha-
rma Pātañjala quoted above, where a sudden change of subject occurs and
the Lord declares to have been reborn not from sperm and blood but from
yoga—along with four brothers:
I died and I was reborn as the Lord. But [we] were not born from sperm and
DhPāt
276.12–17
blood: we were born from the yoga of our Lord, for we were ﬁve brothers.
Each of our names [are] one by one: Kuśika was the eldest, then followed
Garga and Maitri, Kuruṣya, [then] me, Pātañjala is my name, the youngest
son among the Five Sages. I had a recollection of the state of leader among
yogins, that is the reason why I worshiped the Lord, who was also my higher
form.
Te motif of the pañcaṛṣis, also called pañcakuśikas, has been recognized as
a Pāśupata element of Indic origin already by Sarkar (1967:641). Te ﬁrst
four names of the list, which already appears in Old Javanese charters from
the 9th century and are abundantly attested in Old Javanese literature until
the 15th century,70 do in fact correspond to the names of the four disciples
of Lakulīśa, the mythical promulgator of Pāñcārthika Pāśupata scriptures.71
According to the Cintra praśasti of 1287 ad from Somnāthpattan/Prabhāsa,
the four miraculously appeared in bodily form by virtue of Lakulīśa’s perfor-
mance of yoga (cf. Bhandarkar 1908:153). Just as Pātañjala does in Java,
Lakulīśa features as the ﬁnal member of the pentad in Sanskrit sources from
the Subcontinent and is hierarchically its most elevated character. It has
been tentatively argued by Sanderson (2003–04:374–375) that, given the
absence of other suitable candidates to cover the role of a Pāśupata master
in this context,72 Pātañjala could be an attempt to make sense of a corrupted
70.
Te list also appears in a (Middle?) Malay inscription from Lampung, Sumatra (ca.
14th–15th century ad): cf. Djafar (1995).
71.
Tere are, as usual, variants in the spelling of the names of the four in Old Ja-
vanese vs. Sanskrit, and even within the two languages the names vary according to
the sources: Kuśika/Kurṣika vs. Kuśika/Kauśika, Gārga/Garga/Gargī vs. Gārga/Gārgya,
Metri/Maitri/Maitreya vs. Mitra/Maitri, Kuruṣya/Puruṣya vs. Kauruṣya/Kauruṣa.
Te
name Pātañjala appears in Old Javanese sources with the variants Pәrtañjala, Pṛtañjala,
Pratañjala.
72.
Te alternative of explaining the name Pātañjala as a corruption of that of the Patañ-
jali who authored the Yogasūtra appears to be rather weak (but for the hypothesis of this
being so in the Dharma Pātañjala, cf. Introduction, p. 16). Te same holds true for the


--- PAGE 391 ---
372
iii Doctrine
form of the original aluk-samāsa pītañjala, ‘he who drank the waters’, which
would be an epithet of Agastya referring to the mythological episode of his
drinking of the ocean.73 As a matter of fact, no better candidate than Agastya
can be imagined to ﬁt into the list for, if in the Northern part of the Subcon-
tinent Lakulīśa was considered as the ﬁrst and most prominent teacher and
an incarnation of the Lord Śiva himself, the sage Agastya was the Ādiguru of
the Dravidian South (Filliozat 1967:447).74 Being the ‘cultural hero’ who
introduced the religion, he holds a prominent position in the traditional ac-
counts of the diffusion of Śaivism in the Tamil country. For instance, the Old
Tamil Śaiva poem Tirumantiram by Tirumular (2.1.1–2) mentions Agastya,
also called ‘the Muni of the North’, as the ﬁrst hero who transmitted Śaivism
to the South. According to Filliozat, this ﬁgure is to be connected with the
introduction of Brahmanism in Southeast Asia too.
In Java Agastya bears a position of great prominence in iconography,
becoming a sort of quintessential Brahman bearing the attributes of the Ṛṣi
sect. Conversely, to the best of my knowledge, textual occurrences of the
name Lakulīśa or iconographic representations have not been found in the
Archipelago. Tis suggests that the ﬁgure was unknown there or, in any
case, never achieved a wide popularity.75 Tis state of affairs implies that
other Patañjali known to us, e.g. the grammarian author of the Mahābhāṣya and the one
enumerated among the founders of the Sāṅkhya philosophical school. Another Patañjali
ﬁgures, according to (Natarajan 1991:1), among the eight Nāthas who propagated the
Śaiva scriptures to South India, i.e. Sanaka, Sanāntana, Sanātana, Sanatkumāra, Śivayoga-
muni, Patañjali, Vyāghrapāda and Tirumular.
73.
As Sanderson himself points out (p. 375 fn. 86), the compound pītañjala is, however,
unattested in Sanskrit (where the equivalent pītābdhi is found). While the reading Pṛtañjala
(or Pratañjala) in place of P(a/)ātañjala can be explained by the fact that the shif of ṛ(or ra)
to a/ā is a well-attested phenomenon in Old Javanese (cf. Gonda 1973:365, quoting the ex-
ample of the Sanskrit dambha > dṛmbha in Vṛhaspatitattva 34.8), the shif from ī/i to ā/a or
ṛis more difﬁcult to explain straightforwardly on linguistic or palaeographic grounds. Tis
corruption is therefore likely to have occurred by way of analogy with the name Patañjali.
74.
A textual passage partially supporting this identiﬁcation is Pūrvakāraṇāgama 26.3cd–
4ab, where the sage appears, in identiﬁcation with Śiva, as the last and most important mem-
ber in the pentad formed by the ṛṣis and ādiśaivas Kauśika, Kāśyapa, Bharadvāja, Gautama,
Agastya, who have been consecrated in the ﬁve faces of Sadāśiva (kauśikaḥkāśyapaś caiva
bhāradvājo ’tha gautamaḥ// agastyaś caiva pañcaite pañcavaktreṣu dīkṣitāḥ, quoted in Fil-
liozat 1967:448).
75.
We must probably reappraise the ﬁgure of Lakulīśa and his connection with the Pāśu-
patas in South Asia. To my knowledge, the ﬁrst scholar who thought in which direction is
Srivastava (1975), according to whom the identiﬁcation of the rise of the Pāśupata or-


--- PAGE 392 ---
The Lord
373
Lakulīśa, who became a prominent ﬁgure only in the Northwestern part of
the Subcontinent from the 6th century onwards (cf. Acharya 2006:218),
was replaced by the more familiar ‘Southern’ ﬁgure of Agastya/*Pītañjala
in order to enhance the status of the doctrine. It is possible that this shif
occurred in Java,76 or that there already existed an independent Pāśupata
tradition in the Southern part of the Subcontinent, which was responsible
for the diffusion of Pāśupatism in Java. While I am as yet not in a position
to advance any hypothesis as to the historical process supporting this iden-
tiﬁcation, I nonetheless believe that the possibility that Pātañjala might refer
to Agastya is verisimilar. Further research into South Indian literature may
throw light on this matter.
In any case, the Pāśupata connection of the Old Javanese pañcaṛṣis is
beyond doubt, for the pentad is ofen associated with the Javanese Ṛṣi sect,
a class of priests and ascetics to be distinguished from both the Śaivas (i.e.
Saiddhāntikas) and the Buddhists.77 Te followers of the ﬁrst group have
der with Lakulīśa which has been taken granted by many scholars is in reality defective (it
is unfortunate that the—for his time innovative—hypotheses of Srivastava have been ig-
nored in all the most signiﬁcant scholarly articles and studies on the subject of Pāśupatism
that have appeared afer his contribution). As argued by Dyczkowski (1988:20), ‘It is far
from certain that Pāśupata Śaivism starts with him. […] Tere are good reasons to dis-
tinguish between the Lākulīśa Pāśupata and other Pāśupata sects that have nothing to do
with Lākulīśa’. Te recent studies of Bakker on the Ur-Skandapurāṇa and other Pāśupata-
related materials have shown that there existed Pāśupata milieus before the appearance of
Lakulīśa (2000:15), for the name Lakulīśa does not occur in important Pāśupata sources
such as the Pañcārthabhāṣya and the Mathurā Pillar (Acharya 2006), being unattested be-
fore the Ur-Skandapurāṇa (Bakker (2007:2–3). Tat author further argues that ‘Kauṇḍinya
does not know a teacher (incarnation) by the name of Lakulīśa, but speaks only about the
Lord (bhagavant) descending in Kāyāvatāra, who initiated only one pupil, Kuśīka. […] At
some stage of the process in which the Pāśupata movement was gathering momentum, the
avatāra of Śiva/Paśupati received the name Lāguḍi/Lākulin/Lakulīśa. It became a basic as-
sumption that served, on the one hand, to account for the spread of several guru lineages
that all claimed to go back to Śiva’s incarnation and, on the other hand, to unite these into
one coherent religious movement’. Along the same lines, Bisschop (2006:47–48) observes
that ‘the only probable historical ﬁgure of the earliest stage of Pāśupata history is Kuśika,
while identiﬁcation of his teacher—‘‘the lord’’ (bhagavant) according to Kauṇḍinya’s Bhā-
ṣya—as Lakulīśa was established aferwards and is therefore a later invention’.
76.
It may be argued that some Javanese Pāśupata brahmins wanted to link their doctrine
to a lineage going back to the sage Agastya: such lineages of Agastya-priests are a well-
documented reality from the 10th century, as they have been identiﬁed in various reliefs as
bearing the iconographic traits of the sage (cf. Hunter 2000:89–91).
77.
E.g. in the Buddhist Kakavin Kuñjarakarṇa 23.1–4, equating the ﬁve deities of the


--- PAGE 393 ---
374
iii Doctrine
been convincingly identiﬁed by Sanderson (2003–04:376) as representing
local descendants of the Pāśupatas, who held a subaltern position and were
mostly active away from centres of worldly and religious authority.78
Te present section of the Dharma Pātañjala adds further evidence in
support of a Pāśupata link, presenting what is so far both the longest and
most detailed Old Javanese textual account on this pentad. It starts by de-
scribing how the ﬁve brothers, summoned by the Lord (bhaṭāra, presumably
Nīlalohita), have to accomplish the task of performing His funerary rites and
cremating His body afer His death, which apparently occurs shortly afer-
wards. Te disciples then execute their respective tasks as ordered:
Kuśika arrived. He remembered the instructions of the Lord. Te dead
DhPāt
278.6–18
body was taken by him and buried. But he did not give [the same task]
to all of us. Since we were given instructions concerning our tasks, Brahmā,
Viṣṇu, Indra, Yama, Baruṇa, Kuvera, Āgneya, Nairiti, Bāyabya and Aiśānya
came, swooping down on the ﬁve of us. Ten Kuśika was ordered to bury
the corpse of the Lord. Once it had been buried by him, it was extracted
by Garga. It was thrown into a river. It was taken by Kuruṣya; he made a
funeral pyre for the corpse of the Lord. Not long aferwards, it was taken
by Maitri. He cremated the corpse of the Lord. When it had already been
burnt down, turned into ashes, all of them lef. I was lef behind alone, to
gather up the ashes of the Lord. His ashes were taken by me, because of my
devotion toward the teacher. Tat is the reason why I rubbed the ashes on
my body, and I carried the remainder in my hands. Not long aferwards,
my appearance as Pātañjala vanished: [I assumed] the same aspect which
the Lord had in the past, when He was alive, three eyed and four armed. A
jewel served as womb. Likewise was the form that I obtained.
Tis enigmatic (and heavily corrupt) passage seems to detail a ‘magical’ rite,
through which the dead body comes to life again as a transﬁguration of the
divinity. Tis may be inferred from the fact that the corpse is ﬁrst buried,
three groups; cf. also Sutasoma 53.3, where a similar comparison between Vairocana, Śiva
and Pātañjala is made. In the Balinese version of the Pūrvaka Bhūmi (Hooykaas 1974:10–
12), the ﬁve brothers are equated to the pañcabrahmas, the ﬁve faces of Sadāśiva (Pṛtañjala
corresponds to Īśāna/Śiva).
78.
A similar view was independently put forward already by Hunter (2000:95), who
presented evidence for identifying the Ṛṣi group as practising a form of Śaivism different
from the ‘ofﬁcial’ religion of the Kraton and living in hermitages removed from the urban
centres.


--- PAGE 394 ---
The Lord
375
then extracted and made the object of a funerary rite involving its disposal
in the waters of a river, and then cremated on a funerary pyre, so as to fulﬁll
a special ritual procedure. It is interesting that each of the three types of
funeral procedures mentioned in this passage are known to the Anteṣṭividhi,
an early Lakulīśa Pāśupata manual describing the last rite of persons initiated
in the order, such as householder, ascetics (sādhaka) or masters (ācārya).79
It seemingly represents the only known Śaiva source that describes all three
types of ritual and moreover prefer the former two over cremation, the usual
rite prescribed in later Saiddhāntika texts.80 Te Anteṣṭividhi (23) prescribes
that two Pāśupata ofﬁciants separately perform parallel rituals on the corpse,
which is only then ready to be either buried, disposed in a river or cremated.
Albeit not identical, the procedure described in the Sanskrit text is remindful
of the one indicated in the Dharma Pātañjala. Te outstanding character of
the body of the deceased, i.e. Nīlalohita, and the purpose of the ritual, i.e.
bringing it to life again as the incarnation of the Lord known as Pātañjala,
may justify the fact that the Old Javanese text prescribes the performance of
all three Pāśupata funerary rites.
Now, those who are familiar with the myth of Lakulīśa in Sanskrit sources
will note the presence of the same burial ambience as well as the motif of
the incarnation of Śiva-Paśupati as the divine master at the head of the four
disciples, who entered the corpse of a Brahmin to be re-animated in a cre-
mation ground at Kārohaṇa or Kāyāvarohaṇa (‘[the place] of bodily incar-
nation’).81 Bakker (2000:13) relates the legend of the Pāśupata guru So-
maśarman found in the Malhar Plates and in the Ur-Skandapurāṇa, where
‘the play of words may allude to ‘‘Soma’’ as a name of Śiva and the trans-
ﬁguration undergone by Lakulīśa in the initiation ritual, which, when he
underwent the anointment with ashes, made him shine like the moon’. Al-
79.
Tis short text of forty-six verses, written on a Nepalese codex unicus, has been edited,
translated and discussed by Acharya (2010).
80.
Te three rites are also prescribed for diﬀerent kinds of ascetics in certain Brahmanic
smārta manuals, which are however Vaiṣṇava in character (cf. Acharya 2010:134–136).
81.
Cf. Liṅgapurāṇa 1.24.124–134; Vāyupurāṇa 23.219–234; Pañcārthabhāṣya ad 1.1 (pp.
3–4); cf. Lorenzen (1991:180–181 and 176, fn. 39–43) and Bisschop (2006:44–50). Note
that the Liṅgapurāṇa’s account of Kāyāvarohaṇa states twice that the Lord entered the body
of a dead brahmin ‘through magical yoga’ (yogamāyayā, 1.24.127b and 128d). Tis might
be compared to Śiva’s statement occurring at the beginning of this section of the Dharma
Pātañjala, namely that He (in the form of Pātañjala and His four brothers) was born from
the yoga of the Lord (276.13).


--- PAGE 395 ---
376
iii Doctrine
though the process of incarnation is nowhere described in detail and certain
minor elements in the accounts vary, the main motif of Śiva’s incarnation
remains the same.82 Te presence of ashes (smeared on Lakulīśa’s body) is
a recurrent feature too. Further, it is important to recall that Kauṇḍinya in
his Pañcārthabhāṣya ad Pāśupatasūtra 1.1 never refers to Lakulīśa but sim-
ply mentions Kuśika’s newly-incarnated master as bhagavant ‘the Lord’—a
detail that ﬁnds a correspondence in the Dharma Pātañjala.
Given the evident structural convergences present in the above accounts,
it may be argued that we are dealing with different versions of an early Pāśu-
pata motif which developed independently in different areas of the Subcon-
tinent and in the Archipelago. As noted by Bakker (2007:2–3), the idea
of a guru with four pupils named Lāguḍi/Lākulin or Lakulīśa seems to be
an example of ‘invention of tradition’, which was introduced for reasons of
legitimation. Te substitution of Lakulīśa with Pātañjala, as I have argued
above, may be a Javanese invention of tradition, developed on the basis of
an earlier common source.
It is evident that the section of the Old Javanese text devoted to the de-
scription of the Lord’s former incarnations shows a composite structure that,
I believe, was the result of a cut-and-paste operation by the author of the
Dharma Pātañjala. Now, for what reason did he feel the need to insert the
Pāśupata account between the two contiguous Purāṇic myths of Dakṣa-Satī
and of Nīlarudraka-Kāma-Pārvatī? A possible answer might be found in his
eclectic and inclusivist approach, on account of which the harmonization
of a Pāśupata and Śaiva Purāṇic myth would have been deemed desirable.
Some support for this suggestion can be drawn from the closing part of the
pañcaṛṣi section, which has a deﬁnite Saiddhāntika ﬂavour:
Te venerable Ananta arrived, inviting me to go back into the plain of non-
DhPāt
278.19–280.4
being.83 I was not unwilling to be placed in the heaven of the one who is my
superior form, that is in the world of Śrīkaṇṭha. Above Śrīkaṇṭha, I spent a
82.
Cf. also Lorenzen (1991:176–177).
83.
Te connection of Ananta with the plain of non-being—corresponding to the ‘pure
path’ (śuddhādhvan) in the Śaiva cosmography—is also found in a passage of the Tantrāloka
(8.352b–353a), most probably quoting the lost Śivatanu by Bṛhaspati: ‘Te [phenomenal]
existence (bhava) is from Māyā up to the Avīci hell; non-[phenomenal-]existence (abhava)
is said to be from Ananta etc. up to the superintendence of the pure qualities of Śiva. Tat is
also to be abandoned’ māyādir avīcyanto bhavas tv anantādir ucyate ’py abhavaḥ// śivaśud-
dhaguṇādhīkārāntaḥso ’py eṣa heyaś ca /.


--- PAGE 396 ---
The Lord
377
long time in the plain of non-being. Ten I was ordered to take place in the
Egg of Brahmā. I eventually became the teacher of the whole world. Tat is
the reason why I taught all the gods here in the Egg of Brahmā.
Tis passage seems to imply that the form of Śiva obtained by Pātañjala is
that of Śrīkaṇṭha. Tough this detail is not explicitly mentioned by any of
the Sanskrit Pāśupata sources with respect to Lakulīśa, it is in harmony with
Mahābhārata 12.337.62, according to which Śrīkaṇṭha is the form of Śiva
responsible for the promulgation of the Pāśupata doctrine in our era.84 Te
role of this ﬁgure has been incorporated into the scriptures of the Śaiva Man-
tramārga, where he appears as the Guru, living on the peak of the Kailāsa,
who was responsible for the diffusion of the Śaiva knowledge down to earth,
ﬁrst to the Gods and sages and then to human beings.
Here a problem arises: given the mention in the Old Javanese text of
Ananta, the ﬁrst of the eight Vidyeśvaras, it is likely that the author was
thinking about the Śrīkaṇṭha who is the penultimate member of that heptad
(before Śikhaṇḍin). Although the situation is not very clear, Siddhāntatan-
tras seem to know more than one Śrīkaṇṭha. One of them is ofen charac-
terized as residing on the Kailāsa (e.g. in Kiraṇa 8.89–90ab), but also in the
Rudraloka at the top of the Egg of Brahmā. Rāmakaṇṭha in his vṛtti dis-
tinguishes this Śrīkaṇṭha from at least two others, i.e. the Vidyeśvara and
the Mantreśvara residing in guṇatattva who heads the one-hundred Rudras
(śatarudra).85 Now, it seems justiﬁed to assume that the Dharma Pātañjala
84.
Te passage deﬁnes Him as husband of Umā and son of Brahmā (the latter detail also
pertains to Nīlalohita). Interestingly, in the (regrettably lacunary) passage of the Pāśupata
stone-inscription of Ekliṅgjī (Bhandarkar 1908:166, lines 9–12) dealing with the incarna-
tion of Śiva as Lakulīśa, the Lord is referred to as the husband of Parvatī (girisutāpati) and it
is said that, once incarnated as Lakulīśa, ‘he, the enemy of Kāma, does not remember even
the abode on the Kailāsa’ (kailāsavāsam api na smarati smarāriḥ). Tis description might re-
fer to Śiva in His Śrīkaṇṭha form. Tus, it is perhaps against this background that we should
interpret the Pāñcārthika Pāśupata accounts (such as Pāśupatasūtra 4.10 and Kauṇḍinya’s
commentary thereon) describing the Gods, such as Indra, etc., as practising the Pāśupata
observance in former times, when Kuśika and Īśāna had not yet appeared: it is a form of the
Lord himself that must have instructed them. According to Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 3.6cd–
7, Śrīkaṇṭha, taught by Ananta in his turn taught the gods and demons; compare Dharma
Pātañjala 278.19–4, where Ananta accompanies Śrīkaṇṭha to his heavenly abode.
85.
Tat confusion is likely to have occurred is suggested by that author’s lengthy com-
mentary ad Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 1.1ab, ad the end of which (p. 4.8–11) he concludes
that Śrīkaṇṭha is not a pupil of Ananta but of Śiva himself. On all this, cf. Goodall’s exten-
sive note (1998:163–164, fn. 10).


--- PAGE 397 ---
378
iii Doctrine
has preserved a tradition that knew of one Śrīkaṇṭha only. Tat we are deal-
ing with a confusion by the author is unlikely, for the passage of Vṛhaspati-
tattva quoted above (14.27–32) mentioning the genesis of Śrīkaṇṭha’s fam-
ily appears immediately afer the description of the eight Vidyeśvaras; this
fact suggests that the author of the Vṛhaspatitattva too identiﬁed Śrīkaṇṭha
as a form of Śiva with Śrīkaṇṭha the Vidyeśvara. Te penultimate of them,
Śrīkaṇṭha, is succeeded by Śikhaṇḍin in his ofﬁce, and he is explicitly said to
be the incarnation of the Lord who was credited for the transmission of the
scriptures in the Egg of Brahmā.86
As the Same as
or Different
from His
Creation
A lucid theological deﬁnition of God in terms of non-
dualism or dualism is encountered nowhere in Old Ja-
vanese Tuturs and Tattvas. All we have are passages
at best hinting at the status of the individual Soul,
incarnated beings or creation vis-à-vis the Absolute,
without any philosophical implications being problema-
tized. Tis state of affairs ﬁnds a counterpart in the earliest surviving Sid-
dhāntatantras, such as the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha,
the Sarvajñānottara, etc.87
An interesting passage of the Dharma Pātañjala, in the section deﬁn-
ing the so-called disabilities (aśakti), quotes the statements of a pūrvapakṣin
holding monistic—and extreme—positions. Having been introduced by the
Lord as a teacher whose doctrines cause one to fall in hell, he is attributed
the following words:
‘Yourself are the place where the Lord in his manifest form resides, for those
DhPāt
266.2–9
who fabricate liṅgas, build temples, organize assemblies, organize food- and
drinking-feasts, those ones are the place where the Summum Bonum resides!
Tose Gods eat and sleep, walk and sit, just [do] whatever [they want!]. All
of those Gods are hit by punishment, [but] there is no fault in all of them’.
Tus are his words. Tis is the reason why he performs bad conduct, i.e.
because it does not matter, according to him, thus he transgresses, thus he
steals the wealth of others. ‘It does not matter if you are tuhutu, for tuhutu
86.
I have argued elsewhere (Acri 2011) that the doctrine of the gradual change of ofﬁce
of the eight Vidyeśvaras illustrated in the Vṛhaspatitattva is likely to have derived from a lost
scripture by the commentator Bṛhaspati, one of the earliest ﬁgures of the Śaivasiddhānta.
87.
Te absence of any discussion of duality and non-duality, which is one of the deﬁning
features of mature Śaivasiddhānta, is regarded by Goodall and Isaacson (2007:5) as a
criterion to establish the antiquity of a given scripture, in their speciﬁc case the Niśvāsa.


--- PAGE 398 ---
The Lord
379
means, do not be scared of dying, for that is called killing oneself; whatever
way of death, for death is that which is designated as liberation’.
Although the difﬁcult syntax and the presence of some apparently corrupt
words prevent us from getting a full understanding of the passage, it is still
possible to detect in its inclusion a desire to polemicize against a certain
monistic school maintaining an absolute identity between human beings
and the Lord. Te pūrvapakṣin takes this position to its extreme by implying
that such an identity would render the divine moral rules of conduct use-
less (for everybody is but a manifestation of the One Lord). Te equation of
death, which is seemingly conceived as the end of the gross elements con-
stituting the physical body, with the concept of liberation, however, echoes
a materialist doctrine; the same holds true with respect to the accusation of
crimes such as slaying and stealing the wealth of others. It seems likely that
our author willfully merged a monistic with a materialist standpoint. It thus
appears that the Dharma Pātañjala, in polemic with such an overtly monis-
tic doctrine, referred to it in negative terms as belonging to an evil teacher
and to people who commit sinful actions.
Views echoing the one put forward in the above passage of the Dharma
Pātañjala can be found in the Tattvajñāna, which, however, does not as-
cribe them to a pūrvapakṣin. For instance, chapter 44 states that the Lord
is present in a manifest way in every human being. Having described the
prayogasandhi as comprising seven means, namely seven ancillaries of yoga,
the Lord explains that the sentient (cetanā) constitutes one undivided light
(prakāśa). Its nature is constituted by the caturdhyāna, which is deﬁned as
follows:
tiṣṭhan, bhojan, gacchan, suptan. tiṣṭhan [means:] it is the Lord who sits.88
bhojan [means:] it is the Lord who is eating. gacchan [means:] it is the Lord
who is going. suptan [means:] it is the Lord who is sleeping. To sum up: only
the Lord is to be kept in mind, whatever is the state of the human being, for
that which is called remembering is the place of embodiment of the Lord
here in the manifest world (sakala).89
88.
‘Sitting’ (maluṅguh)—and not ‘standing’, as we would expect—is the rendering of the
Sanskrit verb by the Old Javanese commentary, which evidently understood it in the sense
of ‘abide’; cf. the passage of the Dharma Pātañjala quoted above, which presents the same
verb maluṅguh ‘to sit’ in the parallel list of four activities.
89.
Tattvajñāna 44.5–9: tiṣṭhan / bhojan / gacchan / suptan / tiṣṭhan / bhaṭara maluṅguh /
bhojan / bhaṭara maṅan / gacchan / bhaṭara lumaku / svaptan / bhaṭara maturū / saṅkṣepa-


--- PAGE 399 ---
380
iii Doctrine
Te parallel with the above passage of the Dharma Pātañjala is evident: if
in the former the false teacher states that those eating, sleeping, walking,
sitting—or whatever—are the place of existence of the Lord, the latter text
expounds a technique of fourfold meditation (caturdhyāna) involving the
identiﬁcation with the Lord in the same above mentioned four states. Te
parallels are further extended to Sanskrit literature, for analogous lists men-
tioning four or more states/actions in connection with a form of medita-
tion (dhyāna) on the Lord are widely attested in Saiddhāntika90 and non-
Saiddhāntika91 Śaiva Tantras, in the Śivasaṃhitā92 and in the Agnipurāṇa,
where it is mentioned in a Vaiṣṇava context.93
Te strongest piece of evidence suggesting that the pūrvapakṣin might
have been originally a Vaiṣṇava is found in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Bhīṣma-
parva, which is based on a Sanskrit version of the same Parvan of the Mahā-
bhārata (12) that preserves the section of text known as the Bhagavadgītā. A
passage of the Old Javanese version, based on Bhagavadgītā 5.6–10, presents
nya / bhaṭara juga katuturakna / sapolah bhāva niṅvvaṅ/ apan ikaṅtutur ṅaranya / yeka
paśarīran bhaṭara maṅke riṅsakala //.
90.
Cf. Sarvajñānottara VP 91–92 (Ed. Adyar; 92ab missing but found in Ed. Goodall as
45cd), which is part of an overtly monistic passage describing the omnipervasive presence
of the Lord: ‘Nothing apart from Him is useful, neither religious actions nor prescribed
ceremonies; neither a liṅga nor the behaviour in compliance with the rules established for
the social classes resides in the Supreme Self. Śiva is to be meditated upon as One even
while walking, sitting, sleeping, eating and drinking; † śivaṃkaras † anythyng else should
be abandoned’ naiva tasya kṛtenārtho na kāryo na vidhiḥsmṛtaḥ/ na liṅgaṃnāśramācāraḥ
paramātmani saṃsthitaḥ// śiva eko dhyeyaś †śivaṃkaras† sarvam anyat parityajet / gacchan
tiṣṭhan svapan jāgran bhuñjāno ’pi pibannapi //. Tis passage closely recalls that of the Dha-
rma Pātañjala, for it includes eating and drinking and mentions the fact that erecting liṅgas
and doing meritorious acts is not an effective way of worshiping the Lord.
91.
Cf. Kubjikāmatatantra 8.78: ‘Te sādhaka [should have] his body accoutred with
mantras on all occasions, when sitting, waking, sleeping, walking, eating or being engaged
in love-making’ mantrasannaddhadehas tu sarvāvastho ’pi sādhakaḥ/ tiṣṭhan jāgran svapan
gacchan bhuñjāno maithune rataḥ//.
92.
Cf. Śivasaṃhitā 5.118: ‘Te man who performs meditation while sitting, walking,
sleeping [or] waking, he does not incur into sin, for he destroys his sinful karma’ tiṣṭhan
gacchan svapan jāgrat yo dhyānaṃkurute naraḥ/ pāpakarmavikurvāṇo na hi majjati kil-
viṣe //.
93.
Cf. Agnipurāṇa 373.10ab & 12: ‘Te Supreme Hari, omniscient, should be known as
embodied (sakala) and disembodied (niṣkala). […] When one walks, sits, sleeps, is awake,
has the eyes opened or closed, is pure or impure, one should meditate on the Lord at all
times’ sakalo niṣkalo jñeyaḥsarvajñaḥparamo hariḥ/ […] gacchaṃs tiṣṭhan svapan jāgrad
unmiṣan nimiṣann api // śucir vāpy aśucir vāpi dhyāyet śatatam īśvaram /.


--- PAGE 400 ---
The Lord
381
correspondences with many of the passages referred to above, and it is es-
pecially important to contextualize the passage of the Dharma Pātañjala.
Having upheld the superiority of karmayoga ‘pursuit of (disinterested) ac-
tion’ over karmasannyāsa ‘renunciation of action’, Kṛṣṇa explains:
Te sage, furnished with yoga, attains to Brahma without delay—such is the
state of the ascetic who cultivates yoga, without delay he shall attain to the
world of Brahma. He is not stained although he performs actions, though
he went on performing actions, the bad does not stick to his body. For his
own nature then is like this: When he sees, hears, touches, smells—though
he sees, though he is hearing, (though) he is smelling all kinds of perfumes;
eats, moves, sleeps, breathes—though he eats, though he moves, though he
sleeps, though he breathes; when he talks, abandons, takes—when he talks, or
when he gives, or when he might be taking; opens and closes his eyes—though
he might close his eyes, or open his eyes, this is what he thinks: ‘I am doing
nothing’ […] He is not stained by sin—that is the reason why he is not stained
by sin and impurity, no more than a lotus-leaf is wetted by water.94
It is not unconceivable that Bhagavadgītā 5.6–10 could have been the earliest,
and thus prototypical, attestation of the motif upon which all later sources
drew. Whereas the author of the Dharma Pātañjala seems to offer a ten-
dentious reinterpretation of this originally Vaiṣṇava monistic teaching, the
author of the Tattvajñāna appears to have embraced it, perhaps by the inter-
mediary of a Śaiva source, in the form of a visualization technique applied
to the Lord.
Other passages relevant to the issue of monism, in the Dharma Pātañjala
as well as in other Old Javanese texts, present images or similes illustrating
the (ofen paradoxical) relation of the Lord as Absolute with the manifest
reality that His creation constitutes. Te metaphors that are most frequently
94.
Bhīṣmaparva p. 51.7–28 (ed. and trans. Gonda 1935:67): « yogayukto munir brahma
nacireṇādhigacchati » kadi maṅkana tika saṅviku maṅәgә¯ yoga, tan kapilon jugar paṅguh
Brahmaloka; « kurvann api na lipyate » mon sirar lәkas mapravṛtti, ndatan karakәt ikaṅhala
ri śarīranira. Apayan kumva pinakasvabhāvanira: « paśyañ śṛṇvan spṛśañ jighran » yadyapin
mulata juga sira, aṅrәṅә¯ tuvi, aṅambuṅa sarvagandha; « aśnan gacchan svapan śvasan » mon
maṅan ya, mon lumaku, mon aturu, mon pambәkan; « pralapan visṛjan gṛhṇan » yadyan
mojar, maveveh kunaṅ, maṅalapa kunaṅ; « unmiṣan nimiṣann api » yadyapin kumĕḍapa
kunaṅ, ṅuniveh dumәliṅa, ndan kumva tāṅәnaṅәnira, « naiva kiṃcit karomīti » tan aku iki
mapravṛtti, tan aku sumiddhakәn paviṣaya niṅsarvendriya. Maṅkana tah tәkap saṅviku,
tan dadi maṅaku riṅsarvabhāvārәmbha; « na sa lipyati doṣeṇa » nahan ta mataṅnyan tan
kaparatan doṣa mala « padmapattram ivāmbhasā ».


--- PAGE 401 ---
382
iii Doctrine
encountered in speculative Tattvas are those of ﬁre in wood and butter in
milk, which already appear in the Upaniṣads. For instance, the Śvetāśvatara
explains that the Lord is present in conscious and unconscious entities like
ﬁre in wood, butter in milk and oil in sesame seed.95
Te simile of the ﬁre in wood revolves around the common belief that
the element ﬁre, which is already present in the wood in a latent form, be-
comes active and visible only on the occasion of burning. Te same concept
is hinted at in Dharma Pātañjala 236.8–11, when the Lord explains the death
of the body (as a consequence of the destruction of the winds) as a piece of
wood being completely consumed by ﬁre, so that its accompanying cause
also ceases to exist; it is also seen in Bhuvanakośa 2.18.96 Te simile of ﬁre in
wood further appears in Vṛhaspatitattva śloka 49 and exegesis,97 in Tattva-
jñāna 29,98 in Jñānasiddhānta 25.5,99 in Kumāratattva ii f. 19r100 and in the
hymn to Śiva of the Arjunavivāha (10.1, cf. p. 548). In all these ﬁve sources
the analogy is paired with the one of butter in milk. Te latter image also fea-
95.
Cf. Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 1.13–16ab (quoted and discussed below, p. 549).
96.
Bhuvanakośa 2.18: ‘As the ﬁre [which is] in every piece of wood is not perceived be-
cause of [its] subtlety, so Mahādeva [who is] in every creature is not perceived because of
[His] subtlety. Te reverend Fire is in every piece of wood, but it is not seen because of
its subtlety; yathā—as the space, so is the Lord Mahādeva in everywhere being provided
with a body. However, He is not grasped because of His subtlety’ « kāṣṭhe kāṣṭhe yathā bah-
niḥsūkṣmatvān nopalabhyate / bhūte bhūte mahādevaḥsūkṣmatvān nopalabhyate //
17b
sūkṣmatvān nopalabhyate ] em. ; sūkṣmatvam upalabhyate Mss.
17d sūkṣmatvān nopal-
abhyate ] em. ; sūkṣma gno upalabhyate Mss. » saṅhyaṅapuy hanerikaṅkayukayu / ndā-
tan katon / makanimitta sūkṣmanira / yathā / kady aṅgān iṅākāśa / maṅkana ta bhaṭāra
mahādeva, an hana riṅsarva māvak / ndātar kapaṅguh sira / makanimittaṅsūkṣmanira //.
97.
Quoted below, p. 579.
98.
Cf. below, p. 402.
99.
Jñānasiddhānta 25.5: yathā ghṛtaṃpayasi vāri ca dāruṣu / kṣitaṃjalaṃnabha ca
savargo ’nilaḥ/ rajas tamo vṛttimana (?) guṇāni ca / tathaiva sarvagaṃca nopalabhyate //
(no exegesis is provided). Soebadio (1971:240–241), having emended pari in the mss. to
vāri, translates it as ‘juice’ (in the trees); however, the parallel in the Vṛhaspatitattva suggests
that the correct reading is hari, which, according to Sanskrit lexica, means ‘ﬁre’ (‘in wood’,
which is the most natural translation of dāruṣu). Te whole verse indeed turns out to be
a slightly different (and apparently corrupt) version of Vṛhaspatitattva 49, which deﬁnes
yogasandhi (cf. below, p. 579).
100.
Te text attempts to characterize Sadāśiva, previously deﬁned as vyāpivyāpaka ‘per-
vasive and pervaded’ (cf. fn. 22, and Arjunavivāha 10.1), as being ‘subtle like the ﬁre that
is in the ‘‘place of ﬁre’’ (apvan = apvyan, i.e. wood?) and also like [what is] ﬁlled with milk
(i.e. butter?)’ sūkṣma kady aṅgān iṅapvi aneṅapvan / mvaṅmibәkan iṅpәhan //.


--- PAGE 402 ---
The Lord
383
tures independently in Jñānasiddhānta 25.1cd,101 Vṛhaspatitattva 14.2 and
Dharma Pātañjala 214.1–3, where it is used to describe the Soul’s lengthwise
pervasion of the principles;102 in Dharma Pātañjala 288.14–16 it serves the
purpose of illustrating the meditative process of prayogasandhi.103
Both similes of ﬁre and wood and butter in milk are found, besides in
the Śvetāśvataropaniṣad, in other Sanskrit sources.104 Te latter simile only
is found in Dhyānabindūpaniṣad 7 and in the Liṅgapurāṇa, where, just as
in śloka 49 of the Vṛhaspatitattva, it is used to demonstrate the existence of
the (three) guṇas.105 Tis simile also ﬁgures in a small number of early Sid-
dhāntatantras106 and is brieﬂy hinted at by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on
Svacchandatantra 9.80, a text that also preserves an attestation of the image
of ﬁre in wood.107
Admittedly, it is difﬁcult to extract the philosophical standpoint lying
behind the above metaphors, which are liable to have been interpreted by
commentators in different ways according to their own standpoints. For in-
stance, one could see in them illustrations of the Sāṅkhya doctrine of satkār-
yavāda (the pre-existence of the effect in the cause), explaining how every-
thing that is visible directly emanates from the invisible Lord. Yet, it is pos-
101.
Te line characterizes the siddhānta (‘supreme doctrine’) as omnipervasive: ‘it is said
that that only pervades all, like clariﬁed butter the milk’ […] ‘it pervades all that exists, like
butter pervading sour milk’ tad eva hi sarvaṃvyāpi sarpiḥkṣīravad iṣyate […] vyāpaka riṅ
sarvabhāva, paḍanira kadi miñak vyāpaka riṅpәhan asin /.
102.
Whereas in Tattvajñāna 29 the same concept is explained through the image of ﬁre
in wood; cf. p. 402.
103.
To obtain butter, milk must be churned; cf. below, p. 548.
104.
Such as Mahābhārata 3.33.25ab (reporting, as in the Śvetāśvataropaniṣad, three sim-
iles, namely oil in sesame seed, butter in milk and ﬁre in wood); Jayākhyasaṃhitā (4.203),
describing the Lord’s (Viṣṇu’s) all-pervading existence as being unfathomable.
105.
Cf. Liṅgapurāṇa 1.70–74: ‘As oil is in the sesame seed or butter resides in milk, so
the universe follows from tamas, sattva and rajas’ tile yathā bhavet tailaṃghṛtaṃpayasi vā
sthitam / tathā tamasi sattve ca rajasy anusṛtaṃjagat //.
106.
Such as the Trayodaśaśatikakālottara (cf. below, p. 550); Sarvajñānottara VP 28.7
(cf. below, 402); it is also referred to by Rāmakaṇṭha on Kiraṇatantra VP 2.12cd, describing
Māyā as existing in a potential and (and thus inactive) form as butter exist in a potential
form in milk. As argued by Goodall (2006: 97–101) this verse belongs to the series of 20
describing the Soul vis-à-vis Śiva in non-dualistic terms, which has been interpolated from
the Sūtasaṃhitā, a monistic work belonging to the six Saṃhitās attributed to the Skanda-
purāṇa.
107.
Svacchandatantra 10.365: ‘Tey abide there, hidden, as ﬁre in wood’ nigūḍhās tatra
tiṣṭhanti kāṣṭhe vahnir yathā tathā.


--- PAGE 403 ---
384
iii Doctrine
sible to argue that some kind of monism is implied. For instance, Deussen
(1897:412), while commenting on Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad 1.4.7, describing
the Soul concealed in the body as ﬁre in the [fuel] preserving the ﬁre,108 refers
to this simile as being ‘typical in the later Vedānta’ of the Brahmasūtra, char-
acterizing Brahman as latent in the phenomenal world. On the other hand,
the simile of milk and butter is resorted to by the Śaiva author Śrīkaṇṭha in
his Brahmasūtrabhāṣya to 2.1.26 as a way to illustrate the view according to
which the Lord is the material cause of the universe.109
Apart from those described above, other images—showing clear non-
dualist nuances—are found in Tuturs. Tese texts, which are frequently char-
acterized by a markedly esoteric and gnostic stance, betray inﬂuences of early
non-dualist (and hence, perhaps, non-Saiddhāntika) schools.110 One of the
commonest images is the characterization of the Lord as pervading every-
thing as the invisible space or a clear sky—a simile that recurs in various
Old Javanese sources such as the Jñānasiddhānta (15.6, 25.2–3), Bhuvana-
kośa (1.11, 2.17), SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (p. 19 line 28) and in Balinese
Sanskrit Stutis. A passage of the Jñānasiddhānta presents a variation on the
theme bearing a monistic ﬂavour:
He is imperishable and perfect, bodiless and spotless. He is invisible,
incomparable, similar to a spotless sky.
Even though He is not provided with limbs, He is nonetheless perfect.111 He
has no body and He has no stain. He cannot be perceived by direct percep-
108.
Olivelle (1998:47; 493), noting the ambiguity of the term viśvambhara, among
whose meanings are ‘ﬁre’, ‘insect’ and ‘scorpion’, translates the expression viśvambharo vā
viśvambharakulāye as ‘or a termite within a termite-hill’.
109.
Indeed milk is the material cause of butter, which is obtained through the churning
of the former substance by an instrument and agent. Te transformation of milk into butter
is deﬁned as pariṇāma, just like the ‘transformation’ of Brahman into the manifest universe.
According to Śrīkaṇṭha, who seems to follow a kind of transformationist (and not illusion-
ist) Vedānta, Śiva is to be regarded as both the material and efﬁcient cause of creation.
110.
Cf., e.g., Goudriaan’s (1996:28) remarks on a śloka of Balinese Stuti 429
(Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971:265) that the knower of the Supreme Reality
(paramārthavit) may abandon the ﬁre-ritual, the doctrinal knowledge, the yogic postures,
the mudrās and the mantras altogether. Goudriaan argues, since the verse is arranged as a
dialogue between the Lord and the Goddess (devī), that it may have been extracted from a
Sanskrit Tantra belonging to the Vidyāpīṭha and re-contextualized as part of a hymn (which
is also suggested by a pronoun, sa eva, standing alone in the second half). Examples of such
kind of cut-and-paste operations abound in Tutur literature (cf. below, p. 395, fn. 20).
111.
From the syntax of the Old Javanese exegesis, presenting the construction nda tapvan


--- PAGE 404 ---
The Lord
385
tion in the universe as ‘endowed with parts’. He cannot be fathomed, yet He
exists. Indeed He has just a dimly visible form (māyākāramātra); ākāśavat,
He is—to give a comparison—like a clear and cloudless sky.112
It may be pointed out that māyākāramātra, besides (or instead of) ‘just dimly
visible’, could be translated as ‘merely having the appearance of an illusion’,
thereby leaning towards non-dualism. Such a statement ﬁnds a counterpart
in Bhuvanakośa 3.79:
Tis universe, the mobile and the immobile, is the entirely illusionary
appearance [of Śiva]. Śiva’s essence resides in everything; [everything]
is dissolved into the principle Śiva.
Te nature of the whole universe is illusion. Te form of the Lord Śiva is ev-
erything which exists. Te whole universe, in the end, dissolves into Him.113
What may well be regarded as a ‘Vedāntic’ image, well-known to the Śaiva
commentators from the Subcontinent,114 is found in Bhuvanakośa 2.15, where
the Lord’s pervasion of the beings is compared to the reﬂection of the moon
in the water of various pots:
Yet Mahādeva is pervasive within all wombs like space within pots;
[knowing that, the yogin] reaches supportless liberation.
… yayan ‘even though … nevertheless’, it is apparent that here the commentator understood
the Sanskrit avyayaṃ, which in the śloka obviously means ‘permanent, eternal’, as ‘a member
or corporeal part of an organized body’—a meaning that is well-attested in Vedāntic works.
112.
Jñānasiddhānta 8, śloka 5 and commentary:
avyayaṃparipūrṇaṃca na śarīraṃnirāñjanam /
anadṛśyam anopamaṃvyomanirmalasannibham //
5b nirāñjanam ] em. ; nirājñānam Ed. (unmetrical)
nda tapvan abyaya sira, yayan paripūrṇa. tatan hana śarīranira mvaṅtan hanāñjananira.
tan dadi sira katona sakala pratyakṣa riṅrāt.
tan kavәnaṅsira inupalabdha tuhun
hana. māyākāramātra, ākāśavat, kadi laṅit nirmala tan pajalada paṅupadṛṣṭanira • hanāñ-
jananira ] em. ; hanājñānanira Ed.
113.
Bhuvanakośa 3, śloka 79 and commentary:
māyāmātram idam rūpaṃjagat sthāvarajaṅgamam /
śivātmā bhavate sarve śivatattve vā līyate //
79d śivatattve vā ] conj. ; śivatatvavva Mss.
ikaṅjagat kabeh / sthāvarajaṅgamāvaknya / māyā svabhāvanya / rūpa bhaṭāra śiva sa-
hananya / ikaṅrāt kabeh / i vәkasan līna mare sira //.
114.
Cf., e.g., Rāmakaṇṭha ad Mṛgendra VP 2.12ab, who attributes to the Vedāntins the
image of the Sun reﬂected in the surface of the water.


--- PAGE 405 ---
386
iii Doctrine
Te leader among yogins knows that the Lord Mahādeva pervades every-
thing which is provided with a body. Just as the moon, which is one, appears
to abide [on the surface of water of] different pots, so [He], deviating from
non-existence, is the ﬁnal destination of everything. [Being] the epitome of
superiority over the six classes [of inner stain], he reaches the state release;
his release is without boundaries. 115
Te metaphor implies non-dualism, for the images of the various moons re-
ﬂected on the surface of the water have no intrinsic reality, being mere reﬂec-
tions of the one moon in the sky. If the images of the moon stand, as it would
seem, for the individual Souls, it follows that the latter are just manifestations
of the Supreme Reality.116 Tis is implied in the second part of the Stuti of the
Arjunavivāha, which uses the same metaphor to characterize the ineffable
presence of the absolute—in His Sadāśiva form, i.e. sakalaniṣkala—within
all beings:
Te image of the moon is [present] in pots containing water.
Tus anything that is pure and spotless contains the moon.
In such a manner you are said to dwell in creation.
For one who devotes himself to yoga you are in the manifest world.117
Tis image is of Indic origin. It appears, for instance, in the Amṛtabindūpa-
niṣad, a non-dualist Upaniṣad of Yoga:118
Te Soul of all beings, situated in each and every being, is only one.
It is seen as one and as many, just like the moon [reﬂected] in water.119
115.
Bhuvanakośa 2 śloka 15 and commentary:
tathāpi tu mahādevaḥvyāpī sarveṣu garbheṣu /
ākāśam iva kumbheṣu vrajan mokṣam anāśrayam //
14a tathāpi tu ] conj. ; tathāpitva Mss.
14b sarveṣu garbheṣu ] conj. ; vyāpi
sarvva garrisu A ; vyāpi sarvvāgarīrisu B sarvvagaririsu C.
sira saṅyogīśvara vruh riṅbhaṭāra mahādeva / vyāpaka ri sarva māvak / maṅkana riṅ
kumbha makveh inandәlan iṅvulan tuṅgal / maṅkana simpәn iṅnora / ulih niṅkabeh /
taṅkәs viśeṣa irikaṅṣaḍvarga / sira ta mantuk riṅkamokṣapadan / tar pahiṅan lәpasnira //.
116.
A similar image is found in a pre-Śaṅkara Vedāntic work, i.e. Gauḍapāda’s Gauḍapā-
dakārikā 3.3–7, where it is said that the universal Self is like space (mahākāśa), while the
individual self is like the space within a jar (ghaṭākāśa).
117.
Arjunavivāha 11.1: śaśivimba haneṅghaṭa mesi bañu / ndan asiṅśuci nirmala mesi
vulan / iva maṅkana rakva kiteṅkadadin / riṅaṅambәki yoga kiteṅsakala //.
118.
Probably composed between ca. the 9th and 13th century ad (cf. Bouy 1994:48).
119.
Amṛtabindūpaniṣad 12: eka eva hi bhūtātmā bhūte bhūte vyavasthitaḥ/ ekadā bahu-
dhā caiva dṛśyate jalacandravat //.


--- PAGE 406 ---
The Lord
387
An interesting passage presenting the same simile in a way that directly re-
calls the above-quoted verse of the Arjunavivāha is found in the Niśvāsakā-
rikā:
As the moon is seen in the sky, so it is in the water.
Tus God is omnipresent, being unseen on account of His subtlety.
He could be directly seen through yoga, as the moon in water.120
Te fragment, part of a longer passage in which the same simile appears
three times, refers—just like the Old Javanese Kakavin—to a form of yoga
through which the adept can perceive the form of the Lord in the manifest
world, as when one realizes that the moon appearing in the water contained
in different pots is but a reﬂection of the one moon in the sky.
As the Material
or Instrumental
Cause of the
Universe
It is difﬁcult to establish whether the above examples
might be of relevance to the issue of the material or
efﬁcient causality of the Lord with respect to His cre-
ation—a philosophical problem that is discussed since
early times in Sanskrit sources. Te position of the Dha-
rma Pātañjala with respect to this important distinction
appears to be represented in a passage featuring a debate between the Lord
and a materialist opponent concerning the identiﬁcation of the origin and
end of the universe, deﬁned as Bhaṭāra Paramakāraṇa or the Summum Bon-
um (paramārtha) by the former, and non-existence (tayā) by the latter. As
an objection to the opponent’s view the Lord points out that the sentient
(cetanā) is the origin and end of the universe, which rises, exists and dis-
appears as long as the Soul is aware of the principle of unevolved matter
(334.20–336.5). Te Lord then identiﬁes in unevolved matter what is re-
garded as non-existence and as unmanifest by the opponent; hence, even if
no notion or distinctive mark can be attributed to the Summum Bonum, it is
still not right to call it non-existence, for He is the origin, maintenance and
end of the universe, and moreover what causes non-existence to exist and
disappear (336.9–11). Tis characterization seems to imply that the aware-
ness of unevolved matter by the Soul is seen as the material cause of creation,
whereas the Lord is the impeller—or instrumental cause—of it, for ‘He de-
sires to create the universe; that is the reason why the Soul becomes aware of
120.
Niśvāsakārikā 31.32–33ab: tatas toye yathā candro dṛśyaty ākāśasaṃsthitaḥ/ tadvat
sarvagato devas sukṣmatvān nopalabhyate // sa ca yogena dṛśyeta pratyakṣaṃjalacandravat /
32b dṛśyaty ] aiśa passive in °ti, m.c. • °saṃsthitaḥ] T 127 ; °saṃsthitam T 17A.


--- PAGE 407 ---
388
iii Doctrine
the principle of unevolved matter’ (336.18–19). A clariﬁcation of this view is
found in the remaining part of the debate. Te process of origination of the
universe is outlined as follows: unmanifest →nāda →vindu →ardhacandra
→oṂ→the three-syllables (tryakṣara) →the ﬁve syllables (pañcākṣara) →
the universe.121 To this the opponent objects that the nāda and vindu come
from the Lord, which amounts to saying that the material cause of the uni-
verse is not the unmanifest (i.e. unevolved matter) but the Lord Himself. Te
Dharma Pātañjala ends with the following passage:
If it happens that the single entity will be in two entities, what are the two
DhPāt
338.2–13
entities called? Tus: sentient and insentient. What is the meaning of sen-
tient? Te Lord Supreme Cause. What is the meaning of insentient? Tus:
the principle of unevolved matter. It is not possible that they constitute a
single entity. For example: like if midday will be called midnight. ‘What
is the reason why it is impossible that the Lord is in this way, as He is able
to conjure up at the whole universe?’ If the opponent would speak thus, [I
would reply:] If it would be so, the Lord is one who experiences suffering.
‘Let there be the suffering of the Lord’. If the opponent would speak thus,
[I would reply:] Ten, this whole universe is without form. ‘What does it
matter if we call into question the very fact that the universe has a form?’
If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply]: How come that the uni-
verse, which [according to you] does not have a form, is seen by you? For it
is indeed directly perceptible. As soon as the universe does not have a form,
it is the ﬁnal dissolution […] required by the wish of the Lord.
Tis debate, worded in a typically Śāstric style, adumbrates the philosoph-
ical distinction between material and efﬁcient cause through an extended
metaphor: a single entity (dharma), i.e. the universe, is deﬁned as being
made out of two entities, i.e. the Lord and unevolved matter, called respec-
tively sentient and insentient; the two cannot be confused (i.e. what is the
material cause should not be confused with the instrumental cause), for oth-
erwise one would be making a gross mistake, as if confusing midday with
121.
Whereas the tryakṣaras can be easily identiﬁed with the three phonemes/graphemes
constituting the oṂ, viz. a u ma, the pañcakṣaras can be interpreted in various way, viz. as
denoting either a u ma plus ardhacandra and bindu (represented by a special graphic sign in
relevant writing systems), or the ﬁve syllables of the sequence na-ma-śi-vā-ya or sa-ba-ta-
a-i (where each syllable represents the initial of one of the Pañcabrahmas; cf. p. 429). Ac-
cording to the Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa (śloka 6–7 and commentary thereon), the pañcākṣaras in-
deed originate from the Pañcabrahmas (whereas for Gaṇapatitattva par. 1–4 the ﬁve deities
are Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Śiva and Sadāśiva).


--- PAGE 408 ---
The Lord
389
midnight. Te opponent counters by denying the idea that the (insentient)
universe is the object of the will of the (sentient) Lord, to which it is replied
that this state of affairs would entail as a corollary the presence of the Lord
in the cycle of existence; this in turn would imply that the Lord as a material
cause of the universe also is directly involved with and within it—an idea
that goes against the Saiddhāntika dogma characterizing the highest Śiva as
a deus otiosus. Terefore, everything that is visible, as well as its arising, exis-
tence and dissolution must go back to the wish of the Lord, who acts through
the Soul in creating the universe out of unevolved matter.
Te above account agrees with the Saiddhāntika view regarding the Lord
as the efﬁcient but not material cause of the universe, but it differs from
it insofar as the latter system identiﬁes the material cause in Māyā—and
not in unevolved matter. According to the Sāṅkhya, unevolved matter is
both the material and efﬁcient cause.122 Te view of the Dharma Pātañja-
la, standing midway between the two extremes, may be traced to Pāśupata
Śaivism, for the ontology of that system did not feature Māyā. Te Pañcār-
thabhāṣya on sūtra 5.47 indeed identiﬁes in the Lord the cause and impeller
of the Universe, criticizing the views that attribute that role to unevolved
matter or Spirit (puruṣa). Te above-quoted passages of the Dharma Pātañ-
jala thus may be regarded as doctrinal ‘fossils’ that have survived within a
Saiddhāntika framework, where Māyā was already enumerated among the
principles of the universe and assumed a fundamental role in matters of on-
tology, metaphysics and soteriology.
An altogether different standpoint appears to be upheld in śloka 12 of
the Vṛhaspatitattva (cf. above, p. 355), where the Lord in His Sadāśiva as-
pect is deﬁned as the utpādako ‘creator’, ‘generator’ (i.e. material cause?) and
not the na sādhakaḥ‘realizator’ or ‘ﬁnisher’, ‘accomplisher’ (i.e. instrumental
cause?) of the universe, and as being constantly intent upon its maintenance
(anugrāhakapara).123 Such a standpoint recalls that of the transformationist
Vedānta, according to which the Lord is the material cause of the universe.
As we have seen above, the Dharma Pātañjala characterizes the rela-
122.
Tat principle is indeed self-moving, without the need of positing an impeller or pri-
mary cause, i.e. God. Cf. the lengthy critique of contrary views exposed in the Yuktidī-
pikā, discussed by Chemparathy (1965). Te Sāṅkhya view goes against the Śaiva tenet
of causal efﬁciency, which posits that an insentient product must perforce have a sentient
cause (cf. below, pp. 573, 575 and 584).
123.
For the interpretation of the word anugraha as ‘maintenance’ (as the Pāśupata did)
instead of ‘favour’ or ‘grace’ (as the Saiddhāntika did), cf. above, p. 356 fn. 30.


--- PAGE 409 ---
390
iii Doctrine
tionship between the Lord and His creation through the metaphors of ﬁre
in wood and butter in milk only, without mentioning other stock images,
found in the Bhuvanakośa, Jñānasiddhānta and Arjunavivāha, which imply
a clearer non-dualism. Tis, along with the critique of the guru teaching
monistic/materialistic views in 266.1–268.2, suggests that the text does not
support monism—though it does not make any sharply-deﬁned statements
to support a dualistic position or devote a lengthy discussion to the issue ei-
ther. In any event, the textual evidence makes clear that different currents of
Śaivism subscribing to both positions must have existed in the Archipelago.
Te exact nature of the relationship between the Souls and the Lord is of
course crucial for clarifying the issue of monism or dualism, and therefore
also for determining the matrix out of which Old Javanese Śaiva sources have
inherited their doctrinal standpoints. An investigation of this matter will
form the main subject of the next section.


--- PAGE 410 ---
Te Soul
A
ccording to the mature Śaivasiddhānta ‘dualist’ theology, the Soul
(ātman) is one of the three distinct entities that ultimately exist—the
other two being the Lord and Māyā, the matrix out of which the material
universe evolves. Tis triad ﬁnds its standard formulation in the scheme of
pati (the Lord), paśu (the bound souls) and pāśa (the bond).1 Te individual
souls2 are distinct from the Lord because, if the Śivahood (śivatva) of the
latter is beginningless, always untainted, the souls are ab æterno tainted by
maculation (mala) and may attain Śivahood only at a certain moment in
time.3 Tus, the liberated souls are equal but not identical to Śiva. Tey
remain distinct from Śiva but are equal to Him in that they possess—albeit
in a latent state—His powers: omniscience (or: knowledge of everything)
and omnipotence (or: agency of all actions).
If the authors of the Śaivasiddhānta posited a fundamental distinction
to exist between the Soul, Māyā and Śiva, the exegetes of the esoteric Śaiva
traditions of the Pratyabhijñā, Krama and Trika, as well as most of the sem-
inal Tantric scriptures devoted to the cult of Śakti or Bhairava, adhered to
1.
It is notable that this terminology is not found in Tuturs and Tattvas, although the
distinction is already mentioned in the scriptures of the Pāśupatas (e.g. Pañcārthabhāṣya
on Pāśupatasūtra 1). Te three entities are already enumerated as padārthas (‘fundamental
topics’) in some early Siddhāntatantras, but it is only in the post-scriptural Śaiva literature
that their denominations as well as their number become ﬁxed (cf. the informative account
by Goodall 2004:139–140, fn. 6). Note that the followers of the Classical Yoga system also
accepted three distinct realities comparable to those accepted by the Śaivas, namely Nature
(prakṛti, thus ontologically lower than Māyā), Spirit (puruṣa) and the Lord (īśvara).
2.
In fact, the Śaivasiddhānta admits not only one but a plurality of innumerable indi-
vidual Souls.
3.
Cf., e.g., Kiraṇatantra 2.3, which distinguishes the souls, which are ab æterno tainted
by maculation (anādimalasambandha), from Śiva, who is ab æterno free from it (anādi-
malamukta); cf. also Sadyojyotis ad Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP 1 (p. 2).


--- PAGE 411 ---
392
iii Doctrine
monistic positions. Tey considered entities like the Soul and Māyā mere
manifestations of the one universal consciousness, which is nothing else than
the Supreme Śiva.4 For the non-dualist Śaivas the Soul is identical to Śiva,
for He is the only existing Subject and everything is but a direct emanation
from Him—a real and not an illusory one, contrary to what the Vedāntins
maintain.
How Old Javanese Tattvas and Tuturs treat this doctrinal point and specif-
ically how they describe the status of the Soul has not yet been sufﬁciently
investigated, and the Dharma Pātañjala yields precious new data for docu-
menting this doctrinal aspect of Śaivism in the Archipelago. A better under-
standing of this issue may, in turn, help us to trace the history of transmission
of the Śaiva religion from the Subcontinent to the Archipelago.
Vis-à-vis
the Lord
Soebadio (1971:53–54), while noting that the Jñānasi-
ddhānta and other Tuturs known to her uphold the ulti-
mate identiﬁcation of all realities with the Supreme Be-
ing—who also amounts to the Summum Bonum or lib-
eration—remarked that in those texts ‘we do not ﬁnd a lucidly logical dis-
cussion on the philosophical implication of these identiﬁcations’, and that it
is not sure ‘whether some difference is still felt between the individual soul
and the Divine Power, as is explicitly explained in the South Indian Śaivasid-
dhānta concept of Advaita’.5 Although I believe that Soebadio’s statements
require partial revision, since most of the fundamental Sanskrit Siddhānta-
tantras were still little known when she was writing, it is certainly true that
Old Javanese texts do not contain clear-cut and unambiguous statements
aiming at clarifying the ineffable character of the relation between the Soul
and the Lord. Teir relation is nowhere explained by means of philosophi-
cal arguments, but rather afﬁrmed as a doctrinal absolute. Tis appears to
4.
For instance, according to a monist like Abhinavagupta, the Lord manifests Himself
as the Soul, Māyā being a mere contraction (saṅkoca) of the universal divine conscious-
ness: cf. Tantrāloka 9.144b–145a: ‘Te so-called individual Souls (aṇava) are none other
than Maheśvara, whose nature is light. He manifests Himself in the form of both sentience
and insentience [as] an individual body, a knower of the ﬁeld, a bound soul’ aṇavo nāma
naivānyat prakāśātmā maheśvaraḥ// cidacidrūpatābhāsī pudgalaḥkṣetravit paśuḥ/.
5.
Soebadio refers to the Śivajñānabodha of Meyakaṇṭa. Noting the general absence
of rationalizations on monism and dualism of the kind found in South Indian (Tamil) Śai-
vasiddhānta texts, Soebadio concluded that there seems to be a fundamental difference
between the latter and ‘the sect we call in Indonesia by that name, and that in Indonesia the
sect is in this respect certainly closer to Vedānta and Sāṅkhya teachings’. Cf. below, fn. 8.


--- PAGE 412 ---
The Soul
393
be the case also in the earliest and non-dialectic Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras,
where the absolute difference or equality between the Soul and Śiva is rarely
formulated in an explicit manner. It may in fact be argued that dualism and
monism were not yet perceived as issues in the earliest strata of Śaiva litera-
ture from the Subcontinent.6 It is in the philosophical works of the exegetes
of the dualist Śaivasiddhānta, beginning with Sadyojyotis,7 that we ﬁnd ﬁrst
an investigation of ontological matters and the elaboration of a ﬁxed theol-
ogy enumerating souls, Śiva and Māyā. Even the later South Indian (Tamil)
Śaivasiddhānta texts, which were referred to by Soebadio as examples of
philosophical clarity, are far from systematic, and ofen monism is hinted at
while it is nowhere afﬁrmed in unambiguous terms.8
Te majority of Sanskrit Siddhāntatantras, irrespective of their dialec-
tic stance and philosophical awareness, have been regarded as dualist9—the
only exception being the Sarvajñānottara, an early scripture that upholds a
remarkably monistic stance;10 but even in that scripture, the sections char-
acterized by radical non-dualism have been shown by Goodall (2006:96)
to be later interpolations from sources inﬂuenced by Vedānta.11 Te theory
that there is only one Soul or Self, which has the nature of the Supreme Brah-
man, was indeed labelled ekātmavāda in the Sanskrit sources and criticized
by the Saiddhāntika authors, who attributed it to the Vedāntins.12 Apart
from the Sarvajñānottara, traces of monism are found in other early Sai-
6.
Cf. above, p. 378 fn. 87.
7.
Some, to my mind slightly exaggerated, remarks downplaying Sadyojyotis’ role of
primacy in terms of philosophical investigation while stressing his closeness to the earlier
tradition of non-dialectic Siddhāntatantras are found in Watson (2006:76). Contrast Fil-
liozat 2001, especially pp. 38–39, who has—to my mind, rightly—stressed the important
role of Sadyojyotis as the ﬁrst historically known systematizer and polarizer towards a du-
alist reading of scriptures, such as the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha.
8.
Cf. the remarks by Goodall (2006:98) in this direction with respect to two impor-
tant ‘monistic’ Śaivasiddhānta works inﬂuenced by Vedānta, such as Meyakaṇṭaśāstra (13th
century ad) and Tirukkaḷiṟṟuppaṭiyār (12th century ad).
9.
Te categorization of Siddhāntatantras into ‘dualist’ (dvaita or bheda), dual-cum-
non-dual (dvaitādvaita or bhedābheda) or ‘non-dualist’ (advaita or abheda) is indeed largely
artiﬁcial.
10.
Tus according to Sanderson (1992:291) and Goodall (2006).
11.
It is noteworthy that such interpolations must have taken place in South India, for
they are not found in the (earlier) Nepalese manuscripts.
12.
For indeed, as Sanderson (1992:307) has noted, it is not before the late 10th century
that such a monistic standpoint was attributed by Saiddhāntika authors to other Śaivas,
namely Abhinavagupta and Kṣemarāja.


--- PAGE 413 ---
394
iii Doctrine
ddhāntika scriptures. One such statement, worded in a clearly Vedāntic jar-
gon, is found in the Śatikakālajñāna:13
Śiva should be understood to be omnipresent, devoid of name and form.
Śiva is soul that is pure consciousness; He rests pervading everything.14
Te impression that the passage refers to a non-dualist, Vedānta-inﬂuenced
standpoint is strengthened by the presence in the same text of a techni-
cal term (v. 98) that is common in monistic Śaiva exegetes while it is only
rarely encountered in dualist Siddhāntatantras, i.e. sāmarasa (translated by
Goodall as ‘having become of the same ﬂavour [as everything else]’), and
of a reference (v. 95) to the yogin merging into Śiva afer his death, which
constitutes a distinguishing Vedāntic tenet as opposed to the Saiddhāntika
position.15
I cannot escape the impression, and in this I follow Soebadio, that pas-
sages of Old Javanese Tuturs displaying a non-dualist ﬂavour were also inﬂu-
enced by a form of Vedānta. Te Bhuvanakośa upholds a decidedly monistic
stance—especially with respect to the status of the Soul vis-à-vis Śiva. In
śloka 1.27ab the Spirit or Soul is identiﬁed with the Absolute: puruṣo vai
mahābrahmaḥmahādyutir anopamaḥ, glossed in Old Javanese as ‘Te Holy
Brahman is the Soul. Te number of its rays is outstanding’ saṅhyaṅbrahma
ātmā sirātiśaya kveh niṅtejanira. In 4.6 the Spirit is further characterized as
follows:
Shining and utterly void, the (individual) spirit (puruṣa) is said to be
the Brahman. Having reached the Supreme, the spirit, unmanifest,
is said to be the Almighty.
Te spirit is the Lord brahman,16 its form is like the splendour of the Sun.
13.
Tat is, the hundred-verse recension of the Kālottara. Te whole sequence of verses
91–104 has a close parallel in Uttarasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā (5.36–49), which in
all likelihood was the earlier of the two: cf. Goodall (2007:162).
14.
Trans. Goodall (2007:161–162); Śatikakālajñāna 97: śivaḥsarvagato jñeyo nāmarū-
pavivarjitaḥ/ cinmātrapuruṣo jñeyaḥśivo vyāpya vyavasthitaḥ//.
15.
As Sanderson (1992:284, fn. 16) has pointed out, the dissolution (laya) into the uni-
versal Soul (paramātman) from which the individual Soul has arisen is criticized by Said-
dhāntika authors, e.g. Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha ad Mṛgendra VP 2.13–14ab.
16.
It is also possible that the Old Javanese author in his gloss took the neuter term brah-
man, denoting the impersonal absolute of the Vedāntins, to be a manifestation of the per-
sonal god Brahmā.


--- PAGE 414 ---
The Soul
395
Its voidness is extreme. Te masters teach: the spirit dissolves (līna) into the
Lord Śaṅkara; its form is unmanifest.17
Te above passages of the Bhuvanakośa are interesting in that they are both
worded in the jargon of the Vedānta, equating the Brahman with the Spirit
and describing its ﬁnal release as a dissolution (līna) into the Lord (Pra-
bhu, Śaṅkara). Another passage that displays a Vedānta-inﬂuenced theism
has Kumāra ask the Lord to enlighten him about the characteristics of the
Soul—is it one or many?
[Kumāra:] ātmānaḥvāyavāḥbhāgāḥtvayā pūrveṣu vācakāḥ—Te Souls,
which have been taught to me by the Lord, how great is their number? You
said that their embodiments are the [bodily] winds.18 My Lord, please in-
struct me according to the truth!
Te Lord spoke: ātmāni19 śivarūpāṇi—they are the forms of Lord Śiva; ane-
kān te varānane20—thus are their forms, not one; jyotomayāni divyāni—light
always serves as their body; saṅsārāni pṛthak pṛthak—they are miserable,
differing from one another.21
Te view that the individual souls are all forms of Śiva implies the existence
of an identity between those entities, hence it conforms to monism. As was
already argued by Zieseniss (1958:109), it is likely that the doctrines found
17.
Bhuvanakośa 4.6:
bhārūpam śūnyam atyantam brahmā puruṣa-r ucyate /
puruṣaḥparamaṃgatvā niṣkalaḥprabhur ucyate //
4.6c puruṣaḥparamaṃgatvā ] em. ; puruṣa paramaṅgatvam Mss.
bhaṭāra brahma sira puruṣa / ṅa / kady aṅgān iṅujvala niṅāditya rūpanira / atyanta śūnya-
nira / vinarahakәn saṅpaṇḍita, saṅhyaṅpuruṣa, līna riṅbhaṭāra śaṅkara / lvir ira niṣkala //.
18.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 35.17–23, where Vṛhaspati asks about the characteristics of the
Soul being in the body, for the difference between mind (citta) and Soul is difﬁcult to grasp.
Te Lord’s reply is that His Power of Action (kriyāśakti) enters the ahaṅkāra, which (in its
turn) enters the bodily winds; it is the winds that join the Soul with the body.
19.
Note the aiśa neuter of ātman instead of the masculine.
20.
Te verse was probably quoted from a Tantra addressed to the Goddess, as suggested
by the presence of the vocative varānane ‘o you of splendid face’ (which is not glossed in the
Old Javanese); cf. above, fn. 110.
21.
Bhuvanakośa 8.32–33: « ātmānaḥvāyavāḥbhāgāḥtvayā pūrveṣu vācakāḥ» ikaṅ
ātmā vinarahakәn bhaṭāra ri ṅhulun / pira ta kvehnya / bāyu avaknya liṅta / pājarakna
hyaṅmami tәmәntәmәn / « devovāca / atmani śiva rupami » rūpa bhaṭāra śiva ika / « anekān
te varānane » maṅkana rūpanya tan tuṅgal / « jyotomayāni divyāni » teja pinakāvaknya
nityaśa / « saṅsārāni pṛthak pṛthak » saṅsāra ya / mapalenan ta ya //.


--- PAGE 415 ---
396
iii Doctrine
in the Bhuvanakośa derive from an early Sanskritic tradition of Vedānticized
non-dualist Śaiva currents.22
Te doctrinal standpoint concerning the above point upheld in Old Ja-
vanese Tattvas is articulated in a more detailed manner than in Tuturs and
through the use of a different terminology, which suggests its derivation
from another tradition. If a separation between sentient and insentient, i.e.
Śiva and Māyā, is evident in the sources, statements concerning the status of
the Soul vis-à-vis the Lord are far from unambiguous. For instance, in Dha-
rma Pātañjala 336.2–5, the Soul is deﬁned as an illusory image (māyāmāyā),
being a mere denomination (khyāti)23 of the Lord Supreme Cause; the Soul
is also instrumental in creation, for the universe arises following the Soul’s
awareness of unevolved matter (prakṛti), and dissolves as soon as that aware-
ness ceases. Ten to Kumāra’s question as to what is the Soul and the origin
of maculation (mala) the Lord replies as follows:
As follows I shall teach you: what is designated as Soul is the Lord Summum
DhPāt
212.8–12
Bonum. Tat is designated as Śiva Parameśvara. He is to be considered as
the sun. He is like the sun. Te sentient is to be considered as His splendor
when [He is] the sun. Te splendor of the sun goes, spreading over the ten
quarters of the sky. Such is the sentient, for, endowed with the Power of
Pervasion of the Lord, it ﬁlls the whole universe.
Te ﬁrst statement, i.e. that the Soul is the Lord Summum Bonum, i.e. Śiva
Parameśvara, comes very close to an unambiguous profession of adherence
to non-duality. Te Soul is then characterized as sentient and compared to
the splendour of the sun, an equation that is ofen encountered in Tuturs
when describing the Brahman-Soul and in Tattvas when describing Sadāśiva,
22.
Tis view may be extended to a great part of the Tutur literature tout court. For
instance, analogous non-dualistic propositions of seemingly Vedāntic origin are found in
Kumāratattva ii, where the oneness of the Lord is compared to the oneness of the sun: both
only appear to be manifold when contained in the eyes of each person (f. 22v); further, be-
cause Māyā makes Him endowed with a body, ‘the Lord at last [becomes] differentiated;
that can be compared to the sun and the pots. Te Māyā is like that which makes the pots,
hundreds, thousands, millions; the Lord is like the sun present inside; the Nature is the wa-
ter of the pot; the Spirit is the light of the sun’ bhaṭāra prabheda vәkasan, ya ta inupamākәn
āditya mvaṅghaṭa, ikaṅmāyā akәn magave ghaṭa, satus, siyu, sayuta, ikaṅbhaṭāra kadi
āditya haneṅjro, ikaṅpradhāna [em. ; paḍāna ms.] ve niṅghaṭa, ikaṅpuruṣa chāyā niṅ
āditya (f. 23). For the occurrence of the same simile in the Bhuvanakośa and other sources,
cf. above, pp. 385–387).
23.
Tis form is my conjectural emendation of the nonsensical katti.


--- PAGE 416 ---
The Soul
397
who pervades the whole universe in the same way as the sun does with its
rays. Te continuation of the above passage, having brieﬂy listed the prin-
ciples (tattva) out of which the universe is made, adds that all of them are
‘pervaded by the Soul, and also by the Lord Supreme Cause. Tat is why
pervasion is another power of the Lord’ ya binyāpakan saṅhyaṅātmā, as-
tam bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa ya mataṅnyan vibhuh śakti bhaṭāra vaneh. Te
apposition of Soul and Lord in pervading the principles might be an allusion
to the status of the Soul vis-à-vis the Lord; but the sentence is unclear and
difﬁcult to interpret. Te Old Javanese word astam,24 which can be trans-
lated as ‘and also, let alone, even more so’, does not express an unambiguous
relationship of identity between the Soul and the Lord Supreme Cause in
pervading the principles, for a distinction between the two might still be im-
plied. Te reference to pervasion (vibhuh) as being ‘another power of the
Lord’ (śakti bhaṭāra vaneh) probably characterizes the same power that per-
tains also to the Soul insofar as it is sentient (cetanā).25
In Vṛhaspatitattva 14.37–43 the Soul is characterized as the principle of
Śiva (śivatattva) that is tainted by maculation (mala) because of its contact
with Māyā. Te result is that
Te śivatattva stops to be omniscient and omnipotent: it is designated as
Soul, which means sentience that is insensible.26
Te passage suggests an identity between the śivatattva and the Soul. Te
latter is characterized in terms of a single, universal spin-off of the aspect of
Śiva standing below paramaśivatattva and sadāśivatattva when it pervades
Māyā, thereby becoming insentient and losing its innate powers. Tis, again,
would seem to conform to a non-dualist position.
According to the Tattvajñāna, the principle of Soul (ātmikatattva) is iden-
tiﬁed with the Lord in His sadāśivatattva rather than śivatattva aspect:
24.
Te word is my emendation of astā in the codex, which does not make sense in this
context. In fact, it is extremely improbable that the sequence astā bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa
could be interpreted as ‘the Lord by the Eight forms (e.g. Śiva aṣṭamūrti), the Supreme
Cause’, for a ‘gross’ and manifest form of Śiva cannot subtly pervade the principles of the
universe.
25.
A similar point seems to be implied in Vṛhaspatitattva 14, which speaks about the
vibhuśakti of the Lord pervading the principles; and in Tattvajñāna 5, referring to their
pervasion by the Soul (cf. below p. 351). On the pervasion of the principles by the Lord and
Soul in the Pañcārthabhāṣya, cf. below, p. 426.
26.
Vṛhaspatitattva 14.45–46: mari pveka śivatattva / sarvajña sarvakāryakartā / ya ta
sinaṅguh ātmā ṅaranya / cetana lәṅәṅlәṅәṅṅaranya /.


--- PAGE 417 ---
398
iii Doctrine
Tat which is designated as ātmikatattva is the Lord sadāśivatattva. His
characteristics are: woven crosswise and lengthwise (ūtaprota). […] He
is designated as ātmikatattva. He is the holy ātmaviśeṣa. He is the Lord
Dharma. He pervades the whole universe. He serves as the life of all the
universe and all the creatures. Tus is His likeness. He is like the holy Sun.27
Te text refers to the ātmikatattva, amounting to ātmaviśeṣa28 and the Lord
Dharma, using the same ‘solar’ simile that occurs in Dharma Pātañjala with
respect to both the Soul and the Lord. As in the Dharma Pātañjala (214.5–
10) and in the Vṛhaspatitattva (e.g. commentary to ślokas 14, 35, 50), the
principle of Soul is regarded to be originally pure and sentient just as the
Lord, and it is only through the obfuscating activity of Māyā that it loses its
connatural powers.
Losing its
Divine Status
From the Old Javanese passages quoted above it clearly
results that Tattvas uphold the equation Soul = Lord =
sentient. Te last element is part of the basic metaphysi-
cal dichotomy described as a fundamental tenet in both
Tuturs and Tattvas, namely that between the sentient (cetanā) and the in-
sentient (acetanā). Both the Lord and the Soul are sentient, whereas Māyā
is insentient. Tis seemingly dualistic metaphysic is reminiscent of the Sāṅ-
khya dichotomy between a sentient Spirit (puruṣa) and an insentient nature
(prakṛti). Tis old view appears to have retained its prominence in texts from
the Indonesian Archipelago, whereas in the Subcontinent it was superseded
by a more innovative Śaiva cosmological doctrine.
As we have seen, in Old Javanese Tattvas the Soul possesses the para-
doxical aspect of being both only sentience and innately powerful, just as
the Lord, and yet being obfuscated by the inﬂuence of Māyā. It is only be-
cause of the intervention of Māyā that the Soul becomes individualized, ig-
norant about its own nature and impotent, thereby degenerating into lower
and coarser principles. Tis downward journey towards insentient matter
27.
Tattvajñāna 5.1–21: nihan taṅsinaṅguh ātmikatattva ṅaranya / bhaṭāra sadāśivatat-
tva kunaṅlakṣaṇanira / ūtaprota / […] ndan sira ta sinaṅgah ta ātmikatattva ṅaranira / sira
ta saṅhyaṅātmaviśeṣa ṅaranira / sira ta bhaṭāra dharma ṅaranira / sira ta humibәkiṅrāt
kabeh / sira ta pinakahuripiṅrāt kabeh sarvajanma kabeh /nahan papaḍanira kady aṅganira
saṅhyaṅāditya /.
28.
‘Te paramount Soul’? A deﬁnition of ātmaviśeṣa and the Lord Dharma is found in
Tattvajñāna 33.1–5, where both categories are said to be ‘the Soul, without activity, present
in the Fourth State’ ikaṅātmā tan vyāpāra hana riṅtūryapada.


--- PAGE 418 ---
The Soul
399
ultimately leads the Soul to incarnate in a worldly creature and become a
slave to the senses and their objects.
In the Dharma Pātañjala the result of the pervasion of the Soul by Māyā
is described as follows:
Te principle of Soul is omniscient and omnipotent; it pervades the prin-
DhPāt
214.6–10
ciple of Māyā. Eventually the power of the Soul disappears, it ceases to be
omniscient and omnipotent, for maculation is the nature of Māyā. Macu-
lation sticks tightly to the Soul: this is the reason why its nature is being
ignorant; in reality it is only sentience.
A similar characterization of the Soul is found in the Old Javanese exegesis
to Vṛhaspatitattva 14:
Te nature of śivatattva is to be woven lengthwise (prota) within Māyā. Tat
is the reason why it is tainted by maculation. Maculation means the insen-
tience. As the śivatattva is absolutely crystal clear, immaculate, bright, pure
and clear, the sentience forms its nature. Ten it becomes tainted by the
insentience, and its powers disappear. Its powers are: omniscience and om-
nipotence. Te śivatattva stops to be omniscient and omnipotent: it is then
designated as Soul, which means sentience that is insensible.29
And in the Tattvajñāna:
Tis is what the Lord sadāśivatattva pervading and being aware of māyā-
tattva is like. Maculation is the nature of māyātattva. Tat is designated as
being enveloped in and adhered to by maculation. For that reason, it is as
if it (the Soul) thinks that the powers of the Lord are vanished in the end.
But how is that possible? For the Lord sadāśivatattva is just like a crystal, He
cannot be made impure. Indeed it is only His sentience that is adhered to
by maculation. It is enveloped in and covered by māyātattva, so that at the
end the sentience is insensible. It stops to be omniscient and it stops to be
29.
Vṛhaspatitattva 14.39–46: ikaṅśivatattva prota svabhāvanya riṅmāyā / ya ta mataṅ-
yan koparәṅgan mala / mala ṅaran iṅacetana / apan ikaṅśivatattva sәḍәṅsphaṭikavarṇa /
nirmala malilaṅaho mahәniṅ/ pinakasvabhāvanyañ cetana / koparәṅgan pva ya de niṅa-
cetana / hilaṅta śaktinira / śakti ṅaranya ikaṅsarvajña lavan sarvakartā / mari pveka śiva-
tattva / sarvajña sarvakāryakartā / ya ta sinaṅguh ātmā ṅaranya / cetana lәṅәṅlәṅәṅṅara-
nya /.


--- PAGE 419 ---
400
iii Doctrine
omnipotent, even though in reality the sentience is constituted by sentience
only.30
All three Tattvas agree in characterizing the Soul as having consciousness
only as its true nature, while being at the same time ignorant in view of the
fact that this original nature is not realized by the Soul. Tis view conforms
to a well-known tenet of Sanskrit Saiddhāntika literature. It is summarized
in a verse of the Sarvajñānottara:
Te Bound Soul is the Soul when not-independent; [though] being sentience
only, it is deﬁled by maculation. It is ignorant, experiencing suffering ab
æterno, of limited knowledge, devoid of sovereignty, inactive.31
From the Tattva passages quoted above the Soul appears to have a liminal
status, standing between sentience and insentience. Rather than by provid-
ing a rationalization of the paradoxical nature of the Soul, the Old Javanese
texts explain the union between the Soul and Māyā by resorting to similes.
Two of these, namely the simile of the butter in milk and the ﬁre in wood,
we have already encountered while illustrating the existence (or pervasion)
of an invisible entity within a visible one.32 Tus, the sentience of the Soul
being tainted by maculation is described in the Dharma Pātañjala (212.25–
214.4) in terms of a pervasion of the principles of the universe (tattva) by the
Soul, as if woven crosswise-and-lengthwise (ūtaprota). Te Soul being wo-
ven crosswise (ūta) within the principles is compared to the (invisible) but-
ter pervading milk. To illustrate the Soul’s being woven lengthwise (prota), a
30.
Tattvajñāna 5.2–21: kadi maṅkana ta bhaṭāra sadāśivatattva an vyāpaka cumetane-
kaṅmāyātattva / mala pva svabhāva nikaṅmāyātattva / ya ta sinaṅguh koparәṅga karakә-
tan mala ṅaranya / mataṅnyan kadi hilaṅkahiḍәpanya śakti bhaṭāra vәkasan / kintu taha /
apan sphaṭikopama kәtaṅbhaṭāra sadāśivatattva tan vәnaṅcinampuran / tuhun cetana nira
juga karakәtan mala / koparәṅgan sinaput de nikaṅmāyātattva / kavәkas taṅcetana lәṅә-
lәṅә / mari sarvajña mari sarvakāryakartā / tuhun makāvak tuturmātra / juga kaṅcetana
vәkasan /.
31.
Sarvajñānottara VP 28.4: paśur ātmāsvatantraś ca cinmātro maladūṣitaḥ/ sa mūḍho
’nityasaṃsārī kiñcijjño ’nīśvaro ’kriyaḥ//. In pāda c I read, as in the Nepalese manuscript,
sa mūḍho ‘he is ignorant’ instead of sammūḍho ‘bewildered, insentient’, as in the south-
ern transmission commented upon by Aghoraśiva. Note that the text deviates from the
Saiddhāntika path insofar as it characterizes the Soul as inactive (akriya; cf. also 28.18d,
deﬁning the puruṣa as akartā). According to the Siddhānta the Soul is always active (kartā),
whereas both Vedānta and Sāṅkhya characterize the Self (be it Spirit or Brahman) as inac-
tive.
32.
Cf. above, pp. 381–383 and 401–402.


--- PAGE 420 ---
The Soul
401
new metaphor is resorted to, namely that of a string that keeps in one row the
pearls of a necklace. According to the text (214.5), the ātmatattva, pervading
the principle of Māyā, amounts to ātmā prota.
Even though the expression ātma prota is unique to the Dharma Pātañ-
jala, the Vṛhaspatitattva (14) also employs the similes of butter in milk and
the string of pearls to describe the Supreme Śiva being woven crosswise-
and-lengthwise across the principles by way of His vibhuśakti. Te same
image is taken up again in 14.38–40, where ūta is deﬁned as the pervasion of
the body of Māyā by the principle of Śiva, while prota as becoming individ-
ualized (maṅekadeśa).33 Maculation thus obfuscates the principle of Śiva,
which in origin is crystal-clear like a diamond.
Te Tattvajñāna describes the ātmikatattva, which is equal to sadāśiva-
tattva, as pervading Māyā in a woven crosswise-manner, like ﬁre pervades
the ﬁre drill; its being woven lengthwise is illustrated through the same im-
age found in the Vṛhaspatitattva, namely a crystal losing its transparency:
What is designated as ātmikatattva is as follows: the Lord sadāśivatattva.
Its characteristic is that of being woven crosswise and lengthwise. Woven
crosswise is like the ﬁre that is within the ﬁre drill. Te ﬁre, when it resides
within the bamboo-wood, is invisible. In the same way is the Lord sadāśi-
vatattva when He pervades the principle Māyā. He is not seen nor known.
He is pervasive, ﬁlling the principle of Māyā. Woven lengthwise is like a di-
amond, pure, shining, penetrated (by light), clear, without obstructions. It
absorbs the colours. Tus the crystal changes colour, covered by the colours
that adhere to the principle Māyā. It is not seen nor known. It is pervasive,
ﬁlling the principle of Māyā. Te crystal is covered by the colours that ad-
here to it (Māyā). In case of a separation between the gem and the colours,
because of that its pure aspect comes back. Te colours which adhered to it
formerly, in the end they are again in its body.34
33.
Te verbal form (m)aṅekadeśa is glossed by OJED (464) as ‘to be in one place, move
in one direction; to ﬁll the whole place’; its base, i.e. the substantive ekadeśa, is seemingly
not attested in Old Javanese but occurs in a similar context in Sanskrit Śaiva sources; cf., e.g.,
Kiraṇatantra VP 2.13: ‘Once maculation has been split partial manifestation of conscious-
ness comes about in the soul’ malaṃvidārya cidvyaktir ekadeśe bhavaty aṇau (following
the reading of the Nepalese manuscripts, against commentator Rāmakaṇṭha; cf. Goodall
1998:238 fn. 235).
34.
Tattvajñāna 5.1–14: nihan taṅsinaṅguh ātmikatattva ṅaranya / bhaṭāra sadāśivatat-
tva kunaṅlakṣaṇanira / ūtaprota / ūta ṅaranya kady aṅgan iṅpuy hana riṅәsәyәn / sūkṣma
juga kaṅpuy hana riṅkayu priṅ/ maṅkana ta bhaṭāra sadāśivatattva an vyāpaka riṅmāyā-
tattva / tan katon tan kinavruhan / sira vibhu humibәkiṅmāyātattva / prota ṅaranya kady


--- PAGE 421 ---
402
iii Doctrine
Te two similes occur also elsewhere in the Tattvajñāna (29 and 30, associ-
ated with ūta and prota respectively), where they serve the purpose of jus-
tifying the (both visible and invisible) presence of the Lord as Soul within
human beings.35
I have found no Sanskrit sources in which the similes of the ﬁre in wood
and butter in milk are used in precisely the same context, i.e. referring to the
pervasion of the principles by the Soul. Furthermore, these images appear to
be uncommon in Siddhāntatantras. Te closest similarity I have been able to
ﬁnd is in the Trayodaśaśatikakālottara, mentioning the invisible presence of
the butter within milk,36 and in (an interpolated passage of) the Sarvajñānot-
tara, where the same example refers to the inextricable connection existing
between the Soul (ātman) and the Bond (pāśa).37
Te image of the string of pearls is also of Sanskritic origin: it appears
in three commentaries to the Sāṅkhyakārikā (17), where it is referred to as
a view of certain (seemingly pūrvapakṣin) teachers about the pervasion of
the bodies by the Spirit.38 Te simile occurs also in two Siddhāntatantras,
aṅgan iṅmaṇik sphaṭika / hәnaṅ/ hamāyamāya trus alilaṅtan kāvaraṇan / rakәtakna irikaṅ
varṇa / dadi masalin varṇa ikaṅmaṇik sinaput de nikaṅvarṇa rakәta riṅmāyātattva / tan
katon tan kinavruhan / sira vibhu humibәkiṅmāyātattva sinaput de nikaṅvarṇa rakәtanya
jugekaṅmaṇik / makanimitta pasahakna ikaṅmaṇik lavan varṇa / ndan irika mulih rūpa
nikā hәnәṅ/ ikaṅvarṇa rakәtanya ṅūni hana rikāvaknya jugeka vәkasan /.
35.
Cf. Tattvajñāna 29.4–7: ‘Te Lord indeed is what renders the life of all men possible.
His characteristics are being woven crosswise and lengthwise. Woven crosswise is like the
ﬁre that is in the ﬁre drill. Be it either wood of the priṅor ampyal variety, it is not perceived,
its existence is not seen. Its existence is both manifest and unmanifest’ siṅgih bhaṭara hana
pinakahurip niṅvoṅkabeh / ndan ūtaprota lakṣaṇanira / ūta ṅaranya / kady aṅgān iṅapuy
hana riṅәsәyәn / priṅampyal kayu / kunaṅtan kinavruhan / tan katon juga hananya / vyakta
tan vyakta juga hananya //; 30.13–14 (said of one within whom the presence of the Lord is
manifest): ‘Being woven lengthwise is your horizon. Like the light of a gem: its presence
in one place. In this way is the Lord’ prota kapva paṅhiṅgananta / kady aṅgān iṅteja niṅ
maṇik / maṅekadeśa hananya / ndah maṅkana bhaṭara /.
36.
Cf. below, p. 550.
37.
Sarvajñānottara VP 28.7 (ed. and trans. Goodall 2006:96): ‘On sait que le beurre
se trouve, non différencié, dans le lait; de même, l’âme aussi se trouve, non différenciée, en-
travée par les liens [de l’existence mondaine]’ yathā jñātvāvibhāgena ghṛtaṃpayasi saṃsthi-
tam / tathātmā pāśasaṃśliṣṭa avibhāgena saṃsthitaḥ//.
38.
Cf. Māṭharavṛtti, where the simile referred to as maṇisūtravat (cf. Vṛhaspatitattva
14) is explained: ‘Like a string of pearls. In this case, however many pearls there are in a
string, it is only one single string that is present in them all. Similarly, is the string-like
Supreme Soul in the pearl-like bodies only one?’ maṇisūtravat / iha rasanāyāṃyāvanto
maṇayas teṣu sarveṣu ekam eva sūtraṃpravartate / evaṃmaṇibhūteṣu śarīreṣu kim ekaḥ


--- PAGE 422 ---
The Soul
403
namely the Nayasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā and in the Niśvāsakāri-
kā,39 as well as in the Liṅgapurāṇa;40 in all instances it is used in a cosmo-
logical context that recalls that of the Old Javanese sources as it illustrates
the invisible pervasion of the universe by Śiva.
Let us resume the journey of the Soul through the lower cosmological
principles. Having reached the domain of Māyā and being enshrouded by
maculation, the Soul ceases to be a single universal principle and is turned
into multiple individual entities, provided with an intellect. Whereas the
other Tattvas stress the role of intellect (buddhi) and the three constituents
(guṇa) in fettering the Soul, thus perpetuating the old Sāṅkhya view con-
cerning the delusion of the spirit by nature, the Dharma Pātañjala more
closely follows the Śaiva ontological accounts insofar as it brings to the scene
the three principles of activation (kalā), attachment (rāga) and awareness
(vidyā). Te three are produced by Māyā and hence occur right afer that
principle in the cosmic hierarchy described by the Dharma Pātañjala.41 Tey
are called shrouds (kañcuka) by the Sanskrit Śaiva sources, for they intervene
at the deepest unmanifest level of the Soul, enshrouding it and, in so doing,
enabling it to perform the most basic activities of desiring, knowing and act-
ing in the manifest universe. Tese same processes, however, alienate the
sūtrabhūtaḥparamātmā (the view of another pūrvapakṣin is referred to with the example of
the moon being one and yet appearing as manifold on the water’s surface [jalacandravat];
cf. above, pp. 385–387); according to the Suvarṇasaptati, available through Paramārtha’s
(6th century ad) Chinese translation, a single Spirit pervades the bodies of all the beings like
a string tying together pearls: whereas the pearls are many, the string is one (cf. Takakusu
1904:1003); the Bhāṣya by Gauḍapāda (8th century ad) reports the question whether there
is one Soul ‘governing all bodies, like the string belonging to a line of pearls’ (sarvaśarīre
’dhiṣṭhātā maṇirasanātmakasūtravat) or a plurality of them, ‘each one governing a single
body?’ (pratiśarīram adhiṣṭhātāraḥ).
39.
Cf. Nayasūtra 4.146ab: ‘By that [thread that is Mahādeva] all this [universe] is per-
vaded, just as pearls on a thread’ tena sarvam idaṃvyāptaṃsūtre maṇigaṇā iva ≈Niśvāsa-
kārikā 37.11cd, Nāradaparivrājakopaniṣad (Schrader 1912:152) and Brahmopaṇiṣad 2.4
(all reading protam instead of vyāptam; in the last two sources the thread corresponds to
brahman).
40.
Cf. Liṅgapurāṇa 2.16.12–13: ‘Some praise that Śiva as having the invisible form of
a thread; that form is the invisible Nature of the Supreme Lord. Tat through which the
worlds stand along a thread like a string of pearls, that is to be known as the thread, a form
of marvelous power’ sūtrāvyākṛtarūpaṃtaṃśivaṃśaṃsanti kecana / avyākṛtaṃpradhā-
naṃhi tad rūpaṃparameṣṭhinaḥ// lokā yenaiva tiṣṭhanti sūtre maṇigaṇā iva / tat sūtram iti
vijñeyaṃrūpam adbhutavikramam //.
41.
Cf. Figure 4, p. 426.


--- PAGE 423 ---
404
iii Doctrine
souls from their divine nature of unlimited freedom, omniscience and om-
nipotence. Tis fundamental and deﬁning tenet of Śaiva schools, which dis-
tinguishes them from the earlier Sāṅkhya theology, appears to be unknown
to both the Vṛhaspatitattva and the Tattvajñāna.42 It is therefore arguable
that the Dharma Pātañjala amalgamates an old view common to the earliest
Archipelago texts with this speciﬁcally Śaiva item of doctrine.
According to the Sanskrit sources, the ﬁrst principle of the triad, kalā-
tattva, provides the Soul, whose powers have been obliterated, with an in-
jection of basic energy and connects it in an inextricable way to the sense
faculties, bringing about fruition of karma.43 It is therefore of crucial im-
portance in creating the unity called pudgala, which forms the individual
psychosomatic being.44
According to the Dharma Pātañjala, kalā causes the intervention of the
principium individuationis. Te Soul, ceasing to be a single universal prin-
ciple, becomes a plurality of individual souls:
It pervades the level of the principle of activation, and it becomes differentiated
DhPāt
214.10–12
from its [true] nature. Like the children of the bees that are in the holes [of
a hive]: thus is the Soul while being differentiated from its [true] nature,
having as body the principle of activation.
Even though no mention of kalātattva is made, the same metaphor of the
juvenile bees recurs in the Vṛhaspatitattva while it describes how the Soul,
having lost its original powers of omniscience and omnipotence, becomes
individualized in the principle of Māyā:
Te principle of Soul becomes manifold. Tat is the reason why the princi-
ple of Māyā is densely ﬁlled. Like a beehive is tightly arranged, layer upon
layer, Māyā is comparable to a beehive. Te Souls are like child-bees. Teir
faces bent downwards (adhomuka) means: they bend down. Te souls look
42.
Although it is not altogether unknown in sources from the Archipelago: as I have
pointed out elsewhere (Acri 2006:129), the same series of three shrouds is mentioned in
two Sanskrit hymns from Bali, namely Bhūtarājastava/Yamastava (StSt 133.3) and Śivasta-
va (StSt 751.11); cf. below, p. 428.
43.
Cf. Torella (1998:59–61).
44.
Cf. Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama 9.28–29a and Śivasūtravimarśinī, p. 6: ‘Te function
of activation is to delimitate the various things by entering into (taking possession of)
their own natures’ tathā kalayati svasvarūpāveśena tat tad vastu paricchinattīti kalāvyāpāraḥ
(Torella 1998:67).


--- PAGE 424 ---
The Soul
405
downwards only; they do not know about the principles that stand above
them.45
Similarly the Tattvajñāna, while describing the Soul in the sleeping state
(svapnapada), uses the metaphor of the bees in the beehive, thereby distin-
guishing the one, universal Holy Soul (saṅhyaṅātmā) from the individual
souls (ātmā):
But the Holy Soul is one. Tat [Holy Soul] only becomes differentiated [into
a plurality of individual souls], more and more coarse. Te souls are sepa-
rated by all the principles, arranged layer upon layer. Te characteristic of
the Holy Soul, being in various quarters, is like a honeycomb of bees. Te
souls are regarded to be the children of the bees, staying in their [own] quar-
ters.46
Appearing in all three Tattvas, the metaphor of Māyā ﬁlled with souls like a
hive ﬁlled with bees has been borrowed from a common Sanskrit source. It
is indeed found in two early Siddhāntatantras, i.e. the Mataṅgapārameśvarā-
gama (VP 8.65) and the Sarvajñānottara (VP 9.133), and also appears in the
non-Saiddhāntika Brahmayāmala (f. 153r.4–5 to 153v.1); in all sources it oc-
curs in a similar context, namely the description of the bound Soul residing
in Māyā.47
According to the Dharma Pātañjala, the second principle in the list of
shrouds is attachment (rāga), which intervenes immediately afer activation.
Te text (214.13) simply explains that the Soul pervading the principle of
attachment ‘desires to be sentient of [the external reality].’ (mahyun ta ya
mañetanā). Tis conforms to the characterization of attachment in Sanskrit
sources, according to which this principle is the root of all feelings of the
individual soul. Te soul cannot even become sentient without the prior
45.
Vṛhaspatitattva 14.46–50: akveh pvekaṅātmatattva / ya ta mataṅyan sәsә¯k taṅmāyā-
tattva / kadyaṅga niṅumah niṅtavvan / matap matumpaṅtumpaṅan / ikaṅmāyā yāṅkәna
umah niṅtavvan / ikaṅātmā yāṅkәn anak niṅtavvan / adhomuka tumuṅkul ṅaranya / mulat
i sor juga tikaṅātmā / tan vruh irikaṅtattva i ruhurnya /.
46.
Tattvajñāna 35.15–18: kintu tuṅgal saṅhyaṅātmā / ika juga paḍa maprabheda
saṅśaya gaṇal / ātmā mahlәt ikaṅsarvatattva / an matumpaṅtumpaṅan / kadi tala niṅ
tavvan lakṣaṇa saṅhyaṅātmā / hana riṅsapadapada / ātmā ya ta inaranan hanak niṅtavon /
umuṅguḥirikaṅpada /.
47.
A detailed comparison between the Old Javanese passages quoted above and rele-
vant Sanskrit sources, like Bṛhaspati’s Śivatanu and the Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama, may be
found in Acri 2011.


--- PAGE 425 ---
406
iii Doctrine
desire of being so. Attachment is, therefore, not to be confused with the
‘lower’ feeling of craving for the objects of senses but as a subtle psychic force
intervening at a much deeper level of the subject (cf. Torella 1998:63–65).
Te last of the shrouds listed in the Dharma Pātañjala is awareness (or
‘knowledge’, vidyā). It is explained as follows:
It (the Soul) pervades the principle of awareness: ﬁnally it perceives the ex-
DhPāt
214.12–15
ternal reality, for the principles of awareness serves as a light for it. Tat is
the reason why it perceives the external reality. What is the external reality
that is perceived by it? It is the principle of unevolved matter.
Te Dharma Pātañjala’s deﬁnition of awareness conforms to the one com-
monly found in Siddhāntatantras, according to which this principle enables
the subject to perceive the objects of senses.48 Awareness constitutes a link
between the subject and the material world. It is not a perfect knowledge,
through which the adept would recognize His own powerful state and thus
immediately attain Śivahood, but an imperfect one that merely enables the
subject to experience the external world.49 As such, it appears to function as
a higher duplicate of the principle of intellect (buddhi), which, however, is
fundamentally insentient, being merely a mirror for the sentient activity of
the Spirit.50
Since neither the Tattvajñāna nor the Vṛhaspatitattva know about the
three shrouds, they only describe the obfuscation of the Soul by Māyā and
its products. Te Vṛhaspatitattva describes this process as follows:
Māyā means the heavy mind, for the Powers of the Spirit are covered by
it. What are the Powers? Omniscience and omnipotence. Te powers of
48.
Cf., e.g., Kiraṇatantra VP 1.16d (vidyākhyāpitagocaraḥ); Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha
VP 1.10b (vidyādarśitagocaraḥ).
49.
For the Soul, precisely because of the activity of maculation and the shrouds, is kiñ-
cijjña ‘knowing imperfectly’: cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 50, according to which the nature of man
is kiñcidjñāna i.e. having little knowledge (akәḍik paṅavruhnya). For the characterization
of the individual Soul as kiñcijjña in Sanskrit Śaiva sources, cf. Niśvāsaguhya 7.172; Kiraṇa
VP 1.19; Sarvajñānottara VP 28.4; Parākhyatantra 1.92.
50.
As pointed out by Torella (1998:56–57), the status of vidyā as a double of buddhi
was perceived as problematic by the Śaiva sources, which try to anticipate the opponent’s
potential objections. In fact buddhi already had an ambivalent position in Sāṅkhya philos-
ophy, standing at a high level in the cosmological hierarchy and functioning as the primary
locus of knowledge, and yet being an insentient product of nature. For Old Javanese pas-
sages reﬂecting this situation, cf. below, pp. 437–438.


--- PAGE 426 ---
The Soul
407
the Spirit disappear as He pervades Māyā. In the end it stays in the prin-
ciple Māyā. Te principle of Māyā, however, is clear. Te offspring of the
principle of Māyā, namely the principle of nature, that is the coarse part of
the principle of Māyā. It is its manifestation that causes the unconscious-
ness of the Soul. Since it is unconscious because of the principle of nature,
that is the reason why Spirit (puruṣa) is the name of the Soul (ātmā). [pu-
ruṣa is to be analyzed as:] puru śete. puru means: palace. Te palace of the
Soul is the principle of nature. śete means that the Soul sleeps there.51 Tis
is why the Soul is Spirit. Tat is considered as experiencing. Its name is
cetanasaṅsāra.52
Te passage seems to try to accommodate the Sāṅkhya and Śaiva views of
the Soul. Te spirit, which is regarded by Sāṅkhya as the highest principle,
maintains a subaltern position in the Śaiva system, located at a lower onto-
logical level; in the Śaiva system of the Vṛhaspatitattva it came to represent
the Soul when enshrouded by Māyā, and then the principle of nature.
Te text mentions the principles occurring immediately afer Māyā and
nature (pradhānatattva) in the cosmic hierarchy, namely the three constitu-
ents (guṇa) and buddhi or citta, as being the primary factors responsible for
the fettering of the Soul to a body. Śloka 22a of the Vṛhaspatitattva deﬁnes
the mind as being obscured by the three constituents (triguṇamūḍhakañ cit-
taṃ); these amount to having maculation (malatva) and result in being born
as a human being.53
According to the Tattvajñāna (10), the incarnation of the Soul into vari-
51.
Te semantic analysis of puruṣa given in the Old Javanese portion of the text recalls a
cliché found in several Sanskrit sources, the earliest of which is perhaps Śatapathabrāhmaṇa
(13.6.2, puri śete); for Śaiva sources, cf. Liṅgapurāṇa 1.70.103 (puryāṃśete) and Tattvatra-
yanirṇayavivṛti 3.5.
52.
Vṛhaspatitattva 50.34–43: māyā vih ṅaran iṅmanah abvat / apan sinahabanya śakti
niṅsaṅpuruṣa / aparan śakti ṅaranya / sarvajña sarvakāryakartā / hilaṅpva śakti saṅpu-
ruṣa / apan vyāpaka riṅmāyā / ya ta panәṅәr iṅmāyātattva ri vәkasan / kintu malilaṅikaṅ
māyātattva ṅaranya / anak niṅmāyātattva / ya tika pradhānatattva ṅaranya / ganal niṅ
māyātattva /vyaktinya ya vih gumave lupa niṅsaṅpuruṣa / apan malupa de niṅpradhā-
natattva / mataṅyan puruṣa ṅaran iṅātmā / puru śete / puru ṅaran iṅkaḍatvan / kaḍatvan
iṅātmā tekaṅpradhānatattva / ikanaṅśete maturū tekaṅātmā / ya ta mataṅyan puruṣa
tekaṅātmā / yateka sinaṅguh ta maṅhiḍәp / cetanasaṅsāra ṅaranika /.
53.
Te whole verse 22 is very corrupt: triguṇamūḍhakañ cittaṃsunādi sandhakayaka /
tvayakasmatva malatva sameṣṭaṃmānuṣaṃphalam //; only part of its content is made clear
by the Old Javanese commentary. For a different deﬁnition of maculation as insentience,
cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 14.40: mala ṅaran iṅacetana.


--- PAGE 427 ---
408
iii Doctrine
ous kinds of human beings is due to the three constituents, which stick tightly
to the mind (rumakәt irikaṅcitta). Te important role of citta as the place
where both the fettering of the Soul and its freedom from maculation take
place is also mentioned in the Dharma Pātañjala. Tere, in reply to Ku-
māra’s question as to why a master (paṇḍita) is still entrapped in the cycle
of existence, the Lord deﬁnes maculation as
something that adheres to the Soul. Tat is what does not disappear at once,
DhPāt
212.1–3
for the mind is inextricably intertwined with the Soul. Tat ends up in tightly
covering the omniscience of the Soul.
Although a positive deﬁnition of maculation—in spite of this concept be-
ing mentioned several times—is found nowhere in the text, on account of
the above-quoted passages of similar contents in Tattvas it is arguable that
what linked the mind to the Soul were precisely the three constituents. Tat
the motif was widely attested in Śaiva circles in ancient Java is suggested
by the fact that it also occurs in Tuturs. According to the Jñānasiddhānta
(chapter 19), the freedom of the mind from the state of having maculation
(malinatvacittamokṣa) is conceived to be the Spotless Śiva (śloka 5cd).54 In
the Old Javanese commentary the state of having maculation is deﬁned as
the spirit ‘being fettered by the three constituents’ (malinatva ṅaranya pa-
pasahnira mvaṅtriguṇa).55 In a number of Tuturs we come across the term
trimala ‘threefold maculation’, which is explained as the three constituents;56
54.
Tis śloka has a parallel in Gaṇapatitattva 43 and Kiraṇatantra VP 1.23, which con-
tains the verse in its complete form only in the South Indian manuscripts (the second
half-verse is missing in the Nepalese recension and not commented upon by Rāmakaṇṭha;
cf. Acri 2006:119–120).
55.
Tis sentence is problematic as the word papasah- does not make sense in the context
if derived from the base sah ‘depart, be separated, come loose’ (papasah = to be separated,
split, be broken; cf. OJED 1592); mvaṅ(‘and, also’) is problematic too, for we would expect
lavaṅ(‘with, by’). I suggest that mvaṅhere may have the same function of lavan, and that pa-
pasah may derive either from saha ‘together with’, usually followed by lavan (OJED 1593) or,
perhaps more likely, from pāśa ‘snare, bond’; kapāśa, pināśa ‘to bind’ (OJED 1309). In both
cases one has to assume a corruption (from the unfamiliar to the familiar). Two occurrences
of the form papasah (mapasah; pamapasaha) in passages of similar context (i.e. about the
maculation of the Soul and its union/separation with nature) are attested in Kumāratattva ii
f. 25; however, since one instance could be translated as ‘separated from’ (tan pamapasaha
… lavan) and the other as ‘the being ensnared’ (mapasah), no certain conclusion can be
drawn.
56.
Cf., e.g., Tutur Cadhu Sakti, f. 48r = Rәsi Sasana, f. 9v = Vratiśāsana 27.4–5: ‘do not be


--- PAGE 428 ---
The Soul
409
but mala as such is unknown in important texts such as the Bhuvanakośa,
Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa and Mahājñāna.
It has been observed that the earliest of the Siddhāntatantras did not
know about mala either, and that this concept therefore could be regarded as
a doctrinal innovation.57 In the earlier tradition the role of impurity was cov-
ered either by synonyms58 or by different items altogether, such as the three
constituents and their derivates (buddhi, ahaṅkāra and the senses).59 It is
possible to see in this view a clear element of continuity with the earlier Sāṅ-
khya tradition, according to which the fettering of Spirit is to be attributed to
its mistaken self-identiﬁcation with the products of nature, namely the three
constituents and the lower psychic and physical organs of man. Insofar as
they mostly adhere to this doctrinal picture, Śaiva sources from the Archipel-
ago document an ‘intermediate’ phase of Śaivism in which mala was known
but did not yet assume a role of prominence as a separate and innate entity.60
tainted by the threefold maculation: sattva, rajas, tamas’ ayva kalipyan deniṅtrimala, satva,
rajah, tamah; Kumāratattva ii f. 23v, mentioned along with pradhāna, ṣaḍvarga, triguṇa.
Other instances are found in Sutasoma 22.1 and 145.3 (along with ṣaḍripu), and in 146.3.
As I have observed previously (Acri 2006:130), given the silence of the sources on this
point of doctrine, it is most unlikely that the term trimala in Old Javanese sources refer to
the classical division of maculation, formulated in relatively late (i.e. post 8–9th century)
Śaiva Sanskrit sources, into āṇava, kārma and māyīya.
57.
Goodall et al. (2009:315) have argued that what might possibly be the earliest attes-
tation of mala (in the meaning of an innate impurity removed by Śaiva initiation) is found
in the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha, whereas any reference to the term is absent from earlier
Tantras, such as the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā and the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha. Te term and the
doctrine revolving around it become of primary importance in the works of Sadyojyotis as
well as in the dialectic Siddhāntatantras.
58.
As noted by Sanderson (1992:285-286; 2003-04:430-431), various terms, such as
tamas, could stand for mala.
59.
I have found evidence of this in the following sources: Nayasūtra (1.98cd–99, with
lacunae but clearly echoed in Svacchandatantra 11.103) of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, char-
acterizing the spirit as bound by the three constituents (puruṣas triguṇair baddhaḥ) and
also by buddhi, ahaṅkāra, tanmātras, indriyas and bhūtas; the Sarvajñānottara (VP 28.11–
18), describing the spirit’s bonds (pāśa) as consisting in the three constituents and their
derivates (tanmātras, indriyas and bhūtas), and mala as consisting in dharma and adharma;
the Kiraṇatantra (VP 1.17)—where it survives besides this text’s developed and ‘orthodox’
understanding of mala—characterizing the souls bound by nature, consisting in the three
constituents, through the soul’s connection with the instruments of sense and action begin-
ning with intellect (buddhyādikaraṇānīkasambandhāt; cf. Goodall 1998:202, fn. 130).
60.
Even though the Dharma Pātañjala is aware of sahajamala ‘innate maculation’
(320.3) and mentions mala several times, the text constantly falls back on the Sāṅkhya


--- PAGE 429 ---
410
iii Doctrine
At
Liberation
Having presented the treatment by Old Javanese Tattvas
and Tuturs of the aetiology of the Soul, I now take up
the ideas ﬁguring in the above sources about its ultimate
destiny, and in particular its relationship with the Lord from the point of
view of soteriology. What is, then, the status of the Soul when it is released
from the cycle of rebirth?
Te Śaivasiddhānta regards the Soul as being equal to Śiva in that it in-
nately possesses His powers of omniscience and omnipotence. Te Soul
merely does not realize its true nature, being tainted by innate maculation.
Once it has realized its Śiva-like nature, at liberation afer the death of the
gross body, the Lord’s powers become fully manifested (abhivyakti).61 Te
Soul thus becomes a Śiva. Tis against the earlier schools of the Śaiva Ati-
mārga, according to which the individual Soul at liberation becomes similar
to (or conjoined with) Śiva by virtue of a transference of His Powers into it.62
Teistic Brahmanical schools, including the Śaivas themselves, embraced
different views on the status of the Soul vis-à-vis the Lord afer it has ob-
tained release from the cycle of rebirth. Sanskrit sources contain speciﬁc
technical terms deﬁning the allegiance to one or the other particular view
of liberation, be it sālokya ‘community of abode’, sāmīpya ‘contiguity’ or
sārūpya ‘community of form’.63 Te position of the Siddhānta is referred to
as śivasamatā/śivasāmya and śivatulyatva ‘equality (i.e. similarity) with Śiva’,
or sometimes as śivasāyujya ‘intimate union with Śiva’.64
paradigm to explain the fettering of the Soul.
61.
For passages testifying to the doctrine of manifestation (vyakti or abhivyakti) in rela-
tively early Śaiva sources, cf. Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 4.59; Mṛgendra VP 5.1cd; Sad-
yojyotis ad Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP 2, Tattvasaṅgraha 55, Paramokṣanirāsakārikā
7. Cf. also below, fn. 67 and 68.
62.
Tis theory is referred to as saṅkrānti ‘transference’ in the case of the Pāśupatas, ut-
patti ‘arising’ for the Māhāvratas and samāveśa ‘possession’ for the Kāpālikas. For a dis-
cussion of the occurrences of these terms in Saiddhāntika sources, cf. Watson (2006:122);
Sanderson (2006a:180–181); Goodall (1998:xxii); Brunner (1986:518–519).
63.
Cf., e.g., Tantrāloka 8.313 (quoted from Bṛhaspati’s Śivatanu); Mataṅgapārameśva-
rāgama VP 5.63–67 and Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvṛtti 3.2.6. Various passages where these
grades of liberation are referred to are mentioned by Goodall (1998:xxxvii–xxxix, fn. 85).
64.
Te concept of sāyujya appears to have been inherited from the Atimārga, for it is
already encountered in Pāśupatasūtra 5.33 (rudrasāyujya) and Ratnaṭīkā ad Gaṇakārikā
1.6ab (śivasāyujya), and further attested throughout the corpus of the Siddhānta, e.g. in Niś-
vāsatattvasaṃhitā (Mukhasūtra) 4.86 (rudrasāyojyatām), Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP
1.18cd, Sarvajñānottara VP 10.2 (in the last two sources deﬁned as the fruit of initiation),


--- PAGE 430 ---
The Soul
411
Te view that the Soul when liberated becomes like Śiva (i.e. shares His
characteristics) is already found in one of the earliest Saiddhāntika scrip-
tures, the Mukhasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā,65 and in other seminal
scriptures such as the Sarvajñānottara,66 the Kiraṇatantra67 and the Parākh-
yatantra.68 Beyond such scriptures, attestations of this doctrine are found in
works of the Śaiva exegetes, such as Sadyojyotis69 and Rāmakaṇṭha.70 Traces
of this view, attributed to the pūrvapakṣin, appear to be preserved also in the
sources of non-Śaiva traditions.71
Te Saiddhāntika dogma regarding the manifestation of the Lord’s qual-
ities is adhered to by the Dharma Pātañjala. Indeed the text comprises the
only attestations known to me in Old Javanese literature of the Sanskrit word
abhivyakta,72 ‘manifestation’—with reference to the manifestation of the pow-
etc. It is also found in the works of Sadyojyotis, e.g. commentary ad Svāyambhuva (4.5a)
and in Mokṣakārikā 89. Te term implies an intimate union but has a wider spectrum,
conveying also identiﬁcation or even absorption; Filliozat (2001:46) translates it as ‘unity
with Śiva’.
65.
Cf. 4.72–74 (śivavat); cf. also Uttarasūtra 5.4.
66.
Cf. Sarvajñānottara VP 7ab (śivasama).
67.
A classical formulation illustrating both concepts of manifestation (vyakti) and equal-
ity with Śiva (śivatva) is found in Kiraṇatantra 1.21cd–22 (triggered by initiation).
68.
Cf. Parākhyatantra 15.64 (both abhivyakti and śivatva).
69.
Cf. Tattvasaṅgraha 41 (śivasamatā or similarity with Śiva); mokṣakārikā 93 (śivatu-
lya); Paramokṣanirāsakārikā 7 and 32 (abhivyakti resulting in śivasamatā).
70.
Cf. Tattvatrayanirṇayavṛtti 4ab: according to the Śaivasiddhānta ‘liberation consists
in being equal to Śiva (śivasamatvam eva), and not in being merged in Him (na tu tallayaḥ)’.
Tus, the author Rāmakaṇṭha does not accept the position that there is only one Soul (āt-
maikyasya) but rather inﬁnite souls and inﬁnite muktaśivas (however, for the attestation of
the former position of dissolution into Śiva, cf. Śatikakālajñāna and the Niśvāsa’s Uttarasū-
tra, referred to above, p. 394).
71.
Such as in Yogaśāstravivaraṇa ad Yogasūtra 4.33 (arguably referring to the views of,
respectively, the Pāśupatas and the followers of the Siddhānta): ‘For some isolation is union
with the Lord, and for others it is the attainment of the attribute of being equal to the Lord in
the matter of omniscience and so forth’ keṣāṃcit sarvajñatvādīśvaratulyadharmatvaprāptiḥ
kaivalyam iti, where ādi ‘and so forth’ may stand for omnipotence (sarvakartṛtva) and other
divine qualities attributed to Śiva; al-Bīrūnī’s India (chapter 7, p. 64) reports a view of the
‘Hindus’ that the liberated one is equal to God (with the exception that He is liberated ab
æterno) and endowed with knowledge (cf. Pines and Gelblum 1989:266 and 303).
72.
As kābhibyaktā and kābhibyaktan. Te latter is obtained by adding to the Sanskrit
base abhivyakta the Old Javanese circumﬁx ka-…-an, which in the present instance seems
to indicate the place where the action or state indicated by the base takes place (cf. Zoet-
mulder 1983:75).


--- PAGE 431 ---
412
iii Doctrine
ers of the Lord in the realized yogin (saṅsiddha).73 Te ﬁrst occurrence of
the term, in 286.18, is found in the Lord’s reply to an opponent who, com-
paring the Lord with non-existence on account of the fact that His powers
are not given to a master, asks what in that case might be the origin of the
powers of a realized yogin. Te Lord remarks that the leader among yogins
who has already attained perfection is the visible form of the powers of the
Lord (katonan i śakti bhaṭāra). It is not the case that He gives His Powers to
the master,74 for the origin of the Powers of a realized one already lies within
his body, albeit in a latent form. Kumāra, in asking why the powers are in the
end75 made visible (kābhibyaktā) in the realized one, reveals his adherence
to the Saiddhāntika theory of manifestation.
To the Lord’s remark that the powers of a realized one are ultimately the
same as the powers of the Lord, Kumāra objects in 288.10 that, if so, one can
say that the Lord is in the cycle of rebirths. As it is formulated, the statement
would seem to imply that the author was starting from the premise that there
is a factual identiﬁcation between the (Soul of the) realized one and the Lord,
and hence he had to address an objection that could rightfully arise in the
mind of his readers. What is philosophically problematic here is that, as
we have seen above (pp. 365–367), it is not possible for the Supreme Lord
to experience the cycle of existence like an ordinary incarnated being. Te
Lord’s reply dispels Kumāra’s doubt:
Te reason why it is so is that the absorption of the yogin is perfect, for the
DhPāt
288.11–13
Lord is made manifest (kābhibyaktan) in an incarnated creature. It will be
obtained by the yogin if he knows about the prayogasandhi.
Te ineffable nature of such a manifestation of Śiva’s qualities in the yo-
gin who masters prayogasandhi76—which occurs through the grace or ‘love’
(asih) of the Lord toward him77—is illustrated by way of the usual example of
73.
Goodall (2004:404, fn. 907) notes that the use of the term siddha in similar contexts
in Siddhāntatantras is probably non-Saiddhāntika as it is usually associated with Atimārga
(i.e. Pāśupatas, Kālāmukha or Kāpālika) views of liberation (cf. also Goodall 1998:220–
221, fn. 186).
74.
Tis statement appears to be a critique of the theory of guṇasaṅkrānti or transfer of
the divine supernatural qualities adhered to by the Pāśupatas; cf. above, fn. 62.
75.
Te Old Javanese vәkasan ‘in the end’ here probably refers to the yogin’s time of death.
76.
On prayogasandhi, cf. below, pp. 546–550.
77.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 286.19–22 and 288.4–8. On this point the Dharma Pātañjala
is in agreement with the Sanskrit Saiddhāntika sources, which attribute a primary role to
God’s grace in the process of liberation.


--- PAGE 432 ---
The Soul
413
ﬁre and butter existing in a latent state within, respectively, wood and milk.
Te text explains that ﬁre which is in the wood brings forth its body on the
occasion of burning. Likewise, the butter is not produced if it is not churned;
for, even though it is a material substance, it is not produced without work.
Te result is the meeting of the Lord Supreme Cause by the yogin through
prayogasandhi.
So far the Dharma Pātañjala seems to agree with the Saiddhāntika the-
ory of manifestation. But it disagrees with the standpoint of the Siddhānta as
to the nature of the relationship between the liberated Soul and Śiva. Te text
maintains a more markedly monistic stance insofar as it speaks about iden-
tity or sātmya, i.e. oneness or identity of nature (literally ‘having the same
Self’) with the Lord, rather than similarity or intimate union (śivatulyatva or
śivasāmya).78
In the Dharma Pātañjala, to Kumāra’s question as to why a master (paṇ-
ḍita) does not become one in nature (sātmaka)79 with the Lord at once, Śiva
replies that it is because of the existence of maculation, that enshroud the
original omniscience of the Soul, and concludes:
If that (i.e. maculation) disappears, it is certain that the leader among yogins
DhPāt
212.3–3
will be one in nature with the Lord.
According to this passage, the removal of maculation automatically entails
the immediate revelation of the Soul’s innate identity with Śiva (rather than
the union with Him). A second instance of the term sātmaka is attested
in the question of Kumāra about how the yogin should practice absorption
(samādhi) ‘in order to be[come] one with the Lord’ (an sātmaka ri bhaṭāra).
Śiva replies that the state of supernatural prowess of the Lord (kasiddhyan
78.
Te former view is not shared by the dualist Saiddhāntikas but upheld by Umāpati, an
exponent of non-dualist Tamil Śaivasiddhānta, in his Pauṣkarabhāṣya; although still adher-
ing to the doctrine of abhivyakti, He maintains that the ultimate conclusion (paramasid-
dhānta) concerning liberation is identity with Śiva (śivatādātmya) as opposed to equality
with Śiva (śivasāmya). In doing so he refers to the scriptural authority of the Sūtasaṃhitā,
and in particular to the (interpolated) monistic passage in the Sarvajñānottara (Goodall
2006:101).
79.
It is clear from the context that the occurrences of satmāja in the text are to be re-
garded as corruptions (or rather Javaniﬁcations?) of a Sanskrit loanword, and correspond
in meaning to the Sanskrit sātmaka (cf. above, p. 78). For a similar case of Javaniﬁcation,
compare the form sayodya, corresponding to sāyujya (cf. below, p. 414).


--- PAGE 433 ---
414
iii Doctrine
bhaṭāra) can be met by the yogin through his continuous practice of ab-
sorption, which brings about isolation of the mind in the Soul as well as its
adherence to (the thought of) the Lord (rumakәt ri bhaṭāra).
Te view that the liberation of a master (paṇḍita) consists in unity of
nature with the Lord (sātmaka lavan bhaṭāra) is attested, besides in the Dha-
rma Pātañjala, also in a passage of the Vṛhaspatitattva:
He of Four Powers who possesses right knowledge is deemed to be the
most excellent master. Having attained the plain of release, he never
again enters the [cycle of] being.
He in whom the Right Knowledge abides, he is the most excellent one, for he
obtains release. He is not born again. Te Four Powers abide in Him. Tat
is designated as the attainment of the end of incarnation. He returns to the
plain of Śiva. His sentience is one in nature with the Lord.80
Te passage implies that the Soul, which is fundamentally sentient (cetana),
‘returns’ to its original state of Śiva (and not, as the orthodox Siddhānta
would have it, a Śiva-like state).
Te characterization of liberation as the return (ulih)81 of the Soul to an
original status or abode is also encountered in the Tattvajñāna. Te very last
sentence of the work refers to this concept and deﬁnes liberation as sayodya
(= sāyujya)82 with the Lord:
80.
Vṛhaspatitattva, śloka 30 and commentary thereon:
samyajñāno ’dhiko mataḥcatuḥśaktiḥsa paṇḍitaḥ/
mokṣapadaṃsamāsādya na bhave viśate punaḥ//
30a samyajñāno ’dhiko mataḥ] em. ; samyagjñānāddhi kāmataḥEd. ; samyājñā-
naṃdika mataḥA ; samyajñānadhika mataḥB ; samyajñānādhika mataḥE ;
samyakjānadvika mataḥCG ; samyajñānādikatamaḥD ; samyajñānādika mataḥ
ikaṅkinahanan de niṅsamyajñāna / sira ta rasika lәvih / apan sira umaṅguhakәn kamokṣan /
tan paṅjanma muvah / kinahanan de niṅcaduśakti / ya ta sinaṅguh tәka riṅjanmāvasāna
ṅaranya / umulih riṅśivapada / cetananira sātmaka lavan bhaṭāra //.
81.
As such, the verbal form umulih denotes not only coming back but can also be trans-
lated in a more neutral manner as ‘obtain, reach’; but the context of the passages where
it is used, mentioning the ‘remembering’, suggest that the former interpretation is correct
(cf. the remarks by Hadiwijono 1967:53 about similar passages in the Bhuvanakośa). Te
same concept is found in other Old Javanese sources: cf. Kumāratattva ii f. 25v, which refers
to the highest state of liberation attainable by the Soul as its ‘going back to’ or ‘becoming
again’ (valuya) the Lord Paramaśivātma.
82.
Attested in several texts as sayodya, regarded by OJED (1724) as a Javanized loan
corresponding to the Sanskrit sayugya but more likely to correspond to sāyujya.


--- PAGE 434 ---
The Soul
415
[Te souls] go back, one by one, to their [original] abodes. In this way the
leader among yogins remembers. Only in having a recollection does he go
back to the inextricable connection of [his] body with the Lord Paramaśiva-
tattva, by practicing prayogasandhi, whose stages are observances, penance,
yoga and absorption.83
Te concept of inextricable connection of the Soul with the Lord is also ad-
hered to in a number of Tuturs, for instance the Śaiva version of the Saṅ
HyaṅKamahāyānikan (p. 70 lines 9–10), which describes the perfect yogin
as having a soul intimately united with the Lord Sadāśiva (saṅhyaṅātmā
sayodya lavan bhaṭāra sadāśiva). Te Bhuvanakośa describes, throughout
its chapter 10, a yogic procedure through which the yogin obtains release,
which is characterized as becoming sayojya with the Lord and going back to
the abode of Paramaśiva.84 Te liberated yogin is further said to obtain the
Lord’s powers and to become one with the Lord as a river entering the sea.85
Te Jñānasiddhānta (chapter 6, p. 108) expresses similar ideas in that it
states that the great one (saṅhyaṅmahān)—apparently a synonym for the
Soul—does not remember his true nature, i.e. that his body is the Supreme
83.
Tattvajñāna 50.17–20: mulih ry asthitinira sovaṅsovaṅ/ maṅkana saṅyogīśvara /
meṅәt matutur juga sira / mulih sayodya śarīra lavan bhaṭara paramaśivatattva / makasā-
dhanaṅprayogasandhi / makabhūmi brata / tapa / yoga / samādhi //.
84.
Bhuvanakośa 10.22: ‘He is closely united with the Lord.
He enters into Para-
maśiva—he returns to the abode of the Lord Paramaśiva’ sayojya sira lavan bhaṭāra / viśate
paramaṃśivaṃ/ umulih ta sira riṃpada bhaṭāra paramaśiva. Nearly every verse of ch. 10,
from 10 up to 28, ends in the same quarter viśate paramaṃśivaṃ, glossed in Old Javanese
exactly as above.
85.
Bhuvanakośa 10.34: ‘Ten he will attain unity—ﬁnally the yogin becomes one with
me, as it were’ paścād ekatvam vrajet—vәkasan tuṅgal avaknya iva maṅkana saṅyogi lavan
ṅhulun; cf. 9.13, also mentioning the yogin’s release as being one with the Lord Paramaśiva
(ekatva lavan bhaṭāra paramaśiva). Te same simile of the Soul merging into (miśra) and
going back to (maluyi) the Lord as the water of a river entering the sea (kadi aṅgān iṅvvay
riṅlvah tәkeṅjaladhi) is found in Kumāratattva ii, f. 30v. Te same motif is encountered
in the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 8.10cd–13ab: ‘Having died he becomes Śiva, endowed with
the qualities of Śiva. Having obtained Śivaness he partakes of non-distinction: as a river
carrying fresh water, having reached the ocean, has its water turned to salty because of the
power of the great ocean, in the same way he who dies obtains the level of Śiva, because af-
ter the union with the ocean, once and forever, distinction is no more possible’ bhinne dehe
śivo bhūtvā śivadharmaiḥsamanvitaḥ/ śivadharmam anuprāpya hy avibhāgāya kalpate //
yathā samudram āsādya nadī miṣṭāmbuvāhinī / kṣāratoyatvam āyāti prabhāvād dhi maho-
dadheḥ/ evaṃvai bhinnadehas tu śivatattvam upāgataḥ// sakṛt samudrasaṃyogād vibhāgo
naiva kalpate /.


--- PAGE 435 ---
416
iii Doctrine
Overlord (tan atutur iṅjātinirān makāvak pramāṇa viśeṣa), becoming en-
tangled in the cycle of rebirth. As he remembers his true nature, i.e. the
Absolute Reality, the deﬁlements (kleśa) and the suffering are removed.
Similar views are also found in the Tattvajñāna, where multiple passages
(from ch. 30 up to the end of the text) describe the Soul as being not only ig-
norant (apuṅguṅ) but also forgetful (malupa) about its own nature (svabhā-
vanya); thus, liberation is a matter of remembering (matutur). Likewise, in
Vṛhaspatitattva (34.22–23) the Lord states that liberation from sin and hell
is ‘when the Soul remembers about its own nature, when it was pure’ (yan
matutur ikaṅātmā ri jātinya / irika ta yan alilaṅ). In all the above cases, it is
difﬁcult to determine whether the words tutur and lupa denote respectively
‘to remember’ or ‘to be mindful of’ and ‘to forget’ or ‘to be unaware of’, and
hence to establish whether these views constitute a local development or de-
rive from a Sanskritic Śaiva tradition. But if one understands these Javanese
terms in the sense of ‘remembering’, they certainly call to mind the views of
liberation elaborated by the non-dualistic Śaiva school of the Pratyabhijñā,
involving the ‘recognition’ or recollection of the fact that the Soul has always
been Śiva.
In the ﬁrst ﬁve Old Javanese prose chapters of the Jñānasiddhānta we
come across alternative views of the status of the Soul vis-à-vis the Lord at
liberation. Chapter 1 enumerates four viphalas or levels of release called, re-
spectively, desireless (niḥspṛha), extinction (nirbāṇa), unmanifest (niṣkala)
and supportless (nirāśraya).86 In the highest level, called nirāśraya,
there is the place of the oneness (ekatva) of the Lord with the Soul. When it
(the Soul) has reached the unmanifest, it takes place in the level of the Lord
Paramaśiva. Ten it is merged with the body of the Lord.87
Te view of a merging (miśra) into the body of the Lord resulting in com-
plete unity or identiﬁcation with him (ekatva) conforms more to the theistic
Vedānta than to Śaivism. In that state, the text continues, the Soul is free
from conceptual knowledge (luput iṅsarvajñāna maṅalpana) and its very
denomination as Soul (ātman) ceases to exist; it is devoid of external marks
86.
Tis passage ﬁnds an almost identical parallel in Gaṇapatitattva 39.
87.
Jñānasiddhānta ch. 1 (p. 68): ṅkāna ṅgvan iṅekatva bhaṭṭāra mvaṅātmā. huvus pva
sira tәka riṅniṣkala, sira ta makasthāna ri pāda bhaṭṭāra paramaśiva. atәhәr miśra riṅavak
bhaṭṭāra. Note that a level of release called nirāśraya is also mentioned in the Śaiva version
of the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (p. 67, lines 6–7).


--- PAGE 436 ---
The Soul
417
(nirlakṣaṇa) and of any form of existence altogether (luput iṅsarvabhāva).
Tis characterization recalls, once again, the Vedānta negative theology re-
garding the Soul, conceived as fundamentally inert.
Similar speculations are found in passages of chapter 5, for the most part
devoted to instructing the practitioner about esoteric meditation techniques.
One of these passages describes seven absorptions (saptasamādhi) resulting
in a supreme stage of release:
Your knowledge is one, [namely] that [you are] united with the Supreme
Lord. Your body is one with the body (sātmyāvayava)88 [of the Lord]. You
become one and match with the Supreme Lord. Being [at His] side (samīpa),
you join in making and in not being made.89
Another passage, worded in a most esoteric style, provides instructions to
attain release through a kind of yogic procedure:
[You] know then that you are one with the Lord Śiva Paramārtha. […] Ev-
idently you have found unity with the Supreme Lord; that is called libera-
tion. You are one whose body is identical (sātmyāvayava), at the subtle level,
with the Supreme Summum Bonum. You are one with the Lord Śiva in an
ineffable manner. Ten release is complete. What is called the supreme lib-
eration is reached when you have been merged into the Summum Bonum.90
Te concept of unity of limbs (sātmyāvayava), recurring in both passages,
is indicative of identity and hence non-dualism. However, the occurrence
of the technical term samīpa (‘proximity [with the Lord]’, p. 102), implies
a different and contrasting view of liberation. Such apparent incongruity
is probably due to the non-speciﬁc use of terminology of Sanskrit prove-
nance by the Javanese compiler of the Jñānasiddhānta, who was apparently
88.
Te origin of this irregular expression may be explained by postulating a bahuvrīhi
compound sātmāvayava ‘whose bodies share one identity’, corrupted by insertion of the y
that is only ﬁtting in Sanskrit compounds ending in °sātmya.
89.
Jñānasiddhānta ch. 5 (pp. 102–104): eka pva vruhta, an tuṅgal ta lavan bhaṭṭāra
viśeṣa. sātmyāvayava śarīranta. dadi ta kita mapisan maraṅkәp lavan bhaṭṭāra viśeṣa.
samīpa, milu magave, tan ilu ginave.
90.
Jñānasiddhānta ch. 5 (p. 106): vruh ya an tuṅgal mvaṅbhaṭṭāra śiva paramārtha. […]
byakta kapaṅgih ikaṅtuṅgal ta mvaṅbhaṭṭāra viśeṣa, ya ta kamoktan ṅa. sātmyāvayava
sūkṣma riṅparamārtha viśeṣa. mapisan acintya lavan bhaṭṭāra hyaṅśiva. tāvad mokṣo
viśiṣyate. tāvad mokṣaviśeṣa ṅa, yāvat miśra ri saṅhyaṅparamārtha.


--- PAGE 437 ---
418
iii Doctrine
less concerned with philosophical coherence than with proﬁciency in yogic
techniques.
It appears that such ideas derived from the Sanskrit philosophical tra-
dition penetrated the Javanese religious mainstream, for they are traceable
in other Old Javanese sources not belonging to the Tutur and Tattva genres.
Te concept of sātmya encountered in the Dharma Pātañjala and Vṛhaspa-
titattva also appears in the metrical Old Javanese Śaiva catechism from the
Majapahit period Nirarthaprakṛta,91 in the Kakavin Bhāratayuddha92 and
in the Buddhist poem Sutasoma.93 Te concept of sāyujya occurs in the Old
Javanese Uttarakāṇḍa.94
Obtaining the
Lord’s Powers
during Life
As we have seen, the state of liberation is described in
the Dharma Pātañjala as unity with Śiva, determined by
the fact that His powers are made manifest within the
yogin. Although this point is never stated in unambigu-
ous terms, it can be understood that such a state comes
about at the time of death. Tis stands in contrast with other parts of the
text detailing the supernatural abilities pertaining to the Lord, such as the
eight supernatural qualities (aṣṭaguṇa) or sovereign powers (aṣṭaiśvarya),
obtained by the yogin, and what he achieves in this world through exercis-
ing them. Accounts stressing this very aspect, i.e. the transmutation of the
leader among yogins (yogīśvara) into a state where he partakes of the Lord’s
sovereign powers also occur in the Vṛhaspatitattva and the Tattvajñāna.95
91.
Cf. Nirarthaprakṛta 8.1b: ‘Without abiding in a deﬁnite state, without thinking,
merged as a subtle essence into the Lord, perpetually one in essence [with Him]’ tan
maṅavastha tan hiḍәp amiśra sūkṣma ri bhaṭāra sātmika lanā.
92.
Cf. Bhāratayuddha 1.4c, when Girinātha (i.e. Śiva) says to King Jayabhaya (trans.
Supomo 1993:164): ‘Furthermore, you and I shall be one in nature, forever Lord of the
world’ tәkvan laṅәṅa sātmakānaku lavan kita tulusa bhaṭāra niṅjagat; the same concept
occurs in a similar context at the very end of the poem (52.6: tәkvan sātmya lavan bhaṭāra).
93.
Sutasoma 1.2, describing Buddhist liberation in thoroughly Śaiva terms: ‘Truly the
destiny of a leader among yogins, if he is realized, is to be[come] one with the Lord’ siṅgih
yan siddha yogīśvara vәkas ira saṅsātmya lavan bhaṭāra.
94.
Uttarakāṇḍa 133 (p. 132): ‘Whenever there is a man who recites the story of the
Rāmāyaṇa, auspicious for life, his happiness in heaven is assured, along with his grandchil-
dren, intimately united with the gods’ yan hana vvaṅmaṅuccārākәn ikaṅrāmāyaṇacarita
maṅgala niṅhurip, byakta sukhanya haneṅsvargaloka saha lavan anak putunya sayodya
lavan devatā.
95.
I shall discuss below (pp. 534–538) the passages in the two texts detailing the various
siddhis.


--- PAGE 438 ---
The Soul
419
But a different standpoint about this matter can be recognized in Kumāra-
tattva ii, presenting a clear-cut statement about the obtainment of the pow-
ers vis-à-vis liberation. Having mentioned the deﬁnitive obtainment of the
body of the Lord (sadāvak bhaṭāra) by the yogin, who becomes the visible
manifestation of His Four Powers (kahanan iṅcaduśakti), the text remarks:
Te Four Powers are the Power of Pervasion, the Power of Knowledge, the
Power of Action, the Power of Lordship. If [a man obtains] thus, that is
not liberation. If one would think [thus about] the Four Powers, what you,
worshiper of the Dharma, may say, [is that] it is true; for their outcome is
to go straight to maculation. Te proof is that, as soon as a living being
is endowed with powers and supernatural abilities, surely what arises is a
feeling of pride.96
A similar critique of the attainment of the powers during life is made by the
Buddhist Kakavin Sutasoma. Stanza 40.6 openly expounds criticism of the
Śaiva path, constituted by the yoga of the six ancillaries and its ultimate goal.
In the ﬁrst two lines the yogin’s attainment is described as follows: ‘Ten ﬁrst
he will obtain the eight supernatural faculties, he may become now visible,
then invisible, have power over the world, or assume the manifest form of
Rudra’ taṇḍvāṅaṣṭaguṇān kapaṅgih i tәkapnya rakva karuhun dṛśyādṛśya
vaśitva riṅbhuvana rudramūrti sakala; the two remaining lines of the stanza
(cf. below, p. 536) deﬁne that state as a pitfall for the yogin who wishes to
obtain the paramount liberation, which may be achieved only afer the com-
plete paciﬁcation of the senses.
Te above passages appear to admit that the achievement of a Śiva-like
all-powerful state could have taken place already during the yogin’s life. Now,
the view that liberation, achieved through initiation, is a state that will be-
come manifest only at death is typical of the Siddhānta. Tis idea seems to go
back even further, to Atimārga Śaivism, for the Pāñcārthika Pāśupatas too
held that liberation, consisting in the end of suffering and the obtainment of
the divine attributes of Rudra, occurred at the time of death, when the adept
achieved unity with Him.97 But that there possibly existed different lines of
96.
Kumāratattva ii, f. 33: caduśakti ṅaran vibhuśakti, jñānaśakti, kriyāśakti, prabhuśakti.
tan mokṣa ika yan maṅkana. yan tinahan iṅcaduśakti, kaliṅanta saṅsevaka dharma, tuhu
ika, tata, apan tumuju ikaṅmala donya, byaktanya yavat śakti siddhi, niyata gәṅhatinya taṅ
tumuvuh.
97.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya on sūtra 4.19, 5.47; Ratnaṭīkā on Gaṇakārikā 6cd.


--- PAGE 439 ---
420
iii Doctrine
thought among the Pāśupatas themselves is suggested by allusions in their
literature as to the attainment by the practitioner in his fourth stage of asceti-
cism of certain supernatural qualities of Rudra which manifest themselves
afer a certain amount of time, therefore presumably before his death.98 It is
perhaps to such early Śaiva views that the Sutasoma alludes to when men-
tioning the attainment of the manifest form of Rudra by an adept who pur-
suits supernatural powers.
Te possibility of liberation in life was openly upheld by the non-Sai-
ddhāntika, non-dualist and gnostic schools of Śaivism, which perceived the
cause of bondage (i.e. karma and maculation) as an immaterial substance ca-
pable of being completely, and instantaneously, removed through gnosis and
yoga. Tis view stood in contrast with that of the followers of the Siddhānta,
who maintained that maculation and karma were coarse substances which
could be effectively removed only through a ritual act, namely the Śaiva ini-
tiation. Old Javanese sources appear to adhere to this gnostic standpoint
rather than to the orthodox view of the Siddhānta.99
98.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya, anvaya to sūtra 5.12: ‘Question: Is the state of being con-
stantly associated with God the highest ultimate union? Answer: No, for the scripture
(PS 5.12) says: Of him who is united constantly for six months’ āha kiṃdevanityataivāsya
paro niṣṭhāyogaḥ/ ucyate na / yasmād āha // ṣaṇmāsān nityayuktasya //. Te supernatural
abilities to be attained are those deriving from the power of Knowledge. A statement that
seems to imply a gradual temporal process of attainment of the powers deriving from unity
with the Lord is made in sūtra 5.13: ‘[Te powers] for the most part begin to function’ bhūy-
iṣṭhaṃsampravartate; according to Kauṇḍinya, ‘for the most part’ (bhūyiṣṭha) is used in the
sense of ‘gradually’ (krama) and ‘almost’ (prāya), and ‘the powers begin to function when
the state of so-called ‘‘non-Śivaness’’ ends by virtue of the state of ‘‘Śivaness’’ occurring by
grace [of God]’ aśivatvasaṃjñake vinivṛtte śivatvaprasādābhyāṃguṇāḥpravartante
99.
For an explicit critique of the inability of initiation to bring about the omniscience
of the Soul in the Dharma Pātañjala, cf. 320.3–10 and below, pp. 526–527. My hypothesis
is that this standpoint may have originated in an early Śaiva Atimārga milieu, for in that
system too yoga and gnosis are regarded as leading to liberation, initiation not having yet
assumed a prominent role.


--- PAGE 440 ---
Cosmos
T
he cosmology described in Old Javanese Tattvas revolves around the
fundamental dualism constituted by sentience (cetanā), luminous and
unobstructed, and insentience (acetanā), dark and coarse. Tis is of course
reminiscent of the (classical) Sāṅkhya ontological matrix, postulating an ir-
reducible opposition between a sentient spirit (puruṣa) and an insentient un-
evolved matter (prakṛti, pradhāna or avyakta), out of which Śaiva cosmology
developed. Te system of the latter school borrowed the ladder of twenty-
ﬁve principles (tattva) of the universe postulated by the former and added
another series to them, bringing the total to a number varying, according to
the various sources, between thirty and thirty-six. Te principles that were
once the highest for Sāṅkhya were relegated to hierarchically lower levels of
the Śaiva cosmos and regarded as the highest stages of liberation that the
followers of non-Śaiva doctrines could ever aspire to reach.
Even though the dichotomy between cetanā and acetanā is not unknown
in Śaiva Tantras from the Subcontinent,1 it nowhere displays such a promi-
nent position and ﬁxed systematization as it does in Old Javanese Tattvas.
Te Sanskrit sources rather focus on a fundamental partition of the cosmos
into pure (śuddha-) and impure (aśuddha-) paths (adhvan). Te former por-
tion, going from the paramount Śiva up to Māyā, was regarded as the exclu-
sive domain of the ‘inactive’ Lord postulated by the Siddhānta, whereas the
latter spans from the Vidyeśas, i.e. the overlords who act on behalf of Śiva,
down to the ﬁve gross elements.2
1.
Cf. Niśvāsamukha 4.45; Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 10.46–48ab; Kiraṇa VP 2.26–27.
2.
Cf. the locus classicus in Kiraṇatantra VP 3.26cd. As I have previously pointed out
(Acri 2006:130) neither the term adhvan nor references to the sixfold path (ṣaḍadhvan are
attested in Śaiva sources from the Archipelago; cf. also above, p. 349 fn. 14.


--- PAGE 441 ---
422
iii Doctrine
Te development of Sāṅkhya ontology in a theistic direction is observed
in the Old Javanese sources in the homologization of the cetanā with Śiva in
His highest form (Paramaśiva, Paramārtha) and of the acetanā with Māyā.
To this basic dichotomy a third essential element is added, i.e. the Soul. Inso-
far as it is an emanation of the former principle and it is contaminated by the
latter, the Soul possesses the liminal status of being sentient-yet-insentient,
all-powerful portion of the Divine and yet entangled in the painful and lim-
ited realm of existence.3
Lord, Soul
Māyā
Te above triad is systematized in Old Javanese Tattvas
by way of the cosmological principles Paramaśivatattva,
Ātmatattva and Māyātattva. Tese constitute an ‘en-
globing’, and hence ‘horizontal’, division of the cosmos,
which exists besides the ‘vertical’ partition into thirty hierarchically arranged
principles. A similar state of affairs is mirrored in early Siddhāntatantras,
also referring (although generally in rather ambiguous manner) to the triad
of principles (tritattva) formed by Śivatattva, Ātmatattva and Vidyātattva
existing besides the standard ladder of principles.4 Te triad, as pointed out
by Brunner (1992:13–14), apart from surviving in the Vidyāpādas of early
Siddhāntatantras, retains a much more important role in their Kriyāpādas,
appearing in connection with the ritual of pratiṣṭhā, i.e. installation (of an
object of worship), as well as initiation. To Brunner this situation ‘testiﬁes
of [sic] the importance it once must have had in the ontology of the school
and no longer corresponds to the scant attention it is given in the ‘‘ortho-
dox’’ texts’.5 Given the structural similarity existing between them, it is con-
3.
Tat is, provided with an ‘imperfect’ knowledge by the shroud vidyā (‘awareness’),
which enables the individual soul, deprived of its original omniscience, to perceive at least
the manifest reality.
4.
Cf. Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, Upodghāta 4 and 4.42–47, where it is referred to as a par-
tition of the pure path from Śiva to the Vidyeśas; Niśvāsaguhya 9.203–204 and 12.42–44;
Vīṇāśikhatantra 60–61 and 81–83; Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 13.9; Sarvajñānottara 3.14.
5.
Brunner refers to the VP of the Raurava (i.e. the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha) as having
preserved ‘an old vision that it would be interesting to try and trace in other works too’. In
note 50, p. 45, she mentions the ‘pure’ form of the tritattva found in Svacchanda 4.403–406
and commentary thereon, which ‘reminds us of the three tattvas [i.e. Paramaśivatattva, Sa-
dāśivatattva and Śivatattva] that stand at the core of the teachings of the Vṛhaspatitattva—a
text that belongs to Old-Javanese literature and is presumably older than the mature texts
of Śaivasiddhānta’. I fully support the view that the Vṛhaspatitattva, as well as other Tattvas,
have preserved archaic doctrinal themes that have only scantly survived in the mature Said-
dhāntika literature, although I am not conﬁdent to make any assumption concerning the


--- PAGE 442 ---
Cosmos
423
ceivable to envisage a correspondence between the triad of principles Śiva
– Ātman – Vidyā described in the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha and Paramaśiva –
Ātman – Māyā of Old Javanese Tattvas.6 It is in fact the case that in both
the Raurava and the Old Javanese texts the elements follow the same order,
differing from other Saiddhāntika sources in that they put the Ātmatattva in
the intermediate position between Śivatattva and Vidyātattva/Māyātattva.7
While the homology between the elements Śiva/Paramaśiva and Ātman
appearing in both triads is straightforward,8 the one between Māyā and Vi-
dyā is less so, especially because it is not very clear what was originally rep-
resented by Vidyā.9 Yet, it is possible to justify such a homologization on
account of a passage of the commentary to Sadyojyotis’ Tattvatrayanirṇa-
ya 3 where Rāmakaṇṭha explains Māyā as being of two types, i.e. higher or
chronological priority of the former corpus of scriptures over the latter (cf. Introduction, p.
12).
6.
Although, to my knowledge, the triad Śiva – Ātman – Vidyā never occurs in Tattvas
and Tuturs, it appears in multiple passages of the Old Javanese Sūrya Sevana (see s.v. vidyā,
p. 222). While the places of Śiva and Ātman are interchangeable, Vidyā constantly appears
as the middle element (thus, as in the Kriyāpāda of Siddhāntatantras and different from
Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, Vidyāpāda 4).
7.
According to Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 4.7ab and 4.46ab, and in opposition to Rau-
ravāgama KP 6.3ab and 45.61, as pointed out by Brunner (1992:13); Dagens and
Barazer-Billoret (2000:xxxix), however, note that the ‘standard’ order already appears
in the ﬁrst and fourth verse of the introductory chapter (upodghāta) of the Rauravasūtra-
saṅgraha, arguing that no chronological implications could be drawn from the order of the
elements in the list. I think that we should also take into account the possibility that the
Upodghāta of the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha was a later addition, as it is ofen the case of the
beginning and closing portions of Sanskrit scriptures, which went through a long process
of compilation and rewriting.
8.
Cf., for instance, the deﬁnition of ātmatattva given in Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 4.43cd–
44ab, which is in harmony with the descriptions found in Tattvas: ‘Devoid of any stain [and]
ﬁlled up with portions of Śiva’s powers: as such do practitioners proclaim the pure prin-
ciple of Soul’ sarvāñjanavinirmuktaṃśivaśaktikalaidhitam / ātmatattvam idaṃśuddhaṃ
sādhakānāṃprakīrtitam.
9.
It is in fact likely that the Vidyā in this triad does not represent the ‘shroud’ Vidyā
but the ‘end’ of the pure path, corresponding to the level of Vidyeśvaras (cf., e.g., Svāyam-
bhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP 4.14–24). An interesting occurrence of Vidyā is found in Pañcār-
thabhāṣya ad sūtra 2.5, where Kauṇḍinya introduces the Pāñcārthika theory of evolution
and pervasion of the principles from Śiva down to earth (cf. below, p. 426) with the aim
of clarifying the confusion of an imaginary opponent concerning the distinction between
God (īśvara), Spirit (puruṣa), vidyā and the evolutes of nature (kalā). It appears to me that
in such a context the term vidyā is unlikely to mean ‘knowledge’, and that it may already
have indicated a portion of the universe in the cosmology of the system.


--- PAGE 443 ---
424
iii Doctrine
lower, the former corresponding to the reality level of (pure) Vidyā in which
the Vidyeśvaras and the Mantras reside. Te three principles enumerated by
Sadyojyotis in the verse commented upon by Rāmakaṇṭha were indeed Śiva,
Puruṣa and Māyā, all of which are pervasive (vibhu) and eternal (nitya) en-
tities.10 But rather than being a partition of the cosmos, the three represent
the ‘ultimately existing’ entities according to the orthodox Śaivasiddhānta.
Te three encompassing principles are described by the Old Javanese
sources as pervading one another. Te Tattvas describe the pervasion of
Māyā—and hence, by extension, of its lower products—by either the Lord or
the Soul in almost identical terms, as if they inherited the gist of their views
from a common source. Śiva/Soul pervades the principles as woven cross-
wise (ūta), as butter within milk or ﬁre within wood, as well as woven length-
wise (prota), as a thread (sūtra) keeps the pearls of a necklace in a row.11
Te ūtaprota paradigm is encountered (as ota prota) in similar context, but
without association with the above-mentioned metaphors, in a number of
Sanskrit sources, such as Upaniṣads,12 Purāṇas13 and Śaiva sources of the
Mantramārga.14
Te Tirty
Principles of the
Universe
Having introduced in 212.8–12 the equation cetanā =
Parameśvara = Ātman as pervading the whole universe,
the Dharma Pātañjala presents its list of principles, as
follows: Māyā, as subtle as Śiva but insentient,15 from
10.
For relatively early attestations of the same triad, cf. Kiraṇatantra 9.2 and Bhoja’s
Tattvaprakāśa 69.
11.
Cf. above, pp. 401–403. On the pervasion of the principles, as described in Pañcār-
thabhāṣya on Pāśupatasūtra 2.5, cf. below, p. 426.
12.
Cf. Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad 3.8.2–8; Atharvaśiropaniṣad 41.
13.
Cf. Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa 3.2.282; Kūrmapurāṇa 1.11.31; Bhāgavatapurāṇa 9.9.7 and
11.12.21; Liṅgapurāṇa 1.70.73; Śivapurāṇa 7.1.9.19.
14.
Te earliest occurrences being probably in Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 10.7ab (universe
pervaded by oṃ-ekākṣara-brahman) and Bṛhaspati’s Śivatanu (quoted in Tantrāloka 8.316,
describing the pervasion by the Soul of the products of Māyā). Cf. also Spandakārikā 1.4,
Niśvāsakārikā (17A, p. 560, verse 96cd), Kṣemarāja on Netratantra 1.43, Umāpati’s Kuñc-
itāṅghristava 291 (all on the pervasion of the universe by Śiva).
15.
Te description of Māyā as an extremely subtle entity, not directly perceptible but
inferable through its effects, is a cliché in Sanskrit Śaiva Literature: cf., e.g., Parākhyatantra
4.4–5; Bhoja’s Tattvaprakāśa 38 and commentaries; Bṛhaspati’s Śivatanu (quoted in Tantrā-
loka 8.310cd). Rāmakaṇṭha in Mataṅgapārameśvarāgamavṛtti to VP 6.2–5 (p. 261, lines
15–16) defends the Saiddhāntika view that Māyātattva is a subtle and not a gross entity
comprising worlds, etc., as the followers of the Atimārga believe (cf. Sanderson 2006a:179).


--- PAGE 444 ---
Cosmos
425
which the coarse principles (tattva maganal) emanate, namely activation
(kalā), attachment (rāga), awareness (vidyā), unevolved matter (pradhāna),
the three constituents (triguṇa), intellect (buddhi), self-identity (ahaṅkāra),
mind-stuff (manas), the ten faculties (daśendriya), the ﬁve subtle elements
(pañcatanmātra), space (ākāśa), wind (bāyu), ﬁre (tejas), water (āpya), earth
(pṛthivī). Te list concludes by repeating that all the above principles are per-
vaded by the Soul and the Lord Supreme Cause (bhaṭāra paramakāraṇa).
Having described the pervasion of the principles by the Soul in terms of
crosswise and lengthwise weaving, and having also described the effect of the
three shrouds on the Soul, the text (214.13–15) states that the Soul, through
vidyātattva, perceives the unevolved matter. Te unevolved matter, being
dark and insentient, meets the sentient Soul; from that encounter the three
constituents originate, and they in their turn give rise to intellect.16 From
intellect comes forth the self-identity, which is the origin of all the principles
below it. Te process of evolution is shown in Figure 4, in the following page.
A slightly different list of principles is found further on, in 226.4–11.
Tere it is stated that all the principles pervade the principles lower in the
process of evolution, which are progressively coarser. Te sequence of per-
vasion is thus as follows: the Sovereign Lord (bhaṭāra mahulun) pervades
Ātman, which pervades Māyā, which pervades Pradhāna, which pervades
Buddhi, which pervades Ahaṅkāra, which pervades Manas, which pervades
the Daśendriya, which pervade the Pañcatanmātra, which pervade the Pañ-
camahābhūta.
16.
Descriptions of pradhāna and puruṣa (or ātman) being brought together by the Lord
appear also in parallel passages of other Tattvas, i.e. in Vṛhaspatitattva 14: pradhānatattva,
which is the gross form of māyātattva, is brought together with ātmatattva by the Lord, and
there results the insentience of the ātman; and in Tattvajñāna 6, where it is said that the
Lord, wishing to ‘see’ (manon) the manifest universe, brings together Soul with unevolved
matter, the child (anak) of Māyā; there results the pradhānapuruṣa, which begets citta and
the three constituents. Te above accounts appear to be Śaiva theistic revisiting of Sāṅkhya
metaphysics. Te argument revolves around the view that the union between Spirit and
Matter could not have happened without the intervention of a superior entity: cf. Yuktidī-
pikā ad Sāṅkhyakārikā 15d (p. 157 line 13), where a pūrvapakṣin adduces as proof for the
existence of Īśvara the fact that a product like the universe presupposes a superior being as
cause and that the conjunction of the sentient soul with the insentient body is effected by a
sentient being.


--- PAGE 445 ---
426
iii Doctrine
Figure 4: Evolution of the principles of the universe in the DhPāt
Te Lord concludes that the world in which Kumāra ﬁnds himself now is the
place where ‘all the principles are piled up’ patimbhunan tattva kabeh.17 Tis
list is more archaic than the one detailed earlier in the text (212.13–17) in-
sofar as it does not mention the three shrouds and substitutes the Spirit with
Soul, thereby putting the stress on the three pervasive principles followed by
the twenty-four principles of the Sāṅkhya. In fact early textual evidence of
the idea of pervasion of the principles by the Lord, who is deﬁned as a ‘thread’
(sūtra), and by the Soul, is probably found in the Pañcārthabhāṣya on Pāśu-
patasūtra 2.5 ‘a formed seat’ (kalitāsana).18 Te Sanskrit passage displays
an archaic list of principles, adding Śiva to the top of the twenty-ﬁve princi-
ples of Sāṅkhya. Tese evolve one from the other by way of pariṇāma, from
Maheśvara to Spirit and ﬁnally unevolved matter (pradhāna) along with its
17.
Cf. Tattvajñāna 14.5–6: ndan ikaṅbhūrloka patimbunan iṅtattva kabeh; Vṛhaspati-
tattva 33.47–48: ikaṅpṛthivītattva ya patimbunan iṅtattva kabeh.
18.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya pp. 58–59 and above, p. 360. I interpret the sūtratvāt in the
sentence not as ‘because of the authority of the sūtra’, what it would appear to mean prima
facie, but ‘because of its being [like] a thread’, which is symmetrical to the ātmatvāt agreeing
with puruṣatattvam in the second part of the sentence. For characterizations of the Lord as
‘thread’ in similar contexts, cf. above, p. 403.


--- PAGE 446 ---
Cosmos
427
twenty-three evolutes. Te subtler principles stand above the coarser, the
former pervading (vyāpaka) every principle below them and the latter be-
ing pervaded (vyāpya). Te list continues, enumerating buddhi, ahaṅkāra,
the eleven faculties (ekādaśendriyāṇi), the ﬁve subtle elements (pañcabhū-
tasūkṣmāṇi) and the ﬁve gross elements.19
Te list of thirty principles described in Dharma Pātañjala 212.13–17
is almost identical to the list of thirty given in such an early Siddhāntatan-
tra as the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, in which Māyā is substituted by Puruṣa.
Te principles listed in its Adhvaprakaraṇa are Śiva, activation, attachment,
awareness, spirit, unevolved matter, the three constituents, intellect, self-
identity, the ﬁve subtle elements, the ten faculties and the ﬁve gross ele-
ments.20 An identical list of thirty principles is also found at 10.98–101 of
the same scripture, a passage which has a parallel in a fragment transmitted
in the codex of the Pārameśvara.21 Another early scripture, the Nayasūtra
of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, contains a slightly different list of thirty princi-
ples.22 All the remaining Siddhāntatantras transmit different lists of princi-
ples, thirty-six being the ‘standard’ number of principles accepted by Śaiva
commentators (cf. Goodall 1998:li–lii).
Te number of principles in which the Śaiva cosmos is organized is an
effective criterion in the dating of a Tantra, for usually the lower their num-
ber, the older the text.23 Not only the Dharma Pātañjala, but also all the
other sources from the Archipelago that contain lists of principles display
thirty or less tattvas—although a really systematic exposition of the princi-
ples constituting the Śaiva cosmos is not to be found in any of the texts in
question. For instance, the Vṛhaspatitattva, in the Old Javanese commen-
19.
Cf. similar lists in Vāyupurāṇa 5.34–35 and Liṅgapurāṇa 1.70.96.
20.
Cf. Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 4.49–50ab: śivaḥkalā rāgavidye puruṣo ’vyaktam eva ca /
guṇā buddhir ahaṅkāras tanmātrāṇīndriyāṇi ca // mahābhūtāni cāpy atra pṛthivyantāni
pañca ca /.
21.
Cf. Pārameśvara f. 44r (ed. Goodall 1998:liv). In the ﬁrst quarter of the third śloka
I read, as in Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 10.100a (and 1.3a), kalāvyaktaṃ‘activation and une-
volved matter’ instead of kālo ’vyaktam ‘time and unevolved matter’ (em. by Sanderson of
kālāvyaktaṃin the codex, reported and accepted by Goodall).
22.
Cf. Niśvāsanaya 2.10–17, listing Īśvara, Vidyā, Māyā, Kāla, Niyati, Puruṣa, Prakṛti,
Buddhi (dhīṣaṇa), Ahaṅkāra, Pañcabuddhīndriya, Pañcakarmendriya, Manas, Pañcatan-
mātra, Pañcamahābhūta (note that there is a lacuna in the ms. before the ﬁrst principle).
23.
Cf. Goodall (1998:liii–liv) and Goodall and Isaacson (2007:5), who also refer to
the fact that the oldest scriptures, such as Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, do not place any worlds
(bhuvana) within principles.


--- PAGE 447 ---
428
iii Doctrine
tary to śloka 14, mentions Śiva, Sadāśiva, Māyāśiras,24 Māyā, Pradhāna and
Triguṇa, afer which the list is interrupted by a series of ślokas character-
izing mind (citta). But the whole list can be reconstructed thanks to the
commentary to śloka 6, deﬁning the sarvatattva as Pradhāna, Triguṇa, Bud-
dhi, Ahaṅkāra, Bāhyendriya, Karmendriya and Pañcamahābhūta, which are
mentioned next to the triad of Paramaśivatattva, Sadāśivatattva and Śivatat-
tva amounting to cetanā. It is this list of principles, or a very similar one,
that is likely to have been accepted by the Tattvajñāna too. Although the text
nowhere describes a complete succession of principles and simply speaks of
sarvatattva, it is apparent that all the principles mentioned in various places
of the text are the same as those found in Vṛhaspatitattva 6.
Whereas both the Vṛhaspatitattva and Tattvajñāna entirely ignore the
three shrouds (i.e. kalā, vidyā and rāga), that triad appears in the list of prin-
ciples attested in verses of Sanskrit Stutis from Bali. cf., for instance, Bhūtarā-
jastava/Yamastava (StSt 133, Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971:88), which
in verse 3 homologizes eleven principles (īśa, puruṣa, vidyā, kalā,25 rāga,
rajas, tamas, sattva, buddhi, ahaṅkāra, manas) with the eleven faces of the
King of Ghosts (bhūtarāja), and in verse 4 mentions Pradhāna, Śiva, Sadā-
śarva (i.e. Sadāśiva) and Paraśiva.26 A similar list of principles is given in
Śivastava (StSt 751, Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971:450–451), verse 11.
Tere thirty items are listed, viz. twenty-four principles (of the Sāṅkhya) de-
rived from Prakṛti plus Puruṣa, Īśvara, Rāga,27 Kalā and Vidyā up to Śiva.
An elaborate account describing the evolution of the principles is given
in the third chapter of the Bhuvanakośa. It begins by describing Rudra as
being identical to Śiva (bhaṭāra rudra sātmya kalavan bhaṭāra śiva); Spirit,
24.
Tis word, literally meaning ‘the top/head of Māyā’, is attested in the Mataṅgapāra-
meśvarāgama and in the Śivatanu by the early Śaiva master Bṛhaspati (cf. Acri 2011); but
the idea of a ‘superior’ Māyā is found in other early Śaiva scriptures, e.g. in Rauravasūtrasaṅ-
graha 4.28c (māyopari mahāmāyā). Te distinction between a superior and inferior Māyā
is also well-attested in the works of the major post-scriptural Śaiva exegetes.
25.
I emend the reading kāla rāgo of all mss. to kalā rāgo, instead of kālo rāgo (em.
Goudriaan and Hooykaas).
26.
Te verse has unfortunately become garbled to the extent that its sense is virtually
irrecoverable. Te only emendations I feel conﬁdent to propose here are the following:
padana into pradhāna and nipunaś into triguṇaś (cf. the similar occurrence in Tattvajñāna
42.8 of a reading nipuṇatattva instead of triguṇatattva).
27.
I slightly emend puruṣaś ceśvaro ragah into puruṣaś ceśvaro rāgaḥ, which in the
present context makes better sense than the reading puruṣaś cāmaro yagaḥchosen by the
editors.


--- PAGE 448 ---
Cosmos
429
which is homologized to Brahmā, follows. From Spirit the primal matter
(avyakta), which is homologized with Viṣṇu, arises. Ten we have the se-
quence of Buddhi, Ahaṅkāra, Pañcatanmātra, Manas, the ﬁve gross elements,
enumerated one by one. In 3.7 the same sequence is deﬁned as the ‘twelve
principles’ tattva rva vlas, and connected with the mantra sa ba ta a i,
constituted by the initial akṣaras of the names of each of the ﬁve faces of
Sadāśiva.28 Further correspondences among these principles and deities are
introduced. Tis list also retains an archaic ﬂavour, so much so that it puts
Rudra, the supreme deity of the Pāśupatas, at the top of a shortened list of
principles.29
Having mentioned all the principles from the Lord down to the ﬁve el-
ements, the Dharma Pātañjala describes how the coarsest principles mix to
create the (lower) portion of the universe inhabited by Gods, human beings
and animals. Te elements complement one another and are arranged on a
vertical scale, the lower pervaded by the higher. Tere results a combination
of their qualities, i.e. sound, touch, form, taste and smell. Space, the subtlest,
takes place at the top, pervaded by none and pervading all; earth, the coars-
est, at the bottom, pervaded by all and pervading none. Similarly, Space
possesses only the quality of sound, whereas Earth possesses all ﬁve quali-
ties. Tis theory of the elements is described in an almost identical manner
in a number of Old Javanese Tattvas and Tuturs.30 Its origin is in fact Indic,
and it has been inherited by Sanskrit Śaiva sources from the earlier treatises
of the philosophical traditions of Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika and Sāṅkhya.31
Cosmography
and Geography
Having concluded the treatment of the ﬁve gross ele-
ments, the Dharma Pātañjala, in the manner of the Sid-
dhāntatantras, begins its description of the geography of
the Egg-World (aṇḍabhuvana), constituting the inhab-
ited universe. Tis corresponds to the Purāṇic Cosmic Egg or Egg of Brahmā
(brahmāṇḍa). Te text describes the general outlines of such a geography,
28.
Namely, Sadyojāta, Bāmadeva, Tatpuruṣa, Aghora, Īśāna.
29.
Of particular interest is the absence, besides of the shrouds, of guṇatattva, which
appears in the earliest Siddhāntatantras (as well as in Old Javanese Tuturs and Tattvas) but
is never counted as a principle by Sāṅkhya or Pāñcārthika Pāśupatism.
30.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 33; Bhuvanakośa 3.4–7 and 4.1–2; Tattvajñāna 13 and 14.
31.
Cf., e.g., Niśvāsaguhya 2.15–17 and Parākhyatantra 4.109–122; Nyāyasūtra 1.1.13–14
and commentaries; Yuktidīpikā ad Sāṅkhyakārikā 38 (p. 225–226; as the editors note, var-
ious passages of it ﬁnd parallels in Vācaspatimiśra’s Tattvavaiśāradī as well as Yogavārttika
ad Yogasūtra 3.44).


--- PAGE 449 ---
430
iii Doctrine
mentioning seven worlds (saptaloka), the lowest among which, bhūrloka, is
the one inhabited by human beings.32 Part of it are the seven continents
(saptadvīpa) and the seven oceans (saptārṇava), which are not described.
Below the Bhūrloka are the seven underworlds (saptapātāla), whose names
are mentioned one by one although their inhabitants and features are passed
over in silence. In Sanskrit sources these are characterized as subterranean
paradises inhabited by various classes of superhuman beings such as Nāgas,
demons, etc. At the bottom of the underworlds there are the thirty-two Great
Hells (mahānaraka), among which is the Mahāraurava-hell. Further below
there is the Tāmragardabha ‘copper-donkey’,33 a place perpetually dark and
without ﬂames. At the bottom of the Egg-World, just before its external shell,
is the Fire of Kālarudra (kālarudrāgni = kālāgnirudra), eternally blazing. Te
Hundred Rudras reside below and outside of the shell of the Egg-World.
Similar cosmographical (and geographical) sections are found in Old Ja-
vanese sources of the Tutur and Tattva genres (with the exception of the Vṛ-
haspatitattva). Tese accounts, except in the Dharma Pātañjala, occur in
contexts of micro-macrocosmic speculation in which homologizations with
mantras and akṣaras, principles, elements, limbs of the human body, deities,
etc., play an important role.
Te cosmographical accounts found in seven signiﬁcant Old Javanese
sources of Śaiva background are summarized in the following table:34
32.
According to Sanskrit sources, the other are the abodes of Gods, sages, yogins and
other superhuman beings (cf. Kirfel 1920:142–143).
33.
Te word is my conjectural emendation of the original, and no doubt corrupt, read-
ings timirāgarndama and tәmiragarddama. Te form has been arrived at through compar-
ison with the Hell (literally a ‘cauldron’) named tāmragomukha, tambra gohvaktra, kavah
tambra gomukha or gomukhatāmra attested in various Old Javanese sources (cf. Gonda
1973:241) and with the hell Balagardabha attested in a parallel passage in Tattvajñāna 14.
Compare the hell called tamrakuṇḍa or tāmrakumbha listed in Purāṇic sources (cf. Kirfel
1920:161).
34.
Te sections of the sources are the following: Dharma Pātañjala 222.16–226.3;
Tattvajñāna 37.19–25–38.1–11; Bhuvanakośa 4.56–76; Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa 78–86; Jñānasi-
ddhānta 26.3–7; SaṅHyaṅHayu 1.17–26 and 2.1–13 (≈Bhuvana Pitu, Sevaka Dharma,
etc.); Navaruci p. 42.8–24. Te table only presents a limited number of signiﬁcant sources;
these lists are common in Old Javano-Balinese literature, and their detailed comparison
alone would require a separate study. Additional sources preserved on Balinese manuscripts
are presented by Goris (1926:108–114).


--- PAGE 450 ---
Cosmos
431
Table 4: Te Egg-World (aṇḍabhuvana)
Dharma Pātañjala
Tattvajñāna
Bhuvanakośa
Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa
Jñānasiddhānta
SaṅHyaṅHayu
Navaruci
-------Shell-------
Seven Voids
[Saptaloka]
Saptaloka
Saptaloka
Saptaloka
Saptaloka
Saptaloka
Saptabhuvana
Satyaloka
Satyaloka
Satyaloka
Satyaloka
Satyaloka
Atyanta Antaloka
Satyaloka
Mahaloka
Mahāloka
Tapoloka
Tapoloka
Tapoloka
Mahaloka
Mahāloka
Tapoloka
Janaloka
Janaloka
Janaloka
Janaloka
Satyaloka
Janaloka
Janaloka
Tapoloka
Maharloka
Maharloka
Maharloka
Tapoloka
Tapaloka
Svarloka
Svarloka
Svarloka
Svarloka
Svarloka
Janaloka
Svarloka
Bhuvarloka
Bhuvarloka
Bhuvarloka
Bhuvarloka
Bhuvarloka
Svarloka
Bhuvarloka
Bhūrloka
Bhūrloka
Bhūrloka
Bhūrloka
Bhūrloka
Bhuvarloka
Bhūrloka
Bhūrloka
Saptaparvata
Saptaparvata
Saptaparvata
Saptaparvata
Mālyavant
Himavant
Kuruparvata
Mālyavant
Niṣedha
Hemakūṭa
Araṇyaparvata
Niṣadha
Gandhamādana
Niṣāḍa
Hiraṇyaparvata
Gandhamandana
Malayamahīdhara
Meru
Elaparvata
Malaya
Triśṛṅga
Nīla
Hariparvata
Triśṛṅga
Vindhya
Śveta
Kinnaraparvata
Vindhya
Mahāmeru
Triśṛṅga
Bhārataparvata
Mahāmeru
Vindhya (8)
SaptārṆava
SaptārṆava
Saptasamudra
Saptasamudra
SaptārṆava
SaptārṆava
Tasik tok
Lavaṇa
Lavaṇa
Tasik kilaṅ
Kṣīra
Kṣīra
Tasik asin
Dadhi
Dadhi
Tasik miñәk
Sarpi
Sarpi
Tasik madhu
Ikṣu
Ikṣu
Tasik susu
Surā
Surā
Tasik vahan
Svādhu
Svādhu


--- PAGE 451 ---
432
iii Doctrine
Dharma Pātañjala
Tattvajñāna
Bhuvanakośa
Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa
Jñānasiddhānta
SaṅHyaṅHayu
Navaruci
Saptadvīpa
Saptadvīpa
Saptadvīpa
Saptadvīpa
Saptadvīpa
Jambudvīpa
Jambudvīpa
Jambudvīpa
Kuśadvīpa
Śāṅkhadvīpa
Śaṅkhadvīpa
Śaṅkhadvīpa
Kuśadvīpa
Kuśadvīpa
Śālmalīdvīpa
Krauñcadvīpa
Krauñcadvīpa
Gomedhadvīpa
Śālmalīdvīpa
Śālmalīdvīpa
Puṣkaradvīpa
Gomedhadvīpa
Gomedhadvīpa
Krauñcadvīpa
Puṣkaradvīpa
Puṣkaradvīpa
Saptatīrtha
Saptatīrtha
Narmadā
Sindhu
Gaṅgā
Sarasvatī
Airāvatī
Śreṣṭhanadī
Śivanadī
Saptapātāla
Saptapātāla
Saptapātāla
Saptapātāla
Saptapātāla
Saptapātāla
Apatāla
Pātāla
Tala
Pātāla
Rasatala
Vetāla
Vaitāla
Sutala
Nitala
Vetala
Nitala
Nitala
Nitala
Sutala
Nitala
Netala
Mahātala
Santala
Talantala
Mahātala
Gabhastitala
Sutala
Atala
Tala niṅtala
Sutala
Vāratala
Talātala
Vitala
Mahātala
Talātala
Rāsatala
Rāsatala
Talātala
Atyanta Antapatala
Santala
32 Mahānaraka
Balagardabha
Tāmragardabha
Mahānaraka
Kālarudrāgni
Kālāgnirudra
-------Shell-------
100 Rudras


--- PAGE 452 ---
Cosmos
433
In literature from the Subcontinent, besides in the Purāṇas, a section de-
scribing the geography of the Brahmāṇda is found in every proper Śaiva
Tantra. Most of the Siddhāntatantras, being encyclopedic in nature, enu-
merate (usually in their Vidyāpāda), with a wealth of details, various groups
of seven: seven worlds, seven mountains, seven oceans, seven continents,
seven underworlds; then the various hells, Kālāgni at the bottom of the Brah-
māṇḍa and the one-hundred Rudras.35 However, the amount of variation
between the details of the different sources is so great that it is extremely
difﬁcult to search for similarities in order to advance any hypothesis about
the Sanskrit texts from which the Old Javanese sources drew upon to build
their accounts. If the list of the seven worlds, in spite of slight variations in
the position of each world, is well-ﬁxed in Brahmanical literature of all per-
suasions, considerable variation exists in the lists of mountains, oceans and
continents. Since these are only mentioned in the Dharma Pātañjala but not
listed one by one, a detailed treatment is not needed here. Te Seven Under-
worlds too form a list about which the Sanskrit sources themselves are by
no means in agreement. Kirfel (1920:143–147) detailed various such lists,
without however taking into account Tantric literature. Let me simply point
out here that the accounts can be divided, with some omissions and simpli-
ﬁcations, into roughly four groups, as follows:36
Table 5: Purāṇic lists of underworlds
i
ii
iii
iv
Atala
Atala
Tala
Tala
Vitala
Sutala
Vitala
Sutala
Nitala
Vitala
Nitala
Pātāla
Gabhastimat
Gabhastala
Sutala
Talātala
Mahātala
Mahātala
Talātala
Ātala
Sutala
Śrītala
Rasātala
Vitala
Pātāla
Pātāla
Mahātala
Rasātala
35.
Goodall (2004:289–293) has compared with great amount of details the accounts
found in several Siddhāntatantras predating the 10th century. It is on the basis of the data
presented by Goodall (with some omissions and simpliﬁcations) that table 6 has been
drawn.
36.
i = Agnipurāṇa, Garuḍapurāṇa, Śivapurāṇa, Viṣṇupurāṇa; ii = Vāyupurāṇa; iii =
Bhaviṣyapurāṇa, Brahmapurāṇa, Kūrmapurāṇa, Liṅgapurāṇa; iv = Skandapurāṇa, Bhāga-
vatapurāṇa, Yogasūtra, Yogasūtrabhāṣya, Aruṇopaniṣad (note that within the latter list there
exists great variation as far as the position of each item is concerned, even though the name
of the items themselves are identical in all accounts).


--- PAGE 453 ---
434
iii Doctrine
Te Underworlds listed in early Saiddhāntika literature are the following:
Table 6: Tantric lists of underworlds
NiMukha
NiGuhya
SvT
SBSS, MVUt
≈MatPār
SJñUtt
Kiraṇa
Parākhya,
Mṛg
Nitala
Ābhāsatala
Ābhāsa
Tala
Tala
Varatāla
Ābhāsa
Vitala
Uttāla
Varatāla
Vitala
Nitala
Nitala
Paratāla
Sutala
Śrītala
Śarkara
Nitala
Vitala
Tritala
Nitala
Nitala
Gabhastika
Gabhastimat
Sutala
Sutala
Mahātala
Gabhastimat
Talātala
Śiloccaya
Mahātala
Talātala
Talātala
Pātāla
Mahātala
Rasātala
Śarkaroccaya
Sutala
Rasātala
Pātāla
Rasātala
Rasātala
Mahātala
Sauvarṇa
Rasātala
Mahātala
Rasātala
Hāṭhaka
Pātāla
A comparison of the list of Underworlds given by the Dharma Pātañjala
and other Old Javanese sources with the above lists shows only one remark-
able feature, namely that the text, at variance with the other Old Javanese
texts and in partial agreement with Parākhya (5.41), Mṛgendra (VP 13.27cd–
28ab), Svacchandatantra (10.96) and Guhyasūtra (5.1–3), mentions the items
Varatāla37 and Gabhasti(tala). Another interesting fact is that the Dharma
Pātañjala seems to move from a Purāṇic towards a typically Tantric presen-
tation, for it mentions thirty-two Great Hells and Kālāgni. Tis situation
ﬁnds its closest counterpart in the cosmology of the Tattvajñāna, which,
however, passes over in silence the one-hundred Rudras as well as the num-
ber of the Great Hells. As evinced in the data presented by Kirfel (1920:147–
162), the Great Hells in the Purāṇas number only twenty-two or at most
twenty-eight; it is only in certain Tantric texts that we come across the num-
ber of thirty-two, i.e. Niśvāsamukha 4.104 and Parākhya 5.11. According
to another tradition, thirty-two is not the number of the Great Hells them-
selves but of the Rudras reigning over them. Kiraṇatantra 8, for instance,
subsumes four hells under the dominion of each Rudra and eight under the
principal three Hells of Kumbhaka, Raurava and Avīci, thus bringing the to-
tal number to a hundred an forty.38 On the other hand, the last three are
37.
Goodall (2004:289 fn. 522) defends the reading Paratāla in Parākhya 5.41 on ac-
count of internal consistency and because of the fact that the same item appears in Mṛgendra
VP 13.27cd–28ab; however, he also notes that, since vara- and para- can be synonymous,
no real mistake was involved and thus the reading might also be Varatāla, as in Kiraṇa 8.22
and Svacchandatantra 10.96a.
38.
Among the sources that recognize a hundred and forty hells are the Mataṅga (VP
23.73–81) and the Śivapurāṇa (Dharmasaṃhitā 19), which mention the names of their re-
spective Kings (nāyaka).


--- PAGE 454 ---
Cosmos
435
the only hells mentioned in the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha and Svāyambhuva-
sūtrasaṅgraha. It is not unconceivable to regard the above situation as the
result of a process of systematization, through accretion, of a primitive list of
Hells. Even though drawing any conclusions of chronological nature is still
premature, one may assume that the list of thirty-two Hells chronologically
stands between an earlier list of three and a later list of a hundred and forty.


--- PAGE 455 ---


--- PAGE 456 ---
Man
I
n the SāṄkhya ontology, the macrocosmos intersects the microcosmos
in the principle of intellect (buddhi). Te principles from intellect down
to the ﬁve gross elements forming the human body constitute a combination
of cosmological and psychological elements; intellect, self-awareness, mind-
stuff and its lower products are both cosmic principles and psychological el-
ements of each individual embodied human being. Intellect, the principle
constituting the highest boundary of the human psychosomatic ensemble,
is the subtlest principle of the human being, the one standing closest to the
sentient principle of Spirit.
Citta and
Buddhi
Te Śaivas have inherited this cosmological picture from
the Sāṅkhya, but they differ from the latter system inso-
far as they derive intellect from the three guṇas, and not
from Nature, as the Sāṅkhya maintains (cf. Sāṅkhyakā-
rikā 22). Both schools considered that principle ambivalent: although, being
a product of Nature, it is inherently insentient, it is illuminated by the sen-
tience of the Spirit, thereby gaining the capacity to carry out the intellectual
operations that render human knowledge and experience possible.1 Tis
view is expounded in the half-verse 20ab of the Sāṅkhyakārikā: ‘Because
of the conjunction of those two (i.e. puruṣa and prakṛti) the unconscious
liṅga appears as if conscious’ tasmāt tatsaṃyogād acetanaṃcetanāvad iva
liṅgaṃ—where liṅga, as usual in Sāṅkhya, denotes the psychophysical ag-
gregate that constitutes a human being.
1.
An overlap between the two principles is detectable in the deﬁnition of buddhi found
in the Dharma Pātañjala (to be quoted just below), which to my mind recalls the ambivalent
state of the individual soul, whose perfect knowledge has been obliterated by maculation
and then again partially empowered by vidyā (cf. above, p. 406).


--- PAGE 457 ---
438
iii Doctrine
Echoes of this view are found in the deﬁnition of buddhi given in the
Dharma Pātañjala:
From the three constituents comes forth the intellect. Its characteristic is
DhPāt
216.1–5
the perception of the external reality. Te intellect is without sentience, and
yet it serves the purpose of sentience. To serve the purpose of sentience
means that the intellect does not know, yet it is as if capable of knowing.
Te intellect is without thinking faculty, yet it is as if it thinks, for it came
forth from the two principles. Te two principles are: Soul and unevolved
matter.
And in a similar passage of the Tattvajñāna:
From the union of the three constituents with mind (citta) the intellect arises.
Te characteristics of intellect are: the intellect does not think, yet the intel-
lect thinks; it is like if the intellect does not know, yet it knows; it is like if
the intellect is without sentience, yet it is sentient.2
Whereas the Dharma Pātañjala derives the intellect from the three con-
stituents, the Tattvajñāna characterizes it as originating from citta; the latter
denotes a more general psychological entity, which does not appear in the
Sāṅkhya and Śaiva enumerations of the principles of the universe. Chap-
ter 10 states that, as result of its encounter with the three constituents, citta
causes the Soul to incarnate into a human being and produces intellect. Tat-
tvajñāna 6.7–8 deﬁnes the citta as ‘the coarse part of the Spirit’ citta ṅara-
nya gaṇal niṅpuruṣa,3 and as ‘the sentience of the Spirit adhered to and
covered by the three constituents’ cetana saṅpuruṣa karakәtan koparәṅga
de niṅtriguṇa (7.1), while it also declares buddhi to be ‘the coarse part of
the three constituents experienced through sentience by the citta’ gaṇal niṅ
triguṇa kacetana de niṅcitta (11.19–20)—thus considering citta a separate,
and higher, psychological principle from which the intellect arises.
Te Vṛhaspatitattva appears to agree with the Tattvajñāna in that it also
attributes the genesis of citta to the buddhi. Although the text nowhere ex-
pressly declares this to be so, it can be inferred from the fact that the ﬁrst
2.
Tattvajñāna 10.16–18: ri pamaṅguh niṅtriguṇa lavan citta mәtu taṅbuddhi / lakṣaṇa
niṅbuddhi / buddhi tan pahiḍәp / ikaṅbuddhi ndan ahiḍәp ya / kadi tan vruh ikaṅbuddhi /
ndan vruh ya / kadi tan pacetanekaṅbuddhi / ndan cetana ya /.
3.
Which is echoed in Dharma Pātañjala 288.1–2, where to the imaginary question of
an opponent as to what would be the body of the Soul (ndyāvaka niṅātmā) the Lord replies
that it is the citta mixed up with maculation (ikā taṅcitta ivәṅivәṅlāvan mala).


--- PAGE 458 ---
Man
439
mention of citta occurs right afer the discussion of the three constituents
in the cosmic hierarchy (the last word of the Old Javanese commentary to
śloka 14) and before the enumerations of the eight properties of intellect,
when the Old Javanese exegesis ad śloka 24 states that ‘from the three guṇas
arises buddhi’. Te text attributes to the citta the qualities of sattva, rajas and
tamas, in all their possible combinations, just like the Sāṅkhya attributed
them to the intellect. Tat this view was not inherent in the Sanskrit sources
of the Vṛhaspatitattva but is rather to be regarded as an attempt by its author
to identify citta and buddhi as a single principle is suggested by the textual
arrangement of the relevant section of the text, which appears to squeeze
ślokas 15 through 24 on the properties of citta between the deﬁnitions of
triguṇa and buddhi.
Te word citta is not a distinctive term of Sāṅkhya but rather of Pātañjala
Yoga philosophy; it never appears in the Sāṅkhyakārikā, whereas it consti-
tutes the basic term deﬁning the psychological ensemble of man in the phi-
losophy and soteriology of the Yogasūtra. In the latter tradition, the term
may be used either as a synonym of intellect (buddhi) or to denote the three
mental factors of intellect, self-identity (ahaṅkāra) and mind-stuff (manas),
which in Sāṅkhya terminology are together deﬁned as one inner organ (an-
taḥkaraṇa).4 Tis deﬁnition of the inner organ is generally accepted by San-
skrit Śaiva scriptures, and attested in Old Javanese Tattvas as well;5 both cat-
egories of sources, however, are not always consistent, as the antaḥkaraṇa is
there ofen used as a synonym of manas.6 I am not sure whether the ﬂexible
usage of citta attested in Old Javanese Tattvas reﬂects this fact or if it is the
result of a conscious attempt at eclectically merging the Sāṅkhya and Yoga
terminologies into a Śaiva synthesis.
In order to dispel any possible confusion, Kumāra, in Dharma Pātañjala
216.15–16, asks if the mind-stuff, the intellect and the self-identity are iden-
tical. Te Lord explains that they are different because they have different
characteristics. Te characteristic of the intellect is the faculty of ascertain-
4.
Cf. Sāṅkhyakārikā 33.
5.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 218.10 and Vṛhaspatitattva 35.1–2. Te threefold internal or-
gan plus the ten faculties is deﬁned as the ‘thirteenfold organ’ (trayodaśakaraṇa) in Dharma
Pātañjala 220.2 and Tattvajñāna 40.21–22 (compare Sāṅkhyakārikā 32).
6.
Tis holds true also with respect to the Pāśupata tradition: cf., e.g., Pañcārthabhāṣ-
ya on sūtra 5.37, where antaḥkaraṇa, coupled with manas, glosses citta (cittaṃmano
’ntaḥkaraṇam ity arthaḥ). Vasudeva (2005:425–426) observes that the treatment of citta,
antaḥkaraṇa and manas in Śaiva (Mantramārga) sources is ofen imprecise.


--- PAGE 459 ---
440
iii Doctrine
ment or decision (adhyavasāya), which means the knowledge of the bad and
the good (halahayu), and determination (niścaya).7 Te distinction of intel-
lect from the other intellectual faculties on account of its capacity of ascer-
tainment is a cliché in Sanskrit philosophical literature and Śaiva scriptures,
which all seem to go back to the deﬁnition of intellect given in Sāṅkhya-
kārikā 23 (adhyavasāyo buddhir).8 A deﬁnition of intellect including, as in
the Dharma Pātañjala, also niścaya, is documented in the Yuktidīpikā9 and
in the commentary Tātparyadīpikā to the Tattvaprakāśa.10 Tis character-
istic of the intellect is what enables perception of the world;11 the Dharma
Pātañjala in 218.10 deﬁnes the three internal organs, which are perceived
in a conscious manner by the Soul, as its instruments to grasp the objects
of the senses, whereas in 218.12–13 it explains that the ﬁve faculties of per-
ception (buddhīndriya) are called so because they have the buddhi as helper
in grasping the physical objects of senses (ri denyan pakasahāya buddhin
paṅgṛhīta vastuviṣaya).12
It is on account of its faculty of determination that intellect maintains a
central role in determining the course of human action. Te Dharma Pā-
tañjala attributes this central role to the more general element that is citta,
referring to it as if it were a synonym of buddhi. In the text citta features
7.
Whereas the Dharma Pātañjala is the only Tattva to attribute to the intellect the fac-
ulty of ascertainment, the view is attested in a śloka-quarter of the Bhuvanakośa (3.60) ‘In-
tellect determines—it gains pleasure by the objects pertaining to the spiritual world’ bud-
dhir adhyavasāyate [em. ; adhiḥviṣayate Mss]—tṛpti riṅādhyātma viṣaya. Te Tattvajñāna
(10.19) rather characterizes the intellect as being aware of (i.e. able to discern) good and
bad (meṅәt riṅhalahayu jugekaṅbuddhi).
8.
Cf., e.g., Niśvāsanaya 2:63; Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama 17 VP 1–2 and 25; Parākhya-
tantra 4.90 and 92; Svacchandatantra 12.43; Tattvaprakāśa 52.
9.
Yuktidīpikā on Sāṅkhyakārikā 46ab (p. 239.4): ‘intelligence and intellect, ascertain-
ment and determination are synonyms’ pratyayo buddhiḥniścayo ’dhyavasāya iti paryāyāḥ.
10.
Cf. Śrī Kumāra’s Tātparyadīpikā on Tattvaprakāśa 52: ‘[Intellect] is characterized by
the ascertainment of the objects of sense—that is to say, she whose characteristic, i.e. func-
tion (vṛtti), is ascertainment, i.e. determination, of the objects of sense, i.e. sound and so on’
viṣayādhyavasāyarūpiṇī ceti / viṣayeṣu śabdādiṣv adhyavasāyo niścayo rūpaṃvṛttir yasyāḥ
sā tathoktā.
11.
Tough at a lower, i.e. coarser, level than the shroud vidyā, which constitutes a specif-
ically Śaiva innovation.
12.
Tis characterization of the intellect is in harmony with the Sāṅkhya and Śaiva views.
Cf., e.g., Parākhyatantra (4.90–93), according to which sentience ultimately resides in the
Soul, and the buddhi only brings about perception (vibodhaka), taking the form of the ex-
perienced objects.


--- PAGE 460 ---
Man
441
prominently as the locus where the bondage of the Soul effected through
karma takes place. Te Vṛhaspatitattva (14–16, 19–23 and 52) characterizes
citta in a similar manner and regards it as the cause of heaven and hell, of
any kind of human, animal or divine incarnation, and also of release.
Bhāvas and
Pratyayas
Te ‘cosmic’ function of the intellect, which bridges the
macro- and microcosmos, underlies the Sāṅkhya doc-
trine of the eight states or predispositions of intellect
(buddhibhāva) and the ﬁfy conditions (pratyaya) that
arise therefrom. Te list of the bhāvas and pratyayas is well ﬁxed: the former
are made up by the four items Righteousness (dharma), Knowledge (jñāna),
Dispassion (vairāgya) and Sovereignty (aiśvarya)13 plus their opposites; the
latter include the ﬁve kinds of errors (pañcaviparyaya), the eight perfections
(aṣṭasiddhi), the nine contentments (navatuṣṭi) and the twenty-eight disabil-
ities or disfunctions (aśakti).
According to the Sāṅkhya,14 the bhāvas and the pratyayas are not part
of the twenty-ﬁve principles but constitute the whole of the phenomenal or
‘intellectual’ creation that is an essential part of man’s nature. Scholars of
Sāṅkhya have seen an inconsistency in the mode of interaction of the ‘verti-
cal’ creation of the twenty-ﬁve with the ‘horizontal’ creation, springing from
buddhi, represented by the bhāvas and pratyayas, suggesting that the system
preserved two distinct doctrines belonging to different layers of the school
amalgamated at some time.15 Be this as it may, the doctrine of the pratyayas
is old, for it was regarded by Sāṅkhya commentators to form ﬁfy of the sixty
categories or ‘topics’ (padārtha) of the Ṣaṣṭitantra, the oldest Sāṅkhya trea-
tise, of which the Sāṅkhyakārikā claims to be a summary.16
13.
Tese four are deﬁned in the Dharma Pātañjala as the four Sovereign Powers (catu-
raiśvarya).
14.
Sāṅkhyakārikā 40, 43, 46–51.
15.
Cf. Frauwallner (1973 i:268) and Torella (1999:557 and 1998:64 fn. 50), pace
Larson (1979:193–194).
16.
Te possibility that the Old Javanese sources have drawn from an ancient tradition of
pre-systematized Sāṅkhya is suggested by two ślokas (characterized by aiśa Sanskrit, which I
have not ‘corrected’) with Old Javanese commentary of the Bhuvanakośa (4.21–22), the ﬁrst
mentioning the elements (tattva) constituting the ﬁfy pratyayas and the second explicitly
referring to the Ṣaṣṭitantra: ‘Error is ﬁvefold, the disabilities are twenty-eight; contentment
is to be known as ninefold, and the perfection as eightfold. Te meaning is: Tere are the
ﬁve errors, there are the twenty-eight disabilities, there are the nine contentments, there are
the eight perfections. Among the embodied beings there are ﬁve kinds of wombs determined
by karma and ﬁve tapas. Te sixty categories [are thus taught] in this book by the great seer


--- PAGE 461 ---
442
iii Doctrine
Te doctrine of the eight bhāvas and ﬁfy pratyayas has been universally
adopted without signiﬁcant modiﬁcations by Śaiva sources,17 where the def-
inition of buddhi as ‘eightfold’ (aṣṭavidha) or ‘having eight qualities’ (aṣṭa-
dharma/aṣṭaguṇa) has become proverbial.18
An outstanding feature of the Dharma Pātañjala is that it devotes consid-
erable space to the treatment of the buddhibhāvas and the pratyayas. In fact,
the text presents one of the most systematic and exhaustive accounts of this
doctrine to be found anywhere in Sanskrit as well as Old Javanese sources.19
In no less than ﬁfeen folios the text enumerates and deﬁnes each and every
one of the ﬁfy-eight items, as well as the fruits of the eight bhāvas.20
Kapila. Tere are the wombs determined by karma, ﬁve is their number; there are the ﬁve
tapas, ﬁve is their number; thus are the ﬁfy (sic) categories, which constitutes the book of the
reverend Kapila’ « viparyayaḥpañcavidha-m aṣṭaviṅśatāśaktayaḥ/ tuṣṭiś ca navadhā jñeyāḥ
aṣṭadhā siddhir eva ca » hana pañcaviparyaya / ṅa / hana aṣṭaviṅśaty aśakti [em. ; °ti śakti
ms.] / ṅa / hana navatuṣṭi / ṅa / hana aṣṭasiddhi / ṅa // « karmayonis tu pañcaite pañcatāpāni
dehinām / ṣaṣṭītattvam idan tantre kapilasya maharṣinā » hana karmayoni / lima kvehnya /
hana pañcatapa / lima kvehnya / nahan taṅtattva limaṅpuluh / pinakāji bhagavan kapila / //.
Different versions of the ten mūlikārthas are sometimes mentioned, but rarely explained, by
Sāṅkhya commentators; however, they do not correspond with the doublet of ﬁve categories
mentioned in the Bhuvanakośa.
17.
With the caveat that, unlike in the Sāṅkhyakārikā, the bhāvas are explicitly made to be
the causes of the pratyayas by Śaiva commentators: cf. Torella (1999:557 and 1998:64 fn.
50), referring to Mṛgendra VP 10.25a and Rāmakaṇṭha on Mataṅga VP 11.6 and 17.157cd.
18.
Cf., e.g., Guhyasūtra 7.172d (buddhir aṣṭaguṇāṃ); Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 4.26 (≈
Guhyasūtra 7.169b) (buddhir aṣṭavidhā smṛtā); Parākhyatantra 4.91a (aṣṭadharmaguṇope-
tā). Te eight elements constituting the buddhibhāvas are already mentioned in Pañcārtha-
bhāṣya 1.1 (p. 6), polemically referred to as the means to obtain liberation admitted by the
Sāṅkhya system; cf. also 1.42 (p. 54.9), 2.24 (p. 74.10–11) and 2.25 (p. 74.16–19).
19.
Te commentary to the Sāṅkhyakārikā that discusses this doctrine with the greatest
level of detail is the Yuktidīpikā. Early Siddhāntatantras rarely mention the pratyayas but
simply list the bhāvas without going into the details (cf., e.g., Niśvāsanaya 2.62; Guhyasūtra
7:173; Rauravāgama KP 10.23ab; Svacchandatantra 10.1095cd–1096ab), the only exception
being the most Śāstric of the early Siddhāntatantras, i.e. the Mṛgendra, which devotes several
verses of VP 10 and 11 to the treatment of both lists. Te Śaiva exegetes, being aware of the
Sāṅkhya derivation of the doctrine, usually refer to the Sāṅkhyakārikā and sometimes refer
to further sub-divisions of the pratyayas; for instance, according to Aghoraśiva, they are
three-hundred (cf. Mṛgendravṛttidīpikā 10.25).
20.
Tat this extended classiﬁcatory section bordered on pedantry and might have been
detrimental to the attention of his potential readers was present in the mind of the author.
Trough Kumāra’s impatient enquiries about the means for liberation, the author has the
Lord state that the yogapāda will follow soon, but not before the treatment of the present
topic has been completely exhausted (250.14–15); the same is reiterated further below, in


--- PAGE 462 ---
Man
443
Although in its treatment it mostly adheres to Sāṅkhya views, the text
is idiosyncratic insofar as in deﬁning the ﬁfy conditions it does not use the
term pratyaya but vṛtti ‘mode, activity, function; nature, condition’, a term
which is more proper to Pātañjala Yoga than Sāṅkhya philosophy.21 Te use
of the term vṛtti in this context is uncommon in Sanskrit Śaiva sources,22
but attested in the Vṛhaspatitattva (24.19 and 33.20.), which deﬁnes them
as ‘vṛtti of the intellect’ (vṛtti niṅbuddhi). Te Dharma Pātañjala attributes
these vṛttis a role similar to that of the saṅskāras and vāsanās of Yoga, which
accompany the subtle body in the cycle of transmigration.23 As for the eight
dispositions of buddhi, the text does not use the term bhāva either but vīja
(i.e. bīja, ‘seed’) instead, a term that is also very common in Pātañjala Yoga
texts.24
260.12–12. As I have argued in the introduction (p. 18), this remarkable feature suggests
that the Dharma Pātañjala had a single author.
21.
In fact the Yogasūtrabhāṣya on sūtra 1.2 does mention eights bhāvas in connection
with the (sāttvika, rājāsika and tāmāsika) vṛtti of the citta.
22.
I have found one attestation of this usage in the Tātparyadīpikā on Tattvaprakāśa 52:
‘Te mind is shown to possess an eightfold condition (vṛtti), being characterized by Righ-
teousness, Knowledge, Dispassion, Sovereignty, Unrighteousness, Ignorance, Passion and
Non-sovereignty’ dharmajñānavairāgyaiśvaryādharmājñānāvairāgyānaiśvaryātmanā aṣṭa-
vidhavṛttimattvaṃbuddheḥsūcitam.
23.
Te origin of this idea is perhaps Sāṅkhyakārikā 40, where the liṅga is ‘perfumed’ (a-
dhivāsita) by the bhāvas—‘perfume’ being frequently associated with vāsanās (for the simile
equating vāsanās to the scent of perfume sticking to a pot, cf. below, pp. 470–472). An ex-
plicit equation of the bhāvas with vāsanās is found in the Pauṣkarāgama (Puṃstattvapaṭala
122cd–123ab, quoted in Śivāgrayogin’s Śaivaparibhāṣā 65): ‘Tus the dispositions begin-
ning with merit, which reside in the intellect in the form of impressions (vāsanātmanā),
which are of the nature of the conditions, have been mentioned according to the sequence of
their different activities (vṛtti)’ iti dharmādayo bhāvā buddhisthā vāsanātmanā // krameṇa
pratyayātmānaḥproktās tadvṛttibhedataḥ/. A similar concept, expressed in a different ter-
minology, is perhaps detectable in the statement of Sadyojyotis, who, commenting on Svā-
yambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 12, states that the bhāvas and the pratyayas derive from karma
(yaś cāyaṃtriguṇātmako bhāvapratyayākhyapariṇāmaḥso ’pi karmata upādānāt)—indeed,
vāsanās too derive from karma.
24.
In the Dharma Pātañjala the expression vīja nikaṅbuddhi refers indiscriminately
to both the bhāvas and the pratyayas, whereas in the Vṛhaspatitattva (24.4–11) it is only
used twice to refer to the intellect ‘having as offspring’ (makavīja) the opposites of the four
sovereign powers (i.e. the bhāvas arising from an intellect dominated by tamas).


--- PAGE 463 ---
444
iii Doctrine
Table 7: Te eight bhāvas according to the Dharma Pātañjala and the Vṛhaspatitattva
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Buddhibhāva
Deﬁnition
Fruits
Deﬁnition
Fruits
Dharma
Practicing good conduct and reli-
gious duties
Rebirth in heaven and then as a fa-
mous, rich or virtuous man
Practicing good conduct and re-
ligious duties (śīla, tapas, dāna,
pravrajyā, yoga)
Rebirth in heaven as a god and at-
tainment of the supernatural pow-
ers of the aṇimādi group
Jñāna
Practicing absorption and the
three pramāṇas
Obtainment of the Lord’s pow-
ers and consequent rebirth as one
wishes
Being conversant with the three
pramāṇas
Attaining mokṣa, thereby obtain-
ing the Lord’s Four Powers and be-
coming one with the Lord
Vairāgya
Not desiring worldly pleasures
(i.e. bhoga, upabhoga, paribhoga)
Dissolution into unevolved mat-
ter, which is like when one enjoys
pleasure in sleep
Not desiring divine or worldly
pleasures
Dissolution into unevolved mat-
ter, which is like a long dreamless
sleep, and rebirth as a god
Aiśvarya
Human beings possessing bhoga,
upabhoga and paribhoga are re-
spected by other human beings
Becoming the sovereign of heaven
Equanimity towards bhoga, upa-
bhoga and paribhoga
Enjoying in full the pleasures
without impediment and then be-
coming a god,
provided with
the supernatural powers of the
aṇimādi group
Adharma
Considering virtue and religious
duties useless
Being reborn as an animal
Not believing in heaven and hell,
considering merit useless, regard-
ing ascetics as thieves
Becoming an animal
Ajñāna
Using only two pramāṇas (i.e. pra-
tyakṣa and anumāna)
Incessantly transmigrating in the
cycle of existence
A mind devoid of the three
pramāṇas and characterized by
vikalpa, saṅśaya and bhrānta
Being bound by karma deriving
from pleasure
Avairāgya
†
Going to hell and then reincarnat-
ing as an abnormal human being
A mind valuing the material ob-
jects the utmost
Going round and round as human
being, animals, or falling into hell
Anaiśvarya
Perpetual pain
becoming angry due to not ob-
taining what one wishes and be-
ing mistreated, then goeing to hell
and eventually reincarnating as an
ant
Being deprived of bhoga, upabho-
ga and paribhoga
Going round and round as human
being, animals, or falling into hell


--- PAGE 464 ---
Man
445
Table 8: Te ﬁfy pratyayas (or vṛttis) according to the Dharma Pātañjala
5 viparyaya
9 tuṣṭi
8 siddhi
28 aśakti
(1) tamas
(1–10) deﬁcient
to strive afer worldly
objects of pleasure
daśendriya
(2) moha
ādhy-
(1) pradhānaka
(1) dāna
(11) apradhānaka
(20) adāna
to pursue the siddhi
of invisibility in order
to be able to steal
ātmika{
one sees the ugliness
of one’s body due to
bad karma and starts
to perform meritori-
ous acts in order to
have a better reincar-
nation
to offer help, in the form of
body, speech and heart, to
whose who suffer
doing bad because of
the misfortune of one’s
body
not giving alms and not
practicing righteousness
(3) mahāmoha
(2) upādānaka
(2) adhyayana
(12) anupādānaka
(21) anadhyayana
to pursue the aṣṭaiś-
varya in order to en-
joy in heaven and in
the world
one does not suffer if
one has a debt due
to having given away
wealth for offerings
being able to read the sa-
cred texts
running away because
of one’s debts due to
having
given
away
wealth for offerings
not studying the texts, so
that one’s knowledge of
them is not based on evi-
dence
(4) tāmisra
(3) (a-)kāla
(3) śabda
(13) akāla
(22) an-a-śabda
matching the objects
of dislike with the
aṣṭaiśvarya (?)
one feels good when
one’s beloved girl con-
sents to the request of
marriage
having mastered the sa-
cred texts, whatever one
says is accomplished, and
one is able to hear inaudi-
ble sounds
taking by force a girl
who has refused to
marry
not practicing regularly
the means of realization
(5) andhatāmisra
(4) (a-)bhāgya
(4) tarka
(14)
(23) an-a-tarka
being worried about
the end of pleasures
ill-fated
men
seek
refuge
in
religious
instruction
knowledge of past, present
and future
one’s mind is deluded
since one is not able to
cure the deﬁciencies of
one’s body
inability to know past,
present and future


--- PAGE 465 ---
446
iii Doctrine
5 viparyaya
9 tuṣṭi
8 siddhi
28 aśakti
vāhya {
(5)
(5) svādhyāya
(15)
(24) asvādhyāya
when one obtains the
worldly objects of en-
joyment that one de-
sires
to study with excellent
teachers
one who is attached to
the worldly objects of
the senses and is not
satisﬁed once they are
obtained
to study with bad teachers
chosen at random
(6)
(6) trayo duḥkhavighāta i
ādhyātmikaduḥkha
(16)
(25) duḥkhatrayavighāta i
when a man ﬁnds his
beloved one
to become a leader among
yogins, able to extinguish
the three pains
(i) mānasa: kāma,
krodha, lobha, bha-
ya, asūyā; (ii) śārī-
ra: various kinds of
diseases
one who is lazy to act
not being able to elimi-
nate the three sufferings
due to one’s disbelief in the
efﬁcacy of yoga and lack of
practice
(7)
(7) trayo duḥkhavighāta
ādhidaivikaduḥkha
(17)
(26) duḥkhatrayavighāta ii
when, having strived
afer wealth and su-
pernatural
abilities,
one obtains them [and
anything that is striven
afer is obtained]
ii
being struck by a
thunderclap, mad-
ness, demonic pos-
session
one who is handsome
and
enjoys
women
forbidden to him and
gambles
away
his
money
(8)
(8) trayo duḥkhavighāta
ādhibhautikaduḥkha
(18)
(27) duḥkhatrayavighāta
when one suffers, and
one’s suffering then di-
minishes
iii
being hit by weap-
ons, poisoned, be-
witched, bitten by
a snake, eaten by a
crocodile
one who looses pas-
sion; one who suffers
without cure because
he is afraid of the men
of medicine
iii
(9)
(19)
(28) manas viparīta
when a man slaughters
animals to eat them
one who is not able to
obtain what he desires
and, because of that, is
not able to enjoy his
wealth
being insane


--- PAGE 466 ---
Man
447
Table 9: Te thirty vṛttis of the intellect according to the Vṛhaspatitattva (32–33)
5 viparyaya
9 tuṣṭi
8 siddhi
(1) tamas
(1) arjana
} vāhya {
(1) dāna
to strive afer all
kinds of pleasures
one who hoards and
protects wealth
one who is able to give
alms
(2) moha
(2) rakṣaṇa
(2) adhyayana
to strive afer the
aṣṭaiśvarya
having hoarded wealth,
one guards it
one who is able to
study the scriptures
(3) mahāmoha
(3) kṣaya
(3) śabda
to
strive
afer
pleasures in the
unmanifest world
and the aṣṭaiśvar-
ya
one who suffers, then
his suffering decreases
and he is again healthy
a sādhaka who is able
to
hear
inaudible
sounds
(4) tāmisra
(4) saṅga
(4) tarka
to dream about fu-
ture pleasures
one who meets his
beloved one
one who is able to
know visible and in-
visible things by rea-
soning
(5) andhatāmisra
(5) hiṅsā
(5) sauhṛda
to weep for things
that have already
vanished
one who kills [ani-
mals] in order to eat
them
†
(6) bhāgya
ādhy-
trayo duḥkhavighāta i
ādhyātmikaduḥkha
one who does not suf-
fer even though he do-
es not obtain pleasur-
es, doing good in or-
der to have a better
reincarnation
} ātmika { to
be
able
to
ex-
tinguish
the
three
pains,
becoming
a
lord
among
yogins
with
the
highest
supernatural powers
(6) arising from the
mind:
rāga, dveṣa,
moha, various bodily
diseases, vāta, pitta,
śleṣma.
(7) kāla
trayo duḥkhavighāta
ādhidaivikaduḥkha
one who, being impa-
tient to obtain what he
longs for, decides to
wait a bit until he will
eventually gets it
ii
(7) being struck by
a thunderclap, mad-
ness, possession, bad
planetary inﬂuences
(8) ātmā
trayoduḥkhavighāta
ādhibhautikaduḥkha
a mind that investi-
gates the Soul by only
adhering to the teach-
ings of a master, with-
out adding his own or
practicing absorption
iii
(8) being hit by weap-
ons,
poisoned,
bewitched, bitten by
a snake or stinging
animals,
tormented
by evil beings
(9) †


--- PAGE 467 ---
448
iii Doctrine
An intriguing fact is that in presenting the eight items forming the bhāvas
and the ﬁfy forming the pratyayas the text refers to their sum-total being
ﬁfy instead of ﬁfy-eight; perhaps, rather than a blatant inconsistency, it may
be the case that the author of the Dharma Pātañjala understood the ﬁfy as
arising from, or being included in, the eight, without feeling the need explic-
itly to mention that point.25 Further, in 242.2–3, the Lord states that from
the ﬁfy conditions arise such a great number of conditions that they cannot
be counted.26 Tese conditions account for the great number of different
rebirths of the incarnated beings, for their desires, and for the pleasures and
pains they experience. Te various outcomes are caused by the predomi-
nance of either sattva, rajas or tamas in the intellect. From an intellect dom-
inated by sattva arise the ﬁrst four bhāvas, i.e. the four sovereign powers,
whereas an intellect dominated by tamas produces their opposites.27
A closely related, albeit nowhere as systematic and detailed, account of
the doctrine of the bhāvas and pratyayas is found in the Vṛhaspatitattva.
While devoting ślokas 25 to 33 with commentary to the treatment of the
eight forms of buddhi (prakāra niṅbuddhi) that amount to the eight bhāvas,
the Vṛhaspatitattva describes only thirty vṛttis, failing to mention the twenty-
eight inabilities. As can be appreciated from tables 7–10, the descriptions of
many of the items in the two texts are clearly similar, but in all likelihood not
based on direct inﬂuence the one upon the other. Teir similarities might be
due to their drawing upon a common earlier tradition or rather to analogous
local exegetical practices.
25.
No explicit reference of the derivation of the pratyayas from the bhāvas is found in
the Sāṅkhyakārikā either. In order to explain that fact, Larson (1979:194) pointed out that
the eight bhāvas and the ﬁfy pratyayas represent two aspects of the same phenomenon, and
so it would be improper to described the two series in terms of an addition for in fact they
represent an encompassing reality.
26.
Compare Tattvajñāna 15.26–28, which maintains that ‘Te three types of ahaṅkāra
are placed in the buddhi; the three conditions (vṛtti) give rise to ﬁfy; ﬁfy conditions give
rise to one-hundred; one-hundred conditions give rise to a number that cannot be known.
Tat is what causes the Soul to transform again and again’ ikaṅahaṅkāra tiga prabhedanya
maparanti rikaṅbuddhi / ya tiga vṛtti mānak limaṅpuluh / limaṅpuluh vṛtti mānak sātus /
sātus vṛtti mānak sevu / sevu vṛtti mānak tan kinavruhan vilaṅnya / yeka nimitta niṅātmā
patәmahtәmahan // • vṛtti ] (4×) em. ; vṛddhi Ed. (all mss.).
27.
Tus, as in Sāṅkhyakārikā 23. But there were other traditions, such as that docu-
mented in Mṛgendra VP 10.24, which derive the item vairāgya of the sovereign powers from
rajas instead of sattva.


--- PAGE 468 ---
Man
449
Table 10: Te nine contentments (tuṣṭi) in DhPāt, Vṛh and Sāṅkhya sources
DhPāt
Vṛh
SK
YD, GauḍBh
pradhānaka
†
prakṛti
prakṛti
upādānaka
ātmā
upādānaka
upādānaka
(a)kāla
kāla
kāla
kāla
(a)bhāgya
bhāgya
bhāgya
bhāgya
-
arjana
-
arjana
-
rakṣaṇa
-
rakṣaṇa
-
kṣaya
-
kṣaya
-
saṅga
-
saṅga
-
hiṅsā
-
hiṃsā
Both the Dharma Pātañjala and the Vṛhaspatitattva do not precisely con-
form to any of the Sanskrit sources, but display random similarities. It is
interesting to note that the Dharma Pātañjala, like the Sāṅkhyakārikā, does
not specify the names of the second series of ﬁve contentments.
Like Sāṅkhya and Śaiva sources, the Dharma Pātañjala deﬁnes all predis-
positions except Knowledge (jñāna) as the ‘seven fetters’ (saptabandhana),
which keep the Soul entrapped in the cycle of existence.28 Only Knowl-
edge, which is homologized with right knowledge (samyajñāna/samyagjñā-
na), leads to the obtainment of liberation.29 So jñāna is not an ordinary kind
of knowledge of the external world but a salviﬁc gnosis.
Both the Dharma Pātañjala and Vṛhaspatitattva are closer to Sāṅkhya
than Śaiva sources in that they do not explain the item Righteousness (dhar-
28.
Compare, e.g., Sāṅkhyakārikā 63 (rūpaiḥsaptabhir eva tu badhnāty ātmānam ātmanā
prakṛtiḥ/ saiva ca puruṣārtham prati vimocayaty ekarūpeṇa); Niśvāsanaya 2.62–63ab (dhar-
maṃjñānaṃca vairāgyam aiśvaryaṃca caturthakam / adharmaś ca tathājñānam avairā-
gyam anaiśvaram // bandhate saptadhā sā tu jñānabhāvena mokṣate); Svacchandatantra
10.1095ab (dehapāśāḥsamākhyātāḥato buddhiguṇān viduḥ), 12.42 (adharmaś ca tathājñā-
nam avairāgyam anaiśvaram / badhnāti saptadhā sā tu jñānabhāvena mohayet), 11.141ab
(badhnāti saptadhā sā tu puṃsaḥsaṃsāravartmani). Te Vṛhaspatitattva (28.4) does not
mention this point but mentions the four sovereign powers in a positive light, i.e. as being
the cause of the Lord’s love for the Soul (nimitta niṅasih bhaṭāra riṅātmā).
29.
Tis identiﬁcation is found in Vṛhaspatitattva 26, which deﬁnes the three pramāṇas
(that in Dharma Pātañjala are also included in the description of the item jñāna) as right
knowledge. An analogous homologization of jñāna with samyagjñāna is found in the Tāt-
paryadīpikā on Tattvaprakāśa 52, commenting on the list of buddhibhāvas of Sāṅkhyakārikā
23; samyagjñāna is then further subdivided into pramāṇa (valid means of knowledge) and
smṛti (memory).


--- PAGE 469 ---
450
iii Doctrine
ma) by referring to the doublet of ﬁve rules of conducts known as yamas
and niyamas, but rather understand it generally as good behaviour including
meritorious acts, donation, rituals and observances.30 Tis is perhaps due
to the fact that the yamas and niyamas are detailed in the section on Yoga,
being listed among the eight ancillaries of Yoga in the Dharma Pātañjala and
mentioned before the six ancillaries in the Vṛhaspatitattva.
Ahaṅkara,
Manas and
the Lower
Constituents
Te principle of intellect produces self-awareness (a-
haṅkāra). Both Tuturs and Tattvas agree in attribut-
ing to it the function of relating things, like the sensory
objects and the body, to one’s own I (maṅaku).31 Fur-
ther, the ahaṅkāra is held to cause the functioning of
the body and the preservation of life, pervading the ten
winds that, in connecting the body with the Soul, keep it alive.32 Whereas the
former function is found in Sāṅkhyakārikā 24, which explains ahaṅkāra as
abhimāna ‘conception about the self’, the latter seems to be an idiosyncrasy
of Old Javanese Tattvas.33
30.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 242.10 and Vṛhaspatitattva 25. Among Sanskrit sources, the
Niśvāsanaya (2.64–65ab) gives a list of ten items that do not entirely correspond to the stan-
dard yamas and niyamas, whereas the Svacchandatantra (10.1091 and 11.144–145) men-
tions a ‘tenfold’ dharma, whose items coincide with the yamas and niyamas; thus also Agho-
raśiva’s Mṛgendravṛttidīpikā on VP 10.25.
31.
Cf. Bhuvanakośa 3.59 (glossing the Skt abhimāna); Tattvajñāna 11.7, 15.6, 40.20; Saṅ
HyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 37 lines 15–16 (according to which the ahaṅkāra ‘causes
the Soul and the mind-stuff to be connected’ magave ātmā manah samyoga).
32.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 234.5–234.15, 236.7–12; Vṛhaspatitattva 35.20–23:
‘Te
Power of Action of the Lord enters the ahaṅkāra, the ahaṅkāra enters the breaths, the
breaths connect the Soul with the body’ ikaṅkriyāśakti bhaṭāra / yekomāveśa rikaṅah-
aṅkāra / ikaṅahaṅkāromāveśa ikaṅvāyu / ikaṅvāyu ya ta sumambandhekiṅātmā lavan
śarīra; śloka 36d, deﬁning the vessels as ‘coming forth from what is called ahaṅkāra’
ahaṅkārākhyanirgatāḥ; Tattvajñāna 24.3–5: ‘Te Power of Action of the Lord enters the
ahaṅkāra, the ahaṅkāra enters the breaths, the breaths penetrate into the vessels’ kriyāśakti
bhaṭara / umāveśa ikaṅahaṅkāra / ikaṅahaṅkāra umāveśa ikaṅvāyu / ikaṅvāyu ya ta
sumusukiṅnāḍī; 11.2–5: ‘Te citta uses as sentience the ahaṅkāra; that is entered by the
Power of Action of the Lord Almighty. Tat, the Power of Action of the Lord Almighty,
is designated as the life of life, and causes the life of the ahaṅkāra as well as the life of
the intellect’ ika citta makacetana ikaṅahaṅkāra / ya ta inaveśa de niṅkriyāśakti bhaṭāra
mapramāṇa / ya ta sinaṅguh hurip ni hurip ṅaranya kriyāśakti bhaṭāra pramāṇa mvaṅ
pinakahurip niṅahaṅkāra pinakahurip niṅbuddhi /.
33.
Among the Tattvas themselves, the most idiosyncratic treatment of ahaṅkāra is found
in the Tattvajñāna. Te text differs from the other Old Javanese sources in that it attributes
to that principle a more important function, characterizing it as an aspect of buddhi. Ac-


--- PAGE 470 ---
Man
451
Te ahaṅkāra also holds the important function of giving rise to the
constitutive elements of the human body, namely the organs of action and
sense, the mind-stuff (manas) that governs them, and the ﬁve subtle ele-
ments—from which the gross elements making up material reality come
forth. Like Sanskrit Śaiva texts, Old Javanese Tattvas have inherited the Sāṅ-
khya characterization of ahaṅkāra as divided into three types, known as the
‘modiﬁed’ (vaikṛta), the one ‘consisting of passion’ (taijasa), and the one
tthat is the ‘origin of the gross elements’ (bhūtādi), each one of which is as-
sociated respectively with sattva, rajas and tamas.
Unlike several early Siddhāntatantras, which do not make explicit which
type of ahaṅkāra the different evolutes come from, the Dharma Pātañjala
treats the matter with some degree of analysis, thus being in harmony with
Śāstric Śaiva scriptures, such as the Mṛgendra (VP 12.3–5). But it differs
from Sanskrit sources in one important respect. Te latter consider taijasa
as sāttvika and vaikārika (= vaikṛta) as rājasa, and have the faculties of per-
ception evolve from the former aspect of ahaṅkāra while the faculties of ac-
tion evolve from the latter,34 whereas, according to the Dharma Pātañjala,
cording to chapter 10.21, the ahaṅkāra is the coarse part of citta (ahaṅkāra ṅaranya gaṇal
niṅcitta; cf. above, p. 438, where citta was deﬁned as the coarse part of the Spirit); the ahaṅ-
kāra—and not buddhi—is responsible for carrying out good and bad actions (palәkasakәn
kriyā halahayu, cf. 11.6 and 40.20–21), and it also has the capacity to perceive what ex-
ists and what does not exist (mamastuni riṅhana lavan tan hana, 11.5–6). Together with
buddhi, it is deﬁned as pramāṇa viśeṣa (11.8–10), standing still without moving, being con-
sciousness only (sthiti humiḍәṅtan polah / tuhun tuturmātra); in chapter 15, the threefold
ahaṅkāra—again called pramāṇa—is said to be placed within buddhi (maparanti rikaṅbud-
dhi) and held to be responsible for transferring to the buddhi its threefold quality: ‘What
is the reason why the ahaṅkāra is designated as pramāṇa? Because it is the only means to
relate [things] to the I and perceive. And further, it is the reason why the buddhi is as if
being divided into three’ mapa kari dumeh ikaṅahaṅkāra sinaṅgah pramāṇa / ri denyan
pinakasādhana riṅmaṅaku mamastvani juga sira / kunaṅnimitta niṅkadi sapatiga arakva
lvir nikaṅbuddhi (15.13–15).
34.
A discussion of this doctrine in Saiddhāntika sources may be found in Hulin
(1980:267 fn. 2), Bhatt’s introduction to the edition of the Mataṅga (1977, pp. xxxi) and
Goodall (2004:259–260 fn. 399). Note, however, that Goodall is incorrect in attributing
to the Sāṅkhyakārikā the view that taijasa constitutes the sāttvika aspect of ahaṅkāra, which
gives rise to the eleven faculties, and that both the faculties and the subtle elements origi-
nate from the rājasa aspect vaikṛta: the eleven faculties indeed do originate from vaikṛta,
but the latter is intended as sāttvika, for in 25a it is deﬁned as the origin of the faculties,
which themselves are sāttvika (sāttvika ekādaśakaḥpravartate vaikṛtād ahaṅkārāt). Simi-
larly, Goodall refers to Tryambakaśambhu’s position (in commenting upon Kiraṇa 4.23)


--- PAGE 471 ---
452
iii Doctrine
the faculties evolve from vaikṛta and the subtle elements from bhūtādi, both
impelled by taijasa—a treatment that exactly conforms to the teaching of
Sāṅkhyakārikā 25.35 Both the Vṛhaspatitattva (33.21–28) and the Tattva-
jñāna (11.10–14; 12.1–5) agree with the Dharma Pātañjala on this point,
suggesting that the Old Javanese accounts go back to a common tradition
that conforms to the Sāṅkhya rather than the Śaiva perspective.
Figure 5: Evolution of the faculties and elements from the ahaṅkāra
ahaṅkāra
...........................
..........
..............
Vaikṛta
+ Taijasa +
Bhūtādi
[sattva]
[rajas]
[tamas]
......
.....
............
.....
manas karmendriya buddhīndriya
tanmātra
mahābhūta
vāk
śrotra
śabda
ākāśa
pāṇi
tvac
sparśa
vāyu
pāda
cakṣus
rūpa
tejas
pāyu
jihvā
rasa
āpas
upastha
ghrāṇa
gandha
pṛthivī
with respect to Sāṅkhya as deviant, for the early Śaiva author regarded taijasa as rājasa and
vaikṛta as sāttvika; in actual facts, Tryambakaśambhu’s account conforms exactly to Sāṅ-
khyakārikā 25, also in deriving the eleven faculties from vaikṛta (sāttvika) when impelled
by taijasa (rājasa); the same holds true for Tattvaprakaśa 54 (following Kumāradeva’s read-
ing vaikārikataijasa° deﬁning sāttvikarājasa°, against Aghoraśiva’s taijasavaikārika°), Mṛ-
gendra VP 12.2–5 and Mataṅga VP 18.44–45b, which, however, deviate from the SKār (and
from each other) in tracing the faculties and manas from different aspects of ahaṅkāra.
35.
Sāṅkhyakārikā 25b actually claims that both derive from taijasa (taijasād ubhayam),
whereas the Dharma Pātañjala (220.7–8) puts the matter slightly differently, namely that
the taijasa self-identity ‘helps’ or ‘assist’ (tumuluṅ) the vaikṛta and the bhūtādi when they
perform their task. Compare Vṛhaspatitattva 33.26–27: ‘Te taijasa self-identity joins in
bringing forth the work of the vaikṛta and of the bhūtādi self-identity, for its own nature is to
be active’ ikaṅahaṅkāra si taijasa / yeka umilu mamәtvakәn kārya nikaṅahaṅkāra si vaikṛta
lavan si bhūtādi / apan makasvabhāva maṅulahakәn; Tattvajñāna 15.1–2: ‘Te characteris-
tic of the taijasa self-identity is like wind (or: ‘breath’); it helps the vaikṛta and the bhūtādi,
joining in creating the eleven faculties and the ﬁve subtle elements’ kunaṅlakṣaṇa nikaṅ
ahaṅkāra si taijasa / yeka kadi vāyuh lakṣaṇanya / tumuluṅsi vaikṛta lavan si bhūtādi / milu
magave ekādaśendriya / lavan pañcatanmātra /. Tis reﬂects the explanations given in Sāṅ-
khya commentaries, such as the one by Gauḍapāda and the Suvarṇasaptati (cf. Takakusu
1904:1011), according to which taijasa is the only active element among the three and thus
necessarily accompanies the other two, considered to be passive.


--- PAGE 472 ---
Man
453
Te lowest and coarsest of the intellectual faculties constituting the internal
organ (antaḥkaraṇa) is the mind-stuff (manas), which is usually accounted
for as the ‘eleventh’ of the faculties, i.e. the one that directs them to their ob-
jects and synthesizes the results, transmitting them to the Soul.36 Te manas,
a term that is difﬁcult to render in translation,37 represents the ‘organ’ aspect
of perceptive knowledge, whose principal function is to produce saṅkalpa
‘conceptions, notions, volitions’,38 or vikalpa ‘ideation, imagination’, which
represents an uncertain kind of knowledge.39
An interesting aspect of the theory of origination of the faculties from
the ahaṅkāra presented by the Dharma Pātañjala is that, besides deriving
the faculties of perception and action from the vaikṛta aspect, and the gross
elements (mahābhūta) from the subtle elements (tanmātra), the latter are
also held to be the origin of the organs of perception, which serve as the
seats of the faculties (pinakoṅgvan iṅindriya).
Table 11: Origination of the organs of sense and the gross elements
Organs
Tanmātra
Mahābhūta
Ear / taliṅa
←
Sound / śabda
→
Atmosphere / ākāśa
Skin / kulit
←
Touch / sparśa
→
Wind / vāyu
Eye / mata
←
Form / rūpa
→
Fire / tejas
Tongue / ilat
←
Taste / rasa
→
Water / āpas
Nose / iruṅ
←
Smell / gandha
→
Earth / pṛthivī
36.
Cf. Sāṅkhyakārikā 27.
37.
I translate manah/manas as ‘mind-stuff’ whenever the term retains its technical (i.e.
Sāṅkhya-derived) meaning, and as ‘mind’ whenever it is used in a more general, non-
technical manner (i.e. to indicate a certain attitude or the locus of somoebody’s thoughts).
38.
Cf. Sāṅkhyakārikā 27ab and Gauḍapāda thereon; Mṛgendra KP 1.12.7bc; Īśvara-
pratyabhijñāvimarśinī 3.1.11; Svacchandatantra 4.394b; Parākhyatantra 5.149 (as may be
inferred from the fact that it puts a Rudra named Saṅkalpa in the cosmic level of the princi-
ple of manas). Among the Old Javanese sources, cf. Bhuvanakośa 3.58 and Vṛhaspatitattva
33.99–100: ‘Te mind-stuff is the king of the faculties, processing the objects of the senses,
for it is the stem of the faculties. Processing means to form a deﬁnite picture of the objects
of the senses’ manah yeka ratu niṅindriya sumaṅkalpa ikaṅviṣaya / apan vit nikaṅindriya /
manaṅkalpa ṅaranya umastv ikaṅviṣaya /.
39.
Tis results explicitly from the example of vikalpa given in Dharma Pātañjala 218.4–
7, referring to a man who fantasizes about his lover. A Sanskrit source understanding manas
as the origin of both saṅkalpa and vikalpa is the Pauṣkara (cf. Vasudeva 2005:427, fn. 166–
167).


--- PAGE 473 ---
454
iii Doctrine
Tis view is shared by a number of Old Javanese sources, namely the Tattva-
jñāna,40 the Bhuvanakośa,41 the Navaruci,42 Kakavin Dharma Śūnya43 and
an unidentiﬁed fragment quoted in KBNW.44 To my knowledge, the only
Sanskrit parallel for this doctrine that has been documented so far is avail-
able in Paramārtha’s Chinese translation, the Suvarṇasaptati on Sāṅkhyakā-
rikā 3 and 26 (cf. Takakusu 1904:983, 1012). Whereas for the Sāṅkhyakāri-
kā the ﬁve subtle elements are only generative of the ﬁve gross elements, the
Suvarṇasaptati has each subtle element generate a respective gross element
and sense organ as well.
Now, some degree of ambiguity exists in the interpretation of the ex-
act nature of the buddhīndriyas mentioned in Sāṅkhyakārikā 26. Takakusu
(1904:1012) interprets the series of buddhīndriyas, in harmony with the Chi-
nese rendition, as denoting ‘organs’, viz. ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose, in-
stead of ‘faculties’, viz. hearing, grasping, seeing, tasting, smelling.45 Te
Sanskrit commentaries do not clearly problematize this point and probably
implicitly consider the indriyas as material and yet capable of reaching their
40.
Cf. Tattvajñāna 37.17–19: ‘Te outcomes of the ﬁve subtle elements are: the subtle
element of sound becomes the ear, the subtle element of touch becomes the skin, the subtle
element of form becomes the eye, the subtle element of taste becomes the tongue, the subtle
element of smell becomes the nose. Tese are designated as the ﬁve golakas ikaṅpañcatan-
mātra / tәmahanya / śabdatanmātra dadi taliṅa / sparśatanmātra maṅdadi kulit / rūpatan-
mātra maṅdadi mata / rasatanmātra maṅdadi liḍah / gandhatanmātra maṅdadi iruṅ/ yeka
sinaṅguḥpañcagolaka ṅaranya.
41.
Cf. Bhuvanakośa 3.36–41. Te Sanskrit verses are heavily corrupt, but from the exe-
gesis it emerges that the subtle elements are identiﬁed as the origin of the organs, and linked
to a particular deity. Cf. pāda 37a and commentary: ‘Mouth is the subtle element of sound
[…] Te mouth is the outcome of the subtle element of sound’ vacanaṃśabdatanmātra […]
ikaṅvacana / śabdatanmātra ikā / pinakatәmahanya /.
42.
Cf. Navaruci p. 42.4–7, which, apart from the order of the items, is virtually identical
to Tattvajñāna 37.17–19 (cf. fn. 40).
43.
Canto 9.1 (i.e. verse 58); cf. below, fn. 50.
44.
Cf. KBNW (iv.783) s.v. golaka: nihan kaṅpañcendriya haneṅśarīra, pañcatanmantra,
dadi hiruṅ, tutuk, karṇa, taṅan, suku, silit, bhāga, purus, nihan pratyekanya, ikaṅpañcatan-
mantra haneṅśarīra, golaka, mulih mariṅrūpatanmantra, iruṅ, mulih mariṅgandhatan-
mantra, taliṅan mulih riṅkarṇatanmantra, tutuk mulih mariṅrasatanmantra, kulit mulih
mariṅsparśatanmantra, pañcatanmantra, mulih mariṅsaṅhyaṅanantaviśeṣa, sira vastu niṅ
pañcendriya.
45.
Note that the order and exact names of the indriyas vary in the versions of the Sāṅ-
khyakārikā preserved in the different commentaries; a summary of the variations attested
in the early commentaries may be found in Solomon (1974:75).


--- PAGE 474 ---
Man
455
objects on a subtle level.46 On the other hand, the Yuktidīpikā is explicit in
distinguishing the faculties from the organs.47 Te intrinsic ambiguity of the
words and their appearance in Sāṅkhyakārikā 26 alongside the karmendriya,
viz. the series of ﬁve that may be understood prima facie to be the organs of
action voice (vāk), hand (pāṇi), foot (pāda), anus (pāyu) and genitals (up-
astha), has given rise to different traditions.
Te Dharma Pātañjala agrees with the Yuktidīpikā in that it clearly states
that each of these faculties reside in (hana iṅ) their respective seats, i.e. ears
(taliṅa), skin (kulit), eye (mata), tongue (ilat) and nose (hiruṅ). Te same
view is shared by the Tattvajñāna (40.12–17) and by the Vṛhaspatitattva,
which in 33.73–80 connects the faculties with their respective organs, spec-
ifying that they abide or are placed in (muṅgu iṅ) the organs. Te three
texts extend this view also to the karmendriya, which are equally under-
stood as faculties rather than organs: thus vākindriya ‘speech’ resides in
the mouth (tutuk), pāṇīndriya ‘grasping’ resides in the hands (taṅan), pā-
dendriya ‘walking’ resides in the feet (suku), pāyu ‘excreting’ resides in the
anus (lәt), ‘procreating’ (upasthendriya) resides in the female and male gen-
itals (bhaga puruṣa). On the other hand, the Navaruci (44.18–23) explains
the pañcendriya, corresponding to the series of cakṣvindriya, ghrāṇendriya,
karṇendriya, jihvendriya and tvakindriya, as being respectively eye, nose,
ears, tongue and skin; and the same view is shared by certain Tuturs of Bali-
nese provenance.48
Tat confusion was common is apparent from the fact that both Sanskrit
and Old Javanese Śaiva sources are keen to illustrate the interpretation they
adhere to and to refute the opposing view. Tattvas make the point that the
subtle faculties of sense-perception are different from the actual faculties,
i.e. organs. In Dharma Pātañjala 228.15–17, the right view is expounded by
46.
As may be gathered from Sāṅkhyakārikā 28, describing the operation (vṛtti) of the
ﬁve faculties of sense as the ‘bare awareness’ (ālocanamātra) of their objects, i.e. sound and
so forth, and the operations of the ﬁve faculties of action as speaking (vacana), grasping
(ādāna), walking (viharaṇa), excreting (utsarga) and making love (ānanda).
47.
Cf., e.g., Yuktidīpikā ad Sāṅkhyakārikā 1.26cd. Tis distinction is in fact attested also
outside of the Sāṅkhya system, for it already appears in the Abhidharmakośabhāṣya (1.44ab).
Another (late) Sāṅkhya commentary that problematizes the issue is Sāṅkhyasūtra 2.23: ‘Te
faculties are themselves beyond the senses; for the people who are confused they are the seats
[of the senses]’.
48.
Cf. Weck (1976:94–95), referring to Śevaka Darma (sic) i.103 and Buvana Mabah
i.81.


--- PAGE 475 ---
456
iii Doctrine
the Lord in reply to a question of Kumāra as to whether the organs of sense-
perception (golaka) are the same as the (subtle) faculties (indriya). Te term
golaka, which in Sanskrit means ‘ball; globe; circle; sphere’, is translated in
OJED (534, 1) as ‘the faculties of sense-perception in their tanmātra-form’.49
Te OJED translation is, however, incorrect, for from the contexts where
the word occurs it is apparent that it denotes the organ rather than the sub-
tle faculty: as Dharma Pātañjala 228.15–16 puts it, ‘the golakas are gross,
the indriyas are subtle’ aganal ikaṅgolaka, ikaṅindriya sūkṣma ika.50 Su-
darshana Devi (1957:203), commenting on the occurrences of golaka in
Vṛhaspatitattva 33.73, 89 and 92, suggested that golaka ‘organ’ may be a se-
mantic extension of netragolaka ‘the eye’s pupil’.51 Tis explanation is plau-
sible, as in Sanskrit Śaiva sources one ofen comes across the mention of the
eye’s pupil ([cakṣur]golaka) in passages illustrating the doctrine of percep-
tion, which presupposes a difference between the locus of the sense and the
sense itself, which is immaterial. As in Parākhyatantra:
Te faculty of sight (cakṣuḥ) is that which makes forms known; it resides in
the [eye]balls (golaka) of the knower.52
49.
Cf. OJED (1265), quoting KBNW (iv.783) and Navaruci 42.3–7; cf. also pañcagolaka.
50.
A less clear characterization of the golakas is found in Kakavin Dharma Śūnya Canto
9.1 (i.e. stanza 58, in Sragdharā metre), mentioning pañcagolakamārga (pañcagolāka in the
edition, m.c.): ‘Ten what is the preceding state of the gross objects of perception (i.e. the
tanmātras) is [also] the origin of the ‘orbs’ of the ﬁve subtle elements; that is why they grow
and turn into the means that are the ﬁve golakas: the means of hearing and seeing and tast-
ing and speaking. Desire is what causes the bondage of the Soul, the origin of evil’ ndan
ṅūnin pūrvakānyaṅviṣaya vәtu nikaṅpañcatanmātravimbha / hetunyan vṛddhivṛddhi ndan
ika matәmahan pañcagolākamārga / mārgā niṅmaṅrәṅә¯ len umulata ṅuniveh paṅrasa lyan
magoṣṭi / tṛṣṇa pvekaṅdadī maṅrakәtakәn irikāṅātma mūlanya pāpa // (note the compound
pañcatanmātravimbha, where vimbha/bimba seems to be synonym of golaka). Another pas-
sage mentioning the golakas, in a context of meditation rather than philosophy, is in Saṅ
HyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 38 lines 17–18: ‘the golakas of the body are smell, taste and
form; the golakas of the faculties are eye, ears, nose and tongue; the golakas of pramāṇa are
wind, speech, mind. Tis is the triad of the golakas’ śarīragolaka ṅa gandha / rasa / rūpa /
ikaṅindriyagolaka ṅa cakṣu / śrotra / ghrāṇa / jihvā / pramāṇagolaka ṅaranya bāyu / śabda /
hiḍәp / trayagolaka / ṅa //.
51.
Te only Sanskrit source she referred to to support her statement is a commentary on
the Vedāntakārikāvalī, where the compound netragolaka is attested. Her alternative sugges-
tion, namely ‘a round mass’ came to denote ‘the body’ and hence its parts (i.e. the organs)
is unlikely.
52.
Trans. Goodall (2004:261); Parākhyatantra 4.99ab: rūpānuvedakaṃcakṣur jñātur
golakasaṃśrayam /.


--- PAGE 476 ---
Man
457
Similarly several other Śaiva sources.53 Te point that the seats of the senses
are not themselves the perceivers of their objects is made in a more general
way in the Mṛgendra:
Te activities of speech, seizing, sexual pleasure, evacuation, locomotion are
different from their supports, i.e. mouth and so on, because [there are cases
when,] even if the supports exist, they do not possess those capabilities [of
perception].54
Te verse is clearly an attempt to offer a solution to the problem on the ba-
sis of the (ambiguous) Sāṅkhyakārikā 26 and 28, using the deﬁnition of the
functions of the senses found in the latter kārikā to justify the subtle nature
of the faculties mentioned in the former.55 Te second half-verse refers to
persons whose faculties of perceptions are impaired, and yet still dispose of
organs of perception, such as blind men, etc. Te argument that the objects
are not perceived even though the supports (organs) are present is found
in Sanskrit Śaiva sources.56 Te same argument is found in Tattvas as well.
In the Dharma Pātañjala, the Lord justiﬁes the difference between the go-
lakas and the indriyas by pointing out that to maintain the contrary would
be an absurdity, given the existence of the organs in a person who sleeps
even though his senses do not carry out their functions (228.17–2). A sim-
ilar point is made in the Vṛhaspatitattva, which, having deﬁned the golakas
as the ﬁve faculties of actions as what serves as the organ of the faculties
of sense (ya tika pañcabuddhīndriya ṅaranya / apan yeka pinakagolaka niṅ
indriyeka), has Vṛhaspati ask:
53.
Cf., e.g., Jayaratha ad Tantrāloka 3.40 (cakṣurgolakādivat); Pauṣkarāgama (Puṃs-
tattvapaṭala 173–191, quoted in Śaivaparibhāṣā 79), arguing that the eye-ball itself (golaka)
is not the sense of sight (cakṣuḥ) but only its support, for it does not pervade the object of
perception; Śivadṛṣṭi 5.23–24, mentioning the contact of the pupil of the eye with the object
of perception. Te example is ofen employed to prove the existence of distinct faculties,
as opposed to the idea that one unique faculty is responsible for the perception of different
sensory objects (e.g. in Śaivaparibhāṣā 75).
54.
Mṛgendra VP 12.8: vacanādānasaṃhlādavisargavihṛtikriyāḥ/ vāgādīnāṃpadānya-
tvaṃpade saty apy atadguṇāḥ//.
55.
Tat the issue appeared problematic is also suggested by the fact that an early, and
non-philosophical, Śaiva source like the Niśvāsanaya (2.53–56) already makes a distinction
among the indriyas, intended as faculties, and their respective organs.
56.
Cf., e.g., Śivajñānabodhasaṅgrahabhāṣya (ii.4.18, cf. Jayammal 1993).


--- PAGE 477 ---
458
iii Doctrine
Why have the faculties been taught by the Lord as being twofold, the con-
tained and the container?57 As to the existence of the organs (golaka), they
are the cause for the Soul to grasp the objects of senses.
Te Lord replied: O Vṛhaspati, it is proper that you ask. How could the
organs of the Soul be proved? Here it is: the ears are not able to hear sounds
if there is not the faculty of hearing. Te proof of this is a deaf person. He has
ears with their openings, yet they do not hear any sound, if there is no faculty
of hearing. Similarly are the eyes, the locus of sight. If they are covered by
white cataract,58 or—all the more so—because they are devoid of their ﬁlling
(the pupils?), how could it be otherwise that they do not see? In the same
way are lame persons, impotent persons and so on. If they do not have their
faculties, they are not able to reach the objects of the senses. All of this is
seen by you, o Vṛhaspati, that is the reason why the faculties are different
from the organs.59
It thus appears that the word golaka in Old Javanese sources has come to
indicate, by way of semantic shif (or rather misunderstanding?), the organs
of sense in general instead of the organ that is the eye, whose faculty of sight
is located in the eyeball.
Physiology
Afer the discussion of the faculties, the Dharma Pātañ-
jala presents its account of subtle and gross physiology,
thus following the usual order of the topics treated in
Siddhāntatantras. Te account opens with the statement that the Soul is
caused to take a body by the Lord in order that it may know about its true
nature. Tis reﬂects the typically Śaiva conception of the body as having both
57.
I accept the translation of Sudarshana Devi (1957:90), which has the merit of mak-
ing sense of the combination of the active umuṅguh (OJED 2125: ‘to be positioned, to
dwell’) with the passive inuṅgvan (‘to be in, be situated in, occupy’).
58.
Te reduplicated form putihputih, translated thus by Sudarshana Devi, is not at-
tested with this meaning in OJED (1465), which s.v. putih gives only ‘white’ (cf. puputih ‘the
white of the eye’).
59.
Vṛhaspatitattva 33.88–99: mapa teki rva de bhaṭāra majarakәn indriya / umuṅguh
lavan inuṅgvan / apan ri hana nikaṅgolaka ya ta nimitta niṅātmān paṅgṛhītaṅviṣaya //
sumahur bhaṭāra / liṅnira / yogya ika denta matakvan kamuṅvṛhaspati / kadi pramāṇāte-
kaṅgolaka niṅātmā / yaṅtaliṅa tan vәnaṅmaṅrәṅә¯ śabda yan tan hanaṅśrotrendriya /
vyaktinyan atuli / hana taliṅanya lavan lyaṅnya / kathamapi tar paṅrәṅә¯ śabda / yan tan
hanaṅśrotrendriya / maṅkanaṅmata kasahanaṅcakṣuh / yan kasaputan putihputih / ṅuni-
veh ri tan pesyanya / mapeka tar panon / maṅkanaṅlumpuh kәḍi prakāranya tan vәnaṅika
ri viṣayanya / yan tan hanaṅindriyanya / katon pveka kabeh denta kamuṅvṛhaspati / ya ta
mataṅnyan lyan taṅindriya lavan golaka /.


--- PAGE 478 ---
Man
459
a binding and salviﬁc role. Te text then outlines the generation of the hu-
man being. Without going into many details of embryology,60 the Dharma
Pātañjala presents in a synthetic manner the common doctrine of procre-
ation through the union of the male semen and female blood, which, ac-
cording to their combinations, give rise to a male, female or asexual human
being. Te sperm becomes bones, muscles and marrow, while the female
(menstrual) blood constitutes the blood, ﬂesh and body hair; these six parts
making up the gross part of the human body are collectively called the six
sheats (ṣaṭkośa).61
Next comes the description of the ‘vessels’ or ‘tubes’ (nāḍī) spreading
through the human body, largely agreeing with similar accounts given in
Śaiva sources. Te tree principal vessels, namely iḍā, piṅgalā and suṣum-
nā, are regarded as residing in the throat, located respectively to the right,
lef and centre, and serving as the way to convey, respectively, food (lit.
‘cooked rice’, sәkul), water and air.62 Tis view, mixing up gross and sub-
tle physiology,63 represents an innovation of Old Javanese texts, for it does
not entirely conform to the accounts of Sanskrit Śaiva sources. Whereas the
three correspond to the standard list, the vessels are usually located in the
region of the heart and their positions differ from those which the Old Ja-
vanese sources agree upon: iḍā in the Sanskrit sources normally is located
on the lef, piṅgalā on the right and suṣumnā in the centre.64 Te remain-
60.
For a discussion of ideas on procreation in Balinese texts, cf. Weck (1976:99–125).
61.
Tis enumeration is commonplace in both tantric and non-tantric sources:
cf. Goodall (2007:154), commenting upon Śatikakālajñāna 76, who points at the following
passages, with slight variants as to the order and names of the sheats: Guhyasūtra 7.161c–
163b (folio 65v), Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 4.22–3, Svacchandatantra 4.159 and 7.5, Suprab-
heda YP 1.21–22c.
62.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 230.11–13; Tattvajñāna 38.21–23; SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan
(Śaiva) p. 43 line 1, p. 70 line 12–p. 71 line 1; KBNW ii.702; Vṛhaspatitattva 37–38.1–4
(which, however, does not mention their functions, closely following Sanskrit sources:
cf. below, fn. 65).
63.
Sanskrit sources ofen describe the tubes as ‘subtle’ channels involved in yogic pro-
cesses; thus also Tattvajñāna 24.5: ‘the tubes are subtle within the body’ ikaṅnāḍī ya ta
sūkṣma riṅśarīra.
64.
Cf. Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 11.6-7 (where 8ab = Uttarasūtra 5.17cd), Sarvajñā-
nottara 4.31-32, Suprabheda YP 1.145, Svacchandatantra 2.250 and 7.149, Vīṇāśikhatantra
146. Variations in the positioning of the tubes exist also among Śaiva sources: cf., e.g.,
Dīkṣottara 15 (T150, p. 149 vv. 994–999), where the order is suṣumnā (right), piṅgalā (cen-
tre), iḍā (lef); the Niśvāsanaya (5.37–38b) mentions only suṣumnā (lef) and iḍā (right),
associated respectively with exhalation and inhalation (cf. Goodall 2007:160).


--- PAGE 479 ---
460
iii Doctrine
ing unnamed vessels are said to be innumerable, stemming from the navel
and going both upwards and downwards to the rest of the limbs.65 Goris
(1926:59) already noted this idiosyncrasy and connected it with an old doc-
trine, attested already in the Chāndogyopaniṣad (6.6), that the body consists
of breath (prāṇa), water (āpas), speech (śabda) and cooked rice (anna, lit.
‘food’); those elements, except speech, in the Tuturs have become connected
with the three principal vessels.66
Te tubes constitute the means through which the winds or breaths (bāyu)
circulate within the body. Te winds are ten (daśabāyu), divided into two
series of ﬁve main breaths (prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, byāna)67 and ﬁve
subsidiary breaths (nāga, kūrmara, kṛkara, devadatta, dhanañjaya).68 Te
breaths are thought to number ten because of their different functions, thus
implying that, strictly speaking, the breath is only one, i.e. prāṇa.69 Te ac-
65.
According to the Tattvajñāna (38.12–13), the total number of the tubes is 1072 (sevu
pituṅpuluḥro); the same chapter (lines 13–26) describes the three main tubes as being
included within a set of ten, those other items being gandhārī, hastijihvā, pūṣā, yaśā, alam-
buṣā, kūhu, saṅkhinī, and describes their respective functions. Te same list, but without
explanation of the seven minor tubes, is found in Vṛhaspatitattva, ślokas 37–38ab (≈Sār-
dhatriśatikālottarāgama 10.3cd–4 and Agnipurāṇa 214.3cd–4.); compare Svacchandatantra
7.13–16 and Suprabheda 1.146–147.
66.
Cf. also Goris (1926:149) summarizing the contents of ms. LOr 4673 (Weda-
bundels), which refers to the ‘three ways’ marga tiga of tanavāha (i.e. annavāha = iḍā, right),
rasavāha (= piṅgalā, lef), prāṇavāha (= suṣumnā, centre).
67.
Tese are the only breaths known to the Sāṅkhya tradition.
68.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 230.19–20 and 232.15–16, Vṛhaspatitattva 39–40, Tattva-
jñāna 39, Navaruci 44.7–17, Jñānasiddhānta ch. 12, Mahājñāna 3, Tutur Saptati ff. 15v–
16v; cf. also Weck (1976:92–93). On the different names of the second breath (i.e. kū-
rma/kūrmāra) attested in both Sanskrit and Old Javanese sources, cf. p. 78.
69.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 46.5–7: ‘All the breaths are indeed one; since their respective
functions are many, many are their kinds. Tis is why the individual names of the breaths
are numerous’ ikaṅvāyu kabeh tuṅgal pva ya / ṅhiṅtapvan makveh gavenya sovaṅsovaṅ/
akveh bhedanya / ya ta mataṅyan akveh ṅaranya i patuṅgaltuṅgalan ikaṅvāyu /; a similar
point seems to be adumbrated in Dharma Pātañjala 230.18–2, which considers the main
breaths to be ﬁve because of their ﬁve different activities (ri dadinyan lima gavenya, mataṅ-
nyan lima kveh niṅbāyu), for it is the prāṇa that allow all of them perform their activities
(ikaṅbāyu si prāṇa, ya ta mataṅnyan umadәgi ikaṅpañcabāyu kabeh prayatna rumәgәp
gavenya). A perspective similar to that of the Vṛhaspatitattva is implied in the Śatikakāla-
jñāna (74ab): ‘Further, there is the prāṇa, appearing as tenfold’ ataḥparaṃbhavet prāṇo
daśadhā saṃvyavasthitaḥ; in śloka 81b, the same breath is characterized as the lord of the
nines (navānām api sa prabhuḥ). Contrast Tattvajñāna 39.14–15: ‘But the number of the
breaths is eleven; only their functions are ten—that is why they are called the ten breaths’


--- PAGE 480 ---
Man
461
count of the Dharma Pātañjala describing the activities of the ten breaths
presents signiﬁcant similarities with that of the Tattvajñāna (39) and of the
Vṛhaspatitattva (37–46), whose ślokas are parallel to Sārdhatriśatikālottarā-
gama 10.3cd–13ef, Śatikakālajñāna 81–89 and Agnipurāṇa 214.3cd–14ab.70
Te breaths not only preside over the various bodily activities but they
are also what, through the Soul’s conscious awareness of them, keeps the
body alive, even when it is unconscious (e.g. during sleep); any damage to
the breaths, which cuts the connection between them and the Soul, means
certain death. Te breaths are thought to leave the body when death comes,
except the last of the series, dhanañjaya, which remains in the corpse and
causes its reﬂexive contractions.71
kintu savlas kveh nikaṅvāyu / gavenya juga sapuluh / yeka nimittanya sinaṅguh daśavāyu //
(as the eleventh breath is mentioned nowhere in the text and we rather expect the breaths
to be one, this view might be due either to a misunderstanding or to a conception implying
that all the ten together constitute one single ‘super-breath’, which is not included within the
ten).
70.
A more synthetic account, probably derived from that of the Tattvajñāna, is found
in Navaruci 44.8–17. For an overview of descriptions of the breaths in Balinese Tuturs,
cf. Weck (1976:92–94).
71.
In fact, the dhanañjaya wind is described as pervading all the limbs of the body. Te
view that the dhanañjaya remains within the dead body is found in both the Dharma Pā-
tañjala (234.3–4) and the Vṛhaspatitattva (46.4, ri kāla niṅpati tan molah ri vaṅkay ikaṅ
vāyu si dhanañjaya) and is in harmony with most Śaiva scriptures: cf., e.g., Śatikakālajñāna
89b (mṛtasyāpi na muñcati), Suprabheda YP 1.139cd (dhanañjayasthito deha-m amṛtasyāpi
muñcati), Gorakṣaśataka (2) 36ab (na jahāti mṛtaṃcāpi sarvavyāpi dhanañjayaḥ). On the
other hand, the Ur-Skandapurāṇa (182.34) and the Niśvāsa attribute that feature to kūr-
māra/kūrma; Niśvāsanaya 4.128bc–129 mentions the wind in the context of utkrānti, i.e.
yogic suicide by way of the expulsion of the breath, stating that whereas the ﬁve breaths
beginning with nāga are held to be responsible of the movements of the body, kūrma
is the only one to stay within the corpse (nāgādīnāṃtu pañcānāṃmṛtyukālaviceṣṭitam /
† … †otkrāntyā kūrmaś caikas tu tiṣṭhati). Svacchandatantra 7.313cd–14, apparently based
on the former passage of the Niśvāsa, merges both views in that it describes both breaths
as remaining in the corpse: ‘[Te dhanañjaya wind], among the ﬁve winds beginning
with nāga, is what causes the movement [of the body] at the time of death. Te dhanañ-
jaya, when [the other] have lef the body during utkrānti, does not go away. Te kūrma
causes the corpse to contract and dry up’ nāgādīnāṃtu pañcānāṃmṛtyukāle viceṣṭitam //
na caiva yāti cotkrāntau tanuṃtyaktvā dhanañjayaḥ/ ākuñcayati vai kūrmaḥśoṣayec ca
kalevaram // (most of these observations on dhanañjaya in Sanskrit sources were made by
Alexis Sanderson during a reading session of the 2nd International Workshop on Early
Tantra, Pondicherry, July 2009).


--- PAGE 481 ---
462
iii Doctrine
Subtle body
Sanskrit Brahmanical sources generally attribute to the
human being a subtle body (sūkṣmaśarīra, sūkṣmadeha),
which constitutes the invisible aggregate of ﬁne elements that transmigrates
with the Soul from body to body in the cycle of rebirths.72 Schools differ,
however, with respect to what exactly the subtle body consists in. Early Śaiva
sources are either silent about the exact elements of the subtle body or sub-
scribe to the Sāṅkhya view that the subtle body is made up of a series of eight
elements comprising the pentad of the tanmātras and the threefold internal
organ (i.e. buddhi, ahaṅkāra and manas).73 In later sources the constitutive
elements of the subtle body start to multiply, including a higher number of
cosmic principles.74
Speculations about the subtle body are conspicuously absent from the
Dharma Pātañjala, which in 294.18 only mentions en passant a subtle body
when describing the types of souls called disembodied (videha) and dissolved
into unevolved matter (prakṛtilīna); the former cease to have as body some-
thing coarse, having only the subtle body, whereas the latter do not have even
a subtle body, being dissolved in the principle of unevolved matter. A more
detailed treatment of the subtle body is found in the Vṛhaspatitattva. Te
text (52.59–60) deﬁnes the term as follows: ‘Since the ﬁve subtle elements
serving as the body of the Soul are ﬁne, that is called subtle body’ apan alit
ikaṅpañcatanmātra pinakaśarīra niṅātmā / mataṅyan sūkṣmaśarīra ṅara-
nya. A complete deﬁnition is given a few lines before:
At the time of what is called death, it is actually the separation of the Soul
within the body from the ﬁve gross elements. Only what is coarse disap-
pears; the Soul lasts, unmoving, for the whole universe is pervaded by the
Soul. Tat is why the Soul travels [as it were]: the ﬁve subtle elements form
72.
Except the Nyāya, for which it is the Soul itself that transmigrates.
73.
Cf. Sāṅkhyakārikā 40, deﬁning the transmigrating entity called liṅga as ‘beginning
with intellect and ending with the subtle [elements]’ (mahadādisūkṣmaparyantam). Te
Śaiva locus classicus, much quoted by commentators, is Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 17.4c–
5b: ‘Te pentad of [the subtle elements of] sound, touch, form, taste and smell, [plus] in-
tellect, mind-stuff and self-awareness is called puryaṣṭaka’ śabdaḥsparśaś ca rūpaṃca raso
gandhaś ca pañcakam // buddhir manas tv ahaṅkāraṃpuryaṣṭakam udāhṛtam.
74.
Cf., e.g., Tattvaprakāśa 12, adding to the threefold antaḥkaraṇa the ten faculties of
sense and action; and Parākhyatantra 4.44–45, including the three shrouds (kañcuka) as
well as time (kāla). Te apex is reached by Rāmakaṇṭha (and following commentators),
according to whom they are thirty, i.e. all the principles from Mahāmāyā to the Earth
(cf. Goodall 1998:322 fn. 473).


--- PAGE 482 ---
Man
463
its body, along with the ten faculties, the intellect, the self-awareness, the
mind stuff, sattva, rajas and tamas, and also attachment, hatred and delu-
sion together with the latent karmic impressions. All of them, they ﬁrmly
adhere to the Soul, as it uses the ﬁve subtle elements as its body. Tus is the
body of the Soul at the time of death.75
Tis deﬁnition of subtle body, which extends the Sāṅkhya view to include
also the ten faculties, the three constituents, the three kleśas (rāga, dveṣa,
moha) and the latent impressions, has no exact counterparts in the Sanskrit
sources known to me. On the other hand, the motif of the pervasiveness and
immobility of the Soul is a cliché in Śaiva scriptures.
A deﬁnition that is in line with the Sāṅkhya one is found in the Bhuva-
nakośa, which mentions the subtle body in the context of cosmic resorption
(laya) of the principles:
Mind-stuff is absorbed into the ﬁve subtle elements, the ﬁve subtle elements
are absorbed into the self-awareness, self-awareness is absorbed into the in-
tellect. Tus are the principles of the subtle body.76
Another deﬁnition is found in the Mahājñāna:
Mind-stuff, intellect, self-awareness along with the ﬁve breaths: the
eight vital breaths of all living beings are said to be the subtle body.
Tere is mind-stuff, intellect, self-awareness; there are what are also called
‘the ﬁve breaths’ (OJ pañcavāyu = Skt vāyubhiḥpañcabhiḥ). Teir kinds are:
prāṇa, apāna, samāna, udāna, byāna. Five are their distinctions. Te eight
breaths of all living beings—All of those are eight in total, they serve as the
breaths of all living beings. Are said to be the subtle body—they are desig-
nated also as ‘the subtle body’ (OJ sūkṣmaśarīra = Skt śarīraṃsūkṣmaṃ).77
75.
Vṛhaspatitattva 52.42–50: kāla nikaṅpati ṅaranya vih / tuhun mapasah lavan pañca-
mahābhūta juga tekaṅātmā ri śarīra / ikaṅaganal juga hilaṅ/ ikaṅātmā laṅgәṅtan molah /
apan hibәk ikaṅrāt kabeh de niṅātmā / ya ta mataṅyan paparan ikaṅātmā / ikaṅpañcatan-
mātra pinakāvaknya lavan ikaṅdaśendriya / buddhi manah ahaṅkāra sattva rajah tamah /
huvus rumuhun ikaṅrāga dveṣa moha lavan ikaṅkarmavāsanā ika kabeh / kapva rumakәt
iṅātmā / an pakaśarīra ikaṅpañcatanmātra / nahan śarīra niṅātmā ri kāla niṅpati /.
76.
Bhuvanakośa 4, Old Javanese exegesis on śloka 3: ikaṅmanah līna riṅpañcatanmā-
tra / pañcatanmātra līna riṅahaṅkāra / ahaṅkāra līna riṅbuddhi / nāhan taṅtattva sūkṣmā-
vaknya //.
77.
Mahājñāna 14:


--- PAGE 483 ---
464
iii Doctrine
Curiously, the Mahājñāna substitutes the ﬁve subtle elements for the ﬁve
winds, and deﬁnes those ﬁve plus the threefold antaḥkaraṇa as ‘the eight
breaths’. Te inclusion of the breaths in the subtle body recalls the ancient
Upaniṣadic view that the jīvātman, which is the transmigrating part of the
Soul, is made of prāṇa together with manas, ahaṅkāra and buddhi (cf. John-
ston 1937:58–59).
mano buddhir ahaṅkāro vāyubhiḥpañcabhiḥsaha /
prāṇāṣṭau sarvabhūtānāṃśarīraṃsūkṣmam ucyate //
hana ta manah / buddhi / ahaṅkāra / hana ta pañcavāyu ṅaranya vaneh / lvirnya / prāṇa /
apāna / samāna / udāna / vyāna / lima bhedanya // prāṇāṣṭau sarvabhūtānām // ika ta kabeh
vvalu piṇḍanya / pinakaprāṇa niṅbhūta kabeh / śarīraṃsūkṣmam ucyate // ya sinaṅguh
sūkṣmaśarīra ṅaranya vaneh //.


--- PAGE 484 ---
Karma
A
gross body inevitably meets death, and a subtle body inevitably ex-
periences transmigration in the cycle of existence (saṅsāra) or, in Old
Javanese, ‘becoming’ (maṅdadi). Te cycle of rebirths is caused by karma,
action or the retributive force thereof. In the earliest Śaiva scriptures, karma
is characterized as a negative factor, which is responsible—along with mac-
ulation—for the Soul’s bondage and falling into the misery and suffering of
the cycle of existence. Karma and maculation, especially in early Śaivism,
are but different aspects of the same problem.1 With the development of
the philosophical Śaivasiddhānta, karma came, paradoxically enough, to be
regarded as the only means by which the bound souls can achieve release.
It is in fact only through the complete experiencing of previous karma that
one’s karmic burden ripens and becomes capable of being annihilated dur-
ing initiation (dīkṣā). To have a body and karma, therefore, is not entirely a
negative fact but a necessary requirement along the path to liberation.2
Apart from minor technicalities, the Śaiva theory of karma is substan-
tially in line with the conception shared by most Brahmanical philosophi-
cal and religious traditions. Tis is also the case for the theories of karma
exposed in Old Javanese Tattvas, which, as do all Sanskrit Śaiva scriptures,
include a discussion of karma.3
1.
Whereas a clear standpoint is detectable nowhere in the text, the Dharma Pātañjala
seems to adhere to this view.
2.
To be precise, not just a body, but a human body; as the Dharma Pātañjala explains
in 272.9–14, to be reborn as an inferior kind of being, such as an animal, means to have no
opportunity for release since animals have no access to masters who can introduce them to
salviﬁc doctrines.
3.
Two Siddhāntatantras devoting above average attention to karma are the Kiraṇa (VP
3, 5, 6) and the Mṛgendra (VP 8).


--- PAGE 485 ---
466
iii Doctrine
Te Dharma Pātañjala expounds its doctrine of karma in a clear and
detailed fashion, presenting motifs that are paralleled in other Tattvas and
adding others that are not attested there. Te Lord’s explanation of the mech-
anism of karma is prompted by Kumāra’s question regarding the cause of
the death of the human body. Death, as previously explained by the Lord,
amounts to the Soul’s ceasing to be aware of the vital breaths. But why does
that happen?
Te cause of the Soul’s ceasing to be aware of the breaths is as follows: there is
DhPāt
234.14–20
right-and-wrong. Right means doing good, wrong means doing bad. Right-
and-wrong, that is what is done by the human beings. Tat is what bears
fruit. If their bad deeds are greater than the good deeds, that is the cause of
experiencing pain. If the good deeds are greater than the bad deeds, that is
the cause of experiencing pleasure. If their good and bad deeds are equal,
that is the cause for pleasure and pain to be met by the human beings.
Te moral aspect of the karmic retributive force called right-and-wrong (dha-
rmādharma) is a Śaiva cliché.4 Action is deemed to shape one’s incarnation,
causing it to be pleasant or painful or both, according to the prevalence of
good over bad action, or vice-versa, or their being in balance. Tis karmic
lot, which does not bear further fruits but merely establishes one’s birth, cor-
responds to the type of karma described in Sanskrit Śaiva sources as prārab-
dha, i.e. the past karma whose fruits become manifest during one’s current
4.
Cf., e.g., Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP 2.17ab: ‘Tus karma is of two kinds, to be ex-
perienced in the form of right-and-wrong by the bound soul’ karma tad dvividhaṃbhogyaṃ
dharmādharmātmakaṃpaśoḥ(Filliozat 1994:55 oddly translates, against the edited text,
the ﬁrst quarter as ‘Tus karman is of many kinds’, i.e. as if it were karma tad vividhaṃ);
2.18 (trans. Filliozat 1994:57): ‘Knowers call dharma that which bears all these lights and
the highest happiness in the soul, adharma the contrary’ dhatte lokānimān sarvān prītiṃ
ca puruṣe parām / dharmas tenocyate tajjñair adharmas tadviparyayāt; Parākhyatantra 1.79
(trans. Goodall 2004:159): ‘Tat cause is labelled ‘‘past action’’ and exists in the form
of meritorious and bad action. Trough past action the [soul achieves] connection with
a body; through past action the bound soul experiences the fruits [of his deeds]; and im-
bued by past action he wanders about here [in this material universe] deluded by nescience’
karmaṇā dehasaṃyogaḥkarmaṇā phalabhuk paśuḥ/ karmaṇā vāsitaś ceto bhramaty ajñā-
namohitaḥ; 4.41ab (trans. id. p. 241): ‘And [the retributive force of] past action that the
bound soul has to experience is of two kinds: dharma and adharma’ karmāpi dvividhaṃbh-
ogyaṃdharmādharmātmakaṃpaśoḥ; and several other instances in the Rauravasūtrasaṅ-
graha (Upodghāta 12ab, 1.7–8, 10.83ab), Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (VP 7.63ab, 8.98ab),
etc. Te same concept is attested also in the Pañcārthabhāṣya (e.g. ad Pāśupatasūtra 2.21,
5.36), and in the Sāṅkhyakārikā (44).


--- PAGE 486 ---
Karma
467
life. According to the Dharma Pātañjala, it is because of the complete ex-
haustion of the fruits of this type of karma that death occurs, just as a ﬁre
dies as soon as the fuel runs out. Te Lord’s exposition continues and he
individuates two more types of karma:
It is while one experiences the fruits of karma that one accumulates at the
DhPāt
234.20–236.12
same time karmic fruits again, for always doing good and bad takes the form
of the fruits of karma. Tere is the karma whose realization is effected in
the present: its fruits are experienced in the present. Tere are the fruits of
karma whose realization is effected in the present, [but] it is in the future, in
another birth, that its fruits are experienced. What is the evidence of this?
As follows: like in the case of cultivating a rice-ﬁeld, [being a] troop, being
engaged in trade. Paddy is the fruit of cultivating a rice ﬁeld; an apanage is
the fruit of the troop; a gain is the fruit of the trade. Tus is the evidence
of the fruits of karma in the present. What are the fruits of karma whose
fruits are in the future? Tere is karma which is effected in the present, but
it is not able to produce fruits in the present. For what reason is this so?
It is not able to produce fruits in the present, for a great number [of fruits]
has to be taken into account by it. Tat is the cause of another birth. Tose
that are experienced now, they are the fruits of the past karma, [produced]
in another human birth. Te fruits which are experienced now, those are
experienced now in a complete manner; whether bad or good, all their fruits
are equally used up. Tis is why the Soul ceases to be aware of the breaths in
the body. For example: like the ﬁre burning wood. If the wood is consumed,
the concurrent occasion of the ﬁre is dead. Te Soul is likewise. Te fruits
of right-and-wrong shape body and life. Te fruits of karma being ﬁnished,
that is the cause of the death, for there is nothing that is experienced by the
Soul.
At the same time the Soul experiences the fruits of past karma it also pro-
duces new, ‘short-lived’ karma, whose fruits ripen so fast that an incarnated
being is able to experience them during his lifetime. In order to illustrate
this, the example is adduced of categories of workers performing speciﬁc
actions in view of obtaining speciﬁc fruits in the short term. In order that
the eternal cycle not be broken, a third type of karma had to be posited in
addition to the karma experienced in the past or during one’s lifetime, i.e.
the karma whose fruits are so numerous that they cannot possibly be ex-
perienced during one’s present lifetime, but are remitted to another. Tat
karmic lot transmigrates with the Soul to another womb, determining once
again its basic condition.


--- PAGE 487 ---
468
iii Doctrine
It is precisely karma that accounts for the variety of the incarnated beings
and the differences among their conditions, pleasant or unpleasant:
Tese fruits of karma, extreme is their subtleness; this is the reason why the
DhPāt
238.18–240.3
valid means of knowledge of inference is the means to deﬁnitively ascertain
their existence, for the evidence that they exist is as follows: pleasure and
pain are met by the incarnated beings, and their forms are not the same.
Tere are kings; there are householders; there are wealthy ones; there are
miserable ones; there are healthy ones; there are ones afﬂicted by pain. Te
animals are as follows: big and small; low, middle and superior. Te fruits
of karma are the cause of them all.
According to the preceding passage, even though the karma is subtle, hence
invisible, its existence may be established through the apprehension of its
effects by means of inference (anumāna).5 Furthermore, the very fact that
the conditions of living beings are manifold is by itself evidence of the ex-
istence of karma and its fruits.6 Te same standpoint is generally found in
Śaiva Sanskrit sources.7 An analogous exposition of karma and its effects is
given in the section describing the fruits of the four positive conditions of
the intellect (caturaiśvarya) and of their opposites:
What is the evidence of their fruits? Here it is, as follows are their fruits: It is
DhPāt
246.1–6
a human being, when he constantly practices Righteousness, that is the rea-
son of his being carried to heaven. All manner of pleasures are experienced
5.
Tis is done through the example of the course of the sun, a cliché that in Sanskrit
sources illustrates the inference of the sāmānyatodṛṣṭa type: cf. below, pp. 564–570. Else-
where (272.2), the Lord adduces as proof of the existence of the cycle of reincarnations—and
hence of karma—the fact that the number of the deaths is equal to the number of the births
(kveh niṅhilaṅkveh ni mәtu), which amounts to say that any sentient being cannot arise out
of nothing but is the result of the incarnation of an individual soul existing ab æterno (and
hence part of a cycle). A further proof is the existence of men endowed with the ability of
remembering previous lives (jātismara).
6.
For otherwise everything would originate without a cause, just randomly, as the op-
ponent will adduce further down in the text: cf. below, pp. 592–593.
7.
Cf., e.g., Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha 2.12ab (trans. Filliozat 1994:47): ‘From kar-
man derive the transformation into this universe and the transformation of the three guṇas,
the nature of which is peaceful, dreadful or deluded, and which is very unequal’ karmataḥ
pariṇāmo ’sya jagatas triguṇātmakaḥ/ śāntaghoravimūḍhātmā nitāntaviṣamas tataḥ; 2.14
(trans. id. p. 49): ‘And from karman derive bodies of different species for the souls. From
karma [sic] derives all this, which is its fruit made of pleasure and pain’ karmataś ca śarīrāṇi
vividhāni śarīriṇām / karmataḥsarvam evedaṃsukhaduḥkhātmakaṃphalam.


--- PAGE 488 ---
Karma
469
by him. Te fruits of doing good disappear and he is reborn as a god. A long
time afer becoming a god, he is reborn as a human being. He becomes a
king, or he becomes a rich man who has accomplished meritorious acts, for
the lefovers of the pleasures in heaven go along with the human being.
Having described the outcome in the aferlife of a human being with an
intellect characterized by Righteousness (dharma), the Dharma Pātañjala
(246.14–15) characterizes the fruits of Sovereignty as leading to rebirth as a
sovereign of heaven, whereas its opposite (Non-Sovereignty) leads to rebirth
in hell and, once the fruits of bad karma are expired, rebirth on earth as an
ant (248.12–250.2).8 Te possibility of incarnation as either a god, human or
animal is reiterated elsewhere in the text, in a passage that stresses the idea
of karma as a vicious circle:
Te karma, it is impossible that its fruits are not experienced. Numerous are
DhPāt
274.1–8
the karmas, that is why the kinds of incarnated beings are numerous, for the
fruits of karma shape the body. If the karma is bad, the body is bad. If the
karma will be good, the body will be good. Te karma being produced by
an individual being is good or bad; that is the reason why the incarnations
succeed one another through it. Becoming a god is the fruit of one’s good
actions. As soon as the fruits of one’s doing bad arrive, one becomes an
animal. Once the fruits of the animal are ﬁnished, the fruits of a human
being arrive. Again, the fruits of the past karma, they are experienced by
him as he produces karma again. Tus is the nature of all the incarnations.
A closely related description of the outcomes of karma is found in the Vṛ-
haspatitattva. Te text presents the ﬁrst account of its doctrine of karma
right afer its incipit, in the shape of an important doctrinal excursus in-
serted between Vṛhaspati’s enquiry as to what is the best among the Śaiva
teachings (paragraph 2) and the Lord’s justiﬁcation of the multifarious na-
ture of the supreme truth called viśeṣa (paragraph 4). Having praised Vṛhas-
pati for the ﬁttingness of his question, the Lord explains that he has made
many teachings and scriptures on account of the variety of births (yoni, lit-
erally ‘wombs’), i.e. the innumerable modes of becoming. Having discussed
the latent impressions connected with karma (cf. below, p. 470), the Lord
continues:
8.
Te idea that the individual soul, having spent a long period in hell, reincarnates as
an ant is found also in the Agastyaparva (27.10–17) and the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan
(p. 36, lines 23–30). For reincarnation as animals in general, cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 34.15–18,
Tattvajñāna 19.21–26.


--- PAGE 489 ---
470
iii Doctrine
Whatever his mind obtained during his former birth, that is what he desires.
His desire brings the karma into existence. Tat is effected by him in the
future. If the karma that is effected is bad, that is the cause of his falling
into hell. All kinds of sufferings are experienced by him. When the fruits of
his doing bad are ﬁnished, he is caused to become an animal. If the karma
that is effected is good, that is the cause of his incarnation in heaven. All
kinds of pleasures are experienced by him. When the fruits of his doing
good are ﬁnished, he is caused to be born as a king, a high court ofﬁcial or
a rich man; he combines knowledge and morality, and he sees the real state
of everything.9
Te Vṛhaspatitattva recognizes in desire (rāga) the principle triggering the
mechanism of karma.10 Tis view is intimately connected with another im-
portant aspect of the doctrine of karma, i.e. that of the latent impressions
(vāsanā), discussed in the passage immediately preceding the one quoted
above:
What is the reason why [the varieties of rebirths] are numerous? It is because
the latent impressions are numerous. Te latent impressions are the actions
that are done by human beings in this world. Tey experience their fruits
in the other world [or] in their next incarnation. Whether good or bad, no
matter what kinds of actions have been done by them, they eventually stop
bearing fruits. Like a pot containing perfumed resin (i.e. asafoetida): its per-
fumed resin being already used up, the pot is washed to make it clean. Its
smell is lef behind, its smell adheres to the pot. Tose are the latent impres-
sions. In the same way are the ‘karmic latent impressions’ (karmavāsanā)
that are in the Soul. Te karmic latent impressions directly adhere [to the
Soul]. Tey taint the Soul. Te Soul is tainted: that is called desire (rāga). It
9.
Vṛhaspatitattva 3.18–25: asiṅkāptinya manah niṅyoninya ṅūni ya kahyunya / hyunya
ya ta dumadyakәn ikaṅkarma / ya ta ginavenya hәlәmhәlәm / yan ahala ikaṅkarma gi-
navenya / ya dumehnya tibeṅnaraka / salvir niṅsaṅsāra bhinuktinya / hәnti pva ya phala
niṅgavenya hala / vineh pva ya maṅdadya tiryak / yapvan ahayu ikaṅkarma ginavenya / ya
dumehnya dumadya riṅsvarga / salvir niṅbhoga bhinuktinya / hәnti pva phala niṅgavenya
hayu / vineh pva ya dumadya ratu pamәgәt sugih / kasambi tekaṅjñāna hayu denya / katon
taṅvastu kabeh denya /.
10.
Further speculations on this point are found in 52.50–57, where the text speciﬁes that
even when the grip of the mind on the Soul is ﬁnished, men are so attached to the pleasures
of the senses that they end up incarnating again due to the latent impressions. Discussions
on the exact connection between desire, karma and maculation (mala) are found in certain
Siddhāntatantras: cf., e.g., Kiraṇatantra VP 3.1–4 and Parākhyatantra 4.41 (more on rāga
in Śaiva scriptures may be found in Goodall 2004:241, fn. 341).


--- PAGE 490 ---
Karma
471
is the latent impressions that produce the desire. Tat is the reason why [the
Soul] craves for action, being joyful toward all kinds of karmic latent im-
pressions. Te very moment the latent impressions taint the Soul, that will
cause the karmic latent impressions and the karma to come into being. Tey
cause the human beings to differ from one another. Tere are divine births,
there are births as Gandharvas, there are births as Rākṣasas, there are births
as Daityas, there are births as Nāgas. Te types of births that are the source
of incarnation are many. Tat is why their appearances are different.11
Te illustration of the persistence of the latent impressions in the mind as the
smell in a pot that has been used to contain the perfumed resin asafoetida
(hiṅgu), echoes Sāṅkhyakārikā 40, deﬁning the liṅga or subtle transmigrat-
ing body as ‘perfumed’ (adhivāsita) by the conditions of the intellect.12 A
similar account explaining the latent impressions, also featuring the exam-
ple of the pot, is found in the Dharma Pātañjala:
Te karma which has already been experienced produces as lef-overs im-
DhPāt
274.8–18
pressions in the mind, one by one. Tat is the reason why as if being writ-
ten the karma adheres ﬁrmly to it, like tightly [attached] to the body. Tat
causes the remembering in the mind. What has already been experienced
in the past, either as a god, a human being or an animal, the fruits of karma
which go along with it, those are experienced by him. Tose all together
leave behind impressions in the mind. For example like an earthen pot, as it
was used to contain perfumes or asafoetida. Te content of the pot is already
ﬁnished. It is thoroughly washed and puriﬁed, but its fragrance is still there,
not yet ﬁnished; it sticks to the pot. Likewise are the latent impressions as
11.
Vṛhaspatitattva 3.3–18: apa dumeh ya makveha / apan akveh ṅaran iṅvāsanā / vāsanā
ṅaranya ikaṅkarma ginave niṅjanma ihatra / ya ta bhinukti phalanya riṅparatra / ri janma-
nya muvah / yan ahala / yan ahayu / asiṅatah sakalviran iṅkarma ginavenya / hәnti mara
phalanya / kady aṅgān iṅdyun vavaḍah niṅhiṅgu / huvus hilaṅhiṅgunya / ikaṅdyun ina-
sahan pinahalilaṅ/ kavәkas ta ya ambә¯nya / gandhanya rumakәt irikaṅdyun /ndah ya tika
vāsanā ṅaranya / samaṅkana tekaṅkarmavāsanā ṅaranya / hana riṅātmā / rumakәt juga
ikaṅkarmavāsanā ṅaranya / ya tika umuparәṅga irikaṅātmā / koparәṅga tekaṅātmā / ya ta
rāga ṅaranya / ikaṅvāsanā pva dumadyakәn ikaṅrāga / ya ta mataṅyan mahyun iṅkarma /
harṣa salvira nikaṅkarmavāsanā / ikaṅvāsanā pva ya duvәg umuparәṅga irikaṅātmā / ya ta
dumadyakәn ikaṅkarmavāsanā lavan karma / ya ta dumadyakәn ikaṅjanma mapalenan /
hana devayoni / hana vidyādharayoni / hana rākṣasayoni / hana daityayoni / hana nāgayoni /
akveh prakāra niṅyoni saṅkanyan paṅjanma / ya ta mataṅyan kapva dudū veśanya /.
12.
As a matter of fact, the word vāsanā literally means ‘perfume’ (√vās = ‘to perfume,
make fragrant, scent’). In the Bhāṣya to Yogasūtra 2.11, the illustration of the effect of the
latent impressions on the mind is that of a stained white cloth.


--- PAGE 491 ---
472
iii Doctrine
they leave behind impressions in the mind. However great are the impres-
sions in the mind, they constitute the form of the human being, for whatever
is imagined by the mind-stuff, that is followed by its karma in shaping the
next human birth.
According to the passage, karma goes together with the latent karmic im-
pressions that stick to the mind and determine one’s next reincarnation.
How tightly the latent impressions cling to the mind and the subtle body is
illustrated through the statement that karma is ‘written’ on the human mind
or body, which is also attested in the Vṛhaspatitattva and is itself a com-
mon Indic idea.13 Unlike the Vṛhaspatitattva, the root-problem of reincar-
nation is not identiﬁed with desire but rather with the activity of imagination
(kalpanā) of the mind-stuff.
Of the Old Javanese Tattvas, the Tattvajñāna is the only one that lacks a
really systematic exposition of the mechanism of karma. However, the text
devotes great importance to the categorization of the different types of in-
carnations of human beings whose intellects are dominated respectively by
sattva (ch. 16), rajas (ch. 17) and tamas (ch. 18), to varying degrees; it de-
scribes the incarnations as beings such as Bhūtas, Gandharvas, Ṛṣis, etc. (ch.
19); and it mentions three kinds of bad karma, viz. low (kaniṣṭha, ch. 20),
middle (madhya, ch. 21) and superior (uttama, ch. 22). Near its end, in par.
46, the text equates the latent impressions with the obstacles or ‘epiphenom-
ena’ (upasarga), a technical term of Pātañjala Yoga (cf. below, p. 536). In
doing so, it also resorts to the metaphor of the pot:
Te ‘hindrances’ are the latent impressions of the three qualities, which stick
to the body that the Soul inhabits. Te example is as follows: like a pot
containing asafoetida. Te asafoetida will enter in contact with the pot. Te
pot will be washed in order to make it clean. Nevertheless, the asafoetida
still gives off smell inside the pot. In this way are the latent impressions of
the three qualities sticking to the body that the Soul inhabits: they do not
vanish at once through [the practice of] absorption (samādhi).14
13.
Cf. p. 275, fn. 143.
14.
Tattvajñāna 46.24–28: upasarga ṅaranya / vāsanā nikaṅtriguṇa / rumakәt iṅśarīra
niṅātmā / nihan dṛṣṭopama / kady aṅgān ikaṅdyun vavaḍah hiṅgu / alavana hiṅgunya
saṅkerikaṅdyun / vasәhanekaṅdyun pahalilaṅәn / yayātah mambә juga kaṅhiṅgu irikaṅ
dyun // iva maṅkana ta vāsanā niṅtriguṇa / rumakәt iṅśarīra niṅātmā / an tar vavaṅhilaṅ
de niṅsamādhi / • vavaḍah ] conj. ; vavan Ed., vava Gha (cf. Ślokāntara 66.29 and Vṛhaspa-
titattva 3.7) • yayātah ] em. ; ya yataḥEd.


--- PAGE 492 ---
Karma
473
Te ‘body that the Soul inhabits’ (lit. the ‘body of the Soul’, śarīra niṅātmā)
mentioned in the passage may be either the mind (citta), as per the deﬁni-
tion given in paragraph 6.7–8 (cf. above, p. 438) or the subtle body (sūkṣ-
maśarīra), as per Vṛhaspatitattva 52. Te latter text is the only source de-
scribing the soul’s transmigration in connection with a subtle body:
Since the ﬁve subtle elements serving as the body that the Soul inhabits are
ﬁne, therefore it is called subtle body. Tat is the body that the Soul inhabits
when it is embodied in hell. It takes a body there, it experiences suffering. If
its former actions, as a human being, were bad, that is the cause of its falling
down to hell. If its former actions, as a human being, were good, that is
the cause of its being embodied in heaven. Tere it experiences pleasure. If
its former actions, as a human being, were neither bad nor good, that is the
reason why it again takes birth as a human being. Free from its good and bad
actions in former human lives, it obtains the state of a man of religion, and
it is able to perform the observances dedicated to the Lord. But that [man of
religion] does not know his state of leader among yogins (yogīśvara) during
his lifetime. He dies and again becomes a human being. In that [birth] he
will obtain the state of a leader among yogins.15
Te explanation of the incarnation as a man of religion as resulting from
karma that was neither bad nor good is interesting. As in Old Javanese
sources one never comes across deﬁnitions of karma as being in itself neutral,
i.e. neither good nor bad, what the text intends to say might be that the neu-
trality of karma is caused by an equal amount of good and bad karma. Tat
karma is self-neutralizing, for it is said that the man of religion is free from
his good and bad actions in former human lives. Tis situation of karmic im-
passe eventually leading to release ﬁnds a counterpart in the early Saiddhān-
tika formulations of the doctrine of karmasāmya or ‘balance of karma’. Te
balance of karma, caused by the equiponderance of two actions of different
15.
Vṛhaspatitattva 52.58–69: kunaṅapan alit ikaṅpañcatanmātra pinakaśarīra niṅ
ātmā / mataṅyan sūkṣmaśarīra ṅaranya / yatika śarīra niṅātmā / an paśarīra riṅnaraka-
loka / māvak ta ya ṅkāna / pinakapaṅhiḍәpnya saṅsāra / yan ahala gavenya ṅūni riṅmā-
nuṣa / ya ta hetunyan tibeṅnaraka / yan ahayu gavenya ṅūni riṅmānuṣa / ya ta mataṅyan
paśarīra riṅsvarga / pinakapaṅhiḍәpnya sukha / tan ahala tan ahayu pagavenya ṅūni riṅ
mānuṣa / ya ta mataṅyan paṅjanma mānuṣa muvah / luput sakeṅhalahayu pagavenya ṅūni
riṅmānuṣa / kapaṅgih taṅkavikun denya / vәnaṅgumavayakәn brata bhaṭāra / nda tar vruh
ta ya riṅkayogīśvaran ri kāla niṅhuripnya / pәjah ta ya / maṅjanma ta ya muvah / irika ta
yan pamaṅgihakәn kayogīśvaran denya /.


--- PAGE 493 ---
474
iii Doctrine
polarity has the power of blocking the soul’s capacity to experience and nec-
essarily precedes the descent of the Lord’s salviﬁc power (śaktipāta) before
initiation.16 Early Siddhāntatantras offer differing and ofen vague accounts
of this view,17 except in the case of the Kiraṇa, which devotes the whole chap-
ter ﬁve to its discussion and came to be regarded as the locus classicus for
this doctrine. According to verse 1.20cd–21,
Ten it (i.e. the soul) experiences its entire experience, being either happy
or otherwise, according to his karman. When [good and bad] actions have
become equal, by virtue of the power of an interval of time, at that time,
through an intense descent of power, the soul is initiated by his guru and
becomes omniscient like Śiva, devoid of any limitation of knowledge.18
16.
On this doctrine, cf. Goodall (1998:xxxiii, 215–216 fn. 171).
17.
Cf., e.g., Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 13.15–19 (tentatively translated by Goodall
1998:339 fn. 325): ‘When good and bad actions mature [simultaneously] and are seen to
be [as though balanced] on the fulcrum of a pair of scales, [and] when [thereupon] the
principle responsible for binding the soul to the accumulated fruits of his past actions (niy-
atiḥ) because it draws [the soul] out from that [bondage of past action] sees [the fruits of]
the two actions of an experiencer to be equal, and because they cannot then both arise [to
give experience] simultaneously, niyati is seen to stand [inactive], as if non-existent, since
she has nothing [which could cause her to bind the soul to the fruit of one actions rather
than the other] (nirapekṣā). Tis extremely difﬁcult impasse, in which the activities [of
the two opposing past actions] are the same (samānadharma) must result, for how can the
soul simultaneously be linked to happiness and unhappiness? At this time, that power of
the creator whose nature is to ‘draw out’ (uddhāraśīlinī) pushes niyati aside by force with
her great strength and leaves her traces in the soul, afer ﬁrst rendering him dispassion-
ate towards [all worldly] experience, towards this terrible ocean of worldly existence with
its manifold troubles’ dharmādharmavipāke ’smiṃs tulākoṭyupalakṣite / niyatis tatsamud-
dhārād yadā paśyati karmaṇī // same bhoktus tadā tasya yugapac cāpy asaṃbhavāt / śūnya-
vat saṃsthitā yasmān nirapekṣaiva lakṣyate // samānadharmavyāpāraḥkaṣṭo ’yaṃsyāt su-
duṣkaraḥ/yugapat sukhaduḥkhābhyāṃyoktuṃpuṃśakyate katham // etasminn antare kar-
tur yāsāv uddhāraśīlinī / protsārya niyatiṃvegāt svavīryeṇātibhūriṇā // kṣetrajñaṃvāsayet
paścāt kṛtvā bhogaparāṅmukham / nānāyāsān mahāghorād asmāt saṃsārasāgarāt //. More
ambiguous is a passage of the Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha (VP 2.21), where a reference to
karmasāmya seems to be adumbrated: ‘[Te sequence of karman] is without beginning;
it ends in liberation from the blocking of two karmans’ (trans. Goodall 1998:xxxiii, fn.
73) asaṃsthā muktiparyantā dvikarmapratirodhataḥ/ procyate ’sāv aṇor bandhaḥsukaiva-
lyanirodhikā //. Sadyojyotis interprets the verse as referring to the blocking of the karmas
towards the soul rather than to two karmas mutually blocking each other.
18.
Kiraṇatantra 1.20cd–21: tataḥsukhādikaṃkṛtsnaṃbhogaṃbhuṅkte svakarmataḥ/
same karmaṇi sañjāte kālāntaravaśāt tataḥ// tīvraśaktinipātena guruṇā dīkṣito yadā / sar-
vajñaḥsa śivo yadvat kiñcijjñatvavivarjitaḥ//. For the translation of this sequence in har-


--- PAGE 494 ---
Karma
475
Compare 5.8cd–9ab (trans. Goodall 1998:333–335):
Te time of the descent of this [power] is also [that of] the equal balance of
[simultaneously maturing] actions. Te time is [that of] a balance of past
action. [Te two blocking actions are] either destroyed or [rendered] un-
equal.19
What the Sanskrit texts appear to agree upon is the fact that the condition
of equivalence of karma instils in the human being a feeling of dispassion
towards worldly experiences, which they attribute to the salviﬁc descent of
the Lord’s grace, thereupon seeking initiation by a guru.20 Te account of
the Vṛhaspatitattva, while omitting any reference to the descent of power
and to initiation,21 puts it in a similar way by stating that a man is prompted
to enter the career of man of religion (viku) that eventually will lead him to
yogīśvara-hood (and thus liberation) in his next life.22 A somewhat different
mony with the interpretation of Rāmakaṇṭha, cf. Goodall (1998:215–216). Rāmakaṇṭha
does not adhere to the view that the karmic impasse alone causes the descent of grace, but
believes that it must be accompanied by the ripening of maculation (malaparipāka), and
therefore provides a forced interpretation of the relevant passages of the Kiraṇa and other
Siddhāntatantras; contrast Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha on Mṛgendra VP 3.5c–6b, according to whom
śaktipāta does occur afer the karmic impasse created by balance between good and bad
actions (cf. Goodall 1998:216). Yet another view of karmasāmya is expounded by Kṣe-
marāja in his commentary to Svacchandatantra 5.88 (p. 93): ‘When one has two [opposite]
karmas, waiting to be experienced, that are blocked because of [their] equal force, in that
instant he dies’ yasya ca tulyabale karmaṇī bhogonmukhe ruddhe tasya tatkālaṃdehapātaḥ
syāt.
19.
Kiraṇatantra 5.8cd–9ab: tannipātasya saḥkālaḥkarmaṇāṃtulyataiva ca // tulya-
tvaṃkarmaṇaḥkālaḥkṣīṇaṃvā yadi vāsamam /.
20.
Cf. the passage of the Mataṅga quoted in fn. 17 and also Kiraṇa VP 5.5–6b, accord-
ing to which the descent of power instils fear of worldly existence (bhavabhayaprada) and
causes one to seek a teacher; compare Kiraṇa VP 2.29cd, Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha VP
1.17 and Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 10.25cd. A remarkably similar view, which does
echo the doctrine of karmasāmya, is found in a non-Śaiva source, namely al-Bīrūnī’s Arabic
rendition of the Yogasūtra (with a commentary): ‘Tus if both (i.e. merit and demerit) are
not simultaneously annulled detachment does not come about and the cycle (of birth and
death) is not cut off. However, the ascetic referred to above has annulled the effects of the
two as far as the future is concerned, both of them being annihilated or nearly (annihilated)’
(trans. Pines and Gelblum 1989:269).
21.
On the unimportance of (or silence over) of initiation in Tattvas, cf. Part i, p. 13, and
below, pp. 526–527.
22.
Te career of man of religion is only a step in the gradual ascension to yogīśvara-hood,
the highest state that a human being may attain, which is the same as the state of being lib-


--- PAGE 495 ---
476
iii Doctrine
position is maintained in the ﬁrst account of karma given by that text (3.23–
25), where the Lord states that it is when a soul has reincarnated as a human
being afer having spent his good karma in heaven that the career of man of
religion begins. Te Lord then explains:
Ten the desire for emancipation (sambega) comes into being, as well as love,
meritorious acts and devotion. He brings all of them into being. Tat is the
cause of the love of the Lord towards him. Te Lord loves him. [Terefore]
he is able to see the latent impressions connected with his human birth, as
well as hunger, hot and cold, the sinfulness and dirtiness of being incarnated.
As soon as he sees them, he says: ‘Ah! Extreme is the pain connected with
the human state, and whenever one has a body it is inevitably experienced.
Ah! What is the true course of my existence?’ He then goes to a master, in
order to enquire about the meaning of existence. He is instructed by the
sage.23
Here the reference to the Lord’s love (sih bhaṭāra) towards a particular hu-
man being adumbrates the concept of the Lord’s grace. According to the
Dharma Pātañjala too, it is only through the love of the Lord towards him
that a yogin can attain the state of yogīśvara and become the visible mani-
festation of the Lord’s powers.24
erated in life (jīvanmukta) described in Sanskrit sources. Te Dharma Pātañjala (246.6–9),
under the description of the fruit of right knowledge (samyajñāna), corresponding to the
item Knowledge of the caturaiśvarya, states: ‘Te fruit of right Knowledge is as follows: if
his absorption toward the Lord comes into being, and he uses as means of realization the
three valid means of knowledge, he is the place where the Lord incarnates. His supernatu-
ral prowess is like the supernatural prowess of the Lord, and [like] the eightfold sovereign
prowess of the Lord. So he is reborn once again, for [it] is as he wishes, everything becomes
according to his desire; whatever he hopes for, (indeed) comes about’.
23.
Vṛhaspatitattva 3.25–31: kadadi pvekaṅkasambegan lavan sih puṇya bhakti / kadadi
pvekaṅkabeh denya / ya ta sambandhanya sih bhaṭāra iriya / masih bhaṭāra iriya / katon taṅ
janmavāsanā denya / lavan lapa panas tis / pāpa kleśa niṅmaṅdadi / yāvat tinonya liṅnya /
i harah atyanta lara niṅjanma karih / sabarinyan pāvak juga hana bhinuktinya / apa ta lari
hambana ri dadiṅku harah / mara ta ya ri saṅpaṇḍita / tumakvanakna kaliṅan iṅdadi /
vinarah ta ya de saṅṛṣi /.
24.
Cf. the similar passages in Dharma Pātañjala (286.5–286.7,286.19–288.2 and 288.6–
288.8), where the Lord’s love causes the destruction of mala—a view that is a cliché in Sid-
dhāntatantras (cf., e.g., Kiraṇatantra 2.29cd).


--- PAGE 496 ---
Yoga
T
he author of the Dharma Pātañjala devotes almost one-third of the
text1 to the exposition of yoga. Tis long section of the text is twice
referred to by the Lord as Yogapāda.2
As already noted by Ensink (1974:198), the importance and uniqueness
of the Dharma Pātañjala lies in the fact that it constitutes the only Old Ja-
vanese source that describes the yoga of the eight ancillaries (aṣṭāṅga), char-
acterizing the Pātañjala variety of yoga, instead of the yoga of the six ancil-
laries (ṣaḍaṅga), which characterizes the variety of Tantric yoga described in
the majority of Śaiva and Buddhist sources from both the Indonesian Archi-
pelago and the Indian Subcontinent.3 Te text in fact attempts to combine a
Pātañjala philosophical perspective with a Śaiva theistic perspective.
Te classical formulation of Pātañjala yoga, whose seminal text is the Yo-
gasūtra, forming one inseparable whole—called Yogaśāstra—with the com-
mentary (Bhāṣya),4 in the course of time came to be recognized as the ulti-
1.
Approximately thirty folios, from leaf 55v to 84v.
2.
For a discussion of the Vidyāpāda/Jñānapāda and Yogapāda division of Siddhānta-
tantras and Old Javanese texts, cf. Introduction, p. 18.
3.
More on this below, p. 510. To Śaiva and Buddhist Sanskrit sources must be added
also the Jayākhyasaṃhitā, an early source of the Vaiṣṇava Pāñcarātra—a school that does not
seem to have lef any written traces in Old Javanese. In the 14th century Buddhist Kakavin
Sutasoma, the yoga of the six ancillaries is explicitly linked to the Śaiva path as opposed to
the Buddhist advayayoga or advayajñāna; cf. Ensink (1974:198–200, 1978:184–186).
4.
Te ‘original’ denomination of the treatise as Pātañjalayogaśāstra has become amply
clear thanks to the philological work by Maas (2006). I concur with Bronkhorst (1985)
and Maas (2006, 2009) that the Bhāṣya was written by the same author who brought the
sūtras together. Bronkhorst (1985:208) attributes its authorship to Vindhyavāsin (who
deﬁnes himself as a ‘Pātañjala’) or to different hands from his same school, whereas Maas
attributes it to Patañjali. Here I will use the title Yogaśāstra whenever I refer to the sūtra-
cum-Bhāṣya treatise.


--- PAGE 497 ---
478
iii Doctrine
mate authority on yoga in the mainstream Brahmanical tradition. It ﬁgured
among the classical systems (darśana) of Brahmanical philosophy, closely
related—and yet distinct—from Sāṅkhya, with which it shared its basic philo-
sophical tenets. However, insofar as its focus is not on philosophy but rather
on practice, the Pātañjala yoga as formulated in the Yogaśāstra lent itself
to the integration into the scriptures of rival systems.5 Transcending the
boundaries of distinct philosophical schools, it exerted a signiﬁcant appeal
also on certain Śaiva authors, who tended to refer to Patañjali as an author-
ity in matters of yoga and sometimes even programmatically attempted to
absorb elements of the Yogaśāstra toward a higher synthesis.6
Such syncretistic attempts are especially evident in the Purāṇas, where
syntheses of Pātañjala yoga—which is ofen referred to simply as aṣṭāṅgayo-
ga—and ‘sectarian’ or ‘Tantricized’ yogic traditions abound.7 Te account
presented in the Dharma Pātañjala differs from the Purāṇic ones, however,
in that it is philosophical in nature and closely follows the Sanskrit text, down
to the details. It is clear that none of the Purāṇas can be regarded as contain-
ing a possible prototype for the Yogapāda of the Dharma Pātañjala. Te op-
eration carried out by our author is indeed different from a ‘Puranicization’
or vulgarization of Pātañjala yoga and rather amounts to a reworking of a
version of the Sanskrit Yogaśāstra and its absorption into a Śaiva framework.
Tis operation consists in reinterpreting crucial points of the Yogaśāstra in
order to bring them in line with the theistic standpoint of the Old Javanese
text, which reﬂects priorities and themes that were important issues for the
Śaivas.
Te Dharma Pātañjala also distinguishes itself from the Pātañjala-inﬂu-
enced Sanskrit Śaiva accounts in that it closely relies upon the original model
of the Yogaśāstra, incorporating what may be described as an independent
5.
Te Yogaśāstra was described by Larson (1999) as a ‘tradition text’ of ‘non-sectarian’
nature, which, conﬂating Sāṅkhya and Buddhist formulations, was itself characterized by a
markedly hybrid character.
6.
Te attitude of Śaiva exegetes toward Pātañjala yoga is somewhat ambivalent. Te
majority of the historical authors as well as the ‘divinely transmitted’ scriptures, such as the
Siddhāntatantras, adhere to their own form of Śaivayoga and sometimes explicitly contrast
it to Pātañjala views; yet, commentators such as Śrī Kumāra or Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha ofen quote
Patañjali with approval, not to speak of the syncretistic attempts characterizing scriptures
such as the Mṛgendra and the Suprabheda (on which, cf. below, p. 512).
7.
Cf., e.g., Agnipurāṇa 370–375, Garuḍapurāṇa 1.218, Śivapurāṇa 7.2.37–39, Liṅgapu-
rāṇa 1.8–9.


--- PAGE 498 ---
Yoga
479
exegetical treatise on selected sections of the Sanskrit prototype. Tis incor-
poration displays skillful editorial interventions that make it consistent with
the rest of the text and its profoundly Śaiva persuasion. Te sūtras are fol-
lowed in their original sequence, opportunely re-arranged and shaped, like
the rest of the text, as a commentary in the form of questions and answers
between the Lord and Kumāra. Motifs found in the Sanskrit text are occa-
sionally omitted presumably in order to avoid the repetition of topics already
treated elsewhere in the Dharma Pātañjala.8 Te Old Javanese prose is by
no means a direct translation of the Yogaśāstra but a paraphrase alternating
with more original exegetical passages. Te author’s priority was apparently
to present a synthetic account of the most important doctrinal points of Pā-
tañjala yoga.
An analogous transcultural operation can be discerned in the rendering
into Arabic of a version of the Yogasūtra with an unidentiﬁed commentary by
al-Bīrūnī (ca. 973–1050 ad). Te Kitāb Pātañjala ‘Book of Patañjali’ unde-
niably presents close similarities on a structural level, so that it is interesting
to compare the two works as independent, and perhaps even roughly con-
temporary, cultural products. Apart from being seemingly based on related
versions of the Sanskrit text, they reﬂect exegetical practices inﬂuenced by
the theistic persuasion of their respective authors, if not already by the South
Asian theistic and philosophical milieu from which those versions origi-
nated.9 Dasgupta (1922:233) characterized the Kitāb Pātañjala as ‘a new
modiﬁcation of the Yoga doctrine on the basis of Patañjali’s Yogasūtra in the
8.
For instance, the text follows the sequence of sūtras 1.21–28 characterizing the Lord
(īśvara) while omitting sūtra 1.26, where the Lord is said to have been incarnated in a primal
sage (Kapila)—the status of the Lord as an incarnated being and universal teacher having
been treated already in the section 276.2–280.4; it omits references to the three kinds of
pain as described in the Bhāṣya ad sūtra 1.31—those having been already deﬁned earlier,
in 256.10–260.7; it omits deﬁnition and justiﬁcation of the mechanism of karma and la-
tent impressions in Bhāṣya 2.13, this having been treated in 272.17–274.18; while following
closely large portions of 3.16–51, it omits the long and elaborate cosmographical excursus
found in the Bhāṣya on 3.26—cosmography having been treated already in 224.1–226.11.
9.
Pines and Gelblum (1966:305) argued that the commentary that was at the base of
al-Bīrūnī’s rendition could be related to the theistic developments in Sanskrit commentators
(prior or posterior to that author) such as Vācaspatimiśra (9th century ad), Vijñānabhikṣu
(16th century ad), inﬂuenced by Vedānta or devotional currents. Tey also noted, however,
that ‘al-Bīrūnī was a Muslim, so that in this major characteristic of his translation as well
as in its minor characteristics, which likewise exhibit a good deal of islamization, his own
interpretation, conditioned by his own cultural orientation, might have been at work’.


--- PAGE 499 ---
480
iii Doctrine
direction of Vedānta and Tantra’, and ‘the transition link through which the
Yoga doctrine of the sūtras entered into a new channel in such a way that
it could be easily assimilated from there by later developments of Vedānta,
Tantra and Śaiva doctrines’. Te same considerations would equally apply to
the Dharma Pātañjala.
Both texts are based on a commentary that unmistakably betrays the in-
ﬂuence of the Bhāṣya but cannot be identiﬁed only with that source as it
presents motifs that are not found there but ﬁgure in other commentaries.10
Both might have been based on a versiﬁed version of the sūtra.11
Table 12: Sanskrit verses of the DhPāt and their probable prototypes in the YS[Bh]
Dharma Pātañjala
Dharma Pātañjala
Yogasūtra
(codex)
(tentative reconstr.)
[Yogasūtrabhāṣya]
2
cittavrattinirodakyaḥ
cittavṛttinirodhākhyaḥ
1.2
yogaś cittavṛttinirodhaḥ
yogaḥparamadurlabhaḥ
=
tasmә yoga samarābde
tasmin yoge samārabdhe
svayaṃṅātmā prakāśate
svayam ātmā prakāśate
[1.28] [para ātmā prakāśate (?)]12
3b/d13 ātmāna cetana stitaḥ
ātmani cetanaḥsthitaḥ
1.3
tadā draṣṭuḥsvarūpe ’vasthānam (?)
4ab14
kleśakārmmāvipakaśayaḥ
kleśakarmavipākāśayaḥ
1.24
kleśakarmavipākāśayair
aparamraśṭa sadeve-
aparāmṛṣṭaḥsadaive-
aparāmṛṣṭaḥpuruṣaviśeṣa
svaraḥ
śvaraḥ
īśvaraḥ[+ sa tu sadaiva muktaḥ
sadaiveśvara iti]
10.
Pines and Gelblum (1966:304) convincingly argued that al-Bīrūnī might have used
a Sanskrit commentary that has not survived to us, and which may represent a hitherto
unknown line of interpretation.
11.
Te testimony of al-Bīrūnī in this respect is ambiguous and self-contradictory:
whereas in the introduction to the Kitāb Pātañjala he states that the incorporation of the
sūtra within the commentary and the dialogic arrangement were his own making, in his
conclusion he refers to an original source ‘consisting of one thousand and a hundred ques-
tions in the form of a verse’ (Pines and Gelblum 1966:303). As to the Dharma Pātañjala,
the question is whether the versiﬁcation of sūtras occurred already in the original Sanskrit
prototype or in Java. Although the corrupt state of the ślokas may lead one to favour the lat-
ter possibility, my reading of Sanskrit-Old Javanese texts suggests that corruption, especially
in the case of Javanese manuscript, is not a reliable criterion to establish the extra-Indian
origin of the Sanskrit verses.
12.
Tis śloka-quarter (d) is part of a verse quoted in the Bhāṣya, which has a parallel in
the Viṣṇupurāṇa (6.6.2); I quote the full śloka below, p. 504.
13.
Te metrical pattern is compatible with either the second or fourth quarter of a śloka.
14.
Te half-śloka is affected by grave metrical ﬂaws, having one superordinate syllable
in each quarter.


--- PAGE 500 ---
Yoga
481
Dharma Pātañjala
Dharma Pātañjala
Yogasūtra
(codex)
(tentative reconstr.)
[Yogasūtrabhāṣya]
515
bhyadәḥpramādalasya
byādhiḥ
pramādālasyaś
ca
1.30
vyādhistyānasaṅśaya-
sandeha styanam eva ca
sandehaḥstyāna-m eva
ca
pramādālasyā-
bhrantijñānavratatajñāna
bhrāntijñānāviratiś ca
viratibhrāntidarśanā-
bhumyalābhās camacali
bhūmyalābhaś ca cañca-
laḥ
labdhabhūmikatvānavasthitatvāni
cittavikṣepā antarāyāḥ
Te section of the Yogapāda from 290.1 to 306.10 generally follows the se-
quence of the topics treated in the Yogaśāstra until sūtra 1.30, thus covering
more than a half of the ﬁfy-one sūtras making up the ﬁrst chapter of the Yo-
gasūtra, the Samādhipāda. Te Yogapāda is opened by a critical remark by
Kumāra on the Lord’s explanation that His love towards the yogin leads to
the disappearance of maculation and to the acquisition by the yogin of His
powers.
Samādhi
and the
Stages of Yoga
Kumāra’s objection is that, if this is really the case, the
Lord is liable to exist in the cycle of rebirths, a position
that contradicts what had been previously expounded
by the Lord. Te Lord’s reply is that the Lord exists in the
cycle of existence only through the manifestation of His
divine powers in a yogin whose absorption (samādhi) is perfect (286.6–7),
and who knows about, and puts into practice, the prayogasandhi (288.11–
13).16 Having brieﬂy deﬁned prayogasandhi, the Lord introduces yoga by
means of a śloka (2) based on Yogasūtra 1.2. But it is at its very outset, there-
fore much earlier than the Yoga section, that the Dharma Pātañjala provides
a deﬁnition of samādhi—a crucial term in Pātañjala yoga:
Right knowledge is not within reach if there is no absorption. Te absorp-
DhPāt
194.11–13
tion not coming into being, the Summum Bonum is not known, for the ob-
tainment of the Summum Bonum is the result of performing absorption.
Te passage stresses the soteriological importance of samādhi and charges
the term with a theistic connotation: the goal of absorption, the Summum
Bonum, is indeed explained in śloka 1 and its Old Javanese exegesis (194.19–
196.7) as the supreme aspect of the Lord Śiva. Te text continues:
15.
Even though the ﬁrst quarter is deﬁcient by one syllable and the third has one too
many, the original śloka pattern is still discernible; thus, I have emended the Sanskrit to
make it comply with the metre.
16.
I shall discuss prayogasandhi below, pp. 544–550.


--- PAGE 501 ---
482
iii Doctrine
Table 13: Synoptic comparison between the YP of the DhPāt and related sections of the YS[Bh]
DhPāt
YS Blocks
Temes
YS / [YSBh]
Contents
290.1–292.12
1.2–1.3
Yoga is cittavṛttinirodha; the Soul abides in itself
1.2–11
1.4–11
vṛtti: pramāṇa, viparyaya, vikalpa, nidrā, smṛti
yoga
1.17
samprajñātasamādhi (vitarka, vicāra, ānanda, asmitā)
&
1.18
asamprajñātasamādhi
292.13–304.8
samādhi
[1.1]
kṣipta, mūḍha, vikṣipta, ekāgra, niruddha
1.17–30
1.19–20
videhas and prakṛtilīnas; śraddhā, vīrya, smṛti, samādhi, prajñā
[1.33]
maitrī, karuṇā, muditā, upekṣā
īśvara
1.21–28
īśvara
1.30
vighnas
1.50
japa, saṅskāras
304.8–308.12
1.50–2.16
yogin
2.3–9 [1.8]
kleśas (avidyā, asmitā, rāga, dveṣa, abhiniveśa)
2.12–13
embodiment as suffering, the cycle of existence determined by karma
2.15–16
sensibility of the yogin to pain; future pain is to be avoided
2.29
aṣṭāṅgayoga
2.30–32
yama and niyama
308.13–320.2
2.29–3.3
aṣṭāṅgayoga
2.35–45
fruits of yamas and niyamas
2.46
āsanas
2.49 (cf. 2.54)
prāṇāyāma and pratyāhāra
3.1–3
dhāraṇā, dhyāna, samādhi
3.4–8
deﬁnition of saṃyama
322.1–332.15
3.4–47
siddhi
3.16–47
application of saṃyama and the various siddhis resulting therefrom
[3.45]; 3.37
aṣṭaguṇa; upasarga
Chapters of the YS: Samādhipāda (1.1–51); Sādhanapāda (2.1–55); Vibhūtipāda (3.1–55); Kaivalyapāda (4.1–34).


--- PAGE 502 ---
Yoga
483
Your thought about the Summum Bonum, that is what you [should] reﬂect
DhPāt
196.8–14
upon during day and night. One who has wisdom is one who has knowledge,
his characteristics are of one level with the Summum Bonum. Tis is the
reason why absorption is what is constantly practiced by him who desires
the supreme pleasure, for that is what is designated as release. Furthermore,
there is the absorption toward the Summum Bonum: that leaves behind the
latent impressions in the mind. Tat is called right knowledge, as distinct
from the wrong knowledge.
Here samādhi is equated with a salviﬁc kind of knowledge (samyajñāna/-
samyagjñāna) and regarded as essential for attaining supreme pleasure (suka
viśeṣa), i.e. release. Te statement that ‘the characteristics of the yogin are
of one level (samapāda) with the Summum Bonum’ seemingly refers to the
Lord’s qualities of omniscience and omnipotence.17
Te prominence of absorption is reﬂected in the fact that the Bhāṣya
too deﬁnes it for the ﬁrst time at its outset, i.e. when commenting on sū-
tra 1.1: ‘Now the teaching of yoga [is going to begin]’ atha yogānuśāsanam,
understanding it to be synonym with yoga (yogaḥsamādhiḥ).18 Tus, for
the Yogaśāstra, samādhi constitutes not only one—and the highest—among
17.
For two similar Śaiva deﬁnitions of yoga, in which both knowledge and unity with
the Lord play a role, cf. Lakṣmaṇadeśika’s Śāradātilaka 25.2 (trans. Vasudeva 2004:243):
‘Others understand it to be the ascertainment of Śiva and the Soul as non-different. Te
scholars of the Āgamas say that it is a Knowledge which is of the nature of Śiva’s power’
śivātmanor abhedena pratipattiḥpare viduḥ/ śivaśaktyātmakaṃjñānaṃjagur āgamavedi-
naḥ//. As argued by Vasudeva (2004:243–244), the ﬁrst deﬁnition might be derived from
the Mālinīvijayottaratantra or another non-dualist Śaiva source, whereas the second, simply
referring to Śaiva scriptures in general, reﬂects the fact that ‘the importance of this knowl-
edge is undeniable in its insistence on the soteriological value of knowing the thing with
which oneness is sought’. Another relevant set of Śaiva deﬁnitions of yoga is enumerated in
Parākhyatantra 14.98–101ab (trans. Vasudeva 2004:240–241): ‘[Yoga is] conjunction with
the [eight] Perfections [beginning with] miniaturization. Or, yoga arises from the inﬂuence
of [Śiva’s] Power. Or, yoga [arises] from the attainment of samādhi or resides in the prac-
tice of yoga. Or, yoga is the immersion into Him (Śiva) arising from the contemplation of
His nature’ aṇimādiguṇair yogo yogo vā śaktiyogataḥ/ samādhiyogato yogo yogābhyāsagato
’thavā // yogo vā tatsamāveśas tatsvarūpavibhāvanāt /.
18.
Cf. also Bhoja’s Rājamārtaṇḍa on Yogasūtra 1.1: ‘Yoga, from the root yuj, is ﬁxing the
mind in absorption; yuj has the sense of absorption [as in Dhātupāṭha 4.68]’ yuktir yogaḥ
samādhānaṃ/ yuja samādhau. Tis interpretation is openly criticized by Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha,
in his Vṛtti to Mṛgendratantra YP 2a, who rather deﬁnes yoga as union with Śiva (cf. Va-
sudeva 2004:236, referring to Sanderson’s unpublished edition and translation of the YP
of the Mṛgendra).


--- PAGE 503 ---
484
iii Doctrine
the ancillaries of yoga,19 but the very essence of yoga, leading to the state of
isolation (kaivalya) that amounts to release.
Te author of the Dharma Pātañjala, probably conscious of having de-
ﬁned samādhi earlier in the text, formally introduces the Yogapāda with a
śloka obviously based on Yogasūtra 1.2, which presents another famous def-
inition of yoga according to the Pātañjala understanding, i.e. ‘yoga is the
cessation of the functions of the mind’ yogaś cittavṛttinirodhaḥ:
What is called the cessation of the functions of the mind is the yoga,
DhPāt
290.1–8
extremely difﬁcult to achieve. Having undertaken that yoga, the Soul
itself [alone] shines forth.
What is taught about the [cessation of the] functions of the mind, that is
designated as yoga, and its difﬁculty in being practiced is extreme, for not
to want it is the nature of the man toward hard work. But the one who is
passionless, who is already full of the suffering of birth, he desires the yoga,
for he wishes the supreme pleasure. Te obtainment of the true nature of
the Soul, that is designated as the supreme pleasure. In what case is the true
nature of the Soul met? Only when yoga is performed.
Te true nature of the Soul, which in the Sanskrit verse amounts to the
Soul shining forth alone (svayam), i.e. untainted by the mind’s functions, in
the Old Javanese exegesis is deﬁned as supreme pleasure (suka viśeṣa, cf. p.
483) and declared to be obtained through the performance of yoga; earlier
it was stated that ‘absorption is what is constantly practiced by him who de-
sires the supreme pleasure’. Besides being synonyms, yoga and samādhi thus
amount to the same goal, which here—in harmony with the Pātañjala under-
standing—is characterized as the attainment of the true nature of the Soul,
whereas in 196.8–14 it was explicitly deﬁned as the acquisition of Śiva-like
powers.
Te text then focuses on the mind (citta), whose characterization is in-
troduced by an objection raised by Kumāra:
Whether yoga be performed or not, the Soul is still experienced by us. Tat,
DhPāt
290.10–11
according to your words, is by no means the Soul: that is the mind.
19.
It has been argued by various authors (whose views are summarized in Larson
2008:62–64) that the doctrine of the eight ancillaries originally belonged to a different—and
possibly older—system and was merged into the Yogaśāstra by the editor and commentator
of the sūtras. For a discussion of samādhi intended as a speciﬁc ancillary, cf. below, pp.
525–526.


--- PAGE 504 ---
Yoga
485
Te Lord replies:
Te reason why it is designated as mind is because of its having the same
DhPāt
290.12–13
object (ekaviṣayanya) [of perception as the Soul]. Tat is the reason why
only the mind is experienced by him.
Tat the issue was regarded in Java as one worthy of being problematized is
suggested by the presence of a similar theme in the Vṛhaspatitattva (35.18–
19), where Vṛhaspati asks the Lord about the characteristic of the Soul in the
body, ‘for it is difﬁcult to understand the difference between the mind and
the Soul’ apan ivәh ikaṅcitta lavan ātmā bhedanya.20 In the Dharma Pātañ-
jala, the point implied in Kumāra’s statement seems to echo the fundamental
Pātañjala yoga tenet that the perception of reality by the mind is mirrored
in the Soul’s perception of reality, which mistakenly identiﬁes itself with the
mind. Tus, what appears to be the experience of the Soul (i.e. of one’s own
awareness) during everyday life should not be confused with the experience
of one’s own mind.21 Te Soul’s self perception as devoid of any identiﬁcation
with the mind22 amounts to liberation.
Prompted by the question of an opponent as to the functions of the mind,23
the Lord enumerates right perception (pramāṇa), error (viparyaya), imag-
ination (vikalpa),24 sleep (nidrā) and remembering (smṛti). Tese are enu-
20.
To this question the Lord replies by explaining that the Power of Action pervades
the self-identity, which in its turn pervades the breaths, which join the Soul to the body;
cf. above, p. 450.
21.
Note that al-Bīrūnī in the Kitāb Pātañjala describes the functions of the mind (cit-
tavṛtti) as ‘faculties of the Soul’ (cf. Pines and Gelblum 1966:315–316). If the variance
is not simply due to al-Bīrūnī’s rendering of the term ‘mind’ into Arabic, then it may re-
ﬂect an alternative interpretation presented by his Sanskrit source. Compare the simi-
lar Śaiva perspective as described by Aghoraśiva when commenting on Sarvajñānottara
YP 1.1: ‘Tis [yoga] puriﬁes the Soul, not the mind, as the followers of Patañjali main-
tain, because the yoga of Śiva causes the manifestation of omniscience and so forth’ pu-
ruṣasyaivāyaṃsaṃskārakaḥ, na tu pātañjalānām iva cittasyety arthaḥ, śivayogasya sarva-
jñatvādiprakāśakatvāt.
22.
Literally ‘abiding in its own self’: cf. sūtra 1.3 and Dharma Pātañjala śloka 3b/d.
23.
Literally ‘What are its functions, the reason that it is called mind?’ ndya vṛttinya, ma-
taṅnyan citta ṅaranya. Te question, as it is phrased, implies that the very existence of the
functions causes the mind to be what it is.
24.
Because of its intrinsic polysemy, the term vikalpa is a difﬁcult one to render into
English. It may denote either ‘imagination’, ‘ideation’ or ‘discriminative (i.e. language-based)
thought’.


--- PAGE 505 ---
486
iii Doctrine
merated in Yogasūtra 1.5–6 and deﬁned in 1.7–11.25 Te Dharma Pātañjala,
closely following sūtra 1.7, provides a synthetic deﬁnition of right percep-
tion as the three valid means of knowledge, without additional commen-
tary—unlike the Bhāṣya. A deﬁnition of misconception is lacking.26 Te
detailed explanation of imagination deserves to be quoted in full:
Imagination is as follows: the cognition explained by the teaching of the sū-
DhPāt
290.17–292.4
tra yaḥpuruṣa—thus are the words of the treatise. Its meaning is as follows:
the Holy Soul does not move, thus is the content of the teaching. Tat is
what is said. Its explanation is as follows. Te meaning of ‘not moving’ is:
like an arrow that is in its quiver. It is quiet. It is taken from its quiver. It is
shot with the string of a bow. It penetrates into that which has been hit by
it. It (the arrow) becomes quiet [again]. In this way is the quietness of the
Soul. Tus is the meaning of imagination, according to the interpretation of
the teaching. Do not let it be in this way during the time of yoga.
Te passage constitutes an exegesis of Yogasūtra 1.9: ‘Imagination is with-
out a real object and follows as a result of language-based knowledge’ śab-
dajñānānupātī vastuśūnyo vikalpaḥ. An element of interest is the reference
to the Sanskrit clause yaḥpuruṣa as if it appeared in the source, qualiﬁed as
a sūtra,27 used by the Javanese author. Now, the word puruṣa ‘spirit, soul’
appears four times in the respective section of the Bhāṣya, but it is never
preceded by the relative pronoun yaḥ.28 Te fact that both words do not
occur in the Yogasūtra either may suggest that the author was using a hith-
erto unidentiﬁed (versiﬁed?) version, which he called ‘sūtra’ and also, more
generally, ‘teaching’ (varaḥ).
Te explanation of vikalpa through the example of the statement ‘the
Holy Soul does not move’29 is not found in any of the Sanskrit commentaries
I have consulted. Te Bhāṣya rather refers to the problem of thinking that the
25.
Unlike sūtra 1.5, the Dharma Pātañjala does not divide those functions into afﬂicting
(kliṣṭa) and non-afﬂicting (akliṣṭa) ones.
26.
Note, however, that sūtra 1.8 recalls the deﬁnition of ignorance (avidyā) given else-
where in the Dharma Pātañjala, as well as that found in al-Bīrūnī’s Kitāb Pātañjala (cf. be-
low, p. 558).
27.
Emended from strī in the codex, a reading which, despite occurring twice (cf. 292.10),
is manifestly a corruption.
28.
Te sequence yaḥpuruṣaḥis attested in Bhāṣya on sūtra 1.29, which however does
not have any connection with the present passage.
29.
Te view that the Soul, by virtue of its pervasiveness, does not move is a cliché in
Sāṅkhya, Yoga and Śaiva sources: cf. Vasudeva (2004:385, fn. 31), Watson (2006:81, fn.


--- PAGE 506 ---
Yoga
487
Spirit or Soul (puruṣa) has only intelligence (caitanya) as its property, while
in reality it does not have any property at all because it is just intelligence.
Another view expressed by the Bhāṣya is that the Spirit is without action
(niṣkriya), which stands closer to the point made by the Dharma Pātañjala.
What both sources have in common is the example of the arrow:
Tus [another example]: Te Spirit is one whose fundamental properties
have been denied, it is without action. In [the sentence] ‘Te arrow30 comes
to a standstill, will come to a standstill, has come to a standstill’, the meaning
of the verbal root (sthā, ‘to stand still’) is to be understood as the cessation
of movement.31
Unlike the Dharma Pātañjala, the Bhāṣya includes the example in a terse
and nondescriptive manner. Its explanation revolves around the grammat-
ical argument, following Patañjali’s Mahābhāṣya to Aṣṭādhyāyī i.3.1 (7, pp.
246–247),32 that verbal roots express actions (bhāva), while the root sthā
expresses gatinivṛtti, i.e. either the cessation of a movement, the absence of
movement, or immobility, but discloses nothing about the agent of a ‘non-
movement’, which is therefore non-existent or impossible to express.33
Next comes the explanation of sleep (nidrā):
Sleep is as follows: the form of the mind when it thinks is like vanished, and
DhPāt
292.4–9
thereupon it becomes unconscious—viparīta, its consciousness is not there.
Don’t let it be in this way during the time of yoga. Let the mind be fully
conscious in the heart. It should be ﬁxed, do not let it be quivering, do not
111). Te attribution of movement to the Soul is valid only in the realm of discriminative
language-based thought, and thus must be intended as being purely metaphorical.
30.
Although Angot (2008:212, fn. 442) claims that bāṇa here is more likely to denote a
personal name, akin to the Chatra used in the example immediately preceding it, the present
account of the Dharma Pātañjala leaves no doubt on this point.
31.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.9:5–6: tathā: pratiṣiddhavastudharmā, niṣkriyaḥpuruṣaḥ. tiṣṭhati
bāṇaḥ, sthāsyati, sthitaḥ, iti gatinivṛttau dhātvarthaḥ.
32.
Itself referring to a passage of the Dhātupāṭḥa (ṣṭhā gatinivṛttau), which was patently
in the mind of the author of the Bhāṣya too. Curiously, the apparent similarity between
the two sources with regard to the treatment of this grammatical point has not been in-
cluded among the arguments in favour of the identiﬁcation of the grammarian Patañjali
with Patañjali the author of the Yogaśāstra.
33.
A circumstantial discussion of the example given by the Bhāṣya is found in the Vi-
varaṇa: cf. Leggett (1990:90). A critique of the concepts of movement and displacement
in relation to an agent is included in chapter 2 of Nāgārjuna’s Mūlamadhyamakakārikā.


--- PAGE 507 ---
488
iii Doctrine
let it imagine, for there is the perception in a dream: the object being thought
of is another; the mind remembers experiencing it. Tat is perception in a
dream. Do not let it be in this way during the time of yoga.
Let us compare this passage with Yogasūtra 1.10: ‘Sleep is a mode [of knowl-
edge] which does not rest upon a factual ground’, or ‘Sleep is that mode of
functioning of the mind which has as its object the absence of conception’
abhāvapratyayālambanā vṛttir nidrā.34 Te Bhāṣya deﬁnes sleep as a special
kind of mental experience (pratyayaviśeṣa) because there is the recollection
(pratyavamarśa) of one’s own sleep when one wakes up. Te account of the
Dharma Pātañjala is interesting in that it adds dream (i.e. perception in a
dream, svapnajñāna) to the discussion, and considers it detrimental to yoga
as much as the state of insentience caused by deep sleep (nidrā)35 and ‘think-
ing’ or ‘imagining’ (maṅaṅәnaṅәn). Perception in dream is when the object
of what is thought of is other (paran inaṅәnaṅәn vaneh), for it has a recol-
lection of something. One may argue that the Old Javanese idiosyncratic
exegesis is due to the misunderstanding of the point made by the Bhāṣya;
however, that idea is rendered less likely by the fact that a similar character-
ization of nidrā is found in another source, i.e. the Kitāb Pātañjala. In his
rendering of sūtra 1.10, al-Bīrūnī apparently superimposes the category of
svapna onto it:
Te fourth [faculty of the soul] is dream[ing], which is man’s knowledge of
things which are [in reality] other [than what he knows], which have no
subsisting reality corresponding to the knowledge in question.
According to Pines and Gelblum (1966:305–306), this treatment could be
the result of a ‘literal and uninitiated reading of the Sanskrit’ of sūtra 1.10, but
could also suggest that al-Bīrūnī’s source did not include sūtra 1.38, which
manifestly presents nidrā and svapna as distinct states: svapnanidrājñānā-
lambanaṃvā, ‘Or [the mind-stuff reaches the stable state] by having as the
supporting-object a perception in dream or sleep’. Since no reference to that
34.
Yet another translation, based on the interpretation of Vācaspatimiśra, is that by
Woods (1914:29): ‘Sleep is a ﬂuctuation [of mind-stuff] supported by the cause (pratyaya,
that is tamas) of the [transient] negation [of the waking and dreaming ﬂuctuations]’; cf. also
the rendering proposed by Pines and Gelblum (1966:305–306): ‘Sleep is that mode of
functioning of the mind which has as its object the conception of nothing’.
35.
As testiﬁed to by the usage of the word across many Sanskrit literary genres, nidrā
denotes a state of deep, dreamless sleep, as opposed to svapna: cf. Hara (2008).


--- PAGE 508 ---
Yoga
489
sūtra is found in the Kitāb Pātañjala, Pines and Gelblum supposed that it
was the result of a later interpolation, which not yet affected the Sanskrit
text used by al-Bīrūnī, for his confusion of nidrā and svapna could hardly
have occurred if his source included sūtra 1.38.36 It is not found in the Dha-
rma Pātañjala either, which does, however, show awareness of svapnajñāna.
Given the strikingly similar deﬁnition of dream found in the Arabic and Old
Javanese sources as respectively ‘knowledge of things which are other’ and
‘the object of thought being (an)other’, it could be suggested that both texts
based their interpretations on a related alternative exegetical tradition.
Te last of the functions of the mind, remembering (smṛti), is simply
glossed by the Dharma Pātañjala in the following way: ‘Te sūtra remem-
bering means: the mind that remembers about the objects that were enjoyed
formerly’, which in a way does reﬂect the terseness of Yogasūtra 1.11: ‘Re-
membering is the non-loss of previously experienced objects’ anubhūtaviṣa-
yāsaṃpramoṣaḥsmṛtiḥ.37 Both the Dharma Pātañjala and the Bhāṣya agree
in remarking that all the ﬁve functions of the mind should not be present
during the time of what they call, respectively, yoga and samādhi.
At the end of the exposition of the functions the Lord afﬁrms that ‘when
all of them are covered, that is designated as absorption’ yapvan katutupan
ikaṅkabeh, ya tekā sinaṅguh samādhi ṅaranya (292.13). Te Dharma Pātañ-
jala then jumps to Yogasūtra 1.17, expounding the states of cognitive absorp-
tion (samprajñātasamādhi) as restrained by reﬂective absorption (vitarka),
reﬁned reﬂective absorption (vicāra), egoic absorption (asmitā) and blissful
absorption (ānanda).38
36.
Te distinction between the cognition in sleep (nidrājñāna) and the cognition in
dream (svapnajñāna) is explicitly made by the Vivaraṇa on Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.10 (trans.
Leggett 1990:93): ‘Objection: the dreaming state (svapnāvasthā) also must be included
in sleep. Answer: it does not come under sleep as deﬁned here, because the sūtra (1.38)
will distinguish them: Or by meditation on the knowledge of dream (svapna) and sleep
(nidrā)’ nanu ca svapnāvasthāpi nidraiva? naiṣa doṣaḥ/ ‘svapnanidrājñānālambanaṃve ’ti
sūtrakāreṇa bhedenopadiṣṭatvāt / iha suṣuptāvasthaiva nidrābhipretā //.
37.
Compare Kitāb Pātañjala (Pines and Gelblum 1966:316): ‘Te ﬁfh faculty (of the
Soul) is memory, which is the retention of what has been known by the knower without
being obstructed by forgetting’.
38.
Yogasūtra 1.17: vitarkavicārānandāsmitārūpānugamāt samprajñātaḥ; cf. also Yogasū-
trabhāṣya ad 1.1.


--- PAGE 509 ---
490
iii Doctrine
Table 14: Te stages of samprajñāta samādhi according to the DhPāt and the YSBh
DhPāt
YSBh
vitarka
†39
Te mind’s experience,
coarse, resting on the
support of the mental
vicāra
Te mind that has the subtle as its only
object of perception
[Te mind’s full experi-
ence of] the subtle
asmitā
Te Soul is isolated; the external objects
are carried by the mind, but they are not
sentient. It knows about suffering only
as long as it is aware of the content of the
mind. Terefore the Soul is only still,
experiencing its own consciousness
An awareness [of the
mental]
consisting
in
unity
ānanda
Te thinking of the Soul about its body
alone is sharp, therefore the supreme
bliss will be met
Happiness
Apart from its peculiar exegesis, the Dharma Pātañjala is at variance with the
Yogasūtra and the Bhāṣya in that it lists egoicity before joy. Te position of
the four is relevant for the Bhāṣya, which orders them in ascending hierarchy
from the gross to the subtle absorption as comprising four, three, two and
ﬁnally only one of them (ānanda) at the top of the scale.40 Even though an
ascending hierarchy might have been implied also in the Dharma Pātañjala,
the text simply states that ‘when either one, two, three or four [are present],
[that state] is cognitive’. On the other hand, the state where none of them
is present is designated as non-cognitive absorption, and follows cognitive
absorption.
Te text goes on to list the properties of the mind (dharma ni citta), viz.
scattered (kṣipta), distracted (vikṣipta), infatuated (vimūḍha), restricted (ni-
rodha) and single-minded (ekāgra).41 Tese are not found in the Yogasūtra
39.
Te explanation of the reﬂective absorption (vitarkasamādhi) was omitted from the
list due to an error in transmission.
40.
Compare Yogasūtrabhāṣya on 1.46.
41.
Attestations of the ﬁve technical terms are found in other Old Javanese sources: cf. Se-
vaka Dharma (Bali) f. 1v: kṣipta / mūḍha / vikṣipta / ekāgratā / nirodha /. In Old Javanese
Tuturs from West Java the ﬁve items, whose forms have become corrupt, are decontextu-
alized and mixed with other technical terms known in Pātañjala yoga; cf., e.g., SaṅHyaṅ
Hayu 27.8–11, characterizing the many varieties of mind or thought (hiḍep) in the follow-
ing manner: ‘It is thoughts, it is plans, it is stratagems, it is a concern, it is intellect, it is


--- PAGE 510 ---
Yoga
491
but only in the Bhāṣya, at ﬁrst simply enumerated, as properties of the mind
(cittasya dharma), in the commentary on sūtra 1.1:
Yoga is concentration; and this is a property of the mind which belongs to
all the stages. Te stages of the mind are the scattered, the infatuated, the
distracted, the single-minded and the restricted. When the mind is in the
scattered state [or in the others before], absorption is subordinate to dis-
traction and does not belong to yoga. But that [state] which, when the mind
is focused on one object, fully illuminates a real object, destroys the hin-
drances, slackens the bonds of karma, and sets before it the restriction [of
all ﬂuctuations], is called a yoga that is cognitive.42
Whereas no exact deﬁnitions of kṣipta and vikṣipta are provided, more at-
tention is dedicated to the ‘single-minded’ and ‘restricted’ in the course of
the treatise. Te Bhāṣya declares that when absorption is in any of the men-
tal states but the ‘single-minded’ or the ‘restricted’, that is not considered to
be part of the Pātañjala understanding of yoga (yogapakṣe). According to
the Dharma Pātañjala (294.12–13), not necessarily both of them but either
one or the other are sufﬁcient condition of absorption.43 In both the ‘single-
mind-stuff, it is scattered, it is distracted, it is assertion, it is single-minded, it is restricted, it
is reﬂective, it is blissful, it is egoic, it is a faculty’ ya aṅәnaṅәn, ya kirakira, ya upaya, ya cinta,
ya budi, ya manah, ya ksitan (→kṣipta), ya viksatan (→vikṣipta), ya pratijña, ya ekagraha,
ya viroda (→nirodha), ya vitarka, ya ananta, ya smita, ya indriya; cf. also the version of the
SaṅHyaṅHayu or Sevaka Dharma (West Java) preserved on Nipah Mal. Pol. 161, folios
34v–35r: ‘śakṣitan (→kṣipta) means a mind that has departed, vikṣitan (→vikṣipta) means
a mind that comes back again and again, pratijñā means a mind that is frustrated, ekagraha
(≈ekāgra) means a mind † … †, viroddam (→nirodham) means a mind that is restricted,
vitarka (= vitarka) means a mind that is not carried along †ra, ananta (→ānanda) means
a mind that is not happy, asmita means a mind that is not languishing’ śakṣitan ṅaranya
citta matambhaṅan, vikṣitan ṅaranya citta valuvaluy, pratijñā (em. ; pratajña cod.) ṅaranya
citta vuruṅ, ekagraha ṅaranya jñana † … ṅga †, viroddam ṅaranya jñana kahrәt, vitharka
ṅaranya manah tan katut, †ra ananta ṅaranya manah tan harsa, asmita ṅaranya manah
tan lәlәh. Since my purpose here is to show the high degree of ‘localization’ characterizing
the two sources, I have refrained from emending or even standardizing the spelling of the
words, which have been preserved in the same corrupted form in both texts.
42.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.1.3–7: yogaḥsamādhiḥ. sa ca sārvabhaumaś cittasya dharmaḥ.
kṣiptaṃ, mūḍhaṃ, vikṣiptam, ekāgraṃ, niruddham iti cittabhūmayaḥ. tatra vikṣipte cetasi
vikṣepopasarjanībhūtaḥsamādhir na yogapakṣe vartate. yas tu ekāgre cetasi sadbhūtam
arthaṃdyotayati, kṣiṇoti kleśān, karmabandhanāni ślathayati, nirodham āmukhīkaroti, sa
samprajñāto yoga ity ākhyāyate.
43.
Note that the Bhāṣya here speaks of cognitive yoga (samprajñāta yoga) instead of cog-
nitive absorption (samprajñāta samādhi).


--- PAGE 511 ---
492
iii Doctrine
minded’ and ‘restricted’ states of absorption there still is consciousness of an
object.
While both texts agree that it is only when the climax of non-cognitive
absorption is reached that a contentless state of awareness arises, the Dharma
Pātañjala does not regard the scattered, the distracted and the infatuated
as stages of absorption, thus going against the Bhāṣya’s characterization of
absorption as a property that belongs to all the states (sārvabhaumaś cittasya
dharmaḥ). Tis may have to do with a misunderstanding of the Bhāṣya’s
statement that the three stages do not belong to yoga: indeed, the Dharma
Pātañjala consistently, and ofen indiscriminately, employs the word yoga as
a synonym of samādhi.
Having hinted at non-cognitive absorption (Yogasūtra 1.18), the Dha-
rma Pātañjala proceeds to treat the topic of sūtra 1.19, which describes the
categories of divine beings (deva) called disembodied (videha) and dissolved
into unevolved matter (prakṛtilaya)44 as partaking of that kind of absorption:
‘[Te non-cognitive absorption] caused by existence is the one attained by
the disembodied ones and by those who are dissolved into unevolved mat-
ter’ bhavapratyayo videhaprakṛtilayānām.45 According to the Bhāṣya, those
divine beings abide in a state of quasi-isolation insofar as they have their la-
tent impressions ripen to be experienced, and their mind still has a duty to
fulﬁll.
Te Dharma Pātañjala does not explicitly connect the disembodied ones
and those who are dissolved into unevolved matter with non-cognitive ab-
sorption but characterize them in a similar manner. Te former have ceased
to have a gross body and are made up of a subtle body only, whereas the
latter have given up their subtle body too and have as body the principle of
primal matter only. Tey think that their minds have ceased to exist and
desire to obtain release, but are still contaminated by latent karmic impres-
sions, for they have not ceased to experience the pleasures brought about by
supernatural powers.46 Tey therefore lack a mind (citta) that is alilaṅ—a
44.
Or prakṛtilīna, as in the Dharma Pātañjala (294.19–20).
45.
Te interpretation of the word bhava in the compound bhavapratyayo in the sūtra is
matter of disagreement. My translation differs from that of Woods (1914:43), who renders
bhava as ‘[worldly] means’ (an interpretation patently in contrast with the Bhāṣya, which
differentiates bhava from upāya ‘means’); Angot (2008:234) translates it with ‘naissance’.
46.
Te text mentions the fact that ‘when they became addicted to the fruition of super-
natural powers, they became troubled, experiencing again. Tat causes the so-called cycle
[of existence]’ (296.4–4). Unlike the Bhāṣya, the Dharma Pātañjala does not explicitly link


--- PAGE 512 ---
Yoga
493
term glossed by OJED (1027) as ‘clear, pure, free from disturbance, or pas-
sion; ﬁnished, completely disappeared, swept away’. Each of these meaning
entails slightly different conditions of the mind, spanning from clarity or dis-
passion to complete ‘mindlessness’. One clue about the appropriate meaning
of alilaṅin this particular passage may be provided by the deﬁnition of this
condition, which is obtained when one performs yoga at all times, in 296.5–7
as being characterized by ‘faith and so on’ (śraddhādi)—faith being the ﬁrst
item of a list of ﬁve presented in Yogasūtra 1.20. Now, the Bhāṣya deﬁnes
the term faith as follows: śraddhā cetasaḥsamprasādaḥ‘faith is the perfect
stillness of mind’. Another clue is the fact that the text introduces the dis-
embodied ones and those who are dissolved into unevolved matter in reply
to the following objection by an opponent: ‘We [in our system] also know
that which is designated as Yoga, for whenever the mind is still (hәnaṅ), that
is to be designated as absorption’.47 Te opponent’s view is countered by the
Lord simply through the mention of the existence of the two categories of
beings. Tis seems to be a point in support of the view of Yogasūtra 1.20,
i.e. that śraddhā and the other means precede—thus lead to—non-cognitive
absorption (mentioned two sūtras before): ‘For the others (i.e. non-gods,
such as yogins) [this non-cognitive absorption] depends on faith, energy, re-
membrance, absorption, insight’ śraddhāvīryasmṛtisamādhiprajñāpūrvaka
itareṣām. Stillness of mind is thus a means and should not be confused with
its end, as the opponent seems to do.
Tat stillness or dispassion of the mind alone, belonging to the realm
of cognitive absorption, is a necessary but not a sufﬁcient condition for the
attainment of the ﬁnal goal of yoga is proved by the existence of the cat-
egories of beings called ‘disembodied’ and ‘dissolved into unevolved mat-
ter’, for whom the cessation of the enjoyment of pleasure has not yet taken
place.48
these categories of beings to gods, but rather to the leaders among yogins (294.16). Te
explanation provided, however, applies to both gods or yogins (the latter having obtained
a divine status by virtue of good karma), whose lot of karmic merit eventually expires.
47.
Te opponent’s view seems to reﬂect the characterization of yoga given in Bha-
gavadgītā 2.53: ‘When your intellect that has been led to error by revelation will stand still
and ﬁxed, immovable in absorption, then you will attain yoga’ śrutivipratipannā te yadā
sthāsyati niścalā / samādhāv acalā buddhis tadā yogam avāpsyasi //. Te emphasis on a still
or ﬁrm mind recurs in 2.55d (sthitaprajña) and 2.56d (sthitadhī).
48.
Tere is, however, a problem with the presentation of the Dharma Pātañjala. Since
the two categories of beings are said to be devoid of even ‘faith and so on’, the argument


--- PAGE 513 ---
494
iii Doctrine
Right afer the deﬁnition of śraddhādi, thus before the next item in the list
(vīrya, energy), the Dharma Pātañjala enumerates and explains the marks
connected with a yogin’s purity of mind, following Yogasūtra 1.33: ‘Cultiva-
tion of friendliness, compassion, joy and equanimity for [respectively] the
happy, the unhappy, the meritorious and the sinner: therefrom the mind
becomes completely quiet’ maitrīkaruṇāmuditopekṣāṇāṃsukhaduḥkhapu-
ṇyāpuṇyaviṣayāṇāṃbhāvanātaś cittaprasādanam. Te four items are de-
scribed in a rather similar manner in both the Dharma Pātañjala and the
Bhāṣya.49
Te reason why the Dharma Pātañjala makes a leap of twelve sūtras, as
if to explain śraddhā by means of the list of four, probably has to do with
the fact that both are similarly deﬁned as being, or resulting in, ‘(complete)
quietness of the mind’—cittaprasādanam in the sūtra (1.33) and cetasaḥsam-
prasādaḥin the Bhāṣya on 1.20.
Te Lord goes on to state that the pure mind generates energy; energy
generates awareness; awareness generates insight; insight generates absorp-
tion. Tis is different from the sequence outlined in Yogasūtra 1.20, which
was interpreted in the Bhāṣya as a hierarchically ordered process of gener-
ation of each of the ﬁve items from the preceding one. Tus, for the Old
Javanese source absorption, and not insight, is the highest of the ﬁve states.
Furthermore, unlike the Bhāṣya, the Dharma Pātañjala (296.5–298.4) pro-
vides a brief explanation of each item, none of which reﬂects any of the San-
skrit commentaries.
that their very existence demonstrates that clarity/annihilation of mind is not absorption
becomes ineffective. To avoid contradiction one may suppose that ‘absorption’ here ac-
tually denotes the non-cognitive variety.
Cf. Bhoja’s Rājamārtaṇḍa on Yogasūtra 1.17,
which places the disembodied beings in the state of ānandasamādhi and those who are
dissolved into unevolved matter in asmitāsamādhi—both of which belong to the cognitive
variety—reasoning that they do not perceive the soul because their mind has merged into
its own source (cf. Vasudeva 2004:175).
49.
Which again takes up a characterization of these items in 3.23. On the Buddhist
parallels of this list, cf. de la Vallée Poussin (1936–37:232–233). Te same list of items,
collectively called caturpārāmitā, is attested in the Buddhist SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (p.
42 lines 12–22) and in its Śaiva version too (p. 35 line 2).


--- PAGE 514 ---
Yoga
495
Table 15: Te states preceding asamprajñātasamādhi according to the DhPāt
śraddhā
Clarity or dispassion of mind (alilaṅni citta) obtained
through constant practice of yoga.
vīrya
Finding constant pleasure in performing yoga and its
means of realization.
tutur50
Knowledge about the state of yogīśvara, which is the
cure for saṅsāra and the path leading to the meeting
with the Lord.
prajñā
Steadfastness of the yogin with regard to the possession
of the true knowledge guiding to the Lord; this insight
is simple, going straight to the Lord like an arrow whose
course is straight thanks to its wings.51
samādhi
Consciousness abiding within the Soul (or: within it-
self).
Te śloka-quarter ātmani cetanaḥsthitaḥ, deﬁning samādhi, is commented
upon as follows:
Te mind is conscious. Te mind is lef behind by the Holy Soul. It closely
DhPāt
298.2–4
adheres to the Lord. Tis kind of absorption will be met by the yogin end-
lessly. Tat is the reason why the state of supernatural prowess is met by
him.
Te portion of the Sanskrit verse and its gloss reﬂect sūtra 1.3: ‘Ten the
Seer is established in his own form’ tadā draṣṭuḥsvarūpe ’vasthānam.52 Te
Seer (draṣṭṛ) is the Spirit or Self. Te Dharma Pātañjala merges the Pātañ-
jala understanding of the ﬁnal state of contentless consciousness, brought
about by absorption,53 as isolation (kaivalya, which corresponds to the Old
Javanese kavәkas),54 with the Śaiva view of liberation as union with the Lord
and obtainment of His supernatural powers.
50.
Tis is the Old Javanese word equivalent to the Sanskrit smṛti, ‘remembering or rec-
ollection’, but also ‘awareness, sentience’ (OJED 1800).
51.
Te simile of the arrow going straight to its target used in the context of yogic practice
is also found in the Tattvajñāna (cf. below, p. 552).
52.
Or, with Woods (1914:13): ‘Ten the Seer [that is, the Self,] abides in himself’.
53.
It is evident, in view of the Bhāṣya (on sūtra 1.20), that the Dharma Pātañjala too
intends this absorption to be non-cognitive, for it leads to the supreme state.
54.
To say that the mind ‘has been lef behind’ amounts to say that it is no more conjoined
with the Holy Soul, which thus remains in its pure state of awareness.


--- PAGE 515 ---
496
iii Doctrine
In 298.5–12, the text then describes three categories of supernatural prow-
ess (kasiddhyan),55 namely low, middle and superior, which in turn are at-
tributed to the three categories of yogin who practice respectively with gen-
tle intensity (mṛdusambega), with moderate intensity (madhyasambega) and
with keen intensity (tībrasambega). Tis topic coincides with that expounded
by Yogasūtra 1.21 and 22: ‘For those whose practice is keenly intense, the
[absorption] is near’ tīvrasaṃvegānām āsannaḥ, and ‘Tere is a superiority
even to that, on account of [the method] being gentle, moderate or vehe-
ment’ mṛdumadhyādhimātratvāt tato ’pi viśeṣaḥ.
As Bronkhorst (1985:191–194) has argued, these two sūtras are ten-
dentiously interpreted by the Bhāṣya so as to justify the existence of an eleven-
fold classiﬁcation of yogins. Each of the three main categories of yogins fol-
lowing a gentle, moderate or keen method (upāya) is further subdivided into
three sub-categories, depending on the intensity (saṃvega) of their practice
being gentle, moderate or keen.56 In commenting upon sūtra 1.22, the Bhā-
ṣya imposes a further threefold division on the category of yogin who follows
the keen method with keen intensity. It is evident, however, that the two
sūtras do not explicitly refer to this classiﬁcation, at best identifying the cat-
egory of yogin whose practice is keenly intense (tīvrasaṃvega), which is in
turn qualiﬁed into three further subdivisions (keen-gentle, keen-moderate,
keen-vehement). No explanation of what these terms exactly stand for is
given in either the sūtra or the Bhāṣya.
Te Dharma Pātañjala is at variance with the Yogaśāstra not only be-
cause it simply mentions three kinds of supernatural prowess as being the
achievement of three categories of yogins, but also because it provides a def-
inition of each category.
Table 16: Te three categories of yogins according to the DhPāt
mṛdusambega
Te yogin obtains the state of supernatural prowess in a
long time (i.e. not before many births).
madhyasambega
Te yogin obtains the state of supernatural prowess in
another birth (i.e. in his next birth).
55.
It is arguable that here kasiddhyan was intended as the Śaiva equivalent of the supreme
state brought about by non-cognitive absorption; in the Yogaśāstra, the goal seems rather
to be non-cognitive absorption itself.
56.
Cf. the introduction to sūtra 1.21 (Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.20.1–3).


--- PAGE 516 ---
Yoga
497
tībrasambega
Te yogin obtains the supernatural powers deriving
from his intense practice in his present human birth.
It is difﬁcult to determine whether this idiosyncratic treatment reﬂects the
standpoint of the author or goes back to an untraced Sanskrit exegetical tra-
dition.57
To Kumāra’s question as to why the yogin who performs yoga with keen
intensity meets the supernatural powers in his life, the Lord replies that it is
by virtue of ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord (īśvarapraṇidhāna), which is
simply glossed as the direct obtainment of the body of the Lord by the yogin
(298.18). Apart from its synthetic deﬁnition that reveals Śaiva undertones,
the Dharma Pātañjala is in disagreement with the Bhāṣya in that it explicitly
links the quality of īśvarapraṇidhāna to the yogin belonging to the highest
category.58
Te exposition continues with Kumāra’s question about the characteris-
tics of the body of the Lord as it is obtained by the yogin, and to this the Lord
replies by means of a half-śloka (4):
Te Lord is eternally untouched by afﬂictions, karma, fruitions or la-
DhPāt
300.1–3
tent deposits.
57.
It may be pointed out that the division of supernatural powers (siddhi) into three
levels (e.g. niṣṭha, madhya and uttama) is found in the Śaiva Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā and
in the Brahmayāmala, as well as some Tantric Buddhist texts like the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa
(cf. Goodall and Isaacson 2007:5). Abhinavagupta in Tantrāloka 13.129–130 uses a sim-
ilar terminology to divide the fall of the Lord’s grace (śaktipāta) into the categories of violent
(tīvra), middle (madhya) and gentle (manda), each of which are further subdivided into the
same three gradations—a ninefold systematization that reﬂects the one implemented by the
Bhāṣya to explain sūtra 1.21–22.
58.
A passage recalling the deﬁnition of īśvarapraṇidhāna given by the Bhāṣya is found
in the Vṛhaspatitattva (3.25–26), which characterizes the arising of sambega in the yogin
as resulting in the Lord’s love towards him: ‘Ten the desire for emancipation (sambega)
comes into being, as well as love, meritorious acts and devotion. He brings all of them
into being. Tat is the cause of the love of the Lord towards him. Te Lord loves him’ (I
have quoted the passage in full above, p. 476). Compare the Bhāṣya (1.23.4–5): ‘Because
of the excellence of his devotion [the Lord] is inclined to him (i.e. the yogin) and favours
him simply on account of his longing for [the Lord]. It is also by virtue of his longing that
the attainment of absorption and the fruits of absorption are very close within the yogin’s
reach’ bhaktiviśeṣād āvarjitas tam abhidhyānamātreṇānugṛhṇāti. tadabhidhyānād api yo-
gina āsannataraḥsamādhilābhaḥsamādhiphalaṃceti.


--- PAGE 517 ---
498
iii Doctrine
Te yogin’s awareness [of something] is not adhered to by afﬂictions, karma,
fruitions or latent deposits. Tus are the characteristics of the Lord as they
are obtained by the yogin.
Te half-śloka is apparently based on Yogasūtra 1.24: ‘Untouched by hin-
drances or karma or fruition or latent deposits, the Lord is a special kind
of Spirit’ kleśakarmavipākāśayair aparāmṛṣṭaḥpuruṣaviśeṣa īśvaraḥ. In the
Bhāṣya the sūtra is also introduced by a question, namely who is the Lord,
who is distinct from the primal matter and the spirit (atha pradhānapuru-
ṣavyatiriktaḥko ’yam īśvara iti). In the Dharma Pātañjala the attention is
more on the yogin than on God, namely on the Śiva-like state obtained by
him when his being aware of an object (mañetanā)59 is untainted; no refer-
ence to puruṣa is made. Te formulation of the half-śloka evidently reﬂects
an awareness of the Bhāṣya’s emphasis on the fact that the Lord is eternally
liberated (sa tu sadā eva muktaḥsadā eva īśvara iti), so that it may be re-
garded as merging the motifs developed in the Bhāṣya with the ideas ex-
pressed in the sūtra. Whereas the Old Javanese paraphrase does not prob-
lematize the aspect of the Lord being liberated ab æterno, as if it were not an
issue,60 it refers to the Lord’s sovereignty as being absolutely unsurpassed (tā-
tan kalәvihan kaiśvaryanira, 300.12). Tis echoes a statement of the Bhāṣya
that the Lord’s sovereignty is altogether without anything equal or excelling
it, and it cannot be excelled by another sovereignty (tac ca tasyaiśvaryaṃ
sāmyātiśayamuktam. na tāvad aiśvaryāntareṇātiśayyate, 1.22:15–16).
Te elaborate Old Javanese commentary to the half-śloka provides a def-
inition of the hindrances, karma and the latent deposits. Te ﬁrst item is
explained as a series of ﬁve, namely ignorance (avidyā), egoicity (asmitā),
attachment (rāga), aversion (dveṣa), strong desire (abhiniveśa); these terms
59.
On the translation of the verb mañetanā, from the base cetanā, cf. below, fn. 66. Here
the untainted Soul’s faculty of being aware of something corresponds to the ‘establishment
of the [Soul’s] power of sentience in its own form’ (svarūpapratiṣṭhā citiśaktir) described
in Yogasūtra 4.34, which deﬁnes isolation (kaivalya). Cf. also sūtra 2.20: ‘Te Seer is just
vision, even though, pure, he sees in conformity with thought’ draṣṭā dṛśimātraḥśuddho ’pi
pratyayānupaśyaḥ, and its paraphrase in Kitāb Pātañjala (Pines and Gelblum 1977:525):
‘In the abode of liberation, on the other hand, the veils are removed, the coverings are lifed,
and the impediments eliminated. In it the [knower’s] essence is cognizant only and nothing
but that’.
60.
In contrast to the perspective of the classical Śaivasiddhānta, according to which the
Lord is different from the liberated individual souls in that His Śiva-ness is ab æterno, hence
superior (cf. above, p. 391).


--- PAGE 518 ---
Yoga
499
are lef undeﬁned. Tis seems to reﬂect the Bhāṣya, which simply mentions
avidyā and the others (avidyādayaḥ), referring to sūtra 2.3 avidyāsmitārā-
gadveṣābhiniveśāḥkleśāḥ61 (each item is then explained in sūtra 2.4 to 2.9).
Te next item, karma, is glossed as ‘doing bad, doing good’ (gave hala, gave
hayu), which corresponds to the kuśalākuśalāni of the Bhāṣya. Fruition (vi-
pāka) is deﬁned as follows:
Its (i.e. the karma’s) fruits being experienced by the body are without power,
DhPāt
300.5–7
for the body is the fruit of karma along with pleasure and pain. Tose are
not experienced during the time of yoga.
Te point seems to be that, for the yogin, the fruition of karma (and hence
the experience of pleasure and pain) is no more active and what remains is
simply the body, which was itself the fruit of previous karma. A comparison
with this Bhāṣya does not help us to elucidate the point, as the commentary
simply states that ‘fruition is the fruit of [karma, i.e. good and bad actions]’
(tatphalaṃvipākaḥ).62 Te last item, the latent karmic deposits (āśaya), are
explained as ‘the lefovers of the fruits of karma that have already been ex-
perienced’ śeṣa nikaṅkarmaphalān huvus kabhukti, which cause awareness
of the mind (magave tutur niṅcitta)63 and, whether bad or good, are not
in the yogin. Te Bhāṣya deﬁnes them as latent impressions (vāsanā), and
concludes that afﬂictions, karma, fruitions and latent deposits pertain to the
‘mind’ (manas), but not to the Spirit (puruṣa). According to the Dharma Pā-
tañjala (300.9–12), when those negative conditions do not adhere to the yo-
gin, he acquires the characteristics of the Lord: he becomes omniscient and
omnipotent; he creates the whole universe and possesses an unsurpassed
sovereignty.64
61.
Te full series was already enumerated in the commentary to sūtra 1.8 on the ﬁve
errors; both the sūtra and the commentary were not followed by the Dharma Pātañjala
(cf. p. 486).
62.
On the ripening of the fruits of afﬂictions, karma and latent deposits, cf. also Yoga-
śāstra 2.13.
63.
I have translated the word tutur as ‘awareness’, which I understand as referring to
the Soul’s awareness of mind (in its tainted state). If the other meaning of the word, i.e.
‘remembering’, is chosen, one has to assume that it refers to the karmic traces of pleasure
and pain that were experienced by the Soul in former lives.
64.
Tis characterization is echoed in a passage of the Tattvajñāna, which merges Śaiva
and Pātañjala yoga views. Having described the process of puriﬁcation and paciﬁcation of
the mind enacted through absorption (samādhi) and reﬂection (tarka) in paragraph 47, the


--- PAGE 519 ---
500
iii Doctrine
Te text proceeds with a debate not found in the Yogaśāstra.65 An oppo-
nent puts forward the view that the Soul too (i.e. not the Lord-and-enlight-
ened yogin) is untainted, omniscient, omnipotent and sovereign. Te Lord
replies that it is not so, adducing as evidence the existence of (the Soul’s)
awareness of something (hananyaṅmañetanā). When the opponent calls
that fact into question, the Lord replies that ‘the whole universe does not ex-
ist, if the Soul does not exist’—a statement implying that the Soul’s awareness
of reality amounts to its very existence.66 Te opponent then remarks that,
text then (48.1–10) describes the state obtained by the yogin: ‘Te Holy Soul being in such
a condition, will return to the supreme state. It will return to be united with the Lord that
is the principle of Sadāśiva, and [it becomes] again omniscient and omnipotent, [endowed
with] the power of Knowledge, Pervasion, Sovereignty, Action. Te principle of Sadāśiva
is free from karma, fruition and latent deposits. Karma, fruition and latent deposits means
karma—the bad and good actions; fruition—their fruits, having ripened, are experienced in
the body; latent deposits—their lefovers are experienced. Tey closely adhere to the Soul,
creating further karma. Tat is considered as latent impressions. If the latent impressions of
past karma are bad, the man inevitably desires to do bad due to that. If the latent impressions
of past karma are good, the man inevitably desires to do good due to that. If none of them
exists adhering to the Soul, it is free from karma, fruition and latent deposits’ valuya riṅan-
taviśeṣa / ika saṅhyaṅātmā yan maṅkana / valuya sayodya lavan bhaṭāra sadāśivatattva /
muvah sarvajña / sarvakāryakartā / jñānaśakti / vibhuśakti / prabhuśakti / kriyāśakti / luput
saṅkeṅkarmavipākāśaya / ikaṅsadāśivatattva / karmavipākāśaya ṅaranya / karma ṅaraniṅ
gave halahayu / vipāka ṅaranya / ratәṅphalanya bhinukti riṅśarīra / āśaya ṅaranya / śeṣanya
bhinukti / ya teka rumakәt iṅātmā mamaṅun karma muvah / ya ta sinaṅguh vāsanā ṅara-
nya / yan ahala vāsanā nikaṅkarma ṅūni / mogha maharәp magaveha hala ikaṅvvaṅdenya /
yan ahayu vāsanā nikaṅkarma ṅūni / mogha maharәp magaveha hayu ikaṅvvaṅdenya / tan
hana pveka kabeh / rumakәt iṅātmā / yeka luput saṅkeṅkarmavipākāśaya ṅaranya /.
65.
Although it partly reﬂects, in a general way, the issue taken up by the Bhāṣya to 1.24
and 1.26 with regard to the difference between the individual souls in the isolated state vs.
god, who has a superior kind of omniscience.
66.
Te verbal form of the base cetanā, namely mañetanā (active), cinetanā (passive), is
difﬁcult to translate (cf. also the next fn.). It probably means something to the effect of ‘to
consciously perceive, to be aware of’ [something] (OJED). Tis usage might have derived
from the Sanskrit cetayati ‘to remember, have consciousness of’; cf., for instance, the def-
inition of citta by the Pañcārthabhāṣya on Pāśupatasūtra 5.37 ‘Te mind by itself’ saṃcit-
tam (p. 138 lines 6–7): ‘Here the root cit means consciousness. It is called citta because
through it one either perceives (cetayati) or collects (cinoti)’ atra citī saṃjñāne cetayati cinoti
vā aneneti cittam /. According to the Dharma Pātañjala, for something to be alive means
to be ‘sensed’ by the Soul: e.g. the Soul being aware of the vital breaths is what make hu-
mans alive (234.5–7), and the Soul being aware of primal matter results in the creation of
the universe (214.13–18). At the same time, when the Soul is conscious of something it
looses its original ‘immersion in its own state’, without contents of perception with which it


--- PAGE 520 ---
Yoga
501
still, the Soul is omniscient; that objection is countered by the Lord’s obser-
vation that, if the Soul were omniscient, it would not be aware of anything,67
and it would not cause the pain of its body (300.16–300.19).
A question now arises: does the above discussion of sovereignty and
omniscience reﬂect the next sūtra 1.25: ‘In Him (the Lord) is the unsur-
passed germ of the omniscient one’ tatra niratiśayaṃsarvajñabījam—thus
according to the interpretation of the Bhāṣya, which argues that there must
be an omniscient one, and that the special kind of Self deﬁned as Lord is
an omniscient one. One may suspect that the Old Javanese author either
misunderstood the point of the sūtra, or followed a different line of inter-
pretation than the Bhāṣya. In this respect, it must be noted that, as argued
by Bronkhorst (1985:194–197), in this case too the Bhāṣya seems to give
a tendentious interpretation of the sūtra, which in its original context (i.e.
prior to its compilation into the Yogasūtra known to us) would have referred
to the incarnation of the Lord in ‘an omniscient one’ (sarvajña), i.e. a seer.
As a quotation inserted in the Bhāṣya on sūtra 1.25 suggests, the omniscient
one may be identiﬁed with Kapila, the legendary sage who imparted the Sāṅ-
khya doctrine to Āsuri.68 Tis fact suggests that the Javanese author would
have known the ‘original’ line of interpretation and, like in other cases, re-
frained from treating sūtra 1.25 because its topic overlapped with another
portion of the text, namely the long section in which the incarnation of the
Lord—in His form of universal teacher Śrīkaṇṭha—into the seer (ṛṣi) Pātañ-
jala, the Javanese alter-ego of Lakulīśa, the ﬁrst promulgator of the Pāśupata
doctrine (cf. above, pp. 365–378). Tis hypothesis is supported by the fact
that also the topic of sūtra 1.26, ‘He is a teacher of the primal sages also, for
He is free from time’ sa pūrveṣām api guruḥkālenānavacchedāt, is passed
over in silence.
Te following theme is introduced by Kumāra’s praise of the Lord for
mistakenly identiﬁes itself.
67.
Tus, mañetanā is to be intended here as a limited, outer-directed kind of awareness
that is different from the state of sarvajñatva.
68.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya 1.25:8–11:
‘[Lord:]
‘‘Trough the teaching of knowledge and
dharma I will lif up the selves who transmigrate across the dissolutions at the end of
the aeons and the great ﬁnal dissolution’’. And thus it has been said: ‘‘Te ﬁrst knower,
the exalted one, the supreme Seer, having assumed a created mind, out of compassion
declared [the doctrine] to Āsuri, who desired to know’’ ’ jñānadharmopadeśena kalpa-
pralayamahāpralayeṣu saṃsāriṇaḥpuruṣān uddhariṣyāmīti. tathā coktam: ādividvān nir-
māṇacittam adhiṣṭhāya kāruṇyād bhagavān parama ṛṣir āsuraye jijñāsamānāya provāca iti.


--- PAGE 521 ---
502
iii Doctrine
teaching him a method easy to perform, which leads to the knowledge (jñā-
na) of the yogin—for indeed the obtainment of the Lord’s body is difﬁcult
given the man’s proneness to distraction. Te method proposed by the Lord
is the continuous murmuring of the syllable oṂ, which is taught to be the
name of the Lord in all the scriptures.69 Tis leads the yogin to the removal
of all the hindrances (sarvavighna) and the obtainment of the Lord’s body.
Tis section almost paraphrases the sequences of sūtras 1.27–29: ‘Te word
expressing Him (i.e. īśvara) is the syllable oṂ’ tasya vācakaḥpraṇavaḥ;70 ‘Te
murmuring of it [brings about] the representation of its object (i.e. īśvara)’
tajjapas tadarthabhāvanam; ‘Tereafer comes the right awareness, and the
removal of hindrances’ tataḥpratyakcetanādhigamo ’ntarāyābhāvaś ca. Te
Old Javanese texts calls vighna what the sūtra calls antarāya, both meaning
‘hindrances, obstacles’.71 Te characteristics of the hindrances are outlined
by the Lord by means of a śloka—the last one in the work:
Illness, inattentiveness, idleness, doubt, apathy, erroneous perception, intem-
DhPāt
302.13–14
perance in knowledge, inability to attain any stage [of absorption] and lack of
control.
Tis paraphrases sūtra 1.30: ‘Sickness, apathy, doubt, inattentiveness, idle-
ness, worldliness, erroneous perception, failure to attain any stage [of ab-
sorption], instability in the state [when attained]—these distractions of the
mind are the obstacles’ vyādhistyānasaṅśayapramādālasyāviratibhrāntida-
rśanālabdhabhūmikatvānavasthitatvāni cittavikṣepā antarāyāḥ.72
Te Lord goes on to say that once the hindrances have been eliminated
by murmuring (japa), the yogin is able constantly to perform yoga and thus
to leave the (general and negative) impressions (saṅaskāra) behind.
69.
A similar statement is found in the Stuti of the Kakavin Śivarātrikalpa (Canto 33,
stanza 2b): ‘In the sacred books you have a body in the mantra oṂ’ yan riṅveda kitāvak iṅ
praṇavamantra.
70.
Tis idea is a cliché of theistic Brahmanical schools. Among the Śaiva scriptures, cf.,
e.g., Pāśupatasūtra 5.24 and 26: ‘He should meditate upon the sound oṂ[…] this is the
Seer, the Sage, the Great’ oṃkāram abhidhyāyīta […] ṛṣir vipro mahān eṣaḥ; Svāyambhuva-
sūtrasaṅgraha VP 4.7ab: ‘Śiva shines forth under the form of oṂ[…]’ oṃkārātmatayā bhāti
[…] śivaḥ.
71.
Te same series of hindrances is referred to as vighna also in the Śivapurāṇa
(7.2.38.9ab), whereas a similar passage of the Liṅgapurāṇa calls them antarāyaka (1.9.3b).
72.
A series of verses that paraphrases this sūtra and, very patently, also the Bhāṣya, is
found in Liṅgapurāṇa 1.9:1–7; a similar passage is Śivapurāṇa 7.2.38:1–8.


--- PAGE 522 ---
Yoga
503
Table 17: Te hindrances that impede yoga according to the DhPāt and the YSBh
Dharma Pātañjala (302.15–304.8)
Yogasūtrabhāṣya (on 1.30)
vyādhi
internal pain (lārādhyātmika = ādhyātmikaduh-
kha)73
vyādhi
disorder of the humors of the body
pramāda
not performing yoga and its means of realization,
being unwilling to perform yoga
pramāda
absence of [performance of] the means
leading to absorption
ālasya
†74
ālasya
absence of activity due to heaviness of
body, speech and mind75
sandeha
when one thinks wrongly that the constant prac-
tice of yoga does not lead to release and there
might exist another easier path
saṃśaya
a knowledge touching both alternatives
[of a dilemma, as when one thinks:]
‘this might be so, this might be not so’
styāna
not being able to perform yoga because of one’s
weakness and indolence of character
styāna
unﬁtness of the mind for activity
bhrāntijñāna
one who is bewildered
bhrāntidarśana
erroneous knowledge
aviratijñāna
failing to perform yoga
avirati
desire characterized by connection with
the mind (?)
bhumyalābha
one does not desire anything and does not per-
form yoga
alabdhabhūmikatva
not attaining absorption
cañcala
one who never ﬁnds time for performing yoga
anavasthitatva
incapacity to keep the mind in any stage
that has been attained
73.
For a deﬁnition of internal pain, cf. Dharma Pātañjala 258.12–2.
74.
Te Dharma Pātañjala does not gloss ālasya, probably merging it with styāna (cf. the following footnote).
75.
Te critical edition (Maas 2006:48) reads kāyavākcittagurutvād instead of kāyasya cittasya ca gurutvād of the vulgate. Te gloss of
styāna of the Dharma Pātañjala appears to stand closer to the gloss of ālasya of the vulgate, where vāc (speech) is omitted.


--- PAGE 523 ---
504
iii Doctrine
Te (speciﬁc and positive) impressions of the yoga are said to cause aware-
ness (tutur) within the yogin, and the awareness to bring about yoga. Te
yoga in its turn causes impressions in the yogin’s mind.
Te distinction between unfavourable impressions produced by the mind
and favourable impressions produced by yoga, besides being implicit in the
passage, ﬁnds a counterpart in Yogasūtra 1.50: ‘Te impression produced
by this [insight] is an obstacle for the other impressions’ tajjaḥsaṃskāro
’nyasaṃskārapratibandhī. It is enticing to suppose that the term tutur, of
unclear meaning in the context of the passage, was used as a synonym of pra-
jñā ‘insight’. First, because prajñā is described in the series of ﬁve elements
culminating in samādhi given in Dharma Pātañjala 296.16–18, which corre-
sponds to Yogasūtra 1.20;76 second, because to prajñā is devoted sūtra 1.48,
and it forms the subject of sūtra 1.50, which in the Bhāṣya is introduced with
the following words: ‘When the yogin has gained concentrated insight, the
impression gained by the insight are reproduced again and again’ samād-
hiprajñāpratilambhe yoginaḥprajñākṛtaḥsaṃskāro navo navo jāyate.77 It is
evident that both texts, although differing slightly on details, describe the
same continuous circular process involving the production of ‘pure’ and ‘im-
pure’ impressions. Te present passage of the Yogapāda of the Dharma Pā-
tañjala appears to be informed by themes developed in the concluding sec-
tion of the Samādhipāda of the Yogaśāstra.
In 304.11–15 the Lord, having stated that the impressions of yoga bring
about awareness, characterizes them as either large (gә¯ṅ) or restrained (rәt-
rәt), never failing to cause pain to the yogin and being of ﬁve kinds. Kumāra’s
question (30) about the characteristics and the number of the afﬂictions (kle-
śa) gives reason to assume that the author regarded them as being the same
as those of the impressions of yoga. Tis is further suggested by the fact
76.
Where, unlike in the Dharma Pātañjala, the series ends not with samādhi but prajñā
(cf. above, p. 495).
77.
An alternative hypothesis may be advanced. Te circular process outlined in the Dha-
rma Pātañjala reminds one of that illustrated in the śloka quoted at the end of the Bhāṣya
ad 1.28 on japa ‘murmuring’ (= Viṣṇupurāṇa 6.6.2): ‘Trough recitation let one constantly
practice yoga; through yoga let one effect recitation for a long time. By perfection in yoga
and recitation, the supreme Soul shines forth’ svādhyāyād yogam āsīta yogāt svādhyāyam
āmanet / svādhyāyayogasampattyā para ātmā prakāśate. In this case the Old Javanese tu-
tur in the passage might have denoted ‘memory, recollection, thinking on or upon, calling
to mind’ (= smṛti: cf. above, p. 495), which would correspond to the svādhyāya ‘reciting,
rehearsing to one’s self’ in the śloka.


--- PAGE 524 ---
Yoga
505
that the ‘large’ and ‘restrained’ impressions appear to correspond to respec-
tively the ‘great’ (udāra)78 and ‘minute’ (tanu)79 afﬂictions distinguished in
Yogasūtra 2.4.80 Tis lack of distinction between the ‘pure’ impressions of
yoga and the ‘impure’ impressions that are called afﬂictions is, however, at
odds with the testimony of the Yogaśāstra. An elucidation of the matter
is found in Yogaśāstra 1.5, which, equating the ‘impure’ impressions to the
afﬂictions,81 characterizes the conditions (vṛtti) of the mind as being either
stained impressions (kliṣṭa saṃskāra), i.e. the impressions that are caused
by the afﬂictions, and non-stained impressions (akliṣṭa saṃskāra), originat-
ing from (discriminative) knowledge (khyāti). Te Bhāṣya speciﬁes that the
non-stained impressions remain so even though they are immersed in the
stream of the stained impressions, and vice-versa, thus keeping their own
identity in spite of being mixed together. Perhaps the variance in Dharma
Pātañjala 304.11–15 might have been caused, rather than by a doctrinal vari-
ation, by a mistaken interpretation of a Sanskrit passage describing this con-
cept.82
Te ﬁve kinds of afﬂictions, already mentioned by the text in 300.3–4,
are listed once again and explained one by one. Tis section of the Dha-
rma Pātañjala follows the beginning of the Sādhanapāda of the Yogaśāstra:
sūtra 2.3, listing the ﬁve afﬂictions; 2.4, dividing them into four categories
and deﬁning ignorance as the basis of all the other hindrances;83 sūtra 2.5–9,
deﬁning each of the afﬂictions.
Te deﬁnition of the ﬁrst item, ignorance (avidyā), closely reﬂects that
of sūtra 2.5 and shares some elements with the Bhāṣya too. It is presented
in the form of the statement of a (presumably materialist) opponent hav-
ing false knowledge (mithyājñāna), expressing the ‘topsy-turvy’ view that
the Soul does not last; that saying that its nature is vanished (i.e. confused
78.
Also: ‘lofy, active, energetic, clear’.
79.
Also: ‘ﬁne, thin, slender’.
80.
Te sūtra details two more categories of afﬂictions, viz. the dormant (prasupta) and
intercepted (vicchinna), thus presenting a total of four distinctions.
81.
For indeed the conditions are said to be generated by the impressions, and vice-versa,
as a wheel ceaselessly rolling (vṛttisaṃskāracakram aniśam āvartate).
82.
No evident signs of corruption are found in the passage in question, apart from one
oddity: Kumāra asks the Lord both the characteristics and number of the afﬂictions, in spite
of the Lord’s having just pointed out that the impressions are ﬁve. One may thus not exclude
that a portion of text was mistakenly lef out.
83.
On the latter point, cf. Dharma Pātañjala 306.9–10 and below, p. 559.


--- PAGE 525 ---
506
iii Doctrine
with mind) is to no avail; and that yogins are impure, whereas the ﬁve ele-
ments and beautiful women are pure (pavitra).84 Tis criticism reﬂects the
points made by the Bhāṣya, citing examples illustrating that the body, made
of impure substances, is impure (aśuci); that a woman, however beautiful,
is impure; that the recognition of Self in not Self (such as in the mind, etc.)
amounts to ignorance. Te next item, egoicity (asmitā), is glossed as ‘Te
mind does not know about the difference between the mind and the Soul,
for its experience of the two is not clearly distinguished’ (306.4–5). Compare
sūtra 2.6: ‘Egoicity is like [supposing] an identity between the power of the
perceiver and the power of perception’ dṛgdarśanaśaktyor ekātmatevāsmi-
tā, and the Bhāṣya ad loc., glossing ‘the power of the perceiver’ as the Spirit
(puruṣa) and the power of perception as intellect (buddhi).85 Te items at-
tachment (rāga) and aversion (dveṣa) are simply glossed as desire (hyun) and
hate (melik), respectively.86 More interesting is the explanation of obsession
(abhiniveśa):
Attachment and aversion arise at the same time. Tis is obsession. Te mas-
DhPāt
306.6–9
ter is occupied by a constant obsession. Te evidence of this is as follows:
he will hate the actions bringing about suffering and tribulation. He desires
release, longing for the pleasure that does not turn into suffering. Tus is
the state of obsession of the master.
Compare sūtra 2.9: ‘Persisting spontaneously, obsession springs up in this
manner even in the wise’ svarasavāhī viduṣo ’pi tathārūḍho ’bhiniveśaḥ. Te
Dharma Pātañjala and the Yogasūtra agree in that they attribute obsession
to a yogin, indicated (here and elsewhere) respectively by the term paṇḍita
and vidvat. Te Dharma Pātañjala is however at variance with all the known
Sanskrit commentaries, including the Bhāṣya, in that it does not interpret it
as fear of death and wish to live—‘will-to-live’ being the commonest trans-
lation of the term abhiniveśa used by scholars. However, the interpreta-
tion of the Bhāṣya, which has apparently inﬂuenced all the following com-
84.
I quote the Old Javanese and Sanskrit passages, and discuss them, below, p. 613.
85.
Te following passage attributed to Pañcaśikha is quoted in the Bhāṣya to illustrate
the matter: ‘He who should fail to see that the Spirit, without form, propensity and knowl-
edge, etc., is other than the intellect, would consider, out of delusion, the intellect to be the
same as Spirit’ buddhitaḥparaṃpuruṣaṃākāraśīlavidyādibhir vibhaktam apaśyan kuryāt
tatrātmabuddhiṃmohena.
86.
Compare sūtra 2.7 ‘Attachment is that which is consequent upon pleasure’ sukhānu-
śayī rāgaḥand 2.8 ‘Aversion is that which is consequent upon pain’ duḥkhānuśayī dveṣaḥ.


--- PAGE 526 ---
Yoga
507
mentaries, seems tendentious and against a natural i.e. more general under-
standing of the term abhiniveśa in the sūtra.87 Te term is used in a wider
sense in philosophical systems other than Yoga, e.g. ‘application, intentness,
study, affection, devotion, determination (to effect a purpose or attain an
object), tenacity, adherence to’. Te present instance strongly suggests that
the author of the Dharma Pātañjala was following a different (and hitherto
unattested) tradition of interpretation, not based on the Bhāṣya, that under-
stood the term as a kind of ‘attachment’ by the yogin to his salviﬁc agenda,
comprising the wish for yoga and its aim (liberation) and the aversion to-
wards suffering (rather than death). Te sūtra in fact does not exactly de-
ﬁne the term abhiniveśa but simply explains it is present in the wise ‘thus,
in this manner, similarly’ (tathā). Te exact import of tathā has, as far as I
know, never been problematized; in the light of the Old Javanese gloss, which
stresses the concomitant presence of attachment and aversion in the master,
it may be supposed that the tathā originally referred to the two afﬂictions of
attachment and aversion deﬁned in the previous two sūtras, meaning some-
thing to the effect that ‘obsession exists spontaneously in this form (i.e. as
attachment and aversion) even in the wise’.
Te text proceeds with a question by Kumāra (31) about what is the
cure for the afﬂictions. Te Lord replies that the large and coarse ones can
be eliminated through observances (brata) and the yoga of breath-control
(prāṇāyāmayoga), and the subtle ones through cognitive absorption (306.13–
17). Tis indication ﬁnds no counterpart in the Yogaśāstra, where sūtra
2.10 simply states that ‘those [afﬂictions] that are subtle are to be destroyed
through decreation’ te pratiprasavaheyāḥsūkṣmāḥ. To explain this, the Bhā-
ṣya employs the metaphor of the burnt seed (dagdhabīja), which is no more
capable of bearing fruit. Earlier, sūtra 2.1 deﬁnes kriyāyoga as penance (ta-
pas), recitation (svādhyāya) and ﬁxation upon the Lord (īśvarapraṇidhāna),
which ‘aims at generating absorption and attenuating the afﬂictions’ samā-
dhibhāvanārthaḥkleśatanūkaraṇārthaś ca (2.2).
Te Lord goes on to expound the following sequence of generation: non-
cognitive absorption originates from cognitive absorption, which originates
from withdrawal etc., which originates from observances, which originate
87.
Relevant remarks on this point may be found in Pines and Gelblum (1977:535–536,
fn. 47), who propose to translate it as ‘congenital instinctive attachments’. As the authors
point out, the term was rendered as ‘attachment(s)’ by al-Bīrūnī and already translated by
Filliozat (1974:147) as ‘obsessions’, which latter interpretation I have adopted.


--- PAGE 527 ---
508
iii Doctrine
from dispassion, which originates from being full with the suffering. Te
items withdrawal etc. and observances appear to stand, respectively, for the
last ﬁve and the ﬁrst two ancillaries of Pātañjala yoga. Although the men-
tion of dispassion (vairāgya) as part of the process of elimination of the hin-
drances through yoga is found nowhere in the Yogaśāstra, a similar concept
is detectable in sūtra 1.12: ‘Te restriction of those [functions] is by means
of practice and dispassion’ abhyāsavairāgyābhyāṃtannirodhaḥ. As we have
seen above, the functions are largely caused by, and at the same time gener-
ate, the afﬂictions. Another echo of the idea that ‘being full with the suffering
(of life)’ leads to dispassion is detectable in sūtra 1.15: ‘Dispassion is the con-
sciousness88 of the mastery [attained] by one who has rid himself of thirst
for either seen or revealed objects’ dṛṣṭānuśravikaviṣayavitṛṣṇasya vaśīkāra-
saṃjñā vairāgyam.
Te Dharma Pātañjala illustrates the painfulness of reincarnation and
embodiment as follows:
Te so-called suffering, that does not have an end, for the nature of having
DhPāt
306.19–22
a body is only the fact that there is suffering. Tat which has a body, it will
come back endlessly in heaven, hell or as a human being, incessantly revolv-
ing. Te leader among yogins does know that the nature of having a body is
thus.
Temes relating to this synthetic passage clearly recur in the long section of
the Bhāṣya on sūtra 2.12–13, identifying in the afﬂictions the root of karma
resulting in life and death. It is arguable that the extreme synthetic treatment
of karma and transmigration in the above passage, in contrast to the detailed
excursus made by the Bhāṣya, is due to the fact that the mechanism of karma
was already detailed earlier, in 234.13–240.12 and 272.17–274.18. Te ax-
iom that all experience as incarnated beings amounts to suffering, which the
yogin must escape, is stressed in sūtra 2.15—which ﬁnds a clear echo in the
above passage of the Dharma Pātañjala.
Te Lord goes on to state that, in order to escape from the cycle of ex-
istence and thus obtain release and the body of the Lord, the yogin should
practice absorption and its means of realization (sādhananya, arguably the
eight ancillaries), not be inattentive (pramāda) but pay close attention to
88.
I follow Angot’s (2008:221, fn. 490) hesitant translation of saṃjñā as ‘consciousness’
rather than ‘name’.


--- PAGE 528 ---
Yoga
509
suffering. Te difference in this respect between a yogin and a common hu-
man being is illustrated through the example of a spider’s web touching the
eye:
Te stupid man is tolerant with suffering. For example: like a man who is
DhPāt
308.2–7
touched by the web of a spider (savaṅni garagatī);89 it is not painful if the
body of the man [is touched], but if the eyes of the man are touched by it, it is
painful. Te yogin suffers from pain in the eyes, for the eyes of the man that
have been touched by the web of a spider are not comfortable. To be afraid
of suffering is the nature of the yogin. Tat is the reason why he performs
absorption, along with its means of realization.
Te same example is reported in the Bhāṣya ad sūtra 2.15:
Tus this stream of pain from time without beginning, spreading wider and
wider, agitates even the yogin because its essence is counteractive. Why is
this? It is because a wise man is like an eyeball. Just as a cobweb (ūrṇā) fallen
upon the eyeball by its touch gives pain, but not so when it falls upon other
parts of the body, so these pains [from impressions] hinder the yogin only,
who is like an eyeball, but not any other perceiver.90
In both texts the example aims at showing that common human beings are
not as sensible to pain as the yogin. Te word ūrṇā, attested in the Bhāṣya
as well as in most commentaries and sub-commentaries, is usually trans-
lated according to its common meaning of ‘wool’ or ‘thread of wool’.91 But
the meaning of ‘cobweb’ is attested in MW (Bhāgavatapurāṇa),92 which sug-
gests that the rendering of the Dharma Pātañjala might be the most faithful
to the ‘original’, or at least most widespread, interpretation of the word, for it
89.
Te word savaṅis attested in OJED (1717) only in its verbal form manavaṅ, panavaṅ
‘to catch in a net (web)?’; on the other hand, the Modern Javanese savaṅmeans ‘cobweb’. Te
Old Javanese garagatī is glossed in OJED (494) as ‘spider? (cf. KBNW s.v.); or: caterpillar?’;
the form savaṅgaragatī occurs in Sumanasāntaka 1.16.
90.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya 2.15: evam idam anādiduḥkhasroto viprasṛtaṃyoginam eva prati-
kūlātmakatvād udvejayati / kasmāt? akṣipātrakalpo hi vidvān iti / yathorṇātantur akṣipātre
nyastaḥsparśena duḥkhayati na cānyeṣu gātrāvayaveṣu evam etāni duḥkhāny akṣipātrakal-
paṃyoginam eva kliśnanti netaraṃpratipattāram.
91.
Cf. Woods (1914:134), Leggett (1990:215–216), Angot (2008:353). Te word also
denotes the ‘circle of hairs between the eyebrows’.
92.
Te PSW gives the meaning of ‘spider, that which has wool at the navel, at the belly’
(‘Spinne (am Nabel, am Bauch Wolle habend)’) under ūrṇanābha.


--- PAGE 529 ---
510
iii Doctrine
is hardly possible that the author opted for a relatively uncommon interpre-
tation of ūrṇā if it were not already explicitly attested in his Sanskrit source,
perhaps as a synonym.93
Te statement in the Dharma Pātañjala that the nature of the yogin is
to be afraid of suffering seems to adumbrate the point made in sūtra 2.16:
‘Te future suffering should be avoided’ heyaṃduḥkham anāgatam, which
the Bhāṣya explains as follows: ‘It is future pain which afﬂicts the yogin,
who is sensitive like the eyeball, not another perceiver. Only that [pain] has
the property of being avoidable’ anāgataṃduḥkhaṃtad evākṣipātrakalpaṃ
yoginaṃkliśnāti netaraṃpratipattāraṃtad eva heyatām āpadyate.
In 308.7–11 the Lord goes on to say that the yogin performs observances
(brata), which are capable of destroying maculation. To illustrate this He
resorts to the following simile: if a man wants to produce a ﬁre in wood
by rubbing it, the wood must be dry; the observances are what makes the
mind, the body and the senses dry, in order that they can be ‘rubbed’ by the
ancillaries beginning with breath-control. Tis metaphor, not attested in the
Yogaśāstra, might be an allusion to prayogasandhi (cf. below, pp. 546–550);
but examples involving ﬁre used to illustrate yogic practices are common in
Sanskrit literature.94
Te Eight
Ancillaries
As we have seen above, a remarkable feature that dis-
tinguishes the Śaiva from the Pātañjala yoga is the
treatment of the ancillaries (aṅgas) of yoga, and that
what distinguished the Dharma Pātañjala from all other
known Old Javanese sources is its adherence to the latter system, number-
ing eight ancillaries, instead of the former, which numbers six. Tere exists
a signiﬁcant amount of literature on the ṣaḍaṅgayoga, some of which has
taken into account not only Sanskrit but also Old Javanese sources.95 Of
93.
It is in fact not possible to arrive at the exact meaning of the word by studying the
Sanskrit commentaries. A similar version of the example is paralleled in Buddhist sources,
from which a different interpretation of the word emerges: cf. Angot (2008:353 fn. 1040),
who, noting that ‘tout ce sūtra est pénétré des valeurs du yoga le plus ancien et donc du
bouddhisme’, quotes two passages from respectively Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakośabhāṣya
and Candrakīrti’s Prasannapadā, referring to the example of an ūrṇāpakṣma ‘eyelash’ (cil),
which may be more correctly rendered as ‘a lash of the ūrṇā’, which is harmless if placed on
the palm of a hand while painful if placed on the eye.
94.
Cf., e.g., Bhagavadgītā 4.27: ‘Others offer up all works of sense, all works of vi-
tal breath, in the ﬁre of yoga of self-restraint, kindled by wisdom’ sarvāṇīndriyakarmāṇi
prāṇakarmāṇi cāpare / ātmasaṃyamayogāgnau juhvati jñānadīpite //.
95.
I refer the reader to the contributions by Ensink (1974, 1978), Grönbold (1983),


--- PAGE 530 ---
Yoga
511
particular interest are the tables comparing the treatment of the ancillaries
in various sources that may be found in Ensink (1974:211) and Vasudeva
(2004:379–380); the table below is intended to offer an updated presentation
of the aṅgas as illustrated in Old Javanese texts.
Table 18: Te yogāṅgas in Old Javanese texts
VraŚā 21
AgPar
p. 375.20
SHK
(Śaiva)
p. 76–77
JS 15.1 (= TK),
Vṛh 53, Gaṇ3,
Sut 40.2–5
TJ 44.1–2
DhPāt
308.15–17
yama
niyama
āsana
āsana
prāṇāyāma
prāṇāyāma
pratyāhāra
prāṇāyāma
pratyāhāra
dhāraṇā
dhyāna
pratyāhāra
dhyāna
pratyāhāra
prāṇāyāma
pratyāhāra
dhāraṇā
dhyāna
prāṇāyāma
dhāraṇā
dhāraṇā
dhyāna
tarka
dhāraṇā
dhāraṇā
dhyāna
dhyāna
pratyāhāra
tarka
tarka
tarka
samādhi
samādhi
samādhi
samādhi
samādhi
Besides the omission of āsanas, yamas and niyamas, the most salient features
of ṣaḍaṅgayoga versus aṣṭāṅgayoga are the fundamentally theistic nature of
the former and its inclusion of reﬂection (tarka or ūha) among the ancillar-
ies.96 Another interesting fact is the position of dhyāna in the two traditions:
it usually appears as second member in early Śaiva sources,97 whereas in Pā-
tañjala yoga sources—or Śaiva sources inﬂuenced by that system—it appears
as the penultimate one.98 Indeed the Dharma Pātañjala is not the only Śaiva
source giving a syncretic list, for similar instances of Pātañjala inﬂuence, es-
Vasudeva (2004:367–436), and the notes by Sudarshana Devi (1957:316–320) and
Goodall (2004:351–353); cf. also Brunner (1994).
96.
Indeed Grönbold (1983) distinguished a ‘tarka-based’ (ṣaḍaṅga) yoga from an
‘āsana-based’ (aṣṭāṅga) yoga. I believe that Vasudeva’s (2004:373) claim that in the ṣaḍ-
aṅga system tarka was regarded as the most important of the ancillaries is only true with
respect to the Mālinīvijayottaratantra and other non-dualist Kaśmirian scriptures of the
Trika (including the works of the post-10th century exegetes); as Brunner (1994:440–441)
has pointed out, in (early) Saiddhāntika literature (and, I add, in Old Javanese texts too) that
aṅga plays a relatively unimportant role. On the other hand, it is true that samādhi plays a
considerably less important role in the ṣaḍaṅga system than in the yoga of Patañjali.
97.
Cf. Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 7.5, Kiraṇatantra 58.2c–3b, Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama
YP 1.6, Bṛhatkālottara YP 1c–2b, Śrīkaṇṭhīyasaṃhitā 39–40, Parākhyatantra 14.10, Vṛhas-
patitattva 53, Gaṇapatitattva 3 (sources cited in Vasudeva 2004:376, fn. 19); cf. also Grön-
bold (1983:184–186).
98.
Among the Śaiva sources, besides the Dharma Pātañjala, cf. Netratantra ch. 8,
Gorakṣaśataka (1) 4.


--- PAGE 531 ---
512
iii Doctrine
pecially with respect to the number and order of the aṅgas—are documented
in Sanskrit sources too.99
In Dharma Pātañjala 308.14, Kumāra asks about the characteristics of
the means of realization (sādhana) of yoga and of the observances (brata).
As it is formulated, the question betrays Śaiva-Ṣaḍaṅgayoga undertones, for
it implies that the observances, i.e. yamas and niyamas (and possibly also
āsana), are not regarded to be ancillaries or means but just preparatory stages
to the performance of yoga proper. Nonetheless, the Lord explains the means
as the eight ancillaries of yoga, namely: general commandments (yama),
particular commandments (niyama), postures (āsana), withdrawal (praty-
āhāra), breath-control (prāṇāyāma), ﬁxation (dhāraṇā), visualization (dhy-
āna), absorption (samādhi).
Te difference with the list of ancillaries listed in the Yogasūtra (2.29) lies
in the position of withdrawal before breath-control. Te Lord then intro-
duces the ﬁve general and ﬁve particular commandments, whose items cor-
respond, respectively, to those outlined in sūtra 2.30: non-violence (ahiṅsā),
truth (satya), non-thef (astainya DhPāt,100 asteya YS), continence (brah-
macāri DhPāt, brahmacarya YS), renunciation (aparigraha), and in 2.32: pu-
rity (śauca), contentedness (santoṣa), penance (tapas), recitation (svādhyā-
ya), ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord (īśvarapraṇidhāna).
Te deﬁnition of each items is in line with that found in the Bhāṣya, save
99.
It is especially in the case of late (and ofen, South Indian) Saiddhāntika sources that
the adherence to aṣṭāṅgayoga is remarkably faithful: cf. Suprabheda YP 3.53–56; Īśānaśiva-
gurudevapaddhati 2; Ajitāgama 2.29; Makuṭāgama 11.1–21 and the Kaśmirian Netratantra
8.9, 21 (cf. Brunner 1994:439–440); to this list could be added the Devakōṭṭai edition of the
Kiraṇatantra (58.2c–3), which substitutes āsanas in place of tarka, according to Vasudeva
(2004:377), ‘as an attempt (by a modern editor) to approximate the yoga of the Kiraṇa to
the classical system of Patañjali’, for the Nepalese manuscripts retain tarka (but cf. Goodall
2004:351–352 fn. 735, who has shown that all the South Indian manuscripts indeed read
āsana). Other sources teaching a variety of aṣṭāṅgayoga are the Mṛgendratantra YP and the
Sarvajñānottara; the latter represents an intermediary position with six aṅgas without tarka
(cf. Vasudeva 2004:370, fn. 5). An interesting example documenting the appeal that Pātañ-
jala yoga exerted on 20th-century Balinese intellectuals is provided by the Adji Sangkya, a
Balinese Tutur composed in 1947 by Ida Ketoet Djlantik, a text which, while faithfully draw-
ing upon the Vṛhaspatitattva and closely following the order of the topics expounded there,
teaches aṣṭāṅgayoga instead of the ṣaḍaṅgayoga of the Vṛhaspatitattva, using as a source the
Kitāb Joga Soetra Patandjali, a Malay translation, through the intermediary of a Javanese and
a Dutch translation, of Woods’ translation of the Yogasūtra (cf. Ensink 1974:198).
100.
Te form astainya instead of asteya is attested also in the śloka listing the yamas in
the Vṛhaspatitattva; cf. below, p. 514.


--- PAGE 532 ---
Yoga
513
for a few details. For instance, non-violence is interpreted in the Dharma
Pātañjala not only as not killing but also as killing the fear of having a body
and dying (patyanta takut ni māvak pati), an explanation that is not attested
in any Sanskrit commentary. Further, the abstention from killing under all
circumstances, even for the purpose of ritual or food, or during the period
of change of the moon, gives the yogin the status of one who has carried out
the Great Observance (māhābrata/māhāvrata). Tis element ﬁnds a coun-
terpart in sūtra 2.31, ‘When they (the general commandments) are unqual-
iﬁed by status or place or time or occasion and when valid at all stages these
amount to the Great Observance’ jātideśakālasamayānavacchinnāḥsārvab-
haumā mahāvratam, with the important exception that in the Old Javanese
text it is applied not to the commandments but only to the ﬁrst of them,
non-violence. Tis is apparently due to the treatment of the Bhāṣya, which
explains the Great Observance mentioned in the sūtra by taking up only the
example of non-violence as being not restricted to holy places, days of change
of the moon or that are auspicious, or for the sake of Gods or Brahmans, or
in battle.
Of interest is also the explanation, coloured by theistic overtones, of the
particular commandment īśvarapraṇidhāna as the visualization of the invis-
ible essence of the Lord in the whole universe and in the yogin’s body, in or-
der to make absorption perfect (umaṅәnaṅәn kasūkṣman bhaṭāra ri rat kab-
eh, ṅuniveh ry avaknira asthityana bhaṭāra, yatanyan siddhi samādhi, 312.1–
3)101—contrast the Bhāṣya on sūtra 2.32: ‘Fixing one’s mind upon the Lord
is the offering up of all actions to that Supreme Teacher’ īśvarapraṇidhānam
tasmin paramagurau sarvakarmārpaṇam.
Kumāra then asks why a yogin who has already mastered the ﬁve general
commandments should observe also the particular commandments (312.5–
6). Te Lord replies that the two series of commandments are standing in
one place (mekasthā), for the particular commandments are indispensable
for the general commandments to bring about their fruits. Tis verbal ex-
change seems to reﬂect, if only indirectly, a point of doctrine that was an im-
portant issue in Old Javanese Tattvas, but which is not problematized in the
101.
Compare the explanation of the fruit of īśvarapraṇidhāna in Yogasūtra 2.45: ‘Per-
fection of absorption results from ﬁxing one’s mind upon the Lord’ samādhisiddhir īśvara-
praṇidhānāt, and contrast Dharma Pātañjala 314.1–1: ‘Te fruit of ﬁxing one’s mind upon
the Lord is as follows: he is a perfect yogin’ nihan phala niṅīśvarapraṇidhāna, siddhi yogi
sira.


--- PAGE 533 ---
514
iii Doctrine
Yogaśāstra. Te point lies in the consideration of the series of general com-
mandments (yama) and particular commandments (niyama) as a single se-
ries of ten observances, that have to be understood as being practiced by the
yogin at all times. Tis view, as shown by Nihom (1995a), is testiﬁed to by
the treatment of the yamas and niyamas in the Vṛhaspatitattva (śloka 60–61
and commentary thereon) as a single set of ten rules of conduct, preparatory
to the yoga of the six ancillaries, called daśaśīla—a technical term unknown
in the Sanskrit literature.102 Nihom (1995a:204–205), having found the list
in the Vṛhaspatitattva103 to be identical to the one attested in Sāṅkhyavṛtti
(43.14–44.1, p. 36, lines 4–17), Pañcārthabhāṣya on sūtra 1.9 (15.23–16.8)
and Ratnaṭīkā (14.9–22), referred to Hara’s (2002:57–58 [1986:148]) obser-
vation that the subsumption of the niyamas under the yamas as constituting
a single set of ten items is a feature that distinguishes the Pāśupata from the
Sāṅkhya view.104 Echoes of this view are found also in Siddhāntatantras,
102.
Cf. Nihom (1995a:213). Te same point is made in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Yama
Niyama Brata (f. 49r): ‘Te total number of the observances of the general commandments
and particular commandments is ten; those are called the ten rules of conduct’ ikā taṅ
yama niyama brata piṇḍanya [em.; pidhanya ms.] sapuluh kvehnya, ya ika [em.; ya ka ms.]
daśaśīla. Note that the list given in this particular passage of the text differs from the one
of the Vṛhaspatitattva; the identical śloka is found, however, elsewhere in the text (cf. the
following footnote). Cf. also Tantu Paṅgәlaran 1, mentioning the daśaśīla and pañcaśikṣā.
103.
Which I have found to have a parallel in Yama Niyama Brata ff. 2v–3r and Vratiśāsana
3–4. Te ślokas (as edited in the Vṛhaspatitattva) run: ahiṃsā brahmacaryañ ca satyam
avyavahārikam / astainyam iti pañcaite yamā rudreṇa bhāṣitāḥ// akrodho guruśuśrūṣā śau-
cam āhāralāghavam / apramādaś ca pañcaite niyamāḥparikīrtitāḥ//. Tis list is different
from the one given in Yogasūtra. Te yamas are listed in a different sequence and apari-
graha is substituted with avyavahārika; the list of niyamas displays more variance. Note
that the list displaying aparigraha is likely to be the earliest, for it is attested in the Jaina
Ācārāṅgasūtra, dating back to as early as the third to fourth century bc.
104.
As Kauṇḍinya explains, the reason is that the ten items should be understood as gen-
eral commandments as the latter are to be applied with no restriction of time until the prac-
titioner’s death, whereas the ﬁve particular commandments are withdrawn in time. Ac-
cording to Hara (2002:58), the speciﬁcally Pāśupata new list of ﬁve particular command-
ments is constituted by ‘besmearing one’s body with ashes (bhasmasnāna), lying in ashes
(bhasmaśayana), wearing the nirmālya (the remains of ﬂowers offered to the deity) and the
like’—where ‘the like’ presumably refer to the supplementary bathing (anusnānam, sūtra
1.4) and wearing the sectarian marks (liṅgadhārī, sūtra 1.6). A list of ﬁve that might have
been understood as a counterpart of the ﬁve Pāśupatas niyamas is the one referred to as
pañcaśikṣā, mentioned alongside the daśaśīla, in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Yama Niyama
Brata f. 49v, glossing a śloka warning about the dire consequences for ascetics who do not
respect the Pāśupata rules of conduct (pāśupate na śīle); cf. also Tantu Paṅgәlaran 59.11 and


--- PAGE 534 ---
Yoga
515
which ofen mention the items constituting the yamas and niyamas as a se-
ries of ten subsumed under the buddhibhāva Righteousness (dharma).105
Although the ten items listed in the Vṛhaspatitattva and in other Old Ja-
vanese sources are different from those in the Dharma Pātañjala, the former
going back to the Sāṅkhya (and Śaiva) tradition while the latter goes back to
the Yogasūtra,106 the emphasis on their being a single set of ten is likely to
reﬂect a common Śaiva doctrinal standpoint.
Te Dharma Pātañjala resumes the thread of exposition of the Yoga-
śāstra, skipping sūtra 2.33–34,107 by detailing the fruits of the ﬁve general
and ﬁve particular commandments. Tese are treated in Yogaśāstra 2.35–45,
where each sūtra deﬁnes the fruit of one among the ten items. Te deﬁnitions
given in the Dharma Pātañjala are largely similar, although not identical, to
those of the Sanskrit text. Te treatment of the suitable places for practicing
yoga, following thereupon, may be regarded as a reemergence of the Śaiva
heritage of the Old Javanese source. Whereas the Yogasūtra immediately
passes to the description of the postures (2.46), the Dharma Pātañjala ﬁrst
illustrates the places of yoga and prescribes the activities of puriﬁcation and
worship of the Lord to be undertaken:
Desiring to start constantly practicing yoga and its means of realization, he
DhPāt
314.3–11
(the yogin) should look for a good place. His place should be somewhere
far from confusion. It should not be a place for evil people, pure and neat.
In order that his mind will become perfect, his abode should be any of these
places: either a cave, or a mountain, or a forest, or close to a river-bank, or
60.16.
105.
Cf., e.g., the tenfold dharma (daśavidho dharmo) described in Svacchandatan-
tra 10.1090cd–1091 (ahiṃsā satyam asteyaṃbrahmacaryam akalkatā // akrodho gu-
ruśuśrūṣā śaucaṃsantoṣa ārjavam / evaṃdaśavidho dharmo yenokto dharmakṛn naraḥ)
and 11.144cd–145ab (akrodho guruśuśrūṣā śaucaṃsantoṣa ārjavam // ahiṃsā satyam
asteyaṃbrahmacaryam akalkatā / evaṃdaśavidho dharmaḥkathitas tu varānane). Te de-
scription of a tenfold dharma is found in a passage of the Yama Niyama Brata (f. 41v), corre-
sponding to Vratiśāsana śloka 22, reporting another list of yamas and niyamas collectively
deﬁned as daśadharma (ika ta kabeh daśadharma ṅa). Te śloka, which has a parallel in
the Agnipurāṇa (161.17), runs: dhṛtiḥkṣamā damo ’steyaṃśaucam indriyanigrahaḥ/ hrīr
vidyā satyam akrodho daśakaṃdharmalakṣaṇam //.
106.
Yet, it appears that Sāṅkhya sources were not impermeable to the Pātañjala deﬁnition
of the rules of conduct. As noted by Hara (2002:68), the series described in the Yogasūtra
is also found in Mātharavṛtti and Gauḍapādabhāṣya on Sāṅkhyakārikā 23.
107.
Tose describe the opposite conditions that should be dispelled through the com-
mandments.


--- PAGE 535 ---
516
iii Doctrine
on an island, whatever is his desire. When he has already settled down, he
should take a bath, ﬁrst purifying himself and then rinsing his mouth. His
mantra is: aghora, or: tatpuruṢa. Having ﬁnished [to mutter] thus, he
enters the place to perform yoga, either a penance-grove, a cave or a house.
He should wash the feet and take position to the west or to the south of
the Lord. At ﬁrst he shall worship. Te words of the yogin will be: bhāva
siddha.
Several details in the above description ﬁnd a counterpart in related accounts
of Siddhāntatantras, usually in the context of introducing the description of
the yogin’s postures. Te sources mention the same spots that are mentioned
in the Dharma Pātañjala108 and also specify that they should be removed
from people, clean and free from insects.109 Besides in the Dharma Pātañja-
la, I have found such prescriptions in the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan,110 and
also in the Bhuvanakośa.111
108.
Save for an island (nūsa), arguably a local innovation; cf. Bhuvanakośa 10.9 (fn. 111).
109.
Cf. Mālinīvijayottaratantra 12.6 (quiet cave or earthen hut), Kiraṇatantra 58.4 (a
mountain peak, a deserted temple, a house), Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama YP 3.1c–2b (a se-
cluded and clean spot), Parākhyatantra 14.2–3 (a lonely place with one liṅga, a grove, a
mountain cave, an earthen hut, clean and free from insects), Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha
YP 20.1 (a silent spot frequented by yogins, not under any magic spell), Sarvajñānottara
YP 6–7 (an empty building, a monastery, a temple, the bank of a river, a hut, a forest, a
deserted spot), Mṛgendratantra YP 1.17 (a house, a forest)—these passages are listed in Va-
sudeva 2004:248–251; cf. also Niśvāsanaya 4.32, 4.101–103 and Niśvāsaguhya 10.4–5 (on
the japasthānas). Similar lists are also found in the early Upaniṣads (cf. Śvetāśvatara 2.10)
and in the Epics (cf. Mahābhārata, 12.269.12cd–14ab).
110.
Cf. SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan p. 31 lines 4–10: ‘It is good if the one who performs
oblations with ﬁre places himself on a mountain, a cave, the seaside, a hut, a (Buddhist)
monastery, a newly-settled village, a penance-grove, or you [should place yourself in] a
cemetery (? kṣetra haraṇan), or a forest, and suchlike’ yan molaha riṅvukir, gihā, sāgaratīra,
kunaṅkuṭi, vihāra, grāma naruka patapan, kunaṅkita riṅkṣetra haraṇan, alas salviranya
(compare the slightly different version of ms. C: tamolah ta kitāmaṅun patapan iṅvukir,
gihā, sāgaratīrah, oma uṅgvan kuṭi, vihāra, dharma, alas salviranya).
111.
Bhuvanakośa 10.8–9: ‘Here, in a ﬁeld, a forest, the bank of a river, a cave or a moun-
tain, the roots of a tree, a slab of rock, in those places the knower of yoga gives up life, o Goddess.
Your question, o Goddess, is what are the places where one who knows the yogasandhi dies.
Here they are: in a rice-ﬁeld, in a forest, the bank of a river, in a cave, on a mountain, at the
root of a tree, or on a slab of rock. Tere he will abandon his life. Or in a penance-grove,
a forest, a house, a deserted mountain, a cave, a ﬂat surface, an island, the knower of yoga
gives up life. Other places where he should die are the following: in a penance-grove, in
a forest, in a house, on a deserted mountain, on an island, or in an open ﬁeld—there he
abandons his life. Having died there, he goes back to the Lord Śiva’ « asmin kṣetre vane


--- PAGE 536 ---
Yoga
517
Te prescription of the activity of bathing (madyus), puriﬁcation (ma-
śoca) and mouth-cleansing (mācamana) of the Dharma Pātañjala is also an
eminent feature in Sanskrit sources.112 Te worship of the Lord is a cliché
too, but the modalities vary consistently from source to source.113
Te muttering of the Brahmamantras aghora or tatpuruṢa has an in-
teresting parallel in the Pāśupatasūtra and Kauṇḍinya’s commentary thereon.
In Pañcārthabhāṣya on sūtra 1.17: ‘One should mutter the [mantra called]
Raudrī Gāyatrī or the Bahurūpī’ raudrīṃgāyatrīṃbahurūpīṃvā japet (p.
39), Kauṇḍinya explains that the Raudrī Gāyatrī amounts to the mantra be-
ginning with tatpuruṢa, and the Bahurūpī to the mantra beginning with
aghora; the muttering of these words precedes the advance of yoga—cf. Pā-
śupatasūtra 1.20: ‘From these things begins his yoga’ tato ’sya yogaḥpravar-
tate. Te same point is reiterated in the commentary to Pāśupatasūtra 5.21–
22.114 It seems that this prescription was speciﬁcally Pāśupata as no traces of
it have survived in the later scriptures of the Śaiva Mantramārga.115 I have
devi nadīsthale guhāgirau / vṛkṣamūle śilātale prāṇan tyajanti yogavit » ndi ta kapatyanira
saṅvruh riṅyogasandhi / patakvanta bhaṭārī / nyan riṅsavah / riṅalas / tira nikaṅvve / riṅ
guhā / riṅgunuṅ/ ri vit nikaṅvṛkṣa ṅkāna / mvaṅriṅśilātala / ṅkāna ta tiṅgalakna hurip-
nira / « tapovane vane [em. ; vanā Mss.] garhe śūnye girau tathaiva ca / guhe sthale [em. ;
stala Mss.] ca nuse ’pi prāṇan tyajanti yogavit // » nihan vaneh kapatyanira / riṅpatapan / riṅ
vana / riṅumah / riṅguhā / riṅgiri / riṅnusa / riṅtәgal kunaṅ/ ṅkāna ta sirān tumiṅgalakәn
huripnira / mati pva sira ṅkāna / mulih ta sira bhaṭāra śiva //. Te passage is apparently to be
understood in a context of yogic suicide (here called yogasandhi, cf. pp. 544–550). A (still
preliminary) discussion of yogic suicide or utkrānti in the light of Sanskrit sources may be
found in White (2009:83–121) and Vasudeva (2004:437–445).
112.
Cf. e.g., Niśvāsanaya 4.31ab, Sarvajñānottara YP 9, Mṛgendratantra YP 15–16. Only
in the last source we ﬁnd a (non-explicit) reference to ācamana, which may be understood
as either a ritual sipping of water or its sprinkling on the seven bodily oriﬁces (cf. Somaśam-
bhupaddhati 1.47–50, Brunner 1963:42–44).
113.
Cf., e.g., Sarvajñānottara VP 9b, Mṛgendratantra YP 18, Niśvāsanaya 4.31b and
4.104a, Mālinīvijayottaratantra 12.21. All these sources, unlike the Dharma Pātañjala, also
prescribe the worship of the lineage of Gurus or Siddhas of the past.
114.
Cf. Pāśupatasūtra 5.21–22 (pp. 123–124): ‘[Te adept] should repeat the favourite
prayer (i.e. the mantra aghora, according to Kauṇḍinya) [and the] Gāyatrī verse with his
soul restrained’ ṛcam iṣṭām adhīyīta gāyatrīm ātmayantritaḥ; ‘Or either the Raudrī [Gāyatrī]
or the [mantra] Bahurūpī’ raudrīṃvā bahurūpīṃvā. Kauṇḍinya’s interpretation of the
words Raudrī and Bahurūpī is identical to the one advanced by him when commenting on
sūtra 1.17.
115.
Te closest passage I have found is Guhyasūtra 3.7cd–8ab (cf. the following footnote),
which describes a ritual of puriﬁcation involving the muttering of the Brahmamantras vak-
tra (i.e. tatpuruṢa), aghora and vāma (i.e. vāmadeva). Te muttering of these mantras,


--- PAGE 537 ---
518
iii Doctrine
found no Sanskrit parallel prescribing the muttering of the auspicious words
bhāva siddha.
Te prescription that the yogin should take position at the west or at the
south of the Lord (muṅgva kulon bhaṭāra athavā kidul bhaṭāra) must be un-
derstood in the context of yogic worship or initiation attested in early Śaiva
literature, referring to the Lord as the Southern Image (dakṣiṇāmūrti).116
Having taken position in the spot of his choice, the yogin should then
however, is commonly prescribed in all the Śaiva Tantras.
116.
‘Te Lord’ (mahādeva) ofen denotes an actual image, either a liṅga or a statue,
at whose right side the yogin should stand while he faces north; cf. the abundant ref-
erences in Pañcārthabhāṣya on Pāśupatasūtra 1.9 (‘Of the Great God in his Southern
image’ mahādevasya dakṣiṇāmūrteḥ): ‘Here the word southern refers to a particular di-
rection […].
By image here is meant whatever a man sees to the southern side of
God when he stands nearby facing north. Te term includes the image of Śiva of the
Bull Banner, a statue bearing the trident, a statue of Nandin, a statue of Mahākāla,
a statue with erect phallus, etc.’ atra dakṣiṇeti dikprativibhāge bhavati / mūrtināma yad
etad devasya dakṣiṇe pārśve sthitenodaṅmukhenopānte yad rūpam upalabhyate vṛṣadhva-
jaśūlapāṇinandimahākālordhvaliṅgādilakṣaṇaṃ(compare Ratnaṭīkā to Gaṇakārikā 5cd
and Saṃskāravidhi 4–5, cf. Acharya 2007:37, in particular fn. 68 and 69 on dakṣiṇāmūrti;
other relevant passages of Pāśupata sources are quoted in Bakker 2004:123–126); Niśvāsa-
guhya 3.7ab, prescribing that the yogin, having selected a suitable place, ‘should fabricate
his own hut to the southern or western side of the Image’ dakṣiṇā paścimā mūrtau svagṛhan
tatra kārayet; 1.8cd–9ab of the same text (afer the japasthānas: ‘[Te yogin] having carried
out a great homage to the God of Gods, concentrated, stands near the Dakṣiṇāmūrti, seated
on a pile of kuśa-grass’ dakṣiṇāyāṃsthito mūrtau kuśapiṇḍopaviṣṭakaḥ; many more refer-
ences are found there, e.g. in 10.58, 60 and 11.72, where it is associated to a place provided
with (only) one liṅga (ekaliṅge dakṣiṇāyāṃmūrtau). On the other hand, Bakker (2004, es-
pecially pp. 126–127) convincingly argues that such indications must be intended in most
cases to be metaphorical and interpreted in the context of visualization of the Lord from His
auspicious right side, which to the laymen may be represented by an image or the guru, but
which to the Pāśupata initiand rather indicates a particular situation or state implying the
visualization of the initiand’s position with respect to Mahādeva and the cardinal points.
Tis interpretation seems to be in agreement with the description provided by the Dharma
Pātañjala, where no explicit mention of an actual image of the Lord is made (and one cer-
tainly does not expect to ﬁnd images of the Lord in the form of statues or liṅgas in the places
suitable for the practice of yoga mentioned in the text). Te indication by the Old Javanese
text of another possibility, i.e. that the practitioner may position himself at the western side
of the Lord, is not attested in any Pāśupata source but occurs, as I have pointed out above, in
the Niśvāsaguhya. Tis might be related to a tradition going back to the Brāhmaṇas, doc-
umented by Bakker (2004:119), prescribing that the Vedic student should sit at the east
of the east-facing guru (i.e. opposite him, looking at him from east to west). Te Dharma
Pātañjala and the Niśvāsaguhya appear to have inverted this prescription.


--- PAGE 538 ---
Yoga
519
assume a comfortable posture. Te postures mentioned in the Dharma Pā-
tañjala are only three, viz. padmāsana, bhadrāsana and svastikāsana, each
of which is deﬁned in 314.15–20. Te Bhāṣya on sūtra 2.46, ‘Te posture is
ﬁrm and comfortable’ sthirasukham āsanam, names the above three plus an-
other series of ten postures.117 As noted by Vasudeva (2004:401–402), these
are simple seated postures that are widely described in early Śaiva texts and
that stand in contrast to the great variety of more complex postures taught
in later texts of the Haṭhayoga and Nātha-Siddha traditions.118 Other Old
Javanese sources, such as the Tattvajñāna (44.9–10), the Navaruci (42.22–
24) and the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) (p. 75 line 18–p. 76 line 1)
report an identical list of six postures, all of which are found (with only
one small variant) in the Yogasūtrabhāṣya, namely: padmāsana, bhadrāsana,
paryaṅkāsana, svastikāsana, daṇḍāsana, vīryāsana.119
Tereupon follows a description of the comfortable yogic position, which
is not understood as a proper yogāsana, to be assumed by the meditator:
straight erect back and ﬁrm neck, eyes gazing attentively at the tip of the
nose or alternatively closed, upper and lower teeth separated by the tongue
and lips half-closed. Whereas no references to this mode of sitting are made
in the Yogaśāstra, they are commonplace in Śaiva scriptures, which ofen
deﬁne it as karaṇa.120
Te Dharma Pātañjala then embarks on a deﬁnition of the yoga of with-
drawal (pratyāhārayoga):
Te faculties should be drawn away from their domains. Do not let the eyes
DhPāt
316.5–11
see. Te ears, do not let them hear. Te nose, do not let it smell. Te skin,
do not let it perceive hot and cool. Te mouth, do not let it speak. Te
hands, do not let them touch. Te legs, do not let them walk. Tus is the
117.
Namely, vīrāsana (not in all mss.), daṇḍāsana, sopāśraya, paryaṅka, krauñ-
caniṣadana, hastiniṣadana, uṣṭraniṣadana, samasaṃsthāna, sthirasukha and yathāsukha
(the latter may indicate one or more postures whose names are not made explicit).
118.
Passages of early sources describing postures, as listed by Goodall (2004:348–
489, fn. 728 and 729) and Vasudeva (2004:398–401) include: Pañcārthabhāṣya on 1.16,
Mataṅga YP 2.13–22, Kiraṇatantra 58.4e–5, Sarvajñānottara Yogaprakaraṇa 9. Cf. also
Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 9.5, Niśvāsanaya 4:14–16 (= 4.105) and Mukhasūtra 4:49c–50.
119.
As is evident from the comparison between the Tattvajñāna and the other two
sources, the items vajrāsana and vidyāsana in the edition of the former text are corruptions
of, respectively, bhadrāsana and vīryāsana.
120.
Cf., e.g., Niśvāsanaya 4.106, Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha 9.6cd–7ab, Sarvajñānottara Yo-
gaprakaraṇa 10–11, Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama YP 2.22cd–28, Parākhyatantra 14.8–9.


--- PAGE 539 ---
520
iii Doctrine
way to drawing out the faculties. Te mind-stuff, do not let it deliberate. Te
intellect, do not let it reﬂect. Te self-awareness, do not let it relate [things]
to one’s I. Tus is the way of drawing out the threefold internal organ. When
he has already put all of them away, that is the reason why the mind is quiet,
standing still, not like this and not like that.
Contrast Yogasūtra 2.54, ‘Withdrawal is like an imitation of the nature of the
mind by the senses, which are no more joined with their respective domains’
svaviṣayāsamprayoge cittasya svarūpānukāra ivendriyāṇāṃpratyāhāraḥ, and
2.55, ‘Tere results the highest state of control of the senses’ tataḥparamā-
vaśyatendriyāṇām. If, according to the Dharma Pātañjala, both the facul-
ties of perception and action121 and the tryantaḥkaraṇa should be arrested
in order to pacify the mind (citta), the Bhāṣya explains that the quiescence
of the senses follows the quiescence of the mind (rather than the other way
around).122 An account of pratyāhāra upholding a similar standpoint to that
of the Dharma Pātañjala is found in the Tattvajñāna (45.1–3): ‘All the senses
have to be withdrawn from their objects, held with the mind, the intellect
and the mind-stuff. [Tey] are not allowed to roam about, held with a serene
mind’ ikaṅindriya kabeh vatәkәn sakeṅviṣayanya / kinәmpәl iṅcitta buddhi
manah / tan vineh maparanparana kinәmpәl iṅcittālilaṅ. Compare the Vṛ-
haspatitattva:
Assiduously withdrawing the senses out of the domains that are the
objects of the senses with a calm mind is called withdrawal.
All the senses are withdrawn from their objects. Mind, intellect and mind-
stuff are not allowed to roam about. Tey are kept guarded by a serene mind.
Tat is called yoga of withdrawal.123
121.
Te list given in the text is deﬁcient of one faculty of perception, namely tasting (in
the tongue), and of two faculties of action, namely excretion (in the anus, pāyu) and sexual
activity (in the genitals, upastha).
122.
Te example of the bees (i.e. the senses) following the queen-bee (i.e. the citta) wher-
ever she goes or rests presented in the Bhāṣya on 2.54 is not found in the Dharma Pātañjala
either.
123.
Vṛhaspatitattva 54:
indriyāṇīndriyārthebhyo viṣayebhyaḥprayatnataḥ/
śāntena manasāhṛtya pratyāhāro nigadyate //
ikaṅindriya kabeh vinatәk saṅkeṅviṣayanya / ikaṅcitta buddhi manah tan vineh maparan-
parana / kinәmitakәn iṅcitta malilaṅ/ yeka pratyāhārayoga ṅaranya //.


--- PAGE 540 ---
Yoga
521
Te same śloka is found in the Jñānasiddhānta with a slightly different com-
mentary.124
Te Dharma Pātañjala concludes the deﬁnition of withdrawal by stat-
ing that ‘Te oneness of mind and Soul, that is designated as yoga’ ekatva
citta saṅhyaṅātmā ya ta sinaṅguh yoga ṅaranya, and that when this unity
has been accomplished, the yoga of breath-control (prāṇāyāma) should be
performed (316.11–13). Tere is nothing speciﬁcally Pātañjala in the de-
scription of prāṇāyāma, which does not follow the Yogaśāstra (2.49–52) and
is more Tantric in character. It revolves around the practice of the breath-
exercises known in medieval (Tantric and non-Tantric) Sanskrit texts as re-
caka ‘exhalation’, kumbhaka ‘retention’ and pūraka ‘inhalation’. Te initial
part of the passage (316.14–16) is elliptic and rather obscure, seemingly hint-
ing at potentially nefarious consequences if one does not master this tech-
nique. Tis is to be understood in a context of esoteric practices connected
with yogic suicide, usually described in Old Javanese sources in connection
with prāṇāyāma. Whereas other Old Javanese sources describe that prac-
tice as a violent expulsion of the breath through the cranium,125 the Dharma
Pātañjala rather describes it as a technique to achieve a separation between
mind and Soul. Te text prescribes a very slow inhalation of the breath and
then its stopping (i.e. retention) through the ‘key’ (kuñci), a yogic technical
term indicating a practice of stopping the breath. Tis process eventually re-
124.
Cf. Jñānasiddhānta chapter 6, Old Javanese commentary on śloka 2: ‘Te meaning is:
yoga of withdrawal is [when] all the senses are withdrawn, do not allow them to be [directed]
to their objects; they are held within the clear, serene mind, which is untroubled in its ex-
treme pureness. Te objects of the senses cease. Tis is called yoga of withdrawal’ arthanya:
pratyāhārayoga ṅaranya: ikaṅsarvendriya vinatәk hayva vineh riṅviṣayanya, kinәmpәl iṅ
citta maho malilaṅ, enak pva hәnaṅhәniṅnya. māri viṣaya. yeka pratyāhārayoga ṅaranya.
125.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 56: ‘Having closed all the oriﬁces, the breath is held within. Te cra-
nium is [then] broken open by the breath. Tis is called breath-control. All the openings, they
have to be closed, [i.e.] eyes, nose, mouth, ears. Te breath that has already been inhaled
before, that should be expelled by way of the cranium. If, however, one does not master the
expulsion of the breath through that channel, one expels it through the nose. But one expels
just a little bit of breath. Tat is the yoga of breath-control’ « pidhāya sarvadvārāṇi vāyur an-
tarnigṛhyate / mūrdhānaṃvāyunodbhidya prāṇāyāmo nigadyate » ikaṅsarvadvāra kabeh ya
teka tutupana / mata / iruṅ/ tutuk / taliṅa / ikaṅvāyu huvus inisәp ṅūnin rumuhun / ya teka
vinәtvakәn mahavaneṅvunvunan / kunaṅyapvan tan abhyāsa ikaṅvāyu mahavane ṅkāna /
dadi ya vinәtvakәn mahavaneṅiruṅ/ ndan sakasaḍiḍik de niṅmamәtvakәn vāyu / ya teka
prāṇāyāmayoga ṅaranya. Tis passage is paralleled, with minor variants, in Tattvajñāna
15.4, Gaṇapatitattva 6, SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 76 lines 7–11.


--- PAGE 541 ---
522
iii Doctrine
sults in oneness of the mind (316.15). Te effecting of the stopping of breath
is then detailed as follows:
Te supreme key [that stops the breath] does not expel the breath. It is only
DhPāt
316.17–318.8
quiet, without breathing. For the sentience of the Soul, that is what should
be reﬂected upon by him, without interruptions. Te reason why the breath
disappears to where it came from is that the sentience of the Soul is not
reﬂected upon. For example, like the water that is dropped on a heated stone
when working on metal while it is red: it just disappears, sucked out by the
hot stone. Likewise the breath disappears by way of the sentience of the Soul.
Tat is the reason why the key [that stops the breath and leads to] oneness is
special. ‘But, when the recaka, kumbhaka and pūraka have been completed,
what is the fruit of the yoga of breath-control?’ If you would speak thus, [I
would reply:] Te darkness of the heart and the mind vanish by way of that.
Te reason why the mind of the yogin vanishes by way of that, it is that the
mind and the thoughts have various targets. Tey ﬂy away unscathed, they
cannot be cut off. As long as many thoughts are produced during the time of
yoga, so long the absorption of the yogin remains unsuccessful. Te yogin
is afraid that his absorption could fail. Te reason why the performing of
breath-control is strived for, is that it wraps up the mind [so that] it becomes
still, for precisely the breath-control is the reason why the many thoughts
will become still.
Te term kuñcikā ‘key’ (i.e. not kuñci, as in Old Javanese) infrequently ap-
pears in Śaiva Tantric sources in connection with practices of drawing up
(utkrānti) the kuṇḍalinī along the central subtle channel of the body.126 A
similar function is attributed to the key in a number of Old Javanese sources,
where its application concerns the violent uprise (sadyotkrānti) of the breath
that ultimately amounts to a form of yogic suicide.127 But some sources also
describe another key, the application of which, as in the Dharma Pātañjala,
only entails the retention of breath rather than its expulsion.128 Such is the
understanding of the yoga of breath-control also of the Tattvajñāna (44.13–
30), which does not allow the breath to go out (tan pamәtvakәn vāyu) but
126.
Cf., e.g., Kubjikāmatatantra 8.73, 9.82, 23.114 and Gorakṣaśataka (2) 51. For other,
seemingly related, passages of Tantric sources, cf. Mallinson (2007:21 and 177, note 79).
127.
Cf., e.g., Navaruci 43.1–19, SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) p. 39–43, p. 71 lines
4–10, p. 75 lines 6–15, Gaṇapatitattva 49.
128.
Note that in Bahasa Indonesia the word kunci, besides meaning ‘key’ (as in Old Ja-
vanese), also means ‘to lock’.


--- PAGE 542 ---
Yoga
523
requires it to be entirely still (humәnaṅjuga).129 Tis causes the breath to be
reabsorbed within its origin (līna ri saṅkanya), for it is no more perceived by
the Soul (apan tañ cinetana de niṅātmā). Unlike in the Dharma Pātañjala,
this process does apparently end in the yogin’s death. But both sources agree
in characterizing breath-control as purifying, i.e. eliminating the darkness of
heart and mind for the Dharma Pātañjala, and ﬁlling of rajas and tamas with
the splendour of sattva (tәḍuhan iṅrajah, tamah, ri prakāśa niṅsattva) for
the Tattvajñāna.
Besides being propaedeutic to the yoga of ﬁxation, the yoga of breath
control is attributed by the Dharma Pātañjala the very important role of
calming the activity of the mind, thereby rendering absorption successful.130
Te yoga of ﬁxation is then deﬁned as follows:
Te mind [in the state of] oneness is stable in its own place; either in the
DhPāt
318.9–12
heart, outside of the body, in the thought of the Soul. Or the oneness of
[everything with] the Lord will become ﬁxed. One of the instruments of the
single attention of the mind is designated as ﬁxation.
Tis rather general deﬁnition is in harmony with the one provided by Yoga-
sūtra 3.1: ‘Fixation is the binding of the mind to a place’ deśabandhaś cittasya
dhāraṇā. Te loci of ﬁxation mentioned in the Bhāṣya are the wheel in the
navel (nābhicakre), the lotus in the heart (hṛdayapuṇḍarīke), the subtle cen-
tre above the head (mūrdhni jyotiṣi), the tip of the nose or of the tongue, or
any other place in the body or outside of it. A stress on the theistic aspect of
dhāraṇā as focusing on any kind of insentient element (acetanaṃtattvam) as
being part of the body of Śiva (śaivaṃvapur) is found in the Mṛgendratantra
(YP 32–33ab).131 Te Vṛhaspatitattva characterizes dhāraṇā as follows:
129.
Compare Navaruci 43.1 ‘Tere is a key that is different from that [just described], it is
still and without breathing’ muvah ana ta kuñci len saṅkerika, umәnәṅtan pāmbәkan juga.
Te whole description of breath-control is apparently based upon the one of the Tattvajñā-
na. Both kinds of prāṇāyāma, involving either paciﬁed retention or violent expulsion, are
described on the basis of Sanskrit passages by Vasudeva (2004:395–397 and 402–409).
130.
Cf. Dharma Pātañjala 318.8: ‘Te yoga of ﬁxation ripens due to breath-control’ әsә¯
tekā dhāraṇayoga de ni prāṇāyāma. Te importance of prāṇāyāma is clearly documented
in several Sanskrit Śaiva sources; cf., e.g., Śivasantoṣiṇī on Liṅgapurāṇa 1.8.44cd, regarding
breath-control as the cause of visualization and absorption (quoted in Vasudeva 2004:374,
fn. 14).
131.
A similar process of identiﬁcation seems to be described in the Kakavin Dharma
Śūnya (61b): ‘Te man of religion will not become perfect if he does not know about the state


--- PAGE 543 ---
524
iii Doctrine
Having ﬁxed the syllable oṂin the heart, thereupon it is dissolved as
the Soul of Śiva. Because the syllable oṂis held steadfast, it is known
as ﬁxation.
Tere is the sound oṂ, which is placed in the heart. Tat should be ﬁxed
upon. If that vanishes and no sound is heard during the time of yoga, that
is the Soul of Śiva. In such a way the body of the Lord is Void. Tat is called
yoga of ﬁxation.132
Te emphasis on the syllable oṂas a support for ﬁxation and its dissolution
as the Soul of Śiva understood as Void are elements that ﬁnd no counterpart
in the Dharma Pātañjala, which in this respect stands closer to the Pātañjala
tradition.
Te deﬁnition of yoga of visualization is missing from the Dharma Pā-
tañjala due to a textual corruption in 318.13, so one cannot be sure about
the text’s understanding of this technique. In the Āgamic tradition dhyāna
is deﬁned as the application of the mind to some kind of object, although
almost every time a divine one, i.e. Śiva (cf. Brunner 1994:442–43). Both
aspects are reﬂected in the Old Javanese sources.133
of him, the whole universe and the body; he should visualize the elements of the essence of
the body outside or inside of the body’ tan siddhāṅvikva yan tan vruh i kahanan ikā mvaṅ
sarāt lan śarīra / tattvanyan sāra śarīra ri yava ri dalәm niṅavak yeka tonton.
132.
Vṛhaspatitattva 57:
oṅkāraṃhṛdaye sthāpya tato līnaṃśivātmakam /
oṅkāraḥsaṃdhṛto yasmād dhāraṇaṃvai nigadyate //
▷JS 15.5, Gaṇ7, SHK C (p. 154)
57b tato ] JS, TK, TĀdh, Gaṇcod. ; tattva° Vṛh Ed.; tatva Vṛh cod., SHK C
• līnaṃ] JS, SHK C ; līnan TĀdh, TK ; līṇam Gaṇcod. ; līṇa Vṛh A ; liṇa Vṛh
BDEF ; līne Vṛh Ed.
hana oṅkāraśabda umuṅgv iṅhati / ya teka dhāraṇān / yapvan hilaṅika nora karәṅә¯ ri kāla
niṅyoga / yeka śivātmā ṅaranya / śūnyāvak bhaṭāra śiva yan maṅkana / yeka dhāraṇayoga
ṅaranya //. Tis portion of OJ commentary is similar to Tattvajñāna 45.8–10: hana oṅkāra-
śabda muṅguh riṅhati / ya teka dhāraṇān / ya paṅilaṅikaṅkarәṅә¯ / ri kāla niṅyoga / ya teka
śūnya ṅaranya / śivātmāvak bhaṭara śiva yan maṅkana / ya tika dhāraṇayoga ṅaranya //.
133.
As for dhyāna in connection with a deity, cf.: Gaṇapatitattva, Old Javanese com-
mentary on ślokas 54–55, which mentions Śivadhyāna, Paramaśivadhyāna, Rudradhyāna,
Mahādevadhyāna, Śaṅkaradhyāna, Īśvaradhyāna. Otherwise, cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 55 (≈Jñā-
nasiddhānta 15.3, Gaṇapatitattva 5), where dhyāna is characterized as follows: ‘[When the
mind is] without dualities, without appearance, appeased and immovable, whatever form is
constantly visualized, that is called visualization. [When] the mind is not dichotomizing,
without modiﬁcations, being of untroubled quietness, being still and without coverings,


--- PAGE 544 ---
Yoga
525
Te brief passage that immediately follows, explaining the yoga of ab-
sorption, is heavily corrupted and virtually unintelligible. References are
made to the mind transforming into something and visualization reaching
a certain state towards the Lord, which suggests that the protracted prac-
tice of the previous ancillary resulted in absorption. Something to this effect
may be inferred from the Yogasūtras on visualization (3.2) and absorption
(3.3): ‘Te continuous attention of the mental representation on that [which
was the object of ﬁxation] is visualization’ tatra pratyayaikatānatā dhyānam;
‘When this visualization shines forth as the [intended] object in itself only
and, as it were, is devoid of its own form, [this] is [cognitive] absorption’
tad evārthamātranirbhāsaṃsvarūpaśūnyam iva samādhiḥ.134 A rather sim-
ilar characterization of samādhi as a form of supportless dhyāna is found in
other Old Javanese scriptures.135
that is called yoga of visualization’ « nirdvandvaṃnirvikārañ ca niḥṣaktam acalaṃtathā /
yadrūpaṃdhyāyate nityaṃtad dhyānam iti kathyate // 55b niḥṣaktam ] conj. ; niśāntam
Vṛh Ed., niṣaktam JS Ed. » ikaṅjñāna tan paṅrvarva / tatan vikāra / enak hәnәṅhәnәṅnira /
umiḍәṅsadā tan kāvaraṇan / yeka dhyānayoga ṅaranya //. Te commentary of the JS (≈Gaṇ
5) further deﬁnes dhyāna as concentration of the mind on one thing (ekacittānusmaraṇa).
134.
Compare Mṛgendratantra YP 7: ‘Te thought-stream [focused] on that object [that
one has chosen as a support] is visualization; and that has been taught again and again.
When that [visualization] continuously focuses attention on one object only, absorption
is produced’ cintā tadviṣayā dhyānaṃtac cādiṣṭaṃmuhurmuhuḥ/ tad ekatānatām eti sa
samādhir vidhīyate // (for a discussion, cf. Vasudeva 2004:432).
135.
Cf. Jñānasiddhānta 15.7: ‘[When the mind is] not paying attention [to anything], with-
out concepts, without desires, without support, unobstructed, without aims, that is called ab-
sorption. Te meaning is: what is called the yoga of absorption is the mind [when it is]
without paying attention [to anything], without any conceptualizing, without relation to
an I; there are no desires in it, it has no aims, clear without obstructions. Tat is the yoga
of absorption according to the Lord’ « nirupekṣaṃniḥkalpanaṃnirālambananiḥspṛhaṃ/
nirāvaraṇaṃniḥsādhyaṃsamādhis tu nigadyate » kaliṅanya: samādhiyoga ṅaranya: ikaṅ
jñāna tan paṅupekṣa, tan paṅalpana, tan paṅakva, tan hana kahyun iriya, tan hana sād-
hyanira, malilaṅtan kāvaraṇan. yeka samādhiyoga liṅbhaṭṭāra • paṅakva ] em. ; paṅalva
JS. Te Vṛhaspatitattva (commentary on śloka 59, largely similar to JS 15.7) adds the follow-
ing: ‘Te sentience does not have any object, for it ceases to experience the body. It is free
from the four mental creations. Te four mental creations are the knower and what is known,
the means of knowledge and [the process of] knowing. Tus are the four mental creations.
All of them are not in the leader among yogins. Tat is the yoga of absorption’ tatan pavastu
ikaṅcetana / apan māri humiḍәp sira ikaṅśarīra / luput saṅkeṅcaturkalpanā // caturkalpanā
ṅaranya / vruh lavan kinavruhan / paṅavruh lavan maṅavruhi / nahan yaṅcaturkalpanā ṅa-
ranya / ika ta kabeh tan hana ri saṅyogīśvara / ya teka samādhiyoga ṅaranya //. Te fourfold
division of perception called caturkalpanā brings to my mind a similar fourfold distinction


--- PAGE 545 ---
526
iii Doctrine
In 318.16–320.2 the Lord concludes the account of the eight ancillar-
ies with the corollary that they do not constitute means to obtain libera-
tion but are used as external ancillaries (pinakabahiraṅga) with respect to
non-cognitive absorption, and to obtain the state of supernatural prowess
(kasiddhyan). Te supernatural powers are regarded as means to perform
yoga again. Te treatment of the eight ancillaries as external means to non-
cognitive absorption is found in the Yogaśāstra: cf. the introduction of the
Bhāṣya to Yogasūtra 3.1, which deﬁnes the means that are the ﬁve ancillaries
beginning with the yamas and ending with prāṇāyāma as ‘external’ (pañca
bahiraṅgāni sādhanāni), and sūtra 3.8, which speciﬁes that even the triad of
dhāraṇā, dhyāna and samādhi, which was deﬁned as an internal ancillary
with respect to cognitive absorption in 3.7, is to be regarded as external in
relation to non-cognitive absorption (tad api bahiraṅgam nirbījasya).136
Te Lord goes on to state that it is when innate maculation (sahajamala)
has vanished that the yogin is able to act according to his desire. Te state-
ment constitutes another instance of Śaiva theistic attuning: whereas the
Bhāṣya ad sūtra 2.28 deﬁnes the eight ancillaries, with many examples, as
being the cause of discorrelation (viyoga) between the spirit and the mind,
the disappearance of impurity, the cause of manifestation (abhivyakti) of
right knowledge (samyagjñāna) as well as the attainment of discriminative
discernment (vivekakhyāti), the Dharma Pātañjala discusses the matter in
terms of disappearance of maculation and manifestation of the state of om-
nipotence that is coterminous with Śivahood.137 A debate follows:
described in a passage of the Kitāb Pātañjala, where it is linked to the attainment of absorp-
tion and the state that occurs in the yogin before liberation: ‘In the same way he contains
that which encompasses him, so that when union between (the act of) knowing and the
known (is achieved) in him—he being the knower—intellection, he who intellects, and that
which is intellected become in him one thing’ (cf. Pines and Gelblum 1966:323–324). A
fourfold distinction occurs in the Sarvajñānottara (Yogaprakaraṇa 4–5). Te passage, while
explaining dhyāna, states that one is engaged in yoga when one knows the following equa-
tions: visualizer (dhyātā) = self (ātmā), the visualization (taddhyānam) = the mind-stuff
(manas), his object of visualization (taddhyeyam) = the subtle Maheśvara (sukṣmaḥma-
heśvaraḥ) and the purpose thereof (prayojanam) = supreme sovereignty (paramaiśvaryam);
cf. Vasudeva (2004:431), who notes that the verses appear only in the South Indian version
commented upon by Aghoraśiva and not in the Nepalese manuscripts.
136.
Te term nirbīja (‘seedless’), which in the Yogaśāstra (1.51 and 3.8) indicates a liber-
ating, therefore non-cognitive, kind of samādhi, does not occur in the Dharma Pātañjala.
137.
But note that a similar standpoint, although not explicitly connected to God, may be
detected in sūtra 3.49, stating that ‘the mere discrimination of the difference between the


--- PAGE 546 ---
Yoga
527
Te opponent replies: ‘Te explanation of that is very problematic, for the
DhPāt
320.3–10
yoga, if constantly practiced, will not bring about liberation’. If you speak
thus, [I reply:] what is that which can bring about liberation? A [Saiddhān-
tika] Śaiva replies: ‘Only initiation brings about liberation’. [I answer:] Te
Soul is one who is absolutely not omniscient. If the opinion of the opponent
would be that initiation only [brings about liberation], the Soul, when not
omniscient, is not regarded as [being in the state of] liberation. Te state
of omniscience of the Soul is by no means coming into being by means of
initiation alone. Tat is the reason why yoga and absorption should be con-
stantly practiced, now and continuously.
Te debate illuminates us about the soteriological role of initiation vis-à-vis
yoga—an issue that is passed over in silence in all other Tattvas and Tuturs
known to me. Te Lord here upholds the prominence of yoga over initi-
ation—or at least the ineffectiveness of the latter without the former. Te
gist of the Lord’s argument is the observation that the Soul does not become
liberated or omniscient afer having undergone initiation;138 that it does be-
come so by continuous performance of yoga and absorption is seemingly
taken for granted.
What is intriguing is that the view that initiation alone brings about lib-
eration is upheld by a debatant designated as saṅśevaka, which may be taken
to denote either a general ‘worshipper’ (sevaka) or, to my mind more likely,
a śaiva(ka), i.e. a follower of (the ‘orthodox’ variety of) Śaivasiddhānta—for
it is the latter variety of Śaivism that attributes to initiation a role of abso-
lute prominence in bringing about liberation. If so, the characterization of
this view as a pūrvapakṣa has the very important consequence that certain
tenets of Śaivism adhered to by the Dharma Pātañjala as well as the other Old
Javanese Tattvas and Tuturs are pre- or non-Saiddhāntika in nature, stem-
ming from a period or a tradition of Śaivism where initiation did not (yet)
assume a role of prominence.139 Of course, this does not imply that the Old
mind and the Spirit brings about the states of sovereignty over all beings, and omniscience’
sattvapuruṣānyatākhyātimātrasya sarvabhāvādhiṣṭhātṛtvaṃsarvajñātṛtvaṃca. Te two su-
pernatural states can be compared to the divine qualities of sarvajñatva and sarvakartṛtva
attributed by the Śaivas to the Lord and the liberated Souls.
138.
On the contrary, the Kiraṇatantra (VP 1.21bc) afﬁrms that the Soul afer initiation
becomes omniscient like Śiva (sarvajñaḥsa śivo yadvat) and devoid of any limitations of
knowledge (kiñcijjñatvavivarjitaḥ)—cf. Rāmakaṇṭha’s interpretation as emerging from his
commentary to Kiraṇa VP 5.9e–10b (Goodall 1998:338).
139.
As is also the case, for instance, in the Atimārga (i.e. Pāśupata) variety of Śaivism:


--- PAGE 547 ---
528
iii Doctrine
Javanese sources were written at a time when Saiddhāntika Śaivism had not
yet emerged, but merely that they preserved older doctrines within a Man-
tramārga context.140
Te Yogic
Powers
To Kumāra’s question about the characteristics of the
state of supernatural prowess (kaiśvaryan) obtained by
the yogin, the Lord replies by pointing at restraint
(saṅyama/saṃyama), viz. ﬁxation, visualization and ab-
sorption, on a single principle as the means to achieve it. He further speciﬁes
that restraint should ﬁrst be practiced from below (saṅke sor), for the upper
principles cannot be restrained. Tis deﬁnition of restraint is evidently in-
debted to Yogasūtra 3.4: ‘Te three in one are restraint’ trayam ekatra saṃya-
maḥ, which is interpreted by the Bhāṣya as the triad of ﬁxation, visualization
and absorption focused on a single object;141 the warning about the manner
in which it should be practiced reﬂects Yogasūtra 3.6: ‘Its application is on
[every] stage’ tasya bhūmiṣu viniyogaḥ, which is explained by the Bhāṣya as
a gradual application to successive stages, ‘because one who has not yet con-
quered the inferior stages can never obtain restraint towards the superior
cf. Sanderson (2006a:147–148). A Saiddhāntika scripture that characterizes the attain-
ment of Śivahood as a goal of yoga (and not of initiation) is the Sarvajñānottara (Yo-
gaprakaraṇa 30): ‘Having entered into that [state of unity with Śiva brought about by yoga],
the knower of yoga visibly becomes Śiva, whose nature is immortality, who is omniscient,
omnipervasive, subtle, the Lord of everything and the all-doer’ amṛtātmā śivaḥsākṣāt tas-
min viṣṭas tu yogavit / sarvajñaḥsarvagaḥsūkṣmaḥsarveśaḥsarvakṛd bhavet //. Aghoraśiva,
commenting upon this passage, tries to bring it in line with the Saiddhāntika orthodoxy
by identifying yoga as part of dīkṣā. Te important role of dīkṣā is preserved also in the
non-Saiddhāntika Tantras of the Mantramārga, even though there it may assume a more
‘gnostic’ and ultra-ritualistic dimension. As argued by Goodall (2006), it is only in post-
12th century (Vedānta-inﬂuenced and non-dualist) Śaiva scriptures from South India that
dīkṣā loses its importance as a salviﬁc transformatory rite. Since Tattvas do not seem to
share any fundamental (Vedānta- and bhakti-inﬂuenced) theme with the above category of
Sanskrit scriptures—unlike Tuturs, cf. pp. 378–387, it is unlikely that the Dharma Pātañjala
borrowed its view of dīkṣā from those late South Indian scriptures.
140.
Cf. the relevant remarks I have made on pp. 11–16 of the Introduction.
141.
Although the characterization of saṃyama in the Yogaśāstra is undeniably connected
with the obtainment of supernatural powers, sūtra 3.5 regards the mastering of saṃyama as
leading to the manifestation of insight (prajñālokaḥ)—contrast Dharma Pātañjala 322.1–5,
which considers it propaedeutic to the obtainment of the (Śiva-like) state of supernatural
prowess; cf. also sūtra 3.8, describing saṃyama as leading to seedless absorption—compare
Dharma Pātañjala 318.16–1, where non-cognitive absorption seemingly coincides with the
Śiva-like state of omnipotence.


--- PAGE 548 ---
Yoga
529
stages by skipping an intermediary stage’ na hy ajitādharabhūmir anantara-
bhūmiṃvilaṅghya prāntabhūmīṣu saṃyamam labhate.142
Saṃyama is used as a technical term indicating the triad of dhāraṇā,
dhyāna and samādhi in other Old Javanese sources, which however recon-
ﬁgure it in a context that has little to do with the original Pātañjala yoga char-
acterization;143 the Dharma Pātañjala is essentially faithful to the treatment
of the Yogaśāstra, although it also reinterprets several items along Tantric
lines. I have detected no correspondences between the Dharma Pātañjala
and sūtras 3.9–15 of the Yogaśāstra, which are mostly devoted to a detailed
philosophical disquisition on the mutations in the mind in connection with
mutations of substances, time, etc.144 Te ﬁrst supernatural ability attained
through the application of ‘restraint’ is described in sūtra 3.16, which has
no counterpart in the Dharma Pātañjala. Te ﬁrst correspondence is found
between the Bhāṣya on sūtra 3.24 and Dharma Pātañjala 322.9, which men-
tions the attainment of the power of Garuḍa. Te treatment of the restraints
by the two texts is summarized in the following table:145
142.
I support Angot’s (2008:461) translation ‘On applique ce [saṃyama] successivement
à tous les plans’, against Woods’: ‘Its application is by stages’. Te referent of bhūmi is not
explicitly mentioned in the Sanskrit passage, although by comparing it to the expression
sārvabhauma in Yogaśāstra 1.1 one may suppose that it refers to the ﬁve stages of the mind
starting with scattered (cf. above, p. 491). Bhoja (Rājamārtaṇḍa on sūtra 3.6) understands
it as referring to stages distinguished according to the gross or subtle constitution of their
object (sthūlasūkṣmālambanabheda). Te Dharma Pātañjala apparently understood the
stages to be tattvas, i.e. the hierarchically ordered (from coarse to subtle) constitutive prin-
ciples of the universe to which the yogin should apply restraint. Tus, here the term ‘stage’
is perhaps to be understood as having the sense of ‘station’ or ‘level’ and not as indicating a
‘step’ in a process.
143.
For instance, in the Vṛhaspatitattva (Old Javanese exegesis on śloka 64) it is men-
tioned in connection with the seven nectars (saptāmṛta) corresponding to the ﬁve faculties
of sense plus saṅkalpa (= manas?) and boddhavya (= buddhi? cf. below, p. 543), to which the
yogin should apply restraint in order to become forever joined with the Lord (sadāsamāhi-
tanira riṅbhaṭāra) and become the embodiment of the Lord (pāvak bhaṭāra ri sira). Te
Tattvajñāna (19.7) describe saṅyama as ‘the triad beginning with dhyāna’ (dhyānāditraya),
which is inconsistently glossed in the commentary as prāṇāyāma, dhāraṇā and samādhi
(dhyāna having been replaced by prāṇāyāma).
144.
Both the author of the Bhāṣya and Vācaspatimiśra devote considerable space to the
commentary of some of these sūtras.
145.
Te items preceded by an asterisk (*) are not, strictly speaking, objects of saṃyama
but independent, albeit related, meditative techniques or supernatural achievements.


--- PAGE 549 ---
530
iii Doctrine
Table 19: saṃyama and the ensuing supernatural powers in the DhPāt and the YS[Bh]
Yogasūtra[Bhāṣya]
Dharma Pātañjala
Object of saṃyama
Faculty obtained
Object of saṃyama
Faculty obtained
3.16
Tree mutations (pariṇāmatraya)
Knowledge of past and future
3.17
Distinction between word, object
and mental representation
Knowledge of the cries of all the be-
ings
3.18
*Direct perception of impressions
Knowledge of previous births
3.19
Tought-stream
Knowledge of another’s mind
3.21
Colour146 of the body
Invisibility
3.22
Karma that is quickly productive or
slowly productive
Knowledge
of
one’s
impending
death
Right-and-wrong (dharmādharma)
(322.9–12)
Knowledge of one’s death
Fruits right-and-wrong (322.12–13)
To attain one’s death (at wish)
3.23
Friendliness etc.
Te corresponding powers
3.24
Te powers
Powers [like those of Garuḍa, an ele-
phant, the wind, etc.]
Te power of a lion (322.8), the
power of Garuḍa (322.9)
Te power of a lion, the power of
Garuḍa
3.25
*Casting the light of sense-activity
[on subtle, concealed, or obscure
objects]
Knowledge of subtle, concealed or
obscure objects
3.26
Sun
Knowledge of the worlds making up
the universe
3.27
Moon
Knowledge of the arrangement of
the stars
3.28
Polar star
Knowledge of the movements of the
stars
3.29
Wheel of the navel
Knowledge of the arrangement of
the body
3.30
Well of the throat
Cessation of hunger and thirst
Te nectar of immortality below the
tubes of the throat (322.14–15)
Cessation of hunger and thirst
3.31
Vessel of the tortoise
Stability [like that of a serpent]
146.
For the translation of rūpa as ‘colour’ instead that ‘form’, cf. Angot (2008:505).


--- PAGE 550 ---
Yoga
531
Yogasūtra[Bhāṣya]
Dharma Pātañjala
Object of saṃyama
Faculty obtained
Object of saṃyama
Faculty obtained
3.32
Light in the cranium
Te vision of the Siddhas
Te light coming out from the cra-
nium (322.15–17)
Vision of the Siddhas and the Gods
3.33
*Transcendent intuition
Knowledge of everything
3.34
Heart
Consciousness of the mind
3.35
Tat which exists for its own sake
Knowledge of the Spirit (puruṣa)
3.36
*[Divine] intuition, hearing, feeling,
vision, taste and smell
3.38
*Slackening of what causes the men-
tal to be bound (to the body) and
the perfect knowledge of the move-
ments of the mental
Entrance [of the mind] into an-
other’s body
Te right-and-wrong are almost
cut-off, then they completely vanish
(328.16–19)
Ability to enter another man
3.39
*Conquest of udāna breath
Non-adherence with water, mud,
thorns, and expulsion [of life]
udāna breath (322.15–17)
Vision of the Siddhas and the Gods;
not be pressed down by water and
†147 (324.1–2)
3.40
*Conquest of samāna breath
Radiance
samāna breath (322.17–18)
Assuming the appearance of a blaz-
ing ﬁre
samāna breath (322.19–20)
Reducing the body to ashes by ﬁre
3.41
Relation between hearing and the
space
Divine hearing
Te eyes of other human beings or
one’s body, visualized as if not being
seen (324.2–3)
Invisibility
3.42
Relation between the body and
space and identiﬁcation as light cot-
ton
Movement through the atmosphere
[walking on water, a spiderweb or
sunbeams]
Te body visualized as if becoming
light like kapok148 and the charac-
teristics shared by the body and the
atmosphere (324.3–7)
Ability to ﬂy, perch on the long stalk
of a banana-leaf or reside in a cob-
web
3.43
*Activity of the mental uncon-
structed is mahāvideha
Dissolution of the covering of the
light
147.
Te second element of the list is missing due to a textual corruption.
148.
Te ‘Java-cotton’ tree, from which a cotton-like ﬁbre is harvested.


--- PAGE 551 ---
532
iii Doctrine
Yogasūtra[Bhāṣya]
Dharma Pātañjala
Object of saṃyama
Faculty obtained
Object of saṃyama
Faculty obtained
3.44
Te gross, the essential, the subtle,
the inherence, purposiveness
Conquest of the elements
3.45
Atomization and so on, perfection
of the body and not being hindered
by the properties of the elements
Te ﬁve gross elements (324.7–8)
Eternal youth
Earth (324.9–12)
Indestructibility:
one
is
not
wounded by swords or by falling on
trees or rocks
Water (324.12)
One is not pressed down if sub-
merged in water
Fire (324.13–14)
One is not burnt if set on ﬁre
Wind (324.14–3)
Not being hit by the wind, and long-
life (until pralaya)
Atmosphere (326.3–5)
Not falling from the sky, and pos-
sessing a body of beautiful appear-
ance and unaffected by old age
3.46
Perfection of the body is beauty,
grace, force and density of diamond
3.47
Process of knowing, essence, egoic-
ity, inherence, purposiveness
Conquest of the faculties
Te eleven faculties (328.19–21)
Te eight sovereign powers
3.48
*Swifness as that of thought, ac-
tions without instruments, conquest
of unevolved matter
3.52
Te instants and their sequence
Knowledge born from discrimina-
tion
3.53
Capacity
of
distinguishing
two
completely identical objects


--- PAGE 552 ---
Yoga
533
One interesting point is the mention, in Dharma Pātañjala 322.14, of the
nectar of immortality below the tubes of the throat, which corresponds to
Yogasūtra 3.30: ‘[With restraint on] the well of the throat, there is cessa-
tion of hunger and thirst’ kaṇṭhakūpe kṣutpipāsāvinirvṛttiḥ. Te Bhāṣya in-
terprets kaṇṭhakūpe as the well placed under the throat: ‘Below the tongue
there is the cord, below that there is the throat, below that there is the well’
jihvāyā adhastāt tantuḥ/ tato ’dhastāt kaṇṭhaḥ/ tato ’dhastāt kūpaḥ, whereas
Bhoja’s Rājamārtaṇḍa, the Maṇiprabhā and the Kitāb Pātañjala speak of the
well below the tongue in the throat.149 Practices like pressing the palate with
the tongue, or similar ones, to achieve insensibility to hunger and thirst are
already described in early Buddhist canonical scriptures,150 but it is only
in Kaula and Haṭhayogic texts that the process results in the raising of the
Kuṇḍalinī, which is ofen referred to as amṛta.151 Te mention of amṛta in
the Dharma Pātañjala is therefore indicative of a Tantric rather than Pātañ-
jala yoga background.
Te subjugation or conquest (alah) of the ﬁve gross elements described
in 324.7–326.5 ﬁnds a counterpart in sūtra 3.44, which results in the attain-
ment of the supernatural faculties of the aṇimādi-group, in the perfection
of the body and in not being hindered by the properties of the elements
(3.45). Whereas the Yogaśāstra speaks of the subjugation of the elements in
a general manner and focuses on philosophical distinction of the qualities to
which the yogin should apply restraint, the Dharma Pātañjala, also in this
case, takes a more practical stance and stands remarkably close to Tantric
accounts of the conquest of the elements (bhūtajaya) by means of the ﬁve
149.
Cf. Rājamārtaṇḍa: ‘At the basis of the tongue, below the cord of the tongue, there is
a ‘‘well’’, as it were; the well is a region that has the shape of a seat’ jihvāmūle jihvātantor
adhastāt kūpa iva kūpo gartākāra pradeśaḥ; Maṇiprabhā: ‘Below the cord of the tongue
is a region of the throat in the shape of a cavity (or well)’ jihvātantor adhastāt kaṇṭhasya
kūpākāraḥpradeśo ’sti. According to Pines and Gelblum (1983:284–285, note 169), these
deﬁnitions are echoed in the rendering of al-Bīrūnī: ‘Whoever wishes to remove the harmful
(effects) of hunger and thirst from himself should direct his thought to the hollow (part) of
the chest and the larynx, (i.e.) the channel (through which) the wind (passes) by means of
respiration’.
150.
Cf. Mallinson (2007:18–19 and notes).
151.
Cf. Mallinson (2007:20–24), who also refers to an early Āgamic parallel in the Ki-
raṇa, YP 59.34c–35b (cf. id. p. 176, fn. 75); interestingly, the śloka-quarter referring to the
‘raising’ (utkramaṇa) of breath, but seemingly also of Kuṇḍalinī, is found only in a South
Indian codex (and not in the Nepalese ones). Note that in Tantric sources, however, this
practice is not intended to overcome hunger and thirst but rather disease or even death.


--- PAGE 553 ---
534
iii Doctrine
respective dhāraṇās. Tese ﬁve ﬁxations are mentioned in the SaṅHyaṅ
Kamahāyānikan (Śaiva) (pp. 28–29) as leading to the powers of invulnera-
bility, the ability to avoid sinking, suffering from the heat of the sun or ﬁre,
etc.152 Accounts of these dhāraṇās are common in Sanskrit Śaiva sources,153
which however display a considerable degree of variation in the attribution
of their respective supernatural powers.154
In both the Dharma Pātañjala (328.19–21) and the Yogasūtra (3.45) the
eight sovereing powers (aṣṭaiśvarya), also known as the eight (supernatural)
qualities (aṣṭaguṇa or guṇāṣṭaka), are described as arising from the restraint
on the eleven faculties of sense and action. Whereas the sūtra only mentions
miniaturization and so on (aṇimādi), the eight supernatural powers are de-
tailed in the Bhāṣya. Te octet is well-known in a large variety of Sanskrit
sources of both Tantric and non-Tantric persuasion,155 and is also widely at-
152.
Te term saṅyama occurs in the SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (Śaiva) as applied only
to the ﬁrst two elements, i.e. earth and water, whereas the other three are simply referred
to as dhāraṇās. Note that the translator Lokesh Chandra (1997:29) misunderstood the
expressions saṅyama ikaṅpṛthvī-apah avakakna as ‘Yama (saṅyama) will be embodied in
the earth/water’ instead of ‘the earth/water should be the body (i.e. support) of saṅyama’.
Further terse references to the conquest of the elements and pṛthivīdhāraṇā are found on p.
37 lines 1–5 (cf. also the Buddhist SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan ms. C, p. 157).
153.
Among the Siddhāntatantras, cf. Parākhyatantra 14.33–47, Niśvāsanaya 3:1c–8
(mentioning the ﬁve gross elements, followed by the other tattvas in 3.9–41) and 4:115–116
(note that in the former passage the term used in the text is not dhāraṇā but dhyāna; this
may be explained by the fact, as Vasudeva 2004:309 fn. 7 notes with respect to the Svac-
chandatantra, that both dhyāna and dhāraṇā ‘are used loosely as blanket-terms covering
all manner of contemplative exercises’). Among the non-Saiddhāntika sources, cf. Svac-
chandatantra 12.83–90 and 5.61–66, Mālinīvijayottaratantra 12–13 (the ﬁve elements) and
14–16 (the mental faculties and the remaining tattvas, cf. Vasudeva 2004:303–365). Te
dhāraṇās are very common in (later) sources of Haṭhayoga, such as, e.g., Śivasaṃhitā 1.75–
77, Gheraṇḍasaṃhitā 3.70–82, Gorakṣaśataka (1) 68–73.
154.
Cf. Brunner (1994:441). For a different tradition of fourfold dhāraṇā, viz. āgneyī,
vāruṇī, aiśānī and amṛtā, documented in the Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha, the Kiraṇatantra and
the Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama, cf. ead. (1994:442); the same tradition is also attested in the
Agnipurāṇa (374.7) and in the Niśvāsaguhya (8.123), which mentions these dhāraṇās in
connection with the ‘razors’ (kṣurikā) for violent expulsion of the breath (sadyotkrānti).
155.
Among the Śaiva Tantric sources, cf. Niśvāsaguhya 7.205, Mataṅga VP 17.108–
125, Kiraṇa 58.52–60, Svacchandatantra 10.1072–1073 (deﬁned in Kṣemarāja’s Uddyota),
Parākhya 14.91–94. Te eight siddhis already ﬁgure in the Pañcārthabhāṣya on sūtra 2.12:
‘Not being intoxicated with delights’ harṣāpramādī, where the delights indicate the super-
natural powers evidently understood as ‘obstacles’ to which the yogin should not attach
himself. Tese aṣṭaguṇas are divided into a series of three (viz. aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā),


--- PAGE 554 ---
Yoga
535
tested in Old Javanese texts of different genres and religious afﬁliations.156
Tis forms a series of siddhis that is distinguished from other common sets
of supernatural faculties, such as dūradarśana and so on, detailed in Pāśupa-
tasūtra 1.21–38 and several other Sanskrit sources (cf. above, pp. 361–363).
But there is no general agreement among the sources—even within the Śaiva
tradition—as to the interpretation of the single items of the octet. Tis can
be appreciated in table 20. Te Dharma Pātañjala, also in this respect, at-
tempts at bridging the Tantric and non-Tantric traditions: whereas it dis-
plays strong resemblances with the accounts of these siddhis given in Śaiva
Tantric sources, it also adheres to the model of the Yogasūtrabhāṣya by in-
tegrating the Pātañjala interpretation of certain powers with the Śaiva one.
For instance, it deﬁnes attainment (prāpti) as the ability to touch the moon,
as per the Bhāṣya, alongside the ability to attain anything at will, as per most
Śaiva sources. On the other hand, such as in the case of prākāmya ‘ability to
produce multiple bodies at will’, the Old Javanese text goes against the Bhā-
ṣya,157 which rather understands prākāmya as the freedom from obstruction
by the elements and the ability to go through solid objects like the earth—a
capacity that all Śaiva sources rather attribute to aṇimā ‘miniaturization’. In
the case of mahimā ‘largeness’, the Dharma Pātañjala merges the Pātañjala
(as well as Sāṅkhya) ‘physical’ interpretation with the ‘moral’ one attested in
many Śaiva sources, i.e. that the yogin is praised and honoured wherever he
goes.158 Te last siddhi of the series, yatrakāmāvasāyitva, is understood as
the fulﬁllment of wishes and as supreme rulership159 but not, as another tra-
deﬁned as the three powers (or qualities) of the body (kāryaguṇa), and a series of ﬁve (viz.
prāpti, prākāmya, īśitva, vaśitva and yatrakāmāvasāyitva), deﬁned as the ﬁve powers of the
faculties (karaṇaguṇa); note that this division has survived in the Mataṅga (17.114).
156.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 14.15–16, 29, 32–33, 63–74; Tattvajñāna 49.1–5; Bhuvanakośa
4.37, 41; SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan p. 51 lines 3–4; Tutur Saptati f. 52v; Navaruci 51.10–
52.2; Kakavin Rāmāyaṇa 17.94, 25.27–28 and 31 (aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, aṣṭaguṇa);
Arjunavivāha 19.3, 29.3, 37.5; Smaradahana 32.1 (aṇimādi devaguṇa); Śivarātrikalpa 29.4
(aṣṭaguṇāṇimādi); Sumanasāntaka 3.3 (aṇimālaghimādi); Sutasoma 4.6; Agastyaparva pp.
48.19–31 and 49.1–2 (where aṣṭabhāga = aṣṭaiśvarya, cf. Gonda 1936:436).
157.
Tus also the Kitāb Pātañjala, where the capacity to appear in whatever form the
yogin desires seems to refer to prākāmya (cf. Pines and Gelblum 1983:264, 295 note 229);
on the other hand, Gauḍapāda on Sāṅkhyakārikā 23 interprets it, in line with the Bhāṣya,
as the fulﬁllment of every wish (prākāmyaṃprakāmato yad eveṣyati tad eva vidadhāti).
158.
Cf. Kiraṇa 58.48–55 and Parākhya 14.93a; the Mataṅga, as the Dharma Pātañjala,
interprets mahimā in both ways.
159.
It thus seems that a connection might have been felt with √vaś ‘command’.


--- PAGE 555 ---
536
iii Doctrine
dition of interpretation has it, as the ability of being wherever one wishes.160
Having detailed the restraint on the ﬁve elements and the powers aris-
ing therefrom, the Dharma Pātañjala introduces the obstacles (upasarga)
to yoga. Te Yogasūtra deﬁne the obstacles in 3.37: ‘Obstacles for the ab-
sorption, these are perfections for activity’ te samādhāv upasargā vyutthāne
siddhayaḥ, as if referring to the powers previously mentioned in 3.36,161
i.e. the divine faculties of intuition (pratibhā), hearing (śravaṇa), sensibil-
ity (vedanā), vision (darśa), gustation (āsvāda) and olfaction (vārtā).162
Te Yogaśāstra apparently does not include the eight siddhis in the ob-
stacles, unlike the Dharma Pātañjala, which understand the latter to encom-
pass all the other powers described in the Yogasūtra.163
160.
As noted by Goodall (2004:379), the explanation of this siddhi is problematic. Some
sources analyze the compound as avasāya ‘to have an end’, hence ‘fulﬁllment’ of whatever
thing (yatra) is desired, while others understandit in the meaning ‘to abide’, thus yatrakāmā-
vasāyitva would mean ‘the power to transport oneself wherever one wishes’ (cf. Brunner
1977:508 fn. 14). Te former interpretation is shared by most Śaiva sources, and also by
Vācaspatimiśra (Tattvakaumudī on Sāṅkhyakārikā 23), who substitutes the locative yatra
with the nominative form of the pronoun yat, reading yac ca kāmāvasāyitvam (another
substitution is documented in Niśvāsaguhya 7.205d, which reads sarvakāmāvasāyitā). Te
latter interpretation is clearly found in Gauḍapāda on Sāṅkhyakārikā 23, the Kitāb Pātañ-
jala (‘going everywhere undisturbed’, cf. Pines and Gelblum 1983:264) and, with a certain
degree of uncertainty, in the Parākhyatantra (cf. Table 20 and fn. 167); the half-śloka 74
of the Vṛhaspatitattva also seems to offer this interpretation (‘to go [wherever] with the
body [according to] one’s desire’ dehena yātum icchā syād yatrakāmāvasāyitvam), which is
incoherently explained by the Old Javanese exegesis as the power to command gods, hu-
mans and animals. Yet another line of interpretation is followed by Kṣemarāja, who in his
Uddyota to Svacchandatantra 10.1073 explains yatrakāmāvasāyitva as the determination of
concealed objects (cf. Vasudeva 2004:365, fn. 44).
161.
Tus the Bhāṣya and virtually all the other Sanskrit commentaries.
162.
Identical lists of six, with their members in different orders, are found in the Liṅga-
purāṇa (1.9.14–21) and Śivapurāṇa (7.2.38.10–14); the latter qualiﬁes them as upasarga,
seemingly understood in the slightly less negative sense of ‘epiphenomena’, i.e. side-effects,
rather than ‘obstacles’. Note that these faculties apparently give access to the experience of
the respective supernatural sensorial domains, which are not accessible to human beings
in normal circumstances; thus they are not to be understood (only) as ‘enhanced’ faculties
such as those of (dūra)śravaṇa, darśana etc.
163.
Tus also the Vṛhaspatitattva (exegesis to 74b) and the Mārkaṇḍeyapurāṇa (40.1).
An equally negative view of the yogic powers (aṣṭaguṇa) is found in the Buddhist Sutasoma
40.6cd: ‘Tese [powers] are a burden on the mind of the perfect one whose purpose is
supreme tranquillity, forgetful of the difﬁculty of being one who has subdued the senses,
a pitfall to the pure mind’ yekāṅbvāti manahniraṅparamaśāntikārya nipuṇa / kempәr yan
rusit iṅjitendriya juraṅniṅambәk ahajә¯ṅ//.


--- PAGE 556 ---
Yoga
537
Table 20: Te eight supernatural qualities of the aṇimādi-group in selected Old Javanese and Sanskrit texts
Powers
Yogasūtrabhāṣya
Dharma Pātañjala
Tattvajñāna
Vṛhaspatitattva
Saptati
Mataṅgapārameśvara
Parākhyatantra
3.45
328.21–330.15
49
66–74
f. 52v
17.108c–125
14.91–94
aṇimā
to become small
to become small and be
able to dive into and out
of the earth as if it were
water, unobstructed by
mountains and penetrat-
ing even rocks
to become small and sub-
tle (from large and gross)
and to be able to go
wherever one wishes, un-
obstructed by mountains
and rocks, and dive into
water
to become small and be
able to dive (unnoticed)
into and out of the earth
as a boy dives into water,
unobstructed by moun-
tains and big rocks
one can go through the
earth and mountain tops
without being injured
miniaturization of one’s
body, so that ﬁrm ob-
jects will not ward-off his
movement;
further, he
becomes invisible
having minuteness
laghimā
to become light
to give up the heaviness
of the body and become
light as kapok and move
in the sky swifer than
thought
to give up the heaviness
of the body and become
light as kapok and move
through the air and water
to give up the heavi-
ness of the body and to
become light as kapok
and travel to heaven, the
seven
continents,
the
seven underworlds,
or
outside the Egg-World
one can set foot (man-
ampak) [wherever one
wants (?)]
to
become
light
and
travel with the velocity
of thought;
not being
submerged
into
mud
or water, and not being
harassed by any enemy
whoever
being light
mahimā
to become large
to become large and be
praised
wherever
one
goes
to go in foreign lands and
be honoured, praised and
worshiped, without be-
ing perturbed whatever
is one’s destination
to be able to roam about
in different places as one
wishes, and there be hon-
oured, praised and pre-
sented with gifs and en-
joyments
one can, like the mount
Meru, umiṅki (?)164 the
universe
one can do violence to
all
beings
unimpeded,
being worshiped by the
Siddhas, get a large-sized
body
and
rule
over
Brahmā and the other
gods
having great size
prāpti
to be able to touch the
moon with the ﬁngertip
to attain whatever one
wishes, and to be able
to touch the moon from
one’s seat
whatever object one de-
sires, that comes without
being the result of one’s
own effort
whatever
one
wishes,
that comes about sponta-
neously—thus one does
not need to crave for
things, a feeling causes
the production of karmic
latent impressions. One
enjoys the pleasures, but
quickly obtains a thou-
sand bodies and enjoys
all kinds of pleasures in
heaven; when one has
ﬁnished to enjoy oneself,
one is not bound by
the fruits of one’s good
actions165
one is able to do as one
wishes and touch the sun
and the moon
whatever the yogin de-
sires he obtains, and is
able to reach whatever
place instantly
attaining everything
164.
Tis might be a corruption for umiṅkiṅ, which OJED (2286) is not able to translate.
165.
Te last sentence might actually intend that the fruits of the good actions do not expire and one is able to enjoy pleasures in heaven


--- PAGE 557 ---
538
iii Doctrine
Powers
Yogasūtrabhāṣya
Dharma Pātañjala
Tattvajñāna
Vṛhaspatitattva
Saptati
Mataṅgapārameśvara
Parākhyatantra
3.45
328.21–330.15
49
66–74
f. 52v
17.108c–125
14.91–94
prākāmya
one’s own desires are not
obstructed (by the ele-
ments) and one is able to
dive into and out of the
earth as if it were water
one’s appearance is as one
wishes
one is able to change
one’s form and become
young or old, male or fe-
male, and is also able to
enter the mind of every-
body in the universe
to obtain whatever form
and body one wishes, i.e.
that of a god, a human
being or an animal
one can obtain any par-
ticular appearance
one enjoys thousands of
women of incomparable
beauty for as long as one
wishes
the procuring of one’s
desires
īśitva166
to reign over the produc-
tion, destruction and co-
hesion (of elements)
to subdue without being
subdued
one is able to go to
heaven
and
there
be
honoured and worshiped
by all the gods, or one
is able to subdue all the
gods in their residences,
for the Lord is within
one’s body
one may go to heaven
to enjoy oneself and sub-
due Brahmā, Viṣṇu, In-
dra, Sūrya or any other
god in their respective
residences, for the Lord
is within him and he has
sovereignty on them
to subdue without being
subdued
one rules over every-
thing,
from
Brahmā
down to movable and
immovable beings;
the
gods
obey
him
and
praise him;
he sports
with celestial women
the state of being a Lord
vaśitva
to master the elements
and their products and
not being mastered by
anyone
to command
nobody can oppose one’s
own orders and desires
one may give orders to all
the gods and attack them
if they do not obey, as
one rules over the whole
universe
to
perceive
(amastu)
without being perceived
(kavastu)
unhindered, one subdues
and holds captive the
whole universe
total control
yatrakāmā-
vasāyitva
one’s desires become re-
ality, and one is able to
dispose of the elements
and their causes accord-
ing to one’s desires
everything becomes ac-
cording to the desires of
the yogin, who acts in
sovereign freedom; fur-
ther, one becomes subtle
(yatrakāma) and a ruler,
able to punish whomever
goes against his orders
(vasāyitva)
one can match all the
gods, becoming the Lord
(īśa); one’s orders cannot
be disobeyed, and one
can curse the gods who
oppose him so that they
become humans
one
can
punish
the
god, men and animals,
whomever do not obey
to one’s orders
one is able to do whatever
is the desire of the Lord
wherever
one
desires
to be king there one
[becomes
king],
un-
hindered;
whatever
pleasures one desires one
gets; one is not oppressed
by anybody
being linked with what-
ever place on wishes167
just as long as one wishes, without having to return to earth and be reborn again because of the termination of one’s previous merit.
166.
Te Yogasūtrabhāṣya, against all Śaiva sources, reads īśitṛtva and places it afer vaśitva.
167.
Tus Goodall (2004:379) translates yatrakāmaṃca vasitā padayogitā, noting that the interpretation is however not sure since the
text is likely to be corrupt. Te gloss occurring in 14.94b is tentatively translated by him (p. 380) as ‘[Te power of being] wherever one
wishes (yatrakāma) [is so called because this is dictated] exactly according to one’s own desire (yathecchayā)’. Otherwise, one may interpret
‘whatever is wished [one obtains] according to one’s will’.


--- PAGE 558 ---
Yoga
539
Whereas sūtra 3.37 does not deﬁne these upasargas, and the Bhāṣya sim-
ply states that ‘they go against the vision of that [puruṣa], perfections arising
only for the mind (still) engaged in activity’ taddarśanapratyanīkatvāt / vyut-
thitacittasyotpadyamānāḥsiddhayaḥ, the Dharma Pātañjala gives a more de-
tailed deﬁnition. Te text glosses them as ‘those which are caused by the
principle of unevolved matter to oppose [yoga]’ ikaṅpinakadәgi de niṅprad-
hānatattva, and explain that they are met in the mind and, even when that
has been lef behind, they remain in the form of latent impressions (vāsanā)
of sattva, rajas and tamas. Each quality is then connected to a series of par-
ticular obstacles, as follows: sattva causes the ‘obstacle’ of insight (prajñā),168
which entails the mastering of the scriptures before the yogin knows them,
to smell fragrances or see godly forms bestowing a boon; rajas is an obstacle
insofar as it causes the yogin to think that powers are within his reach, for he
sees that he has obtained the powers caused by sattva;169 tamas causes the
yogin’s sight and mind to become suddenly dark and bewildered, causing
him to loose his consciousness. Te Lord, before continuing with the expo-
sition of the remaining supports of saṃyama and the eight siddhis, concludes
the account by explaining the remedies to such a situation, and that the only
manner to deﬁnitively eliminate suffering is to separate the principle of un-
evolved matter from the Soul, and the Soul from the mind.
Although the division of the obstacles into three categories linked to the
three guṇas is explicitly made neither in the Yogaśāstra nor in any other
Sanskrit text known to me, other motifs in the remaining part of the Old
Javanese account clearly draw upon the Bhāṣya on sūtra 3.51, ‘Invited by
the residents [of heaven], no attachment or pride should be effected, for un-
desirable consequences will again occur’ sthānyupanimantraṇe saṅgasma-
yākaraṇaṃpunaraniṣṭaprasaṅgāt. Te Bhāṣya, apart from describing what
happens to a yogin who has attained the supernatural powers and what he
should do in order to avoid his absorption being disturbed, introduces a divi-
sion of the yogins into four classes, viz. the debutant (prathamakalpika), the
168.
Tis idea echoes the Bhāṣya on 3.50: ‘When, afer the dwindling of hindrances and of
karma, [intuition] comes to him thus, ‘‘Tis presented-idea of discrimination is an external
aspect of sattva. And sattva is to be reckoned with those things that are to be escaped’’
[…]’ yadāsyaivaṃbhavati kleśakarmakṣaye sattvasyāyaṃvivekapratyayo dharmaḥ, sattvañ
ca heyapakṣe nyaṣṭaṃ.
169.
Although not made explicit in the text, this consideration inevitably entails a feeling
of pride on the part of the yogin, which is detrimental to his pursuing samādhi—an idea
reiterated in Yogasūtrabhāṣya 3.51.


--- PAGE 559 ---
540
iii Doctrine
resident in the stage of honey (madhubhūmika), the one who shines by virtue
of insight (prajñājyotis) and the one who has trespassed the stage where one
has to meditate (atikrāntabhāvanīya).170 Te purity of sattva possessed by
the yogin belonging to the second category (madhumatī bhūmi) having been
noticed by the gods, they try to lure him with the following invitation:
O [Sir], please sit here! Take pleasure here! Here is a desirable object of
pleasure! Here is a desirable maid! Tis elixir suppress old age and death!
Tis vehicle moves in the air! Here are wish-fulﬁlling trees, the meritorious
[river] Mandākinī, the Siddhas and the Maharṣis, incomparable and well-
disposed Apsaras, divine hearing and vision, a body [strong] like diamond!
All these things you have gained because of your intrinsic qualities, please
accept them! Tis immortal place (i.e. heaven) is devoid of decadence and
old age and it is dear to the gods!171
Compare the more synthetic account of the Dharma Pātañjala:
Te gods bring objects of enjoyment and beautiful women, dressed in a
DhPāt
332.1–5
charming way and at the same time exceedingly wanton. Tey greet the
yogin, inviting him to come to the heaven. However, he should not consent,
for that is a deception, its purpose being to cause the failure of the yoga of
the leader among yogins.
According to the Bhāṣya, in order to avoid being lured by the gods’ invitation,
the yogin should not be overcome by attachment to the powers or even by the
pride (smaya) of having been addressed by the gods themselves but consider
the bad consequences caused by attachment (saṅgadoṣa) and stick to the
following resolution:
‘Baked upon the terrifying coals of the cycle of existence and wandering in
the darkness of birth and death, in a difﬁcult way I have found the lamp
of yoga that dissipates the darkness of the hindrances. And these winds of
pleasures born from lust are enemies of that [lamp]. Now that I have attained
170.
On the probable Buddhist origin of this categorization, cf. Angot (2008:563, fn.
1631) and Woods (1917:285, fn. 1).
171.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya 3.51: bho ihāsyatām, iha ramyatām kamanīyo ’yaṃbhogaḥ, kama-
nīyeyaṃkanyā, rasāyanam idaṃjarāmṛtyū bādhate, vaihāyasam idaṃyānam, amī kalpa-
drumāḥ, puṇyā mandākinī, siddhā mahaṛṣayaḥ, uttamā anukūlā apsarasaḥ, divye śrotraca-
kṣuṣī, vajropamaḥkāyaḥ, svaguṇaiḥsarvam idam upārjitam āyuṣmatā pratipadyatām, idam
akṣayam ajaram amarasthānaṃdevānāṃpriyam iti /.


--- PAGE 560 ---
Yoga
541
this light, how could I be led astray by the mirage that are the pleasures, and
make myself fuel for that ﬁre of the cycle of existence as it ﬂares up once
again? Fare thee well, pleasures similar to dreams and to be craved for by
vile folk!’ Tus resolved in his mind, he should then practice absorption.172
Compare with the Dharma Pātañjala, where the Lord exhorts the yogin to
deliberate in his heart as follows:
‘I should be concerned that, should I follow the invitation of the gods, I will
DhPāt
332.5–14
certainly experience again the cycle of rebirth, for the nature of the power of
the objects of pleasure is that the supreme bliss is out of reach because of it.
Te suffering has been unremittingly experienced by me. Te state of super-
natural prowess has been experienced by me already. It was not the result of
my relaxing; it was the result of my practicing observances and absorption.
Tat [state] lasts for as long as the life of the universe. It will vanish in only
a moment because of the sensual objects. Tereupon I shall be impure. Te
likeness of the feeling of those [sensual objects] is like an illusion; the en-
joyment of them is like a lightning. Even if they are enjoyed for a long time,
they cause no less suffering. Te sorts of the suffering are various. As soon
as the human beings are stricken by suffering, †kadasyatanayā. It is difﬁcult
to return to a human birth: only water-buffaloes, cows, dogs or pigs will be
their outcomes’. You should think: ‘Tat is my object of fear, if the invitation
of the gods will be accepted’.
Te equation of the upasargas to vāsanās and their division into the three
types connected to the guṇas is also attested in the Vṛhaspatitattva and the
Tattvajñāna. Te presence of this doctrine in all the three texts suggests that
they inherited it from a common tradition. Te Tattvajñāna describes the
rising of the upasargas as a consequence of the attainment by the yogin of
the seven ﬁres (saptāgni), the seven parts (saptāṅga) and the seven nectars
(saptāmṛta), which represent code-names for elements and faculties that are
mastered and ‘sublimated’ by the yogin through restraint and dhāraṇās.173
It deﬁnes the obstacles as ‘the latent impressions of the three constituents,
172.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya 3.51: ghoreṣu saṃsārāṅgāreṣu pacyamānena mayā jananamara-
ṇāndhakāre viparivartamānena kathaṃcid āsāditaḥkleśatimiravināśī yogapradīpaḥ/ tas-
ya caite tṛṣṇāyonayo viṣayavāyavaḥpratipakṣāḥ/ sa khalv ahaṃlabdhālokaḥ, kathaṃana-
yā viṣayamṛgatṛṣṇayā vañcitas tasyaiva punaḥpradīptasya saṃsārāgner ātmānam indhanī
kuryām iti / svasti vaḥsvapnopamebhyaḥkṛpaṇajanaprārthanīyebhyo viṣayebhya ity evaṃ
niścitamatiḥsamādhiṃbhāvayet.
173.
Cf. Tattvajñāna 46.12–29 and Vṛhaspatitattva 62–64. Te two texts have slightly


--- PAGE 561 ---
542
iii Doctrine
which adhere tightly to the body of the Soul’ vāsanā nikaṅtriguṇa / rumakәt
iṅśarīra niṅātmā, and describes them as follows:
What are the obstacles like? When there is somebody who looks like a gand-
harva, or like a Vidyādhara. Tey come forward to greet the leader among
yogins during the time of yoga. Further, there are some who have the ap-
pearance of deities, presenting him with a golden lion-throne. Tey will
order the leader among yogins to take a seat, and they will order the Seer
to come, worshiping him with a shower of ﬂowers or bringing the [right]
meaning of the sacred texts. Ten they will teach the leader among yogins
during the time of yoga. If this happens, the leader among yogins has met
the obstacles of sattva. But if what is seen is as if the body of the leader
among yogins during the time of yoga is made to swing back and forth, as
if it is rocked, as if it is shaken, as if it is stirred up, as if it ﬂies in the atmo-
sphere, or [if] the Dānavas, the Daityas and the Rākṣasas aim at blocking the
absorption of the leader among yogins—if this happens, those are the ob-
stacles of rajas. Further, if the body of the leader among yogins during the
time of yoga becomes heavy, or suddenly rubs and thunders, ﬁlled to over-
ﬂowing, trembling and raising its hairs [out of fear], as if he is oppressed
in his heart, or he becomes unconscious and obfuscated, as if his awareness
is vanished during the time of yoga, and [he is] fully intent to sleeping on
[his] lap—if this happens, the leader among yogins has met the obstacles of
tamas.174
different opinions as to the identiﬁcation of the single members of the three items, but they
both agree in attributing to them the arising of supernatural faculties, such as obtaining the
Lord’s body and the elimination of the hindrances, old age and death. Te Vṛhaspatitattva
(63) attributes to the saptāgnis the role of burning the deﬁlements in the body and, hav-
ing deﬁned the saptāmṛtas, describes the śivāgni (65) as burning the latent impressions in
the yogin and entering his body; according to the Tattvajñāna (46.28–29 and 47.17–20) the
saptāgnis burn, through absorption, the saptāṅgas and the saptāmṛtas, and with them also
the obstacles to yoga and the latent impressions. An early Sanskrit passage describing the
arising of supernatural powers in connection with a yogic practice based on the burning
of the ﬁve elements in the body (thus resembling the deﬁnition of saptāṅga given by the
Vṛhaspatitattva, i.e. the ﬁve elements plus manas and buddhi) is Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 2.12
(trans. Olivelle 1998:419): ‘When earth, water, ﬁre, air, and ether have arisen together,
and the body made up of these ﬁve becomes equipped with the attribute of yoga, that man,
obtaining a body tempered by the ﬁre of yoga, will no longer experience sickness, old age,
or suffering’ pṛthvyaptejo ’nilakhe samutthite pañcātmake yogaguṇe pravṛtte / na tasya rogo
na jarā na duḥkhaṃprāptasya yogāgnimayaṃśarīram.
174.
Tattvajñāna 46.29–47.1–13: ndya kari lvir nikaṅupasarga nihan // 46 // yapvan hana
katon kadi gandharva / hana kadi vidyādhara / ya ta manuṅsuṅri saṅyogīśvara ri kāla niṅ


--- PAGE 562 ---
Yoga
543
Instructions on how to burn the obstacles through the saptāgnis and the
ﬁre of absorption follow. Te Old Javanese exegesis to half-śloka 74 of the
Vṛhaspatitattva also understands, albeit implicitly, the obstacles as being
the consequence of not only the saptāṅgas, saptāgnis and saptāmṛtas (de-
scribed in ślokas 62–64), but also of the eight sovereign powers (aṣṭaiśvarya)
of the aṇimādi-group (described in 66–74), which are the fruits of the state
of leader among yogins. If the yogin is able to burn with absorption the prin-
ciples below the primal matter and up to the three constituents, the obstacles
that present obstructions (magave vighna) arise:
Tere is the vision, there is the hearing, there is enlightenment, there is the
olfaction. Te vision is as if the appearance of a god is seen during the time
of yoga. Te hearing is as if a feeble sound is heard, bestowing the state of su-
pernatural prowess during the time of yoga. Or there is an extensive knowl-
edge, which is met by him during the time of yoga. Insight suddenly arises,
and he knows about the [true] meaning of the sacred texts [even though] he
has not yet studied them. Tat is enlightenment. Tere is like the perfume
of a king that gives off smell, inhaled by the nose during the time of yoga.
Tat is olfaction. All of them are obstacles of sattva. Te obstacles of rajas
are as follows: he feels that his body is as if rocked during the time of yoga.
It is as if his body is lifed up. It is as if he feels that his body is pressed down.
It is as if his body is ﬂung away. It is as if his body is swung back and forth.
He feels as if it is stirred up. He feels that his body is light like kapok. All of
them, they are obstacles of rajas. Te obstacles of tamas are as follows: it is
as if his body is ﬁlled to overﬂowing during the time of yoga. He feels as if
his body is heavy, he feels. He feels that his body is cold. He feels as if his
limbs are being entered (i.e. possessed) and ﬁlled. His mind becomes dark.
Its awareness becomes dazed and obfuscated; it is unconscious. All of them,
they are the obstacles of tamas.175
yoga / muvah hana ta marūpa devatā / manuṅsuṅi siṅhāsana mās / manon maluṅguha ri
saṅyogīśvara muvah hanona ṛṣi ḍatәṅ/ mamūjā riṅpuṣpavarṣa / athavā umava hartha niṅ
aji / ndan ahajara kunaṅsaṅyogīśvara ri kāla niṅyoga / sattvopasarga kapaṅgih de saṅyogī-
śvara yan maṅkana // kunaṅyan katon / kadīnuntitakәn / kadīnayun / kadīnulahulah / hana
kadi binoṅboṅ/ hana kadi maṅlayaṅriṅākāśa / kunaṅavak saṅyogīśvara ri kāla niṅyoga /
athavā don dānava / kunaṅdaitya / rākṣasa / umalaṅi samādhi saṅyogīśvara / rajopasarga
ika yan maṅkana // kunaṅyan abyәt avak saṅyogīśvara ri kāla niṅyoga / athavā kagyata hu-
maras kumәtuga / gәgәṅәn rumab muririṅ/ hana kadi pinәtәkakәn [pinәtәk Ed.] riṅhatәn /
hanan malupa viparīta / kadi hilaṅikaṅcetana / ri kāla niṅyoga / prayatna turū saṅhulun /
tamah ika kapaṅgih de saṅyogīśvara yan maṅkana /.
175.
Vṛhaspatitattva 74.8–22: hana si darśana ṅaranya / hana si śravaṇa ṅaranya / hana si


--- PAGE 563 ---
544
iii Doctrine
Te text ends with a description of the remedies to be used to cure the ob-
stacles of tamas, which closely echoes a similar account given in Dharma
Pātañjala 326.22–3, and characterizes the successful absorption as causing
the separation of the yogin’s mind (jñāna) from the body.
Te supernatural faculties of perception arising from the obstacles of
sattva as described in the Old Javanese sources closely resemble the divine
faculties mentioned in Yogasūtra 3.36. On the other hand, the faculty of
knowing the sacred scriptures before having studied them is not described
in the Yogaśāstra but in the Purāṇic accounts of Pātañjala yoga listing the
siddhis connected with the upasargas.176
Te Yogapāda of the Dharma Pātañjala comes to an end with the yogin’s
monologue refusing the invitation of the gods. A debate between a materi-
alist opponent and the Lord about the destiny of the Soul afer death and the
essence of the universe follows.
Prayogasandhi
We have already encountered a few occurrences of the
elusive term prayogasandhi, in both the Yogapāda and
other parts of the Dharma Pātañjala. Te expression, at-
tested in several Old Javanese texts but not in Sanskrit, is tentatively glossed
by OJED (prayoga sandhi) as ‘secret means; or prayogasandi, esoteric knowl-
edge of the (right) means?’.177 In the Yogapāda the term features in the de-
boddhavya ṅaranya / hana si gandha ṅaranya / si darśana ṅaranya hana kadi rūpa niṅde-
vatā katon ri kāla niṅyoga / si śravaṇa ṅaranya hana ta śabda sūkṣma karәṅә¯ / kadi maṅanu-
grahāni kasiddhyan rasanya ri kāla niṅyoga / vaneh hana ta jñāna bahu katәmu denira kāla
niṅyoga / prajñā dumadak vruh ry artha niṅaji tapvan paṅaji ya / si boddhavya ṅaranya /
hana ta kadi gandha niṅratu mavaṅi kesәp iṅiruṅri kāla niṅyoga / si gandha ṅaranika /
ika ta kabeh upasarga niṅsattva ṅaranika // nihan taṅupasarga niṅrajah / hana kadīna-
yun ikāvaknira / hiḍәpnira ri kāla niṅyoga / hana kadīnaṅkataṅkat ikāvaknira / hana kadi
pinәtәkakәn ikāvaknira hiniḍәpnira / hana kadīnuntalakәn ikāvaknira / hana kadīnuntitun-
titakәn ikāvaknira / hana kadi binoṅboṅhiḍәpnira / hanan kaḍaṅan kadi kapuk hiḍәpnira /
ika ta kabeh upasarga niṅrajah ika // nihan taṅupasarga niṅtamah / hanan kadi gәṅgәṅәn
ikāvaknira ri kāla niṅyoga / hanan kadi mabvat ikāvaknira kahiḍәpanya / hanan matis ika
si kahiḍәpanyāvaknira / hanan kadi kapasukan kesyan aṅganira kahiḍәpanya / hanan pәtәṅ
hiḍәpnira / hanan vulaṅun viparīta / lupa lvir nikaṅcetananira / yeka kabeh upasarga niṅ
tamah ika //.
176.
Cf., e.g., Agnipurāṇa 375.8: ‘All the scriptures such as the Vedas and so on are mas-
tered by him spontaneously; any desired matters of metrical science and poetry are mastered
by him’ vedādisarvaśāstrañ ca svayam eva pravartate / abhīṣṭachandoviṣayaṃkāvyañ cāsya
pravartate //.
177.
Cf. OJED 1650, s.v. sandhi. Te meaning of ‘esoteric, secret’ is justiﬁed by a seman-
tic shif of the word sandhi borrowed from Sanskrit, documented in several Old Javanese


--- PAGE 564 ---
Yoga
545
scription of the restraint on right-and-wrong (dharmādharma):
Tat is the goal of the prayogasandhi to be enquired about when facing the
DhPāt
328.16–19
guru, if he wishes that the yogin enters in another man. Te right-and-
wrong, that is cut off by him. Tere is a little bit of what remains, which
is why he does not die. When the cutting-off is ﬁnished, he will be success-
ful in entering the other man.
Among Old Javanese Tuturs and Tattvas the Dharma Pātañjala is unique in
connecting prayogasandhi with the above yogic practice, which is described
in the Yogasūtra (3.38): ‘From loosening the fetters of bondage to the body
and from awareness of the bodily processes, there is the entering of the mind
into another’s body’ bandhakāraṇaśaithilyāt pracārasaṃvedanāc ca cittasya
paraśarīrāveśaḥ. Te Bhāṣya mostly paraphrases the sūtra, only adding that
the yogin can withraw his own mind and deposit it into the body of another
living being ‘as when the king-bee ﬂies up, the bees ﬂy afer him, and when
it alights, they alight afer it, so the organs follow afer the mind when pene-
trating into the body of another’ yathā madhukararājānaṃmakṣikā utpatan-
tam anūtpatanti niviśamānam anuviśante, tathendriyāṇi paraśarīrāveśe cit-
tam anuvidhīyanta iti. Te technique of paraśarīrapraveśa is described in
al-Bīrūnī’s Kitāb Pātañjala (Pines and Gelblum 1983:262) as follows:
If he wishes that he, except for his spirit, be transported in this entanglement,
from his (own) body to another body, not in a way in which (one is) trans-
ported afer death, but rather in virtue of his (own) will, volition and (free)
choice, he is able to bring this about. Tis is because the bodies are nets for
the spirits, with a view to requiting them for former good and evil (deeds)
with ease or discomfort corresponding to the two (categories of deeds).
Te entering into another person’s body by way of yogic technique is a well-
known motif in the Epics, and it has been connected by White (2004:622–
623) to the entering by the Śaiva guru into the body of his disciple during
sources, in the sense of ‘not open, covert, deep, subtle, secret, esoteric; deep or hidden
sense, subtleties (ﬁner points), secrets, subtle tactics, secret (uncommon) power; secrecy,
deepest (most hidden) part, innermost recesses. Earliest evidence of the semantic change
from sandhi 1. [connection, alliance, peace, juncture, interval between day and night, twi-
light] to 2. (not found in Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin) seems to be the combination upāya sandhi
(Virāṭaparva; ‘‘peaceful means’’ > ‘‘subtle, or covert means’’, ? cf. sūkṣmopāya, rahasyopāya,
Arjunavivāha 22.7)’ (OJED 1649); for a similar usage, cf. the Sutasoma’s advayayogasandhi
‘the esoteric knowledge of advayayoga’ (Ensink 1978:186), and the Sanskrit sandhyābhāṣā
or sandhibhāṣā ‘twilight language’, which is usually translated as ‘secret (esoteric) language’.


--- PAGE 565 ---
546
iii Doctrine
(Mantramārga) Tantric initiation, to burn the latter’s innate maculation and
guide him toward higher cosmic levels. Te connection between this prac-
tice and prayogasandhi remains obscure to me, even though it may be ar-
gued that the ‘extraction’ and ‘travelling’ of the yogin’s subtle body into an-
other being involve a process active at the ‘ﬁne’ ontological level that seems
to be the reserve of prayogasandhi.178 Te supernatural ability of entering
another’s body is already described in the Pāśupatasūtra and the Bhāṣya
thereon.179 Kauṇḍinya’s elaboration when introducing sūtra 1.31: ‘And all
become such as may be killed by him’ sarve cāsya vadhyā bhavanti (p. 48) is
interesting:
Question: Is [the perfect one] able only to enter into a human like a spirit,
a demon or a devil? Or, is he also able to separate them from life and apply
torture to them? Answer: He is able to do so.180
Tis description presupposes the ability of killing, thus foreshadowing the
Dharma Pātañjala’s allusion to the fact that only when the lefovers of dhar-
mādharma of a living being are cut, which amounts to death, one is able to
enter another’s body.
Elsewhere in the Dharma Pātañjala (326.22) the practice of prayogasan-
dhi is recommended for the yogin when he meets the obstacle of tamas, along
with the application of ﬁre (apuyapuya); whether the application of ﬁre (i.e.
inner yogic ﬁre?) is connected to prayogasandhi is not clear, but very proba-
ble. Te most elaborate deﬁnition of the term is found at the very beginning
of the Yogapāda, prior to śloka 2, in correspondence with the discussion of
the attainment of the body of the Lord by the yogin. Śiva deﬁnes prayoga-
sandhi in reply to Kumāra’s statement that the Lord is within the cycle of
rebirth (which is in fact not true, for He is there only as a manifestation of
His form within the realized yogin):
178.
Tis ﬁnds a parallel in the characterization of practices of paraśarīrapraveśa in the Ne-
tratantra (20.27–36) as ‘subtle’ (sūkṣma) yoga, in contrast to the supreme (para) and coarse
(sthūla) yoga (cf. White 2004:623–624, 2009:161–163).
179.
Cf., e.g., the latter on sūtra 1.28 (p. 47): ‘And he becomes not subject to anyone’
sarveṣāṃcāvaśyo bhavati (also with reference to the pupil being subjected to the master,
yet not entered by him) and sūtra 1.29 (p. 48): ‘And he enters into all’ sarvāṃś cāviśati
(with reference to all the ‘cattle’ or bound souls).
180.
Pañcārthabhāṣya 1.30 (p. 48, lines 5–7): āha kim āveśanamātra eva śakto yakṣara-
kṣaḥpiśācādivad uta prāṇair api viprayogaṃyātanābhiś ca saṃyogaṃkartuṃśakto bha-
vatīti //ucyate śaktaḥ.


--- PAGE 566 ---
Yoga
547
Te reason why it is so is that the absorption of the yogin is perfect, for the
DhPāt
288.11–18
Lord is made manifest in a human being. It will be obtained by the yogin
if he knows about the prayogasandhi. To exemplify it: like the ﬁre which is
in the wood, for it brings forth its body. Te ﬁre which is in the wood is
the consequence of the rubbing—the cause for it to come out. Likewise, the
butter is not produced if it is not churned. Tat is a coarse substance, and yet
it is not produced if no working procedure is applied with a tool. Te Lord
Supreme Cause will not be met by him, if there will not be prayogasandhi.
Even though one may know about the prayogasandhi, if one does not put it
into practice, one will deﬁnitely not meet the Lord.
Te passage tries to explain the term prayoga as the activity of churning (pin-
utәran) and rubbing (aṅәsә¯), and sandhi as a ‘tool’181 through which an in-
visible yet material substance—here the butter—can be produced (i.e. made
manifest) by being ‘worked’ (inupāya). Here prayogasandhi appears to refer
to a kind of yogic procedure, the details of which are passed over in silence,
causing the manifestation (kābhibyaktan) of the visible form of the Lord in
the body of the yogin.
Even though references to prayogasandhi abound in the Tutur and Tat-
tva literature, they are all characterized by secrecy and ellipsis; furthermore,
from the passages it may be inferred that the sources were by no means in
agreement as to what yogic procedure was intended by it, or even its aim.
Terefore, I limit myself here to drawing attention to the Old Javanese pas-
sages that display the most obvious mutual parallels, and try to identify sim-
ilar motifs in Sanskrit sources.182 Te closest parallel to the account of the
Dharma Pātañjala is found in the ﬁrst of the two cantos constituting the
Śaiva hymn of the Arjunavivāha:183
181.
Following OJED (1650) s.v. sandhi ii ‘part. kind of tool’; alternatively, the form may
indicate an ‘esoteric/subtle means’ (cf. above, fn. 177).
182.
Other instances of the term prayogasandhi used in a yogic context that shows no
apparent links with the understanding of the term by the Dharma Pātañjala are found
in Jñānasiddhānta ch. 2, where it is connected with a practice involving a focused atten-
tion even in the state of deep sleep; Vṛhaspatitattva 52.80, where it is not clearly deﬁned;
Kakavin Dharma Śūnya Kakavin 59 (canto 9.2), where the aim of sandhi upāya (= prayo-
gasandhi) is to hold back (or: ‘concentrate upon’, rәgәp) the bad and good actions (pāpa
lavan supuṇya) with the secret key of yoga (kuñci rahasya yoga, perhaps connected with
prāṇāyāma?—cf. above, pp. 521–523); in several passages of the Tattvajñāna, among which
ch. 44, where prayogasandhi is explained as being constituted by the ancillaries of yoga,
which are the upāyas.
183.
I have quoted and discussed the two stanzas of the second part of the hymn (canto


--- PAGE 567 ---
548
iii Doctrine
oṂ–May the homage of him who is in need of a protector (anātha) be no-
ticed by Him who is the refuge of the three worlds! My homage to your
feet is both bodily and mental—there is nothing else [but you]. You are like
the ﬁre [that comes out] from wood and the butter [that comes out] from
the milk. You come out in visible form when there is a man who carefully
‘churns’ the consciousness.
Pervaded and pervasive, you are the essence of the supreme reality, difﬁcult
to grasp. According to your will is what exists and what does not exist, what
is gross and subtle and what is good or evil. Of the origin, existence and
end of creation you are the Cause. You are the origin and end of the whole
universe, having both a manifest and unmanifest form.184
It is arguable that the stanzas adumbrate a yogic method, illustrated through
the metaphors of ﬁre in wood and butter in milk, to make the Lord mani-
fest (sākṣāt mәtu) in the man who practices it. Here the verb amutәr ‘churn’
is connected with tutur ‘consciousness, awareness, remembrance’ and pina-
hayu ‘carefully, with due care’.
An elliptic reference to prayogasandhi in a similar context is found in
the Vṛhaspatitattva (50.1–6), where the Lord, having used the above similes
in śloka 49 and in the Old Javanese commentary thereon, limits Himself to
stating that Vṛhaspati, having been taught about the knowledge of the tat-
tvas, can be imparted the great secret called prayogasandhi afer all the other
gods in the assembly have lef. Another instance is found in Jñānasiddhānta
ch. 25, where the one line constituting the Old Javanese comment to śloka 5,
explaining the invisible presence of the Lord in everything through examples
such as those of ﬁre and wood and butter and milk, states that ‘Te means
(prayoga) of the master to meet with the Lord is yogasandhi’ prayoga saṅ
paṇḍitān tumәmvakәn bhaṭṭāra yogasandhi. Te śloka that follows, which
seems to be only feebly related to the preceding one, refers to the yogin leav-
ing his body with his breath, realizing to be Śiva himself.185
11), using the metaphor of the moon reﬂected on water, above (p. 386).
184.
Arjunavivāha 10.1–2: oṂsambah niṅanātha tiṅhalana de trilokaśaraṇa / vāhyādhy-
ātmika sambah i ṅhulun i jә¯ṅta tan hana vaneh / saṅlvir agni sakeṅtahәn kadi miñak sakeṅ
dadhi kita / saṅsākṣāt mәtu yan hana vvaṅamutәr tutur pinahayu // byāpibyāpaka sāri niṅ
paramatattva durlabha kita / icchāntan hana tan hanāganal alit lavan halahayu / utpattisthi-
tilīna niṅdadi kitāta kāraṇa nika / saṅsaṅkan paran iṅsarāt sakalaniṣkalātmaka kita //
185.
Te śloka appears to have been quoted and decontextualized by the compiler of the
Jñānasiddhānta from a Sanskrit source, for the śloka has a parallel in Niśvāsamūla 6.8 and
Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama 19.4 (cf. Acri 2006:124).


--- PAGE 568 ---
Yoga
549
Sanskrit passages providing what may be the antecedents for this doc-
trine are found in the Upaniṣads. For instance, the late Amṛtabindūpaniṣad
(9–13th century ad) equates the process of mental realization of Brahman
to the extraction of butter from milk and the production of ﬁre through a
churning-stick:
Like clariﬁed butter is hidden within milk, the knowledge [of the self] dwells
within every being. Tat should be churned out constantly with the mind
as the churning-stick.
Having applied the cord186 of knowledge [to the churning-stick], one should
extract, like ﬁre [by friction], the Supreme [Brahman], without parts, im-
movable, paciﬁed; ‘I am that Brahman’—it is said.187
Another, much earlier, parallel is found in the Śvetāśvataropaniṣad (1.10–
12). Te passage, having taught that the Lord abides in one’s body as the
ātman, explains how that realization, which brings about the eradication of
the fetters (sarvapāśāpahā) and universal sovereignty (viśvaiśvarya), can be
attained:
When a ﬁre is contained within its womb, one cannot see its visible form
and yet its essential character is not extinguished; one can grasp the ﬁre once
again from its womb by means of tinder. In just the same way, one can grasp
both188 within the body by means of the syllable oṂ.
When one makes one’s own body the bottom slab and the syllable oṂthe
upper drill, by twirling it constantly through meditation one would see God,
just as one would the hidden thing.
Like oil in sesame seeds and butter in curds, like water in the riverbed and
ﬁre in the ﬁre-drills, so, when one seeks it with truth and austerity, one
grasps that self (ātman) in the body (ātman)—that all-pervading self, which
is contained [in the body], like butter in milk.189
186.
For this translation of netra, cf. MW s.v. (attested in Mahābhārata etc.): ‘the string by
which a churning-stick is whirled round’.
187.
Amṛtabindūpaniṣad 20–21: ghṛtam iva payasi nigūḍhaṃbhūte bhūte vasati vijñā-
nam / satataṃmanthayitavyaṃmanasā manthānabhūtena // jñānanetraṃsamādhāya ud-
dhared vahnivat param / niṣkalaṃniścalaṃśāntaṃtad brahmāham iti smṛtam //.
188.
Tat is, the Lord and unevolved matter, mentioned in verse 1.10.
189.
Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 1.13–16ab (trans. Olivelle 1998:416–417): vahner yathā yo-
nigatasya mūrtir na dṛśyate naiva ca liṅganāśaḥ/ sa bhūya evendhanayonigṛhyas tad vo-


--- PAGE 569 ---
550
iii Doctrine
Te stanzas describe in detail the procedure for producing ﬁre by means of a
ﬁre-drill, as a metaphor for the obtainment through meditation of the man-
ifestation of the Lord who is present in the human body as the Self (ātman).
According to Olivelle (1998:617–618), ‘the womb is the depression on the
lower slab into which the drill is inserted and twirled to produce ﬁre. ‘‘Essen-
tial character’’ (liṅga) appears to refer to the essential element of ﬁre, which
remains within the ﬁre-drill even when its visible form is extinguished’.190
He concludes that ‘the point of all these images is that in every case one
has to engage in a strenuous activity (crushing the sesame seeds, churning
the curds, or digging up the riverbed) to obtain what is hidden therein’, a
point that is clearly implied also in the description of prayogasandhi in Old
Javanese sources—and especially in the Dharma Pātañjala. Te same point
clearly emerges from a verse of the Trayodaśaśatikakālottara (f. 37v.2–3), the
only Siddhāntatantra known to me that includes a reference to this motif:
‘As the butter existing within milk will not become visible without proper
effort (prayoga), thus Śiva, the support of the dhanañjaya [breath], will not
be manifest at all times’ yathā kṣīre sthitaṃsarpir na dṛśyed aprayogataḥ/
tathā dhanañjayāvastho na dṛśyeta śivaḥsadā.
bhayaṃvai praṇavena dehe // svadeham araṇiṃkṛtvā praṇavaṃcottarāraṇim / dhyānanir-
mathanābhyāsād devaṃpaśyen nigūḍhavat // tileṣu tailaṃdadhinīva saprit āpaḥsrotaḥsv
araṇīṣu cāgniḥ/ evam ātmātmani gṛhyate ’sau satyenainaṃtapasā yo ’nupaśyati // sar-
vavyāpinam ātmānaṃkṣīre sarpir ivārpitam /.
190.
Olivelle refers to analogous descriptions of the procedure for obtaining ﬁre in the
Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad (1.4.6 and 3.23-31) and the Kaṭhopaniṣad (4.8), which also under-
stand the ﬁre as being ‘hidden’ within the ﬁre-drill. Tis is a fairly widespread image in
Vedic literature.


--- PAGE 570 ---
Right Knowledge
A
s we have seen above (p. 481), it is at its very outset of the Dharma
Pātañjala that the Lord, prompted by a speciﬁc question of Kumāra,
deﬁnes the right knowledge (samyajñāna/samyagjñāna) and connects it to
the practice of samādhi. Te term, comparable to the synonym tattvajñāna
‘knowledge of the things as they are’,1 is widely attested in Sanskrit Śāstras
of various philosophical and religious traditions, including the Śaiva ones,
as well as in Old Javanese sources. In both traditions it denotes a proper
knowledge, perception or notion, of either intellectual or intuitive, and thus
salviﬁc, nature.
As Salviﬁc
Knowledge
It is the latter characterization of right knowledge that is
found in the beginning of the Dharma Pātañjala, where
it is presented as a fundamental ingredient in the pro-
cess of liberation. It accompanies yoga and its ancil-
laries towards the realization of absorption leading to oneness with Śiva.2
Te connection between right knowledge and the means of yoga must have
been a widespread doctrinal tenet, for it is expounded in other Old Javanese
scriptures as well. For instance, the Agastyaparva prescribes to restrain the
unstable mind by using right knowledge as a hook (aṅkuśa) and applying
the ancillaries of yoga.3 Te Tattvajñāna (42.16–19) explains that the right
1.
Cf. Tattvajñāna 1, 23, 24; Vṛhaspatitattva 5, 32, 50; Nyāyasūtrabhāṣya ad 1.1.2: tattva-
jñānaṃtu khalu mithyājñānaviparyayeṇa vyākhyātam / ‘true knowledge is explained as the
contrary of the wrong notion’ (cf. below, pp. 559–560).
2.
For the conﬂation of samyagjñāna and the item Knowledge (jñāna) belonging to the
eight qualities of the intellect, cf. above, p. 449.
3.
Cf. Agastyaparva 375.18–20: ‘Such a mind, it should be restrained by the master by
means of right knowledge, as if it were a hook. It should be crafed with the yoga of vi-
sualization, ﬁxation, reﬂection, withdrawal and absorption’ ikaṅmanah maṅkana, ya ta


--- PAGE 571 ---
552
iii Doctrine
knowledge must be used as a lamp (makasuluh) guiding the performance
of observances (brata), austerity (tapa), yoga and absorption (samādhi), us-
ing a means of realization prayogasandhi;4 elsewhere (43.13–21), the right
knowledge is compared to the wings that keep the course of the arrow that is
prayogasandhi, shot by the bow that are observances, austerity, yoga and ab-
sorption.5 Te SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan (ms. C, p. 32 lines 1–3) regards the
right knowledge as the cause of absorption, which ends in liberation (kamok-
tan).
A somewhat different characterization is that of the Vṛhaspatitattva (26),
which equates the possession of right knowledge to the being endowed with
the four Sovereign Powers of the Lord and achieving oneness with Him (sāt-
maka lavan bhaṭāra), i.e. liberation from the cycle of rebirth (tan paṅjanma
muvah). Te Jñānasiddhānta in ch. 6 (p. 108) deﬁnes right knowledge as the
means through which someone remembers his true nature as the absolute
reality (katutur i kaviśeṣanira)—a knowledge without thought or thought-
objects (tan paṅhiḍәp, tan kahiḍәp). Tat knowledge is said to annihilate
all the deﬁlements (hilaṅnikaṅsarvakleśa) as ﬁre burns both stinking and
fragrant matter until it is completely reduced to ashes, afer which it also
vanishes and again returns to its latent state (malvi sūkṣma).
As the Tree
Valid Means of
Knowledge
Old Javanese sources also explain samyagjñāna as the
knowledge achieved through the three valid means
of perception (pramāṇa), namely direct perception
(pratyakṣa), inference (anumāna) and reliable testi-
mony of scripture (āgama).6
Te Dharma Pātañjala,
hinәrәtnira saṅpaṇḍita makasādhana samyajñāna kaṅkәn aṅkuśa. inupāya ta ya riṅdhyāna
dhāraṇā tarka pratyāhāra samādhi yoga.
4.
Which in the Tattvajñāna denotes the ancillaries of yoga; cf. also 43.1–3.
5.
Te simile is also illustrated in detail in 42.17–19: ‘[Te yogin who] uses as stages [of
practice] observances, penance, yoga and absorption, who uses as a lamp right knowledge,
who uses as a means prayogasandhi, he is the only one able to obtain the supreme state
of the Lord. Like an arrow that is shot and has already [been discharged] from the bow:
its striking will be altogether straight’ makabhūmi brata / tapa / yoga / samādhi / makasuluh
samyajñāna / makasādhana prayogasandhi / sira juga saṅvnaṅtumәkani kaviśeṣan bhaṭāra /
kady aṅgān iṅhru pinanahakәn / sāmpun iṅlaras / abәnәra juga tampuhnya /. A similar
example occurs in the Dharma Pātañjala in connection with the state of insight of the yogin,
characterized by right knowledge: cf. above, p. 495.
6.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 26: ‘One who possesses the three authoritative means of knowl-
edge—direct perception, inference and testimony of scripture, he is designated as one who
possesses right knowledge’ saṅkinahanan de niṅpramāṇa tәlu / pratyakṣānumānāgama /


--- PAGE 572 ---
Right Knowledge
553
having prescribed the three means as the guide to the human beings who
desire the right knowledge, deﬁnes them as follows:
Te valid means of knowledge of direct perception means: the entity that is not
DhPāt
208.10–210.7
a matter of guess. Tat is the valid means of knowledge of direct perception.
Te valid means of knowledge of inference means: there is an entity which
is not visible, but the thought of men about it is sure, for there is a sign by
means of which one can recognize it. For example: like the foreign countries
across the sea, it is possible that men know about their existence, for one sees
thus, namely that there are men of different appearance, like the Brahmans
and the Pujut, the Nambi, the Persians. Tese are seen by you. And further,
there still are entities which are not seen, they originate in [foreign] lands,
in [other] islands, such as gems, musk, camphor. Tese constitute the evi-
dence that the islands across the sea exist; it is the mind that infers that they
exist. Tat is the valid means of knowledge of inference. Te valid means of
knowledge of testimony of scripture means: the teachings of the people from
the foreign lands, but [only] if there is a proof; if there is no proof, they are
[to be considered] false. If there is a proof, that is designated as the valid
means of knowledge of testimony of scripture. Tus are the three valid means
of knowledge, so that there is no going wrong of the knowledge according to
the men of religion.
Te concise deﬁnition of pratyakṣa as an entity that is ‘not matter of guess’
or ‘uncertain’ (marakva) reveals a rather developed epistemological aware-
ness and may be compared to similar characterizations found in the Śāstric
Siddhāntatantras.7 On the other hand, deﬁnitions of direct perception as a
ya ta sinaṅguh samyagjñāna ṅaranya; Tattvajñāna 36.4: ‘Te aim of the three valid means
of knowledge is to serve as torch for the one who is endowed with right knowledge’ ya ta
don ikaṅpramāṇa tәlu / pinakasuluh mata kita kasamyajñāna; SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan
p. 62 line 11: ‘Right knowledge is direct perception and inference’ samyajñāna ṅaranya
pratyakṣānumāna (in harmony with the late Buddhist rejection of āgama as a pramāṇa).
7.
Cf., e.g., Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama YP 4.15c-16a: ‘Sense-knowledge is unobjecti-
ﬁable, free of doubt, and free of imagination’ anirdeśyam asandigdhaṃkalpanāpoḍhago-
caram / pratyakṣam, which, according to Sanderson (2006b:78), shows an awareness of
Dignāga’s (c. 480–550) deﬁnition of pratyakṣa in the Pramāṇasamuccaya as being ‘free of
imagination’ kalpanāpoḍham; contrast Śrīkaṇṭha’s deﬁnition in Ratnatrayaparīkṣā 227cd:
‘Characterized by imagination, free of doubt and devoid of error’ savikalpam asandigdhaṃ
vyabhicāravivarjitam. All deﬁnitions may be regarded as going back in some way to the
classical deﬁnition given in the (second part of) Nyāyasūtra 1.1.4: ‘Direct perception is
not the result of an inferential mark, devoid of error, certain’ avyapadeśyam avyabhicāri
vyavasāyātmakaṃpratyakṣam.


--- PAGE 573 ---
554
iii Doctrine
mere psychological process of sense-cognition are found in the Vṛhaspati-
tattva (26): ‘Direct perception (lit. ‘what is present before the eyes’) means:
what is seen and grasped’ pratyakṣa ṅaranya katon kagamәl, and in the Tat-
tvajñāna (36.6–7): ‘Te substances that are coarse, whatever can be seen and
heard, whatever can be grasped with the hands, those are within the scope
of the valid means of knowledge of direct perception’ ika taṅvastu gaṇal /
sakaton sakarәṅә¯ / sakagamәl de niṅtaṅan / yeka kavәnaṅdeniṅpratyakṣa-
pramāṇa.8
Te characterization of inference given by the Dharma Pātañjala is also
decidedly more elaborated than those found in the other Tattvas, articulated
as it is through abstract philosophical terms and corroborated by various
metaphors. Te deﬁnition as the sign or means (cihna) through which an
invisible entity can be recognized is apparently based on the very standard
description of inference as the cognition of an entity (or mark-bearer, liṅgin)
by means of a mark (liṅga).9 Te examples cited in support of this deﬁnition,
namely the reference to the existence of foreign lands based on the common
observation of people with an ‘exotic’ appearance (like Brahmans!) and of
products from foreign lands, I have found neither in other Old Javanese nor
Sanskrit sources. On the other hand, what constitutes the standard simile
(or syllogism) explaining inference as an invariable concomitance between
the probans and probandum in Sanskrit literature is found in the Vṛhaspati-
tattva: ‘Inference means: like when one sees smoke at a distance, he infers
the boundaries of the ﬁre’ anumāna ṅaranya kady aṅgān iṅanon kukus riṅ
kadohan / ya ta maṅanumāna hīṅan iṅapuy. Yet another deﬁnition is given
by the Tattvajñāna (36.7–8): ‘What is subtle (i.e. invisible), like the char-
acteristics of the Fourth State, that is within the scope of the valid means of
knowledge of inference’ ikaṅsūkṣma kadi lakṣaṇa niṅtūryapada / yeka kavә-
naṅde niṅanumānapramāṇa. Whereas the reference, by way of example, to
the Fourth State of consciousness is an idiosyncrasy of the Tattvajñāna, the
basic idea that inference serves the purpose of demonstrating the existence of
invisible entities is widespread in Old Javanese sources. In both the Dharma
Pātañjala and Vṛhaspatitattva it is epitomized in the demonstration of the
8.
Tese echo the deﬁnition of direct perception given by the ﬁrst part of Nyāyasūtra
1.1.4, i.e. ‘Te knowledge resulting from the contact of the objects of the senses with the
faculties’ indriyārthasannikarṣotpannaṃjñānam.
9.
Cf. Vaiśeṣikasūtra 9.18, 10.4 and 19; Sāṅkhyakārikā 5; the various commentaries on
Nyāyasūtra 1.1.5, etc.


--- PAGE 574 ---
Right Knowledge
555
existence of karma through the inference of its fruits by way of the example
of the movement of the sun, which is found in Sanskrit sources in connec-
tion with inference of the kind ‘observed from the general’ (sāmānyatodṛṣṭa,
cf. below, pp. 564–570).
Te deﬁnition of testimony of scriptures by the Dharma Pātañjala is in-
teresting in that it mentions the teachings (varahvarah) coming from foreign
lands, which presumably refer to areas of the Indian Subcontinent—refer-
ences of this kind are extremely rare in Tutur and Tattva literature. It also
adds that such teachings are to be considered as valid only if they display
proofs (cihna);10 even though these proofs are not deﬁned, it might be ar-
gued that they consisted in analogies, logical demonstrations, etc. A similar
standpoint is detectable in the Vṛhaspatitattva, which deﬁnes āgama as ‘the
scriptures that are provided with demonstrations by the teacher’ ikaṅaji in-
upapattyan de saṅguru—a gloss of the Sanskrit half-line kṛtāntād vacanāga-
maḥ; the need to integrate the reliable testimony of the sacred scriptures with
logical means emerges also from 52.38–42, ‘the valid means of knowledge
and analogies11 have been presented in the scriptures because they serve as
means to guide what is said’ ya hetu niṅpramāṇopamā / yan hinanākәn ri
saṅhyaṅaji / apan yeka pinakasipat niṅvuvus, and ‘the nature of the scrip-
tures and the valid means of knowledge is to mutually support each other’
iki saṅhyaṅaji masuṇḍaṅsuṇḍaṅan lavan pramāṇa svabhāvanira. Te once
again idiosyncratic deﬁnition of the Tattvajñāna (36.8–9) runs: ‘what is ex-
tremely subtle, like the characteristics of the State [called] the End of the
Fourth, that is within the scope of the valid means of knowledge of scrip-
ture’ ikaṅparamasūkṣma kadi lakṣaṇa nikaṅtūryāntapada / yeka kavәnaṅ
de niṅāgamapramāṇa.
10.
In this instance I translate the Sanskrit cihna as ‘proof’ rather than ‘mark, (distinctive)
sign, characteristic’, on the basis of OJED (326). Te former meaning may be the result of a
semantic shif that occurred in Old Javanese.
11.
Or, if we take the compound pramāṇopamā as a karmadhāraya, ‘the analogies that
constitute valid means of knowledge’.


--- PAGE 575 ---


--- PAGE 576 ---
Wrong Knowledge
T
he opposite of right knowledge is denoted in the Dharma Pātañjala
by the term mithyājñāna or wrong knowledge. Unlike in other Old Ja-
vanese sources,1 the use of such a term is pervasive in the text, and it appears
to have been borrowed from Sanskrit Śāstras—especially of Nyāya, Sāṅkhya
and Yoga—where it is employed with the technical meaning of ‘false con-
ception, error’. Whereas samyagjñāna is widespread in other Tattvas, its
opposite is (indirectly) referred to only once, namely in the Vṛhaspatitat-
tva (47.63–64), where Vṛhaspati’s nihilistic view is deﬁned as jñāna viparīta,
‘perversed’ or ‘reversed’ knowledge/mind. While in Old Javanese viparīta
can be translated as either ‘turned round’, ‘altered’ or ‘obscured’ (OJED 2287),
one may also take into account the translation of ‘opposite to’, which is more
faithful to the Sanskrit original. For instance, the Śaiva author Kumāradeva,
while commenting upon Tattvaprakāśa 52, elaborates on the item Ignorance,
i.e. the opposite of Knowledge among the eight qualities of intellect (buddhi-
bhāva), providing the following deﬁnition:
Ignorance is the opposite of knowledge (jñānaviparyaya), that is to say non-
right-knowledge (asamyagjñāna). Tat is of three kinds: misapprehension
(viparyaya), fantasizing (vikalpa) and sleep (nidrā). Misapprehension is a
false knowledge that is not true to the nature of the object, [like] the knowl-
edge of silver etc. in place of mother-of-pearl etc.2
1.
OJED 1144 lists only one occurrence of the term in Udyogaparva 57.3, meaning ‘with
a false mind’. Cf. the synonym mithyādṛṣṭi attested once in the Buddhist SaṅHyaṅKama-
hāyānikan (p. 38 line 13) in a context in which it seems to conform to the technical use of
the term in the Abhidharma, i.e. disbelief in the four noble truths.
2.
Tātpāryadīpikā ad Tattvaprakāśa 52: ajñānaṃjñānaviparyayaḥ, asamyagjñānam
iti yāvat tat trividham—viparyayo vikalpo nidrā ceti / viparyayo mithyājñānam atadrūpa-


--- PAGE 577 ---
558
iii Doctrine
In the light of the above-quoted passage, deﬁning jñānaviparyaya as asam-
yagjñāna, one may suggest that the compound jñāna viparīta of Vṛhaspa-
titattva 47 may be regarded as a calque of the Sanskrit -viparyaya in the
sense of ‘opposite to’ rather than ‘upside-down, in a contrary manner’. Te
unlikelihood of such a possibility is, however, indirectly suggested by the
gloss, in Dharma Pātañjala 304.20, of avidyā as ikaṅjñāna mabalik, liter-
ally an ‘upside-down’ or ‘turned-round’, i.e. perverse, knowledge; a similar
deﬁnition recurs in 306.3, i.e. mabalik hiḍәpnya ‘his reasoning is perverse’.3
Te whole passage (304.20–306.3), elaborating on the ﬁrst item avidyā ‘igno-
rance’ in the list of the afﬂictions (kleśa), provides a circumstantial deﬁnition
of wrong knowledge by reporting the words of an opponent referring to the
ﬁve elements as beautiful and pure, to a yogin as impure and to beautiful
women as pure; that is to say, a kind of positive error recognizing things for
what they are not, or better, exchanging them for their opposites.4 Such a
deﬁnition of ignorance presents deﬁnite echoes of the treatment of the same
item, which is also listed as the ﬁrst of the ﬁve kleśas—along with egoicity, at-
tachment, aversion, obsession—in Yogasūtra 2.3 (avidyāsmitārāgadveṣābhi-
niveśāḥkleśāḥ). In Yogasūtra 2.5 it is stated that avidyā ‘is the apprehension
of the impermanent as permanent, of the impure as pure, of pain as pleasure
and of not-self as self’ anityāśuciduḥkhānātmasu nityaśucisukhātmakhyātir
avidyā.5
pratiṣṭhaṃśuktikādau rajatādijñānam / • mithyājñānam atadrūpapratiṣṭhaṃ] em. (cf. YS
1.8); mithyājñānatadrūpapratiṣṭhaṃEd.
3.
Both deﬁnitions recall the one given in Yogasūtra 1.29, as translated by Woods
(1914:62), ‘Tereafer comes the right-knowledge of him who thinks in an inverse way […]’
tataḥpratyakcetanādhigamo ’pi […] and commented upon by Vācaspatimiśra: ‘One is in-
verted who knows in an opposite way [to the ordinary person whose mind-stuff ﬂows out
and becomes modiﬁed by objects]. One who thinks in that way thinks inversely; [in other
words] the [ordinary] man [still] under the conditions of undifferentiated-consciousness
(avidyāvant)’ pratīpaṃviparītam añcati vijānātīty pratyak, sa cāsau cetanaś ceti pratyakc-
etano ’vidyāvān puruṣaḥ. Cf. also Parākhyatantra 4.89cd: ajñānaguṇamūḍhaḥsan paśyet
sarvaviparyayam // ‘deluded by the property of nescience he sees everything topsy-turvy’
(or, more literally: ‘he sees the reverse for everything’, cf. Goodall 2004:257–258).
4.
I quote and discuss the passage below, p. 613.
5.
Cf. al-Bīrūnī’s Kitāb Pātañjala, answer to question 27 (Pines and Gelblum 1977:523):
‘Ignorance consists in representing a thing in a way contrary to its true reality. Tus [an
ignorant person] regards the impure as pure, pleasure as good, distress as well-being, the
earthy turbid body as eternal and as being man himself; he is ignorant of the fact that [man]
is the soul rather than [the body]’.


--- PAGE 578 ---
Wrong Knowledge
559
Tat the formulation of the Yogasūtra must have been perceived as au-
thoritative even in Śaiva circles is also suggested by the fact that Kumāradeva
borrowed his deﬁnition of misapprehension from that text.6 If in the Sāṅ-
khya ignorance is simply the absence of discrimination (viveka), due to tamas
obfuscating the discriminative knowledge of prakṛti and puruṣa, in the Yoga
system it is positively false knowledge, i.e. the superimposing onto the pu-
ruṣa of what it is not. Tus, according to the Bhāṣya on sūtra 2.5, ignorance
denotes a wrong cognition as opposed to right cognition; it is viparyayajñā-
navāsanā, a ‘trace lef by wrong cognition’ (2.24). Ignorance plays an impor-
tant role in Yoga ontology as the kleśa leading to wrong knowledge, being the
ground of the other four, which originate with it, and disappear when it dis-
appears (2.4). Tis idea found in the commentary is explicitly mentioned in
the Dharma Pātañjala (306.9–10), where the ﬁve kleśas of the Yogasūtra are
presented as ultimately deriving from avidyā: ‘Ignorance is the basis of all of
them, for they are brought together with the wrong knowledge’ ika ta kabeh,
avidyā anuṅbhūmi nikā, apan yekāpupulan i mithyājñāna.
Te Materialist
Doctrine
Te views labeled as mithyājñāna or jñāna viparīta in
Old Javanese texts are as a rule reported through the
mouth of an opponent and represent an adulterated,
quintessentially unorthodox standpoint that the Lord’s
interlocutor is warned at all occasions to avoid. Tese arguments are out-
lined especially in the markedly argumentative and speculative sections oc-
curring at the beginning and end of the Dharma Pātañjala, containing an
articulated debate between the Lord and the opponent (at times imaginary,
at times assuming the contours of a realistic character). Te sources never
specify the opponent’s afﬁliation but simply refer to an unspeciﬁed ‘other’
saṅpara,7 or saṅmithyājñāna ‘one having wrong knowledge’.8 Tis state
of affairs is reﬂected in Vātsyāyana’s Bhāṣya on Nyāyasūtra 1.1.2 mention-
6.
Cf. Yogasūtra 1.8: viparyayo mithyājñānam atadrūpapratiṣṭham. Tat the sentence is
a direct borrowing from the sūtras is suggested by the explicit quotation, a few sentence fur-
ther, of Yogasūtra 1.10 on nidrā, introduced by the words tad uktaṃpatañjalinā bhagavatā
‘as it is said by the reverend Patañjali’.
7.
Literally meaning ‘another, other(s)’. Tis usage appears to be a calque from the San-
skrit paraḥ/pare referring to opponent(s) in works of Śāstra, where it is also ofen the case
that their afﬁliation is not openly mentioned. Te fact that in the Dharma Pātañjala para is
mostly spelled pāra is irrelevant and due to a mere scribal idiosyncrasy; the word is in fact
constantly spelled in the correct way in other Old Javanese sources, such as the Tattvajñāna.
8.
OJED (1144) glosses mithyājñāna as ‘with a false mind’.


--- PAGE 579 ---
560
iii Doctrine
ing wrong (or: false) knowledge (mithyājñāna), which might have been re-
garded as the locus classicus of such a discussion in the Sanskrit philosophical
tradition. Te author provides a long commentary on the meaning of wrong
notion as the perception of a thing contrary to its real nature (i.e., according
to the view of the Nyāya system). He exempliﬁes false knowledge by quoting
nihilistic statements, yet without attributing them to any speciﬁc opponent:
With reference to the Soul, [false knowledge is when one says that] there is
not such thing as the Soul; when one regards the not-Soul as the Soul; when
one regards pain as pleasure, the non-eternal as eternal, non-salvation as
salvation, the fearful as free from fear, the disgusting as agreeable, that which
is to be lef as that which is not to be lef; with regard to activity, when [one
says that] karma does not exist and the fruits of karma do not exist; when,
with regard to the defects, [one says that] they are not the cause of the cycle
of rebirth; that, with regard to death and birth, there is no creature, be it a
human or an animal or a Soul, who could die and, having died, could be
born; that birth is without cause and the cessation of birth is without cause;
that death and birth have a beginning but no end; that, though caused, death
and birth are not caused by karma; that birth and death have no relation
with the Soul, consisting only in the disruption or restoration of the current
of body, organs of sense, intellect and sensations; it is when, with regard to
the ﬁnal release, [one says that] it is fearful, involving the cessation of all
activities and, there being the separation from everything, much of what is
desirable is lost; [and that] no wise person could possibly take pleasure in
ﬁnal release, which is the extirpation of all pleasures and utter insentience.9
Statements echoing several of the views reported in the above passage are
also uttered by the opponent featuring in the Dharma Pātañjala. Although
the existence of exact parallels suggests that the deﬁnition of mithyājñāna in
the Dharma Pātañjala reﬂects the position of the Yoga system, it is nonethe-
less possible that the general formulation of the pūrvapakṣa by the Nyāyasū-
9.
Nyāyasūtrabhāṣya 1.1.2: ātmani tāvan nāstīti, anātmani ātmeti duḥkhe sukham iti a-
nitye nityam ity atrāṇe trāṇam iti, sabhaye nirbhayam iti, jugupsite ’bhimatam iti, hātavye a-
pratihātavyam iti, pravṛttau nāsti karma, nāsti karmaphalam iti, doṣeṣu nāyaṃdoṣanimittaḥ
saṃsāra iti, pretyabhāve nāsti jantur jīvo vā sattva ātmā vā, yaḥpreyāt, pretya ca bhaved iti, a-
nimittaṃjanma, animitto janmoparama ity ādimān pretyabhāvaḥ, anantaś ceti, naimittikaḥ
sann akarmanimittaḥpretyabhāva iti, dehendriyabuddhivedanāsantānocchedapratisandhā-
nābhyāṃnirātmakaḥpretyabhāva iti / apavarge bhīṣmaḥkhalv ayaṃsarvakāryoparamaḥ,
sarvaviprayoge ’pavarge bahu ca bhadrakaṃlupyata iti kathaṃbuddhimān sarvasukhocche-
dam acaitanyam amum apavargaṃrocayed iti /.


--- PAGE 580 ---
Wrong Knowledge
561
trabhāṣya might have been inﬂuential among the followers of different Brah-
manical traditions that reached the Archipelago.10 Now, since the text at-
tributes to the opponent upholding wrong knowledge similar nihilistic views
but remains anonymous as to his afﬁliation, it is only by analyzing the philo-
sophical tenets of such an opponent that his identity can be established. Te
proﬁle best ﬁtting with this pūrvapakṣin is that of a materialist. Tis is in har-
mony with the situation in the Vṛhaspatitattva, in which the opponent was
on most occasions deemed by Zieseniss (1958:10, 188–192) to be a materi-
alist.11
Te materialists are known from Sanskrit sources with the denomina-
tions of Cārvāka or Lokāyatas.12 While these labels are not attested in Old
10.
A similarity between the Yoga and Nyāya deﬁnition of mithyājñāna can be detected
in Nyāyasūtra 1.1.2, where the item is hinted at as the origin of the three doṣas of rāga, dveṣa
and moha, which in their turn lead to adharma (cf. Nyāyasūtrabhāṣya thereon). According
to both schools, false knowledge denotes a positively wrong knowledge, wrongly taking
realities for their contraries.
11.
It is certainly no coincidence that in this text the interlocutor of the Lord is Vṛhas-
pati, the teacher of the Gods, whom Sanskrit sources see as the legendary promulgator of
materialist doctrines (cf. Padmapurāṇa, 1.13.291–293). It is indeed he himself who reports
the opponents’ views in the text, with the consequence that he is reproached by the Lord
and warned about teaching such wrong doctrines in the assembly of the Gods.
12.
Te term Cārvāka appears once in association with Lokāyata (cārvākalaukāyatikau)
already in the Sanskrit lexicon Amarakośa (2.6.823), dating between the second to the sixth
century ad. Te term Lokāyata may be analyzed as referring to ‘those upholding [views]
prevalent in the world’, or ‘… among people’ (loka). Guṇaratna (anvaya to Ṣaḍdarśana-
samuccaya 80) glosses the word loka as meaning ‘ordinary people who act without distinc-
tion, and since the Cārvākas act like them, they are also called Lokāyatas or Laukāyatikas’.
Te latter etymology is somewhat echoed in Dharma Pātañjala (198.9–11), where those
upholding false knowledge are referred to in the following terms: ‘… their actions are un-
restrained—good and bad are mixed up indistinguishably in them—and their thoughts, as
well as their hearts; such a disposition is called false knowledge’. Te Vṛhaspatitattva (52.34–
35), having illustrated a materialistic position through the speech of Vṛhaspati, refers to it
as ‘a position of human beings, whose wrongness is extreme’ ya teka pakṣa niṃmānuṣa /
atyanta viparītanya (here mānuṣa ≈loka?). Before this (50.22–27) the Lord described the
imperfection of the knowledge of ordinary human beings, who cannot grasp the real nature
of paramaśivatattva, as follows: ‘It is not distinct in the mind of human beings, for their
nature is to have only little knowledge (kiñcijjñāna); small is their understanding, narrow
is their seeing, short is their life, great is their delusion and afﬂiction. According to their
minds they know; they dispute about reality as far as their mind can go. Because of their
knowledge, they easily feel sure about their knowledge of reality. Tey attribute it to them-
selves. Tis is the reason why their understanding is restricted. Tus is their knowledge. In
such a way is the nature of human beings; it stands below that of the Gods’ tan vyakta ri


--- PAGE 581 ---
562
iii Doctrine
Javanese sources, we ﬁnd various instances of the word Nāstika, ‘Nihilist’, re-
curring in Sanskrit works as a deﬁnition of the followers of skeptic and athe-
istic positions (nāsti = ‘there is not’ = Old Javanese taya).13 Te materialists,
whose original scriptures are lost to us, survived in Sanskrit philosophical
literature as the lowest among the opponents. Teir tenets are thus to be re-
trieved from second-hand expositions of their views in Sanskrit philosoph-
ical works of all ages and persuasions, including doxographical compen-
dia such as the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha and the Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya, frag-
ments contained in Epic and Purāṇic texts, and early Buddhist literature.14
Te refutation of materialists is already present as a philosophical cliché in
the more dialectical of the early Siddhāntatantras (Watson 2006:74–75),15
and then developed in the commentaries of seminal scriptures by Sadyo-
jyotis, Rāmakaṇṭha and Aghoraśiva. Te most common attacks which the
Śaiva masters cast against the materialists concerned their nihilistic ideas
about the valid means of knowledge, the origin and nature of the Soul, the
validity of karma, the existence of a creator, etc. Of course, this group was
only one, and the lowest, among the variety of philosophical schools whose
views were rejected by the Śaivas and dialectically refuted in treatises one
afer other. But it appears that in the Dharma Pātañjala and other Tattvas
the views that originally belonged to distinct philosophical or religious tra-
ditions were blended with those of the materialists, so that wrong knowledge
came to represent a coalition of ideas of different scholastic provenance em-
bodied in the ﬁgure of one single (imaginary) opponent.16 I believe that this
hiḍәp niṅmanuṣya / apan kiñcijjñāna svabhāvanya / akәḍik paṅavruḥnya / ahә¯t panonya /
alpāyuṣanya / magә¯ṅmohanya lavan kleśanya / vihikan pva ya ri hiḍәpnya / vinādanya tekaṅ
tattva sahiṅan iṅjñānanya / saka vihikanya enak pva niścayanya irikaṃtattvajñāna / in-
akunya ta ya / ya ta mataṅyan kapihәran ika paṅavruḥnya / tadvat ika jñānanya / maṅkana
jāti niṅmāṇuṣa ṅaranya / kasornya de niṅdevatā /.
13.
Te earliest known attestation of the term nāstika in Old Javanese is found in the
Dawangsari metrical inscription of probably the 9th century ad (in the expression nāstika
buddhinya, verse 7; cf. Setianingsih 1989); most of the instances of the word are, however,
found in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Sārasamuccaya, a collection of moralistic ślokas mostly
deriving from the Mahābhārata. I have found no attestation of the term in Tattvas and
Tuturs.
14.
A recent survey of the surviving fragments is contained in Bhattacharya 2002,
whose readings and system of numeration I have adopted here.
15.
Cf., e.g., Parākhya 1.17; Mṛgendra VP 6.
16.
Cf above, p. 379 and below, p. 603 and 610. It seems reasonable to imagine that
knowledge of Indic philosophical systems existed among the ancient Javanese authors, for


--- PAGE 582 ---
Wrong Knowledge
563
feature reﬂects the theistic persuasion of the texts, which regarded the ma-
terialists as the most dangerous among the rival schools, denying the very
fundamental tenets of Śaiva theology.17
As to the question whether the opponent’s views that can be apparently
linked to some form of materialism represent genuine materialist stand-
points, the answer can never be certain. It is ofen the case that Sanskrit
scriptures themselves attack the well-known philosophical tags from other
schools but they do not always represent them faithfully,18 a feature that is
even more prominent in the case of the materialists, the knowledge of whose
tenets was mostly second-hand.19 Still, as I will show below, there is little
doubt that the majority of these statements genuinely reﬂect, ofen with a
striking degree of similarity, the principal tenets of the materialists as we
Brahmanical and Buddhist darśanas are mentioned since an early time in a variety of epi-
graphical and manuscript sources from the Archipelago: cf., e.g., Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin, Sarga
25, mentioning Tarka (i.e. Nyāya) and the related Aji Viniścaya (a reference to Dharmakīrti’s
Pramāṇaviniścaya?), the followers of Jaimini (the Mīmāṃsakas) and the Sāṅkhyas; Saṅ
HyaṅKamahāyānikan p. 48 lines 15–20 and 49 lines 1–5, mentioning Tarka, Vyākaraṇa,
the followers of Kapila (Sāṅkhyas) and Kaṇabhakṣa (another name of Praśastapāda, the
founder of the Vaiśeṣika school); Tattvajñāna 4.16–17, mentioning, among the others, the
treatises on Tarka and Vyākaraṇa; SaṅHyaṅHayu 7.11–12, mentioning the treatises (aji)
of Kāvya, the books (prakaraṇa) on Sāṅkhya, the books on ritual (kalpa) and the Purāṇas,
the Viniścaya (cf. Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin 25.18), the Caṇḍa (a grammar?) and the science
of Mathematics or Astronomy (gaṇita); the 14th century Varingin Pitu inscription, listing
the names of religious functionaries said to be trained in the following systems: Vaiśeṣika,
Nyāya, Vyākaraṇa, Śaiva and Buddhatarka.
17.
Preoccupation with and contempt for the views of this school are apparent in Tattvas.
For instance, in Dharma Pātañjala 206.15–2 the Lord explains that the wrong knowledge
upheld by the materialists is the knowledge of Kāla, the embodiment that He takes up when
He destroys the universe, and the appearance of religious men teaching such a doctrine in
the future will be a sign that the time of the great dissolution is approaching. A similar view,
deﬁning materialism as the ‘knowledge/doctrine of Kāla’, is found in the Mahājñāna, Old
Javanese exegesis ad śloka 27 (which is, regrettably, corrupt beyond repair): ‘Tere is the
knowledge of Kāla. Te knowledge of the agitated among men, that is the knowledge of
Kāla. Tat is the cause of experiencing [the cycle of rebirth]. Tere is the ignorance that
makes men entitled to be in the cycle of rebirth, as they come back again and again in the
world of incarnated beings’ hana saṅkālajñāna ṅaranya / vruhnya ri kagivaṅsaṅpuruṣa /
yeka saṅkālajñāna ṅaranya / nimitta niṅmanәmvakәn / hana ta ajñāna humādhikārākәn
kasaṅsāran saṅpuruṣa / an pavalivali riṅjanmaloka /.
18.
Such as in the Parākhya (Goodall 2004:li).
19.
Bhattacharya (2002:599) even suggests that any Sanskrit author born afer the 12th
century cannot have had access to authentic Cārvāka works.


--- PAGE 583 ---
564
iii Doctrine
know them from Sanskrit literature.
Admitting only
Direct
Perception
Te basic tenet of the materialists is the recognition of
only direct perception as a valid means of knowledge.
Tis is illustrated by the Lokāyata fragment pratyakṣam
ekam eva pramāṇam ‘perception is the only valid means
of knowledge’.20 Tis belief distinguished them from all
the other Brahmanical and non-Brahmanical philosophical systems, whose
epistemological frameworks admitted two or more means of knowledge.
Most of the positions of this school are indeed a direct consequence of this
basic axiom, which its exponents resorted to when launching their attacks
on the fundamental truths postulated by their adversaries. Tus, in Sanskrit
texts as well in the sources from the Archipelago, useful criterion to identify
the identity of the opponents is their adherence to this belief.
In the Dharma Pātañjala the Lord states, while elaborating on the mech-
anism of operation of karma in incarnated beings, that what is subtle (sū-
kṣma) is within the scope of inference, which is therefore sufﬁcient to de-
termine the existence of the fruits of karma (236.16–238.3). Tis point pro-
vokes the criticism of an opponent, who questions the factual existence of the
fruits of karma on account of their being unseen. In pointing out that ‘only
the valid means of knowledge of direct perception is [admitted] among us’
pratyakṣapramāṇa juga ri kami (238.5), the opponent reveals his afﬁliation
to the Lokāyata school. Elsewhere (196.19–20) the text deﬁnes one possess-
ing wrong knowledge as ‘one who experiences giving authority to what is
within the boundaries of his knowledge, using direct perception only’ ikā-
naṅhumiḍәp humadikārākәn sahiṅan i kavruhnya makasādhana pratyakṣa
juga.21 Tis reminds one of the Lokāyata statement reported in the philo-
sophical digest Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya by the Jaina Haribhadra (8th century
ad), 558.81ab: ‘Tis world consists of only as much as is within the scope of
the senses’ etāvān eva loko ’yaṃyāvān indriyagocaraḥ.
In replying to the opponent’s defence of direct perception as the only
valid means of knowledge, the Lord points out that the subtle falls within
the scope of inference. In doing so he resorts to the example of the course of
the sun:
20.
And the variants thereof, viz. pratyakṣam eva pramāṇam; pratyakṣam evaikam
pramāṇam. Bhattacharya (2002:600, 605, 612) assigns this group the number iii.1.
21.
Cf. also Vṛhaspatitattva 52.30–35, where the Lord criticizes the belief in the validity
of direct perception as the only means of knowledge.


--- PAGE 584 ---
Wrong Knowledge
565
If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply] as follows: the Sun is
DhPāt
238.5–15
present, being seen by the whole world. Is the one that rose yesterday the
same as that that rises now, or is it different? If the one that rose yesterday is
different from the one that rises now, what is then [the sun that] is [rising]
just now here? Teir forms are not different, for their forms are hardly dis-
tinguishable; their nālitā22 is really the same, and the same are their warmth
and their shining power. Te opponent speaks: ‘One and only is the Sun:
the one that rose yesterday is the one rising now’. If the opponent would
speak thus, [I would reply:] where is its course while it moves to the east?
For last night it set in the west. Te opponent says: ‘It sets. Below the earth
is its course when it returns to the east’. If the opponent would speak thus,
[I would reply]: where are you when see it going back to the east, moving
below the earth? You teach something that is not seen, therefore you are
wrong if you use only direct perception as a valid means of knowledge, for
the Sun is not seen when it goes back to the east.
Te same example is expounded in a passage of the Vṛhaspatitattva. Tere
the Lord counters the opponent’s view that there is no proof for liberation or
for the existence of the fruits of good and bad actions by demonstrating the
existence of something that is invisible:
Tere is the sun, which is seen through direct perception. You know about
its rising-place as well as its setting-place. ‘Its rising-place is the east. Its
setting-place is the west’. If you would say thus, [then] the one which arose
yesterday is the one which is rising now. If you would admit so, where is its
course while it returns [to the east]? When it goes to the west, that is seen by
you. Tat it returns again to the east, do you know it by direct perception?
Of course not. [Objection:] ‘the [sun] which arose yesterday is different
from the one which is arising now’. If you would say thus, [I reply:] since,
even so, their appearance are not different,23 they are just the same. Where
do you see a multitude of suns? Wherefrom do you know their number? To
say that they are different is, therefore, wrong. Without evidence you know
about all of them. Tis is the reason why the means of knowledge [of direct
perception] is not appropriate, [being limited to] everything which is seen
and the one who sees. Tat is a view of men; its wrongness is extreme.24
22.
Cf. p. 238, fn. 72.
23.
Te translation of this clause (i.e. from apayapan to ya ta vih) is conjectural.
24.
Vṛhaspatitattva 52.27–35: nihan saṅhyaṅāditya anuṅpratyakṣa katon / vruh kita ri
saṅkanira lavan surupanira / vetan saṅkanira / kulvan surupanira / yapvan kva liṅanta vih /


--- PAGE 585 ---
566
iii Doctrine
Both examples aim at proving in an indirect way the validity of inference by
showing that to rely upon direct perception only would lead to absurd con-
sequences. Having ﬁrst established certain characteristics of the sun, i.e. its
being one and its movement through the diurnal sky, which, being a mat-
ter of direct perception, are above dispute, the opponent is forced to accept
the existence of an invisible movement of the sun under the earth at night.
Te denying of such a movement would lead the opponent to postulate the
absurdity of the existence of a multitude of different suns, which is not expe-
rienced through direct perception. Te passage of the Vṛhaspatitattva ends
with a critique of those upholding direct perception as the only means of
knowledge, who are bewildered (vyāmoha) and teach whatever pleases their
mouths (umajarakәn samenaka niṅtutuknya), and with an injunction to
Vṛhaspati to ignore the views denying the valid means of knowledge (hayva
parәṅә¯rәṅә¯n / irikaṅvuvus yan panayākәn pramāṇa).
Te denial of direct perception as an independent means of knowledge
seems to have been dear also to the authors of Sanskrit Śaiva texts, where
the acceptance of inference as useful for establishing the existence of any en-
tity, even though it is not accessible through direct perception, is upheld for
obvious heuristic and soteriological purposes. Tis point of view is clearly
explained in the Parākhyatantra (trans. Goodall 2002:187–188):
A thing that is directly perceived may be determined to be an inferential
mark [that allows one to assume the existence] of something connected with
the seen thing.25
If [something is] wholly proven by one means of knowledge, then what is
the point of having it proved by a number of means of knowledge?
What is proved by this [one proof], even though it is [only] one [proof], is
still proved. Nor is it the case in this world that establishing the existence of
things must be achieved in all cases by direct perception.
rasika saṅmәtu vәṅī / karika saṅmәtu maṅke / yan kva liṅanta / ndi dalanira valuy / yan sira
maṅetan tinonta / kari siromaluy mon pratyakṣa vruh kita veh / taha / dudū saṃmәtu vәṅi /
dudū saṅmәtu maṅke / yapvan kva liṅanta vih / apayapan yaya ta lvirnira / tan palenan
paḍapaḍa ta sira ya ta viḥ/ ndi ta kita tumon pasamūha saṅhyaṅāditya / ndi ta kita vruh ri
kvehnira / mataṅyan dva niṅsumaṅguh sira dudū / tapvan vyakta vruh terika kabeh / ya ta
mataṅyan tan yogya ikaṅpramāṇa / ikaṅsakaton lavan manon / ya teka pakṣa niṅmānuṣa /
atyanta viparītanya / • ndi dalanira] em.; andidala nira Ed. (with comment: ‘is it dinala?’,
cf. note 81 p. 307).
25.
Goodall inserts this line between cruxes but suggests a plausible reconstruction of
the text along with this translation in fn. 165, which I have incorporated here.


--- PAGE 586 ---
Wrong Knowledge
567
It is for this reason that things that are distant, obscured by darkness, or hid-
den, or [for some other reason not directly perceptible] can be established
to exist. If this were not so, then [simply] because of their not being directly
perceived their non-existence would be proven. So give up this stubborn in-
sistence upon directly perceived objects [as though direct perception were
necessary to establish their existence].26
Now, the analogy found in the Old Javanese texts describes the kind of infer-
ence classiﬁed in Sanskrit philosophical texts as sāmānyatodṛṣṭa (‘observed
from the general’), i.e. when there is no failure of concomitance between
what is to be proved and its probans (lokaprasiddhahetu). For instance, in
this kind of inference the connection has been known from the general case,
that is to say ‘when the connection between sādhya (what is to be proved) and
hetu (the reason or mark) is not apprehended by the senses but is known only
in general, as when the sun’s motion is known from its presence in a new spot
in the sky’ (Schuster 1972:379). Te Yuktidīpikā deﬁnes it as ‘when at some
time one has observed the necessary connection of two entities and later ob-
serves one such entity it is possible to know another entity of a different kind
(necessarily connected with it) which is absolutely unperceived’.27 Te im-
portant status of the sāmānyatodṛṣta kind of inference in Indic philosophical
speculation is suggested by its being discussed in early Sāṅkhya literature.28
For instance, in the Yuktidīpikā the examples provided to corroborate this
kind of inference play a primary role, revolving around analogy rather than
the logical demonstration of the nexus between the proving reason (hetu)
and what is to be proven (sādhya).29
26.
Parākhyatantra 2.73cd–76: yad dṛṣṭaṃdṛṣṭasambaddhe tat syāl liṅgaviniścitam //
yady ekena pramāṇena siddhaṃbhavati sarvataḥ/ tat kiṃpramāṇabhedena sādhitena
prayojanam // enaikenāpi yad vastu saṃsthitaṃsthitam eva tat / na ca dṛṣṭena sarvatra
vastusaṃsthā bhaved iha // viprakṛṣṭatirobhūtavyavadhānādy ataḥsthitam / na ced eṣām
adṛṣṭatvād abhāvaḥsaṃsthito bhavet / tena dṛṣṭārthaviṣaye mucyatām āgraho dṛḍhaḥ// •
73c dṛṣṭasambaddhe] conj. Goodall (2004:187); dṛṣṭasambandhe ms.; • 73d tat syāl] conj.
Goodall (2004:187); tasya ms.
27.
Yuktidīpikā p. 86.6–9: yadā tarhi kvacid dharmeṇa dharmāntarasyāvyabhicāram upa-
labhyaikadharmopalambhād bhinnajātīye ’tyantānupalabdhasya dharmāntarasya pratipat-
tis [tadā sāmānyatodṛṣṭaṃ].
28.
Tis kind of anumāṇa is the only one to be brieﬂy mentioned in Sāṅkhyakārikā 6,
which just names inference as threefold. Cf. also Sāṅkhyasūtra 1.60 and 1.103.
29.
Tis would again suggest a pre-Dignāga dating, cf. Chemparathy (1965:126; 136,
fn. 60). According to Yuktidīpikā on Sāṅkhyakārikā 15d (158.11–12), the fact that there is


--- PAGE 587 ---
568
iii Doctrine
Te analogy of the sun is found in Sanskrit sources in connection with
the discussion of the sāmānyatodṛṣṭa inference, where it usually serves the
purpose, as in the Old Javanese sources, of proving the unseen.30 Most of
the texts in question can be safely dated to before or around the early 6th
century ad on account of the fact that they seem to ignore the sophisticated
logical arguments that became widespread afer the great Buddhist logician
Dignāga, who died before 540 ad (cf. Sanderson 2006b:67). Tese early
sources are characterized by a certain naivety insofar as they make abundant
use of examples, such as the one of the Sun, which, according to Schuster
(1972:359), does not constitute ‘anything more than a (rather primitive) ex-
ample of reasoning by analogy’. Te most striking similarities are detected in
early Buddhist treatises on logic. Te Śataśāstra by Āryadeva (trans. Tucci
1998:28), which has survived in a Chinese translation only, presents the view
of a pūrvapakṣin arguing in favour of the existence of the Soul:
Tere are things which although cannot directly be perceived can still be
known through inference. For instance, having seen that a man ﬁrst goes
and then reaches (a place), since the moon and the sun rise in the east and
disappear in the west, although their movements are not seen, because they
reach another (place), they are known to possess motion; in the same way,
seeing that guṇa depends upon dravya, through the characteristics of the
inference, we know that there is an ātman.
Similarly, the Upāyahṛdaya of Vasubandhu:
Te [inference] based upon a general observation is as follows: a thing that
moves reaches a place. In the sky too, the sun and moon previously arisen
in the eastern region set in the west. Even though their motion is unseen,
the movement of the two [entities] is inferred. Tis is the sāmānyatodṛṣṭa
[inference].31
And Chung-Lun, the ‘Middle Treatise’, a commentary on Nāgārjuna’s Ma-
dhyāmakakārikā by T’sing-mu (i.e. Piṅgala or Vimalākṣa) of ca. 409 ad, sur-
vived only in Chinese translation:
no example (dṛṣṭānta) to prove something implies that there cannot be an argument (vāda)
altogether (dṛṣṭāntābhāvaḥ/ na cāsty anudāhṛto vādaḥ).
30.
For a survey and discussion of the sources, cf. Schuster (1972).
31.
Upāyahṛdaya p. 14: sāmānyatodṛṣṭaṃyathā / kaścid gacchaṃs taṃdeśaṃprāpnoti /
gagane ’pi sūryācandramasau pūrvasyāṃdiśy uditau paścimāyāñ cāstaṃgatau / tacceṣṭāyām
adṛṣṭāyām api tadgamanam anumīyate / etat sāmānyatodṛṣṭam /.


--- PAGE 588 ---
Wrong Knowledge
569
‘Seeing together’ means, for example, that when you see with your eyes a
person going from here to another place, you also see his going. Te sun is
like this. It emerges from the east and goes to the west. Although you do
not see it going, because a man has the characteristic of going, you know
that the sun also has going.32
Further attestations of the same example in connection with the proving of
unseen entities such as the Soul, the Lord, etc. are found in early Brahmanical
sources. Accounts standing remarkably close to those found in the above-
quoted Buddhist are presented in Vātsyāyana’s commentary to Nyāyasūtra-
bhāṣya 1.1.5:
Te [inference] based upon a general observation is the observation [of some-
thing that] has been seen at a different time in a different place when pre-
ceded by movement. In such a way is [the observation] of the sun. Terefore,
the movement of the sun exists, even though it is not seen.33
Calques of the above passage are found in Śabarasvāmin’s Pūrvamīmāṃsāsū-
trabhāṣya34 and the Yuktidīpikā.35 Similar examples are found in a slightly
different fashion in Gauḍapādabhāṣya on Sāṅkhyakārikā 5 and in Yogasū-
trabhāṣya 1.7, proving the movement of the moon and the stars instead of
the sun. A position that seems to stand midway, mentioning the sun and
the moon, is that of the Pañcārthabhāṣya on the Pāśupatasūtra—the only
Sanskrit Śaiva source known to me documenting this example:
Te [inference] based upon a general observation is such as afer observing
the fact in this world that the attaining of a new position is preceded by
32.
Chung-Lun on Kārikā 18.1–12 (24b7), trans. Bocking (1995:277).
33.
Nyāyasūtrabḥāṣya 1.1.5: sāmānyatodṛṣṭam—vrajyāpūrvakam anyatra dṛṣṭasyānyatra
darśanam iti / tathā cādityasya / tasmād asty apratyakṣāpy ādityasya vrajyeti /
34.
Pūrvamīmāṃsāsūtrabhāṣya 1.1.5: [Inference in which] the connection has been
known from the general observation is such: as one perceives that Devadatta has reached a
different place afer he has moved, so there is the inference of the movement in the case of
the sun’ sāmānyatodṛṣṭasaṃbandhaṃca yathā devadattasya gatipūrvikāṃdeśāntaraprāp-
tim upalabhya āditye 'pi gatismaraṇam /.
35.
Yuktidīpikā on Sāṅkhyakārikā 6ab, p. 86.9–11: ‘As Devadatta’s reaching of a new
place by virtue of movement is ascertained even though [that movement] was absolutely
unperceived, so the movement of the sun is inferred because of [its] reaching a new place
[in the sky]’ devadatte gamanād deśāntaraprāptim upalabhyātyantādṛṣṭaṃjyotiṣāṃdeśān-
taraprāpter gamanam anumīyate /.


--- PAGE 589 ---
570
iii Doctrine
motion, one concludes that the moon and the sun are in motion.36
Hara (1992:215–216) observes that ‘if the solar movement is a naive exam-
ple of reasoning as we have in Kauṇḍinya's illustration of sāmānyatodṛṣṭa,
this simplicity and naiveté also may indicate the historical priority of Kauṇ-
ḍinya to the philosophical writers, at least to Praśastapāda, as has been point-
ed out by scholars of Indian philosophy’. He further remarks that the sim-
pler and more primitive character of the Pañcārthabhāṣya with respect to the
Sāṅkhya treatises may indicate an early stage of philosophical speculation as
represented by the Upāyahṛdaya and the like (pp. 219–220).
On the basis of the textual passages presented above, it may be concluded
that when the Dharma Pātañjala and Vṛhaspatitattva illustrate their views
on inference they draw this analogy from a pre-Dignāga Sanskrit source and
re-elaborate it using a different wording.
Denying the
Lord and Sum-
mum Bonum
In harmony with the belief that realities that are unac-
cessible to direct sense perception are non-existent, the
materialist opponents negate the existence of the Lord
(bhaṭāra), who is also characterized as Summum Bon-
um (paramārtha), a term that, according to the context
in which it is used, can mean either ‘Supreme Reality’, with reference to the
impersonal form of God, or ‘Highest Goal’, with reference to the state of ﬁnal
liberation. It is indeed ofen the case that for the Śaivas these two aspects co-
incide, and hence they are attacked simultaneously.37 Whereas in Dharma
Pātañjala 268.6 the opponent deﬁnes the Summum Bonum as being just an
idea or concept (buddhi),38 the negation of the Summum Bonum is usually
achieved in the text, as well as in other Old Javanese sources, through the
attachment of the predicate tayā ‘non-existence’ to it. Indeed, according to
the Lokāyatas, an entity not cognized by direct perception is not existent.
36.
Pañcārthabhāṣya 1.1.44 (trans. Hara 1992:215): sāmānyato/-dṛṣṭaṃapīha gatip-
ūrvikāṃdeśāntaraprāptiṃdṛṣṭvā candrādityādigatiprasiddhiḥ/ • candrādi°] em. Hara
(1992:214); cāsyādi° ed.
37.
Liberation being for the Śaivasiddhānta the manifestation (abhivyakti) of the Lord’s
supernatural qualities; cf. above, pp. 410–413.
38.
Compare the similar use of ambәk in Tutur Saptati f. 51r: ‘Just our Lord is the Supreme
reality (viśeṣa); according to the opponent, another explanation of Him is [that He is] ‘‘a
concept’’. Truly he does not know about the [nature of] the universe. His explanation is:
‘‘the Lord is as follows: He is regarded to be a concept’’ ’ hyaṅmami juga sira viśeṣa, ambәk
haranira vaneh de saṅpara, tuhu ika ndatan vruh ikaṅrat, pratyakṣanira, ndan nihan saṅ
bhaṭāra, ndan sinaṅgah ambәk.


--- PAGE 590 ---
Wrong Knowledge
571
But the term tayā ofen appears to indicate a (paradoxically) positive entity,
a vacuum or ‘nothingness’ parallel, and opposed, to the Summum Bonum.39
In Dharma Pātañjala 196.20–23 the pūrvapakṣin equates the Lord-Sum-
mum Bonum with non-existence on the basis of the argument that non-
existence is visibly the origin and end of incarnated beings. Elsewhere, in a
concise manifesto of a materialist position, the same standpoint is advanced
and coupled with the denial of the existence of the karmic bearing of ac-
tions on the grounds that their effects will ultimately dissolve—along with
the whole universe—into non-existence:
A hundred shall be the number of pleasures enjoyed by the man; he will not
DhPāt
332.16–334.3
experience suffering if he knows about the true state of the Lord. Te reason
why it is so is that all the actions do not actually exist. Te reason why they
do not exist in the real sense is that their effects will all disappear, going back
to their origin. Where is their origin? From the Holy Non-Existence, pure
without obstructions. It is designated as unmanifest, which is the place of
dissolution of the whole universe. […] Such is the true state of human be-
ings, and the knowledge about the Summum Bonum. […] Similarly, water-
buffaloes, cows, dogs, pigs, as soon as they die they return to non-existence.
Te returning to non-existence is by no means a guess, for visibly their bod-
ies disappear’.
Te non-existence advocated by the opponent, also deﬁned as unmanifest
(niṣkala),40 is not only a negative concept, for it is regarded as ‘being pure
and without obstructions’ (malilaṅtan kāvaraṇan). A similar standpoint is
traceable in other Old Javanese texts.41
39.
Tat there is indeed a difference of nuances between such Old Javanese terms as tayā
and tan hana is arguable from the contexts in which they appear. While the former can be
translated as both ‘there is not [anyone]’ and as the substantive ‘non-being, non-existence,
absence, nothingness’, it seems to me that its substantival function is more prominent and
idiomatic in philosophical contexts, as opposed to tan hana, which is always used in the
meaning ‘there is not’.
40.
Te term niṣkala was perhaps understood in a technical manner as a synonym of
avyakta, which in Sāṅkhyakārikā 10 is deﬁned, in contrast with the manifest, as having a se-
ries of characteristics that are attributed by the Śaiva to the Summum Bonum: ‘Te manifest
is caused, non-eternal, non-pervasive, active, non-singular, dependent, with characteristics,
with limbs, conditioned; the unmanifest is the opposite’ hetumad anityam avyāpi sakriyam
anekam āśritaṃliṅgam / sāvayavaṃparatantraṃvyaktaṃviparitam avyaktam //.
41.
Cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 47.54, where Vṛhaspati, who there embodies the pūrvapakṣin,
describes the state of insentient dissolution corresponding to the Summum Bonum termed


--- PAGE 591 ---
572
iii Doctrine
Elsewhere, the opponent challenges the existence of the Lord by reject-
ing, by means of syllogistic logical arguments, statements attempting to prove
His existence. Tus, to the Lord’s deﬁnition of Summum Bonum as a supreme
and unfathomable entity, bodiless and without colours (194.20–24), the op-
ponent replies by partially accepting such a ‘negative’ relative deﬁnition, but
only to force the interpretation of this statement to its extreme consequence,
i.e. that the Summum Bonum does not exist at all:
Indeed the Summum Bonum does not have a body, does not have a colour,
DhPāt
196.20–23
for it is non-existence. What is the evidence of the Summum Bonum being
non-existence? Because non-existence was your cause in the past, and with-
out an effect you will be in the future; mere non-existence will be your end.
Tis is the reason why the Summum Bonum is non-existence.
Te equation of the Summum Bonum to non-existence is made on the ground
that the latter only is the cause of the universe. Further on, an opponent pos-
sessing wrong knowledge (saṅmithyajñāna) reiterates the point through the
denial of the Lord’s body:
How is it possible that the Summum Bonum is what serves as life for the
DhPāt
200.6–7
whole universe? For the life of its body does not exist!
Te argument revolving around the absence or non-perceptibility of the body
of the Lord ﬁnds a counterpart in Sanskrit Śāstras in connection with the
defence of the existence of the Lord (īśvara) from the attacks of the oppo-
nents of theism. Te attribution of a body (śarīra) to the Lord is important
to the discussion of the issue as to whether the visible universe is an effect
viśeṣa as ‘unmanifest, pure and without obstructions at all times’ tan vyakta ika, alilaṅtan
kāvaraṇan sadākāla; in 52.10, the luminous aspect of the sentient (prakāśa) is also described
as constantly pure and without obstructions (nityomiḍәṅtan kāvaraṇan). Te concept of
Summum Bonum (paramārtha) as Void (śūnya) and non-existent (tayā) is met in Navaru-
ci p. 54; the text explains that tayā is like the image of a heron ﬂying in the sky and that
from śūnya plus tayā the subtle (sūkṣma) comes forth. Te simile of the ﬂying heron (kun-
tul aṅlayaṅ) is illustrated in an identical context also in Kumāratattva ii f. 27v. Te ﬁrst
paragraph of the Jñānasiddhānta (p. 68) deﬁnes the Unmanifest (niṣkala) as sarva tayā or
‘complete non-being’, which has no characteristics (tan katuduhan), no form or colour (tan
parūpavarṇa), no remnants (tan pahamәṅan).


--- PAGE 592 ---
Wrong Knowledge
573
(kārya) of a former cause.42 Tis cause is deemed to be the Lord by the theis-
tic systems. However, to this view the atheists object that, according to com-
mon experience, any entity, in order to qualify as an intelligent and capable
agent, should necessarily be provided with a body. Te standard example
illustrated in the sources is that of the pot maker, who, in order to create a
pot out of the insentient clay, must be provided with intelligence, desire and
ability to carry out his work.43
Te example of the pot is attested in the Vṛhaspatitattva, where it serves
the purpose of dispelling Vṛhaspati’s view regarding the Summum Bonum
as an insentient reality, corresponding to liberation, called viśeṣa. Having
reproached Vṛhaspati for repeating his view, the Lord retorts:
According to you the unconscious is viśeṣa. Te so-called unconscious is
insentient. Te so-called insentient, that is sought afer by the sentient. Its
illustration is like the clay out of which a pot is made. He who makes the pot
is the one who wishes it. Te clay is the insentient, because it does not ex-
perience. Te person (i.e., the pot-maker) is the sentient. It is the insentient
that is shaped by him. Feeding troughs,44 pots, vats, earthen pots and such
other things are afer the own desire of the sentient, which desires to create
them. In the same way, the Lord is just like the person who makes the pot
in subjecting what is insentient to His desire. Te body of the unconscious
is insentient, hence it is not proper that you term the Summum Bonum as
viśeṣa.45
42.
Cf. Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 6.61–62ab: ‘Tis universe ﬁlled with movable and
immovable beings is to be regarded as the effect of unevolved matter; an effect is established
to originate from a cause, and that cause is desired by an enjoyer. Te one who causes
to enjoy the object of enjoyment is God, the Lord Parameśvara’ kāryam etat pradhānasya
dṛśyaṃyat sacarācaram / kāryeṇa kāraṇaṃsiddhaṃtac ca bhoktur abhīpsitam // bhogyaṃ
bhojayitā devo bhagavān parameśvaraḥ/.
43.
Passages of Śaiva sources supporting the argument that the creator of the world
needs a body with the example of the pot are, e.g., Kiraṇa VP 3.12ac; Mṛgendra VP 1.8–9a
(and the elaborate Vṛtti thereof), 3.7b–15a; Pauṣkara-Parameśvara VP 1.28cd–39; Parameś-
varatantra 9–10 (cf. Goodall 1998:lvii); Mokṣakārikā 1–11; Rāmakaṇṭha on Paramokṣa-
nirāsakārikā 2.
44.
OJED (2342) translates kavvaṅan (from vvaṅi), quoting this line of text, as ‘birth,
form of existence (man, animal, etc.) ﬁxed by birth, position assigned by birth, natural dis-
position; noble birth, high position’; however, the context suggests that the form may be
derived from vvaṅ* iii (attested only as amvaṅ, vinvaṅ, amvaṅi, vinvaṅaṅ) ‘to take care
of, foster, feed, kindle; treat fondly, guard, look afer, tend’; hence, kavvaṅan = ‘place of
feeding/from where it is fed’.
45.
Vṛhaspatitattva 47.44–52: ikaṅlupa ya viśeṣa liṅta / acetana kaṅlupa ṅaranya / ikaṅ


--- PAGE 593 ---
574
iii Doctrine
Te argument is that the unconscious—which is also called viśeṣa by Vṛhas-
pati—cannot be the Summum Bonum because of its insentience; and what is
insentient is by deﬁnition an effect, created by what is sentient. Te exam-
ple of the pot is here employed to demonstrate this basic axiom. Te same
example occurs in Sanskrit philosophical literature to demonstrate the sen-
tience of the Soul, which knows, desires and acts. Te traditional purpose
of the example seems to be presupposed by the Old Javanese text, which in
fact construes a syllogism by equating the sentiency and agency of the Soul
of the pot-maker to the power of sentience and action of the Lord.46 Still,
Vṛhaspati claims the status of non-effect, hence cause, for the non-existence,
describing it through the epithets attributed to the Summum Bonum:
Te unconscious is just like an absurdity (asambhava).47 It is not manifest
(tan vyakta),48 always pure and without a covering. For it is only a thing
with a body that can be desired and created. Tese [characteristics] just
do not exist (tan hana) [with respect to the unconscious]. Hence, it is not
appropriate [to say] that it (the unconscious) can be created.49
Te point underlying this statement is that non-existence can never be an
effect, for that state applies only for entities that are insentient and possess
a body. Tis is important in view of the fact that, according to Vṛhaspati,
non-existence is the supreme goal out of which existence arises; if it would be
proved to be an effect, the veracity of this proposition would be undermined.
acetana ṅaranya inicchā de niṅcetana teka / paḍanya kady aṅgān iṅlәmah ginave dyun /
ikaṅmagave dyun yekaṅumicchā ya / ikaṅlәmah yekaṅacetana / apan tan paṅhiḍәp / ikaṅ
vvaṅyeka cetana / ikaṅacetana yeka ginavenya / kavvaṅan dyun paluṅan paryuk saprakāra /
svecchā nikaṅcetana / maṅicchā dumadyakәn / tadvat maṅkana kady aṅgān ikaṅmagave
dyun / tadvat maṅkana ta bhaṭāra / ar pakecchā ikaṅacetana / acetana pvāvak nikaṅlupa /
ya ta mataṅyan tan yogya ikaṅparamārtha liṅmu viśeṣa / • paluṅan paryuk ] BDEF, OJED ;
paluṅan / paryuk A ; paryuk paluṅhan CG ; paluṅhān payun Ed. • liṅmu ] em. ; liṅnyu Ed.
(all mss.).
46.
A similar point appears to be made in the Dharma Pātañjala (cf. p. 582), arguing that
the element earth is an (insentient) effect, whereas the Soul can experience and know by
virtue of the Lord’s jñānaśakti (cf. p. 344.
47.
Following OJED (134): ‘hard to believe, absurd, impossible’, etc.
48.
Against OJED (2347), which s.v. vyakta gives only ‘(1) evident, certain; (2) distinct’
(the latter on the basis of Vṛhaspatitattva 47.7). Note, however, that OJED 134 s.v. asamb-
hava quotes this sentence with the reading vyakti.
49.
Vṛhaspatitattva 47.53–56: kadi asambhava atekaṅlupa / tan vyakta ika / alilaṅtan
kāvaraṇan sadākāla // apan ikaṅvastu māvak atah / kavәnaṅinicchā lavan ginave / ika tatan
hana juga / ya ta mataṅyan tan yogya ika gavayәn //.


--- PAGE 594 ---
Wrong Knowledge
575
A comparable controversy over the existence of an intelligent creator is
documented already in early texts of Sāṅkhya and Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika,50 be-
coming one of the standard clichés in Śaiva scriptures, from the early Śāstric
Siddhāntatantras throughout the later exegetical traditions. Te replies to
the atheistic objection, of course, vary according to the philosophical afﬁlia-
tion and period. An early argument against the existence of God is found
in the Yuktidīpikā on Sāṅkhyakārikā 15d. It objects to the view that the
conjunction of the sentient Soul with the insentient body is effected by a
conscious being.51 According to the Sāṅkhyas, God does not exist as the
universe can be reduced to two fundamental principles, the sentient puruṣa
and the insentient prakṛti. Te argument of the bodiless52 state of the Lord
is attributed to a (seemingly materialist) pūrvapākṣin:
[…] both [the Soul and the body] are not conscious; for we do not admit
that Īśvara has a body, and (hence) there is no fault (in our doctrine). Tose
who acknowledge the substance (called) Īśvara, teach that he is possessed of
inﬁnite marks such as being all pervasive, devoid of parts, of inﬁnite power,
the subtlest among the subtle, the biggest among the big, the subject of merit,
eternal etc. Why, then, should one attach a body (to him) and falsely attribute
it to him?53
Te commentator refutes this point, remarking that the Lord does have a
body; and it is because of this very fact that he cannot be the creator, for
50.
On the defence of an invisible but intelligent creatorship for, respectively, atoms and
material entities such as trees, mountains, etc., cf. Uddyotakara’s Nyāyavārttika and Vācas-
patimiśra’s Nyāyavārttikatātparyaṭīkā on Nyāyasūtra 4.1.19–21.
51.
Tis may very well represent the Śaiva standpoint; cf., e.g., Vṛhaspatitattva 14.52–53,
according to which ‘Te priciple Soul is caused to meet the principle unevolved matter by
the Lord’ pinatәmvakĕn pvekaṅātmatattva lavan ikaṅpradhānatattva de bhaṭāra.
52.
Te technical term used by the Yuktidīpikā for ‘body’ is kāryakaraṇa, in which kārya
denotes the ﬁve tanmātras plus the ﬁve elements, and karaṇa the ten organs of sense and
action plus the three internal organs (all these being Sāṅkhya categories). As pointed out by
Chemparathy (1965:139, fn. 70) this technical usage is frequently found also in the Pañ-
cārthabhāṣya (74.2–8; 76.8; 141.21). Since, as far as we know, the Pañcārthabhāṣya is likely
to be earlier than the Yuktidīpikā, it is possible that such usage was ﬁrst introduced in the
former text.
53.
Trans. Chemparathy (1965:141); Yuktidīpikā 159.8–13: na tarhy ubhayoś cai-
tanyam / kāryakaraṇavattānabhyupagamād adoṣa iti cet / [syād etat / ] vyāpī niravayavo
’nantaśaktiḥsūkṣmebhyaḥsūkṣmatamo mahadbhyo mahattamo ’dhikaraṇadharmānādir ity
evam anantalakṣaṇam īśvarapadārthaṃtadvidho vyācakṣate / tasya kutaḥkāryakaraṇam
avalambyedam adhyāropitam iti /.


--- PAGE 595 ---
576
iii Doctrine
revelation (śruti) speaks of his gross bodily forms as well as other ‘glorious
bodies’ (māhātmyaśarīrāṇi) of supernatural beings, all of which come out of
unevolved matter. Assuming the existence of a prior divine entity is, there-
fore, useless.
On the other hand, Nyāya seeks to dispel this objection by demonstrating
that agency (kartṛtva) does not necessarily require the possession of a body
(śarīravattva).54 A development of this standpoint is probably detectable
in the Īśvara doctrine of the Pāśupatas, according to whom He is bodiless,
being described as niṣkala and vikalaḥ, ‘without parts’; when He is said to
possess a body, He does so only in a ﬁgurative sense.55 Te solution of the
Śaivasiddhānta is to postulate for the Lord an invisible and pure mantric
body. Tis point is already found in the Mṛgendra (VP 3.8–15) and in the
Parākhya, which justiﬁes the Lord’s embodied form (sakala) as a necessity
‘for the sake of worship’ (upacāranimittaḥ, 2.87).56
In the Dharma Pātañjala the ﬁrst argument advanced to demonstrate the
Lord’s existence is constituted by a matter-of-fact proposition pointing at the
absurdity of postulating the derivation of the visible world from an invisible
non-existence:
Te evidence that it (i.e. wrong knowledge) is wrong [is]: indeed the whole
DhPāt
200.2–5
universe does not exist, if the Summum Bonum is non-existence, and all of
you could not live, if the Summum Bonum is non-existence. Tis life of yours
is visible, as is the existence of the whole universe: from this you can infer
that the Summum Bonum is not non-existence.
Tis syllogism, implying inference, is used to attack the views of those con-
sidering non-existence as the cause of the universe. Another proof adduced
refers to the establishment of the cause from its effects or creation (Skt kārya,
OJ gave), which also implies the upholding of inference as a legitimate means
to arrive at the Lord’s existence through the direct perception of reality:
Not visible is the Summum Bonum, but what is visible is its creation. What
DhPāt
204.7–9
54.
Tis end is ofen achieved through the ﬁnding of logical fallacies in the position of
the adversary, such as, e.g. āśrayāsiddhi or the assuming of Īśvara’s body without accepting
Īśvara Himself who is the substratum of that body (cf. Nyāyakusumañjali 485,1–502.7).
55.
Cf. Pañcārthabhāṣya 76.5–17 and 128.8–10, as pointed out by Chemparathy
1965:141, fn. 77.
56.
Among the Archipelago sources attributing a mantric body to Śiva, cf. Vṛhaspatitat-
tva ad śloka 14 (quoted above, p. 356).


--- PAGE 596 ---
Wrong Knowledge
577
is its creation? Here it is: the animals as well as this world, not to speak of
the human beings. Tese are its creation.
Te establishment of the existence of the Lord on the inference of His effects
is a well-known motif in Sanskrit sources. Since, according to the Śaiva, the
Lord is not perceivable by the limited human senses and ungraspable by the
limited human mind, His existence can be proved only through His effects,
i.e. creation. Te paradigmatic instruments to carry out such a discussion
are provided by a non-Śaiva system, i.e. the (theistic) Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika. As
it is put forward in the Nyāya section of the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha (11.165,
which is largely based upon Udayana’s Nyāyakusumāñjali), ‘the mountains,
seas, etc., must have had a maker because they possess the nature of effects,
like a jar’ nagasāgarādikaṃsakartṛkaṃkāryatvāt kumbhavat. To this propo-
sition the opponent objects that ‘the mountains, etc., cannot have had a
maker, because of the fact that they were not produced by a body’ (11.174).
Having shown this to be a wrongly-formulated syllogism, the follower of
Nyāya points out that if such gross entities had no maker, they would not be
effects; but since all acknowledge that they have the nature of effects, there
also must be a maker. Te same argument is put forward in Sāṅkhyakārikā
7, defending the view that prakṛti can be perceived only though its effects.
In Parākhyatantra 4.4–5 it serves the purpose of proving the existence of
Māyā.57 Now, it is probably this widespread axiom that the above-quoted
terse statement of the Dharma Pātañjala presupposes. In order to know
about the Lord from His effects, an inferential process is required. Tis is
made explicit in Mṛgendra VP 3.1, a verse much quoted by Śaiva commen-
tators:
Now, having perceived that things such as bodies etc. have the nature of
effects, we can know their particular creator by way of inference.58
Similarly, Parākhya 2.2–3 and 7 (trans. Goodall 2004:165–167):
All things that are endowed with form, that are made up of parts, that have
various forms, because they are distinguished by having gross parts, must
necessarily depend on a sentient cause. (2)
57.
Cf. also Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama VP 6.56, and Vyomavyāpistava 22, on Vāmadeva
being devoid of distinctive marks yet inferable from His effects.
58.
Mṛgendratantra VP 3.1: athopalabhya dehādivastu kāryatvadharmakam / kartāram
asya jānīmo viśiṣṭam anumānataḥ//.


--- PAGE 597 ---
578
iii Doctrine
Terefore there exists some sentient [cause]. [And that is] proved to be the
Lord. He is known, according to this system, by inference, because of His
effects, which we directly experience. (3)
By these inferential marks, such as effects, He may be known even though
He is not directly perceived. A gross effect with parts must lead [one to
assume] a cause. (7)59
Further on (2.11) the text elaborates on the correct type of inference to be
employed:
Terefore [we know that] He must be the sentient cause of this coarse [body
of] effect[s that is the universe], the ﬁrst of whose effects is the effect that
is earth, by inference based on [a connection that is] known from a general
principle.60
Te type of inference referred to as ‘observed from the general’ (sāmānya-
todṛṣṭa) is commonly used in early Brahmanical texts to prove unseen re-
alities such as the Supreme Being.61 As I have shown above (pp. 564–570),
in the Dharma Pātañjala and the Vṛhaspatitattva this type of inference is
illustrated through the example of the Sun to prove the existence of the in-
visible fruits of karma. A logical demonstration of the existence of the Lord
through inference, against an opponent maintaining His bodiless state, is
found in the Vṛhaspatitattva:
If you would say that He has no body, and it is not appropriate to speak about
a Lord because there is no proof to establish Him, then look, as follows are
the proofs to establish Him:
Just as butter invisibly resides in milk and ﬁre in wood; as water abides
in clouds and the wind is omnipresent, so also are rajas and tamas.
59.
Parākhyatantra 2.2–3, 7: mūrtāḥsāvayavāḥye ’rthā nānārūpaparicchadāḥ/ sthūlā-
vayavaśiṣṭatvād buddhimaddhetupūrvakāḥ// ato ’sti buddhimān kaścid īśvaraḥsamavasthi-
taḥ/ pratipannaḥsvakāryeṇa dṛṣṭenātrānumānataḥ// […] ebhiḥkāryādibhir liṅgair adṛṣṭo
’pi pratīyate / sthūlaṃsāvayavaṃkāryam avaśyaṃkāraṇaṃnayet //.
60.
Parākhyatantra 2.11: tena sāmānyatodṛṣṭād anumānena buddhimān / kāraṇaṃsthū-
lakāryasya kṣitikāryādikasya saḥ//.
61.
Cf., e.g., Nyāya sources such as Uddyotakara’s Nyāyavārttika and Vācaspatimiśra’s
Nyāyavārttikatātparyaṭīkā on Nyāyasūtra 4.1.19–21. Yet, for the Śaivas this kind of ana-
logical inference cannot amount to the only source of knowledge of the Lord but must be
corroborated also by revelation (āgama): cf. Vṛhaspatitattva 52.38–39 (quoted above, p.
555).


--- PAGE 598 ---
Wrong Knowledge
579
Tey are existent and yet not existent in as much as they are not grasped
by the man in the visible world.
What is your means to know the ﬁre which is present in wood? Why should
something that is not seen be described as existent? As the wood is not
burnt by that [ﬁre,] so according to you it does not exist. [Yet] that [ﬁre]
comes out of the wood: that is your means to know about it. In what way
will you acknowledge the factual existence of such [an event]? Similarly,
butter comes out of milk. You can say that it exists. You can say that water
alone is the nature of milk, and [butter] does not exist. But it exists! How
can it be so? Even though it is a visible substance it is difﬁcult to be clearly
deﬁned; it cannot be perceived in its concrete form. What, according to your
proposition, is denoted as viśeṣa, is it anything less than a visible substance?
As long as it can be compared to ﬁre and butter, the holy viśeṣa is as such, it
cannot be clearly deﬁned, it is difﬁcult to be perceived in its concrete form.
What is your means to know it? It is just subtle, without external marks,
extremely difﬁcult to grasp. Tis is regarded as viśeṣa. For if [you would
say that] the Lord exists [then] He can be grasped, and He is subject to the
cycle of existence, and, according to your view, it is as if He is designated as
non-existence, then how would this whole world exist, as well as your life?
How would all this exist if the Lord is non-existence? Tis is the reason why
your proposition is wrong.62
Tis difﬁcult passage, the translation of which is not always beyond doubt,
62.
Vṛhaspatitattva 48.2–5 and 49.1–14: tan hanāvaknira / tan yogya ika vuvusәn bha-
ṭāra / apan tan hana pramāṇa sumiddhākәnya / nyapan tahan kva liṅanta / nyaṅnihan
makapramāṇa sumiddhākәnya //
yad ghṛtaṃpayasi hariś ca yad dāruṣu kṣitaḥjalaṃnabhaḥsthitaṃsarvago ’nilaḥ/
rajas tamo ’dṛśyamāno nareṇa sann asat tathā bāhye jagati tan nopalabhyate //
49c ’dṛśyamāno nareṇa ] em. ; ’dṛśyaṃmano nare Ed. ; ’dṛsyamanas sa narena
AD ; ’dṛśyamanas sa narena BEF ; vṛṣamana sa nareṇa CG
apa kari panaṅguhanta riṅapuy yan haneṅkayu / umapeka tan katon sәṅguhәn hana /
apa ya tan gәsәṅikaṅkayu denya / tan hana liṅanta / mijil ta ya saṅkeṅkayu / ndya
panaṅguhanterika / mapa deyanta mastvi maṅkana / maṅkana tekaṅmiñak saṅkeṅsusu /
hana liṅanterika / vvay juga ta lvir nikaṅsusu / taya liṅaterika / hana mata ya / ika ta umapa
maṅkana / vastu bāhya ika iva maṅkana evәḥyan linakṣaṇan / tan kәna vinastvan / ika
pakṣanta pva sinaṅguh ta viśeṣa / apeka sor de niṅvastu bāhya / yāvat kady aṅgān ikaṅapuy
lavan miñak / yāvat maṅkana ta saṅhyaṅviśeṣa / tan kәna linakṣaṇan / mevәh vinastvan /
apa kari panaṅguhanta ri sira / sūkṣma juga ya / alakṣaṇa / atyanta paramadurgrāhya / ya ta
sinaṅguh viśeṣa ṅaranya / apan yan hana bhaṭāra kavәnaṅta sikәpәn / lavan kәna ta sira riṅ
saṅsāra veh / yan saṅguhan taya kadi pakṣanta / kadi hana tekaṃrāt kabeh / nihan huripta
tuvi / ndah kadi hana teki yan taya bhaṭāra / ya ta mataṅyan salah ika pakṣanta /.


--- PAGE 599 ---
580
iii Doctrine
upholds syllogistic arguments to reduce to an absurdity the opponent’s propo-
sitions (either factual or implied) that unseen realities are non-existent; that
the Summum Bonum is the viśeṣa; and that the Lord is non-existence. Te
refutation of these propositions is done by means of analogies, whose gen-
eral validity is determined by direct perception. It may be pointed out that
of the four similes mentioned in the śloka only two are taken up in the com-
mentary, namely those of butter in milk and ﬁre in wood. Nor is the syllo-
gism mentioning the guṇas explained there. Tis leads me to suggest that
the commentator was only familiar with the two examples, a fact that is
supported by the appearance of the same illustrations in other Old Javanese
texts. Tese metaphors appear to be an archaic defence of satkāryavāda or
the doctrine upholding the existence of the effect in the cause. Exact coun-
terparts of these illustrations are found in Sanskrit sources, where they usu-
ally serve the purpose of demonstrating the invisible presence of the Lord
(or Brahman) in everything.63
Tat inference is required in order to prove the existence of the Lord who,
although invisible, is omnipresent, is adumbrated in the following passage
of the Dharma Pātañjala, occurring in the debate between the Lord and the
opponent at the end of the text:
‘What is the distinctive mark of the Summum Bonum, which is the direct
DhPāt
336.12–17
aim of the absorption of the yogin?’ If you would speak thus, [I would reply:]
Te sentient: omniscient, who knows the whole universe; omnipotent, who
is the author of the entire universe. ‘Where are His whereabouts?’ If you
would speak thus, [I would reply:] His whereabouts are the whole universe,
although he is not seen, for He is without distinctive marks, without form,
without a notion. ‘Impossible. What is the evidence of its existence?’ If you
would speak thus, [I would reply:] As follows: the creation, maintenance
and dissolution of the universe. Tat is the wish of the Lord.
Te invisibility and lack of distinctive marks of the Lord-Summum Bonum
do not preclude His pervasive existence, which is proved by the sentient na-
ture of that reality, characterized by the Powers of Knowledge and Action.64
63.
Cf. above, pp. 381–383 and 401–402.
64.
A similar argument is put forward by Śaṅkara in his commentary to Taittirīyopaṇiṣad
2.6.5, where the opponent points out that what exists, like a pot, is provided with speciﬁc
characteristics (viśeṣa); since the Brahman is not perceived, nor are its properties, it follows
that it does not exist. Śaṅkara replies that the world is an effect of Brahman, as no effect
born from the non-existence is perceived in this world.


--- PAGE 600 ---
Wrong Knowledge
581
Te reference to the activities of creation, maintenance and dissolution by
the Lord may be intended here to afﬁrm His causal efﬁciency, which, accord-
ing to the materialists, could be denied on the ground that inherent efﬁcacy
(svabhāva) accounts for those activities.65
Te argument in favour of theism—already hinted at in the above pas-
sage—revolving around the idea that sentience (cetanā) is required as the
basis of reality is advanced in reply to the opponent’s objection (200.6–7)
that the Lord-Summum Bonum cannot be what serves as life for the universe
since there is no such thing as His body:
What is, then, the reason why Summum Bonum is the designation of it? If it
DhPāt
200.7–202.2
were something else than sentient—for sentient is the origin for life’s exis-
tence—what is called sentience would be without distinctive characteristics,
without a [deﬁnite] state, really it would be heavy, it would be standing lower
than the Summum Bonum, and not omniscient. Te sentient in such a way
is what brings life into existence. Could that be anything different from the
Summum Bonum?
Again, the Lord attempts at formulating a simple syllogism, corroborated by
the axiom that sentience must be the origin of organized life. In the part
of the debate following thereupon the Lord and an opponent adhere to, re-
spectively, the existence and sentience of the Summum Bonum, and its non-
existence and insentience:
Moreover, as follows could be my question to the opponent: if the Summum
DhPāt
202.2–11
Bonum is sentient, it is non-existent, just impossible, [like] gleaming with-
out a body.66 Tat is designated as void; that is designated as formless’. Tus
answers the opponent. [I reply:] where is the place of such a non-existence?
At what moment will this whole universe suddenly cease to exist? Te op-
ponent answers: ‘Tis universe will disappear suddenly in the future, for
non-existence was its former cause. What is the reason why the universe
exists in the end? It just exists without having a cause; existence exists with-
out using as a former state something that has been created. Similarly, if it
vanishes, there is nothing that causes it to disappear’; thus speaks the oppo-
nent. [I reply:] it is not possible at all that insentient matter creates the body
of what exists and does not exist.
65.
Cf. below, p. 590.
66.
For a tentative explanation of this image, cf. p. 202, fn. 18.


--- PAGE 601 ---
582
iii Doctrine
Te argument raised by the opponent concerning the origin and end of the
visible universe recalls either the doctrine of non-causality (nirnimittavāda)
or spontaneous origination (svabhāvavāda), according to which things can
be born out of themselves without needing a former cause, and can also dis-
appear without a reason. Tis concept, besides eliminating the need of a
creator, undermines the very idea of causality, and was one of the most crit-
icized tenets of the materialist school(s).67
As we have seen in Parākhya 2.11, the ﬁrst of the coarse bodies usually
taken as example of the Lord’s effect is the earth.68 Tis ﬁnds a counterpart
in our text in the opponent’s objection to the above statement of the Lord:
‘Take, for example, the earth (lәmah): there is no one who creates its body.
DhPāt
202.11–204.2
Who is the one who creates its existence and disappearance?’ If the opponent
would speak thus, [I would reply:] According to me He is the Lord Summum
Bonum. He can destroy and create, for He is the Almighty, being able to will
into existence the whole universe.
Afer the Lord’s assertive demonstration, the opponent reiterates the argu-
ment, already put forward in the passages quoted above (p. 580), pointing
out the paradoxical character of Śaiva deﬁnition of the Summum Bonum:
Te opponent replies: ‘According to you, the Summum Bonum exists. It
DhPāt
204.3–8
exists, without any distinctive characteristics whatsoever. It has no body.
It is not visible. It is ungraspable. It cannot be fathomed!’ [I reply:] that
[entity] is designated as subtle. Te opponent replies: ‘Your statement is not
a response to my question’. [I reply:] ‘Let it be as you wish’. ‘Nevertheless,
there would be a characteristic’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would
reply:] Not visible is the Summum Bonum, but what is visible is its creation.
Tis—regrettably corrupt—passage defends the deﬁnition of the Summum
Bonum by pointing out that it is only apparently paradoxical, for the epithets
may apply to the description of a subtle (sūkṣma), yet existing, reality.69 To
67.
Cf. below, pp. 592–595.
68.
Cf. also Mṛgendratantra VP 6.2a: ‘Te creator of the earth and other effects is the
Lord’ kāryaṃkṣityādikarteśas.
69.
Similar epithets are found in a passage of the SaṅHyaṅHayu (ms. Mal. Pol. 161, f.
35v) to deﬁne the breaths: ‘Te subtleness of the breaths means that they do not have a body,
do not have a form, do not have a colour; they cannot be touched, they cannot be grasped;
the subtleness of the breaths means that they are invisible’ lit niṅbāyu ṅaranya, tan pāvak
tan parūpa tan pavarṇa, tan kagamәl tan kasikәp, sūkṣma niṅbāyu ṅaranya tan katon.


--- PAGE 602 ---
Wrong Knowledge
583
the Lord’s point the opponent rightfully objects that, in this case, the Sum-
mum Bonum would be provided with a distinctive mark, namely subtleness,
and this would result in an apparent contradiction with the previous attri-
bution of the epithet ‘devoid of distinctive marks’ (tan palakṣaṇa, 200.9) to
the Summum Bonum.70 Te point made by the Lord somehow escapes this
contradiction and jumps to the conclusion that, even though the Lord/Sum-
mum Bonum is subtle and hence invisible, His effects are to be regarded as
proofs of His existence. Unsatisﬁed by this reply, the opponent remarks that
the Lord, who has created the universe, is not visible, and enquires about
the valid means of knowledge in order to prove His existence. According to
the Lord, the means is the power of knowledge (jñānaśakti), made of sen-
tience (cetanāmaya), present in the Souls of the incarnated beings. Tus, the
argument of the existence of the Lord’s power of knowledge within the in-
carnated beings is considered to bear the force of evidence in order to prove
the existence and (omniscient-cum-omnipotent) creatorship of the Lord.
Te debate reaches its conclusion with the opponent’s denying that the
power of the Lord is sentient, adducing as a proof that what creates aware-
ness in the men’s bodies is merely the coming together of elements. Te Lord
replies by mentioning the example of the sleeping man who does not die even
though he is unconscious—an example I shall discuss below (pp. 607–612),
in connection with the materialist’s denial of the Soul. What is interesting
to mention here is that this example serves the purpose of corroborating the
view that sentience is a qualiﬁcation of the Lord and His power of knowledge
within the human beings. Te same example is found in the Vṛhaspatitat-
tva, where it also appears in connection with the more general debate on
the equation of the highest reality (called viśeṣa) with non-existence. Te
fact that the example of the Soul of a sleeping person is brought forward in
both the Dharma Pātañjala and the Vṛhaspatitattva to demonstrate the ex-
istence of an omniscient agent and creator of all effects might have had its
origin in the Sanskrit tradition. For instance, a similar illustration is used by
the Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika author Śrīdhara (10th century ad) in his commentary
70.
Another interpretation may be that the opponent, while admitting the Lord’s objec-
tion that his observation is not pertinent, forces the adversary to concede that the Summum
Bonum possesses certain distinctive marks, namely existence, lack of a body, invisibility,
etc. Te view that the Summum Bonum has no distinctive marks whatsoever is raised also
in the Vṛhaspatitattva, commentary ad śloka 8b (anirdeśyam alakṣaṇam), and in 49.8–12
(sūkṣma juga ya / alakṣaṇa / atyantaparamadurgrāhya, cf. p. 578).


--- PAGE 603 ---
584
iii Doctrine
to Praśastapāda’s Padārthadharmasaṅgraha to uphold the theistic view that
what exists has the nature of effect and must therefore have been produced
by a cause, namely an intelligent Supreme Being. However, he concedes to
the opponent that (intelligent) agency needs not necessarily to be regarded
as synonymous with embodiment. Tis view is defended by means of this
same example, which proves that, in spite of the presence of a physical body,
no intelligent activity is present (Bhattacharya 1961:83–85). Although
both the Śaiva and the (classical) Nyāya-Vaiśeṣikas agreed on the existence
of God, this position on the disjunction of kartṛtva and śarīratva was in all
likelihood perceived as untenable by the former group, who postulated the
existence of a supreme body for the Lord. It may be concluded that the Ja-
vanese authors were familiar with this common cliché used by the Vaiśeṣikas
and felt the need to include its critique in the debate. Of course, the critique
of this example also served the purpose of criticizing the Vaiśeṣika (or mate-
rialist?) view regarding the insentience of the Soul and the state of liberation.
Upholding
Non-Existence
as Origin and
End of the
Universe
Having negated the existence of the Lord and of the
Summum Bonum, the opponent offers his own (some-
what paradoxical) alternative, which may be regarded
as a kind of ‘nihilist metaphysic’.71 In particular, he up-
holds the view that what is before and afer the visible
reality is non-existence/non-being (tayā). Such a view
is attested in various passages of the Dharma Pātañjala.
As we have seen above (p. 572), in 196.20–23 the opponent refuses to admit
the existence of the Summum Bonum as an invisible and unthinkable reality,
arguing that non-existence is the cause or origin (saṅkan) and end (paran) of
human beings. Tis statement turns upside-down the idea, common among
Śaiva theists, that the Lord and Summum Bonum is the origin and end of the
universe,72 arguing that the origin and dissolution of the universe is just non-
existence. A similar view is put forward in 332.16–334.3 (discussed above,
p. 571), where the opponent claims that the effects of the human actions
will disappear, going back to the Holy Non-Existence they originated from,
71.
As a matter of fact, anything resembling a Lokāyata metaphysic is not represented in
Sanskrit sources. It is difﬁcult to establish if the standpoint that ﬁgures in the Dharma Pā-
tañjala is a genuine representation of the doctrines of certain strands of materialists which
have not survived in Sanskrit literature, or a distorted interpretation of their positions.
72.
Cf., e.g., Kumāratattva ii f. 6v, where the Lord says: ‘I am the origin, I am the end’
aku saṅkan / aku paran, and Arjunavivāha 10.2, characterizing the Lord as ‘the origin and
end of the whole universe’ saṅkan paran iṅsarāt.


--- PAGE 604 ---
Wrong Knowledge
585
which is also the place of dissolution of the universe, called unmanifest; and
that animals such water-buffaloes, cows, dogs and pigs, as soon as they die,
they return to that non-existence. Tis state of non-being is deﬁned as an
ontological principle, pure without obstruction—a characterization that oc-
curs also in Vṛhaspatitattva 47.53–54, where Vṛhaspati describes the state of
utter annihilation that is viśeṣa, corresponding to the state of unawareness or
unconsciousness (lupa) entered by the Soul during sleep and afer death.73
Such a deﬁnition seems to be polemically intended as a parallel to the def-
inition of cetana given in 6.1–3: ‘sentient is what has knowledge as its own
nature, knowing without being affected by unconsciousness; it is constantly
standing still, without obstructions’ cetana ṅaranya jñānasvabhāva vruh tan
kәneṅlupa / nityomiḍәṅsadākāla / tan kāvaraṇan.
A further elaboration of the above ideas is found in the debate about the
existence of the Summum Bonum (and liberation) occurring at the end of
the Dharma Pātañjala:
‘Only when one vanishes, that is liberation’. If the opponent would speak
DhPāt
334.7–16
thus, [I would reply:] When, then, does it (i.e. liberation) come? For there is
not one who lives [afer one is liberated]. How could what exists be perma-
nent? When is the non-existence directly perceived? Te opponent replies:
‘It is in the future, at the time that dissolution comes about, when the whole
universe will be non-existence’. Tus speaks the opponent. [I reply:] What
if the whole universe will arise once again? ‘Tat explains why the uni-
verse is dissolved into non-existence, for from non-existence is the origin
from which it came forth formerly’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I
would reply:] If it is so, your view is contradictory. Te reason why it is
regarded as contradictory is that, as you say, the universe is dissolved in
the non-existence. Te universe arising now, it is regarded as arising from
non-existence. ‘Wrong, non-existence does not mean the dissolution of the
universe while it arises’. If the opponent would speak thus, [I would reply:]
it is not possible that the Summum Bonum is like this.
Te elliptic character of the passage makes it difﬁcult to grasp the positions
of the interlocutors. In the beginning, the Lord replies to the opponent’s
view that liberation is not the acquisition of the Lord’s supernatural pow-
ers but just the disappearance of the body. Te argument seems to be that
it is impossible to establish the validity of such a proposition, for liberation
73.
Cf. above, p. 571.


--- PAGE 605 ---
586
iii Doctrine
comes when there is at least a body or something that was previously living,
while in the state of non-existence postulated by the opponent, how could
there be liberation, and from what? Te controversy then shifs from the in-
dividual to the ontological level. To the opponent’s claim that non-existence
is the origin and end of the universe the Lord replies that this fact is not nor-
mally perceived, thus forcing him to postulate that the non-existence of the
existent reality will come at the time of the universal dissolution (pralaya).
Te reader’s need for further clariﬁcation of this difﬁcult philosophi-
cal passage is anticipated through Kumāra’s enquiry about the reason that
the cause and effect of the universe is deemed by the opponent to be non-
existence (334.18–19). In reply, the Lord equates this non-existence, which
is also deemed to be liberation by the opponent, with the state of semi-
liberation attained by the beings dissolved into unevolved matter (prakṛti-
līna), concluding that the principle of unevolved matter is indeed the origin
and end of the universe (334.20–336.5).74
To Kumāra’s question following thereupon (336.7), i.e. why the principle
of unevolved matter has been designated as non-existence by the opponent,
the Lord replies that it is on account of the fact that there is no notion or
distinctive mark of it; the opponent, however, is wrong: although unevolved
matter is unmanifest (niṣkala) and the Lord is not seen and has no distinctive
marks, form or notion, His existence may be inferred from the fact that cre-
ation, maintenance and dissolution of the universe come about due to His
wish (336.9–17).75
Te view that non-existence or nothingness is the origin and ultimate
end of the universe as well as incarnated beings is found, besides in the Dha-
rma Pātañjala and Vṛhaspatitattva, in a number of Old Javanese sources.
74.
As it results from 336.10–11, where it is said that the origin of the universe, and of
non-existence itself, is the Lord-Summum Bonum, unevolved matter is to be regarded as
the material cause (nimittakāraṇa), whereas the instrumental cause (upādānakāraṇa) is the
Lord: cf. above, pp. 387–389.
75.
Te opponent’s main argument, i.e. that something without distinctive marks and in-
accessible to the human intellect cannot exist, echoes the common Sāṅkhya representation
of the pūrvapakṣa denying the view that unevolved matter is the origin and dissolution of
the universe. Sāṅkhyakārikā 8 counteracts as follows: ‘Te non-perception of these [en-
tities such as unevolved matter] is due to their subtlety, not to non-existence, for they are
known from their effects. Tese effects are intellect (mahat) and so forth, which are similar
or dissimilar to unevolved matter’ saukṣmyāt tadanupalabdhir nābhāvāt kāryatas tadupa-
labdheḥ/ mahadādi tac ca kāryaṃprakṛtisarūpaṃvirūpaṃca //.


--- PAGE 606 ---
Wrong Knowledge
587
Te Koravāśrama (94.25–26) hints to the non-being as a reality characterized
by void (śūnya): ‘Te Lord Umāpati, He wished to perform yoga on the peak
of the Rājaparvata; the reason was in order to go back to the Void, non-
existent’ bhaṭṭāra umāpati, sira arәp maṅanakәn76 yoga riṅpucak saṅhyaṅ
rājaparvata, karaṇanira mulya mariṅśūnya taya.77
A less ‘metaphysical’ and purely negative characterization of non-exist-
ence as the origin and end of the beings is found in the Kakavin Smaradaha-
na. It appears to reﬂect a genuinely materialist standpoint as it is illustrated
by Vṛhaspati, to whom the role of promulgator of materialist doctrines is
traditionally ascribed (cf. above, p. 561). Te teacher of the Gods, as an at-
tempt to comfort Rati afer the loss of her husband Kāma, burnt by the ﬁre
of Śiva, makes the following statement:
Te non-being (taya) is the origin of what is in the three worlds. For a mo-
ment it is being (bhāva), then it goes back again into non-being (abhāva).
What is the [usefulness of the] way of being attached to life? It is truly un-
76.
I understand maṅ(h)anakәn, against OJED 96, according to which maṅәnakәn is a
separate form attested only once in Uttarakāṇḍa and whose translation is dubious: ‘maṅә-
nakәn? (corr. to maṅәn-aṅәn?)’.
77.
A similar deﬁnition of non-existence is echoed in Kakavin Pārthayajña 36.2, where a
particular yogic process resulting in the ‘taking as abode non-existence, void and annihila-
tion’ is enacted: ‘Te King became silent and concentrated his mind on a single point; He
squeezed out the quintessence of the inconceivable, He joined together the excellent Five
Holy Springs, taking as a support the non-being, the eternal Void’ humәnәṅta narendra
maṅekacitta / patitis niṅacintya tәlas pineh ya / pinasaṅnira taṅvara pañcatīrtha / mak-
agәgvan ikaṅtaya śunya laṅgәṅ; and KiduṅHarṣavijaya 1.17b, in which a yogin is ‘con-
stantly occupied with non-existence with visualization, void, unfathomable, subtle without
material consistence’ ginuṅriṅtaya sasmṛti śūnyācintyānūkṣma tan kavastu; cf. also Kiduṅ
VaṅbaṅVideya 3.187b (version A), where a virtuous King who embodies the Supreme Śiva
(paramaśivātmaka) is said to look down from the subtleness of the non-existence (mulat
sakiṅsukṣma niṅtaya). Perhaps it is to this idea that we must relate the mention of the
‘plain of non-existence’ (abhāvapada) above the world of Śrīkaṇṭha in Dharma Pātañjala
280.2. A special meditation upon Śiva as non-existence (abhāva) is described in Guhyasū-
tra 8.85cd–87, which constitutes the Lord’s reply to the Goddess’ question about how Śiva,
who is without distinctive marks (alakṣa), beyond mantras (mantrātīta) and unfathomable
by means of direct perception and inference, is to be visualized. Although the passage is
so problematic that it is hardly worthwhile to quote it here, its main intent appears to be
the description of a meditative procedure, which involves the imagination of Śiva as having
non-existence as support, resulting in the obtainment of the plain of non-existence (abhā-
vaṃpadam). Similarly, in Niśvāsanaya 4.17b the yogin is exhorted to ‘meditate constantly
upon non-existence’ abhāvam bhāvayet sadā.


--- PAGE 607 ---
588
iii Doctrine
natural, for it is plain that [life] is transitory.78
A similar view is found in the Kakavin Sumanasāntaka 103.1c: ‘[Among]
those who have become incarnated beings from the non-being, there is none
who is like your majesty’ saṅdadi janma sakeṅtaya taya kadi rakryan. See
also Sārasamuccaya 382.4: ‘in this way are the entities which exist: it is sure
that they will end in non-existence only’ maṅkana taṅvastu hana / niyata
makāvasānaṅtayā juga ya. A somewhat different standpoint emerges from
śloka 494 and exegesis, referring to one’s dead relatives:
Tey have fallen from out of the invisible and again they are gone into
the invisible. Tey do not belong to you, you do not belong to them.
What is [the use of] lamenting about it?
Tey have come from the non-being, and again they go back to the non-
being. In short: do not regard them as your own [property]; they have noth-
ing to do with you. Tis being so, what could one possibly say? What could
one possibly do?79
Tere is no indication that the above śloka from the Mahābhārata speciﬁ-
cally represents a materialist standpoint; it is more likely that it conveys a
sort of mainstream (laukika) view, which could sound acceptable to the or-
thodox Brahmanic world-view insofar as it is not abhāva ‘non-being’ that is
spoken of but adarśana ‘the invisible’. Why the Old Javanese commentator
glossed the latter term as tayā, which is usually used as a synonym of abhāva
or asat to indicate ‘non-being’ or ‘non-existence’,80 cries for an explanation.
A possibility is to assume that the Old Javanese gloss is not the result
of the commentator’s carelessness but it reﬂects the Indic usage of glossing
adarśana ‘invisible’ as asat, lit. ‘non-existent’. For instance, it has been argued
by Oertel (1938–39) that in Vedic prose the word asat must be understood
not in the sense of non-existent but rather in the sense of ‘formless, without
distinct shape’; ‘invisible to the senses’ (as an epithet of antarikṣa), ‘without
78.
Smaradahana 19.15–17: taya mūla nikiṅhaneṅtriloka / sakarәṅbhāva muvah mareṅ
abhāva / ndya ta mārga nikiṅhurip katṛṣṇan / tuhu yāvat kṛtakān katon anitya //
79.
Sārasamuccaya 494 (śloka from Mahābhārata 12.168.17):
adarśanād āpatitāḥpunaś cādarśanaṃgatāḥ/
na te tava na teṣāṃtvaṃkā tatra paridevanā //
tәka sakeṅtaya marika / mvah ta ya mulih riṅtaya / saṅkṣipta / tan akunta ika / ika tan sapa
lavan kita / an maṅkana / apa tojara / apa polaha / • tәka ] em. ; kәta Ed.
80.
Cf., e.g., Sārasamuccaya 502a, rendering bhavābhavau as hana lavan tayā.


--- PAGE 608 ---
Wrong Knowledge
589
marks’ (alakṣaṇa). Tat author (p. 320), on the basis of several passages of
the Vedas and the Brāhmaṇas, excluded the possibility that in the Brahmanic
cosmogony asat meant non-existence, except in the following passage of the
Chāndogyopaniṣad, which ‘expressly objects to the idea of ‘‘some’’ that the
existent (sat) could be derived from the non-existent (asat)’ (trans. Oliv-
elle 1998:247):
‘In the beginning, son, this world was simply what is existent—one only,
without a second. Now, on this point some do say: ‘‘In the beginning this
world was simply what is nonexistent—one only, without a second. And
from what is nonexistent was born what is existent’’. But, son, how can that
possibly be?’ he continued. ‘How can what is existent be born from what is
nonexistent? On the contrary, son, in the beginning this world was simply
what is existent—one only, without a second’.81
Te passage is usually referred to by Śaṅkara in his commentaries (e.g., ad
Taittirīyopaniṣad 2.6.5) as an example to dispel an opponent’s objection point-
ing at the absurdity of the view that non-existence is the origin of the existent,
which is found in connection with other Upaniṣadic passages in which that
idea would seem to be implied.82 Śaṅkara, besides citing the above passage,
replies that asat must be interpreted in the sense of unmanifest, inaccessible
to name and form—which are characteristics of the brahman.83
81.
Chāndogyopaniṣad 6.2.1–2: sad eva somyedam agra āsīd ekam evādvitīyaṃ, tad
dhaika āhur: asad evedam agra āsīd ekam evādvitīyaṃ, tasmād asataḥsad ajāyateti kutas
tu khalu somyaivaṃsyād iti hovāca katham asataḥsaj jāyeta, sat tv eva somyedam agra āsīd
ekam evādvitīyam.
82.
Cf., e.g. Taittirīyāraṇyaka 8.7.1 (=Taittirīyopaniṣad 2.7.1): asad vā idam agra āsīt tato
vai sad ajāyata; Chāndogyopaniṣad 3.19.1: ‘Tis world was non-existing in origin; it is from
it that the existent was born’ asad evedam agra āsīt tad sad āsīt / tato vai sad ajāyata. Cf. also
the famous Ṛgveda 10.72.2–3: asataḥsad ajāyata.
83.
Śaṅkara’s interpretation, therefore, appears to be along the lines of that advanced by
Oertel on the basis of other Upaniṣadic passages understanding the term asat in the sense
of ‘unmanifest’. Tis state of affairs ﬁnds a remarkable parallelism in the gloss of adarśana as
tayā provided by the Sārasamuccaya. Tat such an interpretation may be implied in other
Old Javanese texts besides the Sārasamuccaya is suggested by the following passages: Saṅ
HyaṅKamahāyānikan p. 65 lines 20–21, containing a ‘praise’ of tayā as an aspect of Akṣob-
hya: ikaṅtayasvabhāva, ya ākāśa ṅaranya ‘What has the nature of non-existence is that
which is called atmosphere’; Bhuvanakośa śloka 2.16, characterizing Śiva as omnipervasive
and subtle (sarvagataḥsūkṣmaḥ), encompassing the beings as the atmosphere (bhūtānāṃ
antarikṣavat) and commentary thereof, which explains the latter metaphor as ‘He is like
the space, not being grasped by the mind-stuff and the senses’ kady aṅgān iṅākāśa sira, tan


--- PAGE 609 ---
590
iii Doctrine
Now, do the ‘some’ mentioned by the Chāndogyopaniṣad refer to the ma-
terialists? If so, it would be possible to identify their views with those of the
nihilist pūrvapakṣins in philosophical Tattvas, where the term taya seems to
be used in the technical way of ‘non-existence’. Echoes of this standpoint
can be detected in rare Sanskrit textual passages. Te earliest passage doc-
umenting nihilist views is perhaps Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 1.2, which refers to
the various views of some brahmavādins according to whom the origin of
the universe is to be sought in, respectively, time (kāla), nature or inherent
efﬁcacy (svabhāva), fate (niyati), chance (yadṛcchā),84 elements (bhūtāni),
the womb (yoni) or the spirit (puruṣa).85 A similar list mentioning kāla, sva-
bhāva, niyati and yadṛcchā as the causes of the universe is found in one of the
earliest Śaiva sources, i.e. the Guhyasūtra of the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā, 7.59–
68. A more analytic, and yet early, account is that of the Yuktidīpikā, which
criticizes the theories postulating, respectively, the atoms (paramāṇu), spirit,
Lord (īśvara), karma, destiny (daiva), nature, time, chance and non-existence
(abhāva) as the origin of the universe (cf. Chemparathy 1965:122). Te
refutation of the last item of the list is only brieﬂy taken up by the commen-
tator, a fact suggesting that its upholders must have been held in low esteem
and that the argument itself somewhat appeared as self-defeating. Te pas-
sage runs as follows:
Now also non-being is [shown to be] not the cause [of the universe], be-
cause evolution etc. is observed. Indeed it is not admissible that the evolu-
tion of products comes from it, and therefore logical succession [is] also [not
admissible], because the difference between what possesses individual exis-
tence and what does not possess it is beyond birth. And further, no powers
[arise], because of the non-existence of that. Tere is no advantage, because
of instability. Tere is no distinction, because of the lack of individual exis-
kagṛhīta de niṅmanah mvaṅindriya. Te Old Javanese passages appear to stand in parallel
with the Brāhmaṇa fragments quoted by Oertel (1938–39:317), which imply the meaning
of asat as ‘unaccessible to the senses’ and synonym of antarikṣa, deﬁned as a sort of ‘void’,
hollow and without form.
84.
Both svabhāva and yadṛcchā represent the view of the materialists, according to whom
an event, like creation, may happen by itself, without the need of positing a cause or creator.
On nirnimitta applied to the universe, cf. Dharma Pātañjala 202.7–10, 332.16–334.19, and
above, p. 581.
85.
Cf. also other early textual passages, e.g. Mahābhārata 16.9.33: kālamūlam idaṃsar-
vaṃjagadbījaṃdhanañjaya / kāla eva samādatte punar eva yadṛcchayā //; Buddhacarita
9.52–63, mentioning kāla, niyati, svabhāva, yadṛcchā, ātman and īśvara.


--- PAGE 610 ---
Wrong Knowledge
591
tence.86
In Nyāyavārtika 4.1.14 we ﬁnd the examination of the theory that the things
of the world are produced out of the void. Giving as an example the de-
struction of the seed and appearance of the sprout, the commentator argues
that, if mere negation were the cause of the production of the sprout, then
anything would be produced out of anything and everything. In 4.1.25 the
same text refers to some who hold that the universe is non-eternal, for ev-
erything is produced and destroyed: that is, nothing exists before the pro-
duction nor afer the destruction. Hence, everything is non-eternal.87 Tis
view has been traditionally ascribed to Buddhists rather than Lokāyatas. For
example, the view of ‘some’ denying the existence of unevolved matter as the
cause of the universe, referred to by Vācaspatimiśra’s Sāṅkhyatattvakaumudī
on Sāṅkhyakārikā 8, according to which passage the existent emanates from
the non-existent (tathā hi kecid pradāhuḥasataḥsat jāyate iti) has been in-
terpreted as a Buddhist position. Tis might, however, not necessarily be the
case, for such a position can also be ascribed to the materialists.88 According
to Chattopadhyaya (1990:447–448) this view can be referred to as anu-
pakyotpādavāda or an event happening from something which is not real,
which in Udayana’s Nyāyakusumañjali is referred to as one of the ﬁve forms
of ākasmikatvavāda upheld by the materialists. According to Chattopad-
hyaya, that ‘is evidently some form of Śūnyavāda in which a product is said
to appear from a pre-existing Void or Nothing. In this view of causality, the
reality of both upādāna and nimitta is denied’. Since the view reported by
Udayana is not traced in the extant Lokāyata sources, we may suppose that
either the author had ﬁrst-hand knowledge of texts that are lost to us, or he
drew this illustration from another (also lost) secondary source.
One last piece of evidence pointing to the materialist provenance of such
a view is constituted by the Lokāyata fragment (comm. 16) of Bhaṭṭa Udbha-
ṭa, a pre-8th century ﬁgure who commented upon the (lost) Cārvākasūtra in
86.
Yuktidīpikā on Sāṅkhyakārikā 15d (p. 162.8–11): abhāvo ’py akāraṇam / parimāṇā-
didarśanāt / na hi tata utpannānāṃparimāṇam upapadyata ity ato nāpy anvayaḥsāt-
makanirātmakayor atyantajātibhedāt / nāpi śaktis tadabhāvāt / nopakāro ’navasthānāt / na
vibhāgo nirātmakatvāt /.
87.
I refer to this Sanskrit passage again below, p. 595, in relation with the materialist
denial of causality found in the Dharma Pātañjala.
88.
Te sentence quoted by Vācaspatimiśra is indeed similar to that found in the Vedic
sources cited above, fn. 82.


--- PAGE 611 ---
592
iii Doctrine
a manner relatively close to Nyāya doctrine (cf. Bhattacharya 2002:624).
According to this commentator,
Te word iti (at the end of the list in the sūtra illustrating the existing princi-
ples admitted by the materialists, i.e. the ﬁve elements) does not denote the
end, [but] it is illustrative. Tere are other principles such as consciousness,
sound, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort, impression and others. Tere
are also prior non-existence of the earth, etc., posterior non-existence, the
mutual difference which are quite apparent and distinct (from the princi-
ples, viz., earth, etc.).89
It is possible that the prior and posterior non-existence of the principles
(pṛthivyādiprākpradhvaṃsa) may refer to a materialist (either genuine or
distorted) ontological position.
Te frequent discussion of the views about the origination from and the
dissolution into the non-existence of the universe ascribed to the pūrva-
pakṣin in Tattvas suggests that this philosophical position was considered
controversial by the ancient Śaiva authors. Te appearance of echoes of such
views in Old Javanese sources belonging to other literary genres conﬁrms
that such positions were known also in the mainstream.
Denying
Causation
It is known that certain materialist positions not only
denied the view that the Lord was the cause of the uni-
verse, but went as far as denying the process of causality
altogether. To the opponent’s view reported in Dharma
Pātañjala 236.13–16 denying the existence of the fruits of karma on account
of their non-perceptibility, the Lord replies that inference is a ﬁtting means of
knowledge to establish them (236.16–238.3). Having defended the validity
of inference, the Lord goes on stating that, in order to account for the vari-
ety of the characteristics of the incarnated beings, either humans or animals,
and of the varieties of pleasures and suffering they experience, the existence
of karma has to be necessarily admitted. Te opponent replies thus:
Tose ones happen to be just fortunate or unfortunate. And as for the fact
DhPāt
240.3–4
that the incarnated beings are not similar, they are [so] just accidentally (ka-
hadaṅadaṅjuga)’.
89.
Fragment Comm. 16, from Vādidevasūri’s Syādvādaratnākara (trans. Bhattacha-
rya 2002:607): iti śabdaḥpradarśanaparo na punaḥsamāptivacanaś caitanyaśabdasu-
khaduḥkhecchādveṣaprayatnasaṃskārāṇām tattvāntaratvāt pṛthivyādiprākpradhvaṃsāpe-
kṣānyonyābhāvānāṃcātyantaprakaṭatvād uktatvavilakṣaṇatvāc ceti (I have corrected the
printing error °pradhavmṣā° to °pradhvaṃsā°).


--- PAGE 612 ---
Wrong Knowledge
593
Te Lord points out that, if the causal process of karma is challenged, it may
well be the case that a man would eat without satisfaction, while another one
is satiated without having eaten; paddy may—just by chance—give millet as
crop, and vice-versa.90 Te absurd corollary of this state of affairs will be a
world dominated by casual rather than causal laws:
In this way the whole world will transform, if one subscribes to the view of
DhPāt
240.8–12
accidentality, [and] if [the view of the human beings being randomly] for-
tunate or unfortunate is subscribed to. If so, it may be possible for a thing to
come into existence without a cause, like a hermaphrodite who may become
pregnant and give birth to a child, like extracting milk out of excrements.91
If one subscribes to the doctrine of the [randomly] being fortunate or un-
fortunate, the whole world will transform likewise. By no means any certain
fact come about; that is the reason why [that which is] subscribed to by the
opponent is not right.
Te concept of ‘accidentality’ is conveyed in the text by the expression ka-
hadaṅadaṅ.92 Tis appears to occur in the passage as a technical term echo-
ing, or even literally translating, the Sanskrit kādācitkatva ‘occasionalness’,
ākasmika ‘causeless, unforeseen, unexpected, sudden, accidental, casual’ and
yadṛcchā ‘spontaneous, accidental, unexpected’. Tese expressions occur in
contexts of logical debates on causation, where the svabhāvavādins maintain
that the occasionalness of an event is explained as not being determined by
any cause but by its own nature (Bhattacharya 1961:8–9). Te standard
90.
A similar illustration taking seeds of different species as example is found in several
Sanskrit sources, for instance the commentaries of Gauḍapāda and Paramārtha ad Sāṅkhya-
kārikā 9, mentioning barley-seeds and paddy seeds (the latter only in Gauḍapāda); cf. also
the Pāli Milindapañha 3.4.65–67, explaining the diverse fortunes of the incarnated beings
with the example of different seeds giving rise to different plants—none of which, however,
exactly corresponds to the example given in the Dharma Pātañjala.
91.
Te simile of the eunuch begetting children appears to be a masculinized version
of the one, commonly found in Sanskrit Brahmanical and Buddhist sources, of a sterile
woman’s son. Tat cow-dung is made of milk (gomayapāyasīyanyāya) is another common
metaphor denoting an absurd statement (cf. Yogasūtrabhāṣya and Yogavārtika 1.31; Sarva-
darśanasaṅgraha, Bauddhadarśana 237). A comparable simile is found in Rāmāyaṇa Ka-
kavin 8.124a, where the squeezing milk out of sand (susun pamә¯ hәnī) is used to illustrate
an impossible eventuality. Cf. Gauḍapāda and Paramārtha on Sāṅkhyakārikā 9, mentioning
the (impossible) example of the production of oil from sand (Takakusu 1904:14).
92.
Unattested as such in OJED, but cf. ibidem s.v. haḍaṅ(aṅhadaṅ= hadaṅ) ‘to lie (stand)
ready, stand by, lie in wait (for)’, etc.; kahaḍaṅ‘just, just then, it just happened that’ (compare
with modern Indonesian kadang-kadang ‘occasionally’).


--- PAGE 613 ---
594
iii Doctrine
denomination for the doctrine of negation of causal origination is yadṛc-
chāvāda, deﬁned by Śaṅkara in his commentary to Śvetāśvataropaniṣad 1.2
as ākasmikaprāptiḥor ‘coincidence’, a doctrine upholding that any regular-
ity in experience and birth is due to mere chance. In an early Brahmanical
source such as the Yuktidīpikā on Sāṅkhyakārikā 15d (p. 162.4–7) we ﬁnd
a refutation of the pūrvapakṣin accounting of yadṛcchāvāda as the cause of
the universe (and of avyakta in the speciﬁc context). Tese are likely to be
the same as the heretics called adhiccasamuppannikas ‘fortuitous originists’
in Pāli Buddhist canonical texts, who held that the Soul and the world came
into being without a cause.93 Te deniers of the theory of causality known as
yadṛcchāvādins at a certain time came to be named also svabhāvavādins in
Buddhist, Sāṅkhya, Nyāya and Vedānta sources (Bhattacharya 1961:84–
85). Although the svabhāvavādins hold a somewhat different position, name-
ly that each existing thing originates and undergoes transformation accord-
ing to its own intrinsic nature only, it is ofen difﬁcult to distinguish between
them and those who adhere to yadṛcchāvāda. As a matter of fact, both views
have come to represent a Lokāyata standpoint regarding the theory of causal-
ity.94 It is most likely the materialists that Guṇaratna had in mind when
commenting on the maṅgala verses of Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya:
According to the views of the yadṛcchāvādins, the word yadṛcchā means the
obtainment of objects without any prior deliberation. But, then, who are
these yadṛcchāvādins? Te answer is as follows. Te yadṛcchāvādins are
those who, in this world, do not admit to any ﬁxed cause-effect relation in
respect to objects, but (hold such a relation to be due to) accidentality.95
93.
Cf. Brahmajālasutta 1.30.34; Milindapañha 1.443. adhicca = fortuitous, opposed to a-
bhiṇha = habitual, Milindapañha 1.442, or paticca = having a cause. Te same nihilist view
as adumbrated in association with the Lokāyatas is found in the statement uttered by the
materialist Sañjaya in Sāmaññaphalasutta 2.23: ‘and if you ask me whether or not beings
are produced spontaneously […], whether there is the ripening of the fruits of good and bad
actions’ atthi ca natthi ca sattā opapātikā ’ti iti ce maṃpucchasi […] atthi sukaṭadukkaṭānaṃ
kammānaṃphalaṃvipāko.
94.
Cf., for instance, Mādhava’s mention of the svabhāvavādins in the Cārvāka section of
the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha (104–108), and, among the Śaiva sources, Rāmakaṇṭha’s anvaya
to Mokṣakārikā 11, where the opponent propounding svabhāvavāda is introduced by the
words lokāyatabhūmikayā paraḥ‘another [opponent] who takes the part of a materialist’
(the preceding verse 10 criticizes the view of ākasmikatva).
95.
Tarkarahasyadīpikā 25.4–8: yadṛcchāvādināṃmate / yadṛcchā hy anabhisaṃdhipūr-
vikārthaprāptiḥ// atha ke te yadṛcchāvādinaḥ/ ucyate / iha ye bhāvānāṃsaṃtānāpekṣayā
na pratiniyataṃkāryakāraṇabhāvam icchanti kiṃtu yadṛcchayā te yadṛcchāvādinaḥ/.


--- PAGE 614 ---
Wrong Knowledge
595
Having illustrated this view through a set of examples not found in any Old
Javanese sources, Guṇaratna concludes by citing a verse explaining that ‘the
variety of pleasures and suffering experienced by people come about only
unexpectedly’ atarkitopasthitam eva sarvaṃcitraṃjanānāṃsukhaduḥkha-
jātam.96
It is to the views of the Lokāyata that Nyāyasūtra 4.1.19–24 most proba-
bly refers when exposing the pūrvapakṣin’s nirnimittavāda, i.e. the doctrine
of the absence of cause. Tere we ﬁnd the view that the world, containing
beings of particular shapes, is the result of chance only, which goes against
the siddhānta previously put forward in 3.2.60, namely that the production
of the body is due to the inﬂuence of previous deeds. It might therefore be
argued that nirnimittavāda is ultimately a form of svabhāvavāda.
Denying Karma
Judging from the widespread echoes found in both Old
Javanese and Sanskrit sources, the negation of karma
and its fruits must have been a fundamental tenet of the
materialist school, and one that is a direct corollary of their negation of enti-
ties inaccessible to direct perception. Te Sārasamuccaya, for example, de-
votes several ślokas to the deﬁnition of the Nāstikas in these terms, elab-
orating on this theme in the Old Javanese exegesis even when it was not
touched upon in the Sanskrit. For instance, the word nāstikaṃin śloka 120
is commented upon in the following terms: ‘the Nāstika does not recog-
nize the existence of the fruits of good and bad karma, doing what is for-
bidden by the sacred scriptures’ vvaṅnāstika / tan pamituhu ri hana niṅ
śubhāśubhakarmaphala / umambah ikaṅsenuhutakәn saṅhyaṅāgama; sim-
ilarly, śloka 116a97 glosses nāstikyaṃvedanindā as ‘not accepting the exis-
96.
A similar, although by no means identical, example mentioning the fruit of people
involved in service, agriculture, etc. (the ādi presumably standing for the people involved
in commerce) is found in the Nyāyakumudacandra by Prabhācandra, who answers to the
materialist’s challenge to the Nyāya concept of the ‘invisible’ adṛṣṭa as an explanation of the
variety of the fortunes and characteristics of the incarnated beings: ‘As a result, without
adṛṣṭa, the variety of pleasure, pain, etc., or the variety of body, etc., cannot be logically
explained. Otherwise how is it that out of so many people engaged in service, agriculture,
etc., who put in the same amount of effort, or who are devoted in the same degree, only
some achieve results while others fail to do so?’ (transl. in Chattopadhyaya 1990:330).
Unlike in the Dharma Pātañjala, where the different qualities of the results are associated
with different classes of workers, the point here is rather about the different quantity of
results obtained by each of them.
97.
Corresponding to Mahābhārata Citraśālā ed., 13.104.36 (cf. Suppl. 14 to the critical
edition, 4.2537).


--- PAGE 615 ---
596
iii Doctrine
tence of the other-world and of the fruits of good and bad karma, despis-
ing the holy Veda’ tan pamituhu ri hana niṅparaloka / lavan phala niṅśub-
hāśubhakarma / kanindān saṅhyaṅveda. Te words of the materialists are
reported in 117.1–4: ‘Karma does not98 exist, along with everything that
is prohibited by the masters. Te masters are just dishonest. Te revealed
scriptures are false about the existence of heaven and hell. […] Te good and
bad karma bears no fruits’ siṅhana ikaṅkarma senuhutakәn saṅpaṇḍita /
lәñoka pva rakva saṅpaṇḍita / advā saṅhyaṅāgama / ri hana niṅsvarga-
naraka / […] tan paphala ikaṅśubhāśubhakarma.99
Te Dharma Pātañjala devotes a section (234.13–236.12) to the explana-
tion of the mechanism of karma, whose fruits may come into effect within
one’s own lifespan or, if they are too numerous, in another lifetime. Te
Lord illustrates this causal process by means of the following example: the
actions of farmers, servants and traders will produce, respectively, paddy, a
land-grant and a retribution as their fruit, each one different according to
its own characteristics. As long as there are fruits to be experienced by the
Soul, life exists; when the whole karmic lot attached to the Soul has been ex-
perienced, death arises—as when a piece of wood is completely burnt by ﬁre.
Te opponent questions the validity of such a state of affairs in the following
terms:
‘How is it possible that the fruits of karma themselves bring into existence
DhPāt
236.13–16
life? And furthermore, they are surely not the cause of pleasure and pain
experienced by human beings. Te reason for this being the case is that the
fruits of karma are not seen in the incarnated beings. Te reason why the
so-called fruits of karma do not exist is that they are not proved’.
Here too, the materialist’s objection revolves around perceptibility to the
senses as the only valid criterion to admit the existence of a given entity.
Te Lord, in reply, details the respective domains of the three valid means of
knowledge, specifying that inference is capable of ascertaining entities which
are subtle, hence invisible to human sight. As a way to dispel the opponent’s
criticism, He provides the example of the course of the sun, which in San-
skrit sources illustrates the inference of the sāmānyatodṛṣṭa kind (cf. above,
pp. 564–570). Similarly sceptic statements about the existence of actions and
98.
Te word siṅis likely to be a Balinism here: cf. BED (447 s.v. sing 1) ‘not’ and contrast
OJED (1775 s.v. siṅ) ‘whoever, whatever’.
99.
Cf. also śloka 122, quoted below, p. 612.


--- PAGE 616 ---
Wrong Knowledge
597
their fruits are reported in the concise materialist manifesto that is 332.16–
334.3 (quoted above p. 571). Tere the opponent seems to refute the karmic
bearing of actions, insofar as concepts such as the Summum Bonum and re-
lease are equated to non-existence, and concludes : ‘What is the reason of
doubting about all the acts? What is the reason of causing suffering [to one-
self]? Let there be the enjoyment of the objects of pleasure!’ ndya ta mataṅ-
nyan saṅśaya riṅulah kabeh, apa mataṅnyan pamuhāra lāra, kabhuktya niṅ
viṣaya (334.1–2). While the refutation of karma is a widespread theme in
the stock of Lokāyata fragments retrieved from Sanskrit literature, the (ap-
parently ironical) mention of the Holy Non-Existence (saṅhyaṅtayā) as the
origin of human actions and their ultimate end is original. Also striking is
the argument that the effect of actions do not exist as a consequence of there
not being a factual existence of all the actions. An analogous view may be
extrapolated from another passage in the text:
Te Summum Bonum is non-existence: this is the reason why all the actions
DhPāt
198.1–9
will not have any consequence, for this body comes [to exist from nothing]
and goes away [into nothing].100 One who is said to do good deeds, he is
wrong. Who sees the fruits of doing good deeds? […] Likewise [it is wrong
that] one who does bad deeds is regarded to be a sinner. […] Tis is the
reason why your acts should aim at pleasing yourself, for in any case your
acts are with regard to the Holy Non-Existence.
Te point seems to be that any invisible entities that are held by Brahman-
ical schools to be associated with the body, such as the fruits of good and
bad actions, will cease to exist as soon as the body will cease to exist. Te
Sanskrit compound yātāyāta ‘come and passed by’ seems to express the ma-
terialist view that the body just comes to exist from nothing and, when he
dies, disappears into nothing. In the last lines of the passage the point seems
to be that, since non-existence is the Summum Bonum and the origin and
end of creatures, it is useless to do good actions, for neither punishment nor
reward can be distributed by a supreme entity that is non-existing.101
100.
For an alternative interpretation of this clause, cf. p. 198, fn. 7.
101.
A similar point, i.e. that merit and demerit in the Soul need an efﬁcient cause or
‘supervisor’, is treated in an untraced passage quoted in Nyāyavārtika 4.1.21, where the Tāt-
pārya speaks of it as smṛti: ‘Te ignorant creature, not master of his own pleasure and pain,
may go to heaven or to the nethermost hole, only as he is urged by God’ (also quoted in Ka-
malaśila’s Tattvasaṅgrahapañjikā 46) ajñaḥjantuḥanīśaḥayam ātmanaḥsukhaduḥkhayoḥ/
īśvarapreritaḥgacchet svargam vā svabhram eva vā //.


--- PAGE 617 ---
598
iii Doctrine
Te denial of the existence of the fruits of actions is found in several of
the Sanskrit verses attributed to the Lokāyatas, e.g. naiva varṇāśramādīnāṃ
kriyāś ca phaladāyikāḥ‘nor do the actions of the four castes, orders, etc.,
produce any real effect’;102 dharmo na kāryaḥ‘meritorious action is not to
be performed’.103 A verse in the Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya echoes the exposition
in the above passages of the Dharma Pātañjala insofar as it puts on the same
consequential level the negation of the fruits of actions and their positive or
negative connotation and the negation of God and liberation:
Te Lokāyata say thus. Tere is neither god nor liberation. Merit
and demerit also do not exist. Nor is there any fruit of virtue and
vice.104
[…] So, also, there is no ﬁnal bliss, i.e. there is no liberation. Moreover, merit
and demerit, i.e. the so-called dyad of merit and demerit, do not exist, and
virtue and vice [too] are absolutely non-existent. Further, there is absolutely
no fruit of virtue and vice, such as heaven, hell, etc. If merit and demerit are
non-existent, wherefrom, indeed, can their fruit be produced?105
Te striking similarity between these Sanskrit passages and the Old Javanese
ones suggests that the Archipelago sources drew either on Sanskrit Lokāyata
materials or other Brahmanical works dealing with Lokāyata positions to
characterize the opponent’s views on karma.
102.
Śloka 1cd, cf. Bhattacharya (2002:609, 616).
103.
Fragment v.1, cf. Bhattacharya (2002:605, 613).
104.
Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya 80: lokāyatā vadanty evaṃnāsti jīvo na nirvṛtiḥ/ dharmādhar-
mau na vidyate na phalaṃpuṇyapāpayoḥ// Tat this fragment was remarkably early and
widespread is suggested by the fact that we ﬁnd it, in a slightly different shape, in the Bud-
dhist Pāyāsi Suttanta 3, where the skeptic Kumāra Kassapa maintains that ‘there is no Other-
world; there is no being born spontaneously (viz. no divine being and no inhabitant of hell);
there is no maturation for the fruits of good or bad deeds’ iti pi n’atthi paraloko, n’atthi sattā
opapātikā, n’atthi sukaṭadukkaṭānaṃkammānaṃphalaṃvipāko ti; this in its turn echoes
the exposition of Ajita Kesakambala known from Sāmanññaphalasutta 2.23 (quoted below,
p. 605).
105.
Guṇaratna’s Tarkarahasyadīpikā 557 (p. 452): tathā na nirvṛtir mokṣo nāstīty arthaḥ/
anyac ca dharmaś cādharmaś ca dharmādharmau na vidyate puṇyapāpo sarvathā na sta
ity arthaḥ/ na caiva puṇyapāpayoḥphalaṃsvarganarakādirūpam asti, dharmādharmayor
abhāve kutastyaṃtatphalam iti bhāvaḥ//.


--- PAGE 618 ---
Wrong Knowledge
599
Denying Heaven
and Hell
Te negation of karmic bearing of human actions as well
as the causality of the mechanism of karmic retribution
propounded by the opponent leads to the corollary that
neither reward nor punishment exist for human beings in the aferworld.
Tis conclusion is found in the following passage of Dharma Pātañjala, in
which a materialist negates the existence of heaven and hell on account of
their being beyond direct perception:
Who sees the fruits of doing good deeds? Who [has come] from heaven?106
DhPāt
198.2–8
Who knows about the abode of the gods by means of direct perception?’ So
he says. ‘His knowledge of the abode of the gods, and of the cause of [going
to] heaven, is by no means based on direct perception. Tis is the reason
why all of that is wrong. Likewise [it is wrong that] one who does bad deeds
is regarded to be a sinner. Who [has come] from hell?—whose knowledge
of the Great Raurava[-hell] was based on evidence? [And who knows] the
reason why the man who does bad is a sinner? Tere is no direct evidence
whatsoever for one’s knowledge of hell.
Te Vṛhaspatitattva conveys substantially the same ideas, in a slightly dif-
ferent wording, while elaborating on the characteristics of the intellect char-
acterized by Unrighteousness (adharma), one of the eight buddhibhāvas:
Unrighteousness means the intellect that does not possess dharma. Its though-
ts are: ‘Who knows about heaven? Who [has come] from hell? It is said that
one who does bad is marked out for hell107 while one who does good attains
heaven. Tese are the words of thieves—ﬁe upon them! Te men of reli-
gion who teaches these [views] are people who wish for gifs.108 Te cause
of their undertaking the career of religious people is their fear of the imme-
diate repayment [that they owe to people whom they have robbed].109 Te
106.
An alternative translation, following the interpretation of saṅka as ‘cause’ instead of
‘from’, may be: ‘Who [sees] the cause of [going to] heaven?
107.
For this meaning of pāpa (lit. ‘sin’), cf. OJED (1271) and above, p. 198 fn. 7. Compare
the similar usage of naraka ‘hell’ in the sense of ‘one destined to hell’, already attested in the
Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin (8.113, 10.70).
108.
In my translation I render puṇya ‘merit’ as ‘gif’ on account of what seems to me a
sarcastic use of the term in the present context, for the very concept of ‘meritorious deed’
cannot be accepted by a materialist. Conversely, the Lokāyata Sanskrit fragments depicting
the venial and greedy nature of cunning religious people are common.
109.
Te form takәr hopan, attested only in the present passage, is commented on by OJED
1903 as follows: ‘forced immediate repayment? cf. Bal. nakәr (kb[n]w): to demand imme-


--- PAGE 619 ---
600
iii Doctrine
views of the sacred teachings are without evidence, for what they teach is
not seen’.110
Te Dharma Pātañjala deﬁnes the item Unrighteousness as the attitude of
one who denies the karmic results of meritorious deeds:
Unrighteousness means: the mind that considers righteousness as non-ex-
DhPāt
244.9–12
istent. It thinks: ‘Te gifs of the liberal men, to organize food-feasts, to give
away as alms rice and wealth [until] all of one’s possessions are ﬁnished, it
is not true that have heaven as result. Likewise, building temples, erecting
liṅgas and performing sacriﬁces [is fruitless]’.
Echoes of the same nihilistic standpoint are found in the Tattvajñāna, where
the opponent says: ‘How could it be logically admissible to [say that] sattva,
rajas and tamas are what causes one to become [incarnated], revolving back
and forth, in heaven, hell, as a human being or as an animal?’111 Compare
the following statement of the Sārasamuccaya: ‘Te other world has never
been seen by means of direct perception […] the knowledge of the learned
about the existence of the other world, of heaven and hell is not based on
direct perception’.112
Te Old Javanese passages quoted above are comparable to similar ones
belonging to the stock of materialist quotes from Sanskrit literature. For
instance, as reported in the Lokāyata verse 1ab (Bhattacharya 2002:609,
616) the materialists maintain that ‘there is no heaven, no ﬁnal liberation,
nor any soul in another world’ na svargo nāpavargo vā naivātmā pāralauki-
kaḥ. Maṇibhadra’s commentary ad Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya 81, a verse stating
diate repayment from a person, to force the fulﬁllment of a promise. Vṛh 28.10: (people who
do not observe dharma) […] (the viku’s rob the people and have invented heaven not to be
forced to repay immediately)’. For the same accusation against the Brahmans in Sanskrit
Lokāyata quotes, cf. below, p. 615.
110.
Vṛhaspatitattva 28.6–11: adharma ṅaranya ikaṅbuddhi kinatayan de niṅdharma /
liṅnya / syapa karih vruh riṅsvarga ṅaranya / [syapa saṅkanya /] syapa saṅka niṅnaraka /
pāpa magave hala / kasvargan rakva magave hayu / ḍә¯h adoh ika vuvus niṅmaliṅ/ vvaṅma-
harәp puṇyan ana saṅviku majarakәn ikāna / ri vәdinya riṅtakәr hopan hetunyān lumakva
viku / ika tatan byakta vuvus niṅaji / apan tan katon vinarahakәn / • [syapa saṅkanya /] ]
only in B against all mss. (spurious?).
111.
Tattvajñāna 16.1–2: mapa kari yukti nikaṅsattva rajah tamah / an patәmahtәmahan
maputәra riṅsvarga naraka mānuṣa triyak //.
112.
Sārasamuccaya 118a and commentary: na dṛṣṭapūrvaṃpratyakṣaṃparalokaṃ…
tan pratyakṣa kәta paṅavruh saṃpaṇḍita ri hana niṅparaloka / svarganaraka /.


--- PAGE 620 ---
Wrong Knowledge
601
that ‘this world consists of only as much as is within the scope of the senses’,
comments:
[…] However, others have spoken of heaven, hell, etc., which can be achiev-
ed by virtue and vice. Tey are also unproved on the same ground that they
can never be perceived.113
Te Śaiva author Kumāradeva introduces an analogous materialist view while
commenting on verse 72 of the Tattvaprakāśa:
Certainly the so-called liberation is not the aim of human life, and also the
so-called heaven, for there is no right means of knowledge to ascertain their
real existence. […] Terefore, only direct perception is the right means of
knowledge, and it does not recognize heaven and hell.114
Te main point in the materialist’s argumentation in the Old Javanese pas-
sages, i.e. that nobody has come back from heaven or hell to relate his expe-
rience as based on direct perception,115 ﬁnds a counterpart in the Cārvāka
fragments iv.1–2: ‘Tere is no other-world, for there is no means of knowl-
edge for determining the other-world, and because there is the absence of
any other-worldly being’ paralokasiddhau pramāṇābhāvāt / paralokino ’bhā-
vāt paralokābhāvaḥ.116 Similarly, Guṇaratna in his Tarkarahasyadīpikā on
Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya 81 attributes to a materialist the following words:
113.
Laghuvṛtti p. 74: tathā pare puṇyapāpasādhyaṃsvarganarakādy āhuḥ/ tad apramā-
ṇam pratyakṣābhāvād eva //.
114.
Tattvaprakāśatatpāryadīpikā p. 108: na mokṣākhyaḥpuruṣārtho ’sti, nāpi svargā-
khyaḥ, tayoḥsadbhāve pramāṇābhāvāt […] tasmāt pratyakṣam eva pramāṇam / tac ca
svargāpavargau nāvagamayatīti.
115.
A similar argument is used by an opponent questioning the cosmological account
referred to by the SaṅHyaṅHayu (2.12–16): ‘For it is said that seven are the world below
and above. Who ever came from [the worlds] below, and from [those] above, who knew
[about them] on the basis of factual evidence and not of such kinds of holy scriptures and
stories? Tey are certainly wrong. You should ignore them; do not accept them!’ apan pitu
ikaṅbhuvana i sor ta mvaṅi ruhur ta rakva / syapa ta ya sakeṅsor / mvaṅsakeṅi ruhur anuṅ
vruh byakta / lena sakeṅkalpa ata ya / lavan carita maṅkana / yeka adva rakva manavasta
ṅa / tiṅgalaknanika denta / hayva pinituhu //.
116.
Te word ‘other-worldly being’ has been interpreted by Bhattacharya (2002:605)
as indicating the transmigrating self; however, it is possible to take it, as the Old Javanese
sources seem to do, as referring to the absence of any creature from the other-world. Te
motif of the absence of persons coming back from heaven to report is also found in the
Pāli Pāyāsi Suttanta 12–13 (Dīghanikāya 23), reporting a dialogue that occurred afer the
death of the Buddha between the master Kumāra Kassapa and the evil King Pāyāsi, upholder


--- PAGE 621 ---
602
iii Doctrine
In spite of the fact that no entity capable of travelling to the other world,
distinct from consciousness produced by matter […] is ever apprehended
by perception, [the Brahmanical opponents] claim […] that there are things
like merit and demerit which are the causes of a living being’s pleasure and
pain, heaven and hell which are abodes for the enjoyment of fruits of the
most intense forms of merit and demerit, and liberation which results from
the destruction of virtue and vice.117
Denying Soul
and Liberation
If the retributive force of karma does not exist and the
other world does not exist either, what is, then, the des-
tiny of human beings? Te Lokāyatas say: total annihi-
lation. For, according to that system, the Soul is no sep-
arate entity but it consists, just as the body, of the four elements only. Te
doctrine maintaining that the body is identical with consciousness (bhūta-
caitanyavāda) is a well-known Cārvāka tenet, which is ofen attacked in San-
skrit scholastic texts: cf. the fragments i.2–4 (Bhattacharya 2002:603–604,
612): pṛthivy āpas tejo vāyur iti tattvāni ‘earth, water, ﬁre and air are the prin-
ciples’; tatsamudāye śarīrendriyaviṣayasaṃjñaḥ‘their combination is called
the ‘‘body’’, ‘‘sense’’ and ‘‘object’’ ’; tebhyaś caitanyam ‘consciousness (arises
or is manifested) out of these’.
Deﬁnite echoes of this view are to be found in the Dharma Pātañjala, in
of materialistic doctrines (trans. Rhys Davis, reprinted in Chattopadhyaya 1994:12): ‘If
what those reverent wanderers and brahmins say is true, this, sirs, will be your fate. If these
things should befall you, sirs, come to me and tell me, saying: ‘‘Tere is another world,
there is rebirth not of parents, there is fruit and result of deeds well-done and ill-done. You,
sirs, are for me trustworthy and reliable and what you say you have seen will be even so,
just as if myself had seen it.’’ Tey have consented to do this, saying, ‘‘Very good’’. But they
have neither come themselves, nor dispatched a messenger. Now this, master Kassapa, is
evidence for me that there is neither another world, nor rebirth not by human parents, nor
fruit or result of deeds well done and ill’. A speech of analogous contents is found in the
Jaina version of this story, i.e. the Paesikahāṇayaṃ, 750 (cf. Bollée 2002:106–107, who
also refers to the occurrence of a similar motif in the story of the skeptic teacher Aṣādhya
narrated by the Jaina Nemicandra in his commentary on the Uttarajjhāyāsutta).
117.
Tarkarahasyadīpikā 559 (p. 543): yāvatā ca bhūtodbhūtacaitanyavyatiriktaś […] pari-
kalpyamānaḥparalokayāyī jīvaḥpratyakṣeṇa nānubhūyate, tāvatā jīvasya sukhaduḥkhani-
bandhanau dharmādharmau tatprakṛṣṭaphalabhogabhūmī svarganarakau puṇyapāpakṣay-
otthamokṣasukhaṃcopavarṇyamānāni. Cf. verse 8 in the section on the Cārvākadarśana of
the Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha (1.124–125): ‘If he who departs from the body goes to another
world, how is it that he does not come back again, restless for love of his kindred?’ yadi gac-
chet paraṃlokaṃdehād eṣa vinirgataḥ/ kasmād bhūyo na cāyāti bandhusnehasamākulaḥ//.


--- PAGE 622 ---
Wrong Knowledge
603
a passage where the Lord and the materialist opponent are debating over the
existence of the Summum Bonum:
Te reply of the opponent is as follows: ‘How could it be that the sentient
DhPāt
206.7–8
is the power of the Lord, for the coming together [of elements] of the body
creates awareness (hiḍәp). Tat is designated as sentient’.
Let us compare this somewhat elliptic statement to a similar one in the Vṛ-
haspatitattva:
Tere is another position which has been heard by your son: ‘Life exists be-
cause there is the coming together of [the elements forming] the body. Tat
is what causes it to exist. Te evidence of this is: look at the human be-
ings who suffer, who are injured by weapons or poisoned. Tese are their
sufferings. Teir body is different from the suffering of their body. Tat is
regarded as what causes death. Death means to just dissolve, without any-
thing which is carried along. Tis is the evidence that the body is capable
of making life possible [without postulating a Soul]. Tat is the Summum
Bonum. Anything which lives only suffers, and death is liberation, for it is
complete dissolution without experiencing suffering’. Tese are the state-
ments of another position.118
Te passage adumbrates the concept that the physical aspect of the body only
is capable of making life possible, without the need of postulating a Soul.
Since several points expounded by the opponent recall Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika po-
sitions, one is tempted to identify the ‘other view’ (pakṣa vaneh) exposed by
Vṛhaspati with that school of thought.119 For instance, certain Vaiśeṣikas
denied the existence of the Soul, arguing that the body and consciousness is
the result of the combination of physical elements—a standpoint that clearly
emerges from the beginning of the passage, attributing life to an ensemble of
bodily elements, and explaining that death amounts to complete dissolution
118.
Vṛhaspatitattva 52.14–22: hana ta pakṣa vaneh rinәṅә¯ rānak bhaṭāra / ikaṅhurip
mataṅyan hana papupul nikaṅśarīra / ya ta humaṅun ikān hana / vyaktinya / nyaṅvvaṅ
malara / api tuvi pinәraṅ/ rinacun kunaṅ/ ikaṅkalaranya / bheda ika śarīranya lavan
laranika śarīranya / ya ta magave pati ṅaranya / ikaṅpati ṅaranya hilaṅjuga tar paham-
ban / nahan vyaktanyan śarīra vәnaṅhumaṅun ikaṅhurip / paramārthanya / ikaṅmahurip
ya juga saṅsāra / ikaṅmāti ya mokṣa ṅaranya / apan hilaṅtuhutuhu tan paṅhiḍәp lara /
maṅkana liṅniṅpakṣa vaneh /.
119.
As done by Zieseniss (1958:188–190), who regarded this passage as an exposition of
the Vaiśeṣika pūrvapakṣa.


--- PAGE 623 ---
604
iii Doctrine
(hilaṅjuga), ‘without anything which is carried along’ (tar pahamban). On
the other hand, Vṛhaspati’s statement that ‘their body is different from the
suffering of their body’ bheda ika śarīranya lavan laranika śarīranya seems
to echo a Nyāya position, according to which the existence of the Soul can be
inferred from the fact that consciousness, pleasures and pains do not directly
belong to the body or the senses but to some other unseen substratum. It is
possible that here the author of the Vṛhaspatitattva mixed the two points of
view. Te equation of liberation to complete dissolution—a state devoid of
any experience of pain (and pleasure too)—advocated by Vṛhaspati is a well-
known Vaiśeṣika tenet, along with the consideration of the Soul as insentient
(jaḍa).
Tus, whereas the standpoint of the Dharma Pātañjala, namely that the
coming together of the elements only causes life and its sentient dimension,
which is not separated from the body, reﬂects an exquisitely materialistic
position, the Vṛhaspatitattva appears to present a more nuanced standpoint.
However, that the latter was held in as a low esteem as the materialist position
is suggested by the following statement of the Lord:
Do not teach it in the assembly [of the Gods]! Such a position is shameful.
How far is the limit for the eyes to see? If everything that is seen is shown,
why then [you maintain that] death means not being reborn? What is to be
done with the good and bad karma? Your statements are without any proof
whatsoever.120
Tis cannot but reﬂect the view exposed by the heretical school of deniers
of invisible realities represented by the Lokāyatas. A blatant contempt also
results from several passages in the Dharma Pātañjala, for example where
the Lord points out to Kumāra that views such as admitting only direct per-
ception and the denial of karma are evidence of wrong knowledge, which is
the label used throughout the text to deﬁne the materialist standpoint.
Statements equating death with emancipation that are analogous to those
found in the Old Javanese sources are part and parcel of the Lokāyata stock
in Sanskrit texts. For instance, Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha 1.53 has dehacchedo
mokṣaḥ‘liberation is the dissolution of the body’; and the widespread Lo-
kāyata fragment maraṇam evāpavargaḥ‘death indeed is emancipation’, or
120.
Vṛhaspatitattva 52.23–26: hayva kita mājarakәn ika riṅsabhā / keraṅiraṅikaṅpakṣa
maṅkana / pira ta hiṅana nikaṅmata mulat / yan ikaṅsakatonan pinintonakәn / mapa kari
kaṅmati ṅaranyan tan paṅjanma muvah / apekaṅśubhāśubhakarma ginavenya / tan kapva
pramāṇa liṅta /.


--- PAGE 624 ---
Wrong Knowledge
605
the variant mṛtyur evāpavargaḥ.121 Te materialist stance is illustrated by
the statement uttered by a Lokāyata pūrvapakṣin in Rāmakaṇṭha’s Vṛtti to
Sadyojyotis’ Paramokṣanirāsakārikā:
Consciousness arises from the elements alone, and vanishes with those same
[elements]; hence, because of the destruction of the body, the destruction of
everything (sarvanāśa) [comes about].122
Instances of the doctrine of sarvanāśa are already found in earlier sources,
such as the Buddhist Sāmaññaphalasutta of the Dīghanikāya, which in 2.23
reports the words of the heretic Ajita Kesakambala: ‘Both fools and wise,
afer the dissolution of the body, are cut-off, annihilated; afer death they do
not exist [anymore]’ bāle ca paṇḍite ca kāyassa bhedā ucchijjanti vinassanti /
na honti param maraṇā ti.
Other instances of bhūtacaitanyavāda bearing slightly different doctri-
nal nuances may be found in the Old Javanese sources. For instance, a state-
ment of an opponent in the Dharma Pātañjala (cf. above, p. 571) upholds
that death means to return into non-existence, for the body of the living be-
ings visibly disappears, then negates the Śaiva idea of liberation, namely the
obtainment by the Soul of the Lord’s powers of omniscience and omnipo-
tence:
When one obtains the state of supernatural prowess, that is not liberation.
DhPāt
334.6–7
Only when one vanishes, that is liberation.
Te Lord criticizes this viewpoint by pointing out that ‘the heart and mind
do not know about that [state of liberation]’ jñānanya lāvan cittanya tan
121.
Bhattacharya (2002:618–619) considers both fragments—deriving, respectively,
from the Advaitabrahmasiddhi and the Prabodhacandrodaya—spurious on the ground that,
as the Cārvākas denied the very idea of rebirth and emancipation, the use of such a term
may not be considered as a genuine representation of the Cārvāka position but rather as
an aphorism framed by a Brahmanical opponent. Although conscious distortion or misun-
derstanding of their positions are common, I ﬁnd the validity of Bhattacharya’s criterion
questionable for, in the context of debate, a certain ﬂexibility might have been allowed as to
adapt one’s own concepts to the opponent’s categories.
122.
Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvṛtti 5: bhūtebhya eva vijñānam utpadyate, tāny evānuvinaśy-
atīti śarīravināśād eva sarvanāśa ity /. Cf. also Aghoraśiva’s commentary on Sarvajñānottara
VP 1–3, referring to the Lokāyata’s view seeing the Soul as having the form of the body, and
hence being unconscious (jaḍa).


--- PAGE 625 ---
606
iii Doctrine
avruh irikā,123 which amounts to say that the state of liberation advocated
by the opponent consists in utter dissolution, without a sentient entity (be
it mind or Soul) that experiences it—a standpoint that again recalls the one
adhered to by Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika. In 334.4–6 He further points at the fact that
the opponent’s equation of the Summum Bonum with non-existence grants
neither favour (upakāra) nor supernatural powers (siddhi) to man—unlike
the Śaiva one; this recalls the argument put forward in Sarvadarśanasaṅgra-
ha (11.108–109) by an opposer of the Nyāya view that liberation amounts to
the total annihilation (non-existence) of the Soul, i.e. that nobody provided
with intelligence would strive to reach such a goal. Tere is even closer sim-
ilarity with the statement of a Vaiśeṣika in the same text (10.181) pointing
out that if one would raise the objection that non-existence (abhāva, i.e. the
seventh category admitted by that system) can never be a ﬁtting object of
human pursuit (na cāsya puruṣārthaupāyikatvaṃ) the answer would be that
abhāva is the very Summum Bonum (paramapuruṣārtha), consisting in ﬁnal
beatitude devoid of pain.
Further below, the Lord seems to attune the materialist view of the Sum-
mum Bonum—intended as both ﬁnal liberation and Supreme Reality—to
Śaiva categories, describing that state as a hierarchically lower kind of lib-
eration:
What has been designated by the opponent as non-existence and Summum
DhPāt
334.20–22
Bonum, that is designated as [being] dissolved into unevolved matter: there
is no union of the mind [and] the sattva, rajas, tamas. Its characteristic is
darkness without sentience, for the state of insight is not found in it.
According to the Lord, the characteristics attributed by the opponent to non-
existence and liberation indeed correspond to the characteristics of the state
of quasi-liberation where the mind is untainted by the guṇas, namely the
one attained by the categories of beings called prakṛtilīna. Tese beings, as
described in the Yogapāda of the Dharma Pātañjala, are dissolved into un-
evolved matter, devoid of any kind of subtle body and ‘sleeping’ in the sort
of limbo existing between the end of a universal life-cycle and the beginning
of a new one.124
An interesting argument of the Lord against the bhūtacaitanyavāda put
forward by the opponent in 206.7–8 (quoted above, p. 603) is found in the
123.
Tis clause can also be translated as ‘in that state, the heart and mind do not know’.
124.
I have discussed these categories of yogins above, pp. 492–493.


--- PAGE 626 ---
Wrong Knowledge
607
following passage of the Dharma Pātañjala:
How could it be that the man dies while dreaming? His body exists with-
DhPāt
206.9–10
out damage! How could he not be aware of [anything]? Only when [the
body] will be rotten it will have an end. Tus is the evidence of the wrong
knowledge, my son.
According to the Lord, the Soul not being aware of anything (tan pañetanā)
amounts to death—like when, for example, the Soul ceases to be aware of the
breaths (cf. 234.9). If the person who sleeps does not die, however, it is be-
cause he is provided with a sentient element that must be identiﬁed with the
Soul. Tis argument is also found in the Vṛhaspatitattva, where it assumes a
role of primary importance, being discussed throughout an extensive debate
forming a large section of the text. In order to better understand the philo-
sophical context of the debate, I shall therefore turn to the analysis of the
motif in the Vṛhaspatitattva. From 47.43 onwards, the Lord sets about dis-
pelling His son’s doubts about the ontological status of the Summum Bonum,
called viśeṣa by Vṛhaspati, and of such states as awareness or consciousness
(tutur) and unawareness or unconsciousness (lupa).125 Te debate starts af-
ter the Lord’s explanation of the well-known Upaniṣadic doctrine of the four
states of human being, viz. waking (jāgrapada), sleep (svapnapada), deep
sleep (suṣuptapada), and the ‘fourth’ (tūryapada).126 Te third state of deep
sleep suṣuptapada, also known as śrīpada, is characterized as being darkness
(timira, andhakāra), having the form of śūnya, acetana and nirvāṇa, when
nothing is desired, seen or experienced (niṣprakāmya tan katon kahiḍәp)—a
deﬁnition that clearly resembles that of non-existence as found in the Dha-
rma Pātañjala. To the Lord’s account Vṛhaspati objects by pointing out that
the Soul vanishes during sleep and forgets about the whole world. For the
Soul in such a state it would be possible to disappear without awakening
again. Te state of annihilation is called viśeṣa by Vṛhaspati, who compares
it to the Summum Bonum (paramārtha) previously described by the Lord:
125.
It is apparent that these are the appropriate translations of the two terms when used
in this philosophical context, even though they bear the primary meaning of, respectively,
‘remembering’ and ‘forgetting’; cf., e.g., KBNW (ii, 657), considering tutur to be a synonym
of cetanā and smaraṇa; OJED (2084) ‘memory, recollection, consciousness’. Furthermore,
cf. Dharma Pātañjala 214.17–17: ‘Sentience means consciousness, unevolved matter means
unconsciousness’ cetanā ṅaranya tutur, pradhāna ṅaranya lupa.
126.
Cf. Vṛh 47.1–22. Tis doctrine, which ﬁgures in the Vṛhaspatitattva and especially
in the Tattvajñāna, where it is pervasive, is altogether absent from the Dharma Pātañjala.


--- PAGE 627 ---
608
iii Doctrine
Te Soul is in the waking state. Ten it falls asleep and it vanishes, forgetting
about the whole world. Te sleeping [Soul] is as dead, for it is unconscious
(viparīta). It is indeed very admissible [to say] that it could die thereupon. It
will vanish, without awakening again. For, being vanished, the Soul ceases
to experience again. What is meant by your Lord’s son is [this]: since all
that experiences is regarded by the Lord to be sentient, in that case it is not
admissible that the sentient will be the nature of the Soul, for it sleeps and
then lives again. What is the explanation of this fact?127
Vṛhaspati expresses his doubts concerning the fact that during deep sleep
a person looses his consciousness and that it would therefore be possible
for him to disappear without awakening again. Te Lord (30–34) explains
that the Soul’s obfuscation during sleep is due to the fact that the sentient
principle is permeated by the insentient unevolved matter, thus becoming
viparīta. Being unsatisﬁed by this explanation, Vṛhaspati counters:
Tis is verily the doubt of the Lord’s son, concerning the Soul becoming
mixed up with unevolved matter. To my mind, the unconsciousness (lupa) is
the unmanifest [state] of the Soul, for the consciousness (tutur) arises from
the unconsciousness. Consciousness means the experiencing of pleasure
and pain. Pleasure and pain, they constitute the cycle of existence. Te cy-
cle of existence is to experience. Terefore, it is not appropriate to call the
experiencing viśeṣa. On the contrary, the unconsciousness, that is the viśeṣa,
for it does not experience pleasure and pain.128
Here we have another syllogism: since consciousness involves the experi-
ence of pleasure as well as pain, it would be absurd to say that the Summum
Bonum (viśeṣa) is consciousness; indeed, the experience of pain is no advan-
tage to man. Hence, Vṛhaspati’s initial position, i.e. that the unconscious is
127.
Vṛhaspatitattva 47.23–29: ikaṅātmā hana riṅjāgrapada / maturū pva ya hilaṅta
ya malupa riṃrāt kabeḥ/ tulya māti ikaṅmaturū / apa viparīta / atyanta yogya nikan
manәhәr amātya / hilaṅa tan pataṅhya muvah / apan hilaṅmari maṅhiḍәp muvah ikaṅ
ātmā / kaliṅanya vuvus rānak bhaṭāra / apan asiṅmaṅhiḍәp ya sinaṅguh bhaṭāra cetana /
ṅkān tan yogya ikaṅcetanāvaka niṅātmā / apan mahurip ikaṅmaturū muvah / ndya ta
kaliṅanika //.
128.
Vṛhaspatitattva 47.35–41: ya teka saṅśaya rānak bhaṭāra tәmәntәmәn / ri kadadinyan
ivәṅivәṅikaṅātmā lavan ikaṅpradhānatattva / ikaṅlupa yeka niṣkala niṅātmā ri hiḍәp rā-
nak bhaṭāra / apan mәtu sakeṅlupa ikaṅtutur / tutur ṅaranya ikaṅmaṅhiḍәp sukhaduḥkha /
ikaṅsukhaduḥkha yeka saṅsāra / saṅsāra pva maṅhiḍәp / ya ta mataṅyan tan yogya ikaṅ
hiḍәp saṅguhәn viśeṣa kunaṅikaṅlupa ya viśeṣa ṅaranya / apan tan paṅhiḍәp sukhaduḥkha /


--- PAGE 628 ---
Wrong Knowledge
609
both the origin of the conscious and the redemption for the Soul, is demon-
strated to be true. Te equation of ﬁnal release with a state of insentience
devoid of both pain and pleasure was upheld in the Sanskrit tradition by
the Vaiśeṣikas. Tis atomistic school of thought, at least in its early period,
was atheistic. No place for a supreme being could be found in the system,
attributing to the invisible and unexplainable force called adṛṣṭa the expla-
nation of all phenomena. It is only at a later date, probably because of the
inﬂuence from the Pāśupatas or other theistic groups, that the school admit-
ted the existence of a supreme being (Śiva) and became, in practice, afﬁliated
with the theistic Nyāya (cf. Chemparathy 1965). As already pointed out by
Zieseniss (1958:106–107; 188–190), the utterly unconscious non-existence
termed viśeṣa by Vṛhaspati and equated with the Summum Bonum of the
Śaiva seems to correspond to the Vaiśeṣika view on ﬁnal release. According
to this system, the liberated Soul is insentient, as though non-existing, free
from pain and pleasure as well as from knowledge. Now, the Soul of a per-
son who is in deep sleep does not experience pain and pleasure; this indicates
that the consciousness can, if only temporarily, become separated from the
Soul, which is non-consciousness. Te only difference between deep sleep
and liberation lies therefore in the fact that the latter is a permanent condi-
tion. Tis view is attested already in the Nyāyasūtra:
In the case of deep sleep, in absence of dreams, there is [a state like]
release, for there are no deﬁlements.
As the connection with attachment and the end of the connection with plea-
sure and pain of someone who is sleeping disappear, when there is deep
sleep, so also in release there is also [the end of such connections]. In fact
people who know the brahman describe the condition of the released Soul
as being such.129
Has such a deﬁnition of liberation possibly been known to the author of the
Vṛhaspatitattva? Tis seems plausible, also on account of the fact that, as
pointed out by Zieseniss (1958:106), Vṛhaspati’s description of the insen-
tient in the exegesis ad śloka 6 as being ‘like a stone’ closely echoes a Vaiśe-
129.
Nyāyasūtra (with Vātsyāyana’s Bhāṣya) 4.1.63: [sūtra] suṣuptasya svapnādarśane kle-
śābhāvād apavargaḥ// [Comm.] yathā suṣuptasya khalu svapnādarśane rāgānubandhaḥ
sukhaduḥkhānubandhaś ca vicchidyate tathāpavarge ’pīti / etac ca brahmavido muktasyāt-
mano rūpam udāharantīti //.


--- PAGE 629 ---
610
iii Doctrine
ṣika formulation of jaḍa.130 However, it is not possible to determine if the
above views genuinely reﬂect Vaiśeṣika positions or are the result of either
a conscious or unconscious misrepresentation along materialistic lines. Be
this as it may, it will still be worthwhile to investigate further the old idea of
Jacobi (1923:40–43) that the early Vaiśeṣika, before assuming its classical
contour of orthodox (and theistic) system, could have arisen as an offshoot
from the Lokāyata school. Or one may suggest that, conversely, some mate-
rialists eventually assumed positions close to the non-theistic Vaiśeṣika and
borrowed the doctrines, such as the one concerning the insentience of the
Soul, that they felt to be close to their world-view.131
Afer an excursus illustrating the example of the pot and the potter con-
cerning the sentience of the Soul and the Lord (quoted above, p. 573), the
debate about the status of the Soul in a sleeping person in the Vṛhaspatitattva
ﬁnally reaches its conclusion, as follows:
O poor you, Vṛhaspati, your view has been answered. Why do you state
again and again the same view? According to you, the sentience of one who
sleeps has completely vanished, and that [state] is liberation. Tereupon he
will never experience again, for non-existence is the highest reality (viśeṣa).
If non-existence is the nature of the highest reality, then, how does it hap-
pen that one [before sleeping] is, then [during sleep] ceases being and be-
comes not-being again; then [when he is awake] he ceases not being and
again becomes being? [To uphold] that what is regarded as highest reality
and what is regarded as Summum Bonum (paramārtha) is such, that is a per-
verse knowledge, [of a] bewildered, giving instructions at random.132 Tat
130.
Vṛhaspatitattva 6.3–4: acetana ṅaranya ikaṅtan pajñāna / kady aṅgān iṅvatu / ‘in-
sentient is that which does not possess knowledge, like a stone’. A critique to the view that
the liberated Soul is insentient like a stone is found in Sarvasiddhāntasaṅgraha 6.41–43 and
Naiṣadhacarita 75. Te Vaiśeṣika argument of jaḍatva is frequently criticized also by Śaiva
commentators: cf., e.g., Mṛgendravṛtti ad VP 2.6 and the Tamil Śivajñānasiddhyār 11.5, ac-
cording to which the school of the paṣāṇavādins (paṣāṇa = ‘stone’) holds that the liberated
Soul is like a stone, remaining unconscious and experiencing neither suffering nor happi-
ness (cf. Paranjoti 1954:107).
131.
An interesting example of this is provided by the ﬁgure of Bhaṭṭa Udbhaṭa (ca. 8th
century ad), who commented upon the lost Cārvākasūtra in order to bring it closer to
Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika positions.
132.
Against OJED 2044 s.v. tuduhtuduhi: ‘to point in all directions’ (hapax), which in the
present context does not make much sense. Cf. tuduh (2044) ‘instruction, direction, direc-
tive, order, guidance’ and pati (1322)s: ‘practice denoting continuation […]; in the case of
action, usually with the connotation that it is lacking purpose, order or a deﬁnite object


--- PAGE 630 ---
Wrong Knowledge
611
is contravened by the knowledge of the learned.133
Te Lord’s reconstruction of the example upheld by Vṛhaspati, according to
which the sleeping person enters in a state of non-existence that is [similar
to] liberation, aims at showing that, if accepted, it would entail the undesired
corollary that one may attain liberation during sleep, and completely vanish.
Tat, however, this does not happen is conﬁrmed by common experience,
hence the example is refuted.
To Vṛhaspati’s question in the Vṛhaspatitattva about what is, then, the
Summum Bonum, the Lord replies by means of a śloka and commentary
outlining its characteristics. Te siddhānta putting an end to the controversy
appears at the conclusion of that passage:
As to the vanishing of the Soul when he sleeps: [in reality] it just enters the
principle of unevolved matter, for the principle of unevolved matter causes
the unconsciousness of the Soul. If you would possibly ask, ‘what is the
reason that one who sleeps does not die—for he forgets about his body?’
[I reply:] that is the purpose of the ﬁve winds which I have taught before;
they act as bonds for the Soul. Tat is why one who sleeps does not die.134
A similar point is made by the Lord in the Dharma Pātañjala:
Te reason why one who is sleeping does not die is that the Soul is constantly
DhPāt
234.4–7
(at random, haphazardly, aimlessly, unthinkingly, indiscriminately) […] ofen followed by
the verb in the form of the base word, either single […] or duplicated […], with or without
sufﬁx -i’; cf. pati sәsәmbahi (OJED 1734) ‘to worship everywhere, to make a ‘‘sĕmbah’’ in
every direction (at random)’ and pati taṇḍaktaṇḍaki (OJED 1929) ‘to dance around (with-
out purpose or order, as in trance, blindly)’, also used in Vṛhaspatitattva 4.15 afer vulaṅun
‘bewildered’ to characterize men without knowledge.
133.
Vṛhaspatitattva 47.57–64: hemanku sinahuran pakṣanta kamuṅvṛhaspati / mapa teku
punahpunah denta mavuvus ikaṅpakṣa / huvus hilaṅcetana nikaṅmaturū / mokṣa ta ya /
matәhәr hayva maṅhiḍәp muvah / apan taya ikaṅviśeṣa liṅta / an taya lvir nikaṅviśeṣa
vih / umapa tәkān hana / huvus hana / umaluy taya / huvus taya / umaluy hana / maṅkana
karikaṅsinaṅguh viśeṣa ṅaranya / maṅkana karikaṅsinaṅguh paramārtha ṅaranya / yateka
sinaṅguh jñāna viparīta ṅaranya / vulaṅun pati tuduhtuduhi / ya tika inuhutakәn jñāna saṅ
paṇḍita //.
134.
Vṛhaspatitattva 49.15–20: kunaṅri hilaṅnikaṅātmā ri kālanyan paturū pih / kapasuk
riṅpradhānatattva teka juga / apan gumave lupa niṅātmā ikaṅpradhānatattva / mapa pva
mataṅyan tan tәhәr amāti ikaṅaturū / apan malupa ya riṅśarīranya / nyapan tahan kva
liṅanta / ya don ikaṅpañcavāyu inajar ṅūni / yeka pinakāpusapus niṅātmā / ya dumehnya
tan tәhәr amāti ikaṅmaturū //.


--- PAGE 631 ---
612
iii Doctrine
conscious of the breaths. If the Soul ceases to be aware of them, the breaths
as such, that is designated as dying.
Upholding
Hedonism
It is natural that the consequence of the materialists’ de-
nial of a Soul separate from the body, of the effects of
actions in terms of merit and demerit, of the existence
of any form of retribution or state of being afer death, is
that the pursuit of pleasure is regarded by this system as the principal aim of
human life. Tis theme ﬁgures in a number of Sanskrit fragments attributed
to the Cārvākas: arthakāmau puruṣārthau ‘wealth and pleasure are the two
aims of life’;135 yāvajjīvaṃsukhaṃjīven nāsti mṛtyor agocaraḥ‘while life
remains let a man live happily; nothing is beyond death’.136 Kumāradeva’s
commentary on Tattvaprakāśa 72 has:
Only pleasure is the foremost end of human life, and wealth too because it is
capable of bringing it about. As it has been declared, happiness is the goal of
human life, to be brought about through activity. Tat is pleasure, and not
other things such as liberation, etc.137
Te stress on the material aspect of life and the unconcernedness with meta-
physics and soteriology is reﬂected in śloka 122 of the Sārasamuccaya (from
Mahābhārata 12.309.9), whose ideas are attributed to the nāstikas in the Old
Javanese exegesis:
Te utter nihilists aim at what belongs to this world, [merely] caus-
ing [their] ﬂesh and blood to increase. Tey are insensible to the acts
aiming at the other world.
Te nature of the nihilists is as follows: they only take care of their bodies,
they strive afer the increase of their blood and ﬂesh. Whatever action that
bears fruit here [in this world] is practiced by them. On the contrary, actions
that bear fruit with respect to heaven or emancipation in the future, they are
insensible towards them, they are not concerned at all with them.138
135.
Also in this case, Bhattacharya (2002:618) expresses serious—albeit, to my mind,
unjustiﬁed—doubts concerning the originality of these fragments since they contain the
typically Brahmanical concept of puruṣārtha.
136.
Śloka 7ab (cf. Bhattacharya 2002:600, 610, 616).
137.
Tattvaprakāśatātpāryadīpikā p. 108: kāma eva mukhyaḥpuruṣārthaḥ, arthaś ca tatsā-
dhanatvād iti / taduktam—vṛttisādhyā prītiḥpuruṣārthaḥ, sa kāma eva nānyo mokṣādiḥ//.
138.
Sārasamuccaya 122:


--- PAGE 632 ---
Wrong Knowledge
613
According to the Dharma Pātañjala, a hedonistic attitude characterizes a
mind affected by dullness (tamas):
Dullness means: the mind that desires to enjoy the objects of enjoyment.
DhPāt
252.3–6
[It thinks:] ‘Since you will ﬁnd enjoyment in the objects of pleasure, that is
the reason why you should strive for wealth in the form of gold, vestments,
slaves and beautiful women, for there is nothing which is superior to the
pleasure of becoming a human being!’
As we have seen above (p. 571 and 597), the view that in this life one should
strive afer pleasures only was already attributed to a materialist opponent:
A hundred shall be the number of pleasures enjoyed by the man; he will not
DhPāt
332.16–334.2
experience suffering if he knows about the true state of the Lord. […] What
is the point of causing suffering [to oneself in this life]? Let there be the
enjoyment of the objects of pleasure!
In the above passage a hedonistic stance goes together with an allusion to a
critique of ascetic self-mortiﬁcation. Tis results even more clearly from a
passage of the Dharma Pātañjala containing a scornful depiction of religious
people performing observances. When elaborating on the ﬁrst item avidyā
‘ignorance’ in the list of the afﬂictions as the cause of an altered or ‘upside-
down’ mind, the Lord attributes to the opponent the following words:
‘Te Soul, that is not lasting, it is good for nothing that its true nature has
DhPāt
304.20–306.3
vanished. But the earth, water, ﬁre, wind, space,139 those are beautiful! Tus,
they are designated as pure. A man of religion performing the observance
aihalaukikam īhante māṃsaśoṇitavarddhanāḥ/
pāralaukikakṛtyeṣu prasuptā bhṛśanāstikāḥ//
nihan ta krama nikaṅnāstika / kevalāvaknya juga iniṅunya / yatna ri vṛddhya niṅrah dag-
iṅnya // sāsiṅpravṛtti maphala maṅke linәkasakәnya / kunaṅikaṅpravṛtti maphala svargā-
pavarga dlāha / aturū ya irika / tan vava rәṅәh vih //.
139.
Te presence of space (ākāśa) among the elements enumerated by the opponent
seems to be at odd with the materialist position, for the (mainstream) Lokāyatas did not
admit the existence of the ﬁfh element on account of its non-perceptibility, accepting only
four. Yet, I believe, this is no conclusive proof for dismissing the identiﬁcation of this
passage as exposing materialist doctrines, for we know that in the Indian Subcontinent
itself there existed differences of opinions and philosophic tenets among the Lokāyatas
themselves. Tat ﬁve elements were admitted by certain materialists is suggested by fairly
widespread textual evidence, such as Guṇaratna on Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya (555): ‘Some
sections of the Cārvākas, considering space as the ﬁfh form of matter, declare that the


--- PAGE 633 ---
614
iii Doctrine
of a leader among yogins, he is designated as pure. Tat is just wrong, for
he is impure. What is the cause of his being impure? Because his mind-
stuff is suffering because of the observances; he does not notice the worldly
pleasures. Tus is the reason why he is impure. A beautiful woman—she is
pure!’.
Te above passage, besides criticizing the Śaiva view of an everlasting Soul
whose original nature has been obliterated, inverts the concept of purity re-
lated to accomplished ascetics by attributing it to any element of the outside
world, and—irreverently—to objects of pleasure such as beautiful women.
We encountered a deﬁnition of purity earlier in the text (310.11–15), in cor-
respondence with the treatment of the item śauca in the list of the particular
commandments (niyama), as denoting purity in one’s behaviour, and in eat-
ing and drinking.
Te uselessness of disregarding the pleasures of this world, performing
painful acts such as the practice of ascetic observances in view of the enjoy-
ment of pleasures in the other world, is expressed in the Lokāyata śloka 15ab
(Bhattacharya 2002:611, 617): tapāṃsi yātanāś citrāḥsaṃyamo bhogavañ-
canā ‘penances are only various forms of torments, and abstinence is only
depriving oneself of consuming (the pleasures of life)’. Cf. also Guṇaratna
on Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya 85:
Te main point of the [Lokāyata] contention is: people have their critical
judgement bafﬂed by the verbosity of knaves. Leaving aside worldly plea-
sures which are within their easy reach, they strive (with a desire for obtain-
ing pleasures like heaven and liberation) by practising penance, muttering
spells, sitting in meditation, offering oblations, etc. Te only cause for such
acts is their ignorance.140
world consists of ﬁve forms of matter’ kecit tu cārvākaikadeśīyā ākāśaṃpañcamaṃbhūtam
abhimanyamānāḥpañcabhūtātmakaṃjagad iti nigadanti; the anonymous (10th century?)
Jain religious poem in Tamil Nīlakeci (vv. 856–857), in which the materialist debatant ex-
pounds ﬁve elements (cf. Miyamoto 2007:104–105); the Tamil Vaiṣṇava work Paramata-
paṅkam by Vedānta Decikar (14th century), in which is is stated that the Lokāyatas admit
also ākāśa among the elements (Miyamoto 2007:106). Among the Buddhist sources, cf.
Sāmaññaphalasutta (Dīghanikāya) part 1, pp. 48–49. Of course, it is also possible that their
doctrines were ofen slightly misrepresented by their opponent.
140.
Tarkarahasyadīpikā 570 (p. 459):
yo hi loko vipratārakavacanopanyāsatrāsi-
tasaṃjñāno hastagatam ihatyaṃsukhaṃvihāya svargāpavargasukhaprepsayā tapojapad-
hyānahomādau yad yatate, tatra tasyājñānataiva kāraṇam iti tanmatopadeśaḥ//.


--- PAGE 634 ---
Wrong Knowledge
615
In Vṛhaspatitattva 28.6–11 (quoted above, p. 599), the opponent’s denial of
the orthodox doctrine of heaven and hell results in the ridiculing of the au-
thority of cunning men of religion, which is held for nothing more than a
means to earn their livelihood. Tis theme, again, is common in Sanskrit
fragments attributed to the Lokāyatas; cf., e.g., Rāmāyaṇa 2.100.15 ‘Tese
books composed by wise men [containing precepts as] perform ritual, be-
stow, perform initiation, perform austerities, renounce, are means to draw
forth gifs’ dānasaṃvananā hy ete granthā medhāvibhiḥkṛtāḥ/ yajasva dehi
dīkṣasva tapas tapyasva saṃtyaja; Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha 1.126–127 (śloka
9): ‘It is only as a means of livelihood that brahmans have established here
all these ceremonies for the dead—there is no other fruit anywhere’ tataś ca
jīvanopāyo brāhmaṇair vihitas tv iha / mṛṭānāṃpretakāryāṇi na tv anyad
vidyate kvacit.


--- PAGE 635 ---


--- PAGE 636 ---
Appendices


--- PAGE 637 ---


--- PAGE 638 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Tree Tattvas
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Kumāra approaches the Lord on the
peak of the Kailāśa, enquiring about
the tattva viśeṣa (194.2–7)
Vṛhaspati approaches the Lord on
the peak of the Kailāśa, enquir-
ing about the essence of the sacred
teachings (1)
Deﬁnition
of
tattvajñāna,
the
knowledge of which liberates (1)
Deﬁnition of samyajñāna (194.7–14)
Different teachings in the Śaivamār-
ga: Śaiva, Pāśupata, Alepaka (2)
Characteristics of paramārtha (pra-
bhu, vibhu, sarvajña, sarvakārya-
kartā) (194.15– 196.14)
cf. 11–13
cf. 4.1–5
Deﬁnition of mithyājñāna (196.15–
198.11); debate with an opponent
adhering to it (198.12–208.2)
Te three pramāṇas (208.3–210.7)
Origin of mala and its end, when
one becomes one with the Lord
(210.8–212.5)
Different varieties of yonis and
vāsanās (3.1–3)
cf. 272.17–274.18
Karma and its fruits; vāsanās ex-
plained through the example of
the pot containing perfume, which
sticks to it even afer the pot has
been washed (3.4–10)
Effects of the karmavāsanās on the
ātman (3.10–15)
Different
kinds
of
yonis
and
(re)births explained (3.15–25)
cf. 298.2–12
sambega in the yogin is the result of
the Lord’s love and of the painful-
ness of life; need of instruction in
the viśeṣa by a teacher (3.25–35)
No difference of status in the knowl-
edge resulting from the way of
Śaivas,
Pāśupatas and Alepakas;
those who uphold the contrary are
bhrānta (3.36–48)
Explanation of bhrānta through the
story of the blind men and the ele-
phant (4.1–20)
Doubt
of
Vṛhaspati
about
the
tattvajñāna; instruction of the Lord
about the Śāstras (5.1–9)
Dichotomy cetanā/acetanā at the
origin of all the tattvas (6.1–5)


--- PAGE 639 ---
620
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Deﬁnition of Soul and listing of
the tattvas: śivatattva, māyā°, kalā°,
rāga°, vidyā°, pradhāna°, triguṇa°,
buddhi°, ahaṅkāra°, manaḥ°, daśen-
driya°, pañcatanmātra°, the pañca-
mahābhūtas (212.8–25)
Te tattvas listed: pradhānatattva,
triguṇa°, buddhi°, ahaṅkāra°, bāh-
yendriya°, karmendriya°, pañcama-
hābhūta° (6.5–8)
Tree tattvas of the cetana: parama-
śivatattva, sadāśivatattva, śivatattva
(6.9–11)
Deﬁnition of cetana and acetana,
corresponding to, respectively, śiva-
tattva and māyātattva; śivatattva is
divided into paramaśivatattva, sa-
dāśivatattva, ātmikatattva (2)
paramaśivatattva (7–10)
paramaśivatattva (3)
sadāśivatattva as savyāpāraḥ; pad-
māsana with caduśakti: vibhuśakti,
prabhuśakti, jñānaśakti, kriyāśakti
(11–13)
sadāśivatattva: sarvajña, sarvakār-
yakartā,
jñānaśakti,
prabhuśakti,
kriyāśakti (4.1–5)
Te
ātman
pervades
the
tat-
tvas
lengthwise
and
crosswise
(ūtaprota), like butter within milk
or a string and pearls (214.4–5)
Explanation of the tattvas being
ūtaprota as butter within milk and
as a necklace of pearls; ūtaprota =
vibhuśakti and prabhuśakti (14.1–5)
vibhuśakti,
prabhuśakti (4.8–10),
kriyāśakti (4.10–16)
Description of the padmāsana with
caduśakti; the mantric body of the
Lord (īśāna, tatpuruṣa, aghora, bā-
madeva, sadyojāta) (4.6–10)
cf. 282.18–284.16
Powers of dūraśravana, dūrasarva-
jña, dūradarśana (14.11–15)
jñānaśakti: dūradarśana, dūraśra-
vaṇa, dūrātmaka (4.5–8)
sadāśivatattva, which is Bhaṭāra Gu-
ru, is the author of the śāstras and
the holy scriptures (4.1–24)
cf. 328.15–330.15
Te aṣṭaiśvaryas of the Lord: aṇimā,
laghimā, mahimā, prāpti, prākāmya,
īśitva, vaśitva, yatrakāmāvasāyitva
(14.15–18)
māyāśirastattva is below sadāśiva-
tattva, abode of the aṣṭavidyeśas:
Ananta, Sūkṣma, Śivatama, Ekaru-
dra, Ekanetra, Trimūrti, Śrīkaṇṭha,
Śikhaṇḍī (14.19–26)
cf. 280.4–20
Śrīkaṇṭha as the teacher in the brah-
māṇḍa; legend of the incineration of
Kāma and marriage with Umā, who
begot Sanatkumāra. Śrīkaṇṭha is el-
evated, then Śikhaṇḍī takes his po-
sition (14.26–33)


--- PAGE 640 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Three Tattvas
621
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
ātma prota:
the ātman looses its
original omniscience and omnipo-
tence because of mala; it is en-
veloped by kalā, vidyā and rāga.
Example of the young bee (214.5–
216.14)
māyātattva: same as śivatattva, but
acetana; permeated by śivatattva,
which is cetana; relationship Śiva-
Māyā explained as ūtaprota (14.34–
39);
mala = acetana;
śivatattva,
which is pure, looses its power
(śakti) and becomes acetana, im-
pure (14.40–43); śakti means: sar-
vajña and sarvakāryakartā. It is
of śivatattva and of the ātman(s),
which are many. Example of the
young bees (14.44–50)
ātmikatattva: ūtaprota; example of
the ﬁre within wood and the gem as-
suming different colours; sadāśiva-
tattva permeates māyātattva (5.1–
11)
māyātattva is characterized by mala;
cetanā looses its power of sarvajña
and sarvakāryakartā (5.11–18); āt-
mikatattva is the same as Bhaṭāra
Dharma; it is like the sun pervading
the universe and giving life to all the
creatures (5.18–29)
Te ātman and pradhāna are caused
to meet by the Lord’s will;
ce-
tanā is remembering, pradhāna is
forgetting. From this union, the
three guṇas originate, in their turn
followed by buddhi and ahaṅkāra
(212.25–216.6)
māyātattva is set into action by
the power of the Lord:
pradhā-
natattva arises. Te Lord brings
together ātmatattva and pradhā-
natattva: the former becomes aceta-
na; pradhānatattva is set in motion
by kriyāśakti, generating the three
guṇas (14.51–57)
māyātattva is forgetting, pradhāna-
tattva is sleep; the prakāśa, which
is remembering, of the ātman meets
with pradhānatattva, giving rise to
pradhānapuruṣa; the three guṇas
now taint the citta (6)
Concise deﬁnition of sattva, ra-
jas, tamas when characterizing citta
(15) citta as the cause of liberation,
heaven and hell (16)
citta characterized by sattva (17), ra-
jas (18), tamas; the three guṇas fet-
ter the ātman (19)
citta means: the cetana of the puruṣa
is tainted by the three guṇas; citta
characterized by sattva (7), rajas (8),
tamas (9)
citta dominated by extreme sattva
(20), by both sattva and rajas (21),
by sattva, rajas and tamaḥin equal
measure. Bhaṭāra Vidhi remembers
the actions of human beings, who
need to be puriﬁed in the place be-
tween heaven and hell (22); citta
dominated by extreme rajas (23)
and tamas. Incarnation of the ātman
in the six kinds of animals (24.1–14)
Fruits and incarnations resulting
from the various combinations of
sattva, rajas and tamas in the citta
(10.1–15)
cf. above
From the three guṇas arises buddhi
(24.15)
From the meeting of the three guṇas
with citta originates buddhi and ah-
aṅkāra (10.15–24)


--- PAGE 641 ---
622
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
cf. 240.13–242.8
Te eoght states of buddhi: dharma,
jñāna, vairāgya, aiśvarya and their
opposites: adharma, ajñāna, avairā-
gya, anaiśvarya; the pañcaviparyā-
yas, the tuṣṭis, the aṣṭasiddhis. Such
are vṛttis of the buddhi (24.16–20)
cf. 242.9–244.16
Deﬁnition of dharma as śīla, yajña,
tapa, dāna, pravrajyā, bhikṣu, yoga
(25); deﬁnition of jñāna as the three
pramāṇas:
pratyakṣa,
anumāna,
āgama. Tese constitute samyag-
jñāna (26); def. of vairāgya (27),
aiśvarya (28.1–4), adharma, ajñāna,
avairāgya, anaiśvarya (28.4–24)
cf. 246.1–15
Fruits of buddhi dominated by dhar-
ma (29), jñāna (30), vairāgya (31),
aiśvarya (32.1–3)
cf. 246.16–250.9
Fruits of buddhi dominated by a-
dharma, ajñāna, avairāgya, anaiś-
varya (32.4–11)
cf. 250.10–252.16
Te pañcaviparyayas: tamas, moha,
mahāmoha, tāmisra, andhatāmisra
(32.12–19)
Cf.252.17–256.9
Deﬁnition of the tuṣṭis and their di-
vision according to bāhya and ād-
hyātmika (32.20–40)
Cf.256.10–260.7
Te aṣṭasiddhis (bāhyasiddhi); tra-
yoduḥkhavighātas (ādhyātmikasid-
dhi)
(33.1–8);
the three kinds of
pain
(ādhyātmikaduḥkha,
ādhi-
daivika°,
ādhibhautikaduḥkha)
(33.8–20)
Te Lord senses the ātman, which
senses the citta, which senses the
ahaṅkāra, which is permeated by
kriyāśakti; ahaṅkāra and buddhi are
called pramāṇaviśeṣa
Tree kinds of ahaṅkāra: vaikṛta,
taijasa, bhūtādi (216.7–14)
Tree kinds of ahaṅkāra: vaikṛta,
taijasa, bhūtādi (33.21–28)
Tree kinds of ahaṅkāra: vaikṛta,
taijasa, bhūtādi, characterized by,
respectively, sattva, rajas, tamas (11)
Difference between the three inter-
nal organs (216.15– 218.8)
cf. 40.17–22
daśendriyas derives from the vaikṛta
ahaṅkāra (218.8–220.3)
from the ahaṅkāra of the vaikṛta
type the manaḥand daśendriya
originate (33.23–24)
Deﬁnition
of
ahaṅkāra
of
the
vaikṛta type, from which manas
and daśendriya come forth (12.1–5)


--- PAGE 642 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Three Tattvas
623
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
From the ahaṅkāra of the bhūtādi
type
the
pañcatanmātras
origi-
nate;
the pañcamahābhūtas are
listed along with their respective
characteristics and qualities. Te
lower elements are pervaded by
the upper ones and combine their
qualities, which are described in
detail (220.3–224.1)
From the ahaṅkāra of the bhūtādi
type
the
pañcatanmātras
origi-
nate (33.25–28);
description of
pañcatanmātras
(33.29–40);
the
pañcamahābhūtas are listed along
with their respective characteristics
and qualities (33.41–44); combi-
nation of the elements and their
qualities (33.45–49)
ahaṅkāra of the type bhūtādi, from
which the pañcatanmātras (12.6–
17) and pañcamahābhūtas (13.1–
4) originate. Combination of the
elements and their characteristics
(13.4–18)
aṇḍabhuvana; vertical pervasion of
tattvas:
Lord, Soul, Māyā, prad-
hāna, buddhi, ahaṅkāra, manas,
daśendriyas, pañcatanmātras, pañ-
camahābhūtas (224.1–226.11)
aṇḍabhuvana (14)
ahaṅkāra of the type taijasa joins
the other two in originating ekā-
daśendriyas and pañcatanmātras.
Explanation of SaṅHyaṅPramāṇa
and pramāṇaviśeṣa (15)
cf. 16–24
Incarnations of the buddhis domi-
nated by sattva (16), rajas (17) and
tamas (18) in various degrees; fur-
ther elaborations on the above (19)
Incarnations of the ātmans whose
bad actions were small (20), middle
(21) or great (22)
tattvajñāna aims at putting an end
to the incarnations through brata,
tapa, yoga, samādhi (23)
cf. 35.17–23
kriyāśakti
permeates
ahaṅkāra,
which permeates the winds, which
permeate the nāḍī. Te body expe-
riences pañcagatisaṃsāra; example
of the ironsmith (the Lord) and
the swords (the ātmans), whose
characteristics differ according to
their functions (24)
Te Lord creates the beings; the āt-
mans are in the three stages (tūrya-
pada, jāgrapada, suptapada) and ex-
perience pañcagatisaṃsāra (25.1–6)
Te ātmans get separated from the
sakala by virtue of the Lord’s desire
to behold the latter. Te ātmans are
vyāpāra and not-vyāpāra; explana-
tion of vyāpāra (25.6–13)
Non-vyāpāra is ātmaviśeṣa or Bha-
ṭāra Dharma; vyāpāra is pramāṇa.
Te non-vyāpāra ātman resides in
tūryapada, while the ātman that
is cetana resides in jāgrapada; the
coarse part of it is the citta, tainted
by the three guṇas; citta is vyāpāra
(26.1–17)


--- PAGE 643 ---
624
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
cf. 218.8–220.3, 220.3–224.1
cf. 33
Te ātman that resides in jāgrapada
is called ahaṅkāra: the vaikṛta pro-
duces the daśendriyas; the bhūtādi
type produces the pañcatanmātras,
pañcamahābhūtas
and
manas
(26.17–23)
Te manas is reﬂected in the ātman,
which becomes ātmaparivāra, i.e.
ātmā, parātmā, nirātmā, antarātmā,
sūkṣmātmā (26.17–28)
cf. 34.1–6
Śloka: parable of the chart about the
relationship among puruṣa, pradhā-
na, the Lord and the world (27); Old
Javanese exegesis (28)
Even though the Lord serves as
life for all creatures and permeates
the saṃsāra, it does not experience
pleasure and pain. Te relation is ex-
plained in terms of ūtaprota; vyakta-
avyakta; ﬁre and wood (29)
Te Lord is not in all beings, for
they lack in remembering and gno-
sis; those who know prayogasan-
dhi and have gnosis attain the ād-
hyātmika status, seen by the Lord.
Te relationship is prota. samādhi is
īśvarapraṇidhāna; without it, men
incarnate in lower creatures (30)
Different kinds of men, i.e. kaṇiṣṭha,
madhya, uttama and their combina-
tions, caused by śubhāśubhakarma
(31)
Further speculations on the above.
Even though some are knowledge-
able in the Śāstras, they may not
have the gnosis (32)
Some are really endowed with gno-
sis and the aṣṭaiśvaryas. Bhaṭāra
Ādipramāṇa, who is sadāśivatattva,
resides in that ātman (33)
Te ātmans that reside in jāgrapada
and tūryapada incarnate and begin
to
perform
śubhāśubhakarma;
example of the pure gem that
becomes
coloured
by
reﬂecting
light (34). Such ātmans are not
affected by good and bad actions.
But the ātmans that are in supta-
pada and svapnapada experience
ātmasaṃsāra; they are like young
bees. Te differences between the
ātmans in these states of being are
explained (35)


--- PAGE 644 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Three Tattvas
625
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Te three pramāṇas in relation with
the above states are explained (36)
Incarnation of the ātman into a hu-
man being; process of generation
of the ṣaḍrāsa through copulation
(226.12–228.10)
ṣaḍrāsas (33.50–55); generation of
human beings through copulation;
deﬁnition of ṣaṭkośas (33.56–67)
Te ātman permeates pṛthivī and
the ṣaḍrāsas; these give rise to a new
life when man and woman meet.
Te process of generation and its
outcomes according to the various
combinations of male and female
elements is described; mention of
pañcagolaka; correspondences be-
tween pañcamahābhūtas, pañcatan-
mātras, bhuvanas, pātālas and parts
of the body (bhuvanaśarīra) (37)
Te buddhīndriyas and the golakas
(daśendriyas) (33.68–87)
Te golakas are different from the
daśendriyas; example of the deﬁ-
cient organs of sense (228.11–230.2)
Question of Vṛhaspati about the
difference between the golakas and
the indriyas and explanation of the
Lord by means of the example of
the deﬁcient organs of sense. Te āt-
man is addicted to the enjoyment of
the senses through the body (33.88–
105)
Parable of the chart to explain the
relationship among pradhāna, pu-
ruṣa, īśa and jagat (34.1–6)
cf. 27–28
Te ātman meets rāga, moha, dṛm-
bha, lobha, mātsarya, prihati, lapa,
vәlәkaṅ, panasbhāran and becomes
viparīta, incarnating in lower forms
of existence (34.7–18)
Means of avoiding hell through
awareness of the ātman of pleasures
and pains of the body (34.19–26)
cf. 42?
Te parable of regalia (35.1–8); ex-
ample of the different workers en-
during suffering to satisfy the ten
senses (35.9–16)
Difference between citta and ātman;
kriyāśakti enters ahaṅkāra, in its
turn entering the bāyus, which ties
the ātman to the body (35.17–23)
cf. 24
Origin of the nāḍīs (36); ten nāḍīs
explained (37–38)
Further
correspondences
with
saptapārvatas,
saptārṇavas,
sap-
tadvīpas;
ten
nāḍīs
explained
(38)
cf. 230.6–234.9
Te ten vāyus are listed (39–40) and
explained one by one: prāṇa (41),
apāna (42), samāna (43), udāna
(44), vyāna (45); nāga, kūrmāra,
kṛkara, devadatta, dhanañjaya—the
winds have many functions and
names but are one (46)
Te daśabāyus explained:
prāṇa,
apāna, samāna, udāna, vyāna; then
nāga, kūrmāra, kṛkara, devadatta,
dhanañjaya. Tey are eleven (sic)
but they are called ten because their
activities are ten (39)


--- PAGE 645 ---
626
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Te ﬁve states: jāgrapada, svapna-
pada, suṣuptapada, tūryapada, tūr-
yāntapada (47.1–22)
Te ﬁve ātmans:
ātmā, parātmā,
antarātmā,
sūkṣmātmā,
nirātmā
(40.1–7)
cf. 218.8–220.3
cf. 33, 35, 52
daśendriyas explained (40.7–18)
cf. 218.8–220.3
buddhi,
manaḥ,
ahaṅkāra
plus
the daśendrias form the trayo-
daśakaraṇas (40.18–22)
Correspondences between deities
and parts of the body (41)
Te mind (ambәk) and the body
are called aṅgapradhāna; pleasure
and pain are experienced through
the daśendriyas. By retracting them,
through prayogasandhi,
into the
mind, and then into pramāṇa, into
pramāṇaviśeṣa, into dharmaviśeṣa,
into antaviśeṣa, into anantaviśeṣa,
the ātman is released. Example of
the arrow kept in track by samyag-
jñāna. A further reincarnation in
heaven, hell or as a human being is
possible (42)
Te three guṇas should be burnt by
samādhi in order to acquire samyag-
jñāna. Te prayogasandhi is the ar-
row, samyagjñāna the feather, brata,
tapa, yoga and samādhi the bow (43)
Doubt of Kumāra: the ātman of one
who sleeps still lives in spite of the
fact that the nature of sleep is ac-
etanā (230.3–5)
Doubt of Vṛhaspati about the āt-
man during sleep becoming ac-
etana, thus like death; therefore
cetana is not the embodiment of
ātman, because a sleeping person
comes to life again. Reply: ātman
is in pradhānatattva during sleep
(47.23–34)
Question about the relation be-
tween ātman and pradhānatattva in
connection with remembering and
forgetting. Reply: acetana is made
by cetana, like the potter, the pot
and the clay (47.35–52); debate over
existence and non-existence applied
to viśeṣa (47.53–68)
paramārtha as existent and not non-
existent, though invisible (48); its
existence proved through the exam-
ple of invisible things that yet exist
(milk in butter, ﬁre in wood, water
in clouds, wind in space, guṇas in
the body) (49.1–18)


--- PAGE 646 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Three Tattvas
627
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Explanation:
the daśabāyus keep
the body alive, operating through
the three main nāḍīs (230.6–234.9)
Te pañcabāyus act as bond for the
ātman, so that a person who sleeps
does not die (49.18–26)
cf. (288.11–288.18), 328.15–330.15
prayogasandhi (50.1–6)
cf. 42–44
Doubt of Vṛhaspati about the di-
vision of cetana, which is jñānasv-
abhāva, into two, i.e. knower and
known (50.7–14)
cetana is of three varieties: para-
maśivatattva, sadāśivatattva, śiva-
tattva. Te knowledge of men is
limited. ātmatattva:
cetana expe-
riences, māyātattva is experienced
(50.15–34); Māyā covers the pow-
ers of the ātman, i.e. sarvajña and
sarvakāryakartā (50.35–36); prad-
hāna is a product of māyātattva. pu-
ruṣa interpreted as puru śete. Te āt-
man becomes puruṣa. Deﬁnition of
viśeṣa as alakṣaṇa (50.36–68)
Question about the right means to
attain viśeṣa (51)
Liberation is obtained through jñā-
nābhyudreka,
indriyayogamārga,
tṛṣṇadoṣākṣaya. Characteristics of
cetana (52.1–13)
A person die when the fruits
of dharmādharma have expired
(234.10–236.12)
Objection: the fruits of karma are
not seen by means of direct percep-
tion (236.13–238.3)
Objection:
death and liberation
from suffering of life means release
(52.14–22)
Reply: example of the course of the
sun illustrating something that is
true in spite of not being seen. Va-
lidity of the three pramāṇas; refu-
tation of random causation (238.3–
240.12)
Reply: example of the course of the
sun illustrating something that is
true in spite of not being seen. Va-
lidity of the three pramāṇas (52.23–
42)
Explanation of the beings’ engage-
ment in dharmādharma; the con-
nection of the ātman with the body
is due to the enjoyment of plea-
sures through the intellect;
ﬁfy
vṛttis of the mind; the variety of be-
ings. Te vṛttis are listed: these are
the caturaiśvaryas along with their
opposites; the pañcaviparyaya; the
twenty-eight aśaktis; the nine tuṣṭis;
the aṣṭasiddhis (240.13–242.8)
cf. 24.16–20


--- PAGE 647 ---
628
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Explanation of the caturaiśvarya
(242.9–244.6) and their opposites
(244.7–244.16); fruits of the former
(246.1–246.15) and of the latter
(246.16–250.9);
pañcaviparyayas
(250.10– 252.16); the nine tuṣṭis
(252.17–256.9);
eight
siddhis,
the three kids of pain (256.10–
260.7); twenty-eight aśaktis (260.8–
268.13)
cf. 25–33
trikāya paramārtha; devotion to-
wards the Lord; false masters; mis-
ery of incarnated beings; opportu-
nity to get released applies only to
humans, not to animals (268.14–
272.14)
Condition of the ātman at the time
of death, united with the three
guṇas, the lower tattvas and the
vāsanās; citta attached to the body
is the cause of rebirth. sūkṣmaśarīra
goes to hell if the karma is bad; if
good, it goes to heaven; if neutral, it
incarnates in a human being, possi-
bly an ascetic (52.42–69)
Explanation of the vāsanās and the
outcomes in low or high incarna-
tions; example of the perfume stick-
ing to the pot even afer it has been
washed (272.15 –274.18)
cf. 3.6–9
Te Lord experiences saṃsāra; ac-
count of His former incarnations
as Nīlalohita (276.1–276.13);
as
Pātañjala, the eldest among the
ﬁve Ṛṣi-brothers (276.13–280.4); as
Śrīkaṇṭha (280.4–280.20)
cf. 14.26–32 (not mentioning Pātañ-
jala and his brothers)
Unpleasantness of the life of in-
carnated beings; liberation is the
supreme pleasure, which means be-
ing one wit the Lord Paramakāraṇa
(280.21–282.4)
Asceticism consists in karma, jñāna,
yoga. Knowledge is of three kinds:
gurutaḥ, śāstrataḥ, svataḥ(52.70–
88)
Paramakāraṇa and His Powers: vi-
bhuśakti, i.e. avaśya, anāvaśyaḥ;
jñānaśakti, i.e. dūradarśana, dūra-
śravaṇa, durāt manana, durāt ma-
sarvajñāta; kriyāśakti, i.e. manojavi-
tvaṃ, vikaraṇadharmitva, kāmarū-
pitvaṃ; prabhuśakti, i.e. abhītaḥ, a-
kṣayaḥ, ajaraḥ, amaraḥ, apratihata-
gatiḥ(282.5–284.16)
cf. 14 (only jñānaśakti)
A yogīśvara manifests the powers of
the Lord within himself; affection of
the Lord causes mala to disappear
from the yogin; prayogasandhi and
samādhi cause the manifestation of
such powers (286.1–288.18)


--- PAGE 648 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Three Tattvas
629
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Śloka 2: deﬁnition of yoga as citta-
vṛttinirodha (290.3–8)
vṛttis of the mind (290.9–292.12);
samprajñāta-
and
asamprajñāta-
samādhi, with their intermediary
stages and the characteristics of
the mind (292.13–294.13);
enti-
ties called videha and prakṛtilīna
(294.14–296.7);
marks of purity
(296.8–298.1).
Quarter
of
śloka
3:
supernatural prowess result-
ing from three kinds of sambega
(298.2–12)
Efﬁcacy
of
īśvarapraṇidhāna
(298.13–18)
Śloka 4: the yogin is untouched by
kleśas, karma, fruition or latent de-
posits; hence, he becomes sarva-
jña and sarvakāryakartā (298.19–
300.12); debate with the opponent
about the ātman and the universe
(300.16–19)
An easy means to obtain the body
of the Lord is the murmuring of the
syllable oṂ(302.1–302.8)
Śloka 5:
the vighnas and the
saṃskāras (302.9–304.15)
Te kleśas, stemming from igno-
rance (304.16–306.10); their cure
is (brata,
prāṇāyāmayoga or a-
samprajñātasamādhi; mala is burnt
(306.11–308.12)
aṣṭāṅgayoga: yama, niyama, āsana,
pratyāhāra, prāṇāyāma, dhāraṇa,
dhyāna, samādhi (308.13–17)
ṣaḍaṅgayoga (53): pratyāhāra (54),
dhyāna (55), prāṇāyāma (56), dhā-
raṇa (57), tarka (58), samādhi,
which is the end of caturkalpanā
(59)
prayogasandhi: āsana, prāṇāyāma,
pratyāhāra, dhāraṇa, dhyāna, tarka,
samādhi. sandhi means caturdhyā-
na, i.e. tiṣṭhan, bhojan, gacchan, sup-
tan (44.1–9)
Detailed
explanation
of
yamas
(308.18–310.9)
and
niyamas
(310.10–312.3).
Te
two
are
only one series; fruits of yamas
(312.4–17);
fruits
of
niyamas
(312.18–314.2)
daśaśīla,
i.e. one series consti-
tuted
by
yamas
and
niyamas
(60–61.1–14)
Te places for performing yoga; the
āsanas (padmāsana,
bhadrāsana,
svastikāsana);
brief
deﬁnition
of
prāṇāyāma
(recaka,
pūraka,
kumbhaka),
pratyāhāra,
dhyāna,
samādhi (314.3–320.3)
āsanas listed:
padmāsana, vajrā-
sana, paryaṅkāsana, svastikāsana,
vidyāsana,
daṇḍāsana (44.9–11);
explanation of prāṇāyāmayoga (re-
caka, pūraka, kumbhaka) (44.11–
30); brief deﬁnition of pratyāhāra-
yoga, dhyānayoga, prāṇāyāmayoga,
dhāraṇayoga, tarkayoga (45.1–13)
Liberation is caused by constant
practice of samādhi, not by initia-
tion (320.3–10)


--- PAGE 649 ---
630
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
Description of saṃyama applied ot
various elements to obtain speciﬁc
siddhis (320.11– 326.7)
cf. 64
Various kinds of upasargas (326.8–
328.3)
cf. 74
cf. 46–47
A means to achieve the end of
suffering is to separate the un-
evolved
matter
from
the
Soul,
or the mind from the Soul; by
means of prayogasandhi the yogin
cuts
dharmādharma
and
enter
another man;
saṃyama applied
towards
the
ekādaśendriyas
be-
stows the aṣṭaiśvaryas, i.e. aṇimā,
laghimā, mahimā, prāpti, prākāmya,
īśitva, vaśitva, yatrakāmāvasāyitva
(328.4–330.15)
cf. 66–74
cf. 59
vighnas (332.1–15)
cf. 59
Te division into caturkalpanā ends,
the ātman is pure like a gem and
all the tattvas, along with the good
and bad karma, are burnt. Tis is ex-
plained as dhāraṇayoga (45.13–28)
Trough samādhi guarded by the
daśaśīla the yogin attains the gno-
sis known as tūryapada; when free
from the body and māyātattva, it
is called tūryāntapada, i.e. jīvan-
mukta. Te karmavāsanās that have
not yet been destroyed are burnt by
yogic ﬁre, as well as mala (61.14–20)
Te oṂthat is in the heart dis-
solves into śivatattva; citta is re-
leased from aṅgapradhāna, concen-
trated into the sūkṣma. Tat is in the
tūryapada (46.1–8)
When jāgrapada comes together
with tūryapada, there appear the
saptāṅga,
saptāgni,
saptāmṛta
(61.20–23); saptāṅga: pañcamahāb-
hūta, buddhi, manaḥ(62)
When tūryapada and jāgrapada
meet, there occurs abhisandhi, i.e.
the separation of pradhāna from pu-
ruṣa (46.8–13); saptāṅga, saptāmṛta
and saptāgni arise (46.13–20)
saptāgni:
ghrātā, rasayitā, draṣṭā,
spraṣṭā, śrotā, mantā, boddhā (63)
cf. above
saptāmṛta:
śabda, sparśa, rūpa,
gandha,
saṅkalpa,
boddhavya.
When saṃyāma is applied to these,
and the yogin’s attention is ﬁxed
upon the Lord, he obtains His body
(64)
cf. above
śivāgni burns all the sins and
vāsanās lef in the yogin,
who
attains the aṣṭaiśvaryas (65)
Te yogīśvara acquires supernatural
faculties here in this world. But the
upasargas, i.e. vāsanās of the three
guṇas, still stick to the body (46.20–
29)
aṣṭaiśvaryas
(66),
consisting
in
aṇimā (67), laghimā (68), mahimā
(69), prāpti (70), prākāmya (71),
īśitva (72), vaśitva (72), yatrakāmā-
vasāyitva (73)
cf. 49


--- PAGE 650 ---
A: Parallel Synopses of Three Tattvas
631
Dharma Pātañjala
Vṛhaspatitattva
Tattvajñāna
cf. 326.8–328.3
If samādhi is sharp, all the tattvas
up to the three guṇas are burnt.
Te yogin then encounters the up-
asargas of sattva, i.e.
the powers
of darśaṇa, śravaṇa, prajñā, bod-
dhavya, gandha;
those of rajaḥ;
those of tamaḥ. Te remedies are
listed, and practice of samādhi is
recommended (74.4–35)
Descriptions of the various kinds
of upasargas. Tese are burnt by
samādhi,
and the yogīśvara re-
mains with a spotless mind. Tat is
tarkayoga (47)
He becomes like sadāśivatattva,
he is sarvajña,
sarvakāryakartā,
and is endowed with jñānaśakti,
vibhuśakti, prabhuśakti, kriyāśakti.
He is freed from karmavipākāśaya
(48.1–11); cetana is in viśeṣa, an-
taviśeṣa, tūryāntapada; the ātman
leaves behind all dichotomies, such
as vyāpāra and nirvyāpāra, being
and non-being, omniscience and
omnipotence; it is just niṣprayojana.
Tat is samādhi (48.11–20)
cf. 328.4–330.15
cf. 66–72
Te yogin obtains the aṣṭaiśvaryas,
which are explained (49)
Also the vāsanās of the sattva are
consumed:
the yogin remembers
and returns to sadāśivatattva, be-
ing released from the ﬁve elements
through prayogasandhi, using brata,
tapa, yoga and samādhi (50)
Elaborate debate with an opponent
on non-existence as origin and dis-
solution of the Universe;
stages
of creation from phonemic emana-
tion: niṣkala, nāda, vindu, ardha-
candra, oṂ-kāra, tryakṣara, pañcā-
kṣara; continuation of the debate on
ontology (332.16–338.13)


--- PAGE 651 ---


--- PAGE 652 ---
B: Parallel Synopses of the Yogapāda of the DhPāt and the YS[Bh]
Dharma Pātañjala
Yogasūtra / [Yogasūtrabhāṣya]
Śloka 2: deﬁnition of yoga as cittavṛttinirodha; the Soul
only shines forth. Te true nature of the Soul obtained
through yoga is the supreme pleasure (290.3–8)
Yoga is cittavṛttinirodha (1.2); in that state, for nothing
becomes an object of consciousness, the Soul abides in
itself (1.3)
When yoga is not performed, the Soul is experienced;
but that is only citta (and not the Soul), because it has
one object. Te Lord replies listing the functions (vṛtti)
which are the causes of the mind: grahaṇa, viparyaya,
vikalpa, nidrā, smṛti (290.9–14)
At other times (when yoga is not performed) the Soul
takes the same form as the functions (of mind) (1.4),
which are of ﬁve kinds and hindered and unhindered
(1.5); they are pramāṇa, viparyaya, vikalpa, nidrā, smṛti
(1.6)
Grahaṇa is pratyakṣa, anumāna and āgama (290.15–
16)
Pramāṇa is pratyakṣa, anumāna and āgama (1.7)
cf. 196.15–198.11
Viparyaya characterized as mithyājñāna (1.8)
Deliberation is when one acts on account of the word
of others or of the holy scriptures, which, for example,
attribute motion to the Soul. To explain this, the ex-
ample of the arrow coming to a standstill is employed
(290.17–292.4)
Deliberation is without any object and follows as a re-
sult of perceptions or of words (1.9). [YSbh: mention
of the problem of the thinking that the Soul (puruṣa)
has only intelligence (caitanya) as its property, while it
does not have any property because it is intelligence;
mention of the example of the arrow coming to a stop,
improperly attributing the cessation of motion to the
arrow]
Nidrā is when the consciousness is like totally vanished;
when there is svapnajñāna, the object of the thoughts is
another, and the mind remembers about that (292.4–9)
Nidrā is a function supported by the cause/experience
(pratyaya) of the negation [of the waking and dreaming
functions] (1.10). [YSBh: sleep is a pratyaya because
there exists memory of it]
Memory is remembering about something that was for-
merly experienced (292.10–12)
Memory is not adding surreptitiously to a once experi-
enced object (1.11)
When the ﬁve functions are obstructed, one enters
samādhi, which is samprajñāta and asamprajñāta.
samprajñāta is restrained by either one or more ele-
ments of a series of four, namely savitarkasamādhi, sav-
icārasamādhi, asmitāsamādhi, ānandasamādhi. asam-
prajñātasamādhi, which follows samprajñātasamādhi,
is when none of those is present (292.13–294.4)
[Absorption] is samprajñāta when it assumes the form
of vitarka, vicāra, asmitā, ānanda (1.17). Te other
(asamprajñāta) consists of only saṃskāras, and follows
afer the cessation [of the functions] (1.18)
Te mind has ﬁve characteristics:
kṣipta, vikṣipta,
vimūḍha, nirodha, ekagraha; of these, only the akāgra
and nirodha constitute stages of samādhi (294.5–13)
[YSBh 1.1: the mind has ﬁve stages, viz. kṣipta, mūḍha,
vikṣipta, ekāgra, niruddha; ekāgra corresponds to sam-
prajñātasamādhi]
According to an opponent, when the mind is pure, that
is samādhi, and hence yoga; the Lord replies referring
to the existence of the categories of yogins called videha
and prakṛtilīna; these desire to obtain release and will
eventually return to the cycle of existence. Tey still en-
joy the objects of enjoyment, though their minds are no
more perceiving. Faith etc. (śraddhādi) denotes the pu-
rity of mind, and it is not in the above categories of be-
ings; a yogin obtains purity of mind by practicing yoga
with zealousness (294.14–296.7)
[Tis kind of absorption characterizes] the videhas and
prakṛtilayas, who still have an inclination toward be-
coming (1.19). [YSBh: these do not obtain a full state
of isolation but are bound to return to the world; their
minds experience only latent impressions]. Te yogin
attains [asamprajñātasamādhi] through śraddhā, vīrya,
smṛti, samādhi, prajñā (1.20)


--- PAGE 653 ---
634
Appendices
Dharma Pātañjala
Yogasūtra / [Yogasūtrabhāṣya]
Marks of purity of mind: maitri, karuṇā, muditā, up-
ekṣā.
Te yogin’s pure mind generates vīrya, tutur
( = smṛti), prajñā, samādhi (296.8–298.1)
Te yogin attains the undisturbed calm of the mind
by cultivating maitri, karuṇā, muditā, upekṣā (1.33).
Cf. also 1.20
Te yogin’s mind is lef behind and through absorption
he attains oneness with the Lord, thereby attaining also
His state of prowess. Tis state may be low, middle and
high according to the three kinds of intensity that char-
acterize the yogin’s practice, viz. mṛdusambega, mad-
hyasambega, tībrasambega (298.2–12); the tibrasam-
bega is superior because it involves īśvarapraṇidhāna
(298.13–18)
[Absorption] is attained by tīvra- (1.21) and mṛdu- or
madhya- (1.22) saṃvega; or by īśvarapraṇidhāna (1.23)
Śloka 4: the yogin obtains the Lord’s body, which is
eternally untouched by kleśas, karma, vipāka and āśaya,
becoming sarvajña and sarvakāryakartā; the Lord’s
sovereignty is unsurpassed (298.19–300.12). Te āt-
man perceives in a sentient way and is free from the
kleśas (300.16–19)
Not touched by kleśas, karma, vipāka and āśaya, the
Lord is a special kind of Soul (1.24). [YSBh: Īśvara’s
relation to isolation is not bound to time but eternal;
His sovereignty is unsurpassed]. In the Lord the germ
of omniscience is at its outmost excellence (1.25)
An easy means to obtain the body of the Lord is the
continuous murmuring of the syllable oṂ; by way of it,
all the hindrances disappear (302.1–8)
Te word expressing the Lord is the mystic syllable
(praṇava) (1.27), which should be reﬂected upon and
repeatedly recited by the yogin (1.28)
Śloka 5: Te vighnas to the performances of yoga and
ﬁve saṃskāras are mentioned (302.9–304.15)
Te hindrances (1.29) and their ﬁve accompaniments
(1.30)
Te ﬁve kleśas: avidyā, asmitā, rāga, dveṣa, abhiniveśa
(304.16–306.10)
[≈YSBh 1.8]
Teir cure is (brata, prāṇāyāmayoga, samprajñāta-
or asamprajñātasamādhi; suffering endured by beings
provided with a body, and desire of the yogin to escape;
mala is burnt through the above stages of practice and
the Lord’s body is obtained (306.11–308.12)
aṣṭāṅgayoga: yama, niyama, āsana, pratyāhāra, prāṇā-
yāma, dhāraṇā, dhyāna, samādhi (308.13–17)
aṣṭāṅgayoga: yama, niyama, āsana, prāṇāyāma, praty-
āhāra, dhāraṇā, dhyāna, samādhi (2.29)
Explanation of yamas: ahiṃsā, satya, asteya, brah-
macarya, aparigraha; one who does never kill, irre-
spective of the circumstances is one who follows the
mahāvrata (308.18–310.9)
Explanation of (the same list of) yamas (2.30) [and
YSBh]; one who does never kill, irrespective of the cir-
cumstances follows the mahāvrata (2.31) [and YSBh]
Explanation of niyamas: śauca, santoṣa, tapas, svādhyā-
ya, īśvarapraṇidhāna (310.10–312.3)
Explanation of (the same list of) niyamas (2.32) [and
YSBh]
Te two are to be regarded as one series of ten. Fruits
of yamas (312.4–17); fruits of niyamas (312.18–314.2)
Fruits of yamas and niyamas (2.35–45)
Te right places for performing yoga and the āsanas
(padmāsana, bhadrāsana, svastikāsana) (314.3–316.3)
Stable and easy posture (2.46); padmāsanam, bhadrā-
sanam, svastikāsana, daṇḍāsanam [YSBh]
Te yogin’s posture being comfortable, he performs
pratyāhāra, withdrawing the organs from their do-
mains, and achieves tranquillity of mind and one-
pointedness (316.4–12)
cf. 2.49 and 2.54 (pratyāhāra)
Deﬁnition of prānāyāma as recaka, pūraka, kumbhaka)
(316.12–318.8)
Te yogin’s posture being comfortable, he performs
prāṇāyāma (2.49), which is characterized as recaka, pū-
raka, kumbhaka [YSBh]


--- PAGE 654 ---
B: Parallel Synopses of the YP of the DhPāt and YS[Bh] 635
Dharma Pātañjala
Yogasūtra / [Yogasūtrabhāṣya]
Deﬁnition of dhāraṇā as ﬁxation of the mind on a single
point, resulting in ekāgra (318.9–12)
dhāraṇā is ﬁxing the mind on a single place (3.1)
Mention of dhyāna, brief characterization of samādhi
as dhyāna transforming the mind into its object (i.e. the
Lord) (318.13–16)
Description of dhyāna (3.2) and then samādhi (3.3),
which is dhyāna shining forth as the contemplated ob-
ject only, emptied of itself
Te eight subsidiaries of yoga constitute external sub-
sidiaries of samprajñātasamādhi, hence they do not
lead directly to liberation; that is when sahajamala van-
ishes by way of constant practice of samādhi, and not by
initiation (318.16–320.10)
dhāraṇā, dhyāna and samādhi joined together are
saṃyama, which serves the purpose of realizing the
state of supernatural prowess; the way the yogin should
apply saṃyama is from below and not directly to the
upper tattvas (320.11–322.7)
Te three in one are called saṃyama (3.4), which
should be applied by stages (3.6)
If the yogin wishes to obtain speciﬁc siddhis he should
apply saṃyama upon various elements or beings, e.g.: a
lion or an eagle, thereby obtaining their power; his own
karmic lot of good and bad deeds, thereby knowing the
moment of his death; the nectar of immortality (amṛta)
below the sof palate, thereby obtaining insensibility to
hunger and thirst; the udāna wind, thereby being able
to see the Siddhas and the Gods and obtaining invinci-
bility against his opponents; the samāna wind, thereby
transforming his body into ﬁre; the eye of other beings,
thereby becoming invisible to them; kapok, thereby
becoming able to ﬂy on account of his lightness; the
ﬁve gross elements (whose respective ‘conquest’ is de-
scribed), thereby obtaining eternal youth (322.7–326.7)
If the yogin wishes to obtain speciﬁc siddhis he should
apply saṃyama upon various elements or beings, e.g.:
the three guṇas (3.16); the distinction between word,
object and presented idea (3.17); latent impressions
(3.18); a presented idea (3.19); the outer form of the
body (3.21); the karmic lot, resulting in knowledge of
the moment of his own death (3.22); friendliness (3.23);
powers, like that of an elephant (3.24), or of Garuḍa
[YSBh]; sense-activity (3.25); the sun (3.26); the moon
(3.27); the pole-star (3.28); the cakra of the navel (3.29);
the well of the throat, thereby obtaining insensibility to
hunger and thirst (3.30); the kūrma-vessel (3.31); the
radiance of the head (3.32–33); the heart (3.34); that
which exists for it sown sake (3.35–36); […] the udā-
na wind (3.39); the samāna wind, resulting in radiance
(3.40); the organ of hearing and the space (3.41); the
relation between the body and the air, or the lightness
of the cotton-ﬁbre, resulting in the ability to ﬂy (3.42)
Various kinds of upasargas are met by the yogin; these
are the vāsanās of sattva, rajas and tamas, character-
ized, respectively, by insight, quickness, heaviness; de-
scription of their outcomes, which are supernatural
(sattva and rajas) or causing sickness (tamas); remedies
to cure the latter situation (326.8–328.3)
In samādhi the supernatural powers are upasargas
(3.37)
A means to achieve the end of suffering is to separate ei-
ther the unevolved matter or the mind from the Soul; by
means of prayogasandhi the yogin cuts dharmādharma
and enter another man (328.11–19)
As a result of the dwindling of the bondage of karma,
the yogin penetrates into the body of another (3.38)
[and YSBh 3.43]
saṃyama applied to the ekādaśendriyas bestows the aṣ-
ṭaiśvaryas, i.e. aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, prāpti, prā-
kāmya, īśitva, vaśitva, yatrakāmāvasāyitva (328.19–
330.15)
saṃyama applied on the gross, the essence, the sub-
tle and purposefulness results in subjugation of the el-
ements (3.44); that is followed by the powers such as
aṇiman, etc. (3.45) [explained one by one in the YSBh]
Te vighnas arise: the yogin should refuse invitation
of celestial beings to follow them to heaven and en-
joy pleasures, for they ultimately lead to the suffering
of reincarnation; he should continue his meditation
(332.1–15)
Te yogin, being invited by celestial beings, should re-
sist attachment and pride, for undesired consequences
will follow (3.51)


--- PAGE 655 ---


--- PAGE 656 ---
C: Transliteration Tables
Vowels
(including visarga and anusvāra)
Roman
Akṣara
Vocalizations
Superscript
Parallel
Subscript
Before
consonant
Afer consonant
/ Akṣara
a
ā
or
or
i
ī
+
or
ә
ә¯
+
or
u
ū
+
or
or
+
e
ai
or
+
o
or
+
or
au
or
+
+
or
ṛ(> rә)
ḷ(> lә)
ṃ(> ṅ)
ḥ(> h)


--- PAGE 657 ---
638
Appendices
Consonants
Roman
Akṣara
Sub-
script
Roman
Akṣara
Sub-
script
Parallel
Superscript
Ka
Pa
Ga
Pha
Gha
Ba
Ṅa
Bha
Ca
Ma
Ja
Ya
Ña
Ra
or
Ṭa
La
Ṭā
Va
Ṇa
Śa
Ta
Ṣa
Ta
Sa
Da
Ha
Na
Other signs
Roman
Akṣara
Function / (Name)
Roman
Akṣara
Function
·
vowel-killer
(virāma)
◉
punctuation
mark
,
standard
punctua-
tion mark (pada)
◆
punctuation
mark
§
line-ﬁller
oṂ
or
the syllable oṂ


--- PAGE 658 ---
Sigla


--- PAGE 659 ---


--- PAGE 660 ---
General
BEFEO
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient
BG
Bataviaasch Genootschap
BKI
Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde
BSOAS
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies
C
Consonant
Ca
Consonant with inherent vowel a
CP
Caryāpāda
E
Ensink
EFEO
École Française d’Extrême Orient
GOML
Government Oriental Manuscript Library of Madras
H
Hooykaas
IAIC
International Academy of Indian Culture
IFP
Institut Français de Pondichéry
K
Kirtya (Singaraja)
KITLV
Koninklijke Instituut for Taal-, Land- end Volkenkunde
KP
Kriyāpāda
LOr
Leiden Oriental
MS
Manuscript
NAK
Nepal Archives Kathmandu
NGMPP
Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project
OJ
Old Javanese
OJO
Oud Javaanse Oorkoonde (cf. Brandes 1913)
PNRI
Perpustakaan Nasional Republik Indonesia
PusDok
Pusat Dokumentasi Budaya Bali (Denpasar)
Skt
Sanskrit
StSt
Stuti and Stava (cf. Goudriaan and Hooykaas 1971)
TBG
Tijdschrif voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde, uitgegeven door het
Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen
V
Vowel
VP
Vidyāpāda
YP
Yogapāda
Dictionaries
BED
Balinese-English Dictionary (cf. Shadeg 2007)
JED
Javanese-English Dictionary (cf. Robson and Wibisono 2002)
KBNW
Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandsch Woordenboek (cf. v.d. Tuuk 1896–1912)
MW
Monier-Williams’ (1899) Sanskrit-English Dictionary
OJED
Old Javanese-English Dictionary (cf. Zoetmulder 1982)


--- PAGE 661 ---
642
Sigla
PSW
Petersburger Sanskrit-Wörterbuch (cf. Böthlingk and Roth 1855–75)
TĀK i
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa i (cf. Brunner, Oberhammer and Padoux 2000)
TĀK ii
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa ii (cf. Brunner, Oberhammer and Padoux 2004)
Titles
AgPar
Agastyaparva
RSS
Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha
AV
Arjunavivāha
SBSS
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha
BhPitu
Bhuvana Pitu
SHH
SaṅHyaṅHayu
DhPāt
Dharma Pātañjala
SHK
SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan
Gaṇ
Gaṇapatitattva
SiGu
Siksa Guru
GauḍBh
Gauḍapāda’s Bhāṣya on the SK
SJñUtt
Sarvajñānottara
JS
Jñānasiddhānta
SK
Sāṅkhyakārikā
KK
Kuñjarakarṇa (prose)
SKK
Siksa KandaṅKarәsian
MatPār
Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama
Sut
Sutasoma
Mṛg
Mṛgendratantra
SvT
Svacchandatantra
MVUt
Mālinīvijayottaratantra
TĀdh
Tutur Ādhyātmika
NBG
Notulen van de BG
TanKām
Tantri Kāmaṇḍakan
NiGuhya
Niśvāsaguhya
TigaJñ
Tiga Jñāna
NiKār
Niśvāsakārikā
TJ
Tattvajñāna
NiMukha
Niśvāsamukha
TK
Tutur Kamokṣan
NR
Navaruci
VraŚā
Vratiśāsana
NT
Netratantra
Vṛh
Vṛhaspatitattva
PS
Pāśupatasūtra
YD
Yuktidīpikā
PBh
Pañcārthabhāṣya
YS
Yogasūtra
RCar
Rasa Carita
YSBh
Yogasūtrabhāṣya


--- PAGE 662 ---
Bibliography


--- PAGE 663 ---


--- PAGE 664 ---
Manuscript Primary Sources
Old Javanese / Sanskrit-Old Javanese
Arjunavivāha
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 16 L 641; 38 leaves.
Ṛṣi Śāsana
Romanized paper transcript by Ketut Sudarsana (1988), PusDok 290; 21 leaves
/ 17 pages.
Kuñjarakarṇa (prose version)
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, LOr 2266; 53 leaves.
Kumāratattva I
Romanized paper transcript LOr 14.984 of a Lontar from Geria Pidada
(Klungkung); 26 leaves / 18 pages.
Kumāratattva II
Romanized transcript K iii c 2256, by I Gusti Nyoman Agung (1941), of
a Lontar from Singaraja; 36 leaves / 31 pages.
Catur Bhumi
Nipah Ms, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 16 L 634; 80 leaves.
Cadhu Śakti
Romanized paper transcript PusDok 371, by I Gusti Ngurah Gede (1977,
re-typed by Suastawa 1990) of K iii b 4718, a Lontar from Geria Gede (Balayu,
Marga, Tabanan); 56 leaves / 32 pages.
Tiga Jñāna
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, LOr 2267; 29 leaves.
Tutur Ādhyātmika
Romanized paper transcript LOr 10.286, copy of K 2375; 82 leaves / 34
pages.
Tutur Kamokṣan
Romanized paper transcript LOr 10.258, copy of K 2335; 18 leaves / 18
pages.
Dharma Pātañjala
[1] Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, Schoemann i-21 (Berlin
Staatsbibliothek), 89 leaves. [2] Romanized paper transcript by J. Ensink (s.d.) of
MS Schoemann i-21.
Bhimasorga
[1] Lontar MS, Old Sundanese script, PNRI 16 L 623, 30 leaves. [2] Nipah
MS, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 16 L 455; 36 leaves.
Bhuvanakośa
[A] Roman transcript, provided with an Indonesian translation, by a re-
search team headed by I Gusti Ngurah Rai Mirsha, printed by PusDok (1991) [B]
Lontar MS, Balinese script, LOr 5022, 68 leaves. [C] Balinese transcript PNRI Br
562, 198 pages.
Mantra & Akṣara
Lontar MS, Central Old Javanese (‘Buda’) script, PNRI L 256, 66 leaves.
Yama Niyama Brata
Romanized paper transcript PusDok no. 1446, by Anak Agung Dewi
Sunihati (1996), of a Lontar from Griya Pekarangan (Budakeling, Karangasem);
57 leaves / 40 pages.
Rasa Carita
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, ms. Jav. b 1 (Oxford Bodleian Library)
(≈SaṄHyaṄHayu); 78 leaves.
SaṅHyaṅHayu
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, ms. Mal. Pol. 161 (Bibliothéque
Nationale de France); 78 leaves.
Saptati
Romanized paper transcript K iii b 1199, by Ketut Kaler (1949), of a Lontar from
Banjuning (Buleleng); 71 leaves / 56 pages.


--- PAGE 665 ---
646
Bibliography
Siksa Guru
[1] Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 16 L 628; 19 leaves. [2]
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 88 L 642; 24 leaves.
Sevaka Dharma (West Java)
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 16 L 637; 103
leaves.
Sevaka Dharma (Bali)
Lontar, Balinese script, MS Kropak 363 no. 562 (Universitas Uda-
yana, Denpasar); 6 leaves.
Sumanasāntaka
Romanized paper transcript PusDok 1999, of a Lontar from Puri Kelodan
(Karangasem); 102 pages.
Old Sundanese
Siksa KandaṅKarәsian
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, PNRI 16 L 630; 28 leaves.
SaṅHyaṅRaga Devata
Nipah MS, Western OJ quadratic script, ms. 07.106 (Museum Sri
Baduga Bandung); 36 leaves.
Sanskrit
Trayodaśaśatikakālottara
Paper Ms, Devanāgarī, in NAK 5-4632, NGMPP Reel No. B 118 /
7; 46 pages.
Niśvāsakārikā
[A] Paper transcript, Devanāgarī, IFP MS T 17, from a MS belonging to
M.K.S. Bhattar Madurai; 188 leaves / 635 pp. [A] Devanāgarī transcript, IFP MS
T 127, from MS GOML R. No. 16804; 506 pp. [B] Devanāgarī transcript, IFP
MS T 150, from MS GOML R. No. 14403; 353 pp. [C] e-texts (Roman) of the
above transcripts, typed principally by S.A. Sarma and Nibedita Rout (T 17), R.
Sathyanarayanan (T 127), Nibedita Rout (T 150).
Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā
[1] Palm-leaf MS, early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script, NAK 1-227, NG-
MPP Reel No. A 41/14; 114 leaves. [2] e-text (Roman and Devanāgarī) prepared
by Dominic Goodall, with the contribution of Diwakar Acharya, Peter Bisschop
and Nirajan Kaﬂe, from MS NAK 1-227, supplemented with readings from its
two Devanāgarī apographs, MS 5-2401, NGMPP Reel No. A 159/18 and Sanskrit
MS i.33 of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, London. [Includes
the Niśvāsamukha, Niśvāsamūla, Niśvāsottara, Niśvāsanaya and Niśvāsaguhya].
Te verse and chapter numeration used in this book is that of Goodall’s edition
in progress.
Brahmayāmala
Palm-leaf MS NAK 3-370, NGMPP Reel No. A 42-6; 344 leaves.
Sarvajñānottara
[1] Palm-leaf MS, early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script, NAK 1-1692, NGMPP
Reel No. A 43/12; 35 leaves. [2] e-text of an unpublished critical edition by Do-
minic Goodall, collated from IFP MS T 334, T 760 and NAK 1-1692 (December
2008). Te verse and chapter numeration used in this book is that of Goodall’s
edition in progress.
Sarvajñānottaravṛtti of Aghoraśiva
cf. Sarvajñānottara [2]


--- PAGE 666 ---
Bibliography
647
Printed Primary Sources
Old Javanese / Sanskrit-Old Javanese
Agastyaparva cf. Gonda 1936a.
Arjunavivāha Kakavin of Mpu Kaṇva cf. Wiryamartana 1990.
Uttarakāṇḍa
Uttarakāṇḍa; Teks Jawa Kuna, ed. by P.J. Zoetmulder. Yogyakarta: Penerbit Uni-
versitas Sanata Dharma, 2006.
Kuñjarakarṇa
Kak
Kuñjarakarna Dharmakathana, Liberation through the Law of the Buddha. An Old
Javanese Poem by Mpu Dusun, ed. and trans. A. Teeuw and S.O. Robson. Te
Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1981.
Prose
cf. van der Molen 1983.
Koravāśrama
Korawāśrama; Een Oud-Javaansch proze-geschrif, uitgegeven, vertaald en toege-
licht, by J.L. Swellengrebel. Santpoort: Mees [PhD diss., Leiden University].
Gaṇapatitattva cf. Sudarshana Devi 1958.
Catur Bhūmi
Serat Catur Bumi dan Sang Hyang Raga Dewata; Edisi dan terjemahan serta de-
sckripsi naskah, ed. and (Indonesian) trans. research team including E.S. Ekadjati,
U.A. Darsa, T. Wartini, Ayatrohaedi, A. Yogaiswara. Bandung: Toyota Founda-
tion/Fakultas Sastra Universitas Padjadjaran, 2000.
Jñānasiddhānta cf. Soebadio 1971.
Tantu Paṅgәlaran cf. Pigeaud 1924.
Tattvajñāna cf. Sudarshana Devi 1962. Devabuda
Serat Dewabuda. Alihaksara dan Terjemahan. Laporan penelitian, ed. and (In-
donesian) trans. Ayatrohaédi. Bandung: Bagian Proyek Penelitian dan Pengajian
Kebudayaan Sunda, Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, 1988.
Dharma Śūnya Kakavin
Dharma Śūnya; Memuja dan meneliti Śiwa, ed. and (Indonesian) trans. Ida Bagus
Made Dharma Palguna. Leiden, 1999 [PhD dissertation, Leiden University].
Navaruci
Nawaruci: inleiding, Middel-Javaansche prozatekst, vertaling vergeleken met de Bi-
masoetji in oud-Javaansch metrum, by Prijohoetomo. Groningen: Wolters, 1934
[PhD Dissertation, Utrech University].
Nirarthaprakṛta
‘Nirartha-Prakreta’, ed. and (Dutch) trans. R. Poerbatjaraka, BKI 107 (1951), pp.
201–225.
Pārthayajña Kakavin
Unsur-unsur ajaran dalam kakawin Pārthayajña, ed. and (Indonesian) trans. S.S.
Adiwimarta. Jakarta: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Indonesia, 1993 [PhD
Dissertation].


--- PAGE 667 ---
648
Bibliography
Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa cf. Gonda 1932.
Bhāratayuddha cf. Supomo 1993.
Bhīṣmaparva
Het Oudjavaansche Bhīṣmaparwa, ed. J. Gonda. Bandoeng: A.C. Nix & Co., 1936.
Bhuvanasaṅkṣepa
‘Bhuvana-saṁkṣepa: Śaiva Cosmology in Indonesia’, ed. and trans. Sudarshana
Devi Singhal, in Lokesh Chandra (ed.) Cultural Horizons of India, Volume V, pp.
102–161. New Delhi: IAIC/Aditya Prakashan, 1997.
Mahājñāna cf. Sudarshana Devi 1962.
Rāmāyaṇa Kakavin
Rāmāyaṇa Kakawin, ed. and trans. S. Santoso (3 vols.). New Delhi: IAIC, 1980.
VaṅbaṅVideya Kiduṅ
Waŋbaŋ Wideya; A Javanese Pañji Romance, ed. and trans. S.O. Robson. Te
Hague: Nijhoff, 1971.
Virāṭaparva
Wirāṭaparwa; Oudjavaansch Prozegeschrif, ed. and trans. H.H. Juynboll. ’s-Gra-
venhage: Martinus Nijhoff, 1912.
Vṛhaspatitattva cf. Sudarshana Devi 1957.
Vratiśāsana
Wratiśāsana. A Sanskrit text on Ascetic Discipline with Kawi Exegesis, ed. and
(Hindi) trans. Sharada Rani. New Delhi: IAIC, 1961.
Śivarātrikalpa Kakavin of Mpu Tanakuṅ
Śiwarātrikalpa of Mpu Tanakung; An Old Javanese Poem, its Indian Source and
Balinese Illustrations, ed. and trans. A. Teeuw, T.P. Galestin, S.O. Robson, P.J.
Worsley and P.J. Zoetmulder. Te Hague: Nijhoff, 1969.
SaṅHyaṅHayu cf. Darsa 1998.
SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan
Sang Hyang Kamahāyānikan; Oud-Javaansche Tekst met Inleiding, Vertaling en
Aanteekeningen, by J. Kats. ’s-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff, 1910.
(Śaiva)
‘Śaiva Version of SaṅHyaṅKamahāyānikan’, ed. and trans by Lokesh Chandra, in
id. (ed.) Cultural Horizons of India, Volume V, pp. 7–101. New Delhi: IAIC/Aditya
Prakashan, 1997.
Sārasamuccaya
Sāra-samuccaya (a Classical Indonesian Compendium of high ideals), ed. and trans.
Raghu Vira. New Delhi: IAIC, 1962.
Sutasoma Kakavin of Mpu Tantular
Sutasoma: a Study in Javanese Wajrayana, ed. and trans. S. Santoso. New Delhi:
IAIC, 1985.
Sūrya Sevana cf. Hooykaas 1966.
Smaradahana Kakavin of Dharmaja
Smaradahana; Oud-Javaansche tekst met vertaling, by Poerbatjaraka. Bandoeng:
A.C. Nix & Co., 1931.
Harṣavijaya Kiduṅ
Kidung Harsa-Wijaya; tekst, inhoudsopgave en aanteekeningen, by C.C. Berg. ’s-
Gravenhage: Nijhoff, 1931.


--- PAGE 668 ---
Bibliography
649
Old Sundanese
Jati Niskala
Kawih Paningkes dan Jatiniskala: Alihaksara dan Terjemahan, ed. and (Indone-
sian) trans. Ayatrohaédi, T. Wartini and U.A. Darsa. Bandung: Bagian Proyek
Penelitian dan Pengembangan Kebudayaan Sunda (Sundanologi), 1987.
Bhujaṅga Manik cf. Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006.
SaṅHyaṅRaga Devata cf. Catur Bhūmi
Sevaka Dharma
Sewaka Darma (Kropak 408) dan Sang Hyang Siksakandang Karesian (Kropak
630): Transkripsi dan Terjemahan, ed. and (Indonesian) trans. S. Danasasmita,
Ayatrohaédi, T. Wartini, U.A. Darsa. Bandung: Departemen Pendidikan dan
Kebudayaan, Direktorat Jenderal Kebudayaan, Proyek Penelitian dan Pengkajian
Kebudayaan Nusantara (Javanologi), 1985–86.
Sri Ajnyana cf. Noorduyn and Teeuw 2006.
Sanskrit
Agnipurāṇa
Agnipurāṇa: a Collection of Hindu Mythology and Traditions, ed. by Rajendralal
Mitra. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1870–79.
Ajitāgama
Ajitāgama (2 vols.), ed. by N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1964 and 1967.
Atharvaśiropaniṣad
Atharvaśira Upaniṣad, ed. and trans. B. Tubini. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve, 1952.
Anteṣṭividhi cf. Acharya 2010.
Abhidharmakośabhāṣya
Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam of Vasubandhu, ed. by P. Pradhan (rev. 2nd ed.). Patna:
K.P. Jayaswal Research Center, 1975.
Amṛtabindūpaniṣad
Te Yoga Upanishads; with the commentary of Sri Upanishad-Brahma-Yogin, ed.
by A. Mahadeva Shastri. Madras: Te Adyar Library.
Aṣṭaprakaraṇa
Aṣṭaprakaraṇam, ed. by V. Dvivedī. Varanasi: Sampurnananda Sanskrit Univer-
sity, 1988.
Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati
YP: Īśānaśivagurudeva Paddhati of Īśānaśiva Gurudeva, Vol. 4, ed. by T. Gaṇapati
Śāstrī. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1990 [Trivandrum 1925].
Īśvarapratyabhijñāvimarśinī of Abhinavagupta
Te Īśwarapratyabhijñā of Utpaladeva with the Vimarśinī by Abhinavagupta, ed.
Madhusudan Kaul Shāstrī. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1918–1921.
Upāyahṛdaya cf. Tucci 1998 [19812].
Ṛgvedasaṃhitā
Die Hymnen des Ṛgveda (2 parts), ed. by T. Aufrecht. Bonn: Adolf Marcus, 1877
[1861].


--- PAGE 669 ---
650
Bibliography
Kiraṇatantra
(1)
VP: Il ‘Kiraṇāgama’. Testo e traduzione del «Vidyāpāda». Supplemento n. 3 agli
Annali, vol. 35, fasc. 2. Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale, 1975.
(2)
VP 1–6 with Rāmakaṇṭha’s Vṛtti: cf. Goodall 1998.
Kuñcitāṅghristava of Umāpati
Śri Kuñcitāṅghistavaḥśrīmadumāpatiśivapraṇītaḥ, ed. by Rājakaṇēsa Tīkṣitar. Chi-
dambaram: Kirāsvēṭa Piras, 1958.
Kubjikāmatatantra cf. Goudriaan and Schoterman 1988.
Kūrmapurāṇa
Te Kūrma Purāṇa, crit. ed. by Anand Swarup Gupta. Varanasi: All-India Kashi-
raj Trust, 1971.
Gaṇakārikā of Bhāsarvajña (or Haradattācārya)
Gaṇakārikā of Ācārya Bhāsarvajña with the Ratnaṭīkā and four appendices, ed. by
C.D. Dalal. Baroda: Oriental Institute of Baroda, 1966 [1920].
Garuḍapurāṇa
Garuḍapurāṇam of Maharṣi Vedavyāsa, ed. with introduction, indexes and textual
criticism (in Hindi) by R. Bhattacharya. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series
Ofﬁce, 1964.
Gorakṣaśataka of Gorakṣanātha
(1)
Gorakṣaśatakaṃ, ed by Swami Kuvalayānanda and S.A. Shukla, in Yoga-Mīmāṃ-
sā 7. Lonavla: Kaivalyadhama S.M.Y.M. Samiti, 1958.
(2)
ed. by G.W. Briggs in Gorakhnāth and the Kānphaṭa Yogīs, pp. 284–304. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1938.
Gauḍapādakārikā of Gauḍapāda (ii)
Gauḍapāda-kārikā, ed. with a complete trans. into English, notes, introd. and ap-
pendices by R.D. Karmarkar. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1973 [1953].
Gauḍapādabhāṣya of Gauḍapāda cf. Sāṅkhyakārikā.
Gheraṇḍasaṃhitā
Das indische Yoga-Lehrbuch Gheraṇḍasaṃhitā; Aus dem Sanskrit übersetzt, kom-
mentiert und mit Abbildungen herausgegebenen, by P. Tomi. Wichtrach: Institut
für Indologie Wichtrach, 2006 [1993].
Chāndogyopaniṣad cf. Olivelle 1998.
Jayākhyasaṃhitā
Jayākhyasaṃhitā of Pāñcarātra Āgama, crit. ed. by Embar Krishnamacharya. Ba-
roda: Oriental Institute, 1967 [1931].
Tattvatrayanirṇaya of Sadyojyotis (With Aghoraśiva’s VṚtti) cf. Aṣṭaprakaraṇa.
Tattvaprakāśa of Bhojadeva
(With Aghoraśiva’s Vṛtti) cf. Aṣṭaprakaraṇa.
(With Kumāradeva’s Tātparyadīpikā) cf. Aṣṭaprakaraṇa.
Tattvaprakāśatātparyadīpikā of Kumāradeva cf. Tattvaprakāśa.


--- PAGE 670 ---
Bibliography
651
Tattvavaiśāradī of Vācaspatimiśra
Pātañjalayogadarśanam; Vācaspatimiśraviracita-tattvavaiśāradī-vijñānabhikṣukṛta-
yogavārtikavibhūṣita-vyāsabhāṣyasametam, śrīnārāyaṇamiśrena ṭippaṇīpariśiṣṭā-
dibhiḥsaha sampaditam. Varanasi: Bhāratīya Vidyā Prakāśan 1982 [1963].
Tantrāloka of Abhinavagupta
Te Tantrāloka of Abhinava Gupta. With Commentary by Rājānaka Jayaratha, ed.
by Madhusudān Kaul Śāstrī (12 vols.). Allahabad/Bombay/Srinagar, 1918–38.
Tantrālokaviveka of Jayaratha cf. Tantrāloka.
Tarkarahasyadīpikā of Guṇaratna cf. Ṣaḍḍarśaṇasamuccaya (1).
Taittirīyopaniṣad with Bhāṣya of Śaṅkara
Taittirīya-upaniṣad: avec le commentaire de Śaṃkara / Śāṅkarabhāṣyasahitā tait-
tirīyopaniṣat, ed., trans. and notes by M. Angot. Paris: Édition-Diffusion de Boc-
card, 1997
Netratantra
Netratantra with the commentary (Netroddyota) of Rājānaka Kṣemarāja, ed. Mad-
husūdan Kaul Śāstrī. Bombay, 1926 and 1939.
Nyāyamañjarī of Jayantabhaṭṭa
Nyāyamañjarī of Jayantabhaṭṭa with Ṭippaṇī—Nyāyasaurabha by the editor, ed.
by K.S. Varadacharya (2 Vols.). Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1969 and
1983.
Nyāyasūtrabhāṣya of Vātsyāyana
Gautamīyanyāyadarśana with Bhāṣya of Vātsyāyana, ed. by Anantalal Takur.
Delhi: Indian Council of Philosophical Research, 1997.
Pañcārthabhāṣya of Kauṇḍinya
(1)
cf. Pāśupatasūtra.
(2)
Pañcārthabhāṣya; draf critical edition of chapter 1 (on sūtra 1–47) by P. Bisschop,
2009.
Pañcāvaraṇastava of Aghoraśiva
Te Pañcāvaraṇastava of Aghoraśivācārya: A twelfh-century South Indian pre-
scription for the visualization of Sadāśiva and his retinue, An annotated critical
edition, ed. by D. Goodall, Nibedita Rout, R. Sathyanarayanan, S.A.S. Sarma, T.
Ganesan, S. Sambandhasivacarya. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO, 2005.
Padmapurāṇa
Mahāmuniśrīmadvyāsapraṇītam Padmapurāṇam, ed. by Viśvanātha Nārāyaṇa Ma-
ṇḍalika (4 vols.). Poona: Ānandaśrama Sanskrit Series, 1833–1894.
Paramokṣanirāsakārikāvṛtti of Ramakaṇṭha cf. Aṣṭaprakaraṇa.
Parākhyatantra cf. Goodall 2004.
Pātañjalayogasūtrabhāṣyavivaraṇa (of Śaṅkara?)
(1)
Pātañjala-yogasūtra-bhāṣya-vivaraṇaṃof Śaṅkara-bhagavatpāda, ed by P.S. Rama
Śastri and S.R. Krishanmurthi Śastri. Madras: GOML, 1952.
(2)
A Critical Edition of the Pātañjalayogasūtrabhāṣyavivaraṇa, First Pāda, Samād-
hipāda with an Introduction, by K. Harimoto [PhD DIssertation, University of
Pennsylvania], 1999.


--- PAGE 671 ---
652
Bibliography
Pāśupatasūtra
Pasupata Sutras with Pancarthabhashya of Kaundinya, ed. by R. Anantakrishna
Sastri. Trivandrum: Te Oriental Manuscript Library of the University of Tra-
vancore, 1940.
Pūrvamīmāṃsāsūtrabhāṣya of Śabara cf. Frauwallner 1968.
Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad cf. Olivelle 1998.
Brahmasūtrabhāṣya of Śrīkaṇṭha
Te Brahma Sūtra Bhāṣya of Śrīkaṇṭhācārya with the Commentary Śivārka-
maṇi Dīpikā bu the Famous Appaya Dīkṣita, ed. and publ. with Sūtrārthacan-
drikā by R. Halasyanatha Sastri (vol. 2). Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1986 [1906].
Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa
Śrī-Vyāsa-maharṣiproktaṃBrahmāṇḍapurāṇam. (With Introduction in Sanskrit
and English and an Alphabetical Index of Verses), ed. J.L. Shastri. Bombay: Veṅ-
kateśvara Steam Press, 1912.
Bhagavadgītā cf. Mahābhārata
Bhāgavatapurāṇa
Bhāgavata Purāṇa of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa; With Sanskrit Commentary Bhā-
vārthabodhinī of Śrīdharasvāmin, ed. J.L. Shastri. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1983.
Maṇiprabhā of Rāmānanda Sarasvatī cf. Yogasūtra (3).
Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama
(1)
VP: Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Vidyāpāda) avec le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rā-
makaṇṭha, ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1977.
(2)
K-Y-CP: Mataṅgapārameśvarāgama (Kriyāpāda, Yogapāda et Caryāpāda), avec le
commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha, ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1982.
Matsyapurāṇa
Śrīmad-Dvaipāyanamuni-praṇītaṃMatsyapurāṇam, etad pustakam Ānandāśra-
masthapaṇḍitaiḥsaṃśodhitam, ed. by H.N. Apte. Poona, 1981 [1907].
Mahābhārata
Te Mahābhārata. For the ﬁrst time critically edited by V.S. Sukthankar, with the
cooperation of S.K. Belvalkar, A.B. Gajendragadkar, V. Kane, R.D. Karmakar, P.L.
Vaidya, S. Winternitz, R. Zimmerman, and other scholars and illustrated by Sh-
rimant Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi. (Since 1943 ed. S. Belvalkar), 19 vols. Poona:
Bandharkar Oriental Research Institute, 1927–1959.
Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali
Te Vyākaraṇa-Mahābhāṣya of Patañjali, Vol. 1, ed. F. Kielhorn. Poona: the
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1962 [Tird edition, revised and fur-
nished with additional readings, references and select critical notes by K.V. Abhy-
ankar].
Mārkaṇḍeyapurāṇa
Te Mārkaṇḍeya Mahāpurāṇam (with Hindi trans. and textual corrections) by
Rājendranāthaśarmā. Delhi: Nag, 1984
Mālinīvijayottaratantra
(1)
Mālinīvijayottaratantram, ed. Madhusūdana Kaula Śāstrī. Srinagar, 1922.
(2)
(Chapters 1–4, 7, 11–17:) cf. Vasudeva 2004.


--- PAGE 672 ---
Bibliography
653
Mṛgendratantra
(1)
VP-YP: Śrī Mṛgendra Tantram (Vidyāpāda and Yogapāda) with the Commentary
of Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shāstrī. Srinagar, 1930.
(2)
KP-CP: Mṛgendrāgama (Kriyāpāda et Caryāpāda) avec le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa
Nārāyaṇakaṇṭha, ed. N.R. Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1962.
Mṛgendravṛttidīpikā of Aghoraśiva
Śrī mṛgendram kāmikopāgamam vidyāyoga-pādādvayamilitaṃśrībhaṭṭanārāya-
ṇakaṇṭhaviracitayā vṛttyā tadvyākhyayāghoraśivācāryaviracitayā dīpikayā cālaṅ-
kṛtam, ed. by Kṛṣṇaśāstrī and K.M. Subrahmaṇyaśāstrī. Śaivāgamasiddhāntapa-
ripalanasaṅgrahasaṃkhyā 12, Devakottai, 1928
Mokṣakārikā of Sadyojyotis (with Rāmakaṇṭha’s Vṛtti) cf. Aṣṭaprakaraṇa.
Yuktidīpikā
Yuktidīpikā. Te Most Signiﬁcant Commentary on the Sāṃkhyakārikā, crit. ed. A.
Wezler and S. Motegi. Hamburg: Institut für Kultur und Geschichte Indiens und
Tibets, 1998.
Yogasūtra of Patañjali
(1)
cf. Angot 2008.
(2)
[Samādhipāda] cf. Maas 2006.
(3)
Yogasūtram by Maharṣipatañjali With Six Commentaries (1) Rājamārtaṇḍa by
Bhojarāja, (2) Pradīpikā by Bhāvā-Gaṇeśa, (3) Vṛtti by Nāgoji Bhaṭṭa, (4) Maṇi-
prabhā by Rāmānandayati, (5) Chandrika by Anantadeva and (6) Yogasudhākara
by Sadāśivendra Sarasvatī. Edited with Notes by Nyāyāchārya Kāvyatīrtha Paṇḍit
Ḍhunḍhirāj Śāstrī. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 1930.
Yogasūtrabhāṣya of Vyāsa (or Patañjali or Vindhyavāsin)
(1)
cf. Maas 2006.
(2)
cf. Angot 2008.
Ratnaṭīkā of Bhāsarvajña cf. Gaṇakārikā.
Ratnatrayaparīkṣā of Śrīkaṇṭha cf. Aṣṭaprakaraṇa.
Rājamārtaṇḍa of Bhoja cf. Yogasūtra (3).
Rāmāyaṇa of Vālmīki
Te Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa, ed. by G.H. Bhatt and U.P. Shah (7 vols.). Baroda: Ori-
ental Institute, 1960–1975.
Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha cf. Rauravāgama (Vol. 1)
Rauravāgama
Rauravāgama, ed. by N.R. Bhatt (3 Vols.). Pondicherry: IFI, 1961, 1972, 1988.
Liṅgapurāṇa
Liṅgapurāṇa. Bombay: Śrī Veṅkateśvara Steam Press, 1906
Vāmanapurāṇa
Te Vāmana Purāṇa, critical ed. Anand Swarup Gupta. Varanasi: All-India Kashi-
raj Trust, 1967.
Vāyupurāṇa
Te Vāyumahāpurāṇam, ed. by Khemarāja. Delhi: Nag Publishers, 1983 [Bom-
bay, Veṅkateśvara Press 1895].


--- PAGE 673 ---
654
Bibliography
Viṣṇupurāṇa
Viṣṇupurāṇa. Bombay: Śrī Veṅkateśvara Steam Press, 1910.
Vīnāśikhatantra
Te Vīnāśikhatantra; A Śaiva Tantra of the Lef Current; Edited with an Introduc-
tion and a Translation by Teun Goudriaan. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985.
Śataśāstra of Āryadeva cf. Tucci 1998.
Śatikakālajñāna cf. Goodall 2007.
Śivadṛṣṭi of Somānanda
Te Śivadṛṣṭi of Srisomānandanātha with the Vritti by Utpaladeva, ed. Madhusu-
dan Kaul Shastri. Srinagar, 1934.
Śivapurāṇa
Te Śivamahāpurāṇam, ed. Kṣemarāja Śrīkṛṣṇadāsa (2 vols.). Delhi: Nag Pub-
lishers, 1986 (reprint).
Śivasaṃhitā
Śivasaṃhitā; Kāśīnivāsī Gosvāmī Śrīrāmacaraṇapurīkṝta-bhāṣānuvādasahitā. Bom-
bay: Śrī Veṅkaṭeśvara Steam Press, 1960.
Śaivaparibhāṣā of Śivāgrayogin
Śrīśivāgrayogīndrajñānaśivācāryaviracitā śaivaparibhāṣā. Te Śaivaparibhāṣā of
Śivāgrayogīndrajñānaśivācārya, ed. by H.R. Rangaswamy Iyengar and R. Ramasas-
tri. Mysore: Oriental Research Institute.
Śvetāśvataropaniṣad cf. Olivelle 1998.
Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya of Haribhadra
(1)
Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya of Haribhadra Sūri. With the commentaries Tarkarahasya-
dīpikā of Guṇaratnasūri and Laghuvṛtti of Somatilaka Sūri and an Avacūrṇi, ed.
by M.K. Jain. Calcutta: Bhāratīya Jñānapīṭha, 1969.
(2)
Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya. With the Laghuvṛtti commentary by Maṇibhadra, ed. Ka-
mesvaranatha Misra. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofﬁce, 1969.
Saṃskāravidhi cf. Acharya 2007.
Sarvajñānottaratantra
‘Sarvajñānottarāgamaḥvidyāpāda and yogapāda’, ed. by K. Ramachandra Sarma
and revised by R. Tangaswami Sarma, Adyar Library Bulletin 62, 1998, pp. 181–
232.
Sarvadarśanasaṅgraha of Mādhava
Sarva-darśana-saṃgraha of Sāyaṇa-Mādhava edited with an original commentary
in Sanskrit by the late Mahāmahopādhyāya Vasudev Shastri Abhyankar. Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1954.
Sāṅkhyasūtra
Vijñānabhikṣubhāṣyānvitaṃsāṅkhyasūtram: saṭīkatattvasamāsasūtra-sāṅkhyasā-
ra-sametam. Sāṅkhyasūtrānuvāda-śabdānukramaṇī-ṭippaṇyādi-yutam, ed. by R.S.
Bhattacharya. Vārāṇasī: Bhāratīya Vidyā Prakāśana.
Sāṅkhyavṛtti
Sāṅkhyavṛtti; A commentary on the Sāṅkhya Kārikā, ed. by E.A. Solomon. Ahmed-
abad: Gujarat University, 1973.


--- PAGE 674 ---
Bibliography
655
Sāṅkhyakārikā of Īśvarakṛṣṇa
Te Sāṃkhyakārikā: Īśvarakṛṣṇa’s Memorable Verses of Sāṃkhya Philosophy with
the Commentary of Gauḍapādācārya, ed. and trans. H. Dutt Sharma. Poona: Te
Oriental Book Agency, 1933.
Sāṅkhyatattvakaumudī of Vācaspatimiśra
Te Sāṁkhya-Tattva-Kaumudī; Vācaspati Miśra’s Commentary on the Sāṁkhya-
kārikā, ed. and trans. Mahāmahopādhyāya Ganganatha Jha, with Introduction
and Critical Notes by Har Dutt Sharma, Revised and Reedited by M.M. Patkar.
Delhi: Chaukhamba Sanskrit Pratishthan, 2004.
Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama
Sārdhatriśatikālottarāgama avec le commentaire de Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha, ed. N.R.
Bhatt. Pondicherry: IFI, 1979.
Suprabhedāgama
Śrīmat suprapētākamam, printed by Mayilai-Aḻakappa Muyaliyār. Madras: Civa-
ñānapotayantracālai, 1908.
Skandapurāṇa (Ur-)
Skandapurāṇasya Ambikākhaṇḍa, ed. by Kṛṣṇaprasāda Bhaṭṭarāī. Kathmandu,
Mahendrasaṃskṛtaviśvavidyālayaḥ, 1988.
Spandakārikā of Vasugupta
Spandakrikas of Vasugupta with the Nirnaya by Ksemaraja, edited with preface,
introduction and English translation, by M.K. Shastri. Srinagar: Kashmir Pratap
Steam Press, 1925.
Svacchandatantra
Te Svacchandatantram: with commentary ‘Uddyota’ by Kṣemarājācārya, ed. by
Vraj Vallabh Dvivedi. Delhi: Parimal, 1985.
Svacchandatantroddyota of Kṣemarāja cf. Svacchandatantra.
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha
VP
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgrahaḥ: VidyāpādaḥSadyojyotiṣkṛtaṭīkāsahitaḥ/Te Tantra
of Svayaṃbhū: Vidyāpāda with the Commentary of Sadyojyoti, ed. and trans. P.S.
Filliozat. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts/Motilal Banar-
sidass, 1994.
Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgrahaṭīkā of Sadyojyotis cf. Svāyambhuvasūtrasaṅgraha.
Other Languages
Adji Sangkya of Ida Ketoet Djlantik
(Balinese) Adji Sangkya. N.p., 1947.
Chung-Lun of T’sing-mu or Piṅgala (Chinese) cf. Bocking 1995.
Tirumantiram of Tirumular
(Tamil) Tirumantiram, A Tamil Scriptural Classic, ed. and trans. B. Natarajan.
Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1991.
Dīghanikāya
(Pāli) Te Dīgha Nikāya, Vol. 1, ed. by T.W. Rhys Davids and J. Estlin Carpenter.
London: Te Pali Text Society, 1890.


--- PAGE 675 ---
656
Bibliography
Paesikahāṇayaṃ(Prakrit) cf. Bollée 2002.
Milindapañha
(Pāli) Te Milindapañho being dialogues between king Milinda and the Buddhist
sage Nāgasena, ed. by V. Trenckner. London: published for the Pali Text Society
by Luzac, 1962.
Sāmaññaphalasutta [Pāli] cf. Dīghanikāya.
Pāyāsi Suttanta (Pāli) cf. Dīghanikāya.
Suvarṇasaptati (Paramārtha’s Chinese trans. from the Sanskrit) cf. Takakusu 1904.
Secondary Sources
Abraham, M.
1988
Two Medieval Merchant Guilds of South India. New Delhi: Manohar.
Acharya, D.
2007
‘Te Saṃskāravidhi: A Manual on the Transformatory Rite of the Lakulīśa-
Pāśupatas’, in D. Goodall and A. Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la
mémoire d’Hélène Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, pp.
27–48. Pondicherry: IFI/EFEO
2010
‘Te Anteṣṭividhi: A Manual on the Last Rite of the Lakulīśa Pāśupatas’, Jour-
nal Asiatique 298, pp. 13–156.
Acri, A.
2006
‘Te Sanskrit-Old Javanese Tutur Literature from Bali. Te Textual Basis of
Śaivism in Ancient Indonesia’, Rivista di Studi Sudasiatici 1, pp. 107–137.
2008
‘Te Vaimala Sect of the Pāśupatas. New Data from Old Javanese Sources’,
Tantric Studies 1, pp. 193–208.
2010
‘Javanese Manuscripts of the Tattvajñāna’, in Gupta, M. (ed.) From Beyond
the Eastern Horizon: Essays in honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra, pp. 115–
125. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan.
2011
‘Glimpses of early Śaiva Siddhānta; Echoes of doctrines ascribed to Bṛhaspati
in the Sanskrit-Old Javanese Vṛhaspatitattva’, Indo-Iranian Journal (forth-
coming).
Angot, M.
2008
Pātañjalayogsūtram Vyāsabhāṣyasametam, Le Yoga-Sūtra de Patañjali; Le Yo-
ga-Bhāṣya de Vyāsa; avec des extraits du Yoga-Vārttika de Vijñāna-Bhikṣu.
Édition, traduction et présentation de Michel Angot. Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
Bakker, H.
2000
‘Somaśarman, Somavaṃśa and Somasiddhānta. A Pāśupata tradition in sev-
enth-century Dakṣiṇa Kosala’, in R. Tsuchida and A. Wezler (eds.), Ha-
ranandalahari. Volume in Honour of Professor Minoru Hara on his Seventieth
Birthday, pp. 387–410. Reinbeck: Dr. Inge Wezler.
2004
‘At the Right Side of the Teacher: Imagination, Imagery, and Image in Vedic
and Śaiva Initiation’, in P. Granoff and K. Shinohara (eds.), Images in
Asian Religions: Texts and Contexts, pp. 117–148. Vancouver/Toronto: Te
University of British Columbia Press.


--- PAGE 676 ---
Bibliography
657
2007
‘Tanesar, the Pāśupata Order and the Skandapurāṇa; Studies in the Skanda-
purāṇa IX’, Journal of Indological Studies 19, pp. 1–16.
Behrend, T. E.
1998
Katalog Induk Naskah-naskah Nusantara, Jilid 4: Perpustakaan Nasional Re-
publik Indonesia. Jakarta: Yayasan Obor Indonesia/EFEO.
Bhandarkar, D.R.
1908
‘An Êkliṅgjî stone inscription and the origin and history of the Lakulīśa Sect’,
Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 21, pp. 151–167.
Bhattacharya, G.
1961
Studies in Nyāya-Vaiśeṣika Teism. Calcutta: Sanskrit College.
Bhattacharya, R.
2002
‘Cārvāka fragments: a new collection’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 30, pp.
597–640.
Bisschop, P.
2006
Early Śaivism and the Skandapurāṇa: Sects and Centres. Groningen: Egbert
Forsten.
2010
‘Once Again on the Identity of Caṇḍeśvara in Early Śaivism: A rare Caṇḍeś-
vara in the British Museum’, Indo-Iranian Journal 53, pp. 233–249.
Bocking, B.
1995
Nāgārjuna in China: a translation of the middle treatise. Lewiston: Edwin
Mellen Press.
Bollée, W.
2002
Te Story of Paesi (Paesi-kahāṇayaṃ). Soul and Body in Ancient India. A Di-
alogue on Materialism. Text, Translation, Notes and Glossary. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz Verslag.
Böthlingk, O. and R. Roth
1855–75
Sanskrit-Wörterbuch. 7 parts. St. Petersburg.
Bouy, C.
1994
Les Nātha-Yogin et les Upaniṣads. Paris: Diffusion de Boccard.
Brandes, J.L.A.
1900
‘Bladvulling betreffende het citeeren uit palmblad handschrifen’, TBG 42, pp.
102–104.
1913
Oud-Javaansche oorkonden: nagelaten transcripties. Batavia/’s-Hage: Alb-
recht/Nijhoff.
Bronkhorst, J.
1985
‘Patañjali and the Yoga Sūtras’, Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik 10, pp. 191–
212.
Brunner, H.
1963
Somaśambhupaddhati; Première Partie: Le rituel quotidien dans la tradition
sivaïte de l’lnde du Sud selon Somaśambhu. Pondicherry: IFI.
1977
Somaśambhupaddhati; Troisieme Partie: Rituels occasionels dans la tradition
sivaïte de l'lnde du Sud selon Somaśambhu II: dīkṣā, abhiṣeka, vratoddhāra,
antyeṣṭi, srāddha; et Rituels dans la tradition śivaïte selon Somaśambhu. Pon-
dicherry: IFI.


--- PAGE 677 ---
658
Bibliography
1986
‘Te Pāśupatas as Seen by the Śaivas’, Schrifen zur Geschichte und Kultur des
alten Orients 18, pp. 513–520.
1986–92
‘Te Four Pādas of Śaivāgamas’, Journal of Oriental Research Madras 56–62,
pp. 260–278.
1992
‘Jñāna and Kriyā: Relation between Teory and Practice in the Śaivāgamas’,
in T. Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in
Honor of André Padoux, pp. 1–59. Albany: State University of New York
Press.
1994
‘Te Place of Yoga in the Śaivāgamas’, in N.R. Bhatt et al. (eds.) Pandit N.R.
Bhatt Felicitation Volume, pp. 425–461. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Brunner, H., G. Oberhammer and A. Padoux
2000
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa I. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature
hindoue tantrique. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissen-
schafen.
2004
Tāntrikābhidhānakośa II. Dictionnaire des termes techniques de la littérature
hindoue tantrique. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissen-
schafen.
Cabaton, A.
1912
Catalogue sommaire des manuscrits indiens, indo-chinois et malayo-polynésiens.
Paris: Leroux.
de Casparis, J.G. 1950Prasasti Indonesia I. Bandoeng: A.C. Nix & Co.
1975
Indonesian Palaeography. A History of writing in Indonesia from the beginning
to c. a.d. 1500. Leiden/Köln: Brill.
Cerquiglini, B.
1989
Éloge de la variante: histoire critique de la philologie. Paris: Editions du Seuil.
Chattopadhyaya, D.
1994
(Ed., in collaboration with M.K. Gangopadhyaya) Cārvāka/Lokāyata. An
Anthology of Source Materials and Some Recent Studies. New Delhi: Indian
Council of Philosophical research.
Chemparathy, G.
1965
‘Te testimony of the Yuktidīpikā concerning the Īśvara doctrine of the Pāśu-
patas and Vaiśeṣikas’, Wiener Zeitschrif für die Kunde Südasiens 9, pp. 119–
146.
Coedès, G.
1930
‘Les inscriptions Malaises de Śrīwijaya’, BEFEO 30, pp. 29–80.
Dagens, B. and M.-L. Barazer-Billoret
2000
Le Rauravāgama: un traité de rituel et de doctrine śivaïtes. 2 Vols. Pondi-
cherry: IFP.
Dain, A.
1975
Les Manuscrits. Paris: Société d’édition les belles lettres [1949].
Damais, L.C.
1958
‘Études d'épigraphie indonésienne V; Dates des manuscrits et documents di-
vers de Java, Bali et Lombok’, BEFEO 49, pp. 1–257.
1970
Répertoire onomastique de l’épigraphie javanaise (jusqu’a pu Siṇḍok Śrī Īśā-
nawikrama Dharmottuṅgadewa). Paris: EFEO.


--- PAGE 678 ---
Bibliography
659
Dasgupta, S.
1922
A History of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dyczkowski, M.
1988
Te canon of the Śaivāgama and the Kubjikā Tantras of the western Kaula tra-
dition. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Darsa, U.A.
1998
Sang Hyang Hayu: kajian ﬁlologis naskah Bahasa Jawa Kuno di Sunda pada
abad xvi. Bandung: Program Pascasarjana Universitas Padjadjaran [M.Hum.
Tesis, Universitas Padjadjaran].
Djafar, H.
1995
‘Prasasti Batu dari Sumberhadi Daerah Lampung Tengah (Suatu Informasi)’,
Jurnal penelitian Balai Arkeologi Bandung 1, pp. 1–3.
Ensink, J.
1974
‘Sutasoma’s Teaching to Gajavaktra, the Snake and the Tigress (Tantular, Su-
tasoma Kakavin 38.1–42.4)’, BKI 130, pp. 195–226.
1978
‘Śiva-Buddhism in Java and Bali’, in H. Bechert (ed.) Buddhism in Ceylon and
Studies on Religious Syncretism in Buddhist Countries. Report on a Symposium
in Göttingen. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht.
Filliozat, J.
1967
‘Agastya et la propagation du Brahmanisme au Sud-Est Asiatique’, Te Adyar
Library Bulletin 31-32 (Dr. V. Raghavan Felicitation Volume), pp. 417–475.
1974
‘Te psychological discoveries of Buddhism’, in J. Filliozat and C. Caillat
(eds.) Laghu-prabandhā, pp. 143–156. Leiden: Brill.
Filliozat, P.S.
2001
‘Te philosophy of Sadyojyoti’, in V. Kameswari, K.S. Balasubramanian
and T.V. Vasudeva (eds.) Śaiva Rituals and Philosophy, pp. 19–49. Chennai:
Te Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute.
Frauwallner, E.
1968
Materialien zur ältesten Erkenntnislehre der Karmamīmāṃsā. Wien: Kom-
missionsverlag der österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschafen.
1973
History of Indian Philosophy. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
Gonda, J.
1932
Het Oud-Javaansche Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. Prozatekst en kakawin uitgegeven
en van Aanteekeningen voorzien. Bandoeng: Nix.
1933
Het Oud-Javaansche Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa. Bandoeng: Nix.
1935
‘Te Javanese version of the Bhagavadgītā’, Tijdschrif voor Indische Taal-,
Land- en Volkenkunde, pp. 36–82.
(1936)
‘Agastyaparwa, uitgegeven, geommenteered en vertaald’, repr. of BKI 90 (1933),
pp. 329–419; 92 (1935), pp. 337–458; 94 (1936), pp. 223–285. N.p., n.d.
1970
‘Śiva in Indonesien’, Wiener Zeitschrif für die Kunde Südasiens 14, pp. 1–31.
1971
‘Balinese Hymns addressed to god Ākāśa’, in S. Ganesan (ed.) K.A. Nilakanta
Sastri Felicitations Volume, pp. 404–415. Madras: Professor Nilakanta Sastri
Felicitation Committee.
1973
Sanskrit in Indonesia. New Delhi: IAIC [1954].


--- PAGE 679 ---
660
Bibliography
1975
Te Indian religions in Pre-Islamic Indonesia and Teir Survival in Bali. Lei-
den: Brill.
Goodall, D.
1998
Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s Commentary on the Kiraṇatantra. Vol. I: chapters 1–6.
Critical edition and annotated translation. Pondichéry: IFP/EFEO.
2004
Te Parākhyatantra. A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. A Critical Edition and
Annotated Translation. Pondichéry: IFP/EFEO.
2006
‘Initiation et délivrance selon le Śaiva Siddhānta’, G. Tarabout and G. Colas
(eds.) Rites hindous: transferts et transformations (Puruṣārtha 25), pp. 93–116.
2007
‘A ﬁrst edition of the [Śatika-]Kālajñāna, the shortest of the non-eclectic re-
censions of the Kālottara’, in D. Goodall and A. Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tan-
triques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner / Tantric Studies in Memory of Hélène
Brunner, pp. 125–166. Pondicherry: IFI/EFEO.
forth.
‘Te Rauravasūtrasaṅgraha Revisited (some indications of its relative antiq-
uity with an appendix of improvements to the edited text)’. Unpublished pa-
per.
Goodall, D. and H. Isaacson
2007
‘Workshop on the Niśvāsatattvasaṃhitā: Te Earliest Surviving Śaiva Tantra?’,
Newsletter of the Nepal-German Manuscript Cataloguing Project 3 (January-
February), pp. 4–6.
Goris, R.
1926
Bijdragen tot de Kennis der Oud-Javaansche en Balineesche Teologie. Leiden:
Drukkerij A. Vros [PhD Dissertation, Leiden University].
Goudriaan, T.
1996
‘Translating Problematic Balinese Stuti-s’, in F. Garzilli (ed.) Translating,
Translations, Translators from India to the West, pp. 25–38. Cambridge, MA:
Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, Harvard University.
Goudriaan, T. and S. Gupta
1981
Hindu Tantric and Śākta Literature. History of Indian Literature, vol. II, 2.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Goudriaan, T. and C. Hooykaas
1971
Stuti and Stava (Bauddha, Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava) of Balinese Bauddha Brah-
mans. Amsterdam/London: North Holland Publishing Company.
Goudriaan, T. and J. Schoterman
1988
Kubjikāmatatantra, Kulālikāmnāya version. Critical edition. Leiden: Brill.
Granoff, P.
2006
‘Śiva and his Gaṇas: Techniques of Narrative Distancing in Purāṇic Stories’,
in R. Panda and M. Mishra (eds.) Voice of the Orient; Tribute to Prof. Upen-
dranath Dhal, pp. 77–103. Delhi: Eastern Book Linkers.
Grifﬁths, A.
2005
‘La stèle d'installation de Śrī Tribhuvaneśvara: une nouvelle inscription pré-
angkorienne du musée national de Phnom Penh (K. 1214)’ (In coll. with G.
Gerschheimer and J.C. Eade), Journal Asiatique 293, pp. 11–43.
2010
Review of Uli Kozok et al., Kitab undang-undang Tanjung Tanah: Naskah
Melayu yang tertua, BKI 166, pp. 133–138.


--- PAGE 680 ---
Bibliography
661
Grönbold, G.
1983
‘Materialen zur Geschichte des Ṣaḍaṅga-Yoga I. Der Ṣaḍaṅga-Yoga im Hin-
duismus’, Indo-Iranian Journal 25, pp. 181–190.
de Haan, M.J.M.
1973
Enige aspecten van de tekstkritiek van Middelnederlandse teksten. Leiden: El-
ve/Labor Vincit.
Hadiwijono, H.
1967
Man in the present Javanese mysticism. Baarn: Bosch and Keuning.
Hahn, M.
2001
‘On editing codices unici’, in F. Grimal (ed.) Les sources et le temps. A collo-
quium. Pondicherry, 11–13 January 1997, pp. 49–62. Pondicherry: IFP/ EFEO.
Hara, M.
1992
‘Pāśupata Studies (1)’, in T. Goudriaan (ed.), Ritual and Speculation in Early
Tantrism. Studies in Honor of André Padoux, pp. 209–226. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
2002
Pāśupata Studies (Edited by J. Takashima). Vienna: Sammlung de Nobili,
Institut für Südasien-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde.
2008
‘Sleep in Sanskrit literature: nidrā and svapna’, Traditional South Asian Med-
icine 8, pp. 130–163.
Holle, K.F.
1867
‘Vlugtig berigt omtrent eenige lontar-handschrifen, afomstig uit de Soenda-
landen, door Raden Saleh aan het Bataviaasch Genootschap van K. en W. ten
geschenke gegeven, met toepassing op de inscriptiën van Kwali’, TBG 16, pp.
450–471.
1877
Tabel van oud- en nieuw- indische alphabetten. Buitenzorg: C. Lang.
1882
Tabel van oud- en nieuw- indische alphabetten. Bijdrage tot de palaeographie
van Nederlandsch-Indië. ’s Hage/Batavia: M. Nijhoff/T. Bruining & Co.
Hooykaas, C.
1962
‘Śaiva Siddhānta in Java and Bali, some remarks on its recent study’, BKI 118,
pp. 309–327.
1966
Sūrya-Sevana. Te way to God of a Balinese Śaiva Priests. Amsterdam: Noord-
Hollandsche Uitgevers Maatschappij.
1974
Cosmogony and Creation in Balinese Tradition. Te Hague: M. Nijhoff.
Hulin, M.
1980
Mṛgendrāgama; sections de la doctrine et du yoga, avec la Vṛtti de Bhaṭṭanārā-
yaṇakaṇṭha et la Dīpikā d’Aghoraśivācārya. Traduction, Introduction et Notes.
Pondichéry: IFI.
Hunter, T.M.
2000
‘Te Aridharma reliefs of Caṇḍi Jago’, in Lokesh Chandra (ed.), Society and
Culture of Southeast Asia; Continuities and Changes, pp. 69–102. New Delhi:
IAIC and Aditya Prakashan.
2007
‘Te Body of the King: Reappraising Singhasari Period Syncretism’, Journal of
Southeast Asian Studies 38, pp. 27–53.


--- PAGE 681 ---
662
Bibliography
forth.
‘Sanskrit in the Archipelago: Translation, Vernacularization and Translocal
Identity’, in Chattopadhyay Suchorita (ed.) An Anthology of Critical Es-
says on Southeast Asia. Kolkata: Centre for Advanced Study, Department of
Literature, Jadavpur University.
Jacobi, H.
1923
Die Entwicklung der Gottesidee bei den Indern und deren Beweise für das Da-
sein Gottes. Bonn: Kurt Schroeder.
Jayammal, K.
1993
Te Sivajñānabodhasaṅgrahabhāṣya of Śivāgrayogin. English translation with
introduction and indexes. Madras: Radhakrishnan Institute for Advanced
Study in Philosophy, University of Madras.
Johnston, E.H.
1937
Early Sāṃkhya. London: Royal Asiatic Society.
Jones, R.
1980
‘Review Article—Problems of Editing Malay Texts Discussed with reference
to Hikayat Muhammad Hanaﬁat’, Archipel 29, pp. 121–127.
Kent, E.F.
2009
‘ ‘‘What’s Written on the Forehead Will Never Fail’’. Karma, Fate, and Head-
writing in Indian Folktales’, Asian Ethnology 68, pp. 1–26.
Kern, H.
1920
‘Spraakkunst van het Oudjavaansch; slot diversen oudjavaansch, eerste gede-
elte’, in Verspreide Geschrifen IX. ’s-Gravenhage: Martinus Nijhoff.
1922
‘De legende van Kunjarakarna volgens het oudst bekende handschrif’, in H.
Kern, Verspreide Geschrifen 10, pp. 1–76. ’s-Gravenhage: Nijhoff [1901].
Kirfel, W.
1920
Die Kosmographie der Inder nach den Quellen dargestellt. Bonn: Schroeder.
Kratz, E.U.
1981
‘Te editing of Malay manuscripts and textual criticism’, BKI 137, pp. 229–
243.
Krom, N.J.
1911
‘De inscriptie van Nglawang’, TBG 53, pp. 411–434.
Larson, G.J.
1979
Classical Sāṃkhya; An Interpretation of its History and Meaning. Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass [1969].
1999
‘Classical Yoga as Neo-Sāṃkhya: A Chapter in the History of Indian Philos-
ophy’, Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 53, pp. 723–732.
2008
‘Introduction to the Philosophy of Yoga’, in G.J. Larson and R.S. Bhatta-
charya (eds.), Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies, Volume XII. Yoga: India’s
Philosophy of Meditation. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
la Vallée Poussin, L. de
1936–37
‘Le Bouddhisme et le Yoga de Patañjali’, Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 5,
pp. 223–242.
Leggett, T.
1990
Te complete commentary by Saṅkara on the Yoga Sūtra-s: a full translation of
the newly discovered text. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.


--- PAGE 682 ---
Bibliography
663
van Lennep, D.
1969
‘Some observations on the nipah leaf kropaks from West Java, with an anal-
ysis of content and historical relevance of the manggala to the Old-Javanese
Amaramālā’ [Unpublished BA Honours Tesis, University of Sydney].
Lorenzen, D.N.
1991
Te Kāpālikas and Kālāmukhas; Two Lost Śaivite Sects. New Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass [1972].
Maas, P.A.
2006
Samādhipāda; Das erste Kapitel des Pātañjalayogaśāstra zum ersten Mal kri-
tisch ediert/Te First Chapter of the Pātañjalayogaśāstra for the First Time Crit-
ically Edited. Aachen: Shaker Verlag.
2009
‘Te So-called Yoga of Suppression in the Pātañjala Yogaśāstra’, in E. Franco
(ed., in collaboration with D. Eigner) Yogic Perception, Meditation, and Al-
tered States of Consciousness, pp. 263–282. Vienna: Verlag der Österreichis-
chen Akademie der Wissenschafen.
Mallinson, J.
2007
Te Khecarīvidyā of Ādinātha; A critical edition and annotated translation of
an early text of haṭhayoga. London and New York: Routledge.
Miyamoto, J.
2007
‘Lokāyata in Tamil’, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 55, pp. 103–107.
van der Molen, W.
1981
‘Aims and Method of Javanese Philology’, Indonesia Circle 26, pp. 5–12.
1983
Javaanse Tekstkritiek. Een overzicht en een nieuwe benadering geillustreerd aan
de Kunjarakarna. Dordrecht: Foris Publications [PhD Dissertation, Leiden
University].
van der Molen, W. and I.K. Wiryamartana
2001
‘Te Merapi-Merbabu manuscripts. A neglected collection’, BKI 157, pp. 51–
64.
Monier-Williams, M.
1899
Sanskrit-English Dictionary. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
van Naerssen, F.H.
1937
‘Twee koperen oorkonden van Balitung in het Koloniaal Instituut te Amster-
dam’, BKI 95, pp. 441–461.
Netscher, E.
1853
‘Iets over eenige in de Preanger-Regentschappen gevonden Kawi-handschrif-
en’, TBG 1, pp. 469–479.
Nihom, M.
1994
Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism. Te Kuñjarakarṇadharma-
kathana and the Yogatantra. Wien: Sammlung de Nobili, Institut für Südasi-
en-, Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde der Universität Wien.
1995a
‘Sāṅkhya and Pāśupata Reﬂexes in the Indo-Javanese Vṛhaspatitattva’, Wiener
Zeitschrif für die Kunde Südasiens 39, pp. 203–220.
1995b
‘Old Javanese Rāmāyaṇa 25.25 and 24.117ab: a Study in Literature and Pāśu-
pata Śaivism’, Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 39, pp. 653–671.


--- PAGE 683 ---
664
Bibliography
Noorduyn, J.
1982
‘Bujangga Manik’s journeys through Java: topographical data from an Old
Sundanese source’, BKI 138, pp. 413–442.
1985
‘Te three palm-leaf mss from Java in the Bodleian Library and their donors’,
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, pp. 58–64.
Noorduyn, J. and A. Teeuw
2000
‘Te Ascension of Sri Ajnyana; A local form of Śaivism in an Old Sundanese
allegorical poem’, in Lokesh Chandra (ed.) Society and Culture of Southeast
Asia; Continuities and Changes, pp. 283–298. New Delhi: IAIC and Aditya
Prakashan.
2006
Tree Old Sundanese poems. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Notulen van de Bataviaasch Genootschap
1867
Notulen van de Algemene en Bestuursvergaderingen van het Bataviaasch Ge-
nootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen (published as vols. 1–59, 1862–
1921). Bandung.
Oertel, H.
1938/39
‘Asat = ‘Undifferentiated’, ‘Formless’, ‘Incapable of Perception by the Senses’
in Vedic Prose’, New Indian Antiquary 1, pp. 317–321.
Olivelle, P.
1998
Te Early Upaniṣads; Annotated Text and Translation. New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pigeaud, T.
1924
De Tantu Panggelaran; Een Oud-Javaansch prozageschrif. Uitgegeven, ver-
taald en toegelicht. ’s-Gravenhage: Nederlandsche Boek- en Steendrukkerij
[PhD dissertation, Leiden University].
1960
Java in the 14th century; A study in cultural history; Te Nāgarakĕrtāgama by
Rakawi Prapañca of Majapahit, 1365 A.D. Tird edition, revised and enlarged
by some contemporaneous texts, with notes, translations, commentaries and a
glossary (Vol. 1 of 5). Te Hague: Nijhoff.
1967
Literature of Java. Catalogue raisonné of Javanese manuscripts in the Library
of the University of Leiden and other public collections in the Netherlands. Vol.
I. Synopsis of Javanese literature 900–1900 A.D.. Te Hague: M. Nijhoff.
1968
Literature of Java: […] Vol. II. Descriptive list of Javanese manuscripts. Te
Hague: M. Nijhoff.
1970
Literature of Java: […] Vol. III. Illustrations and facsimiles of manuscripts,
maps, addenda and a general index of names and subjects. Te Hague: M.
Nijhoff.
1975
Javanese and Balinese manuscripts and some codices written in related idioms
spoken in Java and Bali. Descriptive catalogue. Wiesbaden: F. Steiner.
1980
Literature of Java: […] Vol. IV: Supplement. Te Hague: M. Nijhoff.
Pines, S. and T. Gelblum
1966
‘Al-Bīrūnī’s Arabic Version of Patañjali’s Yogasūtra: A Translation of his First
Chapter and a Comparison with Related Sanskrit Texts’, BSOAS 29, pp. 302–
325.


--- PAGE 684 ---
Bibliography
665
1977
‘Al-Bīrūnī’s Arabic Version of Patañjali’s Yogasūtra: A Translation of the Sec-
ond Chapter […]’, BSOAS 40, pp. 522–549.
1983
‘Al-Bīrūnī’s Arabic Version of Patañjali’s Yogasūtra: A Translation of the Tird
Chapter […]’, BSOAS 46, pp. 258–304.
1989
‘Al-Bīrūnī’s Arabic Version of Patañjali’s Yogasūtra: A Translation of the Fourth
Chapter […]’, BSOAS 52, pp. 265–305.
Pleyte, C.M.
1907
‘Raden Moending Laja di Koesoema. Een oude Soendasche Ridderroman’,
TBG 49, pp. 1–33.
1914
‘Poernawidjaja’s hellevaart, of de volledige verlossing. Vierde Bijdrage tot de
kennis van het oude Soenda’, TBG 56, pp. 365–441.
Poerbatjaraka, R.M.N.
1933
’Lijst der Javaansche handschrifen in de boekerij van het Kon. Bat. Genoot-
schap’, Jaarboek van het Koninklijk BG van Kunsten en Wetenschappen 1, pp.
269–376.
Reynolds, L.D. and N.G. Wilson
1974
Scribes and Scholars: A Guide to the Transmission of Greek and Latin Litera-
ture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Robson, S.O.
1988
Principles of Indonesian Philology. KITLV Working Papers 1. Dordrecht/Prov-
idence: Foris.
Robson, S.O and S. Wibisono
2002
Javanese-English Dictionary. Singapore: Periplus editions.
Rubinstein, R.
2000
Beyond the realm of the senses. Te Balinese ritual of kekawin composition.
Leiden: KITLV Press.
Sanderson, A.G.J.S.
1988
‘Śaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, in: Sutherland, S. et al. (eds.) Te
World’s Religions, pp. 128–172. London: Routledge.
1992
‘Te Doctrine of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra’, in T. Goudrian (ed.) Ritual and
Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of André Padoux, pp. 281–312.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
2001
‘History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra
and the Buddhist Yoginītantras’, in F. Grimal (ed.) Les sources et le temps. A
colloquium. Pondicherry, 11–13 January 1997, pp. 1–47. Pondicherry: IFP/
EFEO.
2003–04
‘Śaivism among the Khmers. Part I’, BEFEO 90/91 (2003–2004), pp. 349–462.
2006a
‘Te Lākulas: New Evidence of a System Intermediate between Pāñcārthi-
ka Pāśupatism and Āgamic Śaivism’, Indian Philosophical Annual 24 [2003–
2005], pp. 143–217.
2006b
‘Te Date of Sadyojyotis and Bṛhaspati’, Cracow Indological Studies 8, pp. 39–
91.
2009
‘Te Śaiva Age—Te Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Me-
dieval Period’, in S. Einoo (ed.) Genesis and Development of Tantrism, pp.
41–350. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo.


--- PAGE 685 ---
666
Bibliography
Santiko, H.
1995
‘Early Research on Śivaitic Hinduism during the Majapahit Era’, in J. Mik-
sic and E. Soekatno (eds.), Te Legacy of Majapahit, pp. 55–69. Singapore:
National Heritage Board.
Sardjono, P., E. Ekadjati and E. Kalsum
1987
Naskah Sunda Kuna: Transliterasi dan Terjemahan. Bandung: Proyek Peneli-
tian dan Pengkajian Kebudayaan Sunda, Pemda Jawa Barat, Dinas Pendidi-
kan dan Kebudayaan.
Sarkar, H.B.
1967
‘Te Evolution of the Śiva-Buddha Cult in Java’, Journal of Indian History 155,
pp. 637–646.
Schoterman, J.
1979
‘A Note on Balinese Sanskrit’, BKI 135, pp. 223–346.
Schuster, N.
1972
‘Inference in the Vaiśeṣikasūtras’, Journal of Indian Philosophy 1, pp. 341–395.
Sedyawati, K., I.K. Wiryamartana and W. van der Molen
2002
Katalog Naskah Merapi-Merbabu Perpustakaan Nasional Republik Indonesia.
Leiden: Opleiding Talen en Culturen van Zuidoost-Azië en Oceanië.
Setianingsih, R.M.
1989
‘Telaah Singkat Prasasti Dawangsari’, in Proceedings Pertemuan Ilmiah Arke-
ologi V, Yogyakarta, 4–7 Juli 1989, vol. II A: Kajian Arkeologi Indonesia, pp.
143–155. Jakarta: Proyek Penelitian Purbakala.
Sferra, F.
2007
‘Materials for the Study of the Levels of Sound in the Sanskrit Sources of the
Śaivasiddhānta. Ratnatrayaparīkṣā 22, 70c-86b, 171c-173b and its Ullekhinī.
With Excerpts from an Unpublished Commentary’, in D. Goodall and A.
Padoux (eds.) Mélanges tantriques à la mémoire d’Hélène Brunner / Tantric
Studies in Memory of Hélène Brunner, pp. 443–474. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO.
Shadeg, N.
2007
Balinese-English Dictionary. Singapore: Tuttle Publishing.
Soebadio, H.
1971
Jñānasiddhānta. Secret Lore of the Balinese Śaiva Priest. Te Hague: M. Nijhoff.
Solomon, E.A.
1974
Te commentaries of the Sāṃkhya Kārikā—A Study. Ahmedabad: Gujarat
University.
Stephen, M.
2002
‘Returning to original form; A central dynamic in Balinese ritual’, BKI 158,
pp. 61–94.
Subbarayalu, Y.
2002
‘Te Tamil Merchant-Guild Inscription at Barus, Indonesia: A Rediscovery’,
in N. Karashima (ed.) Ancient and Medieval Commercial Activities in the
Indian Ocean: Testimony of Inscriptions and Ceramic-Sherds [Report of the
Taisho University Research Project 1997–2000]. Tokyo: Taisho University.
Sudarshana Devi
1957
Wṛhaspati-tattwa, an Old Javanese philosophical text. Nagpur: IAIC.


--- PAGE 686 ---
Bibliography
667
1958
Gaṇapati-tattwa. New Delhi: IAIC.
1962
Tattwajñāna and Mahājñāna. New Delhi: IAIC.
Sukanda-Tessier, V.
1977
Le triomphe de Sri en pays soundanais: étude ethno-philologique des techniques
et rites agraires et des structures socio-culturelles. Paris: EFEO.
Supomo, S.
1993
Bhāratayuddha: an Old Javanese poem and its Indian sources, ed. and trans. S.
Supomo. New Delhi: IAIC/Aditya Prakashan.
Takakusu, J.
1904
‘La Sāṃkhyakārikā, étudiée à la lumière de sa version chinoise’, BEFEO 4, pp.
1–65 and 978–1064.
Tanselle, G.T.
1989
A rationale of textual criticism. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Teeuw, A. and S.O. Robson
2005
Bhomāntaka; Te death of Bhoma. Leiden: KITLV Press.
Torella, R.
1998
‘Te kañcukas in the Śaiva and Vaiṣṇava Tantric Tradition: Some Consider-
ations between Teology and Grammar’, in G. Oberhammer (ed.) Studies
in Hinduism II; Miscellanea to the Phenomenon of Tantras, pp. 55–86. Wien:
Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschafen.
1999
‘Sāṃkhya as Sāmānyaśāstra’, Asiatische Studien/Études Asiatiques 53, pp. 553–
561.
2001
‘Te Word in Abhinavagupta’s Bṛhad-vimarśinī’, in R. Torella et al. (eds.)
Le parole e i marmi; Studi in onore di Raniero Gnoli nel suo 70° compleanno,
pp. 853–874. Roma: Istituto Italiano per l’Africa e l’Oriente.
Tubb, G.A. and E.R. Boose
2007
Scholastic Sanskrit; A Handbook for Students. New York: American Institute
of Buddhist Studies, Columbia University.
Tucci, G.
1998
Pre-Diṅnāga Buddhist Texts on Logic From Chinese Sources. Translated with
an introduction, Notes and Indices. Kathmandu: Pilgrims Book House [Ma-
dras 19812].
van der Tuuk, H.N.
1896–1912
Kawi-Balineesch-Nederlandsch woordenboek (four Vols.). Batavia: Landsdruk-
kerij.
Uhlenbeck, E.M.
1986
‘Clitic, sufﬁx, and particle: Some indispensable distinctions in Old Javanese
grammar’, in C.M.S. Hellwig and S.O. Robson (eds). A Man of Indonesian
Letters: Essays in Honour of Professor A. Teeuw, pp. 334–341. Dordrecht:
Foris.
2003
‘Old Javanese word structure’, in J. Hladký (ed.) Language and Function: To
the Memory of Jan Firbas, pp. 307–314. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Vasudeva, S.
2005
Te Yoga of the Mālinīvijayottaratantra. Pondicherry: IFP/EFEO.


--- PAGE 687 ---
668
Bibliography
Watson, A.
2006
Te self’s awareness of itself; Bhaṭṭarāmakaṇṭha’s arguments against the Bud-
dhist doctrine of no-self. Wien: Sammlung de Nobili, Institut für Südasien-,
Tibet- und Buddhismuskunde der Universität Wien.
Weck, W.W.
1976
Heilkunde und Volkstum auf Bali. Jakarta: P.T. Intermasa [Stuttgart 1937].
White, D.G.
2000
‘Introduction; Tantra in Practice: Mapping a Tradition’, in D.G. White (ed.)
Tantra in Practice, pp. 3–38. Princeton/Oxford: Princeton University Press.
2004
‘Early Understandings of Yoga in the Light of Tree Aphorisms from the Yoga
Sūtras of Patañjali’, in E. Ciurtin (ed.) Du corps humain, au Carrefour de
plusieurs saviors en Inde. Mélanges offerts à Arion Rosu par ses collègues et ses
amis à l’occasion de son 80e anniversaire, Stvdia Asiatica 4–5 (2003–2004), pp.
613–629.
2009
Sinister Yogis. Chicago and London: Te University of Chicago Press.
Wiryamartana, I.K.
1990
Arjunawiwāha. Trasformasi teks Jawa Kuno lewat tanggapan dan penciptaan
di lingkungan sastra Jawa. Yogyakarta: Duta Wacana University Press.
1993
‘Te scriptoria in the Merbabu-Merapi area’, BKI 149, pp. 503–509.
Wolters, O.W.
1967
Early Indonesian Commerce: A Study in the Origins of Śrīvijaya. Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press.
1982
History, culture, and region in Southeast Asian perspectives. Singapore: Insti-
tute of Southeast Asian Studies.
Woods, J.H.
1914
Te Yoga-system of Patañjali. Delhi-Varanasi-Patna: Motilal Banarsidass.
Zieseniss, A.
1939
‘Studien zur Geschichte des Śivaismus: die śivaitische Systeme in der altja-
vanischen Literatur’, BKI 98, pp. 75–223.
1958
Studien zur Geschichte des Śivaismus. Die Śaiva-Systematik des Vṛhaspati-
tattva. New Delhi: IAIC.
Zoetmulder, P.J.
1974
Kalangwan: a survey of Old Javanese Literature. Te Hague: M. Nijhoff.
1982
Old Javanese-English Dictionary [With the collaboration of S.O. Robson] (2
vols). ’s-Gravenhage: M. Nijhoff.
1983
De taal van het Ādiparwa. Dordrecht: Foris [1950].


--- PAGE 688 ---
Index of Selected Words


--- PAGE 689 ---


--- PAGE 690 ---
Tis index covers the most important and interesting words (in both Sanskrit and
Old Javanese) that appear in the Dharma Pātañjala, and/or that have been discussed
in Part iii. It does not include those words that appear in the philological commen-
tary of Part i (pp. 53–81), in the Diplomatic Edition and in the Translation—these
last can be easily found by consulting the relevant entries referring to the Critical
Edition, which faces the Translation on even-numbered pages). Proper names are
not italicized and appear with initial capital. Italicized page numbers refer to oc-
currences in the Critical Edition.
abhiniveśa
‘obsession’ 300, 306, 482, 498,
506, 507.
abhivyakti
‘manifestation’ (of the divine
qualities of the Lord in the yogin) 286,
288, 366, 410, 411, 413, 547, 570; (of
right knowledge) 411.
āgama
‘reliable testimony of scripture’,
‘revelation’ 29, 208, 210, 236, 348, 552,
555, 578, 622, 633.
Agastya
339, 372, 373.
ahaṅkāra
‘self-awareness’ 30, 212, 216, 220,
226, 316, 329, 395, 409, 425–429, 439,
448, 450–453, 462, 463, 620–626.
aiśvarya
‘Sovereignty’ (a Power of buddhi)
244, 246, 250, 364, 441, 444, 449, 622;
(property of the Lord) 361, 362; kaiś-
varyan, ‘supernatural prowess’ 286, 300,
359, 498, 528.
ākasmika
‘accidental’ 593.
ākasmikatvavāda
‘doctrine of accidental-
ity’ 594.
ānandasamādhi
‘blissful
absorption’
37,
292, 494, 633.
aṇḍabhuvana
‘Egg-World’ 31, 204, 206,
222, 224, 226, 330, 429, 431, 623.
aṇiman/aṇimā
‘miniaturization’ 41, 328,
330, 362, 444, 483, 533, 535, 537, 543,
620, 630, 634, 635.
anumāna
‘inference’ 25, 29, 208, 210, 236,
238, 244, 290, 444, 468, 552, 554, 567,
577, 578, 622, 633; of the sāmānya-
todṛṣṭa kind 468, 555, 567–570, 578, 596.
aśakti
‘disability’ 33, 242, 260, 262, 264, 268,
378, 441, 442, 445, 627, 628.
asamprajñātasamādhi
‘non-cognitive
ab-
sorption’ 37, 292, 294, 306, 318, 482,
490, 495, 629, 633.
āsana
‘yogic posture’ 39, 40, 308, 314, 316,
482, 511, 512, 519, 629, 634; ‘throne’
352, 357, 360, 361, 364, 426, 542, 620.
asmitā
‘egoicity’ 38, 300, 304, 306, 482,
489–491, 498, 506, 633, 634.
asmitāsamādhi
‘egoic absorption’ 37, 292,
494, 633.
aṣṭaguṇas
‘eight supernatural powers’ 257,
418, 419, 482, 534, 535, 536; ‘eight qual-
ities’ (of buddhi) 442.
aṣṭaiśvarya
(= aṣṭaguṇa) 41, 246, 252, 328,
330, 418, 445, 447, 534, 543, 620, 624,
630.
aṣṭāṅga yoga
‘yoga of the six ancillaries’
vii, 39, 318, 510, 477, 482, 511, 512, 629,
634.
aṣṭaśaktis
‘eight powers’ 362.
aṣṭasiddhis
‘eight perfections’ (among the
pratyayas), 33, 242, 256, 262, 264, 442,
622, 627.
avidyā
‘ignorance’ 38, 300, 304, 306, 482,
486, 498, 505, 558, 559, 613, 634.
bhāvas
‘qualities, predispositions’ (of bud-
dhi) 441–444, 448, 449, 515, 557, 599.
Bhṛṅgiriṭi
35, 280, 369, 370.
bhūtacaitanyavāda
‘doctrine of the identity
between the body and consciousness’
602, 605, 606.
bhūtādi
‘origin of the gross elements’ (type
of ahaṅkāra) 30, 216, 220, 451, 452, 622–
624.
buddhi
‘intellect’ 30, 212, 216, 218, 220,
226, 242, 244, 246, 248, 250, 252, 256, 260,
268, 316, 364, 403, 406–409, 425–429,
437–443, 448–451, 462–464, 493, 506,


--- PAGE 691 ---
672
Index of Selected Words
520, 529, 542, 599, 620–623, 626, 630;
‘concept’ 268, 570.
caduśakti
‘Four Powers’ (of the Lord) 35,
62, 282, 356–358, 361, 414, 419, 620.
Cārvāka
cf. Lokāyata.
caturaiśvarya
‘Four Sovereign Powers’ (of
buddhi) 32, 242, 244, 364, 468, 476, 627.
citta
‘mind’ 196, 212, 268, 274, 280, 288,
290, 292, 294, 296, 298, 300, 304, 306, 308,
316, 318, 326, 328, 334, 353, 395, 407,
408, 425, 428, 437–440, 443, 450, 451,
481, 484, 485, 490–495, 499–503, 520–
525, 539, 545, 605, 621–625, 628–630,
633.
daśabāyu/daśavāyu
‘ten
bodily
breaths’
460, 625, 627.
daśaśīla
‘ten rules of conduct’ 514, 629,
630.
dīkṣā
‘initiation’ 13, 320, 465, 528, 615.
dūradarśana
‘seeing from afar’ 35, 284,
362, 363, 535, 536, 620, 628.
dūrasarvajña
‘knowing everything from
afar’ 620.
dūraśravaṇa
‘hearing from afar’ 35, 284,
362, 363, 536, 620, 628.
dūrāt manana
‘thinking from afar’ 35, 284,
363, 620, 628.
dūrāt masarvajñatā
‘knowing
everything
from afar’ 35, 284, 628.
ekagraha/ekāgra
‘single-minded’ 37, 292,
294, 318, 490, 633.
golaka
‘organs’ 31, 228, 230, 454–458, 625.
grahaṇa
‘perception’ 37, 290, 633.
guṇasaṅkrānti
‘transfer of the powers’ (of
the Lord to the worshipper) 410, 412.
īśitva
‘sovereignty’ 41, 328, 330, 535, 538,
620, 630.
īśvarapraṇidhāna
‘ﬁxing one’s mind upon
the Lord’ 38, 39, 298, 310, 312, 314, 497,
507, 512, 513, 624, 629, 634.
jñāna
‘mind/heart’ 32, 622, 210, 242, 258,
292, 304, 306, 312, 314, 316, 326,
328, 334, 525, 544, 557, 605; ‘knowl-
edge/cognition/doctrine/holy scripture’
9, 206, 208, 210, 218, 254, 290, 354, 470,
502, 543, 554, 557, 558, 562, 563, 611,
622, 628; ‘Knowledge’ (one of the catu-
raiśvaryas) 622, 242, 244, 364, 441, 443,
444, 449, 551, 622.
jñānaśakti
‘Power of Knowledge’ 35, 206,
282, 284, 344, 347, 356–364, 419, 500,
574, 583, 620, 628, 631.
kahadaṅhadaṅ
‘accidentality’ 240, 593.
kalā
‘activation’ (kañcuka) 30, 212, 214,
403, 404, 425–428, 620, 621; ‘part’ 349,
354, 424.
kāmarūpitva
‘ability to assume any form at
will’ 36, 284, 360, 363, 628.
kañcukas
‘shrouds’ 403, 462.
karmasāmya
‘equality of karma’ 473–475.
kriyāśakti
‘Power of Action’ 35, 282, 284,
336, 356–364, 395, 419, 450, 500, 620–
625, 628, 631.
kṣipta
‘scattered’ (stage of citta) 37, 294,
482, 490–492, 633.
kumbhaka
‘retention’ (yogic technique) 40,
316, 318, 521, 522, 634; name of a hell
434.
kuñci
‘key, bolt’ (yogic technique) 316,
521–523, 547.
Kuśika
(one of the ﬁve pañcaṛṣis) 34, 276,
278, 371–377; as the ﬁve kuśikas vii, 16,
195, 371.
laghiman/laghimā
‘weightlessness’ 41, 328,
330, 535, 537, 620, 630, 635.
Lakulīśa
371–377, 501.
Lokāyata
‘materialist’ 561, 564, 570, 584,
591, 594–605, 610, 613–615.
lupa
‘forgetting’, ‘unconscious(ness)’ 214,
230, 232, 292, 326, 407, 416, 543, 544,
573, 574, 585, 607, 608, 611.
mahiman/mahimā
‘enlargement’ 41, 328,
330, 535–537, 620, 630, 635.
mala
‘maculation’ 30, 40, 212, 214, 226,
282, 286, 288, 308, 320, 391, 396–401,
407–409, 419, 438, 470, 475, 476, 498,
526, 619, 621, 629, 630, 634, 635.
manas
‘mind-stuff’ 30, 212, 216, 218, 220,
226, 230, 268, 274, 316, 318, 425–429,
439, 450–453, 462–464, 491, 520, 526,


--- PAGE 692 ---
Index of Selected Words
673
529, 542, 590, 620, 623–626, 630; ‘mind,
heart, thought’ 242, 248, 252, 258, 284,
306, 330, 332, 407, 446, 470, 499, 549,
551.
manojavitva
‘swifness as of thought’ 36,
284, 363, 628.
mithyājñana
‘wrong knowledge’ 29, 196,
198, 200, 206, 208, 306, 505, 551, 557,
559, 561, 572, 619, 633.
nāḍī
‘vessels’ 32, 230, 234, 450, 459, 623,
625, 627.
Nīlalohita
(incarnation of Śiva) 20, 34, 276,
367, 368, 377, 628.
Nīlarudraka
(a Daitya) 35, 280, 368, 369,
376.
nirṇaya
‘determination’ 24.
nirodha
‘cessation’ 20, 36, 290, 480, 482,
484, 629, 633; ‘restricted’ (characteristic
of citta) 37, 294, 490, 491, 508, 633.
nirnimittavāda
‘doctrine of non-causality’
582, 590, 591, 595.
niyamas
‘particular commandments’ 15,
39, 308, 310, 312, 314, 450, 482, 511–515,
614, 629, 634.
niyati
‘necessity’ 427, 474, 590.
pañcabāyu/pañcavāyu
‘ﬁve
breaths’
32,
230, 232, 460, 463, 611, 627.
pañcaśakti
‘ﬁve powers’ 362.
pañcaviparyaya
‘ﬁve kinds of error’:
cf.
viparyaya.
paraśarīrapraveśa
‘entering into another
body’ 545, 546.
parīkṣā
‘investigation from all sides’ 24.
Pātañjala
(one of the pañcaṛṣis) vii, 16, 20,
34, 276, 278, 367, 368, 371–377, 501,
628; (referring to Patañjali’s school of
yoga) 439, 443, 472, 477–481, 484, 485,
490, 491, 495, 499, 508–512, 515, 521,
524, 529, 533, 535, 544.
prabhuśakti
‘Power of Lordship’ 36, 282,
284, 356–364, 419, 500, 620, 628, 631.
prabhutva
‘Lordship’ 360.
pradhāna
‘unevolved matter’ 30, 212, 214,
216, 226, 294, 296, 326, 328, 396, 403,
407, 408, 421, 425–428, 498, 539, 573,
575, 607, 608, 611, 620–627, 630.
prākāmya
‘ability to produce multiple bod-
ies at will’ 41, 328, 330, 535, 538, 620,
630, 635.
prakṛti
‘unevolved matter’ 246, 336, 338,
391, 396, 398, 421, 427, 428, 437, 449,
462, 559, 575, 577, 586, 606.
prakṛtilīna
‘dissolved into unevolved mat-
ter’ (semi-liberated beings) 37, 407 [līna
riṅprakṛtiloka], 294, 334, 462, 482, 492,
493, 586, 606, 629, 633.
prāṇa
‘vital breath’ 32, 230, 232, 460, 463,
464, 510, 517, 546, 625.
praṇava
‘syllable oṂ’ 351, 502, 550, 634.
prāṇāyāma
‘breath control’ vii, 39, 306,
308, 316, 318, 482, 507, 511, 512, 521–
523, 526, 529, 547, 629, 634.
prāpti
‘attainment of anything at will’ 41,
328, 330, 535, 537, 620, 630, 635.
praśna
‘question’ 23, 24.
pratyāhāra
‘withdrawal’ vii, 39, 306, 308,
316, 482, 511, 512, 519–521, 552, 629,
634.
pratyaya
‘concurrent occasion/cause’ 77,
236, 488, 492, 633; ‘condition(s)’ (aris-
ing from the buddhibhāvas) 441–448.
prayogasandhi
‘secret means/yoga’ 20, 36,
41, 288, 326, 328, 348, 366, 379, 383, 413,
481, 510, 544–550, 552, 624–631, 635.
pratyakṣa
‘direct perception/directly per-
ceived’ 29, 26, 196, 198, 206, 208, 236,
238, 244, 290, 334, 338, 344, 347, 385,
387, 444, 552, 553, 564, 566, 569, 600–
602, 622, 633;
‘explanation/example’
570.
prota
‘woven lengthwise’ 30, 214, 351, 398–
403, 424, 620, 621, 624.
pūraka
‘inhalation’ (yogic technique) 40,
316, 318, 521, 522, 629, 634.
pūrvapakṣa
‘prior view’ 24, 27, 527, 560,
586, 603
pūrvapakṣin
‘one exposing the prior view’
11, 301, 345, 378–380, 402, 411, 425,
561, 568, 571, 575, 590–595, 605
rāga
‘passion’ (a kleśa) 38, 268, 280, 282,


--- PAGE 693 ---
674
Index of Selected Words
300, 304, 306, 310, 312, 362, 447, 463,
470, 482, 498, 506, 558, 561, 634; ‘at-
tachment’ (a kañcuka) 30, 212, 214, 403,
405, 425–428, 620, 621.
recaka
‘exhalation’ (yogic technique) 40,
316, 318, 521, 522, 629, 634.
ṣaḍaṅga yoga
‘yoga of the six ancillaries’
477, 510–512.
ṣaḍrasa
‘six tastes’ 31, 222, 226, 625, 629.
śakti
‘power(s)’ 206, 212, 214, 284, 286, 288,
322, 326, 332, 344, 347, 361, 397, 399,
400, 407, 412, 419, 423, 474, 475, 483,
497, 498, 575, 591, 621.
samādhi
‘absorption’ 39, 29, 194, 196, 242,
246, 250, 268, 276, 282, 286, 288, 292, 294,
296, 298, 306, 308, 310, 312, 318, 320, 322,
332, 336, 413, 417, 472, 481–484, 489,
491, 495, 499, 504, 507, 511–513, 525,
526, 529, 536, 539, 541, 543, 551, 552,
623–635.
sāmānyatodṛṣṭa
cf. anumāna.
sambega/saṃvega
‘desire of emancipation’,
37, 298, 476, 496, 497, 619, 629, 634.
samprajñātasamādhi
‘cognitive
absorp-
tion’ 37, 292, 294, 482, 489–491, 629,
633, 635.
saṅaskāras/saṃskāras
‘impressions’
38,
196, 274, 280, 296, 304, 443, 482, 502–
505, 629, 633, 634; ‘rite of passage’ 14.
samyajñāna/samyagjñāna
‘right
knowl-
edge’ 29, 194, 196, 208, 242, 246, 250,
296, 322, 414, 449, 476, 481, 483, 526,
551, 552, 557, 558, 619, 622, 626.
saṅyama/saṃyama
‘restraint’ (yogic tech-
nique) 40, 322, 324, 326, 328, 482, 528–
534, 539, 630, 634, 635.
sarvajña
‘omniscient / omniscience’
29,
196, 200, 212, 214, 282, 300, 320, 336,
344, 353, 356–358, 380, 397–400, 407,
474, 500, 501, 527, 528, 619–621, 627,
629, 631, 634.
sarvajñatā
‘omniscience’ 36, 284, 362, 363.
sarvajñatva
‘omiscience’ 358, 362, 411,
485, 501, 526.
sarvakāryakartā
‘omnipotent / omnipo-
tence’ 29, 196, 214, 300, 336, 353, 357,
358, 397–400, 407, 500, 619–621, 627,
629, 631, 634.
ṣaṭkośa
‘six sheats’ 31, 228, 459, 625.
sātmaka
‘identical’ (to the Lord) 30, 210,
212, 282, 298, 413, 414, 417, 552.
sātmya
‘identity’ (with the Lord) 413, 417,
418, 429.
sayodya/sayujya
‘unity’ (with the Lord)
413–415, 418, 500.
smṛti
‘memory’, ‘remembering’ 37, 290,
292, 449, 482, 485, 489, 493, 495, 504,
633.
Śrīkaṇṭha
(form of Śiva) 20, 21, 22, 35, 280,
369, 377, 378, 501, 587, 628; (one of the
Vidyeśvaras) 378, 620.
svabhāvavāda
‘doctrine of self-origination’
/ ‘inherent efﬁcacy’ 581, 582, 590, 593–
595.
taijasa
‘consisting of passion’ (type of ah-
aṅkāra) 30, 216, 220, 451, 452, 622, 623.
tarka
‘reasoning’ (one of the aṣṭasiddhis)
33, 256, 258, 445, 447; ‘reﬂection’ (ancil-
lary of ṣaḍaṅgayoga) 499, 511, 512, 552,
629, 631; ‘logic’ (philosophical system)
354, 563.
tayā/taya
‘non-existence’ / ‘there
is
not’
196, 198, 200, 202, 206, 270, 286, 332,
334, 336, 345, 346, 387, 562, 570–572,
576, 579, 581, 584–590, 597, 605, 606,
611.
trikāya paramārtha
‘threefold paramount
body’ 7, 34, 268, 628.
triśakti
‘the three powers’ 362, 363.
tuṣṭi
‘contentment’ 33, 242, 252, 254, 256,
264, 441, 445, 447, 449, 622, 627, 628.
tutur
‘remembering’ / ‘conscious(ness)’ 37,
214, 230, 270, 272, 274, 276, 278, 290, 292,
296, 300, 304, 326, 328, 380, 400, 415,
416, 451, 495, 499, 504, 548, 552, 607,
608, 634.
uddeśa
‘label’, ‘preliminary listing’ 24.
upasargas
‘obstacles’ 40, 41, 326, 472, 482,
536, 539, 541, 542, 544, 546, 630, 635.
ūta
‘woven crosswise’ 30, 214, 351, 398,


--- PAGE 694 ---
Index of Selected Words
675
401, 402, 424, 620, 621, 624, 625.
vaikṛta
‘modiﬁed’ (type of ahaṅkāra) 30,
216, 220, 451–453, 622, 624.
vāsanās
‘latent impressions’ 34, 40, 268,
272, 274, 443, 463, 470–472, 476, 499,
539–542, 559, 619, 628–631, 635.
vaśitva/vaśitā
‘control of the elements’ 41,
328, 330, 346, 359, 419, 535, 538, 620,
630, 635.
vibhuśakti
‘Power of Pervasion’ 35, 282,
356–364, 397, 401, 419, 500, 620, 628,
631.
vibhutva
‘pervasion’ 360.
vicāra
‘reﬁned reﬂection’ 482, 490.
vicārasamādhi
‘reﬁned reﬂective absorp-
tion’ 37, 292, 489, 633.
videha
‘disembodied’ (semi-liberated be-
ing) 37, 294, 296, 462, 482, 492, 629, 633.
vidyā
‘awareness’ (tattva/kañcuka) 30, 212,
214, 403, 406, 422, 425–428, 437, 440,
621; synonym of Māyā 13, 422–424.
Vidyeśas/Vidyeśvaras
(eptad
of
Rudras)
35, 63, 282, 366, 370, 377, 421–424, 620.
vighnas
‘hindrances’ 302, 304, 332, 482,
502, 543, 629, 630, 634, 635.
vikalpa
‘ideation’ / ‘imagination’ / ‘deliber-
ation’ 30, 37, 290, 292, 444, 453, 482,
485, 486, 553, 557, 633.
vikara(ṇa)dharmitva/vikaraṇabhāva
‘act-
ing without physical organs’ 36, 284, 360,
363, 532, 628.
vikṣipta
‘distracted’ (stage of citta), 37, 294,
482, 490–492, 633.
vimūḍha
‘infatuated’ (stage of citta) 37,
294, 482, 490–492, 633.
viparīta
‘contrary to, upside-down’ / ‘wrong’
/ ‘unconscious’ (cf. viparyaya) 270, 292,
446, 466, 487, 543, 544, 551, 557–561,
566, 571, 608, 611, 625.
viparyaya
‘error, misapprehension’ 33, 37,
242, 252, 290, 441, 442, 445, 447, 482,
485, 557, 622, 627, 628, 633; ‘contrary
to’: cf. viparīta.
vitarka
‘reﬂection’ 482, 489–491.
vitarkasamādhi
‘reﬂective absorption’ 37,
292, 489, 490, 633.
vṛttis
‘conditions’ / ‘functions’ (of citta or
buddhi) 18, 20, 32, 36, 242, 260, 268, 290,
292, 443–448, 480–485, 488, 505, 622,
627, 629, 633.
yamas
‘general commandments’ 15, 39,
308, 310, 312, 450, 482, 511–515, 526,
629, 634.
yatrakāmāvasāyitva
‘ability to satisfy one’s
own desires’ 41, 328, 330, 535, 538, 620,
630.


--- PAGE 695 ---
676
SAMENVATTING
Dit proefschrif bestaat uit een uitgave, vertaling en studie van een uniek
Oudjavaans-Sanskrit Śaiva geschrif—de Dharma Pātañjala—dat slecht be-
waard gebleven is op één codex van West-Javaanse oorsprong, die teruggaat
tot de 15e eeuw. Dit geschrif, hier voor het eerst gepubliceerd, is om twee re-
denen belangrijk: ten eerste, omdat het bewaard is gebleven op een codex die
behoort tot een zeldzame traditie van handschrifen van Java, die aanzienlijk
ouder is dan de meerderheid van Balinese handschrifen met Oudjavaanse
teksten; ten tweede, omdat het een tekst betref uit een oude corpus van spec-
ulatieve teksten (tattva), dat tot nu toe alleen vertegenwoordigd werd door
twee Oudjavaanse teksten, namelijk het Vṛhaspatitattva en het Tattvajñāna.
De sociaal-culturele en doctrinaire achtergronden van de tekst, evenals
de codicologische en ﬁlologische aspecten, worden in deel i opgevoerd. Deel
ii is een geannoteerde diplomatieke uitgave van de tekst met facsimile repro-
ducties van de codex op tegenoverliggende pagina’s, gevolgd door een kri-
tische editie en een geannoteerde Engelse vertaling. Deel iii vormt een sys-
tematische studie, die zich richt op de interpretatie van de leringen van de
Dharma Pātañjala door vergelijking met verwante teksten in het Sanskriet
afomstig van het Indiase subcontinent en enkele Oudjavaanse geschrifen
uit de Indonesische Archipel.
Deze studie toont aan dat de auteur van het Dharma Pātañjala, omdat
hij gebruik heef gemaakt van een Pātañjala vorm van yoga in plaats van
de Śaiva vorm van yoga (dat gebruikelijk is in andere Oudjavaanse teksten),
een syncretistisch systeem heef uitgewerkt. Waarschijnlijk volgde hij daar-
bij een nog onbekende commentariële traditie, die met het Sanskriet Yoga-
sūtra gerelateerd is, doch geenzins identiek is aan die van de Bhāṣya. De
Dharma Pātañjala vertegenwoordigt een vorm van Śivaisme die getypeerd
kan worden als een vroege Saiddhāntika, één waarin meer archaïsch, pre-
Saiddhāntika (d.w.z. Pāśupata) elementen bewaard zijn gebleven als waren
het doctrinaire ‘fossielen’. De Dharma Pātañjala vult dus een leemte in onze
kennis van die Śivaitische theologie en ﬁlosoﬁe in Indonesië vóór de komst
van de Islam, maar kan tevens licht werpen op de oorsprong en ontwikkeling
van het Śivaisme op het Indiase subcontinent.


--- PAGE 696 ---
677
SUMMARY
Tis dissertation is an edition, translation and study of an Old Javanese-
Sanskrit Śaiva scripture—the Dharma Pātañjala—preserved on a single co-
dex of West Javanese origin dating back to the 15th century ad. Tis previ-
ously unpublished scripture is doubly important: ﬁrst, because it has been
preserved on a codex belonging to a rare tradition of manuscripts from Java,
which is signiﬁcantly older than the majority of Balinese manuscripts con-
taining Old Javanese texts; and second, because it documents an early tra-
dition of speculative texts (Tattva), which was previously known to us only
through two Old Javanese scriptures, namely the Vṛhaspatitattva and the
Tattvajñāna.
Te cultural and doctrinal background of the text, as well as its codico-
logical and philological aspects, are introduced in Part i. Part ii presents an
annotated diplomatic edition of the text with facsimile reproductions of the
codex on facing pages, followed by a critical edition with English annotated
translation. Part iii is a systematic study focusing on the interpretation of the
doctrines taught in the Dharma Pātañjala in comparison with related San-
skrit texts from the Indian Subcontinent and Old Javanese scriptures from
the Indonesian Archipelago.
My study demonstrates that the author of the Dharma Pātañjala, having
adopted a Pātañjala form of yoga instead of the Śaiva variety that is common
in other Old Javanese texts, elaborated a syncretic system. In so doing, he
followed an hitherto unknown commentarial tradition to the Sanskrit Yo-
gasūtra that is related, albeit by no means identical, to that of the Bhāṣya.
Te Dharma Pātañjala also documents a form of Śaivism that may be re-
garded as early Saiddhāntika, but in which more archaic, pre-Saiddhāntika
(i.e. Pāśupata) elements have been preserved as doctrinal ‘fossils’. Te Dha-
rma Pātañjala, therefore, ﬁlls a gap in our knowledge of Śaiva theology and
philosophy in pre-Islamic Indonesia, but also cast light on the origin and
development of Śaivism in the Indian Subcontinent.


--- PAGE 697 ---
678
CURRICULUM VITAE
Born in Parma, May 17, 1981. Secondary education at Liceo Classico ‘G.D.
Romagnosi’, Parma, 1995–2000. Studied Oriental Languages and Civiliza-
tions, with focus on Sanskrit and Indology, at the University of Rome ‘Sapi-
enza’ from 2000. Laurea degree (roughly equivalent to a Dutch Doctoraal)
awarded in 2005 (cum laude). Holder of a Darmasiswa scholarship at Uni-
versitas Indonesia in Jakarta from mid-2004 to mid-2005. Studied Lan-
guages and Cultures of Southeast Asia and Oceania, with focus on Javanese
Studies (Old Javanese), at Leiden University from September 2005. Master
degree (MA) awarded at the same university, June 2006. Attached to the Re-
search School of Asian, African and Amerindian Studies (CNWS, now LIAS,
Leiden Institute for Area Studies) as AIO/Junior Researcher from Septem-
ber 1, 2006 to August 31, 2010. Attached to the International Institute for
Asian Studies (IIAS) in Leiden as a J. Gonda fellow from September 1, 2010
to March 1, 2011.
