# EXTRACTED TEXT: 2011-sundberg-giebel-vajrabodhi-srilankan-antecedents-vajrayana.pdf
# Total Pages: 95 | Direct: 95 | OCR: 0 | Blank/Sparse: 0
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 17:53:00
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [DIRECT] ---

PACIFIC  WORLD
 
Journal of the Institute of Buddhist Studies
Third Series	 Number 13
Fall 2011
Special Section:
Recent Research on Esoteric Buddhism
TITLE
iii


--- PAGE 2 [DIRECT] ---

129
The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi as 
Chronicled by Lü Xiang (呂向): South Indian and Śrī 
Laṅkān Antecedents to the Arrival of the Buddhist 
Vajrayāna in Eighth-Century Java and China
Jeffrey Sundberg, in collaboration with Rolf Giebel
Independent Scholars
I. ABSTRACT1
This paper will examine a Tang-era biography of the great Tang 
court monk Vajrabodhi. The biography was composed by Lü Xiang 
(呂向), lay disciple of Vajrabodhi, tutor to the emperor’s sons, and 
one of the most esteemed scholars of his day. After the presentation 
of an annotated translation of this biography, the paper will examine 
external evidence which serves to validate Lü Xiang’s biography and 
add substantive context to the life of Vajrabodhi. These validations 
all concern two closely linked southern kingdoms, the Pallava king-
dom at Kāñcī on the mainland and the Lambakaṇṇa ruling in north-
ern Śrī Laṅkā, whose dynastic fates were entwined by the fact that the 
Sinhalese regent Mānavarman had been restored from his exile by the 
Pallava army and Mānavarman’s three successor-sons were all born in 
Kāñcī. Vajrabodhi’s metaphysical experiences at the Tooth Relic at the 
Abhayagirivihāra in Anurādhapura, the stūpa of the Eye Relic, as well 
as at the Footprint Relic on the summit of Adam’s Peak will be noted. 
Lü Xiang’s biography will be shown to offer strong suggestions why 
the supreme Tang court monk Amoghavajra, Vajrabodhi’s primary 
disciple, selected Śrī Laṅkā when he ventured abroad to obtain a com-
plete library of the manuscripts of esoteric Buddhism. The paper then 
examines the context of Kāñcī and Vajrabodhi’s preceptor Nāgajñāna, 
explaining why the doctrinal character of several works of esoteric 
Buddhism such as the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, first noticed 
when Nāgajñāna inducted Vajrabodhi into their secret rites during his 
seven-year tutelage in South India, are demonstrably derivative from

--- PAGE 3 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
130
tantric Śaiva doctrine and material by noting the effervescent Śaiva 
milieu supplied by the contemporary Pallava domain, which ranged 
in creed from Siddhānta to Kāpālika. The paper will then initiate an 
argument that Buddhist wilderness monks, a type sponsored by both 
the Sinhalese Lambakaṇṇa and Javanese Śailendra kings, served as the 
bridge by which Śaiva religious innovations were channeled into eso-
teric Buddhist texts. These wilderness monks may have been the pre-
cursors or prototypes for the Buddhist siddha movement: both wilder-
ness monks and siddhas, it will be argued, were known in the Śailendra 
kingdom in Java around 835 CE or even earlier. Finally, this paper will 
examine Adam’s Peak, noting how the early Tibetan rNying-ma eso-
teric material was imputed to originate there, and how some imagery 
from the Vajrabodhi biography parallels the imagery of the allegorical 
mountain in the opening strophes of the Javanese Abhayagirivihāra 
inscription. 
II. PREFACE: AN EIGHTH-CENTURY JAVANESE MONK IN  
THE LINEAGE OF VAJRABODHI AND AMOGHAVAJRA
The sophisticated Kělurak inscription2 demonstrates that the 
great Śailendra kings of Central Java were actively engaged in erecting 
shrines and temples to Buddhist deities of the Vajrayāna around 782 
CE. The precise textual provenance and doctrinal affiliation of the eso-
teric doctrine embodied in the Mañjuśrī temple of Kělurak is in some 
doubt. However, the primacy which the Kělurak inscription accords 
to the deity Mañjuśrī paralleled, or was even possibly inspired by, de-
votional observations to the same deity by the great Tang court monk 
Amoghavajra (705–774 CE),3 minister to Chinese emperors, bureau­
crats, and generals.4
That the Śailendra kings certainly knew of Amoghavajra and 
were probably powerfully attracted by his prowess in state-protec-
tion5 is beyond dispute, for at least one Javanese monk, referred to 
as Bianhong (辯弘), went to China intending to study the doctrines 
of esoteric Buddhism at Amoghavajra’s feet. Modern Javanology owes 
a tremendous debt to the influential Japanese monk Kūkai (空海) for 
documenting the essence of the story of Bianhong:6
Bianhong, a monk of the country of Heling,7 was while in his native 
land practicing the yoga of Cakravarticintāmaṇi and had attained 
some degree of spiritual power. On suddenly hearing that the 
teachings of Mahāvairocana’s Great Mandala of the Matrix of Great

--- PAGE 4 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
131
Compassion8 were to be found in South India, he fervently yearned 
to study them and set out for South India. On the way he suddenly 
met someone who asked, “Where are you going?” He replied, “I 
have heard it said that the great teachings of the Matrix [of Great 
Compassion] are to be found in South India. I yearn in my heart to 
study them, and therefore I have equipped myself for a journey and 
taken to the road.” That person informed him, “Those teachings have 
been taken by the Ācārya Amoghavajra and transmitted to the land 
of the Great Tang, and his pupil, the Ācārya Huiguo, is presently at 
Qinglong Temple (青龍寺) in Chang’an (長安), where he is giving in-
struction in them. If you go there, you will certainly be able to re-
ceive them together with others, but otherwise they will be difficult 
to obtain.” When he had finished speaking, he vanished. It is thus 
evident that he was a divine being. [Bianhong] turned back and set 
out for the Great Tang. He eventually visited Qinglong Temple, where 
he met His Reverence [Huiguo] and explained in detail the purpose of 
his visit, offering him one seven-gemmed initiation flask, one bronze 
bowl, three conch shells, and various famed aromatics. His Reverence 
held an initiation [ceremony] for him and conferred on him the great 
teachings of the Matrix [of Great Compassion]. Bianhong presently 
resides in Bianzhou (汴州), where he propagates the esoteric teach-
ings [lit. “esoteric wheel”].9
Kūkai’s report on the Chinese journey of Bianhong affords us one 
perception of the religious culture of Java around the time Bianhong 
arrived in China in 780, showing the Javanese groping towards cur-
rency with the systems of the Buddhist tantras. It is uncertain whether 
Bianhong ever returned home to Java or sent scriptures copied from 
the manuscripts available to him in the monasteries of Chang’an, but 
it is clear that he was not the only Javanese monk to venture abroad in 
search of esoteric knowledge. It seemingly took the Javanese about a 
decade to establish another important link with the Indic world which 
undoubtedly guaranteed them access to tantric libraries and consecra-
tion lineages in the more current of esoteric doctrines: if Bianhong was 
tracking down Amoghavajra, other agents of the Śailendra king were 
evidently tracking back Amoghavajra’s sources in Śrī Laṅkā, soliciting 
Sinhalese monks from the famed Abhayagirivihāra to establish them-
selves in the Javanese heartland.
This paper seeks to amplify understanding of the religious and cul-
tural context of Śailendra Java by translating and examining an under-
appreciated early biography, written a few decades after his death by 
a scholarly lay disciple, of the influential Tang court monk Vajrabodhi,

--- PAGE 5 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
132
Amoghavajra’s mentor. The information in Lü Xiang’s biography, 
which focuses on the life of Vajrabodhi before he arrived in China, 
will be seen to yield plausible explanations for much of the extant 
evidence concerning the early propagators of esoteric Buddhism to 
China and the early exponents of that Buddhism, such as the Javanese 
Bianhong. We will examine Vajrabodhi’s connection to a particular 
nexus of South Indian cultural power, centered on the Pallava king-
dom at Kāñcī and the Pallava-sponsored Sinhalese Lambakaṇṇa king-
dom at Anurādhapura, noting its particular relevance to the history of 
Buddhism in Java. This dyad was greatly influential to Vajrabodhi and 
Amoghavajra, and seemingly greatly attractive to the Sumatrans and 
Javanese, who themselves, in many ways, were exponents of it.10 Such 
Malayo-Javanese interest in South India is evident in their adoption 
of the Pallava-Grantha script,11 both in Śrīvijaya as well as in Sañjaya-
era Java: one presumes that contemporary South Indian ideas about 
kingship, cosmology, and the divine accompanied the use of the script 
across the ocean. This essay will conclude with an examination of 
the implications of this study of the Pallava-Siṃhala background for 
certain expressions of early Javanese esoteric Buddhism, namely, the 
participation of Sinhalese wilderness monks of the Abhayagirivihāra 
and some allegorical imagery contained in the opening strophes of the 
Javanese Abhayagirivihāra inscription, for our understanding of the 
Pallava and Sinhalese milieu from which they sprang. 
In particular, we will see that Lü Xiang’s biography of Vajrabodhi 
provides an intellectual and cultural context which renders plau-
sible and comprehensible the specific interest manifested by both 
Amoghavajra and the Śailendra kings in the Sinhalese kingdom: 
indeed, so deep are the Laṅkān associations of the two Tang patriarchs 
that careless Chinese chroniclers claimed at one time or another that 
each of the two were Sinhalese.12 In the case of at least Amoghavajra, 
and arguably Vajrabodhi as well, Laṅkān preceptors provided essential 
access to the preeminent Buddhist tracts in the Yoga-tantra collection. 
In any effort to understand more about the pan-Asian influence of the 
cultural dyad of Pallava India and Śrī Laṅkā, it is important to examine 
the lives of these two monks. It will be especially worth our while to 
focus on the life of Vajrabodhi.

--- PAGE 6 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
133
III. THE SCHOLAR LÜ XIANG
The biography of Vajrabodhi which will be examined in this paper 
is the extensive one written by his lay disciple Lü Xiang, probably com-
piled within two decades of Vajrabodhi’s death and then included in 
Yuanzhao’s (圓照) Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu (貞元新定釋教目錄, 
Catalogue of Buddhist Teachings Newly Established in the Zhenyuan 
Era, T. 2157, 55.875a–876b) in the sixteenth year of the Zhenyuan (貞
元) era (799–800 CE). The biography has been referenced or summa-
rized by modern scholars on several occasions,13 but until now has yet 
to be fully translated and explicated. It, and another early biography 
by Hunlunweng (混倫翁; T. 2157, 55.876b29–877a21) which was com-
piled into the same volume immediately after Lü Xiang’s biography, 
differ substantially from the better-known Song-era biography14 com-
posed by Zanning (贊寧), some two hundred years later, as part of his 
series of profiles of Buddhist monks.
Before examining the biography of Vajrabodhi, a few words should 
be said about its eminent and highly educated author, whose own bi-
ography is found in the Tangshu (唐書, 202.10b–11b). Born of humble 
means in Shandong Province, Lü Xiang rose in the bureaucracy on the 
strength of his scholarship, was the second of the scholars inducted 
into the Hanlin (翰林, the Imperial Academy), and once served as a 
teacher for the emperor’s sons.15 Of the three hundred-odd individuals 
honored with induction into the Imperial Academy during the entire 
Tang dynasty, Lü Xiang held the longest recorded tenure within that 
organization. After his initial induction into the Hanlin in 722 CE, he 
steadily gained in rank within the academy and served the Tang court 
as a scholar and a government official who prepared official docu-
ments for the emperors, and was celebrated for his style. Indeed, he 
was one of five court scholars tasked with producing a commentary 
on the Wenxuan (文選), the famous anthology of Chinese verse and 
prose,16 the study of which rivaled the Five Classics of Confucius during 
the Tang period. The Collected Commentaries of the Five Officials was pro-
duced in 718. 
Formal dates for the birth and death of Lü Xiang are unknown, but 
it is certain that one of his classmates (Fang Guan, 房琯) was born in 
697; Lü Xiang was probably of the same age and thus in his mid-forties 
when Vajrabodhi died. While the date of Lü Xiang’s death is unknown, 
within his biography of Vajrabodhi is a reference to titles which only 
came into being in 757 CE but not the posthumous imperial honorific

--- PAGE 7 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
134
granted him in 765, suggesting that Vajrabodhi’s biography was com-
posed around two decades after Vajrabodhi’s death.17
There are several indicators which suggest that the biography 
as compiled into Yuanzhao’s Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu had been 
touched up with a light editorial hand after Lü Xiang’s own death, 
for the biography as published alerts the reader to the availability of 
Vajrabodhi’s translated texts, incorporated elsewhere into the volume. 
IV. TRANSLATION OF LÜ XIANG’S BIOGRAPHY OF VAJRABODHI,  
AS FOUND IN THE ZHENYUAN XINDING SHIJIAO MULU18
There is also the abhiṣeka disciple Lü Xiang, Grand Master for 
Proper Consultation, Branch Secretariat Drafter, Attendant on the Heir 
Apparent, Scrivener for Princes, and Academician of the Academy of 
Scholarly Worthies, who out of veneration for his teacher, the Tripiṭaka 
Master [Vajrabodhi], [875b] recorded [his biography] as follows:
His Reverence19 was originally the third son of Īśānavarman 
(Yishenawamo, 伊舍那靺摩), the kṣatriya king of a kingdom in Central 
India. Because he was later recommended to the [Chinese] emperor by 
Mizhunna (米准那),20 the general of the king of a South Indian king-
dom,21 he ended up being called a South Indian. At the age of ten years, 
he became a monk at Nālandā Monastery, where he studied gram-
matical treatises under the teacher Śāntijñāna (Jijingzhi, 寂靜智).22 
When he was fifteen, he went to the countries of West India,23 where 
he studied the treatises of Dharmakīrti (Facheng, 法稱) for four years. 
He returned to Nālandā Monastery and at the age of twenty received 
full ordination. For six years he studied the vinaya of the Mahāyāna 
and Hīnayāna, as well as studying the Prajñāpradīpa (Bore deng lun, 般
若燈論), Śatakaśāstra (Bailun, 百論), and Dvādaśamukhaśāstra (Shier 
men lun, 十二門論)24 of the Southern school.25 When he was twenty-
eight, he studied the Yoga Treatise (Yuqie lun, 瑜伽論, Yogācārabhūmi), 
Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi (Weishi lun, 唯識論), and Madhyāntavibhāga (Bian 
zhongbian lun, 辯中邊論) under the scholar Jinabhadra (Shengxian, 勝
賢) in the city of Kapilavastu.26
Three years later, at the age of thirty-one, he went to South India, 
where for seven years he served and worshipped Nāgajñāna,27 a dis-
ciple of the bodhisattva Nāgārjuna (龍樹)28 who is seven hundred years 
old and is even now still alive. He was instructed in the Sutra of the 
Yoga of the Adamantine Pinnacle (Jingangding yuqie jing, 金剛頂瑜伽經),29 
Vairocana’s dhāraṇī teachings,30 Mahāyāna sutras, and treatises on the

--- PAGE 8 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
135
five sciences and received abhiṣeka [initiation] into the Five Divisions,31 
and there was nothing in the treasury of the buddhas’ secrets that he 
did not master. He then took leave of his teacher Nāgajñāna and re-
turned to Central India, where he visited and paid homage at the holy 
stūpas commemorating eight events [in the life] of the Tathāgata [i.e., 
Śākyamuni]. 
Then, South India having suffered for three years from a severe 
drought, its king Narasiṃhapotavarman (Naluosengqiebuduowamo, 
捺羅僧伽補多靺摩)32 sent an envoy to invite His Reverence to erect 
an abhiṣeka site within his palace and pray for rain, on which occasion 
the sweet beneficence of rain poured down and the king and ministers 
rejoiced. They then built a temple for His Reverence and installed him 
in it, and more than three years passed.
In the south of the country, near the sea, there was a temple of 
the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara, and beside the gate there was a nyag­
rodha [banyan] tree that had withered. His Reverence fasted and cir-
cled it for seven days, whereupon the tree grew vigorously once again. 
The bodhisattva appeared in response and spoke these words: “Your 
studies have now been completed. Go to Siṃhala to pay homage to 
the Buddha’s tooth and climb Mount Laṅkā to worship the Buddha’s 
footprint.33 Upon your return, go to the Middle Kingdom and pay your 
respects to the Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. That country has a karmic con-
nection with you. You should go to spread the teachings and save all 
beings.”
Having heard these words, he was overcome with joy. The monks 
had all heard these words, and the crowds at the temple then said, 
“If the bodhisattva descends on the nyagrodha tree, the branches and 
leaves thrive, and when he leaves, it promptly withers. Take this as a 
sign.” After three weeks [His Reverence] went back and took leave of 
the country’s king.
Taking with him eight disciples, both monks and laymen, he went 
to Siṃhala and reached the city of Laṅkā. The king, ministers, and four 
groups of people34 welcomed His Reverence with fragrant flowers.35 He 
then went to Abhayarāja Monastery,36 located next to the palace, and 
made obeisance to the Buddha’s tooth, holding fragrant flowers and 
worshipping with earnest sincerity. He then sensed the Buddha’s tooth 
radiate light in the air [875c], which formed a canopy that manifested 
everywhere. A large crowd all saw this auspicious sign.

--- PAGE 9 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
136
He resided at that monastery, worshipping for half a year. He 
then betook himself to the southeast, to Mount Laṅkā. En route, he 
paid homage at the Stūpa of the Buddha’s Eye,37 on which occasion he 
circled it for one day and one night, and none of his prayers went un-
fulfilled. Next, he arrived at the city of Saptaratnagiri [Mountain of 
Seven Jewels]. Then he came to a mountain of jewels under the state 
control of the kingdom of Rohaṇa [Luhena, 嚕呵那].38 The ground on 
that mountain was replete with tāla [palmyra] trees. The king of that 
kingdom had previously believed in the Hīnayāna. Hearing that His 
Reverence had arrived, he went outside the city to welcome him from 
afar, and extensive offerings were laid out beside the king’s palace. For 
a month and some days His Reverence explained for [the king] the es-
sential principles of the Mahāyāna, whereupon he was able to compre-
hend them, and he faithfully accepted them and rejoiced. He then gave 
His Reverence extensive gifts of sundry valuables, but he did not accept 
them, saying, “My original purpose in coming was to pay homage to 
the Buddha’s footprint; it was not for the sake of rare treasures. Since I 
have come here from afar, pray show me the way.” The king then dis-
patched people to carry a sedan chair for His Reverence to ride in, and 
they took him as far as the foot of the mountain.
The mountain had many ferocious beasts, lions, poisonous snakes, 
savages, and rākṣasas [demons]. Dark winds [full of dust] and a cruel 
fog constantly protect the rare treasures on top of this mountain. 
Unless one is paying one’s respects to the sacred sites, it is not possible 
to ascend and gain entry to this mountain. His Reverence burned in-
cense at the foot of the mountain and, making obeisance, made a great 
vow: “I pray that I may see the mountain gods from the time when the 
Buddha was formerly in the world and preaching the dharma!” When 
he had finished making this prayer, the sky cleared, the fog dispersed, 
and the ferocious beasts hid themselves. Then, together with his dis-
ciples, he crossed a stream towards the east on the mountain’s north 
face. Ascending, they turned back towards the northwest and then the 
southwest, exploring valleys, grasping lianas, and hanging on to creep-
ers. In a strange kind of solitary danger, they reached halfway up the 
mountain. Near the north face, there was a spring from which water 
flowed forth, and in it there were nothing but red crystals, lapis lazuli, 
gold, silver, and jewels, as well as precious grasses and also mandāra 
flowers and utpala [blue lotus] flowers. From time to time they came 
across caves,39 all of which were places where earlier spirits40 had

--- PAGE 10 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
137
cultivated the Way. It would be impossible to list all the fragrant flow-
ers, grasses, and trees on the mountain.
Without stopping or tarrying, they climbed for seven days, and 
only then did they reach the summit of the mountain. Searching for 
a holy site, they saw a round stone, about four or five feet high and 
about twenty feet across. The Buddha’s right foot[print] was hidden on 
top of the stone and was seen to be damaged.41 Doubts arose in their 
minds that it might not be the Buddha’s footprint, and they looked up 
to the heavens and wept, thinking of the Tathāgata of yore. Then in 
response five-colored clouds appeared and there was a halo of light, 
and the wheels on the Buddha’s footprint appeared quite clearly. They 
heard a voice say, “This is truly the Buddha’s footprint. He only left 
this footprint for the sake of beings of past generations whose karma 
would be heavy in the future.” On hearing this, they rejoiced and made 
offerings of fragrant flowers. They entered meditation for one day, and 
after coming out of meditation they circumambulated [the footprint] 
for seven days, holding on to the stone as an aid as they proceeded 
around it. Apart from the Buddha’s footprint, there were on top of the 
stone several stone saucers, in which they lit lamps.
At the time, there were savages who brought sugar cane, coco-
nuts, bananas, yams,42 and so on, which they came and offered to His 
Reverence. [876a] When his disciples saw them, they ran off, scattering 
in all directions. His Reverence said [to the savages], “We have come 
here to worship, not to harm you.” He then took their gifts and be-
stowed on them the precepts of the Three Refuges. The savages used 
to bring small stones, which they would place as offerings on top of 
the Buddha’s footprint and [then] crush and ingest them. What was 
the meaning of damaging the top of the center [of the stone] in this 
way? They said it cured chest pains. From this they realized why the 
Buddha’s footprint had gradually worn away.
It was very windy on top, and they could not remain for long. 
The summit provided a panoramic view in all four directions. Fifty to 
sixty li from the foot of the mountain it was surrounded by an outer 
perimeter of mountains, like city walls in appearance. On top of the 
mountains there were generally white clouds. People of that country 
called them the Laṅkāpura Mountains. Beyond the mountains to the 
northwest there extended the realm of Siṃhala, and in the other [di-
rections] the ocean. As he was looking at the view, His Reverence in-
advertently lost his foothold and came to a stop at the bottom of some

--- PAGE 11 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
138
steps overlooking a cliff without harming a single hair. Know that this 
was due to the inconceivable power of the Buddha. There was no end 
to the shock and joy of the disciples and others. They then returned 
along the path and made their way back.43 They paid their respects 
once again at all the holy sites and took their leave.
One year after his arrival [in Siṃhala], [His Reverence] returned 
to the kingdom in South India. He related the above events in detail, 
and they were reported to the king, who again invited him to stay and 
worship in the palace. One month passed, and His Reverence said re-
spectfully to the king, “This poor monk previously made a sincere vow 
to go44 to the land of China45 to pay his respects to Mañjuśrī and spread 
the Buddhist dharma.” On the same day he took leave of the king.
The king said, “The route to the Tang kingdom is very far, the 
ocean is difficult to cross, and you will not manage to get there. If you 
stay here and teach and convert [people], it will suffice to obtain ben-
efits.” [The king] repeatedly asked him to stay, but His Reverence’s 
long-cherished wish did not change.
The king said, “If you insist on going, I shall send an envoy to 
escort you and present some local products [to the Tang emperor].” 
He then dispatched General Mizhunna with a Sanskrit copy of the 
Mahāprajñāpāramitā[-sūtra] (Da bore boluomiduo, 大般若波羅蜜多), a 
chair adorned with seven precious materials, a gold bracelet adorned 
with seven precious materials, earrings inlaid with jewels, miscella-
neous articles, armor, silk cords,46 agallochum, Borneo camphor, vari-
ous goods, aromatics, and so on to present to the Tang kingdom, asking 
His Reverence to inspect and bless them and deliver them to that coun-
try. On the day of their departure, the king, his ministers, and the four 
groups of people escorted them to the seashore with fragrant flowers 
and music. His Reverence, facing east, paid homage to Mañjuśrī from 
afar and paid homage to the Bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara in the west. 
Then, having bidden farewell to the multitudes, he boarded the ship 
and they took to the sea.
Catching a favorable wind, they crossed the sea in a day and a night 
and arrived at the port of Bozhili (勃支利津) in Siṃhala. They encoun-
tered thirty-five Persian vessels which were trading in precious stones 
in that country. Seeing His Reverence, the merchants attended on him 
with one accord. Śrīśīla (Shilishiluo, 室哩室囉), the king of Siṃhala, 
hearing that His Reverence had returned, again welcomed him into his 
palace and hosted him for one month. But although he tried hard to

--- PAGE 12 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
139
detain him, he would not stay. Having paid his respects once again to 
the Buddha’s tooth, he promptly proceeded on his way. The king sent 
monks and laymen to see him off at the seashore with fragrant flow-
ers and music. When the day came for His Reverence’s departure, the 
merchants all followed him across the sea.
After a month they reached the kingdom of Vijaya (Foshi, 佛逝).47 
The king of Vijaya [876b] welcomed His Reverence with a golden para-
sol and a golden litter. Hampered by foul winds, they stayed for five 
months. It was only after the winds had settled that they were able to 
set out. It is impossible to describe in detail the minor incidents and 
strange things in the countries through which they passed and the 
perils at sea, with its immense waves and seething waters.
When they were within twenty days from Tang territory, they all 
of a sudden encountered foul winds which suddenly gave rise to fog 
while they were in the middle of the ocean. In the darkness poison-
ous sea-serpents, whales, and their ilk appeared and disappeared, their 
heads intertwined. The thirty-odd merchant vessels drifted with the 
waves, and it is not known what became of them. Only the single ship 
carrying His Reverence was able to escape this disaster because he re-
cited the [Mahā]pratisarā[-dhāraṇī] (Suiqiu, 隨求).48
It is estimated that they covered more than one hundred thousand 
li by sea, chasing the waves and drifting with the swell. For about three 
years they passed through foreign lands, experiencing various hard-
ships, and only then did they manage to reach the imperial borders of 
the Great Tang. On reaching Guangfu (廣府)49 they again encountered 
a rainstorm. The military governor (jiedushi, 節度使) sent two or three 
thousand people on several hundred small boats to welcome them to 
the seaport from afar with fragrant flowers and music.
They reached the Eastern Capital (Luoyang, 洛陽) only during the 
eighth year of the Kaiyuan (開元) era [720], and [His Reverence] had 
a personal audience with the emperor at which he reported one by 
one details of every incident. By imperial edict measures were taken to 
have him settled and provided with the four necessities [of a monk].50 
Monks requested [instruction in] the dharma, and princes and dukes 
asked about the Way. Henceforth he accompanied the imperial car-
riage back and forth between the two capitals [Luoyang and Chang’an].
In the eleventh year [of the Kaiyuan era, 723], he became en-
gaged in translation. What he translated at Zisheng Temple and Jianfu 
Seminary51 amounted to four works in seven rolls.52 In the cyclic year

--- PAGE 13 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
140
gengwu (庚午), the eighteenth year of the Kaiyuan era [730], they were 
entered into the Kaiyuan Catalogue of Buddhist Teachings.53 From the 
nineteenth year [of the Kaiyuan era, 731] he further translated the 
Ritual for Practicing the Samādhi of Vairocana in the Yoga of the Adamantine 
Pinnacle Sutra (Jingangding jing yuqie xiuxi Piluzhena sanmodi fa, 金剛頂
經瑜伽修習毘盧遮那三麼地法) in one roll, the Spell Text of the Great 
Body of the Bodhisattva Thousand-Armed and Thousand-Eyed Avalokiteśvara 
(Qianshou qianyan Guanshiyin pusa dashen zhouben, 千手千眼觀世音菩薩
大身咒本)54 in one roll, the Spell Text of the Heart Dhāraṇī of the Vast, 
Perfect, and Unobstructed Great Compassion of the Bodhisattva Thousand-
Armed and Thousand-Eyed Avalokiteśvara (Qianshou qianyan Guanzizai 
pusa guangda yuanman wuai dabei xin tuoluoni zhouben, 千手千眼觀自在
菩薩廣大圓滿無礙大悲心陀羅尼咒本) in one roll, and the Secret Ritual 
of the Dhāraṇīs of the Messenger Acala (Budong shizhe tuoluoni bimi fa, 不
動使者陀羅尼祕密法) in one roll.55 The texts of the above four works 
in four rolls are extant, and they were translated by the South Indian 
Tripiṭaka Master and śramaṇa Vajrabodhi,56 known as Jingangzhi57 in 
Chinese.
In the twenty-fourth year [of the Kaiyuan era, 736] he accompanied 
the imperial carriage to the Western Capital [Chang’an]. In the twenty-
ninth year [of the Kaiyuan era, 741] there was an imperial edict, al-
lowing him to return to his home country.58 He reached the Eastern 
Capital [Luoyang], where he fell ill and bade his final farewell. A stūpa 
was erected at Longmen (龍門)59 on the cyclic day dingyou (丁酉), the 
twenty-seventh day and day of the new moon, in the cyclic month 
xinwei (辛未), the second month, in the cyclic year guiwei (癸未), the 
second year of the Tianbao (天寶) era [743].60
V. AN EVALUATION OF THE CREDIBILITY OF  
LÜ XIANG’S BIOGRAPHY OF VAJRABODHI
There is much reason to pay attention to Lü Xiang’s biography 
and to prefer it to Zanning’s Song-era portrait despite its discrep-
ancy with Zanning’s biography on many important details concerning 
Vajrabodhi’s life before his arrival in China.61 The grounds for favoring 
the biography by Lü Xiang over that by Zanning are substantial. First, 
the biography was written by one of Vajrabodhi’s lay disciples, one of 
the most accomplished and honored scholars of his day, and a man 
who was tasked with getting his details right; this fact alone should 
provide innate credibility for the account. Second, as is mentioned in

--- PAGE 14 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
141
Figure 1. Śrī Pāda or Adam’s Peak: the “*Laṅkāparvata” was a pilgrimage 
quest of the Tang monk Vajrabodhi as well as the reputed source of many 
early rNying-ma Buddhist tantras.
note 60, the much shorter account of Vajrabodhi’s life composed by 
Hunlunweng, which includes the epitaph written on Vajrabodhi’s fu-
neral stūpa and was placed immediately after Lü Xiang’s biography in 
the Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu, also accords by and large with Lü 
Xiang’s with regard to the basic facts of Vajrabodhi’s life, including 
the ascent of Mount Laṅkā. These two biographies were preserved in 
Yuanzhao’s Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu by the end of the century 
in which Vajrabodhi died. Lü Xiang’s biography thus found its final 
form within the lifetime of those who knew Vajrabodhi, and as noted 
above it seems possible to date the biography to 757–765 CE. Lü Xiang’s 
biography is further validated because it served as the basis for the 
biographical notes recorded in the Japanese monk Kūkai’s Himitsu 
mandarakyō fuhōden (祕密曼荼羅教付法傳, Account of the Dharma 
Transmission of the Secret Mandala Teachings), indicating that Lü 
Xiang’s account was considered as factually unobjectionable in the 
circles of esoteric Buddhist devotees from whom Kūkai obtained his 
biographical materials.62 Furthermore, the density of detail is impres-
sive (as Lévi notes, Lü Xiang furnished “the richest and most precise 
biography of Vajrabodhi”63), even if the proportions of the biog-
raphy seem odd on the surface—Lü Xiang devotes more space to

--- PAGE 15 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
142
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Portraits at Tōji of Vajrabodhi (left) and Nāgajñāna (right) flanked by magnifications of their Siddham-scripted 
names. The label of the latter portrait (far right) deems him, ineptly, “Na-gha-jña.” The portrait of Vajrabodhi originated 
in China and was brought back to Japan by Kūkai, while the portrait of Nāgajñāna was commissioned by Kūkai in 821 CE 
and possibly labeled by him. The Chinese text associated with the murals of the patriarchs is Kūkai’s Shingon fuhōden (眞
言付法傳). Photo appears in Tōji Hōmotsukan 東寺宝物館, ed., Kōbō daishi no sho: onhitsu shichisoei shichifuku 弘法大師の
書 御筆七祖影七幅 (Kyoto: Tōji Hōmotsukan, 2002).

--- PAGE 16 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
143
Vajrabodhi’s fortnight at the Buddha’s footprint on “Mount Laṅkā” 
than he does to Vajrabodhi’s first thirty-one years, let alone his semi-
nal indoctrinations into the mysteries of the primary Yoga-tantra 
Vajroṣṇīṣa at the hands of Nāgajñāna64 of South India. These seemingly 
haphazard distributions and curiously inverted proportions also obtain 
in the narration of Vajrabodhi’s Chinese period. It is possible that the 
uneven prominence of detail within Lü Xiang’s biography came about 
because he considered that the bare bones of the story (for instance, 
the relationship with Amoghavajra) would be known to his readership 
and he wanted to focus his efforts on material that would add nov-
elty to aspects of his preceptor’s life which either were less widely ap-
preciated or else were conveyed to Lü Xiang in private audiences with 
his master. I personally consider the latter explanation more likely; it 
is worth noting that much of the biographic material focuses heavily 
upon Vajrabodhi’s career prior to his arrival in China, and seems to be 
the result of personal interaction with Vajrabodhi, with the uneven 
distribution of detail in his biography conveying his master’s sense of 
what was important.65
Augmenting the inherent credibility of the court scholar Lü Xiang’s 
account, certain of the details in the biography accord with, are vali-
dated by, or even explain several of the curiosities associated with 
the transmission of esoteric yoga-tantric Buddhism to China in the 
first half of the eighth century. The suite of corroborating evidence, 
discussed in detail in three subsections below, includes the Pallava 
ambassador-general Mizhunna (section Va), the southern Śrī Laṅkān 
kingdom of Rohaṇa (section Vb), and the account of the shipwreck on 
the initial approach to China (section Vc). 
Va. The First Validation of Lü Xiang’s Biography:  
The Pallava General Mizhunna
The first interesting facet of Lü Xiang’s biography which tends to 
validate its legitimacy is its repeated mention of General Mizhunna, 
who was tasked by Narasiṃhapotavarman to accompany Vajrabodhi 
and present a set of gifts to the emperor of China. In providing a proper 
name for Narasiṃhapotavarman’s ambassador, Lü Xiang included him 
among only three other members of the laity (Vajrabodhi’s father King 
Īśānavarman, his Pallava sponsor King Narasiṃhapotavarman, and his 
Sinhalese admirer King Śrīśīla) to be so distinguished. Of this group of 
four, only Mizhunna was not a regent whose name would be known

--- PAGE 17 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
144
to anyone reasonably well-versed with the contemporary royalty of 
the more prominent South Asian polities; Mizhunna ranked a mention 
even where the kings of Rohaṇa and Śrīvijaya remained unnamed.66 
Despite Lü Xiang’s pointedly double-introduction of Mizhunna into 
the narrative, he is allowed to disappear during the voyage and that 
component of the Vajrabodhi saga is unresolved. If Lü Xiang troubled 
himself in twice providing Mizhunna’s name to his audience, then it 
is likely that he had a reason for doing so. Indeed, of all the histori-
cal personages whose lives intersected Vajrabodhi’s, only Mizhunna 
intended to reach China, the location of Lü Xiang’s readership, so we 
may presume that his name was featured because Mizhunna’s was a 
name and a story which was known to the readership and doubtlessly 
available in the full diplomatic records of the Tang court. This, I be-
lieve, is a supplemental demonstration of the earliness of Lü Xiang’s 
undated work: some of Lü Xiang’s readership likely met Mizhunna and 
therefore knew him personally. Such acquaintances extended, almost 
certainly, to Lü Xiang himself, the second person honored by induction 
into the Imperial Academy. 
Despite the biography’s suggestion that Mizhunna accompanied 
Vajrabodhi throughout his three-year diversion through Southeast 
Asia, I am uncertain whether Mizhunna continued to accompany 
Vajrabodhi after the sea-storm, or whether Mizhunna’s diplomatic 
duties demanded that he continue to press his mission by continuing 
to China. The success of General Mizhunna’s mission also might ac-
count for the access which Vajrabodhi obtained when he arrived in 
Guangzhou several years later: how could the Chinese possibly eval-
uate Vajrabodhi and accord him with a triumphal welcome at both 
the harbor where he docked as well as at the palace of the emperor 
without someone like an ambassador to attest to his exploits, his back-
ground, and his royal connections with the Pallava court at Kāñcī and 
the Sinhalese court at Anurādhapura?
It is interesting to note that Mizhunna was only one of a flurry of 
Pallava ambassadors to be sent around this time to the Tang court. Sen 
provides an interesting précis: 
The Indian mission of 720 on the other hand, specifically mentions 
the threat from the Tibetans and Arabs as the reason for seeking 
help from the Tang court. The envoy from the South Indian King 
Shilinaluolu(seng?)jiamo (Śrī Nārāyaṇasiṃha?) sought permission 
from emperor Xuanzong to attack the Arabs and Tibetans with 
the war elephants and horses the Indian king possessed and asked

--- PAGE 18 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
145
the emperor to pick a title for his army. Pleased with the Indian 
king’s offer to form a coalition against the Arabs and Tibetans, the 
Chinese emperor bestowed the title of “Huaide jun” (“The Army that 
Cherishes Virtue”) to Śrī Nārāyaṇasiṃha’s troops. The South Indian 
king sent two more envoys in the same year, one seeking an epithet 
for a (Buddhist?) monastery, and another acknowledging the title of 
“king” that the Chinese emperor had bestowed on him. 
	
The above South Indian king, as has been pointed out by Luciano 
Petech, can be identified as Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha of the 
Pallava dynasty. Since Narasiṃhavarman II’s reign is marked by 
peace, prosperity, and flourishing maritime trade, Petech is perhaps 
right to observe that the Indian king’s “quite gratuitous offer of help, 
which could not possibly materialize for obvious geographic reasons, 
was evidently prompted by reasons of prestige and/or maritime 
trade.”67
Indeed, the Pallava-Chinese relationship was so cordial that, as 
Mahalingam notes, Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha built a Buddhist 
vihāra at Nāgapaṭṭinam68 for the Chinese emperor and allowed him to 
name it,69 and one is led to wonder whether Vajrabodhi had a hand in 
its design.70 Such repeated, persistent diplomatic intercourse may serve 
as an explanatory context for Vajrabodhi’s easy access to the inner 
sanctum of the Tang court. In fact, given the chronology, one surmises 
that the welcome arrival of Vajrabodhi or Mizhunna in Guangfu in 
719 CE actually instigated the series of intense and cordial diplomatic 
interchanges between the Chinese and the Pallavas recorded to occur 
in 720.71 If so, their salutary effect paralleled the arrival of Amoghavajra 
in Laṅkā in 742, where the transmission of religious knowledge and 
texts between highly adept monks immediately stimulated a high-
level religio-diplomatic interchange between the Buddhist Sinhalese 
king at Anurādhapura and the Tang emperor at Chang’an.72 A similar 
occurrence seemingly transpired some half a century later, when the 
Javanese kings became patrons involved in the Sinhalese dispensations, 
likely involving precisely this same style of interchange of tantric texts 
and, in the Javanese case, a cadre of adept monks as well.
Vb. The Second Validation:  
Contemporary Evidence of the Mahāyāna in Sinhalese Rohaṇa
The account of the kings encountered while in Laṅkā provokes in-
terest. The Anurādhapura king Śrīśīla was obviously sympathetic to 
Vajrabodhi and his doctrines, and indeed, the extant historical records

--- PAGE 19 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
146
of Laṅkā inform us that the Sinhalese king Mānavarman (the patron 
“Śrīśīla” of Vajrabodhi’s biography; his reign lasted from approxi-
mately 684 to 718 CE) had intimate ties and relations with the very 
Pallava lands and court where Vajrabodhi had sojourned for the seven 
years prior to his arrival in Laṅkā: Mānavarman had spent a long exile 
serving as a general for that regal South Indian court at Kāñcī before 
gaining the use of the Pallava army to effect his own installation on 
the Anurādhapura throne and reestablish the second Lambakaṇṇa 
dynasty. Mānavarman’s three sons, each of whom would in turn rule 
at Anurādhapura, were all born in Pallava lands during the exile. The 
dates of the early Second Lambakaṇṇa dynasty assigned by Nicholas 
and Paranavitana are: Mānavarman from 684 to 718 CE, followed by 
his sons Aggabodhi V from 718 to 724, Kassapa III from 724 to 730, and 
Mahinda I from 730 to 733.73 Amoghavajra, in turn, must have met the 
long-reigned Aggabodhi VI (733–772) during his 742–746 stay in Śrī 
Laṅkā.
The other, and often subordinate, kingdom in Śrī Laṅkā was the 
southern tropical kingdom of Rohaṇa, which Lü Xiang noted adhered 
to the principles of the Theravāda when Vajrabodhi arrived. Rohaṇa 
was seemingly not yet a client kingdom of Mānavarman, who emerged 
from exile only around twenty-five years earlier, and so the king’s de-
votion to Theravāda is not unexpected. It is likely that Vajrabodhi’s 
efforts to elucidate the principles of his brand of the Mahāyāna at 
the court of the king of Rohaṇa indeed worked as claimed. Dohanian 
notes the relics of Mahāyāna worship scattered across the island, even 
though he assigns dates of a century or two after Vajrabodhi’s travels.74 
However, there is a datum in the epigraphic evidence which is immedi-
ately pertinent and indicates that the south of the island had adopted 
Mahāyāna shortly after Vajrabodhi’s sojourn. Paranavitana discusses a 
triplet of large rockface inscriptions concerning an Aritārāvehera from 
Rässahela (Rājagala) near Bätticaloa.75 The donor of one of the inscrip-
tions found at this Tārā Vihāra was Äpāy Daḷsiva, who is to be identi-
fied with the ādipāda Dāṭhāsiva mentioned as a king of Rohaṇa in the 
Cūlavaṃsa. Perera notes that paleography suggests that the inscription 
comes after Kāśyapa III’s (724–730) inscription, bolstering the credibil-
ity of Lü Xiang’s claim that Vajrabodhi had indeed persuaded the king 
of Rohaṇa to accept the principles and deities of the Mahāyāna.76

--- PAGE 20 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
147
Vc. The Third Validation of the Biography:  
Shipwreck and Vajrabodhi’s Loss of the Vajroṣṇīṣa
In his tale of the Iron Stūpa, an allegorized account of the origin 
of the highly-valued Vajroṣṇīṣa77 teachings, Amoghavajra quotes 
Vajrabodhi’s telling of the episode of the cataclysmic sea-storm which 
beset his ship on the initial approach to China: 
I set forth from the western country [India] to cross the southern 
ocean in a fleet of more than thirty great ships, each one carrying 
more than five or six hundred persons. Once, when we were cross-
ing in convoy in the very middle of the great ocean we ran into a ty-
phoon. All the ships we depended upon were tossed about [like drift-
wood], and the ship I was on was about to be inundated. At that time 
I always kept the two scriptures [that is, full and abridged versions 
of the Vajroṣṇīṣa—my brackets, JRS] I was bringing nearby so that I 
could receive and keep them and do the offerings. Now, when the 
captain saw that the ship was about to sink, everything on board was 
cast into the ocean, and in a moment of fright the one-hundred-thou-
sand-verse text was flung into the ocean, and only the superficial text 
was saved. At that time I aroused my mind in meditation, doing the 
technique for eliminating disasters, and the typhoon abated, and for 
perhaps more than a quarter mile around the ship wind and water 
did not move. All on board took refuge in me, and bit by bit we got to 
this shore and arrived in this country.78
There are many factors and circumstances in Vajrabodhi’s bi-
ography and translated works that lead us to believe in the ve-
racity of Amoghavajra’s account. Primarily, the veracity is evi-
denced by Vajrabodhi’s 723 CE translation of the first samāja of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, which bears but faint resemblance to 
the highly corroborant texts for which we have extant Sanskrit manu-
scripts from Nepal, the Tibetan translations, and the version known to 
Amoghavajra, which was seemingly gathered from his Śrī Laṅkān ex-
pedition just two decades after Vajrabodhi’s publication.79 The “trans-
lation” of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha provided by Vajrabodhi 
stands at such variance to all of the other versions, including the text 
translated by Amoghavajra upon his return from the text-gathering 
trip to Śrī Laṅkā, that it has been taken to be a ritual sādhana.80 Indeed, 
it is not impossible that what Vajrabodhi provided as his translation of 
the first section of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha is entirely his own 
creation, extemporized in Chang’an based upon imperfect memories 
of the text he encountered in Kāñcī and resources available to him in

--- PAGE 21 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
148
China: Vajrabodhi’s version of the text disposed many excerpts from 
the Mahāvairocana-sūtra,81 an alternate mūlasūtra certainly available to 
Vajrabodhi in Chang’an because it was translated by his fellow Indian 
monk Śubhākarasiṃha.82
These considerations are reinforced by the chronology worked out 
by Chou, which places the meeting of Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra in 
718 CE.83 It is interesting to note that Amoghavajra’s presentation of the 
storm story perfectly accords with Chou’s chronology: Amoghavajra 
quotes Vajrabodhi in the third person, confirming that the loss oc-
curred on the initial approach to China in 716, when Amoghavajra was 
not there.84 
It is imperative to observe that for the remainder of Vajrabodhi’s 
life, he and Amoghavajra had to conduct their activities without access 
to the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, the major text of the school, im-
provising and relying upon Vajrabodhi’s memory.85 Even with this 
drastic impairment, Vajrabodhi established his reputation in China as 
an influential Buddhist thaumaturge, preceptor, confidante to the em-
peror, and innovator despite his lack of access to the major texts of his 
discipline, and at the end of his life he instructed his favored disciple 
Amoghavajra to journey back to Śrī Laṅkā to find them. 
Laṅkā as the Exclusive Destination for  
Amoghavajra’s 742 Text-Gathering Expedition
Another primary benefit to the study of Lü Xiang’s biography of 
Vajrabodhi is that it provides clues and a context for the seemingly ex-
clusive interest in the Sinhalese kingdom of Anurādhapura exhibited 
by Amoghavajra during his 742–746 sojourn, and subsequent Śailendra 
interest in the Abhayagiri monks and monastery.
That Vajrabodhi’s disciple Amoghavajra restricted his epic jour-
ney of 742–746 to the Sinhalese kingdom of Anurādhapura, but no 
farther, is almost certain. There is an off-pitch tone which is rung in 
the several accounts which describe Amoghavajra’s alleged journey to 
India, namely, the pervasive attempts on the part of his biographers to 
excuse a description of Amoghavajra’s exploits in India on the grounds 
of its indescribable expansiveness. The early biographer Zhao Qian’s 
(趙遷) awkward interjection of a brief mention of India (“Amoghavajra 
then visited India; he traveled in all of India’s kingdoms. The traces of 
his activities are so plentiful that we must leave a gap, as we cannot 
record all the details”; T. 2056, 50.293a16) is reprised in the official

--- PAGE 22 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
149
Song biography collated by Zanning. Zhao Qian makes no mention of 
texts gathered, sights seen, teachers found, notables encountered, re-
searches conducted, or miracles performed, despite this journey being 
Amoghavajra’s first trip to the original sites of historical Buddhism. 
On this fundamental detail, the question of whether Amoghavajra 
went to India at all, Zanning was unable to conjure up any more de-
tails of Amoghavajra’s alleged Indian excursion despite his access to 
the widest array of biographical material possible; Zanning’s narrative 
simply claimed that “then he visited the Five Indias, where he caused 
auspicious omens many times” (T. 2061, 50.712c10).86
Amoghavajra’s monastic disciple Feixi (飛錫),87 who helped 
Amoghavajra with translation work, presents a restricted and, to 
my mind, accurate account of Amoghavajra’s journey. In his bio-
graphical stele,88 dated just a handful of days after the 774 CE death 
of Amoghavajra and composed on imperial order, Feixi stated flatly 
that his master’s singular destination for the transoceanic voyage was 
the island of Laṅkā: the emperor Xuanzong (玄宗 ) sent Amoghavajra 
to the Country of the Siṃhalas as an “envoy to aid the religion of the 
empire” (jiguo xinshi, 齎國信使).89 According to Feixi, Amoghavajra 
then returned directly from Laṅkā in 747 CE.90
Given this abundant and persuasive evidence that Amoghavajra 
limited his ventures to Laṅkā (a constraint seemingly imposed by his 
dying master Vajrabodhi in his will; see Zhao Qian, T. 2056, 50.292c14)91 
when he sought to recover the missing cardinal texts of his credo, 
the operative task is to deduce the unacknowledged rationale which 
directed this Tang exegete to the Lion Isle. The Song-era biography 
by Zanning provides no clue to clarify this underlying motive, but in 
light of the biography of Lü Xiang, a number of plausible explanations 
suggest themselves. First, the history of the Pallava kingdom where 
Vajrabodhi spent his seven years of tutelage under Nāgajñāna suggests 
that it was then unsuitable for Amoghavajra’s purposes. It is a historical 
truth that the Pallavas were in 742 in much tighter straits than when 
Vajrabodhi studied there during the golden rule of Narasiṃhavarman 
II. Indeed, given the conditions in the Pallava lands, it may have been 
not just optimal but absolutely necessary for Amoghavajra to visit 
Anurādhapura instead of Kāñcī to obtain the Vajroṣṇīṣa: the Pallava 
capital had been overrun and the Pallava dynasty riven by schism 
since the time that Vajrabodhi had left.92 However, whatever might be 
happening in the domain where Vajrabodhi took his seminal esoteric

--- PAGE 23 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
150
instruction at the hands of Nāgajñāna, there are perfectly sound rea-
sons to consider Śrī Laṅkā as a valid objective, rather than a second-
best fallback for the crumbling and trouble-filled Pallava state. An ob-
vious justification for preferring Laṅkā comes from noting the fact that 
the Lambakaṇṇa kings were Buddhists, profuse in their sponsorship of 
their religion and impressive public monuments to it.93 Lü Xiang de-
votes great space to accounts of Vajrabodhi fervently and continuously 
worshipping at such specifically Buddhist sites as the Tooth Relic at 
the Abhayagirivihāra in Anurādhapura as well as at the Footprint on 
Adam’s Peak.94 Given the record of the miraculous response by both 
items to Vajrabodhi’s presence, Vajrabodhi’s deep appreciation for the 
unique spiritual possibilities of contemporary Śrī Laṅkā is not surpris-
ing. However, there is no extant documentation which indicates that 
Amoghavajra followed Vajrabodhi’s trail up the sacred mountain, and 
it seems that the primary purpose of Amoghavajra’s trip was to acquire 
a library of esoteric texts rather than visit pilgrimage sites.95 There 
are other rationales and considerations for preferring Anurādhapura 
to Kāñcī not inherently evident from the biography of Vajrabodhi. It 
was certainly within his royal power for Mānavarman to have compos-
ited the best library of the type of Buddhist esoterica which attracted 
Vajrabodhi, and generously allowed him both access and the amanu-
ensis staff necessary to copy the prized texts. Indeed, it is not out of 
the question that the Sinhalese library of Buddhist esoterica was itself 
largely authored by the Laṅkān monks exiled with Mānavarman while 
he awaited his opportunity to cross the strait and gain the throne,96 that 
they were the true source of the innovative esoteric doctrines, and that 
Nāgajñāna was conveying these Laṅkān-originated teachings. Finally, 
there is a substantial chance that Nāgajñāna or a skilled disciple, per-
haps either the master Samantabhadra, who served as Amoghavajra’s 
final preceptor and initiator, or else the ācārya *Ratnabodhi,97 moved 
from Kāñcī to Anurādhapura. In fact, in his longer account of the 
Shingon lineage, Kūkai wrote of Nāgajñāna specifically that he “re-
sided in South India, where he spread the dharma and benefitted 
people, and traveled to the kingdom of Siṃhala, where he exhorted 
those with links with Buddhism” (Kōbō daishi zenshū 1:9). It is impos-
sible to determine which of the several alternative rationales is the 
true reason for Amoghavajra’s exclusive preference for gathering texts 
in Laṅkā, but the repeated claims in both the contemporary Chinese 
and the early Shingon material that Amoghavajra also studied under

--- PAGE 24 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
151
Nāgajñāna during his excursion98 seems to tilt the balance of plausibil-
ity toward this last explanation.
Given the historical information about Vajrabodhi’s discipleship 
under Nāgajñāna at Kāñcī, we see that we have a very formidable quin-
tet at Kāñcī in the 680s: an internationally renowned tantric master 
whose disciple ministered to Indian kings and the Chinese emperor, 
and the four exiled royals (Mānavarman and his sons Aggabodhi V, 
Kassapa III, and Mahinda I) who would recover their throne and 
govern Sinhalese Rājaraṭṭha for the fifty years from 684 to 733. It is 
significant that Amoghavajra took the tantric consecration in Laṅkā. 
This second, Laṅkān consecration (Amoghavajra’s first consecration 
into the mysteries of the Yoga-tantras was given in China by his pre-
ceptor Vajrabodhi) was the capstone, the non plus ultra, of his religious 
education and training. To me, it is interesting that Amoghavajra 
required, requested, and accepted another consecration lineage 
aside from that offered by Vajrabodhi, his dead primary preceptor, 
mūlācārya and noted patriarch of the Shingon school. Within four years 
of Amoghavajra requesting his final instruction in the esoteric teach-
ings in Laṅkā, the particular Sinhalese abhiṣeka lineage, seemingly as-
sociated with Nāgajñāna either directly or at one disciple’s remove, 
again freshly touched the emperor Xuanzong of China, one of the most 
singularly powerful men in the medieval world before the generals’ An 
Shi rebellions of 755–763 ruined his state. Although Amoghavajra had 
administered an esoteric consecration to the emperor shortly before 
setting off on his pilgrimage, providing the emperor with another tan-
tric initiation perhaps superseded the original consecrations which 
were performed within the lineage of Nāgajñāna via Vajrabodhi. The 
crux of the issue, as was argued above, may have had to do with the 
availability of authentic esoteric Buddhist texts.
The Sea-Storm, Java, and the Location of  
the Meeting of Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra
Amoghavajra’s independent but parallel account of the great sea-
storm, quoting Vajrabodhi in the third-personal singular as though 
Amoghavajra was absent from the scene, helps substantiate the 
claim of one of his biographers that Amoghavajra had originally met 
Vajrabodhi in Java, during the three years after his shipwreck that 
Vajrabodhi wandered in Southeast Asia. Where exactly in Southeast 
Asia Vajrabodhi traveled is left unspecified by Lü Xiang, but I do not

--- PAGE 25 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
152
envision Vajrabodhi finding spiritual and intellectual satisfaction in 
the more primitive islands in the South China Sea. Kūkai, for his part, 
took it as fact that Vajrabodhi met Amoghavajra in Java.99 This is cor-
roborated by an extant account, exceedingly likely to be accurate given 
that it convenes in both time and location with other known facts, of 
his meeting with Amoghavajra, also compiled into the Zhenyuan xinding 
shijiao mulu:100
He was from Siṃhala in southern India. His dharma name was Zhizang 
[Wisdom Treasury, 智藏] and he was called Amoghavajra [Bukong 
Jingang, 不空金剛]. Since I have not heard of his clan or family, I 
will not write about it. It is reckoned that he was born in the cyclic 
year yisi (乙巳), the first year of the Shenlong (神龍) era [705] of the 
Great Tang. He was naturally intelligent and yearned for the Way 
from a young age. He left his parents, shaved his head, and [donned] 
tattered robes. In the cyclic year wuwu (戊午), the sixth year of the 
Kaiyuan era [718], when he was just fourteen, he met Vajrabodhi, 
the Tripiṭaka Master Hongjiao [Propagator of the Teaching, 弘教
三藏],101 in the land of Java [Shepo, 闍婆]102 and studied under him. 
He attended upon him in the southern seas, boarding a sailing ship 
and braving dangers, and through terrifying waves and pounding 
swells he followed him like a shadow. Only in the eighth year of the 
Kaiyuan era [720] did he reach the Eastern Capital [Luoyang]. (T. 
2157, 55.881a11–a17)
What might we learn from this passage? First, it is obvious that 
Java ranked among the locales suitable for a well-educated Indian 
religious adept like Vajrabodhi to occupy his time, instead of ener-
getically resuming his approach to his intended destination of China. 
Indeed, Java had for centuries been an exponent of Indian Sanskritic 
culture, in both Śaiva and Bauddha strains, and some locations on the 
island must have been perceived as hospitable ground for Vajrabodhi. 
Whether Vajrabodhi, accompanied by an ambassador of the Pallava 
king, bided his time in the circles of Javanese monastics, Java’s laity, or 
the Śailendra royalty will forever be unknown. However, his presence 
in Java raises speculation whether such mid-eighth century activity 
as the establishment of a monastery, whose precise nikāya affiliation 
and Buddhist doctrinal background remain uncertain, at Pikatan by 
a younger sibling of King Sañjaya (r. 716–746? CE) and the subsequent 
allotment of crown lands to the Pikatan monastery by Sañjaya’s prob-
able son the Raka of Panangkaran,103 might reasonably be attributed 
to Vajrabodhi’s influence. As late as his Canggal inscription of 732 CE,

--- PAGE 26 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
153
Sañjaya was seemingly devoted to the worship of Śiva, but the my-
thologized sixteenth-century Sundanese narrative Carita Parahyangan, 
the only pertinent account known to me, declares that Sañjaya him-
self urged his son to convert from his religion, on the grounds that its 
bloodthirstiness scared people.104 It is thus well within the realm of 
historical possibility that Vajrabodhi planted the seed of appreciation 
for esoteric Buddhism in Java during his sojourn in 717: the elaborate, 
richly, and regally endowed Buddhism of the high Śailendra period 
some decades later seems to have sought to ground itself in the very 
locales and traditions esteemed by Vajrabodhi a half-century before. 
VI. THE PALLAVAS, THE SINHALESE, AND THE  
SHAPING OF MEDIEVAL BUDDHIST CULTURE
This section will address information and indicators from the 
realms of the Pallavas and the Sinhalese which bear on the question 
of Nāgajñāna, Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, and the doctrines that they 
encountered and transmitted. In particular, we will take note of the 
strong Śaiva inflection to some of the Buddhist Vajroṣṇīṣa texts associ-
ated with this trio, and as well of the great influence of these centers 
of esoteric teaching on the Buddhist world of the eighth century. After 
examining briefly the astonishing content of some of these Vajroṣṇīṣa 
works, I will note the pertinence of the thesis which posits ascetic wil-
derness monks, communing in forbidding locales with Śaiva counter-
parts, as prototypes of the Buddhist siddhas. 
In a passage above, it was noted how only four historical person-
ages, three regents and a royal ambassador, were singled out by name in 
Lü Xiang’s biography. It was further established that two of these kings 
were intimately connected: the Pallava regent Narasiṃhavarman II 
and the Sinhalese dynast Mānavarman, who spent a long exile at Kāñcī 
serving as a general (Narasiṃhavarman and Mānavarman possibly 
shared the bonds of successful campaigns under the Pallava insignia), 
and who owed his kingdom to the Pallava army of Narasiṃhavarman 
II’s grandfather, the first Narasiṃhavarman (r. 630–668 CE). This debt 
to the Pallavas was profound: Holt notes Mānavarman’s Kāñcī-born 
sons and successors Aggabodhi V, Kassapa III, and Mahinda I, “all of 
whom sustained their father’s reestablished dynasty, not only had 
shared their formative exilic years in the court of Narasiṃhavarman 
but were actually born in India. It is only natural, then, that Pallava 
cultural and political influence would have become quite strong in Śrī

--- PAGE 27 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
154
Laṅkā during the reign of these Sinhalese but culturally and politically 
Pallava-dominated kings. Indeed, this period of Sinhalese history, be-
ginning in the early eighth century and continuing well into the ninth, 
witnessed largely unsuccessful attempts at the centralization of royal 
power patterned after the Pallava administrative model.”105 
The extent of Pallava influence is not limited to extensions of 
their administrative structures to an allied kingdom. While the con-
temporary Pallava kings remained energetic devotees of Śiva—
Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha built the fabulous Kailasanāth temple 
in Kāñcī, the Dharmarāja maṇḍapa cave, and the Rājasiṃheśvara shore 
temple at Māmallapuram—a remarkable diversity of religious belief 
was allowed to flourish in their tolerant and cosmopolitan domain.106 
The Pallavas had long permitted Buddhism,107 and in fact the Chinese 
religious pilgrim Xuanzang (玄奘) wrote this about the kingdom of 
“Drāviḍa” (Daluopitu, 達羅毘荼): 
The capital is Kāñcīpura, situated on a seaport across from the 
kingdom of Sinhala.... They are deeply attached to the principles of 
honesty and truth, and highly esteem learning; in respect of their 
language and written characters, they differ but little from those 
of mid-India. There are some hundred of saṅghārāmas and 10,000 
priests.108 They all study the teaching of the Sthavira school belong-
ing to the Great Vehicle. There are some eighty Deva temples, and 
many heretics called Nirgranthas. Tathāgata in olden days, when 
living in the world, frequented this country much; he preached the 
law here and converted men, and therefore Aśoka-rāja built stūpas 
over all the sacred spots where these traces exist.109
In contrast to the conventional Mahāyāna monk Xuanzang fifty 
years before, the Vajrabodhi of Lü Xiang’s biography is very much im-
mersed in the apparatus of the generation of the early tantras with-
out Lü Xiang explicitly stating so. We observe this in his reading of 
Nāgārjuna’s corpus, the emphasis on Adam’s Peak (a topic to be ex-
plored in depth in the next section), and both the esoteric Buddhist 
master Nāgajñāna and the Vajroṣṇīṣa textual corpus he transmitted 
to his disciple.110 Indeed, thanks to Lü Xiang we are fortunate to have 
caught a datable glimpse of these Eighteen Assemblies (largely a proxy 
reference for the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha) at Kāñcī, in the hands of 
the teacher of Vajrabodhi, at a datable time. Their second retrieval oc-
curred thirty years later through the directed agency of Amoghavajra, 
one of its earliest proponents, from the Sinhalese at Anurādhapura.

--- PAGE 28 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
155
This Pallava-domain Buddhism, manifestly accepted although 
seemingly not sponsored by the contemporary Pallava kings, may have 
served its credo by generating and crystallizing such a seminal text as 
the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. That such a text should receive its 
first historical mention in the Pallava domains is significant in light of 
Alexis Sanderson’s extensive scholarly documentation of direct esoteric 
Buddhist borrowings from Śaiva tantric texts.111 Indeed, Sanderson ob-
serves specifically of the innovations of the Tattvasaṃgraha that “we 
find the beginning of a process of assimilation of Śākta Śaiva language, 
practices, iconography, and concepts that would become ever more 
comprehensive throughout the rest of the Mantranaya’s creativity. 
Here we find for the first time the requirement that candidates enter 
a state of possession (āveśaḥ) at the time of their initiation. This fea-
ture, which is altogether alien to antecedent Buddhism, is the hallmark 
of initiation in the Śaiva Kaula systems, setting them apart from all 
others.” Sanderson then proposes that “the centrality of possession 
in the Śākta Śaiva domain may derive from its Kāpālika antecedents, 
since the Saiddhāntika Śaivas report that the Kāpālikas [of the Atimārga] 
defined liberation as arising from a state of possession (āveśaḥ) by the 
qualities of the deity.”112 That the Kāpālika themselves were recognized 
quantities in the Pallava kingdom is known from the Sanskrit farce 
Mattavilāsa (Drunken Sport), where its royal author the Pallava king 
Mahendravikramavarman (r. ca. 600–630) contrived a story around 
a Kāpālika seeking his missing skull-bowl.113 As for the religious situ-
ation at the beginning of the eighth century when Vajrabodhi lived 
in the Pallava domains, the foundation inscription on the vimāna of 
Narasiṃhavarman II’s showpiece Kailāsanātha temple mentions spe-
cifically that he was devoted to the Śaiva Siddhānta mārga.114 Given the 
dedication of this regent, one of the cardinal figures in the Vajrabodhi 
story, to at least a mild form of Śaiva esoterism, one can easily see how 
a tantric adept like Nāgajñāna could flourish there.115
Assuming that the Vajroṣṇīṣa as summarized by Amoghavajra in 
the Indications of the Goals of the Eighteen Assemblies of the Yoga of the 
Adamantine Pinnacle Scripture116 did not differ from the set of original 
texts given by Nāgajñāna to Vajrabodhi, we see that it is a heady mix 
indeed, as the Vajroṣṇīṣa obtained by Amoghavajra from Śrī Laṅkā117 
is redolent of an origination in an esoteric Śaiva context. Among the 
texts obtained by Amoghavajra may be found the above-mentioned 
Tattvasaṃgraha, which constitutes the first through fifth assemblies

--- PAGE 29 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
156
in his Vajroṣṇīṣa system; at least one Yoginī-tantra, the system’s ninth 
assembly, the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga-ḍākinījālasaṃvara;118 and as well 
an edition of the Guhyasamāja, the fifteenth of the assemblies.119 
Appreciation of this latter text, which declared itself to be promul-
gated while the Buddha was residing in the vulva of the Vajra Maidens, 
was effectively censored by Amoghavajra, who chose to transliter-
ate rather than translate the unchaste term in the original Sanskrit; 
he noted both discretely and opaquely that the Guhyasamāja120 was 
“expounded in a secret place, that is to say, it was expounded in the 
yoṣidbhaga place, which is called the Prajñāpāramitā Palace.”121 Invoking 
specifically these two latter scriptures, Davidson was led to observe 
that “The earliest siddha literature simply speaks of a sexual ritual that 
is sacramental rather than yogic. It is found in such scriptures as the 
Guhyasamāja, the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga, the Laghusaṃvara, and others 
that became understood as proposing the path of ‘highest yoga.’ ”122 
It is indeed difficult to envision such nominally but superficially 
Buddhist texts originating in any locale other than a tolerant, strongly 
Śaiva, and doctrinally effervescent location like Kāñcī, where indeed 
they were first seen.123
A graphic indicator of the presence of the type of transgressive 
doctrines espoused by such texts as the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga and 
the Guhyasamāja occurs in the peculiarly-named Nālandā temple in 
Śrī Laṅkā. This Sinhalese Nālandā was created, almost assuredly by 
Mānavarman or one of his three Kāñcī-born successor-sons, in a con-
spicuously anomalous Pallava style. The temple, whose associated in-
scription has now largely weathered beyond legibility, was evidently 
built for some transgressive doctrine, as it was embellished with two 
bas-reliefs each depicting three human and humanoid creatures, the 
middle of whom is indisputably male, engaged in sexual intercourse. 
The erotic frieze defies both easy description and easy identification 
with standard images of symbolic union between a deity and his con-
sort. Possibly the frieze represents the copulation with non-humans 
enjoined by the Subāhuparipṛccha, translated into Chinese in 726 by 
Śubhākarasiṃha, as a means of harvesting siddhi powers.124
The context of this first glimpse of the Tattvasaṃgraha and the 
other texts constituting the Vajroṣṇīṣa was “South India,” a term which 
Lü Xiang seemingly used to specify the domain of the Pallavas, where 
the text likely originated125 and was formulated before it had a chance 
to be institutionalized in such renowned monasteries as Nālandā.126

--- PAGE 30 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
157
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The “Nālandā” temple in Śrī Laṅkā, unique for its execution in Pallava style, was almost certainly the handi-
work of Mānavarman or one of his three Kāñcī-born successor-sons. The temple contains an erotic frieze which must 
accord with the purpose of the temple. Photographs courtesy of Ven. Rangama Chandawimala Thero.

--- PAGE 31 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
158
That the Tattvasaṃgraha should make its way quickly into the larger 
and more influential intellectual venues is no surprise if we consider 
the firm evidence of the wide-ranging journeys of such historical char-
acters as the peripatetic Vajrabodhi; the near-contemporary Chinese 
pilgrim Daolin (道琳), who expressed strong interest in the meth-
ods of the Buddhist tantra and who coursed from Nālandā to Lāṭa in 
western India to “stand before the divine altar and receive the vidyās 
once again”;127 or his kindred spirit Śākyamitra, tentatively dated by 
Davidson to the late eighth or early ninth century,128 who traveled 
almost as widely as Vajrabodhi in search of spiritual truth, venturing 
to Koṅkana in western India, Sahya in the Western Ghats, Draviḍa in 
the south, and Oḍiyāna in the north. 
That Nālandā served as a common nexus among these characters 
is significant, for as Sanderson observes, “Under these [Pāla] rulers 
eastern India witnessed an extraordinary development of Mahāyāna 
Buddhism in all its branches, particularly in the Tantric Way of 
Mantras (Mantranaya), which if not entirely the product of this region 
was very largely so; and this immense creativity, whose products 
formed in due course the basis of the Buddhism of Inner Asia, was nur-
tured and refined in a number of major monasteries, of which the most 
eminent were those of Nālandā, Vikramaśīla, Somapura, Trikaṭuka, 
Uddaṇḍapura, and Jagaddala.”129
However true this may be, Nālandā was not uniquely prolific, as 
there was seemingly no geographic center for the depth-psychological 
realizations which underlay the generation of the Buddhist tantras; 
Sanderson’s reliable primary observation on Nālandā seems to ignore 
an obvious second pole in the early development of these scriptures: 
the Pallava-Sinhala nexus which is so evident from the biography of 
Vajrabodhi and the actions of Amoghavajra. Indeed, it is interest-
ing to reflect on the fact that, of all of the Buddhist vihāras visited by 
Vajrabodhi during his long monastic career, only the Abhayagirivihāra 
and Nālandā are singled out by name.
That Nāgajñāna, the earliest recorded preceptor known to pro-
mote and distribute this genre of text, is associated with no named 
vihāra despite Vajrabodhi’s seven years’ study there is indeed food 
for thought, especially in light of Gray’s hypothesis that the Buddhist 
forest or wilderness monks served as a bridge by which Śaiva reli-
gious innovations were channeled into esoteric Buddhist texts. Gray 
ascribed the genesis of this esoteric Buddhist material to the mingling

--- PAGE 32 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
159
of Buddhist wilderness monks and Śaiva meditators and ascetics in 
the charnel grounds on the edges of society.130 It is therefore of some 
importance to note that the extant Theravāda chronicles record a re-
vival, starting with Mānavarman himself, in sustained royal sponsor-
ship of the Sinhalese forest monks during the second Lambakaṇṇa dy-
nasty,131 even while suppressing mention of Lambakaṇṇa patronage of 
the type of esoteric doctrines which are so manifest in the contempo-
rary Chinese chronicles of Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra. (Besides the 
direct textual evidence of the esoteric inclinations of the Lambakaṇṇa 
dynast Mānavarman, it is clear that his grandson Aggabodhi VI, the 
king named Śilāmegha in the biographies of Amoghavajra who reigned 
ca. 733–772 CE, worshipped in the same manner. A unique admis-
sion by any of the Mahāvihāra chronicles that a Sinhalese king was 
lured into delusional support for tantric doctrine comes from the 
early fourteenth-century chronicle Nikāya Saṃgrahaya written by the 
monk Devarakṣita/Dharmakīrtī at the upland temple of Gaḍalādeṇiya, 
which asserts that King “Matvala-Sen” [“Mad Dog Sena,” i.e., Sena I, r. 
833–853 CE] fell victim to a cunning Indian monk of the Vajraparvata 
sect.132) Either we must posit that the kings of the second Lambakaṇṇa 
dynasty like Mānavarman and Sena I followed a curious pattern of 
dual tracks of royal favoritism, supporting handsomely both the as-
cetic wilderness monks mentioned in the later Theravāda histories and 
separately (but in parallel) the group of tantric adepts whose existence 
was edited out of the orthodox histories; or else we must accept that 
the Sinhalese wilderness monks were the monks who were the primary 
transmitters of Vajrayāna Buddhism in Śrī Laṅkā. A fascinating sub-
stantiation of the validity of Gray’s hypothesis about the role of the 
wilderness monks in the introduction of Śaiva doctrine into esoteric 
Buddhist practice is found in the form of the cache of unambiguously 
esoteric Buddhist statues,133 discovered together in 1983 at the circular 
hilltop vaṭadāge named Girikaṇḍivihāra at Tiriyāy on Laṅkā’s northeast 
coast134 which was created during the reign of Amoghavajra’s patron 
Śilāmegha.135 The statues were recovered from under a paving stone 
of a ruined meditation hall (padhāna ghara) with the double-platform136 
which is distinctive to the Sinhalese wilderness monks,137 positioned 
just to the west of the northern stairway leading to the vaṭadāge. Given 
this apparently substantial indication of the esoteric proclivities of the 
eighth-century Sinhalese wilderness monks,138 there can be no surprise 
in discovering the presence of exactly this genre of monks occupying

--- PAGE 33 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
160
another double-platform meditation hall on the Ratu Baka plateau in 
the Central Javanese heartlands,139 explicitly Sinhalese, explicitly origi-
nating from the Abhayagirivihāra, and acting under royal Śailendra 
patronage.140 Indeed, these royally-patronized ascetic activities par-
alleled and possibly inspired the intermittent wilderness retreats of 
such Sino-Japanese tantric figures as Kūkai, Hanguang (含光), and 
Amoghavajra himself at their imperially-sponsored mountain vihāras 
of Jingesi (金閣寺) on Mount Wutai (五臺山) and Kongōbuji (金剛峯寺) 
on Mount Kōya (高野山).
With Gray’s strongly and almost undeniably substantiated supposi-
tions about the central role played by wilderness monks in the transfer 
of tantric Śaiva doctrine into esoteric Buddhist text in mind, we might 
account for the lack of a named vihāra for Nāgajñāna by assuming that 
he was not formally associated with a temple, but instead led his life 
as a wandering ascetic, rather like Nāgabodhi and other siddha figures 
known to the Tibetans. Indeed, in any effort to examine the evidence to 
understand what Davidson in his influential study called “the tension 
that developed between forms of esoterism that evolved within the 
hallowed walls of Buddhist monasteries and those forms synthesized 
by the peripatetic figures of the Buddhist ‘Perfected’ (siddha),”141 it 
seems to me that what we know about the nominally liminal wilderness 
Abhayagirivāsins like those at the top of the Ratu Baka in Java renders 
them strong candidates for the role of proto-siddhas. The similarities 
in practice and background between wilderness monks and siddhas are 
undeniable: as Davidson phrases the matter, “Since the contemporary 
Indian literature depicted this dominion [over Vidyādhara sorcerers—
my brackets, JRS] as achieved by those performing their rites in real 
or visualized cemeteries, siddhas’ ritual systems demonstrate an obses-
sion with the same means. The cemeteries, isolated groves, primal for-
ests, and analogous locales were understood to be the gateways to the 
Vidyādhara realm, and alternative species of beings—tribal, demonic, 
kingly, whatever—were understood to be their aids to success. All these 
elements contributed to the siddhas’ practice, whose overarching des-
ignation was simply the Vidyādhara discipline (vidyādhara-saṃvara).”142 
The wilderness monks were likely the agents who ushered in the ma-
terial of the transgressive Yoginī-tantras like the copies of the Sarva­
buddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara143 and the Guhyasamāja which were 
obtained by Amoghavajra during his 741–746 text-gathering trip, and 
which almost certainly came from a sojourn at the Abhayagirivihāra

--- PAGE 34 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
161
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The prākāra created by the Javanese Śailendra king on the 
Ratu Baka plateau for the Sinhalese monks of the Abhayagirivihāra. 
The distinctive double-platformed structure lying within is found 
in a number of places in Śrī Laṅkā, primarily some kilometers to the 
west of the Abhayagiri stūpa at Anurādhapura and at Ritigala, but 
also at Tiriyāy where the large hoard of esoteric Buddhist statues 
was discovered under one of the paving stones. The structures 
served the tapovana, or forest ascetic, monks. In this Javanese 
instance, the vana was conspicuously lacking; the structure was 
located at the end of a long array of purposely-leveled terraces, 
accessed by a lofty double gate, near which was found a royally-
sponsored vajra-mantra associated with the Sarvatathāgatatattva­
saṃgraha.144 Photo courtesy of Mark Long.
Figure 4. The hilltop vaṭadāge named Girikaṇḍivihāra at Tiriyāy 
and Paranavitana’s proposed reconstruction of the original form. 
At the wilderness monastery, presumably named Girikaṇḍi, just 
to the north of the stūpa was found the largest cache of esoteric 
Buddhist statues yet recovered from Śrī Laṅkā. Also around the 
vaṭadāge were six shrines, including one devoted to the Footprint 
Relic worshipped by Vajrabodhi. The inscriptions of the vaṭadāge 
associate it with Amoghavajra’s host, King Śilāmegha. Image 
taken from Senarat Paranavitana, Sinhalayo (Colombo: Lake House 
Investments, 1967), 26.

--- PAGE 35 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
162
there. Indeed, the Śailendras were very likely acquainted with these 
particular Yoginī-tantras, and perhaps more, at least by the time of 
their first contacts with the Abhayagirivihāra a half century after 
Amoghavajra. For this reason, Central Java might offer uniquely illu-
minating and tightly chronologized data on the joint presence of both 
wilderness monks and siddhas, as will be argued in depth below. 
Continuing on the theme of the wilderness monks straddling the 
line between ordained Buddhist monastic and free-living antinomian 
Buddhist siddhas, we see that there are implications for the dating and 
relative sequencing of the texts of the Yoga-, Yoginī-, and Niruttarayoga-
tantras which might help illuminate an important historical process. 
Nihom observes that “despite the Tattvasaṃgraha’s proclamation 
that the purely Buddhist Vajradhātu maṇḍala subordinates the other 
maṇḍalas presented in the text,” which are populated by a mélange 
of Buddhist and pacified Hindu deities, “the Vajradhātumaṇḍala may 
have been codified from pre-existing elements and so introduced by 
the Tattvasaṃgraha for the purpose of providing a relatively orthodox 
Buddhist explanation for other yogatantra maṇḍalas.”145 Acknowledging 
the validity of Nihom’s point, Gray worked with the extant evidence 
to place the early Yoginī-tantras like the Cakrasaṃvara in a freshly en-
visioned historical setting, reaching the novel but well-substantiated 
conclusion that the Yoginī doctrines must have paralleled or probably 
even preceded the Yoga-tantras rather than followed them.146 Gray con-
cludes that the Niruttarayoga-tantras were “texts which may have been 
inspired in part by sources of authority which lay outside of the mo-
nastic sphere, such as among the forest and charnel ground renun-
ciants whose relationships with the monasteries were probably tenu-
ous, and where they would come into close association with the Śaiva 
renunciants who were originating a similar set of practices and medi-
tations.”147 The interesting dynamic in late seventh-century Buddhist 
India was therefore not how the early Niruttarayoga-tantras evolved 
from the Yoga-tantras, but rather how the tantric texts which were being 
synthesized and increasingly studied in the orthodox urban grāmavāsī 
monasteries accommodated the transgressive but apparently effective 
doctrines originated by the wilderness āraṇyavāsī monks.
We may be witness to this phenomenon of assimilation reified in 
a Sinhalese Siddhamātṛkā inscription of the mid-ninth century, found 
among the ruins of a group of buildings to the north-west of the Twin 
Ponds (Kuṭṭampokuṇa) area, themselves about 125 meters to the

--- PAGE 36 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
163
east-northeast of the Abhayagiri stūpa.148 The ruined structures may be 
safely identified as the ārāma of the Abhayagirivihāra named Kapāra, 
for another Sanskrit inscription from within the same confines, first 
reported in 1954, provides the name of the cloister.149 The Cūḷavaṃsa 
chronicles record that Sena I built the Vīraṅkura ārāma150 within the 
precincts of the Abhayagiri and extended his royal patronage to the 
Kappūra and Uttarāḷha fraternities.151 An extended examination of the 
paleographical features led Gunawardana to conclude that the record 
contains features closely approximated by the inscriptions of the Pāla 
king Devapāladeva and thus falls within the first half of the ninth cen-
tury, incidentally the period during which Sena I reigned.152 The in-
scription was treated by Gunawardana, who wrung useful facts out of 
it. Based on the content of the extant portions, Gunawardana notes 
that “the last of the legible lines [of the inscription] fix the number 
of monks who were to live at the monastery and lay down regulations 
pertaining to the filling of vacancies that may occur. It appears from 
this portion of the inscription that regulations were being laid down 
for a hermitage which had been recently founded.”153 The cumulative 
evidence (the provenance from the Kapārārāma, the paleography and 
the very choice of the Siddham script, the inaugural tone of the in-
scription) thus all seems to point to this inscription being an edict of 
Sena I, who was the confirmed sponsor of the multitude of wilderness 
monk meditation platforms clustered at Ritigala and the notorious 
apostate admitted to by the Nikāya Saṃgrahaya. The inscription con-
tains a strophe reading cāturmahānikāyeṣu pañcaviṃśatiḥ pañca­viṃśatis 
tapasvinaḥ tena śatannaivāsikānāṃ catvāriṃśat śāstrābhiyuktās tapasvinaḥ 
nikāyabhedamvināpi gṛhītaniśrayāḥ, or “[There shall reside] twenty-five 
monks from each of the four mahānikāyas; thus [making] one hundred 
residents in all. [Of these, there shall be] forty ascetics versed in the 
śāstras. [They shall be] those who have taken tutelege (niśraya) void of 
any difference with regard to a nikāya.”154 On the basis of this informa-
tion, Gunawardana was able to demonstrate the presence in medieval 
Śrī Laṅkā of the four great Indian Buddhist nikāyas.155 
For the purpose of the present essay, especially given Sena I’s 
sponsored erection of fifty-odd wilderness double-platform structures 
on the mountainside at Ritigala, what is remarkable is the term used to 
designate the newly installed inhabitants of the Kapārārāma: tapasvins, 
or “ascetics; generators of ascetic tapas power.” Given Rahula’s 
observation that “there were also forest-dwelling monks known as

--- PAGE 37 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
164
āraṇyavāsī or vanavāsī dwelling in jungle areas, as opposed to grāmavāsī 
residing in towns and villages. From about the 6th century, the forest-
dwelling monks were sometimes referred to as tapassi ‘hermit’ or 
‘ascetic’, which is not a term usually applied to bhikkhus,” we might 
very well surmise that these selected individuals were the same 
species of royally-patronized wilderness monks who were sponsored 
by Lambakaṇṇa and Śailendra alike.156 Given our complete lack of 
understanding of the nikāya affiliations of the wilderness monks, we 
must raise the issue of what sort of tapasvins are designated in the 
inscription, especially the forty who were tasked with studying the 
śāstras.157 What are we to make of the situation? Several interpretations 
present themselves. First, the inscription may after all refer to one 
hundred ordinary grāmavāsī monks from the four traditional nikāyas, 
flattering them with an unconventional and perhaps unexpected 
description of their tapas power, a term which seems much better 
suited to the āraṇyavāsī from both the more ancient sister structures 
explicitly associated with the Abhayagiri and located just a few miles 
to the west of the Kapārārāma and as well from Sena I’s Ritigala site 
along the Kadambanadi river thirty miles to the southeast. If this 
first interpretation is rejected as unlikely, then in the inscription 
are we encountering a description of a mixed cohort of monks, both 
conventional grāmavāsī monks of an ascetic tapasvin bent as well as 
forty wilderness monks, devoid of nikāya affiliations, who excelled in 
the study of the śāstra texts?158 As a final alternative, are we to interpret 
the inscription as designating an entire century of the wilderness 
monks sponsored by Sena I and inducted into an urban monastery, 
including both sixty wilderness tapasvins who were formally affiliated 
with a nikāya and a group of tapasvins who stood outside of the nikāya 
structure?159 If the latter is the case that holds, then we must confront 
the possibility that we have intercepted the chance epigraphic survival 
of a historical datum which suggests that Sena I sponsored not only the 
monastic wilderness tapasvins who seemed to be so heavily involved in 
the germination and propagation of the esoteric Buddhist texts, but 
also sponsored within his urban monastery a group of individuals with 
only a nodding acquaintance with monastic norms and obligations, 
who we might take to be siddhas. In support of this interpretation, we 
should note an observation by Gray, in his fascinating dissertation 
on the origins and doctrines of the Cakrasaṃvara-tantra: “the locus 
of tantric practice in early medieval India appears to have been the

--- PAGE 38 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
165
siddha movement.... It appears to have developed in association with 
the forest renunciant tradition, independent of the monasteries, 
which is suggested by the numerous stories of siddhas who did live 
in the monasteries being expelled on account of their antinomian 
behavior.”160 Indeed, these forest monks, like siddhas, seem to have 
organized themselves into gaṇā, or “circles”:161 the paṃsukūlikas 
belonging to the Abhayagiri separated and formed their own special 
group (gaṇā’hesuṃ) in the twentieth year of Sena II (r. 853–887 CE).162
Antinomian siddha figures seemingly are not directly represented 
in contemporary East Asian accounts, but I think that there is substan-
tial evidence that such adept ascetics were known to the Javanese and 
were prominently and copiously represented in the lithic sculptures of 
certain of their temples, including such Śailendra Buddhist edifices as 
the causeway amendments to the eminent Caṇḍi Sewu temple, the lin-
tels above each of the appended porches in the inner- and outermost of 
the four tiers of Sewu’s 240 shrines, at least two of the five Jina temples 
at Caṇḍi Ngawen, on the lintel above the entryway to Caṇḍi Pawon, and 
on the reliefs of the Barabuḍur stūpa. In all cases, these bearded figures 
seem to be positioned on high in the backgrounds of lintels, sometimes 
amidst clouds, in poses of apparent flight or levitation. They wear ear-
rings, jeweled armbands, and an upavīta cord, and tie their hair back 
into a topknot (fig. 6). On both the Sewu shrines and the Barabuḍur 
reliefs, these bearded images share space with conventional heavenly 
devas as the predominant iconic motif.
Given the prevalence of these bearded figures, we must seek to 
determine what the sculptors intended to represent. When I first no-
ticed these figures at Caṇḍi Sewu, I assumed that they were ṛṣis and 
marveled at the pervasive portrayal of a Hindu presence on a Buddhist 
temple. This superficial identification is trivially disproven by compar-
ing these bearded mystery figures’ iconography with that of the depic-
tion of the explicitly ascetic ṛṣi Bhīṣmottarasangheṣa from the story 
on the Barabuḍur walls (fig. 7). Bhīṣmottarasangheṣa is presented as 
quite lean and wearing nothing but a loincloth; he certainly bears no 
adornment like the bearded lintel figures. Conveniently for our exami-
nations, the image on his Barabuḍur panel provides the ṛṣi with the 
conspicuous heavenly accompaniment of our floating bearded figures 
on one side and devas on the other; the bearded figures clearly differ 
from the ṛṣi.

--- PAGE 39 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
166
Figure 6. A lintel recovered from the Plain of Saragedug 
south of the Ratu Baka plateau, providing an excellent general 
depiction of the type of figures which adorn the entryway 
amendments on the main Caṇḍi Sewu temple and the porches 
added to the inner and outer of its four tiers of 240 subsidiary 
shrines, as well as several other temples in Java. Records of the 
precise provenance of this particular lintel, conspicuous for 
its depiction of apparently East Asian figures and now in the 
Museum Sonobudoyo in Yogyakarta, were destroyed during 
the Indonesian War of Independence, allegedly by a Dutch 
bomb.163
Figure 7. Bhīṣmottarasangheṣa, explicitly identified in the 
Gaṇḍavyūha as a ṛṣi, depicted on the walls of the stūpa at 
Barabuḍur. The reader will note that both varieties of the Sewu 
shrines’ lintel motifs are to be seen perched in the clouds in 
the background; the figures on the Javanese temple lintels are 
clearly not intended to represent ṛṣis.

--- PAGE 40 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
167
A well-considered hypothesis concerning the specific identity of 
somewhat similar bearded figures has been recently made by Acri.164 
On the basis of evidence gathered from Old Javanese literature and 
Central Javanese temple reliefs at both the Buddhist stūpa of Barabuḍur 
and the Śaiva temple of Prambanan, where figures with comparable 
general attributes to the bearded lintel figures are found in narrative 
panels depicting scenes of human dancers and terrestrial entertain-
ers, Acri has proposed to identify them as vidus, Śaiva ascetics-cum-
performers living at the periphery of the religious scene. These the-
atrical ascetics, Acri argues, could represent a Javanese localization of 
Atimārga groups known from Sanskrit literature, such as Pāśupatas, 
Kāpālikas, and Kārukas. Just like their South Asian counterparts, the 
Javanese characters, although bearing signs of Brahmanical attire, are 
ridiculed by the literary sources—apparently lying within the boundar-
ies of the orthodox form of Śaiva Siddhānta sanctioned by the kraton—
and depicted as dancers and buffoons indulging in drinking bouts and 
enjoying the company of women, or even as foreign spies and insur-
rectionists masquerading as ascetics.165 Indeed, Acri’s identifications of 
vidus at the performance scenes in the narrative panels seem highly 
plausible. However, for the bearded lintel characters to be selected for 
widespread representation at such a number of the Central Javanese 
Buddhist temples, alternating at Sewu and at Barabuḍur with repre-
sentations of celestial beings, suggests to me that the bearded figures 
on those temples are more than just the peripheral Śaiva minstrel- 
ascetics who might be found intermittently in the performance scenes 
demanded by the narratives depicted on the panels.
If the ṛṣi hypothesis does not bear fruit and the Śaiva vidu hypoth-
esis seems unlikely given the predominance of these bearded figures at 
Buddhist temples, I cannot at present reject the notion that these un-
tonsured figures represent adept monks subject only to the Mahāyāna 
vinaya, a topic of considerable importance in Kūkai’s Japan and per-
tinent to the lintel’s figures because the Mahāyāna vinaya did not re-
quire the shaving of a disciple’s head.166 Alternatively, the bearded 
lintel figures may be references to the great tantric ascetic monk 
Mahākāśyapa, whose long hair and unshaven beard served as an indi-
cator of the longevity of his cave samādhi. Vajrabodhi’s fellow Indian 
monk Śubhākarasiṃha (fig. 8) reportedly tended Mahākāśyapa’s 
locks.167 However, pending further research into the specific stipula-
tions of the Mahāyāna vinaya, both the provision of sculpted earrings

--- PAGE 41 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
168
and jeweled armbands for the lintel figures, as well as their existence 
on an elevated plane that they shared with devas, tends to minimize 
the persuasiveness of appeals to a relaxed vinaya code as an explana-
tion for the bearded mystery figures.168
As argued in an earlier paper of mine,169 an eleventh-century 
Ratnagiri portrayal (fig. 9) of a possible siddha170 presented in David­
son’s study171 provides to my eye an exact iconographic match for the 
bearded mystery figures on the Javanese lintels: each of the fundamen-
tal features (the beard and moustache, the hair tied into a topknot, 
the upavīta, the earrings and jeweled armbands) are shared between 
the two depictions. As Davidson argues, the seeming Ratnagiri siddha 
has gained the sword siddhi and become a vidyādhara, a Buddhist sor-
cerer of immense contemporary fascination to Indian and Chinese 
Buddhist audiences. I am presently convinced of the identification of 
the Javanese lintel characters as siddhas who had gained the supernat-
ural power of khecari, the siddhi of flight.172
To summarize the developments in Central Java discussed in the 
pages immediately above, we find that within a fifty-year span we 
evidently have a stimulating and edgy mixture of modes of Buddhist 
being: Sinhalese wilderness monks of the Abhayagirivihāra (792 CE), 
and, seemingly, depictions of siddhas on some of the middle-period 
Buddhist temples (Barabuḍur ca. 825?, the renovated Caṇḍi Sewu173 
ca. 835?). How these seemingly consonant groups might fit together 
on a Venn diagram is still a matter of conjecture and speculation, 
but the Central Javanese evidence argues that they do all indeed de-
serve to appear clustered on the same diagram. Whether or not a true 
eighth-century wilderness monk resembled the siddha characters or 
followed a specifically Mahāyāna vinaya, there is no denying that an 
excellent case could be made that the behavior and beliefs associated 
with ascetic wilderness monks who held to the doctrines of the eso-
teric Buddhist texts was the fundamental causeway to a fully devel-
oped siddha movement. 
In regard to the surfacing of explicit siddha modes only in India, 
Tibet, and Java, I would like to remark on a statement by Gray, who 
notes of his studies on the date of the Cakrasaṃvara: “This would 
make the Cakrasaṃvara an unorthodox contemporary tradition to the 
Tattvasaṃgraha; the former the product of extra-monastic communi-
ties of yogins, the latter a product of the monastic context. The latter 
tradition was well received in East Asia which was for cultural reasons

--- PAGE 42 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
169
Figure 8. The self-portrait of Śubhākarasiṃha from the Gobu shinkan. 
Image taken from Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Five_
Abhisambodhi_1.jpg.174
 
Figure 9. In the center, an eleventh-century Ratnagiri depiction 
of a possible siddha who had gained the sword siddhi and become a 
vidyādhara. Detail from the pedestal of a crowned Buddha image (left) 
from Ratnagiri, Orissa, now in the Patna Museum, inv. no. Arch 6501. 
Ratnagiri photos: G. Mevissen 2011, courtesy of Patna Museum. At the 
right, a close-up of the Saragedug lintel of fig. 6. Although more than 
a century and a half separates their sculpting, the reader will observe 
the striking similarities between the figures: the topknot, beard and 
moustache, the upavīta, the earring and armband. The Javanese ver-
sions are almost entirely depicted among the clouds, presumably 
having mastered the flight siddhi.

--- PAGE 43 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
170
more receptive to less transgressive traditions, but the former tradi-
tion was very well received in Tibet, where objections of the type en-
countered in China were raised, but were evidently overcome, prob-
ably due to the decentralized political state Tibet was in at the time, 
which would have rendered ineffective any attempts at censorship.”175 
We should note that the extant historiographical evidence and the 
geography of Java suggest that the Javanese were better linked with 
those traditions which traveled to China, but the social milieu suggests 
that the Tibetan experience with Buddhism was better suited. In the 
end, it may have been the personal predilections of the reigning king 
which determined which types of doctrines, monasteries, and monks 
would receive royal patronage and official support. 
VII. ADAM’S PEAK: ALLEGORIZED MOUNTAIN AND  
MYTHICIZED SOURCE OF ESOTERIC TEACHING
The final feature of note in Lü Xiang’s biography is the extensive 
narrative of Vajrabodhi’s ascension of Adam’s Peak to worship at the 
Buddha’s mystical footprint. It is remarkable that Lü Xiang should de-
scribe the event with such care and in such detail; the reader is left 
with the almost necessary interpretation that this mystical ascension 
of Adam’s Peak was seminal for Vajrabodhi,176 perhaps exceeding in im-
portance even his esoteric consecration at the hands of Nāgajñāna.177 
While the importance of this is implied by the substantial narrative 
space devoted to the episode by Lü Xiang, there is much that is known 
from the schools of Buddhism practiced in Tibet, Laṅkā, and Java some 
eighty years later which offer the grounds to greatly amplify modern 
understanding of this passage in Lü Xiang’s biography. 
Such an intensive and dedicated description of Mount Laṅkā would 
not be out of place in the judgments of near-contemporary Tibetan178 
devotees of esoteric Buddhism, for, as Mayer observes in regard to the 
early Tibetan rNying-ma (Ancient) School, “The rNying-ma-pa tradi-
tion holds that many of their earliest scriptures, specifically very early 
tantric materials, were first revealed in Ceylon, especially at Adam’s 
Peak.”179 Few of the texts which Mayer describes as claiming to orig-
inate on Adam’s Peak have been published, but one prime example, 
the Dgongs pa ’dus pa’i mdo180 (The Sutra of Gathered Intentions, Skt. 
Samājavidyā-sūtra), has been translated and extensively explicated 
by Dalton in his doctoral dissertation. The root tantra of the Dgongs 
pa ’dus pa’i mdo opens with a prophecy of the historical Buddha at his

--- PAGE 44 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
171
parinirvāṇa that he will “return to teach secret mantra at the peak of 
Mt. Malaya181 in Śrī Laṅkā” to five notable disciples, one of whom is 
the demon Rāvaṇa known as the “Lord of Laṅkā,” who spent the in-
tervening 112 years in meditation. After the century passed, the five 
disciples emerged from meditation to discover the Buddha had died 
and the world has plunged into misery, provoking a curious reaction 
which is strikingly similar to Lü Xiang’s description of the reaction of 
Vajrabodhi and his disciples upon encountering the Buddha’s foot-
print on the peak of the *Laṅkāparvata: “Having marvelously and in-
voluntarily wept, they each clairvoyantly perceived all. Through acts 
of magic they truly and completely gathered upon the peak of the 
thunderbolt Mount Malaya, on the ocean island of the realm of [Śrī] 
Laṅkā. Thus gathered together, the whole assembly, with one voice 
let out a wail of extreme desperation.”182 Dalton continues: “This cry 
of yearning is heard by the Buddhas, who rouse Śākyamuni and send 
him, in the form of Vajrapāṇi, the Lord of Secrets, down to the peak 
called ‘Ferocious’, otherwise known as Mount Malaya [Malayagiri], on 
the island of [Śrī] Laṅkā, to fulfill his own prophecy.”183 Interestingly 
for Laṅkān studies, “Mount Malaya” also features in the Dgongs pa ’dus 
pa’i mdo’s incorporation of a Rudra-taming myth, where Adam’s Peak 
replaces the Mount Sumeru of the analogous Maheśvara-taming myth 
in the preeminent Yoga-tantra, the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha.184 The 
linkage between Adam’s Peak and Sumeru is seemingly made explicit 
in a piece of archaeological evidence recently recovered from no place 
other than the Abhayagirivihāra itself, where a replica of Sumeru 
bearing the footprints of the Buddha was lodged under a statue of the 
Buddha.185
Other than the Laṅkā-centered experiences of Vajrabodhi, I am 
aware of no evidence which suggests that an equivalent appreciation of 
Adam’s Peak in the extant corpus of the Tang Chinese esoterists, so Lü 
Xiang’s inclusion of this passage might seem to be the product of some 
tale related to him by Vajrabodhi; I can only surmise that the emphasis 
that Lü Xiang placed on the story comes from his honest conveyance 
of an equal sense of importance to his master. Phenomenologically, 
Vajrabodhi’s experience of Adam’s Peak is reported as mystical, wild, 
and dangerous; literarily, Lü Xiang has conveyed a great number of 
seeming irrelevancies, such as the lateral movements across the moun-
tain.186 There is just enough possible irrelevancy to make one think that 
it is a factual narrative of a journey, and just enough of the patently

--- PAGE 45 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
172
supernatural to make one think that it is an allegory; Lü Xiang’s de-
scription might be intentionally metaphorical, or it might also be his 
own direct but uncomprehending transmission of a narrative which 
his preceptor Vajrabodhi fashioned as a metaphor or an allegory. 
Pertinent to the study of Javanese Buddhism, such allegori-
cal imagery features in the very opening strophe of the Javanese 
Abhayagirivihāra inscription of 792 CE, which is also devoted to a de-
scription of Sumeru. This passage was initially deciphered and trans-
lated by de Casparis and later commented upon by the learned Indian 
scholar Lokesh Chandra, who suggests many amendments and en-
hancements.187 Basing his efforts upon the transliteration offered by 
de Casparis,188 Chandra renders the following translation of the open-
ing strophe:189 “I pay homage to Sambuddha who is verily the Sumeru, 
of vigorous qualities, and endowed with the awe-inspiring power of 
knowledge, whose deep caves are [profound] wisdom, whose rocks 
are lofty tradition, whose Good Words are brilliant [like the sheen of] 
metal190 (dhātu [of Sumeru]), whose cascades are Love, whose forests 
are meditation, whose glens are few desires, who is not shaken by the 
violent tempests of the eight ways of the world //1//”191
Chandra notes that the first three stanzas refer to Sumeru, fire 
(vahni), and waters (arṇava), corresponding to three of the mahābhūtas 
or elements: earth, water, fire. He suggests that the fourth element, 
wind, may be found in the succeeding stanza. In the Vajradhātu Mahā 
Mandala only these four elements guard its corner directions. Chandra 
proceeds to tabulate the following correspondences between the 
Perfectly Enlightened One (Sambuddha) and Sumeru:
Sumeru
Sambuddha
deep caves (guhā)
profound wisdom (dhi)
rocks (śila)
lofty traditions (smṛti)
shining metals (dhātu)
Good Words (sadvākya)
cascades (prasravaṇa)
Love (maitri)
forests (vana)
meditation (samādhi)
valleys, glen (kandarā)
few desires (alpecchatā)
violent tempests (ugra pavana)
eight ways of the world 
(aṣṭa loka-dharma)

--- PAGE 46 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
173
Such allegorical imagery highly parallels Vajrabodhi’s account of 
Śrī Pāda and indeed may account for its form. It leads me to believe 
that it bore an importance to contemporary Buddhists which is now 
but imperfectly recoverable by us, much like the fascinating biography 
of Vajrabodhi itself.
notes
1. Unless otherwise indicated, credit for the present translations of the 
lengthier passages from the original Chinese as well as a substantial number 
of their scholarly footnotes is due entirely to Rolf Giebel. In fact, there is no 
section of the manuscript which has not benefitted from his deep acquaintance 
with both the primary and secondary sources, and the reader would soon 
bore of the reading of a note of thanks for each individual contribution by 
this scholar; I expect that his contributions are obvious. For their assistance 
with my preliminary studies of the biography of Vajrabodhi and for enriching 
the commentary on it, I am immensely grateful to Bart Dessein, Chih-Jie Lee, 
Karen Mack, Jin Su Tsai, and Hongbo Li, whose spot appraisal at Tucson’s 
Himmel Park, where our deeply loved daughters Phoebe and Vivian played 
for many contented hours after preschool, convinced me that the Vajrabodhi 
biography was tractable. Laura Harrington was kind enough to provide a copy 
of Eastman’s unpublished conference notes; Geoffrey Goble shared access to 
his unpublished conference presentations; Venerable Rangama Chandawimala 
Thero supplied valuable perspectives and material on recent discoveries 
in Anurādhapura; Dulmini Silva helped with a transliteration of the Nikāya 
Saṃgrahaya; Ralph Gabbard facilitated access to the essays of Du Hongjian; 
Sudarshan Seneviratne clarified my understanding of the fascinating and 
important esoteric Buddhist edifices at Tiriyāy; Gudrun Bühnemann assisted 
greatly in the interpretation of passages of Sanskrit; Gerd Mevissen provided 
images from his private collection and offered knowledgeable background on 
their possible interpretation; James Hartzell amplified the understanding of 
the Sinhalese preceptor Jayabhadra; and Emmanuel Francis lent his expertise 
in South Indian epigraphy to thresh out misimpressions in my treatment 
of Pallava affairs. Ping Situ, Chinese librarian at the University of Arizona, 
initially unearthed background information about Lü Xiang, and I am indebted 
to both Hongbo Li and Dexin Liu for providing a précis of Fu’s biography of 
Lü Xiang. Andrea Acri, Jacob Dalton, Roy Jordaan (whose engaging study of 
the Prambanan temple complex stimulated me to investigate Central Javanese 
history and led to this paper), Charles Orzech, Henrik Sørensen, and Hiram 
Woodward all deserve much credit for commenting upon a draft of this paper 
and pointing out useful research leads or generating observations. Finally, I 
wish to express my thanks to John Holt, both for his critical reading of this 
paper as well as his excellent lectures on religion, which opened my eyes to a

--- PAGE 47 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
174
deeper and more satisfying dimension of existence.
A note (or apology) to the reader: the evidence and issues examined in 
this essay are often densely interconnected and sometimes defy easy repre-
sentation in the linear form of a printed essay. I have tried to smooth the 
presentation as effectively as I could, in order that it might be a pleasant and 
logical read. The reader will forgive the author if the material defied his best 
efforts to tame it.
2. F. D. K. Bosch, “De inscriptie van Keloerak,” Tijdschrift Bataviaasch Genootschap 
86 (1928): 1–64; Himanshu Bhusan Sarkar, “South-India in Old Javanese and 
Sanskrit Inscriptions,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 125, no. 2 
(1969): 193–206; Lokesh Chandra, “The Śailendras of Java,” in Cultural Horizons 
of India, vol. 4 (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan, 1995), 218–224.
3. Raoul Birnbaum (Studies in the Mysteries of Mañjuśrī: A Group of East Asian 
Maṇḍalas and Their Traditional Symbolism [Boulder: Society for the Study of 
Chinese Religions, 1983]) dwells extensively upon the centrality of Mañjuśrī 
to the late period of Amoghavajra’s esoteric practice.
4. For an extensive list of Amoghavajra’s major clients and patrons, see 
Charles Orzech, Politics and Transcendent Wisdom: The Scripture for Humane Kings 
in the Creation of Chinese Buddhism (University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1998), 144n31.
5. Lokesh Chandra, “Tantras and the Defence of T’ang China,” in Cultural 
Horizons of India, vol. 2 (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and 
Aditya Prakashan, 1992), 257–266. Recently, Geoffrey Goble delivered highly 
informative conference papers (“Bloodstained Bodhisattva: Amoghavajra’s 
Militarized Buddhism in the Chinese Context,” paper presented to the Midwest 
Regional American Academy of Religions conference, Chicago, April 2008; and 
“Amoghavajra and Esoteric Buddhism: The Presentation of Foreign Ritual 
Technologies in Tang China,” paper presented to the American Academy of 
Religions conference, Montreal, November 2009) which greatly amplified 
these themes of Chinese state-protection and grounded them in great factual 
detail. See also Geoffrey Goble, “Chinese Esoteric Buddhism: Amoghavajra and 
the Ruling Elite” (PhD diss., Indiana University, 2012). In addition, see Steven 
Weinberger, “The Yoga Tantras and the Social Context of Their Transmission 
to Tibet,” Chung-Hwa Buddhist Journal 23 (2010): 131–166, for parallel evidence 
of the Tibetan king’s great fear and suspicion of the power of Indian esoteric 
masters and texts. 
6. C.f. Yutaka Iwamoto, “The Śailendra Dynasty and Chandi Borobudur,” 
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Chandi Borobudur (Tokyo: The 
Executive Committee for the International Symposium on Chandi Borobudur, 
1981), 85; Hudaya Kandahjaya, “A Study on the Origin and Significance of

--- PAGE 48 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
175
Borobudur” (PhD diss., Graduate Theological Union, 2004), 95 offers an 
alternative translation of the same passage, which is from the biography of 
Huiguo (惠果).
7. The Chinese characters specify Heling (Ho-ling, 訶陵) as the country of 
Bianhong’s origin. This country was Java. As Junjiro Takakusu, A Record of 
the Buddhist Religion as Practiced in India and the Malay Archipelago (A.D. 671–695) 
(Delhi: Munshiram Manohar Lal, 1966), xlvii, n. 3 notes, the New History of the 
T’ang (618–906), book 222, part ii records that “Ho-ling (Po-ling) is also called 
Java.” Book 197 of that same work points out that “Ho-ling lies to the east of 
Sumatra.”
8. *Mahākaruṇāgarbha-mahāmaṇḍala, the main mandala described in the 
Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi-sūtra.
9. Kōbō daishi zenshū 弘法大師全集 1:42.
10. John Holt (Buddha in the Crown: Avalokiteśvara in the Buddhist Traditions of Sri 
Lanka [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991], 82) observes that “these artistic 
similarities between insular Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka point to a common 
source of religious and cultural inspiration: South Indian Pallava culture. 
Indeed, these three regions may have constituted a veritable ‘cultural triangle’ 
from the seventh into the ninth century. Of greatest cultural importance to 
the period from the seventh through the tenth centuries was the political link 
established between the fortunes of the Pallava Empire and Sri Lanka. Because 
of this link, Pallava cultural influence flowed rapidly into Sri Lanka.”
11. For a good summary of the importance of South India to the archipelago, 
see Sarkar, “South-India in Old Javanese and Sanskrit Inscriptions.” Himansu 
Bhusan Sarkar (Corpus of the Inscriptions of Java, 2 vols. [Calcutta: Mukhopadhyay, 
1972], 1:16) notes in his paleographic commentary on Sañjaya’s Canggal 
inscription that its script was used in the Hanh Khiei inscription as well as the 
Uruvalli copperplates of the Pallavas. The time is ripe for a renewed study of 
the provenance of the varṇapāṭha of Śrīvijaya and Sañjaya-era Central Java, 
using present knowledge of South Indian inscriptions. M. Dhaky ( “Javanese 
Pīthikās of Śivalingas,” South Asian Studies 20, no. 1 [2004]: 1) notes that the 
pīṭhikā bases which are invariably found with the Śivaliṅgas of Central Java 
are found almost nowhere in mainland India other than in a few Pallava 
complexes associated with Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha, one of the central 
figures in the Vajrabodhi story. 
12. Zhang Yanyuan’s (張彥遠) 847 CE Lidai minghua ji (歷代名畫記, Record of 
Famous Painters of Successive Dynasties, 9.16b–17a) mentions Vajrabodhi. 
Zhang records that Vajrabodhi was from Laṅkā and was particularly good 
at painting Buddhist images. The statues under the wooden stūpa of the 
Guangfu temple were attributed to Vajrabodhi (Yiliang Chou, “Tantrism in 
China,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 8, nos. 3–4 [March 1945]: 276n30).

--- PAGE 49 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
176
Yuanzhao writes in one place in the Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu (T. 55, 881a) 
that Amoghavajra was originally from Siṃhala, but later in the same work 
(T. 55, 889c) and elsewhere (T. 2120, 52.826c) he writes that Amoghavajra was 
born in the Western Regions (i.e., Central Asia). Amoghavajra’s birthplace has 
been variously identified by different authorities, and it has been suggested 
that Yuanzhao’s identification of Siṃhala as his birthplace was due to a 
misinterpretation of a statement by Liangben (良賁; T. 1709, 33.430b), who 
refers to him as “a Tripiṭaka master who received abhiṣeka in Siṃhala in South 
India” 南天竺執師子國灌頂三藏 (Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 285n2). An 
inscription attributed to Quan Deyu (權德輿, 759–818), a high-ranking official, 
also assigns a Sinhalese origin to Amoghavajra, but it should be noted that 
Quan Deyu’s authorship of the said inscription is suspect. 
13. The biography first came to the attention of Sylvain Lévi (“Les missions 
de Wang Hiuen-Ts’e dans L’Inde [suite et fin.],” Journal Asiatique 15, 9th ser., 
no. 156 [Mai–Juin 1900]: 418–421), who found the “Tcheng-iuen sing-ting-i-kia 
mou-lou,” compiled by “Iuen-tchao” at the start of the ninth century, in the 
first chapter of the Korean Wen-tcha-lo kia fou fa tchoan (History of the Tantric 
Sect), which Lévi brought back from Japan. Lévi furnished a précis of this 
biography of Vajrabodhi. Prabodh Chandra Bagchi (Le canon Bouddhique en 
Chine, les traducteurs et les traductions, vol. 2 [Paris: Librarie Orientaliste Paul 
Geuthner, 1938], 554–557) also offered an abbreviated commentary. Chou 
(“Tantrism in China,” 272n3) also took note of Lü Xiang’s biography, observing 
that Yuanzhao’s Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu, which Zanning refused to use, 
contains two biographies of Vajrabodhi. The first one (T. 2157, 55.875b1–
876b27) was written by his lay disciple Lü Xiang. The second was much shorter 
and made by somebody named Hunlunweng (T. 2157, 55.876b29–877a21). Chou 
intermittently used Lü Xiang’s biography to offer supplemental or alternative 
information to Zanning’s biography of Vajrabodhi. 
14. Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 251–271.
15. Fu Xuanzong 傅璇琮, “Zhongguo zuizao liangwei hanlin xueshi kao” 中国
最早两位翰林学士考, Wenxian 文献 4 (October 2002).
16. David R. Knechtges, Wen xuan, or Selections of Refined Literature, vol. 1 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982), 53–54.
17. Lü Xiang’s biography was probably composed earlier than 765, as it neglects 
to mention Vajrabodhi under the posthumous title Dahongjiao sanzang 
(大弘教三藏) granted to him in 765 with Amoghavajra’s recommendation 
(see Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 283n61). Chou (ibid., 275n20) observes an 
anachronism in a military title which suggests to him that Lü Xiang wrote 
his account after 757. However, it is possible that Yuanzhao himself updated 
minor details in a biography which had been composed shortly after the death 
of Vajrabodhi and the erection in 743 of his stūpa: Yuanzhao’s editorial hand

--- PAGE 50 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
177
is evident in his advertisement of the existence of Vajrabodhi’s translations 
compiled elsewhere into the Zhenyuan xinding shijiao mulu. 
The parallel and much shorter biography by Hunlunweng (T. 2157, 
55.876b29–877a21, compiled by Yuanzhao into the Zhenyuan xinding shijiao 
mulu immediately after Lü Xiang’s biography) forms part of the epitaph that 
was apparently inscribed on Vajrabodhi’s stūpa, presumably at a slightly 
later date since it refers to Amoghavajra by the epithet Zhizang (智藏), 
which Zanning reports was granted to him around 746 (T. 2061, 50.712c12; 
Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 293). Mention may also be made of an account 
of Vajrabodhi’s life attributed to Du Hongjian (杜鴻漸, d. 769), the Assistant 
Secretary of the Imperial Secretariat (zhongshu shilang, 中書侍郎) mentioned 
by Zanning (T. 50 712a; Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 283–284). Excerpts of this 
account are preserved in the Japanese Ruiju hassoden (類聚八祖傳, Classified 
Anthology of Biographies of the Eight Patriarchs) by Yōkai (榮海, 1274–1347), 
but its authorship has been queried by Iwasaki, who suggests that it possi-
bly dates from sometime between 795 and 806. For our present purposes it 
may be worth noting that it briefly mentions Vajrabodhi’s visit to Sri Laṅkā 
and his ascent of Mount Laṅkā. Iwasaki Hideo 岩崎日出男, “To Kōzen senjutsu 
Kongōchi sanzō oshō ki no itsubun ni tsuite” 杜鴻漸撰述『金剛智三蔵和尚
記』の逸文について, in Ajia bunka no shisō to girei: Fukui Fumimasa hakushi koki 
kinen ronshū アジア文化の思想と儀礼　福井文雅博士古稀記念論集, ed. 
Fukui Fumi­masa Hakushi Koki Taishoku Kinen Ronshū Kankōkai 福井文雅博
士古稀・退職記念論集刊行会 (Tokyo: Shunjūsha 春秋社, 2005).
18. Credit for the following translation of Lü Xiang’s biography of Vajrabodhi 
is due to Rolf Giebel, who is also to be thanked for contributing substantially 
to the commentary upon the biography. 
19. The term by which Lü Xiang refers to his master is Heshang (和上), a 
combination of the logographs for “harmony” and “superior”; William 
Soothill and Lewis Hodous (A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms, with Sanskrit 
and English Equivalents, and a Sanskrit-Pāli Index [London: Kegan Paul, Trench, 
Trubner & Co., 1937], 253a) note that this is a conventional term for a monk. 
They record that “the Sanskrit term used in its interpretation is upādhyāya, 
a ‘sub-teacher’ of the Vedas, inferior to an ācārya; this is interpreted as 
strong in producing (knowledge), or in begetting strength in his disciples.” 
Raffaello Orlando (“A Study of Chinese Documents Concerning the Life of the 
Tantric Buddhist Patriarch Amoghavajra (705–774 A.D.)” [PhD diss., Princeton 
University, 1981], 41n3) notes that upādhyāya indicates “a preceptor monk 
or teacher of novices; it is often used in an extended sense as an honorific.” 
He-shang could therefore be translated as “senior preceptor”; Orlando in his 
dissertation chose in many cases to translate it as “His Holiness” or “Your 
Holiness.” 
20. His name has been restored as Madhyana (Toganoo Shōun 栂尾祥雲,

--- PAGE 51 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
178
Himitsu Bukkyōshi 秘密佛教史 [Kōyachō 高野町: Kōyasan Daigaku Shuppanbu 
高野山大學出版部, 1933], 93, 95) or Mihr Zāda (Sakaki Ryōzaburō 榊亮三郎, 
“Kongōchi sanzō to shōgun Maijunna” 金剛智三藏と將軍米准那, Daijō 大乘 
[1943]: 22–7).
21. Although there were several kingdoms in contemporary South India, 
among which were the Cōḷa, the Pāṇḍya, and the Chāḷukya, Lü Xiang seems to 
use the term “South India” not generically but rather to refer specifically to 
the dominant South Indian polity of the Pallavas.
22. This name could very well be Śāntibodhi according to the careful 
investigation by L. W. J. van der Kuijp, “*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes on the 
Guhyasamāja Literature,” in Pramāṇakīrtiḥ: Papers Dedicated to Ernst Steinkellner 
on the Occasion of His 70th Birthday, ed. Birgit Kellner, Helmut Krasser, Horst 
Lasic, Michael Torsten Much, and Helmut Tauscher (Vienna: Wiener Studien 
zur Tibetologie und Buddhismuskunde, 2007), 1001–1021.
23. Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 314, notes that many Chinese monks went to 
Western India during the seventh century, because Laṭa in Southern Gujarat 
was mentioned as a center of the dhāraṇī teaching at this time.
24. These include two of the set of four famous śāstras (四論) enumerated in 
Soothill and Hodous, A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms, 182a. They note 
that the Śataśāstra of two juan was composed by Devabodhisattva, and the 
Dvādaśanikāya(-mukha) śāstra of one juan was composed by Nāgārjuna. By 
citing this specific text by this specific author, Lü Xiang is contributing to 
a notion, strongly held by Kūkai, of a sequence of patriarchs which extends 
back into the primordial divinity of Vairocana. I am grateful to Bart Dessein 
for drawing attention to these relevant scholarly references: For the 
tradition that the Śataśāstra (or Śatakaśāstra) was written by Nāgārjuna’s 
disciple Āryadeva, see Richard Robinson, Early Mādhyamika in India and China 
(Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1967) or Cheng Hsueh-li, Nāgārjuna’s 
“Twelve Gate Treatise” Translated, with Introductory Essays, Comments, and Notes 
(Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing, 1982). For the Sanskrit title of the Shier men 
lun, we find Dvādaśadvāraśāstra, Dvādaśanikāyaśāstra, Dvādaśamukhaśāstra, and 
Dvādaśadvāraka. Of all the variants, Dvādaśadvāraka might be preferred (C. 
Lindtner, “Cheng Hsueh-li: Nāgārjuna’s Twelve Gate Treatise,” Orientalische 
Literaturzeitung 80, no. 4 [1985]: 409–413). 
25. Or “Emptiness school” (reading kong 空 for nan 南)? Cf. Mochizuki Shinkō 
望月信亨, Mochizuki Bukkyō daijiten 望月佛教大辭典, 10 vols. (Tokyo: Sekai 
Seiten Kankō Kyōkai 世界聖典刊行協会, 1957–1960), 2:1339c.
26. Kapilavastu is one hundred miles due north of Benares and was the capital 
of the principality occupied by the Śākya clan. Xuanzang, writing in the 640s, 
recorded that the country was largely a wasteland (Samuel Beal, Buddhist 
Records of the Western World, Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang [A.D. 629]

--- PAGE 52 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
179
[London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., 1884], 14).
27. Longzhi (龍智), whose original name has often been restored as Nāgabodhi, 
especially in the Japanese-language scholarship originating with Matsunaga. 
The esoteric preceptor Nāgabodhi was known to the Tibetans, who had 
preserved his commentaries on the Guhyasāmaja. Like Longzhi, the Tibetans’ 
Nāgabodhi lived in the South of India and enjoyed an age reputed to be seven 
centuries. The Nāgabodhi known to the Tibetans served the master Nāgārjuna 
as a disciple; this same relationship between Longzhi and Nāgārjuna is stated 
as fact in Lü Xiang’s biography, affirmed by the circle around Yuanzhao 
around 800 CE, and is taken as true by Kūkai when he produced his histories 
of the Shingon traditions.
	
Van der Kuijp (“*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes on the Guhyasamāja 
Literature”) conducted an extensive scholarly examination of the Tibetan 
records of Nāgabodhi’s writings. While acknowledging points of similarity 
between the master Nāgabodhi known to the Tibetans and Vajrabodhi’s 
preceptor Longzhi of the Chinese records, van der Kuijp calls into question 
the proper restoration of the original Sanskrit of Longzhi’s name. Based on 
the Chinese-Sanskrit lexicographical resources available to him, van der Kuijp 
was compelled to conclude that Longzhi’s name could represent *Nāgajñāna, 
*Nāgaprajñā, or *Nāgabuddhi, while, on the basis of additional considerations 
of Lü Xiang’s phonological rendering at the end of his biography, Jingangzhi’s 
(金剛智) name would likely have to be restored as *Vajrabuddhi. In the case 
of neither Longzhi nor Jingangzhi could van der Kuijp find grounds to justify 
a restoration to *Nāgabodhi or *Vajrabodhi, nor could he equate the former’s 
name to the Tibetans’ Nāgabodhi, whose original Sanskrit name could be 
restored with great certainty because of the Tibetans’ regularization of 
Sanskrit translation. It may be noted in passing that Hunlunweng (see section 
V) writes in his brief account of Vajrabodhi’s life that “the Great Master was 
called Bodhivajra” (T. 55.876c), with “Bodhivajra” being rendered in phonetic 
transcription, but this is perhaps an error on the part of Hunlunweng.
	
Van der Kuijp’s erudite examination overlooked one piece of salient 
evidence which confirms his doubts about the identity of Nāgabodhi and 
Longzhi: the Siddhamātṛkā-scripted spellings of the names of Nāgajñāna 
and Vajrabodhi’s names on the Tōji (東寺) monastery’s huge wall murals 
of the seven Shingon patriarchs. Kūkai brought back five of these portraits, 
including that of Vajrabodhi, from China in 806 and they are listed in his 
Go-shōrai mokuroku (御請來目録, Catalogue of Newly Imported Sutras and 
Other Items) of 806. A further two portraits, those of the second and third 
patriarchs Longshu and Longzhi, were created in 821 at Kūkai’s request and 
have been lodged in the Tōji monastery since that time (Cynthea Bogel, With 
a Single Glance: Buddhist Icon and Early Mikkyō Vision [Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 2009], 120). These latter two portraits included labeling in 
ineptly spelled Siddham, providing the name of Nāgārjuna in the five syllables

--- PAGE 53 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
180
na-gha-ra-rju-na, while that of the remaining patriarch is rendered in merely 
three syllables as na-gha-jña. The Siddham labels of these Tōji portraits of the 
eighth-century patriarchs clearly show the true Sanskrit name of the fourth 
patriarch to be Vajrabodhi, and it is highly likely that the clumsy execution of 
the name of his predecessor was intended to designate Nāgajñāna or Nāgajñā 
(see fig. 2). In keeping with van der Kuijp’s surmises, this person will be called 
Nāgajñāna throughout the paper. 
	
Van der Kuijp’s correct conclusion that the Tibetan Nāgabodhi was to 
be distinguished from the Indian master recorded as the Chinese Longzhi 
is a useful historical fact. His corollary observations about the curious, 
even perplexing, multiple biographical parallels (to wit: discipleship under 
Nāgārjuna; an age reputed to be seven centuries; residence in the esoteric 
centers of South-Central India, at either Śrī Parvata / Śrī Śailam or at Kāñcī; 
abhiṣeka names which are almost cognates) and about the discrepancy between 
the Tibetan recordings of Nāgabodhi’s recorded mastership and authorship of 
texts in the Guhyasamāja tradition, on the one hand, and Lü Xiang’s attribution 
to Longzhi of mastership of the Vajroṣṇīṣa corpus, on the other hand, are 
significant and well worth pondering.
28. Ryūichi Abé (Weaving of Mantra: Kūkai and the Construction of Esoteric Buddhist 
Discourse [New York: Columbia University Press, 1999], 229–230) discusses 
the representation of Nāgārjuna’s name in Chinese: the variants Lung-meng 
(“Victorious Dragon”) and Lung-shu (“Dragon-Tree”) for Sanskrit Arjuna. Lü 
Xiang chose to translate as “Dragon-Tree.”
	
It is worthy of note that such mythological facets contained within 
Nāgārjuna and Nāgajñāna’s biographies as their celestial travels to the 
heavens and submarine travels to the palace of the King of the Nāgas (Abé, 
Weaving of Mantra, 221–222) were independently noted as important by Yijing 
(義淨), who arrived in India in 673 CE. Yijing’s Da Tang xiyu qiufa gaoseng zhuan 
(大唐西域求法高僧傳, Record of Eminent Monks Who Sought the Dharma in 
the West) recorded Indian adepts who “seek the secret books from the nāga 
palaces in the oceans and search for mantras from stone chambers in the 
mountains.” Yijing also independently knew of a “Vidhyādhara” collection, 
comprised of one hundred thousand verses in Sanskrit that were collected by 
Nāgārjuna, but were then gradually lost and scattered. He explicitly said that 
there is no way of comprehending the tantras without an oral transmission 
(Stephen Hodge, “Considerations on the Dating and Geographical Origins of 
the Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi-sūtra,” in The Buddhist Forum III, ed. Tadeusz 
Skorupski and Ulrich Pagel [New Delhi: Heritage Publishers, 1995], 63–64). 
There lies within Yijing’s observations of Buddhist monastic concerns at 
Nālandā ca. 680 CE the kernel of Kūkai’s concerns when establishing his 
Shingon school in Japan more than a century later. 
29. Presumably a version of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. Jingangding 
is frequently restored to *Vajraśekhara by other commentators, but as

--- PAGE 54 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
181
Rolf W. Giebel (“The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-
kuei: An Annotated Translation,” Journal of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist 
Studies 18 [1995]: 109) has pointed out, the Siddham characters provided 
by Kūkai and Haiyun (海雲) read Vajra-uṣṇīṣa/Vajroṣṇīṣa. An extensive, 
132-folio Vajra-śekhara-mahā-guhya-yoga-tantra (an explanatory tantra of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha) is registered in the Tibetan Tohoku catalogue 
(James Hartzell, “Tantric Yoga: A Study of the Vedic Precursors, Historical 
Evolution, Literatures, Cultures, Doctrines, and Practices of the 11th Century 
Kaśmiri Śaivite and Buddhist Unexcelled Tantric Yogas” [PhD diss., Columbia 
University, 1997], 381).
30. Presumably the teachings of the Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi-sūtra.
31. The five families (kula) of deities (Buddha or Tathāgata, Vajra, Ratna, 
Padma, and Karma).
32. Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 316 notes that the Pallava kings carried 
confusingly many birudas or royal titles. Each king could have more than a 
dozen such epithets. The Narasiṃhapotavarman of Lü Xiang’s narrative is to 
be identified with Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha, who is believed to have 
reigned from 690–728 CE (T. V. Mahalingam, Inscriptions of the Pallavas [New 
Delhi: Indian Council of Historical Research and Agam Prakashan, 1988], xciv).
33. The holy footprint, the Śrī Pāda, still exists today on the Samanalakanda, 
or the Butterfly Mountain. One ancient name for the mountain was Mount 
Rohaṇa and another Mount Malaya, for the Malayaraṭṭha kingdom and 
district in which it lay.
34. I.e., monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen.
35. Here and below xianghua (香花) can probably be taken as either “fragrant 
flowers” or “incense and flowers.”
36. Wuwei wang si (無畏王寺), lit. “Fearless King Monastery.” The true name of 
the Fearless Mountain Monastery, Abhayagirivihāra, could be obtained with 
the substitution of shan (山), mountain, for wang (王), king: Lü Xiang’s variant 
is either an inadvertent misprint or else an indicator of the close royal ties 
enjoyed by the Abhayagirivihāra, located to the side of the royal palace and 
custodian of the palladium of the Sinhalese kingdom. It should be noted that, 
during the medieval period, the Abhayagirivihāra served as the custodian of 
the Buddha’s Tooth Relic which Vajrabodhi worshipped repeatedly, on both of 
his landings in Laṅkā, and Xuanzang affirms Lü Xiang’s location of the palace: 
“By the side of the king’s palace is the vihāra of Buddha’s tooth, which is 
decorated with every kind of gem, the splendor of which dazzles the sight like 
that of the sun.... By the side of the vihāra of Buddha’s tooth is a little vihāra 
which is also ornamented with every kind of precious stone. In it is a golden 
statue of Buddha; it was cast by a former king of the country, and is of the size 
of life” (Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, 249).

--- PAGE 55 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
182
37. Foyan ta (佛眼塔, *Buddhanetrastūpa). Such a temple devoted to an eye relic 
is unknown in extant Theravāda chronicles. Amoghavajra was reputed to 
have employed a *Buddhanetradhāraṇī (佛眼真言, T. 2056, 50.293a14; Orlando, 
“A Study of Chinese Documents,” 163) to halt elephants that had run amok 
in Anurādhapura; it is possible that he was employing a spell of great local 
importance to the Laṅkāns of the eighth century. The temple containing the 
eye relic, if Lü Xiang is correct about its existence, was perhaps so strongly 
associated with the esoteric movement that it was eliminated in an orthodox 
Theravāda reaction.
38. During the early medieval period, the island of Laṅkā was divided into 
three kingdoms, the lush southern portion of the island being known as 
Rohaṇa, the mountainous central region termed Malayaraṭṭha, and the harsh 
northern Anurādhapura kingdom as Rājaraṭṭha. The northern kingdom, whose 
extensive irrigation works rendered it the most advanced and prosperous of 
the regions, could often impose a client kingship on the southern portion of 
the island.
39. Read ku (窟) for jue (崛)?
40. These “earlier spirits” may be taken to be either ancestral spirits or the 
spirits of former monks.
41. As will be noted in greater detail in note 177 below, Faxian (法顯), writing 
about three hundred years before the visit of Vajrabodhi, noted the legend of 
the Buddha’s conquest of the island from nāgas by striding across the land. His 
right foot was placed on Adam’s Peak, while the left foot was placed where the 
Abhayagiri stūpa was erected.
42. Read shu (薯) for shu (署).
43. Or, “He then returned to the path and made his way back”?
44. Read wang (往) (v. l) for bi (彼).
45. Interestingly, “China” is rendered phonetically (Zhina, 支那), rather than 
being referred to as the Middle Kingdom or the Country of the Tang; it is as 
though the author is trying to add a sense of verisimilitude to Vajrabodhi’s 
speech by transcribing the word “Cīna,” which he would use when conversing 
with the South Indian king.
46. Or bridles?
47. Edwin George Pulleyblank’s researches (Lexicon of Reconstructed Pronuncia-
tion in Early Middle Chinese, Late Middle Chinese, and Early Mandarin [Vancouver: 
University of British Columbia Press, 1991]) show that the early Tang pronun-
ciation of the characters 佛逝 should be expressed in the international pho-
netic code as “fɦut ʥiajʰ”. I have restored Vijaya with confidence.
48. See Gerd J. R. Mevissen, “Images of Mahāpratisarā in Bengal: Their Icono-

--- PAGE 56 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
183
graphic Links with Javanese, Central Asian, and East Asian Images,” Journal of 
Bengal Art 4 (1999): 99–129 for an extensive discussion of Mahāpratisarā, a god-
dess of substantial popularity in both Java and Tang China, for whom there was 
a cult but no mandala. Mevissen (ibid., 123n57) notes that Amoghavajra also 
employed the Mahāpratisarā-dhāraṇī to save his ship from foundering off the 
coast of Java. A recently discovered Sanskrit codex unicus of the Mahāpratisarā-
dhāraṇī-vidyāvidhi, devoted to the making of a protective amulet, is translated 
and explicated in Gergely Hidas, “Mahāpratisarāvidyāvidhi: The Spell-Manu-
al of the Great Amulet,” Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 63 
(2010): 473–484. Aspects of Mahāpratisarā worship are treated in Gergely 
Hidas, “Remarks on the Use of the Dhāraṇīs and Mantras of the Mahāpratisarā-
Mahāvidyārājñi,” in Indian Languages and Texts through the Ages: Essays in 1Hon-
our of Prof. Csaba Töttössy, ed. Cs. Dezso (Delhi: Manohar, 2007); Gergely Hidas, 
Mahāpratisarā-Mahāvidyārājñī, The Great Amulet, Great Queen of Spells: Introduc-
tion, Critical Editions and Annotated Translation, Śata-piṭaka Series: Indo-Asian 
Literatures, vol. 636 (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and 
Aditya Prakashan, 2012); and T. Cruijsen, A. Griffiths, and M. Klokke, “The Cult 
of the Buddhist Dhāraṇī Deity Mahāpratisarā along the Maritime Silk Route: 
New Epigraphic and Iconographic Evidence from the Indonesian Archipelago” 
(forthcoming). I am indebted to Hiram Woodward for the original reference.
49. The capital of Guangdong (廣東) Province, i.e., Guangzhou (廣州) or 
Canton.
50. Clothing, food, bedding, and medicine.
51. Zishengsi (資聖寺) and Jianfu daochang (薦福道場), both temples in 
Chang’an; the latter is more commonly known as Dajianfusi (大薦福寺).
52. T. 866, 18.223c (4 rolls); T. 1075, 20.173a (1 roll); T. 1087, 20.211c (1 roll); and 
T. 1173, 20.710a (1 roll).
53. Kaiyuan shijiao lu (開元釋教錄, T. 2154, 55.571bc).
54. Lokesh Chandra, “Mantras of the Thousand-Armed Avalokiteśvara,”  in 
Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 2 (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture and Aditya Prakashan, 1992), provides an interesting facsimile of a 
Japanese copy of the Mahākāruṇika-dhāraṇī, illustrating the primary forty-two 
mudrās of Avalokiteśvara’s one thousand arms. The authorship is attributed to 
Amoghavajra and not Vajrabodhi. Cynthea Bogel (“Ritual and Representation 
in Eighth Century Japanese Esoteric Buddhist Sculpture” [PhD diss., Harvard 
University, 1995], 325) discusses the location of Sahasrabhuja-sahasranetra 
images in Japan.
55. T. 876, 18.326c; T. 1062A, 20.113c; T. 1061, 20.112a; and T. 1202, 21.23a.
56. Here Vajrabodhi’s name is transliterated (Bariluoputi, 跋日羅菩提), with 
instructions to combine (二合) the sounds of the second and third characters.

--- PAGE 57 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
184
57. Read zhi (智) for he (合)?
58. Charles D. Orzech (“Esoteric Buddhism in the Tang: From Atikūṭa to 
Amoghavajra [651–780],” in Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia, ed. 
Charles D. Orzech, Richard K. Payne, and Henrik H. Sørensen [Leiden: Brill, 
2010], 280) notes that Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra “left Chang’an in 741, like-
ly in response to an imperial order expelling foreign monks,” and observes 
that “Zanning’s account obscures the issue by presenting Vajrabodhi saying 
that he does not have to leave because the order applies to ‘barbarian’ monks 
huseng 胡僧, not to ‘Indian’ monks fanseng 梵僧, and it also portrays Xuanzong 
as personally ordering Vajrabodhi to stay.” Orzech cites Song gaoseng zhuan (T. 
2061, 50.711c2–6) and Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 277–278, for the relevant 
translation (Orzech, “Esoteric Buddhism in the Tang,” 280n75).
59. Zanning’s biography records that Vajrabodhi’s stūpa at Longmen (near 
Luoyang) was located to the south of the Yi (伊) River. 
60. Lü Xiang’s biography of Vajrabodhi presumably ends here, and it is fol-
lowed by the epitaph composed by Hunlunweng, which is prefaced by a bi-
ography of Vajrabodhi that by and large concurs with Lü Xiang’s biography 
regarding the basic facts of Vajrabodhi’s life.
61. Zanning seemingly had access to other radically discrepant sources which 
are today lost. This other body of biographical sources even contains dates for 
Vajrabodhi’s death which vary from Lü Xiang and Hunlunweng’s by a decade! 
The discrepancies with Zanning’s sparse account were so great that Chou 
(“Tantrism in China,” 273n5) felt compelled to inject a comment wondering 
whether Zanning had reason to reject Lü Xiang as a source. This reluctance to 
use Lü Xiang’s information is especially baffling as Zanning was himself a late-
era inductee into the Hanlin (Charles Orzech, “The ‘Great Teaching of Yoga,’ 
the Chinese Appropriation of the Tantras, and the Question of Esoteric Bud-
dhism,” Journal of Chinese Religion 34 [2006]: 590). I thank Charles Orzech for 
drawing attention to the work of Jinhua Chen (“Zhihuilun 智慧輪 [?–875/876], 
a Late Tang Promoter of Esoteric Buddhism Whose Life Was Misrepresented 
by Zanning 贊寧 [919–1001]: A Reconstruction on the Basis of New Textual and 
Epigraphic Evidence,” in Buddhism across Borders, ed. Jinhua Chen and Tansen 
Sen [Singapore: Nalanda-Sriwijaya Series of the Institute of Southeast Asian 
Studies, forthcoming]), which demonstrates Zanning’s unreliability in regard 
to another Tang-era monk. For reference, here is the entirety of Zanning’s 
presentation of the brief pre-China portion of Vajrabodhi’s biography as ren-
dered by Chou (“Tantrism in China,” 272–275, translating T. 2061, 50.711b6–
711b18):
The monk Vajrabodhi 跋日羅菩提 [namely] Chin-kang-chih 金剛
智 in Chinese, was a native of Malaya 摩賴耶 (meaning brightness 
in Chinese) in South India. It was a district located near Potalaka 補

--- PAGE 58 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
185
陀落伽 Mountain, where Avalokiteśvara’s palace was situated. His 
father, a Brahman, was proficient in the five kinds of knowledge and 
a teacher of the king of Kāñcī 建支. Vajrabodhi was able to read ten 
thousand words every day when he was a few years old. He quickly 
comprehended whatever he saw and retained it throughout his life. 
At the age of sixteen he was enlightened by Buddha’s doctrine and 
[therefore] did not wish to learn the treatises of the Nigaṇṭhas. He 
cut [his hair and put on] a dyed [robe] and became a monk. [This 
conversion] was probably the result of [good seeds] planted during 
a former existence. Later he accompanied his teacher to Nālandā 
Monastery in Central India where he studied the sūtras, abhidharmas 
and so on. When he was fully ordained, he heard the lectures on the 
Vinayas of the eighteen schools. Again he went to West India to study 
the Hīnayāna treatises and the doctrine of yoga, Three Secrets, and 
dhāraṇī. By the time ten years had passed he had become conversant 
with all the three Piṭakas. Then he visited Ceylon and climbed Laṅkā 
Mountain. Travelling eastward, he visited twenty countries or more, 
including Bhoja [Chou’s transliteration of the characters transliter-
ated above as Vijaya—see note 47; my brackets, JRS] 佛誓, the coun-
try of naked people, and others. Having heard that Buddha’s Law was 
prospering in China, he went there by the sea route. Because of fre-
quent mishaps, he took several years to get there. In the year of chi-
wei in the K’ai-yuan period [719 A.D.] he reached Kuang-fu.
62. Van der Kuijp (“*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes on the Guhyasamāja 
Literature,” 1016n38) observes that Kūkai’s primary treatment of Vajrabodhi 
“is taken verbatim, and with but a few omissions, from the sketches of 
*Vajrabodhi’s life by Lü Xiang and Hunlunweng that, inclusive of various dates 
for several events in *Vajrabodhi’s life, are quoted in Yuanzhao’s Zhenyuan 
shinding shijiaolu. To be sure, Kūkai himself readily acknowledges his source 
for these dates.”
63. Lévi, “Les missions de Wang Hiuen-Ts’e dans L’Inde,” 418.
64. Given the importance in esoteric Buddhism of guided gradations of practice 
which culminate in a tantric consecration (abhiṣeka), Zanning in his Song-era 
biography strangely omits mention of the name of a teacher under whom 
Vajrabodhi was consecrated with the initiatory rites of esoteric Buddhism.
65. To me, what is remarkable in Lü Xiang’s account, besides the sketchy 
references to disciples, none of whom are provided with a name or a 
background, is the paucity of detail about Vajrabodhi’s life before arriving at 
the Pallava court. To quantify this, I note that approximately 7 percent of the 
biography deals with the life of Vajrabodhi before he went to Kāñcī, 16 percent 
deals with his experience in Kāñcī, 38 percent deals with his initial experiences 
in Śrī Laṅkā, 11 percent concerns the preparations for the diplomatic mission

--- PAGE 59 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
186
from Kāñcī, 6 percent deals with his second six-month stay in Śrī Laṅkā, 8 
percent involves the sea journey and sea-storm, and 15 percent addresses his 
time in China. All told, a rough quarter of the biography involves the Pallava 
state at Kāñcī, while almost half concerns the isle of Laṅkā. 
66. The country of Śrīvijaya existed as late as 742 CE when it sent its last em-
bassy to China (Hans Bielenstein, Diplomacy and Trade in the Chinese World, 
589–1276 [Leiden: Brill, 2005], 59). It dropped off the historical map some time 
thereafter, with it falling under the control of the Śailendra dynasty. It is pos-
sible that the name of the Śrīvijayan king would have been provided by Lü 
Xiang if the country still existed when he wrote his account circa 760.
67. Tansen Sen, Buddhism, Diplomacy, and Trade: The Realignment of Sino-Indian 
Relations, 600–1400 (Honolulu: Association for Asian Studies and the University 
of Hawai’i Press, 2003), 26.
68. John Guy, “The Lost Temples of Nagapattinam and Quanzhou: A Study in 
Sino-Indian Relations,” Silk Road Art and Archaeology (1993): 291–310, provides 
line drawings of the temple, which had a distinctively tiered Chinese appear-
ance, before they were destroyed.
69. Bielenstein (Diplomacy and Trade in the Chinese World, 75) reports that the 
king requested the name “Attachment to Civilization.”
70. Mahalingam, Inscriptions of the Pallavas, lvi.
71. In his biography of Vajrabodhi, the imperial-court scholar Lü Xiang 
meticulously lists the items sent with Mizhunna as diplomatic gifts. In the 
diplomatic chronicles documented by Bielenstein (Diplomacy and Trade in the 
Chinese World, 75), no mission with these specific gifts can be identified. That 
said, it should be noted that the Chinese diplomatic chronicles are incomplete, 
as is evident in the case of Śrīvijaya (Bielenstein, Diplomacy and Trade in the 
Chinese World, 62).
72. Just as in the case of the gift by Narasiṃhavarman of a Sanskrit copy of 
the Mahāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra to the emperor Xuanzong, the Sinhalese king 
Aggabodhi VI too sent a copy of the Prajñāpāramitā with his initial embassy to 
the Tang court.
73. Cyril Wace Nicholas and Senarat Paranavitana, A Concise History of Ceylon, 
from the Earliest Time to the Arrival of the Portuguese in 1505 (Colombo: Ceylon 
University Press, 1961), 344.
74. Diran Kavork Dohanian, The Mahāyāna Buddhist Sculpture of Ceylon (New 
York: Garland, 1977).
75. Senarat Paranavitana, “Three Rock Inscriptions at Rāssahela,” Epigraphia 
Zeylanica, vol. 4 (London: Oxford University Press, 1943), 171.
76. Lakshman S. Perera, The Institutions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions

--- PAGE 60 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
187
(from 3rd Century B.C. to 830 A.D.), vol. 1 (Kandy: International Centre for Ethnic 
Studies, 2001), 237–238.
77. The Vajroṣṇīṣa is the label for a vast one hundred thousand-verse funda-
mental text of esoteric Buddhism. It was comprised of eighteen “assemblies,” 
which are independent tantric works. In his Indications of the Eighteen Assem-
blies of the Yoga of the Adamantine Pinnacle Scripture (Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting 
ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei”), Amoghavajra translated a summary 
of this Vajroṣṇīṣa, and it is clear that the Vajroṣṇīṣa obtained by Amoghavajra 
placed the first five samāja of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha at the begin-
ning of the sequence of assemblies. Systems of eighteen esoteric texts were 
also known to both the late eighth-century Indian scholar Jñānamitra and as 
well the contemporary Tibetan rNying-ma school (K. Eastman, “The Eighteen 
Tantras of the Vajraśekhara/Māyājāla,” paper presented to the 26th Interna-
tional Conference of Orientalists in Japan, Tokyo, May 8, 1981; Giebel, “The 
Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei,” 114). In both of these 
systems, the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga replaces the position of dominance held 
by the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha in the system described by Amoghavajra 
and, presumably, known to Vajrabodhi. 
78. See Charles Orzech, “The Legend of the Iron Stūpa,” in Buddhism in Practice, 
ed. Donald Lopez, Jr. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995), 317 from 
which this translation of T. 1798, 39.808b16–28, is directly excerpted. David B. 
Gray (“On the Very Idea of a Tantric Canon: Myth, Politics, and the Formation 
of the Bka’gyur,” Journal of the International Association of Tibetan Studies 5 [De-
cember 2009]: 13) offers a parallel translation.
79. David L. Snellgrove, “Introduction,” in Sarva-tathāgata-tattva-saṅgraha: Fac-
simile Reproduction of a Tenth Century Sanskrit Manuscript from Nepal, ed. Lokesh 
Chandra and David L. Snellgrove (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture, 1981); Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-
kuei”; Rolf W. Giebel, Two Esoteric Sutras: The Adamantine Pinnacle Sutra and the 
Susiddhikara Sutra (Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and 
Research, 2001); Steven Weinberger, “The Significance of Yogatantra and the 
Compendium of Principles (Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra) within Tantric Buddhism 
in India and Tibet” (PhD diss., University of Virginia, 2003). Cardinal man-
tras of the vajra-goddess-dominated Vajraguhya Mandala from the second 
chapter of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha have recently been identified by 
Ven. Rangama Chandawimala Thero (“Esoteric Buddhist Practice in Ancient 
Sri Lanka,” International Journal of the Humanities 5, no. 12 [2008]: 950) on two 
of the “dhāraṇī stones” recovered from the Abhayagirivihāra. Interestingly, 
Chandawimala has discovered that the Abhayagiri tablets provide mantras 
for the four Offering Goddesses of the Vajraguhya Mandala which are miss-
ing from the extant text of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha itself, suggesting 
that the Abhayagirivāsins may have had access to a slightly more extensive

--- PAGE 61 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
188
version of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. The text of the Abhayagiri tablets 
is presented in Nandasena Mudiyanse, Mahāyāna Monuments of Ceylon (Colom-
bo: M.D. Gunasena, 1967), 99–103. It should be pointed out that Mudiyanse’s 
published transcription is not complete—no transcription of the back of tab-
let vii is offered despite the text being clearly visible in Mudiyanse’s Plate 
39. Gregory Schopen (“The Text on the ‘Dhāraṇī Stones from Abhayagiriya’: 
A Minor Contribution to the Study of the Mahāyāna Literature in Ceylon,” 
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 5, no. 1 [1982]: 101–102) 
identifies another of the tablets’ dhāraṇīs as being taken from the Āryasarva­- 
tathāgatādhiṣṭhānahṛdayaguhyadhātu-karaṇḍamudrānāmadhāraṇīmahāyāna-
sūtra, which advocates its placement in a stūpa. Rolf Giebel has identified this 
dhāraṇī among the forty-two Siddham manuscripts brought back to Japan in 
806 by Kūkai. Besides the extant Sanskrit, the text exists in two redactions 
of a translation by Amoghavajra (T. 1022a and T. 1022b) and another Chinese 
translation by Dānapāla (T. 1023), as well as a late eighth-century Tibetan 
translation, and it has been found in tenth-century Chinese stūpas (Schopen, 
“The Text on the ‘Dhāraṇī Stones from Abhayagiriya,’ ” 102, 106).
80. Kazuko Ishii, “Borobudur, the Tattvasaṁgraha, and the Sang Hyang 
Kamahāyānikan,” in The Art and Culture of South-East Asia, ed. Lokesh 
Chandra (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan, 1991). Rolf Giebel, the translator of Amoghavajra’s edition of the 
Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, offered valuable amplification in a personal 
communication. He noted that it could be said to read like an extended sādhana 
with explanatory interpolations. It is definitely not a faithful translation of 
the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha as we have it today, although there are many 
parallel sections. Matsunaga Yūkei 松長有慶 (“Fuhōden no tenkyo to chosaku 
mokuteki” 『付法伝』の典拠と著作目的, in Kōbō daishi kenkyū 弘法大師
研究, ed. Nakano Gishō 中野義照 [Tokyo: Yoshikawa Kōbunkan 吉川弘文館, 
1978]) has suggested that Vajrabodhi’s translation reflects a somewhat more 
primitive version of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. Giebel also wondered 
whether one should not consider the possibility that it may be an adaptation 
and rearrangement by Vajrabodhi for practical purposes, which might 
explain why it gives the impression of being more like a ritual manual. Dale 
Todaro (“An Annotated Translation of the ‘Tattvasamgraha’ [Part 1] with an 
Explanation of the Role of the ‘Tattvasamgraha’ Lineage in the Teachings of 
Kukai” [PhD diss., Columbia University, 1985], 11) provides a brief survey of 
the text Vajrabodhi translated: “It is not properly speaking a translation of 
the Tattvasaṃgraha but a somewhat unorganized and partial outline of major 
practices in the Tattvasaṃgraha lineage. In contrast to the Tattvasaṃgraha 
translated by Amoghavajra this text explains in greater detail how to make 
and enter the central assembly of the Vajradhātu maṇḍala, how to perform 
a homa or burnt offering, etc. This text and Amoghavajra’s translation are 
the first two texts Kūkai lists in his Sangakuroku and so this indicates the

--- PAGE 62 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
189
importance he attached to both of them.”
81. Ishii, “Borobudur, the Tattvasaṁgraha, and the Sang Hyang Kamahāyānikan,” 
157–158. The research results of Takahashi Hisao 高橋尚夫 (“Ryakushutsu-
nenju-kyō to Vajurōdaya—nyū-mandara ni tsuite” 『略出念誦経』と『ヴァ
ジュローダヤ』—入マンダラについて, Mikkyōgaku Kenkyū 密教学研究 14 
[1982]) found that wording reminiscent of the Mahāvairocana-sūtra and not 
dissimilar to that found in Vajrabodhi’s translation is also found in the Sarva­
vajrodaya, a ritual manual for the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha composed by 
Ānandagarbha, who flourished towards the end of the eighth century and who 
also wrote a word-for-word commentary on the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. 
Takahashi suggests that there either may have existed some sort of ritual 
manual known to both Vajrabodhi and Ānandagarbha, or else such thinking 
was commonplace at the time and may even have been deliberately employed 
so as to moderate the message of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, which (as 
argued by Tsuda Shin’ichi in, e.g., “A Critical Tantrism,” Memoirs of the Re-
search Department of the Toyo Bunko 36 [1978]) was at complete variance with 
that of the Mahāvairocana-sūtra. 
82. Rolf W. Giebel, The Vairocanābhisaṃbodhi Sūtra (Berkeley: Numata Center 
for Buddhist Translation and Research, 2005). It is possible that Vajrabodhi 
did not lose everything, as he provided a number of translations which were 
entered into the official catalogs. Besides those listed by Lü Xiang in his bi-
ography, Vajrabodhi is credited with translating twenty-four other works 
(Bagchi, Le canon Bouddhique en Chine, 559–560, 712–713), including the Cundā-
dhāraṇī in 723 CE and the Pañcākṣara-Mañjuśrī-dhāraṇī in 730. His translation 
of the Cundā-dhāraṇī (T. 1075, 20.173a–178c), called the Foshuo qi juzhi fomu 
zhunti daming tuoluoni jing (佛說七俱胝佛母准提大明陀羅尼經, Sutra of the 
Great Spell and Dhāraṇī of Cundā, Mother of Seven Koṭī Buddhas, Spoken by 
the Buddha), claimed that it contained a dhāraṇī so essential that it was called 
the “mother of the past seven koṭīs of tathāgatas.” Given the lengthy list of dip-
lomatic gifts sent by Narasiṃhavarman via Vajrabodhi and Mizhunna, which 
presumably actually arrived at the harbor at Guangfu if Lü Xiang were able 
to give such an extensive and precise account of them, one wonders how the 
textual baggage brought on the same ship by Vajrabodhi was so terribly mis-
treated. It may ultimately have been a question of the accessibility of various 
items in the hold of the ship.
83. Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 321. I am in agreement with the generally 
accepted view that takes Yuanzhao’s biography as the most reliable. Contrary 
evidence, however, can be found in the biographies of Amoghavajra by Zhao 
Qian (T. 2056) and Feixi (T. 2120), according to which Amoghavajra left his 
home in northern India and at age ten traveled with his maternal uncle, 
presumably through Central Asia, arriving in China in modern-day Gansu 
Province (Orlando, “A Study of Chinese Documents,” 136, 161). This is the

--- PAGE 63 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
190
itinerary favored, for instance, by Hiram Woodward (“Esoteric Buddhism in 
Southeast Asia in the Light of Recent Scholarship,” Journal of Southeast Asian 
Studies 35 no. 2 [2004]: 339).
84. Orzech, “The Legend of the Iron Stūpa,” 317.
85. It remains a curiosity that Lü Xiang reports the storm but does not report 
the loss of manuscripts. Perhaps Vajrabodhi, given his standing and ambitions 
at the Tang court, found it impolitic to mention the loss to anybody except 
his disciple Amoghavajra, preferring to cloak his inadequacy by invoking the 
secret obligations and revelations which were a hallmark of the esoteric Bud-
dhist system.
86. Those biographers who do stipulate that Amoghavajra went to India may 
have been obligated by Amoghavajra’s own statement in his will that he 
went to the “Five Indias” (T. 2120, 52.844a16; Orlando, “A Study of Chinese 
Documents,” 108). A similar statement may be found in the biography of 
Hanguang (T. 2061, 50.879b18), Amoghavajra’s chief disciple, who is named as 
accompanying Amoghavajra to Śrī Laṅkā and being allowed to take an esoteric 
abhiṣeka under the Sinhalese preceptor Samantabhadra. In trying to evaluate 
these elements of prima facie claims that Amoghavajra and his monastic suite 
did indeed visit all five portions of the Indian mainland, I am struck that 
neither Amoghavajra nor Hanguang include a mention of Śrī Laṅkā, where 
they most assuredly did go. It is possible that Amoghavajra was speaking quite 
generally, including Laṅkā as a part of India, in much the same manner that 
an American visiting England might speak of a “European” vacation. Such a 
surmise is supported by the observations of Bielenstein (Diplomacy and Trade in 
the Chinese World, 72) that “The Chinese historians of T’ang and Sung times had 
only vague knowledge of the political borders of India.... They were usually 
content to divide it schematically into Northern, Southern, Eastern, Western 
and Central India, which stood in no relation to real conditions.” 
87. Soothill and Hodous (A Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms, 318) translate 
this name as “Flying Staff,” a synonym for a traveling monk. 
88. T. 2120, 52.848b1–849b25; Orlando, “A Study of Chinese Documents,” 159–
171.
89. T. 2120, 52.848c4, translated by Orlando, “A Study of Chinese Documents,” 
162.
90. These considerations on the exclusivity of Laṅkā in Amoghavajra’s itin-
erary are corroborated by considerations on the diplomatic activity gener-
ated by his visit. Upon his departure from China, Amoghavajra was seemingly 
either acting as or being accompanied by an ambassador. Why, if he were an 
ambassador, go only to Śrī Laṅkā unless it was thought that Laṅkā was the 
place to go to get the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha? And why would he go 
there unless Vajrabodhi did indeed direct him? Amoghavajra’s great spiritual

--- PAGE 64 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
191
breakthrough in Laṅkā is confirmed by the fact that he returned either ac-
companied by an embassy from the Śrī Laṅkān king or himself served as the 
Laṅkān king’s ambassador, an event that is independently documented in the 
Tang diplomatic annals and the Tang History of Foreign Countries. The Sinha-
lese king Śilāmegha was thus the only Indic king to be represented diplomati-
cally by Amoghavajra upon his return to China, further evidence both that 
Amoghavajra’s Western journey was confined to the island and did not include 
the mainland, and that Amoghavajra knew the Sinhalese king well enough 
to act as his ambassador. Amoghavajra thus seems, minimally, to have initi-
ated and concluded his journey to the West at the court of the Laṅkān king at 
Anurādhapura; it is impossible to find any extant evidence to corroborate the 
single-sentence assertion that Amoghavajra went elsewhere. While Stanley 
Weinstein (Buddhism under the T’ang [Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1987], 57) reported of Amoghavajra’s intentions of a second departure to Śrī 
Laṅkā in 750, a trip ostensibly abandoned because of an illness, Weinstein in 
specifying Laṅkā seems to have read more into the cited passage than is war-
ranted. The passage in question leaves Amoghavajra’s destination for the 750 
trip ambiguous, merely reading “In [Tianbao] 9 (750), there was again an im-
perial edict allowing him to return. He [Amoghavajra] left the capital but fell 
ill en route and, unable to proceed, stayed in Shaozhou” (T. 2157, 55.881b).
91. Pertinent to the theme of this section (Vajrabodhi’s apparent urging 
that Amoghavajra visit Laṅkā), Hyech’o (慧超), a Korean named as a disciple 
of both Vajrabodhi and Amoghavajra (the latter naming in 774 the elderly 
Hye-ch’o as one of the six living monks who had been inducted into the 
Five Families of the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha; see T. 2120, 52.844a29–b2; 
Orzech, “Esoteric Buddhism in the Tang,” 282), left in 723 for a pilgrimage 
to the Five Indias (Henrik H. Sørensen, “Esoteric Buddhism in Korea,” in 
Tantric Buddhism in East Asia, ed. Richard K. Payne [Boston: Wisdom Publicati-
ons, 2006], 68–69). The record of Hyech’o’s youthful travels, recovered among 
the manuscripts at Dunhuang, indicates that he went to Magadha and the 
sites of historical Buddhism, rather than the South Indian sites the biogra-
phy of Lü Xiang leads us to expect if indeed Hyech’o’s itinerary was guided 
by Vajrabodhi. (Henrik Sørensen observed in a private communication that 
“the Buddhist sanctuaries in Northern India would in any case appear to have 
been the goals Hyech’o set himself. Moreover, the travelogue is rather terse 
and really does not reveal much in terms of Esoteric Buddhism. As can be seen 
from the Dunhuang manuscripts, it is a far cry from Xuanzang or Yijing.”) 
The extant evidence suggests that Hyech’o began both his association with 
Vajrabodhi and his inspired interest in esoteric Buddhism in 733, after 
Hyech’o’s return from India. Max Deeg (“Has Huichao Been Back to India? On 
a Chinese Inscription on the Back of a Pāla Bonze and the Chronology of Indian 
Esoteric Buddhism,” in From Turfan to Ajanta: Festschrift for Dieter Schlingloff on 
the Occasion of His Eightieth Birthday, ed. Eli Franco and Monika Zin, vol. 1 [Lum-

--- PAGE 65 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
192
bini: Lumbini International Research Institute, 2010], 207) presents this infor-
mation in an integral translation of the preface to T. 1077a, a unique Mañjuśrī 
text which was one of the collaborations of Vajrabodhi and Hyech’o. An ex-
tended reconstruction and examination of the mantric content of T. 1077 has 
been offered in Rolf W. Giebel, “The One Hundred and Eight Names of Mañjuśrī: 
The Sanskrit Version of the Mañjuśrīkumārabhūta-aṣṭottaraśatakanāma based 
on Sino-Japanese Sources,” Indo Ronrigaku Kenkyū インド論理学研究 3 (2011). 
Hyech’o stayed with Vajrabodhi for eight years until the latter’s death in 741. 
Deeg’s careful analysis (“Has Huichao Been Back to India,” 210) suggests that 
Hyech’o possibly made a second trip to India. 
92. Mahalingam, Inscriptions of the Pallavas, lviii–lxiii.
93. Senarat Paranavitana (Sinhalayo [Colombo: Lake House Investments, 1967])
surmised that half of the extant architecture of Anurādhapura was due to the 
kings of the second Lambakaṇṇa dynasty.
94. As I mentioned above, it seems that Vajrabodhi personally narrated to Lü 
Xiang accounts of his Laṅkān journey, which Lü Xiang faithfully conveyed to 
his readership.
95. This goal is made concrete in a recollection of this episode in Amoghavajra’s 
life shortly before he died: “I served my Master Vajrabodhi for twenty-four 
years and received the methods of Yoga. I traveled to India to search out 
those I had not yet received and all the scriptures and commentaries.... In 
all I obtained over five hundred mantras, scriptures and commentaries on 
the Yoga. I presented careful translations of the Sage’s words to the State to 
promote reverence and prosperity” (Orzech, “The ‘Great Teaching of Yoga,’ ” 
49, translating T. 2120, 52:840a). 
96. As will be examined in greater detail in section VII of this paper, many of 
the earliest tantras in the rNying-ma school are attributed to supernatural 
revelation on Adam’s Peak. This fact might suggest that the original Laṅkān 
compositors of these texts, while anonymizing themselves, left proud clues 
to their ethnic origin by positing the origin on a conspicuous token of their 
island.
97. According to the preface to the Dacheng yuqie jingang xinghai Manshushili 
qianbei qianbo da jiaowang jing 大乘瑜伽金剛性海曼殊室利千臂千鉢大敎王經 
(Ocean of the Adamantine Nature of Mahāyāna Yoga, Being the Scripture of 
the Great King of Teachings of Mañjuśrī of a Thousand Arms and a Thousand 
Bowls, T. 1077a), seemingly written by Vajrabodhi’s Korean collaborator 
Hyech’o, in 741 Vajrabodhi returned an esoteric Buddhist manuscript to his 
master in the kingdom of Siṃhala in South India among the Five Indias. This 
master’s name is given as ācārya *Ratnabodhi (Baojue, 寶覺) who, it would 
seem, is not attested elsewhere in the extant literature. It is possible that 
Vajrabodhi maintained communication across the two decades he spent in

--- PAGE 66 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
193
China with several of his old Indian and Laṅkān teachers, with Nāgajñāna 
being the cardinal one. Although it has to be pointed out that doubts have 
been cast on the reliability of this preface because of several factual errors 
contained therein (e.g., the assertion that Vajrabodhi was still alive in Tianbao 
1; cf. Giebel, “The One Hundred and Eight Names of Mañjuśrī”), the specificity 
of this detail of Vajrabodhi’s Sinhalese correspondence in the last year of his 
life weighs strongly in the effort to deduce why Amoghavajra was directed to 
Laṅkā upon Vajrabodhi’s death.
98. It is very difficult to reconcile the conflicting accounts about Amoghavajra’s 
teacher(s), and perhaps one should not even attempt to do so. Nonetheless 
some sort of summarization of the claims might be in order. In their two early 
biographies, both Feixi and Zhao Qian record that Amoghavajra underwent 
his final abhiṣeka and received his vast corpus of manuscripts and resources 
from a monk in Laṅkā named Samantabhadra Ācārya (普賢阿闍梨). Begin-
ning with a stele inscription (no. 133 of the Daizongchao zeng sikong dabian 
zheng guangzhi sanzang heshang biaozhiji, 代宗朝贈司空大辯正廣智三藏和上
表制集, Collected Documents Related to Amoghavajra; T. 2120, 52:860a9–c10; 
Orlando, “A Study of Chinese Documents,” 92–93) written on Jianzhong (建
中) 2/11/15 (4 December 781) by his highly placed lay disciple, the Censor 
General Yan Ying (嚴郢), and probably initially installed in the grounds of 
Daxingshansi (大興善寺), mention of an alternate Laṅkān preceptor for 
Amoghavajra is recorded: none other than Vajrabodhi’s mentor from South 
India, Nāgajñāna himself. Yan Ying also mentions Nāgajñāna’s recurrence in 
the history of the patriarchs in his eulogy for Amoghavajra and preface for 
his portrait (no. 70 of the Daizongchao zeng sikong dabian zheng guangzhi sanzang 
heshang biaozhiji, T. 2120, 52:847a2–b7; Orlando, “A Study of Chinese Docu-
ments,” 78). Although one could understand why Yan Ying might wish to 
reintroduce Nāgajñāna to avoid acknowledging an alternate lineage through 
the Laṅkān master Samantabhadra (indeed, Matsunaga, “Fuhōden no tenkyo 
to chosaku mokuteki,” 25, has suggested that the reason why Kūkai adopt-
ed this scenario in the Himitsu mandarakyō fuhōden was to lend authority to 
Amoghavajra’s lineage by positing a direct master-disciple relationship be-
tween Nāgajñāna and Amoghavajra), Yan Ying forewent an opportunity to 
strengthen this association in his cursory treatment of the tale of the Iron 
Stūpa (on which see Orzech, “The ‘Great Teaching of Yoga,’ ” which paralleled 
Amoghavajra’s telling of it.
	
It should be said that it is not out of the question that Nāgajñāna could 
have resided in Laṅkā at the time of Amoghavajra’s visit. Although it was 
claimed that Nāgajñāna appeared thirty years old but actually had lived for 
seven centuries, it is entirely possible that Nāgajñāna looked thirty because 
he was indeed thirty (seldom do the elderly champion and enthusiastically 
adopt texts and rituals with an erotic aspect), and forty years later when 
Amoghavajra may have encountered him, he would have been a wise seventy-

--- PAGE 67 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
194
year-old hosted by new Buddhist sponsors while his prior base in the Pallava 
kingdom was disturbed by schism and war.
	
Acknowledging the name of Amoghavajra’s patron in Laṅkā seems to 
have been a point of controversy and subject to dispute, for Kūkai says in the 
821 CE Shingon fuhōden (眞言付法傳, Account of the Dharma Transmission of 
Mantras) that Nāgajñāna is also called Samantabhadra (Kōbō daishi zenshū 1:54). 
Yet in his account of Amoghavajra in the earlier Himitsu mandarakyō fuhōden, 
in a passage largely based on Feixi’s biography, he substitutes Nāgajñāna for 
Feixi’s Samantabhadra as the name of Amoghavajra’s teacher in Laṅkā (Kōbō 
daishi zenshū 1:20–21; cf. Orlando, “A Study of Chinese Documents,” 162–163; 
Ryūichi Abé, “From Kūkai to Kakuban: A Study of Shingon Buddhist Dharma 
Transmission” [PhD diss., Columbia University, 1991], 190–191). Elsewhere, 
in his Heizei tennō kanjōmon (平城天皇灌頂文, Emperor Heizei’s Abhiṣeka 
Document) for the 822 CE ordination of the emperor at the newly constructed 
abhiṣeka hall at Tōdaiji (東大寺), Kūkai again claims that Amoghavajra was 
instructed by Nāgajñāna: “During the Tianbao [742–756] years [Vajrabodhi’s] 
senior disciple, the Tripiṭaka Master Daguangzhi (Amoghavajra), paid a visit 
to Nāgajñāna, obtained the Vajroṣṇīṣa- and Mahāvairocana-sūtras and so on, as 
well as the mandalas of the five families and so on, and returned to the Tang 
kingdom” (Kōbō daishi zenshū 2:157; cf. Abé, Weaving of Mantra, 198).
99. Abé, Weaving of Mantra, 222–223, citing Kōbō daishi zenshū 1:11.
100. Feixi, whose account of the exclusivity of Laṅkā as the locale of 
Amoghavajra’s text-gathering pilgrimage I considered plausible and valid 
while others were not, reported that Amoghavajra was the son of a north 
Indian Brahman and met Vajrabodhi in Chang’an (Orlando, “A Study of 
Chinese Documents,” 161). Other, and in my opinion more candid and 
forthright, biographies declare Amoghavajra to be an assistant, accompanying 
his merchant uncle, presumably joining the great Persian trade fleets which 
Vajrabodhi used as his conveyance to China.
101. This is an abbreviation of Vajrabodhi’s posthumous name, Dahongjiao 
sanzang (大弘教三藏).
102. As Pulleyblank documents in Lexicon of Reconstructed Pronunciation, 278, 
the character 闍 was used in Buddhist transcription for Sanskrit “ja” and “jā,” 
while 婆 had a phonic value of “ba” in Tang times. The island of Java is clearly 
designated. 
103. M. Boechari, “Transkriptsi sementara prasasti Wanua Tengah III” (unpu-
blished manuscript, n.d.).
104. Jeffrey Sundberg, “The Old Sundanese Carita Parahyangan, King Warak, 
and the Fracturing of the Javanese Polity, c. 803 A.D.,” in From beyond the East-
ern Horizon: Essays in Honour of Professor Lokesh Chandra, ed. Manjushree Gupta 
(New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan, 2011).

--- PAGE 68 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
195
105. Holt, Buddha in the Crown, 83.
106. Dehejia and Davis argue strongly and persuasively that a Śaiva curse 
inscribed on the floor of the royal Vaiṣṇava Ādi-Varāha cave of earlier Pal-
lava kings, admonishing worshipers not to stray from the worship of Śiva, 
was instigated by none other than Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha himself; 
the curse is also chiseled upon three monuments known to have been spon-
sored by Rājasiṃha. However, as noted above, Rājasiṃha seemed to be quite 
accommodating of the Buddhist sympathies of the Tang emperor in his deal-
ings with that country. Vidya Dehejia and Richard Davis, “Addition, Erasure, 
and Adaptation: Intervention in the Rock-Cut Monuments of Māmallapuram,” 
Archives of Asian Art 60 (2010): 4.
107. In the Pallava King Mahendravikramavarma’s (fl. 600–630) Sanskrit farce 
Mattavilāsa, the monk Nāgasena, speaking in demotic Sanskrit, refers to re-
turning to the “Rā’avihāra,” the Royal Monastery. Michael Lockwood and A. 
Vishnu Bhat, Mattavilāsa prahasana (The Farce of Drunken Sport) by King Mahen-
dravikravarma Pallava (Madras: Christian Literature Society, 1981).
108. Longhurst remarked that there are a few Buddhist images to be seen in 
temple yards, but “of the monasteries and other Buddhist buildings men-
tioned by Xuanzang, not a vestige remains, and the mutilated state of the few 
remaining images of the Buddha seems to indicate that the overthrow of the 
Buddhists at Kāñchī was both sudden and violent.” A. H. Longhurst, Pallava 
Architecture, part 3 (Simla: Government of India Press, 1930), 9.
109. Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, 228–231.
110. In this regard, it is instructive to contemplate Ronald Davidson’s dic-
tum that “if we are seeking prototypes for those composing the new esoteric 
scriptures as the Word of the Buddha, we need to begin with the teachers of 
the first commentators” (Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric 
Movement [New York, Columbia University Press, 2002], 160). In the case of 
Nāgajñāna, the lineage of preceptorship explicitly lies in Nāgārjuna, the first 
of the human figures in the Shingon line promoted by Kūkai. Realistically as-
suming that this Nāgārjuna composed the texts (rather than receiving them 
supernaturally from the deity Vajrasattva), then another link to the Pallava 
domain may be made: according to the Tibetans, Nāgārjuna was born in Kāñcī, 
and they explicitly assign to him the alias “Kāñcīnara.”
111. One of the great regrets for the history of medieval Buddhism is that no 
Javanese canon stands preserved alongside those composed in Tibetan and 
Chinese for Java seemingly maintained its contacts with the Buddhist Indic 
world even while these were interrupted for different reasons in both China 
and Tibet around the year 840: the Chinese began a drastic crackdown on the 
bankrupting tax privileges given to Buddhist monks and monasteries, while 
the Tibetan king turned against Buddhism. Neither kingdom esteemed esoteric

--- PAGE 69 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
196
Buddhism again until the eleventh century. Furthermore, Javanese Buddhists 
were also subject to the cultural strains of competing with Śaivas, unlike the 
cases of both Tibet and China where Śaiva theologies were largely an abstract 
rhetorical postulate. Despite their texts having been gone for the past five hun-
dred years and more, the evidence due to the Śailendras might yet help shed 
light onto one of the deeper mysteries of medieval Indic Buddhism. In par-
ticular, it will be suggested below that Java holds uniquely illuminating data 
for a historically interesting phenomenon: wilderness monks like those of the 
Abhayagirivihāra are exactly the group of monks who both channeled Śaiva 
developments into Buddhist esoteric texts, and might otherwise be known as 
the monastic version of those itinerant and vinaya-rejecting Buddhist sages, 
the siddhas. Furthermore, it will be seen that pursuing a thesis of the wilder-
ness monks as quasi-siddha or proto-siddha characters might offer some satis-
fying interpretations of otherwise baffling features from the Central Javanese 
Buddhist temples. One notable exception to the general disappearance of the 
Javanese corpus is the early tenth-century Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamamahāyānikan, a tan-
tric manual which exists in both purely Buddhist and a hybrid Bauddha-Śaiva 
redaction (Lokesh Chandra, “Saṅ Hyaṅ Kamahāyānikan,” Cultural Horizons of 
India, vol. 4 [New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya 
Prakashan, 1995]).
112. Alexis Sanderson, “The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism 
during the Early Medieval Period,” in Genesis and Development of Tantrism, ed. 
S. Einoo (Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, 2009), 133 and 133n311. For an 
extended study of the South Indian phenomenon of āveśaḥ and its Chinese 
correlate aweishe (阿尾奢), see Smith’s well-written volume, The Self Pos-
sessed: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Literature and Civilization (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2006), particularly pp. 390–470, which focus 
upon āveśa in its esoteric Buddhist context. For research specifically oriented 
to East Asian esoteric Buddhism during the Tang period, see as well Michel 
Strickmann, Chinese Magical Medicine, ed. Bernard Faure (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 2002), 204–238; Edward L. Davis, Society and the Supernatu-
ral in Song China (Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press, 2001), 123–141; and 
Charles Orzech, “Vajrabodhi,” in Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia, 
ed. Charles D. Orzech, Richard K. Payne, and Henrik H. Sørensen (Leiden: Brill, 
2010). Regarding mention of āveśa in Vajrabodhi’s translations, I am indebt-
ed to Charles Orzech for pointing out in a personal communication that the 
Jin’gangfeng louge yiqie yuzhi jing (金剛峯樓閣一切瑜伽瑜祇經, Scripture of 
the Pavilion with the Vajra Peak and All Its Yogas and Yogins), the work of 
Vajrabodhi, Amoghavajra, or a collaboration between the two (Pol Vanden 
Broucke, “On the Title and the Translator of the Yugikyō [T.XVIII no. 867],” 
Kōyasan Daigaku Mikkyō Bunka Kenkyūjo Kiyō 高野山大学密教文化研究所紀要 
7 [1994]: 184–212), contains multiple references to āveśa (T. 867, 263a8, 264a19, 
268c23–26, 269b23, and 269b27). As Pol Vanden Broucke (“The Twelve-Armed

--- PAGE 70 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
197
Deity Daishō Kongō and His Scriptural Sources,” in Tantric Buddhism in East 
Asia, ed. Richard K. Payne [Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2006], 149–150) doc-
uments, this very scripture was brought back to Japan by Kūkai in 806 and 
serves as one of five cardinal texts which constitute the Shingon canon even 
though no record of it exists in any of the scriptural catalogues of the Tang. 
Todaro (“An Annotated Translation of the ‘Tattvasamgraha,’ ” 387) points out 
that Kūkai’s main temple at Kōyasan, the Kongōbuji, is named after this par-
ticular sutra.
	
Both Lü Xiang and Hunlunweng are silent on Vajrabodhi’s induction 
of possessions, but Zanning’s Song-era biography records Vajrabodhi as 
employing two child spirit mediums to lead the spirits of one of the emperor’s 
deathly ill daughters and her deceased nurse back from the Land of Yama 
(Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 279). Verifying Vajrabodhi’s interest in using 
children to act as spirit mediums, Michel Strickmann (Mantras et mandarins: 
Le bouddhisme tantrique en Chine, Bibliothéque des sciences humaines [Paris: 
Éditions Gallimard, 1996], 213–241; and Chinese Magical Medicine, 206–207, 210, 
233–234) discusses and offers pertinent excerpts of various of Vajrabodhi’s 
translations which specify the ritual means by which children might be so 
possessed. A text by Amoghavajra (T. 1277) entitled Suji liyan Moxishouluo tian 
shuo aweishe fa (速疾立驗 Gobu shinkan 魔醯首羅天說阿尾奢法, The Rites of 
Āveśa with Swift Efficacy as Explained by the Deva Maheśvara) is a manual for 
inducing the possession of children by “emissaries of Maheśvara” (Strickmann, 
Chinese Magical Medicine, 229–233; Davis, Society and the Supernatural in Song 
China, 125, 280n27): one presumes that this text is very close to the Śaiva 
antecedents of this esoteric Buddhist phenomenon. Written by none other 
than the Pallava king Mahendravikramavarman, the seventh-century farce 
Bhagavadajjukāprahasanam features a tale of identity confusion when the 
spirits of two people, one a Buddhist yogin and the other a prostitute, manage 
to inhabit each other’s bodies (Smith, The Self Possessed, 328–330).
113. Lockwood and Bhat, Mattavilāsa prahasana.
114. South Indian Inscriptions I.24:12–14. For examinations of Narasiṃhavarman’s 
devotion to the Siddhānta mārga, see Alexis Sanderson, “History through 
Textual Criticism in the Study of Śaivism, the Pañcarātra and the Buddhist 
Yoginītantras,” in Les sources et le temps, ed. François Grimal, Publications 
du Département d’Indologie 91 (Pondichéry: École Française d’Extrême- 
Orient & Institut Français de Pondichéry, 2001), 8n6; and Dominic Goodall, The 
Parākhyatantra: A Scripture of the Śaiva Siddhānta. A Critical Edition and Annotated 
Translation, Collection Indologie 98 (Pondichéry: École Française d’Extrême-
Orient & Institut Français de Pondichéry, 2004), xix n. 17. I am indebted to 
Emmanuel Francis for the references.
115. Kaimal, noting the admixture of male vimāna and female prākāra walls at 
Narasiṃhavarman II Rājasiṃha’s Kailāsanātha temple, offered an interpreta-

--- PAGE 71 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
198
tion of the prākāra ensemble as a prototype of a yoginī temple. Padma Kaimal, 
“Learning to See the Goddess Once Again: Male and Female in Balance at the 
Kailāsanāth Temple in Kāñcīpuram,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 
73, no. 1 (2005).
116. Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei.”
117. As argued extensively above, I believe that his biographer Feixi is correct 
when he wrote that Amoghavajra went only to Śrī Laṅkā, but in any case all 
the biographies concur that it was from Laṅkā that he obtained his texts and 
received his ultimate abhiṣeka.
118. Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei,” 179–
182; see also David B. Gray, “On Supreme Bliss: A Study of the History and 
Interpretation of the ‘Cakrasamvara Tantra’ ” (PhD diss., Columbia University, 
2001), 411; Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 198, 204; and Sanderson, “The 
Śaiva Age,” 145–156.
119. Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei,” 193–
195; Sanderson, “The Śaiva Age,” 141–145.
120. Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei,” 193. 
Extant commentaries on the Guhyasamāja are attributed to Nāgabodhi, who 
was a South Indian disciple of Nāgārjuna and reputed to have attained the 
age of seven centuries, much like the Shingon lore surrounding Nāgajñāna 
(van der Kuijp, “*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes on the Guhyasamāja Litera-
ture”). The commentaries of Nāgabodhi are preserved in Tibetan translation, 
and Nāgabodhi is regarded as one of the prominent Indian siddhas. Given the 
similarity of their names, backgrounds, and circumstances, Nāgabodhi and 
Nāgajñāna have been mistaken for one another. Without constituting proof, 
there is much to suggest these two exegetes were collaborators or confeder-
ates, each working slightly different veins of early esoteric Buddhist material, 
or perhaps, in the case of Nāgajñāna, even generating that material in the 
name of Nāgārjuna. (The doctrinal discrepancies between the commentaries 
of Nāgārjuna and Nāgabodhi discussed in Bentor’s study of the Guhyasamāja 
make it clear that Nāgabodhi was not creating material in the name of 
Nāgārjuna [Yael Bentor, “The Convergence of Theoretical and Practical Con-
cerns in a Single Verse of the Guhyasamāja Tantra,” in Tibetan Rituals, ed. José 
Cabezón [New York: Oxford University Press, 2009]. It is possible, however, 
that Nāgajñāna composited the Tattvasaṃgraha and assigned to his creation 
the famous name of Nāgārjuna.)
121. Bogel (With a Single Glance, 75) remarks on the relative chastity of the 
depiction of consorts in the Vajradhātu system mandalas of the Gobu shinkan 
(五部心觀), an illustrated pantheon of the Tattvasaṃgraha preserved at the 
Onjōji (園城寺) monastery since 855 CE and due to Śubhākarasiṃha. The same 
illustrated pantheon contains the image of a stūpa in Kelikila’s hand which

--- PAGE 72 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
199
is an adroitly camouflaged ithyphallic symbol, its true nature made evident 
only by the Siddham label “stabdha-liṅga” (Lokesh Chandra and Sudarshana 
Singhal, “The Buddhist Bronzes of Surocolo,” in Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 
4 [New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan, 
1993], 129). The vajra also came to be regarded as a phallic symbol (Davidson, 
Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 197).
122. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 198.
123. Research into the erotic forms of Gaṇeśa so prominent in East Asian ico-
nography might reveal that their textual basis lay in the only extant work 
of the important monk Hanguang, who is known to have accompanied 
Amoghavajra to Śrī Laṅkā on his text-fetching expedition. Paralleling inter-
est in Śiva’s elephant-headed son by Nāgārjuna, Śubhākarasiṃha, Vajrabodhi, 
and Amoghavajra (Lewis Lancaster, “Gaṇeśa in China: Methods of Transform-
ing the Demonic,” in Ganesh: Studies in an Asian God, ed. Robert Brown [Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1991], 281–285; James H. Sanford, “Liter-
ary Aspects of Japan’s Dual-Gaṇeśa Cult,” in Ganesh: Studies in an Asian God, 
291–296; Christopher Wilkinson, “The Tantric Gaṇeśa: Texts Preserved in the 
Tibetan Canon,” in Ganesh: Studies in an Asian God, 238–239; and Strickmann, 
Chinese Magical Medicine, 255), Hanguang’s work (T. 1273, 21.321b–323a) con-
cerns worshipping the yab-yum form of the god Gaṇeśa, who is generally called 
*Mahāryanandikeśvara in esoteric Buddhism (Chou, “Tantrism in China”) and 
addressed as “Vinayuḥka” [sic] in the mantra of Hanguang’s text. Hanguang’s 
work seems to be yet another of the Śaiva-influenced ensemble of Buddhist 
texts to be retrieved from Laṅkā.
124. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 203. A detailed study of the “mantras 
and invocations” which appear on a broken stone slab found near the Nālandā 
gedige (Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Annual Report 1952 [Colombo: Archaeo-
logical Department, 1953], 11) might go far in revealing the purpose of the 
temple; these were written in Sinhalese characters also datable to the ninth 
century.
125. Rolf Giebel’s examination of the shorter but parallel biography of Vajra­
bodhi by Hunlunweng reveals that although Hunlunweng does not directly 
refer to the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha, he does specify that it is from South 
India that Vajrabodhi procured “a text of the great bodhisattva teachings in 
200,000 words and a Sanskrit manuscript of yoga.” 
126. The respect for north Indian culture by the Pallavas is evident in the 
existence of the Śaiva cave-temple Atiraṇacaṇḍeśvara at Śāḷuvaṅguppam (E. 
Hultzsch, “The Pallava Inscriptions of the Seven Pagodas,” Epigraphia Indica 
10 [1910]: 12), which Hultzsch implies was founded by Narasiṃhavarman II 
Rājasiṃha as it contains many of his known epithets (the name of the cave, 
Atiraṇacaṇḍa, “Destroyer of Enemies,” is itself one of them). What distin-

--- PAGE 73 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
200
guishes this inscription is the fact that its six verses were transcribed twice, 
on either side of the entrance. The characters on the left compose a Sanskrit 
verse executed with Pallava-Grantha characters of a style associated with 
Narasiṃhavarman II, while those on the right contain the same verses but 
executed in North Indian Siddhamātṛkā script. (The Grantha offering on the 
left is extended by a seventh verse interspersed with a few birudas. Emmanuel 
Francis, who had closely inspected and photodocumented the inscription, ob-
served in a personal communication that the seventh verse and birudas are 
seemingly of another hand than the previous six verses.) Hultzsch (“The Pal-
lava Inscriptions of the Seven Pagodas,” 3) notes that the same duality of Pal-
lava and Siddham script is found on Narasiṃhavarman’s Kailāsanātha temple 
at Kāñcī, where the royal birudas on the first and fourth tiers of the prākāra 
shrines surrounding Kailāsanātha are executed in an extraordinarily florid 
and gracious style of Siddham, while those of the second and third tiers were 
engraved using the Pallava-Grantha script (Michael Lockwood, Māmallapuram 
and the Pallavas [Madras: Christian Literature Society, 1982], 104). 
	
The presence of the Siddham script as a second medium for Pallava Śaiva 
dedications seemingly shows an attempt to be cosmopolitan, to connect with 
a respected cultural powerhouse, and implies the rapid dissemination of 
knowledge and of religious innovation. This Siddham script also obtained in 
important Buddhist inscriptions in Java and Śrī Laṅkā, and was used to record 
the mantras in the manuscripts of the Chinese and Japanese esoteric schools.
	
In a past paper (Jeffrey Sundberg, “The Wilderness Monks of the Abhaya­
giri­vihāra and the Origins of Sino-Javanese Esoteric Buddhism,” Bijdragen tot 
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 160, no. 1 [2004]: 110–113), I had occasion to 
observe that the eight paleographic peculiarities of Javanese Siddham inscrip-
tions documented by Bosch, “De inscriptie van Keloerak,” 1–16, were found 
as standard forms in the contemporary Chinese manuscripts, even though no 
extant North Indian example of these distinctive forms has ever been found. 
I had hopes of finding the origin of these Sino-Javanese peculiarities when 
I first read of the Siddham inscriptions in the Pallava temples. While the 
Atiraṇacaṇḍeśvara inscription does not offer the hoped-for Indian paradigm 
for the distinguishing Sino-Javanese form of the script, it is worthy of note 
that the Pallava implementation of the “ta” exhibits exactly the same post-
scripted half-length stroke that differentiates a Chinese or Javanese “ja” from 
the North Indian form.
127. Hodge, “Considerations on the Dating and Geographical Origins of the 
Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi-sūtra,” 64.
128. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 159–160.
129. Sanderson, “The Śaiva Age,” 87–88. Hodge demonstrates, on the basis 
of the identification of the flora prescribed in the rituals discussed in the 
Mahāvairocana-sūtra, that this fundamental text was almost certainly for-

--- PAGE 74 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
201
Figure 10. Narasiṃhavarman’s cave temple “Atiraṇacaṇḍeśvara-Pallava,” its flanking inscription executed in the Sid-
dham script, and (inset) a unique formation of the “ta,” exhibiting exactly the same half-length post-stroke which distin-
guishes the Sino-Javanese formation of “ja.” Photographs courtesy of Emmanuel Francis.

--- PAGE 75 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
202
mulated in the region between Nālandā and the southern foothills of the 
Himalayas (Hodge, “Considerations on the Dating and Geographical Origins 
of the Mahāvairocanābhisaṃbodhi-sūtra”). Hodge specifically considers the 
Mahāvairocana-sūtra as composed in the quiet of the wilds in the foothills of 
the Himalayas, by monks traveling out from Nālandā for spiritual exercises 
(ibid., 74).
130. Gray, “On Supreme Bliss,” 204ff. I am impressed with Gray’s conclu-
sions about the relationship between Buddhist and Śaiva ascetics in their 
venues in the wilderness and on the margins of society. However, Gray de-
rived those conclusions by drawing logically correct inferences from faulty 
evidence introduced by Max Nihom (Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian 
Tantrism: The Kuñjarakarnadharmakathana and the Yogatantra [Vienna: Insti-
tut für Indologie der Universität Wien, 1994]), whose erudite meditations on 
the strange, disjointed legacy of Balinese Buddhist literature led Nihom to 
conclude that the extant Balinese mantras dated from before the time that 
this mantric material was composited in great Buddhist compendia such as 
the Sarvatathāgatatattvasaṃgraha. In light of present understandings of Java-
nese history and culture, Nihom’s conclusions are indefensible: the Javanese 
sought out from South India, Śrī Laṅkā, China, and Nālandā such exponents of 
esoteric Buddhism as Amoghavajra, but during the eighth century were not 
themselves sought by these sources. I hope in a future publication to present 
an argument that in the ninth century, the splendor of their Buddhist temples 
and culture garnered overseas admiration for the Javanese achievements.
131. Mānavarman himself sponsored the wilderness monks: the Cūḷa­vaṃsa 
records that he built a hermitage for paṃsukūlika monks at the Thūpārāma. 
During the reign of Mānavarman’s oldest son Aggabodhi V (r. 718–724), four 
monasteries were built for the paṃsukūlikas and he presented them with his 
royal garments. Aggabodhi VII (r. 772–777) “decreed that food fit for roy-
alty be given to them regularly.” Sena I’s wilderness monastery complex at 
Ariṭṭhapabbata (the subject of n. 132) was “endowed with extensive resources 
(mahābhogaṃ) and equipment worthy of royalty (parikkhāraṃ rājārahaṃ). Fur-
thermore, attendants, slaves and workmen were appointed to look after their 
needs” (R. A. L. H. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough: Monasticism and Economic 
Interest in Early Medieval Sri Lanka [Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1978], 
43). 
132. The passage in question reads:
After them, 1,126 years after the introduction of Buddhism and 1,362 
years after the death of Buddha, King Matvala Sen became ruler of 
this country. But, he was not a man who had associated with men 
of learning. During his reign, a heretic (tīrthaka) of the Vajraparvata 
nikāya clad in the robes of a priest (bhikṣu-pratirūpaka) came to this 
country from Dambadiva, and lived in the ārāma called Vīraṅkura.

--- PAGE 76 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
203
Having presented 15 kaḷand of gold which he had brought to the cook 
of the royal household, Girivasasen by name, he got him to sound his 
praises to the king, who, hearing of his virtues, just as the grasshop-
per leaps into the fire taking it for gold, went to the ascetic and being 
impressed with his secret discourse, which he called a secret teaching 
(rahas baṇa), accepted the false (adharma) Vājiriyavāda doctrines, and 
abandoning the true doctrines such as the Ratna Sūtra, which shine 
in power extending over 100,000 crores of worlds, he by reason of 
his embracing these false doctrines fled from the palace he lived in, 
and giving up the city to the Tamils went to Polonnaruwa and died 
there. (C. M. Fernando, Nikāya saṃgrahaya: Vicārātmaka prastāvanāva, 
niväradi peḷa, hā gäṭa pada vivaraṇayekin upalakṣitaya [Colombo: Lake 
House, 1908], 18, with light amendment and amplification by Jeffrey 
Sundberg based on the edition by L. Gunaratna, Nikāya saṃgrahaya 
hevath śāsanāvataraṇaya [Colombo: Ratna, 2005]).
	
Epigraphical and historical records show that Sena I sponsored on Mount 
Ariṭṭha scores of double-platform tapovana structures, of exactly the type 
hosted by the Śailendra king on the Ratu Boko plateau in Java. The Cūḷavaṃsa, 
presenting Sena I as a pious “aspirant to Buddhahood who had his thoughts 
fixed on the Ultimate,” records that he built a paṃsukūlika monastery at 
Ariṭṭhapabbata, and a contemporary epigraphical source supports the 
Cūḷavaṃsa’s account. In his pillar inscription of Kivulekaḍa in the Kuñcuṭṭu 
Koraḷe of the North Central Province, Sena I employs the name Salamevan-
raj and deems himself Riṭigal-aram-kaaru, the “Founder of the Riṭigala Ārāma” 
(Lakshman Perera, The Institutions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions [from 
831 to 1016 A.D.], vol. 2, part 2: Economic and Religious Institutions [Kandy: 
International Centre for Ethnic Studies, 2005], xxxiii. “Gala” is Sinhalese for 
“mountain” and directly translates Pāli “pabbata” or Sanskrit “parvata”). In 
admitting the tantric apostasy of Sena I, the Nikāya Saṃgrahaya has singled out 
Sena I as an opportunity for a moral lesson, relating his credo to the disaster 
which befell his kingdom: during his reign the South Indian Pāṇḍya ruler 
Śrīmāra Śrīvallabha (r. 831–861) invaded Laṅkā and sacked Anurādhapura for 
the first time in four centuries, taking away all the valuables in the treasure 
house of the king and plundering the valuables of both vihāra and town. (The 
Cūḷavaṃsa acknowledges the invasion and notes: “He took and made the island 
of Laṅkā deprived of her valuables, leaving the splendid town in a state as if it 
had been plundered by yakkhas.”)
133. The Tiriyāy site turned up thirty-one statues of the Buddha, eleven of 
various bodhisattvas, three of Tārā, and a casket with a stūpa top and four 
dhyāna buddhas on the circumference (M. H. Sirisoma, The Vaṭadāgē at Tiriyāya 
[Colombo: Department of Archaeology, 1983], 9). Images of the bronzes are 
presented in Ulrich von Schroeder, Buddhist Sculptures of Sri Lanka (Bangkok: 
Visual Dharma, 1990). The published collection includes a bodhisattva with a

--- PAGE 77 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
204
crown containing all five tathāgatas (ibid., 232), which recent research by Hiram 
Woodward  associates with the worship of Vajradhara of the Guhyasamāja 
(“Aspects of Buddhism in Tenth-Century Cambodia,” paper prepared for the 
conference “Buddhist Dynamics in Premodern Southeast Asia,” Nalanda-
Sriwijaya Centre, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies, Singapore, 10–11 March 
2011). 
	
In light of the themes of this section, it is interesting to note the ascetic 
character of some of the peripheral bodhisattva statues discovered among the 
cache of esoteric Buddhist statues under the paving stone of the ruined medi-
tation platform at Tiriyāy. Two statues of Avalokiteśvara and one of Maitreya 
(Von Schroeder, Buddhist Sculptures of Sri Lanka, 252, plates 61C–H) are wearing 
animal hides tied around their waists and the yajñopavīta across their chests, 
while one statue, likely of Maitreya (ibid., 259, plate 64C) is almost unique in 
showing the bodhisattva wearing a dhoti. The Avalokiteśvaras from plate 64F 
and plate 64C wear arm bands besides having Brahmans’ caste cords.
	
The Tiriyāy wilderness monastery was seemingly not alone in harbor-
ing valuable material within. Strickland discusses the recent find of an 
Anurādhapura-area wilderness platform which still bears the telltale evidence 
of “robber pits,” where knowledgeable treasure hunters singled out specific 
features of the monastery for excavation. It may be that Tiriyāy yielded its 
seemingly unique treasure because it was too remote to suffer the depreda-
tions of looters. Keir Strickland, “The Jungle Tide: Collapse in Early Mediaeval 
Sri Lanka” (PhD diss., Durham University, 2011), 266–267.
134. Sirisoma, The Vaṭadāgē at Tiriyāya, 9.
135. A huge Sanskrit rockface inscription, located about 60 meters south of 
the shrine and written in Pallava-Grantha script of the eighth century (Sen-
arat Paranavitana, “Tiriyāy Rock Inscription”; Senarat Paranavitana, “Note 
by Editor”; and B. Chhabra, “Text of the Tiriyāy Rock-Inscription”; all in Epi-
graphia Zeylanica, vol. 4 [London: Oxford University Press, 1943]), mentions 
both Avalokiteśvara and Mañjuvāg-Mañjuśrī in connection with the foun-
dation by a pair of merchant guilds of the Girikaṇḍicaitya, the ākāśa-caitya 
which forms the core of the circular shrine vaṭadāge monument at Tiriyāy and 
which seems to have enshrined hair relics from the Buddha. Another Pallava-
Grantha bilinear boulder inscription, located next to the staircase leading up 
to the Girikaṇḍicaitya, records that the document had been engraved in the 
twenty-third regnal year of Siṃghaḷendra Śilāmegha Mahārāja, identically 
the proper name provided by the Chinese biographies for the king who hosted 
Amoghavajra. No king of the Lambakaṇṇa dynasty other than Mānavarman (r. 
684–718) and Aggabodhi VI (r. 733–772) held their crown this long, so the asso-
ciation with Aggabodhi VI is assured and the correctness of the name given in 
the biographies of Amoghavajra is confirmed (Senarat Paranavitana, “Tiriyāy 
Sanskrit Inscription of the Reign of Aggabodhi VI,” Epigraphia Zeylanica, vol. 
5 [Colombo: Government Press of Ceylon, 1955]). Paranavitana (ibid., 176) ex-

--- PAGE 78 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
205
presses little doubt that the dating inscription was carved by the same hand as 
the main inscription: the shrine at Tiriyāy was thus constructed in the decade 
after Amoghavajra departed Śrī Laṅkā. Sirisoma (The Vaṭadāgē at Tiriyāya, 9) 
mentions a pillar inscription, located near the ponds to the east of the shrine, 
which had not yet been transcribed or translated. Given the importance of 
the Tiriyāy site to the history of esoteric Buddhism, the reading of this in-
scription should be a research priority. Interestingly, the Tiriyāy structures 
were fashioned with a Pallava aesthetic. Kārttikēcu Indrapala (The Evolution of 
an Ethnic Identity: The Tamils in Sri Lanka c. 300 BCE to c. 1200 CE [Sydney: South 
Asian Studies Centre, 2005], 191–192) observes that the dvārapāla figures at 
Tiriyāy “exhibit Pallava influences of the eighth century.” Of the choice of 
Pallava-Grantha script, which was also employed in inscriptions at Kuccaveli 
and at the Ambasthala caitya at Mihintaḷe, Indrapala (ibid., 191) notes that 
“for the Pallava-Grantha script to have had such a pervasive influence over 
the local script so as to change its course of independent development, the 
Mahāyānists from the Pallava kingdom must have had far more influence in 
the island than is generally conceded.”
136. The meditation platform at Tiriyāy, with two platforms linked by a cause-
way and enclosed within a wall, has an unmistakable architectural connec-
tion to clusters of similar structures scattered across Laṅkā and as well, the 
single instance found in the Śailendra heartland in Central Java, explicitly 
associated with the Sinhalese Abhayagirivihāra and discussed extensively in 
note 140, below. Wijesuriya, working with references to the inhabitants of 
these structures in the extant histories generated by the orthodox Theravādin 
Mahāvihāra sect as well as in the Sinhalese inscriptional record, determined 
that these ascetic forest-monk (tapovana) structures were associated with 
rag-wearing (paṃsukūlika), forest-dwelling (āraññaka) monks and seemingly 
initially served them as shelters during the rain-retreats (Gamini Wijesu-
riya, Buddhist Meditation Monasteries of Ancient Sri Lanka, Memoirs of the Ar-
chaeological Survey of Sri Lanka, vol. 10 [Pikakotte: State Printing Corpora-
tion, 1998]). Because these structures were not found in the proximity of the 
Abhayagirivihāra stūpa within urban Anurādhapura but located a few miles 
to the west, the structures have come to be called the Western Meditation 
Monasteries. Besides being found at Tiriyāy and by the score at Anurādhapura 
and at Sena I’s site at Riṭigala, ruins of these “double meditation platforms” 
are also found at Mullegala, Mānakanda, Veherebändigala, Sivalukanda, 
Galbändivihāre, Mäṇikdena, and Nuvaragalkanda (Gunawardana, Robe and 
Plough, 44).
137. References to these wilderness monks and their productions may 
perhaps be found in rNying-ma “prophecies” like the Tantra Which Comprises 
the Supreme Path of the Means Which Clearly Reveal All-Positive Pristine Cognition 
(Dudjom Rinpoche, Gyurme Dorje, and Matthew Kapstein, The Nyingma School 
of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and History [Somerville, MA: Wisdom

--- PAGE 79 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
206
Publications, 1991], 460), which predict:
	
“The Mahāyoga tantras will fall onto the palace of King Ja.
	
The Anuyoga tantras will emerge in the forests of Siṅghala.”
	
Attribution to Laṅkā of the sequence of classes of tantras known as the 
Mahāyoga-Anuyoga-Atiyoga may be found in investigations of the oeuvre attrib-
uted to the mid–eighth-century Sinhalese monk (siṅgalācārya) Mañjuśrīmitra, 
the earliest of the commentators on the Mañjuśrīnāmasaṃgīti and commenta-
tor as well on both Mahāyāna and Vajrayāna ritual (Ronald Davidson, “The 
Litany of Names of Mañjuśrī,” in Tantric and Taoist Studies in Honour of R.A. Stein, 
vol. 1, ed. Michel Strickmann [Bruxelles: Institut Belge des Hautes Etudes Chi-
noises, 1981], 5n13), who was active about the time Amoghavajra was journey-
ing to Anurādhapura. I am indebted to Jacob Dalton for conveying valuable 
information on references to Mañjuśrīmitra found in the Dunhuang cache to 
me in a personal e-mail: 
Regarding Mañjuśrīmitra, there are two mentions of him in the 
Dunhuang mss. The first one (1774) is a Chan text that received sig-
nificant attention from Mahāyoga circles around Dunhuang (Pelliot 
Tibetain 689 is a Mahāyoga commentary on it). ITJ1774 is interest-
ing because at the end, after the Chan text is over, there is a brief 
discussion of the “three secret classes” (gsang ba sde gsum), which 
may be a reference to the development-perfection-great perfection 
(Mahayoga-Anuyoga-Atiyoga) triad. In this context are mentioned 
three Indian Mahāyoga teachers—Buddhagupta, Śrī Mañju (whom I 
assume is Mañjuśrīmitra), and Huṃkara (slob pon nI ’bu ta kub ta dang/ 
shI rI man ’ju dang/ hung ka ra dang). Unfortunately, the rest of the work 
seems to be lost. The same passage seems to attribute the three secret 
classes to “Guhya Laṅkā.” The other manuscript (ITJ331) contains sev-
eral texts, including a longish Mahāyoga sādhana I discussed in my 
article in Journal of Indian Philosophy [“The Development of Perfection: 
The Interiorization of Ritual in the Eighth and Ninth Centuries,” 
Journal of Indian Philosophy 32 (2004): 21–26]. The first text, however, 
is attributed to Singhala Ācārya Mañjuśrīmitra. It fills the first two 
folios. The title seems to be the “Body, Speech and Mind Sādhana” (sku 
gsung thugs kyi bsgrub thabs). It is basically a short sādhana for purify-
ing one’s body, speech, and mind by means of light-rays dissolving 
into the corresponding three points of the head, throat, and heart.
	
Mañjuśrīmitra’s is not the only prominent instance of Sinhalese connec-
tion to the origination and dispensation of esoteric Buddhism. For instance, 
Padmasambhava, the Indian master who was invited to Tibet by its king and 
to whom the rNying-ma sect trace their roots, is reputed to have embarked 
on the long journey to Ceylon in order to obtain certain teachings and tan-
tric ritual objects (Lokesh Chandra, “Evolution of the Tantras,” in Cultural

--- PAGE 80 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
207
Horizons of India, vol. 3 [New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture 
and Aditya Prakashan, 1993], 114). Even more significantly, the commentarial 
literature on the major Yoginī-tantra the Cakrasamvara-tantra records that its 
earliest extant commentarial work (the short, seven-hundred-śloka [Cakra] 
Śaṃvaratantrapañjikā, manuscript III.365A in Shāstri’s Durbar Library Cata-
logue of Sanskrit manuscripts) was composed by the Sinhalese monk named 
Jayabhadra (“May the heroic ḍākiṇīs grant peace!”). Jayabhadra, an adherent 
of Heruka, was born a Sinhalese in what was even then called “Śrī Laṅkā’” 
(Hartzell, “Tantric Yoga,” 320, translating the colophon which reads “kṛtir 
iyaṃ siṃhalāvasya śrīlaṅkājanmabhūr abhūt tasya jayabhadrākhyaḥ khyātaḥ. 
kṣāntiṃ kurvvantu vīraḍākiṇyaḥ”; I am indebted to James Hartzell for provid-
ing the original Sanskrit for his translation). The medieval Tibetan historian 
Tāranātha assigned to Jayabhadra the place of third vajrācārya at the Pāla 
monastery of Vikramaśīla. Sanderson (“The Śaiva Age,” 91, 158) notes that ep-
igraphical evidence confirms that the monastery was founded by the Pāla king 
Devapāladeva, rather than Dharmapāla as claimed by Tāranātha. The presence 
at one of the foremost of the great East Indian monasteries of a Sinhalese ab-
bot who is expert in the esoteric doctrines of the  Yoginī-tantras tends to sup-
port many of the arguments of Javalogical consequence to be mounted in note 
170, below. It should be noted that the dates plausibly assigned to Jayabhadra 
vary by six or seven decades. Van der Kuijp (“*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes 
on the Guhyasamāja Literature,” 1015n37) dates Jayabhadra to around 900 CE 
and Sanderson (“The Śaiva Age,” 159, 161) supports the assignment of a tenth-
century dating to Jayabhadra by accepting Tāranātha’s claim that the hold-
er of the office of Vikramaśīla’s vajrācārya maintained his tenure for twelve 
years, and deducing Jayabhadra’s date by counting backward by twelves from 
one of the better-dated late vajrācāryas. If, however, it is assumed that the of-
fice of vajrācārya was instituted with the foundation of Vikramaśīla, as Gray is 
wont to do, we see that Jayabhadra thus dates to around the middle third of 
the ninth century, about the time when, as will be argued below, widescale de-
pictions of siddhas begin appearing on the Central Javanese Buddhist temples 
(David Gray, “Eating the Heart of the Brahmin: Representations of Alterity 
and the Formation of Identity in Tantric Buddhist Discourse,” History of Reli-
gions 45, no. 1 (2005): 62n65; David Gray, The Cakrasamvara Tantra (The Discourse 
of Śrī Heruka): Study and Annotated Translation [New York: American Institute of 
Buddhist Studies and Columbia University Press, 2007], 11–12).
138. In my initial study of the Abhayagirivāsin wilderness monks of the Ratu 
Baka plateau (Sundberg, “The Wilderness Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and 
the Origins of Sino-Javanese Esoteric Buddhism”) and its claims about the rela-
tionship between wilderness monks and esoteric Buddhism, I crucially relied 
upon a datum which I discovered in the section of Coquet’s 1986 work devoted 
to Nāgabodhi, the name conventionally provided for Vajrabodhi’s preceptor 
Nāgajñāna (see note 27 for this paper’s confirmation of the name proposed

--- PAGE 81 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
208
by van der Kuijp, “*Nāgabodhi/Nāgabuddhi: Notes on the Guhyasamāja Lit-
erature”). According to Michel Coquet (Le Bouddhisme ésotérique Japonais [Pa-
ris: Vertiges, 1986], 84), who provides no reference for his statement, tradi-
tions hold that Vajrabodhi’s tantric master “Nāgabodhi” went to Laṅkā and 
preached esoteric doctrines among the ascetic monks of the “Secret For-
est school” or guhāvāneyāh vāsinah (Sanskritization found in Coquet) of the 
Abhayagirivihāra. These ascetics studied the Small and Large Vehicles as well 
as the Triyāna, the three stages leading to the Yoga-tantras. They called them-
selves disciples of Kāśyapa, the disciple who received the esoteric doctrines 
from the Buddha. Despite the number of tantric masters this Secret Forest 
school produced, they were still considered heretics for their doctrines and 
after a number of persecutions were forced to leave Laṅkā and seek refuge in 
the Himalayas. I am indebted to Andrea Acri for pointing out that this materi-
al seems derived from the entry “Abhayagiri” in the 1892 Theosophical Glossary 
of Madame Blavatsky. Coquet appears to have adopted Blavatsky’s unattrib-
uted (but curiously, almost unnervingly and supernaturally prescient!) data, 
given it a light amendment, and embedded it in his discussion of “Nagabodhi.”
139. John Miksic, “Double Meditation Platforms at Anuradhapura and the 
Pendopo of Ratu Boko,” Saraswati Esai-esai Arkeologi. Kalpataru Majalah Arkeologi 
10 (1993); Lokesh Chandra, “The Contacts of Abhayagiri of Sri Lanka with 
Indonesia in the Eighth Century,” in Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 4 (New 
Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture and Aditya Prakashan, 1995); 
Sundberg, “The Wilderness Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and the Origins of 
Sino-Javanese Esoteric Buddhism.”
140. The Javanese inscription announcing the presence of the Sinhalese monks 
of the Abhayagirivihāra was recovered just outside the east wall of the double-
platform peṇḍapa (see fig. 6) at the southern tip of the artificial Ratu Baka 
plateau, a plateau which looked over some of the great Śailendra Buddhist 
religious edifices like the immense Mañjuśrī temple complex at Caṇḍi Sewu 
on the Prambanan plain to the north. That the monks, explicitly Sinhalese, 
occupying the Ratu Baka Abhayagirivihāra were monks of the “wilderness” 
or ascetic variety is the necessary conclusion drawn from the form of the 
stone structure adjacent to the Siddham inscription which documented the 
Sinhalese presence for the Ratu Baka peṇḍapa, with two platforms linked by 
a causeway and enclosed within a wall, has an unmistakable architectural 
connection to the Western Meditation Monasteries of the Abhayagirivihāra. 
Given the enormously indicative recovery of the cache of esoteric Buddhist 
statues from the wilderness meditation structure at Tiriyāy, what was the 
reason for the overseas Śailendra patronage of them? There is unfortunately 
little content in their inaugural inscription which directly bears on the nature 
of these Sinhalese monks and helps to resolve the question, so we will have to 
examine the context in order to suggest a plausible answer.
	
May we believe that these representatives of the Abhayagirivihāra acted

--- PAGE 82 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
209
as conventional ascetic monks rather than the esoteric Buddhist adepts who 
occupied a similar double-platform wilderness structure at Tiriyāy? Could this 
explanation accommodate the circumstances of the royally sponsored erec-
tion of the Abhayagirivihāra pendopo in Central Java by the Śailendra king? 
The explanation of strict asceticism suits the Javanese case poorly. In refu-
tation of the possibility that the Sinhalese monks in Java were conventional 
ascetics, it seems to me unlikely that the Śailendra king would benefit from 
procuring ascetic monks of this strictly ascetic variety—why cast across the 
Indian ocean to find a rag-garbed monk when you could more or less compel 
by royal fiat the existence of such a type from local Javanese stock, and what 
direct ritual or pedagogical benefit could such nominally self-absorbed Sin-
halese monks render to the Śailendra king other than setting an example for 
Javanese equivalents? Given that the “tapasvin” monks seem to have indisput-
ably not only cultivated royal Lambakaṇṇa support but also enjoyed a hand-
some lifestyle at the time of the construction of the Javanese Abhayagirivihāra 
(see note 131), it hardly seems possible that these monks were selected for 
their devotion to exemplary ascetic practices: their asceticism was relaxed. 
Indeed, it should be pointed out that nothing about the terrain surrounding 
the Javanese Abhayagirivihāra suggests that it should be considered as even 
slightly uncultivated: the Ratu Baka plateau at that time was an immense civil 
engineering project involving clearing, quarrying, excavating, and filling up 
the natural hill and refashioning it as a flat, manicured, terraced, and walk-
wayed plateau. (In just such a fashion, the elaborate preparation of the Ratu 
Baka joins this site with the Barabuḍur and Tiriyāy stūpas, both of which were 
erected upon natural hillocks which were laboriously enhanced by bulking 
them up with large quantities of fill; Jeffrey Sundberg, “Considerations on the 
Dating of the Barabuḍur Stūpa,” Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde 162, 
no. 1 [2006]: 98–99, 120n44; Caesar Voûte, “A New Perspective on Some Old 
Questions Pertaining to Borobudur,” in The Restoration of Borobudur: The Jewel 
of a Golden Age [Paris: UNESCO, 2006], 240–250). In the cases of both Barabuḍur 
and Tiriyāy, the justification for the immense effort must have been a very 
pressing religious reason.) Given its condition, it is almost impossible to con-
ceive of the artificial plateau area as “wild” and if it was difficult to access 
from the south and east because of the steepness of the bluff, from the north-
west easy and flat access could be gained to the “wilderness” monastery via 
the stone stairs, paved paths, and walkways across the terrace. Furthermore, 
strict asceticism is a stratum of Buddhist monastic experience that is unlikely 
to travel well: if the world esteems the ascetic highly, the ascetic is unlikely 
to pay attention to the world at all; so seen from the opposite point of view, 
what inducements could be offered to a Sinhalese monk to traverse the ocean 
and conduct his austerities in proximity to the court of a different king? A 
wilder jungle than the one in which he already lives and even more wretched 
rags to wear? In summary, it seems that the “vana” was likely missing and the

--- PAGE 83 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
210
more burdensome aspects of the “tapas” were minimized at both the Javanese 
tapovana-type monastery and many of the kindred ascetic meditation halls in 
its homeland.
	
In light of these considerations, it seems obvious that the attractiveness 
of the Sinhalese monks accommodated in the structure on the Ratu Baka pla-
teau greatly transcended a mere admiration of paradigmatic ascetic monks by 
the Śailendra patron. These Sinhalese monks were, at very least, sufficiently 
interested in the enclaves of worldly power to respond to the inducements 
of patronage by the powerful Śailendra king, known to be deeply interested 
in Buddhist esoterism, and were persuaded to come to Java. The selection of 
these specific Abhayagirivihāra monks, out of all the spiritually accomplished 
or ritually competent personnel that the Śailendra might have found fit to im-
port from across the sea, seems to me to be strongly suggestive corroborative 
evidence that these wilderness monks were indeed high-caliber masters of 
the yoga techniques and more, skilled commentators on the doctrines of these 
esoteric Buddhist texts, and, quite possibly, custodians of the most authentic 
versions of the texts because these Abhayagiri monks themselves were gener-
ating them.
	
The tantalizing opportunity to confirm or nullify this strongly-found-
ed hypothesis on the true nature of the padhānaghara on the Ratu Baka lay 
in the grasp of scholars as recently as 1958, when an archaeological inves-
tigation unearthed written material within a foundation box on the Java-
nese Abhayagirivihāra structure’s north-east side, 60 centimeters below the 
ground. The foundation box included inscribed metal foils, one a small bronze 
sheet plated with silver and the other made of gold (S. Pinardi, “Data semen-
tara bangunan kompleks pendapa kraton Ratu Baka,” Berkala Arkeologi 5, no. 
2 [1984]: 37; Laporan Tahunan Dinas Purbakala Republik Indonesia [Jakarta: Dinas 
Purbakala Republik Indonesia, 1951–1952], 17–18, photo 24), potentially in-
valuable not only to the local history of the Śailendras and the Ratu Baka but 
also to the history of the pan-Asian Buddhist religion in the eighth century. 
(For a preliminary explication of another gold esoteric Buddhist mantra-foil 
found elsewhere on the Ratu Baka plateau, see Jeffrey Sundberg, “A Buddhist 
Mantra Recovered from Ratu Baka Plateau; a Preliminary Study of Its Impli-
cations for Śailendra-Era Java,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 159, 
no. 1 [2006].) Tragically for pan-Asian history, no reading or facsimile of these 
foils was ever published, and the foils had vanished from the archaeological 
repositories when I sought them in 2000, doubtless sold by a corrupt official 
to a corrupt collector. I am unable to determine whether the Archaeological 
Service of the Republic of Indonesia indeed explored the other cardinal direc-
tions at a sufficient depth to exclude the possibility of the existence of other 
pripih boxes, or even a cache of esoteric Buddhist statues like that recovered 
at the kindred double-platform meditation structure at Tiriyāy.
141. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 3.

--- PAGE 84 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
211
142. Ibid., 332.
143. Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei,” 179–
182; Gray, “On Supreme Bliss,” 411; Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 198, 
204.
144. Sundberg, “A Buddhist Mantra Recovered from Ratu Baka Plateau.”
145. Nihom, Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism, 114. Nihom, mani-
festly a competent philologist, reached his conclusion trying to rationalize 
the strange detritus of Buddhist mantras which washed up in Bali after the 
fall of the Majapahit kingdom in Java. Nihom postulated that the Vajradhātu 
Mandala was unknown in Java, a conclusion which is substantially invalidated 
by the historical and archeological considerations outlined in the first part of 
this paper.
146. Gray, “On Supreme Bliss,” 411ff.
147. Ibid., 380. The reader is directed to the extensive corpus of recent writ-
ings of Alexis Sanderson (e.g. “The Śaiva Age”), who has provided substantial 
primary-source documentation indicating that vast tracts of the Yoginī-tantras 
are directly adapted from Śaiva materials. 
148. M. Wickremasinghe, “Buddhannehäla Pillar-Inscription,” Epigraphia Zey-
lanica, vol. 1 (London: Oxford University Press, 1912), 191–200; cf. R. A. L. H. 
Gunawardana, “Buddhist Nikāyas in Medieval Ceylon,” Ceylon Journal of His-
torical and Social Studies 9, no. 1 (Jan–Jun 1966): 57. This inscription has been 
mistakenly called the Jetavanārāma Sanskrit inscription. The remainder of 
the inscription has never been found (ibid., 58).
149. Archaeological Survey of Ceylon, Annual Report 1954 (Colombo: Archaelogical 
Department, 1955), 11, 30. The inscription employed Grantha characters of 
the tenth century and expresses the desire of the donor to become a perfect 
buddha who can quench the thirst of all men. The inscription is dated in the 
thirteenth regnal year of a king styled Sirisaṃghabodhi and records a lunar 
eclipse in the month of Nabhas (July–August) of that year.
150. The reader will recall from note 132 that the Vīraṅkurārāma is the 
monastery which, the Nikāya Saṃgrahaya alleges, hosted the Vajraparvata 
monk who corrupted Sena I with esoteric Buddhist heresies. The ruins of the 
Vīraṅkurārāma have yet to be identified. The researches of Perera (The Institu-
tions of Ancient Ceylon from Inscriptions, 247) show that “vīraṃkura” seems to be 
a title of a high-ranking official in the Rohaṇa kingdom.
151. Gunawardana, Robe and Plough, 16. In addition to Sena I’s constructions 
at the Abhayagirivihāra, four new colleges—Mahindasena, Uttarasena, 
Vajirasena, and Rakkhasa—were added by Sena’s queen and ministers.
152. Gunawardana, “Buddhist Nikāyas in Medieval Ceylon,” 58–61.

--- PAGE 85 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
212
153. Ibid., 61.
154. M. Wickremasinghe, “Anurādhapura Jetavanārāma Inscription,” Epi-
graphia Zeylanica, vol. 1 (London: Oxford University Press, 1912), 9. Wickrema-
singhe mistakenly assumed that the inscription came from the Jetavanārāma. 
I am indebted to Gudrun Bühnemann for amplifying the translation. Cf. Gu-
nawardana, “Buddhist Nikāyas in Medieval Ceylon,” 61.
155. On what the four mahānikāyas associated with the hundred monks might 
represent, Gunawardana (“Buddhist Nikāyas in Medieval Ceylon,” 62) con-
cludes that it must represent a school of monks and proposes that the four 
nikāyas were the Mūlasarvāstivāda, the Mahāsāṅghika, the Sthavira, and the 
Sammitīya mentioned by Yijing as existing in India in the seventh century and 
by Vinītadeva, abbot of the Nālandā monastery who lived in about the eighth 
century. Similarly the Varṣāgrapṛcchā-sūtra, translated into Tibetan during 
the eleventh century, structures the eighteen main nikāyas under these four 
principal groups (Gunawardana, “Buddhist Nikāyas in Medieval Ceylon,” 60; 
cf. Janos Szerb, Bu-ston’s History of Buddhism in Tibet [Vienna: Österreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, 1990], 98–100). Both Feixi (T. 2120, 52.848b27–
b28) and Zhao Qian (T. 2056, 50.292c1) record that Amoghavajra was ordained 
at age twenty (i.e., in 725 CE, when he was already in China) in accordance 
with the vinaya of the Sarvāstivādin school (cf. Orlando, “A Study of Chinese 
Documents,” 136, 161; Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 286n8). Yuanzhao says that 
when he became an upasaṃpanna, the ceremony was held at an altar built in 
accordance with the vinaya of the Sarvāstivādin school at the Guangfu Tem-
ple (廣福寺). Although the fact is unmentioned by Lü Xiang, the very title of 
Zanning’s biography of Vajrabodhi (T. 2061, 711b5) associates him with the 
Guangfu monastery of Luoyang. 
156. Walpola Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon: The Anuradhapura Period 3rd 
Century BC–10th Century AC (Colombo: M.D. Gunasena, 1956), 195.
157. Rahula (History of Buddhism in Ceylon, 197n1) puts paid to the notion that 
the wilderness monks were uninterested in scholarship and learning when he 
observes that in later times the Sinhalese āraṇyakas “took a greater interest in 
intellectual pursuits, and were even engaged in writing non-religious works. 
The Bālāvabodhana, a Sanskrit grammar, written by āraṇyavāsī Dimbulāgala 
Mahā-Kāśyapa is a good example.”
158. Additional considerations support this suspicion, as information suggests 
that the phrase also connotes wilderness monks who stood apart from the 
traditional sangha: in his history of Island Buddhism, Rahula (History of Bud-
dhism in Ceylon, 195) notes that “it is curious that only the paṃsukūlikas and 
āraṇyakas were regarded as separate groups, and for this we are at a loss to 
find a satisfactory explanation.” Indeed the Cūḷavaṃsa notes that during the 
reign of Sena I, a separate kitchen was established at the Abhayagiri for the

--- PAGE 86 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
213
paṃsukūlikas. Wijesuriya (Buddhist Meditation Monasteries of Sri Lanka, 142) fur-
thers this discussion of the separation of grāmavāsī and āraṇyavāsī even when 
they shared space: 
It was a time in which ascetic monks lived in “open” monasteries 
but frequently retreated to the exclusive monastic compounds built 
especially for them…. The ascetic monks seemed to have lived just 
as separately within these “open” monasteries as in the Meditation 
Monasteries which were built in the forest. The building of separate 
residences and kitchens for paṃsukūlikas in the “open” monasteries 
is evidence of this. In support of this, the Samantapāsādikā suggests 
that the two groups of monks could reside in one monastery while 
maintaining their identity: “A bhikkhu who had taken up the practice 
of purification (dhūta), though he stays in a monastery, does not stay 
in the rooms of the Sangha, or does not eat food given to the congre-
gation by donors. He sets up a temporized [sic] room for himself. The 
Sangha cannot take the services of such an ascetic as a distributer of 
duties or as an attendant who would look after some other work.”
In considering this evidence, it seems possible that some groups of ascetic 
monks were distinguished as “separate” because they lacked the caitya struc-
ture which formally defined an ārāma or vihāra. As Rahula (History of Buddhism 
in Ceylon, 115–116) writes, “Usually a monastery was called an ārāma or vihāra. 
According to the accepted option of the fifth century A.C., even a hut of leaves 
(paṇṇasālā) of at least four cubits in extent was indeed a vihāra built ‘for the 
Saṅgha of the four quarters,’ if there was a cetiya there, if the hearing of the 
Dhamma was done there, and if the bhikkhus coming from all four directions 
could, even without permission, wash their feet, open the door with the key, 
arrange the bedding, stay there and leave the place at their convenience.” 
As far as is known, the monks of the Western Meditation Monasteries had no 
caitya.
159. Gunawardana (Robe and Plough, 41–42) comments upon the nikāya affili-
ation of the wilderness monks: “The instances cited above also suggest that 
groups of paṃsukūlikas tended to live separately even if they were affiliated to 
a particular monastery or a nikāya” and, noting the incidence of paṃsukūlikas 
at the Mahāvihāra, he concludes that “it is not unreasonable to suppose that 
the nikāya division cut across the paṃsukūlika sect, although there is no clear 
reference in the sources to a paṃsukūlika faction within the Jetavana nikāya.”
160. Gray, “On Supreme Bliss,” 204.
161. Rahula, History of Buddhism in Ceylon, 195.
162. Gunawardana (Robe and Plough, 42) comments on this gaṇa: “The relevant 
passage in the chronicle is too brief to enable one to make an adequate assess-
ment of this incident, but there is no doubt that the loss of this faction would

--- PAGE 87 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
214
have been detrimental to the prestige of the Abhayagiri nikāya since, as is evi-
dent from the generous patronage they enjoyed well into the tenth century, 
the paṃsukūlikas seem to have been immensely popular.” 
163. In a prior discussion of this specific lintel (Sundberg, “The Wilderness 
Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and the Origins of Sino-Javanese Esoteric Bud-
dhism,” 114–116), I dwell extensively upon the implications of the markedly 
East Asian features, including slanted eyes and a long flowing beard, of the fig-
ures on this particular lintel. However, there is a substantial chance that the 
lintel I examined was the handiwork of a modern Chinese stonemason who 
stamped his own ethnicity upon ancient Javanese stonework. Eliza Scidmore 
(“Java: The Garden of the East,” in Architecture of South East Asia, ed. Roxana 
Waterson [Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press, 1984], 199), writing in the 
1880s, recorded that “in the garden of the Magelang residency, Miss Marianne 
North found a Chinese artist employed in ‘restoring’ Boro Boedor images, 
touching up the Hindu countenances with a chisel until their eyes wore the 
proper Chinese slant.” If the Sonobudoyo lintel was one of the archaeologi-
cal artifacts subjected to the Sinifying enterprises of the nineteenth-century 
Chinese chiseler, then obviously my conclusions about the implications of 
the ethnicity of the figures is dead wrong. However, the lintel was seemingly 
found in the Yogyakarta rather than the Central Javanese province which en-
compassed the Magelang residency where the chiselman was at work. I am 
genuinely uncertain whether the Sonobudoyo lintel originally contained Chi-
nese figures, but a very close inspection might reveal the relative ages of the 
carving marks around the eyes.
164. Andrea Acri, “More on Birds, Ascetics and Kings in Central Java. Kakawin 
Rāmāyaṇa, 24.111–115 and 25.19–22,” in From Laṅkā Eastwards: The Rāmāyaṇa 
in the Literature and Visual Arts of Indonesia, ed. Andrea Acri, Helen Creese, and 
Arlo Griffiths (Leiden: KITLV Press, 2011), 63–79.
165. Andrea Acri, “On Birds, Ascetics, and Kings in Central Java. Rāmāyaṇa Ka-
kawin, 24.96–126 and 25,” Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 166 (2010): 
475–506.
166. Abé, Weaving of Mantra, 50–55.
167. Chou, “Tantrism in China,” 258. Śubhākarasiṃha seems to have led por-
tions of his life in a manner which strongly paralleled that envisioned for the 
Sinhalese wilderness monks of the Abhayagirivihāra. Chou (ibid., 258) records 
that Śubhākarasiṃha wandered wild plains and made pilgrimages to all the 
sacred spots: “He went to Kukkuṭapāda Mountain, where he cut [the arhat] 
Mahākāśyapa’s hair and Avalokiteśvara laid hands on his head. He spent the 
rainy season at Gṛdhrakūṭa Mountain, where a wild animal guided him into 
a deep mountain cave in which it was as light as day. There he saw a vision 
of Śākyamuni with attendants on both sides as if they were bodily present.”

--- PAGE 88 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
215
Chou (ibid., 258n35) further notes that cutting hair for monks in a prolonged 
samādhi in their caves was a common practice. For similitude to the descrip-
tion of monks following this sectarian Mahāyāna vinaya, observe the self-por-
trait of the earringed, bearded Śubhākarasiṃha; the image is derived from the 
end of the Gobu shinkan (see fig. 8). 
168. Interestingly, the Sinhalese Nikāya Saṃgrahaya mentions a gūḍhavinaya, 
a secret vinaya, which was held specifically by the esoteric Buddhist Vajra­
parvata heretics and which could be important for considerations that the 
tantrists accepted an alternate vinaya (for gūḍha, see Monier Monier-Williams, 
A Sanskrit-English Dictionary Etymologically and Philologically Arranged with Special 
Reference to Cognate Indo-European Languages [Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1960], 
s.v. √guh). It is possible that this alternate secret vinaya finds expression in an 
alternate group of tantric practitioners mentioned in the Nikāya Saṃgrahaya, 
the nīla-paṭas, who seem to have worn dark-colored robes (nīla-paṭa, lit. “blue 
robes”) and practiced the “nil-sādhana.” The Nikāya Saṃgrahaya actually quotes 
a stanza from the Nīlapaṭadarśana, which “preaches of indulgence in women, 
wine, and love” (Mudiyanse, Mahāyāna Monuments of Ceylon, 9). Davidson (In-
dian Esoteric Buddhism, 387n111) adds more on the nīla-paṭas, identical to the 
nīlāmbara. Having taken note of a passage in the Subāhuparipṛccha as preserved 
in Śubhākarasiṃha’s 726 CE translation of the text into Chinese which enjoins 
that “a monk or yogin will attract a ‘non-human’ (generally a yakṣī) in the 
forest or other secluded spot, and their copulation yields worldly benefits, es-
pecially magical flight,” Davidson wryly comments on the Subāhuparipṛccha’s 
specifications of the color of clothing appropriate for the ritual: “it also speci-
fies the attraction of female tree-spirits (yakṣī) as sexual partners to confer 
siddhi and specifies which clothing is appropriate for the rite. Since the well-
dressed mantrin wears blue to the ritual, we may suppose that this is the ear-
liest datable attestation of the notorious ‘blue-clad’ (nīlāmbara) mob, whose 
sartorial preferences became the insignia of their infamous behavior. They 
are possibly connected to the extremely popular cult of Nīlāmbara-Vajrapāṇi 
(‘blue-clad Vajrapāṇi’), a system enjoying a plethora of Buddhist texts and 
ritual manuals” (Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 203–204).
169. Sundberg, “The Wilderness Monks of the Abhayagirivihāra and the Ori-
gins of Sino-Javanese Esoteric Buddhism,” 113n30.
170. The image presented in Davidson (Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 333, fig. 23) 
has been published several times and with variant identifications. Debala 
Mitra (Ratnagiri [1958–61], vol. 2, Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India 
No. 80 [New Delhi: Director General, Archaeological Survey of India, 1983], 
427–428, pl. CCCXXV.A) identifies the figure in question as Māra and the sur-
rounding females as the daughters of Māra. Donaldson identifies the figure 
as either the vidyārāja Acala or Māra (Thomas Donaldson, Iconography of the 
Buddhist sculpture of Orissa, 2 vols. [New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre

--- PAGE 89 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
216
for the Arts, Abhinav Publications, 2001], vol. 1, 58; vol. 2, fig. 95). Finally, 
Claudine Bautze-Picron (The Bejewelled Buddha from India to Burma: New Con-
siderations [New Delhi: Sanctum Books in association with Centre for Archae-
ological Studies & Training, Eastern India, Kolkata, 2010], 105–106, fig. 127) 
identifies the fallen figure in the proper left of the pedestal as Māra and the 
central pot-bellied figure is identified as Yamāntaka. I am indebted to Gerd 
Mevissen for the references.
	
Given the essential similarities between this Ratnagiri figure and the 
widespread Central Javanese figures, I believe that a mutually reinforcing ar-
gument can be made on behalf of their being siddhas/vidyādharas. Assuming 
that the Ratnagiri and Central Javanese figures were intended by their sculp-
tors to represent the same type of Buddhist character, an identification with 
Māra cannot be considered as a valid emblem to sculpt in pairs along with 
elegant devas above temple lintels and in the background of the Barabuḍur re-
liefs, while Acala and Yamāntaka should only be represented in the singular, 
and probably only once, prominently, within an entire temple complex. Given 
the cluster of near-contemporary antinomian themes (the beard and earrings 
on the self-portrait of Śubhākarasiṃha [fig. 8] and the bubblings of concern by 
Kūkai with a “Mahāyāna vinaya” which permitted the beard) which seem con-
sonant with siddhas or vidyādharas, I am highly inclined to accept Davidson’s 
interpretation of the Ratnagiri image.
171. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 333, fig. 23.
172. Of interest and of potential benefit in a more particular identification of 
the bearded lintel figures, it should be noted that the sixteen figures super-
vising the eight circumambulation portals leading into the four peripheral 
chapels of the central Sewu temple each hold a slightly different attribute, 
like a citrus, a pitcher, or a rosary. They thus differ from the cookie-cutter 
depictions of bearded figures placed on the lintels of the shrine porches.
173. Among the Buddhist ruins of Central Java which can be comfortably as-
signed to particular early Buddhist kings, the small sum of available evidence 
suggests to me that the rakas of Panangkaran (r. 746–784) and Panaraban (r. 
784–803) were primarily interested in the Yoga-tantras, while their succes-
sors the rakas of Warak (r. 803–827) and Garung (r. 829–847) may have been 
more interested in the Yoginī- or Niruttarayoga-tantras. The first two kings’ 
beliefs may be indicated in the inscriptions of Kālasan and Kělurak as well 
as the vajra-mantra which seemingly bears Panaraban’s raka title (Sundberg, 
“A Buddhist Mantra Recovered from Ratu Baka Plateau”). Nothing is con-
cretely known of King Warak’s religious appreciations, but I have argued 
(Sundberg, “Considerations on the Dating of the Barabuḍur Stūpa”) that the 
stūpa of Barabuḍur was erected both during Warak’s regnal period and within 
the watak of Warak. Although, given its ascent from the concrete literality 
of the closed galleried tiers into the obscure abstraction of the upper levels,

--- PAGE 90 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
217
Barabuḍur is open to many reasonable interpretations, Hiram Woodward 
(“Bianhong: Mastermind of Borobudur?,” Pacific World, 3rd ser., no. 11 [Fall 
2009]) acknowledges the presence of esoteric Buddhist practice just meters 
from the stūpa (M. Boechari, Some Considerations of the Problem of the Shift of 
Mataram’s Center of Government from Central to East Java in the 10th Century A.D., 
Bulletin of the Research Centre of Archaeology of Indonesia No. 10 [Jakarta: 
Pusat Penelitian Purbakala dan Peninggalan Nasional, 1976], 92, 94; Sundberg, 
“Considerations on the Dating of the Barabuḍur Stūpa,” 103; Hudaya Kandah-
jaya, “The Lord of All Virtues, Pacific World, 3rd ser., no. 11 [2011]: 1–25), gives 
the monument a canny and comprehensive reading based upon the assumed 
directorship of someone like the China resident Bianhong (the Javanese mo-
nastic acquaintance of Kūkai whose story opened this essay many pages ago), 
and invokes explanations which were concordant with the early Yoginī texts 
like the Sarvabuddhasamāyoga. The widely distributed presence of the char-
acters I have identified as siddhas in the skies of the reliefs may serve as a 
supplemental suggestion that the underlying concept of the monument may 
have ultimately originated in the early Yoginī-tantras.
	
Garung built up the temple complex at Plaosan Lor (Kusen, “Raja-raja 
Mataram Kuno dari Sanjaya sampai Balitung: sebuah rekonstruksi berdasar-
kan prasasti Wanua Tengah III,” Berkala Arkeologi, Tahun XIV, Edisi Khusus 
[1994]: 87; Sundberg, “Considerations on the Dating of the Barabuḍur Stūpa,” 
112–113) and seemingly founded the temple of Sajiwan (Jeffrey Sundberg, “Śrī 
Kahulunnan and Central Javanese Buddhism during the Reign of the Raka of 
Garung,” forthcoming, will adduce a substantial number of indicators which 
suggest Sajiwan to be contemporaneous with Plaosan Lor). While the siddha 
characters are lacking at these sites, the westward orientation of both of the 
two temples safely attributed to Garung might be attributed to an apradakṣiṇa 
orientation of these temples and so may indicate their conceptual origin in the 
Yoginī-tantras: Heather Stoddard (“Dynamic Structures in Buddhist Mandalas: 
Apradaksina and Mystic Heat in the Mother Tantra Section of the Anuttarayoga 
Tantras,” Artibus Asiae 58, no. 3/4 [1999]) discusses the practice of the reversed 
or leftward circumambulation, apradakṣiṇa, which is prescribed in some of the 
extant Tibetan Buddhist Yoginī texts. (Todaro, “An Annotated Translation of 
the ‘Tattvasamgraha,’ ” 68, observes that Vajrabodhi’s ritual manual called for 
the drawing of the Vajradhātu Mandala starting with Vajrasattva in the west 
and moving to Akṣobhya in the north, i.e., in a clockwise, pradakṣiṇa fash-
ion but originating in an unorthodox location.) While the loss of the primary 
statuary at Sajiwan and Plaosan (in particular, the statuary, almost certainly 
fashioned of hollow metal rather than monolithic stone, associated with the 
upper floors of the primary Plaosan temples) prevents the unequivocal de-
termination of whether they were arrayed for a reversed circumambulation, 
their orientation to the west rather than the east suggests that custom had 
been reversed at those temples. Interestingly, the Abhayagirivihāra on the

--- PAGE 91 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
218
Ratu Baka plateau is almost unique among the Sinhalese meditation monas-
tery platforms in opening to the west. (At the time of the publication of this 
essay, I do not know the orientation of the wilderness monastery at Tiriyāy.)
	
Klokke observes a number of specific stylistic correspondences—in my 
opinion, they might be better termed direct stylistic borrowings—of the kālas, 
makaras, and floral borders between some architectural amendments to the 
original Śailendra Caṇḍi Sewu temple and King Garung’s temple at Plaosan 
Lor which lead Klokke to posit Garung as the king who promoted these struc-
tural modifications (Marijke Klokke, “The History of Central Javanese Archi-
tecture: Architecture and Sculptural Decoration as Complementary Sources of 
Information,” in Anamorphoses: hommage à Jacques Dumarçay, ed. Henri Cham-
bert-Loir and Bruno Dagens [Paris: les Indes savants, 2006], 55–57). We might 
with great justification assert that Garung instigated all of the architectural 
and decorative supplements (including the introduction of the iconic ele-
ments of the bearded siddhas) to the Sewu temple, including both the porches 
newly added to the shrines of the Sewu complex and the portals of the cir-
cumambulatory pradakṣiṇa corridor, and as well the erection of a balustrade 
to the new pradakṣiṇa walkway which was decorated by raucous dancing and 
drumming figures. These architectural amendments and the associated op-
portunities to introduce new iconic motifs therefore provide an indicator of 
a change in the primary icon featured within the Sewu temple complex, from 
the original Mañjuśrī to an esoteric Buddhist deity more in keeping with the 
theme of the newly instituted friezes, perhaps Hevajra or Heruka. As a supple-
mental insight into the implication of the added siddha figures, we may turn 
once again to Davidson (Indian Esoteric Buddhism, 223) for the likely explana-
tion of the musical figures introduced into the reconstituted circumambula-
tion corridors at the central Sewu edifice: “Likewise, Vajrayāna siddhas were, 
for all appearances, the first of Buddhists to employ singing (not chanting) 
and dancing (not simple hand gestures) in the acts of offering before images. 
Such acts were frequently enjoined in the yoginī-tantras, right from its earliest 
expression, and sometimes brought with them the values espoused in Śaiva/
royal court affiliation, as seen in the longer Sarvabuddhasamāyoga.”
	
There are at least two other pieces of evidence known to me which suggest 
that the Yoginī-tantras existed in Central Java before the shockingly abrupt 
termination of government in 929 CE. Stutterheim discusses an oblong bronze 
cast skullcap, chased along the perimeter with clumsily executed spirals and 
florals, recovered from the saddle between the dead Merbabu and active 
Merapi volcanoes (Willem F. Stutterheim,“Een bronzen schedelnap,” Djåwå 9 
[1929]). Chandra and Devi, in their study of the bronze hoard originating from 
Surocolo, identify the majority, including the central Vajrasattva, as belong-
ing to the Naya-sūtra, which was translated, inter alia, by Amoghavajra (Lokesh 
Chandra and Sudarshana Singhal Devi, “The Buddhist Bronzes of Surocolo,” 
in Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 4 [New Delhi: International Academy of Indian

--- PAGE 92 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
219
Culture and Aditya Prakashan, 1995], 125, 133). (Giebel, “The Chin-kang-ting 
ching yü-ch’ieh shih-pa-hui chih-kuei,” 175n182, notes that the shorter ver-
sion is called the Adhyardhaśatikā-prajñāpāramitā-sūtra and the longer version 
the Śrīparamādya, which is the sixth assembly in Amoghavajra’s taxonomy. 
Amoghavajra’s translation [T. 243] is of the shorter version, of which there is 
also a translation attributed to Vajrabodhi [T. 241], but this attribution is sus-
pect.) The remainder of the Surocolo hoard, including two distinctively boar-
faced females, seemingly derives from a mandala of sixteen-armed Hevajra. 
174. Cf. Lokesh Chandra, “Portraits of Two Kushan Princes and of Śubhākara,” 
in Cultural Horizons of India, vol. 3 (New Delhi: International Academy of Indian 
Culture and Aditya Prakashan, 1993), 179; Bogel, With a Single Glance, 76.
175. Gray, “On Supreme Bliss,” 422–423. Refer to note 121 for prime evidence 
of this East Asian sensibility.
176. As noted above, Vajrabodhi’s ascent of Adam’s Peak also features in Hun-
lunweng’s biography.
177. I am aware of no extant evidence which suggests that there was an ap-
preciation by esoteric Buddhist Sinhalese of Adam’s Peak per se, but evidence 
suggests that the Śrī Pāda footprint relic was important: one of the image 
shrines at the Tiriyāy site was specifically devoted to the Buddha’s footprint 
(Sirisoma, The Vaṭadāgē at Tiriyāya, 2). The footprint may indicate an asso-
ciation with the Abhayagirivihāra; Faxian, traveling three centuries before 
Vajrabodhi, relates the story of the Buddha taming the native Ceylonese nāgas 
by planting one foot on Adam’s Peak and the other on the location where 
the Abhayagiri stūpa was erected (James Legge, trans., A Record of Buddhistic 
Kingdoms, Being an Account by the Chinese Monk Fa-Hien of His Travels in India 
and Ceylon [A.D. 399–414] in Search of the Buddhist Books of Discipline [New York: 
Dover, 1965], 102). The east side of the hillock on which the Girikaṇḍa caitya 
was built contained meditation caves which had been used by Buddhists since 
the second century BCE (Sirisoma, The Vaṭadāgē at Tiriyāya, 3, 6). Such caves 
seemed essential to the wilderness monks, being found in proximity even to 
the Javanese instance.
178. In a characteristically careful reading of and deeply informed reaction 
to this essay, Henrik Sørensen has properly emphasized the hazards and 
liabilities of employing Tibetan mythological material which dates from sev-
eral centuries after the period of Vajrabodhi. It seems appropriate to clarify 
for the reader the evidentiary dependencies upon Tibetan material in this 
study.
	
For the purposes of amplifying the Chinese material on the life of Vajra­
bodhi, reference has been made to Tibetan sources on five occasions. In the 
first (see note 27, with the topic reprised in note 120), attention is paid to 
the existence of a South Indian master Nāgabodhi known to the Tibetans,

--- PAGE 93 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
220
whose seven hundred-year longevity, fellow discipleship under Nāgārjuna, 
and supernatural exploits curiously paralleled the accounts of Nāgajñāna in 
Chinese and Shingon sources around the turn of the ninth century. In the sec-
ond reference to Tibetan material (see note 77), the variances in composition 
of the eighteen assemblies between the canon described by Amoghavajra and 
the Indo-Tibetan analogue are observed. In neither of the first two instances 
where Tibetan material is discussed does the Tibetan material employed in 
the essay serve as anything other than a comparison. The third of the uses 
of Tibetan material is to incidentally note (see note 110) that Nāgārjuna was 
termed “the man of Kāñcī,” which seems to be a plausible but not conclusive 
acknowledgment of his origins in light of the material presented by Lü Xiang. 
Again, the use of this Tibetan information is descriptive and seems concor-
dant with the context of the other information in this paper. The fourth use 
of asynchronous Tibetan materials occurs in note 137, where in a discussion 
devoted to the evidence discussing the Sinhalese wilderness monks as propa-
gators of esoteric Buddhism, it seems appropriate to point out that a Tibetan 
text of mythological and imaginative character nevertheless specifically as-
sociated the production of the Anuyoga-tantras with the forests of Śrī Laṅkā. In 
this final section of the present essay, the argument will necessarily rely upon 
a final cluster of references to Tibetan material to allow an explication of the 
significance of Adam’s Peak; this dependence will differ fundamentally from 
the prior employment of Tibetan material because the reliance in this case 
is fundamental and interpretive rather than just incidental or comparative. 
The use of Tibetan attributions of its early materials’ revelation on Śrī Pāda is 
absolutely necessary to actively amplify this essay’s exploration of the possi-
ble meaning of the Chinese accounts, given that an interior understanding of 
Adam’s Peak is now lacking in the contemporary Chinese accounts them-
selves. 
179. Robert Mayer, A Scripture of the Ancient Tantra Collection: The Phur-pa bcu-
gnyis (Oxford: Kiscadale, 1996), 12n16.
180. Dalton extensively examines the varying interpretations and apprecia-
tions of this sutra, the root tantra of the Anuyoga class of teachings, through-
out its thousand-year lifetime (Jacob P. Dalton, “The Uses of the Dgongs pa 
’dus pa’i mdo in the Development of the rNying-ma School of Tibetan Bud-
dhism” [PhD diss., University of Michigan, 2002]).
181. Dalton (ibid., 72n79) devotes a footnote to differentiating this Mt. Malaya 
from alternate Malayas, ultimately citing Lochen Dharmaśrī on its location in 
Śrī Laṅkā: “Malaya is at the center of the island which is like four petals of a 
lotus. In the local tongue it is called Sumanakūṭa.” As noted above in note 33, 
the name for the central mountainous region of Sri Laṅkā is “Malayaraṭṭha,” 
and this is the name which apparently held force for the Tibetans when de-
scribing the region’s most prominent peak.

--- PAGE 94 [DIRECT] ---

Sundberg and Giebel: The Life of the Tang Court Monk Vajrabodhi
221
182. Ibid., 64, translating Dgongs pa ’dus pa’i mdo, vol. 50, 17.5–17.7.
183. Ibid., 64.
184. Ibid., 72. For an instance of the employment of one of the Sarva­tathāgata­
tattvasaṃgraha’s Śiva-taming mantras in contemporary Java, see Sundberg, “A 
Buddhist Mantra Recovered from Ratu Baka Plateau.”
185. Ven. Rangama Chandawimala Thero, “The Impact of the Abhayagiri Prac-
tices on the Development of Theravāda Buddhism in Sri Lanka” (PhD diss., 
University of Hong Kong, 2007), 236. Ven. Chandawimala Thero has amplified 
the published information on this Sumeru in a personal communication: The 
image of Sumeru is small, just a few centimeters high, and rather crudely fin-
ished as it was placed in an invisible position under the Buddha image. It was 
accompanied by other auspicious marks. Another Sumeru has been found at 
the Topaveva Stūpa. 
186. Rinpoche, Dorje, and Kapstein (The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, 
455) include the following description of Sumanakūṭa or Adam’s Peak, taken 
from Tibetan rNying-ma scriptures:
On its peak dwells the king of powerful craft.
On its face is a dog-shaped white rock.
It’s adorned with the likeness of a lion
Leaping through space.
At its base grow eight medicinal roots:
Illness and disease do no harm here.
On the summit there is the eyrie and nest
Of the solitary Kalantaka bird,
Which dwells apart from all others.
The peak is of easy access to those of good fortune,
But to the unfortunate completely impregnable.
I am uncertain whether or not the various vegetation mentioned at the Adam’s 
Peak of Lü Xiang’s Vajrabodhi narrative bore some relationship to the eight 
medicinal roots of the Tibetan description.
187. Chandra, “The Contacts of Abhayagiri of Sri Lanka with Indonesia in the 
Eighth Century,” 13–14.
188. Johannes de Casparis, “The Dual Nature of Barabudur,” in Borobudur: His-
tory and Significance of a Buddhist Monument, ed. Luis O. Gomez and Hiram W. 
Woodward (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981).
189. In his discussion of the Abhayagirivihāra inscription, Chandra (“The 
Contacts of Abhayagiri of Sri Lanka with Indonesia in the Eighth Century”) 
proposes several variant readings to those published by de Casparis. Having 
personally examined the stone on two occasions, I have found that about a 
third of Chandra’s suggested alternate readings are indeed confirmed by a

--- PAGE 95 [DIRECT] ---

Pacific World
222
careful examination of the stone, a third of the proposals are invalid, and the 
final third are uncertain because the relevant akṣara have been obliterated by 
fissures in the stone. In order not to disturb the symmetry of his subsequent 
analysis, I choose to present Chandra’s translation integrally, without fuss-
ing over the precise details of the validity of several of his proposed amend-
ments to de Casparis’ original published transcription. This commentary will 
be subject to minor amendments in a future, comprehensive, and adequately 
documented publication of the inscription.
190. The stone of the Abhayagirivihāra inscription, like a number of other 
important Central Javanese inscriptions, was chosen because it was flecked 
with large crystals of quartz. The effect, when the stone is clean, is to produce 
a surface with speckles of crystalline luster. The hardness of the crystal often 
interfered with the lapicide’s attempt to incise cleanly formed characters.
191. Chandra, “The Śailendras of Java.”
