# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 2014-ciotti-gornall-visigalli-puspika-vol2.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 (OCR Corrected via Tesseract 5.4.0)
# Total Pages: 227
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
CONTRIBUTIONS TO CURRENT RESEARCH IN INDOLOGY

Volume 2

EDITED BY
Giovanni Ciotti
Alastair Gornall
Paolo Visigalli

--- PAGE 2 ---
puspika

--- PAGE 3 ---
A puspika (‘little flower’) is the scribes’ way of marking the end of the main text and
the beginning of the colophon. The present logo is an artistic impression by Shubhani
Sarkar based on such a scribal flourish seen on a Nepalese manuscript.

--- PAGE 4 ---
PUSPIKA

Tracing Ancient India,
through Texts and Traditions

Contributions to Current Research in Indology

Volume 2

PROCEEDINGS OF THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL INDOLOGY GRADUATE RESEARCH SYMPOSIUM
(SEPTEMBER 2010, CAMBRIDGE)

Edited by

Giovanni Ciotti
Alastair Gornall
Paolo Visigalli

cy

Oxbow Books
Oxford & Philadelphia

--- PAGE 5 ---
Published in the United Kingdom in 2014 by
OXBOW BOOKS
10 Hythe Bridge Street, Oxford OX1 2EW

and in the United States by
OXBOW BOOKS
908 Darby Road, Havertown, PA 19083

© Oxbow Books and the individual authors, 2014

Paperback Edition: ISBN 978-1-78297-415-4
E-pub Edition: ISBN 978-1-78297-416-1; Mobi: ISBN 978-1-78297-417-8;
PDF: ISBN 978-1-78297-418-5

A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical including photocopying, recording or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without permission from the publisher in writing.

For a complete list of Oxbow titles, please contact:

UNITED KINGDOM

Oxbow Books

Telephone (01865) 241249, Fax (01865) 794449
Email: oxbow@oxbowbooks.com
www.oxbowbooks.com

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Oxbow Books

Telephone (800) 791-9354, Fax (610) 853-9146
Email: queries@casemateacademic.com
www.casemateacademic.com/oxbow

Oxbow Books is part of the Casemate Group

--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents

CONTENTS
PREFACE

(1) SIMON BRODBECK
Refuge and Reform:
Snakes, Gleaners, and Nisddas in Early Kavya

(2) GIOVANNI CIOTTI
Like a Howling Pisdca:
A Note on the Pronunciation of the Rgvedasamhita

(3) ELISA FRESCHI
Does the Subject Have Desires?
The Amman in Prabhakara Mimamsa

(4) ALASTAIR GORNALL
Karakas in Candra Grammar:
An Interpretation from the Pali Buddhist Sastras

(5) ROBERT LEACH
The Three Jewels and the Formation
of the Paficaratra Canon

(6) DANIEL STENDER
Preliminary Survey of Sanskrit Manuscripts
of the Bodhicarydvatara

iii

35

55

87

115

147

--- PAGE 7 ---
vi Contents

(7) MAEGORZATA SULICH-COWLEY
Asiddha vs Asiddhavat in Pataiijalis Mahabhdsya

(8) PAOLo VISIGALLI
Continuity and Change in Chdndogya Upanisad 6.1-4

171

191

--- PAGE 8 ---
Preface

Puspikd 2 is the outcome of the second ‘International Indology Graduate
Research Symposium’ (IIGRS) held at the Faculty of Asian and Middle
Eastern Studies, University of Cambridge, on the 23rd and 24th of
September 2010.
The purpose of IIGRS is to provide young scholars with an international
platform to discuss and share the results of their research on premodern
South Asian cultures. All participants focus on textual sources, whether
manuscripts, inscriptions, published editions, or oral recitations, in the lan-
guage in which they were composed.
The papers offered here cover a great variety of topics related to the
intellectual traditions of South Asia, which are examined from different
disciplinary perspectives, such as intellectual history, linguistics, philo-
sophy, literary criticism and religious studies.
The rich variety of topics presented at IIGRS was a source of inspiration
for all those who participated. The symposium provided an open forum to
discuss ideas and methodologies in a relaxed and friendly environment,
where young scholars could experience presenting their own research in
front of their peers and senior scholars. At IIGRS the latter category was
represented by Dr. Whitney Cox, Dr. Eivind Kahrs, Dr. Federico Squarcini
and Dr. Vincenzo Vergiani, whose contributions to the discussion of each
paper were much appreciated.

Here follows the list of the contributors to Puspikd 2 along with a brief
summary of the contents of their works:

(1) Simon Brodbeck, who offered a keynote lecture during the first day
of IIGRS, here (“Refuge and Reform: Snakes, Gleaners, and Nisddas in

--- PAGE 9 ---
viii Preface

Early Kdvyd’) further elaborates on some of the issues he touched upon
during his presentation. In particular, he engages with the topic of carnage
as a means of imperialistic strategy for ksatriya self-assertion. He gives a
close reading of selected passages of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana,
by applying the categories of coloniality and post-coloniality.

(2) Giovanni Ciotti (“Like a Howling Pisdca: A Note on the
Pronunciation of the Rgvedasamhita’) studies a specific aspect concerning
the pronunciation of the Rgvedasamhitd. Using the data offered by the
Vedic ancillary literature (vedalaksana), he casts some light on the tra-
ditional view about the pronunciation of the Veda, a feature of the text

which Western scholarship has sometimes just marginally addressed.

(3) Elisa Freschi (“Does the Subject Have Desires? The Prabhakara
Mimamsa Answer”) suggests an answer to the question ‘Does the subject
have desires?’ from the point of view of the Prabhakara Mimamsa school.
After a close reading of the relevant primary sources, she argues that in the
Prabhakara view there can be no subject without desire.

(4) Alastair Gornall (“Karakas in Candra Grammar: An Interpretation
from the Pali Buddhist Sastras”) explores the reception of Candra Sanskrit
grammatical literature in 12th century Sri Lanka and investigates the ways
in which Theravada Buddhist grammarians used this literature to create a
new system of Pali grammar, the Moggallana system. In particular, he
focuses on how Pali grammarians interpreted the treatment of kdrakas as
found in Candra grammar.

(5) Robert Leach (“The Three Jewels and the Formation of the
Pajficaratra Canon’) investigates the formation of the Paficaratra canon.
Focusing on three texts belonging to the Agamasiddhanta tradition, namely
the Jayakhyasamhitd, the Satvatasamhité and the Pauskarasamhitd, he in-
dicates a precise period—the 14th century—in which these texts were
adopted as canonical also by non-Agamasiddhanta Paficaratrikas, therefore
marking a profound restructuring of the whole Paficaratra canon.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Preface ix

(6) Daniel Stender (“Preliminary Survey of Sanskrit Manuscripts of the
Bodhicaryavatara’) offers a thorough survey of the available manuscripts of
the Bodhicarydvatara. The article identifies the manuscripts that were used
for the previous editions of the text and also locates the newly discovered
ones, thereby facilitating future work on a revised version of the critical
edition of the Bodhicarydvatara.

(7) Matgorzata Sulich-Cowley (“Asiddha vs asiddhavat in Pataiijali’s
Mahdabhdsyd’) investigates one of the key concepts characterising the
architecture of Panini’s grammar, that of asiddha. Critically engaging with
previous scholarship, she offers a new interpretation of the terms asiddha
and asiddhavat and their function in the application of the rules in the
Astadhyayi.

(8) Paolo Visigalli (“Continuity and Change in Chdndogya Upanisad
6.1-4”) offers a close reading of the initial section of the sixth chapter of the
Chandogya Upanisad. In particular, he attempts to delineate the innovation
of Uddalaka’s discourse as compared with the preceding Vedic belief
system.

We are grateful to those who helped bring this book to completion.
Firstly, we would like to thank the authors for their contributions. Secondly,
thanks must go to the Faculty of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies,
University of Cambridge, for its logistic and financial support both for the
organisation of IIGRS and for the publication of the present volume. In
particular, we would like to express our gratitude to Dr. Eivind Kahrs, Dr.
Vincenzo Vergiani and the faculty administrative staff. We also thank
Oxbow Books for publishing this volume.

Cambridge 2013,

Giovanni Ciotti
Alastair Gornall
Paolo Visigalli

--- PAGE 11 ---


--- PAGE 12 ---
One

Refuge and Reform:
Snakes, Gleaners, and Nisddas
in Early Kavya

Simon P. Brodbeck

Introduction: Janamejaya, Asoka, and Postcoloniality'

The Ramayana tells of the war, in distant Lanka, between Rama DaSaratha
of Ayodhya and Ravana’s demon hordes — Rama was the victor, and
Ravana’ estranged brother Vibhisana, who fought for Rama, was installed
as king of Lanka (Ram 6). The Mahabharata tells that story too (Mbh
3.258-75), amongst others, and orders events such that Rama's righteous
war is followed by other bloodbaths: northwest of Ayodhya, Arjuna and
Krsna massacre the inhabitants of Khandava Forest (Mbh 1.214—25;
Hiltebeitel 1976); at Kuruksetra, the Pandavas as advised by Krsna preside

' This paper includes material presented at the Centre for Hindu Studies in Oxford (29
October 2009) and in the History Department of the Jawaharlal Nehru University in
Delhi (13 January 2010), as well as at the IIGRS2 gathering in Cambridge (23-24
September 2010). I am indebted to my hosts and discussants on all those and some
previous occasions; to Julia Leslie, Jim Fitzgerald, Alf Hiltebeitel, and James Hegarty
for assistance; and to the Arts and Humanities Research Council for funding.

--- PAGE 13 ---
2 Simon P. Brodbeck

over a massacre of almost all ksatriyas (Mbh 6-10); at Prabhasa on the west
coast, the Vrsnis kill each other (Mbh 16.4); and at Taksasila, in revenge for
the assassination of his father Pariksit, Janamejaya starts to kill all snakes,
but then stops, after Astika’s intervention, on condition that the surviving
snakes behave themselves (Mbh 1.45-53). We also hear details of how
other kings of the past, and Krsna at other times, did sterling deeds licking
various miscreants into shape (Mbh, Hy, passim).

In this paper I take an abstract view of these various events, seeing
them, for the sake of argument, as depictions of a single process; and I
begin to explore some of its contours and ramifications. This is royal
ksatriya business, conceived in terms of kings milking their wife the land
(Bailey 1981; Hara 1973), protecting and growing their land, with weapons
and armies, against others (sometimes other kings with armies); and in
terms of constitutively iterated royal rites of expansive self-assertion, in-
volving appropriation, the crushing of resistance, and the exploitation of
resources thereafter. It is well-known business; imperial business. It can be
conceptualised in terms of development, and perhaps as a kind of
missionary work, finessed in terms of what is said to be best for the people
in the places that it most directly affects. There is an ideological component
in the representation of the process. I will look at some passages from the
Mahabharata and Ramayana from a Marxist perspective, attending parti-
cularly to certain categories of person.

King Janamejaya calls off the snake massacre. Why didn’t Janamejaya’s
snake massacre kill all snakes? It was intended to, but Janamejaya changed
his mind about it, while listening to Vaisampayana’s story about the
Pandavas, and called it off uncompleted (Mbh 1.50-56).

The cause of the ceasefire is variously given. According to the first
presented account, it was because, long ago, the snake massacre was set up
by the mother-of-all-snakes, Kadri, who cursed her children to die in it,
and by Brahma, who, later petitioned by those children, specified that only
the wicked snakes would die in it.

tad vakyam nanvapadyanta tai Sasapa bhujamgaman \| Mbh 1.18:7 \\
sarpasatre vartamane pavako vah pradhaksyati |
janamejayasya rajarseh pandaveyasya dhimatah || 8 ||

--- PAGE 14 ---
Refuge and Reform 3

Sapam enam tu Susrava svayam eva pitamahah |
atikriiram samuddistam kadrva daivad ativa hi \\ 9 |
sdrdham devaganaih sarvair vacam tam anvamodata |
bahutvam preksya sarpandam prajanam hitakamyaya |\ 10 ||
tigmaviryavisa hy ete dandasiika mahabalah |

When the Snakes did not obey her command, she cursed them that they would be
burned in the fire, when the Snake Sacrifice of the royal seer Janamejaya, the wise
scion of Pandu, was to take place. The Grandsire himself, however, heard this all-
too-cruel curse pronounced by Kadri; and, although it went far beyond what fate
had ordained, he and all the hosts of the Gods approved her word, for the good of
the creatures, as he saw how many Snakes there were. They were powerful and
mordacious, their poison was virulent ... (Mbh 1.18:7c—-11b, tr. van Buitenen 1973:
77)

brahmovaca |

bahavah pannagas tiksna bhimaviryd visolbanah

prajanam hitakamo "ham na nivaritavams tada || Mbh 1.34:9 ||
ye dandasiikah ksudras ca papacara visolbanah

tesam vindso bhavita na tu ye dharmacarinah || 10 |

Brahma said:

There are too many Snakes, they are harsh, terribly brave, and covered with
poison. At that time I did not stop her [i.e. Kadrii], as I wished the creatures well.
It is the eagerly biting Snakes, the mean and evil and virulent ones, that are
doomed to die, not the law-abiding Snakes. (Mbh 1.34:9-10, tr. van Buitenen
1973: 95)

It seems unlikely that only wicked snakes were killed, until there was a
ceasefire just at the point where there were no more wicked snakes to kill,
so that by stopping there, Janamejaya would leave only dharmic snakes
alive. We would more naturally imagine that some dharmic ones would
have been killed before the ceasefire, and/or that some wicked ones would
have survived it. So how does Brahma’s stipulation work?

Astika makes the surviving snakes solemnly promise, after the cease-
fire, that they will never attack anyone who knows the story of how he
saved them.

--- PAGE 15 ---
4 Simon P. Brodbeck

Gstika uvaca |
sdyam pratah suprasannatmartipa
loke vipra mdnavds cetare pi
dharmakhyanam ye vadeyur mamedam
tesam yusmadbhyo naiva kimcid bhayam syat || Mbh 1.53:20 |

suta uvaca
tais capy ukto bhdgineyah prasannair

etat satyam kamam evam carantah |
prityd yuktd ipsitam sarvasas te

kartarah sma pravana bhagineya || 21 ||

Astika said (to the snakes]:

The brahmins and other folk in this world
Who, morning and evening, tranquil of mind,
Will recount this epic of Law of mine

Must never need be in fear of you.

The Bard said:

And serene they spoke to their sister’s son [i.e. Astika]:
‘Then this shall be true, we shall do the wish

You have wished, for we all are wholly pleased —

We shall do it willingly, sister’s son!’

(Mbh 1.53:20-21, tr. van Buitenen 1973: 122-3)

So after the massacre, and in connection with certain public statements,
there is to be a reform in the behaviour of the snakes. When combined with
Brahma’s stipulation, the implication is that before this reform, all snakes
might be wicked.

The referent of dharmakhyanam ... mamedam (‘this epic of Law of
mine’) has usually been taken to be the story of Astika, ie. the
Mahabharatads Astikaparvan (Mbh 113-53; see e.g. Hegarty 2006: 45); but
the word dkhydna is used in preference to parvan, both here and at 1.53:23-
6 when the phala is repeated, and in my view its referent should be taken
also to be the dharmic tale told by Astika, ie. Mbh 1.50 in miniature (the
hymn of praise for Janamejaya and his rite, which wins Astika entry and an
open boon) and, in fuller form, VaiSampayana’s whole discourse (Mbh 1.55—
Hv 113; for the implied identity of Asttka and Vaisampayana, see Brodbeck
2009: 233-8; Brodbeck 2009b). The people who need not fear snakes

--- PAGE 16 ---
Refuge and Reform 5

would thus be the same people included by the various phalasrutis (e.g.
1.56:14-30) relating the benefits of Vaisampayana’s discourse.

King ASoka calls off the Kaliriga massacre. Compare Janamejaya’s deeds
with the situation sketched by Asoka’s thirteenth major rock edict (Hultzsch
1925: 207-12; Thapar 1961: 255-7). This edict specifically concerns
ASoka’s massacre of the Kaliigans (referred to by Taranatha as ndgas; see
Thapar 1961: 36). After the ceasefire the good King Asoka, the handsome
one, beloved-of-the-gods, advertises across his realm that although the high
death toll has saddened him deeply, he will resume killing if there is
misbehaviour.

[T]he Beloved of the Gods conciliates the forest tribes of his empire, but he warns
them that he has power even in his remorse, and he asks them to repent, lest they
be killed. For the Beloved of the Gods wishes that all beings should be unharmed,
self-controlled, calm in mind, and gentle. (tr. Thapar 1961: 256; Hultzsch 1925:
209-10, lines M-O)

Fitzgerald discusses this edict in the introduction to his Santiparvan
translation.”

[I]t ... contains a clear ultimatum directed at the ‘forest tribes’ of the empire.
Those peoples are to accept the peaceful conquest of Dhamma (dhammavijaya),
which is ‘pleasant’, or they can expect the same kind of travail the people of
Kalinga suffered. ... [N]ot only does the edict fail to renounce violence, it
threatens it explicitly as well as implicitly. (Fitzgerald 2004: 118)

Inconclusive genocides recur in old Indian texts. This theme in the
Mahabharata has been discussed by Minkowski (1991: 396-400) and
Fitzgerald (2002: 104-7, 115-19), amongst others. But the implication of
ASoka’s edict is that ASoka thinks having this inscription put up across his
realm (in six locations, though interestingly not in Kalinga itself; Thapar
1961: 164) will be instrumental in causing the ‘forest tribes’ (atavi, ataviyo)
to be better behaved — a textological implication equivalent to that which is
made explicit in the Mahabharata.

2 There it is called the twelfth major rock edict.

--- PAGE 17 ---
6 Simon P. Brodbeck

Postcolonial text in ancient India. Kosambi takes the Mahabharata’s
‘snakes’ to be human. He infers that the context is one in which plough
agriculture was taking up increasingly more land;* practitioners of older
types of economy would be made into refugees.

The prime historical and social context of the document [i.e. the Mahabharata] can
only be change (in a comparatively restricted locality between the Punjab and the
Ganges) from food-gathering to food-production; the redaction of the epic merely
reflects the change.

Nagas were food-gathering aborigines ready to change over. ... the name must
indicate in a group many thinly scattered, linguistically and perhaps ethnically
diverse, primitive tribesmen who had a snake totem or snake worship among other
totems and worship. (Kosambi 1964: 36, 38; = Kosambi 2002: 357, 360-61)

The Mahabharata showcases changes in land use. It depicts good
ksatriyas stripping land of its wild beasts; prior inhabitants must be tamed
or perish. The burning of Khandava Forest by Arjuna and Krsna is mytho-
logised as an offering for Agni, but we naturally imagine a simpler
explanation: the Pandavas have been given the outlying region of
Khandavaprastha by their uncle Dhrtarastra, and they must make it work
for them, so they clear woodland by fire, kill what flees, then move in (Mbh
1.214-19).* Bhima Pandava, a man like an elephant, son of the Wind, wins
against a rdksasa in a fight of pulled-up trees (Mbh 1.151:12-20). And there
is economic growth; the Pandavas are soon famous on the high-class circuit
— hosting a rdjasiiya, no less (Mbh 2.142).

The operation at Khandava Forest is replicated on a smaller scale by
royal hunting expeditions, whereby dangerous beasts are killed in outlying
regions and spoils of the chase are distributed, domesticating the locals and
developing the land (Allsen 2006: 168-93, 197-201). Rama’s activities in
the Ramdyands Bdlakdénda and Aranyakénda can be similarly viewed:

‘The extension of agriculture has been a normal activity throughout the sub-continent

characterising Indian history in all periods’ (Thapar 1978: 23). On the question of land
use, see Lal 1986, Thapar 1997, and Rangarajan 2001 (the latter two discussing also the
symbology of forest and settlement).

ASoka’s fifth pillar edict says ‘Forests must not be burned in order to kill living things
or without any good reason’ (tr. Thapar 1961: 264); Bhisma permits forest-burning in
order to create pasture (Mbh 12.35:31).

--- PAGE 18 ---
Refuge and Reform 7

Rama goes to the wilds, kills demons, and is respected by those who
remain.

These texts exemplify and explain various ideological moves through
which subjects of development are more or less dehumanised, and the
expansionist activity of their overlords is presented as a birthright or as
manifest destiny (‘Kingship alone is legitimate and its absence can only re-
sult in anarchy’, Thapar 1978: 17). In the Indian story, one was reborn into
this life as a just desert for activities in previous lives, which could
theoretically legitimate any amount of discrimination and repression; and
the same idea would encourage self-policing among the population, lest
things get worse in the next life.

If the activity and ideology thus depicted were described as colonial,
then the Mahabharata would be a postcolonial text. We can read it as such,
even though the prevalent tendency is to use the word ‘colonial’ for activi-
ties prosecuted by Europeans in recent centuries.’ As the text presents it —
with clear disquiet over their methods — the next thing that happened to the
Pandavas, after they had risen to social prominence by bloody means, was
they lost Indraprastha and had to live homeless in the forests themselves for
many years. But Bhima carried on pulling up trees and killing raksasas
(3.154:47-5 1), and the Pandavas later returned, many years ago, and killed
many more people, and took over more or less properly; and Janamejaya
carried it on.

* Cf. Pollock 1993: 77: ‘A fundamental thing about orientalism is that it offers an
extreme and often transparent instance of knowledge generating and sustaining power
and the domination that defines it. How might we apply this insight of the orientalist
critique [i.e. Said 1978 etc.] to precolonial forms of domination? Pared to the bone,
orientalism is disclosed as a species of a larger discourse of power that divides the
world into “betters and lessers” and thus facilitates the domination (or “orientalization”
or “colonization”) of any group. From this perspective, indigenous discourses of power
— the various systematized and totalized constructions of inequality in traditional India
— might be viewed as a preform of orientalism. Raising such a possibility, at all events,
might encourage extending to premodern Indian cultures the problematics of power
and domination necessary to help us interpret their products.’ Pollock’s impressions of
his paper's likely audience notwithstanding, I am not sure how sound this extension
can be when the direction of application is so clear.

--- PAGE 19 ---
8 Simon P. Brodbeck

I will explore some of the explicit and implicit textual explorations of
the fall-out from such colonial or developmental activities. Overall the
impression given is that resistance is futile, and this means the issue is
addressed in ways we might not expect; but there are postcolonial voices
discernable.° By keeping in mind Kosambi’s notion of economic trans-
formation, and by focusing on identity types, we can read the human
consequences of such transformation, even where there is no sign of
victimhood as such.

Stories of Gleaners

Padmandbha the snake. At the end of the Moksadharmaparvan, Bhisma
tells Yudhisthira a story Narada once told Indra in heaven (Mbh 12.340-—
53; Brockington 2000: 81-2; Hiltebeitel 2001: 19-20; Smith 2009: 666-7;
Fitzgerald 2010: 102-7). A brahmin householder is bewildered by the plu-
rality of soteriological options, and voices his concerns to another brahmin,
his guest. The guest says he feels the same, and also says he has heard of a
good snake called Padmanabha (‘Lotus-Navel’), who lives in Naimisa, by
the River Gomati; he suggests his host go and find that snake, and ask him
for advice. Next day, when the guest leaves, the host says goodbye to his
people and goes off too, and travels to Naimisa. Another brahmin gives him
directions, and he finds Padmanabha’s house. Padmanabha is away pulling
the sun’s chariot, and his wife tells the visitor he will not be back for fifteen
days. So the brahmin waits, fasting, in riverside woods.

Padmanabha returns and is received by his lovely wife, who tells him
how good she’s been while he was away, and why.

pativratatvam bharyayah paramo dharma ucyate

tavopadesan nagendra tac ca tattvena vedmi vai || Mbh 12.347:10 ||
sadham dharmam vijananti dharmanitye tvayi sthite

satpatham katham utsrjya yasyami visame pathi |\ 11 ||

° Regarding the ‘post-’, it is notable that Hv 114 presents Janamejaya’s descendants as
living unidentified amongst weavers and brahmins, apparently having lost their
kingdom.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Refuge and Reform 9

It is said that the paramount duty of wives is to be avowed to the husband; and I
know that truly, O chief of the ndgas, because you've taught it to me. Since I’m
dedicated to you who are constant in your duty, I am one who understands duty; so
how could I discard the true path and travel the bad path? (Mbh 12.347:10-11)

She then says there is a brahmin waiting for him. Padmanabha is surprised;
but his wife tells him to go and see him. Padmanabha says:

abhimanena mano me jatidosena vai mahan |

rosah samkalpajah sadhvi dagdho vacagnina tvaya || Mbh 12.348:13 ||
na ca rosad aham sadhvi pasyeyam adhikam tamah |
yasya vaktavyatam yanti visesena bhujamgamah \\ 14 |
dosasya hi vasam gatva daSagrivah pratapavan

tathd Sakrapratispardhi hato ramena samyuge || 15 ||
antahpuragatam vatsam Srutva ramena nirhrtam |
dharsanad rosasamvignah kartaviryasuta hatah \\ 16 ||
jdmadagnyena raémena sahasranayanopamah |
samyuge nihato rosat kartaviryo mahabalah || 17 |

tad esa tapasdm Satruh Sreyasas ca nipdtanah |
nigrhito maya rosah Srutvaiva vacanam tava || 18 ||
Gtmanam ca viSesena prasamsamy anapayini |

yasya me tvam visalaksi bharya sarvagunanvitd || 19 |
esa tatraiva gacchami yatra tisthaty asau dvijah |
sarvatha coktavan vakyam nakrtarthah prayasyati \\ 20 |

Due to the vice of arrogance that resulted from the station of my birth, my
pride was plentiful; but my wilful anger has been burned by the fire of your words,
good woman. And I don’t see any dullness worse than anger, good woman. Snakes
got a bad reputation through their characteristic anger.

The brilliant ten-necked [Ravana] was overpowered by this vice, and so
competed with Sakra; and he was killed in battle by Rama. Hearing that a
youngster had been abducted from the inner chambers by Rama [Jamadagnya], the
sons of Kartavirya were moved to anger; and because of their offensive, they were
killed. Powerful Kartavirya, who was like the thousand-eyed [Indra], was struck
down in battle by Rama Jamadagnya because of anger.

Having heard you talk, I have checked anger, this enemy of austerity and ruin
of good fortune. And I extol myself in particular for having you as my all-virtuous
wife, O constant long-eyed lady. I will go to where this twiceborn is staying; and

--- PAGE 21 ---
10 Simon P. Brodbeck

when he’s spoken, he won’t leave with his purpose unfulfilled — he’ll get everything
he asks for. (Mbh 12.348:13-20)’

Padmanabha finds the brahmin, and the two introduce themselves. The
brahmin is called Dharmaranya. Padmanabha makes sure Dharmaranya
introduces himself first. Before asking the question he has come to ask,
Dharmaranya asks what Padmanabha has seen on his trip away. Padma-
nabha extols the sun, and says he has seen a blazing figure approach, be
received by, and merge into the sun; and that the figure was a person
purified by performing the wiicha vow (this was revealed by the sun
himself, in answer to Padmanabha’s question; see below). Dharmaranya
says that thanks to Padmanabha’s words, even before asking the question he
has come to ask, he has had it answered: he knows he must undertake the
uficha vow. And he takes his leave from Padmanabha and goes to find
Cyavana Bhargava, who initiates him into the u/icha vow.

The story is known because Cyavana told it to Janaka, who told it to
Narada. It is told to Janamejaya’s great-great-uncle Yudhisthira, so the
narrated events must have taken place long before Janamejaya’s snake
massacre. But Padmanabha’s comments about snakes seem to match the
situation after the snake massacre. Why not? Despite the fictional setting,
the story is told by Ugrasravas the sia, after the snake sacrifice.

Padmanabha says that because he was born a snake, he has a tendency
to anger; he decries anger, and illustrates, through stories of others, how
getting angry leads to one’s downfall; he says the natural anger of snakes
has led to them being despised, but that he himself has prospered by re-
straining his anger, thanks to his dutiful wife. We shall return to the dutiful
wife, and to Jamadagnya and Kartavirya. But what is the uficha vow?

Compare and contrast Padmanabha and his wife with Yudhisthira and his on the
occasion of their debate in the Aranyakaparvan. In Mbh 3.30, Yudhisthira, powerless
and deposed, extols the virtues of forbearance and the suppression of anger in similar
terms to Padmanabha; but he is a royal ksatriya, and Draupadi suggests he is privi-
leging a set of dharmas that is inappropriate for him (Malinar 2007).

--- PAGE 22 ---
Refuge and Reform ll

The uiicha vow. The uficha practitioner who merged into the sun is de-
scribed by the sun:

esa miilaphalaharah Sirnaparnasanas tatha |

abbhakso vayubhaksas ca asid viprah samahitah \| Mbh 12.351:2 ||
reas canena viprena samhitantar abhistutah |
svargadvarakrtodyogo yendsau tridivam gatah \\ 3 ||

asannadhir anakanksi nityam uichasilasanah |

sarvabhiitahite yukta esa vipro bhujamgama || 4 ||

This fellow gathered roots and fruits, and ate fallen leaves too; he was a steadfast
seer, drinking water and eating wind. And verses from within the collections were
recited by this seer, by means of which he has gone to the third heaven; his efforts
built him a door to heaven. This seer, who was cheerful in mind, without
expectations, and whose food was always gleaned or gathered, was harnessed to
the welfare of all creatures, O snake. (Mbh 12.351:2-4)

Key here is the livelihood of gleaning, which goes with humility,
landlessness, lack of material ambition, and yet also with the dutiful and
generous fulfilment of one’s role as householder and host. Gleaning is
mentioned in the Ramayana, as a livelihood anticipated for Rama while he
is in exile (2.21:2), and as the livelihood of a poor brahmin whom Rama
rewards with the gift of cattle (2.29:23; cf. Mbh 12.192:94). In the
Mahabharata, in addition to the stories of Padmanabha (12.340—-53),
Mudgala (3.246-7), Satya (12.264), and the story told by the mongoose
(14.92-3; for these latter stories, see below), gleaners are mentioned
occasionally in passing: Yayati, after retiring from kingship, lived as a
gleaner (1.81:13; cf. Manusmrti 7:33); Bhrgu says good gleaners go to
heaven (12.184:18; cf. 12.235:22-3; 14.94:30-31); and at 13.27 a gleaner’s
guest describes the glories of the Ganga. At Mbh 13.129:35-55 Siva dis-
courses on the topic of rsidharma and distinguishes different types of glea-
ning rsis: froth-drinking Phenapas, thumb-sized Valakhilyas who dress in
bark and hides and glean like birds, Cakracaras who live on moonbeams,
Sampraksalas who store no food from day to day, ASmakuttas who break
grain with rocks, Dantoltikhalins who break grain with their teeth, and
Usmapas nourished by flames or steam (cf. Hiltebeitel 2011: 609-13;
Baudhayana Dharmasiitra 3.1-2; Manusmrti 4:2-12).

--- PAGE 23 ---
12 Simon P. Brodbeck

Fitzgerald’s discussion of the Mahdbhdrata’s gleaners presents the
gleaner as ‘a brahmin family man ... who is heroic because he voluntarily
embraces poverty and suffering rather than compromise his brahmin
svadharma when he cannot earn a living as a proper brahmin’ (Fitzgerald
2010: 92-3; cf. Fitzgerald 2006: 275). This view follows Manusmrti 10:101
and 112; it implies that gleaning would be a response to brahmin
unemployment, and thus implicitly a symptom of bad kingship; and it is
consonant with Fitzgerald’s recent general approach — the Mahabharata as
we have it being a response to ‘the fact that the Vedic “golden age” [of
funding for brahmins] was never to return’ (Fitzgerald 2010: 94 n. 18; cf.
Fitzgerald 2006: 269-84). My interpretation resembles Fitzgerald's in that it
treats the (textually constructed) phenomenon of gleaning in its (textually
constructed) economic context, and as a response to a changing cultural
situation. But Fitzgerald seems to reify and backdate the category of
“‘brahmin’ (many Sanskrit texts do the same; cf. Hiltebeitel 2001: 19, ‘the
Mahabharata was written by “out of sorts” Brahmans who may have had
some minor kings or merchant's patronage, but, probably for personal
reasons, show a deep appreciation of, and indeed exalt, Brahmans who
practice the “way of gleaning”). The brahmin category is under con-
struction (Brodbeck 2009c: 138-43); gleaners, qua gleaners, are cate-
gorisable as brahmins, but might not have been had they had a different
livelihood. Whatever established brahmins there might already be, the label
is open to the opportune, and presumably always was.

The story of Mudgala. Vyasa tells the story of Mudgala in the
Aranyakaparvan, while the Pandavas are living in the woods (Mbh 3.246-7;
Hiltebeitel 2001: 54; Fitzgerald 2010: 101-2). Mudgala lived in Kuruksetra
with his wife and sons, living like a pigeon, gleaning grains of rice, but he
was able to feed the gods and all his guests. It seems he went off on a
fortnight-long gleaning expedition once a month, and held open house for
the other fortnight, especially at its beginning and end. This is called the
istikrta satra (3.246:4-8; cf. 3.129:1). Mudgala fed even the brahmin
Durvasas, who started coming every month, naked, abusive, shaven-

--- PAGE 24 ---
Refuge and Reform 13

headed, and emptying his cupboards every time.* For six months Mudgala
was unperturbed (the power of his generosity is said to have multiplied his
gifts, 3.246:9-10), and just went out gleaning again. Durvasas declared that
Mudgala was so perfected he would go to heaven in his own body; and the
envoy of the gods came, and invited Mudgala aboard a celestial chariot.
Mudgala asked the envoy where he would take him, and the envoy de-
scribed various heavens, and said the one awaiting Mudgala is very lofty,
but that heavens are impermanent.’ Mudgala refused to mount.

ity uktva sa munir vakyam devadiitam visrjya tam
Silofichavrttim utsrjya Samam atisthad uttamam || Mbh 3.247:41 ||

8 Elsewhere in the Mahabharata Durvasas, who is said to be a form of Siva (13.17:61;
13.145), is famous for his time staying with Kuntibhoja and family (1.104:5; 1.113:33;
1.114:2; 5.142:19; 15.38:2), and for his time staying with Krsna and Rukmini (7.10:9;
13.143-5; 16.5:17; Dange 2001, cover picture). On both occasions he was an exacting,
eccentric, but eventually boon-giving guest, interested most particularly in the sub-
ordination of female family members. At Mbh 3.80:81 he is commemorated for having
given a boon to Visnu, which would presumably refer to his stay at Krsna’s place. See
also Mbh l.app118 (Durvasas as a ritual officiant); 2.7:10 (Durvasas is in Indra’s
sabha); 3.83:104 (Durvasas is waiting to go on tirthaydtra with Yudhisthira); 3.app25
(Duryodhana arranges for Durvasas to visit the Pandavas in exile, hoping that he will
curse them, but the plan fails); 13.27:6 (Durvasas is there while Bhisma teaches
Yudhisthira — and so also, presumably, when Krsna takes over the narration and tells
the story of Durvasas’s visit at 13.143-5, including his prediction of Krsna’s weak spot,
which Krsna later recalls at 16.5:17 shortly before dying); Hv app29E:136-43
(Durvasas cursed Bhanumati); Hv app31:2098-614 (Durvasas cursed Hamsa and
Dibhaka). For studies of Durvasas and Kunti, see Scheuer 1982: 56-64;
Bandyopadhyay 2007 (arguing that Durvasas was Karna’s biological father; cf. Dange
2001: 93-4); Mehendale 2008 (arguing that he was not); more generally, see Dange
2001: 229-39. In Kalidasa’s Abhijiianasakuntalam Durvasas’s curse is the cause of
Sakuntala’s humiliation (Johnson 2001: 43-5). In the Ramayana Durvasas predicts
Rama’s separation from Sita (7.49-50), and is a proximate cause of Laksmana’s
banishment and death (7.95—6; Rama is in a private room with Kala, the death penalty
having been agreed for any who would disturb them, and Durvasas comes and insists
that Laksmana report his arrival to Rama immediately); he also appears with other rsis
in the story of Ila (Ram 7.81:5), and when Valmiki testifies to Sita’s purity (7.87:2).
Fitzgerald (2010: 101-8) discusses the discrepancy between this presentation of the
uficha practitioner’s destiny and that of the Padmanabha story, in which the uficha
practitioner enters the sun, which would imply moksa (Brhaddaranyaka Upanisad
6.2:15-16; Chandogya Upanisad 5.10:1-6).

--- PAGE 25 ---
14 Simon P. Brodbeck

tulyanindastutir bhiitva samalostasmakdiicanah |
jiianayogena Suddhena dhyananityo babhiiva ha || 42 ||
dhydnayogad balam labdhva prapya carddhim anuttamam
jagdma sasvatim siddhim param nirvanalaksanam | 43 ||
tasmat tvam api kaunteya na Sokam kartum arhasi |

Having thus spoken the hermit dismissed the Envoy of the Gods. He gave up his
life of gleaning and took to complete serenity. He became indifferent to praise and
blame; a piece of clay, a rock, and gold were all the same to him; and he was
forever immersed in meditation with the pure yoke of insight. Through the yoke of
meditation he gained strength, and having acquired an incomparable fortune he
attained to the eternal and supreme perfection that is marked by Extinction
[nirvana].

Therefore, son of Kunti, you too must not harbor grief ... (Mbh 3.247:41-44b,
tr. van Buitenen 1975: 705)

Mudgala was perhaps unlucky to be visited by Durvasas. His hospitable
livelihood was being made hard for him. Was the offer of heaven the offer
of a good job in a new regime? Mudgala refused, choosing not to sell out,
(then) voluntarily went under. In tandem on another level, there is the
soteriological aspect; rejecting pravrtti, he was the last candle before
nirvana of a karmic flame-chain, ie. moksa, and songs can be made about
it.

The uficha vow could be what Padmanabha was away doing when
Dharmaranya arrived. Dharmaranya was hungry only for knowledge, and
(arriving in the wrong fortnight?) was not hosted by the family. If
Padmanabha is a gleaner, he is the only one said to be a snake — a reformed
snake, anger subdued.

The story told by the mongoose. After the Kuruksetra war, Yudhisthira,
like Asoka, feels the sorrow of his slaughter (Sutton 1997; Fitzgerald 2004:
100-142; cf. Selvanayagam 1992). His position is also precarious; his
nominal victory has come by unpopular means. Duryodhana makes last
words for Samjaya the herald, and for the surviving troops, and his parents,
and his friends, and the gossips (vatikams cabravid, 9.63:30; cf. vartikams,
‘messengers’, Meiland 2007: 386-7), saying that the Pandavas did wrong.
All our narrators agree that they committed war-crimes. Effectively there is
a fine paid in many ways, one of which is that Yudhisthira has to do an

--- PAGE 26 ---
Refuge and Reform 15

inordinately munificent asvamedha (Mbh 12.8-16, 34-6; 14.2-13, 61, 70-
91), at the end of which, when the gifts are being distributed, he is publicly
badmouthed by a mongoose (Mbh 14.92-3; Reich 2001; Hiltebeitel 2001:
78-9; Fitzgerald 2010: 98-101; Hegarty 2012: 7-13).

The mongoose ridicules Yudhisthira’s bloody rite, and says his grandiose
gifts do not match those made by a certain gleaner who used to live in
Kuruksetra — a practitioner of the uficha vow — and his family. This poor but
generous householder was visited, in a time of famine, by a greedy
brahmin. He gave his own miserable portion of barley-meal to his guest,
and then each member of his family surrendered theirs in turn — his loving
wife, his good son, and his dutiful daughter-in-law (cf. Mbh 1145-7). The
visiting brahmin was revealed to be Dharma in person; he declared himself
well satisfied (in this story the revealed identity stands in for the envoy of
the gods), and produced a celestial chariot, and the family got in and went
to heaven.

We see the virtues and possible rewards of remaining hospitable under
grinding poverty. In place of Durvasas, there is hidden Dharma. But
perhaps by riding the chariot this family have just starved to death (Dharma
as Yama); there are no lurid descriptions to tempt them as there are for
Mudgala. Then the mongoose’s intervention would be to remind
Yudhisthira that there are folk starving in his realm. The following chapters
(Reich 2001: 155-69) contain a two-part charter for ahimsd and vegeta-
rianism (14.94, the story of Vasu’s arbitration and condemnation,’ and
14.95, the story of Agastya’s victory over Indra on this issue), and then a
karmic deconstruction of the mongoose’s intervention (as required to free
him, ie. Anger, from a curse; 14.96). The detail of the mongoose’s real
identity serves, amongst other things, to underline the thematic link to the
story of Padmanabha.

The stories of Satya and Trijata. Gleaners are vegetarian — the sun’s
description of the w/icha practitioner mentions fruits and roots, and other

0 There are other versions of this story at Mbh 12.324, 13.6:34, and 13.116:54-5.
VaiSampayana’s commentary on the 14.94 version specifies that food offered in sacri-
fices and/or as gifts must have been lawfully obtained (14.94:23-33); thus, whether or
not one shares Vasu's (false) opinion that animal offerings are legitimate, poaching,
rustling, and scrumping are clearly forbidden. On Vasu, cf. now Baltutis 2011.

--- PAGE 27 ---
16 Simon P. Brodbeck

descriptions mention grain and the pigeon. The vegetarianism of gleaners is
stressed by the story of Satya (Mbh 12.264; Ganguli 1993: sec. 12.272;
Hiltebeitel 2001: 20 n. 78). Satya, gleaner, lives in the forest with his wife.
He is a bit kinky; he makes her dress up in peacock feathers. A talking deer
comes and asks to be eaten, and when Satya hesitates, it describes the
glorious heaven that awaits Satya if he eats it. Satya gives in and agrees to
eat the deer, but it reveals itself to be Dharma; it scolds Satya for his lapse,
and sets him back on his previous diet, vegetarianism reinforced.

If wilderness is being transformed, then where there once were fruits
and roots in season, there might only be stubble-fields and loose grains. Or
perhaps pasture-land, with the possibility of some milk. Samika lives on the
milk-froth that leaks from the mouths of suckling calves (Mbh 1.36:15),
and in the Mahabharata there is respect for this livelihood — that of the
Phenapa rsis,'! marked by the verb wich at 13.129:37.

Honest gleaners can be rewarded by the gift of cattle (Ram 2.29:23;
Mbh 12.192:94). This presumably does not happen to gleaners who eat
deer. In the Ramayana episode the gleaner seems keen for another liveli-
hood, and Rama plays with him:

tatrasit pirigalo gargyas trijato nama vai dvijah |
G paitcamayah kaksyaya nainam kascid avarayat || Ram 2.29:22 ||
sa rajaputram asadya trijato vakyam abravit |
nirdhano bahuputro smi rajaputra mahayaSah
ufchavrttir vane nityam pratyaveksasva maim iti \| 23 ||
tam uvaca tato ramah parihasasamanvitam |
gavam sahasram apy ekam na tu vi$rdnitam maya |
ipasi dandena yavat tavad avapsyasi || 24 ||
am sambhrantah parivestya tam |
avidhya dandam ciksepa sarvapranena vegitah \\ 25 |
uvdca ca tato ramas tam gargyam abhisantvayan
manyur na khalu kartavyah parihaso hy ayam mama \| 26 ||

tatah sabhdaryas trijato mahdmunir

gavam anikam pratigrhya moditah
yasobalapritisukhopabrmhinis

tad Gsisah pratyavadan mahatmanah || 27 \\

"' Mbh 1.3:48-50; 2.8:27; 5.100:5-6; 12.325:4; 12.336:14; 13.14:39; 13.76:19-26;
13.128:10-12; 13.129:36-8; Brodbeck 2009: 225.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Refuge and Reform 17

There came a sallow brahman then, by the name of Trijata Gargya, all the way up
to the fifth courtyard without anyone stopping him. Reaching the prince, Trijata
said, ‘Glorious prince, I am penniless and have many children. I must live by
constant gleaning in the forest. Have regard for me.’ Rama replied to him jokingly,
‘There are one thousand cows I have not yet allocated. You shall have as many as
you can cover by hurling your staff.’ In a frantic rush he girded up the rag around
his loins and, brandishing his staff impetuously, he hurled it with every ounce of
his strength. Rama then said to Gargya, seeking to placate him, ‘You must not be
angry, truly. This was only a joke on my part.’ Then the great sage Trijata along
with his wife accepted the herd of cows and pronounced blessings on the great
prince conducive to fame, strength, joy and happiness. (Ram 2.29:22-7, tr. Pollock
2008: 163-5)'*

In conjunction with the story of Satya, this shows that if circumstances
permit, uficha may be abandoned in favour of pastoralism, but not in favour
of hunting.

Nisddas and Dasyus

Ekalavya and the nisadas. Raksasas are monstrous and flesh-eating;
ksatriyas, who have a monopoly on human violence, tame them. Gitomer
discusses Bhima Pandava’s rdksasa affinities; ‘Bhima’s entering into
raksasa-hood is somehow able to transform bad raksasas into good
raksasas’ (Gitomer 1991: 305; cf. Sengupta and Purkayastha 2011: 155-7).
Ksatriyas also tame and receive tribute from lesser ksatriyas; and they also
tame nisddas, as Arjuna and Drona tamed Ekalavya (Mbh 1.123).

Nisddas are small, dark, dirty, wear deerskins, and live in the wilds, by
hunting or fishing. Some are cannibals (nisaddan purusddaéms, Mbh
2.28:44).° Their lives are expendable (as at the burning of the lacquered
house, Mbh 1.136-7). They originate from an eponymous ancestor Nisada.
The rsis who speak brahman killed bad king Vena, churned Nisada from
the ‘right thigh’ of his corpse (Mbh 12.59:99-103), and told Nisada to ‘stay

12 T have adjusted quotations from the Clay Sanskrit Library volumes, adding diacritics

for the names.

On nisddas in general and Ekalavya in particular, see Parasher 1991: 197-202;
Shankar 1994; Goldman 1996: 7-12; Leslie 1998: 459-60; Leslie 2003: 27-47, 182-3;
Brodbeck 2006, 2009c; Brodbeck 2009: 230-31, 261.

--- PAGE 29 ---
18 Simon P. Brodbeck

down’ (nisida, 12.59:102, tr. Fitzgerald 2004: 309). Nisada’s younger
brother was the paradigmatic good king Prthu, churned from Vena’s right
hand (Mbh 12.59:104-31; Fitzgerald 2004: 130-35; cf. Hv 5:14-21). The
friction between nisddas and royal business is clear; but there is also depen-
dence, since if the nisddas and their ilk did not need to be kept down, what
protective function would the good king exercise?

A young nisdda, Ekalavya son of Hiranyadhanus (“Goldenbow’), comes

to Drona’s school, at which Pandavas, Kauravas, and others are learning
martial arts. Drona rejects Ekalavya because he is a nisdda. Ekalavya goes
back into the woods, and using a model of Drona as his teacher he practises
archery alone. He gets incredibly good, and Arjuna finds out, and tells
Drona, and Drona comes and demands a tuition fee from Ekalavya, and
Ekalavya promises to pay it, and Drona asks for Ekalavya’s thumb, and
Ekalavya severs and gives it. So Ekalavya is nullified, and Arjuna is the
best archer in the world.
Ekalavya’s promise to pay Drona’s fee is like the promise made by the
surviving snakes, to be harmless; it is like Padmanabha’s renunciation of
anger. Diplomatic tactics are used against Ekalavya, and he unilaterally
decommissions his weapons. Satya would presumably have become a
nisdda had he started eating deer; and Ekalavya, now that he cannot shoot,
may have to be a gleaner.

Kdapavya and Guha. Kapavya (Mbh 12.133; Bowles 2007: 23440, cf.
226-9) was the son of a ksatriya man and a nisadda woman. An expert
hunter and gatherer,'* he lived the nisdda life in the forest, and dutifully fed
and honoured his parents as they aged, and fed the brahmins and their
visitors. He was elected by the dasyus — rogues, bandits — to be their chief.
That he was ‘elected’ (root abhi-vr, 12.133:10) is interesting given the
political usages of the label ‘non-democratic’ in recent times, often to
legitimate interventions safeguarding economic interests. Kapavya made
the dasyus agree to a certain code of behaviour.

The verb wich is not used, but Kapavya has ‘honey and meat, and roots and fruits, and

various other foods high and low’ (madhumamsair miilaphalair annair uccavacair api |
Mbh 12.133:7, tr. Fitzgerald 2004: 509).

--- PAGE 30 ---
Refuge and Reform

kapavya uvaca |

mai vadhis tvam striyam bhirum ma sisum md tapasvinam |
nayudhyamdno hantavyo na ca grahya balat striyah \| Mbh 12.133:13 ||
sarvathd stri na hantavyé sarvasattvesu yudhyatd |

nityam gobrahmane svasti yoddhavyam ca tadarthatah | 14 ||
sasyam ca ndpahantavyam siravighnam ca ma krthah |
piijyante yatra devas ca pitaro tithayas tatha || 15 ||
sarvabhiitesv api ca vai brahmano moksam arhati |

karyd capacitis tesam sarvasvenapi ya bhavet | 16 ||

yasya hy ete samprarusta mantrayanti parabhavam |

) lokesu trata bhavati kascana |\ 17 ||

yo brahmanan paribhaved vindsam vapi rocayet |

stiryodaya ivavasyam dhruvam tasya parabhavah || 18 ||
ihaiva phalam asinah pratyakanksati Saktitah |

ye ye no na pradasyanti tams tan sendbhiyasyati || 19 \\
Sistyartham vihito dando na vadhartham viniscayah |

ye ca Sistan prabadhante dharmas tesam vadhah smrtah \ 20 ||
ye hi rastroparodhena vrttim kurvanti kecana |

tad eva te ‘nu miyante kunapam krmayo yathd \\ 21 |\

ye punar dharmasastrena varterann iha dasyavah |

api te dasyavo bhiitva ksipram siddhim avapnuyuh || 22 \|

bhisma uvaca |
tat sarvam upacakrus te kapavyasyanusasanam
vrttim ca lebhire sarve papebhyas capy updraman \\ 23 ||

Kapavya said:

You ought not slay a woman, nor one who is cowering, nor a child, nor an ascetic.
A noncombatant man should not be slain, and women should not be taken by force.
Under no circumstances should the female of any kind of being be slain by a
warrior. Everything must be good for cows and brahmins; one should make war
for their sake. But grain should not be trampled down, nor should anyone erect any
obstacles to the plowing of the fields, nor where the Gods are paid honor, or the
ancestors, or guests.

Of all beings, a brahmin deserves to be let go free. And any recompense that is
to be made to them should be made, even if it is the whole of one’s property. In all
the three worlds there is no one who will save the man whose ruin they intone
when they are furiously enraged. He who insults brahmins or approves their
extinction will be ruined as surely as the sun will rise.

He who lives here looks to the benefits of doing so. Our army will attack any
who will not remit to us as they are able.

--- PAGE 31 ---
20 Simon P. Brodbeck

The rod of punishment has been ordained for the purpose of education, not for
the sake of inflicting corporal punishment — that is the settled conclusion. Corporal
punishment is taught by tradition to be Lawful for [use against] those who harm
educated people.

There are some who make their living by damaging the country; for that
reason, they are likened to worms upon a corpse. On the other hand, those bar-
barians [dasyus}'* who would live in this world in accordance with the Learned
Traditions of Law attain perfection directly, even though they are barbarians."

Bhisma said:
They paid homage to Kapavya’s entire instruction, and they all took up that way of
life and quit their evil ways. (Mbh 12.133:13-23, tr. Fitzgerald 2004: 509-10)

The tenor of some of Kapavya’s speech is redolent of Asoka’s thirteenth
major rock edict. The emphasis on not obstructing agriculture is notable. So
is the institutionalisation of brahmin privileges. This last is sometimes
taken as evidence of the self-interest of an established authorial class; but it
might be seen in connection with the assumption of brahmin identity by
some peaceable inhabitants of newly developed land — and we can imagine
some antipathy towards those seen to be collaborating with the new
regime.”

This passage describes the regulation of non-brahmin behaviours, such
that dasyus may facilitate royal revenue without disrupting development. A
similar scenario is evident in the Ramdyana in relations between the house
of Ayodhya and Guha, the ‘overlord’ of the nisddas (nisddadhipati, tr.
Pollock 2008: 233 etc.), who lives in an outlying realm, by the Ganga. Guha
is ‘accompanied by his aged ministers’ (vrddhaih parivrto ’mdtyair, Ram
2.44:10) and ‘prepared to withstand even a vast army of four divisions’
(caturanigam hy api balam sumahat prasahemahi || 2.45:7; cf. 2.80:8), but he

15 For discussion of the translation of dasyu as ‘barbarian’, see Hiltebeitel 2005: 248 n.

25. On the more general issue, cf. Hiltebeitel in that note: ‘The major trait of dasyus
that interests the Apaddharma is that, although they can be wild and unruly, especially
in their forests, they can be managed once a king recognizes that their wildness and
unruliness can be of service if they run what are essentially protection rackets.’

Ihave rejigged Fitzgerald's translation of verse 22, to correct what looks like an edi-
torial syntax error.

Cf. Sengupta and Purkayastha 2011: 156: ‘the munificence of the king towards the
brahmanas is actually also an investment whereby the state expands into areas with no
clearly defined or organised state authority’.

--- PAGE 32 ---
Refuge and Reform 21

tells Rama that ‘This land, no less than Ayodhya, belongs to you
(yathayodhyad tathedam te, 2.44:12); ‘We are servants, you the master.
Come, our kingdom is yours to rule’ (vayam presya bhavan bharta sadhu
rajyam prasadhi nah || 2.44:14; trs Pollock 2008: 233-5). Guha affectiona-
tely renders assistance as requested by Rama and, later, by Bharata (Ram
2.78-83). He seems to be a client king within an Ayodhya empire —
someone whose local power Rama wants to prolong (at 2.46:59 Rama gives
him advice on how to retain it), but whose subordination must also be
underlined.'* Guha tells Bharata that he offered Rama a variety of
foodstuffs,

tat sarvam pratyanujiastd ramah satyaparakramah

na hi tat pratyagrhndt sa ksatradharmam anusmaran \| Ram 2.81:15 ||
na hy asmabhih pratigrahyam sakhe deyam tu sarvada

iti tena vayam rdjann anunité mahatmana || 16 ||

But the truthful Rama refused it all. He heeded the code of ksatriya and would not
accept it. ‘It is not for us to take, my friend. Ours is always to give’ were the words
with which great Rama entreated us, your majesty. (Ram 2.81:15-16, tr. Pollock
2008: 411)

The relationship between Ayodhya and Guha is presented here as a fait
accompli, but elsewhere — not least in the battle for Lanka — we see the
diplomatic and military negotiations that might have been required in order
to set it up.

Two Curses, and the Good Wife

Arjuna curses ASvasena. When Arjuna and Krsna feed Khandava Forest to
Agni, one of the creatures they terrorise and kill is the wife of Taksaka the
snake (cf. Kapavya’s ‘Under no circumstances should the female of any

‘8 Cf. Trautmann 1981: 429: ‘the course of ancient Indian history shows that the
competitive advantage lay with the hereditary monarchies and against the once
numerous samghas, which were gradually absorbed by the more expansionist king-
doms or (sometimes under conditions of conquest by imperial states) internally trans-
formed into their like’.

--- PAGE 33 ---
22 Simon P. Brodbeck

kind of being be slain by a warrior’). Taksaka is away in Kuruksetra at the
time, but his snake wife is in Khandava Forest with their son ASvasena.
Mother and son are trapped; and the mother responds by trying to swallow
the son. Just then, Arjuna shoots her head off with an arrow; and Indra
(who opposes the massacre) intervenes to distract Arjuna, and Asvasena
escapes. Arjuna curses ASvasena as he escapes, and then starts fighting (his
own father) Indra. Arjuna’s curse:

Sasapa tam ca samkruddho bibhatsur jihmagaminam |
pavako vasudevas ca apratistho bhaved iti || Mbh 1.218:11 ||

Wrathfully, the Terrifier cursed the Snake — and so did the Fire and Vasudeva:
‘Thou shalt never find shelter!’. (Mbh 1.218:11, tr. van Buitenen 1973: 419)

Minkowski has noted that this scene sets up an ongoing family feud
(Minkowski 1991: 397). In the Kuruksetra war, ASvasena tries to get his
own back on Arjuna, fails, and is killed; and years after that, Arjuna’s
grandson Pariksit commits a diplomatic faux-pas, and gets cursed by Srigin
and killed by snakebite — the bite of ASvasena’s father Taksaka. And
Janamejaya begins his snake massacre in order to avenge his own father,
Pariksit.

Valmiki curses the nisada. Compare the curse that Arjuna casts with the
one Valmiki casts at the beginning of the Ramayana — the curse which was
allegedly the first verse in the sloka metre of which these texts are mainly
composed. Valmiki sees two cranes mating, but a passing nisdda kills the
male, and the female weeps, and Valmiki, moved, curses the nisada:

md nisdda pratistham tvam agamah sasvatih samah |
yat krauiicamithundd ekam avadhih kamamohitam || Ram 1.2:14 ||

May you find no peace, Nisada, for all eternity — because you killed the male of
this loving kraujica pair when he was intoxicated by desire! (Ram 1.2:14, tr. Leslie
1998: 460)

Valmiki’s curse upon the nisdda is variously translated: ‘you shall not
live for very long’ (Goldman 2005: 47); ‘mayest thou seek in vain for a

--- PAGE 34 ---
Refuge and Reform 23

resting place forever’ (Shastri 1962: 10; cf. Hara 1972: 121); ‘Never more
shall you come home’ (Hammer 2009: 197). Arjuna’s curse upon ASvasena
is practically identical: apratistho bhaved. The cursed one is to be deprived
of pratisthd — foundation, support, or home. This fits the analogy between
snakes and nisddas; and if we read ASgvasena and this nisGda as
representatives of their type, it fits the situation wherein hunter-gatherers
are finding their economy increasingly unsustainable.

Lineal tensions in sexual reproduction. Consider the violent acts
immediately preceding these curses. In one case the perpetrator of the
violent act is also the pronouncer of the curse; in the other case the curse is
cast upon the perpetrator of the violent act. In both cases an arrow is fired,
and it kills. I understand these arrows in lineal terms.'? In the Mahabharata,
Arjuna’s arrow kills the snake-mother as she is trying to encompass her son.
In the Ramayana, the nisdda’s arrow kills the male crane.

Consider the royal lineal ideal, as we see it in Sanskrit texts. In each
generation the king dies, and there is a new king: the son of the last king.
This ideal, and most especially the difficulties that then attend the plurality
of sons, is explored in the Mahabharata and Ramayana; not just for kings, it
can apply to any business of the type ‘so-and-so and sons’ — minimally, the
possession of a surname (‘the hereditary principle pervades the political
system, not just the kingship’, Trautmann 1981: 425; cf. Brodbeck 2011:
93-4). The ideal is patrilineal and patrilocal. Girls are given away in
marriage, by their natal family, to their husband’s family; they then have
sons under his family name. This is the kind of family that the gleaner has
in the story told by the mongoose: his household consists of him, his wife,
their son, and his wife. Any daughters would be living elsewhere, with their
husbands’ families. The families of Padmanabha, Mudgala, and Satya would
by implication be the same kind of family, where wives are relative new-
comers, and marital relations are to provide the local son.

The similar Mahabharata scene, where Pandu kills the male of what looks like a

mating pair of deer, plays with the same theme (Mbh 1.109, etc.; Brodbeck 2009: 171-
6), though the character array is different in each of the three cases. In the Pandu story
the male deer’ plays a symbolic role comparable to that played by the nisdda in the
Ramayana story, and the patrilineal king is cursed by the wild man.

--- PAGE 35 ---
24

At the other extreme a mirrored

Simon P. Brodbeck

lineal paradigm can be sketched,

whereby women are not given away, and men come along, inseminate them,
and either stay or leave. In this paradigm, if a king were to rule the same

realm as his biologically connected pri

edecessor, he would perhaps be the

son of that predecessor's co-uterine sister (cf. Vielle 2012, Fig. 2). But it is

not clear that the same notion of ‘b
paradigm.

Neither or both of these two paradi;
ways of thinking about sexual reproduc
one the same sex as ourselves, one no
But the patrilineal paradigm is obviou
texts and elsewhere, it is explored in
would identify and be identified with tl
their mother’s. Thus Kapavya would be

eing king’ would apply under this

gms are instantiated; they are crude
tion. We generally have two parents,
t, and we have brothers and sisters.
s in regal discourse; in old Sanskrit
some detail. In this paradigm sons
heir father’s people rather than with
more of a ksatriya than a nisada.

Consider the two arrow scenes emblematically. In one case a (snake)

mother is killed and fails to keep her sot
killed but the mother is left alive. Two
or rather, one is at play with the other.

mn, and in the other a (crane) father is
lineal paradigms are in play here —
[he royal model, wishing for sons in

each generation, would be inconvenienced were daughters-in-law to keep
their sons in their own natal houses. That is what Yayati’s wife Devayant
seems to have done; she left her husband and went back to her father (Mbh
1.78:22-36; interestingly, she was from a brahmin family). In the curse

scenes under discussion, Arjuna, the
appropriate her son; and Valmiki, the
the father. Thus although in one scene

hero, kills the mother who tries to
author, curses the nisada who kills
the killer is the ‘goodie’ and in the

other the killer is the ‘baddie’, both scenes can represent the condemnation

of the matrilineal paradigm, because

case.” The snake is parallel to the nis

a different parent is killed in each
ida, both are associated with lineal

aberrancy, and the sorrow of the surviving female crane provides a ventri-
loquised rubber-stamp for the patrilineal judgement.

The matrilineal paradigm is a shadow. It is too natural, visible only as it
is rubbed out. It is the feared snakebite that can kill a patriline, as Sragin’s
curse and Taksaka’s bite killed Pariksit and threatened to kill Janamejaya’s

20

such that it is the female crane that is kil
disrupt this reading.

The tendency in Kashmiri commentarial tr

‘adition to re-configure the Valmiki scene,
led by the nisdda (Masson 1969), would

--- PAGE 36 ---
Refuge and Reform 25

patriline, before the deal was done at the snake sacrifice (Brodbeck 2009:
217-66; Brodbeck 2009b).

The good wife. In his speech quoted earlier, Padmanabha says the
taming of his dangerous snake heritage is due to his excellent wife. She has
helped him conquer his wildness. We could envisage the wife as
Padmanabha’s moral tutor, but perhaps what has specifically enabled
Padmanabha not to bite anybody is the fact that she is a good patrilineal
wife, who was given away and is now devoted to him, and will give him a
good son for his line. Surely the basis of the famous pativratd ideal — the
perfect wife (Leslie 1989) — is lineal, and the devoted wife stands in the
same symbolic position as the reformed snakes.

Padmanabha says that even if someone steals a youngster (vatsa, ‘year-
ling, usually translated ‘calf?) from one’s inner chambers, as Rama
Jamadagnya did, one must not take offence; if one does, one may pay with
one’s life, as Kartavirya and his sons did.”' The incident in question is
narrated at Mbh 12.49:40-41 (the Kartaviryas take the calf of Jamadagni’s
cow, so Rama cuts off King Kartavirya’s arms and takes it back), and is
implied at Mbh 3.116:19-24 (King Kartavirya takes the calf of Jamadagni’s
cow, so Rama cuts off his arms and presumably takes it back). I would
interpret the vatsa as a boy produced by intermarriage between Jamadagni’s
family and Kartavirya’s, and the quarrel as over which line gets the child.”
Padmanabha implies that Kartavirya and sons should have let go of the calf
without getting angry; and Padmanabha favours pativratad wifehood, so
presumably the cow was a Kartavirya daughter.

At Hy 23:134-8 Kartavirya is specified as a descendant of Hehaya and of Yadu.

» For a comparable dynamic, see Mbh 1.165 (cf. Ram 1.50:16-54:7): Vasistha’s Nandint is
being taken, and with her her calf; Vasistha says to her, ‘this youngster of yours has
been tied with a strong rope [by Visvamitra the ksatriya] and is being taken away by
force’ (drdhena damnd baddhvaisa vatsas te hriyate balat || Mbh 1.165:30). Nandini
seems to be Vasistha’s daughter (Brodbeck 2009: 79-80); Vasistha is prepared to let her
go, but a host of jungley peoples — presumably representing those who thwart patri-
lineal arrangements — prevent Visvamitra from taking her. The connection between
this story and the story of Kartavirya is underlined by the fact that it was Vasistha who
cursed Kartavirya to be killed by Rama (Mbh 12.49:30-37; Hv 23:151-5); and
intriguingly, the curse was prompted by the fact that his grove had been burned down
by Kartavirya. Cf. also Ram 3.3:15; 3.66:6.

--- PAGE 37 ---
26 Simon P. Brodbeck

This interpretation receives support from the story of Aurva (Mbh
1169-71), which represents the same events, but with the generic
‘Bhargavas’ standing in for Jamadagni and sons. Here the quarrel is over
treasure that was formerly given by the Kartaviryas to the Bhargavas, but
that the Bhargavas later withheld from the Kartaviryas, and so the
Kartaviryas massacred the Bhargavas ‘down to the children in the womb’ (@
garbhdad, 1.169:18). The Aurva story focuses on a wife-of-a-Bhargava who
wants ‘to propagate the line of her husband’ (bhartuh kulavivrddhaye,
1.169:20; trs van Buitenen 1973: 339), and hides an embryo in her thigh; it
is Aurva, who defeats the Kartaviryas and is seemingly a double of Rama.
There is no vatsa in this version, but we can read the treasure as human,
and the quarrel as over the lineal placement of offspring.”* The implication
of Padmanabha’s mentioning Kartavirya is that good snakes would let ndga
women have sons in non-ndga lines, because they have good wives of their
own.

Conclusion

There is more to be said about snakes in early kdvya, and gleaners, nisddas,
dasyus, brahmins, ksatriyas, rsis, etc., and all the stories I have mentioned. I
have suggested experimental interpretations to coordinate different aspects
of Mahabharata discourse.

Prioritising the Mahabharata and the Khandava and sarpasatra scenes, I
have imagined, in broad strokes, new identities (hence communities) in the
wake of economic growth and developmental changes, particularly re-
garding land use and means of livelihood. Because this imagining is done
from the text, it implicates the text’s reciters and audience, who are
integrated into the text through its detailed phalas and multiply framed
structure (it is usually about what happened to a person when they heard a
certain story), and who include all rsis at Saunaka’s satras in Naimisa
Forest, whatever their livelihood. But that includes me at Saunaka’s satra; so

2B

The story at Mbh 3.116, where Rama Jamadagnya is told by his father to kill his
mother for unfaithfulness, could be read — with the similar story of Cirakarin at Mbh
12.258 (Fitzgerald 2010b) — in lineal terms, as if the unfaithful thoughts are thoughts
of her own natal family and the possibility of having her sons be part of it.

--- PAGE 38 ---
Refuge and Reform 27

I think also in terms of development and its wake in my world, centred on
the British Isles, as organised from the foreign office and the home office,
which I would imagine to be generic in type, about whose various en-
closures, clearances, and massacres I know so few details, but supported by
whose funding I work.

In discussing this theme I have come, towards the end of the paper, to
the edge of a gendered perspective which needs to be more widely
integrated. There was also the edge of a soteriological perspective with
Mudgala, whose representation (along with so much more moksadharma
distinctly framed) must also be a sociological move on the part of the text,
but one that is hard to conceptualise (cf. Brodbeck 2007). Also hard to
conceptualise is the relationship between early Sanskrit kdvya and its
contemporary discourses, and the relationship between the Mahabharata
and Rdmédyana. But though this paper works to some extent on stolen
ground, it has linked some textual gobbets together in what I hope are
useful ways.

Appendix: Krsna, Bana, and the Vrsnis

To finish, I would like briefly to register the also-hard-to-conceptualise
relationship between the Mahabharata and the Harivamsa (Brodbeck
2011b), with regard to Krsna’s people, the Vrsnis. Their self-slaughter in
Mbh 16 is one of the massacres I mentioned at the start. The Harivamsa
features several incidents, set before that massacre but narrated after it, in
which Krsna fights his in-laws, or those of his son or grandson. The fight
with Bana (Hv 105-13; cf. Couture 2003) is particularly lineally striking.
Krsnas grandson Aniruddha and Bana’s daughter Usas pair up, and
Aniruddha goes to live with Bana’s people. So Krsna and various family
members go there, defeat Bana and his army in battle, and bring the couple
back to live with Krsna’s people. Here Krsna is an enforcer of patrilocy.

The Vrsnis became refugees after King Jarasamdha of Magadha’s royal
civilising mission on the Yamuna; Krsna led them to flee, and they settled
in Dvaraka by the western ocean (Mbh 2.13; Hv 25:15-16; Hv 80-82, 84).
This seems to have happened before Krsna and Arjuna burned the

--- PAGE 39 ---
28 Simon P. Brodbeck

Khandava Forest, but perhaps not very long before (cf. Mbh 1.199:50;
1.213:42). Krsna throws his weight behind the Pandavas’ patrilineal efforts,
and makes sure they win the Kuruksetra war.

The Vrsnis are presented as Yadavas, descendants of Yadu, one of
Yayati’s sons by Devayani. As mentioned earlier, she went back to her
father; and Yadu disobeyed Yayati, spurning his primogenitive patrilineal
rights and duties (Mbh_ 1.70:33-40; 179-80; Hv 22:19-28). In the
HarivamSa critical apparatus, in a different account of the origin of the
Vrsnis (Hv app18), the Yadavas are descendants of a non-crown prince of
the Iksvakus, who went to live with his in-laws. And in a passage in the
Mahabharata critical apparatus (Mbh l.app72) Bhima Pandava is re-
cognised as the daughter’s son’s daughter’s son of a snake, which would
make Krsna’s paternal grandfather (Stra) a snake, since Bhima’s mother,
Prtha Kunti, is Krsna’s father’s sister.

Krsna supervises the massacre of the Vrsnis, and Dvaraka is flooded.
The last we hear of Krsna’s line is that his descendant Vajra is brought back
from Dvaraka and finds a home in Indraprastha, near where Khandava
Forest used to be (Mbh 16.4-8). We can imagine that Krsna’s descendants
through this line would be reformed — after Janamejaya’s snake sacrifice,
even if not before.

Bibliography

Allsen, Thomas T. 2006. The Royal Hunt in Eurasian History. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.

Bailey, Gregory M. 1981. ‘Brahma, Prthu and the Theme of the Earth-Milker in Hindu
Mythology.’ Indo-Iranian Journal 23.2: 105-16.

Baltutis, Michael. 2011. ‘Reinventing Orthopraxy and Practicing Worldly Dharma: Vasu
and Asoka in Book 14 of the Mahabharata.’ International Journal of Hindu Studies
15.1: 55-100.

Bandyopadhyay, Indrajit. 2007. ‘Karna’s Father Found.”
http://www.boloji.com/hinduism/138.htm

--- PAGE 40 ---
Refuge and Reform 29

Baudhayana Dharmasiitra. Patrick Olivelle (ed., tr.), Dharmasiitras: the Law Codes of
Apastamba, Gautama, Baudhdyana, and Vasistha: 191-345. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass. 2000.

Bowles, Adam. 2007. Dharma, Disorder and the Political in Ancient India: the
Apaddharma of the Mahabharata. Leiden: Brill.

Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. Patrick Olivelle (ed., tr.), The Early Upanisads: Annotated Text
and Translation: 29-165. New York: Oxford University Press. 1998.

Brockington, John L. 2000. ‘The Structure of the Moksa-Dharma-Parvan of the
Mahabharata.’ In Piotr Balcerowicz and Marek Mejor (eds), On the Understanding of
Other Cultures: Proceedings of the International Conference on Sanskrit and Related
Studies to Commemorate the Centenary of the Birth of Stanistaw Schayer: 71-83.
Warsaw: Oriental Institute, Warsaw University.

Brodbeck, Simon P. 2006. ‘Ekalavya and Mahabharata 1121-28.’ International Journal of
Hindu Studies 10.1: 1-34.

—— 2007. ‘Gendered Soteriology: Marriage and the Karmayoga.’ In Simon Brodbeck and
Brian Black (eds), Gender and Narrative in the Mahabharata: 144-75. London:
Routledge.

—— 2009. The Mahabharata Patrilines Gender, Culture, and the Royal Hereditary.
Farnham: Ashgate.

—— 2009b. ‘Janamejaya’s Big Brother: New Light on the Mahabharata’ Frame Story.’
Religions of South Asia 2.2 (for 2008): 161-76.

—— 2009c. ‘The Bharadvaja Pattern in the Mahabharata.’ In Petteri Koskikallio (ed.),
Parallels and Comparisons: 137-79. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts.

— 2011. ‘Sanskrit Epics: the Ramayana, Mahabharata and HarivaméSa.’ In Jessica
Frazier (ed.), The Continuum Companion to Hindu Studies: 83-99. London:
Continuum.

—— 2011b. ‘Analytic and Synthetic Approaches in Light of the Critical Edition of the
Mahdabhdrata and Harivamsa.’ Journal of Vaishnava Studies 19.2: 223-50.

van Buitenen, J. A. B. (tr.). 1973. The Mahabharata. Book 1: the Book of the Beginning.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

--- PAGE 41 ---
30 Simon P. Brodbeck

(tr.). 1975. The Mahabharata. Book 2: the Book of the Assembly Hall. Book 3: the
Book of the Forest. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Chdandogya Upanisad. Patrick Olivelle (ed., tr.), The Early Upanisads: Annotated Text and
Translation: 166-287. New York: Oxford University Press. 1998.

Couture, André. 2003. ‘Krsna’s Victory over Bana and Goddess Kotavi’s Manifestation in
the Harivamsa.’ Journal of Indian Philosophy 31.5-6: 593-620.

Dange, Sadashiv A. 2001. Myths from the Mahabharata, Vol. 2: Study in Patterns and
Symbols. Delhi: Aryan Books International.

Fitzgerald, James L. 2002. ‘The Rama Jamadagnya “Thread” of the Mahdbhdrata: a New
Survey of Rama Jamadagnya in the Pune Text.’ In Mary Brockington (ed.), Stages and
Transitions: Temporal and Historical Frameworks in Epic and Puranic Literature: 89-
132. Zagreb: Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts.

(tr.). 2004. The Mahabharata. Book 11: the Book of the Women. Book 12: the Book of
Peace, Part One. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

2006. ‘Negotiating the Shape of “Scripture”: New Perspectives on the Development
and Growth of the Mahabharata between the Empires.’ In Patrick Olivelle (ed.),
Between the Empires: Society in India 300 Bce to 400 ce: 257-86. New York: Oxford
University Press.

—— 2010. ‘The Ethical Significance of Living by Gleaning (Ufichavrtti) in the
Mahabharata.’ In Andreas Bigger et al. (eds), Release from Life, Release in Life: Indian
Perspectives on Individual Liberation: 89-110. Bern: Peter Lang.

2010b. ‘The Boy “Slowpoke” as Deep Thinker: in Defense of “Straying’ Wives
against Father’s Uxoricidal Rage.’ In Sheldon Pollock (ed.), Epic and Argument in
Sanskrit Literary History: Essays in Honor of Robert P. Goldman: 31-59. Delhi:
Manohar.

Ganguli, Kisari Mohan (tr.). 1993. The Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa,
Translated into English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text. 4 vols. Delhi: Munshiram
Manoharlal.

Gitomer, David L. 1991. ‘Raksasa Bhima: Wolfbelly among Ogres and Brahmans in the
Sanskrit Mahabharata and the Venisarnhara.’ In Arvind Sharma (ed.), Essays on the
Mahabharata: 296-323. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE 42 ---
Refuge and Reform 31

Goldman, Robert P. 1996. ‘Valmiki and Vyasa: their Contribution to India’s Discourse on
Ethnicity.’ Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda 46.1-2: 1-14.

—— (tr.). 2005. Ramayana Book One: Boyhood, by Valmiki. New York: New York
University Press / John and Jennifer Clay Foundation.

Hammer, Niels. 2009. ‘Why Sarus Cranes Epitomize Karunarasa in the Ramdyana.’
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (series 3) 19.2: 187-211.

Hara, Minoru. 1972. ‘Valmiki, the Singer of Tales.’ In R. C. Hazra and S. C. Banerji (eds),
S. K. De Memorial Volume: 117-28. Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhopadhyay.

—— 1973. ‘The King as a Husband of the Earth (Mahi-Pati).’ Asiatische Studien / Etudes
Asiatiques 27.2: 97-114.

Harivamsa [Hv]. Parashuram Lakshman Vaidya (ed.), The Harivariga: being the Khila or
Supplement to the Mahabharata, for the First Time Critically Edited. Poona:
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 1969-71.

Hegarty, James M. 2006. ‘Extracting the Kathd-Amrta (Elixir of Story): Creation, Ritual,
Sovereignty and Textual Structure in the Sanskrit Mahabharata.’ Journal of Vaishnava
Studies 14.2: 39-60.

—— 2012. Religion, Narrative and Public Imagination in South Asia: Past and Place in the
Sanskrit Mahabharata. London: Routledge.

Hiltebeitel, Alf. 1976. ‘The Burning of the Forest Myth.’ In Bardwell Smith (ed.),
Hinduism: New Essays in the History of Religions: 208-24. Leiden: Brill.

—— 2001. Rethinking the Mahabharata: a Reader’ Guide to the Education of the Dharma
King. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

— 2005. ‘On Reading Fitzgerald’s Vyasa.’ Journal of the American Oriental Society
125.2: 241-61.

—— 2011. Dharma: its Early History in Law, Religion, and Narrative. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Hultzsch, Eugen (ed.). 1925. Inscriptions of Asoka, new edn. Corpus Inscriptionum
Indicarum, vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon (for Govt of India).

Johnson, W. J. (tr.). 2001. Kalidasa, the Recognition of Sakuntala, a Play in Seven Acts;
Sakuntala in the Mahabharata (Mahabharata 162-9). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

--- PAGE 43 ---
32 Simon P. Brodbeck

Kosambi, D. D. 1964. ‘The Autochthonous Element in the Mahabharata.’ Journal of the
American Oriental Society 81.1: 3144.

—— 2002. Combined Methods in Indology and Other Writings, ed. Brajadulal
Chattopadhyaya. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Lal, Makkhan. 1986. ‘Iron Tools, Forest Clearance and Urbanization in the Gangetic
Plains.’ Man and Environment 10: 83-90. Reprinted in Rangarajan 2007: 18-32.

Leslie, I. Julia. 1989. The Perfect Wife: the Orthodox Hindu Woman according to the
Stridharmapaddhati of Tryambakayajvan. Delhi: Oxford University Press.

1998. ‘A Bird Bereaved: the Identity and Significance of Valmiki’s Krauiica.’ Journal
of Indian Philosophy 26.5: 455-87.

—— 2003. Authority and Meaning in Indian Religions: Hinduism and the Case of Valmiki.
Aldershot: Ashgate.

Mahabharata [Mbh]. Vishnu Sitaram Sukthankar, Sripad Krishna Belvalkar, Parashuram
Lakshman Vaidya, et al. (eds), The Mahabhdrata for the First Time Critically Edited.
Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. 1933-66.

Malinar, Angelika. 2007. Arguments of a Queen: Draupadi’s Views on Kingship.’ In
Simon Brodbeck and Brian Black (eds), Gender and Narrative in the Mahabharata: 79—
96. London: Routledge.

Manusmrti. Patrick Olivelle (ed., tr.) with Suman Olivelle, Manu’s Code of Law: a Critical
Edition and Translation of the Mdnava-DharmaSastra. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
2006.

Masson, Jeffrey M. 1969. ‘Who Killed Cock Kraufica? Abhinavagupta’s Reflections on the
Origin of Aesthetic Experience.’ Journal of the Oriental Institute, Baroda 18.3: 207-
24.

Mehendale, M. A. 2008. ‘Kunti’s Relation with Durvasas.’ Annals of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute 89: 129-32.

Meiland, Justin (tr.). 2007. Mahabharata Book Nine: Salya, Volume Two. New York: New
York University Press / John and Jennifer Clay Foundation.

Minkowski, Christopher Z. 1991. ‘Snakes, Sattras, and the Mahabharata.’ In Arvind
Sharma (ed.), Essays on the Mahabharata: 384400. Leiden: Brill.

--- PAGE 44 ---
Refuge and Reform 33

Parasher, Aloka. 1991. Mlecchas in Early India: a Study in Attitudes towards Outsiders up
to AD 600. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal.

Pollock, Sheldon I. 1993. ‘Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power beyond the
Raj.’ In Carol A. Breckenridge and Peter van der Veer (eds), Orientalism and the
Postcolonial Predicament: Perspectives on South Asia: 76-133. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.

—— (tr.). 2008. Ramdyana Book Two: Ayodhya, by Valmiki. New York: New York
University Press / John and Jennifer Clay Foundation.

Ramayana [Ram]. Govindlal Hargovind Bhatt, Umakant Premanand Shah, et al. (eds), The
Valmiki-Ramayana Critically Edited for the First Time. Baroda: Oriental Institute.
1958-75.

Rangarajan, Mahesh. 2001. ‘The Forest and the Field in Ancient India.’ In Mahesh
Rangarajan, India’s Wildlife History: an Introduction: 1-9. Delhi: Permanent Black.
Reprinted in Rangarajan 2007: 42-8.

(ed.). 2007. Environmental Issues in India: a Reader. Delhi: Dorling Kindersley.

Reich, Tamar C. 2001. ‘Sacrificial Violence and Textual Battles: Inner Textual
Interpretation in the Sanskrit Mahabharata.’ History of Religions 41.2: 142-69.

Said, Edward W. 1978. Orientalism. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Scheuer, Jacques. 1982. Siva dans le Mahabharata. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Selvanayagam, Israel. 1992. ‘ASoka and Arjuna as Counterfigures Standing on the Field of
Dharma: a Historical-Hermeneutical Perspective.’ History of Religions 32.1: 59-75.

Sengupta, Saswati, and Sharmila Purkayastha. 2011. ‘When the King is the Subject: the
Play of Power in Kalidasa’s Abhijfidnasakuntalam.’ In Saswati Sengupta and Deepika
Tandon (eds), Revisiting Abhijfia@nasdkuntalam: Love, Lineage and Language in
Kalidasa’s Nataka: 148-66. Delhi: Orient Blackswan.

Shankar, S. 1994. ‘The Thumb of Ekalavya: Postcolonial Studies and the “Third World”
Scholar in a Neocolonial World.’ World Literature Today 68.3: 479-87.

Shastri, Hari Prasad (tr.). 1962. The Ramayana of Valmiki, vol. 1. London: Shanti Sadan.

Smith, John D. (tr.). 2009. The Mahabharata: an Abridged Translation. Delhi: Penguin.

--- PAGE 45 ---
34 Simon P. Brodbeck

Sutton, Nicholas G. 1997. ‘Asoka and Yudhisthira: a Historical Setting for the Ideological
Tensions of the Mahabharata?’ Religion 27.4: 333-41.

Thapar, Romila. 1961. Asoka and the Decline of the Mauryas. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

—— 1978. Exile and the Kingdom: Some Thoughts on the Ramayana. Bangalore: The
Mythic Society.

—— 1997. ‘Forests and Settlements.’ In Paola Manfredi (ed.), Jn Danger: Habitats,
Species and People: 112-19. Delhi: Ranthambhore Foundation. Reprinted in
Rangarajan 2007: 33-41.

Trautmann, Thomas R. 1981. Dravidian Kinship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vielle, Christophe. 2012. ‘Ravivarman Kulasekhara the Yadava and Sagara the Son of

Yadavi: Real and Ideal Kings in Matrilineal Kerala.’ Religions of South Asia 5 (for
2011): 365-87.

--- PAGE 46 ---
Two

Like a Howling Pisdaca:
A Note on the Pronunciation
of the Revedasamhita

Giovanni Ciotti

This paper offers a contribution towards a better understanding of what the
brahmanical tradition considers to be the correct pronunciation of the
Vedas.' Furthermore, it will also give the opportunity to enter the highly
complex and mostly unstudied field of vedalaksana and to look at certain
dynamics through which some Vedangas interact with one another.

Vedalaksana

Vedalaksana (lit. “characteristic of the Vedas”) is the field of Brahmanical
scholarship that collects those language-related expertises that have been
used in India for more or less the last three millennia in order to preserve

' It is worth remembering that Vedic recitation has been included in the “UNESCO

Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity” since 2008.

--- PAGE 47 ---
36 Giovanni Ciotti

and transmit, generation by generation, the Vedic Samhitas (“Collections
[of hymns]”), in particular as far as their form is concerned.

In fact, the Vedic reciters are expected to master a gamut of topics,
including the correct articulation of the Sanskrit speech-sounds (varnas)
and pitch modulations (svaras), the modifications these can undergo in
specific linguistic and recitational contexts (sandhis, lit. “combinations”),
and the mastering of complex recombinations of the words of the text
(vikrtis, lit. “[textual] modifications”),> which in fact are the mnemonic
techniques devised for the preservation of the form of the Samhitas.*

Within this field there are hundreds of texts, of which a great number
have been listed by Kota Parameswara Aithal in his [1991] Veda-Laksana.
Vedic Ancillary Literature: A Descriptive Bibliography. This work offers a
comprehensive bibliography of almost all known manuscripts and editions
of vedalaksana texts that are preserved in both Western and Indian
institutions.’ It is to be noted that the number of works listed reaches the
impressive figure of 1,619.5

It goes without saying that in the Vedic context the term ‘text’ refers to both oral and
written media.

There are eight vikrtis in which Samhitas can be recited. The one called jata, for
instance, prescribes a chiasmus-like rearrangement of the wording of the text. In fact,
the jatd form of Rgvedasamhité [RV] 1.1.lab (agnim ile purdhitam | yajfidsya devam
[...]) goes as follows: agnim ila ile ’gnim agnim ile | ile purdhitam puréhitam ile ile
purohitam | puréhitam yajidsya yajhdsya purohitam purohitam yajfdsya | purohitam iti
purdh hitam | yajfidsya devam devdm yajidsya yajfidsya devam | etc. Note that the rising
stroke marks the uddatta, the falling one marks the svarita, whereas the anud€tta is left
unmarked. Hereafter, I do not mark the svaras in the Vedic quotations: once sandhi is
split, their reposition would require lengthy explanations that are not suitable for both
the size and goal of this article.

There are of course lacunae in Parameswara Aithal’s work, such as the 11 manuscripts
containing Siksas preserved at the University Library, Cambridge (UK).

The size of these works can vary from a few lines to hundreds of stanzas or pages of
prose. Concerning the kinds of texts considered to be part of the vedalaksana field,
Parameswara Aithal [1991: 1] writes: “These texts are of ancillary nature and
generally classified under Vedariga, though only a few of them belong to the proper
Vedariga known as the Siksa-s. They include Pratisakhya-s, Anukramani-s, works on
accentuation (svara) and on different forms of modified recitation (vikrti), and various
kinds of indexes.” Parameswara Aithal has not included in his bibliography the works
on chandas (“metrics”), the inclusion of which in the realm of vedalaksana is, in my

--- PAGE 48 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 37

In his preface to Parameswara Aithal’s volume, Albrecht Wezler stresses
the importance of the vedalaksana texts for a better understanding of Vedic
literature, which modern Western philologists should take into con-
sideration during their investigations.°

About the definition of vedalaksana

At present, I do not know of any passage within Sanskrit literature where
the compound veda-laksana is explained. However, there are plenty of
sources in which the term /aksana is commented upon in contexts related to
Vedic recitation.”

In the primary sources, the sense of the term /aksana is rather fluid,

ranging from that of “rule” to that of “system of rules”.* The same term can

opinion, justified by the the definition that the commentarial literature gives of the
term /aksana (see § 2). In this article, on the other hand, I will not take into considera-
tion texts such as the Anukramanis, since they deal with topics that are not, strictly
speaking, linguistically-related.

In particular, Wezler mentions Cardona’s [1993] article in which the age-old issue of
the accentuation system of the Satapathabrahmana is elegantly discussed on the basis
of some passages taken from the Vedic ancillary literature (in particular, from the
Bhdasikasitra).

Western scholarship has not dealt in any comprehensive manner with the topic of
vedalaksana. Much of the important literature about Sanskrit pronunciation and
recitation simply ignores the term (neither Varma [1929] nor Allen [1953] mention it
at all). On the other hand, we have a few exceptions to the general trend such as, of
course, Parameswara Aithal [1991] and also Suryakanta [1940 (1982)]. The latter
scholar proposes a classification of the /aksana works into two categories: prescriptive
laksanas and nomenclatory laksanas. Such a classification, however, is not supported
by any direct statement in the primary sources.

A well-known definition of /aksana in this sense is found in the Paspasdahnika on
Katyayana’s varttika 18, where Patafijali clearly states that /aksana means siitra
(“rule”): laksyalaksane vyakaranam || vt. 18 || [Paspasahnika:] laksyam ca laksanam
caitat samuditam vyakaranam bhavati | kim punar laksyam laksanam ca | Sabdo laksyah
stitram laksanam | (Abhyankar [1962: p. 12, Il. 15-17]) “Vyakarana (means) laksya
(and) laksana.” [Paspasahnika:] “This whole (consisting of) both laksya and laksana
becomes vyakarana. But what is laksya and what is laksana? Laksya is Sabda ‘the
words’ and laksana is siitra ‘the rules’.” (tr. Joshi and Roodebergen [1986: 173]).

--- PAGE 49 ---
38 Giovanni Ciotti

be also used to indicate a specific textual category.’ Furthermore, it is my
opinion that there are passages in the primary sources where laksana
demarcates a specific field of study, or in other words a specific sub-domain
of the various sets of rules pertaining to the form of the Vedas. Here, I
mention two of these passages:

(a) According to Uvata’s Parsadavrtti (ca. 12" century), a commentary
on Saunaka’s Rgvedapratisakhya [RP], /aksana represents the sum of the
knowledge of three Vedangas, namely siksé (“teaching [on
pronunciation]”), vydkarana (“[grammatical] analysis”) and chandas
(“metrics”):'°

An explicit occurrence of this use of the term /aksana is found in Sdamaveda-
sarvanukramani 7 where a list of titles of works about the Sdmavedasamhitd is
introduced as follows: sapta gandni sdmndm vai brahmand asta vai smrtah | dasa
stitrani saptapi dasa laksanam isyate \\ tata esam svariipam tu kathyate ’tra samasatah |
[...] (Suryakanta [1933 (1970): p. 1, Il. 3-5]) “The Ganas (“song”) of the Samans are
taught to be seven, the Brahmanas eight. The Siitras are taught to be ten, and the
Laksanas seventeen. Their forms are briefly explained here.” Despite the position of
the word api in the sentence, one could consider to translate the last line of Samaveda-
sarvanukramani 7 as: “The Siitras are prescribed as seventeen, and the Laksanas as
ten”. This would maintain the caesura but, later on, the text says: “[...] sitranam
dasakam smrtan’’ and “atha saptadasa laksanani’. A further problem here is the use of
laksana in the singular form: I argue this is a case of metrical license. As a matter of
fact, at the end of the work, the correct grammatical form in the plural is then used: ity
ete saptadasa tu laksanani vidur budhdh (Suryakanta [1933 (1970): p. 8, 1. 22]) (“The
sages knew these as the 17 Laksanas”). Note that, among the 17 Laksanas, we find
both known and unknown texts. Instances of the former ones are: the Rktantra, the
Samatantra, the Puspaka (= Puspasiitra), the Ndaradiya[siksa], the Gautamiya[siksa],
the Lomas (= Lomasi a), the Ravaniya (= Ravanabhait), etc.

The Vedangas are a group of disciplines developed in order to engage with the Vedic
Samhitas both from the point of view of the ritual practices in which the Samhitas are
used and the language in which the they are composed. The Vedangas are six, namely:
kalpa (“ritual”), jyotisa (“astronomy”), nirukta (“semantic analysis”), and the three just
mentioned chandas, vyakarana and Siksd. Although no certain dates are available, this
sixfold division seems to be rather old, possibly coeval with the systematisation of the
Vedic hymns into fixed collections. In this respect, one can assume that the Vedangas,
in particular those focusing on language, were, at first, tools employed for the
systematisation of the canon and, later, tools employed for its conservation.

10

--- PAGE 50 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 39

kimartham idam drabhyate |
Siksacchandovyakaranaih samanyenoktalaksanam |
id evam iha Sakhayam iti Sastraprayojanam ||
pra hyaprayojanam anena Slokenocyate | SiksGdibhir yat
sdmdnyenotsargenoktam laksanam | (Shastri [1931: p. 21, Il. 7-11])

Why is this [work, i.e. the RP] begun?

The aim of [this] treatise is that the /aksana that is taught in general terms
(saméanyena) by siksad, chandas and vydkarana, [is taught] in respect to this re-
cension (sakhd).

This verse states the aim of the Pratisakhya. Laksana is that which is taught in
general terms (sdmdnyena), i.e. by a general rule (utsargena), by Siksd, etc.

evam siksacchandovyakaranair yat sarvasu Sakhdsu samanyena laksanam ucyate
tad evasyam sakhayam anena vyavasthdpyate ity etat prayojanam asydigasya |
tatha catharvanapratisakhya idam eva prayojanam uktam ‘evam iheti ca
vibhasdpraptam samdanyend’ | asya stitrasyayam arthah | sémdnyena laksane yad
vikalpapraptam tad evam asyam sakhdyam vyavasthitam bhavatiti pratisakhya-
prayojanam uktam | (Shastri [1931: p. 23, Il. 7-12])

So that /aksana which is taught in general terms by siksa, chandas and vyakarana
for all the recensions [of the Vedas], is specified for this recension by this (anena)
[treatise]: this is the aim of this work (aviga) [of the Rgveda]. Similarly, this very
aim is stated in the Atharvanapratisakhya: ‘evam iheti ca ‘vibhdsdpraptam
samanyenad (Saunakiyacaturadhydyikd 1.1.3-4)."' The meaning of this satra is:
‘That which is known from the general /aksana [as] an option (vikalpa), it is thus

fixed in this recension: [this] is said [to be] the aim of a Pratisakhya’.'

Thus, according to this definition, /aksana describes in general the
features of Sanskrit according to the teachings of siksa, chandas and
vydkarana. On the other hand, the Pratisakhyas specify those instructions
that are particular to each Vedic recension, in this case to the RV. In a way,

"Possibly following Whitney [1862], Shastri [1931: 23] considers this quotation as
forming only one siftra, i.e. 1.2. The new numbering follows Deshpande [1997: 100-2],
who translates them as “[this treatise] also [defines that the phonetic/phonological
features of the words] in this [tradition] are such and such” and “[These
phonetic/phonological features of the words] obtain optionally in a generic [grammar
of Sanskrit]”.

* Note that this definition of laksana is followed in Uvata’s Parsadavrtti by a further one.
There /aksana is described as a more independent field, which includes topics that
Siksd, chandas and vydkarana do not cover.

--- PAGE 51 ---
40 Giovanni Ciotti

laksana can be seen as some sort of curriculum that the Vedic reciter is
expected to master. As we will see later, the interaction among the various
Vedanigas is in fact fundamental in allowing the reciter to collect all the
information he needs to deliver the Vedas in their prescribed, and thus
correct, form.

(b) A further definition of /aksana is that it is in opposition to nirukta
(“semantic analysis”), the fourth of the Vedangas dealing with language
matters. In fact, a conscious distinction between laksana (‘form’) and artha
(“meaning”) of the Vedas emerges from the vedalaksana literature. An
interesting passage that discusses this distinction is found in Visnumitra’s
Vargadvayavrtti (possibly, a partial commentary on Uvata's Parsadavrtti, see
Shastri [1922: 15]):

vedabhyaso hi paficadha vihitah | adhyayanam vicdro  ‘bhyasanam  japo
‘dhyapanam iti | [...]
[...] sa ca vicaro dvividhah | arthato laksanatas ceti | tathd coktam |

sthanur ayam bharaharah kilabhid adhitya vedam na vijanati yo’rtham |

yo ’rthajiia it sakalam bhadram asnute nakam eti jidnavidhiitapapma ||
iti | tatha ca |

laksanam yo na vetty rksu na karmaphalabhag bhavet |

laksanajito hi mantranam sakalam bhadram asnute |
iti | tasmat tavat pirvam laksanam ucyate | laksanapiirvakam hy arthaparijia@nam
tathd coktam |

svaro varno ’ksaram matra daivam yogarsam eva ca

mantram jijfi@samanena veditavyam pade pade \ (Shastri [1931: p. 2, Il. 15-6;
p. 3, Il. 8-17])

For the practice (abhydsa) of the Veda is fivefold: recitation (adhyayana),
examination (vicdra), exercise (abhyasana), repetition by muttering (japa) and
teaching (adhydpana). [...] Examination (vicdra) is twofold: with respect to the
meaning (artha) and with respect to the form (/aksana). In fact, it is said: ‘He is
the bearer of a burden only,—the blockhead who, having studied, does not
understand the meaning of the Veda. But he who knows the meaning obtains all
good fortune and, with his sins purged off by knowledge, attains heaven.’'
(Nirukta 1.18) And similarly: ‘He who does not know the /aksana of the rcs cannot

The translation of this Nirukta quotation is from Sarup [1921: 18]. Its numbering
follows Sarup [1927: 40]: according to SastrT [1931: 3], in fact, this is Nirukta 1.6.
Note that this passage is itself a quotation within the Nirukta.

--- PAGE 52 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca Al

partake in the fruits of the sacrificial action. In fact, [only] the knower of the
laksana of the mantras attains all good fortune.’ Therefore, the /aksana has to be
said first, for the comprehension of meaning [occurs only] once Jaksana [is
known]. Thus, it is said: ‘Pitch modulation, speech-sound, syllable, mora, the deity
and the rsic way of [its] employment (yogdrsa) (?):'* he who desires to know has to

understand a mantra step by step (?)’.'°

Here, it is openly stated that the focus of /aksana is the preservation of
the form of the Samhitas. Understanding the meaning of the texts is a task
for other disciplines that the reciter is also expected to master.

Chandas and the Rgveda

So far we have seen that chandas is an important discipline in which every
Vedic reciter is expected to be well-versed. He should be able to recognise
the various meters and to scan the lines in order to count their syllables.
The purposes of chandas are listed in numerous passages of brahma-
nical literature. One of these is Sayana’s introduction to his Rgvedabhdsya
(14th century) in which the domain of chandas is described as follows:

This verse is also found in other texts with some variant readings, in particular
concerning the line daivam yogarsam eva ca. While commenting on Paniniyasiksa 1,
the Si dprakasa (see Ghosh [1938: 24]) attributes this verse to Saunaka despite the
fact that it is not found in the Rgvedapratisakhya and reads viniyogdrtham eva ca.
Ghosh however notes also a variant reading, found in the manuscript L of his edition,
that is closer to the one of Visnumitra, i.e. viniyogdrsam eva ca. Furthermore,
Bhaskararaya’s Chandahsiitrabhdsyaraja reads viniyogo ’rtham eva ca (see Kanjilal
[2000: p. 68, 1. 23]) (“[ritual] employment and meaning”, note artha as a neuter noun).
The understanding of the two, i.e. Jaksana and artha, is not mutually exclusive: on the
contrary, they complete one another and it is the duty of the Vedic reciter to master
them both. As Yaska states in Nirukta 1.18: yad grhitam avijftatam nigadenaiva
Sabdyate | anagnav iva suskaidho na taj jvalati karhicit || (“What has been taken [from
the teacher’s mouth] but not understood [and] is uttered by mere recitation, that never
flares up, like dry firewood on a non-fire.”, tr. Kahrs [1998: 46]). The same passage is
found in Pataiijali’s Paspasahnika (Abhyankar [1962: p. 2, ll. 15-16]) with the variant
adhitam (“recited” according to Joshi and Roodbergen [1986: 42], “studied” according
to Kahrs [1998: 46]) instead of grhitam (“what has been taken [from the teacher's
mouth]”).

--- PAGE 53 ---
42 Giovanni Ciotti

tathd chandograntho ‘py upayujyate | chandovisesanam tatra tatra vihitatvat |
tasmat sapta caturuttarani chandamsi prataranuvake ’nicyanta iti hy amnatam |
gayatryusniganustubbrhatipanktitristubjagatity etani sapta chandamsi \ cartur-
vimSaty aksara gayatri | tato ’pi caturbhir aksarair adhikastavimSaty aksarosnik |
evam uttarottaradhika anustubddayo ’vagantavyah | [...] tatra_magana-
yaganddisadhyo gdyatryadivivekas chandograntham antarena na suvijiieyah | kimca
| yo ha va aviditarseyacchandodaivatabrahmanena mantrena ydjayati vadhydpayati
va sthanum varcchati gartam vapadyate pra va miyate papiyan bhavati | tasmad
etdni mantre mantre vidydd iti Srityate | (Miiller [1890-2 (1966): p. 21, Il. 22-28])

So the Chandograntha (lit. “book on metres”, possibly the title of a work) is also
used, since specific metres are prescribed in various occasions. For it has been
handed down: ‘Therefore seven plus four metres [are recited] in the morning
recitation (prdataranuvaka)’. The seven stanzas are: gdyatri, usnih, anustubh, brhati,
pankti, tristubh, [and] jagati. The gdyatri has twenty-four syllables. The usnih has
four more, [i.e.] twenty-eight syllables. Similarly, anustubh and so forth can be
understood one by one as having more and more [syllables]. [...] In this respect,
without Chandograntha it is not easy to understand the distinction between gdyatri
and so forth that is obtained through [the knowledge of] the ganas ma, ya and so
forth.'® Moreover, it is learnt that: ‘The one who instigates a sacrifice or teaches by
means of a mantra whose rsi, stanza, god [and] Brahmana are not known, he either
runs up against a post, is made to fall into a well,” dies or becomes more sinful.
Therefore, for every mantra he knows all this’.

Going back to Uvata’s Pdrsadavrtti, we find an example of what the
Vedic reciter is expected to be able to do in order to classify the stanzas
according to the right metre:

Chandas analyses each metre as a clusters of ganas, i.e. groups of three syllables. Ma
and ya are the technical names proper to two out of the eight possible ganas: ma
indicates a group made by three heavy syllables (molossus), whereas ya indicates a
group made by one light syllable followed by two heavy syllables (baccheus). Note
that not all the metres contain a number of syllables that is a multiple of three;
therefore, there can be either one or two stray syllables for each metre. According to
chandas, these constitute independent ganas and are called ga-gana or la-gana
according to their heaviness (ga = guru “heavy”, la = laghu “light”).

Miiller’s edition reads gartam va dpadyati, which I have emended in dpadyate.
Peterson’s [1890: 210] edition gives the text as garte vd pdtyate. as it is also found in
Katyayana’s Rgvedasarvanukramani (see Sharma [1977: 1]); Durgasimha’s commentary
on Nirukta (see Bhadkamkar [1918: p. 738, ll. 16-7]) reads garte va patati.

--- PAGE 54 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 43

tatha —sarvai§_—_ chandovicityddibhih _ pitigalayaskasaitavaprabhrtibhir _ yat
samanyenoktam laksanam | yathd satsaptatyaksara catidhrtir bhavati | tatha
tatraivoktam ‘pddah’ ‘iyadipiiranah’ | evam samanyalaksane sati ‘sa hi Sardho na
marutam iti caticchandasy astapadayam astasastyaksardyam rci samdehah | kim
iyam — astasastyaksaratyastih pddanam —avikarsena | Ghosvit — padanam
vikarsenatidhrtih | asmin samdeha idam visesalaksanam Grabhyate ‘sakhe ca sa hi
Sarghas ca madhyamo varga ucyate iti | evam asyam Sakhayam pddavikarseneyam
atidhrtih | (Shastri [1931: p. 22, Il. 1-9])

Similarly, /aksana is taught in general by all [the treatises] such as the
Chandoviciti,® etc. [and] by Pingala, Yaska, Saitava, etc. As [for instance] the
atidhrti is [a type of stanza] with 76 syllables, so in this respect it is taught that the
filler of the metrical line is iy, etc.'? Thus, from the point of view of the general
tule, there is a doubt concerning the rc [beginning with] sa hi Sardho na marutam
(RV 1.127.6a), [which is] an aticchandas [stanza type] having 8 padas and 68
syllables. Is this an atyas¢i stanza with 68 syllables without separation of words
(padas)? Or [is this] an atidhrti with separation of the words? Concerning this
doubt, a specific rule (visesa-laksana) is composed, [which ends with] sakhe ca sa
hi Sardha§ ca madhyamo varga ucyate (RP 16.91). Thus, in this sakhd, this [case] is
an atidhrti with a separation of words.

The whole siitra 16.91 of the RP is as follows: tam indram pro su
susuma trikadrukesv aya rucd | sakhe ca sa hi Sardhas ca madhyamo varga
ucyate || (“[The stanzas beginning with] tam indram, pro su, susuma,
trikadrukesu, aya rucd, sakhe and sa hi sardhah [are examples of] the
middle class [i.e., of the seven long metres Atijagati etc.]”, tr. Shastri [1937:
123]). Siitras 16.79-86 of the RP give the list of the seven aticchandas,
which are the intermediate class of stanzas starting from the atijagatT and
ending with the atidhrti. Thus the stanza beginning with sa hi sardhah,
which is the last given in 16.91, corresponds to the atidhrti.

Note that the restoration of the right number of syllables is a process
which directly affects the pronunciation of the text. Let us take into
consideration the example (sa hi sardho na mdarutam) quoted by Uvata, i.e.
RV 1127.6:

Chandoviciti is an alternative title for Pingala’s Chandahsiitra, i.e. the seminal text of
the chandas discipline.

Padah (“metrical line”) and iyadipiranah (“the filler [of the metrical line] is iy, etc.”)
are respectively sitras 3.1 and 3.2 of Pingala’s Chandahsiitra (see Kanjilal [2000]).

--- PAGE 55 ---
44 Giovanni Ciotti

sa hi Sardho na marutam tuvisvanir (a) | apnasvatistrvarasy istanir (b) | artanasy
istanih (c) | @dad dhavyany adadir (d) | yajitasya ketur arhand (e) | adha smasya
harsato hrsivato (f) | visve jusanta pantham (g) | narah Subhe na pantham (h) |

Let us now consider Van Nooten and Holland’s [1994] metrically restored
version of the same passage:

sa hi Sardho na mdarutam tuvisvanir (a) | apnasvatisu urvarasu istanir (b) | @
artandsu istanih (c) | ddad dhavyani Gdadir (d) | yajfiasya ketur arhand (e) | adha
sma asya harsato hrsivato (f) | visve jusanta pantha-am (g) | narah subhe na
pantha-am (h) | (van Nooten and Holland [1994: 77])

The strategy followd by Van Nooten and Holland for their pursuit is that of
dissolving the sandhi of the text. In particular, they have adopted a
disyllabic scansion of certain vowels or of certain clusters made by a
semivowel and a vowel. This procedure is in keeping with the various aims
of chandas, among which one finds the normalisation of the number of
syllables for hypometric and hypermetric lines. Generally speaking, in fact,
each line of a stanza should have the same number of syllables. When this
does not happen, one of the possible reasons might be that, in the recitation,
some phonological phenomena have affected the speech-sounds by either
modifying their features (e.g. i + a > y + a) or by merging them into one
single speech-sound (e.g. i + i — i). By dissolving these sandhi forms, it is
possible to obtain, for instance, 8 more syllables in RV 1.27.6, thereby
totalling 76 syllables, i.e. the number of syllables that is prescribed for an
atidhrti verse.

Iyadipiranah

The operation carried out by van Nooten and Holland is similar to the
one prescribed by the vedalaksana literature and, in particular, by the texts
dealing with metres. However, I argue that the metrically restored version
given by van Nooten and Holland can be phonetically improved using
further passages from the vedalaksana literature.

--- PAGE 56 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 45

To support my stand, I discuss excerpts from the RP, the Chadahsiitra of
Pingala (along with three of its commentaries) and the Lomasisiksd.

(a) The RP contains the following sidtras:
vytihed ekaksaribhavan padestinesu sampade || 17.22 ||
ksaipravarnams ca samyogdn vyaveyat sadrsaih svaraih || 17.23 ||

In the defective metrical lines, one should split single speech-sound up to the
fulfilment (sampade) [of the metrical requirements] (17.22).”” And, one should
separate the consonant clusters (samyogas) with semi-vowels (ksaipras) by means
of the homogeneous vowels (17.23).”!

This passage does not prescribe that, in the case of CyV (read:
consonant-y-vowel), one should restore the metre by changing y into i, thus
obtaining CiV. Instead, it states that “one should separate [...] by means of
the corresponding vowels”, i.e. a vowel i has to be inserted in CyV so to
obtain CiyV. Van Nooten and Holland [1994] follow the CiV model for their
metrically restored edition of the RV. Although this choice does not modify
the syllabic computation, I argue that it does not reflect the articulation of

»  Shastri’s [1937: 126] translation of sampade is “for the sake of perfection”. In my
translation, I follow Uvata’s commentary which states: sampada iti kasmat | a
itayamopa gavyanta indram \ ity atra traya ekibhadvas tatra piirvasyaiva vyithena
sampatsiddher uttarayor [vyitho — GC] na kartavyo bhavati (“Why sampadé In *a
itayamopa gavyanta indram’ (RV 1.33.la), there are three [conjunctions] made of a
single speech-sound. In this case, thanks to the separation of the first [of the
conjunctions] only, one should not separate the other two for accomplishing the ful-
filment [of the metrical requirements].”). The padapdtha of RV 1.33.la is: a | ita |
ayama | upa | gavyantah | indram |. Thus, ita + ayama and ayama + upa are the other
two conjunctions.

Ksaipra (“[a sound] that is quickly [pronounced]”) is a term used for indicating y and
v when they respectively substitute i and wu — see RP 2.21 samandaksaram antastham
svam akanthyam svarodayam (“A monophthong is changed into its own semivowel if it
is non-guttural [ie. i and u] and is followed by a vowel”) and 2.23 te ksaiprah
prakrtodayah (“These [semivowels, i.e. y and v] are quickly [pronounced] if followed
by an unchanged [vowel]”). Samyoga (“conjunction”) is a term specifically used for
indicating consonant clusters — see RP 1.37 samyogas tu vyaijanasamnipatah (“But a
conjunction is an aggregation of consonants”).

--- PAGE 57 ---
46 Giovanni Ciotti

the speech-sounds that the traditional scholars prescribe for the Vedas. The
pronunciation of CiV is in fact clearly different from that of CiyV.”

(b) According to the vedalaksana scholarship, the same rule works for
the whole Vedic corpus. Pingala in his Chadahsiitra, the seminal work on
chandas, states at sittra 3.2:

iyadipiiranah |

The filler of [the metrical line (pdda) 3.1] is iy, etc.

In order to understand the proper meaning of this siitra, it is helpful to look
at some of the commentaries on this passage.

* Halayudha states in his Mrtasamjivani (ca. 10th century, see
Ayodhyanatha [1947]):

padah ity anuvartate | iyadih piirano yasya sa iyadipiiranah | adi$abdena uvadayo
’pi grhyante | tatrdyam arthah | yatra gayatryadicchandasi padasyaksarasamkhya
na piiryate tatreyddibhih piirayitavya | (Ayodhyanatha [1947: 37-8])

‘padah’ (“metrical line”) is repeated [from the preceding sitra]. That [metrical
line] which is filled by iy, ete. is ‘iyadipiiranah’. By the word ‘dd? (“ete.”) also uv,
etc. are understood. In this respect, this is the meaning: where in a gdyatri stanza,
etc. the number of syllables per line is not complete, it has to be completed by iy,
ete.

* YadavaprakaSayati explains in his Chandovicitibhdsya (ca. 10th/11th
century, see Sinharay [1977]) that iy can substitute y also when the latter
has not been produced by sandhi:

sa ca paddo drsyamdnair aksaraih Sastriyam sampattim andpnuvann iyddibhih
piiraniyah, yatra sandhinimitto yakdravakadrayoh samyogo bhavati | yatha -

~ | would like to point out that the phonetic rendering of the RV might not have been the
focus of Van Nooten and Holland’s project. In the introduction to their volume, in fact,
they do not openly engage with this topic.

--- PAGE 58 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 47

divasprthivyah paryoja udbha tam iti | [...] kvacid asandhinimitto ’pi samyogo
vytihyate® | yathd — pratno hota varenyah iti | [...] (Sinharay [1977: 10])

And, where there is a consonant cluster with y or v caused by sandhi, the metrical
line, which has not obtained [its] fulfilment in accordance with the treatises on
account of [its] visible syllables, has to be completed by iy, etc. For instance: divas
prthivyah pary oja (— pariy oja) udbhrtam (RV 6.47.27a) [...]. Sometimes, also a
consonant cluster not caused by sandhi is separated. For instance: pratno hota
varenyah (— vareniyah) (RV 2.7.6b) [...].

* Bhaskararaya’s Chandahsiitrabhdsyardja (ca. 18th century, see Kanjilal
[2000]) extends the meaning of this siitra to include not only the procedure
of adding a vocalic epenthesis (CyV — CiyV), but also the conflation of
vowels and ‘dubious cases’:

tatas ca pada iyadibhih pitrayitavyah™ pramapaniyas cety arthah | pirtisadhanata
tv anytindnatirekikaranam | tena vihitaksarasamkhyato nytinasyabhivardhanam tato
‘dhikasya hrdsanam samdigdhasya nirnayanam ceti tritayam piiranapadarthah | i$
ca y ca iyau as ca as ca au | iti dvau dvandvau akdrah kevala eka iti trayanam
punar dvandvasyddipadena bahuvrihis tasya pitranapadena bahuvacanarthena*
punar bahuvrihih | teneyddayo vikarsd abhivardhanopaya yasya savarnadirgha-
samkarsddayo nyiinikaranopdya yasya avasanddayah sandehanirasanopaya yasya
sa iyddipiiranah | ino ‘dhikah*® sandigdhas ceti padavisesanatrayam aksepa-
labhyam | tenonah pddah iyadibhir vardhaniyo ‘dhikah padah hrasaniyah
sandigdhah pado nirnetavya ity arthah | (Kanjilal (2000: 101])

Thus, the meaning is [that] a metrical line has to be completed with iy, etc. and
made to scan [well]. Moreover, the accomplishment of [metrical] completion
(piirtisadhanatd) is the act of [making the metrical line] neither lacking nor
exceeding [syllables] (anydndnatirekikarana). Because of that, the meaning of the
word pitrana is threefold: supply of the lacking [syllables], then diminution of the
exceeding [ones] and removal of ambiguity according to the number of prescribed
syllables (vihitaksara) [for each verse]. [The compound iyd is formed of], two

Sinharay’s [1977: 10, fn. 5] edition reads vyahyate (“it is explained”) and reports also
the variant bddhyate (“it is removed”) found in a two manuscripts. I propose to emend
the reading with vyithyate (“it is separated”) for the same form appears later in the text
and it seems to me a better choice given the context.

The edition reads pitrayitavya.

The edition reads bahuvacandntena.

The edition reads anodhikah.

--- PAGE 59 ---
48

30

Giovanni Ciotti

dvandva compounds - [i.e.] iy (iyau) [formed of] i plus y and d (au) [formed of] a
plus a — [and] one a, which is absolute (kevala).”’ In turn, the dvandva compound,
[which is formed by] the three [items i plus y, a plus a, and the absolute a], [is
made into] a bahuvrihi compound with [the addition] of the word di. Then, this
[bahuvrihi, i.e. iyadi, is made into another] bahuvrihi with [the addition] of the
word piirana, the sense of which is plural.”* Therefore, the means for increasing
[the number of syllables] are iy and so forth, which are dividers [of words]; the
means for diminishing [the number of syllables] is the conflation into homo-
geneous (savarna) long [vowels] and so forth; [and] the means for removing
doubts is the pauses (avasdna) [at the end of the verse] and so forth. [These are
the means of] iyadipiranah (“The filler of [the metrical line] is iy, etc.”]. The three
qualifiers of a metrical line, [i.e.] lack, excess and uncertainty, have to be under-
stood as alluded to (dksepa) [by the sitra]. Thus, this means that, through iyd, etc.,
a defective verse has to be increased, an extrametrical (adhikah) verse has to be
diminished [and] an ambiguous verse has to be clarified.

(c) Finally, according to the unknown author of Lomasisiksa:

Siinyagrhe pisacas tu garjate na ca drsyate
evam yakara vaktavyda ‘dhi-y-agnir jma@ nidarsanam |

Like a pisaca who howls in an empty house, but is not seen, so the y [semivowels]
should be pronounced as in the example ‘[a]dhi-y-agnir jma (< [...] adhi | agnih |

jma [...]) (SGmavedasamhita, kauthuma recension, 4.8.3.17.1a)."°

The attribute kevala indicates that the sound a has to be understood as not undergoing
any sandhi phenomena. This implies that any word ending in a has to be understood as
if in pausa (avasdne) once this is required by the metrical scansion. Later in the text,
avasdna will be listed as one of the means for removing ambiguities.

In other words, iyadipiiranah is analysed as:

C{[CAY) avandia + (A+) dvandva + (A) avandia Adi) } bahwvrini PUPANAN)Yvahuvrinie

The term avasdna is later explained as avasdnam tat [...] niyamitam tat paddantyatva-
vydpyam (“avasdna is prescribed [as] that which is reached at the end of a metrical
line”).

This is some sort of floating verse in the Lomasisiksd. Its position varies according to
the various manuscripts I have consulted, which are: Add 1938 of the University
Library of Cambridge (Cambridge, UK), BORI ms. n° 114/1879-80 of the Bhandarkar
Oriental Research Institute (Pune, India). Furthermore, Kielhorn [1876 (1969)] reports
it as the last one in the text whereas it is not found in the printed editions of the the
Lomasisiksa (Pathaka [1889-93] and Tripathi [1989]). Taking into account the obscure
genesis of the Siksas as they are nowadays attested, it would not be surprising if this
verse were a later addition from another text.

--- PAGE 60 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 49

In this passage, the pisdca — a flesh-eating fiend — howling in the empty
house represents the semivowel y that has to be articulated in the place of
the interval (technically called avagraha “separation”) occurring between
the words adhi and agnir. The kind of analysis carried on in this passage
suggests that, contrary to the treatises we have seen so far, the Lomasisiksa
engages with the word by word version (padapdtha) of the Vedic text and
not with its continuous version (samhitdpatha, i.e. the version recited
during the rituals), which in this case would be adhy agnir jma. In other
words, the Lomasisiksa does not prescribe CyV — CiyV, but Ci#V — CiyV.

Already Kielhorn [1876: 196], Varma [1929: 50] and Mishra [1972: 17]
attribute, with different degrees of certainty, the Lomasisiksa to the Sama-
vedic tradition, but they do not quote any primary source to justify their
claims. This affiliation seems anyway to be correct since the Lomas
for instance included in the list of Laksanas ancillary to the Samaveda-
samhita in the Samavedasarvanukramani (see fn. 9).*!

The form of RV 1.1276

In light of the sources taken into consideration in the previous section, I
suggest that, according to the vedalaksana teachings, the most proper form
of RV 1.27.6 is the following:

sa hi Sardho na mdrutam tuvisvanir (a) | apnasvatisu urvardsuv istanir (b) | @
artandsuv istanih (c) | dad dhavyaniy adadir (a) | yajftasya ketur arhand (e) | adha
sma asya harsato hrsivato (f) | visve jusanta pantha-am (g) | narah Subhe na
pantha-am (h) |

*! However, according to Falk [1992: 156] it is impossible to trace any of the so-called
Samavedic Siksas — namely the Naradi: a and Gautamis — back to
any attested Saimavedic school or family, and it is plausible to infer that they were
never used for teaching the Samavedic texts to the new generations of priests. If this is
true, the purpose of these texts remains quite obscure. One may surmise that, since the
Siksas deal not only with the language of the Vedas, but with Sanskrit in general, the
LomasSisiksa can be seen as a phonetic and phonological manual, possibly composed by
a member of a Samavedic school or family, which aims at describing some general
aspects of Vedic recitation.

--- PAGE 61 ---
50 Giovanni Ciotti

To conclude, I would like to stress the importance of this example for
the understanding of the relationship occurring between chandas and siksa,
two of the Vedarigas that compose part of the field of vedalaksana. In order
to obtain the proper form of the Vedic text, i.e. the form that is suitable for
recitation, the teachings of these two disciplines have to be mutually
integrated. In fact, siks@ is the discipline that describes the articulatory
features of the various speech-sounds. As a consequence, in order to be able
to establish that the semivowels y and v correspond respectively to the
vowels i and u, the Vedic reciter has to be acquainted with the articulatory
properties of these speech-sounds. This information is found in the texts
dealing with siksd, but not in those dealing with chandas. For instance, to
quote the most influential of the Siksas, the PdniniyasiksG (see Ghosh
[1938]) states:

kanthyav ahdav icuyasas talavya osthaja vupit
syur miirdhanyd rturasa dantyd ltulasah smrtah || 17 |

A and h are handed down as guttural [speech-sounds]; i, cu, (i.¢., c, j, jh and ii),
yand §as palatal; v, u and pu (ie., p, ph, b, bh and m) as labial; r, tu (i.e., t, th, d, dh
and n), rand s as cerebral; and /, tu (i.e., t, th, d, dh and n), / and s as dental.

In this respect, one should note that the Pratisakhyas, which are the main
form of textualisation of vedalaksana, list together all this information. This
is what Uvata describes as the restriction of the general /aksana. That i and
y share the same point of articulation is learnt from RP 1.42 tdalvydv ekdra-
cakaravargav ikadraikadrau yakdrah sakarah (“E and the c-class (i.e. c, ch, j,
jh, fi), the i-class (i.e. i, 7) and ai, y and § are palatals.”). As a consequence,
the reciter can correctly apply the instruction of RP 17.23 ksaipravarnams
ca samyogdn vyaveyat sadrsaih svaraih (“And, one should separate the con-
sonant clusters with semi-vowels by means of the homogeneous vowels”),
since he understands that the term sadrga (“homogeneous”) is used to refer
to the tdlvya (“palatal”) feature proper to both i and y.*”

~The RP does not define sadrsa, i.e. it does not openly state which articulatory features

are encompassed by this category. However, this attribute clearly resembles that of
savarna: note, in fact, that the term savarna is used by Bhaskararaya in his Chandah-
sittrabhdsyaraja to comment on RP 17.23. As stated by Deshpande [1975], the term

--- PAGE 62 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 51

Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Victor D’Avella, Alastair Gornall and Paolo
Visigalli for their insightful remarks on preliminary versions of this article.

Abbreviations

RV = Revedasamhita
RP = Rgvedapratisakhya

Primary sources

Chandahsiitra = Kanjilal [2000]
Chandahsiitrabhdsyardja = Kanjilal [2000]
Chandoviciti = Chandahsitra
Chandovicitibhdsya = Sinharay [1977]
Lomasisiksd = see fn. 30
Mrtasamjivani = Ayodhyanatha [1947]
Nirukta = Sarup [1921]

Paniniyasiksd = Ghosh [1938]
Parsadavrtti = Shastri [1931]
PaspaSsahnika = Abhyankar [1962]
Revedabhasya = Miiller [1890-2 (1966)]
Revedapratisakhya = Shastri [1931]

Rgvedasamhitd = van Nooten and Holland [1994]
Revedasarvanukramani = Sharma [1977]

Sadmavedasarvanukramani = Suryakanta [1933 (1970)]

savarna is used in the Pratisakhyas to refer to those speech-sounds sharing the same
point of articulation, whereas, within vydkarana texts, it refers to those speech-sounds
that share the same point of articulation and the same articulatory effort.

--- PAGE 63 ---
52 Giovanni Ciotti

Saunakiyacaturadhyayika = Deshpande [1997]
Vargadvayavrtti = Shastri [1931]

Secondary sources

Abhyankar, Kasinatha Vasudevasastri (ed.) [1962] The Vydkarana-Mahdbhdsya of
Pataiijali. Edited by Kielhorn, vol. 1, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute.

Allen, William Sidney [1953] Phonetics in Ancient India, London-New York: Oxford
University Press.

Ayodhyanatha (ed.) [1947] Pirigalacchandahsiitram - Haldyudayavrtti-sahitam, Banaras
Siti: Caukhamba Samskrt Sirij Aphis.

Bhadkamkar, H.M. (ed.) [1918] The Nirukta of Yaska (with Nighantu) edited with Durga’s
Commentary, vol. 1, Bombay: The Government Central Press.

Cardona, Geroge [1993] “The bhasika accentuation system” in Studien zur Indologie und
Iranistik 18, pp. 1-40.

Deshpande, Madhav M. [1975] The Theory of Homogeneity [Sdvarnya], Ann Arbor: Center
for South and Southeast Asian Studies University Press.

Deshpande, Madhav M. (ed.) [1997] Saunakiya Caturadhyayika: A Pratisakhya of the
Saunakiya  Atharvaveda, with commentaries Caturadhyayibhdsya, Bhargava-
Bhdaskara-Vrtti and Paficasandhi, London: Harvard University Press.

Falk, Harry [1992] “Samaveda und Gandharva’, in A.W. van den Hoek, D.H.A. Kolff, and
M.S. Oort (eds.) Ritual, State, and History in South Asia: Essays in Honour of LC.
Heesterman, pp. 142-63, Leiden-New York: E.J. Brill.

Ghosh, Manmohan (ed.) [1938] Paniniyasiksd, Calcutta: University of Calcutta.

Joshi, Shivram Dattatray and J.A.E Roodbergen [1986] Patafijali’s Vydkarana-
Mahabhasya, Paspasahnika, Introduction, Text, Translation and Notes, Pune:
University of Poona.

Kahrs, Eivind [1998] Indian Semantic Analysis: The Nirvacana Tradition, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

--- PAGE 64 ---
Like a Howling Pisaca 53

Kanjilal, Kripamayee (ed.) [2000] Chadahsiitrabhdsyardja of Bhaskarardya, Calcutta:
Sanskrit College.

Kielhorn, Franz [1876] “Remarks on the Siksh4s” in The Indian Antiquary 5, pp. 141-4,
193-200. (reprint: Rau, Wilhelm (ed.) [1969] Kleine Schriften I, pp. 158-69,
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag Gmbh.)

Mishra, Vidhata [1972] A Critical Study of Sanskrit Phonetics, Varanasi: The Chowkhamba
Sanskrit Series Office.

Miiller, EF Max (ed.) [1890-27] The Rig-Veda-Samhita the Sacred Hymns of the Brahmans
together with the Commentary of Sdyandkdrya, London: Henry Frowde. (reprint:
[1966] volume 1, mandala 1, Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office.)

van Nooten, Barend A. and Gary B. Holland [1994] Rig Veda: A Metrically Restored Text
with an Introduction and Notes, Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.

Parameswara Aithal, K. [1991] Veda-Laksana Vedic Ancillary Literature: A Descriptive
Bibliography, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. (reprint: [1993] Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass Publishers.)

Pathaka, Yugalakisora Vyasa (ed.) [1889- 93] Si samgrahah, A collection of Sikshas by
Yajiivalkya and Others, pp. 456-462, Varanasi: BB. Das & Co.

Peterson, Peter [1890] Handbook to the study of the Rigveda; Part 1-Introductory
[Sayana’s preface to his commentary with translation into English], Bombay.

Sarup, Lakshman (tr.) [1921] Nighantu and Nirukta: The Oldest Indian Treatise on
Etymology, Philology, and Semantics, English Translation and Notes, London-[etec.]:
Oxford University Press.

Sarup, Lakshman (ed.) [1927] Nighantu and Nirukta: The Oldest Indian Treatise on
Etymology, Philology, and Semantics, Sanskrit Text, Lahore: The University of the
Panjab.

Sharma, Unesh Chandra (ed.) [1977] Katydyana’s Rgvedasarvanukramani, Aligarh: Viveka
Publications.

Shastri, Mangal Deva [1922] The Rgveda-pratisakhya with the commentary of Uvata, Vol 1
(Part of the Introduction), Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- PAGE 65 ---
54 Giovanni Ciotti

Shastri, Mangal Deva [1931] The Rgveda-pratisakhya with the commentary of Uvata, Vol
Il (Text in Siitra-form and Commentary with Critical Apparatus), Allahabad: The
Indian Press.

Shastri, Mangal Deva [1937] The Rgveda-pratisakhya with the commentary of Uvata, Vol
Ill (English Translation of the Text, Additional Notes, Several Appendices and
Indices), Punjab Oriental Series 24, Lahore: Moti Lal Banarsi Das.

Sinharay, Haridas (ed.) [1977] Chandahsiitrabhasyam — Yadavaprakdsakrtam, Calcutta:
The Asiatic Society.

Suryakanta (ed.) [1933] Rktrantra: A Pra
[1970] Delhi: Meharchand Lachhmandas.)

ikhyas of the Sdmaveda, Lahore. (reprint:

Suryakanta (ed.) [1940] Laghurktrantrasamgraha and Sdmasaptalaksana, Lahore:
Meharchand Lachhmandas (?). (reprint: [1982] Delhi: Meharchand Lachhmandas)

Tripathi, Rima Prasada (ed.) [1989] Siksdsangrahah, Varanasi: Sampirnananda-samskrta-
visvavidyalayah.

Varma, Siddheshwar [1929] Critical Studies in the Phonetic Observation of Indian
Grammarians, London: Royal Asiatic Society.

Whitney, William Dwight (ed.) [1862] “Atharva-veda pratigékhya, or, Caunakiya
caturadhyayika: text, translation, and notes”, in Journal of the American Oriental
Society VIL.

--- PAGE 66 ---
Three

Does the Subject Have Desires?
The Atman in Prabhakara Mimamsa'

Elisa Freschi

1. Introduction

The starting point of this paper is the question posed in the title, namely;
Does the subject have desires? In other words, are desires something
belonging to the subject?

Several answers could be proposed:

(1) It is not the subject who desires, but a different entity
(Sankhya).

(2) Desire is a quality of the subject (Nyaya).

(3) The subject is essentially desirous.

' This paper has been written as part of a research project on Salikanatha Misra lead by
the author and funded by the Faculty of Oriental Studies, University “Sapienza”, Rome,
from January 2009 to December 2011.

--- PAGE 67 ---
56 Elisa Freschi

The first solution is the Sankhya one, since Saikhya authors postulate a
conscious subject (the purusa) that is distinct from the psychic faculties to
which desire is said to belong. In this sense, qualities such as desire might
be said to be adventitious characteristics of the purusa, and there is no real
connection between the two.

The second solution is the Naiyayika one. Nyaya authors say that desires
are qualities (guna) of the subject (Gtman). Douglas Berger (Berger 2012)
claims that such qualities are intrinsic to the subject because it is precisely
through desire etc. that one infers the existence of the dtman. The seminal
text of Nyaya, the Nydyasiitra, states in fact that “desire, aversion, effort,
pleasure, suffering and cognition are the inferential mark of the dtman”
(icchddvesaprayatnasukhaduhkhajnadnany atmano lingam, NS 1.1.10). But, in
fact, Naiyayikas also stress the fact that the dtman is different from its
qualities.” Specifically, an Gtman is conceivable even without desire, as, for
instance, in the state of liberation.

The third solution is, I will argue, the Prabhakara Mimamsi one. There
is no subject without desire.

In order to prove this statement, I will start with an introduction on the
Prabhakara Mimamsa approach to the problem of subjectivity and desire,
and I will then investigate further the theories about the subject in
Prabhakara Mimamsa. Before the conclusion, I will explain that one of the

The Vaisesika Siitra (5.2.20) describes liberation (moksa) as consisting in the absence
of all conjunctions regarding the self and in the fact that there is no [new]
manifestation of it. Since there are no more conjunctions, the self remains completely
isolated. This idea has been strongly criticised by theist and atheist schools alike,
which compared the self’s condition to that of a stone and suggested that it resembles
hell much more than it seems to be desirable. A similar stress on the absence of
qualities in the “pure self” is evident at the beginning of the Atmatattvaviveka
(“Discernment about the Reality of the dtman’), where Udayana (10th c.) lists the
views opposing his own and seems to consider the idea that qualities constitute the
very nature of the dtman as dangerous as the idealist perspective: “On this topic, this is
what would contradict the [theory that there is an] dtman: the destruction [of
everything] at [every] instant of time or the destruction (i.e., refusal) of [each] external
object or the destruction of the difference between the qualities and the one who is
endowed with them or the non-grasping [of any dtman]” (tatra badhakam bhavat
atmani ksana-bhangah va bdahyarthabhangah va  gunagunibhedabhangah va
anupalambhah va iti, ATV, p. 5).

--- PAGE 68 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 57

consequences of conceiving the subject as desirous, as it is in the
Prabhakara Mimamsa view, is the solving of the so-called conundrum of
desire.

One of the dilemmas of every philosophical paper is that it has to
presuppose a general understanding of the terms it wants to investigate.
Such a preliminary understanding is the conditio sine qua non that makes
possible any investigation. However, at the same time, this hampers the
investigation because it is a presumption and because its users might not be
aware of its philosophical burden. In this paper, terms such as “subject” and
“desire” will be defined in a more specific way in due course and it will be
shown eventually that the Prabhakara understanding of them might at times
be strikingly different from the one common in contemporary Western
thought. For the time being, suffice it to say that “subject” and any other
term referring to it (such as “psychic”) is used to refer to the “agent” (once
again, an ambiguous term) of actions, acts of will and acts of cognition.

2. The Prabhakara Mimamsa approach

2.1 Methodological Premise

Generally speaking, Prabhakara authors elaborate their philosophical
theories out of Vedic exegetical concerns. The theories about the subject
can be divided into two groups. On the one hand, there are theories
primarily based on Vedic exegesis and, on the other, there are those that are
also common to Nyaya and/or other schools. I start by focusing on the first
ones, for the second group occupies only a liminal position in Mimamsa
works. As my sources, I rely upon Sabara (before the V c.), the author of
the first extant commentary on the Mimamsdsiitra, and then (in decreasing
order of frequency and importance within my argumentation):
Ramanujacarya (XIV c. or later), Salikanatha Misra (VIII c.?), Prabhakara
Misra (VII c.?), and other (Bhatta) Mimamsakas. I preferred Salikanatha
over Prabhakara because of the greater clarity of the former over the latter,
and, for the same reasons, I preferred Ramanujacarya over Salikanatha. No

--- PAGE 69 ---
58 Elisa Freschi

commentary is available for Ramanujacarya’s text and for the most relevant
portions of Salikanatha’s one, but much information can be gathered by
comparing them and by cross-references to further texts on the same topics.
Methodologically, I will apply the principle of charity, that is, all else being
equal, I will prefer the interpretation which makes a theory appear more
sensible (or less absurd). This methodological approach is — in my opinion
— to be preferred both because of intrinsic and extrinsic reasons. Among
the former is the fact that Mimamsa authors start their investigation by
presupposing the validity of the Veda and then use all their skills to build a
consistent system within this framework (see Freschi 2008a). Some of their
theories may be extremely complicated, but the system they create is
generally intrinsically sound. The probability that a theory is just
preposterous and naive is hence lower than the probability that we do not
fully understand it. In fact, as non-Mimamsakas we lack so much that was a
necessary part of the Mimamsa background (such as a thorough knowledge
of the ritual and of its linguistic aspects). Given such distance from the
Mimamsa worldview, much of what will be found below has been
reconstructed through a jigsaw of different sources and by filling in the
gaps of what is not explicitly stated in the texts preserved but appears to be
logically required by their arguments.

2.2 From ritual to subject

Let us now try to think in a Mimamsaka way, namely by starting with the
Vedic prescription that is the most quoted one in Mimams texts, i.e., “the
one who is desirous of heaven should sacrifice with the New- and Full-
Moon | sacrifices” (darsapiirnamdsabhyam  svargakamo  yajeta). The
Prabhakara Mimamsa school begins its investigations on the “subject” by
discussing the role of the sacrificer (yajamdna, the one who has some
Brahmans perform the sacrifice for his own sake), who is being instructed
in this sentence. The contiguity of the concepts of yajamdna and subject is
also evident from the Prabhakara interpretation of Upanisadic statements
about the dtman. For instance, the well-known statement “the dtman has to
be seen, to be heard, to be considered, to be meditated upon” (Gtmd va are

--- PAGE 70 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 59

drastavyah Srotavyo mantavyo nididhydsitavyo BU 2.4.5) is taken to refer to
the agent of the sacrifice (see TR III §7.8.3, [1956 p. 40]).

Ramanujacarya states that the above-mentioned prescription (darsa-
pirnamasdbhyam svargakamo yajeta) refers to four levels:

(1) The desirous one (°kama).

(2) The enjoined one (niyojya).

(3) The responsible one (adhikdrin).
(4) The agent (kartr).

In Ramanujacarya’s words:

For instance, the one who is desirous of heaven (svargakama) is firstly connected
[to the prescription] as the enjoined one (niyojya), insofar as he understands
(budh-) that “I have to do (kdrya) something I did not know about before (apiirva)
[hearing this Vedic prescription]”. Thereafter, [he is connected] as the responsible
one (adhikdrin) since [he realises that] “as the ritual act (Karman) is an instrument
to realise it (heaven), this act has to be performed by me for the sake of realising
that’. [...] [Lastly, one is connected] as an agent (Aartr) when one performs it (the
ritual act). Thus, the three stages (enjoined, responsible and agent) are the
successive [conditions] of only one [type of person] (i.e., the one who is desirous
of heaven).’

The level of the desirous one is inevitably the first, because one who is
still not aware of oneself as a moral agent, will already recognise that one’s
desires are named. The level referring to the enjoined one is preceded by
the desirous one, since one becomes aware of being enjoined because the
prescription mentions as its addressee a desirous one. Hence, without desire
the subject does not exist as such. As for the next stage, “responsible”
translates the Sanskrit adhikdarin, which refers both to the fact that one is
eligible to perform a sacrifice (and the chief requirement is the fact of
being desirous) and the fact that the eligible one is bound to perform it.

* tathé hi prathamam apirvam eva mamedam karyam iti boddhrtayd niyojyatvenainveti
svargakamah purusah. sa pascat tatsiddhaye tatsadhane karmani mayanustheyam idam
karmety adhikdritaya. [...] tadanutisthan kartrtayd. ity ekasyaiva tisro ’vasthah krama-
bhavinyah, TR IV §4.10.4 [1956: 58]. For a more comprehensive analysis of this
passage, see Freschi 2007.

--- PAGE 71 ---
60 Elisa Freschi

From the point of view of the Veda, one can see how the Veda needs an
agent in order for its prescriptions to be performed. And being an agent
means being responsible, hence enjoined, hence desirous.

One might object that Ramanujacarya is a late author and that he is,
thus, not representative of earlier positions within the Mimamsa school.
However, a passage in Sabara’s text also seems to hint at a similar
interpretation and, perhaps more importantly, the same tendency may be
detected in a Srautasiitra text, that is, in one of the classes of texts which
share a common prehistory with the Mimamsa thought (see Freschi-
Pontillo 2012, § 5). In fact, in the Apastamba Srauta Siitra, desire is
mentioned among the preconditions for one to be a sacrificer.* Sabara, in
his commentary on the Mimamsd Sitra, spells out the connection with the
prescription: “After the prescription (vacana) [‘the one who is desirous of
heaven should sacrifice with the New- and Full-Moon sacrifices’] has made
the one who is desirous of heaven responsible [for the sacrifice], [it] says
‘he should sacrifice’. In this way, the distinctive mark of the responsibility
is established”.°

Sabara’s sequence has the prescription perform two functions, insofar as
it makes the desirous one into a responsible person and then makes the
latter into an agent:

injunction
gv \

1. desirous Saad 2. responsible person Saad 3. action
(the injunction influences the process twice, acting on the two links)

4 “The sacrificer must be chaste, he must [be able to] give the ritual fees, he must [be
able to] provide the ritual substances [and] he must long for the desires (i.e., the
desirable outputs mentioned in the Vedic injunctions to sacrifice)” (yajamdnasya
brahmacaryam daksinadanam dravyaprakalpanam kamanam kamanam, ApStSii 4.1.2).
The passage is mentioned in connection with Sabara’s passage (see infra) in Yoshimizu
1997: 151, fn.5.

*  svargakamam adhikrtya yajeteti vacanam ity adhikdralaksanam idam siddham bhavati,
Sabarabhasya (henceforth SBh) ad MS 6.1.3.

--- PAGE 72 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 61

To summarise, desire is the motive of (ritual) action. Indeed, there
cannot be (ritual) action without desire. Moreover, desire operates directly
on the (ritual) agent to be. Without desire, the agent is not just inactive, but
he or she does not even exist as a subject.° One might argue that one can
ontologically be a subject without being phenomenologically aware of it and
this topic will be discussed in full infra, §4.2. But this is not the kind of
“subject” I am referring to. By “subject” I exclude, e.g., amoebas, which
might exist as substances, but are not aware of it and I only refer to subjects
who are aware that they are such. The yajamdna becomes aware of his
existence as subject when he is enjoined by an injunction. And his/her’
awareness of himself or herself as subject becomes possible exactly at the
moment in which s/he recognises himself or herself as the desirous one to
which the injunction refers (see Freschi 2012 for a full discussion of this
point).

To sum up, if my interpretation is correct, before hearing the injunction
the desirous one is not aware of himself or herself as a subject. S/he had
desires, of which s/he might have had some sort of pre-conscious feeling.
These desires, were still not the desires of someone, since no one could
have claimed them as her or his own. The injunction initiates a move from
a general desire (ontologically existent, but not phenomenologically linked
to any subjectivity) to a desire perceived as pertaining to oneself, and from
this to one’s responsibility and, last, to one’s awareness of oneself as a moral
agent:

injunction

desire —> mydesire —> my responsibility —> J decide to act

It might be worth stressing that “my” underlines a connection with an
indefinite “me”, and that it still does not imply a first person perspective.
° On the necessary link between subject-ness and desire, see Freschi 2012.

MS 6.1.13 makes it clear that svargakama refers to both men and women, exactly
because women desire as well. Their role in sacrifices is, by contrast, restricted
because they lack personal wealth.

--- PAGE 73 ---
62 Elisa Freschi

One feels that the desire pertains to oneself, although one has not yet a fully
developed notion of oneself as a subject and (as explained above) one is
hence not yet a subject. This means that the experience of desire predates
the experience of oneself as a subject and that the latter happens only
insofar as it has been promoted by the former.*

3. Is desire directly connected to the subject?

Now, one might ask whether desire is directly connected with the self or
with an intermediate organ, such as the ahavikdra. It is noteworthy that this
is an ontological question, whereas the above account of the subject rather
focuses on the way it gradually relates to the sacrifice. In other words, the
above account is not determined by an ontological concern. An ontological
concern is, by contrast, easily detectable in Prabhakara texts about theories
of the dtman shared by Nyaya and other schools (and about which, see
infra, §§ 4.2 and 4.2.1). I will, therefore, first try to look for an answer to
the question outlined in the title in the proper Prabhakara texts, the
approach of which is not ontological, and later test it against the
Prabhakara-Naiyayika background of the ontologically oriented theories of
the dtman shared by other schools.

3.1 Rebuttal of intermediate entities

In many Indian schools of philosophy the psychic organ’ is described
according to the Sankhya view, ie., it is made of manas, buddhi and
ahankdra. The first (manas) indicates just one’s inner sense, the one which
grasps pleasure or pain and all other inner sensations. The second one
(buddhi), usually translated as ‘intellect’, indicates the intellectual faculty

* This interpretation relies on Ramanujacarya’s text quoted above and on its immediate

context. It elaborates on it, trying to make explicit some of its implicit passages. For a
fuller discussion, see Freschi 2012, Chapter 1.

I use this label just in so far as it might evoke, grosso modo, the collection of faculties
related with thought, will and inner sensation. No ontological commitment is meant.

--- PAGE 74 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 63

(possibly akin to Kant’s Ich denke). The third one (ahankdra, literally
meaning ‘doing “I’”) is the locus of proclaimed subjectivity, the stage in
which one recognizes oneself as an “I”.

Could this scheme also apply to Prabhakara Mimamsa? Probably not,
because the ahankdra (just like any similar intermediate organ) is hardly
mentioned in Prabhakara Mimamsa literature and because of the role desire
plays in the identification of the subject. In this function, desire relates
immediately to the subject and this process does not involve any inter-
mediate step. More generally, the account of the stages of desirous/en-
joined/responsible/agent is (probably) not ontologically oriented. It de-
scribes the phenomenology of the yajamdéina as it is experienced by Vedic
listeners and probably also the individual arousal of one’s awareness of one-
self as a subject while listening to the Veda. In fact, as seen in the above §
2.2, the yajamdna-to-be becomes aware of herself or himself through the
fact that s/he becomes aware first of desires and then of himself or herself
as the subject of them and so on. This is a purely phenomenological
description which would not make sense if seen from an ontological
perspective (in ontological terms, how could the prescription “create” the
subject it refers to?). Hence, it runs parallel to ontological descriptions.
Consequently, ontological descriptions of how the psychic organ is
constituted seem alien to this kind of account. In fact, they consider sub-
jectivity as something already there and analyse it, rather than looking at
the way it constitutes itself. Furthermore, they consider subjectivity “from
the outside”, as an object of study, whereas desire makes one aware of him-
self or herself as subject “from within”, that is, as a person and not as an
object.

3.2. Rebuttal of the quality/substrate model

Mimamsa authors, in general, seem to refute implicitly the Naiyayika
model of an dtman which is in itself motionless and without qualities, and
to which characteristics are attached during its samsaric existence. Among
the Mimamsakas, SomeSvara (12" c.?), in his Nyayasudha (a commentary
on Kumiarila’s Tantravarttika), opposes the distinction between mental acts

--- PAGE 75 ---
64 Elisa Freschi

and actions, as well as the Naiyayika claim that the former are only
qualities (dharma) of their possessor (dharmin):

By contrast, the idea that effort could be a quality of the soul has been refuted
before.”

Someévara could here be just opposing the idea that a mental act is
different than an action, but his point might have a further implication,
insofar as he might be opposing the idea of a “pure” subject, a dharmin,
distinct from its qualities, as in the Naiyayika model.

3.3 What kind of subject is a desirous one?

If the subject as conceived by Mimamsakas is not separated from action, in
particular mental acts, how can it be at the same time permanent, since
actions are transient by nature? Does not permanence imply changeless-
ness?

Although I have never read it explicitly in any Mimamsa text, the
solution might be that of conceiving a subject with a dynamic character. It
would not be permanent in a static way, but pravdhariipena (in flux). The
concept of a ‘fluxing permanence’ (pravahanityatva) is formally defined in
Gagabhatta’s Bhdttacintamani as “having the form of destroying something
of the same species [while being] mutually concomitant with the previous
non-existence of something of the same species”.'' In less technical terms,
it is a permanence of the underlying universal, while its concrete mani-
festations might be destroyed or might have not arisen yet. The concept is
applied in Mimamsa texts to meanings (artha). In fact, although the relation
between a word and its meaning is said to be permanent (nitya), words are
said to be in themselves permanent, whereas meanings are said to be per-
manent insofar as they are part of a permanent flux, so that a specific tree,
for example, will not be permanent, but it will be substituted by further

© pumdharmas tu prayatnah syat sa ca piirvam nirakrtah || 10 |\, Nyayasudha ad TV 2.1.1,

p. 576, 1.2. My emphasis.

' pravahanityatvam sajattyapragabhavasamavyaptasajatiyadhvamsakatvariipam (p. 175).

--- PAGE 76 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 65

trees, without interruption.’” I am suggesting here that just like the universal
character of tree-ness is enough to ensure the permanent relation between
the word tree and its meaning, also the subject might be conceived as acting
in various ways and changing, if only there is some undergoing continuity. I
will address in §4.2 the problem of whether such continuity should have an
ontological foundation.

4. Tests: Other occurrences of subject-theory in Mimamsa

4.1. The subject as an agent of knowledge

Apart from the ritual context discussed above, another locus classicus for
inquiries about the subject is, in Prabhakara Mimamsi, the epistemological
discussion about the way an act of knowledge is apprehended. The
Prabhakaras maintain that in every act of knowledge three items are
grasped at once, i.e. the cognised object, the cognition itself and the
cogniser. The theory is often referred to with the name of svayamprakasa
(light for itself?) and it is hence natural to compare it to the Buddhist
Pramanavadic doctrine bearing the same name. According to the latter, each
cognitive act grasps at the same time its object and itself, like a lamp, which
sheds light on outer objects and on itself at the same time. Consequently,
there is ultimately only cognition, which is self-aware insofar as it is
essentially luminous. Its own-nature is a single act of awareness and it is

Cf. ‘Therefore [Jaimini] said: “The relation between word and meant entity is
originary. Its knowledge is the teaching. And this is non-erroneous in regard to meant
entities which cannot be perceived by the senses. Hence it is an instrument of
knowledge, according to Badarayana, because it is independent”. “Originary” means
intrinsic, not relying on a person, permanent. The phonemes are permanent, the meant
entities are permanent in [their] flux. Hence, their relation does not depend on a person
(ie., it has not been created).’ (tad uktam — autpattikas tu Sabdasyarthena
sambandhah. tasya jfianam upadeso ’vyatirekas carthe ’nupalabdhe tat pramadnam
badarayanasyanapeksatvat. iti. [MS 1.1.5] autpattikah — svabhaviko ’pauruseyo nitya
ity arthah. varnanam — nityatvad ~~ arthanadm __pravahartipena _nityatvat
sambandhasyapauruseyatvam, TR III §1.3 [1956: 22]).

--- PAGE 77 ---
66 Elisa Freschi

only at a conventional level that such awareness is distinguished into a
knower subject and a known object.

In contrast, the Prabhakara view distinguishes three elements within a
cognition and claims that they are also ontologically distinct.'* In this view,
the three elements are understood in every single cognitive act, insofar as
no cognition of an object is possible without a cognising subject and
without a cognitive act itself. Nor is one only aware of the mere cognised
object, without the frame of the cognition within which this is known. One
knows a known object. This also means that, in the Prabhakara view, a
cognition is a piece of knowledge only insofar as it is self-aware. It is not,
as in Sankhya, a mechanical act to which the conscious subject adds
awareness.'* For Buddhists and Prabhakaras, in order to count as know-
ledge, a cognitive act must be intrinsically conscious.

What about acts of cognition which are not self-aware? A cognitive act

which is not self-aware could not be a case of knowledge, because it would
necessarily lack the important component of being present to itself. But are
such cases conceptually possible? An interesting example is discussed by
Ramanujacarya in the epistemological chapter of TR (TR DJ.
Ramanujacarya mentions a case where the recollection of silver arises in
one’s mind upon seeing something shiny on the beach. What one sees is
actually mother-of-pearl but one does not recognise it as such. Instead, one
only perceives its being shiny and is hence automatically reminded of
silver. Thus, one thinks one is perceiving silver In this way, what eventually
arises is an incomplete cognition, since it is a jigsaw formed of the present
indeterminate thing one sees and the silver one remembers. However, this
silver lacks the component of its being remembered (and not directly
experienced), and for this very reason it cannot be a piece of knowledge.
Now, one could ask, who is the agent in the case of such cognitions? And
how is it possible that the cogniser, who is said to be necessarily involved in
On this difference and on the Prabhakara theory in general, see Chatterjee 1979.
In Sankhya, the self, purusa, is in rest and hence all actions, including the acts involved
in the process of knowing, are carried out by its unconscious counterpart, prakrti. It is
only at the end of the process that the knowledge so gained is reflected in the purusa,
who thus becomes aware of it. The basic idea might be compared to that of a computer
carrying out a complex calculation and having a person reading the output at the end.

4

--- PAGE 78 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 67

all acts of knowledge, seems to be absent from such cognitive acts? Do
memories arise only due to samskdras ‘traces left by previous experiences’
and, hence, automatically, or is a knower nonetheless present? If s/he is
nonetheless necessary present even in memories, why does s/he seems to be
absent from the incomplete recollection of silver? In fact, the silver-
component is driven out of the recollection free from the fact that it is a
recollected item and that someone perceived it in the past.

Ramanujacarya does not explicitly address these questions and the
following is hence only my interpretation. In the case of a conscious
recollection of silver, one would simultaneously be aware of oneself and of
the act of recollection. By contrast, the recollection of silver evoked by a
lustrous piece of mother-of-pearl seems to be necessarily unconscious,
since if it were conscious, one would be able to distinguish it as a separate
piece of cognition and one would not conflate the remembered silver with
the apprehended lustrous thing. Does not its “incompleteness” exactly refer
to the fact that it lacks the element of a knower and of an act of cognition?

If this interpretation is correct, such cognitions would arise in-
dependently of a subject, which would otherwise necessarily be included in
the knowledge act. They arise due to samskdras and are, hence, not acts of
knowledge performed by an agent, but only results of the samskdras’
function. Hence, they can occur independently of an agent. Notice the
impersonality of Ramanujacarya’s account:

First of all, once there is a contact between the sense faculty and the object, the
mother-of-pearl in general, with no specific characteristic grasped, is grasped in its
general aspect, as “this”. Thereafter, due to flaws [in the cognitive process], the
silver in general, devoid of that part (the “this”- or “that’’-part, i.e., its being or not
present to the senses) [and] similar to it (mother-of-pearl), is remembered. In fact,
it is commonly experienced (drs-) that out of seeing something the recollection of
something similar [arises]. And this recollection, due to the fact that that part (i.e.
the part regarding its being or not present to the senses) has been removed, has the
same form of an experience. So far is uncontroversial for both of us (i.e., the
Prabhakara siddhdntin and the ptirvapaksin who upholds the view that recollection
is an instrument of knowledge)

At this point, due to the fact that one does not grasp the difference either
between what is being grasped and what is being remembered (i.e., between the
vaguely perceived mother-of-pearl and the recollected silver) or between grasping

--- PAGE 79 ---
68 Elisa Freschi

and remembering, there is a specific behaviour (vyavahdra) based only on the
grasping" of a form in general, and not on a specific idea [as it should be]."°

Prabhakara is clearer on this point, since he stresses the fact that
memories are usually just memories of an object and do not include the
cognitive act of grasping that object. When they occasionally do include the
cognitive act, it is because one has inferred the act of cognition (see
Chatterjee 1979: 272).

Furthermore, it is also noteworthy that the Prabhakara view on the self-
aware nature of cognition (named svasamvitprakasa by Ramanujacarya) is
discussed also in the ontological chapter of TR (TR 2) in order to oppose
the claim that the subject might be known through mind-perception
(mdnasapratyaksa). The subject cannot be accessed through mind-
perception, replies Ramanujacarya, since s/he is intrinsically a knower (i.e.,
possibly, an agent).'’ Hence, one cannot make him/her into an object of
knowledge and the only way to know about him/her is to know him/her as a
subject of knowledge, a knower. In other words, the subject can only be
grasped through his/her own activity of knowledge, insofar as this reveals
its agent:

In the same way, the self is not mind-perceptible, since [if it were so] there would
be a contradiction between the agent’s and the object’s condition. The assertion “I
know myself” is, by contrast, metaphorical. By contrast, when the objects are
illuminated (i.e., cognised), [the self] becomes evident (lit. illuminated) as it is the
substratum of cognition. Each cognition (samvid) is three times illuminating. The

According to the common usage of Sanskrit epistemology, Ramanujacarya uses three
semantic fields to refer to the act of cognition: that of grasping (upalambh-, grah-),
that of illuminating (prakds-)/shining (bhds-) and that of knowing (vid-, jfid-). Since all
translations here are merely instrumental to the general point of the article, I
eliminated much of these metaphors and preferred a plain translation.

prathamam indriyadrthasannikarse sati Suktikamatram agrhitavisesadharmakam idam
iti sdmanyena grhyate. tadanu dosavasat tadamSavikalam tatsadrsam rajatamdtram
smaryate. loke ca sadrsadarsanat sadrsasmrtir drstaiva. tac ca smaranam tadamsa-
pramosad anubhavasamdandkaram. etdvat tavad dvayor avivadam. tatra grhyamana-
smaryamdnayor grahanasmaranayor va bhedagrahat kevalam sémanyakdropalambhad
i vyavahdarah. na tu visistadhitah, TR I, 1956: 2.

The shift from “it” to “s/he” is meant to emphasise the subject-character of the subject,
which cannot be reduced to an object, an “it”.

--- PAGE 80 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 69

knower’s experience (anubhava) is necessarily present among the experiences of
the knowable contents. Since otherwise there would be an equivalence (an-atisaya)
between what is intelligible (samvid) for oneself and what is intelligible for
another.'* And since it is so, it is congruous (upapad-) that [the self] is invariably
cognised (upalambh-) together with the [knowledge’s] contents (visaya). Indeed,
the self does not appear separated from the contents nor do the contents appear
(bhds-) [in one’s intellect] if the knower does not. Therefore, that very cognition
(samvid) (namely “I know myself’) is a means of knowledge in regard to [its]
content. Although [the person] is part of the result of that cognition (samvitti), as
far as that very [cognition] turns the person into a content of knowledge, s/he is
not an object [of cognition]. S/he is only an agent. The [Grammarians] who know
what an object is [state] that the object is what is endowed with the result of an
action inherent in something different [i.e., inhering in its agent]. Hence, [the self]
is not mind-perceptible [since it is the agent of cognition, and not its object].

Similarly, Salikanatha also denies that the dtman is mind-perceptible,
since it is always a subject of cognition and never an object. Interestingly,
he then adds that the samvid (and not the dtman) is self-illuminating (TA ad
2, pp. 333-334). Thus, it is the active nature of the subject as knower (the
samvid) which can be accessed by knowledge.And this knowledge cannot
but be self-awareness, since any other type of knowledge would make the
subject into an object of knowledge, thus violating his/her nature of subject
of knowledge.

Both Ramanujacarya and Salikanatha mention no intermediate entity,
such as buddhi, ahankéra, antahkarana, in this connection, although one
could expect the buddhi to be the real agent of knowledge, as in Sankhya.
In general, they tend not to speak of the buddhi as the knower. The subject

‘8 In other words, there would be no difference between what we know directly and what
we apprehend from others. The first kind of knowledge is endowed in our awareness
with the additional features of having been experienced by us.

 tatha dtma@ ca na mdanasapratyaksah. karmakartrbhavavirodhat. “mam jandmi” iti
vyapadesas tu bhdktah. kin tu visayesu prakdSamdnesu jfiandSrayatayad prakdSate.
sarvapi samvit tritayaprakasikd. avasyam jndtur anubhavo meydnubhavesv anuvartate.
anyatha svaparasamvedyayor anatiSayah syat. visayais sahopalambhaniyamas ca evam
saty upapannah. na hy atmd visayananuviddho vabhdsate visayds ca boddhary
anavabhdsamane bhdsante. tasmat saiva samvid visaye pramdnam. saiva purusam
visayikarotiti_ tatsamvittiphalabhagitve ‘pi purusasya na karmatd. kartrtaiva. para-
samavetakriyaphalaSali karmeti karmajniah. ato na manasapratyaksah, TR I, 1956: 17.

--- PAGE 81 ---
70 Elisa Freschi

seems to be at the front line, since what one experiences is nothing but its
cognitive agency.

The svasamvitprakaésa account also shows the structural similarity of
action and knowledge. In fact, in the Mimamsa account, knowledge seems
to be just one sort of action (see supra, §3.2 for Somegvara’s explicit claim
about it). As in the case of action, knowledge is not secondarily linked to a
previously established subject. The subject is not an inert entity to which, at
a certain point, the characters of action or knowledge are linked, as in
Sankhya and, to a certain extant, as in Nyaya. The subject himself or her-
self acts or knows. Consequently, s/he does not need any intermediate link
between himself or herself and the action s/he undertakes. Unlike in
Sankhya, for instance, it does not need the faculties of action (karmendriya)
to act or the buddhi to know. For Prabhakara authors, the psychic faculties
such as the buddhi, if ever they are admitted to exist, are just the subject’s
instruments and do not change the unavoidable link between the fact of
being a subject, and acting, knowing and desiring.

Outside the Prabhakara school, a similar conclusion might be achieved
through Kumiarila’s stress on ahampratyaya as an argument to establish the
existence of an dtman (see SV, atmavada 107-139). The ahampratyaya
‘notion of the I’ is used in order to infer the existence of the subject out of
sentences such as “I know”. The dtman, according to this view, is what
appears as the aham ‘I’ in every cognition. This means that the con-
ventional I of one’s (spoken or unspoken) sentences, such as “I am running
to the office”, “I am making a cup of tea’, etc., is the subject. Such
arguments, no wonder, are strongly opposed by Vedantins, who rather aim
at establishing a self as sheer consciousness, well distinct from the con-
ventional “I”.

4.2 Salikanatha on the ontology of the atman

What about Prabhakara texts that directly elaborate on the ontology of
the dtman? As already mentioned above, such passages are not very
frequent in Prabhakara works. In fact, in the TR, which is a compact
Prabhakara encyclopaedia of sixty pages (in the 1956 edition), there is no

--- PAGE 82 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 71

mention at all of this topic. On the other hand, in the PrP several pages are
dedicated to the ontology of the dtman in the Tattvaloka section (henceforth
TA). Though even there, this topic, which is considered crucial in other
schools, is treated in a concise manner (approximately 18 pp. out of 499 in
the 1961 edition).

In the following pages I will analyse the TA in order to see whether its
ontological approach radically contradicts the phenomenological one out-
lined above.

From the very beginning, the TA seems to seek a balance between the
two opposite tendencies. In its second verse, the first hemistich is rather
ontologically oriented, whereas the second one stresses the role of the
subject as the agent of cognitions we can experience in everyday life:

The self, distinguished from intellect, sense faculties and from the body, is all-
pervasive and stable, different according to each field [of experience] (ie.,
according to each empirical individual), it shines forth in the act of understanding
of the objects.”

Further in the TA, the subject is repeatedly identified as the knower
(jfatr)' and its necessity is demonstrated through epistemological
arguments (such as the need for a reunification of different sense-
cognitions and the possibility of memory).” Similarly, the empirical subject
(i.e., the embodied atman, see infra) is said to be an experiencer (bhoktr).”

Such emphasis on the subject as knower or as experiencer might,
however, be interpreted as just instrumental to the ontological foundation of
the dtman. That this is not the case is only suggested by the history of the
Mimamsa reflection on this topic, which originates from Vedic hermeneutic
concerns and not from ontological ones. Historically, it is more probable

°° buddhindriyasarirebhyo bhinna atma vibhur dhruvah | nanabhiitah pratiksetram artha-

vittisu bhasate || 2 ||
21 ‘The self is indeed the knower’ (jaata hy dtma, TA ad 2, p. 320).
“Tam touching now what I saw before”: in such cases a single synthesiser is
apprehended. And one acquires the recollection of sense-objects even once they have
disappeared to the respective sense faculty.’ (yad aham adraksam tad aham sprsamity
atra pratisandhataikah pratiyate. smaranan cendriyarthandm tattadindriyapaye "pi yad
upalabhyate, TA ad 2, p. 319).
2 so ’yam atma bhokta, TA ad 2, p. 332.

--- PAGE 83 ---
T2 Elisa Freschi

that ontological arguments have been added in epistemology and ritual
hermeneutics in order to firmly ground the subject’s phenomenological role,
than the other way around.

Later in TA (p. 343), Salikanatha reinforces the ontological com-
mitment. He says that the dtman is existent (sat), stable (dhruva), in-
destructible (avinasin) and uncaused (akdrana).

Why, then, is the ontological approach added to (or presented along
with) the phenomenological one? Hypothetically, one might propose that
Salikanatha adds a further line of argumentation to the standard Prabhakara
one, based on the Veda and, therefore, on the phenomenology of the subject
and on its role in epistemology. This new line of argumentation is based on
ontology and is inspired by the arguments of its interlocutors, mainly
Naiyayika authors. Consider, in the following sequence of arguments, how
there is no interruption between the hermeneutical and the ontological
approach, but the latter is marked by the usage of dtman instead of “agent”
or “experiencer”:

(Vedic-based argument:) In regard to someone who [performs] no action, agency
and the fact of being an experiencer would be [merely] ad hoc constructions. [But]
an agent and an experiencer, presupposed by the [Vedic] sentence about the one
having the sacrifice’s weapons [which refers to the dtman as the sacrificer and as
the one who will enjoy heavenly bliss],”* must be determined, hence the mention of
recognition has been put forth.

(Nyaya-influenced argument:) And when this self has been recognised,
consciousness (lit. “what consists of consciousness”) is its characteristic. Nor does
this (consciousness) arise at a certain point from it (the self) alone. For an effect
whose [single] cause is always present would not arise [only] from time to time.
[...] Therefore this self, which is the cause in which [consciousness] inheres,
requires a [further] cause, one that is inherent to it.”

* “This sacrificer who has the sacrifice’s weapons (the sacrifice’s substances and tools),
will go to the heavenly world quickly’ (sa esa yajfdyudhi yajamano ’iijasa svargam
lokam yati). The sentence is discussed by Sabara, SBh ad MS 1.1.5. I could not locate a
Vedic source for it. On yajfidyudha, see Mylius 1995, s.v.: “die ‘Waffen des Opfers’;
gemeint sind die Opfergerite.” Mylius further mentions many instances of this
compound in the Taittirlya Samhita, the Katha Samhita, the Kapisthala Katha Samhita,
the Maitrayani Samhita, the Aitareya Brahmana, the Taittiriya Brahmana, the Satapatha
Brahmana and the Baudhayana Srautasiitra.

--- PAGE 84 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 73

In this regard, some [opponents] say: “[This required] cause inhering in the
inherent cause is another activity, defined as knowledge, inherent to it (the self)”.

[Siddhantin:] “But this is incorrect, since this also should be followed by a
cause inhering in its cause. Therefore let there better be a [cause] of consciousness
only. And this is called contact of mind and self. And the cause inhering in this
cause is the movement of the mind (which inheres in the contact of mind and self).
And of this (movement) the effort, inherent to the self and other than the contact
of self and mind, or the unseen [force] is the required cause inhering in its cause.
And the effort and the unseen [force] are other than (i.e., different from) the
contact of self and mind. Hence, it has to be considered that this succession of
cause and effects has no beginning, like sprout and seed”.”°

According to the Nyaya school, there are three sorts of causes: 1. the samavdyikdrana
‘cause in which [the effect] inheres’, such as the two halves of a pot, in which the effect
(the pot) inheres; 2. the asamavayikdrana ‘cause in which [the effect] does not inhere
[since this cause rather inheres in the cause mentioned above]’, such as the contact of
the two halves, which inheres in them; 3. the nimittakdrana ‘necessary condition’, such
as the potter. In Roy W. Perrett’s words: “[T]he pot-halves or the threads are the
inherent causes of the pot or the cloth because the latter effects inhere in the former
causes. Note that for Nyaya the halves or the threads are not that out of which the pot
or the cloth are composed. Rather the effects inhere in the cause so that, for instance,
the cloth is not produced out of the threads but subsists in the threads” (Perrett 1998:
255). The translation “non-inherent cause” for asamavdyikdrana is appealing because
of its simplicity and because of the straightforward opposition to the samavayikdrana
(wrongly) translated as “inherent cause”, but it is essentially wrong, since the
asamavayikdrana does indeed inhere in something and the samavayikarana is the
cause in which the effect inheres.

The sprout and the seed are the Indian equivalents of hen and egg. akriyasya kartrtvam
bhoktrtvam ca kalpanikam syat. karté bhokta ca yajiiayudhivakyena daksiptah
samarthayitavyah iti upayuktah  pratyabhijiiopanydsah. yada cayam_—atma
) idatma tasya dharmah ndasau tanmdatraprabhavah
at. sada sannihitakadranakam hi karyam na kdddcitkam bhavet. [...]
tasmad ayam dtmd samavdayikdranabhiitah kificid asamavayikadranabhiitam apeksate.
tatra kecid jidnalaksanam vyaparadntaram tatsamavetam evdsamavayikdranam Ghuh.
tat tv anupapannam iti. yatas tasyapi kificid asamavayikdranam anusaraniyam. tac ca
varam citer evdstu, tac catmamanassannikarsakhyam. tasya ca asamavayikdranam
manasa eva parispandah. tasyapi dtmamanassannikarsdntaram dtmasamavetam
prayatnam, adrstam vapeksamdnam asamavdyikdranam. prayatnddrstayo§ catma-
manassannikarsantaram eveti, anddir esa kdryakdranaparampara bijankuravad iti
veditavyam, TA ad 2, p. 329.

--- PAGE 85 ---
74 Elisa Freschi

In the first part of the argument, the subject is declared to be
intrinsically an agent and an experiencer. This point is confirmed also by
the editor of the PrP who comments on the above as follows:

Through the recognition [the author] does not aim only at establishing the
persistence of the dtman. Rather, he wishes to express also that it is established
that the dtman is an experiencer. Fruition, experience, sensation share the same
meaning. Sensation is also an action, since it is expressed by a verbal root.
Ordinary people say that actions are expressed by verbal roots. Hence the dtman is
established to be intrinsically an agent and an experiencer.””

There appears to be a contrast between this part of the argument and the
statement immediately following in the TA, which is the one quoted above
about the fact that consciousness is a quality of the dtman. In fact, the latter
seems to imply that at least in principle consciousness is something added
to the subject, whereas the Vedic-based argument pointed to a subject
which is intrinsically an agent and a knower. Perhaps one might understand
Salikanatha’s last point as a way to smooth the contrast. In fact, the
(otherwise obscure) hint at sprout and seed might be meant to stress the
fact that the connection of self and awareness has no beginning and is hence
not just accidental. For the time being I can only solve the contrast by
postulating a second level of influence on Salikanatha’s teaching about the
subject.

To sum up, Salikanatha (VIII ¢.?) dedicates several pages to the
ontology of the dtman. These pages appear neither innovative nor parti-
cularly original, yet Salikanatha must have deemed the topic important
enough to include it in his PrP. By contrast, Ramanujacarya (XIV c. or
later) hardly uses the term dtman and does not discuss at all any ontological
argument about it. That the topic of the subject interests him is proved,
however, by the many pages concerning its hermeneutical and epi-
stemological phenomenology.

pratyabhijidya natmanas sthiratvasiddhir evaikam prayojanam abhipretam, api tw
atmano bhoktrtvasiddhir api vivaksita. bhogah anubhavah  samvedanam _ ity
anarthantaram. samvedanam api kriyd dhdtuvdcyatvat, dhatuvacya kriyeti laukikah.
atah kartrtvabhoktrtvasvariipa atma siddhah, editor's note on TA, pp. 329-330.

--- PAGE 86 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 75

Why does Salikanatha feel the need to add ontological arguments,
probably borrowed from the Nyaya school? And why does not
Ramanujacarya feel the same need? What happened in the intervening
period?

The following answer is tentative and it is based mostly on the method
of investigating into the history of ideas (Jdeengeschichte). It is easy to see
that one of Salikanatha’s principal opponents, namely the Buddhist
Pramanavadins, is altogether absent in Ramanujacarya’s work. In fact,
Ramanujacarya was active in South India and at a time when Buddhism
was no longer a philosophical concurrent. Consequently, Salikanatha might
have felt the need to defend the dtman also from an ontological point of
view, in order to resist to the Buddhist andtmavdda, whereas
Ramanujacarya was active at a time in which the existence of an Gtman was
common sense among philosophers. Thus, he could rather focus on its
epistemological and hermeneutic phenomenology.

However, this cannot be the whole picture, since a philosopher, like
Salikanatha, cannot be thought to just respond to external inputs. On the
contrary, he must have replied to the Buddhist objections by formulating an
answer which used the principles of his system. In other words, Salikanatha
may well have felt the need to oppose the Buddhists, but he surely did it in
a way that he felt was consistent with the rest of his system. Hence, did he
adjust his system to accommodate the dtman-ontology, or should one
presuppose an ontological background also in the works of his pre-
decessors? If so, why is this ontological background lacking in his suc-
cessors?

To sum up, there are two possible explanations for the presence of
ontological discussions in Salikanatha’s discourse and for their absence in
Ramanujacarya (who usually closely follows Salikanatha): (1) It was
Ramanujacarya who strongly exhibited the tendency to deal with the topic
of subjectivity in a non-ontological way; (2) It was Salikanatha who was the
innovator in admitting ontology within the Prabhakara Mimamsa’s in-
vestigations about subjectivity. It is difficult to advance a conclusive ex-
planation, since the Prabhakara texts that were written during the time
separating these two authors have been little, if at all, studied.

--- PAGE 87 ---
76 Elisa Freschi

As a first assessment of the issue, one might note that the term dtman is
almost absent in Ramanujacarya’s text, just like in the works of Sabara and
Prabhakara referred to above and in many passages of Salikanatha dealing
with the subject. In all these cases, terms referring to the role of the subject
as knower, experiencer and (ritual) agent are preferred (e.g. yajamédna,
jfatr, bhoktr, adhikarin, kartr and purusa). The term dtman is, by contrast,
only found in some specific passages authored by Salikanatha Misra. If I
am understanding Salikanatha correctly, the dtman lies beyond the
yajamdna, etc. For instance, it is only once embodied that the dtman
becomes an experiencer, and it is only thanks to the manas that it gets in
touch with sensory perceptions. In itself, it has no direct link to action (in-
cluding knowledge) and experience alike, it constitutes the bare
precondition for these to happen. Since, however, Mimamsa authors mainly
focus on everyday experience as we know it, they are hardly interested in
this precondition and rather focus on the subject in its empirical form,
which is the only one that can be encountered. As stated by Salikanatha:

Wherever one grasps a quality of the dtman, there alone is the dtman.”*

In other words, the dtman is grasped only through its qualities.

4.2.1 The subject and the psychic functions: buddhi, ahankara, manas

There is a related point regarding the connection between buddhi ‘intellect’
and the subject. In the TA, a Pramanavadin opponent states that the buddhi
is to be equated with the subject insofar as it is a knower:

And the self is the knower, the self is the intellect.”

This has a further, interesting consequence. Unlike the Vedantic dtman,
the Pramanavadic intellect is impermanent. The same intellect does not ex-
tend throughout one’s life. If it seems it does, it is only insofar as all

8 -yatra yatrdtmano guna upalabhyate, tatra tatra tavad atma vartata iti, TA ad 2, p. 343.

” — boddha catma bhavatiti, buddhir evatma, TA, ad 2, p. 326.

--- PAGE 88 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 77

interruptions (be they caused by sleep or whatever else) do not hinder the
previous intellect to produce a further one, which—being its product—
closely resembles it:

This self-luminous (intellect), which flows in the beginningless flux of causes and
effects, does not attain the course of the synthesising cognition continuously since
it is overpowered in cases such as sleep, intoxication and fainting.*°

One would expect a sharp retort on the part of the siddhdantin, whereas
he just states:

As for what has been said, that the intellect continues to be present during sleep,
etc., that also is not the point, because there is no instrument of knowing [about
it}.

This doubt might be related to the ahampratyaya (‘notion of an I’)
conception sketched above (end of § 4.1). If the self is tantamount to the “I”
we experience, we have no way of knowing about its presence or absence
when there is no “I”, as in deep sleep.

A last point worth investigating is the link between subject and
ahankara. The ahankdra is the function through which the sense of an I is
constituted. Hence, given that the subject is known as an “I” in the
ahampratyaya, could not one say that what the Prabhakaras call “subject” is
just the aharkara function? Salikanatha discusses this point in the TA (ad
2, p. 327) and rejects it together with the idea that the subject is nothing but
the body. The ahakdra, in sum, is nothing but a physiological function,
with ultimately no intellectual nature that could account for the existence or
the experience of the subject.

The manas ‘inner sense-faculty’ is discussed in TA, especially on p.
332. Its depiction resembles the one common to other darsanas. In fact, the
manas is said to be a substance (dravya) of atomic size (paramdanu-
parimdna), to be permanent (nitya) insofar as it does not depend on a cause

© sa ca svayamprakasa karyakadranabhdvenandadisantanavahini: svapamadamurcchddisv

abhibhiitataya punah punar anusandhanapatham nayati, TA, ad 2, p. 316. Z
svapdadisv api buddhir anuvartata iti yad uktam, tad api pramdnabhdvad asaram, TA,
ad 2, p. 319.

--- PAGE 89 ---
78 Elisa Freschi

(akdrana), and to move quickly through the body, for it is only through its
contact with one of the senses that the atman becomes aware of a sense
perception. The manas is thus one of the senses, responsible for inner
perceptions of pleasure and pain and is co-responsible for outer perceptions
of external objects. It is an epistemological instrument of the subject and
has little connection with the “mind” as discussed, for instance, in con-
temporary Analytic philosophy, where the “Philosophy of Mind” is now a
distinct branch of philosophy.*?

To summarise, Salikanatha does not seem to be particularly keen either
on defending buddhi or ahankdra, probably because they do not play any
significant role in the Prabhakara theory about the subject.

5. The conundrum of desire

A related issue is that of the so-called conundrum of desire.** In fact, if
desire is needed as a phenomenological trigger to make one become aware
of oneself as a subject, should not it be all the more true that desire is the
cause of every action?

The conundrum of desire is a well-known puzzle that seems to lead to a
logical paradox. Below, I will show that the conundrum does not arise in the
Mimamsaka approach to desire, action and subjectivity.

The starting point of the conundrum is the seemingly obvious statement
that all action is preceded by one’s desire to undertake it, and by the also
commonsensical statements that liberation entails the absence of desire.
Hence, if:

Compare the meaning of mind in the many companions and introductions dedicated to
this topic (Blackwell, Continuum, Routledge, etc.) or the content of the journal of
Analytical Philosophy bearing the same name. In all these cases, mind refers to
consciousness, mental events and to what pre-modern philosophy deems to be the
function of the “soul” and today’s reductionists consider to be the function of the
“brain”.

On the conundrum see Framarin 2005 and its thorough review, Brodbeck 2010.

--- PAGE 90 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 79

(1) Desire leads to action.

(2) Liberation is the absence of desires.

(3) Liberation has to be achieved (through actions).
Then:

(4) The absence of desires is achieved through desire.

This seems paradoxical. There are several ways to resolve the
conundrum, for instance, by denying premise (3). Saikara explains how
liberation does not need to be “achieved” nor “realised”. It occurs only
through knowledge and this knowledge is in itself only an awareness and is
not a cognitive act. One is liberated once one is aware of what has always
been true. Consequently, there is no need for any action and, consequently,
for any desire to undertake it. A similar solution is the one proposed by the
Saiva school of recognition (pratyabhijfid), where liberation occurs through
one’s recognition of oneself as identical with the Supreme Lord. Also the
Madhyamaka denial of any difference between samsdra and nirvana could
lead to a similar output.

Such solutions do not seem to be viable options for Mimamsa authors,
who generally oppose the view that liberation can be achieved through
knowledge alone.“ Let me, therefore, examine other possible ways out. In
his essay on this conundrum, Christopher Framarin discusses one of the
most common solutions, which solves the paradox by splitting the meaning
of “desire”. According to this view, desire is made of passion and will. In
Indian terms, I might suggest a distinction between kdma ‘desire, passion’
and icchd ‘will’ (or sarikalpa ‘resolution’). One has to get rid of passion. By
contrast, ‘will’ enables one to act and should not be eliminated. Here is the
conundrum rephrased accordingly

If:

(1) Desireteadste-aetiorn icchd leads to action.

(2) Liberation is the absence of desites kamas.

(3) Liberation has to be achieved (through actions).
Then,

(4) The absence of kdmas is achieved through icchd.

* On this topic, see the debate between Mesquita 1994 and Taber 2007.

--- PAGE 91 ---
80 Elisa Freschi

When understood in this way, consequence (4) no longer contradicts its
premises.

Does this solution suit the Mimamsa context? Apparently not, since the
kind of desire mentioned in Mimamsi texts, referring to desirous ones,
seems to point to an interpretation of desire as “passion”, rather than will or
intention (icch@/sankalpa). Mimamsi texts address people who are desirous
of something as X-kdma (e.g. pasukama ‘the one who desires cattle’,
putrakama ‘the one who desires a son’, svargakama, ‘the one who desires
heaven’). More importantly, also the kind of desires mentioned, e.g. the
desire for a son, cattle, happiness, rain and a village etc., seems to point to
desire in the sense of “passion”, or at least not to exclude it. Further,
Kumiarila implicitly refutes the distinction between desire and will while
discussing the Buddha's absence of desires. In the Buddhist vs. Kumarila
debate about the epistemic validity of the Buddha's words, the Buddhist side
maintains that the Buddha was free of desires, i.e., passions, and Kumarila
replied that, if so, he could not have been able to speak, since speaking
implies the desire to express something. The Buddhist side, as evident in
Dharmakirti, maintained that he was free of ordinary desires, but not of the
resolution to act.*° For Kumarila, however, the distinction was just sophistry.
Therefore, how could a solution similar to the one rejected by Kumarila be
used by the Mimamsakas themselves to explain the conundrum of desire?
Lastly, Mimamsakas never accept anything extra-ordinary, unless they have
strong evidence in favour of it.*” Now, desire is commonly experienced,
whereas the distinction between two orders of desires runs the risk to be an

5 ‘And once he (the Buddha) has been established (vyavasthd-) as being devoid of desire
(raga), etc. and inactive, [his] instructions must have been composed by someone else
without [proper] consideration (pratyaveksana)’ (ragd@dirahite casmin nirvydpdare
vyavasthite | desananyapranitaiva syad rte pratyaveksanat || SV codana 137). A paper
on the Buddhist-Kumarila controversy is under preparation by the present author
together with Chiara Neri.

*© On this topic, see Pecchia 2007-8 and Taber 2011. Dharmakirti’s treatment of the theme

is closely linked to Kumarila’s objections discussed in Kataoka 2003: 24-26.

“By the Mimamsakas [...] now, as always, nothing is postulated, besides what is

directly perceivable.’ (mimamsakaih tu punah || 98 || idanim iva sarvatra drstan

nadhikam isyate, SV codana 98d-99ab).

--- PAGE 92 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 81

unwarranted presupposition, invented ad hoc in order to explain how the
Buddha could be able to speak and to solve similar difficulties.

5.1 What happens in the Prabhakara Mimamsi context?

To summarise, the solution that postulates a distinction between passion
and will does not apply to the Mimamsa context in general. What could,
then, be the Prabhakara Mimamsa solution to the conundrum of desire?

As already explained, the subject is identified due to fact that s/he is
desirous. Desire is not a sufficient cause for one to undertake an action. By
contrast, it is a necessary cause for a human being to understand an
injunction. It is this alone that causes him or her to act. This is evident in
the ritual sphere, but can be applied, according to Prabhakara authors, to all
sorts of actions, insofar as they are performed in order to fulfil something
which has to be done (be it studying, since one is a brahmacdrin, or
working, or eating, or having a family, etc.). Further, within Prabhakara
Mimamsa, liberation is beside the point; the chief concern is to perform
what one has to do (i.e., fulfilling one’s kdrya ‘duty’). Even in the TA, the
“ontological” chapter of the PrP, Salikanatha only speaks of prescriptions as
that which leads to liberation. Desire is needed in order to identify the
enjoined one even when liberation is at stake:

The prescription “The one who desires immortality should meditate upon the
dtman” has to be postulated. The meaning of the sentence is that the enjoined one
is the one who desires immortality and what has to be done by him has as content
a meditation upon the dtman.**

These premises lead one to a radical rephrasing of the conundrum:

(1) Desireteads+te-aetion Desire enables the injunction to lead the
subject to action.

(2) Liberation is the absence of desires.

(3) Liberation -haste-be-achieved Liberation is a by-product.

amrtatvakamah = dtmanam upasita iti vidhih kalpyate. amrtatvakamaniyojyakam
dtmopasandavisayakam karyam iti vakyarthah, TA ad 2, p. 343.

--- PAGE 93 ---
82 Elisa Freschi

Thus, the paradox is neutralised since the desire is no longer the direct
cause of action, but rather the cause of the identification of the agent-
subject. Her being desirous constitutes the conditio sine qua non for her
acting, but not its cause. The desire is here a precondition for the possibility
of a subject and not just for its undertaking an action. In this sense the
desire might be equated to the role of the mere existence of a subject. The
existence of a subject is also needed in order to perform an action, but this
does not lead into a conundrum. Furthermore, although desire is still
present as a precondition, the goal is now the performance of what has to
be done and the condition of absence of desire is achieved while per-
forming what has to be done. Hence, there is no contrast between pre-
condition and goal.

This shows that the conundrum in fact depends on the assumption that
the first premise is true and that there is no desireless action. The belief that
desire is the necessary and sufficient cause for action can also be found in
David Hume’s analysis of action (see, for instance, Enquiry 1999:293).”
However, this claim is controversial. In the Indian world, Simon Brodbeck
has, for instance, offered a very insightful discussion of Krsna’s injunction
of acting without desire in the Bhagavadgitd (Brodbeck 2010). After an
analysis of the will/passion interpretation, Brodbeck dismisses it and
explains that Krsna is literally enjoining a desireless action, which is hence
not something inconceivable in the Indian world. In other words, the whole
conundrum might not apply to all Indian authors and schools and seems not
to apply at all to the Gita context. The same holds true in the case of
Prabhakara Mimamsa, where desire is not the cause of one’s action and the
emphasis is rather put on performing what one has to do. It might be
interesting to note that Prabhakara authors in the Post-Classical period
were often Vaisnavas and sometimes quote verses from the Gita in the
closing stanzas of their Mimamsa works. Therefore, the proximity of the
two conceptions is probably no accident.

* This opinion is upheld by Framarin, who generalises Hume’s influence (Framarin

2005: 144).

--- PAGE 94 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 83
6. Conclusion

In the preceding pages I hope to have shown that the subject is conceived in
Prabhakara Mimamsa as intrinsically desirous. Hence, the subject is also
intrinsically a moral subject and an agent. Possibly, as a consequence of
these basic links, intermediate psychic faculties (such as buddhi and
ahankara) become marginal in Prabhakara thought and are only confined to
the rare ontological discussions about the constituents of the psyche. In
other words, the very marginality of buddhi etc. in Prabhakara texts could
be a further evidence of the fact that their conception of the subject is a
phenomenological one.

If I were to render this phenomenological description in ontological
terms, I would suggest that the subject implied in Prabhakara“® texts is a
dynamic entity, which exists insofar as it acts. It must however be
remembered, once again, that Prabhakara texts do not explicitly describe
the subject and they rather focus on how it relates to the sacrifice.

The necessity of desire as the trigger for one to become a subject should
not be misconstrued as identical with the theory that all actions are
undertaken because of desire. Prabhakaras rather think that desire makes
one aware of the injunctions addressing him or her and that injunctions
alone cause one to act.

Lastly, the ontological treatment of the dtman in Salikanatha’s
Prakaranapajiciké raises further questions: is this ontology the presupposed
background of the phenomenological approach current in other Prabhakara
texts? Or has it been borrowed by Nyaya authors, due to the contingent
problem of opposing the Buddhists? A tentative answer is that Salikanatha
spells out the ontological precondition for the phenomenological
appearance of the subject.

“And possibly also in Bhatta texts, as may be suggested by the usage of the aham-

pratyaya.

--- PAGE 95 ---
84 Elisa Freschi

Bibliography and Abbreviations

ApSrSii, Apastamba Srautasitra: Apastamba-Srauta-sitra: text with English translation
and notes (2004). Ed. by Ganesh Umakant Thite, New Bharatiya Book Corp.: Delhi.

ATV, Atmatattvaviveka: Atmatattvaviveka by Udayanacarya with Translation, Explanation
and Analytical-Critical Survey (1995). Ed. by N.S. Dravid, Indian Institute of
Advanced Study: Shimla.

Berger, Douglas (2012). The Abode of Recognition: Memory and the Continuity of Selfhood
in Classical Nydya Thought, in Irina Kuznetsova, Jonardon Ganeri, and Chakravarti
Ram-Prasad (eds.), Self and No-Self: Hindu and Buddhist Ideas in Dialogue, Dialogues
in South Asian Traditions: Religion, Philosophy, Literature, and History Series,
Ashgate: Hants and Indianapolis.

Brodbeck, Simon (2010). “Review of Ch.G. Framarin, Desire and Motivation in Indian
Philosophy”, Religious Studies 46, pp. 135-140.

BU, Brhaddranyakopanisad: Brhadaranyakopanisad (1988). Ed. by Krishnacharya
Tamanacharya Pandurangi, S.M.S.O. Sabha publication: Chirtanur.

Chatterjee, Tara (1979). “Did Prabhakara hold the view that knowledge is self-
manifesting?”, Journal of Indian Philosophy 7.3, pp. 267-276.

Framarin, Christopher G. (2009). Desire and Motivation in Indian Philosophy. Hindu
Studies Series, Routledge: London and New York.

Framarin, Christopher G. (2005), “Taking Desirelessness (Niskamakarma) Seriously”,
Asian Philosophy 15.2, pp. 143-155.

Freschi, Elisa (2012). Action, Desire and Subjectivity in Prabhakara Mimamsd, in Irina
Kuznetsova, Jonardon Ganeri, and Chakravarti Ram-Prasad (eds.), Self and No-Self:
Hindu and Buddhist Ideas in Dialogue, Dialogues in South Asian Traditions: Religion,
Philosophy, Literature, and History Series, Ashgate.

Freschi, Elisa (2007). “Desidero Ergo Sum: The Subject as the Desirous One in Mimamsa”,
Rivista degli studi orientali 80, pp. 51-61.

Freschi, Elisa (2008a). “Structuring the Chaos: Bhatta Mimamsa Hermeneutics as
Depicted in Ramanujacarya’s Sastraprameyapariccheda. Critical Edition and Annotated
Translation of the Forth Section”, East and West 58, pp. 157-184.

--- PAGE 96 ---
Does the Subject Have Desires? 85

Freschi, Elisa and Tiziana Pontillo (2012). When one thing applies more than once: tantra
and prasatiga in Srautasitra, Mimdaémsa and Grammar, in Maria Piera Candotti and
Tiziana Pontillo (eds.), Ancient India and Greece Reflections on Denotation in absentia,
Anthem: London.

Hume, David (1999). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. by Tom L.
Beauchamp, Oxford University Press: Oxford.

Kataoka, Kei (2003). “Kumiarila’s Critique of Omniscience”, Indo Shisd shi Kenkyii 15, pp.
35-69.

Mesquita, Roque (1994). “Die Idee der Erlésung bei Kumarilabhatta”, Wiener Zeitschrift
fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 38, pp. 451-484.

MS, Mimdamsasiitra, see SBh.

Mylius, Klaus (1995). Wérterbuch des Altindischen Rituals, Institut fiir Indologie:
Wichtrach.

Pandurangi, Krishnacharya Tamanacharya (2004). Prakaranapafcika of Salikanatha: with
an exposition in English. Indian Council of Philosophical Research: New Delhi.

Pecchia, Cristina (2007-8). “Is the Buddha like ‘a Man in the Street’? Dharmakirti’s
Answer”, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 51, pp. 163-192.

PrP, Prakaranapaiicika: Salikanatha Miéra (1961). Prakaranapaiicika with the commentary
Nydyasiddhi of Jayapuri Narayanabhatta, ed. with notes by A. Subrahmanya Sastri,
Visvavidyalaya: Kasi.

Perrett, Roy (1998). Causation, Indian Theories of, in Edward Craig (ed.) Routledge
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, vol. 2, pp. 244-257, Routledge: London and New York.

SBh, Sabarabhasya: Sabara et al. (1970). MimdamsadarSana, ed. by Kashinath Vasudev
Abhyankar and Ganesasastri Ambadasa Josi, Anandasramasamskrtagranthavali n.97,
Anandasrama: Pune.

SV, Slokavarttika: Kumiarila (1978). Slokavarttika of Sri Kumarila Bhatta with the
Commentary Nydyaratnakara of Sri Parthasarathi Misra, ed. by Dvarikadasa Sastri,

Prachyabharati Series 10: Varanasi.

TA, Tattvaloka chapter of PrP.

--- PAGE 97 ---
86 Elisa Freschi

Taber, John (2007). Kumdrila the Vedantin?, in Johannes Bronkhorst (ed.), Vedanta and
Mimdmsa: Interaction and Continuity, Motilal Banarsidass: Delhi.

Taber, John (2011). Did Dharmakirti think the Buddha had desires?, in Helmut Krasser,
Horst Lasic, Eli Franco, Birgit Kellner (eds.) Religion and Logic in Buddhist
Philosophical Analysis. Proceedings of the Fourth International Dharmakirti
Conference Vienna, August 23-27, 2005, Austrian Academy of Sciences Press (Beitriage
zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens 69): Vienna.

TR, Tantrarahasya: Ramanujacarya (1956). Tantrarahasya. A Primer of Prabhakara
Mimamsa, critically ed. with Introduction and Appendices, ed. by Ramaswami Sastri
Siromani, K.S., Oriental Institute: Baroda.

TV, Tantravarttika: see SBh.
Yoshimizu, Kiyotaka (1997). Der “Organismus” des urheberlosen Veda: eine Studie der

Niyoga-Lehre Prabhdkaras mit ausgewdhlten Ubersetzungen der Brhati, De Nobili
Research Library N. 25: Vienna.

--- PAGE 98 ---
Four

Karakas in Candra Grammar:
An Interpretation
from the Pali Buddhist Sdastras'

Alastair Gornall

In all traditional Sanskrit grammars the goal of the treatment of cases is to
relate semantics and morphology, ultimately enabling nominal inflection.
However, the way in which this is done varies greatly. The nature of the
treatment of case relations in the Candra grammatical tradition and its
connection with the closely-related Paninian grammatical tradition has
received a fair amount of critical attention, though, due to the lack of
editions of commentaries on the Cdandra-vrtti, the inner-workings and
mechanisms of the grammatical system have often remained obscure and
subject to debate.’

‘ I am greatly indebted to the thoughts and comments of Eivind Kahrs, Vincenzo

Vergiani, James Benson, Giovanni Ciotti, Paolo Visigalli, and Patricia Sauthoff. All
errors that remain are, of course, my own.

2 Cf. JOSHI and ROODBERGEN (1975: xvi-xix), DESHPANDE (1979), VERHAGEN
(1992, 2001: 292).

--- PAGE 99 ---
88 Alastair Gornall

In this article | explore an interpretation of the Candra treatment of
cases in a highly sophisticated, yet almost completely neglected, system of
Pali grammar, the Moggalldna system. This grammatical literature is of
particular relevance since it is largely based on the Cdndra-vydkarana
(CV), its vrtti (CVV) and commentaries. Consisting of the Moggallana-
vydkarana (Mogg), Moggallana-vutti (Mogg-v) and the Moggalldna-paficika
(Mogg-p), this system was composed in Lanka by Moggallana Mahathera
in the aftermath of the sangha reforms of Parakramabahu I in 1156.
Moggallana’s pupil, Sangharakkhita, later composed a sub-commentary
(tika@) on the Moggallana-paficika (Mogg-p-t) as well as a handbook on case
relations, the Sambandhacinta (Sambandh).

While this grammatical literature is written in Pali, it represents the
most comprehensive analysis available of a grammatical system that
operates on Candra principles. In this regard, the Moggallana grammatical
tradition provides a unique opportunity to understand how 12" century
Lankan grammarians understood the Candra tradition’s treatment of cases.

1, MOGGALLANA AND CANDRA

Moggallana’s treatment of cases is largely based on a CV design and to
various degrees a use of the Cdndra tradition permeates the Moggalldna
system. For instance, even with only a superficial analysis of the grammars’
siitras, R. Otto Franke found that 121 sdtras out of Moggallana’s 813 are
translated from the CV.* In addition, Franke demonstrated that many more
siitras are fashioned from only part of a Candra siitra or by amalgamating
parts of a variety of sdtras. For instance, Mogg.2.9 dhyddihi yuttd = C.2.1.50
dhigantarantarenayuktat.6 Franke’s research has also shown _ that
Moggallana has a tendency to follow the sdtra order of the CV and that he
occasionally adopts sections of the CV wholesale into the Mogg. He
presented a general concordance of these corresponding sections,® which I
have adapted below with section headings and revised sitra numbering:

3 FRANKE 1902-3: 87.
4 FRANKE 1902-3: 87.
8 FRANKE 1902-3: 88.

--- PAGE 100 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 89

Mogg.1.13-25 = C1.1.6-16 (meta-rules [paribhdsda]); Mogg.2.2-42 = C.2.1.43-96
(treatment of cases); Mogg.2.120-121 and 123-124 = C.2.1.38-39 and 41-42 (the
elision of case endings after indeclinables and within compounds); Mogg.2.237-
246 = C.6.3.15-26 (specifications for enclitic pronouns); Mogg.3.1-20 = C.2.2.1-49
(defining compounds and their functions); Mogg.3.74-85 = C.5.2.91-106
(substitutions for particles [na, saha etc.] in compounds); Mogg.4.96-113 =
C.4.3.8-16; (some secondary adverbial suffixes, e.g. -to, -ttha/ -tra and -da etc.);
Mogg.5.1-13 = C.1.1.17-39 (suffixes for verbal derivatives [khddi]); Mogg.5.55-60 =
C.2.66-77 (defining -tavantu, -tdvi and -ta in the sense of agent [kattu], object
[kamma] or state [bhdava]).

The work of Franke, then, suggests a large dependence on the CV and,
while this reliance is far from uniform, the sections that most clearly
exhibit a Cdndra design are highly significant. For instance, the Mogg
follows the CV in its treatment of case endings, compounds, verbal de-
rivatives and, to some extent, in its treatment of verbal voices, all of which
are important engines of grammatical theory. In addition, the Mogg adopts
meta-rules (paribhdsa) directly from the CV and therefore operates on
Candra principles.

However, Moggallana’s use of the CV in the treatment of case endings
appears more nuanced and complex when analysed through the Mogg-v
and Mogg-p. From the concordance given below, it is apparent that
Moggallana does not accept all of the Candra siitras in his treatment of case
endings and that many of the siitras he does not include in the sitra-patha
he treats critically in the Mogg-v and Mogg-p:

--- PAGE 101 ---
90 Alastair Gornall

A Concordance of the sittras of the Mogg and CV Treatment of Case Endings®

Mogg cv Mogg cv
21 1.4.148, 2.1.1 2.25 2.1.72
2.2 2.1.43 2.26 2.1.73

2.2 (v) 2.1.49 2.27 2.1.79

2.2 (v) 2.1.50 2.27 (v) 241.97
2.3 2.1.51 2.27 (v) 2.1.98
24 2.1.44 2.27 (p) 2.1.74
2.5 2.1.45 2.27 (p) 2.1.75

2.5 (v) 2.1.46 2.27 (p) 2.1.76
2.6 2.1.47 2.27 (p) 2.1.77
275 2.1.48 2.27 (p) 2.1.78

2.8 ii 2.1.49 2.27 (p) 2.1.80
2.9 2.1.50 2.28 2.1.81

2.9 (v) 2.1.52 2.28 (v) 21.87
2.10 2.1.54 2.29 2.1.82
211 2.1.55 2.30 2.1.83
2.12 2.1.56 2.31 2.1.84
2.13 2.1.57 2.32 2.1.85
2.14 2.1.58 2.33 21.86
2.15 2.1.59 2.34 2.1.88
2.16 2.1.60 2.35 2.1.89
217 2.1.61 2.36 2.1.90
2.18 2.1.62, 2.1.63 2.37 2.1.91
2.19 2.1.65 2.38 2.1.92
2.20 2.1.66 2.39 2.1.93
2.21 2.1.68 2.40 2.1.94
2.22 2.1.69 241 2.1.95
2.23 2.1.70 2.42 2.1.96
2.24 21.71

It seems likely then that the Moggalldna system's reliance on the CV is
wider and more pervasive than Franke’s analysis of the sitras would
suggest. However, R. Otto Franke did also predict a correlation between the
Mogg-v and CVV. Using fragments of the CVV obtained by Bruno Liebich,
Franke began to prove such a correlation between a few siitras of the
grammars. For instance:

°  (v) = Mogg-v, (p) = Mogg-p.

--- PAGE 102 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 91

M.’s Comm [Mogg-v]. zu II, 122 (ekatthatayam): ekatthibhave sabbdsam
vibhattinam lopo hoti bahulam: puttiyati, rajapuriso, Vasittho.

C’s Comm [CVV]. zu II, 1, 39 (aikarthye): ekdrthibhdve supo lug bhavati:
putriyati, rdjapurusah, Aupagavah.’

As a result of his initial discoveries regarding the intimate relationship
between the Moggallana and Cdandra traditions, Franke recognised the
important contribution the Moggallana tradition could make in
understanding the Candra tradition:

Diese Existenz eines Comm. von Moggallana zu seiner Grammatik ist ein weiterer
Grund, dessentwegen die Sanskritphilologie der Pali-Philologie zu Dank sich
verpflichtet fiihlen diirfte...*

From my own analysis of the treatment of case endings, I can conclude
that all sidtras but two (Mogg.2.3 and Mogg.2.40) use the CVV as a
framework.’ Three sitras, Mogg.2.11, Mogg.2.16 and Mogg.2.21, could even
be classed as translations as they exhibit almost no variation from the CVV
at all:

Mogg.2.11 patiparihi bhage ca'® C.2.1.55 pratiparibhyam bhage ca’*
patiparthi yuttamha lakkhanddisu  pratiparibhyam yuktal laksanddisu
bhdge c’ atthe dutiya hoti; rukkham  bhdge carthe dvitiya syat. vrksam
pati vijjotate vijju, sadhu devadatto  prati vidyotate. vrksam vrksam prati
mdataram pati, rukkham rukkham _ tisthati. sadhur devadatto mataram
pati titthati, yad ettha mam pati siya, prati. yad atra mam _ prati_ sydt.
rukkham pari vijjotate vijju, saddhu  vrksam_ pari vidyotate. _ vrksam
devadatto mdtaram pari, rukkham  vrksam pari tisthati. sddhur deva-

7 FRANKE 1902-3: 95. The square brackets are my own addition.
8 FRANKE 1902-3: 94.

‘The existence of Moggallana’s commentary to his own grammar is another reason

for which Sanskrit philology might feel indebted to Pali philology.’

® ~GORNALL 2012: 68-136.
‘[The second pair of suffixes occurs after a nominal stem co-occurring] with [the
particles] pati and pari when they are used to indicate [a characteristic (Jakkhana),
change of state (itthambhiita), distributive function (vicchda)], and a division (bhdga).”

--- PAGE 103 ---
92 Alastair Gornall

rukkham pari titthati, yad ettha mam datto mataram pari. yad atra mam

pari siya." pari syat."*

Mogg.2.16 sattamy adhikye'’* C.2.1.60 saptamy adhikye'®
ddhikyatthe upena yuttamha sattami  adhikye rthe upena yuktat saptami
hoti; upa khariyam dono."* bhavati. upa kharyam dronah."

Mogg.2.21 hetumhi'* C.2.1.68 hetau”

tatkriydyogye trtiya sydt; annena
vasati. vidyayd yaSah.”'

It is possible to conclude therefore that whenever Moggallana has used
siitras from the CV he also used the CVV as a basis for his Mogg-v.
Whether this reliance extends to the Mogg-p is difficult to determine since
commentaries to the CVV remain unedited and are often incomplete.

Despite the lack of available Sanskrit commentaries, the internal
evidence from the Mogg-p suggests that Moggallana’s appropriation of
Candra literature was mediated by his teacher Sariputta, who wrote the
Candralamkara (CA), a commentary on the Cdandra-pajiciké (CP) of
Ratnamati, itself a commentary on the CVV. Sanskrit manuscripts of the CP

"  Mogg-v 1931: 48.

‘[The second sUP triplet occurs after a nominal stem co-occurring] with [the particles]
prati and pari when they are used to indicate [a characteristic (Jaksana), distributive
function (vipsda), change of state (itthambhiita)], and divison (bhdga).’

CVV 1953: 173.

‘The seventh [pair of suffixes occurs after a nominal stem co-occurring with the
particle upa] when it is used in the sense of ddhikya “more”.’

© Mogg-v 1931: 50.

‘The seventh [sUP triplet] occurs [after a nominal stem co-occurring with the particle
upa] when it is used in the sense of adhikya “more”.’

7 CVV 1953: 174.

‘[The third pair of suffixes occurs after a nominal stem] in the sense of a cause (hetu).”
18 Mogg-v 1931: 53.

‘[The third sUP triplet occurs after a nominal stem] in the sense of a cause (hetu).’

1 CVV 1953: 175.

--- PAGE 104 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 93

are extant,” though an edition of the work has yet to be published.” A
facsimile edition of parts of the CA has been recently published by
Dragomir Dimitrov,” though it does not include the CV section on the
treatment of case endings.

That Moggallana utilised a commentarial lineage on the CV, which
included Ratnamati’s CP and Sariputta’s CA, is explicitly confirmed by a
15th century monk, $17 Rahula, who states in his Padasadhana-tikd (Pds-t),
a commentary on a Moggalldna handbook, that Moggallana had learned and
memorised, among many other grammatical texts, ‘the grammar and
critical commentary composed by the Teacher Candragomin, [and] its vrtti,
commentary and sub-commentary composed by Jaddugomi (?),”° Ratnamati
and Sariputta the Grand Master (mahdsami)...’.”°

Moggallana and his pupils appear to have seen both Sariputta and
Ratnamati as authorities and sometimes refer to them in points of
grammatical dispute. The reverence paid to Sariputta as commentator on
the Cdandrapajicikaé (‘ratnamatipaiicikdlankarakdara [lit. the author of the
ornament of Ratnamati’s extensive commentary]) is clear from the Mogg-p-
t (Mogg.2.6) where Sangharakkhita states that Moggallana ‘illuminates the
basics points already taught by the teacher (Sariputta).’*”

22 Cf. SANKRTYAYANA 1937: 43 nr. 295, OBERLIES 1989: 27-28.

Jam aware that Dragomir Dimitrov plans to publish a monograph on Ratnamati. This
work will be useful for understanding the adoption of the Candra tradition by the
Lankan sangha.

DIMITROV 2010.

Most Tibetan and North Indian source material states that the author of the Candra-
vrtti is Dharmadasa. Therefore, the identification of the vrttikdra with one ‘Jaddugomi’
is particularly significant here. In addition, the description of the Candra-vyakarana as
a ‘critical commentary’ (paccakkhanabhassa, S, pratyakhyana-bhdsya) is also
interesting. It perhaps refers to the fact that the Candra-vydkarana is largely a
reformulation of the Astddhydyi based on the recommendations of Katyayana’s

varttikas.
8 Pds-t 1908:6, 8-10: dcariyacandagomiviracite saddalakkhane paccakkhanabhasse ca
jaddugomiratanamatisdriputtamahasdmippabhutthi viracitesu vuttipanicika-

paiicikdlankdresu ca...

Mogg-p-t B® 85: duhddinam ty evam ddo amhdkam paramagurund ratanamati-
‘drasdratthavedaveditu. mahapafindpdtavanam paitiia-
vantanam saminda mahdsadminaé sambuddha-sdsanaratanavaropakdrakena “idam ettha
vicdraniyam’ty abhidhdya ndndmatantaram dkaddhiya bahum sampaveditam  atthi,

--- PAGE 105 ---
94 Alastair Gornall

In addition, Moggallana and his commentators also saw Ratnamati as a
grammatical authority. For instance, Moggallana justifies his rejection of a
particular grammatical issue in Mogg.2.28 paficamy avadhisma™ by stating
in the Mogg-p that ‘it has been rejected by Ratnamati ete.
(ratanamatippabhuti) [and, therefore,] we are not pressed for a refutation
{of our own].’” The use of the term ‘ratanamatippabhut? (lit. beginning
with Ratnamati) is also important here since Moggallana is not just
appealing to Ratnamati but to a lineage beginning with him. In this regard,
Ratnamati’s commentary can perhaps be seen as the stimulus of Candra
grammatical production within the reformed sargha in 12" century Lanka.
Therefore, it is possible that like the Mogg and Mogg-y, the Mogg-p is also
based on Candra grammatical literature and therefore preserves clues
concerning the ways the Candra tradition interpreted the CV. In this regard,
| illustrate below the way in which the treatment of cases is interpreted in
the Moggalldna tradition as a possible means of obtaining an insight into the
Candra treatment of cases. However, before turning to the Moggalldna
tradition it is perhaps beneficial to first compare the treatment of cases in
the Paninian and Cdndra traditions.

mayam pan’ ettha dcariyenadhippetamattam evalamba-attham pakdasayissama. (With
respect [to the statement] ‘for the [verbal bases] dul etc.’, saying that ‘this here should
be considered’ [and] drawing out various alternative views, much has been taught by
our teacher’s teacher/supreme teacher, author of the Ratnamati-paicikdlankara etc., the
master among the learned—who are skilled, have great wisdom and realise excellent
knowledge of various types—the great master, the most eminent assistant, like a jewel,
to the teaching of the Perfectly Enlightened One. Again here we will explain a
supporting meaning that has simply been taught by the teacher.)

‘The fifth [pair of suffixes occurs after a nominal stem] that is a limiting point
(avadhi).”

Mogg-p 1931: 68, 17-19: ratanamatippabhutihi yeva patikkhitta na amhehi
patikkhepaya payatitabbam.

--- PAGE 106 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 95
2. KARAKAS IN THE PANINIAN TRADITION

In the Astddhyayi (A), kdrakas are abstract syntactico-semantic categories
that mediate between the semantics and morphology of a case suffix.*” This
separation of semantics and morphology by means of kdrakas allows for
variation in the phonological representation of underlying semantic
structures in Sanskrit nominal inflection. For instance, as I illustrate below,
it accounts for such sentences as ‘graémam adhiseté (he lies/sleeps in the
village), where the second case suffix -am of ‘graémam is assigned as a
karman (grammatical object) in the sense of a locative. The key idea in the
As treatment of cases is that there is no one-to-one correspondence between
three modules, i.e. between semantics and kdrakas, kdrakas and
morphological cases (vibhaktis) and, ultimately, semantics and morpho-
logical cases.*' I have adapted Joshi and Roodbergen’s representation of this
principle as follows:

(a) one and the same semantic characterisation may be linked to different k@raka-
names,

(b) one and the same kdraka-name may be linked to different semantic
characterisations,

(c) one and the same vibhakti may be linked with different kdraka-names,

(d) one and the same kdraka-name may be linked with different vibhaktis.”

As part of the derivational process, then, kdrakas are linked with various
semantic characterisations (A.1.4.24-55). There are six different kdrakas:
apadana ‘stable point when there is moving away’, sampraddna ‘recipient;
indirect goal’, karana ‘instrument’, adhikarana ‘locus’, karman ‘object; goal’
and kartr ‘agent’.** As mentioned, these kdraka labels may be assigned to
more than one semantic characterisation and, likewise, a semantic

characterisation may be assigned more than one kdraka. For instance, the

0 For further reading on the topic of kdrakas, cf. CARDONA (1967, 1970, 1971 and
1974), DESHPANDE (1979, 1980 and 1991), JOSHI and ROODBERGEN (1975),
KIPARSKY (1982) and MATILAL (1991).

31 Jt is important to bear in mind that these three modules are etic, rather than emic,
descriptions of the architecture of the A. They are not labelled as such in the A itself.

2 JOSHI and ROODBERGEN 1975: xvi.

38 KAHRS 1998: 51.

--- PAGE 107 ---
96 Alastair Gornall

principal definition of karman (grammatical object) is A.1.4.49 kartur
ipsitatamam karma ‘[The technical term] karman denotes what the agent
(kartur) most desires to reach (ipsitatamam) through his action’. This rule
is used to derive forms such as katam (mat) in the sentence katam karoti (he
makes a mat), where the second case suffix —am is assigned to the kdraka
category karman in the sense of object, i.e. ‘what the agent most desires to
reach’.

However, the kdraka category karman can also be assigned other
semantic characterisations, such as locus (ddhdra) by means of
adhisinsthasam karma A.1.4.46 (Gdhdarah # 45, kdrake # 23) ‘(The technical
term] karman denotes [the locus or substratum] in relation to the verbal
stems siN-, “lie down, sleep’, sthd-, “stay, stand”, and ds-, ” all co-

“sit”,
occurring with the preverb adh? .* This rule is used to derive forms such as
gramam (village) in the example ‘gramam adhiseté (he lies/sleeps in the
village), where the second case suffix -am is assigned to the kdraka
category karman in the sense of locus (ddhdra). The semantic characte-
risation locus (Gdhdra), though, primarily defines the kdraka category
adhikarana, by means of A.1.4.45 ddhdro ‘dhikaranam ‘[The technical term]
adhikarana denotes the locus or substratum (Gdharah)’.*° This rule is used
to derive forms such as kage (mat) in the example ‘kata asté*’ (he sits on
the mat), where the seventh case suffix -Ni is assigned to the kdraka
category adhikarana in the sense of locus. Therefore, while kdraka
categories, such as karman, have a variety of semantic characterisations,
their semantic characterisations may also be assigned a variety of kdraka
categories.

After a kdraka category has been assigned a semantic characterisation in
the derivational process, any of six morphological case categories (2nd, 3rd,
4th, 5th, 6th and 7th cases) are then assigned to a kdraka (A.2.3.1-73).
Again, a single kdraka may be assigned to a variety of cases and a single
case may be assigned to a variety of kdrakas. For instance, the second
(dvitiya) case is assigned to the karaka category karman by A.2.3.2

4 KATRE 1987: 88. For more detail, see VERGIANI, forthcoming.
88 KATRE 1987: 88.

88 KATRE 1987: 87.

37 ‘kate asté before sandhi (A.6.178, A.8.3.19).

--- PAGE 108 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 97

karmani dvittya ‘The second sUP triplet (dvitiya) is introduced [when not
specified otherwise] to denote the object (karman)’.** However, the third
(trtiya) case, as well as the second, is also assigned to the category karman
under certain circumstances by A.2.3.3 ¢trtiy@ ca hos chandasi ‘In the
domain of Chandas (chandasi) the third sUP triplet, as well as the second,
is introduced to denote the karman of the verbal stem hu- “sacrifice’”.* For
example, in the sentence ‘payo / payasd juhoti (he offers milk), the word
‘payas’ (milk) denotes the grammatical object and can either be in the
second or third case. The third case, though, is primarily assigned to the
kdraka categories kartr (agent) and karana (instrument) by A.2.3.18
kartrkaranayos trtiya ‘The third sUP triplet (¢rtzya) [is introduced after a
nominal stem] to denote the agent (kartr) and instrument (karana)’.

Once a kdraka category has been assigned a semantic characterisation,
and a morphological case has been assigned to that kdraka category, it is
then possible for phonological representations of the morphological case
categories to be assigned. For instance, ‘am’, ‘au and ‘as’, representing
singular, dual and plural, respectively, are the basic suffixes of the second
case. Taking the derivational process of ‘gramam (village) as an example,
the interrelation of the different derivational modules described above can
be represented in the Paninian system as follows:

1, Semantic characterisation: adhara ‘locus’

{ladhisinsthasam karma A.1.4.46 (adharah # 45, kdrake # 23)]

2. Abstract syntactico-semantic structure (kdraka): karman

{[karmani dvitiya A.2.3.2]

3. Morphological structure (vibhakti): dvitiya

| [sV-au-Jas--am-auT-CHas--Ta-bhyam-bhis--Ne-bhyam-bhyas--Nasi-bhyam-
bhyas-- Nas-os-am--Ny-os-suP AA.1.2]

4. Phonological representation: am’

3° KATRE 1987: 138.

8 KATRE 1987: 138.

40 The headings of this four-fold framework are adapted from CARDONA 1974,
KIPARSKY and STAAL 1969: 84, KAHRS 1998: 52, and HOUBEN 1999. My
discussion of the A is indebted to the summaries in KAHRS 1998, and VERGIANI,
forthcoming.

--- PAGE 109 ---
98 Alastair Gornall

Through this flexible mechanism, the variation in the phonological
representation of underlying semantic structures in Sanskrit nominal
inflection is accounted for.

3. KARAKAS IN THE CANDRA TRADITION

In contrast to the A, the CV does not have a formal semantic module that
defines the kdraka categories to which morphological structures are
assigned. It treats the kdraka categories as semantically meaningful
technical terms and relates morphological cases directly to them. In this
way, it appears to lose the kdraka module as a mediator between semantics
and morphology. In this regard, Joshi and Roodbergen state:

Candragomin...links syntactic meanings, and, in some instances, non-linguistic
features directly with case endings. Thus he can do without a kdraka-section
proper, and confines himself to a vibhakti section...Moreover, since Candragomin
leaves the syntactic meanings undefined, and relates the use of case-endings to
vivaksd: ‘the wish of the speaker’ (to present items in language as he likes)’, it
relieves him of problems, such as rule-ordering, conflict procedure, and
adjustments due to the definitions. *'

Joshi and Roodbergen’s initial statement that the CV links semantics
directly to case endings has become almost universally accepted. For
instance, more recently Madhav Deshpande has reiterated this view and has
stated that ‘Candragomin dispenses with this intervening layer and links
semantics directly with morphology’.”’ While Deshpande agrees with Joshi
and Roodbergen in this regard, he has also illustrated that the treatment of
case-endings in the CV is not as loosely regulated as Joshi and Roodbergen
describe. He has shown that the CV is sensitive to rule-ordering and
conflict procedure, and that the notion of ‘vivaksd’ is not meant to replace
automatic operations.’ In support of Deshpande, I illustrate below that
Moggallana shows that vivaksd in the Moggalldna tradition—and therefore

“JOSHI and ROODBERGEN 1975: xvi-xvii.
“2 DESHPANDE 1992: 49.
48 DESHPANDE 1979.

--- PAGE 110 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 99

by analogy also in the Candra tradition—is not a freelance principle that
allows one ‘to present items in language as he likes’.“

Since the CV lacks distinct semantic and kdraka modules, it appears to
adopt kdraka categories that are designed to encapsulate many of the senses
outlined in the semantic module of the Paninian system. They are six-fold:
kriyapya ‘object’ (lit. reachable by an action), karana ‘instrument’,
sampradana ‘recipient’, avadhi ‘limiting-point’, ddhdra ‘locus’ and kartr
‘agent’. Pieter Verhagen argues that, although these technical terms are
designed to be semantically self-evident, it does not mean that the CV
combines the semantic module and kdraka categories into a single module.
He argues that one should implicitly distinguish between the semantic
module and kdraka categories, despite the fact the semantic module is not
explicitly defined. In this respect, Verhagen states:

As the karaka terms themselves are more obvious reflections of the semantic
aspect of the categories, Candra grammar gives the impression of combining the
semantic and kdraka level in one. | think that this is not the case; if we compare
the formation processes (prakriyda) according to Panini and Candra we find that
the kdrakas assume the exact same intermediate position allowing for bilateral
mapping in (and from) both the semantic and morphological levels.“

Verhagen concludes that ‘the kdrakas occupy the same position in
Candra grammar as in Panini’s original karaka system.” There is some
evidence in the CVV that would support such a view. For instance, the CVV
does acknowledge some degree of variation between semantic
representation and kdraka categories. For instance, the CVV on C.2.1.43

“4 It should be noted that JOSHI and ROODBERGEN (1975) and DESHPANDE (1979)
viewed the CV and the Candra-vrtti (CVV) as the product of the same author and,
therefore, their observations on the CV often amount to readings of the CV in light of
the CVV. However, it is now accepted that the CV and CVV were written by different
authors, Candragomin and Dharmadasa, respectively. For an overview of this debate,
cf. VERGIANI 2009. Therefore, I use the expression ‘Candra tradition’ instead of CV
to indicate that, like Moggallana, I am interpreting the CV through the lens of
Dharmadasa’s CVV.

In the CVV the term ‘Gpya’ (reachable) is glossed with ‘vyapya’ (pervaded).

46 VERHAGEN 2001: 292.

47 VERHAGEN 2001: 292-293.

45

--- PAGE 111 ---
100 Alastair Gornall

kriydpye dvittya (The second case is introduced to denote that which is
reachable by an action) defines ‘dpyd (reachable) in the sense of ‘ipsitam
(desired), ‘anipsitam’ (undesired) and ‘ipsitam ndpy anipsitan’ (neither
desired nor undesired)* in an analogous way to A.1.4.49-51.° The CV too
also acknowledges variation between kdraka categories and morphological
cases. For instance, by C.2.1.87 stokdlpakrcchrakatipaydd asattvarthat
karane, the fifth case, as well as the third, is assigned in the sense of
instrument (karana) after the nominal stems stoka ‘a little’, alpa ‘a little’,
krcchra ‘difficult’, and katipaya ‘a few’, when these do not denote a
substance (asattvdrtha). While it is difficult to come to definitive
conclusions about the relationship between semantic representations and
kdraka categories in the Candra system, | show below that the closely-
related Moggallana grammatical tradition viewed the Candra treatment of
cases in a similar way to Verhagen.

In any case, throughout its treatment of case-endings, the Cdandra
tradition clearly shows that it does not formally account for separate
semantic and kdraka modules as in the A. By way of illustration, I return to
the example ‘gramam adhisete’ (he lies/sleeps in the village). In the CVV on
C.2.1.49, the second case -am of ‘graémam is accounted for by the maxim
‘vivaksato hi kdrakdni bhavanti (for kdrakas are [used] according to the
desire to express [them]). Through this statement, the CVV intimates that
since there is a desire to express the grammatical object, i.e. that which is
reachable by an action (kriydpya), the second case is suffixed. Whether or
not the grammatical object is employed in the sense of locus (G@dhdra) as in
the A is not stated. In this instance, then, the CVV does not define kriydpya
in terms of locus (Gdhdra) and is certainly unable to do so in the same way
the A is able to define ‘karman’, via A.1.4.46 adhisinsthasaém karma. Joshi
and Roodbergen interpret the lack of a formal re-cognition of an underlying

4 CVV 1953: 168, 21ff,
For instance, the three main definitions of karman are: A.1.4.49 kartur ipsitatamam
karma ‘karman denotes the item that the agent most desires to reach (through his
action)’; A.1.4.50 tathdyuktam cdnipsitam ‘also (karman denotes) that which is not
desired to be reached (directly) (through an action)’; A1.4.51 akathitam ca ‘also
(karman denotes) that which has not been mentioned (when it becomes instrumental in
bringing about an action).”

--- PAGE 112 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 101

semantic module, separate from a kdraka module, as meaning that the sense
of grammatical object in effect replaces the sense of locus:

In this connection it is interesting to see how Candragomin accounts for usages
like graémam adhisete. ‘he sleeps in the village’...He accounts for them by
appealing to the dictum vivaksdto hi kdrakani bhavanti: ‘as we know, kdrakas are
(used) according to the wish of the speaker’. Whenever a speaker wants to express
the idea of vydpya, ie. dpya: ‘to be reached (directly)’ instead of ddhdra:
‘location’ ...he is free to do so.*”

For Joshi and Roodbergen then a comparison between the A and CV
could perhaps be represented as follows:

Paninian Candra

1. Semantic representation: ddhdra 1. Semantico-syntactic

‘locus’ representation: kriydpya
{ladhisinsthasam karma A14.46 | [kriyapye dvitiya C.2.1.43]
(Gdhdarah # 45, kdrake # 23)] 2. Morphosyntactic structure:

2. Abstract syntactico-semantic dvitiya

structure: karman { [am-auT-CHas C.2.1.1]
{[karmani dvitiya A.2.3.2] 3. Phonological representation: am

3. Morphological structure: dvitiya
{ [am-auT-CHas A.4.1.2]
4. Phonological representation: am

At face value it would seem that Joshi and Roodbergen were right in
their observation that by conflating the semantic module and semantico-
syntactic (kdraka) module the CV had greatly limited the scope of variation
in the phonological representation of underlying semantic structures.”
However, as mentioned above, I will show that the Moggallana system
provides a different interpretation of the Candra treatment of cases.

8° JOSHI and ROODBERGEN 1975: xviii.
®' For a further account of this reduction in variation, cf. JOSHI and ROODBERGEN
(1975: xvi-xix).

--- PAGE 113 ---
102 Alastair Gornall
5. KARAKAS IN THE MOGGALLANA TRADITION

The Mogg’s treatment of kdrakas is essentially the same as the CV.
However, Moggallana changes the name of the kdraka category ‘kriydpyd
in the CV to ‘kamma (object, S. karman). His kdraka categories are
likewise six-fold: kamma ‘object’, karana ‘instrument’, sampaddna
‘recipient’, avadhi ‘limiting-point’, ddhdra ‘locus” and kattu ‘agent.’

The mechanism through which these categories relate to morphological
structures is essentially identical to the CV. The Mogg accounts for the
same level of semantic variation in its kdraka categories as the CV.
However, it tolerates less variation between morphological cases and
kdraka categories. For instance, the prescription of the fifth case in the
sense of karana (instrument) by C.2.1.87  stokdlpakrcchrakatipayad
asattvarthat karane is rejected by Moggallana and is dealt with under
Mogg.2.28 paficamy avadhisma.” However, Moggallana does not posit a
one-to-one correspondence between kdraka categories and morphological
cases and still accounts for variation between them. For instance, by
Mogg.2.18 kattukaranesu tatiyd (the third case occurs in the sense of agent
and instrument), the third case can still express the sense of both ‘katt
(agent, S. kartr) and ‘karand (instrument).

Just as in the CV, the lack of recourse to a formal semantic module as
found in the A is often explained through the principle of ‘vivaksa’ (the
desire to speak). To highlight the different approach of the Moggallana
system to the A, it is useful to explore Moggallana’s treatment of the
example ‘gramam adhisete’ (he lies/sleeps in the village), represented in the
Mogg-v by the canonical quotation ‘pathavim adhisessat? (he will lie on the
ground). This quotation is taken from verse 41 in the Dhammapada:

® ‘The fifth [pair of suffixes occurs after a nominal stem] that is a limiting point

(avadhi).’

Alongside the discussion of vivaksd in Candra grammar in JOSHI and
ROODBERGEN (1975: xvi-xix) and DESHPANDE (1979), there is also a notable
contribution by RADICCHI (2002). For more general studies on the concept of
vivaksa@ in grammar, cf. van NOOTEN (1983), RADICCHI (1994), and SCHARF
(1995, 2002).

--- PAGE 114 ---
84
55
56

Karakas in Candra Grammar

aciram vat’ ayam kayo pathavim adhisessati,

chuddho apetavifiiano nirattham va kalingaram.**

Too soon this body will lie on the ground, bloated and devoid of consciousness
like a useless log.

103

I quote the relevant passage of the Mogg-v below alongside the CVV to
show that ‘pathavim adhisessati is a direct substitute for ‘gramam adhisete
as found in the CVV:

CVV 2.1.49: gramam adhiSeta iti vyapya-vivaksaiva. evam gramam adhitisthati,
vrksam adhydste, dharmam abhinivisate, triratram upavasati, gramam anuvasati,
parvatam adhivasati Gvasatham dvasatiti.

[For the example], ‘gramam adhiSeté (he lies/sleeps in the village), there is only
the desire to speak of that which is pervaded [by an action] (i.e. the grammatical
object). Likewise, [there is only the desire to speak of the grammatical object for
the examples] ‘gramam adhitisthat? (he stays at the village), ‘vrksam adhydste (he
sits at the tree), ‘dharmam abhinivisaté (he enters into the dharma), ‘triratram
upavasat? (he dwells for three nights), ‘gramam anuvasati (he settles at the
village), and ‘parvatam adhivasat’ (he lives on a mountain), ‘Gvasatham dvasati
(he dwells at the lodging).

Mogg-v 2.2: pathavim adhisessati, gamam adhititthati, rukkham ajjhdasate ti
adhisithasanam payoge ‘dhikarane kammavacaniccha vatticchato hi karakani
honti.*®

[For the examples], ‘pathavim adhisessati (he will lie on the ground), ‘gamam
adhititthat’ (he stays at the village) and ‘rukkham ajjhdsaté (he sits down at the
foot of a tree), when there is the use of the roots ‘si’, ‘tha’ and ‘as’ [preceded by
the pre-verb] ‘adh’, there is the desire to speak of the grammatical object in the
sense of locus (adhikarana), for kdrakas [are used] when there is the desire to
express [them].

When these two discussions are compared, it is clear that Moggallana
has used the canonical quotation ‘pathavim adhisessati as a substitute for
‘gramam adhisete . Moggallana’s discussion is especially significant since he

Dhp 1855: 8, 7-8.
CVV 1953: 170, 21-23.
Mogg-v 1931: 38, 3.

--- PAGE 115 ---
104 Alastair Gornall

reveals that he interprets the prescription of the second case here along
Paninian lines. For instance, while the CVV states that the second case is
appointed in sentences such as ‘gramam adhiseté only when one wishes to
speak of a grammatical object, Moggallana makes it explicit that the
grammatical object is used in the sense of locus (adhikarana), i.e. he
mentions a semantic module. His discussion directly refers to A.1.4.46
adhisinsthdsam karma and his recognition of semantic variation underlying
the linguistic choice of kdraka categories can be seen as a more Paninian
interpretation of the mechanisms involved in the Candra treatment of cases.

That Moggallana is providing a Paninian-style interpretation of the
CVV is made clear in the commentaries on this passage. For instance, the
Mogg-p states:

adhipubbasithasdnam Gdhare dutiyabhimata paresam, sadpiha kammavacanicchay’
eva siddhd ti dassetum vuttam pathavim icc adi.”

Others (the Paniniyas) approve the second case in the sense of locus (ddhdra) for
the roots ‘si’, ‘tha’ and ‘ds’ preceded by [the pre-verb] ‘adh?’. Here too (i.e. in this
grammar), it (the second case) is appointed only when there is the desire to speak
of the grammatical object. To show that it is said ‘pathavim ete.

In the Mogg-p-t, Moggallana’s pupil, Sangharakkhita, makes a further
explicit comparison between the Moggalldna system and the Paninian
grammatical system:

atha adhisitthasanam kammam ty Gdind (A1.4.46) tena tena kammasaiiiam
vidhdya pathavim adhisessati ti Gdo (tattha) tattha kamme dutiyd ti (A.2.3.2) dutiya
vidhiyate tehi tehi satthakarehi. sabbatthev’ettha lokassa kamma-vacaniccha ti

kamen’etam ‘itiasainiadpubbakam kammam upadassento dha adhi-pubba ice adi.

Now, the grammarians, having appointed the technical term ‘karman’ by a (rule)
such as Al.4.46 adhisitisthasam karma, appoint the second case in [examples]
such as ‘pathavim adhisessat? according to A.2.3.2 karmani dvitiya. In each
instance (sabbattha) here, showing that this grammatical object (kamma), which
was previously a technical term of others, (is used) since the people (Joka) desire

57 Mogg-p 1931: 40, 24
8 Mogg-p-t B® 80.

--- PAGE 116 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 105

to speak of the grammatical object, it is said “preceded by [the pre-verb] ‘adhi”
ete.

Here, Saiigharakkhita explains that Moggallana is contrasting the formal
appointment of kamma in the sense of locus (ddhdra) in the A with the
informal appointment through vivaksé in the Mogg. In his Sambandh,
Sangharakkhita makes it explicit that, even though the grammatical object
is governed by vivaksd, it still refers to the same semantic range as in the A.
In doing so he quotes the additional examples from the CVV 2.1.49 given
above:

pathavim adhisessati, gamam_ adhititthati, rukkham  ajjhavasate, dhammam
abhinivisate, rattim upavasati, gamam anuvasati, pabbatam adhivasati, gharam
Gvasati, nadim pibati, gamam carati ty Gdisv Gdhare kammavacanicchayam kamme
yeva dutiya.”

The second case occurs only in the sense of grammatical object (kamma) when
there is a desire to speak of the grammatical object in the sense of locus (ddhdra),
such as in (the examples) ‘pathavim adhisessati (he will lie on the ground),
‘gamam adhititthat’ (he stays at the village) and ‘rukkham ajjhdsaté (he sits down
at the foot of a tree), ‘dhammam abhinivisaté (he enters into the dhamma), ‘rattim
upavasati (he dwells for a night), ‘gamam anuvasati (he settles at the village), and
‘pabbatam adhivasati (he lives on a mountain), ‘gharam dvasati (he dwells at the
house), ‘nadim pibat? (he drinks in [from] the river), and gadmam carati (he
wanders in the village).

From the discussions above, it is clear that the Moggalldna tradition is
aware of the intricacies of the Paninian treatment of cases. In addition, the
tradition acknowledges that the relationship between the formal semantic
and kdraka modules of the A has been replaced by the intentions of a
linguistic community. Importantly, however, Moggallana shows that these
linguistic judgements imply the same semantic range as that which is pre-
scribed in the A. In this regard, the degree of semantic variation underlying
kadraka categories would appear to be unchanged from the A, although
Moggallana, following the Candra tradition, rejects the formalism of the A.

--- PAGE 117 ---
106 Alastair Gornall

It is therefore possible to compare Moggallana’s treatment of cases with the
As as follows:

Paninian Moggallana

1. Semantic representation: ddhdra 1. Semantic representation: ddhdra

‘locus’ ‘locus’

{ladhisinsthasam karma A.1.4.46 | [vivaksa: the desire to speak]
(Gdhdarah # 45, kdrake # 23)] 2. Abstract syntactico-semantic

2. Abstract syntactico-semantic structure: kamma

structure: karman | [kamme dutiya Mogg.2.2]
{[karmani dvitiya A.2.3.2] 3. Morphosyntactic structure: dutiya
3. Morphological structure: dvitiya { [am-yo Mogg.2.1]

{ [am-auT-CHas A.4.1.2] 4. Phonological representation: am

4. Phonological representation: am

The Moggalldna tradition, then, appeals to vivaksd as a link between the
semantic and kdraka modules, rather than formalising the two modules in
his grammar. However, importantly, according to the Moggalldna gram-
matical tradition, the semantic and kdraka modules are not conflated. The
karaka module holds the same intermediary position as in the A and, while
the semantic module is subject to vivaksd rather than being formalised in
the grammar, the senses conveyed by the kdraka categories also appear to
be identical to the A. However, as shown above, in contrast to Joshi and
Roodbergen’s interpretation of ‘vivaksa’ in the CVV as meaning ‘the wish
of the speaker (to present items in language as he likes)’, Moggallana
provides a different, perhaps more orthodox, understanding of the term. His
arguments accord with Madhav Deshpande’s views that vivaksd in the CV
‘is not meant to replace the automatic operations of Panini’s grammar, but
to indicate the source of input for voluntary operations.’®!

The way Moggallana interprets vivaksd in his grammatical system is
most clearly articulated in Mogg-v.2.28, where he rejects the Paninian
sittras A.2.3.34 darantikarthaih  sasthy — anyatarasyam,” — A.2.3.35

® JOSHI and ROODBERGEN 1975: xvi.

1 DESHPANDE 1979: 143.

© KATRE 1987: 146. ‘(Optionally), the sixth sUP triplet [as well as the fifth] are
introduced after (nominal stems) co-occurring with synonyms of diira- “distant, far”,

--- PAGE 118 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 107

darantikarthebhyo dvittya ca® and the relevant portion of A.2.3.36™
saptami adhikarane.’ Moggallana states that the cases governed by
A.2.3.34-36 can be assigned instead in the sense of their own specific
domain (savisaya, S. svavisaya), i.e. according to their own governing rules.
With respect to this rejection, the Mogg-p states: ‘Here, the linguistic
community's desire to speak (/okiyd...vacanicchd) is the restriction. There-
fore, one should not consider the possibility of the over-application [of a
rule].’ Moggallana, then, anticipates that some may interpret vivaksd as a
freelance principle that would allow ‘the over-application [of a rule]’,
meaning that the application of a case-ending would be subject to the whim
of the speaker. In this regard, he makes it explicit that ‘vivaksa’ in the
Mogg-v is not a speaker’ desire but the desire of a linguistic community, i.e.
a common linguistic convention. On this point, Sanigharakkhita states the
following in the Mogg-p-t:

and antika- “proximate, near”.’
In his translation KATRE does not translate ‘anyatarasyam (optionally) and
therefore I have amended it accordingly.

8 KATRE 1987: 146. ‘The second sUP triplet (dvitiya) and [the fifth as well as the third]
are introduced (after nominal stems) synonymous with diira- “distant” and antika-
“proximate” [when they do not imply a substance].’

& KATRE 1987: 146. ‘The seventh sUP triplet (saprami) is introduced (after a nominal

stem) to denote the adhikarana karaka and [also after synonyms of diira- and antika-].’

Mogg-v 1931: 67, 4-7: ditrantikatthayoge pi savisaye va paiicamichatthiyo siyum: diiram

gamasmd, antikam gamasmd, ditram gamassa, antikam gdmassd ti. ditrantikatthehi tu

sabba va savisaye siyum badhakabhava: diiro gamo, antiko gamo tv evam Gdi. (Also in
connection with [words] meaning ‘far’ (diira) and ‘near’ (antika), the fifth and sixth
cases should occur in the sense of their own domain (i.e. in the sense of limit (avadhi)
and relation (sambandha)). For example: ‘far from the village (gdmasmd)’, ‘near to the
village (gamasma)’, ‘far from the village’ (gamassa), ‘near to the village’ (gamassa).

However, all [cases] should occur after [words] meaning ‘far’ and ‘near’ in the sense of

their own domain, since there is no problem [in doing so]. For example: ‘the far

village’, ‘the near village’ etc.)

® Mogg-p 1931: 68, 15-16: lokiya Cettha vacaniccha nibandhanan ti natippasangam
maiinate.

65

--- PAGE 119 ---
108 Alastair Gornall

evam carahi tamtamkarakavacanicchdyam aiid pi vibhattiyo kasmad na

ppayujjeyyun ti Gha “lokiya cettha”ti ddi, ettha vibhattinam niyame lokiyad eva
vacaniccha nibandhanam karanan ti attho.”

Since, in this case, [it is asked] ‘why could not other cases also be used when there
is the desire to speak of this or that kdraka?’, [the statement] beginning ‘/okiya
Cettha is said. The sense is that, here, when there is a restriction of cases, only the
linguistic community’s desire to speak is a restrictive cause.

The Mogg-p-t makes it explicit here that there is a restriction in
variation due to the common linguistic convention and not due to an in-
dividual speaker’s desire. This is, in fact, also the dominant interpretation of
vivaksa in Pataiijalis Mahabhasya® and Patajfijali defines the term under
A.5.1.16® tad asya tad asmin sydd iti.

vivaksa ca dvayi. asty eva prayoktri vivaksasti laukiki. prayoktrt vivaksd. prayokta hi
mrdvya snigdhaya Slaksnaya jihvayéd mrdiin snigdh ‘abdan prayurikte. laukiki
vivaksd yatra prdyasya sampratyayah. praya iti loko vyapadisyate.”

The desire to speak is twofold, that pertaining to the user (prayoktr7) [of language]
[and] that pertaining to the linguistic community (/aukiki). The desire to speak
pertaining to the user is when an individual utters soft, slippery words with a soft,
slippery and smooth tongue. A linguistic community’s desire to speak refers to the
understanding of the majority. The linguistic community (/oka) is what is meant by
the term ‘majority’.

Like Patafijali, Moggallana understands that vivaksd is not a freelance
principle but a restriction based on the linguistic usage of a community.
Therefore, Moggallana does not replace the automatic operations of the A’s
karaka section with voluntary ones, but replaces them with the restrictions
imposed by common convention. This reliance on the intentions of a lin-
guistic community fundamentally questions the As formalistic approach.

Mogg-p-t B® 108.
SCHARF 1995: 72.
6 KATRE 1987: 518. ‘The taddhita affixes listed prior to below occur after a nominal
stem ending in the first sUP triplet to denote “may possibly be (syar)”, “of it (asya)”, or

“in it (asmin)”.
7 MBh II 2.342.26-343.3.

--- PAGE 120 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 109

How far Moggallana’s almost Paninian interpretations of the CVV reflect
actual discussions in commentaries on the CV is unclear. However, until
the commentaries on the Cdandra tradition are edited, Moggallana’s
grammatical insights may provide the first clues on the deeper workings of
the Candra tradition’s treatment of cases.

6. CONCLUSION

This article has compared the general principles underlying the treatment
of case-endings in the Paninian, Candra, and Moggallana systems, to
highlight the sophisticated and nuanced discussions of linguistic issues in
the Pali grammatical tradition. In doing so, I have shown that a group of
12" century Lankan grammarians, who certainly modelled their grammar
exceptionally closely on the Cdndra tradition and its commentaries, have
interpreted the treatment of cases in their own system in ways that are often
quite different from the usual understanding of how Candra grammar
operates.

In contrast to the almost unanimous opinion of scholars who have
worked on the Candra treatment of cases, the Moggallana grammatical tra-
dition appears to support Verhagen’s view that ‘we find that the kdrakas
assume the exact same intermediate position allowing for bilateral mapping
in (and from) both the semantic and morphological levels.’’' In addition, the
Moggallana grammarians support Deshpande’s criticisms of Joshi and
Roodbergen’s argument that ‘vivaksa’ is ‘the wish of the speaker (to present
items as he likes)’. Such interventions by Pali gram-marians in pan-South
Asian debates only reinforce the importance of Pali sastra as source for
understanding South Asian intellectual history.

™  VERHAGEN 2001: 292.

--- PAGE 121 ---
110 Alastair Gornall
BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. PRIMARY SOURCES

A (Astddhyayt): KATRE, Sumitra M., trans. Astadhydyi of Panini in Roman
Transliteration. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1987.

CV (Candravyakarana): CHATTERIJI, Kshitish Chandra, ed. Cdndravydkarana of
Candragomin Part 1 (Chapters 1-3). Pune: Deccan College Postgraduate and Research
Institute, 1953.

CVV (Candra-vrtti): CHATTERJI, Kshitish Chandra, ed. Cdndravydkarana of
Candragomin Part 1 (Chapters 1-3). Pune: Deccan College Postgraduate and Research
Institute, 1953.

Dhp (Dhammapada): FAUSBOLL, V,, ed. and trans. Dhammapadam. Copenhagen, 1855.

Mbh II (Mahdabhdasya): KIELHORN, EF, ed. The Vyadkarana-Mahabhdsya of Pataiijali,
Adhyayas III, IV and V. Third edition revised and furnished with additional readings,
references and select critical notes by MM. K. V. ABHYANKAR. Volume II. Pune:
Bhandarkar Institute Press, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1965.

Mogg (Moggallana-vyakarana): Sti DHARMANANDA, ed. Moggallana paiicika
suttavuttisameta: anuradhapure thiiparamamahdaviharamajjhdvutthena mahdsaddikena
Sirimata Moggallanamahdsaminad  viracita. Colombo: P.A. Peries Appuhamy
Wirahena, Saccasamuccaya Press, 1931.

Mogg-v (Moggallana-vutti): S1i DHARMANANDA, ed. Moggallana__ paiicika
suttavuttisameta: anuradhapure thiiparamamahdaviharamajjhdvutthena mahdsaddikena
Sirimata Moggallanamahdsaminad  viracita. Colombo: P.A. Peries Appuhamy
Wirahena, Saccasamuccaya Press, 1931.

Mogg-p (Moggallana-paficika): Sti DHARMANANDA, ed. Moggallana paiicika
suttavuttisameta: anuradhapure thiiparamamahdaviharamajjhdvutthena mahdsaddikena
Sirimata Moggallanamahdsaminad  viracita. Colombo: P.A. Peries Appuhamy
Wirahena, Saccasamuccaya Press, 1931.

Mogg-p-t_ B°  (Moggallana-paficika-tika): CSCD — Tipitaka (Roman), SM
“Moggallanapaiicikatika”.

Pds-t (Padasadhana-tika): Sri DHIRANANDA and VACISSARA, ed. Buddhippasadani:
A commentary on Padasadhana, Grammar of the Pali language by Sangharaja Sri

--- PAGE 122 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar lll

Rahula, Principal of the College Sri Sanghabodhi Srivijayabahu Parivena, Totagamuwa.
Colombo: A.D.A. Wijeyasinha Arachchl, Kalutara, Vidyasagara Printing Works, 1908.

Sambandh (Sambandhacinta): SARANANDA, ed. The Sambandha-cinté by Venerable

Sthavira Sri Sangha Rakshita, translated by Gotama Mahasami. Colombo: K.D. Simon
Appuhami, Lakrivikirana Press, 1891/2434.

Il. SECONARY SOURCES

CARDONA, George. “Panini’s Syntactic Categories”. In Journal of Oriental Institute,
Baroda, vol. XVI, 1967: 201-215.

. “Some Principles of Panini’s Grammar”. In Journal of Indian Philosophy, Vol. 1,
1970: 40-74.

. “Cause and Causal Agent: The Paninian View”. In Journal of the Oriental
Institute, Baroda, Vol.21, 1971: 20-40.

. “Panini’s Karakas: Agency, Animation and Identity”. In Journal of Indian
Philosophy, Vol. 2, 1974: 231-306.

DEOKAR, Mahesh A. “The treatment of compounds in the Moggallanavyakarana vis-a-vis
Candravyakarand’ in Ocean of Buddhist Wisdom, Vol.4, edited by Satyaprakasa Sarma.
Delhi: New Bharatiya Book Corporation, 2009.

DESHPANDE, Madhav M. “Candragomin’s Syntactic Rules, Some Misconceptions”.
Indian Linguistics, Vol. 40, 1979: 133-145.

. Evolution of Syntactic Theory in Indian Grammar: Syntax of the Sanskrit Infinitive
—tumUN. Ann Arbor: Karoma Publishers, Inc, 1980.

. The Meaning of Nouns: Semantic Theory in Classical and Medieval India,
Namartha-nirnaya of Kaundabhatta. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992.

DIMITROV, Dragomir. The Bhaiksuki Manuscript of the Candralamkdra: Study, Script
Tables, and Facsimile Edition. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Harvard Oriental Series,
2010.

FRANKE, R.O. “Moggallana's Saddalakkhana und das Candravyakarana.” In Journal of
the Pali Text Society, 1902-3: 70-95.

--- PAGE 123 ---
112 Alastair Gornall

GORNALL, Alastair. Buddhism and Grammar: The Scholarly Cultivation of Pali in
Medieval Lanka. Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Cambridge, 2012.

JOSHI, S.D. and J.A.F ROODBERGEN, eds. and trans. Vydkarana-mahdabhasya
Karakahnika (P.1.4.23-1.4.55). Poona: University of Poona, 1975.

KARRS, Eivind. Indian Semantic Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.

KATRE, Sumitra M., trans. Astddhydyi of Panini in Roman Transliteration. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1987.

KIPARSKY, Paul and J.E STAAL. “Syntactic and Semantic Relations in Panini”. In
Foundations of Language, 5, 1969: 83-117.

KIPARSKY, Paul. Some Theoretical Problems in Paninis Grammar. Post Graduate and
Research Department Series, No.16. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute,
1982.

MATILAL, Bimal Krishna. “Bhavananda on ‘What is Karaka?”’. In Paninian Studies:
Professor S.D. Joshi Felicitation Volume. Edited by Madhav M. Deshpande and Saroja
Bhate. University of Michigan: Centre for South and Southeast Asian Studies, 1991:
263-283.

van NOOTEN, Barend. “Vivaksd-, or intention to speak, as a linguistic principle”. In
PCASS E 9, Proceedings of the International Seminar on Studies in the Astadhydayi of
Panini, edited by S.D Joshi and S.D, Laddu. Pune, 1983: 43-52.

OBERLIES, Thomas. “Studie zum Candravyakarana. Eine kritische Bearbeitung von
Candra IV4.52-148 und V.2”. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien herausgegeben von
Institut fiir Kultur und Geschichte Indiens und Tibets an der Universitat Hamburg.
Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag, 1989.

RADICCHI, Anna. “Vivaksa in the Vakyapadiyd’. In Bhartrhari, Philosopher and
Grammarian: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Bhartrhari, edited
by Saroja Bhate and Johannes Bronkhorst. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1994: 221-234.

. “Two Buddhist Grammarians: Candragomin and Jayaditya.” In Indian Linguistic
Studies: Festschrift in Honour of George Cardona, edited by M. Deshpande and P.E.
Hook. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2002: 165-181.

SANKRTYAYANA, Rahul. “Sanskrit Palm-leaf Manuscripts in Tibet”. JBORS XXIII,
1937: 1-57.

--- PAGE 124 ---
Karakas in Candra Grammar 113

SCHARE Peter M. “Early Indian Grammarians on a Speaker's Intention”. Journal of the
American Oriental Society, Vol. 115, No. 1, Jan. - Mar., 1995: 66-76.

SCHARE Peter M. “Panini, vivaksa@ and kdraka rule-ordering’. In Indian Linguistic
Studies: Festschrift in Honour of George Cardona, edited by M. Deshpande and P.E.
Hook. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2002: 121-149.

VERGIANI, Vincenzo. “A Quotation from the Mahdabhdsyadipika of Bhartrhari in the
Pratyahdara Section of the Kasikavrtti’. In Studies in the Kasikavrtti. The Section on
Pratyaharas: Critical Edition, Translation and Other Contributions, edited by Pascale
Haag and Vincenzo Vergiani. Societa Editrice Fiorentina: Firenze, 2009.

“The adoption of Bhartrhari’s classification of the grammatical object in
araiyar’s commentary on the Tolkdppiyani’. In Bilingualism and cross-cultural
fertilisation: Sanskrit and Tamil in medieval India, edited by Whitney Cox and
Vincenzo Vergiani. Pondicherry: Publications de l'Institut Frangais de Pondichéry,
Forthcoming-a (expected date of publication: January 2013).

VERHAGEN, P. “A Ninth Century Tibetan Summary of the Indo-Tibetan Model of Case
Semantics”. In Tibetan studies. Proceedings of the 5th seminar of the International
Association for Tibetan studies, Narita 1989. Edited by ShGren Ihara, Yiisho Miyasaka,
Shigeaki Watanabe, and Shokei Matsumoto. Narita: Naritasan Shinshoji, 1992: 833—
844.

. A History of Sanskrit Grammatical Literature in Tibet. Volume 2: Assimilation into
Indigenous Scholarship. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2001.

--- PAGE 125 ---


--- PAGE 126 ---
Five

The Three Jewels
and the Formation
of the Paficaratra Canon!

Robert Leach

General introductions to the Paficaratra literature commonly emphasise the
exalted status of the so-called “three jewels” of the tradition, namely the
Jayakhyasamhita (JS), the Sdtvatasamhité (SS), and the Pauskarasamhita
(PausS). However, despite its ubiquity in oral traditions and in the
secondary Indological literature, the claim that these three works are
supreme in the Paficaratra canon is itself contained in only four of the
published Samhitas, namely the Paramesvarasamhita (ParS), the Isvara-
samhita (IS), the Sriprasnasamhita (SriprsS), and a late, interpolated
section of the JS entitled Adhikah Pathah. Further, only the latter among

Many thanks to Giovanni Ciotti, Alastair Gornall and Paolo Visigalli.
This is among as many as 35 published Samhitaés. Parampurushdas and
Shrutiprakashdas (2002) list 34 of these (I omit the A gastyasamhitd, which is included
in their list, but which is certainly not a Paficaratra text, as has already been pointed
out by Smith 1975: 3-4). More recently, the Prak@sasamhita has been made available
online by members of the now defunct Sansknet project.

--- PAGE 127 ---
116 Robert Leach

these works actually refers to the JS, SS and PausS as the “three jewels”
(ratnatraya). In this brief article, I aim to show that the idea of the
supremacy of these three scriptures emerged in South India within a
Paficaratra tradition known as the ‘Agamasiddhanta’, and that the textual
evidence suggests that it did not gain acceptance among non-
Agamasiddhanta Paficaratrikas until as late as the 14th century. The
acceptance of the claim of the supremacy of these three works by non-
Agamasiddhanta Pajficaratrikas, I will argue, was part of a broader process
by which “canonical” systems from distinct Paficaratra traditions were
brought together and subsumed into a single tradition.

The following will consist of three parts. In the first I will address the
scriptural passages which contain reference to the supremacy of the JS, SS
and PausS. In the second I will present an account of the distinct traditions
within the South Indian Pajicaratra. This, I hope, will help contextualise
part three, where I will address the integration of these distinct traditions
into a single Paficaratra “system”.

1. The Three Jewels

The earliest of the four texts which claim the superiority of the JS, SS and
PausS is most likely the ParS. Rastelli (2006: 54, 98) cautiously assigns the
composition of this work to the period 1100-1300 CE, favouring the earlier
half of this time frame on account of the social and political upheavals
which affected Srirangam, the ParS’ likely place of origin, during the 13"
century. However, bearing in mind that the composition of the ParS very
likely occurred after the career of Ramanuja (Rastelli 2003), we may
tentatively suppose that the majority of this work is attributable to the
period c. 1175-1223 CE.* As far as we know the latter date marks the first
significant disruption to Srirangam temple polity in the 13" century —
namely, the invasion of Sriraigam by the Oddas, the army of the Eastern
Ganga King Anangabhima III, who purportedly reinstated Vaikhanasa ritual

5 The traditional date of Ramanuja’s death, 1137 CE, is now widely regarded — see

Carman (1974: 27) and Young (2007: 236) — as 30 or 40 years too early.

--- PAGE 128 ---
The Three Jewels 117

practices at the Raiiganathasvamin temple throughout the two year period
of their occupation (Spencer 1978).

In the ParS’ opening adhydya the SS, PausS and JS are listed together
and are said to confer both liberation and “enjoyments” (bhoga). This is in
contradistinction to the “first teaching’, called here the “secret tradition”
(rahasyamnaya), which grants liberation only. We are told elsewhere in the
first chapter that the three Samhitas were revealed for the benefit of those
who had, from the time of the tretdyuga, given up the “supreme dharmd’
(ie. the secret tradition), which refers only to Vasudeva, and replaced it
with a “mixed dharma’ (misradharma), which refers to other deities and
fulfils other desires (kama). In the present age these people “long again for
that abode [of Vasudeva]”, and so the three Samhitas are revealed, which
are accessible to members of each social class (varna), and which combine
a concern with worldly enjoyments (bhoga) as contained in the “mixed
dharma’ with the Vasudeva-oriented soteriology of the “supreme dharma’.
Elsewhere in the ParS, this supreme dharma or “secret tradition” is
variously called miilaveda and ekdyanaveda.

The SS, PausS and JS are also mentioned together at ParS 10.376cd, this
time in the context of a classification of Paficaratra scriptures into three
distinct groups, namely the divine teachings (divyasdastra), the teachings of
sages (munibhdsitasastra), and the teachings of men (paurusasastra).’

4 ParS 1.16c-19b: srutvaivam prathamam $astram rahasyamnayasamjitam || divya-

mantrakramopetam moksaikaphalalaksanam | bhiiyah samcoditat tasmat tena

lokahitaisina \| Srutam vistaratah Sastram bhogamoksapradam hi yat | anustupchando-
baddhena proktam bhagavata svayam \\ satvatam pauskaram caiva_ jayakhyety
evamdadikam |.

* In other words, desires for “enjoyments” (bhoga) rather than for liberation. See ParS
L75: ... tatas tretayugddisu | vikdravedah sarvatra devantaragocarah \\; 1.79: tatas
tretayuge sarve ndandkaémasamanvitah vyamisraydjino bhiitva tyajyanty adyam
sandtanam I; and 1.87 (see next note). The “changed Vedas” (vikdravedah) at 1.75c¢
and the “mixed dharma’ mentioned at 1.87b both refer to the actual Veda.

° In addition to the above verses, see especially ParS 1.87-89: parityajya param

dharmam  misradharmam  upeyusam bhiiyas tatpadakanksanam  Sraddhabhakti

upeyusam || anugrahartham varn yogyatdpadanaya ca | tatha jananam sarvesam
abhistaphalasiddhaye || sdtvatadini Sastrani bhogamoksapradani ca | upadigya tu
divyani Sastrani tadanantaram \\.

For this classification see especially ParS 10.336-345, and the parallel verses at IS

1.54-63.

--- PAGE 129 ---
118 Robert Leach

Although this classification is already present in the SS (22.52c-59b),
which was known to the authors of the ParS, the theory that the SS, PausS
and JS alone among Pajicaratra scriptures represent the direct revelation of
God (divyaSastra) is, as far as we can tell, here expressed for the first time.*

Like the ParS, the IS is included in the canonical list of scriptures found
in the Padmasamhita (PadS) (1.1.99-114), but the IS is certainly the later
text, probably not composed before the late 13th or 14th century
(Matsubara 1994: 28-31). Numerous passages in the first chapter of the IS,
a short history of the “descent” or genealogy of the Pajficaratra scriptures
(Sastravatdra), contain material which is apparently drawn directly from the
ParS.? The author refers to the three texts SS, PausS and JS again as the
“divine” (divya) teachings, which are proclaimed by Hari in the anustubh
metre, and are in accordance with the “original Veda” (miila-
vedanusarena)."” A few lines later the text partially repeats itself with a
verse, the first part of which is the same as ParS 10.376c-377b:

sdtvatam pauskaram caiva jayakhyam ca tathaiva ca || evamadini divyani Sastrani
harind svayam | milavedanusdrena proktani hitakamyaya ||.

Such divine teachings as the Satvata, Pauskara and Jayakhya were taught by [the
Lord] Hari himself, in accordance with the original Veda, for the sake of the well-
being of others. (IS 1.64c-65)

See ParS 10.376c-377b: sdtvatam pauskaram caiva jayakhyam ca tathaiva ca ||
evamddini Sastrani divydnity avadharaya |. It should be pointed out that Rastelli (2006:
111ff) offers a different reading of the passage containing these verses. My own
reading is in agreement with that of Vedantadesika in his Paficaratraraksa (40.3-7).
The parallel verses, containing a few minor changes, between the first chapter of the IS
and the ParS are as follows: IS 1.1 <— ParS 1.1; IS 1.2cd <— ParS 1.3cd; IS 1.3ab —
ParS 1.4cd; IS 1.12ab — ParS 1.25cd; IS 1.16ab — ParS 1.32ab; IS 1.19 — ParS 1.57c-
58b; IS 1.20-21 <— ParS 1.33-34; IS 1.22c-28 < ParS 1.74c-80; IS 1.29¢-35b <— ParS
1.59-64; IS 1.36b-38a <— ParS 1.65b-67a; IS 1.39b-40c <— ParS 1.54c-S6a; IS 1.41-42
< ParS 1.72c-74b; IS 1.43 — ParS 1.56c-57b; IS 1.45c-47a — ParS 1.84c-86a; IS 1.48-
49 <— ParS 1.87-88; IS 1.50ab — ParS 1.91ab; IS 1.50cd <— ParS 1.19ab; IS 1.54-63 —
ParS 10.336-345; IS 1.64c-65a <— ParS 10.376c-377a; IS 1.70ab <— ParS 1.90cd.

IS 1.50-Sla: miilaveda@nusdrena chandasanustubhena ca | sdtvatam pauskaram caiva
jayakhyety evamadikam || divyam sacchastrajalam....|.

10

--- PAGE 130 ---
The Three Jewels 119

A ‘Sriprasna is also mentioned in the canonical list of the PadS but, like
both the ParS and the IS, the SriprsS is almost certainly later than the bulk
of this text. The chronology proposed by Raghavan (1969) places it as
roughly contemporary with the IS, with the SripréS likely to be the later of
the two works. As with both the ParS and the IS, the SriprsS contains a
large amount of material drawn from other texts. It reproduces a significant
number of verses verbatim from the Kriyapada section of the PadS, and
also shares parallel verses with the SS and the IS. In a similar manner to the
ParS and the IS, the SriprsS refers to the SS, PausS and JS as the “divine”
scriptures in a passage which contains strong echoes of ParS 1.77 and IS
1.25, and which also refers to an original Paficaratra sastra or milaveda."'

Finally we turn to the interpolated section of the JS entitled Adhikah
Pathah. This “additional text” offers the most substantial account of the
“three jewels” theory, as well as an interesting and unique interpretation as
to how the three texts relate to one another. The narrator explains:

paficaratrasya krtsnasya vakté narayanah svayam | iti sarvatra vikhyatam bhagavac-
chastragauravam \\ sdttvatam pauskaram caiva jayakhyam tantram uttamam |
ratnatrayam iti khyatam tadvi§esa ihocyate || sdram sdttvataSastrasya rahasyam
prdjiasammatam | ratnatrayam idam saksad bhagavadvaktranihsrtam \\ pravartitam
tathaivedam anyiindnadhikatvatah | anyanyani tu tantrani bhagavanmukhanirgatam
|| saram  samupajivyaiva samdasavydsadharanaih | vyakhyopabrmhananyayad
vyapitani tatha tathd \| vyakhyamiilanayenaisam gauravam sampratisthitam |.

Narayana himself is the proclaimer of the whole of the Paficaratra. The
venerability of the teaching of the Bhagavat is thus known everywhere. The
Sattvata, Pauskara and Jayakhya are [collectively] the highest Tantra, called the
‘three jewels’. Its particularity is explained here. The essence of the Sattvata sdstra
is a secret that is honoured by sages. This triad of jewels has come forth directly
from the mouth of the Bhagavat, so indeed this [triad] is established as neither de-

SriprsS 49.471¢-473: jaganmiilam vasudevam mukhyatah pratyapddayat \| tac chastram
miilavedakhyam ity api procyate budhaih | adhyetrbhedam Gsritya Sastram etat tridha
rame || sdttvatam pauskaram caiva jayakhyam ca bhavisyati | athaitah samhita divyah
vadisyanti vipascitah ||. — ‘The teaching is designated with the name miilaveda by the
learned because it primarily expounded upon Vasudeva [who is] the root of the world.
Owing to there being differences among students, I delight [in the fact that] this
teaching will become threefold: Sattvata, Pauskara and Jayakhya. Thus, the learned
will say these Samhitas are divine.’

--- PAGE 131 ---
120 Robert Leach

ficient nor excessive. After the tantras established themselves (samupajivya) [out
of] the essence emanating from the mouth of the Bhagavat, they supplemented
(vyapitdni, literally ‘pervaded’) one another with a commentary (or ‘explanation’,
vyakhyd), [that is] based upon a principle of strengthening (upabrmhana) [the ‘root
text’], and in such a way [these tantras can be characterised] by their possessing
both brevity [i.e. in the form of the root text], and detail [in the form of the
commentary]. Indeed the venerability of these [texts] is established on the grounds
of [this combination of] commentary and root [text]. (JS Adhikah Pathah 1-6b)

As far as I am aware, this is the only passage in any extant Paficaratra
text in which the relationship between the “three jewels” is characterised in
this way. As we have seen above, the ParS, IS and SripréS all indicate the
common origin of the JS, SS and PausS in their references to an “original
Veda” (miilaveda). That which distinguishes the above account, however, is
the idea that the three texts remain interdependent even after they have
emerged from the same source (here simply “essence”, sdra), and that each
of them supplements the other in the manner of root text and commentary.
Rastelli (1999: 54) explains their relation in this context thus: “Jede
Samhita beinhaltet einen Teil der von Gott verkiindeten Lehre, und zwar in
der Weise, dass eine die andere erginzt bzw. eine den Stoff ausfiihrlicher
erklart, welcher in einer anderen nur kurz angerissen wird”.'? In other
words, none of these texts can be fully understood except when read in
tandem with the others, since the three taken together constitute a single
teaching (sastra). The narrator himself explains this a few lines later:

miilavyakhydnariipatvad upajivyam parasparam || tantratrayam idam vidyad eka-
Sastram tatha budhah \,

Owing to the form of root [text] and commentary, the three Tantras are mutually
supportive, so the learned should know that this [threefold Tantra] is a single
SGstra. (SS Adhikah Pathah 11c-12b)

The Adhikah Pathah is also unique among the aforementioned
Pajficaratra works in that it is the only one which actually contains the term
ratnatraya. The prevalence of this term in the secondary Indological
‘Each Samhita contains a part of God’s teaching in such a way that one completes the
other. Where one explains some material in detail, in the other it will be described
only briefly.’

--- PAGE 132 ---
The Three Jewels 121

literature therefore far outweighs its presence in the Paficaratra scriptures
themselves, where it occurs only in this late, interpolated section of the JS.
In fact, to my knowledge, the only other extant Sanskrit text of this period
which contains this term in reference to Paficaratra scriptures is the
Paficaratraraksé. (PRR) of Venkatanatha — hereafter referred to as
“Vedantadesika’, the honorific by which he is now more commonly known.
This author belonged, at that time, to the Srivaisnava community at
Srirangam. In the PRR, as elsewhere, the “renowned” (prasiddha)
scriptures called the “three jewels” are characterised by their having come
forth directly from the mouth of God."

The Adhikah Pathah and the PRR, the only two extant works which
employ this term ratnatraya to describe Paficaratra scriptures, were in all
likelihood both written during the 14th century, the former in Kaficipuram
and the latter in Srirangam. The Adhikah Pathah was written, at least partly,
to eulogise the Varadarajasvamin temple in Kajfict (referred to as Hastisaila
throughout). The general date of its composition is provided by Rajan
(1981: 27), whose 14th century estimate is based on the correlation of
architectural descriptions contained in the text with historical data
concerning the construction of the temple building. Meanwhile, although
the PRR is likely to have been written during its author's first stint as an
dcarya at Srirangam,"* VedantadeSsika (whose traditional dates are 1268-
1369) did spend his formative years in Kajficipuram, and his writings
exerted considerable influence in this city during his lifetime as well as
after his death (Raman 1975: 70ff Hopkins 2002).'° It is not therefore
wholly implausible to suggest that the author of the Adhikah Pathah might
have been familiar with the PRR.'® At any rate, if Rajan is correct in identi-

PRR 47.6-7: yathoktam saksad bhagavanmukhodgatataya ratnatrayam iti prasiddhesu
jayakhyasattvatapauskaresu...

In other words, during the period before the second sack of Srirangam by Muslim
forces, in 1323. See Singh (1958: 100), and Hari Rao (1976: 116-117).

Vedantadesika wrote a stotra, the Varadardjapaficasat, in praise of Lord Varadaraja at
Kaijici, and was intimately connected with this temple in his early years.

Of course this does not enable us to conclude that the author of the Adhikah Pathah
directly borrowed from the PRR, for (an)other text/s no longer available to us may also
have characterised the JS, SS and PausS as ratnatraya. However, the influence of the
teachings of Visistddvaitaveddnta are clearly discernible in the Adhikah Pathah (see,
for example, JS ap 109), and Vedantadesika was a very important figure in that milieu

--- PAGE 133 ---
122 Robert Leach

fying the gateway (gopura) described in the Adhikah Pathah with one added
to the Varadarajasvamin temple during the Vijayanagar period, it is fairly
safe to assume that this interpolated section of the JS was composed during
the second half of the 14th century, during the 1360s at the very earliest,'’
and is therefore almost certainly later than the PRR.

This would mean of course that the composition of the Adhikah Pathah
was also subsequent to that of the ParS and the IS. That the Adhikah Pathah
contains the claim that these two texts serve to elucidate, respectively, the
PausS and the SS, further bears witness to its later composition. The author
of the Adhikah Pathah tells us:

ttarasate paramesvarasamhita \| pauskararthavivrtyartha vyakhya-
sdttvatasya vivrtyartham isvaram tantram uttamam | jayakhyasydsya
tantrasya vyakhyanam padmam ucyate |.

Also, among the 108 tantras, the Paramesvarasamhitd was transmitted (avatdrita,
literally ‘brought down’) in the form of a commentary (vyakhyda), [whose] purpose
is the explanation of the meaning of the Pauskara [Samhita]. The Iévara [Samhita]
is the highest tantra [whose] purpose is the explanation of the Sattvata [Samhita].
The commentary on the Jayakhya Tantra is called the Padma [Samhita]. (JS
Adhikah Pathah 6c-8b)

Whilst the ParS (1.90-92b) and the IS (1.69c-71la) themselves claim
association with, respectively, the PausS and the SS, the Padmasamhita
(PadS) does not link itself to the JS in the manner described above. Indeed,
it is tempting to conclude that this single verse in the Adhikah Pathah has
provided the basis for the claim, which has been perpetuated in a number of
modern exegetical and scholarly works, that the PadS is “based on” or
“derived from” the JS. This explanation appeals because although the first
section of the PadS appears to have incorporated several passages from the

during this period.

"According to K.V. Raman (1975: 26) Kajfici did not come under Vijayanagar domi-
nance until the 1360s. The outer, western gopura of the Varadarajasvamin temple (i.e.
that which Rajan identifies as being described in the Adhikah Pathah) is likely to have
been built following Vijayanagar leader Kumara Kampana’s arrival in the city,
sometime during, or shortly after, 1361. The earliest dateable inscription found on the
plinth portion of the gopura belongs to Kampana and is dated 1374. On this see Raman
(ibid: 54).

--- PAGE 134 ---
The Three Jewels 123

fourth chapter of the JS (Rastelli 1999a), in general the PadS owes little to
the earlier work, and contains a wealth of information, especially on the
subject of the construction of temples, which is wholly absent from the JS.
It is indicative, indeed, that the JS’ 20th patala, wherein the majority of this
work’s architectural detail is to be found, shares no significant data with the
PadS, and describes a style of temple which is not referred to by the latter
(see Rajan 1981). It is worth mentioning, in addition, that the status of the
PadS as a “commentary” on the JS does not appear to have been accepted
always by the traditions which have inherited and used these texts. For
example, the 19th century Srivaisnava author Alasingabhatta writes in his
commentary on the IS, the Satvatarthaprakasika (SAP), that in fact it is the
Laksmitantra (LT) that is the commentary (vriti) on the JS, and that the
PadS is only consulted by the priests of the HastiSailanatha (i.e.
Varadarajasvamin) temple on those subjects (specifically “festivals etc.”)
which the LT does not cover.'*

In the context of the ratnatraya the PadS is important for its presentation
of an alternative scriptural hierarchy, not found elsewhere in the extant
literature. At the very end of this long text, we encounter the claim that
there are “five jewels”, and these do not include the JS, SS or PausS:

tantranam caiva ratnani paicahuh paramarsayah | padmam sanatkumaram ca
tathd paramasamhita || padmodbhavam ca mahendram kanva tantramrtani ca |.

Eminent sages name five jewels among the tantras: Padma, Sanatkumara,
Paramasamhita, Padmodbhava and Mahendra are the immortal tantras O Kanva.
(PadS 4.33.204-205b)

We are faced here, at least ostensibly, with a somewhat puzzling
situation. Whilst the author of the Adhikah Pathah tells us that the PadS is a
commentary on the JS, and is in use in the same temple in Kaficipuram as
that text,’” the PadS itself does not include the JS in its list of “five jewels”,
those scriptures which, we can presumably infer, the author of the above

18 SaPr on IS 1.64-67: idam sdtvatapauskarajayakhyatantratrayam... isvarapdramesvara-
laksmitantrakhyatantratrayam kramena tesdm vrttiriipam | tatre$varapdramesvarayor
utsavadinam pauskalyam asti | laksmitantre tu tan nasti | atah anuktam anyato grahyam’
uktaritya hastifailanatharcakaih padmoktanam utsavadydcarandm parigrahah krta

--- PAGE 135 ---
124 Robert Leach

passage considered superior within his tradition. Leaving aside for the
moment the question of why the author of the Adhikah Pathah might have
made this claim on behalf of the PadS (I will discuss this question below),
we must first attempt to explain why the JS is not included in this list.

There are, on the face of it, at least two possible explanations for its
omission. The first is simply that the composition of this portion of the
PadS was complete before the idea of the supremacy of the JS, SS and
PausS became current.” Given that it appears quite probable that the ParS
(the earliest extant text to list the JS, SS and PausS as the “divine”
scriptures) incorporated passages from the PadS and is therefore later than
the bulk of that text (Rastelli 2006: 58-59), it is certainly a possibility that
the composition of this section of the PadS predated the idea of the
superiority of the three aforementioned scriptures. However, we can be
certain that the PadS’ list of canonical scriptures (at 1.1.99-114) was added
to the main body of the text at a much later date (as can be inferred from
the inclusion within the list of demonstrably later works such as the IS and
the SriprsS), and this shows that additions were still being made to the
PadS at a time when the theory of the supremacy of the JS, SS and PausS
was already quite well established. Indeed, the fact that its list of “five
jewels” occurs at the very end of the PadS might well suggest that this
passage is itself a later addition.

The second possible explanation is that the author of the passage in
question in the PadS belonged to a tradition within the Paficaratra which
did not at that time accept the supremacy of the JS, SS and PaussS. It is to
the distinct traditions within the Paficaratra to which I shall now turn.

On the JS’ and the PadS’ association with Kajficl see JS ap 13-14b: hastigaile
jayakhyam ca sdmrajyam adhitisthati | pddmatantram hastisaile... ||... karyakari
pracaryate |, On the JS’ association with Kajict at the time of the composition of the IS,
see IS 1.67.

As is the case with much of the anonymous Paiicaratra literature, the PadS is certainly
not a homogeneous, singly authored work, and so it is difficult to establish its date.
Rastelli (2003) claims that its date can be determined only in relation to other
Samhitas, and places the bulk of its composition between that of the Paramasamhita
(ParS), from which it borrows, and that of the ParS. Her suggestion that it is sub-
sequent to the Ahirbudhnyasamhitd as well as to the lifetime of Ramanuja would most
likely place it towards the end of the 12" century, or shortly thereafter.

20

--- PAGE 136 ---
The Three Jewels 125
2. Divisions within the Pajicaratra

The PadS is one of several Samhitas which divide the Paficaratra tradition
into four separate traditions or ‘Siddhantas’. The other scriptural works
which enumerate four Paficaratra Siddhantas are the PausS (38.293-307b),
the ParS (19.522-544), the IS (21.560-586), the SriprsS (16.31c-35b), the
Bhdrgavatantra (BhT) (22.87-94b) and, according to Vedantadesika, the
Hayagrivasamhité (PRR 8.5-8), the Kdlottara (PRR 31.14-18), and the
Srikarasamhita (PRR 30.18ff).2' PadS 1.1.80-82 names the four Siddhantas
as ‘Mantra’, ‘Agama’, ‘Tantra’, and ‘Tantrantara’. At 1.1.86cd, the PadS
claims that it belongs to the Mantrasiddhanta. This Siddhanta, the PadS tells
us elsewhere (4.19.115d), is “foremost” (agrimam). Mantrasiddhantins
primarily worship a single form of god (ekamiirti, 1.1.80ab), which we are
told (at 4.21.25c) is Vasudeva.” The PadS asserts (4.21.28c-29) that
21 Smith (1975: 296) convincingly suggests that the passage in the PausS which deals
with the Siddhantas is part of a later interpolation. Rastelli (2006: 190-191) suggests
that we can assign its composition and inclusion within the PausS to a period prior to
the composition of the ParS. The Hayagrivasamhita, quoted by Vedantadesika, is
another name for the Hayasirsapafcaratra (HP) (on this equivalence see e.g. Schrader
(1916: 11) and Gonda (1977: 106)). This work, which is not available to me, appears
to have its origins in North India, and several scholars (e.g. Rajan 1981: 34) favour an
early date, perhaps as early as the 9th or 10th century. Since there is no mention of the
four Paficaratra Siddhantas in any other works dating from this period, or indeed from
quite a lengthy period subsequent to this, we can suppose that this passage was also
probably part of a later interpolation into the HP. The K@lottara referred to by
Vedantadesika is listed by Parampushdas and Shrutiprakashdas (2002: 83), under
“Unpublished Samhitas”, as the ‘(Sri) Kalottara-~Samhita’. Such a title does not appear
in any “canonical” list given in a Samhita. Each of the works listed above gives the
same names to the four Paficaratra Siddhantas with the exceptions of the PausS
(32.35b, 38.293c-294c) which calls what is elsewhere known as ‘Agamasiddhanta’
simply ‘Siddhanta’ and, according to Vedantadesika, the Srikarasamhita. This latter
work refers to the four Siddhantas as the ‘Vedasiddhanta’, the ‘Divyasiddhanta’, the
‘Tantrasiddhanta’, and the ‘Puranasiddhanta’. As far as I am aware, such a classification
is not found in any other extant work. A Srikara is listed in the PadS (1.1.102b), the
Visvamitrasamhita (2.18d and 24c), and, according to Schrader (1916: 11), the
Visnutantra.
» As Rastelli (2006: 224-225) shows, according to ParS  19.529-539 the
Mantrasiddhantins do not always worship god as a “single form”, they also worship
him in his vyiha and vibhava forms. This is merely one example of conflicting

--- PAGE 137 ---
126 Robert Leach

Mantrasiddhantins should “visualise” (dhydyeyuh) and worship Vasudeva’s
image with Vedic mantras (trayimantra). The Vedic origin of the
Mantrasiddhanta is described at PadS 4.21.2/f, Here we are told that a group
of 8000 rsis, led by Aupagayana and belonging to the Kanva and
Madhyandina sakhdis (i.e. of the Vajasaneyin recension) asked Brahma for a
means to liberation (moksopdya), and in response Brahma, “desiring to
grant favours” (anugrahakdmyaya), initiated these rsis into the Paficaratra
“by way of the Mantrasiddhanta” (7c-8). Having been initiated into the
cakravarijamandala (also known as the cakrabjamandala), the rsis are
instructed to study the Kanvi and Madhyandani sakhds, and to accompany
the performance of Vedic rituals such as somaydga with visualisation
(dhyana) and worship of the Lord (bhagavat) (10c-11b).

The author of the PadS then tells us that Mantrasiddhantins are those
who are born into the lineage (vamsa) of Bhagavat worshippers founded by
these original Vajasaneyin rsis, and that it is for this reason that they are
called ‘Bhagavatas’. Once these Bhagavatas have themselves been properly
initiated, they are also qualified to perform the ritual worship of Visnu in
accordance with the “five times”.”’ It is further stated (at 4.21.17c-21b) that
only Bhagavatas can perform worship for the sake of others (parartha-
yajana), though this rule is then immediately revised to enable an initiated
non-Bhagavata to do so if commanded by a Bhagavata.™

This account of the Mantrasiddhanta is followed by a description of the
Agamasiddhanta. We have been told previously (1.1.80cd, 4.19.116-117)
that members of this Siddhanta favour worshipping the four forms
(caturmirti) of god, namely the vyithas Vasudeva, Samkarsana, Pradyumna
and Aniruddha. The author of this section of the PadS clearly regards the
Agamasiddhanta as an inferior tradition, and its inferiority is conveyed by
the fact that its members do not undergo diksd (see PadS 4.1.3-5b, 21.53),”

(“internal’/“external”) descriptions across texts which belong to different Siddhantas.
PadS 4.21.14-15: yiiyam bhdgavatas tena jata bhagavadarcanat | bhagavadbhakti-
karandd vamSajatas caturmukha \| namnd bhagavatah santo diksayitva yathavidhi |
yathoktam karma kurvanah prapnuvanti param padam |.

This immediate revision possibly indicates that the second, more moderate “rule” was
incorporated into the text at a later time.

The ParS, which does not describe the initiation rite, also appears to confirm (at e.g.
9187-190, 13.114c-115, 15.14c-20, 18.116-117) that Agamasiddhantins do not undergo

--- PAGE 138 ---
The Three Jewels 127

and are therefore not qualified to perform certain rites (PadS 4.21.33-35b,
43-46, 53). Both passages that discuss the omission of diksd refer to an
‘Ekayana’; in the first instance to ekdyanam vedam (4.1.3c), and in the
second instance to ekdyanddhvan (4.21.53d). This ‘Ekayanaveda’ or “way of
the Ekayana” is the ritual teaching to which members of the Agama-
siddhanta adhere.” According to the PadS, the Paficaratrika ‘Ekayana’ (this
designation is shown to be synonymous with ‘Agamasiddhantin’ at
4.21.47ab), in contrast to the Mantrasiddhantin is not permitted to use
Vedic mantras, and recites the dvadasaksara mantra without the elements
“seed” (bija), “power” (Sakti), “limb” (arga), “seer” (rsi) and “metre”
(chandas).”” Further manifestly “non-Vedic” characteristics of this
Siddhanta include the fact that its followers have no gotra (4.21.41ab), and
that its “leading rite” or “rite of guidance” (nayakarma) is enjoined for all
four varnas, rather than only for the highest three (4.21.36c-37b).**

Among the Paiicaratra scriptures which contain, or are said to contain, a
hierarchical description of the Siddhanta divisions, only the PadS, the BhT
(whose account appears to be based on that of the PadS),” and the SriprsS
give the highest status to the Mantrasiddhanta.* The PausS, the ParS, the IS

diksd. This information is taken from Rastelli (2006: 193-195).

6 PadS 4.21.36cd refers to ekddhvan as the tradition according to which the samskdras
are performed in the Agamasiddhanta. It seems reasonable, in light of line 53cd
referred to above, to take this as a synonym for ekdyanddhvan. At PadS 4.21.47ab it is
stated: ekdyana§ caturmiirtim pratigrhya samarcayet |. — “The Ekayana should worship
having accepted the fourfold form.’

27 PadS 4.21.37c-39b. These elements are explained at PadS 4.27.216c-219. As Hanneder
(1997) and Rastelli (2006) have shown, these last two elements serve to make Tantric
mantras seem more Vedic. The Mantrasiddhanta as presented in the PadS incorporate
these elements, whereas the Agamasiddhanta does not. Rastelli (2006: 208) writes, “Es
paBt sehr gut zu der PadS, deren Anhiinger sich selbst auf vedisch-orthodoxe
Traditionen zuriickfiihren und die ihr Ritual als visnuitische Modifikation des vedisch-
orthodoxen Rituals betrachten” (‘This fits very well with the PadS, whose followers
trace themselves back to the Vedic-orthodox traditions and who regard their rituals as
Vaisnava modifications of Vedic-orthodox rituals’).

8 See the discussion of this verse in Rastelli (2006: 196-197).

» See BhT 22.87-93b, and BhT 24.19-20 (<— PadS 4.21.36, 37cd, 38ab), BhT 24.25-27b

(< PadS 4.21.53-54b, 38c-39b).

See e.g. SriprsS_16.32-34b: tantrantare tv Ggame ca siddhante tantrasamjiike | tesu

piijapravrttanam diksd nirbijasamjnika || anyesam diksakarane tesam anadhikaritd | ato

30

--- PAGE 139 ---
128 Robert Leach

and, according to Vedantadesika, the HP and the Kalottara each name the
Agamasiddhanta at the top of the Siddhanta hierarchy.*' Moreover, portions
of these works, and sections of others which we must assume were authored
by Agamasiddhantins, explicitly contradict several of the aforementioned
descriptions of the Agamasiddhanta which we find in the Mantrasiddhantin
PadS. Thus, for example, according to the ParS (1.67c-71), the Ekayana-
veda prescribes sacrifices such as the asvamedha, and it contains all Vedic
mantras, as well as teaching the dvddasaksara mantra (10139). The SS
(24.333, 25.53-54b, 95c-96b, 113d-115b, 253-257b etc.) and the PausS
(42.145c-147b, 180) also prescribe the recitation of Vedic mantras for
Ekayanas. Likewise, the PadS’ claim (at 4.21.43-46) that Ekayanas are not
qualified to perform the rites related to the construction of temples and the
installation (pratisthd) of divine images therein, is contradicted by the SS
(24.282-25.294) and the PausS (42.1-202b), and in passages borrowed from
these works by the authors of the IS (e.g. 16.139c-287) and the ParS (e.g
15.14c-20).*

nirbija ity ukta vidvadbhih kamaleksane || sabijam mantrasiddhantadiksakramam
udiryate |. — ‘For those engaged in worship according to the Tantrantara, the Agama
and the Siddhanta called Tantra, the initiation is called ‘without seed’. For them there is
no entitlement to perform the initiation of others. Thus it is called ‘without seed’ by the
learned, O lotus-eyed. [Conversely] the method of initiation in the Mantrasiddhanta is
called ‘with seed”.

The verses attributed to the HP or, as Vedantadesika names it, the ‘Hayagrivasamhita’
in the PRR (8.5-8) read: dgamakhyam hi siddhantam sanmoksaikaphalapradam |
mantrasamjfiam hi siddhantam siddhimoksapradam nrndm || tantrasamjiiam tu
siddhdntam caturvargaphalapradam | tantrantaram hi siddhdntam  vaiichitartha-
phalapradam \. — ‘The Siddhanta named Agama grants liberation as its only fruit. The
Siddhanta called Mantra grants to people liberation and magical powers (siddhi). The
Siddhanta called Tantra grants the ‘group of four’ (i.e. the purusdrthas) as its fruit. The
Tantrantara Siddhanta grants as its fruit the desired goal.’ Vedantadesika (PRR 8.9)
explains that the “desired goal” here indicates liberation (apavarga). The verses
attributed to the Kdlottara in the PRR (31.14-18) read: anekabhedabhinnam ca pajica-
ratrakhyam @gamam | piirvam dgamasiddhantam mantrakhyam tadanantaram || tantram
tantrantaram ceti caturdhd parikirtitam ||, — ‘The tradition named Paficaratra is split
into various divisions. The first is the Agama, and after that there is the one called
Mantra, the Tantra, and the Tantrantara. Thus it is said to be fourfold’.

For reasons which will have to await publication elsewhere, I am confident that SS
24.282-25.294, and possibly these two chapters as a whole, and the 42nd chapter of the
PausS are later additions to these texts. The same can be said for JS 20.265-270, which

--- PAGE 140 ---
The Three Jewels 129

The fact that “internal” descriptions of the Agamasiddhanta conflict
with “external” descriptions of the same should not surprise us. For the
textual evidence points to a climate of intra-Paficaratrika sectarianism in
South India during the early centuries of the second millennium. Rastelli
(2006: 186-187) draws attention to the fact that the warnings against
“mixing” Siddhantas which are found in the 19th adhydyas of both the
PadS’ Caryapada and the ParS are contained within sections of these texts
which deal primarily with the rites of “reparation” (prdayascitta). Given that
such rites are also prescribed, for instance, in the event of a tantrasankarya
ie a “mixing” of systems, whether it be Vaikhanasa or Pasupata (ParS
19.520, 549), the term “sectarianism” does not seem too out of place in a
discussion of the Paficaratra Siddhantas of this period. Indeed, the PadS
(4.19.125c/f) explicitly states the equivalence between a siddhdntasankara
and a tantra-sankara.

The type of Paficaratrika who adheres to the Mantrasiddhanta is
commonly referred to as a “mixed sacrificer” (vyamisrayajin) by Agama-
siddhantin or Ekayana authors who considered such worshippers to be
inferior.* A good example of this typically sectarian attitude can be found
in the PausS:

vaivam bhaktisankaryam na kuryad evam eva hi || varjaniyam prayatnena ya
icched uttamam gatim ||vipra ekayanakhyd ye te bhaktds tattvato ’cyute || ekantinah
sutattvastha dehantan ndnyaydjinah | kartavyatvena ye visnum samyajanti phalam
vind || prapnuvanti ca dehante vasudevatvam abjaja \vyan
bhaktabhasas tu te smrtah \\ parijfieyds tu te vipra nandémargagana.

Knowing thus [i.e. that Purusottama is the ‘inner ruler’ (antaryamin) of all gods],
one should never perform mixed devotion. Indeed one who desires the supreme
goal should avoid [that] with every effort. Those Brahmanas that are called
Ekayanas are truly devotees of Acyuta. They who worship Visnu as a duty [that is]
without (worldly) fruit, worshipping no other [god], are Ekantins who [will] exist
in their true state after death. [In other words] at death they attain the state of
Vasudeva, O Lotus-born! And the others are mixed worshippers — they are
considered to be devotees in appearance only. Those Brahmanas are [easily]

contains a reference to mantras of the ekdyaniyas
The designation “mixed sacrificer” (vyamisrayajin) ‘does not only refer to Mantra-
siddhantins. In the ParS, for instance, it is used more generally to denote all followers
of the “mixed dharma” (misradharma), which is the ParS’ name for the Vedas.

--- PAGE 141 ---
130 Robert Leach

recognised on account of their worshipping a multitude of inferior gods in various
different ways. (PausS 36.259c-263b)

The division between the Agamasiddhantins or Ekayanas and the
“mixed worshippers” or the Mantrasiddhantins appears to have been the
most significant schism within the South Indian Pajficaratra in the early
centuries of the second millennium. The BhT (24.17-18) characterises these
groups as, respectively, the “pure” (suddha) and the “mixed” (misra)
Vaisnavas.™* Perhaps the most telling distinction between these traditions is
the manner in which they position themselves with regard to the Veda. For
while the Ekayanas declare that the Ekayanaveda is superior to the Veda,
the Mantrasiddhantins claim that their texts are “based on the Veda”
(vedamiilata). One of the earliest clear expressions of this idea within the
scriptural corpus appears to be the declaration, found in both the PadS
(1.1.91ced) and the Visvaksenasamhitd (8.5ab), that it is “rooted in sruti, and
an authority like the Kalpasiitras” (srutimilam idam tantram pramdnam
kalpasiitravat). The same verse is found in the later Markandeyasamhita
(1.38ab) as well as the Sripurusottamasamhita (1.26cd).

Representatives of these two Paficaratra traditions are contrasted with
each other already in Yamuna’s Agamapramanya (AP) (169-171) and, as we
have seen above, both traditions produced scriptural works which glorify
their own tradition and undermine the other. Conversely, no extant work, as
far as I am aware, identifies itself with the Tantra or Tantrantara
Siddhantas.** In the following section I will show that this climate of
sectarianism was succeeded by one of inclusivism and integration. A clear

The “mixed” Vaisnavas, who are described as traividya, are here associated with the
astaksara mantra, and the “pure” Vaisnavas, who follow the Ekayanaveda, with the
dvadasaksara mantra. Colas (1990: 26) reports that the Vaikhanasa work Kriyadhikdra
also divides the Paficaratra into mira and suddha sub-groups and that, according to
the Yajfddhikara, the latter has no vedamaryada.

However, according to Vedantadesika (PRR 30.18ff) the Srikarasamhitd associates
itself with the ‘Puranasiddhanta. The PRR (31.1-2) quotes this text thus: eat
puradnasiddhantam Srikaram ca visesatah | idam Srikarasamjiiakhyam bhogamoksa-
phalapradam |. Vedantadesika (PRR 30.21-22 and 31.5-6) asserts that the name
‘Puranasiddhanta’ designates the “Tantrantarasiddhanta’, and argues that it is precisely
the Tantrantarasiddhanta that is denoted by the particle ca in the above verse.

--- PAGE 142 ---
The Three Jewels 131

demonstration of this pattern can be found by looking through the prism of
the idea of the superiority of the JS, SS and PausS.

3. The Formation of the Paficaratra Canon

As we have seen, three of the four Paficaratra scriptures which claim the
superiority of the JS, SS and PausS also mention a “root-Veda’ or an
“original Veda” (miilaveda) within the same context. In each instance, this
“original Veda” designates the so-called ‘Ekayanaveda’,** thus linking these
passages, and therefore presumably the “three jewels doctrine” itself, with
the Paficaratra tradition that is referred to in the PadS and the ParS as the
‘Agamasiddhanta’.*” However, whilst the ParS and the majority of the IS
are undoubtedly authored by Agamasiddhantins, the third work which
associates the “three jewels doctrine” with the Ekayanaveda, namely the
SripréS, is almost certainly primarily a work of the Mantrasiddhanta. This
is evident not only from the fact that substantial portions of this text borrow
from or are based upon the PadS, as Padmanabhan (1969) has shown, but
also from its frequent use of Vedic mantras* allied to its claim (at 16.34c-
35b) that among the four Siddhantas it is only members of the Mantra-
siddhanta who are entitled to use Vedic mantras alongside those belonging
to the Ekayana. How, then, are we to interpret the inclusion of these
‘Ekayana’ passages in the SriprsS?

*© See especially ParS 1.32c-33b: ity uktvadhyapayamasa vedam ekdyanabhidam ||

miilabhiitas tu mahato vedavrksasya yo mahdan |. — “Having spoken thus, he taught the
Veda called Ekayana, which is the main root of the great Veda-tree”; TS 1.19-20b (—
ParS 1.57c-58b, 1.33ab); IS 1.24ab ( ParS 1.76ab): mahato vedavrksasya miilabhiito
mahan ayam |, — ‘This [Ekayanaveda] is the main root of the great Veda-tree’; SriprsS
2.38ab: vedam ekdyanam nama vedanam Sirasi sthitam |, — ‘The Veda named Ekayana
is situated at the head of the Vedas’.

I have referred to the claim that the SS, PausS and JS are the superior Paficaratra
scriptures as the “three jewels doctrine” for ease of exposition, though it should not
obscure the fact that these texts are not referred to as the “three jewels” in any extant
Agamasiddhanta source.

These are listed by Padmanabhan (1969) in the appendix to the SriprsS.

--- PAGE 143 ---
132 Robert Leach

In the 16th chapter of the SriprsS, the term ‘Ekayanaveda’ is used to
refer to the Paficaratra teaching in general. The verse in question reads as
follows:

yathaiva karmakandesu diksokta yagasiddhaye | tathaivaikdyane vede pijaydgadi-
siddhaye |).

Just as initiation (diksd) is spoken of [as necessary] for the performance of sacri-
fice in the ritual portions (karmakdnda) [of the Veda], so too [it is spoken of as
necessary] for the performance of worship (piija) and sacrifice etc. in the
Ekayanaveda. (SriprsS 16.20)

This verse provides the second instance in the SriprsS (after 2.26-46b)
wherein an association is drawn between followers of the ‘Ekayanaveda’
and the rite of initiation (diksa@). Earlier works such as the PadS (4.21.51-
53) and the ParS (13.114c-115) indicate, contrarily, that followers of the
Ekayanaveda do not undergo diksa.* Of course, the passages from these
works which address this issue do not use the designation ‘Ekayana’ as a
name for the Paficaratra in general, as is the case in the 16th chapter of the
SriprsS. The fact that the above verse (SriprsS 16.20) occurs in a passage
which identifies the SripréS with the Mantrasiddhanta (see especially
16.31c-35b), means that this is quite a clear example of a Mantrasiddhantin
incorporating the idea of the Ekayanaveda into his own tradition’s self-
understanding. The same process also appears to be at work at SriprsS
49.47 1c-473, which incorporates the apparently Agamasiddhantin claim
regarding the superiority of the JS, SS and PausS. Although we cannot be
sure of the “sectarian” identity of the author of this passage, it is quite clear
that these verses are borrowed from an Agamasiddhanta source. This is
evident not only from the fact that, as mentioned previously, they strongly
echo ParS 1.77 and IS 1.25, but also from the fact that the section of the

* A further clue, albeit one from outside the South Indian context, that the Ekayana was

recognised as a tradition or “lineage” which one is born into (rather than one that is
joined through initiation) is provided by the Kashmirian Vamanadatta, author of the
so-called Samvitprakdsa. For in the closing verses of each prakarana of this work
(1.137c-138b, 2.61, 3.60, 4.98, and 5.52), Vamanadatta claims that he is a Brahmin born
into the Ekayana.

--- PAGE 144 ---
The Three Jewels 133

SriprsS in which they are found is replete with borrowings from Agama-
siddhanta sources.”

Why should the SriprsS, a work which seems to have been authored
byMantrasiddhantins, incorporate these passages extolling the Ekayana-
veda? It appears that by the time of the composition of this work, the idea
of the Ekayanaveda had, in certain contexts, acquired an authoritative status
among non-Agamasiddhantin Paficaratrikas. Already in Yamuna’s AP we
encounter an example of a non-Agamasiddhantin (ie. Yamuna himself)
accepting the validity of the Ekayanaveda (or the ‘Ekayanasruti’), and it
should be noted that Vedantadesika, whose PRR may well predate the
SripréS, followed Yamuna in this respect.’ Turning to the scriptural
literature, this pattern is also evident in a section of the PadS which
addresses the various paficakdla observances incumbent upon the Pajfica-
ratrika initiate. In the passage (PadS 4.13.66c-72b) which deals with the
study of texts (svddhydya), the initiate is instructed to study, alongside the
various recensions of the three Vedas, the “original recension based on the
Ekayana” (miilasakham ekdyanasamasrayam). Although, again, the
“sectarian” identity of the author of this passage is not absolutely clear,** his
allegiance to the three Vedas and the respectful reference, for example, to
“experts in the six limbs [of the Veda]” most probably indicates a non-
Agamasiddhanta background.** Certainly the remainder of this chapter

“© See for example: SriprsS 49.446cd — IS 19.103ab; SriprsS 49.448cd — IS 19.93ab;
SriprsS 49.454abe — IS 19.100c-101a; SriprsS 49.457a > IS 19.104c; SriprsS 49.464-
466a <> ParS 19.496-498a — IS 19.117c-119c; SriprsS 49.475-476b — ParS 15.928c-
929 — IS 19.67-68b; SriprsS 49.476c-479b <> ParS 19.545-547 — IS 21.582c-584;
SriprsS 49.481-483b <> ParS 10.329-331b — IS 23.45c-47; SriprsS 49.486abe «> IS
19.121abe; SripréS 49.487a < IS 19.123a. It is possible, of course, that the SripréS
borrowed these verses from another work. It should also be noted that close variants of
ParS 19.545-548b and 10.329-333b are quoted by Vedantadesika in his PRR (18.15 ff;
40.8/).

4! See, for example, PRR 4.5-18 (— AP 169.7-170.11). The SriprsS is not quoted by

Vedantadesika, and thus may well succeed him.

There are passages in the PadS which do appear to have been authored by Agama-

siddhantins, most notably in the first chapter of the Caryapada. See especially PadS

4.1.3-9.

4 See PadS 4.13.67-70b: rco yajiimsi samani bhidyamanany anekadhd \| sakhabhedair
mialasakham ekdyanasamasrayam | trayimayim adhiyita sukhasinas samahitah || anyais
sardham adhiydnais sadangesu ca kovidaih | adhyapayita va Sisyan Sastrani vividhani

a2

--- PAGE 145 ---
134 Robert Leach

exhibits the kind of Veda-congruent Vaisnava devotionalism which is more
representative of the Mantrasiddhanta.“

That the PadS should contain a passage wherein an apparently non-
Agamasiddhantin author invokes the Ekayanaveda might appear somewhat
surprising given that in this work’s descriptions of the Pajficaratra
Siddhantas (see especially 4.21.30-54b), the Ekayanaveda is explicitly
associated only with the Agamasiddhanta. We must assume that these two
sections of the PadS do not share a common author, and that the summary
of the paficakdla duties in PadS 413 is in all likelihood the later
contribution to the text. This is most likely the case because, in the
scriptural literature, the non-Agamasiddhantin incorporation of the idea of
the Ekayanaveda is a strategy which is found primarily in the later works,
including the SripréS, as we have just seen, and also the Sripurusottama-
samhitd, to which I shall turn shortly.

Yamuna’s acceptance of the validity and authority of the Ekayanaveda
may have been motivated, at least partially, by the prominence of
Agamasiddhantins at the Raiganathasvamin temple in Sriraigam, where
Yamuna was an dcarya.*° Can we advance similar explanations for the non-
Agamasiddhantin acceptance of the Ekayanaveda in such texts as the 13"
chapter of the PadS’ Caryapada, the PRR and the SripréS? In other words,
were these works also produced in environments in which the Agama-
siddhantins or Ekayanas continued to exert a significant influence? This is
not an easy question to answer, but since we know considerably more about
the provenance and likely date of the PRR than we do about PadS 4.13 or
the SripréS, I will address this issue in relation to VedantadeSika’s work.

ca | itihdsapuranani dharmasastrani va punah |.

See especially the injunction to perform the Vaisvadeva ritual at home following the
recitation of the Jitamtestotra. This act completes the performance of the five “great
sacrifices” (mahdyajfia), which should be undertaken according to one’s Grhyasiitra.
PadS 4.13.64 reads: iti vi va devesam vaisvadevam svadhamani | kuryat pajica
mahdyajnan api grhyoktavartmand |.

The Pajficaratrika inclusivism conveyed elsewhere in the PadS (e.g. 4.2.87c-88) is also
likely to belong to later additions to the text, since such strategies, as we will see
below, are increasingly met with in the later literature.

Such an environment may also have persuaded Yamuna that there were advantages in
including the followers of the Ekayanaveda in his description and defence of an
“orthoprax” Paiicaratra.

44

45

46

--- PAGE 146 ---
The Three Jewels 135

It is difficult to overlook the fact that, in his defence of the Paficaratra,
Vedantadesika lends his support in particular to the Agamasiddhanta. Thus,
in the opening section of the PRR’s first chapter, Vedantadesika establishes
that the Agamasiddhanta is the primary Siddhanta. In support of this he
quotes (at PRR 6.4ff) PausS 38.293c-305, and (at 8.5-8) the Hayagriva-
samhita (otherwise known as the Hayasirsapajicaratra), both of which list
the Agamasiddhanta at the top of the Siddhanta hierarchy. Subsequently, at
PRR 9.8-11, he quotes PadS 4.19.111c-113b, which lists the Mantra-
siddhanta as the “first” Siddhanta, but in his succeeding commentary,
Vedantadesika notes that this is a reversal of the sequence (vyutkrama) that
is found in the PausS, and that this reversal is intended merely as a means
of praising the Mantrasiddhanta.”” In other words, the hierarchy found in
the PausS is the canonical one. As if to emphasise this, Vedantadesika then
claims, at PRR 9.13-14, that the PadS itself acknowledges the superiority
(atiSaya) of the Agamasiddhanta, and that this superiority is conveyed,
according to the PadS, by the fact that the Agamasiddhanta confers
liberation alone.

These verses in the PRR are followed by a short quotation of PadS
4.19.117ab: “And in the Agama [Siddhanta], wherein the renunciation of
actions is described...” (karmandam api samnydsah kathyate yatra cagame).
Vedantadesika quotes this half-sloka in order to issue an important
corrective as to its meaning. The “renunciation of actions” mentioned here
refers, in fact, to the renunciation of “actions motivated by desire” (kdmya-
karma) which is performed in the Agamasiddhanta, says Vedantadesika, in
accordance with the teaching of “pure renunciation” (sdttvikatydga) that is
propounded in the 18th chapter of the Bhagavadgita.* In other words,
according to Vedantadesika, Agamasiddhantins perform rituals relating to
their own social class and stage of life etc. (svavarndSramddi), and also the
daily and occasional rites prescribed in the Grhyasitras of their own sakhda,
but they renounce what the Bhagavadgitd (at e.g. MBh 6.40.2) calls the
“fruits” of these actions. “Therefore”, concludes Vedantadesika, “it should

47 PRR = 912-13: atra— gamamantrasiddhantayoh — pauskaroktakramat —_ vyut-
kramenopadddnam siddhimoksapradamantrasiddhantaprasastye tatparyat.

48 PRR 9.15-17: atra kamyakarmanam svariipatah samnydsah. svavarnasramddiniyatanam
tu bhagavadgitastadasadhydyanirnitaprakdrena  sattvikatydgah. svasakhdgrhyokta-
maryadaya ca sarvatra nityanaimittikadiparigrahah.

--- PAGE 147 ---
136 Robert Leach

not be erroneously thought that in the Agamasiddhanta all actions are re-
nounced, for there is a great variety of specific actions [performed
therein].’””

These verses are worth summarising because they strongly indicate that
the Agamasiddhanta was still a living tradition in the early part of the 14th
century, when Vedantadesika composed the PRR. Moreover, this passage
very much reads like a defence of the Agamasiddhanta against a very
specific accusation — namely, that of renouncing ritual action. Who, in the
eyes of Vedantadesika, might have been “erroneously” suggesting that
Agamasiddhantins do not engage in ritual action? Such an accusation is not,
after all, included in the various objections against the Paficaratra which are
listed in Yamuna’s AP. First of all, it should be noted that Vedantadesika’s
contention that Agamasiddhantins renounce only the desire which
ordinarily motivates ritual action — i.e. they do not renounce ritual action
itself — is supported by the PadS’ Caryapada, from which the above half-
Sloka is taken, as well as by several Agamasiddhanta sources.*
Furthermore it is significant that the PadS, like the PausS and the ParS,
does actually on occasion refer to this renunciation of “desire” as simply
the “renunciation of action” (karmasamnydsa)."' In other words, there is
scriptural support for Vedantadesika’s aforementioned interpretation of
PadS 4.19.117ab, not least in the PadS itself. In the absence of any evidence
to the contrary, then, this suggests that the accusation that Agama-
siddhantins do not engage in ritual action might have come from
somewhere other than the Mantrasiddhanta, the tradition to which the
majority of the PadS belonged.

The most likely source of this criticism is perhaps the Vaikhanasa
tradition. According to Gérard Colas (1990: 24-25), the Vaikhanasa

# PRR 9.17-10.1: ata dgamasiddhante sarvakarmasvariipatydga iti na bhramitavyam,

karmaviSesabhityastvat.

See for example PadS 4.19.116, immediately preceding the half-sloka quoted by
Vedantadesika above, in which Agamasiddhantins are said to worship the four vydhas.
Elsewhere (e.g. PadS 4.21.34c-36), Agamasiddhantins are said to be devoted to the
pajicakdla ritual system, and to worship God “without desire” (nirasa). Among
Agamasiddhanta sources, see for instance PausS 27.4 and 38.28c-32, and ParS 15.14c-
18.

*! See for example PadS 4.21.35cd, PausS 38.32cd and ParS 15.16cd.

50

--- PAGE 148 ---
The Three Jewels 137

Samiirtércanadhikarana states that the Paficaratra “is esteemed by hermits
(vanastha) and ascetics (yatin)”, and several other Vaikhanasa works cited
by Colas also include the claim that (in Colas’ words) “while the
Vaikhanasa cult is citadine, the Paficaratra is prescribed for far away places,
outside towns, on a hill or a mountain, near a river or an ocean, in forests”.
Such descriptions of the Paficaratra as a renunciative tradition as opposed
to an urban, temple-based cult must, of course, be assessed alongside the
context from which they emerged. Elsewhere, Colas (1995: 117) addresses
this issue when he writes of the opposition between “les deux écoles
Agamiques, celles-ci s’affrontant pour obtenir le contréle du rituel dans les
temples de I'Inde du Sud.”** Of particular relevance to the question we are
addressing presently, Colas (ibid: 117-118) notes that: “A Iépoque de
Vedanta Desika, les querelles entre les desservants de temple se réclamant
de lune et de Pautre école 4gamique vishnuite ne cessent de croitre et de
s’étendre avec la prolifération des temples publics”.°* Further on, moreover,
Colas (ibid: 119) suggests that Vaikhanasa authors may have been directing
their criticisms at one Paificaratra group in particular, namely those who had
abandoned their Vedic siitra. “C’est peut-étre cette partie de lécole
paficaratra”, writes Colas, “que les manuels des prétres vaikhanasa visaient
a stigmatiser.”*

If Colas is correct, it would seem quite likely, then, that in his PRR
Vedantadesika is defending the Agamasiddhanta against criticisms which
were coming from within the Vaikhanasa tradition. After all, the Agama-
siddhantins or Ekayanas are those Paficaratrikas who, according to both the
AP (169.7ff) and the PRR (4.5/f), had “abandoned” the dharma of the triple
Veda (trayidharma) in order to follow the Grhyasiitras of their “own
Sakha@’. Irrespective of the source of these criticisms, this discussion raises
another possible explanation as to why Vedantadesika, who himself did not
abandon allegiance to the “triple Veda’ as the highest scriptural authority,

2 ‘The two Agamic schools [i.e. the Vaikhanasa and the Pajficaratra] which clashed with

one another in the attempt to gain control of ritual in the temples of South India.”

‘At the time of Vedanta Desika, the quarrels between the temple priests claiming

{allegiance to] one or other Vaisnava Agamic school continue to grow and expand with

the proliferation of public temples.’

** ‘It is perhaps this branch of the Paficaratra school which the manuals of the Vaikhanasa
priests aimed at stigmatising.’

--- PAGE 149 ---
138 Robert Leach

might have sought to defend the Agamasiddhantins, who had abandoned
that allegiance. He may have sought to defend them not only because they
held positions of influence at the Raiganathasvamin temple in Srirangam,
but also because they were the Pajficaratrikas who were especially subject to
external criticism. Viewed in this way, the success of Vedantadesika’s
Defence of the Paficaratra would have rested in large part on the success of
his defence of the Agamasiddhanta. For if criticisms of the Agama-
siddhanta could be used to denounce the Pajficaratra in general, a successful
defence of the latter could be built upon a persuasive vindication of the
former.

If authors belonging to the Vaikhanasa tradition occasionally ignored the
internal divisions within the Paficaratra and resorted to branding the
Pajficaratra in general as “non-Vedic” (avaidika), or as devoted only to the
attainment of moksa, or as not concerned with temple worship etc.,* then
Vedantadesika, like Yamuna before him, also attempted to present a unified
and coherent Pajficaratra “system”, adherence to which would not
contravene allegiance to the Veda.*° Thus, although the PRR, unlike
Yamuna AP does contain a number of descriptions of the Siddhanta
divisions, as well as passages drawn from the scriptural literature which
warn against “mixing” the Siddhantas, Vedantadesika also attempts to mini-
mise the importance of any internal “conflict”.*’ Accordingly, as we have
seen, in the presentation of the PRR the supremacy of the Agamasiddhanta
is not a “sectarian” issue, but one on which even the PadS, a predominantly
Mantrasiddhantin work, is in agreement. Indeed, it is precisely this de-
piction of a universally acknowledged hierarchy of Paficaratra Siddhantas
which is key to Vedantadesika’s mitigating what is probably the most
characteristic feature of Paficaratrika “sectarianism”, i.e. the prohibition
against the “mixing” of Siddhantas. For it is in this context that he quotes,

55 See Colas (1990) for a list of Vaikhanasa classifications of the Paficaratra.

See especially PRR 21.7ff, which asserts the validity and authority of Paficaratrika
prescriptions for the installation and worship of the image of Visnu when prescriptions
for these rites are not contained in the Vedas (that is, other than for the Baudhayana,
Vaikhanasa and Saunaka schools).

See e.g. PRR 11.18-19. Here Vedantadesika, having just quoted the PadS’ (4.19.113c-
128b) account of the Siddhanta divisions, falsely claims that the PadS and the PausS
do not contradict each other.

56

--- PAGE 150 ---
The Three Jewels 139

without attribution, a passage which claims that Paiicaratrikas are not only
qualified to perform the rites of their “own” Siddhanta, they are also
eligible for the ritual “systems” (tantra) of those Siddhantas which are
“lower” than their own. Thus, since the Agamasiddhanta is at the top of the
hierarchy, its members are also entitled to worship according to the systems
prescribed by the Mantra, Tantra and Tantrantara Siddhantas. A Mantra-
siddhantin, meanwhile, is also qualified for the Tantra and Tantrantara
Siddhantas, while a Tantrasiddhantin is qualified in addition for the
Tantrantarasiddhanta. Likewise, members of each Siddhanta have the
authority to worship in places which have been established by a Siddhanta
“inferior” to their own. This means that, according to this account, Agama-
siddhantins have the entitlement to worship in any Pajficaratra temple, while
Tantrantarasiddhantins appear to be restricted to worshipping in their own
homes.*

How are we to interpret these claims, and the inclusion of this passage
in the PRR? Vedantadesika does not name the source of these verses, and I
have been unable to locate them in the scriptural literature. The most
striking claim contained here is that members of the Agamasiddhanta have
the authority to perform all rites which are prescribed by the Mantra-
siddhanta, and that they can execute this entitlement without being guilty of
“mixing Siddhantas”, or of leaving their own Siddhanta and entering
another. Could this possibly reflect and validate actual processes which
were then taking place? In other words, were Agamasiddhantins affiliating
themselves with the more Veda-congruent Pajficaratra traditions, perhaps
because the latter had by this time become the more dominant? Can this
help explain why apparently non-Agamasiddhanta scriptures begin to
incorporate Agamasiddhanta canonical systems, such as the idea of the
Ekayanaveda and the supremacy of the JS, SS and PausS, within their own?
Although these questions are very difficult to answer at present, such a
* PRR 13.9-14.4: punar apy uparyupari tantrasthitandm adho dhas tantradhikdritvam
uktam — tantrantare tatha tantramantrasiddhantavartmani | diksitanam kramenaiva hy
uparyupari yogatah | anyesam adhikdrah syat tattatsamskarapiirvakam || kdrandgama-
siddhantanisthendnyais tribhih sada | arcaniyam athanyabhyam mantrasiddhantina
tatha || piijantyam athanyena tantrasiddhantindnigam | svena tantrantarenaiva
piijaniyam svake grhe || iti | atrapy utkrstasiddhantasthitendpi apakrstasiddhanta-
sthanesu tattatsiddhantaprakarenaiva piijaniyatvam uktam.

--- PAGE 151 ---
140 Robert Leach

pattern may help explain why the culture of Paficaratrika sectarianism gave
way to the synthesis of previously distinct groups.

This latter process is especially evident in the opening chapter of the
Sripurusottamasamhita (SripurS), another scriptural work which appears to
have been composed at a relatively late date. Here, the sage Vasistha
presents the designations Paijicaratra, Milaveda, Sattvata, Tantra, Ekayana
and Agama as synonymous terms, and in explaining why each of these
names is an appropriate designation for the Lord’s teaching (bhagavac-
chastra), the author incorporates passages from both the PadS and the IS,
including them alongside each other. In fact, much of the first chapter of the
SripurS is an amalgam of verses borrowed from these two works.*! I
propose that this section of the SripurS can be understood as a conscious
attempt to accommodate forms of self-understanding found within the more
Veda-congruent Paficaratra traditions, as represented in the PadS, with
those found within the Ekayana tradition, and articulated in the IS, so that
both are included within a single, homogeneous Paiicaratra “system”
(tantra). The inclusion of a canonical list of Paficaratra scriptures, which
is found at the end of the SripurS’ first chapter, as well as in several other
South Indian works including an interpolated section of the PadS, also
derives from this same integrative strategy.” Accordingly, as in the Adhikah
Pathah to which I shall turn shortly, there is no mention of distinct

%° Smith (1975: 274) suggests that the SripurS may post-date Vedantadesika.

%  SripurS 1.11ff See also SripurS 22.57c-59b (<— PadS 4.2.87c-88, referred to above): sa
eva siiris suhrt sattvatah pdiicaratravit \| ekantikas (ekamtikas) tanmayas ca desiko
diksito rcakah | gurur bhdgavatas caiva pitjakas sadhako harih || bhattdrakadir
akhyabhir akhyeyah kamalasana |,

“ SripurS 1.3cd <— PadS 1.1.14ab; SripurS 1.6cd — PadS 1.1.32ab; SripurS 1.10cd — IS

118cd; SripurS 1.12 — IS 1.19 (— ParS 1.57c-58b); SripurS 114-15 — IS 1.24-25 (cf.

ParS 176-77); SripurS 1.18-19b — PadS 1.1.63-64b; SripurS 1.25-26 — PadS 1.1.90-

91; SripurS 1.27ab <— PadS 1.1.96cd; SripurS 1.28-29 — PadS 1..97-98.

See SripurS 1.29ab: satam ekam athdstau ca tantre smin viditam maya |. — ‘In this

system (tantre smin), 108 [Tantras] are known by me.’ Cf. PadS 1.1.98ab.

Shortly before enumerating 108 Paiicaratra scriptures, the PadS’ narrator Samvarta

declares that “Narayana himself is the proclaimer of all the Tantras” (1.1.88cd). This

claim is also contained in other South Indian Samhitas which contain extensive lists of

Paiicaratra works, such as the Visvamitrasamhitd (2.14-15) and the Bhdradvdjasamhita

(1.1-8a). Such claims, of course, openly contradict the ParS’ assertion that only the

three divine scriptures are directly revealed by God.

e

63

--- PAGE 152 ---
The Three Jewels 141

Pajficaratra Siddhantas in this work. As in the PRR (e.g. 3.7-12), however,
the two distinct Paficaratrika modes of self-description sit rather uneasily
alongside each other in the SripurS. Thus, the Ekayana claim that “this is
the main root of the great Veda tree — the Rc etc. are its trunk and
branches”, is included beside the PadS’ declaration that “this Tantra,
rooted in sruti, is an authority like the Kalpasiitras. There is no teaching
superior to the Veda”.

The only extant non-Agamasiddhantin scriptural source that contains an
apparently original formulation of the “three jewels doctrine”, then, is the
interpolated section of the JS entitled Adhikah Pathah. This 14th century
work follows the PadS in invoking the memory of the sage Aupagayana,
said here to be a student (adhiyana) of the Kanvi sakhd (109ab) and it also
prescribes the “mixing” (vimisrita) of Vedic and “divine” (divya) mantras
(118). Having declared that the Jayakhya is superior among the “three
jewels” (108ab), Lord Varada (varadardja), the narrator of this section,
asserts:

jayakhyendtha pddmena tantrena sahitena vai || miilavyakhyanarapabhyam
samarcayatu mam sadd | na tantrasankaro dosas tantrayor anayor iha |.

Thus, one should always worship me according to the Jayakhya [Samhita] along
with the Padma Tantra [i.e.] according to both forms — the root [text] and the com-
mentary. Here, with regard to both Tantras, the defect is in not mixing the Tantras.
(JS Adhikah Pathah 111c-112)

Thus, the apparently Mantrasiddhantin author of the Adhikah Pathah
has found a way of incorporating the teaching of the “three jewels” whilst
ensuring that the PadS, a work which belongs to the Mantrasiddhanta, is,
practically speaking, as essential as those texts. Where the “mixing” of one
Tantra with another is normally discouraged as a “defect” or a “fault”
(dosa), in this instance the defect is said to be that of following the JS
without also following its “commentary”, the PadS. This case offers a good
example, then, not to mention a more seamless process, of forming a single
of SripurS 1.14: mahato vedavrksasya miilabhiito mahan ayam | rgadyah skandhabhiitas te
Sakhabhitas ca yoginah ||,

SripurS 1.26c-27a: srutimilam idam tantram pramanam kalpasiitravat || vedac
chastram param ndasti... |.

65

--- PAGE 153 ---
142 Robert Leach

“Paficaratra canon”, of bringing together canonical systems from distinct
Pajficaratra traditions and subsuming them into a single tradition. This
integrative strategy is a clear development from the Mantrasiddhantin
appropriation of the tradition of the Ekayanaveda which we have met with
in the SriprsS. Indeed, unlike the Adhikah Pathah and the SripurS, the
SriprsS contains no deliberate and sustained attempt to present the Pafica-
ratra as a single, homogeneous system. The more fully developed in-
tegrative approach of the Adhikah Pathah and the SripurS probably in-
dicates that both of these works post-date the SriprsS.

References

Sanskrit Texts

Agamapramanya of Yamunacarya, ed. M. Narasimhachary, Baroda: Oriental Institute,
1976.

T§varasamhita with the commentary of Alasingabhatta, ed. M. A. Lakshmithathachar,
revised by V. Varadachari, New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the
Arts,2009.

Jayakhyasamhita, ed. Embar Krishnamacharya, Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1931.

Pajicaratraraksa. of Sti Vedanta Desika, eds. M. Duraiswami Aiyangar and T.
Venugopalacharya, Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1996.

Padmasamhita, eds. Seetha Padmanabhan and R. N. Sampath, Madras: Pancaratra
Parisodhana Prasad, 1974.

Paramesvarasamhita, Govindacaryaih samskrta, Srirangam, 1973.
Pauskarasamhita Part Il, ed. P. P. Apte, Tirupati: Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 2006.

Bhargavatantram, ed. Caudhari Raghavaprasada, Allahabad: Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan,
1981.

Markandeyasamhitd, Tirupati: Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, 1984.

--- PAGE 154 ---
The Three Jewels 143

Visvamitrasamhita, ed. Undemane Shankara, Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha,
1970.

Visvaksenasamhita, ed. Lakshmi Narasimha Bhatta, Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit
Vidyapeetha, 1972.

Sripurusottamasamhita, ed. A. K. Kalia, Delhi: Nyu Bharatiya Buka Korporesana, 2007.

Sriprasnasamhita, ed. Seetha Padmanabhan, Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha,
1969.

Samvitprakasa by Vamanadatta, ed. Mark S. G. Dyczkowski, Varanasi: Ratna Printing
Works, 1990.

Satvatasamhita with the commentary of Alasinga Bhatta, ed. Vraja Vallabha Dvivedi,
Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya, 1982.

Secondary Works

Carman, John B. (1974) The Theology of Ramdnuja: An Essay in Interreligious
Understanding, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Colas, Gérard (1990) “Sectarian divisions according to Vaikhanasigama”, in Teun
Goudriaan (ed.), The Sanskrit Tradition and Tantrism, Leiden: E. J. Brill: 24-31.

Colas, Gérard (1995) “Cultes et courantes du vishnouisme en Inde du Sud. Quelques
observations a partir des textes”, in M.-L. Reiniche and H. Stern (eds.) Les ruses du
salut: Religion et politiques dans le monde Indien, Paris: Editions de l école des hautes
études en sciences sociales: 111-138.

Gonda, Jan (1977) Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit, Wiesbaden: Otto
Harrassowitz.

Hanneder, Jiirgen (1997) “Vedic and Tantric Mantras”, Rivista degli Studi Orientali 71:
147-167.

Hari Rao, V. N. (1976) History of the Srirangam Temple, Tirupati: Sri Venkatesvara
University.

Hopkins, Steven Paul (2002) Singing the Body of God, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

--- PAGE 155 ---
144 Robert Leach

Matsubara, Mitsunori (1994) Paficaratra Samhitds and Early Vaisnava Theology, Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass.

Padmanabhan, Seetha (1969) “Introduction [to Sriprasna Samhita)”, Tirupati: Kendriya
Sanskrit Vidyapeetha.

Parampurushdas, Sadhu and Shrutiprakashdas, Sadhu (eds.) (2002) Catalogue of
Paficaratra Samhita, Amdavad: Swaminarayan Aksharpith.

Raghavan, V. (1969) “Foreward [to Sriprasna Samhita)’, Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit
Vidyapeetha.

Rajan, K. V. Soundara (1981) “Kaustubha Prasada — New Light on the Jayakhya Tantra”, in
Glimpses of Indian Culture: Vol. 2, Architecture, Art and Religion, Delhi: Sundeep
Prakashan: 26-35.

Raman, K. V. (1975) Sri Varadarajaswami Temple - Kaiichi: A study of its History, Art and
Architecture, New Delhi: Abhinav Publications.

Rastelli, Marion (1999) — Philosophisch-theologische | Grundanschauungen der
Jayakhyasamhita, Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Rastelli, Marion (1999a) “Zum Verstiindnis des Paficaratra von der Herkunft seiner
Samhitas”, Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Sudasiens 43, 51-93.

Rastelli, Marion (2003) “On the Concept of Vaikuntha in ViSistadvaitavedanta and
Pajficaratra’, in Renata Czekalska and Halina Marlewicz (eds.), 2nd International
Conference on Indian Studies: Proceedings, Krakéw: Ksiegarnia Akademicka: 427-447.

Rastelli, Marion (2006) Die Tradition des Pdficaratra im Spiegel der Paramesvarasamhita,
Wien: Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.

Schrader, EF Otto (1916) Introduction to the Pdjicaratra and the Ahirbudhnya Samhita,
Madras: Adyar Library.

Singh, Satyavrata (1958) Vedanta Desika: His Life, Works and Philosophy, Varanasi:
Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office.

Smith, H. Daniel (1975) A Descriptive Bibliography of the Printed Texts of the
Paficaratragama Vol. 1, Baroda: Oriental Institute.

--- PAGE 156 ---
The Three Jewels 145

Spencer, George. (1978) “Crisis of Authority in a Hindu Temple Under the Impact of
Islam: Sriraiigam in the Fourteenth Century”, in Bardwell L. Smith (ed.) Religion and
the Legitimation of Power in South Asia, Leiden: E.J. Brill: 14-27.

Young, Katherine K. (2007) “Brahmanas, Paiicaratrins, and the Formation of Si-
vaisnavism”, in Oberhammer and Rastelli (eds.), Studies in Hinduism IV; On the
Mutual Influences and Relationship of ViSistadvaita Vedanta and Pdficaratra, Wien:
Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften: 179-226.

--- PAGE 157 ---


--- PAGE 158 ---
Preliminary Survey
of Sanskrit Manuscripts
of the Bodhicarydvatara

Daniel Stender

The Bodhicarydvatara (henceforth “Bca’) is the “passing over (avatdra, ~
introduction) into the course (caryd) of enlightenment (bodhi)”, which can
be rendered as “introduction into the course that leads to enlightenment”.'
The text is very popular among Buddhists, has been translated several

times,” and is well known to Mahayana scholars and teachers, who have

In Tibetan the title byan chub sems dpa’i spyod pa la ‘jug pa (“Bodhisattvacaryavatard’)
is commonly used alongside byari chub kyi spyod pa la ‘jug pa (“Bodhicaryavatard’).
The former has been claimed to be the original title of the poem: “[...] the full title of
his poem is Bodhisattvacarydvatdra (rather than the abbreviated form Bodhi-
carydvatara). This form is also supported by the Mongolian [...]. Obviously, our poem
is not an introduction to the life of bodhi, but to the career of a bodhisattva. The source
of the abbreviated title is probably the author himself’ (Lindtner 1998, p. 239).
However, that the longer title is to be found in the Mongolian is not a sound argument,
because Weller in 1950 found that the Mongolian title borrows from Tibetan sources,
where it seems this longer title originates for reasons as yet unknown.

Concerning the translations, cf. G6mez 1999, p. 330 sq.

--- PAGE 159 ---
148 Daniel Stender

extensively published on it. The author of the work, Santideva, a Buddhist
monk and scholar of the Nalanda university, outlines the spiritual career of
a Bodhisattva. In the beginning the text deals with the bodhicitta, the
“thought of awakening”, which is to be developed and then cultivated by the
adept. The author then describes the stages of the “sixfold perfections”
(satparamita),* concluding in the Prajfaparamita chapter with a discussion
about “emptiness” (sunyatd). This links the work with the Madhyamaka
school of Buddhist philosophy.‘ The work is beautiful classical Sanskrit
poetry, and a sophisticated and remarkable piece of Buddhist literature.
Furthermore, it is an important text for understanding the relationship
between Madhyamaka teachings and the Bodhisattva ideal, and for
ascertaining the philosophico-metaphysical foundations of a Bodisattva’s
career.

The hitherto consulted manuscripts for the previous editions

In this section, I will try to find out which manuscripts of the Bca have
been considered for the available editions.” The Sanskrit Bca° has been
edited several times, independently and in combination with
Prajfiakaramati’s commentary Bodhicarydvatarapanjikd (henceforth “Bca-
Paiijika’):

In contrast to the author Candrakirti, for example, who represents the dasapdramita

system with the Mddhyamakdvatara. That system adds updyakausalya, pranidhdna,

bala and jfidna to dana (5,9-10 in the Bea), sila (5,11 sq.), ksanti (chapter 6), virya

(chapter 7), dhyana (chapter 8), and prajfiapdramita (chapter 9). On the systems, cf.

Eimer 2006, p. 107 sq.

+ Cf. Seyfort Ruegg 1981, p. 82 sq., and Saito 1996.

* An earlier attempt to trace which manuscripts might have been consulted for the
editions is Pezzali 1968, p. 50 sq.

° Unlike the shorter, most probably earlier Bca, which has survived solely in its para-

canonical Tibetan translation and consists of 701.5 verses and 9 chapters including the

parindmand, the text which has been preserved in its original Sanskrit counts 913

verses in 10 chapters, cf. Saito 1993 and Dietz 1999 for details.

--- PAGE 160 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 149

Minaev 1889

The first edition of the text without the commentary was made by Ivan
Pavlovié Minaev (1840-90)’ in 1889 for the Memoirs of the Eastern Section
of the Imperial Russian Archaeological Society. In the short introduction to
his edition, Minaev gives some information about three manuscripts which
were available to him. Two he borrowed from London, the first one (L')
from the India Office:

“7713. 2927. Foll. 1-25, 28-40, 42-55; palm leaf; size 12% in. by 1% in.; Nepali

ornamental (Rafija or Lantsha) character, very clear and regular, of A.D. 13992;

five lines in a page. [...] The colophon is: samaptoyam bodhicaryavatarah. krtir

dcaryasantidevasya mamjughosapra (sic) sddaditi. On the outer side of fol. 1 we

find [...] damma (sic for dharma) 9 samvat 519 marggasiraSuddhi. Thus the date of

completion may be Margasiras in Nepal samvat 519 = A.D. 1399, or earlier. [B.H.
oo 8

Hodgson]”.’
The second one (L?) was obtained from the Royal Asiatic Society:

“13, Bodhicaryavatara. In ten parichchhedas. 47 palm leaves. 12 in. by 1% in.
Five lines in a page. Old. The shape of the figures and some letter is very

peculiar”.”

The third manuscript at his disposal (M) was privately owned.'”

For biographical and bibliographical information, cf. Schneider 1934 and Bongard-
Levin/Vigasin 1984, p. 82 sq.
Keith 1935, p. 1394. The supplement by EW. Thomas lists the 30 manuscripts donated
by Hodgson in the years 1838-45, cf. Waterhouse 2004, p. 249.
Cowell/Eggeling 1876, p. 13. This catalogue lists 79 manuscripts donated by Hodgson
in the years 1835-36, cf. ibid. p. 1.
This manuscript was obtained by the public library of St. Petersburg after the editor's
death, cf. Mironov 1918, p. 261 sq. (no. 281). It is a Nepalese paper manuscript
consisting of 28 fols. 3 to 6 were written by a different hand. Minaev gives the
information that the text generally agrees with L?. Samvat 791 or 891 (A.D. 1671/70
resp. 1771/70) could be found as the year of the manuscript’s completion (the Nepalese
era starts October 20th 879 A.D., cf. Lienhard/Manandhar 1988, p. XX VIII).

10

--- PAGE 161 ---
150 Daniel Stender
Sastri 1894

The second edition of the text was made by Haraprasada Sastri (1853-
1931)'' in 1894. Unfortunately, no information about the consulted material
is given here. However, in an article on Santideva from 1913, Sastrt men-
tions a palm leaf manuscript of the Bca in the Hodgson Collection of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal that he has consulted.'? Rajendralal Mitra’s cata-
logue of the Hodgson donations to the Asiatic Society from 1882 lists a
palm leaf manuscript of the Bca, which presumably is the one mentioned
by Sastri:

“Old No. 815. - New No. B. 42. [...] Substance, palm-leaves, 11x2%. Folia 48.
Lines on a page, 6. Extent in s'lokas 1,100. Character, Newari. Date ? Appearance,

13

old and smudgy. Verse. Generally correct”.
La Vallée Poussin 1898 and 1901-14

Three manuscripts of Prajfiakaramati’s commentary on the Bca are recorded
by Sastri in the 1917 catalogue of the Government Collection of Sanskrit
manuscripts in the archives of the Asiatic Society of Bengal:'*

“49. 3830. bodhicaryydvatdra pafijika [...) Substance, palm-leaf. Character,
Newari. Date, N.S. 198=1078 A.D. In good state of preservation. With the first leaf
and 26 others missing. Colophon: - bodhicaryyavatare
prajiaparamitdparicchedatika samapta. krtiriyam

o9 15

panditabhiksuprajnakarapadanam’”’.

"See Law 1933 for obituary including a bibliography.

2 Sastri 1913, p. 49: “Then it was published in the Journal of the Buddhist Text Society by
me. I had the advantage of collating a beautiful palm-leaf manuscript belonging to the
Hodgeson Collection; in the Library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal”.

‘Mitra 1882, p. 47. These Hodgson donations appear again in Kavyatirtha 1904, p. 243
sq. (B. 42 on p. 251).

4 §astri 1917, p. 49 sq. Cf. Chakravarti 1959-60, p. 664, and Kimura’ article on that
collection (cf. Yuyama 1992, p. 7).

'5 Tt is noted in the catalogue that this manuscript had been lent to La Vallée Poussin, and
the record had to be taken from Sastri 1893, where the whole transcript of fol. 213 up
to the end could be found, cf. p. 246 sq. The colophon gives the information that this
copy has been written in the Raghavavihara in Patan (/alitapure) during the reign of

--- PAGE 162 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 151

“50. 9979. bodhicaryyavatara. Bodhicaryavatara and the Pafijika commentary [...]
Four seasoned palm-leaves. 20x2. Written in old Newari Character. I.
Bodhicaryavataéra with six lines on a page, faded, containing the colophon: -
bodhicaryyavatare dhyanaparamita ’stamah paricchedah. 11. Two leaves with five
lines on a page - one is marked on the left-hand side asa 9 = 127 - the other
without leaf mark contains the colophon  bodhicaryydvatarapanjikayam
dhyanaparamitdparicchedo ’stamah”.

“51. 3829. bodhicaryyavataratika [...] Substance, palm-leaf, 12x2 inches. Folio,
109. Lines, 6 on a page. Extent in slokas, 2725. Character, Bengali of the 12th
century. Appearance, fresh but worm-eaten in places. Complete. Written in a neat
and small hand. Colophon: bodhicaryyavatare prajidpdramitdparicchedatika
samapta. krtiriyam panditabhiksuprajiakaramatipadanam’.

The Bca-Tiké actually is the same as the ninth chapter of Prajfiakaramati’s
commentary Bca-Paijikd. The former seems to have been transmitted
independently, since it carries its own invocation and closing verses, as
found in Louis de La Vallée Poussin’s (1869-1938)'° edition published in
1898.'’ Later, in the years 1901-14 the Belgian scholar edited again the
whole extant commentary along with the mila in seven volumes for the
Bibliotheca Indica series."

However, before Sastri’s 1917 catalogue, it was thought that there were
only two manuscripts of the Bca-Pafijika in the Asiatic Society collection.
In 1895, in fact, Sastri mentions a Nepalese manuscript from 1078 A.D.
ending with the ninth chapter of the Bca commentary, and another one con-
taining just the ninth chapter of the Bca commentary (= Bca-Tikd), written
in Maithili script (cf. p. 7). These two manuscripts are the same mentioned
in both La Vallée Poussin’s editions (1898, cf p. 233, and 1901-14, cf. p. D.
This discrepancy between, on the one hand, Sastri 1895 and La Vallée

Saitkaradeva. The date of completion has been settled as Tuesday 31st of July 1078
A.D. (cf. Petech 1984, p. 47), which is a fairly early date for a palm-leaf manuscript.
© On La Vallée Poussin, cf. Vielle 2010.
Vaidya’s hypothesis that the Bca-Tikd was composed before as a single text is quite
tempting (1960, p. IX: “I, therefore, feel on sure grounds that Prajfiakaramati first
wrote his commentary on the 9th chapter, and added the same to first eight chapters at
a later date”). This is because that would provide an explanation why Prajiiakaramati
has not commented upon the tenth chapter, the Parinamand.
8 Cf. Sieg 1908, p. 12, and Nobel 1928, p. 5.

--- PAGE 163 ---
152 Daniel Stender

Poussin 1898 and 1901-14 and, on the other hand, SastrT 1917 raises the
question about the actual number of manuscripts available in the Asiatic
Society.

It is evident that manuscript no. 51 of Sastri’s 1917 catalogue — probably
acquired between 1893 and 1895 — corresponds to the second item men-
tioned by Sastri 1895. This is in fact the one written in Old Bengali and
carrying the Bca-Tikd only."

On the other hand, if one observes the colophons of manuscripts no. 49
and no. 50 as reported in Sastri 1917, one can observe that the former
contains only the ninth chapter of the Bca-Pajijikd, i.e. the commentary to
the Prajfidparamitda section of the Bca, whereas the latter contains the first
eight chapters of the same text. It is therefore possible that manuscripts no.
49 and no. 50 had been kept together in order to form a complete instance
of the Bea commentary until Sastri’s 1917 closer examination.

In the Bibliotheca Indica edition (1901-14), La Vallée Poussin also gives
the information that for Santideva’s text he also made use of Minaev’s
previous edition together with two manuscripts from Paris, referred to as
“Devanagari 78” and “Burnouf 98”. Even if the label do not match exactly
(the second one should be “Burnouf 90”), these items are presumably these
two described by Filliozat in 1941:

“78, BODHICARYAVATARA par Cantideva. Marges, verso A droite: guruh, a
gauche: bo. va. Début: namah sarvabuddhabodhisatvebhyah || sugatan sasutan ...
Colophon, fol. 56 |. 3: iti bodhicaryavatara parinamaparicchedo dagamah || cubham
astu.  jagatah | samapta  bodhicaryavataraparikatha = krtir_ = iyam
Acaryagrigamtidevapadanam iti | creyo stu jagatah sada || cubham astu
sarvadakalam || namo buddhadharmasaghaya. [...] Vol. relié, 56 fol. recto blanc,
verso jaune, 265x108 mm., 7 |. - Devanagari. Vers 1836. - Prov. Népal. Coll.
Hodgson. Don Soc As. 1840 - Ane. cote: S. dév 85”.7!

The colophon of no. 51 reports “Bengali of the 12th century”. Most probably, the script
that is meant here, which has already been designated as Maithili, is the one called by
Roth “Proto-Bengali-cum-Proto-Maithili’, cf. Dimitrov 2002, p. 32 sq.

Cf. p. 63 sq. Both items could be found already in the earlier catalogue assembled by

Cabaton in 1907, cf. p. 11.

This one belonged to a bunch of transcripts which were sent in 1837 to the Société

asiatique by Hodgson (cf. the list from 1837, where a Bca of 56 fols. could be found on

p. 296), It was included in the library already in 1840. The different title, Bca-

parikatha, which can be found here in the colophon, appears a few other times among

--- PAGE 164 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 153

“79, BODCHICARYAVATARA par Cantideva. Fol. 1* sur papier collé: titre et
nombre de fol. en devanagari et hindoustani. Début fol. 1: namo ratnatrayaya.
sugatan sasutan ... 1 ligne ajoutée audessus: namami buddhan ... Colophon,
comme 78: ... dacamah samaptah. ye dharmma ... bhadram astu sarvvajagata ||
cubham || [...] 1 vol. relié, 55 fol. recto bis, verso jaune, 260x80 mm., 7 1. -
Ecriture népalie. Derniére feuille: écriture grossiére. S.d. (fin du XVIII* ou début
du XIX¢® siécle). - Prov.: Népal. Coll. Hodgson-Burnouf. - Anc. cote: Burnouf 90”.

Bhattacharya and Vaidya 1960

In 1960, Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya edited the Bca along with its Tibetan
translation also for the Bibliotheca Indica series. In the same year
Parasuram Laksman Vaidya (1891-1978) edited again the Bca-Paijika
together with the miila for the Buddhist Sanskrit Text series. Bhattacharya
and Vaidya did not include further material, meaning that these editions
predominantly assemble their text from the editions which had been
published before.“ Although it is frequently used in Indology and
Tibetology, the Sanskrit text of Bhattacharya’s edition is rather pro-
blematic.”

Summary

Apart from the palm leaf manuscripts belonging to the Government
Collection of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, most of the above-mentioned
manuscripts that have been used to create editions were acquired by Brian

the Bca manuscripts, cf. below, Tokyo 261 and NAK 3/257.
This one was originally obtained by Eugéne Burnouf (1801-1852). Although it could
be found in the auction catalogue (cf. Burnouf 1854, p. 332, no. 90), this item was not
sold in the auction of 1854 (cf. Yuyama 2000, p. 5 sq.), since it had already been sold
in 1852 to the Bibliothéque impériale — the precursor of the Bibliothéque nationale (cf.
Colas 1986, p. 285).
For a brief obituary cf. Bapat 1978.
That is also true for the bulk of the Indian editions which are considered to be mere
reprints of those discussed here.
25 Mukhopadhyaya 1961, p. 287: “The late lamented Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya had
barely completed his edition when death snatched him away from us. He had no time
to revise it. [...] In such circumstances, as in natural, some mistakes have crept in”.

--- PAGE 165 ---
154 Daniel Stender

Houghton Hodgson (1801-1894) in Nepal.** Hodgson began collecting
manuscripts during his first appointment as Assistant Court Resident in
Nepal at the beginning of the 1820s. During his second stay in 1824-43, he
carried on acquiring manuscripts and made transcriptions, employing the
Pandit Amrtananda and a team of scribes.”’ All of these items were given to
several libraries and to private scholars in Europe and India.** Out of the
Bca manuscripts consulted for the editions above, it seems that only Paris
78 is a transcript, and that the others are original ones.

Unconsulted manuscripts

For this chapter I have collected references to manuscripts that have not
been consulted so far.”

Original pieces
Cambridge

A paper manuscript of the Bca, written in Devanagari is kept in the
University Library, Cambridge:

“Add. 869. Paper; 66 leaves, 7 lines, 10/4x4% in.; modern, ordinary Devanagari
hand. BODHICARYAVATARA. This is the ninth section of the Acokavadana-
mala (see MS. Add. 1482)”.
26 Nepal is a rich storehouse for Sanskrit manuscripts because: “Die speziellen
klimatischen Gegebenheiten dieses Himalaya-Landes sind iiberdies von solcher Art,
da dort mehr alte Handschriften den Unbilden der Zeit getrotzt haben als in
irgendeiner anderen Region des Subkontinents [Furthermore, the specific climatic
conditions of this country in the Himalayas are of such a nature, that there more
ancient manuscripts have withstood the ravages of time than in any other region of the
Indian subcontinent]” (Wezler 1986, p. 3).
27 For a biographical sketch cf. Waterhouse 2004, p. 1-24.
** Cf. Hunter 1881 and Waterhouse 2004, p. 249 sq.
» Cf. Tsukamato/Matsunaga/Isoda 1990, p. 255 sq.
Bendall 1883, p. 6. The manuscripts in this collection were procured by Daniel Wright,
who was a surgeon at the British Residency in Nepal, from 1873 to 1876, cf. p. VII. A

--- PAGE 166 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 155

Kolkata

There is an old palm-leaf manuscript of the Bea mila written in Bengali
script listed in the catalogue of the Government Collection of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal. However, as far as I can tell, this manuscript has not
been used for any of the previous editions:

“19. 8067. bodhicaryyavatara. [...] Substance, palm-leaf. 12%x1'% inches. Folia,
66. Lines, 4, 5 on a page. The 60th and the 62nd leaves are missing. Character,
Bengali. Copied in Samvat 1492 = 1436 A.D. Appearance, old, discoloured and

o9 31

worn-out”.
Kyoto
The Kydto University owns two other manuscripts:

“No. 72 (E 260) 66 leaves (last fol. numbered, wrongly, '67'), 6 lines, 25.7x8.3 cm,
'Samvat 1027' = c. 1907 A.D”.

“No. 73 (E 261) 60 leaves, 6 lines, 27.9x5.8cm [...] 10 Pariccheda-s, both
complete”.

Tokyo
The Tokyo University Library owns five other manuscripts:**

“No. 260 (1) Bodhi-carya-'vatara. (2) Paper, 46 leaves, 6 lines, 13%x3 inch.,
Nepalese character [...] The pagination of 23 is missed out. (3) (47b2) iti
bodhicaryyavatare parinamanah dasamah palicchedah || samaptah ||”.

brief listing of his donations can be found in Wright 1877 p. 316 sq., cf. also Weber
1877, p. 526 sq.
31 Sastri 1917, p. 21. On this item see Dimitrov 2002, p. 36, fn. 36.
Goshima/Noguchi 1983, p. 20. This collection was assembled by Ry6zaburd Sakaki
(1872-1946) in Nepal, cf. p. I sq.
Matsunami 1965, p. 97 sq. An index of the sections of the manuscripts can be found on
p. 352. This collection was gathered by the Zen monk Ekai Kawaguchi (1866-1945)
together with J. Takakusu under the permission of Maharaja Chandra Shumsher, cf.
Thapa 2004.

--- PAGE 167 ---
156 Daniel Stender

“No. 261 (1) Bodhi-carya-'vatara. (2) Paper, 70 leaves, 7 lines, 10'x4% inch.
Devanagari, modern [...] (3) (70b6) iti bodhi-carya'-vatare parinamana-parichedo
daSamah samapto ‘yam bodhi-carya-'vatara-parikatha Subham bhilyat sarva-
jagatam |”.

“No. 262 (1) Bodhi-carya-'vatara (Two fragments of the °). (2) Palm leaf, (I) 17

leaves, (II) 43 leaves, number of lines variable, 10x24 inch.; (I) Siddhanta, (ID
Nepalese character”.

“No. 263 (1) Bodhi-carya-'vatara [only the beginning]. (2) Paper, 13 leaves, 6
lines, 12x2% inch., Nepalese character [...] (3) (12al) \| bodhicaryavatare
bodhicittapramado nama caturthah paricchedah ||”.

“No. 264 (1) Bodhi-carya-'vatara. (2) Palm-leaf, 60 leaves, 5 lines, 10%x2 inch.,
Siddhanta like Kutila”.

Kathmandu, NAK
The National Archives in Kathmandu (Rastriyabhilekhalaya, NAK) stores

several manuscripts,” all of which have been made available on microfilm
by the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP):*

fol reel
1/772 Palm Np 7 B 23/5
3/91 Np 33 B 98/5
3/257 Pap Np 126 B 98/8
3/297 Pap Dn 47 A121/9

“From 1970, manuscripts of the NAK have been microfilmed. And from 1975 onwards

also private collections have been covered. The films are available in the NAK,
duplicates of which can be examined in the Oriental Department of the State Library
Berlin (SBPK).

Cf. Samksiptasiicipattram and Brhatsiicipattram. In the shelf marks (first column), the
number before the slash denotes one of the collections (“lagat”) within the NAK: For
lagats 1-3 (former Durbar, resp. Bir library - Virapustakalaya), cf. Sastri 1905-1915,
Griinendahl 1989, as well as Kaneko/Saito 1954. The stocks of lagat 5 (the mss. of
Hemaraja Sarma from the former Nepal National Library - Nepalarastriyapustakalaya)
are catalogued in the Sicipattram (V.S. 2021-24, Puratattvagranthamala 26, 27, 32, 41),
cf. Griinendahl 1989, p. XVIII. Detailed information on the history of the NAK can be
found in Dimitrov 2007, p. 117 sq., esp. fn. 16.

--- PAGE 168 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 157

fol reel
3/663 Dn 47 B 98/9
3/723 Dn 304 A9IS/7
4/1033 Pap Np 54 BOTT
S/185 Np 99 A 121/8
S/191 Dn 39 A915/6
5/7727 Dn 129 A 134/5
5/7954 Np 46 B97/9
6/3311 Palm Np 11 A 1389/23
6/3313 Palm Mai 19 A 1389/22

Kathmandu, Kaiser Library

The Kaiser Library in Kathmandu owns two manuscripts of the Bca, and

these are also available as NGMPP microfilms:*°

fol reel
124 Palm Np 73 300 N.S. Cc 14/2
127 Palm Np 41 Cc 14/5

Manuscripts from Tibet

Ye 2009 lists seven precious old Bea manuscripts that have survived in
Tibet:

* One (6.2.1) was catalogued by Rahula Sankrtyayana (1893-1963)
in the Ngor monastery.**

36

Photographs of this collection are stored on the NGMPP microfilm reel nos. C 1/1 - C
124/6, cf. Dimitrov/Tamot 2007 p. 31.
7 Cf. p. 231 sq. (6.2).
“14 fols. (incomplete), 12x 1% in., Magadhi script”. Cf. Safkrtyayana 1935, p. 37 (no.
XXI-4-110). “Magadhi” as a name for a script is used by Saikrtyayana for Old
Bengali, cf. Bandurski 1994, p. 19. About the scholar and his travels, cf. Kellner 2010.

--- PAGE 169 ---
158 Daniel Stender

* Two of them (6.2.2” and 6.2.3) were kept in the China
Library of Nationalities (Zhongguo Minzu Tushuguan) in

Beijing, but have been brought in 1993 to the Tibetan Museum in
Lhasa.

* One manuscript (6.2.4"') has been catalogued in the Norbulingka
palace.

* Two others (6.2.5,° 6.2.6") have been catalogued in the
Drepung monastery.

¢ Another manuscript (6.2.7) was held by the Administrative
Committee of Cultural Relics of the Lhoka district.

The Tucci collection in Rome does not contain any more manuscripts of
Santideva’s poem from Tibet.**

Reproductions
IASWR

The former Institute of Advanced Studies of World Religions (ASWR) at
the State University of New York (SUNY) has microfilmed several Sanskrit

39

“Palm-leaf, 23 fols (complete, 10 chapters), 6 lines, 22 x 2 in., Proto-Bengali script”.
Catalogued by Sankrtyayana at Saskya monastery, cf. the report from 1937, p. 24 (VI-
VI-196) [not available to me, but cf. Tsukamato/Matsunaga/Isoda 1990, p. 257 (no.
18)]. This manuscript was examined by Lindtner in Beijing (,,very accurate“), and he
noted variants, cf. Lindtner 1991.

“Paper, 71 fols. (incomplete, fols. 8, 9, 31, 42, 50, 59 are missing, 10 chapters), 5 lines,
Eastern Nagari script”.

“Paper, 38 fols. (incomplete, missing fol. 17), 8 lines, 29.9 x 6.3 cm, Gupta script”.

#  “Palm-leaf, 58 fols. (incomplete, fols. 27, 38, 39, 60 missing, 10 chapters), 5 lines, 30.2
x 4.9 cm, Gupta script [...] Tibetan notes on the last folio: sgu rum dpe gang gi rgya
dpe. From this we know that this manuscript comes from India and was formerly held
in the sGu rum library of the Sakya Monastery”.

“Palm-leaf, 67 fols. (complete, 10 chapters), 5 lines, 29.1 x 5.4 cm, Dharika script”.
“Carydvatara, palm-leaf, 69 fols. (complete), 5 lines, 32.2 x 5.6 cm, script similar to
Gupta, title on the cover: spyod ‘jug gi bzhung’.

4 Cf. Sferra 2008.

40

43
44

--- PAGE 170 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 159

manuscripts from Nepal. These photographs have been made available in a
set of microfiches, a copy of which was sold to the Indological Department
of Bonn University. Within these microfiches, two manuscripts of the Bca
are found:*°

MBB-I-1 (microfilm number MBB-1971-1-1) is a palm leaf manuscript of N.S.
880 in Bhujimola script, 5x28 cm with 7 lines, 38 numbers of leaves, the 2nd one
is missing, cf. IASWR 1973. Unfortunately, most of the photographs are blurred,
which makes it hardly legible in large sections. The scanned card gives the
information that the manuscript contains nine chapters up to the Prajfiaparamita.”

MBB-II-231 (microfilm number sheet and card not legible) is written in Nepalese
characters, 6 lines on 42 fol. Some folios are not legible.

Nagoya

The Buddhist Library in Nagoya owns several microfilms containing Bca

manuscripts from private collections in Nepal

46

47

48
49

1:8

“CA 10-3. Bodhicaryavatére parinamanta pariccheda: (Language) Sanskrit,
(Script) Devanagari, (Material) Paper, Hartala on b, (Size) 26x12% cm., (Leaves)
ff.104 (1b-104b), ex.ff. 3, (Lines) //.6”.

“CH 257. Bodhicarya avatara: (Language) Sanskrit, (Script) Devanagari,
(Material) Paper, Hartala on b, (Size) 22x12cm., (Leaves) ff.62 (1b-61b) doubled
£.41, (Lines) /1.6 (£.1-54) /L10 (f.55-last)”.

“CH 314. Bodhicaryavatare parikatha krtiyamacarya éri Santideva padanam:
(Language) Sanskrit, (Script) Newa: Lipi, (Date of writing) SAMVAT written in
letters “NANDA-SARA-KHACARE”,”” (Material) Paper, Hartala on b, (Size)
31%x11 cm., (Leaves) ff.65 (1b-65b), (Lines) 11.7”.

Cf. Eimer/Paffen 1988, p. 146 On the remarkable collection of reproductions in Bonn,

cf. Hahn 1988. Duplicates of the NGMPP reels nos. B 97 and 98 are also available
here.

Chapter II begins on fol. 3r6, III on 7r4, IV on 9r8, V on 13v2, VI on 1917, VIL on
22v3, VIII on 30r1, and IX on 3717.

Cf. Takaoka 1981. Cited from Tsukamato/Matsunaga/Isoda 1990, p. 258.

Probably “9-5-0”, cf. Sircar 1965, p. 230 sq.

--- PAGE 171 ---
160 Daniel Stender

“DH 219. Bodhicaryavatare Prajiiaparamita pariccheda: (Language) Sanskrit,
(Script) Devanagari, (Material and form of MS) Paper, Hartala on one side,
Banded, (Size) 22%4x15cm., (Pages) pp.57, (Lines) //.20”.

NGMPP
The NGMPP holds several microfilm rolls in the State Library Berlin

(Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin) with photographs of manuscripts from private
collections:”

reel fol
E 910/10 Dn 76
E 910/11 Dn 29
E 1099/1 Np 65 1839 A.D.
E 1256/7 Np 26
E 1518/5 Palm Np 32
E 1553/2 Dn 79
E 1375/2 Dn 46 1937 A.D.
E 1375/3 Dn 86
E 1484/13 Dn 9
E 1700/9 Np 80
E 1730/16 Dn 76
E 1730/17 Dn 28
E 1838/4 Dn 49 1816 A.D.
E 2511/1 Np 47
E 322717 Dn 8
H 3/3 Dn 6
H44/5 82 1924 A.D.
H 3321/7 Np 63
H 380/8 Np 17 1644 A.D.
H 1086/5 Dn 61

*° Reels carrying the siglum “E” have been filmed from private collections in

Kathmandu, “H” from private collections in Patan, cf. Moriguchi 1989, p. VIII.

--- PAGE 172 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 161
References

Bandurski 1994
Frank Bandurski: Ubersicht iiber die in Géttinger Sammlungen der von Rahula
yana in Tibet aufgefundenen buddistischen Sanskrit-Texte (Funde
istischer Sanskrit-Handschriften, HI). In: Bandurski et.al.: Untersuchungen
zur buddhistischen Literatur. Géttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht 1994 (Sanskrit-
Worterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden, Beiheft; 5), p. 9-
126.

Bapat 1978
P.V. Bapat: Professor Dr. P.L. Vaidya. In: Journal of the International Association
of Buddhist Studies 1 (1978), p. 91 sq.

Bendall 1883
Cecil Bendall: Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts in the University
Library, Cambridge. Steiner: Stuttgart 1992 (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen
Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplementband; 33 / Publications of the Nepal-
German Manuscript Preservation Project; 2) [reprint of: Cambridge 1883].

Bhattacharya 1960
Vidhushekhara Bhattacharya (Ed.): Bodhicaryavatara. Calcutta: Asiatic Society of
Bengal 1960 (Bibliotheca Indica; 280, fasc. 1580).

Bongard-Levin/Vigasin 1984
G[rigorij] Bongard-Levin, A[leksej] Vigasin: The image of India. The study of
Ancient Indian civilisation in the USSR. Moscow: Progress Publishers 1984.

Brhatsiicipattra
Buddhisagara [Parajuli] (Ed): Srvh_~— Nepalarajakiya-virapustakdlayastha-
hastalikhitapustakandm — Brhatsiicipatram. VII, — 1-3: Bauddhavisayakah.
Kathmandi: Virapustakalaya V.S. 2021-23 (Puratattvaprakasanamala; 29, 38, 39).

Burnouf 1854
Catalogue des livres imprimés et manuscripts composant la bibliotheque de Feu M.
Eugéne Burnouf. Paris: Duprat 1854.

Cabaton 1907
A[ntoine] Cabaton: Catalogue sommaire des manuscrits sanscrits et pdlis. ler
fascicule. - manuscrits sanscrits [nos. 1-1102]. Paris: Bibliothéque nationale,
Départment des manuscrits 1907.

--- PAGE 173 ---
162 Daniel Stender

Chakravati 1959-60
Chintaharan Chakravarti: Sanskrit manuscripts in the Asiatic Society. In: Indian
Studies Past & Present 14 (1959-60), p. 663-72.

Colas 1986
Gérard Colas: South Asian documents in the Oriental Division of the Department
of Manuscripts of the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris. In: A. Gaur (Ed.): South Asian
Studies. Papers presented at a collogium 24-26 April 1985. London: British
Library 1986 (British Library Occasional Papers; 7), p. 284-89.

Conze 1982
Edward Conze: Buddhist scriptures. A bibliography. Edited and revised by Lewis
Lancaster. New York, London: Garland Publishing 1982.

Cowell/Eggeling 1876
E[dward] B[yles] Cowell, J[ulius] Eggeling: Catalogue of Buddhist Sanskrit
manuscripts in the possession of the Royal Asiatic Society (Hodgson Collection).
In: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland N.S. 8,1 (1876),
p. 1-52.

Dietz 1999
Siglinde Dietz: Santidevas Bodhicaryavatara — Das Weiterwirken des Werkes
dargestellt’ anhand der Uberlieferungsgeschichte des Textes und seiner
Kommentare [Lecture script]. In: Buddhismus in Geschichte und Gegenwart 3:
Santidevas ,,Eintritt in das Leben zur Erleuchtung“. Hamburg: Universitat
Hamburg 1999 (Weiterbildendes Studium), p. 25-41.

Dimitrov 2002
Dragomir Dimitrov: Tables of Old Bengali script. In: Dimitrov/Roesler/Steiner
(Eds.): Sikhisamuccayah. Indian and Tibetan studies (collectanea marpurgensia
indologica et tibetica) [Festschrift fiir Michael Hahn zur Vollendung des 60.
Lebensjahres]. Wien: Universtitét Wien, Arbeitskreis fiir Tibetische und
Buddhistische Studien 2002 (Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und
Buddhismuskunde; 53), p. 27-78.

Dimitrov 2007
Dragomir Dimitrov: Ratndkarasantis Chandoratnakara and Tathdgataddasa’s
Chandomanikya. In: Klaus/Hartmann (Hrsg.): Indica et Tibetica. Festschrift fiir
Michael Hahn. Zum 65. Geburtstag von Freunden und Schiilern iiberreicht. Wien:
Universitat Wien, Arbeitskreis fiir Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien 2007
(Wiener Studien zur Indologie und Buddhismuskunde; 66), p. 113-38.

--- PAGE 174 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 163

Dimitrov/Tamot 2007
Dragomir Dimitrov, Kashinath Tamot: Kaiser Shamsher, his library and his
manuscript collection. In: Newsletter of the NGMCP 3 (2007), p. 26-36.

Eimer 2006
Helmut Eimer: Buddhistische Begriffsreihen als Skizzen des Erldsungsweges. Wien:
Universitat Wien, Arbeitskreis fiir Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien 2006
(Wiener Studien zur Tibeologie und Buddhismuskunde; 65).

Eimer/Paffen 1988
Helmut Eimer, assisted by Roland Paffen: Microfilms, microfiches and other
reproductions of North Indian manuscripts kept in the Indological Institute of Bonn
University. In: Eimer (Ed.): Indology and Indo-Tibetology. Thirty years of Indian
and Indo-Tibetan Studies in Bonn. Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag 1988 (Indica et
Tibetica; 13), p. 97-192.

Filliozat 1941
Jean Filliozat: Catalogue du fonds sanscrit. Fasc. 1: Nos 1 a& 165. Paris:
Bibliothéque nationale, Département des manuscrits 1941.

Gomez 1999
Luis O. Gémez: The way of the translators: three recent translations of Santideva’s
Bodhicarydavatara. In: Buddhist Literature 1 (1999), p. 262-354.

Goshima/Noguchi 1983
Kiyotaka Goshima, Keiya Noguchi: A succinct catalogue of the Sanskrit
manuscripts in the possession of the Faculty of Letters, Kyoto University. Kyoto:
Kyoto University, Society for Indic and Buddhistic Studies 1983.

Griinendahl 1989
Reinhold Griinendahl: A concordance of H.P. Sastris catalogue of the Durbar
Library and the microfilms of the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project.
Stuttgart: Steiner 1989 (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in
Deutschland, Supplementband; 31 / Publications of the Nepal-German Manuscript
Preservation Project; 1).

Hahn 1988
Michael Hahn: Indische und nepalesische Handschriften im Indologischen Seminar
der Universitit Bonn. In: Eimer (Ed.): Indology and Indo-Tibetology. Thirty years
of Indian and Indo-Tibetan Studies in Bonn. Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag 1988
(Indica et Tibetica; 13), p. 81-96.

--- PAGE 175 ---
164 Daniel Stender

Hunter 1881
Wlilliam] W[ilson] Hunter: Catalogue of Sanskrit manuscripts collected in Nepal,
and presented to various libraries and learned societies by Brian Houghton
Hodgson. London: Triibner & Co 1881.

IASWR 1973
Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts. A title list of the microfilm collection of the Institute
for Advanced Studies of World Religions. [Stony Brook] 1973.

Janert 1965
Klaus Ludwig Janert: An annotated bibliography of the catalogues of Indian
manuscripts. Part 1. Wiesbaden: Steiner 1965 (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen
Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplement; 1).

Kaneko/Saito 1954
Ryotai Kaneko, Kojyun Saito: Buddhist manuscripts of the Bir Library. In: Taisho
Daigaku Kenkyii Kiyé 40 (1955), p. 55-84.

Kavyatirtha 1904
Kunja Vihari Kavyatirtha: Catalogue of printed books and manuscripts in Sanskrit
belonging to the Oriental Library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Calcutta: Baptist
Mission Press 1904.

Keith 1935
Arthur Berriedale Keith: Catalogue of the Sanskrit and Prakrit manuscripts in the
Library of the India Office. Vol. I: Brahmanical and Jaina manuscripts. With a
supplement Buddhist manuscripts by FW. Thomas. Oxford: Clarendon Press 1935.

Kellner 2010
Birgit Kellner: Rahul Sankrityayan (1893-1963) und seine Tibetreisen im Kontext.
In: Masala Newsletter 54 (2010), w/o page numbers.

La Vallée Poussin 1889
Louis de La Vallée Poussin: Bouddhisme. Etudes et Matériaux. Adikarmapradipa.
Bodhicarydavataratika. London: Luzac & Co. 1898 [Tika on p. 233-404].

La Vallée Poussin 1901
Louis de La Vallée Poussin: Bodhicarydvatarapanjika. Prajiakaramati’s
commentary of the Bodhicaryavatara of Cantideva. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press
1901-14 (Bibliotheca Indica; 150, fasc. 983, 1031, 1090, 1126, 1139, 1305, 1399).

--- PAGE 176 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 165

Law 1933
Narendra Nath Law: Mm. Dr. Haraprasad Sastri (1853-1931). In: Indian
Historical Quarterly 9 (1933), p. 307-416.

Lienhard/Manandhar 1988
Siegried Lienhard, Thakur Lal Manandhar: Nepalese manuscripts. Part 1: Nevari
and Sanskrit. Staatsbibliothek Preussischer Kulturbesitz, Berlin. Stuttgart: Steiner
1988 (Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland; 33,1)

Lindtner 1998
Christian Lindtner: [Review of:] The Mongolian Tanjur Version of the
Bodhicaryavatdra. Igor de Rachewiltz. Wiesbaden 1996. In: Buddhist Studies
Review 15,2 (1998), p. 238-40.

Lindtner 1991
Chr[istian] Lindtner: Textcritical notes on Sanskrit texts I.
Bodhi(sattva)caryavatara. In: Zheng/Zhongxin (Eds.): Papers in honour of Prof.
Dr. Ji Xianlin on the occasion of his 80th birthday. Beijing: Nachang Chi 1991, II,
p. 651-60.

Matsunami 1965
Seiren Matsunami: A catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts in the Tokyo University
Library. Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation 1965.

Minaev 1889
I[van Pavlovié] Minaev (Ed.): Spasenie po uceniju pozdnéjsich buddhistov
[Salvation according to the teaching of the late Buddhists]. In: Zapiski Vostoénago
Otdélenija Imperatorskago Russkago Archeologiteskago Obscestva 4 (1889), p. 153-
228.

Mironov 1918
Nlikolai] D[mitrievich] Mironov: Katalog indijskich rukopisej Rossijskoj
Publi¢noj Biblioteki, sobranie IP. Minaeva i nékotoryja drugija. Vypusk 1.
Petrograd: Rossijskaja Akademija Nauk 1918.

Mitra 1882
Rajendraldla Mitra: The Sanskrit Buddhist literature of Nepal. Calcutta: Asiatic
Society of Bengal 1882.

Moriguchi 1989
Mitutoshi Moriguchi: A catalogue of the Buddhist Tantric manuscripts in the
National Archives of Nepal and Kesar Library. Tokyo: Sankibou Busshorin 1989.

--- PAGE 177 ---
166 Daniel Stender

Mukhopadhyaya 1960
Sujitkumar Mukhopadhyaya: Appendix to the new edition of the Bodhicarydavatara
[Bhattacharya 1960]. In: Indian Historical Quarterly 37 (1961), p. 287-92.

Nobel 1928
Johannes Nobel: Fortsetzung des Verzeichnisses der Bibliotheca Indica und
verwandter indischer  Serien.  Sonderabdruck aus “Zentralblatt __ fiir
Bibliothekswesen” Jahrgang 45 (1928). Leipzig: Harrassowitz 1928.

Petech 1984
Luciano Petech: Mediaeval history of Nepal (c. 750-1482). 2nd edition. Roma:
Instituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente 1984 (Serie Orientale Roma;
54).

Pezzali 1968
Amalia Pezzali: Santideva. Mystique bouddhiste des VII* et VIII? siecles. Firenze:
Vallecchi Editore 1968 (Testi e richerche di Scienze religiose; 3).

Saito 1993
Aikra Saito: 1990.4-1993.3. Grant-in-aid for scientific reasearch (C). A study of
Aksayamati (=Santideva)s Bodhisattvacaryavatara as found in the Tibetan
manuscripts from Tun-huang. Project number 02801005. Mie: Mie University
[1993].

Saito 1996
Akira Saito: Santideva in the history of Madhyamika philosophy. In:
Sankarnarayan/Yoritomi/Joshi (Eds.): Buddhism in India and abroad. An
integrating influence in Vedic and Post-Vedic perspective. Mumbai (etc.): Somaiya
Publications 1996, p. 257-63.

Samkspitasiicipattra
Buddhisagara [Parajuli] (Ed.): Nepalardjaktya-virapustakdlayastha-
hastalikhitasamastapustakanam Samksiptasiicipattram. Kathamadaum:

Virapustakalaya V.S. 2020 (Puratattvaprakasanamala; 18).

Sankrtyayana 1935
Rahula Sankrtyayana: Sanskrit palm-leaf mss. in Tibet. In: The Journal of the
Bihar and Orissa Research Society 21 (1935), p. 21-44.

Sastri 1893
Hara Prasad Shastri: On a new find of old Nepalese manuscripts. In: Journal of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal, Part 3: Anthropology 1893, p. 245-49.

--- PAGE 178 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 167

Sastri 1894 .
[Haraprasada Sastri (Ed.):] Bodhicarydvataram. In: Journal and Text of the
Buddhist Text Society of India 2,1 (1894), p. 1-16 & 2,2, p. 17-32.

Sastri 1895,
Haraprasad Sastri: Notices of Sanskrit mss. Volume XI. Calcutta: Baptist Mission
Press 1895.

Sastri 1905-15
Hara Prasad Sastri: Catalogue of palm-leaf & selected paper mss. belonging to the
Durbar Library, Nepal. 2 Vols. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press 1905-1915
[reprinted in: Griinendahl 1989].

Sastri 1913
Haraprasad Sastri: Santideva. In: Indian Antiquary 42 (1913), p. 49-51.

Sastri 1917
Hara Prasad Shastri: A descriptive catalogue of Sanscrit manuscripts in the
Government Collection under the care of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. Vol. 1:
Buddhist manuscripts. Calcutta: Baptist Mission Press 1917.

Schneider 1934
Alexandra Schneider: Professor LP. Minayeff (the Russian Indologist) 1840-90. In:
Indian Historical Quarterly 10 (1934), p. 811-26.

Seyfort Ruegg 1981
David Seyfort Ruegg: The literature of the Madhyamaka school of philosophy in
India. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz 1981 (A History of Indian Literature; VII,1).

Sferra 2008
Francesco Sferra: Sanskrit manuscripts and photographs of Sanskrit manuscripts
in Guiseppe Tuccis collection. In: Sferra (Ed.): Sanskrit Texts from Guiseppe
Tuccis collection. Roma: Istituto Italiano per I Africa e Oriente 2008 (Serie
Orientale Roma; 104 / Manuscripta Buddhica; 1), p. 15-78.

Sieg 1908
Emil Sieg: Verzeichnis der Bibliotheca Indica und verwandter Indischer Serien
nach Werken und Nummern. Sonderabdruck aus dem “Zentralblatt _ fiir
Bibliothekswesen” Jahrgang 24, 1907, Heft 11. Leipzig: Harrassowitz 1908.

--- PAGE 179 ---
168 Daniel Stender

Sircar 1965
Dfines] C[handra] Sircar: Indian epigraphy. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 1996
[reprint of: Delhi 1965].

Société Asiatique 1837
Catalogue des livres bouddhiques, écrits en sanscrit, que M.B.H. Hodgson a fait
copier au Népal pour le compte de la Société asiatique, et qui ont été présentés au
conseil dans sa séance du 14 juillet 1837. In: Journal Asiatique troisigme série 4
(1837), p. 296 sq.

Steinkellner 2004
Ernst Steinkellner: A tale of leaves. On Sanskrit manuscripts in Tibet, their past
and their future [2003 Gonda Lecture]. Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy
of Arts and Sciences 2004.

Takaoka 1981
Hidenobu Takaoka: A microfilm catalogue of the Buddhist manuscripts in Nepal.
Vol 1. Nagoya: Buddhist Library 1981.

Thapa 2004
Shanker Thapa: Buddhism and Nepal-Japan academic relations: a_ native
perspective. In: Journal of Nepal-Japan Studies 4,1 (2004), offprint w/o page
numbers.

Tsukamoto/Matsunaga/Isoda 1990
Keisho Tsukamoto, Yukei Matsunaga, Hirofumi Isoda: A descriptive bibliography
of the Sanskrit Buddhist literature. Vol. III: Abhidharma, Madhyamaka, Yogacara,
Buddhist epistemology and logic. Kyoto: Heirakuji-Shoten 1990.

Vaidya 1960
Pfarasuram] L{aksman] Vaidya: Bodhicarydvatdra of Sdntideva with the
commentary Paiijikd of Prajidkaramati. Bombay: Mithila Institute of Post-
Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning Darbhanga 1960 (Buddhist
Sanskrit Texts; 12).

Vielle 2010
Christophe Vielle: Louis de La Vallée Poussin. In: Nouvelle biographie nationale
de Belgique. Tome 10. Bruxelles: Académie Royale de Belgique 2010, p. 122-124.

--- PAGE 180 ---
Sanskrit Manuscripts of the Bodhicaryavatara 169

Waterhouse 2004
David M. Waterhouse (Ed.): The origins of Himalayan studies. Brian Houghton
Hodgson in Nepal and Darjeeling 1820-1858. London (etc.): RoutledgeCurzon
2004 (Royal Asiatic Society Books).

Weber 1879
Albrecht Weber: Combined review of Wright 1877 and Cowell/Eggeling 1876. In:
Indische Streifen. Dritter Band. Leipzig: Brockhaus 1879, p. 520-532.

Weller 1950
Friedrich Weller: Uber den Quellenbezug eines mongolischen Tanjurtextes. Berlin:
Akademie-Verlag 1950 (Abhandlungen der Siichsischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Phil.-Hist. Klasse; 45,2).

Wezler 1986
Albrecht Wezler: Geisteswissenschaftliche Forschung in Nepal (Bericht iiber das
“Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project)”. In: Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenliindischen Gesellschaft 136,1 (1986), p. *2*-*14*.

Wright 1877
Daniel Wright (Ed.): History of Nepal, translated from the Parbatiya by Munshi
Shew Shunker Singh and Pandit Shri Gundnand. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press 1877.

Yamada 1959
Ryijo Yamada: Bongo butten no shobunken. Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten 1959.

Ye 2009
Shaoyong Ye: A preliminary survey of Sanskrit manuscripts of Madhyamaka texts
preserved in the Tibet Autonomous Region. In: Steinkellner/Qing/Krasser (Eds.):
Sanskrit manuscripts in China. Proceedings of a panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar
on Tibetan Studies, October 13 to 17. Beijing 2009, p. 307-36.

Yuyama 1992
Akira Yuyama: Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts collections - a_ bibliographical
guide for the use of students in Buddhist philology. Tokyo: The International
Institute for Buddhist Studies 1992.

Yuyama 2000
Akira Yuyama: Eugéne Burnouf. The background to his research into the Lotus
Sutra. Tokyo: Soka University, International Research Institute for Advanced
Buddhology 2000 (Bibliotheca Philologica et Philosophica Buddhica; 3).

--- PAGE 181 ---


--- PAGE 182 ---
Seven

Asiddha vs asiddhavat
in Patanjali’s Mahdabhasya

Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

Introduction

The asiddha principle employed by Panini in his Astddhydyi (A.) (Sth-4th
cent. BCE)! allows for the division of the text of the treatise into two parts:
the Sapadasaptadhyayi (comprising seven chapters and the first sub-chapter
of the eighth chapter) and the Tripddi (comprising the last three sub-
chapters). Panini uses the term asiddha twice in his treatise in the rules A.
8.2.1 pirvatrasiddham (‘all the following rules are] suspended (asiddha,
have not taken effect) with respect to the previous ones’) and A. 6.1.86
satva-tuKor asiddhah (‘[a single substitute of a preceding and a following
phoneme is considered] suspended with respect to the augment tuK and the
s-substitution’); and once he uses the term asiddhavat — A. 6.4.22
asiddhavad atrabhat (‘from this sitra up to the sittra A. 6.4.129 bhasya?
[including the domain of bhasya, the rules are to be applied] as if suspended

' CARDONA 1997(a): 260, 268.
A. 6.4.129 bhasya (‘[The operations introduced hereafter up to the end of the chapter
apply to the presuffixal stem termed] bha).

--- PAGE 183 ---
172 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

[with respect to each other]’). There has been disagreement amongst recent
scholars such as Bronkhorst, Kiparsky, Cardona and S.D. Joshi as to
whether these two terms are synonymous or whether they mean two
different things.

I will analyse what Patafijali (2nd cent. BCE),* Panini’s commentator,
says about asiddha and whether he is right in his assumptions. In all three
places Pataiijali quotes Katyayana’s (3rd cent. BCE)* varttika (vt.) on the
stra A. 6.1.86 -  Gdesa-laksana-pratisedhartham —utsarga-laksana-
bhavartham ca (‘\asiddha is used] in order to prohibit [the application of] a
tule [conditioned by] a substitute (ddega) and allow [the application of] a
tule [conditioned by] a substituend (utsarga)’) — to explain the principles of
asiddha and asiddhavat. Patafijali quotes this vt. again under two other
siitras, A. 6.4.22 and A. 8.2.1, on the vt.s 1 and 8 respectively, both of which
read: asiddha-vacana uktam (‘it has been explained in the asiddha rule’).
Then Patajfijali explains what he means by referring to the aforementioned
statement. As can be seen, therefore, the author of the Mahabhdsya uses the
same argument in all three cases irrespective of the fact that the term
asiddha is used only twice. Patafijali ignores the fact that in the rule A.
6.4.22 asiddhavad atrabhdat the term asiddha is followed by the suffix vatl,
which in this case denotes similarity. It seems that he considers both of the
terms equal. He pays no attention to the form asiddhavat whatsoever. He
does not even try to explain the use of the suffix. Later commentators
accept that in all three rules the term should be understood as standing for
asiddhavat, even in those two cases when Panini himself uses asiddha only.

The so-called asiddha principle has been discussed frequently over the
last thirty years or so as it seems to be one of the most important tools for
the application of rules in the A.* The very term asiddha is difficult to

* CARDONA 1997(a): 266.

* CARDONA 1997(a): 267-268.

* See for example: Banerjee, Rabi Shankar: Concept of asiddhatva in Panini, Sanskrit
Pustak Bhavan, Calcutta, 1984; Bronkhorst, J.: Asiddha in the Astadhydyi — a mis-
understanding among the traditional commentators”, Journal of Indian Philosophy
8:69-85 (1980); Bronkhorst, J.: ‘Review of Some Theoretical Problems in Panini’s
Grammar, by Paul Kiparsky’. Indo-Iranian Journal 27 (1984), pp. 309-314;
Bronkhorst, J.: ‘What is asiddha?’ Annals of BORI 70 (1989 [1990]), 309-311; Joshi,
S.D., and Kiparsky, P.: ‘Siddha and asiddha in Paninian phonology’ in: Current

--- PAGE 184 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 173

translate. It is the past participle of the verbal root ‘sidi — ‘to be accom-
plished, to take effect’ and therefore it can be rendered as ‘that which has
not been accomplished, has not taken effect’.° It is important to mention
that the term asiddha was not defined by Panini in the A. and that is where
the difficulties arise. It was either obvious for those who studied his
grammar at the time or it was used in its basic meaning. As the Monier
Williams dictionary definition is ambiguous, it is very difficult to define the
term properly. Following the dictionary, asiddhavat would therefore mean
‘as if it has not taken effect’. There is a great difference between under-
standing the sitras as ‘not having taken effect’ or ‘as if not having taken
effect’. According to Patafijali’s commentary, they ‘have not taken effect’
but, according to the later tradition, they are ‘as if not having taken effect’.
Which interpretation is right? Or maybe they are both wrong? I will present
some arguments supporting the opinion that they are both wrong and that in
fact those two terms are not synonymous.

Examples in the Asiddhavat Section

When we look at how the rules are applied in both the asiddha (A. 6.1.86,
A. 8.2.1-8.4.68) and asiddhavat (A. 6.4.22-6.4.175) sections, we can see that
there are major differences. It has been generally accepted that the asiddha
principle establishes the order in which the rules of the A. are applied
during the derivational process. In the whole of the A. the rules are applied
depending on the derivational context, absolutely irrespective of their place
in the treatise. This is not the case as far as the asiddha section is con-
cerned. Contrary to the rest of the A. the siitras in the Tripddi section (A.
8.2.1-8.4.68) are applied during the derivational process in the order they
appear in the A. In the asiddhavat section (A. 6.4.22-6.4.175) the applica-
tion of rules is determined by other factors, most certainly not by their
order. The argument can be advanced that this is the result of the

Approaches to Phonological Theory, ed. Daniel A. Dinnsen. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press. 1979. Pp. 223-250.

I translate it sometimes as ‘suspended’ after Kiparsky and Cardona, my translation has
not been determined yet.

--- PAGE 185 ---
174 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

formulation of the sidtras A. 8.2.1 piirvatrasiddham (‘[all the following rules
are] suspended (asiddha, have not taken effect) with respect to the previous
ones’) and A. 6.4.22 asiddhavad atraébhat (‘from this siitra up to the siitra A.
6.4129 bhasya’ [including the domain of bhasya, the rules are to be
applied] as if suspended [with respect to each other]’). The words of
interest are piirvatra and even more so the word atra. According to
Kiparsky® the latter term allows us to apply the rules in conflict in
whichever order we choose. In my opinion, however, it is not entirely the
case. If the term atra were to specify the domain in which the asiddhavat
principle works, the expression @ bhat would be superfluous. So it has to
serve another purpose which is, as the commentators agree,” to describe the
context in which the rule in question takes place. It is used to show that one
tule can be suspended with respect to another only when they have the
same conditions for operation. I think it is very difficult to deduce from this
word that the order of the application of rules is left to our choice. There
are other factors that determine which siitra is to be applied first.

Let us deal with @ bhat first. There could be two possible interpretations
of this term. First, that the scope of this governing rule extends up to the
tule A. 6.4.129 bhasya which introduces a new adhikdra, thereby ending the
application of asiddhavat. The rule A. 6.4.129 says that from now on all the
operations will take place on the stem termed bha. Another interpretation
would allow the scope of the governing rule A. 6.4.22 to include the term
bha as well. So all the siitras that belong to the group governed by the rule
bhasya (A. 6.4.129) are subject to the asiddha or asiddhavat principle. The
term d bhdat is absolutely necessary because otherwise the principle of
suspension would extend outside the domain of bha, which ends in the
fourth pada of the sixth chapter and would apply to the rules that lie outside
it, for example in the seventh chapter. This is not what is desired.

A. 6.4.129 bhasya (‘[The operations introduced hereafter up to the end of the chapter
apply] to [the presuffixal stem termed] bha).
* KIPARSKY 1982:105-107.
See for example Kasikdvrtti on A. 6.4.22: atreti samandasrayatva-pratipatty-artham /
and Kaiyata on the Mahdbhdsya: visisto yo visayah samana-laksanas tan-nirdesartham
/ tena samandsrayam asiddham vyaSrayam tu siddham ity eso ‘rtho  varttika-
karasyabhimatah /.

--- PAGE 186 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 175

What is more, both of the rules in question must belong to the so-called
abhiya section." Otherwise, the ‘suspension’ does not work at all. Let us
see, for example, the derivation of the form abhdji (‘it broke’, aor. pass.):

bhaj + 1UN

bhaij + CLI + ta (A. 3.1.43 CLIIUNi")

aT + bhaij + CiN + ta (A. 6.4.71 [UN-IAN-IRNksv aD-udattah,”
A. 3.1.66 CiN bhdva-karmanoh"*)

a+ bhaaj +i+0 (A. 6.4.104 CiNo luK"*)

atbha(@i>O0)j+i (A. 6.4.33 bhaiijes ca CiNi"*)

a+ bhaj+i

a+bh(a>a@jti (A. 7.2.116 aTa upadhayah"’)

abhaji

First the augment aT is added to the stem followed by the suffix CiN.
The ending ta is further deleted by the rule A. 6.4.104. The problem starts
with the deletion of the nasal consonant fi by the rule A. 6.4.33. It is a sditra
belonging to the asiddhavat section. To derive the correct form abhdaji with
the phoneme @ we need to apply the rule A. 7.2.116, which prescribes the
vrddhi substitution of the penultimate phoneme a in a stem when the same
is followed by the suffix marked with N or N. The suffix CiN is such a suf-
fix but, as the deletion of the nasal belongs to the asiddhavat section, it
should be treated as if suspended. Therefore the phoneme a of the stem

© The section A. 6.4.22-6.4.175 is called the dbhiya section due to the expression d bhat

used in the satra A. 6.4.22.
"A. 3.143 CLI IUNi (‘{The suffix] CLI comes [after a verbal stem] before the 1-
substitutes of JUN’).
A. 6.4.71 IUN-IAN-IRNksv aD-udattah (‘[The initial increment] aT is inserted with
high pitch [at the head of a verbal ariga] before the l-substitutes of IUN, IAN or IRN’).
A. 3.1.66 CiN bhava-karmanoh (‘[The aorist marker] CiN [comes in place of CLI]
when denoting the action itself or the object’).
4A. 6.4.104 CiNo luK (‘[The aorist marker] CiN is deleted’).
A. 6.4.33 bhajijes ca CiNi (‘[The penultimate phoneme n] of [the verbal arga] bhaiij
(‘to break’) [is not optionally deleted] before [the aorist marker] CiN’).
A. 7.2116 aTa upadhdyah (‘[The vrddhi vowel a comes in place] of the penultimate
[vowel] a [before suffixes marked with N or N}’).

--- PAGE 187 ---
176 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

bhajij would not be penultimate; the stem would still have the nasal # which
would constitute the penultimate phoneme. And as such the stem would not
be able to undergo the vrddhi substitution by A. 7.2.116. However, the sitra
A. 7.2.116 does not belong to the domain prescribed by the sitra A. 6.4.22,
the so-called Gbhiya domain; it is outside this domain. Therefore the
asiddhavat principle will not apply in this case. As can be seen from the
above example, the conflict between the two siitras has to refer to the rules
that belong to the same domain of operation. If one of them lies outside it,
the principle of suspension does not work.

Another question arises with respect to the word atra. Pataiijali says that
it specifies the domain. But the very form of the term a bhdt restricts the
domain already. What is the purpose then in using this additional
expression? It is used to show that one rule can be suspended with respect
to another only when they have the same conditions for operation (atra). A
good example is the word papusah (‘of the one who has drunk’, gen. sg.):

pa + pa + KvasU + Sas (A. 3.2.107 KvasUS ca"’)

pa + pa + vas + as

pa+pa+(va>u)s+as (A. 64.131 vasOh samprasaranam'*)
pat p(@—0)+us +as (A. 6.4.64 aTo lopa iTi ca’)

pap + us + as

papu (s > $) + as (A. 8.3.59 adesa-pratyayayoh”)

A. 3.2.107 KvasUS ca (‘[In Vedic literature the suffix] KvasU also [optionally comes in
place of the |-substitutes of IIT introduced after a verbal stem to denote the general
past tense’).

A. 6.4.131 vasOh samprasdranam (‘Vocalisation of the semivowel of [the suffix] vasU
(=KvasU) [occurring as an aviga-final of a bha stem] takes place’).

A. 6.4.64 aTo lopa iTi ca (‘[The arga-final phoneme] d before [the initial increment]
iT is deleted as well as [before drdhadhdtuka suffixes beginning with a vowel marked
with K or N]’).

A. 8.3.59 ddesa-pratyayayoh (‘[The phoneme s comes in place of a phoneme s] of a
substitute or of a suffix [occurring after vowels other than a, after a semivowel r or
velar stops even when there is an intervention by nUM, / or sibilants in continuous
utterance’).

20

--- PAGE 188 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 177

papusar (A. 8.2.66 sa-sajuso rUh")
papusah (A. 8.3.15 khaR-avasdnayor visarjantyah”)

In this case the rules that are of interest to us are A. 6.4.64 and A.
6.4.131. The deletion of the final phoneme d takes place only when the stem
is followed by the suffix beginning with a vowel marked with K. The suffix
KvasU is marked with K and it does begin with a vowel when it undergoes
samprasdarana. On the other hand, the occurrence of samprasdrana for the
suffix KvasU depends on the following case ending. Therefore the con-
ditions for both of the operations are different. And because the conditions
are different, the samprasdrana is not treated as suspended with respect to
the deletion of the phoneme 4. In other words, the samprasdrana of KvasU
allows for the deletion of the phoneme 4, otherwise the correct result would
not be possible.

Kiparsky in one of his articles (1982)”* claims that the suffix vatl in the
word asiddhavat is used in the same way as in other places in the A., for
example in the rule A. 1.1.56 sthdnivad Gdeso ‘naL-vidhau — ‘the substitute
is to be treated like the substituend except for an operation depending on
the original phoneme’. He uses this as an argument to support the view that
asiddha equals asiddhavat and says that in the case of asiddha Panini
simply did not have to use the suffix vatI in the rule as it was obvious. In
other words, Kiparsky agrees with the grammatical tradition, which does
not see a difference between both terms and explains them both as meaning
‘as if suspended/has not taken effect’. I agree with Kiparsky that Panini
could use the suffix vatl in the same way in the rule A. 6.4.22 as in A.
1.1.56. In my opinion, however, it does not prove that the terms asiddha and
asiddhavat signify the same thing. On the contrary, it can prove quite the
opposite. When we look at the rule A. 1.1.56, we can see that the
substitution in question did take place, i.e. the substitute (ddesa) has been

21

A. 8.2.66 sa-sajuso rUh (‘The substitute rU comes in place of [a pada-final phoneme]
s and also in the expression sajus ‘with”).
A. 8.3.15 khaR-avasdnayor vosarjaniyah (‘The visarjaniya comes in place of [the pada-
final phoneme r] before voiceless consonants (khaR) or at pausa’).
* KIPARSKY 1982:106.

--- PAGE 189 ---
178 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

applied; and only for the sake of some operations do we still treat the
substitute as if it were the substituend. In the case of asiddhavat we see the
same thing; the operation has taken place but we consider it suspended. We
treat it as if it has not taken place. The sitra has applied, the operation has
been performed but the result is treated as if it has not taken place. But the
important thing is that it has actually taken place. In the case of asiddha,
though, the operation has not taken place at all!

Let us analyse yet another example. This is the derivation of 2nd sg.
impv. of the verb sas — to instruct.

Sas + si hi (A. 3.4.87 ser hy-aPiTi ca”)

(Sas — $a) + hi (A. 6.4.35 s@ hau)

Sa+hi

SG + (hi > dhi) (A. 6.4.101 hu-jhaLbhyo her dhih?®)
Sadhi

What is of interest to us in this example are the stages of derivation
needed to produce sas + hi. To derive a proper form we need to substitute
both the stem sas with the form Sa and the ending hi with the ending dhi. In
this case the substitution sds — sa eliminates the context for the hi > dhi
substitution because dhi can come in place of hi only when the preceding
stem ends in the phoneme denoted by the term jhaL and the phoneme s is
included in it. When the stem has been substituted by the form sa, the con-
ditions for the dhi-substitution are no longer met. If, however, the ending
substitution takes place first, the stem substitution cannot take place
because it depends on the following suffix hi. That is why the rule A.
6.4.35, prescribing the stem substitution, is treated as suspended with
respect to the suffix substitution prescribed by the rule A. 6.4.101.

* A. 3.4.87 ser hy-aP-iC ca (‘[The suffix] hi without the marker P comes in place of siP

[substitutes of the -member LOT introduced after a verbal stem]’).

A. 6.4.35 sa hau (‘[The substitute] s@ [comes in place of the verbal stem sas (‘to

instruct’)] before [the suffix] h7).

6 A. 64.101 hu-jhaLbhyo her dhih (‘[The substitute] dhi comes in place of [the suffix] hi
[introduced after the verbal stem] hu (‘to sacrifice’) or those [verbal stems] ending in
[the phoneme denoted by] jhaL (non-nasal consonants)’).

--- PAGE 190 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 179

The question might be asked as to why the order of the rules cannot be
reversed. Why cannot the dhi substitution take place first and be treated as
suspended and then the s@ substitution? The explanation is provided by the
tule A. 1.1.56 sthdnivad Gdeso ’naL-vidhau — the substitute is treated as the
substitutend except when the rule depending on the original phoneme is to
be performed. Let us consider in the above example whether this rule can
apply here and if so, to what effect. The ending dhi comes in place of the
ending hi but it can still be treated as having the /i form according to A.
1.1.56 (sthdnivad-bhava rule). Therefore, there are the conditions for the
application of A. 6.4.35 and sa can substitute sas. However, the reverse is
not possible. The substitute s@ cannot be treated as the substituend sas for
the sake of the rule A. 6.4.101 because this very rule, i.e. the hi > dhi sub-
stitution, is merely the substitution of single sounds; it is the aL-vidhi.
Therefore, because the sa@ substitution can apply whether the ending sub-
stitution has taken place or not, it takes precedence and applies first. Thus it
has to be considered suspended. If the siitra A. 6.4.35 were not treated as if
suspended, the result would be this:

Sas + si— hi (A. 3.4.87)
(Sas — §@) + hi (A. 6.4.35)
“$a + hi

*§ahi

The reason why we can refer to the sthdnivad-bhdva in this case is that
it has not been prohibited. In the varttika 3 on the siitra A. 11.58 na
padanta-dvirvacana-vare-ya-lopa-svara-savarndnusvara-dirgha-jaS-caR-
vidhisu (‘[The substitute of a vowel] is not [treated like the substituend]
with respect to the operations regarding a pada final, reduplication, the
deletion before [the suffix] varaC, the deletion of [the phoneme] y, accent,
homogenous phonemes, the anusvdra replacement, the long vowel re-
placement, the replacement by jaS (voiced unaspirated stops) and the re-
placement by caR (unvoiced unaspirated stops)’) we read piirvatrasiddhe
ca (And also in the pirvatrasiddha [section]’). Had the varttika read simply
asiddhe, we could make use of it also in the abhiya section. However, it

--- PAGE 191 ---
180 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

does not say so and in my opinion it implies that Panini treated these two
sections, that is the Tripddi and the abhiya sections, differently.

As mentioned above, Patajijali does not use the term asiddhavat but
always asiddha. Now, later commentators only, on the other hand, use the
term asiddhavat. 1 am of the opinion that there is no reason to believe that
Patajfijali also understood the term asiddha as asiddhavat. Rather, he read
the word asiddha in all three rules given above. Does it create any problems
in the derivation of the form sadhi then? It most certainly does. The rules
A. 6.4.35 and A. 6.4.101 are mutually exclusive. The application of one
eliminates the environment of the other. If one of the rules is asiddha, it has
not taken effect and therefore after the application of the other, it cannot be
applied. What we need, however, in the example given is both rules, to be
able to derive the correct form. Asiddhavat lets us do so because the first
tule applicable — whichever it is — is considered only ‘as if it has not taken
effect’, i.e. it has but the derivational process continues as if it has not.

The forms dgahi (‘come!’, 2nd impv. sg.) and jahi (‘kill!, 2nd impv. sg.)
are also very good examples:

dgam + LOT = siP han + LOT = siP
Ggam + SaP + si han + SaP + si

dgam +0 + si han + 0+ si

(A. 2.4.72 adi-prabhrtibhyah SaPah”’) (A. 2.4.72)

agam + si — hi han + si > hi

(A. 3.4.87 ser hy-aPiTi ca”) (A. 3.4.87)

agam + hi han + hi

aga (m > 0) + hi han > ja + hi

(A. 6.4.37 anudattopadeS$a-vanati- (A. 6.4.36 hanter jah”)

7 A. 2.4.72 adi-prabhrtibhyah SaPah ([The marker] SaP introduced after [the verbal
stems] ad ‘eat’ etc. [is deleted]’).

* A. 3.4.87 ser hy-aP-iC ca (‘[The suffix] hi without the marker P comes in place of siP
[substitutes of the -member LOT introduced after a verbal stem]’).

» A. 6.4.36 hanter jah (‘[The morpheme] ja comes in place of [the verbal arga] han
‘kill’ [before the suffix hi]’).

--- PAGE 192 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 181
tanoty-Gdindm anundsika-lopo jhaLi K-NiTi®)

agahi jahi

If the siitras A. 6.4.36 and A. 6.4.37 were not treated as if suspended,
the result would be as follows:

dgam + LOT = siP han + LOT = siP
dagam + SaP + si han + SaP + si
dgam +0 + si han + 0+ si
(A. 2.4.72) (A. 2.4.72)
agam + si — hi han + si hi
(A. 3.4.87) (A. 3.4.87)
agam + hi han + hi

aga (m > 0) + hi han > ja + hi
(A. 6.4.37) (A. 6.4.36)
*Gga (hi > 0) a (hi > 0)
(A. 6.4.105 aTo heh*) (A. 6.4.105)
*aga a

The rule A. 6.4.105 aTo heh (the suffix hi is deleted after the stem
ending in the phoneme a), could apply because after the deletion and the
substitution of the stem respectively, both of the stems end in the phoneme
a. However, when the preceding operation, namely the deletion of the nasal
m of dgam is treated as if suspended, the rule A. 6.4.105 has no scope of
application. The stem is considered to be ending in a consonant, therefore
the conditions for the hi-deletion are not met and the correct form dgahi is
derived.

* A. 6.4.37 anudattopadesa-vanati-tanoty-adinam anunasika-lopo jhaLi K-NiTi (‘A nasal

stop of [the ariga of verbal stems] which are low-pitched when first introduced
(upadesa), van ‘to like’ etc. and tan ‘to extend’ etc. is deleted before [the suffixes
beginning with] non-nasal consonants (jhaL) marked with K or N’).

A. 64.105 aTo heh (‘[The suffix] hi occurring after [a verbal asiga ending in the
phoneme] a [is deleted]’).

--- PAGE 193 ---
182 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

A similar issue is found in the derivation of the form jahi. When the
ending si is substituted by hi, the siitra A. 6.4.36 applies which prescribes
the substitution of the stem han by ja. At this point A. 6.4.105 could apply
deleting the ending /i because it appears after the stem ending in the
phoneme a. This is not desired. However, the substitution han — ja is con-
sidered suspended and therefore the preceding verbal stem still ends in a
consonants. The conditions for the application of A. 6.4.105 are not met.
Thus we can derive the correct form jahi.

The rules prescribing the deletion of the phoneme m and the ja-
substitution are treated as suspended so that the rule conditioned by those
substitutions, namely A. 6.4.105, does not take place.

Examples in the Parvatrasiddha Section

Let us compare the above examples to what happens with the rules within
the Tripddi section. The example chosen is paktavya ‘ought to be cooked’
and the derivation is as follows:

pac + tavyaT
pa(c—k) (A. 8.2.30 coh kuh*) + tavya

In stage one of this derivation two rules can be applied: A. 8.2.30,
prescribing the substitution c + k before a non-nasal stop, and A. 8.4.40
stoh Scund scuh,* prescribing the substitution tf > c when in contact with a
palatal stop. Thanks to the sdtra A. 8.2.1 and the asiddha principle, the only
order acceptable is the one shown: first we apply the rule A. 8.2.30 and
then the environment for the application of A. 8.4.40 disappears. Thus, we
arrive at the correct form paktavya. However, if we accept that the term
asiddha should be interpreted as asiddhavat, we could reverse the order

* A. 8.2.30 cOh kUh (‘A velar stop (kU) comes in place of a palatal stop (cU) [at the end
of a pada or before a non-nasal consonant]’).

A. 8.4.40 s-tOh §-cUnda §-cUh (‘A palatal sibilant § and palatal stops (cU) come in place
of a dental sibilant s and dental stops respectively when those are in contact with
them’).

--- PAGE 194 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 183

because asiddhavat does not require the rules to apply in order of their
appearance in the treatise. We could, therefore, apply the rule A. 8.4.40 first
and treat it ‘as if it had not taken effect’ with respect to A. 8.2.30.
Afterwards, the rule A. 8.2.30 would apply, but as A. 8.4.40 is only ‘as if not
having taken effect’ in reality it has, which means that we get both of the
substitutions c > k and tf > c resulting in the incorrect form *paccavya.

The examples given above show that there is a difference in the way the
tules are applied in both of the sections. In the Tripddi (A. 8.2.1-8.4.68)
section the rules must be applied in order (there are very few exceptions to
this and they are carefully thought out by Panini) unlike the asiddhavat
section (A. 6.4.22-6.4.175) where this is certainly not the case.

It is true that in some cases within the Tripddi section it does not make
much difference whether we interpret the term asiddha as ‘not having taken
effect’ or ‘as if not having taken effect’; for example, when we derive the
form rdjabhis from rdjan + bhis. The phoneme n is deleted by the rule A.
8.2.7 na-lopah pratipadikantasya.™ After the deletion has been made, the
ending bhis can be substituted by the ending ais because the preceding stem
ends in the phoneme a. This substitution takes place on the basis of the rule
A. 7.1.9 aTo bhisa ais.*° This does not happen, however, because the rule de-
leting the final phoneme n belongs to the Tripdd7 section. Therefore, with
respect to the rule in the seventh chapter it is suspended. In such a way, the
deletion of the final phoneme constitutes the final stage of the derivation. In
this case the interpretation ‘as if suspended’ would still yield the correct
result. However, it is not always the case as I have shown previously.

In my opinion there is also one argument showing that asiddha is not
equivalent to asiddhavat. Since rules in the Tripddi apply only in order of
appearance, this forces Panini to arrange the rules in this section in a parti-
cular manner. A very good example is the derivation of the form amund
(Instr. Sg. m./n. of the pronoun adas ‘that one’). The inflectional process is
as follows:

A. 8.2.7 na-lopah pratipadikantasya (‘There is the deletion of the final phoneme n of a

nominal stem’).
A. 7.1.9 aTo bhisa ais (‘[The ending] ais comes in place of [the ending] bhis after [the
nominal stem] ending in [the phoneme] @’).

35

--- PAGE 195 ---
184 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

adas + Ta

ada (s > a)+Ta (A. 7.2.102 tyad-adinam ah*°)

ad(a+a—a)+Ta (A. 6.1.97 aTo gune*’)

a (da — mu) + Ta (A. 8.2.80 adaso ser dad u do mah**
with A. 8.2.3 na mu ne*)

amu +(aN > na) (A. 7.3.120 @No nastriyam*)

amuna

The first stage is the addition of the instrumental singular suffix Ta to
the pronominal stem adas.

The next stage is the substitution of the final s by the phoneme a
according to the rule A. 7.2.102. Then the vowel a in a stem is substituted
by the vowel a which comes as a result of the s — a substitution. In other
words: a + a — a. This process is prescribed by the rule A. 6.1.97. Thus we
achieve the stem ada followed by the suffix Ta. What results is the stem
ada to which the instrumental suffix should be added. This is the moment
when the siitra A. 8.2.80 from the Tripddi section applies, prescribing the
substitution da — mu.

The process of derivation mentioned above allows the substitution of
the suffix Ta by the suffix na on the basis of the rule A. 7.3.120 aNo
nastriyam. The rule prescribes the substitution of the instrumental suffixes

%© A. 7.2.102 tyad-adinam ah (‘[The phoneme] a comes in place of [the final phoneme of]

the pronominal stem tyad (‘that’) etc.’).

A. 6.1.97 aTo gune (‘[A single substitute comprising of the second of two continuous
phonemes comes in place of a non-pada final phoneme] a and a guna vowel which
follows it’).

A. 8.2.80 adaso ‘ser dad u do mah (‘[The phoneme] u comes in place of [the phoneme
occurring] after [the phoneme] d of [the pronominal stem] adas ‘that’ when it does not
end in [the phoneme] s, and [the phoneme] m comes in place of [the phoneme] @).

A. 8.2.3 na nu ne (‘[The morpheme] mu is not considered suspended (asiddha) with
respect to [the instrumental singular ending] na’).

A. 7.3120 aNo ndastriyam (‘[The morpheme] na comes in place of [the instrumental
singular ending] aN [introduced after GHI stems] except for feminine stems’).

40

--- PAGE 196 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 185

when the stem is termed ghi (so-called when it ends in i or u [A. 1.4.7]"),
and when it is not feminine. Looking at our example, we can see that after
the rule A. 8.2.80 has applied, and the phonemes da have been substituted
by the phonemes mu, we arrive at the stem ending in the vowel u. The con-
ditions for the rule A. 7.3.120 and the substitution of the instrumental
singular suffix are met. However, the rule A. 8.2.80 is placed in the
piirvatrasiddha section and as such is suspended/has not taken effect with
respect to the rule A. 7.3.120. For the rule in the seventh chapter, the stem is
still ada and as such does not meet the requirements of the operation. The
problem was solved by Panini by creating the negative sdtra A. 8.2.3 na mu
ne which states that the substitution prescribed by the rule A. 8.2.80 is not
suspended/has taken effect when the instrumental suffix is to be added. It is
absolutely vital because otherwise the construction of a correct form
amund would be impossible.

If we accept the interpretation asiddhavat instead of asiddha, it would
make no difference whether the negative rule A. 8.2.3 na mu ne is placed
before or after A. 8.2.80 adaso ser dad u do mah because the order of their
application would not be determined by the order of their appearance in the
treatise. In fact, it would probably be placed after A. 8.2.80 in the A. as this
is the usual order Panini employs; he puts negative rules after, rather than
before, those that prescribe the operations to be negated.

The other example to be quoted here is the past participle of the verb /ih
(‘to lick’) — lidha (‘licked’).

lih + ta
li (h > dh) (A. 8.2.31 ho dhah) + ta
lidh + (t+ dh) (A. 8.2.40 jhaSas ta-thor dho dhah*) a

4A. 14.7 ghy asakhi (‘The technical term] ghi denotes the remaining [stems
ending in -i or -w which are not uniquely feminine as well as uniquely feminine stems
not covered by the technical term nadi] with the exception of sakhi ‘companion”).

® A. 8.2.31 ho dhah (‘[The phoneme] dh comes in place of [the phoneme] h [at the end
of a pada before non-nasal consonants (jhaL)’).

*® A. 8.2.40 jhaSas ta-thor dho dhah (‘[The phoneme] dh comes in place of [the
phoneme] ¢ or th [appearing] after voiced aspirated stops (jhaS) excluding [the
phoneme dh of the verbal root] dha (‘to bear, support’)’).

--- PAGE 197 ---
186 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley

lidh + (dh — dh) (A. 8.4.41 s-tUnd s-tUh™) a

li (dh > 0) (A. 8.3.13 dho dhe lopah*) + dha

1 (i 0) (A. 6.3.111 dh-ra-lope parvasya dirgho 'Nah**) + dha
lidha

The rule of importance is A. 8.3.13 dho dhe lopah prescribing the de-
letion of the phoneme dh appearing before the phoneme dh. The problem is
that the rule A. 8.4.41 s-1Und s-tUh, prescribing the substitution dh — dh,
belongs to the fourth subchapter of the eighth chapter and is therefore
treated as nonexistent for A. 8.3.13. This sdtra would be superfluous if the
order did not matter in the Tripddi section as it would have no scope of
application. The formulation of the rule A. 8.3.13, namely mentioning the
phoneme dh twice, shows that in this particular case the sdtra A. 8.4.41 is
not asiddha with respect to A. 8.3.13. If the order of the rules did not matter
in the Tripddi section, Panini would not have had to use the phoneme dh
twice; once would be enough. He is forced to do that though, as the rule
‘creating’ the phoneme dh in question is placed later in the treatise. It in-
directly proves, in my opinion, that the term asiddha cannot be understood
as asiddhavat because in the asiddhavat section the order of the rules makes
no difference whatsoever.

Type of Operations

One more argument to be advanced is that the types of operations described
in both the pirvatrdsiddha (A. 8.2.1-8.4.68) and asiddhavat (A. 6.4.22-
6.4.175) sections are different. First of all it is important to notice that they

“A. 8.4.41 s-tUnd s-tUh (‘The retroflex sibilant s and retroflex stops (tU) [come in place
of dental sibilant s and dental stops (tU) respectively] when those are in contact with
them’).

* A. 8.3.13 dho dhe lopah (‘[The phoneme] dha [appearing] before [another phoneme]
dha is deleted’).

“A. 6.3.111 dh-ralope pirvasya dirgho ’Nah (‘A long vowel comes in place of a vowel
denoted by aN (i.e. a, i, «) before a deleted [substitute] of [phonemes] dh or r when it
immediately preceds it’).

--- PAGE 198 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 187

deal with different types of stems. Their domains of application are dif-
ferent. The piirvatrdsiddha rules apply to the stem termed pada by Panini
defined as suP-tiN-antam padam (A. 1.4.14 — that which ends in nominal or
verbal endings). It is a general samjfd rule meaning that a pada is a fully
inflected word. However, this very term can apply also to some stems, such
as the one ending in the phoneme n before the suffix Kya (A. 1.4.15 nah
Kye) or an item before the suffix marked with S (A. 1.4.16 SiTi ca), or
finally a nominal stem before the case endings excluding the strong ones
(ie. Nom. and Acc. Sg. and Du. and Nom. Pl. A. 14.17 sV-ddisv
asarvanadmasthane).

The asiddhavat section (A. 6.4.22-6.4.175) deals with other types of
stems. In this section, the rules apply when the stem is termed aviga and, in
the latter part of the same section (A. 6.4.129 onwards), they also apply
when this term is named bha. The term ariga is quite wide and it describes
that part of a stem that is before a suffix (A. 1.4.13 yasmdt pratyaya-vidhis
tad-ddi pratyaye ’hgam). For example, when we derive the form bhavati
starting from bhi + a + ti, first the root bhi is termed anga with respect to
the suffix a, and then the form bhava is so termed with respect to the suffix
ti. The sitra A. 6.4.129 bhasya introduces another domain, the domain of
the stem termed bha. It is defined by Panini as y-aCi bham (A. 1.4.18 — it is
an element before the suffix beginning with a vowel or the semivowel y).
The term bha is also extended to such stems which end in the phoneme ¢ or
s before a suffix having the same meaning as the suffix matUP, i.e. posses-
sive, (A. 1.4.19 ta-sau matV-arthe) and in the Vedic language onto the stems
grouped in the gana ayasmayddi (‘made of metal etc.) before any suffix.

The difference lies also in the operations those two sections prescribe. In
the piirvatrasiddha section (A. 8.2.1-8.4.68), in most of the cases the siitras
describe phonological operations, substitution, making the phonemes
retroflex and accented. Furthermore, the Tripddi section contains rules in
which Panini describes pronunciation of certain phonemes depending on
the meaning of an expression. The asiddhavat section on the other hand de-
scribes the changes in presuffixal stems, deletion of phonemes, long sub-
stitutions, operations on infixes and the like.

--- PAGE 199 ---
188 Malgorzata Sulich-Cowley
Conclusion

In conclusion, I have argued that both asiddha and asiddhavat refer to two
slightly different ways of ordering the application of sitras. There are
major differences between the two sections: A. 6.4.22-6.4.175 and A. 8.2.1-
8.4.68. In the former the siitras are applied irrespective of their position in
the section, the order of their application is determined by other factors,
whereas in the latter the sdtras apply in order of the appearance in the A.
Moreover, in the dbhiya section (A. 6.4.22-6.4.175) the suspension applies
only when two applicable rules share the same conditions for operation.
This is not the case in the Tripddi section where such a restriction is not im-
posed.

One more argument I have advanced in favour of my hypothesis is the
application of the siitra A. 11.56 sthanivad ddego ’naL-vidhau, which can
apply for the rules in the dbhiya section but is forbidden in the
pirvatrasiddha section. In the Tripddi it is not allowed to treat the substitute
like the substituend as it would obviously defeat the purpose of the asiddha
principle. The fact that this is not the case in the asiddhavat section proves,
in my opinion, that these two terms: asiddha and asiddhavat refer to two
separate principles.

The possibility, which I find worth considering, is to determine whether
actually in both cases it is the rule that is suspended. I would be inclined to
think that in the case of asiddhavat (A. 6.4.22-6.4.175) it is actually the
operation that is suspended after the rule has been applied. In such a way
the operation is performed and it is the result of this operation that becomes
suspended. After all the other necessary siitras have been applied, we can
see the result of the suspended rule there. In the case of asiddha (A. 8.2.1-
8.4.68), however, it is the rule itself that is under suspension, which means
that it is not used after all, unless the conditions for it to apply can still be
met at a later stage of the derivation. This solution requires further in-
vestigation.

--- PAGE 200 ---
Asiddha vs asiddhavat 189

Abbreviations and Bibliography

A.

Mbh.

MPV

CARDONA 1997(a)

CARDONA 1997(b)

KIPARSKY 1982

= Panini: Astadhyayit

(1) Stiga Chandra Vasu: The Astadhyayi of Panini, edited
and translated into English, 2 vols., Motilal Banarsidass,
Delhi 1997 [lst edition: The Panini Office, Allahabad
1891].

(2) Sumitra Mangesh Katre: The Astadhyayi of Panini in
Roman transliteration, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi 2003 [1st
edition: University of Texas Press, Austin 1987].

= Patajijali: Vyakarana-Mahabhasyam, ed. by E
Kielhorn, 3 vols., BORI, Pune 1972 (3rd edition).

= Mahabhdsya-pradipa-vyakhyanani, ed. By
M.S. Narasihmacharya, 10  vols., Institut Frangais
d'Indologie, Pondicherry, 1983.

= Cardona, George; Panini —A Survey of
Research, Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Pvt. Ltd., Delhi
1997.

= Cardona, George; Panini — His Work and Its
Traditions, vol. 1, ,,Background and Introduction”, Motilal
Banrsidass, Publishers Pvt. Ltd., Delhi 1997.

= Kiparsky, Paul; Some Theoretical Problems in
Paninis Grammar, BORI, 1982.

--- PAGE 201 ---


--- PAGE 202 ---
Eight

Continuity and Change
in Chdndogya Upanisad 6.1-4

Paolo Visigalli

Eavesdropping might well be despised as a reproachful practice but its
allure can generally be opposed only with strong resolve. The more so
when we are deftly cajoled into indulging in it and our conciliatory
disposition finds sanction in a sacred text.

What is characteristic of the Upanisads as a whole, and of Chandogya
Upanisad (ChU) 6 in particular, is that we are offered the chance, as silent
spectators, to intrude into a secluded circle and listen to dialogues whose
nature is most secretive. Uddalaka and Svetaketu, father and son, are
ensconced in a highly defined environment whose narrow spatial boun-
daries are often conjured up by the recurrent use of strong deictic words.’
They sit in the shadow under a specific nyagrodha, i.e. a banyan tree,
whose actual roots and branches, and one fruit, are resorted to by
Uddalaka, who uses them as stepping-stones, to illustrate the successive

'  Cf., for instance, the frequent use of the deictic asya; e.g. ChU.6.11.1-2; 12.1. The
emphasis on deixis is considered as a remainder of the ‘oral nature’ of the Upanisads;
ef. in this regard OLIVELLE (1996: xxxii).

--- PAGE 203 ---
192 Paolo Visigalli

steps of his teaching and to rub his lesson more effectively into his pupil’s
mind.

This dialogic, almost intimate, scene is also enhanced by its
grammatically heteroclite forms and vernacular formations; phenomena
that have induced some distinguished scholars to argue that in ChU.6 we
get glimpses of a late Vedic colloquial register.”

It is in these sequestered and ‘cosy’ surroundings and through the
medium of a language open to infiltrations of everyday speech that one of
the most famous Upanisadic teachings is being imparted.* Paul Thieme
(1968: 722-23) has pointed out, in passing, the defining import of ChU.6.
Considering it as marking a watershed in the development of Indian

2 HOFFMANN (1975: 370) claims that ChU.6 represents ‘a piece of late Vedic
colloquial language’ (ein Stiick spitvedischer Umgangssprache); this observation has
been taken up by WITZEL (1989: 109): ‘One could, however, study colloquial late
Vedic as comparable to Panini’s bhasd, notably some text portions found in ChU.6.”
The infiltration of elements that tend to be collected under the somewhat vague
heading ‘Volkssprache’ has been noticed at a phonetic, morphological, and syntactical
level. Here are some instances for each group.

Phonetics: A Prakritic phonetic development possibly appears in nibhdlayase
(<nismarayase) (ChU.6.12.2 / 13.2). It was first suggested by TEDESCO (1943: 12-
13); cf. further MAYRHOFER (1963: 482-83), KUIPER (1958: 309), HOFFMANN
(1975: 370), and WITZEL (1989: 110 n. 33). ORTEL (1931) discusses other
Prakritisms.

Morphology: KUIPER (1958: 308) considers jayata, apaharsit (ChU.6.2.1 / 16.1)
as unaugmented preterits that ‘are no doubt to be paralleled with analogous forms of
the epic idiom’. HOFFMANN (1975: 368-70) explains upasidathah (ChU.6.13.1.3) as
‘a popular reconstruction of the imperative in —-/dt, in order to build a separate form
for the 2nd person’; cf. also MORGENROTH (1970: 39). Further, the word
vacadrambhanam (ChU.6.1. 4) has received special attention. DEBRUNNER &
WACKERNAGEL (1957: 72) considers it to be a tatpurusa whose first member is he
instrumental vaca; however, the first member of the compound seems better to be
analysed as a nominative vdcd; according to KUIPER (1957: 155), ‘the substitution of
stems in —a for feminine root nouns is a well-known feature of popular Sanskrit and
Prakrit’; cf. also KUIPER (1958: 306-8) and MAYRHOFER (1976: 180).

Syntax: the future bhavisyati (ChU.6.8.3) expresses a presupposition which is
perceived as certain; cf. HOFFMANN (1975: 371) ‘der wohl umgangssprachliche
potentiale Gebrauch des Futurs’ and KUIPER (1958: 309). For the epic language,
some instances of the future used in this sense are collected by HOLTZMANN (1884:
35). Different and more complicated is the case of apraksyah (ChU.6.1.3); cf. the
discussion in THIEME (1968: 722 n. 1) and HOFFMANN (1975: 370 n. 25).

--- PAGE 204 ---
Continuity and Change 193

thought, he speaks of a ‘significant swerve within the intellectual history’
(bedeutender geistesgeschichtliche Umschwung).* Accepting his con-
clusions, I will build on them in an endeavour to further delineate this land-
mark shift. This will be done through a careful reading of ChU.6.1-4. The
pertinent elements encountered on our path will be tested against the Vedic
backdrop they derive and detach themselves from, in order to put them into
perspective.

§1. To begin with, it is appropriate to summarise Thieme’s view.
According to him, the mental sea change voiced in ChU.6 is concretised in
the new meaning taken on by ddega, the term which Uddalaka uses to
denote his new doctrine. This term maintains the specific meaning,
‘substitution’ (Ersetzung), which it used to have in the previous literature,
but the nature of this substitution changes drastically. While in the earlier
tradition ddesa denoted a substitution operating on the basis of esoteric
affinities, now it comes to mean a substitution operating on the strength of
a logic-based reasoning. This is indicative of a paradigmatic shift: the
former worldview, relying on the belief in magic, is superseded by a
materialistic philosophy of nature whose attitude can roughly be defined as
rational and proto-scientific.°

§2. The setting of ChU.6 is well-known. Having completed his
traditional Vedic instruction, Svetaketu comes back home swell-headed and
arrogant. The son’s pride in his own learning is silenced as his father

4 THIEME (1968: 722).

* KAHRS (1998: 178-83) is sceptical that ddesa means ‘substitution’ in pre-
grammatical literature; instead, he suggests for it the sense of ‘specific instruction,
specification’. However, Kahrs too agrees that the Vedic occurrences are the source of
the later semantic specification of ddesa in the sense of ‘substitution’ as employed in
grammar.

® THIEME (1968: 722): ‘Die an die Wunderkraft iibersinnlicher Wahrheit glaubende
Magie mit ihren esoterischen Identifikationsersetzungen [...] wird abgelést von einer
an die Kraft der Vernunft glaubenden materialistischen Naturphilosophie — der
Vorstufe des Samkhya’; cf. also THIEME (1966: 84-85).

--- PAGE 205 ---
194 Paolo Visigalli

questions whether he had been acquainted with the ddesa, ‘by which one
can learn what has (hitherto) not been heard of (by oneself), can think of
what has (hitherto) not been thought (by oneself), can apprehend what has
(hitherto) not been apprehended (by oneself)’ (ChU.6.1.3: yena asrutam
Srutam bhavaty amatam matam avijitatam vijndtam iti).’ Svetaketu knows
nothing about this unheard-of rule of substitution (adesa) and requests his
father to disclose it to him. Uddalaka agrees and starts to expound his
wisdom systematically.

In the section under discussion, the progression of Uddalaka’s speech
follows a clear path.‘ Firstly, he sketches a cosmogony, showing how, from
the primeval being (sar), the three basic evolutes (tejas, dpas, anna) came
into being, engendered one from the other (ChU.6.2). Then, he moves on to
describe how the three basic evolutes, after being entered by the living self
of the sat, and after acquiring their distinct ‘name and appearance’ (naéma-
rapa), become the three basic substances of the cosmos (ChU.6.3). Lastly,
he shows that worldly phenomena, both at the macrocosmic (ChU.6.3.4-
4.7a, adhidaivika) and the microcosmic (ChU 6.4.7b-7, adhyatman) level,
are in essence a mixture of the three basic substances.

This sentence, owing to its tempting transparency, has often been understood
imperfectly. What is here foremost at stake, I believe, is not the acquisition of a
rarefied mystical knowledge; instead, the stress is on how to get the key to the
understanding of the world, with the empirical phenomena in the forefront; this clavis
universalis, which is the unheard-of ddesa taught by Uddalaka, will consist in the
notion that the whole world, at its different levels, is made of the intermingling of the
three basic evolutes (tejas, apas, anna) which emanated from the primeval ‘being’
(sat).

I take ChU.6.3.1 as a later interpolation, as it is widely assumed to be, and do not
include it in my analysis; cf. FALK (1986: 125 n. 79), HANEFELD (1976: 146). In
this regard, it is worth stressing that ChU.6 undoubtedly has a complex textual history,
being a cobbled-on ensemble of bits of disparate origin. RENOU (1955: 91) identifies
at least two sections on the grounds of the repetition of vijajfiav iti (ChU.6.7 / 16);
HANEFELD (1976: 142) argues that, from a ‘mere formal standpoint’, this text is
made of two major sections (ChU.6.1-7 / 8-16) but an analysis of its contents shows a
much more complex situation (Ibid. 168). Against Hanefeld’s ideas and according to
the traditional interpretation, I take 1-7 as expounding a rather organic teaching.

° Cf. below §7.

--- PAGE 206 ---
Continuity and Change 195
§3. ChU.6.2.1: sad eva somyedam agra asid ekam evadvitiyam [...] |

Nothing but being, my son, was here in the beginning — one only,
without a second.

The opening of Uddalaka’s cosmogony is indebted to the cosmogonic
narratives of the Brahmanas. Clear indicators of this dependence are the
use of the imperfect to denote a remote, ‘mythical’ past!’ and the two
adverbs — agre, which, in this context, typically refers to the primeval time
before the creation,'' and idam, which oscillates between the pronominal
(‘this [universe/world]’) and the adverbial (‘here’, i.e. in this world)
meaning.'*

A divergent position is introduced and then immediately refuted:

ChU.6.2.1-2: tad dhaika Ghur asad evedam agra asid ekam eva advitiyam tasmad
asatah saj jayata \| kutas tu khalu somyaivam sydd iti hovaca katham asatah saj
jayeteti sat tv eva somyedam agra asid ekam evadvitiyam ||

An original narrative imperfect has partially been ousted in this function by the later
emergence and diffusion of the perfect. WITZEL (1989: 139-55) shows how the
diffusion and incidence of these two forms can help determine the chronology and
geographical origins of a text; cf. also WITZEL (1987: 392 ff. / 2009: 295-96).
RENOU (1955b: 82 n 2) observes that agre meaning ‘A l’origine’, ‘originated in this
sense in the cosmogonic hymn RV.10.129.3-4, appropriately next to the imperfect
sit.”

® Cf. RENOU (1955b: 81-82) and HAMM (1968-69: 151 n. 10). In post-Brahmana
literature, these three features — imperfect, accompanied by agre and idam — abound
whenever ‘un esquisse de cosmogonie’ (RENOU, 1955b: 81) is being drawn. They
also show a lasting vitality into later Sanskrit literature; see e.g. Manusmrti 1.5, where,
as several commentators have pointed out, there is a clear hint at RV.10.129: dsid
idam tamobhiitam aprajidtam alaksanam | apratarkyam avijfieyam prasuptam iva
sarvatah ‘There was this world pitch-dark, indiscernible, without distinguishing
marks, unthinkable, incomprehensible, in a kind of deep sleep all over’, Tr.
OLIVELLE (2004: 13).

--- PAGE 207 ---
196 Paolo Visigalli

Now with respect to this (point)'* some say: “Nothing but non-being was here in
the beginning — one only, without a second. From that non-being, being was
born”. “But how, son, could that possibly be so?” He said. “How can being be
born from non-being?”. “On the contrary, son, nothing but being was here in the
beginning — one only, without a second”.

§4. | We are in the fortunate position to know the source Uddalaka is
arguing against; it is widely recognised that asatah saj jdyata is a quotation
from Rgveda (RV) 10.72.2-3. An analysis of that source will help us
identify the reasons of Uddalaka’s refutation:

RV.10.72.2c,d-3: devdnam piirviyé yugé dsatah sdd ajayata || 2 devanam yugé
prathamé dsatah sdd ajayata | tad 48a anv ajayanta tdd uttandpadas pari || 3

In the earliest age of the gods the existent was born from the non-existent. In the
first age of the gods the existent was born from the non-existent. After this (tdd)
the quarters of the sky were born: this (1dd)'* was born from her crouching with
her legs spread.

This hymn deals with cosmogony in a way that seems to us rather odd
and inconclusive. Instead of offering a clear grasp of the matter, the poet
churns out different and self-contradictory explanations; he is not aiming at
providing one consistent narrative, just the opposite. The thriving of irre-
concilable viewpoints is intentionally sought after in order to generate the
strong impression that nothing definite can be said of the ‘fernstes
Morgengrauen des Weltleben’ (‘the distant daybreak of cosmic life’).'°
Modern readers are particularly puzzled by the inconsistency of the
accounts on the origin of sdf.'° It is said to have been born from dsat (2d,

8 HAMM (1968-69: 151 n. 11) is wrong when he states that ‘fad surely refers back to
idam in the previous sentence’. Here tad is used adverbially, as made explicit in my
translation; similarly, THIEME (1966), HANEFELD (1976: 119), and OLIVELLE
(1996: 149).

4 The two /dd refer back to sdt in the previous line; cf. GELDNER (1951: 251).

© OLDENBERG (1919: 53); similarly, GELDNER (1951: 250) and O? FLAHERTY
(1981: 37-38); cf. further ELIZARENKOVA’s (1995: 142) pertinent remarks on
another Rgvedic cosmogony (RV.10.129).

‘© Cf. for instance OLDENBERG’s (1909-12: 275) uncertainty on this score.

--- PAGE 208 ---
Continuity and Change 197

3b), and then, in the very next hemistich (3d), this primordial non-existent
is vividly rendered with the image of uttdndpad ‘one whose legs are
spread’,'’ depicting a woman in childbearing. The explanation we can give
of this seeming contradiction may shed some light on Uddalaka’s rejection
of this Vedic cosmogony. It may be suggested that the difference in
meaning that this pair of terms (sat/asat) show in the two different contexts
(RV.10.72.2-3 / ChU.6.2.1-2) accounts for Uddalaka’s blunt refusal (he
does not feel bound to give any explanation for his dismissal of asat in
favour of sat: for him, it seems to be almost a matter of course'’).

In ChU.6, both sat and asat have a strong ontological status — therefore
my translation with ‘being’ and ‘non-being’. Indeed, sat is a highly refined
abstract notion; nothing can be predicated of it except that ‘it was’ (dsit)
and that it was ‘one only’ (ekam eva);'? ‘non-being’ follows suit. In this
regard, it has been noticed that the passage under discussion is the only
passage in Vedic literature in which ‘asat may be interpreted, with a fair
degree of certainty, as 10 mé 6n’, i.e. as the non-being in a fundamental
sense.” Arguably, the status the two words have in RV.10.72.2-3 is rather
different, and this difference is what allows the poet-seers to equate dsat
and the figure of utténdpad without incurring in a logical-philosophical
contradiction. One can argue that, in the Vedic hymn, the adjectival value

Following OLDENBERG (1909-12: 275), most translators take witandpad as standing
for dsat of the preceding line; cf. HILLEBRANDT (1913: 129), BROWN (1965: 29),
GELDNER (1951: 251), HOCK (2007: 72 n. 1). The sense of uttdndpad has been
much discussed; for a survey of opinions, see O’ FLAHERTY (1981: 38).
OLDENBERG (loc. cit.) draws attention to the similar expression uttdndhasta ‘whose
hands are outstretched’, an expression which has a counterpart in Avestan; see MELI
(1996: 5 n. 1). KRAMRISCH (1956) reproduces some iconographic examples of
uttandpad.

‘8 1 do not think one can subscribe to VAN BUITENEN’s (1957: 104) opinion that
‘Uddalaka, while doing away with asat, is quite aware of his originality as his
justification shows’. On the contrary, the teacher is so much aware of the self-evident
nature of the truth he has just expounded that, expecting it to be a truism also for
Svetaketu, gives no justification whatsoever. This point is aptly evidenced in
EDGERTON ’s (1965: 171) translation: ‘But how — surely you must see — could it be
so, my dear?’.

‘© Cf. THIEME’s (1966: 45) remarks and OLDENBERG?’s succinct yet insightful
observations (1919: 52).

20 ORTEL (1938: 321).

--- PAGE 209 ---
198 Paolo Visigalli

of sdt and dsat (I therefore translated them with ‘existent’ and ‘non-
existent’) is still at the forefront, whereas in ChU.6 they have acquired a
substantive force, becoming full-fledged abstract nouns.”

Further, one could say that the weak ontological status of sdt and dsat in
the Vedic hymn is due first and foremost to a limitation inherent in the
Vedic conceptual background itself: no rarefied creatio ex nihilo is con-
ceivable in Vedic cosmogony, the underlying paradigm of the creation of
the world being human (and animal) birth, as is graphically exemplified in
the figure of uttdéndpad. As Geldner briefly points out, ‘jan- is the oldest
expression to denote “to create”. The image of birth will be always
maintained with respect to cosmogony.”’” The whole range of verbs em-
ployed in a cosmogonic context, as is illustrated by Oldenberg,”* make
clear that the creation (no matter whether occasioned by a personal god, as
Prajapati, or an abstract Ursubstanz) is viewed as the passage of a pre-
existing substance into another state, a passage in the course of which,
however, there occurs no change affecting the substantial identity between
the cause and its product. To use the much later and colder scholastic
terminology, we can say that there is no substantial diversity between the
material cause (upddanakarana) and its product (karya).™

§5. Bearing in mind the newer and ontologically ‘strong’ meanings of
sat and asat, Uddalaka could not but reject the Vedic position as blatantly
untenable. Then, Uddalaka goes on describing the next step of the cosmo-
gonic process:

21 BRERETON (1999: 250 n. 11) too emphasises the difference between sat and asat in
the Vedic hymns and in ChU.6; commenting on their adjectival force in RV.10.129 he
argues that ‘by the time of Chdndogya, the religious and literary contexts had changed
and these terms had begun to develop a technical and abstract meaning’. Cf. further
VAN BUITENEN (1957: 104) ‘The habit of translating this sat itself as “Being”,
already in RV.10.129 is at best an error of anachronism’.

2 GELDNER (1951: 251).

28 OLDENBERG (1919: 167-74).

4 Cf. ORTEL (1933: 358-60).

--- PAGE 210 ---
Continuity and Change 199

ChU.6.2.3-4: tad aiksata bahu syam prajdyeteti | tat tejo ’srjata | tat teja aiksata |
bahu syam prajdyeyeti | tad apo ’srjata [...] || t@ dpa aiksanta — bahvyah syama
prajdyemahiti | ta annam asrjanta [...] |

And it (sar) thought to itself: “Let me become many. Let me propagate myself.” It
emitted heat. The heat thought to itself: “Let me become many. Let me propagate
myself.” It emitted water [...]. The water thought to itself: “Let me become many.
Let me propagate myself.” It emitted food [...]. (Tr. Olivelle).

It is at this stage that a most significant element in Indian cosmogonic
narratives makes its somewhat concealed appearance: kdma ‘desire’; it is
its stealthy entrance on stage that perturbs the equilibrium and triggers off
the process of creation. In this passage the agency of ‘desire’ may not
appear as clearly as elsewhere, owing to the seeming (perhaps only for us)
lack of ‘emotional involvement’ that a neutral verb such as aiksata seems
to convey.” Nevertheless, the fact that the substances, in turn, express their
wishes (in the optative), seems to be reason enough to assume ‘desire’ as
the actual if implicit cause of their resolve. A comparison with the cosmo-
gonic narratives of the Brahmanas will bring out the peculiar traits of the
cosmogony narrated in ChU.6 and suggests an explanation for the low-
profile role ‘desire’ seems to have in it.

Stripped to the bone, Brahmana cosmogonies follow a simple under-
lying pattern: the primeval entity, Prajapati, the generator of all creatures,
is overcome by the desire of emitting offspring; in order to do so, he heats
himself up by means of tapas. Typically, the texts read: ‘Prajapati con-
ceived the desire “may I emit offspring” [thus] he heated up himself with
tapas’ (prajapatir akamayata praja srjeyeti sa tapo ’tapyata).”> It is clear
25 The sense of aiksata here is not just ‘to see’ but ‘to see with one’s mind’s eyes’, ‘to
think’; cf. THIEME (1966: 46) ‘Da nahm das Seiende wahr’; EDGERTON (1965:
171) ‘It considered’; HAMM (1968-69: 151) ‘Das betrachtete bei sich’. FALK (1986:
28-29) suggests that expressions that seem to appear interchangeably in cosmogonic
sections such as so ’manyata and so ’kamayata have the very same meaning. We
might be tempted to add aiksata to the group of synonyms and put our text on a par
with the rest. Only an extensive exploration and comparison of the occurrences of
these verbs would probably settle the question.

28 See the references in GELDNER (1951: 360), ad RV.10.129.4. For tapas in
cosmogony cf. KALBER (1976: 371-76). Cf. Much Ado about Nothing (IV.1.39): ‘She
knows the hear of a luxurious bed’.

--- PAGE 211 ---
200 Paolo Visigalli

that in ChU.6, though desire (yet in a somehow subdued manner) and the
cosmogonic verb par exellence (Vsrj)” are present, neither Prajapati nor
tapas are mentioned (unless we want to adopt the unlikely view of con-
sidering it as indirectly referred to, though in a different cosmogonic
function, under the disguise of tejas, the first product of sat). The very first
stage in the cosmogony of ChU.6 can be summarised as follows: compelled
by desire, the primeval being (sat) emits the first evolute (tejas). Because of
the absence of a markedly gendered masculine Prajapati the cosmogony
appears as a ‘desexualised’ and ‘mechanical’ process which merely
involves substances. Passivity and ‘the least possible amount of physical
action’ have been identified as the defining traits of cosmogonic narratives
as they appear in the Upanisads, in sharp contrast to the highly active role
played by Prajapati in the Brahmanas.”* As I will show later in detail, the
general impression of ‘automatism’ that characterises this cosmogonic nar-
rative is to be understood in relation with the new doctrine expounded by
Uddalaka.

27 As pointed out by OLDENBERG (1919: 168-71), Vsqj ‘to release from oneself’ (‘aus
sich entlassen’) is used in cosmogonic narratives together with nir-V ma, ‘to measure
off from something (a material), (therefore to fashion, to produce).’ We may add to
these verbs also nir-¥ taks; cf. ORTEL (1933: 359 / 1938: 320). DELBRUCK (1888:
457) perceptively defines the nuance conveyed by the upasarga nir: it indicates that
‘the product is already present in the material from which it will be produced’ (‘das
Kunstwerk steckt in dem Stoff, aus dem es herausgebracht wird’). Though Delbriick’s
observation is confined to nir-Vtaks, it can nevertheless be extended to include nir-
¥ ma, and, generally, all verbs of creation used in cosmogonic narratives (Vjan and
¥ srj included).

Further, a remark concerning the sense of ¥s7j; if understood in light of the Vedic
notion of conception, Vsrj does not simply mean to ‘emit’ but ‘to procreate’. As
KALBER (1976: 351-55) has shown, according to Vedic ideas, the embryo (garbha)
is already fully present in the male’s semen (retas) and is solely transferred into the
female (garbhddhdana), without her actual participation in its formation. This means
that Prajapati’s ejaculation is already a kind of procreation.

28 KALBER (1976: 372-73) identifies the roots of this lack of agency in the fact that
Prajapati’s original status as the divine creator begins being obliterated in the
Upanisads and thus he comes to be frequently equated with the ‘unknowable,
unalterable, impersonal Gtman’.

--- PAGE 212 ---
Continuity and Change 201

86. As mentioned above, kama ‘desire’ is a trait which, variously in-
flected, is invariably present in Indian cosmogonic narratives; its irruption
sparks the shift from unity to multiplicity. Its appearance in such contexts
can be traced as far back as the tenth book of the Rgveda (10.129). As this
hymn had enormous influence on later cosmogonic narratives, ChU.6 in-
cluded, it is worth dwelling on it. In particular, I shall focus on the fourth
verse in which kama makes its appearance— RV.10.129.4a,b: kdmas tad
dgre sdm avartatadhi mdnaso rétah prathamdm ydd asit.

The interpretation of this hemistich is not straightforward and may lead
to two renditions, depending on how we analyse and construe the first
pada. Construing sam Yvrt- (sdm avartata) with ddhi, and thus intending it
as a transitive verb with the sense of ‘to come upon’, ‘to take possession
of’, several scholars take tdd as its governed object. For instance,
Macdonnel translates like this: ‘Desire in the beginning came upon that,
(desire) that was the first seed of mind.’” On the contrary, two other
scholars (Thieme, Brereton) take tdd as an adverb and therefore understand
the verb vrt- as intransitive. Consequently, ddhi is not considered as an
upasarga of sam Yvrt- but as an independent particle. Thus, taking ddhi as
a preposition governing the following ablative mdnaso, Joel Brereton
(1999: 253) translates as follows: ‘Then, in the beginning, from thought
there developed desire, which existed as the primal semen.’*’ In support of
his translation Brereton claims that: ‘although the construction crosses
pada boundaries [ddhi / mdénaso],*' it is more in accordance with Rgvedic
diction to construe mdnasah as an ablative with ddhi’, and points to a
parallel phrase in RV. 7.33.1 lab: utdsi...urvadsya brahman mdnasé ‘dhi
jatah, ‘And you, Brahman, are born from the thought of Urvasi’ (254).
22 MACDONELL (1917: 210).

80 THIEME (1964: 67) too takes dd as an adverb and renders: ‘a craving [for existence]
originated there in the beginning, which [i.e. craving] existed as first as seed of the
mind’ (‘Ein Begehren [nach Entstehung] bildete sich da im Anfang, das als Same des
Denkens als erstes existierte’); in his translation, Thieme unaccountably omits ddhi.
The rendering of this pada, and therefore a right understanding of ddhi, seems to be
the key to the interpretation of the whole hymn, and my entire interpretation relies on
it. 1am aware that, if scm avartatadhi were to be satisfactorily explained in a different
way, my whole analysis should need to be reconsidered.

1 However, JAMISON (2007: 241) shows that, in some cases, Vedic poets deliberately
use the crossing of pada boundaries as an expressive device.

--- PAGE 213 ---
202 Paolo Visigalli

Brereton’s interpretation is however unconvincing, for two main reasons.
First, ddhi preferably tends to occur as a postposition (as in the example
adduced, in which, incidentally, there is no pada crossing) rather than a
preposition, although, as is well-known, Vedic poetic syntax is rather fluid.
Second, and more cogently, it may be observed that in all its occurrences in
the tenth book of the Rgveda in the sense of ‘originate’ sam- Yvrt governs
the ablative, without requiring the preposition ddhi. This can be proven by
quoting the relevant passages:

RV.10.90.14b: sirsné dyatih sdm avartata
From [his] head the sky evolved.

RV.10.121.7a,b,c: dpo ha ydd brhatir vigvam Gyan gaérbham dédhand jandyantir
agnim | tato devénam sdm avartatasur ékah |

When the high (deep) waters came, impreganted with the All as an embryo,
bringing forth fire, from that one [i.e. the embryo] evolved the life’s breath of the
gods as the only [which existed].**

In light of the above, then, it seems better to endorse the first inter-
pretation. Now, a question arises, the answer to which will prove to be
fundamental for the right understanding of the hymn: what does the pro-
noun tdd in RV.10.129.4a stand for? In order to gain clarity on this point,
we need to consider this verse together with verses 1-4a, because they
constitute a closely knitted series of argumentation.

82 Cf. GELDNER (1907: 170) ‘werden, entstehen’.

33 Cf. THIEME (1964: 70) ‘bildete sich der Lebenshauch der Himmlischen als der
Einzige [der existierte]’. I take gdrbham as predicative of visvam, following
GELDNER (1951: 348) ‘das All als Keim empfangend’, THIEME (1964: 70) ‘die
[Wasser] das All als Embryo trugen’, and ELIZARENKOVA (1972: 262) ‘carrying in
themselves the whole as an embryo’ (BOupas B ce6a Bce Kak 3apogpiut). Further, I
take tdto as referring to gdrbha, an interpretation which is also accepted by
ELIZARENKOVA (Ibid.): ‘... he arose from this as the only and vital force of the
gods’ OH BOSHHK u3 9mozo Kak eMHad HW KM3HeHHaA Cua Soros (emphasis added).

--- PAGE 214 ---
Continuity and Change 203

RV.10.129.1-4a: ndisad asin né sad asit tadénim  ndsid rdjo nb vioma paré yat |
kim varivah kiiha kas id gdhanam gabhirdm || 1

nd mrtrir dsid amétam nd tarhi_ nd ratri) isit praketdh |

nid avatdm svadhdya tad ékam  tasmad dhanydn nd pardh kim canasa \\ 2
tdma dsit tamasd giilhém dgre apraketdm salildm sdrvam a iddm |
tichyénabhi dpihitam ydd asit tépasas tan mahindjayatatkam | 3

kamas tad dgre sam avartatadhi_ mdnaso rétah prathamém ydd asit |

Then there was neither non-existent nor existent; there was not air, nor the sky
beyond it; what stirred? Where? In whose keeping?* Was there water — the deep
chasm? (1) Then there was neither death nor non-death; there was no sign of night
and day; that, alone, breathed, windless, by its own impulse; other than that there
was not anything beyond (2). In the beginning there was darkness, hidden in
darkness; a signless ocean** was all this; the germ, which was covered by empti-
ness, that was born as the one, through the power of heat (3). 7 Desire in the

There has been much controversy among scholars whether dsat and sdt in 1a are to be

taken as subjects or rather as predicates of an implied subject. In the latter case there
seems to be two options: either to take them as predicates of iddm ‘this [i.e.
undeveloped world]’ (supplied from 3b) or of mdnas ‘mind’ (supplied from 4b). This.
last interpretation is supported by Satapathabrahmana10.5.3.2; it is also adopted by
GELDNER (1908: 16 / 1909: 208) and BRERETON (1999: 254). However, it seems
to me that OLDENBERG (1912: 346 / 1919: 53 n. 2) convincingly argues that la
should be interpreted in its context: just like in 1b it is said ‘there was not air’, or in 2a
‘there was not death’, so in la dsat and sdt should be understood as the subjects of the
respective clauses (‘nicht war das Nichtseiende noch war das Seiende damals’). Such a
conclusion does not deprive mdnas of its centrality in the hymn, however. As FALK
(1986: 25-34) has taught us, this cosmogony (macrocosm) is intrinsically bound up
with the psychic structure of man (microcosm) and is primarily a ‘psychological
cosmogony’ (‘cosmogonia psicologica’).

T adopt COLLINS’ (1975: 272 n. 6) suggestion that here kdsya sérmann ‘seem to refer
to the power of constriction’, to be interpreted as ‘bondage’ rather than ‘protection’.
THIEME (1964: 67 n. 1) offers two different interpretations of the passage.

For a full discussion of the word salildm, see THIEME (1961: 102-6). Questionable is
ELIZARENKOVA’s (1972: 408) remarks that salilém (rendered with nyuuna,
‘abyss’) indicates ‘waters representing chaos, opposed to the water that bears in it the
cosmic embryo’. Among all the translations that I have consulted, only FALK (1986)
intends a full stop after Gsit in 3a and translates thus: ‘Oscurita c’era. Da oscurita
celato un inconsaputo ondeggiare era tutto questo’.

BRERETON’s (1999: 252) translation of this verse is strained, principally marred by
his refusal to recognise the clear relative-correlative construction; he intends ydd and
tdd as temporal adverbs and translates thus: ‘When the thing coming into being was

--- PAGE 215 ---
204 Paolo Visigalli

beginning came upon that (dd), which [i.e. desire] was the first seed of the mind
(4a).

Let us focus on the verses 3c,d and 4a,b. In my opinion, these two hemi-
stichs, closely interwoven formally in a chiasmic construction,* do not re-
present successive phases of the cosmogonic account as is generally ad-
mitted. Instead, they both refer back to the primordial time of the origins,
thus severing any presumed temporal/causal link between 3c,d and 4a,b;
this is corroborated by the following observations. According to both tradi-
tional cosmogonic narratives and logic, kama (introduced in 4a) always
precedes tdpas (introduced in 3d), and not vice versa.” Accordingly, if a
succession of cosmogonic stages is given at all, it would be more
appropriate to consider 4a to describe a stage preceding the one in 3d.
However, the hymn does not seek to provide a coherent cosmogony which
can be articulated in subsequent stages. In this regard, consider the use of
dgre in 4a, which suggests that the episode that is there referred to took
place ‘in the beginning’. Indeed, adverbs indicating a mythical past are
deftly positioned in the first pada of each verse,"* thus giving the im-
pression that each verse does actually refer to the same primordial stage,
rather than depicting subsequent stages of the evolution of the cosmos. As
Brereton (1999) has perceptively noticed, all verses up to 4a included,
show a similar ‘rewinding’ structure; after describing the primordial
situation before creation in the first hemistich, they give some new in-
formation in the second hemistich, only to slip back, almost fuelling a sense
of exasperation, and start once again this sequence in the first pdda of the

concealed by emptiness, then was the One born by the power of heat’.

The two imperfects (ajdyata, avartata) occur in the same position within their

respective pddas, closed in by two genitives (tdpasas, mdnas the whole portion is

locked in by ydd dsit. All translators render 4b as a relative clause with ydd as the

subject standing for kdma; the change of gender is explained by the attraction of the

predicate rétas. I wonder whether it would not be more straightforward to see a

relative-correlative construction in 4a,b; the formal symmetry with 3c,d would seem to

support this interpretation.

89 | think RENOU (1956: 254) is wrong when he affirms that kama follows tdpas.

49 Ja) taddnim; 2a) tdrhi; 3a) dgre; 4a) dgre; cf. BRERETON (1999: 252) ‘Like the first
lines of vss. 1 and 2, line 3a ends with an indicator of time [...] that once again places
the verse back at the origins’.

--- PAGE 216 ---
Continuity and Change 205

next verse. I take fdd in 4a as having the same referent as the
relative/correlative clause of 3c,d, namely abhi, the “germ”;*' this abhi is
also the tdd ékam in 2c.

Furthermore, this interpretation — which identifies only one main
referent (i.e., 2c: tad ékam; 3c: abhi; 4a: tdd) for all the verses — seems to
be supported by the overall structure of the first half (1-4a) of the hymn.
Indeed, these verses can be interpreted as attempts to answer the three
questions posited in le: kim dvartvah kiitha kdsya §drmann, ‘what stirred?
Where? In whose keeping?’. The first question is answered in 2c: dnid
avatdm svadhdyd tad ékam, ‘that, alone, breathed, windless, by its own im-
pulse’. The second one is answered in 3b: apraketdém salilam sdrvam &
iddm, ‘a signless ocean was all this’. The third one is answered in 3c:
tuchyénabhi dpihitam ydd Gsit, ‘The germ, which was covered by
emptiness’.

In conclusion, we can plausibly reconstruct the following cosmogonic
narrative. In the mythical past before creation there was neither the existent
nor the non-existent; there ‘existed’ only an embryo (abhi), placed in the
primordial waters, enwrapped in emptiness (tuchyéna). Within its covering,
this embryo is said to live a maggot-like life, a form of quiescent existence
on the liminary threshold between non-existent and full-blown life.” This
life in potentia — this existence preceding actual existence — has its defining
activity in breathing without wind.“ This phantom of life is stirred by the
action of kama, which, coming upon the embryo, sets it into imperceptible
motion; the embryo begins to breathe and to stir.“ It is the entrance on

‘| Tn this passage, the continuous text can be separated differently and thus yield abhi
resulting from ‘a’ privative plus V bhi. The separation in abhi is however to be
preferred; cf. BRERETON’s (1999: 253) brief discussion of these two possibilities.

To put it in FALK’s (1986: 25) suggestive words: ‘Era di certo, ma poiché ancora il
suo essere non s’era rivelato, doveva vivere di una vita sensibile, celata — quasi
dormiente’. Ultimately, the symbolic image alluded to in this hymn, the egg immersed
in the primordial waters, is similar to that employed in another famous cosmogonic
hymn, RV.10.121.7.

It is not superfluous to remark that breathing and blinking are Vedic expressions
commonly used to denote life tout court; cf. e.g. RV.10.121.3. Therefore, breathing
without actual wind seems to be a phrase that fittingly refers to an embryonic stage of
existence.

It is noteworthy that dvarivah 1c has been interpreted as a stirring that refers

42

43

44

--- PAGE 217 ---
206 Paolo Visigalli

stage of ‘desire’ that triggers off the appearance of tdpas, in a causal
rapport that is widely attested in the Indian tradition. Through hatching,
tdpas brings forth the embryo, making it come into actual existence
(ajayata 3d). At this point the narration of the cosmogonic process stops,
and the second half of the hymn shifts to other topics.

It is worth stressing that the cosmogony in RV.10.129 is a model for the
cosmogony in ChU.6, inasmuch as it represents ‘one of the oldest attempts
in ancient India of a cosmogony deriving from a philosophy of nature, an
approach which will reach a peak in the Upanisads.’“°

§7. Let us go back to the conclusive steps of Uddalaka’s cosmogonic
narration.

ChU.6.3.2-4: seyam devataiksata hantaham imds tisro devatdnena jivendtmandnu-
pravisya ndmariipe vyakaravaniti || tasam trivrtam trivrtam ekaikam karavaniti |
seyam devatemds tisro devatdnenaiva jivendtmandnupravisya namaripe vyakarot ||
tasam trivrtam trivrtam ekaikam akarot | yathé tu khalu somya imas tisro devatas
trivrttrivrdekaika bhavati tan me vijanihiti ||

Then that same deity thought to itself: “Come now, why don’t I establish the
distinctions of name and appearance by entering these three deities here with this
living self (atman), and make each of them threefold”. So, that deity established
the distinctions of name and appearance by entering these three deities here with

predominantly to breath; cf. GELDNER (1951: 359). Further, it may be suggested that
a semantic link connects together kim dvarivah 1c and sdm avartadhi 4a. As was first
pointed out by OLDENBERG (1919: 346), and afterwards generally accepted by most
scholars, dvarivah is an intensive better to be derived from ¥ vrt than from Y vr.
The use of verbal forms from the same root may be considered as an intentional
device used to suggest a link between these two passages of the hymn;
HILLEBRANDT (1913: 133 n. 2) too identifies this link but he interprets it
differently.
tdpas and embryo seem to depend on the image of a bird hatching her egg. THIEME
(1964: 66) renders tdpas ‘[Brut-]Hitze’; cf. also GELDNER (1951: 360): ‘Im tapas
steckt zugleich die Vorstellung des briitenden Vogels’.
48 THIEME (1964: 65): ‘einer der altesten Versuche altindischer naturphilosophischer
Weltentstehungsspekulation, wie sie in den Upanischaden einen Héhepunkt erreicht’;
emphasis added.

45

--- PAGE 218 ---
Continuity and Change 207

this living self (3), and made each of them threefold. Learn from me, my son, how
each of these three deities becomes threefold. (Tr. Olivelle)

After the production of the three basic evolutes (tejas, Gpas, anna) the
creation is still incomplete. Condensed though it may appear, I think that a
typical Vedic conception is here implied. According to a widespread Vedic
paradigm, the first creation proves to be something of a bungled work
brought about by the activity of an awkwardly operating creator who fails
to endow his creation with the necessary equilibrium: his product is im-
paired either by the excessive similarity (fami) of its components or by
their unbridgeable discontinuity (prthak). Stability is generally obtained as
a consequence of a second creation (visrsti),"” which is represented as a
sacrificial act that marks the passage from a chaotic primary phase to a
well-structured cosmos.“ Applying this Vedic paradigm to our passage, we
could say that, after coming into being, the three evolutes are still in a state
of jami and need to be differentiated so that a cosmos may be shaped out of
them. The primordial divinity achieves this by entering them and making
them articulate (vy-a-/kr) in name and appearance (ndmariipe).”

The verb vy-d-/kr deserves consideration. The meaning it shows in our
text has been explained by Thieme as: ‘to drive asunder, to give a specific
form.’*? We see that by ‘driving asunder’ the devatd (sat) performs a
creative act, endowing that which was previously undifferentiated with
‘name’ and ‘form’. In this operation one can legitimately see a far-off
reverberation of Indra’s demiurgic act directed against the power of re-
sistance personified by Vrtra, an act through which ‘a world of mere
potentiality became the world of reality.’*' The devara (sat) enters the three
basic evolutes, provides them with name and form and, by mingling each
of them with the other two, makes each one threefold, thus creating the

47 Cf. RENOU (1956: 254).

48 SMITH (1989: 54-69) gives a clear treatment of this mythical model.

* For the rendition of ndmaripe with ‘name and appearance’ cf. OLIVELLE (1996:
493).

50 THIEME (1982: 27) where vy-d-Vkr in ChU.6 is analysed within a redefinition of the
meaning of the term vydkarana. Referring to ChU.6, OLDENBERG (1919: 173)
renders vy-d-Vkr with ‘auseinanderlegen’; ‘Er legt das Geschaffene aus einander, gibt
so dem Ungestalteten Gestalt’.

51 KUIPER (1975: 109); cf. THIEME (1982: 23).

--- PAGE 219 ---
208 Paolo Visigalli

phenomenic world. At this point, Uddalaka goes on showing how his
teaching can find an application on an ‘empirical’ level; he illustrates the
validity of his cosmogony by resorting to examples which make evident
how particular forms of the first of the basic evolutes (fejas) can be broken
down into their constitutive elements.

§8. It will suffice to examine only the first example given by Uddalaka.

ChU.6.4.1: yad agne rohitarh riipam tejasas tad riipam | yac chuklam tad apam |
yat krsnam tad annasya | apagad agner agnitvam | vacérambhanam vikaro nama-
dheyam trini riipanity eva satyam ||

The red appearance of fire is the appearance of heat, the white, that of water, and
the black, that of food. [Thus] the distinct/proper nature (agnitva) of fire has dis-
appeared; the modification™ is [merely] a verbal handle, a name — the actual
reality is indeed the three appearances.

This is a very dense passage which has been interpreted in different
ways. In particular, the latter half has been appropriately called a crux
interpretum.* Harking back to Thieme’s observations, I shall attempt to
provide a more exhaustive interpretation of this passage. First of all, it is
important to point out that in these lines two radically different cognitive
modes (one could say epistemologies) are opposed. By deliberately chal-
lenging the received wisdom, Uddalaka prompts his son to recognise fire
not as a unitary entity but as a composite one, which can be broken down
into its three constituents, an operation which seems to rest on a pre-
liminary observation.” Let us have a closer look at Uddalaka’s words.

2 1 share VAN BUITENEN’s (1958: 296) view, who sees a clear link between vikdra
(ChU.6.4) and the verb vy-d-Vkr (ChU.6.3), ‘a process of vikdra , or the creation of
names and forms’; so the specific and partial forms (vikdra) are the product of the
‘driving asunder, giving a specific form’ of the sat.

8° KUIPER (1957: 155).

With respect to this interesting aspect THIEME (1966: 46) comments that the white

riipa appears in the smoke, whereas the black one occurs both in smoke as well as in

the burned things; cf. further HANEFELD (1976: 157), where he speaks of a ‘theory
relying on observing nature’.

--- PAGE 220 ---
Continuity and Change 209

The received wisdom that is here challenged is briefly yet, I believe, in-
controvertibly evoked with the phrase apdgdd agner agnitvam ‘[Thus] the
distinct/proper nature (agnitva) of fire has disappeared’. Indeed, the
expression agner agnitvam can be identified as one of the formulas
commonly found in the Brahmanas in which the genitive of a noun
precedes its abstract (schematically: x-genitive x-tva). These formulas have
been shown to introduce a ‘semantic analysis’ of the name under
discussion,” i.e. a semantic etymologising which aims to elucidate the con-
nection between name and entity — these two things being perceived as in-
timately connected.*° Uddalaka’s teaching breaks away from the tradition,
for he rejects semantic etymologising as a valid means of knowledge. To
this ancient means he opposes an observation-based cognition of worldly
phenomena which is both exemplified and sanctioned through the above-
sketched cosmogony. It is erroneous to assume an essential nature under-
lying the empirical manifestation of fire; a nature expressed by the abstract
noun in -tva, which is known only to the initiated who uncovers it by
means of a semantic etymologising. Uddalaka considers this knowledge as
insufficient, because it is solely limited to the verbal level (vacdrambhana)
and incapable of disclosing the actual nature of the phenomena. The truth
(satyam)*’ is that the name ‘fire’ rests on the three underlying basic
evolutes. The innovative core of Uddalaka’s teaching is that the Brahmana
semantic analyses are ousted by the power of an observation-based logic.

§9. To conclude, there are three main elements in ChU.6.1-4 in which a
departure from the previous Vedic backdrop comes forth more clearly.
First, we observe the difference in meaning and ontological status of sat
and asat — from participles capable of a low degree of abstraction to full-
fledged abstract notions (see §4 above). Second, unlike the most common

®5 Cf. DEEG (1995: 58). About the origins of this phrase see ORTEL (1937: 32-33).

8° Cf. BRONKHORST (2001).

57 Jt would be interesting to try to ascertain the sense of satya in this passage; Uddalaka’s
definition may indeed run counter to the Vedic notions of satya [for which, see
EDGERTON (1929a), THIEME (1982: 15-21), and SOHNE-THIEME (1995)]. If this
were the case, this difference could be considered as a further innovative feature of
Uddalaka’s doctrine.

--- PAGE 221 ---
210 Paolo Visigalli

cosmogonic narratives in the Brahmanas, in ChU.6.1-4 the creator’s
agency fades into the background giving way to a process of creation
viewed as the product of a materialistic philosophy of nature. The
cosmogonic narrative seems to continue a model already present in
RV.10.129 (see §§5-6 above). And third, Uddalaka rejects the semantic
etymologising which is commonly used in the Brahmanas as a reliable
means of knowledge; in its stead, he replaces an empirically based logical
analysis of phenomena (see §8 above).

There remains a last question: why does Uddalaka go as far as resorting
to a cosmogony to expound his unheard-of teaching? I suggest that
Uddalaka’s conscious effort to provide a new method for comprehending
reality, a tool which aims to oust the previous one, cannot but involve a
new cosmogony. And this is for two reasons.

First, on a general level, cosmogonic narratives are of intrinsic
importance; as it has often been noticed, cosmogonic myths have a
paradigmatic value. They constitute the paradigm against which many
aspects of reality, as is perceived by a given social group, are being con-
tinuously tested. To borrow Kuiper’s words, ‘the origin of the world con-
stituted the sacred prototype of how, in an endlessly repeated process, life
and this world renewed themselves again and again’.** It seems thus
possible to suggest that the implementation of a new method of interpreting
reality as the one which is introduced by Uddalaka demands a compatible
cosmogony which sanctions and supports it. In essence, the evolution of the
world as retold by Uddalaka has the purpose of founding and thereby con-
ferring validity to the notion that all worldly phenomena can be broken
down into three basic constituents; in a way, this mental operation of
‘analysis’ is just the reverse of the creative process of evolution.

But I think one can find an explanation rooted in a deeper layer which is
in line with the general purpose of most of Upanisadic literature. As em-

8 KUIPER (1975: 108); cf. further LINCOLN (1975: 121) ‘[...] the cosmogonic myth is
the myth which establishes the order of the world and thus has important social,
material, and economic ramifications as well as deep religious significance’. This
myth owed its fundamental importance to the fact that every decisive moment in life
was considered a repetition of the primeval process. Elaborated by Mircea Eliade (cf.
e.g. Le mythe de l’éternel retour, Paris 1949), this assumption is applied to the Indian
context, with significant adaptations, by SMITH (1989: 50-51).

--- PAGE 222 ---
Continuity and Change 211

phasised by Brereton, one of the ‘broad themes’ underlying much of the
Upanisadic disquisitions is the aspiration to reach a unifying vision of life
and of the world.® In contrast to the uninitiated laymen, those who truly
know realise the meaningful unitary fabric underlying the separate
phenomena and thereby become aware of the meaningfulness and essential
unity of the whole. Uddalaka’s teaching is a powerful tool for providing an
integrative comprehension of the seemingly fragmented reality.

Bibliography

BRERETON, J.P. (1990) “Upanisads Eastern Canons”. In Approaches to the Asian
Classics. Edited by Wm. Theodore de Bary and Irene Bloom, New York: Columbia
University Press.

. (1999) “Edifying Puzzlement: Rgveda 10.129 and the Uses of Enigm”. In
Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 119, 248-260.

BRONKHORST, J. (2001) “Etymology and Magic: Yaska’s Nirukta, Plato’s Cratylus, and
the Riddle of Semantic Etymologies”. In Numen, vol. 48, 147-203.

BROWN, W.N. (1965) “Theories of Creation in the Rig Veda”. In Journal of the
American Oriental Society, vol. 85, 23-34.

VAN BUITENEN, J.A.B. (1957) “Studies in Samkhya (III): sattva”. In Journal of the
American Oriental Society, vol. 77, 88-107.

. (1958) “Vacarambhanam Reconsidered”. In Indo-Iranian Journal, vol. 2,
295-305.

COLLINS, A. (1975) “Reflections on Rgveda X 129: stimulated by Walter Maurer’s
paper. In Journal of Indo-European Studies, vol. 3, 271-281.

59 BRERETON (1990: 118) ‘In general, each Upanisadic teaching creates an integrative

vision, a view of the whole which draws together the separate elements of the world
and of human experience and compresses them into a single form. To one who has this
larger vision of things, the whole world is not a set of diverse and disorganized objects
and living beings, but rather forms a totality with a distinct shape and character’.
THIEME (1966: 84-85) expresses a similar view.

--- PAGE 223 ---
212 Paolo Visigalli

DEBRUNNER, A. and J. WACKERNAGEL (1957) Altindische Grammatik (Band III);
Nomninalflexion-Zahlwort-Pronomen. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

DEEG, M. (1955) Die altindische Etymologie nach dem Versténdnis Yaska’s und seiner
Vorgéingen: eine Unterschung uber ihre Praktiken, ihre literarische Verbreitung und

ihr Verhéiltnis zur dichterischen Gestaltung und Sprachmagie. Dettelbach: Joseph H.
ROll.

DELBRUCK, A. (1888) Altindische Syntax. Halle: Verlag der Buchhandlung des
Waisenhauses.

EMENEAU, M.B. (1968-69) “Sanskrit Syntactic Particles—Kila, Khalu, Ninam”. In
Indo-Iranian Journal, vol. 11, 241-68.

EDGERTON, F. (1929a) “Studies in the Veda”. In Journal of the American Oriental
Society, vol. 35, 240-46.

. (1929b) “The Upanisads: What Do They Seek, and Why”. In Journal of the
American Oriental Society, vol. 49, 97-121.

« (1965) The Beginnings of Indian Philosophy: Selections from the Rig Veda,
Atharva Veda, Upanisad, and Mahabharata. London: Allen & Unwin.

ELIZARENKOVA, T.J. (1972) Rigveda: Izbrannye Gimny [Rigveda: Selected Hymns],
Moscow: Nauka (In Russian).

- (1995) Language and Style of the Vedic Rsis; edited with an introduction by
Wendy Doniger. New York: SUNY.

FALK, M. (1986) II Mito Psicologico dell’India Antica (Ast. ed. 1939) Milano: Adelphi.
GELDNER, K. F. (1907) Der Rigveda in Auswahl. (Theil 1 - Glossar), Stuttgart.

- (1908) Zur Kosmogonie des Rigveda mit besonderer Beriicksichtigung des
Liedes 10.129, Marburg: N.G. Elwert.

- (1909) Der Rigveda in Auswahl. (Theil 2 - Kommentar), Stuttgart: W.
Kohlhammer.

. (1951) Der Rig-Veda. Aus dem Sanskrit ins Deutsche Ubersetzt und mit
einem laufenden Kommentar versehen. Dritter Teil (9-10).

--- PAGE 224 ---
Continuity and Change 213

HAMM, F.R. (1968-69) “Chdndogyopanisad VI. Ein erneuter Versuch”. In Wiener
Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens, vol. 12-13, 149-59.

HANEFELD, E. (1976) Philosophische Haupttexte der dlteren Upanischaden, Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.

HILLEBRANDT, A. (1913) Lieder des Rgveda, Géttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
HOCK, H.H. (2007) An Early Upanisadic Reader, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

HOFFMANN, K. (1975) “Zur vedischen Verbalflexion”. In Johanna Aufsétze zur
Indoiranistik; edited by Johanna Narten. Wiesbaden: Reichert: 358-372.

HOLTZMANN, A. (1884) Grammatisches aus dem Mahdbhdarata: ein Anhang zu W.D.
Whitney's indischer Granunatik. (Bibliothek Indogermanische Grammatiken, Band 2.

Anhang 1) Leipzig: Breitkopf & Hartel.

JAMISON, S.W. (1991) The Ravenous Hyenas and the Wounded Sun: Myth and Ritual in
Ancient India. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

KAHRS, E. (1998) Indian Semantics Analysis: The Nirvacana Tradition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

KALBER, W.O. (1976) “Tapas, Birth, and Spiritual Rebirth in the Veda”. In History of
Religions, vol. 15, 343-386.

KRAMRISCH, S. (1956) “An Image of Aditi-Uttanapad”. In Artibus Asiae, vol. 19, 259-
270.

KUIPER, F.B.J. (1957) “Vacarambhanam”. In Indo-Iranian Journal, vol.1, 155-159.
. (1958) “Vacdrambhanam (II)”. In Indo-Iranian Journal, vol.2, 306-310.

. (1975) “The basic concept of Vedic religion”. In History of Religions,
vol.15, 107-120.

LIMAYE V.P. and R.D. VADEKAR (eds.) (1958) Eighteen principal Upanisads, Poona:
Vaidika Samsodhana Mandala.

LINCOLN, B. (1975)“The Indo-European Myth of Creation”. In History of Religions, vol.
15, 121-145.

--- PAGE 225 ---
214 Paolo Visigalli
MACDONELL, A.A. (1917) A Vedic reader for students, Oxford.

MAYRHOFER, M. (1963) Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Wérterbuch des Altindischen. A
concise Etymological Sanskrit Dictionary. Band Il: D-M, Heidelberg: C. Winter.

. (1976) Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Wérterbuch des Altindischen. A
concise Etymological Sanskrit Dictionary. Band III: Y-H, Heidelberg: C. Winter.

MELI, M. (1996) Inni di Zarathustra, Milano: Mondadori.

MORGENROTH, M. (1970) “Die Lehre des Uddalaka Aruni Ch.-Up. VI”. In Archiv
Orientdlni, vol. 38, 33-44.

ORTEL, H. (1931) Zur Chandogya Upanisad. Studia Indo-Iranica. Ehrengabe fiir Wilhelm
Geiger. Edited by Walther Wiist. Leipzig: Harrassowitz, 134-38 (Reprinted in ORTEL
1994: 272-76).

. (1933) “The ‘Background’of the Pantheistic Monism of the Upanisads”. In
Oriental Studies in Honor of Cursetji Erachji Pavry; ed. By Jal Dastur Cursetji Pavry.
London: Oxford University Press (Reprinted in ORTEL 1994: 277-84).

« (1937) “Zum altindischen Ausdrucks-verstdrkungstypus satyasya satyam
‘das Wahre des Wahren’ = ‘die Quintessenz des Wahren’”. In Sitzungberichte der
Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften: Philosophisch-historische Klasse.
Miinchen, 3-42 (Reprinted in ORTEL 1994: 773-814).

. (1938) “Asat = Undifferentiated, Formless, Incapable of perception by the
senses in Vedic Prose”. In New Indian Antiquary, vol.1, no.5, 317-321 (Reprinted in
ORTEL 1994: 459-63).

. (1994) Kleine Schriften, edited by H. Hettrich und T. Oberlies. Stuttgart: F.
Steiner.

O’ FLAHERTY, W.D. (1981) The Rig Veda: An Anthology, 108 Hymns Translated from
the Sanskrit. Harmondsworth: Penguin.

OLDENBERG, H. (1896) “Upanisad”. In Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenléndischen
Gesellschaft, vol. 50, 457-462.

« (1909-12) Rigveda: Textkritische und exegetische Noten, Abhandlungen der
K6niglichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Gottingen, phil.-histor Klasse, Berlin.

--- PAGE 226 ---
Continuity and Change 215

« (1915) Die Lehre der Upanishaden und die Anftinge des Buddhismus,
G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

. (1919) Vorwissenschaftliche Wissenschaft. Die Weltanschauung der
Brahmana-Texte, Géttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

OLIVELLE, P. (1996) Upanisads; Translated from the Original Sanskrit. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

« (2004) The Law Code of Manu; a New Translation based on the Critical
Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

RENOU, L. (1955) “Remarques sur la Chandogya-Upanisad”. In Etudes Védiques et
Paninéennes, vol. 1, 91-102.

. (1955b) “Les parties en prose de |’Atharvaveda”. In Etudes Védiques et
Paninéennes, vol. 1, 71-90.

« (1956) Hymnes spéculatifs du Véda, Paris: Gallimard.

SCHAYER, S. (1925) “Uber die Bedeutung des Wortes upanisad”. In Rocznik
Orjentalistyczny, vol. 3, 57-67.

SMITH, B.K. (1989) Reflections on Resemblance, Ritual, and Religion. New York -
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

SOHNE-THIEME, R. (1995) “On the Concept and Function of satyam (‘truth’) in Ancient
Indian Literature”. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Sanskrit and
Related Studies. September 23-26: 1993, 235-244.

TEDESCO, P. (1943) “Sanskrit milati ‘to unite”. In Language, vol. 19, 1-18.

THIEME, P. (1961) “Idg.* sal- ,Salz’ im Sanskrit”. In Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenléndischen Gesellschaft, vol. 111, 94-117 (Reprinted in THIEME 1984: 170-
193).

. (1964) Gedichte aus dem Rig-Veda. Stuttgart: Reclam.

. (1966) Upanischaden, Ausgewdhlte Stiicke. Stuttgart: Reclam.

--- PAGE 227 ---
216 Paolo Visigalli

. (1968) “Adega”. In Mélanges d’Indianisme & la mémoire de Louis Renou,
Paris: De Boccard, 715-23 (Reprinted in THIEME 1984: 259-267).

. (1982) “Meaning and form of the ‘grammar’ of Panini”. In Studien zur
Indologie und Iranistik, vol. 8/9, 3-34.

. (1984) Kleine Schriften; edited by G. Buddruss, Wiesbaden: F. Steiner.

WACKERNAGEL, J. (1953) “Indogermanische Dichter-sprache, unpublished lecture
delivered in Munich on 29 November 1932”. In Kleine Schriften; vol. 1, 186-204.
G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

WITZEL, M. (1987) “On the Origin of the Literary Device of the ‘Frame Story’in Old
Indian Literature”. In Hinduismus und Buddhismus. Festschrift fiir Ulrich Schneider.
Freiburg: Falk, 380-414.

- (1989) “Tracing the Vedic Dialectes”. In Dialectes dans les Littératures
Indo-Aryennes, edited by Collete Caillat. Paris: Collége de France, Institut de
civilisation indienne, 97-269.

. (2009) “Moving Targets? Text, language, archaeology and history in the
Late Vedic and early Buddhst periods”. In Indo-Iranian Journal, vol. 52, 255-299.

