--- PAGE 1 (Book pp. 275) ---
	  
Minor Vajrayāna texts V:  
The Gaṇacakravidhi attributed to Ratnākaraśānti 
Péter-Dániel Szántó 
Overview  
There are very few studies on the gaṇacakra, a ritualised communal feast 
as celebrated by followers of the Vajrayāna, i.e., Tantric Buddhist commu-
nities. LALOU’s preliminary study (1965) is still useful, and it was only 
recently followed up. The only monograph on the subject, which I was 
unable to consult in its entirety, is in Japanese by SHIZUKA (2007), who has 
before and since authored several articles on the topic, including a very 
useful English summary of his research (2008). Shizuka mostly worked 
with Tibetan canonical translations, however, as I will demonstrate below, 
a relatively small amount of material does survive in the original Sanskrit. 
The main point of this article is to present a gaṇacakra manual in San-
skrit. First, I will say a few general points on the rite for the non-specialist 
reader. I will then give a rough overview of the earliest (eighth to ninth 
centuries CE) sources for this rite in Buddhist literature, followed by a brief 
discussion of later (tenth to thirteenth centuries CE) sources and Sanskrit 
manuals, or fragments thereof, specifically devoted to it. I will then turn to 
announce a fortunate discovery of one such manual in the original. After 
some introductory notes, in the next section I will provide a diplomatic 
edition of the text accompanied by philological notes and a tentative trans-
lation. The final section contains a diplomatic edition of a short and incom-
plete gloss that was found together with the manual.  
The non-specialist reader will probably be baffled by the amount of 
philological groundwork required to clarify sometimes even very basic 
points as well as by the amount of unpublished and/or unstud-
ied/untranslated literature provided in the references. Alas, such is the state 
of our field.  


--- PAGE 2 (Book pp. 276) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
276
General introduction  
The main points of a gaṇacakra (or gaṇamaṇḍala), lit. “assembly circle,” 
essentially a ritualised communal feast, are as follows: The ritual should be 
observed periodically, at least once a year, but preferably more often. It is 
not a public affair, as participation is limited to initiates of a particular Tan-
tric cult, ideally both male and female. They are headed by their master 
who is seated in the middle, usually accompanied by his consort, and offi-
ciates during the key points of the rite. Lesser duties are delegated to an 
assistant. The resources are provided by a sponsor, who is also present. The 
chief aim of the rite is to consume the so-called samaya (“vow,” “pledge”) 
substances – bodily fluids and meats – in a communal fashion. These are 
placed in a vessel (usually a skull bowl) filled with liquor and are conse-
crated by the main officiant. The vessel is then passed around, usually ac-
companied by verses in Apabhraṃśa, a kind of literary Middle Indic, with 
everyone obliged to partake. This is followed by a feast with food, drink, 
song, and dance. Some descriptions specify that participants should com-
municate using secret signs and secret codewords (both called chommā). It 
is usually assumed that intercourse also takes place, and we do indeed find 
allusions to this in some of our manuals, e.g. the one discussed here, but 
this is not the main point. The ritual usually takes place at night and can last 
until daybreak. Thereupon the participants are dismissed respectfully.  
The ritual manuals explain the rationale behind celebrating a gaṇacakra 
in various ways. Most relevant authors will state that the primary reason is 
to gather the equipments of merit and knowledge (puṇya° and 
jñānasaṃbhāra), which are obligatory requisites for one’s spiritual career. 
Abhayākaragupta, a highly influential East Indian author from the late 
eleventh and early twelfth century, claims (Tōh. 2491, 243b) that it is a 
transgression not to perform it, while his disciple Ratnarakṣita lists as aims 
(Tōh. 2494, 249a) restoring transgressed Tantric vows, gaining victory over 
enemies, achieving all objects of desire, pleasing the deity, and ultimately 
obtaining the accomplishment of the highest state of consciousness, the 
mahāmudrā. However, there are also dangers: at least one author, the 
somewhat obscure *Bhavya, warns (Tōh. 2176, 31b–32a) that participants 
will be killed by ḍākas (or ḍākinīs), either malevolent spirits or possibly the 
deities themselves, if the rules of the feast are not observed correctly.  
Modern anthropological theory would no doubt find such manuals a rich 
resource for topics such as celebrating and maintaining identity, testing 


--- PAGE 3 (Book pp. 277) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
277 
	  
communal loyalty, distribution of resources, ritual etiquette, transgressive 
behaviour and control thereof. 
The earliest textual sources for the gaṇacakra ritual  
While I am fully aware that the Buddhist gaṇacakra/°maṇḍala probably 
imitates a Śaiva ritual (note that gaṇa primarily means an attendant of the 
god Śiva), I will ignore this point in my brief historical overview (for more 
on this topic, see SANDERSON 2009: 154). 
To the best of my knowledge, the earliest reference in Buddhist litera-
ture to a gaṇacakra or gaṇamaṇḍala dates to the early eighth century or 
possibly slightly earlier.1 This is in a nebulous but incredibly important 
text, the so-called Longer Paramādya (Tōh. 488, 238a):  
 
The vajra-holder (i.e., the initiate) together with (i.e., holding) his 
vajra-sceptre should place in the middle of the assembly (tshogs = 
*gaṇa) great (i.e., human) blood together with camphor (i.e., semen) 
and sandalwood (i.e., faeces) mixed with [menstrual] blood. [In the 
state of] the best of yogas (i.e., meditative identification) with 
*Sarvākāśa (i.e., the deity?), he should taste [the mixture] as if it 
were Soma,2 [lifting a bit from the vessel] with the [joined] tips of 
his ring finger and thumb; [by this] he shall obtain eternal accom-
plishment.3 
 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1 This dating is based first and foremost on the fact that the Sarvabuddhasamāyo-
gaḍākinījālaśaṃvara (on which see GRIFFITHS & SZÁNTÓ 2015), which borrows 
extensively from the Longer Paramādya, was already extant in the first half of the 
eighth century. SHIZUKA (2008, 188) proposes that the gaṇacakra/gaṇamaṇḍala is a 
historic outgrowth of guhyamaṇḍalas taught in the Tattvasaṃgraha (ca. early 7th c.). 
This may be accurate, but one significant difference is that the pivotal moment of 
consuming the antinomian substances is missing in the description of the guhya-
maṇḍala in the Tattvasaṃgraha. 
2 Here the intended sense is more akin to “drink of immortality,” rather than a re-
ference to the drink usually consumed in Vedic ritual. 
3 Tōh. 488, 238a: | khrag chen ga bur dang bcas pa | | tsandan dmar dang sbyar ba ni | 
| tshogs kyi nang du rab zhugs nas | | rdo rje dang bcas rdo rje ’dzin | 
| srin lag mthe bo rtse mo yis | | nam mkha’ thams cad sbyor mchog ldan | 
| zla ba’i btung ba bzhin myangs na | | rtag pa’i dngos grub thob par ’gyur |. 


--- PAGE 4 (Book pp. 278) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
278
This crucial passage is reproduced with two changes (marked here in bold 
and irrelevant for our present discussion) in a dependent text, the famous 
Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara (ms. fol. 14r): 
 
mahāraktaṃ sakarpūraṃ raktacandanayojitam | 
gaṇamadhye pratiṣṭhaṃ śrīsarvocchiṣṭarasāyanam ||4 
anāmāṅguṣṭhavaktrābhyāṃ svādhidevātmayogavān | 
somapānavad āsvādya siddhim āpnoti śāśvatīm ||5 
 
The Longer Paramādya does not actually use an equivalent of the Sanskrit 
term gaṇamaṇḍala, but it is not unlikely that the word tshogs (Skt. *gaṇa) 
and the use of gaṇa in gaṇamadhye in the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinī-
jālaśaṃvara are simply abbreviations with the same meaning. On the other 
hand, in another passage the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara 
already uses the term gaṇamaṇḍala (ms. fol. 13v: kalpayed gaṇa-
maṇḍalam) and gives a more detailed but still rather obscure description. It 
seems to me that the point here is to recreate a “live” version of the deities, 
in other words, an enactment or re-enactment of the maṇḍala. The partici-
pants wear costumes, and if their number does not match the number of 
entities in the maṇḍala, simulacra made of wood or metal are used. There 
are very few restrictions imposed and possession (āveśa) plays a major 
part. This stands in contrast with later, more standardised descriptions, 
where behaviour is controlled and dignified: for example, singing and danc-
ing is to be performed only with the officiant’s permission, and alcohol is 
to be consumed with moderation. 
Most of the relevant verses from the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījāla-
śaṃvara are rehashed and expanded in what may be regarded the classical 
description of the gaṇacakra, namely, Āryadeva’s Sūtaka, chapter 9. This 
work dates from the ninth century and played a major part in establishing 
one of the two major schools of exegesis of the Guhyasamājatantra, one of 
the most (if not the most) influential Tantric Buddhist scriptures. An Eng-
lish translation has been published by WEDEMEYER (cf. 2008: 291ff. for the 
relevant part), which is, however, in need of revision. 
The next important scriptural source is the Catuṣpīṭhatantra (ca. mid or 
late ninth century), which does not explicitly mention the standard term 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4 The word pratiṣṭhaṃ should be interpreted as a present participle. The reading 
°occhiṣṭa° is my emendation, the ms. has °ontiṣṭha°. 
5 The manuscript reads ādmoti, which I have corrected to āpnoti. 


--- PAGE 5 (Book pp. 279) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
279 
	  
gaṇacakra or gaṇamaṇḍala, but it does have yogayoginīmaṇḍala, which in 
the strange language of this text means “the circle of yogins and yoginīs.” It 
does not give a precise description of what the rite consisted of, however, it 
does teach several features which later became standard, most notably the 
Apabhraṃśa songs intoned when gaining entry in the assembly and when 
passing around the vessel with the transgressive substances as well as the 
mantras to purify them (cf. SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 330ff. & 357ff.). 
Later sources 
Some of the later scriptures from the so-called Yoginītantras are also note-
worthy: the Hevajratantra (ca. 900 CE) passages are quite well-known 
(II.vii.5–13 in SNELLGROVE 1959; there are some other details scattered 
throughout this text), as is the eighth chapter of the Saṃvarodayatantra, 
most likely a relatively late (eleventh to twelfth centuries?) Nepalese com-
position-compilation, one among the selected chapters published by TSUDA 
(1974). The commentaries on these passages are also very rewarding to 
consult (e.g. Padminī ms. fols. 15r–17r). Perhaps less well-known is a 
chapter entirely dedicated to the subject, the twenty-third of the un-
published Mahāmudrātilaka (ms. fol. 47r ff.), a scripture probably com-
piled in the late eleventh century. This is almost entirely a copy of the six-
ty-second chapter of the Vajramālābhidhāna, a Guhyasamāja explanatory 
scripture (Tōh. 445, 267a ff.; KITTAY 2011: 728–736), one of the many 
parallels between the two texts.6 
Further material in Sanskrit can be gathered from ritual compendia. The 
Vajrāvalī of Abhayākaragupta does not teach the gaṇacakra, but the author 
wrote a separate manual  that survives only in Tibetan translation (Tōh. 2491). 
Kuladatta’s version of the gaṇacakra ritual, which is heavily dependent on the 
text we examine here, constitutes the final chapter of his Kriyāsaṃgra-
hapañjikā (edited by SAKURAI 2001). Dating this author is a tricky matter: he 
must precede 1216 CE, the date of the oldest manuscript of his compendium, 
but he could be as early as the middle of the eleventh century (TANEMURA 
2004: 5–10). Jagaddarpaṇa, a Nepalese author from ca. the thirteenth century 
who was heavily influenced by Abhayākaragupta, describes a number of 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6 The historical aetiology of the Vajramālābhidhāna is very obscure, I will 
therefore refrain from assigning it a date. Some parts must date from as early as the 
ninth century. 


--- PAGE 6 (Book pp. 280) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
280
Gaṇavidhis in his Kriyāsamuccaya, which probably demonstrates a local di-
versification among Newar Buddhists (ms. fol. 22v ff.7).  
Some shorter but still noteworthy witnesses are the second half of the 
ninth section (and various details elsewhere) in the initiation manual 
Saṃvarodayā nāma maṇḍalopāyikā (ms. fol. 38v ff.) of Bhūvācārya, an 
author active before 1054 CE at Ratnagiri in present Odisha, and the fourth 
chapter of the anonymous and undatable Śiṣyānugrahavidhi (ms. A fols. 
18v–19v, ms. B fols. 3v–5r), a short compendium on various subjects relat-
ed to the worship of the deity Cakrasaṃvara. 
Gaṇacakra manuals 
Besides the present text, the only other complete and self-standing manual 
surviving in Sanskrit is to be found in the so-called Ngor Hevajrasādhana 
collection as its last item (see ISAACSON 2009: §45). The manuscript is now 
said to be in China, and the only way to access it for the time being is 
through copies of Rāhula Sāṅkṛtyāyana’s photographs taken in Tibet (ms. 
fols. 264v–271v). Appropriately for the collection, this text describes a 
gaṇacakra for Hevajra initiates, although the influence of the Ca-
tuṣpīṭhatantra is substantial. The work is anonymous, has no identifiable 
Tibetan translation, and has not been edited yet. 
The manuscript NAK 1-1679 = NGMPP B 24/13, catalogued under the 
misleading title “Samājatathānuṣārinī”, contains two fragments of one 
folio each from works related to the gaṇacakra. The first fragment, penned 
in the so-called hook-topped Nepalese script, is very corrupt, but from the 
statement of purpose it can be made out that it is a manual based on the 
Guhyasamājatantra. The available text amounts to a little more than ten 
verses and contains descriptions of the ideal officiant (ācārya), his empow-
ering of the assistant (karmavajrin), and some preliminary purificatory acts. 
The most striking feature of this text is its very existence. Āryadeva openly 
admits that the Guhyasamājatantra does not contain injunctions concerning 
the gaṇacakra (which he equates with “practices with elaboration,” sa-
prapañcacaryā), which is why he supplies the description from the 
Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara (cf. WEDEMEYER 2008: 291). 
From this manual, as well as the Vajramālābhidhāna description mentioned 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
7 Note that the Tibetan translation in the Derge Canon omits a significant part, as 
the parallel ceases after Tōh. 3305, 216a4, which is probably unintentional. 


--- PAGE 7 (Book pp. 281) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
281 
	  
above, it would seem that followers of the Guhyasamāja thought they were 
lagging behind and needed to update their ritual repertoire.  
The second fragment from the same bundle (NAK 1-1679 = NGMPP B 
24/13) is penned in a rather different, bolder, hook-topped script. Here we 
have not the first, but the final page of a work styling itself a 
Gaṇacakravidhi. About seven verses survive in this fragment, but none deal 
with the rite proper. The penultimate verse, which is rather corrupt, de-
scribes either the author or the patron as the ruler of Dhavalapura,8 named 
either Sumati or Udayacandra. The colophon also contains a date falling 
within the reign of Abhayamalla, which can be converted to Friday, No-
vember 24, 1217 CE.  
Another fragment, in this case of two folios, can be found in NAK 1-1679 = 
NGMPP B 24/24, catalogued as “Mahāpratisarādhāriṇī”. Unfortunately, most 
of the fragment is badly effaced. From what remains legible, it can be deter-
mined that the work once described a gaṇacakra of the Catuṣpīṭha cycle, or 
that at the very least it was heavily influenced by that ritual system. There are 
several parallel phrasings with works of that cycle, the meats usually styled 
pradīpa (“lamps”) are here called aṅkuśas (“hooks”), and the mantras used to 
empower them (śriṃ, hūṃ, ghruṃ, jriṃ, saḥ) are hallmarks of the Ca-
tuṣpīṭhatantra as well (SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 359–360). 
A newly discovered manuscript 
About half a decade ago, the aforementioned Shizuka, who can without 
doubt be called the world’s foremost expert of Buddhist Gaṇacakra manu-
als, published a study of a canonical Tibetan text that is titled *Vajra-
bhairavagaṇacakra (Tōh. 1995) and attributed in the translators’ colophon 
to Ratnākaraśānti, one of the most famous and influential Buddhist thinkers 
from East India (floruit ca. late tenth to early eleventh century). In the Eng-
lish summary of his study, SHIZUKA (2011) stated the following: “In the 
Sde-dge edition this manual amounts to only two and a half folios, and a 
Sanskrit manuscript has not yet been reported.” I am happy to announce 
that I have identified a Sanskrit witness of the manual (according to my 
notes, in 2013), which is the main subject of this paper. Since ignorance of 
Japanese is one among my many shortcomings, I may reproduce some of 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8 Converted into Modern Indo-Aryan, this would sound something like Dholpur. 
This is a fairly common toponym, but I do not find it impossible that here we have a 
variant of Dhavalasrotas, for which see PANT & SHARMA 1977: 22–24. 


--- PAGE 8 (Book pp. 282) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
282
Shizuka’s findings and claim them my own. Should this indeed occur, I 
apologise profusely.  
The witness in question is a manuscript kept at the National Archives in  
Kathmandu under call number 5-7871. I had no opportunity to perform an 
autopsy of the manuscript, but I was able to consult it from digital images 
of the microfilm prepared by the Nepal German Manuscript Preservation 
Project, reel no. B 104/10. I cannot tell how long the original manuscript 
was; here we have only three initial folios, which contain the complete text 
of the Gaṇacakravidhi and the beginning of a gloss calling or describing 
itself as (a) Saṃkṣiptā Pañjikā, that is to say, “a short commentary on diffi-
cult points.” 
The script is a rather unusual, headless devanāgarī, employed through-
out, except for the first two lines of fol. 2r and a single akṣara on fol. 3v. 
This hand, or a very similar one, can also be seen in other manuscripts from 
Nepal, both in the main text and in paratextual notes. A thorough palaeo-
graphical analysis would perhaps be aided by a hypothesis I wish to ad-
vance here: I think that this is the hand of a famous Nepalese scholar active 
in the first half of the nineteenth century, a man called Sundarānanda. 
Sundarānanda was not only an author and avid collector of manuscripts on 
various subjects,9 but he also maintained a scriptorium10 and occasionally 
copied manuscripts himself.11 
From Shizuka’s wording in the aforementioned summary it seems to me 
that he accepted the attribution to the great eleventh-century East Indian 
scholar and perhaps even accepted the suggestion of the Tibetan title that 
this work forms part of the Vajrabhairava corpus, i.e. the group of works, 
both scriptural and exegetical, centred on the cult of the eponymous deity, a 
Buddhicised form of Śiva-Bhairava. I would disagree on both counts. First, 
it is quite impossible that Ratnākaraśānti, whose Sanskrit is beyond re-
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
9 His signature or ownership mark can be seen on the final folio of the only 
Sanskrit witness of Kalyāṇavarman’s Catuṣpīṭhapañjikā (ms. fol. 45v), dated Nepāla 
Samvat 132 = 1012 CE; see SZÁNTÓ 2012: I:116. In my thesis (ibid. and p. 85, n. 24), 
I suggested that this may be Hara Prasād Śāstrī’s handwriting. I now wish to with-
draw that statement. 
10 I thank Iain Sinclair for this information as well as for making me aware of 
Sundarānanda’s importance and influence in the first place in personal communica-
tions (e-mail, June–July 2013). 
11 For example a manuscript of the Śālihotra of Indrasena, a treatise on hippology – 
further testimony for his wide-ranging cultural interests – with a Nepali translation and 
commentary, dated Śaka Samvat 1765, Nepāla Samvat 963, that is to say, 1843 CE. 


--- PAGE 9 (Book pp. 283) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
283 
	  
proach, would have perpetrated any of the “barbarisms” (mlecchita, mle-
cchabhāṣā) in diction I will point out in my notes. Second, there is not a 
single word about the deity Vajrabhairava in the text or even the slightest 
allusion in wording, or otherwise, to texts of that cycle. I suspect that the 
work was grouped thus on account of its Tibetan translator, who identifies 
himself in the colophon as “the monk rDo rje grags.” This is none other 
than the famous and infamous translator of the Rwa clan, the foremost 
propagator of Vajrabhairava teachings in the Land of Snows.12 
Indeed, the text does not seem to affiliate itself to any Tantric cycle. On 
the contrary, it seeks to stay as general as possible, allowing for particular 
customisations according to the liturgy of whichever cycle the participants 
followed. The strongest scriptural influence I could detect is that of the Ca-
tuṣpīṭhatantra. However, this scripture, which I tentatively date to the middle 
or second half of the ninth century, cannot be accepted as the lowest terminus 
post quem, since the present text also alludes to a cakra in the navel, a feature 
completely missing from the Catuṣpīṭhatantra along with all other parapher-
nalia of so-called subtle body practices. The terminus ante quem is also 
slightly difficult to determine. As I will point out in the notes, the text’s in-
fluence on Kuladatta’s description of the gaṇacakra in the final chapter of his 
Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā is very clear, but Kuladatta’s dates are not fixed with 
certainty. The date and authorship of the gloss is impossible to determine. I 
find it very unlikely that the author was the scribe (Sundarānanda, if my hy-
pothesis is correct), since the gloss uses lemmata which sometimes differ 
from the main text. It is also too corrupt for an autograph. 
A few words about how I wish to proceed in presenting these two texts. 
In September 2013, in the idyllic setting of the island of Procida in the Bay 
of Naples during the Third Manuscripta Buddhica Workshop I had the 
good fortune of submitting my preliminary draft to what may be described 
without exaggeration as the most competent panel of experts of Tantric 
texts in the world. During our reading, my understanding of the texts grew 
considerably, but so did my despair. A host of new problems were pointed 
out and some passages were declared beyond redemption. Our verdict was 
unanimous that this is not the work of Ratnākaraśānti. Several emendations 
were proposed, but in the heat of the moment I stupidly forgot to record 
each and every person’s name who came to the rescue. Alexis Sanderson 
and Harunaga Isaacson will stand behind most emendations and conjec-
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
12 For the life of Rwa lo, see CUEVAS 2015, a recent English translation of his 
biography.  


--- PAGE 10 (Book pp. 284) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
284
tures, but I also recall excellent suggestions by Kazuo Kano and Kenichi 
Kuranishi. I wish to apologise to anyone who might feel left out. I also 
wish to thank the editors of the present volume for their excellent sugges-
tions and gentle persuasion to include a translation, something I was initial-
ly reluctant to do. In spite of all this remarkable learning that came to my 
aid and for which I feel forever grateful, I still think that a definitive edition 
and precise translation cannot be attempted at this stage. I will therefore 
give the text as it stands in the manuscript, accompanied by a highly tenta-
tive translation (where this is possible) and a running commentary, which 
may point the reader in the right direction. Needless to say, all errors are 
my own. 
Annotated diplomatic edition and tentative translation 
 
[1r] namo Vajrasatvāya || || 
 
Obeisance to Vajrasattva! 
 
This is the scribal obeisance and does not form part of the text, although 
most editions of Buddhist texts ignore this point. Vajrasattva is a kind of 
undifferentiated main deity of Tantric Buddhism, portrayed with two arms 
holding a vajra-sceptre (a symbol of means, upāya) and a bell (a symbol of 
wisdom, prajñā), which are also the two chief implements of Tantric Bud-
dhist initiates. Most exegetes would agree that other Tantric deities (e.g. 
Hevajra, Cakrasaṃvara) are, roughly speaking, “emanations” or forms of 
Vajrasattva. 
 
[1] Vajrasatvaṃ praṇamyādau bhāvābhāvātmakaṃ vibhuṃ || 
sarvakāmapradaṃ devaṃ vakṣye haṃ gaṇamaṇḍalaṃ || 
 
After having first bowed to Vajrasattva, the pervading Lord, embodying 
both existence and non-existence (i.e., conventional and ultimate reality 
or transmigration and liberation), the god bestowing all objects of desire 
(or: the absolute object of desire), I shall teach the gaṇamaṇḍala. 
 
This is the customary maṅgala (obeisance, auspicious utterance) and 
pratijñā (statement of purpose). Both ādau and [’]haṃ are superfluous: the 
meaning of the first is already implicit in the absolutive praṇamya, whereas 


--- PAGE 11 (Book pp. 285) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
285 
	  
the meaning of the second can be gathered from the finite verb vakṣye. The 
object of vakṣye – unless we understand it to mean “I shall describe” – is a 
bhīmavat 
compound 
for 
gaṇamaṇḍalavidhim. 
The 
description 
bhāvābhāvātmakaṃ is understood by the glossator as “embodying [both] 
conventional/superficial and ultimate truth,” whereas sarvakāma° is inter-
preted as the absolute object of desire, i.e., great bliss (in this literature a 
synonym of Buddhahood), and not “all objects of desire.”  
 
[2] nirvikalpaparo maṃtrī sarvakālasamāhitaḥ | 
sarvataṃtrānusārajño daśatatvavidāṃ varaḥ || 
 
The mantra-practitioner (here: the chief officiant), whose aim is the 
non-discursive [state], who is composed at all times, who knows the in-
tent of all Tantras, who is a great expert in the ten fundamentals,  
 
This verse describes the qualifications of the chief officiant. Here he is 
simply called mantrin, but later (v. 10) more appropriately gaṇanāyaka. 
anusāra° is best understood as a synonym of abhiprāya. There are several 
lists for the ten tattvas (see KLEIN-SCHWIND 2012: 28 ff., she translates 
tattva as “fundamentals”), essentially types of rituals a vajrācārya (i.e., a 
Tantric Buddhist officiant, master) is expected to know, but none match the 
one given by the glossator (see p. 307), which is most likely an ad hoc crea-
tion and not something supported by scriptural or exegetical authority. Note 
his variants: nityakāla° for sarvakāla° and °vidhānavit for °vidāṃ varaḥ. 
 
[3] gaṃbhīrodāradharmyarbhyā sārdravībhūtamānasaiḥ || 
nirābhimānaiḥ sacchiṣyaiḥ śuśrūṣaṇaviśāradaiḥ || 
 
with true disciples, whose minds are †...† in the profound and vast doc-
trine, who are free from pride, who are obedient [and] skilled,  
 
This verse describes the disciples accompanying the chief officiant. The 
second quarter must have begun with a cvī formation, otherwise the first 
line is beyond repair. Perhaps the point is that the disciples should have 
faith in or be versed in the profound and vast doctrine (i.e., the Buddhist 
dharma). The ungrammatical lengthening in nirābhimānaiḥ seeks to avoid 
the metrical fault of having both second and third syllables short. 
 


--- PAGE 12 (Book pp. 286) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
286
[4] devatāgaṇasaṃkīrṇe paṃcakāmaphalaprade || 
vivikte ramyagehe smin nijapūjāṃ samārabhet || 
 
should undertake self-worship [as taught] in this [system] in a secluded, 
lovely house, which is scattered with groups of deities and which be-
stows the five objects of desire (i.e., the five sensory objects). 
 
The exact meaning of the first quarter is obscure. The glossator would want 
the deities to mean “young women passionate about reality,” but this is 
doubtful, unless he means yoginīs incarnated into young women. However, 
in that case the author would have surely used that word, which is metrical-
ly equivalent. Perhaps the first line does not necessarily describe the house, 
but the larger polity where the rite is to take place. In that case, devatā 
might refer to local deities with a friendly disposition towards Buddhism. 
Should the compound refer to the house after all, perhaps it means that the 
consecrated ritual space was adorned by images of deities on scroll paint-
ings or sculpted. Privacy was crucial to the rite; Indrabhūti’s manual (Tōh. 
1672, 196a) mentions two appointed door guardians. Āryadeva’s Sūtaka 
mentions both elaborate, three-storied brick palaces and more humble cot-
tages as suitable locations (WEDEMEYER 2008: 294–295). Other manuals 
(e.g. Tōh. 1231, 43a; Tōh. 1439, 238b; Tōh. 2491, 243b) list the usual plac-
es for practice (a cremation ground, the top of a mountain, a thicket, a 
grove, banks of a river, etc.), but most stress that they should be isolated. 
The glossator’s explanation is somewhat opaque: “where there are no bad 
people [or] people” or perhaps “where there are no people, who are bad peo-
ple.” “Bad people” in this kind of literature are opponents of (Tantric) Bud-
dhism. It is perhaps not out of the question that the author used the pronomi-
nal locative ending, thus °gehesmin. The glossator, however, interprets 
[’]smin as an equivalent of iha, meaning asmin tantre, “in this scripture.” The 
collocation nijapūjā is unattested elsewhere, but nija° is sometimes men-
tioned in the sense of the chosen deity’s mantra, e.g. hūṃ. The deity and its 
mantra are not separate, and one is supposed to visualise oneself as a deity, 
therefore we are probably not far from capturing the intended meaning: 
“worshipping oneself as the deity, who is the same as its mantra.” 


--- PAGE 13 (Book pp. 287) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
287 
	  
[5] jyeṣṭhānukramayogena vaṃdanā pūjanā smṛtā || 
atha guṇamāhātmyād ātitheyatvagauravāt || 
 
Homage and worship are taught [to take place] according to the rule of 
seniority; alternatively, according to the greatness of virtues or out of re-
spect for a guest. 
 
This verse explains the rule of seniority, which was observed not only in 
the order in which the participants are greeted and honoured, but also in the 
order of entry and seating. For an elaboration on jyeṣṭhānukrama by Ku-
ladatta, see SAKURAI 2001: 18–19. Five kinds of seniority are listed there: 
according to initiation (abhiṣeka), according to observance (vrata), accord-
ing to knowledge (jñāna), according to birth (janma), and according to 
learning (vidyā). Our glossator acknowledges only the first. For atha we 
should adopt the glossator’s atha vā, otherwise the line would be hypomet-
rical. The formation ātitheyatva° is excessive for ātitheya° or atithitva°; the 
irregularity, however, allows for a metrical verse quarter. This last rule is 
especially noteworthy, because it suggests that the list of participants was 
not stable, but it could also include foreigners to the land, as the glossator 
suggests, provided of course that they are initiates. The glossator’s variants 
are matā for smṛtā and atitheyatva° for ātitheyatva°, provided that this lat-
ter is genuine. 
 
[6] snānaṃ gaṃdhaṃ ca vastraṃ ca mālābharaṇalepanaṃ || 
arghaṃ dhūpaṃ yathāśaktyā gaṇamaṇḍalam ārabhet || 
 
[After having gathered] according to one’s means [articles for] bathing, 
scented powders, cloths, garlands, ornaments, ointments, the guest wa-
ter, incense, one should begin the gaṇamaṇḍala [ritual]. 
 
This verse lists the articles of worship. Although not mentioned separately 
here, later on (see v. 7) a sponsor (indeed, sponsors) is mentioned, so it 
stands to reason that these are charged to him and that it is his duty to pre-
pare them. We should probably see an invisible absolutive meaning “after 
having gathered/prepared” for the accusatives. Note the glossator’s variants 
mālyaṃ ca vastrā° for vastraṃ ca mālā°. 
 
[7] samāhitāya karaṇī proktaiṣā karmavajriṇī || 
karṇe kṛtvāṃjaliṃ mūrddhni dātā cāṣṭāṃgato namet || 


--- PAGE 14 (Book pp. 288) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
288
The gesture calling to order is taught to be this: the female chief assis-
tant, after having placed the folded palms on the ears [she should place 
them] on the head. As for the sponsor, he should perform a prostration 
of the eight parts [of the body].  
 
Understand samāhitāya as samāhitatvāya. It is slightly unusual that the 
absolutive and the finite verb have different subjects, but otherwise the 
verse does not seem to make sense. It is also somewhat unusual that the 
chief assistant (elsewhere, as in the Tibetan translation, karmavajrin) is 
female, but this reading as well as its interpretation as instrumental is rein-
forced by the glossator. The point of her gesture (karaṇī) is to call the par-
ticipants to attention. This feature is not paralleled in any other manual 
known to me. 
 
[8] baliṃ ratnādibhāṇḍasthaṃ datvā lokottarān jinān || 
laukikān maṃtradevāṃś ca pūjayet tatvatatparaḥ || 
 
After having given the food offering, which is [to be] placed in a vessel 
[made of some kind of] precious material [such as gold and silver] or 
something else [such as clay], the one intent on reality (i.e., the chief of-
ficiant) should worship the supramundane Victors, the mundane [gods], 
and the mantra gods.  
 
The absolutive should probably be understood as a present participle. Al-
ternatively, offering the bali and worshipping the three groups are distinct. 
The compound tattvatatparaḥ may suggest that the worshipper should be 
aware of the ultimate nature of the mentioned deities. The last group, name-
ly the mantradevas, is interpreted by the glossator as genii locorum. The 
word ratna is frequently translated as “jewel,” but the actual meaning is 
simply “precious material,” including some metals. 
 
[9] maṃtrābhiprāyayogena padmabhāṇḍe mahāmṛtaṃ || 
daśāṃkuśaṃ ca saṃjapya sarvās tān paritoṣayet || 
 
He should [then] satisfy all [participants] with the great nectar and the 
ten hooks [which are placed] in a skull bowl and empowered by recita-
tion according to the intent of the Tantra.  
 


--- PAGE 15 (Book pp. 289) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
289 
	  
The transgressive substances, normally referred to as samayas, here called 
great (or “special”) nectars (mahāmṛta) and hooks (aṅkuśa) – both collec-
tive singulars – are placed in a skull cup (padmabhāṇḍa), empowered by 
recitation, and distributed. Although not mentioned here, it is usually un-
derstood that the substances are provided in small quantities (usually fash-
ioned into a pellet) and dissolved in liquor (cf. SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 327 ff.; 
SAKURAI 2001: 19). Correct sarvās to sarvāṃs. The recipients are not de-
scribed clearly; they could be the three groups mentioned above or, as the 
glossator would have it and what seems more likely, the participants them-
selves. We should accept the Tibetan reading and emend to tantrā-
bhiprāya°; the glossator’s reading tattvābhiprāya° seems to be a corruption 
of this. The substances are alluded to below by their acronyms (see v. 16). 
Two points are noteworthy here. The first is that the meats are usually 
called pradīpas (“lamps”), aṅkuśa is a somewhat less used term and inex-
tricably linked to the Catuṣpīṭhatantra (SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 315, 348–349). 
The influence of that text is observable also in v. 17, which features the odd 
word chiḍiṅga. The second interesting point is that here, as well as in v. 18, 
the hooks are said to number ten, but in fact this is the total number of the 
nectars and the meats (see commentary on v. 16). The glossator discreetly 
ignores this problem.  
 
[10] sarvāḥ sādhāraṇāḥ pūjāḥ sarvaguhyottarottarāḥ || 
mahāsukhapade sthitvā varteta gaṇanāyakaḥ || 
 
All common acts of worships and all [acts of worship which are] utterly 
and ultimately secret should be performed by the leader of the assembly 
[after having] established [himself] in the state of great bliss. 
 
Perhaps it would make the verse more elegant to emend to sarvā guhyo°. 
The medial optative varteta is a barbaric form, understand vartayeta. 
 
[11] vinayanibhṛtanārī namravaktrāraviṃdā  
vipulaguṇaviśālā tatvatas tatvayogyā | 
hṛdi vigatavikalpā sarvanepathyayuktā  
pṛthuṃtarakucayugmā sandade kāntibhāṇḍaṃ || 
 
The vessel with the charming [substances] should be presented by a shy 
woman, whose lotus-face is bent, who is rich in extensive virtues, who 
is truly suitable for truth, in whose heart discursiveness has disappeared, 


--- PAGE 16 (Book pp. 290) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
290
who is wearing all kinds of makeup, and who has a pair of exceedingly 
large breasts. 
 
This verse in the mālinī metre picks up the ninth stanza. The vessel with the 
consecrated transgressive substances is presented (understand: distributed?) 
to the assembly. The usage kānti for the amṛtas and aṅkuśas in the vessel is 
unknown to me from elsewhere, but this is what it must mean (see also v. 
33). It is not clear who this attractive young woman is, perhaps the same as 
the karmavajriṇī mentioned above (v. 7) or the officiant’s consort. We 
must emend pṛthuṃtara° to pṛthutara°. The form sandade probably stands 
for saṃdadet, another barbaric optative for saṃdadyāt. Kuladatta para-
phrases the verse thus (SAKURAI 2001: 20): īṣannamramukhapadmā (I 
conjecture this reading for īṣattāmra° against Sakurai, his mss., and the 
Tibetan translation) ghananirantaratuṅgastanayugalā (I prefer this, the 
mss.’s reading, over Sakurai’s ghananirantarā tuṃgastanayugalā) sarvā-
bharaṇavibhūṣitā ativistaraguṇayuktā manovikalparahitā savinayā yoṣid 
[…]; “A woman, whose lotus-face is slightly bent, who has a pair of breasts 
which are firm, with no space in-between and very prominent, who is deco-
rated with various kinds of ornaments, who is endowed with extensive vir-
tues, who is free from mental conceptualisations, who is shy, [...]” There 
she is also to recite a verse. Note that Kuladatta does not render the most 
obscure of her descriptions, tattvatas tattvayogyā (the point is perhaps that 
she must be suitable for nondual, antinomian practice), at the same time, 
there is a striking parallel between his paraphrase and the glossator’s text, 
which breaks off at this point. 
 
[12] kāyeṃdhanaṃ samujvālya jñānasaptārciṣā svayaṃ || 
tatvahomāya vaktrādau pātaye[1v]d rasādikaṃ || 
 
After having kindled at will the firewood (here: constituents) of the 
body (or: one’s person) with the fire of gnosis, one should drop the juice 
etc. in the mouth etc. in order [to achieve] the fire sacrifice of reality.  
 
We should either emend to pātayeta to fix the metre or read pātayed with a 
slight pause after it. Also, samujvālya should be corrected to samujjvālya. 
Juice (rasa) must mean the nectars (amṛta), in which case ādi stands for the 
meats. The meaning of °ādau is beyond my understanding; perhaps we 
have a double sandhi, that is to say, we must understand vaktre ādau, 
where the word “first” is picked up by tato in the next verse. Alternatively, 


--- PAGE 17 (Book pp. 291) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
291 
	  
ādau stands for the other points in the body which are reached by nectars. 
Otherwise the general import of this and of the next two verses is fairly 
clear: the tasting of the transgressive substances (normally amṛtāsvāda/na) 
is framed here as an internalised fire sacrifice (tattvahoma), where the fuel 
is the body, the fire is knowledge, and the oblation the aforementioned 
substances. The word svayaṃ is also slightly difficult, perhaps it does not 
mean more than “spontaneously” or “at will.” There are some similarities 
with what the commentator Bhavabhaṭṭa calls guhyahoma in the Ca-
tuṣpīṭhatantra (see SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 452–453).  
 
[13] tato hṛccaṃdramadhyasthaṃ biṃdudevaṃ mahāvibhuṃ || 
athavā sveṣṭadevādiṃ cakrābharaṇabhūṣitaṃ || 
 
Thereafter, the deity [in form of a] drop, the great pervasive Lord locat-
ed on a moon-disk in the heart, or one’s chosen deity, etc. adorned with 
the retinue  
 
The worshipped recipient of this internal homa is said to be the deity either 
in an aniconic or iconic form. The former is in the shape of a drop (bindu) 
atop a moon-disk in the heart. The latter appears in the fully visualised 
form adorned either with a discus or, more likely (also cf. Kuladatta’s para-
phrase, māṇḍaleya°, below), his retinue (cakra). Kuladatta seems to con-
flate the two, since he writes (SAKURAI 2001: 21): tato mano-
’ntargatasūkṣmabudbudākārapratimaṃ (I conjecture this reading against 
Sakurai’s °buddhabuddhākārapratimaṃ inspired by the reading of the 
Cambridge ms., not consulted by the Japanese editor, which is itself corrupt 
but more revealing: °budbuddhākāra°) mahāprabhuṃ (I disagree with Sa-
kurai’s mahāprabhu°) māṇḍaleyadevatāsahitam […] snāpayet; “Thereaf-
ter, he should bathe the great pervasive Lord accompanied by the deities of 
the maṇḍala (i.e., his retinue) in the shape of a subtle bubble within his 
heart.” budbuda, “bubble,” seems to paraphrase the word bindu. 
 
[14] anāmāṃguṣṭhabiṃdvagrais tritatvonmathitabhāsuraiḥ || 
svalpajihvāgrasannyastaiḥ sudhādhārāṃbubhiḥ snapet || 
 
should be bathed by oozing streams of nectar [emitted from the sub-
stances blazing with] rays [owing to their] having been agitated by the 
three realities (i.e., three mantras) placed on the tip of the tongue in a 
small quantity by the [joined] tips of the ring finger and the thumb. 


--- PAGE 18 (Book pp. 292) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
292
Taking the substances with the joined ring finger and thumb is a standard 
and old feature, compare the section on the earliest textual sources above. 
The reading °biṃdv° is very problematic, a (somewhat diagnostic) conjec-
ture °baddha° would solve the problem. The three tattvas must mean three 
mantras, which purify (again?) the substances. The Catuṣpīṭhatantra teach-
es the triad ha, ho/hoḥ, and hrī/hrīḥ (SZÁNTÓ 2013: I: 331, 440), which 
removes the disagreeable colour, smell, and potency respectively. Kuladatta 
(SAKURAI 2001: 19) seems to teach aṃ/a, haḥ, and hoḥ to purify the liquor 
holding the nectars and meats and the standard oṃ, āḥ, hūṃ to empower it. 
He also uses the root math in the same context, but there it is taken literally 
to mean mixing in with the ring finger and the thumb. We should probably 
emend svalpajihvāgra° to svalpaṃ jihvāgra° and understand the irregular 
simplex to stand for the causative snāpayet. The description is elliptical, 
but perhaps we are not very far from the point: the substances are first 
placed in a small quantity on the tongue, and as they are swallowed, they 
turn into streams of nectar which then bathe the deity.  
 
[15] nābhicakrotthitair nādair ākṛṣyākṛṣya tadrasaṃ || 
puṭikātrayataḥ pītvā mahāyogī sukhaṃ vaset || 
 
Gradually drawing in that nectar with subtle sounds (or: channels) aris-
ing from the discus in the navel, after having taken three sips, the great 
yogin[s] should rest at ease.  
 
The first line of this verse seems to describe this gradual journey aided by 
subtle sounds (nāda) or perhaps channels (if we emend to nāla) issuing 
from the cakra in the navel. Kuladatta (SAKURAI 2001: 21) has vital ener-
gies to correspond to this element: tato nābhimaṇḍalagatāyāmavāyubhis 
tadrasam ākṛṣya […]; “Then, after having drawn in that nectar by means of 
the restraining[-type] of vital energies located in the discus of the navel 
[...].” The word puṭikā in this sense is unattested elsewhere (our standard 
dictionaries give “bag” or “vessel”), save Kuladatta’s text as transmitted in 
the Cambridge ms.; Sakurai accepted ghuṭikā° (ibid.). I am also inclined to 
emend puṭikā° to ghuṭikā°, especially after having consulted TURNER’s 
entry on ghuṭṭ, “gulp, swallow” (1962–1966: 242), a word ultimately of 
Dravidian origin. The two letters pa and gha look very similar in Old 
Newar and other East Indian scripts. The subject, mahāyogī, should be 
understood as a collective singular. 
 


--- PAGE 19 (Book pp. 293) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
293 
	  
[16] vimūmaraśu _ _ d anyac ca dahanagokupaṃcakaṃ || 
taṃtrataṃtrāṃtare proktam anyac cāpi mahāmṛtaṃ || 
 
[The substances are:] faeces, urine, meat, [menstrual] blood, semen as 
well as [the meats of] a horse, an elephant, a human being, a cow, and a 
dog. But there are other [such lists of] great nectars taught in various 
Tantras.  
 
This is a description of the transgressive substances by their acronyms. The 
nectars are vi [faeces (viṣ)], mū [urine (mūtra)], mā [meat (māṃsa)], ra 
[menstrual blood (rakta)], and śu [semen (śukra)]. The hooks are da [horse 
or elephant (damya/dantin)], ha [elephant or horse (hastin/haya)], na [hu-
man (nara)], go [cow (go)], and ku [dog (kukkura)]. The second line seems 
to state that there are other possible lists for the nectars. By this perhaps the 
following is meant: the duplication of meat is usually taken for granted, but 
there is another list, which incidentally tallies better with the Śaiva tradi-
tion, where māṃsa is replaced by phlegm (kheṭa), see, e.g., SZÁNTÓ 2012: 
I: 358–359. It is not entirely clear why the scribe signals two lost/illegible 
syllables in the first quarter. With lengthening °mā° (for māṃsa), the quar-
ter should read vimūmāraśum anyac ca. 
 
[17] chiḍiṃgaṃ sarvato dadyād aṃtarīkṣasthitāya tat || 
vīro vīrāya devāya sarvadevīgaṇāya ca || 
 
The hero should offer sprinklings [of] that [mixture of substances] in all 
directions to the hero (i.e., the chief officiant), to the gods, and to the as-
sembly of various goddesses [visualised] in the sky. 
 
After tasting the substances, they should be offered to the officiant, the 
deity, and the goddesses. It is only the latter two who should be visualised 
in the sky, as the officiant is present. This happens through sprinkling, 
which is the meaning of the odd and specifically Catuṣpīṭha word chiḍiṅga, 
also spelt chiḍriṅga (SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 334). 
 
[18] tatvaṃ daśāṃkuśaṃ prāpya dātṝṇāṃ cittaśuddhaye || 
pratipāta _ sākalyaṃ bāhyadevāya ḍhaukayet || 
 
 


--- PAGE 20 (Book pp. 294) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
294
After having obtained the ten hooks, reality, in order to purify the minds 
of the sponsors †...† should be offered to the external gods.  
 
This verse is corrupt, but perhaps the point is that some of the aforemen-
tioned offering is extended to outer gods, so that the minds of the sponsors 
(note the plural) are purified. The connection between the two is not readily 
apparent. 
 
[19] bhūtānāṃ sarvabuddhatvaṃ siddhaye karuṇābalaiḥ || 
vajraghaṇṭānvitaiḥ stotraiś cakravartī tam arcayet || 
 
The one strong in compassion should propitiate the universal ruler (i.e., 
the deity) with praises accompanied by [shaking] the vajra-sceptre and 
[sounding] the bell, so that all beings may achieve absolute buddhahood.  
 
For bhūtānāṃ the Tibetan has sems can rnams la, which may suggest a 
variant *sattvānāṃ. Emend °buddhatvaṃ to °buddhatva°. Since we are 
lacking a subject and because the adjective is not apposite to stotra, we 
must emend karuṇābalaiḥ to karuṇābalaḥ to describe the officiant. We 
would have a subject in the final quarter, however, here there is nothing to 
pick up the pronoun tam, therefore we are constrained to emend to 
cakravartinam, meaning the deity, the object of the finite verb. Understand 
vajraghaṇṭānvitaiḥ as an elliptical compound meaning “accompanied by 
shaking the vajra-sceptre and sounding the bell,” alternatively, “accompa-
nied by sounding the vajra-bell,” so called because the bell is topped by a 
half-vajra. 
 
[20] śṛṃgārābhinayenaivaṃ datvā naivedyabhājanaṃ || 
pratyekaṃ sarvam ekaṃ vā śuddhyaśuddhaviparyayaiḥ || 
 
After having offered thus (?), with an (or: with the same?) erotic ges-
ture, a vessel [containing] food, either one each or the same to all, over-
turning [the concepts of] pure and impure,  
 
This verse is also puzzling. We should probably understand that the nai-
vedya vessel presented here is not the padmabhāṇḍa with the transgressive 
substances, but a new vessel with food. The third quarter seems to evoke 
two scenarios: there is only one vessel and everyone eats from that (which 
is of course highly impure by Indic standards) or there are as many vessels 


--- PAGE 21 (Book pp. 295) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
295 
	  
as participants. At any rate, the text enjoins that conventional values of 
purity-impurity should be suspended, indeed, overturned (we should emend 
to śuddhāśuddha° or śuddhyaśuddhi°). The first quarter describes the ges-
ture with which the vessel is presented. This is elsewhere (e.g. in the Kriyā-
saṃgrahapañjikā, see SAKURAI 2001: 20; SZÁNTÓ 2012: I: 327) called the 
kamalāvarttamudrā, an elegant gesture with which the vessel containing 
the samayas is received and passed on. If we emend evaṃ to eva, this 
would mean that the naivedya vessel is to be handled in the same way. 
However, the gesture was not mentioned before. 
 
[21] yatheṣṭhaṃ bhojanaiḥ pānair nānāpūjākadaṃbakaiḥ || 
yathāsukhaṃ yatheṣṭaṃ ca vaded dātā ca vajriṇī || 
 
[a vessel accompanied] with food and drink, as much as desired, [as 
well as] a multitude of offerings, the sponsor should say to the initiates 
“as you please” or “as you wish.” 
 
The first line should probably be construed with naivedyabhājanam from 
the previous verse (while correcting yatheṣṭhaṃ to yatheṣṭaṃ). Then, the 
sponsor should utter the words “as you please” or “as you wish” (emend 
the first ca to vā or understand it to have that meaning). We should also 
emend vajriṇī to vajriṇām, i.e., the initiates addressed by him. The point of 
this utterance seems to be that the strictly formalised part of the rite is over, 
and the feasting can begin. This is a standard feature of the rite (e.g. the 
Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā, see SAKURAI 2001: 21), although the older, scrip-
tural injunction does not make it clear who says the words (cf. SZÁNTÓ 
2012: I: 341). 
 
[22] iti vigatavikalpaḥ siṃhavan nirviśaṃko  
bhavaśamapadasaṃsthas tatvasadbhāvayuktaḥ || 
svahṛdayasamaprajñaḥ kaiśikādīn pragāyan  
sakalajinagaṇaughān pūjayen nṛtyato ’pi || 
 
Thus, [the officiant,] uninhibited like a lion [roaming at will], in whom 
conceptualisation has waned, who is [equally situated] in transmigration 
and liberation, who is merged with the true essence of reality, accompa-
nied by the consort pleasing to his heart, should worship the mass of all 
Victors singing [in various musical scales] beginning with the kaiśika, 
and also with dance. 


--- PAGE 22 (Book pp. 296) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
296
There follows a session of song and dance as acts of worship. This part is 
opened by the officiant accompanied by his consort (prajñā). kaiśika is a 
kind of musical scale (rāga). 
 
 
[23] yasya haste patet pātraṃ kramaśaḥ karavartanaiḥ || 
bhaven mohād avajñair vā tiraskārī sa daṇḍabhāk || 
 
Should the vessel drop from one’s hand [during] the gradual activity of 
the arms (i.e., passing the vessel around) because of lack of attention or 
disgust, that person is an offender liable for punishment.  
 
The next two verses address the issue of fines or punishments meted out in 
case of slight misdemeanours such as dropping the vessel or lack of deco-
rum. Emend haste to hastāt. 
 
[24] kasyacid avinayotpanne manovākkāyakarmabhiḥ || 
yuktaṃ tasya prakalpeta daṇḍa gaṇḍādiśāṃtaye ||  
[Gloss in lower margin:] kapardakapalacatuṣṭayaṃ 
 
Should one commit indecorous thoughts, speech, or deeds, it is fitting to 
mete out punishment in order to counteract [karmic retribution] such as 
boils. [Gloss: four weights of cowrie shells] 
 
Emend °otpanne to °otpannaiḥ and daṇḍa to daṇḍaṃ. The idea that one 
will become infected with boils (gaṇḍa) as karmic retribution for indeco-
rous thoughts, speech, or deeds is otherwise unknown to me. The Tibetan 
omits rendering this word. The gloss is a rather interesting detail: to my 
knowledge, this is the only case in this kind of literature where a well-
defined penalty is mentioned. The amount, four palas of cowrie shells (on 
the monetary use of which see GOPAL 21989: 213–214), seems rather mea-
gre. Unbecoming acts, according to, e.g., the Mahāmudrātilaka (ms. fol. 
47v, the passage is copied from the Vajramālābhidhāna, Tōh. 445, 267b), 
include chatting, quarrelling, expectorating, laughing, stretching the limbs, 
getting up again and again, and singing or dancing without permission from 
the officiant. Quarrelling during the gaṇacakra is singled out as a gross 
trespass in several works containing lists thereof (e.g. LÉVI 1929: 268: 
gaṇacakre vivādakāriṇaḥ […] sthūlāpattir bhavati), but it is not made clear 
what the subject of such a quarrel may be. 
 


--- PAGE 23 (Book pp. 297) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
297 
	  
[25] hastadvayena mudrābhir vidhivat tatvatāṃ varaḥ || 
anyonyatarpa[2r]ṇaṃ kṛtvā kelikrīḍārasotsavaiḥ || 
 
That best of experts, after having mutually propitiated [his consort] with 
displays of gestures with the two hands [and] nectar[-like] merriments 
of amorous sport and play, as prescribed,  
 
For vidhivat tatvatāṃ varaḥ there are several possible emendations: 
vidhivat tadvidāṃ varaḥ, vidhitattvavidāṃ varaḥ, less likely vidhivat 
tattvatatparaḥ, since we have the same compound following the predicate 
in the next verse.  
 
[26] gaṃbhīrodārasāṃkathyaiḥ pūjayet tatvatatparaḥ || 
gītavādyādibhir nṛtyaiḥ prajñopāyaratottamaiḥ || 
 
the one intent on reality should worship with conversations on the pro-
found and vast [doctrine], with dance accompanied by singing, music, 
etc., and most exquisite amorous acts [in which] Wisdom and Means 
[unite]. 
 
The last quarter is an explicit mention of intercourse, since prajñā and 
upāya are codewords for the female and male initiates. 
 
[27] samādareṇa cānyonyaṃ samaśuśrūṣayā bhṛśaṃ || 
daśapāramitāyogair yajeta yajñavad vratī || 
 
The observer of the vow, who is an expert in propitiatory sacrifice, 
should, with mutual respect and mutual reverence, sacrifice intensively 
with meditation practices [embodying] the ten perfections. 
 
Emend yajñavad to yajñavid. The precise meaning of the third quarter es-
capes me. An exegete, Mahāsukhavajra, states in his commentary to the 
Caṇḍamahāroṣaṇatantra (Padmāvatī ms. fol. 30r): suratayoga evaikasmin 
ṣaṭ pāramitāḥ pūritā bhavanti |; “The six perfections become fulfilled in a 
single place, the yoga of intercourse.” The list of six is older, but in later 
literature both are used interchangeably. Achieving the perfections (of giv-
ing etc.) occurs through arduous and lengthy practice in the non-Tantric 
Mahāyāna; the Tantric mode of practice has the same aim, but it offers a 
“shortcut.”  


--- PAGE 24 (Book pp. 298) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
298
[28] kṣamitvā gaṃtukāmo pi sāṃjaliṃ saṃmukhaṃ gataḥ || 
kāryaṃ kṛtvāgato dhīmān praviśet praṇato nataḥ || 
 
As for a person wishing to leave [the assembly temporarily], he should, 
after having excused himself, depart with folded hands, facing [the offi-
ciant]. Having finished his business, the wise one should return and en-
ter bowing dutifully. 
 
This verse contains the rule for excusing oneself to leave the assembly 
temporarily. Emend sāñjaliṃ to sāñjaliḥ, and praṇato nataḥ to prayato na-
taḥ or praṇato ’bhitaḥ.  
 
[29] sadā yogātmako bhūtvā sadā tatvaparāyaṇaḥ || 
sadā vinayasaṃpannaḥ sadā cakraṃ samācaret || 
 
One should consistently perform the [gaṇa]cakra, [and he should do so] 
always intent on yoga, always dedicated to reality, and always with due 
decorum. 
 
A general injunction. The final sadā is perhaps superfluous, unless we are 
to understand it as a call to celebrate the ritual periodically. 
 
[30] pakvānnam iva vīrāṇāṃ mudrā sādhāraṇā smṛtā || 
tasmān niḥśeṣakāmena svaṃ parāṃś caiva pūjayeta || 
 
Just like (the?) cooked food, the mudrā[s] (consort[s]? hand gesture[s]?) 
[are] taught to be common to [all] heroes (i.e., the male initiates). One 
should therefore worship one’s private [mudrā], but also those of others, 
with all objects of desire. 
 
Understand the second quarter as collective singulars; alternatively, emend 
to mudrāḥ sādhāraṇāḥ smṛtāḥ. I am forced to emend svaṃ parāṃś to svāṃ 
parāś, and we must correct the predicate to pūjayet metri causa. The overall 
meaning is somewhat obscure. The cooked food perhaps refers back to the 
communal naivedya vessel. The verse might suggest that the female partic-
ipants must yield sexually to all. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 25 (Book pp. 299) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
299 
	  
[31] yāvat svechā sadānaṃdaṃ līlayā tatvalīlayā || 
tāvat tatvanijāṃ pūjāṃ kartavyaṃ prajñayānayā || 
 
The worship of reality as oneself (!?) should be performed together with 
this (?) consort (wisdom?) until one so desires, with true bliss, with 
grace, with the grace of reality (?). 
 
We should correct to svecchā and emend to tattvanijā pūjā kartavyā. The 
strange sadānandaṃ seems to be adverbial. The overall meaning is ob-
scure: the act of self-worship together with the consort (prajñā) should be 
continued while it causes pleasure? 
 
[32] cakṣurādiṃ mahopāyai rūpādi lalānāgaṇaiḥ || 
vijñānena mahānandaṃ bāhye nityaṃ pravartayet || 
 
[After having empowered] the eyes etc. (i.e., the sense faculties) and 
form etc. (i.e., the respective objects of the sense faculties) [as] the host 
of [divine] women together with their consorts, with this awareness (?) 
one should constantly activate great bliss in the external [world]. 
 
This verse, too, is obscure. I conjecture that it may be an injunction to em-
power the senses (eyes etc.) as the goddesses (emend to °lalanā°), e.g. 
Rūpavajrā etc., together with their male consorts (in which case we must 
emend to sahopāyai) and thus, with this knowledge, one should experience 
great bliss with respect to external sensory objects during ordinary activi-
ties, i.e., outside meditation sessions. At least this accords with general 
Tantric practice. 
 
[33] kuliśakamalakāṃtiṃ caṃdraśubhraṃ suśubhraṃ  
ghṛṇivisarajinaughān niḥsvabhāvān svabhāvān || 
atitararatiramyāṃ prajñayā sājñayā ca  
vihati mukhaśuddhyā sarvasatvaṃ susatvaḥ || 
 
This verse is beyond my comprehension.  
 
[34] atha visarjane prāpte maṃgalāgītistotrataḥ || 
stavitvā sarvadevānāṃ cakrāṇāṃ ca samakṣataḥ || 
 


--- PAGE 26 (Book pp. 300) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
300
Next, once the time for dismissal has arrived, after having chanted 
praises with hymns of auspicious songs, in the presence of all deities 
and [the participants of] the assembly,  
 
This is the last section proper of the rite, the dismissal of deities and the 
participants. Understand maṅgalagītistotraiḥ: the irregular lengthening is 
required by the metre (but note that the very same rule is broken in the first 
quarter), whereas the suffix taḥ stands for a plural instrumental. stavitvā 
means stutvā. cakrāṇāṃ must mean the participants of the cakra. 
 
[35] dātṛṇābhyukṣarā śiṣyā saṃyojya jinasaṃvaraṃ || 
sarvabuddhāni buddhatve cānusaṃśya niruttare || 
 
[the officiant] should besprinkle the sponsors, then [re]appoint [his] 
good disciples to the vow[s] of the Victors (i.e., buddhas), then praise 
(i.e., foretell? pray for?) all beings [to reach] unsurpassed buddhahood, 
 
I conjecture dātṝn abhyukṣya sacchiṣyān […] °saṃvare | sarvabhūtāni […] 
cānuśaṃsya. For the plural “sponsors,” cf. v. 18 above. The Tibetan sug-
gests placing a flower on the head of the sponsor. The accusa-
tive °saṃvaraṃ is perhaps original; note, however, that the Tibetan does 
not mirror disciples, but has another absolutive meaning “having uttered 
auspicious words.” The second line is more obscure: note the irregular ac-
cusative neuter; the Tibetan also suggests plural °bhūtān.  
 
[36] ucchiṣṭadevān saṃtuṣya samāsṛjya mahābaliṃ || 
dharmajñānātmako bhūtvā yuṃjīta matimān śubhaṃ || 
 
then propitiate the deities of the leftovers [by] having dispersed a great 
food offering. Then the clever one should perform [this] auspicious 
[practice] after having developed in himself the gnosis of the doctrine:  
 
Understand or correct saṃtuṣya as/to saṃtoṣya. śubhaṃ should perhaps be 
emended to śubhe with the meaning śubhāya, in which case the translation 
would be: “the clever one should perform [the following] yogic exercise for 
the sake of auspiciousness.” For this practice (vv. 36cd–39), we once again 
have a parallel with the Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā (SAKURAI 2001: 21): tada-
nu nairātmyajñānātmako buddhimān svaśirasa (although widely attested, I 
cannot make sense of svasvaśirasa, which I have corrected) ūrdhvaṃ vi-


--- PAGE 27 (Book pp. 301) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
301 
	  
tastimātropari sravadaparyantajñānāmṛtadhāraṃ (Sakurai reproduces the 
present participle outside the compound) candramaṇḍalaṃ vibhāvya | tad-
madhye svasvadevatābījāni [|] sthire sati hṛdantaḥsuṣirasthacandra-
maṇḍalopari (Sakurai reads hṛdantaḥsvaśirastha°, which does not make 
sense to me) svasvadevatācihnāni yavaphalapramāṇāni vibhāvya prīṇayet ||; 
“Thereafter, the wise one, who has interiorised the gnosis of selflessness, 
should visualise one span above his head a moon-disk oozing boundless 
streams of gnosis-nectar. Then, in the middle of that [he should visualise] 
each deity’s seed[-syllable]. When this [visualisation] has become stable, 
he should visualise on a moon-disk situated within the subtle space in his 
heart each deity’s implement measuring a barleycorn [each]. Then he 
should propitiate [himself as the deity].” According to Kuladatta’s para-
phrase, dharmajñānātmakaḥ means nairātmyajñānātmakaḥ. 
 
[37] kiṣkumātropari sūkṣmaṃ dhyātvā dharmālayaṃ jinaṃ || 
anantāmṛtavat tasmāt skravaṃtaṃ ciṃtayet svake || 
 
After having visualised one cubit above [his head] a subtle abode of the 
doctrine, that of the Victors (i.e., a moon-disk), containing endless 
[amounts of] nectar, he should think that [streams of nectar] ooze from 
that onto his head. 
 
Again judging from Kuladatta’s paraphrase quoted above, the dharmālayaṃ 
jinaṃ anantāmṛtavat must be a moon-disk oozing nectar. The author could 
not write jainaṃ for metrical reasons, but this is the meaning. Emend 
skravaṃtaṃ to sravantaṃ. Note that kiṣkumātropari […] svake was some-
what reformulated in Kuladatta’s paraphrase. It may be significant that this 
distance is twice as much as the dvādaśānta of the Śaiva tradition, note, 
however, that Kuladatta’s vitasti could be equal to that length. 
 
[38] siddhārthamātra[2v]sūkṣmaṃ tat cihnaṃ vā vajriṇaṃ svakaṃ || 
vajrāgre nāsikāgre vā dhyātvā sphārayate sthire || 
 
Or, after having visualised either the holder of the vajra (i.e., the deity) 
himself or his [chief] implement (i.e., a vajra-sceptre), small in size like 
a mustard seed, on the tip of the vajra (i.e., the penis) or the tip of his 
nose. Once [the visualisation is] stable, he should emit [the nectar]. 
 


--- PAGE 28 (Book pp. 302) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
302
This verse is somewhat obscure. It seems to present alternatives for the 
moon-disk visualised above the head. If this is correct, then Kuladatta rein-
terpreted the passage freely, since there is no mention of the insignia of the 
deity (tat cihnaṃ should then be corrected to taccihnaṃ) or the deity him-
self (understand svakaṃ as svayam) as a suitable variant, nor does he give 
alternatives for the locus of visualisation (alternatively, svakaṃ is perhaps a 
corruption of svake, “on his head,” but that would be a repetition). For 
sphārayate, we should probably understand sphārayet. We should also read 
sthire as a locative absolute as in Kuladatta. Of course, there is a variety of 
further ways in which one could emend the text, but this is the one that 
seems most likely to me. 
 
[39] hṛdayāmbaramadhyesminn akhaṇḍaśaśimaṇḍalaṃ || 
tatra dharmasamālīnaṃ sūkṣmavajraṃ sadā smaret || 
yavaphalapramāṇaṃ ca _ _ vajraṃ bhāvayet || 
 
In the middle of the subtle space in his heart, he should imagine a disk 
[in the shape of a] full moon, and on that, joined with [that abode of] the 
doctrine, [he should] always [visualise] a small vajra-sceptre †...† 
measuring a barley corn †...† 
 
This stanza too is obscure and corrupt. The compound dharmasamālīnaṃ is 
somewhat puzzling (but we had dharmālaya in v. 37 describing the moon-
disk), as is the sixth verse quarter. The word sadā is a mere verse-filler. 
 
[40] karuṇādirasopetaṃ trivimokṣaṃ manomayam || 
sarvākārārthasaṃyuktaṃ nirvikāramahāsukhaṃ || 
 
Endowed with the essence of foremost compassion, [having the nature 
of] the three liberations, consisting of mind, endowed with †...† all as-
pects, unchangeable great bliss– 
 
Here we have another parallel with the Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā (SAKURAI 
2001: 21–22): tato yogatatparo yogī prajñopāyasvabhāvo mahākaruṇā-
rasasaṃyuktaṃ vimokṣatrayasvabhāvaṃ sarvavastusaṃśuddham avikāra-
paramārthasukhaṃ sarvakarmasu sarvaprakāreṇānantatathāgataparama-
rūpaṃ vicintayet ||; “Then, the yogin, dedicated to yoga, having the nature 
of wisdom of and means, should contemplate [the resolve of enlighten-
ment] as being joined with the essence of great compassion, having the 


--- PAGE 29 (Book pp. 303) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
303 
	  
nature of the three liberations, pure regarding all things (?), [equal to] the 
unchangeable bliss of absolute truth, having the supreme form of endless 
Tathāgatas, in all rituals, in all aspects.” If Kuladatta’s reading is correct, 
beginning with v. 40 we have a new topic, a general injunction concerning 
all rituals undertaken subsequently by the yogin. I suspect that Kuladatta’s 
text is missing the actual object of contemplation, which is the resolve of 
enlightenment, which is also semen in the Tantric tradition (bodhicitta), as 
we have it here (41c). My interpretation of karuṇādi° is somewhat unusual 
(not “compassion etc.”), but it is inspired by Kuladatta’s mahākaruṇā°. The 
point is that this is not common compassion, but the compassion felt by the 
Buddhist practitioner in spite of his/her knowledge that all beings and ex-
istents are ultimately empty (lacking an inherent nature). The three libera-
tions, also often called gateways thereof, are śūnyatā (emptiness), animitta 
(causelessness), and apraṇihita (desirelessness). Kuladatta’s sarva-
vastusaṃśuddhaṃ seems to mirror manomayaṃ, but I do not quite see how. 
Alternatively, it mirrors sarvākārārthasaṃyuktaṃ, an opaque expression. 
Emptiness is frequently described as sarvākāravaropetaṃ, “endowed with 
all best aspects.” Perhaps °artha° is a corruption for a synonym of °vara°. 
Kuladatta’s °anantatathāgataparamarūpaṃ does not seem to have an 
equivalent in our text, unless this is the way in which he intended to say 
bodhicitta, which is not impossible. 
 
[41] prajñopāyātmako yogī sarvakarmaṇi sarvathā || 
saṃbodhicittasadrūpaṃ ciṃtayet tatvatatparaḥ || 
 
[thus] should the yogin, who [unites] within himself wisdom and means 
[and] is dedicated to reality, contemplate the true nature of the resolve 
of perfect enlightenment in all [subsequent] rituals, at all times. 
 
[42] prāṇamaṃtrākṣarair japtaṃ biṃdu prakṛtibhāsvaraṃ || 
dharmādharmair vinirmuktaṃ tatvataḥ paribhāvayet || 
 
He should contemplate the bindu, luminous by its very nature, recited 
with the syllables of the mantras of the vital energies (?), as utterly free 
of both dharma and adharma (?).  
 
Emend to binduṃ. Judging from Kuladatta’s paraphrase, this verse and the 
next one do not form part of the practice previously described. What exact-
ly the first quarter refers to is beyond my comprehension, since the bindu, 


--- PAGE 30 (Book pp. 304) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
304
that is to say, the anusvāra crowning mantra-syllables, is not recited on its 
own. In any case, we are assured in the next verse that this practice, what-
ever it may be, or practice in general, is conducive to liberation. 
 
[43] tatkāle sarvakāle vā mokṣodyamaparāyaṇaḥ || 
kṛtvābhyāsaṃ sadākālaṃ sa labhen mokṣasaṃpadaṃ || 
 
Whether at that time (i.e., the gaṇacakra) or any other time, if the one 
dedicated to the effort [which brings about] liberation performs the prac-
tice consistently, he will obtain the accomplishment of liberation. 
 
[44] saṃpūjyaṃ jagatāṃ manorathaparaṃ sarveṇa dānādinā  
piṣṭvā sarvavikalpamohanagaraṃ nairātmyavajrādinā || 
yaś cakraṃ prativartate jinaguror jñānodayaṃ mokṣadaṃ  
tasyāryasya kṛpāparasya mahato nityaṃ bhṛśaṃ śreyase || 
 
The supreme wish of people should be honoured with everything, giving 
etc. He, who after having destroyed with [weapons] beginning with the 
vajra-sceptre of selflessness the city of delusion [founded on] various 
conceptualisations, celebrates the knowledge-raising, liberation-giving 
assembly of the Victor-Guru, for such a great, noble man, intent on 
compassion, there will always be great success. 
 
This somewhat obscure verse in the śārdūlavikrīḍita metre, which I have 
translated rather freely, describes the benefits of the practice (phalaśruti). 
Before jagatāṃ, the scribe first wrote sarva°, but then realised his mistake 
and deleted it. Understand prativartate as simply vartayati or emend to 
parivartate. The compound jinaguror is unusual and unparalleled. It is also 
somewhat unclear who the intended beneficiary is. Perhaps it is the spon-
sor(s), but it is equally possible that all the participants are meant. 
 
[45] gaṇāya gaṃbhīraguṇopayuktaye  
vikalpakalpājitakleśahāriṇe || 
savāsanāvāsavimuktamuktaye  
vibhāvabhāvāya namo stu yogine || 
 
Homage to the yogin[s], [members of] the assembly, endowed with pro-
found virtues, [they] who remove the obscurations acquired due to con-
ceptualisations [entertained] through the aeons, [they] who possess lib-


--- PAGE 31 (Book pp. 305) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
305 
	  
eration free from the abode of latent imprints, [they] who [are beyond 
both] liberation and bound existence. 
 
The work concludes with four verses of praise, and it is perhaps here that 
the author’s idiosyncratic usage is most visible. Apparently, he strives to 
achieve poetic effect through alliterative yamakas (vikalpakalpa°, 
savāsanāvāsa°, vibhāvabhāvāya in the first verse) and by using somewhat 
more sophisticated metres (vaṃśastha, upajāti, vaṃśastha, and svāgatā 
respectively), much to the detriment of lucidity. We should most likely 
understand °upayuktaye as simply °yuktāya. Emend °ājita° to °ārjita° or 
°ācita° and understand the first members of the compound in reverse, that 
is to say, kalpārjitavikalpa° or kalpācitavikalpa°. It is helpful to go into 
“soft focus” while interpreting the third quarter. vibhāva probably stands 
for abhāva, that is to say, nirvāṇa. The object of obeisance in this verse is 
most likely the group of male participants (in which case we take gaṇāya 
literally and understand yogine as a collective singular; this interpretation is 
supported by the next verse) or, perhaps less likely, the officiant (in which 
case we understand yogine literally and gaṇāya as gaṇanāyakāya).  
 
[46] vibhūṣaṇair bhūṣitayāṃgayaṣṭyā  
cakrāmbare caṃdrakaleva dhāmnā || 
karoti yā kṛtyakalāpakāya  
namo stu tāyai lalanāgaṇāyai || 
 
Homage to that assembly of ladies, whose slender bodies are adorned 
with ornaments, who resemble the digit of the moon because of their 
lustre as they move through the sky that is the assembly, performing all 
duties. 
 
This somewhat freely translated verse describes and pays obeisance to the 
female participants. The datives are at the very least irregular, note espe-
cially tāyai for tasyai. 
 
[47] salaukikaṃ lokaguruṃ sacakriṇaṃ  
vibhāvya bhāvyaṃ jagatāṃ vimuktaye || 
hitāśayā yo nukaroti maṇḍalaṃ  
namo stu tasmai gaṇacakravartine || 
 


--- PAGE 32 (Book pp. 306) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
306
Homage to the leader (lit. universal monarch) of the assembly, who, af-
ter having visualised [all] that needs to be visualised – the teacher of the 
world (i.e., the Buddha or Vajrasattva) together with the worldly deities 
and the retinue – with the intention of [bringing spiritual] benefit [for 
beings], imitates the maṇḍala for the liberation of the world. 
 
This verse pays obeisance to the leader of the assembly. Understand 
sacakriṇaṃ as sacakraṃ and hitāśayā as hitāśayena. For anukaroti, the 
Tibetan reads *atra karoti (SHIZUKA 2011: 69). In this case, we should 
translate: “who performs the maṇḍala[-rite] ... in this world.” 
 
[48] sarvasatva[3r]gatinirmalabhāva- 
bhāvanodbhavamahāsukhapiṇḍaṃ || 
piṇḍitottamaparārtham udāraṃ  
dārayā saha name kṛtasarvam || 
 
I pay homage to him, together with [his/my] consort, who has per-
formed all, who [possesses] a heap of great bliss born from meditation 
on the spotless nature of [he] who is the refuge of all beings (i.e., the de-
ity), who has distilled the supreme benefit for others, the lofty one. 
 
The obscure final verse also eulogises the chief officiant. Alternatively, the 
object of homage is in the first line, i.e., great bliss, in which case the obei-
sance is performed by the author together with his consort, which is per-
haps what the Tibetan translation suggests (SHIZUKA 2011: 69). Understand 
°gati° as śaraṇam, alternatively emend to °gata° following the Tibetan. 
The reading dārayā is guaranteed by the metre; ironically, the correct form 
would be dāraiḥ.  
 
|| gaṇacakravidhiḥ samāptaḥ || 
 
The Ritual Procedure for the Gaṇacakra is completed. 


--- PAGE 33 (Book pp. 307) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
307 
	  
 
Diplomatic edition of the fragmentary gloss 
 
|| namo buddhāya || || 
 
taṃtreṣv abhiṣiktānāṃ caryāyatayennānāṃ gaṇacakravidhānam aṃta-
reṇa siddhir na bhavatīti kṛtvā vighnotsāraṇāya mahate siddhaye prāpanā-
rthaṃ | sveṣṭadevamahāvajraṃdharanamaskārapūrvakagaṇacakravidhā-
nasya saṃkṣiptā paṃjikeyaṃ || || 
 
[ad 1] tatrādau tāvat || vajrasatvam iti || abhedyāyuktaparamārthasat-
vaṃ bhāvābhāvātmakam iti || saṃvṛtiparamārtharūpe | vibhuṃ prabhuṃ | 
sabodhipakṣayogāt sarvakāma iti, mahāsukhakāmaṃ taṃ pradadātīti sa-
rvakāmapradaṃ, devam iti divyatīti devas taṃ praṇamyādau ahaṃ 
gaṇamaṇḍalaṃ, yogayoginī<|dva|>dvayamaṇḍalaṃ vakṣye vadiṣyāmi || 
 
[ad 2] nirvikalpaparaḥ || nirvikalpasvabhāvaḥ | maṃtram asyāstīti 
maṃtrī | nityakālasamāhitaḥ | niṣadyaca||karmayānaśayanāsanamaithu-
nādiṣu tatsvarūpeṇa samāhitaḥ, sarvataṃtrānusārajñaḥ, niravaśeṣa-
taṃtrānugataḥ | daśatatvavidhānavit | daśatatvam iti | bāhyaguhyābhiṣekī 
1 nirvikalpaviśuddhī 2 bāhyaguhyamaṇḍalajñaḥ 3 vivekasamādhikovidaḥ 4 
paramārthacaryābhirataḥ 5 mudrādisarvagamanāgamane sarvakarmānu-
sārajñaḥ 6 japahomapūjāpravartakaḥ 7 sarvatṛṣṇāvinirmuktaḥ 8 yathāya-
thāgocaradharmadeśakaḥ 9 advayasamatāvidhijñaḥ 10 iti || evaṃvidho 
yogī gaṇamaṇḍalam ārabhed (= 6c) iti saṃbaṃdhaḥ || 
 
[ad 4] devatāgaṇasaṃkīrṇaḥ | tatvasadbhāvānuraktayuvatījanākule, 
rūpādipaṃcaviṣayānuyukte vivikte, asajjanajanarahite, ramye gehe, mano-
jñe, asmiṃs taṃtre nije pūjyāḥ | para[3v]mārthapūjāṃ samārabhet || ku-
ryād ity arthaḥ | 
 
[ad 5] jyeṣṭhānukramayogena vaṃdanā pūjanā matā || abhiṣekadīkṣā-
jyeṣṭhānukrameṇa vaṃdanāpūjanādikaṃ kartavyaṃ | atha vā guṇamāhā-
tmyaṃ guṇaprakarṣāc ca, atitheyatvagauravāt, deśāṃtaragato ’tithitva-
gauravāt || 
 


--- PAGE 34 (Book pp. 308) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
308
[ad 6] snānaṃ gaṃdhaṃ ca mālyaṃ ca vastrābharaṇalepanaṃ || artha 
dhūpaṃ yathāśaktyā gaṇamaṇḍalam ārabhet || yathāśaktyā kubjaṃvo(?)-
payuktena gaṇacakraṃ kartavyaṃ || śeṣaṃ sugamaṃ || 
 
[ad 7] samāhitāya karaṇī prokteṣā karmavajriṇī || karṇe kṛtāṃjaliṃ 
mūrddhnā kāyavākcittavikṣepārthaṃ yogakaraṇīṃ karmavajriṇyā gaṇā-
nāṃ pratyekamūrddhni aṃjaliṃ kṛtvā karṇe kartavyaṃ || paścād dātā cā-
ṣṭārgena cakraṃ praṇāmyate || 
 
[ad 8] baliṃ ratnādibhāṇḍasthaṃ khādyādikaṃ ratnābhāṇḍe sthāpayi-
tvā lokottarān jinān tathāgatādīn ādau datvā paścāl laukikān harihara-
hiraṇyagarbhādīn maṃtradevāṃś ca kṣetrādipratibaṃdhān pūjayet tatva-
tatparaḥ || arcayet tatvavidhānajñaḥ ||  
 
[ad 9] tatvābhiprāyayogena samāyātitaṃtrakrameṇa padmabhāṇḍe 
mahāmṛtaṃ || kapālādibhāṇḍe paṃcāmṛtādikam aṃkuśaś cādau samaya-
kuśaṃ ca saṃjapya maṃtrapūtaṃ kṛtvā sarvān tān gaṇān paritoṣayet || 
pradātavyaṃ || 
 
[ad 10] sarvāḥ sādhāraṇāḥ pūjyā sakalajagatsukhāvāptakāraṇāḥ sa-
rvaguhyogurottarā niravaśeṣaparamārtharahasyānāṃ rahasyatarā || ma-
hāsukhapade sthitvā prajñopāyasamarase sthitvā vartanta gaṇanāyakaḥ || 
taccakravartī  
 
[ad 11] vineyanibhṛtanārī savinayā yoṣit namravaktrāraviṃdā īṣanna-
mramukhapadmā vipulaguṇaviśālā, ativistaraguṇayuktā tatvā tatvayogyā 
paramārthataḥ paramārthaguṇayuktā, hṛdi viga [explicit ms.] 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Manuscripts13 
 
Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā  
Ms. (one of many) Cambridge University Library, Add. 1697.12. 
Kriyāsamuccaya of Jagaddarpaṇa  
Ms. (one of many) Kyoto University Library no. 7. 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
13 NAK = National Archives, Kathmandu. NGMPP = Nepal-German Manu-
script Preservation Project microfilms. 


--- PAGE 35 (Book pp. 309) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
309 
	  
Gaṇacakravidhi & Saṃkṣiptā Pañjikā  
Ms. NAK 5-7871 = NGMPP B 104/10. 
Catuṣpīṭhapañjikā of Kalyāṇavarman  
Ms. NAK 3-360 = NGMPP B 30/37. 
Padmāvatī of Mahāsukhavajra 
Ms. NAK 3-402 = NGMPP B 31/7. 
Padminī of Ratnarakṣita 
Ms. Buddhist Library Nagoya, Takaoka CA 17. 
“Mahāpratisarādhāriṇī”  
Ms. NAK 1-1679 = NGMPP B 24/24. 
Mahāmudrātilaka  
Ms. Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Preußischer Kulturbesitz Orientabteilung 
Hs. or. 8711. 
Śālihotra of Indrasena 
Ms. NAK 4-1640 = NGMPP A 47/3. 
Śiṣyānugrahavidhi  
Ms. A six folios in Kaiser Library 139 = NGMPP C 14/16; ms. B nine 
folios in NAK 1-1697 = NGMPP A 936/1. 
“Samājatathānuṣārinī”  
Ms. NAK 1-1679 = NGMPP B 24/13. 
Saṃvarodayā nāma maṇḍalopāyikā of Bhūvācārya 
Ms. Tokyo University Library no. 450. 
Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālaśaṃvara  
Ms. Collège de France, Institut d’Études indiennes, Lévi no. 48. 
Hevajrasādhana collection of various authors 
Ms. photographic copy in Niedersächsische Staats- und Universitätsbib-
liothek, Göttingen Xc 14/39. 
 
Editions, translation, and studies  
 
CUEVAS, B.J. 2015. Ra Yeshé Sengé – The All-pervading Melodious Drum-
beat. The Life of Ra Lotsawa. New York: Penguin Books. 
GOPAL, L. 21989. The Economic Life of Northern India, c. A.D. 700–1200. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. 
GRIFFITHS, A. & SZÁNTÓ, P.-D. 2015. Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinī-
jālaśaṃvara. In: J. Silk, V. Eltschinger, O. von Hinüber (eds.), Brill’s 
Encyclopedia of Buddhism. Volume I: Literature and Languages. Lei-
den: Brill, pp. 367–372. 


--- PAGE 36 (Book pp. 310) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
310
ISAACSON, H. 2009. A collection of Hevajrasādhanas and related works in 
Sanskrit. In: Ernst Steinkellner in cooperation with Duan Qing and 
Helmut Krasser (eds.), Sanskrit Manuscripts in China: Proceedings of a 
panel at the 2008 Beijing Seminar on Tibetan Studies October 13 to 17. 
Beijing: China Tibetology Publishing House, pp. 89–136. 
KITTAY, D.R. 2011. Interpreting the Vajra Rosary: Truth and Method 
Meets Wisdom and Method. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Colum-
bia University. 
KLEIN-SCHWIND, S.G. 2012. The Compendium of the Ten Fundamentals. 
Daśatattvasaṃgraha of paṇḍita Kṣitigarbha. Critical Edition of the 
Sanskrit Text with Introduction and Annotated English Translation. Un-
published Doctoral Dissertation, University of Hamburg. 
LALOU, M. 1965. Préliminaires d’une étude des gaṇacakra. In: Studies of 
Esoteric Buddhism and Tantrism. Koyasan: Koyasan University, pp. 
41–46. 
LÉVI, S. 1929. Autour d’Aśvaghoṣa. Journal Asiatique 215, pp. 255–285. 
PANT, M.R. & SHARMA, A.D. 1977. The Two Earliest Copper-plate In-
scriptions from Nepal. Kathmandu: Nepal Research Centre. 
SAKURAI, M. 2001. Kriyāsaṃgraha shosetsu no ganachyakura girei [Kri-
yāsaṃgraha 所説のガ
ナチャクラ儀礼]. Chisan Gakuho [智山学報] 50, 
pp. 17–40. 
SANDERSON 2009. The Śaiva Age: An Explanation of the Rise and Domi-
nance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period. In: Sh. Einoo (ed.), 
Genesis and Development of Tantrism. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Cul-
ture, University of Tokyo, pp. 41–349. 
SHIZUKA, H. 2007. Ganachyakura no kenkyu: Indo koki mikkyo ga kaita 
chihei [ガナチャクラの研究: インド後期密教が開いた地平]. Tokyo: 
Sankibo Busshorin. 
2008. An Interim Report on the Study of Gaṇacakra: Vajrayāna’s New 
Horizon in Indian Buddhism. In: Editorial Boards ICEBS (eds.), Esoter-
ic Buddhist Studies: Identity in Diversity. Koyasan: Koyasan University, 
pp. 185–198. 
2011. Ratnākaraśānti no ganachyakura giki [ラトナーカラシャーン-
ティのガナチャクラ儀軌]. Mikkyo Bunka [密教文化] 224, pp. 51(78)–
83(46). 
SNELLGROVE, D.L. 1959. The Hevajra Tantra: A Critical Study, Part 2: 
Sanskrit and Tibetans Texts. London: Oxford University Press. 
SZÁNTÓ, P.-D. 2012. Selected Chapters from the Catuṣpīṭhatantra. 2 vols. 
Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of Oxford. 


--- PAGE 37 (Book pp. 311) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
311 
	  
TANEMURA, R. 2004. Kuladatta’s Kriyāsaṃgrahapañjikā. A critical edi-
tion and annotated translation of selected sections. Groningen: Egbert 
Forsten. 
Tōh. Tibetan canonical material in the Derge (Sde dge) print according to 
Ui Hakuju, Suzuki Munetada, Kanakura Yenshō, Tada Tōkan. A Com-
plete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons (Bkaḥ-ḥgyur and 
Bstan-ḥgyur). Sendai: Tōhoku Imperial University, 1934. 
TSUDA, Sh. 1974. The Saṁvarodaya-tantra: Selected Chapters. Tokyo: 
The Hokuseido Press. 
TURNER, R.L. 1962–1966. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan 
Languages. London: Oxford University Press, including three supple-
ments 
published 
between 
1969–1985. 
Online 
version: 
http://dsal.uchicago.edu/dictionaries/soas/ (accessed July 4, 2018). 
WEDEMEYER, Ch.K. 2008. Āryadeva’s Lamp That Integrates the Practices 
(Caryāmelāpakapradīpa). The Gradual Path of Vajrayāna Buddhism 
According to the Esoteric Community Noble Tradition. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press. 
 


--- PAGE 38 (Book pp. 312) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
312
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 39 (Book pp. 313) ---
PÉTER-DÁNIEL SZÁNTÓ 
313 
	  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 40 (Book pp. 314) ---
TANTRIC COMMUNITIES IN CONTEXT 
 
314
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
