=== Book Page 130 (PDF P.151) ===
THE HEVAJRA-TANTRA

V. The Five Buddhas and their Associations

Buddha Family name Affiliated Yogini Family symbol
Aksobhya Vajra Dombi viSvavajra
Vairocana ‘Tathagata Brahmani cakra
Amitibha Padma Narti padma
Ratnasambhava Ratna Candalini ratna
Amoghasiddhi Karma Rajaki khadga

For the five families, see I. v. 5—7 and II. xi. 5-7.

For the adornments, see I. vi. 11-12.

VI. The Elements and their Various Correspondences

EARTH Locana Pukkasi Vairocana
WATER Mamaki Savari Aksobhya

FIRE Pandara Candali Amitabha

AIR Tara Dombi Amoghasiddhi
SPACE — a Ratnasambhava

See vol. II, p. 104, ll. 7 to 14 for Locana, &c.
See I. ix. 16 for Pukkasi, &c.
See II. ii. 53-57 for Vairocana, &c.

VII. The Three Adamantine Ones and their Various Correspondences

SPEECH Khecari Amitabha Raga
MIND Nairaitmya Aksobhya Dvesa
BODY Bhicari Vairocana Moha

See II. iv. 97-99 and Introduction pp. 28-29.

128



=== Book Page 131 (PDF P.152) ===
DIAGRAMS

V. continued

Symbolic
Colour adornment Seed-syllable Type of wisdom
black or dark blue circlet HUM suviguddhadharmadhatujfiana
white bracelets BUM adarSajfiana
red ear-rings yjRIM pratyaveksanajiiana
yellow necklace AM samatajiiana
dark green girdle KHAM krtyanusthanajiiana

For the syllables, see I. ii. 2, and Vajragarbha’s commentary (XV. 26a 7-6 1).
For the five wisdoms, see I. viii. 6-7 and p. 62, fn. 5.

VIII. The Inner Circle of Five Yoginis showing their Sphere of Purification
and their Correspondence with the Five Buddhas

(moghasiddhi)
Vajradakint
Trsya

(Amitabha) Qksobhya) WVairocana)
Variyogini Nalratmya Vajra
raga dvesa tmoha

Qatnasambhava)
Gaur
paisunya

B 0300 129



=== Book Page 132 (PDF P.153) ===


=== Book Page 133 (PDF P.154) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL, GERMS

abhiseka. Literally a (purificatory) sprinkling, the basic sense seems to come
close to that of ‘baptism’. It has acquired, however, the wider sense of
any kind of initiation rite. In the earlier tantric period (as typified by the
Maaijusrimiilakalpa and the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha) it refers
primarily to initiation into the mystic significance of the mandala. Since
there is explicit analogy with the rite of royal consecration, for which the
term abhiseka is also used, ‘consecration’ seems to be the most suitable
general translation. But the idea of a purificatory sprinkling is never
lost. ‘As externally one washes away exterior dirt with water, so one
sprinkles water for the washing away of ignorance; it is thus called a
sprinkling’ (Advayavajrasamgraha, p. 36).
In accordance with the general theory of the Buddhist tantric yogins,
for whom everything goes in fours (Hevajra-tantra, I. i. 30), there are
four consecrations:

1. Master-Consecration.
2. Secret Consecration.
3. Consecration in Knowledge of Prajna.
4. Fourth Consecration.

The first consecration may also be known as the Jar-Consecration
(kalasabhiseka), for it consists of six subsidiary consecrations, in all of
which the ritual jar (kalasa) is used. These six consecrations are those
of Water, Crown, Vajra, Bell, Name, and Master.! It is presumably
because the Master-Consecration completes the set of six, that this name
is also given to the whole set. The main set of four, with which the
Hevajra-tantra is primarily concerned (see Index, consecrations), 1s
interrelated with other sets of four, especially the four Moments (ksana),
the four Joys (amanda) and the four Mudra. Externally they are related
with the four classes of tantras and symbolized by the smile, gaze,
embrace, and union (II. iii. 11 and 54). This set of four gestures is :
presumably related with the actual meeting of yopins and yoginis at places |
of pilgrimage (see I. vii). Concerning the internal interrelations I quote |
K (vol. II, p. 107, 1. 24 #f.):
“Consecration is said to be fourfold for the benefit of living beings.
One is sprinkled, that is to say cleansed and the consecrations are distin-
guished as four.” Thus it is said (in our text, Il. iii. 10) “the Master,
the Secret, the Prajfa and then the Fourth thus”, &c. In this yogint-

X See p. gs fn., Hevajrasekaprakriya (7A, July-Sept. 1934), PP: 39-49 and Advayavajra-
samgraha, p. 36.

131


=== Book Page 134 (PDF P.155) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

tantra the Master-Consecration is given, in order that (the initiate) may
progress far from evil dharmas. It is his “bond” (samvara). The essential
nature of the Master-Consecration is a conferment by means of the
Karmamudra and contains in essence the four Moments and the four
Joys. Some say that one can receive the Master-Consecration by the
mere receiving of the non-retrogression Consecration (avaivartikabhi-
seka'), which is common to the kriyatantras and all the others; one is
then worthy, they say, for exposition and initiation in the yoga-tantras,
yogini-tantras and so on. What an idea is this? In the first place then
one is consecrated with the Master-Consecration in the Hevajra-tantra
or some other yogini-tantra, so that one may be worthy of the initiation,
reflection and meditation (which follow). Then in accordance with one’s
knowledge the Master, the Secret, the Prajfa and the Fourth are charac-
terized momentarily and so known.

‘Tn the case of those of weak sensibility, who have received the Master-
Consecration, when once their zealous application has been established,
they should be given instruction in meditation with the Karmamudra.
Thus under the aspect of the Process of Realization (nispannakrama’)
with the Gem (mani = tip of the vajra) set in the Secret (= lotus) they
experience in accordance with their master’s instructions the four Joys
which have the nature of four Moments; this experience is the Secret
Consecration because it cannot be explained to yogis in terms of diffuse
mental concepts.

‘Now in the consecration of those of medium sensibility instruction
is given in meditation (bh@vana) on the Samayamudra. Even thus is
Prajna (Wisdom), for she is the highest knowledge, the knowledge that
all the elements (dharmas) are nothing but one’s own thought (citta-
méatra). For conferring this the consecration is the Consecration of the
Knowledge of Prajfia. In the unity of the three veins, which represent
the three kinds of consciousness, imaginary (Ralpita), contingent (para-
tantra) and absolute (parinispanna), one marks the four Moments by
means of the Gem and in accordance with one’s master’s instructions.
Because of the external mudra (= feminine partner) it is properly known
as the Knowledge of Prajiia.

‘When this consecration has been given, instruction is given to those
of strong sensibility in the Dharmamudra, the mental concentration
(samadhi) in which all appears as illusion. And so (it is said: II. iii. 10)
“then the Fourth thus”. It is “thus-ness” (tathata), the climax of being
(bhutakoti), the elemental sphere (dharmadhatu) and similar names with-
out any difference of meaning. The consecration by which its nature is

x See Hevajrasekaprakriyd, P- 43; correct avaivarnika to read avaivartika, amending
translation accordingly. 2 See Glossary below, p. 139, utpattikrama.

132


=== Book Page 135 (PDF P.156) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

}

seen or realized, its ‘“‘thus-ness’, is indicated by the word “‘thus”
“Then” means that it is given immediately after the Consecration in the
Knowledge of Prajida. So this perfection is experienced with the external
mudra and by one’s master’s instruction, yet by a process of yoga which
has no object of experience (analambanayogena); it is characterized by
the absence of discrimination with regard to definite places of origin.
This is the Fourth Consecration.’

See also D’s interpretation (translated p. 95 fn.), where the stages are
related progressively with the four buddhakaya and with personality as
expressed in the formula, Body, Speech, and Mind.

The Tibetan term dbari-bskur-ba means literally ‘bestowal of power’.

adhisthana. From the literal meaning of ‘position’, this word is applied
specifically to ‘authoritative position’ and then to the ‘power’ pertaining
to such a position. It can therefore mean the power which belongs
naturally to divine forms and in this sense it comes near to the Christian
conception of ‘grace’. It can also refer to the power which is experienced
spontaneously in meditation or achieved through the recitation of
mantras. In that it may be transmitted by a man of sanctity to his
disciples, it may also be translated as ‘blessing’. Abhiseka is essentially
a ritual empowerment. Adhisthdna refers to innate or spontaneous
power and always with the connotation of active expression; in the sense
of ‘grace’ or ‘blessing’ it becomes, however, a form of empowerment.
For its use in various contexts see ‘empowerment’ in the Index.

The Tibetan translation is byin-rlabs, literally ‘power-wave’. Byin
means ‘power’ in the special sense of its inherent splendour (i.e. majesty).
Byin-rlabs is also used to translate Sanskrit prabhava (power, lustre,
splendour), which thereby becomes implicitly a synonym for adhisthana.

Byin-rlabs is often written as byin-gyis (b)rlabs-pa, as though (b)rlabs
were the perfect root of a verb:

rlob-pa perf. brlabs fut. brlab imp. rlobs

In fact the imperative form byin-gyis rlobs appears quite regularly in
ritual texts and elsewhere. This verb scarcely occurs, it seems, apart
from byin, but it is given both as rlob-pa and with the reduplicated form
rlob-rlob-pa, meaning ‘to pillow’, in the brDa-dag min-tshig gsal-ba of
dGe-bSes Chos-kyi Grags-pa (Ko-hsi ch’tt cha: Tsang-wén tz‘ti-tien),
Peking 1957, p- 846. .

adhyatmika. Internal or esoteric, in contrast with bahya, external or exoteric.
Thus the contents of the Hevajra-tantra can often be interpreted in
two ways. E.g. the places of pilgrimage (1. vii) refer exoterically to actual
sites, but esoterically they are identified within the body of the meditat-
ing yogin. Thus the commentaries often give double interpretations,

133


=== Book Page 136 (PDF P.157) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

e.g. vol. I, pp. 71-72 fns., 86 fn., vol. II, pp. 103-4, 110, 121-2. Be-
sides adhyatmika and bahya, certain other terms are used: aksarartha,
‘literal meaning’ in contrast with sampradayartha, ‘traditional meaning’ ;
neyartha, ‘expected meaning’ in contrast with nitartha ‘real meaning’.
In the case of our texts neydrtha means in effect ‘literal meaning’ and
nitartha ‘figurative meaning’, thus reversing the normal meaning of
these two terms. See Egerton, BH'S Dictionary, p. 310.

ananda. Joy which is fourfold:

(Just) Joy dnanda
Perfect Joy paramananda
Joy of Cessation viramananda
Joy Innate sahajananda

These joys are related fundamentally with sexual experience, envisaged
as fourfold because ‘everything goes in fours’ (I. i. 30). Joy is the contact
of lotus and vajra; perfect joy is the desire for yet more; the joy of
cessation comes from the destruction of passion and the joy innate is a
transcending experience sprung from the preceding joy (I. viii. 32-33
and K’s commentary, vol. II, p. 127).

The four joys are experienced at four successive moments (ksana, q.v.),
with which they are in a sense identical. Their relationship with the four
consecrations (abhiseka, q.v.) is more complex. The Master-Consecra-
tion bestows them in anticipation; the Secret Consecration involves their
actual experience by the master and their essence, still unrealized, is
transferred to the pupil; in the Consecration of Knowledge of Prajna
the pupil experiences them directly. His experience leads to the Fourth
Consecration, which is identical with the Joy Innate. Schematically,
however, the four joys are placed parallel with the consecrations and it
is explicitly stated (see K, vol. II, p. 132) that the first joy is experienced
in the first consecration, the second in the second and so on. This would
seem to be the esoteric interpretation arising from mystic experience

(see samvara, p. 138,). Concerning the possible variation in the order of
the last two joys see p. 35.

bhavana. Meaning literally ‘causing to be’, this is one of the words which
Thave translated as ‘meditation’ (compare dhyana). It means ‘meditation’
in the special sense of mental production or thought-creation, corres-
ponding with the emanative process of meditation discussed below (see
utpattikrama). One may observe that ‘being’ (bhava) and ‘meditation’
(bhavand) are in essence identical. The first, which just ‘is’, is normally
regarded in a falsified condition by ordinary men as a result of original
accidental defilement (dgantukamala). The second is a deliberate pro-
duction of ‘being’ in an idealized form, of which the mandala is the

134


=== Book Page 137 (PDF P.158) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

complete expression, and by means of this deliberate production the true
nature of ‘being’ itself is spontaneously realized.

bindu. Meaning literally a ‘drop’ or a ‘point’, bindu refers pre-eminently to
the point at the centre of the mandala, where all ‘thought-creation’
(bhdvana) is absorbed. Hence it represents the Void (sumyata) or the t
‘Moon’, which is the bodhicitta in its absolute aspect. Through identifica-
tion of terminology it may also mean the bodhicitta in its relative aspect;
thus it may be known as the white bindu, being paired with ‘blood’,
which by analogy is called the red bindu. The Tibetan term thig-le (Ces
used to translate Sanskrit taka) is the usual word for semen. It occurs
glossed with bodhicitta on pp. 94 fn. and 95 fn.

cakra. Literally ‘wheel’ or ‘circle’, cakra refers pre-eminently to the circle
of divine forms of which the mandala consists. Hence it may mean
‘manifested being’, viz. ‘existence’ in relation with the ‘point’ (bindu),
where all manifestation is absorbed. Cakra is also used in a technical
sense to refer to the ‘psychic centres’ within the yogin’s body, envisaged
as lotuses with radiating petals (see K, vol. IJ, p. 107). In the literal
sense of ‘wheel’, it is the symbol of the Buddha-Family of Vairocana.

dakini. This curious term, of which I have so far found no adequate
definition, refers in Buddhist tantric tradition to a type of yogini, with
which word it is all but synonomous. It is commonly related with the
Sanskrit verbal root di ‘to fly’, and represents that ‘perfection which acts
throughout the whole of space’ (K, vol. II, p. 142). The Tibetan transla-
tion mkhah-hgro-ma means ‘she who goes in the sky’.
The dakinis par excellence are the five yoginis who are identified with
the five Buddhas and represent the unity of existence (samvara). See
diagram VIII, p. 130. On the other hand, the yoginis of flesh and blood,
with whom the yogins come together at places of pilgrimage, may also be
referred to as dakinis. However, their divine, rather mystic, aspect tends
to predominate, especially in later Tibetan tradition.
In Hindu tantric tradition they appear 4S the attendants of Kali, the
Great Goddess, and their flesh-eating propensities relate them closely
with the ritual feasts of tantric yogins(see Index, ‘feasting’). They belong
to the lowest stratum of tantric practice, but are purified in interpretation
and elevated as supreme symbols.

dhyana. Derived from the root dhyai, ‘to think or ponder’, it isthe general
word for ‘meditation’. Compare the special sense of bhavand, q.V- The

: : ’
Tibetan translation bsam-gtan means literally ‘mind-composure -
as the effect

japa. Repetitive recitation of set formulas (mantra), which has t hich
of directing the mind one-pointedly upon the divine form, with whic

135


=== Book Page 138 (PDF P.159) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

the particular formula is traditionally related. Beads are normally em-
ployed for counting.
ksana. Moment. Therearefour moments, marking the stages of the four joys:
Variety vicitra
Development  wipaka

Consummation wvimarda
Blank vilaksana

My use of ‘consummation’ for vimarda represents an interpretation and
not a translation. Vimarda, which actually means ‘rubbing’ is regularly
glossed by dlocana, ‘reflection’, viz. the reflection that bliss has been
experienced oneself (see pp. 35 and 95).

mahamudra. See mudra.

mandala. Sphere of divinity, mystic circle, idealized representation of
existence. It may be produced mentally (see bhavand and utpattikrama),
marked out temporarily on the ground, or painted in permanent form.

mantra. Mystic formula or spell, deriving its power from traditional
association with a particular divinity or a desired result. It is rendered
effective by means of repetitive recitation (japa) combined with medita-
tion (dhyana).

mudra. The basic meaning is seal or sign, especially a hand-sign, which is
the literal interpretation of the Tibetan term phyag-rgya. The related
meaning ‘symbol’, presumably reached by way of ‘symbolic gesture’,
has led to this word being used in a variety of special meanings, which
seem at first to take one far from the basic meaning. As everything goes
in fours (I. i. 30), there are four Mudra:

karmamudra ‘Rite Symbol’
samayamudra ‘Convention Symbol’
dharmamudra ‘Truth Symbol’
mahamudra “Great Symbol’

The karmamudra refers to the feminine partner, normally known as the
Prajna (‘Wisdom’), who plays an essential part in the second and third
consecrations (see abhiseka). The term mudra itself is commonly used
as a synonym for Prajna in this special sense (see Index).

The samayamudra refers to the use of conventional symbolic forms in
meditation, e.g. concentration upon Heruka. See samaya below.

The dharmamudra refers to realization of the Absolute itself (dhar-
madhatu).

The mahamudra is identical with the Joy Innate and is the final goal

of the tantric yogin’s practice. As such, it is one of the names given to
their whole school.

136


=== Book Page 139 (PDF P.160) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

This set of four is not referred to explicitly in the Hevajra-tantra
where the only terms in use are mudrd@ in the sense of feminine Bartrier
and mahamudra, which is used not only to refer to the final goal, but also
in the sense of partner, for she is identified with the enue vein
Avadhiiti, the blazing Candali who is Nairatmya (II. iv. 40-47).

In the Advayavajrasamgraha (pp. 32 ff.) there is a short work on the
Four Mudra, of which the correct title is Caturmudraniscaya* and the
author in fact the Mahdsiddha Nagarjuna, who was master of Advaya-
vajra (alias Maitrpa). The mudra are discussed there in the order:
hkarmamudra—dharmamudra—mahamudra—samayamudra; the first three
are conceived of as definite grades of realization, but the last seems to be
added without any integral connexion with the others. In his own short
work on the subject (Caturmudropadesa, Narthang Tenjur, vol. xlvu, pp.
220b-2242) Maitrpa sets the four symbols side by side with the four joys:

Rarmamudra  ananda

dharmamudra paramananda
mahamudra sahajananda
samayamudra  viramananda

Maitrpa’s argument for placing the Joy Innate third has been given
briefly on p. 35. If this comes third, then the mahamudra must also be
placed third. One suspects here an artificial scheme, for it is associated
with no improved interpretation of them as a coherent set.

nitartha|neyartha. See adhyatmika.

prajfia. Wisdom, one of the two supreme coefficients of final enlighten-
ment, of which Means (upaya, q.v.) is the other. In Buddhist tantras the
feminine partner is properly known as prajna, and this is the usual
meaning of the term throughout the Hevajra-tantra. ‘The Hindu term
éahti is never used and would be quite inappropriate (see p. 44). Other
terms in use are mudra (q.v.), vidya (q.V-) and yogini, which however,
has the more general meaning of any feminine practiser.

sadhana. Evocation, viz. the envisaging and calling forth of a divinity
normally by means of repetitive recitation (japa) of the appropriate
formula (mantra) and by meditation (dhyana) upon his formal representa-
tion. Thus a written sadhana of a divinity usually provides a full
description of his form and attributes together with his special formula.

samaya. The basic meaning 1s that of ‘coming together’ 1n the literal sense
of ‘concurrence’. In tantric practice 1t refers to the “concurrence of
I It is also used in the basic sense of ‘sign’ and in the special sense of ‘symbolic adorn-

ments’, of which a set of five symbolize the Five Buddhas. In these two senses a masculine

form mudra or mudrana is sometimes used. See Index. ; Piferbys
2 The Tibetan translation is in the Narthang Tenjur, vol. xlvi, pp. 807-034

137



=== Book Page 140 (PDF P.161) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

absolute being and phenomenal forms, by means of which the practiser
may experience that which by its very nature he would otherwise have
no means of experiencing. The mandala and the different forms of the
divinities are means of just such a kind. In this sense we may translate
samaya as ‘conventional form’, observing that ‘con-vention’ has also the
literal meaning of ‘coming together’. Samaya also refers to types of
ritual food. The meaning is still the same, but it has seemed suitable to
use the term ‘sacrament’ in these contexts. The samaya is always the
outward sign of an inner hidden power. The Tibetan term dam-tshig
means primarily ‘pledge’ or ‘guarantee’, which is precisely the function
of the ‘sacrament’.

samvara. ‘Bond’ or ‘Union’, translated by Tibetan sdom-pa, which has the
same meaning. It may be used in the sense of religious observation
(I. vi. 24 and II. iii. 29), but more commonly in that of mystic union.
Thus the Innate is described as the ‘single union of all forms’ (I. x. 41)
and Vajrasattva, supreme buddha-being, as the ‘single union of all
elements’ (II. x. 1). Samvara has a special technical use in the sense of
the union within the yogin’s body, the ‘internal mandala’ (see I. i. 21 ff.
and II. iv. 48 f.). Here it can refer to the union of macrocosm and
microcosm as well as to the union of the two coefficients (represented by
the two outer veins) in the central vein of the body, which is also the
centre and union of all phenomenal forms. This unity is conceived of as
a consuming by cosmic fire and this consuming is the consummation of
the yogin’s practice, his reintegration with the Innate, the supreme
buddha-being. One may note in this respect the Tibetan translation
of Samvara (= Samvara, a form of Heruka) as ‘Supreme Bliss’ (bde-
mechog).

siddht. ‘Attainment’ in the sense of ‘Perfection’ when referring to the
highest religious striving; in the sense of ‘Success’ when referring to
meaner objectives (see Index, rites).

tantra. Literally the ‘warp’ of woven fabric, the term tantra refers to a
clearly definable type of ritual text common to both Hindu and Buddhist
tradition, concerned with the evoking of divinities and the gaining of
various kinds of szddhi by means of mantra, dhyana, mudraé and mandala.
K glosses the term with prabandha, ‘connected discourse’ and defines
our work under three aspects: as a hetu-tantra (‘cause-tantra’), members
of the vajra-family being the cause; as a phala-tantra (‘result-tantra’),
the perfected form of Hevajra being the result; as an updaya-tantra
(‘means-tantra’), the way which it teaches being the means (vol. II,
Pp. 105). The Hevajra-tantra is in fact a yogini-tantra as distinguished
from a yoga-tantra (see p. 132 above, also Buddhist Himalaya, p. 203).

138


=== Book Page 141 (PDF P.162) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

According to another mode of grouping, it is classed as an anuttarayoga-
tantra, a ‘tantra of supreme yoga’, for it is the means to the highest ae
of siddhi.t Five classes of tantras are mentioned by K: kriya, carya
yoga, yogottara and yoganiruttara (vol. II, p. 156), but the Aurnber ae
traditionally fixed at four (for everything goes in fours) and it was in
four such groups that the Tibetans later arranged their impressive
collection. As grades they are associated, probably quite artificially, with

the four consecrations (abhiseka) and typified by the four gestures of the
‘smile’, &c.

Rriya-tantra Master Consecration smile
carya-tantra Secret Consecration gaze
yoga-tantra Knowledge of Prajna embrace

anuttarayoga-tantra Fourth Consecration union

‘In some kriyd-tantras the smile indicates the impassioning of the Wis-
dom and Means of the divinities, by which symbolizing (v:suddha, q.v.)
the Master Consecration is indicated; in some caryd-tantras the mutual
gaze indicates their impassioning, by which symbolizing the Secret
Consecration is indicated; in some yoga-tantras the embrace indicates
their impassioning, by which symbolizing the Consecration in Know-
ledge of Prajiia is indicated; in some anuttarayoga-taniras the union
indicates their impassioning, by which symbolizing the Fourth Con-
secration is indicated’ (K, vol. II, p. 142).

K also refers to the universally authoritative nature (sarvadhikaritvam)
of this Hevajra-tantra which is authoritative in that it is yogini-niruttara
in kind (loc. cit.). It is suitable for women as well as men of all three
grades: weak, medium, and strong sensibility (vol. II, p. 126). See the
‘references to these grades under abhiseka.

upaya. ‘Means’, one of the two supreme coefficients of final enlightenment,
of which Wisdom (prajia, q.v.) is the other. For references to this pair,
Wisdom and Means, see the Index. The Means par excellence is Hevajra/
Heruka, with whom the yogin must identify himself (see pp. 32-33)
él. I. x. 30, II. iv. 78). In the rite of union the feminine partner is prajna
and the yogin himself is upaya (I. x. 7):

utpattikrama and utpanna- or sampannakrama. These two terms refer
cosmologically to the manifestation (utpada) and reabsorption (pralaya)
of phenomenal existence, and thus to the special technique of meditation
which imitates this twofold process, thus identifying microscosm. and

macrocosm. By thought-creation (bhavana, q-V-) the yogin produces an

idealized form of existence, symbolized by the divinities of the mandala.

This is the utpattikrama, ‘Process of Emanation’. He conceives of

ee Roerich, Blue Annals, p. 753+

™ Tt might also be called a mahdyoga-tantra;

139


=== Book Page 142 (PDF P.163) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

himself as the centre of the process, and drawing the forms into his own
heart, realizes his essential identity with the central all-comprehending
divinity. This is the utpannakrama, ‘Process of Realization’. For refe-

rences see the Index.

vajra. In early (Vedic) times the vajra was the divine weapon of Indra,
god of the sky and lord of thunder and storm. In this context the
obvious translation is ‘thunderbolt’. The Tibetans use the term rdo-rje,
literally ‘lord of stones’. It symbolizes pre-eminently whatever is be-
lieved to be indestructible; thus it also has the meaning of ‘diamond’.
In the tantras vajra indicates the absolute nature of whatever it may be
referred to. Thus Vajrasattva means ‘Absolute Being’, viz. supreme
buddha-being. Vajragantha means ‘bell of the absolute’, viz. the bell
used in the rite of supreme realization. Everything associated with this
intention assumes vajra-nature and the word is scattered freely through-
out the texts. As an epithet I have used ‘adamantine’. Vajradhatu,
‘adamantine sphere’ is the Absolute itself, personified as the Supreme
Buddha Vajrasattva, ‘Adamantine Being’. Also in use is the adjective
vajrin, used in our text either of Hevajra himself or by the pupil addres-
sing his master (vajraguru or vajracarya). See vajrin in the Index. The
concealed meaning of vajra is male organ; as such it pairs with ‘lotus’

(padma).

Vajradhara and Vajradhrk. “Holder of the Vajra’.

Vajradhrk is the name by which the master addresses the pupil during
the rite (see Index). Vajradhara is used in the Hevajra-tantra (II. iv. 31;
vi. 3) referring to masters, who belong to the tradition. It is already
established in the Sarvatathagatatattvasamgraha as the title of supreme
buddhahood and is in general use by the Buddhist tantric yogins
(84 seddhas). Our commentators refer to the Supreme Buddha both as
Vajrasattva and Vajradhara. Aksobhya, the Buddha ‘Imperturbable’,
as head of the vajra-family, is also Vajrasattva in essence and so may be

considered Supreme Buddha by his family, to which those of the
tradition of Hevajra belong.

Vajrasattva. See vajra.

vajrin. See vajra.

vidya. ‘Spell’ in the special sense of the formula (mantra), which is the
verbal expression of a divinity. Like ‘speech’ (vak) it is considered as
the feminine aspect and thus becomes one of the names for the feminine
partner (see Buddhist Himalaya, pp. 288, 289). Itis used in the Hevajra-

1 . 1 5 ; Ef oe 9°
fi © a oe
OL prane .

140


=== Book Page 143 (PDF P.164) ===
GLOSSARY OF SPECIAL TERMS

viguddhi. Meaning literally ‘purification’, this word refers to the process
whereby the various divinities symbolize the macrocosm and mnicrocoeh
under their several aspects, thus identifying them with aspects of buddha-
hood. Thus the Five Yoginis (diagram VIII, p. 129) ‘symbolize’ on one
side the five evils and on the other the five aspects of wisdom. This
active symbolizing (visuddhi) represents the intended effect of any ‘con-
ventional’ or ‘sacramental’ form (samaya, q.v.). For references see the
Index, purification.

yoga. ‘This is the one item for which it is scarcely practicable to give index-
references, for the whole of the Hevajra-tantra is concerned with yoga,
both in the sense of ‘union’ and that of the schemes, rites and practices,
which should produce realization of that union. This tantra teaches the
supreme type of yoga (anuttarayoga), which is the final identification and
unifying of the macrocosm in the body of the yogin. The main technical
terms used have their equivalents in the Hathayoga tradition (see P. C.
Bagchi, ‘Some Technical Terms of the Tantras’, Calcutta Oriental
Journal, vol. i, no. 2, Nov. 1933, pp- 75-88). Given a more limited
meaning, yoga refers to union with one’s chosen divinity; one may note
in this respect the terms samahitayoga, ‘concentrated yoga’, and mirantara-
yoga, ‘continuous yoga’ (p. 89 fn.). This is, however, but one of the
means which will lead to the supreme yoga.

141


=== Book Page 144 (PDF P.165) ===


