
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



LOKANiTI 



TE ANSLA t tON 

by 

JAMES GRAY 

(1886) 



Digitized 



y Google 



. cXtY Oi? , 








^»- ,/* rt. * 




iiized by 



Google 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S 

ORIENTAL SERIEa 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



PRINTED BY THE 

BUDDHA SASANA COUNCIL 

UNION OF BURMA 

KABA-AYE 

( For Research Purpose and Study ) 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



ANCIENT 
PROVERBS AND MAXIMS 

from Bnrme^e Sources; 



OR, 



THE Nin LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



BT 



JAMES GRAY, 



AQTBOR or 

* SLninm or pali orammab," " teai»latiov or tbs dmammapaoa," sic 



LONDON: 

TRttBNER & CO., LUDGATE HILL. 

1886. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



PA/ 

6-73 



BALUkNTVNB, HANSON AND CO. 
KDINBUBGH AND LONDON 



Digitized by CjOOQIC 






^joji^^ 



P°^M. 



rr./^ l/J7J5 



CONTENTS. 



PAOB 

INTRODUdnON vu 

L THBLOKANtn— 

ThbWisbMait I 

TheGtOOdMan II 

ThbEvil-Doeb i6 

Fbiee^dbhip 19 

Woman 22 

Kings 26 

MlSCZLLANBOUS . . ' 3I 

IL THE DHAMMAJrtn-- 

The Pbioeftos 37 

dOHOLABSHIP 40 

W18DOM 43 

Knowlumib 49 

gonysbsation 5i 

Wkalth 53 

Rbbidenob 55 

Depbndbnoi 57 

Fbdendship 59 

Thb Bad Man 62 

ThiGUmdMan 67 

The Powebful 69 

Women 70 

Sons 73 

Servants 75 

Rbidenoe 76 

What should BE Done 79 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



vi CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

What should be Avoided 85 

Oenauentation 90 

Kings 92 

Ministration 96 

Things Taken by Twos, &o 102 

Miscellaneous 105 

III. THE BlJANtri 119 

IV. THE SUTTAVADDHANANITI . . . . .142 

APPENDIX:— 

A. Old Indian Satings 161 

B. COBBBSFONDINO StANZAS IN THE NITIS . . . • 175 

C. Ck)BBE8FONDINO STANZAS IN THE DhAMMANITI . •179 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



INTRODUCTION. 



The Sanskrit-Pftli word Mti is equivalent to "conduct" 
in its abstract, and "guide" in its concrete signification. 
As applied to books, it is a general term for a treatise 
which includes maxims, pithy sayings, and didactic stories, 
intended as a guide to such matters of everyday life as 
form the character of an individual and influence him in 
his relations to his fellow-men. Treatises of this kind 
have been popular in all ages, and have served as a most 
efifective medium of instruction. In India a very compre- 
hensive literature sprang up, known as the Nitiadstras, 
embracing what is called ** Beast-fable " lore, represented 
by the Pafidatantra, and its epitome the SttcpadeSa of 
Yishnusarman, and the numerous ethico-didactic antho- 
logies which, based chiefly on the Mahdhhdrata and other 
ancient poems, gained popularity by the collected apo- 
phthegms of Bhartrihari and C ^^tdcya. Anthological study 
at length became so inviting, that in the ^drAgadharapad- 
dhoti, a compilation of the fourteenth century A.D., we 
find about 6000 stanzas, gathered from more than 250 
sources. 

The Buddhist Jdiakam, containing 550 stories, is a rich 
storehouse of fables, and, though in character similar to 
the FaiUkUarUra, is not classed as a Nitit nor does the 
Dhamrrwpada, and other treatises of the same kind, full 
of maxims of morality and religious reflections, come 
under the designation. The term Mti^ in so far as it 
describes anthological collections, is, in Burma, found 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



vui INTRODUCTION. 

connected with the following works — ^the Zokantti, the 
DhammanUi, the BdjanUi, and the SuUavaddhananUt: 
Of these, the first three are original recensions in the 
M&gadhese dialect, adapted from Sanskrit works; while 
the last is a comparatiyely recent collection of useful 
maxims from the Buddhist canon itself. The former form 
a group in themselves^ and owe their importance to being 
of Sanskritic origin. The remarks which follow are in 
special reference to them alone. 

The earliest reference in Burmese literature to the 
Lokantti and Sdjanitt is, so far as I have been able 
to ascertain, to be found in the Arakan Bdzdwin^ or 
'^ Chronicles of Arakan,** in connection with Prince Kha 
Maung's visit to Pegu early in the seventeenth century. 
Mention of the Dhammaniti is rarely met with, as it 
seems never to have become a handbook for study like the 
other two. The exact dates of these collections in Burma 
are not recorded anywhere, nor is their authorship a 
matter of certainty. That they were compiled between the 
twelfth and fourteenth centuries is not unlikely, judging 
from the progress of literature under the patronage of 
Burmese kings. King Anoratha, in the first half of the 
eleventh century, organised an expedition to Thaton, and 
obtained thence a copy of the Buddhist Scriptures. Their 
interpretation was then only possible through the Mun 
language. The Mun alphabet was consequently adopted 
by the Burmese, and the learned among the latter made 
the literature written in it an important study. Wars 
between the Muns and Burmese led eventually to a good 
deal of intercommunication between the two races. Hindu 
colonists, besides, had settled on the lower valleys of the 
Irawadi and Sittang rivers, and a religious struggle be- 
tween Brahmans and Buddhists resulted in evoking the 
erudition of the learned Pu^^as. Their services were 
Suon utilised by the Burmese kings in furtherance of the 
cause of literature, and it was through their invaluable 
assistance that the study of Sanskrit became a sine qud nan 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION. ix 

in the royal monasteries. Being familiar with M&gadhese 
(then the literary language of the country), and also ac- 
quainted with the local vernacular, they were of great 
help to the Buddhist Bahans in the interpretation of the 
Pitagat. And it is reasonable to suppose that when that 
great task was completed attention was paid to secular 
literature, the outcome of which was the compilation of 
the three Mtis. Similar, or perhaps the very same 
treatises, were in use in the royal courts of India, and 
their introduction into the court of Ava was natural 
enough. The translation of Sanskrit works of a more 
erudite character was a work of later data 

That Brahmanic influence had been at work in the 
compilation of the Nitis of Burma is evident from the 
nature of certain passages found in them. Evidence is 
also not wanting to show that additions have been made 
to the original treatises more in consonance with Bud- 
dhistic belief and idiosyncrasies. Partial emendations 
have also been resorted to, and can be discovered as the 
work of Bahans anxious to replace Hinduic ideas by others 
more congenial to their orthodoxy. 

Sanskrit editioDS of the three NUis are to be found 
unong the Manipurian Punnas, who, driven from their 
native abode by the vicissitudes of war, made a home 
for themselves in Burma. They are written in Bengali 
characters, but editions in Sanskritised Burmese are also 
procurable. The Sanskrit LokanUx of the Manipurian 
Punnas commences with the same stanza as the JSttopO' 
deia of Yishnuiarman — 

SiddhiB sftdhye sat&m aata 
PraHAdAt tasya dhiirjates 
JfthnavlpheiiAlekheYa 
Yftdmurdhm tfa^inah kalA.^ 



^ "For the good may there be sucoeis in achievements through the 
grace of Dhiirjati (Siva), on whose head there is the moon's si^eenth 
part, like » streak of the Ganges' foam." 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



X INTRODUCTION, 

This stanza is disregarded in the Burmese anthology, 
most probably on account of the difficulty of its adaptation 
to Buddhistic views. The Sanskrit l^kanUi originally 
contained 109 g&th^, which, in the Burmese yersion, have 
been expanded to 167. 

The Lohaniti and DhammanUi embrace a miscella- 
neous collection of subjects, and serve as suitable hand- 
books for the general reader for the study of prudential 
rules and principles of morality. The former is taught 
in almost every monastic school in Burma, and printed 
editions of it have helped considerably to extend its 
popularity. That a work of the kind should have charms 
for the Buddhist is not to be wondered at. He firmly 
believes that his future happiness depends upon his be- 
haviour in his present life, and relies more on practical 
deeds rather than on the faith which his religion demands ; 
and nothing could be more suitable to his wants than a 
kind of literature which lays down for him in pithy stanzas, 
and often in metaphoric language, a number of simply- 
worded apophthegms which are to shape his career in this 
world and fit him for a better sphere of existence when 
he leaves it. 

The Rdjaniti is an anthology originally compiled for the 
use of kings and princes, and based chiefly on the ancient 
Dharma^tras, of which Mann's code has evidently sup- 
plied the greater proportion of the stanzas. It must not 
be confounded with the BAjaniti of Lallu L&la, which is 
nothing more than an adaptation in the Braj dialect of the 
Sanskrit Hitopade&a, The Burmese Niti seems to have 
for its prototype the BdjanttiSdstra of C'S-nakya. The 
DhammanUi, although the best and most comprehensive 
of the NUis, is very little studied — a circumstance that 
can be explained by its being more extensive in its scope 
than the LokanUi, and therefore proving a task of greater 
labour to the copyist, through whom chiefly the wide 
circulation of texts could have been carried on in the 
absence of printing-presses. The Lokaniti, besides, had 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



INTRODUCTION. xi 

an Indian reputation which was never extended to the 
Dhawmaniii. The same may be said of the Bdjaniti. 

The stanzas of the Nitis belong chiefly to the Viittu, or 
heroic measure, corresponding with the octosyllabic llokas 
of the Mahdbhdrata and Rdmdyana, but the exigencies of 
expression have, as in those poems, necessitated the occa- 
sional use of longer-lined verses. The Pftli of the texts 
belongs to the later rather than to the earlier style as 
represented in the Dhammapada of the Buddhist canon. 
On the whole, tlie translations are faithful to the original 
Sanskrit from which they have been adopted. In some 
cases the FIdi is a mere transcript. For instance, the 
Sanskrit — 

M&t& ^tro]^ pit& yairt 
Yena bftlo na p&thitah 
Na ^bhate sabh&madhye 
Hamsamadhye yako yathi^ 

is rendered in Pili by 

M&t& verl pitft satra 
Kena bftle na sikkhitft 
Sabhftmajjhe Da sobhati 
Hamsamajjhe bako yath&. 

Again, in Sanskrit we have — 

RiipayauvaaasampaimA 
ViBJllakulasambhayd^ 
Yidy&hlnft na ik>bhante 
Nirgandh& iya kimfakA^, 



and in Faii— 



. Rtlpayobbanasampannft 
VinftlaknlagambhavA 
Vijj&hinft na sobhanti 
Niggandh& iva kiihwikft. 

In other instances some material modifications have 
been made necessary, as would be expected in a para- 
phrastic translation, in which the rules of versification 
have to be rigidly enforced, and in which Brahmanic sen- 
timents had to be so modified as not to wound the suscep- 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



xii INTRODUCTION. 

tibilities of the Baddhist reader. Some passages will be 
found reyolting to our inteUigence, but they may be of 
use in giving us an insight into the superstitious practices 
of the ancient Indians, and furnishing an index to the 
state of society at the period to which they refer. 

In the footnotes to the English translations I hare 
made some passing observations and given parallel pas- 
sages. These might have been largely augmented, but I 
have refrained from encumbering the pages of a work 
intended chiefly for the general reader. The F&li texts of 
the Burmese NUis are in preparation, and will be, it is 
hoped, useful to the student who would like to compare 
these anthological treatises with those of a similar nature 
which were at one time highly popular in India^ the 
cradle of proverbs, parables, and folklore. 

In conclusion, I take this opportunity of expressing my 
deep gratitude to Dr. Bost for the kindly encouragement 
he has given me in the publication of this work, and for 
the many tokens of the interest he has taken in the 
literary labours on which I am engaged. 

J.G. 

Ramgoov, Jamuuj 1886. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'8 ORIENTAL SERIES. 



" A knowledge of the commonplace, at least, of Oriental literatare, philo- 
Bophy, and religion ia as necessary to the general reader of the present day 
as an acquaintance with the Latin and Greek classics was a generation or so 
ago. Immense strides have heen made within the present century in these 
branches of learning ; Sanskrit has been brought within the range of accurate 
philology, and its invaluable ancient literature thoroughly investigated ; the 
language and sacred books of the 2Soroastrians have been laid bare ; Egyptian, 
Assyrian, and other f ecords *of the remote past have been deciphered, and a 
group of scholars speak of still more recondite Accadian and Hitfcite monu- 
ments ; but the results of all the scholarship that has been devoted to these 
subjects have been almost inaccessible to the public because they were con- 
tained for the most part in learned or expensive works, or scattered through- 
out the numbers of scientific periodicals. Messrs. TitCBkBR & Co., iu a spirit 
of enterprise which does them infinite credit, have determined to supply the 
constantly-increasing want, and to give in a popular, or, at least, a oo'mpre- 
hensive form, all this mass of knowledge to the world.'* — Timea. 



New Edition in prepar(Uion, 
Post 8vo, with Map, 

THE INDIAN EMPIEE : ITS HISTORY, PEOPLE, 
AND PRODUCTS. 

Being a revised form of the article "India,'* in the "Imperial Gazetteer," 

remodelled into chapters, brought up to date, and incorporating 

the general results of the Census of 1881. 

By the How. W. W. HUNTER, C.S.L, CLE., LL.D., 

Member of the Viceroy's Le^lative Council, 
Director-General of Statistics to the Government of India. 

"The article 'India,' in Volume IV., is the touchstone of the work, and prtjvcH 
clearly enough the sterling metal of which it is wrought. It represouts the esycncn 
of the 100 ▼olumes which contain the results of the statistical survey conducted l.y 
Dr. Hunter throughout each of the 840 districts of India. It is, moreover, the ouly 
attempt that has ever been made to show how the Indian people liiive been built u)i. 
and the evidence from the original materials has been for the firat time Bifted aii.l' 
examined by the light of the local research iu which the autht)r was for 5u Inn,, 
engaged. "-- TifMt. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



THE FOLLOWING WORKS HAVE ALREADY APPEARED:^ 
Third Edition, post 8vo, cloth, pp. xvi.--428, price i6g. 

ESSAYS ON THE SACRED LANGUAGE, WRITINGS, 
AND RELIGION OF THE PARSIS. 

Br MARTIN HAUG, Ph.D., 

Lftte of the Universities of Tiibingen, Gottingen, and Bonn ; Superintendent 

of Sanskrit Studies, and Professor of Sanskrit in the Pooua College. 

Edited and Enlarged by Dr. B. W. WEST. 

To which is added a Bu>graphical Memoir of the late Dr. Haug 

by Prof. E. P. Evans. 

I. History of the Researches into the Sacred Writings and Religion of the 

Parsis, from the Earliest Times down to the Present. 
II. Languages of the Parsi Scriptures. 

III. The Zend-Avesta, or the Scripture of the Parsis. 

IV. The Zoroastrian Religion, as to its Origin and Development. 

" * Essays on the Sacred Tjauguago, Writings, and Religion of the Parsis,* by the 
late Dr. Martin Haug, edited by Dr. E. W. West. The author intended, on his rettim 
from India, to expand the materials contained in this work into a comprehensive 
account of the Zoroastrian religion, but the design was frustrated by his untimely 
death. We have, however, in a concise and readable form, a history of the researches 
Into the sacnjd writings and religion of the Parsis from the earliest times down to 
the present — a dissertation on the languages of the Parsi Scriptures, a translation 
of the Zend-Avesta, or the Scripture of the Parsis, aud a dissertation on the Zoroas- 
trian religion, with especial reference to its origin aud development."— Tim€». 



Post 8vo, cloth, pp. viii.-*-i76, price 78. 6d. 

TEXTS PROM THE BUDDHIST CANON 

COMMONLY KNOWN AS " DHAMMAPADA." 

WUh AccompanyxTig Narratives, 

Translated from the Chinese by S. BEAL, B.A., Professor of Chinese, 
University College, London. 

The Dhammapada, as hitherto known by the Pali Text Edition, as edited 
by Fausboll, by Max Mtlller's English, and Albrecht Weber's German 
translations, consists only of twenty-six chapters or sections, whilst the 
Chinese version, or rather recension, as now translated by Mr. Beal, con- 
sists of thirty-nine sections. The students of Pali who possess Fausboirs 
text, or either of the above-named translations, will therefore needs want 
Mr. BeaVs English rendering of the Chinese version ; the thirteen above- 
named additional sections not being accessible to them in any other form ; 
for, even if they understand Chinese, the Chinese original would be un- 
obtainable by them. 

"Mr. Seal's rendering of the Chinese translation is a most valuable aid to the 
critical study of the work. It contains authentid texts fathered from ancient 
canonical books, and generally connected with some incident in the history of 
Buddha. Their great interest, however, consists in the light which they throw upon 
everyday life In India at the remote period at which they were written, and upon 
the meuiod of teaching adopted by the founder of the religion. The method 
employed was principally parable, and the simplicity of the tales and tlie excellence 
of we morals inculcated, as well as the strange hold which they have retained upon 
the minds of millions of people, make them a very remarkable sttidy."— Timet. 

•* Mr. Beal, by making it accessible in an Engliah dross, has added to the great ser- 
vices he has already rendered to the comparative study of religious Yasiory"— Academy. 

'* Valuable as exhibiting the doctrine of the Buddhists in its purest, least adul- 
terated form, it brings the modern reader face to face with that simple creed and rule 
of conduct which won its way over the minds of myriads, and which is now nominally 
professed by 145 millions, who have overlaid its austere simplicity with innumerable 
ceremonies, forgotten its maxims, perverted its teaching, and so inverted its leading 
principle that a religion whose foimder denied a Qod, now wor8hi|)d that founder as 
a g<Ki himsidf. "—-iSeottman. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



TRUBl^ER*S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Second Edition, post 8vo, oloth, pp. xxiv.— 360, price zot. 6d. 

THE HIST0B7 OF INDIAN LITllBATUBR 

Bt ALBRECHT WEBER 

Translated from the Second German Edition by John Manit, M.A., and 
THJtoDOB Zaohasiab, Ph.D., with the sanction of the Author. 

Dr. BuHLEB, Inspector of Schools in India, writes :— ** When I was Pror 
f essor of Oriental Languages in Elphinstone OollM;e, I frequently felt tiie 
want of such a work to wMch I conld refer the students." 

Professor CoWell, of Cambridge, writes :— ** It will be especiallv useful 
to the students in our Indian colleges and universities. I used to long for 
such a book when I was teaching in Calcutta. Hindu students are intensely 
interested in the history of Sanskrit literature, and this volume will supply 
them with all they want on the subject.*' 

Professor Whitnbt, Yale College, Newhaven, Conn., U.S.A.» writes :~ 
" I was one of the class to whom the work was originally given in the form 
of academic lectures. At their first appearance thev were by far the most 
learned and able treatment of their subject ; and with their recent additions 
they still maintain decidedly the same rank.'* 

** Is perhaps the most comprehensive and ludd surrey of Sanskrit literature 
extant The essays contained in the volume were originally delivered as academic 
lectures, and at the time of their first publication were acknowledged to be by far 
the most learned and able troatment of the subject. They have now beoi brougiit 
up to date by the addition of all the most important results of recent reseMn^— 
Timu. _^ 



Post 8vo, cloth, pp. xiL-~i98, accompanied by Two Language 
Maps, price Z2s. 

A SKETCH OF 
THE MODERN LANGUAGES OF THE EAST INDIES. 

Bt ROBERT N. CUST. 

The Author has attem]>ted to fill up a vacuum, the inconvenience of 
which pressed itself on his notice. Much had been written about the 
languages of the East Indies, but the extent of our present knowledge had 
not even been brought to a focus. It occurred to him that it might be of 
use to others to publish in an am^iged form the notes which he had collected 
for his own edification. 

** Supplies a deficiency which has long been t^tT—Timu. 

" The book before us is then a valuable contribution to phlloloftical science. It 
passes under review a vast nimiber of languages, and it gives, or prtneases to give, in 
every case the sum and substance of the opinions and judgments of the best-infonned 
ynit»n.'*— Saturday Meview. 

Second Corrected Edition, post 8vo, pp. xiL — iz6, cloth, price 5s. 
THE BIBTH OF THE WAE-GOD. 

A Poem. Bt KALIDASA. 

Translated from the Sanskrit into English Verse by 
Ralph T. H. Obifftth, M.A. 

" A very spirited rendering of the JTumaratamdAaro, which was first published 
twenty-six years ago, and wmch we are glad to see made once more accMslble.'' — 
Time$. 

" Mr. Grlfi&th's very spirited rendering is well known to most who are at all 
interested in Indian literature, or enjoy the tenderness of feeling and rich creative 
imagtaiation of its author."— /ndtan Anttqwiry. 

"we axe very glad to welcome a second edition of Professor Griffith's admirable 
translation. Few translations deserve a second edition better."— ^tAmflnm. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Post 8yo, pp. 432, cloth, price x6s. 

A CLASSICAL DICTIONARY OP HINDU MYTHOLOGY 

AND BELIGION, GEOGBAPHY, HISTORY, AND 

LITERATXJRE. 

By JOHN DOWSON, M.R.A.S., 
Late Professor of Hindustani, Staff College. 

*' This not only forms an indispensable^book of reference to students of Indian 
literature, but Ib also of great general interest, as it gives in a concise and easily 
accessible form all that need be known about the personages of Hindu mythology 
whose names are so familiar, but of whom so little is knowu outside the limited 
circle of tavanU." — Time*. 

" It is no slight gain when such subjects are treated fairly and fully in a moderate 
space ; and we need onlv add that the few wants which we may hope to see supplied 
in new editions detract but little from the general excellence of Bir. Dowson's work." 
—SaiurdAif Review. 

Post 8vo, with View of Mecca, pp. oxii. — 173, cloth, price 98. 
SELECTIONS FROM THE KORAN. 

By EDWARD WILLIAM LANE, 

Translator of " The Thousand and One Nights; " ^., k/a. 

A New Edition, Bevised and Enlarged, with an Introduction by 

Stanley Lank Pooub. 

** . . . Has been Ion? esteemed in this country as the compilation of one of the 

greatest Arabic scholars of the time, the late Mr. iJane, the well-known translator of 

the 'Arabian Nights.' . . . The i>resent editor has enhanced the value of his 

rdative's work by divesting the text of a great deal of extraneous matter introduced 

by way of comment, and prefixing an introduction." — Timet. 

** Mr. Poole is both a generous and a learned biographer. . . . Mr. Poole tells us 
the facts . . . so far as it is possible for industry and criticism to ascertain them, 
and for literary skill to present them'in a condensed and readable form.'*— Bnglieh- 
man, CaUuttcu 

Post 8vo, pp. vi— 368, cloth, price 141. 
MODERN INDIA AND THE INDIANS, 

BEING A SERIES OF IMPRESSIONS, NOTES, AND ESSAYS. 

By MONIER WILLIAMS, D.C.L., 
Hon. LL.D. of the University of Calcutta, Hon. Member of the Bombay Asiatic 
Society, Boden Professor of Sanskrit in the University of Oxford. 
Third Edition, r^visfed and augmented by considerable Additions, 
with Illustrations and a Map. 
** In this volume we have the thoughtful impressions of a thoughtful man on some 
of the most important questions connected with our Indian Empire. . . . An en- 
lightened observant man, travelling among an enlightened observant people. Professor 
l^nier Williams has brou^t before the public in a pleasant form more of the manners 
and customs of the Queen's Indian subjects than we ever remember to have seen in 
any one work. He not only deserves the thanks of every Englishman for this able 
contribution to the study of Modem India— a subject with which we should be 
8peci£^y familiar— but he deserves the thanks of every Indian, Parsee or Hindu, 
Buddhist and Moslem, for his clear exposition of -their manners, their creeds, and 
their necessities." — Timet, 

Post 8vo, pp. xliv. — 376, cloth, price 14s. 

METRICAL TRANSLATIONS FROM SANSKRIT 
WRITERS. 

With an Introduction, many Prose Versions, and Parallel Passages from 
Classical Authors. 
By J. MUIR, CLE., D.C.L., LL.D., Ph.D. 
"... An agreeable introduction to Hindu poetrv."—7'imf«. 
"... A volume wliicb mnv be taken coa a fair illustration alike of the religious 
nnd monil sentiments and of the legendary lore of the best Sanskrit writers." — 
Ji li-iihurgh Daily lierieto. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



TRUBNERS ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Second Edition, post 8vo, pp. xxvi— 244, cloth, price los. 6d. 

THE GULISTAN; 

Ob, ROSB garden OF SHEKH MUSHLIU*D-DIN SADI OF SHIRAZ. 

Translated for the First Time into Prose and Verse, with an Introductory 
Preface, and a Life of the Author, from the Atish Kadah, 

By EDWARD B. EASTWICK, C.B., M.A., F.B.S., M.R.A.S. 

'* It is a very fair rendering of the original. "—TifMS. 

*< The new edition has long been desired, and will be welcomed by all who take 
any interest in Oriental poet^. The OulUtan is a typical Persian verse-book of the 
highest order. Mr. Eastwick's rhymed translation . . . has long established itself in 
a secure position as the best version of Sadi's finest work."— .^ca<iem|f. 

** It is both faithfully and gracefuUy executed."— TaMtL 



In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. viiL — 408 and viiu— 348, cloth, price 288. 

MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS RELATING TO INDIAN 

SUBJECTS. 

By BRIAN HOUGHTON HODGSON, Esq., F.R.S., 

Late of the Bengal Civil Service ; Corresponding Member of tbe Institute ; Clievalier 
of the Legion of Honour ; late British Minister at tbe Court of Nepal, ^., &c. 

CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 

Sectiom I.— On the Kocch, B<Sd6, and Dhimdl Tribes.— Part L Vocabulary.— 
Part IL Grammar.— Part III. Their Origin, Location, Numbers, Creed, Customs, 
Character, and Condition, with a Qeueral Description of the Climate they dwell iu. 
— Appendix. 

Section II.— On Himalayan Ethnology— I. Comparative Vocabulary of the Lan- 
guages of the Broken Tribes of N^p^.— II. Vocabulary of tbe Dialects of the Kirantl 
Language.— IIL Qrammatical Analysis of the Vdyu Language. The V4yu Grammar. 
—IV. Analysis of the Bdhing Dialect of the Kintnti language. The B^hing Gram- 
mar.— V. On the Vdyu or Hayu Tribe of the Central Himaldya.— VI. On tne Kiranti 
Tribe of the Central Himalaya. 

CONTENTS OF VOL, IL 

'Section III. — On the Aborigines of North-Eastem India. Comparative Vocabulary 
of the Tibetan, B6dd, and Gar6 Tongues. 

Section IV. — Aborigines of the North-Eastem Frontier. 

Section V.— Aborigines of the Etustem Frontier. 

S;egtion VI. — ^The Indo-Chinese Bordereraj and their connection with tlio Hima- 
layanS and Tibetans. Comparative VWabuIarv of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Arakan. 
Comparative Vocabulary of Indo-Chinese Borderers in Tenasserim. 

Section Vlt.-^The Mongolian Affinities of the Caucasians. — Comparison and Ana- 
lysis of Caucasian and Mongolian Words. 

Section VIIL— Physical Type of Tibetans. 

Section IX.— The Aborigines of Central India.—Comparative Vocabulary of the 
Aboriginal Languages of Central India.— Aborigines of the Eastern Ghats.— Vocabu- 
lary of some of the Dialects of the Hill and Wandering Tribes in the Northei-n Sircars. 
— Aborigines of the Nilgiris, with Remarks on their Affinities. — Supplement to the 
Nilgirian Vocabularies.— The Aborigines of Southern India and Ceylon. 

Section X.— Route of Nepalese Mission to Pekin, with Remarks on the Water- 
Shed and Plateau of Tibet. 

Section XI.— Route from Edthmdnd\i, the Capital of Nep&l, to Darjeeling iu 
Sikim— Memorandum relative to the Seven Cosis of Nep&l. 

Section XII. — Some Accounts of the Systems of Law and Police as recognised in 
the State of Nepftl. 

Section XIII.— The Native Method of making the Paper denominated Hindustan 
N^p&lese. 

Section XIV.— Pre-eminence of the Vernaculars ; or, the Anglicists Answered ; 
Being Letters on the Education of the People of India. 

" For the study of the less-known races of India Mr. Brian Hodgson's ' Miscellane- 
ous Essays ' will be found very valuable both to tho philologist and the ethnologist" 
—Tvmt». 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBiTBR'S ORIENTAL SBRIBS. 



Third Ediiion, Two Vols., post 8vo, pp. tuL— 268 ftnd viii.— 336, doth, 
price 21S. 

THE LIFE OB LEGEND OF GAUBAMA, 

THE BUDDHA OF THE BURMESE. With Annotations. 

The Ways to Neibban, and Notice on the Fhongyies or Burmese Monks. 

Bt thb Right Rev. P. BIGANDET, 

Bishop of Ramatha, Yicar-Apostolic of Ava and Pegn. 

'*The work is furnished with copious notes, which not only illustrate the subject- 
matter, but form a perfect encydopeedia of Buddhist lore." — Timet. 

** A work which wlU furnish .European students of Buddhism with a most -valuable 
help in the prosecution of their investigations."— ftfinduivA Ihilp Review. 

" Bishop Bigandet's invaluable work."— /ndtan Antiquary, 

** Viewed in this light, its Importance is sufBoient to place students of the subject 
under a deep obligation to its author."— CoZeutta Review. 

** This work is one of the greatest authorities upon Buddhism."— Du&lin Review. 



Post 8yo, pp. zziv.— 420, eloth, price i8s. 

CHINESE BUDDHISM. 

A VOLUME OF SKETCHES, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL. 

By J. EDKINS, D.D. 

Author of '* China's Pkce in PhUology,*' " Religion in China," &o., &o. 

"It oontains a v&st deal of important information on the subject, such as is only 
to be gdned by long-continued study on the spot" — Athenaum, 

" Upon the whole, we know of no work comparable to it for the extent of its 
original research, and the simplicitv with which this complicated system of philo- 
so^y, religion, literature, and ritual is set forth."— .BriCuA Qu4xiterlp Review. 

" The whole volume is replete with learning. ... It deserves most careful study 
from all interested in the history of the religions of the world, and expressly of those 
who are concerned in the propagation of Christianity. Dr. Edkins notices in terms 
of just condemnation the exaggerated praise bestowed upon Buddhism by recent 
TBngHMh writoni." — Beccrd. 



Post 8vo, pp. 496, cloth, price i8s. 
LINGUISTIC AND ORIENTAL ESSAYS. 

Wbittbn fkom thb Tsab 1846 TO 1878. 
By ROBERT NEEDHAM OUST, 

Late Member of Her Majesty's Indian Civil Service ; Hon. Secretary to 
. the Royal Asiatic Society; 
and Author of " The Modem Languages of the East Indies." 

" We know none who bss described Indian life, especially the life of the natives, 
with so much learning, sympathy, and literary talent, —^eaelemy. 

*' They seem to us to be full of suggestive and original remarks."— St. Jamet'a Cfasette. 

** His book contains a vast amount of information. The result of thirty-five years 
of inquiry, reflection, and speculation, and that on subjects as fuU of fascination as 
of food for thought."— Toilet 

" Exhibit such a thorough acquaintance with the historic and antiquities of India 
as to entitle him to speak as one having a,\xtliOTity.''-~Bdinjburgh Daily Review. 

** The author speaks with the authority of personal experience It is this 

constant association with the country and the people which gives such a vividness 
to many of the pages." ^Athetueum. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Post 8yo, pp. civ. — 348, cloth, price 18s. 

BUDDHIST BIRTH STORIES; or, Jataka Tales. 

The Oldest Collection of Folk-lore Extant : 

BEING THE JATAKATTHAVANNANA, 

For the first time Edited in the original P&li. 

By V. FAUSBOLL ; 

And Translated by T. W. Rhys Davids. 

Translation. Volume I. 

"These are tales supposed to have been told by the Buddha of what he bad seen 
and heard in his previous births. They are probably the nearest representatives 
of the original Aryan stories from -which sprang the folk-lore of Europe as well as 
India. The introduction contains a most interesting disquisition on the migrations 
of these fables, tracing their reappearance in the various groups of folk-lore legends. 
Among other old friends, we meet wi th a version of the Judgment of Solomon. " — linus. 

" It it* now some years since Mr. Rhys Davids asserted his right to be heard on 
this subject by his able article on Buddhism in the new edition of the ' Encyclopasdia 
Britanuica.'"— Zetdx Mercury. 

" All who are interested in Buddhist literature ought to feel deeply indebted to 
Mr. Rhys Davids. His well-established reputation as a Pali scholar is a sufficient 
guarantee for the fidelity of his version, and the style of his translations is deserving 
of high praise." — Academy. 

" No more competent expositor of Buddhism could be found than Mr. Rhys Davids. 
In the J&taka book we have, then, a priceless record of the earliest imaginative 
literature of our race ; and ... it presents to us a nearly complete picture of the 
social life and customs and popular beliefs of the common, people of Aiyan tribes, 
closely related to ourselves, just as they were passing through the first stages of 
civilisation."— £(. Jwrneit Gazette. 



Peat 8vo, pp. xxviii, — 362, cloth, price 148. 

A TALMUDIO MISCELLANY; 

Ob, A THOUSAND AND ONE EXTRACTS FROM THE TAI.MUD, 

THE MIDRASHIM, AND THE KABBALAH. 

Compiled and Translated by PAUL ISAAC HBRSHON, 

Author of " Genesis According to the Talmud," &c. 

With Notes and Copious Indexes. 

" To .obtain in so concise and handy a form as this volume a general idea of the 
Talmud is a boon to Christians at least."— 7if?i««. 

" Its pecuUar and popular character will make it attractive to general readers. 
Mr. Hershon ia a very competent scholar. . . . Contains samples of the good, bad. 
and indifferent, and especially extracts that throw light upon the Scriptures." — 
British Quarterly Review. 

** Will convey to English readers a more complete and truthful notion of the 
Talmud than any other work that has yet appeared." — Daily News. 

"Without overlooking in the slightest the several attractions of the previous 
volumes of the ' Orient^ Series,' we have no hesitation in saying that this surpasses 
them all in interest."— JFdinfturg'A Daily Review. 

" Mr. Hershon has . . . thus given English readers what is, we b^eve, a fair set 
of specimens which tiiey can test for themselves." — The Record. 

" This book is by far the best fitted in the present state of knowledge to enable the 
general reader to gain a fair and unbiassed conception of the multifarious contents 
of the wonderful miscellany which can only be trulv imderstood— so Jewish pride 
asserts — ^by the life-long devotion of scholars of the Chosen Pebple." — Inquirer. 

" The vadue and importance of this volume consist in the fact that scarcely a sii^gle 
extract is given in its pages but throws some light, direct or refracted, upon those 
Scriptures which are the common heritage of Jew and Christian alike.**— /oA^rt Bull. 

*' It is a capital specimen of Hebrew scholarship ; a monument of learned, loving, 
ii^ht-giving labour.^*— /<m«* Herald. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES, 



Post 8vo, pp. xii. — 228, cloth, price 7s. 6d. 
THE CLASSICAL POETRY OF THE JAPAllESE. 

By basil hall CHAMBERLAIN, 
Author of ** Yeigo Heilkaku Shirafl." 

** A very curious ▼olurae. The author has manifestly devoted much labour to the 
tank of studying the poetical literatures of the Japanese, and rendering charBCteristic 
specimens into Em^lish verse." — Daily JXeies. 

" Mr. Chamberlain's voliune is, so far as we are aware, the first attempt which has 
been made to interpret the llteratiu>e*of the Japanese to the Western world. It is to 
the classical poetry of Old Japan that we must turn for Indigenous Japanese thoughl^ 
and in the volume before us wo have a selection from that poetry rendered into 
graceful English verse." — TabUt. 

"It is undoubtedly one of the best tr.inslations of lyric literature which has 
appeared during the close of the last vea,r."—Cele»tial Empire. 

*' Mr. Chamberlain set himself a difficult task when he undertook to r^noduce 
Japanese poetiy in an English form. But he has evidently laboured con amoref and 
his efforts are successful to a degree." — LoTuion and China Bxpreu. 



Post 8vo, pp. xii. — 164, cloth, price los. 6d. 

THE HISTORY OF ESARHADDON (Son of Sexmacherib), 

KING OF ASSYKIA, RO. 681-^68. 

Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions upon Cylinders and Tablets in 
the British Museum Collection ; together with a Grammatical Analysis 
of each Word, Explanations of the Ideographs by Extracts from the 
Bi-Lingual Syllabaries, and List of Eponyms, &o. 

By ERNEST A. BUDGE, B.A., M.R.A.S., 
Assyrian Exhibitioner, Christ's College, Cambridge. 

*' Students of scriptural archwology will also appreciate the ' History of Esar^ 
haddon.' ** — Times, 

" There is much to attract the scholar in this volume. It does not pretend to 
popularise fjtudic) which are yet in their infancy. Its primary object is to translate, 
but it does not assume to be more tliau tentative, and it offers both to the professed 
Aflsyriologist and to the ordinary non-Assyriological Semitic echolar the means of 
controUiujf its restdts.'' — Academy. 

"Mr. Budge's book is, of course, mainly addressed to Assyrian scholars and 
sttxlents. They are not, it is to be feared, a very numerous class. But the move 
thanks are duo to him on that account for the way in which he has acquitted himself 
in Ilia lubojious task.."— Tablet. 

Post 8vo, pp. 448, cloth, price 218. 
THE MESNEVI 

(Usually known as The Mesneviyi Sherif, or Holt Mksnevi) 

OF 

MEVLANA (OUll LOUD) JELALU 'DDIN MUHAMMED ER-BUML 

Book the First. 

Tiygetfier with some Account of the Life and AcUofthe Author^ 

of his AnccitorSy and of his Descendants, 

Illustrated by a Selection of Characteristic Anecdotes, as Collected 

by their Historian, 

MevLxVna Shem8U-*D-Din Ahmed, el Eflaki, el *Abifi. 

Translated, and the Poetry Versified, in English, 

By JAMES W. REDHOUSE, M.R.A.S., &c. 

•' A complete trea.sury of occult Oriental loi-e." — Saturday Revitw, 

"This bo«k will be a very valuable help to the reader ignorant of Persia, who is 

desirous of ol)taiiiiiip an insight into a very important department of the literature 

extant in that language."— roWrt. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Pott 8yo, pp. zvi— 380, doth, price 6s. 

EASTEBN PR0VEBB8 AND EMBLEMS 

Illustrating Old Tbuths. 

By Eiv. J. LONG, 

Member of the Bengal Anatic Society, F.B.G.S. 

" We regard the book as valuable, and with for it a wide drculation and attentiTe 

idlng. ""^Jtecord. 

''Mtogether, it ia quite a f eart of good thlng8.''-0to6<. 

' It ia full of intereeting matter.**— ^nK^vory. 



Poet 8vo, pp. TiiL— S70, cloth, price 71. 6d. 
INDIAN POETRY; 

Containing a New Edition of the "Indian Song of Songs," from the Sanscrit 
of the *'Qita Qovinda" of Jayadeva; Two Books from *'The Iliad of 
India** (Mahabharata), "Proverbial Wisdom " from the Shlokas of the 
Hitopadesa, and other Oriental Poems. 
By BDWIN ARNOLD, O.S.L, Amthor of "The Light of Asia." 

<* In this new volume of Meisri. TrUbner's Oriental Series, Ifr. Edwin Arnold does 
good service by illustn^ing; tbrou^ the medium of his musical EogliiAi melodies, 
the power of Indian poetry to stir European emotions. The * Indian Song of Songs * 
is not unknown to schol«irs. Mr. Arnold will have Introduced it among popiHar 
English poems. Nothing could be more graceful and delicate than the shades by 
whlBh Krishna is portrayed in the gradual process of being weaned by the love of 

'Beantifal Badha, jasmine-bosomed Radha,' 
from the allurements of the forest nymphs, in whom the five senses are typified."— 
Time*. 

" No other English poet has ever thrown his genius and his art so thoroughly into 
the work <^ trstislattng Eastern ideas as Mr. Arnold has done in his splendid para- 
phrases of language contained in these mighty epics. "—Dai^y TdtgrrapL 

" The poem abounds with imagery of Eastern luxuriousness and sensuousness ; the 
air seems laden with the spicy odours oi the tropics^ and the verse has a richness and 
a melody sufliclent to capnvate the senses of the dullest." — Standard, 

" The translator, while producing a very enjoyable poem, has adhered with toler- 



able fidelity to the original taxX.**— Overland 

'*We certainly wish Mr. Arnold Success in his attempt <to ponularise Indian 
classics,* that being, as his preface tells us« the goal toivards which be bends his 
efforts.'*— ^Uen's Indian Mail. 



Post 8vo, pp. xvi.— 296, cloth, price los. 6d. 

THE MINB OF MENOIUS ; 

Or, political ECONOBHT FOUNDED UPON MORAL 

PHILOSOPHY. 

A Ststematio Digest of ths Doctrines of the Chinese Philosopusb 
Henoius. 

Translated from the Original Text and Classified, with 
Comments and Explanations, 

By the Rev. ERNST FABER, Rhenish Mission Society. 

Translated from the German, with Additional Notes, 

By the Rev. A. B. HUTCHINSON, C.M.S., Church Mission, Hong Kong. 

** Mr. Faber is already wsJl known in the field of Chinese studies by his digest of 
the doctrines of Confuciin. The value of this work will be perceived when it is 
remembered that at no time since relations commenced between China and the 
West has the former been so poweiful— we had almost said aggressive— as now. 
For those who will give it careful study, Mr. Faber's work is one of the most 
valuable of the excellent series to which it belongs."— ATaCure. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER^S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Post 8vo, pp. 336, cloth, price 168. 

THE KELIGIONS OF INDIA. 

By a. BARTfl. 

Translated from the French with the authority and assistance of the Author. 

The author has, at the request of the puhlishers, considerahly enlarged 
the work for the translator, and has added the literature of the subject to 
date ; the translation may, therefore, be looked upon as an eqidvalent of a 
new and improyed edition of the original. 

" Is not only a valuable manual of the religions of India^ which marks a distinct 
step in the treatment of the subject, but also a useful work of reference." — Academy. 

**Thi8 volume is a reproduction, with corrections and tulditions, of an article 
contributed by the learned author two years ago to tiie ' Encyclop^ie des Sciences 
Religieuses.' It attracted much notice when it first appeared, and is generally 
admitted to present the best summary extant of the vast subject with which it 
dcalB." — Tablet. 

"This is not only on the whole the best but the only manual of the religions of 
India, apart from Buddhism, which we have in English. The pi-esent work . . . 
shows not only g^reat knowledge of the facts and power of clear exposition, but also 
great insight into the inner history and the deeper meaning of the great religion, 
for it is in reality only one, which it proposes to describe. "—Jifoctem Review. 

" The merit of tbe work -has been emphatically recognised by the most authoritative 
Orientalists, both in this country and on the continent of Europe, But probably 
there are few Indianists (if we may use the word) who would not derive a good de«d 
of information from it, and especklly from the extensive bibliography provided in 
the notes." — Dublin Review. 

" Such a sketch M. Barth has drawn with a master-band.**— Oitic {New Torh). 



Post 8vo, pp. viii — 152, cloth, price 6s. 

HINDU PHILOSOPHY. 

The SlNKHYA KARIKA op IS'WARA KlRISHNA. 

Ad Exposition of the System of Kapila, with an Appendix on the 
Nyilya and Yais'eshika Systems. 

By JOHN DAVIES, M.A. (Cantab.), »LK.A.S. 

The system of Kapila contains nearly all that India has produced in the 
department of pure philosophy. 

** The non-Orientalist . . . finds in Mr. Davies a patient and* learned guide who 
leads him into the intricacies of the philosophy of India, and supplies him with a clue, 
that be may not be lost in them. In the preface he states that the system of 
Kapila is the 'earliest attempt on record to give an answer, from reason alone, 
to the mysterious questions which arise in every thoughtful mind about the origin of 
the world, the nature and relations of man and his future destiny,' and in his learned 
and able not^s be exhibits ' the connection of the Sankhya system with the phUo- 
sophy of Spinoza,' and ' tbe connection of the system of Kapila with that of Schopen- 
hauer and Von Eartmann.' "—Fwdgn Church C7tronicle. 

'• Mr. Davies's volume on Hindu Philosophy is an imdoubtcd gain to all studentib 
of the development of thought. The system of Kapila, which is here given in a trans- 
lation from the S&nkhya Karika, is tbe only contribution of India to pure philosophy. 
. . . Presents many points of deep interest to the sttHent of conoparative philo- 
sophy, and without Mr. Davies's lucid interpretation it would be dimcult to appre- 
ciate these points in any adequate manner."— Saturday Review. 

'* We welcome Mr. Davies's book as a valuable addition to our philosophical 
library."— iVote* ond Qturies. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Post 8yo, pp. X. — 130, oloih, price 69. 
r^T" TTT'WnTTPAWTTrCTRM' 17T!1 



A MANUAL OF HINDU PANTHEISM. VEDANTA8AEA. 

Translated, with copious Annotations, by Majob 6. A. JACOB, 
Bombay Staff Corps ; Inspector of Army Schools. 

The design of this little work is to provide for missionaries, and for 
others who, like them, have little leisure for original research, an accurate 
summary of the doctrines of the Yed&nta. 

"There can be no question that the religious doctrines most widely held by the 
people of India are mtdnly Pantheistic. And of Hindu Pantheism, at all events in 
its most modem phases, its VedAntas&ra presents the best summary. But then this 
work is a mere summaiy : a skeleton, the dry bones of which require to be clothed 
with skin and bones, and to be animated by vital breath before the ordinary reader 
will discern in it a living reality. Major Jacob, therefore, has wisely added to his 
translation of the Ved&ntas&ra copious notes from the writings of well-known Oriental 
scholars, in which he has, we think, elucidated all that required elucidation. So 
that the work, as here presented to us, presents no difficulties which a very moderate 
amoxmt of application will not overcome." — Tablet. 

** The moaest title of Major Jacob's work conveys but an inadequate idea of the 
vast amount of research embodied in his notes to the text of the Vedantasara. So 
copious, indeed, are these, and so much collateral matter do they bring to bear on 
the subject, that the diligent student will rise from their perusal with a fairly 
adequate view of Hindft philosophy generally. His work ... is one of the best of 
its kind that we have seen."— Calcutta Review. 



Post 8vo, pp. xii — 154, cloth, price 78. 6d. 

TSUNI— 1 1 GOAM : 

The Suprbms Bbimo of the Khoi-EIhoi. 

By THEOPHILUS HAHN, Ph.D., 

Custodian of the Grey Collection, Cape Town ; Corresponding Member 

of the Geegr. Society, Dresden ; Corre8X)onding Member of the 

Anthropological Society, Vienna, &c., &c. 

"The first instalment of Dr. Hahn's laboxirs will be of interest, not at the Cape 
only, but in every University of Europe. It is, in fact, a most valuable contribution 
to the comparative study of religion and mythology. Accounts of their religion and 
mythology were scattered about in various books ; these have been carefully col- 
lected by Dr. Hahn and printed in his second chapter, enriched and improved by 
what he has been able to collect himself."— Pro/. Max MiUlcr in the Kineteenih 
Century. 

" Dr. Hahn's book is that of a man who is both a philologbt and believer in 
philological methods, and a close student of savage manners and customs." — Satur- 
day Review. 

" It is fuU of good things." — St. James's Gazette. 



In Four Volumes. Post 8vo, Vol. I., pp. xii. — 392, cloth, price 12s. 6d., 

VoL XL, pp. vi — 408, cloth, price 12s. 6d., Vol. III., pp. viii. — 414, 

cloth, price I2B. 6d. 

A OOMPBEHENSIVE COMMENTARY TO THE QUEAN. 

To WHICH 18 PREFIXED SALE's PEBUMINARY DISCOURSE, WITH 

Additional Notes and Emendations. 

Together with a Complete Index to the Text, Preliminary 
Discourse, and Notes. 

By Rev. K M. WHERRY, M. A., Lodiana. 

" As Mr. Wherry's book is intended for missionaries in India, it is no doubt well 
that they should be prepared to meet, if they can, the ordinary argmnents and inter> 
pretations, and for this purpose Mr. Wherry's additions will prove usefuL"— ^tetwntey 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Poit 8vo, pp. vi.— ao8, cloth, price 8f. 6d. 
THE BHAGAVAD-aiTA. 

Translated, with Introduction and Notea 

By JOHN DAVIES, M.A. (Cantab.) 

" T^t us add that his translation of the Bhagarad 01t& is. as we Judge, the best 
hat has as yet appeared in Enf" '^ .. ^. ^^^ .«..../. ^,_. . .._ 

peculiar value."— lh(2>{in Review, 



that has as yet appeared in English, and that his Philological Notes are of quite 
" ' "— ihttti " • 



Post 8to, pp. 96, cloth, price 58. 
THE QUATRAINS OF OMAR KHAYTAM. 

Translated by B. H. WHINFIELD, M.A., 
Barrister-at-Law, late H.M. Bengal Civil Service. 



Post 8vo, pp. xxxii.— 336, cloth, price los. 6d. 

THE QtJATBAINS OF OMAR KHAYYAM. 

The Persian Text, with an English Verse Translation. 
By E. H. WHINFIBLD^ late of the Bengal Civil Service. 

"Mr. Whinfield has executed a difficult ^<ik with considerable success, and his 
version contains much that will be new to those who only know Mr. Fitzgerald's 
deli^tful selection." — Academy. 

** There are several editions of the Quatrains, varying greatlvin their readings. 
Mr. Whinfield has used three of these for his excellent translation. The most pro- 
minent features in the Quatroiiis are their profound agnosticism, combined with a 
fatalism based more on pbilosophlc than religious grounds, their Epicureanism and 
the spirit of universal tolerance and charity which animates them. "~Ca£cutta Meview. 



Post 8vo, pp. xxiv. — 268, cloth, price 98. 

THE FHILOSOFHY OF THE UPANISHADS AND 

ANCIENT INDIAN METAPHYSICS. 

As exhibited in a series of Articles contributed to the Calcutta Review. 

By ARCHIBALD EDWARD GOUGH, M.A., Xaneoln College, Oxford ; 
Principal of tho Cidcutta Madrasa. 

*' For practio«4 purposes this is perhaps the most trnpo^tantef ibe Works that have 
thus far appeared in * Triibuer's Oriental Series.' ... We cannot doubt that for all 
who may take it up the work must be one of profound interest." — Satmiiaif Review. 



In Two Volumes. Vol. I., post Svo, pp. xxiv, — 230, cloth, price 78. 6d. 

A COMFABATIVE HISTORY OF THE EGYPTIAN AND 

MESOPOTAMIAN RELIGIONS. 

By Dr. C. P. TIELE. 

Vol. I.— -History op the EaYFnAN Rbugion. 

Translated from the Dutch with the Assistance of the Author. 

By JAMES BALLIKGAL. 

" It places in the hands of the English readers a history of Egyntian Religion 
which IS very complete, which is hasc^ on the best materiius. and which has been 
iUustrated by the latest results of research. In this volume there is a great deal of 
information, as well as independent investigation, for the trustworthiness of which 
Dr. Tide's name is in itself a guarantee ; and the description of the Fuccessive 
religions under the Old Kingdom, the Middle Kingdom, and the New Kingdom, is 
given in a manner which is scholarly and minute."— iScotman. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER*S ORIENTAL SERIES, 



Post 8to, pp. xii.— 303, cloth, price 8i. 6d. 

TXTSXJF AND ZXJTiATKHA. 

A Pone BT JAMI. 

Traotlated from the Penian into Bngliih Yene. 

Bt RALPH T. H. GRIFFITH. 

** Ifr. Griffith, who has done tlnmAj good aerrioe as transUtor Into Terse from the 

Sanskrit, has done farther good wonc in this translation from the Persian, and he 

has eridently shown not a little skill in his rendering the quaint and Tonr oriental 

style of his vithor into our more mtMaic, less llgurattre, language. . . . The work. 

besides its intrinsic merits, is of nnportance as oeing one of the most popular and 

famous poems of Perria, and that which is read in all the independent native schools 

of India where Persian is taught**— fieotenum. 



Poft 8to, pp. TiiL — 366, doth, price 91. 

Lmaxnsno essays. 

Bt carl ABBL. 

<* AH these essays of Dr. Abel's are so thoughtful, so full of happy illustrations, 
and so admirably put together, that we hardly know to which we should specially 
turn to select for our readers a sample of his workmanship." — TabUt. 

« An entirely novel method of deiding with philosophical quAfttioiis and impart a 
real human interest to the otherwise d^ technicalities of the science.*' — Standard. 

** Dr. Abel is an opponent from whom it is pleasant to differ, for he writes with 
enthusiasm nnd temper, and his mastery over the BngUsh language fits him to be a 
champion of unpopular doctrines." — Athenctum, 

*'Dr. Abel writes very good English, and much of his book will prove entertaining 
to tlie general reader. It may give some useful hinu, aud suggest some sutrjects for 
profitable investigation, even to phUologists.'*— JfcUion {Ntw fork). 

Post 8vo, pp. ix. — 281, cloth, price lot. 6d. 
THE SABVA-DAESANA-SAMOBAHA; 

Ob, review of the different systems of HINDtJ 

PHILOSOPHY. 

By MADHAVA ACHARYA. 

Translated hv B. B. GO WELL, M. A., Professor of Sanskrit in the University 

of Oambridge, and A E. GOUOH, M.A., Professor of Philosophy 

in the Prf^sidenc^ College, Calcutta. 

This work is an interesting specimen of Hindu critical ability. The 

author successively, passes in review the sixt9.Qn philosophical systems 

oarrent in the fotirteeii^h .centucy in. the South ofln^ia ; and he gives what 

appears ^ him to be their most important tenets. 

'*The translation is trustworthy throughout. A protracted sojourn in Indfn, 
where there is a living tra<lition, has familiarised tjo translatoi-s ^ith Indiim 
thought."—^ thmaniM. 



Post 8vo, pp. Ixv. — 368, cloth, price 148. 

TIBETAN TALES DEBIVED FBOM INDIAN SOUBCES. 

Translated from the Tibetan of the Kah-Gtur. 

By F. ANTON VON. SCHIEFNER. 

Done into English from the German, with an Introduction, 

Bt W. R. S. RALSTON, M.A. 

'*Mr. Ralston, whose name is so familiar to all lovers of Russian folk-lore, has 

supplied some interesting Western analogies and parallels, draWn, for the most part, 

Arom l^vonic sources, to the Eastern ft>lk-tale8, culled from the Kahgyur, one of the 

divisions of the Tibetan sacred hooVA." ^Aeademy, 

"The translation . . . could scarcely have fallen into better hands. An Introduc- 
tion . . . gives the leading facts in the lives of those scholars who have given their 
attention to gaining a knowledge of the Tibetan literature and language. "—Cafcueta 
Review, 

" Ought to interest all who eare for the East, for amusing stories, or for comparative 
folk-lore."— Poff Mall OautU, 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Post 8vo, pp. xvi — 224, oloth, price 98. 

UDANAVABGA. 

A CoLLBcnoN OP Verses pbom the Buddhist Canon. 

Compiled by DHARMATRATA. 

Being the NORTHERN BUDDHIST VERSION OF DHAMMAPADA. 

Translated from the Tibetan of Bkah-hgyur, with Notes, and 
Extracts from the Commentary of Pradjnavarman, 

By W. WOODVILLB ROCKHILL. 

'* Hr. Bockhill's present work i& the first from which assistance will he gained 
for a more accurate understanding of the Pali text; it is, in fact, as yet the only 
term of cumparison available to us. The *■ Udanavarga,' the Thibetan version, was 
originally discovered by the late M. Schiefner, who published the Tibetan text, and 
had intended adding a translation, an inteution frustrated by his death, but which 
has been carried out by Mr. Rockhill. . . . Mr. Rockhill may be congratulated for 
having well accomplished a difficult task." — Saturday Review. 



In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. xxiv. — 566, cloth, accompanied by a 
Language Map, price 253. 

A SKETCH OF THE MODERN LANOUAGES OF AFRICA. 

By ROBERT NEEDHAM OUST, 
Barrister-at-Law, and late of Her Majesty's Indian CIyU Service. 

" Any one at all interested in African languages cannot do better than get Mr. 
Cxist's book. It is encyclojMedio in its scope, and the reader gets a start clear away 
ill any particular language, and is left free to add to the initial sum of knowledge 
there collected." — Natal Meivury. 

" Mr. Oust has contrived to produce a work of value to linguistic students." — 
Nature. 

Post 8vo, pp. xii.— 312, with Maps and Plan, cloth, price 148. 

A HISTORY OF BURMA. 

Including Burma Proper, Pegn, Taungu, Tenasserim. and Arakan. From 

the Earliest Time to the End of the First War vrith British India. 

Br Lebut.-Gen. Sir ARTHUR P. PHAYRE, G.C.M.G., K.C.S.I., and O.B.. 

Membre Correspondant de la Soci^t^ Acad^miqne Indo-Chinoise 

de France. 

"Sir Arthur Phayre's contribution to Trtlbner's Oriental Series supplies a recog- 
nised want, and its appearance has been looked forward to for many years 

General Pbayre deserves great credit for the patience and industry which has resulted 
in this History of Burma.^' — Saturday Review. 

Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. 276, cloth, price 78. 6d. 
RELIGION IN CHINA. 

By JOSEPH EDKINS, D.D., Peking. 
Containing a Brief Account of the Three Religions of the Chinese, with 
Observations on the Prospects of Christian Conversion amongst that 
People. 
** Dr. Edkins has been most careful in noting the varied and often complex jdiases 
of opinion, so as to give an account of considerable value of the subject" — Scotsman. 
" As a missionary, it has been part of Dr. Edkins' duty to study the existing 
religions in China, and his long residence in the country has enabled him to acquire 
an intimate knowledge of •them as thev at present exist."— Saturday Review. 

** Dr. Edkins' valuable work, of which' Uiis is a second and revised edition, has, 
from the time that it was published, been the standard authority upon the subject 
of which it tre&ta."—N(mcon/(n'mi9t. 

" Dr. Edkins . . . may now be fairly regarded as among the first authorities on 
Chinese religion and language."— BntuA Quarterly Review. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. XV.-250, cloth, price 78. 6d. 

OUTLINES OP THE HISTORY OF RELiaiON TO THE 

SPREAD OP THE UNIVERSAL RELIGIONS. 

By 0. P. TIEI^, 

Doctor of Theology, Professor of the History of Keligious in the 

University of Ley den. 

Translated from the Dutch by J. Estlin Carpenter, M.A. 

" Few books of its size contaiD the result of so much wide thinking, able and labo< 
riouB study, or enable the reader to gain a better bird's-eye view of the latest results 
of investigations into the religious history of nations. As Professor Tiele modestly 
saye, * In this little book are outlines — pencil sketches. I might say— nothing more/ 
But there are some men whose sketches from a thumb-n.ail are of* far more worth 
than an enormous canvas covered witb the crude painting of others, and it is easy to 
see that these pages, full of information, these sentences, cut and perhaps also dry, 
short and clear, condense the fruits of long and thorough research." — Scoismanx. 



Post 8vo, pp. x,-274, cloth, price 98. 

THE LIPE OP THE BUDDHA AND THE EARLY 
HISTORY OP HIS ORDER. 

Derived from Tibetan Works in the Bkab-hgyur and Bstan-hgynr. 

Followed by notices on the Early History of Tibet and Khoten. 

Translated by W. W, ROCKHILL, Second Secretary U.S. Legation in China. 

"The volume bears testimony to the diligence and fulness with which the author 
has consulted and tested the ancient documents bearing ui>on his remarkable sub- 
ject."— rime*. 

" Will be appreciated by those who devote themselves to those Buddhist studies 
whidi have of late years taken in these Western regions so remarkable a develop- 
ment. Its matter possesses a special interest as being derived from ancient Tibetan 
works, some portions of which, here analysed and translated, have not yet attracted 
the attention of scholars. The volume is rich in ancient stories bearing upon the 
world's renovation and the origin of castes, as recorded in these venerable autho* 
ritie8."—Z)o«fy Ntvoi. 

Third Edition. Post 8vo, pp. viii.-464, cloth, price i6g. 

THE SANEHYA APHORISMS OP EAPILA, 

With niuatrative Extracts from the Commentaries. 
Translated by J. B. BALL ANT YNE, LL.D., late Principal of the Benares 

College. 
Edited by FITZEDWARD HALL. 
"The work displays a vast ex|)enditure of labour and scholarship, for which 
students of Hindoo philosophy have every reason to be grateful to Dr. Hall and the 
publishers."— Caictttta Review. 

In Two Volumes, post 8vo, pp. cviii.-242, and viiL-370, cloth, price 248. 
Dedicated by permission to H.K.H. the Prince of Wales. 

BUDDHIST RECORDS OP THE WESTERN WORLD, 

Translated from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (a.D. 629). 
By SAMUEL BEAL, B.A., 
(Trin. ColL, Camb.) ; RN. (Retired Chaplain and N.L) ; Professor of Chinese, 
University College, London ; Rector of Wark, Northumberland, &c. 
An eminent Indian authority writes respecting this work: — "Nothing 
more can be done in elucidating the History of India until Mr. Real's trans- 
lation of th« * Si-yu-ki * appears." 

*' It is a strange freak of historical preservation that the best account of the con- 
ditioa of India at that ancient period has come down to us in the books of travel 
written by the Chino«e pilg^ms, of whom Hwen Thsang is the best known." — Timti. 
" We are compelled at this stage to close our brief and inadeouate notice of a book 
for eaty access to which OrientaUsts will be deeply grateful to the able trautdator." — 
LiUrary World. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



TRUBNER'S ORIENTAL SERIES. 



Post 8to, pp. xlTiii.-398, oloth, price lat. 

THE ORDINANOES OF MANU. 

Translated from the fiknikrit, with an Introduction. 

By the late A. C. BURNBLL, Ph.D., O.I.B. 

Completed and Edited hy E. W. HOPKINS, Ph.D., 
of Columbia College, N. Y. 

" Thi9 work is lUll of interest ; while for the student of sociology and the science 
of religion it is full of importance. It is a great boon to get so notable a work in so 
accessible a form, admirably edited, and competently translated."— <8cot«man. 

<* Few men were more competent than Bumell to gire us a really good translation 
of this well-kiiown law book, first rendered into English by Sir William Jones. 
BumeU was not only an independedt Sanskrit scholar, but an experienced lawyer, 
and he Joined to these two important qualifications the rare faulty of beixig able to 
express his thoughts in dear and trenchant TBngHsh. ... We ought to feel very 
grateful to Dr. Hopkins for havinff givenus aU that could be published of the trans- 
Ution left by Bumell. '*'>F. Max ITOllxr in the Aeademp, 



Post 8vo, pp. xii.-234, oloth, prioe 91. 

THE LIFE AND WORKS OF ALEXANDER 

080MA DE K0R08, 

Between 1819 and 1843. With a Short Notice of all hii Published and Un- 
published Works and Essays. From Original and for most part Un- 
published Documents. 

By THEODOEB DUKA, M.D., F.B.C.S. (Ehg.), Surgeon-Major 
H.M.'s Bengal Medical Service, Betired, &c. 

"Not too soon have Messrs. Trttbner added to their Taluable Oriental Series a 
history of the life and works of one of the most gifted and deroted of Oriental 
students, Alexander Gsoma de Koros. It is forty-ti^ee years since his death, and 
though an account of his career was demanded soon after his decease, it has only 
now appeared in the important memoir of his compatriot, Dr. Duka."— JooJbieUer. 



In Two Volumes, post 8Yo,.pp. xii.-3i8 and 3x0, cloth, prioe ais. 
MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS 

ON SUBJECTS OOKNEOTED WITH THB 

MALAY FENINStJLA AND THE INDIAN ARCHIPELAOO. 

Reprinted from '' Dahymple's Oriental Bepertory," '^Asiatiok Researches,'* 
and the *"' Joxxtnal of the Asiatic Socie^ of Bengal." 

"The papers treat of almost every aspect of Indo-Chiua~its philology, economy, 
geography, geology— and constitute a very material and important contribution to 
our accessible iuformation*regarding that country and its people."— Ctontmporory 
Meview. 

Post 8to, pp. xii.-72, oloth, price $§. 

THE SATAKAS OF BHARTRIHARL 

Translated from the Sanskrit 

BytheBEV. B. HALE WORTHAM, M.R.A.S., 

Rector of Eggesford, North Devon. 

" A very interesting addition to Trtlbner's Oriental Bwiea."— Saturday Revitto. 
** Many of the Maxuns in the book have a Biblical ring and beauty of expression." 
~5(. Jama* Qaxette, 

LONDON : TRUBNER & CO., 57 and 59 LUDGATE HILL. 

500 — 20/3/86— M. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE 



NlTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



I.— THE LOKANtTI.^ 



SECTION I. 

THE WISE MAN. 
I. 

Having paid homage to the Three Gems,* I recite con- 
cisely in M§.gadhese^ the "Lokanlti," extracted from 
various treatises * 



^ I have selected this Nlti for 
translation before the others because 
it is the most popular in Burma. Its 
popularity during recent years has 
been increased by printed editions 
of it enumating from the presses of 
Rangoon. It forms, besides, a text- 
book for the vernacular schools of 
the province. The P&li text of it 
is very corrupt in many places, and 
an emended edition has not yet 
been attempted. The Lolcantti 
("Worldly Behaviour") is divided 
into seven sections, viz., (i) The 
BviL-DoEB, (2) The GtOod Man, (3) 
The Evil-Doer, (4) Friendship, (5) 
Woman, (6) EIinos, and (7) Misoel- 
LANBOUS. It was, for the first time, 
rendered into Burmese in A.D. 1835, 
during the reign of Bhagidaw, by 
the guru Gakkandftbhislri. 

^ The TinUanartif viz., Buddha, 
hts Law («.e., the Buddhist Scrip- 
turec), and the Priesthood. Bud- 



dhistic compositions frequently begin 
with a respectful reference to these 
three objects of veneration in addi- 
tion to the formula addressed to 
Gotama — Namo taata bhagavato 
arahato sammdtamlniddhassa, '* Hon- 
our to him the Blessed, the Sancti- 
fied, and All-wise." 

^ The language of Mllgadha. This 
was one of the nine tracts into 
which India of the Pur&^a period 
was known to be divided. During 
Gotama's time it was probably 
boimded by the Ganges on the north, 
Hiranya Parvata (Monghyr) on the 
east, Kirana Suvarna on the south, 
and the l^nares ciistrict on the 
west, making in all a circuit of about 
800 miles. Its ancient capital was 
P&taliputra, established in the reign 
of Ajfttaaatru. Magadha was ako 
known as Paldia or Pardaa, the 
land of the Butea frondosa. Hence 
Arrian, Strabo, and Pliny call the 
A 



Digitized by 



Google 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



The "Nlti,"^ in this world, is a man's substance, his 
father, his mother, his teacher, his friend : a person, there- 
fore, knowing the " Nlti," is a wise man, both excellent 
and well-informed. 

3- 

How can there be proficiency for one who is indolent, 
wealth for one without proficiency, friendship for one 
without wealth, happiness for the friendless, merit for the 
unhappy, and Nibb&n* for the unmeritorious person ? 



Wealth is not equal in value to learning. Thieves do 
not take away learning : ^ it is friendship in this world, 
and the bearer of happiness in the next. 

5. 
One should not despise a little; he should keep in his 
mind what has been acquired : drops of water in an ant- 
hill will fill it at length.8 



people Prasii, The chief places of 
Buddhistic interest in Magadha weve 
Bnddba Gavft, R&jagriha, N&landa, 
and KusAgifiirapuiu, the original 
capital. The sacred texts writ'ten 
in the M&gadha dialect are, properly 
speaking, termed Pftli The latter 
word is spelt P&li by the Burmese. 

^ Sanskrit chiefly. There ib in- 
ternal evidence to show that pre- 
existing Buddhistic compilations 
have also been made use of in this 
anthology. 

' This word has the form nUi also 
in Burmese palm-leafs. The ortho- 
graphy nidhif signifying a " reposi- 
tory," IB met with occasionally, but 
this, no doubt, is the result of pho- 
netic similarity. For remarks on 
NUi literature, see the Introduction 
to this work. 

* This is the form which tho 
Sanskrit Nirvftna takes in Burmese 
literature. [Nibbdn = nibbdna = m 
+i^+na=mvi^na, which, accord- 



ing to rule, becomes nUbdna, **a 
going out"] 

' The idea is borrowed from Cftn- 
.al^: — 

** With knowledge say what other 
wealth 
Can vie, which neither thieves by 

stealth 
Can take, nor kinsmen make their 

prey; 

Which lavished, never wastes 
away." — Muir, 
Or, more literally, '* That jewel know- 
ledge, which lansmen plunder not, 
nor thieves carry away, which de- 
creaseth not by giving, is great 
wealth." 

" Compare HUoptuUkit ii 10 : — 
" By drops of water falling one by 
one, 



Such is the law < 



Little by little may a jar be filled ; 

" r of all accumula- 

tions — 

Of money, knowledge, and religious 
merit." — Indian Wisdom, 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE LOKANtTL 3 

6. 

One should despise neither science nor art, saying to 
himself — " It is of little consequence : " even one learnt 
to perfection is a suitable means of livelihood. 



There is not a gem in every rock nor pearl in every 
elephant,^ not sandal- wood in every forest, nor erudition 
in every place. 

8. 

If it be known where a wise man, full of learning, is — 
one in search of knowledge should eagerly repair to that 
placa 

9. 

Learning comes by degrees, wealth little by little, 
climbing a mountain is done gradually, love comes by 
degrees, anger little by little, — these five little by little.^^ 

10. 
General knowledge,^^ the science of law,^ calculation, 



' Fabolously supposed to be in 
the head. There is a similar conceit 
concerning the snake and toad. 

^^ Sine 8ine= "little by little." 

" SuH (= Sanskrit iruti, "hear- 
ing**) is rendered in Burmese by 
"what is heard and seen." I have 
translated it by "general know- 
ledge** The reference, no doubt, 
18 to the knowledge of the Vedas, 
or at least of the mantras (hymns), 
and brdhmanas (expositions) — the 
books obtained by Rishis through 
divine revelation. 

^^ The PAli sammuti (an adapta- 
tion of smriti, "memory**) is ren- 
dered by "the knowledge of the 
DfiammatJuUs.** Sammuti, strictly 
speaking, signifies "tradition,'* to 
which heading the Sanskrit DJumt- 
maidgtnu are referred. S^ruti is 
what is heard by divine revelation 
in contrast with smrUi — what is 
received from memory (tradition). 



With regard to the latter, Monier 
Williams remarks : — " This is be- 
lieved to be founded on ^ruti, 
'direct revelation,* as its primary 
basis, and only possesses authority 
in so far as it is in harmony with 
such revealed truth. The very 
essence of SmfUi, however, is con- 
sidered to be that it was delivered 
memoriter by human authors and 
put into the form of human composi- 
tion." The six principal divisions of 
Smfiti in Sanskrit literature are : — 
L The Veddngas ("Helps to the 
Vedas"), comprising — 

(a) Kalpa ((Ceremonial Direc- 
tory). 

(6) Stkshd (Pronunciation). 

(c) Chandat (Metre). 

(d) Nirukta (Exposition). 
(«) Vydkarana (Grammar). 
(/) J yoiisha (Astronomy). 

IL The Smdrta SiUras {Son-Yedic 
Ceremonies). 



Digitized by 



Google 



4 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

meclianical art; the knowledge of the "Nlti/'" the By&- 
karein,^* and music; manual dexterity, archery, antiqui- 
ties ;i5 

II. 

Science of medicine, wit and humour,^* astrology ;i^ 
strategy,^^ versification ; diplomacy, magic,^ and grammar : 
these are the eighteen acquirements.^ 

12. 

A wise man who is not questioned is like a drum ; ^ 
one who is questioned is like a violent shower : a fool, 
whether addressed or not, speaks much. 

13. 
The knowledge that is in books, and the wealth that 



III. The Dharmaidstrat (Law 

Books). 

IV. The Itihdsas (Legendary 

Poems). 
V. ThePttr4na«(LegendaryTale8). 
VI. The NUiidstras (Moral Pre- 
cepts). 

" The ancient collection known 
as the Nttiidstra is referred to. 

'^ Visesakd is so translated in the 
Burmese nUsyUf and ** grammatical 
analysis" is probably referred to. 
»*The word Vydkararia (Pali Byd- 
karanOf Burmese Bydkarein) means 
literally 'undoing,' and is applied 
first to linguistic analysis and then 
generaUy to grammar, but especially 
to P&^ini's Grammar. It is oppo- 
site to Sanakarcma, 'putting to- 
gether/ whence the formed language 
is called Sanskfita, 'constructed.'" 
— Indian Wisdom. As there seems 
to be a great deal of misconception 
on the part of the Burmese trans- 
lator in several of the renderings of 
words in the loth and nth stanzas, 
the rendering attached to visesakd 
can scarcely be looked upon as the 
right one. I have no doubt that 
there is a reference to the Vai4eshika 
philosophy, one of the six systems 
which had their origin in the Upa- 



nishads of the Vedas ; so yoga may 
refer-to the yoga system and not to 
" mechanical art." 

" Or " Old Writings," i«., the 
eighteen Pur&rias or Ancient L^en- 
danr Histories. 

^' The Itihdtas or "Legendary 
Poems" are referred to. Among 
them are the Rdmdyana and Mahd- 
bMrata. 

^' Joti (jyoHsha). 
18 Or "circumvention." Bymdydf 
possibly "mysticism," such as we 
read of in connection with the 
Vedftntist and Mimftns& systems, is 
the idea intended to be conveyed by 
the text. 

" Or "incantations," "the use 
of spells." 

^ The following is the P&li text 
of the loth and nth stanzas, oom^ 
posed in the VaUa metre : — 
(10) Suti sammuti sankhyft ca 
yoga niti visesakft 
gandhabbft ganikft ceva 
dhanubbed& ca piiran& 
(i I ) tikicch& itihas& ca 
joti m&yft -ca chandati 
ketumantft ca saddft ca 
sippfttthArasak& ime. 
^ The sound may be produced 
from it whenever it is necessary. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE LOKANtTI. 5 

is not in one's hands,— the one is not knowledge, and the 
other not wealth, when occasion arises.*^ 

14. 

The criterion of water is the water-lily; of a race, 
discipline and discourse ; of wisdom, the words that are 
uttered ; and of the ground, the fading of the grass. 

15. 
A man of little learning deems that little a great deal ; 
he is proud: a frog not seeing the water of the sea,^ 
considers it as much as the water in a well 

16. 

One who, in the first place, has not acquired knowledge, 
in the second, has not obtained wealth, and, thirdly, has 
not acquired the " Law " 2* — what will he do in the fourth 
place ? 

17. 

Children, be wise ; wherefore are ye idle ? One without 
wisdom is the bearer of another*s burden. A wise man 
is honoured in the world; day by day be ye wise, 
children. 

18. 

A mother is an enemy, a father is an enemy. Where- 
fore ? Because their offspring, being uneducated in their 
youth, are as unbecoming in an assembly as cranes among 
swans.^ 

19- 
Who gives the point to a mountain thorn ? Who gives 

^ Kicee aamwpanne, " wh^n occa- hue. It is possible that the flam- 

sionanses." According to Cftnakja, ingo {PTujenieoptems ruber) is re- 

'*.the time of action." f erred to by Indian writers. The 

^ The Japanese proverb says, lower eastern part of the delta 

" A frog in a weU sees nothing of of the Irawadi was called Harhsa- 

the high seas." vatt ("valley of hajhsas^*), Hiuen 

^ The Buddhist Scriptures — the Tsiang, the Chinese pilgrim, refers 

TipifaJca — as furnishing the rules to the tract as being included in 

for religious duties, kc KdmalankA. 

^ " Brahmanic ducks " of golden 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA, 



sight to the eye of a deer or fragrance to a lily in the 
pond? Who gives to the descendants of a race their 
disposition ? Each comes of itself.^ 



20. 

Flavourless is a betel-leaf without lime ^ and insipid 
the adornments of one without wealth; tasteless is a 
curry devoid of salt; senseless the exposition^ of one 
without knowledge. 

21. 

One observant is full of learning; he increases his 
knowledge ; by means of knowledge he understands the 
meaning :^ the comprehension of the meaning brings 
satisfaction. 

22. 

Food, sexual intercourse, and sleep appertain both to 
oxen and men; knowledge is peculiar*^ to man: one of 
a debased intellect is on a level with oxea 

23. 
Friendship is not equal in value to knowledge; there 
is no enemy like sickness ; no love is equal to self-love ; 
no power equal to moral merit.*^ 



M Buddhism does not accept a 
god as creator. Hence, tajnati Shavo 

^ AhOambulaih = <*betel-leaf 
without lime," where ho is used for 
lime. The betel (Malabar beftla) 
is a species of pepper, the leaves of 
which are chewed in the East with 
a little areca-nut, catechu, and shell- 
lime. To improve the flavour rose- 
T^ater and spices, such as cinnamon, 
clove, 9lo. , are added. The prepared 
betel-leaf acts as a digestive after 
meals, and serves the same purpose 
as smoking in temporarily staving 
off hunger. By some it is looked 
upon as a luxury, and one of the 
etiquettes of hospitality is to offer 
it to a visitor. The Hiiopadeia 
says: *' Betel is pungent, bitter, 
spicy, 8weet» alkaline, astringent ; a 



carminative, a destroyer of phlegm, 
a vermifuge, a sweetener of the 
breath, an ornament of the mouth, 
a remover of impurities, and a 
kindler of the flame of love! O 
friend ! these thirteen properties of 
betel are hard to be met with, even 
in heaven ! " 

^ Bpdkaranath (here equivalent 
to fUndOa). This word has a com- 
prehensive application in Burmese 
literature. Not only is the term 
applied to P&nini*8 great Grammar, 
but also to several works, astrologi- 
cal, medical, &c, translated into &e 
vernacular from Sanskrit. 

* AUhckih. 

* Or " distinguishes man." Vmja 
potatsa viteso. Vide BUopadekt, 
Introduction, 25. 

^ Kamwuuh (Sanskrit harma. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE LOKANtTI. 



24. 

A swan is out of place among crows, a lion among 
bulls, a horse in the midst of asses, and a wise man 
among fools. 

25. 

U^ a fool be attached to a wise man all his life long, 
he does not know the '' Law," ^ just as a spoon does not 
know the taste* of a curry gravy. 

26. 
If, however, a man of understanding be associated for 
a short time with one who is wise,** he perceives the 
" Law " just as the tongue the flavour of the curry gravy. 

27. 
A warrior should not go on the battle-field without his 
weapon,^ nor a wise man go about without his book : a 

Burmese hdn) = ''moral merit'* 
The doctrine of ibnmma is bound 
iq» with that of transmigration, and 
implies that the present condition 
of every sentient being is deter- 
mined by the aggregate of its ac- 
tions in previous states of existence. 
What one now is is the result of 
his previous deeds in one or more 
past existences. What one sows 
that he must reap. We have as 
a corollary to this teaching that 
the cessation of existence (or the 
attainment of Nibb&n) is dependent 
on the destruction of its cause, 
hamma. This is effected by sancti- 
fication, or the entrance into the 
Four Paths {caUdro maggd). 

** This and the following stanza 
are verses 64 and 65 of the Dliam- 
mapada, the former having been 
uttered' by Gotama in reference to 
Ud&yithera. The idea about the 
spoon and curry gravy is taken 
from the Mahdbhdrata. In Bk. ii 
1945 we have : " He who is without 
understanding, but merely learned, 
learns not the sense of books, as a 
spoon does not taste the flavour of 
broth;'* and in x. 178— "A brave 



man, if stupid, though he serves a 
learned man for a long time, does 
not know what is duty, as a spoon 
does not taste the flavour of brotii, 
but an intelligent man who has 
served a learnt man a short time 
only, soon knows his duty, as the 
tongue tastes the flavour of brottL** 
n (( jjg^^ >* ||g^ in the sense of 
duty, 

** Compare ir«qpa(2e^ (Introduc- 
tion, 41) : — 

" A piece of glass may like a jewel 
glow. 
If but a lump of gold be placed 

below; 
So even fools to eminence may 

rise 
By dose association with the 

wise." — Indian Widdom. 
^ There is a play here on the 
word doUha, which signifies a 
"book," a "weapon," and a "com- 
panion." The stanza runs : — 
" Vinftsattham na gaccheyya 
Siiro sa&gftmabhfimiyam 
Pan^itavaddhagu vftnijo 
Yidesagamano tathft.^' 
Here, by sandhi, pan4iUwad' 
dhagu =span4ita + addhagtu 



Digitized by 



Google 



B NItI literature of BURMA. 

travelling merchant and one going to another land should 
not move without a companion. 

28. 

A wise man should not proclaim the loss of his wealth, 
the anxiety of ' his heart, domestic misdeeds, and his de- 
ception and disrespect by others.*® 

29. 

He is a wise man who knows the use of opportune 
language, who knows of one worthy of his love and what 
a befitting temper is.*^ 

30. 
One without wealth consuming his substance, a weak 
person engaging in fight, and one without wisdom taking 
part in discussions — these are like madmen. 

31. 
Going to a place uninvited, speaking much when not 
questioned, proclaiming one's own merits: these three 
things are the characteristics of baseness. 

32. 
One of little beauty speaks a great deal (of his looks) ; 
one of little understanding shows oiBf (a great deal) ; a jar, 
not full, causes the water in it to shake ; a cow with little 
milk kicks about. 

33. 
A frog, sitting on its haunches, considers itself a lion ; 
a crow, being captured, cries out, "Dear friend! dear 
friend!" When questioned by the wise, an ignorant 
man, thinking himself wise, exclaims, "My master! my 
master ! " 

*• Compare Jlitopadeki, i. 138, ^ Compare HUopadeiOf il 48, 
and see note to corresponding stanza and see note to corresponding stanza 
in Dhammantti, in DIuimmanttL 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtri. 9 

34. 
Does a frog, seated on its haunches, become a lion? — a 
hog, grunting, become a leopard ? Does a cat, by its 
similarity to a tiger, become a tiger ? Are all wise men 
alike in knowledge ? 

35. 
A king is not satisfied with his wealth,*^ a wise man 
with well-uttered discourse ; the eye in seeing a lover, and 
the sea with its water. 

36. 

They who, being of little knowledge, are full of youth 
and beauty and have a noble lineage, do not appear to 
advantage; like the Butea frondom, they are without 
fragrance.*® 



* MaMbhdrata, xil 6713, says : 
" Men, after obtaining riches, desire 
royal power ; after getting kingly 
power, they desire godhead ; ob- 
taining that, they desire the rank 
of Indra. Thou art wealthy, but 
neither a king nor a god ; but even 
shouldst thou attain to godhead and 
to the rank of Indra, thou wouldst 
not be content" 

''This is an often-quoted saying 
of <3^akya. The apothegm has re- 
ceived' various developments. We 
quote from Long's '* Eastern Em- 
blems and Mottoes " : — 

"Men are foolish in cherishing 
the gay blossoms of the palas tree, 
fair to see, but without scent" — 
Hindu Dramatist. 

" A bad person, though decorated, 
remains the same as cow-dung, 
which, though it be fertilising, does 
not become pleasing.*' — Driahtanta 
Shatak. 

"Outside smooth and painted, 
inside only straw — like Hindu idols 
stuffed with straw." — Bengal. 

"The fruit of the colocynth is 
good to look at, not to taste." — 
Urdu. 



" Like a broom bound with a silk 
thread. " — Malay. 

" Beauty in the ignorant as a jewel 
in a swine's snout" — Prov. xL 22. 

The kiitisuko or paldso is the 
Butea frondosa. Southern Be- 
har was formerly called PaUsa on 
account of the luxuriant growth of 
the tree from which it got its 
name. Behar signifies the " land of 
monasteries {vihArat\^ of which a 
large numbec were erected in the 
reign of Asoka. The bright -red 
flowers of the paldsa have furnished 
many an imagery to Indian poets 
and prose writers. The following is 
from the Mcihdbhdrata {vide Monier 
Williams* " Indian Wisdom,*' page 
406):-. 

" Anon the clashing iron met, and 
scattered round 

A fiery shower ; then fierce as 
elephants 

Or butting bulls they battered 
each the other. 

Thick fell the blows, and soon 
each stalwart frame. 

Spattered with gore, glowed like 
the kinfoka, 

Bedeck'd with scarlet blossoms.*' 



Digitized by 



Google 



lO 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



37. 
The son of a man of low origin becomes a king^s min- 
ister, a fool's son a learned man, a pauper's son a million- 
aire : do not, therefore, despise men. 

38. 
A pupil who, by a desire of knowledge, learns oflF a 
great deal, that knowledge he is unable to reproduce, just 
as a dumb person, seeing a dream, is unable to give utter- 
ance to it. 

39. 
A potter does not strike a pot to break it, but to fashion 
it : a teacher beats his pupils to increase their knowledge', 
not to throw them into the states of suffering.*^ 

40. 

The man who rolls up the taggara^ with the pcUdsa leaf 
finds that a fragrant odour is emitted from the leaf itself : 
serving the wise produces a similar result. 



^ By apdyetu^ the caUUtbhido 
apdyaloka, or '*F(mr States of Suf- 
fering/' are referred to. They are, 
(l) Narakorloia, (2) tirtieehdna'i^, 
(3) peta-V*, and (4) a9ura4\ The 
Naraka-r^ or ''HeU for Human 
Beings," has eight subdivisions. 
Each heU is said to be 10,000 yo- 
janas in length, breadth, and height* 
and is situated in the interior of the 
earth. The walls are nine yojaoas 



in thickness, and their brightness so 
overpowering that they burst the 
ms of those who lode at them. 
'itke Buddhist hell is a kind of pur- 
gatory for the expiation of former 
sins. It is a temporary state lead- 
ing to re-lnrth in a blissful state. 

^ The TabernoBmorkanacorcneyria. 
It is a shrub from which a fragrant 
powder is obtained. 



Digitized by 



Qoo^^ 



( " ) 

SECTION II 

THE GOOD MAN. 
41. 

Associate with the good, form companionship with the 
righteous : it is good, not bad, knowing the goodly ways 
of righteous men. 

42. 

Spurn companionship with the wicked, cultivate the 
society of the virtuous ; night and day do what is good ; 
remember always the impermanence ^ of worldly things. 

43. 
Just as ripe figs,^ although red outside, are full of 
worms inside, even so are the hearts of wicked men. 

44. 

But as ripe jacks, although, thorny outside, are full of 
juice inside, even so are the hearts of righteous men. 

45. 
The sandal- tree, being dry, does not part with its 
odour ;^ an elephant, on the march, ceases not to display 
its grace in the eyes of men; the sugar-cane, being 
brought under a pressing-machine, does not dissipate its 
sweet juice ; a wise man even under afiUction does not 
abandon his virtuous conduct. 

^ AfUccatanlt. The " ImpermA- '* beautiful outside, bitter with- 

nenoe of Worldly Thmgs *' is one of in. " 

the salient doctrines of Buddhism. ^ The idea contained in the fol- 

Vide Eitopadekt, iii 24, in con- lowing couplet is &om the Subkdahir 

nection with the gander, crow, and tdrnavin : — 

the traveller, ^ ** The sdudal-tree, most sacred tree 

^ Udunibara.ss Fieut gUmurata, of all, 

In Bengali literature a hypocrite Perfumes the very axe which Inds 

is compared to the makhala fruit, it falL" 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



12 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

46. 
The lion, being hungry, does not eat leaves and the 
like; even emaciated, he does not eat the flesh of the 
elephant. 

47. 
A descendant, belonging to a good family, maintains 
well the family lineage; having of himself fallen into 
trouble, he should not commit a mean action. 

48. 

Sandal-wood, in the world, is pleasant; pleasanter is 
the light of the moon ; far pleasanter than sandal- wood 
and the moon is the well-uttered discourse of the 
righteous. 

49. 

Should the sun rise in the west,*^ and Meru,*® king of 
mountains, bend, — should the fire of hell grow cold and 
the lily grow on the mountain-top, yet unchangeable will 
be a good man's words. 

SO. 

Pleasant is the shadow of a tree ; pleasanter that of a 
relative, a father, or a mother; more pleasant that of a 
teacher ; pleasanter still that of a king ; and still more 
pleasant, in many ways, the shadow of Buddha. 

SI. 
Bees wish for flowers ; good men for what is virtuous ; 
flies for what is putrid; bad men for blemishes*^ (in 
others). 

^ Gomp. HamUty act ii. sc. 2 : — yojanas in height. Immediately 

** Donbt thou the stars are fire, above it is the TdvcLtirhsa heaven, 

Doubt that the sun doth move ; over which 8akka (Indra) holds 

Doubt truth to be a liar, sovereignty ; under it the asura helL 

But never doubt I love." Around Meru are four kuldcaias or 

*^ Each Cakkavdlay or "World concentric circles of rock, and be- 

System" of the Buddhist cosmogony, yond these the four MdhddtpcLS or 

has a huge and high mountain in its Great Continents. 

centre called . Meru, or generally *' Compare itfaAd6Mm<a, v. 1 380: 

MahdmertL It is said to be 168,000 ''Evil men do not so much like to 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtri. 13 

52. 

Bad is the speech of one who has a vile mother, bad the 
conduct of one who has a vile father ; but he who has a 
father and mother both vile, his speech as well as his con- 
duct is bad. 

53. 

Good is the speech of an excellent mother, good is the 
conduct of one who has an excellent father ; but he who 
has a mother and father both excellent, his speech as well 
as his conduct is good. 

54. 
In battle we need a warrior, in a commotion a coun- 
sellor, during meals a loved one, a wise man in an emer- 
gency. 

55. 
A dog> seeing a dog, shows its teeth to harm ; a bad 
man, being irritable, on seeing a good man, wishes to 
oppress him. 

56. 

Do not perform nor cause actions to be performed 
hastily ; a deed being done hastily, a foolish man suffers 
at length. 

57. 

A person grieves not at all, having put aside anger ; 
the sages praise the abandonment of hypocrisy;*® bear 
with the harsh language of all : the righteous say that this 
forbearance is excellent. 

58. 

Living in a place dirty, circumscribed, and crowded is 

learn the good qualities of others as To hear of others* virtues makes 

their want of virtues.*' And also them sad.*' 

xii 11014: ''Detractors do not so This couplet is a metrical rendering 

much like to speak of a man's good by Muir of the sentiment conveyed 

qualities as of his want of virtues. " in the above passages. 

*' Of others' iU to hear makes bad ^ Makkhajpahdnath iuayo vanna- 

men glad ; yanti. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



14 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

a hardship ; a greater hardship living with an unloving 
foe ; living with one ungrateful is a greater hardship stilL 

59. 
A man should admonish in what requires admonition ; 
he should prevent the commission of an evil deed. Such 
a one is beloved by the good, but disliked by the wicked. 

60. 

One exalted should be overcome by humility, a warrior 
by dissension, one lower in position by the bestowal of a 
small gift, one's equal by industry. 

61. 

A poison, they say, is not a poison ; the wealth of the 
priesthood*® is said to be a poison ; poison kills but once ; 
the wealth of the priesthood kills entirely.^^ 

62. 

They know a horse's worth by its speed,^ the value of 
oxen by their carrying power, the worth of a cow by its 
milk-giving capacity, that of a wise man by his speech.'^ 

63- 

The wealth of the virtuous,^ although scanty is service- 
able like the water in a well-; that of the bad, though con- 
siderable, is like the water in the ocean. 

64. 
Eivers do not drink up their water, nor trees eat up 

*• One of the rules of the order ^ The Chinese say: **A man's 

strictly forbids the amassing of conversation is the mirror of the 

wealth. heart." 

*• Through every transmigration. ** A Canarese proverb says: "The 

'^ Compare the Bengali apothegm: riches of the good are like water 

**One knows the horse by his ears ; turned off into a rice-field.'* The 

the generous by his gifts ; a man by Jlaghuvania has : ** The good, like 

laughing ; and a jewel by its bril- douds, receive only to give awiQr." 

liancy." — KdLiddsa, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANlTI. 15 

their fruit ; rain does not fall in some places only : " the 
wealth of the virtuous is for others. 

65. 
One should not long for what should not be desired, 
nor think of what should not be thought ; he should think 
only of what his duty is ; he should not wish for unpro- 
fitable time. 

66. 

What is not thought of happens; what is thought of 
comes to naught ; riches therefore, for man or woman, are 
not made by thinking.^ 

67. 
He who has an endearment for a bad man does not love 
a virtuous one ; he delights in the ways of wicked men : 
that delight to him is the occasion of ruin. 



^ The Sanskrit version is : " The Nahi cintftmayft bhoeft 

donds eat not the crops.'* Itthiyft porisaraa v&." 

^ The principle of fatality or In the Introduction to the HUo- 

Karma underlies the sentiment ex- padeia we find : "Deeds are acoom- 

pressed here. The stanza runs : — plished by effort, not by wishes ; 

" Acintitampi bhavati verily deer do not enter into the 

Cintitampi vinassati month of a sleeping lion." 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( i6 ) 
SECTION III. 

THE EVIL-DOEB. 
68. 

A WICKED man should not be loved much, being as 
unstable as a jar half-full of water carried along on the 
head. 

69. 

A snake is harmful; a wicked man is harmful, a wicked 
man being more harmful than a snake : a snake is brought 
to subjection by charms and drugs — ^how can a wicked 
man be subdued ? 

70. 

The fool who knows his ignorance is a wise man on 
that very account ; a fool who deems himself wise, he is 
called a fool indeed ! ^ 

71. 
So long as his sin does not ripen,^^ a fool considers it as 
sweet as honey ; when his -sin ripens, he then undergoes 
suffering. 

72. 

It is not good for a foolish man to be strong ; he obtains 
his possessions by force : on the dissolution of the body 
he goes to hell, being of little understanding. 

73. 
A mouse is destructive in a house, a monkey in the forest ; 
injurious among birds is the crow, among men a Brahman.^ 

^ This is stanza 63 of the Dham- ^ At the time of Gotama there 

mapada. were two religious parties — the 

^ Compare DhaiMna/pada^ 69 : Samanas and Br&hmanas. Gotama 

** Does not ripen," ie., " when the himself belonged to the former, and 

consequence has not been developed.'* the latter, therefore, were considered 

The verb paeccUi is used in this as heretical by him and his disciples, 

sense. and looked upon with contempt. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtTI. 



17 



74. 
The night is long to one awake, a stage '^ to one who is 
weaiy ; to fools not knowing the true Law,^ transmigra- 
tion, too, is long. 

75. 
One of vile nature notices the trivial fault of others 
though small as a grain of sessamam, bat his own fault, 
as large as a cocoa-nut, he does not see.^ 

76. 

A wise man should not make known his fault to others ; 
he should, however, notice the defects of another ; as a 
tortoise conceals the members of its body, so should he 
conceal his own blemishes, but discover those of others.^ 

Punishment is awarded to a wise man when praised hj a 
fool;^ a wise man praised by a wise man is well praised. 



Hence the aspersion against them. 
When Buddhism was fully estab- 
lished, the word bmhmana was 
employed as a term for an Arhat, 
or "one who has obtained final 
sanctification." 

*• " A stage," t.e.f the distance of 
a yojana (eight miles). This stanza 
is the 60th of the DhammapadcL 
* ** True law," i.e., religious duty. 
'^ Compare the following metrical 
translations by Muir : — 
" Thou mark'st the faults of other 
men, 
Although as mustard -seeds mi- 
nute: 
Thine own escape thy partial ken, 
Though each in size a bilva fruit." 
— Mahdbkdrata, i. 3069. 
" All men are very quick to spy 
Their neighbours* faults, but very 

slow 
To note their own ; when these 

they "know. 
With self -deluding art they eye." 

— MakdbhdrcUa, viii. 21 16. 
The following is adapted from 
SubJidshUdrTiava, 275 : — 



"Men soon the faults of others 
learn: 

A few their virtues, too, find out ; 

But is there one — I have a 
doubt — 

Who can his own defects discern ? " 

Compare also Matthew vii. 3 and 
4: "And why beholdest thou the 
mote that is in thy brother's eye, 
but considerest not the beam that 
is in thine own eye?" &c. The 
Burmese version makes a compari- 
son with the cocoa-nut {ndlikera), 
the Sanskrit version with the bilva 
or Bengal quince {jEgle Marmdos), 
which is sacred to Mahftdeva. 

^ Compare Manu, vii. 104 and 
105, with reference to a kin&('s 
duties : — 

" He should indeed act guilelessly, 
never by guile ; but he, self-guarded, 
should be aware of the frauds used 
by his enemy. Let another know 
his weak point ; like a tortoise, he 
should protect his members and 
guard his own defect." 

^ Compare Mahdbhdrata, xii. 
4217. 

B 



Digitized by 



Google 



i8 NJT/ LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

78. 

One should win oyer an avMicions person by money, 
one presumptaons by a salatation, an ignorant man bjr 
giving him his way, and a wise one by speaking the 
truth.«* 

•« OonqMyfv BUofodtSa, W. 108, joiniiig the bancb,** the Oriental 
where we find "Uie hanghtj bj meth<Kl of ■bowing reject 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



( 19 ) 



SECTION IV. 

FBIXNDSHIP. 

A STRANOSBy being a benefactor, is a (real) relatiye; a 
relative not conferring a benefit is a stranger ; a disease, 
though arising in the body, is not beneficial ; a herb fiN>m 
the forest is a boon.^ 

8a 

A man who injures another^s virtue in his absence, who 
speaks lovingly in his presence, one would consider such 
friendship like honey in a pot of poison.^ 

81. 

In poverty a friend forsakes you; son, and wife^ and 
brothers too forsake you ; being rich, they ding to you : 
wealth in this world is a great friend.^ 

82. 

One can know a ^ood) servant by his taking errands, a 
relative when danger comes ; thus also a friend in times 
of poverty, and a wife when wealth disappears. 

83. 

He is a relative who in prosperity makes you ding to 
him; he a father who supports you; in whom there is 
affection, he is a friend ; she a wife who pacifies. 

* This stanza is adopted from ^ There are some very fine lines 
BUopadeia, iii loi. in the Mahdbkdrata on the subject 

* (JAnakya says, "As a bowl of oi riches and poverty. Vide zU. 
poison With milk on its soxfaoe." 213 ft 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 



84. 

One should confide neither in an enemy npr a friend ; 
when a friend becomes angry he makes known all your 
faults.<» 

85. 

He who once becomes angry with a friend and wishes 
to be reconciled, he follows him even unto death, like a 
mare pregnant with a TarS. colt.®* 

86. 

Until the time (for vengeance) has not arrived, one 
might carry his enemy on his shoulders ; the time hav- 
ing come, he should break him to pieces like a jar on a 
rock.^® 

87. 

A debt balance as well as a remaining fire increases re- 
peatedly; so also increases remaining enmity: one shoidd, 
therefore, have nothing remaining.^ 



^This and the following two 
stanzas are of an epigrammatic, sati- 
rical character. 

«» TheTara,like the Aj&nlyA horses, 
are fabulous animals with supernatu- 
ral powers. It is* said' that Jts soon 
as the Tar& colt is bom, the mother 
at once dies. Hence the allusion. 
The Tar& horses are also cilled cusa- 
ta/rd (fem. attatari), 

^^ The idea set forth here is of |b 
somewhat repulsive nature. In the 
Burmese anthology it can only be 
construed as sarcastia The advice, 
however, appears in the MaMbhd- 
rata as a Machiavelian counsel, and 
there are others of a similar nature 
in the poem most repugnant to 
the moral sense. Muir has col- 
lected several in his supplement 
to '* Metrical Translations from 
Sanskrit Writers." The foUowing 
are examples :— '* Let a man be very 
hulnble in his speech, but in heart 
as shaip as a razor r let him speak 
with a smile when bent on a ter- 



rible act " [Mahdfih, i 5606]. •* By 
kindling fire, by sacrifice, by a 
bejfgar's saffron g4rb, by bndded 
hair, and clothing of skin, let a man 
fill his enemy with confidence, and 
then seize him like a wolf " [L 5560]. 

The Sanskrit version {MaMbh,, i 
5563) is well rendered by Muir : — 
*' Whilst thou dost watch thy chance, 
with seeming care 

Thy mortal foe upon thy shoulder 
bear; 

Then down to earth thy hated 
burden dash, 

As men against a rook an earthen 
vessd smash.'* 

C<»npare Mahdbhdrata, ziL 4167 : 
'* What is broken is with difficulty 
united, and what is whole is with 
difficulty broken. But the friend- 
ship which has been broken and 
again cemented does not continue to 
be affectionate.'* 

^ G&nakya says : ** To pay off 
debts, to quench a fire, and remove 
desire is good, for should they in- 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE LOKANlTL 21 

88, 

He whose face is like the lotus lily and his speech as 
cold as sandal- wood, one should not associate with such 
a person^ there being poison in his intentions.^ 

89. 

One should not serve a severe master, nor one who is 
ni^ardly ; more so he should not serve one who does not 
commend, nor one who is an oppressor. 

90. 

Homed animals should be avoided at a distance of 
fifty cubits, horses at a hundred, a tusked elephant at 
a thousand ; a bad man by quitting the place where he 
resides. 

91. 

A bad place, a bad friend, a bad family^ a bad relative, 
a bad wife, a bad servant — ^these should be avoided at a 
distance. 

92. 

The friends who stand by you in severe ailment, in 
time of scarcity, or in misfortune, when captured by an 
enemy, at a king's door, or in the charnel-house, they 
indeed are good friends.^* 

93. 
One of pleasant speech has many a friend, one of harsh 
speech few friends : in this place the illustration concern- 
ing the sun and moon^* should be remembered. 

crease, they cannot be stopped." ^ See Mitopadeia, I 74, 75. 
One passage advises that love alone ^^ The reference is to the respec- 
8hoiild be ^owed to remain. tiye heat and coldness of the two 
^* In Sanskrit we have : *' A face Imninaries. The sun is said to be 
shaped like the petals of the lotus, composed of coral inside and gold 
a voice as cool as sandal, a heart outside, thereby giving rise to in- 
like a pair of scissors, and excessive tense heat ; the moon of crystal 
humility — these are the signs of a within and silver on the surface, 
rogue." — Eastern Proverbs and Em- thereby producing great cold. 
blems. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 22 ) 



SECTION V. 

WQHAN. 
94- 

The beauty of the cuckoo is its voice ; of a woman, her 
devotedness (to her husband) ; the beauty of the uncomely 
is knowledge; that of hermits, forbearance.^^ 

95. 
Women's wealth is beauty, learning that of men ; the 
wealth of priests is virtue, strength that of kings. 

96. 

Hermits, if lean, are becoming; becoming are quadru- 
peds if corpulent; men, being learned, are becoming; 
becoming are women having husbands. 

97. 
A good musician is ruined in five days, an archer in 
seven, a good wife in a month^ a pupil in half a month. 

98. 

A buffalo delights in mud, a duck in a pond ; a woman 
delights in a husband, a priest in the law. 

99. 

One should praise food after digestion, a wife when 
she has passed her prime, a warrior on his return from 
battle, and com when it is brought home. 

100. 
A woman who has had two 6r three husbands, a priest 

^ This if stanca 212 of the MitnOAbha Beetion of the ItUopadeia. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtri. 23 

who has been in two or three monasteries, and a bird two 
or three times ensnared, are so many instances of practical 
deceit 

lOI. 

Subjugation comes by beating a wicked man,^ by not 
speaking to a bad friend ; to women there is subjugation 
by misfortune, to the greedy by moderation in food. 

102. 

The night is not pleasing without the moon, nor the 
ocean without waves, a pond without ducks, nor a maiden 
without a husband.^ 

103. 

By a husband is wealth produced; by woman is its 
preservation ; a man is, therefore, the origin ; a woman 
like thread in a needle. 

104. 

All rivers are crooked ; all forests are made of wood ; 
all women, going into solitude, would do what is eviL 

105. 

A woman of contentious disposition or one using depre- 
ciatory language; one who, seeing a thing, has a desire to 
have it, who cooks and eats often, who eats before her 
husband, who lives in another's house — such a woman, 
even if she have a hundred sons, is shunned by men. 

106. 

The woman who, during meals and in her adornments, 
delights like a mother, who in things that should be 
concealed is bashful like a sister, who during business 
and when approaching her husband is respectful like a 

^ The following, aoooiding to an ^ The Hitopadeia, iii. 29, says : 

old Sanskrit proverb, improve their "A hnsband is indeed the bestoma- 

good qualities by beating :— ^A bad ment of a woman without other or- 

man, a bad woman, gold, a drum, naments. She, though ornamented, 

sugar-cane, and sesamum seed. deprired of him shines not" 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



24 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



slave, in danger is deliberative, in sleep affords delight, 
in appearance is becoming, in moments of anger forbearing 
— such a woman, say the wise, is most excellent ; such a 
woman on the dissolution of her body will assuredly have 
a place in heaven J® 

107. 

A youthful woman who is blonde, has deer-like eyes 
and slender parts, fine hair and even teeth, and is well- 
conducted — she, though she be in a wicked family, is 
sure to be taken to wife. 

108. 

Of all seasons, autumn is the best; of all wives, she 
who is beautiful; of sons, the eldest is the best; of all 
directions, the north.^ 

109. 

Whatever woman should wish to be a human being 
repeatedly in every existence, she should cherish her 
husband as Pfiric&rik&^ cherished Inda.®^ 



^ Or "in the deva world" (dive 
hkaveyya). Vide HUopadekk, iii^ 27, 
28. 

^ Because the north face of Mount 
Mem and the oceans and lands 
which lie in the same direction are 
of a golden colour. Silver is the 
prevailing colour on the east, on the 
south sapphire, and on the west 
coral. 

^ The wife of Inda (Indra), also 
known as Suj&tft, having her abode 
with her husband on the T&vatimsa 
heaven above Mount Meru. 

^ Inda or Sakka was deposed 
from his godship by Gotama, and 
made archangel over the five lowest 
Kftmadevalokas. He is inferior to 
M&ra and Mah&brahma. like these, 
he exercises a beneficent influence 
over human aflfairs, and Buddhist 
literature is fuU with instances of 
his descent upon earth in some form 



of disguise. In Vedic times he is 
represented as the god of the firma- 
ment, and stands in the first rank 
among deities. He was of a ruddy 
colour and capable of assuming any 
shape. His weapon was the thunder- 
bolt which he carried in his right 
hand, and he is described as using 
arrows, a great hook, and a net, in 
which he entangled his enemies. 
The Boma, juice was his favourite 
drink, and, stimulated by it, he went 
forth to war and performed his 
numerous duties. In later Indian 
mythology Indra lost his first rank, 
and is now ranked with gods of the 
second order. Among Buddhists 
Inda is considered as a '* recording 
angel," who, "four times a montl^ 
setd^ed in his Hall of Justice caUed 
SudhammA, reads aloud from a 
golden book a record of good works 
done by men during the week." 



Digitized by 



Qoo^^ 



THE LOKANITL 25 

iia 

Whatever man should wish to be a man repeatedly in 
eveiy existence, he should shun another's wife just as 
one washing anothei^s foot shuns the filth (that comes 
from it). 

III. 

An old man provides himself with a young wife with 
breasts like the tinduka^ fruit Her desire is not grati- 
fied : this is the cause of ruin.^ 

V Diotpfna Embryoptetii, her hnsbMid, Tide Mahdbhdrata, i. 

*** For datiet of a wife towards and xii, and Mamt, obi^ iz. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 26 ) 



SECTION VL 

KINGS. 
112. 

A KING should sleep during the period of one watch,^ 
a wise man two, a householder three watches, a b^gar 
during four. 

113. 
In whatever place these five — a man of wealth, a man 
of learning, a king, a river, and likewise a doctor — are 
not to be found, there a man should not live for even 
a day.®^ 

114. 

"Whierever respect, love, relatives, and a learned man 
are not to be found, there a man should not reside for 
even a day.** 

IIS. 

Dreary is a sonless home;®^ dreary a kingdom with- 
out a king;^ dreary the utterance of an illiterate man ; 
dreary, altogether, that of a needy one. 

116. 

A man should trade if he desire wealth ; if he desire 
knowledge, he should serve a learned man; if he want 
a child, he should establish a young woman (in his house) ; 
should he wish to be a king's minister, he ought to 
comply with the king's behests. 

^ YdaM^ a watch of three hours. ^ Hitopadeia, i 135 : ''Empty is 

The period from 6 p.m. to 6 A.M. was a childless hoxne, empty the home 

divided by some into three, and by of a friendless person ; for a fool the 

others into four wateheM or vigUi. regions of space are empty ; poverty 

^ Vide notes to stanza 78 of is altogether dreary." 

DhammanUi. '^ Qee SUopadekt, m, ^ Kod I 216. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtri. 27 

117. 

A priest is ruined if discontented^ an emperor if satis- 
fied; a harlot being ashamed is joined, and ruined is a 
daughter of good lineage if not ashamed.^ 

118. 

The strength of birds lies in air, that of fish in water; 
the strength of the helpless is in a king, of children in 
tears. 

119. 

Patience, vigilance, and industry, liberality, compassion, 
and hope — ^these are the qualities of a leader; these the 
qualities that should be wished for by the righteous. 

I20. 

Kings speak but once, so also Samaras and Brah- 
ma^aa^ Good men, in the world, speak but once : this 
is a constant practice. 

t2l. 

A householder being idle is not good; a priest being 
unrestrained is not good; it is not good a king being 
inconsiderate, or a wise man passionate. 

122. 

Where chiefs are many, all consider themselves wise, 
all wish for superiority; their work (in consequence) 
ends in ruin. 

123, 

A king should of himself know about the revenues 
as well as the expenditure; of himself should he know 
what is and what is not done; he should punish him 
who deserves punishment, and favour him who deserves 
favour.*® 

^ HUopaMa, ill 67. diapter vil of the ^Imiitatei of 

• BmMUjM = Baddhiit monks ; Mann." Alto the MdhMMtfiOa^ 

IMAiiMNyatsAriiftti. Bodki ▼. and xii. 
^ For the dutiei of » king, vide 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



28 NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

124. 

The snn should be approached with the back towards 
it, fire by the stomach (facing it); a lord should be 
approached with all one's possessions, the next world with 
wisdom.®^ 

125. 

Fire, water, a woman, a fool, a snake, and royal families 
— these shotdd be passed by avoiding them; suddenly 
they take away life. 

126. 

One living with a wicked wife, one sending a slave 
with a violent temper, one living in a house having 
snakes — this is death itsel£ 

127. 

By giving instruction to a stupid pupil, by supporting 
a wicked wife, and by attachment to a person who is b^d, 
even a wise man deteriorates. 

128, 

A son's evil act is a mother's deed, a pupil's that of 
his teacher; a people's act is the king's doing, a king's 
that of his private chaplain^^ 

129. 

One should overcome one haughty by civility, one who 
is bad by goodness ; a niggardly person by liberality, one 
mendacious by veracity .^^ 

130. 
Liberality is the subjugation of one who is not sub- 

•' ffitopadeia, ii 32. This stanza( 1 29) accords with if aA<£- 

^ PurohUo, A private spiritual dhdrata, v. 1 518, in which passage 

and temporal adviser nsed to be " one should overcome one haughty 

retained by a prmce or grandee to by civility** appears rather as **one 

offer advice and specify lucky and should conquer anger by kindness." 

unlucky days. Compare also Mahdbhdrata, iii 

** See Dhammapada, verse 221. 13235. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtri. 29 

dued; liberality is the consummation of every benefit; 
by liberality and loving speech men bow themselves and 
cause others too to bow. 

Liberality is the medicine of love, niggardliness the 
medicine of hate, generosity the medicine that brings 
attendants, niggardliness that which keeps solitary. 

132. 
One can overcome him who is to be overcome by the 
concord of many, though individually of little worth; by 
grass is rope made; by that same rope is an elephant 
secured.^ 

133- 
What can one incompetent effect by his power, even if 
he have an ally ? fire lighted where there is no air goes 
out of itself. 

134. 
Never should one indulge in the pleasures of sense 
that appertain to a king : personal appearance, command, 
using of flowers and perfume, dressing, ornaments — all 
these, in so far as a king indulges in them, should not 
be imitated. 

135. 
" The king is not my friend ; the king is not my brother- 

^ Compare the following transla- Through mutual support and de- 

tions by Muir from the Mahd- pendenoe kinsmen flourish as lotuses 

hhdrata: — in a pond" (v. 1321). .A^n : 

"A tree which stands by itself, "£yen a powerful enemy can be 
though large, strong, and well rooted, destroyed by weak foes combined 
can be overthrown by the wind, and together, as a honey-gatherer is by 
by its trunk be broken down in a b^"(iiL 1333). Also: ** Threads, 
moment. But those well-rooted though long and thin, if many and 
trees, which stand together in a similar, can, from their number, 
clump, resist the fiercest winds, always bear many strains; in this 
owing to their mutual support So, is found, an emblem of the good " 
too, the enemies of a single man, (v. 1318). The following is like- 
though he be possessed of good wise a good metaphor: ''Elinsmen 
qualities, regard him as in their resemble firebrands : separated they 
power to overwhelm, as the wind only smoke; united they blaze '* (y. 
can oyerthiraw a solitary tree. 13 19). 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



30 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

in-law ; this king is mj lord *' — ^tihis (idea) one should hold 
yeiy caiefuUy in his mind to the yeiy end 

136. 
An attendant should not wait upon the king at too 
great a distance; he should not serve him too near at 
hand; he should not be in the way of the wind, nor 
directly opposite ; not in a place too low down, nor one too 
high up: these six faults he should avoid; he should 
remain guarded as he would with regard to fira 

137. 
One replete with excellence like the Omniscient One ^ 
does not appear to advantage without a patron : a gem, 
though priceless, looks well being set in gold. 

» SaUmMMulfo, *«like the Omnisoient One." 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 31 ) 



SECTION VIL 

mSCKLLANBOUa 

138. 

How can there be piety in a priest who associates with a 
woman, compassion in a flesh-eater,^ truth in a drunkard, 
shame in one greatly covetous, proficiency in one who 
is slothful, and wealth in one with a bad temper ? 

139. 
A drunkard, and one who goes about at unseasonable 
moments; one who frequents a public assembly (for 
amusement) ; a gambler ; one having wicked companions, 
and one who is an idler — ^these are persons who bring 
about the destruction of their own welfare. 

14a 

During the day persons should not be spoken of with- 
out looking around, nor at night without inquiry being 
made (whether any one is near or not) ; one should act 
like a hunter, who, fearful of danger in a forest, looks 
this side and that. 

141. 

Although living, four persons are declared to be dead 
by the IfUi teacher Vy&sa*^ — one in poverty, one 
in sickness, a fool, one in debt, and one who serves a 
king. 

^ That is, one who kills animals of an animal when life leaves it in 

to eat their flesh. The taking of the natural coarse. 
Itfe is forbidden by a Buddhist com- ^ YyAsa is looked upon by the 

mandment. The Burmese are very Burmese as the compiler oi an 

strict on this point, and eat the flesh ancient anthology. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



32 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

142. 

A wise man, seeing danger not at hand, avoids it at a 
distance ; on seeing it approach^ he remains undaunted. 

143- 
A sleepy-headed fellow as well as one who is negligent, 
one who lives comfortably as well as one who is sick, 
a sluggard, one covetous, and one who delights in action 
— ^these seven have nothing to do with books. 

144. 

gain I do thou go to one in poverty ; a rich man is 
replete with wealth. rain ! pour thyself on dry land ; 
the sea is full of water. This, however, does not happen : 
the force of circumstance reigns paramount.^ 

145. 
When what should be done is done, no one looks upon 
the doer; all that should be done, therefore, should be 
done without being brought to completion.^ 

146. 

Cotton in this world is light ; lighter is one of a fickle 
disposition; lighter still one who does not suffer tiie 
reprimand of his elders ; still more light he who is negli- 
gent of the teachings of Buddha. 

147. 
A stone umbrella is weighty ; weightier is the utterance 
of the gods ; the chiding of elders is weightier still, and 
still more weighty are the words of Buddha. 

148. 

The right hand is the slave of the body; the Small 
finger on it the slave of the ear, nose, and eyes ; the left 
iiand is the slave of the legs. 

*" Natth*idftm, kammapBtthAaam. ^ A aarcasm ia impUed here. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtTI. 



33 



149. 
Kuvera^^ always keeps watch in the centre of the 
betel-leaf, Bakkha^<>i at the base, and K&lakanni^^^ at the 
tip. One shonld eat the leaf having broken off the upper 
and lower ends : ^^ liis prosperity increases thereby. 

150. 

BrahmS,^^ watches the slate,^®*^ Bissano^^ the wrapper; ^^^ 
let those who learn worship them. Upon him who does 
so they always look with complacenca 

151. 

For the reason that cows nourish all men and give them 
happiness, for that very reason should men love and honour 
them.^<» 



100 The god of wealth »nd chief of 
the Takkhas, a class of saperhtunan 
beings. He and those subject to 
him are supposed to exercise a bene- 
ficial influence on human beings. 
The Yakkhas dweU upon earth and 
in the water, and form one section 
of the guards round the abode of 
Sakka. There are some malignant 
Takkhas as well, but they are not 
referred to here. In Brahmanio 
mythology, Kuvera is looked upon as 
a kind of Pluto living in the shades 
and exerdsing an exol influence. 

a demon living in the Himalayan 
forest and f eeoUng on the carcases 
of men and beasts. 

^"* An evil Deva or NaJL 

m This is a common practice with 
the Burmans. 

^^ The greatest of all the DevoM, 
The world he rules is called BrakoM- 
loha. 

^ Rather **a wooden board" for 
^ting on {tamfmnda), 

^ A propitious NaL 

^^ Made of doth, as a case {accu) 
for the wooden board. 

*» The Hindus hold the cow in 
great reverence, and in Vedic times 
it was an object of worship. ** Like 



Egypt long ago, India has its sacred 
animals. Already in the ancient 
religion cows are the object of a 
special worship. It is expressly en- 
joined to treat them with gentleness, 
and the Smptis require the same 
respect for them as for the images 
of the gods. It soon became matter 
of religious scruple to offer them in 
sacrifice ; to slaughter them for a 
profane purpose is one of the greatest 
crimes; to tend them, provide for 
them, serve them, is reckoned in the 
first rank of good works and of acts 
of expiation ; to risk one's own life 
to save theirs atones for a Brahma- 
nicide ; contact with them purifies ; 
and, as in the Parsi ritual, their very 
dung and urine have the power of 
preventing or cleansing away mate- 
rial and moral defilements. Thee 
customs subsist still in some degree 
in our own day. The Hindus do not 
scruple indeed to subject their miser- 
able cattle to a labour that is often 
excessive, but it is rare that they 
ill-use them. Very few, especially, 
wiU consent to feed on their fle^h, 
and the slaughter of a cow excites 
more horror among many of them 
than the slaying of a man." — JBarth's 
" .Religions of India," 

C 



Digitized by 



Google 



34 NlTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

152. 
They who eat^ the flesh of cows are like persons who 
eat their xnothei^s fledi : when cows die, we should give 
them to Yultores or send them adrift upon a stream. 

IS3. 
Beginning a study on Thursday is the consummation of 
that study ; beginning on Sunday or Friday is doing but 
half; b^;inning on Wednesday or Monday is learning 
nothing; b^;inning on Saturday or Tuesday occasions 
death.^^ 

154. 
If a person learn on the eighth day of a lunar half 
mouthy it is like killing his teacher; on the fourteenth 
day, it is like killing the pupil ; it is like killing know- 
ledge if one learn on the tentii day ; or killing his parents 
if he learn at full moon. 

155- 
A person who leams should not eat cocoa-nut on the 
seventh day; he should, likewise, not eat pumpkin on the 
ninth ; on the twelfth day he should not eat pinnam ; ^ 
and on the third day he should not eat a curry : if hd do 
so, there will be an end to his knowledge. 

156. 

One of a family should be discarded for the good of the 
whole family ; a family for the good of a village ; a village 

^ There Me eome Baddhiste in tfon. Tlie Bunneee are m fwj 

BanDft who wiU not eet the ileah of sopentitioot race, and place great 

the oow Cram a humane point of streas on hiol^ and nnlndrv daja. 

▼iew, bnt tbej form only an ezeep- Thej hare a work called the i)iffA^ 

tioB. ABramnaniciniluenceinthe kpcm, which contains a detailed 

coUeetion of the sCansat of this an- aoooont of good and bad omens, 

thologj is quite apparent from the Fide Sangermanc's ''Bormese Sm- 



eKprsswd here. pbe,''chapirvii^and''TheBnrman: 

iM This and the following two bis Life and Notions," chi^ s. 
tanas display a puerile snpersti- ^^ A kind of potato. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE LOKANtTL 35 

for the good of a district; and for one's own good the 
world itself should be abandonei^" 

157. 
A lion, a good man, and an elephant — ^these, abandoning 
their residence, go away (in search of a more suitable place); 
a crow, an evil-doer, and a deer arrive at destruction in 
their own habitation.^^ 

158. 
In whatever place there is no respect, no love, no rela- 
tives, and no clever man, there indeed a man should not 
make his abode.^" 

159. 
A wise man takes a step at a time; he establishes 
himself on one foot (before he takes up the other): an 
old place should not be forsaken recklessly. ^^ 

160. 

When paddy is being sold and knowledge is being 
acquired, when a messenger is being sent and desire is 
being gratified, on occasions such as these shame should 
be abandoned. 

161. 

Women's appetite is twice that of men, their wisdom 
four times,^^* their industry six times, and their desire 
eight times as great. 

^^^ This stanza is adapted from the HiJtopadeia, concerning the wily 

MilrdLdbh/i (in the HUopadekL, 159). woman and the magistrate. In the 

The Sanskrit version has, " For the fourth section (Sandhi) we read : 

sake of his soul he should abandon " Now once this Jewdhright was 

the earth." seen by Sea-given to be kissing the 

*" Compare MUraWjiha^ 105, cheek of the servant Then the 

where, instead of ** evil-doer," we wife instantly approaching her hus- 

iind ''coward.** In verse 104 of the band said, ' Husband ! the assurance 

same, it is said that " teeth, hair, of this servant is great, for he eats 

naUs, and men, removed from t^eir the camphor brought for yon. I 

place, are not beautiful" have smelt the perfume of the cam- 

*^ Compare MUraldbha, 109. phor plainly in his mouth.*" The 

lu This stansa is No. 107 of MU' application is the same. Instead of 

raldhha. ** industry six times," the Sanskrit 

^^' Read the illustrative stoiy in has " cunning sizfoldL*' 
Stthridbheda, the second section of 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



36 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

162. 

The sugar-cane has a better taste knot after knot from 
the tip : a good friend is like that ; a bad man just the 
reverse. 

163. 

A cultivator, a trader, a minister, a priest full of 
learning and virtue — when such as these increase in 
number, the country must assuredly grow great. 

164. 

Texts, not being repeated, become useless ; the house of 
an indolent person comes to ruin ; indolence is filth to a 
person of comely appearance ; and forgetfulness a taint to 
one who keeps a watch over his senses.^^^ 

165. 
The property of men of little industry becomes the 
possession of those more industrious : evil-doers say that 
their present lot has its origin in former deeds.^* 

166. 

The wise do not say so;^^® they have striven ener- 
getically in every work ; if their work does not come to 
completion, it is only devoid of fruit — ^what blame can 
there be ? 

167. 

One of low extraction is without wisdom, beauty, and 
power ; wealth, however, is all-important, this age being a 
degenerate one.^^ 

^^^ There is here a play on the and forgetfulness the taint of one 

word vudarfi. See DkammapadcLt keeping watch." 

239, where I have translated as ^^^ Compare Hitopadekt, vr. i, 2. 

follows: "The non -repetition (of ^^^ Namely, what is said in the 

texts) is the taint of the wise ; non- latter part of the previous stanza, 

repair the taint of houses ; indolence See Hitopadeia, 2 and 3 of the 

the taint of (personal) appearance, Sandhi section. 

^ Imam kftlam chuttakalarh. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



( 37 ) 



11.— THE DHAMMANITI} 



SECTION L 

THE PBECEPTOR. 
I. 

To whom in this world there is no solicitude for service 
at the feet* of preceptors, by them what can be accom- 
plished ? Those, however, who bow down to the dust at 
their teachers' feet are looked upon as both good and 
discriminatinsf. 



^ The DkarMMLntti consisteof 414 
stanzas in 24 sections. It was for 
the first time translated into Bur- 
mese by the head priest Tipitakalia- 
k&ra Mah&dhamma in 1784 A.D., in 
obedience to the order of ^ng 
Bodopra. The f oUowing three stan- 
zas are introductory : — 
(i.) '* Vanditvft ratanam settham 
Niss&ya pubbake garum 
Nitidhammaih pavakkhdmi 
Sabbalokasukh&vaham. 
(iL) Acariyo ca sippafica 

Pa&M sutalh kathft dhanam 
Deso ca nissayo mittam 
Dujjano sujano balam. 
(ill) Ittht putto ca d&so ca 
Gharav^o kat&kato 
K&tabbo ca alank^o 
R&jadhammopasevako 
Duk&dimissako ceva 
Pakinnako ti m&tikft.'* 
Translation: — 

(i) EEaving paid homage to the 
Three Qems and- to my venerable 



preceptor, I shaU recite the Dham- 
manttif based on ancient works, for 
the benefit of the whole world. 

(ii.) The Preceptor, ScJwlarshipy 
WUdom, Knowledge, Conversation, 
Wealth, Baintation, Dependence, 
Friendship, the Bad Man, the Good 
Man, the Powerfxd ; 

(iii) Women, Children, Servants, 
Residence, Whai should he done. What 
should not he done. What should he 
known. Ornamentation, BoyaUy, 
Ministration, Things taken hy ttoos 
and threes, and Miscellaneous: 
these form the subjects of discourse. 

' We find the following in Manu's 
Ordinances regarding a pupil when 
reciting the Law : — "At the begin- 
ning and end of the Veda {i.e., of its 
recitation), the teacher's two feet 
are always to be clasped. The 
clasping of the teacher's feet is to be 
done with the hands crossed " (ii 71, 
72). 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 NTTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



An ignorant man, not following the instruction of his 
teacher, desires elegance of diction : how can the learned 
do otherwise than hold him in derision ? 

3. 

A clever pupil delights his preceptor by his industry 
and support, by attention to his speech, ministration 
to his wants, and by zeal in the acquirement of know- 
ledge. 

4- 

He who does not tend his spiritual and his secular 
teacher as well as his parents with due respect, his 
pupils, too, will be just like him. 

s. 

But he who does cherish his spiritual and his secular 
teacher as well as his parents with due respect, his 
pupils, too, will be just like him. 

6. 

A pupil, investigating both letters and words, should be 
like one who destroys a thief, but a teacher like one whose 
work is to examine a thief. 

7. 
If it be heard where a wise man replete with learning is, 
that place should be eagerly resorted to by one desirous of 
knowledge. 

8. 

Pleasant is the shade of a tree; pleasanter that of 
parents and relatives; still more pleasant that of a 
teacher ; pleasanter yet is the shadow of a king, and still 
more pleasant in many ways that of the doctrine of 
Buddha.« 

' See stanza 50 of LokantH, For ent NUis, consult the comparative 
corresponding stanzas in the differ- table in the Appendix. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THB DHAMMANtTL 39 

9- 

Weighty is an umbrella of stone ; weightier the utter- 
ance of the gods ; weightier still the admonition of elders, 
and still more weighty the teaching of Buddha. 

10. 

Cotton in this world is light ; lighter is one t>f a fickle 
disposition ; lighter still he who does not mind the admo* 
nition of elders, and still more light a priest remiss in the 
law. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 40 ) 



SECTION II. 

SCHOLARSHIP. 
II. 

General knowledge,* science of law, calculation,* mecha- 
nical art, the Byakareins,* music, manual dexterity, 
archery, antiquities; 

12. 

Science of medicine, wit and humour, astrology, strategy, 
versification, diplomacy, magic, grammar — these are the 
eighteen acquirements.^ 

13. 

How can there be knowledge to one who is idle, or 



^ See notes on Lokantti, verses 10 
and II. 

^ Perhaps by Sankhyd the system 
of philosophy known by that name 
may have been originally intended. 
For the various systems of ancient 
Indian philosophy, vide Earth's 
" Religions of India." 

' P&ninfs Grammar and other 
translations in Burmese of scientific 
works from Sanskrit, prepared in 
the reign of Sinbyu-shin. 

7 Alabaster remarks : "In a 
Siamese historical novel treating of 
the kings of Pegu I found a list 
of twenty-four arts which princes 
should be conversant with. They 
are divided into 4 crafts, 5 arts, 8 
merits, and 7 manners of action. 
The four crafts are — warlike tactics, 
omens, skill in dealing with men ac- 
cording to their characters, and the 
art of judiciously acquiring wealth. 
The five arts are — knowledge of all 
mechanical arts, soothsaying, history, 
law, and natural history. The eight 
merits are — truthfulness, just treat- 
ment of all people, kindliness. 



courage, good manners, knowledge 
of medicine, freedom from covetous- 
ness, and forethought. The seven 
manners are — noble daring when it 
is required, calm and even govern- 
ment, considerateness for the people, 
merciful adaptation of government 
according to circumstances, punish- 
ment of the wicked, watchfulness 
for their detection, and just appor- 
tionment of punishments." 

Trenckner, in a note to Milinda- 
pafihOf writes : " The nineteen sci- 
ences are intended to represent the 
Yonaka cyclopaedia, the difference 
of which from the Indian must have 
been well known to the author. 
Hence the number was fixed at 
nineteen to mark them out as dis- 
tinct from the 'eighteen' Indian 
sciences. But this was all he knew 
about the matter, and so his specifi- 
cation of them turned out a mere 
farrago of Indian words, the exact 
meaning of which no one would pro« 
bably lulve been more puzzled to ex- 
plain than himself (Milinda). He 
first thought of gruti and sm^ti of 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE DHAMMANtri. 41 

wealth to one without knowledge ; friendship to one with- 
out wealth, happiness to the friendless ; merit to one un- 
happy, and Nibb&n to one without merit ? 

14. 
Wealth is not equal to knowledge; thieves do not 
take away knowledge;^ knowledge is friendship in this 
worid, and the bearer of happiness in the next. 

IS. 
Always, dear one, acquire knowledge; do not bring 
trouble to your venerable teacher : a king is honoured in 
his own country — a man of knowledge in every place. 

16. 

Dear one ! wherefore art thou idle ? An ignorant man 
is the carrier of another's burden. Acquire knowledge 
day by day. A man of knowledge is honoured in this 
world. 

17- 
Men, wealthy and reputed, though full of youth and 
beauty, are without grace, being without knowledge; they 
are like the Butea frondosa^yrhiQli emits no fragranca 

18. 

A father is an enemy,^ a mother is an enemy, if their 
children are not educated when young. As cranes are 
unbecoming among swans, so are the children in the midst 
of a (learned) assembly. 

Mbikhya, ^oga, nySya, yai9e8hika. Milinda suspected of Buddhist at- 

For smfiti and nyHya were substi- tainments previous to his oonversioo. 

tuted sammuti (S. sammati, perhaps The rest of the names are chosen 

in the sense of 'what has univer- rather at random, and mostly dis- 

sally been agreed on ') and nlti ; the gnised as feminines ending in -d, in 

regular equivalents, sati and fiftya, order to look less like Indian.** 

bemg objectionable, because these * ^e% Hitopadeia, Introduction, 4. 

are among the technical terms of * HUopadeia, Introduction, 37- 

Buddhism (fiSyo-*ariyo atthangiko 39.1 (jftnakva also says ''as herons 

maggo), and might have rendered among fliEunmgoes.*' 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



42 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

19. 
One without worth should not remain in a place of 
prominence; a man of quality has a good destiny: how 
oan a crow, though perching upon a steeple, become a 
garuia ? ^® 

2a 

A fool praising himself to his heart's content does not 
appear to advantage in this world : a wise man renders 
himself conspicuous although he conceal himself in a 
pitii 

22. 

A religious book, intended for the subjugation of pride, 
excites the vanity of fools; the sun, though created for 
all eyes, is darkness to owls. 

23. 
Food, sexual intercourse, and sleep appertain both to 
oxen and men;^ knowledge is characteristic of men: to 
be devoid of knowledge is being on a footing with oxen. 

24. 

The pupil who, by a desire to possess a vast amount of 
knowledge, learns a great deal, that knowledge he is 
imable" to convey to another, just as a dumb person, 
seeing a dream, is unable to give utterance to it 



^® A gigantic bird in Buddhist wonted in battle and had his 

mythology. The Garujas are repre- thunderbolt smashed. Vide Dow- 

sented as being ever at war with son's " Hindu Mythology." 

the Nftgas. In Hindu mythology ^^ See verses 10576 ff of Mahd- 

the Gr^da (sGarula) is a biid bhdrata, book xii., from which the 

on which Vishnu rides. He has sentiments of stanzas 19 and 20 

the head, wings, talons, and beak are adapted. 

of an eagle, and the body and limbs ^ The HUoftadekty Intr.f 25, says : 
of a man. His face is white, his " Food, sleep, fear, and sexual inter- 
wings red, and his body of a course, this is the common property 
golden hue. He is said to have of man with beasts. Virtue is their 
stolen the amrito from the gods in great distinction. Deprived of virtue, 
order to obtain his mother's freedom men are equal with brutes.'* 
from Eadru. Indra fought against ^ Because it ia not properly di- 
him and recovered it, but he was gested. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



( 43 ) 



SECTION IIL 

WISDOM. 
25. 

Close attention to stadj augments knowledge; know* 
ledge increases wisdom ; by wisdom we know the signifi- 
cation (of a thing); the knowledge of the signification 
brings happiness. 

26. 

A wise man, seeing coming danger,^^ should avoid it 
at a distance; on seeing it approach, he should remain 
fearless. 

27. 
A wise man should spurn one who is avaricious, irri- 
table, proud, arrogant, idle, and covetous ; he should spurn 
also one who is remiss, addicted to drink, slothful, hypo- 
critical, and niggardly. 

28. 

He who is full of faith and modesty, who shrinks from 
sin and is full of learning, who is diligent, unremiss, and 
full of understanding — ^he, being replete with these seven 
things, is esteemed a wise man. 

29. 

One who is stable, by obtaining what benefit there may 
be in his present state of ignorance or what there may be 
in the future, is termed a wise man. 

^ '* Peroeiving danger not yet burrow with a hundred openings.'* 
arrived, an old mouse, skilled in See stoiy in Hilapadeia, i. 38, 39 ; 
books of policy, occupied there a also iy. 17. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



44 Ntn LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

30. 
He is a wise man who knows his speech, his affections, 
and his anger to be in keeping with his status.^ 

31. 
A king and a wise man are never alike: a king is 
honoured in his own country, a wise man everywhere. 

32. 
Punishment truly is awarded to a wise man receiving 
praise from a fool ; but a wise man praised by a wise man 
is well praised.^* 

33. 
By one in power controlling himself, his underlings, 
too, will exercise self-control : a wise man should put an 
end to his anger. 

34. 
Wide certainly is the difference between the body and 
the good qualities of mind ; the body perishes in a short 
time, the qualities last a cycle. 

35. 
He is called wise who, obtaining much benefit, know- 
ledge, and prosperity, can conduct himself as one devoid 
of pride and stubbornness. 

36. 

Those men who desire not what should not be desired, 
nor sorrow for what occasions loss, who, moreover, do 
not suffer confusion in failure, they indeed are wise men. 

37. 
A wise man should not think lightly of a knotty point 
in a sentence : how can the sun, though shedding light 

u SiMdwuddiMrh, ie., the occa- *'0f what avail is the praise or 

sion should be considered. See the censure of one of the vulgar, who 

HiUypadekk, IL 48. makes a useless noise like a senseless 

^ MdhMhArata, xii. 4217, says : crow in the forest?" 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THB DHAMMANtTI. 



45 



on the Three Islands,^^ throw light into tlie hollow of a 
bamboo? 

38. 
There is no one without merit or demerit in something 
or other; even the gentle lily has a tough stalk. 

39. 
They who are covetous and deluded come to grief, 
although, knowing a large number of books, they possess 
a vast stock of knowledge for the dissipation of doubts. 

40. 

Men spoken of as good, on seeing a fault in another 
who is good, say nothing : the world sees not an impres- 
sion ^ in the moon, although it be apparent 



^^ According to Buddhist cosmo- 
gony, each ea&avd^a has four great 
islands or continents — (i) Pubbavi- 
deha, (2) Jambudlpa, (3) Aparago- 
yftna, and (4) Uttarakuru. The allu- 
sion to the Three Islands will be un- 
derstood by considering the path in 
which the sun is said to move. This 
luminary gives light to the whole of 
the four continents, but not to aU 
at the same time. When it rises in 
Jambudlpa, it is in the zenith to the 
inhabitants of Pubbavideha, sunset 
in Uttarakuru, and midnight in 
Aparagoytoa. At sunset in the 
latter it is mid-day in (2), sunset 
in (i), and midnight in (4). When 
the sun, moon, and stars go to the 
other side of the Yughandhara rocks 
nearest to Mah&-Meru, they appear 
to set in (2). See *' System of the 
Universe " in Hardy's *' Manual of 
Buddhism." 

^ LaHjanarti. Just as Occiden- 
tals speak of " the man in the moon," 
Orientals speak of " the hare in the 
moon." Bi Burmese folklore the 
moon is represented as having a 
picture of a man and his wife poimd- 
mg rice, and a dog seated by. With 
regard to certain philosophioil specu- 
lations respecting consciousness in 
the MilindapaUSo, the following 



appears in Hardy's ** Manual of 
Buddhism" :— " The other viiUidna$t 
as taste and smell, are produced* by 
contact. Unless there be actual 
contact between the tongue and the 
object tasted, there is no production 
of jivhd vifikdna ; but when any- 
thing is in contact with the eye, 
whether it be coUyrium by which it 
is anointed, or the grain of sand by 
which it is annoyed, there is no 
consciousness of its colour or shape ; 
notwithstanding the eye can discern 
the hare in the inoon, though it is 
at so great a distance." 

The idea of the hare being in the 
moon is a very old one, and had its 
origin, no doubt, in the Satajdtaha, 
iv. 2 (6) of the Jdtahatthavaiinand, 
Fausboll's, voL iii p. 51. Rhys 
Davids, referring to certain legends 
concerning Grotama, writes: — "He 
takes his place also in the 'Dio- 
tionnaire Inf emel ' of M. Oollin de 
Plancy, a quaintly illustrated dic- 
tionary of all matters relating to 
devils, fairies, magic, astrology, and 
so on. There he appears in a curious 
woodcut as 'Salomuni, g^nie ou 
dieu,' in the character of Man in 
the Moon, or, rather, of the Hare 
in the Moon." 

The following is the Chinese ver- 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 



NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 



41. 

If a wise man once contract a friendship with a wise 
man, he should strive after not only his own welfare, but 
also that of the other ; he should likewise strive after the 
final bliss of Nibb&n. 

42. 

It should not be said that in a well on the bank of a 
river there is no water, in wood no fire, in a palm-leaf 



sion of the story, as given in Seal's 
"Buddhist Records of the Western 
World/' in connection with Gotama's 
wanderings in the Benares district : 
— ** To the west of this lake (Cham- 
pion's Lake) there is a ttUpa of 'the 
three animskls.* In this place, when 
Bddhisattva was practising his pre- 
paratory life, he burnt his own body. 
At the beginning of the kalpa in this 
forest wild there lived a fox, a hare, 
and a monkey, three creatures of 
different kinds but mutually affec- 
tionate. At this time ^akra('Sakka), 
king of Ddvas, wishing to examine 
into the case of those practising the 
life of a Bodhisattvay descended 
spiritually in shape as an old man. 
He addressed the three animals 
thus : — ' My children, two or three, 
are you at ease and without fear? ' 
They said, *We lie upon the rich 
herbage^ wander through the bosky 
brakes, and though of different kinds 
we are agreed together, and are at 
rest and joyfuL' The old man 
said, 'Hearing that you, my chil- 
dren, two or three, were peaceful 
at heart and living in sweet accord, 
though I am old, yet have I come 
from far idone, forgetting my infir- 
mities, to visit you ; but now I am 
preNBsed with hunger, what have you 
to offer me to eat?' They said, 
' Wait here awhile, and we will go 
ourselves in search of food.' On 
this, witii one mind and with single 
purpose, they searched through tiie 
different ways for food. The fox 
having skirted a river, drew out 
from thenoe a fresh carp fish. The 



monkey in the forest gathered fruits 
and flowers of different kinds. Then 
they came together to the appointed 
place and approached the old man. 
Only the hare came empty, after 
runniiur to and fro both right and 
left The old man spake to him and 
said 'As it seems to me, you are 
not of one mind with the fox and 
monkey ; each of those can minister 
to me heartily, but the hare alone 
comes empty, and gives me nought 
to eat ; the truth of what I say can 
easily be known.' The hare, hear- 
ing these words and moved by their 
power, addressed the fox and monkey 
thus, ' Heap up a great pile of wood 
for burning, then I wO give {do) 
something.' l^e fox and monkey 
did accordingly; running here and 
there, they gathered grass and wood ; 
they piled it up, and when it was 
thoroughly alight the hare spake 
thus : ' Good sir ! I am a small and 
feeble thing ; it is difficult for me to 
obtain you food, but my poor body 
may perhaps provide a meal.' On 
this he cast himself upon the fire, 
and forthwith died. Then the old 
man reassumed his body as King 
^akra, collected all the bones, and 
after dolorous sighs adchressed the 
fox and monkey thus: 'He only 
could have done it. I am deeply 
touched ; and lest his memoryshould 
perish, I will place him in the moon's 
disc to dwell.' Therefore through 
after aees aU have said, ' The hare 
is in the moon.' After this ey^nt 
men built a HUpa on the spot." 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE DHAMMANtTI. 47 

fan no wind ; in like manner it should not be said that in 
the mouth there is no speech. 

43- 
A wise man questioned by another is like a drum; 
being questioned, he is like a great shower: a fool, 
whether questioned or not questioned, speaks boastfully. 

44- 

If one embellished with abundance of good qualities 
strives not after his own and the welfare of others, how 
can he, a bearer of happiness to all beings, be called a wise 
man? 

45. 

One wise should strive after his own and the welfare 
of others ; being unable to do both, he should seek his 
own good ; unable to do that, he should at least restrain 
himself from sin. 

46. 

A wise man hears everything with his ear and sees 
everything with his eye: it does not become him, how- 
ever, to wish for all that he sees and all that he hears. 

47- 
Having eyed; one should be like a blind man ; like a 
deaf man, one who has ears; possessed of wisdom, one 
should be like dumb, and like a weak man one possessed 
of strength; and, when prosperity comes, a man should 
sleep the sleep of one who is dead. 

48. 

Wise men wish for sons superior to them, or equal to them, 
in excellence ; if the child be one who injures the family, 
him, as being of inferior worth, they desire not to have. 

49. 
There are three in books who call themselves wise: 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



48 Ntri UTERATURB OF BURMA. 

one who says, ''I only am wise;" one who says, "I eUso 
am wise ; " and the one who says, '' I am not wise/' These 
are the three. 

50. 

That assembly is not becoming in which no good men 
are to be found; they are not good who do not speak 
what is right : they, however, are good who, abandoning 
lust, hatred, and folly, speak what is right. 

SI. 
The wise should not look for faults in a child, a mad- 
man, and a king ; nor, also, in teachers and parents, in 
the priesthood, and in an elder brother. 

52. 

A wise man should not publish his anxiety of mind, 
misconduct in his house, his deception by others, and 
likewise disrespect.^ 

S3. 

He is a wise man who looks upon another's wife as he 
would upon a mother, upon another's property as upon a 
clod of earth, and upon all creatures as he does upon 
himself.^ 

S4- 

They, however, are not wise who seek for friendship by 
deceit^ virtue by defilement, property by another's anguish, 
learning by amusement, and a wife by severity. 

^* For "deception" and "dig- * This is a literal rendering of 
respect" the Hitapadeia has "the stanza 13 in if ttro^Aa. 
being cheated " and " disgrace " 
respectively. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 49 ) 



SECTION IV. 

KNOWLEDGE. 

55. 
One desiring knowledge should seek knowledge, having 
(first of all) sought for learned men : rice cooked in the 
pot is (also found) cooked in the dish.^ 

56. 

The wise from afar, not hillmen dose hj, take away 
the gem £rom the hill abounding in riches : like this are 
the foolish in reference to the learned. 

57. 
What benefit is there to deer by mineral wealth or to 
the impious by a moral precept ? what benefit by law to 
the lawless^ by knowledge to fools ? 

58. 

The man who is of little knowledge lives like an ox ; 
Ins flesh increases, not his wisdom. 

59. 
One of little knowledge, being presumptuous, deems 
that little a great deal; a frog,^ not seeing the water in 
the sea, thinks the water in a well considerable : 



^ In which the rice is served at a or one of narrow experience is 

meal The BdjanUi of Lallfi Lftla frequently likened to a frog in a 

says : ** As whatever you put into a welL " He who does not go forth 

new earthen vessel, you wiU find its and explore all the earth, which is 

quality there." full of many wonderful things, is a 

^ One of drcninscribed intellect well-frog." — PanoatarUra. 

D 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



so NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

6a 

Know hj this : — a small stream Mows into chasms and 
fissnies, murmuring (on its coarse); a large river flows 
silently along.* 

" A Vrfngti apophthegm iay»: oonne, but % foul itream vaAm 
'*The GMigM aowi with % truiqail with a roar." 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 51 ) 



SECTION V. 

COKYKRSATION. 
6l. 

Good men say that pleasant speech is excellent — (this 
is the first thing); we should speak in accordance with 
the scriptures, not what is not in keeping with it — ^this is 
the second thing; we should speak words of affectiou, 
and not give expression to unloving speech — ^this is the 
third thing; we should speak the truth, and not give 
utterance to falsehood — this is the fourth. 

62. 

The fat of lions remains in gold and not in silver;^ 
the conversation of the wise finds no place in a f ooL 

63. 

Fire, having great heat» does not soften earth; water 
reduces it to softness ; the words of the good soften one 
who is severe. 

64. 

Bj gentleness should one overcome an enemy or one 
who is harsh : for the reason that a thing is not accom- 
plished, for that very reason it should be overcome by 
gentleness. 

65. 

Pleasant is sandal-wood in this world; pleasant the 
light of the moon ; pleasanter, however, than sandal-wood 
and the moon is the conversation of the righteous. 

** The BannMe ny that thef6 li except a gdlden yeaseL Am toon m 

a fish oalled the Ngaktaukma in a it ii pat into any other, it speedily 

liiU-etream of the Pega-yoma lange, evapoiates. 
-▼hoee fat will not reinain in any 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



52 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

One of pleasant speech has many a friend, one of harsh 
speech few: here the metaphor^ concerning the sun and 
moon should be brought tomind. 

67. 
A word in season, though little, is well spoken ; to a 
hungry man delicious is the badly-cooked rice that has to 
be eaten. 

68. 

The large talk of the garrulous, though beneficial, no one 
should pay regard to ; is it not found that the water of a 
river, though serviceable, is viewed with indifference ? 

69. 

One should not speak when the time for speaking is 
past, nor should he remain silent at aU times ; when the 
time for speaking comes, he should not utter what is 
irrelevant ; — he should speak with deliberation. 

70. 
Wisdom in speech is the foundation in reference to 
things that are wished for ; when there is no wisdom in 
speech, what is wished for is not achieved. 

71- 
The hand, the leg, the head, the back, the stomach — 
these are five individuals; they serve the mouth, being 
subject, so to speak, to its admonitions. 

^ Taken from the excessive heat of the sun and the great coldness of 
the moon. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 53 ) 



SECTION VL 

WEALTH. 
72. 

Faith is wealth ; virtue, modesty, fear of sinning, know- 
ledge, sacrificing, too, are wealth ; wisdom, certainly, is a 
" seventh ** wealth.. 

73. 

The wealth of women is beauty, of men good ancestry, 
of snakes poison; the wealth of rulers is an army, of 
priests virtue, of Brahmans knowledge. 

74. 

Beauty in the hour of misfortune is of no benefit^ nor 
wisdom, ancestry, and relations ; wealth alone is a special 
boon.^ 

75. 

Relatives, son and wife, and companions forsake one in 
poverty ; they clii^ to him in prosperity : wealth in this 
world is a great friend.^ 

As people always depend upon tanks and the like when 
they contain water, so also do they depend upon one who 



^ Vide ffUopadekt, iL 3 : **A *< He who has wealth has friends, has 

man of great wealth is honoured, relatives. There is no prosperity 

be he even the murderer of a Brah- in existence without wealth. Like 

man ; although equal in race to the smaU streams in the hot weather, 

moon, if poor he is despiised." the acts of a destitute man are cut 

^ See some beautiful lines on the off ; ** and so forth, 
subject in MaAdbhdrata, zii 213 ff. : 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



54 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



has wealth, on one who has fortune ; when thej nm low, 
they foisake him, 

77- 
Prosperity is brought about iby oneself, and so is ad- 
versity; no one brings about the prosperity or adversity 
of another. 



( 55 ) 



SECTION VII. 

BE8IDBNCE. 
78. 

Whsbs these five — a man of wealth, an astrology, « 
king, a river, and likewise a doctor — are not to he found, 
there one should not remain for even a day.*^ 

79. 
Where there is no love, no joy, no relatives, and no 
man of learning, there a man should not live for even a 
day. 

8a 

Where there is no love, no respect for the virtuous, 
no disregard for the wicked, &ere one should not live for 
even a day. 

81. 

lions, good men, and elephants, leaving their habita- 
tion, go elsewhere; crows, bad men, and deer die even 
in their own abode. 



" We quote from the MUraidbha 
Beetion of the ffitapadekt in oonnec- 
tion with stanzM 78 to S4 of the 
DkanMnanHU:— 

''Teeth, hair, naili, and men 
removed from tiieir plaoe are not 
beautifnl; knowing this, the wise 
should not abandon his own place." 

** lions^ good men, and dephants, 
having abandoned a idaoe, go away ; 
crows, cowards, and deer meet d^^ 
at the same spot" 

*<The wise man moves with one 
foot, and rests still with one foot : 
without having inspected anotiier 
place, he should not abandon a 
former station." 

"In whatever country there is 



neither respect for the good, nor the 
means of livelihood, nor friends, nor 
the advance of knowledge, any one 
should abandon that countey/' 

** A rich man, a religious teacher, 
a king, a river, and, fifthly, a j^ysi- 
oiaxk — ^where these five are nc^ one 
should not make cme's abode." 

"Traffic, fear, modesty, honesty, 
and generosity — where tiiese five 
are n^, there one should not make 
an abicUng-j^aee." 

'* Thou, O friend, must not dwell 
where this quaternion i» not — a 

Eft^er of debts, a physician, a re- 
gions teacher, and a river of 
wholesome water." For these see 
Fineott's ffUopadeh, i. 104-112. 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

82. 

Where an idler, a clever man, a hero, and a coward are 
equally praised, there the virtuous do not remain ; what 
benefit is there to them by absence of distinction ? 

83. 
A wise man moves on one foot and halts on the other; 
he should not quit a previous abode without carefully 
thinking about another. 

84. 

Teeth, hair, naiLs, and men, not being properly rooted, 
do not appear to advantage ; a wise man, knowing this, 
does not hurriedly quit his residence. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 57 ) 



SECTION VIIL 

DKPENDBNCK. 

85. 

Oke, though he be similar in goodness to the all-wise 
Buddha^ sinks (into obscoiitj), being alone and not de- 
pendent on another ; a gem, tiiough priceless, looks well 
being set in gold.^ 

86. 

One should not serve a severe master, and yet he 
should serve one; one should not serve one who is 
niggardly; more so, he should not serve one who op- 
presses; aoid, furthermore, he should not serve one who 
will not give him promotion. 

87. 
One speaks badly of another in his absence, but 
lovingly in his presence; no one should serve such a 
person, treacherous as a pot of poison.^ 

88. 

The sun should be approached by the back towards 
it, fire by the stomach facing it; one should approach 
kings by his whole body, the next world by laying aside 
delusion.*^ 



* Compare *'61m8 by anocia- <* A wicked peEson speaks swaeklj, 

tion with gold acquires an emerald but that is not a reason for confiding 

Instre.*' — Bitopadeia, Intr,, 41. in him. He has sweetness on the 

*> **One should ayoid that kind tip of his tongue, but in the heart 

of Mend who behind the back yimlent poison." — MiiraUBtkot 8a 
injures one's purposes, and before '^ The Sanskrit has "the next 

the face speaks sweetly. He is a worid by sincerity." — Sukndbheda^ 

dish of poison with milk on. the 32. 
surface."— iftirciM&Aa, 79. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



58 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

89. 
One should not rely upon an evil-doer, nor on one who 
k given to lying ; he should not depend on one who is 
mindful of his own interests, nor on one who acts very 
much in secret. 

90. 
One, though he be of little excellence, becomes eminent 
by serving a man of eminence : golden-winged birds be- 
come so by remaining on a gdden mouniain.^ 

91, 
A powerful person, what can he effect, tiiough strong, 
if he be without followers ? Fire put where there is no 
air goes out of itself. 

92. 

Flowers and fruits grow plentifully, the tree depending 
on a good soil; by depending on a good man great merit 
springs into existence. 



" The reference is very likely to upon the eastern mountain an object 

the fabulous birds on the northern shines by the drawing near of the 

fao!0 of Mount Mem. Compare sun, so by the proximity of the good 

Introduction to BUapadeia, 46 : "As even an outcast is enlightened. ''^ 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 59 ) 



SECTION IX. 

FRIENDSHIP. 
93- 

Hb who is not idle, severe, and deceitful, but is pure in 
mind, truthful in speech, free from covetousness, eager 
for his welfare — such a person is said to be excellent. 

94. 
Staving off evil in misfortune,*' supporting you in 
prosperity, not abandoning you in adversity — ^these, in 
short, are the characteristics of a friend. 

95. 
They who stand by you in sickness and in adversity, 
in famine and in captivity, at a king's door^ or in the 
charnel-house — ^they are friends indeed. 

96. 

Just as difficult is it to find a wise man, a good friend, 
and a well-wisher, as ;it is to find a good doctor or a 
delicious medicina 

97- 
He who, forsaking staunch friends, forms acquaintance- 
ship with those who are unstable, to him there is the loss 

* " In misfortnnes one may know *^ For says an old proverb : ** Even 
a friend, in battle a hero, in decav- touching an elephant kills ; a sor- 
ing fortunes a wife, and kinsmen in pent smelling ; a king even when 
afflictions." — MUraldbha, 74. Also protecting ; and the wicked even 
compare SuhruBfkeda, 79: *<Onthe smiling."— J7itopa(iefo, iil 15. The 
tondistone of misf ortone a man Sanskrit veision adds : " during a 
ascertains the strength of the intel. national tumult."— JfttroiiSAo, 75. 
lect and goodness of the relatioo, 
wife, servuits, and of himself* 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



6o NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

of his faithful Mends; — what can there be said about 
those who are unstable ? 

98. 

One should win over an ayaricious person by a gift; 
one presumptuous by salutation ; a fool by giving him his 
way ; a wise man by right behaviour.^ 

99. 

By constant intercourse^ verily, and by keeping aloof, as 
well as by proffering requests at an unseasonable moment 
— by this do friends fall away. 

100. 

One should, therefore, not go to another constantly, nor 
after too long a time; he should proffer a request at a 
seasonable moment: friends thus will not fall away. 

lOI. 

By association with whatever friend safety dinumshes 
— a wise man should, above all things, guard against ruin 
from him as he would guard against fire. 

102. 

By association with whatever friend safety increases — 
a wise man should, in all matters, act towards him as he 
would towards himself. 

103. 

The sugar-cane is decidedly sweeter knot after knot 
from the tip ; a good man is like that— a bad man just 
the reverse.^ 

* Vide staDzas 78 of LohanUi, 221 *' One should win a friend by good- 

of Dhammapada, and Mahdbhdrata, nature, a relative by courtesy, 

iit 13, 235, V. 1 5 18. The Sandhi women and servants by gifts and 

section olTSiiopadeia, 108, 109, has : honours, other people by dexterity." 

^ The covetous should be won over ^ The friendship of a good man 

by money, the haughty by joining becomes more and more devoted ; 

the hands, a fool by humouring his that of a bad man deteriorates little 

inclination, a wise man by truth." by little. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtTL 6i 

104. 

Therefore there was preached by the sage (Gk)tama) 
whatever Worldly Laws ^ there are as well as the Spiritual 
Zaws^ that lead to heaven. 

105. 
All those having reference to proper companionship 
are for the benefit of living beings; therefore in good 
friendships affection ought to be shown. 

106. 

That wise man, certainly, who is imbued with gratitude 
and knows how to perform a grateful act is a good friend, 
a devoted and a staunch one ; he does zealously what is 
necessary for one in distress: people in this world say 
that one of such a nature is a good man. 

107. 

A stranger conferring a benefit is a relative ; a rela- 
tive doing what is unbeneficial is a stranger: a disease 
arising in the body is unbeneficial; a medicine from the 
forest is a boon.^ 

108. 

He whose face is like the lotus-lily, his speech is as 
pleasant as sandal-wood; honey is on the tip of his 
tongue, poison in his intentions : such a one we should 
not cling to ; such a friend we ought to avoii*<> 

'^ Lohiyd dhammd — the eight tives who do not help in time of need, 

"Worldly Conditions," Tiz., gain, that the Sanskrit maxim says: 

loss, famt, diskonovr, praise, Uame, ** Better a forest haonted by tigers 

lumnness, suffering. and elephants, trees for shelter, ripe 

•8 The nine '* Transcendental f mits and water for food, grass for a 

States " (nava lohUtard dhammd) bed, bark for clothing ; but with- 

are referred to— the four Maggas, out wealth, not living amidst rela- 

the four Phakts, and Nibbdna. tions." 

^ ffUopadeki, iiL loi. So pro- ^ See note to LokartUi, 88, and 

nounced is the feeling against rela- DhammantU, 87. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 62 ) 



SECTION X. 

THB BAB MAK. 
109. 

He is a fool who, having done a good deed or a bad deed 
in a previous existence, does not perceive the one being 
a sonrce of happiness, the other of suffering. 

IIO« 

One foolish deems his transient self intransient; he 
(thereby) perpetually diminishes the performance of vir- 
tuous deeds. 

III. 

A fool, having done what is evil, does not exert himself 
to put it away: wherefore ? — a tiger going along does not 
endeavour to obliterate its footmark. 

112. 

One in poverty seeks wealth; one weak strives to be 
strong; one of little knowledge is argumentative: these 
are the characteristics of a fool. 

"3. 
Going uninvited, speaking much when not questioned, 
vaunting one's virtues — ^these are the characteristics of a 
tool 

114. 

Just as ripe figs are red outside but full of worms 
inside, so are the natures of those who are wicked. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMMANtTI. 63 

115. 

A pot not full of water makes a noise; one full of 
water remains noiseless : a fool is like a half-full jar — a 
wise man like one quite foil. 

116. 

A foolish man does many an evil act^ though receiving 
admonitions from the wise : charcoal, being washed, still 
continues black.^ 

117. 

By instructing a foolish pupil, by maintaining a wicked 
wife, by companionship with vile friends, even a wise 
man deteriorates. 

118. 

Beauty in the vile is the grief of another^s wife ; wealth 
is the grief of the world ; the learning of the bad is for 
the ruin of the good; advantages in the vile are the 
greatest tyrannies. 

119. 

Himself wicked, one calls a good man wicked : there is 
nothing whatever in the world more ridiculous than sudi 
declaration of his. 

12a 

A wicked man, verily, remains unhappy without re- 
viling others ; a dog, having tasted every dainty, is dis- 
satisfied, being without what is unclean. 

121. 

When iron is heated it can be welded ; it is soft; it is 
malleable : the heart of a wicked man does not soften : — 
how then can it be compared to iron ? 

^ The SMwkrit ▼eni<m b : " Let though you wash a ooal in milk, 
the nimer listen to ho]^ texts, he will the Maoknessbe lemoTed? " 
will not reUnqoish his ?ile nature ; 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



64 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

122. 

Therefore, if a man of discrimination wish for pros- 
perity, he should shun companionship with evil-doers ais 
he would a venomous snake at a distance. 

123. 

Verily neither enmity nor friendship with evil-doers is 
befitting; charcoal bums, being ignited; when the fire is 
out, it regains its black condition.^ 

124. 

Though a bad man be embellished by knowledge, he 
ought to be shunned: how can a snake be harmless 
though tricked out with gems ? ^ 

125. 

The wind is the friend of the fire burning a forest ; it 
even extinguishes a lamp ; in a wicked man there is no 
friendship whatever. 

126. 

A snake is bad, a wicked man is bad, a wicked man 
being worse than a snake: a snake may be tamed by 
charms and herbs; how can a wicked man be reduced 
to subjection ? 

127. 

A wicked man cannot be virtuous by (simply) having 
knowledge in his mind : how can the tragacanth become 
full of sweetness by honey deposited in one of its hol- 
lows?** 



43 xhis stanza is thus expressed in when cold, it blackens the hand." — 
the Sanskrit original — " One should Miiraldbha, 83. 
not bring about neither friendship ^ This stanza is from Cftnakya's 
nor even acquaintance with a wicked collection. 

person : charcoal when hot bums ; ^ When pierced for the eztraution 

of gum. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtri. 65 

128. 

By association with the wicked the good eveii become 
bad: unpleasant is a road, though straight, on which 
rubbish is deposited. 

129. 

The man who wraps up putrid flesh with kusa ^ grass, 
finds that the grass emits a putrid odour : like this, too, 
is association with fools. 

130- 
One should not look at a fool nor listen to him; he 
should not associate with him; he should neither hold 
conversation with him nor take pleasure in him. 

131- 

One of little intelligence leads one to destruction ; he 
strives to lead him to what should not be striven after ; 
he is misleading ; he is sleepy-headed ; if kindly admon- 
ished, he flies out into a temper ; he knows not admoni- 
tion : the good, in consequence, avoid him. 

132. 
Should a fool serve a wise man all his life long, he will 
not perceive his duty, just as a spoon cannot perceive the 
flavour of the curry gravy.** 

133. 
The plantain fruit, verily, kills the plantain-tree ; the 
bamboo and the reed flower kill the bamboo and the 
reed: homage kills *^ a bad man just as a Tara colt its 
mother. 

^ Poa cynontroides, used in an- —InstUutes of Afanu,n, Brahmanic 

dent Brahmanic sacrifices. There girdles were also made of kusa 

is a reference to it in Dhammapada, grass. 

7a It was supposed to have a ^ Vide note to stanza 25 of 

purifying influence. A Brahman Lokantti, 

before reciting the Vedas had to sit ^^ During gestation Vide stanza 

on it and rub his hands with it also. 85 of Lokantti. 

£ 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



66 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

134- 
A dog seeing a dog shows its teeth to bite ; on becom- 
ing angry, a bad man, seeing a bad man, wishes to injure 
him. 

135. 
A frog sitting on its rumps is not a lion; a hog 
grunting is not a leopard ; a cat is not a tiger on account 
of its similarity to one ; he is not wise who is of little 
wisdom. 

136. 

A frog is like a lion ; if a crow seize it, it begins to 
squeak: a fool is like a learned man; if a wise man 
question him, he says, " Sir ! sir !"^ 

137. 
Harmful among birds is the crow, a rat in a house, a 
monkey in a forest; a Brahman among men. 

^ Submissively and as if in ad- is like a learned man," ie., when 
mission of his inferiority. '* A fool he deems himself one. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



67 ) 



SECTION XL 

THE GOOD MAN. 
138. 

Grass, earth,** air, and, fourthly, pleasant speech — these 
should never be put an end to in a good man's house. 

139- 
Bivers do not drink up their water, nor trees eat up 
their own fruit ; rain never eats up com : the wealth of 
the righteous is for others.®* 

14a 

The good qualities of a good man living at a distance 
do service as messengers : bees go off at pleasure, smelling 
the fragrance of the ketaka '^^ flower. 

141. 

As a fair tree, in too great proximity to the thorn apple, 
is not affected by it ; a good man, likewise, is not affected 
by the wicked though mixed up with them. 

142. 

One seeking permanent happiness should serve a man 
of excellence, forsaking his evil companions ; he should, 
moreover, abide by his admonitions. 

143. 
Just as ripe jacks, though thorny outside, are full of 
juice inside, so are the dispositions of righteous men. 

^ A spot of ground where a stran- See Mitraldbha, 60-65, on the duties 
ger may take up his abode ; grass of hospitality, 
tor cattle or to serve as bedding. "^ Compare Lohanttif 64. 

*^ The Pandanui odoratissimus. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



68 NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

144. 
He who wraps up the taggara with the pai&m leaves 
finds that the leaves give forth a sweet fragrance ; similar 
to this is association with the wisa 

145. 
One should look (with reverence) and attend upon a 
wise man ; he should associate and converse with, and^ 
moreover, esteem him. 

146. 

A man of wisdom leads one to prudence ; he does not 
strive to lead to what is unpleasant ; he leads well ; he is 
excellent; being admonished rightly, he does not lose 
his temper ; he understands reproof : on account of (all) 
this a good man has companionship with him. 

147. 
If a man of intelligence serve for a short time a learned 
man, he speedily perceives his duty, as the tongue the 
taste of the curry gravy. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 69 ) 



SECTION xn. 

THE FOWEBFUL. 
148. 

Than these four kinds of power — ^power of arm, power 
of rank, power of wealth, and the power 6f high ancestry 
— wisdom, undoubtedly, is a more exalted power. 

149. 

In air lies the strength of birds, in water that of fish ; 
the strength of the helpless is in a king ; the strength of 
childen in tears.^ 

150. 

The moon is powerful ; powerful, too, are Brahmanas 
and Samanaa; the power of the sea is its shore; the 
power of woman is the greatest power. 

151. 

Among creatures having feet, the lion is powerful; 
more powerful is a worm ; an ant is still more powerful ; 
man still more ; a king more powerful than all within the 
limits (of Ms kingdom). 

152- 

A forest is the resort of deer, the sky the resort of birds ; 
emancipation from passion is the aim of religious precepts ; 
the aim of the sanctified is NibbS,n.^3 

^ Oorn^, HUopadeia, 207: "The their own grouna; of kings, an 

chief strength of aquatic animals is army." 

the water ; of residents in strong- ^^ Virftgo gati dha mm Anarii, 

holds, a forest ; of beasts of prey, Nibbftnam rahataih gatL 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 70 ) 



SECTION XIII. 

WOMEN. 
IS3. 

A WISE man should many a maid of good descent, even 
though she be ugly ; he should, likewise, marry one who 
is beautiful, even though she be of mean descent. 

154. 

The woman who is lovely in looks, has eyes like those 
of deer, hair long, waist narrow, who has fine teeth, is 
worthy of admiration, and has a pretty mouth, is clever 
in talk, virtuous, and industrious — she, though she be of 
an inferior caste, should be taken to wife. 

IBS' 

The woman who attends to her husband at his meals as 
a mother would, who, in nourishing those in her care, 
acts as nurses do, who in her own avocations is enthu- 
siastic, and in her husband's business helpful like a 
nurse; 

156. 

Who in her wifely duties is well grounded, in time of 
sleep affords comfort, and among relatives speaks as she 
would to a mother — such a woman is called " excellent" 

157. 
He who under all circumstances is constantly earnest 
and energetic, that man, as being a gratifier of every 
wish, a woman despiseth not. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMMANtTI. 71 

158. 

A good woman should not vex her husband by froward- 
ness ; a wise woman honours all those worthy of respect 
who have aught to do with her husband. 

159. 
An energetic woman is not idle ; she looks after her 
attendants; she does her husband's pleasure, and keeps 
a guard over his acquisitions. 

160. 

The woman who acts thus, doing her husband's will, 
those heavens, where she is re-bom, are (made) lovely 
indeed. 

161. 

Certain women have been declared most excellent of 
all by the Sage (Gotama) : " Of all beings, woman is most 
excellent; she is the chief of supporters." 

162. 

A man of discrimination should not take counsel'^ in 
secret even with his mother, his daughter, or his sister ; 
(for) are not women (known to be) deceitful ? 

163. 

Women act with the quick movement of lightning, 
with the cutting sharpness of weapons, with the rapidity 
of fire and air. 

164. 

Women's appetite is twice that of men, their intelli- 



"* Bead the itoiy of the ''Two- But tell them not your pkns if 
headed Weaver " in the PaneaUmira. you are wise.'* 
A truislation of it appears in Monier ' ' If you have aught to do and want- 
Williams' Indian WitoUm, in which to do it, 
we find the foUowing passages : — Don't ask a woman's counsel, or 
'*Give women food, <£ress, gems, youllrueit." 
and all that's nice, 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



72 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

gence four times, their assiduity six times, and their 
desires eight times.^ 

165. 

If each woman had eight husbands — a heroic husband, 
a powerful husband, an indulgent husband, and the like 
— she would yet long for a ninth; being unbounded in 
her wishes, she is indeed not satisfied. 

166. 

A woman who is disputatious, who desires whatever 
she sees, is immoderate in her wants, gluttonous, and 
given to sleep — one should shun such a woman, even if 
she have a hundred sons. 

167. 
Women speak with another, see another having an 
attachment for him, think of another who is possessed of 
various advantages ; — who then can be called the darling 
of women such as these ? 

168. 
If a man could catch, the air in a net, bail away the 
ocean with one of his hands, or produce sound too from 
his own hand, he would, then, satisfy women; such, 
verily, is woman's nature.^ 

169. 
If a man, having a thousand tongues, live a hundred 
years, and by him, by his having nothing else to do, 
expression is given to blemishes in women, how will his 
fault-finding come to an end ? 

'^ In connection with stanzas 163, Jivh&sahassiko yo hi 

i64f vide Lokaniti, 1 6 1. Jive vassasatam naro 

^ The following is the P&li text of Tena nikkammunft vutto 

this and the next stanza : — Thidoso kim khayam gato/' 

" Ganheyya v&tam j&lena For passages in praise of women 

S&garam ekapS.ninft and their duty to their husbands, 

Osinceyya ca talena consult " Institutes of Manu," ix. ; 

Sakena janaye ravam Mahd^Mrata, i. 3027 ff., xii 5497 

Pamd,d^u visajjey3ra ff., and xiii. 6781 it 
Itthiye s& vajjadhiEunmat&. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



( 73 ) 



SECTION XIV. 

SONS. 
170-171. 

The wise wish for a son having five things in view, — 
" having cherished him, he will cherish ns, or he will carry 
on our work ; he can keep up the lineage ; he will inherit 
the property; he will give offerings to onr spirits after our 
death." 

172. 

The wise wish for a son either superior to the father or 
equal to him; that evil offspring they do not desire who 
is the destroyer of his race. 

173. 
They who are bom from the same loins are not the 
same; their features are different as well as their be- 
haviour, just as the thorns on the plum-tree. 

174. 

Many are the faults in the absence of restraint, many 
the virtues by the exercise of restraint ; therefore, when 
it is time for restraint, one should restrain a son or a 
pupiL 

175- 
One should admonish by means of admonition; he 
should hinder from what is unbefitting; he, indeed, 
who is subdued is loved; he who is not subdued is 
hated. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



74 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

176. 

One should admonish a sbn or brother who is wicked ; 
he should not forsake them:- the hand and the foot 
being smeared with filth, wherefore should they be cut 
oflf? 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 75 ) 



SBCTION XV. 

SERVANTS. 
177. 

A SKRViNT bom in the house or one obtained by money, 
a servant who is a servant from choice or one who is cap- 
tured in war — these are four kinds of servants. 

178. 

Servants are of five kinds — one who is like a thief, one 
who is like a master, one who is like a friend, one who is 
like a relative, and one who is like the master himself; 
in the same way ^^ should friends, wives, and relatives be 
considered by the wise. 

^ That 18, as being divided into five kinds. 



Digitized \ 



>ogle 



{ 76 ) 



SECTION XVL 

BBSmEHCK 
179. 

LiYiNa with a wicked wife or with one who is loveless, 
living with one who speaks with an air of superiority, or 
in a house infested with snakes, is, it cannot be doubted, 
death itsell^ 

180. 

We avoid at a distance a man seeking name and dis- 
tinction ; a wise man, therefore, by not seeking them finds 
the road (that leads to notoriety). 

181. 

One should always go himself to the threshing-flooi 
and to the stable and field; he should store the grain, 
having measured it; he should cook it in his house, 
having first weighed it out. 

182. 

B^g cognisant of the diminution of collyrium, of the 
increase of ant-hills, of the accumulation of honey little 
by little, — a wise man should even thus conduct his own 
house.*^ 

* With reference to the crow and no additions to hit wealth, he haa 

the Uaok snake on the tree where nothing left in the end. The ffilopa- 

the f onner made her nest, the Sito- dda lum : " Having observed the 

padektwyn: — wasting of ooUjrriam and the ic- 

** A wicked wife, a false friend, a creasing of an ant-hill, one should 

servant giving saacy answers, and make Utoe fmitfnl with almsgiving, 

residence in a house with a snake, stady, and worics." CoUyrinm is a 

is death without doabt" — Suhrid' kind of unguent used by Asiatics tc 

bkeda, laa strengthen and brighten the eyes 

" If only one spends and makes (Greek KoKk6pim), 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtTI. 77 

183. 
One ought himself to know what is got and what is 
spent ; of himself should he know what should or should 
not be done; he should punish one deserving of punish- 
menty and praise one deserving of praise.^ 

184. 

A ruler should sleep during one watch only, a priest 
during two, a householder during three, and a b^ar 
duiing four. 

185. 

He is a relative wha clings to you in his prosperity, 
he a father who nourishes you ; in whom there is sincerity, 
he is a friend; she a wife in whom there is quiet. 

186. 

There being love for and trust in Another, one does not* 
consider a hundred as even an anna; there being no love 
and trust, he looks upon an anna as a hundred. 

187. 

One who asks is hated ; one not giving, being asked, 
is also hated ; a man of* excellence, therefore, should 
obtain the wealth of knowledge. 

188. 

One should guard his wealth under all circumstances ; 
more so should he guard his wife ; a greater watch tlian 
over wife and wealth should he always keep oyer himself. 

189. 
A wife should not be held in common ; a dainty should 

^ This refers to the duty of » king. Vide ^'Institates of BCanu,'* 
oh»pter YiL 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



78 



NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



not be eaten alone ; one should not follow the Lokayatam : 
this is not for the advancement of wisdom.^ 

190. 

A man of discrimination should be virtuous and obser- 
vant of his duties ; he should not be neglectful ; he should 
be humble, not proud; he should delight in righteous- 
ness, and be affable and gentle. 

191. 

A wise man gives help to his friends, sharing his 
property with them; priests and saints, too, he always 
provides with food and drink. 

192. 

A man of learning, who wishes to know the Law, should 
put questions over and over again ; he should serve with 
reverence those who are virtuous and of extensive know- 
ledge. 



^ The LoloAyata/Oh is the oame of 
an old work (now said to be lost), 
treating of controversy of a casuisti' 
cal nature. Being of a misleading 
nature, it was treated with contempt. 
The first half of this stanza presents 
an example of the kind of casuistiy 
in which the C&rvAka materialists 
indulged. The latter are referred 
to in the Sarvadarkmasangraha, a 
Sanskrit work by MAdhav&c&rya, 
who gives an account of the old 
religious and philosophical systems 
prevalent in hiduk CArv&ka was 
the founder of the materialistic 



school. His system was a heretical 
one, which rejected the previous 
doctrines in connection with the 
sources of knowledge. He taught 
the existence of four eternal prin- 
ciples—earth, air, fire, and water ; 
that the soul is not a distinct prin- 
dple from the body, and that crea- 
tion of things and phenom^ia was 
a spontaneous process. The belief 
in heaven and a state of punishment 
was emphaticaUy denied by him 
and his followers. He calls the 
composers of the Vedas fools and 
rogues. 



Digitized by 



Google 



( 79 ) 



SECTION XVII. 

WHiLT SHOULD BE DONS. 
193. 

He is wise who sleeps with his head to the east; of 
long life he who sleeps with his head to the south; he is 
of tranquil mind who sleeps with his head to the west ; it 
is death if he sleep with Ids head to the north. 

194. 
Prolonged is the life of one who eats with his face to 
the east; he is wealthy who eats with his face to the 
south; he famous who eats with his face to the west; 
one should not eat facing the north. 

195. 
Eating while seated makes one stout; eating standing 
increases strength ; walking augments life ; running wards 
off sickness. 

196. 

He who, attending to his manly occupations, does not 
consider heat or cold of greater consequence than grass — 
such a one does not decline in happiness. 

197. 

If nectar may be got from poison, it ought to be ex- 
tracted ; so also gold from filth : if a man of excellence 
can get wisdom from the vile or a woman of worth from 
a family that is debased, he ought to do so.^ 

' Manu sftys: "Ambrosift can even from impurity." — InaiUfiUes, VL 

be extracted from poison, elegant 239. We read in Mahdbhdratat v. 

speech even from a child, good 1125 : "Let a man take from all 

oondnct even from an enemy, gold quarters what is valuable even ttcm 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



8o MTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

198. 

The man who knows a secret that should not be known, 
one bears with him like a slave from fear that his plans 
may come to nought 

199. 

The threat of even a slave should be tolerated by a 
wise man living in obscurity, though having a temper as 
potent as fire. 

200. 

As in striving after the acquisition of wealth and corn, 
so in the acquirement of knowledge, in sending an errand, 
as well as in times of business, shame should always be 
discarded. 

201. 

Because, whenever a work is completed, no one indeed 
notices the performer, for that very reason should all 
works be incompletely performed. 

202. 

One should meet a benetactor by means of a benefit, an 
enemy by means of enndty ; a thorn stuck in the foot is 
extracted by means of one held in the hand.^ 

203. 

Honour him who honours you, serve hira who serves 
you, work for him who works for you, befriend him not 
who befriends you not, be not devoted to him who is not 
devoted to you.^ 



a raving madman and a chattering This latter idea occurs also in Suhrid- 

child, as he extracts gold from hhedat 78. 

stones/' The S'drngadhara - pad- •• The idea is: "Do nnto others 

dhati-NUi (vide Yon Bohlen's Latin as you would have them do to you." 

translation) has: **A wise thought Vide Mahdbhdrata, xiii C571, 5572. 
should be got even from a child : ^ See note to stanzas 86 and 145 

does not a lamp illuininate a house of the Lokaniti, 
when the sun is hid- from view?" 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtri. 8i 

204. 

Abandon but do not make friends with him who aban- 
dons yon; associate not with one devoid of love: as a 
bird, knowing that one tree has no fmit, looks for another, 
so shoxdd a man forsake one friend and go to another: 
the world indeed is, for the most part, like this. 

205. 

Abandon one man for the good of a family ; abandon a 
fomily for the good of a village, a village for the good of 
a country, the earth for the good of oneself.^ 

206. 

Forsake wealth on account of the noble body; one 
keeping guard over life should sacrifice the body : a man, 
bearing in mind the scriptures, should forsake even all — 
wealth, limbs, and life. 

207. 

Here, as days pass away diminishing the years of man, 
let people, thereforie, not be oblivious of the teachings of 
OotanuL 

208. 

He who endures the severe reproach of others, and 
hd who knows the true doctrine, their friends faU not 
away from them; they the sooner attain to the peace of 
mbbAn. 

209. 

Fire, water, a woman, a fool, a snake, royal families — 
these should be zealously avoided, knowing that they pro- 
tect life like Death himself. 

2ia 
However well cases are decided, the code has to be con- 

• MUraldbka, 159. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



82 NtTI LITBRATVRB OP BURMA. 

suited ; however familiar one is with a kiidg, he has yet to 
fear him; a young woman come into one'a hands has to 
be guarded well : how can there be an end to the require- 
ment9 of laws, kings, and Inaidens? 

211. 

Energy, which is friendship, is looked upon as an 
enemy ; indolence — an enemy — is considered friendship : 
knowledge, which is nectar, is considered a i>oison ; negli- 
gence—a poison — is looked upon as nectar. 

212. 

So long as the hour (for reyenge) has not arrived, one 
should carry his enemy on his shoulder ; haying arrived, 
he should break him to pieces as a pot on arock.^ 

213. 

One should avoid homed animals at a distance of fifty 
cubits, horses at a hundred, elephants at a thousiand, but 
a bad man by quitting the place altogether. 

214. 

One should praise teachers before their face, friends 
and relatives behind their back, servants while at work, 
and sons and wives when carried off by death. 

215. 

Knowledge should be gained little by little ; wealth 
acquired by degrees ; in climbing a hill the ascent shotdd 
be gradual ; desire and anger should come little by little : 
these five little by little. 

216. 
To a chief there shoiild be a hundred eyes and a hun- 

* Fide notes to stoncft 86 of Xo2»iilei 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DBAMUAMtn. S3 

dred 6ira : being t)iii4 provided, he should be like one who 
is deaf: this is the characteristic of a leader. 

217. 

B7 the concord of many actii^ in concert, to be over- 
come is most difficult: rope is made from grass; by that 
yery rope is an elephant secured. 

318. 

If anger arise, oonsidsr it like a saw ; if there be longing 
for what is pleasant^ look upon it as the flesh of your own 
son. 

219. 

(Generosity is the drug of frioidship ; niggardliness the 
drug of hate: generosity brings renown; niggardliness 
keeps obscure. 

22a 

One desiring wealth should trade ; he should gather 
experience who wishes for knowledge ; one wanting a son 
should obtain a wife ; one wishing to be a minister should 
do the king's pleasure. 

221. 

A man doing good deeds or bad should have before his 
eyes large expanding trees, which abound in fruit, how- 
ever small may have been tiie seed. 

222. 

He who acts humbly in matters deserving of respect, 
he, putting aside his humble condition, is established in a 
position of advantage. 

223. 
One should overcome one exalted by humility, a war- 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



84 Ntri UTBRATVRB OP BURMA. 

lior by di>«enrioii, one Tile hy geneioaitjr, his equal bjr 
eneigjr. 

224. 

Oihen ehould not know on'e's fault ; he should diseorer 
the fault of another: hiding his own, like a tortoise hides 
its members, he should notioe the disposition of others. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 8s ) 



SECTION xvra. 

WHAT SHOULD Bl ATOIDID. 
225. 

SLBPora late, remaining idle, behaving with aererity, 
deeping long, travelling alone, paying attention to an- 
other's wife— these, indeed, are not for one's advantage^ 
be he even a saint. 

226. 

A dninkaid, one who goes and eomes out of season, one 
going to a place of amnsement^ a gambler, one having bad 
associates, and an idler — ^these people destroy mnch wealth; 
this is the outcome of a vile nature. 

227. 

•'Now it is cold;** "Now it is hot;** "Now it is too 
late.'' The moments slip past those who neglect the per- 
iormanoe of actions with thoughts such as these. 

228. 

One iiguxing another is, in the first place, injured by 
that other: the grass itself which bums a mansion comes 
speedily to destruction. 

229. 

One should not be familiar with an enemy, nor even 
with a friend: a friend some time or other, on being 
annoyed, will divulge your faults. 

23a 

A bad place, a bad friend, a bad acquaintance, a bad 
kinsman, a bad wife, and a bad king — ^these should be 
avoided at a distance. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



86 Ntri UTBRATURB OP BURMA. 

231. 

A crab goes along without a head, a snake without feet; 
a hen has its brood without suckling: one should not 
despise human beinga 

232, 

A son of low parentis becomes a king^s minister; a 
fool's son a learned man ; the son of a pauper a millionaire: 
one should not despise human beings.^ 

233- 
One who desires another's friendship must not do three 
things^ — quarrel, enter into partnership with him, and pay 
attentions to his wife. 

234. 

A debt balance, a smouldering fire, and, in the same 
way, remaining enmity, augment continuoiusly : therefore 
have nothing remaining. 

235. 
A descendant, being bom into a good family, should 
guard well the family -lineage; having fallen into mis- 
fortune, he should not commit a debasing act. 

236. 

He who is well oflF in grain is deficient in wood, water, 
grass, and fire : a poor man is deficient in all ; therefore 
he should not do what is evil.® 

237. 
One should not take the lead among many : should the 
action succeed, equal is the reward ; should it fail, he re- 
ceives the rep imand.®* 

^ Compare SUopadeiti, i 187. of his can alter that worldly statos. 

^ The idea nnderlyiDff this stanza Groodness in the present will be pro- 
is in keeping with Buddhistlo belief, dnotive of goodness in the fatore. 
A man's present status is the result "^ JSUopadeia, L 25. 
of his past career ; no present effort 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtri. Zj 

238. 

Basking in the rising sun, inhaling the smoke from 
bodies of the dead, maintaining an aged wif e» and eating 
a cord meal at night, always destroy life. 

239. 
Association with women and with bad men is not 
proper; so also with a snake or a homed animal, with 
a river or disease, or with a royal family. •*** 

240. 

Taking in hand an improper work, opposing a multi- 
tude,^ contracting companionship with women — ^these, the 
wise say, lead to death. 

241. 

One should not indeed pay attentions to women, nor 
partake in what is unbeneficial, thinking it good: we 
shpuld honour and revere the aged ; we should not serve 
a teacher with deceit. 

242. 

A warrior should not go to the battlefield without his 
weapon; a wise man should not go without his book; 
a traveller, and similarly a merchant, should not travel 
without a companion. 

243- 
The five spirits which remain in the body— calmness, 
ability, wisdom, modesty, and honour — are taken away 
from the portals of request.^ 



**> Compare Hitop,^ L 17. ^^ " From the porUls of request*' 
^ It IB said : " A Idng should not This iE a free reDdering of dekitiva-' 
make war npon many opponents at c&nadvArd, the literal signification 
onoe : even a fierce snake is surely of which is — " from the door of say- 
destroyed by a swarm of insects." — ing give** The idea is that one who 
Hitopadeki, !▼. 96. bc^ loses the qoalities referred to. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



^ Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

244. 
Denying a request giyes pain ; making a request like- 
wise gives pain : whatever be the circumstance, never say, 
" I have not," and never say, " Give." 

245. 
When people do not know a man, whether by means 
of his lineage or by means of his knowledge, there he 
should not make a boast of himself. 

246. 

Bad is the speech of one who has a bad mother ; bad ti^e 
conduct of one having a bad father ; but he who had a 
father and mother both bad, his speech is bad as well as 
his conduct. 

247. 

Good is the speech of one having a good mother, and 
good the conduct of one having a good father ; but he .who 
has a mother and a father both good, his speech is good 
and likewise his conduct 

248. 

One of great height is a great fool; one of mediocre 
stature a sensible man : all dwarfs, coming before Y&su- 
deva, are cnrfty.^ 

249. 

Behaviour shows the race, conversation one's country, 
companionship love, and food the body. 

250. 

The criterion of water is the lily-stock, behaviour that 



71 They imagine that they can out- In the BkagavadffUd he calls him- 

wit a god. l^Undeva is a name for self the creator. Stories oonoem- 

Kfishna, the celebrated hero of In^ ing him abound in the Mtthdbhdraia 

dianmythologyand the most popular and Purdnoi, His exploits mark 

of the Hindu deities. He is said to him out as the Hercules of the In* 

be the eighth incarnation of Vishnu, dians. 



Digitized by 



Gpogle 



THB DHAMMANtri. 89 

of a race ; Uie criterion of wisdom is convenatioii, of soil 
its grass and water. 

251. 

One shonld know a horse by its speed, an ox l)y its 
burden, a oow by milking; and a wise man by his speeclu 

252. 

One shonld know a servant by an errand, a kinsman by 
the .approach of danger, a friend likewise in adversity, a 
wife when wealth disappears. 

253. 

Even all astrologists know not the time without a book, 
but cocks know the hoiur ; more so trees ; and even more 
the eaJrth and water.^ 



^ The monl of thii vene is thfti hmhi ihoiild not be o?flr-boMtfiil of 
bit ftbilitiee. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 90 ) 



SECTION XX. 

ORNAMENTATION. 

2S4. 
The ornament of the earth is Mem, that of the night tiie 
moon ; the king is the ornament of the people, an elephant 
of an army. 

255. 
Beauty is becoming accompaniedby virtue; a race is 
good on account of its behaviour; a forest is befitting, 
having flowers, an army on account of the elephant. 

256. 

The beauty of the cuckoo is its voice ; a woman's beauty 
her devotedness to her husband ; the beauty of the un* 
handsome is knowledge, forbearance that of priests. 

257. 

Hermits are becoming being lean, quadrupeds if fat; 
men are becoming having knowledge; becoiuing is a 
woman if she have a husband. 

258. 

The moon without the night is not befitting, the ocean 
without waves, a pond without geese, a man without a 
wife. 

259. 

An ornament without clothes is not becoming, nor a 
woman without a husband ; a man without knowledge is 
not becoming, nor a feast without milk. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THB DHAMMANtri. 



91 



260. 

The moon is the lamp of the Island World,^ the husband 
of a woman ; the Law is the lamp of the Three Worlds ; ^^ 
a good son the lamp of the family. 

261. 

Dull is a sonless home/* dull a country without a king ; 
the speech of an ignorant man is dull ; a beggar is dull 
entirely. 

262. 

The ear shines onitccount of its hearing, not account of 
an earring; the hand by a gift» not by a bracelet; the 
person of one exalted shhies by his goodness to others, not 
by the application of sandal-wood.^ 



''The Four Great Continents 
{MaMdipd). 

7^ Kdmaloka, lUipdloha, *nd AtHpa- 
loka, the worlds of Sense, Form, and 
Absence of Form. These are the 
three subdivisions of sentient beings. 

^ Old Indian writers compare such 
a home to a cemetery. Compare 
stanza 115 of Lokanttij which has 
rait^rh instead of daai^ and atip- 
jMMM for apaflfUuta. 

^Referring to the casu>m of 
smearing the body with perfumed 
unguents, &o. 

The following is from Tawney*s 
" Two Centuries of Bhartrihari : " — 

''No earrings deck the good man's 
ears, which still on scripture 
feed; 



His hands, stiU open to the poor, 

no golden bracelets need ; 
The perfume of his kindly acts, 

like flowers in leaves concealed. 
Exceeds the fragrant soent which 

nard and sandal unguents 

yield.*' 

" Charity best adorns the hand 
And reverence the head ; 
Truth is the virtue of the mouth, 
In th' ears is scripture read." 

** Valour lends glory to the arms, 
Contentment ciJms the heart ; 
Thus lofty souls, though poor, are 
decked 
With grace in every part." 
— Nituatakam. 



Digitized by 



Google 



( 93 > 



BBOTION XXL 
Kivoa 

263. 

Almbqivivo, piety, liberality, leotitade; mildnesB^ leU- 
gioQS devotioii, and good temper ; freedom from oppree- 
sbn, patience, and nnobetmotiyeneai; kings of these ten 
duties should not be in the least forgi^tfoL 

364. 

Almsgiving, beneficial condnct, loving speech, and re- 
dprocal behavionr*^— these five dnties were by the great 
sage dedaied ^the elements of popnlaiity.'' 

¥tcm t&Kt in a forest deer get no repose^ nor a king 
from fear of the superior stroigth of oth^; the irise 
from fear of transmigratiim obtain no pleasure. 

266. 

Patience, being on the alerts industry, the division of 
property, compassion, and inspection—these four qualities 
should be wished for by a leader desirous of his prosperity. 

267. 

Gentleness causes oppression, severity creates enemies; 
these two things being known, one should take a medium 
course. 

'^BoiMPVBloollMnMjoa would B om mk h&n 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THB DHAMMANtri. 93 

26S. 

Truly by gentleaeBs^ tnily by sererity, one k not aUe 
to liiake himself exalted; one dumld teke both oomtea. 

369. 

A enltiTator, a trader, a minister, a learned and Tirtaons 
monk — tiiiese abounding, a conntiy flonriaheB : 

270. 
These being deficient^ It country declines; therefore one 
bMring the reins of gOYemment^ should act so as to make 
his country flourish. 

271. 
He who plucks an unripe fruit from a large tree bearing 
sweet fruits, he not only does not taste ite sweet juice, but 
the seed itself is destroyed. 

272. 
The king who does not lawfully direct a'kingdom which 
is like a great tree, he not only does not taste ite sweiet- 
ness, but the country itself is ruined. 

273' 
He who plucks a ripe fruit from a large tree bearing 
sweet firuits, he experiences its sweetness; the seed, too, 
is not desteoyed. 

274. 
The king who lawfully directo a kingdom which is like 
a large tree, tastes its sweetness, and the country is not 
ruined. 

275. 
Whatorer princely ruler governs a people lawfaUy, he 
discards the use of all medicinal herbs.^ 



** Jtofl!>aftMrapl 
^ He doet not infiBr aflnumti^ and tbndan ne^di no 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



94 Ntri LITBHATURB OP BURMA. 

276. 

The king who oppresses townspeople, traders, and re- 
venue collectors, that king suffers the loss of his trea- 
sure. 

277. 

The king who oppresses ministers and warriors who 
know to choose the best battle-ground, he suSetfi the loss 
of his army. 

278. 

A prince who acts contrary to duty, oppressing monks 
who practise restraint and attend to their religious duties, 
he suffers the. loss of heaven. 

279. 

The straightness and crookedness of a large river is 
brought about by itself, not by any other; the prosperity 
and adversity of a country is occasioned by a ruling prince, 
he having the sole supremacy in his realms, 

280. 

A son's evil act is a. mother's doing, a pupil's that of his 
teacher ; the deeds of the people is the king's doing; a king's 
that of his spiritual adviser, 

281. 

All subjects doing good and bad deeds, a sixfold share is 
got: the king receives one share;®® he should, therefore, 
restrain the people from evil and admonish them, striving 
to increase their meritorious deeds. 

282. 
The life of an ignorant man is of small value, that of a 

^ ** For it is declared that lie obtains i share of the spiritual merit (of his 
sabjeots).*'— ^pcMtomdo, xi 4. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMMANtri. 95 

wise one of great worth : the life of a people is the king 
himself, that of the king his religious duty. 

283. 

People without a leader are ruined; ruined also are 
they having many leaders : those with women as leaders 
are ruined, and those oome to destruction who allow 
youngsters to rule. 

284. 

As is the cherishing of the oflfspring of tortoises, fish, 
hens, and cows, so should all creatures be cherished by a 
king. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



(96 ) 



SECfTION XXII. 

MOriSTRATIOK. 
285. 

If one entering a king^s family brings no proeperityy tot 
that Teiy reason one entering it shoidd not be devokl of 
biaTeiy andfoigetfol of his dnties. 

286. 

Whenerer a king comes across one Tirtoons, wise, and 
pore, he then, entering into confidence with him, does not 
witUidd a secret 

287. 

If a wise man, by night or by day, receiTe a oommissbn 
in matters relating to the king, he should not be neglectfdl 
of them; soch a person should reside in the palaca 

288. 

One should not dress like a king, nor decorate himself 
with flowers in the same way; he should not use the 
same toilet perfume, nor speak nor look like him. 

289. 

Should a king, surrounded by ministers and queens, joke 
with them, a minister, if he be wise^ should not practise 
dalliance with the queen& 

29a 

One who is calm and collected and of unwavering dis- 
position, who is prudent^ circumspect^ and full of resolu- 
tion, he should rctfide in the palace. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMMANtTL 97 

291. 

He who does not wanton with the queen nor take 
counsel with her in secret, who does not purloin money 
from the treasury, he should reside in the palace. 

292. 

He who does not sleep much nor drink intoxicating 
liquor, who oppresses not th^ animals in the forest, he 
should reside in the palace. 

293. 
"I am esteemed!" one who, thinking thus, does not 
mount the king's bedstead, throne, couch, boat, or 
chariot, he should r»^side in the palace. 

294. 

One of discrimination should not serve the king at too 
great a distance nor too close at hand ; facing him,^^ he 
should remain calm and reserved. 

295. 
"The king is not my friend, the king is not of the 
same disposition as mysell" Kings soon get angry, like 
the eye pricked by something sharp. 

296. 

A wise, intelligent man, thinking himself esteemed, 
should not harshly contradict a king who is in the midst 
of an assembly. 

297. 

A doorkeeper should not enter the apartments of a 

^' As regards students, the not tnm his towards him." "He 

Apcutamba, i '2, 6, says — " If the shaU sit neither too near to, nor too 

wind blows from the pupil towards far." *' But at such a distance that 

the master, he shall change his the teacher may be able to reach 

place." him with his arm." See Lokcmtti, 

" He shaU turn his face towards stanza 137. 
his teaieher, though the latter does 

G 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



98 NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

king, saying to himself, *' I have the door (in my charge) ; " 
he should station himself as if guarding fire ; such a per- 
son should reside in the palace. 

298. 

If a prince extend his patronage to a son or brother by 
apportioning villages, towns, provinces, or hamlets, one 
should make his observations in silence ; he should not 
make any unfavourable reflections.^ 

299. 

A king, noticing the manner in which elephant-drivers, 
horsemen, charioteers, and foot-soldiers do their duty, in- 
creases their wages ; one who does not go among them ® 
should reside in the palace. 

300. 

One who has a slender stomach like a bow,^ who shakes 
like the bamboo,^ and does not contradict, he should re- 
side in the palace. 

301. 

He who has a stomach like a bow, whose silence is like 
that of a tongueless fish, who is prudent and wise, he 
should reside in a palace. 

302. 

One seeing clearly the decline of power should not go 
frequently into the presence of a woman ; he who does, 
suffers from cough, asthma, anguish of mind, and loss of 
strength. 

303. 
One should not speak beyond bounds ; he should not 

^ Or "clever innuendoes," — chela- posture that should be obaenred 

jodpakarfi na hhane. when a minister or servant stands 

^ To make it appear that his before a king, 

ftervices are also deserving of recog- ^ " Who shakes like the bam- 

nition. boo," i.e., who bows to the king's 

^ The reference is to the elegant will. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtTI. 99 

always be sileiit; at a seasonable moment he should speak 
what is not irtelevant 

304. 
One who ntters neither angry nor spiteful words, bat 
speaks what is true and pleasant, who utters not what will 
give rise to hate or destroy another^s prosperity — such a 
one should serve the king in his palace. 

SOS- 
One who supports his parents, who honours his seniors, 
who is replete with modesty — such a one should serve 
the king in his palace. 

306. 

He who is restrained, learned, and polite, who has the 
control of his senses, is industrious, and of sweet disposi- 
tion, who is unforgetf ul of his duties, pure in heart, and 
experienced — such a person should reside in the king's 
palaca 

307. 

He who is humble in disposition and obsequious to 
his betters, who is respectful, delighting in good and 
living in concord, he should reside in the palace of the 
king. ( 

' 308. 

One should avoid ^ at a distance a man deputed as 
a spy; he should look after only his master's interests, 
not Uie interests of another king. 

309. 
One should respectfully serve Brahmans and Bahans, 
full of knowledge and replete with virtue; he should 
be satisfied with the gruel of boiled rice; he should, 
approaching the king, make inquiries about his welfare. 

** In oMe be it suspected of abetting the spy. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



loo Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

310- 
He should not relax his usual almsgiving to Brahmans 
and Bahans ; at the time of asking for alms, he should 
not restrain mendicants in anything. 

311- 
One who is wise and full with the desire of benefiting 
himself and others, who is skilled in rites and ceremonies, 
and knows the times and seasons,^ he should reside in 
the king's palace. 

312. 
One with discrimination is assiduous in his avocations ; 
he is well attentive to his assigned duties — not neglectful ; 
such a person should reside in the king's palace. 

313. 
He should go repeatedly to the threshing-floor, to the 
storehouse, to the cattle-shed, to the field ; having mea- 
sured the grain, he should store it ; measuring it in the 
house, he should have it cooked. 

314. 
One should give instruction to a brother or son not 
established in the precepts; truly they are foolish, being 
young ; . like as the spirits ^ of the departed, so are they : 
let them, therefore, have wearing apparel, food, and a 
resting-place. 

315. 
One should appoint in governmental duties hirelings 
and servants who are industrious and wise and well 
established in the precepts. 



^ For feasts, fasts, opportune mo- idea is, that as there seems no end 

ments for undertaking a work, &c. to the wants of the departed soul, so 

* " Manes," to whom offerings on are young people full of wants, 
a large scale used to be made. The 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtTI. loi 

316. 

One who is virtuous, one who is not covetous, one 
who is devoted to his king, being mindful of his in* 
terests both in his presence and in his absence — ^such a 
one should reside in the king's palace. 

317. 
He who is mindful of the king's wishes, stable in mind, 
in his behaviour free from suspicion — such a one should 
reside in the king's palace. 

318. 
While a king is being anointed, or during his ablutions, 
while his feet are being washed, one should remain with 
bended head ; even if struck, he should not display his 
anger; such a one should reside in the king's palace. 

319. 
Truly should one pay respect and salutation to a water- 
jar and kingfisher,*^ — why not to one ^ who is most excel- 
lent, resolute, and generous in the bestowal of desires ? 

320. 

He who bestows bedding, apparel, conveyance, a dwell- 
ing-place or house, he too, like the cloud-god,^ showers 
down wealth upon living beings. 



^ An old custom is referred to. pared with the clouds in Sanskrit 

It is well known that the fish used literature. " The good, like clouds, 

as a sign of Yaruna, the Neptune of receive only to give awa^." — RaghtH' 

the Brahmans, was looked upon as vatlUa. We find in Mitopctdeia, i 

sacred and saluted. 2 1 7 — " Like a cloud, the king sustains 

^ The king. creatures ; one may live without a 

*^ Pajjunno, used as a personified cloud, not without a king.*' 
deity. Qenerosity is frequently com- 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( «02 ) 



SECTION XXIIL 

TWOS, THBEESy ETC. 
321. 

He who wishes for enjoTment, having no wealth, and 
one having no authority, displays anger — ^ihese ^ are two 
thorns that prick ; they waste away the whole hody. 

322. 

One who, without wealth, indulges in luxury; who, 
being without strength, fights constantly; who, destitute 
of wisdom, wishes to discourse — these are three charac- 
teristics of baseness. 

323. 
Three things on this earth are sweet — sugar-cane, a 
woman, and good speech: people are satisfied with the 
sweetness of a woman and sugar-cane, not with that of 
good speech. 



324. 
Three things on this earth are accounted precious : the 
three are knowledge, grain, and friendship. 

325. 
Those who, without wealth, wish for friendship ; without 
a friend to go on a difficult journey ; who wish to go to 
war without a weapon, or speak in an assembly without a 
book** — these are four fools. 



** Anger and poverty. tmIous meanings of 9aUka. Oom- 

"■ There is a play here on the pare stanza 27 of LokanUi. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMMANtTL 103 

326. 

One in miseiy, one in sickness, a cripple, one in debt, 
and one serving a ruler — ^these, though living, are pro- 
nounced dead by Vy&sa.** 

327- 
That wise man who guards the doors of his six senses,^ 
he, on account of his virtue, is put into a sixfold divi- 
sion ; ^ so also one on account of his n^lect of virtuous 
conduct 

328. 

One given to sleep, one remiss in his duties, one fond of 
pleasure, one diseased, an idler, one irresolute, one work- 
ing in ease — ^these, in books, are looked upon as people to 
be shunned. 

329. 
One of good family, a wise man, one resolute, a modest 
person, one fearful of sinning, one versed in the mttas^ 
one desirous of good, one watchful of himself — these, in 
books, are mentioned as persons whose company should be 
sought 

330. 

One of noble lineage, a wise man, and one seeking his 
welfare, a brave and a virtuous man, and one of great 
knowledge, an industrious person, one stable, and he who 
strives after heaven* — these nine are called good and ex- 
cellent; one should, therefore, restrain himself from eviL 

*^ Vydta, by the Bunnese, is looked ^ The idea \% that each of the 
upon as the author or compiler of senses is a source of merit or de- 
ft very ancient NUi-tdilraf and is merit. 

alluded to in writings as the NUi ^ Sutadharo^** one versed in the 

teacher. Some take him to be the suttas/' or perbap, *' one who is 

compiler of the Yedas and other full of knowled^ ' 

Sanskrit works. On the sentiment ^ SugtUigdmtko, (literally) " one 

compare PancatantrOf i 298. on the happy journey," ie., one 

** Cahkhudvdrd, "the six doors striving for heaven. By "heaven*' 

or apertures," viz., the eye, the ear, a deva world is implied, 
the nose, the tongue, the sldn, and 
the mind. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



I04 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

Buddha » a Paccekabuddha,i^ an Ariiat/<>i a chief dis- 
ciple/^ a mother, a father, oiie^^ worthy of reverence, a 
teacher, a benefactor, a preacher — these ten by the wise 
shoidd be known as non-offenders.. 



^ Buddha Gotama. ^^ The roference is to the two 

'^ A Paecekdbuddha Is one who principal disciples of a Bnddba — ^the 

has the knowledge and conditions « right-'' and *' left-hand" disdples. 

necessaiy to the attainment of These, in the case of Gotama Buddha, 

NibbAn, but does not take upon him- were Moggallfino and Sftriputto. 

self to instruct mankind. ^^ €hiru= ** one carrying weight, 

^^ One who has attained final %,€,, one deserving of respect 

sanctification, and has no farther 

transmigrations to go through. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



( 105 ) 



SECTION XXIV. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 
332. 

Life is the means of bliss ; one who takes life, how can 
he not be called a slayer ? one who saves life, how can he 
not be termed a preserver of life / 

333 
The long life of the good is productive of benefit to all 
beings ; that of the wicked is, without doubt, the cause of 
misfortune to all. 

334-335. 
The sugar-cane being brought under a pressing machine, 
does not dissipate its sweet juice ; an elephant, likewise, 
loses not its grace marching on battle-fields ; sandal- wood, 
if dried, parts not with its sweet perfume ; a wise man 
under affiction does not abandon his virtuous conduct — 
how can he do so during his prosperity ? 

336. 
People are their own friends or their own enemies ; one 
is always a friend to himself, or always an enemy.^^ 

337. 
Good people by self-sacrifice look after those dependent 
upon them ; such is not the teaching of the Niti instruc- 
tor.i«*» 



^^ This Btanza is an adaptation of ^^ Vydta, or some other old com- 
Bitopadeiaf i 73. piler of a Sanskrit anthology. Self • 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



io6 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



338. 
The time of the wise passes in examining prose and 
poetij;^^ that of the wicked in injariag others, in sleep, 
and in quarrel. 

339. 
Bees wish for flowers, flies for what is putrid; good 
men desire virtue ; bad men seek for blemishes in others. 

340. 
Fruit-bearing trees and wise men bend ; dry wood and 
a fool do not — they have to be broken.^^ 

341. 
If a good man quarrel, he soon makes friends again ; 
as earthen cups are broken, so does a fool break friend- 
ship : a good and a bad man are not alika 

342. 
The wealth of the good, though little, is serviceable, 
like water in a well ; that of the bad, though abundant, 
is like the water of the sea 

343- 
Day by day a thousand anxieties and a hundred fears 
influence a fool ; they do not affect a wise man.^^ 



sacrifioe is oonndered a Bnddhiatio 
virtue; so that the author of the 
DhammanUi very likely intends to 
be sarcastic upon one supposed to be 
a teacher of moral maxims. Pos- 
sibly there is a reference to some 
artful or Machiavellian counsel of 
the kind found in the MaJidbJidrcUOf 
and to which attention has abready 
been drawn in a previous note. For 
further specimens, see Muir's '* Met- 
rical Translations," Supplement, pp. 
363-365. 



!•• "Prose and poetiy,** SaUha- 
kabba. The Burmese gloss has " reli- 
gious writings and poetry." See 
BUopadekif £itroduction, 48. 

^^This is one of C'&nakya's tago- 
thMfms — 

* ' l^ees are bowed down with weight 
of fruit, 

Clouds big with rain hang low ; 

So good men humbly bear success, 

Nor overweening grow." 

— Bhartrihari. 

^ See HitopacMa, I 2. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE DHAMMANtri. 107 

344- 
The anger of a mean person having a malicious disposi- 
tion is like a character written on a rock ; that of a good 
man is like a character inscribed on water.^^ 

345. 
One given to sleep, one discontdkited, one ungrateful, 
and one without confidence in himself — these four are 
never able to acquire good behaviour. 

346. 
The behaviour of bad men associating with good men 
is considered good; that of good men with bad men is 
not deemed bad : the earth holds the perfume that exists 
in flowers ; flowers do not retain the odour of earth. 

347. 
In a quarrel with another, people do not say that one's 
goodness is like a mountain ; they show the small fault, 
an atom in size, to be as big as a mountain. 

348. 
People see the fault of others though big as a sessamum 
seed; their own, as large as a cocoa-nut, they do not 
notice. 

349- 
An angry person does not know his own good — ^he does 
not understand his duty: when anger oppresses a man, 
thick darkness then asssdls him. 

350. 
When anger arises in one, it destroys entirely, like a 
fire in a basket fiUed with clothes and ornaments. 



^ The idem it from the Mokd" their Tiitiiee we write in water." — 
bhdmta. Compere Sbekeepeaxe— Hemrp VIII. 
** Men'i otU maanen liye m ham ; 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



io8 Ntri LITER A TURB OP B URMA . 

351. 
Greed is the splinter of the mind, the robber of one's 
welfare ; ignorance is the E&hu^^^ of the moon ; anger the 
fire that bums up the wealth of virtue. 

352- 
A king is not satisfied with his wealth, a wise man with 
well-uttered discourse, the eye in seeing a lover, the ocean 
with its water, 

353- 
A monk, if dissatisfied, is ruined ; a king if satisfied : a 
harlot is ruined if ashamed ; the daughter of a good family 
if not ashamed. 

354. 
A king, the ocean, fire, a woman, an artisan, and a cove- 
tous man, — desires such as theirs should not be entertained 
by any one. 

355. 
Freedom from sickness is a great boon, contentment a 
great treasure, friendship a great relative, and NibbS.n the 
highest happiness. 

356. 
gain ! do thou go to one in poverty — a rich man is 
full of wealth. rain ! do thou fall on dry land — ^the sea 
is full of water. 

357. 
Beggars ^^^ do not beg, saying, " Give; " they offer infor- 
mation, saying, " Look at the circumstance of one who did 
not bestow alms ; let not such be the case with you," 

^'® An Asura or demon who ia be- those who are beggars now have 

lieved to cause eclipses by taking been made so on accomit of their 

ike sun and moon into its mouth. niggardliness in a previous ezist- 

^ Literally, " the lowest of men," ence. 
— paechimdjand. The belief is that 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtri. 109 

358. 
There is not a gem in every rock, a pearl in every 
elephant, sandal-wood in every forest, a learned man in 
every place. 

359- 
A brave man is one out of a hundred, a wise man one 
out of a thousand ; one eloquent is one out of a hundred 
thousand ; a self-sacrificing man may or may not exist. 

360. 

One should praise a warrior on his return from victory, 
wealth when it is brought home ; he should praise food 
when it is digested ; a woman on passing her prime. 

361. 
The knowledge that is in writings and the wealth in 
another^s hands, the one is not wealth and the other not 
knowledge when desire for their use arises. ^^^ 

362. 

A word is the weapon of a king, truth that of Sahans ; 
the weapon of the rich is wealth, of the needy an ox. 

363. 
In battle they need a warrior, in a^ commotion a good 
speaker, in eating and drinking a loved one, in matters 
tending to one's welfare a man of wisdom. 

364. 
One should hold up a friend in affliction, reserve grain 
in time of famine, carry his knowledge into an assembly 
— ^these upon the earth are the things that ought to be 
kept 

us This is from Cftnakya's Collection of Maxims. See Joh. Klatt'a; 
'* Jk TrecerUis Cdnakyat SenterUiis,** 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



no NlTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

365. 
Giving of food in famine, of gold in time of plenty, 
protection in danger — ^these are by far the most excellent 
of all virtues. 

366. 
Unbecoming is a swan among crows, a lion in the 
midst of oxen, a horse in the midst of asses, and a wise 
man among fools. 

367. 
He is not a king who conquers one who should not be 
conquered; he not a friend who overcomes a friend by 
unfair means; she is not a wife who contradicts her 
husband; they not sons who do not support their aged 
parents. 

368. 

Friendship is not equal to knowledge; there is no 
enemy like sickness; no love is equal to self-love; no 
power like moral merit. 

369. 
Where is virtue in one who associates with a woman ? 
where compassion in a flesh-eater? how can there be 
truth in a drunkard? restraint in one who is greatly 
irritable ? 

370. 
What weight is there for those with strength? what 
place too far for a trader? What place is there not for 
the learned ? what strans;er to those of loving speech ? 

371. 
There exists no famine for a cultivator, nothing evil 
for the good; for the dumb there is no contention, no 
fear for one who keeps awake. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMMANtri. in 

372. 
A young woman, toything touched by a fly's feeler, 
a hennit's water-jar, pure water, fruit, and betel — ^these 
should not be rejected. 

373. 
A harper is ruined in five days, an archer in seven ; a 
wife in a month, a pupil in half a month. 

374- 
Bad conduct is impurity to a woman, niggardliness to a 
giver; sinful behaviour is indeed impurity in this exist- 
ence and in the next ; lust is a greater impurity, but the 
greatest of all impurities is ignorance.^ 

375. 
The protector of knowledge is constant industry; be- 
haviour is the protector of a family name; knowledge 
guards a man; energy guards a king; contentment is a 
keeper of wealth; but women, indeed, have nothing to 
restrain them. 

376. 
Old age destroys sentient beings, lust destroys every- 
thing ; scheming destroys all power, compassion destroys 
one's wealth. 

377. 
Living in a lowly place destroys greatness, begging 
destroys respect ; praise destroys merit, absence of restraint 
destroys the mind. 



^ Compare Dhammap,, 240, 241 : " There is a taint greater still — 

*' The taint of women is bad be- ignorance is a far-surpassing taint ; 

haTionr, the taint of a giver niggard- having cast away that tidnt, O 

liness ; evil actions are taints indeed, priests, be ye free from taint." 
whether in this world or the next" 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



112 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

378. 
Food is a source of danger to the base, death a source 
of danger to sentient beings; to all persons of quality 
disrespect is the greatest source of danger. 

379. 
The sun is hot ; it has no attendants : the moon is cold ; 
it is attended by stars : the simile concerning the sun and 
moon shoidd be here borne in mind. 

380. 

An idler is dull of intellect ; one living in enjoyment is 
oppressed with disease ; a sleepy-headed man increases his 
flesh ; a great feeder grows apathetic. 

381. 

From pride comes negligence, from negligence loss ; loss 
engenders enmities: wherefore should a wise man not 
give up pride ? 

382. 

As is the seed sown so is the fruit that is obtained ; he 
who acts virtuously obtains happiness ; an evil-doer has an 
evil destiny.^^* 

383. 

He who believes not really in the fruit of good and bad 
deeds, he, in truth, should speedily bring a mirror (and see 
his face).^^^ 

384. 

He who believes not in rewards in a future state, how 
can he not behold the happy abodes ^^® of those who have 
attained tlie dcva world ? 

114 «« What a mans sows, that he one*s future existence reproduce the 

must reap/' is the Buddhistic doc- merit or demerit of a previous exist- 

trine of Karma. ence. 

^^ As the mirror gives a precise "• Mokkhahhe literally signifies 

representation of the face, so will ** halls of freedom." 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE DHAMUANtri. 113 

385. 
Faith, shame, fear of sinning, great knowledge, industry, 
thonghtfolness, wisdom — a man replete with these seven 
things is known as a "^ wise man."" 

386. 

On Sunday the root,^^ on Monday the trunk, on Satur- 
day and Tuesday the leaf, on Wednesday the flower, 
Thursday the seed, on Friday even the fruit. 

387. 
One who makes a blank-book into a field, writing 
materials into a plough, and letters into seed, he is a 
Wiseman."* 

388. 

For the reason that each letter is the image ^ of Buddha, 
for that very reason should a wise man write the Three 
Pitakas. 

389. 

A person who writes the Three Pifakas cannot fall into 
hell; he becomes over and over a monc^h of the four 
islands 

390. 

Or there will be to him the sovereignty of a part ruler/^ 
so extensive as to be incalculable by reckoning ; or he will 
many times become the king of the six deva worlds.^ 

^ H on 8iiiid»y a medicme is re- ^^ This is the Burmese belief aad 

aaiied from a tree, it should be taken a Barman will not, therefore, step 

^om the root This stanza foi^ across any writing in the vemaonlar 

nishes an example of Indian saper- character, thinking by so doing he 

stition with regard to lucky and will show disrespect to Buddha. 

mduclnr days. ^ Padetardjd, a ruler of a part of 

^^ The metaphor is rather forced, one of the great continents. A 

The PAli runs as follows : — monarch of iJl four is termed a Oak- 

*• PotthakAdlni khettaih va l»vattJr4;Vl 

lekhAni yuganaAgalam '^ The six deva worlds are : — 

ak hariUii bt jaiik katv& Cdhtmmahdr4jik<i-devatohct, Tdv- 

car nto pandito bhave." oMoua-iir, Tdma^T, TutUa-€r, Nim- 

H 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



114 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

391- 
A coming Buddha, by practising such good deeds as ahns- 
giving, and having his existences complete with all bodily 
members, is honoured in the three worlds. 

392. 
A teacher of the scriptures is bom in a family, noble, 
prosperous, opulent, and possessed of extensive property ; 
by his excellence he obtains a retinue. 

393. 
A writer of the scriptures by the fruit of one letter 
obtains the highest happiness during eighty-four thousand 
revolutions. 

394. 
A clever man, fall of discrimination, by small means 
causes his prosperity, just as a fire of the size of an atom 
causes the consumption of a wick. 

395. 
Suffering for the wicked, happiness for the good ; suffer- 
ing and happiness for the partly wicked and partly good : 
every cause has a corresponding effect ; the fruit of merit 
or demerit should be borne in mind. 

396. 
Those who encourage others obtain a fourth, hired 
servants a third, possessors of property in proportion to 
their wealth, those who are happy a tenth. 



mdnarati-fTt and Paranimmita-ras- in it being equal to 100 of the years 

avatti-<r. The first extends above of man. The other four lokas rise 

the four MaluidipaSt from the Yug- one over the other above Menu 

andhara rocks to the Cakkav^lapab- For the Buddhist system of the 

bata, and has each of its days equal universe, see Hardy's ** Manual of 

to fifty of the years of men: the devas Buddhism/' section L The devas 

there live 500 such years. The are superhuman beings, who live a 

Tdvatifhsa heaven is situated on the life of happiness free from the ills of 

summit of Moimt Mem, each day ordinary human beings. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE DHAMMANtri. 



lis 



397. 
Better silence than unprofitable speech, living alone 
than companionship with the vile; better looking at a 
blind person than on a pretty wife ; better possessed of 
nothing than wealth acquired from a distance.^^ 

398. 
A man, though he be of mean ancestry, he shines like 
fire at night, being industrious, resolute, and replete with 
virtue. 

399. 
One is not vile now nor noble, if by his deed he was vile 
before or by his deed he was not noble before. 

4CX>. 

Ck)mpared with a mother^s love, the earth is like a 
bamboo-leaf, a Cakkav&}a like a needle's eye, Mount Meru 
an ant-hill, the ocean a water-bowL 

401. 

If, indeed, a person nourish a mother during a cycle,^^ 
her milk will far exceed even the water of the ocean. 



^^ The version in the HUopadeia 
is as foUows : — *' Better silence than 
an nntnithfal word; better impo- 
tency than intercourse with the 
wife of another; better the aban- 
donment of life than delighting in 
the words of a slanderer; better a 
subsistence on arms than the plea- 
sure of feasting on another's wealth." 
— Miti-aldbhet, 155. 

^ Kappa = a cycle, " The term 
Slappa is given to certain vast 
periods or cycles of time, of which 
there are three, Makdkappa, Aiaii- 
kheyyabappa, and AntatxJtappa, AU 
the OaklMvdlas are subject to an al- 
ternate process of destruction and 
renovation, and a Mahftkappa is the 
period which elapses from the com- 
mencement of the destruction of a 



Gakkavftla to its complete restora- 
tion. Each MahAkappa is sub- 
divided into four Asankheyya- 
kappas, called Saihvatto, Samvaf- 
tatthdyir Vivatto, and VivaUaithAyt 
In the first the destruction (by fire, 
water, or wind) begins and is ac- 
complished, the Cakkav&la being 
resolved into its native elements, or 
consumed so that nothing remains ; 
in the second, this state of void 01 
chaos continues ; in the third, the 
process of renovation begins and is 
completed ; and the fourth is a 
period of continuance. After the 
end of the fourth period the dis- 
solution recommences a:* before, and 
so this alternate process of doiitrue- 
tion and renovation «;«k'h on to all 
eternity. Kach ^Vwuiklu'vyakappa 



Digitized by 



Qoo^^ 



ti6 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



402. 

Parents are the first teachers of their offspring : they are 
spoken of as Brahmas, and are worthy of reverence. 

403. 
Therefore should they reverence them: they should 
honour them by food and by drink, by apparel and by 
bedding. 

404. 

By anointing and by bathing, by washing the feet, by 
attending to their wants and by waiting upon them, should 
a wise man cherish his parents : people will praise him in 
this existence; in the next he will find delight in heaven. 

405. 

It has been declared by the great sage ^ that a collec- 
tion of bones — of one man's bones through one cycle, is 
equal in size to a cluster of mountains. 

406. 

The gift ^f the law surpasses all gif ts^ the juice of the 
law all juices ; the pleasure of the law surpasses all 
pleasures, the destruction of desire overcomes all suffer- 
ing.^ 



contains twenty Antarakappas, an 
Antarakappa being the interval that 
elapses while the age of man in- 
creases from ten years to an Asatii- 
^eyya, and then decreases again to 
ten years : this period is of immense 
duration. A Kappa is either Sufi' 
flahappo, in which there is no 
Buddha, or AauMahappo or Btui- 
dhakitppOf in which one or more 
Buddhas appear. 

»«*Gotama. 

^* This is stanza 352 of the Dham^ 
mapada. Suffering may be over- 
come by attention to the scriptures. 
This is the natural inference. "The 



discourses of Buddha are/' it is 
said, "as a divine charm to cure 
the poison of evil desire; a divine 
medicine to heal the disease of 
anger; a lamp in the midst of 
the darkness <^ ignorance; a fire 
like that which bums at the 
end of a kalpa to destroy the evils 
of repeated existence ; a meridian 
sun to dry up the mud of covetous 
ness ; a great rain to quench the 
flame of sensuality; a thicket to 
block up the road that leads to thb 
Narakas (hells) ; a ship in which to 
sail to the. opposite shore of the 
ocean of existence ; a oollyrium for 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE DHAMMANtTI. 



"7 



407. 

Delight in non-foigetfttlness ; keep a guard over jawt 
mind ; free jonisdf from suffering as an elephant sui^ in 
the mud. 

408. 

Shun the company of the bad» cultivate the companion- 
ship of the virtuous; night and day do what is good; 
remember the impermanence of things.^ 

409. 
Worldly affairs are indeed transient ; they are in their 
nature liable to pass away : this being the case, they perish ; 
their extinction is happiness.^ 



41a 

Grood and bad are not both productive of the same 
result: evil leads to hell, virtue conveys to heaven. 



taking away the eye-film of heresy ; 
a moon to bring oat the night-blow- 
ing lotos of merit ; a sucoession of 
trees bearing immortal fmit, placed 
here and there, by which the tra- 
veller may be enabled to cross the 
desert of existence ; a ladder by 
which to ascend to the Deyalokas ; 
a straight highway by which to 
pass to the incomparable wis- 
dom;, a door of entrance to the 
eternal dty of Nirvftna; a talis- 
manic tree to give whatever is re- 
quested ; a pkywT more exquisite 
Plan any oiher in the three wands; a 
treasury of the best things it is pos- 
sible to obtain; and a power by 
which may be appeased the sorrow 
of every sentient being.*' — £astem 
Monaehism, 

^^ The same stanza is quoted in 
the Biicpadeia, in connection with 



the f oUowing story : — " In a solitaiy 
path on the road to Ujjeni there 
dwelt on a pipal-tree a gander and 
A crow. A wearied traveller on one 
occasion, on a hot sommer day, went 
asleep under the tree vdth his bow 
and arrows beside him. After a 
while the shade of the tree passed 
away from off his face. Seeing this, 
the good-hearted gander perched 
upon the tree, and, spreading out 
its wings, caused a Miade to fall 
upon his face. Having enjoyed a 
sound sleep, he at length yawned. 
Thereupon the crow, maliciously in- 
clined, voided excrement into his 
mouth and flew away. The tra- 
veller, on looking up, saw the 
gander, and killed it with an arrow- 
shot" — Viffraha, 24. 

^ This is obtainable by the attain- 
ment of Nibbdn, 



Digitized by 



Google 



ii8 



Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



411. 

One should write the Three Pifiakas ^ keeping his head 
steady and his feet steady, and attending to his wants 
durini; the intervals. ^** 



1^ Three PitakA8~Pt^al»ltoyaift, 
or "The ThreeBasketi," vii.— 

L Vinayapiidkarh — ** The Bas- 
ket of Discipline,'* to which 
belong MahdvoffgOt C^Uavag' 
go, &C. 

IL SuUapitahaf^—'* The Bas- 
ket of rdscounes," contain- 
ing Dtjhanikdjfo, Majjhim- 
anikdyot Khudiiakanibdyo, 
&c 

III. A bhidhammapitakath — 

<<The Basket of MeUphy- 

sics,'* containing Dhanima- 

9angani, Pai^hdnaih, &c 

At Mandalay, the capital of 



Upper Banna, a copy of these 
books is inscribed '* npon 729 marble 
slabs, containing, it is said, 131,220 
lines and 15,090,300 letters." — 
Maton, They are held in great 
yeneration by Buddhists, who look 
npon each letter as an image of 
Gotama. 

^» That is, **in the intervals of 
writing." The scriptures are so 
venerated that it is considered a 
sin to stop writing daring the time 
devoted to copying jast for the par- 
pose of attendmg to one's personal 
wants. 



Digitized by 



Qoo^^ 



( "9 ) 



III.—RAyANtTI.^ 



I. 

Here is recited the Bdjaniti, for the accomplishment of a 
king's present prosperity, and the acquirement of expe- 
rience for the subjugation of the kingdoms of others. 

2. 

I shall set forth the meritorious characteristics of kings 
and ministers. A noble ruler should always carefully 
scrutinise the actions of his subjects. 

A man is known to be wise by his speech — ^his conduct, 
good or bad, by the company he keeps; by his general 
behaviour he is known to be pure; in time of danger, 
whether he is a man or not. 

4. 
A ruler of men should avoid a servant who is indolent, 
harsh in his actions, severe in his mind, rough and harmful, 
dissatisfied and lacking strength* 

5. 

The king should not appoint him a minister who is 



^ This anthology, based on the Hitopadeki. Chronologically, the 

Indian DharmaH^tras, was compiled Burmese compilation stands after 

by the Brahioans AnantaMna and the LohanUi and DTuimmantUj and 

GanHmissaka. It must not lie con- has for its prototjrpe the Rdjantti- 

founded with the RdjanUi of Lallu idstra of Cf&nakya, the famous 

Lftla in the Braj dialect, which is minister of Candragupua, king of 

comparatively modem (a.d. 1859), PAtaliputra. 
and based chiefly on t^e Sanskrit 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



lao Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

loogh and harmful, who takes bribes, is ignorant of 
books,* looks after his own interests, and is ungrateful 
and given to falsehood. 

6. 

If foolish persons be appointed ministers, a king suffers 
three disadvantages : these three without doubt are — ^loss 
of fame, loss of prosperity, and falling into helL 

7. 
If good and wise ministers be appointed, a king derives 
three benefits — fame, heaven, and the most exalted pros- 
perity. 

8. 

Whatever good or bad deed a subject does, that good or 
bad deed is connected with the king.' 

9- 

Therefore, should a king appoint a minister who is re- 
plete with good qualities, and will bring about his present 
welfare ; he should avoid one lacking in excellence.^ 

10. 

He should be appointed a judge who is full of family 
piety and virtue, who maintains the true law, who is full 
of wisdom, amiable, and shrewd. 

II. 

He should be appointed treasurer who is of an apright 
family, who hoards up the treasure, who can appraise all 
valuables, is virtuous,^ is a permanent resident and of 
good character. 



* Sach M the LobanUi, B^antti, « See Hitopadeia, iiL 18. 

fta * That is, one who maintaini the 

* Gautama^ xl 4, says : **For itig five preeeptt (Pa&ca4tlftiu)— refrain- 
declared (in the Yedas) that he ob- ing from taking life, from th^, 
tahii a share of the spiritual merit impurity, falsehood, and spiritaous 
of his subjects." liquors. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RljANtTL I2t 

12. 

He should be appointed gatekeeper who knows old from 
new people, who is strong and of good appearance, honest,* 
ci^ble of hearing fatigue, and shrewd. 

13- 
He should be appointed ambassador * who is wise, un- 
derstands the conversation of people, is brave, familiar 
with the disposition of others, and of ready speech. 

14. 

He should be appointed writer who is clever in reading 
the thoughts of otliers, writea rapidly, whose penmanship 
is good, who is intelligaiL of good address, and shrewd. 

15-16. 

He should be appointed commander-in-chief who is ex- 
perienced in the subjugation of others, who knows to choose 
a victory-giving battlefield, idio does not abandon his forces 
in misfortune, who remains the same in adversity or pros- 
perity, who is strong, of irreproachable character, skilled in 
the use of weapons, who can bear the fatigues of riding, 
and is replete with diligence and bravery. 

17. 
He is praised as a good cook who is the descendant of 
cooks, who is clever in cooking, who is acquainted with 
books ^ on cookery, who can serve up dainties, who is de- 
voted to his profession, and does not give away articles of 
food. 

* With TtgKtd to the appointment is praised who is liked, pure, clever, 

of an anrihatsador, we find the follow- with a good, memory, who knows 

ing in the ** Institutes of Mann," place and time, personable, fearless, 

▼it 63, 64: — *'He should appoint eloquent." See also irt<op<K^^,iii 2a 
an ambassador learned in sil the ^ Such, perhi^M, as the Drav^ 

treatises, who understands gestures, gv^a, an edition of which is found 

expression, and acts, pure, clever, well- in Burma under the name of ** Drap- 

descended. The ambasssdor of a king yagun Kyan." 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



122 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

I8. 

He is praised as a doctor who is skilled in the treatise 
on the principles of life and its dissolution, who is clever 
in his profession, who is acquainted with works ^ on medi- 
cine^ who is of pleasing countenance and of high morals. 

19. 
He should serve the king as an attendant who under- 
stands the king's wishes, is of good morals, clever, obser- 
vant of the law, well read, free from covetousness, and not 
remiss in his duties. 

20. 

He should be a king's domestic chaplain* who is ac- 
quainted with the Vedas and its subdivisions, who is prac- 
tised in fire-ofierings and the use of spells, and always 
prays for the long life of the king. 

21. 

He who is modest, righteous, versed in languages, who 
understands physiognomy, is conversant with diflferent arts 
and sciences, brave, endowed with race virtues, and fearful 
of the king — such a one should be appointed to serve in 
the palace. 

22. 

The attendant of whatever king is wise, loves his avo- 
cations, is brave, worthy to be consulted — he brings about 
the entire welfare of the king. 

' Cfaraka and Su-^ruta were two what is useful in life, of a good 

great medical writers of ancient family, not deficient in limb, and 

times. The Ayur- Veda is a treatise persistent in the practice of aus- 

on medicine belonging to the ** Upa- terities, . . . pure, free from covet- 

vedas." See Weber's ** History of ousness, attentive, and able." In 

Indian Literature," pp. 265-271. Gautama^ xl 12, we find : ''And be 

' With regard to the appointment shall select as his domestic priest a 

of a Purohita, compare VishnUf iii. Br&hmana who is learned (in the 

70^ 71 : "Let him appoint as Puro- Vedas), of noble family, eloquent, 

hita a man conversant with the handsome, of (a suitable) age, and 

Vedas, epics, the institutes of of virtuous disposition, who lives 

sacred law, and (the science of) righteously, and who is austere. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RAjANtTL 



123 



23. 
He who hajs employment, although he have much 
power and reputation, should not deceive the king; he 
should be able^ to disclose what is good or what is bad. It 
is a difficult matter to point out what is for the king's 
advantage or agreeable to his mind.^ 

24. 

He is no man who overcomes the vile ; he is not called 
a man who is assiduous in a trifle ; he who achieves some- 
thing great is a man. Who scandalises a king, although 
he conquers, is not a conqueror; he is not noble who 
suppresses the conquered." 



^ "IsbeaminiBterwhOitopleafle 
the king, counsels what ought not 
to be done as though it ought to be 
done ? Better womid the feelings of 
the king, but not cause his destruc- 
tion by what should not be done." — 
ffUopadeki, iii. 107. 

^^ The Pftii of the stuiza runs 
thus — 

" Nonanunnunnnanunno, nILn&nunno 
njtnit nunu 
Nunnanunno nanuimon4, na nane 
nunanunanu.** 

Compare Kirdtdrjuniya^ xy. 14 — 

*' Na nonanunno nunnono n&n& nftnA- 
nan&nanu 
Nunno nunnonanunneno n&nenA 
nunnanunnanut. ' ' 

The following, quoted in *' Indian 
Wisdom," is from Mfigha's S'iiupd- 
labadha, xiz. 114 — 

'* DAdadoduddaduddAdl d&dAdodti- 
dadidadob 
Duddftdam dadade dudde dadftda- 
dadado dadah. " 

With regard to the artificial cha- 
racter of verses of this kind, Monier 
Williams remarks : " Some of these 
poems, especially the Haf/Juivatfiia, 
Kumdrasambhavfit MeghadiUa, and 
RiiuMCtthhAra of KAlidlLsa, abound in 
truly poetical ideas and display great 



fertility of . imagination and power 
of description ; but it cannot be de- 
nied that even in these works of the 
greatest of Indian poets there are 
occasional fanciful conceits, com- 
bined with a too studied and arti- 
ficial elaboration of diction, and a 
constant tendency to what a Euro- 
pean would jonsider an almost pu- 
erile love for alliteration and playing 
upon words. Some of the other 
pcjems, such as the Kirdtdrfuntya, 
Stkipdlahadha, kc, are not wanting 
in occasional passages containing 
poetical feeling, stnldng imagery, 
and noble senthnent, but they are 
artificial to a degree quite opposed 
to European canons of taste, the 
chief aim of the composers being to 
exhibit their artistic skill in bringing 
out the capabilities of the Sanskrit 
language, its ductility, its adaptation 
to eveiy kind of style, from the most 
diffuse to the most concise, its power 
of compounding words, its intricate 
grammatical structure, its complex 
system of metres, and the fertility of 
its resources in the employment of 
rhyme, rhythm, and idliteration." 
Extreme - cases of such artificial 
structures are those in the examples 
given above, and the discovery of 
the meaning of the verses is only 
possible with the help of a native 
commentary. 



Digitized by 



Google 



124 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

25-26. 

A king, a minister who attends upon him» a country 
inhabited by good people, a fortress difficult to be taken, 
punishment in keeping with crime, a granary always filled 
with com, a friend devoted to the king in danger — these 
are seven elements spoken of in connection with royalty 
by wise men versed in the Niti 

27. 

These are spoken of as seven elements in connection 
with a country^ a king, a minister, a kingdom, a fortress^ 
a granary, an army, and an ally.^ 

28. 

Among these, even if one element is deficient, the king's 
good state' declines ; another, not wishing to remain on 
terms of inequality with him, strives hard to gain an 
ascendancy. 

29. 

A king first of all wishes for himself association with 
the virtuous ; he next devotes himself to acquire various 
qualifications, and then looks after his remaining dlity. 

30. 
He who ^ is exalted among men, is wise, intelligent, 
avoids low conversation, is shrewd, patient, and upright, 
he is law-abiding and not envious of another's prosperity. 

31. 
He acts well, is provided with friends and allies ^^ full 
of ability, knows how to bring about the ruin of other 
kings, is industrious, possessed of fortitude, and is cog^* 
nisant of loss and gain. 

^ The leyeii oonttituent elements and mi ally.*' — InUUiUea^ iu. 

of state as given by Yishnn are: 33. 

*' The monaroh, his oounoilj a for- ^ The king {nardtabho), 

tress, treasore, the army, the realm, >^ SamlbandkddimthayuUo, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RljANtri. 125 

32. 

He is grateful, brave, depends on the intelligent, shuns 
harmful practices, is considerate, not fault-finding, and is 
prompt in the carrying out of a promise. 

33. 
He knows how to cause the ruin of an enemy, has* a 
mastery over his temper and over his senses, is neither 
covetous nor lethargic, is liberal, and in the habit of giving 
admonition. 

34- 
He is free from bevrilderment^ does not take what does 
not belong to him,^ is respectful to the righteous, knows 
the proper time and place, and is devoted to the seven 
duties. 

35. 
He understands the signification of terms, is skilful in 
the use of stratagems and in the organising of campaigns ; 
he delights in charity and the observance of the precepts, 
and speaks cautiously. 

36. 

A king who is replete with the qualities above men- 
tioned, he, by conquering the whole earth, is honoured for 
his well-deserved greatness. 

37. 
The king who is retentive of knowledge, who is wise, 
iutelligent, unenvious, and waits upon his preceptor — ^he 
attains a widespread reputation. 

38. 
The king who is possessed of the seven qualities, is 
acquainted with the Niti,^* and is wise and discriminating, 
he has the power to conquer the whole earth. 

^ Afwriggako. any treatifle which serves as a gaide 

^ NtUBoMfuuh, This may be a to conduct, 
particular Niti, or it may refer to 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



126 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

39. 
Indra, the sun, the god of wind, Yama, the ocean, the 
moon, the earth, and the god of rain — ^these eight should 
be borne in mind by the king.^^ 

40. 

As Sakka, the king of devas, exalts or degrades crea- 
tures according as they deserve exaltation or degradation, 
like him should a king also act 

41. 

As the sun (gradually) dries up the water durii^ eight 
months, so should the king, who is like the sun, exact 
taxes in his kingdom.^ 

42. 

As the air (unobserved) reaches all creatures, so should 
the king know all about his people by means of spies : ^ 
this secrecy is the character of the wind. 

43- 
As the king of death, at the right moment brings about 
the death of one whom he loves or one whom he hates, 
even so should a king inflict punishment upon one who 
deserves punishment : this infliction of punishment is the 
character of Yama.*^ 

44. 
As small streams fill the ocean without the ocean mak- 



^ ** He 18 fire and wind; he is the little from the kingdom by the 

sun, the moon, the king of justice king/* 

( Yama) ; he is Kuvera ; Varuna, he ** Spies are spoken of as the 

great Indra in grandeur."— J/antr, '* eyes " of a king ; if he has not one, 

vil 7. It is said that the Creator he is called " blind." See Hito- 

organised a king by drawing forth padcsd, iii. 37 ; Manu, ix. 256 ; 

eternal particles {nuUnih iiUvatth) VUh^Uf iii. 35. 

from the essence of these eight. ^ Punishment is personified as 

" Ck>mpare Manu, vii 129 : "As the son of l^vara and spoken of as 
the leech (water animal), calf, and *' the protector of all beings.*' For 
insect eat their food little by little, remarks on the infliction of punish- 
so yearly taxes are taken little by ment, see Manu, viL 13-31. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



rAjanIti. 127 

log a demand upon them^ so should the king not long for 
all wealth : this not making a demand is the character of 
the ocean. 

45. 
As men who see the moon when it is fall are* delighted, 
so shonld all people, seeing the face of the king, feel 
satisfied : a ruler who is like the moon should show him- 
self in the same way. 

46. 

Just as the earth bears upon it all creatures equally, 
thus should a king take in his charge all townsfolk and 
country, people. 

47. 

As the rain falls in showers during four months, a ruler 
should give happiness to the soldiery by paying them 
their wages. 

48. 

A king should act the one act of the lion, one act of 
the crane, four acts of the fowl, five of the crow, six of 
the dog, and three of the ass. 

49. 
Whatever act a king wishes to perform, whether great 
or small, it should be done with all his vigour : then that 
will be one act of the lion's. 

SO. 
A wise king is like a crane, keeping a guard on his 
senses : he accomplishes all his work in the proper time 
and place. 

SI. 
Cocks rise first, are very pugnacious, divide their food 
with their companions, and have the upper hand over the 
hens :^ these are the four acts of a cock. 

^ LiteraUy, thtya aJcamma bhiUla/ih, 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



128 Ntri LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

52. 
A crow satisfies his passions in secret, is very cautions, 
eats his food in company with his relatives, is observant 
and industrious : these are the five acts of a crow. 

53. 
A dog is not idle, is easily content^ sleeps easily and 
rises easily, is a staunch attendant and full of brave^ : 
these six are the attributes of a dog. 

54. 
An ass, although fatigued, carries his burden, he minds 
not heat nor cold, and is ever content: these are the 
three acts of an ass. 

5? 
The wise king who acts in this world in keeping with 
these twenty virtues overcomes all his enemies and derives 
great glory. 

56. 

Diseases arise by too much drinking, by gratifying the 
passions inordinately, by constipation and by constric- 
tion," by sleeping in the day, and by keeping up at night : 
from these six diseases arise. 

57. 
Neither by drinking too much nor by drinking too little 
can digestion be carried on : therefore for the regulation of 
the bowels one should drink in moderation. 

58. 
Until food is settled, one, having eaten, should sit like 
a king; till then, after walking a hundred paces, he should 
lie on his left side. 

59. 
Wishing for long life, one should eat facing the east ; 

" Vaecapastdvanirodhd. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



RljANtri. 129 

wishing for wealth, he should face the south ; if he desire 
prosperity, he should eat facing the west; one should not 
eat facing the north. 

6a 

He who sleeps after eating gets his body bloated; he 
who stands grows strong; he who walks up and down 
prolongs life ; and as for a person who runs, death follows 
him. 

61. 

He who sleeps with his head to the east becomes wise ; 
who sleeps with his head to the south prolongs his life ; 
if one sleeps with his head towards the west, his mind 
grows perturbed; who sleeps with his head to the north 
dies soon. « 

62-64. 

Cutting the grass always, writing on the ground with 
the nail, not washing the feet clean, not washing the 
teeth, the soiling of clothes, allowing the hair to become 
dry, sleeping at twilight, sleeping without clothes, eating 
to excess, striking the limbs and back : to those who do 
all this, neither the god of wealth ^ nor Pissahanu is able 
to bring greatness. 

<5S. 

Placing flowers on the head, washing the feet clean, 
espousing an excellent wife, eating in moderation, having 
intercourse while robed, avoiding intercourse on the five 
special days:^ the king who is resolute in these for a 
length of time obtains glory. 

66. 

Harsh speech, punishment, truculence, the destruction 
of the property of others, over-indulgence in drinking, in 
intercourse, and gambling : these bring uin to a king. 

^ Kuvera^ the Indian Pluto. Pk- birth anniversary, and at the com- 

sahanu, a benign deity, who looks menoement of every new year, when 

after the interest of iDankiud. the fabulous head is transferred from 

^ That is, on the eighth and one goddess to another, 
fourteenth days, at full moon, at a 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



I30 NlTJ LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

67. 
It is indeed tme that many faults accompany those 
kings who attach themselves to these sources of rain; 
they should therefore avoid them. 

68. 

The wise have said that the drinking of intoxicating 
liquors ranks highest amongst all those things that cause 
destruction: the drinking of spirituous liquor tends to the 
loss of property^ wisdom, strength, prosperity, reputation, 
and dignity. 

69. 

By indulgence in spirits great wisdom is destroyed ; one 
cannot understand the truth nor know the vitality of 
another; he cannot discriminate between harmful and 
unharmful food. 

70. 

A drunkard looks upon his mother as his wife, and his 
wife as his mother, his house as a pit or the like, and a 
small thing as a thing of great consequence. 

71. 
He looks upon a small piece of water like the ocean, 
and the ocean as if dry land ; he considers the king as his 
friend. 

72. 

A drunkard diminishes his present property, engages 
in quarrel, contracts disease, destroys his good reputation, 
loses all sense of shame, and becomes weak in wisdom. 

Corrupt people are devoid of purity of behaviour; they 
discard Uieir relatives as dead ; they are without anxiety, 
and dead to a sense of shame ; with great difficulty do they 
obtain the necessaries of life. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RljANtTL 131 

74. 
To him there are ao friends and relatives, no tranquillity, 
no compassion ; he is not fit to be seen ; he knows not 
about the two worids;* he deceives others and causes 
dissensions in the family. 

75. 
The king who puts no faith in the words of his coun- 
cillors acquainted with the Yedas, but acts up to the 
wisdom of his own inclinations, he, like a blind man 
without a guide, will, on account of enemies, ere long 
come to destruction. 

7^77' 
^Who am 17 what is the time and place? who are 
my enemies having advantages equal to or superior to my 
own ? who my friend ? what strength have I ? what stra- 
tagem should I use ? what is the benefit of my industry ? 
what the good results of my merit? who inimical to my 
prosperity ? what the best reply to an opponent's speech ? " 
Those kings who know these things in the accomplish* 
ment of a work have been termed by the wise ** the most 
exalted of kings." 

78. 
Let them think about their duty in the morning — about 
the people in an enemy's country, the army, resources, 
and the land, those who are allies, the present and the 
future life, and what should and should not be done. 

79. 
A king should honour one of conspicuous merit who 
has nobody to depend upon ; he should likewise honour a 
brave man and a righteous man belonging to a foreign 
country, saying for the information of all, '' This man has 
come into my kingdom.** 

^ ^tmuki life and future life. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



132 NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

80. 

First of all, a king, having driven oflf sleep by song on 
the harp, should, at the conclusion of the singing, hear the 
recitation of the blessings,^ and go to sleep on the arrival 
of the third watch. 

81. 

A king, comporting himself suitably, holding up his 
right hand and appearing thoughtful, remaining gracefully 
seated and in a good position, and forgetful in his decision 
whether one is a friend or an enemy, should give a legal 
iudgment.^ 

82. 

It is not the characteristic of a king not giving punish- 
ment while thinking to himself, " I am replete with for- 
bearance ; " ^ by doing so a good king is looked upon as 
bad. This reflection on the part of others is the occasion 
for the infliction of punishment 

83. 
The pride of low people increases by the display of too 
much forbearance ; by the chastisement of a bad person 
others should be deterred f ronx acting like him ; by chas- 
tisement he is made to desist from evil ; by chastisement 
the king bestows happiness. 

84. 

By a king inflicting punishment on any one others are 
afraid of acting in the same way ; even if unwilling to 
punish, he should award punishment having regard to 
future actions. 

85. 

The tooth-cleaner about which he is ignorant, that which 



^ From the Mangcda and other enemy and a friend is truly the or- 

parittaa, nament of ascetics ; towards offen- 

-7 Manu, vii. 13, and viii. i, 2. ders it is verily, for kings, a defect." 

39 ** Forbearance towards both an — Bitopadeikt, ii. 180. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RljANtri, 133 

has knots, that with leaves, one from a fallen tree, one 
from the dry bark, that from a stump, and that produced 
in a village garden — such should not be used by a king. 

86. 

He should use a tooth-cleaner facing the east and the 
north ; it should be straight, without defect, and half a 
cubit in length: having washed it well, he should dis- 
pose of it in a clean place : while using it, he should not 
talk. 

87. 

Should a king not inflict 'punishment, he comes to grief 
like an elephant without his mate, a isnake without poison, 
a sword without a scabbard, and a cave without a lion. 

88. 

People with large stomachs, hands, -^nd feet, being 
afraid of punishment, pay great honour to a king ; being 
punished severely, they hate him. Awarding punishment 
compatible with a crime is a means of securing peace. 

89. 

Punishing the bad, honouring the good, increasing 
property lawfully, being impartial, and looking after the 
kingdom — these five things have been declared by the 
wise as characteristics of a king. 

90. 

The king when wearied of fighting should tell some 
ministers equal in ^ability to himself, " Do you decide 
matters aright." Daily then should he make inquiries 
and allow himself proper rest.^ 



* ManUt vii 142, has : " When chief of the ministerfl, knowing law, 
wearied of regarding the affairs of discerning, subdued, bom of a good 
men, let him put in that place the family." 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



134 



NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 



91. 
Excepting every fifth day, at the appearance of the 
Eazor asterism,^ while that asterism is in the ascendant, 
and at the appearance of asterisms 7, 5, and 3, reckoned 
from the date of one's birth— -excepting on these, one 
might cut off his beard : beard-cutting should not be done 
during war or while spells are being performed.^ 

92. 

Kings who do the things stated above, having con- 
quered their enemies, will enjoy sovereignty for a long 
time over the earth, even to the verge of the ocean. 
Happy in their prosperity, there will be the advancement 
of religion. Having great happiness by being established 
in the Scriptures, they will attain the eternal rest. 

93. 
Just as a gardener always waters a good fruit-bearing 
tree and cuts down one having branches old or overgrown, 



» This is known as KaUikd (Sk. 
Krittikd), the first of the lunar 
asterisms, according to Buddhist 
astronomy. It consists of six stars 
figured as a rasor, and corresponds 
nearly with the Pleiades. For the 
Indian divisions of the zodiac, see 
Golebrooke's "Essays," vol ii., chap, 
ziy. For remarks on the Indian 
system of astronomy, see also 
Weber's *' History of Indian Litera- 
ture," pp. 246-264. There are seve- 
ral astronomical and astrological 
works found in Burma, which are 
either translations of or adapted 
from Sanskrit books. The Lagkur' 
graha and Suriytuiddhanta are 
among the most popular. Learned 
Brahmans, entertained by the court 
of Ava, have, from time to time, 
been instrumental in giving the 
Burmese the bulk of their scientific 
literature. . During the latter half 
of the eighteenth century about 
sixty works were translated from 



the Sanskrit by the great scholar 
Maungdaung-sayadaw and; others, 
and are known as the Byakaraina, 
the first of the series being the 
SarasvaH VydharanOf a weU-known 
Sanskrit grammar. 

'^ In order to deviate the course . 
of harma by artificial means (yatrd 
kaU). The Tatrft practice is common 
in Burma. When a man, for in- 
stance, is very sick and his death is . 
anticipated, his friends and relatives 
try to ward it off by finding a sub- 
stitute in a dummy formed from a 
plantain tree or otherwise, shaped 
as much as possible like a human 
being. The improvised dummy is 
then put into a coffin and aU cus- 
tomary funeral rites are performed 
over it. ' By so doinff, it is believed 
that the sick man^ life will be 
spared. Other practices, similar in 
character, are also resorted to for 
various purposes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



RljANtri. 135 

crooked, dry, and trailing, so should a king, who resembles 
a gardener, ever bear this in mind. 

94-95. 
A gardener should carefully plant a twig that has been 
thrown away; he should break off the flowers in bloom, 
allow the small plants to develop, cause very erect ones 
to bend, those too much inclined to be made more erect ; 
he should remove the bark from trees that are too green; 
a tree being small, he should plant thorny shrubs on the 
outside; he should cherish lovingly one that is in a 
thriving condition : a king, the cherisher of a kingdom, 
should take delight in his realm, just as a good gardener 
takes delight in a garden. 

96. 
The king should have ministers who are nobly descended, 
pure, brave, learned, amicable, and well versed in the NttL^ 

97. 

He is spoken of as a good minister who is learned, 
virtuous, and brave, industrious, accustomed to be vic- 
torious, and powerful, who is not covetous, has an amiable 
appearance, and is perfect in his organs. 

98. 

A king governing a kingdom having deliberated sepa- 
rately with his ministers, should subsequently, after assem- 
bling them, follow a counsel which has been well con- 
sidered.** 

99. 

The king should find out from wise men a thing he 
does not understand; by removing doubt and making 
comparisons by means of his own wisdom, he should 
show the various advantages of his deliberation. 

*s Manu, yil 54 ; EUcjpadeid, iil i& » Manu, vil 57. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



136 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

100. 

The king who always decides well is a perfect ruler; he 
is more powerful than his enemies ; he never suffers ruin. 

IQI. 

One who ministers to a king should prevent him from 
the commission of evil, should advance his prosperity, and 
should not reveal what ought to be concealed ; he should 
show forth his good qualities ; in an emergency he should 
not forsake him; he should, on suitable occasions, give 
him what should be given : the wise say that these are 
the good characteristics of an attendant. 

IQ2. 

The forming of friendship is easy, but difficult it is to 
keep it up ; a wise king should, therefore, contract friend- 
ship with both rich and poor. 

103. 
He should bestow on a friend suitable gifts ; in time of 
adversity he should keep up his friendship; not being 
forgetful of him when occasions of friendship present 
themselves, the king derives extensive benefits. 

104. 

Until a favourable occasion has not arrived, one should 
carry his enemy on his shoulders ; the time having come, 
he should dash him to pieces as ajar on a rock.^ 

105. 

The king who knows the horoscope of a brother king 
and strives to learn his own with reference to his strength 
and merits, he should engage in war ; doing so, he will 
always conquer. 

106. 

He should organise a campaign, having discovered all 
** See stanza 212 of DhammanUL 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



RljANtTI. 137 

favoarable circumstances in connection with himself, tne 
great loss that his epemy is capable of suffering, and the 
weakness of an enemy or of an ally. 

107. 
The constellation being propitious^ by paying honour to 
the Three Batanas^ and bestowing bounties upon the 
soldiery, the fighting becomes effectiye. 

108. 

A king is capable of conquering the whole eart^ if he 
have elephants, horses, and weapons, chariots^ infantry, 
and treasures of every kind. 

109. 
The king being wealthy who exalts and degrades accord- 
ing to people's deserts, he escapes everything — anger, 
anxiety, fear, covetousness, misfortune, and the loss of his 
lands. 

no. 

Therefore with great zeal should a king amass wealth 
by this is his safety secured. 

III. 

He should overcome an enemy by concord, a coward by 
dissension, one avaricious by a gift, a weak person by 
punishment.^ 

112. 

He who, having elephants, horses, wealth, and forces, is 
satisfied, does not engage in war, another subjugates him. 

113. 
Those on the border having raised a rebellion, plunder 

^ Buddha, his law, and the priett' to be uncertaixL By conciliation, by 

hood, bribeSybydiBsensicm — by these means, 

** Hitopadekk, iii. 42, 43, has : either combined or separately, one 

" One should strive to conquer ene- should strive to overcome enemies ; 

mies, not by war, because the vie- never by war.'* See also " Insti- 

tory between two combatants is seen tates of Mann," viL 198-200. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



138 NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

the wealth of the country. One acquainted with the Ntti 
causes them to ceme into his territory. 

114. 
A crow coming at night to an owl's habitation, dies ; an 
owl coming during the day to the crow's, also dies; a 
crocodile dies coming on land, a tiger coming into the 
water. 

IIS. 

Thus a king, not knowing the country and the proper 
time for battle, makes war. He, arriving in the enemy's 
kingdom and being deficient in forces, should bear in 
mind the words of the wise. 

116. 

He should not^ being intoxicated with pride, despise the 
enemy, thinking he will be overcome; he should not relax 
his efforts — he should always be diligent. 

117. 

Verily small enemies'^ are like fire-poison. The ram- 
pant elephant on the difficult mountain paths, although 
he has the strength of ten thousand soldiers, is subdued 
by men : being tied to a post, he rids himself of the tem- 
poral juice. 

118. 

The king should rule, first of all having constructed a 
fort, surrounded it with a rampart, and provided it fully 
with weapons, projectiles, and other munitions of war.^ 

119. 
He should then maintain guards as vigilant as himself, 

'^ " A little fire barns up an en- high nunpMt, having engines, water, 

tire forest by gaining shelter in it" and took, with the protection ol a 

—Mahdbhdraii, I sss^ riyer, a desert, and a forest"— 

^ " He should oonstmot a fort Eiiopadsia, iiL 55. See M€mm, Tii. 

with a great moat, sarxounded by a 70-76 ; Viikjfu, iii. 6. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RAjANtTI. 139 

elephants, horses, physicians, carpenters, Brahmans, and 
learned men. 

120. 

A king desiring to fight with another king should not 
go to war with a soldier who is covetous and evil-minded, 
CQwardly, devoid of strength, and having no virtue. 

121-122. 

Being properly cognisant of the enemy's strength and 
the strength of his own army, the S^mya, Bheda, and 
D&na stratagems, and the circumstances of the country, a 
king should employ the S^mya ^ stratagem against one 
on an equality with himself, the Bheda ^ against a brave 
warrior, and the D^oa stratagem ^^ against one who is 
covetous ; all others he should overcome by fighting.*' 

123. 

Of the six qualities, first of all generosity is termed 
sandhiguna ; not realising its value is termed viggahagurui ; 
the non-possession of both these is dsanaguna; marching 
with all the necessaries of war is ydnaguiia ; going with 
half an army is called dvidhdguna ; having to depend upon 
the enemy is saiigagurj^. 

124. 

The root of the kingly tree is the treasure, the earth is 
the branch. What can a king do without wealth ? He is 
like a bird without wings. 

125. 

As to one desirous of appearing pleasant and beautiful 
the eye is a source of excellence, so should a king by 
watchfulness increase his property, income, carefuhiess, 
and prosperity. 

• Gonciliatioii. ^ By giving money or by bribery. 

^ Creating disseneion (by setting ^ See Mamu, vii 107, 108, 198, 
up some claimant to the throne). 199, 20a 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



I40 NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

126. 

A king keeps watch over his country against thieves, 
favourites, and people of low quality ; he should then keep 
a guard over the revenues of the country : a king should 
keep a careful watch over these four. 

} 127. 
A king in his domain should not exact a tax in excess 
of what is customary ; if he does, there is the dissatisfac- 
tion of the people and the diminution of the treasure. 

128. 

To a king there is a good result if his army is marched 
to battle in autumn or during the rains:** certain wise 
men have said that there cannot always be victory nor 
always defeat.** 

129. 

If there be the destruction of an enemy, it is productive 
of merit: this destruction of the enemy is a source of 
general happiness to the king. 

130. 

If the king's destiny be bad, he should send to the wars 
a minister with good fate for the destruction of the enemy ; 
if good, he should not abandon his own prosperity : when 
an elephant is discovered, what need searching for its foot- 
marks ? 

Men of distinction, although they do not try, obtain 
their wishes promptly when the time arrives, just as boa- 
constrictors without effort come upon the place where 
food is to be obtained. 



^ " Let a king go on an expedi- March), according to his forces.'* — 
tiou in the clear month M&rga9ir8ha Institutes of Manu, viL 182. 
(November), or about the two months ** See note to stanza 3 : "Victory 
Ph&lguna and Caitra (February and between two combatants is seen to 

be uncertain. " 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



RAjANtTI. 141 

132. 
Many people^ although they strive much, are not suc- 
cessful in obtaining unripe fruits placed in an inaccessible 
place ; when the fruit faUs of itself and is got without 
trouble, it is full of juice and is eaten with pleasure. 

133- 

Hearing the admonition of the wise^ paying attention 
to good wQrds, receiving education, retaining knowledge, 
looking on both sides,^ comprehending the meaning, un- 
derstanding its purport — these ate seven characteristics of 
the wise. 

134. 

A rampant elephant, powerful and possessed of noble 
qualities, although alone, destroys a whole army : a king, 
victorious among elephants, is like the driver's hook; 
therefore is he known to be stronger than an elephant. 

13s. 
A wise king should acquire knowledge for the purpose 
of keeping control; he, should practise restraint for vir- 
tue's sake: to attain Kibb&n he should follow the pre- 
cepts, and for almsgiving and personal sustenance he 
should accumulate wealth. 

136. 
. A king who bears in mind this treatise,^ he, by knowing 
the devices for the conquest of enemies and by being free 
ifrom anxiety, overcomes the whole earth and enjoys the 
bliss of heaven. 



^ Behind and before. have prevailed in their court 

^ Burmese kings, as a rule, com- to be influenced by many of the 

mit the whole of this Niti to memory, sentiments which are found in 

and several of the, practices which this treatise. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



( 142 ) 



TV.— THE SUTTAVADDHANANItI} 



I. 

Thb thinking of a bad thought, the uttering of a bad 
speech^ and the doing of a bad deed, — ^tbis is the charac- 
teristic of a fooL 

2. 

The thinking of a good thought, the uttering of a 
good speech, and the doing of a good deed, — this is the 
characteristic of a wise man. 

3. 

Even if there be no one to depend upon, one should 
not depend upon a fool : a fool, indeed, like an enemy 
with a sword in his hand, leads one to destruction. 



If occasion arise, one should depend upon a wise man : 
like a dear, loving relative, a wise man does not lead one 
to destruction. 

5. 
The mango-tree, yielding sweet fruit,* grew bitter once 



^ This anthology was compfled It is » collection of maxima from 

and translated into Burmese by Sad- Buddhistic sources chiefly, 
dbammanandlmahtthera <^ Chaun- * Reference is here made to the 

kauk in Upper Burma. SuUava4' storr of the mango -tree hi the 

4hananUi signifies the '* Guide for Daakivdhom^jdtdha, a fairy tale in 

the Advanoement of Knowledge.*' Jdiaka((hakaikd, il 4. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE SUTTAVADDHANANtTL 



143 



upon a time l>y commingling with useleas plants;' why 
not living beings ? ^ 



' Niniba toidpaggavalli, the useless 
plants which destroyed the mango- 
tree. The story is as follows: — 
"One day while casting nets and 
creels in the river for sport* a celestial 
amba (mango) fraitcomin|f from the 
Kannamnnda lake, stack m the net 
Those who cast the net, when they 
saw it, gave it to the khig. It was 
a large golden ball of the size of a 
bowl. The king asked the fores- 
ters, 'Of whattreeisthisthefmit?' 
Having learned that it was an amba 
fmit, he enjoyed it, planted its stone 
in his ffarden, and oansed it to be 
watered with milk-water. The tree 
having sprang up, bore fruit in the 
third year. Great honour was paid 
to the amba-tree^ They sprinUe it 
with milk-water, they give it five 
fingers full of perfume, thev surround 
it with garlands, they light a lamp 
with pnfumed oiL Its covering, 
furthermore, was of sUk and coarse 
doth. Its fruits were sweet and 
polden. King DadhivAliana, send- 
mg the fruit to other kings, from 
fear that a tree might grow up from 
the stone, sent them after having 
first pierced with a ma^du thorn the 
place where the sprout should spring 
forth. When, after eating the amba, 
they planted the stone, it would not 
thrive. They asking, 'What is the 
reason of it?* learned the cause. 
Then one of the kings called his 
gardener and asked him, ' Wilt thou 
be able to destroy the sweetness of 
King DadhivAhana's amba fruits and 
make them bitter?' and when he 
answered, < Yes, sire 1 * he sent him 
away, after giving him a thousand 
pieces of silver, saying, ' Go, then ! ' 
He went to BM^as! and caused it 
to be reported to the king, 'A 
gardener has come ; * and being sum- 
moned by him, and having entered 
and saluted the king, he was asked, 
'Art thou a f^ardener?' and liaving 
said, 'Yes, sire I ' he enlarged upon 
his ability. The king said, ' Go and 



stay with our gardener.' These two 
persons henceforth tend the garden. 
The newly arrived gardener, causing 
flowers to bloom and fruits to be 
gathered out of season, made the 
garden charming. The king being 
pleased with him, having dischaarged 
the old gardener, gave him the 
charge of the garden. He finding 
the garden in his hands, sowed 
nimbas and raggavallis round the 
amba-tree. Gradually the nimbas 
grew up. Their roots and branches 
were united and variously connected 
together. By this union with what 
was disagreeable and sour, the sweet- 
fruited amba at last beaome bitter, 
with a taste like that of the nimba 
leaf. Having discovered that the 
unba fruits mui become bitter, the 

Srdener ran away. Dadhiv&haaa, 
ving gone into the garden, on 
eating an amba fruit, but not being 
able to get down the juice of the 
amba, which had entered his month, 
because it was like that of the dis- 
gusting nimba, hawked and spat 
At that time BodhisaUa was hia ad- 
monitor. The king having invited 
Bodhisatta, on asking him, *0 
learned man ! of the umuJ care be- 
stowed upon this tree nothing has 
been omitted, still its fruit has be- 
come bitter ; what is the cam of 
this ? ' he recited the first stumk— 

'This amba-tree was formerly en-'> 
dowed with oolonr, smell, and 
flavour; 
Obtaining such a culture. Why 
has this amba bitter fruit? ' 

Then telling him the cause of it, 
Bodhisatta recited the second 
stanza — 



'Thy amba, O Dadhivfthana, is 
surrounded by nimbas ; 

The root of one is united with the 
root of the other. 

The branches of one embrace the 
branches of the other: 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 



NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 



6. 

If one not doing evil associates with one who does^ 
he is suspected of evil and undergoes disgrace.' 



The man who wraps putrid flesh with sacrificial grass ^ 
finds that the grass itself emits a fetid odour; even such 
is the case by association with a fooL 

8. 

The man who wraps the taggara with the paldsa finds 
that the leaves themselves emit a fragrance ; even such 
is the case by association with the learned.^ 



A man deteriorates who associates with one who is 
vile ; associating with an equal ever prevents deteriora- 
tion ; a wise man who associates with one more exalted 
progresses ; serve, therefore, one who is superior to one- 
self. 

10. 

One who seizes the property of another, one who is 



By reason of its connection with 

the bad, 
Therefore the amba has bitter 

fruit:' 

The king, having heard his words, 
caused all the nimbas and paggavallis 
to be cut off and their roots to be 
eradicated, the sour earth entirely to 
be carried away and sweet earth to 
be brought to it, and the aniba to 
be tended with milk-water, sugar- 
water, and fragrant water. By the 
union with sweet juices it again be- 
came sweet** — FauabolVa, " Five 

* " Evil communications corrupt 
good manners." — I Corinthians xv. 



33. A passage in the Mahdbhdrata 
says that a person acquires the char- 
acter of him with whom he associ- 
ates, just as a cloth becomes tinged 
with the dye that is brought into 
contact with it. 

^ A South- Indian proverb says, 
''If you drink milk under a date- 
tree, they will say it is toddy.'* 

• The Poa etfnosuroidet. It is 
frequently referred to as the grass of 
good omen. It was customary for 
Brahmans, before reading the Vedas, 
to sit on the grass and purify both 
hands by rubbing them with it. 
See ** Institutes of Manu,** Bk. ii. 

^ See Lokantti, 4a 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE SUTTAVADDHANANtTI. 145 

hTpocritical, a subservient friend, a friend who brings 
destruction, — one should shun these four. 



II. 

A friend who supports you, who is alike in adversity 
or prosperity, who speaks about your welfare, and one 
who is compassionate, — one should associate with these 
four. 

12. 

A wise man does not utter any and everjrthing that 
rises to his lips, as if the mouth were for the purpose alone 
ot eating and of talking. 

13. 

A wise man should give utterance to speech of four 
kinds, — good speech, right speech, loving speech, and 
truthfal speech. 

14. 

One should speak refined language ; for civilised people 
make use of suitable speech, saying *' Brother" to him 
who is like a brother, and " Father " to one who is like a 
father. 

IS. 

One should give expression to what is pleasant, not, 
indeed, to what is bad: giving expression to what is 
pleasant is good; a person grieves giving utterance to 
what is bad. 

16. 

One ought to speak what is pleasant ; never should he 
speak what is unpleasant: unpleasant utterances are 
harsh even to brutes. 

K 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



146 



NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 



17- 

Indeed, in fonner times, the ox Nandivis&la overcame 
by a thousand the Brahman who spoke in a displeasing 
way.® 

18. 

Ignorance is displeasing ; a man, verily, of little know- 
ledge does not really know what should or should not be 
spoken. 

i9-2a 

In former times, a Brahman, on one of his two oxen 
djring, having learnt repeatedly during one year the way 
of making a request, on his having to ask the king, 
" Give me one ox," spoke differently, saying, ** Take one.'* * 

21. 

It is said, besides, that a fool, from ignorance, is afiraid 
of what does not occasion fear : a worm and also a jay, a 
heron and Dhammika Brahman ^^ — ^these, who comprise 



* GoUm» in m previoiiB exittenoe 
was m baU known as Nandivis&la. 
He came into the poeseedon of a 
Brahman, and, in order to do his 
master m kindness, he one day 
asked him to make a bet of a thou- 
sand that his bnU would move a 
hundred carts weU laden. The bet 
was made with a squire. A hun- 
dred carts were laden with sand, 
stones, &a When Nandivis&lA was 
yoked to the foremost cart, he was 
ruged on by the Brahman with 
shouts of "brute" and "wretch." 
This made him stubborn, and he 
would not move an inch. The 
Brahman lost lus bet, but when he 
came to know that it was on account 
of the harsh language he employed, 
he conmienced to speak to the 
animal in sweeter tones. At the 
instance of the bull, he then laid » 
wager of two thoasand. A hundred 



carts were laden as before, and 
Nandivis&Ia was yoked to the fore- 
most When he was urged on this 
time, his master used the expressions, 
*'Go on, my beauty," "Drag them, 
my beauty ; " and so giving a vigo- 
rous pull, he won the wager. See 
Jdtaha, Bk. L 28. 

* The reference here is to the 
story of L&ludayi, the simpleton, to 
be found in the SomadaUa Jduiha. 
The moral of the legend is that no 
amount of training will make up for 
a want of brains. Lftludayi was for 
one year taught by his father how 
to ask for an ox from the king, yet, 
when he went to make the request, 
he lost his presence of mind, and 
spoke in a contrary way. See 
Jdtaka, Bk. iL 7. 

^^ Dhammika Brahman was m 
heretical teacher, to whom reference 
is often made in Buddhist writings. 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE SUTTAVADDHANANtTI. 



147 



the four foolish beings, fear what they should not be 
afraid o£ 

22. 

The fourteenth day of the dark half of a month, a 
dense forest, an overclouded sky, and midnight — ^these 
are the four kinds of darkness : darkness, however great 
each of these is, an ignorant man is darker stili.^^ 

23- 

An ignorant man does not free himself from suffering, 
being like a log in (the ocean of) transmigration ; there- 
fore two kinds of worldlings have been spoken of by 
Gotama, the kinsman of the sun, — one a worldling who 
is blind, and the other a worldling who is irUelligent. 



24. 

By the eye of " mental clearness " ^ one sees an object 
to be plain and unconcealed — he sees nothing else ; by 
the eye of knowledge he sees everything without doubt. 

25. 

It is true that an officer, going in search of gain, saved 
from suffering a Brahman who was returning (home), 
having known, by his wisdom, that a snake, from the 
smell of flour-cake, had entered into the (alms), bag (of 
the Brahman). 



^ Such a person is very often com- 
piured to an eclipse caused by lUhu. 
The latter, in ancient mythology, is 
represented as a demon who drank 
purt of the nectar obtained by 
churning the ocean. The sun and 
moon having revealed the droum- 



stance, Vishnu severed his head and 
throat from the rest of his body. 
He is supposed to wreak vengeance 
upon them by periodically swallow- 
ing them up. See DkammanUif 
stanza 35 1* 
^ PasAdacakkhunft. 



Digitized by 



Google 



148 NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

26. 

Of the four lights — the lights of wisdom, the sun, the 
moon, and fire — the light of wisdom is, in point of 
power, the greatest, as declared by the most exalted 
Buddha. 

27. 

There are four kinds of "Buddhas," namely, the 
omniscient "Buddha," the secondary^* "Buddha," the 
"Buddha" acquainted with the four truths,^^ and the 
"Buddha" who is full of learning: a man who is full 
of knowledge is also a " Buddha." 

28. 

Knowledge is an excellent thing, and so is wisdom ; 
the virtues are seven (in number) — faith, religious prac- 
tice, knowledge, liberality, wisdom, modesty, and fear of 
sin. 

29. 

The seven good things also are faith, modesty, fear of 
sinning, great knowledge, energy, caution, and wisdom. 

30. 

These are said to be the seven gems — ^gold, silver, pearl, 
sapphire, cat's-eye, diamond, and coraL 

31. 

They say that the ten precious things are silver, gold, 
ruby, &c., cat's-eye, pearl, oyster-shell, coral, crystal, and 

^^ Or Faccekabuddha. end to by the destraction of passion ; 

^^ The Cattdri ariyasaccdni, or and (4) a life of holiness leads to the 

"Four Truths," which form the destruction of passion. Each of these 

basis of the Buddhist religion, are : is capable of comprehensive appli- 

( I ) Existence is suffering ; (2) human cations, and is made the foundation 

passion is the cause of human suf- of a great deal of doctrinal discus- 

fering ; (3) existence may be put an sion. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE SUTTA VADDHANANtTI. 149 

the variegated rabies (ijb.^ the spotted ruby and the red 
ruby)* 

32. 

The learned declare that as the moon is. more excellent 
than all the heavenly bodies, even so is wisdom (than 
all other acquirements); virtuous practice, glory, and 
goodness follow ^^ in the wake of those who are wise. 

33. 

Even if, during his whole lifetime, a foolish man 
attends upon one who is learned, he knows not his duty, 
just as a ^wooden) spoon perceives not the flavour of the 
cuny gravy. 

34. 

But if a wise man attend upon a wise man only for a 
moment^ he soon knows his duty, as the tongue the flavour 
of the cuiry gravy. 

35. 

Eight things have been declared by Buddha, the relative 
of the sun, to be inconsistent with the hearing of the True 
Law, namely, a foreign country, existence in the formless 
stated'' existence in the %mc(yfisci(ms state, defective members 
(of the body), false doctrine, being a brute, being a spirit, 
and existence in helL 

36-37. 

Greneral knowledge, the knowledge of the Dhammathats, 
arithmetic, architecture, knowledge of the Nlti, knowledge 
of the Yy&karana, music and poetry, calculation by the 
fingers, the use of bows and arrows, the Pur&nas, medical 

M Just like the stars accompany of the Buddhistic subdivisions of the 
the moon. world of sentient beings. 

^ That is, in the ArCLpakiha, one 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



ISO NtTI LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

knowledge, the knowledge of the Itihftsas, astrology, the 
art of circmnventing, versification, diplomacy, knowledge 
of spells, and grammar — ^these are the eighteen arts and 
sciences.^^ 

38. 

A wise man should not despise as trifling these fonr — 
a nobleman, a snake, fire, and a priest 

39. 

Besides the three kinds of sons, viz., those who are 
superior to, those who are inferior to, and those who are 
on an equality with (their fathers), there are besides 
four others — adopted sons, sons begotten of slaves. In- 
timate sons, and pupils. 

40. 

A son should act towards his parents in five things — 
supporting them, doing their work, maintaining the family, 
hearing (parental) admonitions, and making offerings to 
his parents when they die. 

41. 

They — the parents — ^should attend to their sons in 
these five matters, viz., preventing them from doing what 
is bad, encouragement in doing what is good, giving in- 
struction, contracting of a proper marriage, and bestowing 
the inheritance (when the time arrives). 



^ See notes on corretponding maoy." The Burmese rendering of 

verses in LohanUi and DhammanUi, these two stanzas in the SuUava4' 

Hetu, which Trenckner, in his Mo' dhanantU is sli^tly diffelrent, id- 

lifidapa^, renders doubtfully as though a little more explicit, than 

*' logic,*' is, in the Bnrmese ^oss, what is found in the other NUU, 

expllhhied by " knowledge reganiing Muddd vacanena of Trenckner is 

embassies," an idea somewhat akin given as Buddkaraeanena in the 

to what is expressed by "diplo- iwcmeae editUm ai MUindegpaliko, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE SUTTAVADDHANANtri. 151 

42. 

A pupil should act towards teachers in these five 
things — ^attending upon them, looking after them, hearing 
their discourses, feeding them, and receiving instruction 
properly from them. 

43. 

They — ^the teachers — should pay attention to the pupil 
in these five points — complimenting him, allowing him 
instruction, admonishing him, training him, and giving 
him protection. 

44. 

A husband should act in five matters towards his wife 
— speaking sweetly to her, not despising her, not taking 
another wife, allowing her control (in cooking, &c.), and 
supplying her wants. 

45. 

The duty of a wife towards a husband should be 
observed in five matters — punctualit]^, entertaining (rela- 
tives, &C.), not taking another husband, protecting the 
property, and being skilful and assiduous. 

46. 

In five things should a person pay r^ard to friends 
— loving speech, liberality, looking after their interests, 
seeking their prosperity, considering them like himself. 

47. 

A Mend should pay regard to individuals in five 
things — seeing that they are not remiss, looking after 
their property, affording protection in danger, not aban- 
doning them, and ofiering them presents, &c. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



152 NtTI LITERATURE OF BURMA. 

48. 

A master should pay attention to his servant in five 
things — allowing him to work up to his abilities, sup- 
porting him, looking after him, giving gifts, and giving 
leave. 

49. 

A servant should do his duty towards his master in 
five things — working well, showing gratitude, sleeping 
after his master, rising before him, and taking what is 
given him. 

50. 

An individual should act in five things towards priests, 
viz., liberality, almsgiving, regard for his person, regard 
for his speech, and regard for his inward feelings. 

51. 

Priests should have regard to individuals in six things 
— preventing evil, encouraging good, wishing for the wel- 
fare of others, giving instruction, making them cautious 
in accepting a belief, and telling them of the sixfold 
heavenly path.^* 

52. 

Friendship with women and with wicked men is not 
befitting; association with poison, a homed animal, a 
river, disease, and a royal family is not good.^ 



^ That is, the path leading to the ^ Mitraldbha, 18, has : *'Goiifi- 

six Devalokas or angel worlds. For dence should never be placed in 

the various duties contained in stanzas rivers, in those holding weapons, 

40-5 1| see Sigdlovdda SuUa (Grim- in those with claws and horns, in 

blot's "Sept Suttas P&lis"), sum- women, and in kings' families." 
marised in Rhys David's "Bud- 
dhism," p. 143. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE SUTTAVADDHANANtri. 



153 



53. 

All good and bad men are distinguished even by tbeir 
attributes ; in the eyes of those wanting in discrimination 
no difference is seen. 

54. 

Seven times is the destruction by fire for one by 
water ; on the sixty-fourth occasion the time for destruc- 
tion by air arrives.^ 

55. 

'Destruction by fire is below the Abhassara heaven, by 
water below the Subhakinha; destruction by air below 



" The Buddhistic doctrine of the 
world's destmction and reproduction 
is peculiar. The moral causes which 
destroy the world are lust, anger, 
and ignorance, and the physical 
forces they give rise to in bringing 
about the result are fire, w^ter, and 
wind. Intimation is given of the 
approaching dissolution a hundred 
thousand years before the event by 
angels from one or other of the De- 
valokas. At the same time they urge 
upon mankind to practise virtue and 
do such deeds as will ensure their 
safety in the Rupa and Arupa 
worlds, which will not be involved 
in the destruction of the earth. 
When destruction by fire is to take 
place, all plants and vegetables will 



perish from drought, the sun and 
moon wiU cease to shine, other suns 
will make their appearance and dry 
up everything. Wlien the sixth sun 
appears, some millions of islands will 
open and send forth smoke and 
flames. Eventually Mount Meru, 
with all the deva worlds, will be 
consumed. The fire will cease only 
when all matter is completely de- 
voured by the flames. Periodically, 
heavy and continuous showers of rain 
will fall and destroy the world, and 
the destruction may also be brought 
about by wind according to a certain 
routine. After the destruction of 
the world takes place sixty-four 
times, the series will begin again. 
The following is the general plan : — 



I. 11. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. 

Destruction by fire, 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 = 56] 
Destruction by water, i+i + i + i + i + i + i = y \ =z 64. times. 
Destruction by wind, 1=1; 



For every seven times the world is 
destroyed by fire, destruction by 
water takes place once until the 
eighth occasion of the destruction 
by fire occurs. It is then destroyed 
by wind. For details regarding the 



periodic destruction and renovation 
of the world, see Hardy's " Manual 
of Buddhism," i. 12; Bigandet's 
**The Legend of the Burmese Bud- 
dha," vol. i. p. 22 ; and Sangermano's 
** Burmese Empire," v. 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 Ntri LITERATURE OP BURMA. 

the Vehapphala heaven : ^ thus is the destruction of the 
world 

56. 

One part should be used in enjojrment^ two parts in 
business, a fourth should be put bj; it will answer for 
emergencies. 

57. 

Benefits slip by from those idlers who abandon their 
work, saving, " Now it is hot," " Now it is cold," " Now 
it is very dark." 

58. 

He who, attending to his avocations, looks upon heat 
and cold as of no greater consequence than grass, he does 
not diminish his prosperity. 

59. 

Patience, watchfulness, industry, distributing money, 
compassion, precaution — ^these are the qualities of a 
leader; they should be desired by one wishing for his 
own welfare. 

60. 

NoticiAg the diminution of collyrium, the increase of 
ant-hills, and the accumulation of honey, a wise man 
should accordingly look after his house.^ 

61. 

Charity, good behaviour, amiable speech, unselfishness — 
these by the chief sage have been declared the " elements 
of popularity." ** 



** The ooemical limits of the de- Destruction by water reaches the 

struction by fire, water, and air are hiffhest 

here given. The three heavens ** Compare JffUopadeia, ii 8, 9. 
named belong to the Brahmaloka. ** See bkammanUi, 267. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE SUTTA VADDHANANtTI. 1 55 

62. 

Charity, Yirtae, liberality, lectitade, gentleness, demo- 
tion, good temper, humanity, patience, unobstmctiyeness — 
these, the ten duties of a king, should be obseryed without 
n^lect^ 

63. 

A wise man, full of discrimination, brings about his 
benefit by a small means, just as a small fire bj blowing 
(causes a great conflagration). 

64. 

A wife who does not commit violence, one who is likle 
a thief, one who makes herself like the master, one like a 
mother one like a sister, one like a slave, and the wife 
like a ^.iend — these are said to be the seven kinds of 
wives.* 

65. 

A female at eight i» termed "Qoti" or ""DftrikA;" one at 
the age of twelve, or one jet a virgin, is called " KbMjL" 

66. 

A female at twelve is called ** £um&rl " or " Kum&rik&;" 
one older than that " Yuvatl ** or '' Tarunl/' 



67. 

A woman who is old is called "Thert" or " MahallikA ; *' 
this method of naming should be duly observed. 



* See lUim 266 of DkammanMi. "BiantuJ of BiidcDiifm,''z. 1 7, or Jftr- 

» SuUapitaktuk (Sigftlovftd* Sat- dine'i *• Notet on Buddhirt Iaw," iiL 

to). For explaiuktioii of the varioog 18. 

tenm nsed in thk itaiiiftk lee HMdy*! 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



1 56 Ntri LITBRA TURE OF B URMA . 

68. 

A woman like a murderer, one like a thief, one like a 
master — these are said to be bad wives: one like a 
mother, one like a sister, one like a slave, and one like 
a friend — these four are said to be good wives. 

69. 

One guarded by a mother, one guarded by a father, 
one guarded by both father and mother, one guarded by 
a brother, one guarded by a sister, one guarded by rela- 
tives, one guarded by one of the same clan, one guarded 
by the scriptures, one guarded by one betrothed, and one 
who is punished for her falling away — ^these are ten 
kinds of women with whom no liberty should be taken. 

70. 

One who marries of her own wish, one obtained by the 
bestowal of property, and one got by giving apparel, a 
wife who undergoes the water ordeal,^^ who is procured 
while carrying a load,^ a slave, a wife who works as a 
servant, a captive woman, a temporary wife, and one 
bought by moiiey — no liberty should be taken with 
these ten also. 

71. 

He who through love, hate, fear, or ignorance trans- 
gresses what is right, his prosperity declines just like 
the moon at the time of its waning. 



^ OdapaUaJd, The symbolic prac- '^ Oropacumpatd. Cumpataih (or 

tice of placing the hands in a bowl of rather cumbaftMh) is the circular roll 

water is referred to. As the particles of cloth used as a stand for a vessel 

of water adhere to each other, so or heavy weight carried on the head, 

should the union between husband Vide Jardine's " Notes on Buddhist 

and wife be permanent. Law,*' iiL 16. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE SUTTAVADDHANANtri. 



157 



72. 

He who does not transgress what is right, whether 
through love or hate, or fear or ignorance, his prosperity 
increases like the moon at the time of its waning. 

73. 

Parents are spoken of as the east, teachers as the 
south, wives as the west, and friends as the north ; slaves 
and servants are like the nadir ; Babans and Brahmans 
like the zenith.*^ 



^ The author of this anthology 
doses with three stanzas having re- 
ference to himself. They are : — 

(a.) ** By this my merit (in writing 
this NUi) may I attain Nibbftn; 
nntil then, may I always, in all my 
existences, be replete with the four 
BampaUit, four eakkas, and seven 
tudhammas,** Note — 

(I.) The four aampaUii are, ''Kdla, 
g<ai, upddhi, payogaJ* 

(2.) The four ceUcka$ are, ''Living 
in a suitable place, association with 
good men, right self-regulation, and 



the performance of good works in a 
former existence." 

(3.) The seven tudhammas are, 
*' Faith, modesty, fear of sinning, 
learning, energy, intelligence, and 
wisdom." 

(b.) ** May I be bom in a family 
altogether pure and honoured, es- 
teemed and exalted, of a good faith 
and replete with wealth." 

(e.) " May I obtain food, clothing, 
and wealth, not by manual labour, 
but my supernatural power, accord- 
ing to my desires." 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



APPENDIX. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



APPENDIX 



IL.—OLD INDIAN SAYINGS. 



[The following collection, as bearing upon parallel pas- 
sages found in Burmese literature, was made a few years 
ago, and comprises only those maxims or sentiments 
which, by their pointedness or by their happiness of ex- 
pression, seemed deserving of being put together as pearls 
upon a single thread.] 

I. 

Better one accomplished son than a hundred fools : one 
moon can dispel darkness; not so a myriad stars. 

2. 

As from a lump of clay a workman produces whatever he 
wishes^ so a man obtains the destiny prepared by himsell 

3. 
Deeds are accomplished by effort, not wishes : deer, 
verily, do not enter into the mouth of a sleeping lion. 

4- 
So long as a fool is well-dressed and speaks nothing, 
even so long does he shine in an assembly. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



i62 APPENDIX. 

5. 
Glass by association with gold acquires an emerald 
lustre ; bj association with the good a fool becomes wise. 

6. 

Labour bestowed on the worthless is vain: even by a 
hundred efforts a crow cannot be made to talk like a 
parrot. 

7. 
As a river takes a brook to the sea, so does knowledge 
take a man to a king. 

8. 

As the heavens acquire light from the moon, so does 
a family from a wise son. 

9- 
Whosoever^s name is not written with the pen in the 
enumeration of those who are learned, his mother is called 
barren ; and those who have not obtained praise in charity 
and penance, in valour, science, and the acquisition of 
property, their mothers have no pleasure in them — they 
have only obtained the pain of giving them birth. 

10. 

Better silence far than speaking ; 

Worse are kinsmen oft than fire ; 
There's no balm like friendly counsel. 

There's no enemy like ire. 
Eogues have keener teeth than vipers ; 

Brains outweigh the miser's hoard ; 
Better modesty than jewels. 

Tuneful lyre than kingly sword.^ 

^ Tftwney's Bhartrihari's NUitatakairh. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



APPENDIX. 163 

II. 

Wide is the difference between the body and the virtues 
of heart ; the one lasts for a season, the other endures for 
eternity. 

12. 

Where a wise man is not to be found, there even one of 
little sense is commended : in a country devoid of largQ 
trees the castor-oil plant is accounted one. 

13. 
In misfortunes we know a friend, in battle a hero, an 
honest man in debt a wife when fortunes disappear. 

14. 

The time of the wise passes away in the enjoyment 
of poetry and the sciences ; that of fools, in vice, sleep, 
and quarreL 

15- 
Avoid him who injures you in your absence and speaks 
sweetly in your presence: he is a bowl of poison with 
milk on the surface. 

16. 

Better be dashed to pieces on a rock, better insert the 
hand between the fangs of a poisonous snake, better fall 
into a fiery furnace, than ruin one's character by stains of 
infamy. 

17. 

When night comes, fear is at the threshold ; at break of 
day it flies to the hills. 

18. 

The poison-nut and bitter margosa are useful as medi- 
cines ; the unfeeling wretch is utterly unprofitable. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



i64 APPENDIX. 

19. • 
Long are the anns of a learned man. 

20. 

Cowards sink from toil and peril. 
Vulgar souls attempt and fail ; 

Men of metal, nothing daunted, 
Persevere till they prevail 

21. 

As the sun in the east dispels the gloom of night, so 
can books dispel ignorance. 

22. 

Companionship with the base leads to vice : rivers of 
sweet water become undrinkable when they join the sea. 

23. 
Impossible is it for those consumed by desire to gain 
repose, as it is for two pieces of green wood to burn when 
rubbed in water. 

24. 

Beason is carried away under the influence of passion, 
just as a ship in a stormy sea. 

25. 
A bear's skin washed becomes not white: a wooden 
image, if beaten, does not acquire excellence. 

26. 

Treating an evil-doer kindly is like painting a picture 
on water ; no one ploughs the air nor bathes the wind. 

27. 

A dog's tail cannot be made straight; a stubborn 
woman cannot be reformed. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



APPENDIX. 165 

• 28. 

Will white ashes remove the smell of the wine-pot ? 
Will a cord put on the neck make one twice-bom ? 

29. 

The eyeball is large ; the pupil, througn which we see, 
is small. 

30. 
Trees are bowed down with weight of fruit, 

Clouds big with rain hang low ; 
So good men humbly bear success. 

Nor overweening grow. 

31. 
A small deed honestly performed is a work of great merit: 
a small seed may grow into an extensive banyan tree. 

32. 
A scorpion's poison is in its tail, a fly's in its head ; the 
poison of a snake is in its fangs ; a bad man is poisonous 
altogether. 

33. 
The philosopher's stone in a fool's hand would vanish 
as fast as hailstones that come with the rain. 

34- 
What use of an eloquent man where there are no hearers ? 
What use of a washerman in a country of naked beggars ? 

35. 
Act in time : wait not to repair the tank after the water 
has escaped. 

36. 
As gems on a string, so on God is the whole universe 
woven. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



i66 APPENDIX. 

37- 
Science is a couch for the wise ; reclining on it they 
feel no fatigue. 

38. 

A man of feeble character is like a reed shaken by the 
wind. 

39. 
Wealth without liberality is like riches still buried in 
the earth. 

40. 

Here, in this world, love's only fruit is won 
When two true hearts are blended into one ; 
But when by disagreement love is blighted, 
'Twere better that two corpses were united.^ 

41. 

The washerman beats the cloth to remove the stains : a 
teacher chastises to make his pupil good. 

42. 

A crocodile in water can destroy an elephant; out of 
the stream it is overcome by a dog. 

43. 
Sust makes iron soft; the soul is softened by griefl 

44. 
The friendship of the bad is like the shadow of a preci- 
pitous bank, ready to crush him who sits beneath. 

45. 
Where frogs are the croakers, their silence is becoming. 

^ Monier Williams* iraiiBUtion of & passage of Bhartrihari 



Digitized by 



Google 



APPENDIX. 167 

46. 

Grood people are like the cocoanut; the bad, like the 
jujube, charming only in the exterior. 

47. 
Unpleasant speech is often salutary: drops of bitter 
medicine produce a beneficial effect. 

48. 

Friendship with the good is permanent: even when 
broken, the fibres of the lotus-stalks are connected. 

49. 
As the spokes of a wheel are attached to the nave, so 
are all things attached to life. 

50. 

The good man, like a bounding ball, 
Springs ever upward from his fall ; 
ThQ wicked falls like lumps of clay. 
And crumbles into dust away. 

51- 
Let a man act so by day that he may live happily by night. 

52. 

He by whom swans are made white, and parrots green, 
and peacocks variegated in hue, he will provide thy sus- 
tenance. 

53. 
When men are ripe for slaughter, even straws turn into 
thunderbolts. 

54- 
The tempest does not uproot tender grasses : great men 
expend their valour on the great 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



i68 APPENDIX. 

55. 
The streams of rivers flow on and return not; so day 
and night take with them the. life of mortals. 

$6, 
As a man extracts gold from stones, let him also receive 
what is valuable from all quarters — ^f rom a raving mad- 
man or a chattering fooL 

57. 
For a man of energy Meru is not too high to be ascended, 
nor the ocean too extensive to be crossed. 

58. 

Show compassion to all: the moon withholds not its 
light from the house of a Ch&n4&la. 

59. 
There should be no companionship with a wicked man : 
charcoal, when hot, burns ; when cold, it blackens the hand. 

60. 

Treachery is of crimes the blackest. 

Avarice is a world of vice; 
Truth is nobler far than penance. 

Purity than sacrifice. 

61. 

Companionship with the bad is easily severed ; the good, 
like vessels of gold, are hard to break and easily united. 

62. 

Better a forest haunted by tigers and elephants, trees 
for shelter, ripe fruits and water for food, grass for a bed, 
bark for clothing, but not deprived of wealth living among 
relatives. 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



APPENDIX. 169 

63. 
AfiQiction is the touchstone of friendship. 

64. 

An elephant maj be stopped by a kick ; for the head^ 
strong there is no remedy. 

65. 
As a showman displays his pnppets while he himself 
remains concealed, so God governs mankind unseen by 
them. 

66. 

The weak should ally themselves with the strong: a 
rivulet reaches the sea by the river's aid. 

67. 

The sky seems as if limited and a firefly looks like fire, 
but the one has no bounds and the other no fire. 

68. 

Let a sinner listen to the Scriptures, he will not relin- 
quish his vile nature : though a coal be washed in milk, 
its blackness does not disappear. 

69. 
Fire bums without speaking ; the sun shines silently ; 
silently the earth supports all creatures, moving and sta- 
tionary. 

70. 

To a man of weak intellect the death of a friend is a 
thorn in his heart ; to the wise man it is as extracted, for 
death is the gateway of happiness. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



I70 APPENDIX. 

71- 

A man is only half until he finds a wife : a childless 
house is like a cemetery^ 

72. 

A house without a wife is like a desert; she is the 
best physician for many a su£fering. 

73. 
A tranquil lake conceals an alligator: anger is often 
hidden under an appearance of joy 

74- 
No honey without a sting ; no rose without a thorn. 

75. 
The man of means is eloquent, 

Brave, handsome, noble, wise ; 
All qualities with gold are sent, 

And vanish when it flies. 

76. 

The desires of the heart are insatiable; those of the 
stomach may be soon gratified. 

77- 

What use is knowledge to a senseless man ? of what 
use a mirror to one without eyes ? 

78. 

A shepherd guards his flock with a staff: Gk>d, by 
correction, protects mankind. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



APPENDIX. 171 

79. 

One dry tree by friction destroys a whole forest; one 
vile man ruins the whole family. 

80. 

Anoint an ass and he feels not your kindness ; he turns 
upon you and kicks you. 

81. 

Mortals possess no goods of their own, but we hold as 
stewards things which belong to the gods: when they 
require them, they take them away again. 

82. 

The learning of men is from books; women obtain 
theirs from nature. 

83- 
Amass that wealth which has nothing to fear from 
kings or thieves, and which will desert thee not at the 
hour of death. 

84. 
Better a woman blind than one too beautif a1. 

85. 

Give women food, dress, gems, and all that's nice. 
But tell them not your plans, if you are wise : 
If you have aught to do, and want to do it. 
Don't ask a woman's counsel, or you'll rue it. 

86. 

A mean person, though rich, may be utterly despised : 
can a dog with a golden collar attain the dignity of a lion ? 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



172 APPENDIX. 

87. 
Books are endless, time is short : let a man, therefore, 
extract the substance, just as a swan extracts the milk 
which is mixed with water. 

88. 
Itectar becomes poison if kept too long. 

89. 

To obtain merit is like rolling a stone up a hill ; to fall 
into evil, like rolling it down a mountain-side. 

90. 

The repetition of idle words becomes an ox : it is like 
chewing the cud. 

91- 
A Brahman can make what is not divine divine, and 
what is divine not divine. 

92. 

A hungry snake devours its own eggs : a woman pinched 
by hunger may desert her own child. 

93- 
The winkings of men's eyes are numbered all by him : ^ 
he wields the universe as gamesters handle dice. 

94. 

Time, like a brilliant steed with seven rays. 
And with a thousand eyes, imperishable, 
Full of fecundity, bears all things onward.' 

* Vftnum. 
' Monier WUliMm' rendering of & passage from the Atharvaveda, 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



APPENDIX. 173 

95. 
I'd sooner live in mountain caves 

With lions, bears, and apes, 
Than dwell in Indra's heavenly halls 

With brainless human shapes.^ 

96. 
To argue with a fool is as if to bring the dead to life. 

97. 
A moth is caught by glare, a fish by a bait ; a man is 
ensnared by desire. 

98. 
Truth is weightier than sacrifice. 

99. 

Wealth i» a great perverter. 

ICX). 

The society of the good is a medicine. 

lOI. 

Be generous : the tree does not refuse its shadow to the 
man who cuts it with his axe. 

T02. 

Have not too many enemies : a fierce serpent may be 
killed by a swarm of insects. 

103. 

Poisonous trees, though watered with nectar, do not pro- 
duce wholesome fruits. 

* Tftwney's Two Centuries of Bhatirtharu 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



174 APPENDIX. 

104* 

As wood is consumed by the fire to which it gives rise, 
so a foolish man is rained by his own greed. 

105. 
Thou canst not gather what thou dost not sow ; 
As thou dost plant the tree, so will it grow. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



APPENDIX. 



I7S 



B.^^ORRESPONDING STANZAS IN 
THE NITIS. 



DkammantU. 


«-. 


Dkamwuipada. 


Jt4i<MtiUi. 


auUavad- 


SUnxa 


Stum 


Stansa 


SUiisa 


Stum 


7 


8 








... 


8 


so 








... 


9 


148 








... 


lO 


147 








... 


II 


10 








36 


13 


II 








37 


13 


3 








... 


14 


4 








... 


i6 


17 








... 


17 


36 








... 


t8 


18 








• •• 


33 


33 








... 


as 


31 








••• 


36 


143 


• *. 






... 


30 


39 








... 


3a 


77 








... 


43 


13 








... 


Sa 


38 








••» 


58 


... 


152 






••• 


6S 


48 








<•• 


66 


93 








•• • 


73 










38 


73 


95 








... 


78 


114 








... 


79 


"S.159 








... 


83 


160 








... 


8S 


138 








... 


86 


89 








... 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



176 



APPENDIX. 





Lo»ia»M. 




Jt4itu^UL 


8uUava4- 


Stuu 


StMua 


SUiisa 


StMin 


Stansa 


87 


80 


... 


... 


• •• 


88 


"5 


... 










91 


134 


... 










94 


92 


... 










95 


92 


... 










98 


78 


... 










103 


163 


... 










107 


79 


... 










108 


88 


... 










"3 


31 


... 










"4 


43 


... 










117 


128 


... 










126 


69 


... 










129 


... 


... 






7 


133 


25 


64 






33 


134 


55 


... 






... 


13s 


34 


... 








... 


136 


33 










... 


137 


73 


... 








... 


U3 


44- 


... 








... 


144 


40 


... 








... 


147 


26 


65 








J4 


149 


119 


... 








... 


154 


108 


••• 








... 


»55 


106 


... 








• .. 


156 


106 


.•• 








... 


164 


162 


... 








>.• 


166 


105 










... 


175 


59 


77 








... 


179 


127 


... 








... 


182 


• •• 


... 








So 


183 


124 


... 








• • 


184 


"3 


... 








.. 


i8s 


83 


... 








.. 


»93 


... 


... 


61 




!•• 


194 


...• 


... 


59 




... 


198 


... 


60 


• •• 




... 


199 


... 


... 


• .• 




58 


200 


161 


• .• 


... 




... 


201 


146 


... 




... 




... 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



APPENDIX. 



177 



DhammmOti. 


LokaiMi. 




Il4ja»im. 


4htmanUi. 


SUon 


Staan 


stanza 


Stanza 


Stanza 


aos 


157 








... 


309 


136 












312 


86 






104 






213 


90 












"5 


9 












317 


133 












219 


132 












2 30 


117 












223 


60 






Illy 112 






224 


76 












226 


140 












337 


... 












329 


84 












330 


91 












332 


37 












234 


87 












235 


47 












343 


27 












346 


52 












247 


53 












350 


M 












251 


63 












252 


83 












256 


94 












257 


96 












258 


I03 












261 


•15 












263 










62 


264 


• •• 








61 


266 


120 








• •• 


269 


164 










>•• 


280 


129 










>•• 


288 


13s 












294 


137 












29s 


136 












322 


30 












326 


142 












328 


144 












334 


45 












335 


45 













Digitized byVjOOQlC 



178 



APPENDIX. 





XoioMtti. 




B4ia9^fU, 


8uUava4' 
4hamanlUi. 


SUan 


Stann 


Stonm 


Stanza 


Staasa 


339 


SI 


... 






... 


342 


63 


•• • 






... 


348 


75 


... 






... 


3S' 


35 


• . • 






... 


355 


• •• 


201 or 203 






••• 


35« 


7 


... 






... 


360 


99 


... 






••• 


361 


13 


... 






••• 


363 


54 


... 






... 


366 


24 


... 






59 


368 


23 


... 








373 


97 


... 






... 


374 


... 


240 or 242 






... 


394 




... 






63 


406 


... 


3S« or 354 








407 


... 


325 or 327 






... 


408 


4« 


... 






... 



Digitized by 



Google 



iiiiiiliiliinii 



3 9015 02467 0427 

APPENDIX. 179 



C— CORRESPONDING STANZAS IN THE 
DHAMMANtTI. 



The following stanzas of the Dharnmaniti are similar — 
28 and 385 
48 „ ^^2 

69 » 303 
»8i „ 313 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 



DATE DUE 



^ 




Digitized byVjOOQlC 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



/ 



11 



Digitized by 



GOOQ 



