VOLUME I _ PART I 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY. OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


BEING 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


This is the complete series of 7 books, 
with Pali transliteration and English 


translation. | Edited by 
TAW SEIN KO, C.LE., 1.8.0. 


Superintendent, Archaeological sneer: | Burma Circle - 
AND 


CHAS. DUROISELLE 
Asst. ieeehaceigpel Supdt. for Epigraphy, Burnla Circle 


ASIA COLLECTION 
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI LIBRARY 


RANGOON 
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 


(ep oI 


PREFACE 


T had at first been intended. to publish epigraphs found in Burma in 
the Epigraphia Indica; several considerations went against this 
course, the principal of which being the desirability of keeping together 
all the epigraphical documents found in this proviace. These documents, 
with very rare exceptions, bear on the political, religious and cultural 
development of Burma as a whole, whatever the language in which they 
are composed, and will therefore present greater facility for research 
and study in things Burmese, when published. together in a series of 
volumes, than if they were scattered among other epigraphs of totally 
different character in the pages of another publication. This was the 
leading idea in the genesis of the Epigraphia Birmanica. 
The material is abundant, Burma being one of the richest countries 
of Indo-China in lithic and other inscriptions. There is already a 
collection of six large volumes, Elephant size, of inscriptions transcribed 
in modern Burmese characters; and there is sufficient material for a 
seventh; these do not include the Talaing and Pyu inscriptions. And 
yet, all the Divisions of this province have not as yet been thoroughly 
explored—such as Tenasserim, Pegu, Irrawaddy and Arakan. A good 
search in these Divisions would no doubt. bring to light a large number 
of Burmese, Talaing, Pyu and Arakanese inscriptions, and no doubt also 
a certain number of Siamese ones. The three principal centres from 
which the material now at our disposal has been obtained are Pagan, 
Pegu and Prome. There is no likelihood of Pagan yielding anything 
much further. Notwithstanding the good crop of Talaing inscriptions 
found in Pegu, very many more will, I am certain, be yet discovered 
as the result of a more thorough search, for those we have already 
were found within a comparatively very restricted radius. Prome has, 
up to now, yielded the oldest inscriptions; two in Pali, which contain 
only passages from the Scriptures; the others in Pyu, a now extinct 


( wv ) 


language. These latter are short, but important; and (yet they have 
been all found, except one or two, at the same spot: the Pyu 
cemetery near the Payagyi pagoda; it is probable this cemetery has not 
yielded all its funeral urns, and that further excavations will bring 
more to light. The site of the ancient city of Prome, Sarekhettara, 
is very extensive and full of ruins, and there is, I think, no doubt that 
a thorough exploration and systematical excavations would yield more of 
these precious documents of a nation now long disappeared. 

Besides their historical and religious interest, these epigraphs are of 
great value for Indo-Chinese philology. Thanks to the splendid labours 
of Mr. C. O. Blagden, the result of which will be published in these. 
pages, the old forms of Mén or Talaing, as preserved in the inscrip- 
tions of the llth century, will now be available for further researches 
in a family of languages which. is spread over a vast area. The same 
scholar’s acumen has rescued “from total oblivion a language dead since 
about six hundred years and buried, on the funeral urns of its speakers, 
in the cemetery abovementioned—that is, the Pyu language. It is true 
that, beyond some dozens of words and the fact that it belongs to the 
Tibeto-Burman family; yet little is known of this idiom; this is due to 
the small number and shortness of the inscriptions found up to the 
present; but, as pointed out ahove, all the. probabilities tend to show 
that more will be forthcoming. The oldest Burmese inscriptions (11th 
century) show us the language in a stage of phonetic flux, during which 
old forms were slowly giving way to new ones, and furnish us with a 
number of words now forgotten for centuries. 

The necessity for such a publication and its usefulness are self- 
evident, and scarcely require any comment. It will at last unlock for 
us the treasures slowly accumulated by the generations of three ‘nations. 
It will constitute a store-house for the reconstitution, on a solid basis, 
of the political history of this province, and for that of its religious 
development ; it will enable us to follow, almost step by step, the 
evolution of the Burmese and Talaing languages, through their gradual 
phonetic changes, up to the modern stage in which we now know 
them; it will also, though perhaps: in a less satisfactory degree, help 
in understanding better the evolution of the national institutions. and 
national spirit. The publication of the Epigraphia Birmanica we owe 
to the enlightened solicitude of the Government of Burma for the 


( ¥] 


advancement of oriental studies in this province, for, it is scarcely 
necessary to say, it could never have been brought about without their 
help. - 

This first part of the first volume contains the four faces of the 
Myazedi pillar found at Myinkaba near Pagan: Burmese, Pali, Talaing 
and Pyu. The importance of this inscription-pillar is made clear in the 
introduction and need not be dwelt upon here. It is this pillar which 
gave to Mr. C. O. Blagden the key to the reading of old Talaing, and 
enabled him to decipher what we know of Pyu. The second part, now 
in the press, consists of eight Talaing epigraphs, among which is the 
most interesting of early Mén records: the great inscription of the 
Shwezigén pagoda at Nyaung-U, near Pagan. It may be here mentioned 
that extra copies of all the Talaing inscriptions of Mr. Blagden will 
be struck off with consecutive pagination so as to form a handy volume 
of these important records. The second volume, also now in the press, 
consists of the four hundred plaques with Talaing legends, in illustra- 
tion of the last ten great jataka-stories, which ornament the upper 
terraces of the Ananda temple (1090 A.D.) at Pagan. The material for 
the third volume is ready; it is made up of another long Talaing inscrip- 
tion, and of the inscription in Talaing, Burmese and Pali engraved on 
the great bell at the Shwezigén pagoda at Nyaung-U. Other volumes 
will follow in due course. Our best thanks are due to Mr. R. W. Bishop, 
Superintendent, and Mr. R. Baillie, Deputy Superintendent, Government 
Printing, Burma, for the interest they take in this publication and for 
their successful overcoming of many typographical difficulties. 


CHAS. DUROISELLE, 
Assistant Archaeological Superintendent 
Manbaay, 21st October 1919. for Epigraphy, Burma, 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


THE BURMESE FACE OF THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTION 
AT PAGAN. 7 


| HE two Myazedi inscription stone pillars were discovered at Myinkaba, 
a small locality quite near to Pagan, in 1886-87, by Dr. E. Forchhammer, 
then Professor of Pali at the Rangoon College and Government Archaeologist. . 
- A, The better preserved pillar was found near the Myazedi pagoda, quite 
close to it, on the north, in front of a small ruined square temple, in which the 
remnants of a seated Buddha may still be seen. It is in a good state of preser- 
vation and has been, some years ago, for greater safety, removed to the Pagan 
Museum, near the Anandatemple. It contains the same document composed in 
four languages, one on each face: Pali, Burmese, Talainy and Pyu. It is from 
estampages and photographs of this pillar that Mr. C. O. Blagden gave us 
his translation of the Talaing face’ and of the Pyu face,? and he designated it as 
A, to distinguish it from the other pillar, estampages of which he received only 
later, and which he called B. It is best to keep these designations in mind 
in order to avoid confusion. 

B. The other pillar, which contains replicas of the former’s inscriptions, was 
badly broken; Forchhammer recovered two picces of the «nner half within the 
precincts of the Kubyaukkyi temple, which adjoins the Myazedi on the west. 
The third piece completing the upper part was discovered, in 1904, in the 
surrounding wall of the Myazedi platform while it was being repaired and into 
which it had been immured. The lower half was found accidentally, deeply 
- buried in an erect position near a small, old brick building, close to the Myazedi, 
on the east, and which is supposed to have been a Pitakat-taik or library. All these 
pieces were badly weathered and a large proportion of the letters had disappeared, — 
what remains being, however, beautifully clear. The several portions, after 
having thus been scattered for no doubt several centuries, were pieced up together 


1 The Talaing Inscription of the Myazedi Pagodaat Pagan,” in Fournal Royal Asiatic Society for 


October 1909, pp. 117 ff. 
* “Preliminary Study of the Fourth Text of the Myazedi Inscriptions,” 7.R.AS., April 1911, 365. 


2 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA . (vor. 1 


and the pillar, thus restored, was erected on the platform of the Myazedi. This 
pillar is designated as B. > 7 

Decipherment.—The Burmese and Pali faces were first transcribed into 
modern Burmese characters in 1892, after Forchhammer’s death, in the first 
volume of inscriptions? published in Burma, on pages 203 and 207 respectively. 
But the estampages from which these transeriptions were made, and which were 
found among Forchhammer’s: papers, had. been taken before disengaging the 
lower portion of the pillar from the ground in which it had sunk, so that in both 
these transcripts the last ten lines are missing. Moreover, in transcribing — 
the Burmese, the archaic spelling has been, to some extent, modernized, 
and this cannot, therefore, be called an exact transcript. Mr. Blagden, in his 
‘Talaing Inscription of the Myazedi Pagoda at Pagan,” has also given a 
transcript of the Burmese which includes the last ten lines, much more correct 
than the other, and corrections to which he published in subsequent notes.* These 
corrections being taken into consideration, it will be seen that his transcript and 
mine agree almost completely, except in a very few particulars which will be noted 
in their proper place. While making the transliteration into Roman characters, | 
was at Pagan, and thus had the advantage of being able to examine pillar A itself 
whenever some doubt arose; this has enabled me to settle a few doubtful points. 
I had besides at my disposal a very good photograph of A taken by Forchhammer ; 
this is much clearer than subsequent estampages and photographs, and shows 
that the stone in some places has certainly deteriorated, this being due, no doubt, 
to the numerous estampages which were taken of it subsequently with the 
attendant washing and beating with brushes. 

A first translation of the Burmese face was made by Maung Tun Nyein, of 
the Burma Secretariat, in 1899°; but this translation is rather defective, as a 
comparison between it and mine will show. On the other hand, it will be seen, 
on examination, how very closely Mr. Blagden’s translation of the Talaing and 
mine of the Burmese agree. 

Chronological Importance.—This i inscription has been of the greatest value in 
that it has helped to rectify the chronological errors of the Burmese chronicle 
Mahayisawin (a02.pe08) and Sir Arthur Phayre in respect of four of the most 
important reigns of that period of Burmese history. We are told at the begin- 
ning that Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraj became king at Pagan after 1628 


1 The Inscriptions of Pagan, etc.” 
* “A Further Note on the Inscriptions of the Myazedi Pagoda, Pagan,” 3.R.A.S., July rg1d. 
“ Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava.” Translation, with Notes, sss 1899, 


PART. 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 4 


years of the Buddha’s religion had elapsed. This date Anno Buddhae is one of 
the very most important as yet yielded by Burmese epigraphs, for it enables us to 
fix with absolute certainty the accession to the throne of Kyanzittha, and thereby 
also that of his successor, Alaungsithu, and of his two immediate predecessors, 
Anorata and Sawlu. The Burmese reckon the Era of Religion from 544 B.C.; 
subtracting this from 1628 we obtain 1084 A.D. as the commencement of the 
reign of Kyanzittha, and this corresponds to the year 446 Burmese Era, which is 
reckoned from 638 A.D. The inscription tells us Kyanzittha reigned 28 years 
which, added to 1084, give 1112 A.D. as the year of his death and that of his 
successor Alaungsithu's accession, or 474 Burmese Era. Sir Arthur Phayre who, 
in compiling his Htstory of Burma, had to rely almost entirely on the Mahdydsa- 
win ot Hman-Nan-Yasawin, is eutirely wrong in the dates he assigns to 
Kyanzittha, his predecessors Anorata and Sawlu, and to Alaungsithu who 
succeeded him. The following are the dates given by Phayre for these four 
reigns, p. 281 :— 


Commencement of Reign. 


Name cf King. | Fa eet ge eer 4 EE 


Year of - Burmese 
A.D, Era. 


Reign. 
Religion. 


’ 


Anorata 35 1533 
Sawlu os | 1595 
Kyanzittha 6 1604 


Alaungsithu toe j 1628 | 


This 1s in disaccord, not only with the Myazedi inscription, and some earlier 
inscriptions now colleet:d at Amaranurs, but also with the Za/a-Bon-Yasanin, 
one ©{ the most trustworthy sources for the dates of Burmese history ; the dates 
given above, as based on the Myazedi inscription, agree singularly with the latter 
work. Mr. Taw Sein Ko (Burmese Sketches, p. 66) has already rectified the 
dates in Phayre’s History for this period; ! carnot do better than quote here his 
own words: “ These latter figures correspond ina remarkable degree with those 
given inthe ¥a¢a-Bon-Yasawin or the chronological tables based on the Royal 
horoscopes. As the Burmans, in common with the Hindus, set a great store 
by astrology and horoscopes, these tables appear to afford us trustworthy 


4 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [voL. 1 


chronological data, Relying on the Myazedi inscription as well as these tables 
and the other records, Phayre’s dates may be revised as follows :— — 


Commencement of Reign. 


Name of King, | j grees 
Year of A.D Burmese 8 
. Religion. | — | Era. 
Anorata ou] 1s88 | 1044 | 406 33 
! 
Sawlu ; vee | | 4627 1077 439 7 
Kyanzittha was 1628, 1084 446 a8 
Alaungsithu eae 1656 . 1112 474 3 eas 


These dates of Mr. Taw Sein Ko agree with those of the 7ad-Bon-Yasawin 
except for that of Kyanzittha’s death, which it gives as 1111. But this seeming 
difference may perhaps amount to only a few days, according as the year is 
recorded as expired or current. Such differences can be settled only when a 
complete date, that is, the year, month and day, is given.’ The date 1084 for 
the accession of Kyanzittha is confirmed by the Shwesandaw (Prome) Talaing 
inscription which gives the date 1628 after the parintrvdna for this event. The. 
date 1630 Anno Buddhae given in the same document very probably refers to his 
abhiseka or coronation as the context itseli seems to show." 

Kyanstttha.—Vhe checkered and romantic, but intensely human career of 
Kyanzittha, would be too long to recount here. Suffice it to say that, with all 
his defects and shortcomings, he impresses the reader who has carefully gone 
through his life in the indigenous chronicles, as a high-spirited, strong, energetic 
‘and wise captain and ruler, with a heart full of human sympathy and love. He 
was not of pure Burmese race, but of Indian descent by his mother, who was a 
princess of Vesali or moderna Besdy in Central Inaia ; with one or tre exceptions, 
Burmese histories agree on this point; those which do not accept this—no acubt. 
from a motive of national pride—aflirm the princess came from Vesali in Arakan 
and not from Vesdli in. India; but practically the whole mass of written and oral 
tradition goes against this latter assertion. This is, however, still a moot point, 
which only further researches will enable us to settle. A doubt subsists as to the 


1 Cf. Article on “ Date of the final fall of Pagan” in the Annual Report of this Department for the 
year ending March 1917, p. 36. 
3 See “ Dates of King pyenatthe: 3 accession and pemeuene in the same Report, p- 19. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 5 


legitimacy of his birth; on the whole, however, evidence goes to show that he was 
not Anorata’s son, but of the minister who was sent to bring the princess from 
India (or Arakan) to Pagan. Thus, he was not, as a matter of fact, entitled to the 
succession to the throne of Burma; but he was, after the death of 5. ‘ son of 
Anorata, unanimously chosen by the Burmese generals and high officials as the 
most worthy and capable of holding firmly the reins of Government in his hands. 
It is he who completed the famous Shwezigén pagoda at Nyaung-i, which had 
been begun by Anorata, and who erected the magnificent Ananda temple in which 
is seen his likeness in stone executed by a contemporary sculptor, and that of 
Nagayén, besides several other smaller ones. 

The queen mentioned in this inscription was not his chief queen. He had 
four principal queens, mentioned in the following order : 

1. Abhéyadand (s00005qo0$20), the chief queen, who bore him a daughter, 
known as Shwe-i:ng-thé (eg s85o0958). 

2. A princess from Pegu, who had no children. 

3. Kuindan (oéo$e), the daughter of the head man of Thilhain (oB:oQés), 
who likewise bore him no children. 

4. Sambhiila (cog 000), the niece of a monk, who bore him his only son, 
prince Rajakumar, the founder of this inscription. 

His deep affection for Sambhila, made so clearly evident in the inscription 
was no doubt due to the fact that, before his accession to the throne, she had 
devotedly ministered to him in jhis cistress and exile at Kyaungbyu, where he had 
fled for his life. When he was recalled to Pagan, he left her under the care of 
her uncle the monk, asking her, if the fruit of their union was a son, to come 
back to him to the cipital when times were better. Years rolled by, and when he 
had been king already for some years, Sambhila brought her boy to the palace. 
de made her his fourth queen, with the title of U-Sauk-pan (8:ccosa5o$su), 

U-Sauk-pan means an artificial fower, of gold or silver, used as an ornament 
for the hair, also a crest, an ornament in general to adorn the hair. It is this 
Burm¢se ttle, which seems to have been given by some kings to the queen they 
taved most, which is translated in the four faces of the inscription by the Pali 
equivalent, Vatamsaka (Skt. avatemsaka) ; her full title in Pali, 7r?/okavatamssha, 
meaning “ the Ornament of the Three Worlds.” Besides Sambhila, I have found 
only two other queens bearing this title: one was a queen of Sawlu, the prede- 
cessor of Kyanzittha; and the other, a queen of Narapatisithu. 

Kyanzittha seems to have regretted the delay of Sambhila in bringing him 
his only son, for some time before his arrival he had made his grandchild, who 


6 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. t 


succeeded him with the title of Alaungsithu, heir-apparent to the throne; such 
a course, however, as well as the appointment of his son to a distant province, 
appears to have been dictated by political expediency. He gave him the name of 
RAjakumar, and some years later, with the title of Jeyakhettara, made him Governor 
of Dhafifiavati or Arakan and of the adjacent seven hill tracts. Nothing more is 
heard of him either in epigraphs or histories. | 

The Alphabet and Transtiterattosx.—An examination of the Talaing and 
Burmese faces of the Myazedi pillar at once discloses the fact that the characters 
used in both are practically identical ; setting aside the two letters (@; 4, and y, 4) 
which the Talaings invented to represent sounds in their language which no 
Indian letters could do adequately, it is one and the same alphabet. The evident 
deduction is that one of the two nations borrowed its alphabet from the other. 
All evidence tends to show that the Burmese received their alphabet from the 
Mé6ns about A.D. 1057.’ It is in that year that Anorata, king of Pagan, 
swooped down upon the deltaic provinces of Burma, that is, RAmafifiadesa, the 
Talaing country, and, after a siege of three months,’ entered Thatén, the capital. 
Both the Talaing and Burmese chronicles give as the reason of this onslaught the 
desire of king Anorata to transfer to.his capital the sets.of the ¢ripitakas and 
their commentaries in the monasteries of the Talaing capital, . But the probability 
is that the sack of That6n was only an after-thought and that his primary and 
real motive in thus swooping suddenly on the Delta was purely political, and his 
aim was the destruction of the strong and flourishing Indian settlements which 
then dotted the Delta and which, in his estimation, were a growing danger to his 
own power in Pagan. One.of these and probably the oldest was Criksetra or Old 
Prome (Hmawza), some six miles below the modern Prome; four others are 
mentioned as having existed near where is now Rangoon: Pokkharavati, Triha- 
kumbha, Asitafijana and Rammanagara*; from the conquest of Anorata on,. 
nothing more is heard of these independent foreign settlements, 

The result of the conquest of Thatén was momentous for Pagan; 
Anorata took Manuha, the king of That6n, a captive to his capital, and with him, 


1 The Talaing history Diammaecti (printed at Patlak), p,12, gives Anno Buddhae 1600, that is 
A.D. ros6, 

8 The Burmese chronicles do not mention this; the statement is found at p. 13 of Dhammaceti~Seths 
Arimandenapura tun , . . blun euip dus Suddhammarati buin khadan law pi gitu, “The king of 
Arimaddanapura (Pagan) . . - having come, invested closely the city of Suddhammavati (Thatén) for 
three months.” In Talaing, Arimandena for Arimaddana, is frequent. 


3 Vide Forchhammer, Notes om the Ancient Geography of Buyma, I1—The Shwedagin Pagoda, 
Rangoon, 19tt; and aleo the g0S§ sag Sc08ag 5:1 (cway cush kyo* than kyam), Vol. HI, p, 721 9. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 7 


the most learned monks, the Pali scriptures and their commentaries, and all the 
best artisans and artists he could find, and, adds the Talaing chronicle, ‘‘ from 
that time Pagan flourished exceedingly.”? | Materially the conquerors, the 
Burmese became, to a great extent, intellectually the conquered ; such examples 
are not rare in history. The form of Mahdy4nism then extant at Pagan* gave 
way to the Hinayadnism of Thatén; magnificent temples were built under the 
supervision of Indian and Talaing architects; it is only soon after 1057 that 
inscriptions on stone and votive tablets in Burmese, Talaing and Pali make their 
appearance at Pagan. [It is from that time that writing was adapted to common 
use by the adoption of a foreign alphabet to represent Burmese sounds ; if it is 
considered that, as pointed out above, the Talaing and Burmese characters at 
that time were identical, and that the greater antiquity of Talaing civilisation is 
accepted on every hand,’ I think the rational conclusion is that the Burmese 
borrowed their alphabet from the Talamgs.‘ This does not certainly mean that 
writing was unknown at the Burmese capital; it.can be easify proved that 
Sanskrit works, Mahdydnis?, and probably also Sanskrit Hinaydnt'st and Brahma- 
nical works, were in use at Pagan before Anorata.® But it is only after the 
conquest of Thatén that an alphabet is devised for writing the vulgar tongue. It 
is noteworthy that no inscription whatsoever in Burmese or Pali has yet been 
found at Pagan antedating Anorata; and this fact is the more remarkable 
still, when the dry and, to stone and brick, undestructive climate of Central 
Burma is taken into consideration. I think also there is strong internal evidence 
in the earliest Burmese inscriptions themselves, of this adoption by the Burmese 
at that time of an alphabet for writing their own language; I refer to the 


1 Dhammaceti, p. 12, i” fine. 

7 See my paper on “The Ari of Burma and Tantric Buddhism,” in Archaeological Survey of India 
for 1915-16, pp. 79-93. 

8 Cf. for instance, Bigandet, Legend of Gotama, Vol. H, p, 143; Forchhammer, opud eit, [— 
Shwedagin Pagoda, and his Jardine Prize Essay, p, 22 ff; Parker’s Burma, with special reference to her 
relations with China, Rarzoon, "895, 7. t8 F; J. Stuart, Burma through the Centuries, p. 30; the 
Kalyani Ins; “Tiption, Dipavazhsa ‘and Mabivathens Lajonquitre, 2omaine Archéologigue du Stam, 41, 425 
Laser, , Indische Alterthumskunde, 1V, 801. 

s Againet this is sometimes brought the statement of the Burmese Mahdydsawin that the tripitakas 
were transcribed from the Talaing into the Burmese characters; but this no doubt must be understgod as 
meaning into the newly adopted alphabet; and as these two alphabets, for the writing of Pali, were 
identical in all their characters, this can have presented no difficulty, The real meaning seems to be that 
new copies of the Scriptures were made for the use of the Burmese monks. 

5 Vide opud cit in note (2); see also L, Finot, “Un nouveau document sur le buddhisme birthan,” 
Fournal Asiatique, juillet-aodt 1912, p. tag: “on conclut trop vite du sanskrit au Mahdydna”; but now 
the recent discovery of the trantric-Buddhist frescoes at Min-nan-thu near Pagan leaves little room for doubt 
as to the existence of certain Mahay4nist works at Pagan. 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


extraordinarily numerous ways of spelling the same words, not only in different 
epigraphs, but very often in the same document, and which seems to me to show 
pretty clearly that, for nearly a century, the Burmese were grappling with the 
problem of exactly representing some sounds with the new tool at their 
disposal.? 

The old Burmese alphabet as we find it in the Myazedi has become, through 
a series of gradual and slow changes, the modern Burmese alphabet as used now. 
There was always a perceptible tendency to round off the more or less angular and 
square letters into soft curves and circles or parts of circles ; but for these general 
changes and some others, few but more radical, as for instance, in the subscript 
letters A and m, the old and the modern alphabets are practically identical. 
The method of transliteration followed here has already been explained in the 
Fournal of the Burma Research Soctety for August 1916, p. 81. As this young 
Journal has not yet, however, a very wide circulation among oriental scholars, 
this scheme of transliteration, since it will be used regularly in the Epigraphia 
Birmanica, is reproduced here. | 

In transcribing an oriental language into Roman characters, two methods 
naturally present themselves. The first, like the Hunterian system, is purely 
phonetic, and endeavours to represent, as accurately as possible, the pronuncia- 
tion only of the language ; the purpose of this method is to furnish a ready means 
of transcribing, as they are spoken, geographical names and other common words 
current in the country and in every day use even among people not speaking the 
language; it ts also used with advantage in obtaining, without going the length 
of mastering the native letters, a knowledge of the colloquial. It is a method of 
practical utility well adapted to official and commercial requirements. The 
second is what has been called the ‘ scientific method’; it does not in the least 
take into account the pronunciation, its aim being solely to reproduce, in Roman 
characters, as faithfully as possible, the exact form of the language as it has 
been fixed in writing ; thus endeavouring to retain, in the foreign characters, the 
older form of the language as preserved bv its alnhahet and unaffected by its 
pronunciation which is alw2;3 subject to slow but none the less very rea: change. 
Such a literal transliteration is "generally adopted for transcription of inscriptions 


' The several varieties of alphabets in the Indo-Chinese Peninsula were derived from one or two’ 
archetypes from Southern India ; and so far as epigraphical and historical evidence is available, these adop- 
tions—direct or indirect—of a foreign alphabet appe4r, in point of time, to have followed the following order : 
Khmer, Mén, Burmese, Thai, Cf. also Lunet de Lajonquiere, Le domaine archtologigue du Siam, p, 41 BA 
For a reliable and succinct survey of the progress.of epigraphy in Indo-China generally, see L. Finot, 
Notes d’Epigraphie, XIV-XX, in B.E.F.£.0., Vol. XV, No. 2, pp. 113-172. 


PART | | THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 9 


and for the purpose of philological comparison. This is the method.adopted in 
the following scheme of transliteration :— 


I, CONSONANTS. 


The consonantal system is the same as in Pali, and the transcription ' is that 
used for that language in Europe, except for one letter :— 


Gutterals ... oka o kha © ga wo gha c ha 
Palatals ds «(O08 co cha @ja  qijha @ fia 
Cerebrals ... ¢ ta gtha @da » dha ana 
Dentals a TE otha 3 da © dha $na 
Labials ae Opa o pha e ba oo bha © oma 
Semi-vowels oo ya q ra co la gia ° wa 
Sibilant 0 00 Sa aspirate co ha 
Anusvdra.. 22m unclassified sa 


(a) In all consonants the vowel a is inherent. No ais inherent in anusvdra. 
This @ is elided when a consonant is final, which is indicated in Burmese by a 
curve stroke above it, thus, eg., 5 4, & #, 6c, S #, & g, etc.; & final in a 
syllable is often superscript over the initial consonant of the following syllable, 
thus oo5co = ac€0u, sangaha ; cos = of0002, mangald. 

(6) Double a, #%, becomes 99, ##%; these letters are used only in Pali words. 
eS (now pronounced 7) is final in pure Burmese words and is transliterated 
by #, for 9 at the end of words is not intended to represent a double a 
but a single one; eg., (905, Pra; op, cat. 


1 An ideal transliteration would be one uniting both methods, the literal and the phonetic, which could 
be applied to all purposes both practical and scientific ; this would not, of course, be impossible. But to do 
so for Burmese, for instance, in which some letters have acquired a quite different value from their original 
one, in which each vowel has two or three sounds according to'the combination in which it appears, final 
consonants freely interchange their classes and medial vowels and nasals are often dropped owing to a shift 
of accent, such a transliteration would require a diacritical apparatus so complicated as to be more puzzling 
than useful. Moreover I have remarked that, for purposes of comparison, the literal transliteration of 
Burmese is in many cases more useful than the rendering of the modern pronunciation. But as, in all 
such comparisons, we have to deal with living languages, the actual pronunciation cannot altogether be put 
aside, for it enables us to lay down more or less fixed rules of phonetic equivalences ; in these circumstances, 
the best way is, whenever necessary, to indicate the pronunciation within brackets after the literal translitera- 
tion. This is what has generally been done in the few—unfortunately too few—-essays on Indo-Chinese 
philology in which Burmese enters as a term of comparison. 


10 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


(c) The letter ‘o’! is transliterated by m instead of 2, because w 
represents the true value of ‘o’; moreover a v would make some combina- 
tions unpronounceable. But in Pali and Sanskrit words and in quotations 
from these languages, the Continental transliteration v is retained. 

(d@) The letter o>, a, is also included among the consonants ; a8 such, 
itefulfils two functions ; first, in inscriptions, it is used to denote the short 
tone, which consists in the sudden occlusion, of the voice affecting the 
vowels pronounced in this tone; this letter, with the vrrdma (¢) is either 
subscript or postscript, and in transcription is represented by an..inverted 
comma placed «after the word affected ; ¢.g., ov0205, maya’; 83, min’; nS, 
am’. The dot (.) now used for this tone is nothing but this 5 simplified 
for ease and rapidity of writing. Then, 3° is also used as a fulcrum to initial 
vowels; this use is practically unknown in old epigraphs and becomes current 
only very late; in. such a position, this o> has nothing to do phonetically 
with the word itself, it is mefely a support for the initial vowel, and has 
therefore no value in the pronunciation or etymologically ; hence, in trans- 
literation, this fulcrum is left unrepresented by any sign or symbol; in so 
doing, 1 am but following a usage already established, and which has the 
advantage of presenting the word in its original and true form, and as it 
is still found in related dialects ; thus 988, to sleep, is transcribed ip; 388, 
im, etc., the ancient way of writing these words (without the fulcrum) being 
gS, 1p; «5, 1m. To transcribe 385 by aif would give the impression of a 
diphthong which does not in reality exist; to transcribe it by a-#p would 
bring in an element a, which is phonetically non-existent, and might be taken 
for the common prefix so, | 


Medial Consonants.. 


The following are the symbols used to represent the medial consonants :— 


—— ae 


Symbol 


Consonant, ; Medial), Transliteration. - Examples, 
w | J y Y kyi 
Gx En é r ego kra 
° : OW og} kwan 
o | es ee g$ mhan 


-| 
vd. 


a 


—_ ey 


1 This letter is pronounced % in scme L.olo-dialects ; Ve = Burm. cos, we!, far. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI.INSCRIPTIONS | in 


These symbols are further combined one with another as follows :— 


Combinations. tia | 
q and o es rw 
q and co | G “h 
| 
I], VOWELS. 


Leaving aside, for a while, the consideration of the tones, we see that 
the vowel system in Burmese is the same as in Pali; the following vowels 
have the same value as the Palit ones and can be transliterated in exactly 
the same manner :— : a 


Initial. . Medial, 


wma wo a : + -> and -) a 
gt Se Qt a i 
gu oa nj u “1 a 
ce sfog> 0 | 0 


The dash accompanying the symbols of the medial vowels indicates the position 
of the consonants. 

_ (a) The initial vowel 3 has no corresponding medial symbol because, as 
has already been said, it’ is inherent in all consonants. 

(6) Besides the above, Burmese possesses two others that are foreign 
to Pali: ~ and Qi~ is ‘transliterated by ai, pronounced as‘e in ‘ met,” or 
az in the French “/ast”’; it is in reality the same as -05, y, and made its 
appearance regularly in inscriptions only in the 15th century, before which date all 
the words now spelt with ~ were most often written with an -o5. The only real 
difference between the two is tonal, -o5 belonging to the medial and ~ to 
the heavy tone. is merely a conventional sign made up of two vowels, us 


13 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


and 1; it is now pronounced “o” as in “photo,” “ bone,” but its pronuncia- 
tion is affected by a following final 05, 4, or &, %, when it becomes the diphthong 
at. It is now impossible to ascertain its pronunciation eight hundred years 
ago, date of the earliest inscriptions. as yet found. Burmese words con- 
taining this symbol are, in related dialects, principally Lolo dialects and Maru, 
pronounced with the following sounds: 6, %, 6, %, as and of. We shall repre- 
sent it in this scheme by wi, to be in conformity with the transcription of 
it adopted already by Mr. Blagden in his literal transliteration of the Talaing 
alphabet. 


Il]. TONES. . 


There are three tones in Burmese,’ which affect all the vowels; the short 
or abrupt, which is but an occlusion of the voice; the medial or long tone, and 
the heavy or falling tone. 

(1) The short tone ts denoted by a dot (.) placed under the vowel 
affected by it. The vowels s> a, @ ?#, 2 wu, are naturally short, and as 
such do not require the tonal sign; the other vowels, not being naturally 
short, require it when affected by this tone, thus:— on, -, 669, Q. 
It has already been stated that this dot (.) is but a modification of the 
old oS (’) which was used to denote this tone. In the transliteration of 
tonal languages, numbers, indicating each tone, are now generally used; the 
same system will be followed here, and the short tone designated by the 
number 1 placed to the right of the word; e.g., 6co, de’; 3, pat’; 609, mo’; 
8, put’. . 

(2) The medial tone, when affecting the vowels a, #, u, is denoted in the 
transcription of Pali by a dash over these letters, so that 4, and @ belong to this 
tone and need no other “diacritical sign or number to show this. The following, 
as they stand, without any special sign, belong to this tone—se, od y, and «2 
ut, and no number will be used to indicate it. When eGo, 9, is affected by this 
tone, a small curve stroke is placed on the top to the right of it, o695; this 
shall be denoted by the number 2 placed after the word: sol, £ho*; 605, mo*. 

(3) The third or heavy tone is indicated by two dots (1) placed after the 
vowel affected; ¢g., s028, 23, +13, s—s, Qs; it will be marked in transliteration 
by the number 3— cv2:, /a° ; 82, mi*; sor, pe?; Gt, chest. This tone is inherent in 


1 Practically four, if the very abrupt stop of the voxe in pronouncing the finals oS, 8, 3, 5 
is reckoned, as it should be, as a tone; this tone has and requires no particular sign to denote it. 


PART 1] . THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 13 


the vowels 692, 0, and >, ai, so that the dots are not used with these two letters 
and this practice will be olioweds in transliterating. 

(Sometimes, but very seldom, the heavy tone is denoted, for the sake of 
emphasis, after ego and > which are then written c{G>s, o*, and “2, as*.) 

The following table gives the vowels arranged according to tones :— 


Short tone, Medial tone. ; Heavy tone. 


| 
2 oS |” oD 
o— > of o—5 | o—9 o 


o—] o—! Come] J. 


| Sa o° (very rare) 


> —d y ~ ai 
| s  ai* (very rare) 
QW ui Q ui . Q: ui’ 


a ne 


The tones also affect the short vowels a, t, u, when followed by final nasals, 
the same signs being used. When the signs of neither the short tone (.) nor 


14 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA: vot. t 


the heavy (:) are used the- word naturally belongs to the medial tone; of the 
nasals, #50 and Q take only §&, #, after them, in modern Burmese; ¢.¢.— | 


IV. ABBREVIATIONS. 


A number of abbreviations of frequently recurring words are often used; 
most of these abbreviations do not admit of any practical transliteration, so'that 
it is necessary to transliterate them according to their full form? 


Abbreviation Abbreviation, | Fallform, Full form. Transliteration, 
5 <= |e Sas | —nhuik 
o&s 6038s kon® 
fe | eeoe 
a} copSeean08: | lafi® kor? 
&s | a on 
§ | og | maf 
*] | oe | sah 
an 5 il 
ulan 
oe | poanee swe® sok 
§ ms kywannup 
; $ya8 nathnak 
g | sg | rwe' 


dj as a verbal and genitive suffix is of very frequent use ; it is a modification 
of the old form as5, e’. It is now pronounced #; its full modern form, seldom 
used, is o¢§, ef’, which is also pronounced +; we shall therefore transcribe it 
by #. 

In the above scheme, I have purposely left out all considerations of Burmese 
phonetic, which can be better treated in a special paper, though it would have 


‘PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS ag 


_ shown that such a scheme of literal transliteration as the one explained above is 
by far, in so.-much as Burmese is concerned, better adapted to our purpose than 
any phonetic scheme could have been,’ It is a pleasant duty to acknowledge 
here the help and suggestions so kindly given by Mr. Taw Sein Ko. . 

Philological Interest.—Besides its importance for Burmese history, this _ 
document is also full of interest to the philologist.- It is among the oldest inscrip- 
tions as yet found written in Burmese. It contains a few ‘words which, though 
current at that time, have not yet been found in other inscriptions of the sante 
period and after ; for instance, ¢g205, rwoh, for “ village,” now @>, rwd; 0, yo, 
“to take,” now 0, y#; 6995, rhow, “in front, before,” now og, rhe’. In it 
also we find, for the first time, a medial / in words now since long written regu- 
larly with a medial y or y; and a form of the négative, =, @; scarce even in the 


dialects of the Burmese and Lolo groups of Tibeto-Burman languages, and of — 


which, only one other example has up to now been found, in an inscription dated 
a few years later than the Myazedi. The Myazedi shows us, though not so fully 
as we should desire, the language in a state of transition from older to newer forms, 
and it is to be regretted, in this connection, that this epigraph is so short and its 
vocabulary so restricted. It is to be hoped that other Burmese inscriptions of 
the same period and containing words of the same archaic character as those 
found in the Myazedi pillar will yet be discovered. 

In the notes after the translation I have endeavoured to ascertain, as far as 
possible, the real older forms of some words or classes of words which are now 
written and pronounced differently ; no previous study of some scope in this direc- 
tion is available, and it is attempted here for the first time ; moreover, as will 
just now be explained, the necessary and indispensable material for such study, 
so far as Burmese more particularly is concerned, is very meagre; under these 
circumstances, these notes do not pretend to be final and definitive in their 
conclusion on each and every point; I feel confident, however, that, in a few 
cases, the conclusions arrived at will need no modification when more ample 
material to work upon will be at the disposal of scholars. To try and settle the 
older forms of the language and their transition to the modern ones, there is 
only one certain means: comparison with other related languages and dialects of 
the Tibeto-Burman family. It is what I have done, and the necessity of doing 
it will be sufficient excuse for the, in a few cases, rather long array of barbarous- 
looking words. In drawing up these comparisons, I have availed myself of every 


1 Cf. Note £, p.@ 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 1 


vocabulary and word-list 1 could procure, and a list of which is given further on. 
The Lingutstie Survey of India has proved invaluable; unfortunately, it does not 
extend to most languages within the limits of Burma; the vocabularies of 
languages spoken in Burma and on her frontiers on the north and east and closely 
related to Burmese are very, few and might, to use a hackneyed but expressive 
phrase, be counted easily on the fingers of one hand. This has been a drawback, 
for, except in the case of Maru, Lolo, and one or two others, I had to fall back 
on languages and dialects more distantly. related to Burmese, though these, as 
will be seen, have proved very useful. Never did I feel so keenly the need of 
such a work as a Linguistic Survey of Burma somewhat on the plan of the 
admirable Lingusst'c Survey of /ndia. Mr. Morgan Webb, of the Burma Com- 
mission, was, a few years ago, deeply impressed with the necessity of carrying out 
such a work before many a dialect, almost on the eve of extinction, disappeared 
completely under the pressure of more virile and numerous tribes. It is 
earnestly to be hoped that the Government of this province may, in the near 
future, see their way to bring to a successful issue this most important work, 
which will be the connecting link between the labours of Grierson and Konow in 
India and those, patiently prosecuted during the past few years, of the Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient in Indo-China. _ 

To make the comparisons contained in the following notes easier to follow, 
the few rules given below will prove useful; further researches will no doubt 
bring forth more material in support of them, as well as new rules of phonetic 
correspondence among the languages of the Tibeto-Burman family. 

(1) The vowels a, H, 0, aw, are found constantly interchanged, as will appear 
in S: words given below. The use, indifferently, of « and o, even in the same 
document, is frequent in the earliest Burmese inscriptions. 

(2) Similarly the vowels #, e, 2. | 

(3) The final nasals are not constant, that is, they interchange their classes 
in the different groups of the family : 


To bet ee Burmese, coors, Jon? (pronounced laok®); Tavo- 
yan, /aon*, 
Blossom use Burmese, 9&, pman' (pron. pwn); Tavoyan, 
puam. 
Hawk 1s Burmese, 9§, cwax (pron. sus); Maru, tsum. 
Room 2s Burmese, s00$t, athan"; Tibetan, shan. 


1 Census of India, tg11, Vol, 1X—Burma, Part 1. 


THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 17 


PART 1] 
To delay Burmese, (4§, éran* (pron. hyan') ; Tibetan, dyan. 
To enter ie Burmese, 0&, wan’ (pron. win) ; Matd:.wawn, and 


also wew, in which the nasal is dropped (see the 
— 4th rule). 
To move from side 
to side 
To be defective 


Burmese, 088s, cad (pron. yen®); Tibetan, yeas. 
Burmese, 09§, sun’; Tibetan, hom; the intef 
changeability of cand hk is quite common. 


(4) Final consonants which appear in one language disappear in another. 
' This is especially the case with Maru and Lolo, which are closely related to 
Burmese. 


(6) Other consonants : 


To sleep 
To sew 


(a) Nasals: 

Axe vr Butness: gB§, puck (pron. paw sea); Tavoyan, 

| pau St. 

Head se Burmese, colét, &hon® (pron, got) ; Maru, as 
khau (= Burm. @ khon*); Lolo, o 40 (= Burm. 
d° khon*); Sifan, go; Tibetan, mgo. 

Cloud rn Burmese, 085, frm (pron, #én); Lolo, ¢é, #1. 

‘Wing . Burmese, coor, ton (pron. ¢aon) ; Lolo, tee, ds. 

To fly ue Burmese, qj, pyar (pron. pyan) ; Lolo, byo. 

A fly ie Burmese, 008, yan (pron. yim); Lolo, ys, Ja-ms : 

cf. Sifan, rram, and Tibetan, shran-ma. 

To spy Burmese, ogpt:, khyon*® (pron. chaon*); Maru, 
chaw, | 

Canal, river Burmese, ¢q2&, £hyon® (pron. chaon*) ; Lolo, i cho 
(= Burm. yé chaon®, eogqcqo&). The old 
Burmese was 4hlon. In the notes below, two 
Tibetan words are given for comparison, &/z# 
and chu; the latter, chu, is given only as a 
possible equivalent, though doubtful ; the former 

- tS more probable. 
Finger Burmese, cocdegzés, Jak khyon' oon let chaon') ; 


Lolo, la chu. 


Old Burmese, 35, ip; Lolo, ¢. 


Burmese, 96, Ahyup (pron. chot) ; Maru, chu. 
3 3 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vont 


To stop u » Plug 
up, cor 


To carry , ee 

Chatty _ saé 

Reward nes 

Bone _ 

Bad, troublesome, 

injurious 

To report, announce 

To do, act = 


To say, speak ... 
Rope ain 


Burmese, , chus' (pron. sé'); Maru, - led 
Tibetan, Sup. 


Burmese, 9t, pus* (pron. 26°) ; Maru, dod. 
Burmese, 291, wt* (pron, 6°); Maru, uw. 
Burmese, 99, chu; Tibetan, sug. 

Burmese, 2081, arus® (pron. ay’) ; Tibetan, rus. 


Burmese, os, chut® (pron. 36%); Tibetan, btsog. 

Burmese, >, #74 (pron. nya) ; Tibetan, ssyad. 

Burmese, Q, fru (pron. py); Tibetan, spyod ; 
the old Burmese = glo’ and plw..- 

Burmese, ca, pro (pron. pyaw); Tibetan, brzod. 

Burmese, @t, £rus* (pron. dyo*); Tibetafi, rgyud. 


(5) Final consonants, when not dropped, are soft in one language, oni hard 


in the other : 
Broad cloth 


To speak loudly, } " 


scold. 
Helmet 
Below ual 
To build «ae 
Paper eee 


Burmese, nee sakkalat ; Tibetan, bs thie cf, 
Malayalam, shakalathu. 

Old Burmese, coi (still used in ce)a5cod), zak (pron. 
net) ; Tibetan, nag, talk. 

Burmese, 6020509, mok tus, and oc02085, kha mok; 
Tibetan, rmog. 

Old Burmese, (905, of ; Tibetan, og. 

Burmese, coooad, chok (pron. sawk) ; Tibetan, sug. 

Burmese, ogi, caé-k@ (pron. sé&-k@); Tibetan, 
suggu, sog-gu: cf. Mosso, shewgu, and 
‘Sifan, shuegu., . 


(6) Prefixed consonants are often dropped; examples will have been 
remarked from the Tibetan equivalents given above. It would be interesting to 
study the effects on the value, in Burmese, of the consonants remaining after the 
prefixes have been drepped, as well as on the value of the medial or final vowels. 


Here are a few more examples : 


Cat 
Fowl 


Burmese, ¢{g26, éron; Maru, roa, raus. 

Burmese, (05, Arak; Maru, raw: here the initial 4 
is dropped as well as the final; the dropping of 
the final is very frequent in Maru, and the 
equivalence, aw = Burm. a, is regular. 


PART 1 } THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 19 


Rat one Burmese, 6305, 4rwak ; Maru, ruv&, which written in 
Burmese would be qo5. The equivalence, x, 
o, @, is also frequent. 


River er Burmese, (98, mrac (pron. mrit, now myzt); Maru, r#é. 

(7) Initial 4, s, sh (s) and #4 (English sound) are frequently found inter- 
changed : 

To die a> agg Old Burmese, 0865, siy (pron. syé) ; Mod. Burmese, 


coo, se (pron. thé); Black Lolo, éhyé; Limbu 
(Nepal), sz@; Maru, shtk; Lashi, shtk and shé ; 
Tibetan, sht-pa ; Kadu, hé; Pyd, 42; Tavoyan, 
hé and ht. : 

The number3_... Old Burmese, of, sus; Mod. Burm., o§2, stsh* 
(pron. thon®); Maru, sam; Mosso, som; Pya, 

. hos (= hom), 

The number 8 ... Old Burmese, ccooS, het; Mod, Burm., 9 &, rhac 
(pron. shit); Maru, shé; Lashi, shet; Garo, 
shet; Chinbok, shit ; ils (Kopu), hi-lS ; Lolo 
(jen), 4é; Lolo (Maseupu), As; Kachin, 
ma-sat; Tamlu (Naga), sef. | 

To have .. Old Burmese, 8, Ai’, ov095, Ae’; Mod. Burm., 8, 
rhi (pron. sht); Chin (Lai ana Manjogi), she ; 
Tavoyan, At; several Lolo dialects have Az, 
others é. 

Norz.—The close connection between an initial rh (or kr) and the sounds h, sh, has been dwelt upon 

in the notes below (line t, Goood); the word for “gold” gives a further illustration, and no doubt some 
_ more examples will be found : 

Gold “ae Old Burmese, «5, Away (pron. Awé), ood, huy 

| (pron, hwé), and go, rhuy (pron. shwé); these 

have become in medieval Burm., 3, rhwt (pron. 

shtot), and in Mod. Burmese, og, rhwe (pron, 

skwé) ; with the above compare Yawdin, rhwt; 

Kortse (Sifan), r4u0; and Dzorgai (Sifan), 

shruo, in which the initial sh is due probably to 


an older &. 
(8) The semi-vowels 7, y and / are interchangeable : 
Water «. Old Burmese, 805, rs’y (pron. ryé); Mod. Burm., 


cq, re (pron. yd); Black Lolo, yé; Lolo 


20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von. 1 


(Achipo), yi; Maru, ré; Arakanese, rf; some 
Lolo dialects have dyé. 


To laugh .. . Old Burmese, 905, vty (pron. ryé) ; Mod. Burm., 
905, ray (pron. y#); Maru, ryt, ri; Lashi, 91; 
Moseu, #6. 

White we Old Burmese, Q1, phi/@:; Mod. Burm., a phra 


(pron. phy@); Tavoyan, phi; Lolo (Wo-ni), 

fyw; Maru, Lashi and Szi, phyz ; Lolo as 
ch’uan), phru ; Kachin, praw. | 
River ae Old Burmese, 25, Jac; Mod: Burm., G5, mrac 
| (pron. myst); Maru, rit; Tavoyan, mii, 


It is a pleasant duty to express here my thanks to Mr. Taw Sein Ko, for his 
kindness in furnishing me with many examples from the Tavoyan dialect, with 
which he is thoroughly conversant, and of which, to my knowledge, no vocabulary 
or word-list has ever been made. 


I—PiLLarR B, AT THE MyYAzEp! PAGoDA, PAGAN. 


As already said, the several pieces of this pillar, found at different places, 
have been cemented together, strengthened with a wooden frame and, the pillar 
thus reconstituted, placed on the platform of the Myazedi pagoda. The stone 
proper, on which are engraved the inscriptions, measures from bottom to top 
5 feet 2 inches, and the ornamental mouldings above, from the top of the stone to 
tip of finial, 2 feet, making a total height of 7 feet 2 inches. The two broader 
sides have a breadth of 1 foot 8} inches; the surface of these broader sides 
actually covered with letters measures, in height, 4 feet 4,4 inches and in 
breadth 1 foot 74 inches. The letters on this pillar are slightly bigger than those 
on the pillar (A) at the Pagan Museum; they have an average of inch, 
measuring the letters themselves, without taking count of the subseript and 
“superscript letters, The Burmese inscription is on one of the broader sides. The 
other two sides are a little smaller in breadth, and narrow slightly from top to 
bottom, the stone measuring at the top 1 foot, and at the bottom 10} inches. 
The Talaing and the Pyu inscriptions are engraved on the narrower faces. 
The Burmese face contains 34 lines and, except in two cases (as far. as 
can be ascertained in its present state), the omission of ao9, amhac, in line 
1, of fa before non in line 31 and the substitution of co, &4, for coyscods, 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI!I INSCRIPTIONS ‘21 


tamu leh, in line 5, the wording is identical with that of pillar A. The fol- 
lowing is a list, given line by line for easy reference, of the different readings 
in the two pillars. These differences are touched upon in the body of the 
notes, | 


Pagan Museum Reading. Myinkaba Reading. | Line, 

§ Sri 6 Sra “a I 
805 liy 0805 liy a 
BS thiw 085 thuiw ee 5 
old pay vo pay ee 5 
coqecous = tamu leh > ka ee 5 
0} pay 00 pay — 6 
old pay ood pay 7 
old pay ood pay ans 8 
oS siy 805 : siy ae 
300) maya GoosS «= maya’ om | a8 
208 ity B05 liy | wx | 19 
qo rhiya Qa rhuy or EY 
86 —thiw 38 thuiw wee EE 
2 @g90 show og 2d TWwow . won | 49 
BO phiw BS thuiw we | 29 
20099 yd a ovo235 = maya’ we | 23 
«BSE thiw 88 thuiw ra | 25 
cg = rwoh Sq | nwo va | @6 
086 thuiw 008 thiw ie 1 
Gord sic’ exad sie’ was 29 

~* got prajiia {S932 pranja im | 30 
3900 acaka som acak ‘in em 


soG8hcoo Arimittiya oo §8g°.5> Arimittirya ... | 33 


22 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


Text of the Burmese Face of the Myaszedt Pillar at Myinkaba (Plate f, B). 
1. Sra? » namo Buddhaya® [+] . . rha skhan sdsand tac thon khrek ry& 


Fs . 
oegceeenpree@rntbeerteteesoe*"se = Gees we DB @ @ 6 


chay he ........n lity bri ra ka « iy Armaddanapur ma 
wanddityadhammaraj mafi su mah 


Chee ee ee ee yd tac yok su ka Trilokavatath 
Df tae ee ...... thuiw pay mayd si ka Rajakuma 


Sees »... .... kyon suth rwoh pay. may4; 4 

CLre ferro re ss ee ye .. fa ka s pay maya ta 

see aS (vee eee sy we ee ae SR Pay. ea xu cd SERS 
kuma4 | .* 

ree eae rae . tuth e’ « thuiw man anhac nhac chay 

ee J ae e’ sly khamd nd su rhow nhik e . 
et a aa es r mafi su pay maya’ si mimi 

eer eee ee oe ee klafijo okmi ra ka « rhuy 

Vsten ns oes OS ey oA Ree » e’ nhap liy su rhow.. . 

ee ee ’ a ay rhuy purha ka 


. aphie’ atie’® . . y& .. plo’ su teh «. 
. n sum rwoh athui’‘ kyon na skhan ‘piy su safi ka . 
. thuy purhd 4 atui’ kyon . . y ye’ « thuiw rwolw] 


~h man nhac. klui’ ra ka kon then’ teh kone... 


. teh min’ ruy’ e’ « s[ang]r[i] Mahdather » sangzi . 

. liputtatissatther » sangri Sume . . papdits nee Reskns ‘4 

. 1» sangri Brahmadiw » sangrt So . § sangri Sanghasenawarapandi 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 


t » thuiw skhan ty’ am... ..h man riy son e’s 

thuiw bri ra kd thuiw Rajak........... y ae 84 thuiw rhuy 
parha thapand . 2 <0 @ sere wen es so ka “iad 

plo’ bel ra k . ty kG porhd tho... 2 i ee ws 

Sakmunalon tac rwo « Rapav t® ...... Henbuiw ta 


1 The stone has § instead of &. 


& Mr. 


Blagden suggested (A Further Note, etc., p. 798) that in the space after Buddhdya, there 


probably was a second (§, ¢ri. But after examining the stone carefully and taking measurements, I think 
such was not the case, Only the first stroke of ya in “ Buddhdya” is visible, and there appears to be 
about the space necessary to write the two strokes (#) after Buddhdya, and 2) the first part of QQ. 

3 The is and postscript a’ ate somewhat damayed, . 

4 This should be atus’, but the stone clearly reads ethui’; whether this is original or is due to a defect 
in the stone cannot easily be ascertained, 

§ The right half of ¢ has disappeared, 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS | 33 


27. c rwoh # iy klon [surmh]’ rwoh yo ruy’ e’ « thiw 

38. Rafa #5 Ba pay may iy ka pane a riy 

2g. son ruy’ e’ iy sie’ min’ e’ @ iy i amho’ 

3o. ka sarwwafifutafiay prafijd ra ap’* sd akron phlac ciy? 

31. teh # non 4 ha sa lah gon « na mliy lafi gon 

32. § na achuy lafi gon # sii tac thd lafi gon « iy purhd a na 
33. |hO kha su kyon anhip acak teh ma mu ka» » Arimittirya pu 
34. -rhad skhan a phi ra ciy 1 o 1 


I].—PiILLar A, AT THE PAGAN MUSEUM (Plate 1, A). 


The pillar in the Pagan Museum is somewhat smaller than the other. Its 
total height is 4 feet 8} inches, the capital being 1 foot 2% inches. All the faces 
have the same dimensions; height 3 feet 6 inches; breadth 1 foot 2 inches. 
The surface of the Burmese face actually covered with writing is about, in height, 
3 feet 3 inches and in breadth 1 foot } inch. The height of the letters, not 
counting the superscript or subscript symbols, has an ereage of # inch. 


Text ted the Burmese Face of the Myasedi Pillax at the Pagan Museum. 


. © St « namo Buddhaya « purha skhan sdsand anhac ta 
2. c thon khrok rya nhac chay het nhac lon 
3. liy bri ra kd « iy Arimaddanapur mafi su prafi 
4. nhik 4 « Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraj mafi sa ma 
5. f phlac e’ » thiw man e’ pay maya ta 
6.c yok su ka Trilokavatamsakadevi 
7+ mafi e’ « thiw pay maya sd tamu leh Raja 
8, kumar mafi e’ » thiv man ka kyon suth rwoh 


g. teh pdy mayd 4 piy e’ « thiw pdy ma 


1 Summ (= three) is the reading in A, which seems necessary to the sense. The stone is broken here, 
Immediately after é/on (the left loop of the subscript / of which has been broken off), there is a word cut in 
two by the break, the lower part of which is clearly subscript / and the upper either si or pi; this would 
give a word, sii or pli, to which, in this context, I can ascribe no fitting meaning. Immediately after this 
there appears to be either yu or wyw subscript (more probably the former), and above it, separated by the 
break, what looks like the anusvadra (th). The letter to which yu is subscript, it is impossible to make 
out, Supposing this letter to have been s (f) this would give a reading ; syum, which perhaps might be a 
variant of sum. 1 have not been able to decipher these two words. 

- $ The stone has ao), for m§; either the stone has been damaged here, or the lapidary has forgotten 
to place the little slanting .stroke within the letter, thus making it look like ap, §; but as, as a final, it is 
naturally short and abrupt in tone, the subscript gS, a’, the sign of the short tone, is not here necessary. 


Moreover, the sense requires 28, am’, 


24 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


10, yd sly’ kha ra ka « thiw pay mayd tancha nhan’ thi 
11. w kyon sun rwoh su nhan’ teh thiw pay maya 
-¥3. sd a* 34 Rajakumar mafi so 4 man piy tum 
13. e? ¢ thuiw man anhac nhac chdy het nhac man mii bri. ru 
14. y-a® e’ siy kham@ na-su rhow nhik teh « thuiw Rajaku 
15. mar maf su pay mayd sd mimi kiew muy so man 
16. gri klafijo okmi ra ka » rhuy ati su purhd skhan a 
17. chan i ruy’ e’ nhap liy su rhow teh iysi’ 
18, min’ e’ « iy rhuy purhd ka na skhan aphie’ ati’. 
1g. kyon‘ plo’ su teh « kyon sum rwoh atu’ kyo 
20. n na skhan piy su safi ka iya rhuya purha 4 atui’ kyo 
21. n piy ye’ « thiw rhow teh man nhacklui’ ra ka kon 
22. lhef’ teh kon Ihen’ teh min’ ruy’ e’ sangri 
23, mahither # sangrl® Muggaliputtatissatther s sangri Su . 
24. medha pandit * sangri Brahmapal « sangri Brahmadi 
25. w # sangri Son 4 sangri Sanghasenawarapandi- 
26. t « thuiw® skhan tui’ amhok teh. man riy‘son e” 
27. « thiw bri ra ka thuiw Rajakumar mari su pay mayd a? sd 
28. thiw rhuy purha thapanda ruy' e’ iy rhuy athot ma so 
29, kit plo’ e’ # plo’ bri ra ka iy ka purha thot 
go. su rhow nhik teh « Sakmunalon tac rwoh « ‘Rapa 
31. y ‘tac rwoh s Henbuiw tac rwoh 1 iy kyon 
32. suth rwoh yo ruy’ e’ # thuiw a mses mait su pay 
33- et ad sd iy k@ purhd a riy son ruy’ e’ iy. sie’ 
34. min’ e’ « iy ff amho” ka sarwwafifutaha 


1 The inscription writes this word #, an unusual way of placing the virdma; it should be written 
Boh as in line 14. 
2 The true reading is goo .aScgon «(Vide Notes. 
3 For y’, os . the virdma has been omitted, as: in line 20, which has q|m_co instesd . of 
| RQ. 
' 4 Mr. Blagden, in his transcript, has by a ‘slip cayaf, but it is properly cay§, the loop at.the 
bottom left of y subscript is very frequent. 
5 The first and second off appéars to be. , but Forchhammer’s photograph seit the’ stone itself 
have a faint trace of the small curved line within the of (3) which does not appear in later estampages. 
¢ The slanting stroke in the centre of the letter th has faked off or has otherwise been’ 
that it now looks like a dh; but the oldest photograph of this pillar in: our possession clearly shows she 
traces of the stroke. 
1 Here again the tirdma has been forgotten ; this a with the virdma goes with the preceding word ; 
read therefore ©0029, mayd’. 


Epigraphia Birmanica . VOLUME I, PLATE L. 
INSCRIPTIONS OF THE MYAZEDI PAGODA, PAGAN 
THE BURMESE TEXT 


ra: — 


Lm) 


t) 


tb) 

x 
S 

1a 
© 

12 
12 
Ty 

18 
He, 

ou, 
oN 

ae 
Qe 

a4 
22 

nis 
aN ar ee OPP E 24 

; ts 
Age yeti! 
CY: 

st 
2 

ya 
aw 

AY, 
3G 

Ao, 

3B Pebe” oy se AS & : 3 


PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 25 


35. 9 prajfid ra am’ sd akron phlac ciy’? teh # ha 

36. non & ha s& lafigon # na mliy lafigon « na af{chu] * 
37. y lafigon « sd tac thi lafigon « iy purhad 

38. & na lht kha su kyon anhip acaka* teh md mu 
39. ka Arimittiya purha skhan a phi ra ciy a= 


Translation. 


Prosperity! Honour to the Buddha! One thousand six hundred and 
twenty-eight years of the Buddha’s religion having elapsed, Si Tribhuwan- 
adityadhammaraj became king in this city of Arimaddanapur. A beloved ‘ 
wife of that king was called Trilokavatatnsaka-devi, and that beloved wife 
had a son named Rajakumdr. The king gave that beloved wife three 
villages of slaves." That beloved wife having died, the king gave her 
ornaments® and the three villages of slaves to her son, named Rajakumar. 
In the presence of the king who, having reigned twenty-eight years, had 
become sick even unto death, the son of the beloved wife, who was named 
Rajakumdr, calling to mind the favours of the king who had nurtured him, 
made an image of the Buddha all in gold and, approaching unto his 
presence, spoke thus: “I, your slave,’ made this golden Buddha for® my 
lord ; the three villages of slaves which my lord gave me, I give to this golden 
Buddha.” In its presence® the king, being delighted, said: ‘Good, Good!"? 
and, in the presence of the Chief Monk, and of the ecclesiastical 


, } 88 and not QoS as transcribed by Mr. Blagden; it must have been a slip, for the subscript go 
is quite visible, 

* The chu is searcely visible in the plate. 

3 The virdma here also has been omitted, read acak, gooo5, 

4 wmolod, apdy, or 30005, apay, modern socoud, abhay, is a pure Burmese term and it is 
not derived from the Pali piya. In this inscription it is used adjectively, but this use does no more 
obtain ; this term is used now as an expression of endearment and cofresponds to the P4li bhadde, 

5 That is, as the Pali more explicitly states, to enjoy the revenues accruing therefrom. 

6 Under this term must be included all her jewellery and trinkets and probably other property ; 
the Talaing has éiryd, which in Burmese means: appendages, utensils, furniture; in fact, all that a 
person does or may use, 

7 Prope ‘ly: ‘I.’ A respectful form of the first personal pronoun used in addressing superiors. 

8 306835, “for, on behalf of,” that is, that the king might share in the merit of the good work; 
this is more fully expressed in the Pali, bhagam katvdna, 

$ That is, when he saw the golden image as it was brought in. 

19 Lit, “It will be good.” The king uses here the future, in reference to the prince’s intention 
of dedicating the three slave-communities. to the image. This is clear in the Pali: spasastemma 
vdjanam dha cintitam attano . . . . gdmattayark pi vo sdmi pubbe dinnan tu me aham imass? 
va munindassa dem, 


4 


6 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot. 1 


dignitaries, Muggaliputtatissatther, Sumedha-Pandit,’ Brahmapal, Brahmadiw, 
Son and Sanghasena Varapandit,! the king poured water." This being done, 
the son of the beloved wife enshrined the golden Buddha, and made this shrine 
with a golden spire. Having finished (it), when dedicating this shrine and 
Buddha, he brought up (the folk of) Sakmunalon, one. village, Rapdy, one 
village, Henbuiw, one village, these three villages of slaves and he, the son of 
the beloved wife, poured water for® this shrine and Buddha, and thus. said: 
“ Let this deed of mine be the cause of my obtaining Omniscience! After me, 
_ (whosoever) whether (he be) my ‘son, or grandson, or relative, or any other 
person, if he oppresses the slaves | have offered to this Buddha, may he not 
behold the Buddha Arimittiyd !’’ 


NOTES ON THE BURMESE FACE OF THE MYAZED! INSCRIPTION. 


Line 1.99, purhd, now written ogeps (b4srd*) but pronounced ‘ phaya’ 
and sometimes still ‘ phra.’ This is the well-known Burmese expression applied 
to exalted personages ; the Buddha isso called; the king was addressed with 
this word during the Burmese régime ; the monks are still so styled when spoken 
to; now-a-days, it is even used as an epithet when addressing Government 
officials of a certain standing. The temples, pagodas and statues of the Buddha 
are also called phaya. The form yg>, as found in the present inscription, 
appears to be the oldest; it is found subsequently written yquo (gurahd),‘ 
og? (bhurhd), 9q> (phurhd), gop (phurd) and finally ogops (bhura*). But 
this word is not, as might on the face of it be thought, Burmese in its origin ; it is 
found, under very slightly different forms, all over Indo-China, and even in Java. 
Opinions still differ as to dts derivation ; some eminent authorities would derive it 
from vara, a Sanskrit and Pali word meaning “excellent, noble, exalted’; this’ 
is the derivation generally accepted. Some years ago Mr. Taw Sein Ko 
(Burmese Sketches, p. 30) suggested a derivation from the Chinese Fu-ya (now 
pronounced Fo-yeh). The form Fo-ya does not explain the r in the second. 
syllable of the Burmese word; for there can be but little doubt, if at all, that 

1 Pagdit and varapapdit are properly descriptive honorific terms, equivalent to “learned” and 
“very learned.” 

£ The pouring of water is the usual rite of dedication. 

® goo, “to, for,” that is, he poured water to consummate the consecration of the image and 
shrine and in ratification of his dedication to them, for their serviee, of the three communities of 
slaves. The Talaing has the equivalent expression, Au. 


4 gauosthis is no doubt but another way of writing 99>, the aspiration being postscript instead 
of subscript, and to be really transliterated purhd. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 49 


this letter r, though now it is pronounced y, was sounded according to its original 
value in old Burmese, as « comparison with the languages most closely related to 
it—Tibetan, Lolo, Maru, etc.—-abundantly shows; the full value of yr is still 
retained in Arakanese, which is but Burmese of an archaic type. The form vara 
does not seein to explain the Burmese medial vowel u in purka ; but this vowel 
has been frequently developed in the first syllable of dissyllabie words when that 
syllable begins with a labial, but is now practically never pronounced ; examples 
are numerous in Burmese. All evidence tends to show that the Sanskrit word 
vara is the original of this expression, found under several forms as: polas, phola, 
poula, purahd, phurd, phara, phré, phray4, prah, prah, varah, etc. This seems to 
be settled by the Phimanakas Inscription, where the old Khmer text has orah 
Igvara, the modern Cambodian being prak Eisor, and »vrak Mahabodhi = 
prak Mahabodhi! 

YY, ry4, one hundred = modern cp, rd (pronounced ya); this old form 
does not appear to have survived much later than the 14th century, from 
which period it is regularly replaced by the inodern and shortened form. It was 
no doubt pronounced as written: vyd, or, not improbably, with a short and some- 
what indistinct vowel sound between the 7 and the y, something between d and i. 
Forms closely approaching the Burmese ryd can be traced in some other more 
or less closely allied dialects of the Tibeto-Burman family, bearing in mind, for a 
large number of these dialects extending over a vast territory, the equation s— 
j—y, above all of the latter two, whose sounds are regularly found interchanged 
in those dialects. 

Old Kuki dialects :—Périm, rz-yd- ; Hirdi, Lamgang, arza ; Rangkhdl and 
Langrong, raja; Central Chin sub-group—Pankht, raza; different dialects 
of Northern Chin sub-group—zé, 7a, jhd, ya; Tibetan, brgya@, gya; Old 
Burmese, ry@; Mod. Burmese, rd, pr. yd. : 

I have found but very few words with the combination ry; they are: 
yo, ryak, a day = mod. qo}, rak, pr. yet; qyé, muryan, a kind of rice 
grown on the banks of rivers and lakes = mod. qqct:, muran® (pr. mayin'), 
Some others of these old forms will no doubt be yet discovered. 

core, chdy, a variant of mod. <005, chay; this kind of variants, that is, by 
the insertion of along a, is pretty frequent; for instance, in Myazedi pillar A, 
the word olcS, pay, dear, beloved = mod. 20005, abhay, is regularly written 
with medial long 2, except in lines 15 and 27, where it is dropped and the word 


1 See B.E.F.E.0., 1918, No. 9, p. 9 ff, Fournal Astatique, mai-juin 1914, p. 643; Mission Pave, 
Histoire, p, 228, note 2, and 237, note 1; Reoue /ndo-Chinorse, 15 février 1904, P. 138, note 2, 


28 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. | 


written 005, pay; but this latter ooS is constant in Myazedi pillar B, 
lines 5, 6, 11. Other instances are: (Q2c08, khranse, lion; (926 mrdn, 
horse; og2$, kywan, slave; wo&, chan, elephant; cord, Jay, field; for 
Qe05., (G&:, ag$, «& and ood, respectively. All these variants, which 
may after all be phonetic representations, are found written indifferently in 
one way or the other, often in the same inscription. 


cud, het = mod. 96, rhac (pr. shit), the number 8. This is the only 
inscription in which this word is found so written, and it is no doubt the old 
Burmese form, which is also in pillar B, line 2, in which the final ¢ has flaked off. 
In other inscriptions it is found written 0905, yhat, 098, yhac, 99%, shac, ag, 
shyac, and 9°, rhac, the last being the most common; all are pronounced shift, 
except 0905, which now would be read shat but which probably was pronounced 
something like yAat at the beginning of the 13th century. It is probable the pro- 
nunciation in the 12th century was as itis spelled here, that is Aet; but the 4 must 
have been pronounced very much as a palatal sibilant, the organs being almost in 
the same position as when pronouncing the syllable se, that is, the middle of the 
top of the tongue against the palate, but the contact while pronouncing this old 
Burmese /# was not quite so hard as it is for ke; the breath, being then strongly 
forced through, produces a kind of fricative very similar in sound to English sh or 
French ‘“chuintante,”’ ch into which, as requiring less effort, it would naturally 
glide. Whether or not it was really so—that it was seems to be corroborated by a 
few other words, as will be seen lower down—these two words, Ae¢t and rhac, are 
undoubtedly closely allied, though they present two distinct forms. In this con- 
nection, it is interesting to notice that a large number of Tibeto-Burman 
languages have forms representative of either the one or the other, while others 
again have the-—what | would call—medial or connecting form with initial sh. A 
comparison of the materials on Tibeto-Burman languages now available, makes it 
clear that the two forms (with initial 4 or 7) may roughly (and provisionally) be 
divided into eastern and western with special reference to Burma. The line, as 
may well be understood, cannot be a sharp and fast one; there is certainly over- 
lapping; but broadly, it may be stated that the forms with initial & are mostly 
found in the languages to the east ; those containing an r in the languages to the 
west, Burma being roughly the dividing line from south to north. 

East: he’, hé, het, he'e, he-te, hei, hi; hié, ho, hé, th, hen, hon. 

West: rhe, re, rai, pre bhre, ma-rit, garit, riet, pa-riet, riet-ka, ka-rict, 
arret, Ki-ret, ka-ret, ka-rat, atl, ta-rik, ti-ret. It is interesting to note that 


PART 1} THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 29 


in Pyu this number is 47a (rh); but at the present stage of our knowledge of 
Pyu, it would be unwise to class it as yet at all in any group or sub-group. | 
The form with sk is found in—Maru, shi; Lashi, she¢; Szi, shst; Garo, 
shet; Chinbdk, shit. In. Tamlu (Naga) we find set (the equivalence of 5 
and A in not a few Tibeto-Burman languages is frequent). 
Burmese, as we have seen, had both forms, ket (found only in. this ‘insetip- 
tion, on both pillars) and rhac (pr, shi#), The close connection between the two 
is shown by a few other words which have undergone the same changes, the 
older form being in 4 and the later in rk, both being dater on: frequently. found’ in 
contemporaneous inscriptions. The most common is 3&, :As, “to be, to have,” 
which has become &, ri (pr. skt). Some dialects of ‘the- Central Chin sub- 
group, such as the Lai and the Banjogi, have the same verb s&t; several Lolo 
dialects have retained the form 41, while others have Ae’, which is also found in 
Burmese, cop, he, and -cvosS, fe’. Mr. Taw Sein Ko informs me that in 
Tavoyan this word is still pronounced At; 905, Auty, oS, hway (pr. Amé), 0905, 
huy (pr. Awe), these forms representing a frequent go, rhuy (pr. shwe), 
medieval §, rhwi (pr. shmi), and the modern op, rAwe (pr. shwé), meaning 
“gold.” With this may be compared the Kortsé (Sifan) rkwo and the Dzorgai 
(Sifan) shruo, also the Yawdwin rhws. Again, 28$, ahin = mod. 98, arhin 
(pr. asheign), “ heat, velocity, power”; the Tavoyans pronounce this word ashin. 
Moreover, this word het seems to show that modern final ¢ (8) in some 
words stands for an older final #; it is still, in fact, pronounced as a ¢. In 
some other words it appears for a final & (05); cf. the Maru words sa, a 
tree, Burmese 006, sac; asak, new, Burmese 0008, asae; pak, to throw, to 
shoot, Burmese ‘pac ; rit, a river, Burmese mrac, pronounced mrit and now mytt. 
cco2§, Jon = mod. o3$, /wan, to go beyond, pass, elapse. A comparison 
of the Tibeto-Burman dialects establishes the equivalence among them of x, 9, 
and w; two or three examples of such interchange are found in this very inscrip- 
tion and will be noticed in their place. So, in the earlier inscriptions, the words 
now since several centuries regularly written with w medial followed by a final 
Consonant ora vowel, were written with o or w. Besides coos} =. mod. o9§, this 
inscription céntains also the following words :— coq>$, kyon = mod. og$, dywan, 
a slave; c002§, son = mod. og$, swan, to pour; soc020, ethof = mod. 
soaz6,, aihwal, also written so09e5, sthwat, pinnacle, summit ; ¢0g205, Jet = mod, 
o305, /hwat, to let go, hence to dedicate. The same seems to have obtained 
also in Talaing about the sth century in a few words at least ; for instance, the 


30 _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA von. 1 


word for ‘som’ is properly written coo2§, fo, before and after the 15th 
century, but in some plaques of the latter date found at the Ajapala pagoda near 
Pegu, this word is written og§, Awan; even a form ¢og2}, won, in which both 
letters are retained is also found, with which may be compared the Burmese 
cag$, Aywon, slave, in an inscription dated 1190 A.D. 

Line 3.—0305, /ty = mod. co, Je, a verbal suffix denoting sadefnite past- 
time; also euphonic. A number of words ending, as the above, in sy (#05) are 
found so written in epigraphs extending over a period of about four centuries, 
that is, up to the end of the 46th century and perhaps evenalittle later. Besides 
0805, iy, the other words with the same ending found in this inscription are : 
805, pty, lines g, 12, 20, 21 == mod. cos, pe’, to give; gf, line 10 == o8c6, siy, a 
variant of the usual 0805, sty, line 1.4 = mod. 609, se, to die ; 805, rity, lines 26, 33 
= mod. cq, ve, water, and 805, cry, lines 35, 39 = mod. oo, ce, here a precative, 
often also used as a causal particle. 

The final y (05) is not a consonant, but the vowel ¢ as in the French 
“ étre, prétre” which, in the course of a few centuries, has changed into the more 
close éasin French “été”; the medial ¢ (®) stands for the semi-vowel y ; so 
that the above words inust have been, at that time, pronounced: 0805, Jyé (lié) ; 
cd, pyé (pié) ; of05, sye (si€), etc. ; the semi-vowel being dropped inthe course of 
time and the open é becoming the close ¢, these words have become, as they now 
are: cco, le; co, pe (now Gus, fe* with the heavy tone) ; s0o,se, etc. A reference 
to other Tibeto- Burman languages shows that this must have been the case ; for 
the sake of better comparison, | have, besides the words in the Myazedi inscription; 
added a few others having the same spelling ; the list might have been somewhat 
longer but for the fact that the word-lists in the several publications at my disposal 
do not include a large number of them. It must be remembered that in most of 
these languages the interchange of the vowels a, 4, e, 4, is frequent not only among 
the various languages, or dialects of one language, but even within one and the 
same language ; for instance, in Burmese to a large extent. Similarly the deve- 
loping of a final nasal (nasalized vowel) and the dropping of it, as well as of final 
consonants, such as &, d, ¢, is frequent and Burmese also offers not a few examples 
of these. All of the dialects having the same form are not mentioned ; they are 
in some instances too numerous, and may be referred to in the works cited. 

8o5, pry (pr. pye), mod. cos, pe* (pr. ~é*), to give; Maru, pys#; Tibetan 
(written), sbytn-pa; Lokhe dialect of Tibetan (Darjeeling), dy; Lolo 
(Mission d’Ollone; Languages non Chinots, p. 19), bieuk and ké bieu (eu 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 4 


as in French ‘peu, peut’). A large number of Tibeto-Burman dialects 
have preserved (with or without prefixes or suffixes or the final nasal) the 
forms pt, pe and 1; cf. Tibeto-Burman dialects: Sharpa, 612; Dajonka, 
phin; Himalayan dialects: Gurung, pen, pingo; Bahri and Rong, 41; Dhimdl, 
pi-li; Thami, pr-yang; Yakha, pz; Khambu, pr-te; Old Kuki dialects: 
Kolren, a-p2; Kom, ka-~e; Piriim, fe, etc. 

805, siy, and 085, sty (pr. syé), mod, coo, se fies thé), to die ; Black 
Lolo, thye; Lolo (Naseupu), Asy*; Lolo (Tatseu), sse-46; Mosso, shre-tz; 
Limbu (Nepal), sz; Maru, shtk; Lashi, shtk, she; Katchui, s#; Tibetan, 
cht-pa, shs-pa. | 

8S, rty (pr. ryé), mod. eq, ve (pr. yé), pronounced by the Arakanese 
rt, water; Lolo (Ahi), dyé yt; Lolopo, ot-dyé; Black Lolo, yé; Lolo 
‘(Achipo), y#; Lolo (Iyen), y#é; Mosso, gie; Maru, 7#; Lolo (Kopu), ya. 

Words from other inscriptions are: 


(1) $05, 1'y (pr. myé), mod. 63, xe? (pr. ué!), day (the word for sun, which 
is the same, is devoid of the short tone, 33. me); Eastern Dafla and Miri, 
da-ny?; Bunan (Lahul), zyt-ts#; Lolo dialects: Ijen, nzé; Neé, nfe-tze; Noseu, 
nte-ti; A-chang, #7; Maru, #@; Lashi, nyz-hyo; Szi, &hu-nyr; Pon, kha-nt. 

In an inseription dated 1442 A.L., the word is found written s§, xze. 

(2) $5, mty (pr. nye), mod. 3, ne (pr. #é), to dwell, stay; Maru and 
Szi, na; Lashi, nyt. | 

(805, krty (pr. kye or aA), mod. logs, 4re® (pr. zye), copper; Kachin, 
ma-grt, ma-fyt; Lolo (Achipo), dyz; Lolopo, 7e; Lolo (Moseu), 2Azé pid; 
Maru, &yt4; Lashi and Szi, yz. 

$05, mty (pr. mye), mod. 8, co, soee, mz, me, ame (pr. mé, amé), mother; 
Maru, myé; Lashi, my; Mosso, amyé, amé. Mr. Taw Sein Ko tells me that 
the Shan form is 65, mye, which corresponds- closely to S05, pr. myé. 

845, rzy (pr. ryé), mod. 9.8, ray (pr. yé, now yz), to laugh; Maru, ryz, rt; 
Lashi, yz; Lolo (Moseu), se, syé 7e. 

It is not easy to determine the exact value of final oS, y, atte the demonstra- 
tive of (mod.), in line 3, ef, zy, and line 18, god, zy; the old pronunciation of 
this can be just now but a matter of speculation, there are too few other similar 
examples to form an opinion. 

(8. or7, a variant of 8, prf; qo02, ra £4, mod. qaoos, va £a° (pr. yagd’). 
in modern Burmese this is used as a causal postposition, in the sense of “ owing 
to, because of,” etc.; in this inscription it is used as a continuative affix 


32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vor. 1 


implying priority to some other state or action ; sco0$BabBqaoo, fon h'y bvF ra Ra, 


“ having elapsed . . .”; line 10, vloSecosX¥oqo02, pay mayd sty kha va ké, “his 
beloved wife having died . . .”; line 27, BSQqooo, thiw brit ra kd, “ that being 
finished . . .” = after that, then. Cf, also lines 16, 21, 29. 


ao§09996, Arimaddanapur, one of the many classical names of Pagan; 
9§ = 9q, Pali pura, a fortified city, stronghold. | 

%, su, mod, coo, so (pr. thaw); it has been said on page 29 that 
the vowels o and ~ are used interchangeably ; this holds good, not only in 
related languages and dialects but also in the same language; in this inscription, 
for instance, we have oq, su, everywhere, except in lines 12, 15, 28, where the 
same word is written ¢002, so, as now; again, ¢Q105, plo’, line 29, and 
Qt, plu, line 17 = mod. Q, to do, to make; line 32, sw», yo = mod. oy, 
ya; line 34, e923, amho’ = zg, amhu. 

Line 4.—$05, Ask, found thus written only in the Myazedi pillars, it is 
a variant of 305, nhutk (pr. nhatk), a locative postposition. Cf. further on, 
so0895, a/1”, for soc$a5, atus’; BS, thiw, for oS, thut'w, etc. ; these variants 
are pretty common in other inscriptions also. _ 

%2, @ = mod, o>, 4°, used now exclusively as the true dative postposition ; 
in the oldest epigraphs, however, it was also extensively used to express the 
locative, either by itself or with another locative postposition, generally 305, nhurs. 
Such is the case in Tibetan, in which the dative suffix is often used to denote 
the locative (Z.S., II], Part I, p. 27). The Burmese postposition 4, a°, is found 
in all Tibetan dialects under the form /a, which in the west takes the form a 
(cf. Z.§., 111, Part I, p. 26). In this inscription this @ is. used in both relations, 
as a locative in lines 4 and 36 and as a dative in lines 9, 12, 20, etc. 

(RBoqQ 03 2Bayogerd;, SH Tribhuwanadityadhammaraj, this is the style of 
King Kyanzittha. ; . 

Line 5.—&§, phlac = mod. (§, phrac (pr. physt), to be, to become. A 
number of words with subscript o, /, are found. in Burmese inscriptions from the 
11th up to about the 15th century ; the words in this inscription with subscript /, 
besides 8, are—line 16, Bcog, Al/aiizo ; line 17, Qi, plu; line 19, ¢Q135, plo’, and 
line 36, 8, mlty. I have elsewhere (‘‘ Klafijo-kye®zu’,” in Fournal of the Burma 
Research Society, Vol. V, Part Il, p. 99) endeavoured to show that it was more 
than doubtful whether, in old Burmese (that is, of the 11th century and after), 
this / had really the value of an/ and was not rather a form of medial’r, (%, or 
y, J, for in pronunciation the Burmese make no difference between these two 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 43 


letters, and pronounce them both as ¥. I shall quote here the passage containing 
the examples: “In form it (the subscript 4 looks, it is true, like an /, and is 
written exactly as in Talaing inscriptions in which it has really this value, for 
instance in the word 42, c/on, in the Talaing face of the Myazedi. But such is 
not its value in old Burmese epigraphs, where it stands indifferently for a +j, y, or 
a (,7, and shows incidentally that, even in the 12th century A:D., the r had 
already lost its original pronunciation and had softened into a y, while in Arakan it 
has retained it up to the present. Even the cursory examination of a few Burmese 
inscriptions clearly brings this fact into light, for the same words are often found 
indifferently written with an 7 or y, as the case may be, or with this supposed / 
symbol, and sometimes both forms are found in the same epigraph. I shall 
quote here only a few examples. - The numbers within brackets show the dates of — 
the inscriptions :—o§>05, khvok (1197) ; 8205, Ahlok (1380) ; a&, Zhyan (1207) ; 
BS, khlaw. (1373); 22R, sakhriey (1207); e805, khley (1229), the modern form 
is 6G,6G ; .c(908, Aron (1229) ; 8326, Alon (13.42) ; i, para (1284); Oi, pale 
(1299); 68, phrac (1284); &8, phlac (1112, 1299); saqrd, Ayon (1084) ; BF, 
kiwan (1395). 

“The following are: examples of the same words written both ways in the 
same inscription :—-&¢8, plait, Ge prafi (1197); (3, 4rwam, the anusvara, in 
Burmese, always stands for an 7, so that the word is properly érwan; &&, £/wan 
(1373), this interchange of anusvdra (= Burmese ») with 2 is rather scarce, but 
several other examples have been found. | 

‘ To the above may be added—o88, man fri, &B, man ki (1 205); in an 
inscription dated 1385 A.D., both forms follow each other in the same line 200000 
»  « GOQPEGQSSjoocovky, (ayakd. .. . kyon pruruy plusa kon mhu.. . ‘thes 
deed of merit performed by the devotee building a monastery.’ The last few 
examples are particularly interesting, as they show both forms in the same’ 
document.” 


Researches subsequent to the article above quoted show, however, that, 
notwithstanding the recurrence of the same words contemporaneously under two 
forms, there can be ro doubt that this subscript / was given its proper value and 
that the Burmese of eight centuries ago wrote their language as they pronounced 
it, that is, phonetically. This curious recurrence of the same word, written somes 
times with an / and sometimes with an r or y, points to a stage in the language 
during which this particular class of words was undergoing a phonetic change. 
which is reflected in the epiyraphs. It is, moreover, well known that these 

5 


34 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


letters, /, y and y, are to a great extent interchangeable even within the same 
language, as is evident in Burmese. For instance, whereas the Tavoyans have 
preserved the /, the Arakanese pronounce the same word with an 7, but the 
Burmese with a y. From what precedes it may be deduced that subscript / 
represents, in Burmese, an earlier form of the words in which it occurs; and 
that these words were, for a certain period, pronounced indifferently with an / or 
with an » probably already softening into y, since we find them, during that period, 
indifferently spelt with any of these three letters. An exhaustive comparison of 
all the words in Burmese which now contain a medial 7 or y with related dialects 
would no doubt reveal, in many cases, those among them which could be traced 
back to an earlier dialectical form with / But this would be a task of some 
magnitude. Meanwhile, the list of words given below, with medial / and found 
in this inscription and some others, compared with their equivalents in -other 
Tibeto-Burman languages, may prove interesting, in so much that it shows that 
many, if not all as yet, have also been found with a medial / in other languages. 
The lists of words at my disposal unfortunately often do not contain the words 
I was comparing. 

35, phlac; mod. (95, phrac (pr. phyzt); no equivalent of this word 
could be found. 

6Qlc5, plo’, and Mi, plu, mod. Q, pru (pr. pyu), to do, make; Tibetan, 
spyod-ba ; Chinbdk, pyro. 

BS, mit'y (pr. mlyé), mod. c(gt, myve* (pr. my), grandson, grandchild ; Lolo 
dialects: Achipo, fs so (so = son = B. sa’); Lolopo, /: po (po = sign of the 
masculine) ; Naseupu, #@ s/:: all these mean" grandson”; grand-daughter is : 
Achipo, 4 4 mé; Lolopo, /s mo (mo = feminine, Burm. ma) ; Pyu, pit, grandchild ; 
Tavoyan, m/e’, 

&%cag, Alaizo (two other old forms are: ogy, e/ariz#, 1375 A.D., Bed, 
klanecht, 1194 A.D,), mod. cogsg:, kye* sa? (pr. /ye® sd*), favour ; the only equivalent 
found is Kachin, ¢yaw ya; in related languages, the vowels a, e, #,0, are often 
interchanged ; also the consonants y. 7,2; for instance, in the Lolo dialects, sx, 
50, se = B. sé’, a son: ‘‘to take” is in Singphd, ya and 70 ; “ one hundred,” in the 
Northern Chin sub-group, 24, 74, ya (see line 2, gp). 

m69826, aklon (1190, 1342 A.D.; inthe Myazedi it is written cfagos, 4ron), 
mod. socfagr&s, 6f692§, akron’, kron' (pr. ayyaung’, jyaung'), cause, reason, because ; 
Tibetan, rgyu, rkyen = cause, on account of, because; Maru, yaung ; Tavoyan, 
aklong. 

cQlo5, shlok, mod. e&p5, £hrok (pr. chauk), the number 6 ; Sifan, fru, chro; 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 45 


Mosso, choa; Lolo (Liso), khrawk, chawk ; Maru, chauk; Lashi, chuk; Szi, 
cho; Kachin, 4ru; Ao (N4ga), tvoé; Khan (Naga), farok; Kham, teri, tard ; 
Tengsa (Naga), ¢helok; Siyin, /ok, /uk; Tibetan,’ drug. The equivalence of 4 
(g) and ¢ (d) is common. | 

6S205, kok, mod. cayood, kyok (pr. t7yauk), stone, rock; Lolo, éa-/aw ; P’én, 
Ralok; Maru, laukepat; Lashi and Szi, luk; Tibetan, drag (rock); Tavoyan, 
klok, lot. 

Bi, Pklad, mod. §, Phra (pr. phy), white; Lolo (Wo-ni), pyu; Lolo (Ssi- 
ch’uan). phru; Kachin, praw, progn; P’én, a-phyu; Maru, Lashi and Szi, 
phyu; Tavoyan, phd. 

CIE, thlon, mod, cqoS:, Ahyon’ (pr. chaong), alarge brook, rivulet, river ; Sifan, 
che-kong ; Sifan (Peu), chaung 0; Maru, hok-lawng, kiaung ; Szi, khawng ; Ahi 
(Lolo), yt cho (CE. B. cqegj&s, pr. ye chaony) ; Tavoyan, £hlong ; Tibetan, Alun, ches 

8, mlac, mod. (, mrac (pr. mrtt, now mytt), a large river; Matu, rtt; 
Tavoyan, w/tt. 

oS, A/wat, mod. ogo, Aywat (pr. tut), to be loosed or freed from. Cf. 
Tibetan, glod-pa, to loose ; grol-ba, to become free ; Tavoyan, £/wat (pron. &lué). 

oat, Alon, mod. cayrks, kyon® (pr. t/yaong), a monastery; I have not found 
this word in the vocabularies. Mr. Taw Sein Ko, however, tells me that it is still 
pronounced é/ong in Tavoyan; and he givesthe Chinese kung (pr. kiong in the 
Amoy dialect) in Burmese Sketches, p. 30. 

G39, e’, mod. qj, t. It will be remarked that the modern form is merely a 
simplified way of writing the old one, and that it is really e’ with the short tone, 
but now pronounced # (short). The 35, postscript or subscript, was the sign of 
the short abrupt tone ; it was fully written for a very long time and finally degener- 
ated into the easier and more quickly written dot (.). In modern and medieval 
Burmese q@ is used solely as a genitive suffix and as a verbal suffix of the present 
but used in recounting past events. As a genitive it is used only m line 5 : B50é 
cxv)odeus, thiw man e' pay maya, “the king's beloved wife”; as a sign of the 
genitive, dj, 2, has become altogether formal, and is replaced, in familiar conver- 
sation, by the shortening, if long, of the vowel of the word preceding it. It is 
interesting to notice that such was already the case at the beginning of the 1ath 
century ; except in line §, in the phrase just quoted, this suffix is everywhere else 
replaced by the shortening of the vowel preceding it by means of the short tone 
Sign 3 actually written or even also left out and to be supplied in reading, for 
instance, line 33, 9v02c5a00, maya’ sd, “ wife’s son,” but line 10, cacxcc$co>, mayd 
tancha, properly ovcodSaafeo3, maya’ tanch3. ‘Asa verbal suffix showing the past, it 


36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL."1 


is used in lines 5, 7,9, 13 and 26, Besides the two above uses, which are still current, 
eo is used inthe Myazedi in a way that has now become long obsolete, that is, as a 
slightly emphatic or as a particularizing particle after the connecting parti¢le. qo, 
ruy; examples are found in lines 14, o8 Gq ScoS8oSog9onqe q28$adecced, mat mi 
bri ruy’ ¢' sty khami na su rhow nhik teh, ‘‘ and having reigned (28 years) became 
‘sick even unto death”; 17, qgpaSssetQiqgiess, purha skhan achah plu 
yuy’ e’..., “and having made a statue of the Buddha...” ; 22, 8 § ess, 
min’ ruy'e, “and having said . . .”; g5s (= e005 of the Myazedi) is used 
in modern formal language in the same way. Up to now, the only other 
inscription in which I have met this word thus used is dated 1194 A.D. 
With cs5 genitive, mod. q (pr. #), may be compared the Tibetan dys, gyt, t 
and the Chinese cht: (Z.S., If], Part 1, p. 3, and Part Il], p.6: H. B. Hannah, 
A Grammar of the Tibetan Language, p. 63). With eo suffix of the past 
time may be compared @ in Lushei, Lai, Zahao, Anal, etc.; e in Sopvoma, 
Kabul, Khnirao, and we in Angami (Z.S., III, Part Ill, p. 7). 

8, thtw, mod. &, ¢hui (pro. ¢hd), that, the; a variant of 9, thutw; 
both forms 085 and of5, the latter being the more common, are found pro- 
miscuously mixed in this inscription, both are even found in line 27. Cf. also 
85, /rw, and cS, /utw (mod. ©9, /ut, to desire), in the same_ inscription 
dated 1194; 66, ak/tw = modern so2372, akyui® (1179, 1194 A.D.) ; 8898, 
miwran (1165 A.D.), 898 muiran (1408 A.D.) = mod, 9a&s, muran’®, a kind 
of rice. The same variant with the short tone is 10085, afz’= mod. 8, éus’, for 
which pillar B has socc8s5, azie’, and with this latter cf. s06¢895, aphte’, line 18 = 
mod. 90, afAu:’. Similar forms are found in an inscription dated 1165 A.D., 
685, kiew = mod, &, hud; 035 , tiew'= mod. of, tus* ; 85, thiew = mod. &, thus ; 
go835, zyss”, in line 17, is likewise a variant of gcde8s8, ysze’, inline 33 = mod. 
efjo§, iso’. Inline 15, 65, &zew, the body, hence ‘self,’ is the-mod. %, 4us (pr. £6), 
wrongly spelt oS, &uty, under the impressiori it is derived from the Pali kaya. 
Lolo dialects have this word under slightly different forms : g6, 4’6, gu, ko-po, ke-po. 

olo5, pay, mod. uo0005, abhay, the new spelling for 2005, apay (pr. apd), dear, 
my dear, used by a man addressing a woman, This is a pure Burmese word and 
is not, as some native scholars would have, derived from the Pali prya. Sez 
under coood, line 2. 

Line 6.—«co, 44 = mod. coo, k@, See under ay below. 

Line 7.—cx, ‘amu, mod, og, tam#, ‘one,’ now prowing obselescent, ©, 
ta, is the number one; ¢, mz, in several Lolo dialests seems fo Se an invase -- 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 3 


numerative particle, placed practically after every number; Kopu (Lolo), 72 su, 
ta mu; Naseupu (Lolo), a mx, ta mo; Lolopo (Lolo), #’s m0. 04 is generally 
followed by cogs, /a##*, represented in this inscription by soudB, /eh, which is explained 
below. cogcog§s is applied to persons only and is very emphatic and particularizing, 
and may be translated “‘ the one sow,” that is “the son.” Pillar B, instead of 
coyecood, has og, 4 ==.nod. o00s, £2", which is a nominative suffix, emphatic and 
particularizing ; the translation of B therefore would be “‘ the son”; the expression 
in A is more emphatic. 


ood, /eh, mod. cop§s, daz® (pr., in formal discourse, 4°, in conversation /é°) : 
and, also. 1 have shown already, with examples, the regular interchange of 
the vowels #, é, gin Burmese, which was already apparent in the old inserip- 
tions; and also that the true value of 5, 4, final is not that of a nasal, but of 
the vowel ¢ (short or long) and pronounced #, 2, or é; this is made clear beyond 
doubt by the evidence of the epigraphs. Whether, i in some words, this final 9§ 
does really go back to an earlier fogm with a final nasal, is beyond the scope of 
these notes; my desire here is simply to point out that our oldest documents 
show abundantly this symbol to have had the value of ¢ and ¢ in the 12th 
century already. This particle, c.oo5, is found indifferently written, sco, /e, 6008, 
_ dew, 05, lari (= li), and ¢c025, /e#, properly fe-s (pr. 4é or de), In eooc5, deh, the 
final 4 does not represent an aspiration, but is the old way of indicating the heavy 
tone now shown by two dots (t). Cf. gc8, uwak = mod. g>, 2wd’, cow; 200, sah = 
mod. 2038, 84", son; 80005, ms’yak = mod. ocoo:, maya’, wife ; o3c5, samth = mod. 
o08s, sami*, daughter ; 0005, kak = mod. coor, 44°, nominative emphatic particle. In 
this very inscription coovS is found written e998, line 36, in the expression coSeol, 
laigon = mod. wpecorS, fai® kon’ (pron. /i* geok® and fa gaok’), which 
means literally: “ ae as_ well - coos, teh = mod. copgs, fad’ (pr. é', 
di"). 

Line 8.—6g205, oatk mod. §>, rwa (pr. yw), a village. In Tae it is 
pronounced ol, w4. This work is found in this inscription only; that it is an 
old form may be seen from the following in related languages :—Maru, waw ; 
Lashi, wo; Szi, wa; Tavoyan also, w%; Chinbék, :-rew; Burmese has 
preserved the initial y; it seems to have lost it in a few words, for instance, 
“bamboo” = Burmese, ols, w2*; Haka, rwa; Chigbdk, rao. The & is not 
easy to explain, for Burmese contains no words with a final aspiration, unless it be 
the sign of the heavy tone, as explained under cod, sugra. Pillar B has but 
once only, ego, rwo, which form.is nearer to the modern rad, 


38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


Line 9.—ccoxS, tek, mod. op§s, tan" (pr. #* or df"); it is used here, as in 
modern Burmese, as a terminal and emphatic particle. The remarks under 
saxd, supra, apply also to this word, which is found also written.ea, /e (1190 
| AD}, gh, fet Apr. #) (1188 A.D.), and scop§; de (pr. te or #8), in numerous 
ingest pions. 

Line 10,—0, 4ka, mod. 9, khat" (pr. bhP); & particle showing time not loag. 

past, also euphonic. 
Line 12,—-coosso0, sé a sd; the stone, where the first coo is, is slightly _ 
damaged ; on close inspection of the pillar, however, it is evident that the lapidary, 
as he proceeded, found out his error, and scratched off the first co>, the left 
stroke of which is still visible; the 90 following should have the virdma, 3, 
which appears to have been forgotten, as it has been in two or three other places. 
The sentence is then perféet and reads : Bdvlodon2seoxqpanqoergeciss0079; 
“to the son of the beloved wife, named. Rajakumar « . 2” Cf. line 39, 
where the 90 is also without virdma. 

Line 13.9, #8, the same asin mod. Burmese. Cf. the Ahi (Lolo) #20 
with the same meaning, ‘to do, make,” 

Line 14.—=q8, an error for Qe, ruy’, mod. og.,. bet (pr, “ywé), and 
generally written in the abbreviated form g, a:verbal connective particle, equal 
in sense to the Pali fea; for qi8eoS see under ee, Pp. 35- 

og, Akama, a verbal suffix expressing the near future, may be translated : 
‘on the point of, about to”; it seems to have long fallen into disuse ; the modern 
equivalents are: 09, /1, o9§s, / n*, cqecod, fu matat. 

095, rkow, mod. ¢g, rhe’ (pr. sh&), before, in the presence of, near: 
this word appears again in lines 17, 21 and 30, an examination of which leaves no 
doubt as to its meaning. I have found no equivalents in other languages. 

Line 15.88, mined, for 88, mss, a pronoun = one’s self. 

oB5, kiew, modern Bod, busy (pr. #6) ; see under 85, p. 36. 88cd85 = 
mod, 88805, ‘‘ one’s body,” that is one’s self. 

qo, weuy (pr. mwé), mod. 39:1, mmeé, to nourish, take care of, oe Up; 
medial ss, before the vowel é (cS), has naturally changed to its semi-vowel w ( g). 

Line 16.—{3, grt, for 68, érz, mod. &, drt* (pr. sy?) ; § is a phonetic 
spelling. 

ga%eg>, Alafizo, mod. copes, hye® 78° (pr. tfyé® s@*); see under 38, p. 332. 

gakS, owes, mod. caor0589, obme’. 

Line 17.—-&|, pis, mod. Q, pru (pr. pyu); see under QS, p. 32. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 39 


35, nhap. This word offers the only real difficulty in this inscription in 
that no other word in the modern language can be traced back to it in the 
sense it seems to have here, anc in that, up to the present, it has been found 
only in this place, and there are, therefore, no other passages containing it 
from which, by comparison, its exact meaning might be settled. The 
Pali face reads here: upasankamma rajanam, “he (Rajakumara) having 
approached the king . .. ,” the corresponding passage in the Burmese 
being: gScBcSaqegq28ec008, nhap Ivy su rhow teh; if this is the exact 
equivalent of the Pali phrase, then hap must be taken as corresponding 
to upasankamma and to mean: to “ approach"; this is the opinion of 
Mr. Taw Sein Ko, whom I approached on the subject; it is also mine. In 
this case, one should have expected the locative particle $o5 (mod. $25) 
between 625 and coccS as in lines 14 and 30; the sense would then have 
been much clearer. The same omission occurs in line 21, in B8sq>rdco005, 
The Burmese literally means: ‘‘in the presence, whom he had approached, 
he spoke thus. (20508338 .$ ¢33).” | 

gSo8a8, sy sz”; see under 088, line 5. | 

Line 18.—s0c835, aphre’, mod. 2§, aphut! (pr. apho'); see under 88, 
line 5. 00338, aft’, a variant of :90°§38, afut’, which is found in lines 19, 20. 
a0§s8 is formed from the plural suffix ofs$ (this is seen in line 26) by 
means of the prefix. 9, a, and means ‘ we,’ the prince speaking of himself 
in the plural, and is therefore to be translated here by ‘I.’ In modern 
colloquial the plural suffix, &, /uz!, is often used as the first personal 
pronoun plural and is then pronounced dé'. It is but an abbreviation of 
ogy§So%  (og$aSoh), which is the equivalent of the old Burmese soc8aScaq$. 

Line 19.—¢g4198, plo’, mod. @, pru; see under &6&, line 5. 

Line 20—g,vo, a mistake for go5ao5, the virama having again been 
forgotten: several instances of the engraver's lack of attention have already 
been noticed. | | | . . 

a&, rhuy, mod. oy, rhwe (pr. shwé). Many Tibeto-Burman languages 
pronounce this word: shwt, shut, 

Line 21.—ewsS, ye’, a variant of coS; B has also cvoo3; this variant 
is found only in the Myazedi pillars. | 


BSc qodcor5, thim rhow tek; the locative suffix Zo8 (mod. 305) is omitted 
after rkow; lit. “in that presence,” that is, in the Buddha-image’s presence. 


40 ~—S EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vow. 1 


35:8 198, nhac b/us”; Mr. Blagden in his transliteration has 383,108, 
nhac phlut’; pillar B has 95¢8,93 very clearly, which Mr. Blagden has 
rightly noted as a correction. A’ careful examination of the stone itself, 
which is somewhat damaged at that place, made it clear it is really Qs. 
This word means “to be pleased, delighted”; the modern equivalents are 
z5B0S or pbQBos, nhac hhrutk, nhac druth, 38ccorks, nhac thon’, 358, nhac 
mrut', and 30005, nhac sak. The form 75<8,98, which would now be written 
388, hac krus!, and approximates to p8(Q05, nhac krutk, or 78Q05, whac 
khrutk, has not as yet been found but in this inscription. 

emohc03.£, fon then’, mod. cooéec8$, fon? lim' (pr. kaung® lea), “it 
will be good,” this corresponds to the Pali sadhu/ One would quite 
_ naturally have expected 959, sd@d@hu, also here, for it is-the usual exclamation 
of approbation and applause in things reliyious, and other epigraphic 
documents show that at the time the Myazedi’ inscription was composed, 
this word was already so used. But here the dying king expresses his 
approbation of his son’s ¢ntention, that is, of dedicating the. three slave- 
villages to the Buddha statue; hence, the future used in the exclamation, 
This intention, though clear enough in the Burmese and Talaing, is made 
much more so in the Pali by the use of the words ciatitam attano in line 
1g and of the future dems in. line 22. | 

Line 22.—cog§, chen’, is the result of the aesimnilation af Geo, a verbal — 
euphonic suffix, and of the future suffix oR, am’ (= mod. 39, pr. an!) ; coo, Je, is 
a variant of SoS (9.0. line 3); 0%, by itself, is found in line 35. This 
assimilation of the sufhx 3) to a preceding. euphonic or causative suffix 


ending in é is quite common: ¢q, éhye + 33, am’ = 45, khyim'; co, 
pe + %, am’ = 88, pim' (pronounced chén®, pén'); the subscript 4 as 


well as the final gutteral nasal c, #, show clearly that a9 § was written 
according exactly to its pronunciation; in speaking, the c of certain words is 
often slightly aspirated, for instance: in o>, “to come,” and this colloquial 
aspiration is actually shown in old’ manuscripts and not seldom ‘in letters 
written by half-educated Burmese. a7 

20ff, sangri, for off; sankri®, a high seclecinstical dignitary. This is 
no doubt an abbreviation of ~ocd28:, sanghadhy?*; sood. means “a member 
of the sangha” as well as the sangha collectively, The Talaings have 
also clipped this word to 08, san.. 


Line 23.—-oc2cnd, siahaeveries == Pali mahathera, a chief monk. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS gt 


Lines 23 to 25.—-The names of the six ecclesiastical dignitaries recorded 
here appear in the Pali face as Muggaliputtako, Sumedho, Brahamapalo, Brahma- 
devo, Sono, and Sarghaseno, As far as | am aware, the names of the five last are 
not found any more recorded in any Burmese document. The name of the first, 
however, appears scratched on the back of small votive tablets found at 
Wetkyi-in, Pagan, in the following short inscription: Muggaliputtacartyena 
mapitam :dam buddhardpam, “This Buddha-image has been made by the 
teacher MUBEMIpUcta, ’ Tt is not. certain to what statue and temple this 
refers. 

Line 26.—§05, riy, mod. cq, ve (pr. yé), water; see under 0805, p. 30, 
6002, son, mod. og§, swan, to pour. 

Line 27.—0wox, mayd a, for ovo208, maya’. 

Line 28,—s0600235, athot, mod. 20099, athwat, summit, pinnacle, spire, 
It is also written s00g05, athwat. 

Line 29.—9, ##@ = modern 9, 4%, from Pali guha@, a cave; this word 
commonly denotes a temple, into which access can be had, in contradistinetion - 
to the solid dagobas or pagodas with a bell-shaped superstructure, such as the 
Shwedag6n at Rangoon. This distinction is not generally observed in Burma 
among Europeans, every religious edifice being called a ‘ pagoda.’ 

co9o05, /hot, mod. 0905, /hwat, “ to dedicate.” 

Q9\2G09205993425 $05, in modern Burmese, would run : ogodcooseqepes fads 

Lines 30-31.—The names of the three villages enumerated here— 
aoxigaccork, Sakmunalon, qvld, Rapay, and curhg5, Henbutw—are now completely 
forgotten; they do not appear in any of the lists of localities often given in chron- 
icles. 1 am inclined to think that they are not Burmese names, they do not look 
as such; no reasonable sense can be extracted out of them, as can be done for 
other Burmese place-names, almost without exception. The third only, ceo$86&, 
has a faint and distant resemblance to a Burmese word and, according to phonetic 
rules, might represent a modern Q$SoSa AdsGod or gS8odilod (pron. 66 = Pali bala), 
meaning a “chief”; 9$, rhen (pr. sheng), means ‘to be hot,” 9§, to “ smart ” 
and also “the faculty of becoming invisible’; these yield no rational sense. 
9, rhan (pr. shin), means a “novice,” and g&%05 would be a ‘‘ master of | 
novices,” but this expression, in this particular sense, is nof Burmese. Enquiries 
as to what these names might mean in Talaing have altogether failed to throw 
any light on them; to modern Talaing monks (the most educated persons in this 


language) these words are a perfect blank. 
: 6 


4a | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vont 


Line 32.—s0, yo, mod 0, yd, “to take,” hence “to bring.” This was 
really the old form of the word; compare the following :—Liso (Lolo), ru Ja; 

(Lolo), yo; Singpho, yd, jo; Pin, yo, ye; A-chang, nys /ew, 
Maru, yo Jaw; Lashi, yw Jaw; Tibetan, &’yel-yon. The Ia, and lew after 
some of the atoxe words, is the verb ‘to come” = B. wo, ld; rg a=“ to 
take and come” = to bring. The old Burmese form has survived in the 
exclamation, yo’, take! here, take it! 

Line 34. —m069208, amho’, mod. 9, aor act, deed. 

006 999|00, sarwwafiuta, a hybrid form from Sanskrit and Pali = -Sansk,, 
sarvajnata; Pali, sabbaiiuta. | 

Line 35.—Qp%), direct from the Sanskrit, praziia. . 

cog, am’, mod. 33, amt' (pr. an"), the sign of the future tense. Cf. Lushei, 
ang, also a future suffix. . 

8S, ciy’, mod. co, ce (pr. sé), a causal and precative suffix. Mr. Blagden 
reads 8 instead of ag ; this is a slip, for the underscript s> is quite clear 
in the estampayves. | 

Line 36. ——-onghaol, lah gon; see wader e005, line 1, Pp. 37: 

&05, ‘mity, mod, sgt, mre’ (pr. myt); see line 5, p. 34. 

00, achuy, mod. 603, achwe (pr. asm). 

Line 38.—F or 2000 read s0005, acak, the virima having been omitted. 

qooo, mu kB, mod. gos, mi 44°, an emphatic conditional suffix. 

Line 39- — 209 83d, as ene da the Buddha who is to 
appear next in this cycle. | | 

soy, @ phil, mod. oy:, ma pha’; ys = “to behold with reverence,” asa Buddha 
or a sacred object. There is no mistaking the 90, which is quite clear in both 
pillars. This line means: ‘Let him not behold Arimetteyya!” Besides the 
Myazedi, it has been found only in one other epigraph dated 1238. A.D. and which 
reads very clearly s0qq8c5c06008 +The inscriptions in which some such imprecation 
occurs are fairly numerous, but the common negation, ma, is used throughout, 

aoyq8d, a phitra cry; the Pali has: ‘“ Metteyyadipadindassa dassanarh 
n’adhigacchatu.” The a@ therefore corresponds to ma, and is the negative 
particle. But with it may be compared the Ahi (Lolo) negative a’ which is 
placed, as here, immediately before the verb; it appears to be special to the Ahi 
and a few other dialects, most other Lolo dialeots using for negation the particle 
ma, which is also Burmese. The following are examples in Ahi:—go @ ngo, 
“1 do not wish”; go a dso, ‘I do not eat.” 
1 BEF SZ.O., 1909, PP. $o9-i0, and pp. 56-7 in the Ahi text, 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS ~ 43 


Index of Burmese words explained, and compared with the words of other 
| Tibeto-Burman Languages. 


(O.B. after a word means Old Burmese ; words without any indication are modern Burmese.) 


o, a (O.B.)—the negative particle, equi- | o<92§, &/o” (O.B.)}—monastery, p. 35. 
valent to 0, ma (modern Burmese), p. BS, kiwat (O.B.)—to be freed from, p. 


2. 
ws, akiiw {O.B.)—benefit, p. 36. | 15 * re : 
ssegg76, aklon (O.B.)—cause, reason, p. gio aac emphatic 

34. : ee 
coo$s, akhan'— room, p. 16. . epee rar nana suffix, p. 36. 
soc8s8, af? (0.B.)—we, Pp. 36.39 | scoa8cog., kom hed’ (O.B.)—it will 


cocs8, afte’ (O.B.)—we, p. 36. hae RPE 

2oyss, atut’ (0.B.)—we, p. 39. | DE Zood, p. 40. 

swecoxs8, ati’ (0.B.)—pinnacle, summit, | tiew (0.3.)—body, self, pp. 36 
Pp. 29, 41. re 

soy, 2 phd (O.B.)—not to behold with i Og edie reac lac P. 36 


et eae $, kywan (O.B,)—slave, p. 28. 
3096835, aphie (0.B.)—for, pp. 36, 39. eoS, jaa " 18. P 
wp, am’ (O.B,)—the sign of future i, éran!—to delay, p. 17 

&, &rty (O.B.)—copper, p. 31. 

26, kron—cat, p. 18. 

1. krui*— rope, p. 18. 

%, krwak—rat, p. 19. 

2, kha (O.B.)—a particle showing time 
not long past, p. 38. | 
og, khamé@ (O.B.)—a verbal suffix ex- 

pressing the near future, p. 38. 
cle, khlok (O.B.)—number 6, p. 34. 
c@lé, khlow (O.B.)—rivulet, a large 
brook, p. 35. | 
col&:, shon*—head, p. 17. 
q15, 4hyup—to sew, p. 17. 
orbs, kAyon*—canal, river, p. 17. 
6q2&, khyon’—to spy, p. 17. 
G268, shranse (O.B.)—lion, p. 28. 
to remember, p. 38. cod, nak (O,B.)—to speak loudly, scold, 
gge8%q, klaicha (O.B.)—favour, p. 34. | p. 18, 


tense, p. 42. 
uo63205, amho' (O.B.)—act, deed, pp. 
a, ao, 
a G8ghios, Arimtttiya—the Buddha who | 
is to appear next in this cycle, p. 42. 
3091, arut*—bone, p. 18. 
co$, ahin (O.B.)—heat, velocity, 
power, p, 29. 
w2, @ (O.B.)—dative postposition, p. 32. 
341, us*—chatty, p. 18. 
5, 1p (O.B.)—to sleep, p. 17. 
gpoSo8a5, sys” (O.B.)—thivs, 36. 
eo5, ¢’ (0,B.)—genitive ale 
suffix, p. 35. | 
eae ok (0.B.)—below, p. 18. 
08, okmi (O.B.)—to call to mind. 


, verbal 


Gee Alanzz (O.B.)—favour, p. 34. >, nvd—to report, to announce, p. 18. 
g°e3?, Alavizo (O.B.)—favour, pp. 34, | oggj, cak-ka—paper, p. 18. 
8 Bcd, cry (O.B.)—precative particle, 
causal particle, p. 30. 


35. 
sg205, 4lok (O.B.)—stone, rock, p. 35. 


. 
a en Semmes eee em ern ee te ee ere eee we ever etenmse 


a ee wesie 


44 | - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


88, cy’ (O.B.)—a causal and precative | &||, pia (O.B.)—white, pp. 20, 35. 
suffix, p. 42. | gop, phurd (O.B.)—the Buddha, P: 26. 

g}, cwan—a hawk, p. 16. | 9q2, phurha (O.B.)—the Buddha, p. 

oo2&, chan (O.B.)—elephant, p. 28. 26. | 

con, chdy (O.B.)—number 10, p. 27. | (89:02, dr raka—a continuative affix im- 

«9, chu—reward, p. 18. plying priority to some other state or 

econ, chok—to build, p. 18. action, p. 


Pp. 35. | 
38, rials stop up, plug: up, cork, p. | 992, bkurhd (O.B.)—the Buddha, p. 
I | = 26 


ee ee 


of, chui*—bad, troublesome, injurious, oe: milae (0.B.)—river, pp. 20, 35. 


p. 18. : &, mlry (O.B.)—grandson, .grand- 
coy, tamu (O.B.)—one, p. 36. child, pp. 34, 42. , 
cod, teh (O.B.)—closing particle, em- | 88, mimi (O.B.)—one’s self, p. 38. 

phatic particle, p. 37. 805, mty (O.B.)-—mother, p. 31. 
eooré, ton—wing, p. 17. -Bcoos, miyah (O.B.)—wife, p. 37. 

028, ¢1m—cloud, p. 17. | 8538, miwrak{O.B.)—a kind of rice, p. 
5, ¢h#w (O.B.)—that, the, p. 36. 36. 

685, thiew (O.B.)—that, the, p. 36. yo>, mu k& (O.B.)—an emphatic condi- 
5, thutw (0.B.)—the, that, p. 36. tional suffix, p. 42. 

$o5, nty (O.B.)—-day, p. 31. aq6, muryan (O.B.)—a kind of rice 
305, nwah (O.B.)—cow, p. 37. grown on the bank of rivers and 
968,00, nhac lus’ (O.B.)—to be | lakes, p. 37. 


pleased, delighted, p. 4o. | 9, muy (O.B.)—nourish, take care of, 
35, nhap (O.B.}—approach, p. 39. bring up, p. 38. 
$05, nhtk(O.B.)—locative postposition, | y, ##%—to do, make, p. 38. 

' 6v2058, mok tut—helmet, p. 18. 

ce mrac—river, p. 19. 
3 / 2, mran (O.B.)—horse, p. 27. 
6135, plo’ (O.B.)—to, do, make, pp. 32, | 5, yan—a fly, p. 17. 

34) 39 35:3, yinl*—to move from side to side, p. 
old, pay (O.B.)—dear, beloved, p. 36. | a 
85, pry (O.B.)—to give, p. 30. : Goods, ye’—a variant of 035, p. 39. 
e02, yo (O.B.)—to take, to bring, pp. 
| 34) 42. 
: 096, yhae (O.B.)—number 8, p. 28. 


P. 32. 
&|, plu (O.B.)—to do, make, pp. 34, 
8 


yh}, puchin—axe, p. 17. 
qquo, puraha (OB) —the Buddha, p. 
6 


» 


26. 

gg2, purhd (O.B.)—the Buddha, p. 26. | 0905, yAat (O.B.)—number 8, p. 28. 

8s, pui*—to carry, p. 18. | ap, rya (O.B.)—one hundred, p. 27. 

Q, pyam—to fly, p. 17. | Ks, rty (O.B.}—water, pp. 19, 30, 31, 


2, pragna (Sanskrit)—wisdom, p. 42. | 41. | 

grein do, act, p, 18. | §5, riy (O.B.)—to laugh, pp. 20, 
2, pro—to say, speak, p. 18, : I, | 

yo, pwan'—a blossom, p. 16. | g@, ruy’ (O.B.)—a_ verbal connective 


& 5, phiac (O.B.)—to be, to become, : particle, p. 38. 
PP. 32, 34- - ge, rhuy (O.B.)—gold, pp. 19, 29. 


PART 1] THE .MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS — 45 


cg, rwo (O,B.)—village;p. 372. eeu sakkalat—broad cloth,.p,.38. 
63268, rwoh (O.B.)—village, p. 37. | cof, sangri (O.B.)}—a high ecclesias- 
§, rhw: (medieval B.)—gold, p...19. | tical dignitary, p. 40... | 
6920, rkow (O.B.)—before, in the pre- | é, sainth (0. .)~ daughter, p: 37. 


sence of, p. 38. : oo eee and 
coode926:, dak khyon’—finger,.p..17. | . Pali)—-supreme knowledge; p.. 4s. 
copscolé, Jafigon (O.B.)}—and, as well, | «05, sak (O.B.)—son, p. 37. 


PR. 37, 42. . B05, sty (0.B,)—to die, pp. 19, 30, 31. 

co205, lay (O.B.)—field, p. 27: “BS, siy (O:B.)—to dié, pp. 30, 31. 

&05, dy (O.B.)—a verbal suffix denoting | o94, stsn’+—to'be defective, p,’ 17: 
indefinite past time, p..30. 08, sum, (O.B.)-- number. 3,.p.°19, 

ox, lew (Q.B.)—and, also, -p..37. {| G002§, ,so# (O.B.)—to pour, pp. 29, 41. 

cocud, leh (O.B.)—and, also, p. 37. 38, shyac (O.B.)—number 8, p. 28. 

ecor&s, Jon®>—to bet, p. 16. 3 hi (O.B.)—to have; ‘pp. 19,'29. 

sco2§, fon (O.B.)—to go beyond, pass, | «905; Auy (O:B.)—gold, :pp.t9, 29. 
elapse, p. 29. Gd -husy (O.B.)}—gold, p. 29. 

cose, /hot (O.B.)—to let go, dedicate, | 0005, het (O.B.)—number 8, pp. 19, 28. 
pp. 29, 41. 60 8, he’ (O.B.j—to have, pp. 19, 39. 


of, wun—to enter, p. 17. 0365; hway'(O.B.)—gold; pp. :19, 29: 


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


The Talaing Inscription of the Myazedi Pagoda at Pagan, in Fournal Royal 
Asiatic Society for October 1909, pp,;:117 77, by C- O.: Blagden. 

Preliminary Study of the Fourth Text of the Myazedi:Inseriptions, %2.A4.S., 
April 1911, 365, C. O. Blagden. jie 

A Further Note on the Inscriptions of the Myazedi.Pagoda, Pagan,.:‘¥.R.A.S.. 
July 1919, C. O. Blagden, | 

Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava: Translation, with Notes,. Rangoon, 
1899, Tun Nyein. | 

Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States, Part I, Vol. I, Rangoon, 
1900, J. George Scott. | 

Linguistic Survey of India, Vol. III, Parts I, HU, II], Caicutta, 1909, 
G. A. Grierson. 

Burmese Sketches, Rangoon, 1913, Taw Sein Ko. 

Essai de dictionnaire Lolo-frangais, Leide, 1912, Alfred Liétard. 

Notions de grammaire Lo-lo, Bulletin de l'Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme- 


Orient, Vol. 1X, 1909, pp. 285 7, A. Liétard. 


P) EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vou. } 


Notes sur les dialectes Lo-lo, B.£.F.£.0., 1X, 1909, pp. 549 7: 

Langues des peuples non chinois de la Chine, Mission d’Ollone, Paris, 
1913. 

Sprachvergleichende Studien, mit besonderer Berficksichtigu&g der indochine- 
sischen Sprachen, Leipsig, 1870, Dr. Adolf Bastian, 

A Manual of the Lawngwaw or Maru Language; Rangoon, 1gtt, F. V. 
Clerk. 

H. Kern’s Verspreide Geschriften, Vol. VII—* Inscripties van. den Indischen 
Archipel,” and Vol, Ill, p. 235. 

Tibetan-English Dictionary, London, 1881, A. A. Jaschke. 

T&ranatha’s Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, St. Petersburg, 1869, 
Anton Schiefner. 

Indischen Alterthumskunde, IV, Lassen. 

A Grammar of the Tibetan Language, H. B. Hannah. 

Domaine Archzologique du Siam, Lajonquiére. 

Notes d’Epigraphie, B.2.F.£.0., XV, L. Finot. 

“Un nouveau. document sur le buddhism birman"—Journal Asiatique, 
Juillet-aout 1913, L, Finot. 

Jardine Prize Essay, Forchhammer. 

Bigandet, Legend of Gotama. 

Parker's Burma with special reference to her relation with China, Rangoon, 
1893. 

The Talaing History Dhammaceti, Patlak. 

grXgeagSaobaySs. Vol. II. 

Forchhammer, Notes on the Anciént Geography of Burma, I—The Shwe- 
dagén Pagoda, Rangoon, 1911. 

Burma Research Society’s Journals from 1910-1917. 


PART 1} THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 


Transliteration of the Péli Face of the Myasedi, B Pillar at Mytnhaba 


47 


| (Plate I, B). 
1. « Sri buddh&dikash vatthuvarath nametva pufifiath katath yath Jina... 
3. kath Rajakumdrandmadhayyena vakkhami supi....... 
3. nibban4 lokandthassa atthavisddhike ga. e ... . sse pana 
4- vassdnath chasate vd pare tathdso Arimadda:..... smi’ pure 4si 
5. mahabbalo raj4 Tibhuvanadiceo udiccd ... . . vahsajo « 
6. « tass’ ds’ ekd ply4 devi sd Tilokava ..... ka hitesi 
7. kusala sabbakiccesu [pana] rajino#o4 . . ss’ 4s’ eko su- 
8. to Rajakum4ro ndma ndmato amacco rdjakiccesu 


31. 
32. 


. byavato satima vidi «01 add gamattayath tass4 de- 

. viyd so mahipati pasano* sabbad4 . . saparibhogena 

. bhufijitum + 0 « aniccatdvasam tassd ga . dya pana deviyd 

. raja Rajakumdrassa add gamattayam puna # o « atthavisati 

. Vass4ni rajjam dhammena kd4nya mdrananti . . rogassa vasath pa- 
. tte naradhipe #0 » saranto dhammar&jassa . . hantath guyasafica- 
. yath ka{rjetva satthuno bimba sabbasovanyayarh subhath » o « ga- 
. hetva tam mahantena sakkirena sum’naso upasankamma 

. r3janath 4ha cintitam attano os bhagath katvan’ idath satthu- 


bimbath sovanpayath subham akdsith vo vararh pufifiath sami 
tumhe ’numodatha 1 0 # gamattayam pi vo simi pubbe dinna 
-n tu me ahath imass’ eva munindassa demi tafi c’ dnumodatha so 


. # evath vutte mahipalo rogen’ dturam&naso sddhu s4. . 
. ti vatvana tutthahattho pamodito 1 0 1 dayaparo Ma 

. -hithero thero Muggaliputtako sumedhatta Su 

. ‘medho ti laddhanamo ca pandito « os Brahmapa- 

. lo tatha Brahmadevo sampannasflava Sono bahu- 

26, 
27. 
28, 
29. 


-ssuto Sanghasennavho varapandito 5 o # etesamh 
pana bhikkhinamh sammukhd so sum4naso . . lam p&tesi katva- 
-na sakkhin tu vasudhatalath to 1 tate* . so tah mahdmacco 


ti. » BOVERgRyam .. ublia” pall . oc ces cee saensaen 


Lee aw Re eee ae .... . Mangala . buddhapa- 
timdya guhaya ca akas ‘era panidhanam 
nibbinno bhavasahkate # o « karontena may& etath 


. . e 


1 Saei both on pillars A and B, ! For pasanno. * The right half of ¢ isdamaged. ‘4 a subhars. 


48  EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


33. yath pufifiarh samAcitam hotu sabbafifiutafidgam 

34. pativedhdya paccayo 10 « yattaka tu maya 

35. d4s& gamattayanivasino dinnd guhaya sova- 

36. . . . patim&ya mahesino 1 0 s putto me va pa- 

37. . . tto va afifio vi pana flatako yo koci 

38. . . pasankappo naro assaddhamanaso « 0 « kare- 

39. yy’ upadduvamh tesath dasanath so naradhamo Mittiyadi- 
40. padindassa dassanam n’ Adhigacchatd tito # 


Transliteration of the Pali Face of the Myasedt Pillar, A (Museum) 
(Plate IT, A). 7 


. | Sria buddhadikarh vatthuvarath namitva ! pufifiahh kata yath Jinasa-* 
. sanasmim anarikam Rajakumarandmadheyyena?® vakkha- 

. mi sunatha? me tam «‘ nibband lokanathassa atthavi- 

. sddhike gate sahasse pana vassdnam chasate vd pare ta- 

tha #‘ Arimaddanandmasmi pure Asi mahabbalo raja 

. Tibhuvanddicco udiccadiccayamsajo 4 tass’ 4s’ e- 

. *ka piya® devi sa Tilokavatamsika ¢ hi- 

tesi kusala sabbakiccesu pana rdjino # ta- 

g. ss’ 4s’ eko suto Rajakumdro nama ndma- 

10, to amacco rdjakiccesu bydvato satima 

11, vids adi gamattayamh tass4 deviyd so ma- | 

12, hipati pasanno sabbada dasaparibhogena bhufjitum 

13. «‘ aniccatavasam tass4 gatdya pana deviyd rd- 

14. ja® Rajakumarassa ad gamattaya {. puna # atthavisa- 

15. ti vassdni rajjam dhammena kariya maranantikarogassa 

16, vasam patte narddhipe 1‘ saranto dhammar&jassa mahantam gu- 
17. pasaficayam karetva satthuno bimbam’ sabbasovanna- 

18. yam subham «‘ gahetva tarh§ mahantena sakkdrena sumanaso 
19, upasankamma rSjanath Zha cintitam attano #* bhagarh katva- 
20. -n’ idath satthubimbath sovannayamh subhath akasith vo va- 


YO pW wD = 


com OV 


The following are the different readings in Bi— A? 
1 Nametva; *% Naémadhayyena; ° Supatha; ‘40%; ° Piyi; §& Raja; 7 Bimba, 
* The d in sé, very faint on the stone, is invisible in the plate, 
t The niggahita (rh) ower ? is scarcely visible on the estamipage, but is quite distinct on the 
stone, though very shallow. I gamattayas. 
§ The niggahita ms not seen in the plate. i 


2 


Priarica 


Eviaraphia Bi 


GAN 


PA 


PAGODA, 


EDI 


MY AZ 


E 


Hi 


FT 


CRIPTIONS O 


NS 


1 


B 


te 


Tha 


PARTI} THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 49 


21. rath pufifiarh sAmi tumhe ’numodatha «' gamattayath pi vo 

22, simi pubbe dinnan tu me aham imass’ eva munindassa demi ta- 

23. fic’ anumodatha «’ evarh vutte mahipdlo roge- 

24, n’ Sturam&naso sadhu s&dhd ti vatvana tutthahattho 

25. pamodito « dayaparo Mahithero thero Muggali- 

26. puttako sumedhatta* Sumedho ti laddhanamo ca pandite 

27. Brahmapdlo tathd Brahmadevo sampannasilava Sono 

28. bahussuto Sathghasenavho* varapandito «’ etesam pa- 

2g. na bhikkh@nam sathmukha so sum4naso jalath patesi katvana sa- 

30. kkhin tu vasudhatalam «? tato so tah mah3macco bimbam sova- 

31. pmayath subhath patitthdpiya karesi guhath kaficanathOpikathe 

32. katvana mangalath buddhapatimaya guhaya ca akas’ evath pagi- 

33. dhdnath nibbinno bhavasankate «’ karontena mayd etath yath pu- 

44. fifiah* tath samacitam hotu sabbafifiutafiapapativedha-* 

35. ya paccayo «’ yattakd tu mayd dasd gamattayanivas 

36. sino dinnd guhdya sovapnapatimaya mahesi- 

37. no! putto me vd paputto vd afifio vd pana fia- 

38. tako yo koci papasathkappo naro assaddha- 

49. mdnaso «! kareyy’ upadduvath tesath dasdnam so narddhamo 

40. Metteyyadipadindassa * dassanath n’ athigacchata ° 

41. tison 
Su 

1, Buddh&dikamh vatthuvarath namitva 

pufifiath katarh yath Jinasasanasmim 
anaérikamh RAjakumarandma 
dheyyena vakkhdmi sunatha me tars 

g. Nibbana lokanathassa atthavisddhike gate 
sahasse pana vassanath chasate va pare tath&s 

3. Arimaddanan&masmi pure asi mahabbalo 
raja Tibhuvanadicco udiccidiccavathsajor 

4. Tass’ as’ ek& piyé devi s4 Tilokavatarhsika 

hitest kusala sabbakiccesu pana rdjinos 


Myaszedi Pali (Museum) im Stansa Form. 


The following are the different readings in B :— 
1 nowy  ®*Sumedhatti;  ° Saighasennavho; ‘4 Sabbafifiutafigoarh; - 5 Mitziyya; 
¢ n’adhigacchata, . 

* The niggahita cannot be seen in the plate. 


50 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {vou 4 


. Tass’ 4s’ eko suto RajakumSro nama namato 


amacco rajakiccesu byavato satim& vidiie 


. Ad& gamattayath tass% deviyd so mahipati 


pasanno sabbad&4 dasaparibhogena bhuiijiturhs 


. Aniccatavasamh tass4 gataya pana deviyd 


raja Rajakumdrassa ad4 gamattaya punat 


. Atthavisati vassani rajjath dhammena kariya 


m&ranantikarogassa vasath patte naradhipes 


. Saranto dhammar4jassa mahantath gunasaficayarh 


karetva satthuno bimbam sabbasovannayam subhame 


. Gahetv& tath mahantena sakkarena sumanasow 


upasankamma r4janam 4ha cintitam attanos 


. Bhagath katvan’ idam satthubimbath sovannayam subhath 


ak4sim vo varath pufifiath simi tumhe ’numodathas 


. G&mattayath pi vo simi pubbe dinnan tu me ahath 


imass’ eva munindassa demi tafi c’Anumodathas 


. Evath vutte mahipalo rogen’ Aturamanaso 


sadhu sadh0 ti vatvana tutthahattho pamoditor 


. DayASparo Mahathero thero Muggaliputtako 


sumedhatta Sumedho ti laddhandmo ca panditoe 
Brahmap§lo tatha Brahmadevo sampannasilava 
Sono bahussuto Samghasenavho varapanditos 


. Etesam pana bhikkiénam sarhmukha so sumdnaso 


jalarh patesi katvana sakkhin tu vasudhatalarhw 


. Tato so ta mahimacco bimbarh sovannayath subham 


patitth4piya karesi guharh kaficanathipikashe 


.Katvana mangalath buddhapatimaya guhaya ca 


ak&s’ evath panidhanath nibbinno bhavasankates 


. Karontena may4 etam yath puiifiam tam samdcitam 


hotu sabbafifiutafanapativedhaya paccayou 
Yattaka tu maya dasa gamattayanivasino 
dinnd’ guh&ya sovannapatimaya mahesinor 


. Putto me v4 paputto v4 wfifio va pana fiatako 


yo koci p&apasamkappo naro assaddhamanasor 
Kareyy’ upadduvath tesam diasAnam so naradhamo 


Metteyyadipadindassa dassanam n’ athigacchatd tis 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 51 


Translation of the Pali Face. 


1. Prosperity ! Having bowed to the Buddha andfhe other ee Excellent 
Objects, I. shall relate the noble work of merit perfggmmad, in the Conqueror’s 
dispensation, by Kajakumara. Hearken to me! | 

2. When one thousand six hundred and twenty-eight years had elapsed after 
the Nirvana of the Lord of the World, 

3. Tibhuvanadicca,! a powerful king and scion of the exalted ° solar. race, 
became king in the city called Arimaddana. : 

4. He had* a beloved queen, Tilokavatamsika (by name), who was bene- 
volent and skilful in all the affairs of the king. 

5. She had a son, Rajakumara by name, a minister, zealous in tine manage- 
ment of) the affairs of state, prudent and wise. 

6. The king, graciously disposed towards the queen, gave her: tlifee: ‘villages 
for her to enjoy, for life, the revenues (accruing from) the slaves (thereof). 

7. Now, upon the death of the queen, the king again made those hese 
villages over to Rajakumara. 

8. On the king, after having ruled mghteously for twenty-eight years, being 
seized with a mortal illness, 

9. He (Rajakumara), remembering the numerous and great favours of the 
righteous king, had a beautiful image of the Buddha made all in gold, | 

10. And, carrying it with great pomp, and well pleased (with his meri- 
torious act), approached unto the presence of the king and told him of his 
intention : 

11. “On your Majesty’s behalf,‘ I have made this beautiful golden i image of 
the Master ; deign, my lord, to rejoice in this excellent work of merit ! 


1 This is King Kyanzittha’s style; the full style as given in the Burmese and the Talaing faces is (ri 
Tribhuv ‘andditya-Dhammard). 

2 Udicca: this word is frequent i in the Fatate, where it is mostly applied to Brahmins, and means “ north- 
western, northern, of northern origin,” that is, from the northern region of India to the north and west of 
the river Sarasvati; but it means also “ noble, exalted,” and this isthe sense that fits better here. This 
meaning is given in the Fdtaka-tikd, a voluminous work written by Dhammapaila, near Anuradha in Ceylon, 
thus, xdicco’ ti aggam patio, The Talaings and the Burmese, in their translations of Pali works, constantly 
translated udicca by “ exalted, noble,” or.some similar expression, and never attach to it the meaning of 
“northern”; “exalted” is therefore no doubt the sense which the author of the inscription had in mind. 
The Burmese kings, however, traced their lineage to a branch of the solar dynasty that came to Burma 
from India im the hoary past. 

8 Tass’ ds’ ehd, that is, tasea dsi ebd. 

3 Bhégam katvudna, that is, sharing, with the king, the fruit or reward of his good action, which is to 
be received in a future existence; cf. pattiss daddts. 


52 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


2. ‘ The three villages which you formerly gave me, I have dedicated to 
this image ; at this also rejoice ! ” 

13. On this being said, the king, (though) his mind was troubled by disease, 
rejoiced and, pleased and delighted,’ exclaimed : “ Good! good!” 

14. The compassionate Chief Monk, the théta Muggaliputtaka, Sumedha: the 
wise, so called on account of his wisdom,’ 

15. Brahmap&la, likewise Brahmadeva the viftuous, Sona, the learned and 
eminent scholar called Sanghasena : | 

16. In the presence of these monks (the king), well pleased, poured the 
libation on the ground, taking the earth to witness. 

17. Then, the minister enshrined the beautiful golden image and built 
(over it) a shrine surmounted by a golden spire. 

18. Having performed the dedication ceremony for the Buddha-image and 
the shrine, he (Rajakumara), weary of repeated birth, made the following 
aspiration : 

19. “ May this. meritorious work, performed and accumulated by me, be the 
cause of my attaining Supreme Enlightenment ! 

20-22. Whosoever, be he my son, or grandson, or any other relative, 
with evil intent and unbelieving mind should oppress those slaves, dwellers in the 
three villages, whom | have dedicated to the shrine and the golden image of the 
Great Sage, may this vile person be precluded from beholding Metteyya, the 


Chief of men!” ® 
CHAS. DUROISELLE. 


! Here, both stones read tuttha-hattho; the last word being the participle from /hrg. we should have 
expected kattho, which is, in fact, the reading most generally met with, The Abdidhdnappadipikdsuct 
(Hanthawaddy Press, Rangoon, 1915), p. 660, gives, nesavtie both readings, . 

3 Reading, with B, sumedhatta. 

3 The Pali face of the Myinkaba pillar has been saptodaced by L. de Beylié in his “ Prome et 
Samara,” Plate VIII, and a translation of it is given in French, on pp. tog-f0; but this translation is 
defective. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 53 


THE MON OR TALAING FACE OF THE MYAZEDI 
INSCRIPTION AT PAGAN 


HE Mé&n texts of this important quadrilingual record are of peculiar interest : 
they were the first of the early Mén documents to be deciphered and their 
interpretation has furnished the clue by which the other M6n inscriptions of the same 
period are now being explained. As in the case of the other three languages 
concerned, the M6n version of this record exists in two copies, on two separate 
columns. In the one, which for convenience may be styled A, the inscription 
contains 33 lines and covers a space of about 2 feet 74 inches in height by 1 foot 
1} inches in breadth. In the other, there are 46 lines, covering (when allowance 
has been made for the first line, which is broken off) about 5 feet 1 inch, by a 
breadth which is variable and decreases downwards from about 11 inches to about 
9} inches. not counting the very short last line of all. In the A copy the text is 
in an excellent state of preservation, the stone being evidently of good quality and 
havirg apparently been kept in a sheltered position. In recent times a small part 
of it, covering the ends of I]. 26-30, has flaked off and is apparently lost. This 
would constitute a serious blemish were it not for the fortunate circumstance that a 
photograph still in existence was taken of an estampage made before the damage 
was done. The B copy has suffered more vicissitudes. Apparently the stone 
on which it was engraved was not of the same quality as the other, and the letters, 
though well formed, do not now appear as deep and distinct as those of the A text. 
Worse than that. moreover, the stone is broken into several pieces, some of which 
are lost altogether. In this way practically the whole of |. 1 as well as the ends 
of Il. 2-15 and a few letters in many of the other lines have entirely disappeared. 
It may be added that the normal height of the ordinary letters in A is about 
i inch, and letter ¢ is about 4 inch long, while the normal interlinear space is 
about 4 inch. In B the size of the letters is much the same (if anything, very 
slightly larger), but the interlinear space is almost 1 inch. 

Under these circumstances, the A text is manifestly the one to which one has 
to turn for a general understanding of the whole of this record, while the B copy 
can only be used to a limited extent to confirm or correct it, and that is what has 
been done here. The text here printed is the A copy, variants in B being given in 
the notes appended to it. As it happens, the A text was the first to come under 


54 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


my notice, I published a very tentative decipherment of it in the Fournal of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, 1909, pp. 1017-52, which I was able to correct in many 
important particulars when in tbed., 1910, pp. 799-812, I issued a decipherment of 
the B text. The text now printed represents a further amendment. Reconsidera- 
tion of the doubtful points and a comparison with other early Mén inscriptions have 
led me to modify some of my first tentative readings. 1 am also much indebted to 
a review of my first paper by the late M. Huber in RE.F.£.0., XIII, 7, pp. 11-4, 
for several valuable suggestions. The untimely death of that brilliant scholar has 
been a serious loss to M6n studies. as well as to the many other branches of 
Oriental research in which his extraordinarily versatile mind excelled ; and there is 
no doubt that, had he survived, he would have made many other useful contri- 
butions to Mén epigraphy. 

Of the many problems left unsolved by the first reading of this inscription, 
very few now remain at all doubtful. The word pa’ (A15) or fo’ (B 1g) is still not 
quite satisfactorily explained, inasmuch as it has not been found elsewhere or 
correlated with a modern form. But the vreat crux was the word which I[ read, 
somewhat doubtfully, ¢icdr (A 18-21. B 24-7). Huber proposed to read it dcdr, 
but in the absence of any Mé6n palaeographic evidence for an initial @ so closely 
resembling fi, | felt unable to adopt a suggestion which would. otherwise be most 
acceptable. [t occurred to me later that the mysterious word might conceivably 
be an abbreviation (or possibly a genuine contraction) of ¢ivla acar, ‘the lord 
teacher.” Both titles are appropriate to ecclesiastics. ind medieval Mén offers 
somewhat of a parallel m the title ¢7pu7n, which presumably stands for ¢e/a pus. 
This explanation has now been confirmed by Professor Duroiselle on the authority 
of a learned M6n monk. he title is one appropriate to a high ecclesiastical 
dignitary and i my translation | have rendered it by “the Venerable.” 

From internal evidence it seems clea’ that the B text is nearer the original 
draft than the A’can claim to be in at least one important. particular, viz. the name 
of the third village dedicated by the prince (A 26-7. B 35): a comparison with the 
Burmese version establishes that fact beyond all doubt. The latter has Henbury, 
and it may be inferred that the Mon draft had Henduty, which has been corrupted 
in both copies, but much more seriously in A than in B- But as a rule their 
differences are mere variants of spelling, though in A 28 (B 38) the B reading has 
contributed to the rectification of the interpretation as well. A number.of points of 
agreement between the M6n and Pali versions raise the probability that they were 
composed by the same draftsman. But in general the M6n agrees pretty closely 
with the Burmese, on which it would seem to have been modelled. 


Th 


e 
4 
* 


6 1, PLATE 


a 
av. 


VOLU 


% 
Co 


? 
ica 


Furman 


é. 


fgraphita 
ERE E AY SEI TEC LATE SAN RRS 


Pty 
yey 


CRIPTIONS OF THE MYAZEDI PAGODA, PAGAN 


S 


7 
N 


i 


E TALAING TEXT 


TH 


1 


2 
-_ 


a 


™ 
Le 


PART 1} THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 55 


Text (Plate I1I,, A). 


. ' $rta[nJamo B[u]ddhaya » Sri « sas kyek Buddha tirley 

. kuli &r moy Inim turow k{lJarh bar cwas-dificam cnam 

. tuy # de[y dun Ajrimaddanapur wo’ smi Sti Tribhuwanadi- 
. tyadhamimaraj das » gnakyek smin gohh moy Tri- 

. lokawatathsak4dewi! imo’ s kon gnakyek go(h)- 

. h* Rajakumar imo’ « smin gohh kil dik pi {twa]- 

. fiku gnakyek gohh « kal’gnakyek gobh cuti 

. are a-ut kirya gnakyek goh ku dik pi twafi g[o]h’® 

. smin-tun kil‘ ku ko[n] gnakyek ma i[m]Jo’ Rajaku- 

. mar goh * smin gohh kmin bar cwas dificdm cném tuy 

. [ka}] smin goh (ajjey fia{n] scuti s kon goakyek ma i- 

. mo’ Raja(kJumar goh* [mlirnas gua ma smin ificim 

. jirku kin{dJath kyek thar moy 4r tu[bJok smin mu- 

- was row wo’ « kyek thar wo’ ey dik pa rath 

. pa’ tifrjla dik [p]i (e]wa ma tirla kil® ku-ey gohh 

— ey dik kil ku kyek wo’ tirla anumodana da’® 

. 'kal goh smin sdik gap puma[s] th[i]e 4 thic 4 smin [pa] 
. sAdhukér v kal goh(h}” tirla poy mhda[the}r « ticd- 

. t" Muggaliputtat[i]ssat[th]er « ticar Sumedhapandit « ti- 
. [c&]r Brahma[p]al « tic&r Brahmadiw «ticar Son 

. « ticir Sanghasenawarapandit ® « kinta tir{IJa 

. (t]a goh smin cut dek han ti» blah goh kon gnakye- 

. k ma imo’ Rajakumar goh ™ ket kyek thar gah ™ 

. (th]fpana kandath guoh clfo]f [th]ar [w]o’ « kal b[ujsac kye- 
. k guoh * wo’ kon gnakyek goh ket Sa{k }muna- 

. lor™ moy twafi » * Rapa{y] moy twafi »'® fabh gir-v- 

~ Ly] *® moy twat « a-ut ® dik pi twafi goh cut dek ku 


= OFF ©=3 Quanh-a ns — 


= 
nN 


| > en 
0D OM AM BR TD 


N 
noe = 


» YW HW WH Ww 
“I Am hb GW 


’ Bhas‘i, * Bhasgokh, * Bhas gokh, * Bhas geil, * B has gohh. ° B probably had gokh, 

7 B has po’, which is probably correct-and may have been intended in A, 

* B has éeil, * B has da. 1° B has gok, 

*) Other possible readings of this word (here and infra) are titar and perhaps #iwar. But ftiedr is 
almost certainly right. 

12 Bhas °reB°, 1 Bhas *wa(r)pandit, %* B probably had gohh, 18 B has gokh, 

'° B has goh, '' Brightly has °/on. | '* B omits the stops, 

1» B has an impossible reading, which may be rendered Hegir-uy (but the H has a vsvdma, which is 
incompatible with the ¢), The original intention must have been to write Henbusy. The A reading. repre- 
sents a further corruption of this presumed original. 1° B nas ut. 


56 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (vor. 1 


a8. kyek thar ma (th]apan4! hin goh* wo’ radhan4 row wo’ 
ag. # sinran e('}* wo’ or das het ku gwo{’] sarwwafi{u]ta- 
30. flap # kon ey lah « cow ey ‘ lah « kulo 

31. ey lah fiah c-en lah « yal pa upadrow ku di- 

32. k ma ey kil ku kyek wo’ yan fiirfide kye- 

33..k tre[y] Mettey lah or deh go's o1 


Translation. 


Prosperity! Honour to Buddha! Prosperity! After the religion of the Lord 
Buddha had gow on for one thousand six hundred and twenty-eight years, (I. 3) in 
this city of Arimadéanapur King Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraj was * (king) ; one 
queen of that king was named Trilokawatarnsakddewi ; that queen’s son was named 
Rajakumar. The king gave tisee villages of slaves (I. 7) to the queen. When 
the queen died, the king gave all the queen’s goods,* together with the three 
villages of slaves, to the queen’s son, who was named Rajakumar. 

After the kmg had reigned for twenty-eight Years, (1.11) when the king was 
sick well-nigh unto death, the queen's son, who was named RAjakumér, remem- 
bering the favours wherewith the king had nourished’ him made a golden Buddha 
(and) went (and) offered ® it to the king, (and) addressed (1. 14) (him) thus: “ This 
golden Buddha (have) I made to assist* my lord. The three villages of slaves 
that my lord gave to me, I am giving to this Buddha: may my lord approve !” 

Then the king, being well pleased. expressed approval, (saying), ‘‘ Well done ! 
Well done !"™ (1. 18) Then (in the presence of) our lord ™ the Chief Monk, the 
Venerable the senior monk Muggaliputtatissa, the Venerable the learned Sumedha, 
the Venerable Brahmapal, the Venerasle Brahmadiw, the Venerable Son, (I. 21) 
(and) the Venerable the very learned Safighasena, in the presence of those lords 
the king poured water onto the ground. 

’ in A che initial looks like m, the top stroke having been omitted, 
* B has guch, a better reading. * Brightly has ey, * Bhase’, 


* Or “became.” The date of his accession is apparently the date. mentioned. 
* Or “ ornaments,” 
’ To be taken figuratively, of course: “the favours which the king had bestowed upon him.” 
® For the royal approval, not as a gift to the king. : The word is used elsewhere apparently in much the 
same way, 
* That is, as a votive offering in connexion with the king’s sickness, Apparently the word po’ (or pd’, 
as the A text has it, though probably wrongly) is a preposition going with the verb; but it has not been 
antisinctorily identified with a modern equivalent. 
10 The Pali has sddhu (repeated)... Apparently the ‘¢ in our version is an interjection emphasizing the 


king's approval. 
12 Or “lords”: it may apply to alll these ecclesiastics, 


PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 57 


After this, the queen’s son, who was named R&jakumar, took the golden 
Buddha (1. 24) (and) enshrined it (and) made this golden-spired cave-pagoda. 
When dedicating this Buddha (and) cave-pagoda, the queen’s son brought up (the 
men of) Sakmunalon, one village, Rapfly, one village, Henbuiy,’ one village, all 
those three village-communities of slaves, (and) poured out water for (I. 28) the 
golden Buddha that he (had) enshrined in this cave-pagoda, (and) prayed thus: 
“May this act of mine be a cause for the attamment (by me) of enmiscience | 
_ Be it my child, be it my grandchild, be it my kinsman, be it (any) other person, if 
he do violence to the slaves (1. 32) whom I am giving to this Buddha, may he not 
get sight of the exalted Buddha Mettey !” 


GLOSSARY OF MON WoRrRDs. 


a-ut : all. kiry4 : property (or, perhaps, “ orna- 
ajey : sick. ments-”’). 
anumodan4 : to approve. kil: to give. 
&: a particle or interjection, probably ku: to, for, with. 
emphatic. kuli: to go on (used with dr). 
ar: to go. Also used as a sort of kulo: kinsman. 
auxiliary, e.g. duds dv, cutt dr. keil: = kil. 
ificim : to nourish. ket : to bring. 
imo’: name, called. kon: child. 
ut: = a-ut. gnakyek : queen. 
upadrow : violence, hurt. gap: used with. pumas in the sense of 
ey: I, my. “ happy.” 
eo’: = ey. gwo’: attainment. 
or: particle with an optative force. guoh : cave-pagoda. 
kandam : to make. gun: favour. 
kmin : to rule. goh: = guoh. 
kyek : any worshipful person or object; go’: to get, to obtain, to attain to. 
here “‘a statue of Buddha.” goh: (1) = gohh; (2) = guoh. 
-klarn: a hundred. gobh : that, the. 
kal: time, when. cném : year. 
kinta: in the presence of. clon: spire of a pagoda. 
kindarh : = kandam. cwas : ten (used as a multiplicand). 


1 See the note on the text: the Burmese version has Menbduse, 
8 


58 _- -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


cut : to put (and here “to pour”). 

cuti: to die. 

c-en: other. 

cow : grandchild. 

jirku : self. 

flan: near. 

fiah: he, they, person. . 

fiirfifc : sight, vision (verbal substantive 
from 7#ac, ‘‘ to see’’). 

dik: slave (also with ey = “J,” res- 
pectfully). 

dun : city. 

dek : water. 

dey : in. 

deh: he. 

ta: particle forming the plural. 

trey : exalted. 

twafi: village. 

ti: earth, ground. 

tic’r: an ecclesiastical title (see Intro- 
duction). 

tirla : lord. 

tirley : lord (probably for ¢ir/a ey, ‘‘ my 
lord ’’). 

tun: particle or auxiliary. 

tuy : particle or auxiliary forming the 
past tense. 

turow : six. 

tubok : to present, to offer. 

thar: gold, golden. 

thipana : to enshrine. 

thic :. worthy, well done. 

da: particle, probably. emphatic. 

das : to be. 

da’: = da. 

dificim : eight. 


wo’: this. 


[VoL. 1 


pa: to do, to make. 
pa’: probably for go’. 
pi: three. 

pumas: see gap. 

poy : we, our. 

po’: for, on behalf of. | 


blah: used with gof in the sense of 


“ thereafter.” 

busac : to dedicate. 

ma : relative particle. 

mh&ther: for sah&ther, ‘‘ chief monk.” 

mimas : to remember. 

munas: to address. 

moy : one. 

yah: introductory particle. 

yal: if. 

ram: to assist. 

radhana : to pray, to utter a vow. 

row : manner (as in row wo’, “ thus”). 

Inim : a thousand. 

lah: (1) prohibitive negative ; (2) when 
repeated after other words, “ either 

, a 

scuti: = cuti, with a Mé6n_ verbal 
affix. 

sdik : to be pleased. 

smin: king. 

sarwwafiutafidy : omniscience. 

sadhukar : expression of approval. 

sas; religion. 

sinrah: act, deed. 

han: to, onto. 

hin: == han, in the sense of “ for.” 

het : cause. 

bar : two. 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 59 


THE PYU FACE OF THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTION 
AT PAGAN. 


HE fourth, or “ Pyu,” version of this record exists like the others in two copies 
on two separate pillars, On the one it measures about 3 feet 3% inches by 
1 foot 1 inch and contains 26 lines, on the other about 3 feet 93 inches by 11 to 
12 inches, containing 39 lines. | have styled the former A and have adopted it as 
the basis of the text here given. adding the B variants in the appended notes. Both 
texts are on the whole in a good state of preservation, though B shows a break 
across its ll. 6, 7 and is seriously defaced in ll. 24, 25. The alphabet in which the 
record is w aden is an archaic form of script relatively to the date of the document, 
and both it and the language of this version were for many years somewhat of a 
puzzle to archaeologists, though they recognized that the alphabet was of a 
Southern Indian type. In form, however, it differs profoundly from the alphabet 
of the three other versions, which is much nearer to the type of the modern 
Burmese script. 

In F.4.4.S., git, pp. 365° 847, 1 attempted to throw some light on the matter 
by means of a detailed comparison of this version with the corresponding parts of 
the Pali, Burmese, and Mén texts. It is not necessary to go over the same ground 
again here : persons interested in the method pursued can refer to the article cited 
above. Briefly, it amounted to this. The letters were as far as possible identified 
by their oceurrence in proper names and loanwords and by their resemblance in 
shape to corresponding letters in other forms of the Indian alphabet. As for the 
words, whenever a word occurred repeatedly in varying contexts, there appeared 
the possibility of determining its meaning, if it had in fact any definite meaning at 
all. So far as it went, I think it may be claimed that this method was successful. | 
But it has its obvious limitations. Some of the letters resemble one another so 
closely that it is difficult to discriminate between them, and the conjunct letters offer 
special difficulties of identification. A number of words that recur several times 
in our text appear to be mere particles, without any very definite or ascertainable 
meaning. A great many others occur only once, or only in contexts which 
do’ not serve to identify them with certainty. This leaves a large residuum of 
unknowns. 

At this stage it is clear that comparison with further material should have 
been the next step. Unfortunately very little is available. On the one hand, the 


bs EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


remaining Pyu material is very scanty and most of it is either illegible or at present 
practically unintelligible. The urn inscriptions discussed by me in Zpigraphia 
Indica, Vol. XII, pp. 127-32, have thrown very little additional light on this obscure 
subject. Consequently the Text and Translation as printed here differ but slightly 
from those given in ¥.8.A.5S., l.c., and both must be regarded as somewhat tentative 
and provisional. On the athe tard, comparison with the other languages of the 
Tibeto-Burman family has not. yet been seriously attempted. - For personal reasons 
I have been unable to undertake it, but certainly much could be done in that direction 
and it is to be hoped that it will eventually be taken‘in hand systematically. So 
far as can be judged from the existing materials, Pyu (as I have ventured to style 
the language of this version) was a:somewhat distant cousin of Burmese, and a 
comparison with Burmese alone would not be productive of very satisfactory results. 
It will be necessary to carry the matter further and study a number of the more or. 
less cognate languages as well: Want of leisure prevents me from undertaking such 
a serious task, which could only be recommended to some one who had much 
patience and spare time, and who also had (or was in a position to acquire) a.very 
wide and intimate acquaintance with this family of languages as a whole. 

Some of the peculiarities of Pyu have been indicated in ¥.7.A.8., lc. - It 
would appear that it had a wide range of tones, of ‘which the various dots 
(represented in the transcript by small circles) and their combinations used in the 
text seem to be the expression. It did not draw a very clear distinction between 
long and short vowels: the only certain case of differentiation is the case of | 
and a. It did not tolerate closed syllables or the gemination of consonants: but 
allowed a limited number of combinations of two consonants as initials, the second . 
member of such combinations being a semi-vowel or a liquid. : But even in such 
cases it is not quite certain that a short neutral vowel may not have been inserted 
in between the two consonants, for the spelling often uses conjuncts in combinations 
(such as fd) where such a vowel must of necessity be introduced. It shares this 
peculiarity with the contemporary M6n usage, a usage that has survived in modern 
Mén also. Like most other Indo-Chinese languages, Pyu tended towards mono- 
syllabism and generally abbreviated long Indian words by cutting off the end. - Its 
syntax seems to have been substantially on the lines of the typical Tibeto-Burman 
syntax, and such peculiarities as it exhibits may be due to foreign (probably Mén) 
influence. Its spelling is rather variable, but it has a distinct tendency to use the 
' gonant letters as surds, a phenomenon which is susceptible of several alternative 
explanations, none of which can be regarded at present as established with 
certainty, though for my own part I incline to the view that it points to a phonetic 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 61 


change in the language itself which took place after it had begun to be a written 
language but before the date of our record. | 

The evidence at . present available seems to indicate that the nation which 
‘spoke the language of our text was a forerunner of the Tibeto-Burman movement 
into the southern parts of the Irrawaddy valley and had reached the neighbour- 
hood of Prome (where many of its records have been found) long before the 
Burmese had come down from the North, The name ‘“ Pyu” has merely been 
_attached to it as a convenient label, not intrinsically improbable in view of Burmese 
traditional history, but by no means to be accepted as final. In the Prome region 
it would appear that this nation acquired a veneer of Indian civilization, almost 
certainly through the intermediary of the Mén population of the Delta.. When 
this process began, it is impossible to say. But the alphabet exhibits archaic 
peculiarities (such as the form of conjunct y) which in India itself were becoming 
obsolete in the 4th century A.D. One word in our inscription appears to be a 
loanword from M6n, viz. tha, ‘gold’ (Early M6n thar, modern thaw) : they are 
at any rate identical and are evidence of some contact between the two races, 
such as their geographical positions almost necessarily tmply. .The peculiar 
letter that | represented by 4 is somewhat stinilar to the Mén 6 and may have 
been derived from it. Both, however, look rather like modifications of a 4 of. the 
North Indian type. (In other respects the letters used in the record have been 
transcribed in the way generally adopted for Pali and Sanskrit.) 

So far as appears at present, the prospects of Pyu epigraphy are not very 
promising, and unless much additional material is discovered in the future, it does 
not seem likely that any great progress will ever be made in the study of this 
obsolete language. Should, however, further exploration succeed in unearthing 
fresh documents, the present record would acquire a new value, for it would be the 
only safe clue to the interpretation of such additional documents. In any event, 
it has somewhat unexpectedly revealed the former existence of a nation and. 
language which have apparently been completely absorbed by the Burmese and 
‘of which no modern representatives in the direct line have as yet been discovered. 
The mere fact that at the beginning of the 12th century the language was still 
considered sufficiently important to warrant its inclusion together with Burmese and 
M6n in this record, is evidence that the nation which spoke it still maintained a | 
certain status in the Burmese empire, and had somewhat of.a separate existence 
side by side with the other two races. -That in itself is a contribution to the 
history of Burma which cannot be overlooked in assessing the importance of 
our text. 


62 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


Text (Plate IV, A) 


1. ewe girie wu? Dathaggda ba dg ba: big pdy sgu das ba tva MDC 
2. XX* hrd u snis big tvat thadas® ya ti? pris Rimadhanabi umi big sis 
3. Sri Tribhuvanady? tyadhamaraja umi big si « u dos da‘ bas uvgt * ma- 
4. yas Trilogavadasagadgvi * big’ si umis dhau u sa: Rajaguma big 
5. si umit uva’ trat o? hos big par tot « dtiau ba: maya big hi tada* 
6. mayat *u tra trat o hor’ bis ‘pat tha: bar mayat u sas Rajaguma uvae 
7. dhau bas °tda: sis tpi” hra big tadae” big» sris bis hnis ‘hlis hi'wmtu dd 
8. ross dhau bar Mayat u;sat Rajaguma big ‘si umi « udi° 
g. big mtau ma dhau tdas:to™ u lo: tro di° ‘bis mdau hat'da:™ dasdhau bat 
io." Badha u chat bo bradima’ tha ta big se kyat' dhau ba: Badha™ big tus 
Pi.thmit lot ya na big tdis tots ya ‘bai Badha tha bis raz Sat bi 
ta! Se mabar bat-uva paz che chore ya trat o* hot big pas 
13.) mabi' ya ‘bat ‘hra tha uva pa: che » dhau Jos, bar tdat big ri®° 
14. pa™ da’ big nu ha pra cho: ha’ pra™ chor ®* if sis dhau u dos tras bas 
1 g.mahathe i trat bas’ ‘Magalubadadisathe ™ rtrat bar Simiedhabadi°* 
16. i tras-bar’ V rahmaba 1 tras bas Vradeyor™ 1 tra: bas Si'trat bas 
17. “Sagasivarabadi® ¥ dhau'‘tra: ba: sagha tvo u hnu di®° dp tdas 
18: tu’ ba: bid’ cha tot tdg # dhau big ‘tada mayat-u sat Raja- 


..) The. stops before and, after siré are in a couventional form which occurs in other Pyu inscriptions. 
All; except the first of the first'growp, resemble in shape the letter >” 
Bo sot The: symbols; M, DC;.and XX. Tepresent, ancient Indian numeral s\mbols for:1,000, 600, and 20, 
respectively. - It is possible that Ara also is such a symbol for 8, but the presence of the anusvdra mark 
inclines me to the view that it'is a genuine Pyu numeral; expressed phonetically. See Epigraphia Indica, 
Vol: SEE pe: 1,30. 
waht * B omits this. stup. Pessibly. to be read la. 
“81 am ‘not sure of the final’ vowel! I'ie-same word seems to occur in one of the Hmawza urn inscrip- 
tions)( DI see Lc. p. £2Q « 
ap has T rilogavadasagadgvi. li would. seem from, its shape .that the 7 in this name, and in the 
inscription ‘erierally, i ig not the ‘ordinarv one but the so-called lingual one, whith comes further down in the 
al habst, 
J The reading 0 is conjectural, heing based merely on the shape of the character. 
“8B here inserts u bag" * ® This Word, illegible in A, is clear i inB. 198 wrongly has di. 
13} Orcnpess the reading is doubiful, but the word must mean “ twenty ” (see /.c., p. 130): 
is B has the. bigger stop HOM, probably merely to fill up a bit of spare space at the end of its 1. 7 
13 B has to. * Possibly this is a variant of the tw at the beginning of 1. 18. 
1%: Possibly to: be read Jas or. fe. 1%, The reading ts doubtful : ‘possibly it should be tkha. . 
16 B has Bi:dha. 17 B omits 4a. 2° Bomitso. | 
iv B appears to have 92°, , which is probably the right reading in A also, though the latter may have rig: 
« Alappears to read pha, but the initial. is doubtful.’: B has pa. 
1 B omits this pra, .*? A thay have chof here. B has chog, 
33 B has mhathe. 1s B has Migglubsdi °sathe. = ** Bhas Saumedhgbads* ‘ 
*¢ B rightly has Vrahmadgyog. But the ¢ is doubtful in both texts, 


i\ 


oy ee af a 


10 
14 
ffi 
° 
} 
> 
, 


tga, Dae ee Chagrin: i Runa a ne Daas cgi rumea igs oe arses 
lao i aN Oe SY Loi gh aamad A" eS a sah isa cid Bh 
i a foresee Cant Pea nks dt bok e . ne eck 
ee P . . 4 or. e i ¢ 2 - ) nah xt nt ‘ : } x ante. 
e Ore 3, ba ET 4 l- : AR : , 
£4 weg oS 
re 


. PLATE 


IME I 
AN 


, 


VOL 
A, PAG 


GOD 
B 


DI PA 


E PYU TE 


XT 


E 
peed a) 


¢, 


\ 


OO me 3 
NNER tn tan 
EE Ad om Reo 


af v Dae . ee $ ad ey 


eres a 


‘s 


rH 


a el 
a 


OF THE MYAZ 


wean 


ONS 


Tov 
eat CH 
xsi daes 


> 


if 
vt 
Matte 


‘8 


I 


it 


« 


AMC 


ee 
: 


Fras 


a 
i 


wo Foe eee 5 
+ EPR Se $a ran prfado ae Rahate 9 " 
ah EF gag A Mi 6 i 7, * 
eT BH Fue OE gy : 
. : ey - . .. 
eye PE is cSehey whe 
Selina a oe xii By, \ ayy. 
eve te 4 rae Zs pt ‘ - 
i Dra amay Oy Sa : . Pi aewe c ary 
era t am ee tah 


vw = nx 


P 
if 


cita B 


m 
INSCRI 


are 


shop 
~ 


be as 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 63 


1g. guma bi8 si umi ma [#]’ big stabana* gidha® tha big se go u stau 
tha bif: }* 
20. tada s dhau go u hlau bi8 sat (t)ot*s Samanalo’* o ta 17 Rabai o rT 
[y}i*)- 
21. vit®o ta »* yd trat o ho: di® big di° da» ya bat mayar (u sat} 
22. Rajaguma ya go” Badha uva tdi big chai tada» yd na big dj° cho 
[ ya]™ 
23. ma gar pra bi: cavetiodete brefie big big. pa: che nat® ti? pla: pa™ « 
24. ya trat ti? mtu kus di gi sat da™) gi pli da gi srus da ® mra ja hfuda”™ ya 
25. [Bidha]*® uva gd: hiis to: ma di°: ga (hii)i® chi ga bro pda ma tat 
nds bis « 
26. ya bi: Biidha Ari Medeya da bat di chi ti° tma ma pas che chos ™ 


Translation.™ 


Prosperity ' 1628 years after the Tathagata’s partnirvana,™ in this city called 
_Arimaddanapur (1.3) Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja so-called was lord,® his 
queen consort was called Trilokawatamsakadewi, her son was called Rajakuméar. 
(The king) gave her three villages of slaves. When the queen had died, (I. 6) 
(he) gave the queen's goods (and) the three villages of slaves to the queen’s son 
Rajakumar. 

When the king had reigned for twenty-eight years, (and) was sick nigh unto 


’ Bhas «; there is a blurin A * B has stabana, 

* For Budha. But Bhas Badha. 4 Brightly has &:3 A has 5: only. 

* For tot we should perhaps read ros, which is quite distinct in B, where it is apparently preceded 
by an inserted ma, 

* B’has Samana/ég. The final vowel is more or less doubtful in both texts, as it has a hook on the 
top, the force of which is obscure. 


7 B has u instead of 1, * Bhas Fi‘vsis (or, possibly, Fitvat), 
“ B has i instead of t. 10 There is a blur here in A, but B has u sag. 
42 B inserts gai before Badha. ‘9 There is a blur in A, but B is quite clear. 


18 Or possibly nus, 

14 The vowel is doubtful: there is an unexplained mark over the letter. 

1* For da (throughout this line) we might perhaps read /a or /e. 

1* In these places B inserts 1, 17 B inserts 1 of, more probably, 1 here. 

* There is a blur in A, but B has Bidia, 19 Very doubtful reading. 

*° B has a more elaborate stop at the end, something like the punctuation marks in I. 1. 

*1 This translation is tentative, beiny to a great extent based net so much on the obscure original as on 
the more intelligible Burmese and Mén versions. At the present stage of Pyu studies no other course is 
possible, but in the event of fresh material being made available in the future the translation will have to 
be submitted to a critical revision. 

** That is, “after Buddha’s death,” But possibly the phrase means “after the establishment of 
Buddha’s religion,” which would be another way of indicating the same point of time and would agree 
more Closely with the other versions. 

** The word here rendered “lord” is 408, but it is doubtful whether the phrase has been rightly 
apprehended, 


6 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vot. 1 


death, the queen’s son named R4jakumér, (I.9) being mindful of the benefits 
wherewith the king had nourished him,? caused this golden image in’ the likeness 
of the Buddha to be made, (and) brought this Buddha into the (royal) presence 
(and) spake thus :—‘‘ This golden Buddha which | have made on my lord’s behalf 
(1.12) 1 present tomy lord. The three villages of slaves (that) my lord gave me 
I give to this sacred image of gold.” Thereupon the king was delighted (and) 
exclaimed, “ Well done! Well'done!" Then (in the presence of) my lord (I. 15) 
the Chief Monk, my lord the senior monk Muggaliputtatissa, my lord the learned 
Sumedha, my lord Brahmapal, my lord Brahmadiw, my lord Son, my lord the 
very learned Sanghasena,” in the presence of these lords of the church the king 
(1. 18) poured water (onto the ground). 

That having been done, the queen’s son named Rdjakum4r enshrined the 
golden Buddha, (and) having made the golden spire of the cave-pagoda, pronounced 
the dedication of this cave-pagoda (and) having assembled (the men of) Sakmuna- 
lon, one village, Rapay, one village, (and) Henbuiw, one village, these three villages 
of slaves, the queen’s son (1.22) Rajakum4r, having poured out water to this 
cave-pagoda (and) Buddha, spake thus :—‘' May this that I am doing be a cause 
for giving me omniscience (and) wisdom! As for these slaves, be it my son, be it 
my grandson, be it my kinsman, be it any other person, (I. 25) if he shall do 
violence to those that I have dedicated to this Buddha, may he never be 
permitted to approach the presence of the lord Buddha Ariya Metteya !’"" 


GLOSSARY.’ 


u: a particle used (1) to connect numerals with a noun, 2; (2) after words in the 
genitive relation, 4, 6-10, 18-21 ; (3) in certain other combinations not falling 
clearly under these heads, 3, 14,17. (Cf. Early Burmese e’, Burmese q ?) 

udi® : 8. 

umi: name, called, named, 3-5, 8,19. (Early Burmese maz.) 

-uvad: (1) a particle or postposition meaning “to” (dative), 6,12, 13, 22, 25; 
(2) in 5 it apparently means “ to her.”’ 

1 The translation of the whole phrase is based on the other versions. 

* In the case of these and the other proper names occurring in the inscription I have used in the trans- 
lation the forms found in the other versions. For the Pyu forms the text may be referred to. As to the 
expression rendered by “my lord,” see the Glossary, s.v. tra. bd3, 

3 The translation of ll. 25, 26 is based mainly on the other versions, 

* This glossary is mainly tentative and provisional, for the reasons stated in the Introduction. Where 
no meaning is attached to a word, it is to be inferred that its sense has not been determined. The figures 


indicate the lines in text A where the word appears. The Indian order of the alphabet has been followed, 
but without distinction between conjunct and primary letters, 


PART 1] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 55 


uvg:: possibly a word meaning “ queen,” perhaps to be split up into « and 
gt, 3. oe 
©: a conjectural reading ; the meaning “‘ village” is certain, 5, 6, 12, 20, 21. 
kya:: probably a verb meaning “to cause” and forming a causative, or perhaps 
_a particle, 10. 
kus: future time (?), 24. 
ga: possibly a particle meaning “if,” 25, 
git: I, 23, 95. , 
gi: my, 24. 
giidha: error for Bidha (usually Badhka), 10. 
go: cave-pagoda, 19, 20, 22. (Sanskrit guhd.) 
hu; to exclaim @, 14. | 
nds: 25. 
ja: 24. See mra. 
cha: to pour, 18, | 
char: likeness (?), 10. (Early Burmese achat.) 
chi: violence (?), 25, cf. Avs, et eal) Burmese acaé ?) 
chig = 26. 
che: probably | a’ particle, or a verbal auxiliary to the verb pat, $2, 13, 23, ae 
(Cf. Early Burmese cty ?) 
chai: to pour out, cf. cha, 22. ; 
cho: possibly a variant of the following, 22, 
chot: apparently a final particle, 12, 14,. 26. ae | 
da (perhaps to be read bas (1) apparently means “was,” 3; (2) “be it,” or 
| “either... 0... ‘24. (Cf. Early Burmese lati ?) 
das (possibly to be read pe or let): Qo 
dhau : a demonstrative, meaning “that,” or simply used where we should use the 
definite article “the” in referring to something previously mentioned, or well 
known, 5, 7-10, 17, 20; also by itself (substantively) in reference to persons, 
points of time, and events, 4, 13, 14, 18. (Early Burmese ¢hurw, thi.) 
ie one, 20,21. (Early Burmese fac.) 
at; 25. 
ae a verb or auxiliary indicating the past, 5, 7 18, 20, 22. (Probably the 
_ original ineaning was “ to end,” ‘‘to finish.”) 
tdas: king, 7, 9, 13, 17- 
tdis: to say, to speak, 11. 
td : water, 18, 22. 


66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA —  EvoL. § 


tpi (or npii ?).:. twenty, 7. 

tmo: presence (?), 26. (Cf. thmis: 11.) 

tra: goods, ornaments, 6. (Sanskrit dravya ?), 

tras: slave, 5, 6, 12, 21, 24. | 

tra: baz: a title anplied to ecclesiastics, lord, 14-17. ;(Possibly the first 
element is the preceding word “ slave ” used as a deprecatory pronoun of the- 
Ist person, or it might conceivably be the.same as the Burmese tard: 
(“‘law,” dhamma). For the second element, see 581.) ; 

trot : apparently this together with /o: means “ benefits,” 9 

tva: I. 

tvas : to elapse, to pass, 2. 

tvo: probably a particle indicating the plural, 17. (Cf. Early Burmese ¢z’ ?) 

that: apparently an auxiliary going with pa:,6. 


ti’: appaenty a particle of relation, corresponding sometimes to our reposition 


“in,” 2, 23, 24, 26. See mtu. 

tu: 18, 

tut : to bring, ro. 

tii (possibly to be read tkhka): 10 

to:(or to): (perhaps = tu): 9. 

tot: a particle used after verbs, 5, 11, 18, (20), 25. (Cf. Early Burmese tus ?) 

tha: gold, golden, ro, 11, 13, 19. (Early Még thar.) ~ 

thada (probably = ¢adaz: 1): 2 | | 

thmas: presence (?), 11. (Cf. ¢mis.) 

dg (probably = fad@): 9, 14, 21, 26. 

das : I 

di: 26 

di° the phrase Anu di? du appears to mean “ in the presence (of),” 17. 

ai: ©, 2, 22, 25. The shales seems to have several meanings: in 22 it 
apparently means “to pray,” or at least “to say’; in 21, after 678, it may 
mean “to assemble,’ “to bring: together”; ‘but it ise occurs before that 
particle, and there and in 9 and 25 its sense has not been determined. 

dQ: apparently a_particle of relation, 7, 17, 24. It seems to correspond 
roughly. with our. preposition ‘‘ in.” , 

do: I, 

dot: possibly a variant of @#: in 14 the phrase dhau u do: seems to mean 
“thereupon”; in 3 the sense is not so clear. 

na: manner; the phrase ¥@ na seems to mean “ thus,” “as follows,” 11, 22. 


PART I] THE MYAZEDI INSCRIPTIONS 67 


nat (or mut ?): 23. (Somewhere in the phrase beginning with this word the idea 
of “cause” must be expressed.) | 

pa (in A 14 perhaps pha): in 13-14 548 1° po must mean “was pleased’’; in 23 
the sense is undetermined, see at. 

pat: to give, 5,6, 12,13: perhaps also in 23, 26, though there the meaning is not 
so certain. (Early Burmese /ty.) 

pda: 25. 

pd: possibly “to achieve” or “ to enter” (partntredna), or “ to be established ”’ 
(of the Buddhist religion), 1. 

pra: to do, done, deed (?), 14, 23. 

prit: city, 2. (Early Burmese praii.) 

plas: 23. (Cf. na:.) 

pli: grandchild, 24. (Early Burmese mizy.) 

bradima: statue, image, 10. (Sanskrit pratsmnd.) 

brefie: wisdom, 23. (Sanskrit prayid.) 

bro: meaning undetermined, but possibly the phrase which it begins contains the 
idea of “‘ violence,” “harm,” 25. 

bo: image, representation, likeness (?), cf. chat and bradima, 10. (Cf. Burmese 4 ?) 

ma: apparently a particle, 9, 19, (20 n.), 23, 25, 26. 

mtu: in 7 the phrase « mtu dy must mean “nigh unto,” in 24 21° mtu may mean 
“as for.” | 

mtau: perhaps ‘to nourish,” “to foster.” 9. (Or alternatively, the meaning 
ascribed to mau.) 

mdau : to remember (or alternatively, the meaning suggested for the preceding), 9. 

mayat: wife, consort, 3, 5, 6, 8, 18, 21. (Early Burmese maya.) 

mra: the phrase mra ja Aw must mean “any other person” or “a stranger,” or 
the like, 24. 

mahathe (and mathe): chief monk, 15. (Pali mahathero.) 

mabi:: possibly either a title of respect (like “my lord’) or a deferential 
equivalent for the 1st personal pronoun singular; unless it is to be split up 
into ma and d7:, 12, 13. 

yd: a demonstrative, “this”; also used where we should say “the,” 2, 11-13, 
21,22, 24,26. (Cf. Karly Burmese zy, zy.) 

rat sat: on behalf of, 11. 

n° (with pa): to be pleased, 13. 

tot: apparently a particle, perhaps meaning ‘“‘ when,” 8, 20 n. 

sat: child, son, 4, 6, 8, 18, 21, 24 (but not init). (Early Burmese sd.) 

sat: to pronounce, to declare (?), 20. 


68 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ vor. 1 


sgu: the meaning is undetermined but will depend on that of pdu, 1. 

sagha: church, Buddhist hierarchy, 17. (Sanskrit-Pali sampha.) 

stabana (in B stabana): to enshrine, to set up (a sacred image), 19. (Sanskrit 
sthapana.) | 

stau: spire of a pagoda, 19. (Sanskrit stépa.) 

snit: year, 2,7. (Early Burmese aac.) 

srit: to reign (?), 7. 

srut (reading not quite certain) : kinsman, relative, 24. . 

savefiodefie: omniscience, 23. (Sanskrit-Pali sarvaviutafidnamn.) 

si: the root meaning is apparently “to be,” 2-5, 8,14, 19 (though in 14 it is 
difficult to see how that meaning can be appropriate). 

se: to make, 10, 12, 19. 

ha: good, well (?), 14. 

hat: 9. 

hnu: 17,24. (See d° and mra.) 

hfii (?): violence (?), 25. (Cf. Early Burmese anhzp ?) 

hnit: to be sick, 7. (Cf. Early Burmese nd ?) 

hra: sacred image (?), 13. 

hra: eight, 2,7. (Early Burmese Aef?.) 

hlit : in 7 it seems to go with An?:, with what sense is not clear; in 25 it seems 
to mean “to dedicate to,’ ‘‘to make a gift to pious uses.” (Cf. Early 
Burmese /Ag ?) 

hlau: dedication formula (?), 20. (Cf. Early Burmese /hot ?) 

hi: to die, 5,7. (Early Burmese s7y.) 

hot: three, 5, 6, 12, <1. (Early Burmese sum.) 

Jos: in 11 and 13 it seems to be a postposition, ‘in,’ ‘‘on” (so dhau fos, 
thereupon”) (cf. Early Burmese riow ?); ing the phrase /o: ¢rot seems to 
mean “ benefits.” 

ba: 1. 

ba:: 26 (possibly an optative negative, ‘‘ may not ”). 

bas : honorific particle or title, 1, 3, 5-18, 21, (22 n.), 26. 

bi: error for 4r8, 19. 

big : particle preceding verbs, 1-14, 18-22. The doubled form in 23 is probably a 
distinct word (perhaps meaning ‘‘ for myself,” cf. Early Burmese mzmi ?). 

bi: : to do (?), 23, 25. (Cf. Early Burinese ma, amho’ ?) 


Notr.—siri, “ prosperity” (Pali, or from Sanskrit sri), which does not form part of any Pyu 
sentence, has not been included in the Glossary, nor have the proper names, 


C. O. BLAGDEN. 


Naiidshica ,' SURVEY OF BURMA 


Bir oS! 


; Ri ' : ‘ oy 
¢ z “ J i Sb oot 
38 f rif ea) He : 
: } 3 } 3 ' a 
¥ : 4} a . 
4 y H R i t , : f 
3 ' ve] 4) j : 
i $ ‘ , > ¥ wey : eo “ peels 
‘ . heey wn Sei eae ‘ as SSF & ‘ a 
be , Tot ee doe ; ‘ a a5 FS BS ee ae word 
‘ t “ ? ' ' > 3 = ; 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


4 
, } 
' 


gate (eo AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA. 


_. Bdited by 
CHAS. DUROISELLE. 
Seperistendest, Archacological Survey, Barms a. 


a ee - 1960 


" SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY, UNION OF BURMA 
RANGOON 


‘ ' 
, $y : } 
' . 
- 
$e. 8 \ 
“ 4 sey teens} » 
Ec is ‘ ‘ Se 4 
we tae ‘ 
Fiat : : : 
; ’ c 
asc 2 we * 2 a) 
¢ t, : 2 J , i a ie F 
i, Pape ag is s 
( . re | ee ‘ 
Fa * he : 


i ; ; arr: % ae 2 
it , i , 7 { «3 ° 

t ss etl gas i te : i. : 4) : ; = 
le s 
j 


’ 


LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF THE GOVERNMENT OF 


> BQ re 


> 


THE UNION OF BURMA PUBLICATIONS 


IN BURMA © 


. City Boox Cuus, 98, Phayre Street, Rangoon. 
. New Lint OF BurMA Press, 58, Komin Kochin Road, Rangoon, 
. PROPRIETOR, THU- -DHAMA-WADI Press, 55-56, Tsee Kai Maung 


Khine Street, Rangoon. 


. ProprigTor, BurMA News AcENCY, 135, Anawrahta Street, 


Rangoon. 


. MANAGER, BURMA’ Book. Co, 62, Barr Street, Rangoon. 


Burma EpucaTIONAL Book SHop, 551-3, Merchant Street. Rangoon. 


. MANAGER, UNION PuBLISHING House, 93, “C” Block, Bogyoke 


‘Market, Rangoon. 


. SECRETARY PEOPLE'S Literature Commirree AND Housg, S46, 


Merchant Street, Rangoon. 


. THE BuRMA TRANSLATION SOCIETY, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
. Messrs. K. Bin Hoon & Sons, Nyaunglebin, Pegu District. | 
. U Lu Gazz, GovERNMENT Law Boox Acegnt, 34th Road, Nyaung- 


zindan Quarter, ‘Mandalay. 


. U Kyaw Zan, Tue NaTIonaL Boox Depét AND Srianenne SuPPLy 


House, North Godown, Zegyo, Mandalay. 
In Inu 


. MEssrs. HiGGINBoTHAMS Ltp., Post Box. No; 3t, Madras (India). 
. Messrs. ‘THACKER, SPINK & Co. .(1933),-L1p., P.O, Box: No. 54, 


3.. Esplanade East, Calcutta (West Bengal). 


| RESEARCH cOuecone 
“ARCH COLLECTIONS | 


East-Wfest Center 
Honoluly Meee 
Phe) ey 2 cet Cie} 
VOLUME I ee ee PART II 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


BEING 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


Edited by 
CHAS. DUROISELLE 


Superintendent, Archacological Survey, Burma Circle 


1960 


SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY, UNION OF BURMA 
,RANGOON 


CONTENTS 


me aT. eee ice -grinn YAGER 
Mon INSCRIPTIONS Gee ee ie bye ng Ee, Jit  69—168 
General Introduction. Fie wikis’ gf Tue a ak! Ske, 69— 84 
The Mén People and Their History : ee Se! es | 

Effects of Burmese Ri: ‘ : Views: FP 
Historical Position of th: . ede 4 Fins . r *. F2— 73 

Mon Influence or Puriacse Sivilixaon (7% «= 15 73 


The Mon Inscriptions of Upper and Lower Burma wg, SS 6-— 7-74 75 
Linguistic Importance of the Mon Inscription. . 9. 8—9 75— 76 
The Indian Element inthe Inscriptions . . . . ‘10—1i 76— 78 
Alphabet, Spelling, and Transcription ©. « °, «©. 12—18 78— 82 


_ Beginnings of Mon Epigraphical Study . «.. . 19-20 82— 83 
Acknowledgment of Assistance . 1.) 1 ew ee 21 83— 84 
“Section I.—The Early Mén Records 2 1. we eke 84—168 
Introductory Observations | : _" ose 84— 90 
King Kyansittha in Traditional Lesedidsty History . 22-23 84— 85 

_ King Kyansitthain Contemporary Records. « 24-27 85— 88 
Chronology of King Kyansittha and,of His Records . 28—30 88— 90 

The Inscriptions e & 3: 8 ° e e e e 2 el eee 90—168 


No, 1.—The Great Shwezigon Inscripti.n,Pagan .. 31-35 | 90-129 
No. | Il.—Fragmentary ReplicaofNo.I . . . 36—38  129—130 
No. ° I1I.—The Myakan Inscription, Pagan . . . 39-41 = 131-143 


No. IV.—The Alanpagan Inscription, Pagan. .  . 42 143 
No. V.—An Inscription in the Phayre Museum, _ 43. 143—147 
Rangoon. 

No. VI.—The Shwesandaw (i) Inscription, Prome . 44-47 147-152 


No. VIE.—The Shwesandaw (ii) Inscription, Prome . 48-49 = 152—152 
No. VIE. —The Shwesandaw (iii) Inscription, Pie 50—53 153—168 


LIST OF PLATES 
Mon Inscriptions— 


Plate V.—The Great Shwezigon ‘iscsi aie ie &B. facing Page 


Plate VI—~ Do, do. C&D , : 
Plate VII,— ‘Do. do. ; » Bee « “s 105 
Plate VII— - Do. do. .. GeH . = 6G 
Plate IX.—The Myakan Inscription (No. IM) . A&B. 7s 
Plate X.— Do. do. C&D "138 
Fiate XI.—An Inscription in the oe Museum (No. V) (Top Half) ~ 
Plate XII— _ Do. , (Bottom Half) * = 145 
Plate XIII.—The Shwesandaw (i) ee (No. VI) (Top Half) " 149 
Plate XIV.— Do. do, ‘Bottom Half) ” 150 
Plate XV.—The Shwesandaw (iii) Inscription (No, vay Top Half) "157 
Plate XVI.— Do. do. (Bottom Half) ” 162 
ABBREVIATIONS 
B.E.F.E.O. = Bulletin de !’Ecole Francaise J.RAS. = Journal. of the Royal Asiatic 
d’Extreme Orient, ‘Society of Great Britain 
E.I, = Epigraphia Indica. and Ireland. 
LA. = Indian Antiquary. J. Siam §. = Journal of the Siam Society. 
JA. = Journal Asiatique. E.M. = Early Mon... © 

J.A.8.B. = Journal of the Asiatic Society M.M. = Middle (or medieval) Mon. 

of Bengal, L.M. = Later Mén. 

J. Burma z Journal of the Burma ‘tr. = translation, 

Research $.J Research Society, . n = note. 


G-U.B.C.P.0,—No, 2, Dir. of A.S., lata! Ve 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 69 


MON INSCRIPTIONS. 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.—THE MON PEOPLE AND THEIR HISTORY, 
1.1 The people who call themselves ‘“ Mén.” and who are known to the 
Burmese, and generally to Europeans, as “ Talaing,” are probably the descend- 
ants of a race that settled in Burma earliest of all the races that now inhabit 
the province. They seem to have preserved no traditions of their migration into 
the. country. At the present time they inhabit a small fringe of the coast-line 
of Lower Burma on both sides of the mouth of the Salween River, from some- 
where in the neighbourhood of Pegu to a little to the south of the town of Ye. 
In the Census of 1911 the persons returning themselves as Mén by race numbered 
320,629, of whom however only 179,443 claimed to be Mén in speech. Of this 
latter number 175,127 were returned as living in the Tenasserim division (139,970 
in the Amherst district, where they considerably outnumber the Burmese 
inhabitants, and 34,805 in the That6n district), while in the Pegu division there 
were only 1,960, and in the rest of the province the numbers are negligible. 
Plainly the language is moribund outside of the Amherst and Thatén districts, 
but in these and particularly in the former it still retains considerable vitality, 
though it is carrying on a very unequal contest with the much more important and 
growing official vernacular of the province, Burmese. However, as between 
the Census of 1901 and that of 1911, there has been a reviva} amounting to 
an increase of nearly 25,000 in the number of those who wish to be considered 
Mén in speech; so it would appear, either that the Mé6n-speaking population 
is actually augmenting now or that there has been a recrudescence of national 


1 For convenience of reference the commentary has been divided into numbered paragraphs and these 
will accordingly be referred to by their Arabic numerals. But in the case of the inscriptions, both as regards 
text, translation, and the notes thercon respectively, reference will be made by the serial (Roman) number of 
the inscription, the letter denoting the face (or fragment), and the Arabic number of the particular line, with 
the addition (when necessary) of “tr,” for “ translation” and “n,” for “ note,” 

10 


70 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


self-consciousness in the race, leading it to insist more distinctly on its specific 
differences. This bids fair to postpone indefinitely the extinction of the language 
in Burma, which at one time seemed to be inevitable and imminent.’ 

2. In a remote past, which we cannot precisely date, inasmuch as it precedes 
local recorded history, the area occupied by the Mén people must have been very 
much more extensive than at present. To the northward their linguistic influence 
seems to have penetrated as far as Prome, where a completely different people and 
language were centred.2 To the southward the race seems to have wandered 
very far. There is some reason to believe that at a very'early period they settled 
in Ligor (on the isthmus leading to the Malay Peninsula)’; and as far south as the 
northern border of Johor (the most southern state in the Peninsula) there are 
jungle tribes who to this day use a series of numerals (up to “seven”) which are 
substantially identical with the 11th century Mén numerals.* About the middle 
of that century the Mén area was much reduced by Burmese conquests, 
culminating in the total annexation of the M6n country to the Burmese kingdom of 
Pagan and the settlement of Tavoy and Southern Tenasserim by Burmese, 
who thus cut off the Mén race from their connexion with the more ‘distant 
south. To the kingdom of Pagan they remained annexed (apart from occasional 
revolts of local Burmese governors or casual Tai incursions) until A.D. 1281,5 when 
they again became at least partially independent under the rule of an adventurer, 
probably of Tai origin. He founded a dynasty which rapidly assimilated itself 
to its Mén subjects and by degrees united the bulk of them into a kingdom 
comprising the three provinces of Bassein, Pegu and Martaban, with its capital 
eventually fixed at Pegu. This, the medieval Mén kingdom (as one may 
conveniently style it), was in the clerkly Pali terminology of the time called 


1 Cf. Haswell, Grammatical Notes:and Vocabulary of the Peguan Language (1874), pp. xii, xiii: 
“ The language is gradually going out of use, and the sooner it is supplanted by the Burman the better, yet I 
think it will be a‘ long time before it ceases to be the language in common use in country villages in 
the Amherst district, and near the sea coast of the Martaban district.” Haswell was the first scholar 
who seriously studied the language, and it is rather surprising that he should have expressed a desire for its 
extinction: such an attitude of detachment towards the subject of one’s life’s work is decidedly unusual, 

3 F.R.AS., 1911, p. 380,- See also Phayre, History of Burma (1883), p. 19. 

§ Bastian, Geschichte der Indochinesen (1866), p. 197, presumably basing the statement on native 
traditional history, says that this happened in As6ka’s time. This author’s sources are of very varying 
value, and of course this particular date, as a date, is absolutely worthless. ‘But the tradition may represent 
a real event in some distant past. 

« Compare the forms given in the Glossary with the Peninsular — in the Comparative Vocabulary of 
Skeat and Blagden’s Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula (1906). It was the connexion with the 
jungle dialects of the Peninsula which impelled me originally to investigate Mén, 

* I follow the commonly received chronology as given in Phayre, op. cit., p. 6§ It agrees with the 
statements of the Mén chronicles (¢.g, p, 122 of the composite collection headed by the Sudhammavatiraja- 
varhsa, Pak Lat, A. Bud, 2453). 


PART I] | MON INSCRIPTIONS "1 


“‘Ramafifiadesa,” a name coined from the ethnic appellation “Rman,”! which is 
the medieval form of the word “ Mén” and appears constantly in inscriptions: 
of the 15th century. The kingdom lasted till A.D. 1540, when it was conquered 
by a Burmese dynasty from Taungu, which soon annexed Upper Burma as 
well. . This event involved the final extinction of Mén political independence. 
Save for a few shortlived revolts and other, mainly local, episodes and for a brief 
and revolutionary interval in the 18th century, when a temporary Mén revival 
threatened to turn the tables and subject Burma to Mén rule, the Méns of 
Burma now remained definitely subject. to the Burmese until the wars of the 
rgth century brought first one great section of them *. and soon afterwards 
‘the remainder ® under British rule. 


EFFECTS OF BURMESE RULE ON THE MON PEOPLE AND LANGUAGE. 


3. One result of Burmese rule, which was often oppressive and became 
particularly severe under the Alompra dynasty. in the 18th and. 19th centuries, 
was the assimilation of a large part of the Mén people to. their Burmese 
conquerors and a BIOECERSIVS dwindling of the area in which the M6n language 
prevailed. ‘ Its use was “strongly discouraged” after A.D..1757 and “ absolutely 
proscribed ” in Pegu from 1826 to 1852. Hence the great preponderance of the 
Méns of the Tenasserim division, where the British Government laid no restrictions 
on the use of the language, though on the other hand they took no active steps to 
encourage it. Another result was the degradation of ‘the spoken language 
from its old position as a national tongue with a literary standard, into the 
‘disintegrated state of a congeries of local ‘dialects, differing almost from village to 
village even in ‘the small area where it still forms a general medium of communica- 
tion. Burmese has largely taken its place as the form of speech of the educated 
and _ influential sections. of the community. The Mén written language has 
remained more uniform than the spoken, but its use is.even more restricted® On 
the other hand the positive influence of the Burmese language on the Mén 
does not appear to have been as great as might have been expected La oe 

? Probably pronounced Rémdn, 7.e, with a short neutral vowel in the first syllable and the accent on the 
final syllable (as usual in Mén words), See ¥, Burma Research Sa + 1914, PP. 59» 60; I91 5, Pp. 27. 

* By the annexation of Tenasserim in A.D, 1826. 

* By the annexation of Pegu and the rest of Lower Burma, 1852, - 


* Census of India, 1911, Vol. IX, Burma, Part I,—Report, p, 208, 


* In 1893, Temple noted that “the Talaing language, though still spoken to a considerable extent, is 
ceasing. to be a literary medium very rapidly; sc much so that it is already extremely difficult to find an 
educated Talaing able to read even modern documents in his native language ” (LA., 1893, Pp. 333 n.). 


72 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


the circumstances. The two languages are fundamentally distinct and uncon- 
nected, and they contrast to a marked degree in phonetics, morphology, and 
syntax. Apart from a certain amount of mutual borrowing of words it does not 
seem that they have greatly modified each other, though it is possible that 
Burmese influence has been a contributory cause in the Mén tendency towards 
monosyllabism (which, however, is capable of another explanation) and that certain 
conventionalities of Burmese orthography have been imitated in medieval and later 
Mén.’ A third consequence of Burmese rule was the emigration at various 
periods® of considerable sections of the Mén population to Siam, where their 
descendants still flourish in large numbers and keep up their ancestral speech and 
customs under the tolerant and sympathetic sway of the Siamese Government. 


HISTORICAL POSITION OF THE M6N INSCRIPTIONS. 


4. The foregoing preliminary observations will have served to pave the 
way towards a clear understanding of the historical position of the Mén 
records that are contained in this collection. Some of them rank among the 
oldest vernacuiar records of Burma,* being approximately coeval with the earliest 
of the Burmese ones. It is true that of the first period of M6n history, which 
terminated in the Burmese conquest of the 11th century, nothing apparently 
remains in the way of inscriptions, though probably some may yet be discovered 
when the work of excavation is systematically undertaken. But the second 
period, the subjection to Pagan, and the third, the time of the medieval Mén 
kingdom, are well represented. They are not, however, illustrated quite in the 
same way by their respective sets of records, for these do not run in precisely 
parallel lines. The earlier ones, though in the Mén language and found in various 


1 On occasions where it may be convenient to use abbreviations for the three main phases in the historic 
evolution of the Mén language (as hereafter described), the following will be used :—E,M.=Early Mén; M.M. 
=. Middle (or medieval) Mén; L.M.= Later Mén (including the modern form of the language), 

2 In some cases Méns were also taken away by the Siamese as prisoners during the wars between 
Burina and Siam, On the whole question of the immigration of the Méns into Siam, see F. Siam S. 
1913, Vol. X, Part 3. . 

$ In the large section of Indo-China in which Indian civilization became dominant it is the genera 
rule that inscriptions in an Indian language (mostly Sanskrit, sometimes Pili, in the extreme south in a few 
cases also Tamil) precede inscriptions in the local vernaculars, In Burma these early Indian inscriptions are, 
however, scarcer than, for instance, in Champa and Camboja, Two Pali inscriptions attributed on 
palaeographical grounds to the 6th century (or thereabouts) have been found at Prome ( F.4., juillet-aoat 1912, 
PP. 121-36 ; juillet-aoft 1913, pp. 193-5). The so-called Pyu inscriptions, in a vernacular of that neighbour- 
hood, seem to be somewhat later, but some of them appear.to be older than any of the hitherto discovered 
Mén records (£./., 1913, Vol, XII, pp, 127-32). It is highly probable that in the early period the ruling 
and educated classes in the several countries of Indo-China were Indian settlers and their locally born 
descendants, by whom from various centres Indian culture was diffused among the ruder native races, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 93. 


parts of Burma, nearly all emanated from the Burmese headquarters at Pagan and 
were in substance Burmese records; they really throw more light on Burmese 
than on Mén conditions. The later ones, belonging to the medieval Mén kingdom, 
with its centre at.Pegu, were found in the really M6n country of Lower Burma, the 
old Ramafifiades’, and are purely Mén records. 


MON INFLUENCE ON BURMESE -CIVILIZATION. 


s. This difference should be borne in mind; but, on the other hand, it must 
not be forgotten ‘that in a sense, apart from the linguistic one, even the Burmese 
records were to a very great extent, and probably more so in-early times than in 
later ones, a reflex'and copy of Mén thought and life. The conquest of the old 
Mén capital of Sadhuim (in Burmese pronounced That6n) was a critical moment in 
Burmese history in the same way that the Roman conquest of Greece was in the 
history of Rome. In each case the conquered nation imparted to the conqueror 
many things which he lacked and which he eagerly accepted. The Burmese took 
‘over from the Méns their form of Buddhism with its Pali canon, their particular 
variety of the Southern Indian alphabet, and certain useful or ornamental arts 
and crafts. Monks, scholars, and skilled artisans were imported in considerable 
numbers from the Mén country? to the Burmese capital, and it is largely due to 
the religious, scholarly and artistic impetus thus given that Burmese civilization, as 
illustrated for example in the temples and inscriptions of Pagan, took its particular 
line and form. That is not to say that the Burmese prior to this period were a 
mere race of savages, any more than were the Romans before they fell under 
glamour of Greek art and literature. But just as Rome became ina great measure 
Hellenized, so the Burmese adopted much from the Méns, and a great deal of 
what is now supposed to be distinctively and characteristically Burmese was in fact 
derived by them from the Méns, who had themselves originally borrowed most of 
it from India or Ceylon. For a brief period and under rather exceptional 
conditions the Mén language seems to have become a favourite vehicle for 
epigraphic records at Pagan, Prome, and elsewhere in Burma, side by side with 
Burmese.” 

* Burmese history goes so far as to attribute the conquest chiefly to the desire of the Burmese king for 
the possession of the Buddhist sacred books, though no doubt his real objects were mainly political, Fora 
definite case of a Mén scholar being imported by a Burmese king (the same who inspired most of our early 
M6n inscriptions), see 7, Burma R.S., 1912, pp.246-8, That was in A.D, 1107, 

* And also, at least in. one case, with the “ Pyu ” of the Prome region (F.R.A.S,, 1911, pp. 305-88), 
In the.same way Khmer (Cambojan) was occasionally used, as late as the middle of thé 14th century, at the 


Tai court of Sukhothai, where it was just.as much a foreign language as Mén was at Pagan (sce Finot, 
Notes d'Epigraphie Indochinoise (1916), p. 254). : 


74 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. t 


THE MON INSCRIPTIONS OF: UPPER AND LOWER BURMA, 


6. This use of Mén was fostered. by the patronage of a Pineal king whose 
reign covers the end of the 11th, and the beginning of the 12th, century; and it is 
to him and to the fortunate circumstance of his having been a great author or 
inspirer of such records (which were largely panegyrics on himself) that we owe 
nearly all the earliest’ Mén inscriptions -yet discovered. Apart from the much 
briefer documents engraved on small votive tablets and on glazed tiles illustrating 
Buddhist legends,? these early records constitute the whole of the material available 
for the study of the Mén language of the 11th and 12th centuries. After. this 
period there is an almost blank interval of about three hundred years. It may be 
that the use of Mén for epigraphic purposes in Upper Burma was dictated mainly 
by the fancy of an individual monarch and practically ceased when that influence 
was no longer operative. Or it may be that as Burmese scholarship developed it 
became more independent, a Burmese national reaction set in, and Mén .ceased to. 
be a fashionable literary medium at the Burmese capital. At any rate, ‘soon after 
the death of their chief royal patron, Mén inscriptions apparently became scarce in 
Upper. Burma : there are only two, not very long or important specimens, in the 
collection, one being a brief record of a danation by a later king and the other, 
which is probably of Mén authorship, commemorating the foundation of a 
provincial monastic building, 

7. The next big group of inscriptions in the collection dates from’ the 1 5th 
century, the high-water mark of the medieval Mén kingdom, and especially from 
the time of the great Mén king Dhammaceti. As already stated, these documents 
were found in the really M6n country of Lower Burma. To that fact, partly on 
account of the “exceedingly rainy * climate of that region and partly by reason of 
the destructive wars which have devastated it, we owe the unfortunate circum- 
stance that these medieval inscriptions. ate often less well preserved than the older 
records that have been left undisturbed in the deserted metropolis of Upper 
Burma. Both sets are, for the most part, temple records, and the temples in both 
cases were dedicated to the same faith, But, as even the most recent experience 
has again taught us, that fact is no safeguard in time of war; and there is reason 

1 Some of the inscriptions on glazed tiles adorning the Ananda pagoda at Pagan were discussed by 
Huber in 8.£.F,2.0., 1911, tome xi, no, 1, and the whole set is now being edited by Professor C, Duroiselle. 
These are of the early period.. Some of the medieval or later ones (also on glazed tiles) have been dealt with 
by myself (F,R8.4.5., 1912, -pp. 680-98, FY. Burma R.S., 1915, pp. 30, 31, 97, 98), and Duroiselle 


(Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survéy, Burma, 1934, 1915), 
3 Jt is thus characterized in the Kalyani inscription, which discusses the point in some detail, 


PART I | MON INSCRIPTIONS 75 


to believe that in Lower Burma, as elsewhere, the destruction of . consecrated 
buildings was often systematic and intentional. Both the early and the medieval 
records are characterized by abundant .expressions of religious sentiment, and both 
were probably as a rule, and perhaps invariably, drafted by. ecclesiastics. But 
there is a marked difference between them. The earlier ones contain a much 
larger element of royal panegyric and’ also introduce, in some cases, many parti- 
culars about the state of the country and people. The picture is, no doubt, some- 
what idealized, but it is drawn with graphic, vivid touches. --Indeed, one or-two of 
these documents have some claim to be considered as pieces of literature and not 
merely as specimens of epigraphy. The-medieval records; on the other hand, 
restrict themselves more to specifically Buddhist matters (such as the incidents of 
Buddha’s life, but including also the local legends or traditions about the introduc- 
tion of the faith into Lower Burma, etc.), and to the details of the pious donations 
or of the construction or restoration of the buildings with which the records are 
connected. From the point of view of their contents they are, therefore, perhaps 
of somewhat less general interest than the older documents, but incidentally they 
sometimes contain items of historical, chronological, or topographical value. 


LINGUISTIC IMPORTANCE OF THE. MON INSCRIPTIONS.” 


8. Owing to the fact that the Mén language, especially in its older forms, is 
at present almost a sealed book to European scholars, the chief. point of interest in 
this collection of records is the language in which they are written. In that 
respect their value is beyond price. Mén is a member of a fairly large but much 
broken down and scattered family of languages, which extends (in detached 
fragments) from the extreme west of the Central Provinces of India through 
Assam and Indo-China right down into the Malay Peninsula. The family is of the 
highest linguistic interest, being very peculiar and characteristic in its structure, 
and apparently constitutes a series of links in a broken chain that formerly 
connected the still more extensive and important Malayo-Polynesian (or Austrone- 
sian) family with its original Asiatic home. Further, be it remembered that of all 
the languages of the scattered Austroasiatic family (as it has been’styled) only 
one other besides Mén, namely Khmer (or Cambojan), possesses literary records 
going back beyond the most recent times.! All the rest are known only in their 

_2 Annamese, though in some way connected, does not appear to be a genuiné member of the family ; 
and Cham, with its very mixed vocabulary, is claimed by some scholars for the Malayo-Polynesian family, 


and at any rate is not-in line with the rest of the Austroasiatic languages but heads a little group of 
its own, 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL I 


modern forms. When these facts are borne in mind, it will be realized how 
important these Mén records are, especially the older ones. From them alone can 
we form anything like an adequate picture of the language in its earlier phases, 
when its structure was still relatively unimpaired and perspicuous : for here too, as 
‘is so often the case in the history of languages, the process of change, both 
phonetic and morphological, has been mainly in the direction of decay; there has 
been a progressive breaking down and obliteration of distinctive features. 

g. The medieval records represent, of course, a transitional stage between the 
early and. the late, or modern, Mé6n, but on the whole they may be said to 
approximate more to the latter than to the former. That is, however, more 
apparent than real, and is due in great part to the fact that the written language 
(like our own) has lagged behind the spoken one. Its orthography does not 
constitute a simple, straightforward system, but an elaborate tangle of conventions, 
complicated of course by the dialectic differentiation referred to in § 3.1 Some 
of these conventions in attempting to link the present with the past have only 
succeeded in falsifying both and producing spellings that never had any phonetic 
basis at all.2_ The medieval records, standing as they do between the early form of 
the language and the modern form, often throw light on both, and with their help 
the whole process of evolution of the M6n language during more than eight 
centuries can now be studied in detail. The fuller illustration of this subject must 
be left to a later stage, and it will suffice to have drawn attention here to its great 
importance from the point of view of linguistic study. 


THE INDIAN ELEMENT IN THE INSCRIPTIONS, 


10. One point worth noting, on account of the general interest attaching to it 
and the historical conclusions to which it may lead, is the Indian element which is 
such a marked feature in these records. Having regard to the fact that the Méns 


1 Cf. F.A., mai-juin 1910, pp. 477-505, in which an attempt is made to explain the phonetics of the 
modern stage of Mén in relation to the spelling. 

2 It is a fundamental defect of Schmidt’s “ Grundziige einer Lautlehre der Mon-Khmer-Sprachen’ 
(Denkschriften der k, Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, phil.-hist, Kl. (1905), Band LI) that it is 
based solely on the modern forms of the languages with which it deals, though specimens of early Khmer 
were available when it was written, Some of its conclusions will have to be revised by the help of the early 
Mé6n records, as pointed out by me in ¥. Burma R.S., 1915, pp. 28-30, Schmidt’s reliance on the 
modern orthography of Mén and Khmer (on behalf of which he breaks a lance with Finot in the introductory 
section of his valuable dissertation) is far more extensive than the case warrants, The spelling of these 
languages has been modified from time to time, so that it is no longer a safe guide to the old sounds, and as 
a clue to the historic development of their phonetics it is just about on a par with modern English 


spelling. 


» 


PART 11 | MON INSCRIPTIONS a 


at some very early period became acquainted with the form of Buddhism which 
uses Pali as its sacred language,’ it is not in the least surprising or remarkable 
that several of the inscriptions contain at the beginning, or the end, or in the 
middle, short Pali sentences testifying to the somewhat pedantic erudition of the 
draftsmen. More important is the considerable number of Indian loanwords in the 
Mén text itself: for these form an integral part of the language and are not merely 
tacked on like the Pali sentences.. They are very common in the early inscrip- 
tions, and many of such loanwords have survived through the medieval into the 
modern form of Mén. A remarkable proportion of these words is of Sanskrit 
origin, not Pali. Sometimes we find mixed forms, partly Sanskrit and partly Pali, | 
and of course also forms that are taken straight from Pali. The Sanskrit forms 
include some of the commonest religious terms, such as dharmma, swar (from 
svarga), and the like. As to the reason for their presence in early Mén, allowance 
must be made for the fact that Brahmans, who are often mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions,” played a great part at all the Indo-Chinese courts, from Burma to Champa. 
Vestiges of Hinduism have been found in Lower Burma, though they are not so 
common as in several other parts of Indo-China. But there is much reason to 
believe that some form of Buddhism using Sanskrit as its sacred language also 
existed there in former times,® just as it did, for example, in Camboja. The fact 
is not without some bearing on the much discussed question of the Sanskrit words 
in Burmese: there seems to be no necessity for the assumption which has been 
made that they must have come through a Chinese channel, in view of the occur- 
rence of words of the same class in Mén. The soundest inference seems to be 
the one drawn by Finot (7.A., /.c.) that Sanskrit and Pali (and the several forms of 
religion with which they are respectively associated) were more or less concurrent 
influences in the Mén country from an early period. Whatever may have been 
the channel or channels through which -he Sanskrit words came in, they are 
present in such numbers that the strength of the influences that introduced them 
must have been considerable and probably extended over a fairly long period. 

11. Other, more superficial, evidences of Indian influence are not wanting in 
our records: in the earlier ones the proper names are Sanskrit, Pali, or mixed ; and 


1 Finot has shown (7.A., juillet-aoht 1912, pp. 121-36; juillet-aoft- 1913, pp. 193-5) that the: 
Vibhaiga and other religious texts in Pali were known at Prome about the 6th-century A.D. As Prome 
is on the Irrawaddy, the presumption is that the Pali canon was introduced there by way of the river route, 
not by some difficult overland track; and consequently that it was known in the Mén. region round the 
mouths of the river before it reached Prome, , 

2 Eg. No.1 G17, 18. 3 See F.A., juillet-aout rgr2, pp, 121+36. 

4 Mahayanist Buddhism from about the 5th century A.D.. But the same learned scholar points out 
that the Hinaydna with a Sanskrit canon also enjoyed a wide diffusion in the Far East, 


II 


¥8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA TVoL. 1 


this persists more or less in the medieya] ones, though here a few other names 
occur which appear to be native. The kings, both Burmese and Mén, seem to 
have indulged in a. double nomenclature: an elaborate Indian name, sometimes of 
stupendous length, was used by them as their royal style, though they -had. shorter 
native names as well, by which (as a rule) they are known in the histories. In the 
inscriptions the Indian style is given the preference, presumably because it sounded 
grander and was the specifically royal name, the other . one being personal. 
Certain conventional phrases based on Indian originals are also sometimes uséd : 
for example, the people in general are styled ‘“‘the four castes,” although there ts 
no real reason to believe that, apart from the Brahmans, who were of foreign 
‘introduction, any real division into castes was recognized in Burma. | 


ALPHABET, SPELLING, AND TRANSCRIPTION. 


12, The alphabet of the inscriptions, like the generality of the so-called native 
alphabets of Indo-China and Indonesia, is manifestly derived from some South - 
Indian type, akin to the old Telugu-Canarese. Its form in the early Mén records 
(as the late Professor Kern pointed out to me) is very nearly identical with that of 
contemporary Javanese inscriptions, It is evident that in the early centuries of 
our era there was constant intercourse between Southern India and the Eastern 
regions to which Indian civilization spread itself, and that the fashions in the 
former country were readily followed in the latter? The identification of the 
various symbols used in the early Mé6n inscriptions and their derivation from their 
Indian prototypes offer no:special difficulties. The Méns discarded some of the 
Indian letters, as they had no use for them; others they used*<only in words of. 
Indian origin. But they also invented two new signs, both labial letters. The 
first of these is really a new letter’ and is found in the. early inscriptions, where.it 
has the shape of a circle with a smaller one inscribed in the ‘centre of it, looking in 
~ fact exactly like their combination zm, except of course.that the ‘latter is super-. 
script whereas the new labial} is on the line. This may have been.based on 
some northern form of 4, and finds its analogue in the so-called Pyu script. ‘The 
sound denoted is in modern Mén described as something between 4 and , ze. a 8 
deprived of sonority, and to me it sounds somewhat nasal and vaguely like w. 
The other labial is simply derived from the combination md, the b here being in a 
subscript form which has been slightly modified in the modern language, where the 

1 Finot (%.A., l.c.)-points out that the alphabet of the Prome Mauriggun plates (now in the British 


Museum and dating from about the 6th century) is practically identical with the Kadamba alphabet of 
‘North Kanara, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 79 


combination, when initial, is treated as a genuine letter (as it has now in fact 
become). It is extremely rare even in modern M&n, and of doubtful existence in 
the earlier phases of the language, and I have adhered to the transcription m0. 

13. The alphabet of early M8n has become in its tum, through the medieval 
stage, the ancestor of the modern Mén alphabet, which is substantially the same 
as the modern Burmese one. In the early stage the letters, though already 
showing a tendency to become circles, or parts of circles, or aggregates of such. 
elements, are still very distinctive and include some complex and beautiful forms.- 
In the medieval period the tendency is towards less distinctiveness: certain of the 
letters and combinations of letters beconie very similar to one another, thereby 
increasing the difficulty of deciphering blurred or otherwise damaged passages. 
As regards the size of the letters, the descriptions of the several records should be 
referred to. Speaking generally it may be said that in the early stage there is 
much variability, the height of the typical letters varying from about an inch to 
three-eighths of an inch as between one inscription and another. The medieval 
ones tend to a more generally uniform scale of about half an inch. These parti- 
culars refer, of course, to the generality of the letters, neglecting all such as by 
_ their special forms project above or below the general limits, and also excluding 
superscript and subscript symbols fram consideration. 

14. As regards the use of the letters, it may be noted that when a word has 
two medial consonants (without an intervening vowel) the matter can be treated in 
two ways: the first consonant receives a vivdma and the second then follows on 
the line ; or the second is written under the first, without any vivdma. The two 
methods are used interchangeably, but the second is preferred. The'letters 7 and 
# are sometimes superscript, the former very frequently, and are then to be read - 
immediately before the letter over which they stand. Superscript letters an 
many of the subscript ones affect special, modified forms. Initial vowels 
have their own proper forms,! but may also be represented by the symbol 
for initial @ with the appropriate auxiliary vowel symbol . added to it. 
These several alternative methods are. not differentiated in my transcription. 
Apart from such formal varieties as these (and a few-others heréafter mentioned) 
and from certain interchanges of cognate’ vowels, early Mén spelling is relatively 
regular and appears to be a genuine attempt, in the main fairly successful, .to 
write phonetically. Its transcription therefore offers few difficulties. Medieval 
Spelling is less genuinely phonetic ; it is partly more’ or less under the influence of 
the early spelling, partly an attempt to meet the phonetic changes that had taken 


! Not, however, @ of the diphthongs. 


80 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vow. t 


place in the meantime. In fact it is on the way to the complexities of the modern | 
system, and consequently the transcription is more remote from the phonetics in 
the medieval records than in the early ones. It is, of course, impossible to repre- 
sent in a literal transcription the modifications which the various sounds have 
undergone in thé course of the historic evolution of the language. An attempt 
will, however, be made hereafter to trace the outlines of these changes. 

15. The system of transcription here adopted for M6n is as follows :-— 


Vowels and Diphthongs. 


a a 4 i i u ai e ai tr) au 
Consonants. 
Velars : k kh gg — gh n 
Palatals : c ch j jh fi 
Cerebrals : t th d dh n 
Dentals : t th d dh n 
Labials : p ph b bh m 
Unclassed: yw r l 
§ S s h ] 
b : 


Excepting the addition of some extra letters, this scheme differs only in one 
particular from the system: of transliterating the Indian alphabet that has won the 
widest international consent. The letter w has been adopted instead of », partly 
because it is the modern representative in Mén (as in almost all the languages of 
Indo-China) of the Indian v, and chiefly because it is used in early M6n to form 
diphthongs and must therefore have had the value of w in that position at any rate, 
as it most probably had in all others. In the Indian sentences that occur in the 
inscriptions (but not in Indian loanwords and proper names found in a Mén 
context) the letter v will be used,.in conformity with Indian spelling.’ 

16. Theoretically, the vowel a is, as in other Indian alphabets, inherent in the 
consonants in general, unless negatived expressly (in one of the ways indicated 
in § 14). It therefore represents no separate symbol save when initial of 
a word or syllable. As a matter of fact the actual sound is not always a, 
and even in the early period it is probable that in svllables preceding the final 
one the inherent sound was really a short neutral vowel (something like the a 
in abide). The symbol @ stands for an inherent « modified by the addition 


1 In other respects, also, the usual Pali spclling will be followed in the Pali passages, 


PART I! ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 81 


of the anusvara symbol in a syllable closed by a velar. This begins to occur 
in the medieval records and the sound denoted is probably an open 0, much 
like our English aw. The diphthongs az and az also do not occur in the early 
stage of the language, though they are of course part of the Indian alphabet 
and are used in medieval and later Mén. In early Mén their place is taken 
(in the words where they subsequently occur) by various diphthongs formed 
with final y and w, respectively. The combination w7, not entered in the 
above scheme because symbolically merely made up of 7 and w, probably 
represented a neutral vowel (something like the one in our words bird, cur) and is 
very rare in early Mén, the vowel in question being therein usually represented 
by some other, almost at random and quite interchangeably (¢.g., a, 2, w, e, et). 
17. The cerebrals (except d and occasionally 7)! and the letters $ and / are 
confined to words of Indian origin (§ to Sanskrit, 7 to Pali words). The letter 
s when subscript in Mén words merely represents s, a usage to be paralleled in 
Javanese, where conjunct s has a forin derived from s. Modern Mén has 
dropped s and s from its alphabet. The peculiar labial 4 has been explained in 
§ 12. The apostrophe (’) represents the symbol for initial @ with the wrdma 
“over it and stands for the glottal check or abrupt ending of a vowel, This use is 
peculiar and un-Indian, but in early Burmese the same device was adopted to 
indicate the abrupt tone in words ending in a vowel. The letters mm and h 
represent symbols (anusvara and visarga, respectively) which the Méns put after 
the diphthongs, not among the consonants. They are properly speaking final 
sounds and of course involve no inherent vowel?; but they are really consonants, 
In early Mén 7 is merely shorthand for mz (final of a word or. syllable) and inter- 
changes freely with it. In medieval Mén m is sometimes superfluously followed 
by a final m, and has no force at all, apparently, in such cases. Later usage has 
adopted it as an abbreviation for (’) and even /, as well as for m. Its use as a 
vowel symbol has already been mentioned. In early Mén & interchanges with h 
in certain words, and the latter is sometimes superfluously added to the former, 
as m to m in the medieval stage. There seems to be no difference in their sounds 
aS consonants, but in the later stages of the language they become definitely 
separated and affect the preceding vowel differently. It will be understood that 
these explanations are merely intended to make the system of transcription 
adopted intelligible, and that other phonetic details will be considered separately, 


1 There is some icason to believe that originally 2 as well and also the aspirated sonants (which occur 
but rarely in Mén roots) were foreign to the language, 
* Naturally (’) has none either, 


82 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vot, 1 


18. A hyphen i is used, (1) at the end‘of a line if a word is not completed. 
there, (2) to separate letters which would otherwise form: one or- other of: 
the abovementioned digraphs (ai, au, wut, and the aspirated consonants), 
(3) between a consonant and a vowel to indicate that the consonant (with-an 
unexpressed a or short neutral vowel) forms a syllable and the written vowel (which 
in the original is in its initial form or attached to an initial a as.a fulcrum) begins 
the next syllable. This device is necessitated by the common habit of writing the 
second of such letters under the first as if. there were no intervening short vowel. 
When the two letters do not fall into one of the above categories, the hyphen has 
not-‘been inserted, but it: will be uriderstood- that, e,¢., in such a combination as ¢d- 
(initial) a short neutral vowel must be read after the #4. Nor has the hyphen been 
used . after m, for by ‘definition the »-must close the syllable that -precedes and 
cannot commence the one that follows. The double hyphen is used to separate 
words which in the original are written in one. This is of decidedly rare occur- 
rence in Mén inscriptions, Square brackets enclose letters or symbols which are 
more or less broken or illegible but capable of certain restoration. When there 
is any reasonable room for doubt, round, brackets are used.» The stops of the 
‘original -have been reproduced. Dots. indicate that something is missing which 
I have been unable to restore. As far as possible the number of missing or quite 
unidentifiable letters has been indicated by allotting one dot to each with’another 
dot if there is believed to have been’a vowel. attached to it; or in the absence 
of any other indications, two dots for the space supposed to be occupied by each 
missing letter-group (akshara). 


BEGINNINGS OF MON EPIGRAPHICAL STUDY, 


19. The first attempt to decipher and interpret. the early Mén inscriptions? 
was made in 1909, when by the help of the Pali and Burmese texts the Mén text 
of the quadrilingual inscription of the Myazedi pagoda of Pagan was published 
(¥.R.A.S., 1909, pp. 1017-52). The reading was tentative in many respects and 
a comparison with some of the other early records caused it to be much amended 
subsequently (1b7d., 1910, pp. 797-812, 1912, pp. 486, 487). It was, there- 
fore, the Myazedi inscription, the only .considerable early Mén record hitherto 
published, that laid the foundation of this course of research, by giving the clue to 
many of the phonetic and morphological factors that characterize the early. stage 

TA few short and not very important medieval or seanvanditvely modern records had previously been 


interpreted : e.g, see /,A., 1893, Pp. 343» 344 (reviewed in F.R.A.S., 1912, pp. 689-98), See also F.A.S,B,, 1836, 
Vol. Me P. 280, and Plate X (facing p. 340), and sbid,, 1838, Vol. VII, Plate facing pp, 294 and 295. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 83 


of the language. This line of study. has been coptinued since then, in the 
intervals of other work, and the results here published represent the fruit of several 
years of intermittent labour on the materials put at my disposal, and supersede 
what Ihave already published on the subject. . 

20, The difficulties were’manifold. The ink-i -impressions supplied to me were 
often imperfect representations of much weathered and battered originals, which 
of course I have never had an opportunity of seeing. I deduce the imperfections. 
of the-copies from their frequent diversities. The early stage of the language 
was quite unknown to everybady: even an intimate acquaintance with modern 
Mén, had I possessed it, would not have made it ‘at once intelligible. The 
changes wrought by. upwards of eight hundred ‘years are often so radical that 
it is very ‘difficult to recognize quite common words: e.g., one may be excused 
for not seeing at a glance that jiiijuit is the same as the modern dayutn or that 
kandar is the old form of kalaw. When: detected, such cases of correspondence ~ 
had to be further confirmed and definitely established: by discovering the laws of 
phonetic change which they exemplify. Unfortunately some of the old words 
do not recur in the medieval records and seem te have disappeared altogether 
from the modern language. A great many of them are not to be found in the 
only existing vocabulary! and have not been met with in such texts as I have 
_ been able to read. It will therefore be understood that.in such cases, unless the 
meaning or reading was sufficiently determined by the context, or by ‘a comparison 
of several contexts, a considerable element of uncertainty remains, It is only too 
probable that such cases are fairly numerous, byt in: a first attempt imperfections 
of that kind are inevitable. To do full justice to these records would require in 
the editor a number of qualifications that are seldom found united; amongst 
others, a thorough knowledge of Mé6n, Sanskrit and. Pali, much experience in 
Indian epigraphy, great familiarity with Buddhist thought and legend, an intimate 
acquaintance with the local conditions of various ‘parts of Burin&, much leisure and 
a good deal of patience: . _To these, except the last two, I.can lay no claim. But. 
in view of the growing interest taken in the Mén language by scholars-in Burma; 
I venture to hope that the defects of the present work will eventually be amended 
by. their corrections, based on’ wider sources of. information than.-have- been 
available to myself - 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OF ASSISTANCE. 


m1. Inthe meantime it would not be right to omit here the thanks which 
are due to the numerous friends, critics, and correspondents who have contributed 


4-Haswell, Grammatical Notes and. Vocabulary of the Peguan Language, 2nd ed., 1901, 


84. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


to the production of the work. To Mrs, Bode, and Messrs. F. W. Thomas, 
L. Finot,.and A. Cabaton, I am indebted for some assistance on individual péints 
of reading er interpretation.” Mr. Taw Sein Ko and Professor C. Duroiselle, 
both in their official capacity as officers of the Archaeological Survey Department 
and individually, have been of priceless help. Without their aid and support, and 
that of the department which they represent in Burma, this work could not have 
been produced. To Mr. R. Sewell, Sir Alfred Irvin, and the late M. Auguste 
Barth I am much indebted for assistance towards’ the understanding of the 
chronological details contained in some of the records. In this connexion also 
the late Dr. J. F. Fleet’s criticisms, even when I found myself unable to agree 
with them, have served to draw my attention to points that required further 
investigation or more precise treatment. But most of all, I am bound to single 
out for special mention the assistance of my friend Mr. Robert Halliday, whose 
unique mastery of the Mén language in its modern form, both written and spoken, 
has been of invaluable help at every stage of my work. To all these fellow- 
workers I tender my hearty thanks. 


Section I.—THE EARLY MON RECORDS. 
INTRODUCTORY. OBSERVATIONS, 
King Kyansitthayin Traditional Legendary History. 


22. The main conditions affecting the genesis of the early records having 
‘been summarily stated above, it will now be convenient, before dealing with 
these inscriptions: individually, to mention certain matters. which are common 
ground for most of them. The majority of these early records relate to the 
reign and achievements of the Burmese king Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. 
This was a royal style or title adopted by several monarchs of Burma, but the one 
with whom we are here concerned also bore the more familiar name of Kyansittha 
(or K yanzittha, and other variants). Of him there are more or less legendary 
accounts in Burmese traditional history, which can only be very briefly summarized 
-here, a 
23. According to these tales, Anawrahta (Anuruddha), king of Pagan, who 
subsequently conquered the Mén country. about the middle of the 11th century, 
1 I must also put .on record my obligations to the writings of that very distinguished scholar, Edouard 


Huber, who included a critical acquaintance with Mé6n in his extraordinarily long list of linguistic acquires 
ments and whose premature death is an irreparable loss to Oriental studies. 


PART II | MON INSCRIPTIONS 85 


sent a minister to India some time after his accession to search for an eligible 
princess as an addition to the royal household. The choice fell upon a daughter of 
the king of Vesali, who on the journey to Burma became involved in an intrigue 
with the minister and on her arrival in Burma was secluded in a remote 
village, where she became the mother. of Kyansitth3. Another version of the 
story fathers him on a Naga. Warned by an astrologer, the king (without 
knowing the child’s identity) makes repeated attempts to kill him, because he has 
been led to fear his eventual rivalry and contingent succession to the throne. 
These attempts all fail and ultimately, after hearing that the dreaded event 
foreseen in the stars is not to take place till long after his own death, the king 
appoints Kyansittha, now full-grown, to be one of his chief officers. In that 
capacity he renders valiant and faithful service, until after the conquest of That6n 
he is enthralled by the charms of a Mén princess whom he should have escorted to 
the king: he falls from grace and has to flee from the royal wrath, taking his love 
with him, Thus, a second time, does the Tristari and Isolde morif occur in this 
legend. After having passed through many perils and miraculous adventures, 
Kyansitthaé, after the death of Anawrahta and of his son and successor Sawla, 
returns to expel the usurper who had dethroned and killed the latter; and so 
succeeds to the throne of Burma.’ The story goes on, introducing the strange and 
tragic episode of the Indian prince who came to Pagan as a suitor for the hand of 
Kyansittha’s daughter. But for our purposes it need not be pursued further. 


King Kyanstttha in Contemporary Records. 


_ 24. Contrasted with the wild legends that have gathered round his name, the 
king’s own records are relatively sober and matter of fact documents. As. seen 
through the veil of tradition, he is a fantastic hero of a fairy tale. In his own 
inscriptions, with their strong ecclesiastical flavouring, he is presented as a grave 
and religious, but quite human, monarch, taking a deep interest in the spiritual and 
temporal welfare of his people, and actively contributing thereto by his piety and 
good works, It is true that the records contain legendary matter enough and to 
Spare; but it recedes (as legend usually does) into a still remoter past. And 
though his reign is highly idealized by his courtly draftsmen, and the records teem 
with superlatives, their atmosphere is quite different from that which pervades the 

7 Lam indebted to Professor C, Duroiselle for the legendary account of which the above is the merest 
abstract: it would be worth publishing in full in another place, Bastian (Geschichte der Indochinesen, pp. 36, 


43-7) gives, from Burmese sources, a somewhat similar story. Actual historical information relating to Kyan- 
sitthd seems to be very scanty: Phayre (History of Burma, p, 38) has comparatively little to say about him, 


12 


86 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, I 


traditional story. The supernatural element (as judged by our standards) is not 
indeed altogether excluded’ even from the king’s actual reign: thus natural 
phenomena are represented as being favourably affected by his benign influence 
(ID 53—E1). But inthe primitive and Oriental conception of kingship that is mere 
common form, and it should not blind us to the actuality and realism which is in 
fact the background of these rather florid documents. They. give us quite a vivid 
representation of the life of the people of Burma at this period, wherein the king 
and his court; the monks, Brahmans, chiefs, and commonalty of divers degrees, all 
appear in their turn. On the other hand the events recorded in them are relatively, 
and disappointingly, few. There are.'some vague references to warfare, but no 
definite accounts of actual campaigns. The building of tanks or reservoirs for 
storing water for purposes of irrigation (Nos. III and IV), the repairing ofa temple 
(No. V), and the like, are sometimes made the occasions for the inscription of a 
panegyric. But other records seem to have been made without any such particular 
incentive, merely for the glorification of the king. Of events of wider historic 
interest, the most notable are the mission to India with funds for the rebuilding and 
endowment of the Vajrésana at Bodh Gaya (VIIIA 4-8), being the earliest 
instance, I believe, in which such. an act is recorded of a Burmese: king ; and 
Kyansittha’s friendly intercourse with a .“‘ Coli” prince (zbid., 10-6), who may 
perhaps have been a member of the great. Dravidian Chola dynasty. 

25. The legend which forms the introduction and framework of several of 
these records is of a typically Buddhist complexion, relating as it does the succes- 
sive rebirths of the king and in one of these incargations embodying an alleged 
prophecy by Buddha Sakyamuni as to the monarch’s career. We have the story 
in two versions. In the more extensive, but less detailed, recension, the prophecy 
is preceded by brief statements about three of the king’s still earlier existences. 
In Buddha Kassapa's time he was a wealthy and pious man, apparently living at 
Benares. Next, he was born in the family of the kings of Patna, and eventually 
succeeded to that throne. And, thirdly, he was born in the royal house of the 
Rama dynasty of Oudh and became king there. These preliminary particulars are 
given in Nos. III-V.1. They are followed by the incidents which are common to 
the two recensions (and are embodied, therefore, though with varying elaboration, 
in Nos. I, I], VI-VIII). In the time of Buddha Sakyamoni the future king was, 
a sage named Bisni. Of him Buddha prophesies that in his next human incar- 
nation he is to become the founder of the city of Prome. (Sri Ksetra, Sri Kset, 
or Sisit), and ina subsequent rebirth (after an interval.of bliss in Brahmaloka) king 


1 The first half of No. IV is lost, but.as the remainder agrees very closely with the corresponding 
portion of Ne, III it is a reasonable inference that the inscription as a whole belongs to this group. . 


PART] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 87 


at Pagan (Pokdm or Arimaddanapir). Eventually he is to be reborn in still 
higher spheres and finally to be a Buddha and a saviour of the world. 

26. The less extensive version (particularly as presented in Nos. I and II) 
introduces much wealth of detail into the Bisni episode, which is treated as the 
most important stage in this preparatory course of evolution. In the setting of the 
prophecy (according to this version) the chief dvamatis personae besides Buddha 
himself are Ananda, the great disciple, to whom in the first place the prophecy was 
made, Gawarhpati, who has been styled the patron saint of the Méns,! and who 
appears here as the patron saint of Pagan, Indra, the king of the devas (Mén 
dewatau, Burmese mat), to whom the prophecy i is repeated by Gawampati, and of 
_ course the sage Bisni himself, to whom it is again communicated, twice over, first 
by Gawampati and ‘then by Indra. Minor personages, who are mentioned as 
destined to assist in the foundation of Prome, etc., are Bissukarmma (ViSvakarman, 
the celestial architect) and. a Naga king named Katakarmma (or Katakarmma). 
The story is repeated with much tautology and almost ad nauseam, but these 
repetitions, though wearisome in themselves, have proved of great value from the 
point of view “a lexicography and interpretation by reason of their occasional 
. variations in expression, 

27. In No. VIII. Bissukarmma and the Naga king join w ith Gawarhpati and 
Indra in exhorting Bisnii to accept the great future that is offered to him. This 
is apparently a modification of the less extended version. The more extensive one, 
as contained in Nos, III-V, merely gives the prophecy as delivered to Ananda 
(with some ‘embellishments i in detail, which can often be paralleled almost verbatim 
from other parts of No. 1), but it stops there, It mentions the other personages in 
the prophecy itself ; but they are not introduced as parties to the action. It seems 
hot impossible that. the less extensive, though more elaborate, recension represented 
by Nos. I, I, VI, VII (and probably VIII) is the earlier one. ‘In that case we 
may perhaps plausibly conjecture that the further development of the story 
took place at some time between the date of No. VI (A Bur. 455, A.D. 1093-1094) 
_and the probable date of No. V (A. Bur. 460, A.D. 1098-1099). In No: IX Kyan- 
sittha is introduced as the reigning monarch who takes part in the great ceremonial 
described in that record. This inscription, which is devoted to ‘details of ritual and 
architecture, is in a class by itself, and has no reference to the royal legend. . Nor 
_has the Myazedi inscription (Zp. Birm., pets Ty which records that near the close 

1 This Personality i is interwoven with the ees accounts of the foundation of Thatén, the history of 
which kingdom is put into his mouth in the form of a prophecy in a work that sometimes bears his name for 


a title: see the Suddhammavatirdjdvatnsa, Pak Lat, A. Bud, 2453) and Report of the Superintendent, 
Archaeological Survey, Basis, 1983, P- 23. 


88 ~ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von, I 


of the king’s life, after a reign of 28 years, his sickness occasioned the votive 
dedication by his son and chief minister Rajakumér of a. golden statue of Buddha. 

This pious act was duly carried out with the king’s personal approval; and the. 
inscription records the circumstances in a simple and straightforward manner. The 
remaining inscriptions in this section are apparently subsequent to Kyansittha’s 
reign and have no concern with him. | 


Chronology of King Kyanstttha and of his Records. 


28. The period with which we:are dealing here is really the: dawn. of, Burmese 
history properly so-called, meaning thereby history supported by contemporary 
records and an ascertainable chronology. Prior to the Burmese conquest of That6n 
it may fairly be said that we have nothing but a more or less doubtful tradition ; soon 
after that event the historical inscriptions begin, and from this time onwards they. 
are very numerous in Burma. By far the greater part of them are in Burmese and 
lie outside my scope. ‘But the Mén records here published speak for themselves : 
they are manifestly genuine contemporary documents. That appears plainly from 
the very nature of their contents : royal: panegyrics like these, elaborated in such 
full detail and spread broadcast. over the land with such frequent repetition of the 
same theme, must obviously have been written during the reign and by the order 
of the monarch whose praises they sing. The fact is so self-evident that it would 
be superfluous to mention it had not some doubt been cast uponit. The doubt did 
not arise from any intrinsic considerations, but merely from a question, altogether 
external, as to the origin and antiquity of the. current reckoning of the Buddhist era. 
It was alleged that that era was not used in Ceylon till some time late in the 12th 
century, and. the inference was drawn that it must have been invented in Ceylon 
somewhere about thaf time,’ and could not therefore have been in use in Burma in 

the 11th. It necessarily followed from these premisses that the early Mén records 
could. not be genuinely contemporary, and must have been composed at:a time 
when the king they somewhat fulsomely celebrate. had been dead for nearly a 
century or perhaps even longer; which, in my judgment, is absurd, for the reasons 
already stated.* As the whole basis of the argument was a purely negative one, 
viz. the non-existence at this early date of Sinhalese records embodying the current 
| Buddhist reckoning, the matter could not be satisfactorily pursued any: further at 
the time. No conclusive reason was alleged for the assumption that this mode of 


“L F,R.AS. 1909, PP. 332s 333- 

% The discussion on the subject may be read in %. R, A.S,, 1910, pp. 474-81, 850-60, 1911, pp, 209-17. 
But so far as my own share in it is concerned, it should be read as amended by what is stated here and in 
the.accounts of the several inscriptions contained in this collection, See also F.R,A.S., 1909, pp. 322-56, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 89 


reckoning must have originated in Ceylon, and at a date just prior to the first 
surviving evidence of its existence in that island. And this last point, after having 
been again asserted in 7.R.A.S., 1912, p. 241, was eventually abandoned by its 
author in F.2.A.S., 1912, p. 1113, when it appeared that he had misunderstood 
the import of the Sinhalese evidence.’. As against the concrete evidence of our 
Mén records it is absolutely unarguable. 

29. These records tell us that the king whom they celebrate became king ot 
Pagan after the lapse of 1,628 years® from the Parinirvana (that is, the death) of 
Buddha ; and after a reign of 28 years lay “sick nigh unto death,” so that we 
may fairly assume that his demise followed very soon after. Here, then, we have 
the use of some form of the Buddhist era. But of course this still leaves open the 
loophole :. ‘‘ What was the initial point of the reckoning?” I admit at once that 
on the evidence here published a definite conclusion would be hard to come by. 
But there are at any rate the following indications. Our inscription No. VI was 
composed by the king’s order (so it seems to say) in A. Bur. 455, that is 
A.D. 1093-1094, if the Burmese year is to be taken as an “‘ expired” year. © Inscrip- 
tion No. V contains a date towards the end, in an unfortunately obliterated context, 
which probably indicated the occasion of its composition: the date is A. Bur. 460, 
te. A.D. 1098-1099. - Both documents relate the royal legend, the former in the 
shorter, the latter in the more extended version. These dates therefore must fall 
within the period of the years 1628-56 above referred to. The two dates are 
consistent with the ordinary Buddhist reckoning and would be incompatible with any 
reckoning that did not place its initial point within a very few years of the usual 
one, That is as near as we need go on the evidence contained in these records. 
But it seems sufficient to shift the onus probandi onto the shoulders of anyone who 
may choose to contend that the Buddhist reckoning therein mentioned refers back 
to some other than the conventional starting point. Even if we take the result as 
being merely approximate, it gives us within a possible margin of a few years the 
date of Kyansittha’s reign. If we assume that the reckoning is from the conven- 
tional initial point, his accession must have taken place in A D. 1085-1086 if the 
years are taken as “expired”: and the phraseology used makes this the better 
interpretation. If they are taken as “current” years, the date of his accession 
fell in A.D. 1084-1085. 


1 Geiger, in the Introduction to the Translation of the Mahévarnsa by himself and Mrs, Bode, remarks 
(p. xxviii): “ From the middle of the eleventh century the new era took its rise, being reckoned from the year 
544, and this is still in use.” He scems to prove it as far back as A. Bud, 1590, 

® Or 1,630 years in some passages. This last may be a statement in round numbers, or may possibly 
refer to the date of his actual anointment as king. 


go 3 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von t 


30. Until recently this king’s reign was given in the history books? as 
extending from A.D. 1057 to 1085, and the Mén records -will have borne their 
share in correcting that erroneous chronology to some extent at least. It is no 
part of my task to anticipate here the conclusions which may be drawn from the- ' 
Burmese inscriptions of this period. But it may be permissible to refer to one 
Burmese record in which Kyansittha’s predecessor Sawlii is associated with A. Bur. 
444° and another of Kyansittha himself dated A. Bur. 469°: these two documents 
confirm the general soundness of the rectified chronology.‘ 


THE INSCRIPTIONS. 
No. I. 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 
‘Descriptive Account. 


31. This inscription is on the whole the most interesting and important of the 
early Mén records. Its great length and the variety of matters with which it deals 
make it a rich mine of linguistic material and it has often served to confirm words 

which were doubtful in some of the other records.. The inscription is noticed (but 
left undeciphered and untranslated) in /uscriptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava 
(both Text and Translation), where it figures as No. I (1)-(8). Some extracts 
from it were given in 7.R.A.S.,-1910, pp. 797-812, a few words in F.A., mai-juin 
- 1910, pp. 499-503, and a few more together with another extract in F.A., juillet- 
aoit 1912, pp. 128, 129, and it was referred to in the discussion mentioned in 
§ 28 (note) and in the Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, 
Burma, 1910, 1911. The inscription is engraved on two stone columns standing 
within the precincts of the Shwezigén Pagoda at Pagan. Each column has four 
faces, and their dimensions, as reported to me, are as follows :—Southern column : 
height, 9 feet 4 inches; breadth of the two broader faces, 2 feet 5 inches: of the 
narrower faces, 2 feet 14 inches. Nortnern column: height, 8 feet 1 inch; breadth 


1 Phayre, History of Burma, pp. 37-9, 281 3 Cocks, Short History of Burma, pp. 22, 23. 

2 ¥. Burma R.S., 1913, Vol, 111, pp. 84-6. 3 Ibid, 1912, Vol, II, pp. 246-8. 

1 As regards the difficulty arising from insciiptions which would apparently make Kyansittha’s accession 
fall before A.D. 1085, it must be borne in mind that according to the traditional history he was (for some time 
before the death of Sawla) resident at a village called Hti-hlaing (‘Thi-lhuif or Dhi-luif) and styled himself 
lord or king of that place, a title which he seems to have often used even after he had become king at Pagan. 
lence the apparent overlapping of the two reigns of Sawld and Kyansittha, 


PART 11} MON INSCRIPTIONS | 9! 


of the two broader faces, 2 feet 23 inches: of the narrower faces, 2 feet 13 inches. 
I have lettered the faces consecutively A-H. The first (or Southern) column 
having been broken at one corner at the top, the ends of the first 15 lines in Face 
C and the beginnings of the first 14 lines in Face D are lost, but can be replaced 
in part by the aid of the context and of the replica of this record (No. II). The 
text has been determined from four sets of ink-impressions, together with photo- 
graphs of one of the sets, and checked with a set of ink-impressions of No. II, the 
variants contained in the latter (so far as legible) being entered in the notes to the 
text of No. I. 

32. The space actually covered by the lettering of this ‘scption on its 
several faces, as measured on the ink-i -impressions, is as follows :—Southern column : 
Face A, 6 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; B, 6 feet 10 inches by 1 foot 1o$ 
inches ; C, 6 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; D, 6 feet 11 inches by 1 foot 10} 
inches. Northerncolumn: E, 5 feet 5 inches by 2 feet 2 inches ; F, 5 feet 43 inches 
by 2 feet; G, 5 feet 44 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; H, 5 feet 5 inches by 2 feet } 
inch. On Faces E-H this record is followed by a much shorter one of later date, 
which will be separately dealt with ; and this in its turn, on Face F, by a Burmese. 
inscription transcribed and translated in /zscrtptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava. 
The letters of our inscription are well cut and measure about % inch in height.? 
Letter ¢ (which may be selected as a convenient one for purposes of comparison 
between the different inscriptions) is about 3 inch long. The space between the 
lines, in the absence of subscript and superscript letters, is about ? inch.? One 
disconcerting feature of this inscription (which it shares to some extent with some 
of the others, notably Nos. II and VI) is the fact that the surface of the stone seems 
to have been somewhat imperfectly prepared and is affected in a number of places 
by flaws which were there before the record was cut. In such cases the engraver 
has simply cut his lettering up to one edge of the flaw and, skipping over it, has 
resumed his work just beyond the other "edge. This results in irregular spacing, 
which when the part happens to be weathered or otherwise damaged by subsequent 
vicissitudes often makes it very hard to restore the more or less illegible text, 
particularly if the flaw extends to several consecutive lines, as is often the case. 
One is apt to fail at first, to recognize the existence of such an original flaw, unless 
it happens to occur in the middle of a common word whose identity is positively 


1 Here and elsewhere I do not take into account the few letters which nantly project above or below 
the usual level. 

2 It will be understood that there is a certain amount of variability in tase dimensions, partly perhaps 
unintentional, partly caused by the desire of the engraver to adapt his letters to the particular space available. 
The same obsct vation applies to the other inscriptions, 


92 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. ! 


determined by the context. When these conditions are not present, restoration 
becomes more or less conjectural. The presence of original flaws. when material, 
has been indicated in the notes accompanying the text. Irregularity of spacing by 
reason of the presence of subscript letters attached to the line next above is also a 
common and more normal occurrence, and sometimes gives Euabie when the letters 
are not quite clear. 

33. In editing the text of this inscription a somewhat more liberal use has been 
made of square brackets than in the case of the other records. It must not, how- 
ever, be inferred that it is in a worse state of preservation than the rest. Precisely 
the contrary is the case: apart from the loss of the portion already mentioned and 
a certain amount of weathering and other damage, it is in good condition. The 
square brackets have been freely used, first in order to show (negatively) how well 
preserved a great part of it is—there being quite a number of lines where not a 
letter is bracketed—and secondly because, in view of the special lexicographical 
importance of this record, it seemed desirable to indicate exactly which words are 
absolutely. unmistakable as regards their spelling and which are not. 


34. The contents of this inscription are too miscellaneous to be summarized, 
but have been described in general terms in §§ 25, 26. No special object or 
occasion is. recorded as having given rise to the engraving of it, except a desire to 
inform the people at large of its contents: it is in fact a pure panegyric, a sort of 
royal advertisement. An account of the general framework of this record (and most 
of the other inscriptions of King Kyansittha) has been given in §§ 25-7, but in 
view of its great length it may he convenient to give here a sort of Table of Contents 
indicating the several sections into which it may be analysed :— 


A 1-12. Pali exordium, followed by a xzssaya (Pali words explained by a 
Mén paraphrase) of the fact that Buddha Sakyamuni prophesied concerning King 
Kyansittha. 

- A 12-54. The circumstances of the prophecy, made first to Ananda and 
next to Gawathpati; the latter informs Indra of it. — 

A 54—F 1g. After Buddha’s death; Gawampati again goes to Indra and 
expounds the prophecy in full detail. 

F 19-28. Indra replies, accepting the duties imposed on him. 

F 28—G 23. Gawampati.goes to the sage Bisni and communicates the 
prophecy to him, exhorting him to act up to it. 

G 23-39. Bisné replies, accepting the position, and Gawarnpati leaves him. 

G 39—H 17. Indra goes to Bisni and after repeating the substance of the 
prophecy promises his aid and that of the Naga king. 


Birmanica No. I. Votume 1, Peate V. 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 
B 


" on ee 
be . 


a tae UR Shick 
rainy hh 
RIC UE 


4 


le eh al p23 XS é ‘ 
sSgrpilt +S Ryle ‘ 

: ag prrande Yist: utipre 2. 
~ {abe 
wayaecls, ANS Aes LE 3 8 

bat Ae maa: + Melt hat ABs 

prek Hig him RON bene 
gore if fired Tages ue mW: nity. 


> Fs 

- a ia Vs: any. y whi 0% One? 

. Png } S wd A lehingce 6)8 O78 uae = 
T nate rhe if teakiecy) 


gO te i 


yy eye 


2S 


Oe 
ay, Fey 
en : + 4: 


LAT Wu 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS — “94 


H 18~25. Bisnii replies to Indra.. 
H 25-43. Peroration: all men should know that the. king of whom this 
prophecy was spoken is-the king now reigning. 

38. The proper names contained in this inscription, so far as they are material 
to the story, have been given in §§ 25, 26, and further explanations will be 
found in the notes appended to the translation. The dates contained in it have 
been discussed in §§ 28, 29. They will be found in A 17 and 18,B 5~7, and 
H 34 and 35. Further, in F 14-and 15 there is a statement to the effect that the city 
of Prome shall have been in existence for 1,200 years before (but it does not say 
precisely how long before) King Kyansittha becomes king in Tattades (apparently 
the region in which Pagan is situated). There is no evidence as to the date when 
the inscription itself was engraved except the general nature of its contents and the 
tenour of its peroration; but see § 27. In the translation of this record the 
order of the original has been followed as much as possible, sometimes even at the 
expense of English idiom, with a view to retaining the balance and emphasis of the 
‘original and facilitating comparison between translation and text. 


Text. 
A 


1, 0 [Sri] « na[mo BJu[ddha}ya ¥ namo dhammaya ’ namo > safalghatya] " 
2. 9 angiraso Sakyamuni | sabbebhataoutalenpa ko]: i (sab jbasabtialts 


_ [tam]o [si]- 
3. ho « raja-uppatti(mh)? desayi ti Sak{yam uni eee yan kLy BL 
Buddha ta- 
4. [r]ley Sakyamuni | ki[th] viseso BE [rd]p wises ta[rlJely] (yo) 1 
an[gira]so 
. tarley ma nom ku yiryas sirku i(mu)n.... (kit) v[i]seso (1) h(a)w rip 


. wises tarley g(a)th yo 1 sabbabha[ta]nukampako tarley [ma cha]n smin 
. [ult sat gurhlons sabbasa{ttut]}tamo tarley [ma prely nor ut sa- | 
. [t]-gumlon 1 siho [tarjley ma row -kesarajadisin 1 raja-uppattimh 
. yan kantar gna smi[n]} Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja ma nom pufn] 
pra[j]fia gar(go)- 
. [n] trejas wir] yas pariwar ma kah sak fiah c-3n das pu(m)rey 7 sumoh 
11. [go]h s desayi desesi cin kyak Buddha ta[rJley go[h] desana culoh 


NS 


© 


1 The ss is not in the original. 8 The tis is very doubtful, 


13 


94 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1. 


. tuba(h] lar kantar dirdas g[nja smifi] Si Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 


gumlon gun goh 


. mo’ dey kal y{o] ma kyak Buddha tarley goh culoh tu- 
. bah lar kantar dirdas gna smi Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh | 


no-: 


. m dey moy leh kal kyak Buddha tarley taw dey Jeta- 
- Wanamahawihar .+ ma_strak (tla]Jn (mno)r dhah marmar sasana kyak 


Buddha ta- 


. tley 1 [nJor ma kyak Buddha [ta]rley parini{r}bban « kuli Ini turow 
. klarh pli] cwa[s] cnam': dey dan a 4: 1.yan kantar gna - 


~smin Sri Tri- 


. [bhuwa]nadityadhammaraja goh kyak Buddha tarley fia Ac (c)i (1)? tarley 


ktir 


. k-im + (k]al kyak Buddha tarley ktir k-im goh ci + nor g{njis pan 

. yiryas turow sak deh tit cup Brahmalok deh tin ar 

. boy sma{r] ci-yiryas goh deh ar kirloh ut ti dak (t)yal* s 

. boy * (gna)[n} ‘ cis ut dis pan kah moy laksa koti cak[k]Jawal 

. deh art blah goh ci yiryas goh tin lo[p] mukhawar kyak 

. Buddha tarley kuth : tarle[y] Anan fiac ascar goh Inor yil ki- 

. nta{l] ju[n] kyak Buddha tar[]Je[y] tay | [y]uk suthbup tey sma- 

. firfo}w wo’t ma tirla pa ki[r]-im® wo’ ci + mu het yo ' sa- 

. k het kyak Buddha [t]arley gurhlon sik-im * ci kah sak 1 ro- 

. w goh tarley Anan smafi da 1 goh ma kyak Buddha tarley [gah] 

. [ku] tarley Anan row wo’ « Anan [mJnor ci = [r]isi moy ma i- 

. mo’ Blisna + jnokriddhi! jnok anubhaw ' go’ abhifia msiin | [kJo[m] 
. ku k{oJn ey Gawampati |. ku smin In + ku Bissukarmmadewaput 1 ku. 


Kataka- 


. rmmanagaraja + skandam din moy imo’. Sis(i)t? + blah goh risi Bisni 


gfolh ['] 


1 There seems to be an original flaw after the ois 3. and the reading is conceivably ohé or ¢cé ra, but. 


probably as in the text. 


2 Apparently the reading is fyd/, though segmilegs seems to require kya. 

3 There is an original flaw just before the y. 

4 The reading is very doubtful, though the last letter seems to be #. 

5 There is an apparently original flaw before the 7, The letters # and @ are often used for (or inter- 


changeably with) ¢ and (respectively) in this and other early inscriptions. 


8 The si is the verbal prefix (usually written s or sa, but cf, 1) 6, E 8, 23-4, H_ 16), 
7 Possibly the reading is Sisit. 


pan 0] MON INSCRIPTIONS 95 


34 


50. 
51. 


scuti nor goh : stin ar Brahmalok | scuti. nor ‘Brahmalok goh 1 s{t]lan 


[da]- 


. s dey. dan rA}kimaddanapir ci 1 s[d]an imo’ gna smin Sti Tribhu- 


wanaditya- 


. dhammafr]aja 1 syuk sasana ey t row glo]h ma kyak Buddha tarley gah 


kel 


hfeJt k(i)r-im? goh ku tarley [Ana]n 1 kal [g]oh tarley Gawath[pat]i 
. rmin. abhipray kyak Buddha [t]arl[e]ly » ktir Ino} kyak Buddha tarley 


blah [ci] + dhah 


- Spa prakat abhipray kyak Buddha taney goh [']. t[ajn smaii row wo’ | 


tarla 


. [m]Jnor ci + risi ma imo’ Bisnu goh kom’ ku ey dik deh. skandam din 


Sisit abhi-- 


. pray tarla gah ci cmat=ta 1 cmat Gawampati row ‘goh kurt risi Bisnd 


goh kum da ma skandarh ko- 


. m ku kum + daah goh ci Gawampati beh [4]r surh smin th beh gah row 


wo’! smin de- 


; wataw ! yan abhipray kyak Buddha tarley ci beh dun na antil s yan 


risima 


. imo’ Bisntd ma | jnok riddhi anubhaw [g]oh t kom ku ey ci i deh skandam 


di- 


. h Sisit. 1 dey- kal goh ci ut defy] s sanraf risi-Bis[n]a goh beh byapa- 
. (r] ' risi Bisnt: goh deh skan[d]amh din ‘Sisit gohblah ' scuti [njor goh 


dey din A- 


. timaddanapir 1 deh sdas gna smin Sri Tribhuw anityadhannmarija syuk 


sasana kya- 


. k Buddha tarley: smin dewataw + dey kal sanran gna smin Sri Tribhu- 


wanadi- 


tyadhammaraja goh lah 1 dey sanran pun lah + ku[m] bydpar kel ut: | 


ku ka- 
1 1 row goh kyak Buddha tarley kinkan ku tarley Gawampati  [d]ey 


kal -goh ney Gawarhpati din abhipray kyak Buddha [t]arley na 
antu- 


52. I blah t tarley ewin dhyan tay tin ar Tawatin 1 ut abhip[r]ay [k]yak 


1 The wading may be éir-im, hut a long vowel in an infix is quite abnormal (the sound sepresanted 
being probably a short neutral vowel), and the mark in the ¢ which would convert it intoi is probably 
merely accidental, and not original. 


96 


53: 
. kel smin In blah tarle[y] cis tin Jetawanamahawihar 1 ka phar? 


15. 
16, 


Ty. 
18: 


19. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo t 


Buddha tarle[y] ci 1 tarl[e]y Gawampati guran kel smin In « tarley guran 


B 


. lo’ nor goh cit kyak Buddha tarley ar nirbban dey din K[u]si- 
. nar [da]: ka phar? lo[’] nor kyak Buddha tarley nirbban :. tarley Ga-. 
. warhpati taln] ti[n T]awat(i)h® moy leh tin das yan kantir gna smin 


Sr{i] 


' Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja ' tarley kifn]kal [bJoy bistar ku smi- 
. fm In 1 smin [dJewataw kurh rmin da 1 nor. kyak Buddha tarley ar 


ni[r ]bba- 


. n+ kuli moy In(i)m * ee pi [cw]as cnam 1 yan isi ma imo’ Bi- 

. sna goh 1 sdas [g]na smi moy ma imo’ Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
. dey din Ari[m]addanapir ' [ya}h sasana kyak Buddha tarley ci 1 gna 

. smi Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gah ma syak 1 yan yas g[nja 

_ smi Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci ut jirnok Jambudip muleh 

. deh sprakat | m(i)r(gu)h ® gna [s]min. Sri ee 


go[h].ci ro- 


. w bift]sey-kurmh 4 yan s(i)I(a)dharmma ° dumhi{c] ci gna smin Sri 


Tribhuwanadi- 


. t{y]adhammaraja goh scroh ptaw ' ut dussi{] ma dmas marsa na si{]] 


dumhi- 


.¢ ma dmas marmal goh gna smin Sri [T'}bhuwanddityodbammarsj 


‘glolh 
éplit duol 1 ut kayaduccarit wac(i)duccarit manoduccar it ma 
kah c-ah 1 na s[ijl ma c-ah ma dmas dak gna smi Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhamma- 
raja goh skrac duol! yan dewataw ma din sumbup tely] fiah 
guthloh ma rap cir[ciJn dewataw ma tmiy na bajra 1 row [filjah pu(m)a® 
sanran [kjurh deh spa sanran gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 


1 Or in one word, kaphar, perhaps, 2 See last note. 3 Possibly Tawatin. 4 Possibly lzim. 

6 The vowels may possibly be # and a respectively, and perhaps the g is doubled; but this, though 
normal after v in Indian loanwords, is not usual in native words. 

6 Or in. two words, sila dharmma, or sil dharmma, but there is no vtrdma visible.. The first vowel 
may possibly be ¢, but 7 is normal, 

7 Conceivably waciduccarit, but the other is more correct. : 

8 Possibly pupa or puman, but the text is probably right : cf. B 41. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 97 


. goh# ut [jjimok ras gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gfolh [c]i 
. [yan] ku{th Jlac ma dmas jir[l]a goh skah sak wel 1 yan sat[ru] ma 


dmas grip 


. [sJurhturh? gobh ci- s[k]Jah sak 1 deh sbistar row mahasamudra kumh 1 


[y]an pum(i)-* 


. ¢ gna smih Sef Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci pras [deh s]dik pifi: 
. dam Arifm]addanapir goh [c]i kal satru burmrik goh deh sp[]}i# 
. | yan mfiah kirkél [pJan ma taw dey dia Arimaddanapir ma [d]as jli- 


y [boy] smaf.gan ma 4r des c-4n gohi na yiryuk dirhat w(i)r® 


. gna smi Srj Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci ! [prjas deh ta goh sca- 
. s[t]i{n] dak deh slhim dey din Arimaddanapir ti{n 4] yan rumba- 

. t fah [ma] cak [nJor fiah rumlos gurhlon 1 na [pun]-Ar * 

. [ti]r[t]ay na [mo]ytricit > ma dmas tey + gna smin Sri Tribhuwana- 

. d[iftya[dhJammara{ja] goh sjit duol 1 yan sinmor fiah ma aj[ely 

. [pum]Jas gurhblon 1 na pun-ar tirtiiy na karunaé ma dmas dak 

. sk{rJa[c djuol + smi dewataw ' yan gna smin Sti Tribhuwanadi- 

. tyadha[m]maraja goh ci! [n]a te[y] stim skel pi{n] (t)wan® ku ma- 

. [ha]ja{n] gumhlon 1 na tey jwi skjl kr[iy]a glik. a{nta]k ku [m]fiah 

. guthl[on] sut ma[h]ajan [c]i row kon ma t&[w p]dey cris a- 

. [m]bo t row goh gna smin Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja goh sman 

. me{y] na tirtiy 1 ut mfiah ma (mg)th? gumhl[oJa gna smin Sri Tribhu- 


wan[4] 


- dityadhammaraja goh spa lu-i[n] ' [y]ah mfiah ma [s]ak smo(h) na ji- 
. tku na pan na pumas gna smin Sri T[r}ibhuwanadityadhammaraja goh 


spa (sumo)-§ 


. [h] + yaa dik surhur [t]ris pu(m)a® sanrah guthlon’ma sak tim [tJarla 1 
. gna smin Sri T[f]ibhuwanadityadhammaraja goh sguran kel tar[I]a [1 y]an 
; tarley mahather ‘Moy ma ‘nom sil ma das sarathi dharmma 


44. goh cit gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh s[pa] su[t]i(m)” 
Spa a- 

45. car 1 dey kanta tarley [m]Jaha[th]er Imom sil ma das sarathi 

1 Or susis tusin, 2 Possibly pumi=, 

3 Conceivably wir. 4 Conceivably (but, if so, incorrectly) pin-ar, 

® Irregular spelling : cf. G 41. 6 Conceivably kwa7, but see D 49, 


7 Cf. B 11, where apparently the substantive derived from this adjective (?) accurs; unfortunately the 
reading is doubtful i inboth places, 

8 The reading seems almost certain. 9 Possibly pupa: see B 18. 

10 The final letter may possibly be p. 


98 


46. 


47. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vot 


dharmjm]a goh kuth 1 ko[m k]Ju tar[lJa ci ey scual 1! sdsa[na] kya[k] 
Buddha ta- 
[r]le[y] 1r[ow] goh ma gna smin Sri Tribbuwanadi ityadhammaraja goh 


s| g jah 


. [1] bna{h] pa [dJuthhic bnah pa d[u}ihic 1 row goh ma gna smin Sti 


Tribhuj wa ]na dityadha- 


. mmaraja goh s[dijndu binton mahajan [gjumion [ult ku kal 1 yan 
. fiah ma [k]sap suth(a)r? 1 na kansap duthhi{c] gna smin Sri Tribhuwana- 


-ditya- 


51. dhammaraja goh s(tu)den kel p[uJmas ! yan hah [mJa piha[r sum ]a- 
52. rei gna s{m|in [Sri] Tribhuw anadityadham{m Jrdja goh s[-Jor piha[r 
| djum- | 
53. hifc] : yan tin! Gr {tiJnrah [s]war ma ‘tmiy. na thar [m]a cin[c]o[n] na 
ra(t] 
54. [na] prajfia ma dma[s} t[e]y gna smin Sri Tnbhuwanadityadhammaraja 
[g]oh 
B 
1. [s]jak po[k k]el ku® (mahajan gumlon) ......... ie niet. eke 
[gna smi]-| | . 
2. h Sti Tribhu{w janadityadham{m Jal raja] (SON) etd: Sa B aie a aes ie aA 
3. [w plumat dey Maha-A[wic](i‘ st)[r](ak) 22. ee 
4. wari yan salk]kar ut fah ma [t](aw dey din Arimaddanapir goh)® 
[gna smi]-: | : | 
3. h Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh sdud.... 1... ee eee me 
Bice Bes ; (ro)- 
6. w gati di[nnal] thar ma A[i}n cincon ku rat (gna) [smin Sri Tribhuwana]- 
7. dityadhammaraja goh sci{n]l[oJh tumbal) 1 kon hwa[t s]m[in} (gurhlon. 


ma nom) 


1 This stop is clearly superfluous and probably due to an error. 
2 Or perhaps suriuz, which seems to be the more usual spelling. 
3 The stone is broken off here and the words following are e conjectural resturations. The same applies 


to the ends of C 2-11. 
4 Or possibly Awict, Awic, or Awe. LM, has Awik, The next word is very doubtful. 


6 ‘This restoration is extremely doubtful. 


VotuME I, Pate VI. 


aphia Birmanica No. |. 
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 


ee a 
Kj PEA Ae Ariel: He! aN | 
gee a oe ‘ By? tebe 
abv HA as ; ) 


Hig 
‘ 
Pg 
ee 
. 
£ 
> 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 99 


8. mirmal.row mirmal pkaw mlir1 ma no[m] cirhay ro{w] (cirhay) [ka]- 
g. ndar smin In ma imo’ Alambusa goh ma stirwil | Ener dan dun }- 
10. poh kon lwiit smi guthlo ma giti na rat ma kal: mofy praka/- 
11, rma dindar tdun buiitafn] fina} [st]l(G)n? tirw@)l4 1 yah gna smin Sri 
(T}r[ibhuwana J- 
12. dityadhammaraja goh s(dm)o[n® d]ey sihasana ma fti[n kindath na] * 
13. thar ma cincon na rat s-anubhaw [c |(i)r[h]ay § [k]irmun « kon [lwit smi}- 
14.4 gumlon [m]a tlaa nfo]r din [djumhpoh [yan] daa Arima[ddanapir4 
15. ma [njom kya[k] Sri goh spa no[m] ku ya(s)°1 smin dewa{ta]- 
16, w '(d]ely k]al [kiran gna smin Sift] Tri[ bh Juwanadityadham[m laraja 
[goh] 
17. yan pnafi [c]- an ma jnok kuth ci ya{I] gabbha tl[aJa + yan nimit ji- 
18. rnah dumhic naksa{t du]rnhic stlin ta gna smin Sri Tribhuw aang: 
_. dhamma-- 
19. ra[ja] goh 1 dey. kup bleh g{nja smin Sri Tribhuw snadityedhalinma’e 


20. [raja [g]oh sd[ak? ksJeh Papeaey [mo]y [m]a nom kfu] p(u)nras° 
[ro]w 

21. kseh [m]a das nor kirk{al]" mat bre[{y] scinleh rch (st }u(th)[b Jah 4 
ro{w t]ne- 


22. [y].ma [t]aw kurh 1 smin dewataw 1 dey kal g[n]a smia Sri Trifbh Juwa- 
23. na(djityadhammaraja goh spa kirmu(n mah ]ajan [gum ]lon ci sgh [na] ra 
‘24. [t mJa kah mfo]y prakar + s[p]kan ran [mJu(k)ut ” [sJu[kh]ay sirpaln] 
25. ma kah moy prakar [ci] deh t[-]Jeh strak gifgifi 1 fyan] kr(a)-” 
26, [y]a [kto]r (m]a [a}di nor r[ap] cifA! rip [jad li[slin [rap] tro- 
27. n[pju[mifi™ rip ‘nag ra[p s](u)[par.* mJa kah [mo]y [prak]ar fiah [t]a 
28. gfojh spkan ran | yan [g]na.smin Si Trifbhjuw anadi[t]ya{dh Jamma- 
FAUT elo} 


1 Possibly stlun, 2 Possibly érrwil. 

8 Looks like sdwo% but can hardly be anything but sdmon. 

4 The ends of C 12-5 are restored from the replica (No. II). 

5 Possibly cirhdy (which would be incorrect). 

® Looks rather like yarsa or yansa (words unknown to me), but probably yas is right. 

7 IL has sduk, 8 The ts is almost certain, but 11 appears to read purey. 

Me This might be piinras (which would be incorrect) ; but II has puzras. 

° Il may read kiréul : the passage is damaged. 1] The m is almost certain, 

12 Looks like muntut, which is impossible, but might be muakut, though I think the superseribed mark 
that might be taken for 4 is accidental. 

13 One would expect kriyd or kiryd, but there is no trace of an ¢ here, 

4 This reading is confirmed by II, where the sea consonant is certainly ms 

18 The reading is almost certain. © 


100 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. ! 


2g. tnas tirtiy [s]irsu{k] u[t AJah [m]a [t}aw dey Jamb[u]di[p? (spu)- 

30. k[k]el nidhi pi [pJrakar (1 na)’ ra{p] ci dey (d)larh * thar rofw p]nan [m]a 

31. (g)ir* rgoh (sc}inloh tu(mh)bah ® 1 smin dewataw 1 de[y kal] gna smin Sri 

32. TrifbhJu[w ja[na]dityadha[mm Jaraja goh skmun [1 ut [b]rfow] guihlon 

33. [cli s[t]afw] dey sil srl[o]s dhar[m]ma snfom puli-[a]r dfu}mhilc 
s](ba)-° 

34. [k]=t()[t]’ han tarla shi deh [s](d)a[s] row go[h u]t [mJahajan [g]u[rh]- 

35- lon dis amb[o’ a]mba lah dis [k]u(th) [cimun® y](o)w® lah dafs] i[m]a- 

36. a [k]a[n]dar lah (dijs kalyana(m](i)t ® sahidy [rju[th]ifols lah dofs] ran 
sko- 

37. [’] kuth [ku}mh [c](i" dfe]h s[c](u)loh ® tubah kel sa[k| sp(u)r[lJak ze 
smi(c) ci- 

38. r[-ah] (deh)*1 [y]ah [gn]a smifa] Sri Tribhuwanadityadha[mm ]araja 
g[m]oh go(h)- 

39. h u[t. dey] Ja[m]budi[p fAlah gufrhlo]n scu[mJat [na t]r[e]jas 1 de- 

40 fy] prasad ma sa[d]is [ro]w [Wejayanta pr]asad ma sga(p)"* lh(i)[n}* ma 

4%. das] muku[t] rat din Ari[m]Jaddana[p]o[r s](d)iin” (r)i[nd]ak” pir[p]if 
kir[m Jun 

42. ut b[rjow ma [taw] dey [d]an Arimaddanapi[r golh deh t-eh 

43. [s]fiac.swas [slathpa[t] rap gna smi (S]}r[i] Tribhnwanadi{t]yadhamma- 
raja deh 

- 44. [s](t)[&]w dey cnis (rac c)[ro]k (p)[4](A pa)n ® yan swas sa{ th Jpat [ma] ro- 
45. [w] w{o]’ efi djafh pa -plu[n t]lar (da)® [goh-ma go’] deh p Ls}ehfi 

[k]sah ro- 


1 The conceivable alternatives are: for the pa y, and for the uv either ¢ or ui, : 
2 What I have read 1 2a looks rather like sa. ~ 3 The d is almost certain, 
4 Looks rather like iv, but gtr is almost certainly right. 5 The tis is practically certain. 
6 The reading is very doubtful here; for there are possible alternatives »: or c, or it may be an 
accidental mark, or conceal a u ; a dot over the s may be accidental or stand for mm. Inthe last case the k 
in the next line would have to be the initial of the following, not the final of this, 


7 Possibly the vowel is 4. 8 Or in two words, cf mun, 
9 Conceivably the reading may be #aydw, or (as the virdma is not certain) yowa. 
10 The last vowel may conceivably be i. _ 1! Apparently cé, which is properly spelt ci. 


12 The first vowel may conceivably (but improbably, and certainly wrongly) be #/. 

13 The first vowel may perhaps be 2, which would be wrong, 

14 There seems to be a trace of an e here, but the rest is entirely blurred ; the restoration is purely con: 
jectural and very likely quite wrong. At the end there is a mark which might be the trace of a vivdma, in 
which case the restoration is of course untenable, though we might read deh or dekh. 

15 The virama is not clear. 16 Possibly [hiz, 17 The reading is almost certain. 

18 Almost certain, though the initial might conceivably be ¢. 

19 The four preceding words are rather damaged and the reading is doubtful; but it makes good sense 
and is probably right, 20 What I have read da may be merely a stop. 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 101 


46. [w] goh ci deh sgifngia alr [1 ult [mahajan] gumhlon [cli [st]aw 

47. dey dindu bi{nto]n gna smin Sr[f] Trifbh]uwanadit[y Ja[dh]am[m ]ar[aj]a 
yan gna 

48. smin Sri Tri[bh]u[w]anadityadhammara[jja (dJah [s](d)ak fiah [m]a 
s[djas sumoh sturh- 

49. [blah row di{nna]l thar t(a)? ma[ha]jan gurhlon 1 yan [d]an A- 

50. ri[mJaddanapiir row[m]Ja ... . .? tak (na) ®[tn]a[k birsey pjan rgoh 

51. [d]a gna smih Sr{i] Tr[i]bhuwanadityadha[mm]a[raja] gfo]h [s]pa 
(r)u(b)[i]n *1 yan 

52. k[o]n smin gurhlon ci. .® [sa]m[pat m]a [tin]t{en] deh s[I]h[i]a de- 

53. y din Ari[m]addanapiir 1 (yan) ® [g]u[ thir [g]um[lojn ma [I]m{o}- 

54. [m] sil dey [ka] [satru] ? (buthr)a[k]® goh p[l]ifi [m]a sak 


D 


beeee eee ee ey. 09 [b]har kuth kum + [nJa wlir] gna s[m]ia [Sri 
T |ri{bhuwa]- 

2. [nddityadhammaraja] goh # [d]eh scow tin [d]e[y biJhar [kum ku]mh 

Bee eee eee ee eo ol goh sp(u)nd(i)k @ pu(m)pif ™ [s](i)l* 1 yan ras 

4. (twaf gurhlo)a* ma lifi gna smin Sri Tribhuwa{n]adityadhamma- 

5. [raja] (goh) [s]tiin kafnd]atm thif{c] nor 'tumlar wel 1 [y]a[n dijjn A- 


1 Conceivably tz or tna, but see C 18. 

2 At this point there is a blurred space (measuring about three lettersof the original). It is possible 
that there was here some short word (such as deh), but more likely it is an original flaw in the stone, which 
appears to extend through the next two lines (between nd and di and cf and satis, respectively, though its 
extension to the second line is not certain, and if there was in C 50 a letter with a tail, such as the d is deh, 
or a subscript letter, the flaw need not have been an original one). 

3 Looks like ca. | 

4 The dot in the d is probably accidental, the shape of the letter not being quite circular enough for a 4. 
Conceivably (but improbably) the initial might be d. 

® This space is occupied by a blur which may conceal some short word like x. Or it might conceivably 
have been na followed by an original flaw ; or something else. 

‘ 8 A mark after ya# looking like a stop throws some doubt on the reading but may have been an original 
aw, 

_ 7 There is either an original flaw between sa and tru, or (less probably) we must read some short word 

like da before satru, 

8 The first syllable is se badly blurred as to be quite uncertain, but cf. B24 and E35. The mak 
taken for si may be accidental, Conceivably (but improbably) we might read d instead of ». 

3 The stone is broken off and the beginnings of the lines, down to D 14 inclusive, are imperfect and the 
restorations conjectural, 

10 There is a mark here, which is probably an yz, and possibly we might restore the word gurhir, 

11 The first vowel may conceivably (but incorrectly) be @, the second may possibly be #, 

12 The th is doubtful, 13 Possibly si/, 

14 Possibly we should restore twait din: cf. G 31. 


14 


102 
6. 


7 
8, 


9. . 
10. 


Al, 
12. 
13. 
‘14. 
15. . 
16. 
17. 


18, 


19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26: 
27. 


28, 
20. 


30. 
31. 


32. 


-EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [von t 


frimaddanap]ar goh sisubhi[k] s[kJah [s]alk] u[p]adro[w] 1 ut ma(-) 

(nus ? ma t4)w [dJey da[n] Arimaddanapar. g[oh) ko[m] 

(ku gna)® smia Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammara[j]a syas [n]a. (r]iddhi 
2 dfejh swle]a akusalaka{r]mmapatha cas 1 (sp]a(n]-- 

[dak] pu( th) pifi * [kJusalaka[r]mmapatha cas | yan ma{nJufs} 

[guth]l[o]n dey kal g{nJa smin Sri [T]ribhuwanaditya- - 

[dhamma]raja goh k[m]un deh sjnok [r]iddhi row de[w]a- 

[taw] kuth 1 [y]an din Arimadda(n]a{p]ar [m]a das.[t]ir- 

[t]aLw gna [s]min Sri [T]ribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh 

ci sg(u)[ilr ® tinhir na_ratna tre[y] | yan gna smi- - 

nh St ‘Tribhuwa[n]adityadhammaraja go[h] spr[ath]a[n]a 

[m]ic? sabbafiutafidn ' ut fiah § ma taw dely] 

[di]a Arimadda[n]apir goh kom ku gna smin Sri Tri- 

[bhu]wanadityadhammaraja [sr]jan (th]ifc dey ra{t]na tre- 

y | spa pajaw iey plurey] srlos kyak 


Buddha tar[lJey saddharmma ® [k]u {t]arley sat{ghla [g]urh- 


lon 1 [y]an fiah ma ife]y purey ratna t[rey] 

(m]a [kJujih saddharmma [moly sif[k]o’ k[u] dewata[w] g{urh]-” 
lon ku[th] ci deh s[g]ulafi 1 dewat[i]w gur[lon ci s]gfu)- 

[Jai ku manus wel! dewat[4]w [g]umlon [c]i s[ko]- 

[m] ku manus [d]eh spa [s]anran gna smin. Sri Tri[bhuwa]na- 
di{t]yadhammaraja [g]oh 1 dey. k(aJl kirmu[n] gna smin- 

S(r}i Tribh[u]wa[n]adit[y]Jadha[m]maraja goh | [y]an [d]aa Ari- 
{m]Jaddana[p]ér ma das kantir kyak (§]r[i] c[r]ih[Zy] gfo]h 
[sr](b)in™ [pha] 1 [t}i[nm]a satru gum[lon [cli sa[k s]das kusiw 
(rin 1) u(t] kir[kal] pafn] ma t[w dely da[n] A- : 
ri[m]adda[n api go[h] stg[et] thec sdas u[pa]s kyak Bu- 


1 Another possible restoration is mahdjan, though there seems to be scarcely room for. it. 
® Conjectural but practically certain, 8 Restore kugn or 1 yan, perhaps, 
4 The m is very doubtful indeed. 


5 There is a more or less blurred space here of the size indicated, probably due to a flaw which runs 


through several of the preceding lines ; or possibly there may have been some short word, such as da, 
’ 6 The w seems very doubtful and is not strictly necessary, though quite possible, 
1 There is a flaw here (which may be original), in shape something like du, 
8 Before ma there is another flaw, and the spacing seems to indicate that it is original, 


9 Hefe there is a flaw, of the sizé of about two letters of the original, 
flaw, for it extends to the next line, occupying the space of a letter between 7 and'e, The only alternative 
is to suppose that a word containing a letter with a tail (or a subscript letter) is lost in D-21; 3 but none is 


neeced, and the one which would seem most appropriate, viz. 40m, does not fulfil the conditions, 
10 Conceivably (but most improbably) giris-. 11 Cf. C 51. 


It was probably an original 


PART 11] MON. INSCRIPTIONS ; 103 


33. ddha ta[rley] ku [dhJar[m]ma [s]an[gh]a 1 yah [gn]a smin Sui (T}r[i]- 
34. bhu(w]anadi[ty]adhammaralj]a goh scuti nor dirdas goh 
38. sdiia swas sarh[p]a[t] dewatal w manus ma [jnJok dfe]-. 
36. y rin-ut dirdas [u]t sat ma [a]r [apay] pa- 
37. (n ci] syu[k? nJor apa[y plan goh i ut Wo]k? 
38. [g]umo[n] kom * ku dewat[aw] ma [t]inl(u)m * [dJey 
3g. [slansar ma dials m]a[has]amudra® [m]a * [k]ah safk.c]i{n]ruk 
40. [t}]b[o]k? goh [1] spduk d[e]y saddha[r]mma® ma (dm]a{s] 
4i. [kb]an j[u] ra[no}k stuliin (dey [cnils nirbbin [p]u(m)rey | s[mi]- 
42. n dewa[t]aw | row goh da kya[k] Buddha (t]a[rlJefy m]a « dma- 
43. S [k](a)ntu ® goh byades. gna smin Sri Tribhuwanaditya[ dh ]a[mm]a- 
44. raja [I]Jmom pun gob | [s]mif dlew]altaw] t kurh [m|ifa: well. 
4§. [pih]ar c-en gath 1 [d]ey kal kir[m]un gna smin (Sri [Ir] 
46, bhu[w]a[n]adityadhammaraja [go]h ' ptis [tbjah pkaw sac=chu gurii[lo]- 
47. (h] sglfo}a [ph]ar.t [m]a[nu]s dmuk ma (s]j(i)a” (nJa sgfo} pa[n] (1) gli- 
48. k kurh spkan ra{n] krily]a thar glik k[o]ser sca- - 
49. sit cnak ! suthwat ma ckat % ca twan ku sinl[em] ta 
§0. goh ci (slt(g]in [c]i[t] thec row fiah pju [kJu[th] 1 ut rut(u] 
51. ci sak skuli kal-deh kurh kurh [1]* ut son) gurh- 
52. lon nor dé -kuth kurh. sran_tlin tumway * jurhwi- 
53..n [m]a [kJah [mo]y plrjak[a)e rut ji[r]nok ras 
54. [g]na [s]min Sri [T}ribbuwa[n jadityadhammaraja goh ci klazh ba- 


S- 


gS 


1 Here either IT inserts a short. word, illegible but apparently ending in ¢ or &: it might be ik “to 
take out of”? Or, more probably, the broken letter is merely the A of syuk and thére was a big original 
flaw in the stone, ° " 

2 Between o and & there is an’ original flaw. te seems to read lob, 

3 Here II may have inserted something, now illegible ; possibly ku manus, Or, more probably, there 
was a very big original flaw, 

4 Conceivably, but most improbably, the last vowel may be i, II seems to support the text, 

5 Here, as in the last line, I has a blurred space of the size ‘of three or four letters of the original. 

8 Here the original has what appears to be an original flaw shaped like an vy. If appears to read 
merely ma kah, 

7 Looks rather dike uit bok, but IC has na trace of any 4, 

8 Here again II has a blurred space, of the size of some three or four letters of the original ; 
probably part of the same original flaw that appears to affect the preceding lines. 

9 Possibly, but improbably, Aintz. 

10 The: ‘reading appears to be with 7, but Ut has i i. 

11 This stop is doubtful : it is too close to the g and rather too high up, u is badly damaged here, but 
Seems to have no trace of a stop, and none seems to be needed, 

18 The virdnia is damaged and might conceivably, though improbably, have been an anusvdra. 

13°The stop is quite clear in II. 

14 There may possibly be an #1 before the m, but that would be quite unusual in E.M, spelling, wae as 
Il has nothing of the sort the mark is probably merely accidental. 


104 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. i 
. . 4 


. r c[wla[s l]eh brey s(g]ar [ule [kJu [kal s}r[o’] sd{ ila)k : pif] « 

. [dey] ras [gnJa smi Sri Tribhuw Janad[ity Jadha[mm|ara[jJa goh ci 

. sm[i] dewataw [sglo](n) (c](i)[n ksJeh [pret] (j)[lo]w * [c]lik ba[bJe- 

.’? tyans [kon s}min [k]Jo[n fijah [jnok gurhlo]n ® [yan] 

. [k]ri[ya puwifi deh] t-eh [c]i [th Jar s[rja[fi cjo[m 1] yan mfiah [gu]m- 

. [lon mja [kJah rfb](i)[n * tinrJan ci [d]e[h t-eJh [s]pa tinran (p)irnik ® 

. {ktor cif s[nji [deh t-eh ci skumir k]u [cl]a{k] com 1 gna sm{[ija [Sri] 

. [Tribhuw]a[n ]ad{ityJafdhjafmm]a[ra]ja glo]h [ci] sisugih fiah gu[rhjlon 

. (sa){n]® (ar)[i](y) [durnpoh prja{k]ar s[c]uroh kel dharmma ma [d]mas 

. [p]k[a]w spa [m]al na sil [m]a d[m]as [m]i[rm]al ' sm[iJa de[w]a[taw] 
dap 

11. tnefy k |a{l gnja [sm]in Sri { Tr]i{bhu ]wanadityadhammaraja goh di- 

12. ;ndu bi]nton ma[hajjan [g]uml[on] » [y]Ja[n binrju anumodana b[i]- 

13. n{ru tirhin] kirsah binru sadhu[kar mja [m]ah[&]jan guml[ojh spa? [ci] 

14. [row b]inru [b]re[y] jurn[nok dey] kal tirdey [b](i)r[t]am* k[urm] 

15. 1[mJahaljlan gum[l]on sgfii ‘stcar[it lJum[b]ac ma [dmlJals krliya 

16, [dumhic] s[l]hin dey sad[dhJar[mm]a1[y]Ja{n] fiah ma [an diiat]. gum- 

[lo)- 

17. [n ci [st](G)[n]° glo[m d]jfia[t] fiah ma linlas [gumlon] deh stir 

18. (bno)['] + fah [ma j[rlaly guriljon skro[’ wel 1] fiah ma a(n] - 

19. [yi]ryuk dirhat [g]umllo]h snom yiryu[k] d[ijr[hjat + [yJan Aah 

20. [m]a [k]ah [j]ik pta[m gu]mlon [c]i spupifi (pu)[nd]ay ™ juram [n]a sro- 

21.’ sro’ yow™ [m]a [k]ah [moly pra[k]a[r] « j[ap] j[4](p)* shi fah ta 

22. goh sisgih [ph]a[r nla rat « yan bro[w pj]u ma du[k] ma syo’ tumba- 

23. [y] lami gum[loJé ku{r] na gir[go] [A]as [m]a [glo]a deh t-eh si- 


00 won AM DRO BW 


peal 


1 Conceivably, but improbably, sditk. 

3 The reading is probably jlow as in E 24, not glow, though the latter is conceivable. 

3 There are marks here which might be traces of a stop (or a short particle); but this would make the 
spacing very cramped, and probably they are merely accidental. 

4 Conceivably (but improbably) rdin. Cf. C 51, D 30, 6 The initial may conceivably be m or s. 

6 Between sa and # there is an original haw shaped something like rw, 

7 A mark here, which at first inclined me to read spd, is almost certainly accidental. 

8 Apparently the original reads dirtarh, but the proper spelling is certainly dcrtavs, 9 Or stun. 

. 10 The reading is extremely doubtful, all the impressions being bad here and the stone apparently 
damaged. The initial might be 2 or 7, and the subscript 7 or. x. That there is a subscript letter is shown 
by the space between yi and vyuk in the-next line, - 11 Conceivably (but improbably) pindity, 

12 The vivdma is broken and might have been an anusvdra, but the reading seems certain. 
13 The word looks like jam, but either the m is a mistake for p or the cross bar is accidental or 
was added later by some defacer. 


pigraphia_Dirmantca No. I. Votume I, Prats VIL. 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 


oe 
ep 


bree, sik 
x pee tk GEQY ae 
Pe <4 crags + yng ye, ed 


134 oh pacing rene 


a Aig a serun ; 
iio ks re oh: Sa f 


ig? ea G 4 samt Bence 2c6te 
pun ife caneek atin é U: one 
lO AUES) 1 Terai 6 £31 05 20 ‘i i 
Yars $0 Y BALERS Wes Sere 
OU bn wc ex! sens G49 on bee Yh 
Qh mn as welt 8 no noes B 
(ee ay a ASE MQUE LD? 
Fejjoe mi LG aac é = 
AAS etal ouitt Lemay acm aly 


~My oh 


SRG Mh 


aaa 8 


4 
t a 
¥ " ~. ‘ a 
Rita) % ; ee 2 aN} de ae 
» ” Ra, | { . 
mans Ol ee Soe. pee Sas 
7 , + ves re a >, 
tt Sine rn ea ; ™ a ‘ 
Y tat NS . ~} aon ; 5 
My ~, v Vee ye dr ‘ Ass 


2a 
watery ein 
ae 


eo 


i. Bull? ‘lst 

is ee apa 

o Wiss gic aac) apis oy. 
Bes a8 


aD 


tie = 
ieee Sy 


rm 
2, 


y 


mah grt eralea 8 @ A aio eh | 
the SAU ACHEY, ee gre TI 2 EI | 
BA Sears meeLyUs (Qmrasagy py aor 
| Ae MENS Sen (aucnp Mige! | 
' Pett nate ens CCR not pt Oe : 
fe Sues fla a ee tao 4 
Ca Bidicam,’ me A (rato “OBIy Ae 8, 


7) s > 
iLiad ak aE 
Ron Lqpaurigny « : WIG $1 
ee HE ae . GH DE 
Ae: sbiasacieg 4 
eIR\aiat ote y pares ae 
1} Dyan 2 Bic 
ae BAY rae we 
Moe seeing jeu Teal bs sisi ate Me aN + 
winch i UC taf sateg pe hive A: : oi No6y2* Thea es are * 
ates 4 aa Pree al nb OMgeAG. OV; ph bk ce nivied 4 
Wn ey eS) oe eas ueal US RY ss ftpeers 6s B ORTH 
BH ye swaeige UNG 2 bina a AIC Syt 43 4 
Vb ig Lf it a A. pik, faza cei Gc tics ieee . 
: sieuleug ths ahi an peo) % 
OT SESIC gb" AY HI 
Neier ach: 8 pn g: et 
igang Bea uisig i. gycte 
: a Gis2U oT 
i: egeccd ue HEM VI HB CAG) De 


95% Mi 5-3 
ehigintarnbea A 9 2f 


SS } 


@ 
) 


weapon pa 
i — 
rs 


Ss oO Sur 
SOU Wie ed nQ> 
to 
> 
mf Ba = Ag 
Seas 


“ RcaWa cas 
Gitte CGMS 3 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS — 105 


24. s[g]ih # fiah ma an d[i]k sglon dik» [fiJah maan jlo[w] c[i sg]lon [jjlow 

25. 1 yan dharmma tiltol [k](i:[k]al? pan stge[t] thie] + ut fiah ma 

26, [t]aw dey ras g{nja [s]mf[i]a S[r]i Tri[bhu[wan{a]dityadhammaraja goh 
skah 

27. sak bhey skah [s]a[k] upadrow : [u]t fiah [d]an Ari[m]addanapir. 

28. kom ku gna smin Sr[i] Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci sjlin a- 

29. yak ' [y]an [gu]rmir pand[i]t gumlon [m]a fiac tirtiiy rinli- 

30. fi dum[h]ic s[u]m[ulr [te goh [m]a [dm]as mat g[n]a smi Sri T[r]ibhu- 
wanaditya- 

31. dhammara[jja goh bars yan [mfiJahma [nJom kirk(&)[]? gu}mlon [m]a 
s[t ]ri- 

32. [wil] g]na [smin] Sri Tribh[u]wana[d]ityadhammaraja goh 1 yan Hong 

33. twas [m]a [gon] ma kah [mo]y.In(i)m ® g[irlJons [yan ras jana[p Jad * 

34. gna smin Sri Tribhuwa[na]dityadhammaraja g[oh m]a [fjah surhur® 
{ gjurnlo- 

35. (n) b(uru)[k]* lah dain ra[s] smin [c}-an [I]ah deh spa lukow [t]e- 

36.. Ly t]aly] sj(i)n? kel [kJu gna smif Sri Tribhuwanadityddhammaraja 1 

37. yan [gna] smi[A Sr] T[r]i[bhu }wa[najdityadha[mm]araja [go]h stball] 
til- 

38. [tol] smifn p]ora[n glum[ljo[m] + nor mukha[w]ar gna smin Sri 

39. Tr[i}bhuwanadityadha[mm]araja [gloh abhipr[ay] ma (kc)um® ku 
dharmma 

40. [com mla stit » [y]an fiah [m]a | pla dik mfiah [gumlo]a ci staw 

41. dey s[ijl' ya[n p]raj[fi]a [m]a imo? sJa[rJa[s]wa[ti] glo]h staw de- 

42. [y] m[ukh]a[w]ar [gn]a [s]mi[a Sri Tribhuw Janadityadha[mm Jar[a Jja 
goh u- 

43. [t ku k]al1 smin dewa[taw]: [d]ey diff Arji{mJaddanapir ma 


F 


1. [Imom ky ]a{k Sri crihay gojh [yan ki]... .2[mJa [ed](ah) ” [nor] 
2. (d)(ila]n [bu (rh) [hok] goh g[nJa s[ min Shi Tri]bhu[w Ja[nadity Ja[dh]Ja 


1 Perhaps éivkal, as it should be. 2 Very possibly kirkzl, 3 Perhaps Iai. ; 

* Possibly janapada, for the virdma is not certainly visible. However, the L.M, form is janah pruid 
in the Mén Akkharavidhdna of the Absidhinappadipita (Pak Lat, A. Bud. 2453). 

5 Perhaps susnir, 8 Possibly durité, 7 Possibly sjin. 

8 The first letter might be ¢; the second may be m. 

3 The illegible word appears to have two medial consonants and may endiny =, it looks rather like 
Rintir, which seems unsuitable here, 10 Almost certain. 


106: EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 1 


3. [mmJafraj ja [gob]. sd[i]ndu 1s 1 smi[n] de[w]ata[w row) goh [yo] 
: fut] d[e]y sanran? gna smi[n Sri] Tribhuwa{na }dift]ya{ dh Ja[mm Jara- 
5. ja goh dia{h] spunyak pumas ku[rm] ci [pr]a{n]a{n-prja[nJa[n] e[y] 
6. pi{h]ar kel ku* kurh or °-kurh [mirn](a)s ‘ [IJa{h wit] 1 [sm]i[a de]- 
7. [w]a[ta]w® ta gna smia Sri Tribhuwa[n Jadit[y Ja{dh]Ja[mm]a{rajja [goh]- 
8. k[om] ku pa{rjisat ku[m] crloJh [ptaw j]()[rhan]® + [kal] (m)[no}- 
g. [r c]i rfow] kal (t]ufml]a{r kJurh [k]uth [p]a [sumoh]?: [smin] dewa[ta]- 
10. [w kurh] kok Ka[t]aka[rmm]Janaga[raj]a [ci kurn gah ro]w [wo]- 
ii. ty y he smin nag(a) ® jumnfo]k® [w](i)r («)" jlum]n[ok rJid(ahy]i 
[anu 
12. bhaw [tiJrla drabya tirta[w k]ya[k sri] + d[nja{h st}u{n]? tlumi s]a[sa]- 
13. [nJa — Buddha tarle[y] c(i) [kJurh [p]a [bi](r)[bo]y * [p]iha[r 
tarle | 
14. [y Gjawarmpa[t]i + yan din [S}i[sit go}h or taw I[n](irh)* [b]a[r] - 
15. [kljarh [c]na[m] ' blah goh kal gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadi[ty]a[dh]a- 
[mm]a- 
16. [raj]a s[p]a kirmun dey Taltt]ades 1 rut] ras ‘g{nla smin [Sri] 
17. [Tribhu}wa[n]a[d]ityadham{m araja [d]ey turnwin [lurnb]a(h) efi] row | 
18, et ch[u] gurhloh ma tin kjum sp[u]nduk * [pu](rm)[p]ifi ” 
ke [I]t 
1g. tar[l]e[y]® Gawarm{p]ati (gah ku [s]min In ro[w] gfo}hs {kal] 


1 ILhas sénvan, 2 Conceivably kuti. 

3 There is a faint mark here which might be taken fora stop, but is certainly not one: it would make 
the spacing too cramped, II (which, lrowever, is by no means seal here) has nothing, and: a stop would be 
out of place syntactically. 

4 There is a faint mark here which.may be the trace of an e, making the word mirnes, but it is probably 
accidental. The spacing can be accounted for bythe long tail of the « in kum of F 5, 

5 Here begins a long original flaw which extends to F 11 and has caused gaps in the spacing as 
follows : F 7, between té and w; F 8, between £om and ku; Fo, between vo and w; F 10, between um. 
and fot; F 11, between Ad and y. . 

6 Looks like sivhan, but the stroke in the 7 may be accidental. 

7 II, which (as usual) is by no means clear, may perhaps have szmo/. 

8 Il has nig. In our text there is no vivdma visible, but a blur which may perhaps be the remains of 
one. Of course either form is possible (cf, swarga and swar); the modern language writes nade, 

9 [I has jumnok (both times in this line). 

10 The vowel is perhaps doubtful in our text, but 11 has wir distinctly, 

11 After wir our text has a mark which may beastop. But II has nothing here. 
42 [I may have stiin, 

13 A mark across the ¢ is probably accidental, not intended for 3. 

14 There is no y visible in our text, which is. blurred here, but I] seems to’ have a trace of one, 
and the word is elsewhere spelt with one. 

15 A mark here (resembling » with a viréma) must be accidental. 

16 If seems to have spundik, 17 [I] seems to have the sis. 18 1] may have tirley, 


PART 11 ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 107 


20. 
Ql. 
22, 


=m -'S 


23. 
24. 
25. 


26, 


27. 


[go]h [s]min In gah row wo’ [Ib]ac [t]arla ely d](i)k ! (da) * 

[m]a spa [p]u[m]an dey Tattades [go]h [m]a [d]a{s] tir[t]aw [gn]a [smi]- 

[A] Sti Tribhuwanadityadhamma(r]aja ° 1 yan [s]a{t]r(u) * [tinmJa [m]a 
[stl](a)-* 

n ey [k]u[th] da [ma spd{o]w duo[!] :[ya]n® a(ta)s di[h goh]? 

[m]a [sg](@)[t] * ar ey [k]urh ma spa. [prak]a{t tin]: uft defy] 

sanrah gna sm|in Sri T]ribhu(w]a{nad]i{tyadh]Jammar[alja ° [g]oh ci e[y] 

kurh da ma sbyapar u[t kJ ka[l] « [ely ske[!] wa[r] (wel) 

[t]na[s zu Jonat gna _smin Sri Tri]bhu{w]a(n]a[djit[y Jadhammaraja ,ma 
ta]- 


. w dey dharmma goh ' ro[w goJh gna [s]m[i]A I[n] dan [b]lah ” {tJa[rle]- 
. y [GJawampati cis tin [h]Ja[n mJa[nu|ssalok 1! [ar surh risi] 

. [mJa [im]o{’ BiJsni dumon tarl[e]y risi Bis|nd goh] deLy a]- 

|. [s s]urbli[n tay] gah [row wo'] 1 [beJh ci [s]k[o’ kom ku] 

. [ely ku [smija” [In kju [K]Ja[t]afkJa[rmm]a[n]a[g]ara{jJa [ku Bissuk]a- 


[rmmade]- 


. [wapurta * s]kanda[m] di[h m]a [imo] Si(sit] 1 [mno]r-{n]or [goh de]- 
. fy T]a[t]tade[s djely daja [ArJimadda[n]a[pa]r ta[rley sdas] 
. [gna [smin] Sri Tri[bhJu[w]a[n]a[d]it[y ladhaf{mm]a[r]a[jJa (bl]a(h) ci 


{s]y(u)k * [sasa]- 


. {nJa [ky]ak Bu[d]dha [t]arle[y] 1 rfow gojh [m]Ja™ [k]y[ak Buddh]a 


[tja[rle]- 


. y (bly[a]defs] ta[rley 8 4] dnah gfo]h c(i)” ey ac haf{n t]a[rle]- 
. y ttarle[y] da[n” rijr-a[c ey] da lak pa [e}it [c-Ja[n + yal- 
. [A] sanran jurnnok ma gor] tar[IeLy s}pa c[i nom] | [ya]- 
. nh pumic ma [t]arle[y] mic [ci] jnok + dnah na sdafs] kya[k ci] 


40 

41. tar[l]ey pa sathbhar wel 4 [ut] sa[t gu]rmlon de[h scru]- 
1 Or dik; but If apparently has the i. . 2 I] apparently also has da. 
3.II may have a vivama here, 4 Conceivably satri. 


5 Il has the s#/ quite clear, but its vowel may possibly be z. 

& Looks like yuz, probably by accident, as II shows. 

7 The bracketed words at the ends of F 23-5, 27-30, 33, 35, and 37-9 are confirmed by II. 
8 The vowel maybe xz. II (which is not clear here) probably has 7, 


9 II seems to have a wirdma here. 10° Here II inserts a stop. 

11 [I has no stop here. 12 Conceivably smi. 

13 A mistake for waput, the superscript 7 having been wrongly put for the wi7@ma, See A 32. 
14 Conceivably, but improbably, syié, 15 [[ has ma, 

18 I] seems to have tirley. 17 Conceivably, but improbably, ci. 


18 A small flaw between dé and # is avvarently original, as there is an abnormal space there. 


108 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


42, [k sjumnd(i)[n? p]un [t]a[rlJey cfi] deh-s[d](u)[k? pi] ut pufmi]- 
43. [c](m)un® san dai dnah [g]oh [ci] * tar[lJe[y] r[iJsi [jJumh[nok] d[e]- 


G 


1. y [dlifrda[s pli [pi] I[eh tin] (ci) (tJafrley casiJa [crJihay kfirmu}} 

2, _ [ a (Yalh kdas mJle’ (crilha[y k]i[rm](u)[n]® gfoJh 1 

3. ay] dirda[s pi pi] le[h t]a[n tla[rley] sdas [s]min [dh]ar[m]mara{j]a | 

4. [y kal tarley]° da[s smin dh]ar[mm]a[raj]a [goJh [ci kyak Sri t](a)-7 

5: ge a [phar] ' [de]y [sth]a[n] (ma) ® [t]a[rlJe[y] (kuta)® [ei 

u ft | t1|- 

6. [nm]a sat{ru gumhlon sak] sdafs t]u[taw | t]arlely scinljo[h t](@)[mb jafh] # 

*, a a dfey s]a{r]a[d]a [el 1” mja [t]a[w 1 dey k]a{l} kir[m](a)- 

n® tla- 

8. rle[y cli (yan) ' (swas samp ]at [dey ti jnok wo] ci sad[is] 

9. [row] swas [s]a[th]pa[t swar mleJh [) yan tris] bfrow suth }wa[t] guml[o}]- 
10. [n].ci s[j}li[m] afyuk skJah sak afijely] (gwip)® [we]l 1[m]aha[jJan gum- 
11. [lon] ci s[k]ah sa{k bhey sk]ah [s]ak [up]ad[row] 1 [deJh [sca ® hap] 

c(a)-!” 
12. r[nJa=r[h]a[p® mJa [g]lof[n deh ae 9 sulk ' [dely r[as tar[ley 
[c](i) * [bre]. 


1 Possibly suvndin. 2 Conceivably, but improbably, sdiié. 3 Conceivably pun, but cf. H 17, 

4 Apparently there is an original flaw here, cf the size of a small letter. 

5 Conceivably, but improbably, 4irmiin, 

6 Apparently there is an original flaw here, of the size of a small letter. 7 Possibly tt-. 

8 Between rle and y there is a small original flaw. 

9 The letter is not clear, it might be fa or paris, but the sense seems to require ma. 

10 The reading is very doubtful, but the consonants must be & or ¢, though the vowels may be u and a, 
or u and 2, possibly, 

11 The reading is certainly as given, unless the second stroke of the # is accidental, but the proper 
spelling is tussbah. 

12 Or in cne word, saradakal. 13 Perhaps éirmui, as il seems to haye. 

14 There was here a word of one syllable, ending (app arcntly) i in « (or w?), The first part looks as if it 
might have been ya, /:a or pd, but is broken and very doubtful, 

13 Or cwim ? oF distinctly has the w and seems to have the final p, 

18 There i a mark here which might be taken fora superscript 7, but I] has nething of the sort. 

17 If has cz-, 

18 The » is superscript over the fi and is difficult to justify, either orthographically or morphologically, 
unless due to the y in the preceding word, with which this really forms a sort of compound, 

19 Possibly slhiz, 2 Possibly ci, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 109 


13. [y sg]a{r] klam [b]a[r? cw]as leh tif{n} u[t] ra[s t](i) [jJnok [wo] | 

14. [kJufm] st(ijt* [1 plulndily (ju)rabo] gfuJmf{lo}a ci spifi [ult [nJa 
[drJap [guin]- 

15. {lojn i defy r]a[s tla[rfley c[i ut] Sah [mJa micchad[r]i{s gu]m- 

16. {lo]ii ci [s}das sarhj majdris [ut] * + [ujt gumhir gurhlon [c]i [sduJk 

17. {pif na sil] ku [pla[tipJa{t djumhfic]: [ujt [bjurh[njah gu[mljo[n mJa 


[grJa- 
18. [fh] (b)[e]d® [ci dJeh t-e[h s]puln]d{uk] pu(mh)p[ii]® ut dhar[m]ma 
[b](u)[anjah 7 [1] ut 


1g. [smin curmlo]ii ci sp[-]ar dha[rmm]a w[e]l 1 yan kirk[al pan]® ci deh 

20. [t-ejh s[p]unduk pu(sh)pifi? dha[rm]ma deh t-eh kuth kufth] s uftj d[e]y 
stha- z 

21, 4 ci sabh jaw twos cirmat goh spr[a]ka{t] « [t]arley risi 

22. (yan) [sa]bhaw [t]wos cir[m]a{t gnja smin [dh]a(r)fmm]araja ° [mJa 
[njom kyak 

23. [Sri mja d[mJa[s t]umban (sa)” stl(aya® [go]h spra{k]at (kajl goh 
ri{s |i , 

24. [ma imo’] Bifs]ni gloh nla kirjeh [ci djin [kle[t p](ihalr] . tare 

25. [y Gawarhp la[t](i)ther 1 th{ec] ta[rjley [m]nor ci de[y T]atta[ de]- 

26. [s dey] d{@Ji Ari[m]addana[pa]r [ey k]um (d]Ja-[m]a sda{s g]na [s]min 


[mjoy 
27, [ma imo] Sri Trifbh Jawanaditya[dh]a[mma[r]aja [1] yan jul tey fijah 
Oo eke as * [ci] ey kur [k]urh [m]a stbal 1 sa[sJana kya[k] Buddha [t]arley 
ma di- 


1 There is an original flaw betwecn $4 and ry which affects the two following lines also (between dis 
and y, and dey and ris, respectively), [But part of the wide spacing in dér is due to the subscript l of glo 
in G 1, 

2 Conceivably, but improbably, tz, 3 Conceivably séz#, 

4 The virtma here, probably owing to accidental damage, looks rather like a superscript. But I 
_ know of no word uvta, and the reading «f seems fairly certain. 

Most probably 6 (as in dajra, dihdr), though conceivably it might be a very broad ~. The L.M, 
form is duit. 

8 The ms is extremely doubtful. 7 Conceivably, but improbably, the first vowel may be i. 

8 Accidental damage has made this look like pun, but cf. D 31. 3 The m is very doubtful, 

10 | doubt if there is a superscript 7 at all in this word, but it is usually spelt as above, except when 
part of the king’s name, in which case the form with diamine is used. 

11 Looks like ha, or sé. Probably the latter is right, though the point remains doubtful. 

12 Conceivably, but improbably, st/172. 13 Conceivably, but very improbably, pildr, 

14 Conceivably, but very improbably, Gawarispatitier. 

1s ‘There are traces uf three letters here: the first looks like J, or +, or perhaps s, the second seems to 
have been s, and the last was ¢ or possibly 4. Vowel marks (if any) are doubtful, Probably the lost word, 
or phrase, helped to define the 2a/ in the preceding line. 

15 


110 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


sk a aS * [ci] e[y kJum ma [syuk] : [m]Jaha[jjan gumlon ci [ely s-or [ml]a- 
. [f sil? s]-[o]r p-ar dharmma } brow ma [p-]ar pun-[a]r surhur goh 
. fey s-Jo[r] p-a[r pJun-ar du[mh]ic 1 dlukJup ras [twat déJa * surh- 


. [wat gumlon mia [li]A ey k[urh d]a [m]a [s]tu[n]* pa pra[k]at | [ylafn] 
. (sil](a)dha{rmm]a® [du]mh[i]e ci e[y ku]m [m]a [s-or] cr[oJh p[ta]w ' 


ely] sda- 


.{s tulmfbja{n asla{bh]a [pn]an [ml]a(h]a[jJan [gjumnl[o}n [1] ‘tar[lely 


[ri]si [g]ah 


. [row goh bl]ah tafrle]y Gawa[th ]pa[tijther kom ku tarley 

. [risi Bis]ni jurnnok [go]h sd[ik ® mlik t]ay 7 [ult bly ]ades kyak 

. [Bu]d[dh]a tarley tarley Gawarhpatli] gura[n ke]! blah 1 dhah maha- 

. {jJan gurmh[]]on sgo’ swar nirbban [ci] tarle[y] ar gingifi 

- (dja [mnJor [nor goh [ci] smi{h In clis [nor [T]a{w]atin ar suth 

. [t]arle[y] risi Bis[n@] gah ro[w] wo[’] : tar[ley] risi jurhnok 

. rilddh}i nae [m]a [pla st sm[oJh [h]a[n] fiah rumlos ku 


fiah 


. (tli[nm]a [wel(r)[wlefy]® guthlon. tafrljefy] ci ko[m] ku [t]arle[y] 
. [GJawamhpa[ti ku] ey ku [Bis]sukarmma ku Kataka[rm]managaraja 


(sk ]a[n]da[ rh ] 
H 


. [dala [Sisit t tarle]y [s]ka[ndJa[mh din Sisit] gfo]h [bllah sc[uti] 
. {nor goh mnor dey T]a[tt]ade[s dey dah A]ri[m|a[dd]a- 
. [nJa[pa]r [sd]as [gnJja sm[i]A{m]a [imo} [Sri] Trifbhuw Ja[na]d[i}tLy]a- 


(dh Ja- 


4. [mmlara[j]a ® syuk sa[s]a[n]a [ky]a[k Buddha ta[rley] 1° [dh]Ja[rmm]a li- 


5. 


1 Here again a similar amount of matter has been effaced. The last symbol looks like ¢ or ##, but is 


[fi ci st](a)[n]” pa [pr]a[k]a[t]: dnah s[pundtk ” pu](m)pifi® u[t s]a- 


quite uncertain. 


2 This word is confirmed by II, as are also the bracketed readings at the beginnings of G 31-5, 


3 II has dun. 4 Il has stan, 
5 Asin B 12, there is doubt as to the reading and jester Here II probably has dian 
& Conceivably, but improbably, sdutk, Il has sdik. 7 II puts a stop here, 


8 The doubtful letter might conceivably be d or x, and it is doubtful whether there is a virdma, and 


whether the whole is one word or two. Probably it corresponds with the L.M, wiwas, and. the formation 
is by reduplication together with the infix -rr- (assimilated as to the vowel by reason of the vowel of the root), 
Possibly, however, the first syllable is the Pali verarn and the second the L.M, wat. But this seems less likely, 
9 II seems to have something obliterated here, but it may only be an original flaw, with (perhaps) the 
relative particle ma, 
10 |] has no stop here. 11 Perhaps stun, but IT seems to have stun, 
12 Conceivably, but improbably, spandik, 13 The m is doubtful. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 113 


6. nran tarley [ci] :[an]tal swa[r] wo[’ ely s[mi]a [In m]a [pk]a- 
4. [fn rjan [k]am baj[rja n[om]1 [b]oy s[mJar wel s[m]Ji[n nag]a? [ma 
8, [jn]ok rif[ddhi] a{nubh]a[w m]a nom kirwa[s] lni[m]* lefh tin] 
_ g. [g]oh [nom] wel 1 dey dis pa{n] ci sm[i]a lo[k]a[pa]- 
10. | pa{n] scr[a]h ptaw pu[m]Jan ' ut parisat kirkal pa{n] 
11. ko[m] ku [sm]ia [m]a ta[w] dey stha[n m]Ja kah [s]ak k[si]-* 
12. w [mun * t]afriJely G]awam[p]alt]ither croh ptaw [ci s]ka[h] sak 
13. bhe[y sklah sak duk [wel] 1 ut tinma sat[r](u)® tarl[e]- 
14. [y] ci[skJah sa|k] upay [prJajfia(aga)® 1 [mno]r [ci t]arlely dely 
15. kal tarley das gna smin Sri Tribhuwa[n| ad(i)tyadhamma[r ]aja ? 
16, goh i [y]an pent guml{o]n sisaimarttha bicdranar * a- 
17. r[t]tha ma jmo’ k(fi)an® ma [r]juh sduk pifi pum(i)c ® [mun san wei | 
18.. dey kal gfo]h ci yan risi juznnok ma i[m]o’ Bi- 
19..snd [g]oh rm{i]i pi{h]a[r smi]h In blah: [m]nor ci daah fac munmar 
20. [s]asana kyak Bud[dh]a tar[l]e[y]"« thec thec smin de[w]a[t]a- 
21. wi tarley Gawampatither ci guran arttha g[oh kJu [ey]! 
22, [ku]m-ci gura[n}? e[y] we[l] 1 row [mJa kum [t]-el iafh] bar (pi]ha- 
23. r 1 row gfoJh k[u](m)” [mnJor [c]i dnah syuk sdsana kyak B[u]ddha ta- 
24. rley ci gor ku bnal: spa [wi]r * lah a[mb]a[y + t]ar[ley].ri- 
25. si gah row goh(k]u In blah s[d]ik gap pumas da #® [yJan [b]ya- 
26, des ma kyak Buddha tarl[e]y by[Ad]Jes kel k{u t](a)r[le]-! 
24. y Anan go[h] lah + yan suzhmafi ma [t]arley Ga[wJam[p]a[ti smi]- 
28. [c] pa | pr]jakat ma tin sma[fi] kyak Buddha tarley ” goh lah 
2g.  kyak Buddha [t]arley [s]oh kel ku tarle[y G]awathpati 
go. [blah | [ojr tar[le[y] Gawarhpati ti{n] kinkan [k]el ku 


1) has nag. 2 IL has lain. 3 Confirmed by II, 
4 {l.has ma. * Possibly, but improbably, satrit. 
8 The a, if there is one, is superscript 7 The t looks like 7. 


8 The reading is quite certain, though the final r is difficult to account for etymologically. 

9 The letter subscript under & is very uncertain: it might, conceivably, be y, s, m, or even n, being 
badly blurred. 0 Conceivably, but improbably, prmic. 

NUT may possibly have térley, 

12 Above the gu there are marks in several of the cstampages (nd also in 11) which might be 
taken for the traces of an avusvdra. But this seems improbable, and the marks are perhaps accidental. 

13 The rs seems somewhat clearer in I], and would appear to be required by the syntax, balancing 
the keris in the preceding clause, . 

14 IT seems to have a stop here. 15 [L has only A single stop here, 

16 LI may have tirley here, and so teonoeivably, but improbably) ‘May our text, 

WIL may have tivley: 

18 A small space here may be due to a. slight original flaw, or conceivi ibly fliers may have been a 
stop, But this seemss. unnecesary and unlikely, 11 having nothing here. 


12 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


31. mith Ijn goh [IJah 1 yan] pihar [m]a ta[rley]? Galw}arpa- 

32. ti ku smin In cis kin{k]a{l] kef{1] ku [t]ar[ley] ri- 

33. [si Bilsna goh lah1? [y]a[n plihar ma (k]yak [B]uddha tarle- 

34. [y g]ah ku tarlel[y] Ana{n] sasa[n]Ja ey kulfij ar 

35- [mJoy lnivh turow k[]am bar ewas dif{fic]am cnam. ya[n] | 

36. ta[rle]y risi [mja i[m]o’ Bisné [go]h sdas smin de-. 

37. Ly dJa{a] Ar[im]addanapir s[d]ia imo’ g(na sm{in] S[r]i Tabhw- 
38. [w]a[nJadityadhafm) at syuk [s| aia ely ma [ky]ak [Bu]-. 

-39. ddha tar[lely. gah goh cli gn]a smin wo’ (kum dja [go]h + [g]um- 
40. ir lal) pan{djift] lain inate lab Aah jno[k g]umlon | 

41. [lah ut lo[k mJahajan guthlo[m lah [ut bnJah o- 

42. [r] gran da ut b[njah or gra[a] das g[n]a smin wo’ k[ujih [dja [golh 
43. [lJah sandeh garh da lah sandeh [glath da lal sandeh gath danon Gi 


rs ranslation. 
A 


Prosperity !* Honour to Buddha! Honour to the Law! Honour to the Church! 
The brilliant Sakyamuni, who has compassion upon all beings, the lion who is the 
most exalted of all. beings, (1. 3)* thus showed forth the origin of the king. 
Sakyamuni bhagava®: the Lord® Buddha Sakyamuni; 1% viseso: of what 
manner’ is the distinctive shape of the Lord? —avigiraso: (I. 5) the Lord who has 
brilliance of body; mun... . (Atv) viseso: of ‘what manner is the distinctive. 
shape of the Lord?® sabbabhtitanukampako; the Lord who loves all beings; 
sabbasattutiamo: the Lord who is exalted beyond all beings; szho: the Lord who 
is like. a maned lion; rdja-uppattim : (1. 9): the origin of King Sti Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja, who has piety,” wisdom, courage, glory, energy, renown (and) 


VID has tirley, . 2 If does noi appear to have’ stop here.. 
3 Sanskrit. What follows, as sie as the middle of A 3, is in Pali (cf. VI 6-9). Then comes a nissaya 
_ of Pali words paraphrased in Mén,_—- ‘1 These references are to the lines.of the text. 


‘6 “ The blessed Sa kyamuni,” or Sakya sage. These words begin the nissaya, 

6 Etymologically tarley is “my lord,” tarla (or tirla) ey, being either « contraction or a mere 
abbreviation thereof ; but-in actual use it is the other way about, tarla being-generally the mode of address 
(A 27) equivalent to our “ my lord,” and tarley the honorific title used “when speaking of the person. 
There are many exceptions, however, ¢.y. F 34, : 

* The meaning and identity of Jhaw (if that be the right reading) are not absolutely certain, but the 
general sense. of the Mor phrase i is determined by its Pali equivalent. 

8 The meaning of gata is undetermined s probably it is a particle. Cf. D 45,.H 43. 

3 Or “religious merit.” Alternatively. it might be possible (following I..M., usage) to take nom pun in 
the sense of “ possesses,”’ thus eliminating “ piety.” But I prefer the other rendering. 


Epigraphia Birmanica 
(a to leat etal 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA 


50 3I2y 


ie Nite 
idee sents 
4 and fatney 


= 
g 
= 4 
a ws 
7% . 
Dates 
eae 
> + 
4 
y* SF 
* 
a 
: 
i 
1 
se, 
7 
t 
4 
wes 
r - 
st is | 
% 


ey 
S Vy per 
bar 6 1D 
re PCGr 
ae 
s) 
, 4 


Sao 
oF 


te att 

it CEN MAT 

Ba rcemhigztceill 
shaun) REA 
es: demimraitérig 


pe mish uri 
edge tere ie TOC 


AS 


Be eae tae Ne 


Race ANF egenry 


oS oy 


yr tha; » 
s. 


No. I. 


ee 


AB crn cobiiis sig Ye 


Sepa Pile ca om om ae 


ie: 1h. meicain| 


ql 
i ae 


VotumME I, Parte VIII. 


» PAGAN. 


if iu 
Ay eee Paes ¢ a 
Cuan sth “ATE al oy 2 
‘nmaulitggy ey Wr deters) aM 
iG} qgnPayns 14.6 
i: cA); ihe uah ag Gane ML Gg) Bsr ac BST 
gucains a uisuam vue BHINECE Rs 
eS tw Yeo mad: LITO 
4 Sie OGliWlE Rio: eu) 3s: MDGS UT 
n> Aptas acnhe: Wedd, aE} 00 
SB ocvuds seco Heng cin ey 
1O@ Ueto RIT UGC Zia 0 AA 
Bic his ry cint 3 ys AIL ea 
HELA IAQ? Ny 9; aes) an ni? 
ene ach) RE? Wangy USC ey 
chun aoc” Wwe Cs CO VU eA 
dispaichten uit ua WeNee Ie oF § 2 if 
Sunnis ie IAG s Owes 
MQGM| FAI Us CANNY AD UT g ® n) U 
dan Feneniaun au 8 BAe mg grr cy. 
WS fie weal Pie weal eocorn bur) 
Borne RRA Ean icra AA on pI WT | 
roe it CAIs fu =hUFe rire MIP Ag SO) lad 
\ eb ae maa us TESST HE Qo m aleny 
‘cpus VAPOR ny Lan 3 45 
Worth y Peet 5 8s Ae, 
dae suai Mie seid 
WHPqyarie Nf OEE 
ave ti er) aaenls 
JIMsUH a mq fe 
esi Heap My Gk; 1s 
BiG gaq iGo ines ate Ani 
emt PIS Ue CIN S04 ae nest re 
HC LC uw AQ yO | 


¥ mr) 


{2 


, Resa 


Ty Hones 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 113 


pomp,’ who is without a peer’; desay? desesi: the Lord Buddha preached, 
made manifest, (and) showed forth all the coming into being of ne Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja.° 

Therefore, (1.13) at what time didthe Lord Buddha make manifest (and) show 
forth the coming into being of King Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja? It was 
once upon atin e when the Lord Buddha was dwelling in the Jetawanamahawihar,* 
that the Lord Buddha saw® that which was to come (to pass) thereafter ® for 
the advancement, of the Lord Buddha’s religion, (namely) the coming of King | 
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja in the city of Arimaddanapii,’? when a thousand 
six hundred and thirty years should have clapsed after the Lord Buddha’s attaining 
Parinirvana.’ (And consequently) the Lord (I. 20) smiled. 

When the Lord Buddha thus smiled, from his four eyeteeth rays of six colours 
issued forth (and) went up as far as Brahmalok °; (while) down below the rays 
penetrated ” all earth, water, (and) air; (I. 23) across” all the four quarters of more 
than a thousand. million™ universes they went; and then the rays entered the Lord 
Buddha’s mouth. again. The Lord Anan,” seeing this miracle, bowed down (and) 
put on his head (I. 26) the soles of the Lord Buddha’s feet, (and then) lifting his 
joined hands ™ questioned (him) thus: “ What reason (was there) that my lord 
smiled thus?) (For) without reason Buddhas do not sinile:’ Thus (1/29) did the 
Lord Anan ask. | 


~ 1 Or (and) the fame of pomp,” taking yas paviwiir together. 
- 2 Literally ‘‘ who lacks others exalted eqitally ” (possibly “ who lacks superiors and equals”), 
3 At this point the preliminary part’or introduction ends, if we trinslate gin goh by “ therefore,” 
It is conceivable, however, that the words might be taken to mean “ (: ang) his virtues” ’ or “ (and) the benefits 
(ie, accruing from the king’s accession),” and-in that case “ all’ (or “am my ”) might go with it, though the 
“order would be unusual. VI 5 rather supports this interpretation, which i is favoured by Duroiselle, 
4 The great Jetavana monastery, 
» By virtue .of the supernatural power which. Buddhas have of seeing into the Finiee: etc, Cf. lil 
B 3-4; «ind with the whole passige down to I A 37 (2s well as some subsequent parts of: the inscription) , 
cf. HI] A 27—C 26 and VI g—end, 
6 The-meaning of mnor_ is inferred from ‘the rags: ages wheie it ‘occurs, Seperialy F 8-9. The others 
(A 30, 40, F 33, G 2, 25, 39, H 14, 23) are not so definite. 


7 Pagan, 
8 It has been found necessiry to transpose t!.> * ordder very drastically afte Fetawanamahdwihar. In 
the original the order of the clauses is: (1) “that which should come to pass for the advancement » (lit, 


“ increase ”), etc,, (2) “from the Lord Buddha’s attining,” etc, (3) “elapsed 1030 years,” (4) “in the. 
city,” etc,, (5) “ the coming of King §.T, did the 1 ord Buddha see,” Parinirvaga was’ attained by 
Buddha at his death. ® Brahmalo!a, the higher heavens, 

10 The meaning of kirloh is not absolutely determined : forms with the infix <¢r- are usually substantive, 

“The partly illegible expression in the text is conjecturally restored, _ 

12 Thave taken laksa and kof in their L.M, values. If the Indian values be taken, the feauili is a 
million millions. — - 13 Ananda, a leading disciple of Buddha. 

1 Or the passige may mean that Ananda bowed down and “lifted up the soles of the Lord Buddha’s. 
feet and bearing them up on his hinds joined together,” cte But cf. HIB ara, VI 14. 


Lig EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo1. 1 


Thereupon the Lord’ Buddha spake (I. 30) to the Lord Anan thus: “ Anan, 
hereafter a sage named Bisnii,’ great in supernatural power, great in glory, 
possessing the five transcendental faculties, together with my son Gawampati, 
and King In,* and Bissukarmmadewaput,? and Katakarmmanagaraja, shall build 
a city called Sisit. After that, the sage Bisnia, (1. 34) departing® from thence, 
shall go up to Brahmalok; (and) departing from Brahmalok, shall come to 
be® in the city of Arimaddanapir, (and) shall bear the name of King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold? my religion.” Thus did the 
Lord Buddha tell (I. 37) the reason of that smile to the Lord Anan. 

At that time the Lord Gawarmpati, hearing the explanation of the Lord 
Buddha, did obeisance to the Lord Buddha; and then, in order to elucidate the 
Lord Buddha's statement, questioned (him) thus: ‘ My lord, (1. 40) did my lord 
truly ® say that hereafter a sage named Bisna together with me should build the 
‘ city of Sisit ?’ 

“ Truly, Gawampati, thus (itis). The sage Bisni ® shall build (it), together (1. 
42) with thee.” Therefore, Gawampati, go thou to King In, (and) speak thou thus : 
‘O king of devas! Receive with deference ™ the saying of the Lord Buddha : (to 
wit, that) the sage named Bisné, who is great in supernatural power (and) glory, 
together with me shall build the city (I. 45) of Sisit. At that time, in all the (good) 
works of the sage Bisni do thou bestir thyself! After the sage Bisnit has built the 
city of Sisit, he shall depart from thence (and) in the city of Arimaddanapir he 
shall become King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold ™ the 


1 As to Bisnié and the other personages mentioned, sec §§ 25-6. 

2 Indra, The title sui is very elastic, being applied to gods (eg. the sun god, L.M. smta taat), 
kings, provincial governors and even subordinate officials, and in deferential address to private individuals. 
Indra, of course, 2s king of the devas has a good claim to it, .. 3 Le, “Putra, 

4 Prome: apparently we must take the name to be a vernacularized: form of §ri Ksetra, which 
occurs in the parallel passage VI 20, while III C 6 hus the intermediate form Sri Xset, } 

* By death and rebirth, : 

6 ‘That is, come into being, existence, as king of Burma. 

* Or “uplift”; cf. A 26,D 37. Some of the other inscriptions have stbal, e.g. III B 2g. ta L.M. 
usage, however, yuit dusk often means “ to reverence.” : 

8 The sense of td is undetermined ; I think it is probably a particle with interrogative force, like L.M 
ha.- Strange as it may seem, Gawampati is apparently made to ask the buddha (not, as might have ria 
expected, whether the asker had correctly understood the Buddha’s statement but) whether the Buddha’s 
statement is true. . However, the other interpretation (‘‘is it a fact that my lord said” ., .) is also 
possible and may be the right one after all, ; os 

4 Lit. “(It is) the sage BisnG who shall”; the da ma serving to emphasize the subject. 

10 {t would seem that Artis here does duty for a personal pronoun. Cf. A 49, B 3,19, D 44,F 6,1 
13, H 22. ; dh as ail ti 

1 Conjectural; the meaning of anf1/ inthis connexion is undetermined, Cf. A 51. Duroiselle suggests 
that it stands for “head” here: tu receive the message of a superior on one’s head is Sean. a 
Uricntal plirase for respectful deference, 1 2 Cf A 36n. ere 


PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 115 


religion of (1. 48) the Lord Buddha. O king of devas! In the time of the 
(good) works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, and in works of piety, do 
thou bestir thyself at all times!’ ” 

(1. 50) Thus did the Lord Buddha instruct the Lord Gawampati. At that 
time the Lord. Gawampati received the saying of the Lord Buddha with 
deference,’ and my lord,’ having practised Dhy4n,* went up to Tawatin*; (and) 
the Lord Gawarmpati expounded all the saying of the Lord Buddha to King In. 
My lord having expounded (it) (I. 54) to King In, my lord came down to the 


Jetawanamahawihar. Some considerable 


B 
time® after this, the Lord Buddha went to Nirvana in the city of Kusinar.2 Some 
considerable time after the Lord Buddha (had achieved) Nirvana,’ the Lord 
Gawampati (1. 3) went up to Tawatin once more, (and) of the coming of King 
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja my lord informed King In in full detail :-— 

‘OQ king of devas, hearthou! When one thousand six hundred and thirty 
years have elapsed after the Lord Buddha's going to Nirvana, the sage named Bisna 
(1. 7) shall become a king named Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja in the city of 
Arimaddanapir ; (and) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall uphold ® the reli- 
gion of the Lord Buddha. The renown of (I. 10) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadham- 
maraja shall become celebrated throughout the whole expanse of Jambudip®; the - 
hardness of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (shall be) like iron. The true 
principles of morality King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall maintain.” 
All vice, which is even as a stench, with true morality, which is even as a perfume, 


1Cf. A 43n. “ Gawampati. 

8 Taking cwin to represent I..M.swuin, If it represents L,M. cuin, the meaning would be “ having 
become perfect in’? Dhy4na (the latter being the high form of trance whereby supernatural powers are 
acquired). I prefer the first interpretation. _ 4 Indra’s heaven, ‘favatimsa, 

5 Apparently a fairly long time is implied, but the phrase is not at all definite. Cf. B 2. 

8. Kusinara. 

7 Here ntrbban is used verbally, and possibly it should be similarly rendered in the preceding line, i.e. 
“went to achieve Nirvana in the city of K.’ But this seems improbable: see B 5. The reference, of 
Course, is to Buddha’s death and in this use the word is equivalent to the pavinirbbdn of A 17. 

8 Cf. A 36 n. 

9 Jambudipa, the southern continent of the inhabited world, including (iuter alia) India and Indo- 
China, but no doubt used here quite indefinitely. 

10 Possibly this sentence is to be taken as part of the king’s fame, 7.e. that it shall be said of him that 
he is as hard as iron. And perhaps it is to be read closely with what follows, 7.2. his hardness consists in 
his Persistency in maintaining virtue and true religion; but the point does not seem quite certain, 

1 Reading siladkarmma, for which, however, I have found no authority. If we read sil (or sila) 
dharmma, the meaning would be “ morality (and) the Good Law” (f.¢, the true faith of Buddha). Cf. G 33. 

12 Or, perhaps, “ establish,” or “ practise,” “ observe,” etc. 


116 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 1 


shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (I. 15) utterly blot out, All sin in deed, 
sin in word, (and) sin in thought, that are beyond cleansing,’ with pure morality,’ 
which is even as water, shall King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja wash away. 

“ The devas who receive the joined hands of (I. 18) all men,’ who hold 
celestial sceptres* made of dazra,® like the executors of thy (good) works they 
shall execute the (good) works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. The 
whole realm of King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (1. 21) shall be altogether ° 
free from robbers, who are even as thorns, (and) free from all? enemies, who are 
even as a forest It shall be wide as the ocean also. The desires of King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall quickly be fulfilled.? (1. 24) The city of Arimad- 
danapiir, when enemies afflict ® {her), she™ shall suppress them. -The men of the 
four castes that dwell inthe city of Arimaddanapiir, who are (taken as) captives 


1 Or “which need cleansing,” or “ which are unclean ’’? 2 Or “ with virtue, which cleanses ” ? 

3 The meaning is not absolutely certain, but I take it to be that the devas receive the reverent suppli¢ 
cations of men: cf. A 26 for an illustration of what is implied by sumbup tey, Duroiselle prefers another 
‘interpretation of dun, viz. “ The devas with” (lit. “ who hold their”) “joined hands raised (in worship),” 
taking fiah zumlog as referring to dewataw. ; 

4 Lit. “ devas’ staves,” See the next-note. a Sty 

5 The word may mean “thunderbolt,” ‘‘ adamant,” “‘ diamond,” or according to Haswell (L.M, bus#) 
“emerald.” It is the Sanskrit vajva. Possibly, however, the passave should be construed thus: “ devas 
who receive the joined hands of all men” (or alternatively as in B 18n.), “ (devas) who hold staves, devas 
who are armed with the vajra”’ (a kind of celestial sceptre), The absence of dewatdw in the second of 
these relative clauses makes this interpretation less probable, even if ¢miy can be taken to mean “ armed.” 
On the other interpretation, ¢miiy may mean that the staves or sceptres are headed or tipped with bajra (in 
one or other of its possible senses). a 

6 The precise force of wel is undetermined but it seenis to be a particle giving emphasis: cf, D 5, 25, 44, 
E 18, F 26,41, Gro, 19, H 7, 0, 13, 17, 22. 

7 The meaning of surntum is not absolutely determined: perhaps it is connected with L.M. stuzm and 
we should leave out ‘all’? and insert “ thick ” before “ forest.” If the meaning is “ thick,” we must read 
sumtusn ; if it is “all,” probably we should read susis tum, 

8 The preceding sentences have been rendered on the footing that. “realm” is the grammatical 
subject, But this involvcs the position of the object between the subject and the verb, which is not normal 
and is not the case elsewhere with tat saé: see A io, D 6, E 2u-7, Gto, 11, H 12-4. On the other 
hand, it seems hardly consistent with these, passages to treat the verb as intransitive and translate: 
“throughout the whole realm of King S.T., robbers... . . shall be raltogether absent, enemies ,..... 
shall be lacking.” Perhaps the order is determined Ly the presence of the relative clauses, 

° Or, perhaps, “ it (i.e. the realm) shall quickly fulfil the wishes of King §.T.”; cf. F 42, (But in 
L.M, the verb appears to be intransitive.) One might also translate: ‘ King §.T, shall quickly fulfil his 
desires,” fcr though the pronoun deh (L.M. de’) is not apparently used of royalty in L.M.,, it is sometimes 
applied to Kyansittha in these inscriptions (e.g. VI 29, 31). - 

10 Or “ damage,” “ravage.” There is some doubt as to the precise force of Burisrik. CEC 54. E35. 
It may be an adjectival (participialJ form, so that the literal rendering would be “in times of ravaging 
foes.’ Seethe next note. , 

11 As to the pronoun, see the last note but one for the reason why I have not translated: “he (t.e. the 
king) shall suppress them.” It seems to be theoretically possible to interpret the line in quite another way 
viz. “ when ravaging foes destroy the city of A.,” running on the next sentence, “the men,” etc. But it is” 
rather unlikely that such a contingency would he admitted as even possible, unless we assume that it 
took place before the king’s accession. 


PART 1] ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS 7 


downstream, (and) who go? to other countries,? by (virtue of) the strength, power 
(and) energy (I. 27) of King Sti Tribhuw anadityadhammaraja quickly shall they 
return upstream, shall they take (their) pleasure in the city of Arimaddanapirr again. 

“The tears of those who are severed from all? (their) trusty friends,‘ by a 
course (1. 30) of benefits, by loving kindness which is even as a hand, shall King 
Sti Tribhuw anddityadhammaraja wipe away. The nasal mucus of all who are sick 
at heart, by a course of benefits, by compassion which is even as water, (I. 33) 
shall (he) wash away. O king of devas! King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
with (his) right hand shall eve boiled rice (and) bread to all the people, with (his) © 
left hand shall:give ornaments ° (and) wearing apparel to all men.6 All the people 
(shall -be) like a child’ that is in (its) mother’s bosom. Thus shall King Sti 
‘Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja keep w atch (I. 38) and ward with benefits? 

“ All‘men who are harsh,’ King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make 
gentle.” Menwho are not equal ™ (to the rest) in body, in speech," (or) in spirit, ~ 
King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make (them) equal.”. (1. 41) Wicked 

-male slaves, doers of all™ (sorts of) deeds that their masters know not of, 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall report to their masters. A. Lord 
Mahather,” who possesses virtue, who is the charioteer of the Law, King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make > . .. . ,® shall make (him) his spiritual 
teacher. (1. 45) In the presence of the Lord Mahather, abounding in” virtue, who 
is the charioteer of the Law also, ‘ Together with my- lord will I cleanse the religion 
of the Lord Buddha,’ thus shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja say. (I. 48) 
‘Do good! Do good !’: thus shall King Sti pebhavanadtyadhotmnatsp teach 
all the people at all times. 


1 Conceivably, ‘ down the river, which goes.” 2 Or “ districts.” 
3 Perhaps “ all” goes with “ those,” not with “ friends,” 
4 The precise meaning of rutistos is undetermined, but cf, C 36, G41. It seems to be related to srlos 
- (C33,D a0). 
_ 8 Perhaps not necessarily “ ornaments ” but just “articles ” (of wearing apparel), 
6 In the general.sense, not necessarily excluding women and children. 
7 Or “ children,” though there isno plural particlehere, © §& That is, with beneficial effect. 
9 Meaning not strictly determined: cf. A 11. - 10 Meaning conjectural, 

1] If the reading is right, it would seem to bear thisinterpretation, The idea seems to be that those who 
-are below the average standard of the community areto be brought up toit, Or perhaps the meaning may 
be that men, who do not agree (or are not in harmony with) their fellows, shall be made to agree: cf. C 48. 

12 Lit. “ mouth”: the threefold division is the same in principle as in B 45, 

13 See last note but one. | 

14 I take “all ’ with “ deeds ” rather than with “ slaves” because of its being immediately followed by 
the relative clause. 15 A leading monk, 

18 Possibly the doubtful. word is connected with stim, ‘the right (side), and bears the figurative 
meaning that the Chief Monk is to be the king’s right-hand man, as it were. But this seems very doubtful 
and even the reading is not quite certain. 

17 Cf, C 53-4, D 44, 1. The sense is inferred from the context. 


16 


118 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


“Those who intend evil, with good intent shall King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja sotten their hearts.1_ Those who speak evil, (I. 52) King Sti Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja shall exhort to speak good. The bar of the gate of Heaven, 
which is made of gold, which is adorned with gems, (I. 54) by wisdom, which is even 
as a hand, shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja | 


Cc 


draw open for (all mankind*?)............. King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja....... co 4 bole oon wa ew « $e frein Mahs-Awici". « » « 
eee ee (1.4)... The offerings* of all those that (dwell in the city of 
Arimaddanapir ?) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammar&ja shall sustain'..... 
weeeeeeeeeaee (like ?) the appearance of a golden mirror that is set 
with gems, King Sri T ibhuwanadityadhammaraja shall shine brightly 

‘The maiden daughters (of many princes, having ?) (I. 8) fragrance like the 
fragrance of jasmine flowers, (and) having splendour Jike (the splendour ?) of the 
spouse of King In, who is named Alambusi, (they)® shall attend (him). (From 
seven cities7?) the maiden daughters of many princes, adorned with gems of divers 
kinds (I. 11) (and) holding ® white umbrellas, shall come to attend (him). King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall be seated on a throne made of gold (and) 
adorned with gems, (and) shall enjoy the splendour of royalty.2 The maiden 
daughters of many princes, coming from seven cities, the city of Arimaddanapar, 
which is glorious, shall endow (them) with renown.” 

“© king of devas! (1. 16) In the time of the reign of King Si Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja, if another ™ great army should come, a good omen of victory,-an 
auspicious constellation, shall come before ® King Sti Tribhuwanadity adhammaraja. 


1 The original has the same word as in B 4o, where it is rendered “ spirit,” 

2 Conjectural restoration, as are the words in brackets with queries in the following lines, Cf, HI 
C 18-20, VI 30-1, ; 

8 Or “ Awic,” #,e. Avic#, one of the hot hells, L.M. Awsk. 4 Or “ festivals,” or “ hospitality.’ 

5 Apparently the suggestion is that the king is to bear the expenses, but in the mutilated «tate of the 
context the meaning must remain doubtful, 

6 Or“ who,” But in that case thereis an anacoluthon, there oeing then no principal verb, Thesame 
is true of the next sentence. 

7 Or “countries,” Perhaps one ought to prefix “the,” as these seven localities seem to represent 
some conventional group cf. C 14), but I am unable to place them definitely. 

8 Or “shaded by”? 9 Or “sovereignty”; lit, “reign.” 

10 This seems to be the meaning: it is more reasonable to assume that the metropolis confers social 
distinction on these provincial ladies than the converse, and-it would be rather abnormal to put the object 
between the subject and the verb, 7 

11 That is “ foreign” or “ hostile.” 

12 Conjectural : this is perhaps the root of éinta (L.M. gata), Cf. C 49, F 7. 


PART 11] | MON INSCRIPTIONS » 2 119 


In time of war King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall ride upon a noble steed 
that has swiftness even as (I. 21) the steeds that are of the breed of the clouds,? 
(and) shall fight (and) shall shine like the noonday ? sun. — 

“OQ king of devas! At the time when King Sri. Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja 
shall bear sway, all the people shall be. adorned with gems (1. 24) of divers kinds ; 
they shall go about, wearing diadems,®? sukh#y* (and) loincloths® of divers 
kinds. Ear-ornaments, for example in the shape of elephants, lions, troz pumin,® 
Nagas, Garudas,’ of divers kinds, shall they wear. King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja, (I. 29) for the sake of the advantage ana happiness of all that dwell 
in Jambudip, shall . . . .® treasures of three kinds, with ® images ™ in a golden 
reliquary, like a candle ” that glows; so shall (it) brightly shine. 

“QO king of devas! At the time when King Sri (1. 32) Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhamuiaraja shall reigu, all women shall be steadfast in virtue, shall trust” in the 
Law, shall be of good conduct, (and) shall (obediently) follow ® their lords *: 
thus shall they be All the people, be it the faults’ of ® mother or father, 
nephew or brother-in-law,” husband (1. 36) or wife, good friend or trusty ™® 
companion, or the faults of one another, they shall openly declare (them), shall 
not conceal (them), (and) shall desire their purgation.” 

1 Evidently some kind of supernatural horse is referred to; possibly the horses of the sun god are the 
starting point of the idea, It is not unlikely that in Sudhammavatirdjdvamsa, p. 10, 1,13, we finda 


corruption of the term in the phrase kh yeh rat uti gaku ma prat prat, 
e e Conjectural: lit. “the sun that stands’ (z,¢. straight overhead at noon); cf. L.M. tzai éatau, 
eg 

8 Though the royal word (mukut) is used, the reference is presumably merely to the turban or scarf 
wound round the head. 

# An unidentified article of clothing. 

_ § Probably stands for the long skirt, the principal garment of both sexes. 

6 Unidentified. 

7 Monstrous supernatural birds, the deadly enemies of the Nagas, 

8 The reading being doubtful, it is not clear whether the king is to discover the treasures or deposit 


them. 9 Reading doubtful. 
10 Or “ an image.” Wt Possibly “ lamp.” 
12 Conjectural: cf, D 20 and B 29 n. 13 Reading and meaning doubtful. 
It Lit, “house lord(s),’’ z.¢. husbands. 15 Or “sins” or “ offences,” 


18 Conceivably the passage might refer to offences committed against, or in respect of, these various 
relatives and friends. But this seems improbable, as there would be no particular point in the offender 
Teporting himself, when it was always open tothe injured party to complain. . The sense seems to be that 
the duty of reporting ‘offences is paramount, even overriding the claims of family and friendship, and that 
this fact was recognized in practice. 

17 Both words doubtful, If correct, they may include the other sex also. 

18 Cf. B 29. 

19 Meaning somewhat doubtful, but the word appears to be. the verbal noun formed from c-ah, 


“clean,” cuak,"' to clean.” 


120 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ———s[vo. 


“ The brave King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (1. 39) in the whole of. 
Jambudip all men shall glorify’ (him). In a pavilion*® that is like unto Weja- 
yanta,® a pavilion that shall be fit for delights, that is the jewelled crown of the city of 
Arimaddanapir, (he) shall enjoy the fulness of (his) reign.‘ (1. 42) All the women 
who dwell in the city of Arimaddanapir, (when) they see the grandeur (and) magni- 
ficence of form of King Sri Trishuwanadityadhammaraja, (as) they stand by the 
river shore,® (or) on highways, (or) at crossroads,® (they shall say): ‘Such 
grandeur (and) magnificence as (I. 45) this (is) because of doing pious deeds in the 
past!’: thus shall they be able to go about praising (him).’ 

‘All the people shall be steadfast (1. 47) in the teaching of King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. King ‘Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, in order 
to attach (to himself) those that shall be like (him),® shall shine like a golden 
mirror in the presence® of all the people. The city of Arimaddanapir, as if 
fastened down with four stakes of iron, so (I. 51) shall King Sti Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja make (it) firm. All the princes, (with?)....... magni- 
ficence,” they shall delight in the city of Arimaddanapiir. All monks, who abound 
(1. 54) in virtue, (who ?) at the time when ravaging ™ foes destroy (are ?) without 


1 The sense of scumat na trejas is doubtful. Primarily emat means “true,” and cumat should mean 
something like “to recognize as the truth”: Haswell’s L.M. cmat, “to discern,”” seems to be somewhat in 
point here. Perhaps the whole sentence means that the people unanimously recognize and do homage to the 
king’s bravery. In that case the first clause should be read “ That King S.T. is brave,” perhaps, though 
the order would be rather queer. It has been suggested that the king is the subject and scumat means that 
he is to judge the people: but that also involves an abnormal order, 

~ 2 The word prasid seems to be applicable to structures of several kinds, platforms, towers, palaces, etc, 
1 use “ pavilion” asa non-committal word. . 
_» 3 A nameofIndra’s palace. Curiously enough, in Burmese it is applied toa graduated roof: (Judson, 
Burmese-English Dictionary (1893), $.v-). a . 

+ That is, shall fully accomplish his reign and enjoy to the full the splendour of royalty. Or, conceiv- 
ably, it means that “ he shall receive,” by the ceremony of anointment, “ the plenitude of royal power and 
glory”: cf. IC 10-4, VI 27-9. 

® More specifically the tanding-place, quay, or ghaut, The same word, in the sense of “ haven, 
landing-place,” is applied figuratively to Nirvana in D 41. 

6 In thetown, where one street crosses another, 

7 While the general sense is certain, there may be some doubt as to the precise construction. In 
particular, it might be possible to take ma go’ with what precedes, meaning “ on account of former good 
deeds, which (the king) was able to do,” or “succeeded in doing.” Thenext few words might perhaps be 
rendered alternatively : ‘‘ thus shall they praise him (and) go their ways,” . In any case the reference is at. 
any rate, inter alia, to meritorious acts performed in previous incarnations of the king. 

8 The meaning is not quite certain, and for sdaé it may be possible to read sjak, “* draw, attract.” 
Conceivably the idea is that the king endeavours to induce other people in general to become like himself or 
be in spiritual harmony with himself, but I find some difficulty in getting that sense out of the words. 
Cf.B 39 1. CEC 18. : a : ) 

10 Lit. “ children of kings,” or “of princes.” It may refer to a wider class than the actual royal family : 
see A 327, Sanat 

11 The preposition is doubtful, the epithet ¢#intez undetermined, and for “ magnificence ” 
substitute “ prosperity, success, welfare, affluence,” etc, 12 See B 24, 


one might 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS | 121 
D 


(bane ewe eee 1 monasteries also, by (virtue of) the energy of King 
$i ‘Tebtidnpantidityad bar mardja, they shall return again to the monasteries. 
(1. 3) (All ?) the (monks ?) shall fulfil the precepts of morality. (All?) country 
(districts and villages ?) which were ruined, King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
shall build up finer than ever before. The city of (1. 6) Arimaddanapir shall have 
plenty, shall be exempt from calamity. All (men who dwell ?) in the city of 
_Arimaddanapiir, together with King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, shall shine 
with supernatural power (1. 9) (too?): they shall avoid the ten ways of sinful 
action, they shall fulfil the ten ways of meritorious action. All men, in the time — 
when King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja is reigning, they shall be great in 
supernatural power like devas also. The city of Arimaddanapir, which is the 
dwelling-place of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (i. 15) shall glow (and). 
glitter with the Precious Gems.’ King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall 
pray desiring omniscience., 

‘ All those who dwell in (I. 18) the city of Arimaddanapir, together with King 
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, shall seugat worthily ° in the Precious Gems, 
shall worship, revere, (and) put their trust in‘ the Lord (1. 21) Buddha, the Good 
Law, and all the lords of the Church. Those who revere the Precious Gems, who are 
zealous for the Good Law, (in) one fellowship with all the devas shall they converse : 
all the devas shall indeed® converse (I. 25) with men; all the devas shall unite 
together with men, they shall execute the (good) w sitles of King Sti Tribhuwan- 
adityadhammaraja.® _In the’ time of the reign of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadham- 
-maraja, the city of Arimaddanapiir, which is the source of honour (and) splendour, 
(]. 30) shall be very 7 firm: all (its) enemies shall fail to shake (it). All the four 
castes that dwell in the city of Arimaddanapir shall practise righteousness, shall — 
be disciples of the Lord Buddha, the Law, and the Church. 

“ (When) King Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja shall depart from that 
(state of) existence, (I. 35) (he) shall enjoy great prosperity and magnificence (in 

The beginnings of D 1-14 are broken off, and when possible conjecturally restored ; hence this gap. 
The idea is that the monks have been forced by a raid or invasion to leave their monasteries. 

2 The three elements of the Buddhist ‘Triad : Buddha, the Law, and the Church. 

3 It is notcertain that thie, “ good,” “ worthy,” tetains any definite force in this expression, which 
may simply mean “to take pleasure in,” like L.M. sju2 sduit, which may perhaps bea corruption or slightly 
variant form of it (though it must be remembered that sd¢utk by itself has the same meaning). 

4 Cf. Bag n., C 33. 6 Cf. Barn, 


6 The import plainly is that the devas are to unite with men in carrying out the king’s pious plans : cf, 
B 17-20, 7 The exact force of phar is not determined, but cf. D 47, E 22, Gr, 


‘122 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot, | 


the states) of deva (and) man,? (and) in: his final existence (he) shall raise out of 
the four Apay? all those that are going (in)* the four Apay. All the world, 
together with the devas, that are immersed ® in (J. 39) Sansar,® which is even 
as an ocean that is devoid of shelter (or) place of refuge,’ shall (he) lift into’ 
the Good Law, which is even as a great ship, (and) shall bring (them) to the 
haven of exalted Nirvana.® 

“O king: (I. 42) of devas! Thus did the Lord Buddha, who is even as the 
_moon,° prophesy (concerning) King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, abounding 
in piety. O king of devas! Hear thou also (1. 45) another saying”! Inthe time of 
the reign of ‘King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja all (manner of) fungi, sprouts," 
flowers, (and) fruits of trees, shall be very plentiful. Even poor people, who 
had ® difficulty in getting food“ (and) clothes, shall wear golden ornaments (and) 
handsome clothes, (and) shall enjoy (them) fittingly.% Children who are learning 
to eat bread with their fingernails, (I. 50) shall maintain a worthy spirit "” just 
like older persons. : At all seasons, without (any intervening) lapse of time, both - 
they, and all the princes from the cities * also, shall bring® presents (and) gifts of 
divers.kinds. Throughout the whole realm (I. 54) of King Si Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja, rain shall fall 


E 
an hundred (and) twenty times.” At all times rice (plants) shall be full (in the ear). 
(1. 2) In the realm of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, O king of devas, 
1 Or, possibly, “ shall enjoy prosperity (and) magnificence as a:'deva and as a great man.” But with 


this whole passage generally cf, III C 20-1, V 43, VI 3t. 
2 Apaya, being four undesirable forms of heing, viz. as an asiva (a kind of demon or Titan), i in hell, 


as a preta (ghost), and as a beast, Or “ta.” + Or “ worlds,” or “ people.” 
~ 6 Or“ submerged,” or “ sinking.” 6 ,Sarhsara, the state of continuous transmigration and rebirth, 
7 The rendering “shelter... .. refuge” is conjectural, 8 Or “ the exalted haven of N.” 


9 Except as a continuation of the above marine simile, the appositeness of this comparison is not 
obvious to me, 

10 As to kusn, see A 42 n., as to wel, B 21 n,, asto gam, A6n. The general sense of pihdy is determined 
by Bsr. It also occurs in F 6, 13, H 19, 23, 31, 33, in some of which contexts it may conveniently be 
rendered by “ message,” as it might be here also. 

11 Especially edible bamboo-shoots, no doubt. 2 Cf, D 30 n. 

13 The rendering is conjectural: possibly the meaning is “ few men shall have any difficulty i in getting.” 
It turns on the meaning of dmuk and the force of the prefix s- (if it is a prefix in sjiz), 

14 Lit, “ boiled rice,” but often used to cover food generally. | !° The meaning of enaé is doobsfall 

16 The translation 1s conjectural. and seems on the face of it improbable. The doubtful words are ckat 

ind sinlem. 

17 That is, goodness of heart and a proper mental attitude generally, 

18 Presumably this refers to the inhabitants of Pagan in general. 

19 Or “ countries’: the reference is, no doubt, to provincial governors, vassal princes, etc. 

20 Or “come bringing ”: the presents are for the king. *1 That is, in each year or rainy season. 


PART I! ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 123 


there shall be plenty of elephants, horses, buffaloes, cattle, pigs, goats, (and) fowls. 
All the children of princes, the children of chiefs,’ their playthings (shall be of) 
gold (and) silver only. 

“AH men (1. 6) who (wish to) increase (the) security ? of their doors shall 
make doors (of) . . ..° Their roof-ridges shall (they) roof with bronze ‘ only. 
King Sti Tiibinwant dityadhanwmatsia shall enrich them all. (I. g) The San Ariy 
of seven degrees ® shall shower down® the Law, which is even as a flower, shall 
make a fragrance’ with virtue, which is even as a perfume. O king of devas ! 
Every day when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gives instruction to all the 
‘people, the sounds of approval, the (1. 13) sounds of praise, the sounds of applause, 
which all the people shall make, (shall be) like the sound of a great rainstorm in | 
the middle of the night. ~All the people shall be adorned with good deeds; the 
lumbac,? who are even as the ornaments of righteousness, shall delight in the 
Good Law.” 

‘All those who lacked relatives,” (1. 17) shall have plenty of relatives. All 
those who were lazy, they shall be diligent.” All those who were lean shall become 
quite ® fat. All those who lacked (1. 19) strength (and) vigour, shall have strength 
(and) vigour. All those who excel in ploughing (and) planting, shall fill (their) 
barns (and) granaries with rice (and) millet ™* of divers kinds. All their houses 
shall be very * rich in gems. Even all poor old women, who sell pots (and) (1. 23) 
potlids,’* by getting good prices (for their wares) they shall become rich. Those 
who lacked slaves shall have plenty of slaves. Those who lacked cattle shall 
have plenty of cattle. The families of the four castes shall observe the Law 


a Conceivably, “the children of the king, the children of all the great men.” 

2 The meaning seems:doubtful : literally the words seem to mean “ who exceed security,” 

3 Unidentified; presumably doors of some particular type; but there is some doubt both as to eedios 
and meaning. 

4 Or “brass”: some mixed metal, wherein copper is an ingredient. 

8 Ariya Ghee those members of the Church who have entered upon the fourfold path of eight 
degrees leading to Nirvana, the degrees here are seven because as soon as the eighth station is reached 
the perfected saint is absorbed in Nirvana and no longer available for earthly tasks. 

6 Doubtful, possibly “maintain,” or ‘‘establish,” cf. scroh ptaw, B13 n. But in Sudhammavatiraja- 
vasnsa, p, 43, |, 21-2, I find: slep pitakat pi glaai crah pkau kusuiw, Cf. also II C 21-2, 

7 Lit. “shall make fragrant,” no object being expressed. Conceivably the subject may be the “ flower,” 
but then one would expect to see a relative particle after it. 8 Cf. II C 22-4, VILL A 24-5. 

2 Doubtfully identified with L. M. lamdt, “one of a religious order inferior to the monks, or priests” 
(Haswell, ‘s,v.). 

10 Conceivably the rendering should be: “with the geod deeds (appropriate to the) lumbdc, which” (or 
“who ”) “ are like ornaments of virtue, and (they) shall delight,” etc. 

11 L,M. dafiat. But the word might possibly be connected rather with (g#t) gat, and mean “ ornaments,” 

18 Reading and meaning both doubtful. ; 13 Cf, Bain, 

14 Or grain of some other kind, possibly “ barley.” - LB Cf D30n. 

16 Perhaps, “ Even poor old women who sell all (sorts of) pots (and) potlids” (or “ cups, “ig L.M. lami). 


124 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. ! 


aright. All those who (I. 26) dwell in the realm of King Sti Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja shall be exempt from calamity, exempt from misfortune All those 
of the city of Arimaddanapfr, together with King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, 
shall have length of life. 

‘All monks (and) scholars, who see the benefit (and) detrimenit (I. 30) " 
good (and) evil (respectively), shall? be even as the two eyes of King 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. All men who are of (good) family shall Seal 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. Everyone that is brave, who are more - 
than one thousand in number, whether it be the realm (and) country (1. 34) of 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja that. any -evil men (shall have) ravaged,* 
or the city (and) realm of some other king, they shall take (it) in hand® and shall 
offer it to King Sri Tes hiniase byalibamtiaey. (1. 37) King Sri Tribhuwan- 
adityadhammaraja shall keep up the succession‘ of all the kings of old. From 
the mouth of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja only decrees which are quite 
in agreement with the Law shall issue. All those who caused pain? to (other) 
people shall become steadfast (I. 41) in virtue. The wisdom called eloquence 
shall dwell in the mouth of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja at all times. 
O king of devas! In the city of Arimaddanapir, 


F 


abounding in glory (and) splendour, a....... ® which is far removed from 
® shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja teach. 

‘'O king of devas, thus (shall it be)! (1. 4)-In order to lift‘up thy heart in 
(the execution of) all the (good) works of King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, 
Iam ...-... speaking to thee”; do thou remember, do not forget, O king 
of devas, in the (poems of * King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (1,8) and 


1T het text has the relative particle ma, “who,” before the predicate, but if that is pressed: there is no. 
predicate at all, The same applies to the next sentence, Cf,C gn. 
2 Cf. B 24 n., C 54. 
3 The precise meaning is somewhat doubtful, though the general purport is plain. 
4 Meaning, presumably, that he is to carry on their time-honoured traditions, It might, however, be 
possible to interpret it as meaning that the king would support all the ancient families of his vassal princes. 
5 Conjectural rendering. 6 As tothe second ma, see E 30n, 
7 Or“ sorrow.” But there is some doubt as to the meaning generally, The “all” might go with the 
' “people,” and the force of pa dii# is not absolutely determined, 
8 An illegible word beginning with At. 9 The meaning dilan burishob j is undetermined. 
10 Or “ may it be.” But the interpretation of the whole of this passage is rather doubtful, 
11 The sense of pranaz is undetermined : it may be an adverb, with some meaning like “ — * 
4a Ch A qzn, 13 Cf.C 18n. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 125 


the Assembly,’ do thou practise * loving kindness. In time to. come as in times 
past, do thou the same.® 

“O king of devas! (I. 10) Do thou call Katakarmmanagaraja, do thou speak 
thus: ‘O king of Nagas, great in strength,‘ great in supernatural power (and) 
glory, lord of the treasures of the abode of splendour!® In order to establish 
anew the religion (1. 13) of the Lord Buddha, do thou act in accordance with 
the saying of the Lord Gawampati. The city of Sisit is to stand for a thousand 
(and) two hundred years; (and) after that, when King Sti Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja (1. 16) shall bear sway in Tattades,’ thou shalt cause the whole realm 
of King Sri Tnbhuwanadityadhammaraja to be completely within an enclosure of 
well being,® like rising saplings of trees!’”’® (I. 19) The Lord Gawampati spake 
to King In in such wise. 

Then did King Inspeak thus: “...... 10 my lord, I (am he)-(l. 21) that shall 
keep watch over Tattades, which is the abode of King Sti Tribhuwanadityadham- 
maraja. All enemies who shall come, I too shall drive them away. If the fame of 
the city be eclipsed," I too shall make it bright again. In all (1. 25) the (good) 
works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadharhmaraja, I too shall bestir myself at all times. 
I shall indeed ® grant a boon for the sake of the advancement ® of King Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja, who is.steadfast in the Law.” 

When King In had thus received (him), the Lord (1. 29) Gawampati came down 
again to the world of men, (and) went to the sage named Bisnii, (and) having set my 
lord the sage Bisni on a high seat, spake (to him) thus: ‘‘ Thou, in company with 
(1.32) me and King In, and Katakarmmanagaraja, and Bissukarmmadewaput, 
shalt build a city called Sisit; (and) thereafter, in Tattades, in the city of 


! No doubt, at any rate primarily, the Buddhist monkhood. 

2Cf.B13n, For “do thou” one might, perhaps, put “ to,” 

8 That is,‘ act in the future as you did in the past”; Indra is represented as having always played 
the part of guardian angel in human affairs, and is exhorted to continue doing so in this particular case. 

4 Or “energy”; but “strength ” seems more appropriate here. 

5 Presumably this refers to the Nagas being the guardians of subterranean treasures. 

6 Or “ let ” (or “ may ”’) “ the city of S. stand” (Or “ last ’’), etc. 

7 Apparently this represents Upper Burma or at least the eae thereof in which Pagan stands, 

8 Or “happiness.” 

9 The precise sense of this sentence is doubtful. Perhaps it means “ make the whole realm .... to 
develop to perfection in an enclosure,” etc., “like the sprouting shoots of trees,” Whether the simile has 
any reference to the protection of saplings by surrounding them with a sort of small temporary fence, I am 
not sure, but it seems-possible, and the protection to be given by the Naga king to the young, growing 
kingdom may be conceived to be analegous. 

10° The meaning of lbde is undetermined. 

11 Lit. “be. interrupted,” or perhaps “be cut off,” For “bright” we might put “ manifest” or 
“ celebrated,” which would be more literal. ; 

12 Reading doubtful, and as to the meaning cf. B at n. 13 Lit, “ increase.” 


17 


126 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou. 1 


Avinaddcnaptr my lord . shall be? (Ll. 35) King: Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja, 
and shall uphold * the religion. of the Lord Buddha. Thus did the Lord Buddha 
prophesy (concerning) my lord. | een 

‘Therefore? do I ask of my lord, (that) my lord receive- my petition (and) be 
not of another ‘mind. - (1. 39) There is a great work which it is good, that my lord 
should do. The desire that my lord desires is great : in order to become a Buddha, 
let my lord prepare indeed.® All beings shall shelter (in the) (1. 42) shade of the 
merit ® of my lord, they shall fulfil all the desires of the Church. : Therefore, my 
lord, great sage, in — 


G : 


thy third existence, my lord, (do thou) enjoy the splendour of royalty. My lord, 
do not abhor the splendour of royalty. - Hereatter, (1. 3) in thy third existence, my 
lord shall become a king of the Law.? At the time. when my lord is a king of the 
Law, the glory of my lord shall be very 1 great. In the place which my lord 
(shall face ?), all foes shall fail (to make a stand?)." My: lord shall shine 
brightly (1. 7) like the noonday sun in autumn.” In the time of my lord’s reign, 

8 the grandeur, (and) magnificence * of this great earth ® shall be like (1. 9) 
the arated (and) magnificence of heaven entirely.” 

“ All men, women, (and) children shall have length. of life, shall be free from 
sickness. . .. . . .!7 altogether.’® All the people shall be exempt from calamity, 
exempt from snistorune: They shall eat plenty of food, they shall enjoy happiness, 
Inthe realm of my lord, rain (1. 13) shall fall an hundred (and) ‘twenty times,” (and) 
all the sap of this great earth also shall come forth, all barns (and) granaries shall be 


'Y Or “become.” . 2ChA 36 n. 
3 Possibly, ‘for the sake of this do | make a request of my lord; my lord, | receive.my petition ” (or 
request ’’). 4 That is, “adverse,” “ unfavourable,” 
8 Cf.B 21n, Apparently the general meaning of the preceding i is: “ You have set yourself a lofty aim 
(i.e. Buddhahood), and must make every effort to attain it.’ 6 Or * piety.” 
7 There is some doubt as to the meaning: mun usually means “ from,” or “by ” (with the agent), 
-is conceivable that here (and in H 17) it represents munt, “the Sage,” i.e. Buddha, in. which case ns 
rendering would be “the desires of the Sage and the Church.” 8 Cf. Cig 0, 
9. That is,a legitimate and orthodox Buddhist king. ~ 0 CE D300, 
11 Both the bracketed verbs in this passage are somewhat doubtful as regards their meaning, and even 
the reading of the first one is by no means certain. 
12 Or, perhaps, ‘like the sun at the season when it is in the meridian,” te, '* noon,” It.appears ‘that 
savada sometimes means “season.” in general, Cf, C 22 n. 
13 The illegible word is, probably only a particle not affecting the sense. 
13 Or “ prosperity (and) welfare.” 
15 hat is, the earth ; the phrase is common in L.M, 
16 Apparently wleh (like mule in B ro) merely adds ainieata: 
17 Reading and meaning of gwif are doubtful. 18 Cf. Baton, 1 Cf. D 54, 


PART HW] MON INSCRIPTIONS maLy, 


full of all (manner of) goods.’ In the realm of my lord al those who were heretical: 
shall become orthodox entirely. All the monks shall be full of virtue and good 
conduct. . All the Brahmans, who know the Vedas, they shall fulfil all the Brahman 
law: All (1. 19) the princes ? shall carry out the daw altogether.® The four castes. 
they shall fulfil their law also.* In all places the essence of the preaching of truth 
shall be (made) manifest, ‘O my lord sage, (1, 22) the essence of the preaching of 
truth shall come to be.(made) manifest by a king of the Law, who is glorious, who is 
even as the leader of a caravan.’ ® | 

Then the sage (I. 24) named Bisni' zealously received the saying of the Lord 
Thera Gawampati, (and said): “ (It is) well, my lord! Hereafter, in Tattades, in the - 
city of Arimaddanapir, (it is) I that shall become a king (1. 27) named Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja. The feet (and) hands of those Fae) oda Laas sete’ © Lalso 
will support. The'religion of the Lord Buddha, that .. - .,? | also shall uphold. 
All the people shall I exhort to keep (the precepts of) virtue, exhort to carry out the 
Law. Women who carry on. evil conduct (1..31) shall I exhort’ to ‘carry on good 
conduct. All chiefs of country (districts), villages, (and) small towns, that are 
decayed,® I also shal} make famous. The true principles of morality I also shall 
exhort (them) to maintain." I-shall be (I. 34) the chief bull” (of the herd), the 
candle” of all the people!” 

My lord the sage having spoken (1. 35) thus, the Lord Thera Gawampati and 
my lord the great sage.Bisna were well pleased *; and the Lord Gawampati, having 
expounded all the prophecy of the Lord Buddha, to the end that all mankind 
might attain to the heaven of Nirvana, my lord went his ways. 

_ Thereafter, King In came down from Tawatin, (and) went to (1. 40) my lord 
the sage Bisnd, (and) spake thus : ‘ My lord sage, great in supernatural power (and) 


1 Cf. E 20, . 2 Ch, A 320, 3 Cf. Bat n, 

4 That is, the law applicable tothem. Or perhaps the sentence might be construed: “ they shall fulfil 
the law, they also.” 

® The rendering offers difficulties. Lit. the sentence apparently means “ the essence,” etc., “ of aking,” 
etc., “shall come (and) be manifest.” The meaning of tusisbae and sd (if rightly so read) could not be 
definitely determined. Cf.G 34. 

8 illegible: perhaps we may supply “are weak,” or the like, 

7 Hlegible : perhaps “is decayed,” or the like. Cf. H 4-5. 8 Cf. A 30n, 

9 Or “ruined,” or perhaps merely “obscure,” Apparently it must be construed grammatically with 
“chiefs,” though it really refers to the condition of their districts, 

10 Or “ morality and the Good Law,” as in B 12, 1 Cf, B 13. 

12 As to the doubtful word turivban, cf. G 23. 

13 That is, the light of the world, But it is conceivable that pd may represent L.M. pad, in which 
case the meaning w ould be “the chief bull of the pasture of all mankind.” 

14 Or “the Lord T.G, was well pleased with my lord the great sage B,”’ 


128 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. 1 


glory, who hast? loving kindness equally towards all, both those that are trusty * 
and those that are hostile! My lord, together with the Lord (I. 43) Gawathpati, 
and me, and Bissukarmma, and Katakarmmanagaraja, shall build 


H 


the city of Sisit. My lord, after building the city of Sisit, shall depart (1. 2) from 
thence, (and) thereafter, in Tattades, in the . city of Arimaddanapiir, shall" become 
a king named Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold * the religion of 
the Lord Buddha. The Law (when it is) decayed,‘ shalt (thou) make manifest.® 
In order to carry out fully all the (good) works (1. 6).of my: lord, ‘up in Heaven am 
1° King In, who wield the vajra.7?’ Down below is® the Naga king, who is great 
in supernatural power (and) glory, who has coils a thousand fold. In the four 
quarters the four kings guarding the world® shall keep” (their) watch. All the 
assembly of the four castes (1. 11) together with the princes" who dwell in the 
place that cannot be shaken, by reason™ that the Lord Thera Gawarhpati 
maintains * (it), shall be exempt from calamity, exempt from sorrow altogether.’* 
All the enemies of my lord shall be lacking in cunning devices. 

“ Hereafter, my lord, in (1. 15) the time (when) my lord is King Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja, all scholars shall consider (and) investigate * matters that 
are firm™ (and) secure,” that are deep, (and) shall fulfil the desires of the 
Church * entirely.” (1.18) Then the great sage named Bisni, having heard 
the saying of King In, to the end that thereafter (he) might see the advance- 
ment of the religion of the Lord Buddha,” (said): “Right well, O king of devas | 
The.Lord Thera annie aie has expounded that matter to me™; (1. 22) and thou: 


1 Or “dost exercize” : it seems likely that pa implies more than a merely static condition of mind, 
. 8Cf,B2gn. It would almost seem from this passage that rurmlos means “‘friendly,” in which case 
srlos (C 33, D 20) would probably mean “shall love.” ~ . 3 Cf, A36n. 4 Or “obscured,” 

5 Or “famous,” or simply “clear,” #.¢e, he shall expound and explain it, when it has ceased to be 
properly understood and exactly followed, 

6 It seems not quite certain whether wo’ goes with swar or with ey: the objection to the former 
construction is that this conversation is taking place on earth, and wo’ seems inappropriate, If it can be 
taken with ey, the meaning would be “I here,” ¢.e, “1, whom you see here at present.” 

_7 Lit, the “ dajra weapon”: cf. B 18 n, ’ 8 Asto the supposed force of wel, cf, B 21 n, 
9 Mythical, not human, kings, known as the four mahdrajas. 10 Cf. B 130. 
Or “ the king.” 12 Or following the alternative text of II, ‘“ which the Lord T.G, maintains,” 

18 Cf, B13 n. 11 Cf, Barn. 15 Or “shall be competent to investigate,” 

15 So literally: presumably it here means “ important.” 

17 Reading and meaning doubtful : either it is another adjective going with jmo’, “ firm,” or a noun. 

WCE. Fazn - 19 Cf,B 21 n, 0 Cf, F 27 n. 

21 Possibly the speech begins at mnor: “ ‘To the end that I may see hereafter the advancement,” etc. 

2 Conceivably thec thee is used adverbially ; “ Right well, O king of devas, did the Lord T.G, expound,” 
etc. But this seems less probable. The words are equivalent to the Pali sddhu, sadhu: cf, G a5 supra and 
Myazedi 17. , . 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 129 


too’ hast expounded (it). Even as ye- two say, so too hereafter, in order 
‘to uphold* the religion of the. Lord Buddha, (it were) good that thou put 
forth (thy) strength: be not negligent!” * My lord the sage, having spoken 
thus to King In, was well pleased in spirit. 

The prophecy that the Lord Buddha prophesied to the Lord (l 27) Anan, che 
question that the Lord’ Gawaiiipati desired to have explained, which he asked the Lord 
Buddha, (and whereof) the Lord Buddha gave the answer to the Lord Gawarhpati, 
urging the Lord Gawampati to go up (and) inform (I. 31) King In (of it), the saying 
that the Lord Gawampati (and) King In came down (and) told to my lord the sage 
Bisni, the saying that the Lord Buddha (1.34) spake to the Lord Anan (saying) : 
‘When my religion shall have gone on for one thousand six hundred (and) twenty- 
eight years, my lord the sage named Bisni shall become king in (1. 37) the city of 
Arimaddanapir, (and) shall bear the name of King Sri Tnbhuwanadityadhamma- 
raja, (and) shall uphold * my religion ”—he of whom the Lord Buddha spake, (verily) 
this (present) king is he. Monks, scholars, Brahmans, all chiefs, (I. 41) all the 
world of mankind, may you. all understand,® may you all understand, (that) this 
king is he. Doubt not! Doubt not! Dou not ! ® 


No. II. | 
A FRAGMENTARY REPLICA OF No, I. 
Descriptive Account. 


36. This record is apparently engraved on two stones, which are now in the 
Pagan Museum and are numbered 4 and’ 5 respectively in Section I of the 
Catalogue (1906). Their original location was about 50 feet east of the Tharaba 
(Sarabha) Gate, Pagan. -One set of ink-impressions, consisting of seven pieces, 
was supplied to me, together with photographs of the impressions. Each of the 
stones presumably has four inscribed faces, but of the first stone (No. 5 in the 
Catalogue) the impressions of only three faces were sent; from which it would 
seem to follow that the first face of that stone is illegible. The stones are evidently 
remnants of what were originally two columns: about two-thirds of the original 
record have been lost altogether, and the remainder on these seven faces is much 
damaged and in a poor state of preservation. The dimensions of the stones and 

1 Cf, A 42n., Barn. 2 Cf, A 36 n. 
3 The general effect of this rather obscure passage seems to be an echortation to Indra to take active 
steps to carry out the intent of the two messages, his own and Gawampati’s. It is possible that the clause 


at the end is also to be read as dependent on the principal clause : ‘ (and) be not negligent.” 
4 Cf. A 36n. 8 Cf. IT D 14, V 49-51. 6 As to gam, ch A6 nz 


“130 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


other details tia in the Catalogue are as follows :—No. 5, height 4 ft. $in.; 
breadth 2 ft. 5 in.;. number of lines on the’ obverse face (which face this is, is not 
clear to me) 17, on the remaining faces 26. . No. 4, height 3 ft.; breadth 2 ft. 9 in. 
number of lines on the obverse face (unidentified) 24, on the remaining faces 59. 
These particulars. do not tally quite precisely. with those of thé impressions, which 
are somewhat unsatisfactory in some respects ; but the point is not very material. 
The space covered by lettering as measured on the impressions is as follows :— 
Face A (no impression supplied); B, height 1 ft. 10§ in, breadth 2 ft. $in.; C,’ 
height 2 ft., breadth 2 ft..3 in.; D, height 1 ft. 10 in,, breadth 2 fiz; H, REE 9 it. 
2+ in., breath 1 ft, 104 in. larwicying amount, some 6 in., being Jproken off at the 
ends of the lines); F, height 1 ft. 10 in., breadth 1 ft. 2 in. tapering down to 5 in. 
(the stone being apparently broken off at the beginnings of the lines); G, height 
2 ft. 7} in., breadth 2 ft. 6 in.; H, height 2 ft. 32 in., breadth 1 ft. 102 in. Faces 
A-D correspond with the stone numbered 5 ; E-H with the one numbered 4 in 
the Catalogue.- In a general way the letters resemble those of No. I. They 
measure about # in. in height, and letter ¢ ‘about the same, to 1 in., in length. The 
space between the lines, in the absence. of subscript and superscript letters, 1S also 
about the same, though rather variable. ; : 

. 37. The variants between this inscription and No. I feo far as they- could be 
ascertained) having been given in the notes on the text of No. I, it will suffice to 
give here a concordance of the two texts, with an indication of the first and last 
words discernible .(though not necessarily completely legible) on each of the seven 
faces or fragments of No. II of which impressions are available :-— _ 


No, /1. No. I. 
Face A (no i impression supplied). 
B 15 ll. (firwil-. .. sphan) we HS Eee 
C 16 ll. (upas ... moy) ae D 32-83, 
D 15 I. (gua ..-. ma) . F 2-18. 
E 18 Il. (kum ... sdas) o; 2 pag. 
F 14 ll. (and one quite illegible line) 
(tarley ...deht-eh)  .«. G 6-20 | 

G ai ll. (stl... .satru) we G 30—H 13 
H i8 ll. (goh ... smn). ws -H 19-37 


38. The only importance of this inscription lies in the fact that it has served - 
in certain cases to restore or confirm words that were lost or doubtful in No. I. 
These have been indicated in the notes on the text of the latter, 


PARTI] MON INSCRIPTIONS © 131 


No. HY. 
THE MYAKAN (OR MYAGAN) INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN, 
-Descriptive Account, 


39. This inscription (with the two following) was referred to in paras, 45-6 
of the Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma, 1912. 
It is on the bank. of the Myakan lake at the foot of the hill known as 
‘Taywindaung and is engraved on the four faces of a stone column, the 
dimensions of which (as communicated to me by Professor Duroiselle) are as 
follows :—height, 4 ft. 1 in.; breadth of the two broader faces, 1 ft. 8 in. of 
the narrower faces, 1 ft. 4 in. Three sets of ink-impressions were sent to me, 
together with photographs of one of the sets.. The space covered by the 
lettering, as measured on the impressions, is as follows :—Face A, 3 ft. byt ft. 
5a in.; B, 2 ft. 11 in, by 1 ft. 1 in.; C, 3 ft. by 1 ft. 53 in.; D, 1 ft. 9 in. by 1 ft. 
2in. The letters resemble those sf the preceding inscriptions in their general type 
and character, but are’ smaller: they measure about 3 in. in height, and letter 
¢ about # in. in length. The ‘normal space between the lines is about 3in: The 
inscription is a good deal damaged, and on the whole is in an indifferent state of 
preservation. A large piece of the surface ‘of Face A (affecting II. 19-23) has 
been destroyed, and the top and bottom of this face as well as some parts of Faces 
B and C are so blurred as to be practically illegible. The column has also been 
broken off at one corner at the top, so that the ends of Il. 1-5 of Face B and 
the beginnings of Il. 1-7 of Face C. are lost. ‘ But most of the missing text has 
been restored by the help of inscriptions Nos. [V and V, which are on similar lines. 

‘40, The occasion for the making of No. III was the digging of a tank or 
reservoir for the purpose — of storing water for irrigation, by order of . King 
Kyansittha. The name given by him to the tank is stated in D 11-2, but the 
reading is not quite eae The greater part of the inscription is, however, taken 
up by a statement of the Kyansittha legend, in its more extensive form as outlined 
in §§ 25, 27. The proper names of the persons mentioned in it have been given in 
§ 26. The lengthened form of the’ king’s name in D 6-8 should be noted: : 
Apart from the lexicographical material contained i in this record and from its variant 
version of the royal legend, the chief point of interest in it is its insistence on the , 
king’s care for the temporal welfare of his people (C 27—D 6). Itis not, perhaps; 
either unreasonable or uncharitable to assume that considerations affecting the royal 
revenue contributed in some degree to the stimulation of such laudable aims ; but 


132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — {vont 


there is no reason to doubt the genuine existence of the ethical and religious 
motives to which the king ascribes his action. Further, there is a brief ‘statement | 
of his anointment (C 11-4) and of the issue by him of a revised edition of the 
Buddhist Scriptures (C15). The inscription begins (A 1-6) and ends (D 15-4). with 
Pali passages, but the one at the beginning is almost illegible. The dates mentioned 
are, first, the date of the foundation of Prome (here called Sri Kset) in the year of 
Buddha’s Nirvana (C 3-6), of course a purely legendary date; and, secondly, the 
Buddhist year 1630 with reference to the king (C g~-11),. as to which see §§ 28-9. 
Of the date of the inscription itself there is no further evidence save what has been | 
indicated in § 27. | 

. 41. No. IV represents a fragmentary repetition of the text of this record made 
for use on another, similar, occasion. The first part of No. V also runs closely 
parallel to these two. The variants exhibited by No. 1V and the first part of 
No. V are given in the notes appended to the text of No. III. 


Text. 

A 
1, [0 éti u namo] talssa eee a[rahato samnseambuediiay: 
2. [ssa 10 0] uppatti(h@) ......... Nee ee Oe ee a oe 
3... (ta) ee te ih fee ee ee eo ARBE sca ee eas 
AAG nh eens, MS ee aoa a uppa(tti dhammarajassa) . . 
Boh aé pa ee ae. ee ||) ee ee ee 
Oe ere ee ee eee eee ee ee pati (1 0 0 dey) 


7. kal dytdk ... (w) (bar cwas Inim cnam] kyek Buddha ti- 

8. rley Kasspa ur das dey lok wo’ blahh tirley — : 

g. nisrey [da]i* Baranasi-(da goh® ma) tirley taw han Isipata- 
1o, namigadawanamahawihar « kal goh ‘ tirla poy [gna smi]- 
11.  dha(r)mmaraja® wo’ das fiah su(mh)gihh ma nom drap dificam [c]wa- 
12. {s] koti girlon ® blah? kul da[n] man s(i)l® pa pun ka{h mo]- 
13. y prakar 0° dey sas kyek ” Buddha tirley Kassapa go[h]” 
14. taw bak bnat dy(a)k ® blah » cuti’ ® nor [g]ofh]* tlun da[s] 


1 Stic, for Kassapa, 2 Or dun, About here V begins to be legible. . ? V has gokh. 


4 V has gohh. 5 The y is doubtful both here and in V. 6 V has girlun. 
7 V inserts n, 8 The vowel may be ¢ both here and in V, 9 V has no stop here. 
10 V probably has £ya&. 1! V has gokh, ° 12 Or ayuk, 


'3'V has cute, 14 V has gokh, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 133. 


ts. han [kir]k(a)l’ smin de[y duJa Pataliputtana[g](i)[r]? » kal 

16. goh® p[n]ja[fi] paracak jurhnok [moy] de[h] ‘ ktir das [1 pnafi] 

17. [goh * ku]m tirla ® poy [gna] smin dha(r)[mm Jaraja ma &r das [smi}n [Pata]- 

18. [liputtanag](i)[r?7 goh® kuya] .(i)r w(i)[ses] blah® psuk [u]t maha{ja]- 

19. [n gumlujn ® blah(h) [kul dan man] s(i)l" pa pufn] ma ka[h.moy] 

20. [prakar p-ar das rajadha](r)[mma™ cas t](u)y™» taw bak [bnat 4]- 

21. [yuk] blah « [cut}i [nJo[r goh™ tlun da]s han kirk(a)l* smin Ra- 

22. m [dev [d](a)n® [Ayodh](apar” 0) [ka]l gofh ® kum] ci [pnaa p]a[r]a- 

23. cak ju[rhno]k [tl]in . . 19 (d](a)[m ® Ayodhapir we]! *« [pnafi goh]™ 

24. kuth™ tirla™ [poy gna smin dha](r)[mmaraja ma das han] kirk(a)[l® 
smin | 

25. [Ram goh * kuya] .(i)[r w](i)[ses blah ®? psuk ut mahajan gumh]- 

26. [lon] * « kul [dan mJjan s(i)[] ® pa pun kah moy prakar t](@)- 

27. [y taw bak bnat ayik] ® bla{h » cuti nor] go[h® dey] 

28. [kal kintir tirla poy kyek * Sakyamuni ® das risi Bisni] 

29. [ma nom * riddh](yanubhaw ma) [go’ a](bhifian * msun® ma taw hantul) * | 


B 
1... 38... . . [srefi] (ma imo’ Kelasaparwwa)- 
2, [tau kal goh ® kyek “ Buddha ti](rley Sakya)-: 


1 Perhaps éirkul, both here and in V. 
2 V has Pataliputtanagar (the vowel of the last syllable is not certain in either text). 


3 V possibly has gohh kum. 4 V has dekh, 5 V has gohh. §& V has #trla’. 
7 V has Pétaliputtanagar (though the vowel of the last syllable is not quite certain in either text). 
8 Vhas gohh, 9% V inserts i here. 1°-V possibly has. gumliz. 1 V has sil. 

13°V has ty. = 14 V has gokh. 


12 V perhaps has rajadhamma, 
15 V probably has kirkul. 16 Or dun. V has dun. 
1" V apparently has Ayudhyapir (which is followed by 1), but the spelling of the third syllable is 


doubtful in both texts. Here in [1] a large piece of the surface of the stone has perished, affecting the 
middle portions of A 19-23 (which have been restored by the help of V 12-4), and from the amount of space 
available here it would seem that there may have been a short word (e.g. wel) after Ayodhapur. 

18 VY has golvit. 1) A word of one syllable, probably ending in r or n. 2 Ordun. . 

21. V omitswel. 2 Vihasgohh, % V omits huss, 23 V perhaps has farla. 


25 V probably has Airtul. *8'V has gohh. 27 V insertsn. 8 V has gurislun blah, 
29 Orsi]. V perhapshas sithere, °° Or dywk. V probably hasdyuk, 3! V has gohkh. 
32 Vor tirla poy kyek, V apparently has dirdas kyd? Buddha tirley. ‘3: V has Sakyamuni w. 


34 Instead of nom V has snot. 33 VY has ablitdn, 38 Or mstin, as V seems to have. 

37 Or hantil.as V has. The last part of this line (in round brackets) is quite illegible in II] and has 
been restored from V. The same applies to the ends of B 1-6, 

33 The first illegible word is apparently a monosyllable ; it seems toend in s and may hegin with ¢ or &. 
In the next word it is likely that the vowel.of the first syllable is / and the initial consonant may beh. But 
it seems very uncertain, 

2 Or Kelasaparbbata (or °pabbata): the word is not very legible in V. 

® V has gohh, 41 V has kydt. 

1§ 


134 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 1 


ee (j)i(rku ar® afia)- 

4. tasa[fian * tir]l[ey fac) risi (Bisnii ma sda)- 

5. s smin dha(r)[mmJaraja [dey dan]* Ari{m]a{ddanJap(ar ma) 
6. [stbal] sa{sana tirley ci » tirlje[y] sdi(k) 

7. [glap p[umas' tirley] ktif[r k-im] » kal gofh]°® 

8. [nor gnis tirley pan « yiryas pan] (ima })i- 

g. (rnok lah pan) (al? ma nom} [s]e[k]® t{urow | 

10. [turow goh]®« deh” [kurh] (par) " [ut (r)[Iarh ® ca[kk]a[wal- 
11, 1® tuy « [y]ir[yas ba]r goh* deh» dre(p] ti- 

12. [n cup Brahm]alok [mleh]”* « yirya[s] bar 

13. (ci) [de]h ” [drep cis cup] Aw(i)[c Jimahanara- 

14. k®{mlleh « ro[w gojh” da ut yiryas 

15. turow sa[k goh™ de]h™ dre{p a]r p(i)a- 

16. (')® [ut dis cas blah “ »] tun I[o]p tu[n] * 

17, [han mukh]a(p)at ® kyek *” Buddha [t irley * ka- 

18. 1 goh ® [t}irley Anan™ falc] ginr[ujn® [ky ]Je- 

19. k *® [Bu]ddha * [tijrley * (ma sum) * a[sc]ar [m]a no[m] 
ao. ku p[rjati[ha]r ma ro[w] goh * k[t]ir ascar [pa] 

21. li(n)[njor ® [kirjjih * blah » (.u)[t® kbjon klo[a “ sur]- 
22. [bip“ tey mey mukh]a(p)at “ kye[k “ Buddha ti]- 
23. [rlJe[y m]Ja row [d]innal “ [thar] blah “ « smafi het 


S) 


1'V has Sakyamuni n. The preceding words are practically illegible in both texts. 
'S Or perhaps °fan it. V has °fidz 11. In the PAli original of this loanword the #’s would be doubled, 
but there is no trace of that here. 


4 Or dud: the reading of both texts is doubtful. 5 V has gap=pumas, & V has gokh, 

7 V inserts #. The preceding words are very doubtful in both texts. 8 V has sak. 

9 V has gobh. 10 V probably has dekh, 

11 V seems to have par, but both texts are obscure here, 13 Or perhaps dlam, 
13: V has cakkawdl, 14 V has gokh, 15 'V has dekh. 16 V has mlehh, 


17 V is quite illegible here, but probably has dekh; 
18 The second vowel in this word should be 7, but might be read ¢ in both texts. 19 'V has mlehh, 


2 V has gokh, 21 'V has gokh, #2 V probably has dekh. 

23 The reading of this word is doubtful in both texts. , 24 V has dlahh, 

35 Apparently this is the right reading: cf. VIII A 8. : . 

26 A reading mukhamat is conceivable. ‘87 'V has kya. #3 'V inserts | here. 
2 V has gohki:, 0 Vv probably has Ananda. % V has éir-im, 32 V has kydk. 

33 V omits Buddha. 34 'V inserts», 35 The reading is very doubtful in both texts. 
36 V has gohkh i. 37 V seems to have linnor, and perhaps inserts ku after it, 


8 Yy probably has divjihh : at any rate the final letter is i. 

89 It is doubtful whether the reading is uf or whether there is some initial consonant (and, if so, which). 

‘© Professor Duroiselle suggests klow, answering to LL.M, kluiw, “to bend the knee,” but 4/o4 seems 
certain in 111 and at least probable in V, 

43 V has sumbup, 42 See B17, 43 V has kyak, 44V has dinnal. 

.45 V_ probably has d/ahh. 


Fpigraphia Birmanica No. III. Votume I, Pirate IX. 
(a naa rabid 
THE MYAKAN INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN. 


ig " Cetnan 

; a is - 
Paty OB: a at tao sg] ie 

e pres MAO 1 Ti ee, Me buried Soe 
AIO ~ mid 


b 
“*S | 


oe 


ed a 


rage Wego’ 
PEs 2 ai " oe mn, 


sor, 3 hig "BY 2 ti 
oy tour fil gare the mC te 
* 
ay kre is fase. 


: Tran; ay Matt 


7 
as 


ana Ald. cee 


: ne ae. on Fs 


Sh 
ACs eV} 
°° Ak 


97D! au 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 135 


24, kir-i[m? ky Je[k] * Buddha tirley row wo’® 

25. tirla ‘ 4kah sak he]t ci kyek® Buddha ti- 

26. rifey] gurm[IJun sa{k] tirla® grun? [] mu® he[t] 

27, (man) ® [t]irla’ ” [gru]a” y[o « h]ay Anan™ d[hab]™ 

28, [ey fide ri]s[i] Bifsn](a) [ma jno]k riddh(i)* ma sda(s] 

29. s[m]in dha(r)mmaraj(a) ® ma st(b]al sdsan(a)” e[y] da g[oh] * 


Cc 


1, (ma ey grun® » kyek® Buddha tirley gah ro)w (goh)” 
2. (blah™ tirley kinkal krim kintir * smin dharmmaraja ™ ku) 
3. (tirley Anan ® row wo’ **u hay Anan™ dey) [c]nam ma 
4. (ey snirbban goh ® risi Bisnai ” ku.kon) [ey] Ga{w]atmhpa{t]i” k[uy. 
5. (smi In™ ku Bissukarmma™ ku Katakarmma)[nagaraja]° s[k]indarh 
| d(u)h * 

6. (moy ma imo’) [Sri Ks]e[t blah * scu’ti]® nor goh” s[- -|a[r] 

7. (das de)[y BrJjahmalok » [kal goJh * [ut dje[wataw] 

8. [gurn]l[un * sniman] or cis das smin dha(r)mmaraja * [d]ely ti jnok] 

g. wo’ s mu ® kal [ma d]eh “ scis das'yo « nor  [m]a ey [sni]- 
10, [rbban “ In](i)[m ” tujrow klamh pi c[w]as [cnam] ® dey kal g[o]h ” de[h] © 


1V has &ir-im, 2 V has kydk. 3 V inserts 1. 

4V hastarla. IV begins at this point with ’ dah, and must therefore have read #irla’ or tarla’ . 

5 V-has kyak, 6 IV probably has ¢arla, or tirla: V probably tarla’, 

7.V probably has é-im, certainly not gruz. 8 IV and V have mo’, 

9 The reading is doubtful in all-the texts, Corceivably ma da might be read, 10 V has tarla. 
11 V has é-im. 12 V has Ananda, 13 V has dzahkh, 4 V has Bisnai, 


16 In IIL no final z is visible, but V has it clearly, IV-is quite illegible here. 

16 Possibly there is a virdma and we should read °vaj. IV and V are illegible here. 

17 Or perhaps sdsand ; but [V and V have sdsana, 18 V has gohh, 1 V has &-im,  V has hyde, 

31 V has gohh, The words in round brackets in C 1-7 are adapted from IV,-as UI is broken oif ‘ere. 

22.V has blakh, °3 V insertsgnahere. 4 IV may have dharmmarij, V possibly dhammcrdja. 

9% Y has Ananda. °6 Forrowwo' Vhasrwo’”, * V has Ananda. % V has goh. 

2 V inserts 3. £0 V inserts 4. 1 V «has Indra t. 32 V inserts 1. 

$3 IV appears to have Katatarmmanagardja or °rdj (perhaps). V inserts | after the name, 

3§ Or perhaps ¢@% both here andin IV, V has dia: 85 IV and V insert ti here. 

38 JV and V have scuté. It is just possible that in II] we should also read scuti: the text is badly 
blurred here. 37 V has gohh. -38'V has gohh. 

39 There is a small blurred space here, which at first led me to conjecture that it concealed some 
short word such as /ok; but as 1V and V have nothing, i it is probably merely accidental! or perhaps the result 
of an original flaw. 

4 }V has gurnlox, 11 [V probably has dharmmaray, V probably dhammaraja. #2 °V has ft’. 

43 1V has mo’, WV has dekh, 45 V inserts kal. 16 V has nirbban. 

47 1V has late, V litm (or possibly /aim), 48 TV (and probably V) inserts 4. 49 V has gokh. 

86 1V has deh, V deli, In IE there is a small unexplained space after the word, as in C 7. 


136 - EPIGRAPHIA: BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


11, sdas smin chammmara)s 1fdey] d(u)n? [Arima]dda{n]apirr * hantél ‘ [pai 
capra|- 

12. sat® [ma gii]i’ ® [nJa s[n?’ ” clac ® d[nje[n ° bar cwas dji[ficam] ha[nta]l 
ra[ta]- 

13. [na]si[Aghasana ma] fin las [na tmo]’ (s]ak * stim s[g]o’ [muddh ]abhi- 

14. sek [nJa indrabhisek « sd(u)A” imo’ gna smih Sri Tri[bhu}wa[nadi]- 

15. tyadhammaraja ” « scua[h] tug(u)r ® sis(a)1 * kindavh ** [u]t [piltak trey ™ 

16. (skink[a]1 b](u)[ru}’” [dhJa{rmm]a™ d[m]as phath singir® osk[ultir ut 

 maha- 

17. jan gunn ® [ma lhija * abay ™ staw Achy u |posa[th Jas(i)[1] * ut 

18. [ku] kal »* spu[k] ® tinlar * tinra{n *” s|war [ma tm](u)Ly * nja [th]ar ma | 

19. yas ma fin lak (nJa {rJa[t ® du]mpohh ® pi(r)kar ® blah ® splop 

20, mahaja[n g]uthluh * defy sw]a(rg)a * «® [slu’ho’] ® apa- 

21. y pan™ s[clu’rohh ® kul [pk]a[w dh]a[rmm]a (dey] kdip * maha- 

22. [jJan [gu]mf[lujn * » [kal] gna smin dharmmaraja “’ goh “ [tos] dha- 

23. [rmma ci]«® y[a]n “ bi[nrju’ sadhufka |r [fa]h *® ourh(lun “ row] bi[nru] “ 

24. brey rin-ut * c{njam kum ® {#] goh © [d]a min kyek * B[u]- 


1V has dhayminaraja, In 1V the first part of the word is blurred, but it probably ends °va7. 
3 In 1V the vowel may also be either short or long ; but V has div, 3 V inserts 4 here. 
- 4 V has antal. 5 1V and V have paticaprasad, (In 1V the vivdma is not clear,) 
8 IV has gai. 7 V has siz, 8 IV has elec, V either cite or perhaps clac, 
3 IV appears to have dizdi or dizen, V probably dzan, 10 IV has sek. 
11 Conceivably sdiz. The vowel is doubtful in IV and V also, though probably zw. 
12 IV probably has °ydj. V may have Tribhi°, 13 Perhaps tugiir, IV has tugur, V tugar. 
14 Perhaps sisul, as 1V apparently has, V has sist/, 1> 'V inserts thal. 
16 1V and V insert | after ¢vey. 17 1V has baru or perhaps buru, V probably buriu. 
18 [Vand V insert ma, which is needed here. 
19 V has what looks like sigir, but there may be a superscript nz, making stngir, %1V has gumlon, 
21 Vhas lhi (or possibly Jh¢z=, with an effaced superscript 2 over the next word ; but I can see no trace 
of it). “3 [V and V here insert \.. ’ 23 Perhaps ‘sil. IV is doubtful, V has °sil. 
21 1V omits 0. Vv appeass to have ma sjak (or spat, or ma puk, or sapuk) lupok.. 
23 LV probably has ¢enlur, % LV and V have tinvaz, which is the usual spelling. 
23 1V appears to have tmuy. In V the vowel is not clear. 2 V has ratava. % IV has dumpok. 
31 [V and V have prakar, the usual spelling. 
32 V here inserts something which looks like 1 nia sdas ma, but being near the end of the line the 


passage is not very legible,. 33: IV has gumlon. 
%4 The reading is almost certain, though in some of the impressions it looks rather like swar.da. IV 
simply has swar, V swarga. 36 V inserts wa here. 3¢ 1V and V have sluno’”, 37 V here inserts t. 
38 1V has seuvoh, V scurokh. 3) In V the p looks very like m. 10 TV has gumlon, 
41 1V apparently has dharmmara] (certainly dharmma’), V probably ahanarass. 
42 V has gol. 33 TV omits I. bs 
_ 44 The yar looks like yu, but the extra mark is probably accidental: 1V and V have ya, the usual 
spelling. 16 V has mahdjan instead of fah, 6 [V-has gurmlon. 
47 There seems to be no room here for a final ’, but IV and V have dimru’. 48 For rineut V has tam, 
3) V apparently has us, and perhaps omits the Ile 50 V has gokh. 


51 V has mun, LV mun or possibly man. 58 -V has Ayak. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 137 


25. [ddha] tirle[y' by]ades*? kintir g[nja smin statin bia{ ya ku 
ti[rJley 

26, [Anan]‘ s row m/(i)n® kyek * [Buddha [tirJley [bya]des goh? 

27. [tlun] das ut’ mlehs® [y]an g{n]a [smin dha](r)[mml]araja® ma [go’ 
bya]- 

28. [des nJor kyek Buddha tirley ma j[nJo{k me]tta [karu]- 

2g. na dey [sla(rww)a[s]a(tt]a . .1.% [« daah sja(rww)a[satta " gurh]lon 


D 


1, [sgo]’ suk sey subhik [sk]ah byil b(fa) ? — 
2. jap jap sthan ma kah sak dek [m]a kah 

3. sak ti’ bha ma [k]ah sak t[wi]l w[i]r « (ti]- 

4. tla® poy gna smin dha(r)mmara{j](a)** tbi[n] kLul dje- 

5. [k ki}r*® k{ujl [kJumbar®* [pda]s kul t? bha” 

6. tw[ill ® wir « [kJa[l] go[h dja ma g{nJa smin [S]r[f] T[rji- 
7. bhuwanadityadha[m]marajarajadhirajaparamiswa- 

8, rabala[c]a{kkr]awar ® [pum]rey [m]a pa [ya] ku [c]ia [jma]- 
g. (r] ® bintan # (m)a™ go[’] bya{des] nor ky[e]k © 
10. Buddha [t]irley sa(rww)al[fiu * bodhi]sat # k(i)[r]™ 

11, [kJumbar * wo’ blah ® k{ul] imo’ [M Jahari- 


1 V possibly has tarley. 


2 V inserts {| here. 3 IV probably has dhavmmaray, V perhaps dhammardja, : 
4 V has Ananda. 5 V has mun, IV apparently also, & V has éyak, 7 V has gohh. 
8 At this point V diverges entircly from III and IV. * IV probably has dharmmardj. 


10 Or sarbba’ or sabba’, 1V appears to have saywwa’ and after °satta it would seem (perhaps) to read 
nikdy, which would form a compound with what precedes (asin III D 13). But that cannot be the reading 
of III, Possibly it has °wal(a), or *bal(a). 

It Here also sarbba’ or sabba’ is possible, but 1V probably has sarwwa? again, A compound word, 
part Sanskrit and part Pali, is not an uncommon phenomenon in these Mén texts. 

12 The reading seems nearly certain. IV has dara il, but there is no room for that here. 

13 IV has tila’. 

14 There is possibly a virdma here (making °raj), but not in IV, which appears to have dharmmaraya. 

18 [V possibly has 4ir here. 18 1V has éusnbar. 7 LV has bia’. 

18 In IV the-vowel of tal is quite clear. 

19 [V may perhaps have Tridhawan®. Neither in If] nor in 1V is any ‘virama visible over the r of 
*iswara’, but V 42 has ‘iswar. In III the c of °cakkra@ looks as if it had another ¢ subscript under it, but 
this does not appear in ]1V or V._ IV probably has simply °cakra® (the «is certain) ; V 42 °cakkra’, : 

2 There may be a doubt as to the length of the vowel in jmzv, but that appears to be the reading of IV. 

21: 1V has dbumtd. 

2 The actual reading appears to be pa, nocross-bar being visible, but that is certainly wrong, and [V 
has ma. 

23 Or sarbba® or sabba®. 1V is also doubtful liere. I see no trace of any doubling of the #i. 

34 Both Ill and 1V seem to have 4ir, 25 1V has kussbadr. 26 LV has tuy (or ty) instead of blak, 


138 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 1 


12. tbban[L]ak Ch(u)[y]? (Kh)i? (R)i[y ° tnJas [na] * tirtuly ® u]- 
13. t [m]anus(sa) ® satta[ni]kay (kid)em 7 surh(n)en 

14. gumlon »® ult] b[nJah sadh[uljan gurhlun ® or gr(a)- 

15. A! 0 o « (njama[dh]eyyavasen’-e[v]a silale- 

16. kha ’ya{m]=uttama (ta)pi[t]a " dhammarajena ma- 

17. hapufiamatiddhina” ti 10 4 © 


Translation. 


A 


Prosperity! Honour to the Blessed One, the Saint, the Truly Omniscient ! 


Tie one ior the mise of ie Loe t) sx os ha te ee oo ao ee ee 
(l.4)........... the origin (of the king of the Law ?) . ie ee has 


13 


ee geet © sw @ & S «242484 8 © 2 &§ 2. wb FS eeetee e¢ @ @ es e208 © @ 


At (1. 7) the dinni when life (lasted ?)* for twenty chanudind years the Loti 
Buddha Kassapa came into existence in this world and my lord found a resting 
place at the city of Benares and then dwelt in the Isipatanamigadawanamahawihar.* 
At that time our lord (1. 11) this (present) king of the Law * was a wealthy man 
who had property amounting to eighty fotz’s." He made offerings, observed (the 


1 Or possibly Chday, which seems unlikely. 2 The initial consonant is somewhat doubtful. 

3 The initial consonant might possibly be N or D, It is also possible that these two syllables form one 
word ; in fact until it is ascertained whether this part of the proper name consists of Burmese words, much of 
it must remain dubious, It does not appear to be Mén in any case. IV hasa different name here, which 
(after Mahanirbban) apparently readsd... giilik . (or °ka or °&). I cannot restore or explain it. 

4 IV probably has ¢aas=na, 5 IV probably has tiytiy. | § IV has manus or perhaps manus. 

7 IV seems to read kidem: also, but in both texts there is a subscript sign rather like u, curved to the left, 
quite distinct in III but by no meanscertain inIV, where the mark may be merely accidental. This mark 
is hard to explain, It might be an irregular way of writing kiduem, but if there is such a word I have not 
succeeded in tracing it elsewhere. One is temptedtoread éritcem, which would make. tolerable sense, but I 
find no jic written in this fashion, Conceivably the initial might be ¢, but & seems more probable, and 
possibly (but improbably) one might read # instead of i. These uncertainties also throw doubt on the identity 
of the next word. 


8 IV omits i. _ * Whas guslon. 10 1V has grair, the usual and correct spelling. 
11 Or possibly ¢hapstd. 1V may have one or other of these readings, or possibly ¢hapita. It should be 
thapita. 


13 [V has mahdppuiia’, unless the extra stroke is accidental, The i should be doubled, but there is no 
trace of doubling visible in our texts, 

13 This Pali exordium was evidently on the lines of I A 2-3, but somewhat longer. So much of it is 
illegible that it has not been considered possible to make a Satisfactory conjectural restoration, 

14 There is an illegible word here, but the general sense is clear, the reference being to the period in which 
the normal duration of human life, according to Buddhist ideas, extended to the length mentioned, CE, 
F.R.AS.y 1914, Pe 678, 

15 The great monastery of the deer park of Isipatana, near Benares, 16 See lG3trn 

17 In Indian reckoning a kofi is ten millions, but L.M. kurt is only a hundred thousand, The point is not 
very material, particularly as the value of ihe unit is not specified. 1 imagine that the kdrsépana may be the 


one implied. 


THE MYAKAN INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN. 


ae — go gins Mee: 


‘ 
: i € mY 
, \ 
” . 7 . . 4 


ov & "> 
Fe a Anwgy 6 4 
pial Y 


PR 
Rae 
fetes Awe AM 
gfe vee 34 zig? snl , 
ay fh a] Gras ycioyes 9 

peltass es Pauiy fi i OE ands Rc CRI $< 
 eonaaeeege Th Sina . wyt vier 143 ies Oe ee ‘OF 
geese Peek gon. nN geaah oi “fhe EE LaUy eS LSE OS a) 4 
ae SoG ake Eulcal 46h9 ure HA LY PONG GCs on f RO ITIVE x! +5 
nai ys Fasc n3e Ti feel): AOE S ea aD pe a on ee te | | 


x: rahi ‘ : ee ; 
pee ak al pert ie on jal io 4. 1d 
te raters art ns oe ieee oe 


cee tet ae if 


© uih 


Bases tgs ol sakes oO 
oG,°) ees seamen | 
TEMA LIOME ON Me MCHC tig 
ri: 
Shem! yor ss IQS HY 
a mse Dro} ; 
at ints GoRe one. 


No. III. VoLtuME I, PLaTe X. 


10 


ry 


16 


PART I1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 139 


precepts of) virtue,’ did pious deeds of divers kinds under the dispensation® of the 
Lord Buddha Kassapa (1. 14) (and) having lived to the term of his life (he) departed 
from thence (and) came into existence in a family of kings * in the city of Patna. 

At that time a great hostile army arose: that army our lord the king of the 
Law, who had come to be King of Patna, defeated (signally.?)*; and then, after 
giving happiness to all the people, making offerings, observing (the precepts of) 
virtue, doing pious deeds of divers (I. 20) kinds, (and) carrying out the ten duties of 
a king, and after living to the term of his life, (he) departed from thence (and) came 
into existence in the family of King Rama in the city of Oude. 

At that time, too, a great hostile army came to...... ° the city of 
Oude. That army (I. 24) our lord the king of the Law, who was (then) of the 
family of King Rama, defeated (signally ?),® and then, after giving happiness to 
all the people, making offerings, observing (the precepts of) virtue, doing pious 
deeds of divers kinds, (I. 27) (and) after having lived to the term of his life, (he) 
departed from thence; (and).in the time of the coming of our lord the Buddha — 
Sakyamuni’ he was ® the sage Bisnt, who had® supernatural power (and) glory, 
who possessed ” the five transcendental faculties, who dwelt upon 


B 


a silver (mountain ?)" named Kelasaparwwata. 
At that time the Lord Buddha Sakyamuni”™ (directed his mind to ?)’* the 
perception of things unknown, (and) my lord saw the sage Bisni, who was to 


‘1 That is, he kept the ethical commandments of religion. 
2 Lit, “ in the religion ” (or “ ordinance”), V has no stop before this clause.but it might perhaps be 


read with what follows, i.e, (and) having lived to the term of his life under the st a ai of the Lord 
Buddha Kassapa,” etc,, though this seems less likely, 

8 Or “in the family of the king,” #.e, the local royal family, which is what i is meant in any case, There: 
is no plural particle to smif, but M6n words are in their nature indeterminate as regards number. 

4 The reading is doubtful and the rendering conjectural. 

5 The doubtful word in the text may be a preposition meaning “ to,” or alternatively a vetb probably 
meaning “to attack,” or something of that kind, Either way the general sense of the passage is plain, 

6 See A 18 n. 

7 V, perhaps, “ the coming into existence of the Lord Buddha Sakyamuni.” 
8 Or “ became,” #.¢, “ came into existence as.” 
3 V has “ who was great in.’ 10 Or “ acquired,” 

11 There is an illegible word or two here, but the sense must have been pretty much as given, The moun- 
tain referred to is Kailasa, a more or Jess legendary peak in the Himalayas, also known as Rajatadri, 
“ silver mountain.’ The fact of Bisni’s residence there is not mentioned in the other group of inscriptions 
concerned with him, but for Buddha’s prophecy to Ananda seelAr 5-37 and VI 9-end, 

12 V has Sakyamunt. 

18 The words thus rendered are almost illegible aad very doubtful, but the general sense must be some- 


thing of the kind, 


140 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


become (I. 5) a? king of the Law in the city of Arimaddanapir, (and) who would 
uphold my lord’s religion: my lord was pleased (and) happy, (and) my lord smiled. 

At that time (I. 8) from my lord’s four eyeteeth four rays (whose size extended 
to four 7a/’s?),? (and) which each® had six colours, they ‘ (flew ?)® throughout 
(the expanse of ?)* the universe. Two of the rays went coursing (I. 12) right? up 
to Brahmalok, (the other) two rays went coursing right down to Awicimahanarak.® 
Thus did all those six-coloured rays go coursing (and) (travelling ?)® (1. 16) to 
all the ten” cardinal points, and then entered the Lord Buddha’s mouth ™ again. 

At that time the Lord Ananda” saw the laughter ® of (1. 19) the Lord. Buddha 
which (was accompanied by ?) “such a wondrous miracle, (and he) marvelled (and) 
zealously did obeisance," (with bended ?) * knees (and) joined hands, (and) looking 
upon the face of the Lord Buddha, which was like a golden mirror, (he) enquired 
the reason (I. 24) of the Lord Buddha’s smile in this wise :— 

“Lord of heaven!?” Without cause Buddhas do not laugh": what reason 
(was there) that * my lord laughed”?” “O Ananda, (it was) because (I. 28) I 


1 Or possibly “ the,” and so elsewhere where the phrase occurs,eg, B 29,C 11, There is no material 
difference, it is only a question of how much stress is to be laid on the fact that it is the actually reigning 
monarch that is being referred to. In the absence of any demonstrative I prefer the rendering with the 
indefinite article, Contrast A 11, where the reference is definitely emphasized by a demonstrative. 

2 The reading is doubtful and the translation somewhat conjectural. It may be doubted whether it 
does not involve a rather strained use of the relative particle ma, The word rather doubtfully read tal has 
been conjecturally identified with L,M. ta, “a measure of length equal to seven cubits,” the cubit being 18 
inches, so that the ¢@ would be 34 yards. The weak point of the identification is that Burmese also has the 
Word: unless, therefore, Burmese has borrowed it from Mén, we are hardly entitled to assume the identity 
of tal with ta, even supposing the former to be the reading of our text. However, I can suggest nothing 
better, It is to be supposed that the rays of light are regarded as broadening out to this size when they 
issued from Buddha’s mouth: in length they were practically without limit. 

3 The distributive seems to be indicated by the doubling of the numeral. 

} The pleonastic pronoun is in the original. 5 Doubtful reading, 

6 There is some slight doubt as to the reading and the identity of the word, but I incline to the view 
that it is to be considered the same as L.M. alum, The words in brackets are not intended to do more 
than emphasize the sense of completeness, 7 Limagine this to be the emphatic force of the particle mleh, 

8 The great hell Avici, the lowest of the eight hot hells, * Reading somewhat doubtful, but probable, 

10 No doubt the usual eight together with the zenith and nadir, 

11 Though there may be some doubt as to the reading, there is none as to the meaning. Cf, 1 A 24, 
VI 13. 

12 11] and IV (so far as extant) use the abbreviated form Ayan, but V consistently uses Ananda, 
These abbreviations of proper names and loanwords are characteristically Indo-Chinese, but at this early 
period they seem to have been somewhat irregularly used; they alternated with the fuller, Indian, forms, 

13 In V. “smile.” M The reading is doubtful and the rendering conjectural, 

15 The criginal word appears to be a substantive used adjectivally, as it were “ obeisance of zeal,’’ 
that is “ zeal- is obeisance,” but it is more coyvenient to render it by an adverb. Cf. 1G 24, 

1© The reading is somewhat doubtful, but the general sense is plain. 

17 At this point begins the extant portion of IV, but its variants seldom affect the translation, 

18 V seems to have “smile,’’ as has J A 28, 

19 Or “ what (was) the reason that.’’ A slight doubt as to the reading here does not affect the sense. 

20 V has “smiled,” 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 141 


saw the sage Bisni, who is great in supernatural power, who is to become a 
king of the Law, who will uphold my religion: that (was) 


Cc 


why I laughed?” The Lord Buddha having spoken thus, my lord related the 
origin of the king ofthe Law to (1. 3) the Lord Ananda in this wise :— 

“© Ananda, in the year when I shall achieve Nirvana* the sage Bisni, 
together with my son Gawarhpati, and King Indra,° and Bissukarmma, and Kata- 


karmmanagaraja,* shall build a city (1,6) called Sri Kset,S and after that (he)® 


napar. Upon a paficaprasada ® (|. 12) adorned with twenty-eight royal chambers, 
on a jewelled throne inlaid with stone of azure hue, (he) shall receive the anointing 
of the head with Indra’s anointment.’® (He) shall bear the name (of) 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. (He) shall purify (and) make straight, 
write down (and) establish" all the Holy Scriptures. (1. 16) (He) shall proclaim * 
(and) voice ® the Law, which” is even as.a resounding * drum. (He) shall arouse 
all the people that are slumbering carelessly.* (He) shall stand steadfast in the 
observance of the commandments at all times. 


1 V has “ smiled.” 2 This date does not occur in the corresponding passage I A 30-3. 

3 III and IV use the usual abbreviated form Jn, V has Jndra. 4 IV has Kata’. 

6 An abbreviated form of Svi Ksetra, the old name of Prome: for another variant see 1 A 33. VI 20 
has the fullform. ¢/e, BisnG, 7 Lit. “to-be.’ 8 Merely the idiomatic Mén way of saying “‘on earth,” 

‘9 A temporary structure specially built for the ceremony of anointment and consisting of a central 
pavilion surrounded by four others. The word (under the form panchapérsada) is still used in Malay for 
the pavilion constructed to serve as a place for the ceremonial ablutions performed after a royal wedding. 

10 | imagine this does not denote any additional ceremony but rather. the supernatural grace conferred 
by the-solemn anointment: in the chronicles Indra is represented as taking part in the anointment of some 
of the kings, 

1 That is to say, he is to issue a revised edition of the Buddhist Canon, Cf, VII1 A 3. Vadds 
“ (and) shall uphold ” to the other verbs. 12 Or impart,” 

13 The meaning is not absolutely certain, though the simile supports it. The idea is that the king 
makes the Law vocal, causes it to be heard, 

14 This particle is in 1V and V, though not.in III, It seems-necessary to the sense. 

15 The precise meaning is not determined. , 

16 There are two words, identical in form in L.M., one meaning “to sleep”? and the other “to delight 
in,” I prefer the former here, but conceivably one might interpret the passage as meaning “who delight 
in carelessness,” Further, it is not absolutely certain that “carelessness” is the correct equivalent of abdy, 

17 Conceivably we might read “to” instead of “he shall”? and treat what follows as dependent upon 
the preceding sentence: no pronoun is expressed. On the other hand IV and V insert a stop, which tends 
rather against such an interpretation, 


19 


142 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ VOL. 1 


(He) shall? open the bar of the gate of Heaven, which is made of gold 
that shines, which is set with gems of seven kinds; and? shall bring (1. 20) all man- 
kind into Heaven. (He) shall empty the four Apay,® (he) shall drop drown‘ the 
flower of the Law upon the heads of all mankind. When the king of the Law 
shall preach the Law, the sounds of applause of all men ° (shall be) like the sound 
(1. 24) of a rainstorm (at) the end® of the year.” Thus by the Lord Buddha was 
foretold the origin of the king of the Law to the Lord Ananda. 

As by the Lord Buddha was foretold, (so) (1. 27) has all come to pass.’ 
The king of the Law, who was foretold by the Lord Buddha, who’ is great in love 
(and) compassion towards ........ .° all beings,—to the end that all beings 


D 


may obtain happiness, bliss, (and) plenty, (and) be free from famine of tillage,’’—(in) 
every place that lacks water, lacks (1. 3) arable land, lacks strenuous cultivation,” 
our- lord the king of the Law dams ™ the pete digs a tank, (and thus) creates 
arable land (and) (I. 6) strenuous cultivation.” 

At the time when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarajarajadhirajaparamis- 
warabalacakkrawar,“ the exalted, who rides upon a male white elephant, who 
was foretold by the Lord (1. 10) Buddha, the omniscient (one), the Bodhisatva,™ 
had dug this tank, he gave (it) the name of Mahanirbban Lak Chuy Khi Riy,” 


1 V perhaps has “shall draw open.” Cf.1C 1, VI 30. : 

2 V perhaps has “and shall be (he) that shall,’ etc, 3 See 1D 37 n., VI 31. 

4 Or perhaps “shall set,” Chl Egon, 5 V has “all the people,” 6 V has “ beginning,” 

7. At this point ends the agreement of V with III and IV, 8 The antecedent isthe king. 

9 The missing part probably meant “the host of ” (in IV ‘the collection of ”). Cf. D 13. 

10 The rendering is not quite certain, 11 The rendering is conjectural, 

12 The rendering is more or less conjectural. If the word téz” has been rightly understood, the text 
literally says ‘ dams (and) gives” (just as it says “ digs (and) gives” in the next line). But possibly the 
phrase might be taken to mean “ permanently secures,” 7.e., “ secures a permanent supply ” of water. 

13 Rendering conjectural, as above, 

14 For the variants of this name, see note to ID 8 of the text. The additions, over and above the usual 
name of the king in C 14-5 and in his inscriptions generally, mean “supreme king of kings, overlord, 
mighty universal monarch,” 

15 These descriptions must, I think, be taken as applicable to the king (in anticipation of his eventual 
achievement of Buddhahood), not to Buddha. The ascription of the qualities of a Buddha to a reigning 
sovereign is common in Buddhist countries. The ceremonial address “Living Buddha” is used in the 
Mén chronicles towards Mén kings, just as it was recently in China with reference to the Dowager 
Empress. Cf. V 43. 

18 Fo~ other possible readings of this name and for the name given to the tank celebrated in IV, see the 
note to D 12 of the text, 


PART I! ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 143 


(to be) for the benefit of all (1. 13) mankind, the congregation of beings, (and) all 
er ea re atten ear ae 2 May all you good men understand.* 

_ This excellent inscription was erected by the greatly meritorious, wise and. 
powerful King of the Law.’ 


-No. IV. 
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT ALANPAGAN, PAGAN. 
Descriptive Account. 


42. Like the preceding, this inscription records the digging of a tank by order 
of. King Kyansittha, but evidently it was a different tank, for it bore a different 
name (see IIT D12n.). Inall other respects No. IV, so far as it is preserved, is — 
substantially a copy of No. III, and the variants that occur have been given in the 
notes to the text of the latter. One set of ink-impressions, consisting of two 
pieces, was supplied to me, together with a photograph of them. In any event 
the first half of the original record is missing and the remainder is a good deal 
damaged in several places and is on the whole in an indifferent state of preser- 
vation, pretty much like No. II]. The space covered by lettering, as measured 
on the impressions, is as follows :—Piece A, height 3 ft. 4-in., breadth 1 ft. 7 in.; 
B, height 2 ft. 4 in., breadth 1 ft. 13 in. The letters resemble in shape and size 
those of No. III, and the line-spacing is similar. Piece A contains 32 lines and 
begins :—’ (being doubtless the last letter of ¢zvla@’ or tarla’) dkah (= III B 25); 
and ends :—tirley byddes (= III C 26). Piece B contains 22 lines and begins: 
—goh tlun (= III C 26-7); and ends at the end of the record, corresponding 
with the end of II] D. This inscription has served to restore or- confirm certain 
words that were lost or doubtful in the preceding one. | 


‘No. Vv. 
AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON. 
Deserirptive Account. 


43- This inscription is engraved on one face of a large stone (apparently a 
slab), the lettering being enclosed within a bordering line which at the top forms 
a flat curve, like a Tudor arch without a point to it. The original location of this 


1 .am unable to suggest « rendering for the two words at the end of D 13 unless the first one can be 
read kivicem, in which case the phrase would perhaps mean “ winged birds,” But even if this reading is 
permissible, which seems more than doubtful, there is little a deta’ in this mention of birds after and 
apart from the whole collection of sentient creatures. 2 Cf, 1 H 4-12, V 49-51. 

3. For the rendering of this last paragraph (which is in Pali) | am indebted to Professor C, Duroiselle, 


144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL..1 


record is unknown to me. Apparently it originally contained about 55 lines, 
possibly’ more ; but of the first five (corresponding with IITA 1-9) hardly anything 
is legible, and nothing after |. 55, which may however have been the last line. . 
The ends of most of the lines are also seriously damaged. But a good part of 
the lettering is in a pretty fair state of preservation, rather better than that of the 
two preceding inscriptions, Two ink-impressions were supplied to me, together 
with a photograph of one of them. The space covered by lettering, as measured 
on the impressions, is as follows :—height, 6 ft. 2 in.; extreme breadth, 2 ft. 
11 in. The letters resemble in shape those of No. III and are very nearly of. 
the same size; if anything, they are slightly smaller and perhaps a little more 
delicately cut, but that may bé due to the stone being of a different.kind. The 
normal line-spacing is the same asin No. III]. Down to ut mlehu in |. 42 (corre- 
sponding with III C 27), No. V is almost acopy of No. III, but at that point it 
entirely diverges from it. Accordingly it has not been considered necessary to 
give here the text or translation of ll. 1-41, as the variants occurring therein have 
been entered in the notes appended to No, III. Subject to slight variations, 
the proper names also are identical with those contained in the latter. inscription. 
No. V records the restoration by King Kyansittha of a pagoda styled (appar- 
efitly) Kyak Talan. It seems probable that: this pagoda was somewhere in the. 
Mén country of Lower Burma, but inthe absence of information as to the place 
where the inscription was found I am unable to say anything positive about it. A> 
date in Il. 51-2 is probably either the date of the commencement or completion of 
the work of restoration, or else it may be the date on which the order was issued 
for the engraving of the inscription. It appears to correspond with Friday, 16th 
April 1098; the year number is- in figures and of the Burmese common era. 
Another date in |. 54, which may be the actual date of the setting up of the 
inscription, is unfortunately too much mutilated to admit of determination. The 
bearing of the former date has been pointed out in §§ 27, 29. Apart from 
these particulars and a few new words, the chief importance of this inscription 
lies in the fact that it has served in certain cases to restore or confirm words that 
were lost or doubtful in No. III. 


Text. 
(The text of Il. 1-41 is identical with that of III] A 1—C 26 save for the 
variants given in the notes appended to the latter.) 
42. gobh tluh das ut mleh « yan gna smin Sri Tribhiwanadityadhammaraja- 
rajadhirajaparamiswar balacakkrawar pumrey «(ma pa yan ku] 


Epigraphia Birmanica No. V. Votume I, 


to 


10 


AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON. 


(TOP HALF ) 


i hee gy Ma a f 
A Pe Seinen 

bee C a iE ec eihins - 
Rig Jee wh ¢ fai 


Fd aa gnegy Hophsnioiieg eA) ety: “ope . 

‘ ah BP, ne oe 

hey Tee b RD gre ag mag OK diary ays see wi 
OM on : Ae rt i Fee Gk RP os ie 
a a4 MeO) Cuetiouare gy Phy eth en, 44 

Tal ee Fattiognern, 

ats Ai iy; Bod Gin Ko: pani The 

Sop ‘é. 

ane TE fi) pidge A ig Tt a 

ae se uy, fin: en Se 


re.Y 


i} - i Ss bi i 
had pone mae @ Fr ae mh ee 
RS Qi re Wd PAQet urea wa ab AS ms awe ie 


‘¥ Tes: dhs Hee _anChitent, a Big Myre ier Gabe 
yay 


AMS by | Sah “Agana Fi TAN tage fw dis 
55 Se) Face Serna i a oa eee gute Pca One: ee 


a 


: Ra =e i rw 3 M 2 
a A PA a fink poe ae ee ate 5” * Piske: 
Shs y ee od grins copy am fle y Sig 


ae Lo Bsactrny i 2 re Re E xekd 


Prate XI. 


190. 
12 


14 


16 
18 


20 


fa 
26 


28 


Epigravhia Birmanica No. V. Votume I, Prate XIl- 


AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON. 
(BOTTOM HALF) 


30 Pages Ses | a 
rs 4, frases Pent tee st Sas ve 4 ¢: 
32 ee an! ers: Eigppee: ATE. 
34 aa Line ae =a thy reat mY 
36 ied fcc ip ta ede 
rare Yee -% Tig peat ye B a ¢ © at 
38 ae YQ het ess HRC th rye hacia fk iq 
ae 4c Qui hy io By iingg ns 7} agi meade: 
+ 
40 Zbeo aie eel ‘p 
7 = Jan 
patent gon ge aS an i 
42 s/t AGC afi} Snostenanire . arabes 
ae LE Qi on cur ee De ys SU mH) 
h . a le oN 
44 ff Lat WAMU HS Naiyen Gm Rimi a bie <i i 


J ahukuinPocrg sui te teal ty an core 


46 ase es US ee onetime: 
: Papel neintoalt te nigl 0 Asie. 
48 ! Qi Stott iy maleaQilyd a1iaony Es 
ee AoA ead MEY ad? Sesunf fe Tid « 
ae SE SiNswemAC neh dcr pin o's oy. 
eee. een fo Sheets eo Sacer 
52 i Kiger Eo wat ye PPE Pd Eins S eae 
4 fe 4 TE eae eee: fe, Phd O85: as 
54 a4 : 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 145 


43. cin buntan « sarwwafiu bodhisatta ma cmat sdas kyak ma prak nuk ut 
sakala safta gumlun « ma jnok metta karuna [u]- | 

44. t dey sakala satta gumlun ut ku kal» matbal sdsana kyak Buddha tirley 

| 0 ma prey ut nor smin c-4n ma... [u]- 

45. t dis pan sak rimban ka sak smis ma nom prafid trejas puthrey mun 
smin c-an ka das bircas « ma nom ylas]...<:.... 

46, ut sakala Jambudip « ma go’ byades nor kyak Buddha tirley « ma das 
tarla’ din ATE nAgOS nie wna ae 

47. n ceti Kyak Tal(a)h wo’ « ma. rah rlak dnah na sdas namadhey yas 
gir(n)at (t)ilbok ut lok k(u mahajan gurh)-. 

48. (lu)n boy kal (m)a lo’ or tin nawakarmma dak g(i)w? tumi. rbin thic 
jnok nor tlar.... blah or busac]. . | 

49. sut bnab riahisjan gumlun gurhir baranak pandit ......-< ® sadhujan 
guthlun or gra[n] (da) #{wo’ k](urh das sm)i(n)* 

50. dharmmaraja ma go’ byades nor kyak Buddha tarley » ma sdas kyak 


51. n lah pa sandihh ode [da] a1 dey kal sakaraja® 460 goh than ....... 


52> ‘fata ae q ‘they faktahwacl 3 thasta naksatra * nadi [tmin]...... 


@eeeeeee eee se evoerse stoves 


Translation.. 


(For the translation of Il. 1-41 and the first five words of |. 42, see II] A :— 
C 27, subject to the variants in the notes, ending at “ has all come to pass.”’) 


1 Or giw, 

2 There is a word kere that looks like picha. Wy (or'mi°), but it comes just on a spot where two sheets 
(in both impressions) are joined and I cannot be sure of it. 

8 Of these words éurn is very doubtful, but the rest seem probable enough, though little of them islegible, 

4 Probably we should supply heré some words like ma apritk nuk sakela satta gumlue, 

6 There may be a vivdma, possibly. 


146 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, |! 


King Sri Tribhawanadityadhammarajarajadhirajaparamiswar,) the exalted 
mighty universal monarch, who rides upon (1. 43) a white elephant, the omni- 
scient (one), the Bodhisatva, who shail verily. become a Buddha that saves (and) 
redeems all beings, who is great in love (and) compassion for all beings at all 
times, who upholds the religion of the Lord Buddha, who is exalted above all 
other kings that (dwell in?) all (1: 45) the four quarters? without. ..... ;° 
without * exception, who has wisdom (and). splendour exceeding other kings 


....,' who has renown.... - (throughout ?) the whole 
of laiabiaipe who was foretold by the ion Buddha, who is lord of the 
city of Arimaddanaptr........: (L 47), this pagoda of Kyak Talan,? which 


was in ruins, in order that it might become a name of renown (and) a (place of 
refuge ?)® of all the world and all mankind® for a long time, (he) caused 
workmen to build (and) encase (it) afresh ay and fairly, bigger than before ™ 
...., (and) had (it) dedicated... .... 

(1. 49) May all you people in general, rakes Brahmins, scholars,....., 
. , » all good men, understand that this is indeed the king of the Law who was 


’ 


foretold by the Lord Buddha, who is to become a true Buddha. ......... 


BO hae ar tara te :* (1.51) doubt (it) not !* 

In ihe time of (the year) 460 of the common era, .... 2. ee 
.... J8 (of the) month Besakha, the day (being a) Eniday, Hasta 7 (being) 
the lunar mansion, at four MOAT PLECISELY x Sac raed eh aes ete ee 


1 See WD 8tr.n. With the whole passage (to I, 46) cf. III C 27-9, D 6-10. 

2 The four cardinal points of the compass, and the regions situated in those several directions. 

3 The sense of rimbdiz is undetermined, + The sense of 4a sak is not quite certain, 

5 The meaning of éa das bircds is undetermined. 6 See 1B totr. n, 

7 It was, apparently, a caitya (stupa) called by that name, The word &ydé is applied i in L.M. to. 
Buddha, images of Buddha, ‘Buddhist religious edifices, particularly of this description, eminent personages, 
"and objects of veneration in general. It is even used respectfully i in the sense of “ Sir’? in conversation. 

8 The meaning and reading of girndt tiltok are not quite certain. 

9 The last three words.are not quite certain but seem almost a necessary restoration of the more or less 
obliterated text. 

10 This resumes the subject, z.¢, the king, who has been described with so many epithets in ll. 42-6, 

11 After repairing and strengthening what remained of the old structure, the king caused it to be 
covered externally with an additional layer of fresh material. This was a frequent practice i in Burma: 
many. of the existing pagodas have grown by successive acts of encasing’ to their present size from much 
smaller nuclei. 13 The reading is somewhat doubtful here, 

13 There is a partly illegible word here, the sense of which is undetermined. 

11 The illegible phrase probably read much as inl. 43: “ that redeems and saves all mankind.” 


1s ChIH 43. | 
16 The obliterated passage contained, inter alia, the statement of the lunar date, which was probably 
the 13th of the waxing moon in the lunar month Vaisakha. 17 Properly Hasta. 


138 One nddi is 24 minutes.. Apparently the statement in the text means 96 minutes after sunrise on the 
day in question. As to the date, sce § 43. 


PART II MON INSCRIPTIONS 147 


ete elses SS) arate ena Ba, ee a Ss this writing 

C26 A) aia ida ane ee ee Bk ee Ustarabhadrapada (being) the lunar man- 

SIGHS. 3G Mosihe d, jain kee he Poe ieee, Wm ee ae ee oe ae eta ed 

Cl Be Yi ghee. he a hata a ee Ga unig be al an EN el, oe Te set Up * 4a 'y 2s 
No. VI. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 
Descriptive Account. 


44. This inscription is only a fragment of what must have been originally a 
very much longer record. It seems not impossible that it represents the beginning 
of the record of which No. VIII is a subsequent portion ; and it is almost certain 
that it was framed on the same lines as No. VII, for it agrees with the latter 
almost verbatim, so far.as it extends and so far as No. VII can be read at all. 
Unfortunately very little of No. VII is legible. What remains of No. VI 
is engraved on one face of a large stone slab, which has apparently been 
broken about the middle into two pieces. In a good: many places. the 
surface of the stone has also been seriously damaged, so-that many letters 
are lost or quite illegible. But those that remain are clearly cut and well preserved 
onthe whole. Two ink-impressions were supplied to me, together with a photo- 
grar’ of one of them. One of the two impressions has the two fragments 
separate: the space occupied upon them by the lettering is in the case of the 
upper fragment 3 ft- 7 in. in height by about 2 ft. 8 in. in breadth, the actual 
length of the lines being variable to the extent of an inch or so. The lower 
fragment, so far as occupied by lettering, is 2 ft. 6 in. in height and about 2 ft. 
6 in. in breadth, the lines being Kere a trifle shorter than they are above. 
Inthe other impression the two fragments have been roughly pieced together, 
with some allowance for what is missing between them, and the total height thus 
arrived at is about 6 ft. 4 in.; which is probably a fairly good approximation to 
the dimensions of the original. The letters resemble in general style and shape 


1 Presumably the reference is to the inscription itself, 
2 Probably this refers to the date on which the inscription was actually set up, 


148 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


those of the preceding inscriptions but are very much larger : they measure about 
1 in. in height, letter'¢ is about 1 in. long, and the normal interlinear space 
is about 12 in. 

45. By the help of the other records it has been possible to restore a good 
many of the missing portions of this fragmentary inscription, Its general purport 
is to give the. Kyansittha legend in the less extended version (see $§ 25, 26). 
No special reason is given for the erection of the record save the king’s own order 
that this panegyric. should be engraved for general information (Il. 4-5). The 
inscription has been briefly referred to in my second paper on the Myazedi Record 
(F¥.R.A.S., 1910, pp. 797-812), and likewise in the Report of the Superintendent, 
Archaeological Survey, Burma (1911), pp. 19-20, where a translation of a small 
part of it appears. It was also mentioned in the-discussion summarized in § 28. 
But owing to the imperfect state of the only impression at that time available, the 
date in ll. 2-4 was wrongly read, a serious mistake being made in the year number, 
which is in figures.’ As to this there can, however, be no doubt whatever that 
it is the year 455 of the common Burmese -era, which therefore falls within the 
period of Kyansittha’s reign (§ 29). A further error was made in taking the 
word Mrigastras.(l. 2) forthe name of a lunar month: it is practically certain 
that it here stands for a year-name of the Burmese 12-year cycle. The date falls 
within the waxing half of a month which is probably to be read Svéwan (this 
seems to be at any rate a possible reading of the almost illegible corresponding 
passage in No. VII), and there is no doubt as to the weekday and naksatra. 
‘It seems possible, though not absolutely certain, that the date when the king 
gave the order for the engraving of this record was June 3rd, A.D. 1093, but the 
precise day is not really very material from our present point of view, for there 
can be no serious doubt that the inscription is genuine and contemporary. 

46. Apart from its date, No. VI adds little to the information given by the 
previous documents, except its insistence (Il. 23-5) on the king’s pedigree, both 
paternal and maternal: Professor Duroiselle has suggested that this is not 
without significance ‘in view of the doubts cast upon Kyansittha’s paternity in 
popular tradition (§ 23). No. VIII ¢B 16) also fefers to the king’s descent, 
though there the mention occurs in a Pali passage. Paternally he claimed to be 
of the Solar race, thus asserting his legitimate descent from the Burmese royal line, 
which is the point whereon the legendary stories throw some doubt.? For the rest, 
No. VI presents parallels with the inscriptions already given. The proper names 


1 F.R.A,S,, 1910, pp. 853-6. 2 As tothis point, see § 52 (and note). 


ita Birmanica No. VI. Votume I, Prare XIII. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 
(TOP HALF) 


malt a Pe _# sO. 


6 i Sia heino ug wt) P 
fine bang Nowk May 

8 O1o«¢ W S 
leas Brea : 


7% ’ Se ’ ~ 4 [ 

1. oe t § ee: bi~ Same 
+ SeFocces gamrucn Oh Me abt 

re oe syicaleu mn ; ee 4 ‘ 14 
y iD 
‘ “aft Gepeaguicrlaag : 

16 As roniuienaa cng fs ig ie | 16 


¢«. , 
yu = CUTTi Kasam $d yz! 
fl , emit wide vn 4 

oe ee gee arcu | 
Kee 


laa t 18 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 149 


are the same as elsewhere (§ 26), subject to some slight differences in 
spelling and to the fact that Pagan is mentioned by its native name (Pokém) as 
well as by its Pali title (4vimaddanapar). The inscription contains two short 
Pali passages (ll. 1, 6-g) and in]. 22 the date A. Bud. 1630 (see $§ 28, 29). 

47. The variants found in No. VII, so far as legible, have been given in the 
notes appended to No. VI. 


Text. 


(« Sri t) [namo] tassa [bh]agavato arahato sarnmasarmbu[ddhassa | 
(u dey) kal saka[raj](a cnam)! 455.0 mrigasiras*... .. > [mi]- 
rmok ‘ ki[ntu] (srdwan ®«) they sukrawar ® » uttarapha[lg]u[ni_na]- 
[ksatra » kanya” lagna « smin dharmmaraja myil abhipray or (sil) ® 
[lar * girlJun guna ” jirku ma da(s na”) s-or miiah ® gurhlun [gran] ® 
(10+) [Sri ©0 « najmo Buddha[ya] » namo dhammaya « namo 
[sanghaya]" » o [i an]giraso Sakyamu(ni)™ sabbasattanukampa- 
[ko »]® sabbasattuttamio ” siho ® 1” rajuppattim * desa[yi]™ 

[ti] « o «nom dey moy [He[h kal]™ kyak Buddha ta(rl]e- 

[y] taw de[y] Jeta[wana]mah{awihar 1] kyak [BJu[ddha] ta[rl]e- 

. y ktir k-im 1 [k]al goh nor gnis tarley ® yi{ryas] 

12. turow [sak deJh tit dr...... blah deh (tun lop) * 

13. dey mukhawar tarley kum: kal goh t[arley Ananda] 

14, [fiac] ascar goh yuk ku surhbup tey smafi gruff]... 

15. ... kyak Buddha tarley goh * | kal goh kyak Buddha [tarle]- 

16. [y gah]* ku tarley Ananda row * wo’ | Ananda [mnor ci ri}- 


99 PA ANARYD » 


— 
oe) 


1 Probable in VII. 2 VII may have ‘g?°, 

3 After a short illegible word VII apparently has 11 which is probably followed by the lunar date in a 
figure. But the passage is badly blurred. 

4 Certain in VII. © Probable in VII, 6 Or °#2°. 

7 Certain in VII. 8 Probable in VII, 9 Certainin VII. 

10 Between gu and x there is an original aw. There is no virdma over the nin VI and it is doubtful 

in VII. 
- 11 Possibly one might read da san or das da (or, improbably, das 1). 


12 After mriah there is an original flaw, | 13 Certain in VII. 

14 VII omits the whole of 1.6 and the first word of I. 7. 

15 Or °ni t. VIl apparently has °n7 1, 16 Vil has. 

17 Between 6ba and sa there is an original flaw, 18 VII may have stho. 19 Vil hash 

2 There is no virdma visible. 21 VII seems to have °yi. 22 Certain in VII. 


23 Between y and yi there is an original flaw. VII seems to have tirley. 
24 Doubtful, but probable, both in VI and VII, Cf. 1 A 24, II] A 16. 
2 VII has goh, % Certain in VII. 2 There is an original flaw here, 
20 


150 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


17. si[m]Joy ma imo’ Bi[s]n@ ma go’ abhifia[n’ ms](u)[n? goJh ° [1] 

18, [kom] ku kon ey Gawari[p]ati 1 ku smin Int ku [Bijssu[karmma]- 

19. d[e]wa[put 1 ku Kataka}r[mmanaga raja‘! skindam dan moy [ma] 

20. [imo’ Sri] K[s]etra blah cit risi Bisnt goh scu[ti nor] (dirda)- 

21. (s)*®[golh deh stin das dey Brahmalok kal saisana ey 

22. [tlin cup] moy lhim turow klam pi cwas cnam cit deh scuti cis [no}- 

23. [r] Brahmalok deh stlia das nor ti{I]tol wansa bar | amba [go]h [da]- 

24. [s| nor [ad ]iccawansa | ambo’ goh [das no]r wansa (kur) . . 6 ma ta[w] 

25. pdey (b)....7 d(a@)fi® i de[h® sd]as smin dha(r)mmaraja dey din 
Po[k]am=ma [i]- | 

26, [mo]’ Arimad[danapir]......%(m)™ tarley arahan gumlunt ut [ku] 

24. [pn]afi [ca]tu(ranga) .... (jifijun) paficaprasat | de[y] an(ti)l * (si)- 

a Bask ena * (na) [ratna] purhrey gurmlun 1 sgo’ [muddh]abhi- 


ee eae . (As) tmo’ | [deh syu |k [s]as[ana ey 1 deh]... 
Bie tied hase “fetal lupok tinlir tinrah s|]warga ma tmay [na cat 
eee, © > Gen) [sakala sa](twa gurhlun) 1 [deh sluno} ut [apey] 
32. (pant) [sdas smin] (dharmmaraja)..... ey eae eves at? (oath 
lun) 
33, 34. (Illegible.) 
Translation. 


Prosperity! Honour to the Blessed One, the Saint, the Truly Omniscient ! 
In the time of the year 455 of the common era, (being a). Mrigasiras 
eas ....(on the....th) of (1.3) the waxing (half) of the. month of 


vil may have °7. 3 Or msiin. 3 VII probably has goh. 

4 The parts in square brackets in the first half of this line have been restored from VII with the help 
of the other inscriptions. It is here (and in the second half of |. 20) that the break in VI occurs (§ 44). 

§ It is very doubtful whether dirdas should be supplied : on the one hand, VI has a lot of space to 
spare at the end of I. 20; on the other, the word is not in VII and the spare space may be due merely to the 
presence of the group of subscript letters in skindam diz just above. 

8 It is not clear whether what precedes is one word or two: it looks rather like .Aumbdy (or tuthbdy) 
but. the last half is very doubtful: Possibly it represents the proper name of the family of the king’s mother, 
in which case I am unable to identify it. If it is a descriptive, I cannot attach a meaning to it. 

7 The missing word may be monosyllabic or dissyllabic, The final seems to be 2. 

8 Or possibly dui. 3 There is perhaps an original flaw here. 

10 There may be an original flaw here, so that it is impossible to say exactly how much is missing. 
ii This final letter may possibly be p, Over the preceding unidentifiable consonant there is a mark 
which may be a superscript 7. _ 12 Or antul, perhaps. 
13 The restoration of si- at the end of L, 27 is conjectural, but probable: cf. 1C 12, HEC 13. 
14 The misging words must have been something like ma Ain lak or ma cincon. | 
18 Probably one should supply something like ma nuk prak sarwwasatwa, Cf. V 43. 


phia Birmanica No, VI. Votume I, Pate XIV. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 
(BOTTOM HALF) 


4 2 ane = > 


20 | aot 


: 26 
28 
30 


32 


PART It] | MON INSCRIPTIONS 151 


(Srawan P), the day (being a) Friday, Uttaraphalguni (being) the lunar mansion, 
(and) Virgo (being) on the eastern horizon, the king of the Law? issued*® an 
order to write down the full number of his virtues so that all men might under- 
stand (them). | 

Prosperity! Honour to Buddha! Honour tothe Law! Honour (1. 7) to the 
Church!* The brilliant Sakyamuni, who has compassion upon all beings, 
the lion who is the most exalted of all beings, thus showed forth the origin of the 
king 5 

It was once upon a time when the Lerd Buddha was dwelling in the 
Jetawanamahawihar,® (that) the Lord Buddha (I. 11) smiled. At that time, 
from my lord’s eyeteeth rays of six colours issued forth (and) went...... ia 
and then they (entered ?) my lord’s mouth again. At that time the Lord Ananda, 
(1. 14) seeing this miracle, raised and joined his hands,’ (and) asked (about) the 
laughter. . .. . of the Lord Buddha. 


Then the Lord Buddha spake to the Lord Ananda thus: “ Ananda, hereafter 
a sage named Bisni, possessing the five transcendental faculties, (1. 18) together 
with my son Gawarpati, and King In, and Bissukarmmadewaput, and Kata- 
karmmanagaraja, shall build a city called Sri Ksetra; and after that, the sage 
Bisnii shall depart from that state of a he (Il. 21) shall go up into 
existence in Brahmalok. 

“ When my religion shall have attained one thousand six hundred and thirty 
years, he shall depart from Brahmalok; he shall come into existence {as the 
scion) of two families: his father shall be (1. 24) of the Solar line, his mother of a 
..... family that dwells within. ..... .. (of) bamboo.? He shall become 
king of the Law in the city of Pokam, that is (otherwise) named Arimaddanapir 


1 Cf,1G3trn, ILA ws, 2 The rendering is inferred from the context. 

3 This rendering conveys the sense and purport of the original, but rather evades its difficulties. It is 
not quite clear to me whether ma refers to guna or abhipray. If one should read san, presumably the 
meaning would be somewhat emphasized (“his excellent virtues”), but otherwise much the same. {[t is 
possible to interpret giza as “‘ good deeds,” rather than “ good qualities” merely; but that change would not 
seriously affect the sense, 

+ VII omits these ejaculations, * ChIA 2-3. 

6 See l A 16 tr.n., and for the passage generally cf, 1 A 13-36, II! B 2—C 26. 

7 In respectful address, venerating Buddha. Cf. I A 26, III B 21-22, 

8 VII merely has “ from thence,” and perhaps that is also the reading of VI. 

* It is unfortunate that the passage relating to the king’s maternal descent is blurred. From VIII B 16 
it appears that.she was of the Vilva line, so named from a certain fruit of that name (L.M. 27, * Bengal 
quince’), The reference to “ bamboo” here is obscure, and even the rendering may be doubtful. Can 
there have been some confusion in the draftsman’s mind between beluva (the 07 fruit) and venu, velu, 
“bamboo”? It seems hardly likely ; but I can offer no definite explanation of the passage. 


152 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 1 


ere a ee all the Saints } together with all (I. 27) the army, of the four arms,” 

© (the pillars ?) of (his) paicaprasada,' Upon a throne (adorned 
with 2) all (sorts of) noble gems, he shall receive the anointing of the head 
oe ee ee ew eee oe « (2 Seat Of ?) stone.© He shall uphold ® my religion. He 
eee eae SS ee shall draw open the bar of the gate of Heaven, which 
is made of gems (I.31)....... . (for ?) all (manner of) beings. He shall 
empty all the (four?) Apay.? He shall be aking (of the Law, who shall redeem 
and save all beings ?).” | 


No. VII. 


ANOTHER INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, 
PROME. 


Descriptive Account. 


48. This inscription is engraved on one side of a large stone slab. One 
ink-impression of it was sent to me, but no photograph. The spacé formerly 
occupied by lettering on the stone, as measured on the impression, is 5 ft. 
1 in. in height by 3ft. 11 in. in breadth; the letters are in shape like those of 
the preceding records, their normal height is about 2 in., letter ¢ is about ? in. 
broad, and the interlinear space is normally 1 in. The fsseripicn is in a most 
deplorable condition and would hardly be legible at all if it were not for the 
help afforded by No. VI and the other records. The first dozen lines or so 
are more or less decipherable with that help, but even these are badly weathered 
and damaged, while below them the whole central part of the inscription 2ppears 
to have flaked off and has perished irretrievably. [n this part only the beginnings 
of some of the lines and the ends of a few are dimly discernible and towards the 
bottom nothing whatever can be read, except perhaps here and there an isolated 
and doubtfully decipherable letter or two, What is legible of this record agrees 
substantially with the text of No. VI so far as the latter extends; the few trifling 
variants have been given in the notes appended to the latter text. Of the 


1 That is, the Buddhist monks, 

2 The reading is doubtful but probable ; if correct, it referstothe traditional four divisions of an Indian 
army (horse, foot, elephants, and chariots, as exemplified in the old form of chess, the original war game), 

3 The gap here and in the preceding line makes it impossible to give acontinuous rendering, but it 
seems likely that the meaning of the passage is that the clergy and the army are to be the supports of the 
king’s throne, figuratively speaking. + See ll] Crrtr.n. 

5 Owing to the lacuna, it is not clear whether this refers to the same stone as III C 13, but it seems 
likely, [t would appear that in the ceremony of anointment the king sat upon a special stone, 

6 See 1 A 36 tr. n. 7 Cf, 1 D 37, 111-C 20-1. 

8 Conjectural: cf. V 43. Then follow two quite illegible lines, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 153 


remainder no continuous restoration can be attempted. Lines 1-13 cover the 
same ground as Il, 1-30 of No. VI to the word Jupok (inclusive). The legible 
portions of the rest are as follows (doubtful parts being in parentheses) :— 

14. tinlir tinran swarga ma tmiy na (rat), “ the bar of the gate of Heaven, 
which is made of gews”; u(16)¢ mahdjan gumlun, “all the people” (or “all 


mankind”); 17. ...1 wf, “all”; 18 .... (wom), “is” (or “ was”); 20 
(x moy), “one”; 21. (’ dey dan Arimaddanapir), ‘in the city. of Pagan”; 23. 
(.n gohs@....), “that... ."; (end) ...%..;24... (dey rajasthan), 


“in the palace”; 25, (end)... . skak sak upadrow| sgir (26) tinhir na Buddha - 
(dharmma sangha), ‘shall be frée from calamity ; shall shine with (the grace 


of) Buddha, the Law, and the Church ”; i a ee . 4. + (vatna trey), “the 
Precious Gems”; 28. (towards the end) mrbbdn....... Cl) rea eer 
. | row goh (29) (Ayah Buddha), ‘Nirvana. .... HAVER? so -0 5. eel . Thus, 


did the Lord Buddha” (presumably we should add “ prophesy,” in which case 
this would be the end of the Buddha’s prophecy concerning the king in this version, 
corresponding generally with I A 36 and [II C 24);' 29. (near the end) (ma 


das smin ps iol. ee ae ee , “ who is a.king of the Law ”; 31. 
(end)... - (didap) . ee bday ; 93-(end) ....3. (gurlun) smth (tin), 
CAND ss eels Os princes come.’ “lines 34-8 are altogether illegible. 


40; Apart from a few words near the beginning which have helped to fill 
up gaps in the text of No. VI, No. VII owing to its bad state of preservation has 
been entirely useless for my purpose. 


No. VIII. 


A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE ‘SHWESANDAW Pacopa, 
PROME, 


Descriptive Account. 

_ 30. Next to the great Shwezigén inscription (No. 1), this is perhaps the most 
interesting of the early records and it is much to be regretted that it has only 
come down to us in its present fragmentary and dilapidated condition, An ink- 
impression of it was sent to me. several years ago at the same time as one of 
No. VI and before I had become acquainted with No. VII :. consequently No. VIII 
has been previously mentioned as the second of the Shwesandaw inscriptions and 
is thus referred to in several Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological 
Survey, Burma (viz. 1911, p.20; 1912, p. 15; 1916, pp. 21-2), and in ¥.£.4.8., 


154 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 1 


1910, pp. 796-812. The inscription is engraved .on both sides of a large stone 
slab, but the beginning is missing and must have been on some other stone 
(conceivably it is No. V1); and the end, if it is on our stone (which is doubtful) is 
unfortunately quite illegible. It is not even absolutely certain which of the two 
faces precedes the other: the ends of both are more or less obliterated and there- 
fore their connexion is by-no means clear. However, | am disposed to think 
that what I have called Face A precedes the other face. The former is the 
better preserved, though much is lost, especially the beginnings of several of the 
earlier lines. Face B is throughout in a deplorably bad state and becomes 
absolutely undecipherable towards the end. Two sets of ink-impressions of this 
record were sent to me, together with photographs of one set: The lettering on 
both faces is bordered as in No. V by a line, which in this case also forms a flat 
curve at the top of the inscription. The space covered by lettering on either 
face is in height 4 ft. 1 in., in extreme breadth 4 ft. The letters do not differ in 
shape materially from those of the preceding inscriptions, their normal height is 
 in., letter fis Zin. to % in. in length, and the interlinear space is 1 in. 


51. From what remains of this inscription it may be presumed that it belonged 
to the group of records which represent the less extensive version of the 
Kyansittha legend. Buddha’s prophecy is mentioned in B 14, in B 22 Gawarhpati 
is made to exhort Bisni, while in B 24 Indra, accompanied by the celestial archi- 
tect and the Naga king, invites the sage to take up the burden of his glorious 
destiny. In this detail the record differs from the preceding ones: nothing is said 
elsewhere of Indra being accompanied on this occasion by these two minor 
personages. But the chief interest. of the inscription lies elsewhere, namely in 
the enumeration of King Kyansittha’s achievements as king at Pagan. Herein 
are to be specially noted the erection of a building, presumably of a- sacred 
character (A 1-2), the revision of the Buddhist Canon (A 3), the mission to India 
with funds for the restoration and endowment of the temple at Bodh Gaya (A 4-8: 
and see § 24), liberality to the monks (A 8-9), relations with other princes and 
in particular with a certain “ Coli” prince (§ 24), whom the king claims to have 
converted to Buddhism (A 10-4) and whoinreturn appears to have come to do 
obeisance in great state, bringing (as it would seem) a number of magnificent 
presents and one of his daughters for the king’s acceptance (A 15-6). This episode 
is followed in the record by details of the offerings made by the people of Pagan 
and its neighbourhood on festive occasions of a religious character, and stress is laid 
here (as in some of the other inscriptions) on the fact that the king himself delivered 


PART II} MON INSCRIPTIONS 155 


didactic addresses to his subjects, who appreciated them highly (A 24- 5: c. TE 
10¢4, II] C-22-4). The greater part of the remainder of the record appears to deal 
with religious festivals, but much of it is unfortunately almost illegible. In B 2-5 
there is an interesting passage illustrating, as it would appear, the Buddhist 
doctrine of kindness to animals. Much of it is undecipherable, but it seems that 
certain birds were the objects of the king’s special favour and enjoyed his protec- 
tion, while from B 8-9 it may be inferred that animals in general were secured 
generous treatment and somie provision of food. A strong tinge of ethical and 
religious sentiment pervades the inscription, blending curiously with the monarch’s 
laudation of himself and his performances. 
52. In B 15~21 there is a set of Pali versés, in thé celine nd interpretation 
of which Professor Duroiselle has been kind enough to give me his valuable. 
assistance. They amount to a brief panegyric on the king and specially mention 
his paternal and maternal descent (cf. VI 23-5 and § 46). In explanation of the 
epithet of the king’s mother, referring to her ancestry, Duroiselle sent me the 
following abstract of the Burmese legend on the subject :—‘‘ King Anoratha was 
not féeling satisfied with only the mother of Sawlu as his Chief Queen, so he sent 
a minister to Vesali, the modern Besarh in India. Now the king of Vesali had 
seven daughters ; the eldest became a nun. . One day, she planted a di/va tree; in 
due course it hore fruits, one of which was as big as a Pegu j jar. A girl was born 
from it, whom the nun made over to the king ; the latter called the child Ruciya- 
pabhavati. He gave her in marriage to the upartija (whether the latter was his 
brother or his son is not made clear).! From this union was born’a child who 
was named Paficakalyani. It was Paficakalyani whom Anoratha’s minister asked 
or” (on his royal master’s behalf). The rest of the story, in a slightly variant 
version, has. been briefly abstracted in § 23. It only remains to be noted 
that there are various little differences in detail between the two, which however 
are not material to our purpose. Students of folklore will.be familiar with the 
theme of the birth of a child from a-vegetable substance (a few instances of which 
have been collected inthe Notes to Winstedt and Blagden’s Malay Reader (1917), 
pp. 182-3). It is a widespread legend and jis probably of totemistic origin: 
families took their names from particular plants, held them in reverence, and 
imagined themselves to be ‘descended from them. ‘It is, no doubt, possible that 
the legend of this particular miraculous birth was invented, as Duroiselle suggests, 
by King Kyansittha himself in order that in spite of the doubts cast on his 


1 Apparently he was alleged to be the son: see the Report? cited in the following note. 


156 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


paternity he might still be considered as a man of no common birth. But to me 
that sounds a less probable explanation. . Duroiselle adds that it is clear from his 
stone portrait in the Ananda temple that he was not a pure Burman; and there 
seems, therefore, no reason to doubt that he had an Indian mother, whoever his 
father may have been.’ 

53. It does not appear from what is left of this record whether it was made 
to commemorate any special occasion or was merely a royal panegyric engraved 
for general information. Nor is there any precise evidence as to its date. The 
proper names call for no particular remark. From the linguistic point of view 
the record is not without: value, as it contributes a few interesting forms; but its 
dilapidated condition has very seriously impaired -its utility in that respect. It 
concludes the important group of inscriptions which embody the royal legend of 
Kyansittha. 


Text. 


A 


,. . (smin) [Sri] Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh pa tiy da goh ma 

fin kindarh Nirbbana(m)élabajr(apa)r(yamahawihar) 

Dore eaia! i re ee ee ee ‘dey sthan Jayabhami ma taw boy esan din 
Poks[m]-ma imo’ [Arimad ]da[nap Jar! goh ci smi [c-an] 

3. [sak das smoh] (kur) ® [1 blah] goh ya pitak trey pi wo’ ma lif dindan 
{ar goh! fiijn [t ]i[n] pko(m * jurnwan)® [cu]ah t[n] 1 (goh ci) | 

4. [smin c-an sak das] smoh kurh i blah goh yah kyak trey Sri Bajras (pi) 
tr(u)k bla(n) ® p[l ii (mJan smin [c-An] k ...s7... ika® goh (1 smin) 


1 The chronicles of Arakan, however, appear to prove that the Vesali in question was in that country, 
not in India proper, and that if Kyansittha had Indian blood in his veins he derived it indirectly, through 
an Arakanese mother ; .and, further, that the scandal as to his doubtful legitimacy has no historical founda- 
tion (Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma, 1918, paras. 39, 40). 

2 The last part of this proper name is very doubtful, wihkar being entirely conjectural. 

3 This phrase is conjecturally restored on the strength of the other passages where it is clearly legible. 
The only real doubt is as to the particle kv, which may not be needed if the phrase occurs hére for the 
first time. 

4 The final letter might be /. 

5 Very doubtful, though it seems a tenable reading. 

6 The reading is doubtful, the word looks rather like blah, which can hardly be right here. 

7 Looks like adas, Cf..V 45. 

& Looks like patiéd, though the first consonant might be m and the second possibly ch. 


igraphia Birmanica No. VIII. Voctume 1, Pate XV. 


A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 


“PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 157 


5. [Sri ‘Tribhuwanadi |tyadhammaraja ‘goh ket ra[tnja ma kah moy ee 
p(u)ndon? kbaa (ar) or kindamh [t]rey Sri Bajras b{Iah [1] ra[A] . 
6... .. (kir kurmba)r? 1 (k)inda(p)? t[i bra’ 1 [k]i[n]darm [t]imbin 1 or con 
-_pnan edow sak k(u)I1* plit 1 kil pha[rn] klo’ (twija tw[i]k jfijajeh [rinleh] 
khis (tin nor)5 | 

7. (tlar®1 goh ci) [smi}i c[-an| sa[k] das [s]moh [k Juri blah goh yan maha- 
(w)a(tth)u? ma smih Dharmmasok kindarh ma Leiorel) rlim aut 
ta] goh 18min Sri Tri[bh Jul wanadi}- | 

8. [tyadhammaraja] gol t(u)n ® kindarh tumi t(i)n? khis nor tlar goh ci smin 

c-an sak das smoh kum blah [gol] u ut tarley eaipha ma taw dey (dia 
Ari)- 

g. (maddanapir goh)” (smi]n Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja [gol] pureh 4 
na paccey pan prakar dida[p] dl’ | gol ci smin c-4h sak das smoh 
kum [b]lah (go)- | 

10. (h)® . tae eee ee 22 [man] smih gurblin ran tlan ci s(b)ak ¥ 
ee a ‘drwifl 7 kal] goh [sm]in Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
rmin smin Co[l]i deh cup (P)o- - : 

ges tiiy da)* [1] goh ma smif bicarana mey wie] nor [ra]tna [pi] wo’ 
{ci] snom ¢-4n moy [da] ma sda{s] kil si[r]s(t) )k 7 jurhnok [de]y lo[k] 
ae 

12. (lok) . gcd (nJirbban ku. sat{wa] g gunman ci kah sa[k] 1 yan ratna. 
pi wo’ com ma das kili[go]h ma smia (sal gun Blulddharatin}ay 
dha[r]mmaratna | sa[ngha|lrat{na] (dey) | 


1 Possibly (but in that case incorrectly) pando. 

2 Merely conjectural and quite probably wrong, though the final consonant seems to be’ certain. There 
isa great difficulty about restoring the effaced beginnings and ends of these lines because in this part of 
the inscription the bordering line is not.visible, so that as it is a curve here one ‘cannot be sure how much_ 
space is to be allowed for, 


3 Conjectural, possibly bivdap ; kindem seems improbable 4 Or (less correctly) £i/. 

® These two words are somewhat conjectural. ; 8 Merely conjectural. 

1 Or makddhitu (perhaps written mahddhétthu), which seems about.equally probable, 

8 Conceivably tén, The initial consonant is also damaged, - 9 Almost certainly tam, not fun, 


10 The. preceding words (in parentheses) are merely conjectural. 
1 Or putareh, There is a-mark which may stand forthe avusvdva or may be the result of subse- 
quent damage. 12 Merely conjectural. 
13 { cannot’ restore the last of these missing words, the medial consonant appears to be a subscript 
& (or #), the final either v or’, The passage probably refers to delegations from vassal or foreign princes. 
14 Probable, though it might possibly be read sjaé. 
15 |.uoks like bait, probably on account of subsequent damage. 
18 Purely conjectural, 17 Conceivably, but improbably, strsu, 18 Conjectural. 
19 whe missing words (of which the last appears to end i in 2 of w) probably meant something like 
“ give. 
2! 


158 | _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. 1 


13. (sla tha)r? [na].(dak)® [hingu]]* tay [1] smin pundon ar kil ku smin Colit 
smin Coli ku ut bal (dJe[h] rmi[A] gun Buddha iaiertat)oue sa[n]eha 
[man smin [Sri-Tribhuwa] | 
14. [nadityadhammaraja pundon] go[h c]i [i] dfe]k dufull. ewalp mJic[cha }- 
dris deh cap: boy sah ele miuleh t {deh isc. a goh deh 
i Baits gap~pulmas] (i) | 
ihe ial oath ee a athe [bitan bey fk] kal[plablrjiksa rma: t{maly na 
" gattaratria © ku ko[n] lw[at] deh kum moy ma duk tps ku rap] ku 
[k]irya [m]a-ka{h moy] | : 
: [prakar ma dindar ku tdun bhofmjan [t]dua (may (r)inraa? ‘mayar 
{m]a fin] la[k] na sattaratna 1 tli[n pa. pjajaw smin Sti (T}ei[bhu}- ) 
_ wanadit[y Jadhammari[ja] | goh [c]i [smin c-an] | 
. [sak das] g[o’ smoh k]um ul gfoh] ya[n pja[jaw] fiah dan [Ala(h] ras **. 
 fiah grfip® g]uml(u)[® boy samarttha]” fah ta Lg}oh kum kurh 1 
nom [m]a [pa}jaw td(u)a™ [tha]r (tdun sra)-* | 
. [fi bitan thar dinday thlar (na) [tinl]a[y th]ar pnik rihjalr als(thjar (thar — 
[d]indap jun thar sinlufk] jul] thar si(nd)i® 4 thar Elon [jnju ([th]ar . 
: ui [jadisin thar chu k:lpabriksa] °. | 
1g.-. . . [prasa](d1) [rip ciji rip [mfijah [Jap] dewatha rip ki[n]dok [m]a 
: “kal mo[y] pf{rja[k]ar ma [deJh kindarh na thar ma deh cificon na 
: ratna dumpohi [g]lua [pha]r ma (fiah) 2. 2s. | 
go: .. (pa) [pajaw] 1 [ul gloh p[n]aa dula{i: pk]Aw thar Kiet tfrhim] * 
|  ietblar [Haim didap’ kal oe Bia alk] sirgut [nJan ruft] goh 
| [tdun pkaw] tdun [glil(k) ya 
ae (cas) [tap] (cir) e(u)p mursiin Felake' hs kil Jat tap k[lath aera 
_) .. moy tap ci glun phar wel [mJan fia(h] | pa Lass E ka[] gloh c(i} 
| [jmar] gurhl(u)h” elk]e[m] (ku)"* Se ee 


wes od 


ioe) 


1 The Dred preceding words beter the letter v) are ail and very doubtful. 

2 Conjectural; but it seems probable, the final looks like & (but asi be ¢, or something else). 

3 Possibly hangul, The form is rather doubtful. 

§ The final seems certain, but the rest might be read ha, tha, tay 0 or ca; and there are other possibili- 
ties. 

5 The last few letters of this illegible part may be # bley, but’ even these are doubtful. 

6 A small circle over the ¢t is assumed to be not original; but if it is we must read sattam ratna, 
aebere appears to be no such circle over the word in the next line, 


7 Possibly dinrun, 8 Conceivably, but improhbably, grusp. 9 Possibly gumlin, 
10 The + is extremely doubtful. 1 Possibly td:i2. 12 Purely conjectural, 
18 The middle consonants may conceivably (though improbably) be 22 or rz, 
14 Conceivably lirnim., 15 Very doubtful. 


16 Very doubtful. The initial looks as if it might be ch. 
17 Possibly gumliiz, 18 The & might bez. The next letter after this syllable looks like 4 or p. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 189 


Ce ee, [pkaw] (du) . .....[h? t]lua pa paijaw smin 1 kseh ci 
$a | ya] row rip fda guml(u)n * lah rip pee dewataw. 
Be * Jah [m]anus [gum]lua [ki}nda[rm don] ‘ : | 

O8. ov aw 28 (deh lop]® ri[nle]h jifijeh pa pajaw smin t.[ul got) y yan. 


row iifich cei [m]a [das ja[p] dan j jap ras jap] twai jap fiah 
[grip] (gumn)- 

24. (lun) [1 deh]... .7 [tlun rinleh jifijjeh pa pijaw smin dida[p kal ‘kal 
smi[n dijnd(u)* bi{ntjon mahajan guml(u)h * (na) krLujmn dhar[mm]a 
cil yan Hein ses mahaja- 

2s. [n gurhlun]. Pa pnan pkaw [binka] ci row 
brey ‘atk: ma gir [leJurh [sak] sirgi[t] nani [ylanh fiah ma pijaw 
ki(ry)a " (thar) [sr](afi glun)® 

26. (phar wel) ™ [1 jifijeh rinleh bulah sJat ® [m]Ja [nom yumyum] ci[r]cas 
bi[rha]r cwa{s kirlarn] li[rnim * mJa jin= =p(a)n” ku s[m]ia ci glufn] 
phar 1 [yan m]anus lah sa[t]*® (c-an) 


am, Ua wie det oc oe oes 28 [smin cut] dak kil dafn yurhyum] el 
kal ci glun phar | kah moy lh(i)m* kah bar In(i)m * [sak] go’ na 
-_(slros) ee are 

Bg ge a ey, So : Ss [goK(h | yan) row pun=dan frst smin [pa _ 


baal kyak lah Uiileta ceti lah kindarh bihar lah kir kurnbar lah til 
_ afram lah] (deh) ®. 
i. ae ee ee “a sail satwa gu(mlu)a % of tit [blab] no[r sans]ar 
calm] ul goh jap d[aja lisp ras jap eral jap] (fah grip) * 


1 Looks like an, 3 The last of “we missing words may be Hah, or possibly rinleh. 
3 Conceivably gumlii2, 1 Looks rather.like doi, but the marks underneath may be accidental. 
5 The first of these missing syllables looks rather like rap, but this is very doubtful and the rest is 


obscure. 


6 Looks like vamldp or rilip, but probably lopisright. 7 Possibly one might restore lop here, 

8 Perhaps dindi, 9 Perhaps gumlin. 

10 Doubtful, but I can suggest no suitable alternative. ‘ 

11 The obscure passage probably began with ma pijaw. 1% Almost certain, 13 Quite conjectural, 


11 The two preceding words are not quite certain. 

15 Possibly satwa (which one would ExpME)S ; but there Seeins to be a v#rima and perhaps the marks 
under the ¢.are merely accidental. 

16 Conceivably lirzim. 17 Perhaps atl 18 Or satwa, 

19 The preceding words are very doubtful. ‘0 Perhaps (but improbably) inim. 

21 The ! and the final s are particularly doubtful. 

22 Somewhere near the end of the last line one would expect girl, or the like, but I cannot fill up 
the blank. 23 Extremely doubtful. 

21 Doubtful: the spelling is unusual, and —- there is'a mark over the gu which may stand for the 
anusvara, but it may on the other hand be merely accidental. 

%s Conjectura!, 


1G: EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 2 Fwoter” 


Ro, (ottmliit) key sere k i wh ae a (d)[on ti] ....° kraw “ise ificim 
ambo’ amba’ pa] pun kil da[n man sil sak] - ambay) eae arr es e 


B 
(or kraw® ' majan) gol ur [sgo’ si Jr{sak dey lok prt ice on . 


Be (nisbban)* oe fah kraw aa] kal (ovo")® [ia} . aes a 
d[njah d[irha}t [m]e[trici}t ee ee ear gee 
3.-OJ...-. 2..." [gjufrhtun boy] rac boy ira boy] afjasthan] ci 
[sak deh] d[ow] (fiah)™ 2... 2.) 

Bike a Pe MCI SQ) Pattee) ci { dje[h MOnE : d[a}n_ taw han n ginrop 
ne ce [smi]a snr plolt t]aw [na] te[y] we(| kirlo’)® . .. . (ti)- 
a‘ [go]h smin kil . forte . (im)o’ ® kificem dharmma | ul goh 


of fiah gumhlun] lofp tlulb blok [pk](aw dirkas)” .. ’ 
6... (rmin)” [binru phjam (s- a a. (goh™ mirmoy my kos. bial og 
_ (mirmoy) re ee alge y dJe(h] (drep WAR ses aches 23 


| 7. [blah] (ak ah na taw) a8 5 [int smin | k]a[l sma ‘cut dak k{las] thar : 
ty [deh]. ® ar [kJo[m] k[u| pkaw (thar “ fiaty goh tiy)® ... 


F Quite conjectural, except for the’final letter, which seems pretty certain.” 
2 The last of the missing syllables looks like ka or ta, 
3 The last of the missing syllables may be fick, 
4 Not certain, but: probable, 
5 The first two words arc extremely doubtful, except the second +, 
8 Very doubtful. 7 Extremely doubtful. 
8 The demonstrative seems uncalled for and I doubt the reading. Possibly it should be eos ' 
‘9 Possibly we should read Fp, but I cannot restore the rest of the passage.” 
10 Possibly the first of the missing words is kiticem. 


1! Very doubtful, © =. 12: The vowel is very doubtful. 

13 The vowel is- doubtful, |The next letter seems to bé A, but is also sieeueis doubtful. 
44 Or tlun. © 

15 Very doubtful. The word looks like tadez, or £adei. 16 Very doubtful, 


17 The beginning of this word (at the end of the preceding line) is conjectural and seems very doubtful, 
. 18 Possibly po’, Buti imo’ seems more likely. 

Very doubtful. as. 2% Doubtful. 

21 Possibly pear.” oe. 22 Very doubtful. 

23 Not quite certaiti, but probable, The same applies to the subsequent numerals. ‘The short 

legible words following the second pair must be words of distance. presumably. 

24 Conceivably prép, but drep seems right. 

.25. The four. preceding. words are more or less conjectural. 

26 The missing word seems to end in df or.aé, But even the preceding word is father. doubtful. 

27 Very doubtful, 8 The Tast three words are extremely doubtful, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 161 


8. (ca eli 2 2 wat . [ely(@)[ay . oi jap)? (dijda[p they smih myi]! 
[a]bhipray Uk] basi gurila)a (t)i(rmaw)® [sat=tiracchan] (ci) ® 
g. (sadik curtiay? ars woe ce LEE -das] ~ Mag ee ..[k] (ci 1 ut) [goh 
smin k]il (anufiap ® kil) pan ci ee imo[’ dharmma]. . 


Late sw wee OU ed eee Se we RAY we & ~ [pkaw dipkas | ne « = 
foppail guroluln ci deh pkaw sak idyay ™-nor antul pkaw|. :. .. 

tt, [deh]... ice ele ee oie eee. 2h (tnar)® [diticam] OST ns es 
(tnar)"® a tain agt (1) [ue (chu ® dus). va 28 [gurblual (ci)? 
[deh pkaw] . a ae as ee, 

1Best ie a's eg ao pla ie ne nee . (nom) [ku] (mirmal) 
_ [sace= =chu ta sar ‘rom tn ioe ras S (mal mnip=pate™® | a ee 
TAR EC ies a ee 


ot i a Ce ee: S * 8 . « Ys « 


. 29 [oja ras tli ilnok: deh» a das kal ine (¢irdas) Font $1 
--Tribhuwanadi} ies 
14. [tyadhammaraja man kyak Buddha tarley byades la UF . "Tsmia} 
| ‘c-an [sak] das sae ao [dey dun Pokam=ma a Arima]- 


1 The pressifing looks hed ca lib, which seems jniprobablé. 

“a Quite doubtful, 8 Looks like bi2, which ‘may. ‘be intended. . 4. Bethanag gumlin, 

5 Very doubtful. . ‘The initial may be, the supposed: m fay be. an. accidental -mark, and even the 7 
might be d, 
te Doubtful ; and if correct, perhaps only the beginning of a word 

“T These two words are very doubtful. ~ 

~ 8 Rather conjectural. The first two syllables might be roel dan only ove is no vtrama, 
9. ‘Presumably dhaymma is only the first element’of some compound word,. 

10. Extremely doubtful. 1 ‘€onceivably piryam t.. Or the m.might be ap. 

7 12 Possibly the last. of the missing words is dumpok (which would be an unusual but quite possible 
spelling). 

13 This ‘word, though apparently occurring thrice i in this line, remains somewhat doubtful. 

14 In view of dificam, and the possible reading drimpoh, in this line, one is tempted to assume here the 
equivalent of “nine” (L.M. dacit), Unfortunately the E.M. form of this numeral does not appear in any of 
the preceding inscriptions, and the word here is not ‘legible. Tt might conceivably be read cieuc, which 
‘seems an unlikely form, | . 

15 Very doubtful, Possibly, though less probably, xa. 

16 Probably this stands for c-ii7, IT Very doubtful, 

18 The last letter i is not quite certain and therefore doubt also attaches to the stop that is Supposed to 
follow. 

19 In the missing part a few letters are more or less doubtfully decipherable, but as ier do not form 
recognizable words one cannot be guite sure of them, 

% It is doubtful whether there is anything here, even a stop: the space might be accounted for by the 
tail of theo in oj@, above. But possibly some short word like ma should be read. 

al Conceivably one might read ma das, perhaps as ded by a stop. 


G2. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ; [VoL t 


15. [ddanapir goh] (ni)d(an) fi(in)’ ..... [row wo’ « o] «* bly}a[kato 
dhammarajejna 1 [satthu]na teas iyo Sri Tribhuvana- 
dityadhammara}- 

16, [ja ti ndmalko » o » (v)e[lubabbannaja* mata | pits adiccavansajo 1] 
_dvifhi vanse|hi[nibhito 1 dhammaraja]‘........ (won) ® 
19... ses » [pufifio: dinamhi balava]® ...:.....4.. +7 ()® [ananta- 
bhogasarmpujnno 1 [kotthagara anappako] » o uw [tejaJsi.... 

moa ee A ve ewe 

18... .... [yaso | sarfifiamarajadhammesu | appam Jatto Aastha 


Ts os + cat Jursaigahadhammehi pl tavaris CaM wa nO) o> 
JH 


19. ss e's oe (I) [ratanattayamamako tor}. e.... [deva] eee 
[| pajasakkara] . ..... [no 1 sarhpunno raja-iddhihi 1]... ...... 


OO; sex ¥ (0 wo [EMA! Ss ce pete a i oa . . [naradhipo 
o» Arimaddanasanjkh[ate | Pokame nagaruttame!] ........ 


ie Sako ee = 


eo eh REE eS Ae oe LEDS AeA are | a 
. vee te 1 De + be SO Som [i ee" 


MGS octets « (k)[ind](am din)” ...... (blah tirley) Gaivarhpati 
gah ku risi, Bisnt row wo’ 1 ma man kyak Buddha’ byades Raley 


4 


23. (smin thecmnaialle oa: ci cmat] (da tirley sacea) ® [yo 1] alton) " 
[kurn ci dah hues (ea). aid sakala .satwa gumlun] (ar | 
wirbban) Fe a3. y ex : . 


! These two words seem somewhat doubtful, 
2 At this point begins a set of. Pali sloka verses for the reading and interpretation of which (so far 
as it is at all possible) | am very much indebted to Professor Duroiselle, . 
3 Duroiselle reads . be/uvabbannaja, 4 The next two syllables might be maka. 
5 Quite illegibie, but inserted on the analogy of the other verses where it occurs. 
6 The preceding words are so read by Duroiselle; personally I am unable to recognize them, 
7 Somewhere in this obliterated passage Durciselle reads me syllable no, 
8 The stop is doubtful, but seems te be required, 
¥ Here too a stop seems to be required, though none is adiually visible. The first part of the preceding 
obliterated passage looks like fidzassa. ; 
10 Duroiselle explains this as being for razijeti. 
11 Somewhere in the obliterated passage Duroiselle reads so sada, 1 cannot find it in my impressions 
and do not know whether it comes directly after raijati or in the next verse, 
12 End of the Pali verses, 13 Very doubtful. 1) Perhaps we should read sdas, 
15 Very doubtful. . 16 Conjectural, 1 Almost certain, 18 Very doubtful. 


yraphia Birmanica No. VIII. Votume I, Prate XVI. 


A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 


Gs Gan a or: 


SOV 


= = 


Ps Ay - 
ethan mish 


é 


aie * 
f Y ver enatia 
Soi Sia Lee 
i . } ene vite 
% gh Gti 


yoac cages Sei x 
mete pea prr@en eater 

OT a eS 

ence: Pier ete itelh a Phe na ®. 


eat oP ppoctien Ry 


e 7 eo = <," 
.: pu = agi ce iA 
‘ i per Nar 


MN 


ee ee eee 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 163 


24.. (ktir dharmimaraja) ... .’ (pi) [dirdas daij....... [ti]. 
we eee ee ee ee « [kal goh smin In 1 Bissukarmmadewaput | 
Katakarmmanagaraja | * 

25. (tin yuk) [sumbup tey] (Imor)....... .% (1) [kal goh risi Bisnd] 
(rmi)[h niman goh PAN) (haw ce ee ks Re OR ww ed ‘ 


ee (t) [kal] (ma kydk) 0... ee ee eee eee ees 


eee e?##e 8# © © « @¢#e @© © @ @ © # @ # @ * ®@® @ «© © @ © © © » @' @ @ © #& @ 


Mae ee ee is ', (Nothing more is certainly decipherable 
in this line.) 
a8........... (ci) [smin] .... (The rest is quite uncertain.) 
29, 30. (Nothing legible ; it is not clear how many lines there were originally.) 


Translation. 
A 
: . King Sri Teepe yea area made® (and) then (he) built 
the Nizbbanam@labajraparya (?)- (monastery ?)® «=. 2... 24. .:... on the site 


(named) Jayabhiimi, which is to the north-east of the city of Pagan, that is 
styled Arimaddanapir. In that respect (too ?) no other king (I. 3) is like (him). 
Thereafter, the three holy Pitakas,? which had become obscured, (he) proceeded - 
to collect (and) .purify.2 In that respect, too, no other ming | 1S like (him). There- 
after, (for) the holy temple of Sti Bajras,°® (of) three ). ork ee -(?), ® (which had 


1 Gaiety doubtful. Instead of dharmma?® it is possible that we ‘aught to read das; the word left 
blank may perhaps be /oé, the last letter is probably a & in any case. 

2 These names, which are only partly legible here, can be safely restored by: the help of the preceding 
inscriptions. 

3 Possibly we should restore Sate or yak followed by some short word. The appearance of the text 
rather favours the latter supposition; but it is not clear to me that this request to Bisnii was made in the 
presence of Buddha, to whom the word kydk would be most applicable, though it might. possibly be taken in 
a more general sense. 

_ 4 In this long obliterated passage only a few letters are doubtfully legible, making no recognizable 
words and therefore quite uncertain. The same remark applies to Il. 26-8. 

5 Or “ K.S.T. did ” (whatever was mentioned in the preceding, missing, portion of the text) “ (and) 
thereupon built,” etc. 

© Or temple ”*? See the text and note thereon. 7 The Buddhist Canon. 

8 That is, he caused to be made a revised edition, in view of omissions and corruptions that had 
occurred in the text, or of portions having become so scarce as not to be generally available. Probably the 
former is meant : cf. WIC 15. 

9 The Vajrasana, built on the traditional site where Buddha ee enlightenment, at Bodh Gaya, 

10 The reading is doubtful here: see the text, 


164 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


been) destroyed by other kings ............ (?),) King Sri Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja got (together) jewels of divers kinds (and) sent (them in) a ship 
with intent to build up the holy (temple) of Sri Bajras, to buy (land?) (1. 6)... 


, (to dig a tank ?),? to irrigate (?)° arable land, to make dams,’ in order to burn 
6 


tapers that should never be allowed to go out, to present drums, ........, 
xylophones,® singing (and) dancing, finer (than before ?).” In that respect, too, 
no other king is like (him). Thereafter, the great buildings which King Dharm- 
masok ® built, which (were) old (and) in ruins, King Sti Tribhuw 4nadityadham- 
maraja proceeded to build anew, (making them) finer than before. In that 
respect, too, no other king is like (him). 

Thereafter, all the lords of the Church who dwelt in (the city (1.9) of 
-Arimaddanapir ?)® King Sri oe HbEH Nanadity chamnays presented with” the 
four necessaries " on every occasion.” In that respect, too, no other king is like 
(him). | Thereafter, (many persons... . ?)® from all the princes “ came into 
his presence to attend (him). At that time King Sri Tribhuwan adityadhammaraja 
heard that a Coli prince had arrived (at Pagan ?).” Thereupon the king 
bethought him that apart from the Three Gems there is no other single thing that 
could give great happiness in (this) world {or in the worlds beyond (1. 12), or 
confer ?)'® Nirvana upon all beings: the Three Gems alone can give it. 


1 The reading is doubtful. . 2 "sGonjectaral: 

3 Doubtful ; perhaps, though improbably, “to make.” , 

4ore aimbanliments!? surrounding the several fields, as in the cultivation of rice on irrigated land. 
The evident intent was to create a pertnanent endowment of landed property from the rents or profits of 
which certain of the temple expenses should be defrayed. 

5 The sense of £lo’ is undetermired,* It may be the specific name of some particular type of drum, or 
of some other kind of musical instrument 

© Or “dulcimers”: see Haswell, s.v, fwia teuié, But possibly the term may have been used 
forinerly. for any musical instrument of percussion of a more or less analogous nature. 

* Conjectural, but probable. 

8 Probably the reference isto the great Asoka and the Bodh Gaya temple. But it is arguable that 

‘blah gohk indicates a transition to another subject matter and that the reference is to the legendary King 
Dhammiasoka of Thatén (cf. Sudhammavatirdjavamssa, pp. 13, 48, 110, segq.). 9 Conjectural. 

10 Meaning conjectural, inferred from the context, 

11 Shelter, robes, food, and medicine, the four requisites for a Buddhist monk. 

12 Meaning conjectural. 

“13 Conjectural : there is a lacuna here. Perhaps the reference is to diplomatic inissions only, but it may 

include the coming of private adventurers attracted by the splendour of the king’s court, 

14 Either foreign or vassal princes, or both, 415 Or “to follow in his teain’”’: cf. 1 Cg, tr 

18 Or “the” There is nothing to determine the identity of this prmce, and nothing but the resem- 
blance of his designation to connect him with the great contemporary Dravidian dynasty, of which he may 
have been a member and which at a sligbtly earlier period appears to have extended its warlike expedi- 
tions to the Further East, as recorded in the great Tanjore inscription, 

17 Conjectural, but probable, restoration, 

18 Conjectural restoration. 


PART I] ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS 168 


Then the king wrote of the grace of the Buddharatna, Dharmmaratna, (and) 
-Sangharatna’ (upon a leaf of gold with vermilion ink ?),? the king sent it to the Colf 
prince. The Coli prince, with all his array, hearing of the grace of Buddha, the 
Law, (and) the Church, from King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja’s sending 
(word of it to him), he cast off his adhesion to false doctrine, (and) he adhered 
straightway. to the true dectne; he saw...... ,® he was pleased (and) happy. 
Sak tees (1.15) .. “ (of pearls ?), an awning® of pearls, 
a ialvarles tree ° badomied with the seven (kinds of) jewels,’ together with a virgin 
daughter of his who was perfect in form and with ornaments of divers kinds, who. 
was shaded by a white umbrella, a peacock ® umbrella, a peacock*®..... ae 
set with the seven (kinds of) jewels, (he) came to offer to King Sri Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja. That, too, other kings (1.17) have not got the like of. — 

| Then (?) (there). made offerings all the people of the city, of the country, 
(and) of the jungle, according to their several means also. (Some) there weré. 
that offered golden umbrellas, (silver umbrellas ?), golden. awnings (?), golden 
dinddy™ with golden tracery (?), golden fans, golden mats(?), golden sandals, . 
golden greaves, golden. ...... . ,@ golden paddles (?), golden ‘statues of lions, 
kalpavrhsa trees, 2.255. . (lL. 3) (for the ?) palace, statues of elephants, statues - 
of men, statues of gods, statues of demons, of divers kinds, which they made of gold, 
which they adorned with the seven ae of) jewels, in great quantities which 
(they brought ?) (and) offered ; . 2? altar candles, golden flowers, by the 
hundred, by the thousand, _ by the” two thousand, (at) every time, every month, 


without ceasing ...:.;’. . . . umbrellas of flowers, umbrellas of cloth (2), .. . 


1 Thati is, the excellence of the three: members of the Buddhist Triad, and the benefits té be derived. 
from.them. : 

2 Conjectural and extremely doubtful, though royal letters were sometimes written thus. The modern’ _ 

word for “ vermilion ” is 7@%z au, and conceivably there may be some connexion between the last syllable of 


this and the uncertain word in the text. 3 Reading and meaning undetermined, — 
4 This missing part probably contained a statement that the prince came to the king: bringing the 
gifts enumerated in what follows. 5 Somewhat doubtful interpretation, 


6 The earthly image or counterpart of a miraculous | heavenly tree, bearing all manner. of desirable ; 
‘gifts, like our Christmas trees. 

7 There are two distinct categories of seven precious things. Presumably the one here. referred to is 
the list comprising gold, silver, lapis lazuli, crystal, ruby, amber (or coral, diamond, or emerald), and 
agate (?). (The interpretations of the Indian names seem to differ in different authorities.) . 

- 8 Probable, but not quite certain, interpretation. 
9 The meaning of rinrun (or dinrun) is undetermined, _ 
‘10 The sense of «/ is undetermined, it may be an adverb. 11 Meaning undetermined. 
‘12 The meaning of sindz is undetermined, nor is the reading quite certain, and the interpretation. of the 
words to which queries have been appended is also somewhat in doubt. 
13 The meaning of wl is undetermined. 14 The sense of maz is undetermined. 
15 The sense of wu? is undetermined. 
22 


166 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 1 


(1. 21) (ten-fold, even unto?) fifty-fold, an hundred-fold, an hundred-and-eleven- 
fold, in great quantities... .. 1 offered by them. At that time all the full-grown 
elephants pickedup ...... HOWGYS «i + w 5 (and) came (and) offered (them ?) 
to the king. The horses danced. In the semblance of all (manner of) creatures, 
of all (sorts of) demons and gods, all-the people (made a ceremonial dance?)*... . 
(1.23) . 2... . they (entered?) dancing (and) singing, to do obeisance to® the 
king . .,. . .*. in the fashion of singing (and) dancing of every city, every country 
district, every village, (and) of all the jungle folk, they (would enter ?) (and) come 
dancing (and) singing, to do obeisance* to the king every time. When the king 
instructed -all the.people (by ?) declaring the Law, the applause of all (I. 25) the 


people (who offered?)...... _. . candles, flowers, parched rice, (was) like a great 
(shower of) rain that falls without ceasing re Paes ® Those who offered (golden 
and silver ?) ornaments (in great quantities. . Sam a Ely sang (and) danced, released 


living creatures, by tens, scores, hundreds, thousands, which they presented as 
pious gifts (?) to the king in great quantities. Whether men, or (other) creatures 
{Il 27) (that they offered... .. . .?), the king poured out water (and) gave the 
living offerings every time, in great quantities, pa a thousand, exceeding two. 
thousand, not to be (numbered ?) . bas . like the pious gifts that the king 
made, either in consecrating Boildha-statries# or in building pagodas, or building 
monasteries, or digging tanks, or planting groves,........ BQ) ons nace a’s (he 
did these things ?) only in order that all beings might escape out of Samsara ®..... » 
that every city, every country district, every village, all the jungle folk....... 
hereafter might feed mother (and) father, do meritorious deeds, give pious gifts, 
keep the (ethical) commandments, (and) be not (neglectful ?)....... : 


B 


(that hereafter?) all (mankind?) might obtain happiness: in this world (and) 
in the worlds beyond (until: they arrived ...... in Nirvana ?), that those 


1 The sense of wel is undetermined. 

2 The doubtful: word looks like do“, which in LM. denotes the kind of mediums who are the chief 
assistants in the kalok dance ( Halliday, The Talaings, p. 100). But the reading and interpretation are very 
doubtful, though plainly some sort of ceremonial dance is referred to. 

3 Or “to make offerings to,” as before. 4 The sense of wl is undetermined. 

5 Or “to make offerings.” 6 The sense of dz is undetermined, 

7 The reading is doubtful here, and the sense of wel undetermined, 

8 The word kyak is very vague, but this interpretation seems appropriate here, 

9 The continual round of existence, by birth and rebirth. 

10 The sense of ul is undetermined. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 167 


hereafter at all times should (obtain i, a) a ee Because (of) the power 
of loving kindness... ..... (3). ... . « . all (birds ?) on the high roads, in 
the lanes, at the royal residence,! (did)? ‘not flee,...... (cages ?), they 
came (and) alighted on the roof (of . .?), the — stroked (them) with 
HIS) BARES ivi Sy on be BPs &, 0 2 oe the ng PAVE woe es -, (the name of ?) Birds 
of Dharma....* when all the people entered presenting (waterlily ?) flowers 
sbce mma wee (hearing?) the sound of drums ais went?) ...-.... (from) a 
distance of one fos, two kos,* (one?)....,(two?)...., (they went running ?) 
errr se ee (1. 7) Then (they _ were ?) in the presence of the king, when the 
king had poured out water cep) golden vessels, they went (and)..... with (their 
golden?) Howerss:< «i's 00.0% keuwe eds COME hue k s every day the king issued 
an order to the whole host Pues Senate , animals’... «..-.. (9) (happy ?) 
Rec git kr ae . the king gave orders to give bailed rice every shits 
sailed TIAEUEE og Hes chad wk 4.26 OES Ge es Eee * waterlily flowers . aie 
all (sorts of) lotus, they flowered (?) out of time (?). From above, flowers........ 
MT fies 5k ax v's de oa eee ae (SOVEUD) «5 6 og GUE a face sy as PT te 
they flowered (?). All (trees and bamboos ?) . flowered (2) ons so ciaa ou 
ee Te ee (had ?) fragrance, fruits of t trees had a pleasing (?) sap (and) 
SAVOUE. (wx nae be 4 oho sees sas 6 NORM secon: ahha ete Wwe i ah eee Sa sere the 
sap (and) savour of the great earth ® arose at the time of the coming (to be ?) of 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, foretold by the Lord Buddha. No other 
king is like eines: . ... inthe city of Pagan, styled (].15) Arimaddanapir.... . i 
.in this wise :— ) | 

It was foretold by the King of the Law, the Teacher, that the noble King 
named Sri Tribhuvanadityadhammaraja, 

- His mother (being) born of the Vilva line, his father of the Solar race, 
issued from (these) two races, 

CA SBAE YS 5c xcs ws ;a king of the Law,.-...<... (L 17) rer ‘gioes 
in alms-giving, powerful,...... possessed of immense wealth (and) 
of storehouses not a few. ; 

1 Either the palace or the capital generalty. 

2 The whole of this passage, and most of Face B, can only be partially read. Apparently the reference 
is to kindness towards animals, especially birds. 

3 The sense of u/ is undetermined. 4 A measureof length 

5 Probably this passage of which the beginning is untertunately illegible refers to the exceptional 
natural phenomena that heralded the accession (or perhaps the birth) of the king. That much seems clear 
from I. 13, but as so much of it is illegible it is not certain where the new paragraph should really be made 


to begin. 6 That is, the earth, The vse of the epithet is a Mén idiom. 
7 The following paragraph is in Pali verse. 


DS 4AR5 


6&3 E65 
Von. 4 168 —e EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 
PL. 2, | In majesty snaidey Cease weeeaee glorious, in selictescaint (and) kingly 


| duties diligent (and) discerning, 
By (the practice of) the four laws (of popularity), he shall (always ?) 


rejoice the people 2... 1.2: ewes naevewes Ale 19) pigteis Pe tia 
devotedly attached to the Three Gens: . 

Gawd . the gods ............ sacrifices ......... full of royal 

might 5.8) Satie, Hie ane onsle areaers .. oe. the king, 

In the excellent city of Pavan, styled Arimaddana, ieee antes as 

ne ene (0 2» eee ee ee a arg e iecs: ae eee hee 

ee eee ee re Te . his - own. virtue .... COR ee HAS ORC 4 8 OS Hee 

= 1 
. (built the cig ?). "(The Lord. ?) Gawampati spake to the sage 


Bisna i in this wise :— “ What by the. Lord Buddha was foretold, that my lord 
(should become ?) (I. 23) (a king ‘of the Law ?), is true, my lord, (indeed ?). 
(Hereafter ?) in order that- my lord (may. act ?).(for) the benefit of all (manner, of) 
beings (on their way to Nirvina?) ........ (my lord must become a king of 
the Law . ... . in three ?) (stages of) existence.”*........4. 6 bafta Maui maa ote 
Then King ‘int Bissukarmmadewaput, (and) Reckaramanzahs (I. 25) lifted 


up their joined hands (and made. obeisance to ?).. ..! Then the sage Bisna, 


hearing: thats mVvitation; @aida0 oir xe a eeu aes ware wanes When the Lord 
Suu ee ee er re oe ee a 
| eee Siu wake oedine ees kine eats 


1 End of the Pali verses. 
- % So much of the text is iNtegible that the precise interpretation is very doubtful, Perhaps we should 
_ interpret that in his third earthly existence the sage is to be a reigning monarch. It is of course impossible 
to say precisely where Gawarhpati’s speech ends, 
3.Indra, For the other names, see §§ 26, 27, 51. . 
4 [tis not clear to whom they made obeisance ; one would assume it wasto the sage, but see tie note on 
the text. 
6 That is, the request made to him that. he should undertake the duties of royalty, and ultimately of 


Buddhahood, 


RESEARCH COLLECTIONS 
East-Wes} Center 


Honolulu, Hawaii 


Volume Part I | 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


BEING 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
_ OF BURMA _ | 


EDITED BY 


CHAS. DUROISELLE 


SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA CIRCLE 


THE TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


By CHAS. DUROISELLE 


t 


RANGOON — 
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 
1961 | 


Price K 4.60 


~ LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE-SALE OF THE GOVERNMENT OF 


bawt 


THE UNION OF BURMA PUBLICATIONS 


IN BURMA 


_ City Boox Cius, 98, Phayre Street, Rangoon 
. New Licut oF Burma Press, 58. Komin Kochin Road, Rangoon. 


. PROPRIETOR, THU-DiiAMA-WaDI PRESS, 55-56, Tsee Kai. Maung” 


Khine Street, Rangoon. 


. PROPRIEFOR, .BURMA News AGENCY, 1335, Anawrahta ‘Street, 


Rangoon. 


. MANAGER, BuRMA Book Co., 62, Barr Street, Rangoon. 
- Burma Ebucationat Book Suop, 551-3, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
. ManaGer, UNION PUBLISHING House, 93, Be" " - Block, Bogyoke 


Market, Rangoon. 


. SECRETARY PEOPLE’S LITERATURE COMMITTEE AND House, 546, 


Merchant Street, Rangoon. 


. Tat BURMA TRANSLATION SocieTy, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
. Messrs. K. Bin Hoon & Sons, Nyaunglebin, Pegu District. 
. U Lu GaLz, GOVERNMENT Law Book AGENT, 34th Road, Nyaung- 


zindan Quarter, Mandalay. 


..U Kyaw Zan, THE NATIONAL Book DEP6T AND STATIONERY SuepLy 


aed — GOSOme: Zegyo, Mandalay. 


‘ln INDIA 


. MESSRS. Fisanmeiess Lrp., Post Box No. 3H, Madras (India). 
. Messrs. THACKER. Spink & Co. (1933), Ltp., P.O. Box No. 54, 


3. Esplanade East, Calcutta (West Bengal). 


PREFACE 


THE Ananda temple at Pagan, the erection of which was completed in 
1090,’ is not only probably the most graceful structure of its kind in Burma, 
but for the profusion and, from the artistic and philological standpoint, the 
importance of its ornamentation, the most important monument in this Province, 
In the interior, besides very numerous statues of the Buddha in several 
attitudes, there is represented, in a long series of stone sculptures, the life of 
the Master from his decision in the Tusita heaven to be reborn in the bosom 
of Queen Maya to his parinirvana.® On the exterior, the walls and terraces 
are practically covered with glazed plaques. On one half of the basement 
these plaques represent the assault of Mara with his legions of dreadful 
Warriors onthe Blessed One seated under the Bodhi tree, and their ignominious 
defeat the other half representing the apotheosis of the Buddha after his 
victory in a long procession of the hosts of the gods, All these contain a 
short legend in old Talaing. But these scenes are not peculiar to the 
Ananda ; four hundred years later, they similarly, in magnificent glazed plaques, 
adorned the walls of the Shwegugyi and Ajapala pagodas at Pegu®; perhaps 
the inspiration was derived from the Ananda: The anterior existences of the 
Buddha, that is, the: 547 jétazas, adorn the first and second roofs and the 
three terraces above. These representations of the jatakas, one story to one 
plaque, are’ also not peculiar to the Ananda, for they are found on several 
‘other payodas and temples at: Pagan as well as on some other monuments 1m 
Burma.‘ The great feature, however, in this temple is, that the last ten 
longer stories of the collection, from Migapakkha Jataka to Vessantara Jataka 
(Nos, 538-547), are illustrated each in a series of plaques, the total number 
aggregating to 389; these plaques occupy part of the second roof and the 
three receding terraces above it. This feature is, I think, unique, for, so far 
as I have been able to ascertain, on no other monument in the Buddhis: 


1 See Duroiselle’s “Stone Sculptures in the Ananda Temple at Pagan” in Archasologica; 
Survey of I, tia, Annual Report for 1913-14, pp. 64-65. 

2 These sculptures are reproduced and described in the paper mentioned in above footnote. 

8 See my Annu! Report for 1914, pp. t2-14 and Plate V. 

$ Duroiselle’s “ Pictorial Representations of Tatakasin Burma,” in A.S.J, for 1912-13, pp. 89 #7: 


( iv ) 


world are these ten stories illustrated in so large a number of separate scenes ; 
at the bottom of each plaque is a short legend in Talaing briefly indicative of 
the episode above it. It is those legends which are deciphered and explained 
in the present work, | 

Whenever the glaze or the plaque itself is not spoiled, the decipherment 
of these inscriptions’ does not generally present any unusual difficulty ; unfor- 
tunately, a pretty large number of plaques have been badly disfigured, thus 
rendering sometimes the identification of the figures, sometimes the reading of 
the legend and often both, difficult. The plaques around the two uppermost 
terraces have particularly suffered. This disfigurement is due to the frequent 
use of whitewash and the method of its application; it is taken in buckets to 
the top of the temple, and the buckets are tilted over; the liquid, flowing 
dow:. on every side, penetrates the shallow recesses in which the plaques are 
fitted and flows over the latter, filling in details which were formerly perfectly 
distinct ; the glaze often cracks and flakes off under the action of the lime, 
thus obiiterating letters or part-of them. Where this has not happened, the 
layers of whitewash make the deciphering of a number of legends 2 task of 
no little difficulty sometimes. Several means have been resorted to--on the 
advice of experts in Burma and India—in order to clean and restore these 
plaques; but noné was really successful, for most often, notwithstanding the 
care taken, the glaze came off with the lime. To ask the trustees to desist 
from whitewashing the building would be useless, for, in the eyes of the people, 
the beau ideal of their monuments consists in their spotless whiteness. Steps 
have been taken, however, to induce them to use a less primitive and harmful 
method, so as to saye these beautiful specimens of a now practically forgotten 
art, The harm already done is but too apparent in the plates which form the 
second part of this work; a comparison between some of the old photographs 
(now unfortunately unfit for reproduction, and the negatives of which have 
now also spoiled) and some of the new ones, evidences clearly how much 
these plaques have deteriorated in the course of a few years. 

The total number of the jataka stories illustrated amounts to 547; the 
same number as in the Pali recension preserved in Ceylon and known to all 
countries professing. Southern Buddhism; this shows it was this reve sion 
which was followed for the plaques on the Ananda.’ The order of the 

1 The actual aumber in the Singhalese, Talaing, Burmese and other editions is 547 ; but the 


traditional number is gso. The terracotta plaques at the Petleik pagoda, Pagan, illustrate 550 
steriee, The letterpress on these plaques is being written, 


Cv 


shorter stories up to No. 537 included strictly follows that Pali Jataka as 
edited by Fausboll (Vols, I~V), although the names here and there may 
slightly differ. But the traditional order of the Mah4nipata or the collection 
of the last ten long stories (Vol. VI of Fausboll) is not quite the same, as 
shown below :— 


Order on the Ananda, Traditional order. 
1. Migapakkha. 1, Lbid, 

2, Mahajanaka. “2. Ibid. 

3. Sama, 3. lbid. 

4. Nimi, 4. Lbid. 

5. Maha-Ummagga. 5. Khandahila, 

6. Khandahila. 6. Bhiridatta. 

7. Bhiridatta, 7. Mahanaradakassapa, 
8. Mahanaradakassapa. 8. Vidura, 

g. Vidhura.__ g. Maha-Ummagga. 
10, Vessantara. 10. /bid, 


It is not clear why the traditional order of these ten jatakas has not been 
followed ; this is certainly not due to a difference of school, as might perhaps 
at first be thought, because: all the Talaing and Burmese editions have 
always followed the traditional order of the Singhalese collection. I think 
it is to be attributed merely to a lack of strict supervision on the part 
of the Talaing monks in charge of this portion of the work; the more 
so as the plaques of the. stories are serially numbered in proper sequence; 
and the order on the Ananda does not, either, follow the traditional order 
of the Ten. Pdramita, or the Ten Perfections illustrated by these jatakas, 
There are other evidences of a certain Jack of attention which are in each 
case noticed in the body of the work. For instance, a good number of 
plaques, though rightly numbered, have been put in the wrong place, thus 
spoiling the regular order of the episodes in a story; I have placed most 
of these in their proper sequence; others, again, are wrongly numbered 
though in their right place, and not a few bear the same number. In the 
legends themselves a few mistakes, due also to inattention, are found, as, 
for instance,-the dropping of a final consonant. . 

The jataka stories embodying, as they do, their moral and ethical 
teachings in the form of charming tales and fables, were one of the most 


(wi) 
potent means for pressing the claims of Buddhism among the peoples ot Indo- 
China; they have left a deep impression wherever the religion has become 
established. This is true of all the jatakas, but especially of the last ten long 
ones; and the most prized and read among these ten are: Sima, Mahajanaka, 
Mahosadha (Maha-Ummagga) and Vessantara; they have been translated in 
prose and verse, and turned into theatrical plays in the case of Vessantara. 
This predilection explains the great prominence given to these ten stories in 
the plaques of the Ananda, for, while the lesser jatakas have only one 
plaque to each, these ten are illustrated by 389. In Burma, they form the 
subject of a voluminous literature, both in Talaing and in Burmese. | 

In Talaing, the jataka literature may be classed under four principal 
heads :— | 

1. Translations in verse, 805 (lik). 

2. Missaya, or word for word translation; there are two kinds of 
these, called $5 (nam) and ($3 (traai), according as the 
explanation of the text is longer or shorter. : 

3. Abridgements in prose of the texts (skern); theré are two 
recensions of these; in the one, there are embodied copious 
extracts from the text, translated and explained n7ssaya fashion ; 
the other is in pure Talaing. 

4. Complete translations in prose without ‘any abridgement (slapat). 


Thousands of copies of the Ten Great Jatakas (Mahanipata) under the 
above four divisions, are preserved in the monasteries of Lower Burma, ard 
are a testimony to the great popularity of these tales. When, over a decade 
ago, a list of Talaing works in monasteries was compiled on behalf of the 
Educational Syndicate of Burma, 927 copies of the Ten Great Jatakas were 
found in about thirty monasteries round about Moulmein; classified according 
to the four divisions given above it is found that: 65 copies are in. verse 
0805); 46 are mzissayas; 247, abridgements (skem), and 569 copies are 
unabridged translations. Lists taken in other monasteries will probably yield 
some similar result. These jatakas alone offer a splendid material for the 
compilation of a Talaing dictionary ; and when to them is added the trans- 
lation of numerous Pali works, such as the Vinaya, the Dhammapada 
Commentary, etc., etc,, it will be seen what a rich mine there is for workers 
in this comparatively new field of philology to draw from.’ 


1 The author has collected several thousands of new words from these Jatakas and a few other works, 


( vii ) 

In deciphering the legends on these plaques | had at my disposal an 
almost complete set of estampages taken many years ago;. these have been 
generally very useful, though a good percentage of them were very difficult to 
read, either owing to the bad state of the plaques themselves. or to—in not a 
few cases—the indifferent way in which they had been taken; besides, I -had 
a set of photographs, such as they may be seen in the album of plates. I 
had also the advantage, from time to time, of being on the spot and examining 
the plaques themselves in doubtful cases. Notwithstanding all this, a. few 
legends have presented difficulty in deciphering, as might well be expected, but 
I hope they have been deciphered correctly. The translation presented but 
few difficulties, for, besides the scenes on the plaques which, in many 
cases, speak for themselves, I had naturally the Pali text to fall back 
upon, as well as translations in modern Talaing and also those in Burmese of 
these jatakas, which all helped me in fixing the meaning of old words long 
fallen into disuse or whose- phonetic changes had made practically unrecog- 
nizable, However, several words still remain a crux, as will be seen in 
Appendix B, = 7 

It was my intention to include in Appendix C-1, only such words and 
forms as are not to be found in Haswell’s Vocabulary ; but on further consi- 
deration, on the advice of several friends, I have also included in it words 
which are in Haswell’s, so as to make this Appendix, so far as it goes, 
complete in itself. In transcribing into modern Talaing characters a few old 
words, sometimes:a superscript letter has been placed. before the one below it, 
owing to difficulties in casting the types. 

I beg to acknowledge here, with thankfulness, my indebtedness to Mr. 
C. O. Blagden, whose ripe scholarship and ever-ready help have always been 
placed at my disposal; and also to Mr. R. Halliday, whose thorough — 
knowledge of literary Talaing has been very helpful. My best thanks are also 
due to Mr. R, W. Bishop, Superintendent, and Mr. R. Baillie, Deputy 
Superintendent, Government Printing, Burma, for the interest they took in this 
work and for the beautiful get-up of the volume. 


‘CHAS. DUROISELLE, 
Superintendent, Archasological Survey, Burma, 


MRoBAuNG, soth December 1920, 


CONTENTS 


PAGES 
ABBREVIATIONS ‘si 33 ie is sae il 
REMARK a ee de ibe si 98 ies xill 
CORRECTIONS. .., ee ves 53 ie ee XV 
1. Mégapakkha re Jataka, Nos.  1— 37 a I— 12 
2 Mahajanaka - *s ‘4 38— 82 si 12— 28 
3. Sdma “ae roe 9 83—101 29— 34 
4 Nim +3 192-—114 35—- 38 
5 Maha- ees . ¥35—-209 38— 76 
6. Khandahala ‘< 210—~218 78— 79 
7, Bhiridatta rr 219—230 80— 88 
8. Mah&naradakassapa «, js 240-241 88— 89 
g. Vidhura she i 34 2—265 89— .99 
to, Vessantara i 266—389 | TOO——141 
APPENDIX A.—List of the words in the Legends bis ae 143-155 
APPENDIX B,—Additional remarks on a few words... .  - 184-152 
APPENDIX C-1.—List of the modern Talaing words found in the 
explanations of the Legends... cd sac ws : 1632038 


APPENDIX C-2,—List of words under which grammatical explana- 
tions not in Haswell are given in Appendix C-1 1 209-210 


A.V. 


B. . 


B.E.F.E.O. 


Dhe. 


Dhd. Atth. 


| Dh. Dip., Dhm. 


Gpi. 


gee 


oes. 


090 


66e | 


Dip. «.. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


vee Akkharavidhana ee neeeiatie printed at Patlak, 


Siam. 


ee Burmese. 


. Bulletin de ?’Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient. 


... Dhammaceti Mahapitakadhara ; printed at Patiak, Siam. 


.. Dhammapada_ Afthakatha ; Pali Texts and sae 
editions. 
- Prakuih Dhammadipani : Rangoon, 
«. Slapat Gaceth pi rof au ; manuscript. 
The Jataka, edited by Fausboll, Vok. VI. 
ae . Navakovada-vinayakatha ; ; printed at Paklat. 
.. Modern Talaing. 
. Lik Bodhisat' Cah; printed at Patlak. 
.. O. Stevens’ English- Talaing Dictionary ; Rangoon, 
— 1896. | on | 
. Old Talaing. 
Pali. . 
ses! ‘Pali-Talaing Dictionary ; masiuscript. 
.« Skera Jat, Bhitidat = Bhiridattajataka ; manuscript. 
ww. Skem Jat Candakumma = = Khandahalajataka ; manu- 
script. 
Skem Jat Mahajanak = = - Mahajanakajataka ; Manuscripts 


ee, Sanskrit. 


—Sketh Jat Mahosadha = = Mahi-Ummaggajtaka manu. 
script. 
' Skem Jat Smia Naaimi = Nimijataka ;. manuscript, 


| - Skemh Jat Bruim Nardda = mee ane ears 


manuscript 


we Sketh. Jat Suvannasarh — Samajataka ; inanuseript 


Skerh Jat Temi = Migapakkhajataka ; manuscript. 
... Sudhammavati Gavampati Rajadhiraj; Paklat. 

Skemh Jat Vesantaw = Vessantarajataka ; manuscript. 
A Skerh Jat Vidhira = Vidhurapanditajataka ; manuscript, 
.. Uposakoyadakatha ; printed at Paklat. 


REMAR< 


The number on the left of each legend is the serial number of the plaque 
for easy cross-reference; that on the right is the number on the plaque itself, 
The numbers in smaller types after the translation of each legend refer by 
page and line to Volume VI of Fausboll’s edition of the Jataka. 


CORRECTIONS 


For 


(his disciples) ” 
oo, Patt Ip, 4 
we 


+f OS 


Part A; p. 22 
. Punnaka 
ono 


ae: dandas 


Bar 
Skt. s 


: pureh 


coe COQ 

Bene: makes 4 

89> +e Golooleo. 
Bi ww: form 
99 one 098 


oa Qs 


Read 


. {his)-disciples 


Part I, p. 56 


“Win 


fo ke) 
Part II, p. 94 - 
Punnata ey 


Me 
via dandas : 


Bar 


wae: Skt. s 
; QOH. 
.. pureb 
2° caged 


+. makes a 
aa. gSolf a 
vee GOla0}eo 
wee - from 
on 8 
veo OQ 


mg 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 
1.—MOGAPAKKHA-JATAKA 


‘HIS jataka has always: been. known in: Burma under the shorter and 
popular name of Zemt-sat (= Temiya-jataka), after the name of the hero 
inthe story. The. first plaque in. the series of 37 illustrating it is the _ 538th 
on the Ananda temple, corresponding with the number given to this story in 
Fausboll’s edition of the_ ‘“ Jataka” (Vol, VI), thus showing that inthe 
pictorial representations of these old stories the artists of the Ananda followed 
strictly the Singhalese recension as. polenta and Srraneee by the Buddha- 
ghosa school. : 

Prince Temiya, actuated. bj the fea af hell and on the advice . a 
goddess, pretends to be dumb and a cripple; during sixteen years, many 
devices are resorted to to try and ascertain whether he is really so, but all 
fail. At last, his father orders him to. be buried; he then moves and talks 
for the first time and discourses on religious topics to the astounded charioteer. 
He leaves the world, becomes an ascetic, and is followed by his father. 


1, @§ $o$ seo8—990. 
In niman. Temi—538 
Indra invites. Temiya (to be reborn as a-man)—z2. 9 


~The king of Benareshad no children. At the instigation of his. people 
who did not wish to see his line extinguished, he prays for a son. ' Candadevi, 
the chief queen, a'lady of eminent piety, prays ardently for the boon of a male 
child. . Indra’s seat in the Tavatirnsa heaven becomes hot, and on ascertain- 
ing the cause, at once casts about for a suitable son'for her. The Bodhisatta, 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot. 1 


or future Buddha, after a reign of twenty years in Benares, had béen. reborr. 
in hell. and ‘from thence in the ‘Tavatirnsa heaven; Indra goes te. him and 
invites him to be reborn as 2 mani in the bosom of Candadevi, He accepts. ; 
. Niman,: from the Pali nimantett, is still currently used in modern - 
literature; of, soch, ba maw, Dhe.i-1443 3; for a similar change of » tod 
cf. 8S, Imit= $85, nimit (P. nimitta), to create; co§, lara? =.. 
3888, narui: (and scops8, naro’), Sudh. 22, 8, .S.B. &. 20, to cry, cry” 
out; = lamit bdah,: Sndh. 13. 5 = $Bobx08, nimit bdah, te 
create, make; “4938 "Tmow, U:O.R. rs. 10 = soo08, namow, AV. 
129, to incline to, towards or ‘downwards. — 


a emd-—906. 
“Patisan, Temi—s3¢ 
Conception, a. Temiya—s rAd 


‘Patisan, from P. pafisandhi. 


‘This plaque. ‘is: ‘missing,’ but from: the sequence it no doubt repre- 
e: ‘the birth of Temiya, and the legend was either “ parisut' ‘Temi (of. 
No. &4). or “Temi, tit ner gar"! (of No. 39). 


ue of oeesss eob—9g oo 
Pe hime’ Temi—gaz 
| (His: father). gives (eb the name of Temiya—3. 


Pa'= the Méd. ©, pz, te do, make; in Old Mén of the. a inscrip- 
tions:and in these Reale: plaques, a final 9? (’) is. often superadded to somc. 
words, which are found sometimes with.and. sometimes - without it; the follow- 
ing are a few emarepiee himo’, him. L (modern) ; © #14, sii’; sacchu, 
sacchu’; tuno’, Inu: (modern) ; mi, m0’;. tirla, tirla’; gili, ‘gfir 
gufii, gufi?; kinta, kinta’;’ambo, ambo’; ne siru nican 
The same expression i¢ found on two other plaques : himo’ Mahos. 
(Nc. r19) and pa imo’ Wesantar. (No. | 768). ee hk is similarly 
often superadded, which will be noticed in its proper place. Himo’, a 
name, is equivalent to the ‘modern &y, himu} other old-forms are imo’ 
and yimo’, with which compare the modern @j,_ y mu, 03122, ymu ymé 


parti] TALAING PEAQUES ON THE ANANDA 5 


Se ee oe Qgd— 5) 
a Zal aaa: ‘kumlac—342 
When:they..bring the: thieyes-—3. °22 


As Temiya was one month old, and the king his father was holding him 
on his. lap, four robbers were. brought. in, ‘vhom the king condemned to | 
atrocious punishment. | Temiya calls back-.to mind his suffering } in hell, and 
perceiving, from his past experience and the’ verdict. of his father, that kingship 
ig inseparable from cruel deeds“ leading ‘to hell; he becomes alarmed and 
bitterly regrets his having: been: born on the steps ‘of’ a ‘throne. 


Kal, when,. while, from. P.. dla, RA, to. convey, bring, carry, is a 
variant of raa, which forms. ‘the second part of. 4&9, pkaa raa, which 
generally translates, in ‘missayas, the. Pali athéreti. [t is also sometimes found _ 
written, in modern literature, a9, refaj-as at S.B. 17. 9, and in 2809/6, - 
sea tlua, “to convey and: come,” t.e, to ting Dh.. Dip,. 23. 19, though 
the proper form, 4&9)6, raa tlua. (= Q.T.), is much: more frequent; ofde 
A:V. 31, where it translates. ‘the’ P. dutta and Sbhcia; A.V. 121 = dhéranz; 
Dh, Dip. 299. 2 = Dh. Atth. 492, dharati, acne thief; M.T. caged, 
kamlat, ‘from 0308, klat, to. steal. | , 


. 6, 3300095 6005. ex8—y $9 
Dewataw wet Temi-~5 43 
‘The goddess. instructs Temiya—4. 1 


On the morrow,. while. hie was “ying. under a white. ambrella and thinking . 
gloomily over the previous day’s ‘occurrence, the goddess residing in the 
umbrella. appears to him and shows him: the way to escape hell: she instructs 
him to pretend to be deaf, dumb,‘ and a cripple ; he would thus avoid 
becoming king and thereby escape - the possibility, through harsh senténces | 
passed on lawless persons, of returning to’ hell. He agrees” to do so,’ The 
parents, for sixteen years, subject him to many tests in order to ascertain 
whether he was really born: 0. This: explains" the following plaques. 

Dewataw = = P, devata. Wet, ‘to instruct ; the plaque i is a little spoiled 
in the middle - of the inscription, sO ‘that it is not clear whether the verb 


4 _. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vow 1 


should be read ret, det or wet; the final # is however quite clear and 
the middle. consonant looks likey; but the formation of the letter’ is 
defective, and on the whole looks more’ like a misformed O (w),: which 
.has been spoiled by whitewash. Wet is found under the form wec on 
plaque No. 23. Ret or det’ has not yet been found anywhere else either 
in inscriptions or modern literature. - 


7. 89808—95 
| Khirawimahsa—544_ 
The trial with milk—s. 1-20. 


-Temiya is, from time to time, kept the whole day without being: given 
milk, to see if he would cry and ask for it, but, fitm in his pice he 
neither moves ‘nor utters. a sound. S . 

Both words .are Pali, £hira, milk, and vimansa, trial ; final @ is very 
faint: and. seems to have been spoilt by whitewash. . 


a sispitetuit va: 
Piwakhajjanawimassana—s45 
The trial with cakes—s. 20-28 


g. 8005 02 29 }—996 
Bibat ku sacchu—546 | 
They try (Temiya) with fraits—s. 28 


‘Bibat = MT. eed, babat, ‘measure ; . to. measure, take the measure . 
of ; hence, to try, test; of. obed, cambat to try, test, in which the first: 
word is the Burmese o8:, cam’; also ecko, bat. knat, Dh. Dip. 29. 18, 
to measure, compute, estimate; ed§E, bat pruif, Dh. Dip. 30. 44, to 
measure oneself with, vie, contend, in which the word {§§, pruia, is also a 
loanword from Burmese ; edys, bat bnat, A.V. 144, 147, to measure, 
gauge, size up, in all of which the original meaning of 05, bat, is well 


brought out. Sacchu = sac chu, fruit; Blagden tells me that sac. 


paRT1}  TALAING PLAQUES ON. THE ANANDA § 


(fruit) is found in his Inscription No. Se see also plaque No. 330; the 
M.T. is sat, ood: 


10, BoosvsoggmBood3— 961 
Kilabhandakawimafsana—547 
The trial. with toys—6. 3 
Kila, for kija. 


II, scpap80od8s—y oo 
~Bhojanawimafhsana—s48 
The trial with food—6. 6 


12, This plaque is missing; in the regular order of the tests, it must 
_- have represented the trial by fire. 


13. 8005 oy £8 — a0 
_Bibat ku cik—s50° 
They try (Temiya) with elephants—6.. 18. 


Cth, elephant, variant ‘of cin. No number appears on this plaque | 
which is No. 550. in the regular order’ of the series. — 


14, 8005.03 Gi—990 
Bibat ku. jrum—s5r - 
_ They try (Temiya) with *sniakes—6, 26 


6 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. _ tvon.-it 


15, c0g8008s—99 
Samajjawimaasana-—332 
The test of the mime—y. 2 


16, 8005.cy agxd—y99 
Bibat ku sn3k—353 
They try (Temiya) with a sword—y, 7 


17:, 8005 04 oB—399 
Bibat teu sah~3534 
They try (Temiya) with .soneches—7, 19 


Sak, from P. seAAa. 


“18, 8005 fog 3}—099 
Bibat (ku phash)—335, 
They try (Temiya) with drums—7. 23 
The right- rant side of the plaque has been droken and ‘ost and its 
place filled in with cement, half the legend hazing thus disappeared; in 
the sequence of the tests, it represents that with drums,-and I have there- 
fore restored the word for drim, pham = M.T.; it recurs frequently. in 
the inscriptions of King. K yanzittha, at Pagan, which describe the ceremonies 
at the building of his palace. 


19, 3905 02 goE—99¢ 
Bibat ku pnan—556 
They ty (Temiya) with lamps—y, 24 


Pnaf has a variatt' pne. 


PART 1] TALAING’ PLAQUES ‘ON THE ‘AN ANDA | 7 


20: “Be0S"t ‘og CofsoSug'9 7 


. Bibat kv ‘taiiglay—sey * 
They. sey, (Temiya). with molasses—2. 


The modern literary form. Of. taaglaysi 4S <osbega, tanklaai, and ‘the 
colloquial coo0s, tanldai, With. elision .. of. :.43 tha ~ Burmese... is. WER, 
taflai : _ 


 Bibat: ku hadak—558° 
They try (Temiya)’ with filth—6. er 


Hadak, filth, foeces = colloquial Bigo08, hidak, the literary form 
beitig Boos, snidak = “house-water,” that is, -water-closet, a privy ; but 
it means also, excrement, filth; vide - AN. 39 = = P, ukkéra, Dh. Dip. II4. 
ze = P. uecéra, and the eorraapaading | passage of the story in Pah (VI. &. 
6} = asucijiguccha aka. Inthe word’ hadak, the medial consonant . 
appears. tc have been spoilt originally when fusing the glaze and. later by 
whitewash, so that | am not quite spre‘ whether it ‘is really a d, though this 
letter is required here’ on stymclog ae ground, the oldest documents we 
possess writing always the word “water,” _ which -enters into this compounc | 
snidék (collg. hidak) with a d (9298, Qs, dak,. dek); as it stands 
now, however, the letter looks as if it were 7% of du, “which. “would. give. us 
haruk or. baduk; in which ruk might perhaps be compared, with i035, 
duk = “ wet,” which would scarcely convey the meaning intended. Basing 
myself, .however, on the constant usage of old and. modern documents, I 
have adopted the reading d; but the absence of long @ after @ remains to 
be explained; the word should read hadak; it is probable the long @ has 
been dropped through inadvertence ; similar cases are not quite. rare in these 
plaques, and will be noticed in their own places. Moreover, i in. the series of 
the “tests,” this one comes exactly at the place it occupies in the Pali, 
between Nos. 55% and 559). thus leaving no doubt as to the sense. of 
hadak. . 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {vou 


22, mog8o8y—9 96 
Kapallawimansana—559° 
~The test: with fire-pans—8. 18 


23. eagoad sg opf& e2b-—9¢0 
Abo’ aba tlun wec—560 - 
(Temiya’s) mother and father come and remonstrate (with him)—8. 24 


Abo’, mother, is- confirmed by a number of plaques, see Index A; 
so. also aba, father. The Burmese and Talaings, when coupling nouns 
or pronouns denoting one the masculine and the other the feminine, always 
place the feminine first ; this practice is, I think, pretty general in Indo-China 
and seems to be due to the influence of Pali, Tlun = M.T. 99/6 klua, 
but it is still in use in compound verbs, see note on raf, plaque No. 5. 
Wee = M.T. cood, wet; see No. 6.. 


24, -p2gaBoodp— Co 
Natakawimafsana—s61 
The trial with nautches—9. 6 


2 5. on8§, coo8— 6G J 
- Kumin Temi—562 
They make Temiya king—1o, 16 


_ All these ‘tests, spreading over a period of sixteen years, having failed 
to ‘elicit. from Temiya the least sign’ of intelligence and to procure the least 
gleam: ‘of hope that he was not a useless cripple, his father, at the instigation 
of -the- -goothsayers, decides ‘to. have him. ‘buried. in the common. cemetery. 
Candadevi, frightened - for: her, child,: asks ‘her husband to make him king; he 
refuses ; at. last, .after. many. -pressing:- entreaties, he consents-that he should 
rule for seven days. - During. that week, his mother, who feels he is not.a 
cripple, begs of him.to show himself in his: true light; but Temiya, horrified 
by the fear of hell, remains steadfast in his resolution, and she fails. 

“Kumin, accession to the tHrone, rule, to make (some one) king, ‘to 
enthrone {vide plaques Nos. 206, 217); ¢f. kirmin (plaque No. 229), 


PART I] -TALAING PLAQUES UN THE ANANDA 9 


royalty, kingship: and the M.T. o§§, kmin, in BSai8 Biss kmindua 
kduinbtaa, U.O.K. 39. 5;. BSREGIE, kmin kduinbtan, S.M. 10. 
17; $$3$, kminnan, U.O.K. 39. 13. . 
26, 20298 078 emos— 4 G0 
‘Sarathi tlun ket—563 


The charioteer comes to take away (Temiya)—11. 8 


The supreme test, that of kingship, having failed, the royal charioteer 
comes to execute the img order, for T emiya’s burial. 


27. a5 0808 en8—969 
_ Rin tit Temi—s564 
(The charioteer) conveys away Temiya—r1. 17 
Rin, to lead, convey; the rere tit, to go out, after another verb, has 
sometimes the sense of waut, away.” . 


28. e208 8 o0§ B98 
Kal scis han ti—565 
(Temiya) descending on to the ground—12. 4 
| “The charioteer leaves the - city with the : cart conveying the prince; 
having decided on a spot, he begins to dig a grave. Not having moved for 
sixteen years, Temiya doubts whether. he has still the control of his limbs 
_and gets down from the chariot to ascertain, — 


Scis = MT. oBe8, scih; “ gog08, sceh, and 808, cih, coo, ceh,. 
to go down. Han, in, to, at, ON; a. variant. is hin’ (vide Index A). 


29. ‘tas BGinad—9 CG 
Bibat dirhat—566 
He tries his strength—12. 6 


Then, thinking the charioteer, in the execution of his orders, might use 
violence against him, Temiya, to try his strength, seizes the hinder part of 
the chariot, and lifts it up as a bi 


= EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 


Dirhat = MT (S0008, drahat, and s§c05, darhat, S.J. 67; 
the latter form is nearer the old ono . 


ZO, 22290 6o08 Bd—964 
Kal Temi gfi’—567 

Temiya is being adorned—12. 17 
At that moment, Sakka’s seat, becomes iiacointeeianis: and, ascer- 
taining the cause of it, perceives that the prince desires to be adorned ; 

he sends Vissakamma, the heavenly artist, to adorn him. 
Ga? = MAT. g, giii, to adorn; for final @ (’), see note on pa, 
plaque 4. | 


31. 99098 099q08—9 60 
Sma sarathi—568: 


He questions the charioteer—12. 19 


He asks him why he is in such a hurry to dig a grave and for whom 
it is intended ;. the charioteer at first -answers without looking up, but at last 
he recognizes. who speaks to him, and is delighted,. 


32, 02403 6028 —9G@ 
Sarathi kfia cow—569 
The charioteer invites (Temiya) to return (home)—1 5. 


Kita, besides the meaning given in Haswell’s, means also ‘‘to invite 
cf. Dh. Dip. 94. 12—c8o9$ 828 B48 o> aged coo —"the king, sexirous 
of inviting the Buddha up te’ the house”; there is a form g9, fiha, which 
points out to a form §, sfa, through ®, kfia, at N.V.K. 4. 13-—8096003 
Ge gj Saar2033 mag 0968 33 posEBo08n0n§)& bop \Sepo§ ogscossr6032——"' When a 
- monk is going to build a large monastery with (the help of) a layman for 
himself to stay in, he must first invite. the clergy to come and show them 
the site. ” 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA oe 


33. (Pe@> g$ 8} cago85 sg—9 70 
| Raja pcan hin abo’ aba—570 | . 
The king (= Temiya) sends a message to his mother and father—19. 4 


. Pcan=M.T. g§, phyan, not now used by ‘itself but frequent enough 
in the doublet &$qy§,; bkan phyan. For the equation pean = 4, 
phyan, G& pcun = qif, phyun; p (pa) cih = @o5, phyih 
(= oq5); p(pa) cen = cy’, phyen; p (pa) cin = Q§, phyin; 
pacap = 45, phyap; pacot = cypod, phyot, etc.; similarly, # (p a) 
+ initial <0, s, become yg, phy—pasaw = .cqps, phyow; pasun = 
qi; phyun; pasuin=q@§, phyuin; pasuik = @oS, phyuik. But 
pcan under the form eo§, bacan, is. found in literary Talaing, see S.J. 
folio e—8&eo$ of—‘‘hearing the message”; L.B.C. 45. 2—2059 vo$oo$ 
—“ (the Buddha) having thus left his message -(or instructions).” 


34. M208 ‘eped 8§—)19 
Kal raja ma ’ir—571 
When the king leaves the world—21. 8 


Temiya’s mind was inclined towards the quiet happy life of an ascetic ; 
again, Sakka’s séat becomes hot, and having ascertained the cause, he 
sends down Vissakamma, who builds a hermitage and arranges everything 
necessary for a hermit. Then the prince exchanges his royal clothes for the 
bark garments and black antelope-skin of the ascetic and enjoys the spiritual 
bliss of the recluse’s life. | , 

Tr, without a (92) used as a fulcrum, is found in two other plaques, 
written ir (Nos. 71, 114) and again ‘ir with the fulcrum (No. 327). This 
verb, so far as I am ‘aware, has fallen into oblivion and has no corresponding 
form now; it means “‘to leave the world, to become a recluse or monk,” 
and answers to the Pali pabdajati; the word for monk, gam-’i (08), which 
we find in the inscriptions of the 15th century is derived from this verb; the 
older (11th century) form, gum-ir, has preserved the verb intact. The 
modern form is gamhi (09), often found written khamhi (08). 


12 i EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL it 


35> 9000s 09 go 
| Gulafi ku smin—572 
He converses with the king (his father)—22. 247 — 

The king has come to the hermitage with an immense retinue to see 
his son in the plenitude of his bodily strength, and they have a long’ conver- 
sation together. | | 

Gulafi, to converse: conversation = M.T. aco2§, gala a 


36. S$o, G08 ogo00-—9 1p 
| Dindu risi twas—573 _ 
Instructing the hermits (his disciples) —29. 13. 

_ Temiya’s father and mother, their respective retinues ‘and a large con- 
course of citizens follow the prince’s example... A vast hermitage is built for 
them. The Bodhisatta, who knows their inmost thoughts, instructs and. 
admonishes them each according to his needs. 

Dindu, to instruct, I do not know of any modern equivalent for this 
word, unless it be dalo’ (as09288) 5. the interchange of @ and / is very 
frequent, above all when initial ; ‘the equivalence of u-and o (and a) is also 
frequent. Twas = M.T. ORF, twah.- 


37. 200905 og YE—9 9 
Tos dharmma ku smifi—574 : 
(Temiya) peaches the Law to the (three)’ kings—29. aiff 


The king of a_ neighbouring. country - comes. to invade Kasi and ‘rules in 
Benares. But Temiya goes to meet him, sits in the air and teaches him the 
Law; the invading king becomes an ascetic; exactly the same thing happens 


to two other kings, | 
Dharmma, the Law, direct from the Sanskrit. 


TI.—MAHAJANAKA-JATAKA 
The king of Mithila has two sons; when he dies, the elder becomes 
king and the younger viceroy. The younger brother is then wrongfully 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 13 


accused and suspected and thrown into ‘jail; he escapes, raises an army and 
kills his brother in battle. The king’s chief queen, who is enceinte, flees 
from Mithila; she brings forth a son, who is brought up in ignorance of his 
father. At last, learning who his father was, he resolves to regain the king- 
dom and goes to sea as a merchant to make a certain.:amount of money to 
help him in his design. The ship founders. A goddess carries him to his 
father’s kingdom, where, after answering many riddles, he becomes king, 
and marries his uncle’s daughter. At last; he becomes an ascetic, and his 
wife follows him on his way. to the wilderness. 


Janak patisan—575 0° 


Janaka_ is conceived. | 


39, p03 Bod e394 0 —916 
 Janak tit nor gar—s76 | 
Janaka comes out from the womb—-33, 11 


Nor = MT. a, nt, from; gar, from the Skt. gardha = M.T. 08, 
gaw, also written sol, gow, Dh. Dip. 57. 24, 62. 8. 


40. 03.865. 02 o5005-+ 941 
Janak wifi ku samwat—577. 
Janaka plays with the children—33. 13 _ 


Wifi, to playr= M.T. co&, wen; sarnwat, child, a variant. is 
sumwat = M.T. coood, samat. ; : 


41. @03 99905 esgoaS— 90 _ 
jJanak smafi abo’—578 
_Janaka questions his mother—33. 18 


Mahajanaka’s playmates, when angry with him, used to call him 
“ widow’s. son” ; he wants to know whose son he is, and asks his mother. 


14 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ Vou. 


A2, apo g$ o8$ esg0s5—9 1 
_. Janak mun hin abo’—579 
-Janaka informs his mother (he will go trading) —34. 3 


Mun _ means:: to tell, inform, apprise, notify, of. Nos. 90, 183, 203, 
213, 225; and muna s, Nos. 279, 283. Hin, a variant of han, “in, at, 
on, to.” 


43. 2200 (Go— 906 
Kala bram—586 
7 W — (the boat) founders yi 3 


| The serial number on this. plaque i is a good example of the. carelessness 
or oversights to be detected in a certain number of legends in these plaques. 
According to the events of the story. which precede and follow it, this 
plaque is here. in its: right place;.the copyist, however, has inadvertently 
written 586 for 580. 


44 = No. 581, missing) 


45. 6300095 eus00S— 90) - 
Dewataw yok—582 _ 
The goddess. carries (Janaka) in her arms—37. 14 


Manimekhala, a goddess, has for duty to watch over the ocean and 
rescue from death all virtuous’ shipwrecked persons. She sees: Mahajanaka 
‘manfully swimming in the sea; she comes and listens with delight to his 
‘reflections on the virtue of energy. She ‘then catties him in her arms to 
| Mithila, and lays him on a. ceremonial : stone in a mango grove. . Meanwhile 
his uncle the king had died, leaving no male issue, but only a daughter. 
While casting about for a successdr, thé royal chaplain, followed by. the 
grandees of the kingdom.and a vast ‘army, comes to the stone slab on 
which Mahajanaka is lying. asleep. - After several trials to test his mettle, 


i The plaque was found subsequently, spoiled. The original legend had disappeared, and one in 
modern Burmese, “ King Janaka is swimming,” has been substituted, 


PART1]  TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA “1S 


he examines the marks on the soles of his feet and ascertains he is a 
great. man, : ; ae 

Yok, to lift up, carry in the : arms, is the modern 080, vik but’. 
the: old spelling is still occasionally found, for instance at. Dhe. 15%. 26. 


46, e608 cogg$ apad-—900 
-Mey iaksan Janak—583 
The chaplain examines Janaka’s marks—39. 30 


Mey, to lok = M.T. 3, mwai, which is, now-a-days, not used by 
itself, but after a few other verbs of cognate meaning, e.g., §3, hi mwati;. 
695953, hew mlak.. ‘mwai; 483, rah mwai; 83, shi mwai; 
00053, camat mwai, etc. The Prakuih Dhammadipani_ uses 
regularly the form 3, mai, which is nearer to the old form. As a verb 
used by itself I have found 3, mwai, only oncé, at A.V. 19, goR 
pwa ma mwai= P, apekkhé..Laksan, a aac direct from Skt. 
laksan or laksana; it is found written also: lakyan  (coag$) ° (pron. 
laksan), and laksan; the P. form, lakkhana (coogons), is also frequent. 


47. socieooo apS—gog 
Abhiselcha Janak—584_ ae 
’ The anointment (as king) of Janaka—4o, 6 7 : 
The. chaplain, having recognized all the marks of | sprniness on Janaka, 
the latter is forthwith consecrated king. | 


Abhisekha, for abhiseka;. the most ‘common modern form is — 
ccoos; pasek, A.V. a Sudh. 10, 22: giloccoaitobyo—" Indfa_conse- 
crated the young man”; osooodvans, pasek pasaw, is another frequent 
expression, S.J. (A) 75: 9 33058 $005 ‘ocoooSvnd of — having made him 
king, consecrate him (as such).” I have not yet met vsoociooS, pasek 
PaAsaw, in the sense of “ blessedness” as recorded in Haswell’s. 


48, @9o8 ecood 9[E—909, 
> Janak lop dui—s85 
Janaka enters the (capital) city—40. 8 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vol 1 


49. 8S a0$ 02 o«S—goe 
Kil sthan ku gahak—586 
/(Janaka) assigns their places to the officials of. state—4o. 9 


Kil = M.T. §, kuiw. Sthan, from Skt. sthéna. Gahak, P. 
gahaka = “a police officer,”. but here it is question of the officials, , civil 
at cane from the generalissimo downwards, and it means, therefore, 

“officials of state.” A defect in the glaze of the plaque makes final & of 
hak in gahak appear like ¢ in the photograph, There is no doubt that 
Gahak is meant here. . 


50. Qoy203 eA qed—901 
_  . Gnakya&k or khut—587 
The queen sends (a man) to call (Janaka), o 
The queen causes (Janaka) to be ei II 


The princess, daughter of ‘the late king, has been wooed by the highest 
officials in the kingdom; but owing to their fawning beheviour and hurry, 
she has rejected them all; she now wants to see how Mahajanaka will 
act, and sends for him. _ 3 

Or has three meanings: (i) to send, (ii) to cause to, make to, and 
(iii) it.is used in a precative sense. It is curious that in all these senses 
it corresponds | exactly to the Burmese word. ce (ce) which denotes the 
causative, the optative-precative, and which, when used independently of 
any other verb ‘and by itself, also means “to send.” (i) The first meaning 
is found in the legend on the present. plaque, if we consider the 
corresponding passage in the Pali (Fausboll, VI. 40): rajadhita 
purisarn Anapesi, “ gaccha, rajanarh upasankamitva vadehi: Sivalidevi tar 
pakkosati ti”—" the: princess ordered a man, ‘Ge; tell the king: Princess 
Sivali: summons you.’” It is true that the short legends in these plaques 
“are not translations of the corresponding passages in the Pali stories but 
are merely indicative and briefly. explanatory of the scenes represerited 
above them, so that the legend under discussion might as well ve 
translated: “the queen causes (Janaka) to be summoned.” (ii) The second 
meaning is found. in plaque No. 211, in the Candakumara-jataka, smin 
or bicar, ‘the king causes him (makes him) to investigate the cases.” 
Here, it is used as a kind of auxiliary verb, in the same sense and in the 
same manner as && kuiw, is used in the modern language. This 


PART 1] ‘TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 7 


meaning | had deduced from some of the uses of tms word in its present 
form, ¢y>5, p-’ow (with prefix. _p); two Talaing monks, to whom I submitted 
this. inscription in Candakumara, translated it. in Burmese, independently, 
in exactly the same words: “man® safi tara® kui churh® phrat. ce i’ 

(oSt0098 coapes§ o§:(GoSsod}) —" the king causes (him) to decide cases”; and 
the Talaing version of this jataka (Skem Candakumi, fol. ku) has: 

Bchogogg>. GopicBogoo8 cog gor 9, in which §, kuiw, ‘as just pointed out, 
has the meaning of the old or. (ii) The third, or precative force, i is found 
twice in the Talaing face of the Myazedi inscription pillar.’ Line 29 reads : 

sinranh e(’ = ey) wo’ or das het ku gwo sarwwafiutafian, 
“Tet (may = or) this deed of mine be the - cause (for me) to obtain’ 
omnisciencé”; in the corresponding passage of the Burmese face, line 35, 
for the Talaing or. das, “let (it) be, may (it) be,” we have: phlac 
ciy teh (Modern Burmese = phrac ce taf) where ce, as explained 
atthe beginning, of this nole, -haS a. précatiye: sense. The modern. 
equivalent of sinran in the above’ sentence, which had nol yet been 
found when Mr.. Blagden first: published the Talaing face of the Myazedi 


is inscription, has now been ascertained beyond doubt. It is 096, -sarqn; 


with loss of the infix i, reducer enough occurrence; it is found at 
‘SB, 1g: ooqfl8, sarah pap; “a deed of evil” = aoapB0l§, $aram 
pap; S.B. 25: goog 0l8, pwa saran pap, 9, pwa being a synonym. 
of o98 sarah; at Dh. Dip. 241. 3, we find it - followed. by three 
"synonymous words. which practically explain it: .coqé Bg. g coSon.. It is 
also found written caran (096), the consonants s and.c¢ being a 
interchanged, A.V. 96 under jamma,. 116 under dighnasutta ; Dh. Dip. 37. 6 
ogSodaqo3S, caran dhaw kusuiw, “an act of merit.” In line , 
the same inscription : yan. fiirfiac kyek. trey Mettey lah or 
deh go’—‘may (= or) he -not get. sight of the blessed - Buddha 
Metteyya:” “Here lah. isan emphatic negative, ‘still more; intensified 
in the modern. reduplication corcos, lah Tah = not at all (of. Burmese 
contcost, 13° 12%); or is. again: rendered: in the. Burmese’ face, line’ 39, 
by 865, ciy. fmodetn = co, ce), which is ‘the precative, and the phrase, 
lah or deh £0; “let him (may he) not get,’ by the Burmese, 
a pha ra eiy,. in which @ before phu is the old Burmese negative, 
long fallen. into. disuse, but still current | “among some Lolo tribes. 


1 Epigraphia Birnanica, Vol. I, Part I, p. 4. 


18 EPIGRAPHIA. BIRMANICA _ ‘von. 11 


Or is found. in M.T, with the ‘prefix ~, ph (0, ©), and with the 
meanings of (i) -“ to send, despatch, order,” (ii) to cause to, ‘incite to, . 
urge; ‘the precative. sense seems to have fallen into disuse. - A.V. 93, 
00 0 6g Secfo5 = P. codana; A.V. 130, 00 © 6g28 = 'P. miyojana; U.O.K. 
33. 14, og256 oSosqgo—"" to. cause lust, incite to‘ lust”; Dhm. Dip. 173. 24, 
69068 03 6g 2San300§ ogdsra2§q—'the devas “caused the fish inadvertently to 
enter the net”; S.J. (A) -fol. £2, 695§05, -‘“he sent.a man”; Dh, Dip. 96. 
6, eg rBoocnchanagoh-—"" he despatched | (some one). to enguire’ ny Sudh. 21. 19, 
G25 cgengSaoqdarc9sorGc00836—="' he ‘caused the hunter to. go with two warriors 
to bring him. , 

* 7s corresponds in meaning with. the Khmer oy, with ‘which it is 
perhaps related. J. Guesdon, in -his “ Dictionnaire . cambodgien-frangais,” 
p. 76, defines: it: “oy—donner,-.accorder ; pour, afin de—indique l'impératif, 
Je causatif, i aioe . Lower below, -he gives the example: “oy hau, 
faire. appeler” = to cause to call, aud BE. Aymonier ‘“Pretionnaire 
khmer-frangafs,*- p. 47, ui —donmer ; pour, afin de; 4 = signe du dati€ ; 
que; faire. Indique le consatt, le mode sis a le mode optatif.” 


si. e305, BS Grant —s00, 
J anak tin ‘prasid—ses8 | 
Janaka (holding the princess’ S hand). ascends, the palace—4o. 21 


Tin = M. T: 8S, twin, Prasad, a building with superposed roofs ; 
hence, a palace, from Skt. praséda ; the modern form: is G200005, pras at, 
- for soft consonants are not suffered as finals. The pure-modern Talaing word: 
for prasad is 0g (S@gaod8, tnua krakat, very frequent’ in. the literature. 
_ It is found in the Shwezigén Bell-inseription (A.D. 1557) written of conSHanc8, 
shi kanuf kragat. 


52. aacS apd ap%8—g0¢ 
Kal Janak smafi—s89 
When Janaka enquires—4o. 23 


; Mahajanaka enquires. whether the late. king had left any instructions. 
His instructions were: the kingdom should be given: to him who could we. 


“PART 1 1 ‘TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 7 19 


the. eon of ahioces Sivali and. answer some “difficult riddles propounded by 
the late king himself. All this Mahajanaka did without difficulty. 


he, “BS. gxSBRecoo8—y go - 
Kil cnéykinlofi—sgo_ 
~ (Janaka) gives: his (gold) pin ‘to, the queen—so. 30 


me naykinioa is an ornamental pin’ ‘to keep the hair or the headdress. 
in 1 place ; the Burmese version of the. same stories wherein this. word is 
found renders it by 05 (cham ‘-kyan)” and BicogoEayé (a° shyon kyan), both 
of which mean an ornamental. hairpin. The modern. forms of the word are. 
grog,” cndai Anan; gd0o$6, - cndai kanhdaa; goof, cnaais i 
-anhan; opis, tnaai khnaa; apag6, snaai kn Aa; ag 36, snaai_ 
khnan; in which the medial Z and the / in.cnaat kinlo n have been 
-lost; the equivalence -of e—& (on) and- eS (3m) is. not ‘infrequent, of. 
apcilieeas, ayoh ala, S.B. 27. 1, and sooté&socc, aya ala, more | 
common ; 6998," gloa, S.J. (B) 36; and the more common $6 glaa. In | 
the passages where. this ‘word is found it regularly translates the Pali sez, a 
‘pin, a needle; the passage in Mahajanaka to which the present plaque refers - 
reads . (Fausboll VI. 40. 30): “ sisato. suvannasiicirh . niharitva Sivalideviya: é 
_hatthe adasi,” which the modern Talaing version . translates very | Closely . : 
“gcBiSaeQagro§So05 P,05380} JadQayS oBockoQuiSofq. “Cudai kinlon is also found in 
plaque No. 321 of the Vessantara-jataka ; ; the. Pali (VI. 519. 23) has: 
‘ tassa. suvanpasiicirh datva,” “ he gave the hunter’ a golden | ornamental — 


: hairpin,” which is put ‘in the modern version : + don ;EaoSyoo!Sa0cBafoqagun At 


AV. 92. the meaning of ro3s is given as % ‘ cti]amani” “= a crest jewel, 


which is no. doubt .a. slip; the exact meaning as i pin, needle ” is borne out 
i by ‘the first member of. the word, Q>, cnadai, snaai, which by _ itself 


means . a’ “pin, a, needle, something long cused in, keeping something | in its 
proper ‘place, such as for instance a wheel, GS, AY. 194, rathagutt?, and 39, 

ant = 0gdq03§03, snaai-muh ri kwi =a linchpin ; and-in this sense ‘is 
equivalent to the Burmese oy (kyan) in the two expressions given above, 
and’ which reappears in cafcofoye (kan? lan? kyan), a bolt. Moreover, the 
true Talaing expression for a . ies diadem ip @Q Imu; AV. 92, 

hla ” = agjoa0d coog B/S ccoda:, “a ciifa means. - also a crest (gj) tied 


20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. [ VoL. ir. 


(placed) on the. head.” P. W. ‘Schmidt in his “ Buch des R&g’4wan, der 
Kénigsgeschichte’’ (a9008 cpolo& ‘aecnS “eop8),} page 74, has quite mis- 
understood the word; he translates kndf in sndai knda as “ chair,” 
a meaning. it has not 5 this. means the rafters which support the planks. 
of a floor. 


54-57 = Plaques 591-94, missing. 


58, ‘The inscription on this ‘Plaque: is completely ‘spoilt,. only the first 
“letter uy, and the last S, being eo as: well as the number 595. 


59. gé Bos os 9¢6 
Smit tit nyyan—596, 
The king goes out to his pleasaunce—44. 17 


Uy yan = PL uyydne }. ‘a form from the Skt., udyan, is also met with. 


60.. e905 e005 (63/055 —9 e4 
Janak mey truk—597 
Janaka looks at the mango (trees)—44. 18 
The king coniing to the gate of his pleasaunce looks at two mango trees, 
one of which is laden with sweet fruits, the other bearing no fruit at all. He 
plucks one fruit and eats it, ‘intending to eat more on his return. But as he 
passés into the garden, everybody in his’ retinue plucks and eats fruits, and. 


‘those who do not get any strip off the leaves and break the branches, leaving 
the beautiful tree all broken. 


61. e305 E95 GjS—yeo 
Janak fac truk—598 
. Janaka sees the mango (tree) —44. 28 


On his return, Mahajanaka perceives the mango tree all battered and 
_ broken; on enquiry, he learns it is on account of its fruit, and that the other 


i Published in the Sitsungsberichte der Kais. _ Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Band CLI, 1906, 


PART 1] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA a 


tree near by, having no-fruit, has not been molested. This makes him. ponder. 
“ This kingdom of mine,” muses he, “js like the fruitful tree; it invites ruin 
and desolation ; the ascetic life, on the other hand,- is like the barren tree, 
nobody disturbs it; for the ascetic possesses no riches; why should | not be 
like the barren tree?”. And he resolves then and there to become an 
ascetic. This decision explains the plaques which follow. 

Nac = M.T, go5, fiat, to see. 


62, YE a905 Bim§—yee 
Smin Janak kinkan—s99 
King Janaka instructs. (the. generalissimo)—45. 7 


As-he intends living the life - of a recluse in his. palace, he -gives 
instructions to the: -generalissimo. that none but two servants should be allowed | 
to see him, and that he, the general-in-chief, should mgs on the affairs ‘of 
state in conjunction with the high officials, 

_Kinkan, «to instruct’ = M.T. 0008, . BARNS variants are kiak al, 
_kinkal, kifkan.- 


63. GE spo cyecled—Goo 
— Smin Janak luno’—6o00° 


King Janaka- lives ‘in retirement—52. 19: 


‘Luo’, ‘to be- retired, solitary, lonely, = M.T.. ly Inu ; r for the fined. 
8 (’), see. note on pa, plaque No. 4 3 | 


64. 9F B§evE Bo8S—¢oo 
-Raf birbeh sikil—6or | 


They kid, two attendants) bring the alms- bonit (and) give it 
. (to ie cs Pe 22 


Ran, see note on ran, plaque 5. Sikil, “to give,” it is. the verb - 
kil. = M.T. 096, kuivw, 4 to. give,” ‘with prefix si: = M.T. 9, Sa, and. se 
This | prefix is also found. in the Nyauhg-U Shwezigén- saerpuan,” line 28, | 


2 Edited’ by c. 0, Blagde, Epigrophia Birmanica Vol. I, Part I, p. 22 fi 


22 _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. [ VoL. it 


“in the word sik-im, to: -smile;”” in the passage: ma tirla pa kir- 
‘im: wo'cii, ma. het yo; sak:-het kyak buddha tarley gumlon 
sik*im’ ci kah’ sak; ‘which ‘means: ‘“ What is the. reason. that my lord. 
smiles ‘thus? Without reason the lord Buddhas do not smile.’ ” This prefix 
09, 's (a), is frequent in modern literary Talaing; the old form. si, however, 
has not been lost, and it is still found written’8, si, but it is far less 
frequent than sa (s). Here are. a few examples { have gleaned in the 
course of my reading; it will be remarked that, in each example, this — 
prefix denotes the future tenses -S.M. 13: QR ogped 08805 $08 oBoogu $oage5 

§o0z caoo§ 03 optaBu.0dd805 Be Bevo —'* Sire, my father is with child, it is. now 
‘ ten months, ‘he has not yet brought forth, and I know -not (whether) he will 

die”; S.M.21, Oop spazsanom PBoh3q—" Sire, only to-morrow shedl we: answer 

_ this ”; the next twa.ekamplas are interesting because, in the same passage — 
in two: different manuseripts, one form is written with 08, si, in one, and 
with oo .(s) in the other: manuscript ; _ S.M. (A) fol. gha, BSnogcSagood yd 
~ endSagotaoSac§, 0386038. 238.0b BecooSop2q25, and S.M. (B) fol. &ha, BSagcdagaod 
Q lord aqckcofach oA9E03§ S805 69305 aq" Sire, | shold take away: the 
thieves’ and daegits who are -in, prison in chains and irons.’ Similarly, in the | 
following passage, S. M. (A) has the. full prefix 8 and. (B). the attenuated 
co Garey 803059 QeQrc5o3 F8ado80§ (a9§)s: qe" Sire, if we do get a big or 


small (piece of the “sand-rope), seeing it, we shall (be able to) twist (such 


a.rope).” These’last two examples are sufficient to show that 08 and 0 are. 
the same prefix.. The following are examples of 9 ies the future, ° 
picked out of a large number: Dhm. Dip. 159. 16, 90xg - + gr§8g>q— 

“to-day... he wzél enter -parinirvana,” the: corresponding | passage in Pali_ 
‘(Dhp.’ Atth.. 384) reads: “alf'eva . parintbbayissat, Sudh. 29,9, 31§cogo3| 
- QH{BeoScloSe 05355 aah — "i in’. this” _place—prophesied the Omniscient. one— 
well: dwell «a . tooth-relic’ of mine.” Gpi. 9. 12, - coSaficBoo: bo 2d00GoSeao05e.. 

aoSq—"* let him first ‘return to-morrow, I wif. pluck all (his feathers).” 
Dhm. Dip. 27.12, BBosooyD ‘engengyrcoySoGsoed8sbogq—" that I wish to 
devour you is not the fact, I shall: eat only rice and. meat.” ot 
fol. 24, ° cabBopRgec pofacqe5a05 hq —"* if my ‘mother does not - tell . | 
(about my father), 1+ shaél bite off her nipple, » Dhm. Dip. 18. ie 
90080} 39328] 5ag&0 caodggrq 8—“ having. got the gold, I shall go on board 
ship with the others, mother.” S.Jv 6, 15, olq§§sdgg>0QoS9GSo08[Soiu o8§ _ 
QlSzlod>GsoggrAScor05q8—“‘ Mother, if you have (property with you) I'-shall go 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 23 


trading and, ‘having : got plenty of ‘property, 1 shall go and take the - 
‘kingdom which is my father’s portion.” — | 
_>* But 8 and oo do ‘not always denote the future, sh in most passages 
where they occur they do not seem to add anything to the sense of the - 
verb; at least, Ihave as yet not been able to distinguish any other 
connotation but that of the future in a good many cases, except perhaps. 
that, in a very few. passages, this prefix (probably from tke old form a, 
see plaque No. 85). appears to possess a causative force, or active 
_sense ‘in that it seems to turn neuter verbs into active. But the examples I 
have as yet collected are perhaps too few to’ formulate a rule upon. How- 
ever I - give them here, hoping that Talaing scholars, just now unfortunately 
so few, may add to them from: their own notes: 

. Sudh, 14, 10, 99009) oacqdSso001§ 638 0313 6OQ0}68 cocBoSeoafefc} oa 
| Sete eapo$cGo} c@S6co2q—" Atappa became king near the: Asah forest. 
Now, a woman, having got a gada, put to sleep her child in it, and covering 
him with another. .one-ran away”; the meaning of 0305, tik, is, to ‘sleep, 
and x80, satik, here = ‘put to sleep. ._ 

SB. 9, ea02$G08§ - Bi$aw> g31[Goos2050} 0 sa cbiaae offcoB§eGosoc$§6q—the 
corresponding Pali (Fausb. VI. 167. 11), of which the Talaing is an exact 
translation, reads : Rajadhitararh | pasidam aropetva aladkatadibbasayane — 
 ntpayjepesum, “The princess. was taken up into the palace and made to lie 
_ on an ornamented divine couch”; here 835, stik, answers to the causal ~ 
ni dey 

GONG (A) 63, geqBcBocBocerBoob6ch OB guocaBojcoorSqo20}— Queen Sivali 
os "wept, and being unable to make him go back”—the Pali here has nivattesi, 
_a_causal, verb; S.J..(B) in the: same’ passage reads, AeQooss08, kuiw smia 
‘kalea, ‘in which Hy kK uiw,: is. one a of the A ve causal plxillary verbs. 


“Ge. osc8 iS th J 
Smia Janak kis—602 
pu shaves. (his hair and beard) -—52, 23 | 
Kas = = M.T. of, kah, to shave. 


: 
A gada is a broad covering made of leaves, somewhat concave, ~pnich protects the head, 


should id back d to the kn fi 
rien ers and back down to , nees, from sun or rain -the Burmese for this is Ratu, pronounced 


a4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {vou 1 


66, a308 BS p08, B—Goe 
| Janak cis nor shi—609 
-Janaka descends from:(his) house—53. 3 
Cis = = MT. 8, ceh; the form 85, ih, intermediate between the 

old Talaing cis and the modern.ceh is, however, frequent enough, for 
instance at. Sudh. g. 9, 24.12; Dhe. 153: 4; similarly, there is an inter- 
“mediate form, @o5, phyih, at Sudh. 21. 17, 24. 1, which points to an old 
form phyis (= o8s5, see note on pcan, plaque 33), the more common 
modern form oe oyc5, phyeh. 


67- 70, Four plaques are missing here, © ‘that is, up to .No. eae 
ineluded, since plaque 71 bears’ wrongly 602 instead of 603.. The plaque 
‘bearing No. 608 which, in the regular order of the episodes, comes lower: 
down, has been so numbered by mistake, but it is in its right place on the 


Ananda. | 
71, BE e908 © F§—Go) - 


Smii Janak ma ir—602 
_ Janaka leaves the world—52, 24-29 


This plaque bears No. 602 ‘like serial No. 65. For ir,. see plaque 
340 _ 


72. -gsayd B&—Goo 
Gnakyek ptin—610 
The queens beat (their: breasts) —53. 9 
The chief . queen, not - having seen | the king for a long time, goes. 
up to his room followed by the lesser queens; .they meet him on the 
stairs, going down clad in the garb of a recluse, but do not recognize 


him. They soon perceive, however, that ‘it was none but. himself; they 
follow. and come up with him in the palace yard ; they dishevel their hair 


‘and beat: their breasts. 


PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON: THE.‘ANANDA 25 


The verb ptin is somewhat spoiled in the plaque; the 7, though 
visible, is very faint; but this word is very clear in thé estampage. The 
Pali here (VI. 53. 9) has the verb sa@tsumbhat, to beat,-which is no doubt 
the meaning of pti; in the photograph, two queens, representing as usual 
a very large number, are shown dishevelling their hair and beating their 
breasts. There is an adverb, G6 38 tintin, used only in the expression 
BEBEOREIES, “to beat the breast” in sorrow, which is probably connected 
with the old ptin; 8&6 oS seems to be imitative of the sound made when 
striking the breast, perhaps ptifi also implies this idea. Perhaps the word is 
stint; the meaning would be the same; but I think the letter is really a 9. 

Gaalyel. a variant of gnakyak; cf O.T. dak and dek,. 
water; pnda and pne®, candle, lamp.. | 


73. QS0YOS EYE: 0 0R4—-Gd0 
- Gnakyete tubah ‘ma tur—621 
The queen shows’ (Janaka)’ the” (town) *burning—sq. 10 


Sivalidevi and the lesser queens follow Mahajanaka step by step, trying 
to. make him:: change: his .mind; the. queén. tries several: -expedients for this 
purpose; but in vain. - Here she has. ordered: some: old: houses to be: set: on 
fire, to make him believe MithilS is burning and thus induce him to retrace 
his steps. 

Tubah = M.T. 8, thbah, ‘to show; tur, to burn = M.T. 0g, t d, 
with loss of the final consonantiand the lengthening:’of the vowel by compen- 
sation; cf. kwil = ,. éwZiy skamir.=. of kami. 

There are two plaques numbered 611: _ the present. one,.and another 
lower down. | | 


74, 2908 Bod B—Go; 
Fanak. crit: ti—622 
. Janaka draws a line on the ground-=s6, 2 


To prevent the queen from following him further, the king draws a line 
across the road and threatens with dire punishment anyone who dares cross 
it; he then proceeds on his way. The queen, in her sorrow, rolls herself 
on the ground and thus “breaks the line,” and the pursuit begins anew. 


4 


26 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ VoL. 1 


Crit, to draw a line, is still in use: Dhm. Dip. 68. 21, 38 ccosd oo8od5 
9o5po5—"' like drawing a line in water with a stick”; S.J. (A) 66, saq$aj$cogé 
cof GoGdcoig— “the king drew a line across the road with his bamboo staff”; 
a form ©§5, caPic, is also found at A.V. 42—udaranhga = o85953g—"a fold. 
of the skin of the belly”; here it is a noun meaning a line, a fold; 0§05 is the 
literary word; the more common expression is coq03, 0495, sarak, carak. 
The Talaing version of the Mahajanaka-jataka, ms. (B), uses the word 0993, 
S.J. (B) 66, 309} se$szcod Gggsot0qo8en5 8s928ee5—" with his staff, he drew a line 
on the ground of the main road.” Both forms are used together in the sense 
of a line, ibid: o@§od09)F y$ oRoSoqoich SgagSucdenjo} qcgoroj—‘and (9$) the 
people, saying ‘the queen has obliterated the king’s line... ’” 

Again another plaque, the one bearing the legend, ¢(g05 aso8 o (8, 
which comes further on, bears the number 6:2. 


7§. a6 8g, 92q8—Goo 
Doi dindu N&rad—6o8 | 
(Janaka) receives the instruction of Narada—=56, 22 


Narada, a hermit, seeing the plight of Janaka, and wishing to strengthen . 
his resolution, comes through the sky and instructs him, 


76. 3|€ 831 Sal-—Gog 
Dak dindu Mizi—6og | 
He receives the exhortation of Miga—sg. 1 
Another hermit, by name Migajina, likewise exhorts him. 
The upper part of this plaque has disappeared; there remains only the 
legend. 


77, @905 ead gi3—Gs0 
Janak ket pcun—6re 
. , Janaka takes the meat—63. 5 


A dog runs away with a piece of meat ; coming near Mahajanaka, he 
drops it through fright, and the king picks it up for his meal. 
Pcun, meat = M.T. qi$, phywn; see note on pcan, No. 33. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA ay 


78, @po3 0960295. gi$—Ga9 
Janak. lukow pcun—6ir ~ 
Janaka breaks the (piece of) meat (and puts it in his bowl)—63. 5-6 


Lukow: this, I think, means “to break”; the Pali does not mention 
this action, it says: Vamsakhandam adéya puichttod patte katod .. . partbhurjt 
(VI. 63. 5-6), “He took the piece of meat, wiped it, put it in his alms- 
bowl. . . and ate it.” The modern word for “to wipe” is $05, juit, the 
Khmer has chut (Aymonier), and! know of no other word approaching the _ 

form lukow, which means to wipe. The photograph, however, is helpful 
here. Mahajanaka is represented as breaking a long piece of meat and putting 
it in his alms-bowl. There is a-verb, oS, kaw, meaning to break, and lukow 
is the same word with the prefix / (uw); this verbal prefix / is still common in 
the modern language: 6d, lagam (= 6], gm), to go, walk, S.J. (B) 6s, 
#1§coda0qo5 codlacz0}—="then, having gone part of the way”; 95, Ipak 
(= ol, pak), to halve, tear or cut open, S.B. 25. 27, éabog5ca}g95§—" he 
(the suparma) pecked and tore open the naga’s belly’; co§o5, lapuik (= 
405, puik), to tear out, uproot, S.B. 15. 25, S.M. & 7; 0805, labuit (= 
05, buit), to fling,. cast, S.B. te. 22; o}05, Ipak (605, pak), to open, 
As far as I have been able to judge, this prefix adds nothing to the original 
sense of the verb; it is probably to be distinguished from the prefix co, la, 
_ which forms nouns from verbs, unless, indeed, these nouns in co be used 
again as verbs, for there is practically no difference made between noun and 
-verb, the same word. being used as one or the other. Lukow = lakow 
= kow = kaw (modem); the equivalence of medial o and a is very 
‘common, . p 8 a 


79, eogeS aged o gi$-—Go; 
Trey Janak ca pcun—6r2 
The Lord Janaka eats the meat—63. 6 


Trey = M.T. @, trai, excellent, blessed. As a substantive = 
lord; of trey sangha, “lords of the Church” = monks (Blagden). | 


28 re -—PIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA “= [ von. it 


80. 9002S ap cdooS—-Go9 
Gulai ku samwat—613 
(Janaka) converses with the child—64. 18 


On the road, they meet a little girl playing; on one wrist she wears 
only one bracelet and two on the other; these two, being together, jingle. 
Janaka thinks there: is there ‘a good lesson for Sivali, and hopes ‘the girl will 
be clever enough to see it. too, He-asks her. the reason of. the jingling; 
the child tells. him, and. adds. that the jar. is. owing. to ie second bracelet:; 
on the. other arm..the only: one . bracelet - does ‘Not, Jar; ’ says..she,. {if 
you desire to. be ‘happy,. live. alone.” . The king. and. “queen. a take separate 
roads ; - but .the latter,. unable: to. control cher: grief, -again follows. ‘him ..and 
enters. the town. of .Thiina. ‘with. him, 


81... 0903: 9998. od-—-G 99. 
Janak fac kam—614: 
Janaka’ sees “the arrow—66, 5 


They come upon. a. fletcher, who. Js making an. arrow. straight; by . looking 
along | it with one -eye, closing the other. . With; the same. intention . .as with 
the child,, Janaka asks him why he does that. The ‘other.- answers : that 
looking with two eyes at, an arrow. really spoils, the. straight ‘ai of the sight, 
and that, if he, Janaka, wants: to be happy, he: should live alone. 

Kam =  M. T., _ arrow. 


82, e308 20008 7 
Janak lop grip—614 
Janaka enters the forest--68. 7 


The queen still follows him; at last she swoons, and he enters into a 
forest near by, and cannot be followed again. Sivali returns to the capital, 
and there becomes a recluse in the mango-grove. 

| Grip forest = M.T. 68, gruip; ef cip = 9, cup, to arrive, 
and tin = o§, tuin, to go up. 


It will be remarked that this. and the previous ‘plaque are both num- 
_bered 614. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES. ON THE ANANDA 49 


II], —SAMA-JATAKA 


This jataka is better known among the Burmese as Suvanna- 
shyam-jat; it will be remarked that they have preserved the Sanskrit 
form! almost intact, the Pali being sima; in the~Ananda plaques, the 
word is written syam, which is’ still nearer the Sanskrit (¢yama); the 
modern ‘Talaings call it jat-sam, following the Pali form. 


_Two persons, husband and wife, become ascetics; she conceives a son 
‘miraculously, who -is,.called Suvannasima. Both parents become 
blind, and. Sama. looks after, them. . One day a king | comes hunting and 
shoots him with an. arrow. -The king: attends regretfully upon the parents; 
Ss: Am a. is miraculously healed and both his parents recover their sight. . 


_.Patisan Syam—6i5 - 
Conception of Cyama—73, 29 


Parisut Syam—616— 
Birth _ of Cyama—74. r 


- Parisut, bringing forth, from Skt: prasdéi. 


85, -qGoqdod oy95—G97 
_ Phum sutik. Syam—617 
They (his parents) bathe and put Cyama to sleep—74. 4 


Phim = M.T. 4, phurn, to bathe (some one); this form is 
probably due to the -assimilation of 0, pa(p), which forms causal and 


1 Burmese og, shy, almost always represents the Sanskrit '¢7; ‘¢f, ogegq ™ pastva, 


30 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 11 


active verbs, with a following , 4: 06 = §; so, ood, pahap = of, 
phap, to feed; 25, hap = to eat; oof, pahuai = 4 phuai, to 
mix; oj}, huai = to be mixed. Sutik, to put to sleep; on the force of 
prefix s(u), wide note on Sikil, No. 64. Whether the old prefixes sz and 
su are to be treated as being different, the first denoting more particularly 
the future and the latter an active or causal sense, it is impossible to 
determine now, for we have too few examples of verbs with su prefixed 
in this sense; to decide such points many more clear examples are 
needed; whereas the old prefix 08, si, and its attenuated form 99, s, 
are common ‘enough in the modern language. oq, su, has not, so far as 
I am aware, yet been found, except in its attenuated form, 2, s. The 
lengthening of a medial vowel, as Zz, in this word sutik, was common 
enough: skir, to dig, and skir; glik, a- loin-cloth, and gliki 
cin, an elephant, and cin; din, a city, and dun; tiy, the sign 
of the past, and tuy; phdmm in the present plaque and phum in 

the next (86). 7 | 


86, 290§ 95 oqG25—Go0 
Supar phum Syam—618 
The suparnas bathe Cyama—74. 8 


After his parents have bathed him, the suparnas take him to their cave, 
bathe him, take him to the top of a mountain and make on his forehead 
the sectarial marks. 


Supar, from the Skt. suparna = M.T. 2008, sapaw, S.B. 20; 
A.V. 81 = garuja. The word kinnara, used in the Pali (VI. 74. 3) 
instead of suparna (P. supanna), has become in M.T. 35, kanaw. 


87, agaS Beouos SoS—¢og 
Syam titey ptit—6r9 
Cyama leads (his parents) out (of their shelter)—75. 6 


His parents take shelter from the rain among the roots of a tree, but a 
snake living there in an antshill becomes angry and emits a poisonous 


PART 1] ©  TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 31 


breath; both become blind. At last Cyama finds them; hé holds a long 
pole out to them, of which they seize the end, and he leads them out of 
their shelter. 


Titey = MT. oo, thatai, more often written 3%, datai, which 
means, to take along with one, by holding the hand, as for instance a child, 
or an animal with a rope, or a blind man by holding the end of his stick 
(as is the case in this plaque), etc.; od seems to be the colloquial, and 
so the literary, form. Here are a few examples: Dh. Dip. 94. 4— 
ad@emoSsoo2$o}—" she took away her child, holding him by the hand”; Dhce. 
148. 15—pd§Q3$ o acdgayS gar202— “like Indra leading his queen Sujata by 
the hand,” S.V. fol. kha, of . . . s@a@sao0d acoapelas Richa —" Madd... 
taking her two children by the hand, ascended the. cart.” 


Ptit, to cause to come out = M.T.; for the long medial #, see 
sutik, No. 85. 


88. ars05 9q05 08$ eqaad—Gyo 
Kal Sy&m tin tmo’--623 
As Gyama goes up the mountain—75. 23 


Gyama goes, followed by a band of sinnaras, to gather fruit in the 
mountain for. his parents. 


On the Ananda, this plaque is wrongly placed, as well as wrongly 
numbered 623; it should be numbered 620 according to the course of the . 


events in the story; I have here placed it in its proper sequence. 


89, ogo5 8§Go5 639085 sg—e@yo 
Syam pinrih abo’ aba—62o0 | 


Cyama ministers to his parents—75. 28 


Coming back from the mountain, he makes it his duty to wash their 
feet, warm their cold limbs and give them the friits he has brought back. 


32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 


Pinrih, to minister to, attend on, take care of; I know of no modern 
form of this word; it corresponds to the P. pativyjaggatt. 


go. oy28 9$ coped FS—¢ yo 
Syam mun slop grip—621 
Cy4ma informs (his parents) he is going to enter the forest—76. 5 


He informs his parents he is going into the forest to bathe and fetch 


water. | 
Slop: the prefix s here denotes the future, the immediate future. 


QI, ogoS |ec008 S—6 5) 
Syim lop grip—622 
Gyama enters ie forest—76. 6 


He goes to che bathing place i in the forest followed by two tame deer. 


92, M25 ogaS_opa5 990d —@ yg. 
Kal Syam tuk d2k-—624 
As Gyama i ig ition: water—76. 22 


Plaque 88,. as has. been said, IS: wrongly numbered 62%. 


93. m8 GE of oypdS—Gy9 
Kai smi pafi Syam—625 
The king shooting Cyama—76, -24 
King Piliyakkha is hunting; while Cyama is drawing water, he shoots 
him with a poisoned arrow which goes through his body. 
Pafi = M.T. vf, pan, to shoot, with a bow. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 33 


94. BE goood og 032S—Gj 6 
Smin gulaii ku Syam—626 
The king converses with Cyama—77. 14 f 
Piliyakkha runs-to. Cyama, and a conversation follows; the king, 
touched by the virtue and meekness of Cyadma and his devotion to his 


parents, promises that after his death—for the boy’s wound is deadly— 
he will himself look after his parents in the forest as if they were his own. 


95. 80008 cooS— 654 
Pilayak yam—627 
Piliyakkha weeps—82. 25 


Then the usual signs of approaching dissolution make: theit appeatance, 
and King Piliyakkha, thinking Cyama dead, weeps bitterly. 


96. S8c00005 gaxd—G yo 
 Pilayak pujaw—628 | 
Piliyakkha does homage (to Cyama)—84. 26 
He offers flowers to the body, sprinkles water on it, and goes, taking — 
with him the jar from which he had sprinkled the water. 
Pujaw, for pijaw = M.T. gf, pijau, from the P. paya, an 
offering, to offer. A small dot on pu appears to make the reading pum- 
jaw, but it is only a defect in the glaze. 


97. acd BE gE gE oqd—aye 
Kal smin ran pyunh Syam—629 
When the king brings (the parents) and shows (them) Cyima—go, 3 
For ran, see No. 64, and also ran, No.5. Pyun, to show = M.T. 
@1§, pfiua; this word is found also in plaques 199 ‘and 316. 
5 


34 EPIGRAPHIA ‘BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


98. 629005 9g 028 0095—¢90 
_ Abo’ aba Syam yam—63o | 
The mother and father of Cyama weep—go. 5 


99. © cogo3§u0r—Goo 
Pa saccakirya—631 
(They) make an act of asseveration—gt..12 


Then the mother, the father, and a goddess, each in turn make a 
solemn act of asseveration, so as to counteract the effects of the poison and 
thus snatch Cyama from death. 


TOO, M05 aS cmd5—Go/J 
Kal Syam kew—632 
Then Cyama (rises) bright (again)—92. 25 

The act of asseveration produces (as it always does when truthfully 
made) its effects, and Cyama rises fair and strong as before; both parents 
recover their sight, Every one is happy, and the king, reverentially saluting 
Cyama, returns to Benares. 

Kew = M.T. cod, kew,. to be bright, clear, beautiful; happy; it 
answers here to the P. salyénadassana; in common parlance, they have 
an expression, qoSco25, muk kew, which means “to have a bright, happy 
face.” 


FOI, SE GoQr’, og2d-—Go0 
Smit Igor Syam—633 
The king reverentially salutes Gyama—o4. 7 


Lhor = M.T, ess, lnow. 


PARTI] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 38 


1V.-—NIMI-JATAKA 


Nimi is a very holy king, ruling in Videha.: Sakka sends his charioteer, 
Matali, to fetch him and show him round all the heavenly mansions. and the 
hells. After reaching a great old age, his barber shows him his first grey 
hair; then the king renounces the world and becomes an ascetic. . 


The Pali has the form Nem# once only, at page 96. 24, and has 
regularly imi: everywhere else. The. Talaings and Burmese havé adopted 
the form Memt. . 


102, 103, corresponding to Nos. 634 and 635 and probably cepre- 
senting the conception and birth of Nimi, are missing. 


¥O4. 6005 com} cs8—G a 
Mey laksan Nemi—636 
(The fortune-tellers) look at Nimi’s (bodily) signs—g6. 20 


105. mos 638 BI—C0r 
Kal Nemi kmin—637 
When Nimi is ruling—96. 27 


Nimi’s. father becomes a hermit in his mango-grove and makes over the 
cares off the kingdom’ to his son, who becomes king. 


106. 308 e93—Co0 
in smafi Nemi—632 
Indra-is questioned by Nimi—98. 3 


A. doubt arises in Nimi’s mind as to whether almsegiving or a retired 
holy life is better. Sakka, wishing to solve the doubt, comes into the 
presence of Nimi, and, on being questioned by him, answers that a secluded 
ascetic life is better than alms-giving. 

Sma = MT. ap§, smn, here used in a passive sense, cf. No, 298, 


36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. it 


107, 0208 $o§ «s8—Go¢ 
Matali niman Nemi—639 
‘Matali invites Nimi (to get into the chariot)—103. 29 


The gods in the Tavatirhsa heaven become desirous of beholding so 
pious a king, and ask Sakka to bring him to the heavenly abodes. Sakka 
sends his charioteer Matali to fetch him. M4&tali invites Nimi to come 
into the heavenly chariot. . 


108, 20008 99095 co$ecqpS5—Ggo 
Matali smafi tanrow—64o 
Matali asks which way (Nimi wishes to go)—104. 19 


Matali then asks the king which road he desires to take first: that of 
the hells or that of the heavens? Nimi replies he will visit the hells first. 

Tanrow = M.T. od, tarau, a road, way; a variant is tinrow; 
another variant, cinrow, is. found in Pagan -Talaing Inscriptions; 
the equivalence, in Talaing, of the palatals and dentals surd (aspirate and 
unaspirate) is very frequent; cf proqd, clah cardai, 093, tlah 
caradai, majesty, glory, magnificence, pomp; beauty, grace, charm; 
9238, cmadai cmin, ogd$§, tmaai jmin, a present, gift; osos5, 
ca-a’, cososd, tha-a’, and also oo, ta, to vomit; of$, canhin, of$§, 
tanin, to carry (on the shoulder); og:, camlah, oog:, tamlah, free, 
not enslaved; §, cuiw, §, -duiw, up to, until; %, jwi, 8, dwi, the 
left (side); @95, jaram, sep; daram, and oS, dharam, a granary. 


109, 638 8§ sqaS—Ggo 
Nemi bir narak—641 


Nimi looks at hell—105. 29 


Bir = M.T, 4, buiw 


PART. 1 ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 37 


110, 678 8§ 800§ 02§—69J 
Nemi bir wiman swar—642 
Nimi looks at the heavenly mansion (of the goddess Birani)—117. 2 


A defect in the glaze makes mz look like mi. 


111, $8 Qooog8, 2Q gi—SG0 
Nimi gulafi ku In—643 


Nimi converses with Indra—127. 30 


The dot which appears to be on the gu of gulafi is only a defect in 
the glaze of the plaque. 


“12, 638 83, poxs—Ggg 
Nemi dindu fiah—644 
Nimi instructs (his) ‘people (in the practice of the Law)—128, 30 


Nah, besides the meaning “he, she,” given in Haswell’s, also means, 
first, a person, as in the expressions gosee5, fiah jnok, “a great person,” 
a chief; o:5S fiah gman, “a person of courage,” a warrior;  pot9j6, 
fiah dun, “a person of the city,” a citizen, etc.; second, the people, as 
in opeot, tlafiah, “the lord of the people,” the king; in the passage 
corresponding to this plaque the Pali has mahéjano (VI. 128.27); third, it 
is also used -as an interrogative = Who? what? which? Sudh. 9. 13, 
e103 03/5 ge.pes—" Who is this little girl, sir?”; Sudh. 28. 2, goss008 06 005§ 
cop—" What were those sixteen wonders ?”; S.B. 12, 07899:9ecep— Who 
are you, sir?”; S.J. 5, g9s§e§es>ecqp— Who is my father? ”, 


113. $8 coed SBcodss—eoy 
Nimi mey sinko’—645 
Nimr sées (his) grey hair—128, 31 


As with his father, so also with Nimi; his barber perceives the first 
grey hair and shows it to him. 


38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA you. it 


114, BE e983 o eG{—eoe 
- Smih Nemi ma ir—646 
King Nimii leaving the world—129. 3 


Then, following his father’s example, Nimi enters upon an ascetic life. 


For ir, see No. 34. 


Vi~—MAHA-UMMAGGA-JATAKA 


The king of Videha has. four wise men, so self-styled; there appears 
Mahosadha, the Bodhisatta, a fifth and real wise man. Then follows a bout 
of wit between Mahosadha-and the four others, the latter never being able 
to give the right answers to numerous problems and knotty questions, the 


former invariably succeeding. The four false wise men try in many ways to 


undo Mahosadha, but he finally triumphs over them. 


_ This story, which is very popular, is not known among the Buriese by 
the name of ‘ Mahd-ummagga,” but as “ Mahosadha-jat,”. ”. after the name 


of the hero; the Talaings call it ‘‘ jat-Mahos.” 


115, 0f00$, ocur205— G91 
Patisan Mahos—647 
Conception of Mahosadha—33o. 5 


116, 080905 escosxds — ego 
 Parisut Mahos—648 _ 
Birth of Mahosadha—338. 7 


GU ee mood 8 0305 B$o058—Gge 
- K&l In kil kin-uy—649 
When Indra gives the medicinal herb -(to Mahosadha)—341. 1: 
Sakka, desiring to make it known to the world that the Bodhisatta 


Was 


born among men, came and placed a medicinal he etb.in the baby'e hand: 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 39 


this medicine cured instantly all sorts of diseases; the child was therefore 
called Mahosadha, “ He ofthe: great medicine.” 
Kin-uy = MT. 03j, ga+u-uai, and 08, ga-’uai, medicine. 


118, 0600908 0805 HA$g05—@go 
Mahos kil kin-uy—651 
MMahosadha gives the medicine (to his mother)—331. 16 


This piaque is wrongly numbered 651, instead of 650. 


Z1Q, © Beooss oevosd— G90 
Pa himo” Mahos—65:. 
The naming of Mahosadha—3 32. 1 


120, 0600205 6808: oB§iu02—G 9 y 
| Mahos kil kiryi—652 
Mahosadha gives ornaments (to the thousand children) —332. 9 


One thousand boys are found to have been born at the same time as 
Mahosadha, and the father of the latter resolves they should be his son’s- 
attendants.. A festival is celebrated for them, at which they are given 
ornaments. | 

Kiry 4, from the Pali 4¢r#y@, and kriyd; -but in Talaing, as well as 
in Burmese, this word has acquired the meaning of: articles of dress, orna- 
ments, utensils, tools. 


121, 0600008 B§ 02 gocS—Gqo 
Mahos wifi ku puwak—69§3: 
Mahosadha plays with (his) companions——332. 10 
Puwak, a companion; a follower, attendant = M.T. 905, bwak; cf. 


Dhm. Dip. 28. 12, @¢8 sog5a(Gcducosec 59, ogdSaog.— he subdued the fierce 
demon,.and the demon became his attendant.” It is also found written 9005, 


40 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 11 


bhawak, at S.B. 18 = coooiiod, bhawak knak, a follower, retinue, 
and corresponds, in the Pali of the same story, to partvdra (Fausb. VI. 186. 
10); cody, bhawak krau, is again found at S.B. 27. This word is 
derived from the verb 05, bak, to follow; cf .also’ M.T. ce5, bok, a 
follower. 


122, 615 scood G5—Gy¢ 
Dow lop jrap—654 


(Mahosadha’s companions). run to enter the rest-house—332, 15 


Mahosadha is now seven years of age. While playing with his com- 
panions, an unseasonable rainstorm bursts forth; he, uncommonly strong, runs 
and enters a rest-house; the other children follow him, tumbling and bruising 
their limbs. 

Dow, to run = M.T, 6, dau; jrap = M.T., a hall built on the 
roadside for the convenience of travellers, a rest-house; of. the Burmese : 
a95, jarap. — 


123, 0600205 oBcS w§—eg9 
-Mahos kil thar—655 
Mahosadha gives the gold (to the carpenter to build a hall)—332. 22 
Mahosadha, considering that his thousand companions, while at play, 
suffered from the heat in summer and from the rains in the. rainy season, 


decides to build a hall; he tells the boys to bring each a coin and, having 
called a master carpenter makes the money over to him, 


Thar, gold = M.T. 0, thaw. 


124, 0600205 Bs* (GS—Gq 6 
Mahos kindain jrap—656 
Mahosagha builds the rest-house—333. 5 
He is not pleased with the’carpenter’s plan; so, he himself designs a. 


plan, in which were separate rooms for all sorts and conditions of people, 
and superintends the construction of it, 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 4! 
Kindam, to build = M.T. o§ kanham. It means also “to do, 


make”; S.J. 84, o§cogo’$|—" he- made, that is, picked up, a quarrel”; 
e035, to make (write) a book. 


125. 600005 cfg’ 00§ — 694 
-Mahos kindam kathbar—657 
‘Mahosadha constructs a tank—333. 17 
He finds the splendid rest-house not quite complete yet, and has a tank, 
with many bends and a hundred bathing-places constructed. 


Kambar, ‘a tank = M.T. og, kma. The dropping of final 7 is 
oo, 4; bar = el, ba; if. the vowel before it is short, it 


frequent; 4r = i 
is lengthened by compensation: skamir = 8, kami 


126, 0su205 802§ — G90 
-Mahos bicar—658 | 
Mahosadha decides cases—393. 2 5 
Seated in the rest-house, Mahosadha used to decide the cases of all who 


came to him. — | 
Bicar, to decide cases, investigate; investigation, case, from -Pali 


vicareti. 


127, o60x5 09905 gi$—Co¢ 
~Mahos suruh pcun—659 
Mahosadha causes the (piece of) meat to fall—334. 22 via 


A hawk carries off a piece of meat; Mahosadha utters a powerful shout 


which seems to go through and through the hawk which, in its fright, lets 
| 6 


42 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 


go the meat; Mahosadha follows its shadow as it is falling and receives ‘it 
in his hand. | | . 

Suruh, to fall, or cause to fall off = M.T. o§05, saruih, to fall. 
off, drop down, as fruits or leaves: it is used colloquially : oga8 ) 03053 § 99 
soodagasgoo} GafoSccobus8—'' I know not why, this year, all the fruits fall off 
in my garden.” 


128, 800§ 6g28-—GGo 
: Bicar jlow—660 
The case of the cattle—335. 8F 


A man steals another’s cattle; they quarrel; both are brought betore 
Mahosadha. He asks each what he feeds the cattle on. ‘On rice gruel, 
kidney beans and sesame flour,” says the thief. “I could afford to feed” 
them only on grass,” says the real owner. Mahosadha has the cattle given 
panic seeds, the animals vomit grass, and the case is thus decided. 


Jlow, cattle = M.T. §, glau. 


129, 800§ 0&8—G@o 
' Bicar ganthi—661 | 
The case of the necklace of thread-—335. 37 


A woman had tied together some threads of different colours into a. 
necklace. One day, she goes to bathe; while she is. in the water,-a young 
woman looks at the necklace, asks permission to try it on her neck, and runs’ 
away with it. The other follows in pursuit and overtakes her. They are 
brought before Mahosadha. He asks the thief what she perfumes her 
necklace with. ‘“ With a compound of all scents,” says:she. _ But the owner 
says she is poor and uses only gryangu flowers. The young sage has the 
necklace placed in a vessel of water; an expert in perfumes is then called 
in-and asked for his opinion. ‘ This water smells of pzyangu,” says he, and 
this settles the case. | | | 

Ganthi, for Pali gantht. 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 43 


130, 800§ scooxcS—6G) 
Bicar tol—662 
The case of the cotton thread—336. 21 # 


A woman watching cotton fields one day makes a ball of.’ fine thread. 
“While going home she gets into the tank by the rest-house ‘to bathe; 
another woman sees the ball and runs away with it. _Mahosadha asks thie 
thief what she has placed inside the ball to roll the thread on.- -" A cotton 
seed,” says the thief. The true owner replies she has put in a timbaru seed. 
Mahosadha untwists the ball and produces the ¢iméaru_ seed. | 


Tol; cotton = M.T. cooodi 


131, 8006 soo}—¢Go 
Bicar kon—-663 
_ The cast ‘of the child—336. 31 7 

A woman bathes her: little son in the tank ; “she then places him on her 
clothes and herself takes a bath. An ogress - -comes,. takes up the child, ‘and 
flees. Mahosadha draws a line on ‘the ground, places. the child on it, and 
bids: the two women ‘pull, one by the head, the other by ‘the feet, saying 
‘that the child would. be given to who. pilled “fardest. At. the . first cry 
of the baby, its mother lets go: in anguish. © The Spectators agree with the 
sage that.she who cannot bear. to see the. child’ suffer ‘is the mother, and 
her son. is given back to her. 


192.3 anno Bong (B3§—G6o. 
Kal bicar kindar—664 
Deciding the case of-the wife—337. 16 f 


A dwarf marries. One day, he and his wife set out on a journey to 
visit her parents. They come to a shallow pond; thinking it very deep, they ° 


44 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


are afraid to cross. A poor man chancing that way tells. them he can cross 
it; he first. takes the wife across, and, in:the middle of the pond, makes her 
promise to be his’ wife; she accepts. The dwarf runs after them, and the 
noise of the dispute attracts the attention of Mahosadha, who decides whose 
wife the woman is and hands her back to the husband. 

Kindar, wife; the modern form is o0«08, kalaw. I have not yet met 
with this word. anywhere but in A.V., where it occurs frequently: p. 114= 
dara; 136 = pajépati ; 156 = piyd; 171 = bhartyd; 87 = gharani; etc. 


133. 0600205 Boog ofcdS—ee 
Mahos bicar kwil—665 
Mahosadha decides (the case of) the cart—338. 21 F 


Sakka, the king of the gods, desirous of making patent to all .the 
wisdom of the sage, drives away. the cart of a man. The latter follows in 
pursuit. Mahosadha, at certain signs, recognizes Sakka, and easily decides 
the case as to who the true owner is, 


Kwil = 'M.T. o, k wi. 


134, sonmoggo— 666 
Dandakapanha—666 
The riddle ofthe pole—339. 11 f 


The enemies of Mahosadha, hoping to lose him in the esteem of the 
king, put their heads together and invent some puzzles which, they thought, 
he could not solve, The first was that of the pole. They procured an 
acacia pole and had it finely smoothed by a turner. They then sent word to 
the villagers that, if they could not make out the root from the top of the 
pole, they would be heavily fined. They repaired to the sage. He tied a 
string right in the middle of the pole and, holding the string, softly set down 
the pole on the surface of the water ; the root, being heavier, sank deeper 
.than the top. Thus he solved the riddle. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 45 


135. o205 8028 oBS5—ee4 
Kal bicar kdip—667 
‘Deciding the case ‘of the heads—339. 29 # 


Next came the case of the skulls. Two skulls, that of a man and that 
of a woman,- were sent to the’ villagers, asking them to point out which 
was which, under penalty of a fine. The sage solved the riddle by pointing 
out that, whereas the Sutures in a woman’s head are crooked, those in a 
man’s are straight. 

Kdip, the head = M.T. §, kduip; with kdip the modern 
literary form ofS, knip, may. be compared. . | 


136, s0c80p00—G Go 
Ahipafifia—668 
The riddle of the snake—339. 347 
Two snakes were then. brought ; they had to distinguish the male 


from the female. The sage solved the problem by pointing out that the 
tail of the male snake is thick, that of the female thin, etc. 


Pafifia, a mistake for pafiha; the plaque shows no sign of the 
subscript A. 


137. QgBigoep—S Ge 
_Kukkutapafiha—669 
The riddle of the cock—340. 1 f 


‘The villagers were ordered-to. vaid in a white bull with ‘horns on his 
legs and a hump on his head, which regularly gives out his voice three times. 
Mahosadha showed this to be a cock, which has’ horns .on his feet, that is 
the spurs, and a hump on his head, that is the crest, and he gives voice 
three times a day. 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 11 


138, oaBop>—G10 
Manipaithi—67o 
‘The riddle of the gem—340. wid 


-The gem given by Sakka to King Kusa. was contorted in eight places.) 
Its thread was. broken, and_ owing to these contortions no one could take 
out the old thread and put in a new,one.. The villagers weré given the 
task of putting in a new thread, The sage smeared the jewel with honey, 
also one end of a' new thread of wool which he inserted a little way into 
the hole; he then placed the jewel’ where there were ants.’ The ants: ate 
the old thread and pulled through the new one. 


139, eccoxdS So0§ g0000-—G 1.9 
- Mahos bicar usabha—671 
Mahosadha decides the case of the bull—340. 18 


‘The royal bull having been well fed up, so that his belly swelled, was 
smeared with turmeric, The villagers were sent this bull z# caéf and told, by 
royal order, to deliver him. The sage instructs aman. The latter goes to 
the palace lamenting loudly. On being asked by the king the cause of his, 
laments, he answers that his‘father is in labour and cannot bring forth. The 
king perceives the cleverness of the: counter-riddle and-is pleased. 


140. OJspogp—+GrJ 
Odanapafiha—672 
The puzzle of the rice—340. 357 


Une day the villagers are asked to send to the palace boiled rice cooked 
under eight apparently impossible conditions, such as: without rice, without 
water, without fire, etc. As usual, the sage solves the puzzle most easily, 


1 For this translation, more in keeping with the text than that of the Cambridge translation of 
the Jataka, see N. Peri’s “‘ Un conte hindou au Japon,” B.E.F,£.0., Vol. XV, No. 3, page 5, footnote, 
At the end of the same paper have been reproduced plaques Nos, 34, the riddle of the pole; 136, the 
riddle of the snake, and 138, the riddle of the gem. . 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 4] 


141. ologooopg2— 42 
Valukapafiha—673 
The puzzle of the sand (rope) —341. 10 fF 


The villagers were sent word that the rope.of the — swing being 
broken ‘they must procure a new one, made of sand. The sage again got 
the villagers out of difficulty by a counter-request. He sent a deputation to 
the king, to ask him fora small piece of the old sand rope, so that the new 
one might. be made of the same size. 


142. cocoaMUpHI—F1g¢- 
Talakapafiha—674 
The puzzle of the tank—341. 22 7 


The villagers are told the king desires they should send him .a new tank 
covered with lilies... Mahosadha again thinks of a counter-quip. -He sends to 
‘the palace men soaking wet, with their bodies covered with miud. On being 
asked what they want, they answer to the king that they had caught a tank 
‘in the forest, but when she saw the city she was frightened and ran away ; 
they then ask for the old tank to help. them: bring in the.new one. 


‘Talaka, instead of ta | aka’ (Skt. tadaka). 


£43. Qoyrrogne—419 
- Uyyanapaitha—675 
The: puzzle ‘of the -Patk—34a. 4 F 


The dfllsgars are requested to send the king a-new park filled with’ trees 
and flowers, the one he had being old. This request is met, as above, by 
another request. a oa 

Uyyana, park : this is the full Pali form; there is an abbreviated 
form, goop$, uyydn; there are found also two abbreviated forms from 


48 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 


the Sanskrit udy@nua— pao, udy 4, in the Bliridatia-jataka, plaque No. 224, 
and 9942, udyan, at S.B. 10 and S.M, 19. 


144. ofoo{gogs—¢r6 
Gadrabhaprasna—676 
The question of the ass—342. 7 f 


Mahosadha is called to the palace to assume office; he takes his father 
with him. Both arrange beforehand that, when in presence of the king, the. 
father, rising from his place, would ask the sage to take it: a serious 
breach of etiquette on the part of a son. When they perceive what has 
happened the four ministers laugh and call Mahosadha a fool; the king 
expresses his discontent. The sage then asks whether the sire is. always. 
greater than the son. “So it is,” says the king; Mahosadha has then an _ 
ass brought in, and asks whether, in the event of the ass getting a mule 
colt out of a thoroughbred mare of Sind, the colt would be more valuable, 
or the ass? The answer is, the colt. The sage thereby shows that he, 
through his wisdom, is greater than his father. | 

Prasna, from the Skt. pragna, the palatal sibilant being changed 
into the dental. .There were both the Pali and the Sanskrit forms for the: 
same word. There are examples of this dual borrowing in the literary 
language. 


—145,.. 0609905 .60Q9§ sog—G11 
‘Mahos laor amba—677 
Mahosadha salutes ‘his father— 342. a8 

When. called to the palace, together with his father, to assume, office, 
the sage salutes him, and instructs him to give up his seat to him in 
the presence of the king. 

This plaque should come before the previous one, for those instructions 
to‘his father take place before they, go to the palace and therefore before 
the episode of the ass depicted in plaque 144. 

Amba, father; there is also.a form, aba, more common. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 49 


146, 60205 wcBo—G1o 
Ket manika—678 
Taking the jewel-—344. 28 7 


In a crow’s nest on a palm-tree on the shore of a lake, there was a 
jewel. The reflexion of the jewel was seen in the lake, and it was thought 
the jewel was at the bottom. The lake was emptied of its water twice, but 
the precious stone could not be obtained.: The sage is appealed to and 
easily finds it. . | 


147. maanmvp7—G 1G 
Kakandakapafiha—679 
|The « case of the chameleon—345. 29 f 


The king went, riding on his elephant, with the sage to the park; a 
chameleon, which was on the gate, came down and crouched before the king. 
On enquiry, the sage explains it was paying its respects to the king; the 
king, pleased, orders that a half-anna’s worth of meat should be daily given 
to it. On a fast day, the servant, unable to procure meat, tied the half 
anna on the chameleon’s neck, and it became very proud of its wealth, so 
that, when the king again passed that way, it took no notice of him. The 
sage again explains to the astonished king. 


Y 48. SE orrcomcBospp9—Goo0 | 
| Sirikalakandipaftho—680 _ 
The case of good and bad luck—347. 4 f 


A man very” unlucky (kalakanni) marries a very ‘lucky (siri) girl, and 
owing to the man’s bad luck and. dispositions the. marriage is not consum- 
mated. While on a journey he abandons her. - The king meets her and she 
becomes queen. The king, one day, refuses to believe that a man could 


7 


so EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — [ voi. 1 


abandon such a beauty; one of the four ministers says he does not believe 
any man could do so; but the sage says he believes it; the two could not 
mate, even as good luck and evil luck cannot meet together, 


Kalakandi, wrongly for kalakanni. 


£49, Scnve927—-Gao 
‘Mindapafiha—681 
The question of the ram—349. 19 f 


The king one day saw a ram and a dog which had made friends.’ The 
ram brought meat for the dog from the kitchen, and the dog grass for the 
ram from the stables. He puts this occurrence in the form of a question to 
the four ministers and to the sage, saying: ‘Two natural enemies have 
become so friendly as to be inseparable. What is the reason of it?” 
Naturally, the four ministers fail to answer, and the sage solves the question, 
to the king’s delight. 

Minda, wrongly for menda. 


150, gecor$ odsoS o§ —Coy 
Buton pandit pan—682 
(He) instructs the four pandits—353. 6 


The four ministers were nonplussed when the king. put to them the 
“question of the ram,” and could find no solution. The sage has already 
found it, and, full of pity for the four pandits, whom the king had threatened 
with banishment should they fail, he makes them sit below him in the attitude 
of pupils listening to their teacher’s instructions, and teaches to each one 
stanza which, though coming very near the solution, yet does not entirely 
solve the question, and thus saves them from disgrace. 

Buton, to instruct = M.T. cg2$, bton; there is also a variant, 8cao§, 


binton. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 58 


E51, SQogocap2—Gag 
Sirimandapafho—683 
(The king putting tc the five) the question of the Rich 
and the Wise—356. 8 


On the m cof manda, the glaze has flaked off, making it appear as 
m 3. 


1§2, ocoosa8 eooseS (Gag2-—Cag 
Mahos soh prasna—634 


Mahosadha answers the question (of the Rich and the 
Wise) —356. 8 = 


The king having put toe the five pandits the question of the Wise and 
the Rich: which is the better?, the four ministers opine for the rich man, _ 
but the sage conclusively proves that the wise is the better man. The king 
overwhelms him with gifts. 


Soh, to answer, solve = M.T. 2905, sah. 


1§3, 0602905 99995—Go9 
Wahos smai—68s5 
Mahosadha asks (Amara whether she is married, etc.)—364.. 18 


The sage is now sixteen, and queen Udumbara wishes to look out for a 
wife for him; but he prefers to go in search of one by himself. So he sets 
out: disguised as a tailor, He meets Amara, the beautiful, wise and lucky 
daughter of a once rich family.. She was carrying rice-gruel to her father 
working in his field. They both fall in love at sight. To test her wisdom, 
he resolves to ask her questions by gestures. So he clenches ‘his fist, 
meaning “Have you a husband?” and in answer she spreads out her hand, 
meaning “I haye not.” 


52 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 11 


154. ©600005 © oo79q—GoG 


Mahos ca yagu—686 
Mahosadha eats the rice-gruel—g65. 


Amara offers him some rice-gruel, which he accepts. He then goes to 
her house by the way indicated by ‘her in a riddle. | 


155. 600005 805 JoS—¢oy 
Mahos sjifi glik—687_ 
_Mahosadha stitches clothes—366. 7 # 


He reaches the house and meets with Amara’s mother. Knowing they’ 
were poor, he resolves to. help them; so, first, he mends for nothing their. 
old clothes, then those of the villagers, and in one day makes one thousand 
coins, 

Sjifi, to sew, stitch = M.T. 086, sjin, 8. jin; of & jmin, sewing, 
stitching, couture, and 9236 sma jmif, a tailor; sjif corresponds to 
the Pali stbbatz, “To mend” is, properly, ys5 or cyosS, bla’ or blo’. 


156, e305 o& ©60090S —Gn0 
Krow jun Mahos—688 
(Amara) washes Mahosadha’s feet—366. 26 


In the evening, when Amara comes back, she washes her: ‘parents’ and 
the sage’s feet. 


Krow, to wash = M.T. = krau. fiers MT. as, juin; 
see under plaque No. 82, ee | 
1s, 600209 snobs gE— Gog 
Mahos let pun—689 | 
oy smears the boiled rice (on Amara’s head and body)—367. 8 


The sage a a few days in the house to test Amara’s temper. For 
instance, he gives her rice to cook; one part of it she boils, with the other 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 83 


she makes gruel, and with the third a cake, The sage’ finds them delicious, 
but to test her, he makes a mixture ofthe three and ‘rubs it on her head 
and body. She does not in the least get angry. 


158. oeo208 BS g/$—¢ eo 
| Mahos kil gnun—690 
Mahosadha gives (Amara) a loin-cloth—367. 13 
After a few days, the sage gives Amara’s parents the money he had 


brought with him and that which he had earned by stitching;. to Amara he 
gives a petticoat and tells her to follow him. to town.. 


Gnun = M.T. 8§, gnin, a woman’s loin-cloth, a petticoat; of ab. 
kmun, to reign, a variant of o$§, k min. 


159. scone ef cooS—G¢o 
Mahos mun cow—691 
Mahosadha informs (that he is about) to return (home) —367. 1 


The sage, having asked Amara to follow him, comforts her parents and 
takes leave. 


Cow, to return = = M.T. $6, cau. 


160, 9609205 SeoS—Ge@) 
Mahos bibat—692 ; 
Mahosadha tests (Amara’ S chastity) —367. 17 | 


Arrived in town, in order to test her virtue, he tells her to waitin the 
gate-keeper’s house,. goes home and sends some of his men, with a thousand 
coins, to tempt her; thrice she refuses. Then he has her dragged before 
him clad’ in. his cereniohi dress, and she does not recognize him, But 
she still refuses. He is convinced of her ‘chastity. 


54 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [eroi.. HE 


165, os000 0 odw-—Elo 
Mahos pa mafigala—é93 
Mahosadha marries—~368. 7 


The next day Mahosadha brings the girl to the palace and marries her 
amid great rejoicing. 

Pa mangala, to perform a religious ceremony, especially the 
ceremony of marriage; the expression is still used in common parlance; the 
Burmese have the same expression: dco2QoopS (mangala pru safi). It is 
the equivalent of the Pali mangalam karoti, to perform a ceremony, hold 
a festival, which is often used in the jataka in the sense of “to marry.” 


162, 6ecn205 0096 09$--Ee¢ 


Mahos taw man—fo4 
‘Mahosadha lives as a potter-—-369. 27 


The four ministers, wishing to undo the Bodhisatia, steal from the 
king his golden slippers,.a gem from the crest, his robe and his neckiace, 
which they sent surreptitiously to the sage’s house. They are received by 
Amara, who carefully motes down the day on which, and the persons by 
whom, they were brought. The ministers induce the king to put-on these 
things and they cannot be found. They then accuse Mahosadha of theft. 
The latter comes to the palace to explain; the king refuses to see him. 
The sage, afraid, consults with his wife, exenpes from the town and goes 
to live at a potter’s house. 

Taw = M.T. 0, tau, properly means: to dwell, reside, live in or at, 
to be (in a place), ete.; sSec5@&B8acpa—" the nagas who dwell at the foct 
of Mt, Sineru,” S.B. 7; 2000928 §&59gS—" a white bull (whose) horns 
are on his feet,” S.M. a2; sgilooseqp—" where are the flowers?” Dhd. 93. 
‘These meanings are not catered in Haswell’s, who, moreover, on page 35, 
gives it as a “‘euphonic affix”; placed after another verb it shows that an 
action or state is going on, and the example he gives—vormesGoockSasq— 
literally means: (the light) is or was shining. 


PART !] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 55. 


Man, a potter; the modern form is cooo§, laman, by means of 
prefix 1a; man now means: to make pots. This legend might have been 
transiated: “ Mahos lives at a potter's.” The Skem here reads: 4$s0300c0g0$ 
-—“he fled and waited upon a potter,” that.is, took service at a potter’s. 


163, GO§ OcC92D—=G Eg 
Wen Mahos—é6¢5 
(The courtiers) go about (looking for) Mahosadha—g72, 11 f 


The deity that resided in the royal umbrella, not hearing any: more the 
voice of the sage, and finding out what had happened, resolves to bring 
him back. She puts riddles to the king, who asks his four ministers, but 
they cannot solve them. The devaté then repeats the Firefly riddle, threat- 
ening the king with death if he does not solve it. The king, terrified, sends 
four courtiers, with presents, to find out Mahosadha and bring him back. 


For wen, Haswell gives one meaning only: to play. But it means 
also: to go about, wander, roam.; to go to; to visit ; BD Gods09608 3 358.05 08070 
—‘j'll go first to my house,” Sudh. 3. Be cniBeobo5>—" come and’ visit. 
us, it is not far.” The plaque represents the courtier bes has found him, 
after going about looking for him, and offering him the king’s presents, 
Besides the meanings above given, wen has also the following, not in 
Haswell’s:—(a) to avoid, eschew ; egreso&c03—"‘ people (should) avoid him,” 
Dhd. 239. 18; svogco&eo} gqffoS— who does not eschew bad deeds,” -Dhd. 
54.3; (8) in vain, to no purpose, for nothing ; $B vonoseoBahieo8 pate0o—" having 
amassed property, shall I give it for nothing to people?”, Gpi. 14. 


With wen = to go about, roam, compare cof, gen. 


164, op4& Gp24, O28 —G EG 
Tlun nor man—696 
Coming from the potter's—374. 9 
The courtier explains his mission to Mahosadha, who accompanies him 
to the town. 
Tluf, to come = M.T. o9)§, klua; there is a variant, <)&, tlia. 


56 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ voOL. 1 


165, 00005 oSSoop9S— G67. 
-- Soh simmafi—697 | | 
(Mahosadha) answers the (king's) questions—374. 19 


The king receives him kindly and, to test his loyalty, puts him a 
number of questions; he then asks him to solve the four riddles put to him 
by the goddess, having first got down from his throne and made the sage 
take his place, as a mark of deep respect for his learning. The umbrella- 
goddess, delighted, gives the sage a casket full of the seven precious things. 
In the plaque, the casket is represented twice; first, in the hands of the 
goddess, as she is giving it, and then in the hands of Mahosadha.._ 

Simmafi, a question = M.T. 8, sman; ago 38 305 9 o[8359—"'a 
question arose in the naga-city,’ S.B. 11. There are two variants: 


summafi and sumaii. 


166, p08 0§ o2|& a92095—Geo 
Nah pan tluh smai—tg8 | 
The four come to ask (questions to Mahosadha to entrap him)—378. 22 7 


_ The four ministers, vexed at the return to favour of Mahosadha, resolve 
again to undo him. They go to his house and ask him, “ To whom is it ght 
to tell a secret?” He answered, “ One should tell his secret to no one,’ 
They return to the king and denounce the sage as a traitor, telling what he 
thinks about secrets. For not to tell a secret to the king is treason. 


167, YS 925 qood—-ee 
“Smif smafi rahas—699__ 
The king asks (Mahosadha concerning) secrets—379. 29 f 


The sage is called to the palace and, before the other four; is asked by 
the king to whom secrets should be told. Mahosadha maintains that to tell 
a secret is bad; that none should be told until it is no more a secret. The 
king is displeased’ at this answer, and the sage perceives that he has been 


PART 1] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 57 


entrapped by his enemies. He becomes uneasy and resolves to know the 
ministers’ secrets that very day. | 


Rahas, a secret; Pali rahassa. 


168, egl& Belg0S s$oS— 00 
Dmon kinrom danih—7o0 
(Mahosadha) is under the trough—381. 23 7 | 


The king, believing .Mahosadha a traitor, becomes anxious. He asks 
the four ministers what ought to be done; they answer he must be killed. 
The king gives them his own sword and bids them kill him at the door in 
the morning. Every day, on leaving the palace, these four were in the. habit 
‘of sitting on a trough_at the palace gate and talking about their plans. 
The sage gets under the trough, and there learns of his projected murder, as 
well as the several secrets of his enemies. . 

Dmon, to dwell, remain = M.T. §& dmdaa; kinrom, ‘under ; .the 
equivalent of this word, which would probably be s{egoS, I have not yet 
found in the literary language; it is also not colloquial. But modern Cam- 
bodian has it: krom = en bas (Aymonier, Dictionnaire Frangais-Cambodien). 
It is found as karom_ in. the Khmer- inscription of Vat Prah Keo, 1283 
A.D.i—danih, a trough = M.T: 05, dnih, -and cope’, tneh; dnih 
is properly a dry measure = doni := Skt. droni, which means also a 
trough for feeding cattle. The Skem has cog5a08§, tneh-amuin = a 
trough; amuin and amuin is a dry measure, and also a trough ; 
the Pali in this passage has bhattammana and. ammana (Vol. VI. 381. 23, 
25). 7 : 


169+ oaBos ogg, ecoox08—100 
Pandit su-er Mahos—7or 
The (four) pandits: look for Mahosadha—38s, 22 f 
Early next morning, the four pandits, armed with swords and posted at 
the gate, awaited with expectancy the coming of the sage. But they did not 


1G, Ceed’s, Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya, p, 18, B.E.F.E.0., Vol, XVI, No, 2 
| 8 


58 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. I. 


see him; for the queen had sent him word of.the others’ treachery, and 
bade him come well attended. So he did, and the plan of his enemies 
failed. The king received him well and was convinced he was no traitor. 
Then the sage tells the king the secrets of the four ministers, which he 
had surprised under.the trough. The king, incensed, throws them in jail, 
and orders them to be impaled outside the city. Mahosadha pleads for 
them, and the king gives them to him as slaves; he immediately frees them 
and begs of the king to reinstate them in their positions. The king agrees. 
Su-er: this reading is quite clear in the estampage and in the photo- 
graph; the plaque itself, which I have examined, leaves no doubt as to its 
being correct. Taking the scene depicted on the plaque together with the 
text, the meaning of su-ér is, I think, clear, and means; to look with 
expectation. I have not found any corresponding form in the modern 
language. There is a word, oog8, shew, which means: ‘to look, look at, 
look for; this may perhaps be the modern form (?), with the usual elision 
of the vowel « and the insertion of # to facilitate the pronunciation. - But I 
do not feel quite confident of this equivalence, for the simple forms <¢6, &, 
fiew, fi, are also found. The Skem has the word 4§,;rdf, to look, Qy/§ 
o950§s00209§$1203 §ao020$08 poso$Bh$4SsS05q— the king gave his sword to the 
_pandit Senaka. In the morning, all the four pandits were looking for him.” The 
scene depicted is when the plot has failed and Mahosadha has entered the 
_king’s room, which the four ministers also entered; unless we take it that 
two scenes are represented—one which shows the ministers. waiting for the 
sage at the gate: the swords which they are holding seem to corroborate 
this ; the other, the sage in conversation with the king. In the next plaque, 
without their weapons, they are sitting in the royal room in humble posture.. 


170, 060090 gco2: po: o$ —10) 
Mahos bulah fiah pan—7o2 
Mahosadha sets free the four persons—389. 17 £ 
The: scene depicts the ministers being given as slaves to the ‘Sage, who 
sets them free. | . 


Bulah = M.T. .ecos, balah, to set free, to let go. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 59 


171, 0600905 8egoé o89j2—209 
Mahos pindon kirya—7o3 
Mahosadha sends presents (to the 101 kings)—390. 17 # 


Now, Mahosadha’s power became paramount and he practically governea 
the kingdom. To be ready for any eventuality, he had the capital strongly 
fortified; large water-tanks were built, and vast quantities of grains 
gathered. Along the ramparts and between the watch-towers, he dug three 
moats—a water-moat, a mud-moat and a dry moat. ‘He sent men with 
valuable presents to the 101 kings at their capitals, bidding them take 
service at their courts and report regularly on their doings and plans. 

Pindon, to send = M.T. oS, palan, after elision of the infix 
-in; the letters / and'd (dh, t, th) are often used interchangeably ; modern 
Talaing offers many examples of this; cf cod, lalam, and cos, 
ladam, to quiet, appease.-- Medial -zd- regularly becomes /, 


172, 0600205 8eg0€ ogo05— og 
7 Mahos pindon tnak—7o4 
Mahosadha sends (his) parrot—390. 24 # 


At that time, Sankhapala, king of Ekabala was assembling a large 
army. Mahosadha’s spy sent news, adding he could not find out the reason 
of it. Then the sage sent a parrot to find out the truth and report. 

Taak, a parrot = M.T. cocgos, tanhek. For the change of: vowels- 
of. kyak-and kyek, in Blagden’s Talaing Inscriptions. The form tnek 
occurs also'a few plaques below (No. 181). 


173. cg270d Q& SRE— og 
Taak ran pinrih—7o5 
The parrot brings news 
The parrot, having ascertained what was going on at Ekabala, flew to 


all the capitals of India to listen to what was afoot; he thus came to 
Uttarapaficala, the capital city of Kampilla, whose king’ was Cilani- 


60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ Voc. 11 


Brahmadatta. Kevatta, the chaplain of Cilani, took the latter into the park, 
so that nobody might hear their conversation, and then prevailed upon him 
to conquer all India with his mighty army. The parrot, which was perched 
on the tree above the king, heard the conversation, went back to Mahosadha 
‘and feported to him: there was danger from no other king but Cilani. In 
the plaque, the parrot is seen on the right shoulder of the sage. 

Raf, see note on raf (plaque No. 5). There is no virama on the # 
of ran. Pinrin, news = M.T. o8§ paruif; this word has another 
meaning which has not been noted by Haswell; it may often be translated 
by “about, concerning.” Ex, , poggrogisr BeaooSoGEgo5aq o5ac00§ a9 2992005g03 — 
“the wise, thus knowing shout (that is, the evil consequences of) the sin of 
stealing another’s wife... ,” Dhd. 357. 8; “ CQ EaBadoooSaSc8Gag2$.a9159$acor— 
“they conversed about sulieving and happiness,” S.B. 27; 8338. ... 
086 2S095B-Gocraf$oig— King Nemi ... discoursed to the people about 
Tavatirhsa,” S.N, 2. 


174., This plaque, No. 706 of the series, is missing, 


175. cco opopS YE—101 
Maho smafi.smin—707 
Mahosadha is asked by the king’ (how Mithila shall be delivered from 
its enemies) —396. 23 


It is well he has fortified the capital, for Ciilani, king of Paficala, has 
conquered all India, added the armies of 101 kings to his own and is now 
marching on Mithila, The sage is made aware of all this by his parrot 
and his spies; he alone knows. Vast quantities of food, and water. are 
brought : ‘into thé city and numerous warriors called in. King Ciilani arrives. 
He wants to poison the 101 kings, his vassals; but his plan is defeated by 
Mahosadha. Then Cilani prepares to storm. the city. -.The four wiseacres 
hear the noise, and are nonplussed, for they. know nothing; King Vedeha, 
too, raves with fright. He sends for the sage and asks him how Mithila 
can be ‘freed from his enemy. Mahosadha encourages him and unfolds 
part of his plans, | | 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 61 


The s in Mahos has been omitted by inadvertence. As it runs, this 
legend might be read ‘“ Mahosadha questions the king ”; but it is the king 
who asks the questions and not Mahosadha. The verb smafi is used 
in a passive sense; cf. No. 106. 


176, 9609205 coc 295—100. 
Mahos tal. pkaw—708. 
. Mahosadha is planting the flower—gor. 3 f 


King Ciilaniihad conquered all the kingdoms of India, except that of 
Mithila, where reigned King Vedeha. Kevatta, his’ ‘chaplain, knowing the wit 
of Mahosadha would defeat’ all their endeavours, tries to dissuade Cilani from 
attacking this small kingdom. — But Cilani does not listen and lays siege to. 
the capital, It was hoped to reduce it by water-famine, for it was thought 
the city had its water-supply outside; in reality, it was well stocked with 
water. To discourage the enemy, Mahosadha procured bamboo poles sixty 
cubits long, had them split in two, got the knots removed to <allow the flow 
of water, had them joined again, covered with leather and smeared with mud. 
‘He sent for the soil and lily-seed which had been brought from the 
Himalayas by some hermits; he planted the seed in the mud on the edge 
of a tank, placed the bamboo ‘over the seed, and filled it with water. In 
_one night, the seed grew up and flowered, rising a fathom above the top of. 
the bamboo. The flower with this extraordinarily long’ stalk was sent to 
Ciilani, who knew he could not reduce the city by cutting off the water. 


Tal, to plant = M.T. o§8, tuiw; an old final / is, in the latter 
language, ‘either dropped or changed. to final w; cf. gil, to be sick = M.T. 8, 
gi; kintal, surface = M.T. om, gata; ‘tak cotton = M.T. cm28, tow; 
bal, army = M.T. &%, buiw. Tal translates the Pali ropeti in the text 
(p. 40%. 6). 

Pkaw, a flower = MT. g, pkau.. ee one “Sau, wrongly 
entered in Haswell as “a carver in: wood,” also means “ flower”; it is 


often found in writings. with the infix '7, & {3s, pkausesrau. 


62 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


177. 0609209 o8 6398 9)5—0¢ 
‘Mahos ti nor dun—7o9 
Mahosadha leaves the city—403. 31 f 


Mahosadha, surrounded by one thousand warriors, his former playmates, 
leaves the city to fight the “Battle of the Law” with Kevatta. 
Ti, for tit, by inadvertence, to go out = M.T. Nor, see plaque 39. 


178, o600905 0 Se0905— 900 
Mahos pa dhammayut—7I0 
Mahosadha fights the Battle of the- Law—404. 27 


Many means were resorted to to subdue the city, but in vain. At last, 
Kevatta said to Cilani, “ There is a way: I shall invite Mahosadha to fight 
the Battle of the Law; it is thus: the two sages of the two kings shall 
meet at one place, and the one who salutes the other. first shall be 
vanquished. I am the older, so Mahosadha will salute me, for he has never 
heard of this battle. And we shall thus conquer the city.” But Mahosadha 
had. The sage was accordingly invited. Before leaving the city, as depicted 
on the preceding plaque, he asks king Vedeha for the gem contorted in 
eight places (see plaque 138) in order to conquer Kevatta with it. The 
two wise men meet. . Mahosadha offers the gem to Kevatta, who takes it, 
but it slips from bis hand, and in his greed he stoops down at the other’s 
feet to get it back. The sage presses him down to prevent him rising, 
saying: “Do not, O teacher, make obeisance to me, for I am younger 
than you!” Ciilani with his army, seeing what had happened, fled. 

- Dhammayut, the “Battle of the Law,” as explained above, is the Pali 
dhammayuddha. Owing to whitewash, the legend in the photograph is not 
quite clear, but the plaque itself is quite legible. 


179, soD0g3 o|§ 93998—199 
Kevatta tlua smafi—7rr 
Kevatta comes and asks (for Mahosadha)—413. 13 
Cilani had now been one year in his capital of Uttarapaficala. Keyatta, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 63 


his chaplain, cannot get over his ignominious defeat. He elaborates a plan 
to entice the king of Mithila and Mahosadha tq Uttarapaficala and do away 
with them. This plan consisted in so praising the charms of Princess 
Paficalacandi, Cilani’s daughter, to the king of Mithila, that the latter would 
be mad with desire; Kevatta then would go to Mithila and fix a day for 
the king to come and fetch the princess. The plan is put into execution. 
Kevatta arrives at Mithila and sees the king, who falls in his trap. The 
king, glad of this apparent reconciliation between himself and Ciilani, desires 
his wise man also to be reconciled to Kevatta, and sends the latter to 
Mahosadha for that purpose; But Mahosadha deigns not to speak with 
Kevatta, for he is sure he has come for some foul purpose; so he closets 
himself in his room and bids his men prevent Kevatta approaching, 
Kevatta comes and asks for. Mahosadha, but he is prevented from seeing 
him. 


180. BE gS aQ ocoord8—10) 
Smin mdac ku Mahos—712 | 
The king is angry with Mahosadha—417. 16 


Meanwhile, the king had asked his other four wise men what they 
thought of Cilani’s offer of his daughter; they all answered he ought to - 
proceed to Uttarapaficala. Mahosadha, after Kevatta’s departure, goes to_ 
the palace; the king asks him also his opinion, and the Sage answers, in 
strong language, that he ought not to go. The king becomes very angry, 
and Mahosadha, always prudent, takes his leave and returns home. 


Mdac means “to be angry,” and is no doubt a form of go, pnat, 
which appears also as ocan205, panot, and a form cand, panat, is quite 
regularly possible; Halliday tells me he. has found the form oa, manat; 
d and ~-are phonetically. closely related, though I have not met with 
any other example of their being’ thus interchanged.: The plaque represents | 
Mahosadha fleeing before the ‘king’s anger, and confirms the meaning of 
mdac as given above; it is confirmed also indirectly by the next plaque, 
for the instructions to the parrot come, ‘in the text, immediately after the 
sage’s departure from the king’s presence. The three estampages taken at 
different times leave no doubt as to the reading. 


64 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


181, 0600905 cBo3$ 93 eogad—r90 
Mahos kifikan ku thek—713 
Mahosadha instructs his parrot—418. 22 


Mahosadha resolves to find out the true meaning of Kevatta’s mission. 
So he instructs his parrot to go to Cilani’s palace, make friends with his 
minah bird which knows all his secrets, pump her out and come back and 
report. 

Kinkan, see plaque 62, Thek, see plaque 172. 


182, ogo08 6098 6704 99908m2—1 9g 
Tnaak cow nor salika—714 
The parrot returns from the minah bird—g25. 16 7 


The parrot goes as directed, makes love to the minah, and learns from 
her that the real intention of Cilani is to kill the king and. Mahosadha; 
then he leaves the minah, comes back and makes his report. 


183. 200208 a§ » 9924 —199 
Mahos mun na s-ar—715 | 
Mahosadha tells (the king) that he is going (to Uttarapaficala)—426, 27 


Mahosadha, having ascertained the’ true state of affairs, goes to the 
palace and, knowing the king was bent upon going to Uttarapaficala, the 
_ Capital -of Cilani, to marry the latter’s daughter, evolves a plan in his mind, 
by which-the king was to get his heart’s desire, come back to Mithila 
happily and see the disgrace of his enemies. But he must go there first, 
and he tells the king of his intention. Leave to go is graciously granted. 

The last part. of the legend in the photograph is difficult. to read 
rightly, some of the letters having been somewhat spoiled, and I was able 
to decipher it correctly only’ on examining the plaque itself. 

Mun, to tell, inform, apprize, notify, see plaque 42. Na has not here 
the meaning of “by means of” given it in Haswell; but it is equivalent 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON’ THE. ANANDA 65 


to o3$,.tnah na,.a conjunction meaning “that”; -it is also equivalent to 
the Pali attham, atthdya, “for, for the purpose of, for the sake of,” 
when before nouns, and to the Pali infinitive ws before verbs; the s in 
s-ar (M.T. go, s-a) indicates the: future (see plaque 64); na s-ars 
“that (he) will go”; the Pali has -herée aha gacchémi (= gacchissami) 
pure, “I will go beforehand,” which the ‘Skem literally translates, © 805 
 gpoogat Or s-ar may be taken as a noun, “ going,” and the legend be 
translated: “he tells (the king) for going,” that is, “begs (the favour of). 
going.” The following are examples of o3$ used before nouns :—soa0%ca§o} 
$ Sqpolo8 ogSsa29[& epar(fudq—“‘ the thera Assaji.entered the city of Rajagriha 
for alms,”‘ Dhd. 226. 21. ee Ne mother, for the sake 
of (her) son... ,” Dhd. 18. 8. 


184, sooo 9/6 eae 
— Lop dua Pathcal—716 
(Mahosadha) enters the city of Paficala—428. 1 


Mahosadha, with a great army of artisans and labourers, sets forth on. 
his journey; at every league he builds: a village, and puts a courtier in charge 
with instruction to have horses and elephants ready against the king’s return, 
to convey him speedily to Mithila. At ‘the Ganges, he—crosses over and, 
from the place of landing, . measuring the distances says: “This is half a 
league, here. shall be built the great tunnel; in this spot’ shall be a town for 
our king to’ dwell in; and from this place to the palace, that is a mile, shall 
be the small: tunnel. ” ‘All these were to be built for the safety of the king. 
He then entered the city. 

Lop, to enter = M T.. 098, up. “The form lop is also very ss 
in literary Talaing. P athe a] = Uttarapaficala, 


185. qoored 0 YE go8—r07 
‘Gulafi ku smia Cilani—717 
(Mahosadha) converses with king Cillani—428. 10 ¢ 
Mahosadha is well received by Cilani; they converse together; the 
sage tells him of his intention to build a palace for his king to dwell in, and 


permission to do so is granted. 
9 


66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou u 


186, oc00205 BZ oQul§—oo0 
Mahos kindam supan—718 
Mahosadha fixes the stairs (firmly)—428. 29 


After his conversation with Cilani, Mahosadha, bent upon the perfect 
safety of his king, begins to carry out his plans. Standing at the foot of the 
stairs in Cilani’s palace, he thought that the entrance to the little tunnel 
should be there; he had obtained permission to do anything he wanted, He 
was afraid the stairs would come down while digging the tunnel. He told 
Cilani he had remarked a defect in the stairs, and, under pretence of 
remedying it, takes the stairs down, builds a strong wooden platform where 
the mouth of the passage was to be, and thereon fixes firmly the stairs. 


Kindam, properly “to build” (see plaque 124), and here, by 
extension, “to repair, fix,” etc. Supan = Pali sopd@ma, stairs, staircase, 


ladder. 


187, ea05 8 639935 BE—109¢ 
Ket sni abo’ smin—7I9 
(They) take the king’s mother’s house—429. 16 # 


King Cailani tells Mahosadha that he may build a palace for his king in 
the city; but the sage wishes to build it on the spot he had previously 
chosen outside the city. However, he seems to acquiesce, but tells the king 
that the owners of the houses he may choose to pull down will come and 
make endless complaints; to allow him, therefore, to post. his own men at 
proper spots so that no one should come into the presence of the king and 
trouble him. Cilani agrees. He chooses first the house of the queen- 
mother, and sends his men there ordering them to take possession and do as 
if they were about to pull it down. The queen-mother is angered, but 
1S prevented from complaining to the king; she gives a heavy bribe to be 
left in peace, and her silence is thus secured, being afraid of the ridicule of 
paying heavily to stay in her own house. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 67 


188, e005 os emoos—1 Jc 


Ket shi Kewat—720 
(Mahosadha) takes Kevatta’s house—430. 15 7 


Kevatta is treated similarly to the queen, and has also to pay a 
hundred thousand pieces. 


189. 600095 62928 os) BE—1 yo 
Mahos slop shi smin—721 
Mahosadha enters the king’s house—~430. 20 


He thus makes a semblance of seizing many houses in all quarters of 
the city, and receives a bribe at each, for the people thought all this was 
taking place by royal order. Then he-returns to Cilani’s palace. 


Slop, to enter = lop with prefix s (vzde plaque 64). 


190, 0600905 o3§ go08&—1) J 
Mahos kir uman—722 
Mahosadha digs the tuinel—~431. 17 7 


Mahosadha tells the king that the citizens are ready enough to give up 
their houses, but when they are about to be demolished they are stricken 
with grief; he does not want to be the cause of such legitimate grief. And 
he goes on to say it would be better to build the’ palace’ outside the city, 
and that he has found a convenient spot. The king agrees. That no one 
might see what was going on, he asks the king to forbid all citizens to go 
near that spot, for, says he, there might be a quarrel; the king again agrees, 
Then Mahosadha goes to the chosen spot and sets about building the great 
tunnel for his king’s flight. One entrance to the tunnel was on the Ganges ; 
on the other side of which he built a large village, with elephants and horses 
in readiness; the other entrance was in the city itself well dissimulated. 


68 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. u 


Kir, todig’= M. T Bi, kwuiw; some words with the infix D, igen 
properly forms nouns, are used as verbs; it must be remembered that, 
Mén, the distinction. between noun and eth is, to a great extent, vague 
and indefinite, the same word being either the one or the other. The old 
word kir would regularly give a modern form *of, kuiw (cf jin = M.T. 
S$, juin; tin = §, tuin, etc.), which, if extant, has not yet been 
found. There is, however, the form with the infix w, oj, kwuiw, a spade 
(Schmidt, 68. 8; 72.3), also found written of, ‘t wuiw, which is again used 
as a verb: BeSoasoh af s22002q qo coGogaza ASoon§ ayo ar 95 oYod oSfioBi so} 
qiSGS—" owing to having been seven days with but little food, at that 
moment, fierce gases arose within. her stomach -which dug: (that is, cut, 
slashed) her heart,” Dhd. 160.. 2; sgl&o0Se]jaSo§, AoSofsl§—" tore and dug out 
both his eyes and gave them in alms,” Dhd. 33. 26. o8| means (1) to dig, 
dig into, dig out; hence, (2) to stir, disturb, and (3) to slash, cut; literally 
= to spade. Here are a few examples. of nouns in w_ used. ‘ago .as 
verbs: $8o0603|§o)—"the treasure which is at’the rising of the sun” (#.e. to 
the east; the. Pali being surtyuggamane nidhi), S.J.; gojock{§—“as the sun 
was rising,” S.M.; from §, tuin, to rise, ascend, ajo5, twut, weaving ; 
to weave, S.B., from 0705, tut, to weave, N.V.K. If. 7; there is also 09(05, 
tmut, weaving, N.V.K. If. 10, ¢ogo58i5, swek jwuiw, a quarrel; to 
quarrel, A.V. 60, from coooS$5, sek juivw. 

Uman is the Pali ummagga,.a tunnel; .there are two other variants, 
umanh and ummaan. 


TQT, 0go3 BY g[& 09 coor — J9- 
Waddhaki jin dlun ku Mahas—723 
The shipwrights make over the ships to Mahosadha—432. 27 
It will be remembered that, before setting out from Mithila, Mahosadha 
gave orders for ships to be built. Three hundred shipwrights having 
built three hundred ships and loaded them, brought them down and made 
them over to the sage. 
Mahas is a mistake for Mahos. 


PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 69 


Waddhaki = the Pali vaddhaki, carpenter. Jin, .to give, give 
over, grant, confer = M.T. §§, juin; with: this word compare 4, 
phyuin, to hand over, deliver = oo§$, pasuin, ibd. The aspirate q, 
phy, is often the result of 0, p + 0,5; eg. gS, phyaw, to put down = 
of, pasaw; gs phyuf, to give to drink = om; G5, phyuik, to 
render or make happy = oofo5, pasuik. Cf. plaque 33. | 


192, ©600905 BegrE co&—r1y 9 
‘Mahos pindon weh—724 
Mahosadha sends (the boats) out of the way—432. 30 


Then the sage, not wishing in any ‘way to arouse suspicion, sends the 
shipwrights to put the boats away in a secluded place. 


Wen, to avoid, esthew, keep out’ of the way; see plaque 163. 


193. 0600905 ol& BE— 7) 5 
-Mahos wah smia—725 
Mahosadha goes out to, meet the king (Vedeha)—433. 18 


The new city for the use ‘of his king, the big and the small tunnels and 
everything else being ready,-Mahosadha goes to meet King Vedeha who has 
arrived at the Ganges. 

Waa, to go out to meet, the fuller forms being 83/6, waadua, 
ol&a(So\§, wah du tlun, 


194. YE 99295 ecoorx05—1 jG 
Smin smafi Mahos—726 | 
The king (Vedeha) asks Mahosadha—g42. 9 


He takes King Vedeha to the newly built city. King Calani agrees to 
give his daughter, to Vedeha this.very:day;. but in reality he sends word to 
array his mighty legions in order to ‘surround Vedeha and kill him. 
Meanwhile, Mahosadha has tricked Cilani’s mother, his consort, son and 


70 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA von. 1 


daughter through the tunnel into a safe place. Vedeha, impatient with the 
apparent delay of the princess’s arrival, looks out of a window, and is 
terrified at the sight of Calani’s innumerable army surrounding the city. He 
naturally thinks this is due to a lack of prudence on the part of Mahosadha. 
He first asks his four wise men how they could get him out of this danger; 
they are at a loss. Then, lamenting, he asks Mahosadha, who answers 
there is nothing to fear. 


195. god gob oy YE BB—rI1 
Pubar umaa ku smih Widih—727 
He shows the tunnel to King Vedeha—433. 33 & 


Vedeha was comforted. Mahosadha ordered the door of the tunnel to 
be thrown open, when its magnificence appeared in a blaze of light. The 
king and the ministers enter the tunnel. 


Pubar, to show, exhibit; pu is a variant of the causal prefix pa, often 
written ba (cf. su= sa, page 23), M.T. is of, babuiw; caoo$oQydocgr5 
yoSgoor GloleBddconeGegpqs—“‘ when the young princes who were clever in 
wrestling came out and showed the king a fight,’ Dhe. 150. 17; 3ledocBag2 
§G0dq Blo Big FZ ogodqucel 8oocheGags0g|§o3—“‘ the Bodhisatta having shown to 
the people that the extremity (of the pole) which sank first (in the water) 
was the root, and the one which sank after, the tip,...,”’ S.M. 11; 
0gsg§Qgcguccoed oF po:—‘ this brahmin to-day has shown him (the snake) 
to the people and made him dance,” S.B. 19. 


196, 0805 692% QgE—rJo 
Tit nor umman—728 


(Vedeha) comes out from the tunnei—445. .18 


When, through the tunnel, the king and his ministers come to the place 
where Ctjani’s family are kept, the latter shriek in fear. Cilani hears and is 
puzzled, but keeps quiet for fear of being laughed at at the very thought his 
family were prisoners. Mahosadha sets Princess Paficalacandi upon a heap of 
treasure, sprinkles her according to the ceremonial of marriage and makes 


PART | | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 71 


her over to the king as one of his queens. The place they were in was 
near the Ganges. The ships are brought, and Vedeha, coming forth from the 
tunnel, goes aboard ship taking his new queen, with her mother and brother 
and C@lani’s queen, as prisoners. Mahosadha remains behind to bring back 
intact his master’s army. 


197, B$m$ og BE 88S—r yo 
Kinkan ku smin Widih—728 
(Mahosadha) instructs King Vedeha 


As the king is going to embark, the sage instructs him, asking him to 
treat properly his hostages. © 


This and. the preceding plaque again bear the same number. 


198, qeosp8 ag ea~aS—1 Je 
Gulafi ku Culani—729 | 
(Mahosadha) converses with (king) Cilanim451. 5 7 


In due course, Vedeha arrives at Mithila, his capital. The sage then 
goes back to the tunnel, buries his sword in the sand at the door and enters 
the city, where he, takes a much-needed rest. At dawn, Calani orders his 
armies to approach the city and utters dreadful threats to awe Vedeha. But 
Mahosadha shows himself, magnificently adorned, and, in conversation with 
him, makes Cilani know that his plans have been foiled. 


199. gle GO20S goy2085 3924 —~190 
Pyun boy gnakyak a4r—730 
(Mahosadha) shows (Cilani) the way (his) queen is gone—456. 17 


Cilani becomes furious, and orders the sage to be put to death; 
Mahosadha points out to him that any harm which befalls him will also 
befall his wife, mother and son; to the astonished king the sage reveals 
that they are in the hands of Vedeha. Then in safety on the upper 
Storey of the house, Mahosadha points.out, in a number of stanzas, the 


72 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


way the beautiful queen is gone; thus while praising the beauty of the queen 
and making the king long for her, preventing him effectually from ordering 
any violence to be done to himself, through fear of the possible revenge 
which might be wreaked on his wife. 
| Pyuai translates the Pali (VI. 456. 17) acikhhana, from acikkhatt, to 
show = Mod. T. &§, pfiun. | 

-_Boy = M.T. 3, bwai; this word is used in many senses, to form 
adverbs and adverbial expressions, and as a preposition with the meanings of: 
by, to, towards, from, as, about; in this plaque it is indicative of direction : 
-boy 4r, the way she went, and renders the Pali (VI. 456. 19) tto gata ; it 
is also used in M.T. to form adverbs of direction: 3903, against, 3o5eo5an | 
%aorayo—" throwing dust against the wind,” Dhd. 172. 27; 3ecosoecpof— 
“straight or directly towards.” The: following are a few examples of its 
uses : i aaa aie ga know -me.as “Narada,” S.J. 70; 38988ao5— 
“by us it was heard... ,” S.B. 1; Becoancelwooqog9S—" by his common 
appellation,” Dhd. 29. 1; Qs2c§oi5—‘of .one’s own accord,” Dhd. 578. 20; 
Yooys—“'in detail, in full, 7 extenso,” S.B. 24; o§ —t righteously,” Sudh. 7, 
4; 3005, “suitable, fit, proper” (from eo, “to follow ev = anukilya ; 
88\05—in circumference,” Dhd. 60. 11, and many others not recorded in 
Haswell. The forms 0%, 0%, babwai, babai, are also frequently -found ; 
€x., &8 Gogd—"‘ in due course, in regular order,” Sudh. 24. 25, Ja. VI, 179. 
6 = anupubbena ; e05—" righteous, righteously,” Dhd. 236. 16, ‘It is also 
found reduplicated: 33ccg§—‘' in due ' course.” 


200. geo o§ Qoé—199 
-Ciilani bar umah—731. 
(King) Ciilani looks at the tunnel—459. 1 


When Matioeadha having thus praised his queen to Cilani, the latter 
longs for her and his children and thinks: . “The sage alone can give me 
back. wife and children,” the sage tells: the king that his mother, wife and 
son will be given back to him, the only condition is ‘his (Mahosadha’s) 
return. The king now wonders how it is that, the new city being closely 
invested, his family could have been taken away from his own palace’ without. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 74 


anybody having been aware of it. Mahosadha mentions the tunnels, and 
shows. them to him. 
Bar, to look, look at = M.T. §, buiw. 


1. 8008 8g cod oq BE—10) 
Bibat dirhat ku smin—y32 
(Mahosadha) measures strength with the king—460. 10 


Mahosadha shows the king the marvels of-the tunnel, its one hundred 
and. one bed chambers, etc:; there was a mechanism by which the door of 
one being opened, all opened, or being closed, all-closed. Having visited the 
tunnel, the king comes out, and immediately the sage ‘had all the doors 
closed, shutting in all _the king’s attendants. Then Mahosadha takes the 
sword he had the day before hidden i in the sand at.the gate, leaps eighteen 
cubits in the air and, seizing the king’s arm: ‘“ Whose, Sire, are all the 
kingdoms of India?” “They are yours, my dear sir! Do spare me!” 
Then the sage comforts the king, and both strike up a sincere friendship. 


Bibat, see plaque 9; dirhat, see plaque 29. 


(202, BE o7 gerd (B§00r2—100 
Smin klam pujaw kirya—733 | | 
The hundred kings offer ornaments (to Mahosadha)—461. 17 


Mahosadha opens the tunnel’s door, and the one hundred and one kings 
come out. They address the sage: “ Wise sir, you have saved our life; had 
we stayed in a little longer we would have died.” The sage explains this 
was not the first time, he had already done so when he had all the 
vessels in which was poisoned dtink broken, and by which Cialani, on the 
advice of Kevatta, had tried to do away with them. Cilani begs pardon of 
the kings, which they gladly grant, and they, full of gratitude, present many 
ornaments to the sage. 

Pujaw, for paijaw= M. T. gf, piijau, to offer or present something 


in token of homage or honour or worship ; Pali, pi7a. 
10 


74 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1. 


203. BE gq} ecvor08— 109 
Smin pumun Mahos—734 
The king invites. Mahosadha (to stay at his court)—461. 25 


The king, desirous of keeping such an eminent man at his: court, offers 
the sage much honour and wealth if he consents not to go back to Vedeha. 
Mahosadha thankfully declines. 

-Pumun, to invite; beg, entreat; I-am not sure of the exact modern 
Talaing for this word ; but: perhaps ibe word oo§, ga’man, to invite, which 
I have not yet found in the literature but which is colloquial, may be com- 
pared with it. There. is a word, mun, met. with several times in. these 
‘plaques with the meaning: to tell, inform, apprize (see_plaque 42), which 
means also “to entreat” in plaque 213; pumun- is no doubt related to it: 


204, 0600905 008 9)8—1929 
Mahos cow duh—735 
Mahosadha returns to the city (of Mithila)—463..10 # 


Mahosadha promises the king to send back immediately his mother, his 
queen and his son, and ‘Teturns: to Mithila with great wealth. 


205, ocx SegoS s02—106 
Mahos pindon co—736 
Mahosadha sends back (Calan? ’s family)—465. 4 # 

He arrives at Mithila and is received amidst great rejoicings ; then he 
tells King Vedeha it is time to send back the three hostages. They are 
accordingly sent back. Calani, learning of the great hospitality. and honour 
that had been shown. them, sends Vedeha a rich present, and both. kings 


become’ great friends. 
Co, for cow, to return = M.T. 6, cau. 


. 206 0383 corn $ ogé 8ea—191 
Kumin kon smin Wideh—737 
They énthrone the son of King. Vedeha—466. 19 f 


Paficalacandi, the daughter of Calan, was much loved of King Vedeha. 
She bore him a son; in his tenth year the king died. The sage, raising 


PARTI]. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 75 


over him a white umbrella, instals the young prince on the throne, and begs 
leave to visit the young king's grandfather Cilani. 
Kumin, ¢f. plaque 25. 


207. 09918 99295 ocvo20S— 90 
Paribbac smafi Mahos—738 
A female ascetic asks Mahosadha (by gestures, why he does not 
become an ascetic)—467. 21 

Ciilani receives him with great pomp, and the sage takes service under 
him according to a former promise. The queen, however, disliked Mahosadha | 
owing to his having separated her from the king ten years before, and she 
sets some of her ladies to watch him closely in order to catch him tripping 
and lose him in the esteem of the king. Now, a female -ascetic regularly 
‘took her. meals at the palace ; ; she had never seen Mahosadha, but had heard 
- of his- wisdom; he, likewise, had never seen her, but knew she came to the 
palace. One day they: met in the. courtyard of the palace. He saluted her. 
Then, to test his cleverness, she asked him questions by signs: ‘“ Does the 
king treat you well?” “ No, the king is very tight-fisted.” Then she puts. 
her hand to her. head, showing the peculiar coiffiire of ascetics, meaning— 
“Tf you are dispinaned, why do you not become. an ascetic? ”"—and the 
sage answers by showing his stomach, meaning—"‘ It is impossible, because 
I have many to support.” | 

Paribbac = Pali paribbajikd, a female ascetic. 


208: eeco20S 99095 of 9s85—19¢ 
- Mahos -smafi paribbac—739 
Mahosadha ‘asks the female ascetic (to find out the king’s mind) —469. 6 7 


The queen’s ladies have seen the strange’ conversation and, misinter- 
preting it, report to- the king that Mahosadha and the ascetic are plotting to 
take his life. The king: questions the ascetic, who explains the true Meaning 
of the signs, and Cilani, delighted, appoints Mahosadha generalissimo. Maho- 
sadha, surprised at the honour, reflects that kings often do such things when 
they intend slaying one; so, in order to know how things stand, he pays her 
a visit and asks her to find out- for him the’ king’ s‘mind. She does so witl 
great cleverness, and finds out-that the king is really very fond of Mahosadha. 


76 ' EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { von. th 


209, p02 © ay S08 o GogrG§—1g0 
Nah ma kya bicar ma lior—740 
The persons who have lost the case salute reverentially (Mahosadha) 


Although this plaque bears the number 740, it is certainly in the wrong 
place; it ought to have come after one of the numerous cases tried by 
Mahosadha in the earlier part of this story. As, however, at the end of all 
these cases, the two parties make obeisance to the sage, it is impossible to 
say to which of these this plaque belongs. 

Kya = MLT., to lose; the # subscript under 7 in Inor is invisible 
in the photograph, but quite legible on the’ plaque. 


VI—KHANDAHALA-JATAKA. 


This story is popularly known in’ Burma as Candakumara, from 
the name of the’ hero. Candakumara is the son of the king of Benares 
and is viceroy. The brahmin Khandahila is the royal chaplain, he is also a 
judge partial and corrupt. A suitor, dissatisfied with Khandahala’s verdict, 
complains to the viceroy; .Candakumara decides the case most cleverly 
and to the satisfaction of the people, and the king appoints him gi 
The brahmin resolves to take revenge on Candakumara. One morning, i 
his sleep, the king sees the splendours of the heaven of the Thirty-three 
Gods, and wishing to go there, he asks - his chaplain the way thereto. 
Khandahala answers the only way was to sacrifice his queens and his 
children, The foolish king orders the sacrifice. After many. touching scenes, 
Sakka rescues Candakumara and the other innocent victims. 


210, 0909024, 0095 802§—r99 
Candakumar taw bicar—741 
_ Candakumra is deciding the Cas€—131, 21 
Khandahala, wicked chaplain and false judge, having decided a case 
wrongly, the wronged suitor complains to Candakumara; the jatter takes him 


to the court, tries the case and gives an equitable verdict, to the loud 
applause of the people. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA : OF 


211, §& 694 8024§—19) 
Smin or bicar—z742 
The king causes him to try (cases) or 
(The king appoints Candakumara as judge)—131. 27 


Hearing the loud noise, the king enquires what it means, and learning 
of his son’s success at law, gives him the office of judge and tells him that, 
henceforth, he is to investigate all suits. 

Or, for this’ word see No. 50, in which the present algae is discussed. 
Bicar here is used as'a verb: to investigate cases, to judge. 


212, 4& og|& ogoq00§—199 
Ran tlun Candakumar—743 
They bring Candakumara (to the king)—134. 21 


The king proclaims he has decided, in order to gain heaven, to sacrifice 
his children and his wives. He then orders his men to bring Candakumara 
and his four brothers. They first bring the prince to the king and then the 
others, and make them sit together. 

Ran tlua, to bring; for this word see under ran in plaque 5. The 
plaque shows the king in a pavilion; the figure in the upper row, on the 
right, near the pavilion, is Candakumara; he is arguing with the king; the 
four others are his brothers. 


213. 0gooo§ a—199 
Candakumar mun—744_— 
‘Candakumara entreats (his father)—138. 8 # 


Candakumira’s sisters and the queens are also brought before the king. 
The people immediately go to the king’s father and mother, who come to 
remonstrate with their son, but in vain. Then Candakumara, understanding 
‘that he alone is the object of Khandahala’s hatred, and that all the others 
have been dragged in merely to hide his’ real purpose and not to rouse 
Suspicion, entreats his father to spare their lives. 


78 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ~~ [von n 


Mun, to entreat, beg, supplicate, answers to the Pali yacatt ig: 
138. 8); of. pumun, plaque 203. - Mun _ has already been mét with the 
meaning—to inform, tell, apprize; see plaque 42. In the plaque, the figure 
behind ,Candakumiara represents all the other persons. 


214. ogoQorg Bod$—i¢ 9 
Candakuméar kinkan—7450 
Candakumara bids (his wives to implore the king)—142. 18 # 


The king, deeply moved, renounces his sacrifice ahd sets free all his 
family. But Khandahala, hearing of this, reproaches the king with his 
weakness, and the poor victims are again captured; the same thing happens: 
once again, and Candakumira, unable to mollify the king, bids his wives to 
implore him in their turn. | 

‘Kinkan, to instruct, give directions, bid; see plaque 62. One only of 
the wives is ‘Tepresented in the plaque, which is not numbered, probably. by 
inadvertence, for there is room enough to do so. 


215. eglS GE wd— 96 
Dmon jrah yac—746 
Candakumara is near the sacrificial pit—154. 21 f 


All the supplication of the several members of his family could not, 
owing to the wicked brahmin’s influence, deter the king from his purpose. 
The prince is taken to the. sacrificial pit; all the victims. following. Canda, 
his principal queen, was. by his side weeping. All the’ preparations being 
finished, the prince was brought .and placed near the sacrificial pit with his 
head bent forward. | _ Khandahala raised the sword saying, “Now will F cut | 
his neck!” : 

-The inscription on the photograph is difficult to read, but it is quite 
clear on the plaque and the*estampage.e Dmon = M.T. 88, dma, to 
dwell, remain in a place; Jran = M.T. ae9€, jaref, presence, in the 
presence of, near. The nimbus round the head of Candakumara indicates he 
is the future Buddha; between him and Khandahala is seen the sacrificial 
fire; the woman on the left is Queen: Canda,;.Candakumara’s chief queen. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES. ON. THE ANANDA "9 


216, 903 805 manoor70S — 719 
Nah khil Kandahal—747 
The people rush at Khandahila (to kill him)—155. 22 


At that moment, Queen Candi makes a solemn act of asseveration. 
‘Hearing it, Sakka comes down from the heavens brandishing a blazing mass 
of iron, and frightens the king and his ministers, who immediately set all-the 
victims free. The people rush at Khandahala with stones, sticks, etc., and 
kill him. ~ 

Nah, here = the people, see plaque 112. Khil =. modern colloquial 
§, khuiw, not in Haswell's, which means, to rush at, in anger: g§o9{S0o03 
®§gasq—' the fellow (g) who rushed at me to strike me is this fellow.” -I 
have not yet found this_word in literary Talaing. The figure seated on the 
right is Candakumara; between him and the others is the sacrificial fire. 


217. QB} ogogor—290 
Kumin Candakumar—748 
_Enthroning Candakumira 


Having killed Khandahala the people made the king an outcast, and 
forbade him ever to enter the city. All the requisites for coronation were 
brought and Candakumara was anointed king. Candakumira is séated under 
the royal white umbrella; in front is a brahmin pouring the lustral water 
from a conch. 


218, 030702 03$ 03§—r9¢ 
Candakumar tin swar—749_ 
Candakumara ascends to heaven—157. 16 
After a righteous reign, Candakumara went to heaven. 
Tin, to ascend, see plaque 51; Swar, see plaque 11o. 


80. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL 


VII.—BHORIDATTA=JATAKA. 


The king of Benares, perceiving the growing might of his son, who is 
the viceroy, banishes him. The prince becomes an ascetic; he is seduced 
by a Naga-woman and has two children by her, a boy anda girl. In course 
of time he becomes king and his daughter is married to Dhatarattha, the 
king of the Nagas, to whom she bears four sons, one being Bhiiridatta, the 
future Buddha. Bhiridatta is caught by a snake-charmer, who takes him 
from place to place making him dance before the people; one of his 
brothers and his sister, the latter taking the form of a frog, go about looking 
for him and at last rescue him after many incidents. 


219, vd3a0$ o9%s05— 190 
Patisan Bhuridat—750. 
Conception of Bhiridatta—167. 30 


Patisan, for patisan = patisandh#, conception. 


220, 84805 09%sc3—190 
Dirdas. Bhtridat—751 
Birth of Bhiridat—167._ 30 


Dirdas = M.T, 9905, dadah, the being born, the entering into a new 
state of existence, from the root dias (M.T. dah), to be, to become. 


221, ©8$ op890S—19) 
Kumin Bhiridat—752 
Enthroning Bhiridatta—168, 17 
When Bhiridatta attained the age of discretion, his father Dhbatarattha 


gave him a kingdom; his three brothers similarly each received one. The 
plaque is not numbered. 


222, Plaque No. 753 is missing. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES.ON THE ANANDA 81 


223. 038305 e002 of0095 gi$—-195 
Bhiiridat soh summa In—754 
Bhiridatta answers Indra’s question 


Bhiridatta goes to the world of gods to wait upon Indra; the latter was 
propounding a. question which no god could answer; Bhiridatta alone can 
answer it. — . 

Soh, to answer, a variant of soh (plaque 152). Summaf, a ques- 
tion; variants are sumafi and simman, from smafi, to ask, question; 
the M.T. sman is both a verb and a noun: - 99283 G $9 9i8359—“‘a question 
arose in the Naga-city,” S.B. ut. In, generally In, the god Indra. 


2.24.-098905 o& 0805 oof pgo—r199 
Bhiridat man sil han udya—755 
Bhiridatta observes the sz/as in the garden—169. 11 


Having seen. the splendours of the heaven of the gods, Bhiiridatta, dis- 
gusted with his present existence as a naga, resolves-to gain heaven by the 
fulfilment of the’ observances (sila) and by fast; he informs his parents of his 
intention; they agree, provided he practises his religious exercises within the 
Naga eatin, owing to the many dangers to nagas outside; he then keeps the 
uposatha fast in the gardens. 

Sil, the Buddhist precepts, Pali sz/a, M.T. 38, si. Han, in,’ see 
plaque 28; udyda, garden, see plaque 143. Following strictly the text this 
plaque should have come after the next. Unnumbered. | 


225. 9§ ol§ sg 9904 08 Sad—r9¢ 
Mun pan aba s-ar man sil—756 
(Bhiridatta) asks his father leave to go and observe the sz/as—1s69. 6 

See the explanations under No. 224, before which this plaque should 
have come. 

Aba, father, see Nos. 23, 33; S-4r, will go, see No. 183. Mun pan 
is a compound verb meaning, “‘to beg leave respectfully”; mun has been 

is 


82 __- EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 7 (vou. 11 


seen already, plaques 42, 213; pan means “to ask leave or permission to 
do something”; with this may be compared the Burmese o§, pan; pan 
having exactly the same meaning, and the full expression, mun pan, to 
the Burmese o$ 92, pan kra®. Pan, which is still colloquial, is often 
used in the expression pan akhofn, to ask leave (akhon); cf. Burmese 
sogG0$, akhwanh pan; we find also the expression so.05ol§, at pan, at 
A.V., p. 33 under aydcana == gosrdSel$aocol§ = asking permission. This 
plaque is not numbered, 


226, og&s05 Bo8$ og Bg§—2191 
Bhiridat kinkan ku kindar—757 
Bhiridatta instructs his wife—169. 15 £ 


But, as he is observing the fast, the Naga maidens attend upon him: 
with music and song, disturbing him; so he resolves to go elsewhere. In 
the fear of his parents preventing him doing so, he tells them nothing; but 
calling his wife, he gives her some instructions—“I will go to the world of 
men,” says he, “there, on the bank of the Jumna, is a banyan tree and near 
it an ant-hill; on the ant-hill shall I coil myself and observe the fast. When 
the night is over, at dawn, send your women with music,.to take me back 
to the Naga world.” Thus, every day at dawn, did the Naga maidens fetch 
him from the haunts of men, for a long time. 


Kinkan, see plaque 62. Kindar, see plaque 132. ‘Plaque unnume. 
bered. 


227. 9005 qos RQ G—190 
Bhiridat qulafi ku bumnah—758 
ene converses with the brahmin—173, 1 ff 


. At that time, near ‘Benares: there fired a brahmin hunter. One day, 

with his son Somadatta he arrives near the ant-hill where Bhiiridatta observed 
his fast. He kills a deer, but as it is already evening, father and son go up 
in the. banyan tree. Early next morning, the brahmin hears the Naga 
maidens sing to the Naga prince who has assumed the human form. The 
brahmin asks him who he i is, and Bhiridatta tells. him. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 83 


Bumnah, a brahmin = M.T. eg3, bamnah; there is also another 
modern form, gt, bnab, not in Haswell: co2c0§ co2800g39) onggroc$oS$aiq— 
“at that time, the’ Bodhisatta was reborn in an exalted brahmin family, Dhd.. 
Go. 27; gi{goE8SoS 0} 603,E4—“ the brahmin woman heard the Law and came 
back (home),” Dhd. 95. 15. There is another old variant, bimnah, 
plaques 275, 309. Plaque unnumbered. 


228, ogé|goo 6009 92060098—19 ¢ 
Bhiridat lop nagabhow—759 
Bhiridatta enters the Naga world—172. 23 


But Bhiridatta now reflects—‘ This brahmin, who looks cruel and fierce, 
might betray me to a snake-charmer, and‘thus prevent my observance of the 
fast”; so he promises him great honour and wealth and induces him to 
dwell in the Naga country, for, during his sojourn there, there would be no 
danger of his betraying him. The brahmin accepts, and Bhuadae taking 
father and son, enters into the Naga world. . 


Bhow, a dwelling; hence, region, world: = M.T. 96, hee: from Pali 
bhavana, bhuvana; A.V. 13, adhobhuvana = 9Q&320%6u 


Lop, to enter = M.T, 09, lup. Plaque unnumbered. 


229, BcS BES} op o—1G0 
Kil kirmin ku bumnah—760 
(Bhiridatta) confers regal glory on the brahmin—173. 24 


In the Naga worlds ‘Bhiridatta confers on the brahmin and his son all 
the enjoyment and splendour of a regal state, so as to: keep them away 
from the haunts of men. Meanwhile, he goes as usual to the ant-hill to 
perform his religious exercises. 

Kil, to confer, see plaque 49. Kirmin, royalty, regal state; here is 
not to be .taken in the strict sense of ‘‘sovereignty,” but in that of the 
enjoyment, magnificence, splendour, wealth, etc., belonging to royalty, whether 
earthly or divine. The Pali has (172, 24) dibbasampattir; the Burmese 
version translates this by 9o50p8:85, nat caficim =. sempatt/. The Talaing 
version has; 280008 3809 9§coa$ seeds 8Saqe9:—" the Bodhisatta conferred 


84 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vo. 11 


upon the brahmin wealth and honour,” in which 98§0o2$ asovod is the 
equivalent of sampatti. Kirmin corresponds to the M.T. o§§, kmin, 
which means “government, rule, regal state, sovereignty”; also “ kingdom, 
country.” Cf. Aus2n, plaque 25. The inscription is somewhat spoiled; the 
virama on the y and 2 of kirmin is no more visible, as well as the left- 
hand half of the #. Plaque unnumbered. 


230. 298508 o8c5.ca8 a S9:—1¢9 
Bhiridat kil mani ku bumnah—761 
Bhiridatta gives the jewel to the brahmin—r75. 61 


After a stay of a year in the Naga world, the brahmin gets tired, and 
wants to go back to see his wife and friends. Bhiridatta tries in vain to 
keep him back. At last, so that, through greed, the brahmin may not 
show his place of retirement on the ant-hill to a snake-charmer, he gives 
him a jewel which grants all one’s wishes, and promises him more wealth 
whenever he chooses to come and see him. The brahmin, however, desiring 
to become also an ascetic, dues not accept the gem. -Plaque unnumbered. 


231, soc$eou8 p28 o98c05—1 6 J 
Alambiay fiic Bhiridat—762 
Alambayana sees Bhiridatta—184. 1 # 


Alambayana, a poor brahmin full of debts, runs away from Benares and 
lives. with an ascetic to whom he renders many little services. The ascetic, 
well pleased, gives him a spell which renders the most deadly snakes 
inoffensive. Alambayana goes on his way repeating the spell, and- thus 
arrives on the bank of the Jumna, A thousand Naga youths who waited on 
Bhiridatta had brought out from the Naga regions the magnificent gem 
granting all desires, and had placed it on a mound of sand. As Alambayana 
reaches this spot reciting his spell, the Nagas run away terrified, forgetting 
the gem, and he picks it up and goes on his way. He is met by the 
-brahmin and his son who were ahunting. The brahmin at once recognizes 
the gem, and, in order to possess himself of it, ‘tries to convince the other 
that it is very unlucky; but in vain. At last, he shows to him Bhiridatta 


“PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 85 


coiled on his ant-hill. Bhiridatta sees Alambayana, now snake-charmer by 
means of his spell, and resolves not to defend himself, whatever the latter 
does to him. Alambayana seizes Bhiridatta. The brahmin hunter asks 
again for the gem, which Alambayana gives him, not knowing ats value. 
But the gem falls down, and through | the ground goes back to the Naga 
world. 

Alathbay, an abbreviation of Alambayana; it is- now written socogo, 
alambdai, and means “a snake-charmer”; the Burmese have also the 
same word, socogoS, alambay, with the same meaning. Nac, see plaque 
61. Plaque unnumbered. 


232, s2osewS aS o78s0S5—1 60 
Alambay jak Bhiridat—763 
Alambayana pulls Bhiridatta. (by the tail)—185. 3 


Alambayana anoints ‘himself. agin divine drugs, recites the spell, goes 
up to Bhiridatta and pulls him by the tail; he then opens his mouth, spits 
into it a drug he has chewed, spreads oy on the ground and pounds him, 
breaking his bones. Through all these sufferings Bhiiridatta keeps his 
temper. Alambayana puts him in a basket he has prepared, and goes 
away. 

_ Jak = M.T,, to pull. The photograph shows Bhiridatta coiled round 
the ant-hill and the snake-charmer pulling him. Plaque unnumbered. 


233. 3008635 gqécoz: 074s805-—7 eg 
Alambay raleh Bh[i]ridat—764 
Alambayana makes Bhiridatta dance—185. 19 7 


‘He goes into a village and calls out all those who wish to see the 
snake dance; he makes Bhiiridatta. do a variety of tricks. The future 
Buddha hele it would be better to please the crowd, so that Alambayana, 
having received plenty of money, might be satisfied and let him go; and he 
does all he is bidden. Plaque unnumbered. 

Raleh, to make dance, as snakes, bears, marionnettes, etc.; the M.T. 
is oco§, pa leh; U.O.K. 42. 8 7, referring to Bhiridatta, says: $§¢6c0005 


86 ) EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL, i 


em20ec0§ 35 G59 EqroFi cogeB orccdgo5—“' and although he took him to and made 
him dancé in every town, he (Bhiridatta) did not. speak in anger.” Raleh 
is the causal of leh, M.T. co§, leh, to dance; compare with rinleh, 
dancing, in Blagden’s inscriptions. Plaque unnumbered. 


234. socdoeroS o& o7|F 85 BE—1e9 
Alambay ran tlun cip smin—765 
Alambayana carrying (the snake) arrives (in) the king(’s presence) 
—191 17 


But Alambayana is not satisfied with the money he has ‘received in that 
village, and, thinking what a fortune it is in. his power to make, he goes 
from village to village carrying Bhiridatta in a bejewelled basket and, 
reaching Benares, invites the king to come and see the snake play. Now, 
when it was known in Bhiridatta’s family that he had disappeared, there 
was great anxiety and sorrow, His three brothers go in the world of 
men in different directions in search of him. His elder brother, Sudassana, 
in the garb of an ascetic arid accompanied by his young sister hiding in his 
hair in the form of a frog, comes to the ant-hill and, seeing traces of blood, 
knows that his brother has been caught by a snake-charmer. He follows 
Alambayana’s. track, and arrives at Benares at the moment when the 
snake-charmer, in the midst of the spectators, a seat having been prepared 
for the king, sends his message to the latter. Alambayana calls out 
Bhiridatta who, on recognizing his brother in the crowd, goes up to him, 
places his head on his feet and weeps. | 

Ranh tlun, see plaque 5- Cip, to reach, arrive = M.T. 85, cuip, 
see plaque 82. Plaque unnumbered: - ER 

235. 098305 $825 gS o$5—166 
Bhiridat nimit rup manis—766 
Bhiridatta assumes the human form—196. 15 
Alambayana thinks the snake has bitten the ascetic and offers an antidote; 


Sudassana answers he does not fear snakes, and that he can set against this 
one a small frog who can conquer him. The stake is five thousand pieces, 


PART | | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 87 


The challenge is accepted. Sudassana goes to the king to borrow the five 
thousand, and the king comes to see the wonderful fight between a frog and 
a snake. The frog throws out three drops of fearful poison, which makes the 
snake-charmer become a white leper, and he sets the snake free. On this, 
Bhiridatta assumes the human form; so does his sister, and all. three stand 
near the king. 

Nimit, to create, perhaps from the Pali nimminat? through 2immitta ; 
but compare also M.T. 805, |mit, with the same meaning (see also under 
plaque 1); 819 ag" cosQg§oroSo$agteSi sd$co8odyoscoSa— at that place, Indra 
created a square flat stone of ten cubits,” Sudh. 13. 5; 9/8 q ognad o$ 51988 
co8oSco803—“‘and from the time Indra created the city of Suvannabhumi 
...? Nimit is still used in M.T..in the compound $805 go5, nimit 
bdah. Rup, form; image, statue = M.T. Manis, man, Pali 
manussa. Plaque unnumbered. 


236, BE BS o4o05—164 
Smin tim Bhuridat—767 
The king recognizes Bhiridatta—i96. 19 


Sudassana then asks the king whether he knows them, and he says no. 
Sudassana tells him they are the children of Samuddaja, his, own sister, who 
was given in marriage to Dhatarattha, the Naga king. The king then 
recognizes them, and kisses them weeping. 

Tim, to know = = M.T. In the plaque the upper part of the king’s body 
is broken off; the posture of Sudassana shows he is being kissed by the 
king; Bharidatta is recognized by the cobra hood behind his head; their 
sister is not represented. Plaque unnumbered. 


i og§a05. cooS 99060095 —7 Go 
Bhiridat cow nagabhow—768 
Bhiridatta returns to the Naga world—197. 8 
All three stay. some time with their uncle the king; as his mother longs: 
to see Bhiiridatta again, they beg leave to go back, and it being granted 


Bhiridatta goes back to the Naga world with his brother and sister. 
Cow, see plaque 159; bhow, see plaque 228. Plaque unnumbered. 


88 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL.u 


238. 298305 88 pone0005—16¢. 
Bhiridat cip nagabhow—769 
Bhiridatta arrives in the Naga world—197. 9 
When Bhiridatta arrived in the Naga city, being tired and faint with his 


month’s residence in the snake-charmer’s basket, he took to a sickebed ; 
an immense number of Nagas came to visit him. | 


- 239, 228808 qcoed 09 48—120 
Bhuridat gulafi ku risi—77o 
Bhiridatta converses with the hermit—217. 22 f 


Bhiridatta having recovered from his illness goes to visit his grandfather, 
who lives as an ascetic, in his hermitage, and has edifying conversations with 
him. When he died, he went to heaven with a host of Nagas. Plaque 
‘unnumbered. 


VIII.—MAHANARADAKASSAPA-JATAKA. 


The king of Videha is much given to pleasure; he asks an ascetic the 
various paths of moral duties; his daughter, a very virtuous princess, tries her 
best to make him abandon his heretical beliefs; this end is at last effected 
with the future Buddha’s help, the Great Brahma Narada, disguised as an’ 
ascetic. | 


240, 408 324 qooopd 02 o8&—119 
‘Risi Nar gulafi ku smia—771 

The hermit Narada converses with the king—242. 25 f 
The Great Brahma Narada, seeing the endeavours of the princess to 
make her father abandon heretical views, resolves to come down from his 
heaven to help her convert the king to the true path. He takes the guise 
of an ascetic; the king, seeing him, comes down from his throne and makes 

him obeisance. In the ensuing conversation, the king is converted. 


PART 1 | ' TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 89 


241, {08 304 9094 @log}ecord— 15 
Risi Nar ar Bra(hma)lok—772 
The: hermit Narada goes (back) to the Brahma world—255. 2 


‘Narada, having converted the king, goes back to the Brahma ee 


" Braluk for brahmaloka; the meaning is made. clear by the 
plaque; it represents the Great Brahma Narada going back to his heaven, on 
a cloud; in all the Pagan plaqués, deities going up or down from their heaven 
are shown on a cloud which represents the air; below is the king and 
behind him his daughter. The two letters og, hma, have not been left out 
by inadvertence, but because the inscription was too long for the plaque. 
The right comprehension of the word was left. to the pious reader who, 
knowing well the stories (and all these stories are perfectly known), could not 
fail to identify at once the clipped word bra for brahma, the last word 
lok helping him in this. Moreover, the expression “ brahmaloka”’ had 
already, for several centuries, been thoroughly familiar to the Talaings. 
Plaque unnumbered. There are only two plaques. to illustrate this jataka ; 
the reason no doubt is that the story consists mostly of conversations, and 
contains very little action. 


IX.—VIDHURA PANDITA-JATAKA, 


The king reigning ‘at Indapatta, the capital of the Kuru kingdom, is a 
great gambler at dice;...the future Buddha, the wise Vidhura, was his min- 
ister, who gave him advice and instructions in temporal and religious matters. 
One day, the king, who had ‘gone into his garden to practise meditation, 
met there. Sakka, the king of the gods, Varuna, the Naga king), and Supanna, 
the king of the Garudas, come for the same purpose. A discussion arises 
among them as to which is the most virtuous; unable to agree on this point, 
they ask the opinion of Vidhura, who shows them that all four are equal in 
virtue. All go back home. The Naga queen, on hearing Vidhura’s praise 
from the king’s lips, conceives a: strong desire to have the wise man’s heart 
(for the expression of this desire, she knows, is the only means by which ,she 


can manage to have him brought before her, and thus enjoy- his pious 
| 12 


90 EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA [voL, 


discourses). But he cannot do that; he seeks his daughter and tells her that 
if her mother does-not get Vidhura’s heart, she will die. The daughter makes 
it known that, ‘whoever will bring the wise minister’s heart, will become. her 
husband; -Punnaka, the Yakkha general, offers himself. Punnaka goes to 
Indapatta, defeats the king at dice and claims Vidhura as his price. In many 
ways does Punnaka try to kill Vidhura, but in vain. At last, Vidhura asks 
him what he wants, and, on being told, the’ wise man wins over Punnaka 
and goes to the Naga world, where no harm is done him. All the plaques 
in this story are unnumbered. 


242, 88§ coor aj028- §$E—170 
Widhir soh summ2i smin—773 
Vidhura. answers the question of the (four) kings—260. 27 


The four. kings, as told in the synopsis, call Vidhura and ask him which 
is the most-virtuous ; h¢ answers they are equal. 


Widhir = Vidhura; for soh and summdifi, see plaque 223. 


243. BE 02 gGanored 9928—15 
Smih ku Purnayak smafi—774 
The king and Punnaka the, Yakkha ask -(Vidhura)—284, 16 


Punnaka having volunteered to get the heart of Vidhura goes to Inda- 
patta, and having defeated the king at dice, claims the wise man. But the 
king is displeased, because he does not like to part from him, and explains 
that Vidhura is to him like Jife itself, and no“ slave. Punyaka, to avoid con- 
troversy, decides that both should go to the court of justice where Vidhura 
is deciding cases; Punpaka asks him whether he is the king’s kinsman or 
slave. — 


Purna = Punnaka; it will be remarked the sibwviatinn is, not from 
the Pali Punnaka, but from the Sanskrit Purnaka. Yak, a. yakkha. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA gt 


244. BEo0508 off og SE—119 
Kinkal dhar ku smia—775 
(Vidhura) explains the Law to the king—286. 18 f 
Vidhura answers that he is only the servant of the king; the latter has 
now to give him up to the Yakkha. Reflecting, however, that he would 
probably never hear anymore his wise advices, the king asks Vidhura to 
explain to him the right mode of living for a householder. The sage 
complies. | 
Kiakal, to instruct, to inform, to explain; there.is a variant, kinkan, 
at plaque 62.: Dhar, the Buddhist Moral Law, from. the Sanskrit form 
dharma, M.T. o%, dhaw, from dhar; the Pali form, dhamma, is found 
‘on plaque 178 as dhathma;. and the Sanskrit dharmma_ on plaque 
37.. In the photograph, the person on the raised seat is Penne 


245. GE BS 88§—176 
Smih kil Widhir—776 
The king hands over Vidhura—285. 31 


_ The king, ‘saying “If he be a oat) ‘take him,” hands Vidhura over: to 
Punnaka. 


e128 


246, 88§ 9& cod ggRoocS—q11 
Widhir rah cow Punnayak—777 
Vidhura takes Punnaka the ‘Yakkha and goes back (to his home) 
——288. 29 


Vidhura asks Punnaka to allow him. to go home for three days so that. 
‘he may give instructions to his sons, and offers him to lodge at his house 
for that time; Punnaka accepts, and the wise man, returning home, takes 
him with fide 

Ranh, to convey, bring; see plaque ee ‘Punna, we have now the 
Pali form. 


92 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot. 1 


247. 884 905 qggooeS—qr0 
Widhir khut Punnayak—778 


Vidhura (having) called Pupna Yakkha (to his home setties him comfortably) 
. —289. 18 # 


Vidhura, having called home the Yakkha, treats him most hospitably 
and gives him five hundred female attendants. In the photograph Vidhura 
is seen on the right, and Punna Yakkha on the left, on a higher seat, being 
the guest; between them is a woman representing the five hundred 
attendants. 7 | . . 

K hut,’ to call; to name; is still used in the literary language: Sudh. 
45. 15, 0g |spar0gegs3$q050}——" Indra called (the bow) ‘Rajadhanudhamma’”; 
S.M.° 5, se28a008 of05 «93 oc8c5 adi$qr oevor00e 905 co ay) copS—" owing to the 
Bodhisatta grasping’ and’ bringing out (at his birth) a medicine, he was 
called Mahosadha.” Another frequent expression is qo5d, khut khau, 
Dhd. 370. 7, 38055 RQ coor$[agQu paco o702q 992 Qo53 coSugiqg—" she obtained and’ 
brought forth a son; they called him Udayakumara.”. With khau in khut 
khau ef. the Burmese col (kho’), to call, 


248, 600205 speocox8—1 76 
| ; Tos rajavasati—779 
He expounds the rules for courtiers to obtain honours at the 
court—292, 10 # 
He then assembles. his family and sleltvets ta tech a rellefons discourse. 


_ Afterwards he expounds to his kindred, to his friends and enemies, how to 
obtain honours at the court. 


Rajavasati is explained in the Pali text (p. 292. 6) as: Yasapa- 
tilébhakévranam. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES. ON THE ANANDA 93 


249. 88§ qcorS > 9924§—100 
.Widhir gulafi na s-ar—780 
Vidhura tells (Punna the Yakkha) he is ready to go (with him) 
—300. 20 f 


Having thus admonished everybody, taken leave of the king and settled 
his family affairs, Vidhura announces to the Yakkha he is now Teady to 
proceed with him whither he desires. _ 

Gulafi here means, “to tell, to announce.” For the phrase na s-4r, 
see plaque 183. 


250. ygpoodS BF so0§ 88§— 00 
Punnayak rin ar Widhir—781 
Punna the Yakkha carries away Vidhura—go2. 23 


Punna the Yakkha mounts his horse who, like a man, is endowed with 
reason, and tells the Bodhisatta, if he is not afraid, to seize the horse’s tail, 
Vidhura answers he knows no fear, and cannot see what harm could befall 
him, since he has done nobody evil by act, word or thought. Having girt 
his robe tightly round his loins, he grasps the tail with both hands and. 
presses his feet against the animal’s thighs. Punnaka springs forth into the 
sky, carrying away the sage. . 

Rin, see plaque 27. Ar, after another verb, often has the sense of 
“away, off.” 


251, 889 0098 Qe25—10 J 
Widhir taw gulai—782 
Vidhura is conversing (with the Yakkha)—306. 5f 


This slave is in the wrong place; it should come after No, 256. After 
having gone through all the attempts, described in the following plaques, of 
Punnaka to take his life, the sage asks himself what reason could the 
Yakkha possibly have to be so intent on his destruction. On being asked, 
the Yakkha answers he wants his heart, for it is the price of the Naga 
maiden. 


94 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vow. i 


252. QgRod gB5— 09 
Punnayak buhic—783 
Punnaka (tries to) frighten (Vidhura)—305. 3 


Punnaka carries the Bodhisatta on the summit of the Black Mountain, 
and reflects that to get his heart and obtain the Naga princess, he must kill 
him; but again he thinks it would be better, rather than kill him with his 
own hands, to kill him by fright, by showing him dreadful shapes. He 
assumes the form of a lion ready to devour him, but the sage shows not the 
least sign of alarm. 

Buhic, to fear, to frighten = M.T. ecoos, bahek; cf. e008, phek. 


253. ggRoo05 go BE—rog 
Punnayak pdas cin—784 


Punnaka creates an elephant—3o5. 7 


Then the Yakkha comes in the shape of a large furious elephant 
threatening him with his tusks, but. Vidhura shows no fear. 


_ Pdas, to cause to be or become, to make, create = M.T. v305, 0§, gos, 
-padah, badah,.bdah.. 


254. 9930005 Se0cS— og 
Punnayak bibat—785 
Pupnaka tests (the steadfastness of Vidhura by means of a snake) 
 , ERS: 2 

Punnaka assumes the. appearance of an enormous snake, coils himself 
round the sage, spreading his hood over him; but no sign of tremor does” 
Vidhura betray. 

Bibat,. see plaque 9. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 95 


255. qegroos gd of5—106 
Pun[njayak pkak kdip—786 
Punnaka turns (Vidhura) upside down (and flings. him into the shy) 
—~395-. 27 


Pumnaka tries several other means to kill Vidhura, but he fails; he | 
resolves then tv kill him with his own hands; ‘he seizes him by the feet, 
turns him head downwards and flings him in space. 

Pkak, to turn over, upset, turn upside down; with this word may be 
compared the M.T. exad, aco’, batak, gatak, “upside down, topsy-turvy, 
and condecoo, Jakbatak, having the same meaning. The gutturals and 
Jabials often interchange. Pkak kdip, to turn ‘somebody or something 
upside down, head downwards; for kdip see plaque 135. 


256, -gggoodd 995 6Q2—101 
Punnayak dudac tmo—787 
Punraka whirls (Vidhura) round—305. 27 


This plaque is to be read together with the preceding one, for both 
‘Tepresent the same occurrence: the “Yakkha whirling the sage round with his 
head downwards, as he is about to fling him away. 


Dudac, to whirl, to-turn round, to spin; there is a colloquial word, : 
coofo5, thadit, having the same meaning which may be compared with 
dudac, although, regularly, we would expect thadat. 


Tmo, to.turn round and round; over and over, to twirl, whirl, spin = 
M.T. 8 and cooS, tmaw and tamaw--S.J. (A) fol. 4, deol c0§00g50$ 005 
395 ce>Ba008 eco2e0u8s020}—'" the. Bodhisatta in. appearance) like unto a 
jewel, was rolling and iia on. the ‘waves ”;* S.J. (B) 66, gay5 .... coo205 
con203506q —' the queen ...; fell and. rolled per and over,”’ Cf. ales @¢009, 
b ato, reund and round, over and over;: G0020G00, - -lobato, to turn said 
and round, over and’ over. The equivalence of c—> and §, .is - not 
unfrequent. ° 


96 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Il 


257. QgR0003 og995— 1.00 
Punnayak smafi—788 
Punnaka asks (Vidhura to teach him the laws of good men)—309. 8 # 


While thus being held head downwards and whirled round’ and on. the 

point of being hurled into space, Vidhura reflects that there must be a 
mistake somewhere, for what connexion is there between his heart and the 
maiden? And in fact, here it must be borne in mind that the Naga queen 
had asked for his heart in the hope that he might be brought to her alive 
and she might have the privilege of listening to his pious discourses.- To 
gain time, he tells the Yakkha to set him on his legs on the mountain, so 
that he may expound to him the laws of good men. Punnaka agrees, sets 
him on his feet, and then asks him to tell him these good laws, 
In the photograph, the upper # alone is visible with, on the right hand, 
a faint trace of the lower 7; the glaze has flaked off in this place, but the 
traces of the subscript: ~ are clearly visible on the brick. Similarly, the 
virima on the 4, which is quite distinct on the plaque, does not appear in 
the photograph. | 


258, 88§ amrS of —104 
| Widhir tos dhar—789 
Vidhura preaches the Law (to Punnaka)—3o9. 30 


The Bodhisatta then preaches to the Yakkha the fovr rules of good 
men; the Yakkha is touched and. repents his murderous attempts for the 
sake merely of a: woman, and. resolves to lose her rather than harm the sage. 

Tos, to preach: = M,T. 03, twah; the primary meaning of this. word 
appears to be simply: to say, to speak; and is frequent in this sense in 
the literature. Tos dhar = M.T. $65, twah dhaw, means literally : 
to speak the Law. Cf. the expressions: o§86, twah pmin, “to say and 
cause to hear” = to preach, A.V. 118.= desanda; op08, twah gah, a 
very frequent expression equivalent to the English “that is, to wit”; Dhd. 
373- 3, QercoasBadcoin gs0{og FoqrStoojorsodgqan ocegia oo2080038 S—in times past, 
between three kingdoms, to wit, the kingdom of Anga, the kingdom of 
Magadha and the kingdom of Kasi.” | 


PART 1! ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA . 


259. Qapoood o& 85 s05—¢0 
Punnayak ran cip nag—79o 
Punnaka conveys (Vidhura) to the Naga (country)—313. 22 # 


Having made this praiseworthy resolution, the Yakkha offers Vidhura to 
take him back to his home; but the sage requests to be taken to the Naga 
country, and Punnaka conveys him thither. 

Ran, see plaque 5. Cip, to arrive = M.T. §5, cuip, and both 
together ram cip = to carry or convey to. The personage on the left 
of the photograph is the Naga king on his throne; on the right is Vidhura, 
distinguished by a nimbus, and in the middle is the Yakkha. 


260, 600205 ‘of a SE 326— 0 
Tos dhar ku smin nag—791 
(Vidhura) preaches the Law to the Naga king—314. 30 # 


Punnaka having conveyed the sage to the serpent world, the latter has 
a conversation with the Naga king during which he expounds to him edifying 
maxims, On the Ananda, this plaque comes after the following one 
(No, 261). 


61, BE 906 A$ ecosd Bae) 
Smifi nag rin lop sni—792 
The Naga king introduces (Vidhura) in his house—319. 4 


A long conversation takes place between the king and the sage, and the 
latter preaches the Law to the king; the king, delighted, takes Vidhura by 
the hand and leads him into the Naga queen’s presence. 

Rin, see plaques 27, 250; Rin lop = to lead and enter, that is, to 


introduce into. 
13 


98 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


262. gggoocS o& o$—1e0 
| Punnayak ran tun—793 
Punnaka carries (Vidhura) back (to the world of men)—323. 23 -£ 


The Bodhisatta preaches the Law to the Naga queen, whose desire 
to see the sage is gratified. The Naga princess becomes the wife of Pun- 
naka. The latter, delighted at the turn of affairs, offers a magnificent jewel 
to Vidhura, places him on his horse and, from the depths of the Naga 
world, carries him up back to the haunts of men, in the capital of the 
Kurus. 


Tun might appear from the context to = M.T. 8, tuin, to go up, 
ascend and, prepositionally, up, up to, and as a variant of tin (plaque 51) ;. 
so that rah tun would mean, to carry up, upwards. The Talaing version, 
at this passage, reads: ggRoo.. . sadcdoSga}uojop oggopd&o3$B adeqaoqudogéB /§ 
opopo2q1—“ Punnaka ... saddled his horse (and said), O! sage, mount the 
horse with me, I will convey_thee up (to the world of men)”; in which 
Gig, ptuin, would be the causal of tun. . But there is wiezs a modern 
word, o9§, tun, which is frequent with Eis meanings of—and, and then; 
now... again, back, in return; and is also used as an emphatic suffix, 
untranslatable in English, which lays particular stress on the word or words: 
preceding it. Inthis plaque, tun has the meanings of “again, back,” and 
ran tun means “conveyed him again or back”; and this is no doubt 
the right translation. I may notice here another use of the modern o9$, very’ 
frequent in the literature; it is used as a verbal suffix to show- that, 
whatever the verb denotes, refers to another person or abject: coxc§c$ 
HBGorScooa8soa0} 1 guropddecpayohchfudBo5 928 [YoorEa5—" then, the prince followed | 
(her) into the hut and aeket, ‘Who art thou?’ (She answered) ‘I am a 
Nagi, Sir.” | 


263. 88§ 805 o$oS—re¢ 
Widhir kil manik—794 
Vidhura gives the jewel (to the king)—327. 10 


Punnaka takes back the sage to Indapatta and sets him down before the 
door of. the Hall of Truth, wherein the king, who had been warned in a 


PART 1]. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 99 


dream of the sage’s return, was awaiting him in great pomp. Punnaka goes 
back to his celestial abode. Vidhura explains to the king all that has 
befallen him, and presents him with the gem given him by the Yakkha. 


Manik, a gem, from Pali mantka. 


264, 025 RaS—1¢9 
Cow sni’—795 
(Vidhura) returns home 


'Vidhura theri returns to his home. There are great rejoicings for one 
month in the city. At his death, the sage is reborn in heaven. The 
mention of his going back home is not in the text nor in the Skem, but 
must of course .be taken as a matter of course. ; a 

This inscription has suffered from whitewash ; the lower portion of the 
¢ (oc) has disappeared.. In the photograph, the subscript ” in shi’ is 
almost invisible, but apparent-on the plaque. Si’, see plaque 274. The 
woman following him is no doubt his wife. 


265. 886 <glé 8} FH [a5}--re¢ 
Widhir dmon hin sni(’P)—796 
Vidhura is at home (receiving gifts)—328. 31 # 


Then the Bodhisatta, in his home, receives the visit of the queens, the 
princes, brahmins, merchants, etc., who bring him many gifts of food and 
drink. At his death, he was reborn in heaven. 
 Dmof, see plaques 168, 215. Hin, in, at, to; there is a variant, 
han (plaque 28). I had at first taken the character after the word sni to 
be bja, but a close examination of the plaque, which is somewhat spoiled 
at that place, showed that the. letter must have been a’ (s5), and that we 
have to read, as in the preceding plaque, say’. 


100 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, 1 


X.—VESSANTARA:JATAKA. 


This is the most popular jataka, not only in Burma, but in the East 
generally. Prince Vessahtara is very liberal and much devoted to giving 
alms and gifts. One day, he gives to four brahmans an elephant much 
valued by the citizens owing to his magical powers. The citizens force 
the king to banish him; he retires with his wife and his two children 
to the Vindhya Mountains. The prince gives away in alms his wife and 
children. They are at last, after many vicissitudes, happily reunited. All 
the plaques of this story are unnumbered and, generally speaking, their 
inscriptions have suffered more than those of the other jatakas and present, 
consequently, more difficulties, and in some cases more incertitude, in 
reading. 


266, o§00} 600g §—161 
Patisan Wesantar—797__ 
Conception of Vessantara—484. 35 


In times past, in the kingdom of Sivi, there was a king, Sivi by name, 
who ruled in his capital of Jetuttara, To him was born a son, whom he 
called Safijaya; sixty thousand devas were conceived at the same time in 
the families of sixty thousand courtiers. Queen Phusati, the mother, when 
her time was near, desired to visit the city, and the king had everything 
arranged for this visit. When Queen Phusati reached the middle of the 
Vessa Street (the Merchants’ Street), the pains of labour came over her. A 
lying-in chamber was erected then and there, and therein the Bodhisatta 
was born; on that account he was called Vessantara. 


The x in Wesantar is scarcely visible. 


267, c028 c§ 9 ad sl$— reo 
Ac thar na skil dan—798 
(Vessantara) asks for gold to give alms—485. 14 
As soon as he was born, Vessantara ‘held out his hand to his mother, 
saying, ‘‘Mother, I wish to give alms. Have you anything?” Phusati 
placed in his hand a purse containing one thousand coins to satisfy this first 
craving for almsgiving. 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 101 


Ac, to ask = M.T. soo, at. Na skil, cf. No. 183 and see 
plaque 64, where the prefix si = s(a) is discussed. Dan, from the Pali: 
dana, alms, almsgiving. 


268, 0 QG0285 SODHA—1¢@ 
Pa imo’ Wesantar—799 
They give him the name Vessantara—485. 17 


Owing to his having been born in the Vessa Street, they give him the 
name Vessantara. See explanations under No. 266. 

Imo’, a name; ¢f himo’, plaque 4; pa imo’, to give a name, to 
name. 


269. BS 63285 8§3$—000 
Kil abo’ minmin—80o 
The father gives nurses to Vessantara—485. 25 


The king carefully chose sixty-four nurses, all free from the defects of 
ordinary nurses, for the care of the child. [t must be remarked, for he plays 
subsequently a great réle in the story, that a purely white elephant was 
brought, on Vessantara’s birthday, into the royal stables by his mother, who 
came flying through the sky. 

Minmin, a nurse, an ayah (Anglo-Indian); there are two modern 
forms, 88§ and o8$, mimin and mamin, of which the second has lost 
the infix -2z- altogether, and the first, the infixal nasalization; at A.V. 44, 
88§ = upamatu, and at 121, o8§ — dhatt, Co. a a folio ki, [¥ 8 8§ Gs 
QofoSgo<ce28o00xqg—" the king caused sixty-four nurses to look after and 
feed the Bodhisatta”; S.V. folio &&, 805 009)/8c002$0008 Gcor$§dlosn 88§e) 
% go BegSo¥9 ggao2 cul8aoodqg—“ the king rejected (such nurses as had) the 
defect of being too tall or too short, etc., and appointed two hundred and 
forty nurses to take care of the Bodhisatta.”. There are several other words 
meaning ‘““2 nurse”: 88, mini, 5. Nr. II, emoh(g aS 4 9 08 of 83 o3q— 


102 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. tl 


“ (his) daughter thus said to (her) nurses”; 89, mitah (colloquial); 
esof and e009, bamautah and bamatah, mostly in compound forms; 
A.V. 44, 800%9, mibamatah = upamatu; S.V. folio ka, 88$ed6, 
mimin bamautah; goo, baigama, at Sudh. 14. 17. In this expres- 
sions, 02, 902 and. mean ‘“‘to suckle an infant.” The photograph seems 
to read “‘sinsin”; the estampages, however, though much blurred at. that 
place, have “minmin”; the plaque itself leaves no doubt as to the 
correctness of the latter reading. 


270, BE BS Billo v5—o00 
Smin kil kirya h—8o1 
The king gives (Vessantara) an ornament—485. 29 


The king gets a necklace worth. a hundred thousand pieces of money 
made, and gives it to his son. 

Kirya h, this reading, perfectly clear, is also found on plaques 295 and 
387; the virama over the / is quite distinct, although, in the present plaque, 
it has been somewhat spoiled by whitewash. I had at first been tempted to 
read Airyapd as equivalent to £tryaba, which would have made perfect sense, 
for 4try@b@ would. have answered to the. modern word (§oo2e2, kriy aba; 
which has. exactly the same meaning as kirya, so often found in old 
‘Talaing inscriptions; («002 is found at U.O.K. 33. 3, Dhc. 88. 9, A.V. 43 
= upakarana, and 73, under ona. That kiryah has exactly the same 
sense as kiryd is clear. from the numerous plaques in which the form 
kirya occurs with the same meaning, and kiryah is never found in the 
Pagan Talaing Inscriptions edited-by Mr. Blagden. The final 4 has nothing 
to do with a change in the pronunciation of @ in kirya; it is added (only 
three or four times) when the word kirya ends the legend, and never in 
the middle of it. This leads me to suppose that this #4 is a device to fill 
up, on the right hand, the space left blank by the shortness of the 
inscription; it is true we should rather expect the more common two dandas 
(");. but the supposition is confirmed by maddih, for maddi, in 
plaque 288, and a few others, the common reading being of course maddi. 


PART | } TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 103 


271, 3 Bod al$ Bplo—oo) 
Aja kil dan kiryia—802 


The wise (in which Vessantara) gave-the ornaments (to his nurses) 
—486. 1 


The Bodhisatta was four or five years of age when he received this 
necklace; he took it off.and gave it to his nurses. A second necklace was 
made for him, which again ‘he gave the nurses; and it went on like this nine 
times. 

Aja, way, wise, representation, illustration, etc.; as an adjective = like. 
It is still in common use.. It is rather spoiled and not quite clear on this 
plaque, but it is clearer in the next and perfectly clear in plaque 280, 


272,  vd60039 sl$—oo9 
Aja passena dan—803 
Representing (Vessantara) thinking of (more exacting) almsgiving 
—486. 5 f 


When he was eight years old, the child, seated on his couch, thinks that 
the alms he has given up to then are of but little value, being all external 
to his own person, and with all his heart he longs to give such things as 
will require great stoicism on his part, such as his eyes, his heart, his flesh, 
etc. | | ) 

Passena, I am not absolutely sure of this reading, but it-may be 
the right one, the more so as it agrees in sense with the text. Passena 
= the modern ooSog2, bahsna, to think of, remember, long for, and answers 
to the Pali (486. 11), ¢ass’ evam sabhavam sarasacittam cintentassa 
It is true we should expect bassana instead of passena, but the 
labials, surd and sonant are often interchanged, and sena may perhaps be 
an older form of snd. I was first inclined to the reading pa sasana 
dan, “he makes an offering to the religion”;, but this does fit neither the. 
text nor the context, for sésanadéna means ‘giving up one’s son to the 
religion,’ that is, making him a novice; and this was not the case, of 
course, with Vessantara, Perhaps have we to read, after all, pah sasana 


104 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [vol 


dan = “he thinks of (more exacting) almsgiving to the religion,” if the 
dot on the pah after the first word is not merely, as it appears to be, a 
defect in the glaze, like the other two in the middle of the inscription, right 
under the prince’s seat; in which case pah would be the modern bah. 


273, GODSd, 005 of 31$—oog 
Wesantar may sni dan—8o04 
Vessantara looks at the alms-halls—487. 5 


When Vessantara was sixteen, his father, desiring to make him king, 
chose the beautiful Maddi, the young man’s first cousin, for his wife; after 
his marriage, Vessantara, having been entrusted with the government of the 
kingdom, gave abundant alms, six hundred thousand pieces of money every 
day. After a time, he had a son, who was called Jali, then a daughter 
whom they named Kanhajina. Six alms-booths had been built in the city, 
and the Bodhisatta used to visit them every month mounted on his precious 
white elephant. 

May, the same as mey; the form mey is frequent in some modern 


works; see No. 46. 


274, 6000S4 6025 s5—009 
Wesantar cow sni’—805 
Vessantara returns home—487 


Vessantara returns home after his monthly visit to the alms-halls. 


275, 8832 3008 8S—oo0G 
Bimnah ac cin—806 
The brahmins ask for the elephant—488. 4 
At that time, in the kingdom of Kalinga, there was a famine consequent 


on a drought, and men had to rob to live. The people complained to the 
king; the latter, by the strict observance of the precept and the fast days, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 108 


endeavoured to bring on rain, but did not succeed. He made known his 
failure to the citizens, who told him—" Well, Sir, in this case, there is only 
one thing te do; King Vessantara, in the kingdom of Sivi, is greatly devoted 
to alms-giving; he has a white elephant who, wherever he goes, causes the 
rain to fall. Send brahmins, let them ask for that elephant and bring him 
back.” The king did so. The brahmins went to Jetuttara and, stationing 
themselves near the alms-hall at the southern gate, asked for the elephant 
as Vessantara was passing. 

Bimnah, a brahmin = M.T. eg:3, bamnah; there is a_ variant, 
bumhnah, at plaque 227. 


276, Goo7g,§ 805 4326 8E—00 7 
Wesantar cis nor cii—2807 
Vessantara Gets down from the elephant—488. 1 


On hearing the request of the brahmins, Vessantara is delighted, accedes 
to their request and descends from the elephant. 
Cis, see plaque 66. 


(277, BS 929 BE 8a06—n00 
Kil na cin bintan-—808 
(Vessantara) gives away the white elepbhant—-488. 14 


The king, having descended from the white elephant, gives him to the 
brahmins. This inscription has suffered somewhat. The lower stroke of the x 
of na has been spoiled a and cannot be seen in the photograph. The more 
common modern form of this word is a2, n&, but the form 39, n4, is also 
found very frequently. | The original meaning of a2 is “to take to, take 
away, carry (away), to send; to lay or connect, as water pipes, the rails of 
a railway, a telegraph line, etc.,” as may be seen from the following 
examples: seaScoSgcn20g4ag5q—" he took a gold tray to the Buddha and 
offered it to him,’ Such. 32. 4; 90 oo00288 cox0§dicd codq— he sent five 
hundred coins to the house of his younger brother,” Dhd. 274. 26; at 
AV. 42 we have udahdraka, “one who makes small canals for irrigating 
rice-fields”” =: gosounrgSezcocal6, and at p. 133, nettika = udahadraka— 
Bios> eSahoo colS ; cdxGS = literally, “to carry the head towards,” that 1s, 

14 


106 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 


to face towards, [693 905 Qasoc&coogiqs $905§ sans.85q——" in whichever place is 
the thera Assaji, towards that place I face,” Dhd. 229. 8; cmogiS = Jit, 
‘to cause to go and arrive at,” that is, to lead to, convey to, take to; to 
send: ecm2§)So9$gl—“ which leads to Nirvana,” Dhd. 9. 2. Avery frequent 
Meaning derived from those given above is that of “away,” as in the 
English expressions, ‘to put away, give away, go away,” etc.; this would 
give the meaning of na in kil na, ‘‘to give away,” in the present plaque. 

Bintaa, white = M.T. go6, btan; the over the ¢ is doubtful, 
though there seems to be traces of it on the plaque; two variants of this 
word are biftea and bumten. 


278, Gooa§ 805 sl$—ooe 
Wesantar sik dan—8o09 
Vessantara is pleased with his gift—488. 13 


The reading sik is quite clear on the plaque, but it is evidently a mis- 
take for sdik, to be pleased, to delight in, which is in accord with the 
context; it translates the Pali céga@dhimanaso (488.13). Sik (805) in the 
modern language has only two meanings so far as I am aware: Ist, “Why? 
For what reason? How?”, o§¢908 8059 sa0§g|Eqeageco€g|aSso2§q—" O, Rishi! 
why would the whole country be destroyed?”, S.B. 23. 21; Sgsecpso0208— 
“How do you say, ministers?”, S.J. (B) 28, in which 8g, siggah = 
&odes, sikgah, by assimilation. 2nd—the second meaning | have not. yet 
found in books, but it is used colloquially = ‘to put into, cram, stuff, 
compress,” 9§d§o8oafo9Goig8—“ please put cotton into my mattress”; 09§ 
oo8of (§9adsg35—" if one eats too much (crams food in) one gets sick.” 
Neither of these two meanings: can fit the context. 


279. [E92 024& g305—oo00 
Katta tlun munas—8io 
The agent comes and informs (Vessantara of what is happening) 
| —491. 28 : j 


When the citizens of Jetuttara heard that Vessantara had given away 
the white elephant to foreign brahmins, they became angry; they went to 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 107 


Vessantara’s father and told him his son had no right to give away such a 
precious animal, the national property, They go on to say they do not want 
such a king and that he must leave the country and go into banishment in 
the Vindhya Mountains. The weak-minded father, instead of endeavouring to 
appease the citizens, in a moment of fright, gives way to them. He calls 
an agent and sends him to Vessantara; the agent goes to the king and 
informs him of the state of things. 

Katta, Pali, a doer, one who. does or performs, an agent; this is the 
word used in the text. Munas, to tell, inform; cf mun, Nos. 42, 213, 
munpan, No, 225, and pumun, No. 203. 


280, 8 802§ ecordl$—ov0 
Aja bicar mahadan—81I . 
Showing (Vessantara) arranging for the great offering—494. 9 


Vessantara does not, of course, recognize the people’s right to circum- 
scribe his alms; however, he bows to the will of the people so far as he is 
personally concerned. He only asked to be granted one day’s delay in order 
to be able to give the Great Offering, which consisted in giving away seven 
hundred each of everything, elephants, horses, chariots, virgins, slaves, etc. 


Aja, see plaque 271. ‘Bicdr, here “to arrange, prepare.” 


281, 6005008 o§ qco298—no) 
Wesamtar Maddi gulai—812 
Vessantara and Maddi converse—494. 10 f 


Vessantara then goes to Queen Maddi’s apartments and tells her the 
turn affairs have taken. He breaks to her the news that on the day after 
the morrow he will start for the Vindhyas, and makes her understand it wil 
be better for him to go alone; . but Maddi, loving and dutiful, will not hear 
of the proposal, and resolves to accompany him with the two children. 


108 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. u 


282, goqnas oF cood—oo9 
Gnakyak tlun mey—813 
Queen (Phusati) comes to see (Vessantara)—498., 12 
Queen Phusati, Vessantara’s mother, wants to know what Vessantara 
intends doing, whether he will go in exile or not. She goes to see her son 


who is in Maddi’s apartments, and on nearing the door, hearing their 
resolve, she is overcome with sorrow, but tries to console them. 


Mey, see plaques 46, 273. 


283, 02992 QF ge08— 0g 
Katta tluh munas—814 


An official comes to inform (Vessantara that the Great Offering is ready) 
—503. 28 


284, Soodg§ BS sl§ w§—oo9 
Wesantar kil dan thar—815 
Vessantara gives gold in alms—~so4. 1 # 
The Bodhisatta then goes into the city, where the offerings have been 
prepared, and gives golden ornaments and utensils to all comers. 
Thar, see. No, 123. 


285. Soa 9924 0} sog—oos 
Wissantar s-dr han amba—816 
Vessantara goes to his father-—gos. 8 
Evening fell even while the Bodhisatta was giving alms; he then 


returned to the palace, to see his father and mother, before departing in 
the morning, 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 109 


This inscription is very much spoiled; fortunately three estampages of it 
were taken at different times, and they show how rapidly in some cases these 
plaques deteriorate; by their means, I have been able to reconstruct the 
legend as above. | | | 


For s-ar, see plaques Nos. 183. 


286, coos § op& SS sg—007 
Wesantar tlun sip aba—8z7 
Vessantara comes and attends respectfully on his father—so5. 10 


Having come in the presence of his parents, he comes to his father and 
attends respectfully on him. . 


Sip, to attend respectfully on,-as a child on his ‘parents, a courtier on 
the king, etc.; it generally translates the Pali sevatz; the M.T. is 5 95 
sipglip; -A.V. 255, 00908585 = sevana, “attending on.” 


287. o2[& 00$ e9g985—090 
Tlun han abo’—818 


He comes to his mother—505. 28 


Having announced to his father his determination, in accordance with 
the wishes of the people, to retire to the Vindhya Mountains, he turns and 
comes to his mother, and begs her permission to leave the world. 


288, Qoo25 03 of o5—o0¢@ 
Gulaf ku Maddi h—819 
(The old king) converses with Maddi—so06. 16 # 


His mother gives him leave to go, but. entreats him not to take Maddf 
with him; Vessantara answers he does not in any way intend to make her 
follow him, that she is perfectly free to go or stay back. Then the king, 
his father, in a long conversation with Maddi, tries to persuade her to remain 
behind; but she refuses and decides to follow her husband, 


For the # after Maddi, see plaque 270. 


110 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 11 


289, (soaog)§ 0Q00 o805—oJo 
(Wesanta)r kuta tit—820 
Vessantara turns to depart—510. 21 


This is not actually expressed in the text; it probably refers to Ves- 
santara turning back after taking leave of his parents and leaving (0805) the 
apartment. . Only the + in Wesantar remains, the rest having been 
broken off; the rest of the inscription is quite clear, 

Kuta, I think, is the M.T. 00, gata (kuta = kata = gata), 
to turn, turn round, turn to, turn back; kuta tit, “to turn round and go 
out,” that is, to take one’s leave, This is confirmed by the plaque, which 
represents Vessantara leaving the palace. co is both colloquial and literary, 
Ger8o0g}00986015 J80} n acagos} occorsepo9 JoSagSayo—‘‘ the Bodhisatta, having been 
freed from his mother’s bosom (= on being born), turned his face due 
north,” Dhd. 62. 11; sv280g3 9 colS 488. gag a8] 380} aco Bodyadog:— the Bodhi- 
satta, sitting cross-legged in his mother’s bosom, turned his face towards 
the outside,’ Dhd. 62. 6. 


290, 2 GF a6 oBS—ojo 
Nah ran tluh kwil—82r 
They bring a carriage—510. 22 
A magnificent carriage drawn by four horses of Sindh is brought round 
at the gate of the palace. 


Kwil, see variant k wil, No. 133. 


291, Of OQ |em2} 9105 O72 —9J J 
Maddi ku kon duk tlar—822 | 
Maddi, with the children, mounts (the. carriage) before (Vessantara) 
—510. 25 
Then Maddi having made obeisance to her parents-in-law, and bidden 
farewell to the ladies of the palace, goes before Vessantara and mounts first 
the carriage. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON ‘THE ANANDA int 


Duk = M.T. 805, duik, to mount or ride a horse, to mount or 
travel in a carriage. Tlar, before (in time), first; there are two variants 
in the Pagan Inscriptions, tumlar and tumlar, In the 15th century, 
on the glazed plaques of Pegu, we find this word as t14, in which the final 
ry, as well as the infix, have already been lost; the M.T. is 092, kla. 


292. Boog, 0805 sax§—oj0 
Wissantar tit 4r—823 
Vessantara goes away (to the Vindhyas)—5s11. 4 


Then Vessantara takes his place in the carriage and sets out for the 
Vindhya Mountains. His mother caused two carts, full of precious things, 
to follow the carriage,-so that her son’ might give alms on the way; all 
these, and even the ornaments he was wearing on his person, he distributed 
on his way through the city. | 


293. OF 92924 O002@}-—OJG 
Man nanar mahajan—824 
(? ‘He addresses or admonishes the crowd while going—511. 14) 


The estampages and the plaque leave no doubt as to the reading given 
above; the place of the plaque between Nos. 292 and 294 leaves likewise 
no doubt as to the episode it refers to; it corresponds to the Pali (51%. 
14), evan Mahasatte mahajane Gmantetvé “appamatia danddini pufiiant 
havotha”’ tt tesam ovddak ca datoé . .. 1 do not, however, exactly know 
what the words man.nanar mean; but I think it probable the meaning 
is as follows: Man, to give advice, to advise, from the Pali mantetz'; 
there is already a word man from the same Pali word in its sense of 
“to repeat sacred texts, to recite mantras, to consecrate by means of 
mantras,” etc.; mandar may possibly be an adverb from the verb na, 
to go (see, plaque 277), meaning, “‘in going, while going”; perhaps also, 
but I doubt. it on account of the final ry, it may be the Pali zé@né, “ various, 
in many ways,” etc. 


t12 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA C von. 1 


294. 32 Segoé ofoS el§—oj5 
| Aba pindon kwil bar—825 
(Vessantara’s) mother sends (him) two carts (filled with ornaments) 
—51r. 16 


As, after admonishing the people, he was going on his way, his mother 
sent him, for-distribution, two carts filled with ornaments and precious things. 


Aba, this refers to Queen Phusati and therefore means “ mother”; 


up to this plaque it has been found regularly with the meaning of ‘‘father”; 
see plaques 23, 145. Bar, 2 (two) = M.T. », bd.. 


295. comad o8c5 Boor cS—oyG 
Wesantar kil kirya h—826 
Vessantara gives the ornaments—511. 18 # 


Then Vessantara gave, not only all the ornaments contained in the two 
carts, but even those he was wearing on his own person. 


296, 8a00a§ bcd sl$ qoS—osy 
Wissantar kil dan rat—827 
Vessantara gives in alms -the precious things—511. 18 
This almsgiving refers to the precious things, seven kinds of them 
(sattaratana), which were sent along with the ornaments. 


Rat, precious thing, precious stone, jewel, from Pali retana. 


297. 8000 9,6 85 o9$ 9,E—ojo 
- Wissantar bir tun dun—8&28 
Vessantara looks back at the city—511 


Having given away all that his mother had sent him, he went on his 
way and left the city; he then became desirous of bcholding the city once 
more, and he turned round to look upon it, The earth under his chariot, by 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 113 


a miracle, was cleti asunder, and, revolving, brought the chariot round to 
face the city; and there were earthquakes and other wonders, 

Bir, to look; a variant is bar (plaque 200); cf. also the causal 
pubar, plaque i195. Tun, back, again = M.T. bir tun, to look 
back. See also plaque 262. 


298, soog§ &c8oS af—oje 
Wesantar jilik tun—829 


Vessantara drives on again—512. 2 


Having looked at the city, he turns towards the sixty thousand courtiers 
who were born on the same day as he, and towards the people, who had 
so far accompanied him, and makes them turn back. Then, driving on 
again, he says to Maddi, “See, Lady, if any mendicant is coming behind”; 
and he drives on again. ~ 

Jilik, to drive; there are two modern colloquial forms of this word, 
ooo and oo§oS, kaluik and caluik = to drive. A very common word 
is oo5, jak; another is 05, caw, very common in the literature: o&3305 
ogiSo8—"'a young man came driving a cart,” S.M.g; 0503) c}gacogosfSe 
oya05 com 38§5—“ he (Indra) came on driving a cart in front of the rest- 
house wherein the queen was seated,” S.J. 3; A.V. 130, x#yd@maka, a driver. 
= poro0Sd3; A.V. 184, Matals, the deva who drives Indra’s cart = saoo$ca0 
a0Se$1 The Talaing version in this place has aoSe8, jak caw, to 
drive. Qcoogs . . . aoseSsoo3q— King Vessantara . . . drove on.” 


299, 0098 <fg5 e025 cpe2—ooo 
Yac drep boy raja—830 
The mendicants run towards the king—512. 8 

Maddi sat down watching. Now, four brahmins had come too late to 
be present at the last distribution of gifts; they ascertained the direction 
the Bodhisatta had taken and followed up. Maddi took them to the king, 
who had remained in the chariot. 

Yac, a Leggar, Pali ydcaka. Drep, to run = M.T. For boy see 


Plaque 199. 
15 


114 EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA [ voL, 11 


300, soma BS al§ GQQBI—O99 | 
Wesantar kil dan ‘kseh—831 


Vessantara gives the horses-in. alms—g12, 10 


On coming up, the brahmins ask Vessantara for the horses and he at 
once gives them up. 


Kseh, a horse= M.T. oqo, khyeh (pron. cheh). LI had at first 
thought this was to be read kseh, but this word appears in three other 
plaques round the base of the Ananda and twice in the Shwezigé6n inscription 
(lines 128, 129), in which the reading is clearly ks; moreover, for the 
sound sh = Skt. s, they use in Talaing the letter ©. The group 4s seems 
to correspond in M.T. to.q, 44y (pron. ch, in “church”); cf, for instance, 
cong (i), kasd (ksi), M.T. gq, khy@ (pron. chia), to write; cod 
(§), kasau (ksau) = M.T. 4, khyau, an oath, a curse; 08 (9), 
kasi (ksi) = M.T. 4, khyi, to shake, quake, tremble. There is a 
variant; ksehh; in the plaque, after kseh, there appears to be a letter, 
but so much damaged as to make it very doubtful what it is, if it is a letter 
at all. 


30T. go © a3 ofcS—og) 
Raman ma jak kwil—832 
The red deer drawing the chariot—s12. 15 


After the gift of the horses, the travellers were stranded on the road ; 
zat that moment, four gods, seeing their plight, took the form of red deer 
and drew the chariot. 

Raman, a red deer = M.T. 0, mah; with ramaa compare the 


Burmese 0906, samanh. 


302, 8S al§$ o8S—oo9 
Kil dan kwil—833 
He gives away the chariot—512. 22 


A while afterwards, a brahmin comes up and asks Vessantara for the: 
gift of the chariot; this also he gives without hesitation. 


PART ‘1 ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 116 


303. S000 8) 6co2S (§S—oo¢ 
Wesantar lop grip—834 


Vessantara enters the forest—513 


So soon as the chariot was given away, the four deer disappeared, and 
Vessantara and his wife were obliged to go on foot; the former carried little 
prince Jali and Maddi carried _Kanhajina; and thus they entered the forest. 
That they entered the forest is not expressed in this connexion in the Pali. | 


Grip, forest, see plaque 82. 


304. 2920 o8$eep5—oo9 
Sman tinrow—835 — 
They ask the way—513. 11 
Whenever they. met anyone, they asked the way to the Vindhya 
Mountains; all these travellers were much touched on beholding them, and 
answered, “ Long, still long is the way!” 
Tinrow, road, way, a variant of tanrow (see plaque 108). 


305, ©05 Bod 99.9, 155 —09@ 
Bas kil sacchu’—836 
They pluck and give fruits (to the children)—513. 19 
As they were thus going, the two. children were clamouring for the 
beautiful fruits growing on the trees. By the power of the Bodhisatta, the 
fruit-laden branches bowed down of their own accord within reach, and they 
plucked the ripest and gave them to the children. 
Bas, to pluck = M,T. 009, bah. .Sacchu’, a variant of sacchu, 
plaque 9. . | 


116 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vow. 0 


306, 85 cQ0g83—o001 
Cip Suvannagiri—837 
They arrive at the Suvannagiri Mountain—514, 1 


Suvanna, for Suvanna. 


307. §29493-—0p0 
Kuntimaranadi—838 
(They arrive at) the Kontimara River—514. 2 


Leaving the Suvanna Mount, which is five yojanas away from Jetuttara, 
they arrive at the river Kontimara, which is five yojanas still further, 


Kuntimara, the Pali has Kontiméra. 


308, 85 soqgo84—o9¢@ 
Cip Arafifiagiri—8a9 
They come to the Arafijara Mount—514. 3 


309. 022 853:—og0 
Twail bimnah—38 40 
(They arrive at) the brahmin village—514 


Leaving the Arafijara Mount, another five leagues bring them to the 
brahmin village of Dunnivittha. 

Twai, village = M.T. op$ and ogo$, twan and kwan. Bimnah, 
a brahmin = M.T. eg:, bamnah; there is a variant, bumnah (plaque 
227). 


PART 1 | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 117 


310, 020200 98§—oago 
Matula nagir—841 
(They arrive at Vessantara’s) uncle’s city—514. 6 


Ten leagues further, they arrive at the city of the Bodhisatta’s uncle: 
its distance from Jetuttara was thirty leagues .(yojanas). 


Nagir, the Pali nagara, city = M.T. 3085, naguiw, Dhd. 63. 6. 


311, e328 egos (d—o¢ J 
| Dmon pdey jrap—842 
They stay in a rest-house (near the city)—514. 16 


They did riot enter the city but entered and sat in a rest-house situated 
outside the city. Maddi, the dutiful wife, wipes the dust from her husband’s 
feet and shampoos them. 

Dmon, see plaques 215, 265. Pdey, n=M.T. 9, pdai. 


312, This legend is practically illegible. The scene represents Maddi 
with her children, when, having shampooed Vessantara’s feet, she stands 
outside the rest-house, well within sight of people, with the intention of 
announcing Vessantara’s arrival (Pali, VI 514. 17-18). There is a somewhat 
spoiled, but still clear enough, dz on the. left hand, with, before it, some 
traces of a letter which may have been ma; the name Maddi in this 
connexion is probable enough. The last letter on the right is s, with before 
it, and separated from it by two doubtful letters, what lookslike (?) stn, min 
or b2n. 


313. o§ oorS—og¢ 
| Maddi gulan—844 | 
Maddi converses (with the women of Ceta)—514. 19-25 


The women going in and out of the city of Ceta, seeing the queen 
outside the rest-house, come and surround her and ask her about herself; 


118 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {von 11 


Maddi tells them; and the women deplore her fate. The Pali says nothing 
about Maddi telling the women what has happened. ‘and the fatigue of the 
journey.. .It is, however,:in the Burmese version. (Hanthawaddy Press, 
Rangoon, 1903, p. 64); the. Talaing version’ merely says that the women 
asked her about herself, but her-answer ‘is not recorded, though, of course, 
it must have been given: Qoorcoach [Fogg S08 SocBoSaccoSabGi p9205gaySa} » ogegé 
33> off geqSa} nf GoGo5 ops aqoSqr— the women of the city who were going in 
and ‘coming out, seeing the queen, surrounded her. and asked her about 
herself, then they exclaimed (‘O, the tender lady ! 1? ete.);” S.V. 23. 


314. P2095 C&—og9 
Nah taw mah—845 
They are keeping watch (on the king and queen)—517. 26 


They then have abundant food brought, make the rest-house comfortable 
and, surrounding it, keep watch. This plaque should properly come after the 
next. 

The lower part of the right-hand half of the # (oc) ‘in taw is spoiled, 
and at first sight the word looks.as if it were oS (kew). An examination 
-of the plaque shows that the glaze has slightly peeled off. 

Man, to keep, to watch = M.T. | 


315. qoooa5 2 BE—og6 
Gulai ku smin—8 46 
(Vessantara) converses with the princes—s15. 5 & 


Then the people go and inform the king, Vessantara’s uncle, of their 
arrival, and sixty thousand princes come to see him, lamenting. To induce 
him not to proceed to the Vindhyas, they offer him the kingdom of Ceta; 
he refuses. , This should have come before the preceding plaque. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 119 


316, BE gS Begr—ogr 
Smin pyun tinro—8&47. | 
The princes show the way (to Vessantara)—318. 


~ They stay one day and one night in the rest-house, and early in the 
morning resume their journey; the sixty thousand princes accompany them 
for fifteen leagues; then, at the entrance to the forest, they stand and care- 
fully point out his way to the Bodhisatta. 


Pyuf, to show, see plaque 97; Tinro, for tinrow; the iecend as 
it is fills the plaque, and there is no room for the final w; see plaques 304 
and 108: | 


317. 85 og0209—O0gG0 
Cip Gandhamadana—848 
‘They arrive at the Gandhamadana Mountain—519. 1 


The princes, in order to prevent. any danger from befalling the travellers, 
order one of their men, very skilful in woodcraft, to follow them and keep 
a careful. watch; they then go back. The royal exiles, continuing their 
journey, arrive at Mount Gandhamadana. | 


318, cyecpS eqrss—oge 
Kurow tmo’—849 . 
Turning his back on the (Gandhamadana) Mount—519. 20 


- Leaving the Gandhamadana behind, Vessantara goes on his way. 

Kurow, turn the back on = M.T. 4, karau, which is used collo- 
quially in this sense: vzao4 g&o:0§3>—"do_ not be turning your back on 
me.” Tmo’,,a rock, a rocky hill, mountain. = M.T, ogs8, tma’. 


120 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von, 1 


319, 85 cogeoo§—o90 
Cip Wepulapar—85o0 
They arrive at the Vipula Mountain—519. 21 


Par, a mountain, from the Sanskrit parvata; the modern form, 6, 
paw, is very frequent in books after names of mountains. 


320, 69209099 38—099 
Ketumaranadi—-851 
(They rest near the) Ketum. River—519, 21 


Passing by the foot of the Vipula Mount, they come to the banks of 
the river Ketumati, where they rest and take a meal prepared by the 
forester who accompanies them. 


321, Bod goodc8e a08-—09 J 
Kil cnaykinlon—852 . 
They give (their guide) a (golden) hairpin 
In acknowledgment of the forcster’s services they present him with a _ 
golden hairpin. 
For cnaykinlon, see plaque 53. 


322, Q35 eGedSo95—og9 
[G]ja’ jreysum—2853 
Sitting under the banyan tree—519. 24 


After his meal, Vessantara, full of peace, crosses the river Ketumati 
and seats under a banyan tree. 

Gja’, to seat = M.T. Jreysum, a banyan tree = M.T. Qo}, jrai- 
surh, Sudh. 2. 21. The Bodhi tree under which Gautama attained Omni- 
science is called cS, jrai thaw, A.V. 28 = assattha; &goe8, jraimha- 
budh, A.V. 267d, and qee28 oof, chu bodhi paluih, A.V. 167. In 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 12! 


the last expression, ‘0c§o5 means the circle in the centre of Jambudipa, around 
the Bodhi tree; U.O.K., 45. 17, ee280o0cfo5s 


(323. 88 ~2080§—ag¢ 
 Cip Nalipar—854 


Then he moves on and comes to the mount Nalika—srg. 26 


324. 85 goc8$—o9 9 
Cip Mucalin—855 
He arrives at the Mucalinda Lake—519. 26 


325, 85 oogq05 sapQg—096 
Cip caturas anca—856 
He arrives at the square lake—519. 29 


They passed along the bank of the Mucalinda Lake and, following the 
course of the stream which flowed from the ARE, they arrive at the 
square lake. 

Caturas, square, from the Pali caturassa. _ Afica, a lake; I have 
net found any modern. equivalent. 


326. BS so009080}—09 7 
Cip assamapit—857 
He arrives at the hermitage—520. 10 


Now Indra, perceiving from his heaven what was happening, called the 
architect of the gods, Vigvakarma, and told him to go to the Vindhyas, and 
there build a hermitage in a pleasant spot. Vi¢vakarma builds two retreats, 
one for Vessantara and one for Maddi, and keeps there ready all that is 
necessary for hermits. He then writes an inscription: “This is for him who 
wishes to become a hermit”; he drives away from the spot: all inhuman 
creatures and loud-voiced beasts and birds, and goes his way. The Bodhi- 


satta, following a path, arrives at the hermitage. 
“46. 


122 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


Assamapit, hermitage, from the Pali assamapada; M.T. s0ago905, 
asmapuit, A.V. 28, — | _ 


327. op@o ear © o8§—o90 
Raja: lop ma ’ir—858 
‘The king enters (the hermitage), becoming a hermit—s20. 11 ff 


On seeing the inscription, Vessantara understands that the hermitage has” 
been prepared by Indra; he goes in and dons the garb of a hermit which 
was there ready. 


‘Ir, to leave the world, see plaque 34. 


328, 0805 epo§ 0G p2020S—0 9g 
Tit nor parnasal—859 . 
(Vessantara) goes out. from the hermitage—520. 14 


Then he goes out from the hermitage with the calm of a Pacceka 
Buddha, and approaches his family. Maddi falls weeping at his feet. 

Parnasal, a hut made of leaves, a hermitage, from the Sanskrit 
parnacala@; in M.T. the form goo, from Pali pannasé/é, is found, S.B. 1 | 


329. 08 ecorS (8S—oGo 
Maddi lop grip—860 
Maddi enters the forest—521, 1 


Maddi, her emotion over, ‘goes in her hermitage and assumés the ascetic 
garb, She asks as a favour to go herself in search of fruits and roots, and 
he asks her, now they are ascetics, not to come to his hut unseasonably. 
Now, by the power of the Bodhisatta’s compassion, all the wild animals 
within a large radius were full of compassion also and did no harm to 
one another. Daily, at dawn, Maddi fetches water, sweeps the hermitage 
and, leaving the two children in the father’s care, enters the forest in quest 
of roots and fruits, 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 123 


330, © abaq85—0Go 
Ca sacchu’—861 
They eat the fruits—521. 4 


In the evening, she returns, and, having bathed the children, they all 
four sit down and eat the fruits she has brought. 


331. O§ e028 v§ s0000S—o6 } 
Maddi lop parnasal—862 
Maddi enters her hermitage—521. 5 


The meal over, the “queen takes the two children, and retires to her hut. 
Thus did they live for seven months. 


332. 88 9925 @6 op\[S] 09 
Cimi fiac Juc tlu[A]—863 
(Vessantara) looks expectantly and sees Jajaka coming—s41, 20 


Now, in Kalinga, there lives a brahmin named Jijaka; he is married to 
a young wife. She wants two slaves to do the rougher house-work. jijaka 
has heard of Vessantara and of his readiness to give, so he resolves to go 
to him and ask him for his two children. After many adventures, he comes 
near the hermitage, but being afraid Maddi would prevent the gift of her 
two children, he waits till she has gone to the forest for fruits. During the 
night Maddi is visited by a dreadful premonitory dream, and she runs to 
the Bodhisatta’s hut to tell him of it. At once, he understands some one 
is coming to ask for the children, and rejoices; but he does not tell her the 
meaning of the dream; he consoles her, telling her not to believe in dreams. 
Then, early in the morning, as usual, she makes over the children to Vessan- 
tara and goes into the forest. Jijaka comes up the footpath leading to the 
hermitage, and the Bodhisatta sits down, eagerly watching the way by 


124 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 


which he would come; and as he looks forward expectantly he sees Jijaka 
coming. . 

Cimi, to look forward, to look to expectantly = M.T. ©8, cami; the 
Talaing version, at this passage, has: 6280005 20319&g9j, 03208083 @g2003/Sq— 
“the Bodhisatta sat cross-legged on a flat stone and looked forward to the 
brahmin coming”; Sudh. 19. 25, 3la$ o3)&008 9205 aS {G3 cog B/S of 8—" the 
“people of the place, looking expectantly, saw the Blessed Buddha (standing) 
on the summit of the hill.” Haswell has the form 8, lami. Juc = 
Jijaka. The plaque is somewhat spoiled, and the estampage and photograph 
would have been of little avail without the plaque-itself; in cimi, there are 
only faint traces of the ¢ and of the z In tluf, only faint traces of lua 
are still to be seen. | | 


333. @203 olE—oGg 
jali wan—864 
Jali goes to meet (Jijaka)—542. 4 
On seeing Jijaka, Vessantara is delighted, for now he will be able to 
give something to some one, which he has not done for seven months; he 


calls out to him to approach; then he tells his little son Jali to go and meet 
him, The little prince obeys. 


Wan, see plaque 193. 


334. Bd @oci—oG9 
Buhic Jali—865 
(Jajaka) frightens Jali—542. 6 

As the boy approaches him, offering to relieve him of -his luggage, 
Jijaka thinks, “This surely must be Vessantara’s. son;- from the very first 
I must speak harsh words to him.” So he snaps his fingers, bawling out, 
“Get away! Get away!” 

Buhic, see plaque 252. 


PART 1 | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 125 


335. e200 o902§ op§—oGe 
- Jali kumar tun—866 _ 
Prince Jali returns (near his father)—g42. 7 


Jali returns to his father’s side and, looking at the brahmin, perceives in 
him all the signs of a low, cruel man. 

Tun, .see plaque 262; here it is used as-a verb, to return; of. further 
this sense in the expression om@$os2, patun paa, an exchange of friendly 
greetings = Pali pat‘santh@ra; this expression is found at Dhd. 63. 13 and 
226, 27. The text has (542. 7) agantod, * having returned.” 


336. qrored oy go—06y 
~ Guléi ku Juc—867 


(Vessantara) conversing with Jijaka—s542. 11 


The brahmin then comes up to the Bodhisatta and the latter converses 
with him; he asks him on what business he is come and Jijaka answers he 
has come to ask for his two children. Vessantara agrees to give them, but 
asks him to wait for Maddi, so that she may see them once more; this 
Jajaka flatly refuses. Then Vessantara asks him, before taking the children 
to his village, to show them to their grandfather at Jetuttara, but this 
request again is declined, for the brahmin is afraid of the old. king’s ire. 


337. 0205 Ww} coy2x—oGo 
Bat han tyoh—&8 
(The two. children) hide in a clump (of bushes)—545. 13 


The two children, hearing the crue] words of the brahmin. flee and hide 
in a clump of bushes. — 

Bat, to hide; I have found yet no modern equivalent of this word; 
the sense of “to hide” is clear from the context and the scene depicted 
on the plaque; in the text, it answers to the Pali wzltya#, Han, see 


126 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vow it 


plaque 28. Tyoh, a clump, of trees, of bushes, etc.; this word appears 
again. in plaque 356, where it is applied to a clump of flower bushes, t yoh 
pkaw. Of this-also I have found no modern form equivalent. 


338. 0005... , —0G@ 
Samwat ... . —869 
The children 


This inscription is very badly weathered; the first word seems te be 
samwat, children. The last letter is ¢, and that before it seems to be 4; 


the letter before the @ is very indistinct; it may have been 6, thus giving 
us bat, as in the preceding plaque. 


339. @oc8 09026 B$-—-o10 
_ ‘Jali kumar tin—870 
Prince Jali comes up (from the square lake)—546. 11 


From the clump of bushes they run to the square lake and, getting into 
the water, they stand concealed with lily leaves over their heads. Jijaka, 
not seeing them, gets into a temper, and accuses Vessantara of’ having’ 
made them a sign to run away. Vessantara tells him he will fetch them 
back; then, following their footprints, he comes to the square lake; he calls 
out to Jali, ‘‘Come, my boy, come,” and the prince, fearful of disobeying 
his father, comes up from the lake. — 

Tin, to ascend, go up, come up; M.T. = o§§, tuin. 


340. [08]$ 6928 e0§—o0 
[Tijn nor kambar—871 
(KkKanha) comes up from the lake—5 46, 21 
He also calls out to little princess Kanha, who likewise comes up from 
her hiding place and, clasping her father’s feet, weeps, 


Kathbdr, see plaque 125. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON. THE ANANDA 127 


41. BS sl$ emo$—ory 
Kil din kon—872. 
(Vessantara) gives.in alms his (own) children (to Jajaka)—547. 12 


Vessantara explains to the children that he gives them in order to obtain 
the highest fulfilment of the virtue of almsgiving, and so may, in a next 
existence, attair. Omniscience. He then fixes a price on each; if Jali 
wishes to become free, he must pay one thousand “pieces of gold; as for 
Kanha, she will have to give a hundred slaves, male and female, a hundred 
horses, elephants, etc., and takes them back to the hermitage. He takes a 
waterepot, and, consecrating his gift by pouring out the water, gives in alms 
his children to the brahmin. | 


342. PS oy goi—orp 
Juj kdai juk—873 
Jiijaka bites off a creeper—g548, 3 


Having made his gift, Vessantara, joyful, . stands looking upon his 
children; meanwhile, Jijaka bites off a creeper to tie them with. 

K dafi, to bite, bite off; I have not found an equivalent’ modern form; 
in the plaque, Jajaka is depicted as biting off a creeper; the ¢ is somewhat. 
spoiled, but the plaque shows traces of the lower stroke. Juk = M.T.; 
Haswell gives only the meaning of “rope,” but Stevens, under “ Creeper,” 
has: ogq5,-@o5 85, tnamjuk, jukgruip; a rope is Properly 0 ceo205, 
juk lot, Sudh. 22. 16. 


343. G5 303 O83 sos§—org 
Jac dak rin ar—874 
Jajake binds and takes away (the children)—548. 4. 

Wik ; the creeper he has bitten off, the brahmin binds jali’s right hand 
to Kamnha’s left and, beating them with the ends of the ctéeper, takes them 
away. The reading jac with long %, which is indistinct in this plaque and 
the preceding one, is quite clear in the estampages. 


128 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  - [von 1 


344. B§er205 |ealoS—or9 
Kinkal dos—875 
Vessantara subdues his anger—552. 21 ff 


Blood runs down their bodies; in a rugged place the brahmin stumbies, 
and the children slipping off their tiny hands from their bonds -run weeping 
to their father; but the brahmin follows up and drives them away. 
Vessantara’s heart is filled with sorrow, and he retires to his hut where he 
weeps bitterly. At the thought of the unmerciful beatings they were 
suffering, his anger rises, and he resolves to pursue the brahmin, kill him 
and bring back the children. But he thinks better of it and does not do so. 

Kinkal, a variant of kinkan, No. 62; Jit, ‘to instruct one’s 
anger,” that is, to reason it away, to master it, subdue it. Dos = Pali 
dosa, 


345. Ge stS—o7G 
juj dak—876 
Jajaka binds (again the children)—-554. 5 
Meanwhile the children were being taken away by Jijaka. In a rough 
place the latter again falls down, and the children: make another bid for 


freedom. But.the brahmin follows them in a vile temper and binds them up 
again. 


346. g8 8S co2§—011 
_ Juc rin ar—877 
_Jajaka takes away (the children again)—554. 8 


And then he again takes them back with him. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 129 


347. a728§ &c8oS—oyo 
Kanhajin jilit—878 
Kanhajina looks back (at her father)—554. 9 


As they are being led. away, Kanha turns back, looks at her father and 
laments pitifully. 
Jilit, to turn back, to look back = M.T. 805, glit: I have not yet 
_ found this word in the-literature, but it is used colloquially in the expression 
6¢8305, mew glit = to. look back; the Pali has svatditvd olokenti, 
“turning back and looking” (at her father), and the Skem, p. 118, coagags 
ooco0é G&h— Kaphajing turned back (coc008) and looked at the king.” 


348, soaa§ voxS—o1¢ 
‘Wesantar yam—879 
Vessantara weeps—554. 24 


On hearing his daughter’s lamentations, Vessantara’s heart wells up with 
emotion and sorrow, and he weeps bitterly. 


349. Bo sl$ goS—ooo 
| Kil dan buy—88o 
Vessantara gives . . .. (?)—554 


I cannot make out the meaning of the word» biy. The plaque has 
somewhat weathered in this place, and though, in it, the letter looks like a 
b, it may have been originally a ¢; if so, we should read: kil dan tay, 
tiy being the suffix. of the past ee and translate: ‘“(Vessantara) after 
he had given in alms (his children): The plaque represents him seated in 
front of his hermitage ;. and this would tally with the text, which says that. 
after his fit of weeping, he reasoned with himself that he should not give 
way to this earthly affection, but should be calm, and sat still as usual. 
From .the episode of his -weeping to that-of the appearance of the lions in. 
Maddi’s path, there is made mention of no gift of his which could be 
represented by the word biy.. | 
17 


130 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 1 


350. e808 sch—ooo 
Jadisin dal—88r1 
The lion bars (Maddi’s path)—556. 30 


While being dragged away, the little princess continues her lamentations, 
which move the hearts of the deities, who reflect that, if Maddi arrived at 
the hermitage at the usual time, she would immediately go in search of 
her children and thus get into great trouble. So, to keep her back until the 
setting of the sun, they instruct three of the gods to assume the form of a 
lion, a tiger and a leopard, and to obstruct her way till sunset. They do so. 

Jadisin, lio = M.T. @28o9§ jadisuin; cf Cambodian, song 
(Aymonier). Dal, to shut, obstruct, bar = M.T. 38, daw. 


351. of 09995 6m2$—00) 
Maddi sman kon—882 
Maddi enquires about her children—s60. 30 ff 


Maddi, perceiving the wild beasts in her path, is terrified and dares not 
proceed; she remembers the bad dream she has had (plaque 332), and 
becomes convinced something dreadful has happened. At sunset, the gods 
disappear and Maddi proceeds on her way to the hermitage. She does 
not perceive her children as usual, and comes up to Vessantara, who is 
sitting in silence; she enquires of him about the children. 


352. of 88 c@gE—on9 
Maddi cip kren—883 
Maddi comes up to the cugenia tree—564. 5 


To all her enquiries and lamentations, Vessantara does not answer, and 
he keeps his ominous silence. Then, in the moonlight, she seeks her 
children in all the places where they used to play, and thus comes to the 
cluster of eugenia trees, which was one of these, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 131 


353+ 08 95 &E—ong 
Maddi cup krun—884 
Maddi arrives at the river—s64. 9 


Cup = cip, to arrive. 


354. of 08§ q9235—009 
Maddi tin tmo’—885 
Maddi ascends the hill—564. 11 
She goes up the hill where the chidren used to eat fruit and pluck 
flowers. 
355. of 85 8& 6QQ:—00G 
Maddi cip cin kseh—886 
Maddi comes upon the (toy) elephants and horses—564. 15 


In her ramblings she comes upon the children’s toys. - 


356. of 85 soya: o15—004 
Maddi cip tyoh pkaw—887 
Maddi arrives at the clump of flower-trees—564. 25 
She then comes to a clump of flowering plants and looks here and there 
for her children. 
Tyoh, see plaque 337. Pkaw,: see plaque 176, 


cLve of 8S s2p3—000 
Maddi cip anca—888 
Maddi comes to the lakes—564. 29 


She comes to the lakes covered with lotuses, near which the prince and 
princess used to play. 


132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 11 


Afica, a lake = Pali potkharanz; see plaque 325. This plaque, on 
the Ananda; is wrongly placed after the one which follows (358). 


358. oycepS co205 epar—one 
Kurow boy raja—889 
(Maddi) goes back. to the king—565. 2 


But she can see the children nowhere. She then returns. to. the 
hermitage, wherein she finds Vessantara with his face cast down; she 
addresses him; he does not answer. A second and a third time, receiving 
no answer, she wanders into the night. 7 

Kurow, to return, go back, see plaque 318. Boy, to, towards, see 
plaque 199. ‘ihe word raja is not fully clear in the photograph, being 
somewhat spoiled on the plaque itself, but a careful examination of the latter 
shows it to be raja. 


359. o§ 600208 SoS—o¢o 
‘Maddi lot plit—890 
Maddi falls and swoons—566, 8 


Having come back for the third time and still unable to obtain .any 
information from Vessantara, the distracted ‘mother falls down upon the 
‘ground in a swoon. | 

Lot, to fall = M.T. Plit here means ‘‘to swoon”; the M.T. is 
$105, pluit, to become extingutshed. 


360, 609909 goooch—0¢0 - 
Yok rusal—89r 
(Vessantara) raises (Maddi’s head) and lays (it on his lap) . 
Vessantara believes her dead; he feels her heart and, perceiving she is 
still alive, fetches a pitcher of water, raises her head, and lays it on his lap. 


-Yok, raise, lift up; the more modern form is ofo5, yuik, but the form 
exo, vok, is also found, for instance, at Dhe. 151. 26. Rusal, to lay, | 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES.ON THE ANANDA 133 


place, put; it is found also in Blagden’s Pagan Inscriptions. There is a 
variant, lusal, also in the Pagan Inscriptions, and also, in the same 
inscriptions, a form, sal, to which answers the modern colloquial o>, sa. 


361, Songg 002 9005—o@J 
Wissantar sah dak—892 


-Vessantara pours water (on Maddi’s tace)—566. 23 


He pours water from the pitcher on her face, to make. her regain her 
consciousness. | 

Sah, to pour = M.T. 5, suih, occasionally found written co23, 
soh; Dhd. 485. 5, $g2$R 805 c0c305 SoSooho8 6agosee5 oo—‘only Nirvana, 
quenching the eleven fires (eleven passions), is exceedingly cool”; in which 
oS =. to pour and ocfoS = to put out, extinguish. Another modern form 
is o805, caruih, with infix 7. In the Su-daung-bye Inscription, 15th 
century, is found the form eod205, sroh, line 19—306900320§ 0/805 QOQUdg3 
(Goddce5 330509933508 ood (09205 vogadeagss 04 Beascs a8aho8S B0$y0d a0$coo ao0503Se 
cnodys ogcSacg&org codogoS— ‘with the great rain, that is, of the Law.of the 
virtuous of the four continents, he poured down and extinguished the - 
fire that destroys the world, that is, all the passions in man.” 

Between this and next plaque comes No. 375, which has been misplaced 
on the Ananda. 


362, 0§ co4s02392—0¢9? 
Maddi anumodana—893 


Maddi rejoices (at Vessantara having given away the children) 
—507. 22 


‘He then sprinkles her face with water and she comes back to con- 
sciousness; he explains he has given the children away, and did not tell her 
for fear of causing her pain. He consoles her, assuring her they would get . 
back the’ children, alive and well Maddi then rejoices in his gilt 


134 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vow. 11 


363. 8592 0 |F-—08g 
Bimnah tlun—8&94 
(Sakka, disguised as) a brahmin comes——568. 30 

Now, Sakka, in his heaven, thought, “ Vessantara has given his children 
in alms yesterday; now, another low creature may come and ask him for his 
wife, and he would be left helpless and destitute. I will take the form of a 
brahmin and ask for Maddi; he will thus attain the height of perfection ; 
having then made it a condition that she is not to be given to any one 
else, I wil! give her back.” And so, at dawn, disguised as a brahmin, 
Sakka comes to the hermitage. Most of the lower portion of the / in tlun 
has disappeared. — 


364, Bod sl Bgg—oes 
Kil dan kindar—895 
(Vessantara) gives his-wife in alms—370. 4 
Sakka asks for Maddi, and Vessantara, pouring water from a pitcher in 
ratification of his gift, gives his wife to him. 


Kindar, see plaque 132. 


365. 96 olf o3g§—oes 
Dun dan kindar—896 


(Sakka) receives the wife of Vessantara in alms—570, 4 # 


366. Bod. op$ o§—o0e7 
Kil tun Maddi—897 
(Sakka) gives back Maddi—572. 1 
Vessantara looks at his wife’s face to see how she takes his gift of her; 


she is perfectly calm; Sakka then praiscs her and gives her back to the 
Bodhisatta. 


PART 1 | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 135 


367. 2} qooopd—o¢o 
In gulai—898 
Indra converses (with Vessantara)—572. 1 f 
A conversation then goes on between Sakka and the Bodhisatta; the 
former reveals. his identity and asks Vessantara to choose any eight boons, 
and that he would grant them to him. The latter asks them; the first and 


most important for the story is, that his father may become reconciled, soon 
recall him, and set him again on the throne. 


368, @} e025 s024—0@@ 
— . In cow ar—8g99 
Indra goes back (to his heaven)—573. 18 


Sakka assures him that they all will be soon reunited to his father and 
goes back to his own place. 


369. 5 gBo5 B} ag—eoo 
Juc stik hin chu—geo 
Jajaka sleeps on a tree—$73. 29 _ 
Maddi and Vessantara lived happily in the hermitage. Meanwhile, 
Jajaka travelled with the children, over whom the gods watched carefully. 
In the evening, when the sun went down, he used to tie up the children and 


make them sleep on the ground; himself, however, frightened of wild beasts, 
would get up on a tree and sit in a fork of the branches. 


370, 8485 SE[ag? . . Jeo 
Cirmil smin (aba? . . P)—9go! 


(Vessantara) looks out for (his father) the king-—582, 10 


The gods, guiding Jijaka’s footsteps, made him come to the capital, 
Jetuttara, instead of to his own place in the kingdom of Kalinga, and 


136 +. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. 1 


brought him into the palace courtyard. The old king, Vessantara’s father, 
perceives the children and has them brought to him. The young Jali 
explains how they came to be with Jijaka. The grandfather pays the. 
‘brahmin the price set upon each child by Vessantara; Jijaka dies of an 
indigestion. The grandfather gathers a large army to accompany him to 
the Vindhyas in order to bring back the Bodhisatta and Maddi. As they 
near the Vindhyas, Vessantara hears the great noise made by the large 
army and, together with Maddi, ascends a hill and looks out. 

’ Cirmil, to look towards, to. look forward to, is a variant of cimi 
(plaque 332); there remains only faint traces of the 2 over the m. The 
last two words after smin are practically illegible; the first, however, I 
take to be aba, father, but this is only a conjecture; perhaps it is 
amba = father. 


371. YE op\F B5—eo) 
Smin tlun cip—go2 
The king (Vessantara’s father) arrives—583. 15 7 

On beholding. the army, Vessantara, not knowing whose it might be, 
becomes anxious; but-Maddi convinces him it can only be his father’s; then 
he goes back with her and-sits before his hut.. Vessantara’s father having 
arrived, calls Queen. ‘Phusati and explains that, if. they go all together, 
Vessantara and Maddi might receive a shock. “Pll-go first,’ says he; 
‘““when.vou think that, after a few moments, the first emotion has_ subsided, 
follow up. 

The min Smif’ is no more visible a defect in the ‘giaze. in’ the 
middle. of the ‘letter % makes’ it: look ‘ike -+: 


372. BE aE BS cams—eoo 
Smin tlun hin kon—903 — 


The king comes up to his son— 583. 25 


The king mounts his elephant and comes up to his son. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 134 


373. S0dH4 saQrxd 39—¢O>G 
Wesantar Inor aba—9o4 
Vessantara salutes his father—584. 1 


374. 909905 op|F BS—eog 
Gnakyak tlun cip—go5 


The queen (Phusati) arrives—585. 30 


Touching greetings are exchanged; the old king tells them he has 
brought with him the two children, well and sound. And then Queen Phusati, 
feeling the first emotion must by now be assuaged, comes to her son. 


Gnakyak, queen = M.T.; cf. the variant gnakyek, plaque 72. 


375. aE, 009 gave—¢ 0G 
Smin pat cului—go6 
The king (Vessantara) chafes (Maddi’s) head—566. 22 


Tais plaque is altogether in the wrong place; it should come after 
No. 361. It refers to the- episode when Maddi, after a fruitless search for 
her children, falls in a swoon and Vessantara, placing her peas on his lap, 
pours water on her and chafes her face. 

Pat, to press with the hand, squeeze, shampoo, chafe = M.T. Culufa, 
the head; the final # is somewhat spoiled, and could be taken for an x. 
Strange enough the Sem in this place, p. 64, has exactly the same words : 
BEood qagé gogS—"' the king chafed the head of the queen.” This word is 
found also under the form o@&, caluft. There is another literary form, 
oy 6 samlun, with m infix; ¢ and s are often interchanged. With the 
legend on this plaque compare Sudh. 13. 21, $0393) og5{6} cosolsd ag /§— the 
Blessed Buddha stroked (dct. pressed) his head with his right: hand.” 

18 


138 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 


376. sper |GoQrg gQoyra5—¢or 
Raja lor gnakyak—oo7 
The king salutes the queen (his mother)—586. 5 


When they see their mother approaching, Vessantara and Maddi salute 
_her respectfully. On the plaque can be séen pretty clearly the traces of the 
first two words, which are barely legible on the photograph. 


377. ear§ opj& BS cegos5— 00 
Kon tlua hin abo’—908 
The children come to-their mother—586. 8 


The two children, perceiving their mother, come running to her, 
weeping. 


378. of 99 6a22$ s2000S—¢0¢ 
Maddi ku kon lot—gog : 
Maddi falls (on the ground) with her children—586. 29 


Sakka, from his heaven, perceives that the six royal personages have 
fallen on the ground in a swoon and that there is no one to sprinkle water 
5 . . ¥ 
on them; so he causes a wonderful ‘shower to fall, in which only those who 
desired to be wet were wet. 


379. Gomsd qrr%d— too 
Wesantar gulafi—oro. 
Vessantara converses (with his father)—587. 18 


The shower brings back the six royal persons to their senses. The sixty 
thousand courtiers and the people approach, and the people call upon 
Vessantara and Maddi to ascend the throne again. Vessantara addresses 
his father, ‘You and the people have banished me, who was ruling right- 
eously.” His father acknowledges his and his people’s fault, and Vessantara 
consents to become king again. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 139 


380, soma § ekS Ga5—¢oo 
Wesantar bas glik—grr 
Vessantara changes his dress—588. 7 


Then, the sixty thousand courtiers born on the same day as himself 
ask him to throw aside his ascetic garb. Vessantara enters the hut and 


changes his dress. 
Bas, to.change == M.T.; os, bah. 


381, e0QrG ogooscdS—e¢o 
Lhor pannasal—912 
(Vessantara) salutes reverentially the hermitage—388, 10 
Having ehanged his dress, he comes out of the hut and, remembering 
that, therein, he had lived the ascetic life for nine months and attained to 


the summit of perfection in’ almsgiving, he salutes it reverentially, walking 
thrice round it with his right towards it, and falls prostrate before it. 


382. 8eco08 soaaii—eoo 
Bisek Wesantar—9r3 
They consecrate Vessantara (king)—588. 13 
They then: pour over him the water of consecration and make him king. 


Bisek:. coronation; to consecrate king by pouring water on the head 
= Pali abhiseka, M.T. ocooof, pasek, sometimes found as oofos, pasuik; 


also ocooeS od, pasek pasaw. 


383. 8eo008 o§—eog 
Bisek Maddi—9t4 
They consecrate Maddi (as queen)—588. 23 


Maddi also is bathed and adorned and anointed queen. 


140 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. li 


384. of 9[05 BE—¢og 
Maddi duk cin—gt5 
Maddi mounts her elephant—sg. 6 


After the coronation, Maddi mounts an elephant; Vessantara was on 
another; in great pomp they leave the hermitage and proceed to the camp. 


385. BoS es0§ (BS—eoe 
Tit nor grip—9i6 
They go out of the wilderness—592. 4 
The royal family, the courtiers and the army amused themselves with 


sports in the wilderness for a month, after which time they left it and went 
to the city of Jetuttara. 


386. sooag egl (Gooo2[8]— or 
- Wesantar dmof prasa[d]—or7 
-Vessantara dwells in his palace—sg2. 27 
They travelled the distance of sixty leagues in two months. Vessantara 


enters the capital, decorated in’ his honour, and ascends his palace, where he 
dwells ever happy till his death. 


The story of Vessantara ends with this plaque. The three plaques 
which follow have been put in the wrong place on the Ananda. 


387, Bed oBflo v5 —eoo 
Kil kirya h—918 
(Vessantara) gives ornaments 


This plaque should have come among ‘those illustrating the first part of 
’ the -story. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 141 


388, vcdqo0d BagS—¢oe 
Balrat kintaran—org 


I have not been able to read this plaque at all, torn as it is from its 
context. According to the phonetic changes which have taken place from 
the old to the modern language, the first word, balrat, might be now, 
bawrat, or buiwrat; I cannot fix a meaning on any of these. 
In the Pagan Talaing Inscriptions, there is a word, tinrafa, which means, 
I think, ‘door,’ the modern form being o@§, taran, also pronounced 
karan; perhaps kintaran means a door? Supposing this to be correct, 
‘balrat would probably mean ‘to knock,” and the legend would then be 
read, ‘“ {(Maddi) knocks at the door (of Vessantara’s hut),” and would refer 
to the episode when, after her dreadful dream, Maddi gets up and knocks 
at her husband’s door te ask lim the meaning of her dream; but the modern 
word for “to knock” is 90905, cogo5, and o$05, khadak, thadak, and 
phaddak, and I do not see the relation of balrat with these forms. The 
above is all conjecture. ji 


389, comand BS... . —eJO 
Wesantar tin... .—920 


Vessantara ascends . 


This plaque is badly broken and one or two words are missing; all the 
personages have disappeared,-except one, a man seated: this is probably 
Vessantara. Perhaps this plaque was intended to illustrate the Bodhisatta 
ascending his palace after his return from the Vindhyas, and in that case 
should come before No. 386. The difficulty is that Vessantara—if it be he 
—is represented seated. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 145 


APPENDIX A 
Alphabetical List of the words in the Legends of the Ananda Plaques. 


N.B.—Each word is given first in transliteration, and then ‘in the Talaing 
characters; the meaning follows; the numbers indicate the plaques in which 
the word is found; last follows the modern equivalent, in native characters 
and in transliteration. A point of interrogation '(?) indicates that the word 
has fallen into oblivion and has no modern equivalent, or, if any, I have not 
been able to trace it in the literature. When the old form and the modern 
form are exactly the same, the formula ‘ = M.T.”’ (is the same ‘as modern 
Talaing) is used. 


Aja, 33, way, wise, manner, representation, illustration, 271, 272, 280; = 
M.T. This word, in the plaques, might be read’ r4ja; but in the 
first two instances he was only a small boy of five and eight years 
of age, and not yet 1r4j4. 

Afica, s09g, a lake, 325, 357; 00, laca. 

Anumodan4, 30902932, to rejoice in, 362; Pals. 

Aba, -9, father, 23, 33, 98, 225, etc.; (?). 

A bo’, sapos5, mother, 23, 33, 41, ete. ; (?). 

Abo’ aba, esposSgp, parents, 89. 

Abhisekha, s008co09, consecrating as king by pouring water, coronation, 
to consecrate as king, 47; 0¢005, pasek. 

Amba, 2, father, 145, 285; vtde aba. 

Arafifia, soqoo, 308; this is probably an error for Arafija = 
Arafijara; Fal. 

Alambay, socesd, a snake-charmer, 231, 232, 233, 234; so00gd, alam- 
baai; from Pali, Alambayana. . 

Assamapit, svooo3S, a hermitage, 326; soaj005, asmapuit; from 
Pali, assainapada. 

‘Ahi, 9008, a snake, 136; /é/. 

Ac, 2025, to ask, to beg, 267, 2753 30205, at 

ir 329, to go, 199, 241, 250, etc.; %2, 4. 


144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. 1 


Imo’, gcoo%, a name, 268; cf. himo’ (plaque 4); gq, imu; cf. Senoi, 
imo, imi; Khmer, }hmoh., 

In, 9§, the god Indra, 1, 106, 118,117, etc.; = M.T. and also 338, ’In, 

Tr, 38, to leave the world, to become a recluse or a monk, 327; (?); it 
answers to the Pé/z, pabbajati. 

In, ef$, the god-Indra, 223; wide In. 

Ir, of4, 71, 114; vide ’ir. 

Ir, 384, 34; vide ir and ’ir. 

Udya, eg, a garden, a pleasance, 224; Q9 28, udyan; from Sanskrit 
udyana, Cf. uyyan, uyy4na, 

Uman, 906, a tunnel, 195, 200; = M.T 

Uman, go26, 190; = uman., 

Umman, eg& 196; = uman. 

Uyyan, gogp$, a garden, pleasance; 59; from Pals, uyyana. Cf. udya. 

Uyyana, 9oQps, 143 = uyydn. 

Usabha; Qx0, a bull, 139; Pals. 

Odana, 933, cooked rice, food, 140; Palz. 

Or, £94, to send, to cause to, make to, 30, 2113 ogJss, p-’ow. 

Kakandaka, cosogpo, a chameleon, 147; Péls. 

K fia, &, to invite, 32; = M.T., which has also the form a9, fiha. The 4 
in fiha mav be due to the desire of preserving the notation of the 
proper vowel sound, that is @ and not ea; there are numerous 
examples of this use of /. - 

Katta, ocg32, one who does or performs, an agent, 279, 283; Pals. 

Kapalla, oougg, fire-pan, 22; Pals. 

Iv al, 20208, time, when, while, 5, 28, 52, etc.; /@/r, kala. 

Kiald, msco = ood, 29, 

Kas, oo05, to shave, 65; oo, kah. 

Kin-uy, $05, medicine, 117. 118; o3{ and o92, ga-uuai and ga- 
‘ual. 

Kinkan, 08033, to instruct, inform, explain, 181, 214, 226; oo8 gagan. 
Cf. kinkan. 

Kinkal, ®ehodS = kifikan, 244: cf. kinkal. 

Kinkan, c§$oo§ = kinkan, 62, 197. 

Kinkal, &8$o0008 = kinkan. 344; cf kinka.. 

Kinta, ca, before, in front, 388; a variant of kanta; 0209, gata, 

Kindam, 8g, to do, make, build, 124, 186; 3. kanhath. 


PART-t] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 148 


Kindar, &g4, a wife, 132, 226, 364, 365; cod, kalaw. 

Kir, 4, to dig, 190; Bl Bl, kwuiw, twulw, with infix W, 

Kirmin, 8§8$,  regal’state, ‘the magnificence and | enjoyment of such a 
state, 329; 88, ferris, 

Kiry&, Sep, articles of dress, ornaments, 120, 178, 270, 271, 387, etc.; 
(Sogo, kriyya; from Pals, kiriya, kriya. 3 

Kil, 80S, to give, bestow, 158, 229, 230, 245, ete. ; 5 8, kuiw. 

Kinrom, e(§5, under, 168; (?) ; this points tod “ert, *krom, not met 
with, but: compare Khmer, karom. 

Kilabhandaka, Bc03c0gpo, toy, 10; Pay, for kila . 

K u, 0, with, and, to,-9, 13; 16, 35, 37 40, ete; = M.T. 

Kukkuta, gig, a cock, 137; Pals. 

Kuta, ogo, to turn, turn round, turn back, 289; 0%, gata. The 1sth_ 
century Talaing is also ooo. 

Kivhtimara, oQooq, the-river Kontimara, 307. 

Kumlac, 0998, thief, 5; ogo, kamlat. 

Kum 4r, e4, a prince, 335, 339, etc.; Pali, kumara. 

Kumin, 8§, accession to the throne, and as verb, to make. king, 
enthronize, "25, 206, 217, 221. Cf. Kirmun and kirmin, and 
the modern of§, kmiin. 

Kurow, cqsop5, to tirn the back on; to“retutn,’ go. back, 318, 358; ood, 
karau. | 

Ket, coooS, to take, 26, 77, 146, etc. ; oag! Mts 

Kew, 008, bright, clear, beautiful, happy, 100; = M.T. 

Kewat, Kewatta, cooooS, coo, name of a person, 188, 179, Pals, 
Kevatta. 

Kon, coo$, son, child, 131, 206, 291, 341, ete.; = M.T. 

Kath, 0, an arrow, 81; = M.T. | 

Kamb4r, 0004, a tank, pond, 125, 340; 997, km. 

Kdahi, 35, to bite, bite off, 342; (?). 

K dip, 8, the head, 135, 255; % 5, kduip. 

K min, o§§, to rule, reign, 105; = M.T. | 

Krua, @§, river, 353 = MT. 

Kren, ogg, the eugenia tree, 352; = M7 ¥. 

K row, e>6, to wash, 156; , krau. 

K lam, 63, one hundred, 202; = M.T. 

K wil, ‘A308, cart, carriage, 133» gol ; B, kwi, 


146 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL, 1 


K wil, 805, a variant of kwil, 290, 294, 302. 

K-seh, egg, a horse, 300, 355; sqod, khyeh. 

Khil, 805, to rush at in anger, to assault, 216; 3, khuiw. 

Khira, 89, milk, 7; Pals. | 

K hut, 905, to call, to name, 50, 247; = M.T. 

Gja’, 335, to sit, 322; = M.T. 

Giii’, 838, to adorn, to be adorned, 30; 8, gai. 

Gadrabha, ogo, a donkey, 144; Pal. 

Ganthi, 0%, a knot; here a necklace of threads, 129; for Pals. ganthi. 

Gandhamadana, ioe name of a mountain, 317; Pal. 

Gar, o§, the womb, 29; 05 and solS, gaw and gow; from Sanskrit, 
garbha. - 

Gahak, ooood, an official, an officer, 49; Palt, gahaka. 

Giri, 88, a mountain, 308; Pals. . 

Gulafi, qcooa5, to converse, speak, talk, 35; 80, 94, 111, 185, etc.; the. 
modern ocoo$, galan, is regularly used as a noun, meaning: word, 
- speech, conversation. 

Gnakyak, goy0S, queen, 50, 199, 282, 374, 376; = M.T. 

Gnakyek, gcoyo5, a variant of gnakyak, 72. 

Gnun, gi§, a woman’s loincloth, 158; §$, gnin. 

Grip, QS, forest, wood, wilderness, 82, 90, 91, 303, etc.; @5, gruip. 

Giik, 905, loincloth (in general), 155, 380; = M.T. 

Ca, ©, to-eat, 79, 154, 330; = M.T. 

Caturas, -00q08, having four sides, square, 325; Pé/t, caturassa. 

Cin, 8€, elephant, 275, 276, etc.; = M.T. 

Cin, 88, a variant of cif, 13, 253. 

Cip, 85, to arrive, arrive at, come to, 306, 317, 319, 323, ete.; 985, cuip.. 
Cf. the variant cup. — x 

Cimi, 88, to look forward, to look to expectantly, 332; 08 camt. 
Haswell has «8, lami, 

Cirmil, 848c5, a variant of cimi, 370.7 

Cis, 898, to descend, go down, 66, 276; 825 and coo5, cih and ceh. 

Cup, 9, to arrive, 353; a variant of cip, 4.2. 

Culun, 9S, the head, 375; 0g and -oogiS, calunh and samlun. 

Cow, ¢008, to return, go back, 32, 182, 204, 237, ete.; 6 cau. 

Cnaykinlon, gocdoi$ecooS, an ornamental pin used to keep the hair or 
headdress in place, 321; the modern forms are several: 93036 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA _ 147 


cndaikndnh, gdo%, cnadaikanhanh, 9308 cndaisanhah, 
ogd38, tndaikhnda, ogdc3&, sndaiknds, ogd0iS, snaaik- 
hanhaa, a 

Cnaykinloa, goodBheons&, a variant i last word, 53. 

Crit, FS, to draw a line; to draw a line by scratching, 74; ©§8§ and ©So3 
caric and carit; another modern word of the same meaning 
is, o0903, ogo, sarak, carak, and the compound, o§05 cao}, 
carit carak. | 

Chu, 9, a tree, a plant, 369; = M.T. 

Chu’, 038, same as chu, 305, 330. 

Jak, a3, to pull, draw, 232, 301; = M.T. 

Janak, os, King Mahajanaka, 38, 62, etc. 

Jadisin, o28088, lion, 350; o09996, jadisuin. Cf Cambodian, son. 

Jali, aoc8, name of a prince, 333, etc. 

Jilik, 8808, to drive, 298; oc$o5, oco§oS, caluik, kaluik, 

Jilit, @o805, to turn back and look, to look back, 347; the modern collo- 
quial, $05, glit, is found in the expression ¢¢5§05, nhewglit, to 
look back. 

Juc, 5, the brahmin Jijaka, 332, ete. 

Jic, o5, Jajaka, 343. 

Jaj, gS, Jajaka, 342, 345. 

Jun, 8, the feet, 156; $8 juin. 

Jran, @§&, presence, in the presence of, near, 215; a@s9§ jaren. 

Jrap, @§S, a hall built on the roadside for the convenience of travellers, 
a rest-house, 122, 124, 311; = M.T. 

Jrum, @{, a snake, 14; = M.T. 

Jreysum, cfgoSeaS, a banyan tree; 322; God, jraisum, 

Jlow, cg25, cattle, 128; §, glau. a | : 

Nac, 9025, to see, G1, 81, 231, 332; esos, fia t. 

Nah, 993, a person, the people, 112, 166, 170, 209, ete.; = MT. 

Dak, 9205, water, 92, 361; == M.T. Ce 

Duk, 999, to mount or ride a horse, ete., to go in a catriage, 2gt, 384: 
815, duik. 

Dun, 9, city, town, 48, 177, 204, 297; = M.T. | 

Tanglay, cSsc5, molasses, 20; oS093, tanklaai, Ch Burmese, 0086, 
tanlai. 


148 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, 1 


Tanrow, ofcee5, road, way, 108; oof, tarau; see variant tinrowi 
there is a variant, cinrow, in the Pagan Talaing Inscriptions. 

‘Tal, ood, to plant, 176; 5, tuiw. 

Talaka, cocoom, tank, pond, 142; for Pals. talaka. 

Taw, cod, to dwell, live (in or at), to be (in a place), to be (doing some- 
thing), 162, 210, 251, 384; 8, tau. 

Ti, 8, the earth, ground, 28, 74, 177; = M.T. 

Tit, 0805, to. go out; also: away, off; 27, 39, 59, ete.; = M.T. 

Titey, c8cooo5, to take along with one, by holding the hand, as a child, or 
an animal with a rope; or a blind man by holding one end of his 
stick, etc., 87; sc and ood, datai and thatai. 

Tit, 05, a variant of tit, 385. . 

Tin, 08§, to ascend, go up, 51, 88, 218, etc.; 09§, tuin. 

Tinrow, S§cop5, road, way, 304, 316; of, tarau. Cf. tanrow. 

Tim, 85, to know, recognize, 236; = M.T. 

Tuk, 035, to draw water, 92; = M.T. 

Tun, 9, to return, give back; return, come or go back to; back, again, 

262, 297, 298, 335, 366; = M.T. | 

-Tur, 4, to burn, be burning, 73; 0, ta, 

Tubah, ces, to show, 73; —:, thbah. 

Tol, sooscd, cotton, 130; sod, tow. 4 

Tos, soos05, to preach, 37, 248, 258, 260; 03, twah. 

Taak, ogo5, a parrot, 172, 173, 182; a variant of thek. 

Thek, cogos, a parrot, 181; costs, vanek. 

Tmo, sogo, to turn round and round, over and over, .to tell. whirl, spin, 
256; 095, tmaw. 

T mo’, ¢9g298, a rock, rocky hill, 88, 318, 3545-098, tmal. | 

T yok, coys, a clump of trees, of bushes, etc. ; -.337;. 3505: (2). 

Truk, 03, mango, 60, 61; Qo, -kruk. 

Trey, o@5, excellent, blessed, Jord, 79}. oo trai, 

Tlar, ong, before, first, 291 ; 099, kl ax - 

Tlua, 6, to come, 23, 26, 164, 166, ete.; o3j& and also /§ klun 
and tlua. | 

Twafi, ogp5, village, 309; 0og9$, ogo$, twin, kw4n. 

Twas, 9295, a disciple, 36; og, twah. 

Thar,. 4, gold, 123, 267, 284; 05, thaw. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 149 


Dak, 2%, to tie, bind, 343, 345; = M.T. 

Dandaka, sgpoo, stick, pole, 134; Pals. 

Danih, 9905, properly = a dry measure; a. trough shaped like a canoe, 
as used in the East, 168; §o5 and cog, dnih and tneh, CF. 
tHe Pali, doni. 

Dal, 309, to shut, »bstruct, bar, 350; 36, daw. 

Dan, 91§, alms, almsgiving, 267, 271, 272, etc.; = M.T.; Pah, dana. 

Dindu, 8gj, to instruct, 36, 75, 112; 9600035, dalo’. 

Dirdas, 84905, the being born, the entering into a new state of existence, 
220; 930, dadah. 

Dirhat, 840005, strength, 29, 201; (005, agc005, drahat and darhat. 

Dun, 96, to receive, 75, 365; =. M.T. 

Dudac, 495, to whirl, turn round, spin, 256; ? 85, thadit. 

Dewatdw, ¢s00025, a god, 6, 45; o3066, devatau; Pah, devata. 

Dow, oal8, to run, flee, 122; $, dau. 

Dos, ¢olo5, anger, 344; Pali, dosa. 

Dmoan, ogl§ to dwell, remain, 168, 215, 265, etc.; 36 dman. 

Drep, ¢§5, to run, 299; = M.T. 

Diun, 3§ a boat, 191; Qf glun. 

Dhar, 04, the Law, Buddhis: Law, 244, 258, 260; 06, dhaw; Sansértt, 
dharma. 

Dharmma, 4g, same as dhar, 37. 

Dhammayut, 600905, the Battle of the Law; for full explanation see 
under No. 178; Pals, dhammayuddha. 

Na, ¢, with, by, 183, 249, 267; = M.T. | 

Nagir, 884, a town, city, 310; 929, nadguiw; Pals, nagara. 

Nadi, 38, river, 307, 320; Pals. ie 

Narak, 9999, hell; 109; Pali, naraka: 

N.4,- $2,:,away, 277; "for full: explanations ‘see under’ this number’; ;oo>’ and 
$2, Ra and na. 

N&g, . 925, a naga, serpent, . 259;”,260, 261535, nak; Pals, naga, - 

Naga, $20, same as nag, 237, 238.: 

Nagabhow, 2030098, the mansion or world of the nagas, 237, 238; 320 
.%, nagabhau. 

Nataka, 9290, a nautch, 24; Pale. 

Nar, $24, the hermit Narada, 240, 241. 

Narad, 9295, the hermit Narada; 75. 


150 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. 1 


Nali, 3208, the mountain Nalika, 323. 

Niman, 80§, to invite, 1, 107; = M.T. 

Nimit, $805, to create, 235; $805, QoS, nimit, I mit. 

Nor, ¢$29, from, 39, 66, 164, 177, ete.; Q ni. 

Pa, o, to do, make, 99, 119, 161, 178, 268; = M.T. Cf. the variant pa’. 

Pkak, 95, to turn over, upside down, upset, 255; 005, occ), batak, 
gatak. 

Pkaw, ld, flower, 176, 356; L tat, _ 

Pecan, g$, to send or leave a message or instructions, 33; %o$ and q$, 
bacan and phyan; for the latter form see plaque No. 33. 

Peun, gi$, meat, flesh, 77, 78, 79. 127; qi8,* phyun (see plaque No. 33). 

Pafi, oes, to shoot with a bow, etc., 93; o§$, pan. 

Pafifia, ogo0, question, riddle, erobletk 136, wrongly written for agp, 
pafiha = M.T.; Padé, pafiha. CA prasna. 

Pafiha, ogg, vide pafifia, 134, 137, 138, etc. 

Pafiho, os992, same as pafihd, 148. 

Patisan, o820$, conception, 2, 38, 83, t1g; 0808, patisandhi = Pali, 

Pandit, og8o5, a pandit, a clever and wise man, a scholar, 169; Pal, 
pandita. 

Pat, oo5, to press with the hand, to squeeze; to shampoo, chafe, 375; 
= M.T. 

Ptin, &&, to beat the breast, in sorrow, etc., 72; connected with the 
modern adverb o8&085, tintin, 

Ptit, 308, to cause to come out, 87; SoS, ptit; tit is a variant of tit 
(7.0). 

Pdas, yos, to cause to be or become, to aes create, 253; go, bdah. 

Pan, 0o§, four, 150, 166, 170; = M.T. 

Pannasal, ogoos0S, 381; Pa, pannasala; see parnasal. 

Par, 04, mountain; used only after proper names of mountains; 319, 323; 

: 05, paw; from Sanskrit, parvata, 

Parnasadl, of $0208, a hut made of leaves, a hermitage, 328, 331, from 
the Sansrit, parnacala; the modern form, ogx>. pannasa, is 
from the Pali, pannasala, 

Paribbac, o&g28, an ascetic, here = a female ascetic, 207, 208; 09g908, 
0888, paribbat, paribuit; Fal, paribbajika, 

Parisut, ooge5, birth, the bringing forth, 84, 116; = M.T.; Sanskrst, 
prasiiti. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 151 


Passena, oodcoos>, to think of, remember, long for, 272; eo5ajo, bah 
sna, but see note under plaque No. 272. 

Pan, olf, to ask leave, ask permission, beg, 225; = M.T. Cf. Burmese, . 
of, pan, . 

Pindon, 8cg28, to send, 171, 172, 192, 205, 294; ocd&, palan. 

Pinria, S&S, news, 173; 086, paruin. 

Pinrih, 8$8cS, to minister to, take care of, attend on, 89; (?); corre- 
sponds to Pa/t, patijaggati. | 

Pilayak, 8cox, King Piliyakkha, 96. 

Pilayak, 8gc005, 72./., 95. 

Pua, 46, rice, 157; = M.T. 

Pujdw, 9005, to offer something as an homage, to do homage, on 202 5 

| gs, pujau. 

~Puunayak, qggeos, the Yakkha Yunna, 246, 247, etc.; this form is from 
the Pali, Cf. purna. 

Pubar, ge, to show, exhibit,.195; a causal: pu + bar (q.v.); of, of, 
pabuiw, babuiw. 

Pumun, gq, to invite, to beg, entreat, 203: related to the colloquial 
oo§, gaman. 

Purna, g§qo, Purna the Yakkha, 243; this is the Sanskrit form. Cf, 
punnayak, 

Puwak, qooS, a companion, a follower, 121; god, c00c5, bwak, bhawak. 

Piwakhajja, goog, cakes, 8; Pélt, piivakhajja, See Appendix B, No. 8. 

Pameceal, 6020, Uttarapafcdla, 184. Me 

Pa’, 03, to do, make, 4; a variant of pa. 

Pdey, cyod, in, into; 311; 9, pdai. 

Pnan, 9/8, lamp, candle, 19; = M.T. 

Pyun, qgi§, to show, 97,.316; 16 pfiun. 

Prasna, (032, a question, problém, riddle, 144, 152; Sanskrit, pragna. 
Cf. pafiha, 

Prasad, (G:0025, a building with superposed roofs, a palace, 51, 386; 

: Qr00205, prasat; Sanskrit, prasada. , 

Plit, ScS, to swoon, 359; the M.T. 85, pluit = to become extin- 
guished. 

Phum, 98, to bathe, 86; = M.T. 

Phim, ¢, 85; a variant of phum 

Pham, 6, a drum, 18; = M.1. 


152. EPIGRAPHIA: BIRMANICA ~ [ won. M: 


Balrat,: ecSgo5, ?. 388... See Index B; No.. 388: 

Bar, eq, to look, 200; §, buiw; see. variant, bir. 

Bat, elo, to hide, 337; (2); it answers to the Pal, niliyati) The Hok- 
kien dialect, for to hide, conceal, has bat; the Amoy - dialect, 
bat; in Annamese,-mat.. _ | 

Bicdr, 8024, to investigate, decide cases; .a.case (at law); to .arrange; 
126, 128, 192, 210, etc.;; Pali, vicareti.’ 

Bintan, 8325, white, 277; gs, btan. 

Bimnah, 8g:, a Lrahmin, 275, 309, 363;' eg; bamnah. Cf. the variant” 
burinah, and with this the Burmese, qgp>,, puna’. a 

Bir, 8&4, to look, 109, 297; ¢, buiw. Cf. bar... 

Birben, 8{6e6, the begging-bowl of a monk, 64; vce, ba Beat 

Bisek, 8c0005, to consecrate king by pouring water on ‘the: head, 4382, 

383; osoo05, pasek, 

Bibat, 8005, to try, test; 9, 13, 160, 201%, 254;° e6oS, babat. 

Buton,: qac2$, to: teach, instruct, ‘150; ogo$, btorn. 

Bul&h, ¢com, to set free, let go, 170; exe, balah:- 

Buhic, 9085, to: fear,. to frighten, 252, 334; osco05, bahek, and -cood (a 
contraction of ecco), phek. 

‘Bumnah,:-638,:a brahimin, ‘ 227, 229;..230, -a° variant, of: bimnah;: &Qs, 
bamnah. Cf. Burmese, yq@p>:, punna, 

Bay, go5,°(?); see under 349. Perhaps it is tiy, o305e' 

Boy, se205, by, to, towards, from, about, 199, 299, 358;°3, bwai. 

Bhiridat, 08008, the Bodhisattva Bhiridatta, 219, etc. 

Bhojana, so02@3, food, 11, sm2$$, bhojuin; Pale. 

Bhow, coo25, mansion, world, 288; <6, bhau.- 

Bram, (5, to capsize, as a boat, 43; = M.T. | 

Bralok, (coor, a contraction of brahmaloka, 241. 

Ma, ¢, a particle which may be translated by “who, which, where”; some- 
times, perhaps, also by a present participle; 34, 71, 73, 184, 302, 
etc.; the modern is used also somewhat differently. 

Man, o&, to keep, watch, observe, 224, 225; 22 M.T. _ 

Mad gala, e&co, a religious ceremony; marriage, 161; = M.T.; Pais, 

Mani, %o8, a precious stone, jewel, 138, 230; Pal. 

Manika, cc8o, same as mani, 146. Cf. manik. 

Man, 0°$, to advise, give advice; see No. 293. 

Manik, o$%, same as manixa, 263; = M.T.: 


PART 1]. -TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA re 


Manis, o¥S, a man, 235; BS, mnih; “from Pali, manussa. 

‘May, 005, to look, 273; see under mey. oe : 

Maha, oc, great, large, 280, 293 ; ®, mha, pronounced both mha@ and 
mahé. aoe . 

Mahajan, oma, the people, 293; = M.T.; Paki, ‘mahajana. 

Mahos, occorS, the Bodhisattva Mahosadha, 115, etc.; now written GLO? 
090 in full, and go5ooo, Mhuhsadha. 

Matula, o2oj0, uncle, g10; Pali. | _ 

Man, ¢2§, a potter, 162, 164; co2§, laman; o2§ is now used only as a 
verb = to make pots. a ci | 

Miga4, 80), name of a hermit; Migajina, 76. 

Minda, 8g, a goat, 149, for Palt, menda. 

Minmin, 8§8§, a nurse, 269; 88§$ and ooh, mimin and mamin. 

Mucalin, 9oo8$, the lake Mucalinda,. 324. 

Mun, 4§, to tell, inform, apprise, notify, 42, 90, 159, afa, a3. to 
entreat, supplicate; (?); see munas, pumun, munpan, pan. 

Mun pan, q§ ol§, to beg leave respectfully, 225; mun seems to have 
fallen into oblivion; pan: (g.v.) is still used colloquially, 

Munas, 4905, to tell, inform, 279, 283; (?); see mun. 

Mey, eooS, to ‘look, 46, 60, 104, etc.; 5 and 3, mai and mwai; the 
ater form is more commonly used. See may.. 

Mdac, 5, to be angry; of M.T., omod, manat; vide coe No. 180. 

Yac, oo, a sacrifice, 215; 0005, yat; Pal, yaja.. 

Yagu, coq, rice-gruel, 154; = M.T.; Pad. - 

Yac, cood, a beggar, 2995. Pal, oe this word is now weed in its full 

form, oo2e00, as in Burmese. 

Yam, 25, to weep, cry, 95; 98, 348; = M.T. | 

Yok, coos, to lift up, to carry in the arms, 45, 360; 99S, coor, yuik, 
yok; the first form 1s the more common. 

Ran, 9&, to convey, carry, bring, 64, 173, 246, 259; not now used by 
itself, but in composition. See ran. 

Rah, 98, shed, booth, hut, a building of any sot, ae a variant of 

rua; @ and 88 rum and ruin. | 

Rantlun, gS “to carry and come,” to bring, 290; = M.T. See. 
plaque No. 5. , : | 

Rat, 05, precious stones, precious things, ie = M.T.; Pal, ratana., 

Ramah, 908, red deer, gor: o& man. Cf Burmese, sont, saman, 

20 . 


154 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | | [VoL 11 


Raleh, qscoz, to cause to ieee, 233; 000d, paleh. 

Rahas, 0005, a secret, 167; Par, rahassa. 

Rajawasati, spooc3, rules for courtiers to obtain honours at court, 
248; Pals. | 

R&ja, cpa, king, 33, 34, etc.; Pal. 

Ran, 6, to carry, convey, 5, a varidnt of ran. See raftlua. 

Rin, 9§, to lead away, take along With one, convey, 27, 250, 261, 343, 
346 ;- (?). 

Risi, 408, a hermit, a rishi, 36, 239, etc.; = M.T.; Sasshrtt, rsi. 

Rup, 95, form, appearance, 235; = M.T.; Pals, ripa. 

Rusl, qoooct,.to lay, place, put, 360; 002, sa, wide plaque No. 360. 

Laksan, og§, marks, signs, 46, 104; coodoo$, laksan, and coo, 
lakyan (pronounced /agsan). 

Lufiow, cgcclss, to be retired, solitary, lonely, 63; al, lfu. 

Lukow, o¢0028, to break, 78; «5, kaw. 

Let, ccoo5, to smear, 157; = M.T. 

Lot, ccos05, to fall, 359, 378; = M.T. 

Lop, eco, to enter, 48, 82, 91, 122, ete.; 095, scord, lup, lop;.the first 
form is the more common. 

Laor, sogog, to salute respectfully, make obeisance, 101, 145, 373, ete.; 
ooQ05, Ihow. | 

Waddhaki, oge8, a carpenter, 191; Pat. 

W'an; ol§, to -go out to meet, 193, 333; now used only in the compounds, 
having the same meaning, ol&9,8, ol€3,§)§, wan dua, waa dua 
tlun. 

Waluka, olegoo, sand, 141; Pals, valuka. 

_ Wifi, 8:8, to play, 40, 121; co&, wen. . 

Widih, Width, and Wideh, 8305, 83:, 8cov3, King Vedeha, 197, 195, 

* 206, ° 

Widhir, 88§, the Bodhisattva Vidhira, — 245, .etc. 

Wimafisa, 8008, trial, 7; Pali, vimathsa. 

Wimansana, 8008s, taal. investigation, 8; Pélz, vimarnsana. 

_ Wiman, 800§, mansion, 110; 809, Sod, wiman, Iwiman; Péh, 
vimana. | 

Wissantar, 80044, King Vessantara, 285, 292. 

Wen, cof, to go about, wander, roam; to go to; to visit, 163, 192; = 
M.T. See under plaque No, 163. | | 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 155 


Wec, 605, to admonish, instruct, 23; coo, wet. 

Wepula, soyco, the Vipula Mountain, 319. 

Wesantar, Wesamtar, King Vessantara, 266, 281. 

S (a), si, su, 0, 8, 033 on these prefixes, which denote the future and 

. the causal, see plaques Nos. 64 and 8s. | 

Skil, 05, to give, will give, 267; gi, skuiw. Cf. sikil. . 

Sah, 006, a conch, 17; still used in the compound, magos, kanusaf, 

owen Pali, sahkha. 

Scis, g05, to descend, go down, 28 ; .ofo5, sogod, scih, sceh, Vide cis. 

Saccakirya, oogcéddoa, an act of asseveration, 99; = M.T.; Pali, 
saccakiriya. 

Sacchu, og}, a fruit, 9; osoban, og, satchu, sacchu. 

Sacchu’, 29)%, 30s, 330; a variant of sacchu. 

Sjifi, SB, to sew, stitch, 155; &, &&, sjin, jin. 

Stik, 9§5, to sleep, 369; 995, Bo5, stik, tik. 

Sthan, g$, a place, 49; oo$, than; Sanshrtt, sthana. 

Samajja, og, a mime, 15; Pals. 

Sarathi, oooq08, a driver, coachman, 26, 31; Pals. 

~Salika, oorc8002, the minah bird, 182; Pali. 

Sik, 0805, an error for sdik, g.v. 

Sikil, 8B, to give, 64; Bi, skuiw. : 

Sitko’, Scoioé, a grey hair, 113; -coo8o08, sok ka’, in which sok = 
hair, and ka’ = Old Talaing sifko’ (prefix s and infix 7x). 

Sip,. 88, :to attend respectfully on, 286; £695, sip glip. 

Simmafi, 850298, a question, 165; 23, sman. Cf: the variant 
summ aii. : a 

Sil, 8c, = sil, 225. | | 

Sil, 808, the Buddhist precepts, 224; 28, si; Péli, sila. 

Su-er, «64, to look, look at in expectation, 169; ? 

Sutik, cqc&@o5, to put to sleep, 85; oS, stik. 

Supar, od, the garula bird, 86; c005, sapaw; Sanskrit, suparna. 

Sup4n, ol§, stairs, ladder, 186; Palt, sopana. 

Suruh, qo, to fall, cause to fall, 127; 208 65, saruih. 

Summaii, 032293, a question, 223, 242; 923, sman, Cy/. the variant 
simmafi. . — 

Soh, coo205, to answer, solve, 152, 165; 9900, sah. 

Soh, coor, a variant of soh, 223, 242, — 


156 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


~S-4r,. gq, to go,. will go, about to go, 183, 225, 249) 28s. Cf. plaque 
No. 64. , 
Samwat, od005, a child, 40, 80, nant 00005, samat. 

Sah, o8, to pour, 361; sie 620905, suih, soh. 

Snak, 9005, a sword, io: =. MT 

Sai, 08, house, 66, 187, 188, etc.; = “MT. 

Sar, 83, a variant of shi, 264, 274. 

Sdik, ofo3, to be pleased, take pleasure- in, 278, where it iS, by inadver- 


tence, written sik; = M.T. 
Smafi, 9295, to ask, to question, inquire, 31, 41, 52, s ete:; 9928, 
smdn, 


Smin, ¥&, king, prince, 35, "37,-59,. ete. == M.T. 

Sy4m, 9yp5,-the Bodhisattva Cyama, i's Sanskrit, — 

Slop, 25, to enter, will enter, about to enter, 90, 189; [5 and ¢a99S, 
: slup -and -slop. . 

Swar, 4, heaven, 110, 218; 095, swaw; Sanskrit, svarga, . 

Han, of, in, at, on, to, ,28, 224, 285, Se, 337. Cf. hin, 

Hadak, ogo, filth, foeces; 21. Cf. colloquial, Oe hidak, and the 

literary Feats, of 9205, shidak. 

Himo’, 8cors8, a name, 4, 119; 84, himu. Cf. variant imo’, 

Hin, 03}, in, at, on, to, 33, 42, 265, 369, 372, 377. Cf% han. 

Bas, ©05, to pluck, as flowers, fruits, 305; 005, bah. 

Bar, el§, two, 294; ol, ba. 

Bas, elo, to change, 380; o, bah. 


PART 1]. | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 187 


APPENDIX B. 
Additional remarks on a Sew words. 


It was but to be expected that, even with the help of the Jatakas i in 
Pali, Talaing and Burmese, some words and expressions in these plaques — 
would present some difficulty either in fixing their meaning or in tracing 
their modern equivalents ; these words have been, on the’ whole, few.. I sent 
a list of them to my learned friends, the well-known Talaing scholars, Mr. 

C. O, Blagden and Rev. R. Halliday, asking their opinions. Their learning 
has proved very useful, and my thanks are due to them for their ever-ready 
help. A few of their suggestions have been noted in the body of the 
work and duly acknowledged. But others could not be so included as. the 
book was in final proof and practically ready to be ahaee off; these are 
given and discussed below. ey 

No. 8 (p. 4)—-Pawakhajjanawimafsana; I had first written. 
this piwakhajja na wimafsana; but, as Blagden | makes me remark,.. 


na cannot here be taken as the Talaing preposition; the other two words _ 


would have to change places; this is true, and the ‘whole expression .must 
therefore be written as a compound, im one word. But the form khajjana_ 
exists neither in Pali-nor in Sanskrit. The na between the two words 
is probably an error of the scribe. The reader will have remarked: that 
errors, due perhaps to. inattention of the workmen in copying; have been - 
noted in several places, Some examples of such errors occur in the- 
Burmese face of the Myazedi inscription pillar.’ 

No. 21 (p. 7)—Hadak. Blagden remarks:—“The modern form 
shidak may be ‘popular etymology.’ It must be, if the 11th century 
hadak is to be equated with the modern hid&k, for there is no reason’ 
to suppose that sfi was pronounced like ha or hi at that early date.” 
In this’ case, the difficulty is to find the modern equivalent of hadak, for. 
there can be no doubt as to its meaning, which is exactly that of the | 
literary aeieae and its corresponding colloquial hidak. 


1 Epigraphia Biymanica, Vol, 1, Part Ee 


158 _.. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [ vou. 


No. 36 (p. 12)—Dindu. Blagden and Halliday confirm the equation 
dindu = dalo’; the change of medial wd to medial / is frequent and 
regular, eg., kandar = kalaw; dindin = dalif. 

'. No. 78 (p. 27)—Lukow. I take this word to mean “to break” and 
refer it to the modern kaw, Blagden says that it seems to mean “to 
take,” and refers to a word |wkow in his inscription | E, line 35.’ But if 
it means ‘‘to take” then the plaques repeat themselves, for the previous 
plaque, No. 77, reads: Janak ket pcun, “ Janaka takes (ket) the meat.” 
So that it is clear that, in so far at least as this plaque is concerned, 
lukow does not mean “to take”; ‘as explained under No. 78, Janaka is 
represented in the act of breaking a long piece of meat and putting it in 
his almsbowl. I am not sure of the exact meaning of lukow in 
inscription I E, 35; but the sense of the whole phrase, spa lukow 
tey, is quite clear, and in this context means: ‘to make subordinate, 
bring into subjection, subdue, confiscate, ete.’; lukow tey is a compound 
as is shown by the verb spa, “to do, to make,” preceding. it, and 
lukow therefore is a verb used substantively, as. is so often the case in 
Mén. It may be: comnpared with another word of similar import, skem, 


which means “to grasp, seize, clinch”; skem tai, “to clinch in the 
hand, grasp with the hand,” and as a noun ‘‘grasping with the hand, 
hence power, control”; and plop skem tai = to bring within one’s 


grasp, under one’s control, to confiscate; the underlying idea in lukow 
“tey-is probably somewhat .cognate in sense. The several modes of the 
same action are most often expressed by different words, and though in 
spa lukow tey, lukow may mean “to take,” we do not know to 
which mode of “taking.” it refers. But our plaque does not mean. ‘‘ Janaka 
‘ takes (lukow) the meat,” for this has been’ said in the previous plaques : 
‘Janak ket pcun. 


No, 89 (p. 31)—Pinrih, The modern form of this word has not been 
found as yet. Halliday proposes, Safruih (20605); but the reading of 
the plaque is clear, the first letter is ; safruih means generally: “to 
help, aid; give aid” spiritually - and materially, and is from the Sanskrit 
safgraha, Pinrih renders the Pali patijaggati in the corresponding’ 
passage = to tend, minister to, look after. As Blagden remarks, pinrih 
would regularly become, in modern Taiaing, paruih or baruih (0865, 
o§o5) ; but this word, if extant, has not yet been found in this sense. I am 


‘1 Epigraphia Dirmandoa, Vol. I, Part II,'p. 105, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 159 


inclined to think pinrih and safruih are not ‘connected. Blagden 
refers. to a word, pureh, found in his inscription No. VIII, line 9,’ which 
means “to give to, provide things to,” in the passage, blahgoh ut 


tarley sangha... smin Sr. goh pureh na paccey pan= 
“Thereafter, all the lords of the Church ... King Sri Tribhuvanaditya- 
dhammaraja presented with the four necessaries.’ Pureh would probably 


become, in modern Talaing, pareh. Pinrih and pureh may perhaps 
be etymologically related. | | | 


No. 106 (p. 35)—In smafi Nemi. As it is Nemi who puts ‘che 
question one should have expected the words to be reversed and the 
sentence to run: Nemi smafi In. But there is another legend similarly 
constructed at No. 175 (p. 60), Maho smafi smin, in which we should: 
expect Maho and smin to change places. This construction may be 
explained in two ways. First, the verb smafi may be taken as used in 
a passive sense; or, if it be active, the word before it is its object, for it is 
not an absolute rule for the sbiect to come only after the verb; it is true 
that, when it comes. before, whether it be a single word or a whole sentence, 
it is indicated by the-word gah, which’ may have been left out in a pithy 
legend which is merely indicative. of the scene depicted above it. To the 
people, who knew these stories perfectly, such a sentence presented no 
difficulty of interpretation. Or then it may be, but I do not think so, that 
the scribe muddled these two sentences and put the cart before the horse. 

No. 169 (p. 57)—Su- -er, There is no doubt about the meaning of this 
word as gathered from the interconnection of the scenes and from the story 
itself. 1 have doubtfully suggested that its modern equivalent might 
perhaps be sfiew (p.- 58); Halliday and Blagden are also very doubtful 
about it; the difficulty, if it be shew, is to explain the #. Regularly, this 
word would become’in M.T. s-’ew (c935) 

No. 272 (p. 193)—Passena. On further examination of the plaque, 
the reading appears to me to be really passena, which I think we must, 
for the present, accept as the equivalent of the modern bahsna; the 
scene on the plaque and the context require this word, or one with a 
cognate meaning. 1 know of no Pali word with a meaning approaching that 
of bahsna from which passena could be derived, ‘Bladen refers to a 
note of Huber in B.Z.F.£.0., 1913, No. 7. Pp». #2, in which ‘he derives 


1 Epigraphia Birmanica, Vol I, Part Il, p. 257. 


160 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. (11 


_bahsna_ from Pali vasand, adding that, if such be the case, it seems 
unlikely that the same word would appear in the 1ith century as ‘:passend; 
this is of course not impossible. But it is remarkable that the Talaings 
should use the word vasana unchanged with its meaning of “an inclination 
or liking. for something, produced by the ‘impression unconsciously left on 
the mind by goad or bad deeds performed in previous existences,’ and 
should have “ Talainized” it for its meaning of “thinking of, longing for.” 
This process is not impossible, but so a as I remember, I have not come 
Across another example. 

No. 298. (p. 113)—Jilik. The photograph seems to read jilirka, 
wbut this is due to a flake in the glaze. , 

No. 342 (p. 127)—Kdafi. This in M.T. would become kdan or 
tdan, forms which have not been found. Halliday sends the following note 
about juk lot (Sudh, 2%. 16) quoted as example under this word:— 
“Juk lot is commonly applied to ‘drawn wire’; lot being a ‘draw 
plate’ ; ae means a ‘thong.’ _In the passage you quote from 
Sudh. 21.16, the ,;word snam is no doubt understood, and there is 
particular lentes to its work of keeping the skin (snam) tight.” 


No. 293 (p. 111)—Nanar. This word-is-a real crux: I do not 
understand it I transcribe here Mr. Halliday’s note:—‘‘ This is a real 
difficulty. I do not think that nanar can be translated ‘going’; na 
(sometimes na, especially in composition} means ‘taking, bearing or con- 
veying’ in some fashion away from the speaker, Nor do I think that nana 
fits very well; ar seems to be used in the inscriptions-regularly for 4, ‘to 
go.’ But there is a nar also which I think often represents na, It is, 
however, apparently also used in another than its verbal sense, as for instance 
in the expression han nar, This expression seems to correspond to the 
‘han nek of the Pagan inscriptions, which I take to refer to the deference 
paid to the cult of the naga or dragon in house-building. Na very 
probably = na as above defined and nar may be Blagden’s nar of the 
inscriptions. Man no doubt = *mantetz.” 

No. 325 (p. 121)—Afica. This, Blagden tells me, is certainly from 
laca; cf. antal = modern latd.. | 

No. 388. (p. 141)—Balrat kinta raf. The expression balrat here 


is also a crux.. All I have said as to its meaning under this number is 
conjecture. The difficulty arises from the fact that this plaque is not in its 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 163 


proper place; one is not even sure if it belong to the story of Vessantara 
rather than to another, Th sequence of events being lost and therefore 
also the context, makes a crux of a word which, otherwise, might have 
presented no greater: difficulty in fixing its meaning than a few others in 
these plaques. ,f had suggested also that balrat, read as two words, 
might mean, ‘to heap jewels or precious stones (= rat = ratana)”; bal 
ith the meaning ‘to heap” has not yet been met with in old Mén 
tee the modern word is baw, but this form could be derived from 
an old *bar as weli as from bal. Kintaran, I then suggested, might 
mean ‘‘to bring before.” All this was not very satisfactory; so far as I 
remember, there is no episode in these Ten Jatakas which could be 
referred to a woman bringing geins before some building or other. More- 
over, besides’ there being no indication of precious stones in the plaque, the 
woman is depicted in the usual attitude of oriental salutation. I transcribi: 
the notes from Mr. Blagden and Mr. Halliday; they both have given ths 
same meaning to kinta ran, and I agree with them; but balrat ‘s 
still doubtful. Blagden writes:—'‘I take kinta raf as two words = before 
(in front of) the shed or hut. Raf seems to mean any sort of shed, big 
or small; Kinta is quite common for gata, ‘in front of,’ Balrat 
certainly might mean ‘heaping gems,’ though | have not met bal in this 
sense in the old inscriptions, but only in the sense of bala, ‘army.’ In 
view of my interpretation of kinta raf, I do not think it can mean ‘to 
knock,’ and I feel quite sure that tinran, ‘door,’ does not come into 
the question here at all.” Halliday writes:—“1I do not think’ kintaraa 
can be identified with taran (door), but I feel sure it is the same 
expression with variant spellirg as Blagden has in inscription No. IX G, 
line 48.1 [I take kinta ran and kanta raf to represent modern 
muk raf, ‘porch, as in Haswell, but also ‘hall of audience, hall of 
justice,’ as in muk ran smin. I take ran to be a variant of run? 
and ruif, applied to a building of any kind almost (ruf pannasa is 
given as a translation of pannasdla). The clause in the inscription is 
clear: goh ma dmof tau kanta rah = ‘when they stood (or 
remained) at the portico (or the audience hall)” Balrat is another matter. 
From your description of the plaque it seems to me that words describing 
the woman’s act of reverence are required here, As I was discussing your 


1 This inscription is in —, and will form Part I of Vol, Ill of the Epigraphia Birmanica: 
2 With this cf Burmese, rum, a shed, booth, godown, and ru m3, hall of justice. 


21 


162 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. It 


phrase with the upfayyhdat (upajjhaya), there was a man taking leave of 
him. It was the action of the woman in the plate. They describe it as 
kala’ aca It might perhaps. be balrat has some such significance. I 
think it might be read bawrat, but how to give it the required meaning 
I do not know, Bal might be the Pali da/7, as in baw smut, ‘to make 
offerings to the spirits’;-rat might refer to the (three) gems.” 
The meaning of kinta raft as given in these two notes seems to be 
the most probable one, But balrat is still obscure, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 163 


APPENDIX C-1. 


Below will be found all the modern Talaing words given in the explana: 
tions of the plaques in illustrations of the Old Talaing words; I have also 
included the words contained in the sentences quoted from modern works. 
In the following list, words marked with an asterisk (*) are new words and 
are not in Haswell; those marked with a dagger (+) have been given by 
Haswell, but [ have registered under them new meanings besides those given 
by Haswell. Those that have not any mark are the same as in Haswell. | 
have sometimes marked with the dagger such words as appear in Haswell 
under another form, but whose meaning is the same. 


sofogo, akra, interval, space peuaeany between ; 930692, between. Cy, 
Burmese, 3092s, akra®, 
* a5, Afga, name of a country in India, the present districts of Monghyr 
and Bhagalpur in Northern Bengal. 
285, akhin, time. Cf Burmese, ¥$, ak hyin. 
sosol& akhon, permission, leave. Cf. B., 3098, akhwani. 
g002, aca, a teacher, a master. /a/z, Acariya. 
-* gom, aja, manner, wise, way, illustration. 
ax8e5, atik, past time, in time past, of yore, formerly. alt, atita, atite, 
Cf. Burmese, 20808, atit. 
soBeicod, atikte’, same as sac8o5u 
soo§S, atuih, according to; secfSegoo>, according to the usual way, to 
custom, Dhd, 2%. 9; 30098 SoSaoq, at one’s wish or desire, at one’s 
leisure, S.J..20. Cf. Burm,, s0c3&s 
so8ylo5, adhippay, meaning, sense. /é/i, adhippaya. 
sod, amdai, the flesh of beasts, meat, game, venison, Dhd. 26. 16 
354. 15.. Cf. B,, 305, amal. 
* 30805, amuin, a dry measure equal to eleven dronas (o7de §v5), A.V. 
268; a trough for feeding cattle, S.M. 37. 
soy, amhu, a case in a court of law, A.V. 192 = yutti, Cf B., sog 
gocuov§socos, ayon ala, appearance, likeness, S.B. 27. 


* ** 


164 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


% 


so0S$s0002, ayafi ala, appearance, likeness, Dhd. 148. 9, 4; (S8oo0#a0088 
socorcag2§ca00$——"‘like in appearance unto a god.”’ 

wo8§, arhuin, the dawn, break of day. Pali, aruna. 

socogd, alambaai, a snake-charmer. Pas, alambayana, S, Vid. 20. Cf. 
B., socog, alambai. 

3009, alum, whole, all, the whole, throughout, throughout the whole, Cf. 
B., socgs, alum’, . 

30095, aluik, one’s own accord, of one’s own uccord; as according 
as; owing to, Sudh. 27. 18, 34. 3; Dhd. 240. 16. Cf. B., socQobn 


* 2d, 8, awai, age, any time of life. /d@/7, vaya. 


* ssooods, asanhka, doubt, incertitude, misgiving; also ooodon Px é#, asanka. 
* sooc8, asaw, wonderful, extraordinary, marvellous; a wonderful thing, a 


a 


“ wonder, a marvel; os0008, to wonder; v0$s0008, to be wondering, 
to wonder, Sudh. 26.5. Sé¢. dccarya. 
soot, Asah, name of a forest. | 
z09, 4, to go; after another verb has often the meaning of. becoming 
. , turning (into)... ” x. $s02, dah 4, to becon.2; oB&z00, 
tlim a, to become lost; gjso>, ska’ 4, to turn grey (of ‘he hair); 
og[se2, Iu a, to become empty. 
30005, at, to ask, beg. | 
soooSul§, at pan, to ask, beg, implore. Vide ol$n 


/ gon000q, Ahara, food; from Pali; Haswell has s000209q, ahara. 


338, 'In,.the god Indra. Cf shu 

s, ai, I. : 

285, ’ai-dik, “I—slave,” a respectful form-of the pronoun I. 

coos, ’on, few, small in quantity, little; to be few or have little, often 
followed by of (with); ¢as2$ofsos000q—" having had (but) little food.” 

agjo5, ‘uit, to be exhausted, finished, expended; hence: all, entire, whole ; 
used also as a sign of the plural. 

o§oS03, ‘uit-suim, all, entire, the whole. Vide ofn The Burmese 
go§, ussurh, with assimilation, is a loanword from the Talaing, 


6, ‘au, a respectful term of address = Sir, Madam, your Majesty, etc., 


and is always placed last in the sentence. 

geod, ite’, there, yonder; ‘this,’ in this sense it 1s placed after the 
noun; you (polite and honorific); geooE God aqs> gc03 o9q—" will 
you please help me?”, Dhd, 297. 1 


* mo, imu, name; named, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 165 


. 83, iwwa’, this. 
gos isi, a hermit. Sanshrit, rsi. Vide §o8u 
290, up uh, the Buddhist fast day, the sabbath. Pd@/s, uposatha. 
gos, upah> a devout Buddhist layman. P4é@/i, upasaka. 
ogooo, uppaka, to take care of, look after. Pal, upakara. 
* 506 uman, a tunnel. Pa/:, ummanga. 
cooopos, ekarat, a king. Pals, ekaraja. 
aooe, usabha, a bull, Pals. 
oo, ka, a fish. 

*& kiia, to invite. Cf ogi, a very polite and reverential form of the 
imperative ; ofo8009§n Booeo ogScqo98so805—" O, Lord, be pleased to 
listen to my good deeds,” Dhd. 160. 28. 

+t Bi, 818 ktuiw, to rise, arise, rise up; to awake seme one, rouse; ogi, 
eooo§q—‘‘he did not rouse his son,” S.B. 12, equivalent to the Pass, 
pabodheti. 

+ 189, 8§, ktuiw dah, to happen, take place; to be born, be reborn; 
cco feBto-S9ha—" a daughter again was born,” S.B. 4 F15R5— 

‘was reborn (as) a human being,” Sudh. 9. 5. 

* 0038, kanaw, a kinnara, a kind of demi-god, half-man half-bird; there is 

also a form (rare), o034, kanar. Pai, kinnara. 

o3S6g008, kanunkragat, a building with superposed roofs and a finial, 

a palace, a prasdda; this word is found in the Nyaung-U Bell- 
inscription; 16th century. The modern form is 0g|8@g0008, g.2. | 

oo}, kanhan, to build; to do, to make; oo}G@-805, kanhamh prakuih, vo 

make a_ book, write a book ; onkcog5Gt, kanham swekjwuiw, 

s to pick up a quarrel, to quaitel. 

* 8, kami, roof, covering; to roof, A.V. 263 = chandana, covering, root; 
A.V. 94 = chadita, covered, roofed, 

oogos, kamlat, a thief. 

* oof, kar, a period or revolution of the world, a cycle, the world. 
Sanshril, kalpa ; this form, very rare, ‘I found only in the Nyaiing-U 
Bell-inscription (16th century), and is, I am inclined: to think, not 
founded on false etymology, but rather shows that final y was: ri 
that time pronounced, or nearly pronounced, as finkl’§;-aw = cS 
form ooo, kal, is sometimes found, A.V. 16. 56;. Hie modern: Ea 
is 008, kaw, from -cocSu 

+ 4, karau, afterwards; to turn one’s back on, turn round; to turn the 


back on in contempt. Vide (ef 


* 


+ 


166 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von u 


oofet, karau cah, to turn the back. ‘ Vide fox 

* op008, kalaw, a wife; I have as yet found this word only in A.V.. 
under: dara, gharani, jaya, Jari, bhariya, etc.; the’Old Talaing is 
kindar, 

¢ osccoS kalef, to return; _— used also as a verbal auxiliary in the 
sense of: back, backwards, behind; back, again, ane, m return; 
ef go9§ coccoSg5—" and again, did he consider... ,”~ S.V., folio 
ghau; (9Squ coG08d080} 0 Sbacoicpacccabsabaghiaiq—" vonteue: does 
not keep the Law, the Law, in return, does not keep him,” Dhmd. 
172. 1; po&q§oz<a! coscdgoSafoos o}n qScq0053258005an2%s0203203 1 BoS0894 
omec0§o |Sasqotaogof—"‘ like the dust which an irascibie man, angry 
with another, seizes and throws (in his face), it goes against the 
-wind and comes back to himself,’ Dhd. 172. 26, 

* cosSdS, kalen raf, to look back, look backwards. 

oos005, kalok, a demon, evil spirit. 

* ooogo5, kaluik, to drive. Vide ocSo5u 

* coo§cS& kaluiwlif, a fire-fly. 

* mod, kal; vide under a §.. Cf oobi 

m8, kaw; vide under oogu 

* oo0005, kasap, coin, money. Pali, kahapana; BBooo0r8 Ag ®Bakacpss—" how 
many coins will you give me, Sir?”, Sudh. 3. 9. 

_ 08, kasi, to shake, tremble. CA fu 

_ oo9, kasi, to write, to paint. Cf. qin 

moc, kala, time; when, Pé/i; Qoovc0, at that time; oor00§, at that 
time; now, at that time.. ps 

«@, ku, denotes the instrumental, with, by means of; the dative, to. Cf. 
off 

«9of8, kusuiw, merit, meritorious act. Pal, kusala. 

+ cmoS, ket, to take; much used as an expletive implying that the action 
expressed by the verb is done with reference to the doer only, it is 
therefore the opposite of o§$, ¢.z. 

coosdan>, ket na, to take away, carry away. 

t+ eoor$, kon, child; children, son; young of an animal; the so itd of a 
craft or profession; an inhabitant of; caoo§ol$, “zt, “son of the 
army’ = a soldier; ¢eoo2$og°$, Zitz. ‘son of the village” = villager; 
sorsoié, ‘son of the city” = citizen; denotes anything small; 
soor$ (5, a small rest-house; s0o2$¢305, small gravel. 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 167 


* copogea00s, kon devatau, “son of the gods’ = a god; a literal trans- 

lation of the Pa/z, devaputta. : 
sooos¥, kon brau, a female child, daughter. | 

* coogf¥o8, kon brau ‘smin; also coo$8(¥, kon smif brau 

| (Haswell). | | 

conr§8, kon-smin, son of a king, prince. 

cono§oyd, kon smin bladai, a young prince. 

cos09, komh-ku, together, together with; the abbreviated form is ¢«99, 

c0q25i . e008, koth, by itself means: to gather together, collect, | 
assemble. | 

cog3, komku; see above. 

8, kuim, and; also; with. 

+ ofic88, kuiw, to give; as a verbal auxiliary, to cause to; ofs02, caused 
(him) to go, sent him; of 38,0503, caused (her) to mount the 
carriage; == let, 005§09§o8q, and let it be so, S.B. 17; with; to. 

* ofiooo, kuiw 4, to cause to go, to send. 

* ofcl§, kuiw dan, to give alms. 

+ 315, kduip, the head: summit, “top; S03, kduip tma’, the summit. 
of a mountain. 

86 kduin, an umbrella. 

* BIES?E, kduin btan, the white umbrella, the ensign of royalty ; hence 
it denotes the king himself ; wdde9@ige so0v0}Q0B[Em28ogeng EPud3/Sa96s 
coo§—“if that drum was “sounded, all the ro1 kings had to come and 
bow their heads to him,” Sudh. 23. 17; it is then used as a numeral 
sufix denoting kings as well as the countries over which they rule; 
Benosro5081&g309/5.e08—" all the eight kings,” Sudh. 38. 16;. ssogqs 
09308;S 260005 09 olodoloS§g—‘all the tor countries were without 
quarrels, they were at one” (= united, $3), Sudh. 40. 10. 

* oS, knat, end, extremity; last, final; cgoSooo, knat bhawa, the last 
existence, that is, the one in which one attains nirvana, Dhd. 17. 16. 

* mods, knat tau, last, final; at last, at the end, in the end, in fine; 
after, afterwards ; pooorgoSdo-—""in (his) last existence,” Dhd. 60. 23; 
apoSdr0p 353505 8—" may, in the end, my lord become the Buddha!”, 
‘S.M. g. 6; —966809(80} 070565 accoraqpo§escoqra$co0S—" going about, 
came at last straight to the Mén country,” Sudh. 29. 2. C/. ff om 

* 85, knip, the head; also: division or part of an army; gl$o$o35—‘‘an 
army in its fourfold division: infantry, cavalry, elephants, chariot- 
eers,” S.J. (A), folio Ze. Also cog5, N.V.K, 3. 8. 


* 


168 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 1 


-* of$, kmin, to govern, rule; &98$ jo ogd0h3— the king having ruled 28 
years,’ Myazedi Inscription; government, rule; kingdom, country ; 
B$qs0$od003008)0/§ oc8Ba(BYooogg “in Hanthawaddy, the Mén country, 
in the city called Trihakumba (Rangoon),” Sudh. 34. 24. 

* o8$9i§, kmin dus, “ government or rule of the city’’; hence, sovereignty, 
government; country, kingdom; o8$9,§ 8|Ss2—the kingdom, the 
country, U.O.K. 39. 5, 7, Cf BSgoi at S.B. I. 19 = Pali, 
rajjamh = sovereignty, government ; kingdom, country ; Scodse0de0) 
oB$oS3—“‘ he, having given up the sovereignty, or government, or 
kingdom,” S.B. 24. 31; the corresponding Pa@/s (Jataka. VI. 197. 1) 
is: rajjarh pahaya; oB$9|& sooggdoo gA—"‘the kingdom of Ayuthya”; 
S.T. 5 = royal state, royal power, etc. 

oy, kya, the wind; gas. 

* cqongooS, kya jamkat, a strong, fierce wind, or gas. Vide a 9>050 

.. 8, kyak, a god; a pagoda, a temple; a respectful term of address 
used in speaking to a superior. 

* 0953, kyak trai, the Blessed Buddha. Vide (a) 

* (05, krik, the cotton tree = Pali, simbali. 

* (Yoooe2, kriyaba, utensils, furniture, appendages; articles of dress or 
ornaments. 

—* cogod, kreh, gravel. 

CF, krau, wde af; Gor = oofes, gv. 
* (fH, krau tai, after, after i then. Cf. o3o5an 
* Gf 8, krau wwa’, after. this. 

06, klaa, to be angular; an angle, a corner. 

* 07808, kla dhaw, “a straight angle,” that is, a right angle; o§$o3&08, 
having four right angles, square ; 030033§8cooSu$apS058—" a square, flat 
stone of ten cubits on each side,’ Sudh. 13. 5. 

005, klat, to steal. Vide cogoS: 
0933, kla’, a garden: 

Tt o>, kla, before; as a verbal auxiliary, often means, more, again, and in 
this sense corresponds to the Burmese suffix 8s, a (pron. like 
the French oz with a slight sound of the 2); 8 &&032q—O, king, 
stay more (that is stay on), do not yo just yet, DBs Je AGL 

8g, kli gwa’, to get, obtain. 
ois, klun, to come; often written )§ tlun. 

t co}, kle’, to be lost; to abandon a place to go to another, to leave ; ¢oj 

sd]o}—" having left Tavoy,” Sudh. 35: 13; ¢09 $0} —~" having left 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 169 


that place,” i#, “having left from. there,” : ‘Sudh. 26i' 20, As’ a 
verbal auxiliary, makes a. neuter verb: active; 00, gawa, to be 
ashamed; 0c}, to make ashamed, put to shame; 9384008§ cao2$ 
&(J oocajq—" In like manner, the Princess put (the other officials) 
to. shame,” S.J. (A), folio 4e;-it is also much used after active 
or transitive verbs as an expletive 30085, to cause to be destroyed, 
to rout; 09 eco05 cojgl$oo—“he routed Mara’s army,” Dhd. 35. 15: 
og$, kwan, a village; also. op$,.tw4n. | 
&, kwi, a chariot, carriage. 
co}, kweh, truly, indeed; Haswell, by a slip, has entered it as ORS, 
kwe’. 
* BS, kwuin, to rise, arise, ascend; rising, a going up, ascent; from §, 
g.v. Cf. Bsr | 
* ofS, kwuin thai, the rising of the sun, sunrise.. 
Bi, 95, kwuiw, a spade; the Old Talaing is 8§, kir, to dig, and this 
would give a modern form, of, kuiw, which I have not found; 
but. compare: next word. . 
* fi, Bi5,. kwuiw, to dig, dig into, dig out; to ‘stir, disturb; cut, slash, | 
tatllader, in this last sense corresponds, to Pali, santatz; HoBeaoo§ 
essocaaqcqaSoo§ og BPounBagoagrcS) GoGoF Fo Sap qiSGS—" having ‘had 
but little food for seven days, at that instant, fierce gases arose in 
her stomach and stirred or. disturbed, or slashed, her heart,” - Dhd. 
160. 2. The derivation is the same as of, a spade. Vide Blu. 
og, . k baa, a boat, ship. 
‘$00, khaca, to wait upon respectfully, pay respect to, attend upon; pay 
court to; Haswell’s entry, “to be a dependant,” is. not quite to the 
point. Cf. Burmese, oo: 
‘oa, khana, a short time, a moment; o0p§, at that moment; also found 
- written 093, kanha, as at. Sudh. 17. 20, 22. 26. Pali. See G$oans 
ol, kha, when.- Cf. Burmese, oln See. olen 
* ol, kha, if, indeed if; in this sense, is sometimes followed by gt, mgah 
(= ma gah); olc$)Q)$o9a38a000200—" if compared with the stars in 
‘the.sky . .. ,” Dhd. 33. 26; QoS(goq$roloQai§Qodqjg:—" now, a woman, 
if she wishes to become a man... ,” Dhd. 324. 15; 9loogao0d 
‘cojgiif he do.not ask pardon : . .,” Dhd. 17. 30. 
* olq, kha ra, when; if, indeed if; the q after i is slightly emphatic ; pais 
{e}a0§05 8) s0298—" when the - Blessed Buddha rose and went. ..,” 
Sudh, -13. 16:: 
23 


170 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


90, khut, to call, to name, _ 

* 0056, khut khau, to call, name. 

* goSco8, khut law, to call, name ; 905c080g |, ibid. Vide oof, opj1 

* §, khuiw, to rush at_ in anger, to assazlt. The Old Talaing is 9608, 
khil. 

aceoso0S, khadof mat, the eye-ball; Haswell, 069280081 

* 865, khnik, powder, dust. 

* 80508, khnik ti, dust. 

t 8, khmi, a Buddhist monk; often found written 08, ‘gamhi,. which is 
more in accordance with the Old Talaing gurm-ir (11th cent.), 
and the medieval, o8, gam-’i (15th, 16th cent.). 

t 95, khyap, to reflect, consider; to intend, contrive ; from a form, e008, 


995, kasap, ksap. Cf. ¥, ail edu 
€, khyi, to tremble, shake; from:a form, 0098, 98, eet ksi. 


t+ a khyd, to write, to paint; from a form, 909, Oil, kas, ksi. 
cj, khyeh, a horse; from a form; og, kseh. 
* coSf, khyeh erard Waa a thorough-bred horse of Sindh. . Vide o8§« 
Wo, khyuit, to die. Cf 0908, gacuit, to kill, and ofj05, gamcuit, 
death. 
G$oor, khyuin khana, a moment, an instant ; Hasw. = Sogn Vide 
DOI 


om§, gakan,.to instruct, give instructions, to direct. The Old Talaing is 
- Bod§, B§ooh, kinkan, kinkan. Vide eo§, q$u . 
oooh, gakan phyan = ooogs 
osmd, gakom, .a collective body, community, company ; an assemblage, 
collection, mass. Vide under.. coodoquosaisonS, gakom sok, “a 
mass of hair” = a chignon, 
osg&, gafien, to go from place to place, itinerate, go about; BBod03¢8 
gp§o5c0880r0}-—" (the Buddha) having said, we shall descend and 
go about prophesying.” 
d, gja’, to sit. 
* 8, gfii, adorned, decorated ; to adorn ; an ornament. 
“00d, gata, to turn, turn ae ‘turn feeatien. the Old Talaing is 40, 
kuta; 15th century inscriptions have oods 
* omges, gata muk, to turn the face towards ;' as adverb, facing, towards, 
in front; ocgod ofecsso$o}n co280008 as09—" turning his face towards 
the Himalayas, the Bodhisattva went on his way,” S.J. 66; ocogo 


* 


+ 


% 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 171 


(= dds) god goSaq Sqyo—'* turned his face fowatis the north,” S.J. 
40; cogoiQ— (with) face turned towards the king, in front of the 
king, before the king,” Sudb. 28. 12. 

t ccood, gatak, to turn over, upside down, upset; Old Talaing, #05, 
pkak. Cf. Haswell, oco25c§, to tumble; Vide ecooSu 

ocoS, gatew, to cry aloud. 

ocoofejt, gatew krab, to cry aloud, screech, scream. 

osco&os, gatew yam, to weep. 

008, garam to beat, to strike (the breast). 

00805, gatuim sruih, to beat the breast. 

09, gadd, a covering made of leaves to protect the head, shoulder- 
and back, from sun‘or rain; it covers the head and back, falling 
down to the hamstrings. Cf. Burmese, 0, katt (pron, adi). 

* oo§, gaman, to invite. 

* 002, gama, to suckle. Cf. 209, ecedd, of, & 

os, game, to suckle. 

* of, gam-'i, a monk ; ‘this is the medieval form, the old form = gum- 
ir, and the modern form, 08, gamhi, often found written 3, 9.v. 

o§|§ gamluin, many; from 9/6, 9.v., often used as a sign of the plural. 

08, gaw, the womb; foetus, embryo. From the Sanskrit, garbha;. 916 

08, “heaviness of the womb,” grossesse; to be pregnant, G, pi. II.. 

3. Sometimes. written. ool8, Cf. Haswell, 088, 506 Also found 
written. 04, sometimes, | a, 

* 084, paw gnau, embryo, foetus; [¥gj oJoSg—‘'a woman who has an 

embryo,” a woman with child, A.V. 32 (Apannasatta) ; oo0Seco$oggg 

—a being in (whose) womb dwells a foetus,” a woman with child, 

A.V. 59 ‘(kalala); here, of, gar, is the old form found on the 

Ananda plaques, but also found sometimes so written in manu- 


Soko en 


* 


scripts. | | -- | ; 
t 008, 5, gah, that ; also a sign.of. the accusative case before the verb; 
‘Git is often. emphatic, laying | a stress on the word or phrase which — 
precedes it; in its meaning of “that,” it sometimes precedes the 
noun cased of following it; §9§—that deed, S.J. (A), ‘folio hu; : 
here, the first § = that, the os is emphatic = indeed, or some. 
such expression according to the context,; §go.00§—that bull, S.M. 
19; first § = that, second § = accusative case, As an emphatic | 


172  EPIGRAPHIA. BIRMANICA [ vow. 1 


particle = the Burmese, oo, k4°; very. often ‘it is sitnply indicative 
of the subject, and is equivalent to the nominative: case. 
tT OBL, ga-uui, medicine; cf. Haswell, 08, 2 a ais: in. both cases, the 2 
a u, and the so, @, are used as Solera 
col6, gow; see 08, which is the correct spelling. 
col8g, gow gnau = 08¢1 - 
a8, gah, to say, speak ; to mean, 
§&, guia, to take. | 
* 8638 guif nan, to bring, bring along with one, | 
- 9%5,, gnakyak, ‘a. queen. te | 
g, gnau, the womb, abdomen. Cf. 08, colts 
* go5, gndk, the hood. of a cobra; a spoon, a ladle, - 
* 68, gman, daring, brave; the being brave, courage, gallantry. 
* B05, glit, to tir back itl look, to look back, in the expression. 6953.05 
es (g.2.) ;. the Old Talaing =. 8088, jilit. 
+ <938, gloa, a road; Haswell, 9&- 
* 6908, glon, a palace, in the: Nyaung-U Hic dusetetion: Dhe. 343. hy 
; 144. 16. 
* coos, gloa’ jnlok, a main road. 
+ 908, glak, to pull out, tear out from, o&. meaning given by Haswell. 
98, gla, road. Vide e936 ‘ 
§§, gluia, many, much; to be Wiany or much. Vide o8& v4 
8628 gluia gluis, a iit lfcalion of aes much; mary: - often abbre- 
_ -viated to 886, gluia a, — 


e 


> 


of 3, gwa’,. to get, to. obtain, to have; as a verbal. auxiliary it means, © 
according to the: context : "permission, power, opportunity ; with a 
negative, 09,433, means: may not, shall not, can not. It also. 
‘means: -First—to get (to),-come to, arrive ; ‘BSE oBBqcovbars|Garogs - 
BREcoo0goeBq—"* they arrived at the Vipula mountain, and again going 
thence,-came to the river Ketumati,”. $.V., folio #hak ; [Fo5§ gooGog 
sochEogoroeatsoaqSaocpSylS— “those females, having arrived at ‘seven 
.. days (that is, after seven days), were, according to the usual way, 
obliged to go (to hell) to suffer for their sins,” Dhd. 2%. 9 (they 
were pretas, whose karma made them enjoy bliss for seven days 
_ and torments for seven days in regular succession). Second—to take 
with one, take along with one ; co28o008coniagqnogo9$ahs goaySofoorelo§§ 


PARTI] © TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 193 


coonegajqe=“‘the Bodhisattva, being startled and frightened, took 
Queen Maddi with him and both went up the mountain,” S.V., folio 
nak. Note the idiomatic. expressions, -¢q and 935q = very well all 
right! very good! ; Qqeoo2eag3080} —" Somadatta said, ‘Very well!’”, 
AS oe 
* 9, gaSq, gwa’ ra, gwa’ dmaf ra; see under 4, :in fine, 
+ {, ai, to look, look : at, look for; Haswell’s entry, ‘to seek, seek for, 
- only used in seeking lice ,” is too restricted... Cf. gS 
* &>, hi mwai, to look, look ‘at, look for; see 3, 3 
@¢o3;. ek, a tooth, 
* cgS, few, same as {; sdRo08$egSo—"" a nagt came up to look for food,” 
~ Sudh; 34. 3. 
-* 68905, few glit, to turn-round to look, to look back. . Vide Bode. 
* cg50, hew ca, “to search and eat,” to look for food, as animals. 
* 696953, few mfak mwai, to look, look at. Vide 95yu 
©, Ca,: to eat. 
t of$, cain, to carry on the shoulder; Haswell, cof$s.Old Talaing, 
 cifgin. | 7 poe 
¢ 0058, camat, to discern; to place, fix, mark, settle, determine, distin- 
guish; to examine, investigate. Also goSs 
00053, camat mwai, to examine, investigate. See godge 
08, cami, to look towards, look forward to. . Haswell, oo8 
089005, cami fidt, to look towards and see.- 
o8§5, cami rah = 08 
oy:, camlah, free, not in servitude, to be free, Cf. cogn 
0905, carak, to scratch, draw a line; a mark or line so made. Cy. 
02905, colloquial == coqoin Vide 088, o8c5s 
* oof, carat, deed, act; oqSoSoqgo%S—a meritorious act, Dhd. 37. 6. Vide 
| ooa 8, once Su 
* 085, caric, a form of 805 (g.2.), which,- up to’ now, I have met with 
- only in? A.V. 
—® 0805, carit, to scratch, draw a line; a line or mark so made, a fold, as 
of the skin. Vide oq05, 088, cogadh 
# o8cS0q05, carit carak = o§oSi 
® o09& calua, the head. Cf. qc08,. soyi&u 
* 00965, caluik, to drive, a cart, etc; the Old Talaing is 80805; jilik; 
Also written ooQobs 


s- * * * # 


174, EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. It 


* 68, caw, to drive, a cart, etc, 
§, cah, ten. | 
de05, cam bat, to test, try. | | 

id 02088, ca-a’, to vomit, spit out. Vide ~, cososii 

* 0205, cat, to bind, bind about, bind around, -as the ribs of a cask; to 
tie, bind, fetter; ofo2050@ Sof osfoS cogfqg—“ caused him to be bound 
in irons for the whole of ‘his life,” G. pi. 6. Vide 28 o205n 

0386 camguif, a fetter. See oo8& 

* 809:, ci klah, to be clear; clear, evident, manifest; | clever, learned, 
wise; sharp, skilful. | 

t 905, cut, to put in, put ‘into, put’ on, as a glove or shoe ; q%as$, to put - 
into chains, imprison, Dhd. 12; 905, 918, to inflict’ a punishment 
(put a punishment on), 31§ sel be written ‘sa5; as a verbal 
auxiliary, implies: accident, fault, carelessness, hapiees to, unfor- 
turfately ; coosoSee$; touched him accidentally, happened ‘to touch 
him, S.B. 10. 21;. 38c8c5qo5—‘‘the naga happened to bite him,” 
S.B. 22. 13; in se sense it is sometimes reduplicated, 905905, and 
has the same, force as St, 33908, 9.0. 

* gcgS, culua, the, head. “Vide oo98, 009/81 oe 

* co&, cen, to slant, incline, be on one side; to decline, as the sun, after 

noon is past and in the evnaine. 
‘: cau, to return. 

t §y$, cuiw bdan, to be concealed, obscure, not clear, not apparent, not. 
readily understood; indistinctness, unclearness; to screen from view, 

| shut out; cf. Haswell under §o3$u 

<@, Cab, the back. . 

t §, cuiw, to, up to, till; often followed by of. Cf. fe | 

t 2, cna, food; forms many compounds, as goocd, cna tarem, excre- 

“ment = “old food?’ A.V. 39 {ukkara) ; -ggo5,-cna pmat, fuel = 
“food of fire,” -A.V. 37 (idhuma), ‘etc, Haswell has only cap, go, . 
but O. St. has entered @g by itself. - 

* 93, cndai, a linch-pin, a peg, A.V. 30 (ani). 

* gda03§ cndai kanh&f, an ornamental pin used to keep the ‘hair or 
headdress in place; for references see under. 032036. Other. forms 
are 9d036, Qdoo0h5, 02338, agd03&: 

* pd38 cnadai kna A; see above. 


‘PART I] ‘TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 175 


* 930036, cnaai sanhan; see above. | 

tT spo$ogs, cn on thbah, to show, point out; Haswell, os$ogea 

* 93, cma ai, a present, gift, bribe, tribute; also 3, coed, cogdr 

* 9088, cmaai cmin = gd. Vide open | 

* 99d, clah caradai, majesty, glory, magnificence ; pomp; beauty.; 

grace, charm; graceful deportment. C/. os20qdu 

+ 2, cwa’, a part, portion; class, category, kind. 

+t 2%, cha, only; whatever, all; after a number = fold; 0jcocGoocepS—“ even 
a hundred fold, a thousand fold,’ S.B. 7. Reduplicated, soc = all, 
everything’; socof§ccooSg—“ took all that was given,” G. pi. 9. 

+ x, chu, wood, timber; a tree. 

* xovo8odjoS, chu bodhi paluih, the sacred banyan treé, the Bo tree 
under which the Buddha attained: omniscience. Vide oc§oc 

* coo, coo8, che, chew, to find, meet with;- also §, chuiw, as: Haswell, 

t Soigos, chuik bdak.. Haswell has, “to approach, to. draw near,” but 
I have not yet-met this word with this meaning, except in’ a trans- 
lation. of the gospels; though in colloquial it means, ‘to take 
refuge in,” ‘in the literature, it has always and only the meaning: 
to be clever, versed in; intelligent, sharp, skilful. 


o§, chuiw, same as coon 
a0, jak, to draw, pull, drag. 
‘* go508, jak caw, .to drive. 
ta, jaku, the body, : ‘self, person ; Ravcg—"! one body,” by oneself, alone, 
BB. 2. - | | . 
* of, jan, people, the people, man, a person; P@/t, jana. Vide goa$u 
t acs5, janok, great, large ; to make big, enlarge, swell out ; acsSa0qy:G05 
cgo:—“‘ he said, ‘ Swell out your body, spread your hoed, ey ae. Bae 
Vide ogi 
* ogo, jamk at, rough, hard, violent, severe j_ from 99205,. to be harsh, 
_ rough, violent, ete., with # infix. 
ac@é, jaren, in the presence of, near. , 
* ages, jareh, a-chain, an iron chain; fetters, handcuffs. Cf. O.St., 
o6qo5, chain. . 
o>, 14, a net; net-work, lace; of. Burmese go, jha. 
&§, jin, to sew, stitch. Vide $8, 23& 
® ofc008, jaw lagaw, a duct, a small canal which conveys spring or hill 
water into rice-fields. Also a8cocol8 and oaconf Haswell, car026 


176. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von. 11 


t 8&, juig, the leg including the foot; the foot ; base, bottom, foot. 
t $6, juia, to confer, grant, give. Vide GS 
og5, bs ok, great, big, large; a chief, head, tester aglogst—a’ village’ 
 headman, A.V. 82 (gamajetthaka). Vide ocs5u 
dQ. jai, far; to be far, ode. 
gt, jnah, to conquer, overcome. | er 
g25, jmp, every; goSaago5—01—" every ] and every he”. = all, every. 
body, Dhd. 55. 8. 
* $& jmifi, sewing, stitching; from && 
@5, jrap,.a hall on the roadside for .the convenience . of travellers, a 
_ rest-house. Cf, Burmese, 095 (pron. sa-yat), properly a9 Su 
@, jrai, the banyan tree, of which there are several species. - 
* 0S, jrai thaw, -“the golden banyan” = the Bo tree. 
. 9298, jrai mha budh, “the banyan of the Great Knowledge i 
(mahabodhi, or, perhaps, -mahabuddhi) = the Bo tree. 
* §oj, jrai sum = 
gooeS, fit, to see, perceive. | 

+ &, fii, a supplicatory particle, often to be translated by “ Wh scniged in 
conjunction with. of (of ... 8) = “may, let . “It is alee 
used as a sign of the saben omrs§dooqf 8—" I ‘will heir this 
statement”; cogsofp8 = Pais, vittarissami, Dhd.- 35. 27 ; ée0S8x 
S8—"T'll test my mother,” S.B.10; 2% ofal$ S—“I shall give 
alms,” Dhd. 98..1 = Pali, dassami. 

+ 2§, fidn, as; so as...,-so that..., in order to'...; in order 
that...; has often the sense of the imperative, and may be 
translated by “let (me, you, us),” or “do... ,” in which case 
it is often followed by 9; ed88o9og$00g]—"so that his parents’ may 
have faith,” Dhd. 28. 27; 93809§ 8,050} 0% wooq—" do (you) get up 
and sit down in the carriage,” S.J. 4;  oGo&yd_350q5 09/S4—"' young 
man, do (you) come in,’ Dhd. 26. 26. Cf. the following compound 
expressions :—p984—"‘like the manner of” = like, as $.B. 9; . 988 
soom00q—"' like. the manner of” = like, as A. . 198 (under rocana) 
(se20009 is Pali); 38gs, like, see agm pos sog8—" like the . manner. 
of” = like, as, as if, S.B. 24; SS. 17. 

¢ @:, fiah, he, ae often answers to the French; om; a person, the people ; 
gor... oop, GIG. ... cop—who is ... .? wikb or what ‘is, are 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 147 


.P, porgod¥gecpas—“‘ who is this little girl, Sir?”, Sudh, 9.13; 
ese 96 ooS§cq.—'‘ what were those sixteen wonders?”, Sudh. 
28. 2; pos8p0: 5 9§ecp—“ what are these four classes of persons?” 
S:B. 8. opsopos§ecp—"' who are you?”, S.B./ 12-3 901038cee—"' who 
are they ?”, wns 27. 
* 00:95, fiah gman, -“a person of courage,” a brave, a warrior. 
* oorié, fiah dua, ia person of the city,” citizen. 
* 59, fiha, to invite. Vide Bu 
95, dak, water. 
* QSacococal6, dak jalagow = abcc08, ¢.v. 
9i§, dun, town, city; country, kingdom, 
* 96098; dun swaw, the heavenly city or country, heaven, svarga. 
+t 3, deh, he, she, it. Not sg93, as Haswell. 
8\65,-duik, to ride, drive. 
+t ao, na, to go, to send, away, off; for full explanations and meanings see 
under plaque 277. Sometimes also written $2, na, in composition. 
* cooo85, na knip, to face towards, see under plaque 277. 
* ooogi5, na beuip,. to lead to, cofivey to, see under plaque 277. 
ad, na’, this. 
c8, nim, yet, still; a sign of the future. -See ¢326 non. 
*o, ta, to vomit. Vide 02038, cososti | 
cooS, tak, to strike, beat; oooSdao$3S—to. beat the drum and walk the 
gong” = to proclaim, by. beat of drum and gong, G. pi. 3. | 
* wosofod, tak suih, to beat one’s breast, in sorrow, wonder, -ete,, Dhd, - 
12. 8, | 
gg, tka’, an island, content. 
* oo$093, tahklaai, molasses. treacle ; see next. 
o$cod, tanlaai, molasses, treacle; this word is: collequial; 008033, 
literary. Cf. Burmese, 88, tanlai, 
of$,; tamin; see of$u 
¢ coag2, tanha, passion, lust; Haswell, oo321 Pé/s, tanha. 
+ o§, ‘tan, to be valid, have validity; to dwell, abide, remain; as a: verbal 
auxiliary, it expresses: propriety, suitability, tness; possible, may ; 
C$QcBi cofgogor2—is it proper to speak and to act (so)?, U.O.K. 
44. 8; 00300$9q—it cannot be, it may not be, S.J. 4.. Cf. B., oof 
* o08, 098, tamaw, tmaw, rolling over and over, round and round. 


33 


178° EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


* \*.. 


cogs, tamlah; see ogw 


oogd, tamhaal; see g>di, also good! 
cogda8§, tamhaai jamin, a’present, gift, offering, bribe, tribute. 


- gesd, tare mh, old, not new. — 
ood; tarau, journey, way, road, 


® 


ra ‘ 


cat, tarah, to expand, sapaund give in details; ‘to ‘scatter, spread ; 


e strew. 


coo8, tasin, fetters, manacles ; Dhd. 64. 14—o005gj co08&go5 cBBi cogignetod 


soo—" beings with fetters become: free.” Vide o28&u 

ooo8eS, tasuik, happiness; comfortable; luxuriant ; Haswell's entry, “the 
place or state of. ie saa is not to the point, -a3d'c008aS—a 
comfortable seat, G, pi. 

§, ooo, tah, the breast, "hides 


3, ta’, ional the plural.. Cf Burmese, o8, tui’. (pron, do!). 
03, tarh, the beginning; near part, presence, at; the original amount of 


money, capital, stock in trade ; the. profits accruing from it being . 0%, 
parai; o3l—'‘the place of the beginning,” - source, Dhd, 574. 25; 
03g, capital,” A.V. 153 (under pabhata); 05305, capital, stock in 
trade, G. pi. 3; 089 5038 [Sroda0$ 0g 50$—" the capital being large, the 
profits are large; (if) small, the profits are small,” G.. pi. 13. 

BEBE, . tin. tin, an adverb, imitative of the sound -made when striking 
one’s breast. 


BEBEOoREH |S, tintin gatuim-sruih, to beat one’s breast ‘an ‘sorrow. 


805, tit, to go out. After another verb often means: away, out, off, 

3, tim, to know. : ie 

Seoo05, tim ket, to know, perceive. 

oBco, tila, lord, ISStES, setgneur; also co, ~, cocon 

Boo8$, tila puin, “a lord of merit or glory,” a monk, Vide op, 

og§, tun, again, back, in return; to return; now... ,.and now... 3 
it is also used as an emphatic particle: not’ exactly translatable in 
English, which lays a particular stress on the word.or words which 
precede it: 99 ssQco00200003098—" now, the holy disciples, ... .  ,” 
Dhd, 237. 16; Qso§og3oqg$—“ and now, the king of Arimandana (for 
Arimaddana = Pagan) ...°, the reference i is to King Anorata, Dhe. 
IZ. 26; . 0905 coragr098—“ he uplifted religion again, that is, he 
promoted the true religion,” Dhc. 13. 3; gas20 a9 ,c5go98—“' now, at 
that time... ,” Dhd. 117. 27, here it is emphatic, ogjo5 = now. © 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 179 


t 095, tup, like, resembling; to be like, .be. similar, to resemble. 

*- 05, tuy, the ancient. and medieval way of writing o}; > (ai) is the 
modern symbol of 0, y.- 

+ o, tual, the sign of the past tense j- it is also a connective particle, 
connecting two sentences, and ‘is thus similar in use to the. Pali 
gerundive vd; at the beginning of a sentence, it. means: then, 
after this or that, /¢, “this being finished,” and is. ‘probably an 
abbreviation for ojo, “having finished”; it has. ‘sometimes to be 
translated as a conditional : o5c8 Qooqto}sogooco> God08 }9—" if you 
wish to know (the story) 7 extenso, look up that. “commentary,” 
Dhd. 235.4. ..The original meaning of the word is: to be finished, 
be over, be slapecd be past;  c0200 oojcos—in times past, Sudh. 
10. 9; c§ goov00 eoicos—the: thera, in times past, Dhd. 108. 
133 “BgoasoSoo}cos§—the king - Mahajanaka of that time, /:#. = who 
is past, S.J.-88; cjccs—formerly, of yore, in olden times; 03003005. 
bo} codon ROB, co$ oospSol5 — O, demouy because, : in: the past,. you 


haye. committed: evil deeds... ,”° Dhd. 27..21; the following 
expression. is much used at the end. of sections and chapters: 
ojcogq—"* this (g)' so much. (9). is finished (o})” = this section, 


or chapter, is finished, finis. See qi 
cod, te’, that. 
o>, tai, the hand; finger, _ 
O83i, tai stu th, the right hand. | 
* cooxcsp, toro, straight in front, ‘straight ahead, right, Opposite; also. o9, 
with which of. Burmese, ogqieaconsepag, ibid. |  < 
cco3, tot, to cook, to boil.” | | 
™ 06, tau, to. dwell, reside, live ; to. be (in, a place), remain; after. another 
verb, it. i8.not only euphonic, as says Haswell, but. it-shows also — 
that what is°expressed by. the verb is going on; _ it is. always. easy: 
to judge. from the. context whether . it is. merely euphonic or a-conti- 
nuative auxiliary,.thus: 00506 does not. mean only .“‘ he. called,” but. 
“he was calling,” 350059508 ¢opoS—" the nagas who. dwelt. ae the. 
foot of Mount Sineru,” S.B. 7; : 3053050003 03009 cepS—"' this. man is 
on the palm tree,” S.M, 18; " Sgzlodcop—"* in what, place (where) 
are the flowers?”, Dhd. 93. 27. 
‘{ of$, tuin, to ascend, go up; used as an expletive. it: shows that whatever 
the verb denotes, refers to another. person or object ; -9g2809$[¢-—he 
asked the woman. | 


180 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


oj, thai, the sun; a day. 
o3, tnamh, a tree; a plant. 

*.o205, tnah, other, different. 

t 028, 02053, tnah na, for; for the purpose of; for the sake of; to, in 
order to = the infinitive. : 

* 023, tn dai, linch-pin, Vide 93, ogdu 

* 92d396 tnaai khnanh = gooojé, gz. 

&, tnim, to sink, sink down. - Haswell, coa8s 

* copoS, tneh, a trough, for animals to feed. in; in the East, it is most 
often made in the shape of a. boat; a grain measure; also written 
conods Vide godu 

* copodao8§, tneh amuin, same as precedent. Vide ao§abu 

* o2§, tnun, sprout of a plant or tree;. top, summit, pinnacle, finial; also 

i$; Of. Haswell, coagé; see next word. 

* on{8(G30008, tnua krakat, a building with superposed roofs and a finial; 
a palace; qo5Grco208qoSi03) § (Ggo0053098—magnificent houses, magni- 
ficent pavilions, decorated heavenly palaces, Dhd. If. 30 = Dhd. 
269. 4; it is sometimies preceded by 8, dQog(S{egoo0S, Dhd. 204. 8; 

the bell-inscription (16th cent.) at Nyaung-U_ has og&(egookn 

+ o3, tma, a stone, rock; a rocky hill. 

* oScos, tma’ lah, a flat. stone. 

* opd$$, tmaai Jmin; see gd$§, ogd, etc. 

— * 0305, tmut, weaving, from oqo5, tut, to weave. Vide ogioSs 

(qj, truh, a male, a man; used as the’ ‘sign of the masculine. 

. ey Psi, excellent ; blessed ; lord. | 

“op, o000, tla, tala, owner, lord, master. Vide Beco. Old Talaing, tirla. 

7 ope, you, Sir. 

* oor, tla fia, “ he toed of the wer. " =a king: 

* opesloo, tla dosa, “a lord. of anger” = an irascible, choleric person. 

* / ©2089, tha. paehE. a master of ene. y a a learned. man, ‘scholar, 
pandit.. 

8§, tlia, to err, miss the way, get lost, be lost. tenia ft 

* op, tlah, free, not in bondage. Vide ogre. 3 

* opoda, tlah caraai;. see _ptogar | 

* f, 008, twi, tawi, £e surround, Dhd, 224: 24. 

* BE, twi bwuif, to surround; also BRE, eG 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 181 


* oi, twut, weaving, to weave. Vide ogiodn — 

* BS, twuin, the going up, rising, rise ; irom of$ Vide kwuin. 

* fi, twuiw = % G.V. . 7e, 

* fi, twuiw, giving;-from of; ° ‘also Bla 

* of, twah, to say, speak; ‘preach. | | 

* of03, twahgah, to mean ‘to term, call; be termed, -be ‘called. 

* 0335, twah pmif, to preach. | 

009, thapah, seven.  °  ; 

«6 thaw, gold ; golden. , 

ool, thaw4ai, to sit in a cross- legged posture, on the ine, in | oriental 
fashion; statues of the Buddha.are so; seated ; also = the lap when 
seated iri oriental fashion ; goog} cog $B 5c eJohc88 s00q—" placing his — 
head on his wife’s lap, he went to; sleepy” Dhd. 298. 13; also 
written 09>, el 

cos, tha- -a’, to ° vomit. Vide 003038, 032981 

9296, th-'aa, a site, for. building. | 

coo, the, a monk, of at least ten years’. Standing, | Pali, thera. 

coo, thew = coo . 

-¢®, theai, angry; to be angry; _anger.. , 

caged, theai pnat = ce. . Vide goSu | | 
¢ c3, tho’, to cast away, forsake; give up, reject. 

Bt, thbah, to show, Point: Out ;. com | 

3%, dak, to tie, bind. 
a2, daka, a layman. Pali, dayaka: 

acgoS, dakut, a_ piece, fragment ; ~part,\ ‘portion ; half (of time - or 

distancé) ; 00420905, part or half, of the way. 


* 


e 4 KH & 


~~ 


. , ges, ; dget, to observe, to do, to perform ; teninateel deed, | 
ia off, da guin, to observe the fasteday (ex) to observe: the Buddhist. 
7 virtues, | , 


aay 903, dacath,. eight.” oh ce : 


x 


aq, dacun, a stick, a staff to. lean upon. Haswell, gh 

308, dacah, to. oppose, go: against, as the . wind, the tide, etc. . CG. os, 
ibid, 

999009, dafifia Chale: to the ‘atraid, ‘he: ‘anxious. 

304, datuai, benefit, advantage, profit ; end: ‘conclusion ; to doze, ‘nod. 

303 Gso26, datuai mramow, benefit, advantage, profit. 


* 


ee 


182 . EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 


* 2%, datai, to take along with one, by. holding:the: hand, as a child, or 
the end of the stick of a blind man, or the chain of a dog, ete. 
i 306, datau, to stand; an abode, dwelling; 0305, to dwell, S.B. 1, Sudh. 
3. 21. See od 2 
+ 9905, 3, dadah, being, the being born or reborn; state ; circumstance - 
to be, to become. 
¢ 9905, daduik, misery, suffering; poor, miserable. 
ao5, damruih, violent, harsh, wicked. 
s9, damla, a robber, dacoit; ogi 
* agoo08, ago5, darhat, strength. Cf. oood = ccodu 
t sco, dalan, a tray, on which offerings are placed for monks or the 
Buddha. | 
¢ 98, daw, to shut;. the centre, middle. 
9d], Daw4dai, the town of Tavoy; also written ood! 
¢ 905, dah, to be, to become; to be reborn; used as a. verbal auxiliary 
implies : feasibility, _ possibility, that can be done, of. which there 
is a ‘possibility, may be translated by “can”; 95 m§ag&s eS fo 
—could not drink water, could not eat rice, Dhd, 12. 9; in this 
sense is equivalent to the Burmese, 5, phrac, when used as an 
auxiliary. § and §q, used at the beginning of a sentence, ° or 
phrase, gives it a conditional force = if, if it be that, if it happens 
or turns out that, it being... , etc., according to the context; 
BcBol potogeBBicBoscnaticReaGafforqSqonsdacooSfeo§asoas8 Gene —* we told 
other persons it (a fish) was (worth) 1,000 rupees and seven. 
annas; if you take it, we shall take (only) seven rupees,” Dhd, 
173. 30; 89902306 Goooor8ago3—" if they sold that fish to. others 
one thousand bia! ” Dhd. 174. 3 
* $35, ‘dah’ mnih, “to become a man,” to be born, reborn, : 
* 33, dah mwai, “to be one with et to agree, tally ; ol&agoS[¥o9soloul 
co§$g—" the girl's: word, or statement, tallied with ‘Godapila’s,” 
S.M. 9.- 
* Bo dal ya i, tobe univell, sick. 
* $500, dah 4, to become. 
t 34, dah, a verbal. auxiliary ; placed before the verb, implies necessity, 
‘and may be translated by must; but when placed after the verb, 
it implies: inadvertence, satel, fault, mistake, unexpectedness, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA — 184 


accident, etc.; 302 ac0910g2033—" ‘they went, and unexpectedly came 
upon. a lake,” S.B. 14; Soro} 8938 903-—“‘ he came (dit. he found) 
by chance across a fig tree,” S.M. 19; s30dhoisg,28anr0Ga9Sas02§q 
—“the devas causéd the fish to enter. the net inadvertently,” Dhd. 
173. 24. Vide qodu. 
_alf,. dan, alms-giving. Pais, dana. 
85, dip, heavenly, celestial: Pali, dibba.- | | 
qofos, ducaruit, an evil deed, bad action. Pali, ducearita. 
_a$, dun, bamboo. 


95, duh, .sin,. evil, offence. 
63006, devatau, a’ god, a deva, devata. 
cao, desa, a place. Pali, 

* csoog:, desa rah, country. Vide qm , 

E0092, 63939, desana, desna, religious discourse, preaching, sermon, 
Pali, | 

* caoogs0, desana. dhar = caogo, Vide ofn 

8, de’, younger brother or. sister. | te 
6, dau, to flee, run away; $209, ibid. 
+ §, duiw, to, up to, till; §3, up to this, this much; czogor0d8§g— 
“the wise, knowing this much’... ,’” G, ph. 3, , 
t 305), duih, .a point of the compass, region, oleae! direction; aside; 39S 
—one side, Dhd. 378; eoSel§o5—"" eyes two sides,” - both eyes, 
AN. 17° (andha); .9053$05—“face one side,” one face, one side ; 
goel§o5—the two faces: or sides; A.V. 68 (under kuttaka, written 
duis); grel§oS—both shoulders, Dhd. 17. 21. Pali, desa. 

* GoSag80q, duih smaw ky4, the-north. 

t 3, dnaai, place; office, place; hence in some contexts = inheritance ; 
itis also used in the sense of: whatever, whoever ; 31805 g&95 aobeg$ 
—whatever you desire : tice, water, gold, silver, S.B. 14; 31805538. 
—all that you wish, S.B. 15; see s40503 n 313) 8Sco008q—whatever 
they took, Dhd. 299. 4;. 3)29%—-whatever person, whoever, S.J. 
(A), folio. he. 

* 905, dnih = cogod, ¢.v. 
+ a6, dma, to remain, dwell, live; also used as an auxiliary denoting that 
_the.action is being done, is going on. 
@8, dran, a tusk; ahorn, Cf. Haswell, @& 


184 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


68, drap, . property, wealth, substance. ~ Sanskrit, dfavya. 
eg5, drep,‘to run, 

* 6956, drep dau, to run away, flee. See $1. 

695, dlo’, to instruct, teach; accod: 
egicg.§, dlo’ bton =. cgin- 

8, dwi,. the left side; Qu 

— 0god>, dhammata, the usual way, the usual order of things, custom, 

| usage, habit ; nature. - Pa/s. 

+. °%, dhaw, the Law, ‘the Buddhist Law, doctrine, religion; written ¢4 in 
old and medieval. Talaing. Sanskrit, dharma. 

08, dhaw, to be straight, direct from- one point to another; straight, 
_- direct, fight, 

olds, dhat, a ‘telic. Pali, dhatu. 

$, na, by, by means of, with; 309, itd. 

t 3& nan, to bring; i is used also like the Burmese verbal particle 3, khavi’, 
that’ is, it implies that the action which- the verb expresses - is 
followed by going away from. the place where’ the action. has taken 
place; it also, I think, refers to an action just past; it is also 
sometimes merely expletive. 

® 36096, namow, .to bend, bend towards, bend. down, incline to in mind ; 
also $08, o0998: | 

. scops8, naro’, to cry, cry out, bawl, howl, scream; also 3&6, coQ ai 

$2, nd, sometimes found so written instead of a>, g.v:, mostly in com- 
~. position, - 

33, nak, a serpent, the cobra; a:naga or dragon, a species of demi-god. 
= Pali, naga. 38, a nagi or female naga. | 

* 309, ndguiw, a town, city. Pali, nagara, 

338, Naaimi, King Nimi or Nemi. . 
$8, nidhi, treasure, Péli, Wrongly given as $8 by’ ‘Haswell. 
$gl$, nibbdn, nirvana. 

* 3o§, niman, to invite. . | 

* 9805, nimit, to create, make. Cf. Pali, nimitta. Vide -305.. Most often 

- used in the following couplet : 

* 3805405, nimit bdah; to create, make. | 

3, ni, from; than; 8:9, from there, from that place, thence. 

* cs08, cas, non, nof, a particle indicative of the future, Cf. Haswell 

under ecps&: 


PARC @] TALAING PLAQUES GN. THE ANANDA 68s 
3, nwath, to bs, to have; also $j, num, mostly after prefixes oo and on 
7 ve, pa, ta do, make; to cause, in this sense it is widely used as a causal 
prefix in the forms: pa, ~, da and é. [t is an interrogative = why? 

low ?; osgoogoSup3&Fsep—"' how are the Paccekabuddhas?”, «:.J. 40. 


it is also a prohibitive = do not, and probably an abbreviation of 
oF, giod0a32$q—-do not ask!,. S.J. (A), folio fe; o§05—don’t forget, 
i, Pl. 7 | 


* co8, pak, to throw, fling (water, dust, etc.). Cf. Burm., ood 

* e005, pkah ram, to bear, carry, wear: to carry out, perform, fulfil; to 
rule, govern; in word fur word translations, it. very often translates 
Pali ahérett ; saQ&g&co8 consa$ cg 2J— who wears the - 32 great 
characteristics,’ Dhd. 30. 25; @3&qSco8q ogiqeo——"' fulfilled the two. 
gandhuras,” L.B, 2. 1; ogéqSooSgo3-—-carrying a spear. 

* ¢, pkau, a flower. Haswell enters this word only as “ 4{oc02$, garland,” 


but has the entry o5 (colloguial’. To open, as a flower, to blossom, 
to flower; sqooch—a flowering tree, A.V, 164 (phulla). 
* do, pkau sau, a-flower. Haswell’s entry, ‘ ooSa5, a carver’in wood,” 
I have not met’ with, the usual expression is gos;05 fn 
oS, pkau srau = bet, with y infix. : 
pa kom, to bring together, collect, gather, bsed, amass ; 4So¢003 
coiienties coo—“‘ having amassed property, shall I give it br nothing 
to. thew?” G. pr. 14.- 
o§86, pan min, to hear, listen to: Haswell, o&$& 
+ og, pafifiap, a name, appellation, term; to name, call, term; to prepare ; 
Pali, pafifiapeti. : 
opo>, patina, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. Pa/z, 
vo5, pat, to press with the hand, squeeze. Vide cosuloSu 
t+ g§, o@§, ptan, patan, to build; to raise, exalt : to make firm, stable, 
unwavering ; to restrain, control. (of the mind, feclings, etc.); to 
establish; to appoint to an office ; aygrapomg saa v0o§co609q— 
‘fT will exalt you to the state of chief queen,” Sudh, 2-4. 22; goy 
. 033,98c08.H99o3 goSqa03—"'the queen, being unable to control 
. her rel, * S.J, 6& | 
t & ptam, to begin, begin with; et cetera, and’ so forth, and ‘the like. 
Vide dn a a. _ 
* 5, ptath, to fulfil, practise. 


% 
@ 


Tt ane 


24 


186 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 1 


t &,. ptit, to take out, put out, put forth; QoSgoooS— to. put forth 


- strength,” to endeavour, strive, A.V. 47 (ussuka) ; §SolE—" to put 
_ forth words,” to utter, express, say, S.B. 9, S.J. 7. 


Pig patisanti, conception, rebirth. Pal, patisandhi. 


t 


* oo§osos,, patun pa- a, friendly. greeting, exchange of friendly prestige 
agreeable ae in translations, always readers the Pali pat? 
santhéva; Bocor$ ocosos ofoogoq—exchanged friendly greetings, 

Dhd. 226. 27. 

00}, patum, to let fall, drop, throw down. 

oo, patuik, generally written ec$o5, g.v. 

Hr, oQ$, ptuin, patuin, to raise up, put. up, lift up; ‘to put up,” 
present, offer, from a inferior to a superior; ofcco3oc3$q&, “let ye 
cook and put up rice,’ S.M. 13; Qcdoar Bi$o9G— every - day, he 
had to present (flowers) to the. king,’ Dhd. 92. 21. 


o§ pan, four. 
ofoy&, pan klan, having four angles, square. 


ogo, pannasa, the hut of a hermit, made of branches and- leaves, a 
hermitage. Pai, pannasala. 

030%, pa.datau, to dwell, sojourn, live. ‘Vide 305 and 06: 

ogf, pa piijau, to offer, present, in a religious sense. Vide gh 

of, pa buiw, generally written eG, 9.0. 


ogeéoof, pa-bwak karau, “to make a follower, ” that is, to become or 


be, someone's follower, Dhd. 28,12. Vide goSoo{u 
0005, 908, pamat, pmat, fire, also 9995, ecg 205i 
go58e, sacred fire; sacrificial fire, A.V. 36 (ahavaniya). 


—o88gl$, p&rinibban, parinirvana. Pali, parinibbana. 
03, parai, excellence; profit, benefit, advantage; before-a number = 


more. than, over, above. From 8, to gain; to be excellent, noble. 

o8§ paruin, tidings, news; from this meaning it has also come to 
mean: what pertains to, what is connected with, and may be trans- 
lated by, “about, concerning, as regards” ; opopgrcoor090,$0§)EucBan008 
0G EqoSagoc.02$00g>908 ooSgoij— ‘the wise, thus knowing about (that is, 
the evil consequences of) the sin of stealing another's wife... ,” 
Dhd. 357. 8; cSarcqucgodeBo8coah ang GGosqrogofoGq—"he told the 
king, in detail, all about his practising the sz/as,” S.B. 28. 


‘occof, paleh, to make dance, as marionettes, ‘snakes, monkeys, etc. 


oc, paluit, to put out, extinguish. 


* 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 187° 


08S, paluin, ‘to destioy. 

* oo, paluih, the circle around the Bo tree, in the centre of Jambu- 

dipa. 

* 08, paw, a mountain; used only after the names. of mountains. | Sanskrit, 

parvata. 

t 0°, pawa, a deed, act, action; work; vocation; from’ 0; by infix w. It 

is often used followed by 9, to ean abstract nouns. .Also gi 

* ycooos, pasek, to pour water in the act of consecrating king, to anoint. 

Pals, abhiseka. Sometimes written o8ofn 

* ucooosuand, pasek pase same as ocoox%; the meaning given by 

. Haswell, “happiness,” is wrong, I think, | Dae ob 

00805, pasuik, same as osoo05n oO 

oo§§, pasuin, to make over, hand. over, deliver, commit. Cf. gf, Bu 

o8, pa smif, “to make king,” that. is, to. become -king; to rule. 

‘ol&, paa, the mouth; word, statement, speech, discourse ; eaHIATOBMES 

98+ and each spoke only one word,” ‘Dhd. 3575 7. 

olf, pan, to ask respectfully, to beg, entreat. of. Burmese, 08, pan. 

 ol$socol§, pan akhon, to beg leave, ask permission. . 

ol, paai, to reject, put aside. Cf. ‘Burmese, 065, pay (pron. pe); to 
leave, go from, depart from ;> lsi§yso}—" having again departed 
from thence ... . ,’ Schmidt, 88. 2, | 

Sg0le5, pindapat, food given in alms to monks. “Pali, pindapata, 

g& pun, cooked rice. oe 

g$, pun, to rebel, Cf. Burmese, 4S 

* of, piguiw,.a person, individual. Pals, puggala. 

gf, piijau, an offering, to the Buddha, the monks, or a temple ; to 

| make such an offering. Pali, paja. | 

* coos, pek, to be destroyed, done for, ruined, routed. Ch. Bare, qo, 

pyak (pron. pyéz). 

t % puin, property, wealth, possession; glory, dignity, in the expression | 
~ BeoS$, g.v. Cf. the same meaning of the Burmese,” =$, bhun’ - 
(pron. phon), in the expression, 09$:8:, bhun®? kri®? = 8o08$, 
both from the Pali pusiia, whose meaning, as is the case also” | 
with some other words, has been extended. 

§$co0§, puin han, same as 88 

t d05, pak, to open; expound, explain, 


re ee 


+ € 


188 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA fVOL. i 


T sy25, p-’ow, to send, despatch, order; to ‘cause to, incite to, urge; 
persuade, induce. For full explanations see under Old Talaing cr, 
plaque 50. Often also written oga&u. 

* carSeogo5, p-’ow batuik, to incite to, urge, persuade, induce. 

* cmr805, es to incite, urge, persuade; to cause to. 

§, puiai, we; 8805, we (respectful), . 

9, pdai, in, ac into; anciently written, 90, pday, and syed, pdey. 
ge, pdai Itt, on, upon; geoop: 

gos, pnat, anger, angry, to be angry. Haswell, ees Vide o&: 
gt, pnah, the shoulder, 

t 80, pmik, wish, desire; sense, meaning of a word or passage; opinion, 
view ; So08coc8usnlooo—‘'this (is) the meaning of the third verse,’ 
Dhd. 355. 25. 

¢ g#905, pyah duih, to foretell, declare beforehand, prophesy; a prophecy ; 
s0cp2$0053 20g90.4)8 §.Sec Booags/Sa$u50083—" with such words did the 
Omniscient one prophesy on the summit of Mount Hamsagiri,” 
Sudh, 28..23. Haswell, “ ooge§o3, revelation.” Cf Sanskrit, vyadic. 

* @ 00005, prasat, a building. with superposed roofs, a. terraced EOE; 
palace. Sanshrit, prasada. 

+ 9$, plan, to turn, turn back, turn over; and; a$cdo§8[EySo8oSoqaSeBSaay5o 
Beajo} qsdor0}—“ and the people, saying, ‘the queen has obliterated . 
the king’s line... .’” S.J. 66;- again, anew. C/ Burmese, oo, 
lan, and §§, pran (pron, yea) 

t Q$oo:, plan gatah, to turn round; to change, alter, change from bad 
to worse, go wrong;. to oppose, retaliate; to speak in -return, as 
in conversation; 008 y$ooor§—“ he is subject to change (his mind, 

_ dispositions, etc.),”’ Dhd..40. 19. . 
og& plen, to destroy, ruin, blot out. 
y&, pla, to convey or conduct, to take to (a person or a place); 
vod&u. 
yt, plah, to spread, spread out 
Q, PWa, same aS 00, g.vU. 
g$, phun, a mattress.. 

* of, phun sdi, a mattress, S.V,, folio Aham, Dhd. 30. 4 

coos, phek, to fear. Vide esx, of which ceo is a contracted form, 

* 6 phau, with, together with. Cf Haswell, ol 


x 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 189 


6, phamm, a drum. 
ego5, ph-'ow, same as sgl8, 7.v. 

® oagoS, pha-’urt, “to cause to end, make an end of,” to put an end to, 
to end; to spend, waste, squander; to be ended, spent, finished ; 
op seadoScoonnSo—“ in order to put an end to his doubts,” Sudh. 24. 
19; 9860) ovaGod of ogsooc§cS$§—" like the. sun puttiag an end to the 
brightness of the : firefly,” S.M, 1; goasx$o00Sec$8 Sea903 anpao8Eos200 

—“the going to look at dances, wasting (one’s) time,” Dhd. 238. 
26. 

* q, phy; this combination is often the boas of the assimilation of a 
labial, 0, 6, with a following sibilant 2 or palatal ©. Cf. the words » 
below. 

* g$, phyan, to instruct, give instructions, direct (how to act, etc.); to 
send or leave a message; it is used generally in the couplet, ono 
9, from oc$, Old Talaing, ¢$, pcan. In the fellowing, it is used. 
alone: a3sur8o008 GoSs.0 asqbongo}s coco& acorsysg Goaaey —* then, 
the future Buddia went unto his father’s presence and told him 
according to his instructions,’ S, Vidh. 292. 

* 95, phyap, to think, reflect, design, intend; from oo08, kasap; here 
the gq is the result of the assimilation ok the guttural oo with the 
sibiiant oc: 

* gS, phyap, to put together, join, connect, unite, from ocd; 05 = to 
adjoin, be adjoining. : 

* good, phyadk, to. break, tear; hence, it means: “to cause the day to 
break,” that is, to wait for the dawn or until dawn; agSéqooda08Sog 
o§c5—“the Buddha used. to go back and -vait for the dawn, in the 
Middle . Country (majjhimadesa),” Sudh. 13. 10; from 03; 05, 
cak = to tear, to rend; there 1s a colloquial nee ey oh 05, 
‘the day breaks.” 

* @§, phyin, to cook; from o8§; 8§ = to be cooked. 

* Go5, phyih, “to cause to come down,” to put down, throw down; form 
e805; B05 = to come down, descend. 

yi&, phyuan, “to cause to drink,” give to drink; from oS; o9&, to 
drink. 
qgi$, phyun, flesh, meat; from gi (Old Talaing). 
* g$Go5, phyun gruih, the heart. 


190 : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 


fT sy, phyea, to turn aside, torn away; to set on one side, or obliquely, — 
or on the slant, to slant. something’ towards ; wood E§cyS g& —“ he 
looked obliquely, with only one eye,” S.J. 82; from oco&, og&; 
co&, to be. slanting or oblique, incline or be on one side; may also. 
be. from oc0&; see gS = oS, above. 
* G05, phyuik, to cereals or make happy; from 905; see Sods 
= B, phyuin, to make over, hand over, deliver; from o9$ (A.V. 134, 
: under 2yd@sa). 
ood, bak, to follow. 
end, bakap, to turn over, upside down. 
* eo$, bacan, to instruct, direct, commission; to send or leave a 
message, Vide iu 
" eogfoo§; bacan gakan, same as oo$i 
8S, bcuip, to cause to arrive, to conduct, convey to. Vide anr§ou 
eoo0S, batak, same as .00d05; ¢.v. aes 
* 8105, btuik, to incite, instigate, induce to; to urge, stimulate; request 
, to; to attack; ‘to fight, contend. Cf. Burmese, ofo5, tuik. : 
* Zi degls, btuik p-’ow, same as M05, first meanings. Vide cgi, 
680 
cys, bton, to teach, instruct. Vide coin 
+ go5, bdah, to cause to be, to make, to create; Haswell, oft gos, is more 
0h common. | | 
Zi vié, bdun, to cause to receive, to hand, to pass; to give, bestow. 
* ecoods, bapek, to cause to be destroyed, to ruin, destroy; to rout, put 
to flight. Vide cody 
* #3, babai, same as 3, g.v. 
* o§, ba buiw, “to cause to Icok at,” to show. 
, 03065, babnik, to trade. Vid¢ 805: 
* 03, babwai, same as 3, q.2. ; } 
* excogS, babwai.lwen, in due course, in regular course, in regular 
order, successively. Vide 93sog&n : ee , 
es), bama, to suckle. Cf. 002, esedd, &, edi 
o9209, bama tah, same as ooo 
wg bamey, to suckle. 
» bamau, to suckle. 
pe bamau tah, to suckle. 
eg:, bamnah, a brahmin, probably from Sanskrit, brahmana. Vide gz 


x & &F & 


PARTI] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 191 


* 086, 85, bawuih, bwuin, to surround ; cf. Haswell in 3 iS Cf. 
_ Burmese,..9&:, “wuin? (pron, wain’). | 
* ee bahek, fear; to fear; to frighten; 060 9, cogooo5i 
* eed, babat, a’ ‘measure; to measure. Cf. Haswell in ¢og205 ee08, a 
“measure; 93808... aozoJeoo5—“ the great ocean... which is 
measureless,” ae (A),. folio ku. Vide oo5i acts 
va, Buddha, the Buddha; in some compounds, abbreviated to. 08, 
budh: ice o 
* ce5, bok, a companion, companions; follower, “partisan ;. tribe, clan; 
class, kind;  o§ cBjo§ cod 89288038" some ‘persons, who- were 
_ followers of the heretics,” Dhd. 159. 18; ¢gg:§§o§ce5q—‘‘ (of) what 
is termed ‘ Buddha,’ there are four sede! Dhd. 34. 12... Cf. goSu 
* geo8cooc§os, bodhiyapaluih, the spot around the Bo tree, Vide oo§ody _ 
t 95, bnat, measute, scale, standard ; size, extent, quantity, the exact 
quantity; the derived meanings are:. about (so much, ‘so big, etc.) ; 
so (much, long, etc.);-it is equivalent to the Pali, matta and mattam, 
at the end of compounds; ccobgodel8oj—‘‘during the measure of 
two or three days, to the extent of two or three days” = for two 
or three days, Sudh.- 4. 21; BgoSq$oor—“ knowing the measure or 
extent or standard, of others virtues,” Dhd. 59 73 g08 por 8—" the 
quantity of 1,000 persons,’ one thousand persons, S.B. 16; 9080 
_ .8&3—“ the extent or measure, of so much,”: this much, so much, 
about so much, Dhd. 299. 11, equivalent to Pali: ettaka’ (Dham- 
mapadaatthakatha, 293) ; a the measure ‘of that,” that much, 
so much,. about so much,” Dhd. 48. 5; $igoSoacg—* more than (9) 
the old measure,” more than bafore, much more, S.J. (A) 37. The 
form goS, cnat, is also found at Sudh. 28. t5. . 
gc, bnuh, a spear. ¢go05u 
805, bnik, merchandise, goods. 
g:, bnah, a brahmin. g:{¥, a brahmini, brahmin woman. Cf, eg 
* (5, bray, rain; this is a 16th century form; the modern form is @u 
+ @, bru, to make a noise, to sound; to resound, be sounded, etc. 
{¥, brau, a woman. | 
_* (Soos9/§, brau fiah dun, “a woman of the city,” a citizeness. 
* (¥88§, brau mimin, a nurse, Vide 8881 
yd, blaai, young; a young man. 


192 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ENOL, Ht 


¢ 3)05, bluik, to sink; to destroy; be destroyed. 


mp 


we EF op 


we RO 


Pa 


ge3, bwak, a follower, the follower of a person of rank; from #95, by w 
infix. Haswell, cooodn . . 

paBoos, bwak kar2u, same as ¢odi 

>, bwai; for full explanations see plaque tog. Cf. v, eb, BQu 

Rosas, bwai tarah, in cetail, in full, 7 EXPenss, 

Go0:; bwai dacah, against (the wind, water, etc.}. 

Ea01p0, wal i poe kya, against the wind. 

2803, bwai daih, toward, towards (the east ete.}. 

a06, Owai dhaw, snaar se to the Law,” rig tieousiy 

2, bwai bwai, same as 

BycegS, bwai bwai lweh, same as ehsacSs 


aioe bwuik, .in circumference; 0, @ circumference. C7 
Haswell, oo805, circumference. 


* 893, bwal euhah outside, without (direction’, . 
Sac0§05, bwai aluik, accordingly, owing to, of one’s own accord, Vide 


4 ae 
ww 


% 
™ 


3 


seotodu 


bhava, a state of existence, existence. 


Shaw.ak, follower. Vide godu 


, dha, monastery. f@/1, vihara. 
%$, bhau, existence, state of existence; dwelling, world. Paz, bhava. 
0, ma, first—a verbal assertive particle corresponding to the Burmese, 


oop; in this sense the sentence is generally ended by q or sq, two 
emphatic assertive particles; but itis also often used by itself; 
2989 8aa28605008-—"! thus (as shown above) the sub-commentary explains 
it), hd. Ba. 2s oy)... oof BofgosedeosaG Sea$08 gqodhquogoSar08 
mGaodaqSc}o03—" the Blassed Buddha . . . with reference to the laymen 
who observed the nig beanie and the sabbath, told the Bhiri- 
datta-jataka,” S.B. 1; the first o before 59§ = “who.” do)Soon3c00$9 
§ Goo mySeho8 8 ooh yee ae only in the city of Safikassa, do the 
Blessed Buddhas come down from Tavatirhsa,” Dhd. 63. 6; 309 
vpgefogolaazco.gu cdcgdego§ spohogs gocos$—" in. this fifth instruction, 
he taught (this) one statement,’ U.O.i<. 23. 9. In interrogative 


‘sentences, the sentence ends with cop, the interrogative particle, and 


© remains equivalent to the. Burmese, 299, in its abbreviated form 
before the interrogative particles coor and 3953; that is, o . . . cop 
== Burmese, . . . 206003, . . . oosabs; gojodgscte cyOSeep—" why are 


PARTI]. | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 193 


you fleeing ?”, ‘Sudh. 14.14; @sllozd>007|Seep35— where, Sir, do you 
come from?”, Sudh. g. 3. ©, as an.assertive, is most often used with 
-g.and ccp&, two emphatic assertive particles closing sentences, which : 
are the equivalents of the Burmese, cogS: and co05, so thato.:. q, 
'o,.. 6S = Burmese, .. , cocog§s, .. « 200008 ; Ba9r0504 corSaon23008)8 
soobQodfogeaqnaffe—“ the king,. seeing (this), gave many gifts to 
‘those four warriors,” Sudh. 23. 4; ° cgocped og 05[Ygo§8soq—* O, king,: 
this little girl was my mother,” Sudh. 9. 14; oScosaaSofcoroGSooscep& 
—‘people praise: patience,” U:0.K. 44. 6; Qod§ddoa109/§ cop&E—" for 
this reason I_had.to come,” :Sudh. 9. 6. ‘Bicond it is a’ participial 
particle ; it forms participial nouns ; og3:, the purifying, purification 
= Pali, vodanath, P.T.; ©935q3j, the being righteous, righteousness, - 
“6, St.; - aGogodeo08, - the ees: Fay abusing, -P.T.; of§& B, ‘the. making 
known, informing, P.T. ; 9} oc805,° at the time af going cut, when 
he or I went. out; oe in the ‘going, while ‘going ; “syoqd oog/§ BS 
‘from Buddha’s arriving,” Sudh. 1g. 7. [tis also much used as-a 
‘connective particle, and is nearly equivalent 1 to a relative: who, which, 
that ;oloSeoScooBuce BooSaa—" the. relic resting. in the Mahiyadgana 
cetiya,” Sudh. g. 4; REcoeBo8oc8—" according to the words which. 
our lord (Gavathpati) spoke,’ Sudh. g. 11; BaleGcdoo§—" earth of 
“the place which the rhinoceros ate,” that is, earth from the place 
where. the rhinoceros ate, Sudh. ‘fo. 16; . eQ80 ood§jeo:—“ a person 
~ who eats the debts of others,” that is, one who lives. by. borrowing, 
A.V. 12 (adhamanna) ;  sooo$ 63006 008 Bas —". the deva. who drives 
‘Indra’s chariot,” A.V. sed (Matali) ; aa0§5iRo80q1—" having reached 
the age which is clever,” or, ‘of cleverness = the age of reason, Dhd. 
145. 17; _ cogenjorporaS off EcBsnooSea0g3/§y$—“. Omniscience, which 
‘grasps (everything) without indistinctness (= thoroughly),”. Dhd. 
_ 30. 24. From some of the above examples it will be seen that. o 
may also often be translated by a present participle.  From_ its: 
- quasi-relative use, © is also used.to form adjectives; words such as 
‘the following are often. met with in the dictionaries :—oe0jo5, wet;. 
of, excellent ; RE, many. 5 ose5, great, large; o9§, firm, steady. ° 
-_ 9, ma, father. is er 3 i . 
* 0, ma, you, your, Sir; also: fellow, “chap”; Gs00070Sao26ep—" why, Sir, 
do you steal my: cattle?”, S.M. 43. Gos Fd BoS§acos 07. 5a02—"' the 
owner of the bullocks said, ‘that fellow . has ‘stolen away my 


a5 


194 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [vou i 


t 


* 


% 


* 


Saat ad 


bullocks,’ ” SM. 4; $0g— this cattle of yours,” S.M. 4; o§en 028% 
", —you, fellow! this hen... ,” S.M. 8 Cf. ga 
gi, fe ah ‘piepery: ‘ma gah, if, used by itself at the end of the 
clause, and also in conjunction with 008 or co8q, 008 being placed at 
the beginning and gs at the end of the clause (wide 05); it means 
also literally; called, named; hence = to wit, namely; cogoo8g 
003—“ Sudhammayati, to wit: Sadhuim (Thatén),” . Sudh. Iz. 16; 
god 0898 agigs ayScop— why did he receive the name, to wit, 
‘Buddha?’”, Dhd. 30. 7; it is also used emphatically, to lay a 
stress on ‘the preceding word; ojopsdaqé[o} gaqeolocogecg|S 9/§8p8 o8coa 
—‘Sir, will the Buddha’ Maha-Gotama come to our city?”, Sudh. 


12. 25. 
gg, mgah wwa’, what is termed ...., what is called, in regard 
to ..., is often’ strongly emphatic and need not be actually 


translated ; s00lge Grac§eooSanagolguicogiyrasscobyhofSsc02$q—" in regard 
te hell, if once one as (into it), very difficult it is to get free 
again,” U.O.K. 14. 

a8, mgah gah, ‘same. as e. These two expressions are equivalent to 
the Burmese, .cqoogpoon, hii safi ka® 

offo§05, Majjhimaduih, Majjhimadesa, or the Central Region, the 

: region in India where the Buddha’s mission was accomplished. 

06, maf, to wait; to watch over, take care of; to observe. 

o& maf, the red deer. Cf; Burmese, 98 saman; Old Talaing,. ae8, 
raman, | _ 

e693, mah blaai, a young man. Vide y> | | 

0&3, mafi mai, to watch over, take care of. Vide du 

08%, mah mwai,: same as o&dr | 

005, mat, the eye. 


-eaoS, manat, to be angry; see mdac, plaque No, 180, 


oojo, ma twah gah, literally = “said,” that is' to say, to wit, as 
fallcie corresponds to the Burmese, cyoocop§n accom gi$ora09$ (goo o 
oRor caogggest ascoaoe2, ete.—''the hosts of Mara are five-fold, as 
follows: Mara the god, passions, etc.” 

00382, ma. twah pegah, same as’ 20301; this expression is found in 

~ Inscriptions of the 15th and 16th centuries. : 

o§, man, M6n, the M6n or Talaings ; also found written eed and coo$n 

ocpos, marat = ocph = maharaja, great king, king, your Majesty. Cf. 
Haswell, 092051 


PARTI] | -TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 195 


—0$, masun, five. a ; 
* ccoval, mahajan, the people. .Pa/i, mahajana. 
eo, ma, Mara. _ | one | 
- o2, ma, to suckle. Vide 02, ced, di | . _ | 
* oo, ma, a particle meaning: as. to.., as te». . it is as follows, with 
regard to... , as regards... , concerning . . . ; this is probably 
a loanword (fei the Burmese, 92; mha, anil is often found so: 
written; s08gloSg2—" as to the meaning it is as follows,”. Dhd. Io. 9; 
a8gloSe2, Dhd. 302. 28; s8gldoloogoo—“‘the meaning of this 
stanza is as follows,” S.J.-15.- It also shows a present contingency — 
with reference to the future, and is conditional and emphatic; it 
corresponds to the Burmese, og&oo2:, qoors,, lhyan ka’*, ma kai; 
_ opode§osBoo—" if you wish to know,” Sudh. 27. 8. | 
+ 8, mi, mother; it is also used as a term of euttee to women: madam, 
| ladies, miss. 7 | 
8§, min, to hear. | 
8§, mi, harpoon. Cf. Burmese, 9, m hin’, 
Ft Ba 288, micchaditthi, having false views, ‘heretieal, a heretic. © 
* 805, mit, a friend. Pad, mittam. 
* 89, mitah, a nurse, | 
* 83° mini, a-nurse; a maid. _ 
* 88§, mimin, a nurse; an ayah. 
* 88§edj, mimin bamau tah, a nurse. 
* 80009,-mi bama tah, a nurse’ 
* Beéoj, mi bamau tah, a nurse. sg” on 3 
+9, muk, the face; hence: in froiit, RelOees -at; also, one side (of 
| a flat thing). Cf. Pali, mukna.. 
* gadeno8, nuk kew, to have a bright, pleasant, feed see 
- gogol, mukkhaw4, the face, countenance. Cf. Pali, mukha. 
t 905, the end, of anything ; nose; aiso cosoh) 
@ ma, an interrogative, what?, the sentence ending with oe wh. 
cep, wherefrom . . . ?;) gil... cop, in what place,:-.. ?; ¢ 
. ap, how much. .°. ?, iss written o8 and 98 
* 3, oer . look, look at, behold the more’ common form now is 3; 
| itis not generally used as a.verb by itself, but as the second member 
of compounds, after verbs of “looking, considering, thinking, are , 
anne care of, sete, : aie much like the Burmese, (9, ' krafi 


106. _.:.. EPIGRAPHIA’ BIRMANICA’ [VvoL: 1 


* d, mai, to have, possess ; generally not used. by itself, Hii with te 
negative co = 3.(y.v.); vide 
* 3, mai, one; the common form. is a SGiaLt os" tke ‘a man 
with (only) one eye,” . Dhd.’. 54. 
6&, maf, a gong; cf. Burmese, cor, moa. 
-g:, mah, without, otitside. | 
§08,, mnih, a man, sometimes found written 308, mnis. /é/z, manussa. 
* SoSo0g05, mnih.kamlat,: “man-thief,” a thief. Se 
gil, mnum, who has, which has, having; an abbreviation. of o{ug[ode3, et 
- cetera, and so forth, and other . . . ;: ogg g[ccd.f en o88gh—flowers, 
fried grain (eo) and other. ching prope ees — ie for oblation, 
A.V..6 (aggha), 
g?, mnah, thou, you. 
(G08, mramaw, fragrance, perfume. 
* (08, mramaw, benefit, profit, advantage ; (j¢028. Vide sou 
* 953, mlak mwai, to look, look at, Cf. Haswell, gSoo5u 


+ 3,-mwai, to look, look at; one, 1. “See-under 8; only, aloné ; cur8a008g0 
§o$c050928258q—“ only the Bodhisattva could answer their questions,” 
S.B. 113. comegg—he alone, S. B. ig; -as for; .': 3 Baas for 
me, S.B. 12. 


* & mwai, to have, possess ; not used by itself in this Sense ; but only in 
the négative: co}, oggn Vide &, cQu 

“* go, mha, same as 09, third, g.v. ; 

g2Qo5, mha smit, the great ocean the sea, Pali, mahasamudda, 

* oo, yaw, if; stands at the beginning of the clause ; it is often followed 
“by the ‘slightly emphatic 9, -@8q ; and in ‘this form,” has been 
registered by Haswell; it’ is’ often reinforced by’ the other condi- 
tional, gt, which comes at (he énd of the clause, thus giving oS 

prior Sq 2... gt; wd§oos§—very well, Zt, “if it be like 
that, ” equivalent to the Pali tena im, Dhd. 160.. 23; this expres- 
“* sion is’ very frequent: 

* /-e9c00005, yassapat, fame, renown, honour, bajoyment, ° bliss. Probably 
from Pali, yassa, patti: - : 

* 00, ies if; its uses are like those of oS, so that we have 059, ood 

: - 8, wodq . g, 
‘Oo; yal tiviess; sicknéss'; ‘to be ill. Generally siictiued to. names of 
~ °. ‘sicknesses, as &o}, inflammation ; Qos, a swelling, ete. © ~ 


PART i] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 107 


* DoS, yai- pimah, grief ; sorrow, - 
“+ 200205, yok, to raise, lift up, promote, exalt ; the more common form is 
ar 
+ cooocksal, 'yok dok, same as GO0305 ; osagndBoo§§ovas Seal! he ‘promoted 
the Lord’s religion,” Dhc, 151. 26; the more common form is oo5 
Boi 
¢ oo, yah, to shine, give light ; to-morrow, at “dawn ; . canfeooo 8S sor0§ 
“at dawn, all the four pandits,” S. M. 30.5 
008, yah, an emphatic ‘closing particle ; o§cBcooa0c8co1—she, ‘swooned, SJ. 
| 155, 8 Sooo} qoor—" our king has become a monk,” S.J. (A) 61; it 
is somewhat akin to q and ¢cpS (7.2), but is more emphatic. 
cora0, yah gata, the morrow. Vide oo 
‘805 and o§oS§o5, yuik and yuik. duik, same as. ‘eos8; “eooSes, Gd. 
ol, ymu, a name 
* oojcgo, ymu yma, a name. 


b, ya, any, whatever, who or what... soever. a 
03, ywa', yes; sign of the vocative = 0! as. used in addressing ‘persons, 
“0, king, etc. ” : 


t a, ra, an assertive closing particle ; ‘it often stands instead of the rere 
““to be”; 2§8q—'I am the king” ;. epoBaocdgasgcRa5q— Sirs, 
. this jewel is-my (jewel),” Sudh. 19. 3; .it is a sign of the impera= 
tive; it is also slightly emphatic, and is often used in the middle of 
a senience laying a stress on what precedes, but not closing the 
sense of. the whole sentence as it does when used as an assertive 
closing particle ; — a36000$0 8cBqo58 098 a050988qn_oo.co08 coo—'' my. son 
Bhiridatta gave us this jewel, is it not?”, S.B. 23; Goda$Zotghogé 
: a0 209 §qiooo0q/E |aaggec4 0{qa—"‘ because he.-was. born on the-.shore of 
the sea, they gave him the name of ‘Sagara-Brahmadatta, ” SB. 4, 
the same slightly emphatic stress. is found in such frequent expres- 
sions as voSq, if; o3q, if;  olg, if; -when;- mae if, indeed’ if, 
although, etc. | 
+ 995, rat, a precious thing,.a precious stone, a jewel; as an adjective, 
magnificent, splendid. | | at 
*  spanr{od, kajagruih, the city of Rajagaha (Pali); es the Sanskrit, 
Rajagrha. : . | 
* 88, risi, an anchorite, Sansfrit, rsi. 


198 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — [vou. 11 


+ 98, rufa, shed, booth, ats building ; of. Burm., ‘ ruth, shed, booth, 
godown; 4, rum’, court-house. | 
* oo, ref, to carry, convey; wear. . 
* cq&o/$, rea tlun, .to bring, Ut. “to carry and come? 
ep, ro, the sign of the indirect question, Area: an answer. other than 
“yes” or “no.” Vide con 
¥ eopS,-rof, a sign of the future; it is used also in all the senses of =) 
(g.v.), except, perhaps, the last. 
* 4, rau, way, manner, fashion, wise; 49, in this manner, thus; like, as; 
{8oqg4—rlike the earth, Dhd. 54. 25; 4{c2086—like Tavatiina, 
Dhd. 16. 7; at U.O.K. 35. 10, it translates the Pass, yatha, 
g, rdf, to look, look at, behold. 
* 96, ran mwai, to take care of; to look, look at, behold: 
qt, rah, the country; a country ; kingdom. 
G6, ruin = g& 
805, ruih, every ; 90805, dd. 
cood},, lak pluai, hitting with the fists, boxing. 
codecs, lak batak, upside down, 
* cooy$, lak yan (pron. laksan), a mark, sign, characteristic. Sanskrit, 
laksana. 
* codl, lagam, to step, go, walk. 
og, coo, Ica, laca, a lake, 
00g, gat, lata, Ita, above, over, upon. ~ 
co9S, ladath, ladam, to pacify, calm, quiet; subdue; eeateea 
* @FemarsmareBanseodqic} 6A5q)5—" one day, the districts rebelled ; the 
minister went, pacified them and returned to the capital, ” Dhd.. 
159. 5. 
o§, lan, to go. about, wander, itinerate ; - ceo baBq—" ‘he caused the 
gong to go about,” he proclaimed by beat of gong, S.B. 10 = Ja 
VI, 167. 23, bherirh’ carapesi. 
_ &, Ipa, do not, don’t ; often abbreviated to ‘on 
00, lapah, a wave. 
095, 1 pik, to divide lengthwise, to halve ;. to tear or cut open. 
co§o, lapuik,. to be torn out, uprooted; to tear out, tear off, -root out. 
cofo5, la buit, to cast, throw, fling. C/. Haswell . = “a stone’s throw. ‘si 
coo$, laman, ‘to invite. Cf. oofs 
* oo805, fod, lamit, Imit, to create. Vide $BcSe 


* + 


* 008, 


“ 


ee He * 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 199 


a 


* 


+ 


* 


*x 


co8o5y08, lamit bdah, to create; Vide B8o5gosn 
cogé, lamnafh, breadth, width; across, crosswise, athwart. 
covo05, layat, to touch; strike: 
co§35, larui’, to cry, screech, scream. Vide 3998, sccpou | 
coed, cocoS, lalarh, lalam, to be appeased, soothed, quiet, settled; to 
cease. Vide cadn 
co, law, to put, to place, keep, settle; it is not altogether, as Haswell 
has it, ‘a euphonic suffix”; it is vefy often used as an auxiliary 
after an active verb, though it is very difficult to make its exact 
meaning perfectly understood ; ‘this will, however, become clear to 
persons acquainted with Burmese, when | say that it corresponds 
exactly to the Burmese verb com, tha®, when similarly used. It 
seems to imply that the action expressed by the preceding verb has 
been done, and that, in so far, it is settled; the following literal 
translations may perhaps help in catching the idea: wood, “he 
noted (in his mind) and epi”; 88c08—“we heard and kept”; 
ag2$ coS—"he asked (about something) and kept”; 098 ago ce 
co§— the good deeds which you have done and kept.” 
law kuiw, let; coS0¥§q—let it be !; coSc$cow:6092—let him first go 
back to-morrow, G. pi. g; QoSso20}g2g3/$Qa0d10§$§cof0§q—having died, 
let him be reborn in the four hells!, Dhd. 18.2. Let alone, don’t 
mention ; gRagiSohg coSo¥q—let alone this continent of Jambudipa 
(implying : not only in this continent of Jamheeips: but even also 
in the other three), S.J. 25. 
cosaoS, la-’eh, patience, long- suffering ; ees | thid. Khanti, Pak. 
coo, lap, gain, receipts; gift. Pai, labha. | 


089 


co2S00002, lap sak, a present, gift. Pdé/s, labha, sakhara. 


Scr, liyah, the morrow. 

oqo5, lukau, during. | 

695, lup, to enter, go in. Cf. coords | | 

coo, le, also, and. C/ Burmese, oopds, 1a fi” (pron. é°, and in colloquial, © 
18). Vide coo8s 

cof, lef, to be destroyed, lost; effaced. 

ac0&8105, lef bluik, to be destroyed, lost, obliterated. — 

e005, lep, to be skilled in, know, understand ; to-be accustomed to. 

coo8, lew. also, and; scon 


200 _. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


ceoss, ccd, le’, a stick, staff. . — 

6009, lo, to roll over and over. , 

¢ ccoom, loka, the world;. the people; pertaining to the world; worldly. 
Pali. | | a 

* ccoomsolooog, loka wohdra, a common or colloquial expression, as used 

by the people at large. Pal7. | | 

coor, lot, to fall down. _ 

~gcor0008, to roll over and over, round and round. Vide 0008, ogdu — 

stor, lon,.to go beyond; to exceed ; hence: very, very much, 

. _ extremely. C7, Burmese, 098, Iwan; 11th century Burmese also 
Wrote ccorys . 
t oe lop, to enter, 6 ‘in. Vide oo&u. 
lah, ‘flat. 

t “85, luik, to come up, rise, arise, appear. 

* God ghi8, liik ktuiw, to come up, arise, appear, originate. 

* oGoScor, luik lau, same as oQodu . 

of, ‘lmim, one thousand. 

+ og, liu, to be lonely, solitary; to have eee bé enipty-handed, be 
empty; be deprived of, be without; 09 ccgiso2giS—“'a body: 
become lonely of its head,” Jepaved of its head, A.V. 57 
(kabandha); cegi—empty-handed, L.B.C. 28. 14; — 9[SogSc08053 

“ qoSoq|so0q—"' Tavatirnsa was full, and hell became empty,” S.M. 2; 
-G. pi. 4 has the couplet, ogjoa$, with the same meanings. 

&, lauiw, some. 

0, Ima, a hunter. 

* 805, Imit, to create. Cf. $808 ) 

* GoSyo, Imit bdah, to create. Cf, $8oSyotr 

* coi, |mu, a crest, diadem. 

-* 60398, Imow, to incline, bend, stoop; to incline in mind, feel inclined to, 

Of. 30028: 

+ cogs, coor, lyah, layah, light; ray; sunbeam; from oo:, to shine. 

* co Iwen, regular, successive, in succession;. order, sequence, regular 
order. Cf. Haswell, oo, §cogéu 

ol, wa, time; one time, three times, etc.; of; Sl, many times, repeatedly, 

+ olodoleS, wat gat, very difficult; a quarrel; to quarrel; ‘dispute; 00SoloS 

oloSofcogoo(—"' picked up a quarrel with the Buddha,” Sudh. 66, 14. 


® 


+ 


PART 1] | TALAING PLAQUES: ON THE ANANDA 201 


* 8995, wiskaw, the fig tree. Cf Haswell, 8: 
cof, wen, to play; to gamble, | 

* coS, wen, to avoid, eschew; hence: to except ;. yoQcoSeo} ggoQoS—" the 
avoiding of eyil deeds,” Dhd. 54. 3. Bathe 4, 

* cof, wen, to go about, wander, roam; to ramble, go for a walk; to go 
to; to visit;  BBoSao2c0&QaBo5fLog>—"1 will first go home,” 

Sudh. 3. 18; 07j&0&§}—“ come and visit us, it is not far,” S.B. 

25: | 

* co&, wef, in vain, to no purpose, for. nothing; (gSecao5008 oficoBp9t003. 
—‘‘having amassed property, shall I give-it for nothing to them?”, 
G. pi. 14. a. 

* coosd, Wesantaw, King Vessantara. 

+ 805, wuit, to forget; to swoon. 


+ 9, wwa’, this; can often be translated by ‘“the”; is often simply a sign 

| of the nominative case. 

* o0, sa, as a verbal prefix, very often denotes, fist, the future, for exam- 
ples see under plaques 64 and 85; it séems to be an attenuation ‘of 
the old prefix o&; s(a) is also used on the Ananda plaques and 
Pagan inscriptions with a future sense, and is very common. in 
the modern literary language, in which we find also the form 48, 
si. Second—It has also sometimes a causal sense (O.T. «), for 
instance, g§o5, ‘‘ cause to sleep,” to put asleep; 3, “to cause to 
know,” to make known, tell, inform’; og, “to cause to do or make”; 
agsoo§, “to cause to return,’ to send back, ete: Third—Very 
often, it does not appear, from the context, to have any particular 
force or sense; 69, kerh, to hold, or 9g}; 02, to say, or og; 80, 
to descend, or o§o5; &§, to sew, or &; 805, to sleep, or od; a4, 
must, or ogt; 005, to press, squeeze; shampoo, or 2905, also cocoled, 
etc, It is the context alone, therefore, which reveals. the future, 
causal or mere accretion; in word. for word translations from the 
Pali, this prefix, 0, 08, is most frequently used: to render a Pali 
future, and o (= <4) often a causative verb. Fourth—In many 
words, it is not a prefix, but- an integral part of the word, in which 
cases the oo has, in colloquial, become oo, -h, or been dropped 
altogether: 22, house (collq. 03), with the further loss of ¢; <8, to 


- 26 


208 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. ~ fvon. 1 


take sieasires in, be happy, sleep (collq, <8) ; 2 copper (collq. 
ch); 93, a leaf (collq.:og).? 
0005, sak, to be without, be destitute, of, almost always followed by © 
(with) = ov0%09, osBlu 
t agseoS, skalen, to cause to ‘return. or go back. - 
* 3, ska’, grey (of the hair); used only in the compound ; soo5g}, grey hair. 
+ 05, skit, to bite, will bite. Cf Burmese, o§o5, kuik (pron. £a??). 
t og305, sket, to take, will take. . 
tt og% sketh, to grasp, take in the hand, clinch ; colloquial, cS, kem,- 
tt cgi, sketh tai, to grasp; grasp, grip; power, influence, control; §§ 
caor§ oqSsoreqioeG0GoS§—" although the son 1 had gone into the power 
of death,” Dhd. 12. 8. . 
tt og (08, ‘sgut, to be cut, cut of ; to. cease, come to an end; to be scarce; 
what is cut, cut off = an interval to judge, sentence, condemn to, 
‘pass a verdict. - | 
it op 8ago08, sgut sw&t, to be cut; to cut; be scarce ; to decide or 
settle a question, a doubt,. a‘case at law. we 
ops, sgah, to say. 
t 009, sagwa’, to get, obtain. See ander Qu cogin 
oS san, a monk the monks as a body, the clergy ; an abbreviation at 
next. 
* ‘cond, saaaha the clergy. Pali 
. 085, safiruih, to help, aid, assist, as a king a subject; or a monk a 
: layman, in accepting an offering of food, etc., so that he (the layman) 
may acquire merit thereby ; BO cp tess S008 BoSeg 1g Bory —! the king, | 
saying, ‘I will assist: this pannnin ” Dhd. 96. 13 ;. ecocor§$o8 . 
9h 99RIRGOASABaERS Seaqr—" the thera ‘Sariputra (saying), on 
person shall I assist to-day ?’”, Dhd. 96.24. From the Sansé&rit, 
sahgraha. Cf, Burmese, 2," sangruih. . . 
+ 03, sca, to eat, will eat. | | 
+ 805, scih, to descend, go down; ‘will descend. 
" + Gogod, see hi, same as oQosn eS 
+ fé, sjit, to sew. 
1 Under this letter, Oo “ayards which, in Haswell, do not appea'-wich the prefix 00, but wide 
the simple form only, are marked. with a dagger (t) ; those that are not registered at all are marked 


- as before with an asterisk (*)5 and those that appear. in Haswell with the prefix, or under which 
T have registered new meanings, are marked with two daggers... 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 203 


0008, sat, a fruit; to bear fruit. 
o00S, sat, a living being. Pda@/z, satta. 

* oooh, sat chu, a fruit; also, wg), sacchu. 

tt 833, stan, to dwell, abide, remain; to be worth, to cost; a worm, 
caterpillar. : 

_ p08, stik, to lie down, sleep; put to sleep. 
83], stu, the right, as opposed to the left; sometimes also, oy, tur. 
* Bicd, stuit, very, very much, exceeding, exceedingly. 
%:, sdah, must, obliged to; will have to. 

Tt ogl, saddha, faith;- kindly feeling ; to have faith; to ‘hee 8 kindly 
feeling, Palz, 
oo$co2§, santhan, form, the human form, oe person, Pali, etic 

+ 0, spa, to do, make; will do; cause to do. 

* sod, Sapaw, a garuda beutind, suparna; Old Talaing, supar. 

tt cosvlo5, sapot, to. press gently with the hand; to press; squeeze; 
shampoo,’ massage. Vide oodn | 

t 0805, sapuik, to’ pull out, tear out; will pull out. 

—* cog8o5, sapparuih, a good, virtuous man. /a/z, sappurisa. 

* of8o5, sapruih ‘(rth century) = aogQod | 

* conS sabhamn, a festival; cf. Burmese,. o0c0&% 

* ooooSec§, sabhan leh, a nautch. | 

0099, sambh§&, consort, ‘husband or wife. 

tt a2005q00, samahratha,. to be able, be capable of, competent to. “ to 
can.’ Sanskrit, samartha. I have not yet met with the meaning 
given by Haswell, “to consult together, to reason together.” 

* oo08, O98, samah, smah, like, the same, as, as if * 

* o918, samlua, high; something high; “yRBcooqanglSacnSoohoogyBBog 8— 
“some went up on something high. and threw .themselves down cn 
harpoons ‘and swords,” Dhe. 150. 23; $4 §ooge9] 30285 ogoog ER— 

“thence, the Buddha arrived at a high hill,” Sudh, AT. 19. 

* osgié, samluf, the head. Vide oc, goc&u 

oo§, sar, medicine; physician. Vide oof — : 

* oo9°5, sarak, to scratch, as a match; to scratah, with a style, stick, etc., 
to draw a line. Hasivell, oq08, Cf. oacti 

* ooo, sara, a deed, act, work. Vide ~ oocp5s, the ae /Talaing i 1S 
sinran. 


* 


of _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA = [VoL 


* woGcl8, sarah pap, an evil deed, an act of demerit. Vide oocpdal&: 

| Pali, papa, evil, bad. | 

* ooopS, saram, same as oog&u 

+t copSolS, sardm pap, same as ooqEold: 

* 93, sardai, a soldier, warrior, A.V. 192 (yodha) ; 09303, a warrior 
fighting from a chariot, A.V. 194 (rathanika). Cf. Burmese, 4, 
sirai. | te 

* 90805, saruith, to fall, fall off; fall down, as fruits or leaves from trees. 

208, saw, low; to be low, not high, 

* 5, saw, medicine, . drug; physician, doctor; 002 §, “a master of 
medicine,” a physician, A.V. 106 (tikicchaka) ; 0084/9, an old (41) 
physician, Dhd. 72. 6; . cog2$<08, to practise as a doctor; to 
doctor; to physic, Dhd. 172. 7 i 7 

t7 <§, ocd, sah, to untie; to answer. 

20093, sahaai, a4 companion, friend, Pa@/z, sahaya. 
3, $-a, to go; will go. 

tt g, s-ah, to be clear, be clean; to cleanse; to purify. 

* 299, $4, to ‘lay, put, place. 

tt 08, sak, colour; form, appearance; kind, category. 

0059, sak gah, “that kind,” lke that, thus. 
oS, sik wwa’, “this kind,” like this, thus. 

* 8-3, sik, why? for what reason? how? what? generally followed by 
0, 9 or of; S2ko8 008§ cap how doing (= how) did we get 
this (king) ?, S.J. 6:. 

* 8.5, sik, to stuff, cram, compress, make compact. Cf. Burmese, 086, 

sip (pron. the’&). | 

&e:, siggah, what do you say?- how do you say? SoS 3 e3, with 
assimilation 

og, sindhau, belonging to Sind, of Sind; a horse of Sindh; these horses 
were very much prized in ancient India, Pali, indore cgobf, 
a horse of Sindh. 

_* £586, sip glip, to attend respectfully on. 

* o8, si, a prefix denoting the future; see under oo: 

—™* eagles, sujjat, a jataka story; an assimilation of cgodac0o5 = Pals, 

sutta, discourse, and jataka. 

* soodaoos, sut Jat, see last. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 205 


* cof, seh, true; to be true, Dhd. 362. 10, L.B. 28. 14 
co5, sok, the hair of the head, | 
* codg3, sok ska’, grey hair; cooSosr 
* coon, soh, to pour; the more. common form is $5; 15th century 
inscriptions have sgoc5, sroh, and the modern oa is very 
near it: o§05, caruih, both with ~ infix. 
tt So, suik, happiness, well-being; to be easy, happy, douiforishlas Boao 
esnlicdegi bcd apd 4 friend who is the same in happiness, the 
same in trouble,” a friend in need, a friend indeed. Cf. Haswell 
under 805. Vide Goducoc$o5, is the same word with.oo (Old Talaing 
probably 84 or 84), prefix; 05 =. Pals, -sukha. 
—* 88, suin, to build; also with ry infix, (§8\6;- also written e928, Dhc. 
149. 13. 
* o8§ suin, the pandit Senaka. 
tt 93, suim, with; often joined to a verb by 9, when it forms adverbs 
which may often be translated by ‘‘while ... , tout en... ." & 
8 o§og coog a oe king even ‘teosby while sitting on the 
- elephant’s back... ,” S.J. 37. 
03, suim, all, whole. | 
* o8o5) suih, to pour. Vide cooovdu 
* 805, suih, the chest, breast. Haswell, £8105, sruih, with 7 infix. 
* Qodocfos, suih paluit, to extinguish, put out by pouring water; this 
expression is often used metaphorically. | 
8, sni, house; colloquial, 8v | 
* Rog §ogovos, shi tnunh krakat, a house with superposed roofs sur- 
mounted by a spire, palace; also the harem, seraglio. The 
Shwezigén Bell-inscription (16th cent.) reads: Qoo38GiocS: 
* ooo, shi cat, a place of confinement, jail; collg, 80205; see orodu 
tt Q25, sai dak, water-closet, privy; foeces, excrement; collq. 295 
tt -2, shi, tolook, look at; look for; to look askance, sideways; collq. §, 
hi; the form ¢{ is also found, Vide 2,8, os 
<&d,. shi mai, to look, look at. Vide ou 
&3, shi mwai, same as 40. Vede 
Gogh, shew, same as %; collq. ogi 
09, sna, the French-horn; a squirrel. 
36§05, sna krik, cotton, Vide (ods. 


+ &* F F ¥ 


206 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


09>, sna, the small square piece of leather or mat which the monks used 
to carry with them to sit upon, a seat. 

999, sna, the prefix o> + 32, more commonly written cm> (7.2.).. 

035, snak, a sword. — 

039, - snam, a year; 9d. 

993, snadai, a linchpin Vide 93, opdn 


* oda086, snaal kanhan;. ogd036, ogdoZS, 03536, for all these see gd 


ogdqod§o3, sndai muh ri kwi, “the linchpin at the end of the axle 
of a cart,” simply, a linchpin. © 
9305, o005, smat, samat, small, young; a child’ 


9 05fg, smat brau, a young woman, a girl: 


ao, smah, to be. the same, be equal to, be the same as. 
298, smaw, under. 
3602, smaw ky a, the north. 


<; sma, a craftsman, a worker in, one skilful in any craft or art; not 


_used.alone, but. placed before the word descriptive of the craft ; 

also written, g>. Cf. Burmese, 023, sama’. 

9266, sma jmin, “one skilful in’ stitching,” a tailor. 

992§, sm4n,. to ask (about something), enquire; a question, enquiry, 

232$.29 03, sman smuk, same as og2§u 

§o5, smik;. to wish, desire; colloquial, 8%, mik, 

§oig, smik gwa’, “to desire to obtain,” to wish, desire; also used for 
the infinitive: to, in order to; colloguial, 854, mikgwa’, 

8o5, s mit; to dedicate ; to stroke, touch.. 


' 8, smin, a king; prince; governor. 


- 


* 


9988, smin ’In, “King Indra,” the god he 
6g§, sran, shore, bank. Also o0& and i ? 
6§$, sran, silver; money. cov 

305, srit, a rhinoceros. o8cbs. — 

c(aj203, sroh, to pour. Vide coor, ofstu 


fice, sruih, the chest, breast, -o9c5. 


286, -slin, to. delight in, be happy; sleep; .collg. o8& 

a6, slun, high, exalted; to be-high; ajj&a2, to-raise. 

298, sla hy ‘to make’ free, cause to be. free,” to [ree ;. be free, vacant, 
unoccupied ; to bring forth; to be born. ae. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 207 


* opta8 4, slah gaw gnau, to bring forth, 
0905, swat, -smail; to be small. Cf. agoSu . 
06, swaw, Indra’s heaven, Tavatirnsa. Sét. svarga. 
* cogoShi8, swek jwuiw, quarrel; to quarrel; = coooSZ6 ivith w infix, 
o, ha, negative particle, no, not. ou 
wo, hat, a cubit, 18 inches. ) ze 
* 3, hmai (properly-ha mai), there is no, , there is not ; a + mai, 
gv. Ris also met with; see 3 
.0o2, ha, sign of the direct question, requiring a 

; answer. - 

* B05, hi dak, see and fot , B .. 

* 89, himu, named, called; to name, call; cooo$YRZecBqaq;q9§8—“‘'a daughter 
called Uttara,” Dhd. 296. 10; 9S %oc8q8g3;—“‘ a city named: Mithila.” 

- ¢¢ coé, heh, an emphatic particle laying stress. on the word, or clause, 
preceding it; cto&, even I, I myself. 

Tt 805, huit, ‘cause, reason; because; matter; circumstances ; result = 
fruit, benefit; old and medieval language, soo05, Pali, hetu; go%8 

. 6p—for what reason? why? c§oSg—for this reason ; odio 
—with reference to. 

* 3§, huin, often abbreviated to §, 2; this word denotes the accusative . 
case, or object. It is eesnealy used in word for word translations 
from the Pali, being placed before the Talaing word which translates 
a Pali accusative. But it is used also in current Talaing, where it 
denotes the ‘object, especially when it cames before the verb, being 
similar in this to §; wQ$sceacSeog;0S09208—" the minister who decided 
cases” =the judge, S.J, (a), folio Aha; 08(Eo9ol §acos$s2000593 
S&o}—‘‘ the king, repeatedly hearing the statement of the minister,” _ 
S.J. (a), folio 4a. | 

cB, huim, to speak, say. 
Sor, huim gah, to say. 

- &%, huim juim, to say, speak, tell. 

o8, hwa’, negative particle, no, not. .©, ha, 

_ tt 005, bat, a measure; to measure; try, test. 

* eoSgoS, bat bnat, measure, extent, dimension; to measure, 

* 02503208, bat knat, to measure, estimate. compute ; also agoSapo05w 

* e585, bat pruin, ‘o measure, measure strength with, vie. 

t “, ban, to braid. 


a: ‘or a “fo” for 


a EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [voL. It 


, ba,. two. 
- bai, one anna, one-sixteenth of a rupee. Cf. Burmese, 0, pal. | 
* et bak, to hoe; to spin, as a top; to peck, as a bird. Cf. Burmese, 


colod, pok, e: | | 
tt 85, buin, though, although; it begins the clause; often o3 is used in 
_ Conjunction with it; 8$ . . . ou . | 


908, buih, cool, cold; to be we] cold. 
+t 9, ba, you (disrespectful); it; fellow; gad, ba ma’, this fellow. 
4, bai, an elder sister. | | aie | 
t goo, bai gama, a nurse. Vide oon. 


PART 1] 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 


209 


APPENDIX C-2.. 


Under the words which follow, is, in the vocabulary, given grammatical 


information for the most part not in Haswell’s 


‘‘ Grammatical Notes.” The 


words are arranged alphabetically for easy reference. 


go>, used as a verbal auxiliary. 

god, adverb, pronoun. 

§B, a polite form of the imperative. 

oocoo$, verbal auxiliary. 

coooS, expletive. — 

of, verbal auxiliary. 

E26, as a numerat suffix. 

eg>, verbal auxiliary. 

Gj, verbal auxiliary. 

ol, olq, conjunction. 

8, demonstrative pronoun ; accusative 
case before the verb; an emphatic 
article ; nominative ee 

3, verbal auxiliary. 

qo5, verbal auxiliary.. 

@, numeral suffix. 

es, used as an imperative. 

pot, as an interrogative. 

ap, verbal auxiliary. 

o2§, emphatic particle. 

o}, the past tense; a connective = 
Pali, tva; a conjunction; condi- 
tional, —— 

.0$, verbal auxiliary. 

8§, verbal auxiliary. 

933, infinitive. 

§, verbal auxiliary. | 

os, verbal auxiliary; first, before the 
verb; second, after the verb. 


#6, verbal auxiliary. 

#6, verbal auxiliary. 

6906, future. | 

o (e), causal verbal auxiliary; inter- 
rogative; prohibitory. 

o8&, preposition. ‘ 


_ 00, gy, abstract nouns. 
9, forms adverbs. 


o, assertive particle ; participial parti- 
cle; quasi-relative particle ; forms 
adjectives 

©, pronoun; you; Sir. 

g!, conjunction; to wit; emphatic. 

g3Q, conjunction ; -emphatic, 

gt§, same as grgi 

oogos, adverb. | 

oojgs (15th century) = coja 

o>, explanatory - particle. 

%, verbal auxiliary. 


'%, verbal auxiliary; adjective; adverb. 
go om ) 


008, 0089, co8 . . . gt, conjunction. 


_ cos, emphatic cerininal particle. 


9, assertive particle ; imperative ; 

slightly emphatic in the middle of 

a sentence, and after conjunctions 
-and adverbs. 


eopS =-ar 


~~ g adjective ; adverb. 


27. 


210 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, I 


co8, verbal auxiliary. 08 = oon 
coo, 008, conjunction, adverb. o§, forms adverbs. 
6, article, “ the’; nominative case. e206, emphatic after a noun or a 
so, verbal prefix, future; causative ; clause. 
without special force. o8§, $, accusative. 


c8e3, what? why? how? 


PART gf TALAING PLAQUES GN. THE ANANDA 185 
%, nwath, to b, to have; also $i, num, mostly after prefixes co and on 
¢ co, pa, ta do, make; to cause, in this sense it is widely used as a causal 
prefix in the forms: fa, ~, da and 4 {t is an interrogative = why? 

low P; osgoogodup389scp—" how are the Paccekabuddhas?”, .:.J. 40. 


it is also a prohibitive = do not, and. probably an abbreviation of 
oy, gicdoa32$q—~do not ask!,. S.J. (A), folio fe; o§805—don't forget, 
G. pl. 7. 


* oo8, pak, to throw, fling (water, dust, etc.), Cf. Burm., ooSn 

“stcS pkanh rag, to bear, carry, wear; to carry out, perform, fulfil; to 
rule, govern; in word for word translations, it: very often translates 
Pali dhé@ret?#; 06896008 cooioo§$ co QI—'‘ who wears the 32 great 
characteristics,” Dhd. 30. 25; @&q&co8q ogiqeo—-"‘ fulfilled the two 
gandhuras,” L.B. 2, 1; og&qScoSgoS-—carrying a spear. 

o&, pkau, a flower, Haswell enters this word only as ‘‘ ({ae00$, garland,” 


but has the entry o (colloquial!. To open, as a flower, to blossom, 
to flower; cqvocs—a flowering tree, A.V. 164 (phiulla). 
* go, pkau sau, a flower. Haswell’s entry, ‘‘ooba5, a carver’in wood,” 
I have not met’ with, the usual expression is et 05 659 | 
* a(S, pkau srau = last, with » infix. | 
t osood, pa kom, to bring together, collect, gather, Bod amass ; 4Suco03 
coSofcoSeorw02—"' having amassed property, shall I give it a nothing 
to.them?”, G. pi. 14. 
o$8§ pan mif, to hear, listen to: Haswell, o&3& _ 
pod, pafifia p, a name, appellation, term; to name, call, term; to prepare; 
Pali, pafifiapett. 3 
cpoo, pafifia, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. Paiz. 
vo, pat, to press with the hand, squeeze. Vide oosolodu_ 
¢ g§, ooo§, ptan, patan, to build; to raise, exalt ; to make firm, ns 
unwavering; to restrain, controle (of the mind, feelings, etc:) ; 
establish; to appoint to an office ; Pie mae ene ee 
“i will exalt you to the state of chief queen,” Sudh, 2-4. 22; goy 
» 033,08 008.099 23 Qodqoooi —“‘ the queen, being unable to control 
her erick "1200: | 
&, ptam, to begin, begin with; et cetera, and’ so forth, and the like. 
Vide Bi | | 2 | 
&, ptath, to fulfil, practise. 


-- 


a 


*. 


24 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL, i 


3)05, cluik, fo sink; to destroy; be cio 


bwak, a follower, the follower of a person ef rank; from 405, by 2 
infix. Haswell, coocdi . 


* poof, bwak karau, same as godn 
bwai; for fuil explanations see plaque 199. Cf. 9%, ©2, 3Qu 


ATE 


cn °C 
oo ¥F 
ne 


Ne 


DWai Owal, Sainme as gi 


1 : . ms ~ = 4 Ae AAAS, 
ogc, bwai bwai lwem, same as egeoQ5u 


(7) 


co 


A Aa UR CI RR eg ae 


CW ay ay 


‘Ss 


, bwat taradk, in cetail, in full, e2 extenss, 
er dacah, against (the wind, water, etc.}. 


ry so Be ie a OR 
20109 bwai dacah £¥@, age nst the wind. 
$3 % sae eye = 4 
Bwai dath, to sa towards {the east, north, etc.}. 
byai dhaw, “according to the Law,” tustiy, mehteousiy 


~ 
ne 


dwai bwuik, .in circumference; §& 
Haswell, oof, circumference. 
bwai mfiah, outside, without (direction). 


oo, 2@ circumference. Cf 


Rac0§05, bwai aluik, accordingly, owing to, of one’s own accord. Vide 


sp0tadu 

bhava, a state of existence, existence. 
, shawak, follower. Vide godn 

a6. monastery. Pa/1, vihara. 


2%. bhau, existence, state of existence; dwelling, world. Plz, bhava. 
oe, ma, first—a verbal assertive particle corresponding to the Burmese, 


o295; in this sense the sentence is generally ended by q or scp&, two 
emphatic assertive particles; but itis also often used by itself; 
2059 foo205o05c08-—" thus (as shown above) the sub-commentary explains 
(it},” Dhd. 32, 2; mg50) .., oof BR gozo5eq20$ | EesGh08 gqoS$quaqoSao05 

mGsoSaqSa}oos—" the Blessed Buddha. . . with reference to the laymen 
shes observed the aa ees and the sabbath, told the Bhiri- 
datta-jataka,” S.B. 1; the first o before 59§ = “who.” daiSoonSo0039 
§ YovoEu ag Se308)§ oc! joe only in the city of Safikassa, do the 
Blessed Buddhas come down from TAvatithsa,” Dhd. 63. 6; 9 
apgelogelanzon2gu odiegdem 2§ sprhags gocos$.—“ in this fifth instruction; 
he taught (this) one statement,” U.O.ix. 23. 9. In interrogative 
 gentences, the sentence ends with cop, the interrogative particle, and 
® remains equivalent to the Burmese, 2095, in its abbreviated form 
before the interrogative particles cco> and 395:; that is, o . . . ecp 
== Burmese, . . . 206003, . . . cosadi; gotoSgrote cfgSScqp—" why are 


VOLUME Il PART Il 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


LITHIGC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


Edited by 
CHAS. DUROISELLE 


Superintendent, Archaeological Survey. Burma Circle 


The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Plates 


By CHAS, DUROISELLE 


(Reprint—1962) 


«1962 


SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY, RANGOON 


LIST OF AGENTS FROM WHOM GOVERNMENT OF BURMA 
PUBLICATIONS ARE AVAILABLE 


In BuRMA 


1. Crry Book Cius, 98, Phayre Street, Rangoon. 

2. PROPRIETOR, THu-DHama-Wavi PRESS, 55-56, Tees Kai Maung Khine Street,- 
angoon 

3. Propricror, Burma News Acency, 135, Anawrahta Street, Rangoon. 


4. §.P.C.K. (Burma) Ltp., 549, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
§. ‘MANAGER, UNION PusuisHING House, 94,°C” Block, Bogyoke Market, 


Rangoo 
6. Tae SECRETARY, PEOPLE'S LATERATURE COMMITTEE AND House, 546, Merchant 
‘Street, Rangoon. 
4. THE Burma TRANSLATION Society, 520, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
8. Messrs. K. Brn Hoon & Sons, Nyaungicbin, Pegu District. : 
U_Lu Gazz, ae MENT Law Boox AGENT, 34th Road, Nyaungzindan 


. Tue NaTionaL Boox DEPOT AND STATIONERY SurpLy House, North Godown, 
Zegyo,. Mand 
11. KNOWLEDGE Boon House, 130, Bogyoke Street, Rangoon. 
ra. AvA Hovsg, 232, Sule Pagoda Road, Rangoon. 
13. 5. K. Dey, Book Surpiicn & News AGENTS (In Strand Hotel), 92, ‘Strand 
Road, Rangoon. 
14. AGAWALL Booxsuor, Lanmadaw, Myitkyina. 
15. Sawg Ou Daunc Sores, Book Se.ters & Stationers, No. 267, South Bogyoke 
Road, Moulmein. 
16. U AUNO Tin, Your STATIONERY Stores, Main. Road, Thaton. 
17. U Maunc GyI, ‘Aunc BEoTHER Book Starz, Minmu Road, Monywa. 
r8. SHwenintHa Storzs, Bogyoke Road, Lashio, N.S.S.. 
19. = Cc. BaRva, PROPRIETOR, NATIONAL STORES, No. 16-17, Zegyaung Road, 
asaein. 
zo. Daw Avg Kyi, No. 42—44 (in Bazear) Book Stall, Maungmya. 
Zi. Dopama U ° "THEN, PROPRIETOR, Dosama Book STALL, Na. 6, Bogyoke Street, 
enza 
22. SMART AND MOookerpuM, No. 221, Sule Pagoda Road, Rangoon. 
23. Daw Kyi Kyr Sixt, Stationery Mart, Bo Aung Road (E-Road), ), Pyinmana. 
24, Zwe Lirerary Bowsr, No..195 (B-1), 33rd Street, Rangoon. 
25. B. ‘B. Bower, News Bupaa Boos STALL, 28-27; Merchant Street, Bassein. 


In INDIA 


1. Messrs. HicGINsoTHaMs Ltp., Post Box No. 311, Madras (India). 
2. Messxs..- sue (Wer Bans (1933) Ltp., Post Box No. 54—3, Esplanade, 


East Calcutta (West 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


Edited by 


CHAS. DUROISELLE 
Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma Circle 


The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Plates 


By CHAS. DUROISELLE 


(REPRINT—1962) 


1962 


SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING :ANO STATIONERY, RANGOON 


‘ico—K 4:60 ] 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


PREFACE 


For greater ease of reference and study, these plates have been published in 
a separate volume; this plan was preferable to that of having them inter- 
spersed in the text, where it would have~ been impossible, in most cases, to 
make them face the legends referring to them, Fronting each plate are 
short explanations, the first part of which is merely indicative of the episodes 
illustrated in the photographs; then follows a brief description, or rather 
indication, of the personages or objects in the photographs wheneyer necessary, 
for many of these scenes are quite clear by themselves. These ‘explanations 
and those in Part I are complementary to one another. 

Neither in Part I nor here have I touched on the technique of these 
plaques ; this subject will be discussed, together with the history of the intro- 
duction of glaze into Burma, in the preface to the “ Terra-cotta Plagues on 
the Petleik Pagoda, Pagan,” which illustrate the 550 Jatakas, and the letter- 
press of which is now in hand. I would, here merely observe that even-a 
cursory examination of all the sculptures and plaques of the Ananda reveals 
the fact that they all have been done by {ndian artists, mostly Indians from 
the south: the cast of countenance, the dresses—especially of gods, kings 
and queens—the headdresses, ornaments, ¢tc., etc., as well as the fechnique, 
are Indian. The epigraphs of that period fake it clear that Indians were 
then numerous at Pagan, Evidences are not ‘lacking, however, to show that 
these artists, especially in so far as the cast of the scenes was concerned, 
were guided and supervised by Talaings, no doubt monks: the clearest of 
these evidences consists of the short legends in Talaing at the bottom of the 
plaques. So that, in these plaques we behold cormbined the cultural influence 
of two distinct nations at the Burmese capital; nations whose civilization was 
much older than that of the Burmese, and-to’ whom the latter almost entirely 
owe their culture.’ 


CHAS, DUROISELLE, 
MANDALAY, 16th Fanuary 1931. 


1 In this connection, see my paper, “ Pictorial Representations of Jatakas in Burma,” in Archago- 
fogical Survey of India, Annual Report for tg1a-13, pp. 87-89. 


INDEX 


TO 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA, VOLUME II, PART II, » 


Lliustrations. 
NO, OF xO, OF 
PLATE PIGUAR PLATA rigvar 
Mucarakkua (Temira) JAtaka, McaparKui—conid. 
Nos, 1-37 When the king leaves the 
India invites — (to be re-born world B 34 
as 4 man) , ‘ I t He converses with the king 
Conception of — ' x 2 (his father) 9 35 
(His father) gives (him) the The hermit instructs hia dis- 
name of — . 1 4 ciples 9 36 
When they bring the thieves. t 5 — preaches the law to the 
The goddess instructs — a 6 (three) kings 9 37 
The trial with milk a 7 
The trial with cakes a 8 MaHAsanaxa JATAKA, Nos, 38-82 
They try _— with fruits 2 9 —= is conceived 9 38 
Theérial with toys 3 10 — comes out from the womb Lo 39 
The trial with food =. 3 i — plays with the children to 40 
They try — with an elephant. 3 13 _— questions his mother 10 4 
Thay try — with snakes 3 14 —- informs his mother (he will 
The test of the mime * 4 a5 go trading) . . to 42 
They try — with a sword 4 16 When the boat founders . 11 43 
They try — with conches a t7 Manimekhala, the goddess, 
They try <= with drums : 4 18 listens to —~ : ut 44 
They try — with lamps 5 19 The goddess carries — in her 
They try — with molasses 5 a0 arms _—  ! ae 45 
“ss ae The = chaptain examines 
Vhey try — with fiith 5 aa Janaka’s marks. . Ir 46 
The test oe oerpans 5 2a The anointment (as king) of — 13 47 
(Some and removateate (with ~ enters the (capital) city 13 48 
him) , . . 6 a3 — assigns their places to the 
The trial with nautches 6 %4 eeciais of state ( ‘ ny to ta 49 
Accession of — 6 35 call — or The queen. an) 
The charioteer comes to take —to be called ; 13 50 
away — . 6 26 — (holding the princess's 
(The charioteer) conveys ~~ 7 37 hand) ascends the palace 83 Br 
— descending on to the When — enquires. 13 5e 
ground : 7 a8 + gives his (gold) pin to the 
He tries his strength 7 #9 queen ; 3 53 
— is being adorned 7 30 The king goes out to his 
He questions the charioteer 8 ye pleasaunce . 4 59 
The charicteor invites — to — fooks at the mango (trees) 14 6e 
rear home 8 32 — sees the mango (tree) 14 6s 
The ting — sefids a message King — insteucts (the gen- 
to his mother and father . 8 98 ecalissimo) . 14 ée 


es 


Mankszataka—contd. 


King — lives in retirement 
(the two attendants) 
bring the almsbowl anes 
give it (to —) ; 
= shaves (his hair and —T 
— descends from his house . 
King — !saving the world 


The quecns beat (their 
breasts). 


The queen shows — the (tows) 
burning =—iy. 


— draws a line onthe gant. 


— seceives the instruction i 
Ngrada : 


— takes the meat 

— breaks tne (piece of) ment 
(and puts it in his bowl) 

The dlessed — eats the meat 

=~ converses with the child 

=~ geese the arrow 

we enters the turest 


Sime Jataxa, Nos, S3~108 


When ~ ip ruling Py 


Conception of ~— . : 

Births of = 

They (his parents) bathe and 
put — to skep : 

The supargas bathe= 

— leads (his parted) out sai 
their shelter) 

Ae — goes up the mbutivain 

— ministers to his parents 

=< intorms (his parents) he 
is going to enter the forest 

— enters the forest 

Aa — is drawing water 

The king shooting — ’ 

The king converses with — 

Piliyakkha weeps 

Piliyakkha does 
(ta —) 

When the ila tortnge (the 

parents) and shows (them) — 

Ths mother and father of — 
weep : ‘ 

(They) make an act of 
asseveration 

Then — (rises) bright (again) 

The king reverentially salutes — 


map 


Nim Jiraua, Nox. 10a-114 


(The fortune tellers) icok at 
Nimi’s (bodily) signs 


wats 


5 


ts 
1s 
ts 
16 


16 


16 
16 


17 
17 


7 
17 
18 
18 
18 


08 
9 


19 
89 


+9 
20 
20 
20 
20 
at 
a 
an 
at 


22 
23 


@2 


INDEX 
#0. OF 
ri@URE 
Nimi—contd, 
63 Indra is questioned by — 


Matali invites — (to eet sii 
the chariot) . 


Maitali 


asks which way 
(wishes to go) . 
— looks at hell 
—looks at the heavenly 
mansion 


— converses with Indra i 


— instructs (his) people (in 
the practice of the law) 


— sees (his) grey hair 
King — leaving the world . 


(ManosapHa) 


JAraxa, Nos, 115-209 


Conception of — 

Birth of — a 

When Indra_ gives 
medicinal herb (to —) 


— gives the intl (to as 
mother) Q 


The naming of — 


— gives ornaments (to the 
thousand children) 


= ‘plays with ‘es compan- 
ions 

(Mahosadha’s 8 companions) 
run to enter the rest-house 


—gives the gold (to a 
carpenter to build a hall) . 


— builds (plans and super. 
intends the building ” 
the rest-house , 


— constructs a tank . 
— decides cases 


— causes the (piece a meat 
to fall 


The case of the cattle 


The case of the necklace of 
thread 


The case of tthe cotton ca 7 
The case of the child 
Decidirg the case of the wife 


-— decides i= case of) - 
cart 


The riddle of the pate 
Deciding the case of the head 
The riddle of the snake 

The riddle of the cock 

The riddle of the gem F 
— decides the case of the bull 
The puzzle of the rice 

The puszale of the sand (rope) 


the 


106 
107 


108 
109 


{fo 
ttl 


if3 
113 
{14 


115 
116 


417 


a8 
119 


120 


MaHd-U uw Magaa—conid, 


The puazle of the tank 

The puzzie of the pari 

The question of the ass 

— salutes his father 

Taking the jewel 

The case of the chameleon 

The case of good and bad 
luck 

The question of the tam 

(He) instructs the four pandits 

(The king putting to the five) 
the question of the rich and 
the wise 

— answers the question (of 
the rich and the wise) 

— asks (Amara whether she 
is married, etc.) . 

— eats the rice-gruel 

— stitches clothes 


Amara washes Mahosadha’s 
feet . 


— smears the boiled rice (on 
Amar a’s head and body) 
— gives (Amara) a loin-cloth 
— informs (that he is about) 

to return (home) 
— tests (Amara’s chastity) 
— marries 
— lives as a potter 


(The courtiers) go about 
(looking for) 


Coming from the potters 

— answers the (king’s) ques: 
tions 

The four come to ask (ques- 
tions to — to entrap him) 

The king asks — concerning 
secrets 

= is under the trough 

The (four) pandits look for — 

— sets free the four persons 

— sends presents (to | the ror 

kings) . 
=~ sends the parrot 


The parrot brings news 


—is asked by the king (how 
Mithila shall be delivered 
from its enemies). ’ 


— is planting the flower 
— leaves the city . 


— fights tte Battle of the 
Law ' ' 


PLATE 


INDEX 


MO. OF 
FIGURE 


142 
143 
144 
145 
145 
147 
148 


149 
150 


15t 
152 


153 
154 
155 


156 


157 
158 


159 
tho 
161 
169 


163 
164 


Masa Unmaaca—contd. 


Kevatta comes and asks 
(lor —) . 

The king is angry with - 

~— instructs his parrot 

The parrot returns from the 
minah bird 

— tells (the king) that he is 
going (to Uttarapaficala) . 

= enters the city of Paiicdla 

-— converses with King Cilant 

— fixes stairs (firmly) . 

(They) take the  king’s 
mother’s house . . 

—-takes Kevatta’s house 

— enters the king’s house 

-—digsthetunnel . . 

The shipwrights make over 
the ships to — 

— sends (the boats) out of 
the way 


— goes out to meet the 
king (Vedeha) . 


The king (Vedeha) asks —— 

(He) shows the tunnel to King 
Vedeha . 

(Vedeha\ comes out from the 
tuanel : 

— instructs King Vedeha 

— converses with (King) 
Cilani . 


— shows (Cilani) the way 
(his) queen is gone 

(King) Cilani fooks at the 
tunnel ‘ , 

— measures strength with the 
king . 

The hundred kings ofr 
ornaments (to =) 

The king invites — (to stay at 
his court) 

— returns to the city (of 
Mithila) ; ; 

— sends back (C.’s family) 

Accession of the son of King 
Vedeha 


A female ascetic asks — (by 
estures, why he does not 
Become an ascetic) 


— asks the female ascetic to 
find out the king’s mind) 


The persons who have lost the 
case salute — reverentially 


iv INDEX 


K hale Moers bate BO, cr 
HABDAHALA (CaANDAKUMAZA) . ‘menos 
JaAtana, Nos. 210-318 anni 
— 13 deciding the case 4 ete e king and Punnaka the 
The king causes him to try , Yakiha ash — 37 743 
(cases) rhe king appoints The King hands over — 58 744 
— a judge) 50 ail “explains the Law to the 
They bring — (to the king) 50 218 king . 58 245 
— entreats (his father) 50 213 —takes Punoay akkhs and 
_ bids (his wives to implore goes back {to his home) 58 246 
P — (having) called F 
the king) . 50 at kha (¢ e hie Coe aayak- 
— is near the sacrificial pit sr 216 Me covnt is home, Settles 
The people rush at Khapde- H . » $8 “47 
hala (to kilt hi reer onn 
(to kill him) st a6 e expounds the | lea fi 
Accession of — BI 247 Sr the oo it obtain honours 
. e cour 
5 248 
-—— ascends to heaven . 1 a8 — tells (Punnayakkha) he is ° ‘ 
ready to ge (with him) 59 249 
BHERIDATTA JATARA, Nos. 719-839 — Punnayakkha carries 
Conception of — 58 219 away . 59 250 
Birth of — 52 30 — is conversing (with the 
Accession of — . $2 231 Yakkha) , 9 251 
— answers Indra’s question . 52 813 Punpaka (tries ta) frighten — fo 753 
asks his father’s leave to Punnska creates an elephant 60 353 
observe the silas 53 274 Punnaka tests (the steadfast- 
— observes the sslas in the ie. ~ by means of a 6 
garden . 53 225 _ ° 954 
— instructs his wife . 53 aa6 Punnaka turns | — upside 
down (and flings him into 
-- converses with the brahman 53 237 the sky) 6. 
— enters the ndga-world 54 328 Punnaka whirls — round 6 oe 
— confers regal glory on the Puonaka asks (— to teach 
brahman - . . 54 299 him the laws of good men) Or 257 
ives the jewel to the —preaches the law (to 
rahman . . 54 230 Punnaka) 61 
258 
Alambayana sees — . 54 235 Pufpaka tonveys — : to the ° 
Alambayans p pulls — (by the Naga (country) ot 859 
55 a30 — preaches the | 
Alambayaha makes — dance 55 933 Naga king . co" the 6 260 
Alambdyana carrying (the The Naga king introduces _ 
snake): arriyes (in) the in his home fa a6 
king’s (presence) . 55 334 Pongaka carries — up (to the 
— assumes human form 55 335 world of men) 62 26a 
The king rer-g...2e8 — 56 336 — gives the jewel (to the king) 60 263 
— securns to the niga-world. 56 937 — returns home 63 264 
= arrives at the naga-world” 56 238 ~— is at home (receiving gifts) 63 365 
— converses with the hermit 56 239 
MAMAMABADAMASSAPA «© JATARA, arian Jatana, Nos. 266-389 
NOS, 240-241 nception ol — 63 Oa) 
The berm — converses with n asks for gold to give alms 63 a67 
: 57 a40 they give him the name — , 64 268 
The hermit — goes (b (back) to 57 eat The father gives nufses to — 64 e69 
e@ king gives — an orna- 
. tment 
Vipwura JAT Ag. 64 *70 
pay a JaTaga, Noa, cats The wise (in which _) gave 
answers the question of the the 
(four) kings 9 4a nents {te hie 
5 3 fh arees) . 64 s7i 


VasSaNTaRi—contd, 


Representing — thinki 
(more exacting) Tne 
giving 

== looks at the alms-halls 

=— returns home 

The brahmans ask for the 
elephant 

— gets down from the ees 
phant . 

— gives away the white ele. 
phant : 
— is pleased with his gift 

The agent comes and informs 
(— of what is happening) . 

Showing — arranzing for the 
Great Offering 

— and Maddi converse 

Queen (Phusati) comes to see— 

An official comes to inform 
(— that the Great Offering 
is ready) 

— gives yold in alms 

— goes to see his father 

— comes and attends respect- 
fully on his father . 

He comes to his mother 

(The old king) converses with 
Maddi 

— turns to depart 

They bring a carriage ‘ 

Maddi, with the children, 
mounts (the carriage) 
before — — 

— goes away (to the Vin- 
dhyas) 

He addresses (or admonishes) 
the crowd while going 

(Vessantara’ s) mother sends 
(him) two carts (filled 
with ornaments) . 

— gives the ornaments 

ives in alms the precious 
t ings . ; 

— looks back at the city 

— drives on again 

The mendicants run toward 
the king 

— gives the horses in aime 

The red deer drawing the 
chariot 


He gives away the chariot 
— enters the forest. : 
They ask the way 


INDEX 


MATE MuCcAs 


073 
273 
274 
275 
276 


977 
478 


79 
280 


283 


Vassanrana-conid, 


They pluck and give the 
fruits (to the children) 

They arrive at the Suva ppa: 
giri Mountain : 

(They arrive at) the Konti- 
mara River 

They come to the Arazjara 
Mount 

(They come to) the branman 
villape . 

(They arrive at Vessantara’ s) 
uncie scity . 

They stay in arest-house (near 
the city) 

Maudi stands outside the 
Frés: i:ouse 

Madd: cunverses (with the 

woman of Ceta) 

They are keeping watch (on 
the king and queen) 

— converses with che princes 

The Princes” show the way 
(to --) 

They arrive at the Gandha- 
madana Mountain 

Turning his back on the 


Gandhamidana Mountain . 


They arrive at the Vipula 

ountain 

(They rest near the) Ketu 
mati River 


They give (their guide) a 
(golden) hairpin. 


Sitting under the banyan tree 


They arrive at the Na&li 
Mountain 


— arrives at the Mucalinda 
Lake : 


— arrives at the square lake 

— arrives atthe hermitage . 

The king enters (the hermit- 
age),beccming a hermit , 

— comes out from the hermit- 
age . 

Maddi enters the forest 

They eat the fruits 

Maddi enters her hermitage 


=~ looks expectantly and sees 
Jojakacoming 


Jili goes to meet (Jdjaka) . 
(Jdjaka) frightens Jali 
Prince Jali returns (near bis 
father) 
conversing with Jiljaka ; 


Vv 


nO, OF 
PLATS FIGCRR 


73 
73 
73 
74 
4 
74 
74 
75 


VagSanTalaemconia. 


(The twe children) hide in 2 
clump (of bushes) : 

The children (are concealed 
in the square lake) 

Prince Jali comes up (from 
the square lake) 

Kapha comes up from the lake 

ives in akms his own 

Filaren (to Jiifaka) 

Jiijaka bites off a creeper 

Jajaka binds and takes away 
(the children) 

— subdues his anger 


Jijaka binds (again the 
children) . . . 
Jijaka takes away (the 


children again) 

Kanhafina looks back fat her 
father) 

— weeps 

— fives... . 

The lion bare (Maddi’ s path) 

Matdi enquires about her 
children . 

Maddi comes up 
eugenia trees 

Maddi arrives at the river” . 

Maddi ascends the hill 

Maddi comes pon the (toy) 
elephants and horses . 

fAnddi arrives at the clump 
flower-trees 

Madd! comes to the fake 

{Maddi) goes back fo the 
king . 

Maddi falls and swoons 


~ raises (MWhaddi'’s head) and 
iavs (i! on hig lap) . 


to the 


Poate 


79 
79 


79 
79 


G6 C.P.0. --Na, 4,$.AS, torte: g26 — hut, 


INDEX 


Wo, OF 
FIGORS 


VessasTaRA—conid, 


— pours water (on Maddi s 
face) 

Madd rejoices (at— having 
given away the children) 
(Sakka, disguised as) a brah 

man comes . 
— gives his wife (in alms) 
(Sakka) receives the wite 
(of —) in alms . 
(Sakka) gives back Maddt . 
Indra converses (with —-) _ 
Indra goes back (to his 
heaven) 
jJojaka sleeps on a teee 


— looks out for his (father) 
the king. . 


The king (Vessantara’s 
fether) arrives ‘ 


The king comes up to his son 

~- salutes his father 

The queen (Phusati) arrives . 

The king — chafes Maddi's 
head 

The king salutes his mother 


The children come to their 
mother 


Maddi falls (on the ground) 
with her children. 


— convetses (with his father) 
— changes his dress . 


— salutes reverentialiy the 
hermitage ' 

They consecrate — (king) 

They consecrate Maddt (as 
queen} 

Maddi mounts her elephant . 

They geo out of the wilderness 

— dwells in his palace 

— pivesornaments 

— ascends 


PLATS 


83 
83 


RO, OP 
fiGdReE 


36r 
362 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


VOL, Ii-——PART Il 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 


List of Plates 
1, Migapakkha Jataka, Nos. 1— 37 ~ 
2. Mahgjanaka ” »  38— 8a 
3. Sima » » 83—T01 
4. Nimi » » 1O2—114 
5. Mah8-Ummagga » » «« 1L§—209 
6, Khapdahala ” » -340—218 
7. Bhiridatta » » 259—239 
8, Mah4naradakassapa_ ,, 4 240—241 
g. Vidhura » 1 242~—268 


To. Vessantara 


266—389 


aot 


I—IX 

IX—XVIII 
XVITI—XXII1 
XXITI—XXVI 
XXVI—XLIX 
XLIX—LI 
LII—LVI 

LVI 
LVII—LXIII 
LXUHI—LXXXVII 


2 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( VOL. Il 


1. We are in the Tavatirnsa heaven; in the middle, on the seat, is the 
Bodhisattva, the future Temiya; on his right, Sakka, begging of him to be 
reborn as a man in the bosom of queen Candadevi. On his left, kneeling in 
the attitude of adoration, is a deva; he represents the hosts of Tavatirmsa ; 
in the Pagan plaques, one or two devas generally stand for the throngs of 
the gods. 


a. Queen Candadeyi is lying on a couch on her right side; the small 
figure near the couch is the Bodhisattva who, having acceded to Sakka’s 
prayer, comes down from the Tavatimsa to incarnate hinself. 


3. This plaque is missing. 


4. The king gives the baby a name, Sitting on the throne is the king, 
holding the Bodhisattva on his lap; on the left are brahmans, who were 
called in to read the different marks on the child’s body. The young prince 
is named Temiya. 


5. The king is on his throne, with Temiya, one month old, on his 
lap. Four thieves are brought in and condemned to dreadful punishments, 
The person nearest to the throne, in the lower row, is the officer who 
brought them in. 


Part II.) -TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Pcate I.- 


> 
1—Indra invites Temiya (to be re-born as a 2.—Conception of Temiya. 
- man). 


4.—(His father) gives (him) the name of 5.—When they bring the thieves. 
Temiya. 


4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { VoL. 


6. On the couch, the Bodhisattva is thinking deeply ; the sentences 
inflicted by his father startle him, for when he himself is king, similar 
sentences will open to him the gates of hell; over him is spread the -white 
umbrella, symbol of royalty. The goddess, whose care is to watch over the 
umbrella, appears to him, half her body only being visible, and gives him 
advice as to how to avoid becoming king. The lotus bud symbolizes divine 
birth, Near the couch are two perfume vases. 


7. The goddess has advised him to simulate deafness, and to make it 
appear he is a cripple. A long series of tests follow, through all which he 
remains impassible. This is the test of the milk. It will be seen this plaque 
has been repaired by very unskilful hands. Temiya is lying down; his head 
and shoulders on the lap of a nurse who is trying to make him drink. At 
his feet, another woman urges him to take nourishment. 


8. They now try to rouse him from his apathy with tempting cakes ; 
but in vain. Same position; the child is alone ; the cakes cannot be seen. 


9g The sight of luscious fruits may perhaps make him move and ask 
for them ; but this test is also unsuccessful. Same position. Near the cot, 
four women present Temiya with different kinds of fruits. The plaque is 
badly spoiled. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate II. 


See OE 
Oh as 2 © ES 


7.—The trial with milk. 


vs i > | 
Por SA 


es 
* 
% 
~ 
‘ 
$. 
¢ 
‘ 


EPO eo 


"st : 


ih 
A 


= i ith cakes. 
8.—The trial with cakes 9.—They try (Temiya) with fruits. 


6 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { voL. 1 


.to, They now try to move him with beautiful toys, but with the same 
result, Temiya is lying as in the foregoing plaques. Four nurses try to 
tempt him out of his resolve with toys. 


11, They then try to tempt him with dainty food, but he does not so 
much as look at it. The plaque has been spoiled by whitewash. The 
Bodhisattva appears to be lying down quite alone, The dainty food, which 
originally must have been seen near the couch, cannot now be made out. 


12. This plaque is missing. 


13. He is six years old ; at this age, children are afraid of furious 
elephants; they test him with one well trained. On the right sits the king in 
an attitude of discouragement at the failure of the trial; sitting placid and 
unmoved before him is Temiya; close to the latter the ‘elephant is striking 
the pround, Temiya’s companions are seen running away panic-stricken. 


i4. They then try to frighten him out of his composure with snakes, 
but in vain. On the right, the Bodhisattva seated; the head of the snake 
with mouth wide open can be seen above him, while a coil passes under his 
left arm and across his lap. On the left, his companions are seen fleeing. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prare Ill. 


+ 


S|; 
vit, 
= 
— ee ee 


~- 
-*.. 


ne “ea 
’ ~~ > ; 


10.—The trial with toys. 11.—The trial with food. 


13.—They try (Temiya) with an elephant. 14.—They try (Temiya) with snakes. 


ry 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { voL, II 


15. They thought that dancing would elicit from him some glimpse of 
interest, and they test him with mimes. On the right, the king, and Temiya 
in front of him, are seated; in front of Temiya, a dancer. The Bodhisattva’s 
companions—here two represent the whole five hundred—are enjoying them- 
selves looking on. 


16. He goes on steadfastly simulating helplessness; swords will 
perhaps make him give up the pretence, and dreadful men menace him 
with gleaming swords. The king and Temiya are seated as before; the 
latter appears quite unmoved, while a man, on the left, is brandishing a 
sword over him as if to cut off his head. 


17. Perhaps a sudden noice will startle him into speaking; so, when 
he ts ten years old, they try him with conches te make sure whether he is 
deaf. Temiya is on his couch; near it, three persons are seen blowing. 
conches. 


18. Then they try him with drums with the same intention, but in 
vain. The faces of two drums may be seen in the foreground near the 
couch. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. Pirate IV. 


oF 


Taek 


Wa tRyt 


- 
ae 


16.—They try (Temiya) with a sword. 


je 
cad 
aS 
y 
B > 
> + 
Bo 
fi 
4 
ta 


17.—They try (Temiya) with conches. 18.—They try (Temiya) with drums. 


10 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 11 


19, To see whether he does move when alone at night and in dark- 
ness, they hide lamps in jars which they take out suddenly, watching him. 
Two nurses are seen holding lamps near the bed, 


a0. This does not succeed; they now try him with molasses; they 
besmear him and place him in a spot alive with flies. He remains undis- 
turbed on his couch, The two dots, one over his wrist and the other 
over his leg, are not defects in the glaze; they very probably represent 


flies, 


21, He is now fourteen; they want to see if filth will move him. 
They leave him several days without bathing him, bedaubed with his own 
filth, On the couch, the Bodhisattva; near by, two nurses watching him. 


22, Now they test him by placing fire in pans under his bed. He 
remains unmoved. Under the bed, a fire-pan, 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLaTE V. 


19.—They try (Temiya) with lamps. 20.—They try (Temiya) with molasses. 


21.—They try (Temiya) with filth. 22.—The test with fire-pans. 


32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { VoL. u 


23. His parents’ hearts are full of sorrow; they feel sure he is not a 
cripple. So many tests having failed, they come and remonstrate with him 
on his attitude, imploring him to put an end to it. On the left, the king; 
on the right, the queen. 


24. They then try. him. with beautiful nautch-dancers. Temiya’ always 
on his bed; on the right; a girl dancing’; near the bed two men ‘playing, 
one the fiizte, and the other the drum. 


25. As another test, Temiya is made king for a period of seven days. 
He is placed on an elephant and led in great pomp round the city. On the 
left, a tiduse; in front of it, ‘the elephant. On the elephant, in frent, the 
mahout; in the middle, Temiya, and behind him the white umbrella-bearer, 


26. Temiya gives no sign of intelligence. The king orders his removal 
to the cemetery. On the left, the charioteer, who has come to take the 
young prince, carries him away in his arms; behind him, the queen, 
lamenting and beating her breast. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. EPauate Vi 


23.—(Temiya’s) mother and father come and 24.—The trial with nautches. 
remonstrate (with him). 


25.—Accession of Temiya. 26.—The charioteer comes to take away 
(Temiya). 


14 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA f vou. It 


27. Outside the palace, the charioteer places Temiya on a chariot and 
conveys him to the cemetery for burial. One of the horses can be seen; 
the other, alongside of him, being invisible On the chariot, in front, the 
charioteer, and behind him Temiya. 


28. The charioteer has gone to dig a grave near by. Temiya, having 
been still for so long, wonders if he has any strength left; to ascertain, he 
gets down from the chariot. He is in the act of descending; his left leg is 
already outside, his foot resting on a stone. In front, a horse, quite 
diminutive. | | 


29. When on the ground, he tries his strength; to do so, he seizes 
the chariot by its hinder part and lifts it up as if it were-a toy. The horse 
may be seen under the chariot. | 


go. At ‘the orders of Sakka, Vissakamma, the celestial architect and 
artist, adorns the Bodhisattva. On the left, standing, Vissakamma; he is 
arranging Temiya’s turban. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Poate VI. 


27.—(The charioteer) conveys Temiya. 28.—(Temiya) descending on to the ground. 


: 


7 3 TS r 7 y 
Rr a as -— m 
~~ oO 
Sy a ae 
a Ba ZS ee iF ‘nett en OS™ 


~~ &% 


| 
“| 


29.—He tries his strength. 30.—Temiya is being adorned. 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. It 


31. When adorned in a regal manner, Temiya goes up to the char- 
ioteer, who is digging the grave that was to receive him. On the left, under 
a tree, the charioteer, digging; near him, Temiya puts him some questions. 


32. Delight of the charioteer on seeing the prince well and strong; he 
ig kneeling before him, inviting him to return home. 


33. Temiya wants to leave the world; he does not go back to the 
palace; but wishing to see his parents, he sends the charioteer to them with 
a message, The charioteer receives the message kneeling. 


34. The charioteer having gone, Sakka builds a hermitage near by; 
Temiya puts on the ascetic garb, and goes to the hermitage. His hair is 
now arranged into two knots, looking like horns; this is the distinctive 
coiffure of hermits. On the pole he carries, at the front end, a gourd for 


water, encased in wicker work; at the other is what appears to be a large 
fruit. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Prate VIII. 


ee oe a > 


Cen. esy Oe 


31.—He questions the charioteer. 32.—The charioteer invites (Temiya) to 
return home. 


33.—The king (Temiya) sends a message 34.—When the king leaves the world. 
to his mother and father. 


18 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


35. Then the king comes to see him, followed by the queen. The 
ascetic Temiya is seated in his small leaf-hut, The king is in front of him, 
seated on his royal seat; this is against the text which particularly mentions 
that he refused to sit on anything, and sat on the ground. The queen is 
behind him. The king draws the queen's attention to the leaves which will 
henceforth form part of the food of Temiya; he takes them and hands them 
over to the queen and the palace ladies (who are not seen) to examine them. 
These are the leaves both are holding over their heads. The king, queen, 
and a vast retinue become ali ascetics. 


36. Henceforth he goes the round instructing his disciples, travelling 
through the air. He is seen poised in the air which is represented by the 
scrolls under him; in the hut, one of his disciples under instruction, 


37. The city is practically empty, the citizens having become ascetics. 
Three kings, in succession, come tp conquer it. But Temiya converts them. 
He is sitting in the air, represented this time as a threefold jagged cloud, 
and not on leaves, as might be thought. Below him the three converted 


kings. 


38. Mahajanaka descends from heaven to enter his mother’s bosom. 
Compare plaque No. 2. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Pirate IX.. 


ad 


; 
7 
- 
dx 
e 
‘ 
. 
; 
¢ 
¢ 


35.—He converses with the king (his father). 36.—The hermit instructs his disciples. 


t's v? 7 
; egies Ms fe 


‘wa 
ay 


37.—(Temiya) preaches the law tothe 38.—Janaka is conceived. 
(three) kings. 


20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vol, 1 


39. Birth of Mahajanaka ; he is seen on the couch near his mother, in 
exactly the same position as she. Near the bed, one of the lady attendants, 


40. Before his birth, his father the king had been killed in battle; the 
mother had/ fled and been received at the house of a brahman. IJn_ his 
games with other children, owing to his abnormal strength, he handles them 
rather roughly at times, and in revenge they call him “the widow's son,” 
Janaka is on the right, handling roughly one of the boys, who is seen falling 
down; immediately behind him, another boy, lifting his index upwards, is 
calling him “widow's son”; note his sharp Indian features. The last boy, 
on the left, is evidently begging not to be treated like the other. 


41. The expression “widow's sen” puzzles him. He wants to know 
who his father was. He asks his mother, and she télls him. On the left is 
the mother; in front of her, Janaka respectfully sitting in the oriental 
fashion. 


42. He then makes up his mind to regain his father's kingdom; for 
this he must have a large sum of money; to get it he resolves to go 
trading to foreign parts, and he comes and informs her of his intention, 
The mother is on the left. 


Part I].] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate X. 


39.—Janaka comes out from the womb. 40.—Janaka plays with the children, 


41.—Janaka questions his mother. 42.—Janaka informs his mother (he will go 
trading). 


22 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [. VoL. u 


43. He embarks for Suvanpabhimi. On the seventh day the ship 
founders in mid-ocean. The ship must have been a large one, for the text 
says that it carried seven caravans with their beasts; in the plaque it looks 
like a smal! river craft, such as are still seen, and called dinghy. Janaka is 
standing, preparing to take the jump which will carry him far beyond the 
monsters which are hastening to the ship. Five of these monsters are seen 
with wrecked passengers in their jaws; three on Janaka’s left, one on his 
tight, and one in the foreground in the left corner. 


44. The devas have appointed the fairy Maiimekhala to watch over the 
ocean and rescue virtuous. persons from drowning. She sees Janaka swim- 
ming in the sea; she enters into a conversation with him; he expatiates on 
the benefits of manly efforts. The head of Janaka is broken off; Manime- 
khala is following him in the air. 


45. At last she asks him where he desires to go; he tells her. She 
takes him in her arms and carries him to Mithila The scroll represents 
the air through which they are flying. Three sea-monsters ate devouring 
shipwrecked persons. 


46. She lays him down on the ceremonial stone slab in the mango 
vrove near Mithila. The, royal chaplain is examining the marks on the soles 
of the Bodhisattva’s feet. 


Part II.} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XI. 


43.—When (the boat) founders. 44.—Manimekhala, the goddess, listens to 
Janaka. 


45.—The goddress carries (Janaka) in her arms. 46.—The chaplain examines Janaka’s marks. 


24 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor tt 


47. The marks on his person being those of a great man, they at once 
make him king. Janaka is seated on the stone slab. The royal chaplain 
and another brahman are holding conches containing the consecrated water, 


48, Then, with great pomp, they convey him to the’palace. A chariot 
and pair; in front, the charioteer, and behind, Janaka. 


49. Arrived at the palace, he assigns their respective places to-the 
general and the officers of state, and then mounts: the daiss He is on the 
dais ;- before:-iim are the ministers of state. 


50. The daughter of the defunct king is curious to see how Janaka will 
behave on seeing her, and she sends a servant to call him. The servant, 
crouching, is delivering his message to Janaka. | 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Pirate XII. 


47.—The anointment (as king) of Janaka. 48.—Janaka enters the (capital) city. 


‘ 


i 


—_ - — ‘= 
1th 
hee. nay 4 


At 8" 


: , 50.—The queen sends (a man) to call 
49.— (Janaka) assigns their places to the (Janaka), or The queen causes (Janaka) to 
officials of state. ; be called. 


26 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


51. Janaka, to assert his authority, makes no hurry to answer the 
summons, although called three times. At last he goes to meet the 
princess quite leisurely. Struck by his dignified deportment, she hastens 
towards him, giving him her hand to lean on, and he goes into the palace 
with her, The princess stands within a door, holding out her hand, which 
Janaka takes. He is ascending a diminutive stairs. 


52. He then sits himself and enquires of the ministers what instructions 
have been left by the late king. Above Janaka is the white umbrella: in 
front of him, the ministers. 


53. The late king had given orders that, whosoever could tell the head 
of the square bed (on which Janaka is seated) from the foot, was to be 
given the kingdom. On being asked the question, he employs a ruse. He 
hands over his ornamental hairpin to the princess, knowing well that, cut of 
respect, she would not place it at the foot of the bed. She deposits it, of 
course, at the head, and Janaka is able to answer the question. The 
princess, standing, is receiving the gold pin, 


54-57. These plaques are missing. 


58. This plaque is badly spoiled; the legend has flaked off; it is not 
easy to decide which scene it is intended to represent, as, between the last 
and the one following, there are several scenes in which he is seated. But 
it is probably that in which the gardener brings him -beautiful . fruits. Only 
the first two letters,*ud, remain, being probably the beginning of the word 
udydn, garden, 


Part II] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XII]. 


aye) a oy 


Pr ee a Ad GP LO Gy Od 
Aga gad \hatlindli 
7 = . wou * Sehe 


51.—Janaka (holding the princess’s hand) 52.—When Janaka enquires. 
ascends the palace. 


POE a eee ee 
ee ad ee, is 


~ 
™ 


~« 


\ eS ; 

« = a 

; 0 tees ree ing et EEE me 
Alene RNa 5c 

fb, APR aT. 


33.—(Janaka) gives his (gold) pin to the 
queen. 58.— 


38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vo. it 


59. On seeing the products of the garden, Janaka wishes to see it, and 
he sets out on the royal elephant. Janaka is in the middle; in front, the 
mahout; behind, the umbrella-bearer. 


60, janaka is looking at the two mango trees at the gate of the 
garden. In his right hand he is holding the fruit he has plucked. The 
artist, hard pressed for room, has suppressed the mahout. 


61. The king having eaten the fruit, his retimue eat all that remains, 
breaking the branches; on his return he beholds the battered tree. In front 
of the elephant an official, kneeling, explains what has happened ; the upper 
part of the body is broken off from the waist. The umbrella-bearer also is 
badly spoiied. ‘Ihe king is raising his hands in surprise. 


G:. He has resolved to become a recluse in the palace. He is 
mstructing the general-in-chiel, kneeling before him, as to how the affairs of 
the kingdom should be carried on. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {[Prate XIV. 


2 i Wel te ie he 


59.—The king goes out to his pleasaunce. 60.—Janaka looks at the mango (trees). 


FAABEDAIWS TIT’ 


\4 ie Pies => fee x AD * 
after Rims gai). 
\ ) % ‘ y Pains ny 


de 
Ue aie AG aampah 
TTT PEEPS 


61.—Janaka sees the mango (tree). 62.—King Janaka instructs (the generalissimo). 


30 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA f vou. it 


63. He then lives as a monk at the top of the palace. Nobody is to 
see him, except two servants, one to bring water and the other to bring 
food. Janaka has done away with his regal ornaments. The two servants 
are before him. The first, with his left hand, presents him the toothbrush, 
holding a vase with water in the right. The other is holding some food. 


64. After four months he reflects that the proper place tor an ascetic 
is, not a palace, but the wilderness. So he resolves upon leaving the 
palace, and bids the two servants bring him yellow robes and an almsbowl. 
In the casket held by the first servant are the robes. The other is holding 
the bowl. 


6s. He has sent for a barber to cut his hair and beard; Janaka is 
holding his hair to facilitate the operation, 


66. Having dohned his robes, he slings his almsbowl on. ohne shouldet, 
takes his staff and goes down. Queen Sjvali and the lesser queens 
are just going to see him, not having ‘met him for four months, ‘They meet 
him as he is coming down but fail to recognize him in his new gatb, 
Queen Sivali and a lesser queen are saluting the royal monk, 


67-70. These plaques are missing. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (PratE XV 


"rer ci FEF Rr EEPR 


+4 
he. 


, 4 


i¥ 
F 
ey 
4 


eaPt OOP RN Oe ee 


63.—King Janaka lives in retirement. 64.—They (the two attendants) bring the 
almsbow!l (and) give it -(to Mahajanaka). 


pis Tia Ss ex ore 
PeResas oe 2s Paci 
Py BENG. gt Ox - “ os x <k . ~ 


ehh yeh tet 


x 


= se. 


f= Sm fagris Gre 


“he che 


65.—Janaka shaves (his hair and beard). 66.—Janaka descends from his house. 


32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


7%. Janaka passes the queen and continues on his way down. He is 
represented getting out of the palace. 


72. Queen Sivali, on entering his room, immediately finds out her 
mistake, and she follows him, accompanied by the lesser queens. Janaka, in 
front, is pursuing his way. The queen and the others—one standing for the 
whole of them—are unloosing their hair and beating their breasts in sorrow. 


73. In vain does the queen beg of him to abandon his purpose. As 
an expedient, she gets some houses to be burnt to make him believe the 
capital is in flames. On the right Janaka, somewhat annoyed, raises up his 
hands; the queen shows him the conflagration behind. The queen’s face is 
broken off. The upper part of Janaka’s body, which was also broken, has 
been restored very unskilfully. 


74. To prevent them following on, he draws with his staff a line on 
the ground, which nobody must pass. Sivali throws herself down and rolls 
on the ground. The line is obliterated and the pursuit continues. The 
queen's face and breasts are broken; Janaka is going on his way after 
drawing the line. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Pirate XVI. 


GS RIS 


ee 
‘ caf : 


71.—King Janaka leaving the world. 72.—The queens beat (their breasts). 


< 


an-F4 5 


‘? 


TY TITER ee 
‘4 BS woleen he ew age BT, 
e, ‘ re 


73.—The queen shows-(Janaka) the (town) 
burning. 


74.—Janaka draws a line on the ground. 


34 . EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { VoL. 


75. The hermit Narada, seeing the plight of Janaka, wishes to help 
him. He comes through the air and strengthens Janaka’s resolve in a few 
stanzas. On the left, Narada on a cloud. His peculiar headdress shows he 
is an ascetic; the king, being a monk, has his head shaved. 


76. Of this plaque the legend only remains. 


14. A dog, through fright, drops a piece of meat he has stolen. Janaka 
is picking it up for his meal; behind him, queen Sivali. 


78. Janaka is putting the dog’s leavings in his almsbowl. Sivali raises 
her right hand in disgust at the thought of his eating it. 


79. Janaka is eating the meat; Sivali expresses her disgust in words 
and the king rebukes her. It will be noticed how beautifully the two faces 
are modelled—and how thoroughly Indian. 


Part II] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XVII. 


- 
2 
4 
4 
4 
” 
y 
P 
 ) 
+ 
4 
2 
> 
a 
Ae 
2 
75.—(Janaka) receives the instruction 77.—Janaka takes the meat. 
of Narada. 


‘= . 
be: } 


» 
4 
> wh 
J» 
oe. 


78.—Janaka breaks the (piece of) meat (and 79.—The blessed Janaka eats the meat. 
puts it in his bowl). 


36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1! 


8o, Further on, a little girl makes it clear by means of those on her 
arms that one bangle .cannet jingle, but two always jingle and jar, on 
account of being in contaet; therefore, says;she, it is better to live alone. 
But this lesson again is Jost on the queen. On the left, sitting, the child; 
her left forearm and right hand have been testored. 


81, They meet with a fletcher. He looks at an arrow with one eye 
closed; Janaka asks him why he does so; he is answered it is’ because, 
when looking with both eyes at an arrow to See if it is straight, one spoils 
the straight path of vision; so also when a monk drags after him a female, 
The queen understands, but still follows on. 


82. She cannot persuade him to turn back. Near a great forest she 
swoons, and the Bodhisattva escapes in the forest. Sivali returns to the 
capital and becomes a recluse. 


83. Sama comes down from his heavenly mansion to enter his 
mother’s womb. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Peate XVIIE. 


of EAE. 


Vee 


. ¢ 
‘ 
) 

2 

, 
~ 
15 
or 


oie converses with the child. 81.—Janaka sees the arrow. 


CRERELLRBARLEL ba 


Am, em: 9 HA 


 f meals 


4. 
xX .| 
« | 
&. 
~ 
: 
ae 
| 
a 
a 
7 
‘ 
AX 
5 
= 
4 
“& 
Je 
x 


82.—Janaka enters the forest. 83.—Conception of Syama. 


38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


84. Sama is born; he was conceived miraculously, both his parents 
being anchorites in the wilderness. The father is seated at the foot of the 
bed. Above is the roof of the small leaf-hut. 


8s. The parents bathe the infant, lay it down on a small bed in the 
hut and go in the forest to collect fruits as usual. 


86. On a mountain there lived &inmaris or nymphs; when the 
parents are gone, they come, take the child to their cave, bathe and 
adorn him with flowers, and put him back in his parents’ hut. All the heads 
are broken. The Ainnayi, that is, the female, is on the right, holding 
Sama; the &Asenara, her husband, on the left, is holding what appears to 
be a lotus bud with a long stalk. 


87. Sama is now sixteen. One day his parents go out for fruits; they 
are caught in a shower and take refuge among the roots of a large tree; 
a snake dwelling there puffs out his breath; they become blind. The boy, 
anxious, goes in search of them, and, having found them, gives them the 
end of a long pole; he, holding the other end, brings them home. On the 
tight is the tree, which seems to be a cactus. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XIX. 


“= - 


‘ 
' 


\ ecmencente AE 
ea a SS enon 2 C 


PE Ly UPR) - : 


nconpenitnt oo te tte ogee 


84.—Birth of Syama, 85.—They (his parents) bathe and put Syama 
to sleep. 


’ f <a “Ff 


¢ 


*.¢ ¢ © i 


A NE 


nadia f eae 


ha 
ee 
i” 
ih 
ie 


86.—The suparnas bathe Syama. 87.—Syama leads (his parents) out (of their 
shelter). 


40 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


88. Thenceforth Sima looks after his parents, doing all what is neces- 
sary for them. During the day he goes to the mountain with a band of 
nymphs to gather fruits. Above the &rnaras, some rocks, intended ta 
indicate the mountain. | 


89. The two blind parents are seated in the hut; S4ma ministers to 
them: after his excursion in the mountain, he brings back fruits for them, 


go. One day, having brought back fruits, he informs his parents that he 
intends going to the forest to bathe and bring, back water. 


gi. Sama is beloved by all the beasts of the forest; some deer 
generally follow him wherever he goes. He is seen here leaving his 
parents and entering the forest—indicated by one tree—followed by the 
deer. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLate XX. 


“ae fear = 


4 


7 3 2 9 

ae | tS _— vs 4 

ar . . 
* s e.”- -<e, 4 

¥ is 
i A) ie 
7 “ 7. a 
x 


= xs. gx % & om 


mma ee 


Una ARERR ene 


ss 
_&: 


POT SACRA AAA. 


88.—As Syima goes up the mountain 89.—Syama ministers to his parents. 


es OE ao ed 
he 


Ps, 


+ 


oor 
> 


cocrrere 


90.—Syama informs (his parents) he is 91.—S ama enters the forest. 
going to enter the forest. 


4a EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. 1 


92. After bathing, he takes water in his pot, which he places on the 
back of a deer, and starts on his way home, 


93. himself carrying a pot of water. At that time, Piliyakkha, king 
of Benares and very fond of hunting, arrives near the hermitage. He has 
remarked the footprints of many deer; he lies in ambush. The king sees 
Sima, and is astonished at his appearance; is he a man? is he a fairy ? 
Anyway, he does not want to go back without bringing proof of his having 
been in those mysterious regions of the Himalayas; so he resolves to wound 
what he takes to be a wonderful creature, so that he may take him alive. 
The king is shooting an arrow at Sama. 


94. The arrow enters the right side and goes out at the left. Sama, 
recovering consciousness, wonders who may have shot him, since he cannot 
think of any personal enemy, The water-pot is near Sama, and at his 
feet stands Piliyakkha, The feathered end of the arrow is seen jutting out 
from the /ef# side; this is wrong, since the arrow went in at the right side. 


95. Sama perceives the king at his feet, and asks him why he shot 
him. A long conversation ensues. Piliyakkha understands now the enormity 
of his act. He promises to a goddess, who, unseen, whispers in his ear, 
that he will renounce his kingdom and devote his life to looking after his 
blind parents. Then speech fails Sima and he becomes rigid. The king, 
thinking him dead, weeps bitterly. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Prate XXI. 


92.—As Syama is drawing water. 93.—The king shooting Syima. 


94.—The king converses with Syamd. 95.—Piliyakkha weeps. 


44 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vox. it 


96. Thinking Sama to be dead, Piliyakkha does homage te him, by 
offerings. of flowers and sprinkling of water. The king is holding flowers in 
both his hands. 


97. He then picks up the jar of water and goes to the hermitage, and, 
after some desultory conversation, informs the parents of their boy's fate. 
They with difficulty control their sorrow, and the king takes them to the 
spot where Sama is lying. The Bodhisattva is now lying in the parinirvana 
attituce ; his parents are behind the king. The object seen under the king’s 
right hand is the water-jar, mostly broken. The arrow is no more there. 


g8. His father places his boy’s head on his lap, caressing him with 
his left hand; his right is on his breast to express his sorrow. The mother 
is ai the feet, her right hand on her head in her despair, The king is 
kneeling near the boy. | 


99. Then the mother, the father, and the goddess who, a while before, 
spoke to the king, make each in turn a solemn act of asseveration, testifying 
to the virtues of Sima. And Sama gives signs of life. On the left is 
Sama’s mother; and m front of her, her husband; near the father is the 
king, and behind the latter, the goddess. 


Part I1.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prare XXII. 


96.—Piliyakkha does homage (to Syama). 97.—When the king brings (the parents) 
and shows (them) Sydma. 


98.—The mother and father of Syama weep. 99.—(They) make an act of asseveration. 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA f VOL. I 


100, Sama, through the power of the asseveration, is completely 
healed, and well and bright again. He is seated in the middle near the king, 
who js on his left; his father and mother are on his right. The goddess 
has departed. 


ror, The king is released of his promise to look after the two blind 
persons. Sama preaches the Law unto him, and the king, reverentially 
saluting him, returns to Benares. The Bodhisattva, seated, is receiving the 
king’s salutation. 


102 and 103—the Conception and the Birth of Nimi—are missing, 


104. Nimi having been born, the soothsayers come to examine the 
marks on his body, They tell the king that the child shall be the last of 
his long line. On that account, the king calls him “ Nimi.” The plaque is 
spoiled. On the right, seated on a high seat, is the king holding his child, 
The two personages on the left are soothsayers. 


tos. All the kings of this dynasty had, on seeing their first grey hair, 
become hermits. One day his barber showed Nimi’s father his first grey 
hair. Then the king, becoming a hermit, made over the kingdom to his 
son. Nimi is seated under the white umbrella; three brahmans bring the 
coronation water in conches. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Pirate XXIII. 


100.—Then Syama (rises) bright (again). 101.—The king reverentially salutes Syima. 


104.—(The fortune-tellers) look at Nimi’s 105.—When Nimi is ruling. 
(bodily) signs. 


48 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vou. 1 


106, Sakka, coming down from the Tavatithsa heaven, stands in mid- 
air and answers Nimi’s queries; the latter wanted to know which was better: 
almsgiving or the holy life of the recluse? Sakka opines for the latter. 


107. Sakka goes back to Tdvatirhsa, and the gods ask him where he 
has been to. He sings the praises of Nimi. The gods become anxious to 
behold so holy a king, and Sakka sends Matali, his charioteer, in his own 
car to fetch king Nimi to Tavatithsa. M&tali, seated on the heavenly car, 
invites Nimi to take a trip to heaven. 


108. As they are about to start, Matali, who derives, turns round and 
asks the king which he should like to visit first: the hells or T&vatithsa? 
And Nimi, knowing well he would go to heaven in any case, chooses to 
visit hell first. 


tog. Matali takes him to the several hells and explains to him the 
‘torments suffered in each and the sins which send men there. M&Stali, half 
turnea towards the king, answers his questions about the hells. On the 
lefr, an inhabitant of hell is being thrashed by a guardian of those dreadful 
abodes. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Plate XXIV. 


106.—Indra is questioned by Nimi. 107.— Matali invites Nimi (to get into the 
chariot). 


108.—Matali asks ‘ime (Nimi wishes 109.—Nimi looks at hell. 
to go). 


50 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, I 


110, Having gone round the Kells, Matali drives towards heaven ; as 
they approach, the king beholds, in the air, the heavenly mansion of the 
goddess Birani, who is attired with great magnificence. She had been a 
slave, and this was the reward of her entertaining hospitably a guest. Birani 
is seated in her fiverroof mansion, These elegant structures with many 
receding roofs are still exactly the same now. 


111, Many other mansions, each more beautiful than the last, are 
visited. At last they arrive at the Sudhamma Hall, which is the place of 
assemblage of the gods. The gods receive him magnificently ; he takes his 
place near Sakka, and they converse together. Nimi is on the left, in regal 
attire ; inasmuch as he is the Bodhisattva he is greater than Sakka. 


112. Nimi at last takes his leave, and Matali brings him back to his 
capital, The, king, preaching the Law to his people and instructing them, 
tells them of the horrors of hell and of the bliss of heaven. 


113. Then, after a long time, the barber plucks Nimi’s first white hair; 
he is kneeling, showing the king the harbinger of old age. 


Part If]. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PraTe XXV. 


111.—Nimi converses with Indra. 


is 
bal 
=| 
ms. | 
4 


CP 
rr TT 


112—Nimi instructs (his) people (in the practice (113.—Nimi sees (hisy grey hair. 
of the Law). 


52 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 


114. Following the example of all his ancestors, Nimi now leaves the 
world. The scene no doubt represents king Nimi, on the right, speaking in 
the mango grove to his son, who is to “succeed him, and to his barber, by 
whose instrumentality the king is about to enter the path of perfection. (In 
ancient India, the post of barber to the king was a high one.) 


115. King Vedeha reigns in Mithila; at his court are four wise men, 
wise only in their own estimation. The king has a dream to the effect that 
a fifth one—a wonderfully wise man, this one—is about to appear. He 
enquires where he is, and is told he is just about to be born. On that very 
day the Bodhisattva, coming down from the Tavatithsa heaven, is conceived 
in the womb of Sumanddevi, the wife of a nch man. One thousand other 
pods were also reborn on the same day; they were. to be throughout his 
playfellows and companions. 


116. The birth of Mahosadha. His mother is lying on her bed. On 
the left, near the bed, two female attendants; in front of them is a brasier 
with fire, according to the custom, stil] obtaining in Burma and some other 
parts ef Indo-China, of drying the humours of the mother by exposing her 
to fire for some days. On the right, the midwife is holding up the child. 


117. As he was being born, Sakka, to show to the world that the child 
was a great and uncommon one, places in his hand a wonderful medicinal 
herb. The child is held by the nurse. An awkward attempt at restoring 
Sakka’s left hand has been made. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


[PLatE XXVI. 


114—King Nimi leaving the world. 115.—Conception of Mahosadha. 


— 


=a 
‘ VU Yom 
‘ ‘eee ovr | ) 


Benes LISS 
ry ve [eras a 


116.—Birth of Mahosadha. 117.—When Indra gives the medicinal herb 
(to Mahosadha). 


ig 
‘ 
' 
SAR 
* 
’ 
: 
Ly 


¥ 


54 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


118. The mother, perceiving the medicine in the child’s hand, enquires 
about it; the baby tells her, and advises her to give it to all who suffer 
from any sickness. His father had suffered from headache for years. He 
uses the medicine and his pains disappear. A nurse is holding the babe, 
who is giving his mother the medicine ; the father, on the left, is holding it 
in his hand, about to use it. 


119. On his naming day the child is given the name of Mahosadha, 
because he was born with a powerful medicine in his hand. The father is 
holding his son; in front, two brahman soothsayers. 


120. It is discovered that one thousand boys were born on the same 
day as Mahosadha; the father sends, in his son’s name, a nurse and 
ornaments to each, and has them brought daily to attend upon his son. On 
the left, the father; facing him, Mahosadha; on the right, one of the 
thousand children with his nurse behind. 


lai. The sage is now sever years. His games with his companions 
were often spoiled by rain, sometimes by elephants and other animals. Two 
children are frightened by an elephant: a little fellow has fallen down, half 
his face is seen between the animal's legs. 


Part IT.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XXVII. 


Ren girs 


,% 
— 


118.—Mahosadha gives the medicine (to his 119.—The naming of Mahosadha. 
mother ) 


or en) 


tHe 


120.—Mahosadha gives ornaments (to the 121.—Mahosadha plays with (his) 
thousand children). companions, 


56 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { VOL. Il 


122. One day the boys are caught in an unseasonable rainstorm: 
Mahosadha, who was strong and powerful, escaped it by running into a rest- 
house ; but his companions, in their hurry, fell one over the other, bruising 
their limbs, The Bodhisattva is in the rest-house, the boys are running into 
shelter. 


123. Mahosadha reflects that, had they a large hall to play in, their 
games would not be disturbed in so many ways. So he resolves to build 
one; he tells the boys to bring each a piece of money. He calls a master- 
carpenter, hands over the money to him and asks him to build a hall, On 
the left, kneeling, the master-carpenter receiving the thousand pieces from 
Mahosadha ; behind, the latter’s companions. 


124. The carpenter has not grasped Mahosadha’s idea; so the latter 
draws out the plan, and the carpenter, astonished and delighted, works under 
‘his orders. It was a beautiful structure, containing a place for travellers, one 
for the poor, one for Buddhist monks,-one for brahmans, etc., etc. 


125, But this is not yet enough; a tank is necessary; he calls an 
architect and gets him to build a tank with a thousand bends and one 
hundred bathing places. The Bodhisattva and the architect are discussing 
the plan; behind the architect, either a workman or one of Mahosadha’s 
companions, The zigzag figure represents the tank. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate XXVIII, 


=—= eo 


.* * 
— 


=e 
ee eee 


ae? >- STEEL 


122.—(Mahosadha’s companions) run to 123.—Mahosadha gives the gold (to a 
enter the rest-house. carpenter to build.a hall). 


124.—Mahosadha builds (plans and superin- 125.—Mahosadha constructs a tank. 
tends the building of) the rest-house. 


58 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 11 


126. His fame begins to spread far and wide. People come to him 
from everywhere to submit their disputes to him, and they abide by his 
decisions. Mahosadha is seated in the hall; near by are three litigants, 


127. Mahosadha is now eight years of age. The king sends messen- 
gers all round to try and get news of the wise man who was bom eight 
years ago. One of them sees the magnificent hall, tank, etc., and hears of 
the wisdom of Mahosadha He reports to the king, who desires to call the 
boy to the court. His four wise men, however, dissuade him from doing so: 
everybody can build a hall or a tank; no, the king should not call him 
without further tests. Then follows a series of tests or cases for examina- 
tion, represented in the following plaques. In each case, the jealous four 
wise men put off his being called to the palace. A hawk carries off a piece 
of meat: Mahosadha sees it and follows by treading on the hawk’s shadow. 
Then he gives a great shout, the hawk lets the meat fall and the boy 
catches it up. In the left-hand corner, on the top, the hawk; Mahosadha is 
catching up the meat; behind him, his companions; in front, one of the big 
people clapping hands, 


128, Mahosadha is deoiding the cattle theft ; he is in the hall; outside 
the two disputants with their cattle. 


All the tests which follow are shortly described in the explanations of the corresponding Talaing 
inscriptions, to which the reader may refer. 


129. Mahosadha urravels the case of the thread necklace. Below him, 
the two wome:, sho ciaim each to be the owner; near them, the vase of 
water by means of which the case was decided. 


[Prate XXIX. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


Part IIJ 


n) 
a 


Bos 


| ed Serara ee 


een ad 


ay cern Courier 
eet 


+) 


127.-Mahosadha causes the (piece of) meat 


126.—Mahosadha decides cases. 


to fail. 


129.—The case of the necklace of thread. 


128.—The case of the cattle. 


t 


60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vou. 11 


130. Mahosadha decides the case of the ball of thread. On the left, 
the two women who have come to have their dispute settled. One of 
Mahosadha’s companions is untwisting the thread ball held by one of the 
women, to discover what kind of seed has been placed inside it, 


131. The Indian Solomons Mahosadha, in the same manner as 
Solomon, decides which is the true mother of a child. The two women 


holding the child, are explaining their case to the Bodhisattva. 


(32. Mahosadha is deciding whose wife—the dwarf’s or the poof 
man’s—is the woman. Below, on the left, the woman; the man in front of 
her is probably her husband, the other being the poor man. 


133. The Bodhisattva decides the case of the cart against Sakka, who 
has stolen it in order to make manifest his—Mahosadha’s—wisdom. Sakka 
is still on the cart, beside which the true owner, standing, explains his case. 


Part II. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PouaTE XXX, 


ee te a ee 


So ae ‘ Mies 3 
ae. I ; 


» 


t..7” 


Cid tha yw 


130.—The case of the cotton thread. 131.—The case of the child. 


133.—Mahosadha decides (the case of) 
the cart. 


132.—Deciding the case of the wife. 


62 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { VoL. 1 


134. There now follows a series of riddles by means of which Maho- 
sadha's enemies hope to undo him. Most of these riddles are put to the 
villagers, knowing they would go straight to the wise boy. This is the 
riddle of the stick. Mahosadha is holding the string, one end of which is 
tied round the middle of the stick; below is the basin of water which helped 
to solve the riddle. A villager is looking on. 


135. A villager is holding a skull in each hand. Which is the 
woman's, which is the man’s? The sutures in the skull answer the puzzle: 
a man’s are straight ; a woman's crooked. 


136. A villager has brought two snakes: which is the male? which is 
the female? Their tails will solve the problem. The male’s tail is thick ; 
the female's is thin. 


137. The riddle of the wonderful bull with horns on his legs and a 
hump on his head, which crows thrice a day. Mahosadha easily demon- 
strates that it is a cock, and gets a cock sent to the king, who is lost in 
admiration. One of the villagers is holding the cock. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. |Prate XXXL. 


‘ 


Z 
w 


F 

a 
if 
:= 
iM 
By 
i § 
} 4 
4 
4 


EE 


134.—The riddle of the pole. 135.—Deciding the case of the head. 


136.—The riddle of the snake. 137.—The riddle of the cock. 


64 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


138, The riddle of the contorted gem. Two villagers are holding it; 
at each of its ends is seen the new thread which Mahosadha ingeniously 
got inserted by ants lured with honey. 


139. Mahosadha solves the puzzle of the “bull in calf,” which the 
villagers are to deliver. A villager is sent to the king with the information 
that his father is in labour and cannot be delivered. The king understands 
this counter-riddle and is delighted. 


140. The villagers are asked to cook a pot of rice under conditions 
apparently impossible; but the Bodhisattva easily sofves this very clever 
riddle. A villager is cooking the rice. 


141. The villagers must, under heavy penalty if they fail, make a rope 
of sand. Mahosadha tells them to go to the king and ask him a piece of 
his old sand-rope as a model. The lotuses in this and the two previous 
plaques ase devices to fill up empty spaces. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. ([PLate XXXII. 


138.—The riddle of the gem. 139.—Mahosadha decides the case of the bull. 


a 
@ 


CUS teh 


7 
~ f 


CATES 


f. 


© € 


elena hs, we eh 


en Oe ates eer 


140.—The puzzle of the rice 141.—The puzzle of the sand (rope). 


66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. ti 


142. The king orders the villagers to catch, in the forest, a new tank 
covered with lilies. Mahosadha answers the riddle with a counter one. The 
villagers, under his instructions, are preparing to deliver the counter-puzzie in 
the palace; they are holding staves, ropes and clods; they are to tell the 
king the new tank, frightened, has got loose and run away. They are 
holding the clods in their right hands. 


143. Again, the king wants a new park with trees, etc. Mahosadha 
counter-puzzled the king in the same manner as in the tankeriddle, The 
villagers are holding ropes to tie the park. 


144. The king, del-gnted with Mahosadha’s wit and wisdom in his 
solutions of the riddles, at last summons |im to the palace to assume office, 
There will now be bouts cf wit between the four jealous so-called wise men 
and Mahosadha. in which they will always be the losers. He himself origi 
nates the question of the ass: he had sat in his father's place, which way a 
gross breach of etiquette +:t be !s greater than his father and proves tite 
offspring of an ass may be citer tnan the ass himself. The ass, very badly 
modelled, ts seen between the king and the sage. 


145. Mahosadha salutes his father and instructs him how te act before 
tne king, so that he may bring about the question of the ass. 


1 This plaque should come before the previous one. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON: THE ANANDA. [Prare XXXIIL. 


= 


142—The puzzle of the tank. 143.—The puzzle of the park. 


+ 


- 


DK EODE PASI, 


144.—The question of the ass. 145.—Mahosadha salutes his father. 


68 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vol. Ut 


146. The finding of the mysterious jewel, which was thought to be in 
the lake. The four wise men cannot get at it, but Mahosadha experiences 
no difficulty. He is holding the jewel, which he has rescued from the 
palm-tree by the. lake, in his hand. 


147. The sage is explaining to the king the reason of the chameleon’s 
strange behaviour. The chameleon is on the top of the gateway, behind 
Mahosadha. The king is on his elephant, 


548. Mahosadha, standing before the king’s chariot, explains how 
naturally it came to pass that the unlucky man (who is hiding behind him) 
could not possess the lucky. girl, who has become queen, and is seated 
behind Vedeha. 


149. The king, on the dais, is explaining to Mahosadha, and the four 
_wiseacres behind him, that he has seen a ram and a dog who had struck up 
a great friendship, and asks them the cause of it. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. ([Prate XXXIV. 


frtt 


- 


4" 


| Pybed reper, 


Bien monraM ans 1° 6 


b = =e & 


reercetc ory 


ea oe ee ee abit oe 
147.—The case of the chameleon. 


146.—Taking the jewel. 


149.—The question of the ram. 


148.—The case of good and had luck. 


7o EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


150. The four wise men are very much puzzled by that question of the 
ram; they had been threatened with banishment if they did not answer. 
Mahosadha calls them, makes them sit before him like pupils, and teaches to 
each an answer. But the perfectly right one he keeps for himself. 


151, The king wants to know which is better: riches or wisdom ? 
Whenever Mahosadha and the four wise men are represented together, the 
former always sits first in the first row below. 


is2, The four opine that wealth is better, but the sage proves with 
irrefutable arguments that wisdom is preferable, and the king agrees with 
him. 


153. On the right, Mahosadha by clenching his fist asks Amara, his 
future wife, whether she is married ; the girl opens her hand, meaning: No. 
Her left hand is steadying the pot of rice on her head. , 


[|Prate XXXV. 


Part ITI.} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


150.—(He) instructs the four pandits. 151—(The king putting to the five) the 
; question of the rich and the wise. 


i 
i 
ke 
> 
ra} 
, £7 
JS 
cas 
oe ee 

\ 
ax 


leu N IHSAN' : 


\ ee. . es ay Aa > 


152.—Mahosadha answers the question (of 153.—Mahosadha asks (Amara whether 
the rich and the wise). she is married. etc.). 


iE EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ( vot. if 


154. Mahosadha was disguised as a tailor, so that the wife he was 
looking for should take him on his own merits and not on account of his 
position. Having understood she was free, he made up his mind to marry 
her, for she was very clever, but he would first test her, They have a con. 
versation sparkling with wit and wisdom. Then she offers him some of the 
gruel she. was taking to her father. He accepts. The small table on which 
he is eating is one of the details which show the lack of thought sometimes 
manifested by the artists; it was not, and is not, the custom for men in the 
fields to eat on such tables. They ate.on palm or cocoanut leaves. 


155. He asks her the way to her home; she tells him. Amara’s 
mother is on the left; he is mending the villagers’ old clothes, and makes 
in one day one thousand rupees, which he intends giving her. 


186. Amar& comes back from the fields in the evening and, according 
to custom, she washes her parents’ feet; then those of the Bodhisattva. 
She is holding a vase full of water, preparing to pour it on his feet. 


is}. He is testing her temper, submission and patience, by daubing het 
hair and body with the food she has prepared for him. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XXXVI. 


154.—Mahosadha eats the rice-gruel. 155.—Mahosadha stitches clothes. 


156.—(Amara) washes Mahosadha’s feet. 157.—Mahosadha smears the boiled rice (on 
Amara's head and body). 


14 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vol. 1 


158. He has made up his mind to take her to wife; he gives the 
thousand rupees to the parents. To Amara, he presents a loin-cloth and 
asks her to follow him to town. 


159. Having settled everything, Mahosadha takes leave of the girl's 
parents. He is on the right, with his hands uplifted in the oriental salute; 
the father is in the middle, the mother on the left. 


160. Amara knows him only in the disguise of a tailor. He wishes to 
test her chastity ; he puts on his court costume, has her dragged by force 
before him and tempts her. But she steadfastly refuses. The girl is in 
front of him; behind her, one of the men who dragged her in. 


161. The morrow he marries; it was a great gala day at the palace 
and in the city. Numerous presents were sent to them. Amara is seating 
behind the Bodhisattva; on the left, a female servant brings in presents in a 
(probably lacquered) vase. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLate XXXVII. 


"a 


PH bak 


ut 
wf 
Pa 


158.—Mahosadha gives (Amara) a loin-cloth. 159.—Mahosadha informs (that he is about) 
to return (home). 


1440 ee 


*, 
af. 


i 


Ae Ee A ee 


160.—Mahosadha tests (Amara’s chastity). 161.—Mahosadha marries. 


76 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { von. 11 


162. Mahosadha is hiding at the potter's, whither he has been obliged 
to flee, owing to the false charges brought against him by the four wiseacres, 
his enemies. Mahosadha is on the right, in the act of moulding a pot. 


163. The goddess of the white umbrella, by asking difficult riddles to 
the king, and threatening something dreadful if they were not answered 
induces the king to recall Mahosadha. The king sends four courtiers, with 
many presents, in different directions, to look for him. One. of the courtiers 
has found him, and is offering him the king’s presents. 


164, The courtier explains his mission; immediately the sage mounts 
the chariot and repairs to the palace at full speed. The king, on his throne 
and delighted, receives him. Explanations follow, and Mahosadha proves to 
the king he has been calumniated. 


165. Mahosadha agrees to answer the goddess’s riddles; as he thus 
becomes the teacher, the king places him on his throne, as is meet, and 
himself sits below. Mahosadha solves the riddles. The goddess, half of 
whose body appears on the white umbrella, offers the sage a casket full of 
heavenly flowers and perfumes. Mahosadha is holding the casket. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate XXXVIII. 


162.—Mahosadha lives as a potter. 163.—(The courtiers) go about (looking for) 
Mahosadha. 


series as ———— 


- -_— = ed “ 


164.—Coming from the potter’s. 165.—(Mahosadha) answers the (king’s) 
questions. 


78 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


166. His four enemies are vexed at his return. To entrap him they 
go to see him and ask him: “To whom is it right to tell a secret?” “To 
no one,” answers Mahosadha, 


i67, The four go to the king and repeat to him what has passed, 
adding that surely the sage is a traitor, since he holds that not even the 
king is to be told secrets. The king calls him and asks him to explain 
before the four wise men; he is displeased with his answer that a secret 
should not be reported until it is no more a secret. Mahosadha knows he 
has been trapped. Meanwhile, the king gives his sword to the four, ordering 
them to kill him at the door in the morning. 


168. Mahosadha, anxious, resolves to discover the secrets of his four 
enemies. Every day they used to sit on a trough at the palace door, and 
discuss their plans. The sage hides himself under the trough, and there 
learns his intended murder and all the sectets of his enemies. 


169. In the morning, the four, armed with swords, are waiting for him 
dt the door; but he comes with a strong retinue, and their plan fails. He 
is telling the king his enemies’ secrets. The king, furious, wants to tmpale 
them. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prats XXXIX. 


i66.—The four come to ask (questions to 167.—The kirig asks (Mahosadha) concerning 
Mahosadha to entrap him). secrets. 


se > @ @ Gre ¥+eo * 


—— 


168.—(Mahosadha) is under the trough. 169.—The (four) pandits look for Mahosadha. 


80 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { voL, I 


170. But Mahosadha pleads for them and gets them reinstated in their 
respective positions, The sage, rehabilitated, is honoured by being made tq 
sit on a seat as high as that of the king. 


171. Mahosadha’s power is now paramount; he practically governs the 
country. To be ready for any eventuality, he strongly fortifies the capital. 
Then he sends men with presents to the ro1 kings of India, bidding them to 
take service at their courts and report on their plans and doings. He is 
giving his instructions to his men, who are holding the presents. 


172. Mahosadha had a very clever and wise parrot. He receives news 
that Safkhapala, king of Ekabala, is assembling a large army; wherefore it is 
not known. He sends his parrot to ascertain, and tells him to go all round 
India for news. The parrot is on his right hand. The men are those who 
brought the news from Ekabala. 


173. The parrot goes and ascertains what ts going on at Ekabala; 
then he goes the round of the capitals in India. Thus he arrives at Uttara- 
paficdla; there, the king, Cajani-Brahmadatta, and his chaplain Kevatta are 
planning the conquest of India. The parrot hears everything, comes back to 
Mithila, and, perching himself on the sage’s shoulder, tells him all the news. 


174. This plaque is missing. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLATE XL. 


170.—Mahosadha sets free the four persons. 171.—-Mahosadha sends presents (to the 
101 kings). 


a 
in 


eCCeCtcecceccte 
v 


T ; 
: ; 
: ’ 
: i 
t 
; 
‘ A. i 
yt 
f : 
A 
‘ ree ‘ 
we 
Ph 
, ‘i 
we A 
' NM 
. < 


Ab eA . a r te 
at 0 EU RELS ORE OEE EE a 
: . s oe of a ae 


oF 


172.—Mahosadha sends the parrot. 173.—The parrot brings news. 


82 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


178. King Vedeha, aware that his capital is being invested by Célani’s 
vast army, iS greatly troubled, The four cannot advise him; so he calls 
Mahosadha and asks him how Mithila is to be rid of so powerful an enemy. 


176. Cilani, thinking the city has no water, wants to cut its supply 
from outside. To discourage him, the sage plants lilies at the top of 
bamboo poles sixty cubits long; these poles' are camouflaged, and in the 
morning sent to Cijani, who wonders, and knows he cannot get the city 
through thirst. On the left, a man, in a tank, is holding one of the bamboo 
poles, the lily has blossomed at the upper extremity; near the tank, Maho= 
sadha is issuing instructions ; behind him, two attendants, 


177. Kevatta, Cijani’s chaplain, is well aware of Mahosadha’s incom- 
parable wit; he tells his master all his efforts to take Mithila will be foiled; 
but he proposes a stratagem. He, Kevatta, will fight the “ Battle of the 
Law" with Mahosadha, who is young still and does not know one or two 
things. Mahosadha is asked to come over to Ciilani’s camp to fight the 
Battle of the Law. He is coming out of Mithila in his car, preceded by 
Warriors carrying axes and shields, 


178. The Battle of the Law consists in this, that he who first—willingly 
or unwillingly—bows before the other, has lost the battle. By a stratagem 
the sage makes Kevatta bow first, and presses him to the ground. On the 
terms agreed to, Cilani has lost the battle, and, terrified, . flees with his 
vassals and army to Paficdla. 


Part II.} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Pirate XLI. 


- 
- 


uy Gy) ears Ou f: d : 


175.—Mahosadha is asked by the king (how 176.—Mahosadha is planting the flower. 
Mithila shall be delivered from its enemies). 


oe ee EL” 


ome 


KERSARS A 


ota 


177.—Mahosadha leaves the cit 178.—Mahosadha fights the Battle of the Law. 


84 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 


179. One year has passed, Kevatta’s pride rankles at his affront at 
the hands of Mahosadha, He plans to lure him and King Vedeha to Pafi- 
cala, and there destroy them. He goes to Mithila, sees Vedeha, and 
praises Cflanf’s daughter’s beauty. Vedeha agrees to go and fetch her 
as his queen. Delighted, he sends Kevatta to the sage so that the two 
may be reconciled; but Mahosadha, shut up in his room, gives order to 
refuse him entrance. Mahosadha is on his bed; on the left, Kevatta 
coming in, is refused admittance by an attendant. 


180. The four advise the king to go to Paficala; his marriage with the 
princess will cement a lasting peace. He summons Mahosadha and asks him 
his opinion. The sage strongly advises him not to go. The king becomes 
angry ; Mahosadha, prudent, takes his leave and returns home, 


181. Mahosadha desires to know the true nature of Kevatta's mission. 
He sends his parrot to Paficala, with orders to make friends with CGlani’s 
minah bird, which knows all his secrets, and come back. The parrot is on 
Mahosadha’s lap; two attendants. 


182. The parrot makes love to the minah; from her he learns that if 
the sage and the king go to Paficadla, they will be murdered. The parrot 
comes back to tell Mahosadha; the bird is alighting on the latter’s 
shoulder; four attendants. 


Parr I[1.]} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Peate XLII. 


Zs” 
we aS ere 


2 * 4 


— =e 


gs Fay Renter 3 Ahi 2a}? 


179.—Kevatta comes and asks (for 180.—The king is angry with Mahosadha. 
Mahosadha). 


ORE RAAAAPMAAS Bei 


~— — ~ew em. ~~ cee -- a 


5° 
A 
fs 
3 
i" 


ch 


6. a 
, bss Ncesicn an 


“aaa 


“- - 


i} 


181.—Mahosadha instructs his parrot. 182.—The parrot returns from the minah 
bird. 


86 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vou. 1 


183. Mahosadha, knowing that King Vedeha is determined to go to 
Paficdla, evolves a whole plan by which not only shall Vedeha get the 
Paficala princess, but also see the discomfiture of his enemy Cilant; he is 
asking leave to proceed before the king; in front of the king, Mahosadha 
with, behind him, three attendants, 


184; He goes ahead of the king in order to arrange everything on the 
way against the rapid and safe return of the king. He has reached Pafi- 
cala, and is being received. 


885. Cilani dissembles and receives Mahosadha well. They convetse 
together. The sage asks permission—in pursuance of his plan—to build a 
palace for King Vedeha. Permission is granted. Mahosadha, distinguishable 
by his headdress, is near Cilani’s left hand; three attendants. 


186. He begins to work for the safety of Vedeha. He is making 
tunnels; he thinks the entrance to the small tunnel should be at the foot of 
the stairs. He tells Calani his stairs are bad, and, under the pretext of 
repairing theth, builds under them a strong wooden platform; under this will 
be the entrance to the tunnel, invisible. On the left, the palate; on the 
right of the palace, the stairs. Behind Mahosadha a master-carpenter to 
whom he is explaining things. 


183.—Mahosadha tells (the king) that he 
is going (to Uttarapaficala). 


185—(Mahosadha) converses with king 
Calani. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


[Peate XLIII. 


184—-(Mahosadha) enters the city of 
Paiicala. 


We O&VE LE ERR CELL EEL 


ry ene 
mri 


aharaSsaPFX RG wa be Q 


weiriticn ty. 
Mick pA 


A 


186.—Mahosadha fixes stairs (firmly). 


88 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. u 


187. He wants to build the palace not within the city, but outside, so 
that all his plans may come off to a nicety; but he must rouse no suspi- 
cion; so he asks the king permission to pull down the houses which may be 
in the way; he asks also to be allowed to prevent the owners to come and 
annoy the king with complaints. All is granted. He seizes first the queen- 
mother’s dwelling. She complains; nobody listens. She goes to the sage 
who is a little way off; he will not speak to her; a bystander offers his 
services for the explanations. She has to pay a heavy bribe for her house 
not to be pulled down. Near the tree, Mahosadha; on the left, the queen- 
mother; between them, the negotiator. The house behind the queen. 


188. Then it is the turn of Kevatta’s house, who, too, has to pay a 
heavy bribe to preserve his home. On the left, Kevatta’s house; near it, a 
woman offering the money in a casket; the sage is lifting the cover and 
looking at it; behind him, an attendant. In this way, from all parts of the 
city, he gets an enormous sum of money, which will be useful in carrying 
out his plans. And nobody dares complain. 


(89. He repairs to Calani’s palace, and explains to him that the people 
are so Very sorry to lose their homes that it will be impossible to build the 
palace in the city, and therefore asks permission to build it outside. Permis- 
sion is granted. On the left, Cilanf; in front of him, Mahosadha, who 
holds somgthing in each hand, which it is not easy to make out; the text, 
moreover, gives no hint as to what these things are, 


190, He has already chosen the site outside the city; by royal orders 
—on a him from the sage—no citizen is allowed to go and see what is 
going on. Then he begins to build a great tunnel which will be used for 
the flight of Vedeha, one entrance of which was on the Ganges. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLaTE XLIV. 


on 
ew 2 * 


4 eniniirape 5 iar 5 r 


187.—(They) take the king’s mother’s house. 188.—(Mahosadha) takes Kevatta’s house. 


189.—Mahosadha enters the king’s house. 190.—Mahosadha digs the tunnel. 


go EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


191. Before leaving Mithila, Mahosadha had ordered three hundred ships 
to be built; the shipwrights | are delivering the crafts, one of which is repre- 
sented, to the sage, 


192. But, at. all casts, suspicions must not be aroused;.he is giving 
minute instructions to the shipwrights where to hide the ships | in‘a secluded 
but handy place, 


193. Everything has now been completed against the flight and safe 
return of the king of Mithila: the palace, the tunnels big and small, ete- 
King Vedeha is nearing Pajicala, and Mahosadha goes to meet him. In 
front is Mahosadha; on the elephant Vedeha. The mahout has been left out, 


Ags Vedeha takes possession of the néw palace,. By a trick, Mahosadha’ 
hag;. got Calani’s ‘mother, his« queen, ‘séh and ‘daughter into a safe “place 
through the tunnel. Vedeha waits for” the princess and, - impatient, ‘looks* at 
‘the window. He sees the hosts of Colani’s army, becames frightened ahd. 
asks the four. wiseacres for. advice;. they can give, none, . Then: he, asks. 
.Mahosadha, who answers there is nothing to fear. Mahosadha is the first, 
of the two below; the others are the wise men. ~ 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Puate XLV. 


7 ro = <i by iF 
ee ERAN FP 
BY SOS Sw ws ome 


191—The shipwrights make over the ships 192.—Mahosadha sends (the boats) out of 
to Mahosadha. the way. 


193.—Mahosadha goes out to meet the king 194.—The king (Vedeha) asks Mahosadha. 
(Vedeha). 


92 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. i 


195. To convince the king, he shows him and the ministers the means 
of escape: the great tunnel with all its magnificence. First Mahosadha, 
then Vedeha, and last a minister. 


196, They come to the place where COljan!’s family are kept; when 
they see Vedeha they shriek in fear. COlani hears the shriek, is puzzled, 
but keeps his own counsel in very shame. Mahosadha then and there 
marries the Paficala princess to Vedeha. Then they leave the tunnel by 
the entrance near the Ganges, They are getting out: first the king, then 
Mahosadha, and last a minister. 


197. The ships are ready neat the entrance; Vedeha and Cadlanrs 
family embark. Mahosadha, standing on the shore, gives final advice to 
Vedeha ; himself must stay behind to bring safely the king’s army back to 
Mithila, in the boat, from the left: C®ijani’s- consort, Vedeha, the Paficala 
princess, and her brother. There should be five persons, for the queen- 
mother also went, but she is not mentioned in the text, “ being an old 
woman,” and so only four are represented. 


198, Vedeha starts for Mithila. At dawn Cfilani utters dreadful threats 
to awe Vedeha. But Mahosadha calmly.shows himself to him and, in the 
course of the conversation which ensues, tells him that his—Célani’s—plans 
have all been foiled. Cdjani is on the elephant. 


Pari If.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate X_VI. 


195.—(He) shows the tunnel to king Vedeha. 196.—(Vedeha) comes out from the tunnel. 


ee a 


i97.—(Mahosadha) instructs king Vedeha. 198.—(Mahosadha) converses with (king) 
Cilant. 


94 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. it 


199. Cillani orders the slaughter of Mahosadha, but the latter informs 
him that his family will be made to suffer for any harm done to him, for 
they are in Vedeha’s hands, far away. Ciilanit is dumbfounded; Mahosadha 
-shows him the way the beautiful queen is gone, and in so doing reveals the 
existence of the tunnel. 


200. The sage assures the king that no harm will befall his family if 
he, Mahosadha, returns safely to Mithila. He then shows the tunnel to 
Cilani; from the left: Cilani, recognizable by his headdress, Mahosadha, 
one of the vassal kings, a warrior with mace and shield. 


201. As they come out, Mahosadha quickly seizes a sword he has 
hidden in the sand the day before, leaps eighteen cubits in the air, seizes 
the king, brandishes his sword and asks—‘‘ Who is the master of all the 
kingdoms of India?” “You, Sir,” says the king. “And the two strike up 
a sincere friendship, On the right, the tunnel- -door ; the sage is holding the 
king’s left hand. Calani has suddenly grown a beard; he is without it in 
the other plaques. 


o2.. The sage opens the door of the tunnel, which he had closed, 
and’ the 101 vassal kings, who had accompanied him, come out, and thank 
him “for saving their lives. He answers he saved them once already whet 
Cilani wanted to poison them. They forgive Cilani and offer presents to 
Mahosadha. Four of the kings are holding presents in their hands. 


Part IJ.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XLVI. 


, 


A alae 


G 
e 


‘ot 
ec 
ted) 
hat 
~) 
wf 
wy 


“ee = a. ey 


SS 
200.—(King) Cilani looks at the tunnel. 


199.—(Mahosadha) shows (Calani) the way 
(his) queen is gone., 


is 
% 


FeTEETy 


. ; 

by J 
_° ‘ 
1” 
ttre » Oy 


t 
¢ 
y 


eerrrer 


~ 


A; 
fis 
e 
a” 
a NE pee 


s 


iz 
Nx | 


is 


F 
a 


. — 
: iy 
We 


Coe » 


geen» 


“— 


{ 
ug 
; 
Ld 


Osa 


i shatiawitia 


ape > “em 7 ee ray ae ‘ 


a 
Gases 
OEMOECO ROE RES 


rig 
er 
: : 
er 
ee 
oy 


201.—(Mahosadhia) measures strength 202.—The hundred kings offer ornaments 
with the king. (to Mahosadha). 


96 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 


203. Clan! desires to retain the services of so eminent a man, and 
offers him honours and wealth; but Mahosadha declines. Cilanf on his 
throne; an attendant offers presents to the sage in a casket. 


204. Mahosadha takes leave of Calanf, who bids him an affectionate 
farewell. On the left, the white umbrella; two attendants holding presents, 
which seem to be pieces of fine cloth. The king is embracing Mahosadha. 
He is again given a beard in this plaque. 


205. He arrives at Mithila, where he is received amid great rejoicings, 
He sends back to Cilani his mother, wife and son. The two queens are 
below and the son near them. In front are presents in caskets. 


206. The daughter of Colani bears Vedeha a son; when he is ten years 
Vedeha dies. Mahosadha makes him king, and then asks him leave to go 
and visit C@jani. The young prince is under the white umbrella; a brahman 
is holding a conch full of the coronation water; on the right, Mahosadha. 


Part Il.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prats XLVI. 


Fs 


Raa 
ere rr od 


& 
$3 
ui 
o . 
ed 


we, 
Lod 
5 


‘ 
7 

i ] 

ost = wae" at 
Ext PrN oe 7. 2& ro ‘ 
So eattines hated Sed rer: 


204.—Mahosadha returns to the city 
(of Mithila). 


ae —— 


v9 ve 2yereres 


203.--The king invites Mahosadha 
(to stay at his court). 


CUC ELEC LACE ECE 


& 


rer rer i akal t a a 


eco 


“Or err ererer ret rer 


oe 


205.—Mahosadha sends back (C’s family). 206.—Accession of the son of king Vedeha. 


98 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. I 


207. Cilani receives him with great honours. The queen, however, 
dislikes him, and sets her ladies to watch him in the hope of getting him 
trapped. A female ascetic regularly takes her meals at the palace. One 
day she meets Mahosadha and, to test his cleverness, she asks him by 
gestures whether he is not going to become an ascetic? She places her 
hand on her head, showing him the peculiar coiffure of ascetics. He 
answers by placing his hand on his stomach, meaning: “No; because I 
have a large family to support.’ Mahosadha. on the right, has also a hand 
on his.head; this is a mistake, but has been made probably for the sake of 
symmetry. 


208. The queen’s ladies have seen all this, and report to the king that 
Mahosadha is plotting against his life with an ascetic. The king calls him; 
explanations take place. The king offers him the post of generalissimo. 
The sage thinks it is a trap; he brings some presents to the ascetic and 
asks her to ascertain the king’s intentions. He learns that the king is 
indeed very fond of him. On the right, the ascetic; Mahosadha is 


giving her presents. 


209. Persons who have lost in a case’? decided by Mahosadha salute 
him respectfully; on the right, two losers; Mahosadha with, behind him, two 
of his companions. 


210. Candakumara is judging impartially the case which the -high 
judge Khandahala has wilfully decided wrongly. The prince in the court of 
justice; before him, the two suitors. 


1 See explanation of the Talaing legend. 


Part I1.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate XLIX 


ose SRe h pin sa Bi Rees 


meee 
Pe a eet A NS 


207.—A female ascetic asks Mahosadha ~ ’ 208.—Mahosadha asks the female ascetic 
(by gestures, why he does not become (to find out the king’s mind). 
an ascetic). 


a. re 


209.—The persons who have lost the 210.—Candakumara is deciding the case. 
case salute (Mahosadha’ reverentially. 


100 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vot. 11 


211. The king learns of his son’s success at law, and appoints him 
chief judge. Khandahala, deeply offended, swears he will be revenged. 
Prince Candakum@ra, in the hall of justice, is dispensing justice. In front of 
him, four suitors. 


212, The occasion for Khapdahila’s revenge comes quickly. The king 
sees in a dream the Tavatirhsa heaven, and wishes to go there. Khapdahila 
tells him the only way to go to heaven is by sacrifice: he must immolate 
his queens and his children. The king makes known the sacrifice to the 
citizens by proclamation. He first calls Candakumara and his four brothers 
to make known to them his will. The king on his throne; Candakumara, 
the first in the top row, is arguing with his father. 


213. Then Candakumfra’s sisters and the queens are brought in, The 
prince understands that he alone is the object of Khaydahdla’s hatred. He 
is entreating the king to spare the others’ lives, but in vain. Behind the 
prince, one of his brothers. 


214. Candakumara, failing to mollify his father, sends his wives to gd 
and implore him, The wives are represented by one only, on the left. 


Part IU.) TALAING PLAQUES ON}THE ANANDA. [Prate L, 


ee ee 


4OMdad 


&@Agsa 


211.—The king causes him to try (cases) 
(The king appoints Candakumara a judge). 212.—They bring Candakumira (to the king). 


7 = - = 


i a 


213.—Candakumira entreats (his father). 214.—Candakumira bids (his wives to 
implore the king). 


102 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ Vou. 


2ts. All supplications are unavailing; owing to Khaydahala’s influence 
Candakum&ra is taken to the sacrificial pit with the other victims, He is 
placed near the pit, his head bent forward; Khandahala-raisés the sword to 
strike ; behind the brahman is Candakumara’s wife. Before the brahman, 
the sacrificial fire. 


216. But at that moment, the prince’s wife makes a solemn act of 
asseveration. Immediately, Sakka comes down from heaven, brandishing a 
blazing mass of iron. The king flees; the victims are set free, and the 
people kill Khandahala, Candakumara is seated; before him the sacrificial 
fire is still burning. Khagdahdla has been thrown on the ground and the 
people are killing him with sticks. 


217. The old king is banished, and Candakumara made king in his 
stead, He is seated under the white umbrella ; a brahman is about to pour 
the coronation water from a conch; on the left, two more brahmans. 


218. After a good reign and a pious life Candakumara ascends to 
heaven. 


Parr II.] 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


{Prate LI. 


215.—Candakumrara is near the sacrificial pit. 


- * 


4 
t 


Ta DEL te 
{mide gmsereesg 
oS 2393 3S 3% 


217.—Accesston of Candakumiara. 


216.—The people rush at Khandahala (to 
kill him). 


218.—Candakumara ascends to heaven. 


104 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vov. 


219. A prince of Benares is banished to the jungle. He meets with a 
Nagi, or snake fairy; he has two children. After a time he becomes king 
and his daughter is married to the king of the Nagas. The Bodhisattva is 
coming down from heaven to be conceived in the womb of the N&ga king’s 
queen. 


220. The Bodhisattva is born. The midwife is holding the child. Near 
the bed are two fire-pans (see No. 116). 


221. At the age of discretion, Bhiridatta receives a kingdom from his 
father Dhatarattha. He is being anointed king; on the left, a brahman 
with the coronation water in a conch’; on the right, a woman holding a 
small vase with perfumes. 


222, This plaque is missing. 


223. Bhoridatta used to go to the TaAvatirhsa heaven to wait upon 
Sakka. One day a difficult question arose which none of the gods could 
answer. But the Bodhisattva answered it. He is on the right, on a high 
seat, because he alone could answer, and was therefore considered as the 
master. Sakka, standing in the air—represented by scrolls at his feet—is 
offering him divine flowers and fruits, which he is holding in his hands, 
Below, two gods listening to the Bodhisattva. His name before was “ Datta”, 
but on this occasion, on account of his great wisdom, he is given the name 
of “ Bhiridatta” by Sakka. The naga-head over the Bodhisattva indicates 
he is a naga. 


1 No oil was used in the ancient coronation ceremonies in Burma. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate LII. 


219.—Conception of Bhiridatta. 220.—Birth of Bharidatta. 


Le “ ‘ : aS 2 % 


cos 


221.—Accession of Bhiridatta. 223.—Bhiridatta answers Indra’s question. 


106 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vou, 


224. Having seen the glories of Tavatimsa, Bhdridatta is disgusted with 
his birth as a naga, and resolves to gain heaven by the observance of fast 
and of the precepts (silas). He is asking from his father permission to 
observe the silas, The king and the queen are seated, he is standing in 
front of them. The snake over the head of a figure always shows that 


figure is a naga.’ 


225. They allow him to practise the silas in the garden. But young 
. nigis attend on him, playing instruments and dancing; and this disturbs 
him. A n&gi.is playing 6n an instrument; another is dancing; a defect in 
the glaze, over her right shoulder, makes it appear as if she had two heads, 


226, Bhitridatta wants to get rid of the female attendants. He resolves 
to go to the werld of men, on an ant-hill, near the river Jumna. He does 
not tell his parents of his intentions; but he instructs his wife to send the 
attendants every day at dawn to accompany him back to the Naga world. 


227. A brahman hunter from Benares arrives with his son near the 
spot where Bhiiridatta is keeping the silas. He hears the nAga maidens sing 
and dance; he goes to see; the maidens flee. The Bodhisattva, who has 
assumed a divine form, is left alone. To avoid telling a lie, he tells the 
brahman he s a naga. Bhdridatta seated near a tree; the brahman and his 
son Somadatta. 


1 The respective position of these two plaques is inverted om the Ananda. 


Part IU.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {[Prate LILI. 


224.—(Bhiiridatta) asks his father leave to 225.—Bhiridatta observes the silas in the 
observe the silas. garden, 


ea et ry, 
eee 
ABTA aia\ah 


226.—Bhiridatta instructs his wife. 227.—Bhiridatta converses with ines brahman. 


108 EPIGRAPHIA BJRMANICA [ vou. 1 


228. However, to prevent the hunter, who has not a prepossessing 
appearance, from doing him any harm, as, for instance, selling him to a 
snake-charmer, he invites them to come to the Naga world. The Bodhisattva 
is leading them to his abode. 


229. To induce them to remain in the Naga world, he confers upon 
them regal splendours and overwhelms them with good things. Bhiridatta, 
standing, is conversing with the two brahmans, 


a30. Bhiridatta goes regularly to the Jumna to observe the silas. 
After a time, the hunter gets tired and wants to go back. Bhiiridatta 
offers him an all-wish-granting gem. The brahman, who wants to become 
an ascetic, refuses it. Now, Alambayana, another brahman, knows a spell 
powerful against snakes. Reciting the spell, he comes to the spot where 
Bhiridatta is; all the nagas flee in terror, and leave behind the gem they 
had brought with them. 


231. The hunter, in exchange for the gem, points out the Bodhisattva 
to the snake-charmer. Bhiridatta, in snake-form, is coiled on the ant-hill; 
the snake-charmer and, behind him, the hunter. 


Part II. ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [PLate LIV. 


— rt Rha 
SPER oe ak 
a ep AS 
ng ie ye ‘ap. x 

a eat: we “ ha yy 


228,—Bhiridatta enters the naga world. 229.—(Bhiiridatta) confers regal glory on 
the Brahman. 


, — <= ee: ¥ 
SE “es re aaey * 


WoL Ce Oe 4 € eh 


ss 


“ a 44 
CF geo 
> - ~ 


~~ 


230.— Bhiridatta gives the jewel to the 231—Alambayana sees Bhiridatta. 
brahman. . 


t16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


-232. The Bodhisattva makes up his mind to suffer patiently, without 
any resistance, whatever happens. Alambayana recites the spell, pulls 
BhGridatta by the tail, spreads him on the ground and breaks his bones. 


433 Then he puts him in a basket, and goes from place to place, 
making Bhiridatta dance and play tricks. He thus makes a good. deal of 
money. On the left, villagers looking on. The Bodhisattva is dancing. On 
his head, the crest, which is supposed to contain the jewel; the jewel on a 
snake’s head is a superstition common to many nations. 


234. Alamba3yana wants mote money, and goes to Benares to show his 
snake to the king. Meanwhile, Bhiridatta’s family have become aware of 
his disappearance. One of his brothers, in the guise of an ascetic, goes in 
search of him, with his sister, in the form of a small frog, in his hair. 
They arrive at the palace as Bhiridatta is dancing; on recognizing his 
brother, he places his head at his feet and weeps. On the left, the king; 
in the middle, Bhiiridatta’s brother, near whose left foot is the nAga’s head ; 
on the night, Alambayana. 


235. The Bodhisattva’s brother challenges Alambayana to dare make 
his snake fight the small frog. The fight takes place; the small frog drops 
a violent poison; Alamb&yana becomes a leper; BhGridatta is free and 
assumes the human form. On the left, the king; the figure on the right is 
probably Bhiridatta, and that in the middle his brother. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {[Prate LV. 


| te = Rh TS I5 ' 
Yi nwonw we» 33 - a 
se ee ee ete aii wad 


ek 


2 


i: 


aidan = Bhiridatta (by Bio Atariitidvana makes en dance. 
the tails). 


234.—Alambdyana carrying (the snake) 235.—Bhiridatta assumes human, form. 
arrives (in) the king’s (presence). 


112 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. ul 


230. The king is the brother of Bhindatta’s mother. After some 
explanations, the king recognizes them. The upper part of the king’s body 
has broken off, and an attempt at restoration been made. Bbhiridatta is bent 
forward on his lap; the king has his left arm round his neck. Behind, the 
Bodhisattva’s brother. Their sister has been left out for lack of room, The 
lotus above the Bodhisattva has flaked off. 


237. Then, after some time, Bhidridatta (on the left), his brother and 
his sister, return to the Naga world, 


238, Arrived at the Naga world, Bhéridatta, tired and sick, takes to his 
bed; nagas come to visit him, 


239. When he is well again, he goes to visit his grandfather the king, 
who now lives the ascetic life; his brothers and parents follow afterwards. 
On the left, the king-ascetic; in front of him, Bharidatta, with another 
naga behind. 


Part !TI.} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate LVI. 


ee ee 


——— —- 


i 
¢ é 


i 
{ 


Lo 


“= 


Sie 


** 
«at i 
3+ Sa 


236.—The king recognizes Bhiridatta. 237.— Bhiridatta returns to the naga world. 


£ 


¥ 


es 


ey 


<3 Oe" 


® 


7 om 
I Bak 


238.—Bhiiridatta arrives at the naga world. 239.— Bhiiridatta converses with the hermit. 


114 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. It 


240. The king of Videha is an heretic; his daughter tries to make him 
give up his false beliefs. The hermit Narada, who is the Bodhisattva, comes 
through the air to help her. On the left, the throne and white umbrella ; 
the king is kneeling on the ground and listens to Ndarada’s teaching; the 
legs of Narada are hidden by a cloud, for he stands in the air, 


a41. Having converted the king, Narada goes up to the Brahma 
world, Behind the king is his daughter, 


243. Four friendly kings assemble to observe the sabbath; among 
them are Dhanafijaya, king of the Kurus, a great gambler, and Varuna, 
king of the Nagas. The wise Vidhura, the Bodhisattva, is the minister of 
Dhanafijaya. Those four kings have a discussion as to who is the most 
virtuous. They cannot agree. Vidhura is called and answers their question : 
they are all four virtuous alike. On the right, Vidhura., 


243. The queen of Varuna is enceinte; she wants to eat Vidhura’s 
heart; if she does not get it, she will die. Varuga does not know what to 
do; but his daughter makes it known she will be the wife of any one who 
brings it, Punnaka, a Yakkha chief, hears of it; he plays with Dhanaiijaya 
a game at dice, of which Vidhura is the stake, and he wins. The king 
is sorry. “He is only a slave,” says Pugpaka. ‘If he says so, I may 
give him up,” says the king. They go and ask Vidhura what he is. 
Vidhura is Kneeling ; Punnaka is on the left, the king in the middle, 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Peate LVI. 


- . ~~ 
i aoe SS 


“u 


240.—The hermit Narada converses with 241.—The hermit Narada goes (back) to 
the king. the Brahma world. 


242.—Vidhura answers the question of the 243.—The king and Punnaka the Yakkha 
(four) kings. ask (Vidhura). 


116 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 


244. Vidhura answers he is no kinsman, but a slave, being minister to 
the king. The king, angry, makes him over to Puypaka, and goes away. 
On the left, the king, recognizable by his headdress; in the middle, the 
yakkha Pupyaka; on the high seat (he was in the hall of justice), the 
Bodhisattva. 


245. But before he is taken away, the king desires to hear him preach 
for the last time. Vidhura, on the seat, is explaining the Law to the king 
and queen. 


246, Vidhura wants to wind up his affairs, and asks Pupyaka to take 
him away only after three days. Pupgnaka agrees, and the Bodhisattva invites 
him to come and stay in his house, The house on the left, on the right 


Punpaka, 


47. Vidhura having invited Punpaka makes him comfortable in his 
house, and gives him five hundred female attendants. Punnaka is now the 
guest of Vidhura, so that the latter sits on the lower seat; in the middle, a 
female attendant. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. Pirate LVIII, 


244.—The king hands over Vidhura. ' 245.—(Vidhura) explains the Law to the king. 


2 FRO ST, 


7 NOD, 


. ‘ee mp. 
aa: par 


246.—Vidhura takes Punnayakkha 247.—Vidhura (having) called Pupnayakkha 
and goes back (to his home). (to his home, settles him comfortably). 


i18 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL, 4 


248. He then instructs his family in the Law, Afterwards he explains 
to the courtiers how to obtain honours at the court. Two courtiers listening 
in front of him. 


249. Having thus settled his affairs and taken leave of the king 
Vidhura informs the yakkha he is ready to go with him. 


450. Punnaka is eager to get the heart of Vidhura in order to win the 
hand of the fair Naga maiden, He mounts his horse, which is endowed 
with reason and can fly; he bids Vidhura to take hold of his tail, and, 
springing up in the air, takes his flight over the Himalayas. Under the 
horse are represented the peaks of the Himalayas. 


251. Vidhura, in the course of a conversation on the Himalayan peaks, 
tells Punnaka there must be a mistake in all this, that he must have 
misinterpreted what is really needed by the Naga king and his daughter? 


1 This plaque on the Ananda is in the wrong place; see the text, No. ast, 


Part II.] 


248.—He expounds the rules for courtiers to 
obtain honours at the court, 


mat ia ve i : 


he 6 nee =f, Pe. saad 


ri} 3 os OE, epee © Mi 


ase 


ao el a Re Tikale® 


pT gale carries away Vidhura, 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


{Pirate LIX. 


249.—Vidhura tells (Punnayakkha) he is 
ready to go (with him). 


251.—Vidhura is conversing (with the Yakkha). 


$20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { VoL. 1 


252. But Punyaka reflects that, instead of killing him with his own 
hands, it would be preferable to make him die of fright. It is what he sets 
about to do, First, he assumes the form of a huge lion ready ta. devours 
him ; but Vidhura remains unmoved. 


253. He then takes the shape of a furious elephant, ready to gore him 
with his tusks ; but Vidhura is not frightened. 


254. He next assumes the appearance of an enormous snake, and coils 
himself round him; but in vain. 


255. Fright is of no avail; so he determines to kill him with his own 
hands. He seizes him by the feet and holds him head downwards. Punnaka 
is in the air, represented by scrolls; under them, the Him&layan peaks. 


Part I1j TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Pirate LX , 


& 


Pe 
fe 
pts 
as ? {! se 
' - + 
Th * 
ks * 
, mY 
eC 
A ie 
2 
t — 
; ’ 
ge 
4 1] 
wi 
oY. . 
>. 
* é 
: 


‘cp tadd Us ERR UL A) (ar 


» OMe ; a 


—— 


252.—Punnaka (tries to) frighten Vidhura, 253.—Punnaka creates an elephant. 


Ff 


a > 5 _— 


R 
m 

" 
Ao 
* 
re 


SS Sof TS TT 


ewer 


254.—Punnaka tests (the steadfastness of ; i i 
: ut Qq 255.—Punnaka turns (Vidhura) upside down 
Vidhura by means of a snake), (and flings him into the sky). 


122 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { voL, I 


256, He then whirls him about and throws him into space. No, 251 
(g.v.) should come after this plaque. 


257. All is in vain; he cannot kill him, either by fright or by violence. 
He sets him on his feet, and asks him to expound the Law to him, 


258. And Vidhura, nothing loath, unfolds unto him the four rules of a 
good man, Punnaka repents and resolves to set him free. The yakkha is 
listening, kneeling. 


259. Vidhura requests the yakkha to take him to the Naga world, and 
this Punnaka does at once. On the seat, Varuna, the Naga king, then 
Cunnaka, and on the right Vidhura. A long conversation ensues, in which 
everything becomes clear, 


Part II.]} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. | Peate LXI. 


256.-—Punnaka whirls (Vidhura) round. 257.—Punpaka asks (Vidhura to teach him 
the laws of good men). 


258.—Vidhura preaches the law (to Punnaka). 259.—Punnaka conveys (Vidhura) to the 
Naga (country). 


124 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 


260. The Naga king is delighted and Vidhura preaches the Law to him. 
The Bodhisattva is on the seat; the king before him and, behind, the court. 


261. The king, impressed by Vidhura’s wisdom, takes him by the hand 
and conducts him into his apartments to present him to the N&ga queen, 
Vimala, The queen is seated on a dais, 


262. The Bodhisattva preaches the Law also to Queen Vimala, who bows 
down to him reverentially. Pupgaka and the N&ga princess are married ; 
Puppaka, grateful, gives a magnificent jewel to Vidhura, takes him back to 
the capital of the Kurus, and sets him down at the door of the hall of 
truth. On the mght, the hall; Vidhura in the act of entering; Puygaka is 
going back to his own abode, 


263. Vidhura is received with great pomp by the king, the court and 
the citizens. The Bodhisattva is offering the king the jewel given him by 
the yakkha. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Pate LXII. 


' 


‘ % 
he 
rw 
te 


4 

| 
{ 

| 

} 

‘ 
at 
. 


260.—(Vidhura) preaches the Law to the 261.—The Naga king introduces (Vidhura) 
Naga king. ; in his house. 


262.—Puntaka carries (Vidhura) up (to the 263.—Vidhura gives the jewel (to the king). 
world of men). 


126 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


264. After this great reception, the sage goés home. He is followed 
by some one, probably his wife. 


265. Then the queens, the princes and the people bring him abundance 
of food and drink. At his death he is reborn in heaven, 


266, King Sajfijaya reigns at Jetuttara, the capital of the kingdom of 
Sivi. His chief queen’s name is Phusati. Phusati, in her former existence 
in Tavatitnsa, had been given, on her death-bed, ten boons by Sakka. Sakka 
perceives that nine of the boons have been granted; there remains the last: 
that of a good son. He asks the Bodhisattva, then in the Tavatirmsa, to be 
reborn in her womb; he acquiesces and is conceived. 


267, As the queen one day was crossing the Merchants’ quarter, she felt 
her time had come; a lying-in chamber was hastily improvised, and there 
the Bodhisattva was born. As soon as he was born, he put out his hand; 
asking: ‘' Mother, is there anything for me to give in alms?” She placed 
in his hand a purse of a thousand coins, The mother is on the bed; near it 
the usual pan of fire. It will be seen the scene is not faithful to the text, 
the queen should be placing the purse in his hand; instead, it is handed 
over by a palace lady. The child is on the right, standing, and can be 
made out by the small top-knot on his head, which is worn by most 
children in Burma. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate LXIII. 


JER Iepe REP) 


. ee 
Se Re 


264.—(Vidhura) returns home. 265.—Vidhura is at home fe shane gifts). 


; Pee ? oe. a 


yp ef 


SES 6MRELL Ue 


< 


sa ty 


= ty le. a. -& hes 


266.—Conception of Vessantara. 267.—(Vessantara) asks for gold to give alms. 


128 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ Vou. 1 


268. On his naming day, they give him the name of Vessantara, 
because he was born while crossing (tara) the Merchants’ (vessa) quarter. 
On the dais, the king holding the baby, and near him, the queen. On the 
left, two brahman soothsayers. 


269. The king gives him sixty-four nurses, whom he chooses with the 
greatest care. Two nurses; the king holding the child. 


270. King Safijaya has a necklace made worth a lakh and gives it to 
his son. The king, on the left, is giving the necklace to Vessantara, who is 


on the lap of the queen. 


271. The boy—he is five—always ready to make gifts, gives the neck- 
lace to his nurses; the boy is on his mother’s lap. 


Part II.} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. ([Prate LXIV. 


Ps “ 
— 2, ae 


268.—They give him the name Vessantara. 269.—The father gives nurses to Vessantara. 


270.—The king gives (Vessantara) an 271.—The wise (in which Vessantara) gave 
ornament. the ornaments (to his nurses). 


130 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. II 


272, Thus he gave away nine necklaces. Then, when eight years of 
age, seated on his bed, he reflects ali these gifts are of no great value; he 
should like to give his own flesh, heart, ete. 


273. At sixteen, he is married to the beautiful Maddf, and entrusted 
with the government of the kingdom. He has two children: a son, called 
Jali, and a daughter named Kanhajina. Halls to give alms are built in the 
city; he visits them every month on the white elephant. This elephant had 
been born on the same day as himself, and was endowed with magical 
powers, such as to cause rain, etc. On the left, an alms-hall. 


274. He is now returning home from one of his monthly visits, In 
the previous plaque there is no mahout, but an umbrella-bearer, on the 
elephant; in this plaque it is just the reverse. 


275. There is no rain in the country of Kaltiga, and the king sends 
brahman mendicants to Jetuttara to beg the white elephant—who can cause 
rain—from Vessantara. The brahmans, on a small eminence, ask Vessantara 
for the white elephant, as he is passing by. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate LXV. 


272.—Representing (Vessantara) thinking of 273.—Vessantara looks at the alms-halls. 
(more exacting) almsgiving. 


274.—Vessantara returns home. 275.—The brahmans ask for the elephant. 


132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. ti 


276. Vessantara, overjoyed at the request, immediately gets down from 
the white elephant. A ladder against the side of the elephant; in front, 
kneeling, one of the brahmans. 


277. He gives the white elephant to the brahmans, one of whom is 
represented on the left. Vessantara holds the elephant's trunk with his left 
hand, and, from a vase in his right hand, pours water on the ground, in 
ratification of his gift. 


278, The brahmans then get up on the back of the elephant, and 
Vessantara, rejoiced at his munificent gift, assists at their departure. 


279. But the people of Jetuttara have heard of the gift, and are 
furious, They go to King Saitjaya and tell him he must banish his son 
to the Vindhya Mountains. The weak-minded king agrees, and he sends an 
agent to apprize Vessantara of the turn of affairs. The agent, kneeling, 
informs Vessantara. 


Part II. }- TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {[Prate LXVI. 


276.—Vessantara gets down from the elephant. 277.—(Vessantara) gives away the white 
elephant. 


o 


(Ce ea) 


‘= 


278.—-Vessantara is pleased with his gift. 279.—The agent comes and informs 
(Vessantara of what is happening). 


134 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


280. Vessantara bows to the will of the people; but before going into 
exile, he wishes to give alms on a very large scale. He is arranging with 
two officials the details of the great offering. 


28:1. He goes to his wife Maddi and breaks to her the news. He 
efdeavours to persuade her not to accompany him, but to stay back; but 
sue refuses to be left behind, Maddi is on the left. 


982, His mother, Queen Phusati, anxious, goes to her son’s apart- 
ments; arrived at the door she hears their discussion and learns their 
resolves; she then enters and consoles them. On the left, Queen Phusati 
near the door. 


283. Meanwhile, the preparations for the great offering have been going 
on, and officials come to tell him everything is ready. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate LXVII. 


280.—Showing (Vessantara) arranging for 281.—Vessantara and Maddi converse. 
the great offering. 


argue 


2 Orr te Pat 


282.—Queen, {Phusati) comes to see 283.—An official comes to inform (Vessantara 
. (Vessantara). that the Great Offering is ready). 


136 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 11 


284. On hearing this, Vessantara goes into the city on an elephant and 
gives gifts of gold. An official is in the act of giving gold to a poor man, 


285. When everything is over, Vessantara, accompanied by his wife and 
children, goes to visit his father, Vessantara, then Jali, his son, and neay 
the boy Maddf carrying Kanhajina on her hip. 


286. Vessantara and Maddf respectfully take leave of King Saftjaya, 
after informing him of their resolve to go to the Vindhyas with their .two 
children. 


287. On leaving the king, they go to Queen Phusati to take leave; 
she tries to keep back Maddi and the children, but in vain. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prare LXVIIL. 


284.—Vessantara gives gold in alms. 285.—Vessantara goes to see his father. 


286.—Vessantara comes and attends respect- 287.—He comes to his mother. 
fully on his father. 


138 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


288. Now, King Safijaya tries also to keep back Maddf and the 
children, but is no more successful than his wife. The children are between 
Safijaya and Maddt; Vessantara is on the right. 


289. The entreaties of both Safijaya and Phusatf having been in vain, 
Vessantara turns to depart. The female behind the Bodhisattva is probably 
Maddi taking final leave of Saiijaya, 


290, A splendid carriage, drawn by four horses, is brought round the 
palace-gate. Below, on the right, the carriage; one horse only is visible ; 
behind the carriage,«Safijaya and Phusati; above, from the left, Vessantara, 
Maddi, Jali and Kanhajina, 


291, Then Maddi, bidaing adieu to her parents-in-law, mounts first the 
eatriage with the two children, On the dais, near the carmage, Vessantara ; 
in front of him, his father, then Phusatl, 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA [Prate LXIX. 


288.—(The old king) converses with Maddi. 289.—Vessantara turns to depart. 


-_ 


-_ 


tereav> YR Perry, 


etl __— = SS el 


290.—They bring a carriage. 291.—Maddt, with the children, mounts (the 
carriage) before (Vessantara). 


140 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot. 11 


292, Vessantara starts on his journey to the Vindhya Mountams, He 
is in front, carrying Jali; Maddi holds her little daughter; seated below 
are Vessantara’s parents. 


293. Vessantara exhorts the people to be steadfast in alms-giving and 
good works. The man on the left represents the people. 


294. As he is going on his way, thoughtful Phusat! sends him two 
carts laden with precious things for distribution, Part of the two carts are 
seen laden with ornaments and precious things. The head of Jali, on 
Vessantara’s lap, is broken off. 


295. Forthwith the Bodhisattva distributes the ornaments. 


Part IJ.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Prate LXX. 


&—% La 4 << 
292.—Vessantara goes away (to the 293.—He addresses (or admonishes) the 
Vindhyas). crowd while going. 


‘eosin 


ee 


295.—Vessantara gives the ornaments. 
294.—(Vessantara’s) mother sends (him) 
two carts (filled with ornaments). 


i4a EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. 


296. Then, all the ornaments being given he goes on with the 
distribution of the precious things. 


297. Having nothing more to give, he proceeds on and gets out of the 
city ; but he desires to see it once more. The ground under the carriage 
turns round to allow him to do so. On the left, the city. The makara 
ornamenting the fore-part of the carriage may be seen frequently, slightly 
stylized, at the extremity of cart-poles even now, 


290, Having feasted !.1s eyes, he drives on again towards the Vindhyas ; 
he asks Maddi to se. whether mendicants are coming from behinc, Vessan- 
tara is turned towards Maddi, making h's request ; behind, two mendicants, 
kneeling. 


299. Maddt calls the beggars, who come running. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate LXXI. 


ParT II.] 


~ 


-- 


~ 


a 


e 


Py 

t+) 

CY) 

fal wf 

~ 

ans 

o 

wt 

QO 

Oo] 7 

pe) st ) 
wn a 
ot 

° 

E , 
CJ 

g _ 

a vi 
§ ~~. 
é dee 
> “a 
[ oy re 
~ o< 


rer 


.—Vessantara gives in alms the precious 
things 


296 


299.—The mendicants run towards the king. 


298.—Vessantara drives on again. 


144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. u 


300. On coming up with the carriage, the beggars ask for the four 
horses, and the Bodhisattva immediately gives them. The beggars are now 
before the carriage ; the horses are unyoked. 


301. The exiles were now stranded on the road; but four gods trans- 
form themselves into red deer and draw the carriage. As usual, only one 
of the deer is visible. 


3o2. But now, another brahman beggar comes along begging for the 
carriage, which is immediately made over to him. The deer have dis- 
appeared ; Vessantara, holding a vase in his right hand, is pouring water to 
ratify his gift. 


303. And now they have to go on foot, Vessantara carrying Jali and 
Maddi carrying Kanhajina, on their hips, in the typical oriental fashion, 


Part II. ] 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Peate LXXII. 


- ahs Ste E are vA\aist 


300.—Vessantara gives the horses in alms. 301.—The red deer drawing the chariot. 


Ages, 
" 
be 


il all 
Lee 


4 


iil sia 


302.—He gives away the chariot. 303.—Vessantara enters the forest. 


146 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 15 


304. But they do not know the way; so they stop every traveller they 
meet and ask the way to the Vindhyas. 


305. The children are longing for the fruits they see on the trees; the 
branches bend down of their own accord. Vessantara is plucking fruits. 


306. In due course, they arrive at the Suvannagiri or Golden Mountain, 
The mountain is represented on the left. 


307. And going on their way, they reach the river called Kontimara. 
The banks of the river are represented by the two curved lines on the left. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate LXXIII. 


Part II.] 


—They pluck and give the fruits (to the 
children). 


305 


—They ask the way. 


304 


Iho 2 2 2 ada 


bn 


ara River. 


.—(They arrive at) the Kontim 


307 


Mountain. 


306.—They arrive at the Suvapnagiri 


148 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vor, 11 


308. They walk five leagues more and come to the Arafijara Mountain. 
The mountain is pictured on the left. 


309. Five leagues bring them to the brahmin village of Dunnivittha, dn 
the left. 


310. Ten leagues further still, they reach Vessantara’s uncle's city. 


31t. They do not enter the city, but stop at a rest-house outside it, 
The dutiful Maddi wipes the dust from her husband's feet. 


Part II.]} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. {Pate LXXIV- 


af 


f 


nes fee 


a 


—t 


— <r 
a b= 
— *£ ~\ 


308.—They come to the Arafjara Mount. 309.—(They come to) the brahmin village. 


Bao hed 


pi: an See Bt 


i 

ft 

va Ae. 
~ “ 


tek 


310.—( They arrive at Vessantara’s) uncle’s 311.—They stay in a rest-house 
city. (near the city). 


ig0 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von, tr 


312. Maddi, intending to make the arrival of Vessantara known, stands 
outside the rest-house. 


313. The women of Ceta—Vessantara’s uncle’s city—flock round het. 
Maddi tells them of the fatigue of the journey. In front of Maddi, one of 
the women, and behind her Vessantara and the children. 


314. His relations come to see him; he declines entering the city; 
they then bring everything necessary to make the exiles comfortable, and 
surrounding the rest-house keep watch over it. On the left is one of the 
relations with a sword, 


Bhs. His uncle and the princes are conversing with them; they try to 
induce him not to proceed, but in vain. On the left, Vessantara’s uncle. 


316. One day and one night they stayed; early in the morning they 
start again; the princes accompany them and, at the entrance to the forest. 
show them the way. On the left, a prince indicating the way with his 
index, 


317. So that no hatm may befall the exiles, the princes send along 
With them a skilful woodman ; in due course they arrive at the Gandhamadana 
Mountain, which is seen on the lett. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES{ON THE ANANDA. (Prats LXXV. 


313.—Maddi converses (with the woman 
Ceta). 


of 


314.—They are keeping watch (on the 315.—(Vessantara) converses with 
king and queen). the princes. 


316.—The princes show the way (to 317.—They arrive at the Gandhamadana. 
Vessantara). Mountain. 


152 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 11 


318, Then, turning his back on the Gandhamadana Mountain, he goes 
on his way; the mountain is now on the right, 


319. And they arrive at the Vipula Mountain. The plaque is badly 
spoiled; neither the mountain on the left nor the children can be seen. 


320, Going on, they come to the Ketumatf River, and there rest and 
take a meal prepared by the forester. Vessantara on the right; in front of 
him the forester, behind whom Maddi can be discerned with, near her, a 
child. Below them, above the legend, the band with wavy lines is the river. 


321. In acknowledgment of his services, they give, after their meal, a 
gold hairpin to the woodman. The woodman is on the left, just at the bend 
of the river, 


322. Then they cross the river Ketumat!, and rest peacefully under a 
banyan tree, They are holding the children, who are rather indistinct, 


323. After their rest under the tree, they proceed on their journey and 
come to the Nalika Mountain—which is seen on the left. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate LXXVI, 


318.—Turning his back on the 319.—They arrive at the Vipula 
Gandhamadana Mountain. Mountain. 


321.—They give (their guide) a (golden) 
pape 


River. irpin. 


322.—Sitting under the banyan tree. 323 —They arrive at the Nali Mountain. 


154 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. WU 


324. And thence moving onwards, they come to the Mucalinda Lake, 
The lake, with five lotuses, is on the left. 


325. Then, passing through a thick forest, they arrive at a square 
lake—on the left as usual. 


326, Sakka perceives they have arrived; he sends the heavenly archi- 
tect to build two hermitages: one for Vessantara, one for Maddf; one 
hermitage on the left. 


327. He enters his hermitage and dons the ascetic garb. He is in the 
act of entering. 


328. Then he comes forth, and Maddf, seeing him thus, falls at his 
feet, sobbing, The two hermitages; behind Maddf, her two children. 


329. Madd! also assumes the ascetic garb. He asks her not to visit 
him unseasonably. Every day she performs all necessary duties, sweeping. 
bringing water, etc., and then goes into the forest for fruits and roots, Owing 
to the Bodhisattva’s divine compassion, the wild animals within a large radius 
become meek and do no harm to one another. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. ([Prate LXXVILI. 


fa4 


eee 
AIDEITOS LEASE 


327.—The king enters (the hermitage), . 
becoming a hermit. 


328.—( Vessantara) comes oue from the 
hermitage. 


329 —Maddi enters the forest. 


156 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA , VOL. 1 


330. On her return she bathes the children; and all four sit down 
together and partake of the fruits she has brought back. 


331. The meal over, Maddf enters her hermitage with the two children, 
And this went on for several months. Maddi is on the left. 


332. In Kalifga, there was an old, deformed, and cruel brahman called 
Jajaka. He wants two slaves for his wife. Having heard of Vessantara’s 
generosity, he repairs to the Vindhyas to ask him for his two children. On 
that 2ccount, Maddi has had a dreadful dream ; she tells it to her husband, 
who guesses what is about to happen. And he sits down, eagerly awaiting 
the coming of Jajaka. Jajaka is on the left, carryin> his luggage; between 
them, the children, 


333. Vessantara is delighted in that he will now be able to make a 
heroical pift; he calls out to the brahman to approach, and bids Jali to yo 
and meet him. On the left, Jijaka, carrying his umbrella in his right and a 
staff in his left hand; in the middle, Jali. 


334. As Jali approaches, the horrible brahman frightens him by snap- 
ping his fingers and shouting—" Get away!” Jijaka on the left, very badly 
spoiled. 


335. Jali flees back to his father and, examining the brahman, finds in 
him all the signs of a cruel, vile man. 


Part 11. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prats LXXVIII. 


332.—(Vessantara) looks expectantly and 
sees Jijaka coming. 333.—Jali goes to meet (Jijaka). 


334.—(Jajaka) frightens Jali. 335.—Prince Jali returns (near his 
father). 


158 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


336. Vessantara asks Jijaka what he has come for: Jajaka tells him, 
and the Bodhisattva agrees to give his children, but asks the brahman to wait 
for Maddi’s return. Jijaka refuses: he is afraid of a mother’s love. On 


the left, Jajaka. 


337. On hearing the brahman’s refusal, the children, terrified, run and 
hide in a clump of bushes. On the nght, Vessantara; then Jijaka, holding 
his luggage at the end of a stick—this, according to the text; but here it 
is an umbrella. The children, under the bush on the left, are not visible, 
the plaque being spoited, 


338. But even then the children did not feel secure and they ran to 
the square lake before-mentioned, entered it and hid themselves under lotus 
leaves. They can dimly be made out in the lake on the left-hand top 
comer. 


339. The brahman, not seeing the children, accuses Vessantara of con- 
niving with them. The Bodhisattva gets up and looks for them; he calls 
Jali, who comes, seizes his right foot and weeps. Jijaka, behind Vessan- 
tara, holding an umbrella. The lotus leaf at the top of the lake indicates 
where the girl. is still hidden. 


340. Then he also calls out to Kanhajina, and she comes, embraces 
his left foot and cries. According to the text, the children should be holding 
each one of his feet. 


341. He explains to them he is giving them away for the attainment 
of Omniscience, and they submit cheerfully. He then makes them over to 
Jajaka, The Bodhisattva, on the right, is holding a vase, from which he 
pours water in ratification of his gift. 


Part IT ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prats LXXIX. 


pe a> 


: 24 a of * 
“ee a Ee A Pnadiat ~~ 
337.—(The two children) hide in a clump 
(of bushes). 


338.—The children (are concealed in the 339.—Prince Jali comes up (from the 
square lake). square lake). 
. <a! « 4 " = , ~" 
ay \. + 


340.— (Kanh&) comes up from the lake. 341.—(Vessantara) gives in alms his own 
children (to Ja’aka). 


160 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vol, 1 


342. The vile Jijaka bites off a creeper to tie the children with. He 
is biting the creeper, holding it in his left hand. 


343. With one end of the creeper he ties Jali’s right hand to the girl’s 
left, beats them with the other end and takes them away. The plaque is 
badly spoiled, and only Vessantara can be seen. 


344. The brahman stumbles and falls; the children slip away back to 
their father, sobbing. Jijaka again comes to drive them away. Vessantara 
is filled with violent rage and.sorrow. He wants to kill the brahman, but 
he masters his anger and remams caim, 


345. Again the brahman binds them and takes them away; again he 
stumbles and they escape; but he runs after them in a dreadful temper and 
binds them for the third time. The children can be seen in the middle, 


346. And then again beating them, Jijaka takes them away. 


347. And as they go, they turn back and look pitifully at their father. 


Part II, ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Peate LXXX. 


| 


pes 
= oe 


& “4 


wate J es 


re 
1 4 
‘  ] 


, 
i 


eg 
a 
¥) 


ek ie 


~ A 


a ae ae 
Ld ay 


° 


343 —Jajaka binds and takes away 
(the children). 


TArEuS me a 


ee. 


= a 


345.—Jijaka binds (again the children). 


346.—Jutjaka takes away (ihe children 
again). 


347.— Kanhajinaé looks back (at her father). 


162 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vol. 


348. Hearing the lamentations of his little daughter, Vessantara's heart 
swells within him, and, unable to restrain his emotion, he weeps bitterly. 


349. See explanation of the inscription under same number. 


350. The gods reflect that, if Maddi returns early as usual, she will go 
after the children and get into dire trouble. They commission three of their 
number to assume the forms of a lion, a tiger, and a leopard, and bar her 
way until the sun sets. Maddi is on the left; she is, after her return, telling 
her husband how wild beasts barred her way ; the diminutive and spoiled lion 
between them is therefore only {symbolical. 


351. She remembers her bad dream and enquires about the children; 
Vessantara, to all her entreaties and her tears, keeps an ominous silence, 


352. Trembling with apprehension, she goes in search of her children; 
she comes to a clump of eugenia trees where they used to play; but they 
are not there. The clump is on the left. Strictly speaking, Vessantara 
ought not to have been represented in this scene and the five next. 


353. Then she goes to the river bank, but in vain. The river is 
indicated by two lines on the left. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. fPrate LXXXL 


352.—Maddi comes up to the eugenia 353.—Maddi arrives at the river. 
trees. 


164 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vov. 1 


354. She ascends the hill, where her little ones used to pluck flowers; 
but she does not see them. The rocks on the left represent the hill. 


355. In her wanderings, she comes upon the toy oxen, elephants and 
horses, the delight of her children; but she does not see them. On the left, 
from the top: the elephant, the horse, the ox. Her dress is indicated 
merely by a line just above her ankles. 


356. She then enters a clump of flowering plants and makes a search 
for them; but they are not there. 


357. At the lakes also she does not find them. The lakes are repre- 
sented by the square on the left. 


358. Her search has been fruitless. She goes back to the hermitage, 
and finds Vessantara dejected. She asks him again about the children, but 
he keeps silent, and she again wanders back into the night. 


359. Another fruitless search; she comes back again and, unable to 
obtain one word from Vessantara, falls at his feet in a swoon. 


Part I1.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Prate LXXXII. 


—————e =; 
S t— =e gt Se 


ra 
¢ 
. 
& 
t. 
& 
& 
ss 
“ 


355.—Maddi comes upon the (toy) 
elephants and horses. 


356.— Maddi arrives at the clump of 
flower-trees. 


heen heh eh > 


358.— (Madd!) goes back to the king. 359.— Maddi falls and swoons. 


166 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. it 


360. He believes her to be dead; he feels her heart, and perceives 
she is alive; he fetches a pitcher of water and places her head on his lap- 
He is holding the pitcher in his right hand. Maddi, whose head is broken 
off, is in a strangely contorted position: this is due to lack of room, for 
the hermitage has been made too large. 


361. To revive her, he pours water on her face, which lies on his lap. 
The pitcher in his right hand has broken off. 


362. Then he explains to her the high ideal which has induced him to 
give away the children; he consoles her, assuring her they will come back. 
And Maddi rejoices in her husband’s heroic gift. 


363. Now Sakka reflects that another low beggar may come and ask 
for Maddi. To prevent that, he resolves to ask for her himself and then 
give her back; he would thus make Vessantara attain the very summit of 
perfection. To that end, he comes to the hermitage disguised as a 
brahman, 


364. And he asks for Maddi; Vessantara gives her away, and pours 
water in ratification of his gift. Maddi, to help her husband in his high 
resolve, calmly submits. 


365. And Sakka accepts her as a gift. He is on the left. 


1 See No. 375. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. Prate LXXXIIL 


rT - 


’ a init 


g 361.—Vessantara pours water (on 
360.—(Vessantara) raises (Maddi’s head) Maddi’s face). 
and lays (it on his lap). 


o, © 


TT { 


| Bis: Le f 


~Frr Feet & 


363.—(Sakka, disguised as) a brahman 
comes. 


362.—Maddi rejoices (at Vessantara 
having given away the children). 


364.—( Vessantara) gives his wife 365.—(Sakka) receives the wife (of 
(in alms). Vessantara) in alms. 


168 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. II 


366. Sakka praises her fine resolution and gives her back to Vessantara. 


367. Then Sakka discloses his identity, and asks Vessantara to choose 
eight boons. The Bodhisattva chooses; among these boons is the following : 
that his father may recall him soon and set him on the throne, and Sakka 
answers this will soon come to pass; he is now in mid-air, on a cloud. 


368. Then Sakka goes back to the Tavatimsa heaven; he is in the 
act of flying. The scrolls above his left foot represent the sky. 


369. Meanwhile, Jijaka is dragging the children away to his village; 
every evening, afraid of wild beasts he himself sleeps on a tree, but he ties 
up the children at the foot of the tree; the gods, however, watch over 
them, Jiajaka on the tree; the boy has his right hand, and the girl her 
left, tied with a creeper at the trunk. 


370. The gods make Jijaka go the wrong way and bring him to the 
children’s grandfather’s palace, They are redeemed and the brahman dies of 
indigestion. King Safijaya, with a large army, goes to fetch back his son 
Vessantara. Vessantara and Maddi hear the mighty tramp and go up a 
hilt and look out expectantly. They are on the hill, and Vessantara waves 
to his father, who is approaching on an elephant. 


371. King Saiijaya arrives at the hermitage. 


Part II.) TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Plate LXXXIV. 


- 
"ss 


a 


370.—(Vessantara) look out for his 371.—The king (Vessantara’s father) 
(father) the king. arrives. 


170 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vOL. 1 


372. Safijaya dismounts and comes up to his son. Maddi is on the 
left, Saftjaya in the middle. 


473. Vessantara then respectfully salutes his father, who is on the left. 


374. Phusati, who has remained a while behind, for fear that the sight 
of her and of the two’ children at once might give the exiles a shock, now 
comes up to the hermitage. She is on the left, standing; Safijaya is near 
her, with Vessantara at his side; the other figure is Maddi. 


375. Vessantara, having poured water on Maddi, chafes her head. See 
explanation in téxt under same number. 


376. And Vessantara reverentially salutes his mother; they are in 
each other's arms; between the tree and the hermitage, Maddi; Safjaya 
in the left-hand top corner. 


377. Jali and Kanhajina, who have followed at a short distance their 
grandmother, perceiving Maddi, run into her arms. The two children and 
Maddi on the lower plan; above, from left, Phusatt, Safijaya, Vessantara. 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Pirate LXXXV. 


Part II.} 


- 
= 


ee or... 


a. 00h 
mm few a for Cra By 


4s 


373.—Vessantara salutes his, father. 


375.—The king (Vessantara) chafes 
(maddi’s, head. 


377.—The children come to their mother 


376.—The king salutes his mother. 


172 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. tt 


378. On seeing her children, Maddi, overcome with happiness, falls in a 
swoon and the children also. 


379. Vessantara and his parents follow suit. But Sakka comes, 
sprinkles water on them, and brings them back to consciousness. And then 
they all sit down and engage in happy converse, 


380. Now ali the courtiers come up to wish Vessantara, and ask nim 
to change his dress. One courtier is offering regal vestments. 


381. Vessantara, having changed his dress, salutes, with Maddi, the 
hermitage; for here he has lived the holy life for nine months; and here 
he has attained the highest summit of perfection in alms-giving. 


382. Then the consecration water is poured over him, and he its made 
king. The scene probably represents Vessantara, just before or just after 
his consecration, in convérse with his father. The object in the centre is 
not a lotus, aS at first sight appears, but a lacquered stand on which is 
placed what locks like a regal headdress, a crown. 


383. Similarly, Maddi is consecrated queen; she is now in converse 
with her husband. 


Part II.] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. [Purate LXXXVL 


378.— Maddi falls (on the ground) with 379.—Vessantara converses (with his 
her children, father). 


381.—(Vessantara) salutes reverentially 
the hermitage. 


382.—They consecrate Vessantara (king). 383.—They consecrate Maddi (as queen). 


174 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vob. 11 


384. After her coronation, Maddi mounts an elephant; an official is 
following behind. The absence of the mahout and umbrella-bearer is 
remarkable. The upper portion of the plaque is broken off. 


385. And now they leave the Vindhyas, where they have experienced 
so many deep emotions, 


386. At last they arrive at Jetuttara, the capital; and after the 
rejoicings are all over, Vessantara, with his beautiful and devoted queen, 
lives happy in his palace ever afterwards. 


387. Vessantara is giving ornaments. See explanation in text under this 
number, 


388. See explanations in text. 


389. See explanations in text. 


Part I1,} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. (Prate LXXXVII. 


Vessantara ascends. 


VOLUME UW 0 PART 


EPIG RA PHIA BIR MANICA _ 


ao LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS | ° 
v2 OF BURMA | . 


- EDITED BY 


CHAS: DUROISELLE 


- SOPBRINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA CIRCLE 


Sa: 299306,(5 mo | 


AS Deere rerrer rye Che Le 


deswcnepoacamawesehes eestoege 


~—LLNATIONAL LIBRARY | 


HON INSCRIPTIONS. Nos. IXAXT 
| fog te BY : 
Pea 


me 


| a - RANGOON | ere 
daa SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA” ae 
oS : 1923 le avenge Ss 


MON INSCRIPTIONS. 
No. IX. 
“AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN. 


Descriptive Account. 


54. This insefipiion has been noticed in | Reports of the Superintendent, 
Archaeological ‘Survey, Burma, (1912) pp. 14, 15 and (1916) pp. 22, 93, 
but no portion of it has hitherto been published. The stones on which it is 
engraved are preserved in the Pagan Museum, and in the Catalogue of 1906 
they are ‘numbered 1, 2, 6, 7, 8 and g. They consist of two large four-sided 
columns and fragments of, apparently, three others, The dimensions of the 
stones, as given in the Catalogue, are as follows:—No. 1: height, 7 feet; 
breadth, 3 feet. No, 2: height, 7 feet 9 inches; breadth, 3 feet. No. 6, 
height, 2 feet ; breadth, 1 foot. g inches. No. 7: height, 2 feet 3 inches ; 
breadth, 2 hae 6 inches. No. 8: height, 2 feet 5 inches; breadth, 2 feet 9 _ 
inches. No. 9:. height, 2 feet 9 inches; breadth, 2 feet 6 inches. I have . 
"given letters to the several faces*of the stones and ‘fragments containing 
legible parts of the inscription. So far as regards Faces A—H (corre- 
sponding to Nos. r and 2 above), there is no difficulty about the order. But 
the remaining portions, Faces J-Ss, are hard to arrange, and some doubt 
remains in my mind as to whether the order I have put them in is the 
right one. Professor Duroiselle informs me that my Faces J—M (= Pagan 
| Museum Nos. ve and 6) are parts of one column, N,O (== P.M. No, 8) part 
0b another, and P—S (= P.M. No, g) part of a third. Assuming that that 
- the. inscription must originally have comprised at least six columns, 
: the frst, preveding J Faces - A-D, is entirely lost. This: conclusion 


record, 


"and a goo 


oe 


2 ~~ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [Wou, m1 


which: less than half have been preserved. But even the remnants that we 
have got make this inscription by far the longest. of the. Early. M6n records, 
55. The space actually covered by lettering, as_ measured on the ink- 

impressions, is. as follows Face A, 6 feet 1 inch by 1 foot: ‘8 inches; B, 
a - feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; C, 5 feet 10 inches by 1 foot £ 8 inches ; 
D, & feet 6 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; E, 6 feet 1 inch by 1- foot ches }. 
| e. 6 feet 2 inches by 2 feet 1 inch ; G, 6 feet 2 inches by 1 foot 5 inches ; 
Hy 6 feet 1 inch by 2 feet 2 inches ; J, 4 feet by 1 foot 3% inches ; K, 2 
feet 3 inches by 1 foot 3 inches; L, 3 feet 10 inches by 1 foot 4 eae 
_. M, a foot 9 inches by 1 foot r inches; N, 1 foot rok inches by 1 foot 
3 inches ; O, 1 foot 44 inches by 1 foot 3 inches; P, 1 foot 5 inches by 1 
foot 2& inchés; Q, 1 foot 4% inches by 2 feet 4 inches; R, 1 foot 11 inches 
by 1 foot 3 inches; S,1 foot 10 inches by 2 feet 4 inches. The letters 
resemble in their gerieval type. ‘those of the preceding inscriptions. Their 
height varies. slightly, between 3 and 2 inch, in the several faces, letter ¢ is 
about 2 inch long, and the interlinear space is generally between ~ inch and 
es sath, The inscription is, on the whole, in a bad state of preservation. 
- Though a good deal of what 
: extremely dificult to read and would have been practically undecipherable but 
. for. one, of the characteristic peculiarities of this record, namely its many 
| repetitions. The fact is that, in spite of its great length, this inscription is 
of a disappointingly” ignotonous character. The same formulae occur again 
and again with wearisome. iteration. But this has made it possible in many 
eases to read with virtual. certainty many obliterated passages, which it would 
otherwise have been quite impossible to reconstruct. The text has been 
determined from. Shree sets of ink-i imprestions, and a set of Preronraphs of 
one of themy. 0 ee oa: ei | 


56. The rec dis wondkined with: the ‘ahorate ‘Serthotial attending the — 


building of a great palace at Pagans Buddhist monks and Brahmans, besides 
a variety. of officials, chiefs, and other. persons, took part in the proceedings, 
d deal of ‘titual was involyed in them. The Brahmans were 
ged in bringing: water of lustration. in vessels of gold, silver, 
enware, The. monks held a service of blessing and protection. 
he whole aff spread over. many days. of several months, and the 
Se precise times | 1¢ various: actions. ‘took place are generally exactly 
© indicated. : Unfortuna ely no year date is to be found in the fragments that 
remain. 1. submitted details ‘of the dates to Mr. Robert Sewell, a great 


ne constantly 
. brass, and: ea 


remains is quite legible, a considerable part is. 


PART PPro MON INSCRIPTIONS as a ae 5 


authority on Indian chronology (to whose help in this matter | am very much 
indebted) ; and he informs me that, within the period covered by Kyansittlia’s | 
reign, the end of the year. 110! A.D. and the early part of ti1o2 best fit 


the particulars given." But in some cases there are difficulties, and until we 


are in, possession of more precise information as to the method of workin 
the Burmese calendar at this period, some doubt must remain on the subject. 
It is to be hoped that the point may eventually be settled by a comparison of 
the dates of the early Burmese records, A good deal turns on this question 
of the date of our inscription. It. has been suggested, with much probability, 
that the palace built on this occasion was erected for the special purpose of 
Kyansittha’s royal anointment (ab/iseda); and it is a fact that the buildings 
described in the record are such as would be appropriate to an occasion 
of that kind. They apparently constituted what was technically termed a 
fivefold pavilion” ( paiicaprasada), and included amongst their subsidiary 
structures an “ ablution pavilion,” which i in. ‘itself. seems to point to some such 
purpose. On the other hand, in the portions _ of the record. that have been 
preserved, there is no definite statement that such was | their purpose, nor is. 


the ceremony of anointment mentioned at all. If the date above suggested 3 


is correct, it seems difficult to connect this palace with Kyansittha's anoint=— 
ment, for it appears rather improbable that such an important ceremony would 
be postponed for so many years after his accession to the throne. This : 
seems the less likely when we compare II] C 12-14 (including the variants - 
in IV and V) and VI 28, which passages refer expressly to the royal — 
anointment, It is true that they speak of it in the future, as part of Buddha's 
alleged prophecy about the king. But that is, after all, merely a matter of 
form, and it seems probable that the event had actually. happened before 
these inscriptions were set. up. In that case it must have occurred before 
June 4rd, A.D. 1093 (§ 45), the probable date of No, VI, which is the 
earliest of Kyansittha’s dated records, 7 oon 
57. It is hard! ly posable to 2 give, in 2 a ‘reasonably brace Prats, any 


ae 


of The equivalent dates, given in the ‘notes to the - ns are all based on this assumption, 
@ been kindly worked out for me by Mr. Sewé , to whom I must -here e nrass my grateful 
‘eo ahewe so much trouble i in the matter and given me the benefit of” Q very special. 
Subj el res see. Lice y Bui, C au at, 79, D 42, E ar, Fox, 12 
¥ Po * 9 , he aA oe 


- 4 ee — oe _ BPIGRAPHIA A BIRMANICA ee [VoL 1 ‘PART I] oe MON INSCRIPTIONS : ree | - 
| ths F 28, “89, re a eared . with ‘a large retinue to os of the Burmese ones; and it is clear that, ¢housh members of a conquered — 
ee in: this. passage a 29, 4 44), .pp vivid. and contrasts race, they had a recognized status and were by no means merely hewerg of. 


honour the work with his presence. Here the narrati 1 yatenen : } ' 
with. the somewhat monotonous repetition, of; stereot} remonial that ... wood and drawers of water. This is the first occasion, too, on which we 


| ‘constitutes the bulk of the record, The fragmentary face _and S._ enter | aa find them specifically mentioned in this collection of records by their ancient 
nto details. of the decorative architecture. of some portions of. the palace, ° - ethnic name, Rmek, from which the modern form» Méxz is (through the: 
oa subject. of considerable interest, though. the. ‘meanings. of som th e words | medieval Rman) quite regularly derived. Here also, for the first time, occurs | 
“used are still. doubtful, Indeed, the whole inscription teems. with: technical | the ethnic name of the Burmese, under the form Mirmd (B 42, D a4, H 12). 
terms of which I am as yet unable to determine the precise sense. I have _ Whether this is a faithful representation of the name by which the Burmese 
received much valuable assistance“in this matter. from Mr. Robert Halliday | called themselves at this time, or whether the word, occurring as it does in 
hee and Professor ‘Charles Duroiselle, but in spite of their kind help, and after a M&n text, has been modified in any degree by Mén linguistic influences, 
many revisions and much labour devoted to. the study of this difficult record, . is a matter which I must leave to be dealt with by those who. may hereatter 
I must. regretfully admit that many. of its problems still remain unsolved. : study the Early Burmese inscriptions." 
Their solution demands a more intimate acquaintance with the details of | | | , 
| ‘Indian ritual. and architecture than I.can hope to acquire, and I can only 2 Fy ay a tia gar ee Eee 
suggest ‘that. ae ‘comparative study of these highly technical. matters may ie | Tehes Oe Sn Re on e 
2 _ perbeps, in the future throw further light upon the doubtful points, | | sae ee Pea 
58. Although: the inscription — contributes a fair amount of fresh lexico- is & oe o co | A 


ee graphical material, ‘yet owing to its many “repetitions the: new words contained : 7 _ 
“in it are les ; numerous | than might have been expected from its great length, a Sa Bee ee ee, Ree ee ge a Fes ho Sugg ga he ae Let On 
d, for the reasons: already stated, many of them are not yet capable of : ee 

on. I fear. that to the. ordinary. reader this record will seem 


Bee tee dsa eet aay blah. ae tee eee es» (pa brat cindran 
_moh)* | a 
3. (jlow)® [lubac ku kon brat thow] Saas _ (a difkary®. cs. os oe ee 

4....... [lor ku. pkaw se: pnef [dulei- sambhuc duled pa i khal 


ae _ mal 3 
e183 Binare a polly “that - even a conical < arid : , 
S “may eventually turn o out to. con ain nakerial that is = Sane pref gob [ma iat (tay a pian (got lu) (see poy 


pellips ath a desiit : “6, [ther Arahan ket ku tirley sahgha durnpoh] es sal gk rf (kupa)- 
age _ 7. (7 han) {stha kir]® : 

“The + Beat Ha atone attached to pes a: ) [sthan ma skir] eran fais iirkay. {ba}r Huh. yas [jifijua 

8. [tas] sifghasin ku jifjua prasat eae: ku falas. eeatsat bi]- 

9. rlop ku jifijun jua dal ku jap ° jijua atas {muk goh ut] 


aes Report ri the Superintendent, Archaéological Survey, Burne, fae) para, 36. 
eS ‘There may be traces of a line above this one, 
a Very doubtful, The first letter may be the end. of plit Gn one rubbing there seem to be trace’. 
of Land #).. After hain possibly we might supply #a@r x cf, B 34,C 3s, EB 4a, J to. - ee 
4 Conjectural restoration, inferred from. the words legible in the next line. . — ee 
5 Conjectural restoration. 6 Extremely doubtful. 7 Very doubtful: see A ag infra, 
 § Perhaps shir, ‘sro’ Gamesivably firfdp. 0 gm ed Se | pete 


WO, 
ce 


12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16, 


17, 
18, 


TQ. 
20. 


~ 27, 
22. 


23. 
age 


25, 


26. 


t Very doubtful, 
8 ‘Tere: may be any _superse 


KO. 


# Very" 

& The final le! 

“7 The last Te 

context but. doesn 

8 Here, and- elsew 

. BF: 39, ‘and(in'a differen at 
- § They is doubtful. 

10 Possibly ksa.-Or the - 

HW This top is: doubtful : 


{a lwar. tik sia kinta bain hur to! 2 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA von. ne 


we 


ronfiah} ( ma kel) sal sla (darka)s? goh ailake t ‘pharh [klo’ mura i]- 
()[seh sgac si}igir [pgoh’ kata: ap ku. ut] Z 
ws ee: CHER ; 
(da we)l a pli ‘they goldhult a u [bunt : 
ma i 


Beg Mal Wee he ve vel 


ae 


spado- | ee 

[t parit 1 dejh- ae ta ek gob toy]. BY oat (aed Klas thn 
k[laj-. | : | 

[s] s[re]i [kl]as [slay]: ta goh Ue i} ren lar (ae ahaa) wie ge 
[17 mjangal : 

[han] prasa[t jnok 1 kju pra[sat. cindjeow? Cain » ku prasat birlu]- 

p [ku jiJAjof ju[A dal tay » dek kflas ti} pa[n laim ku kinlo’] 


[sai dificam goh deb] rlela ‘ale Taln dirmoa th i °y sangha pan. 


[lmi]- 


[m da ma -spade]t parit [ruaals gol "kt ut “njelthfan " yan 
tirle]-— 


ke gatigha|: (surh, tt) [diftcam ‘nla? foc _saghatiner] (ma aon 


-[pardhan® ma] _ 
[spadot) pari[t rurhé}as Peon I ku gartitr pan lajim Igotit [i]. 2] 
dirmot ee Usaighe]_ ma, EG hee diffic]a[m gob ‘1 diakals snail 
_difteal- 


ene “plik (sit) * 0 “Shean v ‘ke Aificam de host “Klan 


dificam] (0) [ki]. | 
(allel? sai] Hips ‘dhificam] cet) rea lar (ban) [shan giro [tirley 


Agha k [im dificam ko ila’ poy: ntbaele Tahail ne spadat] 
: e sth na balun te ely ede aa dificam: gob] 


ee 8 Possibly oe Ch A 33, F 48; G he H 46K 6. 
t over’ the next letter. iis Lona, is doubetel). Ch é 33, 35, G5, 


6 # Bechage Wei Pees, 

ems: to be ‘A. "peasy one might restore yaz... ake 

ms fairly certain, I doubt if we can restore ma shil, which would. fit the 
“supported by the ink-impressions, 7 


13, C 27, 34s Ady He Sey E23, 26, G a5, H 13, J 3. 
351 46, |: ay ere 
eae 


be y. But probably the text is right 
rd, such. as an reno ae 


sre is a doubt as to whether this. word. is. spelt with 2 ad C f, B 8, 23, . 


PART 1 | MON INSCRIPTIONS ; 7: 


29. [d]iffkar snal] kla{rh dificam gl]i{k] (ksi)’ [klam dificam kwlir [klarh 
dificam] (0 bo)- 

28. [y tla mi}r[mo]k [mJuk [dirlec jnok] goh [kindam dirmof kyek mo]- 

29. [y ma nom ku 4]s om fin kindarh thic ma fiin gufii]* (kupar) ° 
[ku glik] 

30. [burhten] (1 ma pdar)* [ku tdofi burhnteh « goh ma fiin sal ku] 
(asthar ® ta)-§ 

31. [sar’ antél a]s [goh ma] fii[n dumon® rap kyek thar moy « rap]. 

32. [tirlely [Gawarh]pa[ti moy « ku sla pat wilne[y sut] abhi(dhamma® 
Pls 

33.-..... (8) cip pi pahir gilrluk”® pharm sgac singir pgoh®? kaka] 
(ha)- 

34. (n) kyek [thar tlirley Gawa[r]pa[ti] « [ku ut tirley sangha pan Ini]- 

35+ [m] kla[rh dificam ma] ti[r]la[’ poly [mhather Alrathan| dals pirdhan] 
() [sal- 

36. [mbe]h jey sabhah » samben ka[nsasiijr « samben rajafsar] « [ku u]- 

37. [t samben gri# 0] salmbe]A [len kalan yan] sah « [plandit (surh turn) 

38. [ut pdey] rurmnd[s] cut pkiw thar sirwih p[nJe[n] dulen Inofr] 

39. [ac saranasi]l ku [pJarit [mafigal] « p[dJe[y rum]aas wir ut pafn] 

40. [tlan J kal [goh tijrla’ poly mha]ther Ara[han] taw bo[y] 

41, tlai pirlit ku[ta” boy tl]ai [mi]rmo[k © ra]p [k]inlo’ [sam da]- 

42, (kkhinawat)™ [ku dek k]las [th]ar sre [slay ti ma dJeh rea [lar] ™ 

43. [kin]ta [tirla] ploy m]ha[ther]r ae t blah goh tirjla[’ poy mhaj- 

44. [thelr Ara[h]ar ki[l sarjanasif! blah « ut g]urhir [pan laim klarh] 

45. [dificam] d[m]om [taw pdey rurmAas ku tirla poy] mhather [Ara]- 

46. [han ma das plir[dhan padot plarit [mahg]al [v pJadot par[it] (ma)- 

47. (agal goh ey i cli[p=piryam dumhic pi pahir msun nad]i (b)fir]- 
(tari) 18 6 Oe AS 


~ 1 See the note on this word in A 23 supya, 2 Perhaps gass. 


3 The reading is doubtful, Perhaps the same word is to be read in A 6-7 supra, where it is still 
more problematical. 


4 If rightly read, the subscript d is in a form sateehat like the more simplified ‘variety of sub. 


‘script ¢, much as in Arimaddanapur, Mynzedi 3, Conceivably, instead of ma pdar one might read 


pundar, but | prefer the former. 

8 The ta might be mia, ete. 

8 Possibly dimon, a bad spelling. 

10 Possibly girlak, Conceivably p -oh, See A i m 

12 Perhaps grt. WCE EG s, 1; The reading is very doubtful. 

15 Or lar, The / seems pretty certain. Nothing else is: visible. 

18 In this whole line the lower portions of the letters are cut off. But the restorations, cone to 
some extent conjectural, seem pretty certain; for msn one may have to read megan. 


& Sornewhat doubtful, but probable, 
? The vowel is doubtful, it might be 7. 
§ Blurred, but probable. 


IRMANICA — [ VOL. IIL : 


Be Base ea a 
| Bi + a a ae 
Pec ella [racine | ee | 19. [ 
4. [k « muk tirdey . ‘han)) fad) - ra 
oo [pili] eS | 5 
5. [t 0 muk tir]de[y han lar Xs : . 


. [msun] ha[n goh tun. pe 
eo [sal difaykar 2 Foe 
ae feu] plicjalw. thar sirwid A pnei du 
: Plier uf | 

Le hae: msun | an gob ‘blah [0h] bal th pras 4 Q ae 


Et mu]. ae :. oie 

‘Tk jun dal] ut ,sthan [msun han “gob  p- sain ku dek klas “ater a : oe 
a [p-him] * dae 
F (da blajh * [sa]l TdiaTkae cut kaw har sii pnea culef)_ a 27. 
~~ burhnah hurd sa[ma sii’ , 28. 


2 Pe retin ‘[I}for . fut ae msn] (da go wel) i (ein he _mirmok 

-kintu karti]-. s 

Ok they “Candee it fT Lembet en sambeh let tl yall PA \a? L 
bates 5 Cae : 


i ro »[ndrew fee in =e) ak 
oa, i [lark bale til a 


oe 6 Very doubtful. Alternatively it might be #2 mleh, 
dhe be mleht or the supposed da: might be merely an accidental mark 
‘the mark below may be accidental, 

There seems to be only a single stop here, 


Sak Though. these lettre: 2 are @ legible, 1 think the reading i ‘8 practically certain. 
Fair Yes Ree 


the: inm 
dots: ‘Oy 


* 


PART 1) 


6.00 


[ku ut] (ku) (itjua cen 


[han] tlaa [clifa Kite?’ ie) han} . ut elegy) 


i Falcly céttatn, oe . 

8 Looks rather like #7, but may 2 

+ This seems:to be the same phrasé as in- 
~~ here illegible; ‘has: 
be #, The sla 
6 ‘The stop is doubtful, 
ately following &u and tlhe“ 


of The last word seems. fairly céttain. 
8 ae last Biers see 


- [s fu 8 el (oitgin) Dias “y a) i eh surh ka g 
pole. cae | : 


burhnah hora | to ieee oes 
[tuk dek] ... .. . (pehurh) 


gah ; yan jiijun je : os 


1 einige] -% oe “(prs : 
arnt | 
(pan), [han u prasat birlup: moy; hana jisjon mu 1m 1a 
{no jifijun muk] eae [moy han « jifijua jun dal m: ay] iy oh 
[jifjun muk] tlir]de[y | 1an tlan} (mirmok moy) [han q jifijun le ! 
[k tirdey han tlJan pir it] (moy han) [i }Aijuh muk ts y| 


rea la]- 
“moy hana ut cl 


“ea 


ght be slué. 


ta: this” 


Be "The first wordy. 
ts final may possibly 
ibtfal, 
Iso be’ possible to. read 
s but, There ‘are traces € a 


@ subscript under its initia 
ems fairly certain and so dots ¢ 
Perhaps it is really @. 


em which may represent: 
top is also doubtful a: 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | ~ Evon. 1 


10 


32; (tbow)*. . 
ku aie. 
43. (sno? jiljup® ) [all [diak]ar [pkaw] thar fomabhus 4: dujleA pnea 
; dulen [deh [rJe- & 
a 34. C lar)® .... [tay bljah [» han nar dle[h pa brat cindran mjoh 
ale =5 flow [Ijulbac ku] , 
poe | . {kon ae thow pdey goh pan ® khal ma_ “rok. ‘ja pinlea [sarhbhuc ? 
. dulifea] deh ; 
GBs ce oa sh [dek klas thJar sre[fi tity sa] aifikar) ofut pkaw thar 
. cara | | ae 
Be a igolh [ma burhnJah hues (lholr nar ci[p. piryam 
2a *dutihije tk). 
se ee fitey] go[dhuli 4 lagna burhnah hura sama to] 
| pL-ha]m ® GBfAju}a Girkoy] ; 
39. [jiajua yas jiftjula [ajta[s cut k]il [dJek [klas thar sreii] foie ay ees 
40. ick kinlo’ san ma cut tar sao’ jji[ljip » bllah golh deh p-htim] 


ae ta i as ec ae 


ee are + Fagus [kijrrya [sur turn ej-en [da] ta 
“feo ut Filey it sah Cae ed 


: ~ [erc(u)l i ; ‘Tittieh (man) 


° 
ee es ere ee er ee a ee 


CR a or ar 


- [goh ut]. . etal a eo aS oe ee ale a ae ae i oe ee oe oe age o , 


LA ao. ee 8 » @ eo ew 8 ee 8 Hw oe oe 8 © @ & © © @ Y 2 @ e eo 6 
i wa sce, (ek kinlo}- we 
: 48. [ Saft ma cut tarh sito’ jilip] . Be ee ee vee 


eae 


‘From here to the etd of B the beginnings of the lines are broken off. 

@ ts Perhaps one might restore |) ve, Or some other verb (such 

jave beén written, . “8 Or, perhaps, filjep. 

sambhue... 5 Conjéctural restoration, 8 Or pun. 7 Or sumbhuce 

s probably included some word like het, ; 

restore puen dulen, 

teasonably certain.’ What follows looks rather like pa \| in one or two of 

conjecture phat 3 or, alternatively, pan, 

oration pan is accepted. in the last line, it would seem likely that pahir 

: tthe space available seems to be rather small for the two words. 
: 12 Or godhuli, : 13 Or p-hum, 

16 Or; perhapsy tircal. Re 


jec tural restoration 


the impressions. ( 
| AUIE the conjectur: 

plit should be restored her 
Probably, however, pliti 
_ The last word may 


2 [de]k [kl]Jas [thar srefi dek kinlo}’ sah [ma cut 


(goh) [jifjeh mirma — jifijeh r\(m)lefi] jlifije |b 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS : rt 


Cc 7 : 


x) (khal ma) [ero]k [ku pnefi? « cut kil dek klas thar srefi] (sal di)- 
2, (fikar) * bent pklaw [thar sirwi]a poet GULED) sae Wa oe Sa a ees 


3. aie Tpinyant du[rnhic] pi [pahir msun ee oes oe oon 
nah) [hura] 

4. safm]a [to’ p-hum jifjua jirkoy jifjui] (yas ku) [ut kirya pra]- 

g, [sat ku] jiffijuja su[rh turh creh] .. 1... 1... ee ~~ (pehum tay) 
[ut] (bla)h 7 | 

6. lafor ku] pk[aw thar pne]a [duleja............* [cas durhpolh 
(he 

4, [a] (goh mlehn blah goh sambeh)®..........* (ket) [dek parit 
kla]- 

8s rthiee [ma deh] (rem lar)? .r.......... [h® deh] (tluh rum- 
bas han)® [ji]- 

g. fijua j[ijrko]y [jitijui yas blah deh] ru[thbas] (ut) [jifijuA kirya sum] 

10, [tjuth mlehn blah gofh burhnah hura sama to’] (p-hur kirrya) [goh 


ku del. 
11. k k[las thar srefi antél™ jifijuh BTKOY | {en blah) @ [n cip=p]i[rya]- 
12, [m durhJhifc ul(ssajoga)” ......% 0 (goh ma) [burhnah hura] 


(sama to’ p-hu)-"* 
13. (m) [kil durnpo]h [li](cut tiy blah® 1)... (jifjua jirkoy jifijua] 
14, [yas jifijuh atas ta goh] (b)...(n).....(mey)........ 
is...... (goh) [mleh] « [blah [goh ylan [fifijuh sum tjurh # (ku) 
[kirya] oo... | 


1 With this restoration cf. B 35. The last word in the preceding line must have been p4% or 
pun, , 

2 Conjecturally restored ; but the 7 seems pretty certain, 

3 Probably the first part of the missing passage read sasnbhuc dulez, 

4 The last of the missing words may be a, 5 Almost certain. 

6 The first of the missitig words (being a continuation of the title sambex) apparently begins 


with jy (cf. A 36), But the rest does not appear to be sadhaé here. 7 Very doubtful, 


8 The first of the missing words looks like trom, or trey. If it was the latter, we may 
suppose that sazgha came next. The last of the missing words was probably got, unless we are to 
assume ¢as duynpok after the supposed savigha, 


9 Very doubtful, especially the han. - ~~ «10 Fairly certain. 

1 Or antul, - 2 Very doubtful, _ 48 Doubtful, But cf. C 17, E 1s, J 30 
14 Looks as if it might be a/igdr, but is very doubtful, 5 Or, perhaps, p-Ad-, 
16 Very doubtful. And of course ¢iy might be tuy, a 

17 Looks like to’, At any rate the final seems pretty certain. 18 Possibly ha-. 


: 6, (0) prast (te an ku dj. ave eee (ku kirys surh turh ‘crehi] 
eee AO) SB. Lele . 
a 17. eae.) [ut taleh n| agin) Raoek kintu] (magha* ussajoga snisca)- 
48. [F] (goh) [burhnah huJra [to’ p-hum'® jifjui jirkoy jifjui yas] 
. 1g, [jifijuh atas ta goh uku] ..... -[lah]® (p-hum) [ku dek klas thar] 
7s 3 “20. _srefi (tay ? blah pa pujaw)® [pkaw thar] pine] [dulen. blah gohj . 
: ay. (kic) ta(rh)° [jifjua ta gob] (c-eft)* Taleb} n (mgun) [mirmok kintu 
a ~~ phallaj- ~ 
- sg gon) t[hey. 5 idttawa} ci] pifryam uti] hi[e oi} pafha]r [mgun nadi 
| ad ey 
‘ (ar) [tuk dek] (pa). -.. (i arene ae ® (site (t).(k).(b) 2 2. (ny 
ee Tle thee 27 | | 
- be srefi slay} (0 han pei) [klas ta goh deh] (ren lar ku pkaw 
ee ( Brac) © 
9s. (kmow. sla cadas da) # fa] (goh ma) [deh lusal antal® war] (ma 
_.-slom na)" 
26, Gu) [glik burhte]a [pudar ® ky tdof bumteh burhnah] (ma) [dindin 
ios eo dwar ‘tal 
fee got sluk subtly cindrow] (« kdeh bnas)** [ar] (kinta) {« blah] (goh) 


Tooth’ [bumnjah . ao cae kinta n] (goh ma) deh [Gr tulk 
tae lade 
99. dek goh [tlaa]* cip [tay * blah « deh] rfem lar] m[leh [x han turo]- 
w [mli[rmok] ‘kintfu] pha[llagun] t[aje[y] calndraw]ar [bar nadi tmin 
haf] | | 


: ‘Ldokes- Tike dumin or dupa. cannot explain it, ‘The next word looks as if it might have 
been. sinta or ‘sinma, or something like that, also unintelligible. 
~ 9 Looks something like dak. 
8 Conceivably dazkar ov dinkar. 4 Very doubtful. i Or pehiim, 
ooks like rap vuvnlek; but either or both of the #’s might be a d, the p might be m ors, and 
fal The tok seems pretty certain, The next word is also very doubtful, 
2 8, Or piyaw. 

i except. the 7: which is* practically certain, = * 
d looks tke dias. 
exceedingly doubtful, including the stop. But strie seems at ies prob- 
ak tnak wu. CE C 42, 
8,1 7 K 14, L 24, 3 Or antul, 
y though slom seems probable. After it there is a little spare space and 
fort. letter, which could only represent ra. 


es een to be hurd, _ 1 Or Hut, re Or tuy, 


_EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | “— [VOL it 


PLA} mY 


LO . 
= 


VoLume ITI, 


Bi 


ce THARABA GATE, PAGAN. 


a) 
a 
em 
Zi 
‘e) 
mj 
= 
Ay 
Le 
4 
O 
C9) 
Z 
pond 
Z, 
< 


No. IX. 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


- hy: Soon ey eee 


5 sg VL Wes: 
angonkudgmrawacyn 


we: 


a? 


HPQ 208 Fie Pld ope 


3 « 


4rgn oo PF. — 
~ cio ee: me eo) ‘ bd 


Navas Be Ape amenye 2crk 


grt 


aes 
Dg 


No. IX. AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEHARABA GATE, PAGAN. 


Episraphia Birmanica 


ae 


RAE 


MON INSCRIPTIONS. ee 13 


teas) [d]eh pa nae cindran moh] jlow ‘Tuthas] ku Gor brat tho]- 
.w sal diikar cut pkaw thar pnef dulen sarhbhuc * dulea u goh* 
. [ma slambef gr[i] samben ‘ela: Ksfalafn ala’ sah [buthajah: thurs 
~ salma] 
. [to’] sluk s[ijrpun s[u]kh[ely cin(d)row® sufkhily ull sir [na al g 
ku[ch]om burhten » gofh ma ar] Inor na[r tuy « ut] dijs cas} -.. 
[golh deh [pla bralt] cifndran] lu[bjac ku Ukloled prald tLblolw] . 
(rurhlah) * 

37. [pkalw thar pnfaji dulea [sarhbhuc duted dek [ikdas thlar refi dae 

38. [k k]inlo’ sak ma cu[t=t]arh so’ ji[ljf]p [ta gojh d[eh re] [sura]- > 
39. [p tay] blah ciple yan] dumfhiJe [b]a[r] n[adt bjar ad inal Ae 
| -goh| Brae 
40, bu[thnjah [hJura to’ [eu] rplkeaw. thar] éUivis pnea dulea lkJet de- 

41. k klas thar sre[fi] dek kinlo’ [s]ai [mJa cult] ta[m sho) [jij- = 

42. [I]iip [g]oh [s]an [rumbas Iaor] ut dis cas t[ty] bla[h « _sfirlte}- ee 
43. (0) ti tak tinjak [m]le[h 0 hjan pry ES goh kurh de[h] plis] gifnhal]' 

44. (dhah sal)® bific{al] ji[f]} ula. a goh [m]l[e]h « [clu 

, . durhhic [m]Jo- ~ ae oe 
45. (y pahir oe ba tmin deh hal sin[d]ra{’ ‘iiiual ta goh- : 
46. (tiy) deh . so han piven] Asietli [go]b. Haale deh ket : 


1 Possibly scsnbhec. en ee 

2 Looks rather like yz, but. the extra cen is prokebiy: a ocident iy 

3 It is very doubtful whether there is any trace of a 
able reading in this passage. 

! Exceedingly doubtful, though the + seems fairly 

6 The restoration is somewhat conjectural, thoi 
impressions. In any case it is probable, and the r see: 

7 Fairly certain, owing to the context, 

8 There may be traces of -angther ill egrble I Tine above this one, | 


pretty certain, 


14 : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. m1 
Ales ce | . (1). . (@ goh ma burhnah hura ket dek klas thar srefi 

: dek Acnle san) | a 
5. (ma cut tarh sho’* jiljip) det. ee rn ee or eee ins 
6 © 8@ @ «8 @ © @ a es o F © 8 ° « & 2 @ a ’ a8 6 o 4 @ «@ 
| ee : : (nadi) oe gee eer: oe » ++.» (pandit ») Mi eata ot oe «2 


Bh ee ee be re ee tee ao Snel) dents Ills 


9. ae ms aie ae Ee wa ee ee (Rete RSlay wee 7 ta) 
Hilde) 6 22S ae ae a ets Se we ee | 

10. , Pee ha ken (arial ve wan Gla, Sica aes Grd aoa og (phl) 

PT) sine nc alae wee tos oe RS . (tty) [blah deh]... 

Meee sie eH hye WK, aaa ee eo eee ae . « [br] 
«(ket ku) « oes : 

a 5 eee . (sirstl) 2 ce. ee. ee. [deh sill 
one qt “han ‘piryam’ ‘durhhi]- | 


Bee oe ede ae c-en)” . eae ee ee ee ni 
+ ie parit] SS Dee (pa)- aac. 
15. (n) [tlaf] (ku) (s|(inghdsin ren pdey goh mleh) ® ln}... . 6° Emirmok= 
kintu phal](l)afgun they] (su)- 
16, (krawar? goh deh) [ket dek klas char ea (ta goh) [deh] (lop 
rumbas han) [jifi]- 
17. {jun es jfjua yas jifijui atas sifjghasin [ku ut jifjud] (surh tum 
7 crea i 
_ 48. (mleh) [» they goh kum clip=[piryam durtitnte, bar beanie b[lah 
; dje[h ar} (tuk dek)? . ous 


19, (i) . (atthar™ sut ma q ot h ket) +? [kl 
| klas stefi dificim kla]- a) i ah ket) (k as] thar airs 


: Everything after hurd is merely conjectural restoration, though probable ed 
Conjectural restoration, depending on the correctness of the reading jiljip, which is not quite 
certain, 8 Looks like fas or was, * Conceivably omea (as in J 29), but probably not, 
: oa ie doubtful : nih Dee might conceivably be maz mey, mlek might be dlah. 
: oe ei ae the wore. for “nine is ae in this missing passage, 
: a) oy 
9 Very doubtful. The d might be sisi) serait ii ee ee See 
10 Or agers or attara > coe AAT very car aaa 


PART 1] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS. ORs 


go. [s slity klarn dificim klas ti klarh dificim 1] (han) [pen klas ta. 
goh deh] (crok pkaw b)[r](ac) , oie 

21. (kmow sla cadii)[fi] (da)? [tay] " [goh mal] deh KJeft ‘klas thar klas 
srefi| (goh) [deh lusal| 

22, (hantil lwar pan* ma) [deh gufi]i [ku gl]i[k burhteh ma deh pudar Lp 
ku t]d[on bju[rnteh goh ma bumj-  — : 

23, [nah ma dindin lwar ta goh slok sukhiy cindrow ut] (kurh « yai) 

__[klas sliiy klas ti ta gob] 

24, (Rah) .. . (ginlas* ku mirma ma rap sinrai) # ic goh] (hu me 
[cifigin] (dakep)® fiah ma [cifigi]n ta 

25, (goh sluk glik sirpon) [kuchom burmteh juk sok burmten] » (goh ma) 
Saag HUE | 62%, aos" , | | 

OO. THA 4 Scie eine dee Mee ho SM aR Od Pkg ee SG Be eee Ae 
bat ar) Fiinta} (1 poh ma a ar) : 

ay. [tuk] de[k] (« dek goh tli) [cip tay 7 eh] tole ren lar “jinren] 
ae ma on 

28, (stl)®. fc oRidt a ee Gwe ete a han piryam duriJaic Bole, [kur], 

? Ce are ee o gh 

2g. (bal)[i] (Indra ku) [ut dewatiw] (gur)l (u)ia® fei] deh Wiccan) 

tfajy [kil] (bali mleh yiya’) t(a)-” 

30. y (reh)® [buddhariip] (ma nom)*— [dey dia Arimaddanaptir wo’ cil 

| (t)... . (lah). (t)* [lah] . : . 

31. [pnef] (buika) [sarhbhuc™ k](I)[o'] (twit) they [gon] kurt) deh ee 
plijaw jap ut] (mleh « blah) [goh] 

32. (dan nidhi kil) . tee ee ee « (out pi sthan me. at eip-pieyam 
durhhic pan nadi tmin] (da)® dfeh] 

33. (pis)® [jiljip” ku sarbbagan™® marmal ta goh mleh 4 han turow 
nadi tmin goh deh plo]- 

1 CE Borg, C 24, G 28, J 7, K ra, L 24. 

* The word pan is particularly doubtful. 

8 The vowel of the second syllable might be wt? 

4 Possibly sindraz; ci. F 23, 24, H 44. : we 

5 Perhaps kum, & Very doubtful, 

7 Possibly fiak or pan, preferably the former. 

8 Extremely doubtful: ma si~ in the last line might be parnpi, 


9 The last part of the missing passage looks rather Tike jayd. But [ can make nothing of it, 
10 The second w is very doubtful. ~All very doubtful except the 4 


12 Look like ag¢t or 77d. 18 Ot possibly sumbhuc. i 
14 All very doubtful, except perhaps the last word; out might be wf, and the ay is quite 


uncertain. 1b Perhaps sae 
_ 16 Perhaps, though improbably, sare or even sarwb?. . 


16 - 


34: 


35. 
36, 


37 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, Il 


[p jiljip ku] (bdi’)* fcasbbagen’ marmjal ta goh RaTlen [5] hafn 
moy pahir tmin] (goh). [deh] 

[crok tdof bintea bar [« han] iA[jula [jirl coy bar « tdon bintenh mo}- 

[y han jifijuja yals o tdojA [binten moy| ha[n jifijuf atas] (« goh 
ma) [burh]- 

[nah hura ket dek klas thar srei ku dek kinlo’ sah ma cut tarh 
sho’ qil]- 


: [jap ? » goh ma. padot san rumbas tay * goh ma girkar ku jiljaip] az 


(ku ve) ae. 
i erie ictiiamy (vey ae L jirkJoy [ku sruja [jifijuh yas ku srun jifjua 
atas}- : 
: [sil(aghasin) [de]b girfkar ku sla ji \julp (ku lwis tty) [goh] ma [tun 
~ oket} Pea actas ate 
ere (ta) ie ool tun] glirkar #] 2... .. (girkar) § [jiljup}] (ku lwis) 


JB gob maljeh [s sho’] . 


Cie es . [ndjala? [ei djeh [plo]p l[ar ut jijap tla’ mleh — 


cas aienok ent phal](1)a- 


[gun they sniscarwar® cup Piryamm, dunihic moy pahar turow nadi| 
ba (brisa) * [Na(gna) 7 
; 44- (gob. aie) {tte Poy mbather Arahan ku ut trey] (saigha) . wee 


Boek te ‘The last | 
_ § Perhaps: si 
§ This seems to be the 
2 sure that it’ is not 
oe ou ver Souk 


ee b ous >=piryam). (cuinhicy 


rr ec | 


= 
[pahir] (pi) {madi} (tmin) 


i a en: ee 9 


ae ACs kden bnas ar data tik pham klo’) ® | 


eect (jifjui on)... 


3 Perhaps jug, 
—§ Very doubtful. 
"Looks like pandald or mandala, 


widiog passage seems tobe 2, 


ling, though of course in a barely legible passage it is difficult to be 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS LY 
4. (goh ar tuk dek) . si She he opin es nth, eos pag fii]- 
5. [fijun ta goh] (deh) . ae errr er ee 
6, [deh pa brat cindran Nibac ku kon brat tho] 
4. [w sal dinkar pkaw thar pneft dulef sarhbhuc dule]- 
BAO) a dg ee Sa wee ee Ges Sew a CEB DIAN) gee Sa ee ae ce 
5 Sheen aed: Sie . [tli]? (cip) [tay sy}... . eee, , 


10.....6,... (# goh on cee hura to’] (ket) [dek klas hale 
II, fe srefi dek] (kinlo’ sai ma fiin cut tarh)* [sfio’] 

12, [jilji]p [goh ma padot san rumbas tay p-hum ut] — 

13,....... (snal) [jifiju& ta goh mleh « blah goh sal] 

14. [dinkar] (Ifor) [pkaw thar sirwih pneh dulef » cip a 


15. [m ussajogga candrawar] . : hticegea pana mie . (deh) * 
16, (pis tmo’ snal) [jifijua ta gob j jap nade mleh « han] 

17. [piryam goh kuth s] (crif)*.......... (jifijuf)... 

18, [ut pan tlah «] (tlaa)... 2... . [ut jiAjuh] ..... 


ae ee 


IQ. eee ee ee [pijuay ee ee Ck), ffttijun pra]- 
20, [sat birlip® a ut] (jifijua® goh) ) [deh] (a) . [tay blah] 

ax. [v han pirpifi kantu’ phalagun they brahaspati]- 

22. (war moy) [nadi] t{m]i[n] defh surap thar dJeh la(k pa]- 


We aiseca a .° [han jifijuh yas «-taey goh kur] (bar) 


24. [pahir] (pi) (madi plllop jifijual . © (« han) (piryam -goh] 
25. [kuch p-hitm thiwds jifijun jirkoy ‘Tinjua [yas jij-- 

26. [fijui atas ku ut jifijjui [surh tur c-ea] (da) « [goh ma bum]- 
24. [nah] (saikran)® [to”] («)” [gu]fit lwa[r] pudar ku [td]oa [bu]- 
28, [ntea » hantal] lwar ta goh deh lusal klas thar 

2g. [srefi « klas sliy]™ ma fiah [eitgin] goh [pi cwlas pi da « 
30. [burhnah ma dindijé [lwar ta goh slok sukh]iy cindro- 

ar. [w]......* [ku glik kuchom bumten « juk sok} | 


1 Or tun. 2 Except for the 7, ma fin is doubtiul ; but the rest is nearly certain, 
3 Perhaps dek, 4 Perhaps cruz, 
5 Perhaps birlup. 6 Doubtful, There may be a ¢a between it and goh. 


7 Perhaps éintu. But there is no clear trace of an 7, 
8 The last part of the missing passage looks like paz, or pdat, The first letter in the line is 


illegible, and. this throws some doubt on the end of the preceding line also, Cf. E 47 infra, 


§ Presumably we must restore yas or afas. 

10 Doubtful. But cf. At2, J 2,9 . 

Ji There seems to be a stop ee though none is needed, 12 Perhaps sluy, 

13 Looks like n deh na, which I cannot fit into the context satisfactorily, thouge I have 


attempted to translate it on the assumption ae the stop is misplaced. 


3 


18 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA a x -. [von 1 mt 


32. [bumten blah goh] hura [burhnah] ( daksan? phlac * me )[khala] 
" 33. [bnjas k[dJen ° [tik ar pharh aK goh ma] ar tuk _de- 7 
34. [k a ‘kindrow] (ma) [a]r [tuk dek goJh » [han jiJ-- 

35» [fijui ta goh] deh[h pa brat [cindrJan [pi cwlas d{urh poh)- 

36. [h] d{irmoa] « [s]afl dijaka[r pi ew]as [duth]poh 0 [dek kla}- 
37. s k{lam] pa[n] cwas di[ficja[m] u pkaw [thar] pi cwas d{umhpoh]- 
38. [h *] p[nje[a] dulfe]a pi cwa[s durm]pohh 1 sam[bhu]c [dulen] 
39. [pli [cw]as [duth]pohh « de[k kinl]o’ [sah ma cut]=tarm 

40, [sho’ jilji]p aloha [pi cwas d]um[pJohh da [i han] 

41, [najr dfiikar snal p]k[aw] thar p[njef dulea [p]aa [khal ma] 
42. [crok] ku p[nef » ut ta] gfoJh dehh rfe]a surap _ , 

43. lar tiiy] blah » de[k ma] de[hh ar tujk [gohh] | 

44. [tla] cifp t]a[y 0] cip= =[plir[yam godh|ul [i] lafgna] goh [deb)- 
45. [h) p-him thiwas jifijua j[ijrko[y 1]. jifijun yals- n jil- 

46. fijui a[tas] © ku ult jijijua s[urh] * tu[m] e-eh wi[r u]- ‘ 
47. pala] t[la[a] led a ha{n pir[y]afm] goh ku[th tak] ee 
AB ere eee eee ean Piya Boh. bel 


ee oe: | fie eo ee kt [tiey sulrawar - 
, ‘goth kur poe TSS : - . oe 
2. ‘[radi) (mina ® lagna). < ee 
_- milm]of[y]® han goh : 
3. deh {tuip tinlah thar ‘tinlaly srefi tila slay. H [ult cas han. goh 
sone TOW goh- 
; 4. (b) he [tiJnlafh thar Jinlah ref ola say plurpi) o pith deh tuip_ 
a they goh kurh deh kh[ayl | 


s Gian ee , yas infor ata a = e deh khal ut 


a a My - : [sti rajasthan goh | 1 


e a ie be , or. someting else, “The $ may ‘be w 

perhaps. be 8s ot ao 
es Possibly, But" “idiprabably, Sitti, 

“eettain that ‘the initial is not. Pe though a cross- bar’ is. wy, visible. ‘But 
rhaps. cf, E 92-3 supra. ; 
es of the tops of letters and’ superscript symbols remain, but their 
al. restoration, poe oy 
Ly. the end ‘ef ieee ee ee 
Possibly mirmoy,. gee a RR 


ear GEST TE 


PLATE ILL. 


VoLuME III, 


Eprgraphia Birmanica 


PAGAN. 


ABA GATE, 


4 


: 
i 


INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR TH 


AN 


PART 1} MON INSCRIPTIONS - ae 2 19 


6, [cre] mleh « han pilryam goh] ku ae ain on jifijua jirkoy 
jifijua [yas jifijua] 

4. [atjas deh sal tin[lah thar tina stefi. tinlah s{lay] a ‘ut itjola ta 
goh purhpi ta- 


8. p deh sal s[m]oh jirnok ku kifotal] ‘iajua ta glolh A [den [giw] ku 


glik ma deh- 


9. [sil jley[yale]kha goh meh a [tJol ma deh Pa, jiih]ua ta goh 
surhwat kuma- 


10, [ri] kon [b]um[nJah kon kfi(a)m 1 (ma. t)len * a [ma Mindat Klara 


13.7 jifijua yas jijun atlas sighallin han t ti ag 


difichm oll t( (a)y * da oo. 


72, reaety] goh kum pi ae tmin ina a (deh yuk ‘[ptaw lar 
jpaijun jirkoy ba- 


a tne 


‘TA y [go] kurh cip moy pahar turow radi t ‘Gale + loom pun yan cia 


no- — 


Y 5. ¢ (d)indar 4 jinren Jetawan goh [lop pea) cin [han ie raft] 


kinl(@)n® Puka- 


oe ‘16. m pldjey kumbea (ma sar)* [go]h a ya fla a [war ku Twlar (ya)n? 


-goh [lJop [t}aw boy — | 
ry. [k]ro[w] cit yan # bey cif kif got yaa oth bintaa [ina vie’) 
Erawan(a)- 


18, mahawieyyaberabholo x ma duk pitt ko cl ibys), imate) [ma tmay 


na] thar [ima]- 


‘ 19, s [ma fi]i[n] lak na frat mel kah [mjey fpiatked goh ma (ta)[w * 


oe 


| bar lurnjpek go- 
20. [h ylai ee 38 yan [ma] dfuje pif, tke (k]irya (itech thjar [ma 
 yals [ma] fiin {lak na raj- 


an, [t ma kah moy prakar] (gob ma) ® [taw cal) « ut sambef. gri 


samben leh 


| ae [kal an yah sah ma tlin kom ie] slat poy gna smija patieayis 


_ goh. lab) fiah 


: z Poakly Fhitn, -~ 9 Pandey pt one Hens os 3 Possibly tuys 


4 Conceivably vipdar. = - 5 Possibly Aialen, 


~~ S Very dowbtfily 0 ‘Presumably right, Biueh it looks. ted se fai 
8 Looks like warn, yh Baas y ets ae hom, ae : 


nga sr ach keurh n Kul 


RR eg 


ri RET RCT OC OT ee OPE URS Oe eT ee SE Ro Pree Bg RA ee EE, Si a SF ee a lt a al 
EL i MOLE ae UO R gh BE EERE SRE IE SORES 9 EB TB al 5 ; 4 H 


20 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. WI PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ at 


23. [ma rap slinrai’ (ta) * goh lah [sluk sirpia* sukhiy] cindrow sukhiy 
*  . ular glik ku- 
24. [chom juk sok] bi[n]t{eA ut mleJh [i] blah [goh fiah ma rap si]nraa? 
(ta) * goh [sambe]- 
25. f [gri sambea lea kalan yJaf sah [trap] (d)furnsac © kla pnafi burnnah 
_ hura fiah pee 
26. le[p kindath sni’ to’] s[lJok [sirpu]a ® euenly ci[ndrow sukhay ulajr 


36, dumhic bar (pahjir has[ta]* na{ksatra me]thuna lag{nja crun jijua 
jirkoy Fiiju- 
37. i [yas] jifijua atas « ha{n=-tarmh] dir[k]as j[ijajua [ta] goh deh par 
ku glik 
38. bi[ntlef » blah [g]oh jifijuh ju dal [jifjuh] prasat i[no}k ilijajua pra- 
39. [sat cind]row pa[n] jifiju[A prasat blir{lJup ku u[h]* jifijuf sum tum 
_ deh gi- 


(wak) 7 4o. w ku glik binten deh [clut [paficarat tay deja [cJut pan ku dek toh- 
24. (ut. kirya] ® na ku [glik] : bifnt]efa] ecnen bintea juk sok bintea 41. h [curnhal bljah [« deh cru]f® {ut] mleh [« kal crjua [ra}ja[s]tha[n] 
n cut] goh [ya]a tlu]m- 


28. [pk]aw thar sirwii p[nJe[A dulea u lAjor [ic] war fnor tirla poy gna 


42. [way] julra]win [ma] (4d)[i] (nor)* [thar sre bley] (kba)l sattara[t 
s(m]ifa Sri] 


ma] kah [mo]- 


a9, Tri[bha]wanaditya{dhammaraja] I[mom] pun bi(r)[boy] ® sa(lar) ® » blah 43. Ly prjakar [ci] deh [tlt] (tway)®. 2. eee... ss ku) [gna 
[goJh [burbnah] hu- | smi Sri Tribha]- - ; ; 
go. ra {fijah [ma] lep k[indam as tol’ ar pa] plajaw nar rolw ney 44. wanadityadhamma|raja] ee «+. + [ra]ja[sthin] J[eyabhim 
fturh]la(r=)ku ” : | n han ji{fiju)-°® ne 
31. cut kil] es klJas ier srefi blah goh burhJna[h hujra fiah [ma] lep 45. (BR) ee te ee ee asta ete Set 
. ki- + 6 m@ @ 8 8 & wom 8 BF # @ 8 
Bm rideiity: (sal? sum tu[rh] tlan [san feut dek plari[t] klas thar sre(fi hJan AOE toni tree ad hy : ne Bia de fie Wy tacos Pee emcc eee! Hotie ee 
| run ; | ‘ antt)« 
33. [ta] goh roy u] cut paficarat (jap at) [sruf ta goh ku] pia dek 47. (1 Iwlar [a ‘gobh] deh usaf klas_ thar sre] kla[s| sliy klas t{i] 
[to](h)- pa 


48. ci[fgin] Palas dee deh reft {[sulralp] lar [tay 1 culp pifryam 


34. h cumhall] 3 blah [go]h glirjluk®- ut pharm {klo"] (m)ura [ta]pifw] durhhic] « 
urhhic pa 


isea gurmrin la ¥ 


35: (th)ar* [mhasar] s|gac] sliigir hh® kakla(ra)ult] baflelablan 
hi oe eee piryam at | oe ult] bafl-labjak 


; G 


1, [khal ma norh]® ku [pnJen cuft] k[i]l de[k] klas [thar srefi] — 
2. [sal dinklar cut pkaw thar sirwih [pne]a [dulen] « (goh) 


I 1-Pethaps idee 


—® Looks like #, but: the supposed. i is badi 
3 Or, perhaps, sivpun. ; 
4# Here there is no trace of any 7, but the 2 is blurred, 


y shaped and may be due to accidental damage. © 


emean wee aes sae 3. [ma burhnah hurd fijah ma lep indarh al to’ [la]or {nJar « [Ifior 
7 Looks rather like wakagn. Soueeraty tt the initial might be dh. But cf. G ay, nar] 
8 Possibly, but improbably, kivya@. 3 Perhaps plik, 
10 The + is very doubtful, ne 


1) Looks like Satap, 1 Perhaps (but improbably) Aastd. 


5 7 
2 It is exceedingly doubtful whether there i ig an 7 at all, 2 The reading appears to be wh, which can only be a stip for ut, 3 Conceivably crit, 


The blur over the & may he accidental 
_ may ek = ms ae kum, But if the true reading is tusala | think it must be regarded 4 Probable, though not certain, Cf, 1 C 26, | Nearly certain 
i se ot tether a Possibly airs b ® Very doubtful. 7 Possibly one should restore ma ‘igh. 
It is not certain whether J should be joined to what follows: it, | 


15 Looks like bar. (or even 6b 


8 Looks a little like gow, but probably édaz is right. No d is visible, the stone hein apparently 
16 Might be Prolih, CE age 


broken off here. Cf. C 27, E2, 33, 
9 In the preceding line we must assume pia. 


auc o - BPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [VvoL. 1 


. (tay. blah cip= “elvan [godhul}i lag[n]a [tik phar klo’ piw  sifgir a 
pgoh] | 


ands 


[jiiju)- 
6. [i yas jjud catas] Ahad “prasalt p-hiim ainGjula [p|rasat 
thie {up ku ut ji6jula sufi] tu[rhn] mleh » p-ha[m] tay blah sal 
eee os dilakiar. {eu]- 
8. te pkaw-thar suraJbhufe dule]a pnei duflelal laofr ult [jap jilfiju]- 
g. [a ta] goh [mleh | 7 tiley [snijscar® bar cirwek [pi] pahir [blah 
x sum ]|be- ? 
Io. a kalfjsafsir* | - sum]bea eapfiesol aabies fripu}{saddano) ® 
Me -[sumb]efh mhal(chatt)i? 
“AT, *Fumibed prajfialankar ku burbnjah Bits. to’ rumbas {ku] dek [pa]- 
aa, frit klas] thar [srefi] blafh de]h-kir sr(a)a® [ma] st{uip ® njidh? pa[n] 
13. [han pan dis. jifjual ya{s goh] p[dJey tro[f] sl(a)y ™ [pan go]- 
14. [h deh cut. thar] s[rje[& ut] ta{t ma] kah [mo]y [p]rakar [go]- 
ku. glik binte]A a dee vibyae peek Pi Lpabar se 


: — 


Oy Gea) 4 Tele teitany toca as ut i 
Qh. : : hey ma] cr[ujh [rajasthan Pukam goh kurh] (@ da)- 
20, fp they. sil ‘mirmok lah] (dap) * [they sil cirwek]. 

ate en tile oy. aha her eee ku oe ey sangha surf] 


Ee uperscrpt over. the stop. B 


~ The last syllabie + may be sur, 
| a 1 Perape — or meaeattl. 


. [kaka](r=)[0* gol ma ‘borhnah ho) [tor ar p-him jiitjon jirkoly -— 


TE IV. 


PLA 


ME III, 


VOLU 


PAGAN. 


? 


INSCRIPTION FOUND NEA THARABA GATE, 


IX. 


; AN 


0 


N 


MANICA 


pie 


‘raphia Bur 


Ke) 


+ 


N 


parti] —ssts«MON INSCRIPTIONS ar 


26, [m bi}ntefa sjufk sok bintea] (0 ka) [ai * Iw]ar {ku glk]. 
27. [binten pudar ku tdo]a [binteA » hantal *] (lwar ta goh tusal) * 
28, [klas thar srefi ku klas sliiy ti ma fiah] (cifgin)® [1 han pen Kla}- ; 
2g, [s ta goh deh crok pkaw bath: (kmow) [sla] (cada da) ® [uw ab] eee 
 gohyt | 
30. tilk phar kiJnfta i -gofh ma kon fiah jnok ta goh ku pandit] 
31. [yaa sjaa [to’ ar tuk dek 1 de k] (goh tlan cip tay)* [deh] _ 
32. [ren lar dek klas thar srefi sliy ti dek kiJal [o’ sah ma cule 
33. [t tarh] s[ajof’ jiljup) deh ref [lar han sa? ma spadot pals 
- 34. [rit*goh tay blah 1 cip=piryam. sgal they tirla poy mha]- 
35. [ther Arahan ku tinley safigha ma spadot par]i[t ta goh] — 
36. [lop dmofi han sii’ ma spadot parit ta goh " goh ma] 
37. [kon fijah j[n]ok [ta] goh ke[t dek klas thar srefi slaj- 
38. y ti de[k k]i[nlo’] sai [ma cut tarh sho’ jiljup goh] 
39. pit[guin® kil] ja[p tay blah « golh [ma plan[dit yan] sah 
40, [to? cut pkaw] thal] skies pnjen duleh Imor Ac pa- 
4t. r[i]t Ifior tay bylah goh [ma tirla poly [mhath]e[r ee 
42. [ku trey saigha ta] gol pado[t] pafrit bljah » [pado]t pari- 
43. [t ta]y blah goh ma tirla [poy mba]ther Arahan [ku ti]- 
. 44. [rlley sahgha [ma] pado[t] pari[t ta goh kurh ket ku djes 
45. [k parlit kinlo’ [s]an [ma] nom [ku] tam so’ jiffjup » — 
46. goh ma lop ‘rumba[s drac rinsic war) (ut pan) [tlah raj- 
47. jasthin. goh mle « goh ma Ai[t tan nor gojh « [gjoh ee ahs 
48. ia (@)[mot ae bene ran " goh ma ea Sele parit] (he) * ne ae co 


| eee . (08) ta brat. cindran han jifjon joy jiu yas {idjus | 
| 7 roe as Bee 
. 2, — han jinjua pris iap tl 1 han y Heh jut dal] © (ha: pe 
_ Gifijah pra). ee a oe S 


4 Possibly Rui’, The aaa form is s gut, Ct A 995 B 16, Da 24). B 1, y oe 
 & Perhaps glk... “3.Or hantul. Ae ee 
os 4-Or’ possibly lusal, “The exact words. in ‘this restored "passages area. fittle doubtful, ‘buts some- 
> thing of the kind must be sapalled.. 8 Ory Jess probably, ven lar; the passage is barred. ae 
8 The ea is doubtful. The next: etter thay ‘bed. Cf. B 19, © 24, D a0, J 7, K 14; Le Bde 

7 Conceivably. deh > >= - oe This testoration is sgiryoeaa certain, sie i 

9 The mark taken for 4 may be sccddeital., 10 Possibly ruz. ae oe 

M view é doubtful. The. next letters look rather like s sa. : Tas + 38 Almost certain, 


oe 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. m1 


3. (sat pan ut) [jJap ta (goh) [sal difkar] (cut pkaw)? [thar pnen 
dulef sarhbhuc] * 
4. [duleA «] deh [re}a [lar dek klas thar srefi dek kilo san mal c[ut 


 tarh] 5 
5. [sho’ jiljup] (goh)? [tay blah 1 ci] p=p tiryarn durhhic] (moy)! [pahir 
_. moly [nadi tmi]- 
6. [n goh ma buthnjah hu[ra Sah ma lep kind]Jarh (sai? to’ ket dek klas 


thar srefi| 
[dek klinl[o’ sJah [ma] d[eh ref lar] (ti Soh ma deh) * [san rumbas 


iE 

; jla[p ut ku jjiffjual 

8. [ta goh #] b[lah [goh ma deh lafor pkjafw thar sli[rwif pnea dulen 
jap ut] (mleh.«) [ha]. | 

g. [n] they] adi[ttawar goh kurh x i[p=piryam] d[uthh]i[c moy pahilr * 
(bar) ® [nadi tmin] i 

10, [goJh lafor] [nJafr « han nek pa brat [{cindran] (boy® d){irmoa sal 
diakar] (surap) 7 [pka]- 

tr. w [thJar [pne]a [dulea sathbhue dulea 1 goh ma sambefi gti® samben 

tea] (kalan yai)* ; 
12, [sla [bju[thnah| bola. mirma” ma ie ki idem shi’) (rmefi)" ma 


‘[lep kindarn sai’ slok” sirpuf”) 


4g, [bukhoy cindrow sukhoy* ular] (na)* ku gf kuchom burite}a jak 


sok burnten] (1) 


ds [gloh [ma buthnjah hura flah [ma lep kindath sa] elut kil dak klas 


thar srefi tiy blah] 
I 5 [goh ma deh lalojr [nek mleh] 1 [han pilrfyla[m golh. [kum deh cut] 
Jee. + + [bintil han] 


16. [sth]a{n ma a tut srua jifijuli Giletkoy bar jifijuh yas pijua atas 


singhasin ku] 


. U7. [s|tha[n ma skir sruf’® jifij ‘aia. [ut mialk pan tlah mlejh » [blah goh 


1 Almost-certainn ss? Pechape subsibiiice 


. samben -pra]( eee "t 


8 These four‘words are very doubtful. The first might be ¢e or wir, the third possibly blah, 


4 Possibly pahar, ® Conceivably, but improbably, pan. . 

“6 Possibly: oy... =... 1 Quite doubtful, though. the y seems certain, 
8 Possibly gra. 9 This restoration is almost certain, 

18 Possibly marma.. . Very probable, : 

12 Perhaps. sluk. _- 13 Perhaps serpin. 


ob Possibly sri, 16 ‘Possibly Spite, 


14 Both here and at the beginning offthe line the spelling may ee suikhiiy, though it seems improbable, 
17 Practically certain, 


PART 1] -MON INSCRIPTIONS 7 25 


18, klet t}(n)[ak thar] (moy)? [tak? juk srefi] d(u)m(poh ® tay) [goh ma 
-burhnah poe {to’ pa)- 

19. (dot)® .. (c)* [tty cut kil dek klas thar srefi tay blah goh ma 
samben par 

20. (jfa)[laikar® baley® mleh 0 baley® tty blah deh] cay: [tnak thar] 


es * 8 8 . > &© @ « 


21, [ktac sumoh _bintil goh | ‘deh ktéc sumoh tiy goh ma samben 
prajfialanka]- : 
22. [r kejt [t]i{nlah thar ma] (deh) [lubac ku] .[i].... . (sla bil 


baket)? [tol ma surhwa]- 
23. [t] ku[mari kon] blurhnah] (kon kfium)........... 
. .® (tity) [blah sambef prajfia]- | 7 
a4: |lan ear Verole) . 60k ede lg Gr Soe aie A ewe. Baas a ee 
Elin S aoe: @- (DAY wea ooten me CtOy) as 
ie Deke Mi aactuntueectc oe ta eke 
~ + se (kwir tar? buwut mo)-” _ ey | 
OLLI cirshe we is io i tty at Oe arte Sey iad eS HAN sea Se ele oe SE Ge Se. 
ijk PAL ae Gee eS CTS ere | 


ees Se cits oa OE he sas OM mes, OE hg ER Re. Pinkeye ele eae, BUROS oe @ 


2... [stuf jifijuh] (jirko)- 


28. [y triisi] (goh ma)... 1... Se are ee ee 21 
tar buwut) . ae nn? 
29. [y deh] (ac) tren) Ue create, leet eg me Rowe Oe esa: oo cto eon a 


» (ket kwir) ; 
aes Vag Duval) ind "a chenlante dle 8 soa Ge Mote: 3. BO Hak 6 
dak” (lar) [tay] blah™ . 
1, [sambet] (leh kalan ku) [burhnah hura] s[u] ia turh Uklelt deh. klas 
thar srefi dek ki]- 


[jifijuh yas 0] 


1 Almost certain. 4 Cf IC So. 8 Fairly certain. 

4 The first part of this word looks something like @ (or +@, or sa); the final might be x or w, I 
have not succeeded in identifying it. i 

& Practically certain. ® Possibly duley, 

7 This passage is very doubtful: daket, a mere conjacture, looks more like ma ket, but I do not 
see how to construe the latter here. 

8 Cf, F 10, But the words in that passage do not seem- to Seiad exactly with the few traces 
of letters that can be made out in the present indecipherable passage. Here a large piece of the 
surface of the stene has flaked off, leaving big gaps in this. and the next seven lines. =.” 

» Conceivably war, both here and below. The word Asie 1 is quite illegible here and in H a8, 298 


but has been added on the analogy of H 38. 10 Perhaps bom, ; 
11 The initial looks like du or rz, and the & has a mark Gis it, But this and the a oe 


may be. accidental, 12 Conjectural. 


26 


ail aly ea BIRMANICA [ VoL. WI 


2, [nlo’ sah ma cut tarh sto’ jji [ljip s]an (anabws el (han sthan ma 
~ skir? sruf 7] 


33. [jifijua jirkoy tris] goh [tity] [ah « gofh ma sambef] easel 3 


sambefi] (a)-° 


34... . (ra)[e* t]r[Sp® bissukar pa Plifedhan fl gob] ma kala(n siy® 


“igi fsrun jilfijun [jil- 

48. [rrko]y [tra]s goh [mle]h [» han sthan ma delh [skir sru]i (lilfi- 
jjula jjifrkjoy br[ow] 

36. [goh burhnjah [hura] t[o]’ san [rambas idly ie ah goh ma kjJala[n 
kje{a golh kifr mleh] 1 


| 37. [han sthan srun jifijun yas 4 burnnah hulr[a] vafdere san rumblas 


[tty « kalan] sa 

38. [ket kwir t]a(r buwut m)foy 7 kir bljah i deh tee ie ducim kil] 
(cas bar la-*) | 

39. (cut go)[h pan han «] (ma) [kir ducim kil] (Giey jacut® goh moy) 
[han 1] 

40. rfow ma ki}r {ducam] Ki han] a jifijua ae tris goh 1 
row] goh — 


1. [kur] defh kir ducam ‘kill ha[n sruf jinjua itkoy brow « han. 


srujf ji[Ajud] . 
42, [yas » han] s[ruf jifijuja ata[s 1] sifaghasin] Gan “stut jiAjun 
[atlas dir[la]- 


_ 43. [c ecirmuk » kal ae ({ku](m) ult ‘ia[p] al Sal hura to’ 


_ padof[t] sa- 
44. [n rurhbas tiy] « [golh [ma scien kJala[n vat san sap (du]rh- 
dec: ma rap [sinrafi] * 


ees Pinele inl cee ..» [deJb [ele kum cur woe 
ee “fut jap] mu[k] ealal tlatt a ae ee | 
I SRO epee Bhs OR en tes ee a ey, (tik) [pharh klop 
eee sgac (sitgir pgoh oe | | ee 
See : aL ee ee ee les . oe ve oe eee [h a han they golh 
ie 2 kum, moy] mlhir ba)- Wee eee Sol | 
a Possibly shir, : 8 Possibly sri, 


8 Looks rather like u, gu, or ré. 


4 The unidentified ‘symbols look rather like aha, or... Bas. 


- 5 Looks rather like tra eam 6 Or sty. . 
1 Almost certain 0. 8 Or ee 8 Or Lieut. 
10 Perhaps sindran, 


Conceivably wur, 18 Possibly peoh. 


: 


sce SaaS 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


No. IX. 


AN INSCRIPTOIN FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GAT 


Saphi] She. «MON INSCRIPTIONS. 80 8° ay 
PgR GEA) oo a be te es 


SoS ee) ae a Oe eS RS 


J 
I. te aces aa eek ee ie, en 
» fe! they] (buddhawar)* [burhnah safkran] (slok sirpun) 5 
| ; (sukhiy cindrow) [na] (ku) [glik] (kuchom bintef ju): 
4. (k) [sok bintef] (« gufii) [war ku] (glik binten 1) | 
: (pudar ku tdoa binteé u hantil*] (lwar ta goh deh ru)-— 
6, [sal klas thar sjre[fi slaty] (ti ma fiah cifgi)- 
“9. (n) [i han pefi] klas [ta. goh deh] (crok pkaw brac) 

8, (kmow sla’ ca)[d](GAi da)? [1 cip=piryam durbhic] (tik ar) 
g, [pharh kinta] («) [goh ma burhnah safkran to’ ar tuk de]- 
to [k 1 dek gojh tl[tn cip tay] blah [» han] (na)[r] deh 

Oo . [pa brat® cindran moh jlow] lubac [ku kon] bra- 

_ 12,°[t thow pdey goh pia khjal [ma] c{rok ku] p[nea] 

13. [sal] (ditkar cut) [pkaw thar sambhuc dulea] pne[f dule]- 

14. [af] (goh ma) [burhnah hurd to’ ar lajo[r n&* « cut] ki- 

. 1, [I dek] k[las thar srefi tiy blah » han] (muk) fsi]-. 

16, [aghas]i[n ku ut muk pan tljaf [sal] difakar] (cut) [pka]- 

17. [w thar « sarnbhuc dulen pnea dulef «] (goh ma) [burmnah] (to)- 

18, [’ ar ldor jap ut mleh « ldor tity blah] (goh ma) 

1g. (burhnah hura) [to’ ket] dek [klas thar srefi sla]-" 

20. [y tia dek kinlo)’ sala ma cut tarh sho’ jil]- 
a1, [fip] (2) [goh ma deh [t-e]h [san rumbas han] (ti ma) ret) 
[sruA jifijid muk siaghasin] («) [ku sruf jifjia muk] 


22, 


coca e There are only traces of the tops of a few superscript letters. to indicate that ‘be was a 
Tine here. 


' 8 Nothing legible; it may even be doubted whether there was a line here at all, 
3 Probably the final of czrwek, 
4 Almost certain. Between 4u and ddhka the spacing is unusually wide owing to a fissure in the 
ee which seems to be an original flaw and also affects to some extent the following lines down to 
if 
“6 Confentuval restoration based on parallel passages such as B 13, G 24, etc. This applies ta 
the ends of all the lines down to I, ro. § Or hantul. 
7 Ch: B 19, C 24, D 20, G29, K 14, L ag. 
_ = Between bvd and ¢ the spacing is unusually wide owing to an original faw which also aftects 
_ mS . ae especially 1, 14 (between eek and ma), 1; 3 (e and @)y 1 L 16 (agha aad el and 
0 7 ana & ae 


: 9 Or nav. In either < case pian 4 an. error for nap, . 19 ® OF sl 


t is d as ” 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN. 


eo " EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA so Wroug.a ML 


23. (site ut) roa tlaa ale Q cip=piryam dumhic] (sosia)[n° nadi] 

© 24. (moy) [pat tmin] (messa)! [lagna deh kir ut srua] 

25. (ta goh) [mleh » han piryam goh kurt] . . [srua jisjul- 
26. [fa atas prasat jnok] (pan) [goh ci deh hair mich] :: pe 
29. {han piryam goh kur ut jifijuh cmef*] (pan) [tlaf] — 

_ 28. (goh ci) [deh yuk mleh » they goh kum pi pahir]. 

2g. (bar) * [nadi cmen sli[f]gha [lagina deh yuk jifijuja fal- 

30. [tas dihkow ta go]h m[leh « dificam ae 
31. [kintu phal](l)[agun ussajolg[ga sukrawar] . a 


ee Ge a ig eee aa a ae a eo es a ee 


ae 


be a a a | 


(ut pee flan}? imleb i deh] © 


sc a a 


I 
2 
Beas aoa a cip- ~piryam) [dumhic msiin ® nadiy 7 eal 
5 , -, . {lagna deh tik ut pharh klo’]. 


cr ee 2 rr ee Se ee 


- Ghose (sgac) (siagir pgoh kaka (r=) [mura tapiw i]-. 
9. (sea ku ut) [bil=labah h}i [trak goh ma dej|(h yu) 
eRe (Uk). ..., « (blay)® [ku] (tin) [kir mleh « they ean. 


Pe gy (kur) [ourinab sankran to’ slok] su[khiy see 
to. [wena ku glik®] kufchom bintea jlefk sok bi]- 
ai, [teh » gui? lwar ku g]i[ik binteh » pudar ku] - 
12. [tdo]A [binten # hantél Iwar ta go]h rul[sal kla]- 
13. [s thar srefi klas slay ti” ma aah cifAgin™ ha]- 
14. [n pen k[las ta goJh [deh crok “pkaw] (brac #)_ 
: A 5: (kmow ™ sla cada. da) * ® [s cip=piryam dumhic] (bar fo 


a oa Rather ‘doubetul : in one inkeimprenson it looks somewhat like aesalia? 
| Perhaps an error for c-e7. 
8 Doubtful. So far as the tere reading gies it might be wigan, rééeibly.” 
_. Only traces of the tops ‘of letters are visible, nothing legible. 
age Conjectural restoration 3 3: but there ‘seems to ‘be a trace of flan, 
6 Or msn > us lo 4 Or nddiye 
8. Yew. doubtful, thou the L and ¥ seem. certain. 7 9 Or ah, 


ae oo Looks ‘ike: Kina 
ars — Ch. B 19, Cc — 


“tht the’final may be ¢ and the vowel Ge 
oe J ee a. 


paRT a] MON INSCRIPTIONS 


he 


| rhea reo? Tket] de({k klas thar ay b dpsbiciainy 


2, [durnhie godhuli] lagna goh [ma de]h [t-eh p]- -(ua)im ¢ dir lec} Gu) 
3. (a dal) [ku tinrjan {jwa dal goh tay bljaa [goh ma] (dea) 


far Inor ku pnef dujlef- jap] ut mieh » han] ces) 


. [pi mirmok kintu’ cey they buddhawar cip=piry4]- 


, [tinrat jua dal prap mlejh » (han) [pi cirwek kintu’] - 


3 

4 

5 

6. [m. durnhic moy] pahir [msiin nadi tmin d]ch. Tyke] 
4 

8, [cey they cand rawar cip= pifryam. duthhic moy | (radi) 
9 


9. (tmin) * [mesa lagna goh ma d]eh [puc jifjua] (ine. os 
to, . (a) [pan han goh mleja « [msin’ cirwek kintw’ ce]- 
ane fy. they buddhawar methuna lagna“deh] (yuk prasit) . 
cee ee /[siighasin ku tri ji]a [muk war ut] (pan tlaa) 
| 13. (mleb). [v. han they buddhawar. goh kuh cip=piryam_ “duhic} 
mys [pi pete blah] au [lagna goh ma deh] (yuk) 2.2... - ee 


SUR Ses eS [i]... .. . [ut] (pan tlaa milebt 8 mein? ee 
oe 16, (Ik): (kintu’] (cey they. buddhawar. -goh- ku) See 8 ae 
Ae as 1s ene) [gob n ma Air stun as see - ee oe see 


. (to slok “Guay « cisidrdi na ku glik. ‘chou ‘bat au : 
1, (ten juk sok burhteh « gua’ lwar ku glik buinte)-_ ae ee ce 
. pudar ku tdot burhten) [hantul lwar goh. deh raat] 

2. Gl as ae ia [sref] a slay ti ma. fiah. Pitgin. u han) 


oe ge 


a Or nid: a : 2 There seems to be a oe ‘cate bs 
8 Qr-sp-hum © A Conjectural, though: there are Braces: *) 


Phe preceding words seem almust certain. 
6 Conjectural. It might. conceivably: be cme. 


“> 8 Doubtful, but 1 do mot see what else it can me for. 
. 9 Hlegible,- but there is: Aaly, room for a short word and no other Seems 8 appropriate here, 


- 10 Very. doubtful. 


This line and. the next are: gonjecturally seatored from the few t traces “ot létters 
yo se nach os 8 15 


the restoration being based” ‘on the analog: 
JW Conjectural ‘restorati 
_ broken off, snd most oe ¥ 


ot other ere e 
| be 


+ ae a2 te me) e 2: 


owe ae eke oe saélran) 


4s: an * aceidéntal ‘mark. 


4 Or: msn. 
Tt should be: hanya. 


hat: seems: ‘to a es an initial ae: - e 


ie [mo]y [nally 1 tuk ? phat kinta 4 gob ma urinal] (sankea)- aie 


“ay. n [to’ ajr [tuk] defi} (ma) [sp-him * jifijua] (atas) ‘ ls 4 . ee. 
18. [agha}sin k[u isjaa] (co pan. tat ee is oa oS oe | 


oe’ 


30 7 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — Evon. nt 


24. (pea klas ta goh deh) [crok ku pkaw] (brac ee | 
28. ig cadifi da)* 4 cip- piryam durbhic]. 6... ee es 


26. re ce ee ee sk 8 & 8 @ 8 & © HF we Re ee we ee ee He hee 
27. = 8 2@ ® @ © ss & © @ @ e ¢.% © oa & @ .@ cd o $$ 8 @& *.e a. 9 @ $7 8 © e @ 
28. ® 6¢ © @¢ @ * @ # @ &€ # © @ &@ ue ier ae B® 8 4 & be - a 6. @ * 9 @ &@ 6 © @ 
29. i} * a * @ 86-8  & & * e eo poe 8 2 & & » . 2 a * * ° * a > * @ = e e - 6 a a 


BO. wee we ew ee hw ee wee ww ee we ee we 8 ee 


M 


tee eg te ok - [duled pied (Culen yc oe Ae oo gh ae 
2...... (tiiy) [blah » cip=piryam durhhic] (han) oe es 
Rae bumack hura to]’ ke[t dek klas] tha[r srefi de]- 

4. [k kinlo’ sai ma cut tlarh [sao] [jiljip golh [ma deh] 


Be nin oes . [sopan ta goh tiy blah » goh ma] Hah 
¥ 6. [r] (pkaw ie pres) ® [duljef [b]lah [goh ussajoga, eee 
Gah eer ee ere ee [goh tik ut phar kljo’ [goh] ~ 
Book ee ee eee » (goh) [ma yluk jli]Afjlula sopan Tel 
‘Oa oe ee [pan tl]af m[fJehs [hJan cas [ba]r [ci]- 


10. iewek kintu’] cane [they] (buddha)[w]ar® [han nar] deh [pa bra] 
11. [t] (cindran moh jlow) [lubac ku kon bra[t] t{blo[w] 

12. (pdey goh pif khal ma crok) [ku pnjemu [s]a[l di]- 

13. [akar] (lor ku pkaw thar pnef)* [duljef » [goh ma] (burhnah) 


1 mn(uk)? [ela]. (6° tA) ee oe 


ey {slp Tat = [han] tie rr en ee 
1 ChB 1g, C 24,D a0, G 29, 3 7, K 14. ; ec aa 
2. In one of the ink-impressions there are perhaps traces of a line above this « one. The stone 
having been broken off on the left side (and as regards ll..1+4 on the right also) the amount of loss 
has been roughly estimated and the beginnings of the mae restored when it seemed possible, ©. 
8 Merely conjectural. _ # The month is quite conjecparal;: 
5 Possibly candrawar, The last syllable should be war, but does not seem to be. 
6 The words in parentheses in the first part of this and the last two. fines are quite conjectural a 
“being restored on the a ‘y of other passages in the inscription.. a ee . 
7-The vowel is-doubtful-and the ¢ might be £, so the word might. be inst 
“8 This short. word looks like’ das, but even the final letter is not absolutely certain, whe 
9 The ¢ seems fairly certain;. the Ai able;: Hees comes. a vowel which . must” be e or 0 
I cannot fit ee here int ary probable cont 


VOLUME 


; ; PLATE V 
wraphia Bu manicn E VI, 


PART 1] 


3. (cre)a} go[h] ci sin lak]? , po ELE CoG | 
4. [s sijaghasin [ma tmiy na ines yimas| (rae. fiin lak na rat) ® : 


5. [ma ka* moy] pra[kar] « [han turhwift] (tirtaw)* [singhasin] (nom)* 
6. (rup, fiah: ma sinleh’ rup] Balh ma tik p 


4. ditko[w ain goth ru[p jadisif pan . Hae tuchwidl] rel ths] 
. 8. [n plan [t]laa (eal goh rup [2 ]disma pan [ut= ta 
E- vies 
“mis [com n yan dinday thjar. fi 


[taw slant Bars mea ma ee 


’ except the 2. 
a After lak, which is fairly certain, hey next word set 
8. Conjectural restoration, but fairly. certain,” 
4 For the more usual kak, +.” 8 
1 The first of the. paneer letters may: be ry 
>. 8 Even more doubtful than 
wie Coniera restoration. 


11. 


i 


~ seo a se 2 o 


a _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA, OE EVORS are 
: ee (r) . —(mleby. i [han pi cirwek Sauer ... 1 [they] 
. (war) pi pahir mstin nadi] . eae negra u piryém goh] 


= (hurt) 


” (siighasin) : yok, deh pa brat cindran lubae a) 
(kon brat) ithow dey goh deh. sal grikar) 


a ‘pigraphra Birmanica 
Sone Oe: ee ane eel 


No. IX. | VOLUME III, PLATE 


m 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN. 


VIII. 


ey MON INSCRIPTIONS | - 43 
Hy ae te SNE he BIE Gee a an GO ete iol a, aa [ut 
mleh jap ut]...... [jap 9 A A i eh he I ah Aine ahi Me 
ee ee ae Cen ene sk ee [deh sal difkar 
. deh]... cee Aye tosh he ste ee (dek klas thar srefi).. . es 
6 Pans hae ei RE Se. BR ER ee GE) oS «ao Seated [tay blah « ecip= 
piryam ie lagna] Ee ee ee es 
ee ce ee a se ee (ket) [dek klas thar srefi slity ti] 
8. woe eee (Ourhnah hurd fiah) [ma lep dane sni’ to’ lnor pkaw 
thar sirwih pas dulefi surnbhuc pea Se eS donate 
0 se Giese eee ts NON an ne eta ec (k) [ku ut jap prasat mleh u 
dinkipoh TOM OM INty | ante oo ok ete ae aed 
BO ad sae la ery Seek, Rat Ae Gre be dh ONG OT Gk he Shae ete Bee tp ede es 
bats, tua eae Altarce eae acs [deh] (yuk jifjua brow) 
Lies yates we eee oe Os OSA eee now St ee 
: . 7 eae F ; BE OR ER BS OE NR RS ES OTR OR ME BS. OR ew! OL a ee 
Ro 
a, [fy ma fin lak | eae a ere er BE eae , er eee 
2. [m hake thjar bar lufthpek # ma] (duk pifi)*.. 5 fee Sut de : 
3... .. [bar ma tmiy na | thar panes) (ma rap * -pa pujaw) err ee 


oe  6¢ © © 8 


. [thar » hjan [tirdey han hantal] cfle]e roti] (sany 

. [kyak] sri [moy ma tmiiy] na [thlar [y|i[mas ma] gi Tk tat purh]- 

. re{y] « [bar] lu[th]pek [hantal k](@)i{p jJifju[n] tor[in] (goh rup) 

. de[wa]put thar [bar [ma pa sadhuka]r [ku pkaw jurhwan thar] (han) 
. [pdey tojri[n goh ma nom ku bley] tu[lay tinlah] (brat) 


g. thar [1 hjantal clon tori[n goh tar cinroh thar] (mimoy* «) 


1 Only doubtful traces of tops of letters are visible. 
4 Conjectural, though du seems fairly certain. 
3 Perhaps .vup, ar 4 Conceivably mirmoy, 


Epiyraphia Bur mUNea No. IX. VOLUME III, PLATE IX. 
nt ok? a tl 5) 
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND NEAR THE THARABA GATE, PAGAN. 


34 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor i 


Jo... [thar yimis ma nom ku] d[inday thar rup byal thar] (ba)- 
ar, [r] (pa)?! [tutaw bar lufthpek hantil bydl goh rup mhakar] 

12, [thar bar hanti]! [mhakar thar bar goh rup bip thar bar] 

13. [ma gua ku t]ar sla ma [tmuy? na thar yimas hantal] (dirpoh) 


14, [mh]afkar thJar [bar goh tar cinro]h tha[r bar ma nom clof] q 
15. (torin)#[tirdey han] (goh) [pkaw dirrkas| (thar)... 2 
‘S 
Diggs abe tap tale 8 Molies Ba AE tale ral BIN oes 2 Se, 3d BioRad pte ae 
Ds diet cares dont Mie once ts 4 eee danlis Goh aes Ob Renee kate : 
Bde AA Asad tas ci aad oe . [elec] (diftial) . [elec] . ~~ : 
Te ee eee Rte, rw cee ee eee aor Thantul makar | 
goh jifijufi torin] (sighasin dhar) [hantul * jifju]- . | 
BUG | ort g0ly) ese i psc coat bao e, Ew (goh 9) [turhwid tirtaw] 
. (sighasin goh) [rup fiah ma tinle] | | 
Be Gan. hah ma tik ee [rup jadisif]........ (fiah ma) [rinleh 
. goh] (c).... [bar] (lumpek ku c loa) are KO) ed : 
6. [goh hantul] :... [goh] .... . [uppal] .... [uppal bar Tuinpee 
POW WO dey |e Geet teas elena 
or eee ee - [bar mene: . (dirkas) . . . . (ut kwik) 
ee we ee Shere. fe eee a ae (n) [ut] (kwi)- 
Bey cee: DCI aie toasan ttn amet earn eka Sse eke (n) 
_ [hantul] (slar pi). . nee bar hinge jadisia } 
Ore t4 (OT) ak, BP ee, Ste aes [jadisih brow] (ma ° 
cahea) bar ee ae) [dirlac u ut ta goh] : 
PO. ler dele, 7s aa ele) aks tae i te Se a he cae Beene wa 
cia eo ee [elec di. Seas sae ce . [jap difkeow] S 
Be ee ah ae eee Bae nth ives oe Wh a ae a, Yor ed, Sean ; 
Spa a (dinlac): {bar lurhpek iy ele Bee ee 


1 Looks like pare, ‘with the ¥ supefscript over the ¢ following, but I suspect cals the supposed 
y is merely an accidental disfigurement. Cf. Ng. 

2 Possibly ¢mmity, though I can see no trace of the extra stroke, 

8 Only the top portions of the letters are visible in this line, 

4 Or hantiil, and so elsewhere in this fragment, which is in such a poor state of preservation e 
that it is impossible to be sure of minute details like this, 


oa _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 88 


1g eo 8 8 @' 8 @ 8 #4 - 8 8 #& & 8 8 * 8 89 @ 8 8 e @ 2 eo @ ew we a kk tg 


ete tie Bees a euiea) [bar feapel 


ic Se dine Tighe oe oat toca at ee ES A Se Bh ate ay a, Od. eile as tah = 


er ere ee pan dialow) 


Lie ak Sees ip DAR Ohm era, apiece att it Ar nie De gee Le ot .(goh) .. 
.. (tar) . cgay . (a tarh) [clec difnal] (tarh dec) 


Translation. 


A 


Pe he Mi de cat hs es eed dnegies ae . (after sunset ?)* .. eee : 
in honour of Narayana,” a decoration of Slantains (such as is Accmed). 


nose’? ?)® adorned* with young plantains (and) sugarcane... ... et 


MAES PY 2 woke ay (l. 4) . . . made offerings of ® golden flowers, altar candles, 
altar oblations,® boiled rice in cup-shaped vessels’ with candles stuck in it, 
and thereupon (they) worshipped’ | ‘ 

At that time, too, our lord the Chief Monk (1.6) Arahan® brought seven 
lords of the Church® .. 2... . . spread (leaves around on?) the places 
(appointed) for the digging of the holes (for) the pillars of the two sides, the 


1 The time is somewhat doubtful, the reading being uncertain, 

4 The suggested reading ndér is conjectural and it is not certain that it stands for Narayaga, 
2.8. Mercier But cf, the references in the note on the text and compare them, as well as B 37, C 35, 
F 30, G3, H 10, J 14, M 10, and P 8, with the parallel passages with et in H 10, 15, 

3 The term “ox nose” is at present applied to a kind of streamer hanging down from a pole, 
The whole of this passage in parentheses has been conjecturally restored on the analogy of parallel 
passages, The sense of the word eixndyan is not absolutely determined, but it must have been some 
decorative arrangement, lis relation to the L.M. brat chervan, a small sweet kind of plantain, is not 
clearly. made out, 

4] assume that lubac is the L.M, labat, not labak. If it were the latter, we might éoanelate 
“hung with” instead ‘of “adorned with?’ ‘As either version would fit into the context, it is impossible 
to determine definitely which is the right one, 

6 Literally, “worshipped with,’ but the word is also used directly in the sense of “offer” Cf, 
Era, H 8. 

6 These oblations probably consisted of food stuffs. The altar was probably a smail portable 
wooden one, 

1 This descriptive piace represents the term pz khal, The vessels are small, sometimes cut. out 
of wood, sometimes made of leaves. Ci. B35, C1, E41, G1, Jra, M 1a, Ps, 

8 Alternatively this phrase (from “and”) might perhaps be rendered “which they offered,’ but 
that seems somewhat superfluous and pointless. 

9 A Chief Monk is mentioned in Myazedi 18 andin 1A 43 seqge The one spoken of here, whose 
name was Arahan, is known from other. sources. It would seem that in VI 26 the word arahan 
cannot be a proper name, being qualified by the word gurmbluz, ' 10 Buddhist monks, 

11 It is doubtful whether the word s/a here means “leaves” or is to be taken with s@/ to mean 
simply “spread,” because the next word kupar is uncertain, both in meaning and reading: ef, A Xo, 29, 


" : 
36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — [von mn 


yas pillars, the azas pillars (of ?) the siighasin,’ and the pillars of the four 
pavilions, and the pillars of the ablution pavilion, and the ju da!” pillars, 
and all the a@fas pillars of the front? All (I. 10) the men (who gave the 
lotus leaves for them to ?) spread, sounded all the drums ..........., 


a . ® e o % e blew . e e ® a iJ * a. 4 * e * a e ¢ > * s - and all a o a * a e € a e 
sheet oy EINER UA ee Mea : 


At sunset, godhulz (being) dagna,’ the sai#rén Brahmans,® who carried 
litters, beat the foremost® drum. The Brahman astrologers™ went (and) 
drew water for the reciting of the paritéa." Waving brought the water, they 
arranged the water (in)** vessels of gold, vessels (1. 15) of silver (and) vessels 
of copper (at each place where?) the blessing* (was to be given ?): at the 


1 This passage teems with the kind of technical terms which constitute one of the great difficulties 
of the inscription. The distinction between yas and atas has not been determined. Perhaps it is one 
of position merely, the one word meaning “back”? and the other “front.” It is a curious coincidence 
(if it is one) that these words also mean “renown” and “ fame’? (1 F 23; 1A 10, Bg, C 183 V 45, 47), 
which meanings seem inappropriate here, The staghdsix was probably the throne room and I imagine 
that in that case it may perhaps be regarded as forming part of the “great pavilion” (prisat 
jnok) mentioned in A 16 and elsewhere, It does not seem certain that the yas and atas pillars here 
referred to are confined to those of the sizghdsznx, but it seems probable, Cf. B 24, D 15, £7, 40, F 13s 
H 2, 16, 42,-J 15, 22. 

2 1 am disposed to identify dal with L.M. dow and interpret it as meaning “central,” but this 
is quite uncertain at present. The force of jw is not clear. Cf. A 17, B 9, 25, F 38, H2, 13,7. 
Conceivably, the whole phrase means “central,” so here (and elsewhere) the “central pillar,” and in 
‘L 3, 7, the “central hall” and “central door,” But it is difficult to make that meaning fit Bg, 
where juz dal follows. mz, 

' 3 Conceivably we -might translate “ of that face’? Cf. the use cf wu in A 28, B 3-5, 8, 24-27, 
H 17, 45, J 15, 16, 22, K 18, L 2, Na, 

4 Here follow a number of unexplained words doubtless having reference to various musical 
instruments and the sounds produced by them. Cf. A 33, F 34, G 4, H 46, Ks, and VIII A6 tr. n. 
In 111 C 16 I conjecturatly rendered siagiv by “resounding.” 

5 Hlere again musical instruments appear to be mentioned: cf, the passages cited in the preceding 


note. The word ¢afpiw may perhaps mean “trumpet” or “clarionet.” But in that case fiw in G 4 


must be something else. 

6 As to wel, see 1B at tr, ne 

7 The term Jagna generally means the position at the eastern horizon of some constellation 
mentioned, usually in this inscription one of the zodiacal signs, It does not appear, however, that 
godhulié is a constellation, but rather a mist or haze which at certain times of day (varying with the 
seasons) afises from the earth. In this case the evening is definitely indicated. 

8 The reading saztritn, though doubtful here, seems to be supported by E 27, J 2, 9, Kg, and 
Lig. Possibly it stands for Sanskrit samkvants, ae these particular Brahmans were specialists in 
calculating the times of the entry of the sun into the several signs of the zodiac. It seems to be a 
__eurious refinement in view of the mention of astrologers in the very next sentence, 

9 Or “the drum” (or *drums’’?) “in front”; unless this is a technical term for some special kind 
of drum or for ene that served some special purpose in this ritual, Cf, B19, E 33, G 30, } 9, K 16, 

10 Literally it would be “astrologer Brahmans,” 7.2. the Brahmans who specialised in that science, 
the study of which was probably confined to Brahmans. Our idiom prefers the other order. 

11 A Buddhist ritual formula or order of service invoking protection, Cf, A 39 n. 

12 In this frequently recurring phrase there is uo preposition expressed defining the felation between 
the water and the vessels. It is, of course, obvious, but the idiom is curious, * 13 CE A 39 1: 


part 1] : MON INSCRIPTIONS | 39 


great ‘pavilion, and the four cidrow? pavilions, and the ablution pavilion, and 
the ji dal” pillars. Water (in) four thousand earthenware vessels and eight 
conch (1. 18) shells they arranged at the dwellings of the four thousand lords 
of the Church® who were to recite the pariffa* outside and throughout the 
palace ; (and as for all?) the eight lords of the Church, our lords the monks 
of the Chutch (whe were to be?) the leaders (1. 21) in reciting the pardtta 
outside, together with the four thousand monks, ..... .° the dwellings of the 


‘eight leading lords of the Church, eight mats," eight (figured ?)" cloths, (and) 


eight spades; water (in) a hundred and eight vessels (and) (1. 24) a hundred and 
eight conch shells, they arranged (at >) the dwelling places of a hundred and 
eight lords of the Church, with our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, who were 
to recite the garitta within, at the dwelling places of those hundred and eight 
lords of the Church (1. 27) (they arranged) a hundred and eight mats® 
a hundred and eight (figured ?)® cloths, (and) a hundred and eight spades. 
Towards the east side of the front® of the great hall, (they) made a 
sanctuary, furnished with seats,’ which (they) made ftitcly, which (they) 
decorated (round about ?)" with white (I. go) cloth (and which they shaded ?) ® 
with white umbrellas.* Then (they) spread ....* rugs on the top of the 


seats.” Then (they) set (thereon) a golden statue of Buddha, a statue of the. 


1 The word cindrow (ot perhaps c¢urew) is used in this inscription in two distinct sets of contexts, 
Here and in B 8, 23, and-F 39 it applies to the four pavilions which were apparently at the four 
sides of the “great pavilion.” In B13, © 27, 34, D 23, E 30, F 23, 26, G25, H 13, J3, Kg, and 
L 20, it is applied to an article of dress. It is not clear whether the sense is identical, related, or 
quite different. In the second use L.M. has cavau, but the meaning has not been determined 
(Dhammaceti, p. 88, 1.22), In this use it may refer to the material of the article of dress or to its 
form or its. ornamentation, ' ts 

2ChAQm ~ 3Ch AGH | _ §Ch Aidan, 

5 The illegible word is presumably - the. ee here, ag. “ (they) Provided the dwellings 
+o «+ (with) eight mats,” etc, 

6 The word sual defining the mats here (and in A a7 aod E dt) is presumably a derivative 
of sal, “to spread,” and probably identical with L.M. sad, “the leather used by Buddhist priests 
to kneel upon,” though there is nothing here to indicate that jeater is the material of our matse 
In LM. dakaw sid is a general term for “ mats.” 

7.The reading and meaning are doubtful, but in the Kalyani inscription the word ksit occurs in 
this or a similar sense cenchier “painting”? or “ embroidering), ” “For “cloths” one might perhaps say 

“ garments,” 8 As in A 22, 23. 

9 Or, Possibly, “at the eastern corner of the -face.”” The word for “hall” here is dirlec ; 
whether it is to be identified with the great “ pavilion ™ ” (prasdt) seems doubtful. 

10 Or “ sacred dwelling” aia of Rudenay 

1} Or “a seat,” : 

RCRA 6on My “rendering is based on the idea that the doubtful word kupar may be 


identical with L.M. gapaw. Haswell has gapaw dr, “to go around,” 


18 There is no question as to the general sense here, but some doubt shut the precise reading. 
M4 Or “a white umbrella,” the number being left undetermined, ae 
1 The meaning of the doubtfully read tasay is undetermined, 16 Or “seat,” as before.} 


F 


38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Ut 
Lord Gawampati, with books of the Vinaya, Sutta, (and) Abhidhamma’.... 
CEC 5s ee ; 

At three pahzy* (they) sounded the drums ............° (and) 
blew... .. ® (in honour of 2) the golden Buddha, the Lord Gawampati and 


all the four thousand one hundred and eight lords of the Church of whom our 
Jord the Chief Monk Arahan was the leader. The (1. 36) samben jey sabhan, 
sambe kansasar, samben réjasar, with all the samben gri, samben leit, kalan 
yan sav,’ (and) all the scholars, within (and) without, offered ... .* golden 
flowers (and) altar candles, (and) reverently (1. 39) asked for the savanasila° 
and the parttta of blessing,’ within (and) without around all the four sides, 
At that time our lord the Chief Monk Arahan stood® at the western side 
facing towards the eastern side (and) holding a right-voluted® conch shell 
(I..42), together with water (in) vessels of gold, silver, copper, (and) earthen- 
ware, which they arranged in front of our lord the Chief Monk Arahan. 
Then our lord the Chief Monk Arahan gave the saranasila and all the 
four thousand one hundred and eight monks (1. 45) remained standing” within 


1 The three main divisions of the Buddhist Canon. The second half of the third name is not 
distinctly legible but can be safely inferred from the context. 

2 It would seem that theoretically the pahiv or pahar consisted of 7§ nddi, each nddi being 
24 minutes of mean time, so that the pahiy was exactly three hours by the clock (a water clock in 


- former days). Probably, however, the count began in practice at actual sunrise and sunset, and — 


“three pahir, indicated by three strokes on a special gong, meant that the time was just nine hours 
later, round about 3 p.m, or 3 a.m. (as here) but varying of course slightly according to the season, 

3 Cf, A 11 n. and the passages there cited. . 

4 These are all titles of officials or functionaries, The titles sambe and kalan also appear in 
old Burmese inscriptions, the former in the form sambyaz, It is probable that the dalan yan san 
performed duties which brought them into specially close relations with the monkhood (sazi, sarigha), 
The word jey is probably the Pali jeyya, “elder, senior, master,’ and sadhas means “festival,” gvri 
may be the Burmese for “great,” &aftsdsiv and vajasir are plainly of Indian derivation and 
probably merely honorific titles. Cf, B 12, C 7, 33, F at, 34, 95, G g-in, 16, 31, 39, Hux, 17, 19; aty 
93, 3%, 33, 44. 

6 The word rendered “offered” might be rendered “set.” Cf, B 7, 10, 32, 36, 39, 40, 46, etc, 
The meaning of sivwiaz has not been determined, In this inscription it only occurs as part of this 
formula-(cf. B 7, 10, 36, C 2, 40, E 14, F 28, G 2, 40, H 8). Probably it is an epithet of the golden 
flowers. In that case it might be connected either with L.M, srz7i, in the sense of “ slender, delicate,”’ 
“LLM, dawuii,; “coiled, made into a circular ornament,” or perhaps with L,M. swiz, “to wave 
ceremonially over an object. which is to be blessed.” If the last meaning is the right one, perhaps 
we must take the word with puea, translating ‘waved altar. candles.” 

6 The sarana is the formula of adherence to the Buddha, the Law and the Church. 

7 Cf. A 15, 46. It is possible that the reference is to some part of the Manrgalasutta, which was 
used as a paritia, 

8 It does not seem certain that taw here means “to stand.” It might simply mean “ stayed, 
remained.” So too.in A 45 infra. "hg 


9 That is, twisted in the opposite direction from the normal. Such shells, being very rare, were 


regarded as particularly precious and-lucky, and were accordingly used at the anointment (abhiseka) 
of kings in India, oe | , 
10 Cf, the last note but one, 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS | ae 


(and) without, with our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, who was the leader in 
reciting the pariita of blessing. Having recited the paritta of blessing, ‘at 
the auspicious time of three pahtr, five nd@di,’ (at) night....... 


es * 8 @ & 8 @ ¢  @ eo 7 Fe moe e @ e¢ #& # 8 e© aie eo = © 8 8 & «#8 #8 @ a «8 


2 RET, 42k gee Aca be eee RS ........ the ground of the front of the 


middle of the eastern side, (I. 4) the front of the middle of the....... . 
side, the front of the middle of the western side, the front of the middle of th 
side of the front gable-end, (on?) the ground of the great pavilion: all these 


five spots ® they proceeded to bathe * with water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver.. 


(Having bathed them?) (they) spread mats, (and) (1. 7) offered . . . .° golden 
flowers (and) altar candles. Then the Brahman astrologers expert® in house- 
building worshipped (at) all the five places. Thereafter, on the ground of 
the four cfndrow’ pavilions and the ground of the front of the sua dal, 


all those five places, (they) bathed with water (in) vessels of gold (and) 


silver. (Having?) bathed (them), (I. 10) (they) spread mats, (and) offered 

....° golden flowers (and) altar candles. The Brahman astrologers expert ® 
in house-building proceeded to worship (at) all those five places (also?).™ 

On the second of the waxing (half) of the month of Kartik, the day 

(being) Monday,™ the sambesi grt,” samben len, kalan yan san,* (and) 
1Ct A 33n. The proceedings narrated in A 33-47 occupied two hours, roughly 3 to 5 a.m, 

2 Reading and meaning doubtful: see note on the text, [imagine the reference must be to the 
back of the building, which in that case was probably the southern end of it. a co 

8 Owing to the fact that most of I. 2 and the first half of 1.3 cannot be deciphered, it is not 


cettain whether these five places are all mentioned in the text as we now have it: perhaps the first of 
them’ has been lost. I do not profess to understand exactly what they all represent, but have 


endeavoured to translate literally. Cf. B 26 seqgq. 


4 By “bathe,” here and elsewhere, is no doubt meant a ceremonial lustration. 

® Ch A 38 n, 

I presume this is the meaning; not “ and) the experts.” Cf. the variant formula in F 25-26, 
30, 3-32, G3, H 6, 12, 14, and also C 4, to, £2, 33. we = 

7CL A 16 n, 8 Ch AON 9 Cf A 38 n. — 0CEB 7 n 

11 The reading is doubtful and the precise force of wel (if it is to be read here) is not absolutely 
determined. See 1 B 21 tr. n, and cf. HI A 23, VILL A at, 26, B 4, IX A t2 

12 If the year in which these events happened is A.D. rior, the particulars of this date do not fit. | 
It appears that Karttika, as a mean junar month, was intercalated in that year and the second 
waxing of the intercalated Karttika was a Thursday, that of the true Karttika a Saturday. 

18 The same as gvi in A 37, the two forms being used interchangeably in this inscription (there may 
sometimes be a doubt as to which reading is the true one). Cf, C. 33, F 21, a5 G 16, H 11. 

4 See A 37 n. : = es 


& 


is | --EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von In 


all the Brahman astrologers (I. 13) expert in house-building, with the 
Brahmans who were to carry the litters, wore loincloths, sukhiy cindrow, 
sukhiy war, (and) kuchom skirts of white (colour).' Then (there were) 


a hundred and twenty-six Méns," who carried® the vessels of copper (and) © 


vessels (of earthenware, with *?) white duchom skirts; (1. 16) then (followed) 
two litters, (which were?) adorned with white cloth® (and) shaded with 
white umbrellas. (On) both® the litters they laid’ the vessels of gold (and) 
silver, the vessels of copper which they had carried, (and) the vessels (of 
earthenware ?), a hundred and twenty.’ All those vessels they adorned with 
(1.19) Howers of the drac kmow (and) leaves of the cada,’ (and they) 
beat the foremost ® drum, | , 

Then the Brahman astrologers went (and) drew water . . . (and bathed ae 
the side pillars, the yas pillars, the afas® pillars, and all the other pillars, 
“together with all the appurtenances. Then (they arranged) the side pillars, 
(Il. 22) the yas pillars, the atas pillars, and the other twelve pillars (together 
in) one place, the .... appurtenances™ of the great pavilion (in) one 
place, (those of) the four cimdrow™ pavilions (in four?) places, (those of) 


the ablution pavilion (in) one place, the pillars of the front of the stighasin® 


1 The words in italics (all referring to articles of costume} have not been strict] y determined, Cf. 
A-16 n. and 1 C 24 tr. n. It would appear that kuchom indicates a long flowing loincloth such as 
was used by princes and high officials in state ceremonials, The word wliy probably represents Pal} 


ulira, “noble, excellent? (used of fine clothes), It seems probable, though not absolutely certain, 
that the epithet “white” applies to all the articles of dress specified, 


# The reading here is not absolutely certain, but Méns are represented in this inscription as 
playing a fairly prominent part in the ceremonial. The present instance is the earlicst mention of 
them in this collection of records. Cf, B 42, G 23, H ta. 

3 The reading is supported by the occurrence of the same word two lines lower dawn, It means, 
in particular, “to carry on the shoulder.? + Or, perhaps, “ wearing.” 

° The word is the same as the one for “ skirt?’ in the preceding line. The primary meaning 
seems to be “ cloth,”’. and the litters appear to have been covered with white cloth or drapery, 

6 The reading seems to be, literally, “ all the two litters,” Perhaps this means “all over the two,” 


FOr “set? 

- 8 It.is not quite certain whether ‘a 
of a full-stop) after “twenty.” Also it’is doubtful whether instead of “the vessels... .. twenty”? 
we should not simply say “those vessels (were) a hundred and twenty,” reading #a instead of #7. 

9 This phrase occurs also in G 29, J.7 and K 14, and probably C 24, D 20 and {, 24: in all these 
cases the reading is more or less doubtful, Whether drde stands for “ plantain ’’ (which is else- 
‘where spelt dra?) and. is further defined by kimow, or whether. we should read &mac, possibly in the 
d da at the end of the phrase is the particle da or 
ake up the name of some unidentified plant of which 
are points which have not yet been determined satisfactorily. 
ity meaning “bunches of cadaé leaves?’ Cf, K on 


?) “in fronte’ Ch A 13n, 
11 Or, perhaps,“ wherewithto bathe,” Ch A Sn. 


ine’: : 48 Qr, perhaps, “ornaments.” — 
14 See the preceding note, - : IN CR A 36 1. » Perhaps, “ ornan 


fullestop should not be put after “silver” anda comma (instead. 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS : i 


‘») one place, (Il, 28) the pillars of the front of the (audience hall?)! (in) 
e i : the gua dail pilars* (in} one place, the pillars of the front of 
a riddle of the (eastern ?}® side (in) one place, the pillars of the front 
ere middle of the western side (in one place?), the pillars of the front 
of the middle (1. 28) of the side of the front gable-end (in) one place. 
(All the elee* of ?) the eastern side they uranged (in) one place, all the 
clee of the ......° side they arranged (in) one place, all the clee of the 
western side, (and) all the clee of the side of the front gable-end, they 

din) one place, | . ae 
as cg jie places they made a decoration of plantains ® 
adorned’? with young plantains dl. 32) (and) sugarcane, (and set ?) water (in) 
vessels of gold (and) silver (and) water (in} conch. shells wherein (they) ‘i 
cleaned rice (and) dubdz wrass,? (and) spread mats, (with) golden mies tar 
oblations,® find) altar candles, Having (arranged then 2); ek a e, - 
honour of Nardyana,® a decoration of plantains (called) ox nose,”® a pad : 
with (1. 33) young plantains fand) sugarcane, (and) within it see a 
rice in cup-shaped vessels® with candles stuck in it, (and) altar o 
(and) they .........+. (brought?) water (in) vessels of gold 
ee aver spread mats, (and) offered ... ” ease uh e ans 
candles ?). Then the Brahman astrologers worshipped Narayana. 


s 12 Fs . 
auspicious time... ...- (38) 2. ee ee es acne Oe) 


1 This interpretation seems probable, if the reading can be relied on, Cf. H 43. 


: Se are ig doubtful, but seems highly probable. Cf. B 3 segg., a fairly parallel passage. 


: : : : : i 
"Here, as there, 1 have merely attempted a literal translation, without having a very clear idea of 
g eres S ? Basta Sue b | 


whet pare of the ule ae mes ‘ ies a . po aes and forming a covered, two- 
on "at es ace ie * ; . 
ee eae was Sperry a ea a Ndi i f rtico in that the latter is 
ns o building. It differed from a po é 
ne-roofed, arched entrance to the bu . esee entire 
as Bel at the centre of the frontage, while a a pan eee prego . aa 
‘ in 5 A605 have been very n » OL ; 
Jowever, they seem in some cases to ve z : ay cee 
shane oo. heise to be to a number of distinct portions or sections of a building, 
y SLCEC ake ES : ‘ is 3 t - 
crowned with multiple superimposed roofs. Cf, also [IX R 4s 7 Le ieee 
§ The illegible ward (or probably two words) would *PP er : ae 
oe in : i ins ice (that is 
8 ee inclined to think that the shells (or shell; contained | Bea | rt hues = . iapek 
white husked rice) and dudhd grass (L.M. dajip) init. Another view is t Bac cunec! the planes Ghers 
of grains of rice and throws doubt on the interpretation dubba grass,” 3 AyD oe ee ae de. 
the latter word is mentioned seem to favour that interpretation, ae : pases es stirred with leaves of 
In the last three it would xppear that flour (presumably mixed with water 
i ial purposes, 
rch a rece ne . ce ace he ext few words is doubtful. 
11 Or “an” if the precise time is not mentioned: the reading nM , 5 =D GN SMILE ACER 
12 It is doubttul whether, after “time,” we should go on wit i" ae : 
or with “at the stroke of four pahiv, at sunset.” See the note on the . 


6 


420 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL i 


lagna, the expert * Biahoan astrologers bathed ® the side pillars, the yas_ 


pillars, (and) the agas pillars, applying® water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver 
...... (and) water (in) conch shells wherein (they) put cleaned tice (and) 


dubbdé grass.’ After that, they bathed ....... (1 41) ...... (and) all 
the rest of the pillars (and) appurtenances.’ : 

‘Then. ...... (there was ?) Burmese singing, Mén singing ° tireul ay 
singing, ...... BAO tetas oon ag alee i ek Nae orem iy gh ge 
eee (1. 44) Boe” BOR: we tuk all, Sees pe cee ria be wiicds Mat cle ; ema SURE Se oe 

sates ig, PS ate, G Reaats, god) ite CR aed A aro es - Waker UN) Cone Shells 


‘wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dudddé grass. , 


* 6 #© * ¢ @ @ 


(boiled rice in cup-shaped vessels with?) candles stuck in it, offered™ 

water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (spread mats?),” offered . . . 1 golden 

flowers, altar candles, (and altar oblations ?) “ re os 
Als 3) At the auspicious time of three. Wehr five nadi 6 , 


e 9 * 6 8 © «6 


-.... the expert® (Brahman ?) astrologers bathed** the side pillars, the - 


(yas nyt pillars (together with ?) all the appurtenances? of the pavilions,” 


and all the other pillars... ............... (Having bathed them ?) 
all, (1. 6) (they) offered * golden flowers (and) altar candles . . 


; (at ?) all the seventeen places.” (Then the samben ?} 


_—- FS 8 @ 8 2 © @& 


' @ « ® cf e . @ . ® 2 


1 Cf, A tan, - 2Ch Ban, ' 8ChE B6n, 4Ch A 8 n, 
~ © Or“(and) offered,” or “ (and) set’’ But 1 incline to the view that the text describes the 
process of ceremonial lustration with water in vessels and shells, or a shell, 
§Ch Bagn | “7 Cf Bar n, 
© Instead of “singing” we might say “ songs,” “ 
. reading vmetiy “* Mén,” though not quite clear in the 
mirmd, Burmese.’ This is the first time he latter ar 
D 24 and H 1a... 
2 9 The meaning of tircul (or road) has not been determined, In Report of the Superintendent, 


Archaeological Survey, Buyma, (1990) para, 36, Professor Durciselle sy 
iggests Chul Chol 
But in that: case one would expect crrewl (see aise §§ a4, 51, and VIII As, ie aaa 
10: The word for * boiled rice” 


not very legible, though made fairly certain by what follows. 
TE Or “set” (ef A 33 a): or # “gave, ” or “applied,” if it was a case of lustration, 


{then there were) Burmese songs,” ete, ~The 
text, is made practically certain by the word 
8 specifically mentioued in these records, Cf. 


18 Conjecturally restored. 18 CE, A 38 1, . 

BCL Ag n. ae ee ‘WCEBe a, ves 

Ww tts 

: Ch Elias - umber” being aceite But. Probably all are included here. 


ene ie! 


must have occurred at the end of the bpeeceding line, The rest is 


parti] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ | 4g 


- (brought ?) the eritee water (in) vessels of gold, which they 


4 


(arranged?) . Sa . 1... They (came and sprinkled 


on?) (1. 9) the ‘Bide pillars (and) yas® pillars; and then they sprinkled all 


the pillars (and) appurtenances.* After that, the expert Brahman ne as 


(bathed the appurtenances ?) with water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver on 
the top® of the side pillars, 
At the auspicious (I. 12) time of (dawn, on Tuesday, deci the - 


: expert ?) ° Brahman astrologers (bathed?)’ (the several objects above men- 


tioned) seven times ....... the side pillars, the yas pillars, the atas 
pillars; *. ee ee ee es ee 0 Coen ae After that, all - 
the pillars (with ?) the appurtenances (in ?) the pavilions, and........ 
and all the other appurtenances ......... all together. 

On the (fifth?) waxing of the month of (Magha, at dawn, on Satur- 
day?)® (1. 18) the Brahman astrologers bathed the side pillars, the yas 


pillars, (and) the aias pillars, and......... eens be tele oo. HAVING 
(bathed them?) with water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, oa offered 
golden flowers (and) altar candles. After that, (they) (l oe Se ere oa 


the other bases of the pillars. 

On the (fifth?) waxing of the month of Phallagun, the day (being) 
Sunday, at the auspicious time of three pakar, five nag@i," they (went and?) 
drew watery ..... 0.08 eves eo (UNG: SOUND). cia a id ge Ges 
(fixed pegs 2)," vessels of go sid (1. 24) silver, (and) copper. (In the mouths 
of) the vessels they (arranged flowers of the drdc kmow and leaves of 
the cad#t?).4 (Then?) uae laid ® Ane vessels) on the top of the litters 


1Cf A 36. Here the text is hardly legible and the rest of the. official titles cannot be 
deciphered with certainty. & Holy water: cf, A 14 nm 

3 Ch A $n. 4Cf. Barn. 

8 It is not certain that the doubtfully read ussijoga means “dawn” (cf. C 17, E 15, J 31, M 6); 
the word taken to mean “Tuesday” is also doubtful; the word rendered “expert” is fairly certain, 


Ch Bn. 7. Nearly certain, 8 CEA 8 n, 
3 The reading is doubtful. The date may be Tuesday, 25th January, 4.D. t10z, The aed 
rendered “dawn” is doubtful, ’ 10 Fairly certain, 


ef A 33n, The form pahar. is really a better spelling than pahir. The hour here would 
apparently be about 4-44 p.m. The fifth waxing of Phalguna, however, began about 1-13 p.m. on 
Sunday, 23rd February rioz, and strictly speaking, as a calendar date, would be- ‘connected with 
the following Monday, as the rule is that the day takes its number from the lunar day (tithi) current 
at sunrise, 

ec Very doubtful. The preceding word, which apparently reads sirtoh, may have some meaning | 
like “straight, level, even, tight.” ; 

13 Very probable, Cf, D 20, G 28, 2K 13, L a3, 

lu From the analogy of the passages cited in the last note, it is probable that they stuck flowers 


~-and leaves into the mouths of these vessels, Cf, Bign, | ae 18 Ch. BAZ Be 


5 Or, possibly, simply on? 


© 


44 - -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. ir 


(which were covered with ?)! white cloth (and) shaded with white umbrellas. 


The Brahmans who carried the litters (I, 27) wore sukhdy cindrow* (and 


carried javelins* and?) went (in front?) After that, ......... the 


.,... Brahmans went in front. (Then ?) they 5 went (and) drew water; 


and when the water had arrived, they arranged it.° 


On the sixth (I. 30) waxing of the month of Phallagun, the day (being) 


Monday, (at) two #d@d27 precisely, they made (in honour of: Narayana ?) ° 
a decoration of plantains (called) “ox nose” adorned ® with young plantains 


(and) sugarcane, spread mats, (and) offered ® golden. flowers, altar candles 
(and) altar oblations." Then (1. 33) the samben gri, samben len, kalan yan 


sanh,™ (and) the expert * Brahman astrologers, wore loincloths, sushiy cindrow, 
(and) sukhiiy ulér, with kuchom™ skirts of white. Then they went (and) 
worshipped (Narayana?) (At) all the ten points ™® (1, 36) they made 
decorations of plantams adorned with young plantains (and) sugarcane (and 
presented ?) ” golden flowers, altar candles, (and) altar oblations.! Water 


(in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) water in conch shells wherein (they) 


put cleaned rice (and) dudd@ grass,® they arranged in readiness. _ 


At the auspicious time of two udédz, two pat,” precisely, (I. 40) the 


Brahman astrologers offered” ... .™ golden flowers (and) altar candles, 


brought water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver (and) water (in) conch shells 


wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) d¢udda grass, (and) sprinkled (and) 


, 1 Fairly certain. 2Cfh A 16, Big nm 

3 The rendering is conjectural. There is no word for “carried,” so far as I ican see, I assume 
that the reading is kdez bmas as in EB 2 (E 33 dnas kdex, F 48 bnas kdé@it), which may be 
connected with L.M, dnuh kandi (and kanhdn), “a kind of spear”? (probably a “ forked spear,” 
I suppose with more than one point), Possibly it might mean that “ the javelin men went in front,” 
aber if one read gow, “brave,” instead of kdez, But I do not favour. this interpretation ie 
reading. 

4 The word defining the particular kind of Brahmans here referred to is illegible. | 

6 Probably = “ people,” not the Brahmans who carried the litters, though it may have been 

8 Presumably in some definite place or places, cee. 

7 This would apparently be about 6-32 a.m, on Monday, 24th February, or alternatively about 
7-4 pm, At the former hour the sixth waxing (which began 6 hours =2 mi 
was not current, at the latter it was. See A 33 n. be 

8 Cf A-2n, Ch A Zn . 10 Or “set’’; cf A 28 n. NChAAn 

18 Ch A 37 1. 8 Cf Bn, 4 Cf A160, B14 m ~~ : : 

- Cf, Aan, Here the reading is quite certain and only the interpretation is in doubt. It is 
possible that adr, when used after lzor, “to worship,” is merely an auxiliary verh. But then that 
interpretation will not fit the cases of xér coming after the preposition han, “to” © in hotiour ‘of ya 
and such a case occurred only four lines back. On the whole I-incline to the Vishou interpretation 

16 Usually the reference is to eight points of the compass together with the zenith and adit 5 
pathape it can be taken here in a less precise sense, 1 Doubtful reading and meaning. 

wo A pat ee aoe ee 19'Or “arranged near by.” 

e-fourth of a nddi, i.e, six minutes, hy Sos, : 
2 Cf, A 38. n,. 


nutes after mean sunrise) 


al Or “set”; cf. A 38 n, 


PART 11 | MON INSCRIPTIONS as 5 


worshipped * (at) all the ten points. Then (they) levelled ? (I. 43) anne 
ground (and) fixed the pegs.? At that time, too, they pounded giahal” {in 
erder to spread ?)* the bifical® of the pillars. Jd - 

At the auspicious time of (one pahtr, one *)7 nai, precisely, they 
ty the vo... Of the pillars (1. 46) and they ....... At 
that auspicious time, too, they brought 


D 


ee ee ee ee 


speed brought water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver (and) water (in) conch 


shells wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dubdd grass 22 They . < 


7 . 8 8 & © © #& He HH 
ee. 88 Rea OR ce ee See ee ae 
ea * * © & BR - # BF FF 
24h 8 # HH 


BSF aoade UT) awe (W8dE?) 0 oe oes (Soholars ?), hee 24% 


Bice tee Btn oe ge pe NOV recks ba Ge Ow. ee ae 
eet. iit brought”... (eaves. 


ce 8 Re oe we ce SR es 


BoE ee wile ee ee ES oe PON re 


and?) dubbd grass. so ee bee ee Ub 1) . 
oe (the Brahmans ?)\\s0 6G eee Gb ee ey ee lene | 
shoe hen they see et Bee cic Saclay Sonne ce rely eee Pies ae 
te oe abe: acct woe ie ees, (DEO EAU) dds sine, WU ane Gouretsia a SIG) 
Boe SR OFM eae Fa oe (Writing fy ire oe ae ee ... they wrote. 
At the auspicious time ...+-+ sees: (other?) 2s... 
_.... (monks who were to ?) recite the paritfa™® (around ?) all ie 
four ?) sides (and the singhasin,” arranged within it pte On Ghose Gevie th? 
waxing of the month of Phallagun, the day (being Friday (1. 16) they ?) 
brought water (in). the vessels of gold (and) silver, they (entered and sprin- 
kled on ?) the side pillars, the yas pillars, (and) the efas ™ pillars (of P) the 


e os. 8 ¢ ° 


~ 


-1 Or “ reverently sprinkled,” taking ior as used by way of auxiliary. The meaning of the 
word sin before vurmbas, “to sprinkle,” has not been determined, however. 


2 Doubtful: see C a3 nu... Sone ; 

3 The reading is certain here, and the nied ee clon | 

4 Perhaps eindal. The meaning has not been determinec, 
5 Reading Aonhtfal, 6 Meaning undetermined. 7 Nearly certain, 
8 ‘The sense of &hal siadra’ is undetermined. Ct. Fy 4,-5e- 

® Up to here all.is.more or less conjectural. Cf. B 32, 33. _ 

0 Ch A 14 1. = =. Ch A 8 n, 

42 Or, perhaps, “ kept watch within it.” : — 

18 Presumably the “ninth,” Friday, a8th February, A.D, 1102, ° 


ai is i ea a eee Ree: oe ae ee ade 


€ 


56° FPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL mi 


singhasin, and all the other pillars. That day too, at an auspicious time 
after two pahar, they went {and drew water?) ..... (writing ?) (1. 19) 
wees ee (silk mat which ?)?....... (Then they brought ?) eight 


vessels of gold, eight vessels of silver, a hundred and eight vessels of copper, 


(and) a hundred and eight vessels of earthenware. {In ?) the mouths of these 


vessels they (stuck flowers of the érde Amow (and) leaves of the cada ?)4 


Then they brought the vessels of gold (and) vessels of silver, (and) they 
laid (them) (I. 22) (upon four litters,? which ?) they adorned with white cloth 


(and) which they shaded with white umbrellas. Then the Brahmans, who | 


carried the litters, all wore sukhity cindrow.*. The vessels of copper (and) 


vessels of earthenware, (they ?).......:.° (to) the Burmese who (bore 


swords ® and who?) carried. .......’ Those who carried (them) (1. 25) 
(wore?) white Auchom® (skirts ?) (and) white hair bands. 

Then the Brahman astrologers (who?) .... 0. eee ee ee eas 
we... (went?) in front, (Then they went?) (and) drew water. (The 


water having ?) arrived, they went in (and) arranged (it) in front of (the - 


place where they were to write?)® (28) ........... At that 
auspicious time, too, (all-?)........ . (they ?) were to give (as) offerings 
(to Indra and” all?) the gods, they made, and gave (as) offerings . 
....... the statues of Buddha (that are?) in this city of Pagan, (both?) 


ees (and?).... (with) (1. 31) candles, (fried grain ?),” oblations,® (and — 
musical instruments?),“ that day, too, they worshipped all™® (Then?) (they) — 


(gave offerings of treasure ?)*® 2.0. 2. oe es (and set them in 
the ?) three places. | duos : 


4 Very doubtful, Possibly the ‘meaning of sut here is Sutta,. Gut even the reading is doubtful, 
2 Ch Brg n., C 25 n 2Ch Boz mn - ; iCf, A 16 n, 


5 The meaning of ginlas (or ginius) has not been determined and there is a short word missing — 


before it. 

6 The meaning is very doubtful, but seems more likely if it is possible. to read sindvan. For 
“sword”? Haswell gives L.M, sjaz, In Myazedi 29,  simvaz means “act, deed,” which seems 
inappropriate here,” Could rap staran possibly mean “had charge of the works” ? Cf, F 23, 24, H 44, 

7 Meaning and reading of dakep are doubiful: in L.M. the word means “ tongs,” 
8Ch B14 1... qt 


9 Or, perhaps, “in front of the three places ”;- cf, D 3a. . 


10 Probably the missing word refers to some kind of offerings to be used in the worship of these’ 


divinities, Wt The reading is doubtful here: see the text, 

“12 Or “parched rice,” a recognised form of uffering, L.M. baka. 13 Ch A gn, . 

| UM iVery doubtful, though both klo’ and twiz are used elsewhere in: this connexion. 

that the ritual of offering was accompanied by instrumental music, . — 
45 Or, perhaps, “they: worshipped everywhere,” or “they performed all the rites of worship.” 

18 The order is peculiar, the object preceding the verb. But as no subject is expressed and the 

object is expressed by two words (perhaps to be rendered “ offerings and treasure”) the order may 
~ be justified, Still, the lacuna throws doubt on the rendering. _ area ts bo eae 


eo 8 @ @ w 


It might mean 


PART. I | MON INSCRIPTIONS , 47 


At the auspicious time of four nadi, precisely, they (pounded?) the 
dubba grass with all manner of fragrant perfumes. At’ six wadz, precisely, 


‘they put in (1. 34) the dudda@ grass Cand? sce boom ak > all the fragrant 


perfumes. At one pahtr, precisely, they stuck up two white umbrellas for* 
the pillars of the two sides, one white umbrella for® the yas pillars, (and) — 
one white umbrella for® the afas* pillars. (Then?) the Brahman (I. 37) 
astrologers brought water (in) veasels of gold (and) silver, and water (in) 
conch shells wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dudda grass.’ Then (they) 
recited® (and) sprinkled. Then (they stirred ?)" with dubbé grass (and 
Bae eA ats a ie. Ee holes (for) the side pillars, and the 
holes (for) the yas pillars, and the holes (for) the afas pillars (1, 40) (of ?) 
the staghasin,* they (stirred?) with leaves of dubb@ grass (and rice meal ?). 
Then they proceeded to bring ..-.2+++e+ees (and) proceeded to 
(stir ?). ew ee ee ae ees (Stirred?) the dudda grass (and rice meal. 
together ?),- Rice (grains) 6... ee ee ee ee ed they — put 
in at all the sides.? | | ; | 

‘The tenth waxing of the month of Phallagun, (1. 43) the day (being) 
Saturday, at the auspicious time of one pahar, six nddz, (Taurus ? being) | 
lagna, (thereupon) our lord the Chief Monk Arahan and all the exalted 


(ones! of the Church ?)...-- +--+: tes Pet ae 

Bagh tet te Sais oP ewe ces ts aes oven eae Bt, Seen te iar gna RA es | 

—-4¢ ’ i i 8, we must, 1 suppose, assume that the 
1CE A 23 n As “two pakar” was mentioned in D 18, ust, : th 

times now spesifed are after sunset. - 2 Reading and meaning doubtful, perhaps “ applied,” 

‘ 8 Or © on,” ACh AS ne 5 Cf, B 33 n. - 


6 Le, some form of ritual, The sprinkling was, of course, part of the ritual used in consecrating 


‘the building operations. Cf, C 42 n. 


7 Rendering doubtful. | assume that girkar is the LM. dakuiw, thakeiw, but am not certain of it. 
8 Not quite certain, but assumed to be L.M. wath, usually applied to broken rice steeped in 
water for milling or pounding, and to. the batter or Aour-like product. A: sort of rice porridge, in 
fact. The Malay tépong tawar, a mixtare of fine rice flour and water. used in magical lustration 
ceremonies for averting evil influences and sprinkling on objects to be consecrated, is closely analogous, 
i ns of a bundle of leaves. 7 ea acer 
hee a = ane ihunoe and doubiful passages in the above account that: the details of the 
procedure are by no means clear, Provisionally | am disposed to think that it all refers to the places 
where the holes for receiving the bases of the various pillars were sunk, Into irra ae the different 
substances, perfumes, etc. were Sea a stirred with bundles of dubsd grass (the tice 
idge bei d while this was béing done). oh 
Pe Say, ist March es The lunar date, ° tenth waxing,” ended about LOn45 at, 
that. morning. If,.as is to be supposed, the time mentioned is 5 hours 24 minutes after observed 
‘sunrise, that would make it about 11-11 a.m, mean time. Aries was lagna (de, on the ee hablar 
till 12-45 a,m,,.when Taurus became lagua, It is possible that. we ought to read a ATIES, ee 
brisa, “Taurus,” but the latter seems to be indicated by the blurred and broken eters cH E 
‘ink-impressions, pe a ees “tee a dead 
ML Probably merely honorific for monks in general, not necessarily some that. were nore exalted 


“than their fellows, — 


arrived.” 8 Cf, B 33 n 


48 : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von m1 
= 
......,. At the (auspicious?) time of . . pahir, (three?) nddz 
(precisely?) 2.6... 2. ... 4. (carried javelins went in front = 
beat ‘drums 2)". orca ve re eT Se a 3 7 
ate ek ees pillars. 2 J. we. . (l. 4) (went (ana) ince Galen 2). 
eile dp Sangh ten ine ag (the saa? 2) of the pillars, (they) . ee 
e eee Cen eee: They made a decoration of slentains ddovaed with 


young , plantains (and) sugarcane,® (I. 7) spread mats, (and offered) golden 
flowers, altar candles, (and) altar oblations,* rhs cae 
A eee arsaeede ces .... (when the water ?)® hea laeet 2), eee 
a rere eo ear error .. (Then ?) the Brahman astrologers 
(brought ?) water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) water (in conch 
shells wherein (they) put cleaned?) rice (and) unis grass.” Then (they) 
recited’ (and) sprinkled, and bathed all (113) .-.:..... . (the sna/ ’) 
of ‘the pillars, Thereafter, (they) spread mats (and offered 2) sn eee ae 
golden flowers (and) altar candles. 

At the time of (dawn ?)* (on) Monday ® ee 


... (they (1.16) pounded with stones >)” all es suai?) of the pillars." 
At that time, too, (they. rece ae. 


eo # # 8 & 


ee ee re ee - (the pillars at ?)" 
all the four sides. (The) ..:.; (side?) Se yee be % RO ice the 
DINATS i seeks Ci elO)s eS cet SaaS othe ce Gat d ee he daha ne ea Ue 


pillars of the ablution pavilion“: all (those pillars ?) they wads 
At full moon. of the aan of Phalagun, the day (being) Thursday 
l. 22), (at one?) w@dz precisely,” they prepared® gold, they applied™ (it ?) 
_ 1Cf, E27 n, Here, too, no word for “carried” is legible, 
passages cited in IX A10-n, 


2 The meaning of sadl here and in E 13, 16, has. not. been aca nee One would suppose that » 
-- it was. Something that was “spread” (sdi) over. the ‘surface of the- pillars, perhaps 
covering of some sort, 3 Ci, A 3on, £ Cf, A 4 n, 


5 Conjectural, but probable, as a similar formula is used repeatedly elsewhere, 
' Brahmans bring water in the very next line, 


> © wg © 6 6 


seg to Rlo’, cf, VIII A 6 n, and the 


a coating g or 


However, the 
so it may be something clse (or some person) that 
7 Ch C 4am, D “38 n 

8 As regards the omitted word, cf, A s8-n,. The word for “ offered » here is a different one, 

9 CEC 12 n, 10 This would be grd March, but details are lacking, 

M1. Or, perhaps, “pounded the stones of the sl.’ if stone entered into the composition of the 
latter (E 4.n). But the reading is also not beyond duabe. 

12 Or, pechaps, “the sual of all the pillars.”’ 18 The reading 3 is doubtful, © 4 Cf, A 8, 
| - 16 The moment of the full. moon .of Phalguna oceurred on Wednesday, 5th March t1o2, at 
7 hours 56 minutes after mean sunrise, i.e, 56 pm. It could mot be connected with Thursday. 


“One nddi” points to 6-11 am, FeepmeDly the day | was Thursday, 6th March at 6-15 am,, the 
morning following full moon, : a 


18 Or “made ready,” But ef,C 39 n. I tal 


ke this “gold” to be gold leaf for 
17 Presumably by coating the pillars with it, ; coating the pillars. 


But the lacuna leaves the meaning somewhat uncertain, 


PART 1] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 49 


Soe te Jan Gh A eae on the yas’ pillars. That day, too, (at 
tir 0?) pahir, (three >) nédi, (they) put in’ oe (yas ?)* pillars. (At?) that 


time, (1 25) too, (they). bathed ..-.... .‘ the side pillars, the yas pillars, 


the afas® pillars, and all the other pillars. Then the (sathran ?)® Brahmans. 
decorated litters (and) shaded (them) with white umbrellas. (1. 28) Upon the 
litters they laid’ vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) vessels of copper which 
they carried, thirty-three (of them).8 The Brahmans who carried the litters 


wore (their?)® suth@y cindrow,” (1. 31) together with white Auchom™ skirts 
(and) white hair bands. : 


Then the (datsan 2) Brahman astrologers” ..... (girdles 2) e and 


-javelins and) went (and) beat the foremost * drum, ard then went (and) drew 


water. (I. 34) (After they had?)** gone (and) drawn the water, they made, 
for”? the pillars, decorations of plantains *° (making) thirty-seven booths,” spread 


thirty-seven mats, (and offered) water (I. 37) (in) a hundred and forty-eight 


vessels, ay seven golden flowers, thirty-seven altar candles, thirty-seven altar 
oblations,” (and) water (in) the thirty-seven conch shells wherein (they) 
pure cleaned (1. a rice ed) dubba grass) to Narayana’ = - (they sae 


1 Cf AB n, i, 7 

2 Presumably into the holes ‘nails to receive their bases, 

3 Or atas? There is a lacua here. 

4 The meaning of tudwas has not been determined: the word occurs again, in a similar context, 
in, E 45. One view is that it means “(and) swept,’ L.M, twah, but this would normally correspond 


with an E.M, form. in -as, not ~ds. Perhaps it denotes some part of a pillar, 


5 Cf. A 8 n, 8 Cf, Ao 12 n, 7Ch Barwin. . 
81 think the translation is right, but it does not seem clear whether. there were thirty-three vessels 
in all, or thirty-three of each, sort, or merely thirty-three copper ones, the number of the gold and 
silver ones being-left to the imagination, Further, it might be possible to render. the passage: “ Upon 
the litters they laid the vessels of gold (and) silver, The vessels of copper which (they). carried were 
thirty-three (in number}.” If we assume that the stop after sre# is. wrong, one might with less hesita- 
tion adopt the version given in the translation. ® See the note on the text, 
Ch A £6 n, and I C 24 tr, n. U-Cfh, B14 n, 


12 The reading and meaning of datsdu are “doubtful: possibly “of the right,” or “of Southern 


~ India.” In this place the word for “astrologer” for once precedes. the word for “Brahman,” contrary 


to.the usual order observed in the inscription, 
13 The reading and meaning of the word left out before “ girdles” being doubtful, some , doubt is 


_also thrown on the latter... The last part of it. might possibly be the L.M. khalé, “to lean on,” and 


not “ girdle” (mebhald) at all, If the version adupted is right, the missing word . BRebeely meant 


something like “were girt with’? or “ wore.’ 


% Ci. C a7 n. 16 Or “the drum” (or drums” ?) “in front.” Cf A’ 13 n atts 

18 The meaning of &£indvow is not quite certain, byt 1 connect the word with krow, “ “behind, 
_ after” (F 37), and kréw , probably “hereafter” (VIII A 30, B 1, 2), 

" That is, 1 presume, “in honour of,” not that the pillars were necessarily to be housed -in the 
booths ;.though, for aught I know, they may have been. © 418-Ch A 3 on 

19 Literally, “dwellings.” 1 suppose small decorative sheds are indicated. The word i is ‘used here 
like a sort of numeral coefficient following after drat cindran.. Cf. H 10 .n, 

® Ch A4n, ~S 21.Cf. B. 33 n. © Ch Aan, 


so ~~. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo, 111 


mats,’ golden flowers, altar candles, (and) boiled rice in eepsshaped vessels 


with candles stuck in it.” 


All these they arranged aaa placed (I. 43)-in readiness ® ; (and) a 
the water which they had gone to draw, had arrived, at tHe: time (when). 
godhult (was) lagna,’ they bathed ........,° the side pillars, the yas 


pillars, the atas*® (1. 46) pillars, and all the other pillars around all the four 
sides. At that time, too, (they) applied... .. GR she Digi ca ath a Gan eh 
Sige sh AR That TMG: HOO) 2). ew ge ee See 


RP 


Pi cet alt) aoe ea OD NE Satine waning ?), the day (being) Friday, too, at 
one #d@di, (Pisces being lagna?)*®........... . the palace. (In) 
each place (J. 3) they buried gold | leaf, silver leaf, (and) copper leaf. (In) 
all the ten places ae thus buried gold leaf, silver leaf (and) copper leaf, 
all three in each case.? That day, too, they . . ..° the side pillars, the 
yas pillars, (and) the atas® pillars. Then they oye ae oH all the other (1.6) 
pillars. At that time, too, they wrapped the bases of the side pillars, the, 
yas pillars, (and) the a¢as pillars; they spread gold leaf, silver leaf, (and) 
copper leaf (on them). (On) all those pillars they spread (them in) three 
layers equalling in extent the whole bottom ™ of the pillars. They wrapped 


(the bases of the pillars) with cloth whereon they (1. 9) wrote a “ writing » 


of success.” The thread wherewith they bound up the pillars, tender 


maidens, young damsels,™ daughters of Brahmans, had spun (it and) made 


1Ch A 22 n. : ea 2 Ch A 5 n mer 3 Cf. C 39 n,, E 22 n, 
4Ch A Ian, > Cf, Bag n, SCR A 8 n. 
7Cf. E 22n. If the doubtful reading mat is right, lak may mean “ (they) inlaid jewels.” But 
it is not clear that the word here is not the same as the one at the end of E 22, which does not 
‘seem to be mat. 
8 On Friday, 7th March r1o2, which was the. decile waning of Phalguna, Pisces (mia) was 
lagna ‘till 7G am, “ “ One nddi”’ after observed (or ne) sunrise would be 6-11 am. Cf. Aran, 
33 Ne : 
“9 J take this to be the force of the doubled pusnpi, if that is the. true réading. 
10 The sense of bhal has not been determined : of, C 45 Ty E 5, 
1 Cé£ the last note. 
Win l 4 25 kintal (LM. gata) is app lied to the soles of the feet. Whether it here means the 
under surface of the base of each pillar or includes the whole surface 6f such base, 1 am not quite sure, 
13 The text has geyyalekha, of which this seems to be a possible meaning, (A 
victory.”) I presume that some auspicious formula i is indicated, 
14 Perhaps one sheng: add’ “of high degree,” in. oe to 
kumar, 


nother is “record of - 


bring in the associations of the word. 


part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 51 


(it on) a hundred aud eight spools.! Then the Brahman astrologers recited? 
(and) sprinkled, and after that they bound up the pillars. . i 

That day, too, at three #ddz precisely, Pisces (being) lagna, they set 
up the pi llars of the two sides (1. 13), the yas pillars, (and) the afas pillars 
(of ?) the singhasin,* (vertically in their holes ?).§ That day, too, at one 


pahar* six #@dz, the lord abounding in piety’ rode on an elephant. From 


_.... 8 in front of the Jetawan® (he) made the elephant | enter in front of the 
ve aes ee -? of Pagan (1. 16) within the (lower ?)" walls. The _palanquin 
men with the (egins ?) litters entered behind the riding elephants.” (Alongside 
of?) the leading elephant, (went) a white. elephant named Erawan(a)- 
mahawijeyyabajrabhim, which was completely arrayed with all (sorts of) 
ornaments made of shining gold (I. 19) set with gems of divers kinds, on 
both sides, (and) a riding horse completely arrayed with ornaments (and) 
trappings of shining gold, set with gems of divers kinds (appertaining 
thereto?).” All the samben ord, samben len, (1. 22) (and) kalan yan san, both 
these who came with our lord the king of the. Law,” and those who bore 


: Or, conceivably, “(of) 108 strands,” which practically comes to the same thing. For “where 
with they bound up” one might perhaps say “which they wound round, * if the thread is conceived as 


apart from and used to bind the cloth, a. ~ ACh C 4an, D 38 n- 
3Cfi, Fan, Three xddi” would be about 6x9 a.m. $$ Ch AS nn. 
§ The meaning of han tiagdér has not been absolutely aaceaineds I assume agar to be con- 
nected with the iuguy (or tugd@r) of LT C rg and L.M, dagi, “straight.” 6 Cf, A 43 n.. 


? That is, the king: he has the same title in I D 44; and cf, also l Ao. We may assume 
that this was a.courtly formula, like “our most religious and gracious king,” “his gracious Majesty,” 
and the like. - : 

8 The meaning of dindar (or vindér?) has not been determined. It seems barely. possible that it 
may be the L.M, éand, kayd, “shed,” “ payin but I am not prepared to accept this identification 


_ without further evidence. 


9 No doubt a building, and probably a nlonastery, named after the historical one where Buddha 
sometimes resided: cf. 1 A 15. It is mentioned again in IX G 22. 

10 The meaning of raz kenliiz has not been determined, It may refer to some building (as, appar- 
ently, does the word vaiz inG 48), perhaps a reception hall, and that seems to be the more likely 
interpretation. On the other hand we may be tempted to compare the vaz flix of VIIL A 10 (where 


“it appears to mean “came, > though the passage is unfortunately preceded by a lacuna) and of IX A 


14 (where it certainly means “brought ”): cf. L.M, vaz klun, “to go out to meet,” van klus nan, 
“to bring.” In that case jit might possibly mean that the king rode his elephant in front of the 
concourse of the people of Pagan who had come to attend him. But in that case one would have 
expected a word for “ people.” =, . 

il The reading is. doubtful but probable. 

18 Or “elephant,” there being no plural particle, so that it may. bakes exclusively to the elephant 
on which the king rode. But then, why style him “the leading elephant” immediately. afterwards, if. 
-there were no other riding elephants ?. Possibly Aixnta may mean merely that alongside the king’s 


tiding elephant, “ which ‘led the procession,’ came.the white elephant and the caparisonéd horse. 


3 T take cuhaie to be the L.M, chet, Perhaps, however, we should translate: “ With the leading 
elephants. 6.2 sy es a's went alongside”? It seems highly probable that the white elephant and the 
horse were in fact led alongside of the leading sept the one on the right and. the other on the 
left, Se Pe ne 15 Cf, 1G 3. 


32 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. tt 


swords, all wore loincloths, sukhay cindrow, sukhty uldr, kuchom skirts, (and) 
white hair bands? Then those who bore swords,’ the samben (1. 25) evi, semben 
leh, kalan yah san, trap dumsac, kla pna@f,? (and) the Brahman astrologers, =~ 
who were versed in house-building,* wore loincloths, suéhiiy civdrow (and) 

sukhity ular, (adorned ?)® with all (sorts of) ornaments, together with white | 
skirts, white 2uchom, (and) white hair bands. (They) offered (1.28)... ... 
. © golden flowers (and) altar candles, (they) made obeisance’ (and) asked a_ 
boon® from our lord King Sri Tribhiiwanadityadhammaraja, abounding in 
PIGGY oa we dee oe ee es * Then the Brahman astrologers who were versed 
in house-building went (and) worshipped Narayana™ in the ancient manner,” 
and (1. 31) offered® water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver. Then the 
‘Brahman astrologers who were versed in house-building all came (and) (made 
lustrations ?)," putting the paritfa™ water (from) vessels of gold (and) silver 
in the holes,* and put five (sorts of) gems {in each of ?)® the holes, 
together with boiled rice (and) fresh (1. 34) milk.” Then (they) sounded all 
the drums......... Leute axe eN aA. Se eee ES eo Peerage DIBW Las 
.. +)” (and) all the host shouted.” 


1 Doubtful interpretation, Cf, D 24 n. boat ait 
4 [t seems possible that “white” may apply to all these articles of apparel; as to which, cf. B 
14 n. ae: oS aoe es ane Me Gas 
3 It is possible that ¢ydp goes with saz; and if saz stands for “clergy,” ird’ may mean “of the 
Lord,” d.e, “of, Buddha.” Alternatively, trdp dumsac may mean “the chiefs of the dusssac.’> But. 
as the sense of duvhsac (or vuasac) has not been determined, the point remains in doubt. Cf, H 34, . 
44 ie =. two words, literally “tigers of the army,” presumably denote military officers, . 
4Ch Ban = oe 
6 The reading and meaning are almost certain, and they make good sense, Cf, G 25. 
6 Cf. A 38 n. 0 ae ‘ 
7 Or, perhaps, “worshipped.” But from its close juxtaposition with the next word (“asked rr) 
I think it must be inferred that the two are to be taken together and Jor here merely indicates the 
respectful manner and attitude accompanying the making of a request to a royal personage, : 

§ Or, perhaps, “permission, authority,” It would depend on. the meaning of the words left 

untranslated, zufra, ee ee oS Ch R24 1 i : : 
10 ‘The reading and meaning of birboy salar are doubtful, It has been suggested that they mean 
_ that the king was asked as to’ where they should place” the offerings mentioned in. the preceding 
line, If the true reading is satap (not) saldr), presumably the meaning is that the king was. really 
and truly pious (cf, L.M. satap, “upright, righteous”) and we might render the phrase, “in accord- 
ance with righteousness.” ia, ne . UCE Aan. oes : 
19. a ‘ * apn ps : oe es * e. : ; . : 
wali had ie sera ae to for oe this reas to he ue ease, unless it. can be 
_ 48 The force of san is undetermined: cf. C 42 n. The word> is : vant ae 
/ Yumbas, “to sprinkle,” but that does not suffice to decide its eae ae foe omen | 

»_ 78 No doubt the holes made to receive the bases of the pillars, 1 imagine that the water was es 
poured or sprinkled into these holes, and to.make that clearer I have put “from” vessels of gold and 
silver. a eae Se ee 18 The reading is not quite, but nearly, certain, ~ 

_ ™ Perhaps the boiled rice was boiled in the fresh milk, But cf, F AU Ng al Ges a ee 
_ CfA mn, To this must be added that gumviz means “to make. a noise,” and thas, 
Ce 23 chee “ ; ~ aidcedee " V- 
“a great sound. 9 Rather doubtful, -but one does not see what else it can mean. CE, KZ 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 33 
At the auspicious time of two pahiy, Hasta (being) the lunar mansion 
(and) Gemini (being) /agna,’ (they) built up the side pillars, (I. 37) the yas 
pillars, (and) the q@fas pillars.” On the lotus bases of those pillars they 


wound white cloth. Then, the ju dal* pillars, the pillars of the great 


pavilion, the pillars of the four ciadvow* pavilions, the pillars of the ablution 


pavilion,® and all the pillars, they bound up (. 40) with white cloth, (and) 


having put the five (sorts of) gems and put boiled rice with fresh milk,® 
they built them all up. At the time of the building of the palace,’ gifts 


(and) presents, (for example of ?)® gold, silver, pearls, (coral ?),? the seven 


(sorts of) jewels, of divers (1.43) kinds, they came (and presented ?) = 

Ce eee eee ee waevece (to?) King Sri Tri- 
) So ee OR eee we oe woe eo the“ palace ot 
Jeyabhiim.* On (the pillars 2)... .6-+ eee 
(upon ?) the litters they laid vessels of gold (and) silver, vessels of copper, 
vessels. of earthenware (which they?) carried, (and) the javelins 4 they 
arranged in readiness.™ At the auspicious time... ....+.-5 


Cr re 


= 
(offered. boiled rice) in cup-shaped vessels together with candles," offered ” 
water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, spread mats, (and) offered : aut 


1 Cf, A 12 nm, 33 n. The time was apparently six hours after true sunrise, 1.¢. about 11-47 a.m. 


| On. that day (cf. F 2 n.) Mithuna was lagna from 11-16 a.m. to 46 p.m., but the lunar mansion 
- (nabsatva) Hasta was no longer current, having ended at 3-30 p.m. on the preceding afternoon. This 


is -one of the several cases in these dates which seem to throw some doubt on the correct identification 
of the year or the applicability of the reckoning employed... Cf. B22n eee 
8Ch A Bn. rie 3 Ch A Qn SCE ATG mm Ch A 8. 
6Cf. F 34 n.. But the reading here supports the translation given and is rather against the 
i 3 i & . ‘ 
ad a enh aie eee being built.” I take crus to be {at any tate primarily) a verb, . 
though as such it may also perhaps be capable of being used-as a verbal noun. Cf. G 19. 

8 Cf, 1 C 26, Literally the words seem to mean “ beginning with,” and the usage is parallel to 
of the L.M. ma patam, ma ptam ho oo oe : 
baa a -and fs tis but cf, L.M. gwd, dwa, and perhaps Pali pard/at, from which 

the Mén forms. may have been derived. sie a Lo 
10-Cf, IIT C 19, VIII A 15 tr n, i : : : ees 
nl ing is f certain, but nearly soo. -_ se Bae ve 
18CE A 4n, It would appear from that passage (and others there cited) that sentient: 
stuck in the. vessels (probably in. the rice which. they contained). Here the words paar aus 
rice” are conjecturally inserted from the preceding line, which is missing. oC 3 . 


\ 


va ss EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Evo. mn 


golden flowers (and) altar candles. Then the Brahman astrologers who were 


versed in house-building worshipped Narayana.’ When (they) had worshipped 
Narayana, (1. 4) at the time (when) godhulz (was) Jagna* (they) beat drums 
os go ens eas AGB): BIEWS 2 pay .. 2 Then the Brahman astrologers 
went (and) bathed the side pillars, the yas pillars, the afas pillars,’ the pillars 


of the pavilions, bathed® the pillars of the ablution pavilion, (I. 7) and all the | 


pillars together. Having bathed (them), (they) spread mats, offered® golden 
flowers, altar oblations,’ (and) altar candles, (and) worshipped® (at) all the 
pillars. | a 4g oa : 

On Saturday the second waning, after three pahir, the sumben (1. 10) 


hansasiv, sumben rajirsir, sumben ripusaddano, sumben mhachatt?, sumben 


prajialankar,” and the Brahman astrologers, sprinkled with parifta™ water 
(from) vessels of gold (and) silver, and then they dug holes wherein to bury 
four treasures (1.13) at the four sides of the yas pillars: within four copper 
‘chests they put gold, silver, (and) all (sorts of). jewels of divers kinds, which 
(they) wrapped up with white cloth. At the auspicious time of three pahar, 


one (1. 16) aadé, (Cancer ?) being /agaa,” all the suméden eri, sumoben len, 


halan yan sah,* (and) the Brahman astrologers, proceeded to sprinkle “ with 
paritta® water (from) vessels of gold (and) silver, and then buried the four 
treasures (at) all four (I. 19) (sides ?).® C ot 

Also, (on?) the days when the palace of Pagan was being built,” 


both (on) every holy™ day of the waxing and (on) every holy day of i 


the waning (moon), our lord the Chief Monk Arahan™ with all the lords 
of the Church (1. 22) entered (and) dwelt inside the Jetawan.2? From 


1Cf A 2n. 2Ch A i2om 3 Ch A ton, 1m 4 CRA Sn. 

§ Cf, B 4 n.- It is not clear whether the preceding word should be plural, and it seems possible 
to take the two together in the sense of “the bathing pavilion.’ But this does not seem to «be 
mentioned elsewhere and appears to be a less probable rendering. © § A 38 n, 7 CRA 4n. 

8 Or “worshipped all the pillars.’ They may have made obeisance to the pillars after their 
ceremonial lustration and consecration, as mentioned above. . 

- § Cf. A 33 n. This would be nine hours after actual sunrise, presumably. But Saturday, 8th 
March 1102, was the third waning, the second having ended at 1-13 p.m. the previous day, 
- ‘A mre of these titles are doubtfully read: see the text and notes thereon, and cf. A 37-0, 
A Tg m , sed, 
“Ch Ara t., A330. The lagna is doubtfully read. 
13-Cf, A 37 n. “4 CRC 42on. oo: - 16. Cir-A 14 0, 


16 Conjecturally restored on the analogy of F 13. In both places the word (dis) refers primarily : 


to the four quarters, the four principal points of the compass (or rather of the heavens). 
"Cf F 41. Here the word cyu# seems to be used distinctly as a verb, . a 
18 That is, the uposatha days, of which there are four ina lunar month: the eighth waxing, full 
moon, eighth waning, and new. moon, : ” ae fee 
= WCLA6n, ot ee 2 OR Bas a” | | 


. ft 


paRT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS — 7 ss 


sunset of the day that (they) entered (and). dwelt there, children” of 
Mén chiefs and children of . . . . . . chiefs. 2. 0... . (and) 


the scholars wore (1. 25) subhiy cindrow® adorned® (with) all (sorts of) 


ornaments, together with white skirts, white kuchom,* (and) white hair bands. 
(They) decorated litters with white cloth (and) shaded (them) with white 
umbrellas, Upon (the litters they laid ?)* (1. 28) vessels of gold (and) silver and 
vessels of copper (and) earthenware which they (carried ?).© In the mouths 
of these vessels they stuck flowers of the dra@e kmow (and) leaves of the 
cadiit.! Then they beat the foremost* drum. Then the children of the 
chiefs! with the scholars (I. 31) (and) yah san,° went (and) drew water. 
When the water (had arrived), they arranged water (in) vessels of gold, 
silver, copper (and) earthenware, (and) water (in) conch shells wherein Se) 
put cleaned tice (and) dubba@ grass,” ee arranged (it) at the houses’ 
the (1. avitta™ was to be recited. | 
ae un ee F midnight, our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, with the lords 


of the Church who were to recite the partite, entered (and) dwelt in the 


houses where the fariffa was to be recited. Then (1. 37) the children of the 
chiefs ® brought water (in) the vessels of gold, silver, copper, (and) earthen- 
ware, (and) water (in) the conch shells wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) 
dubba grass, (and) reverently. presented (it to) each (of them). Then the 
scholars and yan san (1. 40) offered. . . .” golden flowers (and) altar candles, | 
(and) reverently asked for® the pavitta. When (they) had eyeey (asked 
for it), then our lord the Chief Monk Arahan with the exalted (ones) * of the 


‘Church recited the farzita. When (they) had recited the parttia, (1. 43) 


then our lord the Chief Monk Arahan, with the exalted (ones) of the | 
Church who had also recited the paritta, brought paritta water (in) conch 


shells with * cleaned rice (and) dubba@ grass. (1.46) Then (they) entered 


: ably sons of chiefs or notables are meant, But the phrase might be interpreted to 
mean in i of Mén race (not merely their sons). Immediately afterwards one. would expect 
Burmese to be mentioned, but the reading (which is not clear) does not seem to admit of this. 

2Cf, Bir4 n. 3 CE F 26, : e Ch. B 14 th 

5 The reading, though not quite clear, must represent Something of this kind. CE B 17 1. 

8 Probable, as being supported by parallel passages: cf, B 15, 18, E 29, F 48. 


1 Ch Bign 8 Or “the dram” (or drums” ?) “in front.” Cf, A 13 ne 
9 CL G 24 n, Or “the yan san scholars”? But cf. A 37 n. 

2 o % 7 o 
11 A restoration supported by several parallel passages. 12.Cf, B 33 n. 


» 8 Or “house”; but in view of G 36 1 think the plural must be intended, though there is mo. 
plural particle here. Mie . 2 Cf. A ign. 
: 18 Cf. Gag n, > 16 Cf, G 31 n. ChE A 38 A ; Es 
18 Or “made obeisance (and) asked,’ as I have rendered it at F. 28. T hey would, a COURSE, 
make the usual obeisance to such a high ecclesiastical dignitary. a 
‘Cf D 44 n. . 20 Literally, “which were with. 


pillars of the ablution pavilion, for the jun dal pillars,® 


56 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


| land) oak led (and) scattered (it beoadeast ?)* around {all the four ?)-s 
of the palace. Then they went out from thence. Then ee stopped ir 
front of the hall? Then they gave ate water (to?) . 


H 
.. +... (arranged?) a decoration of plantains® for* the side pillars 
the ‘yas pillars (and)- the atas_ pillars (of >)’ the sthghasin; for th 
| (and) for (¢ 
i pillars of the four pavilions,’ At?) each of (these ?) (they) spread m 
(offered?)° golden (flowers ?),° altar candles, (and). altar (1. 
They arranged water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) (water) (in) (u r 
conch shells wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) dudba grass," 
"auspicious time of (one?) pahir, one adi, precisely, then the Brahind in 
astrologers, who were versed in house- -building, brought water (in) vessels o 
gold (and) silver (1. ay: (and) water (in) conch shells, which they arrange 
(on the ground, Then. they ?) ™ sprinkled ® all the pillars. After that, - 
offered... ae golden flowers (and) altar candles (everywhere 7) 
7 On that Sunday, too, at the auspicious time of one faher, (two as nad 
precisely, (I. 10) (they) worshipped Narayana.” To the Nagas * “(they : 
made a decoration of plantains (for?) a dwelling place, spread mats, (and 
set in readiness ?)™ golden flowers (and) altar oblations.* Then, the samben 


1.The meaning of vinsde is undetermined. .As regards the procedure, it seems on that- they : 
sprinkled the water and scattered the grains of rice, 
g Probably of the monastery, as I presume it to be, where they ladged on ‘these occasions : : of 
Gan” 8 Cf. - 3 n. 
4 Thats, “in honour of.” ce it may be, “ at”? or “on,” and so in the rest of this passage, - 
SO ChAB he ¢Ch Agn, 
= 1 Ch A 8, Presumably these are the four cindvow pavilions of A 16, set at tthe fede sides of the 
principal or great pavilion. 8 Cf, A 38 n, 
. 9 The words in parentheses i in the preceding passage are nearly certain, 
7 10 Cf, AL 4on. U Cf, B 33/7, 
~ 12 Or, perhaps, “ which they arranged around, Then they,” 13 C#,C 4an fy! 
Mf As regards the omitted word, cf, A 38, The word for “ offered ”” here” is a different one, 
- 46 Or, perhaps, “ they all offered .... golden flowers (and) altar candles,” : 
: 16-The” ‘reading is doubtful, ‘The date was presumably the fourth waning of” Phalguna, oth 
March 1402. we? Aan, 
38 The indeepretation is not quite certain, Possibly the reference is to the cosmic dragon discus ds 
in Halliday, The Talaings, ‘pp, 25-27, But there is some appositeness in propitiating the Nagas, a: 
_ guardians of the realms below ground, when one is about to invade their domain by digging holes, | 
19 The reading: is doubtful, perhaps it should be may, “one,” in which case the words: 
« dwelling place ” would perhaps be toned down to the mere value of a numeral auxiliary, CLE 36 
2 Cf, C.38.n, Here the alternative 2 meaning “ set near by” seems rather more. likely, =. 
ae Ci, A 4 ny! mor : z . 


* 
eee 


PART I] 


geri, samben len, 


the faces of the four sides, — 


MON INSCRIPTIONS | 7 # 37 


(kalax yan sanh?),' the Burmese* Brahman astrologers 
versed in house-building, (and the Mén ones?) versed in house-building, wore 
loincloths, (1. 13) sukhily eciadrow, (and) sukhiy uldr, with white Ruchom® 
skirts (and) white hair bands. Then the Brahman astrologers versed -in 
house-building offered* water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, and then they 
worshipped the Nagas. At that time, too, they put. .......... sand 
on (Il. 16) the places where (they) were to dig the holes for the pillars of 
the two sides, the yas pillars (and) the afas pillars (of?) the sthghaszn® 
and the places where (they) were to dig the holes for the pillars (on) all 
Then the samben pragtdlankar® brought (a ?)? 
gold peg (fixed with seven ?)® silver cords. Then the Brahman astrologers, 
(having recited (1. 19)... .. 2),° offered* water (in) vessels of gold (and) 
silver, and then the semben prazhalankar (leant on?) (the peg?) and having 
(leant on it?) they (pressed?)“ the gold PEE ne Bie ean) 
(patted ?) * the sand smooth.”* | 

When they had (patted it ?) smooth, then the samben prajiiilan bar (Il. 22) 
brought gold leaf which (they ?) adorned with ........ .. (leaves of the 


red b2/, and ?)™ thread which (tender maidens ?), 6 young damsels, % daughters 


of Brahmans (had spun?) St ee ee eT 
sambeh prajhidlankary stuck... . : 


(lesag)e 


1Cf, A 37 n, The reading here is supported by cther passages.and is almost certain, 
2 Alternatively, “the Brahman astrologers, the Burmese who (were) versed in house-building, (and 
the Méns ?) who (were) versed,” etc, But on the whole it seems more likely that the versicn in the 


_ Then the 
een eee (with ?) 


o # © © 2.2 © © & 8 6 6 6 


e & @» * @ 


Then he a nek tates 


eo @  § @  % @ @ @ © @ 


ee © © © #@. @& o 8 © @© © «6 


translation is right and that a distinction is being drawn between Brahmans of the Burmese Patt cf | 


the country. and Brahmans of ue M6n portion, 
~§ Ch Big 4.Ch A 38 -n, 5CE A 8&n, cea eee 
7-The numeral is not quite certain, nor is it clear whether the word ¢ak. that immediately: follows 
is to be taken to mean “ fixed with,’ or possibly as a mere numeral auxiliary, in which case one 
would simply say “ with,” 
8 The word “seven” is not quite certain, 9 Reading doubtful. - 
10 | have assumed a connexion with L.M, phalat (cf. dacun balat), which is by no means certain. 
It has been suggested that the right meaning here is “ pulled,’’.. All this also telers to the recurrence 
of the word in. this same line. 
Doubtful nensiie and meaning. It has been suggested that the word means “ * pulled up” “s or 
© pulled out,’ 
12 It has been suggested that the phrase means that they “ polished (the peg) smooth with. -sand,’”* 
But in that case one would expect a preposition for “with,” The word.is repeated in this line, 
13 Or “level,” and so below. 
Ws Very doubtful, If rightly read, it is presumed that bil represents. the bilva or ailoa, LM, Bi, 
“Bengal quince.” The epithet “red”? is also doubtful, - 
15 Doubtful, but it cccuts in the parallel passage, F 10, ie Ch, F 10 n, | 
Ch 10, from which the words .‘‘had spun,’ here illegible,. have been supplied, eeore this 
point on there is a big gap eines: the text down to I, 31. eee 


88 . - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von It 
(a spade with a turned handle?)*.. 6... 50+ eee ees ieee 
ee ee ee See Gilad Donic poured Wiki tete ree teuthe cles 

for the male? (I. 28) (side?) pillars. Then. .........-. nC ae te ole ae 
biting an eae Oh ee a Ot a re .....(a spade with a turmed — 
handle ?), they (asked of ?)*...... et ee ee eee 


8 


excavated at the holes for the male side pillars, so also they dug (and). 


1 See the note on the text. L.M. dué means @to turn with a lathe.’ Conceivably tar duwut 
might mean’ “a drill,’ but in view of H 38 I think it is more likely to describe the kind of digging 
instrument or spade (wir) employed on this occasion. og 7 

2 In the Lokasiddhi, quoted in Halliday, The Talaiugs, pp. 24, 25, the principal posts of a 
house are named “king post,” “queen post,” “ minister post,” etc. In Burmese treatises on 


architecture these wooden pillars are distinguished as “male” and “female” timbers, the latter being. 


- somewhat larger at the bottom than at the top, whereas the former are of uniform thickness through- 
out, not tapering like the others. Probably this ig also the distinction referred to here. ee 
3 Doubtful reading, =. *-Ch A 8 n, § Doubtful zeading, but cf. A 37 1. 


8 CE B33 1. 7 Cf, C 4s n. z 8 Ch H 37 1 9 See the note on the text, 
_-, 10 Cf, F a5 n. The present passage seems to support the second alternative suggested in that . 


note, HCE A 20, pete i CFC gan, 
13: Cf, H_ 19, where, however, the reading is not quite certain. CEH 26 n. 


18 It is. curious that there is no conjunction or. other word introducing fir, . Could it be a 


mere numeral auxiliary, here? That seems rather improbable, — : 


e 


- .. 18 LM. dacuim appears to mean “‘to scratch up,” eg. earth in diggi , i jrordé - 
| «M. dace ears tO, a 2 ging, so the pair of words . 
really only means “to dig,” though I have added “excavated.” No doubt kil, “to Pave,” which 
follows them, really adds nothing to the sense (any more than it does in H 40), but I have retained 


it in: its primary meaning for convenience of rendering. «37 The meaning is not quite certain, 
18 In this whole passage, there is some doubt as to the reading, particularly the word - which” 


in H. 39, and I-am not quite suré what it really means. Are we to suppose that there were three e 
persons, each of whom delivered a stroke of the spade at each of four different places? Or that . 


twelve persons delivered, each of them, one stroke at each of the different places ? 


SRA a SER OR 


PART 1] . MON INSCRIPTIONS §9 


excavated at the holes for the female side pillars, at the holes for the yas 


pillars (and) at the holes for the afas pillars (of the?) st#ghastn,’ (and)*at 
the holes for the a¢as pillars of the audience (i. 43) hall? 

At that time, too, (at) all the sides, the Brahman astrologers recited 
(and) sprinkled.’ Then the samben (and ?) halan yah sah (and the ?) tap 


dumsac * who bore swords®........ Sen a ee ee eee oe they ° 
also around all the fronts of the four sides (1. 46)............. 
egies (beat ?) drums: 06k wl ees Blew he! ey Gee pane demas 


ee eee eras that day, too, at one pahir, two (nadz?)*.... 


eo agsGerte Wy PERS evade Tate Sauce Oe ye ae Na ew Sree SR 9 RS SB Be REE oO 


9 


Pe ee ee ee ® a i i i ee A a oe Re @ ¢°@ @ @ © § © @ @ © BP H © F # 


the day (being) (Wednesday ?),” the saréran 4 Brahmans (wore loincloths 


(1.3) (and) sukhay cindrow?) together with (white &uchom?)™ skirts (and) 
white hair bands. (They) (decorated?) litters with (white cloth and ?) shaded 


(them) with white umbrellas. Upon (the litters they?) laid™ (1. 6) vessels 
of gold, silver, copper (and earthenware, which they carried ?). In the 
mouths of these vessels they (stuck flowers of the dr@e mow (and) leaves 
of the cada >).4 At the auspicious time (they went (and) beat?) (I. 9) the 


foremost drum.” * 


Then the satérvan Brahmans went (and) drew water, (and) when the 
water had arrived, they made in honour of Narayana’ a decoration of plan- 
tains (called) ‘ox nose ’’”” adorned with young plantains (1.12) (and) sugar- 
cane (and) within it (set) boiled rice in cup-shaped vessels * with candles 
stuck in it, spread mats, (and) offered golden flowers, altar oblations,” (and) 


altar candles. (Then?) the Brahman astrologers. went (and) worshipped | 


Narayana. Having offered ™ (115) water (in) vessels of gold (and) silver, 
(they) spread mats (and) offered ® golden flowers, altar oblations, (and) altar 


CRA Bn. oe 8 Ch AaB a, Bagm | 8 Ch C.dan, 
(4Ch Aap n, Fan. a 5 Doubtful interpretation, Cf, D 24 ne 
8 Or, very likely, “their. 2 60.” 7Ch Atgan 8 Ch A 33 Ne 
9 See the note on the text. a ce 
10 The reading is not quite certain, but see J 3r mn, CEA tan, 


WCE A 16 n, Big in. The words in parentheses: accompanied by marks of interrogation 


| throughout this passage bave been restored on the analogy of parallel passages and are fairly certain, 


BC. Bign 4 Cf Baiga,  ) Or “the drum ” (or © deums ””?) “in Front.” Cf A 13 n, 
WChAgn, ChASn BChAgH. Sa 9 Ch A 38 me 


60 a EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Cvonan oo 


candles at (the front?) of the s@#ghasim* and all the faces of the four 
sides.2 (Then?) the Brahmans (1.18) all went (and) worshipped? When 
(they) had worshipped, (the Brahman astrologers ?) brought water (in) vessels 
of gold, silver, copper, (and) earthenware, (and} water (in) conch shells 
wherein (they) put cleanéd rice (and) dubdd@ grass.* (I. 21) Then they 
sprinkled ® on (the ground where they were to?) dig® the holes for the 
pillars of the front ‘of the sing hasin and the holes fe: the pillars of the 
faces (around all?)’ the four sides, | 
| At the auspicious time of (five ?) nadi,’ (1. 24) ‘(one ?) pat, precisely, 
(Aties being ?)” Jagnz," they dug all these holes. At that time, too,....., 
the holes for the four atas pillars of the great pavilion,® they dug. (1. 27) 
At that time, too, they set up all the (other ?)™ pillars of the (four ?)* sides, 
That day, too, at three tee (two 2?) nad@ .... . , Leo (being) lagna, 
they set up the atas pillars (J. 30) of the corners. 
(On) the eighth waning: of the month’ of Phalagun, at. dawn” (on) 
uty 


a 


Kk 


a 8 fe on . o s we oe * * + * ay * nn ® a > e a ® * * @ oT s ry ° 8 * . ° > (all 


four sides aie they (L 1 Bante: stg ae re 


; , 
ef @ @ 8 @ 8 © * 8 © » @ © © © @ © 8 6 & 


1 CE, A on. Re 
2 The word rendered “front” is fa same As. that which I have iransiaied by “ aes viz, muk, 
literally “face.” 1 presume it to mean a side or fagade of a building. facing in any direction, The 


word also occurs in A 9, 28, B 3-5, 8, af-27, H 17, 45, J 22, L a2; and probably Nx, I am not quite 
clear as to what difference, if any, there is between it and ¢laa.- 


- 3 Or, perhaps, “the Brahmans went (and) worshipped everywhere,” te. at each of the places - 


* above referred to, Cf, D gin, H 8 n, L 4on, 
4Ch Bag n.- ee ’ CE C 4a nn. 


8 In view of what ‘allows, ‘ida seems to. ae the right rendering, but one would have expected shir 
{as in H 16,27, 3a, 35, etc.) rather than dir. 


7 Or “at all”. The reading is not quite certain. 


7 8 Cf, A 33 n, | $ CE, C 39 n. 
‘10 The reading i is not certain, it might be “ Taurus,” ACCE B 38 a 


13 This- pending asstimes that ies omen of the text is an error for c#e#, Lf it is not, I do not 
know what the word means, 1t Doubtful treading, i5 Or, perhaps, “ five.” 
_  We-The word cmea occurs here. again in quite a different connexion, ue pornaes in a different 
sense, - oe oS TCE C12 tte. 
18. This vould presumably be- f riday, t4th March rrog, But the eighth waning of Phalguna ended 


2 hours and 12 minutes after: mean Sunrise oe aren: S12 aun) < on the Preceding ays 
W Doubttul reading, 


PART 1] ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS. et 61 


oes eeeee es + At the auspicious time of five nad7,* precisely, ... 
. (being) /agna,? they beat all the drums... .... (1. 6). oa. 
blew See te ee ew eee ee ee ees (and?) the whole host 


» & e e . 


shouted Then they (set up?) ............. (and rose and dug?)! 


That day, (I. 9) (too?), the sawéré@n® Brahmans wore sukhiy erndrow, 


together with white kuchowm" skirts, (and) white hair bands. (They) decorated 


litters with white cloth, (and) shaded (them) with. (1. 12) white umbrellas. 
Upon the litters (they) laid® vessels of gold (and) silver, (and) vessels of 
copper (and) earthenware, which they carried, (and) in the mouths of te 
vessels they stuck flowers of the brac (I. 15) kmow (and) leaves of the cadith. 
At the auspicious time of (two pahir >), one adi, (they) beat the 
foremost 10 drum. Then the (sankran?)™ Brahmans went (and) drew water 
(wherewith to ?)" bathe the (atas ?)* pillars of the sing hasin™ 4 (1, 18) and the 
pillars (of the faces of the four sides and ?) " the ae ee ei ee 


L 


The (Brahman) % astrologers brought water (in) Wasele of rr fand) silver, 
At the auspicious time (when) godhult (was) lagna,° they bathed the 7unr 
dal hall® (1. 3) and the a dal door,” and then they went (and). ones 
altar candles everywhere.” 

On the thirteenth waxing of the eat of Cey, the day (being) 
Wednesday, a at the auspicious (1, 6) time of one pahir,® five nédi, precisely, 


‘they set up the jum dal door......." On the third waning of the 


~1Ch A 337. 2 Cf B 38 9, 3 Ch A ALN 
4 CE, F 25 1, 5 There are two or three doubtful words here. : 
6 Ch A ian. 7 Cf A 16 n,, B 240, 8 CE. Bi7n 


9 Ch Big There seems to be a stop here between brac ae kmow. Unless that is a mere | 


-error, it is an indication. that the two words cannot be taken closely together. 


10 Or “the'drum ” (or “drums ”?) “Cin front.” Cf; A £30, i Almost certain, 
12 Almost certain: at any rate there is no doubt as to the general aay re 
_18 Nearly certain. : Ge ee i A 
16 The word for “ Brahman” must have ended the prec ; 
16 The. same word (dirlec) occurs in A 28, while H 42 has the variant soelling Pare a Le 
meaning “hall” is not absolutely certain. 
WW Cr A'gn. Perhaps, therefore, we should translate, “the central hall and the denteal door.” 
18 Ch A 4n. ke 
Sn, J 28 0, 
19 Or, perhaps, “and they all. ... candles” Cf, D 31m, H ‘ 
20 The Caen waxing of Caitra, as a mean ‘tithi, expired 16 hours and 30. minutes after mean 


- sunrise on Wednesday, 2nd April td. The time given here is 5 hours, presumably - after true 


sunrise, #.e. 20-49 a.m., which fits in correctly. : EN ea 
.. | The meaning of prap is undetermined. Perhaps tt means ‘in its place, 


62 ws . EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. tt 


month of Cey, the day (being) Monday, at the auspicious time of one (nadz, 


(lrg) precisely >), Aries (being) dagna, they (chiselled?)* the... . .* pillars” 


... «(at all?) the four places; 7 . 
(On the) fifth waning of the month of Cey, the day (being) Wednesday, 


(and) Gemini (being) /egn@,’ they (set up the?) ..... (pavilion?) (1, 12) 


».... singhisin® with the vin jin muk® around all (the four sides 3), 
On that Wednesday, too, at an auspicious time after three pahir, (Virgo 
~ bemp:?): Jagea,’ they..(set up Po... ce... e(h 1s) os eee ee edd 
{at ?) all (the four sides ?).. (On that fifth waning of ?) the month (of Cey, too, 
the day (being) Wednesday ?), 2.2... 0... ee ee 


- lagna), (they) dug the holes for the ....... pillars... (118) ...0., 
(to dig the steps?)?. ee ee ee ee we (the sandvan ® 


Brahmans wore sukhity cindrow together with white Awehom™ skirts (1. a1). 
(and) white hair bands. (They) decorated litters with white cloth (and) _ 


shaded (them) with white umbrellas ?).” Upon the litters they laid ™ (vessels 
of gold?) (and) silver, (and) (vessels of copper (and) earthenware, which 
they carried. In (1, 24) the mouths of these vessels they ?) stuck flowers (of 
the dvdc kmow (and) leaves of the cada#i?) At the auspicious time... . 


a ce | se 8 & 8 6 me ee wg 


M 


Peeve ee ees aes altar (oblations,® and altar) candles 


s @ 4 = # «© @ © @ @ 


: i ax esis aed a - - At the auspicious time 6 es Bom em wk ee ee (1. 3) 


<< 1 The third waning was current for some hours after sunrise on Monday, jth April rroz. The - 
‘time here is presumably 24 minutes after observed sunrise, ze, 6-15 a.m. The sign mentioned was 
lagna till about 6-14 am,. %Meaning not quite certain, 3 Perhaps we should supply “side ”- here. 


4Cf, Big n. ; a. 
theses are restored from parallel passages 


- , (Scorpio being 


@ supported by many - 


pant t] MON INSCRIPTIONS 63 
- ¢he Brahman astrologers brought water (in) vessels of gold (and) 
alyer, fand) water (in) conch shells wherein (they) put cleaned rice (and) 
qubba grass? Then they 2... 5.2.6... .* the steps.2 Then 
“(they) offered (1.6) (golden flowers and ?)* altar, (candles ?),° and at dawn® 
(on) Friday... ++ 2s ee ee see ees beat all the drums’. ..... 
| oa eee a ee Next (they) set up the pillars of the steps and 
9) 2 i Ug ee eee aa ena AE thee) tour sides, 
On the twelfth waning of the month of (Cey?)® the day_ (being 
Wednesday ?),° they made in honour of Narayana” a decoration of plantains 
(called ‘ox nose” ?} 4 adorned with young plantains (and) sugarcane, (1. 12) 
(and) (within it (set) boiled rice in cup-shaped vessels with?) candles (stuck 
in it?), spread mats, (and offered % golden flowers, and ?) altar (candles °), 
Then (the Brahman astrologers 7) : = -— 


N 


‘(the front of the gable-end?). 0... ee eee ee eee eee ees 
dere ee all the Dases* (0M?) 0 ce ee ee es 
Pla tue Gotta a SEU ae hoe aerated eta dk ee Seth grea es 
oo... (of?) the staghastn,® which was made of shining gold, (which was 
“get with gems?)* of divers kinds. Around the..... .™ of the seaghdsin 


: (there were?) (1. 6) figures of men who danced, figures of men who beat 
drums, (and) figures of men who... 6. oe eee (at) the four corners, 
“four figures of lions. Around the....... .” of the four sides, four figures 


1 Ci B 93 n. : 

a Fasreably the illegible passige stated thet they sprinkled the ground where these structures — 
were to be erected. ‘ Ci L 18, . 
4 Conjecturally restored on the analogy of other passages. Conjecturally restored. — 

MCE.C 1 1 Ch VIL A 6 tron 8 The month is quite conjectural, 

9 Or, perhaps, “ Monday.” 0 Cf, A zn, | 

1 ¢f, A 3n. This and the next few passages in parentheses with question marks are conjectural 
restorations, but fairly certain ones, ; Ch A 4m 2 
18 The word “astrologers,” if it occurred at all, would be in the next line, which is missing. 
, _M Or “inlaid,” perhaps with jewels. Cf, E22 mo 47 no : | | 
oo. ICE A Bn. 18 Conjectural restoration, but fairly certain. : 
17 The word fumnwiA appears to mean “something which surrounds,” In 1 F 17 1 have rendered 
"jt (in the variant spelling feswiz) by “enclosure.” The reading of the next word is not quite certains 
cand if-it ig rightly read firidw (as in S 4), 1 am not quite sure what it means here, Generally if 
appears to mean “dwelling-place, abode,” as in | D 13, F ra, ae. Here, perhaps, it means site. 
In some way or‘other, we must, | suppose, imagine that round the sezghdsin there was something 
_ {possibly an entablature, frieze, or the like} on which there were the figures mentioned in ae 
line, probably in relief rather than in the round. But as it is not quite certain whether siaghastn 
means “throne room” or “throne,” it is difficult to form a clear conception of what the arrangement 
Was really like, . . og 


6 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 1 


of lions, all (made of pure? shining gold?). (1. 9) Golden dinday,® golden 
figures of byal® (on) both sides (stood?) * above an elephant’s head® which 
was made of gold. Above (the ‘he ?) (were) archway makaras® of gold, 


above the archway makaras,of gold. ...... eee . (lL. 12) 
with (bulbs ?),”7 flowers, (and) fruit... . 8 Abave ‘Ke fruit ‘eae ») water- 
lilies, two golden (figures of geese ?),° se pearls, aa both sides; in the 
middle a great waterlily flower........- ee 0 a ee eee 
= a 

se eB a cell Oia, Ooch, go Tia 
Carrere Seen s fn2 eae apg aes ee 
Pree ant aike all (the four ?) doors, dhe built ups. 22.6 os : 

ee a ee eee eee ee ee ene ae “end en ?) » ies 


Acpreed ee 2) ead) they (offered™ golden (I. 6) ener ?) altar (oblations ” 
and?) altar candles. Then the Brahman sui (who were versed in?) 
- house-building*®..-.6 2 ae | 


On the third waning of the monte sf ee ars ee a the day (1. 9) 
(bingy we Sv cat three. pahin,: five: made oe % (being) 
lagna" at that time OO 8 a a nee ake eis a aed ee ado 
Er oe ae al om Oh ee ook ce 


eo 9 © 8.4 © & @ @ © @ © © 


1Cf. 1 E 5,7. In 1 E 40 and VIII A x2, 29, the word appears to mean “ only.” 
«2 Meaning undetermined: cf. VIII A 18, It seems to have been some ornamental feature of the 
architecture here, Perhaps the phrase should be rendered: “the dinddy (were of), gold.” 
8 Meaning undetermined. Perhaps from Sanskrit vydla, which means “snake, beast of prey, 
tiger, hunting leopard, vicious elephant,” etc, ; 

4 Reading and meaning are not quite certain. If correctly read, it is the same phrase that has 
‘beet. conjecturally rendered “to make a stand” in I G 6, 
ae © Or “the head of an pineal a it is not clear WASH a whole elephant or only the head of 
ortrayed: here, - 
e makara, a etnias marine ‘monster, is a- common theme of architectural decoration, often 
Fabat ate forms, and: "particularly over arched openings, such as doors, Something of the 
7 Both reading and meaning: are somewhat doubtful. 


BCE B 7m 14 1 Possibly Asadha, 
Ch A ra no, 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 6s 


P a | 


> o@ 8 * 6 & @. 8: 8 @ os © 8 8 @ 8 &© @© @« 8 eo 2 @ © # #8. 0 8 e# @ © © 8 «€ 


... the day (being) Endeys 3 at ities nidz,) Xl. ay 
WIth. Mt 0S yee a ea a 


a ee ee 


eo @ © ¢ © © © @ * #@ @# «08 & 


+e... they made a decoration of 
plantains (called) “ox nose,” * adorned with young plantains (and) sugarcane, 


(and) within it (set) boiled rice in cup-shaped vessels® (I. 6) with candles 
stuck in it,......... . spread mats, (and) offered® golden flowers, altar 
candles, (and) altar oblations,® (and) they offered* water (in) vessels of gold 
and silver. (Then?) the Brahman astrologers worshipped Naradyana,® (1. 9) 
(and) having worshipped, (arranged ?)® gold leaf, which they (fitted together 
into ?),” a kyek svi®.. es. (the sthghdsin?) they made a 


decoration of plantains adorned with (young plantains and ?) sugarcane, —) 
within it they aA TASS. o> a8 ta cee'd ite ee 


Q : 


eo 6 © &@© @ @ © © @©@ @€ @ © * @ @©@ #© @ © © @ & @ &@ 8B &% @ 4 


» 


oe @ © 8 BC © 6 8 © 8 e He FF 6 Oe | 


as Cate he BASE CR ee ce pec ee ee eee @ a, (Waller 10, gessels 
Sipold and wiv)! ow, fo 2 a a 


5 ie sgn aoe UNRYT aes creda: * ARO sre acne rate tits acai 
Ne ate Se ice ne bectat ah Wt lls tye erp. eo lige lb GACH oy fhe ae ee 
CAC Bue 6 xe acme ance eee eg ta en ek olin ee eg CHOY 
pee eS a ee 
Of wold cand) -Silver?) See (6) oe es ee (wor- 
shipped ty Phew ee oe eee AE the time (when) godhult ae) ign, 1 


PRIS alec ae analy (Si ecard oe a hse ttre tg tet (brought?) 
sealer. (in) vessels of gold, silcee eepper, (and) Sithenwete Son ts Ee ee 


ee ee ere Lae. aa tue Brahman see ?) who were Neree in 
1 CE. A 33 n, ge Rg a ie een arr 
4 This is a different word from the preceding “ offered, 2? Ch A 38 n. n. 
5 Cf, A.an, ~~ 8 Doubtful reading. - 


7 The meaning of sisip has not been, definitely determined, - 
8 This was apparently some ornamental architectural feature, the precise nature. of which 1 have 
not been able to ascertain, Generally the word means “ glory,” and it may here refer to. something 


like a halo. Cf. R 5. 9 Ch ASM. 


10 This fragment is in a particularly bad state of preservation and all the: passages in. . parentheses 


"with question matks are more or less doubtful, though supported by the aneiey oF — Juss of the 


inscription. CE, A 12 ne 


66 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. um 


house-building,’ offered ... 7 golden flowers, altar candles, (and) altar 
Gilaboris 8M cre SG vane Alto uke  & ayt.a, aia oe lve 
-and all the pavilions. 

3 (On) the seventh waxing of the month of ........ ie i a ng 
re seta eal Be te cet I cls ehh a Raped Sead wens es .- they (set 
up the female pillars ?)4 


e 


eo ¢ &© © * © GB © &F © @ » &8 @ © ££ @ @ # 29 * @ g & @ w w 


ep e @ © 6 8 &8 @ @ 8 


R- 


oe SOU okies gia 6 Sena a: pti Ria acs als oreo as ae Stk Neal oot. Selden 


offered?) aa nao cd xe Of gold, 

_ In the middle, above the arched clec® ...... a dyak sr=® made of 
shining gold (and) adorned with noble gems. (I, 6) (On) both sides, above 
the capitals” of the archway pillars, two golden (figures ?) of devas in the 
act of blessing,” with golden flowers (in) bouquets within the arch, together 
_ with hanging” pearls, (and) golden (plantain ?)? leaves. (1, 9) Above the 
_ apex of the arch (was) a golden scroll®... of shining gold, together 
_ with golden dinday. (Two?)™® golden figures of byal™* (stood on?) both 
sides. Above the bya/ (were) two golden figures of (1. 12) mataras; above 
the two golden makaras, two golden figures of geese ” holding stalks ® (and) 
leaves made of. shining gold; above (the trunks?) of the two golden 


1Ch B7 nn. . 

~ @ As regards the omitted word, cf. A 38 n. The word for “offered” here is a different one, 
SChA 4AM... 4Cf, H a8 n, 
5 Ch N 3 n, 8 Cf. Narn. But here the word is spelt mhakar. 

~ 7 Doubtful reading, § Cf. B a8 n, 3 CE Pon, 


«10 Literally, “heads,” though there is some slight doubt as to the reading. 
Or “approving” te 
le meaning is doubtful, Possibly it means “ pearl tracery,” or the like, 
M talai, “to droop, as the branch of a tree, 


I imagine a connexion 
> but perhaps we should compare the dinldy of 
precisé meaning of tay cinvoh is doubtful, . It appears to have been some ornamental 
jaced high up in the decorative scheme here described, If mimoy (or mirmoy) is to be read 
fter it, it would Seem to imply something like “in each case,” as if this decorative scheme were 
_Tepeated: in several parts of the building, as 

ME CEOIN gets igo oae Pega 3 Doubtful reading, though nearly certain, 

3 Ch. N10 Mee net ee Ch Naan... . 48 Doubtful meaning, 

18 The reading is not quite ce eee: . 


sages F cheng 


PART 1 | MON INSCRIPTIONS 6 


makaras, two golden scrolls forming the apex (I. 1§) (of an arch?) In 
the middle (a golden?) waterlily flower 


ee a oe ed 


Ss ” 
ue Hibay Aine soe aah aaa See 8 ee Mea ie a eae a elec (of 
mirrors?)* . By LOO ye ge tek eos er) ore ee cael ie Rect: 
ees above the makaras* (were) the pillars of the arch‘ (of the seaghd- 
sim®; right?) above the pillars of the arch... .........0, ate 
Around the: 4.4.4: eee hw *(of the sitghdsin?) (were) figures of men 


who danced, (figures of men who beat drums ?),’ figures of lions. ..... 
ae -..... the (men who?) danced ...... . (on) both (sides of the 


apex ?)*; above the......... ,.. (1. 6); above the ....... lotus” 
neat ae Cand) lotus: «.» 4 .-<.3" (on) bothsidés. 2:24 4 (ein seal Gee 
See useea as & se Mis tan Oe ai Vane (on) both sides... ... (waterlilies?). 2... : 
NY See re he en aw, de Se el hy etnies nem Ale Aveta Bs Nie if Sam hes Be Sele tote 
bhi, Sa eat tees ae Wows Ee ey sae ee aes A la wn pita oe OVEN th 
three?) PL, (on) both sides, alion (lg). ... 0... 00000. ee 
ee ee ee . . an (attendant ?) * lioness (on) both sides... . . the hall," all _ 
PCSC ACY cut Gite Wen ae, GTR s Ga ve SR tee ae ees. Olee (and) 
Baty SOME (Ob): ea “COMER -o. ye Gece el ae we Oe eee 


% 


ihe sania is guite conjectural, Assuming it to be right, I do not take this torin ito be the 
main primary arch of the structure termed clec here described, but the arched apex or finial of the 
decorative scherne grovped over it. 

2 As to clec, ch 1 28 Tf the next word is correctly read, it may refer to the. method of orna~ 
mentation by inlaying small pieces of mirror glass. s 

3 Cf. Nit. 4 Or, perhaps, “ porch,’ ' Ch AS ne 

6 Cf, N 5 n. The reading seems to be pretty certain here. : 

7 Cf N 6, which supports the doubtfully read passage here, . oe fa 

8 The translation “ apex” may not be applicable here. The word cloi is applied to pagoda spires, 
and the like, and here it is not quite clear what we have to deal with. Ci, R 4. | 

9 Possibly lotus buds and lotus flowers, or some particular species of lotus, The word seems, 
however, to be specially applied to the blue lotus, though also to other waterlilies, sf ; 

10 The meaning of &lo’ here is not certain, A possible connexion with L.M. ela suggests itself ; 
but that means “ garden,” and unless figuratively applied to this floral decoration it seems out of place 
here. , : F . : 

1. Here there appears to be a word, éwik, which may mean “ponds” and seems oom oe 
after the next ‘all? It gives rise to the same sort of difficulty of interpretation as the wor : 
aboye, and the reading is doubtful. 12 tae : Ki 

18 ‘Doubtful reading, The next word seems to be sla, of which I cannot give the means 

18 Cf F, 21 mn. Here we have cwhez, a variant spelling of the word I os oe 
thereto” or, alternatively, “alongside,” ae : MCE, A a8, 4 ’ 


| 68 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


ig ph of gan Gad hall (on) both sides... ....--- (da) ee eee eee, 

pee idee Oe she NS os ai AP DG Sk LD EP RE Se a BY A oF (appurte- 
adit ?)? (on) both sides ..... eee re ee eee | ee 
TO Ae Sg a ee ee iin i hs wa ah four cornerS.... +e eet te eee ‘ 
SPE ec tek Cah ne Satie, Bago) bLOb- a x Wine ah ee veal sae rages 


(the base?) of the clec of mirrors, the base of the clee 


No. X.- 


- Tye SHORTER INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 
| | Descriptive Account. 
| 60. This is an inscription of four lines written immediately below the 
~ bottom’ lines of Faces E-H of No. I, in that order. Just below it, again, 
‘on Face F, is a short Burmese record which has already been published in 
’ Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava, where it has been dealt with under 
No. I (1)-(8). The lines of No. X are of the same length as those which 
_ precede them, and. the letters are of much the same type but not so regu- 
larly formed and in some cases slightly larger. The spelling of some of the 
‘words is incorrect and ll. 2 and 3 are in part badly preserved and of doubt- 
_ ful interpretation. In fact, like many short inscriptions, this record presents 
some serious difficulties, quite out of proportion to its length. It registers a 
~ royal donation, probably of lands, to the pagoda. Possibly ll. 2 and 3 may 
contain some of the proper names of the lands so granted; but on the other 
hand, some of the words used seem to be descriptive, and it is doubtful 
whether the symbols that have been taken to be numerals are rightly so 
interpreted. Further, the reading Yeyabhum in |. 2 is not quite certain. 
Assuming it to be correct, it seems reasonable to suppose its identity with 
the Fayabhiomi of VIII A 2, which is there located to the North-East of 
Pe Pagan and the Feyabhimn of IX F 44. 
= , This brief: record naturall ly tells us _little that is new. It is AeuiabeL 


é siklcjapevaradbating 3 (in this record ty spelt 
a ity) cannot be identified. This royal name was borne by at least 


or A oe a 


the ; same: -word,: as in 2 the preceding note, 


No. XI. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT 


KYAUKSE. 


LEpigraphia Birmanica 


No. X. 


THE SHORTER INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON 


PAGODA, PAGAN. 


VOLUME 


IU, 


PLATE X, 


PART 1 MON INSCRIPTIONS be 69 


four kings of Pagan, viz. Alaungsithu (A.D. 1112-60), . Narapatisithu 


(1167-1204), Nandaungmya (1204-27), and Uzana (1243-8). The Burmese 


inscription engraved immediately below No, X is dated in the year Onn of 


the common Burmese Era (A.D. 1249-50), and its style of writing is 
decidedly different from (and in my judgment, less archaic than) the style of 
Nos. I and X, which latter have much more in common. No. X, therefore, 
must fall somewhere between 1112 and 1248, and probably nearer ‘the earlier 
than the later date. 


T ent. 


1, (ou smin} Siri T ohurasaialpown[ shana e? ti. (jas 
k(e)l [d]an (1)* ku gyfe}k * 

2. [Jjeya(bh)u(zh)® ti ma rhak gu® pok (ta)w? 1000 | ti ita (si)iy® 

3. (70) 1 ti (m)ri (6)ooo 1 [ti]... . (ra)... (da)n (5)oo t a(gh)a 
(p)awa ° | : ; | 

4. (..)” smih (mja™ prey ma-.cut dekuoa wa & 


Translatton. a we 
King Sri Tribhuwandadityapawaradhammaraja, the lands which (he) gave ® 
as a (pious) donation to the pagoda™ of Jeyabhum,™ lands which... 4 
sees ss, 1000”; lands (for) building (houses ?),” (707) mri jae 
1 Or ° raja t. 
8 No crossbar visible: looks like ga, The next symbol is blurred and has a. wack above it: 


perhaps we should tead fartia &al instead of ma kel, 

8 There ought not to be a stop here, and it is doubtful evhathies i in fact there is one, 

4 Misspelling for kyeé, 5 Conceivably yeyacze, 

6 Perhaps a misspelling for ku, or else it forms a word with the next syllable, 

7 Conceivably waw, 

8 A blur below the s (which letter is itself. not. quite certain) ig my aly. justification Gi abausning, 
the former presence of a subscript a. : 

9 These two words are very doubtful, The gh might he ay and the p an tty ither way, T can 
make little or no sense out of them, . 

10 There is a space here, but it is uncertain whether anything was ever engraved on it. 

ll No crossbar visible: looks like ja. 

12 The reading is doubtful, - Alternatively, “gave arable lands,” but. in any case the: syntax is 
peculiar and was perhaps influenced by Burmese, Normally the object does not come between. 
subject and verb in Early Mén. 18 Or “Buddha.” “14 Doubtful reading. .. | 

15 I can make no sense of the omitted words: rhdk presents an unusual combination of . letters, 
Mr, Halliday suggests that it may be for cak, “to break up”; pok mnignt mean to oe. 3 taw is a 
doubtful reading.. 

16 All the supposed numerals are more or less Aoubtful, ‘Assuming them to be ‘tightly tread, it is. 
to be supposed that they refer to the areas of the: lands according to some understood unit of 
measurement. ie ~ 

VW Conjectural reading. Portiabe tak is an ‘error for dak, which really means “to build” cr, 
the converse case of Eyek in 1. t, 7 we eae suddetermined 


700 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo mt 


(6000?); lands... .... (pious donation ?),* (500?);.-..-ee6- 2 The 
exalted king bowed * down (and) poured out water.’ 


6 No. XI. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT KYAUK SE. 


Descriptive Account. 


62. This inscription covers a surface of 3 feet g inches in height by 
1 foot s inches in breadth, as measured on the ink-impression. It is in a bad 
state of preservation, the stone on which it is engraved having evidently 
weathered considerably, and the last few lines are practically illegible. The 
letters are of much the same type as those of the other inscriptions in this 
Section, but are rather variable in size, ranging between # inch and 1% inch 
in height. Letter ¢ is 1 inch to 13 inch long, and the normal interlinear 
space is about the same, save that after l.20 there is a space of nearly 
2 inches and after 1.21 less than an inch, The text has been determined 
from three ink-impressions. 
| 63. It records the foundation of a baddhasima at Kyauk Sa, in the 
inscription called Klok Sa, which spelling affords some indication as to the 
contemporary pronunciation of that place-name. The daddhasima in question 
was set up by the Chief Monk of the locality with the assistance of certain 
other persons specified in the record, whom he apparently dedicated to that 
service. Further, a grant of land made by some local official or officials to 
the founder was by him transferred to his foundation. The Chief Monk 
records these facts in this inscription, the legible portion of which apparently 
ends with the usual wish that the merit accruing from the deed may enure 

to the benefit of all sentient beings. 

64. So far as it can be deciphered, this inscription contains no date, but 
by virtue of some of its spellings it may be inferred that itis later than those 
which precede it in this Section®: such a form as jra’éu reminds one more 
of 15th century orthography than of the sith century form jirkw. But in 
other words. the spelling is still quite archaic; and the point must not be 


: aa Very doubtful reading, 


a & The meaning of the omitted words is undetermined. Perhaps pawa (if rightly so read) means 
deed, o The word ma is defined in Haswell’s vocabulary as “ to kneel, with the head bowed down,” 
i 4 Asa libation, calling the earth to witness the grant, < 
~~ § But apparently it. was set up before the fall of the Pagan kingdom (civca 1300 a.D.): see Il. gy 5. 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS ni 


unduly pressed, Apart from its bad preservation, which throws considerable 
doubt on a good deal of its contents and particularly on the reading of the 
proper names in it, this record does not offer many difficulties; but on the 
other hand it contributes very little in the way of new lexicographical 
material. | . 


Text. 


1, #08 wo’ ey mahathe(r]. . * 

2, lon [k]al ey tlah dmon (han) 

3. Klok Sa yon wo(’) ey . 

4. [munJas [m]ahather [B]ukam e[y] mu- 

5. nas smin (g)ofh « ma ey cron] — | 

6, [b]a(d}dha[sijm [wo’ tinltiy jra](’)-* 

4. [ku ey] (ma)? [klofi] (ku kyek) * 

8, [wo’ piAjah Maha](de)[w] (1 mba de)- 

9. h 1 [mbo’ deh « I](wa’)* [deh J. .* 

10. [mbo’] (Na) [Lwoy] 1 (Ya Wan kon) ‘ 
it, [Na Mrik ©] (Na Gaj[n* Da 1] (goh da) [e]- 
12. fy cult [kel] (:)? [ku kyek] (.)° | 

13. (ma)® klofi tin[lajy jra[Jku(’) e- . 

14. y ti] b[fa’ [m]aha(da)n (7 bnaf kar)” 

is. [ma] (k)on [sambef dalef k]e- 

16. 1 ku e[y] (go)h ci ey ; 

17. kel [ku ky]ek k(u)m rasi 

18, [pu]in go[h] (jen pijaw)” .. (m) ™ 
i9....... [carit] ku sa(kala)® 

20. (satwa gurh)i(uiji da (not... ) 


} 
Gio o wee eee oe hoe le): Lt lente Sates 
22.4 2 . ® *£ @ side he Se niece: peer) a eee es 
1 The ’ is very doubtful, but cf. 1. 13. _ -® Possibly pa. 


4 Or perhaps Ja’, or possibly even mbe’, 
er here ig 2 monosyllabic name, or merely the first 
Such 2 division sometimes occurs and it seems 
should be omitted. 


3 Or éu kydk, but cf. }, 12. 

6 | am not certain whether the illegible charact 
half of the o of the initial word of the next line. 
probable here, though on the other hand it is odd the person's own name 

8 The G might be K, and the a, w. : 

7 There should be no stop here, but there seems to be ae Bb aaee ie. | 

: i s perhaps mere : pe Ai eae gh! 

: as it whether there was anything heres perhap 10 Very doubtful reading. 7 ae 


i Masi reading, though gen seems Pp 4 Purely conjectural pas 


¥ 


[ VOL, 1 


72 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


Translation, 
1) the Chief Monk ..lon,* when I came to dwell at® Klok Sa‘ 1 
(1 4) informed the Chief Monk of Pagan, I informed the king there,® that 
I was building a daddhastma. These (are the persons) who together with ® 


e 


‘myself worked (for this temple?)7: (1. 8) the junior monk Mahadew his — 


father, his mother, his (grandfather ?),° ( ..?) the mother of Na Lwoy, 
Ya Wan, son” of Na Mrik, Na Gan™ Da: these I (1. 12) dedicate to the 
temple, who worked together with™ myself. The great (donation?) of (7 
measures of ?)™ arable land, which the fox samben dalen™ gave (I. 16) 


1 My rendering hardly gives the force of wo’, which seems to go with ey, “1,” making something 
like “I here? It seems a curious construction, and possibly one could interpret it to mean: “This 
(is) 1, the Chief Monk,” who is recording these matters, But cf, 1. 3, where this would hardly fit in, 

2 Presumably this is part of the Chief Monk’s name or possibly the name of his former place of 
residence. 

8 The preposition is very doubtfully legible, but seems to be required here. 

4 1 take the syllable yor which here follows to be a variant spelling of the particle ya#, not as 
part of the name of the locality, If it were the latter, it would be possible to take wo’ with it and 
not with ey, and the objection to the alternative rendering in note 1 above would be removed, 

5 Presumably this is the force of the (doubtfully read) goh, ‘lf it were permissible to neglect the 

stop after it, we might omit “there”? and proceed ; “and then I built a” (or “ this”) “ Jaddhasima.” 
Tf wo? “(this)’? is construed with baddhasima, we should then have to proceed: “ (The persons) 
who,” etc, “(for this temple?) (were) (1, 8),” ete, 
"6 One of the chief difficulties in this inscription is the sense to be attached to the word tality, 
which also occurs in 1, 13. [t might perhaps mean “on behalf of”? I have been unable, as yet, to 
trace it elsewhere. If it were possible to find some other meaning for it which would enable wo’ to be 
construed with Zaddhasim (as “this daddhasima”), it” would be more consistent with the stopping, 
which is, however, somewhat. erratic anyhow. If we read pa instead of ma in 1. 7, we must translate: 
“(that T) caused to work (for this temple ?),”’ etc, It also depends on the meaning of diniiy whether 
such a rendering is at all possible. On the whole, ma seems the more probable reading. . 

7 The word kyek (cf. ll. 13, 17) means any worshipful thing or person, very often “Buddha”; 
here presumably it refers to the baddhasima. 

8 This name, like most of the proper names in the inscription, is rather doubtful: in all these 
cases the text should be referred to. The word rendered “junior monk” is pifjaa (L.M. payyan), 
plainly identical with the Burmese parican : (ogSs) ; which Judson in his dictionary refers to pafea 
anga, on account of the five qualifications of 2 monk there enumerated, The E.M, spelling is peculiar. 

9 Doubtful reading and meaning. If one read mbe’, it might perhaps mean “ elder sister.” 

10 Or “child,” the sex not being indicated. 11 As to this name, see the note on the text. 

12 See note 6 above, If we read fa instead of ma, the meaning would be “to work,’ instead 
of "who worked.” . Spe * 


ie : 


18. Very-doubtful reading and meaning. 1 conjecture that kay (if rightly so read) is a unit of | 
. measurement, probably referable to the amount of land that could be sown with a certain quantity of 


grain, or worked by one man, and I suppose the word to be connected with Sanskrit tarma. This is 

in some degree confirmed by the Aéekaravidhana of the Min Abitdhdnappadipitd in its explanation 
Of the Pali Barisarw. as “one brari, a piece of land suitable to be sown with four ambanas.” 

~ M1 do not know whether #on\is to be taken as “son,” “ child,” or “children,’ of the samberi 


- > dalek, or as making the fatter pair of words (which apparently are an official title) into a plural. I 


am inclined to prefer the | 
_ word for an altar, often a 
-is.a shortened form of the. sam 


alternative. For the title, cf. 1X A 35-37; dalenz is presumably the 
one, elsewhere dulei, M.M. daldz, but whether the /ei of IX A 
ord, I cannot say. ; 


part 1} ° MON INSCRIPTIONS | 13 


to me, | also give to the temple. (May ?) the accumulation. of merit, 
(offering (and) worshipping ?)’ ,........ . (conduct?) for (all (LL 90) 
beings ?). eee ee ee ee ee . 


Fi] 
POSTSCRIPT TO SECTION I. 


65. The above record concludes the list of those which can with 
certainty be classed as Early Mén inscriptions in the present collection, 
The Mén text of the Myazedi inscription, which really belongs to the same 
category, has been dealt with in Fp. Birm., Vol. I, Part I, pp. 53-8, but 
should be read in connexion with the inscriptions of this Section. In point 
of date it comes between Nos. IX and X above. The numerous but very. 
short inscriptions of the Ananda pagoda plaques (767d., Vol. II) also fall into 
the Early Mén period; and there are a few Mén inscriptions in Siam, as yet 
unpublished, which seem to belong to the same or (in one case at. least) an 
even earlier epoch. | 

1 The reading is very doubtful here, but | think “offering ” is fairly certain ; very likely what [ 
have rendered “ worshipping” really also refers to the offering, that is to the creation and endowment 


of the foundation recorded in this inscription. 
4 Doubtful reading. See § 63 ad jin. 


G.B.C.P.0.—No, 18, S,A,S., 16-861923--500. 


i VOLUME I~ . _ | ? | — PART II | 
- - Archaeological Survey of Burma mole 
EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 

"BEING % 
‘LITHIC AND OTHER eee 
OF BURMA | “ESE : 
eS eae ‘ 
“EDITED i oad... IG. SS. 


: | | NATIONAL LIBRARY 
CHAS.’ - DUROISELLE Peenisnmaauiannnnnienrnaninten 


SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAROLOGICAL SURVRY, BURMA CIRCLE 


witoglsir focagres tan ed 


MON INSCRIPTIONS | 
Sectton iI—The ceed Mén Records 
_ No. XW 
THE ieceemaions OF THE KALYANISIMA, Peau 
ag) 


_C. O. BLAGDEN 


ay RANGOON _ | - 
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVT. PRINTING AND staTionEr’?, BURMA. 
1928, 
a * Me 
. 


CONTENTS 


DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT ... 


eee ace 
TEXT @0e ove te eee 
A TRANSLATION Cx aoe ae 
Ke : 
Y Bos f 
sc 
of a 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


* 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


EPIGRAPI A B 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


EDITED BY | 


CHAS. DUROISELLE 


’ SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA 


ian ate i 


— VoL. U—Part I 


NATIONAL L LIBRAR 


THE TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 
PLATES : 


By CHAS. DUROISELLE 


oo .: 


_ RANGOON 
. SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND. STATIONERY, BURMA 
1924 ee 


2 0 INDEX. wa 


_ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA, VOLUME II, PART II, 


Lhlustvations. 
NO, s : : =. | No, OF 
PLATE FIGURE ~ 4 -) \ PLATE FIGURE 
MicapaKKHA (TEeMiya) JarTaxa, - MicarakKHa—contd. ’ 
Nos, t737, When the King leaves the 
Indra invites — (to be re-born world 8 34 
asa man) : : : , : He converses wih the king 
Conception of — x 2 (his father) . ; 9 35 
(His father) gives (him) the The hermit instructs hits diss 
| fname of , 1 4 ciples 9 36 
When they bring the thieves I 5 ~ preaches the law to ‘He 
The goddess instructs — a 6 (three) kings 9 37 
The trial with milk 4 7 
_ Thetrial with cakes. 2 8 MaAwdsanana JAvaxa, Nos, 38-82 
They try — with fruits 2 9 — is conceived 9 38 
The trial with toys 3 10 — comes out from the womb to 39 
Thetrial with food . . 3 tl _— plays with the children Io. 40 
They try — with an elephant 3 13 — questions his mother 10 Al 
They try ~ with snakes 3 t4 — informs his mother (he will : 
The test of the mime 4 15 go trading). : 16 42 
They try — with a sword 4 16 When the boat founders : rr 43 
They try — with conches 4 Wy ' Manimekhala,. the eediess, 
They try — with drums i 4 18 listens to — es 44 
They try — with lamps . . 5 19 The goddess carries — in Her 
: arms ; ; aL 45 
They try — with molasses 5 20. . : 
Th - a The chaplain examines 
ey try — with filth 2 = Janaka’s marks =. j It 46 
The test with fire-pans 5 ae The anointment (as king) of — 12 47 
(Temiya’s) mother and father — enters the (capital) city. a 48 
come and remonstrate (with 
him) : : 6 23 — ales Lai places to the ‘ 
- The trial with fiautehes 6 a4 Pine Oren at 7 : #“ 
A £ 6 The queen sends (a man) to 
ecession of — . 35 call — or The queen causes 
The charioteer comes to take —to be called . 12 | 50 
away : 6 a6 —-(holding the princess's s 
(The charioteer) conveys — 7 27 hand) ascends the palace 13 51 
— descending on to the _ When — enquires 13 wa 
ground wl, 7 a8 — gives his (gold) pin tothe. 
He tries his strength 7 ag queen 13 53 
“== is being adorned 7 30 The king gous out to his : 
He questions the chariotger . 8 3t pleasaunce . t4 59° 
The charioteer invites — to — looks at the mango (trees) M4. 60° 
return home f 8 32 —- sees the mango (tree) 14 61 
The king —sénds a mccsnee King — instructs (the gen- ie 
_ to his mother and father . 8. 33 _- eralissimo) : : 14 68 
: * 
ee id 
" ry 
C3 4 ig 


MaHA-UmMaeoa—contd, 


The puzzle of the tank 

The puzzle of the park 

The question of the ass 
=~ salutes his father. : 
- Taking the jewel ; 
The case of the chameleon 


The case of Boe and Pre 
luck 


The question of the ram 
(He) instructs the four pandits 
(The king putting to the five) 
the question of the rich and 
_. the wise 
-— answers the giiesion (of 
the rich and the wise) . 


— asks (Amara whether she 
is married, etc.) . 


— eats the rice-gruel 
— stitches clothes ¥: 


Amara washes Mahosadha’s 
- feet F 


—_ smears the boiled - rice (on 
Amara’s head and body) 


=~ gives (Amara) a loin-cloth 


-— informs (that J he ig phew 
to return home) 


~ tests (Amara’s chastity) 

— marries 

— lives as a potter 

(The courtiers) go about 
(looking for) : 

Coming from the potters 

— answers hee (king’ 's) ques- 
tions 

The four come to ask’ (ques 
tions to — to entrap him) 


The king asks — concesnne 
secrets 


“ 


— is under the trough ‘ 
The (four) pandits look for — 
— sets free the four persons 


— sends presents (to the ror 
- kings) : 


— sends the parrot 
The parrot brings news 


_— is asked by the king (how 


Mithila shajl be delivered 
' from its enemies) 


-. — is planting the figwer 
—~ leaves the city a 


— fights the Battle of the 
Law a ‘ 


PLATE 


INDEX 


NO. OF 
FIGURE 


142 
143 
LAd 
145 
146 
47 
148 


849 
150 


tor 


- (They) 


Mana UmMacoesa—contd, 


Kevatta comes and asks 
(for —) : 


. 


- The king is angry with oo. 


~~ instructs his parrot 


The parrat returns from the 
minah bird 


~~ tells (the king) that he is 
going (to Uttarapaficala) . 


w= enters the city of Paicaila 
— converses with King Ciilani 
—~ fixes stairs (firmly) 


take the 
mother’s house 


— takes Kevatta’s house 
enters the king’s house . 
— digs the tunnel —. . 


The shipwrights make over 
. the ships to — 


sends (the boats) out of 
the way ; 


— goes out to ieee the 
king (Vedeha) é 


The king (Vedeha) asks — 


(He) shows the tunnel to Hing 
Vedeha 


. (Vedeha) comes out frat the 


tunnel 

— instructs King Vedeha 

“= converses with (King) 
Ctlani 

— shows (Ciilani) the way 
(bis) queen is gone 

(King) Cfilani gene at the 
tunnel F : 

~~ osaeures strength with me 

king 

The hundred Gigs? ate 

ornaments (to —) 


The king invites Ae stay at 


his court). me 


returns to the city aot 


Mithila) as 
— sends back (C,’s family) 


_ Accession of the son of King 


Vedeha’ 


A female ascetic asks -— (by 
gestures, why he does not 
become an ascetic) 


— asks the female ascetic (to 


find out the king’smind) . 


The persons who have lost the 


case salute — reverentially. 


king’s - - 


PLATE 


4a 
42 


4a 


Ore 


Mi 


, No. OF 


FIGURE. 


179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
486 
187 
188 
189 
rgo 
1ox 
192 


193 
194 


195 


196 
197 


198 | 
199 
200 
aor 
302 
209 


204 
205 


206 : 


207 
208 


209 


MMAHANARADAKASSAPA 


irhige suas (CaANDAKUMARA) 
jJaraka, Nos. 210-218 
_— is deciding the case 
The king causes him to try 
(cases) (The king pean 
~— a judge) 
They bring — (to the king) 
— entreats (his father) 


Papeete wives to implore 
the king) : 


~~ is near-the sacrificial pit 


‘The people rush at el 
hala (to killhim) . 


- Accession of — 4 
~~ ascends to heaven . 


BHORIDATTA Jaraxa, Nos. at03a) 


Conception of — 

Birth of — 

Accession of — : 

= answers Indra’s question . 


—-asks hig father’s leave to 
. observe the silas : 


— observes the silas in: the 
garden 


= instructs his wife .. 


= converses with the brahman 


— enters the naga-world 


‘— confers regal glory on the. 
brahman. , ; 

- ="gives the jewel’ to the 

brahman . j ‘ 

Alambayana sees— . 

Alambdyana oe ~~ (by the 
tail) | 

Alambayana mates _ dance 

Alambayana . carrying (the 
snake) arrives Gn) the 
king’s (presence) : 

— agsumes himan foun 

The king recognizes — 

——~ returns to the naga-world 

w= arrives at the niga-world 

‘=e converses with the hermit 


‘JATAKA, 

Nos. 240-241 

The hermit ~~ converses with 
the king © . 

The hermit — goes (back) to 

~ the Brahma world ae 


VipHURA Jarana, Nos, aiac.6e 


=~ answers the question of the 
(four) kings © ‘ 


INDEX 


NO, OF 
PLATE YFIGURE 


49 810 
50 air 
50 2123 
50. «a3 
50 ai4 
58 ars 
51 216 

. BY 287 
51 218 
5a ang 
52 220 
52 2a 
52 823 

. 53 aa4 
53 225 
53 226 

Bi 227 
‘54 228 
S4 299 
54 230 
54 23r 
55 aga 
55-33 

55 234 

oe 335 . 

56 236 
56-937 
56 238 
56.439 


57 ado 
87 S40. 
87 aga 
° 
(a) 


VipHuRA=contd. 
The king and Punnaka the 


Yakkha ask — 
The king hands over — 


— explains the Law to the 


king, : 
== takes Pupnayakkha ard 
~ goes back (to his home) 


— (having) called Punnayak- 
kha (to his home, settles 
him comfortably) 


He expounds the rules for 
courtiers. to obtain honours 
at the court 


“== tells (Punnayakkha)_ he is 
ready to go (with him). 

—_ Saeayalnha: carries 
away — 


— is eanversine (with the 
Yakkha) : 


Punnaka (tries to) frighten — —_ 
Punnaka creates an elephant 
Punnaka tests (the steadfast- 


ness of —by means of a 
snake) ‘ 


‘Pungaka turns — upside 
down (and flings him into 
the sky) 


Punnaka whirls — round 
Punnaka asks (— to teach 
him the laws of good men) 


— preaches the. law (to 
' Punnaka} ‘ 


Punnaka conveys = to the 
Naga (country) . . 


-~ preaches the law to the 
Naga king . ‘ 


The Naga “king introduces — 
in his home 


Punnaka carries — up (to fhe 
world of men) 


— gives the jewel (to the king) 
—— returns home 
— is at home (receiving gifts) 


Vassiwtana Jarana, Nos, 266-389 


Conception of — : 
— asks for gold to give alms 
They give him the name— 
The father gives nurses to — 
The king gives —- an orna- 
ment : 

The wise (in which -) gave 
_ the ornaments (to his 
, nurses) ‘ : 


HO, OF 
PLATE FIGURE 


57 343 
58 244 
58 245 
38 246 
58 247 
59 248 
59 349 
59 250 
59s 251 
60 252 
60 25% 
60 a54 
60 255 
61 256 
61 257 
61 258 
61 459 
62 260 
62 261 
62 a62 
Ga 263 
63 264 
63 265 
63 266 
63 267 
64 268 
64° 269 
64 470 
64 971 


VESSANTARA=contd, 


Representing — thinking of 
(more exacting) alms- 


giving : : 
= looks at the atmg-halls : 
w—returns home . 


The brahmans ask for the 
elephant . 

— gets down from the ies 
phant ‘ ‘ 

— gives away the white ele-— 
phant . . 

— is pleased with his gift ' 

The agent comes and informs 
(— of what is happening) «. 

Showing -— arranging for ae 
Great Offering 

— and Maddi converse 

Queen (Phusati) comes to see 

An official comes to inform 
(— that the Great Ofens 
is ready) 

— gives gold in alms 

— goes to see his father ; 

— comes and attends respect- 
fully on his father : 

He comes to his mother 

(The old king) converses we 
Maddi . 

— turns to depart 

They bring a carriage 


- Maddi, with the children, 


e 


mounts (the panies) 
before ——- ; 
— goes away (to the Vin- 
dhyas) 
He addresses (or admonishes) 
the crowd while going 


(Vessantara’s) mother" sends 
(him) two carts (filled 
with ornaments) F 


— gives the ornaments : 
—- gives in alms the Be 
things . , 
— looks back at the city ‘ 
— drives on again : 
The mendicants run towards 
the king . 
— gives the horsesinalms . 
The red deer drawing oe 
chariot 4 o: 
He gives away the chariot . 
— enters the forest . 


They ask the way. ' 


“PRATER 


INDEX. 


NO. OF 
FIGURE 


VESSANTARA=-contd, 


972 
a73 
274 


375 
276 


377 
278 


$79 


280 
. 281 
283 


283 
284 
285 


286 
287 


288 
289 
290 


29 
292 


293 


204 
295 
296 


297 
298 


299 
300 


3or 
303 
393 
394 


They pluck and give the 
fruits (to the children) 

They arrive at the Suvanna- 
giri Mountain : 

(They arrive at) the Konti- 
mara River 


- They come to the Araijara 


Mount 

(They come to) the beaten 
village 

(They arrive at V cetantaca! 5) 
uncle’s city - : 

They stay ina rest-house eae 
the city) 

Maddi stands outaide the 
rest-house 

Maddi converses (with the 
woman of Ceta) 

They are keeping watch (on 
the king and queen) 

—- converses with the princes 

The princes show the ued 
(to —) ; 

They a at the Gandha- 
madana Mountain 

Turning his back on the 
Gandhamadana Mountain 


They arrive at the Vagos 
Mountain 


(They rest near the) Ketu- 


mat? River 

They give (their guide) a 
(golden) hairpin. 

Sitting under the banyan tree 


They arrive at the Nali 
Mountain . 


— arrives at the Mucalinda 
‘Lake 
——~ arrives at the square lake 
— arrives at the hermitage 
The king enters (the hermit- 
age),becoming a hermit . 
~ comes out from the hermit~ 
age A 
Maddf enters the forest ‘ 
‘They eat thefruits  . : 
Maddi enters her hermitage 


— looks expectantly and sees 
Jajaka coming ; < 


Jali goes to meet (Jiijaka) . 
(Jajaka) frightens Jali 


Prince Jali returns (near his 
father) : aa 


— conversing with Jajaka , 


v 


wo. OF 


PRATS FIGURE 


73 


73 


73 
74 
74 


74 


94 


15 
75 


75 
75 


75 
75 
76 
76 
76 


305 
306 
307 
308 

— $09 
310 
3Ix 
319 
313 


314 
318 


316 
317 
318 
319 
320 


321 
392 


333 


324 
335 
326 


337 


328 
329 
330 
33K 


333 
333 
334 


335 
336 


VO ae | INDEX cts ite ye 


= 


NO, OF No, oF 
PLATE YIGURE PLATE — FIGURE 


‘VESSANTARA==conid. VESSANTARA= Contd, - 


(Thetwo children) hide in a_ 


— ‘pours water (on Madd?’s 


clump (of bushes) 99 «337 face) 83 360 
The children (are conpealed ~ Maddi rejoices (at — having ee 
in the square lake), “ 79 338 given away the children) 83 362 
Prince Jali comes up (from (Sakka, disguised as) a brah- . : : . 
the square lake). i 719 339 — man comes 83 363 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 
Kanha comes upfromthelake 79 340 — — gives his wife (in alms) ; 83 364 
gives. in alms his own re (Sakka) receives the wife 
children (to Jiijaka) IQ Bad ‘(of —) in alms F ABS cc, 2965 
Jujaka bites off a creeper. 80 | 34a | (Sakka) gives-back Maddi 84 |. 366 
Jajaka binds and takes away ; aay Indra converses (with —) 84 367 
(the children) | . 80 343 Indra. goes~ back os a ered 
— subdues his anger | . ‘80 344. heaven). . 84 368 _ MON INSCRIPTIONS. 
Jijaka binds — agai ‘the mae Jijaka sleeps on a ee 84 369 
children) 80 345 — looks out for his- father) ee a 
Jajaka takes aay (the a the king 84 370 Secrion I] —THE MEDIEVAL MON 1 RECORDS, 
children again) Bo 346 The . king (Vessantara’s 
Kanhajina looks back ie her is father) arrives — : 84 371 - ue ses 
father) . 80 347 The king comes up to his son 85 372 ‘No. XU. 4. 
— weeps 81 348. ~~ salutes his father - 85 373 | 
— givess... F ‘81 349 The queen (Phusati) arrives . 85-4374 . - p. 
The lion bars (Maddi’s path) ar eas The king — chafes Maddie: THE INSCRIPTIONS OF THE KALYANISiMA, PEGU, 
Maddi enquires about her . head oo BE 375 . 
children ; oe St a5r. The king salutes his mother 85 376 Descriptive Account. 
Maddi comes up to the The cules come to their — ; 
oO j aly : 6 mot cr ’ ° 8 ° ©. 8 , . ; . i . c : . 
rea ee tha river” ; ie " Maddi falls (on the ground) a 66. These inscriptions, originally engraved on ten upright stones, which 
with her children. .: 86 378 r represen 7 i nsist 
| Maddi ascends the hil MEgs! Beh Gcpanwernes faeh ie Eatheen) oe are now repre e ted by many. more. or less disconnected fragments, consist 
Maddf comes upon the toy) a == changes his dress . 86 380 of two main parts: a Pali text and a Mén version of the same followed by 
Print ates : 82355 —_ eset aaah pes! the eee certain supplementary matter also in Mén. Only the Mén portions are dealt 
addi arrives at the clump o : ‘ ae : : ae 
flower-trees : P Ba a86 They consecrate — (king) 86 38a with here. The Pali text, with a translation and some notes, as well as an 
_ Madd? comes to the lake har. Sigep Pie cones tate Maddi (as aad ee Introduction, was published in 1893 by Mr. Taw Sein Ko in the Jndian 
fe . . ; 2 FF . 5 é 7 ¢ : 5 
( thee Boes back: to. the . ; Maddt mounts her elephant . 87 «4384 Antiquary (Vol. XXII); and in the following years he appended thereto 
. Og 2 ‘ 
2 «35° They go out of the wilderness 87-385 some valuable additional notes, under the title Some Remarks on the Kalyani 
Maddi falls and swoons 82 359 — dwells in his palace 87 386 
— raises (Madds head) and Sc pircootnmmente’ 2) og. By om 98s Inscriptions (ibid., Vols. XXIII and XXIV). Both publications. were also. 
lays (it on pets » 83 360. ascends 2 87 389 issued in separate form, the second. one. being further. supplemented by. 
‘ hs : 7 a transcript in the Burmese character of the actual Pali text, as it survives — 
in a fragmentary state on the stones. For the text, as originally published, 
was based on two palm-leaf manuscripts, not on the stones themselves, the 
® learned editor not having been able to use these owing to lack of time: 
‘ Mr..Taw Sein Ko’s labours have very greatly facilitated my task, and I- 
sgt | have not hesitated to borrow freely from him when the necessity arose. I- 
-make this summary acknowledgment here, to cover all my indebtedness in ~ 
- eee a this respect, rather than fill up space unnecessarily by repeating it in 
| SAE EON. ty SAS. AQT E Hae B00, connection with every. individual case. His treatment of the whole subject — 
Oo ay S : | ris i : : 
. a ane : & 


a Jee ‘EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA - Tyo. 


also dispense’ me ith much that I might otherwise have had to say here 
and that too is a just cause for gratitude on my part. I must. add tha 
without his translation of the consecutive Pali text before me I could not 
in the absence of other assistance, have produced an intelligible version ¢ 
the Mén fragments at all, so far as the first six faces of the record ar 
concerned. 


67. The Pali text occupies tires out of the ten stones on which the 
whole record is engraved; the remaining seven contain the Mén version an 
supplementary matter. Speaking of the stones, Mr. Taw Sein Ko, in hi: 
Introduction to the Pali text, states that ‘‘when whole, their average dimer 
sions were about 7 feet high, 4 feet 2 inches wide, and 1 foot 3 inche: 
thick,” and that there were “¥4o lines of text to each face, and three letters 
to an inch.” This, however, seems to be merely an approximate statement 
for the number of lines varies on the different faces. All the stones have 
_ been broken into many fragments, of which about half seem to be Jost. !} 
“has been my duty to piece together the Mén portion that is still availablh 
on thirty-three fragments. This was no easy task, and without the help © 
‘Mr. Taw Sein Ko’s translation of the Pali text, it would, at the time wher 
T took it in hand, have been (for me at any rate) a perfectly impossible one 
The general correspondence of the two texts may be indicated thus :— 


Pali Text, — Mim Text. 
_ First stone, obverse (North) Fourth stqne, obverse (North), Face A. 
_ First stone, reverse (South) | Fourth stone, reverse (South), Face s 
saat Se ‘Fifth stone, obverse (N. pelos Cc, 
o et ae cen gQ ty 
ae Second ‘stone, obverse (N.) Fifth stone, obverse (N. ),; Face C, from 
ra ae 1. 49. . 
Fifth stone, reverse (S.), ‘Face D. 


a 7 - Sixth stone, obverse «N. j, Face E, to 


Second stone, reverse (S.) "Sixth stone, obverse (N,), Face E, teeny 
oe | Ee: ore ee 
Sixth Sane: reverse “S.); Face F, to 


about 1. As. 


PARTI] MON INSCRIPTIONS 3 
Third stone, obverse (N.) Sixth stone, reverse (S.), Face F, frome 
about |. 42. 


Seventh stone, obverse (N,), Face G. 
Seventh stone, reverse (S.), Face H, to 


| | lL 8. 
. Third stone, reverse (S.) . Seventh stone, reverse (S.), Face H, 
from |. 8, 


Eighth stone, obverse (N.), Face J. 
The end of the Pali text almost coincides with the bottom of the obverse 


face of Stone 8 (Face J of the M6n version). Thus the latter version takes 
up §0 per cent. more space than the corresponding Pali, which is on the 


whole decidedly more concise. The rasan matter, which has no 
counterpart in the P4li, is distributed as follows :— 

Eighth stone, reverse (S.), Face K. 

Ninth stone, obverse (N.), Face L. 

Ninth stone, reverse (S.), Face M. 

Tenth stone, obverse (N.), Face N.. 


The final end of the record occupied some lines on the reverse of the tenth 


, stone, but the upper part of the stone has sy i hae as. has ao 
happened in other cases. 


68. In every case the bottom portions of the several stones, being still 


Gal in the ground in their proper relative positions, served as definite 


datum points, to which the separated fragments had to be adjusted. As a 


‘rule the text has been determined from two sets of ink-impressions and 


photographs of one of these sets. In one case [H (a)] a missing fragment 
of stone is represented only by an old ink-impression found in the office of 
the Archaeological Survey Department. In two: other instances [A (b) and 

L (b)] similar old ink- -impressions have preserved for us more of the original . 
text than can now be seen on the stones themselves. These ink-impressions, 
made many years ago, had been produced as negatives by inking the face of 
the stones, and consequently had to be deciphered and photographed by 
transmitted light. AS the papér was. very brittle, and in fact already broken’ 


in some places, this could only be done after they had been carefully restored | 


at the British Museum ; but by. these means -a considerable part of the text 
has been preserved hich would otherwise have been altogether lost. I am 


much indebted to Mr. Taw Sein. Ko. and his successor in. 1 office, Professor 


oe 


F Ca 


4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. " [vo 


C: Duroiselle, for information given by them which has greatly assiste 
in determining the order of the severed fragments of this record. Owi 
their help, always readily given, and to the existence of a parallel 
version of the greater part of the Mén text, I succeeded in distributi 
the fragments satisfactorily among the several faces to which they orig 
belonged. It has, therefore, been possible to take these original fac 
units, denoting them by capital letters of the alphabet, and to indica 
small letters the actual fragments now existing. I have noted the pre 
of gaps occurring between the fragments, and also the size of such 


when it could be determined with a reasonable approximation to acc 


But in many cases nothing like an accurate indication could be giv 
only a comparison with the Pali text and its translation could enable « 
estimate, and that not very closely, the amount of matter that hac 
lost. Having regard to the fragmentary state of the stones, which are 
sorts of irregular shapes and sizes, I have not thought it worth wl 
give here a full statement of their several dimensions. It suffices to sa 
the length of the lines, actually occupied by lettering, as measured « 
ink-impressions of .the few bottom portions of stones where some lin 
completely preserved, varies between 3 feet (M) and 3 feet 4% inches 
intermediate cases being 3 feet 3 inches (K) and 3 feet 33 inches ( 
and J). | | 

_ 69. The principal inscription was engraved in or after the year § 
the Burmese Common Era (= 1479-80 A.D.), the latest date mentior 
it, and is therefore one of the later rgth century records. I have ta 


here, out of its chronological order, for reasons of practical convenienc: 


is so long that it seemed best to give it priority of place, as otherv 


would perhaps have been necessary to split up the text of it betwee 


parts of the Epigraphia Birmanica, with much resulting inconveniet 
the reader.’ Further, as the Pali text served in some measure to chec 
meanings of many of the words in the Mén version, there seemed tc 


— special reason for dealing with it before proceeding to the other Me 


Mén records, in which some of these words might be expected to 
As regards the general character of these records, their seript, sp 
and peculiarities of language, | may refer to what has been said in 


(5) 7, 9 11, 13, 14, 16, and 17, reserving more detailed comment 
‘later occasion. In the Kalyani inscriptions, the letters, which (as com 
_ with the Early Mén script) have a very modern appearance, measure 


PART 11] + MON INSCRIPTIONS © 5 


% inch in height, Letter ¢ is 4 inch to $ inch long. The interlinear space 
is about & inch. The spelling is very irregular and shows the characteristics 
of a stage of transition. Thus one gets doublets such as Singhutr and 
Singhuiw. It is evident that final » and / were no longer sounded. Some= 
times, as in the above case, r is written where / would have been etymo- 
logically correct; sometimes, as in the name of the month mrutkkasuitl, the 
reverse happens; but often w replaces both letters, as it normally does in 
Later Mén. In fact the spelling of Medieval M6n is about as chaotic as 
English spelling was in the Elizabethan age. But even from its very 
irregularities we derive valuable information as to the changes which had 
occurred and were proceeding in the pronunciation of the language, as the 
above cases clearly illustrate. Similarly, it is evident that by this time the 
inherent @ in many closed final syllables had acquired the sound of an open 
variety of o (something like English aw in “law,” or perhaps o in “not”), 
This is proved by such spellings as gah (E.M. gok, gohkh, goh), while in a 
few cases we see that usage was still fluctuating and the sound is represented 
occasionally by the anusvdra, even in syllables where the final consonant is 
not a velar (2g. N 13-15, dakar, cwar, dandér). Again such alternative 
forms as fradah and tadah indicate that the old infix -27~ was obsolescent 
in the 15th century: in the modern form of the language it survives in 
extremely few words, whereas in our Early M6n inscriptions it is common 
enough. But I hope to deal with these matters more fully after the other 
15th century inscriptions have been edited, rather than base any final 
conclusions on the evidence of a single record, even though it be as long as 


the present one. . . 


70. The surviving fragments of the Mén text of this record seldom 
constitute a continuous and intelligible narrative for more than a few con- 
secutive lines. While for the most part resisting the temptation to restore in 
the text by conjectures of my own the parts that are lost, save where such 
restoration was practically certain, and the faet has been duly noted, I have 
felt bound to do something to render the English translation readable. 
Accordingly, in Faces A-F, I have used Mr. Taw Sein Ko’s English 
translation of the Pali text as a sort of mortar to cement together the frag- 
ments of the Mén stones, without doing violence to the one or to the other 
more than the circumstances necessitated. Certain trifling verbal alterations 
have been made in the Pali portions, in order to adapt them to the termino- 
logy which I had adopted in translating the M6én. The portions of text 


SOt> 28 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA -  [VOL, 


introduced from the Pali have, in the translation, been put within sq 
brackets, in order to distinguish them from the surviving Mén fragme 
This process of dovetailing had, however, its limitations. The Mén tex 
by no means a close rendering of the Pali (or v¢ce versa), On the contr 
it is often more like an expanded paraphrase. In a good many cases I | 
found it impossible to fit the M&n fragments into the framework of the 
version and have been compelled to present them in my translation in t 
fragmentary state and relegate the more or less corresponding passage 
Mr. Taw Sein Ko’s version of the Pali into footnotes, where they will s, 
aS a commentary to make the general course of the mutilated Mé6n 
more intelligible than it would otherwise have been. All this has invo 
an immense amount .of trouble, and I have often had occasion to ana 
matize with heart-felt sincerity the vandals, whoever they were, who 
their worst in breaking up this record. | 


i. The Text was already set up in print, the Translation based upo 
and its Pali counterpart (so far as the latter extended) was complet 
manuscript, and a Descriptive Account had also been prepared, when 
important discovery was made which threw a flood of light on Faces C€ 
N, inclusive. My friend Mr. Robert Halliday, to whose continual assistz 
in the interpretation of the Mé6n inscriptions I am so deeply indeb 
happened to read some portions of the Text over with a Mén monk, U TI 
wuntha by name, who presently identified them with the contents of a pe 
leaf manuscript which he had formerly read. This manuscript, which wz 
work on stmd@s, was found shortly afterwards in the Kahnyaw monastery 
Kahnyaw village, Bilugyun, and another copy was discovered in the Berr 
Free Library, Rangoon. Mr. Halliday was good enough to have the - 
manuscript (which I have called A) copied and personally to collate wit 
the text of the second one (B). It turned out that the manuscripts inclu 
that portion of our record which began at the end of Face F and contin 

beyond Face N to the conclusion of the whole record, A comparison 

~ the surviving portions of the fragmentary stone text showed that the mez 

~ script. copies, though by no means exact verbatim ones,—inasmuch as 
spelling has been modernized and there are a great number of m; 

_ interpolations, omissions, and alterations—are nevertheless substantially 
- copies’ of the stone original, made at a time when the latter had not b 

_ broken in pieces and was still in a relatively good state of preservati 


Lae . 


PART 11] > MON INSCRIPTIONS | 4 


Consequently -the evidence of these manuscript copies was at once seex to 
be of very great value, and it has been considered imperative to print the 
continuous text of the manuscripts at the foot of the corresponding ~ 
fragmentary Text of the stones and to rewrite the translation of Faces G-N 
accordingly, The introductory portion of the manuscript text, giving merely 
a very brief abstract of the main contents of the first part of the record 
and adding nothing thereto, has not been reproduced, nor has the conclusion, 
which deals with a number of simds unconnected with our subject. I have 
not attempted anything like a critical edition of the manuscript text, a task 
which would have been beyond my power, especially as only two manuscripts 
are available: my purpose has been merely to use them as secondary 
evidence complementary to the Text of the stones themselves. The > 
discovery of this new material has, of course, inevitably caused some delay 
in the publication of our record, but has enabled me to produce a much 
more satisfactory treatment of it than would otherwise have been possible. — 


72. The principal inscription, besides being very long, is also to a large 
extent highly technical in character, being mainly concerned with minute 
details of Buddhist ritual, which (it is to be feared) will be of no very great 
interest to the general reader and are already on record in the Pali text 
and its translation. The chief importance of the Mén version is linguistic; 
it illustrates in considerable detail an interesting stage in the evolution of the 
language, more or less intermediate between the Early Mén of Kyansittha’s 
inscriptions and the language of the present day. Still it may be convenient 
to mention here, very briefly, that its main purport is to relate the 
reintroduction, by the pious and learned King Dhammaceti of Pegu,—in these 
inscriptions always referred to by his other name, Ramadhipati,—of a 
canonically valid monastic succession from Ceylon, where he held that such 
a succession had been preserved, while in Lower Burma the monastic order 
thad long been split up into schismatical sects. The technical validity of 
such succession depends not merely on the ordination in due form of 
all concerned in handing it down by successive ordinations, but also on the 
previous proper consecration of the places where the ordinations are carried © 
out. This condition.involves many refinements, discussed at some length — 
in our record, into which I need not enter here. Suffice it to say that 
when an adequate number of validly ordained. monks had become available, - 
King Dhammaceti caused them to consecrate in due form a stmé, or 

: | : 


m. 


Last 


instructions, to the Order. If we take this as 


_ authority on the other, 


74. The general headings of the chief contents briefly 


_Feformation of the Buddhist Order 
- Suvappabhimi, bes: 


kingdom, is too wel 


8 __-_- EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ ve 


ordination site, at Pepu, to which he gave the name of Kalyanisi 
remembrance of the fact that the monks whom he had sent to ( 
had received their reordination in a sima on the Kalyani River ij 
island. Subsequently a large number of ecclesiastics of the Mén ki 
submitted, on their own motion, to reordination at the hands of the 

who had been reordained in Ceylon, thus healing the existing s: 
and reuniting the Order on the basis of a canonically valid succession. 
king also, with the approbation of the Order, issued a set of rules to 

that, for the future, ordination should only be performed on suitable pe 
and that monks who did not conform to the canonical rules should lea 
Order and become laymen. The principal ‘inscription closes with a pi 
of some length wherein it is pointed out that in this course of conduct 


Dhammaceti was but following the great examples set by Buddhist mo: 
of olden time. ; | : 


_ 73. It would: seem that in the reformations of Buddhism the civil 
frequently took a very leading part, and that the problem of the re 
between Church and State, never entirely settled in Medieval and N 
Europe, was solved ambulando in Buddhist Asia, whenever there y 


orthodox monarch with power to carry out his ideas. It will be remem 


however, that in. Dhammaceti’ 
had been a monk himsel 
incident of his escape 


S case there were special circumstances, 
f, and his romantic history, including the cele 
; from Ava with the Mén Princess whose daugh 
subsequently married and whom he succeeded on the throne of the 

3 1 known to require repetition here. It is no w 
therefore, that when he was king his influence over the ecclesiastical 
of his realm was very strong, though it must be noted that our insc 
throughout represents him as making Suggestions, rather than issuing 
nstruction: a fair statement ¢ 
situation, it represents. a nicely poised balance of 
astical autocracy. on the one ha 


| Ae adir referred to 
are distributed in the principal inscription as follows :—» 
From the missing beginning of the record to A 15. King A 


j and the mission’ of Sona and Utt 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS . g 


A 16-20. Decline and fall of Thatén; and introduction of purjfied 
Buddhism into Upper Burma. 7 

A 20o—B 31. Origin and consequences of the schismatical divisions 
of the Order in Burma, with special reference to the M6n country. 

B 32—D 51. King Dhammaceti’s considerations as to the pre- 
requisites for the healing of the schisms (viz, canonically valid reordination, 
involving duly consecrated simds or ordination sites), with a review of the 
Sinhalese reformations. | | 

D s2-—-E 39. King Dhammaceti requests a group of monks to 
proceed to Ceylon for reordination. Arrangements for the journey ; and 
departure of the monks in two ships. | 

E 39—F 21. Arrival of the ships in Ceylon; reception by the king 
of Ceylon, reordination of the monks, and departure of one party of them, 
who returned in safety to Rangoon. | 

F 21-42. Shipwreck of the other party of monks and ultimate 
return of some of them. 

F 42-55. King Dhammaceti’s reception of the first party of monks, 

Missing portion and G 1-12, Preparations for the consecration of the 
Kalyanisima. Dhammaceti’s considerations as to the conditions for the valid 
consecration of simés. 

G 12~35. Details of the actual consecration itself. 

G 35—H 41 and part of the missing portion. Reordination of many 
monks by the monks reordained in Ceylon. 4 kes 

Part of the missing portion and J 1-26. Dhammaceti’s message as 
to the qualifications of future candidates for ordination. Deprivation of 
monks who would not conform. Number of the monks reordained and 


novices newly ordained. 
J 26-44. Conclusion: a review of former reformations and an 


: aspiration that in after times all impurities in religion might be cast out by 


future kings and monks. es sis | 

75. As indicated above, the story of the ecclesiastical mission to Ceylon 
is prefaced by a good deal of historical matter relating to earlier periods 1 
the long history of “Buddhism, and particularly to its vicissitudes in Ceylon 
and its introduction and development in Burma. The Precise position of 
Suvannabhiimi is not beyond doubt, but its early missionaries, Sona and 


to | - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo 


Uttara, have long been claimed by Burma as the founders of their brar 
the Church; and though the tale has been embellished with many lege 
accretions in the course of ages, it can hardly on that account be disn 
as being altogether devoid of foundation. Evidence is gradually accumu 
from -various different quarters which tends to show that Indian infl 
made itself felt in Indo-China from about the beginning of the Christiai 
ot possibly even two or three centuries before that date; and there : 
“to be nothing antecedently improbable in the story of a Buddhist m 
being sent there at a relatively early period, though it may well be haza 
at present to attempt to fix that date exactly. Subsequently the eccl 
tical relations of Burma were mainly with Ceylon and particulars are 

of several cases of monks from the former country visiting the latter, < 
some instances being ordained there. It is an interesting example < 
solidarity of the Buddhist world of those days that one of the Ceylon 1 
who, in his turn, went to Burma and settled there, subsequently sail 
Malayadipa and for a time became the spiritual preceptor of the king o 
country. This is reported to have happened towards the end of the 
century, and probably Malayadipa represents the historic state of Sri V 
centring at Palembang in Southern Sumatra, which is known to 
flourished as a. Buddhist kingdom from the time of the Chinese p 
I Tsing. (who visited it late in the 7th century) down to well in the 
century. It is unfortunate that the M6n text fails us here, for we shoul 
to know the vernacular equivalent for ‘ Malayadipa.” But perhaps we 
legitimately infer it from the ‘Glass Palace, Chronicle,” which is in 
based on our record and gives it as “ Mallayu island” (p. 145). Ou 
contains Mén forms of other geographical names. Thus “ Ramafifiac 
the Pali name for the M6n kingdom of Lower Burma at that peri 
_ regularly rendered by “ this M6én (rman) country of ours,’ which incide 
furnishes us with an acceptable etymological basis for the Pali 

Similarly, where the Pali has “ Kamboja,’ the Mén has “Krom.” ’ 
Kroms are mentioned on pp. 22, 45, of the composite volume Sudha 
vattrajavamsa (Pak Lat, A, Budh. 2453), The second of these pas 
speaks of an army of them as coming from Chieng Mai, so that they 
probably Laos or Shans rather than Cambojans. But*the point is do 
? and has been learnedly discussed by Professor G. H. Luce in the Fo 
of the. Burma Research Society, Vol. XII, Part I, pp. 39-45. 


PART Il] MON INSCRIPTIONS | ri 


76, In the notes appended to my translation of the principal inscription 
I have drawn attention to any substantial differences between the Mén and 
Pali texts that I have noticed; and in such cases ‘I have also endeavoured 
to see to what extent either of them was in agreement with the fragmentary 
Pali text of the first three stones. But I have not attempted a thorough-. 
going collation of this latter text with that of Mr. Taw Sein Ko, as (apart 
from my want of qualifications for such a task) it did not appear to come 
within the scope of my work as editor of the Mén fragments, It would 
seem desirable that some Pali scholar should eventually undertake it. 


77. The entirely new matter contained on Faces K-N requires special 
mention. These faces contain fragments of three inscriptions which may be 
described as appendices to the principal inscription and are so closely 
connected with it that they are most conveniently included under the same 
general heading. The distribution of this supplementary matter on the last 
four stones has already been indicated in § 67. The fortunate discovery of 
the manuscript copies mentioned in § 71 has revealed its full purport, the 
beginning (and a good deal more) of each appendix having been lost on the 
stones themselves. The first one relates that after the consecration of the 
Kalyanisimd, and (according to the manuscripts) beginning with the year 
838 of the Common Era (1476-7 A.D.), a number of other stimds were 
consecrated by the monks who had been reordained in Ceylon. This 
inscription then resolves itself into a long list of such stmds, distributed over 
various towns and villages of the M8n kingdom; and, subject to the loss of | 
a few lines on the top of Face L (which are, however, preserved in the 
manuscripts), it continued in this strain till it came to an end on the roth 
line of that face, Though in the main a mere catalogue, it has a certain 
topographical interest ; and possibly local enquiry may enable some of these 
sacred sites to be identified even now. | 


‘ 48. The second appendix (Face M) describes the ceremonial that took 
place (according to the manuscripts in the year 839 of the Common Era, 
1477-8 A.D.) in connection with the planting of a Bodhi tree and the 
enshrining of a relic and certain sacred statues in a ceftya in the immediate 
vicinity of the Kalyapisima. It seems probable that the Bodhi tree had been 
raised from seed brought back from Ceylon by the ecclesiastical mission, as 
mentioned in the principal inscription (Face F 51-2). As regards the relic, 
which is termed ‘“‘relic of the exalted. Buddha,” I am not quite clear 


@ 


a 


1a _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 3 [ 


in my mind as to what it really was. The Pali version of the 

inscription (third stone, obverse) speaks of “an image of the Hol: 
Relic”; but the corresponding Mén passage (l.c., supra) says 
about it, and it looks as if some words had been accidentally omitte 
On Face M we repeatedly find the words dhdt patimérup, whic 
mean either “relic consisting of an image” (7.2, of the above mention 
Tooth, of Ceylon), or ‘relic and image.’ As our text in M 19, 23, 
separates the two words by a double stop and in M 22 by the ex 
kwom ku, “together with,’ I have treated them in my. translation 
separate objects. Probably the “image’’ was the replica of the Hol 
in any case; the relic may have been some object closely associat 
Buddha. It is interesting to note that the festival given in connect 
the ceremonial enshrining of these objects included dancing, sword p 
the like, and subsequently the sacred objects received the solemn 
that is usual on occasions of royal anointment (M 31-2). This ir 
ends with 1. 39 of Face M. Nera. 


79. The third appendix (Face N) records in considerable’ de 
elaborate arrangements made (according to the manuscripts in the 3 
of the Common Era, 1479-80 A.D.) in connection with the ordin 
monks of six hundred and one sémaneras (deacons or novices), « 
those mentioned at J 25 in the principal inscription. They were div 
six companies, each of which was put in charge of a prince or ot 
personage, who marshalled them; and they went in procession, ir 
order, to the place of ordination. The end of the record, as show 
manuscript copies, ran over into the upper part of the reverse face 
10, but. is not represented in the surviving . fragments, as the uppe 
that stone (as well as of several others) is lost. 


80. Seventeen of the leading verifiable dates in the principal ir 
have been calculated by Mr, Swamikannu Pillai, the learned a 
“Indian Chronology” and ‘“ Indian Ephemeris,” and a list of them 
on p. 58 of the Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological 
Burma (1922), while some explanatory statements are given on 


the same Report. Owing to an unfortunate inadvertence, Nos. 1, 


and 6 of the list have been attributed to the wrong A.D. years, 


therefore quite incorrect. No, 1 is of the Burmese year 837 (1475 
and Nos, 3-6 are of the year 838 (1476-7 A.D.), and all fiv 


Lol 


c 


- 


PART I] - MON INSCRIPTIONS | 13 


1476 A.D. This unfortunate error led Mr, Swamikannu Pillai to contradict 
the distinct statement of our record (both Pali and Mé6n) that the month of 
Asadha was intercalated in the year in which date No. 4 falls, as was in fact 
the case. I have endeavoured in the notes to the Translation to give the 
equivalents of the leading dates of the record. But-.nothing very material 
from the historical point of view turns on any of its verifiable dates, as they 
merely record the precise times of incidents in the sending of the ecclesias- 
tical mission to Ceylon (January, 1476), its adventures there in the spring and 
summer of that year, and the events that subsequently occurred, particularly. 
the consecration of the Kalyinisima (November, of the same year). 


81. The most important date in the whole record is, perhaps, the one 
which states that 2002 years of the Buddhist Era had elapsed when 
Dhammaceti ruled at Pegu (B 32; and in the Pali, first stone, reverse), the 
Pali also adding that it was the year 820 of the Burmese Era (1458-9 A.D.) 
This does not agree with the reckoning in Phayre’s History of Burma, which 
on p. 84 gives 1460 A.D. and on p. 290 the Burmese year 822 as the date 
of Dhammaceti’s accession to the throne, while the Mé6n chronicles give 
other, divergent, dates. On this point the contemporary evidence of our 
record must be preferred. But as to the earlier dates that it contains, one 
cannot be sure that its authority for them is anything better than tradition 
and it seems hardly worth while to discuss them here. The. one already 
referred to in § 75 in relation to the voyage of a Ceylon monk to Malaya- 
dipa is connected in the P&li text (first stone, obverse) with an event that 
fixes it in the reign of King Narapatijayasiira, ze, according to Phayre 
(op. cit, p. 289), AD. 1167-1204 (cf. A 37-42); and the date given for 
the’ establishment of Pali: Buddhism at Pagan consequent on the Burmese 
conquest of Thatdn is the now generally accepted one, A.D. 1057 (A 19, 
and Pali first stone, obverse). But Phayre (of. c@?., pp. 23, 37, 281) — 
gives dates for the accession and death of the conqueror Anawrahta which 
are evidently derived from a different line of tradition and are certainly 
wrong. The date given in our record is at any rate compatible with the 
information hitherto made available from the 11th century inscriptions, and 
may be regarded as a good ‘provisional pppiesinalion, until more pres 
evidence is produced, Pat 

82, In my translation I have ‘generally given the proper names at 
persons in the form which they bear in the. Pali text, — _ Where the Mén form 


od 


. PY 


4 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA f VOL, II 


differs, it can be found in the Mé6n text. I must here again record my 
grateful acknowledgments for the invaluable assistance of my _ friend 
Mr. Robert Halliday in providing me with the meanings of many Mén 
words that were not to be found in Haswell’s Vocadulavy and were not 
sufficiently determined by their context. In a few cases where some doubt 
remained in my mind as to whether my own rendering of an ambiguous 
passage or Mr. Halliday’s alternative version was the right one, I have 
ventured to put one of the two into the translation while relegating the 
other to a footnote, in the hope that future research may decide which, 
if either, is correct. The meanings of a certain number of words still remain 
‘undetermined, and on these I trust that we may get further light some day 
as research in Mén texts, ancient and modern, goes on and develops. 


Text. 
A 
_ (Fragments @ and 4.)! 


FO Be OE Nace ae Nal ak Re Cahiers tee a) BON ge es ae es ae 


a @€. &@ ¢ @ @ © 89 8 © © © © © s @ we oo ¢ & © @ &@ © & @ @ FF Oe ewe we we he Hh HO we 


[Moggaliput]ta[ti]ssama[ha]the ° [twah tlu(y)‘. 2... 


* 
oe @ © @ # @ © @ 2 8 ' 8 &@ 6 se. e 6 : ? eo * ° 


» * * * * 


_ ey eo ee ee ee we me we we ow 


eo © @ © @ e ee @ @ 


Be eee EAE ghee rine alate de un @ Road ee de sid om. ardine Binet. Aes 


P ane: ‘ 
2 Se ee eRe ee ee ee ee ae we le ww 


low i rau tila pu[iy] mahathe VASE (ont eg es 


os + © #© £ © © © «2 2 © 


FORE NEE TPES ASA By BE IE OR a a eel iw, et BE! mw cg Se 


1 Mr. Halliday’s own Dictionary, issued after my translation of the text (as originally drafted) 


had. been done, has been of 
_ light of the new. M.S. material, 

* The beginning of the inscription, amounting to about ten lines, is lost, The two fragments 
here following do not join exactly at any point and both margins are missing. Accordingly, the dots 
are only an indefinite indication that something is lost, both at the beginnings and ends of the lines 
me in ae Gee two fragments, where they form two incomplete portions. of a line 
_ Mragment 61s to the right and begins at 1. 1, continuing to | i 
goes on wll ond of te Gee peo g to |. 30, Fragment a begins at 1 8 and 
re The first three syllables have been restored from the Pali version. 4 Or ke? 

: ae ® . - ‘ . rn 

e 


reat help to me in rewriting the second part of the translation in the 


e 


+ 


PART Il] MON INSCRIPTIONS : +s 


Bi cas Si ag Rea eS ae ee bl Ne ee We a ee ee Pla oe ae ee 


See ee ee ee ae ree iio 
sun gah | ni mwoy crawek kitu [m]ak 1 cuiw ku cuip bape[n] 
CU) Pade ee Senso Se. Bina nd tevin eies ee Ee esp es te 


* 
a a a a 2 a 
ed 2 


othe Mae Hicks dye ee eid Oost Khe rhe Shae waren are ete Moeeal |: 
i[putt atissamahathe? 1 bicdrana mwoy tuy | pday kA anaga[t]. . 


eo 8 8 @ © @ © © @ © © &@ © @ © © © 9 © © 2 © © B © @ & & 


Be ee eR a eh ee Re ee 8 ee Ree ee eee € 


hbase Mn, pt Mics bt nto he cs dea vanh SR Si a Sa aoe ge oe SOLUTE) 
(pdjay thin paccantarah ta gah .......... tila. puly 
Mabhindathé [gah ila. (whe se atk a es : 


By eon Fa ty OE AL eee Se et Ot SA lay ca CaP GME he, Bin eRe Taal leet sess aha 
ie shee us Cartes he inl OTe lant ay hPa a ar ge OE wa ah aid cam, Beech ee 
tau rah rman rat pday kala (tu)y tila puiy tipuin the ba ma 
twah bgah So[mathe Uttarathe]‘ 2.6... eee eee eee 


a 


5 Re gk BLE Ee aS oi ue Se Oe a Beg Aap 
kyak Kelasapow | [mwoly lapak gah 1 tau latu tmol! | mwoly 
Tap aie) eet ad at gar vet aie Wee oe | 


8. * * ” . * * a e . s » ® 7 * = o ° 2 ® 2 * » * ° 2 e es ° i « @ LJ « e gah I het 
hah * » &* 8 - cy * .* a °* oe @ e @¢ © * o @¢ @ ee 6 @ ° . ry (i) . ruth kwon 
smin ma dah ........ .° 1 rakuih brau ma tau pday maha- 


sami(t] tuin tlun tuy (I)... 2 ee eee ee ee 


6. SiG eee eRe ae ee Ue en ee ee LON 


smin mwoy ktuiw dah rakuih [brau]............ smih gah 
tuy | kwom ku pariwa masun klamh gah tuin tluh ni mahamilt]* 


rat kha gafh]......-e ee 


1 Confecturally restored. 

% The first two syllables have been restored. 

3 Here there are some, letters looking like a repetition of ¢a gah (or perhaps ¢awah ?) followed 
by something else, possibly merely 11. 

4 Restored with the help of the Pali version, 

5 Conjecturally restored, following the Pali. wae 7 

® The first part of the missing passage looks something like su#t or puth. 

& Error for mahdsamit, . 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


[ VOL, U1 
NOR ae St El Sedan ig eB ge ae Be 2.2... gah dafh jajd[isut]n ba | ma gap 
gwow sphek gmak ma gluin ni .............. gamluin 


‘to’ gah (pa) tuy bak bdau kle’ rakuih ta gah rat kha gah 
rakuih .. 6 6. eee 


Dh pig Ge Ce cre aa e (ham Kilw. WaRb.., aha Ban 
go’ plan (b)w(a)y (k)r(au) gah | uit janok .......... gah 
tila puiy [tiJpuin the ba cut lar puman pumwoy tuy 1 ku manih 
[gamluinJ*..... re 


12, . ee eee ee ee ee ees [kfufilw dhar Brahmaljaljasut (tuy) 1 
[Jajjun sadik kuiw flah gamlui[A] tuy t pa[n] (ia)(m)... 2... 
.... [Saranasila® ra 1 pda[y] k[al]Ja gah 1 manth turan cwoh lAim 
gah [i go’ gran ket] ........4 


13. ....+....... [Ini]Jm masun klamh tit pa gam-[f ra] 1 (pa) [tam 

Ge n(a)* gah (hjef samat kwon nak t(u)y* ma (dah)?. 2... 8 
tee eee eee. (thd)n rah rman gah 1 het [ma] ha mik kuiw 
ka(nd)o(k) k[l]a barhu(m® rap) [gah]ia......... 


14. ............. kduip rakuih jaku jadisuin (gah® da)h k{s@] tuy 
fiah la(w tlujA” tau lati (kduip). 2... 2... 00. eee 
. +. (h) 1 atuin ru[p] gah kuim | la[ta k]duip [t]mo’ [TuiJk Gala] 


(jaWEl) wid: ee ate eo 


15... ........{h) nwolm tlaus! pa tam ni tila] puiy [ba ma 
tluja p[t]an [sasa]na [pday tha]n [duJa rman A BAN ia ode Se a 


me ers vere ee ees. () guiw tau pdaly] dun rman Iukau 
ka ma lo’] san heh rat kha kala ma jlin 


i i ee | 


1 The illegible part ends, apparently, in & and looks r ike : ich probably b 
an error for fo’), But it may ha dibee word. ager re enn eae re ene oF 
4 The last syllable has been restored, | 
: ® The first two syllables have been restored. 
* Probably the first of the lost words would be dhar, 
5 There is no # visible, 
¢ There seems to be a trace of a x, 
7 Very doubtful, though the first letter must be d or a. , 
* The final might be 4 The next word is also doubtful, 
9 Here there may be a stop, there being a small space available. 
1@ The initial might be 4, and there is no x visible, 
Very doubtful. 


‘ 


G 


* 


e 


of 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 17 
16. ee ee eee ee ma dafk}o’ tafy]an? a [t]a(nah) [ku]im [lo]{z 1) 
[yJay (dwi kyi)m* to’ gafh] .......... ee rere 


..... (lor + het bhay (k]Janwor ba{yJuiw ma jno[k ma k]tuiw 
dah kuim [law]! . 

7. ...2---..- gah tuim® flojr i [tha]n rah [duh] rman gah 1 ma 
[dujin [duin 4 ku]* dar[h]a[t] gah da[h] uiw rat. ........ 

.... fuiw da] ci 1 gam[-]i tufy] 
ma nisray t[au] rah rman 1 ma (tau)® [tlau [pday than] rah 
Bra an SAT Wee ke Soe ae eae % | 

8. ...,..... (h)t ha [samJah ratha [tuy] 1 (sisana) [ma duin] 
duin [4 k]u darhat [glah dah A rai®.... 2.0. 
vee eee es» (Siriyakuma)? [ma du] yamu smin Manohor 
ma pkan ra[fi tlau duh [Su]dhui[m gah t sAdsand] ......... 


. 6 © * © © © # © we 


Cr ee ed 


a ee 


19, ...... [kyak® trjay [ma pa] par[i]nibban 1 dah lhim tfurau klath 
enja[m} (1) [sasana ma ta]n duf rman da[h] lhim (pi)? 2... 
ee ee ee ee eee ee ee ee ee LEYS tray ma pa parinibban 
dah Ihim [turau kJlath mwoy cndms! pday sa[kkJarat® 2... . 

20, ......([t]wah bgah duf Arimaddanapur ra it [nor] (enim™ sdsana 
ma) [cuip] duf. Pukim gah: dafh}] ......-50. 4.0 2c seen 
eee eee ee eee [813f2] « khd gah s[m]in Sirisalhghab jodhi- 
Parakkamabahu 1 ma caah sisand...... 


1 Looks like fahdn, but I think it must be the equivalent of LM. fayda, dagydn, “to dispute.” 

2 Very doubtiul, especially the d, the 7 (which might be #), and the » (which might be 4). 
Before the d there may be a stop. But probably the expression represents the L.M. yad 77 khyam, 
“ plague, pestilence,” 

8 Error for kuim, 

N 4 The w is not clear, 

§ Very doubtful: the initial is probably #, but there may be something subscript, and the vowel 
is quile uncertain. 

6 The first letter of this missing passage appears to be d or a, 

7 Traces of the last two syllables are visible: the rest has been restored from the Pail. 

8 Restored, 

3 Very doubtful, Put in*view of the traditional chronology, as embodied in the Pali version, the 
time would be 1382 years alter the Council which sent out the missionaries and 1364 years after the 
establishment of Buddhism in the Mén country. Apparently the Pali does not give the figure hera, 

1) Hete appear to have followed numerals, the Pali having 419. 

Y Vary doubtful. 

2 
. i 


18 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, Il 


ai. ........ kala gah 1 mahathe pais eke aca’ smiifh Pukim 2 

| sa" IJahwor (c)e(ti)®... 2... eC Pee re Tey re 
.. (tko)[’ Sin]ghuiw sah tuy | — om [ku san glamf[lujin cuith 5 
do]k [khan p]day ...... 


° 


2a. ........,puiy’ kwan rman 1 twah mahathe Ar[iyawarhsa® 1 
oe Avie yawamsa bun Cal he ea. aaa: Se ad 
ween eeeeee ss [mahalthe Krabanh® dam[y]on [tu]n gah 

eeak maha[the Prajnada[s]* are 


23. ...... .. lokijjhan 1 [tila] puiy t(au) Sudhuim ()........ 
ec 8 (tila: puiy- a) twal tate Jaw’ dokea ewe @ eae ee 
wee eee eee ee ees (tuly i cau pindapat pday duf [Sudhuim 

kuim] | tradah [t]ila puty tuly] t[yjah...... 


ry or re ee {fijah dun Sfudhui]Jm ma 4 banik pday [than] 
(Magadha) ® eae nee ee miaoR: (BSR SU sy as ane os ea 


Sees GHEE EWE SG OE eee ae t {Aah ma [em] 
tradah tila [puiy] (ma) ® [go} lok[i ijhaln rwon 1 (na)" gati 


» + & B 


a5. ...... [simalni mwoy kwan [fijJah twin Cha[pat] (pday rah 
Kusim)™ gafh]1 [blak a ([tlila puiy (thle... ee 
te eee eee eee [Singhtiv™ gah 1] sah gamluih ma tau 
pday tko’ Singhuiw sman cat bat m[wlay.... 


1The last syllable of the name and also the word acd are meget but the restoration is 
supported by the Pali, 


# The stop and the s are not quite certain, 

® Only the ¢ is preserved: the rest has been restored from the Pall. 

4 It may be supposed that this word was preceded by fila. 

5 Although it occurs twice in this: line, the last syllable of this name is doubtful, 
supported by the Pali. 

® Or conceivably *tu%. The Pali form is Kappuhganagara i 
to be the reading of the inscription itself, which has 34 for 
Krabaa is right after all. 


7 Possibly we should supply si to end the name, as in the Pali form in the inscription itseli 
(The MS. has °si, apparently.) ption itself, 


® The first part of the undeciphered passage looks rather like yah cee 
9 Very doubtful, but supported by the Pali, 


10 The ma is by no means clear: so far as appearances go, it igh be sa or rn 
il Very doubtful. 


14 Conjecturally restored on the basis of the Pali version, but very doubtful, 
418 Only the last three letters are visible, but the restoration is a safe one, 


\ . 


But it is 


in the MS. But this does not appear 
fp and ne visible u. So probally 


a. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 19 


a6. ......{Mahindalth[e]? ma tluA ptan sasana pday [t]ko[’] Singhuiw 
sf Geidigud EN AD LY TOU “acts ener bdce oo aut s Gye tel eee ares ye 
.... .. [Sona]thfe]! Uttarathe ma 4 ptan sdsan[a pday] 
Suwannabhurh kuim ci gah tuy!.......00- 

a7. ....[{kwan* fijah Chapato ga{h] 1 mhithe Uttaraj(uiw) gah .... 
ode aa Leyak) piday| del (Singhuiw)* a0. eo 2 oS ao 
eee ee ee ee eee es [Ruim]* 1 dapuin kwon fiah Chapat{o] 
(gah kha) [t]ala puiy ma[hathe}.........-.. 

28. ...... (h)1i fiafn ku kJalo jRat (puji(y san dah uiw da ci 1) 
PREUMANDOGNa Oa | cca cag ie wea a ene ae EK an eee Se 
eee e ee ease es) Grasok cuit sdafh] tau ku ey difk tjun 1 
SY Gk Sel ou 6 ee cee a ee 


ag. .... (Slinghuiw ra 1 [dalpuin gah kat [blatwon [uit] tuy (1)... 
ON a rae we a GOR OL). 2h a. ash hs arch oe Aw pete de ok Wah oR eee 
. . (mahathe Chapato) * fiah gah 11 mahathe Chapato gah! kala 
30. ....y 1 mahathe Siwili kwon fiah Tamal(itthi)?’ ........ 
Pmiahs ithe “Lama dar wy sea oe eeee a ee ae eye 
Sai doled Sivek & a Ee ork ae (Kanctpura ® mway |) [mahalthe 

Fetus (woe) 6c wages 


gi. ...... yt tifla pam]ray masun dok [k]baa [tuy c]au tlu[fA cuip] 
Got: ACusint ee A se ee a se ead Re ee ow 4 


* © 8 © 6 eB em mi tm mw 


Se a a ee a 


32. ...... (ta)g(u)in Pukafm c]nim gah: [ha] ga[tap tuy +» mwoly 
Waly TAQUIO Day Wihe (EA ee ae eee, Sone aah Sw ig gears 


i ee ed es 2 # & *£ #  * £ &© © e + eH ee -_— * 2 oe # 


i * *~_ 2 8 o® 


1 Both these conjectural restorations are based on the Pali and are practically certain, 

2 Conjecturally restored. Perhaps the spelling here should be bwon, 

8 Conjecturally restored. 4 The initial letter is doubtful. 

® Hardly legible, but supported by the Pali, 

® Conjecturally restored. The last of the missing words apparently ended in 4 or o, 

7 Restored with the help of the Pali version. 

® Or °mu®, The last syllable is restored, 

§ Conjecturally restored on the basis of the PSli, and extremely doubtful except the ef (which is 
certain). 

10-Or possibly Xa. Presumably this is the first part of the name of this wshara.: 


20 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA fvoOL. m1 


83. --+...+.«. (Puka)m? ras mahathe ~Uttarij[uilw [tun ler 1 kia 
WIA OPIN On 4s aoe Ble eh Ge oe oe hk Ce 


i a ee a Se 2 * ££ bh of 


BAL oe goatee, we eee (to) [rat yo} tila ta’ [) akha* tuy] afca 
ae ‘paiy ma 4]. A) eat Ae. are a ete hve Gk Sh a ent exe 


a ee a ee 


a SS a a er or a 


Bait IS aay eas ee . (tila® pujiy mahathe [arhan] (ba 1 ma) 
bifmu] Sonathe Uttafrathe]! Aces epee 


i ee ee a ae 


a a ee ee ee 
i ee ee ce” es 


a a a a a ee ee} 


36. oetewecr aan — Bee oe es eee a[dhi]pat 
dafh] ufiw® ace a oni ra eR alae Sn aoa ag oe cae 


. © © © & © w @ ee © 8 es rot & ee ee ek kw kk we Ow 


Pe ER SORE eS CR OR BY oe a, ok aloe Se a eae ip a pee ak 


oe © © &© @ w@ we 


re er a we ih et RR ee Gee ae . [sa]kkarat is4g* «Thies As 
faite ni Sjif{ajghufijr 1 ma % ee 


i 2 


my se ~ e 8 8 6 ew & 
sg we we ® & & eo  F 


a ee ee ee ee ee es i Se 2 


see ee nen Bes a)* {pully to’ [AJah mas[ujn gafh 
Bee (awk sd mate) a a 


o + we © 8 8 @ we ee elm 


a a ee 


a a 


et ID ae RS BN ME Em OE GER. aide ie alee ie BE eS ge Se dg ee ow ln 


1 Conjecturally restored, with the help of the Pali version. 
4 Or, less probably, 1 &ha. . 
3. Conjecturally restored, * Restored, 


. 5 Apparently the first syllable of this word has been lost. Ore is tempted by the Pali version to 
: restore bam-ah, but this would be an unusual spelling for * Burmese,” LM. bamd, Bhamd, 
§ Looks more like uip. 7 A pretty certain restoration, 
8 The first numeral is quite obliterated. 1 follow the Pali, 
- 9% Conjecturally restored. 
1@ The ra may be.vau and the wei may be gen, 
ida two words, 
~ 1 Doubtful, but probable, 


Possibly the two syllables (if the @rst is rate) 


. : 


PART IL] MON INSCRIPTIONS ai 


BQ. we ee eee ee ee et ee ee [mahalthe Rafhula fajt *[k]et 
Dhandays: DSH 6nd. A eet we alee Sw oi wan ye ae 


2 * 6 8 &© &© &@ 2 & 8 © HF mh He Hw He ee He Re we Fe Oe F HF SF HF F F FF © wa eo & wm ew a ew 


- «¢ © & ©» & &© *© © &© © © &#© #8 @ * © 8 @& & FF © 8 #8 & &€ # © 8 & wR 


4o * * * os &¢ © /- * * * ° 7 * os ec ~ * * -— 2. * * : chi d aw {tau kuim t chlt 
Gar acme tay 1h ee eae a Gee ee A aerate cg 


rr 


+ ee 8 6 ee ee He we Oe ym mm mm mmm lm me 


Ay oobi Be wee dace ae eae © He ae Rabulathe 
dion: “hai ia AOU) a Dacha ete ws ee oe Bd gees 


a ee ee ee a a ae? 


ee 2 


AB ew ce eee eee eee ee ee eee (Y pfaben [t]uy 1 Rafhula- 
Lea Sin) DROW) a ee a Se a On oa eed 


a ee ed 


nw *_ * * * * * ca * * * * * ae * e * e * * fie * * * sail 7. 4 a * cd * * 


Wh ee Pas Boe a ee Ee Se et a a BO Bale Siw mahathel 4 
Tatas nda Nae] cs. ie owe: @ Arde Sad oe ee 


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee | Cr | ee ee ee ee ee} 


Oe, ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee 


Ath secant eek, debe s ck RDS Bk ee ce ee ae DR 4 wile 
fe ¥. ke “Paeiuli ndalth ie" 2. o0-um: aid god a eae ace oes. we ade 


Se 


Boe: Louie Beata spate os Caran Shut ae ea eee a: A ree: ae 
gah tlun 1 ma pa fidt(safgaha)®. 2... ee ee 


eo 


% Cr ee 2 


46. het> ahd ae oe paid, BOE, iahay eal had alder at ae a aie ea Ole Seg os eee 
sdalnd[o! [batwon san]... 21. eee eee ee ee eee 


ee a a ey 


*. 
7 


1 Restored, * The « is doubtful, w : 
3 Conjecturally restored; sefg seems te be traceable on the ink-impression, The Pai has 
Rdtisan gaham. 


- f 


» ealculated; but the dots at the ends of the 


22 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, UI 


(Fragment ¢.)} 


47. o r eo re op @ @ © © @ 8@ wo & &@ @ oof eo 8 @ & He BP He eH ee wo oe ew we ee we a ie cd 
- (Ta]m(u)I[indathe] (gah) » paa . . 


Pe 14 “ 
i a 


& 
* 
e 
* 
* 
* 
% 
a 
+ 
e 
: 
* 
* 
# 
* 
* 
£ 
* 


ea 8 @ 


48. ce ee ee (k)w(on) ... 
-- - Jmap daka upah a(thjin amat.... . 


*_* ¢ fe eh me ee mH om 
a a 


i i a ee ee ee” ee 


oe ae eo 


AQ weve eee eee eee eee. (tila to’ pah dok ... . t tent 
dafka) tof’ tak pa](t) | 


**_ 2 ff 


a i Te ea 
i * 


a 


SOv eee ee ee eee ee. we... ftila puiy Siwilithe do(k’ 
[T]am[ullindathe tun 1 yo’ [t]ila... 2 PALO) itis hcigea, ees 


._e © Fe & © ee 6 ew ew 
_* + » & 8 ee ee + 4 
he 
»_ em 


Ble eos ete + -++.... wiha kambd twah tila gah .. 
dah so’: ifah Siwilithe galh 1 rau] ww[o]’ (T]im[u]}[indathe] * 


eo 8 8 @ 


52. Tatts see ee eee eee. ha go’ pa waciwifiat so’ t het 
dratuy mramar [sJisana [ma sdah] (ey)* [la}r (cuit) ® 


_c © @ © © @ mw «& 
oo & 
“7 ee me Re ee tw ke 
-— * ® Oe 


53 see ee eee eee... [TA]m[ullindathe gah 1 sak gah ra tila 


fia me [1] (sabhau)* fiah [tu]y (ma tau tau)? [pday dando’] 


BP DIE A EIT 8 BAB SI aia Aly ae Tale Gg BOY! Jeane as 
r a a 


* * & a ey 


oe ® 8 «© 2s «# 


1 This fragment follows on pre 
pretty closely after the preceding piece, The left- arg i 
_ preserved, the amount missing at the beginnings of the first chi nes ae Bee ae 


Boe gal oe lines are only a ro 3 
4 This missing piece looks like pa cau, ¥ @ rough estimate, 


3 Restored, 

4 This might be read yva or vrau, 

5 Restored; the ¢ is certain and the cx probable = 

€ This looks as if it might be sand. 

7 Very doubtful. At first I was inclined to 
repeated and careful examination of the photo 
not tenable. Another conceivable veading is 

§ Conjecturally restored, 


read samavatha (with the sense of “ agree’), bat after 
graph and ink-impressions | concluded that this was 
ma kat, “who (have) learnt,” | 


% s 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS a4 


54. eee ee ee eee. [ka]m sarah tanoh rat ey ler spa ket [k]Jam 
sarah tano{h] ra gah tu[y 1! pa tah [ni gah tila puily 
SiN soi ce sc pee ttn che ian eee 

55. oe ee eee ee eee Sat to’ dah pan buk ra t tila san to[’] tuy t 
[ma d]ah tnow [sdsana ma tuijn [nd] Su[dhuim] ler mwoy bulk] 

56. atu(in)......[t]now ma tuin nit Sudhuim gah | tila to’ tnow 
fiah ma cuip kla dah] uiw ci (1) arhe’ sa bam to’ gah 1 [tiJla 
{to’ fiah pi buk tnolw fiah ma cau n& Singhufiw]......... 


* * * * * * * * - * * * * * * * * * * hall a i. * * * * * ~ * * 2 & 


Bo 
(Fragments @ and 5.)* 


beg aaieeei wa = aces (mabey [ps a: keer isi Sk as eee ated 


a a ee ee a we 
8 © 8 OH wm em mk a mwa mma mw Kaa mht 
Se a no 
hu)‘ a j k 
Booce ee ea eee esos im tana] am(hu)* afmka jamnlok]...... 
Cr 


=. 2 & FF 8 te ee he lle lm HH me he mmm mea OOH 


Be we ee ee eee». . [n] tuly ma dafh] bwok mahathe psa [krom] 


s 2 © # * He 8 ew eH hw em Oe ee ee Oh hm ew mm mam 


**- & eo ++ * © - + 


he ween e ee ee es st bwok Sah mafha|the psi krom fiah (ma).. 


. wee wa weeteeesceees [PSS krom fiah} (gab)... (kr)... 


? 
Ld (ma) lo a * » *. oa ae | nd * * - #* -_ tl *_ * * -_ eo * * 


? Restored. 

4 There are about a dozen lines missing between this and the preceding piece. Fragment a is to 
the left and runs from 1. # to 1.27. Fragment 6 begins at L 4 and continues to lL 4o, The gap 
between the two fragments has been approximately measured; but as both margins are lost, the 
amount missing at the beyinnings and ends of lines, respectively, could not be estimated, and the 
dots in those positions merely indicate that an indefinite number of letters has been lost, 

3 Practically certain, though only the last syilable is preserved. : : 

4 Conceivably ambx, 

* f 


a _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. i part] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ 8 


lc. fe eich cae ont Si es eh [m] gah tun | bwok san krom flah ma gah 1 pa! if S40 baad [jue ha. po! [hu ly kam’ saran kwom ku raft skof’ 
helt}].............. [t]uy+ [ma] dfah] bwok mahal|the hjen (djah uiw da cis dah uir nana[nikalya [hen ras] uit pdaly] 
psd] krom ga[h] cc. ee bc ee oa ne, nika[ya] tila puily....... <  # 


6. 222.4... .[bwok]® sah tray arhan gamluif ma tau pday rah 
man kuim ler 1 bwo[k] (san)? [krom gah tuy 1 rman gamluia to’ 


[gla(h ci)* 1 [i kh]a gah pday duh... 


15. ........{m]a dah tau blylaltlta (pjatibala ma st[{lujn? cat bat 
k ...{[ka]lm sarfe]aA® ma gah gah ha mwoy [hen ra 1] tila to’ 


tt te tee ee ee tuy 1 ma dah bwok bwok gafh]...... 

Teens «se [Singhui)r ler mwoly] bwok 1 dah 4 ba bwok rat 16. ......[byatta patiybala’ ra gah tuy 1 tila puly to’ gah pad... 
Peay dun Mafttma] tun gah 1 bwok saa krom [leJr [mwoy ..... [ma samut] sim ma kuiw upasa{mpada t paja [kam- 
bjwlo}k | bwok slat] the eee ce eee st tt ee eee tanah hjef (ra) [i] « akha [gah] tila pluly]....... 

: e @ a : , x : ; at way i dah 
: ee ae | Ue ee eee eek ie ee [hb] 1 al[um] gi[m]asim tuly] ma cuin 
ey ee eee bwok | bwok san Sifghuir tuly] ma dah [t]nor f t(au] go’ sodhana [tluy [ayam] 
Siwi[lithe leJr mwoy bwok i 1 &(am 4 san) [Singhuir tuly ma dah  ©=——<—C—C_.__s UA ne ee Rehdang igs ‘ 
| ghuir tuly ma dah pn ee A ON | gcacaee G48 
bwok ba i a ee Oe ee a ee Behe wo . pday [tJmo ee ¢ ee | eae d k 
. 7 5 ; ; -..e4....([K]am ma pa tam ku upasampadakam 
PES Sa es aie ++. (e)r* 1 cuifr] yat ma hap put kha fiah ma — ah on | ie (to) languiw tun (gah 1 ma) 
' niman tang 1(r Ai 4 7} , a QO} 6 a we we ew hee %~ 
sue 4 tun i (pday) [sti than fiah ha go] hap | cau [hap] & dhana] alum gamasfim] heh ma dah (ket) mai........ 
(wiha)* [kuim] 1 [tila pJuiy [O'S GAN ate o snus ae as ji ® lar lak (thuik) ° 
Ny aed Amal kui thu! 
Lor ae eee wie san Singhui aed Bere oe .. [h gama] kuim® lar laksan ma 
| halth'le ‘Tam He ok sah Sifighuir tuy ma dah tnor ¢{w]ah cs oa ee. thuik dah wisluja[glama kuim - lor 
maha[th]e [Tamal]infda ler] mwoy bwo[k | fam bwo]k san aca eee re ware ‘ cat baft] 
-am([at pjrer? cuir Pa a cscs! aie, uh gh | laksan ma ihah gah [ha] go’ cat ba[t}........ 
es oe . an ft T7718 5 
ee ee Buddhawathsamaha{the] ma gah gahi aca gna[klyak Migs, Scteten io o-k ea ee 7 bway ma ji[p] kli{p]® tuy | fiam.... 
 pdaly] Mat{tma] 4 tko’ Singhuir tuy 1 kalen (cau® thud cuip) veeeeeeaees.. [nilsray keft tuly [1 pday] Khana ma pa kam 
| [du}n Ma[ttma] (yra)® ler [AJah ma a Culp (ra) as ma [s]amut sim [gah]: yam than ma dab clu]{t]..... Pieces 
Nr ees ses [karh]m saran ku fiah 1 [p]ai” kathm sarah tanah at ee ee ee (k) mai lath ma dah cuit gah 1 trawuiw 
He ewok] tila puly_galh ler SiJhghuir (mwoy b]w[ok] + bwok assy og eee - - (da)h wifsuthgima hei] gah tuy + pday 
tila puily] Mahasa[m]i[mahathe] ee ore than ma ha mwa[y ku] wi[su]mhgdmalakkha[pa].. 2... 2... 
Chace een: nies | 
. yah 4 [bw k er) nek ' het gah. ra Pday dun Mattma Ba, atin Gh tis Senses, headed es 3 Gi opis [so|dhand ket tuy 1 samut.........., 
Ph : me akan e ener bwok 1 bwo[k Sif] ghuir [mas]un ,....h kuilm lert kam ma pa tlarh ku 
Ok 1 turau bwok dah (uit)® 0 2) ge he eae Pb: St os eg ‘ 
= See ete ea ar a | : ° , upasam[padakam gah pad] hen ra a tila pluily]........ 
1 Or possibly b trong eon 
# Restored, but Mop oe 8 Very d 1 Conceivably Aamm, though I can see no anusvara symbol, Fp eriatd il ea dta 
\ oe ah ma, and the next word is ee ae ae ery doubtful, a Eales certain, though the Jw is af peculiar shape owing to deficiency in i pace. 
” Or lar. ee i ee ae ae ' ‘ 8 Error for savan. 
? Conceivably Brey, the ; Sa ye 8 Or bihde . been restored. 
8 It is pli edie nice mae (LM, brew, “silk cloth ”). : a ee eee it small original flaw. 
Y Thie may be tead $0, belt ne newer caw (or any other word) is here at all, eeves haoel sbeeain thing being the i. The initial might be ¢, or th, 
10 Looks like ue a ee « GO not. see how that could come in here, - 8 Conjectural, t @ only ak alent be 6 ae Wa. 
11 The lat #, which can hardly be meant, 7 Here there is something that mig 
| e ast four syllables have been conjecturally restored, “18 Or ugy? ® Looks like jim &liw, 


26 — BPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  Pvon. ur - “PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS. a” 


© 43. bese ew ee 8 ete ees: ma | da[h] . a a ee ee Se ROG Fre ETE peg) ieee Ate bene Martie ge ak i colin on eee 
os 2 © 8 oo 8 6 ot tlt we ° o © @ 8 © 6 . (m ma dak) rwon® ee ee ee ee eee oe Oo) eee er een re ) 
« pday baddha[sim ku gamast|m ‘ak ler ace ; 7 [sag]ut kle’ tsoldhana] .- see eee ee eee eee nese 
Bee veer te Die. Ae . (simasath)karadosa ® ha dah 1 pday...... dg ack eeerans | ee : 
ig, Miran seca ++ eeeees. [euip* tuy] afkha] ma dak bad- Ree The Ged re ae eee Boe pase and pois Sone 
dhasim r pdaly] | axles cae '(gamasimj)*......... vette eter eee [pa parinibb]an* (gah) .... [bla 
BG. tutes laa . [wi]du[i]h [gah | rukkhasakha(disambandha) 7 I[njim ba cnfam k]ufli] @won).........--. a ete ute ae 
ese Se tele Stns ad. Ge thal Gere a. a yeu ie ht Bie ah ke[t k]wo[m k]u Se 
gamasim [ma dah da]tau ba[ddhasiJm ma sdak (wwo’) ....... nee eae cigs 
26. ()[!]ma sodhana gamasif[m]........0 0 °° = —<“<i—~—i<C (bedagama)* [tlakka bya[karana-chanda-s|attha 
ee ee Bats Pe eet Ti ah alla ten eee lS cpl ae he ly nes Sela Yor te BRL agile aah eae tg de 
Bone ape teh See e agua are G madtgte oo [gama]sim [ma dah] datau | alank{ara] og ral ee cee tal : 
baddhasi[m mJa sda[k] w[w]of’ kJuim + sodhana (enone : nce: tas a mae : 
a ear ee ee eee ee ee ae Be seared ho Mingle tae er deal catalog, Wares ee ieee eR he ve aE Oe Ter Tee See SRS aa GS 
a : ee Ree, yal] ° itera le Gt alee te neg lle ", [bhas}s [ma ka mwoy] ( (ma) * 
na[dila]k[khana jaJtacsa{ralaekchal pa ga[h] (dah)... 0 Uo. dok pen tau kwom] (ku) 2. eS ee ee Se8 resets 
28. eer ee) : woe eo ew _* 6 8 & &© © © © o@ 6 Nee Jee 6! Oe Lee 2g ri 7 aad el a h) 35. ry ; 7 , , : ion - ; : nar _ [Multti[mamandal]® (gah) 
“y. ie ‘- e =.= ¢@¢ «© ¢ *# # @ 
[anJva{ddhamasaih] | t anudasahath i fanupaheatas Ot eid ened ans [babwoy ® eee ee ee eee ae 
POG a tug leh Eee Eas ee. oon ca ee ee en ner 
) ee hee cd ao tuly] (' ha) [mwoy] ; d Nieal ai AP taba ae we dere eps é Wioeieg 3 sade teiievees ee ae 
| ku na[dijlakkhana [1 jJatas[saralakkhana]®.. 2... _ ve ta as pas a ie $i ee enw ek aes Pees 
Cee oo ee me wee wk tw ae) ta eS So ee Sa Cah 8 ey es Pe ee ee ee a a | a ar ee ec 2 
: Se ae eee wen Then] a . ‘tila oe aR TaN Naan S So deca ee oe) (tau) [k]wlom] 
a}hguiw tun gah { (sodhana) * re a, ode aR sa: AS oN a ATE Cd (ku) sa{mpl]atti ma{slu[n] . 3 ttre teen ees 
ie - ae : : ee # wm 


1 After the 4d sac seems to be 


an original flaw ; or a we must read °ka*. whi | 
ertor for °Za°, a, which would be an 


1 The first three syllables have been restored. 


Pali version. 
" ilar ire form : if it were z>wo, with superseript 7. i Sa ana eee : Be ws vaight he written aldebdra) Wak T do ‘hot know whether 
€e syllables have been restored. . d of the vowel. 
3 ty on . ; 5 Very doubtful, =” the Heit: symbol (if presest at all) is intended to indicate a modified sound o 

- € Urst’ syllable has been restored. 4Or w Bec : 

| rth e last four syllables have been Cutest ; 4 5 Or "mandala, if ae supposed virdma is an accidental mark. . 

ae Renn anes have been restored. : at oa ae to begin with bo (perhaps Bodhi?) or bwo (perhaps bwey). 

Ce ae cae ake 8 The last two ayllables have been restored, _ * Possibly praké or tradah + 

3 : : : . % ry : a fj : oc 


aS _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. m1. 


a 38. a a A 
bas ede ee ener ee ee ce [Sampalt{t} (p}i [njwfom].. . 
Cr ee ak a eat © © 8 9 & 8 8B ew = se @ © @ © 6 8 HOH HM 


9 pe © @ @ © 86 8 ee me oh ehl lhl lll 8 le le 


39. a. @ eae a a oe 82 e&@ 8 © PB RP me iw 
ry 
» eo 8 @ oo @ # @ @ e @ 2 * 2 °° * es 8#® # @® oJ * 9 e ¢ 4 a e 2 id win[ay ] * + 


Rep RO A Re BN GRs SUR RSS RRM eile, Aig Bw ay, evar la he ge ig cigs OB awe a Se 


oe @ © © © © © ow ° 2 ° 

40, * e * 2 2 6 2 3 oe e > 2. °° cd 9 ° a 2 s * o 8s 8B 8 8 * e oe o La e * ia * * a - * * 
a 08 wo . Sen’ ‘ee & oe i re ee (o © &@ 2 2 w = [r] ~ oe 
oF. 1.9 © 8 8 8 ee : me fs “ee @ te & - 8 «© . * @ @ ee + mow * ~— = ow 
* ¢ e @ 2 @ 29 2 & ww a . ef, 8 2 @ @ © @ a 


41. #8 @ 8 &  @ es #0 @ © © 2 wo oe 8 tA a ae ae CO me *  & * ” ee) 
RS oe aF vee bs nae Pe ee ee a eee eT ie ectcge ( 
~ e # ¢* # 8 &8 e@ oe 6 &@ 2 & «8 9 of fe “. * es 8 © 6 & + 8 8 8 @ * ” * & 

, : a & #8 e@ @ «@ " - a Te a. Se ee ee he re 
“42, t 8 8 ew ee De I OO cea Sa re ee ey ge og Oe +e 6 Fw ee we we mw ow Cn 
Pi ee Oe pie Ces ake . (bac)arana 3 ma gluin 


a ee ee re ee -[truh] brau gamluih lew 
ae eis ih Gaia ON Et SON Aue: nate my he ke ia i 
44, OE Ow 8 8 er gl ge ig ead ed o ° * 7 x ® . * i > eo F © 2 @© 8's * » eo » * 

lo ee een eae ~ +» (leh) tau lew kuiw dah 


ge ee ee eae 


a This fescue Hallowe: on ‘pretty’ elocsly after 
it is impossible to calculate . exactly the number of lett 
- lines, respectively, but a remeerean with A (2) make 


the preceding piece, Both margins being lost, 
ers missing at thg beginnings and ends of the 


very near to the margin, es cee that the ends of I. 53 and 54 come 
9 This: doubtful reading receiv ves. 
but I see no trace of tha te ne : some support from the Pat version. The usual Spelling is bi*, 


° Probable, 2 Hong not quite certain, ed Error for tradah, 


8 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS ag 


45 e * @ 9 @ &© «© #&# #8 @ & @ © © @ © © @# @¢ © © © © #© © © «& «@ + > oe ee Og 
eo f @ * @ 


Soattdicd, Sy, Wien an (ot GAS re eo 2 »... (sim ma) [ yam trawuir 
than tuy | sarsabhovales ma Bet: ds Grice ha Oe teva: as Bing eas 
BOs ae 8 grad ee it Ra Daan testes Seal 2 F sedan gt Jess 


Byte: ae fe ee aeuGs, Bee do a iis asecaee gy LAN) ae a “adan 
laceh lan[guliw? gafh *] smifk kuiw] fiah (c)-(€AA). 2... ee, 


47. Cr A i ed +- es = 8 © $ © © we B BH 8 © © es we He 8 we 


ee coh Suan aes (w) kuilw ta]n[o]h gah cha deh 
ma ca twin ‘gaat ma [glo’ {bak} * ket akhwon a[dan]®? .. 2... 


2. * © 6 ® 


~ «+ _s 8 © & HB e FH 
48 se se © 8 © © &@ & & BS © Be HH 8 8 He 8 HF we He ew e © wR * 8 
- * 


.. twah tuy ma filah] ..... (w). (r) sftlafwuifw] (ra‘ ma) 
ket akhwon gah kuim lor 1 pday [ oieuioamaliet oy] ima 
eM SU AA as esas Sec da eke ae te a ess 


~_— *# 2 & © © © € &B & & 8B ww & 


— ; ib ra’ : ‘than seeeh {ya]m ma dah cui[t gah] (1) [ke]t ke[t tuly 


yata® (glam-i to[’] ! smik kanarn sim ra + akh[a ma mJik kana 
BOC) eee nee ee een ee a eee 


; ee ee He * sf -_— + © ~ . Wie OR A EB Se ae **-_ * * @ 
* * - * * * * * 

: 

* 


c-An wiiduih = altuastichadieambandta gafh . sag jut kle[’] tuy 
{hjen + wiiduih thin flaleeh ma mik samut sim ga[h t]uilw] 


FT CP ORG, oe ee eee eo 


51 Si ome Eck tee Ta Te aba: sa icteric ate ta aaa Aine ae ven eee oe A OD a 
ga(h +] sjuif na stim ra da[h] ma + ta[m]efh santha]n [ma c-]a[n] 


. a nt san[than ma pa] ta{rh] ku [pli t[lJan: pan tlan (ga]h buin 


ha mw[oly kulim] + pday... 2.6... ee 


i ly laaguiiw., 

z St Se ae. would” mean “to measure, to estimate the amount of,” 
8 Conjecturally restored. 

4Very doubtful, 

8 Possibly for, but I see no ofrdua 

Perhaps yati, But}ef, Diq7, 48, G ag. 


- have anything to do with our text, 


the circumstances permitted, there: 


40 |  EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL, mt 


2 slice eet eras a daa RRS as eh ar tie od ak ac enter ae Gn A 

an buin ha go[’] dabut nimit ma gluin kuim. tarau dare[p] ga[h| 
sw[3] na sti{m] ra [y]lo[w] dah ma mik pa ra» singha[tjaka- 
santhan (t)uly] (gah) ..........- 


Cc 


BBs isa! ta Sak Se Pe Rae Sod neice ot OMe les edhe dle ele 8), pa tla 

ee jamlin kui[m lor] 1 nfim}i{t] pan kuim dabut 1 sm[ik* pa ra] 
santhan masun [t]lan ma» ni[mi]t ma[slun [djabut + smik pa ra 
[t]amea tame[n sJanthan [ma glui]h ma 1 nimit [ma] (pa tam ku) 
MME | he ane sti a 


54. hee Gott oe ae. [fijah swa na stim 
tarau darep [s]i[m gl]ah kuim+ tamen santhan ler ha mwoy | 
ni[m][t] ma gluiff] ler sdabut ma 1 phuiw [m]a dabut nimit ma 
gluin gah ha mwoy ra & = 


Cc 


(Fragments @ and d,)° 


I. e © 9 © «© @ @ 2 es © «6 ‘oe 2 2 8 os *® © @ © ©» © Ss @ of ia a ee ee a oo * 
LEO e ee Baca! noetgdw 2 a (AA pha[h] (sak wo’) 4 
: coon | | : 


ON Ee 8S ee Se GS 


_— 


es ¢ © 8 » «# 


es ses © © @ @ SN hae AR WSR SE ee fat ar ca tg oad 


trtseeeeeee ss (0) [flm[ap j)m[ap] lapfak kijtu he[a 1] 
é mw[oy leh. bray gt] 6 * e * e @ ° . « a a a . * eo * *. . » . 7 * * 6 - * /- 
: Looks like smfi = . 
~* Here there isa decorative mark, like 
paragraph. It seems probable, therefore, 
margin, between the double marginal lines, 


a four-petalled flower, apparently indicating the end o7 a 
that there was nothing more in this line. In the bottom 
some letters have been inscribed, which do not séem to 
I can only make out Ausala dhamma, 

§. Fragment 8 is to the right and begins at 1, 1, continuing to the end of this Piece, 


: Fragment « 
funs from |. 3 to L 41. About ten lines. appear to be lost between this"and the precedin 


i 
4 Conjecturally restored, re 


§ The number of dots at the beginnings and ends of the lines has been estimated i 
being only one margin preserved, 


een conjecturally restored, | 


nso far as 
8 The last three words have b 


~ 


* 


* 


PART It ] 


tke 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 31 


S. ee ab ere 
o++++.-..... [ratha] sammadhadrapawecchana! gah « puwa 
bray’ tia; (eu) Yat ead 2S ee Soar yd Setar tole 4 


4. ...... [sammadharapawecchana* gah 1 plu[wa] b[ray ma gi gah 
ler] @) 22... ....... 00 [lw](on ka)‘ lapak kitu  tufy]s 
Dir lay $260 (i eu. ete ier eee ee caret eee eae 


5. [bray gti k]ufim lar] « [pi pli they mwoy le[h] bray [et kuim lar 0] 
(ba ba they)® mwoy [l]eh [bray] gi [k]uim lar « ruih® tadap 
CIDEY 2 eee ea ee eet ae eas wes i 

6. [h sama]wu[t]thi [gah] « pdafy] pan ki[tu ma tadak K}u wassa[kala 

| gah] ...... (t)u(n)* [pdjay than ma dah f[c]nfi]h kuim lar) 
tale ayant hle Sela) ay teria ardoe a: 4.08 eee gre ra aetna 


_ 2 ee & & 


la tjuy « twak (tlo?® a krun gafh] ras kha gah sapui{n] gam-i 
ee ihe \ mwoly latpjuh ba la{pujh (k]uim [lar [y]ar 
Pan 6 Ciel mar Gale Wy) ae Se Boe Sains ae eg ews sa earth aie, 

. . [sama]-* 

8./ [wlult]th[i gah] pi sik dah uir da cis pday kala samawutthi tuy « 
flapak]* lapak kitu bra[y] ma gi [m]w[oly elt] gath ay yarau 
[pday] (pan kitu ma tadak ku wassakala gah) | | 

9. [sapuin gam-i brjau ma twak clof’ 4 gah] ra tdek ma ' krufa a 
ma [mahanald[i] hen ra 1 pday k(ajla [s]amawutthi tuy : ca 
cafh thley [bray] (ma gi mwoy leh gah « yarau pday pan) 


1 Substituting v for w, this is also the reading of the Pali original on the stone, but the MS. from 


i i ve had sammddhdrapaccheda(vasena), 
which Mr, Taw Sein Ko’'s first transcript was made seems to ha ip 


? 


oe oe have been restored. 

4 aE coh the vowel after lw is certainly either o oF ¢, 

5 Conjecturally restored, but practically certain, from the Pali verion: 
rei eee es may have been another tadap in front of it, 

: Se ae ; be &, as in L.M. &lo’, nor yet @, as in Il. 9, Lo, ¢afra. 
a Siete portions have been restored. The second one is practically certain, pat the a is | 


conjectural, 


32 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. It 


10, [kitu] wa{ssJakala gah sapuif dapuin brau ma twak clo’ gah ra yar 
: [td]Je[k ma] gah « krun gah ma ma[jjhJimanadi ra 1 pday ka 
samawutthi tuy masun Pa they] (bray ma git mwoy leh 

gah 5 sapuin) } 


© [dippetijn brfau. ma] twak clo’ gah ra yar [t]d[ek] ma gah + krun 
gah] ma kru[f samjat ras yarau pday krun [mwoly tun gah 
pday ka ma dah [sama]wutthi ga(h sapuii dipuin brau ma twak 
clo’)? 


[g]ah [td]ek » (kha kala] ma da{h] dubbutthi tun gah ha tdek t 
dubbu[tthi] gah ha sen [k]u® bnat [dah uJir da cis gah kran 
ma phah sak.gafh].lereha. ce. oe ee ee it ak 


12. 


is] 


13. gah + pday kala ma dah samawutthi gah» sapuih tipuin brau ma 
_ [twa]k clo’ gah 1 ha [t]de[k] 1 pday kala ma dah atiwutthi tu[y 
ma] tdek 4 atifewutthil* . eee ee ee Be dar Nit 


14. path '] dah nadi ra ha [gap gor sgah « sabhau jatassara ma gah 
[glah®s (de)h dah ket aluir ay rma mi{k kluir® fah mwoy 
mwoy ha gol’) kanath bdafh] «. Pera ue ses 


+: * @ a 2 & 


‘Is, peh tau > Jaca ma oe sak ga[h] heli r jjatassara ma ga(h)... 


ore ee [ra]? mwoy pday [k]ala ma dah sa[m]awutthi 
gah | pday pan kitu wassa[kalaJ®........00. . [jui]-° 


16, n A tay kuim lar + dak nwo[m] ma gah r deh [8] cuip pasate Cs 


Bete a SoSe6 ty (kuijm ras jatassara gah ku deh go’ ran sama. 
wutthi gah [pli sak (h)e(A)®? ss... [mahajata]-° 


17. ssara } majjhifm]ajatassara + [kh]u[d]dakajatassara 1 pi sak d(ah) . 


pet ee Aaa ao Hy tun gah pday kala ma dah 
-Samawmutthi Meal elles 


i a ee 


1 This passage has heen conjactirally restetad but seems fairly certain, 
* This passage has been conjecturally restored, 
8 Looks: like ta; and if so. written, it is. merely an ‘error for kus = 


4 The last two syllables have been restored, 


5 Looks rather like wah, but in any case it must- be meant for gah, 
_ © Looks rather like mit tuir, but certainly meant for nik kutr. 

’ Perhaps this is the last syllable of jatassava, 

“4 Conjecturally restored, but practically certain. - 

6 eo festored, Perhaps we should Teatoreit jon 


18. 


19. 


20, 


2I, 


2a 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26, 


(Bigs 


. PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 33 


» dak nwom « pday ka dubbutthi kuim lar + pday hemanf[ta] ..*. 
wee eee eee (Kuim) lars dafk? hla mwoy ga[h jas 
gah (ler)*1 (hJa s[eJh ku jaftassara]?. 2... 2. 

y tun + pday ka ma feb sa[m]Jawutthi gah + pday [plan ki[tu] es 
tadak ku wassaka)la* gah 1 da[k? hja mwoy + [p]day ma dah 
atiwutthi gah dak nwom: ga(h)..........2... 

i than puty rman wwo’ tun gah dah tau atiwutthi .. (hen): (ma 
twah) .... (ta)dah (thajn puiy rman tuy ma [dah] atiwutthi 
da[m]li ro » na galin aca attha[katha]®.... | 

ta[d]jah [wlassakala tuy ma dah pan kitu ie .... (t) [twah] lar 
pd[ay attha]katha rai pday [th]a[n pluiy rman wo’ "tun gah 1 
wassakala gah « turau [kjitu.......... 

w[o]’ ma nwlom] ku atif[w]utth[i] gah tim ke[t]......(m gah) 
ha [s]Jenh « bwoy ra[-lit bra[y] ma gluin ma 1 masun masun 
[tnle[y bray ma] ga [mw]oy leh gah he[fn].......... 

atthakatha gah [ulir da cit pan [plan [t]ney [bray sgii mwoy ® leh] 
kuim lar [* p]i [pi] tne[y] bray sgii mwo[y leh kuim lars ba ba 
thjey bray [sgi mwoy leh]... . [bra]-* 


* co pp eo @ & 


y sgii kuim lar» laksan atiwutthi ra gah (hef)’ ...... (pp)ay ? 

(ma yatajh’ cuip [2 ra: p|day than puiy rman wo’ tun gah + 
pday [k]ala la{ch]or gah + pa[n pan] t[ney] (bray)*... . 

+ [pi] pi they [b]ra[y] ma gi mwfoly leh le[r nwom 1]° ba ba t[Ajey 
bray ma git mw[oy] leh ler nwom ' tadap tada[p tnjey bray [ma 
gii ler nwom] + [lachor] (lachor)* 

Wfuk]au cah they [kJui[m] lar + sak ku [sgut] (hen) # yam lyah they 
fi kuim mik pak ha go’ « uit [jJano[k] akah aa (ma) [dlu shim] 
gab Pal nlc k ea tad Pee 


i Looks rather like az, 
2 Fairly certain, though it may be hea, the e being quite certain. 3 Restored, 


4 This restoration is quite conjectural, but the last word is almost certain. 5 Restored. 
6 These two words have been restored, but are practically certain, 
7 The parts in parentheses are very doubtful. The last one might be read bydy ma tanahe 
8 Restored, but fairly certain, After this word one would expect ma eu aes dele ley nwom, 
but there does not seem to be room for all this. 
9 Restored, but fairly certain, 
10 Quite conjectural, though there seems to be a trace of the first letter, 
11 The first part of the portion represented by dots looks as if we a amet either mak 
ray or pa tam, Anyhow, the ¢ seems fairly certain. 


3 ‘ 


oo = Restored, and very doubtful. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. mm. 


a 2m, jawar tuy bray ma gi ler nwom! rfau] ga(h het)’ (dah ulir da ci 
» than puily] rman wo’ gah+ tadah ma n[wojm ku alti]wu[tth]i 
gah 1 [gap gor stim] ket ra | sa(k gah pday than)’ 


28. [pluiy rman wo’ ga[h] yarau pday nadi jamno[k] (mwoy)* [k]Juim 
jar [ylarau pday j[A]tassara ja[mnok] mwoy kuifm [ar [; na 
praka ray ma gt Pdiay [ka]la [samaw]utthi [gah » bui}n [bray] 
. (3) snom ma gah « pday nadi Fae ma phafh sak gah. * pday 
- jatassajra acruk ma pha[h sja{k gah: pa udakukkhepa] tu[y +] 
nies pa tarh ku] upafs]a(m)[mpadakam fiah] (pa)... .. . 
[out crawat. winey tam[~ab] pday (cuit tila fiah)® [Ramadhi]pa[ti] 
ra [r] kha gah rau wo’ gasap ae tkuir® dafh ku tila fab 
Ramadhilpati tun + [pday kala ma] . CM Whol 


2 


ao 


Oo. 7 


30. 


7 


phguiw, gah + yarau pday gamakhet . . ee ee 
[ra] pday ga[makhe]t ga[h 1 yam (pday] ae kuim] (man) 
[ket tuy ¢ yam gam-f tuy ma tau pday nimit]? . ‘ 


am : 


* gam tuy ma ta) manah. ni{m]i[t] ae ee ee ee ae 
--. (hatthapah)® 1 ha gfo’ kuir nan chan” 1 ha go’ kuir bak ptit kle’ 
manah gamakhet tuy + samut] . ia! Sia Get 


-_ * 


ms 33 an(ait) a sak gah a ee eae ee ee a ee 
(mt het ma dah)” [parisawipatti] (ro gah ma) ™ [ yarau pday 
- gamasim mwoy tuy mal] (twah}™ . oo... 


| | 34. ac} ‘gah eft] (t)uir ™ mimift]. 2... area 


_t¢ 8 He ee 


» Lad  & * * * * * (h) 
o _ pday himit gah 1 gamasi[m] mwoy [tanah ni gamasim] ..... . 
ae / Awo! Seah)" I aa, Be Conese Boe (gap) ” 


: “4, Purdy conjectural, 
~ 2 A fairly, certain. restoration. 
“8 Or possibly na. 


2 4 Restored, but practical! fi 
“6 oer: for: Muir, P ally certain, Conjecturally restored. 


a 7 The last syllable is renee but certain, 


fad 


~ 9 Restored. The last syllable i is certain, 
; 10 Possibly chaw, 
eee Probabl thi i being j 
* aepdenial ie S. a either for sariut or nimi Preferably the former, the ¢ being in that case 
8 Restored 18. Rather. 4 : 
ee oubtfal, M4 Very doubtful 
ae Gonctably br ion 18 * Veryadoubtéul, Mw i ease 


PART Hj 
ee. Slow Slawul Na Was, Kelas we ered y. ye oe ee ion hieed as 
[gamakhet] (wo’ gah lay’ tuy ma smik kuir)? .. 2... is lay 
so Gis dairies a ace tc ee ee ee fe aaieaa 
ftuy ma dah pday] (nimit wo’ gah: het ma mik kuir)*.... 
VOY) A 4h ols Soe kre wae 
37. hler ha (el eta doey Biko ak: Ble e Ge aad pea Ale ate ork hs ose , 
. (m)* [dah beds] . fpadwot simasarh mutika th 
* 
Oe. Ca ING: BO. og Roe Pee ww ee eee ee ee 
(laceh) [ma oh wiay nimit wo’ gah»  yamn] GAstave ies ee ee 
go. niijm* dah ...... pb aod Sd ag, BOR ARE ae oe eh fae 
Cee . [tanah sgah ler deh ha dah] (eaddkasias nga) fler 
fhe Bd oa ee es ee, 
40. ¥ dafh] . ee ee ee eee ee ee ee 
Ss ey ee ia i] (yam Sah) [ma tau péaly ‘Tnimit gah iy 
— eine See ae oh ie Wl ee ee tetas he ees Wage te 
eG cece etaatpaukcks ~_ 8 ee em eee ee 
dont we aeee ahaha a “ pun ieenun a (wagga) a uir 
fle bees ee ere eee ee oi ele Rtg 
GR Be NR iy ARG Be EAS ESS AE Pe Ai EP ah SS Soe re Sieh 
buat ycrac ie de Make ee lar Gg . [simawipatti gah] luim 4 tun ( 
NG ae ee ee * * & & | 
Ae ae RR OR ae ee RR OR RO a 
ew wea ei ea Pal Ae a Bete ors Spl Gant) Thay 
4 ij kha tuy [ma] (spa simasarnmutikah)? ............5, 


MON INSCRIPTIONS | 35 


* > * * » * * * * * * » * * * 


1 Very doubtful. 4 The last three words are very doubtful. 
$ Very doubtful, 4 Possibly ma, 

& Or wim? & Very doubtful. 

7 Before these two letters there seems to be pa. & Or waggu F 
® The last word, all but ite first two syllables, is conjecturally restored. 


* 


36 : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


i v1 ee a a 
kui kui g ay 

oid peek we we oe A) CR) eee DBE) 

(VAM). 4 6 oe ee ee He AE ee Oe ee 


J . e 


* 
« 


-— 8 & 


45. A s ° * * * * « . * * * . * * * a * * oa * cl * * * * * * ® * ne - ‘* bail * 


ae @ & 4 e 2 ea ee * * 4 [r kuir tanah ma { dah wisuthgam]? 


"  % 


Sr 


rr ee ae ee ec a 


& 


(Fragment ¢.) * 


46. wc ee ee ee be eee [upasampadakamh]® ma fiah pa [p]d[ay, 
ng. 4 


es eo @ * e* e e . # . * # © » 8 a + * ~~“ * © 


A}. oe eee eee es [gamakhe]t da c-’i ma tau witduih de[h]..... 


* * = * * * « * * * * Oe + * 


48. ........... [hatthapJah gah p-or kufir pa] tuy ' samut uf} 


4g. ...... [rukkhasakha]d[isam]bandha® [mJa nwom gah + ma dafh] 
sanka(rarju*® gah kuim nda» baddhasim ku ga[masim] ...... 


© 8 © #8 @ © ee eH lll Ue 


60. 62+ ee es. ~ (sima)[wilpat[ti? gah + sim]asafmmu]ti[klam ga{h] 
1 luim ma gah rwon « simdsammuti[k]lam .. 3 [h]et luim [Pp]. (u) 


os &© © 6 &@ © # © & BP He He eH ew 


_ 1 Or Sgama P 
§ This fragment follows on pretty closely after the preceding piece: it is even possible that they 
overlap, though I think not. ‘ 
; 8 The first three syllables have been restored. There is no final mm visible, 
. 4 There is no means of placing this small fragment exactly, both margins being gone and there 
being no clear junction with the preceding piece. Accordingly the dots are quite indefinite and 
indicate merely that there is something missing both at the beginnings and ends of the lines, | 
6 The first four syllables have been conjecturally restored, but seem fairly certain. | 
6 Or possibly sazkadhu: either way it is an error for sankarabhu, | 
7 The first two syllables have been conjecturally restored and are doubtful: possibly it should be 
parisawipatts, 
: 8 The omitted word looks like gas, which may be an error for gah, 


* 


PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 34 


D 


(Fragments @ and 5.)* 


1, eo © & @ & bh eH HH FT 5 ae RO IEE. SR EO EAE RNG OES 
« . ° * 

oy 8 e 8 © KE Mo Ee eR SS RR EN « * eo # 
| _ + 4 + e- + @ ee 4 

eo. & * * HO are | ) ee ee © oe # es © 


2 


e @« * @ @® 


a * © 2 He 
Bee ls SS REE DRE Se PT 


- + © * & & £ # 
aes Cag des See hoe He SER A. eR HEE Tit SS Tae BOR OE PRONE: AA 


oe eee ee es (upasampadakath) .- - 


a 
* 
® 
* 
+ 
* 
* 
a 
* 
a 
¥ 
* 
* 


2 © e - # +* «* 


¥ -_ * * * = w a *  ® * os * © oe * * 8 + 
3 ~~ @ eF * r +e + * * © » # * ++ # & * 


s 
i la do. BGR NM, RA ESERN S EEE SEE Oy BS ER 


oe eee ee» (gah ler pabwoy® parisawi)[patti] -..+++-- 


+ * 


4. id * + cad * -~ * * * * * - * = * a - i a * ” * * a * - 7 2 c » * * ~~ * cal & - * Ld 
_... () [ma clui[n skuim tau kwom] (ku)... +--+ sere? 
pas a aca Swe (wis)u(th)[gamjakhfet ma cuin skuji{m tau] 
kw[om] ku ga[ma]- 


s. [lakkhana] ‘ us is a Oe Gece ae EE A (kui)m [lJaw * pday 
mahaja[tassara] tuy ma 4 icuip| 0d 2 2h ees ee eR eS 
cee ee eees ftuy ma 4] cfuip samuddaljak[khaga kui|]m 
[la]ws.. 


6 Lo, ied oh deena Ree TEES to[’] gah tun mas 
pda[y] ba[ddhas]im ma (u)i(m ad[tJuih ee ee ee ee 
ree wisumh )[g]a[makhet ma ck cedah ni gama 
lakkhja(na) © 


1 About a dozen lines are missing between this and the preceding piece. Fragment « (on the 
left) runs from 1. 4 to the end, 6*from |. x to 1. a4. | sal , Aone 
: & The number of dots is roughly estimated, especially at the beginnings of the lines, there being 
no margin preserved. there. 
8 Very doubtful; possibly babwoy or t buoy. 
4 Conjecturally restored, but taitly certain. © 
5 Conceivably “lakkhan 1. 


38 __ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ vo. 11 

Cow, Ose ears eo cays apa ates eae 
[mJa ha [mw]ofy ku jatassarJalakkha{na] Gap eehe, BeBe eo are gia 
Be Monte No Ratti ei de [het dah uiw ¥ het praka ma phah] 

8. (sak gah)*.. 2. 2... ee. (gah) kulim ler] 1 bwoly 
plarisawipa[tti gah luim 4 kuim «] (rau) gafh]...... ity de pea: & 
eee oo [mwol]y [gah r ma] (tadak tau ku). . 

Qo e eee eee eee eS ee... [parisJawipat[t]i® [ma nwom] 
gah ee ket tn khfa tila Ajah Ram[adbjipati + LE ees 
i eedet ace - {simawipatthi [parisawipatti ''ma tadak tjau k(x) 

: [upasa}- i Bees ieee 

to, -[mpada]}*: 6. ee a og oS At). ey glah « sak 
[ww]o’ ma [t]am-ab nach tat oda tha[n puily [rman] wo’: tila 
aig oe F Beer. - (gam-i 1) es tlipitakadhar | ma dah 


byatta patil ga* | 

Un Dei ae Go a oe [than rman] wo’ cit [k]u 
tila pully galnacariya] guinhin [ci thant: Jah® [tJau kwom..... 
hee eels “+ fey: fates HN pulty] tof’ kuiw bicdrana] 


tare Pee ees ie - (saman pubbapara tuy +)? 
ly sap-or. kite tila {pully to’ phyuijh sa[g]ut cralwat]® 2... . 
- (shi (im) wwo[’] fir 4 r[au w]w[lo} til a [fab Ram/a[dh]ipa[ti] 
6. eee . Sete ae 
RP Ea wr as ee [gamluih kjuiw safgut 
< oe wihay tanga sit wwo' ra 1 kha gafh tila puiy et 
Carlyajye et fb Ww 
= teh ee : i Alera: atic r [plat ' whinay 1] kwom 
es ce et ee «+s [sima]w[i]patti [plari[s]awi- 
“patti ha "i oe i ‘ia puiy. tof] ganacariya [gamluin] .. . . 
ee er ree u 
— ee | I 2 ada. ee sie nfwlen 


: Géojectutaty restored. en oe 

_. .# These dots may merely * 

Be yo represent sual ci i 

oy ibe irst tWo syllabi. have béen restored. s : pe ie : ee sala peer 
ae re is something after this: perha 

"after : laps. we sh ere 
dots to Bt ‘Up ‘space, and the next. line may haye a mak gak. Or there may have been two 
The original appears to. Baye Bape al. : : ng a | | 


7 Very doubtful, ie | 
me 'The last. three syllables.» are Prue es ES pe syllable : "restored, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS a) 


Vee MND” gk ated ae ai oe ek ee bo * fiah lana(h) ra « [i kh]a 
la-i[t] tuy ma dun ket ganap ti[lJa puiy {mJaha[the]ra ga(mluia= 
tuy)®.......... [tila tah] Rafm]a[dh]ipalti ojah ksa[p] ra a 
sisana 

Be: tank ai cea cee Gk Sh Se BR eo [mas]ufn] lnim enim Reh gah 
i oe kala lamah [glah: sasana k[ya]k t[rlay dah [ba lnim* 
tujrau cwofh pan cndm kjuim (+)... i(k)® kuim (ha)® ga- 


17. (t8p)?........2......,.. [atw] (ra) eit sfasana] tuy ma 
cap tau kwom [ku u]pa{sljampada gah + [pla farh® ma [sl]ep [t]an | 
- tau cuiw cuifp] .... (ra-it)® {k]ila masu[m™” laijm [c]na[m] 
gafh] ro + tadah [s]a- 
[Sane ye dig ces et [t]di[k] Imeh ma phah sa[k] wwo’ gah « 
puiy [ti]m [t]au [kulim + fa[A sisana tjufy ma s]ac-ah « ma sak 
(ku) [tdik ™ IJHe& + ma ha [mwoly ku asa(th)nka™ [gah ' puiy ha 
wlipara 
[pdaly sasana ky[a]k tray hen sof?] + dah 
puffy ma] ha sjun fsduik] p[djay kyak t[r]afy] hen sfo]’ [dah 
pulify ma ha rjau gau pday kyak [tray he]n sfo]- 


SP” eS eR eee [sak] “ ku tdik Inen 1 ma [hla mwfoly ku 
asa[tmh]nka ma [cuin] dah tau bija sisana gaf[h] + puily m]a sgof’] 
(b) . . . (t) [rjan [tuiw™ tluy + upa{sam]pada[kath] tuy [1] (ma)™ 


dge- 


1 Restored. 2 The last word of the missing passage was probably ttla. 


Sif the above reading is right, the 4 must be superscript over the ¢. } 
4 Conjecturally restored on the basis of the Pali text. The English translation of the Pali 
version gives 2047, but this is due to’a variant MS, reading: the inscription itself has catusatthddikam, 


&§ The missing word locks a little like afft, or dahté. 


é 8 Possibly ta. 


7 Purely conjectural: whether it is admissible will depend i in part on whether the preceding 


word is rightly read. 
8 Presumably for fan. 
9 Or possibly Ja-d¢: the word is conjecturally restored, 
10 Error for masun. 
Restored. 
18 Possibly dsankd, 
id Restored, 
18 Or ba? 


14 Hardly legible, but practically certain, 


18 Oy duiw? But it looks more like tutw, 


40 


ak 


ral 


22. 
23. 


24. 


| 25. 


26. .. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (von. ut 


[t}?. ee... . nan) lam-ow gafh] 1 ma sgo’ ta[lJut ptuin 
t{uy] 1 ma [sgo’ tan t]au cfuliw [cJuip ku raf-jit* [ka]la masun® 

—Tnim cnfam].. . 24 fp rau wo’ tiJla lah k[sap tuy he]n » ga- 

ve ee eee ee © (tun) (nor)? [c]nim tila puily] kyafk] tray ma 
pa par[inibbJan gah + [b]é klath pi [c]wot® turau cndm kuli lwon 
A (tuy).... [tila puily [Mog] galipuft]tat[issJama[haj- 

[the]*........ [tilla puiy Mahamahindathe » [kuliw clo’ [ptan 
sjasana [p]day tko’ Singhuir » ni pa tam tila puty Ma[ha]ma- 
hindafthle.. 2... ........ [tko] [Sitghujir gah 1 lu- 

[kau] (218° cnim) * 1 tnor dhammawadi tufy] ma twaf[h] pgah 
[Mlahawifh]ara[wasin}i[kaya] tuy + ma. sak tu® tdik Ifen [g]ah 
[heJa> ma dget tI]. ......0002. de: 4h am ele ee LEON 


oe ees (hb) [r s]m(ijn® Watagamani [Albhaya “[jJnah plan + smfin] 


kla[n D]afliyja® tuly] ‘go’ plan kramif[n] dua Anuradha[p]é tuy 1 
[kJuiw kanamh Afbhayagiriwihara] ” 


oe. eo © 8 & @ 8 


Te eM ROE ERE Rh ERE ae a es i a ee . 


ee ee tau ku smif ma lwfo]n [t]uy pday [k]afla ma] smin 
kya [kl]an da[pah tu]y » ma dau a bdah dmath® jaren tila [pluify] 
lutau*® [cah pan cnim]” 


a ene ee a ee a se Pe ee 


e , 


1 Restored. 7 
# Possibly, though improbably, va-uét, 


8 Looks like masin, but the e 


xtra stroke is probably accidental, 


4 Looks as if it might have been rwor or her, 
5 Or wo’? ~ x ge are Ms 


8Tam unable to com 
Preceding line, = 
7 Very doubtful, except the last letter, 
E.M,, the usual M.M, being nai 
~ § For cwoh, either in er 
9 Restored, 


plete the word of which the first syllable occurs at the end of the 


But I think the reading is right, though the form is 


ror or through assimilation with the # following, 


10 2 ” 
‘DD Restored, eee ee eT eee a st ali 
18 Error for fu, " P u Or perhary o > me oe ore 
IB Or smig, . eas 
16 This a 


Ppears to be the reading here 
Dédhiya, and a Possible readirig of the Mén 
Corresponding passage, _- Loe, 
__ ™ Restored, except the first letter, 
~ Error for Iukaw. so 


In the version based on PAlj 


MSS. the ; 
text is Daddhiya, The Pali name is spelt 


inscription has lost the 
38 For dda, 
ae % Restored on the basis of the Pali versione 


“ew, 


_ PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 41 


29. sag BES r kuiw [t]ila puify] dma[n] ‘ra 1 [t]ila puiy mah§the - 
Mahitissa wo’ gah # het duh ma dafh]? kulasatnsattha .i.... 


a eo #4 
i ol a ee 


28. ......-.. nti [Maha]wihara* uifr «] pa tah ni gah kuim nda a 
Mahaw(i)hara[wasibhikkhusJangha® ler [pla ufi]lw [kam] tanah 
hfe]n +» Afbhayagiriwihirawastbhikkhusangha]‘ .........-.. 


_ 2 * 


a9. ..+..... (ha) [glo huy kam [k]wom [k]u [ran® s|ka’ he[n] ra 
1 [t]now bhikkhu sa[i] ba coh gafh r] Mahaw(i)harawa[si]bhi- 
Pte Sa, alte eels a cue es de, Bo Se ee ea 


e+ ae s+ kuim ras safh tuy] ma tau pday tko’ Singhuir 


86. 4% 
ga{h] Mahawihirawa[s]infiJkaya lew [m]woy .........- tees 


gi. .... [ADhayagliriwiha[ra]’ ma dah gah + pi [klath maslun cofh] 
da[p]ah cnam ga[h kujli® Iwo[n] 4 tuy hen + smi m[woy}] ....- 


Ce oe ee ee m + pday [k]ala ga[h] he[a] > smin gafh] kanam 
Jelt]awanaw[ijhara [t]uy ' [s]j[un] sdifk] pday ti[tthiJ?........ 


~ 8 & eH eH ee wR ww He 


Gly Sale oe ae Be . . . (cu)fin] dah tau [p]ipami[tt]a « ma pa 
 daftlau pldlay wiha Dakkhifp}aram [tluy + plop low pday 
[Jle[tawanawihdra]™. 2... ee ee ee ee ee Cree Ter 


-_* 2 & Fe e & 


1 Looks like dat, a 
: . ae Pm, if the extra stroke (which is certainly there) is accidental. 
r possibly «uz \ ide 

4 Restored, ‘vith the exception of the first letter, on the basis of the Pali version. 
5 Looks like duf, but can hardly be anything but vad. 

6 Or wt, 

7 The first-three syllables are restored from the Pali. 

8 Conceivably kalz, ; 

9 Not quite clear, but practically certain. 
10 The first two letters are conjecturally restored, 
11 Restored on the basis of the Pali version. 


a ee eee eae fbhikkchu? san tuy mja tau ee Mahawihara ea ete ee ey eee ee ee en Me oe ie a . ee) : fe: hate 
kuim [for (] kwom ku bhikkhu [san] tuy ma tau 1 pdaly Abhaya- | en ee - Ce)! [plata ; rl Sis ane. 
giriwihara]* oe 6 @ © © oe 8 em 8 le we “2 6 s @ 9 @ 8 ¢@ 8&8 © © wo eo ow . : e ; | : 
35 2 eee ee eee ee ~~ Sfeltawa[nawh[h]arawasinika[ya ma] gah . Pt ee ae eee ee ee rs 
nikiya [m]woy gah ktuiw dah tun rau gafh hje(n)..... 2. . wares ey Ale a [tldik [nen [m] . cg a de hoe Soe ees 
BO ine 10h hos ok [turau klajh? cnf[am fiifia kuijm nda + bhifkkhu Bae sal in ast seit se Oe Oe duis CE, ae a Dee eee 
s : a . si te es . | | 
san] (pi dah)* [t]au p[day tko’ Singhuir gah]? MafhJawihdrawa[sf] see - (le) fl dah] ma ha rau gaa) Pee eee 
37. : : bes 3 } is 7 : Big : : ee? : 3 . 45. Pe ee ee ee ee ee, eC *. ee “« a oe a - . ed s are 
vee ee ei e ove dimkaya ler mwoy « [dah] rate - "[aahaeassepalthe" ma pa * eeltan] Shes ee one a eee ee 
Settee eee ee Ce ee ee ee ee 
PR . , ce ane : 
8. «4 - os © © © © © “w 2 @ #' €oo8 = aes 2/6 ee 
3 po Soe ages » Ceol x nda Y Mahawbfaa a, 46. . a ae ges, . n oo, 
WD NEE tea NS Sean gn gies Sor + bulkeya ba (t). ok [MoggaliplultItaftissama athe] * . ; 
ss a ee en , AG +o oo Ge eee ging en Oe ae as Stic ‘nlda. ee tyatal® gam- fi 
= at ieee ae ee ee pe eee ‘papa bbaikiha's ma dah adhammawadl are oe ee ae 
SOe ss ae. deat nck tr [ma ha® sen ke] rr et ger et 
ae. u Eplatlilpate] . 
Rosa eee . | noe aoa ‘ng tah tikaye 1 ah ler | 
ARS ae ae te ea Me ea ee eng MA CWIN: ba(puin) . i: Mon Ba See Aan e See (nikaya) y [pi a : 
eine ea, ence | . ey spa nikaya. mwoy tof 1 a at ae ma dab} fe 
Rte et eee eee om ku jala uma) ae es - MG hee i ee ee ral “keep tuy ' -papabbikicha ‘gambutd : 
2 . : Ld ° 7 8 € e ° . oe. + e 8 . 
et ee ee Ce a i ah t ram: 4M. a uit | yam 
Sheen eee ea ee isan [ma] (bt). | 7 tuy ma dah adhammawad(t) ° g [pra [!] pa y 
ae Rees eee ae Sun aus One ae = Bede GS: eatgios ae a : [fiah ma] Ce ee ne ere le eee oe. : , . 7 
eat ee eae ae | Be ee is ... [eal-ah [sasjana fra yer pla? tam ni [smi]a® 
ge oi : Re a | : wah mja ca-ah sa{sJand kui nda ' ei i Sibghulife gafh oe 
. Pe emi Senge {Plarakkafmabaing> sisanja tuy ma cap [easerts os oe ~ oo | 
ae eee oa ss eg ee re ee ~ : ; 4 Fairly certain, though the first letter is doubtful. 3 The first two syllables « are restored. 
1 Saw coheed ae a 8 This fragment follows closely after the preceding piece, ‘It is even possible that they overlap, 
. : oe Bes oie ee a a re to the extent that 1. 46 may be a continuation of 1.45. But it is impossible to be sure of this because : 
1 Restored, a coer cea ee = ei nt. oyun . "a this piece neither maggin has been preserved. For the same reason the number of dots.at the See 
piwicte) on the basis of the. Pali Mie er | beginnings and ends of | the lines. could not be estimated, and the foe here ‘given merely indicate ae 
na : i that an: indefinite amount is missing there. Be . 
: iis original looks like ta, ahh must be wrong, al Mae wah ee ; 4 The parts in brackets are restored on the basis of the Pati version, ee 
he parts in brackets are restored from: the Pali, 2 | ee oo 6 Or possibly yati originally, the stone being broken off just, below the 4. ae gee » the next Tine, 
ee ee eS 8 Or Ode? 7 1 Looks | like May but. that. is probably accidental... : 8 Or. Smite, a 
ee ov “e 


44 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. mt 


“Bi weeks [cluiw cuip [ku laJma[h] ra 1 sak gah het dafh] uiw da 
cit puiy spa [aya]cana ku tila puify t]ipuin the(ra)........ 


52, ne Cte tae nu? tka’ Sifnlghuir te’ tuy a puiy skuiw cau 


ptan sasan& pday [th]an dua pufiy rman] wwo’ (ra) gah tuy tila 
- fiah Ramadhi[pati]® . 


a ° rs oe @ ® oe ® o oc @ e@ a @ 


E 
(Fragments a and 8,)4 
tee ane ee ed ee [sgo’] (fiat na mat) 4 [sgo’] (pujau).... , 
Me 
Ye ee eee [ceti] Q Stacelth " Kalyaniceti « ta’ gah [ler » tila 
*Y] ta’ seo] Sey ous See MORAG AG 806 © dt ee 8 eo og ante 
Gas Ge. he ae ees : 3 reaky galh] (a ja)wor kus[ujiw ma gluin sgo’ 
dah It]au ku ‘fila pully He Nea ee ae a ccioe Shae ROIS oe gn at puis 
ye ees ene cae . (tila)® puiy ta’ ras rau a tila flah pa ayacana [k]u 
tila puiy pnera LO ie hg ht ess is 
a eee (wa) sty ma pa kabut ma [s]-4 [d]u[n ket] ran 
ae upasa[mpada ma cuin = [t]au bija a ca ee 
ee ead axe 


OES Fee et . [Slinghfufir (ma) | upasam[p]ada tuy ma [tau] 
pday santhan sie Tee. i [ma] sak ku (asanka) ® 


eo 0 ee se oe st 


2 Usually cpa nit, But” there seems to ber no second stroke, 
Onceivably this might be a badly shaped single sto 

vane last two syllables are restored, = . ae due : = 

Lasts a dozen lines appear to be lost between this and the precedin 

Sto the right and begins at 1. t fragment a begins at line as, bot 

almost illegible, ks 


5 The number of dots at the ‘ends aa 
of 1 ia pore, 
¢ Conjecturally restored, : a6 i is merely estimated, . 


& piece. Fragment & 
continue to I, 27, which js 


a 


. PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 45 


Ts Gk Gmigha ee Bates [ku] kwon erafka] tuy [ma nwo]m {pudmi{k] 
upasam[plada pday [jlaren puiy [glake b pitty ced os Ss aes 
Bos ie ero i SES ay oo (kwa)n* wo’ gahs [m]a sak ku safle gah 
[dah] tuly * cluiw cuflijp [kJu raf-it? kala}... ee. | 
On pith a ee ee [plu[ily sgo’ duf [c]a keweft® rja + hfet] tuy 
[m]a go’ 4 cufip t]ka[’ Sinjghuir tun] . 2... ee 
WOs oe Sa . [ky]&k [t]ray [m]Ja pa tarh ku Ratanafcet]i [s‘ t]a_ 
gah ee alas sgo’ linfwor pujau ra 1 ph]ui® Uclusuliv} pies 
6 a ee ae <ooem rita kwof[m k]lu diac rwfon] + [h]e[t] dafh 
altel da [ei] « puiy [k]uiw wuilw] ku maharaj sa[n ras rjau gah 
TILA saneeeal cacad al aes ene eins. eee ba giat uid eee ena | 
12 .......... rela tifl]a [pulify] thera ba cwof[h ba t]u[y] (he)n 


+ [1] s[wla[k m]Ja s[puljau dhalt ginfih kyak trlay gall t]dofn]®.. 


c: aee : = . [JA mwoy [m]a [cult [latt thajpika Ledjora gah ler] 
nuh] eee ‘ath pan cwofh ' pjabenh mwoly sw]..... eae 


4. . i ee: teh sled (kh)i(duiw) 7 n nan Em|wofy thjar [p]i c[woh «J 
sfali dh[{at m]w[oy thlar pi cwoh [pli ti a tha{r ba] klar pi 
daker ¢ Okla that) cs aos va os ae See wa 


ES. ang: ae yi ee bel ha ew aly Sie oe ae oe Her] miwoy [slop 
- dbfat sadeer|® [ele m[woy] + swa[k oe pujau Sfijripaida * [r] bodhi 
ga{m]luin ma pa [tam kJu.. . (kh). 2... ee ee ee eee . 


1 Very doubtful. 

2 Under the initial a (represented by the hyphen) there is a mark resembling a pace mn, 
which is. probably accidental. 

8 Looks rather like 4weh, 

4 There seems to be no reason for a stop here, 

5 Error for phuiw, 

® The Pali seems to differ here. ae 

f l, the second ¢ looks like i. < 

ae eae tad os 9 One or both of these + vs may be Ve Pc 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA = [Vo ne 


16. [Ratanace]t [i] ta gah [lefr]....- nae ~ Gamfn[ok mJas[uJn [c]w[oh 
© p)nfan] ma ha go’ (c)u(t)’ cee ler masun cwoh 1 yat ile 
da[ca]thhm (cwoh masun)®. Se ae aes 

49. pday tka’ Singhuifr gah 1 acs SS ase ee pasa hataun 


[kambar blaket mwofy + kJjambar [sak thar mufoly ’ kambar 


a[pra]k pi tabay (t)wo(r).. 2... ee 
18. ksuim mfwloly] « pandi‘ [t]wo[r] ks(u)iw (pi 3 re ahaly twor say]. 
_» kflje(p)® lay buiw jalm]nok ba cwoh » padak tma’ ‘Tplan 
| [padak] (pan)[gan]® a[prak turau]’ . 


19. tuy he[n® lik tJufy m]Ja ptim [ti]la pluty ta] aah Sifghuir, [gamluin] 


..' tau wo’ tila fiah [prlelal ra it [ta ffiah Ramadhipati] 
bwoy [mla rf rfe]h se san. 2 ee ys ao 

20, datau pday tka’ Sinfgh]uir I pats iat slwlalk mila plujau 
dhJaft gnih ma ey kui](w bak)® wo’ tufn Iefr 1] k{ujiw gof’] pujau 
[dhJat gnih hen [fi '] thera (ba cwoh ba ma ey. kni}e? 


21, [w] 4 wo’ tun [ler kuiw [go] Aat dbat gnifh 1 kuiw go} | [injwfor 


what] gnih kwom, fli! rait ma a gol] linwor dhat. aah tuy 


eo 8 @ © © @ & 


22, ma pa oe iolday” Mana[wihlara tab Ima ee cah [k]e[t my [m]a 
[slafk ku tdik lJne[n] ‘gafh » piely udafikchep as(}m = ony ma 


[ciren [le]r [pday Kalyanigan] . - [tila] ® ee 
- a3, fpuiy. tie go’ dufa] ke[t ran] apadampads fil) rau “wof’ tlla fiah 


prea lifk swak ma skuliw bafk ku sjan [ta glam! uf]A ra [! 9] 


_ SWake paran [ma skuiw. bak ‘ko smi} - (uh) ® 2 


24. [s}ran ba [kl jah [i lac]in mat. [manik pian te aby sran pan klarh 


pli] cwoh | apan lafe]in: {tlurfau] hah: [s]ran fturau. ‘Klar oF 


anol [b]}re[r kh]re tan . [ak Ishk fran 4 Peeled ane) 


eS 


. Very doubttul : “the Pali does not agree here... oe 
The anvusvdra is doubtful and the final may be. es os a 


8 Conjecturally restored, E 4 > 

6 Conceivably blem. A : mel Or pang P . oe ; ; 

8 Possibly pagan or ma : : oe : Cea . Roar gg 
gin, mie Eee ge 38 7 The Pali ag : 

8 Abbreviated hae, the 7 being: superscript ‘over the -A, : dies here, ee eee 

9 Conjectarally. restored. : ee i * Looks like teh, Og eee as 


41 Conceivably ° “si, 


Se er oe ee ee 


of this fragment, i 
- lines, respectively. Accordingly the num 
have been put in merely to mark sae. something is. missing, i 
cone e Concelvabiiar: 


© PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS gy 
as. (t)? [m]wfoy + b]rfer sneJa tife]k alpr]ak ba ' [b]rer lated * lam- 


ek ba + bfrjer snef tfie[k lam-Je[k mwoy + brer sak thar mwoy]* 


® Looks like lapedk, which would be icooasibié., oes 
® There should be a stop here, but none is visible and there is no room n for 0 Ong, ee 
4 Only the tops of a few of the letters in this line are decipherable. - ead 

5 This fragment followseon pretty closely after the preceding piece, - 

6 Both margins being lost, and there being. no other. certain. indications as to ‘the ex. 

it is not ‘possible to estimate how. much: is. missing ‘at the . - beginnings. an 


not to indiease: 3 ts. amount, 


act ot position: ae Boe 
d ends of © 2 
ber -of dots in those positions: is quite indefinite and a they. i ae 


brer. baket Iam(-)e[k] ma . Dele ae nes 
26, fy "] (m) . . fa]. [a] (ka) . {r](i) [ap]rak [mw]oy (2 sh tal byau 
gamhih ba cwofh] + [kaduiw dasok ba] as fh preja 
tu[y h]jen 1 lik tanah oe yal - Shae re er eee 
Cy Re PD Cen RO ea Dee a om ee ra 
ihe os, eo fai) oe eee Poe : 
(Fragment c.)° 
Boney ms ee ae ee ole - (pujau) . ane eee Be re Oe ee 
Bb ea ee » Lkdwfom ku ak Cee ee 
BS, ga Sa eae a ae ee (gah). pb kuiw] ae aS oo ; Pein 
BO wees [m] ifamor tluly] (gh i pilay Kalyonga] ma ees 
— kyafk tray] labfoJh. Taku] a ae ais es ee ee oo 
ee ere gah 1. smin ae (kui vy Jah ‘by t alley a 
[jaren tila pulily saa] ta[’] . SU ee eee ee ee ee oe 
Ce eae ae (ka)bu. fi + rau- wo" ‘galh tloly] ie “(ele ath reli ee 
s ae tanah [thar ma kuiw bak ku smif 1 Singin = a 
Ce ee ee [alprdle ba cfwot. bat We ‘aly. builw [ete ba : ae 
| oe ba. - (p)fret" gam)hfin ey are Pap) eat tee 
1 Or a 


SEMEL ENE MELLEL LEM NL LOTT te TE 


8 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von mr * » PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ 49 
ey ae. 22 - kuiw] dan tuy hfe]ns uit tifla pluify thera ba . [tila] san [ta’] ma [c]Juip tla gah [pti]Jm sm(i)n? [Sh[n- 
c]wofh ba] » [kwom] ku [t]wah [ba] cwofh ba] wo’ [tun]... .. ghuir t]uai* ket kar(i)® ma tim tarau ma (s)-a« [bJacufi]p dun 
oie a | Anur[adhapa@]........ point 
35. ....,.... [ma skuilw [ku slai [fiah SlifaghJuir [g]afm]uin + 45. .... [ceti] 1 Marifcawa]ttifc]e[ti]* » Dakkhinasakha » Lohaprasat 
fpasal ima ietle Balke (es emid | Sfalghuife « i faniahc fonlae fa ta’ gah rat k[bjah Ramadutan tuy [maj........ teeta 
kuiw bak [ku s]m[i Sifghuir]. . 2... sha ia ed 46. .... [Walligam*® gah] (tun) ler t{lJa kban Tha? ejuip gah a[mat 
36... 2... . [kanwor bay]ufi]w (da)? dah ma | het tuly mJa tifla t]a’ SSeS eB EIN 8 ere mn yaa 
skuiw blah nd ta[dojk + [het] ma skuiw [g]o’ paccay pan [gah]. . Bey eet ae : , 
ae pt 985, ad ae | Blo. ie oks gute yaw (leis Seed wee Be, Boa eh aha oe POM EMUIE ie sce en ss 
| the dow Roe ease ees . (sapu)[n] sala[n p]nan da[m]la sa{k]....... 
BUG oe ae [cah mwoy ma pa tlam [ku Mol]ggafl]ana[thJe [ga]Jh 1 aS nT ee = eee atte : pee a 
kwom ku twabh cah mwoy gah + [p]ren kuiw dok kban Ra[mad]u- 8 
tin] .... Se Aa aE Fo Pa 
so | eee ewe eee es bee vevee cis 6 [auralsaft] dafh] ... [i] 
i 2) fear} Clete mn dr fou ehh a Fg ris wey ala esa ata ea Sh ie na ane. eam Oa 
dok khan ns hen | kbaf Ramadutan [g]ah » sakkarat [837]... 
i | (Fragment d.)* 
39. + . (mak)? cah. (bal c[rJawe[k] thay can gah ma t(i)t* ni pan doy veces A) eee -CraWel fa feta g haa ee a da Bee, we 


Yor 1 14 kitu pataeue 8 crawek thay sok gah [h]e[n] . 


2. © © @ © © ww we & : 9 8 & © &e ee © e 8 8 © 8 ee ee OR BR i eT * 


Pr a ee i eh i ad «oc © @ © @ e@ 4 


40, Seg, rohall aguin [gah hjea +» [s]mi[A] Singh[uijr [kuiw] cufi]h 


wan dun talun tila puiy san ta’ tuy + lik tanah [thJar tila nes : : 
R[amadhipati] © ea kanes tila fab R 


rast so, y tila fiah Ramadhi[pati ma kJufiw bak] | Ramadfu]tan ma n-4 ga(h) 
4l, 2+. [n sablu kwom] leu ‘cadain ku tfil]a puiy ta’ rai (pa pati)- a: Debs Blac el I de eta Se ae Ra gt Beet ee ee SI ate! ay one 
aia ee ku tile pay ta’ [ty [hen daman] daft]au 


eo 8 8 ee 


a a ee a Pe a ee a ee a a 


e 2 8 © &@ © & © 8 B 8 Re ee eH me HH HH He He eH e F we He F Fe ow wee 


43, oo a i (a)[tuija idk soar tila puiy sa[h to] tiah Sin ghuir tuy | ele Boece 
iJla fiah : : 
{ila fiah ma [kJuiw balk] gah ler Citradutan]. . 2... Book, ack 1 Or possibly smiz, 
ey ee . 4 This L.M. spelling is exceptional here, 8 Or kari. 
: Pb eS ered i anmeeedll 
ee - [at]uin ga[njap cuit [t]ila cin batan ma dah cuit hen [pluily] 4 The reading looks like ad, but this may be an error for s-2, or the letter may have received 
“spe Peli fe gan tuy [kui]w paptan” Daas & subsequent damage, | 
eon ee 6 ‘The Pali MS. has *ef* for “ea”, but the actual inscription has lost this part of the text. 
1 Caieciatly = +a, oF ‘peseibl 6 All but the last two letters are restored from the Pali. - 
the M.M. forms (in this fn we shoud on - eee ee but aise dadah is the L.M. form 7 Almost certainly not fa, though it looks rather like it, : 
9 Restored ini accordance with the tar Kip and tadah, Cf. A 23, etc,, C 21, ete, 8 The Pali MS. has Garasi, en bieaalcende has lost this part of a text. 
8 Perhaps tit, but probably. th ‘ 9 Or amta, ® This fragment follows on pretty closely after the iol Piece, 
t 
4The next sword e probably i i oe is not original, 1 a ea a " as ed should hari on sale 
42 The number o een estimate e¢ m is the only certain etter. 
“s 4 : 


go : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von, in. 


thc ~ gi. [ta’ t]uy | [kJuiw prea [kuiw djamin datau ee ku tila puiy ta’ 
yas ku Ramaf[duJtan [lJer + (pren)’ . rere ce Ty . tw}. 


e ef e 8 © © @ © © © » © © © © 8 © em ee em RE He » ee em 


(ku sah fiah Singhuir) [ler] (Ramadutan) [n]-(A ku san) [fab] 
| 52. {Singhulir [gamlu}[f ra '] 1 [atuih mJa dah ganap tila cfiJa bat[an 
er hen 1 puily spa ba[k] ta gah [t]u[y tila sJaf [ta’ kuiw patifidn] ... 
ie oye lee -‘Ttila puiy san ta] [ma cui]p tli to’ + ma a 
Andradhapa er » cuip tlun tuy : uit [t]ila [san ta’ ma] 
53. [tluja-[kbah ba co’ w]o’ 1 cuip [kwo]m [m]woy [h]a[n uit] ra [e}is 
puiy [lap gor [stabah dhat gnih ra gah tuy ' they aduit mwo? 
—eraw]e[k dutiy® asat* gah hjen + pok dhat gnih tuy + tabah tiflja 
puly [sah] ta’ ba co’. 
54. [k]w[em ku] Ramadutan + C[itrjadutan fra.+ tila puly ta’] gof'] 
—ltawor [g]of] yuiw [dhat] gnih tuy hefn : tuija lik [gakan tila nah 
Ramadhipati ma gakan n-4° gah 1 smi] Singhuir bah sana [tJufy] 
Fe ts dhat gnifh] cut lar pday sa[i] dha- 
88. [t] thar [tila flah ma kuiw n-4]* tuy [5 croJk (p)dor? tdof baftaa s 
oe plaben thar + (p)a[d]ak®  (c)wi [sablu thar] da[but] lar gaft]a 
— Edh]a[t gnih] tuy + [tabah] kui[w] ti[la puiy ba co’ thera bjs [ewoh ® 
bh kwom ku [R]amadutan Citradutan laha(h) * ra + [gata] 
ee 56. n( ga)h' atuih ga[kaJn [lik tila fah Ramadhipa]ti [ma djah feulift 
giah [h]eh [' puiy spa] ba[k] gah [tuy 1 smiji Sitghuir [p}-ofr 
-amat fiah Slin[gh]uir [t]a’ tuy [pd]ay 'Kalyanigah pday [th]an 
| cnih™ kyak tray ma lafbJofh] jaku gah [hlea + {k]uifw] 
857. Edak - phiifa ']kanam ‘prasdt. ok ewan . [gait 
| gala lar ra] [p]-or tila [puiy Wilda[gamathe] {tuy ra) [bhikkhu] 
(san ta’ ma) [e-ah] (ma) [cdk cdah a] (ui ayam mat): [garJaha 
[palrt[pawada tuy 1 ma] tl[uja tau no” tnor sah ma pa datau 
‘Pidlay eget uals) gah] ru[y ca]- i 


1 1 Only: Y and e are certain, ® Error for mmoy, | 
a There seems t 
| ina Ss to be a virama, If it is an accidental mark, read dutiya, whith would be more 
4 The actual reading ies to ‘be asak, which must be an error. 
 § Looks rather like nwd.. 8 Or na? 7 Possibly Boe. 
4 Possibly badak, Poly BD Perhaps coh, 


10 ] Cyt 
1 Possibly, but improbably, cnuih, Or lanai? But cf, D x5, F 4g, 49, 52. 


18 There may Possibly ‘be an + superscript over the fallo 
wing letter kj t this ; 
aoa E M, ae “Bigher way, the spelling here ij is unusval for this neciption, vege eee 


« 


mane en I Conceivably wo", 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 5t 


66. TH) ssc ew aoe (g)o’? (bhikkhu) [safi b& cwoh pan] (\).....% 
{n ku tila puiy Saddhammakittimahathe}* ( Wanaratanamahathe 
Pafica)[pariwenawasijmangalamaha{the + Siha}ra{jayuwarajacalriya- 
[the]® ta’ gah ras 1 rau gah ciren [phaa t]wan tuly ruy] 

59. [cah] (bhikkhu san) ........ (1) [cah mwoy crawek] (kitu)‘ [asat* 
thay] bu[ddhawa] . ‘ 
[tuy] + kufijw alan tobyulith sjan [Sidlehfufir {ba cwoh pan ma 
skuiw] ulpasa]jmpada* gah + [p-o]r k[ui]w ku[iw] upasa[mpada] 
(ku) 


a 2 


F 
(Fragments a and b.)7 


Te |e Bian te es ae Ws i eB Be Ra eet A aE RO SS 
bea gel a SR Wey MWOY] 4 6 yaa KAW ee Es 


i a | 


2. -_ * & * | ee ee * * * * iad * * * * * * hah ku = 
puiy ta’ gamluih 1 “tila ey ta’] (sat) feamluté gah] . a6 

I ade Mead aaah Agree cal dante a eh goad a ed ve tate 8 .... Ifuim « dan 
tuy ma ipabt yamu (ra) ° ley] PP ae ee are eae . 2° (kha) 
[tila ey ta’ ma}... 0... Sa ee de tal eae eee Sone ae 

Biro tei. Ge Ge ents OP Gala ah a ok ey wv ae eee fey dik milk 
kuiw d[&n] ku tila ey (to’)............ [smith Siighuir 


k]uiw [yamu] . 

5. (yamu ma gah Saciagngheiaalanna gah) ® fhuiw ke] tila [pui]y 
[MJoggallanathf[e] « yamu ma [gah Kittisirimegha]sa{mi] gah kuiw 
ku tifla] (puiy Kumarakassapathe #)™ 


i » 


2 The Pall apparently has Dhanma*, 

8 This (not Sikelardja” as in the English version of the Pali) is certainly right, 

$ Very doubtful, it might be dutiya, possibly. § Or asa? 

6 Perhaps upasamhmpada, 

7 About ten lines appear to de lost between this and the preceding piece, Fragment b is to the 
_ right and begins at I. 12, continuing to the end of this piece; fragment a goes down to L ar, 

8 The number of dots at the beginnings and ends of lines is merely estimated. 

9 Or perhaps 1, © The first of the illegible words may bé ket.” 

11 The parts in parentheses at the beginnings of Il, 5-13 and ends af B. $741 have been 

restored by means of the Pali version, 


* 


52 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vOL. 181 


6. (yamu ma gah Parskkaniabahoseen gah - kuiw ku tila puiy) [N]anasa- 
[garajthe » ya[mu ma gah] B[uddhaghosasimi gah kuiw ku 
Buddhawathsathe » yamu ma gah Sji[haladipa|(wisuddhasami gah 
— kuiw) 


7. (ku Nandathe * yamu ma anh Gunaratanadharasimi gah kuiw ku) 
[RaJhuflathe » yamu ma gah Jinala Jakarasa[mi gah kuiw ku 
Sumafgalathe # yamu ma gah Ratanajmalis[ami gah] (kuiw ku) 


8. (Dhammarakkhitathe 1 yamu ma gah Saddhammatejasimi gah kuiw 

- ku Céla)[sumangalathe » yamu ma gah Dhamm]ara[masimi gah 

kuiw ku Kassapathe 1 yamu ma gah Bhiiwanekabahusami] (gah 
kuiw ku). 


9. (Manisdrathe 1) ........... eeaintn te deste . [kban 
_» Ramadut]a{n tuy hei kuiw yamu thera cah mwoy] (ma dok) 
{kban Citradutan tun 1 yen ma gah] (Tilokagurusimi gah) 


10, (kuiw ku Mahasiwalithe 1 yamu ma gab Siri)[wanaratanasami gah 
kuiw ku Sariputtathe « yamu ma gah Mangalasami? gah kuiw ku 
Sumanathe 1 yamu ma] gah Kalyan[itissa](sami gah kuiw) 


1. (ku Cilakassapathe # yamu ma gah_ Candanagirisami gah) [kuiw ku 
Cilanandathe 4 yamu ma gah Siridantadhatusami gah kuiw ku 


- Sonuttajra[the " yamu ma gah Wanawisitissa? gah kuiw ku] 
_ (Gunasagarathe 1 yamu) — | 


12, (ma: gah Ratanalankarasami a kuiw) [ku Jawanapafifiathe « yamu 
ma gah Mahadewasami gah kuiw ku Cilasiwalithe? u yamu ma 


gah] Udu[mbJaragirisami gah kuiw a Dh]ammaraja[kathe ‘ i 
‘yamu), 


~ 13. (ma gah. Calabhayatissasami one kuiw) ru Candanasarathe ] (sak) 


© Very doubtful, © 


2 The Pali appears to have Vamavdsitissasami, 
3 The Pali appears to have Cilasivilithera on the stone, 


[gah smin Singhuir galan]" (ptim ku)* [tila puiy] ad hen «) *&_ 
{tila puiy thera cal mwoy * kwom ku Ramadutan] . 


1 The Pali appears to have Mah paladhiveeane is 


4 The Pali appears to" Sols Pimentel iva on the stone, 
5 Conceivably gulan. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 34 
Eh: 3 ose nie p-] Seis Stine oe Shee. 2 (tila)? [puiy] thfera cah 
mwoy ma dok kbaf CitradutinJ*......... . (liawor Siripada 


ma tau pday kdip tmo’ S cancksia’ tuy |] (any @ cee 
[dui Jayawaddha]- 


rs. (nanaguir)4. . 1... ee eee ee es  @ ma) [cuijh thu 


Poni WANA ows a ee a ace eae Bee Se Alb al eealg 
gh Ee a tay cine, Sees [cau tli]... 2... geo wohand [ba cawek] (kitu 
gah) - -~ * -_ & * * * FY 

16, se ee he * * * * »> * * * » * ¢ @ + @ GF © a « ® * ., @ & * @ [gah tila 
fiah Ramadhipati dui ket paruin ae (puiy chera) foah mwoy}, 
(ma) [dok kbam Ramadutan].........0.-2 22 eee ee ee 

OR eee Se ee ee ree ee ee er eee ... . fey ma 
Pp or gah fay ] tila puify ta’* a cuip tka’ Sipghuir] (tuy). . 

12 2 aes oe he AG ee a See ch oe Re ~ (t) — 
{win ue talufi tila puiy ta’ maha gap gor? jakuey)..... 

Ge blk ce eiaa: aE SG Se See a Ae eS [pujau ceti 
“dhat sok]® kyak tra[y gamyon tuy] (' kha) [ey] . eee iG ee : 

Bee ie 8h Ae Behe eee ee es AR Ue Bee) nde ese . [ma cuih 
cuip}] dui [Dgua Aa 1 tila puiy thera cah ae le pday] (dun 
Dgun kuiw a dma)... (kld) 2 ee ee ee ee 
e « ee i ad - an ; 

ES al @ ace eae 6S eS ee are wih ee ie eee [n tuly 


i ease [tila puiy ta’ nt] (khan) . Pe eee rn | reer 


1 Conjecturally restored. 
3 The original may have “éri® for *tra® by a mistake of the engraver’s, 
® Perhaps °du*, 4 Conjecturally restored, 5 Conceivably és ma, 


4 Perhaps ewok, 


Sal 


84 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, EP * PART Hi], ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS | 58 
Some Wee Sea OR Ee Oe ee eee Obie! diiaecas abc oat abies Gaba es Bia sy adn date 4 aeons a DOOR at 
- a a uice ec coca ls 4b ow bas eo, Cla) [ey] io") Beak eee aes pao 


3 oe 8 @ ©. 6 © © @ | 
go ha tae as a hice, sea tigztyl oan eg: te Ee RR ma San ae ge gg We ne ies el ee 


ee ee ee ee eee ae 3 Otis nda bare ye oe a wma el parui tuy 1») 
Bie eid eyo Gh coed ge 1 ee eho tee aa, | [ui Hoa] ot eee eee 
Peed Sede ee tere eed eee inh bie ale Siete yar Die ee won laRctenis sf ile.Sl 28 cdcean! acute’ lasek oa | : 

ku] (tamay) 2.2.22... +. 2 + [ey skuiw] (naa)... ee ee ce ree ee er er ee 


* *@ © © © @ © «© 
DR OSES PE Get Ae SS eS er tee ae ee 


ee 


sa on es re Beate Siesta eR tas tee ete egies. ae gc, (ui 
eee es es es cay). es ae as : ku tila _puly) 2. ee ee ee ee ee eee 


* @€ @ @ © * © @ #© © 8 8B 8@ o& © 2 8 eo e@ @ 8 8 @ 


a a 


fie te Via ey ke ee ee en 
eo @¢ © © @ © © & @ 26 34. ey a er a : : 
s . . Nawuta) . e ¢€ (tila puly) @ 8 & @ 8 & © © 8 8 oe 8 HO & © Be H SO Be 


* @¢ @ oo *# 5» @€ © @ @ @ a a oe @ oo @ ~~ - «& ~ ° * @ oF * ° * *. @ @ @ o a a e * 


ee ee te ee ee or eee ae ee o 8 8 © «© e & Oe 


7 : Lee acd yee Se Oak oi Se pee en ee ee ft bas Cyan). foram 
~(Fragment.a.)7 050 0 | 7 | : eae dates ea : 


s ; , ae * © © © 8 8 8 o Be He 
2 a : 
os # 8 @ &@ © @ #8 a 


Pee ee ee ee ee eee we ee (Cup) 


: il 
ri ‘ . * ‘i * 
‘ 26 : * % @ . Pe ee ae ee ee a el [tila 
: Ps eee @ #* @«# : : ? 3 
Re ee ee ee eye 8 Mee We 6 a we oe ; : : : * : ; e 
; : oe Ge ny Pe TS eee Tae _ 47] os Ble a eae ee ee ORS We eee: 8 8 eee Oe ee ee 
: 7 * * puly -_@e@ @ °° @ © 8: @ : hy ; : 
o © 8 @ © € © &@ @ . . e 
: ae 8 8 a. @ 6 8.4 
SESS BH MB Re we we ew we ew te te we ew ww oe ws we (CTU Se eee 


dame ie Vere c ees se s Tel pay] «eo 
SE Oe ie Oh ee ne rene he he seer i Yb » ee © © © © 6 oo” ee ed : 


LEO NE ae Ns Perse gg OR ee eee oe wee me te RE See AR ne 


inten | co a | | Sh gdh tot cg kite sth any bramok thay) . soe e eee eens Loe 


eo 8 ¢ @ 8 -e@ & 


pe er ee [Sitghuir} (ma) tes) (toh gah fest ace ee ee 
1) ® pe cau 3 nee (Singha) = BB. we eee ee es : 


a err fe) iguana, < ; thay sok] (San) otto sae ere ets en er 


. [t kitu jth pan bramak 


29. 


Pe ae ee ee id 


astbegecevnes doucvee esses 0055 Ge ga) re he ee eee 
eee ee 5 gone Pewee, 39- St EE SS : ; soee 


eo ¢@6¢ ©» # @ 8 @ #8 @ 8 @. 4 
B : - 2 © & @ 
Aca nie NaF gts ace OS vact nal! ee 8 ee OR eee 8 
i ® 
oo 8 @ ee © 8 & & * 2 
ae ee, ee at em ee ; 


T Only the ba of a few letters are visibie, ee ee pe ae oo : 
‘This fragment seems to follow on : eeaee oe 
exceedingly bad state of preservation that v 
= The number of dots at the be 

_ is missing could not be, det 
4 Very doubtful, except the cy, 


. «+ [wom Ki} eee sg eo 
pretty closely after the last piece, 
ery little of it can be made out, 

eginnings and ends: 


but is. in such an : Ce ee a a 
ee &€ #4 ‘ ‘ ce 


of lines, is quite. indefinite : the. amount that 23 ; ow ee oe ae a 8 - 


5. Conjecturally restored, 


cy 


é + Vern dosbtil, ray wae . 1 All the preceding words are very doubtful. eae ae z pes 


- 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA © [vou 1 
PATS G65 ee Cece See ee (tila puiy Mangalathe mwoy tun gah)!.. 
i lage. le WS a? les oie? OR Sr eu, O88 SMO 
We a ee, Oe a on ee ee 
Age Si ats SS enees teh te Wig aod cainsa dahwafe atu co ele eta Jag , 
_ (Fragment d.)® 
Ade ee cee eo eo oe oe 6 ° Ce * 
tivated eatretberce Siler Abc sive lee (tuy s tila fiah Ramadhipati cuip) . 
Soe (DEUN)> sacs oa kc Se ee oe ee ee : 
45. leaner Sia OS ays, era acer Ss tbe eee oe ee se 
! ort ee ee [khan] kwom [ku Rama]dutan tufy] 
» ma cau tlui ni Singhuir (m)a* tau pday than Dguf gah ¢ kuiw 
~ dan] han pindapat lahafh ras]... ... (yat) * [ticiwa]- 
H6> a) ie eee i [sana] (bap) [ba ba]........ 


(ku) [tila puiy ta’ + pa] patisan[th]ara tuy + kuiw [p]and(a)a 
[tarJau n-4 [th]an dmaa tila [p]uiy ta’ ra» kha [g]ah tifl]Ja fiah 
[kuiw pa sabhJah [c]a(nak) [pi] thay] (tuy 1 thay) [si bapef kij- 

47. [tu] (asut thay)® [brJa(u)b(bh)ati gah hefn] 1 (tuin pa pujau gandin) 4 
[tam jon ceti dhJat sw[ok kyak tray ra oj 1 thay sok mwoy 
c{rjawek [gah ¢ tiJla flah‘[kui]w baca san Dg[un gamJluin ra es 
[ku t]. .. 2... 2... [tila fab] 


48. (prea tuy + kuiw) [kuiw] dan ra [r thay aduit pi crawek gah] 
| (bwoy) [ma ruiJh [sJe [rJau [g]au (hea: ® dlua) cafh] mwo[y] dlun 
_ Salh] tila [fJah [k]uiw [prJeh phfyjer + swafk] ma sapdok tila 
es pluliy thera cah mw[oy ra « +] (taay) [can] (yah lanai gah) 
] Very doubtful. 7 2 This fragment follows pretty closely after the preceding. 


8 Or pa, 4 Very doubtful 5 Conj 
Peer . . onjecturall 
6 The stop is doubtful and the preceding word. might be kez, oe : oA i eps 


“PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 57 


49. [hJen [t}if[la fiah tuin tlua] ra + [h tila puiy] ta’ tuy [ma tuin tlun kha] 
ma culip] c{nJih? [Mahabu]ddharu[p] gah » tila [puily ta’ d[u]r 
d[man] lanah t{uy] + t{ilja fiah Ramadh[ijpati gah + t[naly] sok 
dacim crawek kitu asut] ; 


50. [g]ah + [cuip shi daman] tila fiah pdaly Pugo ra »]1 [tiJla fiah 
cui[p Pugo tu]y cafh c]rafw]ek tnafy] ad[u]i[t gah] hfen» kui]w 
pre phyer [dlun] kando’ [bwoy] ma dah rah san kwo[m] ku twin 
[twuik ma gluin] (1)* [p-or smin tila gamluin] (tu)- ° 


si. (y t= kuiw) [cuih] (wan) .. (n)‘ [tila pJuily tla’ ras [t]ila puiy ta’ 
cuilp] snfi tila fah tuy he[f] 1 kha gafh] tila [pJufiy ta’] (ptit)® 
ra(f) [cJan[dan] tuy [ma] (tuit buin)® [dh]at gnih kyak tray 
[k]ui[m I]Jar + t[n]a[m jray bodhi + sla jray bodhi » ma jra]- 


52. [y bodhi ma gap] gofr stuiw kuim lar ' tila puiy] ta’ jum [kuiw ku 
tila ah lafah ra! sila pat kJat[iwat] tu[y ma huim akruim] smin 
Sirisahgha[bodhi] Para[k]kamabahu ma caah s[isanad + smli{n 
Wiljaya[bahu ma caah sasana + smii Parakkamabahu] 


53. [ma ca]ah [sdsana] (| ma) [fiah] (kanam) lar [na woha fjah [Sin- 
ghuir] (ma) [tila puiy] (ta’) [fiah Singhuir kui]w ba[k] gafh] I[er +] 
tifl]a pufily taf’ kjuiw ko [t]iflJa fia[h ras ljik [pat]....... 
. cuin [dah] .... (suim gakan)... .” [tila puiy san Sin]- 


54. [nghuir] (gam)l(uin) [| kwom ku smn Sijin[ghu}ifr ma h]i{mu] 
- Bhiwanekabahu gah ler : tifla puliy [ta]’ [kuJiw ku tila flafh ras 
rau gah tila] (fah kwom) [ku tiJla puly [ta’] (pa) [patisanthara. 

tuy hen] ())..-...- [tila puly thera caj- | 


55- [h mwoy kuli[m] ta[nJah tanah hfe] p-or smin tala gamluin tuly 1] 
na jnor na pha[m k]l[o] [t]w[i tLwui]k® ma glui[f g]ah' tifla fiah] 
athe ta: Sal oe Sides Riyal A cio oda rndeelad ah ... [t}la puty [t]a’ tfuy » 

’ 


cd * 


1 Possibly cnuth, 2 Possibly # or ra 1, 

8 Very doubtful. There seems to be a % put at the end of the line to fill in a small spare space, 
4 Very doubtful, perhaps piuin or biutn, but the initial looks rather like e, 

5 Doubtful reading. 

6 Final ¢ and # are doubtful, Perhaps we should read buim: see the translation and notes, 

7 Looks like cyen. a ® Or possibly dwik, 

® Here follows the version from the manuseripts mentioned in’§ 71. 


* 


Bo _ EPIGRAPHIA BIR MANICA 


_ MANUSCRIPT COPY OF TEXT EXTRACTED #ROM THE SLA PAT WAN SUit. 


# kh@ gah tala fal) Ramadhippati khyap kasap raw wwa’ ra u upasammpada ma s-ab 7 gah tila pulat 
~ thera cah mwai gwa’ du raf ra « pdai thdn puiai wwa’ gah sizama ma s-ab ha dah uiw da ci by 
pa fda tila puiai sali ta’ wwa’ ma sgo’ pal uposatha pawdranakam ? ma pa tam 3 upasampadakam 
04 puiai gldai dndai mwai gamakhet ma smal mwai man vu pandhisinn 5 mwai ma s-ah puial 
sakuiw 6 tila ta’? wwa’ ma® smit tuai » tila puiai ta’ wwa’ ma sgo’ uposatha pawarapakam ma pa 
tah ‘upasampadakath rom » rau wwa?9 gah tila gah khyap tuai hei » pdai juif® gnih @ glaai 
gamakhet mwai ma dadak tau amat mwai ma himu Narasamsura 10 gah » dadah ma sman 
smuk mwai gah tith ket tuai # pdai thdn ma fan tau ku. kla? sat amat Narasarhsura 1 gah tila fab 
kuiw tab fab tah jaah jatah tuai kuiw]2 khanham rup samit siva ra w yam twuiw gamakhet gah 
‘ cha.ma dah amat Narasarhsura 10 gah huit ha mik kuiw dah sathkara koth ku gdmakhet da sad 
ma tau wut duih deh gah # kha karow 4 pha-uit tuai wruih chu ruih dun ma tau bwai smaw » ma 
slep pa kuiw sarnkara gah le fiah tah jaah jahah kle’ tuai » knai chu knd& dun ma tau bwai lata 
ma slep pa kuiw sarhkara gah le kuiw kut dan jaah jatah kle’ pha-uit hed ra # pdai than tuai ma 
kbanhath rup ma smit sizh gah tun lew 1 pdai rut kuim law t pdai thdn matah ru& ma thuik dah 
Pai tma’ nimit kuith law 1 matiah tma’ nimit kuimh law » kuiw Aah tah jaah jafah kle’ caruih dak 
karo » law ja lagow-ra 1 matah gah than buih duiw 4 duih-tuai 1 pkuim law tara ra w paluit 
’ than samit sim gah tun lew u wihdra tila puiai the cah mmwai ma sgo” kiufi dmaa kuim law i 
bhattasala kuimh law » waccakuti!® kuim lawi than ma hum dak kuimh law » kanhath law tuai hes 
niman 1 wek dud taluk phyeh the15 cah mwai kuiw dma pdai than gah ra « pdai khanhasm gah rau 
wwa’ tila fah khyap tun 0 uit tila puiai cah mwai komm ku cah mwailé kwah cah mwai wwa’ gah 
kuiw dua kuiw dof 15 rad upasampada s-ah gah ra» tuai puiai ma spa!’ sich lamuin 18 tun w fiah law 
huit smik dah ruih sfsnd. ¥.bwai duih anagat puiai smik s-ah jafah sun 1 0 upasampada ma s~ah hed 
kuiw dah kuish ra w ayash mat garaha pardpawada ° yaw ra snom2l ma » sah ma phah sak gah ma 
" puiai ha mik kuiw lup pdai kath wwa’ swa? » cha gad ma ha mwai kuiw garaha barupawada caah 
hei puiai mik kuiw lop kam swa’ w rau gah khyap tuai heh cash bat mwai rau kha ma cam bat 
mwai gah pnow thera cah mwai gah 1 pdai thera mwai gah duh an ma jnok klah ha mwai o na 
ma lon tuai kla ha dui, upasampada gah i garaha fiah parupawada fiah ma cuin dah may °3 gah 
tadah mnumh kuith law « puiai 23 tila puiai samat tun lew duh chanda s-48 gah ha mwai ra u ayam 
mat garaha parupawada fiah tadah mnum kuim law 4 tim wat tuai tila puiai thera mwai mnum 
kuiw. gahara 24 gah kuith law 1 twah tila gah mwai kuim law w tila puiai smat s-24 4 ma nwarn kuiw 
garaha- kuith law. sad tarau wwa’ weil kle’ tuai a thera le cah 4 tila puiai smat ma dah twah tila 
thera gah lew trau 1 cha sah 16 wwa’ gah upasampada lew s-ah garaha parupawdda tah ha mwai 
ra «rau % gah tila 26 Rab Ramadhippati phyeh law sannithan ra n akha ma fan ku kala ma samit 
sim tun gah tila puiai Gunarakkhutharathera 27 mwai gah yai 4 gah tuai: tila puiai kom ku twah 
tila puiai Sathapdla 8 gah cau dma wihd tila puiai tarern ra « tala puiai Sirisaizhabodhisdmi mwai 
 Kittisirimeghasdmi mwai « Parakkamabahusami mwai.« Buddhaghosasami 2! mwai t! Jindlatkarasami 
mwai « Thenamalisami 31 mwai | Saddhammathejasdmi 22 mwai | Saddhammardmasdmi%3 mwais Cawa- 
negabahusdmi® mwai 1 tila pulai jamnok 1é 9." twah tila puiai Sirisahghabhodhisdmi mwait tila 
puiai Safigharakkhita twah tila Puiai Kittisirimeghasami gah : tila puiai Dhammawilasa twah Bud- 
dhaghosasami_ gah i tila puiai Uttara « twah Janalahkasami 25 5 tila puiai Uttamat twah Saddhamma- 
tejasami gah tila puiai Dhammasara tila puiai aah 14 wwa’ he 1 mnuth tau pdai than wihd ma crod 


1A omits, - : 2A pana’. . A ptam, 
. von, — § B bandhusim, for baddhasigns. 6 B skutw, 
7B san, § B omits, 2B omits, 
10 Bor Narasura, - 


11 B omits tak aah, 
a ee ve : 4B mimenta. ¢ 
€ two preceding. words must be due to a co ist’s error, 7 B sapa, 
18 B lamuh, oD Error for sane 7 . 20 A Lena 
1B onwam. 8 Bor lamiu, 3 For dat, 
24 Error for garaha, 3 A pd. %-B tla. 7 Wor Gunavatanadharathera, B “vatthaharathe 
% B Ratapala, Orig. has °yosa®, «20 Orig, has °sami, 8! For Ratanamdl?’, 
82. For “tea, OB or Saddhamma@rdma’, 4 Boy Ehitwanekabihu®, 88 Ror Findlankéra’, 


12 A has kui 1, 
1 A omits, 


[ vou, mti¢ 


& 


ty 


7 q 7 : . . 
‘ NSCRIPTIONS 8g 
PART H] MON INSCRI | 
G | . 
~ - B o 
I. a 6 @ © © © ® ¢ FF © 8 © © Ce € RP F * @ 8 © © @ © oa we e we ee lll lhl Ul le 
» oe » ° # a * * * * * e * » * oo * * ee ss. > Om * a] «a » 8 * * 3 * es & o a ¢ & * 
* os 8 @ @ FF @ * : * © © » ¢€ oe © * * £ & 2 & ({ksap) ** + © 8 es «6 * «© © 2 © mn ® 
i 

 * me eo «a @¢ © ££ # & & @ eo =e @ 4 . * «= © * «© 8 © & & M@ 

2. ee ee ee ee ee ee | | a ‘* * 2 2 8 © @ a 


a 2 


.. (m ma) nwo[m] (gah ra) [ti]m ma © (sim) 


+ 
* 
* 
? 
* 
* 
* 
* 
s 
4 
* 


| 


3 Ci a ce ee a oa 
e 2 8 FF 


A RE OR RR RR RE RS a le ae a gg 
* 


(ti)m mA" sim [tlarem [g]ah ler lapok ha [tuiJn 5 sfim tami (ler) 


ee a  } 


“Fehon at oe ahs tbat contin og sim [t]amf[i le]r 
gap gor sda[k «] ha tifm m]é « [Yapfo]k le[r] ha gap [gor 
sjla(pok « sim) [tami] ler (ha ga)- | 

7 - sane : tse ee es (mijk dak sim tami gah « tadah sim 
tarem ma nwom gah ra [ha] tim mi « ma la[pok sim tarem].. . 
..... flan ma lapo- | 


1 Nearly thirty lines appear to be lost between this and the last piece. See the manuscript 
version. 
2 Conjecturally restored, 


it than ma samit sith gah ra ¢ acd! ma skuiw samit gah frau wwa? tala Hah Ramadhippati 
aerate than se gah smik samit sith tami ra a pqai than gah sith ei ra det aie 
ma isin tami fab smit gah ma dah ra » pdai than gah sim tarem ra nwam md » ajj se Osa. 
sambhedadosa klud cuip ra dah uiw da ci « sim tmi ma samhit gah mad « ma ha dak sta ran - 
gah heft dah3 uiw da ci» pdai thin ma smik smit tami gah « pwa ma laphok gap a ae la 
tual t sim tami ma smit gah ma sdah rof swa’ rau wwa’ khyap tus het wraw ede tila Dah aie 
dhippati (G 1) khyap tun» sabhau pawa ma laphok sim ma gah wwa tun lew sjuit hos san “4 ij 
khandasim‘ tarema mnum dndai mahdsim tare(2)rh ma nwa 6 gah ra tim ma " . : tarem ee 
tim mha sim tarem gah ma lapuik tuin ra a sit tami ma sdak gah lew sdat | gwa’ dee ae 
khandasim tarem 1 mnuth*dndai mahdsim taremh mnugh gah ra ha (3) tia ma sik tareyh gah Pui 
ha tuin « sith tami lew sdak® ha gwa’ dndai khagdasim tare » dnaai mahasiza nia - ti mm ‘ 
lapuik lew gap gaw lapuik (4) 1 sim tami lew gap gaw sdak t ha tim ma go Red | aoa 
lapuik « sich tami lew ha ga(§)p gaw sdak rau wwa’ gah law pdai rere gab el w pdai 
1 For akhd, 4 In the Pali ajjhottharay,adesa, 3 A, onniadak, “et B adds. tau to it 
4 Orig, has magdasim, SA maui B adds yaw alter gah, D SHatliy, 


” 


60 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. ir 


Ce a) 


O56 EY eee! cca Aa etac ere ceca as ena ee OS tinequne ay aries ee he cee 
Goel aa ¢ubegeleeeso tiw:fhJet © pdafy Wlimaltiwi]- 
nodani tu{n gah 1] rau [w]o’ gah tun © [t]adafh kh]Jandasim 

 [t}are[m ma nwo]m [trawuir khandasi]m tarem « [i] 


' 
e ‘ 
7 L] o © ¢ @ @ @ @ @ e o e eo 6.°@ oe ¢ ee 8@ @ # «6 e e898 ¢ @ oe e oe @ 8@ 9 @ ° * e e @ 


Dee eee eee eee eee ft kuifw] dafh] kuim « yam [pd]ay 
parikkhepa wiharasim ga{h] kui[m] lar » ma[nJab pafriJkkhepa [wi]- 
—“+hafrasjim [y]Jithm [than] mwa[y] sa[bu]it | 
adware ee Rene Gal & ahaa yg! opie 4A OEM a oO a Ave eae. uO 
ote eee eee ee ee (1) gah © tipuin masun tu[rjau [kwo]m 
ku ka[m]ma[wat] sgo’ daft]au by[i] 4 [tuly s[go’ lapojk? ma (w) 
[pday thin ma djatau [g]ah ra® —s “a 


9: se © GS fe ee fe we we wm eel el tll tll tll tll kl 7_ os * & es ee © He Be © we & 


6 hee eG ge aed Gaeta TO Ls A A [p]day * ta[hgi ara] (m)ja® 


lapfoJk® sim wo’ ga[h » ma go’] datau [l]ata [th]a[n sim tarJe{m? 
glah kuim lar ma da(-) a 


10. (hy Se ee i a a 

7 Steet ee eee os ++ sim [tarem] ma nw[o]m « trawuiw 

_. khafnjdafsim] tarem ' [t]rawuiw mahasim tarlem gah m4 # ha seh 
ku afga so’] u rau [gah] 


1 There is a space here, probably due to an original flaw. 

* The va seems to be written twice, but the first one may have been written over an original 
flaw and imperfectly erased. . 
: 8 Conceivably -d, but the traces. of what might perhaps be a subscript 2 (represented b the 
hyphen) are very slight, 4 Between ¢d and y there is an original flaw. 5 Or Be 

¢ There are two original flaws here : one just before the p and the other between 'o and & 

7 Between e and ¥ there is a blurred space probably due to an original flaw. ; 


mh tawuiw 1 mahdsim tarem 
asim 5 gah kuirh law 1 mab 
tama bnat jaf gah kanhah 
kammawat sgo’ datau byi a 


-parikkhepa wiharasim® # yarh than mwai dabuit gah kuizh law « tama 
pha-uit tuai 1 jmap jmap kanha(8)&7 gah tila puin 5 tarau kom ku 

“tual n sgo’ lapuik mha » pdai than ma datau gah yaw ra sizh tarem nwarh ma n sith tarerh gah 
apuik ha tuin mgah gah snu(g)th tan hd » pdai taw& ard ma lapuik sit) wwa? vah w a cones 
até than sith tarerh gah kuim law » ma dah afga row ci # pawa ma tien dadah ch Q oie 

- mnush » maha(10)sizh tarem mnum- tawuiw khandasirh tareth » tawuiw mahasim Bae psi 

1 B omits sim, i ¥ a Atte 

a. Hecor for gah, which th ane en fe eon * Error for wimatiwinodant, 

4 Here we should Insert mnum tawuiw khangasitn tarem ly j 

5 Orig. has wahdra®, - 6 A inserts gah kia » parikkhe paparipdvasits, oe 


as 


PART IL] MON INSCRIPTIONS 61 


5 ee ee ee ee ea on 


cece eee eee eee ee ft]tfi] hei [djah taut rau gafh hjJet 
gah [IJar pdafy] Wimatiw[i]noda[nji dah uifw da] ci: :] pf[d]ay 
ma sa[{slath[mut sim tami lamah gah go’ kanan]? 


DAS Ae ah eal a oS Seb iG BO aes eae Se aye Org ow) @ a ee 
eee eee eee eee fm ra yjar [sno]m tun ma « ma lapof{k] 
ha tuin ma gah ci [n]wlo]m [tun nad] « rau gafh lar>c[uit tJufy] + 
pa[r}ifkam] tluy ma lJapo[k* sim g]ah [rau] — | 


14. ea ¢ @ 4 * ° * * * © &@© @ ¢€ « ~  % ? . & € &€ & BB we »  @ * 4 * ._* &® #8 @ @ #8 - @ 
ee ee ee eee [S]pa pday sfilm gah ler [mJasun masun fhat] 
caturah gah « [kJanah 4 na gapuiw ra « manhah [th]an ma [spa . 
sim gah® tun] le[r « w]a[dJu[ih h]e- 


i4. (a) * + * & * &¢ ¢ @ BR 8 + + #2  #e @ & &£ £  & e . ¢# £ =p *& id *_ *¢ * * * . * : 
eee ee eee ee eee (nt) [gah] tfi]la [fa] niman ran tila 
puly sai cah pan gah tuy « kuifw Ia[p]o[k] sim [ra « » akh]a [ma. 
lapok] gafh] « j[m]a[p jmap] 


15. o. &¢ @© 8&8 © © © @ 8 € © © & & SB we F ao F&F HF & & * . «£ FS + * @ ® * ® = ~ - w ” x * 
ss eee eee ee Ch) tuy « kammawa[t] ler dapofh] co’ lor tuy « 
mwoy m[wlo[y] clwlo’ mwoy mwofy leh « dapoh lejh [padwot] (tu)- 


1 The 2 is between the two marginal lines, 
4 Looks like lapoé. 
8 There appears to be a large original flaw between the g and the A, 


ha set kuiw atiga swa’ s rau wwa’ the Iduiw gah uiw # galin the fuiw ma gah gah 
lew rau ma yu(xxrjtti he& dah tau rau gah gah law pdai wimatiwinodani! dah uiw da ci « 
pdai ma samit sim tami Imuh wea’ yah « gwa’ kanha& pha-uit tuai « jmap jmap kanha& gah 
sgo’ lapuik 4 mha « siyn tare(tajrh yaw sanwam tun mha ma lapuik ha tuin ma gah ci nwash 
tan ha » rau gah law cuit tuai parikam ma lapuik gah rau wwa’ tila fiah Ramadhippati ma 
kuiw cirel # yim bnat than ma (13) spa pdai sim gah le 5 5 hat catturah gah » kapah? a na 
gapuiw3 ra #4 gata (14) nf gah tila fiah niman raf saw ta’ » cah pan gah kludé lapuik sith ra n 
akha 5 ma lapuik gah jma@p jmap kanhat het tila puiai ta’ gaja’ cwa’® pdai kanhaw ga(isjh tual « 
kammawat 7 cwa’ law tuai » mwai mwai cwa’ mwai mwai leh 7 leh phadot tuai heh » klo’ 4 kanhad 


1 A cimati « winodani, 2 A pdn, 3 A gabutw, 
4-There is a considerable omission in the mgs. here, 
5 A kala, 8B cum env, 


> 


e 


6: EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von mt 


Tie CY ace oA ees ee ees, Se ee Sot RS 


oe eee ees es [pathama]? gah « [cluiw c{uip kJana[n rJa-fit] 


c{[njor pathama’ [gah] lapok tuy [hen] « clo’ kanan ra-[it ma | 


dah enor dutilya (te’)? [tun] 
o+.see.... [kJanah ma dah [t]amh cnfor duJtiya gah ras ni 
kanan tath cnor dutiya gah] lapo{k] tuy [hen « clo’ a] lapok 
{kanan] (tam). . | : 
133) eae BS 2 Ce ae ee eae eee ee ee ee ee a 
~».. (abwoy)® f[anuJlum flapojk tuin a* jma[p jmap] kanan 
cvip [kanat] « [nai kjanaf [kJanat a[bwo]y. [patilum jm]a[p jmap 
kanan lapok] c{uih] . . s | 


4 sg : 
19. ¢ ¢ © © @ & . * of *. * - 8 ° *- e# 2 @ e « e a ° ® e * o oe @ * e e * * ¢ ° e * 


+++eee ee [llapok tuy rau ma [l]apfo]k sim wo’ [gah] « they 
shi[syJor dapafh * brjam&k kitu mfrli[kkasui]w ® [gah hJen [0 ma 
lapok tuy + 4] oe 


20, se ee er 


sees ees ett kha ma sa{th]mut gafh 1] rau [wo] cire[n] tuy 1 


ma samut 1 yam bnat than [ma s]pa sim gah « (sal[tim? tuy 
hjeh « dafkau ler pan duih].. | 


1 The ¢h in this word has a peculiar shape much like the #h in the Myazedi inscription (see Ep, | 
Birm., vol, i, pt. i, plate iii, facing p. §5). As it is there used in the word thar, 1 do not think it is 


a th, although in pathama it ought {etymologically) to be one, 


2 Conceivably, but improbably, wo’. = Conjecturally restored, 
4 What looks like an anusvitra above the 4 is probably a subsequent disfigurement. 
5 Possibly dapdh, & Or mruik®. 


* This word seems very doubtful 3 even the ¢ might be a &. 


8-48 tun rau gah ni kna® tach cnow (16) pathama gah cuiw cui 
lapuik tuai hed klo’ 4 kanhaf la-it ma dah cnow dutiya tun » n& kanot! cnow dutiya # te’ lapok ma 
dah ceh klu& tuai a cuip (17) kanhah ma dah tath cnow dutiya ? te’ ran? nd kama tas cnow4 
dutiyya gah lapuik tuai hem u ko’ & lapuik kanad tazn cnow tatiya te’ ra wna nai ma rau wwa’ gah 
no kanhad& tam (18) bwai anulum lapok tuin 4 jmap jmap kanan « cuip kanat bwai patilum ima 
jmap Kanha lapuik ceh klud cuiw cuip knaw tarh » kanhafi gah uit seh het » sim gah eee me 
(19) lapuik tuai ras ma‘ lapuile sith wwa? gah thai ‘stisaw dapak mamak gitu mrekkasuiw hed 
ma lapuik tuai.« ¢ thai aduit 8 mamak gitu mrekkasuiw he ma samit sish (20) » kha ma samit gah 


p kna# la-it cnow pathama gah » ma 


1A kanhan . 2 Orig has 7 

. ig. Dap tatiya. 
8 The following words (to ra» inclusive) oceur only . B. - | ' 
4Netinthe MS, Aga, 2 [A adds 84 


oe ee a ee 2 


‘PART I] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 68 


Zi. pe ois Tin ike, ater lg’ Sie sgt 1G Sige Ue Pak Geta) a GR Wes Sab cas CE tw Tae eas leew Marie dg e, waSie Ut cea ee 
wee ee. tma’ fd]wor pan gafh] « phuiw ttuy] ma (pa) [tma’] 
nimit [dJacam gafh] « mik [kui]Jw nwom ta[me]f ni sa[n]tha[n pan 
tlah tuy «] (dwor) [dwor gah] (p)af{dan]? (t)i(t) 

wee.» PjJuk tuofy] « cruth tma’ (k)uiw? cfrjuifh tma’] gah 

[rjuf calof? 4] t[uly » atuin® jufk] ma cuifh gah heJn « [carit‘ 

calo’ a pday ti] (da »)® carit ca- 

ek oe re eee eee eee Cer a eer re ee ae ee ae eee 
... smik kuiw simamagga 1 calah ta[bJah gafh® jjano[k. mw]ofy 
edja « la[yo]h mway cda [0] karo[n] calllo’ [2 ti ra un kha] ma 


kafron 4 ti glah 7 
24. Scere Cn OG ie BANS sa eae ah aces Se fas RSG a8 
.. maf{njah nimift] gah kuim « kuiw pday nimift t]Juy ma sdah 
s[im tlam[i] gafh] kuim « cafah] janah kle’ [tluly] « gafrjen 
_ (tanam)’ [k]aron lafr jar] lagar tuy 1 
. (ga)h ler « gafii na [thor] na [ka-u]y ba[k]e{t] ta’ gah t[u]y « na 
ylalt bake[t] bata[f glah » (pt® gia[fi lar] Gass) [het tluy ma 
ruifh se k]yak « [j]ma- | 


J The initial of this word might be 5 or #, 

2 Conceivably faz, ; 3 There was probably an original flaw between @ and #, 
4 There was probably an original flaw between c and 7, 

5 Conceivably, but improbably, instead of da 1 one might read a, 

6 There was probably a small original flaw here. 

7 Very doubtful: the ¢ might be &, the x might be 7, end the m possibly 4, 

8 Perhaps the two strokes under the p are accidental and we should read pa. 

9 Very doubtful, Z 


rau wwa’ acirefi pa tuai samit « yath bnat than ma spa sirn gah samtirmn tuai hef dakau! pan duih 
n tma’ nimit 8 ma tuiw nv akha ma tuiwt (21) tma’ dow pan gah « phuiw tual pa ma tma’ nimit dacdm 
gah mik kuiw * nwath tamefi n& fiah Ai? nd santhdn pan klat gah dow gah phadda tit fi #13 tuai ma 
tuiw tma’ tual heh # ket raf (az) juk tual cruih 4 tma’ kuiw craih® tma’ gah rufi calo’ @ tuai atuifi 
juk ma cuip gah hea w ma caruih & calo’ pdai tira « caruih ® ca(23)lo’ tuai he yarn mfiah carik 6 gah | 
he& tuai kuiw simmhadmaggath » canah thabah gah n jnok mwai-sda layah mwai sda w karon calo’ a. 
ti ra « kha ma karo 4 ti gah ruih chu ruih dun kamat han’ ma spa kuiw sahkarakamasimm ma dah 
tau (24) nimit gah kuish « kuiw pdai nimit ma sadah sim tami gah kuim caah jadah kle’ tuai « 
karof kanham law karofi law ja lagaw tuai » cut bape law dak ra» rau gah pa tuai hes tma’ nimit 
(95) gah lew gfii na. thaw na ga-uai phket ta’ gah tuai » na yat bket btad gah pa gfii law ra a huit 
1 A apparently has daé, 


2 The three preceding words are clearly superfluous, : BA HM 
4A crit, ‘ = 5A khruta. | A Ror-cartth 7 Biadda tam, 9 ©. 


ous se oad 


- 86. (P) occ c errr scree ree erre ee Se ee ee Ue ee a ee ee ee 


.. ma pea tau na (g)ara(y)’ # na pnafh na ylat pflja[t] dakor 
sna da{bujt lar [mafjah nimf[i]t tuly] «9 tuy hen [cjuiw t[i]la 
[puiy ta’ ey nijmi{t ra u 4 uit tma]’ daca- — 


37. fal! cMeaphae Ga ogeeted oe ee ee erase di 

| . ma s{kjay [skJay tla gafh tuy « tila pjuty ta’ fais pldaly ruja 
dwfor] s{i]m [t]e’? » kajo[’] pandah * [h]atthapah tuy | [tilla 
[puily [to’] d[maJa ° {Hau rat um etic ; 


mafajah pamaknet [glah 1 mnifh to]k ku[t}m jar fah ma dok cif 
kuim lar » fiah ma dok k[slefh kuim a [cJatan ca[l]o’ [4] 


(pa-)[uit tuy] © jnor 


Ef 
4 


29. eee rae ee a eee ee ee ee ee ee 
fal  da(p)uiw? a{k]ra a[k]ra gath cut 4] tuy « yata® gam-i e-an 
ma t[w]ak tar[au hjet ma ha mfik kjuiw []wfop] pdaly tawuilw 
ease gah t [kui]- 


1 The g looks like w, aid: the y might be 4, 
2 Conjecturally restored, 
8 There seems to have been an original flaw between the ¢ and the ’. 
4 As this d is in the full form, it is probably not to be read @, 
5 The anusvdra is a little doubtful, but it is needed here, 
6 There is a small space here with faint marks on it which might be the remains of md.or na, 
_ but are probably merely accidental. 
7 The doubtful letter may be 4 or even w.. 
® Cf, B 49, D 47, 48. 


_ma reh seh kydk # jma(26)p jmap tma’ nimit gah kuim » na kduith jnow dhup sau nua klah 
bape tau na garaj na pnah » na yat plab? skaw sna dabut Jaw mab nimit tuai hed » kuiw tila 
ta’ skai nimit ra # uit jmap tma’ 8 pi? lapuh tila ta’ skai tuai beuip tma’ (37) ma skai kla te’ tuai 
« tila ta’ lop 4 pdai tawuiw dow sim te’ « gaja’ palah hattapah tuai tila damaé tau ra a kha gah 
atuif gdmakhet ma karo Jaw tuai gah mah (28) mah gamakhet gah mnih tuik kuim law w fiah 
ma quik cif kui law w fiah- ma duik khyeh kaih law » datau calo’ 4 gut tuai jnow ram tda khon 
lew srak dari 4 tuai ». phath kanu sa(a9)f dapuiw akra akra cut a tuat 0 yata gamhi s-44 ma twak 


a A lah. 

48 pI might be read gap? ; but the text on the stones shows that 8 must pe read, though #2 
remains unexplained. 

8 Error for ray, 


J 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — EvoL, mt” 


ma 
wo ily 


* PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 65 


30. [w]? (maf)? mway buin fikan* tuy « [yam p]dfay]........%. 

. [g]ah tun fle]r « [g]am-i c-an [t]uy phek I[wlop nworhm.tau 

pda[y] th[aJn ma ranu[k] danda[n® g]ah tufy © kjui[w* dan]a{y] 
(cat® bat) [may tau ra 1 tujy heft mnfih] 

(ma)? dr[e]p to{k] kui[m] lor » mnih ma dok ks[eh kui]m lar # kuiw 
d{rjep bui[k] krau gah ku fiah ma maf mwoy [te] tun 4 [d]apuin 
taya® pday gamakhet’ [w]o’ [ler ha] mway [ras] da[pui]n c-aa 
ma slop [p]day g4- 

32, makhet wo’ ler ha mwoy ra « plujty difk] mah mwoy [b]Juin fika{n® 
sjan ra 1 rau gah [Ajah ma [p]la[n] tuff] gah gah cui{p)°® tuy 
fhjei « [ma] kuiw tfilla puily] t{@’ sJam[mu]t [sim rwof] « « [kha 
tila] p[uly to? ma [p]ad[wo]- 

[t] kammawaca [tu]n [Ie(r] » [h]et [ma m]ik kJu[tw] akkharawisuddhi 
dafh g]ah » hah ba hela] ma kuiw padwo[t m]waly m]way wa + 
(p)anduk * dapafh w]4 [tuy] he[f] si[m gah dah] ma [sathmut tuy 
ra gah] tuly « phamh k]l[o’ twih twuik™ « dapuiw] 

[kJar[h]a » kanu sah ta gah [pi] leh heh ma kuiw tuik « [p]i leh 
[hje[{i] ma kuiw ho dra sim [ma] sathmut [t]uy wo’ gah 1 
[t]ila puly to’ ma 4 t[k]o’* Siagh{uijr [ma ,ket upasampada® 
pday udakuk]kh[epas]if[m » ma fiah cir]e- 


md 


3 


33 


* 


34 


* 


1 Conjecturally restored, ‘ 2 Error for Aflan, 
3 Written dandan, but certainly meant for dandan. 4 Looks like tude, 

5 This word seems to have been subsequently altered by some intentional disfigurement. 

8 Presumably an error for yata. 7 Between £4 and’ there is an original flaw, 
® Error for fan, as in 1, 30, 

9 Looks like cuim, but the mark in it is probably accidental, 
10 Conceivably, though improbably, the initial may be 4, 


1 The « is doubtful, 
14 The original appears to have ito’. 


18 Conceivably *savinp*, 


tarau huit ha mik kuiw lop pdai tawuiw gamakhet gah (30) bwai ma buin kfian taai yarn pdai 
tawuiw gamakhet gah tun lew gami s-4% phek nwarh tau pdai than ranuk dalan gah tual « kuiw 
glaai dnaai cam bat mwai tau ra « mnih (31) ma drep tuik kuith law « mnih ma duik cid khyeh kuimm 
Jaw » kuiw drep bak krau gah ku fah ma mat mwai te’ tun » gami taya Pdai gamakhet wwa’ ha 
mwai ra « gami s-af ma lop pdai ga(3a)makhet wwa” lew ha mwai ra » puiai dik maf mwai buin 
kfian san ra» rau gal fiah pean gab gah cuit! tual hed » ma kutw tila ta’ samit rof w kala tile ta’ 
ma phado(33)t kammawat gah tun lew » huit? smik kuiw akkharawisuddha dah Aah ba hes » ma 
kuiw phadot mwai mwai! phadct 7 wd tuai hef » sith gah ma samit tual ra gah tuai » phar 3 
klew twid twuik dapuiw (34) kard kanu sat ta’ gah 3 leh heA ma kuiw tuik « pi leh he& ma kuiw 
ho drd « sith ma samit tuai gah » tila ta’ ma 4 taka’ Sidghuiw « ma duh upasampada pdai 


1 Error for euip, 2A omits  Arurd. - 3 A med, ° 


5 


oe 


e 35. fi pday Kalyaniga[a ‘glah 4 ma sathmut het dah uiw da or 
(Kallyanisi[m] gah [tluy + tifl]Ja fiah kuifw] lar [yamju"" pa tam 
ni ti[l]a sah da [t]@’ wo]’ ma cuip tlua] nfti tkjof’? Sinjgh[ulir 
[kuim] ra [tla ha] (g)ata(p)? | 

36. sa(th)mfujt s[iJm wo’ [kuim Ier 1 tila puiy sah to’ [tluly » ma euin 
dafh] tau gan{i glanacariya » laf(@)uiw gafh « hje[t ma_ sdik 
mlik? s]asa[na -s]an da[h uiw] da [ci] « upa[sampada tuy ma dget 
tau pday puiy gah a ma dah tau] 


37. [alsaika gah » ha gap glwojr heh rau pday jaren tila [puliy ta’ 
 [tu]y « [ma d]uh rah upasampada nf tko’ Siffghuir gah «] kuiw 
pufiy wo'® djufa ket* upasathmpada] ra fii [rau gah glah [tuy # 

ma gluin® ku leh hefu tluf ptim tau tila jah [Ramadhipati ra] ° 


1 The g looks something like 6, and the p like m. 
- 2 Conceivably sduié mluzk, but no w’s are ‘visible. 
8 Or go’? 
4 Looks like ¢e¢ but must be meant for Ret. | 
5 The g looks like m, but in view of the context there can be little doubt that glwiz is right. 
@ The va is in the margin, between the double lines, 3 


udakukkhepasimh ma fiah 1 cire(3s)4 pdai Kalyanigah gah ma samit huit uiw da ci «. Kalyanisim 
gah tuai tila fiah kuiw law ymu ra # ni ma pa tam tila sah ta’ wwa’ ma cuip klud n@ taka’ 
Sidghuiw kuim ra 1 kld ha gatap (36) samit sith wwa’ kuith lew tila safi ta’ ma cuin dah tau gani? 
- ganacariya® lduiw gah w“huit-ma sduik mluik ssnd san dah uiw da ci # upasampada ma daget tau 
puiai? puiai gwa’ gah dah tau (37) asankd® gah ha gap gaw het ras pdai jared tila ta’ ma dus 
ra upasampada nf taka’ Sitghuiw gah «# kuiw puiai gwa’ du@ upasampada fi ra » rau gah gah 
tuai » ma gluih ku leh hef kluf pa tim tala fiah Ramadhippatié ra un tila fab lew rau wwa’ huith 
plan ku tila ta’ tun w dndai tila ma nwamh tau saddha ma mik dui upasampada jared tila ta’ ma 
dui upasampada jiah Siighuiw gah dud kuizh ra w fiah ma ha mwai ku saddha ha mik dud 
 upasampada fiah Sitghuiw damaé kuim ra u fiah ma mik sgo’ duh upasampada tnow fiah Sitghuiw 
gah m4» lapa duf gah tuai » ha. gwa’ si dadaw? » tila ta’ ma ha mik tnow upasampada fiah 

. Sidghuiw gah du& hefi ra gah tuai u ai dik hwa’ gwa’ ran skuit » adhipdai sla pat winai ma cuin 
dah tau ma mik kyak trai gah hef tila ai ta’ khyap ket kuiw buin ra « upasampada ma cap tau 
_ kuiw tila ai ta’ asaika8 dah tau pdai cuit mao tila ta’ dut ket tnow 19 upasampada fiah Sidghuiw 
ta" 0 upasampada ma cap tau kuiw 11 tila ai ta’ s-ah tau heh dah ma9 @ dsatkal? ha mwaira dah 
Pdai cuit mha » tila ta’ dmaA kuish ra » rau gah tila fiah Ramadhippati huim plan 23 ku tila sai ta’ 
. gamluih raw gata nf gah rau wwa’ tila fiah Ramdadhippati khyap tun w tila sah ta’ ma dah 
ganacariya |duiw nwath pamik mik gwa’ upasampada fiah Sitighuiw gah yahah » sabhau™ sla pat 
winai ma gah tun lew pubbaja kuin lew » upasampada 15 kuith lew # uppajhaai he& ma dah tnam # 


1 Orig: inserts pgat here. 2 A gaght, 3A gdidacariha, 
4 This should be pat. _~ § Orig. has sdsagka, 8 Error for Ramadhippati. 
-TErpor for ch¥ daw, 8 A sankd, — 2A mha, Sar 
10 A omits tnow, - TA ba. 12 Orig. has asankd 
1B balan : : 


é 14 For yarah s sabhau A has ymu h stau, 
_ 18 Orig, has upasampadd, ae Die SAR Oe 


66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA EVOL, UI 


ut 


Ye 


PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 69 


nN 
(Fragments @ and 4.) 


s. es # e@ @ © & 8 He 8 8 Ge He ee he eo +e 7 Fe Pe he he le 


sce e eee eeeeees (rau) wo’ tila Lis) eens ee ee eae 


i 


4 


* © F He e © F HF me He * oe +e we ow eh elle elUlelUmhlUrlhlUele 


Dae a, We ee ae ee a ee Se eS Be ee ee Se se 


ee ee ee oc ae (3 ee 


* © © © © © © © © es # £f 8 ee 8 8 e e+ & F Hw H a a ee 


a ee ee ee 


see ee ee ee ee ff mii! pday udakulk]khe(pasim) .... | 


+. 2 + © ££ 8 * 2 © &@ & @& 


* 
$ 
* 


~~ © .*- .*. - & * * 2 2 & 2 * 8 8 8 8 & e # & # 


+ * . * 


1 About twenty lines appear to be lost between this and the preceding piece. The dots at the 
ends of the lines are roughly estimated. Fragment a goes down to l. 18, Fragment 3 begins at the 
beginning of 1,16, See the manuscript version. - 


a a A aa nwo rpmareamee or ner 


tila ta’ wwa’ macau ni Sifighuiw ta’ wwa’ tun lew ha duik cah cah! nish » dah niw da ci « pa 
uppajhaai lew ha gwa’ nim « ma dah uiw pa fid& puiai spa tuai tila puiai gat ta’ wwa’ ma sgo° dah 
tnow upasampada fiah Sifghuiw ma thuik dah upajhdai fiah gah puiai ma sgo’ ket ra& tuaj ma 
sgo’ kuiw upajhdai flah gamlui& ma sgo’ duf tnow upasampada fiah Sitghuiw wwa’ ro « rau gah tila 
fiah khyap tuai p-ow kuiw 3 Ai sman glaai dandai mwai ra « kha gah tila puial Parakkamabahd sami 
gah rau wwa’ kluf pa tim tila fiah « tila sad mwai gah ymu tila Mh@suwappasobhana gah yafiah w 
tila ma prai gah mha fab ma dué upasampada fiah tnow Sifghuiw het » pfiguiw ma cuin dah tau? 
Jat]i kukkuccaka sikkhdgdma w arafiaka appiccha « santutha » sallo « dhutafigara heft gah tual » 
pa tim tala fiah kha gah tila fiah p-ow kulw 4 niman rad tila gah ra » kha tila puiai ma klud 
cuip jaref tila flab gah » (Tt) rau wwa’ tila fab smgn ra ¢ tila ai ma 4 taka’ Sidghuiw ma 
dufi upasampada gah » mG pdai sim tila ai ma dui ma ci guin » fab gah ma pa 
uppajhaai y fiah gah ma pa (2) agariya q nd tila ma duh ypasampada fiah Sitghuiw gah 
» lamuh mwaj ci wah fo # rau gab tila fiah sman ra # rau wwa’ tila sah plan tun # 
kp tila fiah puiai ma duh wpasampada fiab SiAghwi(3)w mhd « pdai udakukkhepasich ma§ 
fiah cipe& law pdai Kalambu-jatassara jamnok+ gah hei » guip 33 «4 tila pniai Wapnarakkha® 


: tes oat for ag or ai : 
The equivalent in the Pali text for the passage from here to dhuta rara, inclusi: abtacd 
aintengaah ore appiocho santuttho sallekhi lap fatbustabo SbMRALa no Bate pois fg Be qcaP Mente? 
rig, has mit, 4 A mob, © 
5 A omits guin 32 6, The Pali has appamdyassa ganossa santibe. 
& In the Pai Vitietienantnakek seveams Asadghard/anam, ' 


a age 


68 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou. tt 


a ; . : . upafijjhay | tila puiy Ra(hulabhaddhathe)’ 


mares e e 2 6© @ @ © © © € © @ © © © © 8 F © 
oe 8 eo 6 6 eo ew oe oe HH HF t) : 


se o 6 


oe 8 @ 

6 a oF 

oee @ 6 6 

= ee ee ee a : 

bad ee Se gi ee ee a ih Wi BE 6 Oe 5 Wes ORE OF AO MRE BORE BN ee 
@ 6 @ 6 > @. 


SS (lan) k{u] tila fab « tila (Jah rmia eee eee eee. 


i gue Be. OTS Be Ba 6 eee Tea 8 BTR TOE RL EE OER ER PR EO oe 


e 9 
a 
oeeoef © O08 @ 
= of € 
= - 7 ne 
. : : 
; oo 6 & © @ © 8 Be ee © e& 6 & Oo 8 
e@e¢ © & @ @ © & & @ @. ; 
e* 8 0 © eo @ © 
ag ce : 


.. dui [upasa}m[palda Sfiigh]ufir gafh + glluiA san... ---- 


a. e ; ; e o es6@80 6? e @ ° eo @ soe 5 e @ 2,32 e e ie ° « ° eo 6 a 6 eo ¢ @ ° o oe [r] 
'.. sasana tuy | t[ila puiy] kajo’® (k)wom® ... 22-02 e eee 


ote. vas Se Soe er 8 RE ee ee ee ee oe 


MB aes. OAR cee ee ee ee © (oy kobe 
akhwoa ku tila fah ra | 1 akha ma sammut (sim)* . 


ee © 6 * 8 @ @ 


wy : . : 
eb wile le See! Ss ee ee ea ee a Oe ee ee ee ee 


_ @ @ 0 @ @ 


9. fiah Siighufir].... te Shes . [fiJah ma lwon tuy -gafh] 1 
tlu cuip t[il]ja [fiaJh ral tila fiah ge ed. a tae ee ew ae Pa ena 


1 Restored from the Pali version. . 
2 There is a small circle over the o, but I cannot imagine what function an anusvdya could 
perform there, Probably it is an error of the engraver’s. 
8 The initial of the next word was apparently either 4 or %. 
4 Conjectural restoration. 


Rt 


safigharaja jnok te’ he ma pa (4) uppajhdai « tila puiai Rahulathe ma dah sadgharaja Imuh ma pa 
cariya » was! ai ni? ma dud upasampada fiah Sidzhuiw gah # dah ba coh tarau wah ra3 « rau gah 
tila puiai sah (5) plan‘ » ku tila fiah tila fah mif lahuith tila tuai mip cuit pfiimah san dah tuai tila 
fiah kuiw niman tila puiai ra » sai ta’ ma nwam> kuiw saddhdmala » pamik 6 (6) upasampada fiah 
Sidghuiw gluif san uiw da ci » tila ai mik kuiw upajhaai tuai mik kuiw fiah gwa’ dufé upasampada 
suiw? » tila ai mwai kuiw8 datuai mramo(7)w sasn@ ra » tila ai gaja’ kom? fii » rau gah gah 
tuai tila fiah niman ra » tila puiai tun lew « gabut sasnd rof ci »,puiai gaja’ san ra gah (8) tuai 
kuiw akho& ku tila fia) ra » akhd ma smut si gah tuai " tila puiai gapl ganac@riyya gamluih 
mnum pamik duf upasampada (9) fiah Sidzhuiw ma huimh kuim Jaw « ku tila fiah ma lon tuai gah 10 
» klud cuip tila fah ra « tila fiah koh ku kuiw tila sah ta’ gamluif ceh 4 Kalydnisim ra u tila sat 


1A gah, 2 A omits nd, 8A gah, 1B palan, 
5A mnum, — 6 For » pamik A has pami. 7A soh, 8% For kuiw A has hen kutth, 
9 A adds ku, WA 4a, ; : 


e 


F 


‘PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 69 


ro,’ ma cau ni [Sijaghufijr ler [e tiJla [fJah [k]ui[w n]iman plop pday 
Kalyanis[im ra ' tijla p[uiy Sulwanna(sobhanamahathe)?...... 


eee 8 0@ © @#etse eees ft @ @ @ @ @ © 8 ©  €¢ @ Be © © & & B@ 8 


11. h rfau] wwo’ [tila] fah huim [pljan ku safi [ma] cau ni Sifghuir 
[gamlui]a ra r [tiJla puiy sai gamluif wlo? gahenw.. see 


4 


* @@6e«e¢ # © @ @ @ eae eB oe 6 eH 2 6 6 HH & FH Bw HF 2 HR eB ea He & * © & 8B w 


e 8® ¢ @ 8 @ 


12, [kfia k]u[i]Jw upasampada rau kha gah rau ww[o’ tifla puiy sah 
Sidghuir [to] gamluif huim plan tun i tila...-...-22005- 


oe 8 8 8 @ eH He em mH ee Hm re er ee Per ae eer co) 


13. [ci] are[m] tuy tila puiy to’ fah tko’ Siaghuir ma [ku]iw upasa[mpada 
ku pulty. [gah] + maharfa}(j)*® .. 1.0 6 ee ee ee eee 


* 9 *® © © 8&8 © © & * &© &© 8 @ © & & @ # eB e ee He +e 2 se  & 
ee 


14, fah tko’ Siaghuir (tluy ma sk[uliw upasampada ku puiy gah [r] 
la[hjgat puiy [sah glamluid ma tau pdjay [tko’].-........ 


e > & * * * * * * ¢ & + » *s @¢ Ls bad e* 8 + * _ +. 2. e + * * * # *_ * ee * 


2 


15. [ya]t bata tl]a tu[y] + kuiw tau pday gihiliaga r khi ma tau pday 
ei hillinjea pan tain ler Ss aoa oe eg ee ee eee me ee ee 


o m e * - = . « a * * * *. * * * * * a - . * - * * * 
1 Restored on the basis of the Pali version. 


2 Conjectural restoration, 
8 Qr possibly the final may be #, as in L.M. 


ta(to) ma cau n& Sidghuiw lew tila fiah kuiw niman plop pdai Kalyanisim ra « tila the Suwagna- 
sobhana ma spa upajhdai gah lew tila fah kuiw niman rah pdai Kalydgisim ra a kh@ galixjh 
rau wwa’ tila fab huim plan ku sa ma cau nf Sidwhuiw gamluid rao tila sat gamlui wwa? 
gah nwam pamik kuiw ma mik duf upasampada tnow fiah Sitghuiw gah ci » tila ai ta’ (1a) 
kfia kuiw upasampada gwa’ raw kha gah rau wwa’ tila puiai sa Suhghuiw gamluifi huim plan 
tun « tila fiah peow kuiw @ duf rah upasampada fiah Sitghuiw ra gah tuai « puiai a dud 
ral ra on ou ah a(rg)ci are tila ta’ Aah taka’ Sifzhuiw ma kuiw upasampada ku puiai 
gah n -maharaj? kom ku kuiw tila sad te’ gamiua&i pak mhik fi wn kala tila ta’ (14) flab taka’ 
Sidghuiw ma skuiw upasampada ku puial gah sak wwa’ tila ta’ pa huim w kala puiai sa@ gamluid 
ma tau pdai taka’ Sitghuiw a kuiw upasampada ku fiah ma klufi nf jamfoai mha ku fah ma 
pa sdk wwa’ tuai ma kuiw roi» pasak ron kuiw (15) yat btdd kla tuai kuiw tau pdai gihibhau 
kld #2 kha ma tau pdai gihiliA gah tun lew » ai gihi ra gah tuai pa wacibheda 4 pamik flab 


1 A omits ran. i 2A mahdmardt, 
3A omits », 4B waelbheda, 


a 


4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA vob. 1 
ae tun Mele] (yt pa. cs [ha] seh 1 sabhau tuy [ma] du 


‘upasalmplada ma telah [ms i cladah kle’ > gikilia(ga) ieee ls Ae 

. [ul * ce : 

We franpal rwoh [tr]. . (t)[i]la ey to’)* mik upasampada 

-, » (t)[i](la) fey to’] ra ee aes eee, 
re cee eee ae 

18. mani tuy # puiy ma sgo’ [kJuiw u[pasa]m[pada]...-.-.--+---. 

a eee Oe Sel ee ee es 12% OTN me, ee ee Tew Se eB eae 

1g. to’ een ‘gah tu[y] (}) sdui ket [u]pasampada ra t pday [k]a ma 

(trak) Fs ea ew ce ee a et eee ee ee eee 


rg : i 
oe @ @ © &© @ @ #@ © © @ © 8 © & 8 © 6 @ 8 8 SP Fs es ee ee Fe 


20. k rwof 1 upasampada tami wwo’ gah! puiy ha go’ balk] sgah tuy + 


OC as ae a ar ec ai aie 


8 oso ¢ & @ oe 8° & 6 eo ° s G+ e s * a s e e o = ee. .°@ o ° 


a, {djui [uipasampada ta[m]i xa a [oli t atuif ~wafh tami wwo’ ra smik 
: kuiw ruih cuih cuip (bnat) . . Se et eee 


Pe Adee ee oe i a ea 


22. sat ffjah tko’ [Sia}ghuir [t]o’ huirn plat [k]u puiy- tufy io] wit puly 
fiah [g]amluii ma (d)iG% Cote oe teen a eee ae ew eae 


ee a ar a ee @ 6 © @ © © 8 & © eo eB ss es 8 € 


‘1 These words 2 are the beginning of fragment b, which overlaps fragmént a here, 
2 Conjecturally restored. 3 Very doubtful, except the ”, 


— 


fa nw tia kuiw pa wacibhéda 1 gwa’ (16) tun lew u huit s-d& ha se sabhau ma duf upasam-~ 
pada mgah mha cadah kle’ gihilifga tuai kuiw pa? sammani kla pdai dadah simmani gah tau 
tiiai tha Kkuiw u(17)pasampada ro# » lamuh tila ai ta’? mik du upasampada gah ra e # mik 
dah cmat ra dah md » tau pdai gahiliiga tuai gwa’? gamhi dadah‘ s4(18)mmani kla tuai 
— pulai tha sgo’ kuiw upasampada rof # puiai gihi ra gah tuai ma mik kuiw tim 05 tila ta’ pa 
Wwacibheda © wwa’ tun lew lamah gah tila (19) ta’ saddha dah tuai duh upasampada ra » » pdai 
‘kala gah krau amit pawa aca pajhaai twah ganah ma byi plut gah cuit gatab plan 4 tuai w 
upasainpada tna te’ -pulai ma ‘ba(20)k roa upasampada_ tami wwa’ puiai ha gwa’ bak gah tuai « 
tii wah tarem te’ kuim7?-ma sruih gah ma puiai ha mik kuiw dah y, tila ta’ saddha gah dah tuai w 
(21) dia upasdmpada - tami ra ci « atui& wah tami ra » smik kuiw ruih culw cuip bnat ayuk gah 
tiidi n puiai ‘ma mik kuiw pa wacibheda®-sik gah rof rau gah tila ta’ (24) ) fiah tka’? Sidighuiw 
“huis plan ku puiai ra 1 uit puiai hab gamluiA ma 4 dud upasampada wwa’ gah » puiai? datau 
1 A wabheda, B wicibheda, 2 A inserts gamhi, 2A wwa’, 
- 4 A bdah. : 58 B omits tim », e 8 Orig. has waci®, 
7B omits te? kuin, 8 B wacibheda, A wacibhedabheda. TA pdat, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS oan 


23. dafh pla (bactbheda)! [s]ak gah tuy + tiflla puiy [t]o’? kuiw saffg]s 
p[ijan * gam-i puily tjuy «= kuiw [sarJa(nagamana) ° a a eee ree 

24. ' tila puly “[elor ma] kuiw upjasa[mp]ada kuiw puiy — rwot RE rau 
gah tiflla puiy tloP ma cau nit Sighuir........--2.-4-.- 

as. fiah gam[lJum kuim [h]Jet saddha gah t[u]y ' puty infil] dua upasam- 
pada t[nJor fiah Sitghuir ra cit atuifi] acimna......-.... 
ap a ae Sylaicwit bees Be “tales er GN nah tie Sia ial Wace Seah 

26. [ghjui[r g]amlui[a] kwe[m k]u tila puiy to’ sa[f] gafmluif] samafh]* 
saman tuy heft: pa tam nf thay can dacit bra[mok]®...... 
* o oe e a o * 2 * * * cal 2 e - * ad a so * * es se » a °° * * * . a. oT a cd [ka]- * 

ay. [jlo’ dmana [t]uy + atuif dcinna fiah [S]i{f]ghuir gamluim ma pa gah 
hfen] + tila pui[y] to’ pa tuy ' [pa tlam n& tifla)......2.4.. 
ee ee eee ae ee ee Pen el ec 

28. s[o]bhanamahathe’ damli tuy + uit tiflja puiy [to]’ ma cau nit 
Siaghuir gamluid! ma pa tath tu® tila puiy S[irisJafh(ghabodhi- 
SAMI)? ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee os fupah™ 

1 This (or possibly pa bacc?’) appears to be the reading. 

2 There is excessive space here, probably due to an original flaw. 

3 Conjecturally restored by comparison with the Pali version. 

4 Conjecturally restored. 

5 The final looks like ¢. 


6 Restored. The month was M&rgasirsa. 
7 Restored, so far as the part of the name at the end of the last line is concerned, from the 


Pali version, The first half of the ¢ must have been written at the end of I. 27. 


8 Error for ku, 


9 Restored on the basis of the passage in the Pali version corresponding with F 5. The Pali 
does not actually give the name here, 10 Restored. 


pdai gihilidiga gah J tuai « puiai (23) dah pa wacibheda 2 sak gah tuai « tila ta’ kuiw sf plan « gami 
puiai tuai kuiw saranagamana sikkhdpada ku puiai tuai badah gamhi sammagi ku puiai tuai he (24) 
tila ta’ ma skuiw upasampada ku puiai rof « rau gah tila ta’ macau nf Sitghuir gamluif ra 1 kha 
gah tila ta’ ma dah gandcariya gamluif rau wwa’ gah tun 0 uit puiai (as) fiah gamluif saddhd dah 
tuai o puiai ma mik spa upasampada tnow fiah Sifighuiw ra ci # atuif acinna fiah Sitghuiw gamluid 


. gah puiai spa dak ra. rau gah tila ta’ gah ran rau gah tila sai ma cau ni Sif(26)ghuiw gamluis 


kom ku tila gah ta’ gamlyifi u smik pa upasampada gah smah sman tuai hed » nf batam thai 1 
dacit matnok gitu mrekkasuiw gah heft u lukau 5 thal tila fab Ramadhippati ga(27)ja” damd& tuai 
1 atuif acinna fiah Siaghuiw gamluif ma pa gah hed tila puiai ta’ pa tuai « pa tam nf tila puiai 
mahasami® Dhatnmakitti gah rohu upajhdai ku tila the Suwanpa(28)sobhanamahathe damhik4 tuai 
n uit tila ta’ ma cau ni Sidghuiw gamluid « pa tarh ku tila puiai Sirisaighabodhisami gah alhaai 


on 


1A gihilinggah, B gahi° | 2 Orig. has waci*, 3 A mahdchaps, 4 Bthamhik, 


"2 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. uf 


29, sampada 1 # [tafjay [tlafay gah tila [f]Jah [Rama]dhipati kajo’ 
| dmaai’ 1 dan pu& dak ahara paccay ' sablu sla [!].......--. 


eceos 8 2 oe BHO oO GB ew ew oe wee wee wee oe ese eeaese 


30. cl[akh]i ka[yat] tu[y] + ma maf cut lik [cJad[won g]ah lew tila fliah 
prea law ¢ la{-i]t la-i[t] ma pa upa[sampada]..........-- 
31. law? tila [fiJah prefi law + kha thay ma salw a gah ‘ [s]mia tifla 
cakh]i kaya[t] + pnaa c[d]au p[re}a lafw] tuys tila fah...... 


oe @ @ @ 8 @ @ © @ oo © e® © oO @ © © © @ © © oO ow © ew ew oO Bw Oo A 


32. [a]c& guin r ma dun upasa[m]Jpada tuy gafh] (8) [dah bja klam [pan 
cwJjoh sun ra 0 [»] kha gafh] t[ijla [Ajah kuiw garah ptim..... 


of @ @ @ &@ @ @ @ @ ° @ e e¢ ¢ @ @ @ © @ @ «@ e¢ @¢ @ e.2@ @ @ e a © eo |. @ 


33. ’ (h]efa 5] tila puiy t(o’"] ma dua [upJasampada tami [gah] 1 ba 
kla[mhm] pan c[w]oh [s]u[n ] t[il]a puiy t{o} ma cau ni Siaghuir 
AOU) Seed a celles BS eee eae oe Wl oye ay ee ene 


eo @ @ @ 


34 Ww pa upufh plday [KJalyanisim fi» » (rJa-it tila pufiy tof ma [pa 


~ upujh tuy [gah] + dan pi[ndjapat [ler kJuiw........0-..0060. 


oe @ © @ © © © © © 8 ae 8 88 8h 8 lle ell le 


1 Abbreviated, as if adm, with superscript it. ; 
* Or lew, if the ¢ was at the end of |. 30, as seems probable from the MS. text. 


alhdai ma 4wariya! tuai » ma kuiw upa(29)sampada rau tafai tadai tila fiah Ramadhippati -gaja’ 
dm4s « dan pua dan ahara beai pan « jablu sla dak ydmakdla gah le tila fiah p-ow kuiw taruip 
tau safi ta’ raw (30) cakhi dayah ma cut lik cadon payamn gah le tila fiah pref law la-it l-it ma 
pa upasam pada tuai gah » huit mik kuiw sadhuka gah phash klo’ (31) le tila fiah pre& law un 
_khad t#ai ma saw 4 gah no smi tala cakhi dayah pnd sdau pred law tuai 1 tila fiah tuin 

kluh qui ran kha ma quik 5 thai gah » tah ma pa tim tala guin ma pa (32) aca guin 
ma dua upasampada tual gah» dah 245 rau kha gah tila fliah kuiw gara ptim tila ta’ 
gamluid Bi "thai si bape gitu mrekkasuiw t&ai aduit? wwa(33)’ hea « tila ta’ ma dud upasam- 
pada tami gah «# 345 » tila ‘ta’ ma cau nda Sidghuiw lew 15 9 uit tila ba klam.60 0» wwa’ mik 
kui(34)w upuh pdai Kalyanisimn fii » lait tila ta’? ma pa upuh tuai gah » dan pindapat le kuiw 


1 Error for pa acariya, 
2 A omits adus?, : 


u 
4 
Q 


"PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS ? 13 


35. go’? [kJuiw da[n fifi « [pasada] + cuit? [le]w kuiw pufiy] efo’l 
ga{t]u[i]w bfdjah Ai rau [g]ah « [tiJla fab [garlaf pti[m sah 
NAMEN (0) ei cece: gl Ges Se elxe ne epee eens Wika Be ae oe 


¥ 
e 9 @ @ 


36. s{ujim kuiw aramh parfi]wa 1 [kw]om [k]u amacea [s]enapaf{t]i gamluia 
hen cui[h 4] tuy » lah da[kJar [sw]ak san b[@] klath turau [cw]oh 


*o ff @ ov ¢ @& *# & @ * oo @ © ° * = orf 282 * © oe 


37» kha gafh] tila [sJah ba klam [tujrau [c]woh gah cufip] tluf tuy 
[pa] upuh rat ra-it ti[l]a puiy to’ ma pa upuh tuy gah « 
[DINdapat bee eg Pa ew oh ew aac BAe de ee AMM Rae 
mwo)-° | 


38. y [pjraka : da{k] ya[maka +] ta(rJuip tila puiy [t]Jo’ tuy [hJef « : tila 
puiy mwoy mwoy heh t yat Ss 2. 2. wee eee wee eae 
~..... (bun pana)-* . 


39. [k] sat " [mJe[k] su[t] ++ p[nJik cakkho « tdo[f] « pabeh « [p]adak » 
dakor mom : [ku]iw din kuiw tila [puly}.. 2... 2... 202 ee 


eo °¢« «# @ &@ © &©§ & © © 8B #8 © 2 & 8 & 


40. f gah 1 [tila] puiy Suwa{mnjas[o]bhanamahathe ma pa upajjhay gafh] 
« kuiw [yJamu Kalyani[ti]ssamaha[the] .-... 1... 222 ee eee 


eo ¢ &© 6 © ¢© @ #© &@ @© 8 © & 6 


1 Only the second half of the o appears in this line: the first part must have ended the 
preceding one, . 

3 1 think the reading given is right, though there seems to be no need for the stop. The Pali 
has eitiat ca pasddetum. 

8 Conjecturally restored. 


puiai gwa’ kuiw dan fi» dayadhamma ma gap gaw skuiw dan kui « kuiw puiai (35) gwa’ kuiw 
dain. fii « pasdda cuit le kuiw puiai gwa’ katuiw badah fii « rau gah tila fiah gara& pa tim sad 
gamluia tuai he thai si baped gitu mrekkasuiw gah prah he& ula flab (35) suisn arom pariwdra 
suizh amat senapati gamluiti he ceh 4 tuai » Jab skaw swak sah 2 klam 60 masun pa! upuh pdai 
Kalyanisim gah tuaj tila fah dma tau ra « (37) kha gah tila sat ba klam 60 gah cuip klud 
tuai pa upuh ra « pdai la-it tila ma pa upuh tuai gah « pindapat itu pindapat thai kwid 
yuih than cana ahadra ma ka mw(38)ai praka dak yamaka taruip tila ta’ heA ran tila sak mwai 
mwai gah » yat sand thap b# ba tau o sablu kbom pala suim bi gapuiw « pun pand(39)k% sat 
mhaai sut pnik® cakkho » kduih babe phaddk dakaw moth kuiw dan ku tila ta’ ra w akhad na 
ganap tila ta’ fiah gamlui(4o)A gah tila the Suwanmasobhanamahathe ma pa upajhdai gah kuiw ymv 


1 Error for ma sapa, 2 Orig, has pandat, 3 A bapuit. 


~™ 


Mm HPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor rir! 


41. [] 1 maf dmai tau [p]day sim gah dam[I}i hen ra + t{wlah tila puiy — 
3 aca guin ba klamh pa[n] cwoh sun gafh IJe[w + dju[n] (4)... .? 
(t)au [upasampada he]a* ras ac& guifn]...........22. 


oe 6 © @ & © @ © @ &@ © 6 8 & @ © 


J 
(Fragment a.)* — . 
Bg ee ee a Re ts ON a ee Se 8 ko ee ee 
. [upasampada] (gah)........ Saectae ae | 
Be ee eee eee eee eee ee ee os Eslpa sor tufy] 


smay ca [yay Hah. sf ioe Se bee 


1 There may have been an original flaw here, 

2 Abbreviated, with superscript 7%, as if hhe, 

3 About twenty lines appear to be lost between this and the preceding piece. But see the 
manuscript version, : . - 

4 Both margins being. lost, and there being in this case no other indications as to the amount 
missing at the beginnings and erfds of lines, respectively, thé number of dots is quite indefinite and 
merely denotes that something is missing, without indicating the amount, 
Kalyanitissamahathera » pa tat n& gah kuimh ra smin tala cakhi dayah ma klo(4r)? maa dmaa 
pdai sim damli hef ra» twab tila saf acd guin 245 gah le duf atl upasampada heA ra acd guin da 
s-ah ma nwami tau ku saddha ma mik du upasainpada lew dufé at hed ra # ta? catutha tuai raw 2 
kha gah tila fiah Ramadhippati? ptit + tila saf ta’ gamluif tual n uit pdai jamnok thin ma dah 
rah man wwa’ gah sak wwa’ tila 5 flah kuiw® pa katika kuiw krak samwai uit ran ma lon 3 tual 


g 8, we * a ee. 
is 18-€vidently.q note that has got i i te j 
os Ss -Cvidently te that has got into thé text, but it serves to sh 
go Reta eee & A omite, Big ee 
°K omits pa tous gg Rabo 8 A inserts Rah, | 
12 A sbuit. ee is ag B sph. 1A omits lpaéuiw pa fii, 
16 A sak, age salsa 


A jon juim (2) juin 


om. 


BART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 4S 


Be ne ee ee eee ee ee ee ee oe omfrfa oo Pyarjau [ka] ka[lwfon 
m[wloy gah « [g]arhah to’ tuy s(gyoh)'...........--- 
he we ee eee ee ee oe ee ft] ca [dhar* gatle[r] @ ma ca)* slor 
Ja(b)wfor]‘* (bdah)® ca twor kafn]®. 2.2... 0-0 ee ee ee 


See ee eee eee ee Ggalrhah (p)ah? (0) bly Ja(m)l(ay) « dik 
smin ska’ smin « fiah ma suff cla wle]f [kh]............ 

6 oe ee eee ee ee Pjare]a fii s [kha garhJah tluy] ma tlun nfit] 
pa gam-i ku tila pufi]y t&’ tun lers kuiw.. 2... eee 


Ds ade ee eis ial Boa [saJran(aga)ma[n]a® « sikkha[p]ada « dah rab tufy hJen 
tila puly ta’ [kJuiw pa gam-[i] fi (). 2... ee ee eee 


s 2 @ 


8. : .. . [patimokkhasathwara]sila” « [f]n[d]ri[yasamJwarasila « Ajiwa- 
[parJisuddhis[iJla 1 paccayasannissitasi[l]a « gafh] Iefr] ....... 


1 Very doubtful, except the initial letter, though I think gy is all right. The vowel must be 
either ¢ or o; the final is quite conjectural. 
4 The anusvdva is superfluous, but it seems to be there, no doubt as a yowel modifier indicating 
that the pronunciation of the word had approximated to what it is now ih LM. C&L 12, énfra, ny 
3 Very doubtinl, perhaps for 1 ma ca should be read # 4. ; 
4 The 6 may be # or 4, or perhaps w,. 
_& The ’ might possibly be ¢, and the h may be #. 
€ After # comes either ¢ or o. as 
7 Very doubtful, perhaps sa. The stops are not quite certaifi éither. But the Pali supports the 
reading pak. 
8 Error for mek, 
19 Restored with the help ofthe Pali version. 


3 Or serandgamana, 


n kanham pkau gamat galat ca taw bun (3) mras yrau ki] kalon mwai gah kharah ta’ klon lamuin 
ra gah kalon ma phah sak gah » gamhi ma klon ra gah tila ai ta’ lapa® kuiw mdf jaret jaku Bi n 
gamhi ma pa kraya ha me phado(4)t ca dhaw gatew 4 slow lapow bdah ca tow kanefi 1 ceh badah 
ca sro’ shu 4 juif gnifica tuih badah ca mrek kamhih « gamhi ma dah sak gah tila ta’ lapa law 
jared fi « yim gamhi ma nhau rau ku (s) karhah ma gah blaai lamlaai » dik smi&? ska’ smi 4 
fiah ma suf ca wed khat Jan Ii » tila ai ta’ Ipa law jared fli » yar gami ma nwam kuiw saddha ma 
kat baton kweh kweh gah hea u tila ai ta’ law (6) jare fli» kha karhah ma klu& smik pa gambhi 
jarei tila ai ta’ tun lew kuiw deh phaton lik tual kuiw phadct akhaw dah tuai kuiw deh baton (7) 


_ sarabagamana sikkhapada «dah rah tuai hef tila ta’ kuiw pa gamhi Ai » sammapi mnum ayuk ma 


quik ba coh smik duf upasampada tun lew laksan parisuddhisila pan ma twah gab (8) patimukkha- 
samwarasila « indriyasamwarasila « ajiwaparisuddhisila » paccayasannissitasila gah lew phatdh 
sammapi kuiw lop cuit fii kla fii w#-sla pat padtimuk le ni tam cuip knot kom ku aratha koth ku 


A omits, 1A ma pa | 2A omits, 


+ 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL ur 
Q....0..+ yt plklat salman} [gah] tl fi fv] sla pat khudda- 


IO 2. : seo + (Bit 4)" simalnii (ta’ gah)* [dok] pen tau [k]u kwat 
sak gah tuy 4 [tilJa pully] ta’ ptifm] ... 2.2... ..02.06.., 

tn ees : tk]yak tray ma da(h cui)t* gah hea 1 tila pJuify] +4’ 
| pa fii » [pJati[pJat*® tuy ma ha ga[p go]r ku (winey)* ....... 
12....... (dah) nananikaya [tuy] 1 ma Mam)a7 f[la]me(k)® tau 
kwdm °[kJu ta{duik] lanefi ma pha[h saJk w[o’ ma]. [e]®..... 
13... (sah ma) [tau [pd]ay t[k]Jo[’] Sifalghufir tuy 7 ma] dak 
sagnh[é]" ma kah swok ga{h hen]™ + [tila] (ey ta’)......... 


1 Or, less probably, do. But I cannot restore, the rest of it. 


_ 3 Only the ¢ is quite certain. — 8 Fairly certain, 
4 Very doubtful, though I think it is right. 
5 The original may have éa°, which would be an error, § Only the ¢ is certain, 
7 Very doubtful. 8 Or lamet ? 


9 On the principles of transcription indicated in § 17 supra, this might have been rendered 


_Awamm., But it is clear from the more usual spelling in this record (4wom), as well as from the _ 


E.M, fom and LM, Zom, fom, that the anusvdra is here-used as a modifer of the inherent vowel (as 
explained in § 16, supra), and consequently the transcription kwam is to be preferred. It appears from 
this and some other instances that this use of the anusvdra is not confined to syllables closed by 
velars, Cf. 1, 4, supra, n, a ~ 10 Possibly o. 


1] Error for sanga, 7 . 12 Abbreviated as in H gr. 


A tt reer Cette ts tnrterinennnnenepenynntnen serena 
adhipa(gjai_» 1 pkat sdmmani ta’ klG fii sla pat Kkhuddasikkhd » pa kat simmani ta’ kla fi 0 
 desand apat? lew kuiw simmani gah Pden kla fii » paccawekkhand ma spa prabhok ca pheai 
» pan lew kuiw sammanpi ta’ gah pden (10) fi o simmani ta’ gah quik pe& tau ku kwat sak 
: gah. tuai.-» tila sai ta’ pa tish puiai u pulai dua upasampada rau uit tila sad gamluiA 
: tun: lew Patipat ma gap gaw tau ku winaya§ Sikkhdpuit (11) ky3k trai ma. dah — cuit 
gah he tila ta’-pa fin patipat ma ha gap gaw ku winai kyak trai ma ha dah cuit gah tila 
ta lapa pa fii_ wma lon tuai pdai padesa rah man wwa’ gah tila gamluia huit ma (13) dah 
nananikaya ra ma lamuai lmek4 tau koh ku tadok I:eh ma phah sak Wwwa’ ma gwa’ dah rofi n n@ 
saddha gah tuai du& upasampada fiah Sidghuiw ra cis 


ma dah sAd kab sok gah hefi tila ta’ pa bak kom fi « 


wwa’ ma.s-4 gata uit tila sa@ ta’ gamlniai 
- Hah daget (13) sad ma ‘tau pdai Sidghuiw 1 

ae tnah tnah Ipa kuiw dah fi » rau gah cha mwai sarakattika 
1A inserts J, 4 A aphat, 8 A cintya, 


mwai nikdai hed kuiw dah fi-y nikjai 


is A lamnu lmen, 


4 


ue 


sikkha [lJer « pka[t] simani [gah tla] fii de’... 2... ee we 


E PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS rb) 


If, cee ee eee eee eee ee es (hen) i ufilt pdafy] janfok ra]h [4ula 
[rman] wfo] + tifla jah kuiw ss... ee ee ee ee ee ee eee 


e e a e o ° e s 


Te is ae. PW 4 ose ed oe Se 35 ee [deep] (easap spa)? [taget] 


* * ad e * J e » * + es * ° e ¢ Ld oe . ° e e ° ° © e * e ¢ 2. * * * * e * * e A 


o Ff © 


(Fragment b.)# 


16, 2 e e * e @ e 2 * 2 ° ¢€ e * . e . e 9 . e eo Ff eo * * e 2 @ 2 Ca *. e * 5 * *» @¢ 
be wee ee eee ee eee eee ee + (drap] (gasap) [tuy 
bk] (ma) tage[t].. h......... (ra i) gam-[i lanjguiw (gah) 
e @ e [1] o @ @ e ? ® @ * * ? A ¢ 2 * eo -« @ @ * * € e > e e e 2 * * © *.* * 


e ° hal 


17. es ¢ © 8 © # § @ © © @ @ @€ @ © & & & 2 © © © © © B® © © © © © 2 ee we ee He Fh he he 


OM eS EGS. 4 eta ey eed ee. (meV) tle mah [kaliw 
tau pday gifhiJbhadw -uit [ra 1 ' ajrd gam-i languiw tuy [ma] 
ew(u)in® (pa) ‘* [puin antima](watthu)® .. 2... 2... ee ee ee 


eo ¢ 2 @©@ © ew 


ln this line, after the first word, only the top portions of the letters are clearly visible and there 
is some doubt, therefore, as to the reading. Cf. the next line. 

2 This fragment follows on pretty closely after the preceding one, but it is impossible to join them 
exactly, 

8 The uw is rather curiously formed and may be merely an accidental stroke. 

4 Conceivably 4a. It is often hard to distinguish g and 6 in this inscription ; but the former is 
the right letter here. 

§ Restored on the basis of the spelling in the next line. 


tila fiah kuiw ptuai (14) heé nw uit pdai jamnok rah du man wwa’ « tila fab ma kuiw @ gldaj 
dandai cath bat mwai ra « ra gamhi ma pa tala drap kasap sro’ sflu dik truh dik brau glau prea ta’ 
gah tila fiah kuiw garah pa tim ra tila puiai ta’ ra sil siah kle’ (1s) drap kasap spa daget gamhi 
ra sdah mha pa ra « tila puiai ta’ pa ha dah ma « suirh drap kasap heA pa gibibhau « sak 
gah tila flah kuiw Jan huis ku gamhi gamluowk ra « pamhi lauiw slah kle’ (16) drap kasap tuai 
» ma daget gamhi ra.» gamhi Ifutw slah drap kasap ha dah suim kuiw drap kasap hed pa kle’ 
gihibhau ra » ara gamhi ma swuin bapuin antimawatthu ma canah thabah ku fab gamluid gah (17) 
mha w tila? fiah kuiw tau pdai gihibhau pha-uit ra 1 ard yamhi lduiw ma swuin bapima antimawatthu 
gah ha canah thabah ku fiah «8 garaha paripawada fiah ma nwam tau gamhi ma dah sak gah lew 


1 Apparently error for sim. 
4 The MSS, here insert za’, 
8 For the passage from here to stv, inclusive, A has only garaha par@paw2 vw. 


ra _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


* 18. ee 2 6 Ad ‘ o #8# 2 @ e bd 2 ° ° J oe 09 @ © @ @® © @ e e e e | 68 oe » ¢ * a ¢e ne oS eo. @ cy 
nian hub ale ace See Se ace eee ee I wee Ve eames | 
lafagjuifw gah 1 ma cwuijn” (ba) * [pui]n antima[watthu ma] cuip 


_ tasit [gah ha] se[n]® « (ayami +) 4 ga[raha parfipawada]® . tees 


* 


I Qe ad 9 e e 2 be ® @ J 8 3 °e o ° ° J e ° e e * ° o id e e o e ® eo 6 ® e 5 ¢ e eo e e ; 


ee er ee ee ee ie aaa a a 
tau pday gihi[bhaw uit ra ti glan[-i tluy ma [pa sar] «| ma pa 
hara ima ksi ca ge gnifn jon yat] a lattice! wrk | | 

BO eb Rae eg en ne de Se eaten alee et ons 
a ork ace Ww ee ita ot one ce SDD T TDD ginniphtaw alle ras rau 
fewie! ieladuik Ja[he}h veldlins ma k[tuijw [dah- gah] \ tila [fiJah 
[Ra}mafdhijpalth cafah k]le’ pa. uit toy) ee 


21. ‘e 2 @¢ e 2 - Py e e +) @ ° o . nd ° ° e e.°¢ e e ° e ee. @ ° ° « 0°? e ee e o eo °e ° 


re Perea Os Soe ew dicle. g 2 ftila®: puiy. saa] tof’ gjamluin . 


[tJuy : ma cuin dah t{au gisfmayiasit 1 arjafiawa[s]i 1 ma dmaffi 
t]au. pday [th]an dun rmalal watal gah ia mB sale. 
Ba - (karat age ” Ege aes = o's: :* eee ” e.. |-e@ eos e = ° * e if oe a a @ e 7 
: Ole kcguk wu ae one ee ae ae . [dua] dtaey* ‘dpastiipadal? fiah 
S[iJaghufir ah 1 Culw - cvip] sakkarat (841. slak [kuiw] sglult ou 
tlluja® tau hea rar kha gah tila [puiy] 
1 Here the x is not. quite certain, ‘ioush the trace of it, if it is that, is in the usual position, 
2 Error for pa. Conceivably it may be a much damaged pa, _ 
aA small circle over the s must be a subsequent dishgurement. 
4 For °mi t one might read fd 1, °bt.1, °¢t, or Chi. Perhaps it is an error for aydm. 


5 Or °rvup®. The end of the word has been conjecturally restored on the analogy of E 57° 
® Restored. 7 Conjecturally. restored on the basis of. the Pali. version. 


8 There is no w visible. 9 A-small circle over the mp is probably a subsequent disfigurement, 


tla Aah bak kuiw tau ‘pdai gahipati (18) wit « gamhi lfuiw ma swuin | bapuin antimawatthu ma cuip 
' jasit gah ha sef ra « ayds mat garaha parifpawada fiah Imuiw gah nwa tau » ma sim balah -kle’ 


garaha paripawadda] Aah gah lew ha samah ratha gami ma phah sak gah (19) lew tila fiah bak ~ 
kuiw tau gahibhau ph-uit ra # gamhi ma pa saw ma pa hora » ma khyu ca juif gnin juih yat tuik | 


bacam Jak niba 4. phatcayapaw gami ma pa mitchajiwa? gah lew tila fiah kuiw tau pdai (20) 
gihibhau . ph-uit ra w rau wiwa’ thaduik lafeh 2 sdsnd katuiw dah gah tfla fiah Ramadhippati caah 


ace! kle’ pha-uit ie # uit sal aves ma tau Pedal than dua tah man wwa' gah kkuiw Pa nikaya 


man wwa’ gah un a sa(22) kkarat 848 8 gitu. ivekicaeii 9 ‘mak fai can n tila puiai ta? ma duit Kua 3 


ahaa aies fiah Sidtghuiw: duiw cuip sakkarat 841 sak = kuiw sgut. dua kluaé tau hed ra 9 kha,gah tila 
One, has sake shermpard oe oo a ee Bor miccha”, 


Y 


a upasampada Sifghulw gah.w dak mwai lak masun Mish tarau klar tarau coh tarau i pawa ma. eas 


PART I] ; | MON INSCRIPTIONS es | Se ts ag 


= ar.) - on “ fan” abe a se 


23¢ i eee ee ee oe 
ee ee eee ee eee ee. m acd [gluin [dac]am klam 1 [san] 
samat mwoy lak pan laim [b]a kla[rh] turau [ewoh] sun [i 1 uit 
ajca guin dac[a]m kla[th] wwof’ kuim 1] kha ma | dun ful- 


ed. [pasampada |? ss 6:2 -o.ans) eas ee eek he ace hw a nt at Gea a, 
wee ee ee eee + (k)wfo]m phafla] suim sablu [bi gapui]w' [bjun 
pana[k sajt + me* sut 1 tdo[A 1] (p)abef® 1 pnifk] tila flah kuiw 
dan ui[t + ajra tila [to]’ tul[y ma] gap | | 


256 Cais Grae aS 8 Sag hae Ht A ee ee eee tae ee, S 
wey ees + R[rjau [t]un [sJama[ni] to’ tuy ma lagha[t]“ khudda- 
sikkha 1 patimok ' tufy] tila fab [ma kuijw dan Bee ma _ 
~ kuiw dun upasa(th)mpada ler [tujrau® 


BG. 5b ara le eR ee, ee we Oe SO a chek a ee es a a a ee 
pe} . [r]ma[n] wwo’ [ma d]u[f upasampalda Sif[ghuir gah] + 
dah isier Jak masun lAim turau klamh turau ewoh turau frat i] 
pu[wa ma caah] sa[s]ana (slalk wwo’ tay uJ | 


27. Bp ee ee wae ee lee oe Boe ee ole a eee be es eg 88 


... [klyak tra[y san dJah uiw [da ci] | sasana tuy ma tau tau 
pday duf rman wo’ ler 1 ma sak ku tduile Ihe[h] | ma [sak ku 
asanka ae kali dah tuy 


-1 Restored, _ : = 2 @H 39 has mek, 
3 Or ba°Ph _ 4 Error for langat, . 
6 Here a small superfluous arate has been filled in - with four small circles, 


saw ta? ma tau pdai than du man ma dufi upasampada gah 8 yaaa} aca guin dacdm telash wv. saa 
smat mwai lak 4 jhisn 265 uit acd guin dacdmh klarh wwa’ kha ma dué u(a4)pasampada tyai gah o 
swak ma pa ticiwarik le yat sha tat ba. ba tau. kwarh phal@ suit sablu bi gabuiw bun pandk1 sat 
‘mhaai sut kduin?, babefi poik tila fiah kuiw dan-vit » ara tila ta’ a gap gaw sakuiy nama 4 
pfiap lew w tila fiah ma kuiw din ma phap uit ra 1 (25) trau4 wwa’ tun sammani ta’ ma kat. 
khuddasikkha patimuk ta’. gah tila fah ma kuiw dan parikkhara ma kuiw duh upasampada Jew # 
tarau klam mwaiu apaa uit esuim yam tila ta’? ma tau pdai tawuiw rah (26) man wwa’ on ma va 


sasnad sak wwa’ tila fiah Ramadhippati ma pa gah u huit ma sjof. squik sasna_ (27). kyak trai dat 
uiw dah ci # sisapa ma tau pdai dui man wwa’. lew ma sak kuiw taguik lien ma sak. kui asala , 


1 wh ndat. fe! Sie, H aa “4 Adtdon,. 
a Be ie rie on a ooh 4 Error for. bra, 


80 | | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL, m1 


Aten g at eee ee ai ea ennat 


. [81] lor cuit [tuy] + ma [pa rwoh ! 1] pday kala ma lwon t[uly 


te’ [gah] 1 smif tuy ma nwom tau ku puin-[h]an ma jnok clah 


ma cuip ra-[it | ma sdjif{k mli]-* ~ r 


29. nee ie eee ee eee rare 


. [Asoka]dhammarat? [k]uim [lo}r' ! [pday] tka’ Singhuir [t]un ' 


: “sinifal] mw[oly tuy ma himu Sirisahghabodhi-Parakkamabahu * [ma] 
_sjuh sduik pday sasana kyak [tray san] (gah kuim) * 

BOs. Se eecdis Sa Ee Slee bere 2% {k]yak tra[y] san [k]uim lafrs 
s]mfijA Para[kkJamabahu: ma sjula] sdui[k] pday [s]asana [k]yak 
tray san kuilw]*® lar 1 [ujit smih ta ga{h gjamluin kuim 1 ee 
hel ta[djufik] lafen [ma] ktuiw dah 

cee are ere ee ee ee . es. M(a) ma sak ku tafdjufijk 

- fIJaheh hef [1] het ma mi[k® kui]w sa[s]ané kyak tray tan [t]au 
‘[lJukau [k]i ma lo’ gah 1 [caalh [t]au sa{s]ana tuy | ' pday [k]ala 
ma [won : 

32. Pet tte ee ee gw diva os aes [mah|althe] Ana{n g]ah « (g)a(g)en? 
[bhaw tluy + dah smi mwo[y] ma himu Usinnara 1 pkan [rJaf tau 


[k}ramin [p]day [d]un B[4]ranasi + kha gah ae tila pay 


_ kyak tray Kassapa 


a Conceivably sduik mluie, At the end a small superfluous space is filled in with four small — 


_ circles, as in]. a5. 

# Restored with the help of the Pali version. 

8 Prebably not Sirz° (as it seems to bein H 28). 
4 The last two words are somewhat doubtful, but I think they are right. 
8 frror for kuim, ‘ 

6 The original may have mi#, in error. 


7 Conceivably ganer. 


co nano ce mnanaedenmy ommend mu memenemeneneennemnmenmececeememnemmineneeeceieneten deen tata ielaaaminiea oranda dene enna maaan eam enaaacaemaamenaammel 


gah dah -tuai 1 cuiw cuip 5 Idim snath het kuiw gwa’ tan tau (28) fli.» law euit tuai ma pa rofi« 
pdai kdla ma lon tuai te’ gah # smi mnum puin han ma jnok klah ma cuip la-it pdai ma sduik 


-- mfui(2o)k pdai-sdsnd kyak trai.san » gah kuim law »1.ma himu Asokadhammarat kuim Jaw  pdai 


~ Jaka’. Sila huiw. tun smi mwai ma himu Siris: fzhabodhi-Parakkamabdhu » ma sduik mluik pdai 
_ sasna, kyak ‘trai san ou gah kuin law smih Pijayabaht 2 ma sju& sduik pdai sasna (30) kyak trai 
~ san kuish law # smii. Parakkamabghu ma sjuf sduik pdai sasnd kyak trai san. gah kuith law «uit 
smifi ta’ gamluid kuith, fat ket sduik IMeh ma katuiw badah pdai sdsn®@ kyak trai tuai » (31) na ma 
sak kuiw sduik la:A he huit? ma mik kyak trai tun tau lukaa kdla ma-la’ gah ma caab tau 
sasna tuai hea » pdai kala Jon tuai u tila (32) mahathe Anan gahe tau bhau sashsra4 dah smiti 
mwai ma - himu ‘Usinnara. » pkat ran kmin duf Barannasi 1. kha gah sasna tila puin kyak trai 


1 The words gah kuit law seem to have been cancelled in the MS. 
2 For Wijerehities 8 A omits. 4 A omits bhav samere: 


e, 


ae 


g a OE ae, 


PART I] 


MON INSCRIPTIONS . 81 


QB irk ey wap ao aes (t) 1 cfuih* ¢ tiiy] (1) a ma dah tau [t]aduik lahea gafh] _ 
s s[mih g]ah Aat tau kuim 1 (wi) ‘ mwoy: iy sasana kyak tray 
[K]assapa ma [s]-ah gah 1 smi gah ha go’ pa tuy! pa ga(ti)m® 

34. [t]uy smi gah dmah tau kha gah bodhisat [p]uiy das* smin Int 

7 buin casuii tau yassapat dip pday dua swor Taf{wlat[ia] kufijm + 
da[s]ok yas[sjapat dip gah kle’ lor kuiw t[uly + het tuy [ma] 

35. mi[k] kuiw [s]Jasana kyak tray Kassapa (ma)? c-ah gah + cui{h] tlua 
tha{n mJnihsalok wwa’ tufy 1] (ma)® ket [wlefh lamba tuy 1 
kwon [dJewatau M4tali gah + _kuiw pe r(a)p* cluiw klif dafmy]oa 

 mwofy] 

36. tuy + datay ket cluiw klin [g]ah tuy ’ cuih bahek {s]min Ussinaaen 
gah st kha smih Ussinnara [tluy (ma) dua sajuii pday ma 
sacaah sa[sJanad tuy galh] + smin In- dando’ % batwo[n s]mia 
Ussinna- as 

37- ra tuy « smi In ma tui{n p]lan 4 dua -swafr] Tawatii st rau [gah] 
smif tamla tamla ma pa tath ku smih A[sok]adha(m)mmara[t] ta 
gah + pday ma caah [sdsanJa gah 1 pa tau kabut heh «1 bodhi- 
sat . ge 


1 Or hP 3 Conceivably cuit. 4 
3 Either this or the preceding. stop is superfluous, and probably this one is accidental or an error. 


The spelling ¢#%y may also be a slip, 


4 Or wi? Is it an error for #7? 

5 The ¢ may be 4, and the 7 maybe ¢. Over the g there is a mark resembling a superscript te 
At the end of the line there are two dots (like a visarga) to fill up space. 
: 8 The occurrence here of this E.M, spelling is curious, Is it a conscious (or subconscious) 
archaism, a mere slip, or. due to the s that immediately follows? Anyhow, it is an irregularity, even 
amongst the general inconsistencies of this record in the matter of spelling. 

T. Or pa, or sa? . 8 Or paP 

9 Conceivably vup. 10 Or pal 

il 1 Written with the full form of ¢, subscript, but the proper spelling should be ‘dando? ‘ 


Mahakasapa tasui(33)t! ceh 4 dah tau taduik Iheh gah fiat tau kuish » wi mwai tuai sasna kyak. 
trai Mahakasapa ma s-ah gah smif gah hwa’ gwa’ pa tuai pa gati (34) tuai smnik gah dama& tau w 
kha gah Bodhisat puiai dah smi& Inu buin casui tau yassapat dip pdai dud swaw Tawatwi kuizh o 
dasuik yassapat dip gah kle’ law kuiw tuai « huit (35) kuiw sdsna kyak trai Mahakasapa ma s-ah 
gah « ceh klu& than mnih luiky wwa’ tuaiu pa Iweh lama mwai tuai « kon dewatau Matali u kuiw 
pa cup kluiw damyui& mwai (36) tuai datai ket kluiw kli& mwai tuai 1 ¢ceh bahek smi& Usinnara 
gah ra 0 kha smith Usinnara ma duf sjuif ma s-ah sasha tuai gah « smif& In dalo’ baton smié 
Usinna(37)ra_ gah tuai « smi& In tun plan 4 swaw Tawatid ra « rau gah smifi tamla tamla ma pa 


1A tasush. 


6 


82 __ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 111 


- 38. puiy ma dah In tun ler + buin casuif tau yatsa[p]at dip pday dua 
swalr Talwa[tli[f kJuim 1 pa tau kabut pday ma sacaah sdsa[n4] 
heft + sak gah [het djah uiw da ci tila fiah Ramadhipa{ti] tu- 

39. [n] ler 1 atuih taget sapparuih ma phah sdk ta [g]ah ' [tg]et [bJak 
kwom [tay] (pa)? puwa ma caah [sd ]sana sak wo’ ma pa rwo[i] | 
rau gah het.[d]ah uilw d]a ci: pday ka [a]nagat pdafy] dua 

40. [Hamh]sawati tun gah 1 smin gamluif tuy ma [n]wfoJm tau k[u] 
saddhd ma sktuiw dah pab[wo]y? [k]rau® gafh 1] tadui[k Iafea 
sasand ma k[tluiw dah [g]ah ra [ylar Hat ma gah 1s fida sdsa[n]a 
ma sac[-Jah [hjeh 1 pa wipa[r]a | 

41. kw[ojm fiii 4 [t]ila puiy ara[hJan ma pa ta[th] ku Moggaliputtatissa- 
mahathe 1 Majjhan{tlikathe 1 ta gah gamluif tu[n] Mer 1] fiah ma 
dah + kaft]Ja > kicea tuy ra [dJah uiw da ci: [c]asufijA ket 14 

_ [phala]sama- 

42. pattisu[kh]a dman go’ tau [kjuim + [h]et tuy ma smik kuiw sdsana 

~ jno[k] mar gafh] : daf{sok ph]alasamapatt[isukha]® gah ¢ [k]arau 
kle’ tuy 1 p[djay sasana ma° 

43. [sg]o’ jnok mar gaf{h] he[f t]? pa tau [kjabut® [tjufy]: « [sak]°® gaf[h] 

~hfelt dafh] uiw da ci: tifl]a pfujiy ga[m-i] sapparuifh] gamluin 
tuy |} ma nwom tau ku saddha pday [s]asana 


1 Conceivably ma@ or 11, 2 For babwoy. 
. 3% Looks like: ¢vau. 4 This stop seems to be superfluous, 
_5 Apparently first written °kh@ and then changed to °eha by cancelling the @ by means of four 
small ‘circles, 
8 The ma is followed by the first half of the o of the sgo’ that begins the next line; then come 
two small circles to fill in the remaining space, 
7 Looks a little like Aet, but I think hea 1 is right, 
8 Looks like &tbut, but the extra mark is probably accidental. 
9 Looks rather like saz, but is certainly meant for sdk, 


tamh ku smih Asokadhammarat gah pdai gabut caah sasnad pa tau gabut hed Bodhisat (38) puiai ma 
- dah Inctun «lew w buin casuifi yassapat dip pdai duf swaw Tawatin kuim » pa tau gabnt pdai 
> -ma-caah sasna he » sak gah huit dah uiw da ci tila fiah Ramadhippati tu(39)n lew atuih daget 
“'sapparuih ma phah sak gah pa bak kovh tuai » pawa ma caah sasna sak wwa’ ma pa rof rau gah 
huit dah uiw da ci» pdai kala andgat1 pdai duf (40) Hdtsawati tun » gah smif gamlui® mnum 
ki saddhd ma katuiw dah bwai krau gah sduik leh sdsnd ma ktuiw dah gah ran yaw fiat mgah 
fidh sisnd ma-s-ah heh pa wipard (41) kom fi u tila arhan ma pte? ku Puggaliputtatissathe 3 u 
Majhantikathe ta’ gah gamluia tun lew u fiah ma dah kata? kicca tuai ra dah uiw da ci « casuit 
phalasama(42)pattisuktia dmaA gwa’ tau kuizh » huit smik kuiw sasnd jnok mow gah dasuik phala- 
samapattisukha gah » karau kle’ tuai pdai sdsnd ma (43) sgo” jnok mow gah he& ma pa tau gabut 5 
tuai he « sak gah huit dah uiw da ci » tila sai ta’ gamlui® ma dah gamhi sapparuih 1 mnumm 


TAGdgah « 3 ‘A. inserts dah. 3 For Muggali°, 4A gawd, 5 A bnat, 


ms 


PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 83 


44. [klya[k tray ma] strak tlui [p]da[y k]a anSgat gafh] ‘Ife]r r (pd]ay 
[sjafsan]a [t]uy ma sgo’ c-ah 1 pday sa[s]anaé ma sgo’ jnok mar 
gah | tila puty to’ pa kabut kwom fi a} 


K 
(Fragment a.) 


i. . @ * 2 © BP mw wi a 
j a - © © e & & + f @ % . @ 
e 8 
ae ae. eo 


's ¢ @ @€ © © © @ @ @ »© 2 © @ fg 
8 fe me ee 
os © & & © & 


a. ...... sah [t@ ma dua] (ket upasampada) 


oe @ 8 8 8 «© 


By 8 aS OE al ge ge Sag 


__* © © 8 mw © © @ © 8 ew 8 lt ° 


3. .... (kwom) ku gaf[makhet da c-dn ma tau wildulih 
rukkhad }(isambandha) Idufi deh] gafh « 


4. ...... {tun Iefr « gim]akhelt tuy ma tau pda 
nifmit [ma strJa(k dah baddhasim) Peay! efrujih [t]ma’ 


1 This isthe end of the main inscription, so far 
no more. But the Pali has another short paragraph. 
2 In this line only three or four undeci 
ecipherable characters have been 
; 1 preserved. 
the first of the fragmentary appendices following on the Kalyani ‘iecription oe 
nothing to correspond with them in the Pali version, it is impossible to say es ee 
odes ; an - both margins of this piece are missing and it cannot be fitted in with 
a number of letters lost at the beginnings and ends of lines are also unascertainabl pal, 
t erefore, indicate merely that an indefinite amount is missing in those Benign Ln a The dots, 
version, now made available, will however serve to show approximately what the re € manuscript - 
, was, 


a ae 
e w «6 


oe © &@ wee ek e 
i ae, a ee ee 


as preserved, and the manuscript version gives 


Here begins 
As there is 
w much is lost at the 


kuiw saddha ta’ tun  pdai ssna (44) kya : ? _ 
nw Pe yak trai ma krak pdai kala and , as 
ma sgo’ s-ab pdai sisnd ma sgo’ jnok mow gah w tila sad ta’ pa eabat ae es lew « pdai sdsna 


1A inserts ma, a Bi 3 
7 , B inserts kusw, 3 A omits, 


ad 


84 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. {11 
5...» (lar)? [simamagga hen] « kha [ma lapo]k tuf[n lJer [* yam 
. ti ma tau pday] erfuih nimit]......----+--- | 
6. .... (jmap)? [jmap ° kanan gah ma kuiw lnpok] (byi) * (a pal 
uit an [kha] ma [samit tun ler] (yam)*.. 2... 02 eee 
Ly ae ee es ous [ma dak rwon vj pdaly sim 
gamluin] gafh K]alya[nisim mway hen] (ma)... ee ee ee ee 
8B. ...e-e-. [sim] Kafl lya{zi uu kitu mrulifkkasui cah ba 
cJawe[k thay sok payam] (Pal tag, a ceca kes | : 
9. | eee eee eee es (ma cau na)‘ [Singhuir Sum ( ma) [samjift 
sim bar paay maharam a kitu mruj{kkasuil] .. 2... 2... 
10. . Ee a ae) kla tit)‘ [tila puiy to’ ma cau nu Singhuir 
| kuim ma samit sim] . (ut)° Tralal.(ska0) © 22 eo as 
6 aa ee a (upasamp)af da Silaghuir (kuim ma) [samijt sim [pan 
= duih] j[on kyak] (mah tau)... .......00.. , 
12, ........ [SinghJuir® + p-ofr tijla [puly aca san to’) (ma) fdun 
Cte payee Singhuir toll Site fe eta A peg tes. 
od Or ler, 2) Ge ae { Conjecturally restored, 


& Looks like jmaw. 4 Very doubtful, 
6 It looks rather like hes 1 or &er 1, 6 The final may have been 4, 
7 Or skan, Perhaps these three words are the proper name of the simd, 
8 Or mah thau? This presumably refers to the great pagoda at Pegu. 9 Restored. 


tc I 


cadah kle’ tuai » karof ti.tuai « canah thabah (5) law sithmhdmagga he » kha ma lapuik tun lew 
nl yam ti ma tau pdai stuih nimit kuish law u-yarh ma tau mah kuith law n yarh jali& 5 hatth « jnok 
s hat kana pdai ti na gapuir tual » (6) jmap jmap kanah gah ma kuiw lapuik byi 4 pha-uit 
(kha ma samit tun lew.» yam gamakhet sdah dakau sith ma dah-tami u fiab ma? karof law pdai ti 
quai gah s kuiw fah datau wut dujh kuiw mat mwai calo(7y tuai heA ma dak? rof " pnow sim 
-gamlui& gah Kalyani mwai he ma dah kla rau sakkaraja " gitu mrekkasuiw 8 mamak thai aduit 
py tila. sail ta’’oma cau ni Sifghuiw he& ma smit (8) sith Kalyanisimn 0 gitu mrekkasuiw 12 cwek tihai 
--suik payam yah Idu gah tila puiai ta’ ma cau 4 na Sifighuiw kuith ma samit sith kyak. lair 0 payash 


thai cef gah tila puiai ta’ (9) ma cau né& Sihghuiw kuith uma samit 2 pdai mahararh gitu | 


mrekkasuiw 13 cwek tai shisaw tila ta’ ma cau nO Stighuiw kuish » ma samit sim bha mru « gitu 
phawraguin 13, cwek thai (10) kla ha katau tila puiai ta’ ma cau ni Sidghuiw ma samit sim® ma 


mia skaw » gitu cai 5 mak thai 4 tila puiai ta’ ma cau n& Sitghuiw kuim korn ku tila puiai ta’ sad 


Bago ma duf- (12) upasampada Sitighuiw kuiry ma. samit sith 4 duih jui& kyak muh tau nai ma pa 
tah sakkarat 838.0 gah tila gah Ramadhippati u paramamahddhammarajadhirat » p-ow tila puiai ta’ 
ma cau na (13) Sidghuiw « p-ow tila puiail saa ta’ ma dud paya& Sifghuiw ta’ gah tuai » suim kuiw 
guin danah hea ma. uiw samit sim jmap jmap 7 dui jmap jmap 8 rah rab mafiadesa wwa’ 1 kha ma 


1A omits from here to samit bin lewy inclusive. 2A inserts 2426, fougite an as 


-8 A dah. coe 4 Orig. has of, 
_ § A inserts ba, ~ ® Orig. has sui. 
4 Orie. has: *mopha? (or “mahi and omits 50. ae 8 A omits, . 


1e 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 8s 


13. ee eee eee ee ~ Ch) & pandit [jamnok mway mway tila fab 
 kuiw] . + () [kwom 1 sim] -(tuy) .. ek ee 


14, we eée eee sss [sim k]yafk mahaJbulddharulp -[e sim pai] 


(abea) * fe sim] (kari t sim) +. eee ee ee ee eee 


a ae a a 


ge oar Seige Bate carey 


16. ® © © © @¢ © @ @ © @€ g © © @ @ @ @ > 2 © &© * @ @ ¢ @ o@ 6© @ © @ & @ 8 © 8 @ @ @ 


-@ @ © © 4 «© @ © +8 @ © © © 8 &» 8 © @ © © e © He se ehlUelFhUe 


(F ragment b,)* 


a7. e * e @ ? *. e a o . 2 8 ad o * e a * 2 » « . e e ° o e * 8 oe e 


. (1 sim) [bJa(r)afh 1 sim mba] . [i] 


e* @ @ © ¢ @ #@ @ #@ * 


Fe ia is A es «© © © © © © @ « 


os 8 © © © © @ @ © © © @ «© © © © @ o 


» ° e . o * * e * ° a * * ° 


MB eee es os (tadewolt) "sim 
. "mba flan a. [sim] < pinjan) s+. 2 S4a eee Peek owes 


wine ee 8 ee 8 ee eo ee ee eee we ee ee eee te te tO 


oo 20e« © © #© @ #@ © © @ @ 


% 


1 Very doubtful, The same > remark applies to many of the names of stmds in the long list 
which follows below. 


3 Probably very little is lost between this fragment and the preceding one, but they cannot be 
fitted together exactly. 


3 Or aes Perhaps we should read wd for za, as the MS. text does, 


/sanITTEnE Tn eee nmannnmnitialiemnaieanenaenaneemmeemaaimindineamenememennnemeneenmenaamrammemmeneanisammnmeniennendsieanmenmemtntedmmneamnenmeimmane neem RE 


samit ga(tg)h pandit jamnok1 mwai mwai tala fah kuiw bak 4 korh 1 sit tila? puiai ta’ ma samit 
gah tun « sith kyak kuiw ‘sim ma tam « sim ma rof‘ Jhok » sim caluik® cif # sirh gamalaf o (14) 


sith kyak mahabuddharup " sith pa apuiw « sim kari « sim tam pha wsiti kyak ma tam jow ® « sish 


maa mra sim @uai Adai sith muh? kla but « sizh sama gasfi a sith jip’ brdai » sizh muh ya tala 
(15) 0 sia muh bapuf » sim ka’ kluiw « sith jaldai thaw 1 sith lah padof « sim jrai sapoai i sith 


amat sut 1 sim smi& U Kwew,» sith han games sim Prat sa a sim ma sra ma lef u sim jip dwof 
‘sima run wuin. (17) sith barah n sim ma muin sith kama amat w sim of bra sri « sim kon 
blaai « sirh pan tarau® ba w sim path la& 0 sith mah mrad w sit (18) wa rot # sih ma fiak w sish pat 5; 
dabok ® 1 sim wihd taw n sim ma bat n sim min talorh 2° sith brau gala w sim le’ ‘slop " sim sex 


1A pandita ma jnok, 2 Orig. ineeres tah, For. sim ma tam B has samit tach. 
4B ma rok, 
7B 


3 
6 B ealhuin, > 6 For tan jew Avhas ptah jwow, 
muky 8 A krau, fa a B da bloke 10 Or tale’, 


t sim] male bap]ua [sim ka’ kluiw 5] 


86 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 11 


a ee ee 


19, Trl ills... . (sim) mba sa* [i sijm gan [lon + sim 
[tJaguiw [tla] 1 he fi] co eee ee aie ee ee as 

20, (pan). pan ‘ [siJm ca[gajn* « sim (bha)® ba[k]e[t] 1 Islifm mba a] . : 
[t s]i[m mba TJufit J... ee ee ee ee eet 

1 ead | sim mba lau (ban) ‘sim ar(h)afn 1 sim alpoat ‘s[irn t]rfit]® 
er ee as ee eee ees 

a2, [slim [tha]a’ k(wa)h® [) siJm [mb]o’ yage’ [1 sJim . .° (mba g)ram | 
[s]i[m] gatuim i sfiJm (a)... Le aed sire wih, Sash tan os Aw ara Bt ae 

23. (sim advan. t-sim [a]jan 1 [s]im jfray r]a(t)*? 4. sim [m]ba (cau) 
i sim kyak™ rhi « sim pala] apu(h i sim) pid ger ater essere eats 


a + e *. * Py ° s e 9 o -@ e @ ® ° e * 6 °° * ef e a e oe e e ¢ o e o e oe o 2 


ein ? 
1 Perhaps sash. £ Possibly carvan, or eaban, 8 Possibly a? 
+. 4 Possibly fan. a 5. Possibly trat. ‘6 Possibly mia? 
7 Or than? 8 Possibly émah or kuh? 
9 Perhaps a, making amba. Or else bha or bhu? 
10 Or d? 11 Or rah ? . 19 Very doubtful. 


18 Under the final # (which has the vivdma) there appears to be another & I take this to bea 


later disfigurement. If it is the engraver’s own correction, we must read = karhit for rhii, 
4 Oraput? .. ie 


rr 


a i (19) sith masa un sit gont lon | # sim dhaguiw Ala’? w sish fah sla taluai? » sirh wa dak u 
_ $i) tha Aa @ sich tayu taswok- sim bhalih abah sim ma bah W Sim (20) pan 4 0 sim cagan # sim 
a ‘paket w sith ma asi » sith ma thuik w sim snef juk 41 sith kha mrah u sith srah wa » sith ndai 
‘gaai ¥ sith kyak kwew i sith (a4) kadadk- u sith ma lau ban w sim arhan » sith apon w sim krik ma 
"gah uv sish dai " sith kyak thaw » sim kyak tan 5 dud # sith mo’ ® aduiw w sish wa sw4 o sith baha 
‘jnok » (a9) sim ) tha knuliw siz mo yage u sim bhu mla gram f sith gatuimh " sim adam a sim 
‘mbo'? khot sim _ yak. ma talew o sim jrai mwai 0 sizn kyak prah 1 (a3) siz adon 1 sith ajan 
“w sith jrai rak 8 W sith ma. cau " sim kyadk kana $ W sim pan apuh # sim lalom 10 u sim pa babeé # 


1A gow, : i : Or klavn? : 8 A thlan Sala: 
4A jut. a) ae in 5 Btam =~ 8 Or mom? 
7B moh, 8A jraat rat. 9B ane 

18 A Salon ee ee. ee ee - 


PART In] MON INSCRIPTIONS By 


a4. kufi]w. c[lik* 1] sim (dani) [}] sifm] sarui[m] | s[im] sat dafioa] 
sim mba . ay t si[m jjra(y)* mba (p)a» [sim] pa(g)a* » s[im] 
a5. [sim] (p)an‘ sandan* «sim ban tu* s pday (Bhimap)iira? « sfim 
mahasiami Pago t sli[m mahasami Sighuiw *]........... 


« 8 = @ # © © @€ © © @ © © 89 © © © @ 8 © @ 28 * 28 © @ © © © @ © 2B *# ¢ © &@ @ & 


26. [sim bluip t si[m dJuiw dafn]i [er] sim [tw]in (dhatek)® » sf[im ro]w 
si 1 sim jray (t)aya 1 sifm] (c)l[uin]® ' sim gatah ™ pafn]..... 


27, [tarJh[im 1 sim] (k)are[h]™' s[irh] tar kaflah 1 stm mbo’ uj dwot 1 
[si]m [mbo’ rat]: si[m twin bl]afy1 sim mJ............ 


ae © &© © @ © © @ @ © me © He ee mlm lhl lll lle 


28, [kruJh ph(aéa nan)™ [1 s]im dala[rb] (t)as[ay]* [slim ga[t]ui[m] pharh 
| sim jray psa i [sim tika + sim kho t] sifm] dran thar [: sim]. . 
29, [ray singa’ ¥] sifm pan lay + sim] (du)n ™ jala 1 [sim] (wan™ na)y 1 
[sim] (truk”” kanlaw) [! sim mah] ta jn(u) 1 sim [aJ........ 


+ oe © © © © @ © © 8 @ e eee we eel lee BP ge se ees eet ah, fos a Ga Se al es 


1 Or elit ? 4 Or jrah? § Looks like pagnd, perhaps an error for panga? 
4 Or wan ? -5 Perhaps to be read sandan, € Or ta? 

7 This might be read Bhim Pu (or Bu?) va, 8 Or gatek, or baket? 3 Or khiuta? 
10 Or batah? M1 Or taveh ? 18 Or pham sanan, or phams nen ? 


13 Or kasdy? 14 Conceivably wun. 15 Or pan? 16 Or jay ? 


17 It is uncertain whether the initial and final consonants of this word are & or #, and the vowel 
u oOor a. 


sivh mati glon siz kyal tamion w sith (24) kuiw klik » sith dhani! «sich cd muiw # sith skad non? « 
sivh ma glaai n. sith jrai ma pi « sim pana ® sivh tan sran 0 sith ma seth # sith Rammaptra «# sith 
tamuh tabuai 1 (a5) sim pad saran t sit ban ban  pdai Bhimaptra tun » sim mahdsdmi Pago « 


‘sim mahdsami Singhuiw « sith alha sardai 1 sim buit kamd » sith ji& jam u sith Jagan phen « (26) sim 
buip « suith 3 duiw dani‘ w sith twin’ gatek u sim row saw sith jeal taya w sis khluid§ s sich gatah 


pan « sith kyak raéai mann sis tamrot « sim wah tuin « sim (27) karhim 60 sim? karheh o sim 
taw kalah 0 sizh mo’ u dot nesizn muh rat 0 sirn twan blaai  sisn moh® duh « sith phado®® » sim ma 
ya bia « sith jinai 0 sirh p&i (a8) krum phat nah « sith: dalam tasaai « sim gatuith phath 4 sith 
jrai phyd  sisn t8 «sith kho » sim drah thaw n sith ma maf sa s sim palait du&é Muh Bi w sinh 


maha madi (29) raf sidgasG n sich padi [dai sith dun jala « sish wan @dain sich kruk Kaldiw o sim 


1 Written dhanim, 2B awon. ; 3 Error for stm, 
4 Written danim, ; 5 B khalut#, 6B karim, - 
7 Orig. inserts another sim, 8 A muh, 9 A phadow,— 


~ 


88 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA --_——sé['Vo. tt 


- 30, tado[h] 1 sim basah «8 pday Sren sim t[w]a[n smifj (cun suin? 3 sim 
drat) [t sJi[m] (h)&h* : sim parhak (ga)... .. ee ees tee 


re ee eee atid ee eee 


31. [n] gai® r sim jraly cah] 1 s[iJm kya[k] tafluy 3 sim ray kha 44 sim 
amat W]ifjayasiha 1 s]i[m lagw]or glu si[m mba] samift.... 


ce ee ee eee et ee 


32. ‘[tJamaft thjana 1 sim haf [tJal[un 1 sim] croh ' sim feaduy t] sifm 
bJa( (nda)[n | sim] (saggakam) 1 [sim] os ‘ = mbuifi afli « sim 
saguim # sfim]....... ee ee . (si)- ® 


— 3. [m_ s]rfo’] khyuit «+ s{iJm [mah] Iwan 1 sim nia chu k(w)eft]? 
tt pday {Dguaé si]m (mah damru)* 1 sim ma[h] dufn] + [s]im rak® 


1 | fi} duiw canlan ¢ [s]i[m] pubba............ 


34, WY sim dufijw panah ‘sim goh dhafm]maram d “(aie [tak] (naa) 
[1 sim Hambat 1 sim [apa ” gay | slim [k]yalk] ( (gnak) * + sim nelu 
Jaa + sim dé[f Iu}. wie Bae at eee Eales (si)- 3% 


az Very doubtful, perhaps 2 proper name, 7 Or itdn? . 
$ This transcription treats ‘a subscribed mark as accidental, If it is to be taken into account, 


the transcription would be ga ani, x 4 Or khan? 
§ Or gaday ? - 6 Conjecturally restored, 
7 Or kmet? 8 Or damra? 
9 Or vat P 10 Or nun P . 
11 Or sapaP af . 12 Or gnat? And perhaps the vowel may be #. 


18 Conjecturally restored. — 


o 


| s ona veer =e: nna tn eeneraen engmEpE nen PUREED RRE Onn ERREREER SUnen: RRRRREIC aE RPRRIRECRERERRRERNRRR emneietenemaeenaenaenetenennmneemneenan enna ee 


imuh kal gnu sim asek « sith gala duh? » sith muh fat 1 sim gaya (30) cd dot u sith pdai Sref 
tun # sith twan khun® suin.« sixn dhrat u siz had n sim parak gata 0 sitm tapuin pi bafid .« sizh 
paldai cah wv sith pa(3x)@ gain sith jrai cah w sith kyak taluai « sith rdai khdd » sizh amat n 
Wijayasiha w sim gagow glu sirh ma sami » sith ma dyof 0 sirn jrai Iho# w simh (32) tama 
tan? sim had tam®:luw « sizh crom w sim gaduai ¢ « sim baran w sim saggaddai7 u sim lat8 m sin 
-muai afi « sivh saguim.» sith dhammadu » sim kama ma-soai © si(33)m sro’ Khyuit * sim muh 


Iwan 0 sim . “muh: chu kneh  pdai Lagu tun o sith muh ba Pru sim muh dun i sim rak 0 sim 


duiw calan 1 sish pubbaram 0 sim kyak ma sam kyo(34)w » sivn duiw gnah « sizh dugoh dhammara 
- Ww sith thak nab 10 sith lamak aw sith aba gai n sizh kyak gnuk «-sizh nelu than tt sim daa luin n sis 


LA ga. ee errr ; Qgopre i 5 oe aa, 
OK tiny 28 SB by 6 B gadai. 
. A aggaddat, = BA dowd, 9D A sin 


WA nun, 


e 
& 


PART 11] = ~—)—<C MON INSCRIPTIONS 8g 


3s. m twan akhwon + [sim balJa : sifm dlar[oJA [s]i 1 sif{m miar[gaj « 
[sJim [k]ruf! cra 1 sim camb(u)ih + [sim duiw khlawefi sa pday 
[Yat Khret* MJah Smifa slim]. ........6.-..26-- 
36. sum + sim ta[r] skem + [slim pan 1 sim tko’ ifiit sim jray na(g)uir® 
« [slim dapuin b[rjau t+ pday (Tar) * [sim] De Ree) 
[sim] kyak (thon. Sim): 4 <".05 a" ee xe 


37. 1) [slim [kyak] gatui[w] s sim damra’ ¢ si{m] amit ray [n] pday [J]ray 

| sim kamluif (tla): oe jip safy ' s}im tar sanan » pday Klon 
Palfa]y s[im ® s|mifa] . a See eS Sa 

38. m pday [krun]’ smin 'Sifaghuiw kuim ' sim kya[{k] (m)ah[e]cararm * s 
pdafy] Lanka kruf’ (T)afwanJna® sim la brat + sim kruf’? kawa 
i_sim kruh kamer « pday Sa. r. (si)-? 


39, m [ta cJan(a)a” « slim] gnif (lé)n twan [smi]f [S]udasuim 1 sim adin 
a{dan] 1 sim bale[fi 1 sim] kyak brau » pday Da(m)k[a]k sim amat 
[ok 1 s]im sapa «sim mba 
40. [Buddhawa 1 sim] laten » pday Dallja sim [ky]ak [gn]i + [s]ifm] 
kutti kwon (p)ra{k “1 sijm (k)a[ban]® « [st]lm mba duiff 1] sim 
phyef + sim twan b[r]&k ' sim [jJafath 1 sim brah bra(u)™ 1 sim 
1 Or trun ? ce 2 Possibly Pak (or Lak?) and Khrek. 


3 Or buir, wuir, or dhutr ? 4 The initial may be &, the final may be x. 
5 Or bla, or lagi ? 6 Originally sth, coecisd tO Sim. . 


_1 Or bran P & Or par? 

9 Or Tha, or Ka? 10 Conjecturally restored. 
11 Or canan ? 18 Or araé ? 

18 Or tabda? ; 14 Or bra ? 


oenerenreeremmancannmantictetcerenncer immense tite namatapan en ttnt tnt imeitnrtoaeetireetntareennuatannn tet trentnth inne mnentet roNremntfasneneneeanmtenenere init 


* 


pat ston " si(35)m twan akhlon sim phald n» sin darho& 84 u sirh maha n sith kryufi cra 0 sim. 
damyuit sim duiw kawe@  pdai Lakhlek1 sik muh smifiw sim badow? glarh w sir jrai (36) _ 
sum « sim. thaw skezh » sizh pdn 3 1 sir kko’ iff» sim jrai ndguiw « sizh tamuin brau w pdai Taw4 

n sim kyak Rajadhirat 1 sim kyak thon « sim wih smi tha(37)w « sit kyak gatuiw » sim damra’ 
» sim amat jrais pdai Jrai sith gamluif too u sith jip sai  sizh ta:sanhah w pdai Klon Phaldai y 
sith smif Sifighuiw  si(38)mh pdai kruf smif > Sitghuiw kuim » sith kyak pahecaram 0 pdai Latka 
kru& Kawanna « sith krah brap a sit krah kawa u sith kruf'® kamew « pdai krufi Samrish7 w 
si(39)m ta cand » sim grit yan twdn smifi smif Suddasuim® 1 sim din addfin sim baled ws sith 
kyak brau pdai Damkak 9" » sith amat ot « sith sapa u sirh ma (40) Buddhawa » six laten t 
pdai Dala « sim kyak gnif u sith kuttl! twin w abrak «sim kabahl0 n sith ma duit n sim 


1B Lakhtheb, oak. 3 : B padow. 3B ban. 
4B Thaw 5 A omits. ie 6 A kraa. 


7 Or aire possibly. 8 A Suddasim, . * A Damkdas, | 
0 A kan b Ne on : ae ee 


* 


” 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Lvow. in 


ra 


1. [taba [prje 1 sim [slar(wa)y ? ' sim apha pan 1 sim. abat + sim 
[glayan [tak* 1 sim-ama]t [tarh mrek* | sim lana[n + sim bja(k) ‘ 
_ [srea + s}im tee 18 


L 
(Fragments a and b.) 


Tel pce ee eae a I lh oh ee a es & © @ © 2» @ ©» © * » @ a & 
se hohe Pca ite dd he ey taeomiten ok ee (oat) aes 


eg a ee ce Be EO, Se ei RE a * * 


2, Baek Etec aaa e sgsre gu tian eet Nan a ded At SR hs HR Ope et Spel“ colnet, Sects len ks ah te 
oc tet esas else eg & Sa RU ale: bay] Otwati Ast a5. ke ache 


i, Cr Pe ne ee Pe ee? nee eee eo » © wep aise 8 @ @ « 
eee eee eee ys. [Si]m [khwa]ly jnek? + sim khway dwolt] os 
1 Or sarwuy, or saruy ? : | a Or tak? 


3 Or mret? . ek 4 Or bat, or bak ? ‘ 
5 Or donday, or danay? 


6 This appears to have been the last line on this face in its original state. See the manuscript 


wersion, Which says so, 

7 This fragmentary face is wae up of two pieces, (a). to the left, ll, 7-18, (b) to the right, I. 1-18, 
From 1.8 to 1.16 they practically joined, hardly anything being missing between them, at the time 
when the oldest extant estampage of (b) was taken. But since then the lower portion of (6) at the 
line of junction seems to have broken off, Besides this, there is a good deal of illegibility along the 
line where the pieces should meet. The ‘amount missing between the end of Face = and what 
~ remains of Face L can only be estimated from the manuscript version. 

8 Possibly mah we 9. Error for jnok, 


phyed » sim twin brak1 4 sim jadep « sith brat bra « sim (41) taba bre » sim sarai w sir 
apha ? pah wu sim awat "sith gaya kak 1 sim amat tarn mrek. « sim Jhaw w sith bak sreti 
«sith danai: wtma’ paficama tuai ran 

Pdai Lhuihi? © sivn pan thuii 4 # siza pa mapha5 9 pdai Dhanu Plus simh ba w pdai Moriya « 
sim amat phak # pdai than tala fiah ma dma smith mwai 0 sizh kyak smi (L 1) mat 
Pi “suish -ba on pdai. Klon sizh mwai # sith ‘mwai ramiaai kydk tun u sith smii 7 daw da 1 
sim kyak tala lok ws sivi (2). kyak mah? than « sim bak® lef,90 sith smin lok. wah « pak 
- tarau w pdai Basirh w_ sizh kyak 19 smjil kydk ga 0 sim duiw fi » kaw sizn kut lyeh nad J? 
1 @ sim Anes inok w sivn khwdai dot « sir kyak tma’ 1 siz kama buip w sim kyadk kalay! » 


1 A prak. ek aA apa. 


3B Luin, 
4B lata. - 5 A mapa, 8B Danda Phia, 
7A muh, oe BOA bade 8B lan . 
A nak. "48 A Rate 


10 A. kya, - Wh Error for sits? . 18 


PART 11] | MON INSCRIPTIONS e cevesee GA 


sD 
Dae te ee wee eee (1) Sim caltta]* buii [jnok 1 sim] ca[tta] ? 
bufin dwot] oo eee | 


ee eee ee ee ee es (m 88)* [t sim k]rfuja [man] + sim [haa]? 
(t)wlo]n* 1 sim ky[ak]e oe ew 


e¢ 8 eo eR © @ &@ @ 8 @ # © © © © @ © @ 2 8 #8 ee hell lhl ell lhl lll el lm ll 


wae ee. « (pday) *[Mram? sim jajmha(ih) * fe sim seams] 
t sim [pak glak] » ‘sia ie Me an ete te ik ai “ak 


ap Bee ng Sd caches acta? thalus 8" shi Ga) Cu) te 
pie eee Bee Et aig ane ok ae ee CET ea nye etn dan | 
(pajau) ™ [1] sim kyak bi tagd 1 sim sm(if)® 2... 2, 

8, (Koliya) Eero}: Se Mae eae 4 aes [r] . .? [1 sim jon 


kyak] 2)... 2 rfi sim dap™ chu® 1 sim tlar maf t 0” « pday 
Candapiiri”” 1 sijm eo ae ee ne : ie. | 


1 Or cakkat . 
8 Very doubtful, ; 3 Or haa, or paa ? 
4 This may be an error for kwon. 5 Conjecturally restored, 
8 Conjecturally restored, and extremely doubtful. 7 Or Mrim P 
8 Or jamha ? 2 ae ; 


3 The preceding syllables are presumably part of some place-namie, 

10 The preceding is written in small compressed characters and the reading is very doubtful, 
The last part may be ealed1, For gmt we might read smiz (with the % superscript over the c). 

i! Or pajaP 12 Conjecturally restored, 

i8 Looks like losatrd, ga : 4 Or dip P : 

15 Looks like chwa, 

16 A small mark here may be a stage mark. It seems to be like the cypher « ©. 

Or °piin ?° 18 Or e. 


enema geen ame rete neinntninemeememeneenemennemmmneneenatnanemmmemnenmnmaneneanianen nuaeene mmaemmnabennennenaneentemnmentettnntaeneaarmmenneineEERetemmEeeam ee 


sim muh dha 1 chan lha uw sim muh dhau gnid samuii (4) us sizh atta buik jnok « sizh catta buik dot 


sith tamya sau sizh ka prah drdain sim mah gail Konaguizh 1 smi? mati ceh da® khwaiin sith 
paa jakwa(5) ma sa 0 sit kruti han o sith heé twon o sim kyak gatom « sin bahdsa@ # sirh kawah 
glau 1 sim ganah dud uw. siya jammund + nu 25 0 (6) pdai Samrizh 0 sizh jamham ) sit. camha’ 5 
sim pak gla u sim jrai saldai 0 sim lan u sira (7) meradja 0 sim japuiw » sim bales # sizh kyadk 


‘kanhift » dakd ma khanham law krau 0 sith taniri bajau » smifi’ kyak bi taga » smin teja 1 7 08 


pdai (8) Koliya® a sirn jon kyak smi lok phraai # sim joa kyak mah sgaw w sizh smaw chu «sith 


1 A inserts n here / a This seems to be an error for sit, 
3B omits. 4B jamiind. 5A jamba’, 
6 Te bé read tani. oy Hee 7 Error for sim, 


8A omits 7 | 2A Koltyah, 


Re RO 


92 


[1 sim] mba [mbuiy] (thaw 4 sim)® .. [p biw]* + sim [daka bhut] 
: sim ca{u kamfian® 1 sim garok 7 


10, . . (kana) [1 sim] (la)mba [phar 4 sim tar] (kwan)® [ « sim] (mba) 


[Iau] 1 [siJm [t}wan [bar]’ ma(h)* [# 0 °t pday Sajt(o)i™ sim [jo]A 
kya{k] sa(w)a 1 sifm pan sja(w)a [« sim cadok] rn ee 


Som 


nafafh + sim joh kyak celasa] ' s[im twa]n [mbu]ty [de]wi « [sim 
twin adan® dwot]:s(im)"... 2 0 | 2 y 
. (tow) [sim kyajk banta(ji) [r sim] (kyak) [sura 


2, 2 ew ew te ew wee 


najn + sfim kyak] .. . [in] (lajafa* «sim pajh abla s [1 sim] - 


(p)are(n® g)a{k 1 sim kyak gapat % 1 silm bi]... . 

13. [sim as]a[m callan [1 sim crep 1 sim dJanlafy smin) (#1 sim dui” 
Tuik) [Gala 1 smim]*..... . (bra sa)[man a sim twajn [smip 
Bruim 1] sifm man] cahmha™ [1 sim jak ri] 4 sim dun [Iw]. . 

t The first part of the missing portion looks like 4, 

4 Very doubtful, particularly as to the vowel, 


8 The si is certain, all the rest is more or less doubtful. — 4£:Or prw ? 
5 Or cak, canka, or caka, and mian Po - 6 Or kun ? 7 Or bari ?- 


8 There is a mark under the m which I take to be accidental, though it rather . resembles - 


subscript 1. ae o eg 
9 Here there seems to be an illegible mark something as in 1,8, supra. 


10 Fairly certain. a 11 Or khadok ? 18 Or bhadan? 

18 Conjecturally restored, 4 Or, . sjan? 

16 The superscript mark interpreted as % looks like a virama, which would however. be incom- 
patible with the vowel e. If it is to be considered accidental, we must read pave. I have. taken it to 
represent 1, 3s in the abbreviation of het (egy N 4). Pee see oe 

16 Very doubtful, - There is a mark before the word, but this can only be accidental as there is 
no occasion for a stop there, The g might be w, the p@ might be ha, and the ¢ might be w., 

17 Very doubtful. 48 Error’ for sim ? 19 Looks like suman, 

0 The anusoira is quite clear, but perhaps we should write cam mha. Or the & might be a b. 


Wisukamma 0 sia ma muiai? dhat w sizh jip buiw 0 sivn’'daka bhut 0 siva cau. Kamion « sixzh ma 


garot gapuiw sia mak (10) kardnn sim4 lama. pharh 1 sim taw kun « sith ma lau "siya twan — 


bamiah » pdai Satuifin sith juih kyak saw shh pas thaw » sizh cadok® sith. juil (cr) kyak ta 


w sim juih. kyak Asah sirh twain sagroh é dah w sim juif kyak celasa ein muiai? dewi. n sim twan: 
dadan dot » sim kyak gahassa (12) tuif's sish kyak: dhandhaji » sizh kyak si nen 1 sim kyak li lhef 


w siva paa ablu ». sizn barok8 sim kyak gahat. sizh bi khata® (13) sim asa 10 calahll w sizh 


crep u sith daldai 14 smif « sizh qué Tuik Gala 0 sih twdn sabra sama n si twan smif Bruit 0 


1Bimyak, 3 Written mam. A has mas.- 8 B puiat, 4 Orig, has sia, | 
5 A cadot. -. 6B kwan sarom ee TA mete 8B barom. 
9 A khakd, 19 B anhdm (or avham?), 11 B clan, a 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou mr 
. [mbo’]. . . 1 (mbak)* [1 sim mba] (abat) [1 sim smiji Wlisukjamma — 


|, [kyak] Ome segGt (1 sim] (lo)w [kyak a] ....[} sim tw]an sagra | 


tah maa tt pdai Candapuri x sith juin kyak (9) mho’ imak1 wsiva ma’? bak « siz ‘abak 0 sirh smif 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS =————sogg 


14. (+) [sim p]a[f ja] . . (m lwan)?[s sim mbo’ buila a [sim mrfi(k tasum 
I) a ae a ea mee de lee a (so ane? ¥ sim mah] (sren) 
[is sim lagjan * phfen 1 sim] (t)&’° ga®s o7 1 pdafy]®. . 


15. [n) (ji)... . (Gawampati) . ....... [1 sim] jlon] kyafk blaa 
nak] (¢ 1) [pday] (Mat Lamluim® sim) [pan tara] sabl[u™ 4] sifm 
mahasa |mi [Siighui}w 1 [sim] gaya[m tajm[h]a[k « 9" 1] (sim) * 


160 e eee eee eee ess. (Siighal(nika)fy + j 4 pday Cla(rot) 
[+ sirn] (jon) * [kyak gam-i 1 sim] (klo’).* [drow ” |] sim mran [juins 
98 i pday Jra sim cadim” sama « sim twan cala}(dhi) ° — 
hfs Oa anes as pull aa are eda ae [) slifm] cfela SJadhuim 
sim [thin smin] (gra slan™ 4 sim)™ [tka’] (caren)™ + sif[m fii dja 


ca{n sarun™ 1 sim taban]” jno[k 1 sim k]ray * ba- 


1 The-w may be m, and the » may be - 4 Possibly krun. - 

® The h might be ¢. ; 4 Or Jawan ? 

5 Or ka’ ? 7 e 8 Or gar P 7 
7 Here there is a mark, much like the one in 1, 8, supra, 8 Looks like pazy. 

9 Very doubtful. . : 10 Or sabla ? 


1 The mark here somewhat resembles the numeral figure 3 of that period, 
12 Conjecturally. restored. | : 

18 Here there is a mark rather like the one in 1.15 sapra. 

14 Or Caroh, or Canot? Or Cane Cah?P 


18 Or tho’ ? geo 7 Or dron ? 
i8 Here there is a mark like the one in l.15 supra: 

19 Or cadip P Or cau dip? . %® Very doubtful, perhaps ga. 
41 Or slun ? _ 42 Conjecturally restored. 

23 Or cagat?.. — | Tie ‘ _ 8 Or saran ? 

OR PADRE nse ae | 88 Or tray Be 


sim mad cazamhal » sizh jak? ri sith du Lwan (14) sith pad jaram lwan u siz mho’3 buit « 
sith mruit sabhurm » sim kyak goh craf u kru asaket 4 1 sim muh sre@ » sith lagan phen » sim ka? 
gam « pdai Ya(ts)& Nim w sith Gawarnpati Sadhuish w sizh juif kyak balahi® nak 0 pdai Mat Lam-. 
‘uith 0 sirh pak tara sablu » sizn mahasami Sidghuiw u sim gayah tamlak 0 sith pdai Grah 0 siz 
mit’ (16) Sitghanikdai® » 2 07 pdai Carot sim jo&kyak gam-i8 u sira taka’ druiA « sith mrad juit a 
n9 pdai Jrdai « sizh cau dip sama 19 u siz twan calagall n 2 012 pdai Mattama w sii tala nah 


“men (7) 0 siza cela Sadhuizh wu sixa than smi pra Ifah n sih taka’ ca 0 sith Bi dah ch uv sarumh 


1 Or catnmba, JU "8 Or mbo’, 


2B 
4A asagot, or asagok, ; 5 A bran. : 8B Stighaniradat, 
7 A omits 2 ti. : 7 8A gambht. 9 ‘A somite 3 1, : 
WA samang TB kwdn cilakag 12 A omits @ my 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 11. 


. 4 @ © © @ # 


mah alna{w « sim truiJ}n [1 o 7] 4 [s]ifm trer] 4 sim® 


M | 
(Fragments a, 6 and ¢.) 


I, ee ee ee 6 88 ee eo ees ee eee 8 eS ee ew es ee Be 8 


ge wee ee ae igh, Hee We le a ee eee! See, ay et cee a le niet a, en Se Se RRR Ree 


See ee eee eee eee es [tuy] (k)[ui]w flar]® 


2. Pr ee ee ee eS i i i 2 rh id eo 8 © @ © &® 8 28 8 @ 


e e e a . e e e o a e * 2 s ° ° « . e * . . « . o . a e . a ° a * a e e @ o 


Cee ee ee eee ess [Kaly]anifceti] (gah) * [tuy 1] 


os CMe ee ee a ee ee 


ee ee ee ee ee ee) > © ®© © «© © @ «© 8 © © © © @ 9 * © © @ @ & @ 


vee ee ss Mor] (ma) ® [i uit kju sah gafmlu}in 


1 Here there is a mark which might possibly represent the numeral 4 (or 6). 

2 There does not seem to have been another complete line below this one, so we must suppose 
that this record ended early in the next line, although there are a few traces of apparently unconnected 
letters that are barely visible under this part of the line. See the manuscript version. 

3 Above this line there are illegible traces of another one. Here begins the second of the 
fragmentary appendices. Apart ‘from the evidence of the manuscript version, it is impossible to say 
how much of the beginning is lost: as there is apparently no lettering on the bottom part of the 
precéding face, the maximum loss may be roughly assessed at 25 lines. Face M has been pieced 
- together out of three fragments ; (a) to the right, from 1.1 to 1, 20, (0) to-the left, from 1.5 to 1. 39 
and (c) to the right, from 1, 18 to 1. 39 (which is the end of this face). The fragments do not fit 
precisely and there is a considerable gap in the middle, where they should have met. 

4 Very doubtful. oo 5 Very doubtful. Perhaps tax, 


" sivh tabad jnok » sim krdai pa sren » sa plad wv sim cau han ruim damya! u sim rdai ja(t8)rh 0 
 sisn ky&k mrah 0 siyh dana waai » sirh sahghardja?. damya® no sirh muh andn « sim truin w 4 u4 
sim trew » sir muh hot © sizh karurh 5 0 sivh jayagiri « sim ple « sim pla lat » sim si n 

nf sndzh tila’ puin kyak trai Sakyamini ma pa pariniban gah « bd Inirh 20 snam kalilon d tuai het « 
pdai sakkarat.u. 838  gitu mrekkasuiw 8 mamak thai adwit gah n samit sizh Kalyani tuai het » babwad 
- lwea tala ta’ ma nwarh pamik smik gwa’ dui upasampada fiah Suighuiw gah » du a tau’? babwai§ 
lweh hed ra n-kha gah ma rau wwa’ tila aah Ramadhippati-sriparamamaharajadhirat 9 khyap ran 1 
tila puiai ta’ wwa’ ma klo’ taka’ Sidghuiw gah w pdai Kalyani het huit dui upasampada dah uiw 
‘da ci» sizh tala! puiai ta? ma samit ™ kuiza lew Kalydnisira gah (M 1) tuai 0 ® kulw law ymu ra a 
pdai jareh 18 Kalydnisizh wwa’ gah u ceti mwat ma tupl4 tau rau Kalydpiceti pdai taka’ Sitghuiw 
ta’ gah.» puiai khanhamh pa tup ku (2) Kalydniceti tuai gap gaw kuiw law ymu Kalydnicet? 15 u 
_ tnazh bodhi mwai skuiw tuir5 tuai Kalyanibodhi gah twain puiai skuiv law ymu uo sdk gah ra puiai 
sgo” cireh (3) law mha » uit sah gamluid ma klut pa kayh sarafi!7 pdai sivh wwa’ kulth lew u sgo’ 


(1A dapya, —- 2 B inserts u. 3 A damyu, — 4A omits 4 u. 
5B ka’ ruai, SA ti, 7A dan at, 8 B babwa. 
9 A apparently has °pavamamahddhammardtvajadhirat. 

0 A tla, ~ eee TL AL sont 12 B inserts ma, 


oe oD ; bs 13 A inserts si 
MA tuat 15 A omits Kalydytestt.. 26 A omits.  B san. 


: ewe Cm 1) [sim 
kyak mrah » sim] (dana)... . () [silm [sangha ja]dap[pa « sim 7 


¢ 
i 


PART It] | MON INSCRIPTIONS - a Jae 


[saddha gah] lefr o] s[go}’ lifawor] ey {pa} | 

5. [rey]” . rei Rates Bde Ng eggs eek le ge degie te Gabel ahs . {tila fiah)? [Rama- 
dhilpati ks[ap tluly]..... Bieaiecte ae he. Socada tania ie oes ee 
Se etcs . . [he]h [u t}ila [fiJah [Ramachipati « p-or] 


. ° * eo o£ 2 


(k)won tiflja falfh] Balfia Ramj].... ‘ ee : : . a 
o> » « a (ett) [ra}as, 2 oS, ja [Mindhat ma cuin dah tau jamnok] 
pld]a- * | , 


De ae Seat Steud Souls OE Os ete ts eo 6) @ we he -. [n dah tau 
jamno{k pdjay kwo[n t]ila [Aah]... 2... [klon] .. 
4 a . . . = . : 
. .» (tha)n ma st[ui}w [bojdhi thafn tuy] ma st{uiw bodhi] wfo}- 


8.40)" SPR ae ai ite ie a hahaa! Ag ...[P] klofn tluy «[t]lan ma 
stulw [b]odhi [gah dak tu]y « dfeh ta’] (I)........ [e]anfi- 
galau lar ra u " than ma dak]* c[eti] t{un lJer [uJ . . (bwo)-® 


DN ecard ret aa eee Ghee ose cay) a RBS [ma] cuip 
ar8 [ma sdabut] dla[mh dha]t [gah » d]ak baftuly dlafrh] dhaft] 
BOY eS eg _. (atka)de [ra  ks@ teh] cfut thar] sfrjan gaffi 
galau] lofr ra « rau gah] | 


1 Conjecturally restored. 

2 There seem to be two dots (like a visavga) here, merely to fill Up Spare space, 
8 Conjecturally restored, 4 Looks like dak, 

5 Possibly we should read un ha mwo-, 
® Conjecturally restored.. 


ge ee aR ee NS a ge a a nto 
how ai parai tau ceti! wwa’ ra wv uit sah gamluiA mnum (4) ku saddhad gah lew sgo’ Inow ai 
pa(5)rai ceti bodhi wwa’ hefi » rau gah tala aah Ramadhippati khyap tuai hea pdai sakkardja 
839 n pa tam na gitu bhat heh e# tala tah Ramadhippati » p-ow amat mwai ma himu Krai 
Kamah? ma cuin dah tau jamnok3 pdai (6) kon tala tah Baid Rath tuai w kuiw klon bak than ma 
stan 4 ceti ra u Raja Min® ma cuin dah tau jamnok® pd(7)ai kon tala fab Baha U wu Lak Woai | 
ma cuin dah tau jamnok mwai pdai kon tala fah Baia Barow w kuiw klon than ma sakuiw? bodhi 
m than ma skuiw® bodhi wwa(8)’ tun lew » babwai lwef hen deh ta’ klon tuai dalan 9 ma stuiw badhi 
dak tuaiu deh ta’ 18k law adgaduiw ran gai lalau law rau thin ma sdak10 ceti tun lew » babwig)ai 
lweh deh ta’ dak tuin 4 tuai y kha ma cuip ara ma dak glam dhat gah « dak pa tuai glazh dhat 
tuai lak law afigaduiw ra uo kasi teh cut law thaw san gai lalau law ra rau gah kanhayh tuai 


1A inserts ta’, a 2B Gaman, 
; rs inserts w,. 4 A skan. : 

omething seems to be omitted before Raja (A jard) and has certainly b i ; 
@ A insétts 7 Error for satuiw, te 


8 Error for studw, 


Rp ee 


9 A dian, 10 A sdah, 


| 06 : BriGhare BIRMANICA [ VOL, I! 
ah BOs tae alee ae ere ee ee . (glah hen [1 = (gah) 
[{kanarh]? (than chan) * [jnJofk mway i w[ajdufijh oo . 2 ft 

san coy pile mu glarhah [t]ruh bfrau] het mik . 
If, . Ea og tees . (caloy 4 widui[h oa: “uit blwoy 


“ nlatalh gati g]ah [grop ku ‘nijba [pa-uit] (") [bwoy pday gati sala 
lar‘ yat ca [pa-uit] i rau gah pr(en) 
12. vee ace ee bee ee ees ma). dafbujt kyak dhat [g]lah {l 
! tenga dlarh ba ni 1 dlarh tuy ma cilc]won ma (fiah. pa gap) 
[gwo]r sdah cui[t glah [kan]ath [tuly « [mJluiw tuy [ma] fiah (bat) 
na ENO) | | | | 
13. (w). oe be es . (s)uy ma [cijewon [to) gah tui(m)? lar [¥] 
(af hay)" tof? gah] tui(m)7 [IJar « (kwak) .... 1... (r) ras ma- 
(nah) dlath {ha thap gah] tun [ler » uit jmap] cen ; 
1h eos: a ee fw]. ...:.. [glafii [g]alau® lar ra « rau nay ma 
lwon [tuy] kuim [ na ahi ma fijah bat na (kwow)™. . (ci)- 
[cwon gah u} widuifh] (he) ma gluim ku thap [kwak allo’ ' 


15. os er . [widuiJh dlath gah tun 1 dak nun gara[y] mway tha[p n° 


pnan [kjamak pnan dan(lan) [mway thap «] dhup [mway] tha[p 
u rau gah glafi lo[r uit ra 1 than mal 


1 Ease ee or kandawe , 2 Or chan? 
3 Looks like gah or gapar. 
4 Probably right, though it looks rather like va 1 laga’. 


8 Or kanham, or kandath P 6 Or two- 
1 Probably an error for kuim. 8 Or az may? 
.. % Very doubtful: the middle consonant elem he & or 1, and the final might be w, eg. dakow. 
10 Looks like walauw, 1 Or twow? - : 


heh u-pdai than cet? (10) gah hed » dow gah khanhazh thin cha& jnok mwai » wut duih deh gah 
--gaQ korn ku kharhah truh brau heh mik kuiw gwa’ dma gah tuai« kanhamh tanhin (11) calo’ 4 
wut duih pha-uit 1 bwai mfah2 gah u bak grop yat niba pha-uit bwai pdai sala. yat kamu pha-uit 0 
rau gah prem tuai hef w dow dndaj (12) ma ® thabut dhat kyak gah » kha gah khanham glam dhat 
ba thap @ glam‘ tuai ma cicon ma5 fah gap gaw sdah cuit gah kanham tuai » miuiw jaman tah 
‘bat na to(13)w ma cicon kuim law « pkau ma cicon ta’ gah kuiza Jaw » kwak gai law ra e& maah 
glarn dhat ba tap “gah tun lew « uit jmap dayuid g(c4)wi na yat tuaen giti lalau law rau rau nai 
ma lon? tuai. kuizh 1 na mluiw ma tah bat na tow ma cicon gah wut duih hen ma gluih wu kuiw 
thap kwak calo’ ara nw n8 (1 a) wut duih glam gah tun u dak nut garai mwai thap 1 pnah kmak 


1B uit ge 3 A lamiak. 5 A omits, 
4 B.&hnam, . 5 A mi, thf 6 B inserts twat, 


TA blon e 8 A omits 0. 


PART If] MON INSCRIPTIONS | yi 


16, (stuiw)* [bo]dhi (te)’* ler [u kanJath lor [aram kana « sala® lar] 4 pday 
[mJanafh] « kwak lar®j....... .... [u gafii galjau [lar ras 
tha]n [tuy tila fiah Ramddhipa]- | 


17, [tit kwom] ku amat dakuifp p]ndn 1s [alrath [pariwa gamluihn ma 
sdmaJa 1 [swa]k ma spa sa{bhan m]®........ (dhat) [kyak 


trjay [gah ler] kana[th lar] (ta)m(nak)? . 4 
» SF) . [rau] gah [kJanarm Bea Hels n tl tifa thay b juddha- 
[wa ooh | dhat [patimarip] . ee eo ake * [kuim ler « 


cireh ptuy” low kus|(m)i(h™ .... (t) .. fa]-™ 


19, ma[t da]kuip pnin gamluiff]: atuih aci® arfen] (Sah ma) s(t)awalk a 
wan] phyuih dhat « pati[marip] (« bodhi gah « huim) ™ [lor]?® (kuiw 


amat dakuip pna)n™® ta gafh]...... | 
20, (hen) « [yJah lanai thay brapba[ti gah heJa « tila] fiah Ramadhi- 
pati kwo[m klu®...... org eee (Rak LOM aig Son tae 


. (tuys cui)h dméw” tau ease tafm]n(ak) ” 


1 Conjecturally restored. 2 Or wo’? 
8 Looks like sal. . 4 Looks like larau, 
5 There is something under the » that looks like a g, butis probably accidental, or may represent 
an + belonging to the next line. 
- 6 Perhaps mt. 7 Or tamnuk ? 8 Or p? 
9 The last of the illegible words might be stuiw. 10 Or btuy ? 
Very doubtful: it might be stuéw. 
18 Conjecturally restored. 


18 The original may (wrongly) have acim. 14 Or skawak ? 
15 All these words are very doubtful, 18 Or lon P 
17 Conjectural, _ 18 Looks like rz, | 19 Or lor? 


2 Error for dman. 81 Or tamnuk ? 


mwai thap « pnaAé dhaléi mwai thap « dhup mwai thap rau gah gai law uit ra w thdn ma (16) 
sakuiw! bodhi te’ lew khanham Jaw asa4m kana » sla? law pdai mwah « kwak law muk a4 muai 
v3 ghi lalau law ra uo than tla fah Ramadhippa(t7)ti » kerma ku amat dakuip pnan « param 
pariwa 4 gamluid ma dma « swak ma spa sabhah ma salorh dhat kyak trai gah® Je » kanhaz law 
tamnak jnok mw(r8)ai ra «rau gah khanharh tuai hed thai tif thai buddhawd gah dhat 
pattimarup 6 bodhi ma skuiw? kuizh lew 0 ciref pa tuai law ku smi& wah matafi® a(1g)mat- dakuip — 
pndn gamluif atuid aciredh ma stawat weh phyeh chat pattimarup bodhi gah « huizh law ku dakuip 
pndn ta’ gah tuai (20) hef w* yab Iau thai 5 gah heh fale fiah Ramadhippati » kom ku araz 


1 Error for satuiie. ; 2B salah. 

8 A omits all from # to ny, inclusive, 4 Written pariiswd (tor partway 
5 A omits. 6 B patimdrup. 

7B sakuiw, dances the ‘tight tending should be sturw, 

®Bjataw, — 


7 


98 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — - [VOL, It 


ar, (ma kanarh)? flor gah ra} » rau gafh tila Sah lwon] cfluih tuy hen] # 
se kwon tjru[h] tifla fah]?. 2... ee eee Avia Bods Baar eee ee 
. [to’] gam[lujin « [k]wom i [smin} twa} | 
a2, (i jatah)’ [ama]t [sena]pafti] gam{]]uin gafh i ona. carhafy ky jak 
ae sabhan cana(k) ma jno(k) ... 2... eee ee ee ee ee ‘ 
. (dhat) [kwom ku pathifmarJu[p jray bodhi] ra 
23. Qi). . . [dha] pafti[marup ] bodht i ma acole (te) * ® [tuy} gahe 
halt matimarip} re ee . (dha)[t kyak] kray*. 
gah tuin lar ra 0 rblorabyi? | 
24. (lew pday)* d{ljarh [ma] s[tu}i[w hodhi [gah a dabut] lor ra 0 rau 
gah dabut lojr [dhat bodhi] . /. . (hens sabhan)* ‘{tluy [ma] pa 
tam ku (k)an[chi}n” [» sama] leh gala. 


25. (1 fiah) [ma wea] gdan fsna]k + frah} ma we[n sajah] (sare)” 


- flhor] 4 [fiah ma tuik le} i [ma rap mwla(y ga)........ ee 
(wen ra a kuir wen tuy [hjen « [t]hai safr 4] tuy ! [tha fiah 
pret [lar] 


1 Or kandash ? 
- 4 Confecturally restored. 
3 Possibly gae. 
4 Very doubtful, perhaps jataw, 
8 Or wo’? 
¢ For tray. 
7 Here; by anticipation, follows the vowel symbol e, which is perhaps repeated at the beginning 


of the next line and there to be gag as following the consonant before which it is placed, either as ¢’ 


or as partofo. . 
8 Very doubtful. 
9 Doubtful, except the fast letter. | 
10 Looks like tanchiz. 
11 Very doubtful : possibly saxe or dane, 
12 Leoks like ba% or than, 


patiwara! gamluif jak lan ceh 4 tuai » ceh damaa tau pdai tamnak (a1) ma khanarh gah ra « rau 
gah, tala fah cuih tuai u uit kon truh tala fah gamluifi« kon brau tala fah ta’ gamluid « korh ku 
smi. wa(22)h jatah amat senapati gamluiaé gah u na-cargai kydk sri sabhad sanak jnok klab het # 
wah phyeh o4 dhat korn ku kuiw pattimarup jrai bodhi ra (23). akhad dhat pattima ma cuip te’ tuai 
gah » dhat pattimarup gak pdai than salaw dhat kydk trai gah? tuin law ra « bodhi (24) sat le pdai 
: glarh ma sakuiw4 bodhi gah 4 thabut law ra. rau gah thabut Taw dhat bodhi tuai » sabhah ma pa 
“tam. kuiw tachi sama leh " gela @s) fah® ma [wet damaé sndk »% ah ma we sjah sanew thow # 


1. ‘Written partpara, or parihara 2 A inserts 0. 
* This word is corrupts ies -. 4 Beror for sadudun,. 
5 Ones has fla, - & nas? a See & A ingerts pa, 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS, > a 


26, (euiw) ? [man mway dhat tuy 1 tila fiah] tuifn tu ra « mwfay cawek 
[tijay sok gah « (w akha gah)®* tila fab culh & cui{p}® than [t]am- 
n(a)k * (te’)® [t]un 0 ac® sa- 


a7. [f majsun cwoh gafh nijman [t]ufy} « ae bafe]a [twly he[ha 
djayyadhar® [ma] gap (gor skuiw dan)? ler skuiw dan ra a yat 
sana (b4)p® (ba)-® 1 mrek a galt « t}-” 


28. [la filah [kui]w d[an] tuy « [sabhan] ma pa [t]arh [kJu [kanch]ia * 
[g]ah [le]r «* [k]uiw wen [4" taurasthay] cen Ai [h]en « tila fah 
[Rama]dhi[p lati « kwom ku kaflo d]ia- 


2g. [t] (arath) [pariwa] gamluim tui[n 4 bway] dlarh [dhat] ra 0 (kha 
g)a[h dabut gatuiw™ I]wi mwa(m)™ ... . tufy « tdo]n [bJatan 
ler cr(a)k ® bdar lar [tuy] » da{bJuf{t lar fdhajt [pJatifma]- 


1 Very doubtful. 

% Conjectural : it might equally well be pday kdla gah, 

8 Or euiw P oe 

4 Or tamnuék P 

5 Or wo’? 

® There seems to be an original flaw of the size of two istics (or four dots) after dayya, 

7 Very doubtful indeed, except the w and the #. 

8 Ci. F 46, 

9 Looks like fav (or ta ?), 

10 Two dots, like a visarga, here merely fill in spare space. 

1 Looks like tanchin. 

12 There seems to be an original flaw, of the size of a letter, fust before Aurw. 

18 The @ is almost certain: in any case the a symbol is certain and there ig no rooms for much 
more. . 
14 There appears to be an original flaw before the w. No w is visible, and the reading is 
doubtful but supported by the next line. 

15 The final might be / or w. 

16 The anusvdya is very doubtful, 


hah ma tuile le’ ma rap lak ban pref kuiw we tuai het thai saw 4 tuai vu tala! fab pred. law (26), 
kuiw mah mwai dhat tuai » tala tah? tuin klud ra « mwai cawek tdai suik gah yah Idu tala 
fiah ceh 4 cuip than tamnak te’ tun # acd sa(27)4 50 gah niman tuai « phap baca tuai hea daya- 
dhamma lew gap gaw skuiw dan lew kuiw dan ra. yat snd pat tau mrek sat ta(28)la fab kuiw dan 
tuai sabhah ma ptam kuiw tachif kuiw wef tau ra 13 thai ce Hi het tala fah Ramdadhippati koth 
ku kalo diia(ag)t arami pariwdra4 gamluid tuin 4 pdai glarh dhatra 0 kha gah thabut gatuiw Iwi man 


1 A inserts tuin, ae, 
2 A omits pred to ftah, inclusive. 
2 A inserts 5, 

4 Written pariatea: 


100 ss EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL, 11 


go, frup]? la[t]a gat{uiw] gah [ra 1] saha[ssadh]a[ra] dafbjut [lat]a dha[t] 
~tuy » bam(nah da)cam # (gah 1)® rap ket kanu [sla ga(p)ar ‘ stum 
ma tmuy [t]Jau na thar # ma tmu[y tjau na fsra]}- iO ee 


ar. [n 0] ma t{muly {tau na] ra{t] ga[h 4 rlan nay [ma] caro[h] smi{h ma 


~ 


sadha{ra tluy » (pa)? abhifs]e[k] tu.® dhat 4 [pa]- 


42. [timarup gah] ra # rau (gah pa tuy hefi] aca. sa[n dacim kuiw 
padwat 9] gatha .... . . mano u_yfdana tluy ma gah anekajati 
(s]amh[s]arath kuim ler 1 ga[tha ma] cuin dah tau (ba)-™ 


3. (cf) Wnda[na t]uy [ma] gah yada [have patubhavanti dhamma 4“) 
(g)ah™ [{kuji[m] (lar 1) kuiw (padwat)™ [t]uy (hei) % fu kuilw tuik 
phath « kuiw ho dra ra # rau ga[h pa t]uy « [u djah la[k mijn 


4 Conjecturally restored. 
2 The bracketted portion is conj 
3% Very doubtful. 
4 Possibly wrongly spelt gabar. 
-" § Conjecturally restored. ace Re s . 
| @ Looks like ru, but probably the mark is accidental and the aw symbol obliterated, 
1 Perhaps written ba. a Eve anes hae eee 
8 Error for éu. 
® Or padut P 
10 The last two letters look like dah. | 
11 Extremely doubtful. It might be wa nom, of ma nwom. 
19 Very doubtful. ole 
18 Very doubtful. 
16 Very doubtful, possibly 5a, 
- 38 Fairly certain. z 
38 Very doubtful. 


ecturally restored. 


thaw tuai e kduid btaa lew srak bdaw law tuai » thabut law dhat pattimha(3o)rup latuiw gah « 
sahassadhara thabut lata dhat tuai » bamnah dacita gah rap ket knu sah gapaw 1 satuzh u ma 
tmuai tau na thaw » ma tmuai tau na sra(3t)n " ma tmuai tau na rat gah w raf nai caruih smi 
ma dua abhiseka ru gah da kuizh ra,» caruih cut pdai sahassadhara tuai » pa abhiseka ku. dhat 
pa(3a)ttimarup gah ra rau. gah pa tuai hed w acd san dakuip: phadot gathd ma dah mano-udan 


tual ma gah anekajati sarhsdram1 kuizh lew? » gatha ma cuin dah tau (33) udaa ma gah yada 


have patibhantu dhamma gah kuiza law « phuiw. kuiw. phadot tuai hed « kuiw tuik pham kuiw.-ho 
LA tam sdrda, me 
8A baw. 


dun abhijsek (rau® gah) [kuiJm ra 2 [caroJh cut pday sahas- 


- 


PART 11] = =~=~—~—- «MON INSCRIPTIONS 7 ror 


34. hen? [0] phyui[h dJabut lor [dhat] pati[marup «] pda[y dlarhm] dhat 
[ra «] da[but] dha{t] tuly he]a « waduih [dhat pjatimar[u]p gah « 
ri[p alggasawa[ka] b[a * mJah[as}awa- need 7 


35. [ka] daca[m] cwoh « rup* [arhan brjau [ma go’ et]adagga cafh pis 
rijp [u]pah [trju[h ma] go’ [etadagga] cah mwoy 4 rfap]* uf{pjak 


brau ma go’ etadagga cah [u rap]* mi [k}y[a]k* - eee 


36. [trlay " rup mba kyak tray « ‘uit {kJu rup klam [cah] frente (te’) ® 
[t]uy «ma [sw]on [lar] na s[lJak ma lak lar na th[ojr gah] « rea 
Jor wiiduih tuy he-— RC ee ae | 


37. fi. [p]naa c[dau 1] caf ® pufjjau tuy « drat [plujau mramar [ma] jar 
[ra « tuy] he{n] na tmfo]} [l]Jah ma.j[nok] san [g]ah? dar lar pai. 
ta[rlai tuy « ma kuiw da[k] suiw duit [ra] « dak a3 


38. suifw] duit tuy [hJea « khip cal{o]’ [p4a] masun ta{p® ra 4] bodhi tu[n 
Ae}e [t tujifw] akha afk] min gah hea « (ph]yuih lar pday ktoh — 
[tly ? Bi Fo ES ti Pay ees te 


1 Thee is at the end of the preceding line, 
2 Or rap? Bo 
8 Or ruph = . ee is nie Fae oe : 
4 Here there are two dots, like a visarga, which merely fill up spare space, 
5 Or wo? P aM of ; , ) i‘ 
6 Presumably an error for ca%, There is a mark over the ¢ which does not look as if it were a 
trace of an anusvdra, ce . a 
_ 7 Looks rather like cah, 
8 Or thap P . 


dra ra 0 rau gah pa tuai.w dab lak min (34) hef phyeh thabut law dhat pattimadrup » pdai giarh 


-dhat. ra u thabut tuai heA wut duih dhat pattimarup gah « rup aggasdwaka ba » rup mahdsdwa- 


(35)ka 801 rup asran. brau ma, gwa’ ekatagga 13 4 rup upah truh ma gwa’ ekatagga 12 » rup upak 
bray me gwa’ ckatagga 10 0 rup mi kyak (36) train. rup ma kyak trai « uit rup. klam cah daca 
wwa’ mwai mwai ma son na slak » ma let law na thaw gah u cag law wut duih tuai he(37)4 « 
pnah cdau can pa pijau tuai drat pa pijau mramow jow ra » pa tuai hei tma’ lab ma jnok kish 
san gah » daw law pad tarad glarh tuai ma kuiw dak suiw tuin ra n dak (38) suiw tuin quit tuat 


» dhup calo’ pad masun thap ra 0 bodhi tun lew 1 tuik akhd lak min gah hei # phyeh law pdai - 


A Orig. has gud 


lon _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  Pyon. mt 


Cc 


39. 24 tuiw lar rau kha {gah] cut t]don yofo}r (c)afal pndn cdau tuly | 
a na] dak {m Jra[m Jar ma jar caret! cut [ra] a uy tambrot? [b]uin. 


[lar] racunn® 


1 Error for cavoh. 
2'This seems to ‘be what is intended, though the subscript y is more like subseript A in shape. 
Ci. Schmidt, Rdjawan (Vienna, 1906), p. 140 (C X 4), tamrot ber. — 
8 Between the bordering Jines.at the foot -of this Face there are letters, apparently foeaine words 
but not connected with the text of the inscription and not in Mén. I read tentatively: “.. . » landa 
traya .... yarakabbamasmim kui ma ” and there are two or three traces of single letters besides. 


katuia tuai (39) ‘tuiw lave ra uw kha gah cut tduid jnow ca pnaa édau tuai aa mramow caw 
caruih cut ran pdai kmat buid law ra tma’ chatha tuai ra 0 

sakkarat 839 .cuiw cuip sakkardt 841 » tala, tah Radmadhippati u ube ‘garad pa tirh dndal 
-sammapi nwam pamik upasampada gah atuith kattika puai ma ptim law tila puiai. ta’ 
ma gap gaw skKat. gah tila ta’ » ph-ow kuiw kat tuai ptim puiai dik fi » puiai sakuiw 
simmani ta’ dus upssampada pdai Kalyaoi rau gah gah tuai u tala fah R4&mA&dhippati 
garah pa tirh law ra on wl kha ma tuip sakkarat? dacam klarh pan coh 13 gah sammani 
gamluid atuiA kwat gap gaw skat » pa tarh khuddasikkhd patimuk gah kat tuai « satta 
gamiuid kluA pa tim tala tah ». Ramadhippati ra uo kha gah tala fah kuiw kok ran simmani 4 
ta’ kuiw phadot ra wtala fab pah mii simmani ta’ gah ma phadot tuai « yar cha fab ma Phadot 
dah kweh ra n gah tarau klar mwai ma sgo’ w pdai Kalyapisin damai ma gap.gaw ku sammapi 
_tarau klazh mwai ma dma gah » rug tarau kuiw khanhayh tuai sala phadan law ra» swak aca guin 


505 » ma skuiw upasampada ku sammani tarau-klarh mwai gah u kanhazh law daman tuaiu salaw 


jamnik pdai Kalydnisiz lew kuiw cuiw buid law janik tah law dakaw uit ra.» wut duih Kalyanisish 
tun lew « swak dah gamluid ma maf gah kuiw tuik law dasdrh kana u salaw yat cuiw buid law janik 
lab law dakaw® uit ra 7 pdai tamnak damaa tala jah Ramadhippati ma dman suiyh ararh pariwa- 
ra ma sasabhad sammagi tarau coh ma sda upasampada gah kuiw sala law® janik phadan 
kuiw-lah law skaw sna batuai ra» rau gah cired tuai heh aca guin 50 ma skuiw upasampada ku 
sammagl 6019 gah lew kuiw niman 1 ra u yam tila ta’ ma cau na. Sidghuiw gah 17 » mahdsamj 
Saddhamma 149 Dhammakitti s 1 «1 mahasami Tilokagaru mwai i mahasami Parakkamabahu r.# 
Madgalathe 12 x 1 mahasimi Buddhaghosd 1 » mahasdmi Gugaratanadhara mwai  mahasadmi Nera- 
_ tapalatkara 1 5 mahdsami Taratanamali 111.1 mahasami Saddhammateja 111 1 Dhammardmasami 

411» Mahadewathe’s 1 Culabhayatissathe 1 u N épapanditamahathe qin Wijayabahupaiicapariwena- 
mahathe 111 » Sirilahkaguaawutti 111°» Sirilahkabuddhalo!3 » apaa aah cau ni Sidghuiw 17 « tila 
puiai ta’ acd sah Bago tun 1 mahdsami Udummara™ » mahasami’ Sriramarajagura l6 0 mahadsami 
Buddhadiwakara1’ » mahasimi Ratanagiri w 18 mahadsami Saddhammarajaguru » mahasdmi Saddham- 
madhara ‘# mahasami Suwapnapaduma » mahdsdmi Tipitakadhara u 19 mahdsimi Anumadassi 
-mahasami Dhammardajika » mahasdmi Sdmantapasadika 2° 0 Bias Saddhammawijaya.« apan 15:0 


“TB omits we 8B sabbaraj 3. 


oP BA BG es ane 4 Original has sanimant, 
BD oe od Wine 8 A shaw, 
TA ofits we .. 8 For sala law, A has salaw, 
Ae Od Se hee ae er eS ee 10 B nimantau. 
UA omits a. 18 Orig. thas Ye, 
18 For °lo we must prasumably, read “the 1, M4 A Dudummara, 
15 A sdmhi. ; 16 A Sraramma’.. : ; 
17 A “dita’,  ~ eee 18 B inserts maha v.. 


_ 1 B. inserts mahstni Raw ~ Bahan ote a Orig. inserts a between Sd and man, 


part 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS | | to 


1... [wast gafh] « saigharafja] ae eS ete 


=o 2 @ © ©. 8 © © @ e+ © © &© © © © © P © # © © @ © © @ © @' 8 a2 e@ # # 
o © © © © © © © © & &© © © © © € © © 8 © 8 4 © © 28 @ 2 & @ 


1 


ee 8. © @ © @ @ @ 


2. .. [la]  mahasami Saddhammapaijota [v] [mahasami] . 


a a) 


eee ee ee ee a ee ee ie ee ow a ee Sele eee eee 


Pe eee te ee ee ee es + [mahasa]- 
3. mi Pifyladas[s]i « mahasami S&sanapaj[jolta 1 mahas[ami] aren 


ee a i ce Se i er a 


oe 8 © © @ © © © © © @ # @ © 8B #@ © #@ 8 @ & eo 28 © 8 @ - © 8° 6 8 @ 6 &  @ @ 


eo o8 © «@ 2 « 


4. [h] a[c]a [guin mas]un (coh) tuly] hfe}a* s pdaly t]hay buddhawa ma 
dafh] tia 1 bapen phaf{llag]u[ijn g[ah] (H) De ee em ea ee 


in aclasd CO Oke gh Sata Dein le. No iltss Wi ee 6 iw Sassi fall a Gee eS 7 wea Pie okie es els ae iat oak a ae ve 


Ce 2 


5. sfe]nal pati n elamiuifa] tuy 4 kuiw gatah I@a ® uit ra #4 samani® 
klar (g)a{h]7 P a[p® kui]w [s]mia Bra Sanh ‘[Dea]* Gator ness 


ee ee er ee re a ee 


*. 9 @ @ ww 4 a2 6 


1 Above this. line there are a few undecipherable letters of another one, Judging by the manu- 
script. version, about. a dozen lines are lost between this and the end of the preceding piece, The 
dots represent a rough estimate of the paruens missing to the right. 


2 Conjecturally restored, ‘ 3 Written in abbreviated form, as if hne. 
4°The ¢’ must have been at the ead of ld. 5 Or lia ?.- 
8 Or sdmani? = 7 Looks like wah. Either way the anusvara is ae 


8 Looks like p-aw. | 9 Or Dew, or Dee ? 


x 
a 


tila puiai ta’ n tah Bago} n araiia(N 2)wasi gah tun 0 satigharaja Sammana 1 mahasami Lamudjusa 2 
" Winayapaijjota 3 " mahasdmi Saddhammawijayasenapati*-« mahasami Passath « mahasami. Siwali « 


“mahdsami (2) La « mahadsdmi Saddhammapajjota » mahasami Silapajjeta « mahasami Saddhamma- 


wilasa « mahathe Uttamha 1 mahasami Saddhammasiri 1 mahasdami Dhammadassi « mahasa(3)mi 
Piyadassi » mahasami 5. Sasanapajjota u mahasami Aagulimha « mahasami Gugasagara u acd buin & 
Igan apaf cah dacdza « rau gah niman” law (4) acd guin so tuai hed « pdai thai buddhawa ma dah 
thai si bapeh phawraguin u sammani gamluid ta’ gah» paap® kuiw smifi tala pa tam 9 kuiw amat (5). 
sepapati gamluih tuai « kuiw gatah lid uit ra» sammani klar gah paap 10 kuiw smin Bra Saa Dej 2 


1 Orig, Babo, 8A "Rija’, 8 A °pajo’. 4 Inthe orig, °ya° seems to have deen ‘avicelled: 
5 Orig, stm. 8A duit. 7B nimantar. 8 A p-ow. 


9 For pa ea B has tee: eek ‘Orig. has ee A DA San Det 


104 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Even. 


6, [« « samant] k[ljath gah 1 p-ap kuiw [s]mia wah [Clakkawade pref ra 
ue sAmani klam gafh aj? P-ap [kJuiw SMIN .. ee ee ee ee ee 


wale Cate ae Oe in wo Oe) Ok aS, aire Spm ee cael eee Be oo 


7. (t) pred ra [n “sjamani {lath m]woy gah # p-ap Uk}ui[w" s]mi{a] 
wan Aly] Gam Bin pr[eja ra i fu parikkhara]* Sitio) era ee 


eo «* @ a e ° « * oe ee * . e e J * ee © 8 *e eo ‘e e o o ae 6 oe ¢ e e eo @ @ @ eo oe . 


e @ @ «© 


8. [klam ino] (cwar # 8) paheh turau rk] am | mwoy A be turau klath 
- mwoy « dacun turau klath mwfoly « pnfik] Ce eae es 


PPE ee aia ta a pet Rem as Ae eee 


ee 


9. [ph]ala suim: br gapuiw - tpani}ak [s]at bun jan « me[k] su[t] 8 turau 


k[lJam [mwoy] n rui[h] kufiw] kui[w] s{min]® (ta gah). 2... 0. 


we eee 8 8 6 ew ew ee oe ew 8 Cr eo ee ee Se Se] 


s 8 «@ 


10. hei + Telaaty ‘sf] bafpe]é . kitu [pbirlaguin thaly brabbJatr Dykes 
| lah(a) ° galh he]a’ till]a fiah?® . pads Se ow 


Ce 


e @ © © @ @/ #8 -# 


1 Se restared, but practically certain. 
§ Looks like tucw, 
8 The final syllable is conjecturally restored, 
4 Or ewer (as in |, 14, infra) F 
5 Or smin P 
6 Or lazu? - 
7 Looks like gat ten. 
“8 The next word has ie vowel ¢ or o and : may have been lop (or lwop). 


pred rau simmani lara paap] kuiw smi? Sash Tray pret ra 6) u sammani ilazh paap 4 -kuiw 
smi Cakkawdde pref ra « simmanpi klarh paap* kuiw smin wan Cau Narasi# © pref ra » sammagi 
klayh paap® kuiw Cau Mbharha(7)t? pred ra 0 sdmmani klaza mwai gah paap‘ kuiw smi waft Af 


Gad Bin® pref ra parikkhara swak ma skuiw sdmmani 6or gah tun lew sna (8) Gor swaw 0 haben | 


. 601 kduid 601 in dacun 601 "9 pnik cakkho 601 dakaw morn 6or » kwoyh (9) pala suim bi gapuiw 


- pandk 20 sat bun j jan 11 mhaai sut tarau klam mwai s-roih kuiwsmis ta’ gah 12 ma pref ran rau gah° 


tala tah ciret tual enh hea " thai si Lbages Pitoraeup thai 5 yah lau hea u tla dab lon. ceh 4 tuai 


TA pow; eC ar ee ae ee ae, 7" omits smi, 
§-A Sd Trdai, ee . -4 Orig, has p-ow, 
SA N@vasi, oP oe § Orig. omits, 
“7B Mhardj, oo ee SA Bgin, 
9 A omits 0 dacun 6or Wi, oo ae BE ee 10 Orig, has pandas. 


u Asa . ee vee ae ee Onhee repeats fa’ gah, | 


parTit]) ~=—=—=<“<«~*é‘éMMON INSCRIPTIONS =———OCOSot0g 


11, [wih]ira [g]ah rau [\] acd safA] masun cwoh ler « niman plop fat 
pdaly th]an [djamda [l]ati’ puty [ta gla(h) Sa ee oe ee 


= 
eo e @« eo a * ted a o eo & a ° e ° os o e a e eo oe os 9 @ = oe 6@ eo © . Ld e ee a a ° 


12, (w)# aah wef (p)rfo]a® ra td » kha gah sm(i)n* ta’ fay ma prefi. 
phyer sama[ni] ta gah i jak cuih lal nit Pe) Spe ee ere are 
13. (f)® ma [t]wak galtja 1 fiah [ma] fe [djakar® mwam ma. twak 
ga[t]a « krau [dakJar [gah filah ma yok (1)” tdofa ] (pa). 2... 


ee. © © © #8 @ © © © @ © © © 2 @ Ff o @ oe 8 ww © @ eo mw ee lll a @ @ 8 eee 


14. gah [fiJah ma yok [sang]a [c]war a [\] krau [g]ah cih klath sa[m]ani 
‘{k]lath ma [doJk gah ma t[l]uf [ra] * pday klath * [gah] kui[m] . 


(nda}r [kluia] « 4 kluia ® gah (iJon ma [dandar] kamhofk] thar 2 a 
| uit [s]ama[ni] klarh wo’ kuim «[slok] ¥ tam-in [thiparam]®.... 


le a Td eo «© se ee _@ @ @ @© @¢ #6 @ «@ 


1 Presumably error for tila, we 
20Or2? ne E : 8 Or bron? 
4 Or smin P_ . . 5 Or 7, or wh - 
_ 8 There seems to be no justification for the anusvira, 
7 This stop is clearly superfluous and may be merely an accidental mark. 


8 Looks like ¢lam, 8 Conjecturally restored, is 
10 Written in abbreviated form, as. if abelus 5 ; or the Ssunerecript ” may be regarded as written 
over the following 2. - 1 Or tar? ? 


18 Looks like ma slak ‘Sobectsd’ into slok. 
18 The last syllable is conjecturally restored, 


wa dma smaw. kya. Kalyani( nt) wihd gah tuai « acd sah 50 le niman plop r ra than dmaa tila. ta’ gah 


tual kuiw. dan pindapat ra « sabhad sanak le prea kui(ta)w fiah we gruih ra n kha gah smid 


-ta’ ma pref. phy? sammapi"l ta’ gah jak ceh 4 na Bago: ra tt kha ma jak ceh gah mha smi Bra 


SaA Dej? ma jak gata Ime(t3)a. ma twak gah fab ma yuik dakaw mom 4 gata o krau. gah kquia 
babe dacun  krau gah fiah ma yok. twuiw pala  krau (14) gah. dah ma. -yuik sha swaw « krau 
gah.cif klazh simmani klash ma. quik kluf& ra 0 pdai klarh gah tun» jah ma dalaw gapew 43 gata 


" krau gah fiah ma Fie ay kduit i krau gah dah ma khalaw khamok: thaw # uit ee kia - 


3 +1 Orig. has 5a". sh oe ui A Bat, * eee 8 Orig. omits, : : : 


106 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _  Pvot. tii 


* 6, [basa] gah ma jJakhan jakhan [akr]a afkjra gab [hjen [ma] (cut)? 
araxn samani{klah smii] Sam [Tra]y* ma [plre[a] (gah)* .. . 


e- oe w og! 


17. [a] gah [slawan 4 1 [s]amani klath smi[f S]am [Kifay 5 ma] pref 
gah] lon 4 tuly hen 1 s]athma[n]i klar [s]min (Cakkawade ma prea 


gah « twak tlun tun « ramef ma twak)°® 


oS 


18. [glah tu[p]’ ra 0 [t]am-if gah thaparam kufijm « simani kflJadr smia 


Cakkawa[dje ma [pr}en gah lwon 4 tuy hef[a] (u samani klarh Cau 


Nwarasifi ma pref gah « twak tlua)® 


‘1g. tun [i rlamen ma twak gah tulp raj tam-ii-[g]ah > sal wan a ‘a 


i IR GEOR RE re Ree es Se tee Rage gla 


20. ma preh gah t[w]ak [t]lun ton 1 ramen ma twa{k] gafh tu]p ra 


tam-ih gafh-slawan kufi]m 0 « sarhmafn}i [k]larh Cfau].. 2... 
wg hee eee we Lana pref gah lon a tuy)# 
1 Very doubtful. 2 ; 
2 Or Kray ? Apparently the latter is the teading in Il. 17,26, infra 
3 Conjecturally-restored, 
4 Or nuda, or ndt? 
. § Or Trdy ? ; : 
8 Conjecturally restored, only the first letter of the first wo d bei a 
Pon | ‘ eing traceable, — 


® Conjecturally restored, at 
oe - The # is superscript, and may be regarded either as over the Z or the m. 
this is just an abbreviation like the one of ew in L. 4, Supra, 
10 Looks like’ Vwara® or Nitra? ew wares. 
une ve r 7 ee ? though Eresnmably peresstnidilues be merely ‘variant spellings of 
41 Conjecturally restored, | | 


In the latter case 


f 


. wwa". kuim y slok. thamin -thiparam cam-ah ran kwith “kwuitk ma ptarh bat sreai (16) basa ma w 
jakhan jakhan akra akra heh 0 ma-cut 4 ra 0 saramani klam smia Saya Kraai ma pret gah ma 
klné krau gah rau Imei ma twak tup ra 0 taminl (17) gah sadhan teu sammani klar no Sam 


‘Kraai-ma prem gah lon a tuai n sammani klarh smith Cakkawade ma pred gah ma klud rau men — 


ma twak (18) gah Tup tup ra “ tamif tuparam kuish » sak smih gah 0 sdmmant klam Cau Néirasin 
ma prefi gah tawak Klug (19) tun Imei ma. twak gah tuai3 ra u thamin gah sawan sak gre 4 
Smid gah " sammani klarh Cau Mharat (20) ma pref twak klu& tun lamex ma twak gah ups ra " 


LA sma. : ; 2A sman It. | 
4 Orig. has sakuiw (not sak kuiw), 6 Orig, has bai eee = Benteh 


ae 


a 


PART 14 =—si(<ié‘éziesS MOON INSCRIPTIONS 40% 
an. bfeja’ « [s]athmanfi] klath ; mwoy smia* Ay [Gaim {Blin ma pre|f] 
gah « twak tlun [tun-« rlameh ma twa[k g]ah (tupran?...... 


22. simani turau [kllamh [m]w[oly [ma gatlah lia tuy [g]ah ['] smia* [t]o’ 


tufy] ma [dua dua] sajuin [slamani [ta] gah (). 2... 
23. [c]w[o'] rat {kJuiw [blaca [ph]a[p] ra 0 « afkha}- gah aca sa[a] masun. 
cwoh gafh « parjifbhok puh tanay tujy hen [tlila [Aah]... 2... 


24. sim* gafh] rau tila fiah Welr [s]uif[m k]Juiw aram ‘[plariwa hen 1 - 

 [I]wop tau pday samut [sim]* ra « [] kh[a] gah [sJamani [klam] . 

as. ['] tum rame[n] he[A kwo]k® pt{ujin tuly] 4 kiw® tila to’ [gam]-(i) 7 ra 

4 gam-(i)7 [t]uy [heJa (t)ui(f)® ara [d]amafn] ga[h] kuiw cuth 
dm[an].............. {i simani klamh smih Sa]-° | 

26. {m] Kray ma prei™ [gah] « tuiij[rlamen ra[mJef twlo]k * [pt]uin tu[y] _ 
w [k]uiw tifla to’ gjam-(i) “ra v1 na naly] wo’ heht a....... 


* € &© 8. e@ 8 © © 6 4 we Hw Owe Ree we eke 


a The « must have been at the end of the last line. 


2 Or smin? . - 
3 Conjecturally restored. . mo 
4 Or sim? ; 


& Or {improbably) ¢wok ? 
4S Error for &uiw, 

1 Or gamit?” : ee 

8 Or éaiw? But this seems unlikely, 

9 Conjecturally restored. ' ; 
10 There is an original flaw between the pr and the ¢. 
Wl Eyror for kwok, . 

12 Or ¢imprebably} gam-i, 


thamif gah sawdn kuith.» sak smih gah» (21) sammani klamh smih A GaA Bin ma pred twak klua 
tun » lame ma twak tuaid rau thamhin sawan kuin 1 rau gah: (22) sammapi Gor ma gatah lia 
tuai gah o -smifi ta’ mdut sjuh sAmmani ta’ gah a pref law pdai than dmas sdmmani 601 gah (ag) . 
ra kuiw ‘baca phap ra acd gah. acd sah se gah pa prabhuik .pot thai tuai 1 tala wah miman plop 
pdai (24) sivh Kalyani raw tala jab le suith kuiw arash pariwdra hed lop tau pdaiswh ra wkha gah 
sammapi klazh smii? Bra Saf Det ma pres, gah (25) tui [med kok ptuin tuai v kuiw tila ta’ gamhi 

ran gamni ta’ tui ard dmaA gah kuiw 4a dmaa plan ra « sdmmagi klazh smi Sa(a6)in? Kraai ma 
pref gan tuif Jamed lame kok pa tuin tuai « kuiw tila ta’ gambhi ra 0 na nai sak wwa’ atuia Imea - 


1 For tup, a Orig, has aa es 8 Orig. has Saat 


108 Poets EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ — Evonan 


27. [a] n(i)man’ pf{tuin tluy « [kJuiw ti[l]a to’ gam-i uit [ra] « gam-I tuy 


_ fheja : tua ar[4] ar(@) gafh Bas cuih dmaf ra as rau [gaJh.. ~ 


a8. [ma dah} sa[juin. s]m(i)a* Bra Sat [Dieta * ‘gah i pabwoy rwen [hea] 
« flan ba [ba] k[wok] p[t]w[n] tuly 1 kJuiw tila poy [to’ z kuiw 


Weg Oe ee, Bil a Bla te a eee Ges Ce 


1 The ‘usual and correet spelling i is niman., ‘ 2 Or emin ‘ 

3 If this is rightly read, it is written in abbreviated form, as if 24e, like hea in various places 
eags 1. 4) supra), Otherwise we’ ‘must read De or Dem. 

4 Probably the lost word is upasampada, 

& The inscription continued onto the other side of the stone the sin of which is, however, 


blank. = judging by the manuscript version, there were about £2 or 15 lines ‘on he upper part, which 


” Gg lost. 


ma twak tarau gata u he(27)a niman pa tuin tuai kuiw tila ta’ gamhi kle’ pha-uit rau gamhi tuai 


~atuia ard ara dnaai jaku kuiw ceh dma rau rau gah pref tuai hea « pdai sammani klam (28) ma 


sdah sjuin smia Bra Saa Det gah » babwai Iweh heh ba ba kok pa tuin tuai » kuiw tila ta’ kuiw - 


upasampada kha ma kuiw upasampada gah u upajhdai mwai.» fiah ma phadot kammawat « same 
magi mwai tila ta’ bad ba ma rap kammawat ma skuiw upasampada « kha thai bape 4 tuai gah » 
smin tala jakhi -kayah pham kilo’ pnad sdau pref law tuai tila fab tuin klus ra un tila ta’ ma skuiw 
‘upasampada tun « pa tam na saw! thai bape gitu phawraguin thai? 5 gah « duiw pan cawek3 


- phawraguin thai can + gah hei. ma tuain phyam thai katau hei ma tuai hen « rau gah sdmmani 6o1 


kuiw du&i upasampada tuai kuiw niman aca sad pan kuiw twah°dhaw patimok ku fah ma dus 
upasampada tami ta’ gah ma pa pujau acd sah pan ma Sdesa patimuk’ ku tah ma duf 
-upasampada tami gah mha « ku fah mwai mwai yat yat sné bat pan 4 tau » sat ba ba u kduidé u 
mrek b4 pa coh pasa 1 gitu phawraguin § cwek thai 3 kuiw yah Imu 8 gah u tala fttiah Ramadhippati 
ceh a tuai w uit aca san 50 kom ku® fiah ma dué upasampada tami tarau klaya mwai gah 
na ‘phojuin ma ka mwai praka kuim law 0 na cana ma ka mwai praka kuiyh law  taruih tuai hes 


ku acd sah mwai mwai heA yat sana bat ba bd tau » dakaw mom mwai mwai mrek khamih bd ba 


pasa « mrek kala) pan pan pasa « sat basi Idizh Idizh » kwom pala sablu suim bi. gapuiw bun 
panak J! sat mhaai sut mwai mwai deyadhamma ma phah sak wwa’ tala fah kuiw dan raw ku dah 
60x ma dud upasampada tami tun gah w parai ni athaparikhara ma lon tuai ma kuiw dan lew un 
“mreggala ba ba pasa » sat basi pan pan klara ma kuiw dan plan » rau gah kuiw dan tuai « tila 
sah so palag phyan md ran rau gah pala phyau acd sah 5o tuai heh » dit fah ma duh 
~ upasampada 601 gah}? tui quik gah bapesi gah » bwai lame kuiw twak tat 13 4 tuai o tala fab 
Ramadhippati pa aruizh uih tamuih cujt tuai kuiw palah phyau nd than damda@ tala puiai ‘ta’ ras 


pwald sék wwa’ tala fah Ramdadhippati ma pa gah « huit ma sju# sduik sasna@ san roi n fah ma 


dua - upasampada gah bwai ma buin kfian mik kuiw dah tuai pawa sik wwa’ ma pa ron #0 bwai 


ts krau tun lew yah bnat ayuk tila fah Ramdadhippati 1® mnum gah w ruih ruih sazamani ta’ ma smik 
‘duf upasampada gah wv rau nai wwa’ hei pre&t tuai tla hah Ramadhippati ma tuiw 1¢ 4 upasampada . 


ra » rau’ gah huit dah uiw da ci # smiti ma quik pe tai kot saddh kom ku paiia ma pkaa ra 
kamin qua Haasawati babwai krau tun lew » kuiw dahat ku sasna kozh fi » atuid sak puiai 
bacires wwa’. her pa bak ‘i -tma’ sattama tuai rau, 


1A sak... > 8 Orig. has tua. 3 A eather. Aes | ‘As 


ag A4 8A pa eo 7 B pdtimukbha. 8A. has lriah, 
9A onaiis ku, 10 For gala, ‘11 Orig, has pandas, . 
18 B omits all from here to the next bre head gah, inclusive. 13 For tt, 


MM Orig. has pwat. 18 oe has Kama’, 48 For kusiw, . VA hud, 


paRT I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 109 


Translation? 


-{Reverence to the Blessed One, the Holy One, the Fully Enlightened 
One! May the excellent Religion of the Conqueror flourish and BOE S 
and may reverence be paid to Buddha! 

The purification of the Religion of the Conqueror was: effected by 
Ramadhipati, king of the Mén country. An account of this event will be 
related. During the reign of Ramadhipatiraja, king of the Mon country, 
the Religion of the Conqueror became purified. — 

_ Two hundred and eighteen years had passed away since the attainment 
of Parinirvana by the Fully Enlightened One, the Sage of the Sakyas, 


when Dhammasokaraja was inaugurated as king. In the fourth year? after. 


this event, owing to Nigrodhasdmanera, the king had great faith in the veligion. 
of Buddha; and the gifts and honours to the monks greatly increased, 
while those to the heretics diminished. The heretics, for the sake of gifts 
and honours, embraced the ascetic life among certain monks, received the 
upasampada@ ordination, and promulgated. their own heresies, such as the 


-Sassata heresy. Some took orders themselves, assumed the guise of monks, 
and taught their own heretical doctrines. All these heretics mixed ‘promis- | 
| cuously with, and resided among, the monks, who performed uposatha and. 


such other ecclesiastical ceremonies. Owing. to this circumstance, the Sangha 
considered that the faris@ was corrupt, and would not perform uposatha. 
Therefore, for seven years, the performance of this ecclesiastical ceremony 


wee ceased in the Asokarama monastery. 


1 Owing to the fragmentary condition of the Mén. text, this translation ‘has, for the sake of 


intelligibility, been based on Mr. Taw Sein Ko’s version of the Pali wherever. the M6n text makes 
default. Where both texts are available, any differences worthy of notice are mentioned in the notes. a> 


From the end of Face F a similar use has been made of the Mén MS. copies mentioned in §§ 72,7 7-9. 
For the same reason it has been found necessary in this inscription to place the numbers of the lines 
in accordance with the portions of the Mén text that have been preserved, not whereit might “be 


presumed that a particular line originally commenced, The parts taken over from the Pali and Mén | 


MS, texts have been enclosed in square brackets; and so far as they lie outside the scope of the Mén 


" fragments that have been preserved on the stones, they are not divided into numbered lines and.can 


therefore be easily distinguished from the portions representing the. actual fragments remaining on the — 
stones themselves. “Words conjecturally restored, or added in compliance. with English idiom, or. for 


~ the sake of intelligibility, have been puree in parentheses, A mark of. interrogation’ is added where the 


restoration may be regarded as doubtful. De ake oe Beg Cas 

_. ® According to. the traditional reckoutne, this. ‘date will be 322 3.c., but there is some reason to 
believe that the usual reckoning antedates Buddha’ s death by about 64 yearss so, for ‘3a » we should 
Probably say about 258.3 Bo. a 


HO _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  =————_—s [vo 11 


- On aceount of these circumstances, King Dhammasoka became desirous 
of purifying the religion by removing the impurity, heresy, and corruption 
that had arisen in it, and secured. the co-operation of Moggaliputtatissa- 

mahathera. Having acquired, by study, the knowledge that the. Fully 
Enlightened One was a Vibhajjavadi, and that those who professed the 


doctrines of the Sassata and other schools were heretics, the king 


-conveked an assembly of all the monks. Those who held similar doctrines 
_ were commanded to form themselves into groups, and each group was 
dismissed, one by one. There were six millions of monks professing the 


‘religion, who, if asked what the belief of the Fully Enlightened One was, 


would gay that he was a Vibhajjavadi, while the sinful, heretical monks, who 


~ declared that the Fully Enlightened One professed the doctrines of the 
Sassata and other schools, numbered sixty thousand. The king directed all 
the sixty thousand sinful monks to leave the order, and saying: ‘Now that 
the. partsé has been purified, let the Satgha perform uposathe,”’ returned © 


ta the city. 


Therefore, Moggaliputtatissamahathera performed. uposatha in the 


 Asokarama monastery in the company of all the six millions of monks. This 
being concluded, he promulgated, in an enlarged and expanded form but on 


the lines indicated by the Blessed One, the treatise called Kathavatthu, of 


which a summary had been expounded by the Blessed One.] 


A 


Moggaliputtatissamahatheta having preached,’ [like as the venerable 
Mahakassapathera selected five hundred monks, in whom all passions were 


extinct and who had attained to the possession of the six abhififes and the 


four patisambhidds, and convened the First Council, which sat for seven 
_mionths,} (1.2) and like as our lord the Mahathera Yasa [selected. 700 monks 
in whom all passions were extinct and who had attained to the possession 
of the six a@bAz#fias and the four pattsambhidds, and convened the Second 
Council, which sat for eight months; even so did he (Moggaliputtatissa- 


-mahathera) select 1,090 monks, in whom all passions were extinct and who 
had attained to the possession of the six abhifigids. and the four patisam-— 


: coe — pees. 
1 The Pali merely has “subsequently,” 


PART IT] MON INSCRIPTIONS st ase PEF 


bkidés, and convened the Third Council, which sat for nine months]? (I.93) 
from the first (day of the) waning of the month of Magha until the full 
mroon (day of the month of Karttika).? [At the conclusion of this. Council,] 
(l. 4) Moggaliputtatissamahathera reflected* that in the future {the religion 
would be established in neighbouring foreign countries, and sent such. Theras — 
as Majjhantikathera with the injunction: “Do you establish the religion] (1. 5) | 
in those neighbouring foreign countries.” [Of these Theras, he sent] our lord 
Mahindathera [to establish. the religion in the island of Tambapanni,* and. 
Sonathera and Uttarathera to establish the religion inf (6) the Mén— 
country,” [which was also called Suvannabhimi.] — Ste 

At the time when our lords the two monks, namely Sonathera and 
Uttarathera (arrived ?),® [a king ealled Sirimasoka ruled over the country 
of Suvannabhimi. His capital was situated to] (1.7) the north-west of the 
Kelasapow pagoda.’ One half® of it was on a hill® one half {was built on 
a plain. This town is called, to this day, - Golamattikanagara,}™ (l. 8) 
because fit contains many mud-and-wattle houses resembling those: of the 


‘Gola people.” 


The town was situated on the sea-shore ; and] an ogress who lived in 


the sea [was im the habit of} coming up [and devouring} every child of the 


king that was [born in the king’s palace. On the very night of the arrival of 
the two Theras,] (1.9) a child of the king was born (and) the ogress, saying # 


1 In the Mén this is apparently expressed in days, of which there must have been Poin rae 


. 


- and sixty-five: the only thing legible being (at the beginning of 1. 3) “ five” preceded by the form 


of “tem” used as a multiplicand. The Pali does not give the number of days. 
-® Conjecturally restored. This passage is not in the Pali. . 
3 The Pali has ** foresaw.” ie -. 4 Ceylon, - aa 
5 So far as can be conjectured. from . the fragmentar nains of the Mén te i 
F ca . y remains of the Mén text. i yf 
expressed itself in this way: “in Suvagnabhimi, which is the Mén country,?” . : ey 
_ © For all the preceding, the Pali merely has “at that time,” | 
7 Pali, Kelasabhapabbatacetiya, Explained as being near Bilin i | Shwézyin District, 
E — 19) Qbe in in the Shwé 
§ In the Pali, “the eastern half,” - . ° bai ca ene ‘ 
: Literally, “rock.” But the word is used elsewhere in both senses. ) 
: 0'Tn the Pali, “the western half.” a ae ee ae 
: a Explained. as being Taikkula (Ayetthma) in the Shwégyin District. Here, most curiously, the 
Pali text contaitis (on the stone) & Mén sentence, viz. gun Tuik Gala yman ma dah tlur Fa 
krau to’ gah, “The Méns who. came thereafter called it Tuik Gala.” This does not appear in the: 


manuscript text or translation as edited by Mr. Taw Sein Ko. See Plate I. Lo Oot ecto ee 
Vol. XXIL of the Indian Antiquary, Cf, 1, t4, infra, ie aca mese + h T5» of hisi article in ee 
neat — Probably the ‘Mén order differed somewhat, but the only: legible words are. “ the: Wain. ee book 
which seems to correspond ta the “because” in the .Pali, The Gola (or Ganda) were the- people of 


Easter Bengal, Their mame has become the M6n and B: : : 
a See el urmese appellation for all: forsiene; 


11a EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | : [von HI 


{that a child had been born in] fie king's [palace], came up out of the sea 
together with a retinue of five hundred* When*..............-.5 


(1. 10) having (made?)...... 2s... Were two lions, Ps were 


calculated to inspire terror and were more numerous than . ee 
the. ...... chased away the ogres. Then® the ogres.........-— 


wise bea ele eee ee ee ees Hac (ll ri). (not?) desiring to. allow. the 
ogres to return again (later on ?),4 throughout the extent of the [country] 
our lords the two Theras set guards; and to all the people, [who had 
assembled together], (they) (1.12) preached the law of the Brahmajala- 
“gutta, and delighted them all.® Four (thousand ?).........., me 


the saranasila® At that time sixty thousand people attcined ‘to the. 


comprehension - of [the Lan ise ee Be a ee .... (L113) thousand 


five hundred came out (and) became monks. Thenceforward, in the Mén 


country all young children,’ that were (born?) [on the anniversary day of 
that event, were named Sonuttara.] In order to prevent the savage ® demons, 
(servants) (of Varuna ?),°? (from seizing) them, (1.14) men had to inscribe [on 


‘1 Je. other ogres, as in the Pali, which proceeds: “with the object of devouring it.” 

-@ Literally, “at that time.”. The Pali goes on: “the people saw the ogress, they were stricken 
with terror and raised a loud cry.. The two Theras, perceiving that the ogress and her attendants 
had assuméd the exceedingly frightful appearance of lions, each with one head and _ two bodies, 


created (by means of their supernatural power) monsters of similar appearance, but twice the number . . 


_of those accompanying the ogress, and these monsters chased the ogres and obstructed their further 
progress, When the ogres saw twice their own number of. monsters created by the supernatural 
power of the two Theras,. they Cied out: ‘Now we shall become their prey, and, being stricken 


with terror, fled towards the sea.” It does not seem likely that the-Mé6n text had room for all this. 


and I can only give the fragments of it without attempt at restoration, 
3 Or “when,” lit, “at that time.” ‘The Pali merely has: “In order to prevent the return of the 


: opres, the Theras established a cordon of guards around the country, and preached the Brahmajala- ms: 


sutta to the people, who had assembled together.” 

4 The reading and meaning are doubtful. 

T hese last four words have no equivalent in the Pali. : 

6 In the lacuna we must supply something like “took refuge in.” The Pali gives this passage 
‘somewhat differently: “At the conclusion of the sermon, 60,000 people attained to the comprehension 
of the Truth; 3,500 men and 1,500 women renounced the world, and the rest were established in the 
‘three. Refuges’ and the silas,” adding, “Thus. the religion was established in this Mén country by 

the two Theras in the 236th year that had elapsed since the attainment of parinivvana by. the Fully 


Enlightened One.” This addition has no equivalent. in the Mén text, (The date, according to the. 


traditional reckoning, would be 308 3,c., but. probably this is about 64 years too early.) . 


7. The Pali has “ princes.” The Mén has-a lacuna after “born ”. in which oe may: hove: been 


expressed somehow... 
8 Lit, “because not ‘desiring to et the tiger demons,” 


9 This rendering (which is. not paralleled in the Pali) is somewhat uncertain. It is also not quite ee 
certain whether the fragments supplied from the Pali text in the Passage bavi! following: were 


all contained in the Mén original. 


PARTI] MON INSCRIPTIONS 113 


palm leaves figures of the creatures with ?] heads of ogres (and) bodies of | 
lions [created by the supernatural power of the Theras?] and put them on 
(their heads ?), [and also placed a stone engraved] in accordance with those 
(same) shapes upon the top of the hill* of Tuik Gala* .. 2... 2.0.0. 
eee ee ete el ee we CL 15): remains (until now). . . 
_ From the time that® our two lords* came (and) established the ralipion 
in the Mén country............... it shone® in the Mén ey 
for a very long while. (When) a long time*®........00.0. . (Ll. 16) 

ctiereupon ?) parties disputed (and) went apart (?),’ pestilences® eee 
sous ee eee (and) because of a great calamity of famine which also _ 
BUOSE ha ae els SO eg oa ae Oy . (I. 17) also, the Mén country diminished ® 


in power. Owing to [these - calamities] the monks settled” in the Mén 


country, (or) who lived in the Mén country, (1. 18) were unable... . . 
eG Cae al bare ee aoe © cand “te region diminished in power. 
EDoring the time when?) Sitriyakuma, who bore the name of ° King 
Manohor, ruled the city of Sudhuim,” the religion Bere ey er crs 
(1. 19) [This happened] a thousand and six hundred years from the attainment 


of Parinirvana by the exalted Poe (and) when the religion (had pee) : 


1 Lit, “rock? 

2Cf.1.7. The Pali ‘arely says ‘on the top ne a Ahill to the north-east of the town,” and. adds 
“This stone » (literally, however, “ figure, shape,” Pali vaipam). “may be seen to this day.’ This last - 
sentence is perhaps represented by the Jacwna in the Mén ending with “remains.” But the Mén 


~geems to have something more, the first (and only) word of which is unidentified, finless it i corresponds i 


with L.M,. lweh and ha de the above mentioned ripam, 
3 Lit. “ beginning from.” a ; : geek 
4 Le, the two Theras, ~ 5 Je. flourished, LL a me 
® Presumably we must supply something like “had elapsed.” The Pali equivalent for this whole 


passage is: Since its introduction, the religion flourished’ fora long time in the Mén country, In 


course of time, however, the power of the Mén country declined, because civil dissensions arose, ” ete, 

17 Le, split up. But ‘the’Pali says: “and the extensive country was broken up into separate — 
principalities, and because the people suffered from famine and pestilence, and because, to the detri- 
ment of the propagation of the exelent religion, the country was sponquerca,: by the armies of the: 


. seven kings.” 


8 Doubtful reading and meanines ‘ 


9 Lit. “went soft,” : 

10 Or ‘ sheltered,” The Pali seems to beve no etive len: for this ae 

11 The Pali here has: “ were unable to devote themselves, in peace and comfort, | to the acquisition 
of scriptural knowledge, or to the observance of the es ad and the religion also declined. 2 _ There 


is not room for all this in the Mbn, Seeds ot 2 Saget HO hyd 


12 Ye, Thatén, 

18 The Pali merely has: During the reign of Manchart, who was also ade by his princely 
name of Siriyakumara, the Bowes of the kingdom became very 1 

4 1050-7 A.D. y 


8. 


rg : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL, 1 


gstablished (in) the M6n country a thousand (three hundred and _ sixty-four 
years?)?. .........,.. A thousand six hundred and one years from 
the attainment of Parinirvina by the exalted Buddha, in the year [419]? of 
the Common Era, (King Anuruddha established the religion in Pukain,® 
~ which ?)* (1. 20) is called the city of Arimaddanapur. * 

From (the year when the ple P) reached the city of Puli, it east 
NG EN nee We eo A craidi om. a oat ae ae . 2. (the year) 532.8 At. that 
Hine ¢ King Sirsahghabodli-Parakkaivabalin purified the religion. ..... 


nee (lL 21) (at) that time, the Mahathera Uttarajiva, the teacher of the 


king oe Pukam, in order to go and venerate the pagodas [of Ceylon], said, 


Se ey ha hae Pe ee eee (the island of P) Ceylon,” “and. together - 


with many monks went (and) embarked on a ship at [Bassein,.?7 Who was 


this Mahathera Uttarajiva 2] (Il. 22) Our (lord ?) (was) a Mén, a disciple of .— 


the Mahathera Ariyavarhsa. The Mahathera Ariyavamsa, in his turn, [was a 
disciple of Mahakalathera] (who was called the Mahathera of Krabah 
Damyon ?).8 The Mahathera of Kraban Damyoa, in his turn, (was) a 
disciple of the Mahathera Pranadassi,? [who was endowed with] (1. 23) 
dokiyajjhéna.” Our lord dwelt at coud. 


1 The passage in parentheses has been added conjecturally by subtracting 236 (cf. note on line 12, 


supra), from 1600, there being 1 no equivalent in the Pali for this whole ‘sentence, 
2 1057-8 AD, CE. the note on the text, 
8 Pagan, 
4 There seems to be no room for the whole of the Pali passage, which reads: “ King Anuruddha, 


_ the lord of Arimaddanapura, took a community of monks together with the eae and established 


the religion in Arimaddanapura, otherwise called Pugama,” 
“8 It is not quite clear. whether the Pali, from here on, agrees exactly with the M6n, It has: 
One hundred and seven years after this event, or in the year. 526 of the Common Era [= 1164-5 
“AD.J, King Sirisatghabodhi-Parakkamab4hu purified the religion in Lankddipa (7,e. Ceylon). Six 
years after the latter event, or in the year 532 of the Common Era, Uttara jivamahathera,” etc, 
[t séems difficult to find room for all this amongst the Hest: of the Mén text. 
_ 6 ron ap. ; 
7:-The Pali makes ee «set out for Kusimanagara, saying to himself: ‘1. shall émabark ina asp 
with a great many monks.’” This will not. fit ‘into the. M6n text, which makes reference to Ceylon, 
‘Kusimanagara is the literary name for Bassein (in M. Mén Kusim) ; ef, A 31s 
8 The clause in parentheses is a conjectural restoration. I take damyo% (which means “black, 
dark ”) to be. part of this ea though the Pali tae no equivalent for it, Cf. the note on the 
text, 
8 Ch the note on the text. The Pali adds: who lived at Sudhammanagara,” Ze, Thatén, 


10 The Pali adds “ and ans Re ”” and mentions these ‘qualifications after stating his” place of 
residences : 


* 


PART uw] | MON INSCRIPTIONS ENS 
Og 

(At dawii ?)? our lord woul id go (and) sweep the Bodhi tree. ....... 
pata kb tree es wo, (and) having (swept it ?), would return (and) go on his 
ee -pilgrimage in the city of Sudhuim. (Such) being our lord’s nature,’ 
(one) morning, [while he was sweeping * the Mahabodhi tree, certain] (1. 24) 
men of the city of Sudhuim, who were going to trade in the country of 
(Magadha ?),*.. . having seen (him), [on their return, related what 
they had seen to the: seopile of ‘Sedna (Thus) people knew the fact that_ 


- our lord. indeed possessed lokiyajjhdna, ..... career eee 


eees eee pe eee ee» 8. (L925) a -sdmanera, a: sort of 


bore? “of ‘the village of Chapat (in the district of Bassein ?)* followed our 


lord (the Thera, who, etnbarking on a ship, sailed to the island of ?)®-Ceylon. 
All the moe who lived in the island of Ceylon greeted (him) with particular 
enquities.° [As they were well disposed towards him, they. said: - “ We are 
the spiritual successors of] (1. 26) Mahindathera, who came (and) established 
the religion in the island of Ceylon ....., (you), our lords, [are the 


1 Or perhaps, “every morning.” But either way, a monosyllabic illegible word after the 
supposed yak yah remains untranslated. The Pali of this passage reads: “Being thus gifted, tte 
would, every morning, proceed to Magadha and. sweep the courtyard of the Mahabodhi tree in 
Uruveld, return to Sudhammapura, and go on his alms-pilgrimage,” Es sauraely the missing 


passage in the Mén ‘version contained some of these particulars. 


2 This inadequately represents tradah, lit. ‘being,’ which may include “state, scoddiuen: = “ete., 


and also have the sense of “fact.” If the latter be its meaning here, it may be dependent on‘the 


verb #d¢ and the passage may mean that the traders “ witnessed the fact” of bis miraculous 


petormene 


8 The Pali, as above, adds “the courtyard of.” It also speaks of the men who witnessed the 
miracle as “traders, who lived in Uruvela, and were on their way to Magadha from Sudhammapura,” 


“There is here a difference between the two versions, which I am unable to reconcile, the Mén 


distinctly saying that they were fick dun Sudhuim, “men of Sudhuim.” 
4 Or “of the Mahabodhi,” the reading being very doubtful. 
68 ‘The two words at the end of the line have been left untranslated, as in the Rene of the 
context it is impossible to determine the sense borne here by gati, a word of various shades. of — 


meaning .(lit. “going ”). 


6 The. Pali here has: “On arrival at Kusimanagara, Uttarajivamahathera embarked in a ship, 
accompanied: by many other monks and by a sdmanera, whose age was fully twenty years. ‘Who was . 
this samanera t Why was a called Chapatasimagera? <a _ There is not room Age all. this in the M6n 
version. 

T Le, “natives of” eg Chapat. It may be that the sdmanera was. ; himself born there ‘als, 

8 Doubtful; cf. the note on the text, The Pali has: “His parents were natives of Kusimarattha 


while he: himself was a pupil_of Uttarajivamahathera. ‘He was called Chapatasdmanera because his 


parents were. natives of a village called Chapata in Kusimarattha,” 
3 Conjecturally reatored with the help of the Pali, 
10 The P&li hast “oceordedrhim” egal siaed emanate) “a meek reception,” 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA = [VOLe II 


‘spiritual successors of] Sonathera (and) Uttarathera, who went (and) stabs 


lished the religion in ,Suvannabhimi.”!? Having spoken | (thus), [they con- 
- ferred the upasampadé ordination on] (the “sémapera?) (1. 27) Chapato.’ 


The Mahathera Uttarajiva, (having venerated ?) the pagodas in .the island 


of Ceylon, [made preparations to return to Pukam]. (Then) the monk 
Chapato® [thought thus?]: “(When?) our lord the Mahathera Uttarajiva 
(returns home, if I were to return home with him, ?) (1. 28) by reason of being 


very near my poner (and) runs there would be ‘impediments caused by 


e * @ * 


TOIAUVCS 5 a ee ahare Uy ce a ee eer ee eae 4. there 
would be Happiness of mind for me, on ihe snes hand I should”... ...- 
a eh Mee ee ee eee ee ae » . (I. 29) Ceylon. 

~ This monk, having completed all his studies® .. 2... eee ee ee ee 
liye ear bite See ag ‘ . people called (him he Mahathera 
iChapate: 2 The Mahathera Chapato, when® ee neko te 
: eva see es : ee Sie al ae8 [After electing thug, He 
appointed] (I 30) the Mahathera Sivili, a native of “Teimal ite )* 4 ve 


. Loe fe The Pali ae “ Let us all, therefore, perform rosether “the ceremonies jicumibent® “upon the 
_. Order.” There does not seem to be room for all this in the M6n, 


-9 The M6n appears to call him, literally, “the son of people of Chapato,” here. 


8 Here the Mén clearly has “the monk, son of People of Chapato.”. This-is curious, as in 1. a5, 
the place is spelt Chapat. 


4 The Pali has: J should not be able to enjoy hee peace | and quiet, which are conducive to. 


the study of the Tipitaka together with its commentaries, It is, perhaps, advisable, therefore, that 


I should, with the permission of the Mahathera, remain in Ceylon, and return home only after I have — 


‘mastered the Tipitaka together with its commentaries,’ Accordingly, Chapata asked permission from 
Uttarajivamahathera and remained behind ja Ceylon. Uttarajivamahathera, accompanied by a large 
company of monks, embarked in a ship, and returned to Kusimanagara. Thence he proceeded to 
Pugima she (Ge. Pagan), ‘and took up his residence there, » It is quite impossible to find room for 
all he in the Mé6n, 
5 If this is the force of tum. 

6 The Pali has: “ Meanwhile, the monk, Ce. by dint of hard. study, had acquired a know- 

ledge of the Tipitaka together with its commentaries; and, as he had completed his tenth year in 


orders, he acquired the designation of Thera. Being now desirous of returning to Pugama, he 
-. feflected thus::‘If I were to return home alone, and if, in the event of the death of Uttarajivamaha- 
thera, I did not wish to associate with the monks of Pugama in the performance of ecclesiastical cere: 
monies, :. how could I, in: the absence of a paficavaggagana, perform such functions separately ?. It is, 


- perhaps, proper, therefore, that I should return home in the company of. four other monks, who are 
‘well versed in the ‘Tipitaka,’: ee There is. not 3 room for -all this in eth Mon, 
7 Conjecturally restored, 


8 Perhaps one could conjecturally add: “the -time came one him to return,” etc, But’ it is - 
impossible to be sure. how much of the jong Pali passage above cited” had its counterpart in ane 


. Mén text. 
9 Probably Taluk in Bengals, The reading is doubtful in the Mén but epeecied by the Pali, 


PART It] ~~ ~+MONINSCRIPTIONS = 17 


the Mahathera Tamalinda [the son of the Raja of Kamboja,? the Mahathera 
Ananda, a native of] Kancipura,® aa the Mabathera Rahula, [a native of _ 


Ceylon, to accompany him]*............0..... (1.31) The five 
exalted lords, having embarked on a ship, arrived at the city of Kusim.® All 


ER ee ee tenet eee eens 


ee ere ee ee er ee es ee ie nea . (Il. 32) Not having 


been in time to sheen [the vassa] (at) Pukam. that ‘year, (they) observed 


“one vassa in a monastery .... [at Kusim. .The site and walls of the 


monastery, where they spent the gassa, may be seen to this day, on the 
south side of Kusim. At the conclusion of the observance of the vassa, the 
Mahathera Chapato celebrated ' the pavérané, and, accompanied By the four 


Theras, set out for] ® (1. 33) Eka ?). 


Now the Mahathera Uttarajiva [had died. a few days] ‘before our lords 
(arrived. On reaching Pukam, the Mahathera Chapato heard that his own — 
teacher, the Mahathera Uttarajiva, was dead, and repaired to his tomb and 
performed such acts as that of making obeisance and asking the forgiveness 
of the deceased. He then took counsel with the four Theras, oe 
them thus].” (1. 34) “O my lords, when our feapper, who (is departed 2) o 
ee ie oe pe ey eer yee “L 33) (our lords, 
the two ?) Mahathera iAtahane named Sonathera (and) Uttarathera. [How- 
ever, our teacher, the Mahathera Uttarajiva, who. was a native of the Mén 


a was omen, the sole head - of the Church : but] (. 36) now that (the a 


I Or “ Tamulinda. ye The Mén spelling of this name varies. 


3 Not preserved in the Mén ; URerepe vemos or more probably the Shan and Liao States. 
Cf. § 75. 
3 Doubtful ; ‘the Pali has K&ficipura on the stone, though the M.S. has Kiteipura. The Mén 


spelling Kauc#° (for Katici®) is irregular, but Men spelling often disregards the Indian rules of sandht, . - 


The place is Conjeveram, 
4 The Pali proceeds; “ and, embarking in a ship, returned to his native country, These five 


- Mahatheras were well versed in the Tipitaka, and were learned and able; and, among them, Rahula- ~ 
thera was. thesablest and the most learned. On the arrival of these five Mahatheras at Kusima- - 


wagara, the time for journeying on to Pugdma was unseasonable, because of the ep prea ning vassa: 
and they, accordingly, opactved their vassa at aden 

5. Bassein, -°° 

6 It may be doubted whether all the above was in. ‘the “Men, 

7 The Pali. proceeds : *\As the Mahatheras of Ceylon associated with our teacher, the venerable - 
Uttarajivamahathera, in the performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies, it is proper that we should now _ 
perform such functions after associating ourselves with the monks of Pugama, who are the spiritual 
uccessors of Sonathera and Uttarathera.” oo 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor ami 


Barmese. monks ?) ! have become supreme, we do not wish to associate * [with 
them in the performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies.” Thus, through pride, 
the Mahathera Chapato declined to associate with the monks of Pukam in 
the performance of ere ee ceremonies, and he penermeny such func- 
tions separately. | 


It should be borne in miitd that in he year] (I. 37) 543: of the ore 


- Era fand the ra4th year® that had elapsed since the introduction of the 
religion into Pukam in the Burmese country from Sudhuim in the Mén 
-country,]* the religion from Ceylon [was established at Pukam. At that 


time a king, called Narapatijayastira,® was ruling in Pukam. He conceived a 


feeling of great esteem and reverence for the five Mahatheras, and, after 
having had a bridge of boats constructed on the great river Erawati, 
requested them to confer the upasampadé ordination ies the many monks 
who desired to receive it. In consequence of this,] (1, 38) our lords, these 
five, (gradually ‘increased eye (in) Enevenes and ther following grew in 
numbers. 

One day, the king ‘ordered peas to be held in honour of the oceasion 
of his giving a great offering to the five Mahatheras. On. that occasion} 
(I. 39) the Mahathera Rahula saw a [beautiful] dancing-girl, [and the loss of 
his delight in asceticism became burdensome to him. He longed to be a 
layman, and made preparations to carry out his object. The Mahathera 
Chapato and the three other Mahatheras ‘repeatedly expounded religious 


discourses to him, and, in a body, entreated him to turn away from the 


course he had resolved to take. But]’ (though they endeavoured to?) (I. 40) 
prevent (him), they were not able to prevent (him). (Our?) lords, [therefore, 
said: ‘Brother, we have expounded to you various religious discourses by 
way of admonition, and yet we have not been able to turn. you away from 
your object. Such being the case, do you forbear to become a layman here, 
but go to the Mén country and’ there embark for Malayadipa,* where you 


may carry out your wish, us Being repeatedly urged to adopt this conrse,] 


ro Doubtful : see the note on the text. “8 Conjecturally restored, 3 11f-a A.D. 
4 It seems. ‘more ‘than doubtful whether the Mén version had this sentence, At ‘any. rate, if. it 
occurred, it must have. been after, not before, the next one, 
a According to Phayre Cate), of Burma, pp. 50, 281) Narabadisithu (or Narabaditsitsith®) 
~ geigned from -1167 to 1204. A.D, 8 Doubtful ; see the note on the text. — 
~ 7 The Pali proceeds : “the religious. discourses expounded by the four . Mahatheras, by way af 
admonition, were of no avail, in turning his mind, They, therefore,” eté, 


®t. is regrettable that the Mon equivalent for this place-name cpeobably, Southern Sumatra) has oH 


not been. psa e see : 78+ 


Oo 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ ar 


(I. 41) outa Iigent to the Mén eon and Sabana: on a ‘ship, 
(reached ?) [Malayadipa.*: Now the king of Malayadipa? was desirous of 


learning the Vinaya, and Rahulathera taught him the Khuddasikkha together 


with its: commentary, and instructed him in the meaning of the text of the. 
whole of the Vinaya: The king was pleased with the Thera and presented 
him with] (1. 42) an alms-bowl [filled with many kinds of gems].” Rahulathera 


[accepted the gift,]° became a layman, [and married. 


Subsequently, of these four Mahitheras, Chapato died, and the surviving 
three Mahatheras, namely, Sivilimahathera, Tamulindamahathera,‘ © and 
Anandamahathera, continued to maintain the religion in splendour at Pukam, 

One day, the king of Pukam, having conceived a feeling of esteem and — 
reverence for the three Mahatheras, presented them with three elephants]. 


(1. 43) Then Sivilimahathera and Tamulindamahathera [liberated their two 


seen in a forest. But Anandathera, saying to himself: “I shall make 

a present of my elephant to my relatives living in Kaficipura,” proceeded ‘to. 
Kusim and shipped t off]. (Then ?) (I. 44) the monks Sivyilithera and 
Tamulindathera [said: “ Why have you caused pain to an animal by making 


a present of it to your relatives? Your action is improper. »  Anandathera — 


replied: ‘ Why, reverend. sirs, have you spoken to me in this manner ?]® 


. (Buddha ?)® (. 45) spoke thus: ‘To do [kindness to] relatives [is a sacred 


293 


duty.’ The two Mahatheras continued: “Ananda, you are indeed head- 


- strong. If, brother, you will not accept] (1. 46) advice and admonition” [from 


elders like us, do you “perform your ecclesiastical ceremonies separately, and 
we shall perform ours in like manner.” Thenceforward, the two. Mahatheras] 
(Sivilithera and ?) (1. 47) Tamulindathera® performed [their ecclesiastical cere- 


‘monies ee and Anandathera mae his likewise. 


1 It seems ‘doubtful whether ies yd tuy of the text is a remnant of this clause. . 

2 It is regrettable that the M6n equivalent for this place-name pehen. Southern Sumatra) hae 
riot been. preserved. See § 75. 

3 Tt is doubtful whether our text had the baivstont of these: words, 

-4T have followed the more usual spelling of the M&n version, The English translation of the Pali 
MS. has Sivali°, Tamalinda® » but I observe that the Pali transcript from the actual stone gives Sivili?, 
_. § The Pali proceeds: “ What! Reverend sirs, has not the Blessed One declared that kindness to 
one’s relatives,” etc, ‘8 It may be that Anandathera is the subject of the following verb, 

7 It is mot clear whether this corresponds with the small Mén fragment, which seems to mean | 


“to instruct, thoroughly.’* For one thing, it is difficult to see. ‘how the preceding space can have ‘been 


‘filled in, But I eannot fit the words in elsewhere, : 


. 8 It is by no means certain that. this. name “has been fitted in here correctly. | The Pali version 
does not repeat the names in this-connections and. the Mén- is Prreoneed by two words, with a 
conjectural restoration between: them. 


$2000 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. mt 

* In course of time, Tamulindathera, for the benefit of his pupils, who 
were learned, wise, and able, said to] (lL 48)? all the laymen, nobles (and) 
chiefs, [and other classes, that came to his presence:]. .... 2.0... 0208 


Pe a es ee 49) the ate tee ee 


ate oa. © 6% Sas Jayme cee a ee eee Cae (Lh §0). our lord 
Sivilithera .......% Tamulindathera: “O my lord, (the: acquisition of ?) 
the requisites [by means of vactuzifatti was censured by the Blessed One: 
why have you procured the four requisites by means of vacivitinatt®? Your 
action is improper]. (1. 51) . Chee Geet cc yaa. .?4 So spake Sivili- 


thera. Thus [replied] Tamiotiidathera: te My lord, the acquisition of - 


requisites by means of vactviiitatt: was censured by the Blessed One when 
such. property was for oneself; but, my lord, I] (1 52) did not practise. 
—pactothaatti [for myself;] it was for the sake of the benefit (and) advance- 
~ ment ® of religion ay determined?)®.... pe 
Ca eee eee cee see ee ee oe: [Sivilithera again said to Tamulinda- 
thera di : (So it is thus that my lord *)" (I. 53) Tamulindathera speaks | As 


ee ee es ARR a ie Oe ee 


‘TT have not been able to ft in the doubtfully read word kwon in this ines Perhaps it is. part of 
the expression “ pupils.” 


21 have been unable to fit the fragments of this line into a continuous eonitexts owing to the . 


‘uncertainty of the sense of dok ......¢ and tak patt).. The Pali version gives the following : — 
“© laymen, the monks are learned, wise, and able; but, because of their not being supplied with the 


four requisites, they are unable to devote themselves to the acquisition of scriptural knowledge, or to | 


the. observance of the precepts, Laymen, it is our desire, therefore, that these monks should. be 


furnished with the four requisites. Should you undertake to do this, the monks would certainly be 


_ enabled to devote themselves to the acquisition of scriptural knowledge, or to the observance of the 
precepts,’ The Thera thus procured the four requisites by means of vactuziifiatt?? This word means 
* verbal suggestion.” 


3 The Pali has: “Then Sivalimahathera~ said to Tamalindathera,” . I doubt if. pee Men 


represents this; it depends on the meaning of the doubtful word do(e). 

-4 I cannot fit‘in the M6n from wikd to so’, It seems te have no equivalent in the Pali, and the 
sense is not clear. Wiha means “ monastery,” twahk, “ pupils,’ “disciples,” tila (presumably here in 
» the genitive), “of my lord,” dak, perhaps “ should, v or “‘ must,” so’, probably “indeed,” “ certainly,’ 

‘but I can find no suitable meaning for kamba (ube may mean “ ‘tank,” or “twin,” LM. had); 
and another word is missing. 

5 Literally, increase.” 


@ The Pali, after ‘ but, my lord,” ‘atdendieh “ the four. requisites procured by me cy means of 


vaciuiffiattc were not for myself, 1 thought that if my pupils, who are learned, wise and able, 
“obtained the four requisites, and devoted themselves to the acquisition of scriptural knowledge, and to 
the observance of the precepts, the interests -of the religion would . be promoted ; and... therefore 
1 procured for them the four requisites by means of vacivititatti,” 


- 7 Doubtfully restored, The Pali has the speech thus: ‘ Brother Tamulinda, i is ‘this your explana-_ 


a tion? Do you perform your ‘ecclesiastical ceremonies separately, _and I shall perform mine likewise. 


Brother Tamulinda,. association in the performance of ecclesiastical ceremonies is agreeable only when - 
the parties taking part in the performance are of the same mind and opinions and are amenable to — 


the advice and admonition of each. eta It is clear that the Mon order .ig alifferent 


5 3 


° 


PART Jo. 7 MON INSCRIPTIONS © age 


(it is) thus (that) my lord speaks, (the nature ?)? of men who | are’ steadfaat 
in the doctrine (and teaching ?). 6... Ae err ee weer 


ie ee ly Bales es | Dow you perform] * (1. i (your) eccle- 
siastical ceremonies separately, and I shall perform (my) ecclesiastical cere- | 


"monies separately,” (he) said. Thenceforward our lord Sivilithera (and our 


lord Tamulindathera) * [performed their ecclesiastical ceremonies separately. 
At that period there were in Pukam four distinet communities,] (Ll. 55) 
the monks formed four sects, (namely) the monks who were. of the religious 
succession (of those) that came up from Sudhuim (were) one’ sect, (the 
others being) [the disciples of Sivilimahathera, the disciples of Tamulinda- 
mahathera, (and) the disciples of Anandamahathera (respectively). Of these 
communities] (1. 56) * the successors (of those) who came up from Sudhuim, - 
being of the succession of those who (had) arrived first, were called arhe’ sa® 
by the Burmese, (while) the monks of the three sects of the succession of 
those who had returned from Ceylon” [were called the Sihala fraternity: and 


also the Pacchima fraternity, because of their later arrival. 


Two of these three Mahatheras, namely Sivilimahathera and Taniulinda- 


_ mahdathera, passed away according to their deeds after maintaining the religion 


in splendour to the. end of their lives; and Anandathera, after spending fifty- 


four rainy seasons in maintaining the religion in splendour in Pukam, also 


passed away according to his deeds in the year 607 of the Common Era’ . 
A sdmanera called Sariputta, who was a native of Padippajeyya village,® 
in the province of Dala, went to Pukam and received the upasampadé ordina- 


tion at the hands of. Anandathera. He studied both the Dhamma and the 


Vinaya together with their commentaries. . Being thus well-versed in the - 


‘Dhamma and the Vinaya, the famé of the learning, wisdom, and ability of the : 


1 Doubtful reading, eo 
4 Doubtful reading and meaning. Kicher possibility is “who have lear: et who have. studied.” 
If it were possible to read samaratha it might mean “ agreeing, ie concurring, 2 
8 Restored from the earlier passage in the Pali version of. the speech, 
4C ‘onjecturally restored to fit the context, 
5 I cannot fit in the doubtful atw/4 at the beginning of the line, es 
. 6 The Pali. equivalent for these two. Burmese words is purima, Evidently | che meaning in both 
languages must be “ prior, earlier,” -Insthis place the Pali. stone introduces the Mé6n gloss: nas a 
bamé to’ gah, “the Burmese called (them). arke’ sd,’ See Le., Plate 1, 1, Ye 
7 This is the end of the legible part of Face A. of the. Mén version; what. follows. is 5 merely 
adapted from the ‘Pali, till we reach De beginning of the top fragment of Face B. 
§ 1245-6 AD. 
4 Stated to. be. near. Rangoon. . ee a 


128 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA so vo, tt 


.monk Sariputta spread abroad, The king of Pukam heard about: his fame, 


and reflecting, “Tf the monk Sariputta is learned, well-informed, a seeker of | 


knowledge, wise, and able, and if the members of his. “body are perfect , 
I shall do him honour by appointing him to be my _ preceptor,” sent 
messengers to institute enquiries. The messengers sent by the king 
accordingly proceeded to enquire whether the members of the body of the 
monk Sariputta were perfect. In the course of their enquiry, they found 
that one of the big toes of the monk was too short, and reported the result 
of their investigation to the king. The king, thinking inwardly, “The monk 
is not perfect in all the members of his body,” presented him with a great 
‘many offerings, conferred on him the title of Dhammavildasathera, and 
dismissed him with oe injunction : ‘Do you maintain the Teligion in splendour 
in the Mén country.” 

Dhammavilisathera proceeded to the Mén country, and taught the 
Dhamma and the Vinaya to a great many “monks in Dala. The people of 
_the Mén country called, at the time, the fraternity of these monks at Dala 
the ‘Sthalapakkhabhikkhusangha,”? and designated as the “ Artydrahanta- 
- pakkhabhikkhusaigha” the fraternity of monks who were already in the 

‘country and were the ecclesiastical successors of Sonamahathera and 
-Uttaramahathera.? : 
‘There was a learned Mahathera, ieee to the Ariyarahantapalkha- 
: bhikkusafgha, who lived in a monastery situated near the mouth of a river in 
the Lakkhiyapura* province called the Bakasa, because of its teeming with 
fish, which served as food for paddy birds. Near the monastery was a 
‘market, and not very far from the latter was a settlement where a great 
- “number of Kamboja® prisoners of war were located. On account of this fact, 
the market ‘was called the Kamboja market,® and the monastery was called 


1 Here the Pali stone (J.c., Plate II, 1. 6) had another Mén gloss of which only the words yman 
to’ gah, “ the M6ns-called,”? have been preserved, 


8 Here the Pali stone has another M6n gloss, not very legible on the plate (l.2., Plate II, 1.6) | 


which may “perhaps be read | bmok saa tray arhan rman to’ gah, “the Méns called (them) the 
fraternity of the noble -arahans,” This reading is _ supported by an ink-impression of the stone, 
Ci. B6n.- 

8 Stated to be Sdentical with Lekk’aik near TwAnté in the Hanthawaddy District, 

_ . 4 Here the -P&li stone has another Mén. gloss. (1c. Plate II, 1,7) which may perhaps ~ read 
pan krun gah pan gapuin rman to gah, “the Méns call this riveremouth Paa Gapuis.” 

5 The Mén equivalent, as will shortly appear, is Krom. It has been supposed that Kamboja. nete 
means Shan or Lao; but as to. this point see ¥F. Burma * Research Society (1922), Yon. XI, 
Part 1, pp. 39-45, and §§ 75, supra. 

6 Here the Pali stone has another Mén gloss (i. ee Plate II, 1. 1.8) eee psd krom rman ta" gah, 
‘Sthe Méns called it the Krom market,” . ; ; 


PART 11]  -MON INSCRIPTIONS | eng 


the Kambojapanavihara,’ because of its vicinity to the Kamboja market. 
The Mahathera living in the monastery was, in like manner, called the 
Pathama-Kambojdpanaviharathera." Subseauene yy! the designation Pathama- 
Kambojapagaviharathera was changed to] 


B 
_(Mahathera of ?) the pion mnie AGG dS aaa eee es ae ; 
pie al Baca teh anes OORS: a Pini gery ee pee 
i are er ene ree ..... (1. 3) who were ‘the: fraternity 
of the Mahathera of. the Krom miseeet ... + (At. that period, because » 


this Mahathera of the Krom. market was the oldest and most celebrated 
member of the Ariyadrahantasanghapakkha in Dala, the whole of that fraternity 
was designated] (1. 4) “the fraternity of the Mahathera of the Krom market.” 


[In after times, the designation] “ (fraternity of the Mahathera?) of the Krom i 


market” [fell into disuse, and the fraternity was called “the fraternity of the 
Krom market.’* However, the latter term, ‘fraternity. of the Krom 
market,” itself fell into. disuse and people] (1. 5) called [it “ the Krom” 


fraternity.’ ‘t i 


1 Y,e, the monastery of the Kamboja market. The gloss here (l.e., Plate Il, 1. 9) is “wiha ps 


kvom. yman to gah, “the M6ns called it the monastery of the Krom market,’’». 


2 J.e, Superior of the monastery of the Kamboja market, The gloss here (J.c., Plate I, 1, 9) is | 


“mathe [for mahdthe] wihd psa krom rman to” gah, ‘* ne Méns called him the Mahathera of the 


monastery of the Krom market.” 

3 The Pali equivalent is seria ats aes and. ne words in na entheees are practically 
certain, There is here (J.c.. Plate Il, 1, ro) a gloss of which anly the words mahathe Pa “ Maha- 
thera of the... . market,” are preserved. 

4] canna “Gt in the words of J. a (see the text); Their meaning is. obscure (except jamnok, 
ie great ”Y and they seem to have'no equivalents in the Pali, which proceeds: “A pious nobleman, 
galled Sirijayavaddhana, who was. living at Dala, built a monastery near a great lake and invited the 
Kambojapagamahathera to occupy. it.” 

5 This part does not seem to be represented in the Pali. -It is'evidently a reference to the monks 


of the monastery of which this Mahathera became the head, The Pali equivalent of their designa- 


tion, which appears again in the next line, is Kambojapanamahatherasanghapakkha. A gloss there 


. (le. Plate I, 1.19) reads bwok sai mahdthe.... . to’ gahy “(the Méns) called (it) the fraternity of - 


the Mahathera (of the Krom market). 

6 The Pali equivalent ‘is Kambojapapasatghapakkha, A gloss here (Le. Plate H, 1, 13) reads 
bwok san ‘psa rom (vman) to’ gah, “ {the Méns) called it the fraternity of the Krom market.” It ig 
probable, theugh: not quite certain, that part of the M6n equivalent for the phrase “ip after times is 
is contained in the word Jo’, “ta long time,” 

7 The Pali equivalent is Kambojasanghapakkha. Here the eed is aoe san krom 1 rman to? 08; 
‘*the Méns called it the Krom itaternity is ee &; Plate HI, I, 13), 


24 aw -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. mt 


- Because people called [the Ariyarahanta fraternity’ 4 in Dala,] which was _ 


the fraternity of the Mahathera of .the Krom market, “the Krom 
fraternity,”-. .°. - (1.6) all. the Ariyarahanta fraternity* which was in 
the Mén country: ales having been called “the Krom fraternity,” all the 
M6n so'styled it? : 


At that time, in the city (of Dala, there existed ie Ariyarahanta 


fraternity and?) (1. 7) the Ceylon fraternity: two fraternities had been formed.’ 


In the city of Mattma,* again (there were) the Krom fraternity, (which was) 
one fraternity, (and the Ceylon ?)® fraternities, (which were five?)® (I. 8) 
fraternities. The Ceylon fraternity which was’ in succession to Sivilithera 
(was) one (such) fraternity; the members of® the Ceylon clergy who were 


of the fraternity of ......6......0806..4.2.47 (1.9) screened (them-— 
selves with a ?) cloth % eat ena rice. When people invited (them to a ?) 


shed, they were not able to eat in the house, (but) returned to eat (in the) 
monastery. Our lords, these (monks), .... . (1. 10) the Ceylon fraternity 
who were successors of ae pupils of the Mahathera Tamalinda® (con- 


1 The Mé6n ails it dank San Fray as from which it appears that tray corresponds to artye 


in value.» 


9 Apparently this | is the meaning, though it is croreased’t in a rannidabeut way. The Pali. merely. = 


says, ‘the same designation was thenceforward applied to that fraternity in the whole of the Mén 
country.” 

_ 8 The words in parentheses are a purely oe restoration. There is nothing in the Pali to 
- correspond with this passage. 
_ 4 Martaban, Pali Muttima, 2 - 
6 The queried. words in parentheses are conjectural restorations. In this whole passage the Mén 
~ -yersion seems to be more discursive than the Pali, which has the following: ‘‘ There were in Mutti- 
managara, the _Kambojasaaghapakkha, the Sihalasanghapakkha, whose members were the successors 


- of Sivilimahathera, the Sihalasahghapakkha, whose. members were: the successors of Tamulinda~ 


--mahathera, the Sithalasahghapakkha, whose members were the successors of Anandamahathera, the 
Sihalasahghapakkha, whose members were the successors of Buddhavarhsamahiathera, the preceptor 
of the queen, who. went to Ceylon and received © his upasampadé- ordination there, and who, on his 
return, performed. his ecclesiastical ceremonies separately in Muttimanagara, and. the Sihalasangha- 
_ pakkha, .whose members were the successors of Mahdsamimahathera, otherwise called Mahandga- 
~ mahathera, who visited Ceylon and received his upasampadd ordination there, and who, on his return 
= to. Muttimanagara, performed his ecclesiastical ceremonies seperately The. corresponding M6n 
passage ends in 1. 13. 
'. 6 The meaning of Adm. (if that is the right reading) is Soak tu: cf, I]. 10, 20, infra. 


7 Presumably. we should restore “ Sivilithera ” here, but pe “ Anandathera,” whose name is 


lost: in the lacuna, 
8 The precise’ meaning ‘of-this passage is not certain; as some of the onde are doubtful and 


_ there is nothing in the Pali to correspond with it, ‘Presumably. “not able” means “ not allowed ae ee 


their rules.” 
9 So-spelt ae, 


PART 1] ae om MON INSCRIPTIONS. ee = . 135 


stituted) one fraternity ; the members of 1 the festernity styled “ teachers of the 
minister of the silk cloth screen’* . 0.2... 2... ee ee ee, 


se 6 eve oe 6 « 


(the fraternity?) (1. 11) called (after >) Baddiiayatdamabsthera ; (he was) the - 
teacher of the queen in Mattma (and) went to the island of ‘Geslon and on 
his return to the city of Mattma, (whatever ?)°- persons came (to him, he 
would not perform his?) (I. 12) ecclesiastical ceremonies with them, (but) 
performed (his) ecclesiastical ceremonies separately. The fraternity of these 
clergy (of) Ceylon (constituted) one: ge The fraternity of our lord 
Mahasamimahathera*..... 6... 61... +» (constituted) (I. 13) one — 
fraternity. | : : oe " - 

Therefore in the city of Mattma there were one fraternity of the Krom 7 
clergy (and) five Ceylon fraternities, (making) six fraternities (in all ). ace y i 


ys. (i. 14) (and) as (they) were unable to. join with one another in ecclesi-— 


astical ceremonies, various sects arose into existence. In all these » sects of re 
clergy . sea. (115) there were none... ....° that were wise 


- (and) qualified to come (and) investigate (and) ascertain (matters concerning ?) 


ecclesiastical: ceremonies. The clergy® of thesé various fraternities... «— 
. (I. 16) would say [‘ We, indeed, are. wise and 27 qualified,” and hese 
pee would perform» (ceremonies such as?) consecrating a stma® (or) 
conferring the | uparamn ace ordination, performing -{sueh) ceremonies 
“separately.” ete : 2 | oes Aes : 
At that time [some] clergy, [who, wishing to. consecrate. a sim@ ona 
gamakhetia of whatever size, (and) having placed boundary marks] (1.17) all 


- 1.The meaning of fid@m is doubtful: ef, |, 8, supras and I. 20, ‘infra, a — 
2The meaning is not quite certain, and it is not clear whether these were the successors of 


. Anandathera (following the order of the Pali), or of Buddhavarhsamahathera, next mentioned, 


3 This is doubtful owing to tne uncertain reading. and meaning of the word yra, which I tenta- 
tively. associate. with L.M, yvau, “any.” The doubt extends to the next restoration in parentheses, 
though this receives: support from the Pali, If we read ey (for yra) the phrase might mean: “we 
who have arrived ”” sees e But I'do not: see how this fits in. 

4 Who also received his orders in Ceylon: see the note to 1.7, supra, 
6 Here the Pali-has:“.who were well-versed in the Tipitaka.” 
> @ The Pali speaks: of them as Mahatheras,. . 
~™ Restored with the help of. the Pali, 
8 J have followed the English version of. the Pali i in ihe palling of. this word; but the. dictionaries 


> have sima and this also appears. on the stones of the Pali text. As this discrepancy was not. noticed a 


until: the present translation had already been set up in typey it has not seemed worth while to’ alter : 
the spelling here and in the numerous other places where the word occurs, The M.M, form is sim : 
9 Possibly the last clause should read (and) .would perform other eee ceremonies,’ ~ The 


_s ‘Pali has neither, but says “in a manner that ‘appeared: mee to them.”. oe ee ee ee 


126 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 11 


round the gamasima, purified [it by inducting within the ere the 
monks] if? within those boundary stones; [but they would not] effect purifica- 
tion [through the acts of inducting within the hatthagasa the monks living 
outside the boundary, of receiving the declarations of assent of such of them 
-as were absent, and of excluding such of them as merited exclusion. In 
such a sima] (1. 18) ceremonies such as the upasampadé ordination [would be 
performed.’ er , 
‘There were] some rae again. oie purified all round the gamasimé, 
who had to induct (?)® [within the hatthepasa, etc., the monks residing round 
that g@makhetta, inside or outside the boundary.’ Therefore, whenever a sima 
was to be consecrated, they ees that it would be difficult to purify the 
whole of the case “.... (Ll 19) a gdma (also ?), the (proper ?) 
‘characteristics else te eae ee ce a) Was properly a gisushte 
gama. Those eharactenelics they did not avestieate (and) ascertain. .... 
, a... (120) in a very subtle way.© Members’ (of the clergy ?) 


Dee oth es ew Naving dependéd..on, 44°36 22 ead At the 
moment of performing the ceremony of worsen the simd, if (a piece of) 
land that Bulted’ (Rem) << ni." eteve othe... 4 Re Being eee: CU. at) 


measurement ° that suited (them), boundaries. ee re te ee ee 


. (they would) say (it was ?) a vtsumgdma, and on land which was devoid 
of che characteristics of a visumgama..... : 


ata Si ae ee a PS aa 


1 I take aydm here to be the same as L.M. yam. 

2 It seems to me very doubtful whether there is room in our text for all ‘hee contents of the 
above paragraph, 

3. The reading and meaning are very doubtful here; - Paes 

4 The Pali has: “There were some monks who declared: ‘If it is desired to consecrate a simd 
on a gdmakhetta, such consecration should be. carried out after effecting purification through the acts 
of inducting within the Aatthapdsa, etc,, the monks residing round ‘that gamakhetta, who are inside or 
outside the boundary,’ ” 

6 It. is doubtful whether all the above can have been eater in our text, The Pali proceeds: 


“Cand would not. ascertain the true nature of: the characteristics of a visumgama, They, however, © 


assumed that if.a piece of land with its boundaries defined was granted by a king, that land was a 


 Uisumgama 3 and they would ask the ruling authorities to define the boundaries of a piece of land, 


which they had chosen and epOee area ‘would be sufficient for the consecration of a stmd, or of a 
‘piece of land of larger area,” I find it difficult to fit the fragments of our text into this. 

® Owing to the loss of the context, the meaning is in doubt. 

7 As to the sense of 22m, cf. l, 8, 10, supra. a Sale 

8 It is doubtful whether this is the sense of nisray: bet, In UL A oe seems to mica to 
find a resting place.” 

9 The original includes the expression man lara, which is ‘defined as “a measure equal te seven 
subite,” but how many of thene unite are referced to is doubtful, 


‘PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS Ry 


( 22) having been able to purify, (they would) consecrate... .. 


...«... also, and perform ceremonies such as the upasam pada ordination.’ 
[There were some] clergy [who, holding. the opinion that] (1. 23) there ~ 

would be the flaw of confusion of simés* lif two baddhasimés were] 

(connected ?) [with each other by the branches of trees, etc., a in the 


case of a baddhasima and a gémasima, [or two gaémasimds,) . 2... ee 
(l. 24) there would be no (such) flaw of confusion of se WG aie lke 
ie ge hate oe at. the time os the. pon sHUcEaE, of a i bamshasiaia upon the 
PaMASIMA OE a ae ee ee SE ee es 
ge BEI ice! oe eee ee 25) around it, the (connecting Bereies of) eee, 
ete., . OE a eee ee ee eee .. get together with the 
gamasima which. was tt be) the site of the baddhasimt that (they were) to 
SCONSUTUCE a8 Gare Clrarak pe SER PP Bae . (. 26) who. purified 
the gdmasimGd ......4.4. oe el ae purified the 
gamasima which was : (te be) the aie of the baddhasima that. SS were) to . 
@onstruct, “—  v 25+ 4s ee Pee ree ae ye ee . [In such - 


a simda] (1. 27) the ug~asampada ordination Faoald be performed. 

There were some clergy,| again, [who would not ascertain in “every way] 
whether the characteristics’ of a river or the characteristics of a lake (were 
present ?) [(as) mentioned in the paji and the afthahathas,® and who, without 
ascertaining well the interpretation of the words mentioned in the @tthaka- 
‘thds,] (1. 28) (which are ?) anvaddhamdsamn anudasiham anupaiicéharn [would 
in this excessively ad region, the M6n country, perform. the ie facies es 


1 The corresponding Pali passage has: “They would then consecrate the simd After éffecting 
purification through the acts of inducting within the Aatthapdsa, étc., the monks residing on the. 
pamakhetta, but without effecting ‘purification in regard to the whole of the gaimnasimd, In such a 
simd the upasampadd ordination would be performed.” 

-2 The Pali has “ mutual confusion.” 

3 The Pali proceeds: “there would be no such confusion if a baddhasima ‘and a gamasind, or two 
gamasimds, were connected with each other by the branches of trees, etc, would, whenever there. was 
a sima@ to be consecrated on a gdmakhetta, perform the consetration without cutting off the branches 
of trees, etc., which connected that gamakhetta with. the ‘others around it, but. after effecting .. 
purification through the. acts of inducting within the hatthapasa, étc,, the monks. residing on that 
pamakhetia,” It does not appear that our text fits ‘Precipely. into this, though the general pucport is. 
similar, 


_ 4 That is; as laid down by Buddhist rule for the. special purpose in question. In order to fit in” 


the fragments of oir text, Ihave had to make small verbal, ‘modifications in the English - version of 

the Pali in this paragraph. ; 
5 The canonical scriptures and the. coniimentaiies on thei, 
8 Every fortnight, every ten ides avery five days.” 


188 ~~—«&EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von m1 


ordination in an udakukkhepasima consecrated on a river or] (1, 29) lake 
devoid of the Characteristics: of a river or a characteristics of) of a lake. 


eee ee ee ee ne | tL BO) areas 
ere hee again, euesad ne Coe eee ee Pee as aheay 

ear se ' SU ya noe ya eg ene ee able to 

cut ayy; ‘purified . Sea a ae eis a ose wie a isu: aOR Sos Sees See 


[When] (1 32). two ‘housanla (and). 1 two years had clapsed [ainée the - 


Fully Enlightened One] achieved Parinirvana,® [there reigned in Harhsawati] * 


2. 33) (Veda scriptures Be the sciences of logic, grammar, 


eee ee 8 ee 


(and) prosody, thetoric 2. eS es ce naar eee oe ee ° 
Oe PAAR PRE, Se aaa: G Pe ee a. 34) 1 more than one serene perfect, 

together (with 2) oe oo Geen ween S . 35) the province 

of Muttima according to the ee ae ee ee eee ae 

bed Cheah Mase sk eo = a 36) His wae Ram&dhipat* fad exceedingly 


1 It is not clear whether our text contained anything suis by these dots, The first words, : 


Jegible i in 1. 30 are merely two particles, lee 


2 The Pali corresponding with this paragraph has: “There were some monks who, whenever they. 


_ wished to consecrate a simd on a gamakhetta, would cut off the branches of trees, etc., that connected 
St with other gd@makhettas, and carry out their object through the acts of inducting within the 


hatthapasa the monks residing inside or outside the boundary of that gamakhetta, of receiving the 


declarations of assent of such of them as were absent, and of excluding such of them as merited 
exclusion. But whenever there was an upasampadd ordination to be performed in such a simd, the 
‘ceremony would be performed without cutting off the branches of trees, etc.,. which connected ‘that 
 gdmakhetia with others.” It is more than doubtful whether our text had room for all this. 
3 The Pali also has “the 8zoth year of the Common Era,” which may or may not nave been in 
our text, This corresponds to 1458-9 A.D. 
4 The Pali here proceeds, in a somewhat different order: “ R&émadhipati, who, assuming the title 
of Siripavaramahadhammarajadhiraja, ruled justly and righteously and afforded protection to the 


people of the Mén country, which comprised the three provinces of Kusimamandala, Hamsavati- _ 


mandala, and Muttimamandala. He was the lord of a white elephant, whose colour was like that of 


the white esculent water-lily, or of the fasminum multifiorum, or of the autumnal moon, and he was 


‘replete with faith and many other qualities. He was well acquainted. with. the languages of various 
countries, and. with many manual arts, » ‘such as’masonry and carpentry. He was, moreover, learned 
and well read, and was versed in. the Tipitaka and the sciences of takka, byakarana, -chanday 


alankara, astrology, medicine, and uaa pertaining to the Vedasa. (This last word seems .to 9 be. 


for “ Vedas.”) - ae 
8 So. literally, but it is ‘apparently sometimes ‘extended | to the Buddhist Canon (which is, oweder, 
separately mentioned in the Pali. and probably was in our text), The translator of the Pali takes the 


expression as qualifying these sciences, as it were “ the Vedic sciences of,”’ etc, One text has the . 


Pali terms, slightly varied in order. 
6 The oe, here has’ “the king.” 


PART U1] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ = Stag: 


deep faith in the religion of the Teacher, and the following thoughts arose if 


his mind: “ The upasampada ordination is dependent on that of padbbaja, and | 
the basis of the religion itself is the upasampada ordination, which in order 
to be appropriate, inviolable, and valid must] (1. 37) be possessed of five 
characteristics,’ (namely, szmdsampatit, partisasampatti, vatthusampatti, ftaltt- 
sampatit, and anusdvanasampaiti. Of these characteristics there exist means. 


of attesting the validity of vatthusampattd and fattisampatti, owing respec- 


tively to the ability of a candidate for the pure form of the upasampada 
ordination to fulfil the condition’ of the former, and to the accessibility of 
qualified dcarzyds, who could recite the kammavacd with correct intonation.”]* 
ae Pet eee nee ees » (1-38) there are three characteristics 
eS ee king, in re-- 
péatedly. vesting and considera the. ruling A (l. 39) the Vinaya 


(as regards the consecration of a sima which would be in conformity 


with the intention of the Blessed One, as interpreted by the authors of 
atthakathas, ttkas and pakaranas, consulted both the spirit and the letter of 


_ the following works, controlling the. atthakatha by means of the paf?, the tha 
by means of the atthakatha, and the pakarana by one another, and at the 
same time collating what was gone before with what came after:—the — 


Vinayapali, the Vinayatthakatha, the Vinayatika called Saratthadipani, the 
Vinayatika called Vimativinodani, the Vinayatika written by Vajirabuddhithera, 
the Matikatthakatha called Kankhavitarani together with its ¢#éa, the Vinaya-- 
vinicchayapakarana together with its ¢7#a, the Vinayasahgahapakarapa, the . 
Simalahkarapakarana, and the Simalafkdrasafgaha.® a 
To the king, who] (1. 42) repeatedly [investigated and] considered (this 
question, the ruling of the Vinaya appeared to be thus:—" If it is desired to © 


consecrate a a sima on a selected site, whether it be a pukatigdmakhetta or a 


1’ The original word is sampatts, ‘which ma: b 
y be taken’ in the sense of “co 
pertains : , gee excellence, 
'. 9 Tt seems very doubtful | whether ©: our. ‘text had room for all. the’ foiegoing.. The Pali 
proceeds : “But. by what criterion can 1. ascertain the non-existence ‘of simdsampatté and parésasam= 
patti? In this English version of the Pali there is’ an accidental omission of any reference 
to the validity of anusdvanasampatt: 5 but the Pali original, adds it to the other two whose validity ae 


could be petncit Possibly: our. text pat this Bart about a ‘the . hice characteristics: - eter ‘the 


other. 
8 The above passage ‘in. the, Pali célcninds to an indefinite number of lines in our text, Sof which, 5 


those whereof any traces remain: have been:numbered 40 and 4t in the text 5 but as there is nothing 


pranslatable left i in them, these numbers do not appene in une tranalation. 


2 


oe eee BIRMANICA 


4 


"revenues. In a “viswhgamabhitta, complete. ete 


Dona eee ee (le gg) having taken the piece of land, if it aed: them, (and 2”) 
he: fannie ® (should ?) desire to snake. a simi, at the time, when it was 


[ VOL. Hi 
_wewgamabletta) fas Neila a Re era ee ee 
wine - (1. 43) men (and) women, the fact that . inten oe ete . 
eg ee eee (I. 44) at and the fact that it is a site (obstructing 2 
es . 48) (a simad ” ¥ ‘there are ‘boundaries of the sites, 3 (and) a vile headman® 
who (takes?) — ee re et seeds _ 8) 
also the revenues s of s some portion, desire, to give to (other persons 2. — 
ee Sy te oy (Ley). give the’ other 
“(hat P). he may, enjoy” a new , vlnge whereof he “may collect ? the revenues 
Re eo er  eererr (1. 48) having {discoursed 
what they >. a rn a (to! define who: | shal get ee the 


ne) 


desired to: nake (it) ec ee ee (1s ga) 


oe # or er ee ee Se ee oe 


ms oe ooey soe around. Having cut away the connecting bpnehes. ét trees, _ 
, (and) having planted (boundary) marks around. the Piece of land pile 
) (ey) desired to. consecrate the sind; (when | Dyes 


a It j is ‘difficult ‘to. ft a fragments of ‘our text into the Pali, hich proceeds thus: fe hous boar og 
 daries have been defined for the purpose. of collecting revenue, and which. possesses the. following | 
'. ~¢haracteristics, namely, that it is inaccessible to.men and women; that it is. favourable. to the exercise 
of the four iriyapathas 5. that it is nota ‘place. ‘subject to noise; and ‘that - ‘the usufructiary. ‘tight 
exercised -in respect of it is capable of supporting life ;—the branches of trees, eté., connecting. that. 

a pakatigdmakhetia or: visumgdmakhetta with other gdmakhettas should be cut down ; and a number of. 
boundary marks should be placed around the site selected for the consecration of the sima, should 
. « suéh simd be a: mahdsima, whose | extent is' difficult to” apprehend and ‘whose form is not. well. _ 
fe defined. &. “Our text; Ww v while e fefeiaing. some. of these > Pactienlars, seems: > to eepand others and introduce : 
Soa fresh: ‘matter. : : 


; “Reading and n meaning doubtful. : oe ee 
st Meaning doubtful. - a 


4 Meaning ‘doubtful owing to abacniéa’ ot. ne context, aoe 


rs 5°T have neglected the. ‘doubtful word yata, ‘as its meaning: is. -andegernilved: “ag: ‘itis: ‘to be ‘saad 2 : 
Soy até Wc ascetic, monk "),i it adds nothing to:the translation, being merely a synonym of gam-2, But cf. -. 

Gag, ‘where the fending. is petly, cae Another’ view is shat al means “any. (monks),” Ct, Se 
ieee fe ie sid SR ae 


a wd Br) if (abe: way the boundary ?) runs be 
as. difficult to. apprehend, ‘though’ ne circumference of the figure | ‘should not 
run otherwise than,. toe nee a y Agure of three sides (or) four sides, . 
LOUIS Se ae Ba ne Space eas eel @ Ae dae Pee aoe eae (le ga), thee: 
course | of the boundary As 2asy, to “apprehend even though one cannot set 


aid 


‘should be. received, the remaining monks being excluded from the — 
gimakhetta, For the. purpose of guiding. travelling monks, - guards should ‘be 


. a fe numerous. circumferences of” «may really be. meant to con 
way, to getting. that sense ‘out of thé words as they. stan. 
. in the sense’ “of different,”’ 

seems more. remote from the ‘Pali version, 


ae, The fragments of Free B end ha with: a m patngrapt Lelak ee es - 


paRT i] ~=*=<“‘é‘é Ow MON INSCRIPTIONS age 


a 


up many boundary marks, (and one) desires to make a triangular figure? 


. (..53) (of) four — 


oe * © © © © @ & © # 8 a ee 


sides, set up four boundary marks. Should ae ie to make a a 


figure of five sides, set up fiye boundary marks. If (one) ‘desires to make 


humerous circumferences of figures... + 6 ee ee eee boundary marks _ 
(such as ?)? . oy fee + « boundary. marks... 5. 60. ee ee 
ee Ee ae 54) (should) the ‘circumference ®, “of the - figure. not be | 


, (cael that ?) it 1s easy to. apprehend the course of the boundary of the sim i, = 
(even) if one should set up many: boundary _ marks, there would. be a 


advantage in setting up those many boundary — marks.* 


[‘ The connecting branches of trees, etc., which: are “either. ‘within or 


“without the boundary, should be‘cut down, and the extent of the sma clearly 


defined. Of all the monks residing within or without the boundary of. that. 
gamakhetta, those who are worthy of the privilege should be inducted: within - 
the hatthapasa, and the declarations of assent of these who are absent 


stationed all round the gamaphetta ; and, in order to notify” the faet publicly, 


- flags and. streamers should. De. ee at various. BIBER and the boundaries oe 


and other musical instruments. “Eventually, The. sima should be consecrated. : = 
| by having. ¢ the. hammavaed read with proper intonation. The > consecration of : 


ocd 1 am not sure tat I have ‘ended. this: ‘rather. obscure passage correctly, The corréspoiding 8 
Pali proceeds, much more concisely: Tt; however,’ it is desired to consecrate a: khuddakasimd, whose.’ - 


form is. triangular and whose extent is easy to apprehend, three boundary. ‘marks ‘should be ‘placed. 
But if the form of the sim@ to be consecrated is- square or rectangular, four boundary marks would © 


suffice ; and if the form is a polygon, the number of boundary marks should be in proportion.” 1. 

have taken tamer in the sense of “ boundary, circumferénce. ae (. Ms fumwin IF 17, tumnin IX'N 5) a 
“not as connected with L.M. tmea, either in the sense of - od different.” eo ag a variety,” The: latter hy Ge se 

~ meaning would: make _ an v ingelligible. translation, ‘but, I do not ‘See. how it would ‘be consistent, with ee, 
the: Pali version, Foe z : aoe 


~4 Here again the word tenner comes in, Tam ‘diapaded to. Shee that ‘Sha have: etandeind = 

polygonal,” though 1 do not seen 
uggested tendering, | takir 
is :, ‘fe te itis. desired ito make diiprent figures of many. ides) ie 


4 ‘Reading and meaning doubtful. ‘The ‘cont re wae 5 poehabiy. ri somber. 


1380 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ——s [ von. 1 


Cc : 


fa stma, which is attended by. such ceremonies] (1.1) as aforesaid,? [is 
inviolable and valid; and the upasampadz ordination ‘and other cere- 
monies performed im etek a sima are likewise inviolable and valid. 

©The characteristic of an equable rainy season is, that during -the four 
months of its continuance] (1. 2) (rain falls ?) once (in) each half of a 
month® «2... eee eee bea 
e+ (I. 3) one . etadoe “aa sammidhirapavecchana, ue fact that rain 
(alle 2) via sn ese ee ee ee es ee en ey) 
sammidharapavecchana, the fact that rain falls cist a Seige ePaae aha, wash a a Sinus 
2... (If after the lapse of ?) half a month rain falls, fe i is the Shia 
teristic of a deficient rainy season, and if] (1.5) rain falls [once every four 
days,] or rain falls once every three days, or rain falls once [every two 
days, or rain falls] every [day, it is the characteristic of an excessive rainy 


oo season. 


“ Tf the season is (2)] (I. 6) an . equable rainy season (and), during the foie 
months connected with‘ the time of Vassa,..... 
that is a landing- place (or) a place. that is not, - a ee Pee ee 
(1. 7) (in) crossing a stream at that time the under robe of a nun should be 
wetted, as (one might) say °® [to the extent of] one finger (breadth) or two 
finger (breadths), [such a stream acquires the status of a nadi.] Now, 
= equable (I. 8) rainy seasons (are) of three kinds*: if during an equable rainy 


“1 Tt-is of course impossible to be quite sure that these two words are rightly fitted in here. 

2 The English version of the Pali, which is based on a variant-reading here (see 1,3 of our text) 
after “ continuance ” proceeds :— an uninterrupted shower falls once every half month, or every fifth 
day; that of a deficient rainy season is, that a shower falls after the lapse of a half month; and 


s ‘that of ‘an excessive rainy season is, that the intervening period between one shower and another is 
-. Jess than five days, that is to say, rain falls every fourth, third, or second day, or every day (without 


~ Gntérruption),” “Our text. expands somewhat. After “ every half month ” the original Pali text on 
the stone adds “ or every tenth day.” For “ "the lapse of a half month” we must: t understand “an 

“interval of more than half a month,” : 

$I can make nothing of the fiagmentary rath sanmadhdrdpavecchana means, poparently. 
much the same as “ an uninterrupted shower.’ 

4 Or, simply, “ of,” like the use of L.M, dadak dna 

‘6. These four words are merely an idiom and might have been left tintranslated). 

6 The Pali, which otherwise. sarees any oe in this Passage, does not appear to contain this 
sentence. : nee : . 


ec ec eS 2 ee a eo 


. (whether) in a place 


Pare | 


*§ 


PART I] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS = sage 


season (in which) rain falls once (in) each half of the~ ‘month [during the 
four months connected with the time of Vassa] (I. 9) the under robe of a 


nun who crosses (a stream)? is wetted, that stream isa mahdnadi;* If during 


an equable rainy season (in which) [rain falls once] every ten days’ [during 
the four] (l.10) months of the time of Vassa the under robe of a nun’ who 
crosses (a stream)? is wetted, as (one might) say,* that stream is a maj- 
ghimanadt’ If during an equable rainy season (in which) [rain falls once] 
every five days, [the under robe] (1, 11) of a nun who crosses a stream? is. 
wetted, that stream is a small stream.§ | : : ve a 

If, again, in any stream, during an equable rainy season, [the under 
robe of a nun who crosses] (the stream)! (I. 12) is wetted, but during a 
deficient rainy season (it) is not wetted, inasmuch as a deficient rainy season 
is no criterion, [it should not be declared that] such a stream as aforesaid 
[is] not [a nadt,| (1. 13) (and if) during an equable rainy season, the under 
robe of a nun who crosses (the stream)? is not wetted, but during an 
excessive rainy season (it) is wetted, [inasmuch as] an excessive [rainy 
season iS no criterion,] it is not bree to declare [such a pacha (I. 14) to. 


| be a nadt. 


‘The nature of a jatassdva® is (that) it arises spontaneously : it cannot 
be made by anyone digging (it), [but] (I. 15) is filled [with water that flows 
from all round it.) Sugh a lake as aforesaid (is) called a jatassara. [If in]. 
a [reservoir of such description,] during an equable rainy season, during the 
four months of Vassa, (I. 16) there is water [sufficient for the purpose of | 


drinking or washing] feet Gas) hands, it attains to (the status of) a 


fatassaral ee eas wae Tt can’. be called a jatassara, An 
equable rainy season (is) of three kinds .......... ves 


.- * s.9 @ id a 


mahajatassara, (1. 17) majjhimajatassara, (and), dard ie Lace fare u) three 


1 The Pali here. adds “ at any y places” 
4 A big stream. | a PES S'S 
8 These four words are merely an idiom and might have been left untranslated, 
4 A stream of medium size, | oY 
5 In the Pali, Phuddakanadt, It is ‘curious shai here ‘the Pal ward is. not given in our + texty 
which translates it into its. Mén equivalent oe 
6 That is, “ a lake.” — 


7 After this point our text pact cuingariy: with the Pali, which says. nothing. here about an 7 
three kinds of jatatoras (bigs medium and smal), or ‘of “equable tainy seasons. : 


4 00 EPIGRAPHIA spies [ vou. rit 


Riths ct ee ek ie ge fete Oe SE agate 
sara, im an i inable rainy season, (1. 18) contains water [sufficient] for [these 


purposes, ] (but) during 4 deficient rainy season, (or) in winter [or summer,] 


there is not [sufficient] ‘water, it is (nevertheless) a jatassara. (But it is) 


not a jalassara.....:... (if) (lrg) during an equable rainy season, ih 
the four months (conneeted with the time of Vassa?) there is no . water, 


While during an excessive ay season there is. water tin: lee 


oor ee er es . 


6) 20) a ee this Mén_ ‘country of ours is an excessively rainy. one, , [but 


. Bow can ore} (declare that? the nature ?)* of this M6n country of ours is 


. chrofiically * an. excessively - Faly one? According to the statement of ie 
‘téachers (in) the Atthakathds...... 


cee peepee Bee tery eee © 


(Ek 21) the extent ® of the Vaésa: season is four months .. .. : (this 
it is?) stated in the Atthakathas. But in ‘this Mén country of ours the 
Vassa season (is) six months.... . (How . can one ?)*® (1. 22) know 


(that ?)°® it is excessively rainy be ein Pas ae ?)® not? (I. 23) Inasmuch as the 


_ Atthakathas say [that the charwetédettc of an equable raihy season is] that — 


rain falls, at the very utmost, once every’ five days, (it follows that if) rain 


- - should Lae once  eiete fur pie or Tain should: fall once every. three days, s, 


oh 
ae 
4 The Pali here proceeds; “If a lake, which. satisfies such a condition when the rainy season 
is an equable qne; does not contain- water sufficient for the purpose of drinking or ablution when thé 


_rainy season is a. deficient one, or during winter or summer, it should not be declared that such a 
fake does not acquire the status of a. jatassara. If, during the four months of a rainy: season which — 
is. an equable ong a lake. ‘déé3 “not contain water sufficient for the purpose of ‘drinking or ablution, 
put satisfies this condition when aS fainy. season is an “excessive bre, such a lake: sae not acquire ; 


- the status of a jdtassara,” 


-- # The Pali has : “ but how. aid one know. that’ ite: rainy season is an ‘excessive ‘one P “That. the 
“wainy season comprises _ four. months.. is. thus. declared~ in ‘the... Ayhakathas =! yasmd ht vasiinassa : 


Peale “madsesu. But» in this country. of Ramaiiiadesa the. rainy season comprises six months.” 


pe ‘8 Doubtful. reading ‘and perhaps t the doubetul word Gadaby, hers. means. ‘ “the fact le): 2 smat t 
ee (that) the nature (of) 


o£ ‘Or ne truly,” Bae ‘indeed’ 2 
6 Or “ state, nature,” literally being.” 


mee “6. I am doubtful. whether: T have tightly ‘added these. Soni to Our -fragtintaly texte, “The Pali : 
ee does. not, help, for it merely has :° “¢ Because it is said that the characteristic of an: equable tainy — 
"= géason ‘is, that rain falls. every” fifth” day, ‘methinks that the characteristic of an excessive Bainy, seAS0n: 


aan is, Phat rain falls. every fourth, third, 0 or second Bey. or Syery days gece 


bart it] = MON INSCRIPTIONS: te EN igh 


a0 


day 4 that is salled the characteristic of an excessive rainy. seagon. 
ae eee reached. | 


“Now in this Mén countey of ours (it) sometimes ‘(happeds that) (aig: 


falls once?)? every four days, or (I. 25) rain. falls once every three days, or 
-rain falls once every two days, or rain falls every day. Sometimes (I. 26) 


during ten days, too, without interruption, if the rays of the sun, wish to” 


penetrate. somewhat, (they) are quite unable (to do rh eon the: 


whole expanse of the sky all is dark (and) dull Bee ew ae Ae ay 


pouring forth, rain falls. Inasmuch as it is thus, it is “hitig ‘to “note ‘that 


this Mén country of ours is characterized - by an excessive rainy season, = 


Thus, in (1. 28) this Mén. country: of ours, either. in (the case of) a large a 


nadt,’ or in (the case of) a large jatassara,’ as defined by? the rainfall in an 
equable rainy season, though the “rain (1.°a9)-may bess le 


if in such a large nadi as aforesaid (or) such a large jatassara as aforesaid, 
an udakukkhepa is made, poet (may validly perform Pe such ceremonies as 


the upasampada ordination.” 


1 This restoration, though supported by the Pat seems rather: doubtful, as “there is: perhaps | 


~ hardly room for it... eae ae ee ae 


21 can make nothing. of the doubtful’ words here. ae ah, 
8 This restoration is conjectural, and it is doubtful whether there is room ‘few it 5 but it. seems. to Z 
be required by the context and by the Pali, which has 2 Te this: country. of Ramaiitadesa, some-- 


times once every fourth, third, or second day, or every, day (without interruption);: sometimes orice 


every seventh or tenth “day, the rays of the sun are invisible, and the sky becomes cloudy and 
murky, and a continuous “shower -of rain falls, ‘Therefore it is established. beyond doubt that the 
rainy season of Rimai fiadesa is an excessive one.’ It should be noted that our. text is an epahiee 


" paraphrase, but says nothing about ‘€ every seventh (day).”” ae 


4 That is, “ when there i is no ‘sunshine at all? 


8 The words following in the ink-impression: are~ doubtful, but may. ‘include « clouds,” "whieh _ 
cause the - rainfall to flow” (jawar, which I have rendered “ pouring forth’). - se 


6 Here our text uses the Pali technical terms for “stream ” and“ lake, retpettively. ee 


7 Literally, .“ by. the kind of?” The referénce is to. the tésts mentioned in Ihe B95 - ei though . = 


in the. fragments of our text these is no Age definition at, a A nedessiasiare, trppetved, 
8 Perhaps, “ deficient in. that season”? P Be ae 


9 Conjecturally restored. The Pali. scrresponding. to this: sihiole: passage ‘has 1 au For ‘the reasons. . 


: stated above, in this. country: of ; Ramatiiadesa, during the fotir ‘months of an” equable rainy: season, 

when rain’ falls. in the” ‘matiner. described; the under: ‘robe of a nun crossing a stream. of. such. ; 
déscription, at any place, i is wetted. On, such a mahinadt an udakukkhepasina may be consecrated ; 2 
arid the upasampada ordination pérformed in’ it will ‘be valid and. inviolable.. If, during the four 
-miiénths of an eqiiable rainy season, when rain® falls as -described above, a lake of . such. description 
 Goritaitis. water . “sufficient « for the purpose of drinking or ablution: on’ such a ‘mahajatassara an. 


aeipeine amar ‘be consecrated 5 and the upasompeda ordination performe 
: And: aisle ae us ae 


in: it will be valid 


136 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou. 11 


& 


wee ees (130) the ruling of the Vinaya was clear in (the mind of 
His Majesty ?)? Ramadhipati® Then the following considerations occurred to 
His Majesty Ramadhipati:—‘ At the time that [it is desired to consecrate 
a simé] (1. 31) some [clergy], if upon a gémakhetia... 1... see eee 
. . Within the samakhetta, if within the boundaries also (they ?) have (kept 
watch ?),° if (there are) monks who live within the boundaries ......... 
tae and (1. 32) monks who live outside the boundaries ........... 
5... (and they) have not caused (them) to be brought (down into ?)° the 
hatthapasa' ; (and) have not expelled (them) out of the gémakhetta; (and 
eof Unease ieee: | nas iis ey 33) if. ...... + so, (there 


is) Velde alti ee er ee ee (why is is it said that there 
is?)* parisavipatts ? ® mee , ee a : 
“TES in a gamasimne gai ee Oe 6. ek ees . (L 34) planted 
o boundary Marks 2 oo fe alee eevee se) Within ‘iets pound ae ies, a gamasima 
other than the. ..... g@masim@...,....... » 22+ (it is?) (1. 35) 
proper (to define by getting?) ......... .. that gémakhetta (the line. 
“swhidh’ it--is -desired-2)7 ccc. 2 ae a ... (lL. 36) to the 


king, (define?) .............. which is within (those boundaries; _ 
because one desires to?)7 0... ee ee ee ee (le 37) (not?) ee, 


1C¢ oaiecturaily restored, ao pie 

9 This sentence does not seem to -be literally represented in the “Pali which proceeds : ©The 
following thoughts arose in the mind of Ramadhipati, to whom~the valid manner in which a simd 
should be consecrated had appeared as described above :— There are some Theras who, wishing to 
consecrate a simd on a g@makhetta, carry out their object by inducting within the hatthapdsa the 
monks residing inside the boundary, but without effecting purification through the acts of: indueting 
- within the hatthapdsa, etc, all the monks residing on that gdmakhetta. see ‘consecration of. such a 
_ sim@ by the Theras is invalid by reason of partiavioale: aie 
- 8 Doubtful reading and eens: 

4 Conjecturally restored. 

5 Owing to the fragmentary state of our text, I have not been able to piece it together with the 
Pali version, of which it seems to be an expanded paraphrase, The same applies to much of what 
follows, ; 

6 The Pali. proceeds : _ If, in order to. alienate ‘the revenue of a “selected place, whose boundaries 
have been: defined. for. the purpose of collecting revenue and which is situated on a pakatigdmakhetta, 
~ the boundaries are again defined. and the place itself is given away by the ruling authorities : such a 
- place acquires the status of a wisurngdmakhetta, The consecration of a saddhasima is consummated 


at the conclusion’ of the recitation of the sammavdcd, and not merely by the proclamation of its | 
boundaries. | ‘Lherefore the land referred to above, which is situated inside the boundary, does not — 


acquire the status of a visumgdma, because of its perpetually forming a part and parcel. of the 


gamasimd; nor does the sima become a baddhasima, Decduse the lands, both inside and outside the 


- boundary, constitute but one edmasina,” » 
7 Meaning doubtful, . 


a 


vals 


partit] «= .~Ss MON INSCRIPTIONS = sa 


eh Pe Ak eee eS is a eerie . reciting the service of the conser — 
cration of a SimE .-0 ee ee eee . (L. 38) cannot... . 
etal Mowe (parte) which is within that boundary. | if Bice es ons Lead oF, 


Kg tiene GON. Hacc eke Soe 39) (still ?) Sieh was hate 
.....+ it cannot be said to be another Gice of land, it cannot 


- said to be a ‘badd hasima ?) Bee ee Eee ee ees 
be idee Soak eta dae (Oy 10 Be 

. If the persons who dwell on the Pema ee ee ee 
ee re Or or eee oe te ee er rere ( 41) * aniieh awcthe 
sonaceration of the simé is vagga* ... +1. . [the upasampade 


ordination and other ceremonies eer in such | a smd] (1. 42) are void 
(by reason of] stmdvipatt:® [There are also] (some) clergy, [who ask the — 
ruling authorities to define the boundaries of some place selected by them, 
but which does not possess the characteristics of a g@ma. Considering that. 
such a place is a visumgamakhet ta, | (I. 43) when they have decided on. it‘ 
and. the time has come for the consecration of a szma, (they do so ?) (by , 
inducting within the hatthapasa ony the monks residing on the whole of the 


| pakatigamakhetta.) 60 6 ee (4g) es se 
ee “ (I. 45) making (it) separate, to be a wisumgama... 
a er a er ee eer . [The consecration of the sim@ by - 


these clergy is void by. “reason of jabcndpailt Therefore, because of sima- — 
o patit,] (1. 46) the upasampada ordination which they perform in [such a Sima - 


is inyalid.§. There are also other clergy, -who, wishing to “consecrate a 


sima@ on a gamakhetta, do not cut down the branches of trees, etc., connect- 
ving that. gamakhetta sg (I. 47) the other gamakhettas watch are” around it, 


1 The Pali has: ” “ If all the bioks residing on that very ree who are. aotus of the 


: privilege, ‘are not inducted within the Aatthapdsa ; if the declarations of assent of those who are 
entitled to send them are not received; if those who deserve exclusion are not excluded; and if only — 


the monks residing ‘within the boundary are inducted within the hatthapdsa; the cameron of the 


 sima (attended by such ceremonies) _is violable and not.in accordance with the law.” 


2 This word, which appears in the Pali as vaggam, seems to mean something like * “void. i 

8 That isy “by reason of the invalidity of its consecration.” ~~ ote 

4 The reading is. soups. The Pali has: “ vey select a ‘site on ity and consecrate a ima by 
inducting, ” ete. : 
8 In this line there are only. some doubtfully read and idolated words: such as “cause,” “ also,” 


“revenue”? (?), “if,” which I have been unable to fit inté any framework, Much thes same Auplies 


to the next line. The Pali proceeds as shown in the text. 
6 The Pali has; “ the upasampadd ordination and. other c ceremonies performed i in such a si are 


138 ) ore EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA we von, sft 


Bue carry out their object after effecting purification through the act of] 
(l. 48) inducting [within] the fatthapasa [the monks residing on that 


gamakhetta. By reason of partsavi patt?,| the consecration [of the sca by 


- these monks is invalid. As] (1. 49) there is mutual confusion? [between two 


baddhasimas] because of their being connected by the branches of trees, etc., 


[so there is mutual confusion! between] a baddhasim@ and a Lamasima, 
for. between. two. gémasimés, because of their being connected by the 


af branches of trees, ete, By reason. of] (I. 50). (simavi patti ?),* the consecration - 
of the simd is void, (and) because the consecration of the simé is void,’ | 


(the upasampada ordination. performed therein is invalid 24 : 7 

[‘ There are other clergy, who perform the upasampads ‘ordinaon: and 
‘éther ceremonies in an udakukkhepasima consecrated on rivers and lakes that 
are devoid of their respective characteristics (judged by the. conditions 


prevailing). in the exceedingly rainy region of the Mén country. By reason 
«Of .srmavt patti, ‘the upasampadé ordination and other ceremonies performed by 
these. clergy are void, As to this exceedingly rainy region of the Mén_ 
country : during the four months of an equable rainy season, when rain falls 
in the manner. indicated above, the under robe of a -nun- crossing a_river, at 
any place, | hay not get wet (provided that the prevailing “ conditions are 
oe "normaly ; but owing to excessive rainfall in this country, the. under robe will P 
poe get wet. _ Judging, therefore, by the wetting of the. <urider robe, when the 

: ee rainy season is, as stated before, an equable’ one, how can it be correct to | 


_ say that such a river acquires the status of a nadi? Again, during. the. four 
~ months. of an equable rainy season, when rain falls in the manner indicated 


above, a lake may not contain water. sufficient for the purpose of drinking or 
ablation (provided that the prevailing” conditions -are’ normal) ; but owing to. - 
me excessive rainfall. in this’ country, during. the: four months of the rainy” 
_ season, it will contain water sufficient for the purpose of drinking or ablution, — 
Judging, therefore, by. the ‘sufficiency of water, in sucha lake for the purpose ? 


of. drinking | or. ablution, when the rainy season is, as stated ‘before, an: 


i: ~ equable. one, how can it be ‘eotrect | to. say. that such a lake acquires the | 


: : oe: of. a a jatassara ae 


a ae The English version “ot the. Bali: says junction, ce “but ihe: ‘word ‘guiikapab hu appears to imply eee 
ee confusion,” The curious word 2@@ seems-to be-a- particle, Cf, D 28, 36, 385.475, 508. ones 
2 The’ Pali Proceeds : A. ‘the Mperngade ‘ofdination and other ceremonies Performed 1 in such Be: 


_simd are: void, PR wo 
8 End of the fragments of Face Cc 


ce Conjectaraly« restored. with the help 0 of F the Pal, ie : oo 


re 


oe 


Part 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS = 185 


D | 


[‘‘ There are also some. clergy, who, ‘desiring to conseerate | a stm on a 
gémakhetta, cut down the branches of trees, eté., connecting that gemabhetto 
with others, and carry out their object by induce within the hatthapasa, 


-etc., all the monks residing inside or outside the boundary of that. gama 


knetta, But whenever]? (Il. 2) the upasampadd ordination [and other: ceremonies 
are: performed i in such. a stma@, the connecting branches of trees, etc., of that 
gdmasima are not cut down. The wpasampadé ‘ordination "aid other 
ceremonies of these ae are, therefore, void] (1. 3) by reason of parisavi- 


pattt, [caused through the confusion (of boundaries) of such baddhasima and 


gamasima. If, on the other hand, these clergy perform the upasampada 


_erdination and other ceremonies in a valid. baddhasimé, or. on @ pakatigama- 


khetta| (1.4) which possesses [the characteristics of a gama, or on] a 


 visumngémakhetta, which possesses: 5) [the characteristics of] a gama, e 


[or on a mahdnadi | possessing the. characteristics of a wadt,| of on a 


~ mahdjétassara* which: attains to [the characteristics of a Jatassara,| or [on a 
samudda,| which— attains to. the charastoristics. of a. samudda, [they 


may constitute a Chapter,]* . . Cea ae. . (1. 6) those ceremonies, — 
in a baddhasima hich Gis i according to ). baba. CORY aS 


Tol 


visumgdmakhette which — ‘Is devoid . of the characteristics of a gama 


istics of a “Gahadsaba : aga e4ts fw ore Oy a of (such >) citéum- 2 
stances as aforesaid . oe ee eee yee oe - (I. Bye are void oF | 


we account of perisevipatt” Ae 2) | oe oS ee oe oe 


~1No entire’ aad. is ‘lebibie ia, F “of this: Face, ‘dhodgh < one may. conjecture He’, which: “Probably . 
formed part of the: expréssion “cut down,” Supra. oe ey : = ees 
- 4-The Pali omits the maha, - Pe 7 

8 Owing to differences in. “syntactical order, [ fave nat i: tiemmptad” to fit the: fragments of our text, Hoe 


7 that follow: on here, into, the framework. of ‘the. Pili, which proceeds: “but the functions performed, ioe i 
ss by them are void: by: ‘reason ‘of parisavipatti,. caused through - -their: having been ordained: in. a: sima- a 


whose ‘cofisecration ’ ‘was ‘itivalid’ ‘for the feasons- indicated above, or on (a. vesurngd makhetta - s does 
not pores the. characteristics of a ama or on. a Hiuddikonadt that: does, ‘not. Deed the. 


a he ‘Ring tana ‘Beastie 


: ae existence of’ toidudpalst and 3 priat of the Mpoxenpadt ordination and other « ceremonies ae eer 
“ Bsmathedests and thought thus i— Fel ee eee - 


a (h 4) on a small jitassare that. has. not the character-. ae 


ware: hoe . 


140. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL ut 


considered ......., (which were connected with?) ..... 


. + (1, 9) came to know of (the szmdvipait? and ?) partsavipatti which existed. . 


Then His Majesty Rémadhipat? (thought thus ?):—‘ The stmavipatit (and) 
partsavipatit which are connected with the upasampadé ordination’... . 
Siti a oon it ate whe) (to?) me, appear clearly thus. In this M6n 


country of ours (clergy?) ....... Bie wap. Bea Chats (monks ?) who are 


well versed in the Tipitaka, who are learned Rand) Able o.5) 6 ho aek ete cae 
geet ey ececa els (18) in’ -this Mén country, to our lords the leading 
monks * in es (it) SP PCats ss aa ei Re ee ee cs T should urge 


our lords.’ to. ‘Gonsidet oe coos ne eck Eee eel ote as . (I. 12) 
having compared the older (and) the subsequent,” I should urge our t- lords to 
lay. down a ruling... ............ this sima.” 


Thus His Majesty Ramadhipati ‘ ee era ee aha Stree te at ves so? pad 
... (1. 13) all give a ruling (based on the) aya (as to the) erection ® 


of this sem@. Then our ‘lords the leading monks ........ . considered. 


the Pali Vinaya together with (its Atthakathds ?)®......0...0.., 
(l. 14) the sima@vipatt? (and) parisavi patti which existed, our lords the leading 


1 Here the Pali. has: “The sim@oipatté and parisavipatti of the upasampadd ordination and 
other ceremonies appear to me in the manner indicated above. Now therk are in Rdmafifiadesa and 
Hamsavatinagara many monks who are well versed in the Tipitaka, fests Soy able, and I am not 
sure whether the simdvipatti and parisavipatti of the upasampadd ordination and other ceremonies 
appear to them in the same manner. It is, perhaps, advisable that I should ask all of them to 
investigate the subject. by the light of the interpretation, literal or otherwise, of the Vinayapitaka 
together with its atfhakathds and tikds, to compare and collate the atthakathds with the pd@/z texts, 
the {iz@ with the affhakathds and what follows with what is gone before, and to give an authoritative 
tuling, based on the Vinaya, as to the valid manner of oe a stmd.” \t does not seem 


_. possible that our text can have contained all this. : 
4 The original has gagdcariya which must have the same sense as L. M. acd guia, explained by | 


Haswell as “a head priest of a district, a bishop.” 
8 The reading i is somewhat doubtful but is supported by the Pali. j 
4 Presumably one must. supply “thought,” or the like. The Pali merely proceeds; ‘All the 


monks. who were well versed in the Tipitaka were accordingly asked to give an authoritative ruling, 
based on the Vinaya, as to the valid manner of consécrating a simd,. Then, in compliance with the 
~ request of King. Ramadhipati, all the monks who were well versed in the Tipitaka investigated the 


subject by the Tight of the interpretation, literal or otherwise, of the Vinayapitaka, together with its 


dtthakathds and ftkds, and through repeated comparison and collation perceived the existence: of . 


simduspattt and parisavipatti, and. “communicated to the: king the result of their enquiry as to the 
manner prescribed in the Vinaya.” ~ 


5 1 am not sure that this i ig the sense of tanga. Petaps it means a « straight ” (or “ direct) 
ruling (as to this simd), 


§ Conjecturally restored, — 7 


aol 


Sed 


PART 11 ] MON INSCRIPTIONS . | e 4 


monks in general (having?) ............... gave (?) the nature rat 
the stmduipatti which existed (and) the partsavipatt? .. 0... 0 ee 
(lus) .......:+ In the end, when he had received the decision of our 
lords the Mahatheras*....... His Majesty Raimadhipati considered : 

“The religion (of the exalted Buddha _ should last ?) (1. 16) five thousand 
years, these say. At the present time the religion of the eee Buddha 
has (lasted) two thousand (and) sixty-four® years. ......... Pon Bae 
bid a eee ee eure te er we, 7) the religion, which is bound up with the 
upasampada ordination, how can® it last until (the end?) of the period of 
five thousand years? The state® of the religion ee . (1. 18) 
(being) impure (and) corrupt, as aforesaid, (and) we being aware (of it)? (if ?) 
we do not exert ourselves so as to purify the religion from all impurity (and) 
corruption, (and) all manner of doubt,® (1. 19) (we shall ?) assuredly (be wanting - 
in devotion?) to the religion of the exalted Buddha, we shall assuredly 
be wanting in affection to the exalted Buddha, we shall assuredly, be wanting: 


in reverence to the exalted Buddha i emel k a kat ee cee waa 


1] do not know the meaning of the. word lanah near: ‘the beginning of 1. 15, The word also 
occurs in E 55, F_45, 49, Sar where it does not seem to add anything substantial to the sense of the 
context. . be 
2 The Pali merely ‘has; “ ‘The king said to himself: “The excellent compilers. of atfhakathas 
have declared that the religion of Buddha will, last 5000 years; but alas,’ etc. =. 

8 This agrees with the actual Pali reading on the stone itself, but the MS. followed by Mr, Taw 
Sein Ko makes: it 2047. Evidently the scribe was puzzled by the date, which cannot refer back to 
the time of Buddha’s death but must run from the moment (traditionally 45 years earlier) ‘when he 
received full enlightenment under the Bodhi tree and yields the date 1475-6 aD. (= 837 of the 
‘Common ‘Era of Burma; cf, E38). Making this alteration, the Pali ‘proceeds: “6 aly 2064 years 
have now passed away since the Enlightened One. attained Buddhahood, and the religion has become | 


‘impure, tainted with heresy and corruption, and the «upasampadé@ ordination has. also become invalid. 
_This being the case, how can the religion last till the end of 5000 years?” 


4 I cannot translate the doubtfully read words at the end of this line, 
8 The word actually intended is not quite certain: cf, the text. and 1 note. 
6 Or, “the fact’? > * 
7 { have translated in this way in “order to keep the” sequence of the: original : + what is meant is, ~ 
“if, being aware, of the corrupt state of the: religion, ‘we do not exert ourselves,” etc. The Pali-has: 
“The king. again reflected. thus: * Being aware of the impurity, heresy, and corruption, that have 


_arisen in the religion, methinks that, in. order to ensure the continuance of the religion to ‘the end of 


the period of 5000 years, 'it is essential that it should be purified by resuscitating the pure form of _ 


the upasampada ordisution ‘However, ‘if I do not exert myself, and remain indifferent, I shall be 


guilty of not having intense love for, or faith in, the Blessed Fully Enlightened One, and of being — 
devoid of respect and reverence for him, It. is, therefore, I think, aos that. the purification of. 
thegreligion should be effected by me,” 

8 That pes to itsQvalidity in 1 all essentials, 


i lation, : 


igo _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA = [VOL 10 


0 


re mace tee, UE a0) (IF. 2?) we can.... _ introduce @)? (and) plant. 


an. upasampade ordination (which is free ?) from Teaparity, sonmption and all 
. manner of doubt, (and) which is the seed of religion, * PEGG GS Ak se ce tly 
teu es. (21) the shoot,? which (we) can cause to sprout up, which can 


last until the end of the period of five thousand years,” * 


_ Thus* did His Majesty Fehedh AP oe oe sa 


ee When two hundred (and) thirty-six years® had elapsed after the year that 


our lord the exalted Buddha achieved parinivvdna, .... our lord Moggali- 

: puttatissamahathera (commissioned ?) (1. 23) our lord Mahamahindathera (and) 

- caused him to cross over (and) establish the religion in the island of Ceylon. | 
From the time that our lord Mahamahindathera (established the religion in?) 


the island of Ceylon, (during. 218 years ?)” (1. 24) the orthodox: succession, 


that is to say the fraternity of the residents of the Mahavihara (momatery), | 


mee was free from impurity (and) corruption, which practised . Gate wee 
WS SE ASR ae ed ele VF ay the eand of Ceylon.’ When ° oe = ie oe 


1 There’ are doubts about the ‘yeaditg’ aid’ incaning here: The ‘passage is “not closialy siavaileled a 

a in the Pali, which. proceeds thus :. ue How. shall 1 first call into existence the ‘pure. form of the. — 

Tee upasampada ordination, and ‘establish | Yt in. this: country. of. Ramaftadesa P There are men having _ 
faith, belonging. to good families, aind desirous. of receiving ‘such upasampada ordination, If, at my 
’ instance, they ‘receive it, the religion will | become Purified through — existence of a Bute form of the 


speseee aes ordination.” a 


. 2.) have not attempted to ee the doubttully read dget at ‘the ‘end of this line, © “ie may. | 
mean “to observe, to practise, to. do,” according to context, gee 


a, I omit the doubtful a4 which precedes lam-ow. 

oa 4 In spite of the lacuna, the general sense of the passage is plain, viz... ‘that. valid upasampada 
ordination isca condition precedent to pure sagen the former is the seed, the. latter Bae Plant which 
is to endure for ages. 


~ 8 Normally, being expressed. by | rau wo’, he must gale: to what. follows the Pali es as: ‘ 
“The: following were the thoughts that arose in n the mind of King Ramadhipati, who: considered about 


the condition of the religion :—”. 
6 Traditionally. pale oecoa to 08 BC. “but see “the note near “the beginning at this trans 


1 Traditionally ‘gorresponding to 90 B.C. “but: see as. above. ‘The Agure,. lost. i in our ‘text, has 


been restored from the Pali, which in this ‘passage is - fairly- closely parallel, viz, “It is said that in’ 
oes the: 236th year that had elapsed. since the attainment .of parinirvdna. by’ the Fally Enlightened ‘One, 
. . Mahamahindathera, who. was. sent by Moggaliputtatissamahathera, . went to Tambapannidipa | and. ~~ 

“ established the : religion, Devanampiyatissa, king of. Sihaladipa, conceived a feeling of esteem and — 

= teverence | for. the - thera, and - founded the Mahavihara. monastery.” During the period. of 218 years — 
eye phat elapsed since the foundation of the Mahavihara- the. religion remained ‘pure, pad ‘there was a only: _ 

~~ one fraternity, namely that of the residents ‘of the Mahavihara. ae EN 
_. § Presumably, following the Pali, we. must. suppose _ that the ‘daota ‘proceding’ these. ‘words a 


a contained a ae he: Mahavihara Aratarvity. was the. aly one in the: island, 2 
oe Or. Then i os aoe ees : a a ee : . or 


word “tnow. refers to the transmission . of ecclesiastical status | in a particular line. 


“a 28) King WVatagatnant ? ‘Abhaya Hevene conquered, in his turn? ie 


‘kien king, Daliya,° (and) having again? acquired the sovereignty of) the 


pee of. pure hae founded the Abhayagitivihdra (monastery) . 


« 6 bot a. 


| 26) had been with the 


lung at the time wher ihe king was defeated by seven Klans and ran. away 
(and) had to dwell with our lord (the said monk) for [fourteen years] . ; 


. . (the king) (1. 27) caused our lord (the. monk) to dwell (in the. ‘said ~~ 
Facnastccy) Our lord this Mahathera, Mahatissa, by reason of the offence of : 

associating with lay people ; ee a ee ee ae a ee 
[had been expelled] (1. 28) from the Mabavihara. "Thenicokerward the frater- 
nity of monks resident in the Mahavihara performed (their ecclesiastical), 
“ceremonies separately (and the fraternity. of monks resident in the Abhayagine ne 
| vihara likewise performed | their ceremonies separately eee. re are tk 29) 

_ they were unable to associate (in. such) ceremonies with Sach other? . The 


succession 1 of the ne monks, ne monks resident. in the Mahavihara®, : 


PO Pe eee Nofa des as kien Ss Daw aes a eRe (A, go) the clergy 
che were: in. the island of Ceylon, the fraternity > ‘the: residents. in a. : 


Mahavihara, one (fraternity ye: Stipe eee eee ne ee 
“(. 31) “ Three. hundred (and) fifty-seven 1 years avila elapsed [énce} tee 


coming into existence ‘of the Abhayagirivihara, a king (called Mahasena ruled = 
over: the island Jt: Ceylon for twenty-seven years.) . Dae aaa ne 33) 


rd : 


“a Th: he Pali, “ Vettagimati 2 

4 Not in the Pali, ; Deo , poe ae 

8 ‘The Pali has: “Dadhiya, king of the Damilas,” » 3oe,)" Tamils, Our text may have « Didchiya. 4, 
Apparently * Klan’ means “ Tamil,” : 

4. The Pali has :.“ attained to kingship. in Ladkadipa,” ee ae weer 
Sin this. lacuna we must. probably. supply. something like a chard: was a “monk pecan Mahatis- 


satheeh; who.” The Pali ‘has: “ After founding the ‘Abhayagirivihara “monastery, ‘this king wes 
- defeated ‘by.a. confederacy. of seven Damila princes, and was obliged ‘to fly-the country and remain in... 

_. hiding for fourteen years. (On his restoration) he invited a thera. called . Mahities,, who had saflordes oe 

him assistance during his. exile, and. Dissented the monastery to. tin - 


6 Por ada, ch C: 49.. oS i 
7 The . Pali: merely. says.“ Tishdetorvaed ‘che ananks. ware di 


ee ®. Possibly one. might translate : the twenty suecessions of monks.” . I am ‘not . sure Oo 
precise meaning. of the phrase (which does ot occur in the Pali in’ either of these senses 


uiecession, . 


| a leoeilae however,’ coh is merely. an erior for to’, and we should. translates “the ‘two -suecessions of - 
8! OR 44, the ‘Mahavihara and 1 Abba gia aacte Ausptativaly. This. would ‘agree much...’ 
a Beier wit the Pali versions Fe ee 


Cee idea} into ‘ty: sects, “namely ‘that : : a 
- ef the ‘residents of the Mahavihara and ‘that of the residents ‘of the ‘“Abhayagirivihara, . oe ee 


14d EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


that time that king founded the Jetavanav inate (he) was fond of a heretic’ 


aA ace inietetahetien, 0s Saad wee a. ee. @ [who] (1. 33) was an asso- 
ciate of wicked peaple and dwelt in the Dakkhinarama monastery. (The king) 
caused him. to enter into [the Jetavanavihira] . . [Thenceforward, 


‘the monks of the Jetavanavihara monastery detached themdelyes from] (1. 34) | 


the monks who dwelt in the Mahavihara and also from the monks who 


dwelt in [the Abhayagirivihara] . hi Cte RR tee a water k el fan 


thus] (1. 35) arose this one fraternity éalled the fraternity of the residents of the 
Jetavanavihara. RUS dee Pe ees Fok ee ee (1. 36) [six hundred] 
years [had not yet® elapsed since the establishment of the religion -in the 
island. of Ceylon, when] (there were three?) communities of monks in the 


island of Ceylon: the residents of the Mahavibara.. ee eee ee ; 
ae eee ee Sade at etna Se Shes se 8 . .“ (1. 37) one fraternity, was the 
fraternity fake oo be ee p ee ae oe ac. o's the three fraternities 
eae foes Ni tcl Rap eee, aaa | Sats oate @ StS 2 el de eee cae (Aimone 


these fraternities;] (I. 38) the residents of the Mahavihara [were extremely 
pure and orthodox ; but the remanines two fraternities [were neither pure 
Mor: Orthodox |” Sek hse k aay ee a ain, lee ots ee 39) who were 
deficient in moral. conduck wep oa dD gee te eee ae 
who practicod cg oe eet ke at ee a ae ea Gute las 

eo(hgo) 8a ae eta oe Ua ea ee Pe os (Owing to-this circum= 
stance,] the religion [became impure and tainted with héresy and corruption. 


1 Or “ heretics.” 


2 It appears from the Pali that the latter part of this lacuna must have contained something | 


like “a monk named Tissathera, who.’ The. P4li further characterizes him asa man “of an 
intriguing and licentious character, but for whom he (i. e. ‘the’ king) conceived a feeling of esteem 
and reverence,” 

8 1 have followed the es er the English translation of the Pali. Our text here has the wera 

Rifia, “a very little’ (to which the Pali £i%ct apparently corresponds), Perhaps it means that the 600 
- years had all. but elapsed. As Mr. Taw Sein Ko pointed out in a footnote to his translation, these 
- 600 years elapsed two years before the termination of the reign of the king mentioned in 1. 31, supra, 
4:Here, no doubt, our text enumerated the other two fraternities, 7 perhaps, some further 
‘description of them. This is not in the Pali. 
8 The. Pali proceeds : : “In course of time, however, in the island of Ceylon, the number of the 
‘orthodox. monks gradually decreased, and their sect became weak, while the unorthodox monks 
continually ‘received . fresh accession of strength owing to increased numbers. pla heretical sects 
-did net conform: to the rules of. the Order, and were followers of evil Practices, "° Probably these 
last few words are represented by the beginning of 1.39 of our text. 

8 I am not sure of the sense of ku jala, It might mean “with thorns,” a figurative way of 
expressing the evils that. had grown ‘up n the Church. But this does not ‘seem quite. satisfactory, 
shough the reading Appours to Pe certain, e 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS:  =—._— stg 


a the ere year ‘that had elapsed since the edtahtiananent of the 
religion in the island of Ceylon, the 1708th year that had elapsed since the 
attainment of Parinirvana by. the Master, and the eighteenth year since the - 
inauguration of]? (1. 41) King Sirisahghabodhi-Parakkamabahu [as ruler of the 
island of Ceylon, that king, by seeing the monks who, though professing the 
religion, did not conform to the rules of the order and followed evil] (1. 42) 
practices,? [became aware of the existence of the impurity, heresy, and 
corruption that had arisen in the religion, and he. thought thus :—‘ If such 
an one as I, knowing the existence of] (1. 43) the impurity, (heresy, and] 


- corruption® [that have arisen in the religion, do not exert myself and remain 


indifferent in the matter of effecting its purification, it will be said of me 
that] (1. 44) (I) do not reverence (the Buddha?)*. .......... [It is, 
perhaps expedient that I should afford support to the Mahavihara fraternity, 


who are orthodox, whose conduct is in conformity with the rules of the 


Order, and whose superior is] (1.45) Mahakassapathera, who dwells [in 
Udumbaragiri; and that, as Asoka, king of righteousness, with the assistance 
of (1. 46) Moggaliputtatissamahathera, afforded support to the great fraternity 
of exceedingly pure and orthodox monks who declared that the Fully 
Enlightened One was a Vibhajjavadi, and effected the purification of the — 


religion by commanding the expulsion from the Order of the 60,000. impure _ 
and sinful monks who declaréd that the Fully Enlightened One professed the 


doctrines of the Sassata and: other schools, even so should 1. purify the 
religion by commanding the expulsion from the Order of] (1.47) all the 


impure monks who are unorthodox,’ [who do not: conform to the rules of the - 


Order and are followers of evil practices|® . Re ee a ee es oe (le) 


| (of) the’ three fraternities | should make one fraternity, ‘land. any “monks 


WHO Ate ee ee oo 8 ee Pere ore 


a1 It may be doubted whether there was room in our text for all the foregoing chronological 
details, The date is 1164-5 A.D, 
2 Our text has the word patipat pee) presumably in correspondence with the Pali. apatipattie 


- duppatipattiyo, 


8 Our text has the words as adjectives, no doubt qualifying sdsan@, “ religion.” 

‘4.The Pali, after “that,” proceeds: “ my i for, or faith in, the Fully. Enlightened Ohe, and 
my respect and reverence for ‘ain, ate not intense.’ MSY. Hikely. our text had the. Substance of all 
this. 


6 The Pali has: bd the large number of i impure, unorthodox, and. sinful fhonks,? ‘ete, “As ‘t.. ota See has | 
(or yati ?), cf. Bag n. 


6 The Pali continues: * and by constituting the featerity of the duldants of the + Mahivindra the 
only sect (in my kingdom).” 
7 Here. yato occurs again. — 


[oO 


Lge! 


460  EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ‘[ VOL, UW 
* “The: king]? (1. 49) having (thus?) reflected, entirely expelled’ all the 
-_ impure monks that were unorthodox ; any, that . 2... bi taser Ber at Poke 
UG athe a hee Baa be tase ete eas Hi ao) “murine 
religion. From the. tines that ‘these kings * anal the religion, the ie 
int the pa of Ceylon. was. bound up with... 0.0.0.0. 002. cee. 
bt Ne ate Hie ea eokw Eo Po a a ees . (i 51) until the present time, 

_ Since (that) is so, we shall snake: a 1 request to our lords the monks 


Oe See es Cae ee ad ae es Marea Series he (I. §2) the 
religion from. the island of Ceylon. We will ue - them to return (and) 


establish the religion in this Mén country of ours,” His ae Ramadhi- 


pati said (@nd)* ov wie ee ee ee eee ee : : 


[Accordingly King Ramadhipati ae: the twenty-two oe headed 


by Moggalana, and addressed them thus: “ Reverend Sirs, the upasam pada 
ordination of the monks of the Mén country now appears to us to be 
invalid, Therefore, how can the religion, which is based on such invalid 
ordination, last to the end of 5000 years? Reverend Sirs, from the 
establishment of the religion in the island of Ceylon up to the present day, 
there has been. existing in that island an exceedingly ‘pure sect of monks, 
who are the spiritual, successors of the residents of the Mahavihara 
monastery. If, Reverend Sirs, you goto the island of Ceylon, and, after 
selecting out of the fraternity, whose members are the spiritual successors of 
the monks of the Mahavihara, a Chapter who are pure and free from 
censure and reproach, receive at their hands the upasampada ordination in 
the udakukkhepasima consecrated on the Kalyani River, where the Fully 


Enlightened One enjoyed a bath; and if you make this form of the | 


1-The Pali proceeds: “acted. ‘accordingly, purified the religion, and caused a covenant to be 
entered into by the monks. In after times, with a view to purifying the religion, Vijayabahuraja and 
Parakkamabahuraja caused. (similar): covenants:to be made. From that time up to the present day, 
there has been existing in the island of Ceylon a sect of monks who are. the. spiritual successors of the 
fraternity: of the Mahavihdra, the. exceedingly pure and. orthodox sect}. whose members: conformed i in a 
proper manner to the rules of the Order.” 
2 Or ‘this king,” 
8 The Pali: Hass “1 (Ramadhipati) shall. therefore, invite in a respectful. 1 manner learned: and 
qualified. monks: to: receive the. extremely pure form’ of: the upasampad& ordination: in the island of. 
Ceylon, and to establish it in this country of Radamifiadesa, By inducing men of good family, who- 


r 


have-faith. and are desirous of taking. orders, to- receive: ity, and-by thus calling into existence-the pure 


form of the upasampada@ ordination, the Feligion will become purified.and free from: impurity, and. will 
last: to: the: end of. the period: of 5000" years,” It would: seem. that. our: text did» not contain the! whole 
of this. She | a 

4 End of the legibleZpart of Faced. 


"merit. 


PART It] | MON INSCRIPTIONS | 147 | 


upasampada ordination the seed of the religion, as it were, plant’ it, and | 
cause it to sprout forth by conferting such ordination on men of good family’ 
in this Mén country, who have faith and‘ are desirous of taking orders, the 
religion will become pure and. last till the end of 5000 years. Reverend: 
Sirs, by your going "to the island of Ceylon, much’ merit and’ great advank 
tages will accrue to you. Reverend Sirs, on your arrival in the island of 


Ceylon; |! 


F Eo Poe fe td 
te you} will be able (to” see with your eyes 2, (youy will be able (to 
venerate ?) | 
es te ie ma 2) the. -+..++.. ceti, the Sildceti, the Kal yaniceti, ete. My , 


e @ © #¢ © 28 @ @ a 


es €¢ @ & @° @ © #@ # @ @ 


2 + © @ a #8 @ 


eo @ we ee 8 . a 


ae eee AL D our (lords xy. ie Thus did His: Majesty talle a request to 
ourlordsthe Theras.. 2... 0.200004. toes [To this the Theras replied’: 

“Maharaja, your excellent request is indeed’ in conformity with the law, 
Because’ it is actuated by a desire to promote the interests of the religion]* 


edn chiles aie Ee ee aa gees . (When we?) (1. 5) have taken steps® to go 
(and) receive the pace page ordination, which is the seed of religion . ... . 
eA eh a Re ee ee a (in the island of ?) (1.6) Ceylon, (when the ?) 


upasampadd ordination which is in our station," (is one?) that. i is free from, 


1 It seems: more: than: doubtful whether the whale’ ‘of the above passage’ from’ the Pali’ version can 
havé' been represented'in’ our text, particularly as the substarice’ of some of it appears lower dowii. It 
would seem that the Mén text arranged’ the order differently. The- Pali, However, now’ proceads, with: 
sortie difference’ in: detail: “an opportunity will! Ve afforded’ to’ you of' adoring and’ making offerings 
to the Holy Tooth Relic, to the Bodhi trees, headed by the one ‘which was the’ southern’ branch (of 


the tree at Buddha Gaya), to the Ratanacetiya and other shrines; atid to the Cetiya’ of the Holy 


Foot-print of the Blessed One on-the top of the Samantakiita: Hill; Therefore; Reverend: Sirs; your _ 
great accumulation. of. merit. will increase,. For. the reasons. stated: oe I: beseeeh: of: you the evens 
of going to the island of Ceylon,’ 

2 It is: doubtful: whether. our. text: contained the ect, as: it: appears: to: be : duplicated: tuitions 
on. The Pali: Proceeds : “ ‘the: visit to. the island of Ceylon. will increase: our great aecumulation® of. 
a 3 Literally, “ done deeds,” 

4 That is, the status of a sce: But I am'not clear as to the precise. sense: of. santhan ee 
as the Pali santhdna has so many. different meanings, and the Pali. version. omits-all this. passage:, z 
It also seems possible to translate :. ‘ when the upesampadd ordination, in ourselves ”! es Kore! 6 4 ‘ in: our - 


_ minds’’) “ia free from doubt.” 


148 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Ss voon. at 


(doubt?) . persed Uy aout es wt et iin ar ene 


shall be able i confer it % (1. 7) upon persons of (goad): family who have 
the desire (to receive) the upasampada ordination at our hands.’ We .. 


hdl re Goat alae sera EAS is Seng, toss Dod teeta a A . (1.8) these 
(persons 2, which is free ‘froth doubt, until the end of the: veto (of 5000 
years?) eee ee Re ie ea ee ween fakes re ate . (l.9) we shall 


be able to receive the doctrines, by reason of being aie: 6 aa 1 island of : 


Ceylon... ee eee eee ee ee ee es (Il 10) we shall be able to venerate 
_ (and) make offerings. to the holy. sites, such as the Ratanaceti, the merit . 


ne ele eee a ee ha re ry ree ee ee ce (ayn 


‘daminch as (Your -Majesty’s sequent 2) is esas in accordance with the law, 
it is fitting® (that) we grant a favour to gee mae. _ Thus font lords 
(the Theras spake?) . ee ae BS ons 


> © @ & w- bl ° 


. + (I, 2) our lords the aes -two Theras. Bor - purpose oy pfetinet ta ihe 


Tooth Relic of the exalted Buddha, an umbrella‘... 0... ; 


See ae ed 


rncieece mg ee SS ar aes 2 1g) ae eee iio oul ca thee 


top of the peak. of the umbrella, (of the) value of a ee (and) forty ® of 


silver, a [stone]® alms-bowl, [embellished with sapphires of great value and 


having for its. cover a ayrarhidal covering made of gold weighing 50 phalas; 


an alms-bowl, with stand and cover complete, made of gold weighing 60. 
phalas; a golden vase weighing 30 phalas; a dodecagonal] (1. 14) betel-box” of © 


q Literally, “in our presence.” . a toe ye heh ak. Pe ge toads Se 

2 am not sure that this is the force of san hete. The sentence might be taken to mean. “we 
do indeed grant,” etc,, which is closer to the Pali: ‘ ‘We, therefore, grant yeu the aon and will 
visit the island of Ceylon. Saying thus, the Theras gave a promise.” _ 


3 J have not attempted to translate ven. at the beginning of this line, as it may  galy be the’ last 


syllable of some word unknown, It might mean “arranged, marshalled,” perhaps. The Pali difters 
‘considerably here: ‘On receiving the reply of the Theras, the king directed the preparation of the 
- following articles to serve as offerings to the Holy Booth Relic—a stone alms-bowl, embellished,” etc., 
_ omitting all reference to the umbrella. . 


4 Or “umbrellas” ?. Probably not: ef. 1. 55, pore 


ae) ‘No unit of.yalue is mentioned, but I. presume that what is understood’ i is. identical with the . 


‘phala of the Pali. version, which is really, a unit of weight and would therefore be the same ‘for silver 
‘as. for gold. The. Mén equivalent is dakey (I. 14), L.M. dakew, defined by, asvell as “a tical, a 
weight a little fess than half an ounce, the hundredth part ofa viss, a rupee.” It might be possible 


* to render: the words i in the text by. “the value of the silver (being) 140,” but I do not think that can. : os 


be intended. 


6 It is doubtful whether our text had this, or many. of the details that follow, though the total in 


1. 14. shows that the same objects are enumerated i in: both. versions. 
a © do not know ‘the meaning of nan. 


ene candles, eight(y-five ?) dyed cloths, ‘ 


work ;° four stone pitchers ; six anes, 5d pitchers of motley colour ; 


PART II J . _ MON INSCRIPTIONS ip ee. : 149. 
gold, (weighing)? thirty (phalas)1; a reliquary of gold (weighing)! thirty? 


. three sea he total two hundred (and) three daker of gold; golden flowers 


Fn ee eee es - (1 Es) Bet ee ee oe (and) 
a glitterng® reliquary. For the purpose. of offering to the Holy Foot- | 
print, ei Bodhi trees, beginning: with’... 6... oe eS ee ea 


... (l 16) the Ratanaceti, etc., fifty, ES gilt waxen candles ; fifty 


7 «+ 
oe © © © 4 © & 8 (4 @ ote a Se 


[For presenting to the ‘Mahatheras] (l.17) in . the island of Conlon, cloth : 


te ee eee eee ee es one Ted kambar®; one golden: coloured kambar ; 
three motley kambars; .... . (cotton ?) tabay". 


eS ee eer ee 


sass (I. 18) one bluish? 0. 2s Sena (three 2) fleecy cotton pandi?; 


+++ ++ Sdy* cotton tabay®. 2.2.44... 5. twenty big boxes of. twilled 


} 8 8 


es 8 8 &@ © 8 @ 


1 Our text leaves * weighing ’’ and “ phalas” to be understood, giving merely the numbers. 
2 The Pali proceeds: ‘and constructed in the shape. of a cetiya; a telicereceptacle. made of 


crystal ; a relic-receptacle embellished with pieces of glass resembling masdvagalla gems; and golden 


flowers,’ The order of our text differs somewhat. 


81am not. sure of the ,meaning of paccer (here assumed to be LM. bet), but the ‘reference 3 
seems to be to the last of the” reliquaries mentioned in the Pali version; ~ ; 

4 The Pali has: “For the purpose of offering to the Ratanacetiya and other shaaes, to the 
Holy Foot-print, and to the twenty-two Bodhi trees, the following articles were prepared : —85 canopies 
of various colours; 50 large gilt waxen candles; and the same number of small giit waxen candles,” 

6 The Pali proceeds: “of the island of Ceylon the following articles were prepared : t—40. boxes : 
containing cotton cloth of delicate texture : 20 > silk and cotton BEES robes of various colours, namely, 


red, yellow, motley, and white.” 


6 This is the Pali £ambalam, meaning either “a blanket”. or “ a woollen garment,” in this case 
probably the latter, But it does not agree with the Pali, which speaks only of cottons and silks. 

7 The meaning of this word i is undetermined, but it presumably refers to some kind of- garment. 

8 Or dark blue” ? The meaning. has not been Strictly determined, | 

9 The meanings of these words have not been determined, 

10 L,M. /dai is the name of a species of reed with which stich boxes are - made, It appears. from | 


the Pali that in this case” they were betel-boxes; it has: “20 betel-boxes of motley colour, manu- 


factured in Haribhusija; four. stone pitchers; eight painted pitchers, manufactured in Cinadesa; and 


ao fans manufactured in- Cinadesa,”? But for the “ eight ’ ” the real conse of the stone itself and of 
one MS.) is “six,” as in our text. ~ 


ll. The reading and. meaning of pangen are doubtful ; but ef, L. M. pandn, Bunee pubes, which oS 
denote earthenware dishes, bowls, etc. 


1g0 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA i von. 4ti 


5 >... . 1. 9) a letter addressed to our lords (the clergy) -of Ceylon 


in general. ........ thus did ‘His Majesty prepare: “His ‘Majesty 
Ramadhipati, with great veneration. .............. 2 (1.20) dwelling 
in -the -island of Ceylon, these offerings for the purpose :of offering ‘to the 
Tooth Relic, which I (have) caused ‘(to ibe sent?), ‘let them ‘be offered to 
the Tooth Relic. These * (twenty-two?) Theras (whom I shave caused ?) 


(1.21) to go, let them view. the Tooth ‘Relic, let ‘them adore the Tooth 
Relic also. After adoring the Tooth Relic, [and making offerings to ‘ 


it, the twenty-two Theras and their disciples will proceed] (1. 22) 
elect [from among ithe fraternity] which dwells in the Mahavihara° ie 
Chapter of monks] who are free from impurity (and) ) corruption,’ (and) 4 
an udakukkhepasima attanged on the Kalyani River® . . . (1. 3 
let our (lords?) (the said Theras) be allowed to receive “he epasampads 
ordination.’’* Thus did His Majesty prepare a letter to ibe sent to the 
clergy in- general. 


For a present to: be. given to the king, [Bhavanekababu, king of Ceylon,’ 


two sapphire] (rings,? of the value of) (1.24) two hundred (phalas)*® of silver, 
four ruby rings,” (of the) value of four hundred (and) thirty (Ahalas)® of silver, 


total, six rings, of the value of six hundred (and) thirty. (phalas)* of silver ; | 


1 We must, presumably, supply -either “ (for) ithe clergy,” or “(for) the ‘holy ‘sites,” in the latter. 


case substituting “situated” for “ dwelling.’ The Pali, for this passage, has: “Ram@dhipati, the 
Lord of Ramafiadesa and of the White Elephant, sent respectful greetings to Their Reverences the 
Mahatheras of the island of Ceylon, and thus addressed .them by letter: ‘Reverend Sirs, for the 


purpose of adoring the Holy Tooth and other relics, I have sent monks with offerings, Vouchsafe 


to afford them assistance in making such offerings.’ aed 

2 The corresponding Pali has: With the twenty-two Theras and-their decease Ti shave sent 
Citradita and Ramad&ta together with their attendants. Vouchsafe, Venerable Ones, to .afford them 
such assistance as they may require in seeing and adoring the Holy Tooth Relic, and making 
offerings to it. After seeing and adoring the Holy Tooth Relic, and making offerings to it,” etc. 

3°The Pali’ has: “who are the spiritual successors of the residents of the :Mahavihara monastery,” 
- 4 The Pali has: “ free from censure and reproach.” 

5 The Pali adds: “where the Blessed One had enjoyed a bath,” 


8 Phe !Pali adds: May it please the Venerdble Ones to afford them assistance also.in this . 


/ matter, ” vending, +“ Thus was ‘prepared a letter addressed to the Mahatheras ot as island of Ceylon,’ 
7 'Ehere-was probably. wf0-room ‘in our text for ‘these‘four words, 
8-The :Pali’ thas :*“-sapphires”’. and two “ rubies,” without any reference to “ rings,” but our text 
is explicit on that point. © 


9 Seeithe-note ‘on 1. 1g, “supra, The Paly has‘the word ‘here ‘also, ‘but it does not give the total 


‘walue of the jewellery, while our text does. 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS _ ? agi 


four.(pieces of) Ahve tan lak sak* silk; (of) ag@* 2... _ silk, (1. 25) 
‘one ;- (of) variegated “parrot’s wing ”’® silk, two ; (of) black lam-ee? silk, ‘two ; 
(of) “ parrot’s eee lam-ek* silk, one; (of) gold-coloured ‘silk, one; (of) red 


dam~ek silk oe es . (one?) * (1. se Ge 


ae eee es ONE; twenty oyanepated fine byau* cloths; two (hundred:?) 


woollen. coverlets® ....... were prepared, A letter (on a) gold tablet® 


"e. # @ © © © * @ 0 &@ © 8 © © 8 @ @© © @ © 8 © © @ @ © @© @ #£ 8&8 @ #© © #8 © 


ee ee 
a 


BOE eh aed pigs dats toe en aaetch deans Bae . (1.29) pee with ny servants 7 
rte ee toad Setiet ee mn Mel acta Seatcaare pee ae. ON cents ae Sr tee uc ee eee WG ol Se ee 

. (1. 30) having aopviopal ea mee ORCL err on the Kalyani River, 
phe the exalted Buddha bathed a ge Ne me te ere tere Be (1. 31) the 


1 The meanings of these words are undetermined. It would appear that the Pali here gives its 
account ‘in a different.order; beginning with the pieces of China-cloth, which it specifies, and going on 
to the silk cloth, which it does ‘not. Our text does just the reverse. But in :neither do.the items 
specified amount to the total given in the Pali, Further, there. are discrepancies of reading in the | 
Pali text of the ‘stone itself as compared with the version on which the English translation is based, 


‘the former having vakkhapitthahatthapddathdnesu :and -vattavannam mattham -eham ghana-Cing- 


pattafica, while the latter has givakkhakatinitambapddatthdnesu and  rattavanya-vdyimapupphi- 


‘Ramekam pelava-Cinapattaica. The English version reads: “four pieces of vatiegated China cloth, 
- Of great walue, for making long mantles, which would cover the wearer from head ‘to ‘foot; three 
pieces of thick, embroidered, China cloth, of white and dark blue or ash colour; two pieces .of plain, 


‘thick, China cloth, of white and dark blue or ash colour; one piece of plain, white, thick, China cloth ;_ 


“hwo ‘pieces of ‘green, thick, embroidered, China cloth ; »one:piece of plain, green, thick, China ‘cloth ; ‘two 


pieces of plain, black, China cloth; one piece of yellow, thick, embroidered China. cloth; .one piece of 
red, thin, embroidered, China cloth, of delicate texture; one piece of thin, embroidered, China cloth, 
of delicate texture, and of white and dark blue, or ash colour; in all 20 pieces of China cloth; the 
same number of variegated silk cloths called pavitt:, and a00 mats wrapped up.in leather cases.” 

2 That is, “ green,” Apparently in EM this became snen sek, and, colloquially, s#ek (as in 
Haswell), - ak oe — 
8 Doubtful, but indicated ty the y at the beginning ‘of La6. It is ‘not:clear whether an item has 
not been altogether lost in the lacuna that follows. 

4 Meaning undetermined. 

8 Or “ blankets.” But the Pali says “ mats,” . _ 

6 The Pali proceeds: “ The letter addressed to. Bhivanekabahu, rking -of: ‘Ceylon, owas in import 


ee 


‘similar to that addressed to the :Mahatheras of Ceylon, and -was jinscribed™ on va tablet ‘of ‘gold’? 


Our text, however, not content with this summary statement, apparently gave the -eontents sof «the 
letter in some detail in Il, 27-32,.infra, -Unfortunately the greater: part is lost. 
7 The reference is .to-Ramadfta and -Citradfta (in the M6n text “dutdn) whose: ‘Names seem ‘to be 
dimly discernible in this line, and who were sent: ane with the monks, See note on ‘1, 20, — 
8 Or, “ give,’ ? 
- § The Tooth Relic: see il. al, supra. 
10 Cf, note on 1; 23, supra. 


asa=*é‘<‘é‘é” EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ~ Evon. im 


king of Ceylon having caused to be selected’... .....-- 2.000 ee, 
in the presence *® of our lords the clergy... +--+. .-2- see eee eee eee 
538) sa ee et 


' Having said thus,’ His Majesty prepared a letter (on a) gold tablet to 


be given to the king of Ceylon ........ [Having thus prepared every- 
thing that was necessary, the king presented the twenty-two Theras with the 
following articles®:—twenty-two carpets made of Burma wool ;] (1. 33) twenty- 
two variegated [leather rugs;] twenty-two variegated boxes of twilled work ® 
(with) covers; forty-four [boxes of] fine cotton cloth? [for making the #cZoara 
robes ; and many other articles required for food and for medicinal purposes 


on the voyage, The twenty-two monks, who were the disciples of the 


Theras, were each] (1. 34) presented with [a piece of cloth called kafiputta, 
and a thick, embroidered, carpet manufactured in Burma.] 
All the twenty-two Theras together with these twenty-two disciples [were 
consigned to the care of the two emissaries, Citradutin and Ramadut&n, into 
whose hands were likewise delivered the above-mentioned offerings intended 
for the Holy Relics, the letter and presents] (I. 35) to. be given to the clergy 
of Ceylon, the presents to be given to the king of Ceylon, (and) the letter 
(on) a gold tablet to be given to the king of Ceylon. [Two hundred phalas® 
of gold were given to the emissaries] (I. 36) in case scarcity of food should 
occur, so that our lords (the monks)* should be secured from distress and 
_ should be enabled to obtain the four requisites... . . es 
~....++ (137) The eleven [Theras,]- headed by “Moggalsnathera, vcpeter 
with “Ueheie) eleven disciples were arranged to embark on Ramadutén’s ship; 


1 Cf, Il. at, 23, supra, where, however, the selection: of the ordination Chapter is left to the monks 
themselves, .Our. text may mean merely that the king is to allow the monks to make the selection. 

2 Cf. 1,7, supra, and note, as to the meaninge The reference is to the ordination of the monks 
by the Ceylon clergy, © ot . 

3 The meaning of the doubtfully read babes is undetermined, 

-4 The real meaning is that the king caused a letter “to this effect to be prepared, | 


8 Our text may have expressed the foregoing somewhat more briefly, and it also gives the items” 
ina different order, In the Pali. the * 44 boxes of fine cotton cloth for malting ticlvara robes”? are. 


mentioned: first. 
- 6 These were betel-boxes: ‘see note on |, 18, spre’ 


. 7 This rendering, is. } retin sonics 80 far as the Mén words are concerned, but is supported ce 


é by | the Pali, 
8 See |. 14 nm, supra. 
- # The Pali. text does not appear to: ‘contain the words « and their disciples ” of ‘the English 


. version, es 


ial 


ie 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS Pee 


tec eeeceeeeeeee es [while the remaining eleven Theras, headed by. 
Mahasivalithera, together with their epee?) (l. 38) * embarked on the ship 
of Citradutan. | 


Our lords having thus. embarked, the ship of Rimadutan, (in the year) 
837% of the Common Era, [left the mouth of the Yoga? River on Sunday, 


_the eleventh day of the waning half of the month of Magha,* and went out 


to sea. The ship, in which Citradutan embarked, however,] (1. 39) left the — | 
mouth of the Yoh* on Monday, the twelfth day of the waning (half) of the 


month (of Magha ?).5 On Friday, the eighth day of the waning (half) of the & | 


month of Phalguna’ (it) [reached, through skilful navigation, the port of 


Kalambu. When] (he) [heard the news (of the arrival of the ship), on the 


new-moon uposatha day of the month of] (1. 40) Phalguna’ the king of Ceylon 
sent down (people) to welcome our lords the monks®; (and) His Majesty 
Ramadhipati’s letter (on) a gold tablet (having been read aloud?) .... 


oe ee SAS aN es aiwtee! gece ate + [The king, having exchanged the 
| compliments of friendship and civility with the Theras and Citradutin,® arose 


from his seat, and with his own hands offered] (Il. 41) betel together with | 
camphor ® to our lords, (and) having. given a friendly welcome "to our lords, 


| (appointed for them *) a eveling Pages De te ee bo en 


1 { can make nothing of the syllable qa with which this line havin 
2 3475-6 A.D. 
8 Yoga, the. form given in the Pali text, is - evidently based on 1 the Mén Yor ; the - cefereuiee’ is 


| perhaps to the Bassein River, 


4 Sunday, 21st January 1476 (old style), 

6 Monday, a2nd January 1476, 

8 Friday, 16th February 1476. 

7 Friday, agrd February 1476, 

8 The Pali has; “the eleven Theras and Citradata, ” proceeding, “He was exceedingly delighted: 


aban. he had heard the letter read out, which was inscribed on a tablet of gold, and brought by 


Citradéta, and which was sent by Ramadhipatimahadraja,. who was replete with faith and many other 
good qualities and who, being a descendant of the Lords of White Elephants, was himself Lord of a 


- White Elephant, which was possessed of all the characteristics (of such animals), and whose colour 


was very hae whiter than. that-of a conchesshell, the jasminum multiflorum, the white lily, or the 


_. autumnal moon,” It may be doubted whether all this. was contained in our. text. 


9 Very ily this clause did not’ occur here in ‘our text as a similar sate ment is contained in. 
the next line, 


~~ 10-7 assume that this i is the meaning of f oagan, 2 as the Pali says ‘ - with camphor.” But it is not Lege 
the usual L.M. word and I have found no other authority for it. e200 > 


11 _| take this to be the meaning of the doubtfully read pa patisanthdva of our ‘texts. The Pali a : 
not got an equivalent in this place, but expressed the same idea in I. 40, supra, Cf. F. 46, 54. 
33 The Pali has: “ He likewise had arrangements. made for the entertainment = the Theras and 


“ ; Citradtta.” 


a 7 EPIGRAPHIA ‘BIRMANICA [ VoL. tt 


fOn ‘the following day] ‘(l. 42) Citradutan [delivered to the Mahatheras of 
Ceylon the presents sent by Raméadhipatimaharaja] (and) the letter which 


His Majesty had given (him) for our lords the clergy of Ceylon; [and the - 


‘Mahdtheras;] (I..43) saying: “According to the desire of the Lord of the 
White Elephant, that (which) pleases this heart will we do,” gave a promise, 
3 (The eleven Theras, who embarked on the same ship as Citradutan, 


perceiving the non-arrival of their brethren who embarked in the same ship _ 


as Ramadutan, reflected: ‘ With ‘the permission of the king of Ceylon, we 
shall remain in the island of Ceylon, awaiting the arrival of these Theras.’’] * 
(So) (I. 44) these monks, who had arrived first, informed the king of Ceylon 
(of their desire) and got a guide who knew the way (by) which (they) could 


go to Anuradhapura....-.-.-.+-- (There they visited and adored ?)*— 
(I. 4g) the’... ee. eels the Maricavatticett, the Dakkhinasakha, and the 


Lohaprasat.* 7 
Ramadutin’s ship [missed the route to Anuradha pus, and meeting with 


adverse winds, performed a dificult voyage, and jit was not till Sunday, the. 


minth day of the waxing half of the month of Caitra,° that she reached] (I..46) 
Valligama.® ‘Before the ship had arrived there, the minister Goruci (had 


cheese one against me king of ‘Ceylda “bt the time of the arrival of the 


11 have not. translated the doubtfully read word at the beginning of the lines If it is. etuc#, it 
means “in accordance with,” and perhaps one would ane to presume that something like the 
‘message’? stood before it, 

2It may be doubted whether our text. contained all the “hte zone The Pali now proceeds : 

They accordingly asked permission from the king, aud remained there awaiting the arrival of the 
Theras who embarked in the same ship as. Ramadita”’ ; and does not say anything about the visit 
to Anuradhapura until after relating the arrival of the belated vee when - ‘it speaks of what they had 
_ seen there and of their return, 

8 ‘Gonjecturally restored, to make the passage: intelligible, 


‘a The’ Hnelisn version of the rel has: ere eenisaateee and adored the eee 


tree, iach “was the coitherh branch "al the tree at Buddha :Gay4), and saw :the ahs pbvada: »*  :But on” 


‘the stone ‘itself only ‘the name of the Abhayagiri ‘is -distinctly legible, the stone being fragmentary -in 
this place. ft then ‘proceeds: “ They likewise, to the extent of their ability, removed grass, creepers, 


and shrubbery found growing in the:courtyards of the various cétiyas, and cleaned their walls. “After. 


filfilling such -réligious duties as were ‘performed subsequent ‘to ‘making offerings, they returned 
and arrived.at Jayavaddhananagara,”’ The Datkhinasdkhd of our text means the pol ‘tree «which 
- «was ‘the ‘southern ‘branch “of ‘the one ‘at Buddha Gaya. 

5 Sunday, ard March 1476.” 


6 The Pali adds: “ Now vat Nalligama resided a. Sin hates ates: called -Garavi, who had 
rebelled against ‘the king.” . The «minister’s name, : vowere ‘is lost .on ‘the ‘stone litself, cand nes : 


the M6n version ‘has it correctly, 
"1 Though the reading is not quite clear, this rendering i is almost certainly right. 


part a] MON INSCRIPTIONS = . ait? 


‘ship, the younger brother of the king of Ceylon had Siecostad by ship’ to 
‘the same village, accompanied by many other ships conveying armed «men 


in order to fight the rebel minister. The latter was stricken with terror, and, 
being unable to defend himself, fled the village and sought refuge in a forest. 
The village having fallen into his ‘hands,] (the younger brother of ‘the king 
of ?)1(1.47) Ceylon [took up his residence there] 6. ee ea 
eee rebels? (and) an army (of?) robbers... +. 1s fee eee 
[ Owing .to this circumstance, ‘the ‘king’s brother withheld permission from othe 
Theras and Ramadutin, who were desirous of going ‘to Jayavaddhananagara. 


‘However, on ‘the second day of the ‘waning ‘half of the] (1, 48) [month: of] — 


‘Durasat, [in the year 838° of the Common Era, permission was obtained and 


the Theras and Ramadutan left Valligama. After passing five days on the 


journey, they arrived at Jayavaddhananagara on me (1. 49) bee Uday] ek . 
the) waning (half of that month. as 

_ [When Bhiivanekabahu, king of ‘Ceylon, heard about tlie arrival a the 
Theras and ‘Ramadutan, he directed that'a welcome be accorded ‘to them. 


“After he had heard read out the letter inscribed on a tablet of gold] (1. 50) 


which His Majesty Ramadhipati | had sent and Ramadutan had conveyed, [he 
was delighted, and, in the manner indicated above, exchanged with the 
Theras and Ramadutan the compliments of friendship and civility,] (1.51) and 
caused a dwelling-place (and) food® ito -be arranged for our lords (the monks), 
and ‘for ‘Ramadutan (he arranged PYS ee eee ee ee ee + [On the following 
day] Ramadutan conveyed to the cletgy of (. 5) Ceylon Phe letter and 


1 Conjecturally restored ‘to preserve the continuity of the narrative, The ‘Pali has: * the king’s 


“brother.” - 


2 The meaning of (eee is not quite certain, “The ‘Pali ‘here ‘has:'* The soldiers of the rebel 
niinister remained ‘in hiding at various places between Valligama ‘and Jayavaddhananagara, and were 
a source of danger to the people who passed that way.” 

8 Saturdays’ 8th June 1476, This (as appears from’l. 53, infra): was. the first of the ‘two Savathe 


- which in a year of intercalation would bear the name Agadha,. The usual L.M, name ‘for Asdgha in 


an ordinary year is: Daguin or Dhaguin, and it ee a with the ‘Burmese Waso. 

4 Friday, 14th June. 1476. 
... B The text. has prndapat, which implies, food Pneived in the way of alms by a Buddhist ‘monk. 
This would not apply to the layman Ramadutan. It may, therefore, be conjectured that a ‘separate 


clause, referring tothe arrangements made for him, followed and has been lost, But. that ‘is not. quite 


certain, as the Pali deals with both together ‘in the: words therdnatn Rémadittassa ca pindapatan ‘ca 
paribbayah ca dépetvd, nivdsanatthanam addsi, which the - ‘English version ‘renter “mot ‘too ‘iparally' 


_ “and had arrangements made for their entertainment,” 


8 Very doubtful; see the last note. 


156 | -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  =——s[vo. 111 


présents sent by the king who was the Lord of Hathsavatinagara] (for the 
clergy of Ceylon?) Saying, ‘According to the wish of the Lord of the 
White Elephant, will we do,” the clergy gave a promise. 


[After a month had elapsed from that date,] our lords the clergy who 
had arrived first, and had gone to Anuradhapura,® arrived. [The King of 
Ceylon now] said*: “All the clergy who (I. 53) came (in) ships, these two 
parties,® (having now) come together, (it is) fitting that we should exhibit the 
Tooth Relic,” ‘and on Sunday, the first (day of the) waning (half) of the 
second (month of) Asadha* (he) disclosed? the Tooth Relic, and exhibited 
(it) to our lords, the two. parties of clergy, (1. 54) together with Ramadutan 
(and) Citradutan. Our lords having been enabled to worship the Tooth Relic 
(and) enabled to put (it) on their heads, the king of Ceylon, calling to mind 
the tenour of ® the letter which His Majesty Ramadhipati had sent (to him), 
put the Tooth Relic in the reliquary (1. 55) of ae which His Majesty had 
sent, and set up over it the white umbrella.® The golden alms-bowl, the 


vase, (and) the golden betel-box ” (he) set up ante the Tooth Relic (and) 


a These words are doubtfully read, in AL Sti “owing to the difference between Mén and English 
“syntax, the order of the translation has had to depart considerably from that of the text, 

2 Kn the Pali here follows the passage given in Ll, 45 ny supra, 

3 At Jayavaddhananagara, as stated at the end of the Pali passage referred to in the preceding 
note. It is evident from a comparison of the dates in Il. 51 and 53 that the interval could not have 
amounted to a month and did not exceed three weeks and a day at most, 

4 There is nothing in the Mén to correspond with these words till we get to | 53, but they have 
__ been introduced here, partly from the Pali, in order to. present the narrative in an order intelligible to 
’ the English reader, The Pali has thought ” instead of * said,” 
5 Or, * who came in these two plipe: 
6 Sunday, jth July: 1476, 


7 Lit, “ opened. The Pali, after giving ihe date, has : “and the day on which vassa residence 


was entered upon, he had the whole of the tower containing “the receptacle of the Holy Tooth Relic 
decorated, had a canopy of cloth put up, and had an offering made of scents, lights, incense, and 
flowers. The Mahatheras of Ceylon’ were set apart on one side, while the twenty-two Theras and 
their disciples, who had come by the two ships,” ‘together with Citradita and Ramadiita, were 


- invited to be present, The Holy Tooth Relic, contained in a golden receptacle, - was brought out in | 
order that the twenty-two Theras and Citradata and Ramadita might see and adore. ity -and make | 


offerings to it?” 
8 Lit, in accordance with. ” 


9 No doubt. the one mentioned in 1, 12, supra, stich. the. corresponding Pali Passage did not. 


mention, Here, however, it has: ‘and had a-white umbrella placed over it,” 

10 This box was mentioned, under a | different name, in 1. 14, supra. The reading is doubtful in 
both places. 
“I Or, “in front of.” 


PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS gy 


together with Ramadutan (and) Citradutin........... oan | 
Saying,’ (1. 56) ‘‘ Hereafter, according to the message (in) the letter of 
His Majesty Ramadhipati, that (which) pleases his heart, will we do,” the 
king of Ceylon gave orders to the Sinhalese ministers, and on the Kalyani 
River, in the bathing-place (where) the exalted Buddha had bathed, (he) 


caused (I. 57) a raft‘ to be built (and) a tower to be made" ee : 


ee (and) decorated. iy, GA | ne 
(He) requested our lord Vidagamathera_ to® select mons who were pure 


and free from any degree of? blame (or) reproach and who came of the 


succession of the clergy that dwelt in the Mahavihara ; [and he accordingly 


selected a Chapter of] (1. 58) twenty-four monks [such as] our lords 


Saddhammakittimahathera,’ [Vanaratanamahathera,] Paficaparivenavasimafgala- 


mahathera, (and) Siharajayuvarajacariyathera,? Having thus arranged the 


raft “ (and) selected (1.59) (the clergy ?)" .--- -2+4-+- (on the) eleventh 


1 This refers to Ramadutan’s party and Citradutan’s s party, not to the Sinhalese clergy. and the 


Mén clergy. 
4 The meaning of Jariah (which appears.to be the actual reading) is onic catsed: If it were 
lanat, that would mean “to practise,’? which does not seem to fit in here, Cf, D ts, F 45, 40, 52. 


8 This word does not actually occur till the next line. Here the Pali has: “ ‘Reverend Sirs, and, 


exhibited (them) to the two parties of monks, the oe Theras, ae 


Citrad@ta and Ramad@ta, may it please you to let-me know the purport of the letter of the Lord of | 


the White Elephant?’ asked the king of Ceylon, who saying to himself: ‘ Whatsoever may be the 
purport of the letter of the Lord of the White Elephant, I shall act accordingly,’ issued commands to 
the Ceylon ministers,”’ etc. This is curious, as he had heard both letters already (Il. 40, 49, supra), 

4 Or, “a bridge of boats,” as the English version of the Pali expresses it. It may be possible to 
construe our text, “the king of Ceylon gave orders to the Sinhalese ministers to cause a raft to-be 
built (and) a tower to be made,” ete,, “on. the tia River,” etc., which makes no ‘substantial 
difference in the sense, 

5 The Pali has: “A tower and a- canopy of cloth were erected, on the bridge, and various pind 


of hanging awnings were likewise put up,” 


6 Or, literally, “having requested. Vidagamathera, | selected,” ae But this must i mean 


that the actual selection was done by Vidagamathera, not by the king agree otherwise there is 
ho sense in the request. Cf, note 4, supra, for a somewhat similar case, aan 
7 The meaning of ayam mat is given as “measure, suitable quantity ; just as, while,” ve first - 

: word appears: to be- the Pali dydmo, “length,” «the - second perhaps matid, “ quantity,” or else 


mattam, though the spelling of the word rather supports Schmidt’s derivation from_ mati ka (Buck de 


_ Rajawan, p, 29). But the Pali here has cael paren itene es ganam, - 


-8 The Pali has Dhamma’, 


9 Here the Pali reading on the. stone ig as above, but . ‘the English version caronaly ‘his 
é Sthalardja°, 


10 The usual meaning oof sui is we village,” t but: the Akkharavidhdna of the Mén Abhidhdnap- ; 


padipika gives it as one of the equivalents of the Pali kullo, “raft.” Our Pali text. vee navd- 
sanghdtam, It must have been’ a sort of pontoon, 


- 1 Doubtful reading. The Pali he . eu thus had a bridge of. boats constructed and 2 a . 
chapter of ‘monks pectedt ay a 


ht $ 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  ——~—si[ Von. HE 


(day of the) mans (half) of the month of Asadha, the day (being a), 
Wednesday ’ eee Te [the king] caused the twenty-four Sinhalese 
clergy who. were to confer the upasampadé ordination to be invited to 
descend (to the raft), (and): requested them to have the: upasampadé@ ordin- 
ation conferred? [upon. the forty-four-Mé6n monks, In conformity with the 
- eustom followed by the Sinhalese Mahatheras of old, whenever monks from 
foreign countries were ordained, the forty-four M6n_ monks. were first 
established in the condition of laymen, and then admitted to the Order as 
sémaneras through the act of Vanaratanamahathera, who presented them with 
yellow robes, and accepted their profession of faith in the Three Refuges. 
On the night of Wednesday, five Theras, namely, Moggalanathera, 
‘Kumarakassapathera, Mahasivalithera, _Sariputtathera,. and Nanasagarathera 
were ordained. in the presence of the Chapter of the twenty-four monks, 
Dhammakittimahathera and Paficaparivenavasimafigalathera being. respectively, 
the upayjhéya and acariya,. On the night of Thursday, the s2th? ten 
Theras, namely, Sumanathera, Kassapathera, Nandathera, Rahulathera, 
Buddhavamsathera, Sumangalathera, Khujjanandathera, Sonuttarathera, 
Gunasigarathera, and Dhammarakkhitathera were ordained, Vanaratana- 
mahathera and Paficaparivenavasimafgalathera being respectively the upa7- 
phaya and acariya. In the course of the day on Friday, the 13th,* seven. 


Theras,; namely, Cillasumafigalathera, Javanapafifidthera, Cilakassapathera, 


- Cilasivalithera, Manisarathera, Dhammarajikathera, and Candanasarathera 
were ordained, Vanaratanamahathera and  Paficaparivenavasimangalathera 


being respectively the upajjhaya and dcartya. On Saturday, the r4th,®. 


the twenty-two young monks, who were the disciples of the Theras,, were 
ordained, Paficaparivenavasimaigalathera and | inerelayuyare pea hee 
being. respectively the upayjhaya and acariya. 

’ When the twenty-two Theras of the Mén- country had been ordained, 
the king: of pees aay them to a meal, at the end of which he 
eae 7 3 


at Woe. ipth ‘July. 1476, The Pali proceeds: “the king invited. the twenty-four ordaining 

‘monks, headed by Dhammakittimahathera, on Wednesday,” etc., “ and had. them: conducted- to’ the 

Brides of boats, and had the forty- ene monks of Ramaiiiadesa ordained by. them,” 

= End:of Face E.- 

8 Thursday, r8th July. re 
4 Friday, tgth July 1476. . 
5 Saturday, 20th July’ 14.76," > : 

& sa lala to the reading on the. stone, The English version has | Sthalardiat 


‘PART I]} MON INSCRIPTIONS | Sag 


F 


_ each of them [with the following articles three yellow’ saben a curtain arid 


a canopy manufactured in the country of Gocarati ; ; a leather mat. painted in 
variegated colours; a fan shaped like a palmyra fan but made of ivory 


carved by a skilful turner; and a betel-box. Then the king of Ceylon] (i 2) — 


said’ to our lords (the monks): ‘‘My lords, (members of the Order?) [you 
will return to Jambudipa and maintain the religion in splendour i in Harhsavati- 
pura If, Reverend Sirs, I present you with any other gifts, no reputation 
would accrue to me, because such gifts are subject to speedy decay and] 
(I ay ang (If?) I (confer upon you ?) the gifts that are called titles . . 
: . (they will last during the time that?) my lords (shall live?): . 

pide i as (Therefore): (1. 4) I desire to confer (these) gifts upon my lords.” 4 
[So saying,] the king of Ceylon conferred titles [on the eleven Theras’ who 


embarked in the same ship as Ramadutan, namely,] (1.5) to our lord 
-Mogallananathera (he) gave’ [the title of Sirisafghabodhisami,]* to [our] 


lord [Kumarakassapathera] (he) gave the title of Kittisirimeghasami,, (J. 6) 
[to our lord] Nanasagarathiera [he gave the title of Parakkamabahusami,] to 
Buddhavamsathera (he) gave the: title of Buddhaghosasami, [to Nandathera 


he gave] the title of Sihaladipa[visuddhasami,}’ (1.7) to Rahulathera 


[he gave the title of Gumaratanadharasami,]; to’ Sumafgalathera (he): gaive 
the: title. of Jinalatikarasami, [to Dhammarakkhitathera: he gave]! the title — 
of, Ratanamilisami, (1. 8) [to Cilalsumafgalathera [he gave the title of 
Saddhammatejasami;] to Kassapathera (he) gave the title of Dhammarama- 
sami, (and) [to Manisdrathera he gave] the title of Bhivanekubahusami, | 
(:.9): Having (given: these’ titles to the eleven Theras. who had embarked 
on?) (1.9) Ramadutan’s ship, (he) a also gave’ titles. to. the eleven: Theras 
(who had embarked on?) * Citradutan's.ship. [To Maha Gsivalithera he gave] 


1 Pegu, 


2 The Pali has Ae dissolution,” and ‘proceeds: «Ty herefore, I shall now confer titles on you, If ms 
‘Reverend Sirs, this is done, such: titles. would last throughout | your lifetime.” : 


8 This, and the other passages in square brackets. down to 1.13, tnfva, represent Tacuna in our: 
text which it has been possible to restore with practical certainty by the aid of tthe Pali’ version, 
though the Pali order is different and the wording is much more concise. 

4 Conjecturally restored on the analogy on: the wording. of. the next sentence, . 

5 omcetncal asa ocho: fit, the, Contents, tk 


160 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vo. m1 


the title of [Tilokagurusami], (I, 10) to Sariputtathera. (he) gave {the 
title of Siri]vanaratanasimi, to Sumanathera (he) gave the title of 
Mangalasami,? [to Ctilakassapathera he gave | the title of Kalyanitissa- 
[sami], (Il. 11) to Citilanandathera (he) gave [the title of Candanagirisami], to 
Sonuttarathera (he) gave the title of Siridantadhatusami, to [Gunasagara- 
thera] (he) gave the title of Vanavasitissa,” (I1..12) to Javanapafifiathera [he 
"gave the title of Ratanalaikarasimi], to Ciilasivalithera ® (he) gave the title 
of Mahadevasami, to Dhammarajathera‘* (he) gave the title of Udumbaragiri- 
simi, (and) (. 13) to Candanasarathera [he gave] the title [of Cilabhaya- 
tissasami]. | a | 

- The king of Ceylon having thus addressed our lords,® our lords the 
‘eleven Theras together with Ramadut&n [left Jayavaddhananagara and returned 


to Valligama.] (1. 14) Our lords the eleven Theras who had embarked 


on Citradutan’s ship. ...... . having adored the Holy Foot-print, which 
is on the top of the Samantaktta hill,* [returned to] the city of Jayavaddha- 
_ “nagara. | Pern een | ee — 
. [The eleven Theras,] (1.15) who had come down to the port: of 
~ Valligama, [embarked on Wednesday, the second day of the waxing half of 
the month of Bhadrapada,” and] returning home, arrived [at the mouth of the 
Yoga River ® on Thursday, ] the second (day) of the waning (half) of (that ?) 
month ........ [When] (1.16) His Majesty Ramadhipati received the 


tidings that our lords the eleven Theras who had embarked in Ramadutan’s 


ship [had arrived at thé mouth of the Yoga River, |® (L 17) (he) said : 
i [Considering that] (it, was) I who urged [these Theras to visit Ceylon,] 
(and that) our lords did go to Ceylon [and that they are the inaugurators of 
the upasampadé ordination,] (1. 18) it (would) not (be) proper [to send any. of 
my officials] to meet (and) welcome our lords. [It would, indeed, be appro- 
“priate that] I [should] myself [welcome them on my return from the town of 


Rangoon,]® (1. 19) after having presented the cetiya of the Hair Relics of : 


1 The Pali has-Maxgalatherasami. 
8 The Paliadds stm. tee - eee 
8 The Pali.(on-the stone) has °szvilé° ; in the English version, *stvalts : 
4 The Pali (onthe stone) has °rdjaka° ; in the English version, °rajika’, 
6 The Pali has no equivalent for the foregoing clause. : pte - 
oe Literally “stone,” or ‘rock.’ In actual fact it is a high mountain. < 
- 17 Wednesday, 21st August 14766... a | . 
8 See E 38 n, The date is Thursday, 5th September 1476. ee ae 
9 In the Pali called Zigumpanagara. The Mén equivalent (1. 20, infra) is dun Dgun, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 161 


the exalted living? Buddha [with a large bell made of brass, weighing 3,000 
tolas|* When I...........:+.%% [Agreeably with this thought, he 
wrote a letter, saying: ‘As I am]* (1. 20) going to the town of Rangoon, 
(let?) our lords the eleven Theras (go and stay a while?) in the town of 
Rangoon.” [And after making arrangements for their entertainment, he] 
(Il. 21) caused our lords to be disembarked from [their sea-going] vessel [and © 


conveyed to the town of Rangoon in river] boats. — 


[Meanwhile the eleven Theras, who embarked in the same ship as — 


_ Citradutan, missed’ the appointed time favourable for returning to the Mén 


country, because the king of Ceylon had said to them:] (1. 22) “ My (lords?), - 
[it is my desire to send an emissary to Ramadhipatimaharaja, the Lord of: 
the White Elephant,] (1.23) with presents ...... (which ?) I. will send,°. 
[including a religious gift in the shape of an image of the Holy Tooth 
Relic, embellished with:a topaz and a diamond, valued at a hundred phalas, 
which were constantly worn by my father, Parakkamabahumaharaja. When 


“the vessel, now being fitted out for my emissary, is ready, an opportunity 


will be afforded to her of sailing in the company of. your ship. May it 
please your Reverences to postpone your departure till then!” The eleven 
Theras and Citradutan, therefore, waited for the emissary of the king of 
Ceylon and anchored their ship at the port of Kalambu. - Meanwhile] (I. 24) 
a violent wind, [called garé@dha,] arose [and sank in the sea the large 


- 1 Explained in the Pali as hair relics of Buddha ‘‘obtained during his life-time,” in accordance 
with the well-known traditional story which localized the home of the two merchants Taptsa and 
Bhallika in Lower Burma and the enshrining of the hair relics in the Shwedagén Pagoda, Rangoon. 
The Pali here. mentions the intended date of the presentation of the bell, viz. the full-moon. day of 


- Asvayuja (Thursday, 3rd October 1476)- Seel. 47, infra. . 


2 There seems to be some doubt as to what this weight amounted to,. Taw Sein Ko in his additional 


notes (Some Remarks on the Kalydyt Inscriptions, LA.. Vol. XXIV, p. 332) says 120,000 viss, which 
~ seems unduly large, . According to Childers (s.v. tuld, in his Pali Dictionary) thé tola contained 100 


phalas. We know from E 14, supra, that a phala (in the Pali version of our inscription) was equiva- 
lent to a tical (dater, L.M, dakew) of which there are 100 to. the viss, Therefore, according to this 
reckoning, the bell weighed 3,000 viss. The point cannot be settled by actual weighing, as the bell was 
removed by Philip de Brito and lost at sea (7.4., 1.c.). ns ag) ny SG. 

8 Probably our text differed somewhat in order from the Pali and the sentence went on: “ have 
presented the bell,” etc, é ae ; ee oes 

4 The Pali has: “visiting the town of Rangoon, may it please the Venerable Ones to remain in 

that town!” Our text is in bad ‘preservation here, but from the little that remains it is clear that 
the sense intended is much the same, ; ae oe we ee 

5 This clause does not fit into the framework of the Pali text, which has “with. presents 
including,” etc., but that is .probably. only due to a slight difference of order in our text. It , is, 
however, very doubtful how much of the following details were represented in our text. 9 00 

Ii . ‘ ; a : % : Core os : hu aeen. 


an -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. Ht 
r : ‘ e : 
sea-going vessel, in which passengers had already embarked. When the 


king of Ceylon received the intelligence that Citradutan’s ship had foundered _ 


im the sea, he said thus to the Theras and Citradutin: “If you have no 
ship, you might embark in the same ship as my emissary, and] (I. 253) 
(return home” ?). | [Accordingly, ‘the Theras and Citradutan, together with 
his. attendants, embarked in the same ship as the emissary of the king of 
Ceylon and left the port of Kalambu. 


Sailing out to mid- -ocean, _ the ship continued hes ee (1. 26) (end ; 
reached ?)* [the Strait of Silla, which lies between the island of Ceylon and 


Jambudipa.? After three nights had elapsed since the ship left the port of 
-Kalambu, she was wrecked by a violent storm, and, immersed in sea- water, 
she remained fast between the jutting peaks of rocks. All the passengers, 
realizing their inability to extricate the ship from amidst the rocks, collected 
all the timber and bamboos that happened to be in her, and,| (l.27) (con- 


structing ?) fa raft of them, and embarking . on it, crossed to the coast of 


hs Jatabndips, which was close by. 


Having: lost the presents] (I. 28). which the king of Ceylon had given 
(him), ‘[the emissary of the king of Ceylon returned to the island of Ceylon. 


Fhe Theras and Citradutan, however, travelled on foot to Nesapaviener: and — 


there visited the site of the Padarikarama] (1. 29) (monastery ?) 
(and) (were enabled to see?)® ... . [and worshipped the image of 
Buddha in a cave constructed by etiiead of the Maharaja of Cinadesa 
on the spot, on the sea-shore, where] (I. 30) the Tooth Relic of the exalted 
Buddha was deposited® ‘[in the course of its transit to the island of Ceylon 


in charge of Dandakumara. and Hemamdala, who were husband and wife. 
_ Thence they travelled on to the port of Navutapattana. At this port resided | 


‘Malimmarakaya and Pacculiya,” two intendants of the port, who annually 
sent two ships for trading purposes (to the Mén country), In Sices so, 
: ane sent ae for Rese dee ates and] (l 3) (the. king A: 


p Ft “The Pali has through,” ieee se The inaititand: of India. 
oo 8 These words are not in the Pali, ..° 4 Negapatam, — >. 

“geen 6 These words are. not represented in the Pali, which has; “ monastery, and tie visited? ‘ete, 
 @ F am not sute that the doubtfully read pdok can bear. this meaning (which I have taken over 


" feom the Pali version). Normally the word means “to load,”’-and would apply rather to the act of — 
putting the relic: on. the ship that was to take it to Ceylon, _ The whole of. this passage (IL. 26-43) is 


almost entirely obliterated in our text, 


. % These are, apparently, § the fames ott te abate net Malimparakays « and siesta as sin : 


. the Singlish yersions 


PART UU] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 163 


(having heard the Anas > caused oe to. come os, ep ep ete as 
Merron Ch) an ee ee 7 ae . 
[Owing to this circumstance, they] (le a) ee our deids 2) iced, clothing, 


and a residence, and treated them with much reverence. Citradutan was 
likewise provided with clothing, food, and lodging. The intendants of the 


port then said: “Reverend. Sirs, when our ships start from this] (I. 34) (port | 
of Navuta ?),? [may it please] (our lords?) [to embark in them in order to be 
once more near the Lord of the White Elephant!” Accordingly, the four 
Theras, namely, Tilokaguruthera, Ratandlahkarathera, | Mahddevathera, and 


Ciilabhayatissathera, and their four disciples resided with them. The remaining» : 


seven Theras, however, saying: ‘‘We shall. embark, together with the seven 


‘monks, in a ship at Komdlapattana,” went and resided at that port. 


On Wednesday,] (1. 35) (the fourth?) (day of the) waxing (half of the) 
month of Vaisakha, [in the year 839° of the Common Era, the three Theras, 
namely, Tilokaguruthera, Ratandlahkarathera, and Mahdadevathera embarked 
in the ship belonging to Malimmarakadya, while Cilabhayatissathera embarked 
in the ship belonging to Pacculiya, and they left Navutapattana. Of these 


 Theras,] (1. 36) our lords, [the three who embarked in the same ship, reached — 


the mouth of the river, which has its source in the Nagarasi* Mountain, on 
Friday, the twel Ifth day of the waning half of the month of Vaigakha,® and] 


(1. 37) our lords [arrived at Kusimanagara ® on] the first- (day of the) waxing 


(half} of the month of Jyestha, the day (be eing) [Tuesday.” - Calabhayatissa- 
thera, howeyer,®: reached the mouth of the river, which has its source in the 


- Nagardsi Mountain, on Saturday, the thirteenth day of the waning half of the 
month of Vaisakha,? and arrived at Kusimanagara on] (I. 38) the fourth (day 
“OF. waxing thal) of the month of Jyesthe, the hoe (being) ee ie 


1 1 am not sure “that The fitted ee ae into-their proper place, They have no. precise — 
equivalent in the Pali, which, after “and ?’ proceeds: “thus, because of their having exchanged with 


him, the compliments of friendship and soyility they conceived feelings of great respect and nee 


for him. Owing,” ete. 
2 This appears to be. the spelling: i in our text, but it is a doubtfat reading anyhow, 
3 Fhe Pali version gives full Parmolars: ‘of the date, which was Wednesday, 16th eed rT 
4 Negrais. - . . 8 Friday, oth May 1477+ 
6 Basseins : Coo Tuesday, 13th May 1477. 
8 From this point there'i is a “considerable divergence between the. English version’ of the Pali atid: 


the actual record on the stone itself, the former omitting everything from “reached * to four. 


monks,” | | have endeayoured to fill ne facuna from the Penscripe of Ib = a4 af the Reverse Face 
of the second atone... : 


# aatwriey, roth May tT Alone Helga, Ohh May lan 


ae 


164 __ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — [ VoL, m1 


Fant 


{Thence, these four monks arrived at Hathsavatinayara’ on Tuesday, the 
thirteenth day of the waxing half of the month of Asddha.]* (I 39) a ican. & 


8 


ck re ee cr a ce ee er a ee ee a eS eca a re) Cr es ee eae 6 


[Of the seven Theras, who,] (1. 40) ee with [the seven monks, 
went and resided at Komalapattana,] (1. 41) (our lord Mafgalathera alone?) 
{accompanied by his own attendant monk, as well as by those of Vanaratana- 

thera, and Siridantadhatuthera, embarked in a ship commanded by Binda and 
left . Komalapattana on Wednesday, the new-moon day of the month of 
Bhadrapada, in the year 841 of the Common Era. They reached the mouth 
of the river, which has its source in the Nagardsi Mountain, on Friday, the 
first day of the waxing half of the month of Karttika,® and, touching at 
Kusimanagara on Monday, the eleventh,® eventually arrived at Hathsavatinagara 
om Friday, the fourteenth day of the waning half of the month of Karttika,’ 
The remaining six Theras and the four young monks had died, as they were 
unable to obviate the consequences of demerit and the course of the law of 


mortality, to which all living bemgs are subject. Alas! “ Wn eNEe is. 


material is subject to change and dissolution.” 

On Thursday, the eighth day of the waxing half of the month of Kévayuja i 
in the year 838 of the Common Era, Ramadhipatimahardja, with the object 
of presenting a great bell to the ceftya of the Hair Relics,® embarked on a 
barge surmounted by a golden spire, and, escorted by a number of boats, 
headed by — golden boats, such as the zdavimana, proceeded to the city of 
Rangoon. On Tuesday, the thirteenth day of the waxing half of the month 


of Agvayuja,] (when ?) (1. 44) (His Majesty Ramddhipati arrived at Rangoon ?), - 


[he invited the eleven Theras who] (1.45) had [embarked in the same] ship 


as. Ramadutan and had | returned from Ceylon and were in the town of 


i Pegu. 
-% Tuesday, 24th June 1477.. This date is anomalous: one would expect Tuesday to be the 14th 


day ‘of the waxing half of this month, not the 13th (which would normally be Monday), Probably | 


the weekday is right in this case. The Pali text, right or wrong, is however supported. by the stone. 

3 As this line is entirely illegible, it is impossible to fit it into the framework of the Pali, which, 
_however,.. ‘runs. on. as. shown. The same applies to ll. 42, &® of wien the numerals have, therefore, 
been omitted. ; 

4 Wednesday, tsth ‘September 1479. 

5 Friday, 15th October 1479. 

’ 6 Monday, asth October 1479. 

7 Friday, rath November 1479. _ 

8 Or Asvina, L.M, wah, The date i is ‘Thursday, ne SAape 1476 : 

9 The Shwedagin pagoda, Gees ae td Tuesday, rst October 3476, 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS st” 165 


Rangoon, (and) gave gifts by way of alms food ! ae 7 Be  Hotvare 
(cloths ?) . et a ee ... (1.46) two mats? each. Rau Reaee we ee LO 
our lords, and having given (them) a friendly welcome,’ (he) had our lords 
sent on (their) way to their dwelling-place. Then His Majesty had [grand] ‘ 
festivals held for three days, and on the holy day of the full moon of the 
month (1. 47) (of Agvayuja ?), the day (being) Thursday,® (he) (went up to 
present® the bell?) (at) the foot of the cetiva of the Hair Relics of the 
exalted Buddha, On Friday, the 1st of the waning (half of the mene His 
Majesty feasted all the clergy of Rangoon. Oe Sie eae - 
His Majesty, (1.48) (having made arrangements, caused 2) vifts to he given. 
On Sunday, the 3rd of the waning (half of the month),? His Majesty, by way 


of showing reverence and veneration, had eleven boats - prepared (and) 


decorated in order to convey our lords the eleven Theras.” On Monday, 
(early in the morning, ?) (1. 49) His Majesty embarked 4. our lords (also) 
embarked,” (but) on reaching the landing-place of the Mahabudharipa ® 7” our 
lords stopped” (there). His Majesty Ramadhipati, on Friday, the eighth (day 
of the) waning (half) of the month of Agvayuja," (1. 50) reached His Majesty’s 


abode at Pegu. His Majesty having arrived at Pegu, on the tenth (day) of © 


1 The Pali has: “and served them with various kinds of delicious food. He likewise presented 
each of them with two couples of cloths for their ticlvara robes.” The meaning of lasiah has not 


_ been determined : cf..D 15, E 55, F 49, 52. 


2 Meaning doubtful, Cf. H 39 n. 
3 Cf. E 41, F 54. : ts 
4 So in the Pali. The precise sense of canak has not been determined, ind even the reading is 


not quite certain. It may be connected with the cnak of I D 49. The L.M, sanak, sanak, snak is 


used in the sense of “wedding.” Cf. M 2a. 5 
6 The month is not named but must be ‘Aivayuja. The date is Thursday, 3rd October 1476,. 
_ § The Pali has: “the great bell was conveyed to the be aes of the eé¢tiya of the Hair Relics 
in order that it might be presented to it,” 
7 Friday, 4th October 1476, 
8 The Pali has: “ “and the king.commanded. that largess be given to paupers, way-farers, and 


beggars.” 


9 Sunday, 6th October 1476, 
30 The Pali has: “eleven boats were adorned i in 2 reverent manner, and ministers. were sent to 


‘escort the Theras. Having thus made preparations for escorting the Theras, Ramadhipatiraja left 


Tigumpanagara on the morning of Monday, the fourth day, and, reaching in due course Hamsa- 
vatinagara on Friday the eighth day, entered the bejewelled palace, which was his home.” The Monday 


_ is the 7th October 1476, 


ll The text has tuin tluv, | Perhaps this means “came up (stream),” i.e, up the Pega River. . 
12 Explained as the Kyaikpun pagoda near Pegu, or (tore probably) the A eaioagls recumbent 


: image of Buddha between the Kalyanisimd and the Mahaceti at Pegu. 


18 The meaning of lasah is undetermined, Ct. D 15 E 55: F 45) 52. 
uu Friday, 11th October 1476. ae 


6604 =——*S«SBPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA =f vo. at 
‘the waning (half of the month), the day (being) Sunday, had ferry~boats ® 
‘prepared (and) decorated as was most fitting, with many xylophones,® (and) 


ordered a number of leading chiefs (1. 5!) to go down (and) welcome (and) 
(escort ?) our lords. 


When our lords had ee at His Majesty's abode, our Gta: 


| (anpacked and produced ?)* the sandalwood (powder which had surrounded ?)* 
the Tooth Relic of the exalted Buddha, branches. of the Bodhi ficus, 
Aeaves of the Bodhi. ficus, (and) seeds of the. (I. 82) Bodhi ficus which were 
fit for planting, (and) our lords - presented (them) to His Majesty*; 
a treatise’ relating how King ‘Sirisatghabodhi-Parakkamabahu purified the 
| religion, -how King Vijayabahu purified the religion, (and) how King Parakka- 
mabahu (1.53) purified the religion, which (treatise) had been composed in 


the language of the people of Ceylon (and) which our lords (the clergy) of . 
‘Ceylon had given’ (them), our lords (also) presented to His ea eg 


a wiiting® Lee containing 2005 22, (with instructions ?) . ae 
our lords ‘the clergy of Ceylon (1.54) with the king of- Ceylon: named 


- Bhiivanekababu, our lords {also) presented to His Majesty. Fis. Majesty 


and our lords having thus exchanged friendly greetings,» ... 2... . . our 
lords the eleven Theras (. 55) severally, os king) ordered a snumber of 


q Sunday, 13th October 1476. . 
. 3 Presumably Rando’ is the L, M, khadut? : ; but the identification is: not t absolutely certain, 

. 3 Perhaps specifically xylophones, as described by Haswell, s.v. ¢wia twutk] But it may here 
é represent musical instruments in eoneraty the Pali has: “gongs and many other kinds of musical 
instruments,” : 

4 The reading is doubtful here. ; 

8 The reading is. doubtful, The Pali has: “a casket containing the sandalwood powder, with 
which the Holy :Tooth Relic was-besmeared, an image of the. Holy Tooth Relic; some branches, 


‘leaves, and seeds of the. Bodhi tree ”; etc. It looks as. if our text had inadvertently omitted some 


portion of this list of things. - Possibly instead of bui% we should read buim, “i image” (Pali bimbam), 
and presume that after the doubtfully read tuit the words dhdt gnih kyak tray have been omitted. 
6 The meaning of laiah is undetermined. Cf. D 15, E55, F 45, 49. 
7 J am not sure of the precise meaning of katiwat, It may possibly have some relation to the 


katikavatidnam which the Pali has in the next clause (a clause which is, however, either fragmentary 


or. omitted in our text), But the sense “a book of covenants” hardly fits in here, | 


ee 8 "THe Pali has: a treatise setting forth the covenants entered ‘into, at the solicitation of the said 
kings; by the clergy for the observance of the Order; a letter sent by the Sinhalese Theras and @ 


book recording the covenants entered into by them; a book of gdthas written’ by Vanaratanamaha- 
thera; and a letter from Bhivanekabahu, king of Ceylon, ”?. Tt doesnot appear clearly from the 
fragments of. gar text, how. much of all this was represented i in it; but certainly not ane whole., - For 
“instructions ” we should perhaps read “ information” 

9 CE E4r, F 46. The Pali has; “ Ramadhipatimaharaja aucoried a gracious greeting - to the 
eleven ‘Theras, and commanded ‘his ministers to escort each of. them. to his monastery with many 


~ struments.” 


flags and streamers | fying, and - with the: meee, of “Bongs and Bae other kinds of musical 


rs 


PART 11] - MON INSCRIPTIONS | a 


leading chiefs, with flags, (and) with many drums‘ (and) xylophones,* His 
Majesty . bee Na ee ee Be Se Ok Sicha His Melee (gave 2)" 

“[Then His Majesty Ramadhipati foflacted in this wise : « The ceven 
Theras have received the Pus upasampada ordination; but as in this land of 
ours there is no pure simd,' how can these Theras perforin the ceremonies of 
the uposatha, the pavdrané, the upasampadé, and so on? (Let) us seek a 
gamakhetta that can be guarded (and) ‘cause these Theras to consecrate 
(thereon) a pure baddhasimé.. Then these Theras will be able to perform tee 


ceremonies of uposathé, pavérand, upasampada, ‘and so on.’ 


His Majesty,® having thus reflected, went (and) investigated a gamabhetta 
which was on the edge of the forest and belonged to a minister named 
Narasitra, (and) having taken note of the results of (his) enquiries, upon a 
site which was near the orchard® of the minister Narastra His Majesty 
caused a clearing to be made and a design to be prepared for consecrating 
a stmé, As regards the boundaries of the gémakhetta with (the land of) the 
minister Narasiira, inasmuch as it was not desired that there should be » 
confusion with any other gémakhetias that surrounded it, when (they) had 
trenched (it) around completely, (they) had to clear away Eig Toots of trees 


. 1The precise meaning of élo’. has not been determined, - “Tt is either a specific - desighation of . 
some particular kind of drum (phat) or else the name of some other musical instrument used i in 
conjunction with drums, Cf. G 33, and VIII A6, IX Ato, F34, G4, H 46, Ks. 

2 Or “ musical instruments,” in general. Cf. 1. 50 ny supra, 
8 1 am unable to restore the rest of this line. Here ends Face F, so far as it is decipherable 
from the ink-im pressions available; and here follows the modernized. copy of the text contained in the 


_. MSS, mentioned in § 71 on which the rest of the translation is based, in so far as the text on the 
stones themselves is deficient. 


4 The Pali, instead of. the preceding clause, due : In. this city of Harhsavati there does ‘net 


‘exist any pure baddhasima, nor any mahdnadt possessing the characteristics of a madi, nor any 


‘mahdjdiassara ‘possessing the charantenstics of a jatassara, nor any gimakhetta whose purification 
can easily be effected,’ 

5 The Pali has; “ Ramadhipatiraja accordingly sent his attendants to search for a gdmakhetta 
answering the description. During the course of their search, the king’s attendants found on ‘the 
skirts of a forest to the west of a great cetiya, called Mudhava, a g@makhetta belonging to the 


- minister Narastira, which was small and could easily be guarded; and they reported accordingly to 


the king. Ramadhipatiraja personally inspected the site, and considered that it was a. gamakhetta - 
which could easily be guarded and was an appropriate spot: for’ the consecration of a simd, The 
ground of a selected place on ‘that land was cleared of jungle, the site of the proposed sima was 


marked out, and -a house was built in the middle’ of that site.” The inside and outside of that © ~ 


‘house, as well as the site of the proposed sima and a selected place outside that site, were ‘smeared - 


_ with cow-dung, -Then a fencing was erected enclosing the whole place on its four sides, and: four 


openings: with doors were constructed.” ‘For Mudhava, or Shwe Maw Daw, cf, Kin. . 
®-Or, according. to the ordinary modern meaning of the words, “areca-nut ” ee “betelonat” 


a a a This ° fis met, hierevery jerome in the Pali weRviOn 


168 ~~ -:~*-EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 111 


(and) the roots of bamboos’ (on the ground) below which would be apt to 
cause confusion, and also to lop, cut (and) entirely clear away branches of 
trees (and) branches of bamboos.above which would be apt to cause such 
confusion. On the site where (they) made a design for consecrating the 
simé@, within the building and also on the land outside the building which 
was fitting, within the boundary stones and also outside the boundary stones, 
a general clearance had to be made (and) water poured into the trench,’ 
_ making a wet ditch. Outside, the land being enclosed on the four quarters, 
(they). put doors, On the west of the site where the s¢md@ was to be con- 
secrated (they) made a monastery for the eleven Theras to come (and) dwell 


in, a refectory, privy,-and a place for bathing, Then (they) invited the. 


eleven Theras (and) brought (them) to dwell on the site. 


During these preparations His Majesty again reflected, in this Wise 


“ All these eleven Theras together with (their) eleven disciples have been 
caused to receive the pure upasampadd ordination, (and) when we have 
made a permanent® simd, purifying it because (we) wish it to be the root of 
religion, we desire that for the future it shall be perfectly pure and that it 
Shall make a pure ufasampadé@ ordination. But in so far as there exists 
(among these clergy) any occasion of censure or reproach, we assuredly do 
not desire that such a monk should be allowed to enter into these 
ecclesiastical ceremonies, Certainly we desire that only such clergy as are 
‘ clearly free from censure or reproach should be allowed to enter into these 
ceremonies.‘ Having reflected thus, (he) made enquiries, and upon enquiry 
ascertained that among the eleven Theras there was in one Thera a small 
fault, clearly not a. great one, (dating) from before his reception of the 
upasampada ordination, but. still there were in him grounds of censure and 
reproach of a trivial nature, while among the junior monks, though there 
were no other intentional sins, yet there was some degree of censure and 
_teproach. (Accordingly) the one Thera who was involyed in censure, and 


also . his disciple, and; four other junior monks who were. involved i in censure,- | 


Le Trees and bamboos” is a stock term for juneis vegetation in n gétieral. 
2-The” Pali, ‘which differs somewhat in its order from the above, states that “a small trench, 
about a span in depth and the same in width, was dug.” 


8 Or, following the B reading, “and now when we have made a simd. ” - 


4 The Pali, though agreeing in substance with the foregoing, differs in. some details, particularly 


in the conclusion “because the inclusion of monks who are not free from censure and reproach, 


though they may have received the. ‘pure form of the ypasampadd ordination, in the Chapter a 


eonapcrating a simd, would in after times afford matter for. obj jection to the enemies. of the religions’ 


* 


PART it] ~=~=~—~—S MON INSCRIPTIONS 6 


these six clergy were excluded. Ten Theras and six junior monks who were 


their disciples, these sixteen only (were adinitted as) having an upasampade 
ordination that was pure and being themselves free from censure or reproach. 
Thus did His Majesty Ramadhipati decree. 

When it was near the time for-the consecration of the s¢ed@, our lord 
Gunaratanadharathera* said that he was sick and together with his disciple - 
Sathapala* returned (and) dwelt in his former monastery. Our lords Siri- 
saighabodhisami, Kittisirimeghasimi, Parakkamab3husami, Buddhaghosasami, 
Jindlahkarasami, Ratanamalisami, Saddhammatejasami, Sudhammaradmasami, . 
and Bhavanekabahusami, nine senior monks, and our lord Sirisahghabodhi- 
simi’s disciple Safgharakkhita, our lord Kittisirimeghasdmi’s disciple Dhamma- 
vilisa, our lord Buddhaghosasimi’s disciple Uttara, our lord Jinalankdrasami’s 


‘disciple Uttama, and our lord Saddhammatejasami’s disciple Dhammasiara, 


these fourteen monks, dwelt in the monastery which was built on the west of 


the site where the simd was to be’ consecrated. 


At the tim: when the stm@ was to be consecrated, His Majesty 
reflected in this wise: “If at any place where it is'desired to consecrate a 
sima@ an ancient simé does not exist at that place, the new stmdé (which) they 
consecrate comes into existence; but if at that place there exists an ancient 
simd, then by reason of the occurrence of the faults of overlapping and con- 
junction the new s?m@ which is consecrated does not thus come into  exist- 
ence. That being so, on a place where it is desired to consecrate a new 
(one), it is proper first to perform the act of desecration: ‘ (then) the new 


_ sima which is consecrated will certainly come into existence.”*> Having thus 


if . 


reflected, His Majesty Ramadhipati] 


11 have followed the spelling of these proper names as given in the Pali version... 

% B has Rafap@la. This disciple’s name is not given in the P4li version, 

3.The word siiah has been taken as equivalent to L.M. taiuh. _ 

4 That is with a view to putting an end to any possibly existing ancient s#md.~ . 

6 The Pali here proceeds as follows: “ The king accordingly had preparations made for. perform- 


_ ing the ceremony of desecrating the (existing) sim@ in accordance with the procedure expressly laid 


down in the atthakathd,. ‘Monks, an avippavdsasimd may thus be desecrated by means of the 
tictvara,’ There are certain conditions to be observed by a monk desecrating a simd. The following 
are the conditions. Standing on a khandasimd, a mahdsimad, called avippavdsasima, should not be. 
desecrated ; and similarly, standing on a mahdsimd, called avippavdsastma, a khandasima should not 
be desecrared. It is only when standing on a khagdasimd that another khagdasimd may be. 


- desecrated; and the same rule applies mutatis mutandis to the other class of sima@, A simd is 
desecrated for two reasons, namely, (i) in order to make a mahdsima of one which is originally a 


khuddakasima, with a view that its area may be extended; (ii) in order to make a khuddakasimd Of 
one which is originally a. mahdsima, Hola a view that sites for monasteries a be arnated to piuvatuce 


170 _- BPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA von. mt 


G 


reflected [again, in this wise: “The conditions of the act of desecrating a 
sima@ are exceedingly difficult to fulfil. If (one) knows (that -it is) the site of 


the existence of an ancient £handasima (or) the site] (1.2) of the existence | 


[of - an ancient maahasima, the ancient] sim@ [being known, the desecration of 
‘that ancient simd@ is effected (and) the new simé which is to be made can 
be made.J? (1.3) If (one) [does not] know (that it is) [the site of the 
existence of an ‘ancient shandasim@ (or) the site of the existence of an 


> ancient mahasimé,) the desecration of the ancient s#md is not effected (and) 


the new sim@ [cannot be made.’ If (one) is aware of the site of an ancient 
khandasima (or) the site of an ancient mahdsimé, it is right to desecrate 
(it)) (lo 4) (and) right to make a new simd; (but) if (one) is not aware (of 


it), it is neither right. to per oian desccnoh aor yet is it right (1.5) to make © 


anew s#ma@. [Thus is it stated in the Atthakatha: ‘On a site where] it is 
desired to make a new szmé, if the fact of the existence of an ancient simé 


is unknown, [it is impossible] to perform the desecration of (such) ancient . 
simaG so as effectually to desecrate (1.6) (it) fand. it Is amipossitie -effectually _ 


‘to make a new simd. ake cad 


~ 1 Qr, following B, “come into existence.” a 

2 In place of the foregoing passage the Pali has; “ If, at the place of desecration, the existepce 
of both khandasima and mahasimd, called avippavadsasima, is known, a sim&@ may be desecrated or 
consecrated. . If, however, the existence of a khandasima is known, but not that of a mahdstmd, called 
_auippavasasima, a sima may be desecrated or. consecrated. If, on the other hand, the existence of a 


mahdsimd, called avippavasasima, is known, but not that of a khandasimd, it is only “by standing on 


- such places as the premises of a cetiya, a bodhi tree, or an uposatha hall, which are undoubtedly out-— 


side (the limits of an avippavdsasima), that a sim& may be desecrated ; but by no means can it be 
consecrated, f, however, a sim@ is consecrated, there will be a junction of stmds, and. a vihdvasimd 


> will be transformed into an avihiirasimad, ‘Therefore, the ceremony of desecration should not be pers 
formed. If “the existence of both kinds of s#mds is unknown, neither desecration nor consecration 


should be effected. A sim is invalidated by means of the kammavaca, or through the declension of 
the religion, or’! because ‘those, who do not know a sima, are incompetent to recite the _kammavacil, 
Therefore, desecration should not be effected, Because it is said that it is only when (the different 


classes of stmds)- are well-known, that desecration or consecration may be effected, monks desiring to | 


desecrate a simd, and who are aware of either. the existence of an ancient simd or its extent, may, ‘by 
. stationing there duly qualified monks, desecrate an ancient sim@ or consecrate a new one, The 

interpretation appears to be that, if the extent of an ancient sima is rece, that Sima cannet we 
‘desecrated, nor can a new one-be ‘soneacuated,” : 


phe 


or ae ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS > “aH 


“But in the Vimativinodani (it) is stated thus: ‘When (I. 7) it ‘happens 
that the existence of an ancient #handasima@ (or) the boundaries of an 


ancient thandasimé, {(or) the existence of an ancient mahdsima (or) the 


boundaries of an ancient mahdsimd@, are not known,] if both within the limits 


of the vthdrasima and outside the limits of the wiharasima,. a site of a. 


stone’s throw [is entirely marked out into plots, each of the size of a bedstead, 
and at all the plots] (1. 8) five (or) six monks with the sammazdead, having gone 
(and) stationed themselves in a continuous series, perform (the act of) desecration, 
[if there should be an ancient sim@] on the site where (they were) stationed, 


(1:9) would [not that ancient simé be effectually desecrated?] In the matter 


of the desecration of this s7mdé, (it is) the ability to be stationed upon. the 
site of the ancient s¢m#@ that constitutes [the essential requirement: the fact 
of knowing of the existence of an ancient khandasima (or)] (1.10) an ancient 


-mahasimé, (or knowing) the boundaries of such ancient AAandasima (or) ancient 


mahasima, is surely not the essential requirement. [In so far as some Theras 


‘state (the case)] thus, ee statement of those Theras is a. yi) is right. sae 


1T he Pali piheeeis: “There. are some Theras, who, in the. case of such oihavasivids, would | 
convene a Chapter of. five or six monks, would station them in a continuous row of places, which are. 
each about the size of a bedstead, and whose distances are determined by the fall, all round, of 


stones thrown, first from the extremity of the wihdrasimd, and then towards the inside and outside of 


its limits, and would successively desecrate an avtppavdsasima and a samd@nasamvdsakasima, If either 
a khagdasima or a mahdsima exists on that vihara, the monks, standing, as they do, in the midst of . 
the stmds, would, froma matcatthana, certainly desecrate that simd, and the gamastma would remain, 
In this matter, it is not essential to know the sim@ or ‘its extent. But it is necessary for the reciters 
of the kammavdc& to say: ‘We shall desecrate the inside of a simd,’ (and to act accordingly). It is 


stated in the atthakatha that those who are aware of the existence of a khandasimd@,. but not. of that 


oP an avippavdsasimd, are qualified to effect both desecration and consecration, and that. thus, 
although the extent of a mahdsimd is unknown, desecration may be effected. On the authority of 
this statement, they say that at any selected spot on the remaining g@masimd, it is appropriate to 
consecrate the two kinds of simds and to perform. the upasampadé ordination. and such other 
ceremonies, This dictum appears to be correct; but it should be accepted after due enquiry.” 

2 The Pali proceeds: “ The interpretation of these Theras, therefore, appear to be correct. With 


-regard, however, to the desecration of a sim@ with an ordinary, but not a great, amount of- exertion, 


by those, to whom the performance of the ceremony is difficult. because of their not knowing the 


“existence of an ancient simi or its extent, it is said in the atthakathd . ‘If both classes of simd are 


not. known, the sémd@ should not. be desecrated or consecrated.’ This dictum does not, however, 


“mean to indicate. that, although the existence of the simi to be desecrated may not be known, if 


great exertion is put forth that sZmé@ will not be desecrated, If, at a place where a new. stm@ is 


‘desired to be consecrated, the existence of an ancient sZmé, or its extent, is unknown; if, at selected 
spots within and without the places suitable for the. ‘fixing of the boundary-marks ‘of the new ‘stm@ to 


be consecrated, allotments of space, each measuring about four ‘or five cubits. in length, are marke 


"aut in rows or groups ; ~and, if duly qualified monks station .themselves in the ‘said continuous rows 


of the allotments of space, and effect the desecration of the . simd, how. can there be no desecration 
of. the eoen ancient sima at that place, and how can only’ the sees iced tes not. fee By sid 


79 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA == [vol mt 


_ Inasmoch as it is thus stated in the Vimatinodanf, if in consecrating 
this new simé (one) is able to mark out (the site) [entirely] into plots [and 
desecrate every one of such plots,] (1. 12) would the desecration [of an 
ancient simd,| if one existed, fail to be effected?” Having thus decided, [His 
Majesty Ramadhipati had arrangements made for] the ceremony of desecration 
in the [following] manner:-— __ | 


[The extent of the land which was] (lt 3) to be made ihe ‘inside of 
the sima@ was marked out with lime into quadrangular plots, each of five 
cubits | baka and. outside oe land where the szm@ was to be made, 
around’... 2... Redd Tea abate seca, Oke - + (1,14) Then His Majesty 
invited our lords the aouresen monks and caused (them) to effect the dese- 
cration of a simé. At the time of the desecration (ceremony), for each of 
[the plots, our lords took their seat within the plot] (1. 15) and (read) the 
kammavaécd at seven spots, at each spot once. Having recited (it) seven 
times, [(they) passed on to another plot. In this wise, from the initial plot 
of] (1.16) the first [row] up to the: final plot of the first row was desecrated 
and then (they) passed on to the final plot of the second row. [From the 
end of the second row (they) went on with the desecration till (they) arrived 
at] (1.17) the initial plot of the second row.* ~ From the initial plot of the 
second row, after ‘desecrating (it), (they) passed on (and) desecrated the 
initial plot [of the third row. In this manner, from the initial plot (they )] 
(1.18) proceeded in a forward order (and) desecrated each plot up to the 
end (and) from the end plot (they) came down in reverse order desecrating 
each plot until [(they) reached the initial plot. When all the plots 


had been exhausted, the simé@] d. 19). was (completely) desecrated. (As _ 
for) the desecration of this sima, (it was on) Salareay the seventh (day of © 


the) waxing. (half) ee the month of: “Margasirsa * that (its) desecration was 
coneluded. | 


1 About half a tide: is missing here on the stone and ‘also in the MSS. . The P&li supplies the 
lacuna: “ On the inside of the places, suitable for fixing the boundary«marks of the new. simd to be 
consecrated, allotments of space of five cubits each in length and the same in breadth were marked 
out, and allotments of similar dimensions were marked out also on the outside ; and by means of a 
line drawn with lime or oa rectangular spaces in rows were pele out.’ (I have talicied the 

' missing words.) = 

2 The Pali proceeds: “ When the number of rectangular spaces had been “exhausted, ‘the 

ceremony of desecrating a stmd was | fepeladed _ It says. nothing about:a third row of. such 
" spaces. i 
3 Saturday, weed November rg. 


\ 


PART U1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 473 


.[(On) Sunday, the eighth ai the waxing (half) of the month of Marga: 
Sirsa the consecration of the sd was performed.|'(l.20) At the time when. 
the consecration was to be performed, the following were the arrangements 
made for the consecration :— 


The extent of the site, where the simé@ was to be made, having been 
marked, (at) the corners (facing) the four quarters [four? boundary stones | 
were planted. When] ( (1. 21) these four middle stones [were planted,| it being 
an advantage to have eight boundary stones with a view. to making (the 

plan) other than a four-sided figure, the middle of each (side) [was made] to 
bulge somewhat (outwards) [and stones were planted (there also). Bringing] 


-. (1. 22) a rope, (they) ran it round from stone to stone,® and along the course 
of the rope a line was drawn on the ground. The line [having been] drawn; 


[outside the line] (1.23) in order to make manifest the limit of the site of the 
simé@, a trench was made in the ground, of the breadth of one. span (and) 
the depth of one span. When the trench was made in the ground, [all trees. 


-bamboos, grass (and) rubbish which would cause confusion of sdmds to arise,] 


(1.24) both outside the boundary-marks and inside the boundary-marks where 
the new sim@ was to be, (they) cleared away altogether, and (they) made the 


_trench into a wet ditch, : [filling it with water. When this had been done, 


the boundary stones] (I. 25) were adored with gold and vermilion,® and oe 


wrapped up (and) decorated with red_ (and) white cloth. In order to show 


1 Sunday, 24th November 1476... It would seem from the Pali that this first day was taken up with 


‘the demarcation of the site, the actual ceremony of consecration only beginning on the following day. 


The Pali passage corresponding with our text has: “On the 8th day, Ramadhipatiraja, in order to 


- have the ceremony of consecrating a sim@ performed, visited the place in the morning and had the 
preliminary arrangements carried out in the following manner ;—On the outside of the site selected for 


consécrating the sim@, and facing the four quarters, four boundary-marks were fixed; in order to 
bring into’ prominence the advantage derived from fixing the boundary-marks in a form other than 
that of a four-sided figure, each of the additional four boundary-marks was placed at the end of a 
line drawn from the middle of the line joining each of the two corners facing the four quarters.” 
This explains our text, which is somewhat obscurély worded, : 
2 The MSS. have “eight.” It may be that there is a lacuna after four quarters” and that a 
short passage stating. that four stones were planted (at ‘the corners) preceded the statement that — 


eight were planted in all, At any rate the MS. ‘text cannot ebe right as it stands, and the emendation 


is supported by the Pali version. 
3 Or “from the face of one stone to the face of the” next, ” the Gide rendered “ face” = "being 
literally “chest, breast.’ Cf. K 4. : 

» 4 This.rendering is. somewhat conjectural as fe ota aad meaning of the words. parca finam 
(or kanam, which. would, however, be an unusual spelling for kanam) are doubtful.” _ The Pali has: 
The small trench was smeared with mud, and some water was. a placed in it.” a 

5 Etterally, “red drug.” ee wee 
ge 


Be 2 


a __ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA FvoL. 1 


honour to Buddha, (at) every [boundary stone, umbrellas, streamers, tapers,’ 
vases | (1. 26) full of decorations of plantain leaf,’ candles,* cloths,....... 
(and) mats were set outside the boundary-marks. , 


(This) having been done, (the king) caused our lords to proclaim 5 the 


boundary- marks, [Our lords proclaimed] all the eight stones [three -times® . 


until, they arrived at the stone] (1.27) which they had first proclaimed” and 
then our. lords entered into the building in the middle of the simé, took their 
seat on the hatthapésa and remained (there). 


[Then,® along the trench of the gaimakhetta,] (I. 28) outside the g@ma- 


Ahetta, men on foot, men mounted on elephants, and men mounted on horses 
took up their stations going all around, flags, [banners (and) pennants were 
‘set up (and) arranged, drums, ‘conch-shells, and] (1.29) clarions were 
distributed ® at intervals; in order to prevent other monks,” who (might be) 
walking on the roads, from entering within the limits of the gamakhetta, 


(1.30) a secure watch was ordered to be kept; and in case other monks, | 
afraid to enter within [the limits of] the [g@makhetta,] should be remaining in 


ry have followed the L.M. Dictionary explanation of dhup sau, “packet of. tapers,” But the 
Pali here. has | “ ee incense, and it seems at least possible that. our MS, text: meant “ incenses 
tapers,” coy ot Ney ee aes = : 


- flewers,? 
3 Or * lamps.” 


4 The meaning of plat is indetetitined! It t may go with ydt, and in that case be the specific 


name of some particular kind of cloth. 


5 The meaning of skay has been inferred from the Pali, which says Pc The preliminary arranges 
"ments connected with the consecration of the stmd@ having thus been carried out, the nine Theras and 
the five young monks - were invited, and the eight boundary: marks, eofamencing with the one in the | 


Eastern quarter, were successively proclaimed.” 

6 The MS. text is corrupt here, but the Pali version justifies the above rendering. It has: * The 
; proclamation was continued till the first boundary-mark, which had previously been proclaimed, was 
reached, In this manner the boundary-marks were proclaimed three times.” 
. 7 There is nothing in the Pali to correspond with what follows (to the end of the paragraph), and 
consequently there is nothing iri it to throw light on the word pangah.’ It has been suggested that it 
"means ‘apart? (cf. L.M. sdah) and we should then. take it to mean that the monks took their seat 


a measured distance apart. | 
8 The Pali is somewhat different : “On the following morning, flags and streamers were planted, 


at various places around the gimakhetta belonging to the minister Narasiira ; drums, conch-shells, and 


other musical ‘instruments were sounded ; 3 and the guards, ‘mounted men, jane swift, messengers, who: 


‘had been: stationed for’the purpose of stopping the progress of travelling monks, and of causing 
other monks residing’on that gimakhetia to be speedily excluded from. it, were sent out, to Beaks all 
round it,” As to the date, see 1 Oy Supra, n. ~ 
4a Though the Pali haa “ soundedy” 1 do mot think cut a can ba made ta bear that genges 
0 Gb B 493m Did?s a ae at tata. : 


- 2 The Pali hast t © water-pots, whose mouths were covered and adorned with white water-lily : 


ie 


8). 


PART 1) : MON INSCRIPTIONS | co as 


(some) secret place, a strict search was ordered to be made. (This). having | 
been done, the men (1.31) who ran on foot (and) the men who were mounted 
on horses (would) cause (them) to run away (and would) follow’ after (them). 
(and then) say to the persons who kept watch, ‘‘ There are no monks * within 
this gamakhetta, (and) there are no other monks who would enter into (1. 32) 
this gdmakhetta. We are keeping® a very secure watch.” When the men 
returned saying this, their arrival caused our lords to consecrate the s¢mda.‘: 


When our lords recited (1. 33) the 4ammavacé, in order to secure literal 


exactness, two (of them) recited (it) each time,’ (and) when the full seven-- 


times had been completed, and (it) was stated that the simd@ had been 


consecrated, drums,® xylophones,’ clarions, (1.34) trumpets, and conch-shells | 


were ordered to be sounded thrice, (and) thrice were shouts ordered to be — 
raised. Inasmuch as this-sima@ that had been’ (thus) consecrated was 
consecrated by our lords who went. to the’ island of Ceylon and received the | 
upasampadé ordination in an udakukkhepasima atranged (1.35) on the Kalyani 


River, (it) was called the Kalyanisima ; His Majesty gave (it) the name.’ 


- After the arrival of these monks from the island of Ceylon and before 


(1. 36) the consecration of this s#md@, some of our lords of the clergy who | 
were leading members (of the Order), owing to their great devotion to the 


religion (said): ‘‘ That the upfasampadé ordination which is observed amongst 
us should be subject to doubt, (is) not (a) proper (state of things). Let us - 


receive the wasampad@ ordination at the hands of* our lords who have — 


* 1 LT have taken buck to be. a variant spelling of bak, “to follow, pursue,” Tam not. suse. that my, 
version of this whole passage represents the real construction, which may be that the men ‘on patrol 


' were ordered to run after ”’ (and drive away) any. vagrant monks, . It depends. on the sense assigned . 


to buiw. 

21 take the taya of the text to ‘be merely an error for yata fas to which cf. i a9 a, supra). 

3 Or, “we kept.” 

4 Literally, “Thus saying the men who returned ‘eeved. who ” (oe: « which 7 st geiueed,* etc, 
But the passage might be rendered alternatively, “when the men returning and saying thus arrived, 


- our lords were caused to consecrate the smd.” This rendering, however, takes no account of the-ma. 
The general sense. is determined by the Pali: - “Te was only. when the absence of other monks on 


that g@makhetta had been reported, that the kammavdcd relating to the consecration of a simd@ was 


‘read seven times with proper intonation, and that the ceremony of | consecration. was soncleded 


Throughout this. whole passage the Pali is much the more concise version, 
6 Apparently together, simultaneously. The Pali omits this detail, 
6 As to Ro’, cf. F 55 n.- 
7G; F go ma, 285) 02 ee 
_ &The Pali omits “His ....5. name.” . 
9 Literally, © “in the Pissenice: ce 


176 Ss EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, UI 
ered: the upasampada ordination from the island of Ceylon.’* Having 
spoken in this wise, many a time, (they) came eu petinonce His oe 
Ramadhipati.° 

[His Majesty on his part spoke thus to our lords: “In the case of 
monks who possess faith desiring to receive the upasampada ordination at the 
hands of the monks who received the upasampadé ordination of the 
Sinhalese, let them receive it! Let those who have not faith (and) do not 
desire to receive the upasampada ordination of the Sinhalese remain (as they 
are)! To those who wish to receive the wpasampada@ of the Sinhalese 
succession I cannot say ‘Do not receive (it)!’ (and so) forbid (them) ; 

(and) to monks who do not desire the upasampada of the Sinhalese 
succession I cannot say ‘ Receive (it)!? (and). vielently use them. Let my 
lords carefully consider the intention of the Vinaya, which is the will of the 
exalted Buddha. If the upasampadé attaching to my lords appears doubttu| 
-~o (your) minds, let my lords receive the upasampada of the Sinhalese. _ If 
the upasampadé@ attaching to my lords is pure (and) is not doubtful in (your) 
minds, let my lords remain (as you are).” Thus did His Majesty Ramadhi- 
pati reply to the lords of the clergy. 

- Then His’ Majesty Ramadhipati saflected” in this wise :—‘ Some of he 
clergy who are leading men say (they) have the desire of obtaining the 
upasampadé ordination of the Sinhalese. (But there is) a condition in the 
book of Vinaya. stating that both for the pabbajj@ and the upasampadé 
the (office of) upajjhdya is the basis.* Now inasmuch as our lords who 
have returned from Ceylon have not yet completed ten years (since their 
ordination ), (they) are not yet qualified to be upajjhaya. That being the 
case, how can we proceed, so that these monks may obtain the wpasampada 
ordination of the Sinhalese succession, to get (some one) who is fit to be 
their upajjh@ya and make him their upajjh@ya, so that they may receive 
this upasampadé ordination of the Sinhalese ? His: Males: a reflected 


ods Literally, perhaps, * received (and) brought.” 


2 The Pali gives the above speech, slightly expanded, as the address mene by the monks to the 


king, adding at the end of it; “and thus shall our ordination become pure.’ It says nothing about 


'. many a time.” 


3 Here ends Face G. ‘ 

4 The Pali: proceeds: “ ae it is decreed by the Blessed One that such ‘an office should be 
conferred only:on qualified monks, who, by reason of their having been ten years in orders, have 

acquired the status of a Thera, But these- Theras received their upasampada ordination this year 


only ; and not one of them, therefore, is qualified for. the office of mperihtye. Whence can we get - 


such an upaihayat, ” ete, 


PART 11] - MON INSCRIPTIONS — So atay 


thus, commanded that a search (and) enquiry (should) be made. ‘Then 
our lord Parakkamabahusamithera’ came (and) thus addressed His Majesty : 
“(There is) a monk named the lord Suvannasobhana? a worthy monk, one 
who received the. upasampada ordination of the succession of Ceylon, a man 
who is modest, remorseful, an observer of the precepts, a dweller in the 
forest, with few desires, easily satisfied, eradicating his sins, an observer of 
the diutangas.” (Thus) saying, (he) informed His Majesty. : 

Then His Majesty gave orders to go (and) invite that. monk, (and) 


_ when our lord came "into the presence | of, His Maley 


H 


thus did His Majesty [enquire (of him): ‘ When my lord went to the island 
of Ceylon | and received the upasampadé ordination, in what simé did my lord 
receive it, how numerous was the Chapter (that ordained you), who acted as 
upajjhéya, who acted as} (l.2) @cariya? Since [your reception of the 
upasampadaé of the Sinhalese, how many years (have) now (elapsed)?” 


_ Thus did His Majesty ask, (and) the Thera on his part replied in this wise. 


to His Majesty: “We received the upasampa da ordination of the Sinhalese] 
(1.3) in the udakukkhepisima [which they arranged in the great Kalambu 


_ jé@tassara, the Chapter (numbered) thirty-one,* our lord Vanaratana,® that 


great sangharaja,* acted as] (1. 4) upajjha@ya, our lord Rahulabhadda,* [who is 
now sangharaja, acted as acdriya. Since | received the upasampad@ ordin- 
ation of the Sinhalese, twenty-six years have (elapsed).” Thus did our lord 
reply] (1.5) to His Majesty. His Majesty, on hearing [our lord’s saying, was 
exceedingly glad and His Majesty invited our lord (in this wise) : “Inasmuch 


_as (there are)| (|.6) very many [monks, who possess pure faith and desire] 


to receive the Sinhalese upasampada ordination, [I do. desire to make my lord 


the upajjhdya and enable them to receive the upasampadé ordination. It. is 
-for my lord alone. to work for® the benefit ee advancement of] es 7) the 


_ Al have followed the Pali version. in ite spelling of tees names, 
-& The Pali has; “and at the hands of a Chapter composed of. innumerable monks.” 
8 I follow the Pali in the spelling of these names. 
4 The Pali has: “the ex- Mahasagharaja. ” This is implied in our MS: ‘text. me 
5 The literal meaning of the MS, text, which is probably corrupt. (as the two MSS. differ), would 
seem to be (in B): “My lord alone causes” (or “will cause”) “the benefit,” etc. It seems possible, — 
however, that mwai here represents E.M. mey (not moy), in which case the sense would. be; “Let - 


“my lord look” (or, “see ’’) “to the benefit,” etc. ‘The A pean | is certalaly wrongs ee tae eas 


12 


1798 | ~+~—~—-«EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. son ttt 


religion. ee my lord, be seated together with (them)!”! [Thus saying, 
His Majesty invited (him). Our lord on his part, saying, “It is indeed a 


religious act, certainly we will take our seat (and a it),”"]*. (1.8) gave 


(his) consent to His Majesty. ~ | 

At the time when the semé@ had been consecrated,*® our lords the leading 
monks, who desired to receive the upasampada ordination (I.g) of the 
Sinhalese [and] had [spoken to] His [Majesty (to that effect)] ‘previously, 
approached His Majesty. His Majesty, [together with all the monks, went 
down to the Kalyanisima,] (and) (1. 10). His Majesty caused [the monks] who 
had returned from Ceylon to be invited to enter into the Kalyanisima. [His 
Majesty (also) caused] our lord Suvanna[sobhana, who was to act as 
: upajjhéaya, to be invited (and) brought into the Kalyanisima.t Then] (1.11) 
“in this wise did His Majesty on his part speak to the clergy who had 
returned from Ceylon: “ Our ‘lords, all these monks, fare desirous of receiving 
the upasampada ordination of the succession of the Sinhalese. May. my 
lords] (1.12) vouchsafe to confer the upasampadé ordination (upon them)!” 

Then the clergy. from Ceylon answered in this wise: ‘‘ [Your] Majesty 
{having exhorted (us) to go (and) receive the upasam pada ‘ordination of the 


Sinhalese, we. went (and) received it. As regards] (I. 13) the procedure 


according to which the clergy of ‘the island of Ceylon -conferred the 
sesranpede ordination nose us, Oo king {and all the clergy, ‘pray listen ! 


1 1 The king’s speech is not given in the Pali, which eet states that he “, was extremely 
delighted, and invited the ¢ieva to assume the- office of upajjhdya in respect of the. monks desiring 
to peaks the upasampadd ordination,” 

2 The Pali has the Thera’s speech. differently, thus; “Maharaja, the thea of old, j in whem 
human passion was extinct, disregarded their own interest in effecting the purification of the religion 
in foreign countries. Mahéraja,: I will follow in the footsteps of these holy men, and “even ‘like: them, 
will purify the religion’? — . 

8 The. Palj proceeds; “the monks, “ho bad faith, and were learned aaa ‘able, and who, being 
aware of the impurity of their previous wpasampadd ordination, were desirous of receiving the form of 


ordination. that had been handed down through a succession of the ordained monks of Ceylon, 


approached the king and renewed their former request: Having approached the king, they said; 
‘ Maharaja, now that a sima has been consecrated in a valid manner, and that a mahathera, who is 


qualified for the office of upajjhdya, has been- appointed, we are prepared to receive the Sinhalese . 


~ form of-the upasampada ordination.’ On the morning of Monday, the oth day of the waxing half of 


the month: of Margasirga (z= Monday, 25th November 1476), the king visited the Kalyapisima — 


accompanied. by the: leading monks. The nine theras, together with the five young ‘monks, and 


Suvappasobhapathera,, ‘who. Was . qualified to the office of upadjhaya, were invited ‘and: ecatedt in the. 


~~ Kalyanisima ”. 
4 The Pali proceeds? = Setting aside the fesding miuleas who were desirous of receiving | the 


Sinhalese form of the upasampada ‘ordination, the king approached the: thevas who had oe boiad 


island of Ceylon) and havisg approached, than, “ to thera ‘thts, ‘eti 


“PART IF] | MON INSCRIPTIONS #79, 


When : ithe clergy] (I. 14) of the island of Ceylon. were shank: ‘to confer the | 
upasampada ordination upon us, (they said): ‘The practice of us, the. clergy 
‘who dwell in the island (of Ceylon, is this), [When we, the clergy who 
dwell in the island of Ceylon, confer the upasampadé ordination on persons 


‘who come from afar, (we) confer (it) after dealing -with them -in. this wise, 


(You.ask), ‘How?’.] (1.15) First (we) [give] (them) white robes and establish | 
them in the condition of laymen; and then when they ‘are established in the 
condition of laymen, [(we) cause them to make the confession saying, ‘I am 


‘a layman, making a confession of their. desire.] (1. 16). (This is done for) no- 
other reason (than that) the essence of the reception of the upasampada 


ordination (is) the separation from the condition of laymen [by first being 
made.a sémanera. (and then) in the condition of sdmanera having the] (l-a7) | 
upasampada ordination conferred. [Now] amy lords [say] you desire (to 
receive) the upasampada ordination, {If} your desire fis genuine, (you) will 
first be established in the condition of laymen and then-attain the ecclesi- — 
astical state of] (1,18) s@maneras, (so that) we may be able to. ‘confer. the 
upasampada ordination (upon you). [Your statement, ‘We aré laymen,’ is an _ 
announcement that in making your present profession you’ (are)] (. 19) vsincere, ) 
so that you may obtain the up~asampadé@ ordination. - 
“Tn time to come [(it may happen that by reason of your) alle ened 


teachers, wpajjhayas, (or) eae ‘finding fault with (you, you) may change 
(your) minds (and say), “We will follow (our) original upasampada ordin- 


ation,] (1.20) we. will not follow this new upasampada ordination |’. {(But) we 


do not wish to let (you) reckon by (your) old seniority. If you are. sincere, — 
in) (f. 21) receiving the new upasampada ordination, [we wish (you) to make. 


profession (that you)] will reckon according tothe new seniority ‘until the end 


of your days. Thus did the] (l.22) clergy of the ‘island of Ceylon reply 


to us; and all of us, who [went to receive the upasampada ordination, said 
that we were established in the condition of laymen: and] (I. 23) had to: make 
a profession as aforesaid. Then our lords gave (us) monastic robes again, 
(and) when we had become ecolesiastics, made us profess the (three): refuges 


-[(and) the (ten) precepts, and so made us sémaneras, (and finally)} (1.94) oe 


our lords conferred ‘the. upasampada ordination ‘Upott. us. ” Thus (said) our - 
lords who ha returned from ‘Ceylon, : EER 6 gual 

a The Pali version ee ‘- above’ ‘passage is im’ ‘suibstance: silat, though ‘some , detalle: i fe é ‘Bat oe 
for what’foltows the ‘Pali merely thas 3“ It was ‘only when we had* conformed oursélves ito ‘cliston® 
of the: ‘malidther as: of mache epee coriferred: Hiss he det eat ordination on ae a tie ee 


7180 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — EVon. in 


[Then our lords who were the leading monks spoke in this wise :] (1. 25) 
“© All [of us], inasmuch as we have professed our faith, we desire to receive, 


the upasampadé ordination of the succession of the Sinhalese, [we will act]? 
in accordance with the custom [of the Sinhalese.” Thus said our lords. 
- The clergy who had returned from] (1.26) Ceylon and all the other clergy 
- being (thus) in agreement, from Monday, the ninth of the waxing (half) [of 
-MargaSsirsa,? during five days, His Majesty Ramadhipati] (1.27) remained 

seated ® (and) our lords acted in accordance with the custom carried out by 

the Sinhalese, beginning with [our] lord [the Mahasdmi, Dhammakitti. The 

lord Thera Suvannaj(]. 28 )sobhanamahathera having been established as the 
permanent upajjhéya, all the Theras who had returned from Ceylon, begin- 
ning with Sirisai[ghabodhisami,‘ acted in turn as GcarZyas in the confer- 
ment of the upa|(l. 29)sampadé ordination. 

During the day His Majesty Ramadhipati enewed seated § (there), 
(and) [His Majesty continually caused] gifts of boiled rice, water, food, 
necessaries, betel-leaves (and) [yamaka@* water to be provided for the clergy.] 
(1.30) His Majesty also appointed scribes who should write down (and) keep 
a register of Beal 7 [and for the purpose of eliciting the acclamation 


1 The Pali has; ‘ Then the large number of leading monks said: * Reverend Sirs, since you 
yourselves received the pure form of the zpasampadd ordination only after conforming to the custom 
of the maha@theras of Ceylon, even in this wise, do we, who are replete with faith, desire to receive it. 


_ Therefore, we are prepared to receive the pure form of the unnsen ran? ordination a conforming _ 


‘ourselves to the custom of the mahdtheras of Ceylon.’ ” 


® See I. 8, supra, note. The Pali introduces the date in the next paragraph. e 
3 That is, “was present.” Not in the Pali. 
4 The Pali does not specify who began, but merely says * with the nine Theras who had returned 
from Ceylon as Gcariyas, the ammavdacad being read by two of these Theras in turn.” 
BCE LL 27, supra, 


I suspect that the scribe is responsible for the alteration. The L.M. form is ydma and it seems not 
unlikely that the scribe wrote kd/a in the sense of “ time” (to go with the gah that follows it), The 


original form is Pali” ydmakalt£amm, explained by Childers as “ said to mean drinkables taken by priests — 


~after midday.” Halliday explains ene: as “a sweet. drink. made with any sourish. fruit such as lime, 
tamarind, etc., and plenty of sugar.’ 
“7 The word cadwon (L.M, cagon), is ealaned as meaning, literally, “a footstep,” that ae the 
in method of measuring - ‘one’s shadow in order to determine the time of day on which some. specially 
important occurrence ‘takes place, This method is apparently used by the monks to settle ,such 
questions as relative seniority. of ordination in cases. where both were ordained on the same day and 
the matter resolves itself into one of hours or even minutes. Here the scribes were to make an exact 
record of the proceedings of each ordination in turn accordingly. The Pali, however, merely says that 
they “ were appointed to note the number of monks that had received the upasampadd ordination.” 


@ [ follow the form used in 1.38, izfra, The MS. version here uses the fuller form ydmakdla, but 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 181 


% 


“ sadhu"| after each conferment lof the upasampada ordination, (1.31) His” 
Majesty provided [drums].’ At the time when the sun was going to set, 


having arranged for leading nobles (and) scribes (to remain in attendance at 
the ordination), (and) for lamps, His Majesty [went up to the city. When 


the five days were completed,] (the number of)* (1, 32) leading monks who © | 


had received the sfasampadé ordination was two hundred (and) forty-five. 


Then His Majesty sent word® [to all these lords: “ This Sunday, (being) the 


holy day of the full moon of the month of Margafirsa,] (Il. 33) may our. lords 


who have received the new ugasampadé ordination, (numbering) two hundred 
(and) forty-five, and our lords who have returned from Ceylon, [(numbering) 
fifteen, two hundred (and) sixty in all, be pleased] (1.34) to perform uposatha 
in the Kalyanisima! After our lords have performed uposatha, let [us 
present] gifts by way of alms, [let us] (1.35) present [charitable offerings 


that are fit to be presented as gifts,] and (so) enable us to arouse feelings 


of pious satisfaction (in our own) mind!” In this wise did His Majesty 
send word to the clergy, [and early on the holy day of the full moon of the 
month of MargaSirsa His Majesty,] (I. 36) together with a retinue (and) with 
all the ministers (and) generals,‘ having gone down (to the Kalyanisima),® 
spread mats for the two hundred (and) sixty clergy [who were to perform 
uposatha in the Kalyanisima, and His Majesty remained (there).] (1. 37) Then, 
when the two hundred (and) sixty clergy had arrived, (they) performed 
uposatha. At the conclusion of our lords’. performance of: the uposatha, a 
[breakfast and fore-noon] meal [(with) cakes, preserved fruit, (and) food of 
divers] (1. 38) kinds, (together with) ya@maka ° water, were served to our lords. 
(Ta) each of the clergy [two sets of] cloths [(and) mats, a box for areca- 


nuts and a bottle of lime,] areca-nut & 39) [slicers,] a napkin, a paper fan, 7 


1 As to the word &lo’, cf, F 55 n, The Pali has drums, conch-shells, and other musical 
instruments were sounded. 2 


2 1 follow the Pali here, as the MS. text seems to be corrupt. (For tits fala 1 should refer to 
read #la). The Pali specifies the five days as being “from the 9th to the 13th,’ 
'. -8 The Pali fixes the date of the king’s invitation being given to the monks as “ Saturday, the 


rath * (whith was Saturday, 3oth November 1476). a4 


4 This is the original sense of sendpati, But it may well be that a Pogu i in the “aeth century (as 


~ in modern Siam) the word was differently applied and denoted civil officials, such as ministers: 


_-§ The Pali (which has the words in parentheses) proceeds: “and, having ordered the provision of . 
seats and of water for washing the feet, awaited the atrival of the couly. ordained Ehetes and the 
fifteen conductors of the upasampada ordination ceremony.” 

6 Cf, lag, supra, n. 


1Ba _- BPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA svt. ant 


an umbrella, an alms-bowl, a water vessel, (and) a hemmed: eave 


_ given. as offerings to. our lords. 


Then,, in. compliance. with the wish | é all the clergy,| (I. 40). the: lord 
- Thera Suyannasobhanamahathera, who had acted as upajjhaya, was given 
the. name. of Kalyanitissamahathera. [From. this. time forward? leading nobles 
(and), seribes. went (and)] (1.41) kept. watch permanently in the simé.. The 
disciples, of our. lords the two hundred (and) forty-five: leading monks also 
went (and) ‘received the ordination ; [and other] leading clergy, [who, were of 


good faith (and) desired: to. receive the upasampada ordination,. likewise went. 


(and), received. (it)? Then His. ‘Majesty Ramadhipati* sent word to all the 
clergy: and throughout the whole extent of this Mén country His Majesty 
-eaused them to make agreements (and) make appointments. in this. wise: 


“ What is. past, let. it be done with ! (But) as for, other monks in the future, 


after these, let all clergy who ordain them hereafter see that the candidates 


1 There are several doubtful: words in the above list of offerings, The Pali has: © The following 


‘articles were then presented to each of the: Theras ;~-two couples of cotton. cloths of “delicate texture 


for making tie¥vava robes; a betel-box with cover, areca-nuts, nut-crackers, etc,;.a palmyra fan; an 
umbrella made of the leaf of the wild’ date-palm (phanix sylvestris); and’ an alms-bow! with. cover 
and stand.” 1 have. rendered sand, as in F 46, by “ mats,” L.M.. snd, but conceivably it. may. be the 


Specific name of the cloth: ef. J: a4, where the MS. reading is sid, and M a7. -I have no authority for 
- sets’? except the Pali version, unless faz stands for it, The word “box.” is: supported by the Pali — 
. (cf J24), but I have no other authority for it, The MS, text has bom, evidently an error for 


kwomh: cf...the reading on the stone (and also the MS. itself) in the parallel passage J 243 and cf. 
N 8, 13, The rendering “ arecaenuts;’ though supported by the Pali, is merely conjectural, being 
Dased on the assumption that the MS. pala (for phala, as in J 24):is here a substitute for the Mén 


Sat, generically. “ fruit,’ but specifically. ' ‘areca-nut.’ The expression ‘“’ hemmed.” ’ (mat), which does . 


not occur in the Pali version, is not quite certain. Cf. M 29, N 13. 
© -@-The Pali has: ‘“Thenceforward, the king permanently stationed, in the seipibouthibed bi the 
Kalyanisima, nobles and. learned men for the: purpose. of serving food. and furnishing the ‘requisites’ 


to the ten Theras, headed . by Kalyapitissamahathera, w who, together with the five young monks, 


conducted the upfasampada ordination ceremony, as well as. to the leading monks who had received 4 
their upasampada ordination in the Kalyapisima, and to the numerous monks who presented them- ~ 
‘selves for ordination, There were likewise stationed numerous scribes charged with the duty of 
"recording the number of monks ordained; and musicians to sound the drum, conch-shell, and other 
instruments: for the purpose of eliciting. the acclamation of sidhu at the conclusion of-each reading of 


‘the kammaodcd relating to the upasampada ordination. The ten Theras. who conducted the ordination — ; 


“eeremony;' the two hundred: and’ forty-five. monks who had received such’ ordination, and the numerous 
‘monks who were their. disciples, conferred, day after day, without interruption, the Sinhalese form, of 
the :upasampada ordination on other léading monks, who came.and expressed a desire to. receive: it.” 
- =: ® Here, according: to the: MS. version, ended Face H. 

“.. 4-The. Pali has: Ramadhipatiraja, of his own accord and with the shiotation. of the ‘ahole 


Order, despatched. the: following message to: all the monks residing in the M6n: country: : ‘Venerable 7" 
Ones, there may be men, Raed ‘though wishing te. receive the pabbessa eesinations: are. ‘branded. 


criminals, 7» etc, 


* 


cpantm] SS MON INSCRIPTIONS = gig 


for ordination are satisfactory, and then ordain them. Men: who are: branded, 
men who are notorious as thieves (or) robbers,! men who are not perfect in 
- their limbs, men maimed (in) foot (or): maimed {in). hand, dwarfed (or)- of 
small stature, (or) having crooked limbs,* if people see such a man (they) 
would imitate, laugh at, (and) mock, not reverence, (him). Do not permit 
such persons to be ordained! When (any) disciples desire to receive the 
upasampada ordination, do, not confer it privily ; first inform us. (so that the 


case can be) examined in the sima, here in. Pegu: When definite arrange- 


ments. have been made, we: will present the monastic: requisites and will 
support, the ordination: But. if (you) do- not, act thus, but confer the upa- 
sampadé ordination privily, the mother (and) father of those who receive] 


J 
- such upasampada ordination, [as well as (their). relatives, “and likewise their. 
“lay supporters, will be visited by us with royal penalties. : 

. “Clergy ° in general, (and) clergy who are your. own disciples, (that)] : 
(dL. 2) have been practising medicine and making a_living by tending people’s 
diseases, [suffer (them) not to. do (so)! (Such as) practise astrology (and) 
make a living by observing People's nativities, suffer (them) not to do (so), ! 


(Such as) make a living by - LE os -4 (or) by. embroidering * the. 7 
borders of women’s skirts (or) the Biers ot ches (or) by . Spe eee a 


-. .8 (or) making ornamental designs,’ (or) carving the handles of rive 
and)} (1. 3) cleavers, oo Following]. ou Cor. Jee of such Gecupations 


1 The Pali adds: “or: escaped prisoners, or offenders against. the. Government, or old and 
decrepit, or stricken with severe illness,”’ etc, 

2 The Pali adds: “ or are, in short, persons whose. presence vitiates the partsd,” 

3 The Pali gives a long list of various occupations (not always quite the same as those in our 
text) and reserves to the end the injunction against -allowing offenders. to live. amongst the: well 
behaved monks, It begins : “ There are sinful monks who practise medicine; and others, who devote 
their time to the art of numbers, carpentry, or.the manufacture of ivory articles, or who declare the. 
happy or unhappy lot of governors, nobles, and the common people, By examining their horoscopes 
or by reading the omens and dreams that may have -happened to them.” 

4 The meaning of stuié and baédm (A datayn) has: not been determined, ue Or, “ painting.” 

6. The meaning of 276d has not been determined, though it appears from M tr that. it was. some * 
kind of material suitable for. covering the outside of the gati there described... In this. place't the MS, 


text ‘inserts yat before #, whicti looks as if the copyist took ibd to be the name of some. kind. of 


cloth. The word /¢& can: mean “to paint, smear, overlay.” 
7 The meaning of ela has not t been determined 5 i Phau: literally, means 


ib lowes?” 


Be | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Evora 


live as s laymen do fall the time—my lords, do not suffer nisake who exercise 
such callings to dwell among you! Monks who acquire material wealth,}* 
(1. 4) “make a living’ by [the recitation of] the Dhamma with a loud voice, 


(or) by... eee eee eee eee ». .* (or) acquiring [spindles of] cotton | 


- thread,® [(or) by going down (into the fields) (and) acquiring paddy (and) 
Tiee, (or) going to the edge of the forest (and) getting pepper,‘ do not 
harbour monks of that sort among you! If monks associate with] (1. 5) 
laymen (that are) gamesters, dissolute youths, servants of the king, com- 
panions of the king, men who spend their lives in drinking (and) playing 
[dice® 2 ee we ee es “ses omy lords, do not harbour on among 
you !. 

ee If monks are possessed of sincere Gath and truly study (religion), 


_ (then), my lords, harbour (them)] (I. 6) among (you)! When laymen come 


to (you), my lords, desiring to become monks, cause [them to learn to 


write, and when (they) have recited the alphabet, make them learn] (I. 7) _ 


the confession of faith in the Three Refuges, and the (ten) precepts.6 When 
(they) have become qualified, let. my lords permit (them) to become monks. 
[‘‘ Sémaneras who have attained the age of twenty (and) are desirous of 


‘receiving the upasampadé ordination should first be thoroughly instructed in 


the principles of the four parisuddhtsi/as, namely] (1.8) the péatimokkhasam- 
 varasila, indriyasamvarasva, ajtvapéarisuddhistla, and puccayasannt ssttasila, 


(l.9) the s@maneras should first be taught [the book of the Patimokka from 


beginning to end together with (its) meaning and interpretation,] the 


sémaneras should first’ be taught the book of the Khuddasikka, [the 


_ sdmateras should first be caused to commit to memory the discourse 8f 


1 The MS. reading pakrayd. ha me is corrupt, as is also the corresponding phatraydpdw in 1, 19, 


infra. In both places it should probably be amended into pa kriyd paw; but it is not. aul: certain 
whether this means “acquire. material wealth ” or “ practise unbecoming professions.” 
2 The meaning of slor labwor, and also the reading of this last, are doubtful. 


8 The Pali has: “There are monks who visit cotton fields and preach the Dhamma with long 


intonation, and trade in the cotton which they happen to receive as offerings.” 
“4 The meaning of ¢uii here has not been determined, and the reading is probably corrupt, The 
Pali has: “There are monks. who visit fields of hill-rice, rice, barley, etc., and preach the Dhamma, 


and trade in ‘the’ grain which they happen to receive‘as offerings, © "There are monks who visit fields — 


of capsicum and preach. the Dhamma, and trade in the capsicum which they bepeen to receive as 
offerings, There are monks who trade in many other ways,” . 


8 The word éhat by itself should’ mean “cowries”’; “dice” is khat pa, The’ raeaning of lan li | 


has not been determined ; /an.means “to go from place to place.’ 


® The Pali proceeds: “and eventually, Venerable Ones, confer the pabbajjd ordination on them,” 


Our text uses the word gam-3, “ monk,” but clearly the noviciate is here meant. 


Majesty sent round to all the monks. 


part i] MON INSCRIPTIONS | | 385 | 


ecclesiastical offences, and the sdmaneras] should [also be caused: to soininit 
to memory the paccavekihana concerning the use of the four requisites.] 


(1,10) When the sémaneras have become fully qualified in (all) such learn- 
. ing; our lords should inform [us, (and) we (shall) support their upasampada 


ordination. May all the clergy on their part] (1. 11) carry on [a course of 
conduct conformable to the Vinaya and Sikkhapada] of the exalted Buddha 
and pleasing (to him)! [Do not follow] a course of conduct that is not in 
conformity with the Vinaya lof the exalted Buddha and is not pleasing (to 
him), my lords! 

“In the past, in this Mén country, all the clergy, - reason of] (1. 1a) 
the existence of various sects, were in a state of confusion, together with 


impurity (and) corruption, as aforesaid. [From henceforward all the: clergy, 


having professed true faith, have received the upasampadé ordination of the 
Sinhalese: (therefore) in conformity with the practice] (l. 13) of the clergy, 
who dwell in the island of Ceylon, in wearing (their) robes and shaving 
(their) hair, let my lords [follow (them in those matters also)! Let there be 
a single sect! Let not divers sects arise!” | 

Having caused a message in these terms to be drawn up,] (1.14) His° 
Majesty caused [investigation (and) search to be made] throughout the whole 
extent of this Mén country [regarding monks who were possessed of goods, 


paddy (and) rice, male slaves, female slaves, cattle (or) buffaloes, (and) His 
Majesty caused word to be sent (to them in this wise ) :— 


“My lords, give up (and) surrender] (I. 15) (your) ‘goods, [if youl would 


observe (the conduct of) [monks. If my lords fail to do (so), (then) with 


1 


(jour) goods follow the life of laymen! Such - was s the “messige ie 


Some monks surrendered (and) gave up] (. 16) (their) goods. and 
observed [the (rule of) monks. Some monks did not surrender (their) goods, 
(but) with (their) goods had to abandon (the Order and enter) the lay state, 
In the case of monks who had committed grave offences | that were of 


‘public notoriety,] (1. 17). His Majesty made (them) all live in the lay state. 
As for some monks who had committed grave offences [that were not. of 


publi notoriety, His Majesty. expelled monks who were to that extent “open 


to censure and reproach and made them live as laymen,] (1. 18) all (of them). : 


Some monks who “had committed serious offences that did not ‘reach the 


extreme point, [but were unable to put away] $1 such degree of censure and | 


on as 


‘86 | _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA T VOL. 11 


| seproael as there was, [such: monks: as aforesaid] (Il. 19) His Majesty. expelled 
(and): made (them) all live as laymen. Monks. who: practised medicine, who 
practised astrology, who. made a living by: embroidering® the borders of 
skirts (or) the borders of robes; [lor by «le os eee se LOR) es. 


eee ee ees 3? acquired material wealth! these monks who lived sinful — 


lives His Meaty: made to live in] (I. 20) the lay state, all of them. 
Thus. did His. Majesty Ramadhipati. entirely purge (and) expel the 
dept (and) corruption of religion that had arisen, and {caused all: the 
clergy who were in this Mén country to form one sacle sect.] (]..21): All 
the clergy, who dwelt in villages (or) in the forest, who lived within this 
-Mén country, from the (1. 22) year 838 of the Common Era, [the ninth of the 
waxing (half) of the month of MargaSirsa, the day (being) a Monday, -our 
lords] came (and) received the ugasampadé ordination of the Sinhalese until 
the year 841 of the Common. Era, without. intermission they kept on. coming 
(and) receiving (it). 

At that time our lords [the clergy dwelling in the Mén country sails 


received this upasampadd ordination. amounted] (I. 23) to eight hundred 
‘Trading. monks.(and) fourteen. thousand two hundred. (and). sixty-five young | 


monks. When all these eight hundred leading monks [had] received the 
(1. 24) upasam pada ordination, [His Majesty presented each of them with 


_[two: sets of robe cloths* for making ¢zcivara robes; ] a box’ for areca-nuts, 


with betel-leaves (and) a bottle of lime; areca-nut slicers; a napkin; an 


& 


: 1 The Pali. equivalent of this passage i is : ‘Some of the monks, owing to their being: imbued _ 


with faith; gave up all such possessions and conformed themselves ta such conduct as was *in 
accordance with the precepts; while other Theras did not endeavour to give up all their possessions, 
and they ‘left the Order. There were some monks who had flagrantly committed pardjtka offences : 
these were requested to. become laymen.. There were others, whose commission of parajska. offences 
had not been: proved, but whose reproachable and censurable conduct was difficult to be justified ; 
these were asked to become laymen.” Both texts use the term antimavatthu. for this: class. of 
offences. . : aps 
* 2 Or, “ painting ” : cf, 1,9, supra, and note. . 
 & The’ als of -tutk bacds and ntbd is: undetermined. As to these words and Jak, see I, 2,. 
‘Supray n, . 
4 ‘The. text is 5 corrupt ‘and the meaning doubtful : cf, 1. 3, supra, n 
6 That is, “minor clergy.” The Pali here adds: “ ‘and the total number of both classes- of 
“mortiks was fifteen: thousand and sixty-five, a 
' 6 The: meaning. of tat and ¢auw is not strictly determined, The. position of the latter suggests 
“that it is used merely as a numeral auxiliary. . The former is evidently an error,for bap (cf, .F 46, H 38). 
The Pali speaks of “cotton: Dsaaee of delicate tissue.” See’ the variant reading in -H. 38... 
Ei a9) seb fs aces ee a ee 


PARTIE] _ ° MON INSCRIPTIONS _ ee 


umbrella?; an alms-bowl*; (and).a fan. In the case of the clergy on. whom 


iti was fitting [to confer titles, His Majesty in. every. case. conferred’ -titles.] 


(J. 28). Subsequently His Majesty presented the (monastic), requisites to the 


-s@maneras. who. had studied the Khuddasikkha (and) the Patimokkha, and 


made (them). receive the upasampadd ordination, (to the number of). six 
[hundred and one. The full total of the clergy dwelling within the bounds 
of] (1. 26).this, Mén [country] who received the Ceylon. i cuucane: ordination a 
was fifteen thousand, six hundred (and) sixty-six, is 

The matter. of the. purification, of the religion having beens ius aceom- 
plished, [His: Majesty Ramadhipati, because he del lighted] exceedingly [in the _ 
religion] (1. 27) of the exalted Buddha, (expressed the hope): ‘‘ Now that — 
the religion which is in this Mén country has been freed from impurity 
(and) corruption and freed from doubt, may [it be able to endure for five 
thousand years!”] (1. 28) (Thus) did (he). set his mind (and) dot 

In former times there was a king who. was possessed of great wealth 


(and) supreme majesty, who delighted [in the religion of the exalted. Buddha | Z 


exceedingly, by name] (I. 29) Asokadhammaraja.’ In the island of Ceylon, 
again, there was a king named Siri-sahghabodhi- Parakkamabahu, who. also 
delighted. exceedingly in the religion of the exalted Buddha, [(and) a king - 
Vijayabahu who also delighted in the religion] (I. 30) of the exalted Buddha | 
exceedingly, (and) a king Parakkamabahu who also delighted exceedingly 
in the religion of the exalted Buddha. All these kings saw the impurity 
(and) corruption which [had]. arisen [in the religion of the exalted Buddha, | 


2 and] (J. 31) because (they) desired to enable the religion of. the exalted . 


»Buddha to endure for a long time free from mpaety (and) Des ait (they) 
purified. the religion. 


i 


Se The Pali.adds : “made of the. leaves. of the wild date-palm (bhoonts swlonstrisy 
' ©The Pali adds: “ with a stand and cover.” 
8 The Pali has: “a palmyra fan.” : 
"4 It does not seem quite certain that this is the right rendering. Conceivably the words of the © 
text; might mean: “So. did he set his heart that it should. do.’ The. sentence >is really. the: equivalent 
of the Pali manasi nidhdyakasi, rendered above’ by. « exprented a hope.” in order to. introduce: the 


passage, 


a The Pali adds that. he « Became ‘agitated in mind. at ‘the ‘sight of the: itaputitios bhi had | 


~ arisen” in religion ;, and continues: “ he solicited the assistance of Moggaliputtatissathera: andyeftected 


_ the, purification of the, religion by expelling 60,000. sinful. monks. from. the -Order.”” 
6 The Pali adds; “ Seeing the impurities. of the. religion, agitation arose in. his, mind. ord, he 


expelled numerous ‘sinful monks. who held -heretical doctrines; he. effected. purification, by sparing: the 
. single orthodox pect, where. members. were. a spiritual ‘successors, of the realdenty of Fhe eae aa 


188 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — Evon. ut 


In time past [the Lord] (1. 32) Mahathera Ananda, changing (from one) 
state of being (to another), became a king named Usinnara, holding sway in 
the city of Benares. At that time the religion of the exalted Buddha 
Kassapa (I. 33) had [declined,] but though that king saw that (it) was 
impure (and) corrupt, that king did not take action by diligently securing 
the purification of the religion of the exalted Buddha Kassapa; (I. 34) that 
. king “remained (indifferent?) At that time our Bodhisattva was King 
‘Indra. Though in the enjoyment of celestial bliss in the heavenly city of 
Tavatithsa, (he) forsook the delights of celestial bliss because (1. 35) (he) 
_ desired to effect the purification of the religion of the exalted Buddha 
_Kassapa, (and) came down to this world of men. Assuming the guise of a 
hunter, (he) caused the deva Mitali to take the shape of a black wild dog,* 
(I. 36) and, leading this wild dog, (he) came down (and) terrified King 
Ussinara. Then King Ussinara gave a pledge for the purification of the 
religion, and King Indra instructed King Ussinara, (1. 37) and King Indra 
ascended again to the heavenly city of Tavatimhsa.. 


Thus® did the kings of old, beginning with King Asokadhammaraja 


exert themselves in the purification of the religion ; (and) our (I, 38) Bodhi-- 


‘sattva, who (at that time) was Indra, although in enjoyment. of celestial bliss 
in the heavenly city of Tavatirnsa, (also) exerted himself in the: purification 
of the religion. Therefore‘ His Majesty Ramadhipati, in his turn, (1. 39) 
also observing (and) following. after the practice of the pious ones afore 


‘mentioned, thus did the deeds that he did in effecting the purification of the. 


religion. Inasmuch as (that) is so, in time to come, in the city of (I. 4o) 
Hamsawati, may all the kings that are possessed of faith who shall arisé 
into being hereafter, on seeing the impurity (and) corruption of religion that 
may asise, also diligently exert-themselves so as to effect the purification of 


the religion! (I.41) Our lords - the Arhats too, beginning with Moggali- . 


1 This is a.conjectural rendering based on the Pali, as the reading of the stone is doubtful and 


' that of the MS, is corrupt, 

9 Or “wolf.” But the Pali has “dog.” The Mén expression rendered “ wild 2 ies i 
‘particular to: the jackal, ~~ ae . . cs se ope se 
8 This passage, down to “ Therefore *” (not inclusive), has no equivalent in the Pali: : 
4 The Pali Proceeds : “King Ramadhipati, the Lord of the Mdn country, following respectfully in 
the footsteps of the virtuous, purified the religion with a view that it might last till the end of 5,000 
years. For having purified the religion in the manner described above, I, Ramadhipati, have acquired 
merit, which is inexhaustible as Nirvapa, the state of purity and quiescence.” are 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS : 189 


puttatissamahathera? (and) Majjhantikathera, though they were men who had 
performed their (last) deeds (and) had therefore attained to the enjoyment of — 
phalasamapattisukha' (and) (I. 42) (were able) to remain (thus) permanently, 
(yet) because (they) desired to further the advancement of the religion, 
(they) turned their backs upon the bliss of phalasamapattisukha,* (and) in 
the cause of (I. 43) the advancement of the religion, (they) exerted them- 
selves. Inasmuch as (that) is so, may our lords, all the virtuous monks, — 
who are possessed of faith in the religion of (1. 44) the exalted Buddha, 
(and) who® shall come in-future time, may our lords also exert themselves 
in the purification of the religion (and) in the advancement of the religion! ¢ . 


[Two® thousand (and) twenty years after the year when the Lord of. 
Merit, the exalted Buddha Sakyamuni, achieved parinivo@ua, having deter- 
mined to effect a purification ‘of the religion of the exalted Buddha, as 
regards the persons who were possessed of faith (and) desirous of obtaining 
the pure state of the upasampadé ordination, His Majesty Ramadhipati 
urged a2 Theras to go (and) receive (and) bring the upasampadé orders 
from the island of Ceylon, (and) determined that people should be able “to. | 
obtain, the upasampad@ ordination from the clergy who had gone (and) 
received it from the island of Ceylon; (and) in order that those who received 
*the ugasampadé@ ordination might be able to perform (ecclesiastical) cere- 
‘monies such as the uposatha (and) pavdrand,] ee 


1 Not mentioned in the Pali... ee ; 

2 Literally, “the happiness of the fruition of attainment,” ¢.¢, of spiritual peace, — 

3 The “ who” refers to the monks (of. Hamsavatipura, as the Pali adds). 

4 Here ends Face J, which is the last face of the main inscription. The Pali version adds the 
following, which has no equivalent in the Mén text: “If this is done, the beings who are immersed - 
in the whirlpool of the three forms of existence, will be enabled to cross (to the other shore), or to _ 
free themselves from the conditions of sin and suffering, or to ‘attain the pure and excellent and 


‘supreme Buddhahood, which is. embellished with the attributes of the wise and is the fruition of 


supreme exertion.” In this passage there is a difference between the MS. version of the Pali text - 
and the actual reading on the stone, the former being adhibodhi-budhalalitam lalitam and the latter 
_ amate vibudha late lalitum. a a ee ets re on 
5 Here begins the first of the appendices to the principal inscription, as preserved in the MS. 
text, Sue Sc Oe a ee ; 


aoe, EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von nt 


K 


_ [seeing that the ancient stmas, “which had bea consecrated’ in times past, 
were not (valid) simés, His Majesty Ramadhipati urged] (1.2) the clergy who 
had. received the [Sinhalese] ordination [to consecrate these simd@s. - (In the case 
of) all the simé@s which were (to be) consecrated, (where) there was (already) 
a gémakhetta, (in) the new sima] (I.3) together with other gémakhettas 
‘surrounding it, connections of branches of trees and the like,” [both on the 
“ground and in the air, were cleared away, the ground was trenched, (and) 
within the g@ma that was to be the site® of the new simd,} (1. 4) a gama-. 
khetta was established within the ambit* of the boundary stones where the - 
- baddhasima was to be. [Then with respect to the gd@makhettas outside also, 
the existing connections of branches of trees and the like were cleared away, 
(and) the ground was trenched, to indicate] (1. 5) the limits of the sim, 
At the time ‘of the. desecration (ceremony), [both] (on) the land that was 
within the ambit* of the boundary marks [and that which was outside 
(them), :plots of 5 -cubits in length (and) 5 cubits in width (were marked — 
out) on. the ground with lime and] ds 6) .each | plot was” desecrated, - | 
going evenly over. them aall.. At the time of the consecration, [(on) the = 
 gamakhetta that was to be the site® of the new simd, they trenched the 
ny ground (and) caused persons to ‘be placed around (it and) Patrol (it) ;] e ae 
and so (they) established (the new simé). 
| i ee all the szmés the Kalyanisima (was) the one that [was ‘made 2 “ 
(It was in) the year (838) ® of the Common Era, (on) the: eighth. ofe ° 
nee waxing (half) of the month of Margaéirsa, the day (being) Sunday,’ . 
that the clergy who had returned from Ceylon. consecrated] (1. 8) the. 
Kalyani simé@. On the twelfth of the waning (half) of the month of Marga- 


Sirsa, the day (being) Friday,® (at). the time of dawn, [our lords who had 


~ returned from Ceylon consecrated the stm@ of the Thousand Buddhas. In 
the afternoon our lords] (1. 9) who had returned from Ceylon consecrated 
. two. simas in ‘the, Mabarama, [On the thirteenth of the Sars (hal Mle of. the 


eed “Taking the init of the MSS, to be an error foe smit, he 


2 Cf, Bax, £0, C 49, and (for this passage generally) G8 seqqy bk, eas ats a 


' 8 Taking the daéau of the MSS, to be an error. for’ dataw, oe : 
4-Cf, G 223 as to the word eruth, literally “chest.” ee ‘ 
5 Reading datau for the dakau of the MSS., as in 1 3s’ supra. _ 6 Omitted in the MSS. ; 
a ‘Sanday, agth November lies ‘But see G ud a 8 Friday; 13th December 1476;:- . a 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS O00) Sgn 


month of. Margasirsa, [the day (being) Saturday, the ae who. had returned | 


‘from Ceylon consecrated the Bha Mru* sim@ On the thirteenth ‘of ithe 


waning (half) of the month of Phalguna,.....] (1. to)..... i Sct teach sidan 
...-.® our lords who had returned from Ceylon ete the Muh‘ | 
Mla Skar sim@. [On the fifth of the waxing (half) of the month of ‘Caitra, | 
the day (being) Wednesday, our lords who had returned from Ceylon, | 
together with our lords the clergy of Pegu who had. received] (I. 11) the 
Sinhalese (form of the) upasampada@ ordination consecrated simas at ‘the | 
four quarters of the foot of the Mah Tau pagoda, ® 

~Beginning with the year 838 .of the Common Era, tes: “Majesty 
Ranigdhipati-paramamahadhammarsjadhiraja urged our lords who had returned 


from] (I. 12) Ceylon (and) urged our lords the teachers :of the Order :who 


had received: the Sinhalese (form of) ordination,” [together with the various 
Chapters,? to consecrate simdas (in) every town (and) every district .of the i 
Mén country. At the time of the ponsecra noes) (l: 13) His Majesty caused 
some great scholar to attend also in every case.’ 7 

The simds [that our lords consecrated were the Kyak Kuiw” “simé, ‘the | 
Ma Tam” simé, the Ma Ron. Lhok be Sima, the Calhuin Cih™ siméa, ‘the 7 


I Saturday, t4th a 1476, - 
2“ Monastery of the Stockade,” ees 
3 The reading is doubtful on. the stone and corrupt in the MSS. It: may. perhaps mean to 


‘indicate the time of day or else “ when they first went out.” ane date appears to be Wednesday, 


rath March 1477. ee ee 

4 The reading is , doubtful, The word muh means “ ‘ nose, point, cape, fringe” 3; iskar (LLM. skaw) 
may mean “ mat, sugar, glue.” te . 

e* Wednesday, 19th March 1497. 

"6 The biggest pagoda at Pegu. 4S : 

7 The phrase hese: used is ie payor Stighuir, which plete also “mean a who ‘received ‘the bos 
Ceylon monks,” eae a foes i 

8 Presumably the various fdcal p groups (sarighas). 

9 The phrase might mean that the king caused every great scholar to attend, : 

- 10 This ‘may mean. “ Buddha gives.” But the word éuiw may also be nierely ‘the- “conjunction - 
“and” linking the name of this simd to that of the next’ one, The matter is cal pean ‘a 


difference of reading between the two MSS, in what immediately follows. ; 
11 The word. ma (om the stone mba) literally means: father ’’ and is part of the: name f some of 
the simds, while some others are. called mba’, « mother.” It is not ° clear what distinction, if-anyy 
these two terms may be- ‘supposed to ~ ‘import, but the second ‘one commonly: refers to the’ ‘principal. we. 
part. of anything, or something that is large or full-grown, - The word - tar: means beginning, < 
= principal.” MS. B here has a. ‘variant reading which. would seem to ‘mean that ® it: was the. ‘Buddha ae 
_. Sima that was consecrated first, > of as the principal one, but this is prohably Corrupt 


12 B has rok, “to repay”; lhok is unexplained. 


WE calhuin is for ealuiay: this would ‘mean Fa “aéphant tethering- post” ‘The alternative ca wih : 


means eg shake” a 


192 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA von, m1 


Gamalah szmé,] (1.14) the simd@ of the Mahabuddhariipa the Pai Abea* 
sim@, the Kari® sima, the [Tam Pha]* som@, the Kyak Ma Tar Jow® sima, 
the Man.Mra® simda, the Nuai Naai’ sim@, the Muh Kla But® szmé, the 
Sama Gasi® simé, the Jip Braai stm@, the Muh Ya Tala® simd,] (1.15) 
the Mah Bapufi™ sima, the Ka’ Kluiw™ s7mé, [the Jalaai Thaw” simd, the 
Laft Padoh™ sémdé, the Jrai Sapoai™® simd, the Amat Sut ™ sim, the simé of 
Prince U Kwew, the Han Gam” simé, the Prah Sa™® sima@, the Ma Sra Ma 
Leh® simé, the Jip Dwon simé, the Run Wuin™ simé,] (1. 17) the Barah 
sima, the Mba™ [Muin] stmé@, [the Kama Amat *® sim@, the On Bra Sri® 
sim@, the Kon Blaai™ simé, the Pah Tarau Ba™® stmé, the Pam Laa* 
-stmd, the Mai Mra™ szmé, (1. 18) the Tarwot™ sémd, the Mba Nan® seme, 


the Pnaa™ [Dabok] sémé, [the Wiha Taw" sima, the Ma Bat™ simé, the Min — 


1 Cf. F 49. 
2 Pan, “mouth.” The next word is a doubtful reading; the MS. apuiw suggests an. original 
apents both mes pained: 
* Jungle Guide.” Cf. E be 
4 As to farn, see note on last line; phd may mean “ mountainsjack »? or © side.” 
5 Tam jow (for which A has piam jwow) may perhaps eer “head of the creek,” 
6 Man, “ to. wait ior, to watch”; myrd, “to prosper, to gain.” 
7 “Divers prawns.” 
8 Cf, l. 10, supra, n, (but B has mub, * face”); io means “tiger,” and but, “to grind.’ 
9 If gas@ can be taken to stand for hast, the name ‘would mean something like “ expert in 
writing (painting, etc,).” 
10 Ya is the “wax of the datnnies-bee*”j i tala means “lord.” 
WW Bapun (also bapen) is the name of a tree, Erythvina indica, . 
- 12 Perhaps “ Dog’s Neck.” But in J 36 “dog” is clutw (not hlutw); and ka’ may mean “an 
‘isolated piece of ground.” 
13 * Golden Bud.” 
14 Lan apparently means “to melt,” 
16 “ The Banyan Tree of the Nest.” 
18 Amdt is “ minister’? and Sut may be a proper name (but it also means “ silic ” and “ sutra.” 
On the stone |, 16 is entirely lost; it must have begun about here. 
17 Han, “ company”; gan, “ to step.” 
18 Prag, “to send; bank, slope”; sd, “to spread ; to be light; borax ; company, following.” 
19 Cf. 1, 13, sede n.; sra, “to be sore”; Je, “to carry on the hip; to nourish; to be 
destroyed.’’ 
9 Run, “to be intractable” ; wuin, “ joists. an 
91 CEI, 13, supra, 0 
28 ‘This may be the proper name of a person. 
85 © Junction of Two Roads.” ' 
at Ch. 1 15, supra, ny 
% Or, perhaps, wd rwot (wd, “an open plain”), 


92 The Minister’s Tank,” 
44.“ Son,” usually applied to a young man. 
#6 Lan, “to put, to wager.” 


89 Cf. 1. 13, supra, n. It_ is difficult to see how the usual meaning of Ma, se as,” can be 


appropriate here, oS sie 
© “Candle” (or “ lamp ”).. “For dabok, B has da Blok, 
81 Wiha, “ eeentey 3 : tom, “handle, stalk, side.” — 83 Bat means “ meheny ences likeness.” 


en 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS - - 193 


Taloth! simé, “ahe Brau Gala* szmé,the Leh® Slop stmé, the Sea ja‘ -sima,] 
(1. 19) the Mba Sa® sima@, the Gah Lon® simé, the Taguiw Tla’ simdé, the 
[Nah Slai Taluai]® sem@, [the Wa Dak® sima, the Ma Na stmé, the Tayu 
ates ” sima, the Bhalizh Abah séma@, the Ma Bah simé, the] (I. 20) Paa 
n™ [simda,] the Cagan™ sim@, the Bha® Baket™ simad, the Mba [Asa]® 


en the Mba Luit”* szma, [the Snefi Juk” séma, the Khai Mrah™ simd, 
‘the Srai WaA™ simd, the Ndai Saai” simé, the Kyak™ Kwew sima, the] __ 


(l. 21) Kadak™ [simd,] the Mba Lau Ban™ simé, the Arhan* simd, the 
Apoh sima@, the Trit™ Mba Sam séma, the [Daf] sima@, [the Kyak Thaw” 
sima, the Kyak Tai Dui” szma, the Mo’™ Aduiw simé, the Wa Swa™ sima, 
the Baha Jnok® s¢ma@,] (I. 22) the Thai Kwah™ stma, the Mbo’™ Yage’ 
stma, the [Bhu] Mba Gram® simé, the Gatuim * simd, the [Adarh] sima, [the 


; Or Talo’; min, “to gather in the arms, 
‘“Indian Woman.” But bra is also the name of the cocoanut palm and its fruit. 
8 Cf. 1 15, supra, n.3 slop may mean “ to enter.” ; 
4 Seri, “ta be withered; to be true”; 7a, “fishing net, lattice? 
' 8 Possibly Sah, but the MSS. have sa. 
' © Perhaps “‘ Most Valiant.” 

7 Perhaps cf, L.M. gaguiw, daguiw, “stump” (aisd “thunder”) or ¢agaw, “ginger”; and 
possibly tla (for tala, “lord,” ba or kla, “ tiger.” The MSS, have la’, “ garden, » or klath, 
“ hundred.” 

8 Nak, “person”; slat, “to be dazed” (variant khlan, “to glow, to shine ") taluai, “the 
Otaheite gooseberry.” 

9 Wa, * plain” (or, perhaps, * paper kite”). ie : 

10“ Hairy Maggot.” 11 “ Crossroads”. (where four roads meet), 
12 Perhaps Caran or Caban. . 13 Or A, ; 
16 & Red? . OF 16 Asura, a fallen angel or Titan, 
16 MSS, Thutk, re ‘ 
*17 Snen, “wing” 3 uk, “cord? wariant jut, “bone ). 
18 Mrah, “to spread abroad; te praise; to be merry.” 
19 Svan, “dry land, shore bank”; wd, “plain.” 


2 Ndai, “lord, master”; sdaz, “ bee: 

M1 Kydk, “ Buddha, pagoda, worshipful object.” 

23 « Crow.” ae Adhering Arrow. st 

44 “-Arhat” (if the reading is right; but the # is doubtful). 

MSS. Krik. “28 Golden Buddha” (or pagoda, etc.), 

a? Tan, to pull” (variant tavn, ‘beginning, capital,” etc.) ; gus, “ city, country, kingdom.” 

28 Cf. 1. 13, supray n. ; 29 ¢ Plain oF Waterlilies. 2? 

2% “Great Monastery.” : 

81 Than, “to set upright ; a. ae  s for kwah the MSS. pave kxnuh, “ turtle,” which may y posibly 
“be right. 


> 89 CE L 13, subir, nh 

"8 Bhu is a doubtfub reading; for mba, cf, " 13, supra, N.; as “to put up a barrier 2 (ats in 

combination, “to be waste, to be desolate ’’), 
84 «To beat.” 


13. 


194 __ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


& ; 
Mbo’ Khot! simé, the Kyak Ma Talew sémd, the Jrai Mwai? sima, the 
Kyak Prah® sima,] (I. 23) the Adwon sim@, the Ajan sim@, the Jray Rat? 
sima, the Mba Cau® simé, the Kyak Rha® s?mé, the Pah Apuh? simdé, 
the [Lalom]® sima, [the Pa Baben stm@, the Mah Glon™ sima, the Kyak 
sea sima, the] (1 24) Kuiw Clik ™ [sima,] the Daat 2 sima, the ouaim “ 


simd, cahe Pagna " simé, the [Tan ‘Sran] ® ® sima, [the Ma Seth” stmd, the. 
Rammapiira”™ stmd, the Tamuh ™ Tabuai simésy] (I. 25) the Pana Sandan ae 


- sima, the Ban Tu® sima.. 
. At Bhimapira, the sma of the leading none of Pegu, the sima of the 
leading ‘monks of Ceylon, [the Alha Saraai™ szma, the Buit Kama™ sima, the 


jin Jam ™® soma, the Lagan Phen® simé,] (1. 26) the Buip™ s¢ma, the Duiw 


1 A measure of four dronas. 

4“ QOne Banyan Tree.” : 

3“ To be quick; to fall.” 

4 Or rab, “a cabin.” (Fray is “banyan tree 2%), 

6 *Grandchild; to return” (but the reading is not certain). 

-€ Possibly for s#, “to measure,’ 

7 Cf. 1,14, supra, n. 

8 Perhaps L.M, lala, “ peace, rest.” 

3“ To be in company with; a species of dove.” 
10 Max, “to wait for, to watch over; red deer’ ” 3 glon, “ to pass through ; a crest, tuft, ad 

1h * Give pigs.” 


-sister.”? 
13 Mud” (or to help”) 
™4 Perhaps L.M. zhagon, “brinjal” (sat, “ fruit”), eee eee 
15 Doubtful reading (L.M, gldaz means “ to ‘seek ’’). a oe 
18 P& may mean * dove” or “to wind around with cord or cloth,” 
17 For Pafiga, probably L.M. gaad, “ the wild nutmeg. . 
18 Tan, “to be stable; to be cheap ; an interval?’ 5 srans. ve silver: money.” 
19 & Siamese, Shan.” 
*0 This is plainly a place-name, but not being preceded by. the word ee < in? or “at” it leaves 
“us doubtful whether the particular simd was situated at this place or merely named after it, ‘It is not 


‘ow ¥ 


we 


stated where the numerous simds specified in !l, 13-25 were located, but it may be presumed that they: 


were in-the neighbourhood af Pegu, the capital. of the kingdom, From L. a5 onwards other towns are 
expressly mentioned. 9 > ss : : 
e 21 «ct Broom. » : : 
23 Cf. 1, 14; supray n, But the: true reading here may. be 8 thy “a species ae mint.” 
88 Ban may mean “to embrace,” and ¢u, “a snail” (but the latter is a doub(eal reading). 
4 Sardai, “soldier ; wild beast.” 
% Buit, “diamond; Vedas to throw ; to swoop de ; kamd, « tank.” ek 
88 Fin, “to sew.” - 
The firstZword may be L.M. + legen, “love,” 
Ba ‘,Teal_ Duck,” 


[ VOL. Ir 


12 oceee L.M. dul, oni, “Feushion, pillows the Queen Lagerstroemia,” or dnt, a husband’s 7 


i] 


@ 


” 


PART 11] 


Dani?! stma, the Twin Dhatek* stma, the Row Sa® stma, the Jray Taya‘ simd, 


the Cluih s#ma,®° the Gatah Pan® simé@, [the Kyak Rai Man’ = simd, the 


Tamrot szmd, the Wah Tuin® szmd, the] (le 27) Tarhim ® [sémd,] the Kareh * 
sima, the Tar Kalah™ séma, the Mbo’ U Dwot”™ sim, the Mbo’ Rat sima, 
the Twan Blay ® smd, the [Moh Duh]™ sima, [the Phadoh™ sémé, the Ma 
Ya Bha'® stmé, the Jinai szma, the Pah] (1. 28) Kru Phah Nan” s#ma, the 
Dalam Tasay ® simé, the Gatuim Phath”™ simé, the Jray Psi™ smd, the 


Tika™ sim@, the Kho sémé, the Drah Thar™ sima, the [Ma. Maa Sa] * 


sima, [the sima™ to the West of the town of Muh Bi, the Maha Man] 
(l. 29) Ray Sihga’*®® simé, the Pah Lay ™ szmd, the Dun Jala® stmé, the 


Wan Nay® sima, the Truk Kanlaw™ simé, the Mah Ta Jnu sma, the [Asek] _ 


sima, [the Gala Dut ® szma, the Muh Nat sama, the Gayan] (1. 30) padon 
sima, the Basah simé, 


1 Duiw, “hill”; and cf. 1, 24, supra, n. 
2 Twin, “village.” Dhatek may be L.M. gatek, “ saw, ats mallet.” It appears that there are 
two villages thus named, 
3 Light Basket” (LM. rau, “a kind of basket made of Ppa work ; a football made of rattan 
wickerework ”’), - 
4 Possibly Thaya, 
6 Perhaps L.M. calut#, “to put on; the post to which an elephant is tied ” (cf. 1. 13, supra, n.). 
But the reading is in doubt. The variant éhluti means “ pond, lake; to go beyond.” — 
8 Gatah, “to turn round or over; to turn back; to burst; thunder” ; pan, “four; to shoot.” 
7 Mén mustard plant (or radish),” — 
' 8 Wan, “to cease; enclosure 5 pool”; ¢uin, “to ascend, to increase.” 
9 Perhaps Karhim, — 10 Pecans Tareh. 11 Whip, goad.” 
12 Dwot is LM. dot, “small”? For mbo’ cf. 1, 13, supra, n 18 Young Men’s Village. ‘ 
44“ Fringe of the Town” (unless moh in the MS, represents an original mbo’). : 
18 “To be weary.” ' 16 Ya, “wax of the dammer-bee”; bria, “ricefield.” 


WP Pay krusi, “mouth of stream (or creek)?’ The rest is a doubtful reading, and might be read . 


- pham nei or phat janai. Phdi means “a raft? or Ma beam fixed along the side of a boat”; 
ghee “a drum”; naa, “to bring’; nea, “a fin.” ‘ 
18 Perhaps Kasay. Either way the meaning may be “ inex border,” 
19 «Beat Drum.” 20 “ Banyan Tree of the Market.” . 
#1.“ Commentary ” (on the Buddhist Scriptures). . gts Golden Horn (or Peak)” 
*8 As to mad, cf. 1. 23, supra, n.3 sd, “to spread; to be light ; borax; a following, a follower,” 
- % Or “simas,’ for it is not clear whether this may not be intended to localize the names that 
* follow. 


8 Maha, “ great.” It seems not impossible fae man here may feat meals “blessing” 


“(pat cf. 1. 23, supra, n.). Rady may mean “ mustard, radish ” (cf. 1, 26, supra, N.), 
%6 Pan; “to lift up ”;.L.M, laai, “to become loose, to be dissolved ; line, streak; tiger grass.”’ 
27 * Thorny bamboo.” 


80, Gald, Indian”; dun “city, pune a? 
al Muh, “ noise, point, end of cape”; Adz, “to sea.’ 
88 Tados may. be identical with the Dadon of le 24) ie 


MON INSCRIPTIONS : 195, | 


ae Wan, “dressed laterite ; L.M. #Adai, “various 3 here and there.” eed 
9 Or Kruk Kanluiw. (as the MS, text seems to meta The first ward means “ Chinese mango. sas 


° 


196 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [voL, WI 


At Syriam, the Twan Smif Cun Suin simé, the Drat* szmé, the Haa® 
stma@, the Parhak [Gata] ‘ scmé, [the Tapuin Pi Bafia® s¢ma, the Baldai Cah® 
sima, the Pa] (I. 31) Gai? sima@, the Jray Cah® sima@, the Kyak Taluy ® 
simé, the Ray" Khai simé, the simé of the Minister Vijayasiha, the Lagwor 
— Glu” sima@, the Mba Samii” stmé, [the Ma Dyoa”™ szmé, the Jrai Lhon™ szma, 

-the] (I. 32) Tamat Thana” [s¢mé,] the Ha” Talun s¢md, the Croa” sima, the 
Gaduy™ sime, the Bandan™ sim@, the Saggakam? ° simé, the Lat™ Sima, 
the Mbui Afi sima, the Saguim™ sim@, the [Dhammadu] srma, ie Kama 


Ma Soai™ sim, the] (1. 33) Sro’ Khyuit™ [sém@,] the Mah Lwan™ sma, 


the Mah Chu Kwet® sima. . 
At Rangoon, the Mah Damru” simé, the Mah Dun” stma@, the Rak ™ 


simé, the Duiw Canlan™ sima, the Pubba[ram] ** sima, [the Kyak Ma Sam 
Kyow ™ simd,] (1. 34) the Duiw Panah ® stmé, the Goh Dhammarim * sim, 
the Tak Nan®™ semé, the Lambat™ simé@, the Apa Gay sim, the Ky&k 


1 Village of Prince Cun (variant -Khun) Suin.” 2. To scatter, to sow.’ 
8. To save.” But. possibly the true reading is Tan (cf. l, Ql, SUPYay n.) or Than ve 1 92, 
Supra, 1). | 
4 Gatd, “the under’ part of anything.” 
6 “ Ten springs (or fountains).” _ 
1 Pax, “ mouth”; gal, “ mortar, pounder ;. cucumber.” 
8 © Ten Banyan Trees,” 9“ Otaheite Gooseberry.” 
10° Cf, Raai (1, a6, supra, and note). Perhaps Khafi should be Khan. 
11° Dark Grotto (or Cave, or Ravine). | 12 Samii may mean “ turban.’ 
8 Possibly for dayuin, * post.” ; 4 $Frai, “banyan tree” ; lho, “to sail.” 
18 Perhaps Touch the Lute.” Aue thana, L.M. thaza, may also mean * wall plate’), 
16 Cf, J, 30, supra, n. 7 Perhaps “Built.” . 18 Possibly Gaday, 
19 A doubtful reading: L.M. hada “kernel of nut,” The variant bavan of the MSS, means 
* spotted,” c 
_ © Perhaps « Heavenly Delight.” sae Fresh. is 


#2 Perhaps “Warm” or “ Warmth.” - poagers 
® Kama, “tank.” a4 «Dead Rice (in the fields).” - 


2 Mah is the same as muh (cf, lL 10, supra, n.); Iwan may possibly be connected with L.M. 
kawan, * Martaban camphor wood”? (but can hardly be’ the same word). Cf. also L 13-14. 
28 "Probably L.M, chu kwit, “ wood apple.” 
1 Perhaps L.M. damru, “a sound”; but the ‘eéadhing’ i is not quite certain. | 
88 © Bamboo Cape,” or “ Fringe of Bamboos,” 
$9 Or Rat (which may mean “floor beam; precious gem; to reap”’). i 
_ 80. Perhaps “ Saridalwood Hill.” 31 “ Ancient (or Eastern) Park ia Monastery). a 
8 Sam, “ eunuch”; kyow, “to peep.” 8 < Jackfruit Hill.” : 
BA «c Cave of one ae delights in the Law” (or “of the Park (or Monastery) of the Law ”). 
- & Tek, to strike” ; 2a, “to bring” (the variant nun means “water pot.” 
88 LM. lamat, “one of a religious order inferior to the monks (a petson who separates himself 


6 “The Three Monks of the Prince’ (?). 


from family life and pledges himself to keep the. eight precepts).” This identification is not quite | 


certain: cf, the form lumbde in-1 E.18, which throws some doubt on it, perhaps. But medieval Mén 
spelling is. very. Wb ied and ¢ a contusign between..b and b (after ™) seems possible. “ 


tire 


* 


PART I1] MON INSCRIPTIONS ~ | F967 


Gnak! simé, the Nelu Lah simé, the D&h Lufin]? s/ma, [the Paa® Tabon 
sima, the] (I. 35) Twain Akhwon ‘ [sémd,] the Bala sima, the Daroh Sa sima, 
the Manga simd@, the Krua® Cra szmd@, the Cambuin ° sim, the Duiw * 
Khawenh simé. 

At Yat Khret® Mah Smin, the [Badow Glaa}*.4 simé, [the Jrai] a. 36) 
Sum” [seme the Tar Skem™ simé, the Pan™ sima, the Tko’® Ifi stma> the 


_ Jray Naguir™ simé, the Dapuin Brau ™ sima. 


. At Tar,” the Kya&k Rajadhirat szm@, the Kyak Then: simé, the wits 
Smif Thar]” sima, (1. 37) the Kyak Gatuiw * sma, the Damra’ simé, the 


Amat Jray” sima, 
At Jray, the Kamluif Tla™ sima, the qi Say simé, the Tar Sanda ” 


sima. 
At Klon Palay, the sima of the King™ [of Ceylon,] (I. 38) also the sima] | 
in the King™ of Ceylon’s creek, the Kyak Mahecaramh™ soma. 
At Lahka Kruf * Tawanna,™ the Krua * % Brat” stm, the Kran - Kawa™ 


stma, the Kru Kamer szmdé. 
At Sa[m]r[ith, # the] (I. 39) T& Canéa™ tsimé,) the Gnih ® Lan “ Twan 


Smif Sudasuim ® simé, the Adin Adah sima, the Baleh 8 stmd, the Kyak. 


Brau ® 


sima, 13." oS ae it 
1 Gnak means “to sink deep in the mire.” But the eee is 5 doubtul 
2 Dé, “to jump’; luing “to tread upon.” 38 “ Mouth.” 
4 Akhwon, “tax, revenue.” As to twan, cf. 1. 26, supra, n. . 
5 Krun, “ stream, creck.” 6 Borhaps Cambia&, 7 « Fill.” 
8 This place-name is doubtful: see the text. 9% Glars, “ chamber.” 
10 * Hicus Indica.” 11 Tar, “stalk, handle”; skem, “to grasp.” 
14 Pan, “to ask leave respectfully ; (in certain combinations) an expert in art or craft.” 
% « Island,” 
_\4 “ Banyan Tree of the Town” (but the reading is doubtful), e 
1’ Nun? 16 This placename is doubtful: see the text, 
17 « Monastery of the Golden Prince.” 18% oeat board.” 
19 “Minister of the Banyan Tree.” 
9 Kamluia, “ well” ; tla, “lord, master “3 (out this word may perhaps be read kla, “ tiger,” or 
klam, “ hundred ”’) : : 
_ 81 Perhaps*L.M. sda, “ star.” 
22 Or.“ Prince.” ° 
a4 “Stream, Creek,” 
-86 Possibly Kran. | 


28 Or “ Pahecararh,” 
% Perhaps Thawanga,. or. Kaweippa: 
a7 “¢ Plantain, banana. ee oa 


8 “Bat; short prop.” 7 #9 Or Samri. : . 
0 74, “ palmyra palm; a measure of length (== 7 cubits); to beckon to stops candin “ebaieniag * mee 
(but. the reading is doubtful), 81.“ Side”? Be 


” 32 This is a doubtful reading, but the MS, variant ydn, “ vehicle,” seems out of place here, 
88 * Village of Prince Sudasuiin,” caine To gO astray.” 3 
8 Cf. 1, 18, supra, a 


i98 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA fi VoL, ti 
pe | 

: "At Damkak, the Amat Ok? simé, the Sapa? simé, the Mba (I, 40) 
Buddhawa® sima@, the Late * scm. 

At Dala, the Kyak Gni® siama, the. Kutti® Kwon Prak7” szmd, the Kabat 
stm@, the. Mba Duifi® sdma, the Phyen % séma, the Twain Brak” simd, the 
Jahath sed, the Braf Brau™ sma, the (I. 41) Taba Pre simé, the Sarway ™ 
sima, the Apha Pah séma, the Abat simad, the Gayaa™® Tak™ sim, the 
Amat > Tath Mice "6 sima, the Lahan " sima, the Bak Sren™ sima, the 
‘Danday 3 simas | 

[At Lhuia,” the Paa / Lhuif = simé, the Pan # Mapha® stma. 

. At Dhanu Plu, two simas®: at Moriya, the Amat Phak® sima +s in the 
place where His Majesty dwells, one sima,” the Kyak Smin] 


¢ 


~ Mat Pim simé@, two in all.” 
At Klon, one sima, the ® Ramlsat Kyak simd, the Smif Ni Daw | Da ® 


1 Amit, “ minister ” ; ok may be.a ‘proper name (or possibly L.M. dk, “ parent m, 
9 Sapd, “the skate (fish) ; to be dim-sighted ; (and in combination). arm, breast,”? . 


ae! Wediescey: penne ey Oe ae 4 “Sinew, muscle,” 
5 «Rats mouse? 8 Probably Pali. zuf?, “ hut, cell.” 
7 Perhaps L.M, oe ey spotted, variegated,” ; 
- 8 Heron, stork.” 9 To turn aside,” 
10 “ Village of the Water-Dipper.? 11 Or Bra. 
14 Or Saray. 3 13 & Wood-oil Tree.” 
4.Or Tak. 18 Cf, 1. 39, supra, n, 7 


. 16 Mrek, “red pepper.” As. to tam, cf... 13, supra, ne 
- 11 Perhaps cf. LM. law lian, “lonely. ” 


18 Perhaps L,M. baé, “to pass over” (but it may be bdé, “to thoes: ‘to spin (as. a top); to 


peck,” or bat, “to measure ; to be delicate.” Sve means “to wither; a swinging cradle.” 


19 Or Danday, or Danay, _ 20 Here ends Face K, 
8L Or Luid (which may. mean “bulb ' ? but is here a place-namo), mY . 
93 CE K 14 ne a 88 Or Mapa. : 


~  ** Or Danda Phia, 
85 Presumably the two next following are meant, — 
38 Presumably this last is a proper name: cf, |. 40, supra, n.— 
37 The MSS. have smi mwai, “one prince,” which I have taken to be an 1 errar for sim mwa. 
28 «t Prince. with. Three. Eyes.” i 
; 99, i have taken: this as referring | back to the cap simds + ‘tientioned after Dhanu Plu. file 


9 The word mai seems to be unnecessarily repeated here, and“it is not clear why the preceding 
words sim mwat occur at all, as the simds mentioned do in fact total up °to six. But perhaps for 


-Ramlaai we should read Ramlak {the simd overlooking the pagoda’), 
‘al oe “to be even, to- agree”? $ dgty | ¢ to ‘shut ays #4, *to be shel Ome 2 


~ Naga). 


PART un] = | ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS : a 


simd, the Kydk Tala. Lok! séma,] (1. 2) the Kyak Bay? Twan [sia]? the 
[Bak Len]* semé, [the Smih Lok Wah” szmé, total six. 


At Bassein, the Kyak® simé, the Kyak Ga’ sima, the Duiw Ni® Kah 
sima, the: Kut Lyeh Nan” szmd,] (1. 3) the Great Khway simd, the Small 
Khway simé, [the Kyak Tma’” simé, the Kama Buip™ séma@, the Kyak 
Kalay™ sima@, the Muh Dhau Chan Lha™ s¢m@, the Muh Dhau Gnif Samuii® 
stmé,| (1. 4) the GreateCatta® Buin” s¢mé, the Small Catta2® Buin” soma, 
[the Tamya. Sa® sima, the Ka Pra Draai™ simé, the Mah Gai Konaguimh™ 
sim@, the Mah Ceh Da Khwan™ sim@™ the Pah Jakwam] (1. 5) Sa® stma, 
the Kru Man™ simé, the Haa® Twon™. simé, the Kyak [Gatomh] sima, (the | 


_1 Perhaps “Lord of the World. gs 

2 Perhaps L.M. bag, ‘a leguminous plant (pea, pean, etc.)’; the variant peucings mal, muh, 
mean “ nose, cape, fringe.’ 

3 Twan, “straight”; the variant ¢ban means “ dried preserves,” é 

4 As to bak, cf. K 4x no; lei means “to perish, dissolution.” The variant endings ate baz, 
‘to warm oneself; to give birth’; laa, “to melt.” 

5 Lot and wan may be proper ee or pe ey LM. dash, “world”; wari, to cease (of 
rain); enclosure, fence; pool.” hes 2 

6 «€ Buddha,” ete. The variant kyd means “wind,” 

7 Ga, “a clog put upon the necks of ctiminals ; a lineal’ measure,” 

8 The MS, reading is sma, which I have assumed to be an error for sis, translating acotedingly: 
Otherwise this and the preceding sim@ would be combined into one and the total number of simds at 
Bassein would be 24, and not.25, as stated at the end of i 5, infra. 

9 Duiw, “hill”? ; #7, "a little (in quantity).”~ re aie 
10 Kut, “to cut off” ; vada, “a bamboo frame over a cooking place” ae variant nth means a 


1 Stone, rock, mountain.” — 
12" Teal Duck Tank? 
13 The variant Zlaz means “a . root Seni @ yam.” 
14 Chan, “to love”; lha, “a leaf.” 
- 13 Guin, shadow ; fungtey the loins, the waist.” 
18 Or Cakka. 
7 Buix, “a pickle condiment; a large « species of deer.” 
18 Tamyd, “urine”; as to sd, cf, K 16 n: Se ne 
19 Ka, “ fish; short prop” 3 prad, “to send ; bank, slope”; dviéai, “the porcine deer.” 
20 As to man, cf K23n.3 gan, “to be nett Gf falling objects): an. apes the sea? 
Kondguisi i is the Buddha Konagamana, * ne 
21 As to man, cf. K 23 n.; ceh, “to descend,” -- pine 
_*2 Asin |, 25 supra, I have taken smin to be an error fet. site here also, 
#3 Pada, “ mouth”; as to sd, cf, K 16 n. : ie oa nee 
94 Perhaps “ Potter’s Creek ” (bit the MSS. have the variant ham, which cin combination) means ee 
“ rubbish,” — oe ao 
38" To save” (but the word. may. pethaps be han, = stocks (for beat building) 5 granary; “Oo 
“mouth? 
86. # Possibly for kwon, L .M. bony “child.” ad 


200 - ° EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor 1m 


Bahasa! sima, the Kawah Glau? _sima, the Ganaa Dus. sim, the eseaeine 
sima, 25.) | 

(1.6) At Mram, the Jamharn sima, the Caméa’ simd, the Pan Gla&k¢ 
sima, the [Jrai Talaai]? sima, (the Lan simé@, the] (I. 7)........8 
[szma,| the [Japuiw] sma, [the Balen’ sima, the Kyak Kanhih™ sima; 
created by laymen subsequently :J¥......... ,@the Dani” Pajau™ sim, 
the Kyak Bi”™ Taga sima, the Smin [Teja]* sima, [y. 


At] (1. 8) Koliya, the [Joh Kyak]?” Smif Lokatra ™ szma, the Joa Kyak oe 


[Mah Sga]r sim@, the Dap Chu” simd, the Tar® Mah®™ sima. 


At Candapiri, the [Jon Kyak]” (1. 9) Mbo'....® Mbak sima, the 


Mba Abat™ szma, the sima of Prince Visukamma,* the Mba Mbuiy ® Thaw 
id) the [Ji]p Biw simé, ‘the Daka Bhut® szm@, the Cau Kamfian sima, 


1 Probably for L. M. bhdasd, “a system of religion ; language ; a mode ot practice,” 
2 Glau, “ox, cow.” 3 Dun, “town, country.” 


4 Or -Jaména. Perhaps this: represents us name of the Jumna_ River (which is, however, 


Yamuna in Sanskrit and Pali), _ 
5 This is all that is clear on the stone, but the name may be Mrim, or perhaps Samrim (the 


MSS, have sania gt In K. 38 there is mention of a place with a somewhat similar (or the same) 
name. 


* 


8 Pada, “ mouth,” and perhaps khaldk, “valley, bay” (gidk, “to take out. with ~ hand,” does . 


not seem appropriate), 
7 “Drooping Banyan Tree.” 


8 It is not certain whether there. should be here a place-name or the name of a simd,. The | 
reading on the stone is fragmentary and rather doubtful, but what there is of it cannot well be 


reconciled with the MS. text. 
9 ® TO go astray,”’ 10 “ Bell,”? 


11 This reads rather like an interpolation. Anyway, the total 7 given in the next line does not . 
square with the items mentioned, and there is something on the stone here which does not tally with . 


the MS. text. e 
12 For the unintelligible passage here, see the text. 
ChE Kam | 4 Perhaps cf. L.M. p&jais bjau, “to offer: i 
16 “Small Bottle,” or “ Bengal Quince, ” 18 “@ King of Majesty (or splendons): u 


37 © Foot of Buddha (or pagoda, ete). ” 
18 The reading is doubtful, It might be. Lok Tra (perhaps a proper name of. a prince) “ wiid)e 
The MS. reading is Lok Phraai, 
19“ Wooden Fence,” ~ ; 
2 Or possibly Tan, as'to which cf. K a4gn, Tar, L. M, taw, * stalk, handle ; side,” 
21 Cf, K ag n. But L.M, taw mha# means pean 
92 There seems to be an illegible letter here. 


% Perhaps Abak. The.MS. text seems to have got the name. of this, or the preceding, sima - 


twice over, with variations, 

#4 Visvakarman, the celestial architect. : 

25 Mbuiy may mean “lady.” The next word is doubtfully read but mayebe the name sh Baha 
Thau, the mother-in-law and immediate predecessor. of Dhammaceti, 4 

96 «s Temple Founder’; dakd, “lay (benefactor)” ; bhut, “ ‘temple containing images, ” 


parti] -——Ss MON INSCRIPTIONS 8 age 


the Garok Galpuiw]? sima, the [Mak] (I. ro).. kana * Stmé, the Lamba 
Pham ® simé, the Tar Kwan * simdé, the Pa Lau! sim, the Twan Bar‘ 
Mah simd. | 

At Satoa,’ she: Joa Kyak- Sawa stma, the Paa® Sawa simd, the: Cadok’ es 
sima, the [Juia] (1. 11) Kyak*® T.... -" simd, the Low™ Kyak [Asah] 


_sim@, the Twan Sagra™ Nanah sima, ae Joh Kyak® Celasa stma, the Twan 


Mbuiy Dewi™ sima, the Twan Adan Dwot™ sima, the [Kyak Gahassa) a 


(lL. 12) Tow” sima, the Kyak Bantaji simd@, the Kyak Sura Nan simdé, the 
~Kyak Lin Laan 8 sima, the Pan Ablit. s7ma, the Paren Gak® stmdé, the Kyak 


Gapat” simd, the Bi™ [Khata] simd, (1. 13) the Asam ™ Calan stmd, the Crep 
sim, the Danlay Smih™ smd, the sima@™ of the town of Tuik Gala,™ the 
[Twan Sa]bra Samah simé, % the Twan Smif Bruim™ sdmé, the Mah 


Carhmha™ sima, the Jak Ri” sima@, the sima™ of the town of Lwlan], (I. 14) 


1 Garok, “ hollow between Hilla pass 2, gapuin, lime, chalk,” 

2 The first letter in this line looks more like ¢ than anything else. 

8 “Hunter of the Drum” (unless the second. word is his name). 

4 Or possibly Kun (which means hill”). As to tar, ef. 1 8, supra, 1%; kwan might be 3 a 


as spelling for kwon, “ child? or twan, “ village,’ or else some unidentified word, 


“ Arrow”? or possibly ‘ “ Lao,’ the name of a Tai race in Nant hetn Siam. 
6 Or Bari. . 
7 Presumably Sittang, 8 CE 1. 8, supra, 1. | 9 Mouth.” . ; 

10 Possibly L.M. khagok, “the four-toothed porcupine,” ‘It is just possible that that is also the — 
actual reading. 8 

11 The MS, variant Ta cannot fill the whole of the blurred space here. 

12 Doubtful reading. The MSS. have jut, which presupposes an original jon, but I cannot see it. 
Asah was the name of an early Mén king. 

8 7 wan, “village” ; sagyd, “ sugar.” 

14° Ch Lg, supra, n. Dewi (Sanskrit and Pali an’, “ goddess, queen”) may be used as a proper 
mame here. . 

15 A possible reading is Bhadan, Dwot means “ small.” 

16 This MS. reading does not appear to be consistent with the corresponding (but indecipherable) 
marks on the stone. 

7 «© Cotton.” But the reading is doubtful. If the word is fon, it may mean “castor-oil plant; a 
circumstance” or may be the L.M. butt, “a measure of distance (two anda third mallee) post; a 
kind of basket.” 

18 Very doubtful reading. "See the text for a possible variant, 
19 Very doubtful : see the text. 
9 Or Gahat. | os 31 CEL 19, supra, n 

83 Perhaps L.M. asim lon avin). “ enclosure. in which a Buddhist temple stands,” The hext 
‘word may conceivably be read calan, ‘ pinnacle.” & 

‘88 Smiz, “ king, prince, governor.” AM ie. a4 Or  simas’ 

a5 CE Anu : ; ae 

% The stone wrongly has smim ‘(for sim) here, wan means “ village: Me 

87°« King Brahma’s Village.” 98 Or Carh Mha; or the. & might be read as a bh 

8 Fak, “to drag”; ri, “pestle; axle”? The MS, variant jué means “cord”? 


% 


a2 | -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vos tit 


8 | | : 
the Pah Jafrajm Lwan’ simad, the Mbo’ Bui? smd, the Mrik  Tasum 
sim, [the Kyak Goh Crah Krua] Ahet® [sima], the Mah arene simad, the 
Lagan® Phen simé, the T&® Ga? séma. 
At [Yan] (1. 15) Jim,® the aonaaee [Sadhuirh sina}? the Jon 
Kyak * Blah Nak” stma. 
At Moulmein, the Paa Tarai Sablu 2 sima, the sima of the leading 
‘monks of Ceylon, the Gaya’ Tamhak ®  sima, 3, the stma™ (at Graf, the 
: Smi] {(l. 16) Siaighanikay ™ [sima,] ae 


At Carot, the Joh Kyak Gam-i™ sima, the Klo’ Drow” simé, ne Mran 


: Juia * 8 simd, 3. | 
At Jr3, the Cadim 19 Samia simd, the Twin Caladhi® simd, [2. 


At Martaban, the Tala% Nah Men sima,| (1.17) the Cela ‘Sadhuim® | 


simé, the Than Smia Gra Slan® stma, the Tka’ Careh™ simé, the Ni Daa 
(Can Saruh*® simé, the Great Taban® sdma, the Kray * Ba [Sren Sa Plan] * 
sima, [the Cau Han ‘Rai 2 Damya *° stma, the Raai® Jajm Lsima,| (1. 18) 


- 


1“ Mouth of the granary of Lwdn.? 
2 Perhaps L.M, buds, “elephant grass; to surround,” 
~ 8 Pagoda of the Cave of the Bank of the Ahet Stream.” 


4 Cf, K 4t ne 

5 Perhaps. L.M, leegan, * “love.” Cf. K ag. : 

6 Or Ka’, . 7 Or Garn. 
8 Or Nim, cm ae ® «The sima of Gawampati of ‘Thatén,” 
10 Cf. 1. 8, supra, n, ll Nae, “ ee ? 


12 ** Mouth of the Betel-leat Gate.” 


13. Or possibly Tamaak, in which case the two. words sould mean a « Crooked Wood-oil Tree. 
14 Or “simas,” 


_ 1 “Prince of the Ceylon sect,” or Royal sima of the Ceylon sect.” 
16 CE 1. 8, supra, ni; * gam-t means “ monk.” — - | ee 


17 Kilo’, “garden” (or the possible reading. tho’, “island”), Drow may be read Drow. Both 


these veriarita are supported by the MS. text. 

18 Fuin, foot? (but our text usually spells jon). 

19 Or Cadip; or the Ca may be Cau. . 

0 The final vowel may. be a3 and it, is possible that the dh may be meant for a Be 

21“ Lord, master,” 22.-Thatén, 

% Than, “place”? ; smin, ‘ © king, prince.’ The rest may be proper names, but t slax means “ to. be. 
dazed.” The variant reading slu% means “‘high, exalted,” - 

“24 Or Cagat. Tka’ means “ island.”’ The MS. reading ed means.“ * fowl une 

85 Mi, « even, to agree ”’; dani, “to leap” ; cin may be connected with L.M. gacan, * to put forth. 
effort” ; sarun, to. ‘step over’ as apat the possible reading sara means “ deed”), 


26 Or Tabat, = ~ 87 Or Tray, 

28 Pla may mean “ to ‘melt, but also couch, throne.” eee 
28 Cau, ** grandchild ; to return” ; hada, “ company ne ruin, “ to help.” a 
20 Or Dapya, which seems improbable, eich, Ree oe 


_ 81. Mustard plant ; radish,” 


- paRT MON INSCRIPTIONS =” sn 


a 


the Kyak Mrah! sma, the Dana [Waai]* stmé, the Sahgha Jadappa' 
simd, the Mah‘ Anaw sima@, the Truin sima, 4; the Trer stmda, the 
--[Muh* Hot] semz,® [the Karuth® sima, the Jayagiri’ stma, the Ple sim, 
the Pla® Lat s¢ma, the Si°® stme.|” 7 | 


{[Two™ thousand and twenty years. having elapsed after ‘the: year when 


‘the Lord of Merit, the exalted Buddha Sakyamuni, achieved — pariniryvana, in. 


the year 838 of the Common Era, on the eighth of the waxing (half) of the 


month of Margagirsa, the day. (being) Sunday, the Kalyanisima- was conse- 
_erated™; and in due order the clergy who were desirous of receiving the 


upasampada ordination of the Sinhalese went (and) received (it) successively. 
At that time His poe Dect et stiparamamaharajadhirat reflected i in 
this wise : 

-“Tnasmuch as these our lords who crossed. over to the island at Ceylon | 
received the upasam pada ordination on the Kalyai ni (river), the simé that] 


M 


jolir tends eonsectated has ike wise been styled the Kalyintsima] and given 
, (that) name; (so,) in front of this Kalyanisima, it is fitting that we should 
” puild- a cetiya like unto the Kalyani-cetiyas™ of the island of Ceylon and] 


mie 2) call it the Healy cetiya and [give it (that) name. We: will (also) i 


1“ Famed, approved, praised.” | 8 Waai, “ manure.” ge eee be as 
“8 Sarighay “monastic community.” . The next eord is unexplained and. rather doubtful, . The 


“MSS, get over the difficulty by reading saigharvdjd, etc, This would refer to some head of the Order, 


But I cannot see it-on ie stone, though the final. stroke of the gh is curved so as to resemble + 


omen hgt . 
4.“Nose; cape; fringe.” ar tier ends our- rubbing of Face L, . © 6 Variant Ka ‘Rida: gi 
7 «Victory Hill’? -. 8 “A large Kind of horse: nerflys oes ee Te measure.’ Cae 


Boies 


10 Here ends the first of the appendices, 
- 11-Here begins the second appendix. in the MS, text. 
18 Sunday, 24th ‘November 1476, Cf, G 19 n. . Re ae 4 
It. seems doubtful whether this should be plural. ‘The MS. text of: this passage, as shown sy a 
comparison with the stone fragment that follows, i is not free sees corruption ao 


204 + -~—s«EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von. 11 


have a Bodhi tree planted and call it the Kalyani Bodhi and give it (that) 
name. If we can thus arrange (matters),] (1. 3) all the clergy [who come to 
perform their functions (and) ceremonies in this simé will be able to venerate 


{and) adore this cet/ye; and all the clergy who are possessed] (1. 4) of faith — 


will be able to venerate (and) adore [this! Bodhi (tree).]” 
(I. 5) His Majesty Ramadhipati having reflected [in this wise, in the 


year 839 of the Common Era, beginning with the month of Bhadrapada,] * 


His Majesty Ramadhipati ordered [a minister named Kriai Kamin, who was. 


chief among] (1. 6) the children of His Highness‘ Bafa Ram, [to have a_ 
‘site prepared for the establishment of] the cetiya, (and) [Ra]ja Mindhat, who 


was chief among [the children of His Highness* Bafa U, (and) Lak Woai, 


who] (1. 7) was chief among the children of His Highness‘ [Baia Barow,] to | 


have- a site prepared for planting the Bodhi (tree). 
(l, 8) Having [in due course] prepared the site where the Bodhi (tree) 


was to be planted and having constructed the flan® where the Bodhi (tree) 


was to be planted, they [plastered (it with) cement (and)] decorated (it). 
The site where the cefiya was to be built [they] likewise [in due course 
built up.] (1. 9) When the time arrived for setting up the relic chamber, 
(they) constructed the relic chamber and [plastered] (it with) cement, hewed — 


(and) carved (it), applied gold (and) silver, (and) decorated (it). [Having] 


a 


thus [made (it), upon the site of the cetfya,] (1, 10) in the, middle (they) - 
made a great building in tiers. Around it, for the clergy together with the 
laity, men and women, [to be, (they) made steps] (1. 11) going all around 
(it). The outside of the gatz® (they) covered all over with mba’; .through- 


~ out-the inside of the gati® (they) hung white cloth, [Having] thus preparéd ; 


1 The MS, text here inserts “ cetiya (and),” which seems otiose but may nevertheless be right. | 
_ 2The sixth month of the lunar year, which in this particular year ran from Saturday, 9th 
August, to Sunday, 7th September, 1477: - 
8 Or Gama. 
4 The same term is used as that which I have cisewnere rendered by “His - Maiesty. a 


Apparently it could be used of other princes (unless these were all-deceased kings). 


5 This word usually. means “ side,’ which does not seem. very much in point here, The MS, 


copyists seem to have thought so too ‘and substituted a word: meaning altar,” which is nconsistent , 
® with the reading on the stone, 


6 This word (which has a variety of meanings connected with the fdea of * going”) seeths to 


- denote here some kind of gangway or passage, Perhaps it was a kind of as stand: HOE the 


accommodation of the public at the ceremony that was to take place, - 
7 Precise méaning unknown; it may be some kind of. cloth. oe seems to have. bean ‘the 
copyist’s view as he inserts pat before ite Gh J an, 


a ad 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 205 


(it), [in the middle of the place] (I. 12) where the holy relic was to be set, 
(they) constructed’ a two-fold’ chamber, and decorated the chamber with 
fitting workmanship as seemed good (to them). (With) jasmine flowers 
which they fashioned with cotton,’ [(they) decorated (it); (with)] (1. 1 3) 
copper ® [flowers] -(they) also decorated (it); yak’s tail fans (they) likewise 


hung [up as ornaments]. Outside the two-fold’ chamber, all the pillars 
[were wrapped in cfoth (and thus)] (1. 14) adorned; and in’ the former — 


fashion* (with) jasmine flowers which they fashioned with cotton® (they) 
decorated (them) all round, hanging (the flowers) around in many rows. 
(1. 15) Around the chamber (were) watering pots, one row; _ hanging lamps § 
(and) lamps® set around,’ one tow (and) tapers, one row; thus (did they) 
adorn (it) all. 

-(At) the place where (i. 16) (they) were to. Sine the Bodhi eee (they) 
constructed a pavilion (and) hung (it)® inside (and) outside, (and) hung up 
[strings ® of yak’s tail fans,] (by way of) adorning it. (At) the place where 
His Majesty Ramadhipati (I. 17) together with the ministers (and) chiefs of. 
the army, (and) all the retinue were to be, in order to hold the festival [of 
the dressing]! of the relic of the exalted pedahe, hey) constructed [a 
great] pavilion. | 


1 | imagine the chamber had a double layer of sweats, inner and outer. é 

2 There are two words here as to which there is some doubt,’ and which recur in 1. 14, infra. 

The oe one seems to be bat, of which the only recorded meanings are “adhesiveness” and “like- . 
ness.” I have taken it to een “imitated.” The other word is a doubtful reading. I have taken it 


. to be twow, 'L.M. tow, “cotton”? But if it is to be read Ewow, it might possibly be L.M, éaw, 


“glue,””? and the phrase might mean “stuck on with glue.” It has also been suggested that it may 
‘be L.M. kwauéw, in the sense of “chisel,? though its usual meaning is “spade” or some such 
digging implement, 
' +3. The reading is almost certain and before it there } is a trace of the word pkau, “flower? The 
latter is supported by the MSS., which however omit the word for “ copper,” 

4 Presumably this means with the same scheme of decoration as described in 1. ia, supra; but it 
might perhaps mean in antique fashion. : 
8 Ch 1a, supra, n,- 

& The word also means “candles, tapers.” 

7 Doubtful, reading. and meaning: possibly we might take it for a variant: of L.M. dala, and 
translate “altar candles,” 

8 This word also means “ presents for the nionks, avtariged in the form of a cone or pyramid. td 

9 _Presumably with cloth, as in 1, 11, supra, 

10° Reading juk: the a letter seems to be 7 on. the stone, and the MS. mule supplies the Test, of 
the word. - * 

U1 This does not seem a, very appropriate meaning, but is the only one recorded for the jaloti of 

the. MS. text. -One would have expected some word meaning “to enshritfe, and the word may be 


‘an error for salaw. 


206 =. __-EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA Ss. tn 


(I. 18) (When they had) thus constructed (the necessary buildings), 
(then) on Wednesday, the day preceding the holy day,’ the relic,® image, 
{and the Bodhi (tree) that was to be planted,] were placed (and) arranged 
. for all the [Wan Jatan ?]® princes, (I. 19) ministers (and) chiefs of the army, 
according to their order of walking in procession (in) conveying the relic, 
image, (and) Bodhi (tree); (and) the chiefs of the army were informed. 
(1, 20) Early in the morning of Thursday,‘ His Majesty Ramadhjpati 
[together with all his retinue] set, out (and) came down® and occupied the 
pavilion (1. 21) which had been built. His Majesty having thus come down,’ 
all the sons of His Majesty (and) all [the daughters of His Majesty,] 
together with all the Wan (1. 22) Jatan® princes, ministers, (and) generals,’ with 
the glory (and) splendour of a great festival,® [came down’ (and) conveyed] 
the relic together with the image (and) the Bodhi ficus. _ 
—. [(At) the time] (1. 23) of the arrival of the relic, image, (and) Bodhi 
(tree), the relic (and) image were set up fat the alace (where)] the relic of 
the exalted Buddha [was to be put;] (and) the Bodhi (tree) (I. 24) was 
placed [in] the chamber where the Bodhi (tree) was to be set. When (they) 


[had] thus placed the relic (and) the Bodhi tree, there was a festival, 
including® dancing girls, Indian” dancers, (l. 25) men making a display with 
~ shields (and) daggers, men doing sword play,” men fencing ® (with) staves, — 


wielding ®...... , (who) gave a display. (When they) had been made 


1One of the four cage of the lunar month, It appears from |, 26, infra, that the particular 


holy day of which this was the eve was the fullemoon day, which latter fell on a Thursday. As no 


month jis mentioned, one cannot be quite certain of the date; but the first month that fulfils the 
conditions is Margasirsa, and any this Wednesday was Wednesday, roth November . 1477s 
2 CE, § 78, 
8 Here in the MS, text are two worde which probably ought to be read wa jatan (or jataw)* 
‘and presumably denote some rank or office; cf. Il. 21-22, infra, [ have taken these two words as 
qualifying sma. ~~~ 4 Probably Thursday, 20th November 1477. Cf. 1. 18, supra, n 
5 Je. left the town and went to the place where all these preparations had been made. 
® Doubtful reading. Cf, 1. 18, supra, ‘ne “7 Ch, 1. 19, supra, and H 36 n. 
8 Cf, F 46n, The meaning of é/ah is “ distinct, os _It presumably merely qualifies nok, 
9 Literally, “which began with.” 
10 L.M. gald, primarily the people ‘of the part of Bengal known as Gaur (Sanskrit Gauga, Pali 


- Gola, cf. A 8 4), but nowadays defined as “a native of any country west of Burma.’’ The Burmese _ 


equivalent Auld: seems to be derived from the Mén form of the word. 


11 The meaning is doubtful. It seems possible that the first word, doubtfully read sare, is Setived 


‘from the Burmese word for. © soldier ” (cf. LL.M. sardaz pnan, “ soldier’); the second one means “ to 
move lengthwise, to throw. (asa spear).” ane two together may be descriptive of some kind of 
military display or evolution. | 12 Literally, “ striking.” 


18 The meaning depends on what follows and there is here a lacuna. If the MS. text can be | 


trusted we must substitute “wrestling” for “ wielding,’ but unfortunately” it is igi that this text 
omite part of the original, and it may have intreduced suaksieaed matter, 


. @ 


‘part in] MON INSCRIPTIONS = ay 


to give a display, (and) the sun had declined, His Nites mere aeaneel 
(for men) (I. 26) to guard the relic, His Majesty returned home. 

(On) the first of the waning (half of the month), the day (being) Friday, 
at that, time,? His Majesty came down® (and) arrived at the place of the ~ 
pavilion‘ again. Having invited (1. 27) the fifty teachers of the Order, (he) 


provided (them) with food (and) gave® (them) such gifts as (were) fitting to 
be given. as charitable efferings: (to each one) two cloth mats,® red pepper, 


(and) areca-nuts.’? His (1. 28) Majesty, having given (these as) gifts, caused - 


‘the festival, which included® dancing girls, to proceed. In the afternoon, His — 
- Majesty Ramadhipati, together with (his) family (and) kinsfolk (and) (I. 29) 


all (his) retinue, went up to the relic chamber. Then (having) set up a 


_ stand® (and) cushion hemmed [with gold,]” and having set a white umbrella 
over it, (they) ” installed the relic. (and) image (1. 30) upon the stand? The. 


“ablution of a thousand streams” was performed over the relic ; the eight 
Brahmans, holding right-voluted ® conch-shells adorned with gold, adorned 
with silver, (1. 3!) and adorned with gems, as though pouring the ablution on 
a king receiving the royal anointment,” similarly poured ablution in the 


ceremony of “a thousand streams,” and aia the Hoye) anointment * 


the relic (and) (I. 32) imagen 
When this had been done, eight teachers of the Order had to recite the 
solemn verse’ ibeing]. the mental ejaculation evi anekajati samséramy and ; 


a Literally, “ went up.” Ch the use of the coitreliitive cuth, to come down,” in 1. 20,21, a6 
"2 Thesé words are doubtful, but the alternative “early in the morning” given in the MS, text 


seems to be inconsistent. with the few traces of letters visible on the stone, The date | was propanly oe 
- Ffiday, arst November 1497, Cf. 1, 18, supra, ne 


3 Cf 1. an, supra, n ae 4 The one mentioned in, tl. x7, 20, supra. 
8. It-is. not clear why this word should be in the form skuiw (which usually gives a future or 


potential shade of meaning) instead of the ordinary kuiw. “It may be simply: an error of. the drafts: 

- man or the engraver; the MS, text has-altered it to kuiw, = Mert 
& Or * cloths (nd) mats,” or “ robes (and) mats.” Cf. EF 46, H 38 J 2A» .N Cin the conclusion, 

after I. 28), 


1 The objects. mentioned are probabli to be regarded as: - the ‘grammatical objects of the verb : 
“having: given”? . in the following line, but in order to. keep as a as possible to the original order, 


- J have split up the. phrase 


8 Cf. |, 24, supra, no 2 eras a ® Or * couch, ‘seat; board. _ 
10 Cf, H 39 mn, N 13, Bertiaps: it was a hénitned mat of cloth of gold. 
11. No “subject i is ‘mentioned. It may — conceivably haye been the king himsel, the petson. dat 
mentioned. ae 
12 Cf. IX A 4x n,. The term ees is Pali, while hers the same thing is exprenind: din Men words, ~ 
18 Sanskrit abhiseka, literalty “ sprinkling,” It might be better to render it by “ royal. lustration,” » 


. but the ceremony corresponds with the anointment practised at the coronation of  surtpean kings, 


r 


208 +. ~~ -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ~ Lvon!l rt 


the solemn verse being the verbal? (1. 33) ejaculation called yade have 


patubhavantt dhamma2 Having had (these) recited, (the king)* caused the. 


drums to be beaten (and) shouts to be raised (by the assembled multitude). 


When this had been done, at the time when Pisces was lagna‘ (I. 34) . 


(they) ® installed the relic (and) image in the relic chamber. Having installed 
the relic, all around the relic (and) image, statues of the two Chief Disciples ® 
(and) the (I. 35) eighty Great Disciples, statues of thirteen female Arhats 
who had attained pre-eminence, statues of eleven male devotees who had 
attained pre-eminence, statues of ten female devotees who had attained pre- 


eminence, a statue of the mother of the exalted (I. 36) Buddha, a statue of © 
the father of the exalted Buddha, in all one hundred (and) eighteen statues, 
which were cast in brass and overlaid with gold, were arranged al] around. © 


(1. 37) Having ceremonially burnt’ candles, (they) ceremonially scattered ° 
eRe . * perfumes; and when (that) had been (done), (they) closed the 
mouth ‘of the doorway” with a very big flat stone, which (they) overlaid 
(with) bricks. Having overlaid (it with) (L 38) bricks, (they) roofed (it 
with) a five-fold vault. As for the Bodhi (tree), (they). planted (it) at the 


time when Pisces (was) lagna us j (they) put (it) down in the hole and (1. 39) 


planted..(it). - 
Then ache set up umbrellas (and) streamers, Ae burnt candles, poured 


libations with . - ++. .” perfumed water, (and) set small pagodas around.” 


1 Very doubtful reading ; the MS, text omits it altogether, 

2 These two Pali phrases are the beginnings of solemn utterances attributed to Buddha. himselé 
immediately after his attainment of supreme wisdom, (CE. Dhammapada, Xl (Fardvagga), and 
Commentary ; Vinayapitaka, Mahdvagga, I, 1.) 

3 Though there is no subject expressed, the verb kuiw; “ caused, " implies ons and Presumably 
it would be the king, as he promoted the whole affair, 

4 That is, tangential with the eastern horizon. Cf. 1X A 12 tr. n, 

5 Cf, I. 29, supra, n. 8 Sariputta and Mogallana. 

4 Or, literally, “ burnt (and) offered.” 8 Or ‘scattered (and) offered.” 

9 The meaning of jar (or majar) is undetermined, It might ‘possibly be “ liquid,” but ae cule 
be inappropriate, because superfluous, in the context of 1, 39, infra. 

~ 10 The entrance to the relic chamber, I take this to have been at the top, not at the side, and 
; that the flat stone was laid on the top of it, and over it a fiverisyered Naulting of: brickwork, : 
1 CE 1, (33, supra, nn. ah 
48 The foregoing nouns may be in the moguler _ ; : a8 
18 Cf, 1.37, supra, ee : 
14 LLM, tamret ber. are small ‘pagodas built on the base of a ie one, ead ends Face M, 


concluding the second appendix, - 


‘PART. 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS ee 209 


[(From)* the year 839 to the year 841% of the Common Era, His 
Majesty Ramadhipati sent word to the dwelling-places* of sdmaneras desirous 
of the upasampada ordination, (as follows): “In accordance » with the 
ordinance* which we communicated to our lords as to the proper course of 


Instruction, let (our) lords promote (such) studies and report to us: (then) we 


will. cause the sdmaneras to receive the upasampada ordination in the 
Kalyani(sima).” Thus saying, His Majesty Ramadhipati sent word.. 

When the year 841 of the Common Era ‘arrived, the sémaneras having 
studied in accordance with what it was proper that. they should» study, 


including ® the Khuddhasikkha (arid) the Patimokkha, the whole company ° 


came (and) informed His Majesty Ramadhipati. Then His Majesty caused 
the sémaneras to be called together. (and) made (them) recite; (and) when 


His Majesty had heard the sdmaneras recite, there being six hundred (and) 


one’ who were able to. recite correctly, (he) caused six halls: to be built 


within the Kalydnisima (as) lodgings suitable for the six hundred (and) one 


sémaneras to lodge in, (and) had (them) hung (with) awnings. For the 508 
leading monks who. were to confer the upasampadé ordination on the six — 
hundred (and) one sdmaneras, (he) had lodgings built and curtains hung, 


while within the Kalyanisima (he) had curtains set all around (and) mats 


spread throughout, and around the Kalyanisima, for all the people who. were 
to be there (he) had pavilions? built, sloth hung, curtains set all around, (and) 
mats spread throughout. 

In the pavilion where His Majesty was. to stay together with. hig retinue 
to- celebrate the festival of the 601 sémaneras who were to receive the 


_ 1 Here begins the third appendix in the MS. text. 
2 1477-78 to 1479-80. A.D. : 
3 Literally, “ places. i 
4 Cf. the passage between our Faces H and LJ. 5-10. 
5 Literally, “ beginning with.” 
6 The reading satta seems to be corrupt. In the E.M. inscriptions it occurs, (V 43, is) in, the 
sense of “ creatures, sentient beings,” but. in M.M. this would be archaic, probably, and it does not 
seem to fit the context very well. It would be possible to read sat=da’, but that gives a similar sense, 


‘I have assumed that it stands for saihg (Pali sattho, * troop.”) which I have not, however, found 


recorded as a Mén word, 
7 Cf..J 25, of which this. whole appetite is in éifeee an “expansion (S$ 79). 
8 MS. A wrongly. has 5. 
9 I do not know: the meaning of dasa, It seems not. impossible that this is an error for: ‘asdsn, 
which word appears fo owe its origin to. a confusion between Sanskrit @vama, hermitage,” -and 


drama, pleasure garden, park,” Pali dr@mo, especially as the latter: —— ag a Binet for 
- @¢ligioua gatherings, and even a monastery: CE L. 13. 


14 


é e ; . , | 

(2100 - - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | vor. 3 ait 
upasampada ordination, (he) had curtains (and) awnings hung (and) mats 
spread. Having made these preparations, (he) caused the 50 leading monks 
who were to confer the upasampadé ordination on the 601 sdmaneras, to be 


invited: the number of these monks who had come back from. Cavin was . 


14, (namely) the leading monk Saddhamma, 1; Dhammakitti, 1; the leading 
monk Tilokagaru, 1; the leading monk Parakkamabahu, 1; Mafgalathera, 1 

the leading monk Buddhasboss, 1 ; the leading monk Gunaratanadhara, gj; the 
leading monk Neratanalafkara, 1; the leading monk Taratanamali, 1; the 
leading monk Saddhammateja, 1; Rises Ep 1; Mahadevathera, 1; 
Culabhayatissathera, 1 ; -Nanapanditamahathera, 1 ; Vijayabahupaficaparivena- 
mahathera, 1; Sirilahkagunavutti, 1;  Sinilueiabuddhathera total of those who 
returned from Ceylon,. 17. Then our lords the leading clergy of Pegu: 

the leading monk Udummara?; the leading monk Sriramarajaguru; the 
| leading monk Buddhadivakara ? ‘the leading monk Ratanagiri; the leading 
- monk Saddhammarajaguru ; the “leniding monk Saddhammadhara; the leading 
monk Suvannapaduma; the leading monk Tipitakadhara‘; the leading monk 


° 
3 


Anumadassi; the leading monk Dhammarajika ; the leading monk Samanta- 


pasadika ; thie leading monk Saddhammavijaya ; total 15° of our lords of 
Pegu. Then again: the aaa : as 


N 


dwellers °: the Saigharaja? iSammanee: the leading monk Lamufijusa®; 
-Vinayapajjota ; the leading monk Saddhammavijayasenapati: the leading 


monk Passath; the leading monk Sivali; the leading monk] (I. 2) La®; the_ 
leading monk pean aie the lating monk See a leading 


1 The MS. text has cbuddhalo, which ‘I take to be a Pes error for °buddhathe. For variant 
(and in some cases more correct) forms of some. of these names, cf, F 5-13, 34-41, ae the section 
between FandG 9. 

-2 Or Dudummara,- 
3 Or Buddhaditakara. | : 
4 Here MS, B: inserts “ the leading monk Ra,” which can hardly be his whole name, unless it 
isa ee name (not Pali like the others). 

§ There are actually only 12 names (besides the one given in the last note )» so the copyists have 
evidently dropped some.. 

® Monks leading a secluded life. in the ‘forest, Ch ae an. a 

-T Chief of the Order in a epunlty, or some pats of it. Cf. H- 3&4 4 (MS, téxt and tr...” 

8 Or Lamuajasa. : iets Sirk tee Oe Lae 

9 This name is also a suspiciously slior: one. 


Sr 


an 


monk Saddhammavilasa; the Mahathera Uttamha’; the leading © monk 
Saddhammasiri; the leading monk Dhammadassi ; the leading] (I. 3) monk 
Piyadassi; the leading monk Sasanapajjota; the leading monk [Afgulimha ; 
the leading monk Gunasigara: ..-.........- ,) total eighteen. 

_ Having thus invited] (l. 4) fifty teachers of ‘the Order, on Wednesday,. 
which was the day preceding the full-moon (day) of Phalguna,? [(the king) 
entrusted all the sdmaneras to the charge of leading nobles* including 
ministers (and)] (1. 5) “generals,! (and). caused (them) all to change (their) 
status.© One hundred sémaneras (he) entrusted - to Prince Bra Sath Den ® 


[to prepare; one hundred sémaneras (he) entrusted to Prince Sath Tray 7 to 


prepare ;] (1.6) one hundred sdmaneras (he) entrusted to Prince Wah? 
Cakkawade to prepare; one hundred sdmaneras (he) entrusted to Prince 
[Wan*® Cau Nirasin® to prepare ; one hundred sémameras (he) entrusted to 
Cau Mharhat]®” (1. 7) to prepare; one hundred (and) one samaneras (he) 
entrusted to Prince Wan® Ay Gam Bin to prepare. 

The requisites [to be given to the 6ot sémaneras (diy) six] (1. 8). 
hundred (and) one sets [of monastic robes, ] six hundred (and) one alms- 
bowls, six hundred (and) one umbrellas, six hundred (and) one staves, [601 
paper] fans, [601 hemmed mats,]™ (I. 9) six hundred (and) one boxes for 
areca-nuts ” together with bottles of lime, areca-nut slicers, knives, spoons, 


(and). napkins, (were) counted out (and) ore to these wading nobles [who es 


were preparing (the sémaneras). 
His Majesty. having made. these jena (1. to) (on) the: Tal y day 


of the full moon of the month of Phalguna, the day (being) ‘Thursday? 
early” in the PiCraINe, His Majesty ae down and went to stay to » the 


) 


1 E do. not know the ees of buin Garant burt) lgan. nee it erredents the “nani of an 
individual monk, there is one name missing in this third list. an: 

& Wednesday, 23rd February 1480. pages ow gs 

3-Cf, H gt. oe eGR 6; 

5 That is, into the full monastic condition. | te 

8 There is some doubt ‘as to the reading of this name (cf. the texts) but the. probability seems ‘to a 
be that it was Des, which one copyist first misread De7 and another further transformed into Det. : 

7 In Il. 17-26, infra, the form appears to be Araya 

8 This seems to be a title, Cf. M an-22, 


‘the text, 
10 This evidently represents Mahayat ce Maharaja). MS. B has wien, but that cannot | “have 


~ been the reading on the stone, where the final letter is ¢ not, 7, 


11 Or “ cushions.” . 


12 On ee, and the whole passages c cf, .H 39, supra n 
18 Thursday. 24th February 7480, . 


9 There is some doubt” as to the true reading: of this name : cf. Il. 18, ‘10, saftey and the note on ee . 


Bor 


e 


are : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [voL. wr’ 


northward of the Kalyani] (1. qt) monastery, invited the fifty teachers of the 


‘Order to enter into their lodgings, [gave them alms-food, and arranged a: 


grand festival with] (1. 12) men sporting (and) competing. 

Then the leading nobles, who had arrangéd the sd@maneras, set out om 
[Pegu. When they set out, Prince Bra Sai Dej* led the way. The order] 
_(. 13) of their marching? (was thus): men carrying the hemmed mats ® 
led the way; after the mats (came) men carrying, the umbrellas, [alms- 
bowls, (and) staves; after them, men bearing the areca-nut boxes‘; after] 


(1.14) them, men- carrying the monastic robes. Then came a hundred _ 


elephants with a hundred sémaneras mounted on them. Among the hundred, 


[men wearing caps® led the way, after them (came) men] (I. i5) wearing 
Rein,’ (and) after the k/uzn® (came) men wearing gilt hats. All these 


hundred sémaneras also wore [plain] peaked turbans. {Musical instruments, 
including’ the bat, sveaz (and)]. (I, 16) basa,? were severally disposed at. 


intervals in the procession. 

~ The hundred sémaneras. arranged by Prince Sith Tray® [came next; the 
order of (their) going (was) similar ; (their) turbans (were)] (I. 17) variegated 
in colour.” The hundred sémayeras arranged by Prince Sanh Kray® having 
passed by, the hundred sdmaneyas arranged by | Prince [Cakkawade came 
along in their turn. The order of (their) going] (1. 18) (was) similar ; (their) 


turbans were peaked likewise. The hundred sémaneras arranged by Prince 


Cakkawade having passed by, [the hundred sdémaneras arranged by Cau 
_ Nirasifi” came along] (1. 19) in their turn. The order of (their) going (was) 


similar ; (their) penen (were) Vatiegated in colour.’ The hundred samaneras 


a 
1 As to the. correct form of this name, cf, 5, supra, n. ist 


2 The text. has gata, “in front,” here, apparently; but the MSS. may: be igh in n reading i it as>* 


gah, and I have left it untranslated. 

3 Cf. 1. 8, supra, n 

4. CE. H. 38-305 supra, n 

| 5 L.M, khapead is defined as a “ fez,” and: was cheestorers a somewhat tall cap. 

: 6 The meaning of kluin has not beet determined, but presumably it was some kind of head gear. 
The ‘copyists of the MSS. have arbitrarily altered it into kguia, “umbrellas.” - 

7 Literally, “* beginning with.’ 

-8 Bat (Sanskrit. védya) is any m musical instrument and the ward may be used here merely as a 
generic of the next two; sreaz.is a wind instrument, the “ken” or Lao organ, a kind of Pan pipes, 


and basd either goes with ‘it adding ne to it, or is some other undetermined kind of musical . 


instrument, 
§ The correct form seems to be Kydy, as in th 17,26, te 
10 Doubtful meaning, based ‘on the sense of L,M, dawan, aiep ees: 
i Ch note on I. 19 of the text. : 


‘pART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS =” 213 


arranged by Cau Nwarasii’? [having] passed by,*? [the hundred sd miner as} 
arranged by [Cau Mharat]® (1. 20) came along in their turn. The order of 


(their) going (was) similar; (their) turbans (were) also variegated in colour.’ 


The hundred sémaneras arranged by Cau [Mharat having passed by,] (1. 21) 
the hundred (and) one sémaneras arranged by Prince Ay Gam Bin came along 


in their turn. The order of Chey) going (was) similar; [(their) turbans 
_ (were) also variegated in colour.* Thus] (1.22) did the six hundred (and) 


oné sémaneras change their status ° (and) the leading nobles who accepted 
the charge of those sémaneras [went (and) arranged (them) in the lodgings 


. of those 601 sémaperas, | (1. 23) (and) caused (them) to be provided with 


food. 

- Then, when the fifty teachers of the Order had partaken of the day’s 
boiled rice,© His Majesty [invited (them) to enter into] (1. 24) the sma; and 
His Majesty, together with (his) retinue, also entered into the consecrated 
simaé Then the hundred sémameras [arranged by Prince Bra Saf Det]® 
(I. 25) were called up in (their) order and were made monks. Having 
become monks, (they) were sent off to lodge again in their several lodgings» 
[(and) the hundred sémaneras] arranged [by Prince Sam] (1. 26) Kray were 
called up in successive order and made monks. In this way, [in accordance 
with the order of their going in procession, (they)] (1. 24) were invited to 


-¢ome up and our. lords were all made monks. When they had become- 


monks, (they) were sent to lodge in their several lodgings. Thus [was it 
arranged. Among the hundred sémaneras| (Il. 28) who were under. the charge 


of Prince Bra Sath Den, in regular order two. by two were called up and . 
, our lords (the ordaining monks) were caused to. confer [the upasampada*® 


“1 Cf, note on 1. 19 of the text. 

2 The MS. omits the preceding clause and its text is corrupt here, as it is in ie middle. of 1. 38, 
supra, where the text of the stone serves as a check on it. But from. the general similarity of all 
“these descriptions it is easy to restore the true reading, 

3 Cf,.1. 6, supra, n. oe 4Cf, 117, supra, n. 

5 CE I 55 supra, n. 

6 That is, the day’s meal, taken just Before mid-day, as distinguished: from breakfast. 

71 am not sure that this is the meaning, as it involves an abnormal order of the words. But 
“into the consecration of the sim@” does not make good sense: the business in hand was not the 
consecration of the simd, which had already been dome, but the ordination of these novices int fully, 
ordained monks. : 

& Cf, 1. 5, supra, n, ae 

9 The first lettér of this word | is the last thing legible on. the estampage ftom, ‘ts stone, and the 


: end of Face N must have been a few words further on. What follows is preserved only in. the MSS, 
and must have been inscribed on the reverse of the same stone, the top part of which is now lost,, 


‘a1, °°  ~ ~EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA_ 
% ; E 

ordination (upon them). At the time of the conferring of the upasampada 

ordination, (there was) one upazjhdya, a person who recited the kammavied, 


(and for) each sémanera (there were) two monks, holding the hammaviica, to 


confer (on him) the ugasampada ordination. 

When the day closed,. His Majesty, perme arrange lies the presence 
of) leading nobles, scribes, drums, (and) lights,’ 
who were to confer the upasampadé ordination, did so from the afternoon of 


the full-moon day of the month of Phalguna, the day (being) Thursday ? . 
oo. until the fourth of the waning (half) of Phalguna, the = (being) Monday ) 


it was noontide when they had finished. | 
When the 6or sdmaneras had thus been made fo receive the upasam- 


e 


| { VOL... Ib” 


returned home, Our lords, 


padé ordination, four. teachers of the Order were invited to preach the 


doctrine of the Patimokkha to the persons who had received the- new 
-upasampada ordination. There were offered to the four teachers of the 
Order, who preached the Patimokkha to the persons who had received the 
“new upasampadé ordination, to each of them four cloth mats,. two barrels* of 
areca-nuts, (and) two viss of red pepper. oe 

- On the fifth of the waning (half) of the month of Phalguna, the day. 
? (being) Tuesday, 
down and all the 50 teachers of the Order together with the six hundred 
~ ~(and) one persons who had received the new upasampada ordination were 
entertained ® with viands of divers kind and food of various sorts, each of the 
teachers of the Order (being given also) two cloth mats, one hemmed mat, 
two viss of black pepper, four viss of Indian pepper, a thousand bast fruits,” 
a box for areca-nuts and betel,’ together with a bottle of lime, areca-nut 
slicers, (and) a napkin, the aforesaid pious gifts being presented as offerings" 
by His Majesty. To the 601 persons who had received the new upasampadé 
ordination, besides the “eight requisites” which had already been bestowed, 


were also given ‘two viss each of Indian pepper (and) four hundred das¢~ 


1 Cf H. pee and n. 
3 Thursday, a4th February 1480,” 
8 Monday, 28th. February 1480. . 
4 Or “ tubes,” Or else some high narsiera (100 or 11008) has been omitted by ‘the copys and the 
“word Aduis is used in the sense of “umbrella,” which seems less likely here. 
6 Tuesday, 29th February 1480.. ; 
6 Literally, “ pour out,” but 1 suspect taruip, & to feed, ” was the original redding. eee 
- 7 Perhaps some sort of areca-nuts. 
8 Ch H 3839, supra, nn. 
. y i 


early in the morning, His _ Majesty Ramadhipati came. 


PART In] 


¢ 


MON INSCRIPTIONS . re Ae ans 


fruits? Having Ae been presented with gifts, the 50 ceneliore of the Order 
When the 50 teachers of the Order had been thus © 


were dismissed home. | 
dismissed home, all the 601 persons who had received the upasampadd 
ordination, according to .- - ad See oa ree . . ,? were made to depart 
in due order, and His Majesty having regarded them with agi caused 
them to return to their dwelling-places. 


Such deeds as these did His. Majesty Ramadhipati do, Hecate fis om 


- great delight in religion ; desiring that those who received the ufasampadé 
ordination should be firm (and) steadfast, did (he) do such deeds as these. 


Hereafter, also, for the term of life of His Majesty Ramadhipati, (for) every 


simanera who shall desire to receive the upasampadé ordination His Majesty 
Ramadhipati will make preparation in like manner to have- the upasampada 
‘Inasmuch as that is so, may the princes who are — 


ordination conferred, 
replete with faith and with wisdom, who shall wield the sovereignty of the 
city of Haasawati hereafter, also impart strength to religion | According as 


"we arranged this, (so may they) follow after ty 


Posksorips as to the dates in the preceding tramslation. 
83. Excepting the anomalous case noted at F 38, the verifiable dates in 


the inscriptions of the Kalyanisimd, when collated together, fall into. a, 
consistent scheme or series running from January 1476 to the end of 


February 1480. When rendered into dates of the Julian (or Old Style) 


calendar by the methods explained in Irwin’s The Burmese Calendar ee 
1gor), this scheme involves the following elements :—. | 
boo Aly The first day of the waxing. half of the month of Caitra (ze. the 
first day of ‘the Jumar year) fell in the years 1476-79 on the following A 

dates : (a) Saturday, 24th February 1476, (6) Saturday, 1 5th March ~ 


1477) (ec) Wednesday, 4th March 1478, (2) a uiels aist February 1479" 


1 Ponape. some sort of areca-nuts, 
21 do not understand guia gah baper. 


app endices. 


“4 As the Burmese ‘calendar reckons the: commencement. of the year © (with a view to giving ‘the 
year its serial number) purely by solar reckoning, the initial’ dates of Caitra, together with a 
variable number of other dates i in that month and sometimes even in the next. month, fall into the — 


close of the preceding year. of the Common Era ; in these cases. they fell in the years 897 ‘to 840. 


_ Hence Stinday, the ninth of ¢he-waxing’ half of Caitra, 837 (E 45), fell: on Sunday, ‘grd March 1476; 
and Wednesday, the fifth of the waxing half of Caitra, #38, (K 10), fell on imag saa March 


4477" * 


3 End of. the eiuee “stone -of se Mén cis as stated. in the Mss, and of the last of the 


) 


6 Oe RPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA nae “Tyo. re 


~ Gi) The year 898 was reckoned as a wa-gyt- tat year, Le not a a 


was the month of Asadha intercalated (as appears from a_ comparison of the. 
dates in E 48, 53, and subsequent dates of the same year) but. Jyestha was | 
een an extra day, making it a. month. of 30° days, instead of its normal: 29. 
(iit) The year 841 was reckoned as a wa- nge-tat year, 2.8. Asadha- was i 
intercalated but Jyestha had only 29 days. 3 | Sap: 
The intervening. years were, of. course, ordinary years, without any 


- intercalation at all. Now it is to be observed that the above: elements nea 


- the ‘calendar exemplify both under’ (ii) and (ii) distinct breaches of the rule — 


stated in para. 64, p. 13, of Irwin's work. But in para. 65 of the same page. 


_ he notes that the actual practice of the. calendars frequently differed from 


that rule in the period 1738-1900 AD.; anid it is evident from our record 
that the same was the case. in the last. quarter of the I 1) century. 


G.B.C.P.O:— No, 5» BAS, §-7+1998=600, 


« 


‘VOLUME IV | page? 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


BEING 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


EDITED BY 


U MYA. 


SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA.CIROLE- © 


MON INSCRIPTIONS... 
Section II—The Mediaeval Mon Records, = 
Nos, XIUI—XVIHI 


BY 


C, O. BLAGDEN- 


CONTENTS. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS ae ie ae 
No. XIJI.—AN INSCRIPTION OF THE AJAPALA PaGODA, 
PEGU. 


No. XIV.—AN Inscrierion OF THE SHWEGUGY! PaGoDA, 
PEGU. 


No. XV.—AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PaGoDa, 
RANGOON. 


No. XVI.—-AN INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY, 
Prau. 


No. XVII.—AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KyAg Pan PaGoDa, 
PEGU. 


No. XVIIL—An INscrIprion oF THE GAUNGZEGYUN 
PaGoba, PEGU. 


PostTscriPT one one ote ena eee 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


A 


MON INSCRIPTIONS. 
No. XIII. 
Aw INSCRIPTION OF THE AJsAPALA PacopA, PEcu. 


Descriptive Accotnt. 

34*, This record is engraved on two faces (presumably of the same 
stone), the parts occupied by the lettering here transcribed being on Face | 
A 4 ft in height by 3 ft. 9 in. in breadth and on Face B 3 ft. 2 in. by 
3 ft, 6 in. The letters are about 1 in, high, letter ¢ is about ? in. long, 
and the interlincar space is about 1 in. Though a good deal weathered, as 
are many of the other stone inscriptions of Lower Burma, this one is still 
for the most part legible. 


85. Like the two following inscriptions, it is connected with a sacred 
building erected in commemoration of episodes in the life of Buddha 
shortly before or after his attainment of supreme enlightenment. 


In this case the events are those which occutred under an Indian 
fig-tree (or banyan, Ficus Indica) known as the Ajapala, or goatherds’, fig- 
tree, in the immiecliate neighbourhood of the Bodhi tree under which the 
supreme enlightenment was aiiained. Before going to sit under the Bodhi 
tree, the Bodhisativa rested under the Ajapila fig-tree, where he received 
from the maiden Sujata an offering of rice cooked in milk (A 1—-22). 
The next seven weeks, heginning with the one during which he became a 
Buddha under the Bodhi tree, are especially celebrated. After his attain- 
ment of Buddhahood he spent another week gazing steadfastly at the 
Bodhi tree and satisfied the devas of his Buddhahood by performing a 
miracle; during the third week he walked up and down a “ cloistered 
walk” which they prepared for him. These incidents are commemorated 
in the next record, No. XIV. The fourth weck was spent in a “house of 


* Numbering of the paragraphs in this part is continued from Part I of Volume IL 


2 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. Iv 


gems”, also prepared by the devas and mentioned on Face A of the 
present record, 1. 24, from which he then returned to the Ajapala fig-tree 
to spend the fifth week (A 23-4). During this week he was visited by a 
Brahman, to whose question as to what really constituted a Brahman he 
replied by laying stress on ethical qualifications, not on caste and birth 
(A 25-6). Another event in this week was the recognition by the evil 
spirit Mara of his failure in his conflict with Buddha and the fruitless 
efforts of Mara’s three daughters, the personifications of the passions, to 
tempt the enlightened one (A 26-35). The sixth week was spent under a 
Mucalinda tree (Barringtonia acutangula), where a Naga king, also named 
Mucalinda, sheltered him from the rain with his hood ; and the seventh 
under a Rajayatana tree (believed to be Buchanania latifolia) where he 
was visited by two travelling merchants, Tapussa and Bhallika, to whom he 
gave eight hairs from his head, which according to the traditions of Burma 
are now enshrined in the Shwedagon Pagoda at Rangoon. This episode, 
as well as much of the preceding, is related on Face A of No. XV, but 
unfortunately that part of the record is in a very damaged condition. 
After these seven celebrated weeks, Buddha returned again to the Ajapala 
fig-tree and there reflected as to whether he should preach the Law, and, 
if so, to whom. This is related in our present record, and when he had 
decided the matter in his mind he left the Ajapala fig-tree to go to the- 
region of Benares (B 1—21). 


86. The last four lines of our record tell of the building of the 
Ajapala pagoda at Pegu in imitation of the one that had been erected long 
before on the site of the Ajapala fig-tree. It is unfortunate that a good 
deal is missing in the text here. In the last line there is a date, but the 
year number is not quite certain. If the text as here printed represents 
the true reading of the year, the date fell into the summer of 1480 A.D. 
As however both the year and the week-day are in doubt, it is not 
possible to check it. 


87. For the episodes in the life of Buddha that have been briefly 
noted in § 85, reference can be made to various translations from Buddhist 
works, among which the following have been consulted :-— 


T. W. Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birth Stories, Vol. I, London, 1880 


(especially the revised edition by Mrs. Rhys Davids, London, n. d.) based 
on the Nidanakatha, 


parT I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 3 


The Mahavagga of the Vinaya Pitaka, translated by T. W. Rhys 
Davids and H. Oldenberg, in Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XIII, 
Oxford, 1881. 

E. H. Brewster, The Life of Gotama the Buddha, London, 1926. 

The Sarhyutta Nikaya of the Sutta Pitaka, Book IV, Marasarhyuttarh, 
translated by Mrs. Rhys Davids in The Book of Kindred Sayings, London, 
1917 (Part 1, Sagatha-Vagga, Pp. 153-9). 

P, Bigandet, The Life or Legend of Gaudama, Vol. I, 3rd ed, 
London, 1880. | 

In my notes I have given mainly references from the last named 
work as it is particularly connected with Burma. 


88. It should perhaps be mentioned here that at the Upakasamaga (or 
Bhikkhunima) pagoda, Pegu, there is a fragmentary inscription of which 
lines 1 to 7 contain a much abridged version corresponding roughly to 
parts of lines 2, 3, 6—10, 20 and 21 of Face B of our record. A 
comparison of the two has been of some assistance in the reading of 
doubtful words in both. 


Text.’ 


A 


1. IL IL Bodhisa[t puily lufkau tJu[rau cnajm pa dukkalrac}ariy[4] 
pda[y Uruwela tuy] II [het ma cwin brjapuiln’ m]a(j)jhimapatipat 
ma dah rah gah II dhar 


2. palfija [sat]i [samadh]i gafh jjno[k mar 4 tuy] 11 [pday] prayam 
[batarn] (14)' [bralmak kitu} bafsak gah gol’ fa[t s]wap [lJapo 
jalm Jnok 

1 Above the continuous text and separated from it by an empty space of two to three inches, there. a 

a replica of ll, 1 and 2 of the text as far as the word swap (which in the replica is near the yogi 

of its third line). It has the variant reading dukkaracariyat (1. 1) and probably kate (1. 2), Much 

illegible. “ 
2 Cf 1 A 52, XII D 39, J 17, 18. In the last two places the atte ie be bapuin, 
® ‘The complex letter occurring here probably represents only jh, not jf. ; mae: 
*There is no room for the words, so it is assumed that the “ fourteen” 18 expressed in numeral . 

figures, As to the date, see the note on the text. 
5 Possibly katy. 


10. 


FPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


masun praki [tuy II trladah [ma sgo’ dah kyak] (cmat)' [ga]h 
ph{yuih lar cuit ra II pday thay] si [brapen] (gah) [yah lana] 
gafh kfjon Ibuit k[u] jlrjaku 


[tay II pra{p a] jafren jray slum” Aja[p]ala [tuy IT]... . (tuy) 
.... (wen)... *[pindapat glah IT. .... (tuy II) [gata ket 
bwai.. n]}' duih brama[k dand|ay 


[ke}t tnarh [jlray tu[y] II [Blodhisa[t dma]n [t]au ra [II pday - 
prayam gah II Sujata tlu[y ma] c(u)i[m dah tau kwon] (samneh)’ 
[Senani gah] kha [ma dah] samat lwuit [te]- 


[’ gah] II [4 pday t]narh [jray sum] Ajapa[la tuy II kha ey dik 
ma go’ gayon tuy ma] no[m jati]........ [II pday patisan- 
dhi ey] kufli}p [t]la galh] II kwon [trJuh 


mwaly II ey go’ ma II braman dak] ta[h hen ey sbali] (tla) [ey 
fii gah tuy II pa lar patthana]...... (tuy) [II atuin patthana 
deh ma pa gah] dok pen uiw [t]uy II he- 


[t] ma [sbal]i dewa[t]au [jray sum Ajapala gah II] bra[m]an 
[dak tah gah deh twlim phyu[ijn lar [ra IJ dik brau Punna 
tuy ma] cu[in dah tjaw [mbo]’ tafh deh gah] II [d]e[h] calka 
tu]- 


y [k]ufiw tit 4] mah [tlah da[m4h ma sbali dewaltau [ra II kha 
gah Punna tit 4 tuy II] fi[at ket Bodhisat ma gata ket bwoy 
duih® bram&k] ma dan[d]la[y dmaa tnarh jral- 


[y] Sfulm If na [jraku lyah ma drelp dit a gah] II [uit kuiw 
janok] tnarh [chu ma] da[h s]a[k thar uit gah deh fiat ket tuy 
Il na jraku hen dewatau ma sduja [bali] 


\ Fairly probable reading. 
? Or suthm, 


* The preceding looks like ean win 
“to wander”, ic, collecting alms. = _- 


(or wrw). If the first word is meant for sgazten it would mean 


* Looks lke ban or san, 
* The reading is nearly certain. 
‘Looks like dufy, © 2 


parT I] 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


We 


18. 


19. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 5 


[bakar pluily rwlo[h sdah II deh k]sap [tuy deh] cau [a II 
atuin' trjadafh] de[h ma fiat gah deh huim ku Sujata ra] II 
kh{a gah] Sujata sdik ml(u)ik mi]p cuit pa]- 


ma{h san tlufy II thJah thfor ma nwom] bnat [huh mwoy lak 
kasip gah II cut brapen braman? uit suim tuy II na thah] 
thfor m]wa[y] (ra) [c-an grop braman’ gah tluy na 


[ya}t ma g[wu c-Jah gah [gwi tuy II na kriya thar uit suim gah 
gfii ghat ket tlu[y II thah thor suim braman gah II kdip gah 
yuiw ket [t]uly MI na ajnfu]bho[w ma j]a[o]- 


(k] tlah gafh] I [k]wfom k]u (dik brau Punna gah tit 4 ra I] 
kha gah na jamnay hen na lyjah [jrak]a Bodhisat ma krajo’ 
[dma tau gah II] ufit kJu[i} janfok tnarh chu ma dah sa]- 


[k] thor gah [deh fla[t ket tju[y 11 samtim dewatau jray sum 
hen Jar] c{uit tuy II suim kuiw ma kuiw braman* het jo’ jo! 
[a tlu[y II [thah] thofr ma cut] 


p{rlaman gah phy[uih nu lati [kdip tuly [II yat kambu ma gwi] 
p[raman gah sah kle’ tuy II thah thor ma grop gah pok k]ife’ 
tuy I] na padjik [thor]...... ela wuts 


la[r] na dak mramar gah deh] ra[p ket tluy II [prap] 4 [jaren 
Bodhisat tuy deh dm&n tau I pday kala gah II praben 
Ghatikara Mahabruim ma kuiw] (d). 


(n) . [n® a] ra II Blodhisat] (ha) [fiat] pra[ben. gah thuy II [ay 
stum gah rla(lah) [tuy dJut (kJeft dak ra II kha gah Su }j[ata 
prap 4 tuy II thah thor tuy] (ma pe)- i . 


(a tjan na prama{n] d[ak tah glah II drabu[t cju[t] lata gata 
tay Bolrisat® ra II [kha gafh rau wo’ deh] (gah IT yo’) [tila] 
ey dewal[tau patthana tuy ma ey rada]- 


1 Looks like afuiw, 

? Perhaps praman, 

3 For kite, 

* Perhaps praman, : 

> Possibly danan or dandan, Cf. VII A 3, 
§ For Bodhisat, 


into the passage, 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. rv 


20, [na mik tarh] j[on tila ey gah II dok pen ku ey tuy] ra [IJ] rau 
pa{tthan]a cui[t] ey di[k ma] d[ok pen] (gah) [hen IT patthanja 
cui[t tila ey ler kuiw dok] 


21. [pen fi gah tuy II thah thor tluy [ma nwom nhjuh [mway lak] 
kafsla[p gah]. . [k ku br]. . (y) [tluly II Sujata twak clau [4 
ra II kha gah Bodhisat twak cui] 


22. [h 4] pday [cram krujh Nerafijara tuly II pday cnijh Sulpatittha 
gah pa palfibho|k [praman gah ra] II II pdaly] than ja[rle[n 
bodhi gah II lukau ba coh djac[am tna]- 


23. [y pan sattaha gah II k]ya[k] t[rlay dm[a]n [t]uly hen II plday 
thay] calh] pi [bramak kji[t]u [jih] gah [II ylah [Jan[a hen 
ky a[k tray daloh’ ktuiw a4] II : 


24. [ni ratanjaghara [tuy II 4 dman tau] (a)sma[r tna  [jray 
sjurh[m] Aja[pala tuy] lufk]Jau da[pah thay] gafh II bic]a[ran]a 
ket [dhar clas[uin ket] dra[sok phalasamapat] 


25. [tuy] klyak trlay d[marh} tau [IT] II [pday kala gah] ba[mnah 
mlwaly ma himu] (Hunhukajati® gah) [prap] tlun [sma]n 
sram[an ku ky]ak [trJay [tlufy II kyak tray le]- - 


26. [r sah kui]w [srama]n [ku deh ra] II [IT] p[dai [kJa[t]a kl yak* 
tray ma dman pdai phar Ajapla[la] gafh kuim] II s[min Ma] 
pap 4 tlju[n-jaren’ ky]ak [tray t]u[y] (II)...... * tuy ma 


ui |- 


27. [t] culit ma phylufiJh salnnithan] tradah k[yak tray ma] dah 
ky[ak cmat IT tradah plu[gglu[i]w [ma c-ah cmat gah deh] 
h[uim tuy IT deh] bluiw 4 nor jray Ajapala II bwoy duih] 


1 For dalok ? 
* For dman, 
* For Huhkunkajatr. 
* For kyak. 
5 ° * 
: Bs % of lua appears to be superscript over the 7 of jaren. 
mussing word looks something like lahuim, “ speech ", but it seems difficult to fit this sense 


.RT | 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


32: 


33. 


34. 


35. 


1 Between kajo’ and fuy there is either an original flaw i 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 7 


Ps 


b[ramak] (gah) [twak a tuy IIT pday dor tlarau [jnok deh kajo” 
tuy II carit cah tarjau ga[h] de[h] cari[t ket tuy deh dawin] 
(den) [dmarh” tau II kha [gah] 


[tradok cuit deh that lwon san tuy IJ tan tuy ma deh]... . [d] 
... [lor] pld}ai kana(t)’ [deJh [k]u[im ler IJa(luy) [c(upit 
kuim] (deh) [ha tim ra II kha] 


[Ma ma laluy cuit gah II smin] I[n go] [lapah ket tuy II smin 
In (bjuim ku Paficasi]kha [imah gah IT kha gah kw(a)n brjau 
Ma [pi tuy ma himu] (II) [Tanha IT A}ra[ti] 


[II Raga II gah fiat ket s|m[in mba deh tuy ma den] d[m}{[n 
tau gah II cuih thom] .........-.- * {ku mJba d[e]h [tluly 
Il prap] a [jareh kyak tray]... (ra) [IT] rup 


[brau samat Iwut pli [klath mwai wa] IT [rjup brau lwut ma ha 
go] [kwan pi klath mwoy wa II rup brau ma go’ kwajn mwaly 
pi klarn m]w[oy wa [II rup] bfrau ma go’ kwan ba pi klarh 
mwo ly 


[wa II rup brau ma dah taday fiah pi klarh mwoy wa II rup 
brau ma jnok fii pi klath mw)oy [wa II rau wo’ turau heJA 
[b]rau pi pi [klarh deh 1o”] (nimit bdah)’ [tuy II deb] 


[to’ prap a jare(h=)kyak® tray] (tuy deh to)” huilm juim] (tau) 
(ku kyak tray deh to’ ha go’ akhwon deh to’ tuy] (deh to’) 
[kalen cau] 


[jaren mba deh to’ ra II IT] 


n the stone or some small word (such a8 


) has been effaced, 
? Por dnan. 


* Conceivably kanak, 
‘There are two words here that have not been identified, Each 


or £, 


seems to begin and end with 


5 These two words seem almost certain readings, thongh the second one might be baz, 


® It is very doubtful whether there is any superscript # here at all. 
” Conjectural restoration, 


seem fairly clear the actual reading is doubtful because th 
definitely identified, . : 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. Iv 


B 
i iy kyak tray] ............ [chu 
. [IT ID] khfa] tiflja pluiy kyak tray] vee : 
eee dapah tnay tluly gah II tit tlun no(r-)Rajayatana 


tuy kalen] 


2. plilan {4] pdaly than jray su(rh)m Ajapala II] (casuin ket)! [phala- 
samapati kyak tray dman’ tau ra IJ pday kala tuy ma dman 
pday than gah| 


3. [glasalp ait] mwam’ ma can that ktuiw dah ku kyak tray ra II 
dhlar tuy ma ey kuli go’ gran ke} (wo’)' [gah II sjoh ler sjoh 
san II IT] 


4 s[j(ujin na fiah s]fia{t san] II s[jJui[A na fiah slgra[n ket san IT] 
(iy tdim)* [san II atjufi]A dhar ma [ey go’ gran ket] (wo’)* [ey 
ma twah ku fiah c-an] II [fiah ha gran] ¢{i]- 


5. [m] ra sdah [m]a II [lam-Jon la{m]-a[t] j[rlafkju [ey hen ma sdah 
uiw so} II atu[ija [dhlar ma ley go] graff ket wo’ gah] II [ey 
(hen? spa ke[w srajuia tladui- 


6. [A II s-aly [puray spujau saka tluy II [sdman ket ra II ku fiah 
c-Ajh [ta ey ha mik tw]ah ra gah tuy II [cjulit mw ay [m]way 
i{uy] ma spa (an’ kabut) [pday ma stwah] dhar [ku] 


7. fialh gah] kituliw [dah] ku kyak traly ra II kh] ga(sah)’ 
[Sahampati MahaJbruilm tim ke} [gasap] cui[t kyak tram’ t]uy 
II grakwom bruim grakwom dewaltjau ma 


' The reading is not quite certain, but cf, A 24. 
* Between dma and fi there is an 
® For sway, : 


In ll, 3, 4, it is possible to read te’ instead of wo’ but in 1. 5 the reading wo’ 


original flaw which also separates ¢ from & ¢ in the next line, 
4 
* Though the letters 


is certain. 

e words have not been 
* The word keh might perhaps be read then, 

It might be Possible to tead ara. : 

8 


ly for gah, and translated accordingly, 
* Presumably for tray, - ; 


T 1] 

g, [t]au tau plday cah lnim] cak[k]awa [gah trawi] ba[wuih ket tuy 
II palp' a jalreh kyak] tray ra [IT] kha gafh k]bah mway duih 
pan{dah ti] yok ket samim’ ta- 

9. [y] lifholr [kyak] tram’ tuly II het tuy ma] (sgo’) [kuiw twah 
dhaw ku sat gamluiji gafh II] at* wuiw ku k[y]ak tray ra II 
[ky]ak traly t]un ler 

10. [kJuiw wuilw ku Sjahampa[ti Mahabruim tuy hen II]...... 
.. [tha]y gafh II pday than trjawi w([a] Mafha]bodhfi glah 
guim® II kyak tray gange[h plifp|da[p]a[t] 

11. tuy II d[man tlau pdaly th]i{n gah] ra IT [pday payam saga] 
(thay) [cah pan bram]ak [kitu a(si)t gah II gasap rau wok] 
k{tjui[w] dah ku [k]yak tray ra II isi Af]]ara 

12. [K]ala[ma] gah IT [ma salah tajbah [k]ufiw dhaw] (lo) . 
[samapat’ dapaéh] (ku ey dah)* ufiw] da ci IT [upak]é jnok [ku 
ey san II ku ijsi AflJira Kala- 

13. [ma] hen [ey ma glap gwfor stwah dhJar [twi? ra rau gah] (ksap 
tuy) [II kha gah’) (tradah isi)" [Alara]... ." p[day dapah thay 
ma lwon tju[y ma khy(ujit 4 IT] ma 4 

14. k{t]uiw dah] p{day akiJcca[fiayatanjabbu[m” gah tim] (ket) [tuy 
II isi] Aflara] (Kalama) [ha mway ra ci II isi U[djaka kwon 
[Ram] tu{n ler If het tuy ma] 

1 For prap. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 9 


* For samip. 

® This seems the most likely reading. At first I was inclined to read p-or mea, 

* There is no virdma visible on the f. 

5 Bor kum. 

® For wo’, 

coe looks like Jokiyasamapat, which seems itprobable as Jokkuéarasamapat would be more. 
le. SSG 


® Restored, but supported to some extent by traces of letters, 
* |] take this to be an error for fd. 

Almost certain, 

1 Possibly wo’, 

” For akifcaiiia’, in Pali spelling. 


2 


10 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 


pn 


5. [deh salah tabah kuiw dhar] newalsafianasafiayatanasama pat dah u? 
da ci II] (jnok tau) [upaka] ku [ey]... . [ku isi Udaka hea 
ey ma gal- 


16. [p gwor stwah dhar tl4° ra gah tuy II gasap cuit kyak tray ktuiw 
dah tun II] (kha gah) [tradah isi] Udaka ma khyuit [traday] 
ba[tarh gah ma 4 ktuiw] (dah) 


17. [pday newasafiandsafiayatanalbhum [gah] (tim) [ket tuy IJ isi] 
(Udaka ha) [mway ra ci II tipuin paccawar* to’] ma klo[n 
blui[t] .. [ku ey] (kha) 


18. [ma pa dukkaracariyat gah Ler II [u]paka jnok ku ey sajn dalh] 
uilw da ci II ku tipuin paccawlar [to’ hen] ey ma [gap gwlor 
s[twah dhar tla’ rwo]- 


BOSS Rs we i Si tects ae Ue ee ae es [’ ci II] tipui[n paccawor] (to’ 
tau)° [pday than tuy deh] to’ [ma] dmag* ro [glah tu[y II kyak 
tray ksap bicdrana| (mwa)- 


20. (y tuy) [II tradah tila puin paccawor to’] (ma pa datau)” [pday 


dun Baranasi pdlay grlip Isipa[t]ana gafh tim ket] tuy [II ey 
s-4| (dun Bara)- 


21. (nasi fii) [glah [tuy] IT [pdlay [thay si] brape[A kitu asat gah -hen 
Il _kyak tray tit] 4 [nor] (smar” tnarh) [jray su(rh)m] Aja[p]a[la ra 
aes ee re 


22, [jray sum Aljapa[la tuy] ma cui[n dah tau] (than) [paribhok kyak 
tray gah smih ma nwom ku puin tamla] (ma sjuh) [sduik pday 
sasana] (ma pa) [tarh ku] 


' For ui. : 
* Looks like Ruéi and is perhaps for kui. 
* Or dia, 7 

* For paficawar (Sanskrit paficavargya). 
5 Or Hla. 


* Very doubtful, especially the second word, which might perhaps be read mu rai. 
7 For io. It is, however, 


conceivable that the letter read ma is really the final which would turn 7 
into id. 


The Pali form is paicavaggiya, 


™ This seems to be the actual reading ; but the Upakasamaga inscription, 1. 6, has wa tau ta, and the 
context is not quite identical, 


" This supposed reading would be an error for smar; but both words are doubtful, 


ri] MON INSCRIPTIONS 11 


23. (smin) [Asokadhammarat ta gah IT dak loJr [ceti mway Japalaceti- 
(ya)' tuy ma tlun tau pujau saka II Il pday than puiy Rama- 
fiadesa]....-.-s 

a4, .... (Me)r I] ptup] (ca)? [kuiw Ajapalace® te* gah tuy atuia 
duih tlan] (ca). ........ (thin) [te’ hen II tila fiah tila cif 
batan].....-. 


2, ...... ma [himu Maharaja]... . (tuai)® [II pdai sakkarat 
84(2) kitu asat masun crawek] (thay) ...... [lak min] (gah) 
[II] (ma kuiw kana lor)’ [Ajapalaceti] (wo’)...... 


Translation. 


A. 


Our Bodhisattva, having for six ycars practised asceticism in Uruvela,’ 
rause of® following the proper middle way, the principles of (2) wisdom, 
sntion and meditation had grown great (in him). In the night of the 
th ?) of the waxing (half) of the month of Vaisakha he beheld five 
at (3) dreams and made up his mind that he was to achieve (true ?) 
ddhahood. On the full moon festival day, carly in the morning, after 
ending to himself,'” (4) he approached the Ajapala fig-tree (and having ?) 
........ alms," (having 7) ......., facing towards ... the 
stern quarter (and) resting (5) under the fig-tree, our Bodhisattva 
nained (there). 

At that time Sujata, who was the daughter of the (rich man ?) Senani,” 
iile she was still a maiden, (6) having gone to the Ajapala fig-tree, had 


1 For Ajapala’. 

2 Doubtful, 

3 For Ajapdlaceti, 

‘ This might be wo’, 

5 Very doubtful, 

® Mostly a conjectural restoration, but the traces of letters still legible make it probable, 

’ Cf, Bigandet, I 72-6, Uruvela was a forest country. 

® The original svems ambiguous ; cither “in order to follow” or “because he followed” (in the latter 
se giving the reason why he attained the higher faculties mentioned immediately afterwards), But for 
2 first sense one would expect scwin (cf. I. 7, 8 infra). : 

® This, though illegible, must be the right reading. Cf. Bigandet, I 79—81, 

® Or “to his purson.” Bigandel, I 81, has “washed his hands and face, put on his dress,” 

1 See the note on the text. : ; 

" This was the name both of Sujiti’s father and of the village where they lived (Buddhist Birth 
ories, p. 184), But Bigandet, I 77, has il, spelt in the Burmese fashion, under the form * Thena, 


12 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. Iv 


said, “‘ When I have got a husband of (suitable ?) family, (and if) in my 
first confinement I get (7) a male child, 1 will offer rice cooked in milk’ 
to my (lord #),” (thus she) prayed ..---> The prayer’ she had made 
having been fulfilled, in order (8) to make an offering to the deva of the 
Ajapala fig-tree, she boiled milk rice (and) sent Punpa,’ a female slave whom 
she employed, who had been her foster-mother, (9) to go out and clear 
the place (where she) was to make the offering to the deva. Then Punna, 
having gone out, saw the Bhodhisattva, who was facing towards the eastern 
quarter and resting under the fig-(10)tree. She saw that a radiance was 
issuing from his body and that the whole mass of the tree was of a golden 
colour. ‘Surely the deva in his own person is going to accept our (11) 
offering, it seems,” she reflected, and returned home ; and, in accordance 
with what she had seen, she spoke to Sujata. 


Then Sujata was very glad and happy (in her) heart. (12) She filled 
a golden dish of the value of ten thousand kasap* quite full with the rice 
milk, covered the rice milk with another golden dish and (13) wrapped 
them in a clean white cloth, decked herself with all her golden ornaments,’ 
and carrying on her head the golden dishes with the rice milk, in great 
splendour (14) of beauty, she went out together with the female slave 
Punna. Then from afar, with the radiance of the body of the Bodhisattva 
who was sitting (thére), she saw the whole mass of the tree was of (15) a 
golden colour and thinking (that she) was beholding the deva of the fig- 
tree, she went, bowing low, to give (him) the rice milk. The golden dish 
wherein she had put (16) the rice milk she took down from her head, 
unwrapped the white cloth wherewith (she had) wrapped the (dish of) rice 
milk, took off the golden dish which covered (it), (and) from’ a golden 
water vesSel.....-- 2+ (17) with scented water .... +++: she 
approached the presence of the Bodhisattva and (there) she remained. 


1 ‘This is in accordance with Buddhist Birth Stories, 1c, and Bigandet, 179, 80, though in neither 
case are we told exactly how the rice came in. : 

? Literally “in accordance with the prayer.” 

+ Bigandet, I 80, calls her “ Sounama”, 

* Sanskrit karsdpana, Pali kahdpana, a small coin of varying value, according as itis of gold, silver 
oc COpper, but apparently usually the latter. Bigandet (I 82) has “100,000 pieces of silver.” 

: Bigandet, 1c., has “she forthwith put on her finest dress.” 

Or “with.” Owing to the lacuna in this line it is not clear how the words rap ket in the next one 


should be translated ; they may mean “hold” or “use”. Bigandet, 1 be im i i 
pera reed et aoe gandet, 1.c., has “ offered him in a gold basin 


PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 13 


At that moment the almsbowl, that the Mahabrahma Ghatikara’ had 
presented, (18) (disappeared #)" and the Bodhisattva, not seeing that 
almsbowl, (stretched out his 7)’ right hand and took the water. Then 
Sujata approached and set the golden dish that was (full 7) (19) of rice 
milk on the palm of the Bodhisattva's hand. Then she spake thus: 
“QO my lord deva, the prayer that IT prayed (20) at my lord’s feet has 
been fulfilled for me; as the prayer of my heart was fulfilled, so also may 
the prayer of my lord's heart be (21) fulfilled !,” (she) said ; and, having 
(offered ?)* the golden dish which was of the value of ten thousand kasap, 
Sujata walked home. 


Then the Bodhisattva walked down (22) to the bank of the river 
Nerafijara and at the bathing place (named) Supatittha he partook of the 
rice milk. On the ground in front of the Bodhi (tree) for twenty-eight 
days, (23) four weeks, the exalted Buddha remained ; and on the thirteenth 
day of the waxing (lalf) of the month of Jyeytha, early in the morning 
the exalted Buddha went away (24) from the house of gems‘ and went to 
stay under the Ajapila fig-tree; for seven days, meditating on the Law 
and enjoying the bliss of ihe attainment of fruition,’ (25) the exalted 
Buddha remained (there). At that time a Braliman named Huhunkajati 
approached (and) asked a question of the exalted Buddha; and the 
exalted Buddha (26) gave him the answer to his question.’ 


Also during the time that the exalted Buddha was staying by the side 
of the Ajapala (tree),’ King Mara approached the presence of the exalted 
Buddha, and ...... (being at) his wits’ (27) end, he concluded that 


'The name means “potter. According, to Biguadet, Le, the almsbowl that disappeared was of- 


earthenware. ; 
"1 follow Bigandet in regard to these two words, but the second one is supported to some extent by- 


the text, 

* Bigandel, Le, has “making then the olfering of the gold cup, worth 100,000 pieces of silver, with 
the same disinlerestudness ay it she lad piven over only the dry leaf of a tree, she withdrew and returned- 
to her home with a heart overtluwing, with jo.” wee 

‘This was the fourth of the seven weeks that began when the Bodhisattva took his seat under the 
Bodhi tree, Cf, bigandet, 1 £00, La fe 

® That is, of the altaimment of the several kinds of spiritual insight that a Buddha has. Cf. Bigandet; 
I 102, re ae 

and his daughters” 


6 In Bigandet Uo 104-0) this incident is mentioned afler the appearance o Mara daughters. 
and the Brahman iy called Mingulika, ‘fhe Malvivagga of the Vinayapitaka (I 2) has He haya e, 
interpreted as “of a haughty disposilion", nul as the man’s name; Buddhaghosa adds that be "Wag 
diffhamangalika (¥, Max Muller, Sacred Hooks of the Kast, Vol XII, p. 791. ” 

' With the remainder of Face A of this inscription Bigandet I 102-4 can be compared, ie 


14 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. tv 


the exalted Buddha was a true Buddha, ‘a pure, true man”, he said, 
He looked away from the Ajapala fig-tree (and) having walked towards 
(28) the eastern quarter, sat down in the middle of the high road, (where) 
he drew sixteen lines (and then) remained anxious and dazed. At that 
time (29) his distress of mind was very great,.... . (having remained ?)! 
weeeeeeesy, in (the end?) he lost consciousness, he knew no more. 
When (30) Mara had lost consciousness, King Indra lifted him up and 
King Indra informed Paficasikha of this.’ . 

At that moment the three daughters of Mara, named Tanha, Arati and 
(31) Raga, seeing their royal father was in a dazed state, came down 
(and), having .......° to their father, approached the presence of the 
exalted Buddha ............ Forms of (32) young maidens, three 
hundred at one time, forms of girls that had not borne a child, three 
hundred at one time, forms of women who had borne one child, three 
hundred at one time, forms of women who had borne two children, 
three hundred at one (33) time, forms of women of middling age, three 
hundred at one time, (and) forms of somewhat older' women, three 
hundred at one time, in these six ways, (as) three hundred women at a 
time, did they create,’ and, (34) approaching the presence of the exalted 
Buddha, addressed the exalted Buddha. (But) they had no chance (of 
Success) and (35) they returned to their father. 


B 


_ After our lord the exalted Buddha (bad remained under ?)’ the 
Rajayatana tree for seven days,’ (he) came away from the Rajiyatana tree 
and returned (2) again to the place of the Ajapala fig tree, (where) the 


exalted Buddha remained (enjoying ?)* the fruition of attainment.’ During 


the time when he was Staying at that place (3) a very anxious thought 


1 s 
eu is some doubt as to the meaning here owing to the lacuna and the reading kanal is not quite 


3 5 ~ . s 
: Horiapia tae is Abig is meant, thovgh the reading is not quite certain. Vaiicasikhia was a deva, 
Bean € “given help” (or “ comfort ") would be appropriate here. The two illegible 
, in the text have not been identified, 
: Literally, “ big” oy + bigger *, 
The translati i i 
a aaa alae that in the reading of the text, which is doubtful, visit is used as a verb, 
See inl are . eee and bdak means the same thing. If instead of bdal we read bat 
Capa ae erence in the sense but the construction seems rather strained. 
This was th 
Ny irs : ao the a great weeks. Cf, A 24 supra, and Bigandet, I 107, 
13 igandet, I 111-5, for what follows, down to B 21 infra, 


vant 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 15 


d to the exalted Buddha: “ This Law, which I have succeeded in 


occurre 
getting to understand is deep, very deep, (4) very hard for men to 
perceive, very hard for men to understand, very........ If I preach 


to other people in accordance with this Law which I have succeeded in 
understanding they will not understand (it) (5) and I myself? shall surely 
be tired out. In accordance with this Law which I have succeeded in 
understanding, I will ......-.--e * (6) worship (and) make offerings 
and I will continually keep (it). To other people I do not want to preach 
(it),” (he) said. (Thus), one by one, thoughts, of how to exert himself 
but little’ in preaching the Law to (7) others, occurred to the exalted 


Buddha. 

Then the Mahabrahma Sahampati, having become aware of the 
thoughts of the exalted Buddha, assembled a retinue of the company of 
Brahmas and the company of devas who (8) dwell in a hundred thousand 
universes and approached the presence of the exalted Buddha. Then, 
bending one knee to the ground and lifting up his joined hands, (9) (he) 
revered the exalted Buddha and asked as a boon from the exalted Buddha 
that he would preach the Law to all beings." The exalted Buddha, on his 
part, (10) granted the boon to the Mahibrahma Sahampatii ....... 
that day, on the land around the Mahabodhi tree the exalted Buddha 
wandered for alms, (11) and then remained on that land. 

At the hour of midnight, (on) the fourteenth of the waxing (half) of 
the month of Asidha, this thought occurred to the exalted Buddha : 
“Trasmuch as the hermit Alara (12) Kalama, who taught (and) expounded 
(to me?) the law of the seven stages of ..... . attainment,’ was of very 
great service to me, to the hermit Alara Kalama (13) it is fitting that 


the Law first,” thus he (resolved?). Then, having 


I should preach 
.’. had died seven 


become aware of the fact that the hermit Alara . . 


1 Reading doubtful aud meaning undetermined. 

* Or “my body”. 

2 The meaning of the rest of the line is doubtful, As it stands it might be “ make clear (and) 
delight (in) ” or “set my heart on™, but this leaves faguit, which has not been identified, untranshated. 
Perhaps we should read pa Avi “practise”, Cf, 1D 19. Tf we read then (instead of hea) the meaning 
would be “I think FE will”, ele, but thiy seems less probable, ie PW hee 

The reading not being quite certain, there is some doubt as to the meaning. a ee 

’ The literal sense appears to be “ in order that he might get (him) to preach the Law to all sentient. 

beings (the Mahibrahma Sabampati) asked the exalted Buddha for a boon”, i.e, he asked the favour, 


that Buddha would preach the Law, 
§ Owing to the lacuna it is uot clear whethe 
’ That is the first seven of the ecstatic states enumerated u 


r it should be “day” or “ days”. = of 
nder the head of samagatt, 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 1 


days before and gone (14) into existence in the region of “ nothingness 
(he said), “Inasmuch as the hermit Alara Kalama is no more, (and) seeing 
that the hermit Udaka, son of Rama, (15) taught (and) expounded the law 
of the attainment of “neither consciousness nor unconsciousness ’”” (and) 
was of (great) service to me, ... to the hermit Udaka it is fitting (16) 

that I should preach the Law first.” (Thus) saying, (this) resolve of the 
exalted Buddha arose (in his mind). (Then ?) having become aware of the 
fact that the hermit Udaka had died in the middle of that night and gone 
into existence (17) in the region of “neither consciousness nor uncon- 
sciousness,”* (he said), “Inasmuch as the hermit Udaka is no more, and‘ 
the five monks, who ministered . . . to me (when ?) (18) (I was) practising 
asceticism, were of very great service to me, to (these) five monks it is 
fitting that I should preach the Law first.” (19)... ........ 1 
what place do the five monks dwell?” (he) said; and the exalted Buddha 
reflected . . (20) Having become aware of the fact that the five monks 
had made their dwelling-place in the country of Benarcs in the forest of 
Isipatana, “I will go (to the country of Benares ?),” (21) (he) said; and 


on the festival day of the full moon of Asadha, the exalted Buddha went 
away from (beneath ?) the Ajapala fig-tree 


= © © 8 0 © 


es es” es © @ 


accordance with the orientation of (the) sides... ... (of) that (place ?), 
His Majesty, the Lord of the White Elephant. ....... . ° (25) 
eee - + who was named Maharaja... ., in the year 842° of the 


Common Era, the fifth of the waning (half) of the month Asadha, (a. . 
day *), Pisces being lagna,’ (built ?)* this Ajapalacaitya...... 


I ; : 
ea = third of the Avipabrahmaloka regions. This assumes an cmendation of the reading in the 
- ? The eighth stage of samdapatti. 
. The fourth of the Aripabrahmaloka regions, 
; Or simply, “a place used by”, 
It seems as if some expression like 
som : gave orders to” were needed here. Cf, XIV 12. 
* The last numeral is not quite certain, nor is the week-day. 
: ‘That is; tangential to the eastern horizon, 
Very doubtful, see the note on the text, 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 17 


No. XIV. 
An INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEGUGYI PaGopA, PEcu. 
Descriptive Account. 


89, This is a mere fragment containing only the last 13 lines of a 
record, and most of them in an imperfect condition. It measures 1 ft. 
8 in. in height by 2 ft. in breadth. The letters and the interlinear space 
are of the same dimensions as in No. XIII. 

90. So far aS it is preserved, this record is concerned with the events 
which happened in the second and third of the seven weeks that began 
when Buddha took his seat under the Bodhi tree. For these, reference 
may be made to the account contained in Bigandet, I, pp. 99-100. Put 
shortly, after leaving his majestic seat under the tree of enlightenment, 
Buddha stood gazing at it steadfastly without winking an eye, and in deep 
meditation, which caused the devas to think that he regretted having left 
it and that he had not yet attained Buddhahood.’ At the end of those 
seven days, in order to remove their doubts, he raised himself 
miraculously into the air and performed miracles which convinced them 
that he was really a Buddha (cf. Il. 1-6 of the inscription). Having come 
down to earth again he proceeded to spend the following week, the third 
of the great seven weeks, still in deep meditation, walking up and down 
the “cloistered walk” or ambulatory which the devas had prepared for 
him, and it is especially this that the inscription is intended to 
commemorate (cf. Il, 8-13). 


Text. 
Wee oe east ne ras .. (kyak tray) [gah II Iukau dapah thai] (nda) 
{mat ma ha go’] 
2, .... [labay] (gah)® [II het]. .....---- deal anim ans 7 
sie Ate heen tie fal acaasia 2 [kyak] sat 


1 The Nidanakatha has a slightly different version, viz. that the doubts in the minds of the devas 
arose while Buddha was slill under the Bodhi tree, from which they inferred that “there must, be 
something more Siddhattha has to do, for he still lingers seated there.” (Buddhist Birth Stories, new and 
revised edition, p, 200), Presumably this is an older version than the one in our record and in Bigandet. 

? This is shaped as if it were nda (as also in XII C 49, D 28, 36, 38, 47, 50) and should perhaps be 
80 transliterated, I think, however, that it is identical with the modern particle da (pronounted f) 
though it may be merely a damaged va here. The subscript d in (sa)ndeb, ll. 3, 4, is also of a the 
same ‘shape. 

* The reading ig doubtful, The initial letter, which is blutred, looks like a dh, 


3 


18 


that jaw was intended, as in [ 13 wh 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. ry 


CEEaN) oe ica ae rt as Ae wig agate (sa)nd[ejh 
defwlatau gam[l]uin t[o] [ktuiw dah] 

ee ee ee ve ee ee ee ee ees (Sa)nd(e)h 
[de]wa[tau to’ gah]...... 

Cini case tate wale ite wa kh ae oe BN eck, SoS . tu(y) II tafbjah 
kuiw pat{iha kuiw] (dewa)tau ga- 

(I) So ee eth SS ek ape de pack ee eats ae od [’ tuy] 
I kyak [tray cuih] tl[uja 

Be sisi teh bike at tar see sewers anes. hs Dae ea ecc . [hka] (ra kuim) [ma 


datau glah II [bramak] 4 paluit[t II no(r)] 


[plaluit [4] brama[k] 1] [lukau die{p]ah  tnai [kyak] tray 
calnjkrarh [t]au ra II pda[y than cankrarh] 


gelh] smin tamla [m]a sadha ma pa tah ku smin 
Alsloka{dhammarat] gafh II cankrarh k]wom 


[ku] cle}ti ba [ra-i[t] catkramh gah II [kJu[iw] kanarh larn*® cuiw 
ku lamah nw[4]m tau II p[djay than puiy 


[Ramafilad[e]sa wo’ [gah II [ptu]p ca [ku th}in [te’] tuy II [tuiJa 
duih [t]tan [bjna[t] p[rjabat 


ee ().. [Ay If [tila fiah tila c]in [bat]a[n II p-aw] 
kwon [truh] m[way ma hlimfu Bal- 


(fay --[I ma X(a)ndamJ’ (law) [ceti ba kwam ku 
ratanacankrath wo’ II []] 


' ?* Conjecturally restored, 
* Conjecturally restored. It mi 


ay have been gah, not gamluin, 


* This can also-be transliterated Id, 2 modern spelling for Ja’ (pron y i i 
: + ounced fo’), which occurs in our 
records as Jo’, with the sense of “a long time t : 


". Tcan make nothing of either Jar or ld and suspect 
ere itis the probable reading, 


* One may conjecture than ie ‘hen (cf. RIE B 24), 


* The reading is doubtful. “If ¢ 
“The d@ is written as d. The 


Orreci, it means “ prince ”, é 
vowel of the first syllable may possibly be j, 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 19 


PART 1] 
Translation. 

ait ae ie Tae the exalted Buddha, during the seven days (when he) 
could: not (2)... blink (with) his eyes; because...... the exalted 
(3) Buddha. ..... doubts arose in the minds of the devas (4)..... 
_,, the doubts of the devas.... (5).......5. and the exalted 
Buddha showed forth miracles to the devas, (6)........... and 
the exalted Buddha came down (7).........+. * (from) the east 


going to the west, from (8) the west going to the east, during seven days 
the exalted Buddha kept walking to and fro.’ 

In the place where he had walked (9) the kings of old who had 
faith, beginning with Asokadhammaraja, caused to be built an ambulatory 
together (10) with two caityas at the ends of the ambulatory ; (they) stand 
even until now. 

In this our country (11) of Ramafifiadesa, in imitation of that 
place, in accordance with the orientation of the sides and the dimensions. 
(12) (of that place?), His Majesty the Lord of the White Elephant, 
ordered a son (of his) who was named (Bafid?) (13)...-..-- to erect 
two caityas together with this precious ambulatory. 

1 This is the literal rendering but the sense is “did”, 

2 In the absence of a context it ig not possible to make sure of the sense of ma datau gak. \t may 
mean “where (he) was”, If we may conjecture that ka is a remnant of bodhipallanka, the seat under 
the Bodhi tree (as the superscript # in 1, 2 may also bel, the words could mean “where (he) had stayed.” 


The ambulatory ran from the Bodhi seat to the place where he had stood gazing at it (Buddhist Birth 


Stories, new and revised edition, p. 201.) 
* With the first part of this inscription compare XV 5-9. 


20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. ty 


No. XV. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PaGoDA, RANGOON. 
Descriptive Account. 


91. This inscription is engraved on two faces of a stone slab. On 
the obverse one (Face A) the space originally occupied by lettering appears 
to have been 5 ft. 3 in. (or more) in height by 4 ft. in breadth. On the 
reverse (Face B) it is 5 ft. 8 in. by 4 ft. The letters are about $} in. 
high, letter f is about $ in. long and the interlinear space is about } 
in. but becomes less in the lower part of the obverse. This face must have 
contained at least 56 lines, but it is in such a bad state that no consecu- 
tive transcript or translation can be made of it as it stands. Enough of it 
has been preserved to make it plain that, after a reference to his meeting 
the early Buddha Dipankara in a former life, it deals briefly with the 
events in Gautama Buddha’s career during the momentous seven weeks 
and especially, at greater length, with the story of the brothers Tapussa 
and Bhallika and their meeting with him, mentioned in §85. The reverse, 
though a good deal weathered and otherwise damaged, especially in the 
first twelve lines, is in a much better condition. But there also there are 


many gaps, which interrupt the continuity of the narrative and obscure its 
meaning. 


92, After repeated and intermittent study, spread over a number of 
years, it appeared to me that I had done all that I could do in the way 
of deciphering and interpreting this record. But in October 1932 Professor 


Pe Maung Tin was good enough to send me an extract, with translation, 
of a Pali text entitled Nalatadhatuvarhsa, which at that moment I could 
not deal with as my time was fully taken up with other duties. In the 
following summer he drew m 


y attention to further evidence capable of 
throwing light on the Mén Shw : 


duplicate copy of the Pali extra 
Burmese inscription of the same 

3; pagoda, and also his own transcript and 
translation of the Mén inscription ae 


‘ The Burmese record runs on much the 
ae rae as the obverse of the Mén one, while the Pali extract illustrates 
ew lines of the reverse. As he proposed to publish all this 


vate 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 21 
material, we both considered that it would be better to collaborate, rather 
than work apart. For all this assistance [am much indebted, for without 
it I should not have been able to produce the present text and translation, 
which, though still inevitably far from perfect, are much better than my 
former drafts. Where I have cither adopted Professor Pe Maung Tin’s 
readings or modified them, the fact is indicated by his initials in the notes 
on the text. In some cases I did not venture to adopt them because the 
words were not legible in the ink-impressions which I had. 


93. In view of Professor Pe Maung Tin's intention to publish all the 
relevant material above mentioned and having regard to the condition of 
the obverse face of the Mén record, if does not seem necessary to say 
much more about its presumable contents in this place. Besides the 
sources mentioned in § 87 reference may be made to the brief account of 
Tapussa and Bhallika in the Slapat Rajawah (edited and translated by 
Father W. Schmidt in Sitsungsberichte der Kais. Akademie der Wissen- 
schaften in Wien, philosophisch-historische Klasse, Band CLI (1906) pp. 63 
seqq. and 77-8, and again by R. Halliday in the Journal of the Burma Research 
Society (1923) Vol. XIII, pt. 1, pp. 40-3), and a summary mention in 
G. H. Hough, Translation of an inscription on the great bell of Rangoon 
(in Asiatic Researches (1828) Vol XVI, pp. 273, 282-3). Bigandet’s 
account (in his work mentioned in § 87, Vol. I, pp. 108—10) is somewhat 


more detailed. 


94. The story told on the reverse differs from these narratives by 
bringing in the Ceylon king and the two monks who play a prominent . 
part in it, But from the historical point of view the second half of this 
face is the more interesting one and may be compared with a number of, 
passages in the above-mentioned historical work which tell of the repairs 
and improvements made at the Shwedagon pagoda by successive Mon 


sovereigns. 
The inscription itself is not dated, but as the concluding iines SIV 
detailed account of what was done in this respect by King areas 
royal mother-in-law and by Dhammaceti himself, it may reasonably ie 
lowest, an: 


surmised that the record was made in his time. There ig, Pir ae 
date, in 1. 26 of Face B, connected with the celebrated Aiba TRPB:: 


Ramarajadhirat, who reigned in the first half of the 15th century - 


7: 


22 i EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL tv 


Text. 
A 
fe ib eee [gah pa panidhajn’ [pday] [tarh jon kyak} 
[tray] [Dipahkuiw tuyf..... - 
Dos Wasson tink tet oes ee ele (bapen bwoy ramen)’ [tuy II] (II dhar 
bodhisambhar)’ [ma 4 cuip]..... (ma lwon})..... 
Be“ aire (pday smar tnarh jray bodhi)'.............00. 


...» (ku pradhan jnah gah) [krajo’ dman tuy II buiw pnan] 
[dewaputta Ma]. . (h sjuin ra) 


© @ @ ee @ 


ee ee ee eee [ma twah] (bgah)’ [sabbafiutafian ma 
gfii tau na] (trawah)* [ma twah] (bgah)* [grakwom gun ma] (sak) 


(tradah)’ [kyak] (ra II go’ tradah)! [kyak tuy II] (pday 
jaren bodhipallan)' [gah II] [casuin wimuttisukha] [tuy II] (na 
thawhay mwoy)° lu[kau dapah thay IT] (ka)* 


By A eas 2 [kyak tray ha go’ ktuiw] (na pallan)’).. 2... [ma lep 


pa kuiw tradah kyak gah] (snom)! [ni}m ra gah [tuly [II sandeh’ 
ktuiw dah] 


o @© 8s # © @ 


ee © © » 


\ma ranauk ku dacim tnay)........, (kyak tray). . 
[tuy het ma] [pleh kle’ sandeh’ dewatau] ta gah] II ka[lan tuin 


o 8 © 2» «& 


a (plea kle’)' [sandeh’ dewatau] (ta’ gah tuy II na_pallan)' 
re ee ee [II cuih dah dmfn t]u[y II lukau 


‘PMT _ 
3 2 . i, , 
es Ba at the beginning and end of the first sixteen lines merely indicate that something is miss- 
eta i ge prdizctane 2 its amount, Elsewhere on this face a dot indicates a missing akshara 
; a of these inscriptions), approximately. 
: Perhaps an-error for ivadah, 
; i ied es — Rey Revenge The-last word looks like mwoy. Cf, XVII 8, 9. 
or kaj’ or kale. The vowel of the second syllable is ei 
‘4 Ck, XYv, 3,4. The d has the form of d. Pee 


Bree ome 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 23 


part 1] 

0: scatawed [pallan} [ku jray bodhi] = Dee oceans 3 
[pday catkram] ....... ..... [ku paluit gah IT] ee 
[dapah] (thay)... .. 

Ce [bwoy paluit cankram] (gah). ......... Bie glee 
scarieswhc vie Aeaseaees (gah) [I] kyak tray wicdrana] . . 

be (pan) [satttha]) tuy ..... (day) 2 5-4.4.6 begs 
(jaren bodhi).......... (tnarh jray sum)’ [Ajapala] ra II 
(pd]ay tnarh (j)rlay)..... 

We fetes ys hn, ttn aha ital ph ec, gt rp aaah aes (dah) ie\s.9- 4 -$ ee os 
i wes [Mucalin’ ma tau bwoy dui(h)] 

3 Ui be ee Stee ia: Rpcly OEE We AO eae ak Ra, BS Ge 
Sa apcchens Ws ee ate 6 ep aeee bay) [dman tau ra] Il gafta na 
Pant sto4-alé 

As sda tig edo, Selb ge acai ee ee 
[tny casuin ket] oes Fay peer a ra ial Pees 
[go’ dah tradah] (kyak) . : 

IS: wate e a2 bra TLE 3. eo eng nat . ++ (kyak tray’ ha go’) 
[klon buit ku jraku] (Hi hal 4-3. 4 eee [ahara] hea ra 
IT na jhafna]..... | 

MO: Sela. ane es (dma tau) [ra IT pday ra-uit thay}.....-. op 
be eae et (pamik ca)... 6... 1+ + (kyak tray)! . . dpday! 
ka) {gah smin InJ..... Pe its 

7, (ttuy) 2... 0, {tuy) (esh II] (rau ma kuiw ba) [bya tray). : 
Soataneeiss (kyak tray)... . (tuy Up... eee eee aes “4 ee 

. {kwom ku] . ar 

DSi artes pred, the, aed smin In] (tun ra) [II i ty). ce t2, we 
bidsas k oe 13 ee "gn 
Bhallika I]... 

| PMT, 


, Conjecturally restored, Pe oe 
, Possibly Mucalind, There appears to be a virama here, But the natie shoal i eas at 


‘PMT, reads jhanasukha, 


24 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL n 


19): cine BES [Asitafijananaguirl 2... 6. eee ee ey 
spas eb dene, Stcdaa ee Geo weak Marte aA a Reg . (mahdsamut 
(tuy TT)... 

DOr awe aed (nisray)* [tau ku cran krum]..........0., 

21. (bwoy t)...... (ket) [smar kya] (deh)... .......... 
Re ee en ee ee ee a an ae (pday) ...... 

DP. shige NL, Ah et Mie BEES ED SP RSS OE SS Se 
tp nach lah de geal Gh ELS ae 8G. lip AR ear A . (II kwon ey 

De Secor alas eo eae ence aks eS ae da Boe a Bn Bey we: ee Ee Ge pie 

[Le ee eee ee ee (jak tau kwi kuim)............. 

Ds: 68 ic ici Gian ae Hh Se aR Peas ola Settee eh Gh seg We BG 
ee se (tuy II}. ... (raku). 2... 0... 

| are er ee CEL 5 oe oe a 
Rigas Se GUa ewe a wai ee ace CEMA CRU RA) ay eee, a 

Dds Seah tacav eh td nap atic Saude: Sl te Nee to ae oe at ea a) cde Rete 2 
- (gah II ey) .... (rwoh II)... [dan pindapat].... 

DBs Tie Bela ips otto et a Oe ae at gh tise sae wy ae tieck aba Mina a ac hee, eae 
bas (del: ta? Bah)i6 o/s 5. 20 nce crag bec 

BD is ae ark Bhai alles dented Mad Pore, cit aa ectis Se oben aR 
.» (dak)... (tuy II kusuiw)... 2... 0000, 

OO a SOL Sete Ae ets teleige BGO gta cance Scidohs oh Beales Ba hedoa Maha 
2) a [kyak tray]. ... 

Ee cide ata Nene Seats ee 2, ee ntact Na ceagch Gente 
- ++ [ku kyak tray]... el, 

' PMT. 


(very doublful, 
Tf rightly read this is Presumably the first syllable of Rajayatana, 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 5 


part 1] 
re ae [magga’ I] pnor fiah] (ma a cuip... ee eee. 
sigs wife declk Sacu Fisk Gi af. tdce stays Se? es eh Lies: aE ance axe 
cs a ee (dewa manussa)' [deh ta’] (gaigen tlui tuy II pday 
kala Jakthak kyak tray! . oe ee [tuy II kwon] 
(dakuip)..... 
Bt ackcareain [Il ma kuiw dan aa = sis ie rere 
tae ; : Gate et 
(deh) . 
(tuy II) [deh ta’ prip 4 jaren kydk tray]... eee 
scab ih Gosh, heck Dist ae alte en 8s Rh ae [tila ey kyak] 
36. [tray] [gah kuiw puiy dik go’? (kuiw ahara kla fii’... ..--- 
eee eee ee ae ee a ee ee [deh ta’] 
37, . (dewa manussa)' [gahgen tlun tuy] (II pday kala)’ [kyak ee 
. [TI kwon]... .- ee eee me 


bag) i akan ‘enti a gluiny 


38. (deh ta’ gah) [II ku bhikku san] [kuiw dan tau tuy IT] (kia na 


Bodhisnt puly) sac cw. + oo. cee ee ee eee a 
[go’ yamu] (Pokkharawati)' . 


39, [deh ta ktuiw dah kwon samfeh ma dah dakuip banik mwoy ra 


IT] . > (gah) Oy ete ware a Se (deh ta’ fiah ba)’ [ma fav 
pday] . _ [I pday] (kala ma dah rah gah II)’ a 
des 

40. [kwom ku kwon bani® masun klarh] (dok kban tuy klo’ fe 
[mhasamut tuy II] (4 cuip)) . . ee te avd a 
masun)' (klarh tuy cut bapen drap)’ [wan pa tau banik tuy 
deh ta’] 

PMT, 

? Or wo’, 

5 For banik, 


‘ Very doubtful, 
4. 


26 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [Von. q 
41. (gafigef tau)’ [hei IT rau wwo'] (hen) [patthana deh ta’ ma yp 
bay (eae IT) (pday) oso a: fase a ae a he ee eds ok wd (batwon 


deh ta’ rwon II)’ [kha gah Taphussa Bhallika] (fiah ba)’ 


42. (ko ku de’ min ket galan’ dewatau ma huim II)! [mip cuit pumah 
tuy II] (nd yin deh tay... ee [lo’ san II] 
(thaboh jamkah kuim lar II thaboh)'. . 


Ach Sy iacce ately tec [klen brawut} [kuim lar II] [cut lar tuy}? .... 
re a ee ae (kyak tray)... 2. 1... [yak tray IT] (het? 
hitasukha)’ [ma sdah ku puiy dik] (ta’)! 

5 a ee ee [tila ey dui ket din puiy dik fi II rau gah deh 


ta’ huim] (ku kyak tray ra II)’ (kyak tray tun ler) [II gasap ma 
rau w(w)o’ ktuiw dah ra II baben Ghatikara Mahabrui]- 


45. (m ma kuiw dan ku ey pday) [cram krui Anoma gah ler II]... 
- + (ey dun praman)' (Sujata)?)... 2.0... ews [II kyak 
tray taml4 tun ler II pday gata tay hen] (ma dun) 


46. (ket pindapat)' [fiah ma kuiw dan ka’ mwoy]. .° (II yarau pday 


watthu mwoy))..... 0.0.00... (pindapat Tapussa 
Bhallika)' [ma kuiw dan wo’] ro II rau [gah gasap cuit kyak] 


47. [tray ktuiw dah ra IT kha. 
[gasap cuit} (kyak tray tuy II)............ [ku kyak 


48. (badah phuiw ma jnok)' [ku smith Catumaharat pan tuy IJ] (uit)’ 
[pabe pan gah] (dun ket tuy)h. . ., de 


[bdah paben mwoy ra II pday paben kya 


k] 

1 PMT. 
* Possibly gah, . 

* Not clear on the ink-impression, 
* Or brabut, the text reading is from PMT. 

§ The actual reading may be ket but the sense require 
* Very doubtful, . 
= ha, as PMT. 

° The doubtful word here looks like 7a%, which may be an error for ro#, or rwon. 
2 PMT. But nities he reads sq rau, which seems to make better sense, 


Ss het, 


RT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 27 


49, [tray gah II deh ta’ jiah ba ko ku de’ cut ket] (thaboh jamkah) 
. eee ee (IL pay kala)’ [kyak tray]... .. 


50. [gah tun ler II dak]. . [deh ta’ ket nah kuiw ku kyak tray]... 
see Rana dade RM ee a wees oot @ (eta) (han HT ha - gah)? 


(kyak tray) 


51. [dando’ batwon dhar ku deh ta}... ee ete es 


ee er | 


52. (gah rau)' [wwo’ deh ta’ fiah ba] (gah kyak tray)... 0... 


eo 8 @ © © © @ © 8 # © &8 © &# © © 8 #© 2 © 2 #8 &© © © © © #8 @ 8 


B 


Lovee ee eee ee ee ws (t) delh] taf] ma [spa pijau tajw[ak 
glath) [TI kha gah tha(d)alh] deh’ ta’ [ma het mbay] (.. .)° II 
[smi}i [nak mwoy ma himju Jayasena [m]a tau [tau pldaly 
bhaimindhara’ n](agubhow)’ 2... 0 ee eee 


20 ...... (deh ta’) [alah ba ma het mbaly tluy IT (k)e[t} phyfih® 
na lar pday tha|n jaku (dje(h)” [ta’] (tuy ma tau pa)j(au ra) [II 
II pday] klala krauf..... 0... (paydjm eee ee ees 


Bee eee eee es (gah) I [milk [kan](h)arh” ceti [tuy MI dlarh 
dhat le}r [kuiw kan(h)ath’ If Buddhapat]i[ma ler kuiw kan](h)arh”’ 
(tuy II nalitadhat gah cut” pday) [tnen Buddhapatima ra I 
Peay) odes a ke ht atelwareuceee ood) 


‘PMT, 
: rig appear to have been about half-a-dozen more lines, now illegible. 
rk 
* Looks like dey (which is impossible here), 
* The first letter looks like pa or ma, the second like ¢ or h. 
* The dh is perhaps for /, See the note on the text, 
cers restored (ef. 1,5.) 
ne contemporary spelling is phyuih, but no uw is visible here. : 
* ither at this point ms ann the ¢ and the h, there is a blur which in the latter case may " o 
original flaw. Hf not an original flaw, there is a lacuna of the size of two or three oe there is ‘a 
“The contemporary spelling is variable, but in the occurrences of the etter pie ae the next 
subscript A (or conceivably it night be a d formed like a ¢@), Between the first, han(t}amh 
word there is a small flaw. : 
" The three preceding words are due to P.M.T. 


28 


. * PMT. (one could read me, 


* Doubthil. 
rs : © Or tuy, “ 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL Wy 


4, (t swo)k k[y]ak [tray s]min milk’ go]’ [cut k}wlom tuy ql smi] 
(pa)? [sajuih Ctlapindapat](ikatissathe kuiw ket ran} [dhat 
swok ra II Calapindapat]{ikatissathe)‘.. 2... ...00,, 
Siena re ae4 ({ma)° 


5. [himu Si}wa[th]e’ [kuiw & cuih kJe[t dh]a[t swok smif naz 
Jayasena ma 4 lar pday bhimindhara na](gabhow ra II)’ ..., 
. . [Siwathe gah] cu[ih 4 cuip smin nak] (ra) [IT smin nak] ., 


ee e 8 © © © © © © we ew ee Be eB Be 8 ew 


6. [ma sket] dh[at] tuy II [dh]a[t sluim [kr]of[t] sm[in nak nit let 
tuy If dhat ha bwoy ku cy II tila ey’ fiat] (ra II tila ey ket) 
[kJe[t ra] II [ijnafh] smin nak [gah II]........0..00, 


* @ © © @ 2 & 


7. [t] ket. patifia[n kJu [s]mii nak (pi’® Ich)" [ity II na idhi gat] 
: dha[t swok gah ket ket tuy II kuiw ku smin Kakawannatissa’ 
ra] II s[mia Kakawannatissa]® fun ler II]........ 


* 


8 [gah] tluy HW pata kdip Buddhapa[tlima [yah lar tJu[y] q 
. . [Bud]dhapa[tim)s gah [th]a[pana lar pdlay [dlJarh [tuy IT] (kuiw) 
ee te ee eee [II If Tapussa Bhallika fJah b[& ko 

a k}u [de’ wo] [tun]... ce eee ee eee 


9, {{au] p[day] w[th]s" Jetalwan gah II uit uplah [gamluin Kui jm II 
palbwoy ramen hen] (I) kya[k tray Gabut | oo. u outs ke es 
{twy II) [pnor fijah [ma a Saranagamana gah p|day [than].... 


BRR RE RS OT We eb a ee cp 


: but pa seems to be required by the sense), 
* PMT. (but the last word may be nan), 


_* PMT, 


* Conjecturally restored, 
© Possibly Stwathe. 
te : 

* PMT. (I had formerly read this as wilak +a 
* At this point there is a small gap ; 
PACT. Actually this looks like bf, 


and interpreted it as “ reflect"), 
I can see no letter in it, P.M.T, reads ra. 


ocean, river”, but that may be duc to subsequent damage. 
See the note on the text, 1 had fotmerly read het, which seemed possible. 


3 PMT. 


; - ff had read the initial letter as 4, which is in fact its shape in the second occurrence of 
The matte, the first being hardly e 


y de 


ia ts a gible. In medieval Mén inacri ptions the letters &, #, i, y, 2 and & are 
1 @Siingnish when the stone t vty Oy Vy 


Se aeinent : is weathered or otherwise damaged.) 
DE wika ithe More correct spelling}. : 


part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 99 


10. [ma dabut lar} rwon IT [krau] wwio]’ kha kyak traly ma tau 
pday Rajagruih IT] delh ta] (fia ba plan a)' [mwoy] (thay ra) 
[t]un II [tuy prap 4 jareh k]ya[k tray linwor tuy pday] (than) 
pe icanteeasce ete A (ka)-" 

11, j(o’) dimfafi” tau] ra (IL klyak [t]raly thwalh dhar ku deh ta’ ra 
Il Tapussa] gah go’ [solapatiphuiw* ra II] (tuin lamih)s 
[ulp[asaka dma tau ra Il Bhallika gah pa gam-i tluly] (pa 
mar)" [wilpfassana] (tuy I ee ee 


12. [ra uy IL Bhallikathe}’ gals (yam]u [tilaP gah [ra Il T japus[sa 
dun gah] I [plan cau lua Asitafijananaguir tuy UH pday ceti 
dhat swok kyak tray ma deh ta’ thapana]. . .. [alta kdip 
tm[o’ Tambag}utta’ 6... ee (duk)" 


13, (pe wat) [platilpat t]uy IL dm[&a] yam] bnalt ayuk tuy] H 
‘ II II cet 


(cJufti] a nla] gah] a ktuiw dal pday dun swar ra . 
[dhat swok] (te’)* Liab] (ma ti)m pafray] (wat) [lifalwor . 
(pajjau [tau ra IT krau wwo' [tnolr [fiah] (ma tim) [paray 


dh]at [swok] 


pday [th]an [rah] rman wwo tun 


ler II sisafnai ba gol tan (cu)i-[p dah uiw da cil (I ceti)” 
(dhat swok gah] fa{h ha tim tuy] JI: [hah ha] go’ {[in]wlolr 
[plajau [hJei] ra (1 I het] fiafh ma ha go’] 


14. [kyak tray ma sgut] 4 tuy Il 


1PM.T, 

? Conjecturally restored. 

3 Looks like durdw. 

4 ‘The first i looks like 2 I owe the pl to P.M.T. ; 

‘PMTs reading tein lawih is by no means clear on My ink-impressions. 

PMT. (had read pa-d), 

’ The last word is very doubtful, but ¢ 

eae Bh resembles an A. 2 
Or tila (P.M.T. i : 

W This seems to he the actual reading, though the 7 might be K both here and in il, .20, 23, re 2 

4 Conjecturally restored. 

4 Very doublful. The final letter looks like m and the vird 

% Very doubtful. lt may be merely @ damaged space. 

4 Possibly gal. 

® Very doubtiul, One would expec 


{, the preceding go’. 


ma is uncertain. 


t dndy (of, 1. 20, infra), 


30 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. tv 


15. [linwor pijau gah] kuim nda’ IT [pday] tha[n c]eti gafh] II ma 
[pa tlarh [ku tnjarh [chu juk gruip kambat han t]a galh] (klut 
tuin tuy II dah) [gruip gah] (badan)’ uiw tuy II fiah ha tim 
dnay wla[y hen ra II II nor cnam tila’ puiy kya]k tra[y] 


16. [ma pa parinibba]n [gah] II ba [kJla[th pi cwoh turau cnam gah 
kuli lwon] 4 tluly II [t}la’ puiy [a]ra[han] bla ma himu 
Sonathe Uttarathe gah tlun ptan sa|san[a pday d[uJi S[uwannh- 
bhum [ra] II kh[a sla[sana ma tan] tuy II gam-[i] 


17. [truh] IT gam-[i brau II samalni [triufh] II . [saman}i br[au] II 
kha [ma nwom*® tuy gah IT] kha [gah] smin Silri}ma[soka gah 
II gah] ku ti[la’ puiy ba] (ra II t)o” [tila® ey] II dha[m]mafrat] 
II sa[nghalrat gafh puiy dik go’] lilwwolr’ pajau 


18. (ra II [Buddharjatana m[w]o[y gah puiy dik] mik I[ihwor paljjau 
ha go’] .. (’) [10] dh[at] kyafk] tray [tuy puiy dik] ma [sgo’] 
phyuilh cuit Buld[dhJara[t puiy dik ma sgo’ linwor pajjau [ey] 
puraly" gah] II tifla ey] 


19. [ta’ ren ku puiy dik fii IT rau gah] smi pa dyadcljana [ku tila 
puiy ra II II kha galh tila puily mahathe ba gah II celti dh[at] 
s[w)o[k] kyafk t}ra[y] I mfin Tlap[ussa] II [Bhallika II ma 
thapan a lar p[day lata kdi]"- 


20. [p tmo’ Tambagutta” II dasuiw gruip ma grop badan lar tuy ma] 


fiah ha tilm dnay gah IT taba] k[uliw ku [smi =Si}[imasoka]® 
ra II [kha gah smin~=Siri]m[4soka}* II kuiw [Ajah tah [kle’ cala[h 
janah] (kle’) [dasuiw gruip tuy] II [ce]- 


1 See XIV 1 n, fand ef, 1, 21, infra), 
? The last word is very doubtful, 


*PM.T. But the word Seems doubtful. Cf. 1. 20, however. 
* Perhaps fla, ; 


5 Or Bla, , 
* An original y has been corrected to mm. 
Or fifa, 


* Or ho’ (P.M.T) But it must be meant for the introductory interjection yo’ (cf, XII A 34, 50.) 
® Error for iiwor. 

™ There is a marke 
u Possibly kdui. 
=ChL1I2n 

B The & in sin ( 


d stroke under the , but possibly il is a later disfigurement, not the symbol for 1. 


if there is one} is superscript over the following letter. Siri? may be Siv7°, 


paRT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 31 


21. 


peek 


[ti kuilm [lar TI prasiit! ma dah? (g)[uim] cet[iyaghara kuim lar] 
IL k{ujiw kana’ [try] (pa)’ tau pajjau ra [IT TY pa tap na 
gah [kuim] nda’ Il [uit ku fiah ma tlau pdaly] than [rah 
[rma]n [wwo' gah] U [pabwoy*® ramJen he[n] (ma)’ tlun [tau 
pijau hen ra I] 


92, krau [wwo'] s[m]i ma [n]w[om tau ku sJaddha ma [pa t]i[la] rah 
[rman 4a gah IJ cJetiyaghara w[wo’ tadah] thawara la[r culit 
[tjuy If [ce]tiyaghara gah cladah k{lJe[’ tuy II ma dak grop 
grop] janwo[k] (tlan" ccti) 


23. [wwo’ bwoy ramfen tLuy] IT ce[t]i wlwo' dah mJaha[c]e[tit [rwon 
Il If I] I [tila puiy ceti dha}t [swok kyak tray] m(in) 


Ta[pulsfs]a Bhalflika] ma [thapana lar pday] la[t}a@ kd[ui]p” tmal’ 
Tambagutta® wwo’ II pday k}- 


24. [la tila flab [tala! ci batah ma hijmu Dhammaltrailo]kyana[th ja- 
rfajadhi}ra[t ma pa smih gah prasat’ ma dah cetiyaghara gah 
cadah kle’ tuy If (ma dak)” ... . [jlanwot [r]wfon] I [kha 
ma dak] gah da[h 40] halt] 

. [saljun [ra krau] wo’ pldafy kala tila fiah Sutasomarajadhirat ma 


pa smin gal] IT [kuiw dak lhom janok” plarun IT] da[k IJhfom 
jlano[k” iuy heh IT yok]. . (claflan II yok t]d[on II] (dlah) 


slluly gal] 


2 


Loa) 


1 Por prasad. 

? Or dak, 

3 The last leller seems to be definitely a; the first migh 
kuim, C& 1, 24, 

¢ There is litle or no indication of a subscript letter here, 

5 The supposed pa very much resembles TL 

® Or gata (P.M) But there seem to be traces of an aauseara. 

"Cf XIVin, 

® Possibly babwoy, 

® Looks like fa, or conceivably IL (P.M.T.) 

Doubtful. The first leller may be 2. 

" Possibly keip. 

8 Cf 1.12 n. 

8 Perhaps tila, 

MCE 1 Ot: 

6 PMT, 

1 For janwok. 

” Probably the word is spelt without w in these two cases. 


t be w, Possibly the word is a badly-spelt 


but cf, 1 3. 


32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou Iv 


26. [lar b]wloy plda[y] II dlah [thJar galh ljar mafnah i kuiw lah 
bapen] (calén) [wit II krau wo'] pdaly kJala [tila fiah Ralma- 
rafjladhira[t ma pa smia gah II pday] sak[karat 798 II gah I 
tila puly] c[eti dhat s|w[ok] 


27. [wo’ cha] pnah [gandiJi [ma g]tuliw’ 4 cuip lati] gah Il lak’ 4 
tuly II [tilla® [Jah kwo[m] ku [gnakyak N araesonl II pf-or 
smlin Sarhm Mlam [tuly [II t]ah safmah] .{i)’....... (p).(n) 
[t]u[y] ma ku[iw] dak [p]la{n] I 


28. (I) da{k plan tuy tluly hje[a I k]uilw lak ait kal de ge kha ah] 
ceti [gah] swat [s]an [glah [t]ul[y na tath pajrjah [jnok heJn ma 
kui[w] dafk lholm [plan m]way (tuy’ ra) [tun IT] c[e]ti ma dak 

~ [holm [pljan ga[h le|r [h]a ga- 


29. ta[p tuy] II [tala filah Ramalrajladhfirat (a)° [d]u{n] d[ewat]au 
[hen TI krau wo’ pdlay [ka]la ¢t[ila’ fijah Balfia Barwor ma 
hjimu [Jayald[dislarajfadhirat® ma pa smin gah II tila’ fiah] 
‘kwom ku [glnakya[k] Ra(y) [ler IT] 


30, [salah watthu ma] gfluijA [tuy kulif[w dak lhom]? II [mi 4k tila” 
_ filah [g]nakya[t! Wiharade]wii]?? Il [kwom ku sm]in_ builw 
Yogarat ptit darhat hen II_uit som’ dik ska’] ararh [pariw]a [ma 

_ afwlolm hea] II jak Lift tuy] (ma) [da}- 


1 For Aiuiw, probably. Bat the reading is not quite certain, 

* Looks like dat. 

* Or sla. 

oe would expect #, and the letter under the 7 looks like a f, but the next one has a virdma 
over i : 


* The w is very doubtful. Probably the word intended is thap, 
® Possibly cau. 
. | Or Bla, 

8 Or -ddisa- 
® ‘This: looks like kwom but seems to be really Zhom, 
* Or dla, . 
" For gsakyak, 
4 For Wi- : 
™ Looks like yam. - 
¥ Or wit, : : 

in ee Probably this is what is meant, though the letter looks a little like sa ; but it has a stroke 


part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 33 

31. [k] If [ma dak gah Ter [ha g]atap [tuy II tila fijah [Jayaddisara}ja- 
[dhirJat' [gah 4 dun dewatan II] k[rjau [wwo]’ pday [k]ala [ti]la? 
[fiah Bafiad Ken Dau ima hijmu Dhammaftr]ai[lokyajn[atharaja- 
dhirat ma pa smin] (ga)- 


32, [h mi 4k tala fila ma [h]ilmu glnaky[ak] Wih[arlade[w} ma da[k 
tluy ma tluly 11 [kha ma t}uy galh tala fijah Balfia KeJn [Dau 
ma himju [Dhamimatraillo[kya}jnaftha gah ma] kuliw lk 
ankjad{e] I] ma [yok calan 11 IT] (ma) 


33. [yok tdon] IL [krau] whwo' pday kljfla thifla fijah [Shi] 
Tribhiwal naidityaprawarad han matraijlo[kyanatha®? = Mah]a[dham- 
malrajladhirajadewi If kwom kju [k]w[o]n t[ila* fijah m 
[himu] Rafm‘adh|ipati]’ Sripalramamahadhammara|- ' 


34, [jadhirat ma pa smit gal IT wiatth[u ma gilui[a] ie}r [le] [TI 
» uit suim k}w[om kul darlhat bui}w [pnajn [hen] II tila’ fiah ba 
mi ku kwon 4 diman] (t4m)’ [joh dhat swok tluly IT] ma kufilw 

[bar jrah IT jrah| ma sjofh san ler] 


35, [kuiw] (bar bape)’ [IM duiw ma shui gah Ter klujitw khay 
satlah [samah IT ti bawart ma bar gah] (ma) [IT tma’ Iwan kalo’ 
kalo”) (gal TE bar rei) d(wa) [tuijn taly] (ra) I] mafajah [deh 
ma kuiw dak tuin L-ui[t’ LU pday kala gah] (ma) 


36. [II pajral) mway| (thap' ma) dak dufi ce}ti [gah II plday [b}a" 
{pajrlah [lata gal) TH rej Jar tdon tma’ ma Talk na thar H 
akr}a [ido] (kui k)ui(w)” joi pafjrah cet? gah II lak bapen] 
ima] [Jah Lf {joh] pajralh gab] (ma) [II dak tui} 


’ Por -rajadhiral, 

* Or Hla, 

* For Tribhuwa-, 

‘ Or fila, 

* Possibly -paiy, 

° Or tila, 

’ The reading, though not certain, seems very probable. 

® Possibly bawwar, 

. “ re : i. the # seems pretiy definite, F 

ssibly aw. in | 
; : This, or perhaps ba%, seems to be the reading of the text we ef — words are recorded in the 
clionary, P.M.T. has suggested pa, which may have been the word intended : 3 

_ 4 This seems to be ‘ihe ate reading, thongh owing to the condition of nee ove a 
ink-impression either word might be either wim or kuiw, 


5 


340 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA eek 

37 n (batan’ gnin) tlu[y I] ma [ren calo} [s]a[i? c[dau joa] m 

) [tmu]y tau [na tma’ II pldaly lat]a [c]etitiyahgan(i)* ma twah 

glah [pan](nasa)’ [ma fiah padaksuin" gah ler II uit waduih] 
(tdon Il)’ [lah bap]en [tma’ lah pa-uit] 


38, [II pday ra-uit® pannasa gah tun ler IT] (d)a[k 4 kambaa ma cuin 
dah tau alijwa[t? ma fiab kan(hjarh lar rup pkau dakah Il] 
(p)..... 7 [pday ra-uit dacuit]’ (mway thap) [ra] (tun) [gah 
Il kuiw kJan(d)arh” [cal(w)o’ jrap] (tamliw)” [waduih] 


39, [pa-uit hea II dacuih glah panna[sa dak taluih mway thap f 

. tun] (II) [dacuih gah mway thay" ra tun II kuiw dak call 
kamban wit ]du[ih pa-uit Il pday kambanh gah tun [ler kuiw 
tuiw bapen] (tnam)” 


40. [brau pa-uit] II [mJanah [kJam[b]a[h gah kuiw] (bar) [sajtah 
[samah ti gah pa-uit II IT II 11] 


' Dovbtiul,’ The initial may be p. The final might be #, but nat if the next word is avid; and it is 
to be noted that in 1, 27 this word is spelt gandin. 

® Doubtinl but probable. 

5 Possibly siz, : : 

. 4 This appears to be the actual reading, though one would expect celfyaigaua, 

-* Phere appears to be a flaw between pan and nasd, which are separated by a blurred space of the 
breadth of one akshara. 

* Or ga daksuin, according to modern Mén rsage, 

? Extremely doubtful. 

~§ Bossibly ra-tt, 


® Or-aliwat, 1 take this (whether a compound or (wo words! to represent the Sanskrit (and Pali) 
ali, “ mound of earth”, etc, and vata, “ enclosure, wall”, 


As to the reading, cf. 1. 8 n, 


_ ') Possibly fonnas@ (as P.M.T), the matter being complicated by the Haw referred to in connection 
with the last line, 
2 Bor dacuih, 
* The ¢ is doubtful and the liw 
for #, 
* Or possibly hah ; in either case an error for thap, 


* Fairly certain, though the final letter is illegible, 
.% Extremely doubtful, ~ 


may be Iniw, It is also possible that the final w may be an error 


ry 


part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 35 


A 


Translation. 


..... having made a resolution’ at the feet of the exalted Buddha 
Dipankara .....- (2) .....° having been fulfilled in due order, the 
conditions of supreme enlightenment to attain? ....... (very?) .... 
(3)... . beneath the Bodhi fig-tree ..... with the intention of victory, 
remained sitting. The host of the deva Mara (undertook?})...... (4) 
.,.. to wit, omniscience that is adorned with the (state ?)* of an- 
assemblage of virtues (without?) ..... (5) ..... {the status?) of a 
Buddha. Having attained Buddhahood, (he) enjoyed the bliss of emancipa- 
tion, (seated crosslegged?)’ by the Bodhi throne® for seven days..... 
(6) ....” the exalted Buddha had not been able to rise (from the 
throne 2)... ... Saying that .... .° which usually confer Buddhahood 
(were ?) not yet (present ?), doubts arose’ .... (7) .... (for full eight® 
days?).... (the exalted Buddha?) .... in order to dispel the doubts 
of the devas, floated up to the sky .... (8)... (having dispelled ?) the . 
doubts of the devas, (from the throne?)"...... descended and remained 
for seven days (with eyes ?)”..... (9)... the throne and the Bodhi 
fig-tree ...... upon an ambulatory .... to the west for (seven ?) days - 
....(10)..... to the west of the ambulatory®....... the exalted 


Buddha meditated .... (11)... (for) four weeks - 
..... (near the Bodhi tree?) ........ the Ajapala fig-tree. By 


the (Ajapala) fig-iree . . . . . (12). 6 1 ee + (was)e eee (the) 


1 Namely to become a Beddha, 

? The qualities essential to perfection must be understood here, 

® Supply something like “the status of a Buddha”. 

* Reading (radah ; lrawal would mean “a saying”. 

5 The reading is doubtful, ist Bi 

5 The Ge differ as to whether at this moment Buddha was stili on the nd Lees Birth 
Stories, p. 200; or had already descended from it (Bigandet, I 99). See 1, 6 and also 9 90, note. 

7 Perhaps supply “seeing that". 

§ Supply “the qualities", or the like. 

*In the minds of the devas, Cf. XIV 3-8, 

" This appears to be the reading. One would expect 

" Here probably followed a statement of the direction an 
fathoms, (Bigandet l.c.| 

% Probably supply “not blinking”. Cf. XIV 2-3. 

% This refers to the “house of gems”, of the fourth week. 


” 


“ seven ”. 
d distance Buddha weni, viz: north-east, tex 


fee ay 


36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


Mucalinda (tree?) which was towards... . (13). teens (he 
remained. After that... (14).......... (ie) enjoyed the bliss 
of emancipation and remained (therc)..... obtained the status of a 
Buddha...... (E53) sc abcde ke ees (the exalted Buddha was not able) 
to attend to his personal needs, (did not?)...... food. With’ mystic 
contemplation ...... (16)... . (remained ?) 


At the end of the (forty-nine ?) days’... .. (desire to cat?) . 6.00, 
{the exalted Buddha?) .. At that time King Indra ........ (17) 
eae Aids (to give to?) the exalted Buddha ... (the exalted Buddha? 
ee together with .... (18) ...... King Indra. The exalted 
Buddha ...... Taphussa (and) Bhallika .. (19)... the city of 
Asitafijan® ......... (having crossed ?)' the ocean .... (20).... 
(rested ?) on the bank of the river>......, (21) towards ...... the 


south (they?)..... IT) Sus. ts 22): spot Bs . (my children ?)*....., 
(24)... . (pulled the carts?).... (25)... (having). 0... (self) .., 
2) ee ae 2 eae the (Rajayatana ?)’ tree... (27)....... 
MUA Drea Sea ao Baan gift of alms... 4 (28) 44.44 6% 6% (they ?) 


eid tiaad (29) ...... (having?) ..... (water?), merit ..... (30) 
5 Bites (one?) .... the exalted Buddha... (31)..... to the exalted 


Buddhas ce a (32 Veo des (path ?), among those (who were on the way 


ton Ati te bo ed ee (33) ... they, (having passed through the 
states of devas and men, in the time of the exalted Buddha?)...... 


sons {of a leading merchant ?)*. , . (34).... (to) give a gift of alms to 
the exalted Buddha ...... (among?) ......... (they?) ...-- 


(35) . . (having?) . . . they approached near to the exalted Buddha 


PES es ats tee “My lord the exalted (36) Buddha grant that we may give 
{thee thy) food first!’ 2... . 


-++. they... (37)... having passed through (the states of devas 
and men ?), 


in the time of the exalted Buddha ......... (having 


1 P.M.T. inserts “the bliss of ”. 

* Or “of the day” (viz : the 49th), 

® Where the brothers dwelt, 

* Conjectural. 

: The Nerafijara, according to the Burmese version, cf. XIII A 22, 

. This is Presumably a part of the thoughts or gs 

previovs incarnations been 

should minisier to Buddha. 
" Conjectural, Cf, XII Bl, 
* Canjectural, 


Peech of the earth spirit, who had in one of their 
the mother of the two brothers and: who stopped their carts in order that they 


paRT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 37 


been?) . . . + Children . . . . for (many?) years (38) (they?) had been 
giving gifts to monks of the Order. (Before our Bodhisattva?)....... 
_.,. had the name (of Pokkharavati ?)' . . (39) they came into existence 
as the sons of a rich man who was a leading merchant...... (the two 
of them) who remained in..... At (the fitting time 7), (40) together with 
fve hundred merchants,” (having gone on board ship and crossed ?) the 
ocean, (they arrived ?)....... (having fully loaded five hundred carts’ 
with goods they?) became merchants, (and) they (41) (roamed about ?). 
Having thus made (their) prayer, in. ...... (instructed* them ?). At 
that time Taphussa (and) Bhallika, the two, (42) the elder and the younger 
brother, heard (the words?) which the deva spoke, and being glad at 
heart, (from their cart they ?)*...... very (long?) . . . dry rice cakes 
and... . cakes (43) ...... butter rolls also (they) laid out...... 
_. (the exalted Buddha?)...... “exalted Buddha, that we may (obtain 
happiness ?) (44)...... may my lord accept our gift.” Thus did they 
speak (to the exalted Buddha?). And there arose in the mind of the 
exalted Buddha this thought: ‘The almsbowl that the Mahabrahma 


» @© @# 8 @ 


Ghatikara (45) (gave me on?) the bank of the river Anoma 
(wherein I received the milk rice of Sujata 7)’. ...---- None of the 
Buddhas of old received on their hands (46) the alms of those who gave 


(them) gifts . . On what’ thing. ...... the alms that Tapussa (and) 
Bhallika give me?’ Such was the thought (47) that arose in the mind 
of the exalted Buddha, At that moment the four Catumaharaja kings’ 


(being aware of ?) the thought (of the exalted Buddha?)...-.--6s 
to the exalted Buddha. And the exalted Buddha, in order to confer 


(48) great merit on the four Catumaharaja kings, (accepted all?) the 
four almsbowls ........ (and) made them into one almsbow!. In 


‘ Apparently another mame for the Asilaiijana of 1. 19. 


? Lilerally “sons of trade”. : 
* According to the story there were five hundred carts, but the readin 


doubtful, 
‘ As appears froin the following line it was the earth spirit (referred to in 1 22, 2.) 


them, 


g af the text is extremely 
who instructed 


® Presumably “ descended”, but the text is illegible here. . a 
yailable, Cf. 
*The last word is very. donbiful, ‘he vessels referred to were 00 longer 2 
A 17—19, 
’ This is rather a rendering of the alternative reading mi 1a#. pa eee eee 
reading of the text, the meaning woild probably be “ whenever lor “i 
the long gap that follows one must supply ‘‘shall I receive”. 
* The guardians of the four quarters of the world, 


which seems ig. be the” 
“at the end af 


38 . EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 


this Ae shoul of the exalted Buddha (40) the two of them, the elder 
and the younger brother, put the dry rice cakeS.... ~~... at the time 
the exalted Buddha... . (50)... . water... they brought (and) gave 
to the exalted Buddha ....---- (them. Then the exalted Buddha?) 
(51) expounded the Law to them..... ...... (52) thus did the two 
of them (speak: “ Exalted Buddha") «1.4% 442 


B 


_.... (that) they might worship (them while) travelling.’ At that time, 
(perceiving that?’ they were negligent, a king of the Nagas, named 
Jayasena, who dwelt in the Bhiimindhara (Naga WOLIG:C)? eae et ve vel oo 2) 
_.... because the two men had been negligent, took (the hair relics 
and) carried (them) down to theirt own country (and worshipped them ?). 
At a later time. .... (time?)......(3)......° desiring to build 
a caitya (and) having had a relic chamber made and also having had an 
image of Buddha made, placed the frontlet on the forehead of the image 
of Buddha..... . . (4) the king, wishing also to place the hair relics of 
the exalted Buddha, made the Thera C&lapindapatikatissa responsible for 
procuring® the hair relics. (The Thera) Calapindapatikatissa......... 
. . (5) named Sivathera (and) caused (him) to go down (and) get the hair 
relics that the Naga king Jayasena had gone (and) placed in the Bhimin- 
dhara (Naga world ?)*. . . . this Sivathera went down to the Naga king. The 
Naga king........... (6) to get the relics,” the Naga king, having 


: The meaning is not quite certain, But the Burmese inscription explains that Tapussa and Bhallik. 
enshrined six of the eight hairs given them by Buddha bul kept the other two for private veneration 
These were the ones stolen by the Niaga king. The others are referred to in 1. 12, 

? Conjecturally supplied. 

id The words in parenthesis are conjectural but fairly certain. The Pali Nalatadhattivarnsa vsys the 
expression lin the form bhimidhara) in the sense of the Nagas supporting or bearing up the earth. Before 
I saw this text I took it for a mis-spelling of-bkimintara, in the sense of “the interior of the earth”. 
which would be equally appropriate. 

ied is, the Nagas’ country. But the reading of this passage is not quite certain. 

Somewhere in the preceding passage must have come the king’s name (see 1. 7), and description, 
The Burmese inscription locates him in Ceylon. 

7h teading is not quite certain, “Literally “cause to bring.” 

Here there must have been a statement that the monk mentioned in the next line was a pupil of 


: . : ris and perhaps that the latter summoned him, as in the Burmese version. 


* Probably these words were preceded by § ; : . 
monk’s purpose in visiting him,  - y eons statement that the Naga king was aware of the 


sit a MON INSCRIPTIONS 36 


swallowed the relics (and) the reliquary, (said) “The relics are not with 
me. (If) my lord secs (them, let) my lord take (them)”.' Thus the Naga 
king spake . sae tee Ae heap B * (7) having obtained permission’ from the 
Naga king (three times’ and) having by magic power taken the hair relics, 
gave (them) to King Kakavannatissa. And King Kakavannatissa, having . . 
..... (8) (and) having put (them) on the head of the image of 
Buddha, (and) having enshrined the image of Buddha in a relic chamber, 
(caused ?). 2. ee ee ee eee 
The two (brothers) Tapussa (and) Bhallika, the elder and the younger 
* (9) dwelt in the Jetavana monastery (and) 


BROtN ER avn 628 eek eet es Se 
the exalted Buddha set all the (lay) disciples in (their due) order, ..... 
..among those who went for refuge’ in (that?) place.....-.---- : 


(10) (he) set. After that, when the exalted Buddha dwelt at Rajagriha, 
these (two again?) went one (day? and) having approached the presence 
of the exalted Buddha (and) made reverence, in (that place Pipes ara 
... (11) sat down (and) remained (seated). The exalted Buddha preached 
the Law to them. ‘Tapussa attained the fruit of conversion,® (he entered 
the number of ?)” the lay disciples (and) remained (in that status). But 
Bhallika having become a monk and developed spiritual insight, (attained ) 
Sap he dapp ec A Be eg (12) was named Bhallikathera. Tapussa, on the other 
hand, having returned again to the town of Asitafijana, in the caitya where 
they had enshrined the hair relics . . . on the top of the Tambagutta” hill 
ee fulfilled (13) (his religious) duties, and after dwelling (there) for 
the term of his life passed away from there and came into existence in 


the heavenly city. 
(As for) the caitya of the hair relics, those 


benefits” (of its observance 7)” continually venera 


‘ Literally “my Lord see” (or “look ”), “my lord take”, both verbs being in the imperative. 
joned or referred to again. 


2 Here the monk Sivathera must have been menti 
: Or “consent”, “ promise ”. ; teen 
The Nalatadhatuvarhsa here speaks of a thrice repeated promise or consen™. i 

5 From ie Burmese version i is plain that the preceding gaP Sonisined & SO saa 

—_ who was dwelling in the Jelavana monastery : i sasole ere 
the technical Buddhist sense, i.c, in Buddha, the Law an € . Jisciples 

7 From the Burmese version it anadane that the two brothers obtained fret place among saan th of 

® The word contains a metaphorical reference to entering into the “stream”, 4e. the Ba e ’ 
holiness, 

® Very doubtful. 

” See the noie on the text. 

4 That is, primarily, “ spiritual benefits ”. 

Very doubtful, 


who were aware of the 
ted (and) worshipped it. 


40 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL tv 


Later on, the succession of those, who were aware of the benefits’ of the 
hair relics (14) of the exalted Buddha, having been broken, and because 
in this Mén country the religion had not been (firmly) established, people 
knew not (the caitya of ?) the hair relics and they could not venerate (and) 
worship (it). Because they could not (15) venerate (and) worship (it), on 
the land of the caitya such things as trees, jungle creepers, grass and 
rubbish had sprung up, (and had become ?)? a forest (concealing it ?}', 
people were not aware of its site. From the year of the exalted Buddha's 
(16) achieving parinirvana two hundred and thirty-six years had elapsed, 
(when) our lords the two arhats named Sonathera and Uttarathera came 
(and) established the religion in the country of Suwanpabhum.’ When the 
religion had been established (and) when there were monks, (17) nuns, male 
novices, and female novices, then King Sirimasoka said to the two arhats, 
“© my lords, the gem of the Law and the gem of the Order are we able 
to venerate (and) worship, (18) (but) the gem of the Buddha, (though) we 
desire to venerate (and) worship (it), we cannot! A relic of the exalted 
Buddha, that we may set our minds (at rest upon), a gem of the Buddha 
that we can, venerate, worship (and) adore, let my lords provide for us!”. 
Thus did the king make (his) petition to our lords. Then our lords the 
two Mahatheras showed to King Sirimasoka the caitya of the hair relics of 
the exalted Buddha that Tapussa and Bhallika had enshrined’ on the top 
(20) of the Tambagutta’ hill, which the forest bushes’ had covered (and) 
concealed, and people did not know (its) site. Then King Sirimasoka had 
the forest bushes’ cleared away (21) and also caused the caitya and the 
prasdda (which was also ?)* the cefiyaghara to be built up and offered’ 
(them). From that time also all the people who dwelt in this Mé6n 
country in due course” kept coming and worshipping (it). 


} That is, primarily, “spiritual benefits ”, 
2 Very doubtful. 


 Suvannabhiimi is here identified with Lower Burma. The name has also been claimed by other 
parts of Indo-China, 


* Or, possibly, “have not (got), Here follows in the text an illegible word of one syllable which 
may either have added to the sense or been a mere particle, 


* Or “set up”, the object then being the caitya, 
* Cf 112 n. 


? Or, “bushes (and) forest ”, 


5 The reading is doubtful, especially as regards “also”, For the rest, cf. 1, 24, 
* Or “ worshipped ”, 


“ That is, at the appropriate seasons, 


part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS Ai 


(22) Later on the kings that possessed faith who were lords of the 
Mén country, determining that this cettyaghara should be permanent, the 
ceiyaghara having been severed asunder,’ encased and enlarged (the sides 
of the caitya ?)° (23) successively and this caitya became a great caitya. 
This venerable caitya’ of the hair relics of the exalted Buddha enshrined‘ 
by Tapussa (and) Bhallika on the top of the Tambagutta’ hill, at the time 
(24) when His Majesty the Lord of the White Elephant, named, 
Dhammatrailokyanatharajadhirat, was king, the prdsdda which was the 
ceiyaghara, having been severed asunder,’ was encased (and) enlarged’ 
(by him and) when encased was 40 cubits (25) high. Thereafter, at 
the time when His Majesty Sutasomarajadhirat was king, (he) caused it 
to be encased (and) enlarged again, and when it had been encased 
(and) enlarged (he) erected . . “the spire (and) set up the umbrella (and) 
putting a layer of copper (26) within (and) putting a layer of gold 
outside (he) had the whole of the spire fully overlaid. Thereafter, at the 
time when His Majesty Ramarajadhirat was king, in the year ‘.798 of the 
Common Era,’ this venerable caitya" of the hair relics, (27) (so far as) all 
that had been raised from the shoulder of the bell upwards” (is concerned) 
having collapsed, His Majesty together with (his) queen Narajadevi ordered 
Prince Sarhnm Mlam to level... ..-- and have (it) built wp again: (28). 


When (it) had been built up again (they) “had it plastered. Then, saying 
that the caitya was very” small, from the large plinth (upwards they) had 
it rebuilt (and) encased once more. The rebuilding (and) encasing of the 


caitya had not been completed (29) when" His Majesty Ramarajadhirat 


means “apart from, to be separated from * Ibis not 


_y } The sense is doublful, the word cadah primarily 
a tentional part of the scheme of enlarging 


whether the destruction (if it is that) was accidental or an in 
the caitya, The phrase recurs in 1. 24, 

* Doublful reading. 

3 Literally “our lord this cailya”. 

Cf 1.19 n, 

> CE 1.12 n, 

© CE 1, 22 n, eer 

7 To preserve the order of the original these verbs have been turned into the passive. 

§ Here there is a small illegible word. 

9 A.D. 1436-7, 

0 Cf 1, 23 n. : i en ral 

This seems to be the meaning, though it might conceivably be rendered pies apace 
up as far as the shoulder of the bell.” In view of Il. 25-6, this interpretation doe es 
able, By “bell” is meant the bell-shaped body of the pagoda. ~ 

® Or “ too,” 

% The word gatap means “to be in time.” 


6 


42 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou ww 


departed to the city of the devas. Thereatter, at the time when His 
Majesty Bafia Barwor, styled: Jayaddisarajadhirat was king, His Majesty 
together with (his) queen Ray, (30) having given many offerings, had (it) 
built up (and) encased. His Majesty’s mother, the Queen Viharadevi, 
together with Yogarat, the commander-in-chief of the army, exerted them. 
selves : all the slaves, followers (and) retainers that there were (they) leq 
forth to build (31) but the building had not been completed when! His 
Majesty Jayaddisarajadhirat departed to the city of the devas. Thereafter, 
at the time when His Majesty Bafia Ken Dau, styled Dhammatrailokyana- 
tharajadhirat, was king, what His Majesty’s mother named Queen Vihara. 
devi had built was finished. When it had been finished His Majesty Bafa 
Ken Dau, styled Dhammatrailokyanatha, had it plastered, erected the Spire 
(and) (33) set up the umbrella. Thereafter, at the time when Her Majesty 
Sti Tribhuwanadityapravaradhammatrailokyanatha Mahadhammarajadhiraja- 
devi together with her son named Ramadhipati Sri Paramamahadham- 
mara(34)jadhirat? were rulers, (they made) many offerings together with all 
the forces of their army. Their Majesties, mother and son, having gone 
to dwell at the foot of the hair relics, had the hollows (of the ground) 
filled up, hollows that were very deep (35) (they) caused to be entirely 
filled up, high mounds (they) caused to be dug (and) levelled, (on) the 
earth which was filled in (they) piled up blocks of laterite stone and out- 
side (it) they had it all faced. Then (36) (on) the first’ plinth supporting 
the caitya, on the upper...,, ‘of the plinth, (they) arranged stone 
umbrellas overlaid with gold, and between the umbrellas (they) had the 
foot® of the plinth of the caitya paved throughout with flat stones, (and) 
having (on) the foot® of this plinth built (37) up® the bell,” (they) arranged 
Standing lanterns made of stone,* (and) on the top of the cellyangana,’ 
what is termed a pannasa” for people to go round, (and) outside (the 


' See 1, 29 n. 
? This is the celebrated king, more commonly known as Dhammaceti, who probably had this in- 
scription set up.. The queen just mentioned was his mother-in-law, 
* This appears to be the top storey of the several storeys 
* The reading and meaning are doubtful, 
* This really must be the surface from the context, 
® Doubtful reading, 
: Doubtful reading, See the note on the text, 
: Or, perhaps, “adored with (precious) stones,” 
i The area surrounding the caitya, See the note on the text, 
Doubtful reading. The word should mean a “ hermitage,” Literally “leaf hut,” 


leading up to the actual pagoda, 


parT 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 43 


umbrellas ?, they) laid down flat stones throughout; (38) at the end of 
the pannasd (they) built a wall, with an earthwork, whereon (they) oe 
jotus patterns. .... at the end of (one ?) lower level (they) had perma- 
nent eayats' built all around. (39) On that level (they) built the pannasa 
(apart ?)’ on one level, (and) on the next (lower they) had a wall built all 
around it, Within the wall (they) had (40) coconut palms planted 
throughout. Outside the wall (they) had the ground levelled throughout. 


1“ Rest houses.” The word may be in the singular, 
* Doubtful, 


44 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou. 1 


No. XVI. 
An INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY, PEGu. 


Descriptive Account. 


95. This inscription is engraved on one face of a stone of which 
about a fifth has been broken off and was not available. The dimensions 
of the inscribed area are as follows : height, 2 ft. 14 in., breadth, 3 ft 5 
in. The letters are $ in. high and letter ¢ is $ in. long. The inter. 
linear space is about $ in. Except in places where it has been damaged, 
the writing is clear. 


96. The inscription commemorates the founding by King Dhammacetj 
of a large monastery, the Maharamavihara. It is noticeable that the first 
date given (in L 1) is 819 of the Common Era (=A.D. 1457-8), a year 
earlier than the first date referring to this king in the Kalyani inscriptions. 
This was, apparently, the time when a beginning was made with the 
erection of the monastery, the dimensions of which are given in some detail, 
though unfortunately a good deal of this description is lost. In the year 
823 most of the work had been completed and on the 10th of the waxing 
half of Vaisakha in 824, after all was ready, the monks were invited to 
enter into occupation, to the number of 17,174 all told. The remainder 
of the record gives particulars of the king’s bounty towards the monks, 
whom he provided with large quantities of necessaries, the cletails of which 
are of some interest. Some of these agree with similar gifts mentioned 


in various parts of the Kalyani inscriptions to which reference is made in 
the notes on Il. 20, 21. 


. 
BEERS BR RL EERE Mey vet les Semler vata ae) 0 


+... [palrinibban gah [2001] cnam kuli lo[n] 4 tuy hea I 
 pday sakkarat 8 


mahidha). 819 tila nah [smin dhar] (Ramadhipati-Sriparama- 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 45 


PART 1] 
D;. AtRARAIAC ATAU) 3 ah tke te hawt vise Bata are AS se Ashen Se aves 
. suim bed ma lhin tau pday sabguiw sa[sana kyak}’ tray I ma 
pkah ran tau kramin brabwey’ dhar gah Ima........... 
. [Maharama]wiha[r] 

Bee sas teseis vee Sie Pp Ae ae eos ee al a erg Nout angie Maen te Saw Oh posh (ma) 
[kar gah I ma] kuiw yok dayoh Ma[haramawihar] I pa tah ni 
[gah kJuim ra I (ka na! kuim) lar I ka [1-it lwan kuim] (lar I) 
blwoy ramen]. . 

Ae! EA See a aR Ae SES a Ce - hna 
ha[t plakati ma twah bgah hat basa[y I jalli[n 38] hat I janok 
34 hat I salun 33 hat I [tmit] (muk) pan talluih]....... 

Bees as Minti gyn a ee aay we ee aS ee ee [32] hat 
I jalih 38 hat II wiha tawi clat Jetawa[n] 26 gah] Welr suim ku 
Ma Fe Sah canor hen I wiha [mway mway gah jalin 32] 

6. What ate ao eh eek ea ER BOO Ard (taljuih® II 
[no’ wi]ha [jJnok I bwoy duih esan gah I clat cankram bwoy* 
I [jalih 64 hajt I jano[k] . . [hat I salu ].. [hat I ba talui]- 

To AY os hk Cee ee Bo ek EERE ES (jraly® bodhi 

fjanok] 


mwoy I ceti ler mwoy II clat upuh gah I jalin 38 hat I 
(1)9 [h]at I sa[lua 23] halt I] cett (ta’) clan jon ceti 
Os uae aed. Sod ae ee eee ae eee a . fjnolk © 


bwloly duif[h] smar kya mafah kamba[a wiha glah I [k]. ..- 
(ly)... [ca mwoy 30 manlarh] caturah [I layoh 1] (8) [hat] 1 


dapah taluih I ui[t].... 


1 Conjecturally restored. Cf, XVII 2. 
? Error for kydk. 

8 Error for brabwoy, 

‘ Possibly ra, or cha. 

5 Possibly 33. 

§ Conjecturally restored. 

” For nor. 

§ Error for mwoy, 

® Conjecturally restored. 

® Conjecturally restored, 


TO io dis cls BGS, Bich A Re Oe SE Be Ee Rothe ee eS n I ta 
gah tuy uit hen ra II [alkha ka wih’ ma tuly gah] I aci area 
ma sbalafh wiha gah s|min dhar [tala cin] 


iis ae wee ye etee £4 Oe eek eee whih'ar’ 
[gah] I [k]uiw [fjah tah samah saman tuy I run jamlin ma 
gluin [ku] cnor [fian]’ gah kanarh [tuy] I swa[k aca] san jamnok 


Doon: tance aia e re ECO Mat aed, Syd Wy tees ay hc Pde a Be te Blade he 2 ae 
tade’ I bwoy athu[iJk atan gah salarn kana(rh)m lor na bata[n] 
tanay I kwalk] I[o]r [na] janik I da(pah)* [thap I] 


DAS Cate Gi apie LG Gk GOING ds he he teehee tata Wenig RS. ashy . [sala 
samat to’ gamluin [tuln ler I kutti mway la[k masun I]him 
dapah klarh pan cwoh paray gah I ma pa tath [ku] dafka]r dni 


DO i ain oh caer Gh BME ich a he BR, edge Gl WOR (I pday) [sa]- 
kkarat 824 kitu basak [cah] bramak ga{h I ti]la fiah smin dhar 


ti[la] cih batan het [ma sa]d[dha] pda[y] ra[t p]i 


DD Sah ate tity Was ee ae ts Gothen Sd Sey SF gk (p) tia Gk) ey aes 
-. Maharamawihar tuy I sah ma dah gamawa[s]i arafiawasi 
I ma nwom bnat galui dlarh’ I kutti ta gah I kufilw wala 
pllop [daman] 

DOs suet Pecttesh ta ain (kutti ta)’ [gah] ra II lukau dacim ine[y] (he)a 
Ina pindapatapaccay ma nom tau ku rah ma pray ma twah 
pgah I kha[dJaniya bhojaniya ga[h tajruip tau [ku] (kala).... 

17. 


Se ree ee [mway mway thely hen watthu ba (Inim) 
. . ‘klarh masun basa I dacam thay hen watthu [mway] lak 
[dJapah nim d[aca]m [c]woh pi basa I watthu ma n[wo]m bnat 
ga- 


} Conjecturally restored, 
® There is no virama visible, 
® Or san, 
* This looks like damuh or dapuh, but the additional strokes i 

: may b ; 
: ray : ’ y be accidental 
* Conjecturally restored. 


" It is doubtful if there was a word here. If so, it must have been ba or pi, 


PART I] 


18. 


19, 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 44 


(Iuin)’ [wo"] ma pru pren [pindapatapaccay] I gilanapaccay [ta] 
gah I ra-it ma phap dacam thay tuly gah] I til fiah smin 
[dh]ar tala [ci}h ba[t]an [gah] I day[y]adhar lak[khan]ada[nJawat- 
[thu] 


[ma pa] tarh [inay].... [dacim ma twah pgaJh bray j[ma glah 
I bga tau ku [iJila san to’ ga[m]luin tun II pday [san] m[why 
lak dapah I[nJim klarh [dapah c]woh pan gah I [ca’ shan 
jamnok (I) ta(day)’ 


....' [Ihim dapah klarh ba cwoh] gah I [suim] suim ku kraya 
dlarn [k]wo[m] ku [plari[k]khara dacam I sanga gah ya[t sna 
bap [l]him [dapah] klarh [ba cw]oh mre[k gamih] pan lIhim 
masun [k]larh pi [basa] 


(I) [mrek gala ba lak pan] Inim turau klar [bli cwoh [blasa I 
[a]parn’ ba ra ba [LJak daci[t] laim klarh ba cwoh pi [basa I 
[sat basiw daci]t klarn pa[n] cwoh dacim kdon I [kwom pha]- 


(la suim bi gapuiw panak sat)’ [bun sablu] me[k sut] I para[n 
ka suijm camb[a]y I hah ra [sui]m panga[n] cwa I [kammfali I 
[buJn kneh brakuih I (mamar jragan)’ k(w)uiw . [x]... {n). 
(r] . (ta)ray*® I blujn ksa (I) na (tarh)’ 


mye[k] (c)e(n) I [klen ka-uy I klen lanau] I tl4k pamat I basay 
pamat I juk st{eJa I sakep dun I dako’ salt I] tamah I pareb 
[ I nun] (d).. . [suim jon] I nun swlun)....-- [k I palye 
I (t)am-ot 


1 Conjectural, but cf. 1. 15, supra. 

* For acd, 

° The ¢ is shaped rather like the numeral 3. 

‘ Looks like thane’ but the th might be &, ¢, or / and the # might be 7. 

> For apan. 

®° Except the last two words which are practically certain, this is conjecturally restored from the 


parallel passages referred to in the notes to Il. 20, 21 of the tr 
’ Very doubtful reading ; the first word is quite uncertain, 


ansiation. 
except the initial letter, and in the second 


one the g might be di, 
: braba rdy the former representing the modern babs 


® Very uncerlain, A conceivable reading is 
(=pepz), some sort of knife, and the latter radi (=7a7) 


“mustard plant, radish”; tardy might mean 


“flower bud ”, which does not seem appropriate. 
® Or ham, 


48 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [Vou 1 


DAs NG WON) cog ase! ou ce ie Js a ie eee eee [ma do]k péh san 
hea I tila cin balt}an ma ciren kuiw dan I manah na [gah] | 
san {sJama[t] ma nwo[m bnat] mwa[y I]ak [masun lailm [kam 
masun cwoh=pan’ ta 


25. [gah tun] (ler) [parikkhara] (dacdm I)? [ma pa tarh k]ju da[ka]r 
dni [ler I [mwlay lak masun Ihim pan klarh masun cwoh 
[pjan gah I [m]rek mway lak masun I[him dapah] kla{ih pi 
cwolh sun‘ 


26. ba[sa I sat Inim] pa[n klarhn dapah cwoh] pi kdon II II a[pa]a 
sai pa-uit mwaly] lak dapah laim klath dapah cwofh pajn I 
alpén] mr[ek] ba [IJak da[pah] In[im dapah] kla[r] 


27. pan [cwoh turau] basa [IT apan sat ba Inim] pa[n klJarh [ba] 
cwo[h] m[lwaly kdon I [sak w]o’ heft smih dha[r tila cin 
baltan] tam[o’ sabbafiutafian tuy lon watthu dayyadhar] ma 
[twah] 


28. [pgah bray jma gah] (I) [bga tau ku san ta’] gamluin hen [ra IT] 
(IT) 


Translation. 


re -++++., 2001 years having elapsed (after the exalted 
Buddha had achieved) Parinirvana, in 819 of the Common Era® His 


Majesty the King of the Law (Ramadhipati Sriparamamahadha(2)- 
mmarajadhirat sl together with the Vedas,’ who 
delights in causing the religion of the exalted Buddha to shine, who 
wields sovereignty in accordance with the Law, who ...... the 


ee ee ee eer the ...., who caused the 


? Conjecturally restored, 

7 The h seems to be Superscript over the 9, 

* Practically certain, 

4 For masun, 

5 4457-8 AD, . 

6 * . a 
ee ieee of the name is Practically certain to the end of 1.1; the rest has been conjecturally 
digas e king is Dhammaceti, and the date is a year earlier than the earliest date referring to him 
din Kalyani inscriptions (cf. XII B 32 and the comme 


ya ntary in § 81), 
* This may refer to the Buddhist Canon (cf, XII B 33n, and XVII 2), 


part 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 49 


me (of)... +++ and at the end......, in due order... (4)... 
_.,...+ with pakati® cubits, that is to say iron cubits,“ (in) length 38 
cubits, (in) size’? 34 cubits, (in) height 33 cubits, (the)... .° (of the) 
(sides was ?) four taluil’?.... (5).......... 32 cubits, (in) length 
38 cubits. The viharas surrounding’ the central hall of the Jetavana 
(were) 26, together with... ... row(s); each vihara was 32 (cubits) 
long (6)... ee ee faluih (?)° From the great vihara, towards 
the North East, an ambulatory hall, (in) length 64 cubits, (in) size”... 
cubits, in height . . cubits, two laluih® (7) ......... a Bodhi tree, a 
caitya also. The uposatha” hall (was) (in) length 38 cubits, (in} size 19 
cubits, (in) height 23 cubits. The caitya(s), (from ?) the spire (to ?) the foot 
of the caitya(s) (8)... 6 ee es great... . towards the South, 
outside the wall of the vihara, a... . (tank 2)" 30 manlam square, (in) 
depth 8 cubits, seven fall,” avn. (9) ata eae .«.. (in) succession 
having gone on working," in 823" of the Common Era all the work on the 


moat and wall was quite finished. Beginning with (10)........ the 
.o.. were all finished. When the work” on the vihara was finished, 


arrangements for the ceremonial opening of the vihara (were made by ?}” 
the King of the Law, the Lord of the (White) Elephant, LD car geets 


1 Reading and meaning doubtful. 

2 ‘The meaning of wan has not been determined, Perhaps it is an error for Fwon. 

31, u, “standard”; literally, “ original, natural ”. 

* This is probably the Mon equivalent, in sense, to 
standard cubit 94 inches) and points to a Burmese origin of 
closely resembles the Burmese word for “Fron”, 

’ Presumably this means “ width, breadth ”. 

‘The meaning of Ait has not been determined. Pos 
refer to something julling out. eas : 

The reading nck, “fave, side", is nearly certain; faluih seems to be a anit of measurement. Cf 
IL 6, 8, dafra, It is difficult to connect it with Sanskrit and Pali éala, “span, palm -of hand, sole of foot”, 

8 The second nunber is not quite certain, It may be 3. 

1 Or “dependent on”, 

W See note ? supra. 

N See note > supra. 

2 See note 7 supra. 

8 A Buddhist religious service. 

Mt See note * supra. 

Assuming laca, with a flaw between / and ¢, 

% One matlan=7 cubits. 

™ See nole 7 supra. 

'S Or perhaps “ the works having be 

9 1461-2 A.D. 

” The word ka al this period was used also for kala, 

4 Conjecturally restored, : ; 


7 


¥ 


the expression sar dd#, another name for the 
the latter term, the frst half of which 


sibly it may be from Hid, “to come oat” and 


en carried on in due order”. 
“time” but 1 think it may here gefer © hare. 


50 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


... the vihara; having caused it to be eleares and levelled evenly 
( ‘a de long sheds in many rows near to it for the leading teachers 
ae “O Ger 12) a its Sa hee a ..... in the customary manner 
ae (ther) with embroidered canopies, ° (and) hung (them) with 
curtains, sevenfold, (13)...... a ae (for) the minor clergy also, 
fifteen thousand seven hundred and forty cells, and more, posure with 
mats, pillows, (14)........... (in) 824 of the Common Era, the 
tenth of the waxing (half) of the month of Vaisakha, His Majesty the 
King of the Law, the Lord of the White Elephant, because (he was) 
faithful to the Three Gems (15). ........... oe having (completed) 
the Maharamavihara, caused the clergy who dwelt in villages and in the 
forest, in accordance with the number of the rvuoms (and) cells (available), 
to be inducted into (their) dwellings (16)... . tees (the cells ?), 
During eight days with food requisites that were of excellent favour, ial 
is to say, hard foods (and) soft foods, (he) fed (them) at (the proper) as 
eee is ee re every day offerings (amounting to) two (thousand) 
... hundred’ and five viss,* (in) eight days offerings (amounting 2) 
seventeen thousand eighty-three viss," offerings to (18) this (amount?) 
were prepared, food requisites (and) medical requisites. ; At the end of 
this entertaining for eight days, His Majesty the King of the Law, Lord 
of the White Elephant, (made) donations of auspicious offerings (19) 
beginning with ..... the eight days, (he) poured down, as it were, a 
heavy rain upon the lords of the clergy. Among the seventeen thousand 
seven hundred and seventy-four clergy, (for) the leading teachers (among) 


the clergy,......% (20)... .” a thousand seven hundred and twenty, 
together with all the furnishings of the rooms and the cight 


1 Or, if san is to be read for fan, “made the long sheds in very many rows for”, ete. 
7 The meaning of tade’ is undetermined, 
» * Literally, “ dressed ”, 


* The meaning is not quite certain ; for batdn, of. VLA 15, 18; faniy ig probably the finlay of 


VUI A 18 and the modem laydai, tndai (pronounced fanai), “tracery, ornamentation, floral design, 
carving 2 
* Possibly “at those times” (reading gah after kala), 
* Practically certain restoration. 
* Either a hundred or two or three hundred, 
“It is difficult to reconcile these two figures. 
* Fairly certain restoration, ; 
© The reading and meaning are doubtful - taday may be “ niiddle ", and perhaps “intermediate”, 
but the word at the beginning of 1, 20 is unidentified. Perhaps it indicates some depree of rank amongst 
these 1720 higher clergy, 


wi] MON INSCRIPTIONS 51 
surtenances, a thousand seven hundred and twenty robes and cloth 
ts’ four thousand five hundred and three viss of black pepper, (21) 
enty-four thousand six hundred and twenty viss of Indian pepper ; total 
the two ifems, twenty-nine thousand one hundred and twenty-three 
s; nine hundred and forty-cight barrels of basiw areca-nuts,? boxes for 


aca-nuts,’ (22) together with bottles of lime, areca-nut slicers, knives for 


“with slings... .° and bowls,’ woollen 
10 


fel leah, MAP RIS, e-.00.Gs be Eek & 
sth,* knives and styles (for writing) books, ........... 
3) eye medicine," medicinal oil, sesamum oil, lanterns, fire steels,” 
retched cords," bamboo tongs, areca-nut cases,” brooms, baskets, ... 
“ waterpots with stands," drinking pots,......’” portable stoves, ... 
.° (24) (for?) ............ + very complete.” The Lord of the 


Thite Elephant arranged to give gifts, besides these, (to) the minor 


* e 8 8 & 


Or “clothes (ard) mats", Cf, XID F 46, H 38, M 27 and N (conclusion, after 1, 28), It is to be 
ted however that the Pali version of the first two passages speaks only of “cloths for fcivara robes”, 
ot mats at all, See XU 39, trans. 

Of, XII N (conchision after 1. 28), The word saf also means fruit in general but the meaning is 
etermined by the 948 barrels here, added to the 1473 in 1, 26, making the total of 242% barrels of areca- 


uts in 1, 27, 
¢ The rendering is doubtful, as it depends entitely on the Pali version of XH H 38, See XII H 39 


tans, n. and the passages there cited, 

‘Or “monks’ cloths", Cf. XP H 39, J 24, N 9 and its conclusion after 1, 28. - 

‘The sense of paras kt is not clear: para may mean “a present” and ha may be “a vessel 
vith a spout", But there is a word pala, “bottle” of which parak might conceivably ee 
orm. In that case the sense might be “water vessels with spouts,” simply. 

* Or “straps” for carrying the vessels, The meaning of is va : unknown. 

’ Literally “plates (or dishes, or other crockery) for broth (or curry) ”. i i 

§ Or “blankets " or “ woollen garments”; Pali kambaliya has the lalter sense, Bapeld i es 
hambala all three meanings. The form kambay in XII E 17 comes from one of the fs 
and is represented by ithe madern Amaw (~kaind), which means imah: are, eS 


garment ", 
* Or “knives, styles, books” : 
s, Sty . : * and bux 
© The remainder of thig line is for the most part doubtful : kwutw, Biel Sei, ae : na — 
which may mean a knife for splilting bamboo (modern Ahyd = dha), seem reasonably 


mean “ basket ", va 
U Phe reading of meyek cen ig a little doubtful, but it probably represents : 


with the meaning given. +e “iron 
¥ Presumably flint and s/rel are meant, though the actual word is “i 


* Perhaps for hanging clothes on. ; 
4 Vessels made from a joint of bamboo, like quivers. 
A word qualifying “ waterpots ” is illegible. 


"© Literally, “ feet”, wel Ns 
” The word or wards after “ drinking pots” are illegible. 


'S The meaning of fam-ot is undetermined. 
° Or “ sufficient ”, 


similar Burmese words 


’ 


5. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. iv 


clergy, who numbered fifteen thousand (four ?)' hundred and fifty-four, (25) 
as well, (namely) the eight appurtenances, beginning with fifteen thousand 
four hundred and fifty-four mats and pillows, fifteen thousand seven 
hundred and thirty-five viss of red pepper, (26) (and) one thousand four 
hundred and seventy-three barrels of areca-nuts. The total of all the 
clergy was seventeen thousand one hundred and seventy-four. The total 
of red pepper was twenty-seven thousand seven hundred and (27) forty. 
six viss; the total of areca-nuts was two thousand four hundred 
and twenty-one barrels. Thus did the King of the Law, the 
Lord of the White Elephant, having . . .* omniscience, (give) offerings of 
meritorious gifts, as it were (28) a heavy rain, (which) he poured down 
upon all the lords of the clergy. 

1 The word pan “four” seems to have been wrongly omitted before Ala “hundred”. This appears , 
to follow from the number of mats and pillows in 1, 25 taken in connection with the number (1720) of 


the leading clergy in 1. 19 and the full totals (17,174) in I, 19 and 26, which Icaves 15,454 for the minor 
clergy. 


* It is impossible to reconcile this number with the numbers given in ll. 21 and 23. 
3 The meaning of famo’ is undetermined, It can hardly be tuo’ “rock, stone”. 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 33 


No. XVII. 


AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KyAK PAN PaGopa, PEGu. 


Descriptive Accouni. 


97. This inscription is engraved on one face of a stone which appears 
to have been broken into three pieces. The two upper fragments adjoin 
pretty closely and form a continuous text, though at the junction it is 
often blurred, apart from the fact that the whole document is much 
weathered and to a great extent illegible. The lower fragment is detached 
and it has not been possible to fit it with certainty on to the upper parts. 
The height of the inscribed area, therefore, cannot be stated exactly, but 
it appears to have been a little over 3 ft. ; the breadth is 3 ft. 3 in. The 
letters are $ in. high, and letter ¢ from + in. to $ in. long. The 
interlinear space varies from ¢ in. near the top of the inscription to 1 in. 
near the bottom. 


98. This record commemorates the setting up by King Dhammaceti in 
the last quarter of the year 837 (the first quarter of A.D. 1476) of four 
great statues of Buddha and his three immediate predecessors on a 
common base, whence this monument derives its name which means “the 
Four Buddhas”. Unfortunately the inscription is in such a bad state of 
preservation that only a relatively small part of the text could be deciphered 
and translated. Some portions run parallel with passages in XII M, and 
a comparison of the two records has thrown light here and there on what 
would otherwise have been treated as practically illegible or at any rate so 
dubious that nothing could safely be said about it. 


Text. 


i. It namo Buddhfaya] II nfor c]nam tuy ftila puin kyak] tray 
Sa[kyamuni ma pa parinirbba]n gah 2019 [enam kuli ton 4 tuy 
hen] I pday sak{karat 837. gah I tila] fiah [smin dhar 
Ramadhipati Sripa]- 


4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou. ty 


2, frama]ma[h]adha[m]ma[raja]dhirat I ma [cuin dah tan tila cia 
batanh I ma pkan ran tau pitakat pi suim bed I ma lhih tay 
pday ma pa puin sasana] kya[k tray ma pkan ran tau kramin 
prab]woy dhar [gah I kha gah gasal- 


3, p cuit [ma] rau wo’ [ktuiw dah ra I pday] (kala) [puiy wo’ gah 
I kyak tray Kakkusan] (ma nwom bnat salun pan) [cwoh hat 
pakati ler mwoy I kyak tray Konaguim ma nwom bnat salu] 
pi [ewo]- 


4, [h hat pakati ler mwoy I kyak tray Kassapa] (ma nwom bnat 
salun ba cwoh hat pakati ler mwoy I) [kyak tray Gotama ma 
nwom] (bnat salun cwoh dacam) [hat pakati ler] mwoy I 


5. tila puiy kyak tray pan wo’ dah [tuy ra] (I uit tila puiy) [kyak 


tray pan wo’] (tuy) [ma nwom bnat salun tuy] (ma gah II pan) 
[ewoh hat] (I pi cwoh hat I) [ba cwoh hat] 


6. [I cah dacam hat I ma gah wo’ gah I bnat]....... * [tuy 
ma fiah].... [bnat]... [tila puiy] (te’ gah)... 2... 
eee See (dah uiw da ci) [bnat yam wo] 

7. ’ ya [fiah ma] shat gah I [bat ha go’ bnat tuy].......... 
elie sias Re Sis akan ae ae (kuiw dah) . (kui) . (dah) 
[uiw da ci I patimarup pan wo’] (tu)- 

8. y I [ma] ey ska[namh] wlo’ gah I...’ gah ey.... (tila puiy) 
[kyak tray}... 2... [wo’] ra I [bnat janok] (thawhay)’ 
..lyam bnat]....... (da)- 

9. [calm cwoh [hat salui ma] (dah) [dman] (thawhay® tuy) . . (dah) 
[pi cwoh pi hat ku mwoy] (pat* pakati) [gah hen I] ey s{kanarmh 
fii I patima|(ghara ku)... .. [patimarup pan] 

10. ma sdman I ma nwam bnat [mway mway tlan klarh klarh hat] 
(pakati). .. lL, (ma nwam bnat saluh).......... 


... [ey skanamn fi IT IT rau gah ksap] (tuy hen) [II pday 
sakkaraj It 837 II kitu] 


| Except where otherwise stated, a dot in this tr 


* This appears to be the readin i i 
g. Whether the word is to be regarded as connected with the 
modern thawdai (thawai), “lap ”, seems doubtful. But cf, XV‘A 5. : 


3 7 
Very doubtful reading. Presumably the word represents a subdivision of the cubit, 


anscript represents onc missing akshara, 


>ART 1] 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


10. 


17. 


18. 


19, 


20. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 55 
mak mway [crawek thay brab(b)ati] (lak krakat hen IJ)... (lwon 


PTD): e Sater aoe ede ae as [II kitu cay cah ba bramok thay] 
(buddhawa IJ lak bruih I ma yok ton) [pati]- 

[mJaghara (nda)’ [IJ IN] (gata. . kuim H)..........0., 
Br thoes alt dara Bal Sale seta ws ds cnd Ap OCHS ta gs RS aN (bwoy ramen)... 
.. [heh ra II II akha] (ma cuip ara ma sdabut)’.. 

(i)? gal Ui pday“Gwon) 4 ask a's are Sab ee Se iene Sete 
de Suds ea Ge ae (ler) IE... . (dlarh) .. (ti) . . (lak lar 
ankade bwoy)........ [kwo]- 


(m ku] (garhah) [truh brau] (het mik kuiw go’ dman gab tuy) 
bes 98 Ge gins 8 ae (widuih) [pa-uit] (I bway manah gah grop) 
...' (pa-uit I bwoy) [pday sala kambu pa-uit I rau gah pren] 
(tuy hen)... . (dlarh) 


dhfat dwor gah] .. 2.2... ee eee (Gan) 4 4 aca a wees eg 
... (ma cicwon kuim Jar)... ...-- (gah kuim lar). .... 
saw nm Tar) a eae ears aes 

[n] bulddharup pan duih] (ler rau gah kuim gafi BAI) chs 5 
(dlarh gah) ©... ee ee ees 3 teks Mla Pa) oS Ee ew ee [ma 
cicwon] (gah)... 6. eee siti Ge olde Mtn ee 

. (widuih diam gah tun dak nin garay) [mwoy thap pnan kamak 
mway thap I pnan dalan mwoy AAD ) esa) ee ere (gah) [gafi 
galau lar] (ra IT pa-uit). 6. eee es 

. [IL kwom ku amat dakuip pnan] (ararh pariwa gamluia) [ma 
sadman Il swak ma pa sabhanP...-- eee errr ete 

. (mwoy) .. eee ees fituy].- eee 

ee ae (dlarh Ghat)... ee eee eee 

(ti TW kwom ku]... - sees eee terete Se dines See ® 


' Spelt nda (Cf, XIV 1). 
* Probably for sdabut. 
2 ‘This is probably the last letler of dat. Cf. XII M 9. 


‘ With this passage, cf. XII M 10, 11 whic 


b have helped in the conjectural restorations. 


5Cf XI1 M 15-17 with the preceding passage. _ 
® The dots after the words in IL 20-26 are intended merély to fill up the line, not fo indicate the 


amount that is missing. 


56 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. rv 
i (bran): [Gla Gel | sea ke he ee Soe es eet VR 


OD. ea (ARAVA adie 4 dhs e. Ba eUaanaem wanes aed 


os 8 © 6 @ 6 


23. (nsabhan tuy)... 


24. 248. bway dhat Fa) <a. w ck ae ewe ral e te hats 

256 ORY ew hs ds daheh ds aicaandg Uh Sears es 

26. [truh ma go’ etadagga] (cah mway II rup upal brau ma go’ 
[etadagga]’......... 56 vera S sey ete -aatS 

Di, sb Pees See Ee Ss Ne oe (dabut lar... 

25% Ba eae we aa oa eh si wes danse Tans Pay Stata Bl ik. Sait can "eh gt SE ao : F 

BON cect ete Mette es ae (rup mba) [kyak tray]... (cup 
klarh cah dacdm te’ wo’)............004 

O00 a 8 eee a ....[rup Mahabisnu I] rup]....... ; 
) [rap] (dewatay) 2.25.6 a4 care RS eee cas : 

Sih decdiy oan uy Neath acy, do gets acon’ re ree 

(32 ee. ; dah ig se te (tuy II}...... (gah hen II tuin rup) 


| 33... . (kuim) [lar I] rup dapuin the brau ma tlun pda) iw ses 


BA, Pees a be ee ee beak jie ae watthu [kuim lar II kuiw 
Kanarh calo’ lar pa-uit heh II pday pajrah kyak pan duih tun] 
(ler If pday) .-. 2. Oy whi ‘ 


ye 8 © we ow ° » Pa a 


: Sieg *4I'M 35. Here the legible part of the upper fragment of the inscription ends. 

BA Sica Gabut tar, which may be the actual.reading (cf. 1.12). Here the legible part of the 
lower fragment begins, ‘The dots following the words indicate their posilion with reference to the right: 
Sitio eens Dich precede the words merely fil up the line, This also applies to lines 28-33 in 
sg pre bysencas “What interval there is between the two fragments is not clear. On the analogy 

— rare ts even possible that they overlap to the extent of making 1, 29 the continuation of 


MON INSCRIPTIONS By 


aT 1] 
35, [thun If rup buiw Ma kya] II pday [pajrah] (II). ..-- [lata 
gah II tuin rup dewatau truh brau gamluif ma tau tau pday 
cah Inim cakkawa IT ma thu] (pa pujau)..- eee eens 


en ee eo eee 


36, [masun cwoh I] rup gam-i truh II gam-1 brau] (Il rup dewatau) 
(II rup pruit Il rup buil pnan Ma II rup dewatau truh brau] 


(ma tlun pa pujau) [kyak fay) dekh Sates Be Pe 

37... . [ket teh oe ee eee [ra] I uilt kuiw 

davon sska ene eee ee [lar cut thar gran]... seers 
Translation. 


Honour to Buddha! 2019 years having elapsed from the year when 
he Lord of Merit, the exalted Buddha Sakyamuni, achieved Parinirvana, in 
he year 837 of the Common Era His Majesty the King of the Law Rama- 


dhipati Sri Pal 2)ramamahadhammarajadhirat, who is the Lord of the White 


Elephant, who supports the three Pitakas together with the Vedas, who 
to the religion of the exalted 


delights in rendering meritorious service 
h the Law, at that time a 
“Tn this (time ?) of ours, a 


Buddha, who wields sway in accordance wit 
thought (3) of this sort arose (in his) mind : 

(statue of) the exalted Buddha Kakusandha measuring forty standard 
cubits in height, one of the exalted Buddha Konagamana measuring 
thirty (4) standard cubits in height, one of the exalted Buddha Kassapa 
measuring twenty standard cubits in height, and one of the exalted 
Buddha Gotama measuring eighteen cubits in height (5) these four (statues © 
of) our lords the exalted Buddhas being made, (all 7) these (statues of) our 
lords the exalted Buddhas, measuring in height forty cubits, thirty cubits, 


twenty cubits (and) (6) eighteen cubits, as aforesaid, the measurement. +++ 
which they .-- > the measurement. +: °° these Buddhas gies 
(because ?).--- > to measure the measurement (7) at this time (7); not 
having been able to measure the measurement Aaa Bee a3 (caused to 
bet)... eee these four statues (8) that 1 shall make .-- | eer, 

this... - the measurement {of the 


lords the exalted Buddhas .-:-°° 


1 Of, XII M 9, It would be possible to read keh. 


8 


58 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


size of the seat?)'.... measurement. . . (9) eighty cubits, in height tp 
be (a seat?) . Abinydiuee standard eabits and one pat Gye I will make, 
a statue (hall a eevee (where) the four statues (10) are to be, 
measuring on each side one hundred standard cubits...... measuring 
in height...... I shall make !” 


Having thus reflected, in the year 837 of the Common Era, (11) the 
first (day) of the waning of the month of Magha, the day (being) 
Thursday,’ (Cancer being lagna?), .... (was finished?) ......., (on) 
the twelfth (day) of the waxing of the month of Caitra, the day (being) 
(Wednesday, Taurus being lagna ?), (they) set up the of the statue 
(12) hall) (?). (In front of ?) . . (also ?) . : 


(successively ?)*....... When the time came “ts set up’ bows nto 4 (13) 

2 in the middle... i... 46. (chamber ?)..... smeared plaster on 

. together (14) with the laity, men and women, for them to be, (he) 
BANG}. a Mee i ey ee ees (all around ?). Outside (they) covered .... 
throughout ; inside (they) hung white (cloth) throughout. Having thus 
prepared it}. ....., the central (15) relic (chamber ?).......... 
which (they) also decorated .... also....also..... (16) the four 
Buddha statues (they) thus adorned also. .... (the chamber ?)...... 
..adomed..... (17). around the chamber too (with) watering pots, 


one row, hanging lamps, one row, altar candles, one row, .... . (they) 
adorned. Throughout. ...... . (18).. together with the ministers 
{and) chiefs of the army (and all the retinue ?), to be, in order to hold a 


festival. 2.2... 00... (one)... ... (having 7)... (19). ...... 
. (relic chamber ?} . . . (20) . together with... .. (21) (daughter of 3) 
His Majesty... ...., (22 ieee MAM FY shoe es Be (23) (having held the 
festival?) ...... (24) . . (went to the relic?) . bell ZO Vins, 292 we S (26) 
(eleven statues of)* male (devotees)? who had actanea pre-eminence, (ten) 
Statues of female devotees who had attained pre-eminence....... (27) 
ee {set up 7)’. ANAS) tee eee ence % V2) ee (a statue of the 


} See the note on the text. 
* See the note on the text, It is not cle 
but the secord one seems the more likely. 


® This date appears to correspond with Thursday, 11th 4 ith Wi = 
anuary 1476 and the next one with ednes 
day, ae March 1476, i J 


ar which of the dimensions in this line applies to the height 


* Or “in a row” , or “in due order”. 
5 See the note pa the text, 
* Conjecturally restored, ee XII M 35, 
7 See the note on the text, 


ART I] | MON INSCRIPTIONS 59 
ather of ?) the exalted Buddha. . (these hundred and eighteen statues ?) 


i can (SO fe eecantane niles a statue of Mahabisnu, astatue......... statues 
of devas?)..... (S41) cele As (VIN: eae ech (32) 5.2) 52-38 
having?) 4a $442 (in accordance with the shapes?)'.... (33).... 
also ?), statues of senior nuns who came....... (34)... .. offerings 
2) also, caused to be made and set all around. On the plinth of the 
‘our-sided Buddha (statues) also, on. .......... (35) came, statues 
of the vanquished army of Mara, on the plinth...... above, in accord- 
mce with the many shapes of male and female devas that dwell in 
en thousand universes, who came (to do reverence?)........ (36) 


fifty ; statues of monks (and) nuns, (statues of devas ?), statues of pretas, 
statues of Mara’s army, statues of male and female devas (who came todo 
reverence to?) the exalted Buddha. ..... (37) . . . . engraved and 
Carved. ss aa all the pillars... . applied gold and silver? ........, 


1 Doubtful reading and m2zaning,. But of, 1, 35. 
? Cf, XII M 9, 


60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. ty 


No. XVIII. 


AN INSCRIPTION OF GAUNGZEGYUN Pacopa, PEcu. 


Descriptive Account. 


99. This inscription is on two faces and a detached fragment of stone. 
The parts occupied by the lettering here transcribed are on Face A, 1 ft 
10 in. in height, 1 ft. 44 in. in breadth, on Face B, 1 ft. 9 in. in height, 
1 ft. 45 in. in breadth, and on the fragment C 24 in. in height by 9 in, 
in breadth. The letters and interlinear spaces are nearly of the same 
dimensions as in No. XIII. The inscription contains imprecations on 
persons who are not true to the faith, and blessings on those that are. I 
seems to be only the remnant of a more extensive record, and owing to 
the bad state of preservation of some parts of it, it has not been possible 
to make a complete translation of the portion that is available. 


Text. 
A 

TS Beale Soong Dig ey Gebel, ogres, . [kuiw] dah mran sapa 
uiw barah bara{h] 

Dene e eas Be Sed sees... [narjak jamnok dacdm kuiw cin 
{tau 1a) 

Da Wa oe GE etc Nenagh ae ape es care [tun] II kuiw ktuiw dah pruit mwai 
jaku mwai wa sr[ot] 


Bey ee Boe ge ee ee ee [nd] . [a] I yarh p[ujaA mwai ma II dak 
mwai tandat’ lamlan la... . 


5. .... [go"] lop ka’ II blah ni gah tun II ktuiw dah mnih II. . 


6... [na glaw 500 leh II kamlau na gaw 500 leh II damlu na 
galw 500] 


? Eyror for tandah, or thandah if the word means “ drop ”, 


009054 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 61 


7. [leh] II [tlamnim nai gaw 500 [l]eh II ktuiw dah sat sat 
[tamnirh } 


8, [na gaw] 500 leh] kuiw de[h] ktuiw dah I mnih ma ha cmat 
sa- 


9, [ca gamluin puiai ma huim] wlo]’ kuli]w dah [pigui}]w wa[h] 
hen ra II II 


10. mwai la[ka t]ui[i Mahuim puily] ma gah wo’ [plabwai* dhaw yaw 
puguiw mwai pna 


11. bak cmat II pdai lok wo’ II ma sak [klu antaraai kuiw dah UJ 
ma 


12. sak ku tad[ok] kuiw dah I mnih dewatau le(w kuiw) [s]d[uik] 1 
13. yat [sapat] pdai lok bwai ma gluih hei kuilw go} dun ca I 

14. [ayuk] lew kuiw dlin Il khyuit [4] ni wo’ tun IT pdai dun swa- 
15. w [kui]w go’ 4 dah IT kuiw go’ ca tau yat sapat dip i 

16. [jma]p bhawa ma ktuiw dah ma sa{k] ku tadok kuiw dah I 


tuin -radhan[4] 
17. [parit tlamla ma radana kuilw dok] pet [kjuiw palguilw galh] 
(. .) 
18. (hen) [ra] I 
B 
1. (bra)ma[k t]nai (0 ee ace ea a ee 
Do. stares acne eee [kui]... - (1) [p] . (n) . . i(t bwai m)n.es> 
(gata kA). ee eee te . 
Foe ee ee ee OS (II) [mwai laka] sc{ulii] ..-- [mha] I 
(ga) [kuiw] (la). --- errr 


1 Or tamnt, for tamnim, But probably the fal letter, though it looks like ip raeget toe 
2 Probably for gah. 


® Or babwai. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL. Iv 


Bh peaecurs ae 8 (SA Sar trcl ha Rh Be sad ae II [pawa ma ha] 

Se eee eee ee ee ee eee yee + LH ma] sdafh] (ler sat) 
ihe ae ee OG 

On: eddie trate a, Weasley, eae aes (mw]ai la[ka]....... 
ere ee (II) (skandarhn] .. . 

(isd eel eee eee owe es [11] (manah na) [pawa fiah 


tamla tamla] (ta). . 


Be (a BS) ace, oe ae HS (wo)... [uiw] II [jnok kJuiw 
da[rhat] II 


a re eae a ae a ee (tla ay ese does II (tla) anin 
sguin jak (la). . 


Os, Se ceis lhe a atk @ eid naa oh ek (go’) [pa tuai] II ga{h] lew palan 


14... . [kuliw (tit) IT [dok dua] (11) 
II (grah kuiw) ... . 


a a | 


16, 17, (Illegible). 


* For the fnal letter, cf, the note on A 7, 


PART I] MON INSCRIPTIONS 63 


C 


1. ... (tajndan tha(mbat) fiah Jamm(u)di[t] kuiw ar.... 


Big ae te alirk [iw] . . [fh] II sam(-a)r p(d)jai mhai akah (tau) .... 
Translation. 
A 
ee ee may (he) have smallpox (resulting in) blindness, may (he be 
dispersed ?) (2)....... (in) the eight great hells may (he) be cooked 
ai 8 (3)... . . again; may (he) become a prefa for one existence, 
sucking (4)...... if one grain of boiled rice, one drop of water, dew 
.. . (5) (may it not?) be able to enter (his) throat. And thereafter again 
(may he) become a human being, .. . (6) . . from birth 500 times, dumb 


from birth 500 times, blind from birth 500 (7) times, leprous from birth 
500 times, (may he) become leprous creatures (8) from birth 500 times, 
may he become! A man who is not true to the faith, (9) may all this 
that we have said befall that person ! ; 


(10) On the other hand, in accordance with this saying that we utter, 
if a person follows truly according to the law, (11) in this world may (he) 
be free, from calamity, (12) may (he) be free from suffering, may {he) be 
pleasing to men and devas also, (13) may (he) be able to enjoy much 
happiness in the world’, (14) may (his) life also (be) long, (and when he) 
dies (and) goes hence, (15) may (he) be able to go into existence in the 
heavenly land (and) may (he) be able to enjoy celestial bliss ; (16) may 
every form of being (into) which (he) comes be free from suffering ; in 
accordance with the paritta (17) prayers that (the men of} old prayed’ 
may (it) be fulfilled for that person L 

1 Or “enjoy happiness in many worlds.” But in view of what follows this seems 2 jess probable 


interpretation. ; : ee 
2 Or “the ancient paritia prayers that (men) pray.” 


é4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vor 1 


B 
sunrise (and sun)seté......... (2) serie tenance in the future (7)... , 
Oise rae once again will die....... (4) si8 eset deeds that are 
11) ae ae (rere who shall be (creatures?)..... (6)...... 
once again. .... shall make ..(7)...... (besides ?) the deeds of 
the men of olden times . . . (8) (because?)..... (this) . . . great in 
strengi (9) ca: wears tw Wee ae violent (persons ?) shall seize (and drag 
away?)... (10). ..... having been able to do... . also restore 
{his ?) (11) property....... in accordance with this saying, once again 
BSUA2 or ge ok ee (this)... .. (this) (13) (faitth?)......... 
Hitaeens (f4).... may... (go out?), travel by boat..... (may the 
planets ?).... (15-17). .........00.. 
Cc 
. . may (the offerings of ?) the people of Jambudvipa....... (2) a's 
ee ae ee ee in the heavens...... 
Postscript. 


100. In concluding this series of inscriptions, I desire to express my 
obligations for help given me by the authorities who commissioned me to 
undertake the work, by their officials, and by a number of friends already 
mentioned in § 21, to whom must now be added Dr. C. A. F. Rhys 
Davids, my two former pupils, Professors G. H. Luce and Pe Maung Tin, 
and my colleague, Dr. J. A. Stewart. But especially I would stress again 
the great debt I owe to the ever-willing assistance of Dr. Robert Halliday, 
whose death is a great loss to Burma, to Mon scholarship, and to all who 
knew him. 


‘Or "east (and) west,” 


G.B.C.P.0.—No. 1, S.AS., 1-12-1934—350, 


PLATE I, 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XIII. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF:THE AJAPALA PAGODA, PEGU. 


a? Gane 870 bite te 
aa e | 


“ 


t y . * . se vay Y 
4 ry 3 ‘ a * ; + 
' 7 ¥ hy Py ae ie : A a a , ot: : : ” -< 
ie ; ‘ < be 4 as r at ok . } Dee | ¢ bs 4) : { HH td 4 . Bs bh * 
‘sy eg : x ; é EAS - 7 ; t Bago 3) beg : p ; 
< , z > S rh ' ‘ by Tine ‘ mae? { _ OSA 
. ; : : j os l | ‘ Ri tag has io deta) . \ : " q Tae : iY ee ‘ -F pe? raed 
: 4) Ome 10" “ 4 i 2. wt Se | rad ; * res Pa oe ath] a See aE 4 - . b a as Ya 7 . 
mS j } ; i f f 4 ‘ ‘ ‘ a +. ‘ ‘ } tt 7 Sy. . i Pe 10 
: ye ‘ - ees Ro ¢ . ok i sre : . i Shaan ; 9. A f ~ , Pe ae 
. Pie ’ ¢ - 4 re | ‘ . 4 2 ‘ by ¥ ; Aad ac Y ‘py . ie : sei 
d : if eis CA : { mi ‘ eae ; pia * a. > ‘ 
j T Bet 4 * 
, f Si i | EB ra ete aie ! ae, 
or ; : 4 rege Due C ? . i i{ f% < eT i 
é wee R 
rae a $e af 


bs oar i ii * * 5 TT a : ‘ are r be f u : Tmt, 4 aj = BA ee ‘ x - % Be i . . 
12 ! a te MR UKHO Gi b US AR Fay | get fos ope ox Swell Me, Seisgnl*s ee 12 
? . an é , oe * pr “7h ‘ , 


' _ 47 ri r ee: . Ae ig ve “ “4 sy »s PA se wo t ¥e a ) : A é 5 ang re 
tp oS Oke: ro, ar. Aa: Pos oie, Sane a LS : < , + a 2 4 ep ae ce im 
79 4 P| 307) euniag . 


16 
0} “f ME hs >. M : é e “ ty 4 4 T Bei 'd } = V9 . ee ’ : 1 Fi. Boe ‘ 18 

Pitin Ne SE Soe. Pate ie. ya >» * se ; Aa © be s 

>= 4 : > is, Wy Pid, ' ' Bie f - , i “ 

ants a ‘ede af ‘ af tet 
ee ay ev % , Fy : 4 20 

- ; waa v7 a ; 67 Py , J ” ‘ 3 “<7 rrammesens 

1 p<: pein a ag . . Sue 

’ : / sé ¥ F; : i; : ; 

/ , ‘ ¢ ' y 


22 


20 


ys a ae ee 4 | : ! } 4. Wx He Tahsin: os c 
20 dl ok peecunete’' Tae! & Y a Ne LS 40. A 6) oe 
i. to . ping | cae Le Ron il } iba 


28 ! ‘ ue . : Mig : Me ys ( D ee a HA ; a Laat ine sf ae { % ak 7 At wae Mp ‘ : Pa 26 
er . i Een “Ehy ; dv if 3 ' & WM ALY Wie sug Hite . %. ‘ “ ae : 5 Pe Pe 


24 


Sha 


Wt | id wf ru + huey 4 
is oe wy. i 
He ae Clay fy 


32 


34 I 
32 


34 


PLATE II. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XIII. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE AJAPALA PAGODA, PEGU. 


¥ agp 


ey ee 
oe oe | eg ite 
* 3 * rst Ve ag 
oF ae AS Spe 
nae = 

| 


eee 


i ih raat 


= = . ae us J: - ri WC? ee ‘ey 
eg ‘. : uy 
Ne ee a “ae De nee WOES, | 


’ 
ii 


Fe phendoe : Mcp j : 


<a 
~ “ 


ig AS 
KHG rah 
Bis . 3. oe JX Rat 
oe: Geen fe ea er 


Syenec cy 
r : io a oS 
ie : 


= Tt ts .} . ve + yf (he 4G (7 Ci + : 4 40% 


Papen 


i o4 
ae 


i* Pas A: = 
! eet Sip ft ie ey 

' tat ye! i sara hi, ae : : | 
ig “F: es: if pt z ay e b Yr ¢ > ; .. at ei s 
on. ott AT TES * : ae a4 TN aes iy 3 per iS xt ae of. _ ~ te yt th TWP . 
y Pesihy' ‘- % 5 i eeny Coe ¢ 4 y | eae 


mr By dayooee ape a Ena £- 


3650 See Ks 


+ 
P, A 


ue ys a Onnte Te Laat Ge 
a $< 7 ee 24 - a8 * Fy 
ae} -— [oe ‘ 
ee aaa Ua sae ao otk 


Bios Tee! BS 
5 . 


oe 
a - 4 
_ 


+.PLATE III. 
MON INSCRIPTIONS : 


No. XIV. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEGUGYI PAGODA, PEGU. 


= a 3 < 
te gia 
Pe ta FS 


bee ‘ . ” 
; oe: 3: ae i ian Bet ON <e 3. Sa 
oe ry at 
ie fo» pend 4 * ‘<) . . 
*. hs . -< “ * 4 
"" 4 wt “ om re % ¥ - 
A iy + i S 4 : 4 
ade 4 ‘ a" a rok 4 . : = aie 
me ‘Sie . ‘ * i F ‘ - 7 - 
a oe Phiey aya 2 - ty nei. coat . z 
fe é pig AO ; Rp ; 5 Beer in a 
: $ ry A F Pd ‘ rc 
= , : " a 7. 2 , Fae 1- 
e+ bs a 5 s 4 c “ a Y rz - . y 
ie oe 3 2 es : =m cy hale Gaa* Se FI ne ae. ie 2% a. Saas 2 
. « (ste =f ewe ‘ be ber * igi ane a | 
E : ; 3 ‘ 4 ares + eX ‘: Bt ae . tee 
“ ae Se * ot” . ‘ i 2 fn ee ' ee te | 3 
— a Le atte ss ae Ne . . Sein : ZEN ES 1 
ee * “ Na P. ; 4 
7 ¥ 
7 
A ak | ed 


ee ors 


e 4 


rE a i 

Lo ee $ $ 

ae Beery | \ 

Sa sek | 
: ws " ¥ 


10 


a ee inate Hanan Aha sine 


10 


12 


othe re 


yt 


> 


j 


oe 


e Whe ae 


® 


a ae 


acy 


N. 


ie ws 


{ 


. 


Ne: 


NGOO 


ae 


R 


) 


PAGODA 


F) 


RIPTIONS 
No XW. 
SHWEDAGON 
AL 


(UPPER H 


an: 
a oS 5 ia 
Ride: di 


UO 
a) 
Z, 
ates Aa 
Z 
a 


AN INSCRIPTION 


PLATE V. 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 
No. XV. 
AN. INSCRIPTION OF. THE-SHWEDAGON PAGODA, RANGOON. 
A 


(LOWER HALF). 


acts | 
ae 


. ye 
t 
. 


bey 


28 


at 
+3 


30 


> 


32 


a2 


34 


36 


38 


40 


42 


44 


Bae The GRsA. 

> yO, 
Pte hs 
> eth 


FRAO: : 


—™ * 


P< 


» +. x 


34 


36 


38 


40 


42 


44 


46 


48 


alt Soe 
wy fet 


y4 


a 


” z " x a - + + 4 * . a 
: i. 7 aay x es, "ad ee Dans " .¥ 
wie por em J * a ag » ay he ; ah txt ae ¢ 3 Pe: 3 - + 4 4 = *, , a Ee % ; yy ¥ 
Se | “ . , i A ~~ met Tas, Bie ‘ -. Pec ~€ BS a j+ % “* tol Sy em a . . *~ A 
“te: 3: 3 +t : aS? p : E Ci ter oot? ; ! A o. - * he ; ‘ ; 50 
oe pie Lee : > 6 ”, > } ret . d : 4 ort = ‘hel gee Bey g ° 
f a es Se, Ge = 


10 


12 


14 


16 


18 


bo 
bo 


“ a 


4 


2 
fer 


es 


nee 


e 


oo 
. 


caper tet 2 


, ‘ 


7 


at ae. hay Whe iant 
Pig aie ay 
: ate 


r - * ase “ os 4 yin ‘ -_. mA a S82 « A > e as 
ee i a > 5 mele « => a Ses tide aa 2 < 4 . 5. AT tS A ee ee : ra - A + es ‘A 
tao games giant ooRUl oan Oates: x ty me 7 
fad ct eae cae fod ; iis ¢ MGS? ese x if fee canes 5) de 
ia Se os ae 4 ~ ? + sie et Pe, BP EY a, LP et see bet i. a afi, a . 
: r ; os fig Sal erie «2 =r ue a ef SX} aN arte 
4 Ss e : i ? . ' <i . . - P , | é ; : 


+ 
a. ust 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XV. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PAGODA, RANGOON. 
B 


(UPPER HALF). 


on = SS v 


pee s 
- a _¥. 40 


ed 6 
oy point, bd ae cate AES 


ei ’ o> 


j 


ae A ? 
| poe ae ‘ , ey ae mo > As 
a fenton: Oe tet iti Bite Stam 


st 
a7 
: 


i aS, = : Chis $k at s ae Ra es 4, +. taf 9 T+ pas ‘fs oF 
4 : ~ 3 o tee . * s 
o, od aT 5 er TL 0. a nee pee ep PETS his ieee i noi 4 
fu! ob Fey " Fe Te es i i. a Sgt et Sod <: Ean @ 
: Ces C : : 
pom < 


pits EB on Hg) " ry baie aa cory : : Pr ry, " : i ; : ; f: = 43 < =, mtr e fy 
ae" eet a? peer Hagh Gt Se ee * > ees es ; bf Si Taeeae 


re 
Salat 
sts. tf 

\ 


> 

; 

Fy 
Re 
~ 


Hepa, 1) 


a5 LS 

€ Fo 

cite ne- coe se | 
f Ste : 

a AS u 1d. CEs : 


PLATE VI. 


10 


12 


14 


16 


18 


20 
7 
_- 


2+ 


26 


28 


30 


40 


Te. 


HHT OH 

Rly: tenes 
P eee} ME 
ee , 2 al & me 


OY an Papt £ ity 


~ 
vay, 
. + 


MON 


INSCRIPTIONS 
No. XV. 


B 


(LOWER HALF). 


te : 
nee 


a Stat aya is hy Fgh ae 


AN INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEDAGON PAGODA, RANGOON. 


u 


ry SEN SS, 
aaa. ae 
i a 
PDs se a. 
ba ae oH 


PLATE VII. 


34 


36 


40 


10 


12 


14 


16 


24 


26 


28 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XVI. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE YATHEMYO MONASTERY, PEGU. 


De ; Ue yh 


gs oy £ if 3 a es sae Coouesstost ott on, 
at t ~Agt 
rh SEE | Soi 


se oom 


~~ ae , ~ y wf . 5 aioe! BP et “so “? . ? 
ST Ie COPED OR DOIAETELSICTOO, TACT AP de Pree ae 


ee atnres ma 
hs aa 
pay: ait a i HY eh GMs 
fekps aon’ ne onan x 

ete 


‘ VE Pt 


nie ae i crates af ee 1 wos BEE ae sissies enh Oo Sok psa 
‘es ‘i ae Suey 2 te es ee ee : eS or ae 
he : Vie 3 poe. ee JHEIE 3 AIG a Bh bes agate ile e ines {ae i 
eres a) OURO RASC RRS OC) an) Ee phe a aan 
Reet WGC ae eC eae * PARAS SLE RE Sy brie re ee 


a ey teal Vane oy nCieK “eS afte y ty 


bes hoor 
ab Re ; Pee 


ee ghee 


waKn Ky 


ae te Ee 


near BAe fs 


* 


PLATE VIII. 


Bara RS) peraet) ne 3HO (Ay We PON. ee 


14 


16 


18 


20 


26 


28 


PLATE FX. 
MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XVII. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KYAK PAN PAGODA, PEGU. 


(UPPER HALF). 


‘ nae 


+ 
#, Se t ~ 8 


“~ ns pegs wet * , ars ie afi. yest | 
re) HONS aS ie : omc st align. 
a ae ay ona Bsa <i 
= i ner Coen “ore py iat 


| 


- cy & & Tras noe ; \ a wr : bes ts K-F *. = ' 
ae aes oy cy PES eens ts os al TERY mes es A, ont N 
ape . or ud ‘ i : . ' J 2 uM a pm ph E E> 14 


¥ 


. 


EE? ve : ik 
Ub 4 hyey jas ee ¢ ‘ an 
Y 7? Chat f hie setpe.. AN is ine abe 
yas ad ae eae tapes 7 
bec ge Spe ey ee 


ee ee ee ee. Oe eC! Mee bc agen i ore 
g erg <> ahd a =. mon 4” 8 Je at on % a “Adj > aes SS =e " YS) ork we any) ent aes 


og! 


= 


4 J . 
} . Se a5 
\ 2 « 
ve 
a > ~ 
oe 
“ts 
se 
7 “ xP 
> 


»* 
" 


1 4 . " is Cee ‘- ; '.. * 2 > 
: i ah 4 | pe 4 EFS : ‘ Als 4 & oo > 


t 


ibd ame Seay 8, clear ipihesiinyrois: Asie es ae 

ae cee ee, aA SN 9. yee roto ee ay at . 

foal ‘ We Be Se ee Chg oe enna ee 
ee toys. Ani AR Oe Rar ne Na 


18 


Prats X. 
MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XVII. - 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE KYAK PAN PAGODA, PEGU. 


(LOWER HALF). 


we 
e < oak aie 
~~ toy 
¥ Sp i. o at —® a ad 28 ¢ . ‘3 . 
" &, of et me ge > 4 1 P. . th! he : 
oF = ‘ = : . 
eee utes” et: 


Sue? wh vel geet : 


RS 


20 


24 


26 


34 


36 


28 


30 


32 


a4 


36 


° 
~s 
ca 


os 


10 


12 


14 


16 


MON INSCRIPTIONS 


No. XVIII. 
AN INSCRIPTION OF THE GAUNGZEGYUN PAGODA, PEGU. 


gl SP SES = gto he, = 
i 779 a poses a 


* ao i 


oe 


“ig aN Pete.” Opis 
| s sildae aa ace ) 
panne it Me TT ‘nne AG Le 


acay ane reer Bes Spent | 
pte: yO: . ae i c% > 


EO TAO 


sey ee. Pe Me, Re 


- pl f ot oR 6G Nast i : 


{ f) 34 J , t af , a ss x x <j % . poem ., i pe — 4. 
hee Joe 5 ey ET eee UE a 108 oS “ag 
ed We "ae be tae tide oats 


PLATE XI. 


6 


10 


12 


14 


16 


