--- Page 1 ---
（190） Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies Vol. 70, No. 3, March 2022
About the “Small Characters in Two Lines”
Form of Yiqiejingyinyi
Li Naiqi
1. Introduction
The Yiqiejingyinyi 一切経音義（ Xuanying 玄応） is the oldest Buddhist dictionary that
exists in China. In the Tang Dynasty, Xuanzang 玄奘 brought many Buddhist scriptures
from India to China. In order to translate these Indian Buddhist scriptures into Chinese, a
“translation place（ yichang 訳場）” was set up in Changan 長安, and intellectuals were
selected from among the monks, including Xuanying. Xuanying was conscious of the fact
that there are many difficult words in the Buddhist scriptures, and made the dictionary in
parallel with the translations. This dictionary was called Yiqiejingyinyi, which has
approximately 400,000 characters in a total of 25 volumes, taken from more than 450
Buddhist scriptures and more than 9,000 entries. The Yiqiejingyinyi had a great influence
on later Buddhist dictionaries; this influence was not limited to China but was transmitted
to Japan during the Nara period when the Yiqiejingyinyi was actively transcribed and was
frequently used for dictionary compilation after the Heian period. The classical
manuscripts of the Yiqiejingyinyi that exist in Japan, whose contents are slightly different,
have not yet been divided or systematized. In this paper, therefore, I will examine the
characteristics of these Japanese manuscripts.
There are ten versions of the Yiqiejingyinyi, named in accordance with the places
where they are held: Daiji 大治（ DJ）, Kongōji 金剛寺（ KG）, Goryeo 高麗, Nanatsudera
七寺（ NNT）, Tokyo University 東京大学, Kyoto University 京都大学, Tenri Library 天
理図書館, Imperial Household Agency（ Kunaichō 宮内庁）, Saihōji 西方寺（ SI）,
Kōshōji 興聖寺（ KS）and Hiroshima University 広島大学（ HS）．
2. About the Transcription Format of the Yiqiejingyinyi
Ishizuka and Ikeda（ 1991） studied Dunhuang manuscripts and Japanese ancient manu­
― 1228 ―

--- Page 2 ---
About the “Small Characters in Two Lines” Form of Yiqiejingyinyi (Li) （191）
scripts of the Yiqiejingyinyi and divided them into several types of calligraphic forms.
Some of them are described as follows.
According to this diagram, the two main types are grouped together.
In the first type, the word and the annotation are written in the same size, and if the
annotations is more than one line, the annotation on the second line is not lowered. In the
first type, the words and annotations are also written in the same size, and if the order is
more than one line, the order in the second line is not lowered, or only one or two chara­
cters are lowered. In addition, the items are not transcribed consecutively, but on separate
lines. In contrast, in the second type, the words are written in capital letters and the
annotations are written in lower case. There is also no space between the two items which
are transcribed in succession.
3. About “Small Characters in Two Lines”
The form of the Yiqiejingyinyi varies in accordance with the period and region in which
the text was copied. There are two major types of transcriptions: one with a single line of
capital letters, and the other with two lines of lowercase letters.
According to my research, however, there is a special format in Japanese manuscripts
of the Yiqiejingyinyi in which the first half of an entry is written in capital letters while the
second half is written in two lines in lower case.
Usually, if there are not enough blank spaces in a manuscript, two lines of lowercase
― 1229 ―

--- Page 3 ---
（192） About the “Small Characters in Two Lines” Form of Yiqiejingyinyi (Li)
letters are used. However, in the case of the Yiqiejingyinyi, even though there are enough
spaces, it was changed to the the lowercase style.
In this paper, the first half of a single item in the Yiqiejingyinyi is transcribed in
uppercase and the second half in two lines of lowercase. These contents will be referred to
as the “small characters in two lines.”
At the present stage, as a result of examining 10 different Japanese old manuscripts
and printed Goryeo manuscripts of the Yiqiejingyinyi, we have discovered multiple
examples of the “small characters in two lines” in the Yiqiejingyinyi. In this paper, each
manuscript will be scrutinized in terms of three factors of these items: uppercase/
lowercase, presence/absence of white space, and content of lowercase.
Based on the results, we will examine the characteristics, relationships, and history of
the propagation of each manuscript. In addition, various possibilities will be examined
and discussed in order to elucidate the reasons for the occurrence of these examples. We
will also attempt to clarify the relationship between the propagation of the manuscripts
and the sectarian intellectual groups that wrote them.
4. Concrete Examples
In this section, we will quote and analyze all the items of the “small characters in two
lines” in the Yiqiejingyinyi.
For the sake of convenience of analysis, these items will be classified alphabetically
in this paper, with the first edition of the Korean canon（ KC1） as the standard, and the
items that match KC1 as Type A. The items that do not correspond to KC1 are classified
as Types B and C, starting with those that correspond to other books.
The transcription format of the manuscript is shown in Example 1（ From Example 2
to 8, instead of reprinting the manuscript, we will change them to a horizontal writing
style that reflects the transcription format）.
1 卓犖
KC1, the second edition of the Korean canon（ KC2）, KS: 卓犖 力角反．謂奇異也．
《左傳》：犖有力焉， A
能投蓋于稷門．
NNT: 卓犖 力角反．謂奇異也． B
《左傳》：犖有力焉，能投蓋于稷門．
HS, SI: 卓犖 力角反．謂奇異也．C
― 1230 ―

--- Page 4 ---
About the “Small Characters in Two Lines” Form of Yiqiejingyinyi (Li) （193）
2 蜎蜚
KC1, KC2, NNT, KS: 蜎蜚 一泉反．《字林》：蟲皃也．動也．下古書飛皆作蜚，同．
甫韋反．蜚，揚也．《左傳》：秋有 A
蜚不爲灾．
3 毗挃
KC1, KC2, KS: 毗挃 知栗反．皆 A
神名也．
NNT: 毗挃 知栗反．皆神名也．B
4 空孕
KC1, KC2, NNT, KS: 空孕 古文𥀨，同．翼證反． 依字，含實曰孕．孕，妊子 A
也．《廣雅》：孕， 也．
㑗
5 埤助
KC1, KS: 埤助 或作朇，同．避移反．《説文》：埤，增也．厚也， 補也，亦 A
助也若．
KC2, KG, DJ: 埤助 或作朇，同．避移反．《説文》：埤，增也．厚也，補也，亦助
也．B
NNT: 埤助 或作朇，同．避移反．《説文》：埤，增也．厚也， C
補也，亦助也．
― 1231 ―

--- Page 5 ---
（194） About the “Small Characters in Two Lines” Form of Yiqiejingyinyi (Li)
6 深榛
KC1, KS: 深榛 仕巾反．《説文》：藂木也．《廣雅》‘木藂生曰榛’ A
是 也 ．
KC2, KG, DJ: 深榛 仕巾反．《説文》：藂木也．《廣雅》‘木藂生曰榛’是也．B
NNT: 深榛 仕巾反．《説文》：藂木也．《廣雅》‘木藂生曰榛’是 C
也．
7 填瑠
KC1, KS: 填瑠 又作 ，同．徒堅，徒見二反．《廣雅》：填，塞也．亦滿也．論文從
窴
玉作瑱，他見反．瑱，塞耳 A
也．
KC2, KG, NNT, DJ: 填瑠 又作 ，同．徒堅，徒見二反．《廣雅》：填，塞也．亦滿
窴
也．論文從玉作瑱，他見反．瑱，塞耳也．B
8 讋怖
KC1, KS: 讋怖 章葉反．懼也．《説文》：失氣也．《漢書》‘凶奴 A
讋焉’是也．
KC2, KG, DJ: 讋怖 章葉反．懼也．《説文》：失氣也．《漢書》‘凶奴讋焉’是也．B
NNT: 讋怖 章葉反．懼也．《説文》：失氣也．《漢書》‘凶奴讋焉’ C
是 也 ．
The above examples can be summarized in the following statistical table.
Statistical Table
Vol. Keyword KC1 KC2 KS NNT KG DJ SI HS
5 卓犖 A A A B / / C C
5 蜎蜚 A A A A / / 欠 欠
8 毗挃 A A A B / / / /
8 空孕 A A A B / / / /
10 埤助 A B A C B B / /
10 深榛 A B A C B B / /
10 填瑠 A B A B B B / /
10 讋怖 A B A C B B / /
5. Conclusion
The above results can be analyzed as follows.
1. Although the number of the “small characters in two lines” in the Yiqiejingyinyi is
― 1232 ―

--- Page 6 ---
About the “Small Characters in Two Lines” Form of Yiqiejingyinyi (Li) （195）
small, it can be assumed that the fact that there are eight articles has a special signi­
ficance.
2. In Examples 1 and 2, the contents of the “small characters in two lines” are all taken
from the Zuo zhuan 左伝. Therefore, it can be assumed that the Zuo zhuan was a refe rence
used in the revision and proofreading of the Yiqiejingyinyi.
3. From Example 5 to 8, the various books of the Yiqiejingyinyi are clearly divided into
several systems according to their transcription formats. In other words, they can be
divided into three systems: The first edition of the Korean canon and Kōshōji Manu­
scripts; the second edition of the Korean canon and Kongouji and Daiji Manuscripts;
Nanatsudera Manuscript, Hiroshima University（ HS）, and Saihōji（SI） Manuscripts. Of
these, however, Nanatsudera Manuscript is closer to the first edition of the Korean canon
and Kōshōji Manuscripts.
4. As mentioned above, we can divide the lineage of the Yiqiejingyinyi into three accor­
ding to the “small characters in two lines” transcription format. However, since there are
currently only a few examples, I will have to analyze more of the contents in order to
clarify the systematic classification.
Bibliography
Ishizuka Harumichi 石塚晴通and Ikeda Shōju 池田証壽．1991．“Leningurādo bon Yiqiejingyinyi:
Ф 203 o chūshin to shite” レニングラード本一切経音義：Ф230を中心として [Leningrad’s
Yiqiejingyinyi Manuscript: φ230 Centered]. Kuntengo to kunten shiryo 訓点語と訓点資料 86:
1­44.
Kobayashi Yoshinori小林芳規．1981．“Kaidai” 解題 [Explanatory Note on Yiqiejingyinyi]. In
Kojisho onngi shūsei古辞書音義集成 9，453­514. Tokyo: Kyūkosho’in.
Li Naiqi 李乃琦．2018．“Empirical Study on Heian­Era Ancient Dictionaries by Yiqiejingyinyi Full­
Text Database Construction.” PhD diss., Hokkaido University.
Ueda Tadashi上田正．1981．“Xuanyingyinyi shohon ronkō” 玄応音義諸本論考 [A Study on the
Various Editions of Hsüan­ying 玄応’s Yin­I 音義]. Tōyō gakuhō 東洋学報 63（1/2）: 1­28.
Xu Shiyi徐時儀．2005．Xuanying “Zhongjingyinyi” yanjiu 玄應《衆經音義》研究 [Study on
Xuanying’s Zhongjingyinyi]. Beijing: Zhonghua Book Company.
Yamada Yoshio 山田孝雄．1932．“Yiqiejingyinyi kankō no tenmatsu” 一切經音義刊行の顚末 [The
circumstance of Yiqiejingyinyi publication]. In Yiqiejingyinyi 一切経音義，25 vols., ed. Yamada
Yoshio 山田孝雄，1­30. Tokyo: Seitō Shobo.
Key words Xuanying, Yiqiejingyinyi, classical manuscripts, several types
（Research Associate, Zhejiang University, Ph.D.）
― 1233 ―