Source URL (Puppeteer): https://web.archive.org/web/20170916054256/https://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/news/2017/sep/14/worlds-oldest-recorded-origin-of-the-zero-symbol

=== Plain Text Content ===

Keep the news in the Wayback Machine. Sign Fight for the Future's letter. Close banner Please Don't Scroll Past ThisCan you chip in? The Wayback Machine is fighting for universal access to quality information; we keep the record straight by preserving government websites, news articles, historical data, and more. The Internet Archive, which runs this project, is a nonprofit powered by online donations averaging about $14. We’d be deeply grateful if you'd join the one in a thousand users that support us financially.We understand that not everyone can donate right now, but if you can afford to contribute this Sunday, we promise it will be put to good use. Our resources are crucial for knowledge lovers everywhere—so if you find our resources useful, please pitch in. Continue Remind Me Send me an email reminder Email address (required) Please enter a valid email address. First name Last name Submit By submitting, you agree to receive donor-related emails from the Internet Archive. Your privacy is important to us. We do not sell or trade your information with anyone. Please Don't Scroll Past This We keep the record straight by preserving government websites, news articles, historical data, and more—all powered by online donations averaging about $14. If you find our archive useful, please pitch in. Close banner Can You Chip In? (USD) An icon used to represent a menu that can be toggled by interacting with this icon. A line drawing of the Internet Archive headquarters building façade. An illustration of a computer application window Wayback Machine An illustration of an open book. Texts An illustration of two cells of a film strip. Video An illustration of an audio speaker. Audio An illustration of a 3.5" floppy disk. Software An illustration of two photographs. Images An illustration of a heart shape Donate An illustration of text ellipses. More An illustration of a heart shape "Donate to the archive" An illustration of a person's head and chest. Sign up | Log in An illustration of a horizontal line over an up pointing arrow. Upload An illustration of a magnifying glass. Internet Archive Audio Live Music Archive Librivox Free Audio Featured All Audio Grateful Dead Netlabels Old Time Radio 78 RPMs and Cylinder Recordings Top Audio Books & Poetry Computers, Technology and Science Music, Arts & Culture News & Public Affairs Spirituality & Religion Podcasts Radio News Archive Images Metropolitan Museum Cleveland Museum of Art Featured All Images Flickr Commons Occupy Wall Street Flickr Cover Art USGS Maps Top NASA Images Solar System Collection Ames Research Center Software Internet Arcade Console Living Room Featured All Software Old School Emulation MS-DOS Games Historical Software Classic PC Games Software Library Top Kodi Archive and Support File Vintage Software APK MS-DOS CD-ROM Software CD-ROM Software Library Software Sites Tucows Software Library Shareware CD-ROMs Software Capsules Compilation CD-ROM Images ZX Spectrum DOOM Level CD Texts Open Library American Libraries Featured All Texts Smithsonian Libraries FEDLINK (US) Genealogy Lincoln Collection Top American Libraries Canadian Libraries Universal Library Project Gutenberg Children's Library Biodiversity Heritage Library Books by Language Folkscanomy Government Documents Video TV News Understanding 9/11 Featured All Video Prelinger Archives Democracy Now! Occupy Wall Street TV NSA Clip Library Top Animation & Cartoons Arts & Music Computers & Technology Cultural & Academic Films Ephemeral Films Movies News & Public Affairs Spirituality & Religion Sports Videos Television Videogame Videos Vlogs Youth Media Search the history of more than 1 trillion web pages. Search the Wayback Machine An illustration of a magnifying glass. Mobile Apps Wayback Machine (iOS) Wayback Machine (Android) Browser Extensions Chrome Firefox Safari Edge Archive-It Subscription Explore the Collections Learn More Build Collections Save Page Now Capture a web page as it appears now for use as a trusted citation in the future. Enter a URL to save Please enter a valid web address About Blog Events Projects Help Donate Contact Jobs Volunteer Sign up for free Log in About Blog Events Projects Help Donate An illustration of a heart shape Contact Jobs Volunteer DONATE Latest Show All The Wayback Machine has not archived that URL. Click here to search for all archived pages under https://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/news/2017/sep/14/. The Wayback Machine requires your browser to support JavaScript, please email info@archive.orgif you have any questions about this. The Wayback Machine is an initiative of the Internet Archive, a 501(c)(3) non-profit, building a digital library of Internet sites and other cultural artifacts in digital form. Other projects include Open Library & archive-it.org. Your use of the Wayback Machine is subject to the Internet Archive's Terms of Use.
