=== PAGE 1 ===

=== PAGE 2 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
Contents 
 
Preface  v 
 
Abbreviations  viii 
 
1. Introduction  1 
 1.1 The Mon people and language  1 
 1.2 Sources and methodology  8 
   
 1.3 Sentence structure  13 
 1.4 Sentence types  15 
  1.4.1 Interrogative sentences  15 
  1.4.2 Imperative sentences  18 
  1.4.3 Conditional clauses  20
  
 1.5 Phonology of Mon  23 
 1.5.1 Historical overview  23 
 1.5.2 From Middle Mon to Modern Mon  26 
 1.5.3 Modern dialects  30 
 1.5.4 The phonology of SM  33 
 1.5.5 Phonology and the writing system  37 
 
2. Verbs in Mon  42
 2.1 What are verbs?  42 
 2.2 The predicate in Mon  43 
  2.2.1 Previous studies of the verb in Mon  44 
  2.2.2 Verbs as word class in Mon  47 
  2.2.3 Nominal predicates and topicalised verbs  49 
 2.3 Negation  51 
  2.3.1 Negated statements and questions  51 
  2.3.2 Prohibitive  58 
  2.3.3 Summary  59 
 2.4 Verbal morphology  60 
  2.4.1 Historical development  60 
  2.4.2 Modern Mon  65 
  2.4.3 Summary  67 
 2.5 Verb classes and types of verbs  67 
  2.5.1 Transitive and intransitive verbs  68 
  2.5.2 Aktionsarten  71 
  2.5.3 Resultative verb compounds (RVC)  75 
  2.5.4 Existential verbs (Copulas)  77 
   2.5.4.1 ‹dah› th ‘be something’  78 
   2.5.4.2 ‹må ï› mŋ ‘be at, stay’  80 
   2.5.4.3 ‹nwa ÿ› nùm ‘be at, exist, have’  82 
   2.5.4.4 ‹(hwa’) se ï› (hùʔ) siəŋ ‘(not to) be so’  86 
 i
=== PAGE 3 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
  2.5.5 Directionals  88 
 2.6 Complements of verbs  89 
  2.6.1 Direct objects  90 
  2.6.2 Oblique objects  91 
  2.6.3 Complement clauses  95 
 
3. The syntax of verbs  98 
 3.1 Serial verb constructions  98 
  3.1.1 Historical development  100 
  3.1.2 Serial verbs in modern Mon  102 
 3.2 Voice  106 
 3.3 Attributive and relative  109 
 
4. Causatives  113 
 4.1 Introduction  113 
 4.2 Historical overview  114 
  4.2.1 Verbs with single initial (non labial)  115 
  4.2.2 Verbs with labial initial  117 
  4.2.3 Verbs with initial consonant cluster  118 
  4.2.4 Irregular causatives  119 
  4.2.5 Causatives of directionals  120 
  4.2.6 Affix syncretism in MM  120 
 4.3 The situation in modern Mon  121 
  4.3.1 Productivity of the p-/pə- prefix  121 
  4.3.2 The hə- and pə- prefixes  122 
  4.3.3 The vocalic infix  124 
  4.3.4 The p- prefix in clusters  125 
  4.3.5 Irregular developments  126 
  4.3.6 The periphrastic construction  127 
  4.3.7 Verbs without morphological causative  129 
  4.3.8 Suppletive stems  130 
 4.4 Causatives with  directionals  131 
 4.5 Semantics of causative derivates  132 
 4.6 Orthography of causatives  134 
 4.7 Summary of causatives  135 
 
5. The focal and assertive particles, ‹ra› raʔ and ‹roï› noŋ  137 
 5.1 Description  137 
 5.2 Historical development  139 
 5.3 Modern Mon  142 
  5.3.1 The focal particle ‹ra› raʔ  142 
  5.3.2 The assertive particle ‹ro ï› noŋ  147 
 5.4 Conclusion  151 
 
6. TAM markers and other verbal operators  152 
 6.1 Iterative and con tinuous events  154 
 ii
=== PAGE 4 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
 6.2 Conative reading  156 
 6.3 Predicate operators  157 
  6.3.1 ‹må ï› mŋ and ‹tau› tao ‘STAY, STAND’  158 
  6.3.2 ‹’ā › ʔa and ‹õā› na ‘GO, CAUS:GO’  167 
  6.3.3 ‹klu ï› klŋ and ‹naï› nŋ ‘COME, CAUS:COME’  173 
  6.3.4 ‹tuin› tn and ‹ptuin› pətn ‘MOVE UP, CAUS:UP’  179 
  6.3.5 ‹ceh› ceh and ‹phyeĥ› phyeh ‘MOVE DOWN, CAUS:DOWN’  183 
  6.3.6 Other directionals  187 
  6.3.7 ‹law› l  ‘KEEP’  191 
  6.3.8 ‹tho’› thʔ  ‘THROW’  196 
  6.3.9 ‹ca› iəʔ ‘EAT’  199 
  6.3.10 ‹ket› ket ‘TAKE’  204 
  6.3.11 ‹kuiw› k ‘GIVE’  207 
  6.3.12 ‹gwa’› kʔ ‘GET’  215 
  6.3.13 ‹lep› lèp and ‹mān› màn ‘ABLE’ and ‘WIN’  228 
  6.3.14 ‹dah › th ‘HIT’  231 
  6.3.15 ‹mik, mik-gwa’› mòc, məkʔ  ‘WANT TO’  238 
  6.3.16 ‹tuy› toə ‘FINISH’  241 
  6.3.17 ‹ira, yya› yaʔ  ‘NEW SITUATION’  249 
  6.3.18  ‹keï, klā, õiÿ, phuih› kiəŋ, kla, nm, phh  ‘EXPER, BEFORE, PERS’ 252 
 6.4 Summary of verbal and clausal operators  257 
 
Appendices  261 
A. Maps of Mon speaking areas  262 
B. Phonology tables of Mon dialects  264 
C. Excerpt from Saddā Man ‘Mon Grammar’  272 
D. Sample Texts 
 1. Myazedi Imscription (OM)   277 
 2. Shwedagon Inscription (MM)   279 
 3. The story of King Dhammacetī  (LM)  281 
 4. Experiences of a temple boy (SM)  283
  
E. Table of operators and SFPs  286 
F. Text Sources  287 
G. References  290
  
 iii
=== PAGE 5 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
 Preface 
 
This study of the verb system of Mon w ould not have been possible without the 
assistance of a number of people in Switzerland, Thailand and Burma.   
Prof. Karen H. Ebert, head of the Semi nar für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft at 
Zurich University guided me through my  studies and gave me the support I 
needed, also during long stays in Thailand. 
 Prof. G. Diffloth, Dr. E. Guillon and Dr. Nai Pan Hla shared their profound 
knowledge of the Mon language and culture with me in personal communications 
on different occasions. Prof. Sujaritlak and Dr. Praphasi of the Institute of 
Language and Culture for Rural Developm ent at Mahidol University in Bangkok 
were most helpful, especially in discu ssing parts of the present study with me and 
assisting with the publication of pa rts of my research results in Mon-Khmer 
Studies (Vol. 33). 
I am most indebted to the many Mon peopl e in Thailand and especially in Burma 
who sat through recording se ssions and had to endure my (to them) nonsensical 
questions about their language. Abbots and temple boys, housewives and 
peasants, market sellers and story writers,  pop stars and traditional musicians and 
dancers, drivers and hotel employees, teachers, journalists and politicians, 
scholars and illiterate work ers, and the people just pa ssing by and stopping for a 
chat, they all contributed to the comple tion of this study, more often than not 
unknowingly, sharing their culture and language with an outsider. 
 It is customary (and sensible) not to  mention by name people in Burma itself 
who assist foreign researchers worki ng on Burmese minority issues, however 
apolitical they may be. I therefore refr ain from listing the names of the Mon in 
Burma, who not only invited me to their homes but also accompanied me through 
Monland and introduced me to places a nd people that I would not have had a 
chance to find on my own. It is experiences  like listening to old monks telling the 
long forgotten local history, sitting in wooden houses eating freshly caught fried 
rats, watching whole villages  participating in religious ceremonies at a local 
temple, being invited to an ordination party after a nightlong bus ride through 
southern Burma, spending nights in m onasteries sleeping on the floor among 
monks who have to get up at five in th e morning, and being given the chance to 
teach village children and at the same time  learn a lot from them that keep the 
interest in a culture and its language alive. It is experien ces like these that let one 
forget the heavy monsoon rains that pour down on Monland six months a year, 
the very moody electricity supply (if there is any at all), the less than perfect 
communication and transport facilities w ithin Burma, as well as the political 
tension that surrounds all Burmese ethnicities, including the Burman themselves. 
 v
=== PAGE 6 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
 In Wangka (Sangkhlaburi, Thailand), wher e most of the research was done, the 
situation is much more comfortable, although the village ha s its own share of 
tension (and heavy monsoon rains), bei ng basically a huge Mon refugee camp in 
Thailand, though a very open one. Here I ow e special thanks to Mr. Ok Pung, 
who in the first phase of my Mon studies was an invaluable help in almost all 
respects. He created many sets of Mon fonts for Windows computers and 
published a number of books, mostly edit ions of old manuscripts. His daughters 
Suda and Sajiang spent many nights transcri bing and typing my audio recordings. 
Without their help I would not have been  able to make the extensive use of 
recorded spoken language material that is  necessary for a study of this kind. Mr. 
Ok Pung’s wife Mi Nge proved to be an  inexhaustible source of a variety of 
delicious Mon food, which made working th rough the nights much more pleasant 
than it would otherwise have been. Ot her people worthy mentioning in Wangka 
are Mr. and Mrs. Phophu eak-Sirihong of Wangka Ca ble TV, who possess an 
extensive video collection of documenta ries and music, and an always open 
house. Mr. Win Myint was my first Mon t eacher, patiently repeating his phrases 
and trying to understand my first steps in  a language that seemed impossible to 
master. Many more followed, including a number of people who may never 
realise how much they helped me furthe r my studies just by sitting and talking 
with me or with each other. Thanks to all of them. 
 Anon C. worked for months scanning  and computerising all books in and on 
Mon we could get hold of, making a collection of a few hundred volumes 
covering all aspects of Mon culture and language conveniently available on CD 
ROM. 
 This research project was mainly financed by the Forschungskommission der 
Universität Zürich, which granted funds to conduct field studies for 30 months. 
 Last but not least I have to thank my  family in Switzerland, who not only gave 
me financial assistance over many years of private field research, but also the 
moral support needed to keep on working in  the ‘tropical paradise’ of the Thai-
Burmese border area. 
 
 Mon is a language without overt gender distinctions in pronouns and most 
nouns. The political discussion of correct language use in terms of gender does 
therefore not arise in Mon, a society where “women enjoy as many rights as men, 
also if not necessarily the same ones”  (quotation Nai Ok Pung). Throughout this 
study, I use ‘he, him, his’ in the third person where the context is neutral as to the 
gender of the person(s) c oncerned. It has to be kept in mind that the 
corresponding Mon pronouns, if pr esent in the sentence at all, can always refer to 
either a female or a male person. The choice of the English male pronouns should 
 vi
=== PAGE 7 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
be understood merely as a de fault choice to make the tr anslations more readable. 
The same goes for Burmese and Thai usage. 
 I use the translation ‘man ’ in the glosses for Mon mənìh from Pali manussa 
‘man, human being’ (equivalent and ultimately related to German Mensch). This 
sometimes results in odd-sounding glosses like ‘man female’ for mənìh prè ə, 
which is rendered in English simply as ‘woman’ (although the Mon word is used 
for a female human of any age). 
 
 
 
M. Jenny, Wangka/Bangkok/Zurich 2005 
 vii
=== PAGE 8 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
Abbreviations 
 
ABL  Ablative 
ADH  Adhortative 
ADV  Adverb 
ALL  Allative 
AOR  Aorist 
ASP  Aspect 
ASRT  Assertive 
ATTR  Attributive 
B  Burmese 
BEN  Benefactive 
CAUS  Causative 
CL  Classifier 
COND  Conditional 
CONT  Continuous 
DES  Desiderative 
DIR  Directional 
DMI  Dictionary of Mon Inscriptions (Shorto 1971) 
DOM  Dvāravatī Old Mon 
DSM  Dictionary of Spoken Mon (Shorto 1962) 
DUR  Durative 
EB  Epigraphica Birmanica (Duroiselle 1921 etc.) 
EMPH  Emphatic particle 
EXPER  Experiential 
FOC  Focus 
FREQ  Frequentative 
IMPER  Imperative 
INCL  Inclusive (‘x as well as y; x together with y’) 
INGR  Ingressive 
INSTR  Instrumental 
INTENS  Intensifier 
INTERJ  Interjection 
IRR  Irrealis 
J.B.R.S.  Journal of the Burma Research Society 
Khm  Khmer 
LM  Literary Mon 
LOC  Locative 
MDF  Modifier 
MM  Middle Mon 
 viii
=== PAGE 9 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
MOD  Modal 
NEG  Negation 
NML  Nominaliser 
NSIT  New situation 
OBJ  Object 
OBL  Oblique 
OM  Old Mon  
P  Pali 
PASS  Passive 
PERF  Perfect 
PERS  Persisitive 
PFTV  Perfective 
PL  Plural 
POL  Politeness particle 
POSS  Possessive 
POT  Potential 
PREF  Nominal prefix 
PROH  Prohibitive 
PROSP  Prospective 
PROV  Provisory 
PURP  Purposive 
PWB  Proto-West-Bahnaric 
Q  Question 
RDP  Reduplication 
REAL  Realis 
RECIP  Recipient 
REL  Relative 
RP  Reading pronunciation 
RVC  Resultative verb compound 
SEQ  Sequential 
SER  Serial verb 
SFP  Sentence final particle 
Skt  Sanskrit 
SM  Spoken Mon 
SRC  Source 
SVC  Serial verb construction 
Th  Thai 
TOP  Topic 
 
 ix
=== PAGE 10 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
1. Introduction 
1.1 The Mon people and language 
 
The Mon language is linguistically a member of the Mon-Khmer group of the 
Austroasiatic family, which may be part of a bigger Austric stock comprising 
the Austroasiatic and Austronesian families, for some authors also the Sino-
Tibetan family (s. Benedict 1991 for a summary of the Austric thesis). The 
Austroasiatic languages are spread all over the Southeast Asian subcontinent, 
from southern China to the Malay Peni nsula and from Vietnam to India. The 
largest community of the Austroasiatic  population, which Parkin puts at over 
80 mio. (Parkin 1991:1), are the Vietname se with over 65 mio. speakers. The 
Mon population is estimated at about one  million. It must be kept in mind 
that this is a purely linguistic cla ssification, based on comparative diachronic 
linguistic studies, and has no social or cultural significance. There are among 
the Mon-Khmer peoples in Southeast Asia tribes like the Mlabri with stone-
age civilization (s. Pookajorn 1992, Rischel 1995) and civilizations as old as 
the Khmer and Vietnamese. 
 
 The origin of the Mon people and the de tails of their postulated migration to 
Southeast Asia are not known. 1 According to some indigenous legends, the 
Mon migrated from India, a thesis that is not supported by historical or 
archaeological evidence, t hough. This myth may have its origin in Indian 
merchants settling in what today is southern Burma, introducing not only 
overseas commerce, but also the Indian roots for Mon religious practice and 
culture. 
 Two names are commonly used for the Mon people, the etymology of both 
of which is still unknown. The Mon call themselves mòn, a word that goes 
back to Old Mon (OM) ‹rmeñ›, which is found as ‹rm ěn, r ěměn› in Old 
Javanese. Old Khmer has ‹ramañ, rmañ›, which corresponds to the Pali form 
rāmañña, the origin of the Thai designation ‹r āmăñ›. Formally OM ‹rmeñ› 
looks like the attributive of a verb *‹reñ›, which is not attested in Mon. See 
Guillon 1999:21 for a (very tentative) explanation of the ethnonym ‹rmeñ›. 
The other name applied to the Mon pe ople by foreigners and considered 
derogatory by the Mon themselves, is ‘Talaing’. Different hypotheses have 
been proposed on the etymology of this  name (s. Guillon 1999:17ff, J.B.R.S. 
Vols. II/I:73f, 100f, II/II:246ff, III/I:1 ff, 84ff), but no generally accepted 
conclusion has been reached so far. Another ethnonym applied by Westerners 
is ‘Peguan’, after the name of the Old Mon capital city Pegu (Ha ÿsāvatī, 
today Bago).  
                                                      
1 For a more detailed discussion of the history of the Mon people and references see for 
example Guillon 1999 and Bauer 1990. A different view is presented in Aung-Thwin 2001. 
In this section only a short outline can be given. 
 
 
1 
=== PAGE 11 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The earliest direct linguistic evidence of the Mon are a handful of short 
stone inscriptions f ound in central Thaila nd and dating to the 6 th century. 
These inscriptions are among the earliest record of an indigenous language of 
Southeast Asia, predati ng the earliest Khmer 
inscriptions (but being about contemporary with 
inscriptions in the now extinct Pyu language of 
central Burma). The fact that Mon is the only 
local language used during the Dvā ravatī era 
strongly suggests that th e Mon were at least an 
important part of the Dv āravatī population (cf. 
Saraya 1999:160ff, Guillon 1999:79ff). The 
inscriptions found so far are all very short and 
show the initial phase of  an evolving literary 
language. The following 6
th century inscription 
from Wat Pho Rang, Nakhon Pathom (Thailand) 
illustrates early Dvāravatī Mon. 
The inscription is fragmentary and the reading 
and translation of most of it uncertain. The meani ng of many words in the 
inscription is not known, e.g. ‹dnow›, which is given by Shorto as a not 
defined “quantifier” (DMI:202)
2 and ‹laÿ-ur›, which is an “article given to 
monastery?” (DMI:331). The read ing (and meaning) of ‹sra r āï› is dubious, 
as is Shorto’s interpretation as silver (OM ‹srañ, sreñ›). Although the text is 
hardly intelligible, the language is clearly early OM. 
 
OM text Transliteration Translation 
   
 
duÿpoh cwas 
moy dnow 
hāï klam ti óey 
...ra’ sraï kyāk wihār 
 
seven-ty  
one dnow 
? hundred earth in 
... cast Buddha temple 
 
laÿ-ur sra rāï 
doï bār ∃E ’awo’ 
...r taÿ brāw bihār 
lam-ur silver (?)  
shaman two ∃E this 
... tree coconut temple 
   Table 1.1 Dvā ravatī inscription (after Prapassorn 1999:115f) 
                                                      
2 Formally ‹dnow› may be a nominalization of the verb ‹dow› ‘run’, in which case it would 
be a unit of length. SM uses kok ‘call’ as a unit of length (“as far as a call can be heard”). 
 
 
2 
=== PAGE 12 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The Dvā ravatī kingdom3 (or rather cultural area) covered all of what today 
is central Thailand and southern Burma,  extending to the north and northeast 
of present-day Thailand. In Thailand the original Mon population was 
gradually absorbed from the 12 th to 13 th centuries into the expanding 
Thai/Khmer communities of Ayudhya and Sukhothai, 4 and the northern Tai 
kingdom of Lānnā, which took over the rule from the Mon at Haribhuñjaya at 
modern Lamphun, while the Mon kingdom of Sudhammavat ī (Thaton) in 
southern Burma was invaded by the expanding Burmese kingdom of Pagán. 
The Mon language all but disappeared from Thailand, 5 leaving behind only a 
few remnants known today as Chao Bon in Thai ( Nyah Kur ‘hill people’, s. 
Pan Hla 1986, 1991, 1992; Diffloth 1984), bu t retained its status as spoken 
and written language in Burma even under Burmese rule. During the 11 th 
century, the Burmese rulers of Pagán us ed Mon in their inscriptions, which 
appears in an elevated literary form. This highly developed style of the Mon 
language together with remarkable cons istency in spelling from the earliest 
Dvāravatī inscriptions to the Pagán period, a time span of some 500 years, 
suggests that the lack of inscriptions from the 7th to the 11th centuries may be 
due to the lack of archaeological research in Burma rather than actual literary 
inactivity of the Mon. The following passage from the longest OM 
inscription, the 11 th century Shweizigon, illust rates the Mon language of 
Pagán (punctuation added for readabilty). 
 
                                                      
3 Coedès 1968:76f uses the term kingdom for Dv āravatī and mentions the conflict between 
archeological evidence from the Chao Phraya basin and Mon tradition which places the old 
centre of the Mon kingdom in southern Burma, from where no archeological evidence has 
been recovered up to date. But cf. Myint Aung 1977. 
4  Wongthet 2002 and 2003, as well as Bhumisak 2004 give details of the historical 
development of the early Thai states in the Chao Phraya basin from earlier Mon and Khom 
(Khmer) communities. Their unorthodox view is  supported by historical and archaeological 
evidence, but not yet accepted in Thailand’s official history textbooks, which rather stick to 
the nationalistic version of the Thai migrating from China and expelling the Khmer and Mon 
to establish first Sukhothai and then Ayudhya as real Thai kingdoms. Unfortunately, neither 
Wongthet nor Bhumisak have been translated into English (yet), making them inaccessible to 
a broader international audience. 
5 It is not clear how widespread the use of Mon as spoken language was in central Thailand 
under Thai rule after the 13th century. A city map of Ayudhya published in 1693 (La Loubère 
1693, facing p. 6) shows the “Peguan” quarters on the west bank of the river opposite the 
island of Ayudhya. This shows on one hand that there was a substantial Mon community in 
17
th century Ayudhya, and on the other that they were considered foreigners, being assigned 
quarters outside the city walls like the Europeans and Macassars. The designation as Peguans 
further indicates that they were more recent re fugees from Burma, rather than remnants of 
the original Mon population. Interestingly, in 17
th century European sources the Buddhist 
monks in Siam (Thailand), who since earliest recoreded times formed an important sector of 
Siamese society, are referred to as ‘Talapoins’ from Mon ‹tala puin›, ‘master of merit’. 
 
 
3 
=== PAGE 13 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.1) Shweizigon isncription 
 
tarley ’ānan ñ āc ’ascar goh , l ïor yil kint āl ju ï ky āk buddha tarley t ūy, yuk 
suÿbup tey sm āñ row wo’: “ma tirla pa kir- īm wo’ ci, mu het yo? sak het ky āk 
buddha tarley guÿloï sik-im ci kah sak.” row goh tarley ’ānan smāñ da. goh ma 
kyāk buddha tarley gah  ku ’ ānan row wo’: “’ānan, mnor ci risi moy ma imo’ 
bisnū, jnok riddhi, jnok ’ānubhāw, go’ ’abhiñā msūn, kom ku kon ey gawaÿpati, 
ku smiï  in, ku bissukarmmadewaput, ku katakarmman āgarāja, skanda ÿ óūï 
moy imo’ sisīt. [...] ya ï ruÿbat ñah ma c āk nor ñah  ruÿlos guÿloï, na pun’ār 
tirtūy na moytricit ma dmas tey, gna smi ï śrī tribhuwan ādityadhammarāja sjit 
duol [...] ut mahājan ci row kon ma tāw póey cris ’ambo. [...]” 
 
Translation: 
‘When the Lord Ananda saw this miracle he respectfully put the sole of the Lord 
Buddha’s foot on his head and, lifting up his hands, asked: “That you have 
smiled, my Lord, what is the reason for it? For it does not happen that Buddhas 
smile without a reason.” Thus the Lord Ananda asked, whereupon the Lord 
Buddha spoke to the Lord Ananda thus: “Ananda, in a time to come a hermit 
whose name is Bisnu, a man of great strength and spiritual power, one who has 
achieved the five transcendental faculties, together with my son Gavampati, with 
Lord Indra, with Bissukarma, the son of  gods, and with Katakarma, the King of 
Nagas, will build a city called Sisit (Old Prome). [...] The tears of those who are 
separated from the ones they love, with  perfect loving kindness like a hand he 
will wipe away. [...] All people will live like children in their mothers’ wombs.”’ 
 
 Although Mon was replaced by Burmese in the 12 th century at Pagán, it 
continued to be used as spoken and written language in southern Burma, 
where the kingdom of Haÿsāvatī gained independence from Burmese rule on 
several occasions.  
The 15th century Shwedagon inscription at Rangoon comes with parallel texts 
in Mon and Burmese, showing the shared status of the two languages in 
Burma during that time. The following passage from the Shwedagon 
inscription (face B) serves as an example of Middle Mon (MM). 
 
(1.2) Shwedagon inscription 
 
nor cnām tila puiy ky āk tray ma pa parinibbān b ā klaÿ pi cwoh turau cnā m gah 
kali lwon ’ā tuy, tila puiy ’arahan bā ma himu so õathe uttarathe kluï ptan s āsnā 
pday óuï suwaõõabhum ra. khā s āsnā ma tan tuy, gam ī truh gam ī brau, s āmaõī 
truh sāmaõī brau khā ma nwom tuy gah, khā gah smiï sirimāsoka gah gah ku tila 
puiy b ā ra: “yo’ tila ey, dhammarat, sa ïgharat gah puiy óik go’ liïor p ūjau ra, 
buddharatana mwoy gah puiy óik mik li ïor p ūjau ha go’ swo’. dh āt ky āk tray 
 
 
4 
=== PAGE 14 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
tuy puiy óik ma sgo’ phyih cuit buddharat, puiy óik ma sgo’ liïot pūjau ey-paray 
gah, tila ey ra’ reï ku puiy óik ñi.” rau gah smiï pa ’āyācanā ku tila puiy ra. 
 
Translation: 
‘When two hundred thirty six years had elapsed after the Lord Buddha entered 
Nirvana, two Arahants called Sonathera and Uttarathera came to establish the 
religion in the land Suvannabhumi. When the religion was established and there 
were monks and nuns, male and female novices, King Sirimasoka said to the two 
Arahants: “My lords, we now have the jewel of the Doctrine (Dhamma) and the 
jewel of the monks’ order (Sa ïgha) to worship and pay respects to, but we 
would also like to but cannot worship and pay our respect to the jewel of the 
Buddha. In order that we may lay down our hearts to the jewel of the Buddha, 
that we may worship and praise Him, please arrange and bring us a holy relic.” 
Thus made the king his request to the two holy men.’ 
 
 With the destruction of the Mon capital Ha ÿsāvatī (Pegu) in 1757, the last 
independent Mon state so far ended and Mon as spoken and written language 
was brought back to Thailand by large numbers of refugees. Mon language 
use and teaching was mainly reduced to the religious domain in what used to 
be Monland in southern Burma. Still the literary tradition was carried on and 
a language form that may be called ‘classical’ Literary Mon (LM) evolves 
after the fall of Haÿ sāvatī, especially with writers around the famous Acā 
Hwo’, the abbot of Hwo’ Monastery, who wrote and edited historical and 
religious texts, including the 550 J ātaka tales. Classical LM  is very close to 
late MM, and it is the starting point of separate developments of Mon 
communities in Thailand and Burma, although in the initial phase there 
appears to have been intensive cont act between the two groups. Early LM 
Mon texts are preserved in both Tha iland and Burma and show influence 
from Thai and Burmese. Mon poetry exhibits rhyme patterns that work only 
in a pre-devoiced state of the language (s. section 1.5), i.e. vowel differences 
arising from register spli t in Mon are ignored, as the following passage from 
the epic of King Saïgadā shows.
6 A similar situation is found in classical 
Thai poetry, where tone rhymes are according to tone classes 
(orthographically tone markers 1 and 2, and unmarked tones) rather than 
actual phonetic tones, which have undergone a tone split at some time 
(probably after the 13
th century, s. Brown 1985, Hudak 1997:45ff). The 
passage given below descri bes the king’s anguish afte r his sister has been 
kidnapped by a ghost. 
 
                                                      
6  Wedañā na (1997) is the first and so far only comprehensive study of Mon poetry, 
unfortunately available only in Mon and therefore not readily accessible to the international 
scholar community.  
 
 
5 
=== PAGE 15 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.3) Saïgadā epic (Kalyāõa 1999:7f) 
 
Transliteration:   Reading pronunciation: 
 
’akruiÿ smiï klā seõ āgutta, ʔəkrm smo kla senagùtta ʔ 
iddhi kalok ma jnok teja, itthi ʔ kəlok m ʔ hnòk tècʔ 
smiï cau cuip óuï smi ï cau lïuï-lïa, smo  cao cp ŋ smo  cao ŋŋ-ŋʔ 
ramat bruih-bruih gwit suih sp āt sba. r əmot prh-prh  khwìt s h pat pʔ. 
“hah de’ sóuik bruik-bruik mat b ā, “hah tè ʔ səak pràk-pràk mòt a 
hah thaw thamnat rup óoï padmā, hah th  thmnt rùp oŋ ptmə 
hah thaw thakoï kha óoï mat bā, hah th  thəkoŋ khəoŋ mòt a 
nāy sāy nū ko ko dah  lïāp-lïā, này say nù kao kao t h ŋp-ŋə 
ko dah cåï tū ko dah  pū chā, kao t h cŋ tao kao t h pao cha 
ko dah thaspā dam ānū ’ay gwa, kao t h thəsəpa h əmàn nù ʔuə kwʔ 
ko dah sïoÿ ko dah  hoÿ jra kao t h səŋom kao t h hom sʔ 
galuiï wwa’ pñī lw ī law de’ ma, k əlàŋ wùʔ pəə wì l  tèʔ mʔ 
ko dah ’uit kasap khyap hwa’ m ān ra.” kao t h ʔt kəsp khy p hùʔ màn raʔ.” 
sāk wwa’ smiï dhaw y āÿ gataw gya, sac wù ʔ smo th y m kət kyʔ 
tuy smiï ptuy ’uiw kusuiw dāna, yoə smo  pətoə ʔ kaoʔs dənʔ 
juin puin õā ’au kuiw de’ brau ra. c n pn na ʔao k  tèʔ prèə raʔ. 
  
Translation 
‘This is King Senagutta’s acclamation of the powerful ghost. The king returned 
to his city, the king returned with sadness. Tears flowed from his eyes; he struck 
his breast in anguish. “Oh my dear sister, you were always in my eyes. Oh my 
purest gold, figure like a lotus bloom! Oh my gold piece, apple of both my eyes! 
You are parted from me, my way is lost! I have to suffer the pain, the anguish, I 
can hardly see, all because of my shame.  In speechless sorrow I have to wither 
away. How much I tried to care for you, my dear sister! My thoughts are ended, 
I cannot think anymore.” Thus the righteous king wept and lamented. Then he 
made meritorious offerings, he made merit for his little sister.’ 
 
 The second foot of each line ends in ‹-a› or ‹ ā› in LM, but in the modern 
pronunciation many of the rhymes  are lost, as ‹-a› and ‹-ā› change into [-ʔ] 
and [- ə] after heavy register (i.e. originally voiced ) consonants. Similarly 
some of the internal rhymes are lost, su ch as ‹bruih› - ‹sruih›, which become 
[prh] - [sh] and ‹’au› - ‹brau› which are today pronounced [ʔao] - [prèə]. 
 
 After the classical period of LM, Mon as a writte n language lost steadily in 
importance. Mon as a spoken language today is restricted mainly to the area 
south of the Sittaung River in the north and Ye Township in the south. Earlier 
Mon speaking communities reported in  the Irrawaddy delta and around Pegu 
have probably completely disapp eared. Mon speakers found today in 
 
 
6 
=== PAGE 16 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Rangoon, Pegu and Mandalay are more r ecent migrants from southern 
Burma. Today there are a few books published every year in Mon, subject to 
heavy Burmese censorship. Most texts publ ished in Burma are rewritings of 
old religious books or local legends, sometimes in a modernised form. The 
most famous among the modern writers  is Rev. Palita, abbot of Kama Wek 
New Monastery, who has written and published dozens of religious and 
historical works in an adapted form  of LM, which makes the texts easily 
readable and thus accessible to a wi der audience among the literate Mon, 
which are estimated to make up about  25-30% of the whole Mon population. 
Another centre of contemporary Mon literary activity is the Klo’ Pakao 
Monastery near Moulmein, where a large number of books have been 
published in a language approaching SM . The publications include religious 
texts as well as short stories and cartoons, many in bilingual Mon-Burmese 
editions. An important newer factor in Mon literature (and literacy in general) 
are not only the over 300 M on schools now legally operating in Mon areas in 
Burma, but also the increasing number of popular and traditional music 
appearing as karaoke videos, with sub titles in Mon script. The first one to 
produce a Mon karaoke video was the popular singer Hongchan, who brought 
out his 1999 super-hit chan mòn chan này ‘Love the Mon, love you’ as 
karaoke VCD in 2000, available not only in Burma but also in Thailand, 
Malaysia and Singapore, as well as overseas where Mon refugee 
communities have settled. Mon newspapers appear in irregular intervals, due 
to the instable political situation in Burma and neighbouring Thailand, which 
favours a good relationship with the Burmese government.  
 The ‘Guiding Star’ newspaper is usually published once a month in 
Bangkok, with the editorial board chiefl y in Sangkhlaburi. Textbooks for use 
in Mon schools are prepared by the Mon Education Office (with a branch 
office in Sangkhlaburi). Furthermore,  a few young authors started writing 
short stories and poems which are published in Mon magazines, mostly with 
political topics. The first full length novel in Mon has yet to be written.
7
 
 In Thailand, older people are still ab le to speak Mon in a few Mon (or Thai-
Raman) villages, but the younger generations have all but turned into 
monolingual Thai speakers. Mon language publications in Th ailand are rare 
and mostly restricted to special memorial editions for (Mon) monks’ funerals. 
The only active Mon press in Bangkok, Tech Promotion and Advertising Co., 
ltd., publishes chiefly intern ationally sponsored editi ons like Nai Tun Way’s 
two recent dictionaries and Talanon’s English grammar, among others.  
 A revival of interest in Mon cultu re and language can be observed in 
Thailand in recent years, with a number of Thai language publications on 
                                                      
7  Where no other source is indicated, the information given in this and the preceding 
paragraph is from personal communication with  Mon scholars and politicians in Thailand 
and Burma. 
 
 
7 
=== PAGE 17 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Mon history and culture and the openi ng of a new Mon Study Centre at Wat 
Muang in Rajburi Province, some 100 km west of Bangkok. Whether this 
(scholarly) Mon renaissance  will ultimately lead to  increased language use 
and literacy among Thai-Mon people remains to be seen. 
 
1.2 Sources and methodology 
 
The linguistic material used in this study comes from a variety of sources, 
covering some 1500 years of the written language and a selection of modern 
Mon dialects spoken in Burma and to a much lesser extent Thailand.8  
 
 For OM and MM, the easiest reference book is Shorto’s excellent 
Dictionary of Mon inscriptions  (DMI, Shorto 1971), which not only lists all 
words found in Mon inscriptions up to the date of publication, but also 
provides valuable information about the morphology and etymology of the 
lexical entries, together with sample  sentences. The sample sentences are 
necessarily kept short in a dictionary of this kind. Wherever possible, the 
sentences given in DMI were cross-ch ecked with other publications of Mon 
inscriptions to ascertain the reading a nd translation, taking into consideration 
the broader context.  
 The main editions consulted on OM and MM are the first three volumes of 
the Epigraphica Birmanica  (EB I-III, Duroiselle 1921 etc.; in Roman 
transliteration with English translations), U Hkyit Thein’s Collection of Mon 
inscriptions (1965; in Mon-Burmese script, with Burmese translations) and 
Luce (1961; Roman transliteration, English translations) for the Kubyauk-Gyi 
inscriptions, besides a number of other editions mentioned in the references. 
Where there are wide discrepancies be tween the different editions, they are 
mentioned in the text and the most pr obable reading and tr anslation is given. 
The source of inscriptions of which co mplete editions are available are given 
with the name of the inscription (usually abbreviated), followed by the face 
(a-z) and line(s) (1-99) where the sentence appears. Where no other edition 
apart from DMI was available, Shorto’s reading and translation are taken as 
correct. In these cases the source is indicated as DMI:xx. 
 Most OM examples are taken from thre e inscriptions or inscription groups, 
viz. the Shweizigon inscri ption (SSK), the Ananda plaques (An), and the 
Kubyauk-Gyi inscriptions (Ku), all dating to the 11th century in Pagán. 
 The main texts used to  illustrate MM are the Shwedagon inscription (SDG) 
of 15 th century Rangoon and the Kaly āõi inscription (KLY) of the same 
century at Pegu. 
                                                      
8 Data from Mon dialects in Thailand is used for comparison in some instances, and to 
estimate the age of certain phenomena in the la nguage. The bulk of SM material comes from 
dialects spoken in Burma. 
 
 
8 
=== PAGE 18 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
For both stages of the language othe r sources are used where the main 
inscriptions did not provide appropriate examples. 
 
 The main sources for LM can be br oadly divided into two groups, viz. 
classical LM and modern LM. The first is represented mainly by the Jātaka 
tales (Jat) as edited by Aca Hwo’ in the 18 th century, the epic poem of king 
(or prince) Saïgadā (SGD), which is available in two slightly different 
printed editions (Mem Ong 1999, Kaly āna 1999), and the historical novel of 
Rājādhirāj/Razadirit (RDR), edited by Nai Pan Hla in 1958. 
 An intermediary form between classical and modern LM can be seen in the 
writings of Rev. Palita. Most examples of this  style are taken from The story 
of King Dhammacetī (DC). 
 Examples of contemporary LM are taken from the short story Mi Kon Pliÿ 
(MKP, Candimācāra 2001), a collection of Mon Prose (LPM) edited by Nai 
Htun Thein, newspaper articles taken from the Guiding Star, an independent 
Mon newspaper appearing in Thailand, and from the lyrics of popular Mon 
music, especially by Hongchan. Other s ources were included were necessary 
and mentioned in the text and references. 
 
 The bulk of data used in this study comes from Spoken Mon (SM). Audio 
recordings were made with native  speakers from different locations, 
geographically covering most of the act ual Mon speaking area in Burma. Out 
of the recordings, four main sources were selected, representing four different 
dialect areas (s. Appendix A for maps of the Mon speaking areas): 
 
 1. Ko’ Dot (KD), the southernmost Burmese Mon dialect recorded for this 
study, is a big village some 180 kilometres south of Moulmein. The recording 
for this dialect, which provided the widest range of linguistic material used in 
this study, was made with an elderly couple who tell thei r experiences in 
Monland during WW II, covering periods of English, Japanese, and Burmese 
occupation of their land. This conversat ion is not only a rich source for SM 
data, it also gives interesting insights into life in Monland during the war. 
Both informants are bilingual with Burm ese, which they speak fluently but 
with a heavy Mon accent. They are literate in Mon and Burmese. 
 
 2. Further to the north, some 35 k ilometres south of Moulmein, is the 
village of Ko’ Kapoun (KKP). The recording was made with a young man, 
who at the time of recording had been  working in Sangkhlaburi, Thailand for 
a few months. He was a quasi-mono lingual speaker of Mon, with only 
limited command of Burmese and Thai. This informant does not read and 
write Mon (or any other language). The r ecordings made with this informant 
include a few short tales he remembered from his childhood, a personal 
account of his journey from  Burma to the Thai bord er, as well as elicited 
 
 
9 
=== PAGE 19 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
sample sentences, the correctness of whic h had later to be checked, given his 
low competence in any other language than Mon.9
 
 3. The village of Kanni (KN) is near the town of Kawkareik in Karen State, 
some 80 kilometres northeast of Moulme in. This location is very close to 
Kaw Kyaik, the village where Shor to collected material for his Dictionary of 
Spoken Mon (1962) with which it shows many similarities. The recording 
was made with two brothers working as  actors with a travelling Mon theatre 
group. The older of the two is fluent in Mon and Burmese, while the younger 
is a quasi-monolingual speaker of M on, literate only in Mon. The younger 
brother tells the older one about his life as a temple boy in their home village. 
 
 4. The fourth location where linguistic material was gathered is the small 
town of Sangkhlaburi on the Thai-Burmese border, 400 kilometres 
northwest of Bangkok and some 220 kilometres southeast of Moulmein. The 
town is (geographically and ethnica lly) divided into a ‘Thai Side’ ( s
ŋ sem) 
and a ‘Mon Side’ (sŋ mòn, Wangka, WK ), connected by a 400 metre long 
wooden bridge. Wangka is th e location most easily accessible to students of 
Mon language and culture, as it lies on Thai soil and most of the younger 
generation are fluent in Mon as well as Thai, while many older people speak 
Mon and Burmese. The population of Wangka is almost entirely Mon, 
interspersed with a few Tavoyan Burmese and even fewer Thais. Most of the 
children attend the Thai government school at Wangka, where they get a 
purely Thai education. The language s poken at home and among themselves 
remains Mon, although Thai influence (and language use) is increasing. Only 
few of the younger generation bother to learn the Mon script, seeing their 
future in Thailand rather than in Burm a/Monland. Most recordings here were 
made with students of the local school , telling Mon tales their parents or 
relatives had told them in their childhood. All of the informants interviewed 
at Wangka are fluent speakers of Thai besides Mon, which they still consider 
their first language. Although Wangka is politically located in Thailand, the 
dialect spoken here is considered a Bu rmese Mon dialect, as the inhabitants 
migrated to the area within the past 50 years. With the speakers originating 
from different parts of Monland in Burma, the dialect spoken in Wangka 
shows levelling to some extent, resulti ng in a kind of standard SM. There are 
differences in usage among different speak ers, but they tend to disappear in 
the younger generation who rapidly adapt to  the WK dialect, especially when 
talking with friends rather than their family. Neologisms are taken mostly 
from Thai, less frequently from Burmese, although Burmese loans are still 
more frequent than in Mon dialects of Thailand proper. 
 
                                                      
9 The informant’s competence in Thai increased rapidly, as he was working in a hotel serving 
Thai customers, which greatly facilitated the communication and collection of linguistic data. 
 
 
10 
=== PAGE 20 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Where the recorded texts did not provi de the linguistic material needed to 
illustrate a certain point, sentences were constructed either with the help of 
native speakers or later checked for their correctness. Most helpful in 
constructing sentences (as well as providing explanations about nuances) was 
Nai Ok Pung, a native of Ko’ Dot and perf ectly fluent (and literate) in Mon, 
Burmese, and Thai, and with a very good command of English. Sentences 
provided by Nai Ok Pung are marked (NOP ). For other constructed examples 
no source is indicated. This is also the case with sentences picked up during 
informal conversations (both as an active participant and merely as a listener) 
while staying at Wangka during the past three years and during visits to Mon 
areas in Burma. 
 
 A very important and useful tool, esp ecially in the initial phase of getting 
acquainted with Mon, but also in the fu rther course of studying the language, 
is Shorto’s Dictionary of Modern Spoken Mon (1962), which not only gives 
example sentences for many entries, but  also provides cross-reference with 
LM forms. The dictionary of Halliday  (1955) is useful for LM, while Tun 
Way (2000) combines Shorto (1962) and Halliday (1955), with a number of 
additions by the compiler. Sakomoto (1994) is a valuable source for Mon as 
spoken (and written) in Thailand providing a wealth of example sentences, 
but the fact that it gives only Japanese  translations makes this dictionary 
rather difficult to use for Western linguists. 
 
 Bauer’s (unpublished) 1982 thesis on Morphology and Syntax of spoken 
Mon as well as his 1989 paper on the ve rb in spoken Mon are based mostly 
on data collected in Thai-Mon comm unities, which obviously show some 
clear differences with Mon language usag e in Burma described in this study. 
Reference to Bauer and other previous  publications on Mo n has been made 
where appropriate. It must be kept in mind, though, that Mo n, in spite of its 
being one of the earliest languages of civilisation in Southeast Asia, has 
received little attention from linguists,  and most of the published material is 
out of print and not readily available to the researcher. 
 
 The first step in preparing the present study included collecting and 
screening the available material publis hed on Mon as well as recording SM 
and transcribing the audio recordings. Books written in Mon about different 
subjects were collected, although incomprehensible and unreadable to the 
author at that time. With a rather ex tensive array of ‘raw language material’ 
in both LM and SM, as well as a handful of earlier studies, a choice had to be 
made about which texts to use to get a representative picture of the Mon 
language.  
 
 
 
11 
=== PAGE 21 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Most of the material published by Western linguists on Mon treats 
diachronic comparative phonology, which makes it of limited use for a 
synchronic description of the language like the present study. Although this is 
basically a synchronic treatment of m odern Mon, a diachronic element could 
not be excluded, as only the historical development can explain many aspects 
of modern Mon usage, as will be seen throughout the text.  
 
 The linguistic framework applied here in describing Mon does not adhere to 
a specific linguistic theory. The terminol ogy used is what is considered to be 
general usage rather than theory-speci fic terms, although some labels (and 
ideas) are borrowed from Van Valin’s Role and Reference Grammar (1997), 
which, unlike other models such as GB , takes into account not only purely 
formal criteria of a language, but puts emphasis on semantic and pragmatic 
features. Like in most Southeast As ian languages, semantics and pragmatics 
are important factors in Mon syntax, as will be seen in the text.  
 The approach followed in this study is functional-descriptive, emphasising 
the description of the act ual meaning and use of verbs and verbs-turned-
auxiliaries/operators. As many auxiliaries/operators described in this study do 
not fit into any conventi onal grammatical category, I use the lexical meaning 
of the item in small caps as gloss to i ndicate a grammaticalized element, e.g. 
GO indicates that the morpheme has the le xical meaning ‘go’ but is used in a 
grammaticalized function, which in this case may be as a directional or as an 
aspect operator. There are instances where it is not clear whether a morpheme 
is to be taken as full lexeme (e.g. in a serial verb construction) or as a 
grammatical element. The choice in th ese cases is somewhat arbitrary and 
open to discussion.  Where a form is exclusively used as an auxiliary/operator 
in modern Mon, a grammatical gloss is used for this stag e of the language, 
while in earlier stages a full lexical meaning may be still is use and is 
accordingly glossed. An example is OM ‹mic› ‘desire, want’, SM mək
ʔ/mòc 
‘DES’. While the OM form is used as a fu ll verb, the corresponding lexeme in 
SM is used only in connection with a verb, indicating its grammaticalized 
status as modal auxiliary (
DESIDERATIVE). 
 
 Although this study is concerned prim arily with modern Mon, examples of 
older stages of the language have been included as much of Mon morphology 
and orthography can be explained only with reference to OM or MM. Data 
from other languages is included wher ever conducive to the analysis or 
explanation of a specific phenomenon in Mon. The most important languages 
in this respect are Thai and Burmes e, the sole national languages of both 
countries where Mon is presently spoke n (and has been for at least 1500 
years). The influence of both Thai a nd Burmese on Mon, both in structurally 
and in vocabulary, is considerable after 800 to 1000 years of not always 
peaceful co-existence, although in the initial phase the influence was the 
 
 
12 
=== PAGE 22 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
other way round, with Mon being the culturally (and sometimes politically) 
superior language. The most important sources for Burmese, apart from own 
field notes, are Okell (1969) and Okell and Allott (2001). The former has the 
advantage of giving all Burmese words and examples in Roman 
transliteration, while the latter is more complete, covering both the spoken 
and the written language, including a large number of examples from both 
varieties. For Thai data I have mostly drawn on own field notes where not 
otherwise indicated. 
 
1.3 Sentence structure 
 
 Mon can be described as a basically SVO language, i.e. the subject precedes 
the verb which in turn is followed by the (direct) object. This word order 
holds for standard sentences in most cases, but in natural speech a very 
different picture emerges. Both subject and object can be absent in a sentence, 
or the object can be t opicalised or focussed, which usually involves a 
movement to sentence initial position, w ith or without overt marking as topic 
or focus. Then there are sentences which obviously exhibit two subjects, 
others containing no verb. A more ad equate description of Mon sentence 
structure is probably in te rms of pragmatic rather than syntactical categories, 
i.e. as topic-comment structure. The t opic is old, given information which is 
known or believed to be known to the hearer, while the comment adds new 
information about the topic. Most commonly, but by no means exclusively, 
the subject of a sentence is also its topi c and the verb is the central part of the 
comment or focus. 
 In sentence (1.4a) in a neutral context (if this ex ists at all in a natural 
language) ʔuə is understood as being the topic and the rest of the sentence the 
comment. 
 
(1.4a)   ʔuə iəʔ  p ŋ. 
S M     1 s   e a t    r i c e  
      ‘ I  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
 The pronoun in sentence initial positi on can be overtly marked as topic by 
one of a set of topic markers, most commonly kh, l and teh.10
 
(1.4b)  ʔuə k h iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   TOP eat  rice. 
      ‘ I  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
                                                      
10 kh is the most widely used, neutral topic marker. l is a Burmese loan (B lè) and has a 
connotation of additive (‘me too’). The last one, teh, is a SM innovation of uncertain origin 
which has a conditional/temporal connotation. 
 
 
13 
=== PAGE 23 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.4c)   ʔuə l   iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   ADD eat  rice 
      ‘ I  t o o  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
(1.4d)  ʔuə teh  iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   COND eat  rice 
      ‘As for me, I eat rice.’ 
 
 In another context the same pronoun can function as comment rather than 
topic of the sentence. In this case the focus marker raʔ is usually added. 
 
(1.4e)   ʔuə ra ʔ iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   FOC eat  rice 
      ‘It’s me who eats rice.’ 
 
 If another part of the se ntence acts as topic or focu s, it is marked as such, 
with or without re-ordering of the words. Typically overtly marked topics are 
fronted, while overtly marked focal elements remain in sitū or are fronted for 
emphasis, if they are nominal. There is no marker for the comment as such, 
only for the main predicative part of the comment, i.e. the focus. 
 
(1.4f)   pŋ kh ʔuə iəʔ. 
S M     r i c e  TOP 1s  eat 
      ‘ R i c e  I  d o  e a t . ’  
 
(1.4g)  ʔuə iəʔ pŋ raʔ. 
S M     1 s   e a t   r i c e  FOC 
      ‘ I  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
(1.4h)  pŋ raʔ ʔuə iəʔ. 
S M     r i c e  FOC 1s  eat 
      ‘It’s rice I eat.’ 
 
 While nominal elements can freely be  moved into sentence initial position, 
this is not generally possible for verbs. If a verb is marked as highly focal, it 
remains in sitū. 
 
(1.4i)   ʔuə iəʔ raʔ p ŋ. 
S M     1 s   e a t   FOC rice 
      ‘I eat the rice (I don’t throw it away).’ 
 
 
 
14 
=== PAGE 24 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.4j)   * iəʔ raʔ p ŋ ʔuə.  * iəʔ raʔ ʔuə p ŋ. 
       e a t   FOC rice 1s    eat  FOC 1s  rice 
 
 Usually only one element can be fronted in a sentence, either the topic or 
the focus. Marked fronting of both elements leads to ungrammatical or at 
least doubtful sentences, as in (1.4k). 
 
(1.4k) * ? ʔuə k h p ŋ raʔ iəʔ. 
S M      1 s   TOP rice FOC eat 
       ?‘As for me, it’s rice I eat.’ 
 
 A sentence with fronted topic and verbal focus (extended, non-emphatic 
focus in sitū) is unproblematic: 
 
(1.4l)   pŋ kh ʔuə iəʔ raʔ. 
S M     r i c e  TOP 1s  eat  FOC 
      ‘As for rice, I do eat it.’ 
 
 With the restrictions mentioned above, the word order in terms of topic and 
comment/focus in Mon is rather free, depending largely on emphasis and 
stress. Both verbs and nominals (syntact ical subject and objects), as well as 
peripheral elements such as adverbials and prepositional objects can act as 
topic and focus. 
 
1.4 Sentence types 
 
This section gives a short overview of di fferent sentence and clause types in 
Mon other than plain statements. SFPs  marking illocutionary force and 
sentence/clause types share some similarities with the verbal operators, which 
will be discussed in chapter 6, and some are derived from verbs (viz. the 
imperative markers 
ì ‘a little’ and cm ‘touch, feel’). The sentence types to 
be discussed in this section are interrogative (1 .4.1), imperative (1.4.2), and 
conditional (1.4.3). 
 
1.4.1 Interrogative sentences 
 
Absolute (yes-no) questi ons in Mon are formed by adding an interrogative 
SFP to a statement, as in other South east Asian languages. In modern Mon, 
the interrogative SFP is ‹h ā› ha. This particle is attested in OM as ‹t ā› and 
MM as ‹nā› in the following sentences. 
 
 
 
15 
=== PAGE 25 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.5)  ’abhipr āy tarla  gah  ci   cmat tā? 
OM   speech   lord  say EMPH true  Q 
     ‘Is what you sa y true, Lord?’ (SSKa40f) 
 
(1.6)  ma lapok    ha  tuin    gah  ci   nwom tun   nā? 
MM   REL desecrate NEG move.up SAY EMPH exist  further Q 
     ‘Does it then happen that the desecration is ineffective?’ (KLYg12) 
 
 As Shorto correctly observes (D MI:147), the spelli ng of the question 
particle suggests that it was originally only [a ], i.e. a pure vowel sound 
without initial glottal st op, enclitically added to the last word of the 
sentence.11 This sound can not be represente d in Indian derived Southeast 
Asian scripts, so the closest possible representation was chosen, i.e. repetition 
of the final consonant of the preceding word with a long ‹- ā› added. In the 
modern language the spelli ng is standardized as ‹h ā›,12  avoiding the 
inconvenience of having a large number of different spellings for the same 
morpheme. In SM, the pr onunciation is usually [ha ], but in some cases the 
initial [h] is voiced or dropped completely. 
 Mon being a non-tonal language, there is the possibility to mark a sentence 
as a question by raising the pitch of the last word, without other overt 
marking. This contrasts with Burmese and Thai usage, both of which are 
tonal languages and do not readily allow changes of lexical tones for 
pragmatic purposes (although in some contexts tone changes are observed in 
both languages). Some speakers prefer a lowering of the pitch towards the 
end of the sentence instead of a rise, making questions virtually 
undistinguishable from statements. 
 There are thus two general ways to form absolute questions in Mon, one by 
the SFP ha (with the vatiants [ha ], [ ɦa], and [a ]) and by a rise of pitch 
towards the end of the sentence.
13 The latter is found exclusively in SM, 
while the former is common in both LM and SM. There is no difference 
between positive and negative questions in LM and SM. 
 
(1.7a)  pèh ʔa km ha? 
SM   2   go too  Q 
     ‘Are you going along?’ 
 
                                                      
11 The same morpheme [a ] is also used to form questions by Chinese speakers of Thai, 
resulting in the same dilemma of impossibility of representation in Thai script. The normal 
choice in representing this morpheme in Thai script is as ‹’ā›. 
12 This standardization of the orthography may be seen as a generalization of its appearance 
in the frequent expressions khh ha  ‘is it good?’ and t h ha ‘is it correct?’ or negative 
questions ending in ... pùh ha. 
13 At least some Mon dialects in Thailand form absolute questions by repeating the main 
predicating element once with high pitch once with normal pitch, as in pèh t́m tm ‘do you 
know?’ (data from Ko’ Kret, Nonthaburi Province). 
 
 
16 
=== PAGE 26 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.8a)  m əkʔ tm   h m k    m à n   ha? 
SM   DES   know  speak GIVE WIN  Q 
     ‘I want to know (about  it); can you tell me?’ (KKP) 
 
(1.9a)  ʔuə ʔa km hù ʔ  k ʔ  pùh  ( ha)? 
SM   1s  go too  NEG  GET  NEG  Q 
     ‘Can’t I go along?’ 
 
Sentence (1.9a) is usually pronounced w ith rising intonation on the negative 
particle pùh when the question marker ha is dropped. 
 
 It has to be noted that there are no simple morphemes in Mon corresponding 
to ‘yes’ and ‘no’ in English. This feature of Mon is shared with other 
languages of the region. The shortest affirmative answer to an absolute 
question in Mon consists of the main pr edicating element of the question this 
is a verb or an OP 1 or OP4 verbal operator (cf. ch. 6), optionally followed by 
the focus marker raʔ. The equivalent of ‘no’ is the same element with the 
preceding negation marker hù ʔ. The answers to the above questions are thus 
(affirmative and negative): 
 
(1.7b) ʔa (raʔ) .            h ù ʔ  ʔa  (pùh). 
SM   go ( FOC)            NEG  go  ( NEG) 
 
(1.8b) (h m) màn  (ra ʔ).    (h m) hù ʔ màn  (pùh) 
SM   (speak) WIN  ( FOC)    (speak) NEG WIN  ( NEG) 
 
(1.9b) ( ʔa) kʔ (raʔ) .        ( ʔa) hùʔ k ʔ  (pùh) 
SM   (go) GET (FOC)        ( g o )  NEG GET  ( NEG)    
 
 Absolute questions may be used pragmatically to express negative 
statements. This is usage is not very frequent, though.  
 
(1.10) èh   k    ak mŋ  ha? ʔuə chan- u lèy. 
SM   person GIVE ride STAY Q   1 s   p i t y     EMPH 
     ‘They didn’t let them get on [the  carts]; I really pitied them.’ (KD) 
 
 Relative (wh-) questions involve a fo cal question word (what, where, who, 
etc.),14 which in Mon either occurs in sit ū, or is moved to the beginning of 
the sentence like in Burmese. In some cases the question word occurs both in 
sentence initial position and in sitū. This happens even if the question word is 
                                                      
14 Mon is exceptional in that there is no common component morpheme in the formation of 
question words (as e.g. Latin QV-, English wh-, Burmese be-, Thai - ay). Cf. Mon mùʔ 
‘what’, ʔəl ‘where’, èh-kh ‘who’, chəlʔ ‘when’, etc. 
 
 
17 
=== PAGE 27 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the only element of the sentence, as in ‘what?’, which in SM is usually mùʔ 
mùʔ rao? (‘what what QREL’).15  In ‘correct’ Mon relative questions always 
end in the relative question particle rao. This particle is  homonymous with 
the (negative) topic marker rao (cf. section 2.3.1), which corresponds to 
Burmese usage, where the topic marker lè is also used as relative 
interrogative SFP. The same particle is also used in Mon to ask an already 
uttered question about another individua l or object, similar to the English 
‘and what about ...?’. The precedent does not necessarily have to be a 
question itself, but may be a statement, as in the following example. 
 
(1.11)ʔuə ʔa iəʔ pŋ. pèh rao? 
SM  1s  go eat  rice  2   QREL
    ‘I am going to eat. What about you?’ 
 
 In colloquial SM, the relative question marker is often dropped, especially if 
the sentence contains enough phonetic ma terial (usually three or more 
syllables).  
 
(1.12a) mùʔ  h m  rao ? 
SM   what speak  QREL
 
(1.12b) mùʔ  h hm  ( rao)? 
SM   what 3   speak  ( QREL) 
     ‘What did he say?’ 
 
This tendency is not absolute and varies among speakers and situations. 
Generally the formally ‘correct’ longer form sounds more polite. 
 
1.4.2 Imperative sentences 
 
The simplest way to form an imperativ e in Mon is by a verb alone, without 
any SFP and no overt subject: ʔa ‘go!’, iəʔ ‘eat!’. As in other languages 
(including English) this is  considered abrupt and r ude by most speakers in 
most situations, though, and other ways are preferred in most contexts. The 
most common form of the imperative is by adding the or iginally verbal 
politeness particle ìʔ ‘a little (bit)’ to the sentence.  
 
(1.13) h m   ìʔ   p a    k w ʔ! 
SM   speak  LITTLE PROH shy 
     ‘Please speak, don’t be shy!’ 
 
                                                      
15 The repetition of the interrogative is mostly restricted mùʔ, other interrogatives being rarely 
repeated in the same sentence. 
 
 
18 
=== PAGE 28 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Other weakening adverbial expressions  have the same function and can be 
used instead of ìʔ, but only ìʔ can occur in prohibitive  contexts (s. section 
2.3.2).  
 
(1.14) kon  m ŋ  m ŋ  h ənày  n ʔ mùə cut     nah! 
SM   child stay  STAY place  this one  moment EMPH 
     ‘You stay here for a moment, will you, children.’ (KKP) 
 
Intensifying aspectual operators are used to add urgency to a command. 
 
(1.15)  pèh pli ə    th ʔ  ʔa  kon  pèh! 
SM    2   abandon THROW GO  child 2 
      ‘Go and get rid of your children!’ (KKP) 
 
 As described in section 5.1.4, the focus marker raʔ can be used to form 
strong, definitive commands that do not  allow any contradiction. In the 
following sentence it is reinforced by the use of the aspectual operator ‹tho’›. 
 
(1.16)  hā y i-óo t        c e h        t h o ’     n ū  glu ï  ra! 
LM    hey PREFfem-small move.down  THROW  ABL boat  FOC 
      ‘Hey girl, get down from that boat right now!’ (MKP:28) 
 
 A less strong form of the imperative is achieved by adding the verb turned 
SFP particle c m ‘feel (by touching), try out’. This form seems to be about 
half-way between raʔ and ìʔ. Its actual use in SM is rather restricted and 
much less frequent than the plain verb or verb + ìʔ. 
 
(1.17)  kwah phə   t ʔ  ʔa rŋ  n əi  cm   t k  mù ʔ-ciʔ! 
SM    pupil temple PL  go look  clock IMPER beat  how.much 
      ‘Go have a look at the clock, boys, and see what time it is!’ (KN)   
 
As seen in the examples above, the subject may optionally be expressed in an 
imperative sentence. 
 SM uses direct imperative sentences to express requests, a feature Mon 
shares with Burmese but not with Thai  (and English). The request ‘may I 
have some rice, please?’ in SM is 
 
(1.18a)  k    ʔuə p ŋ ìʔ. 
SM    give  1s  rice LITTLE  
 
which corresponds to Burmese 
 
 
 
19 
=== PAGE 29 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.18b)  c ăno kou ht ămìn pèi  pa. 
B      1 s m   OBJ rice   give  POL 
 
This contrasts with the Thai equivalent : 
 
(1.18c)  kh 4  khaaw 2  n y1     ay2 may 4? 
Th     ask.for rice    little.bit GET  Q 
 
 A subcategory of the imperative is the adhortative (or ‘hortative’), which 
can be described as an imperative of the first person plural, corresponding to 
English ‘let’s V’. The adhortative in Mon is expressed by the SFP coʔ 
(according to Shorto with heavy register, còʔ, s. Shorto 1962:100). This 
particle is a lo an from Burmese sóu ‹cúi›, which the Myanmar-English 
Dictionary of the Myanmar Language Commission (1993:114) describes as a 
“cry uttered by a player when a spinni ng top is caught with the hand after 
flipping it into the air with the string (the  last player to ut ter has to surrender 
his top which is placed in a circle for ot her players to hit it with their tops, 
until it is knocked out of the circle)” and a “postpositional marker following a 
verb indicating a proposal to do sth. t ogether (equivalent in usage to the 
imperative ‘let’s’)”. This explanation suggests that the Burmese adhortative 
marker originally was an interjectio n which was grammaticalized as a SFP. 
In colloquial SM, coʔ is often used alone, dropping the verb which must be 
retrieved from the context. This is especially frequent as an answer to a 
question expressing an invitation or proposal, as in (1.19). 
 
(1.19)  ʔa  iəʔ pŋ ha?  (ʔ a)  coʔ! 
S M     g o   e a t   r i c e  Q    (go)  ADH 
      ‘Shall we go for lunch?’ ‘Yes, let’s go.’ 
 
 Usually the main verb is overtly expressed, but the subject (which is always 
poy ‘we’ in adhortative contexts) is dropped. 
 
(1.20)  ʔa rp  ka ʔ k m coʔ! 
SM    go catch fish too ADH 
      ‘Let’s go fishing!’ (WK) 
 
1.4.3 Conditional clauses 
 
OM and MM make no clear distinction between conditional and temporal 
subordinate clauses. The main markers used are ‹yal› ‘if, when’, ‹yām› (MM) 
‘if, when’, originally ‘time’ and the Pali loan ‹k āl, k āla› ‘when, if’, in SM 
shortened to la
ʔ, originally ‘time’. All of these markers occur in clause initial 
 
 
20 
=== PAGE 30 ===
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
position, and the conditional/temporal clau se usually occurs before the main 
clause. 
 
(1.21)  yal  kcit sak     ñah    m a  y ām. 
OM    COND die NEG:exist person REL weep 
      ‘If/when they die, there is no one to weep.’ (Ku 94) 
 
 In MM, the combination of ‹yaw› with  the focus marker ‹ra› or the adverb 
‹rau›16 ‘as’ becomes popular. In combination with ‹yaw›, ‹ra› still retains its 
original semantics as ‘be’17 (at least partly) and the phrase can be translated 
as ‘if it is (the case that) ...’. This is in apparent contrast with Haiman’s 
analysis of conditional clauses as topics (Haiman 1978). 
 
 The most common ways to express c onditional clauses in LM are by means 
of the above mentioned clause-initial  particle ‹yaw›, usually in the 
combination ‹yaw ra›, sometimes ‹yaw khā ra› (lit. ‘COND time FOC’), and the 
clause-final marker ‹mgah›, lit. an attributive (or relative) form of the verb 
‹gah› ‘say’. The two forms can co-occu r in the same sentence, without 
obvious intensifying value. Less frequent is clause initial ‹yāÿ› ‘time’. 
 
(1.22)  yaw  ra   ’ay r āÿ    t i t    mgah... 
LM    COND FOC 1s  disrobe  EXIT ATTR:SAY 
      ‘If I disrobe ...’ (DC:20) 
 
 The use of a verb meaning ‘say’ in clause-final position parallels Burmese 
usage of clause-final hsou ‘say’ to mark a conditional clause. As in Mon, the 
Burmese marker may combine with th e original conditional morpheme -yin 
as hsou-yin lit. ‘if one says’ (s. Okell a nd Allott 2001:61, 65ff). The time of 
emergence of this marker in LM and its clause-final position make Burmese 
influence very likely. 
 
 SM uses y or y  ra ʔ in clause-initial or, more  frequently, the innovative 
marker teh in clause-final position in conditional clauses. The origin and 
original meaning of the latter is obscu re. It does not appear in Shorto 1962, 
but Tun Way 2000 has “‹teh› [tih] af fix. denoting condition (if).” The 
phonetic shape of the marker excludes Burmese or Thai origin (Burmese and 
Thai do not have final [-h]) and make s it look like ‘real Mon’. According to 
some native scholars it is derived from clause final mə-th, attributive of th 
‘hit, correct, etc.’ (s . section 6.3.14), which is phonologically possible (if 
irregular), but semantically not very lik ely (‘which is correct, which must be’ 
                                                      
16  Usually contracted to ‹yrau›, which may also be analysed as a contraction of ‹ya ï› 
‘emphatic particle’ and ‹rau›. 
17 S. chapter 5. 
 
 
21 