
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
Contents 
 
Preface  v 
 
Abbreviations  viii 
 
1. Introduction  1 
 1.1 The Mon people and language  1 
 1.2 Sources and methodology  8 
   
 1.3 Sentence structure  13 
 1.4 Sentence types  15 
  1.4.1 Interrogative sentences  15 
  1.4.2 Imperative sentences  18 
  1.4.3 Conditional clauses  20
  
 1.5 Phonology of Mon  23 
 1.5.1 Historical overview  23 
 1.5.2 From Middle Mon to Modern Mon  26 
 1.5.3 Modern dialects  30 
 1.5.4 The phonology of SM  33 
 1.5.5 Phonology and the writing system  37 
 
2. Verbs in Mon  42
 2.1 What are verbs?  42 
 2.2 The predicate in Mon  43 
  2.2.1 Previous studies of the verb in Mon  44 
  2.2.2 Verbs as word class in Mon  47 
  2.2.3 Nominal predicates and topicalised verbs  49 
 2.3 Negation  51 
  2.3.1 Negated statements and questions  51 
  2.3.2 Prohibitive  58 
  2.3.3 Summary  59 
 2.4 Verbal morphology  60 
  2.4.1 Historical development  60 
  2.4.2 Modern Mon  65 
  2.4.3 Summary  67 
 2.5 Verb classes and types of verbs  67 
  2.5.1 Transitive and intransitive verbs  68 
  2.5.2 Aktionsarten  71 
  2.5.3 Resultative verb compounds (RVC)  75 
  2.5.4 Existential verbs (Copulas)  77 
   2.5.4.1 ‹dah› th ‘be something’  78 
   2.5.4.2 ‹må ï› mŋ ‘be at, stay’  80 
   2.5.4.3 ‹nwa ÿ› nùm ‘be at, exist, have’  82 
   2.5.4.4 ‹(hwa’) se ï› (hùʔ) siəŋ ‘(not to) be so’  86 
 i
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
  2.5.5 Directionals  88 
 2.6 Complements of verbs  89 
  2.6.1 Direct objects  90 
  2.6.2 Oblique objects  91 
  2.6.3 Complement clauses  95 
 
3. The syntax of verbs  98 
 3.1 Serial verb constructions  98 
  3.1.1 Historical development  100 
  3.1.2 Serial verbs in modern Mon  102 
 3.2 Voice  106 
 3.3 Attributive and relative  109 
 
4. Causatives  113 
 4.1 Introduction  113 
 4.2 Historical overview  114 
  4.2.1 Verbs with single initial (non labial)  115 
  4.2.2 Verbs with labial initial  117 
  4.2.3 Verbs with initial consonant cluster  118 
  4.2.4 Irregular causatives  119 
  4.2.5 Causatives of directionals  120 
  4.2.6 Affix syncretism in MM  120 
 4.3 The situation in modern Mon  121 
  4.3.1 Productivity of the p-/pə- prefix  121 
  4.3.2 The hə- and pə- prefixes  122 
  4.3.3 The vocalic infix  124 
  4.3.4 The p- prefix in clusters  125 
  4.3.5 Irregular developments  126 
  4.3.6 The periphrastic construction  127 
  4.3.7 Verbs without morphological causative  129 
  4.3.8 Suppletive stems  130 
 4.4 Causatives with  directionals  131 
 4.5 Semantics of causative derivates  132 
 4.6 Orthography of causatives  134 
 4.7 Summary of causatives  135 
 
5. The focal and assertive particles, ‹ra› raʔ and ‹roï› noŋ  137 
 5.1 Description  137 
 5.2 Historical development  139 
 5.3 Modern Mon  142 
  5.3.1 The focal particle ‹ra› raʔ  142 
  5.3.2 The assertive particle ‹ro ï› noŋ  147 
 5.4 Conclusion  151 
 
6. TAM markers and other verbal operators  152 
 6.1 Iterative and con tinuous events  154 
 ii
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
 6.2 Conative reading  156 
 6.3 Predicate operators  157 
  6.3.1 ‹må ï› mŋ and ‹tau› tao ‘STAY, STAND’  158 
  6.3.2 ‹’ā › ʔa and ‹õā› na ‘GO, CAUS:GO’  167 
  6.3.3 ‹klu ï› klŋ and ‹naï› nŋ ‘COME, CAUS:COME’  173 
  6.3.4 ‹tuin› tn and ‹ptuin› pətn ‘MOVE UP, CAUS:UP’  179 
  6.3.5 ‹ceh› ceh and ‹phyeĥ› phyeh ‘MOVE DOWN, CAUS:DOWN’  183 
  6.3.6 Other directionals  187 
  6.3.7 ‹law› l  ‘KEEP’  191 
  6.3.8 ‹tho’› thʔ  ‘THROW’  196 
  6.3.9 ‹ca› iəʔ ‘EAT’  199 
  6.3.10 ‹ket› ket ‘TAKE’  204 
  6.3.11 ‹kuiw› k ‘GIVE’  207 
  6.3.12 ‹gwa’› kʔ ‘GET’  215 
  6.3.13 ‹lep› lèp and ‹mān› màn ‘ABLE’ and ‘WIN’  228 
  6.3.14 ‹dah › th ‘HIT’  231 
  6.3.15 ‹mik, mik-gwa’› mòc, məkʔ  ‘WANT TO’  238 
  6.3.16 ‹tuy› toə ‘FINISH’  241 
  6.3.17 ‹ira, yya› yaʔ  ‘NEW SITUATION’  249 
  6.3.18  ‹keï, klā, õiÿ, phuih› kiəŋ, kla, nm, phh  ‘EXPER, BEFORE, PERS’ 252 
 6.4 Summary of verbal and clausal operators  257 
 
Appendices  261 
A. Maps of Mon speaking areas  262 
B. Phonology tables of Mon dialects  264 
C. Excerpt from Saddā Man ‘Mon Grammar’  272 
D. Sample Texts 
 1. Myazedi Imscription (OM)   277 
 2. Shwedagon Inscription (MM)   279 
 3. The story of King Dhammacetī  (LM)  281 
 4. Experiences of a temple boy (SM)  283
  
E. Table of operators and SFPs  286 
F. Text Sources  287 
G. References  290
  
 iii
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
 Preface 
 
This study of the verb system of Mon w ould not have been possible without the 
assistance of a number of people in Switzerland, Thailand and Burma.   
Prof. Karen H. Ebert, head of the Semi nar für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft at 
Zurich University guided me through my  studies and gave me the support I 
needed, also during long stays in Thailand. 
 Prof. G. Diffloth, Dr. E. Guillon and Dr. Nai Pan Hla shared their profound 
knowledge of the Mon language and culture with me in personal communications 
on different occasions. Prof. Sujaritlak and Dr. Praphasi of the Institute of 
Language and Culture for Rural Developm ent at Mahidol University in Bangkok 
were most helpful, especially in discu ssing parts of the present study with me and 
assisting with the publication of pa rts of my research results in Mon-Khmer 
Studies (Vol. 33). 
I am most indebted to the many Mon peopl e in Thailand and especially in Burma 
who sat through recording se ssions and had to endure my (to them) nonsensical 
questions about their language. Abbots and temple boys, housewives and 
peasants, market sellers and story writers,  pop stars and traditional musicians and 
dancers, drivers and hotel employees, teachers, journalists and politicians, 
scholars and illiterate work ers, and the people just pa ssing by and stopping for a 
chat, they all contributed to the comple tion of this study, more often than not 
unknowingly, sharing their culture and language with an outsider. 
 It is customary (and sensible) not to  mention by name people in Burma itself 
who assist foreign researchers worki ng on Burmese minority issues, however 
apolitical they may be. I therefore refr ain from listing the names of the Mon in 
Burma, who not only invited me to their homes but also accompanied me through 
Monland and introduced me to places a nd people that I would not have had a 
chance to find on my own. It is experiences  like listening to old monks telling the 
long forgotten local history, sitting in wooden houses eating freshly caught fried 
rats, watching whole villages  participating in religious ceremonies at a local 
temple, being invited to an ordination party after a nightlong bus ride through 
southern Burma, spending nights in m onasteries sleeping on the floor among 
monks who have to get up at five in th e morning, and being given the chance to 
teach village children and at the same time  learn a lot from them that keep the 
interest in a culture and its language alive. It is experien ces like these that let one 
forget the heavy monsoon rains that pour down on Monland six months a year, 
the very moody electricity supply (if there is any at all), the less than perfect 
communication and transport facilities w ithin Burma, as well as the political 
tension that surrounds all Burmese ethnicities, including the Burman themselves. 
 v
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
 In Wangka (Sangkhlaburi, Thailand), wher e most of the research was done, the 
situation is much more comfortable, although the village ha s its own share of 
tension (and heavy monsoon rains), bei ng basically a huge Mon refugee camp in 
Thailand, though a very open one. Here I ow e special thanks to Mr. Ok Pung, 
who in the first phase of my Mon studies was an invaluable help in almost all 
respects. He created many sets of Mon fonts for Windows computers and 
published a number of books, mostly edit ions of old manuscripts. His daughters 
Suda and Sajiang spent many nights transcri bing and typing my audio recordings. 
Without their help I would not have been  able to make the extensive use of 
recorded spoken language material that is  necessary for a study of this kind. Mr. 
Ok Pung’s wife Mi Nge proved to be an  inexhaustible source of a variety of 
delicious Mon food, which made working th rough the nights much more pleasant 
than it would otherwise have been. Ot her people worthy mentioning in Wangka 
are Mr. and Mrs. Phophu eak-Sirihong of Wangka Ca ble TV, who possess an 
extensive video collection of documenta ries and music, and an always open 
house. Mr. Win Myint was my first Mon t eacher, patiently repeating his phrases 
and trying to understand my first steps in  a language that seemed impossible to 
master. Many more followed, including a number of people who may never 
realise how much they helped me furthe r my studies just by sitting and talking 
with me or with each other. Thanks to all of them. 
 Anon C. worked for months scanning  and computerising all books in and on 
Mon we could get hold of, making a collection of a few hundred volumes 
covering all aspects of Mon culture and language conveniently available on CD 
ROM. 
 This research project was mainly financed by the Forschungskommission der 
Universität Zürich, which granted funds to conduct field studies for 30 months. 
 Last but not least I have to thank my  family in Switzerland, who not only gave 
me financial assistance over many years of private field research, but also the 
moral support needed to keep on working in  the ‘tropical paradise’ of the Thai-
Burmese border area. 
 
 Mon is a language without overt gender distinctions in pronouns and most 
nouns. The political discussion of correct language use in terms of gender does 
therefore not arise in Mon, a society where “women enjoy as many rights as men, 
also if not necessarily the same ones”  (quotation Nai Ok Pung). Throughout this 
study, I use ‘he, him, his’ in the third person where the context is neutral as to the 
gender of the person(s) c oncerned. It has to be kept in mind that the 
corresponding Mon pronouns, if pr esent in the sentence at all, can always refer to 
either a female or a male person. The choice of the English male pronouns should 
 vi
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
be understood merely as a de fault choice to make the tr anslations more readable. 
The same goes for Burmese and Thai usage. 
 I use the translation ‘man ’ in the glosses for Mon mənìh from Pali manussa 
‘man, human being’ (equivalent and ultimately related to German Mensch). This 
sometimes results in odd-sounding glosses like ‘man female’ for mənìh prè ə, 
which is rendered in English simply as ‘woman’ (although the Mon word is used 
for a female human of any age). 
 
 
 
M. Jenny, Wangka/Bangkok/Zurich 2005 
 vii
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
Abbreviations 
 
ABL  Ablative 
ADH  Adhortative 
ADV  Adverb 
ALL  Allative 
AOR  Aorist 
ASP  Aspect 
ASRT  Assertive 
ATTR  Attributive 
B  Burmese 
BEN  Benefactive 
CAUS  Causative 
CL  Classifier 
COND  Conditional 
CONT  Continuous 
DES  Desiderative 
DIR  Directional 
DMI  Dictionary of Mon Inscriptions (Shorto 1971) 
DOM  Dvāravatī Old Mon 
DSM  Dictionary of Spoken Mon (Shorto 1962) 
DUR  Durative 
EB  Epigraphica Birmanica (Duroiselle 1921 etc.) 
EMPH  Emphatic particle 
EXPER  Experiential 
FOC  Focus 
FREQ  Frequentative 
IMPER  Imperative 
INCL  Inclusive (‘x as well as y; x together with y’) 
INGR  Ingressive 
INSTR  Instrumental 
INTENS  Intensifier 
INTERJ  Interjection 
IRR  Irrealis 
J.B.R.S.  Journal of the Burma Research Society 
Khm  Khmer 
LM  Literary Mon 
LOC  Locative 
MDF  Modifier 
MM  Middle Mon 
 viii
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon 
MOD  Modal 
NEG  Negation 
NML  Nominaliser 
NSIT  New situation 
OBJ  Object 
OBL  Oblique 
OM  Old Mon  
P  Pali 
PASS  Passive 
PERF  Perfect 
PERS  Persisitive 
PFTV  Perfective 
PL  Plural 
POL  Politeness particle 
POSS  Possessive 
POT  Potential 
PREF  Nominal prefix 
PROH  Prohibitive 
PROSP  Prospective 
PROV  Provisory 
PURP  Purposive 
PWB  Proto-West-Bahnaric 
Q  Question 
RDP  Reduplication 
REAL  Realis 
RECIP  Recipient 
REL  Relative 
RP  Reading pronunciation 
RVC  Resultative verb compound 
SEQ  Sequential 
SER  Serial verb 
SFP  Sentence final particle 
Skt  Sanskrit 
SM  Spoken Mon 
SRC  Source 
SVC  Serial verb construction 
Th  Thai 
TOP  Topic 
 
 ix
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
1. Introduction 
1.1 The Mon people and language 
 
The Mon language is linguistically a member of the Mon-Khmer group of the 
Austroasiatic family, which may be part of a bigger Austric stock comprising 
the Austroasiatic and Austronesian families, for some authors also the Sino-
Tibetan family (s. Benedict 1991 for a summary of the Austric thesis). The 
Austroasiatic languages are spread all over the Southeast Asian subcontinent, 
from southern China to the Malay Peni nsula and from Vietnam to India. The 
largest community of the Austroasiatic  population, which Parkin puts at over 
80 mio. (Parkin 1991:1), are the Vietname se with over 65 mio. speakers. The 
Mon population is estimated at about one  million. It must be kept in mind 
that this is a purely linguistic cla ssification, based on comparative diachronic 
linguistic studies, and has no social or cultural significance. There are among 
the Mon-Khmer peoples in Southeast Asia tribes like the Mlabri with stone-
age civilization (s. Pookajorn 1992, Rischel 1995) and civilizations as old as 
the Khmer and Vietnamese. 
 
 The origin of the Mon people and the de tails of their postulated migration to 
Southeast Asia are not known. 1 According to some indigenous legends, the 
Mon migrated from India, a thesis that is not supported by historical or 
archaeological evidence, t hough. This myth may have its origin in Indian 
merchants settling in what today is southern Burma, introducing not only 
overseas commerce, but also the Indian roots for Mon religious practice and 
culture. 
 Two names are commonly used for the Mon people, the etymology of both 
of which is still unknown. The Mon call themselves mòn, a word that goes 
back to Old Mon (OM) ‹rmeñ›, which is found as ‹rm ěn, r ěměn› in Old 
Javanese. Old Khmer has ‹ramañ, rmañ›, which corresponds to the Pali form 
rāmañña, the origin of the Thai designation ‹r āmăñ›. Formally OM ‹rmeñ› 
looks like the attributive of a verb *‹reñ›, which is not attested in Mon. See 
Guillon 1999:21 for a (very tentative) explanation of the ethnonym ‹rmeñ›. 
The other name applied to the Mon pe ople by foreigners and considered 
derogatory by the Mon themselves, is ‘Talaing’. Different hypotheses have 
been proposed on the etymology of this  name (s. Guillon 1999:17ff, J.B.R.S. 
Vols. II/I:73f, 100f, II/II:246ff, III/I:1 ff, 84ff), but no generally accepted 
conclusion has been reached so far. Another ethnonym applied by Westerners 
is ‘Peguan’, after the name of the Old Mon capital city Pegu (Ha ÿsāvatī, 
today Bago).  
                                                      
1 For a more detailed discussion of the history of the Mon people and references see for 
example Guillon 1999 and Bauer 1990. A different view is presented in Aung-Thwin 2001. 
In this section only a short outline can be given. 
 
 
1 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The earliest direct linguistic evidence of the Mon are a handful of short 
stone inscriptions f ound in central Thaila nd and dating to the 6 th century. 
These inscriptions are among the earliest record of an indigenous language of 
Southeast Asia, predati ng the earliest Khmer 
inscriptions (but being about contemporary with 
inscriptions in the now extinct Pyu language of 
central Burma). The fact that Mon is the only 
local language used during the Dvā ravatī era 
strongly suggests that th e Mon were at least an 
important part of the Dv āravatī population (cf. 
Saraya 1999:160ff, Guillon 1999:79ff). The 
inscriptions found so far are all very short and 
show the initial phase of  an evolving literary 
language. The following 6
th century inscription 
from Wat Pho Rang, Nakhon Pathom (Thailand) 
illustrates early Dvāravatī Mon. 
The inscription is fragmentary and the reading 
and translation of most of it uncertain. The meani ng of many words in the 
inscription is not known, e.g. ‹dnow›, which is given by Shorto as a not 
defined “quantifier” (DMI:202)
2 and ‹laÿ-ur›, which is an “article given to 
monastery?” (DMI:331). The read ing (and meaning) of ‹sra r āï› is dubious, 
as is Shorto’s interpretation as silver (OM ‹srañ, sreñ›). Although the text is 
hardly intelligible, the language is clearly early OM. 
 
OM text Transliteration Translation 
   
 
duÿpoh cwas 
moy dnow 
hāï klam ti óey 
...ra’ sraï kyāk wihār 
 
seven-ty  
one dnow 
? hundred earth in 
... cast Buddha temple 
 
laÿ-ur sra rāï 
doï bār ∃E ’awo’ 
...r taÿ brāw bihār 
lam-ur silver (?)  
shaman two ∃E this 
... tree coconut temple 
   Table 1.1 Dvā ravatī inscription (after Prapassorn 1999:115f) 
                                                      
2 Formally ‹dnow› may be a nominalization of the verb ‹dow› ‘run’, in which case it would 
be a unit of length. SM uses kok ‘call’ as a unit of length (“as far as a call can be heard”). 
 
 
2 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The Dvā ravatī kingdom3 (or rather cultural area) covered all of what today 
is central Thailand and southern Burma,  extending to the north and northeast 
of present-day Thailand. In Thailand the original Mon population was 
gradually absorbed from the 12 th to 13 th centuries into the expanding 
Thai/Khmer communities of Ayudhya and Sukhothai, 4 and the northern Tai 
kingdom of Lānnā, which took over the rule from the Mon at Haribhuñjaya at 
modern Lamphun, while the Mon kingdom of Sudhammavat ī (Thaton) in 
southern Burma was invaded by the expanding Burmese kingdom of Pagán. 
The Mon language all but disappeared from Thailand, 5 leaving behind only a 
few remnants known today as Chao Bon in Thai ( Nyah Kur ‘hill people’, s. 
Pan Hla 1986, 1991, 1992; Diffloth 1984), bu t retained its status as spoken 
and written language in Burma even under Burmese rule. During the 11 th 
century, the Burmese rulers of Pagán us ed Mon in their inscriptions, which 
appears in an elevated literary form. This highly developed style of the Mon 
language together with remarkable cons istency in spelling from the earliest 
Dvāravatī inscriptions to the Pagán period, a time span of some 500 years, 
suggests that the lack of inscriptions from the 7th to the 11th centuries may be 
due to the lack of archaeological research in Burma rather than actual literary 
inactivity of the Mon. The following passage from the longest OM 
inscription, the 11 th century Shweizigon, illust rates the Mon language of 
Pagán (punctuation added for readabilty). 
 
                                                      
3 Coedès 1968:76f uses the term kingdom for Dv āravatī and mentions the conflict between 
archeological evidence from the Chao Phraya basin and Mon tradition which places the old 
centre of the Mon kingdom in southern Burma, from where no archeological evidence has 
been recovered up to date. But cf. Myint Aung 1977. 
4  Wongthet 2002 and 2003, as well as Bhumisak 2004 give details of the historical 
development of the early Thai states in the Chao Phraya basin from earlier Mon and Khom 
(Khmer) communities. Their unorthodox view is  supported by historical and archaeological 
evidence, but not yet accepted in Thailand’s official history textbooks, which rather stick to 
the nationalistic version of the Thai migrating from China and expelling the Khmer and Mon 
to establish first Sukhothai and then Ayudhya as real Thai kingdoms. Unfortunately, neither 
Wongthet nor Bhumisak have been translated into English (yet), making them inaccessible to 
a broader international audience. 
5 It is not clear how widespread the use of Mon as spoken language was in central Thailand 
under Thai rule after the 13th century. A city map of Ayudhya published in 1693 (La Loubère 
1693, facing p. 6) shows the “Peguan” quarters on the west bank of the river opposite the 
island of Ayudhya. This shows on one hand that there was a substantial Mon community in 
17
th century Ayudhya, and on the other that they were considered foreigners, being assigned 
quarters outside the city walls like the Europeans and Macassars. The designation as Peguans 
further indicates that they were more recent re fugees from Burma, rather than remnants of 
the original Mon population. Interestingly, in 17
th century European sources the Buddhist 
monks in Siam (Thailand), who since earliest recoreded times formed an important sector of 
Siamese society, are referred to as ‘Talapoins’ from Mon ‹tala puin›, ‘master of merit’. 
 
 
3 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.1) Shweizigon isncription 
 
tarley ’ānan ñ āc ’ascar goh , l ïor yil kint āl ju ï ky āk buddha tarley t ūy, yuk 
suÿbup tey sm āñ row wo’: “ma tirla pa kir- īm wo’ ci, mu het yo? sak het ky āk 
buddha tarley guÿloï sik-im ci kah sak.” row goh tarley ’ānan smāñ da. goh ma 
kyāk buddha tarley gah  ku ’ ānan row wo’: “’ānan, mnor ci risi moy ma imo’ 
bisnū, jnok riddhi, jnok ’ānubhāw, go’ ’abhiñā msūn, kom ku kon ey gawaÿpati, 
ku smiï  in, ku bissukarmmadewaput, ku katakarmman āgarāja, skanda ÿ óūï 
moy imo’ sisīt. [...] ya ï ruÿbat ñah ma c āk nor ñah  ruÿlos guÿloï, na pun’ār 
tirtūy na moytricit ma dmas tey, gna smi ï śrī tribhuwan ādityadhammarāja sjit 
duol [...] ut mahājan ci row kon ma tāw póey cris ’ambo. [...]” 
 
Translation: 
‘When the Lord Ananda saw this miracle he respectfully put the sole of the Lord 
Buddha’s foot on his head and, lifting up his hands, asked: “That you have 
smiled, my Lord, what is the reason for it? For it does not happen that Buddhas 
smile without a reason.” Thus the Lord Ananda asked, whereupon the Lord 
Buddha spoke to the Lord Ananda thus: “Ananda, in a time to come a hermit 
whose name is Bisnu, a man of great strength and spiritual power, one who has 
achieved the five transcendental faculties, together with my son Gavampati, with 
Lord Indra, with Bissukarma, the son of  gods, and with Katakarma, the King of 
Nagas, will build a city called Sisit (Old Prome). [...] The tears of those who are 
separated from the ones they love, with  perfect loving kindness like a hand he 
will wipe away. [...] All people will live like children in their mothers’ wombs.”’ 
 
 Although Mon was replaced by Burmese in the 12 th century at Pagán, it 
continued to be used as spoken and written language in southern Burma, 
where the kingdom of Haÿsāvatī gained independence from Burmese rule on 
several occasions.  
The 15th century Shwedagon inscription at Rangoon comes with parallel texts 
in Mon and Burmese, showing the shared status of the two languages in 
Burma during that time. The following passage from the Shwedagon 
inscription (face B) serves as an example of Middle Mon (MM). 
 
(1.2) Shwedagon inscription 
 
nor cnām tila puiy ky āk tray ma pa parinibbān b ā klaÿ pi cwoh turau cnā m gah 
kali lwon ’ā tuy, tila puiy ’arahan bā ma himu so õathe uttarathe kluï ptan s āsnā 
pday óuï suwaõõabhum ra. khā s āsnā ma tan tuy, gam ī truh gam ī brau, s āmaõī 
truh sāmaõī brau khā ma nwom tuy gah, khā gah smiï sirimāsoka gah gah ku tila 
puiy b ā ra: “yo’ tila ey, dhammarat, sa ïgharat gah puiy óik go’ liïor p ūjau ra, 
buddharatana mwoy gah puiy óik mik li ïor p ūjau ha go’ swo’. dh āt ky āk tray 
 
 
4 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
tuy puiy óik ma sgo’ phyih cuit buddharat, puiy óik ma sgo’ liïot pūjau ey-paray 
gah, tila ey ra’ reï ku puiy óik ñi.” rau gah smiï pa ’āyācanā ku tila puiy ra. 
 
Translation: 
‘When two hundred thirty six years had elapsed after the Lord Buddha entered 
Nirvana, two Arahants called Sonathera and Uttarathera came to establish the 
religion in the land Suvannabhumi. When the religion was established and there 
were monks and nuns, male and female novices, King Sirimasoka said to the two 
Arahants: “My lords, we now have the jewel of the Doctrine (Dhamma) and the 
jewel of the monks’ order (Sa ïgha) to worship and pay respects to, but we 
would also like to but cannot worship and pay our respect to the jewel of the 
Buddha. In order that we may lay down our hearts to the jewel of the Buddha, 
that we may worship and praise Him, please arrange and bring us a holy relic.” 
Thus made the king his request to the two holy men.’ 
 
 With the destruction of the Mon capital Ha ÿsāvatī (Pegu) in 1757, the last 
independent Mon state so far ended and Mon as spoken and written language 
was brought back to Thailand by large numbers of refugees. Mon language 
use and teaching was mainly reduced to the religious domain in what used to 
be Monland in southern Burma. Still the literary tradition was carried on and 
a language form that may be called ‘classical’ Literary Mon (LM) evolves 
after the fall of Haÿ sāvatī, especially with writers around the famous Acā 
Hwo’, the abbot of Hwo’ Monastery, who wrote and edited historical and 
religious texts, including the 550 J ātaka tales. Classical LM  is very close to 
late MM, and it is the starting point of separate developments of Mon 
communities in Thailand and Burma, although in the initial phase there 
appears to have been intensive cont act between the two groups. Early LM 
Mon texts are preserved in both Tha iland and Burma and show influence 
from Thai and Burmese. Mon poetry exhibits rhyme patterns that work only 
in a pre-devoiced state of the language (s. section 1.5), i.e. vowel differences 
arising from register spli t in Mon are ignored, as the following passage from 
the epic of King Saïgadā shows.
6 A similar situation is found in classical 
Thai poetry, where tone rhymes are according to tone classes 
(orthographically tone markers 1 and 2, and unmarked tones) rather than 
actual phonetic tones, which have undergone a tone split at some time 
(probably after the 13
th century, s. Brown 1985, Hudak 1997:45ff). The 
passage given below descri bes the king’s anguish afte r his sister has been 
kidnapped by a ghost. 
 
                                                      
6  Wedañā na (1997) is the first and so far only comprehensive study of Mon poetry, 
unfortunately available only in Mon and therefore not readily accessible to the international 
scholar community.  
 
 
5 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.3) Saïgadā epic (Kalyāõa 1999:7f) 
 
Transliteration:   Reading pronunciation: 
 
’akruiÿ smiï klā seõ āgutta, ʔəkrm smo kla senagùtta ʔ 
iddhi kalok ma jnok teja, itthi ʔ kəlok m ʔ hnòk tècʔ 
smiï cau cuip óuï smi ï cau lïuï-lïa, smo  cao cp ŋ smo  cao ŋŋ-ŋʔ 
ramat bruih-bruih gwit suih sp āt sba. r əmot prh-prh  khwìt s h pat pʔ. 
“hah de’ sóuik bruik-bruik mat b ā, “hah tè ʔ səak pràk-pràk mòt a 
hah thaw thamnat rup óoï padmā, hah th  thmnt rùp oŋ ptmə 
hah thaw thakoï kha óoï mat bā, hah th  thəkoŋ khəoŋ mòt a 
nāy sāy nū ko ko dah  lïāp-lïā, này say nù kao kao t h ŋp-ŋə 
ko dah cåï tū ko dah  pū chā, kao t h cŋ tao kao t h pao cha 
ko dah thaspā dam ānū ’ay gwa, kao t h thəsəpa h əmàn nù ʔuə kwʔ 
ko dah sïoÿ ko dah  hoÿ jra kao t h səŋom kao t h hom sʔ 
galuiï wwa’ pñī lw ī law de’ ma, k əlàŋ wùʔ pəə wì l  tèʔ mʔ 
ko dah ’uit kasap khyap hwa’ m ān ra.” kao t h ʔt kəsp khy p hùʔ màn raʔ.” 
sāk wwa’ smiï dhaw y āÿ gataw gya, sac wù ʔ smo th y m kət kyʔ 
tuy smiï ptuy ’uiw kusuiw dāna, yoə smo  pətoə ʔ kaoʔs dənʔ 
juin puin õā ’au kuiw de’ brau ra. c n pn na ʔao k  tèʔ prèə raʔ. 
  
Translation 
‘This is King Senagutta’s acclamation of the powerful ghost. The king returned 
to his city, the king returned with sadness. Tears flowed from his eyes; he struck 
his breast in anguish. “Oh my dear sister, you were always in my eyes. Oh my 
purest gold, figure like a lotus bloom! Oh my gold piece, apple of both my eyes! 
You are parted from me, my way is lost! I have to suffer the pain, the anguish, I 
can hardly see, all because of my shame.  In speechless sorrow I have to wither 
away. How much I tried to care for you, my dear sister! My thoughts are ended, 
I cannot think anymore.” Thus the righteous king wept and lamented. Then he 
made meritorious offerings, he made merit for his little sister.’ 
 
 The second foot of each line ends in ‹-a› or ‹ ā› in LM, but in the modern 
pronunciation many of the rhymes  are lost, as ‹-a› and ‹-ā› change into [-ʔ] 
and [- ə] after heavy register (i.e. originally voiced ) consonants. Similarly 
some of the internal rhymes are lost, su ch as ‹bruih› - ‹sruih›, which become 
[prh] - [sh] and ‹’au› - ‹brau› which are today pronounced [ʔao] - [prèə]. 
 
 After the classical period of LM, Mon as a writte n language lost steadily in 
importance. Mon as a spoken language today is restricted mainly to the area 
south of the Sittaung River in the north and Ye Township in the south. Earlier 
Mon speaking communities reported in  the Irrawaddy delta and around Pegu 
have probably completely disapp eared. Mon speakers found today in 
 
 
6 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Rangoon, Pegu and Mandalay are more r ecent migrants from southern 
Burma. Today there are a few books published every year in Mon, subject to 
heavy Burmese censorship. Most texts publ ished in Burma are rewritings of 
old religious books or local legends, sometimes in a modernised form. The 
most famous among the modern writers  is Rev. Palita, abbot of Kama Wek 
New Monastery, who has written and published dozens of religious and 
historical works in an adapted form  of LM, which makes the texts easily 
readable and thus accessible to a wi der audience among the literate Mon, 
which are estimated to make up about  25-30% of the whole Mon population. 
Another centre of contemporary Mon literary activity is the Klo’ Pakao 
Monastery near Moulmein, where a large number of books have been 
published in a language approaching SM . The publications include religious 
texts as well as short stories and cartoons, many in bilingual Mon-Burmese 
editions. An important newer factor in Mon literature (and literacy in general) 
are not only the over 300 M on schools now legally operating in Mon areas in 
Burma, but also the increasing number of popular and traditional music 
appearing as karaoke videos, with sub titles in Mon script. The first one to 
produce a Mon karaoke video was the popular singer Hongchan, who brought 
out his 1999 super-hit chan mòn chan này ‘Love the Mon, love you’ as 
karaoke VCD in 2000, available not only in Burma but also in Thailand, 
Malaysia and Singapore, as well as overseas where Mon refugee 
communities have settled. Mon newspapers appear in irregular intervals, due 
to the instable political situation in Burma and neighbouring Thailand, which 
favours a good relationship with the Burmese government.  
 The ‘Guiding Star’ newspaper is usually published once a month in 
Bangkok, with the editorial board chiefl y in Sangkhlaburi. Textbooks for use 
in Mon schools are prepared by the Mon Education Office (with a branch 
office in Sangkhlaburi). Furthermore,  a few young authors started writing 
short stories and poems which are published in Mon magazines, mostly with 
political topics. The first full length novel in Mon has yet to be written.
7
 
 In Thailand, older people are still ab le to speak Mon in a few Mon (or Thai-
Raman) villages, but the younger generations have all but turned into 
monolingual Thai speakers. Mon language publications in Th ailand are rare 
and mostly restricted to special memorial editions for (Mon) monks’ funerals. 
The only active Mon press in Bangkok, Tech Promotion and Advertising Co., 
ltd., publishes chiefly intern ationally sponsored editi ons like Nai Tun Way’s 
two recent dictionaries and Talanon’s English grammar, among others.  
 A revival of interest in Mon cultu re and language can be observed in 
Thailand in recent years, with a number of Thai language publications on 
                                                      
7  Where no other source is indicated, the information given in this and the preceding 
paragraph is from personal communication with  Mon scholars and politicians in Thailand 
and Burma. 
 
 
7 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Mon history and culture and the openi ng of a new Mon Study Centre at Wat 
Muang in Rajburi Province, some 100 km west of Bangkok. Whether this 
(scholarly) Mon renaissance  will ultimately lead to  increased language use 
and literacy among Thai-Mon people remains to be seen. 
 
1.2 Sources and methodology 
 
The linguistic material used in this study comes from a variety of sources, 
covering some 1500 years of the written language and a selection of modern 
Mon dialects spoken in Burma and to a much lesser extent Thailand.8  
 
 For OM and MM, the easiest reference book is Shorto’s excellent 
Dictionary of Mon inscriptions  (DMI, Shorto 1971), which not only lists all 
words found in Mon inscriptions up to the date of publication, but also 
provides valuable information about the morphology and etymology of the 
lexical entries, together with sample  sentences. The sample sentences are 
necessarily kept short in a dictionary of this kind. Wherever possible, the 
sentences given in DMI were cross-ch ecked with other publications of Mon 
inscriptions to ascertain the reading a nd translation, taking into consideration 
the broader context.  
 The main editions consulted on OM and MM are the first three volumes of 
the Epigraphica Birmanica  (EB I-III, Duroiselle 1921 etc.; in Roman 
transliteration with English translations), U Hkyit Thein’s Collection of Mon 
inscriptions (1965; in Mon-Burmese script, with Burmese translations) and 
Luce (1961; Roman transliteration, English translations) for the Kubyauk-Gyi 
inscriptions, besides a number of other editions mentioned in the references. 
Where there are wide discrepancies be tween the different editions, they are 
mentioned in the text and the most pr obable reading and tr anslation is given. 
The source of inscriptions of which co mplete editions are available are given 
with the name of the inscription (usually abbreviated), followed by the face 
(a-z) and line(s) (1-99) where the sentence appears. Where no other edition 
apart from DMI was available, Shorto’s reading and translation are taken as 
correct. In these cases the source is indicated as DMI:xx. 
 Most OM examples are taken from thre e inscriptions or inscription groups, 
viz. the Shweizigon inscri ption (SSK), the Ananda plaques (An), and the 
Kubyauk-Gyi inscriptions (Ku), all dating to the 11th century in Pagán. 
 The main texts used to  illustrate MM are the Shwedagon inscription (SDG) 
of 15 th century Rangoon and the Kaly āõi inscription (KLY) of the same 
century at Pegu. 
                                                      
8 Data from Mon dialects in Thailand is used for comparison in some instances, and to 
estimate the age of certain phenomena in the la nguage. The bulk of SM material comes from 
dialects spoken in Burma. 
 
 
8 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
For both stages of the language othe r sources are used where the main 
inscriptions did not provide appropriate examples. 
 
 The main sources for LM can be br oadly divided into two groups, viz. 
classical LM and modern LM. The first is represented mainly by the Jātaka 
tales (Jat) as edited by Aca Hwo’ in the 18 th century, the epic poem of king 
(or prince) Saïgadā (SGD), which is available in two slightly different 
printed editions (Mem Ong 1999, Kaly āna 1999), and the historical novel of 
Rājādhirāj/Razadirit (RDR), edited by Nai Pan Hla in 1958. 
 An intermediary form between classical and modern LM can be seen in the 
writings of Rev. Palita. Most examples of this  style are taken from The story 
of King Dhammacetī (DC). 
 Examples of contemporary LM are taken from the short story Mi Kon Pliÿ 
(MKP, Candimācāra 2001), a collection of Mon Prose (LPM) edited by Nai 
Htun Thein, newspaper articles taken from the Guiding Star, an independent 
Mon newspaper appearing in Thailand, and from the lyrics of popular Mon 
music, especially by Hongchan. Other s ources were included were necessary 
and mentioned in the text and references. 
 
 The bulk of data used in this study comes from Spoken Mon (SM). Audio 
recordings were made with native  speakers from different locations, 
geographically covering most of the act ual Mon speaking area in Burma. Out 
of the recordings, four main sources were selected, representing four different 
dialect areas (s. Appendix A for maps of the Mon speaking areas): 
 
 1. Ko’ Dot (KD), the southernmost Burmese Mon dialect recorded for this 
study, is a big village some 180 kilometres south of Moulmein. The recording 
for this dialect, which provided the widest range of linguistic material used in 
this study, was made with an elderly couple who tell thei r experiences in 
Monland during WW II, covering periods of English, Japanese, and Burmese 
occupation of their land. This conversat ion is not only a rich source for SM 
data, it also gives interesting insights into life in Monland during the war. 
Both informants are bilingual with Burm ese, which they speak fluently but 
with a heavy Mon accent. They are literate in Mon and Burmese. 
 
 2. Further to the north, some 35 k ilometres south of Moulmein, is the 
village of Ko’ Kapoun (KKP). The recording was made with a young man, 
who at the time of recording had been  working in Sangkhlaburi, Thailand for 
a few months. He was a quasi-mono lingual speaker of Mon, with only 
limited command of Burmese and Thai. This informant does not read and 
write Mon (or any other language). The r ecordings made with this informant 
include a few short tales he remembered from his childhood, a personal 
account of his journey from  Burma to the Thai bord er, as well as elicited 
 
 
9 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
sample sentences, the correctness of whic h had later to be checked, given his 
low competence in any other language than Mon.9
 
 3. The village of Kanni (KN) is near the town of Kawkareik in Karen State, 
some 80 kilometres northeast of Moulme in. This location is very close to 
Kaw Kyaik, the village where Shor to collected material for his Dictionary of 
Spoken Mon (1962) with which it shows many similarities. The recording 
was made with two brothers working as  actors with a travelling Mon theatre 
group. The older of the two is fluent in Mon and Burmese, while the younger 
is a quasi-monolingual speaker of M on, literate only in Mon. The younger 
brother tells the older one about his life as a temple boy in their home village. 
 
 4. The fourth location where linguistic material was gathered is the small 
town of Sangkhlaburi on the Thai-Burmese border, 400 kilometres 
northwest of Bangkok and some 220 kilometres southeast of Moulmein. The 
town is (geographically and ethnica lly) divided into a ‘Thai Side’ ( s
ŋ sem) 
and a ‘Mon Side’ (sŋ mòn, Wangka, WK ), connected by a 400 metre long 
wooden bridge. Wangka is th e location most easily accessible to students of 
Mon language and culture, as it lies on Thai soil and most of the younger 
generation are fluent in Mon as well as Thai, while many older people speak 
Mon and Burmese. The population of Wangka is almost entirely Mon, 
interspersed with a few Tavoyan Burmese and even fewer Thais. Most of the 
children attend the Thai government school at Wangka, where they get a 
purely Thai education. The language s poken at home and among themselves 
remains Mon, although Thai influence (and language use) is increasing. Only 
few of the younger generation bother to learn the Mon script, seeing their 
future in Thailand rather than in Burm a/Monland. Most recordings here were 
made with students of the local school , telling Mon tales their parents or 
relatives had told them in their childhood. All of the informants interviewed 
at Wangka are fluent speakers of Thai besides Mon, which they still consider 
their first language. Although Wangka is politically located in Thailand, the 
dialect spoken here is considered a Bu rmese Mon dialect, as the inhabitants 
migrated to the area within the past 50 years. With the speakers originating 
from different parts of Monland in Burma, the dialect spoken in Wangka 
shows levelling to some extent, resulti ng in a kind of standard SM. There are 
differences in usage among different speak ers, but they tend to disappear in 
the younger generation who rapidly adapt to  the WK dialect, especially when 
talking with friends rather than their family. Neologisms are taken mostly 
from Thai, less frequently from Burmese, although Burmese loans are still 
more frequent than in Mon dialects of Thailand proper. 
 
                                                      
9 The informant’s competence in Thai increased rapidly, as he was working in a hotel serving 
Thai customers, which greatly facilitated the communication and collection of linguistic data. 
 
 
10 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Where the recorded texts did not provi de the linguistic material needed to 
illustrate a certain point, sentences were constructed either with the help of 
native speakers or later checked for their correctness. Most helpful in 
constructing sentences (as well as providing explanations about nuances) was 
Nai Ok Pung, a native of Ko’ Dot and perf ectly fluent (and literate) in Mon, 
Burmese, and Thai, and with a very good command of English. Sentences 
provided by Nai Ok Pung are marked (NOP ). For other constructed examples 
no source is indicated. This is also the case with sentences picked up during 
informal conversations (both as an active participant and merely as a listener) 
while staying at Wangka during the past three years and during visits to Mon 
areas in Burma. 
 
 A very important and useful tool, esp ecially in the initial phase of getting 
acquainted with Mon, but also in the fu rther course of studying the language, 
is Shorto’s Dictionary of Modern Spoken Mon (1962), which not only gives 
example sentences for many entries, but  also provides cross-reference with 
LM forms. The dictionary of Halliday  (1955) is useful for LM, while Tun 
Way (2000) combines Shorto (1962) and Halliday (1955), with a number of 
additions by the compiler. Sakomoto (1994) is a valuable source for Mon as 
spoken (and written) in Thailand providing a wealth of example sentences, 
but the fact that it gives only Japanese  translations makes this dictionary 
rather difficult to use for Western linguists. 
 
 Bauer’s (unpublished) 1982 thesis on Morphology and Syntax of spoken 
Mon as well as his 1989 paper on the ve rb in spoken Mon are based mostly 
on data collected in Thai-Mon comm unities, which obviously show some 
clear differences with Mon language usag e in Burma described in this study. 
Reference to Bauer and other previous  publications on Mo n has been made 
where appropriate. It must be kept in mind, though, that Mo n, in spite of its 
being one of the earliest languages of civilisation in Southeast Asia, has 
received little attention from linguists,  and most of the published material is 
out of print and not readily available to the researcher. 
 
 The first step in preparing the present study included collecting and 
screening the available material publis hed on Mon as well as recording SM 
and transcribing the audio recordings. Books written in Mon about different 
subjects were collected, although incomprehensible and unreadable to the 
author at that time. With a rather ex tensive array of ‘raw language material’ 
in both LM and SM, as well as a handful of earlier studies, a choice had to be 
made about which texts to use to get a representative picture of the Mon 
language.  
 
 
 
11 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Most of the material published by Western linguists on Mon treats 
diachronic comparative phonology, which makes it of limited use for a 
synchronic description of the language like the present study. Although this is 
basically a synchronic treatment of m odern Mon, a diachronic element could 
not be excluded, as only the historical development can explain many aspects 
of modern Mon usage, as will be seen throughout the text.  
 
 The linguistic framework applied here in describing Mon does not adhere to 
a specific linguistic theory. The terminol ogy used is what is considered to be 
general usage rather than theory-speci fic terms, although some labels (and 
ideas) are borrowed from Van Valin’s Role and Reference Grammar (1997), 
which, unlike other models such as GB , takes into account not only purely 
formal criteria of a language, but puts emphasis on semantic and pragmatic 
features. Like in most Southeast As ian languages, semantics and pragmatics 
are important factors in Mon syntax, as will be seen in the text.  
 The approach followed in this study is functional-descriptive, emphasising 
the description of the act ual meaning and use of verbs and verbs-turned-
auxiliaries/operators. As many auxiliaries/operators described in this study do 
not fit into any conventi onal grammatical category, I use the lexical meaning 
of the item in small caps as gloss to i ndicate a grammaticalized element, e.g. 
GO indicates that the morpheme has the le xical meaning ‘go’ but is used in a 
grammaticalized function, which in this case may be as a directional or as an 
aspect operator. There are instances where it is not clear whether a morpheme 
is to be taken as full lexeme (e.g. in a serial verb construction) or as a 
grammatical element. The choice in th ese cases is somewhat arbitrary and 
open to discussion.  Where a form is exclusively used as an auxiliary/operator 
in modern Mon, a grammatical gloss is used for this stag e of the language, 
while in earlier stages a full lexical meaning may be still is use and is 
accordingly glossed. An example is OM ‹mic› ‘desire, want’, SM mək
ʔ/mòc 
‘DES’. While the OM form is used as a fu ll verb, the corresponding lexeme in 
SM is used only in connection with a verb, indicating its grammaticalized 
status as modal auxiliary (
DESIDERATIVE). 
 
 Although this study is concerned prim arily with modern Mon, examples of 
older stages of the language have been included as much of Mon morphology 
and orthography can be explained only with reference to OM or MM. Data 
from other languages is included wher ever conducive to the analysis or 
explanation of a specific phenomenon in Mon. The most important languages 
in this respect are Thai and Burmes e, the sole national languages of both 
countries where Mon is presently spoke n (and has been for at least 1500 
years). The influence of both Thai a nd Burmese on Mon, both in structurally 
and in vocabulary, is considerable after 800 to 1000 years of not always 
peaceful co-existence, although in the initial phase the influence was the 
 
 
12 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
other way round, with Mon being the culturally (and sometimes politically) 
superior language. The most important sources for Burmese, apart from own 
field notes, are Okell (1969) and Okell and Allott (2001). The former has the 
advantage of giving all Burmese words and examples in Roman 
transliteration, while the latter is more complete, covering both the spoken 
and the written language, including a large number of examples from both 
varieties. For Thai data I have mostly drawn on own field notes where not 
otherwise indicated. 
 
1.3 Sentence structure 
 
 Mon can be described as a basically SVO language, i.e. the subject precedes 
the verb which in turn is followed by the (direct) object. This word order 
holds for standard sentences in most cases, but in natural speech a very 
different picture emerges. Both subject and object can be absent in a sentence, 
or the object can be t opicalised or focussed, which usually involves a 
movement to sentence initial position, w ith or without overt marking as topic 
or focus. Then there are sentences which obviously exhibit two subjects, 
others containing no verb. A more ad equate description of Mon sentence 
structure is probably in te rms of pragmatic rather than syntactical categories, 
i.e. as topic-comment structure. The t opic is old, given information which is 
known or believed to be known to the hearer, while the comment adds new 
information about the topic. Most commonly, but by no means exclusively, 
the subject of a sentence is also its topi c and the verb is the central part of the 
comment or focus. 
 In sentence (1.4a) in a neutral context (if this ex ists at all in a natural 
language) ʔuə is understood as being the topic and the rest of the sentence the 
comment. 
 
(1.4a)   ʔuə iəʔ  p ŋ. 
S M     1 s   e a t    r i c e  
      ‘ I  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
 The pronoun in sentence initial positi on can be overtly marked as topic by 
one of a set of topic markers, most commonly kh, l and teh.10
 
(1.4b)  ʔuə k h iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   TOP eat  rice. 
      ‘ I  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
                                                      
10 kh is the most widely used, neutral topic marker. l is a Burmese loan (B lè) and has a 
connotation of additive (‘me too’). The last one, teh, is a SM innovation of uncertain origin 
which has a conditional/temporal connotation. 
 
 
13 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.4c)   ʔuə l   iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   ADD eat  rice 
      ‘ I  t o o  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
(1.4d)  ʔuə teh  iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   COND eat  rice 
      ‘As for me, I eat rice.’ 
 
 In another context the same pronoun can function as comment rather than 
topic of the sentence. In this case the focus marker raʔ is usually added. 
 
(1.4e)   ʔuə ra ʔ iəʔ pŋ. 
S M     1 s   FOC eat  rice 
      ‘It’s me who eats rice.’ 
 
 If another part of the se ntence acts as topic or focu s, it is marked as such, 
with or without re-ordering of the words. Typically overtly marked topics are 
fronted, while overtly marked focal elements remain in sitū or are fronted for 
emphasis, if they are nominal. There is no marker for the comment as such, 
only for the main predicative part of the comment, i.e. the focus. 
 
(1.4f)   pŋ kh ʔuə iəʔ. 
S M     r i c e  TOP 1s  eat 
      ‘ R i c e  I  d o  e a t . ’  
 
(1.4g)  ʔuə iəʔ pŋ raʔ. 
S M     1 s   e a t   r i c e  FOC 
      ‘ I  e a t  r i c e . ’  
 
(1.4h)  pŋ raʔ ʔuə iəʔ. 
S M     r i c e  FOC 1s  eat 
      ‘It’s rice I eat.’ 
 
 While nominal elements can freely be  moved into sentence initial position, 
this is not generally possible for verbs. If a verb is marked as highly focal, it 
remains in sitū. 
 
(1.4i)   ʔuə iəʔ raʔ p ŋ. 
S M     1 s   e a t   FOC rice 
      ‘I eat the rice (I don’t throw it away).’ 
 
 
 
14 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.4j)   * iəʔ raʔ p ŋ ʔuə.  * iəʔ raʔ ʔuə p ŋ. 
       e a t   FOC rice 1s    eat  FOC 1s  rice 
 
 Usually only one element can be fronted in a sentence, either the topic or 
the focus. Marked fronting of both elements leads to ungrammatical or at 
least doubtful sentences, as in (1.4k). 
 
(1.4k) * ? ʔuə k h p ŋ raʔ iəʔ. 
S M      1 s   TOP rice FOC eat 
       ?‘As for me, it’s rice I eat.’ 
 
 A sentence with fronted topic and verbal focus (extended, non-emphatic 
focus in sitū) is unproblematic: 
 
(1.4l)   pŋ kh ʔuə iəʔ raʔ. 
S M     r i c e  TOP 1s  eat  FOC 
      ‘As for rice, I do eat it.’ 
 
 With the restrictions mentioned above, the word order in terms of topic and 
comment/focus in Mon is rather free, depending largely on emphasis and 
stress. Both verbs and nominals (syntact ical subject and objects), as well as 
peripheral elements such as adverbials and prepositional objects can act as 
topic and focus. 
 
1.4 Sentence types 
 
This section gives a short overview of di fferent sentence and clause types in 
Mon other than plain statements. SFPs  marking illocutionary force and 
sentence/clause types share some similarities with the verbal operators, which 
will be discussed in chapter 6, and some are derived from verbs (viz. the 
imperative markers 
ì ‘a little’ and cm ‘touch, feel’). The sentence types to 
be discussed in this section are interrogative (1 .4.1), imperative (1.4.2), and 
conditional (1.4.3). 
 
1.4.1 Interrogative sentences 
 
Absolute (yes-no) questi ons in Mon are formed by adding an interrogative 
SFP to a statement, as in other South east Asian languages. In modern Mon, 
the interrogative SFP is ‹h ā› ha. This particle is attested in OM as ‹t ā› and 
MM as ‹nā› in the following sentences. 
 
 
 
15 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.5)  ’abhipr āy tarla  gah  ci   cmat tā? 
OM   speech   lord  say EMPH true  Q 
     ‘Is what you sa y true, Lord?’ (SSKa40f) 
 
(1.6)  ma lapok    ha  tuin    gah  ci   nwom tun   nā? 
MM   REL desecrate NEG move.up SAY EMPH exist  further Q 
     ‘Does it then happen that the desecration is ineffective?’ (KLYg12) 
 
 As Shorto correctly observes (D MI:147), the spelli ng of the question 
particle suggests that it was originally only [a ], i.e. a pure vowel sound 
without initial glottal st op, enclitically added to the last word of the 
sentence.11 This sound can not be represente d in Indian derived Southeast 
Asian scripts, so the closest possible representation was chosen, i.e. repetition 
of the final consonant of the preceding word with a long ‹- ā› added. In the 
modern language the spelli ng is standardized as ‹h ā›,12  avoiding the 
inconvenience of having a large number of different spellings for the same 
morpheme. In SM, the pr onunciation is usually [ha ], but in some cases the 
initial [h] is voiced or dropped completely. 
 Mon being a non-tonal language, there is the possibility to mark a sentence 
as a question by raising the pitch of the last word, without other overt 
marking. This contrasts with Burmese and Thai usage, both of which are 
tonal languages and do not readily allow changes of lexical tones for 
pragmatic purposes (although in some contexts tone changes are observed in 
both languages). Some speakers prefer a lowering of the pitch towards the 
end of the sentence instead of a rise, making questions virtually 
undistinguishable from statements. 
 There are thus two general ways to form absolute questions in Mon, one by 
the SFP ha (with the vatiants [ha ], [ ɦa], and [a ]) and by a rise of pitch 
towards the end of the sentence.
13 The latter is found exclusively in SM, 
while the former is common in both LM and SM. There is no difference 
between positive and negative questions in LM and SM. 
 
(1.7a)  pèh ʔa km ha? 
SM   2   go too  Q 
     ‘Are you going along?’ 
 
                                                      
11 The same morpheme [a ] is also used to form questions by Chinese speakers of Thai, 
resulting in the same dilemma of impossibility of representation in Thai script. The normal 
choice in representing this morpheme in Thai script is as ‹’ā›. 
12 This standardization of the orthography may be seen as a generalization of its appearance 
in the frequent expressions khh ha  ‘is it good?’ and t h ha ‘is it correct?’ or negative 
questions ending in ... pùh ha. 
13 At least some Mon dialects in Thailand form absolute questions by repeating the main 
predicating element once with high pitch once with normal pitch, as in pèh t́m tm ‘do you 
know?’ (data from Ko’ Kret, Nonthaburi Province). 
 
 
16 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.8a)  m əkʔ tm   h m k    m à n   ha? 
SM   DES   know  speak GIVE WIN  Q 
     ‘I want to know (about  it); can you tell me?’ (KKP) 
 
(1.9a)  ʔuə ʔa km hù ʔ  k ʔ  pùh  ( ha)? 
SM   1s  go too  NEG  GET  NEG  Q 
     ‘Can’t I go along?’ 
 
Sentence (1.9a) is usually pronounced w ith rising intonation on the negative 
particle pùh when the question marker ha is dropped. 
 
 It has to be noted that there are no simple morphemes in Mon corresponding 
to ‘yes’ and ‘no’ in English. This feature of Mon is shared with other 
languages of the region. The shortest affirmative answer to an absolute 
question in Mon consists of the main pr edicating element of the question this 
is a verb or an OP 1 or OP4 verbal operator (cf. ch. 6), optionally followed by 
the focus marker raʔ. The equivalent of ‘no’ is the same element with the 
preceding negation marker hù ʔ. The answers to the above questions are thus 
(affirmative and negative): 
 
(1.7b) ʔa (raʔ) .            h ù ʔ  ʔa  (pùh). 
SM   go ( FOC)            NEG  go  ( NEG) 
 
(1.8b) (h m) màn  (ra ʔ).    (h m) hù ʔ màn  (pùh) 
SM   (speak) WIN  ( FOC)    (speak) NEG WIN  ( NEG) 
 
(1.9b) ( ʔa) kʔ (raʔ) .        ( ʔa) hùʔ k ʔ  (pùh) 
SM   (go) GET (FOC)        ( g o )  NEG GET  ( NEG)    
 
 Absolute questions may be used pragmatically to express negative 
statements. This is usage is not very frequent, though.  
 
(1.10) èh   k    ak mŋ  ha? ʔuə chan- u lèy. 
SM   person GIVE ride STAY Q   1 s   p i t y     EMPH 
     ‘They didn’t let them get on [the  carts]; I really pitied them.’ (KD) 
 
 Relative (wh-) questions involve a fo cal question word (what, where, who, 
etc.),14 which in Mon either occurs in sit ū, or is moved to the beginning of 
the sentence like in Burmese. In some cases the question word occurs both in 
sentence initial position and in sitū. This happens even if the question word is 
                                                      
14 Mon is exceptional in that there is no common component morpheme in the formation of 
question words (as e.g. Latin QV-, English wh-, Burmese be-, Thai - ay). Cf. Mon mùʔ 
‘what’, ʔəl ‘where’, èh-kh ‘who’, chəlʔ ‘when’, etc. 
 
 
17 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the only element of the sentence, as in ‘what?’, which in SM is usually mùʔ 
mùʔ rao? (‘what what QREL’).15  In ‘correct’ Mon relative questions always 
end in the relative question particle rao. This particle is  homonymous with 
the (negative) topic marker rao (cf. section 2.3.1), which corresponds to 
Burmese usage, where the topic marker lè is also used as relative 
interrogative SFP. The same particle is also used in Mon to ask an already 
uttered question about another individua l or object, similar to the English 
‘and what about ...?’. The precedent does not necessarily have to be a 
question itself, but may be a statement, as in the following example. 
 
(1.11)ʔuə ʔa iəʔ pŋ. pèh rao? 
SM  1s  go eat  rice  2   QREL
    ‘I am going to eat. What about you?’ 
 
 In colloquial SM, the relative question marker is often dropped, especially if 
the sentence contains enough phonetic ma terial (usually three or more 
syllables).  
 
(1.12a) mùʔ  h m  rao ? 
SM   what speak  QREL
 
(1.12b) mùʔ  h hm  ( rao)? 
SM   what 3   speak  ( QREL) 
     ‘What did he say?’ 
 
This tendency is not absolute and varies among speakers and situations. 
Generally the formally ‘correct’ longer form sounds more polite. 
 
1.4.2 Imperative sentences 
 
The simplest way to form an imperativ e in Mon is by a verb alone, without 
any SFP and no overt subject: ʔa ‘go!’, iəʔ ‘eat!’. As in other languages 
(including English) this is  considered abrupt and r ude by most speakers in 
most situations, though, and other ways are preferred in most contexts. The 
most common form of the imperative is by adding the or iginally verbal 
politeness particle ìʔ ‘a little (bit)’ to the sentence.  
 
(1.13) h m   ìʔ   p a    k w ʔ! 
SM   speak  LITTLE PROH shy 
     ‘Please speak, don’t be shy!’ 
 
                                                      
15 The repetition of the interrogative is mostly restricted mùʔ, other interrogatives being rarely 
repeated in the same sentence. 
 
 
18 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Other weakening adverbial expressions  have the same function and can be 
used instead of ìʔ, but only ìʔ can occur in prohibitive  contexts (s. section 
2.3.2).  
 
(1.14) kon  m ŋ  m ŋ  h ənày  n ʔ mùə cut     nah! 
SM   child stay  STAY place  this one  moment EMPH 
     ‘You stay here for a moment, will you, children.’ (KKP) 
 
Intensifying aspectual operators are used to add urgency to a command. 
 
(1.15)  pèh pli ə    th ʔ  ʔa  kon  pèh! 
SM    2   abandon THROW GO  child 2 
      ‘Go and get rid of your children!’ (KKP) 
 
 As described in section 5.1.4, the focus marker raʔ can be used to form 
strong, definitive commands that do not  allow any contradiction. In the 
following sentence it is reinforced by the use of the aspectual operator ‹tho’›. 
 
(1.16)  hā y i-óo t        c e h        t h o ’     n ū  glu ï  ra! 
LM    hey PREFfem-small move.down  THROW  ABL boat  FOC 
      ‘Hey girl, get down from that boat right now!’ (MKP:28) 
 
 A less strong form of the imperative is achieved by adding the verb turned 
SFP particle c m ‘feel (by touching), try out’. This form seems to be about 
half-way between raʔ and ìʔ. Its actual use in SM is rather restricted and 
much less frequent than the plain verb or verb + ìʔ. 
 
(1.17)  kwah phə   t ʔ  ʔa rŋ  n əi  cm   t k  mù ʔ-ciʔ! 
SM    pupil temple PL  go look  clock IMPER beat  how.much 
      ‘Go have a look at the clock, boys, and see what time it is!’ (KN)   
 
As seen in the examples above, the subject may optionally be expressed in an 
imperative sentence. 
 SM uses direct imperative sentences to express requests, a feature Mon 
shares with Burmese but not with Thai  (and English). The request ‘may I 
have some rice, please?’ in SM is 
 
(1.18a)  k    ʔuə p ŋ ìʔ. 
SM    give  1s  rice LITTLE  
 
which corresponds to Burmese 
 
 
 
19 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(1.18b)  c ăno kou ht ămìn pèi  pa. 
B      1 s m   OBJ rice   give  POL 
 
This contrasts with the Thai equivalent : 
 
(1.18c)  kh 4  khaaw 2  n y1     ay2 may 4? 
Th     ask.for rice    little.bit GET  Q 
 
 A subcategory of the imperative is the adhortative (or ‘hortative’), which 
can be described as an imperative of the first person plural, corresponding to 
English ‘let’s V’. The adhortative in Mon is expressed by the SFP coʔ 
(according to Shorto with heavy register, còʔ, s. Shorto 1962:100). This 
particle is a lo an from Burmese sóu ‹cúi›, which the Myanmar-English 
Dictionary of the Myanmar Language Commission (1993:114) describes as a 
“cry uttered by a player when a spinni ng top is caught with the hand after 
flipping it into the air with the string (the  last player to ut ter has to surrender 
his top which is placed in a circle for ot her players to hit it with their tops, 
until it is knocked out of the circle)” and a “postpositional marker following a 
verb indicating a proposal to do sth. t ogether (equivalent in usage to the 
imperative ‘let’s’)”. This explanation suggests that the Burmese adhortative 
marker originally was an interjectio n which was grammaticalized as a SFP. 
In colloquial SM, coʔ is often used alone, dropping the verb which must be 
retrieved from the context. This is especially frequent as an answer to a 
question expressing an invitation or proposal, as in (1.19). 
 
(1.19)  ʔa  iəʔ pŋ ha?  (ʔ a)  coʔ! 
S M     g o   e a t   r i c e  Q    (go)  ADH 
      ‘Shall we go for lunch?’ ‘Yes, let’s go.’ 
 
 Usually the main verb is overtly expressed, but the subject (which is always 
poy ‘we’ in adhortative contexts) is dropped. 
 
(1.20)  ʔa rp  ka ʔ k m coʔ! 
SM    go catch fish too ADH 
      ‘Let’s go fishing!’ (WK) 
 
1.4.3 Conditional clauses 
 
OM and MM make no clear distinction between conditional and temporal 
subordinate clauses. The main markers used are ‹yal› ‘if, when’, ‹yām› (MM) 
‘if, when’, originally ‘time’ and the Pali loan ‹k āl, k āla› ‘when, if’, in SM 
shortened to la
ʔ, originally ‘time’. All of these markers occur in clause initial 
 
 
20 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
position, and the conditional/temporal clau se usually occurs before the main 
clause. 
 
(1.21)  yal  kcit sak     ñah    m a  y ām. 
OM    COND die NEG:exist person REL weep 
      ‘If/when they die, there is no one to weep.’ (Ku 94) 
 
 In MM, the combination of ‹yaw› with  the focus marker ‹ra› or the adverb 
‹rau›16 ‘as’ becomes popular. In combination with ‹yaw›, ‹ra› still retains its 
original semantics as ‘be’17 (at least partly) and the phrase can be translated 
as ‘if it is (the case that) ...’. This is in apparent contrast with Haiman’s 
analysis of conditional clauses as topics (Haiman 1978). 
 
 The most common ways to express c onditional clauses in LM are by means 
of the above mentioned clause-initial  particle ‹yaw›, usually in the 
combination ‹yaw ra›, sometimes ‹yaw khā ra› (lit. ‘COND time FOC’), and the 
clause-final marker ‹mgah›, lit. an attributive (or relative) form of the verb 
‹gah› ‘say’. The two forms can co-occu r in the same sentence, without 
obvious intensifying value. Less frequent is clause initial ‹yāÿ› ‘time’. 
 
(1.22)  yaw  ra   ’ay r āÿ    t i t    mgah... 
LM    COND FOC 1s  disrobe  EXIT ATTR:SAY 
      ‘If I disrobe ...’ (DC:20) 
 
 The use of a verb meaning ‘say’ in clause-final position parallels Burmese 
usage of clause-final hsou ‘say’ to mark a conditional clause. As in Mon, the 
Burmese marker may combine with th e original conditional morpheme -yin 
as hsou-yin lit. ‘if one says’ (s. Okell a nd Allott 2001:61, 65ff). The time of 
emergence of this marker in LM and its clause-final position make Burmese 
influence very likely. 
 
 SM uses y or y  ra ʔ in clause-initial or, more  frequently, the innovative 
marker teh in clause-final position in conditional clauses. The origin and 
original meaning of the latter is obscu re. It does not appear in Shorto 1962, 
but Tun Way 2000 has “‹teh› [tih] af fix. denoting condition (if).” The 
phonetic shape of the marker excludes Burmese or Thai origin (Burmese and 
Thai do not have final [-h]) and make s it look like ‘real Mon’. According to 
some native scholars it is derived from clause final mə-th, attributive of th 
‘hit, correct, etc.’ (s . section 6.3.14), which is phonologically possible (if 
irregular), but semantically not very lik ely (‘which is correct, which must be’ 
                                                      
16  Usually contracted to ‹yrau›, which may also be analysed as a contraction of ‹ya ï› 
‘emphatic particle’ and ‹rau›. 
17 S. chapter 5. 
 
 
21 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
> COND). This same morpheme is also used as clause linkage marker, 18  
especially in combination with toə ‘finish’ (cf. section 6.3.16), indicating a 
temporal rather than purely conditional value of teh. This can also be seen in 
the following sentences, where both a conditional and temporal component 
are present. 
 
(1.23)  ch   kwi t t  teh  t əŋò     èh   ʔat     ak lèy. 
SM    meet cart exit COND worship person ask.for ride EMPH 
      ‘When/if they saw a car t leaving they prayed and begged  
      to get a ride.’ (KD) 
 
(1.24)  m əkʔ cao   teh   c a o    k e t .  
SM    DES   return  COND  return  TAKE 
      ‘If one wanted to go back, he went of his own accord.’ (KD) 
 
 The use of sentence initial y is unambiguously conditional, as in the 
following sentence. 
 
(1.25)  y   r ə   kwan  hùʔ   h əck h tm  màn  ha? 
SM    COND fellow village NEG  accuse 3   know WIN  Q 
      ‘If the villagers hadn’t turned  him in, could they (the Japanese  
      soldiers) have known  about him?’ (KD) 
 
 Less frequently, clause-initial yàm (for some speakers ym) is used, as in 
MM and LM. 
 
(1.26)  yàm ʔəpat kh p ŋ  kyì ʔ   h ù ʔ  c e h       ʔa ə t -ky tʔ, 
SM    COND time  TOP bomb poison NEG  move.down GO LOC Tokyo that 
      s i əŋ,  h kʔ,  kyə pan  k ʔ thʔ    ʔ t-tah. 
      r i g h t ?   3    g e t   J a p a n    g e t  THROW  all- INTENS 
      ‘If the poisonous bomb (nuclear bomb) had not come down on  
      Tokyo [sic!] at that time, the Japanese would just have got  
      everything.’ (KD) 
 
 Alternatively, conditional clauses may remain unmarked. 
 
(1.27)  ʔ  hùʔ   ket,  ʔ   khy t. 
S M     2 f a m  NEG  take  2fam  die 
      ‘If you don’t take it, you’ll die.’ (KKP) 
 
                                                      
18 Another function of teh is as topic marker, as in the expression ʔuə teh ‘as for me, when [it 
comes to] me’. 
 
 
22 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 There is no way in Mon, neither LM nor  SM, to make a distinction between 
realis and irrealis conditional clauses apart from the context. Thus the Mon 
clause pèh ʔa teh can be translated into English either as ‘if you go’ or as ‘if 
you went’. Sometimes irrealis conditio nal clauses are introduced by the 
adverbial (noun) ʔuʔpəma ‘example, simile, parable’ from Pali upamā ‘id.’. 
In rapid speech this is usually shortened to ʔuma and combined with teh as 
ʔuma teh. 
 
1.5 Phonology of Mon 
1.5.1 Historical overview 
 
As mentioned above many phenomena in modern Mon can only be 
understood in the light of historical developments of the language. This 
justifies a description of the phonol ogical system of Mon, both diachronic 
and synchronic before moving on to the main topic of this study. 
 The sound system of the Mon language has changed in many ways in the 
almost 1500 years of its recorded history. These changes are only partly 
represented in the script, as the spelling is, and for a long time has been, 
rather etymological than phonological. Mon has proved to be very resistant to 
influences from neighbouring language s, unlike its cousin Vietnamese, 
whose phonological system resembles that of Chinese or Tai rather than its 
Austroasiatic roots. The Mon dialects in Thailand show recent influence from 
Thai (cf. Bauer 1986), while Burmese Mon seems to be more resistant to 
Burmanisms in pronunciation. The phonological system of Old Mon has been 
reconstructed by Shorto (1971), Difflo th (1984), and Ferlus (1986). Shorto 
describes basically the classical OM  language as used in Pagán under 
Burmese rule (11
th to 12th c.), while Diffloth recons tructs the language of the 
Dvāravatī kingdom in central Thailand and perhaps southern Burma during 
the first millennium A.D., based on the comparison of Mon dialects with their 
closest relative, Nyah Kur. According to Diffloth (1984:271ff), the Dv āravatī 
Old Mon language (DOM) had the following set of simple initial consonants: 
 
k c t p 
g j d p 
    ∫ 
ŋ  n m 
y r l w 
s h  
Table 1.2 OM initials 
 
 
23 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 No aspirated stops are included in Diffl oth’s list, as they are analysed as 
clusters consisting of a stop + h, based on morphological evidence. Every 
syllable must begin with at least one consonant. Many types of clusters are 
permitted, including stop + stop, nasa l + stop, stop + semivowel, stop + 
liquid, stop + nasal, consonant + , fricative + liquid, etc., and triple initials 
such as tr ŋ-, jrl-, etc. occur. In some cases an epenthetic vowel [ ə] was 
probably inserted to facilitate pronunciation. 
 All words in DOM must end in one final consonant. There are no vocalic 
rhymes19 in DOM, with one exception. The word for ‘duck’ is reconstructed 
as * (a)daa, SM ətə. This is, according to Diffloth, probably an early 
borrowing from an eastern Mon-Khmer language (Diffloth 1984:68). 20 Old 
Mon of the 11th century shows final consonants in all native words, but has a 
large number of Pali and Sanskrit loans ending in long vowels. The following 
consonants could occur as finals in DOM: 
 
k c t p 
ŋ  n m 
y r l w 
s h  
 
Table 1.3 OM finals 
 
 The vowel system of DOM is not uni form. Some vowels occur only with 
certain final consonants, not with others. In Diffloth’s words: 
 
It is difficult to speak of a single vowel system for Dvaravati-Old-Mon; there are 
incommensurable systems for each set of finals, and this diversity increased as 
DOM gradually changed into Modern Mon. For Modern Spoken Mon, Shorto 
spoke of co-existing vowel systems (Shorto, 1966). (1984:300) 
 
In DMI, Shorto states that 
 
The vowels of Old Mon present the most difficult part of the phonological 
analysis. It is complicated by the fact th at not only do different systems have to 
be postulated before different classes of final consonants, but a given vowel may 
be written differently according to the consonant which follows it. (DMI:xvi f) 
 
 The following vowels seem to have existed in Old Mon: 
 
                                                      
19  The rhyme, i.e. vowel plus final consonant (if any), is a basic part of a syllable in 
indigenous descriptions of many Southeast Asian languages. This custom is due to the 
phonological structure and development, in which the quality of the vowel is often determined 
by the final consonant. 
20  Protokatuic, Proto-Western-Bahnaric *(ʔə)da  (L. Thongkham 2001:204,464). 
 
 
24 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
i/ii / u/uu 
e/ee ə/əə o/oo 
/ a/aa / 
iə u ə 
Table 1.4 OM vowels 
  
 Some of the vowels listed may not actually have had phonemic status but 
must be considered allophones. 
 
 In Middle Mon, the system of initials  appears simplified, with OM triple 
initials changed into CC- sequences (Diffloth 1984:324):  
 
DOM *kntuu  MM gitu, gatu ‘moon’ 
DOM *kntaal  MM gatā ‘sole, palm’  
 
 Some of the finals were lost, e.g. -l and -r, resulting in  a large number of 
native Mon words now ending in a long vowel: 
 
OM kirkūl, kirkul, karkul MM grak ū  ‘family, clan’ 
OM kyāl  MM ky ā  ‘wind, air’ 
 
 Palatal finals merged with the dentals after [-front] vowels, as in 
 
OM ñāc  MM ñāt  ‘see, perceive’ 
OM smāñ  MM sm ān  ‘ask’  
OM sac  MM sat  ‘fruit, bear fruit’ 
OM dūñ, duñ  MM dun  ‘bamboo’ 
 
and with the velars after [+front] vowels, as in 
 
OM piñ  MM peï  ‘full’ 
OM phic  MM phek  ‘fear, be afraid’. 
 
 Final -s merged with -h (-h ̣ after ā): 
 
OM cis   MM cuih  ‘descend, go down’ 
OM das   MM dah  ‘be’ 
OM manus, manis  MM m(a)nih, manuih  ‘human, man’ 
OM goḥ, goh, goḥh  MM gah, gåh  ‘that’ 
OM gaḥ   M M  g a h ̣  ‘say’ 
OM kās   MM kaḥ  ‘shave’ 
 
 
 
25 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 OM manus is an early loan from Pali maussa, which has undergone the 
regular changes from OM to MM. 21 The change from - s to - h was gradual. 
The Kyaik Maraw inscription of Queen Mi Cao Pu (1455) still shows the 
spelling ‹das› for ‘be’,22 but ‹cwah› for ‘ten’ (OM ‹cwas›). (U Hkyit Thein 
1965:114) 
 
1.5.2 From Middle Mon to Modern Mon 
 
The following list illustrates the cha nges from MM to LM and SM of the 
above items. 
 
LM gakū SM h kao ‘family, kind’ LM phek SM ph c ‘fear, afraid’ 
LM kyā SM kya ‘wind, air’  LM ceh SM ceh ‘move down’ 
LM ñāt SM àt ‘see, perceive’ LM dah SM t h ‘be’ 
LM smān SM hman ‘ask’  LM mnih SM m nìh ‘man, human’ 
LM sat SM s t ‘fruit, bear fruit’ LM gah SM k h ‘that, TOPIC’ 
LM dun SM tùn ‘bamboo’  LM gah ̣ SM k h ‘say’ 
LM peï SM p  ‘full’  LM kah ̣ SM kah ‘shave’ 
 
 An interersting development is the emergence of a new set of palatal finals 
in SM,23 as in p ‘full’ and phc ‘fear’. These palatals do not correspond to 
the OM palatals though. 24 SM palatals rather originate in MM velar finals 
after ā, e, i, in some dialects also after u, irrespective of the origin of these. 
The following example further illustra tes the differences between MM, LM, 
and SM: 
 
(1.28) a. MM (DMI:148), b. LM, c. SM 
a.grakwom bruim  grakwom dewatau ma  tau  tau  p óay cah-lïim cakkaw ā  gah 
b.gakoÿ  brui ÿ  gakoÿ   dewatau ma  tau  tau  p óay cah-lïiÿ cakkaw ā  gah 
c.həkom  pr m  h kom  tèw tao  m   m  m  c h-ìm c kkwa  k h 
 company Brahma company god    REL stay STAY  LOC 10,000 universe  TOP 
‘the company of Brahmas and the company of gods who dwell in the 10,000  
universes’ 
 
The verb tau ‘stay, dwell, stand’, also used  as durative marker in MM, has 
been replaced in the spoken language by m ‘be (somewhere)’, both in its 
                                                      
21  T ha t  manus is indeed a very early loan in Monic is shown by its presence and regular 
development in Nyah Kur. Diffloth reconstructs a DOM form *mnus (Diffloth 1984:117). 
22  The archaic spelling ‹das› ‘be’ and ‹mnis› ‘man’ is still sporadically used in 20th century 
publications. 
23 Shorto (1962) does not include palatal finals in his description of SM but notes the 
corresponding finals as velar, according to  the pronunciation prevalent in the northern 
dialects. 
24 OM óāk ‘water’ becomes SM ac, while OM ñāc ‘see’ becomes àt. 
 
 
26 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
function as full verb and as asp ect marker, and by its derivate hə tao (‹gatau, 
thatau, datau›) in the m eaning ‘stand up’. In LM tau and dmå ï are used 
interchangeably, apparently without semantic difference in most contexts.  
 
 It is obvious that LM is much closer  to MM than to SM and the transition 
from MM to LM is not clear-cut. 
 
 Although MM looks very similar to LM , some of the major changes in Mon 
phonology came about at some point towards the end of the MM period. As 
the orthography has remained more or less unchanged since MM times, it is 
not easy to reconstruct the events that  occurred and to determine the exact 
time they took place. What is certain is  that at some point before the 16
th 
century, in some areas as early as the 10 th century or even earlier, a 
phenomenon started spreading, probably from the north, over Southeast Asia, 
which has been called ‘devoicing wave ’ or ‘great tone split’ (s. Brown 
1985:18). This devoicing wave affected vi rtually all words in virtually all 
languages in the area, irrespective of their genetic affilia tion, and its effects 
were similar throughout the area. Orig inally voiced ini tial stops were 
devoiced, merging in some cases with pl ain voiceless stops,  in others with 
aspirated stops. The loss of the voiced -voiceless contrast was compensated 
for by a new distinction, which doubled  (or even tripled) the number of 
phonemic tones in tone languages, and gave  rise to register distinctions in 
non-tonal languages like Mon-Khmer. Th e registers in turn affected the 
quality of the vowel sound of the syllable in many languages, including Mon. 
In some languages, such as Khmer, th e registers as distinctive feature was 
later lost, leaving vowel differences as the only trace of the old distinction. 25 
The devoicing of the initials in Mon probably came about quite late, maybe 
as late as the 16th century. 
 One morphologically important developm ent is the loss of most distinctions 
in weak presyllables. All voiced and aspirated stops , together with s were 
reduced to h in this position, while t and k  merged in k. This development 
started in MM and is still going on in  the modern dialect s. All recorded 
dialects allow only a very limited set of regular initials in presyllables, viz. /-
, h-, k-, p-, m-/, some even less. This simplification of presyllables led to a 
distortion of the morphological system of Mon, with derived forms becoming 
obscured and old infixes now looking li ke prefixes, in some cases of 
otherwise unattested roots. These cha nges are not usually represented in the 
orthography, although etymologically incorrect spellings occur often, 
representing the uncertainty of the initial. 
                                                      
25  In Khmer, as in Mon and Thai, the old voiced-voiceless distinction is still present in the 
orthography. 
 
 
27 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
Base LM Derivate LM Base SM  Derivate SM  Gloss 
bru baru prù hrù ‘be loud’ - ‘ noise’ 
sra sara / khara sa hra ‘wounded’ - ‘wound’ 
dmåï damåï m hm ‘stay’- ‘living place’ 
kmāt kamāt mat kmat ‘shut’ - ‘stopper’ 
 Table 1.5 Old infixes in LM and SM 
 
 For detailed accounts of the development of Mon phonology see Diffloth 
(1984) and Ferlus (1986). Certain de velopments from OM/MM will be 
pointed out later where relevant to the analysis of modern Mon forms. 
 
 Mon as it is spoken today is clearly a language with two registers, ‘clear’ 
and ‘breathy’ or, in native terms, ‘light’ (sa) and ‘heavy’ (sà ). The light 
register is usually, but not necessarily, spoken with a high er pitch than the 
heavy register. The main feature of the heavy register is a certain amount of 
breathiness throughout the syllable, which results from a lax glottis. The light 
register is marked by clear voice, i.e. tense glottis. In some idiolects of Mon 
especially in central Thailand, regist er distinctions are replaced by pitch 
distinctions. This can be seen as Thai  influence in semi-speakers. Burmese 
influence in some (semi-)speakers of Mon in Burma leads to uncertainty 
regarding registers, usually  without resulting in ad aptation of Burmese tone 
patterns.  
 The arising of registers can actually be taken as the beginning of modern 
Mon as opposed to MM. The register distinctions are indicated in the 
orthography by the old voiced-voiceless di stinction. The voiced set of initials 
is used for heavy register syllables, the voiceless set for light register 
syllables. The value of many vowel symbol s varies according to the register 
of the syllable. Diphthongisation tends to  occur more frequently in the light 
register. The writing system of Mon makes perfect sense historically, 
preserving a stage of the language very close to MM, but it is at the same 
time far removed from the actual spoken dialects. It is a good means, though, 
to cover the dialect differences, which are substantial, especially in the 
phonological system.  
 
 As the Mon script itself does no t give any hint to the phonological 
development of the language after MM (except for the weakening of 
presyllables), the only evidence we can  gather comes from external sources. 
The earliest record of Mon in European letters is a Pegu (Mon)-English 
wordlist compiled in 1601 and published by Blagden in the Journal of the 
Burma Research Society in 1940 (J .B.R.S.40:371-5). The list contains 55 
words and phrases in romanised Mon w ith English translations. The list is 
rather short and the representation of the Mon sounds is very broad and 
 
 
28 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
inconsistent,26 but some conclusions can be drawn from the vocabulary. The 
comparisons in Table 1.6 of MM, LM, early SM (or late MM), and SM give 
an idea of the state of the language at that time.27
 
MM LM 1601 SM Gloss 
mū gah ro mū gah ro mugaru mù kh rao ‘what is it?’ 
? bgay fegoe hk ‘cat’ (?) 
tay tay toway, -doè t ‘hand’ 
kóip, kóuip kóuip cadup p ‘head’ 
dui’ klā dui’ klā tegla t kla ‘wait a bit’ 
kitu, gatu, gitu gitu catu ktao ‘moon’ 
krajo’, gajo’ gaja’ kecho hc ‘sit’ 
kḅaï kḅaï cabang  ‘ship’ 
brāw, brau brau braw prè ‘woman’ 
’ey ’ā da ’ay ’ā ra oiara u a ra ‘I am going’ 
gluiï gluiï cling, clang klà ‘much’ 
? klik kleg kloc ‘pig’ 
óāk óāk daick ac ‘water’ 
daw taraï daw taraï dotarang t kr ‘shut the door’ 
Table 1.6 The 1601 Mon Vocabulary 
 
 Some of the words in the 1601 list (tab le 1.6) show devoicing, while others 
seem to retain their voiced initials. MM voiced ‹d› is apparently retained in 
do tarang ‘shut the door’, but devoiced in te gla ‘wait a bit’. MM ‹g› appears 
voiced in mu ga ru ‘what is it’ and fegoe ‘cat’,28  but voiceless in clang 
‘much’. We might here have a direct witness of a major phonetic shift taking 
place, with devoicing having started but not being completed yet at the 
beginning of the 17th century. There is of course the possibility of interpreting 
the un-English non-aspirated voiceless st ops as voiced, as is obviously the 
case in te gla ‘wait a bit’, where gla stands for kla. ‘Woman’ seems to retain 
the old voiced initial, together wi th the vowel /au/ unchanged. This is 
especially noteworthy, as almost thr ee hundred years later according to a 
superficial survey of the languages of India by G. Campell (1874), the 
“Talain of Pegu (Burmah)” use “pra-ou” for ‘woman’, showing the voiceless 
initial but the original value of the vowel. Other words with ‹au› in heavy 
register listed in Campell are K-na-ou ‘belly’ (‹gnau›, /nèə/) and Kla-ou  
‘cow’ (‹glau›, /klè/). A few years later Haswell gives the value of the same 
                                                      
26 The inconsistency of the spelling can be seen  from the various ways of representing the 
relative question particle /rao/ in the list, viz. mugaru ‘what call you it?’ (/mù kh rao/ ‘what 
is that?’), memura ‘what is your name?’ (/mù ymù rao/) and mucherow ‘how sell you?’ 
(/mù ci rao/ ‘how much?’). 
27 The order of the words of the original list as published by Blagden is retained. 
28 The list gives “ fegoe, a carte”, which according to Blagden is “perhaps a misprint for 
catte”. 
 
 
29 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
vowel in second register words as  “àow (the flat nasal sound of ow)” 
(Haswell 1901, reprint 2002:8). There is  no known dialect today that retains 
the old diphthong /au/ in heavy register  syllables, neither in Burma nor in 
Thailand.29   
 ‘Water’ shows palatalisation before fina l velar, as in most modern dialects, 
while ‘pig’ retains the quality of both  the vowel and final. ‘Hand’ and ‘I’ 
show vowel shift from /ay/ to / y/, which in modern dialects developed into 
/ə/ and /u ə/.30 ‘Head’, ‘sit’ and ‘ship’ retain the initial consonant cluster as 
represented in the orthography, all with  an epenthetic vowel, presumably ə. 
In modern SM the initials have been simplified. These might be instances of 
reading pronunciation (s. 1.5.3). In spite of all its shortcomings and shortness, 
the 1601 vocabulary remains an im portant document, showing an 
intermediary stage between MM and Modern Mon, which Diffloth labels 
“Early Modern Mon” (Diffloth 1984:57). 
 
1.5.3 Modern Dialects 
 
There is no recognized standard dialect of Mon. Pronunciation varies from 
village to village, to greater or sma ller degrees. Basically common to most 
dialect areas is the reading pronunciation (RP), employed especially by 
monks reciting texts and in other formal contexts, to a lesser extent also in 
modern music. Many artists sing in reading pronunciation, but speak their 
dialect after the performance. The reading pronunciation is closer to LM than 
SM, especially regarding presyllables and initial consonant clusters. Rhymes 
are usually the same as or close to SM. RP enjoys some prestige among Mon 
people, although it is definitely not natura l spoken language. It is considered 
‘clear’ pronunciation ( hm klah ‘speak clearly’), as opposed to the local 
dialects. There is in Mon today a situa tion of diglossia, which is likely to 
have existed at least since late MM times and to go on existing with the 
literacy rate increasi ng among the Mon population. The following table 
illustrates the differences between LM, RP, and SM. 
                                                      
29  The diphthong is retained as /au/ in the Nyah Kur dialects of Central Thailand. 
30  According to Shorto’s phonemization of OM, the pronunciation of ‹ey, ay› was already 
/y/ in OM. 
 
 
30 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
 
LM RP SM Gloss 
smiï smo hmo ‘king’ 
sïi sʔ31 hʔ ‘house’ 
tla tla kla ‘master, lord’ 
lpa lpa pa ‘don’t’ 
póay p  ‘in; LOCATIVE marker’ 
jaku ckao hkao ‘body, self’ 
laca li (li) ‘lake’ 
Table 1.7 Reading Pronunciation 
 
The last  item in Table 1.7 is rarely  found in SM and when it is, it can be 
considered a loan from LM.  
 Most authors on Mon agree on the gene ral division of Mo n into two major 
dialect groups, viz. Pegu (northern) and Martaban (southern). The former is 
also called ‘Mon Ro’, th e latter ‘Mon Rao’, from th e pronunciation of the 
common relative question marker rao as [ro] or [rao] respectively. The 
dialect situation of SM is far from clear, though. 32 The first (and so far only) 
detailed account of different dialect  forms is Diffloth 1984, which compares 
Mon dialects of Burma and Thailand with Nyah Kur. A comprehensive 
dialectology of Mon has still to be  worked out. With (slightly) improved 
communication facilities within Monland and the resulting increased mobility 
and contact between communities, a certa in levelling of dialects can be 
expected. This tendency can already be  observed in Wangka, where speakers 
of different dialect areas  live together. The increasing Mon language use in 
Moulmein might also lead to a new urban standard dialect in the Mon capital. 
With Mon education now offered in over 300 schools throughout Mon State 
and in parts of neighbouring Karen St ate and Tenasserim Division, attended 
currently by some 52,000 students on te n levels, a kind formal standard 
pronunciation seems to be evolving, pr obably close to the current reading 
pronunciation. 
 
 As mentioned above, the bulk of data for the present study comes from four 
distinct dialect areas, all but the first one in Burma: Baan Wangka (kwan w 
ka), Kanni Village (kwan kan nì), Ko’ Kapoun Village (kwan k  h p), 
and Ko’ Dot Village (kwan ko  ot). Although there are clear and regular 
differences between these three dialec ts, they are mutually intelligible 
without difficulty. Ko’ Kapoun and Ka nni share some phonemic features, 
such as the merger of /u / and // into [u] ([ə] for some Kanni speakers), 
                                                      
31 For most speakers, RP of this item is həʔ. 
32 The relative question particle in Ko’ Dot and Wangka, for example, is ro ~ r , although 
these dialects are classified as “Mon Rao”. 
 
 
31 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
which have been retained as different sounds in the dialects south of the small 
market town of Mudon. Other featur es are common to Ko’ Kapoun and Ko’ 
Dot, such as the merger of / / and /o / into [ ] and [ ] respectively, as 
well as the reatined distinction ky - c. This gives the following distributional 
pattern for the phonemes /u/ ~ // ~ /o/~ //: 
Gloss Wangka Kanni Ko’ Kapoun Ko’ Dot LM 
‘performance’ pu pu/p p pu poy 
‘hand’ t tu/t t t tay 
‘finish’ t to/tu t t tuy 
‘sand’ ht hto/htu ht ht/ht btī 
Table 1.8 Dialects compared 1 
 
In Kanni /ky/ and /c/ merge into [c], while Ko’ Kapoun, Wangka, and Ko’ 
Dot keep the sounds apart: 
 
Gloss Wangka Kanni Ko’ Kapoun Ko’ Dot LM 
‘Buddha’ cyaic cac cyaic cyaic kyāk 
‘be torn’ caic cac caic caic cāk 
‘live’ cyà cà cyà cyà gyuiï 
‘foot, leg’ cà cà cà cà juiï 
Table 1.9 Dialects compared 2 
 
 The presyllable /k -/ is retained in Kanni a nd Ko’ Kapoun with the initial 
velar stop, but weakened to [-] in Ko’ Dot and Wangka: 
 
 Gloss Wangka Kanni Ko’ Kapoun Ko’ Dot LM 
‘return’ li kl kli li kaleï 
‘New Year’ tah tah tah tah/t‡h ’ataḥ 
 
  
    Table 1.10 Dialects compared 3 
     
Based on these features, we get the fo llowing picture of the four dialects 
under consideration: 
 
Phoneme Wangka Kanni Ko’ Kapoun Ko’ Dot LM 
/u/ u u  ay 
// 
 
u/  
 oy, way, ay 
/o/ 
  
 
 
 
 
 
uy 
 
 o/u 
 
 
 () // ī 
/ky/ cy cy cy ky, gy 
/c/ c 
c 
 c c c, j 
/k-/ k- k- ka-, ta-, la-,  
/-/ 
- 
- - 
- 
’a-, la- 
Table 1.11 Dialects compared 4  
 
 
32 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Although no recorded dialect make s a four way distinction / / - /u / - /o / - 
//, we have to postulate four different phonemes in order to explain the 
distributional pattern in the dial ects. Throughout this study I use a 
standardized phonemic spelling for spoken sources of Mon. There may be no 
actual spoken dialect making use of th e complete inventory of sounds, but 
they have to be considered phonemic,  based on the criteria outlined above. 
The actual pronunciation in the main dialec ts used in this study is given in 
comparative tables in Appendix B.  
 
1.5.4 The phonology of SM 
 
The following syllable patterns are found in SM: 
 
CV, CVC, CCV, CCVC, cCV, cCVC, cCCV, cCCVC 
 
This gives the overall syllable structure:  
 
(c)C(C)V(C) 
 
where (c) represents the weak presyllable and V can be a simple vowel or a 
diphthong. Every full syllable must begin with at least one but  not more than 
two consonants followed by a vowel (or diphthong) and can end in not more 
than one consonant. The initial consonant of a presyllable and the final 
consonant of a full syllable is one of a restricted set (see below). Notice that 
the aspirated consonants count as single consonants in Modern Mon. Only 
the neutral vowel ə can occur in a presyllable. Examples of the different 
syllable types are given below: 
 
ʔa  CV ‘go’ 
ket CVC ‘take’ 
phya CCV ‘market’ 
plop CCVC ‘insert’ 
kla c CV ‘box’ 
htm c CVC ‘remember’ 
ʔkra c CCV ‘between’ 
ʔklk c CCVC ‘blind person’ 
  
 
 
33 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Initials 
 
The following initials are phonemic in SM: 
 
  k kh   
 c ch 
 
 h 
 t th 
 
 n hn 
 p ph  m hm 
y r l 
 
hl w 
hw  s   
 
 h   
 Table 1.12 SM Initials  
 
There are no voiced stops in SM, the MM voiced stops having been changed 
into voiceless stops with a following heavy register vowel. According to 
some scholars, the second register stops and /s/ are still partly or fully voiced 
in SM. One actually hears voiced stops and /s/ in some Mon varieties, but this 
appears to be due either to Burmese influence or to hypercorrectism and does 
not always correspond to LM usage. Dr . Nai Pan Hla, a respected authority 
on Mon, states that “they [the heavy register stops and s] are perfectly voiced 
[in SM]. If anyone does not believe this , let him have a l ook at the Sanskrit 
values of the letters.” (p.c. 2002). Shor to writes, “In chest register words, k, 
c ,  t ,  p ,  s are partly voiced in initial position and fully voiced in medial 
position.” (1962:xi) Shorto uses the voiceless series throughout in his 
transcription, though.  
 The aspirates now are an integral part of the phonemic system, as can be 
seen from derivates from words with aspirate initials, e.g. pəth
t ‘make 
strong’ from th t ‘be strong’, where th is treated as a simple initial. The 
causative of words with initial cluster are formed by inserting a vocalic infix 
between the two initials, e.g. klah  ‘be clear’ > kəlah ‘make clear’. If th was 
considered a cluster we would therefore expect a causative *kəh
t instead of 
the attested pətht. Another indication that aspirates are treated as single 
consonants is the possibility of clusters of the type ChC, as in phya ‘market’, 
khra ‘be separated’, etc. Three place initial clusters do not appear in SM. 
 The phoneme  was introduced through loans from Burmese and is still 
mostly restricted to loans from Burm ese and English. In some dialects it 
merges with the very rare phoneme / /, which occurs only in a handful of 
words and only with the equally rare rhyme /i /, which in turn is found only 
after this initial, most importantly in the common verb i ‘eat’, an irregular 
development from OM ‹ca›.  
 
 
34 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Except for ŋ all nasals can be aspirated. Original hŋ is reduced to h in all 
recorded dialects. In some people’s pronunciation, an epenthetic vowel can 
be heard between the as piration and the nasal: hman ~ h əman ‘ask’. This 
habit is especially common amo ng the younger generation speakers of 
Wangka Mon and can be attributed to Thai influence, where the original 
aspirated nasals have been lost.  
 The pronunciation of hw varies among speakers. Most commonly it is 
realized as [xw], [khw] or [f]. This variation seems to be idiolectical rather 
than dialectical.  
 
The possible initial clusters are the following: 
 
 ky kr kl kw 
khy khr  khl khw 
py pr 
 
pl  
phy phr 
 
 phl  
 Table 1.13 SM initial clusters 
 
Some of the initial clusters are prone to simplification in some dialects. In the 
southern dialects ky- is realized as ‘doubly palata lised’ [cy-], while in the 
dialects north of Moulmein it merges with the simple palatal stop c-. khy- 
retains its original value only in the most conservative dialects. 33 It usually is 
pronounced as [ch-] in all areas, merging with ch-. phy- merges in some 
people’s pronunciation with ch-, khw- with hw-. Unlike in neighbouring Thai, 
there is no reduction of initial clusters of the type kr/l- > [k-], pr/l- > [p-] in 
any dialect of Mon, including the ones in Thailand. 
 As mentioned above, only a restricted set of consonants is used in common 
presyllables. Others do occur in formal language and in reading 
pronunciation. 
- h- k- p- m- t- 
n- c- s- y- r- l- kh- ch- th- ph- 
    Table 1.14 Presyllables 
 
Only the presyllables in the upper ro w occur regularly in native Mon words 
and in foreign loans. tə- is usually changed to kə-,but it retains its original 
value before main syllables beginning with a velar sound: LM ‹tala› > kəla 
‘master, lord’, but LM ‹takuit, lakuit› > təkt ‘startle, be frightened’. In the 
                                                      
33  According to Bauer (1982:21), the difference between khy and  ch  “is retained in all 
Thailand varieties where /ky-/ ≠ /c/.” This is not true in mo st Burma dialects, even where 
the difference between non-aspirated ky and c is retained. 
 
 
35 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
southern dialects, both kə- and t ə- merge with ə-. Presyllables do not show 
register distinctions. 
 
Rhymes 
 
The vowel system of SM is best described in terms of rhymes, i.e. tyhe vowel 
and final consonant of a syllable. as shown in the following table. 
  
-V -V - -h -k - -c - -t, n, p, m -y 
i i i ih ik i   it in ip  im  
e e e eh     et en ep em ey 
   h k    t  n p  m  
a  a ah ak a ac a at an  ap am ay 
   h     t n p  m  
   h k    t n p m  
   h k  c  t n p m  
o o o oh ok o oc o ot on op om oy 
u u u uh     ut un up um uy 
ao aoh ao  i 
      Table 1.15 Rhymes 
 
The distribution of the vowels depends  to a large degree on the final 
consonant and on the register of the sylla ble. Although register is originally a 
function of the initial, it is presently realized in the rhyme of the main 
syllable.  
Not all rhymes occur in both registers. Boxes marked 
V(C) are found only in light register, while boxes marked 
V(C) are found only in heavy register syllables.  
 Unmarked boxes show rhymes that occur with both registers. There is some 
difference in the quality of most vowels between light and heavy registers, 
with the breathiness of the heavy re gister influencing the vowel quality. 
Some vowels that today appear to be lig ht - heavy register pairs do not share 
a common origin, e.g. t
m ‘know’ vs. km ‘step’. The former is spelt ‹tiÿ›, 
the latter ‹g āÿ›, supposedly reflecting the MM pronunciation of the two 
words.  In other cases, words with hist orically identical rhymes now exhibit 
different vowel sounds due to re gister differences, e.g. LM ‹kuiÿ› ‘also’ and 
‹guiÿ› ‘warm, comfortable’ are pronounced km and k m respectively. 
Vowel length in modern SM is no longer distinctive, although it used to be so 
in older stages of the language. What in LM looks like vowel length 
distinction actually represents different vowel qualities, e.g. ‹man› ‘Mon’ vs. 
 
 
36 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
‹mān› ‘win, be capable’ in SM is /mòn/  vs. /màn/. Written short vowels in 
final position are always pronounced with a following glottal stop. 
 
1.5.5 Phonology and the writing system 
 
The Mon writing system is based on Indi an models, presumably on the South 
Indian Pallava script (Wanida 1996:9; Than Myat 1956). Mon first appears as 
written language in what today is cen tral Thailand, on inscriptions of the 
Dvāravatī era dating from the 6 th century. After a gap of several centuries 
during which hardly any Mon inscrip tions are found, Mon flourishes as the 
official language of the Burmese empi re centred at Pagán beginning in the 
11th c. and of the Mon kingdom of Hari bhuñjaya in what today is northern 
Thailand around the 12 th c. The orthography app ears remarkably stable 
throughout the OM era. This suggests that  the gap in inscriptions is due to 
poor archaeological research especially in southern Burma, rather than to lack 
of Mon language use during that time. After another gap of over two hundred 
years, Mon re-emerges as written language again in the 15th century, now in a 
clearly different shape. It is this MM that was to be the basis of the modern 
written language. 
 The Mon alphabet today consists of  35 consonants, arranged in Indian 
fashion in five groups of five letter s each, starting with the velar sounds, and 
ten “unclassified” letters. The vowel symbols are added like diacritics, 
before, above, beneath, or after the consonant. In consonant clusters, the 
second element is written in an abbreviated form usually beneath the first 
initial. 
 
Consonants 
 
The transliteration in the LM column reveals the Indian values of the 
consonants, with two special symbols added for sounds foreign to Pali and 
Sanskrit, viz. ‹ḅ› and ‹mb›. The latter is a combination of m and b (mÔ) , the 
shape of which has been modified and given rise to a new letter ( Æ), which 
today is considered a simple initial. The comparison of the LM and SM 
values of the letters reveals the notat ion of registers in Mon. Almost all 
original voiced consonants are now pronounced in the heavy register with the 
inherent vowel changed from /a / to / /, while the original voiceless 
consonants are pronounced in the light register with the inherent vowel 
remaining unchanged. The Indian retrof lex series merged in Mon with the 
dentals in pronunciation, the symbols being used only to represent Indian 
loans in LM. Two of letters of the retroflex series are assigned a special 
value, i.e. ‹ó› to represent the dental implosive / / and ‹õ› to represent the 
light register counterpart of ‹n›. The former was used in this function already 
in OM, while the latter is a more recent innovation. The same goes for the use 
 
 
37 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
of ‹ë› for light register /l/. Unlike in  Thai (and other Tai languages) and 
Burmese, the consonants of Mon do not  have special names. The original 
retroflex and dental series are di stinguished in spelling out by adding mùt  to 
the retroflex and tn to the dental consonants: ! ‹ñ› is taʔ mùt, t ‹t› is taʔ tn. 
 
 vel. pal. retr. den. lab. unclassified 
mnj k s ! t p y h 
LM ka ca ña ta pa ya ha 
plain stops 
SM ka ca ta ta pa y ha 
mnj K S # T f r È 
LM kha cha ñha tha pha ra ëa 
aspirated 
stops 
SM kha cha tha tha pha r la 
mnj g z ; d b l / 
LM ga ja óa da ba la ḅa 
voiced stops 
SM k c a t p l a 
mnj G z{ % D B w a 
LM gha jha óha dha bha wa ’a 
voiced 
aspirated 
stops 
SM kh ch th th ph w a 
mnj cC v $ n m q Æ 
LM ïa ña õa na ma sa mba 
nasals 
SM   na n m sa  
 
     Table 1.16 The Mon Alphabet 
 
 The subscript consonants (kw k, kmk ‘hang, hanging’) are used in second 
position in clusters. Only a few letters have special subscript forms: 
 
Full consonant Subscript Value Ex. LM SM Gloss        
cC øC  tCY ‹tïay› uə  ‘day’ 
n øN n tN· ‹tnaÿ› nm ‘tree’ 
m øM m bM. ‹bmā› hmə ‘Burma’ 
y ø[ y f[. ‹phyā› phya ‘market’ 
r ]ø r \phj ‹prah› prh ‘early’ 
l øL l kL ‹kla› klaʔ ‘tiger’ 
h øH h mH. ‹mhā› hma ‘err, do wrong’ 
Table 1.17 Subscript consonants 
 All other consonants func tioning as second element in a cluster are written 
below the initial without any change of shape. Often the pronunciation of 
written clusters is reduced to a simple initial, with the original initial dropped. 
The first two examples in table 1.17, written ‹t ïay, tna ÿ›, show initial t, 
which is dropped in the pronunciation, leaving traces only in the light register 
of the syllable. The word həmə ‘Burma’ is spelt ‹bm ā›, with the initial 
 
 
38 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
cluster extended by insertion of ə and originally voiced ‹b› regularly 
weakened to h. 
 
Vowels 
 
There are two sets of vowel symbols, independent ones used in initial 
position, and dependent ones used afte r initial consonants. Some of the 
vowels can be combined to represent different sounds. All written vowel 
signs in Mon have special names, used when spelling out a word. The 
independent vowel signs are mostly used  in Indian loans. In native words 
initial ‹’› with the corresponding depe ndent vowel is preferred, with the 
exception of a few fixed spellings using independent vowels. In the following 
examples, the dependent vowel symbols are illustrated in combination with 
the letter 
k ‹ka›: 
 
Light 
reg. Ind. Dep. LM SM  Mon name Heavy 
reg. 
a k ka ka  aʔ, ,  ʔ, ,  
a. k.  kā ka  ʔəna tə a  
» ki  ki ki hərəʔ p i, ʔ ì 
»I kI kī ki rə tò i,  ì 
x ku ku ku həck càŋ mùə u, aoʔ ù 
xê kU kū ku həck càŋ a u, ao ù 
¿ ek ke ke həwey mù e, , ey è, , èy 
aY kY kay k həwə pln , u , ù 
ao ko  kau kao ʔəlèə p ao è 
]q ek. ko kao həwao na tə ao , ò 
aui kui kui k həck càŋ mùə - hərəʔ 
p ,   
a· k·  kaÿ km hənm p m, ʔ 
 
m, ʔ 
a, k, kaḥ kah hərah p ah h 
Table 1.18 Vowel symbols 
 
Inherent vowel sounds 
 
In many syllables, no vowel symbol is wr itten. The quality of the inherent 
vowel depends on the register of the in itial as well as on the final consonant. 
In transliteration, the inhe rent vowel is always written ‹a›. The following 
examples illustrate the quality of the i nherent ‹a› in different environments. 
 
 
39 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The last two examples show irregular vowel quality ( o for expected , due 
perhaps to the labial initial). 
 LM SM gloss   LM SM gloss 
         
k ka kaʔ ‘fish’  gW gwa kwʔ ‘be shy’ 
k· ka’ kʔ ‘island, neck’  l· la’ lʔ ‘long time’ 
tkj tak tk ‘hit’  dkj dak tk ‘tie’ 
kcj kaï k ‘guard’  mcj maï m ‘wait’ 
ktj kat kt ‘practice’  gtj gat kt ‘knot’ 
pnj pan pn ‘shoot; four’  bnj ban pn ‘hug’ 
pwj paw p ‘fly’  bwj baw p ‘heap up’ 
k, kaḥ kah ‘shave’  g, gaḥ kh ‘say’ 
kHj kah kh ‘be dry’  gHj gah kh ‘TOPIC’ 
tY tay tə ‘hand’  rY ray rə ‘friend’ 
qMtj smat hmot ‘black ant; child’  mnj man mòn ‘Mon’ 
 
The regular realization of the inherent vowel can be summarised as follows:34
 
‹CLa› → [Ca]/____ ‹ḥ, ø› ‹a› → []/____ C[-velar]
‹CHa› → [C]/____ ‹ḥ, ø› ‹ay› → [ə] 
‹a› → []/____C [+velar] ‹aw› → [] 
 
 If a consonant is to be read without an inherent vowel as syllable final, the 
‘killer hook’  ( j həct) is used to silence the inherent vowel sound.  
 The final consonant as well as the register of the syllable influences the 
quality of the vowel, and the quality of the vowel in some cases influences 
the pronunciation of the final consonant , so that there is no one-to-one 
correspondence between written vowel symbol and vowel sound. Mon can be 
considered an example of syllabic wr iting system, rather than alphabetic, 
although the syllables are made up of  alphabet-like symbols. Table 1.19 
illustrates the representation of different kinds of syllables in written Mon. It 
is obvious that Mon orthography not onl y does not directly represent the 
actual spoken language, but it is also far from being unambiguous. There is 
often more than one way to write a given syllable, and there are usually 
different ways to read a given written word. This is not the place to give a 
complete presentation of correspondences between LM and SM. A detailed 
description of the Mon writing system and its relation to SM is given in Pan 
Hla (1988-89:xiv-19), including compara tive tables of two major dialects. 
The reader should also refer to Shorto (1962) for SM-LM correspondences. 
                                                      
34  CL stands for light register consonant, CH for heavy register consonant. 
 
 
40 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Throughout this study I give a literal transliteration of LM forms and a 
phonemic representation of SM forms according to the system outlined 
above. The number of dialects the phonemic system is based upon is 
obviously limited due to a number of r easons. The system can therefore not 
be claimed to be final, but as the dial ects considered are spread over most of 
the main Mon speaking area in Burma, it can be taken to be a reasonably 
good working basis. 
  
mnj LM SM Gloss mnj LM SM Gloss 
k. kā ka ‘car’ l.pj lāp lp ‘prize’ 
B. bhā ph ‘school, temple’ z.tj jāt càt ‘theatre’ 
gi gi kì ‘hurt’ d, daḥ th ‘hit, right’ 
pi pi p ‘three’ ekW· kweĥ kwh ‘really’ 
qucj suï s ‘drink’ tJ tiÿ tm ‘know’ 
luinj luin ln ‘step on’ m.· māÿ mm ‘young man’ 
puinj puin pn ‘merit; property’ ;.· óāÿ am ‘true’ 
eqcj seï si ‘(not) be so’ /uE ḅuiw  ‘salt’ 
epcj peï p ‘full’ kLÕE kluiw kl ‘dog’ 
qÐikj stik toc ‘sleep’ K[ê khyū khyu ‘write’ 
ricj riï rò ‘hot, peppery’ tU tū tao ‘burn’ 
tHj tah th ‘milk, breast’ pLnj plan pln ‘again’ 
t, taḥ tah ‘clean, clear’ m·cj måï m ‘stay’ 
qCi sïi h ‘house’ tuY tuy to ‘finish’ 
qC. sïā kha ‘monk’s robe’ gxÕY ga’uy huy ‘medicine’ 
Table 1.19 Sample syllables LM and SM 
 
 In transliterating OM, MM, and LM, I basically follow the standard used by 
Shorto (1962, 1971), with one small alte ration: where the written symbol ‹  ·› 
(anusvāra) represents final h, I use ‹ ĥ› instead of Shorto’s ‹’›, e.g. ekW· is 
‹kweĥ› for Shorto’s ‹kwe’›, SM kwh. Where the same written symbol has 
the value of final m, I transliterate ‹ ÿ›, where it stands for the final glottal 
stop, I use ‹’›, in accordance with Shor to. No distinction is made in the 
transliteration between final glottal stop written ‹ ·› (anusvāra) and ‹aj›. The 
former spelling is not found in OM/MM and is in many words again being 
replaced by the latter in modern LM  for clarity reasons. Where the anusv āra 
represents the vowel // before velar finals, I use ‹å›, according to Shorto, for 
MM and LM. 
 
 
 
41 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Mon  LM Shorto   SM     gloss 
ekW·  kweĥ ‹kwe’›   kw h    ‘true’ 
ekL·  kle’ ‹kle’›   kl      ‘disappear, be lost’ 
ekL·  kleÿ ‹kle ÿ›   klem    ‘short note on palm leaf cover’ 
k·kj  kåk ‹kåk›   k k     ‘pick out; levy duty’ 
 
 In many cases the orthography varies even within a single written text. In 
these cases I stick to the spelling of the original, thus keeping the 
irregularities in the tran sliteration. This involves mostly presyllables and 
initial clusters, in a few cases also the final. 
  
Mon LM SM gloss  
as. ø aË. ø a.s. ‹’acā - ’cā - ’ācā› ʔəca ‘teacher’ 
tL ø tl ø tLI ø tIl ‹tla - tala - tlī - tīla› kəlaʔ ‘master’ 
gyuicj ø dyuicj ‹gayuiï – dayuiï› həyà ‘spouse’ 
tÒ· ø k· ‹tka’ - ka’› kʔ ‘island’ 
bàpj ø pgpj ‹bgap - pagap› pəkp ‘join’ 
mvj ø mnj ‹mañ - man› mòn ‘Mon’ 
puidj ø puitj ‹puid - puit› pt ‘verse’ 
 
 
2. Verbs in Mon 
 
Before describing the verb system of  Mon, it is necessary to establish the 
fundamentals, in other word reach a defi nition of verbs as a distinct category 
in Mon. The following section gives a ge neral theoretical overview of verbs, 
while the remaining sections of this chapter are dedicated to the predicate in 
Mon and more specifically to th e category of verbs and possible 
subcategorisations.  
 
2.1 What are verbs? 
 
According to Givón (1984:51f), 
 
[w]e most commonly find four major lexical classes (“word classes”) in 
languages: (a) Nouns; (b) Verbs; (c) Ad jectives; (d) Adverbs. [...] [N]ouns, 
adjectives and verbs distribute rather systematically along one coherent semantic 
dimension [...]. We will call this the time-stability scale. 
Experiences - or phenomenological clusters - which stay relatively stable over 
time [...], tend to be lexicalized in human language as nouns. [...]  
At the other end of the lexical-phenom enological scale, one finds experiential 
clusters denoting rapid changes  in the state of the universe. These are 
 
 
42 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
prototypically events and actions, and languages tend to lexicalize them as 
verbs. Members of this lexical category are much more abstract than nouns [...]. 
[...] Further, within the verb category, members may be graded by their degree 
of time-stability. 
The classes of noun and verb, the two prototypical extremes on our time-
stability scale, are attested in the lexicon of all languages. On the other hand, the 
class ‘adjective’ is a bit problematic. 
 
 Verbs as main predicative elements in an utterance enjoy universal status 
among the world’s languages. Although some languages do not make a clear 
formal distinction between verbs and ot her word classes, all languages seem 
to have a word class that corresponds to what we usually call verbs. Having 
low time-stability, verbs are prone to temporal and aspectual distinctions, 
which may be marked morphologically or periphrastically. Verbs describe 
actions, states, or events (situations) that can occur only in connection with 
nominals and that prototypically are temporally unstable or limited. 
Situations described by verbs do not exist in their own right, but only as 
interaction between or ch aracteristics of real-world or imaginative objects 
expressed by nouns (the arguments of the verb). Unlike (real world, concrete) 
objects described by nouns, which are in most cases clearly and visibly 
delimited in space, situations described by verbs are not visibly delimited and 
cover the temporal rather than the spatial dimension, which in many 
languages leads to an extended use of spatial features to the temporal 
dimension in connection with verbs. 
 In most languages verbs can be groupe d into different classes. The most 
common classes include action verbs versus  stative verbs, transitive versus 
intransitive, and telic versus atelic. In  the following sections I will give a 
short overview of previous treatments of verbs in Mon, followed by an 
account of characteristics of Mon verbs,  and finally I will outline the verb 
classes that can be established in Mon on formal grounds. 
 
2.2 The predicate in Mon 
 
The predicative part of a sentence in Mon in its most common form consists 
of one or more verbal elements, opt ionally accompanied by verbal operators 
and objects. There exist in Mon nomina l predicates, but these have to be 
marked specially, usually with the focus marker ra
ʔ (s. ch. 5). The 
prototypical function of the predicate is to describe actions, events, or 
characteristics of the subject. In other words, the subject (or in some cases the 
object) of a sentence is the topic, i.e. given information, about which the 
predicate adds new information. The pred icate is typically the comment of a 
sentence and thus the main domain of the focus. While we can say that not all 
predicates have to be verbal in Mon, it is equally true that all verbs in a 
 
 
43 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
sentence have not to be predicative or focal. Verbs or whole VPs can be 
topicalised just like nouns or NPs. I w ill return to the discussion of nominal 
predicates and topicalised verbs in section 2.2.3. The topic-comment 
syntactical structure of Mon will be discussed in section 3.2.  
 
2.2.1 Previous studies of the verb in Mon 
 
The earliest extensive description of  Mon in a European language is 
Haswell’s “Grammatical Notes and Vo cabulary of the Peguan Language”, 
which was first published in 1874. The second edition (edited by Rev. E.O. 
Stevens) was published in 1901 in Rangoon and reprinted (actually retyped) 
in 2002 by the Mon Education Committee. Pages 27ff (in the 2002 edition) 
give an overview of verbs in Mon: 
 
§ 17. Verbs  
There are two kinds of verbs, transitive and intransitive. Some transitive verbs 
are formed from intransitive. [...] 
[Active verbs are transformed into passive by the use of ‹du ï› ‘endure, suffer’ 
[...]. The impersonal use of verbs is also quite common [...]. Ed.] 
The tenses and modes of verbs are very imperfectly shown by affixes and 
prefixes. Frequently there is nothing but the connection to show the tense or 
mode. The present is always expressed by the simple verb [...]. 
Sometimes two or three verbs follow a single nominative without anything to 
distinguish tense or mode. This does not cause the confusion that one would 
suppose [...]. 
The only substitute, which the Peguans have for the present participle, is 
expressed by the use of ‹måï› [‘stay’].  
 
Haswell goes on listing and explaining first the  “Verbal Prefixes” and then 
the “Verbal Affixes”, of which he distinguishes “Assertive Affixes”, 
“Interrogative Affixes”, “Impera tive Affixes”, “Affix of Number”, 
“Qualifying Affixes”, “Euphonic Affixes”, and “Closing Affixes”. 
 
 The dictionaries of Ha lliday (1922, reprint 1955)  and Shorto (1962) both 
give a short grammatical overview in the introduction. Talking about verbs 
Halliday simply states that “Verbs are transitive or intransitive, and in some 
cases can be either with a slight chan ge in vocalisation. Transitive verbs have 
the longer form.” (1955:xix). With the “longer form” of transitive verbs 
Halliday means morphological causatives (s. ch. 4), which in LM and SM are 
formed by a variety of affixes. 
 According to Shorto, “words are of three classes, which may be further 
divided into subcategories.”(1962:xii) The word classes as given by Shorto 
are as follows: 
 
 
44 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
1. Nouns. This class includes the translation-equivalents of English numerals 
and pronouns. 
2. Verbs. This class includes the translation equivalents of English adjectives. 
There is a subclass: 
(a) Auxiliary verbs, comprising words ma rked as verbs by their occurrence in 
combination with verb particles (cf. below, 3 ( b)), and capable of combining 
with most members of the class of verbs to form verbal phrases; the majority of 
members of this subclass also occur in one-word verbal phrases, i.e. as full verbs. 
In combination they exhibit a high degr ee of generality of reference and might 
be described as ‘modal’ or ‘aspectual’. Examples are kʔ, th, màn. 
3. Particles. This class comprises of four subclasses: [...] 
(b) Verb particles. These occur in comb ination with verbs, forming verbal 
phrases; examples are hùʔ, nm. (1962:xii) 
 
The detailed analysis of Shorto’s “auxiliary verbs” is the topic of chapter 6. 
 
 The Saddā Man  (‘Mon Grammar’) of the Mon Textbook Publication 
Committee (undated) is a textbook us ed in Mon schools in Burma. The 
definitions of word classes seem to be influenced by traditional Pali 
grammatical categories as well as western grammar books. The Saddā Man 
distinguishes verbs from ad jectives and auxiliaries. Some of the words listed 
as adjectives are better analysed as nominal operators, e.g. õa’ ‘this’, tnaĥ 
‘other’, others are stative verbs, e.g. khuih ‘good’, óot ‘small’. Interestingly 
these two and other lexemes are listed twice, once as nominal 
modifiers/adjectives (nāmawisesana) and once as (stative) verbs. Among the 
auxiliaries one finds elements that ar e better described as  conjunctions, e.g. 
gho ‘while’ (from Pali kho ‘really, then, now’, occasionally used in SM to 
express the continuous aspect as in kh kl ŋ ‘is coming’), japhan  ‘when, 
while’. I give a full translation of the relevant sections of the Saddā Man in 
appendix C for the purpose of reference and as an example of an indigenous 
treatment of verbs. 
 
 The most exhaustive studies of the Mon verbal system so far are Bauer 
1982 and 1989. In his 1982 thesis on Mon morphology and syntax, Bauer 
dedicates some seventy pages to what he calls “the verbal piece” as opposed 
to “the nominal piece”. In his 1989 pape r on the verb in spoken Mon, Bauer 
basically repeats his findings of 1982. According to Bauer,  
 
[a]t least four main classes of words are to be distinguished in spoken Mon, 
nouns, verbs, auxiliaries and clitics. These classes or categories can all be 
distributionally and morphologically defined. Morphologically, verbs cannot be 
derived by prefixation with ‹ə-›, and the scope of the negative particle /hùʔ/ may 
 
 
45 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
extend only over verbs. Historically verbs and nouns can be distinguished in that 
the former alone may take inflectional affixes (OM ‹s-› and ‹-m-›, for the 
hypothetical and attributive respectively). (1982:298) 
 
Bauer attempts a classification of verbs based on phonological features: 
 
A phonological classification of verb is possible within certain limits, and has 
already been outlined in the nominal specific shapes like / əC-/, /ʔiʔC-/, tri- and 
tetra-syllables (except /hə carəna/ ‘to reflect, think’, P. vic āraõa). No noun-verb 
classification, on phonological grounds alone, is possible for the bulk of simple 
forms in the lexicon, CV(C), CCV(C), CCCV(C), C əCV(C), C əCCV(C). [...] 
The majority of nouns and verbs cannot be distinguished phonologically, and the 
lexicon abounds in homophonous forms. (1982:367) 
 
Bauer goes on describing subclasses of verbs, such as “operational” versus 
stative verbs, as well as different verb complexes, ordered according to the 
number of terms involved. 
One interesting point in Bauer’s trea tment of verbs in Mon concerns the 
status of numerals. He lists the numerals in the chapter on the nominal piece 
(1982:352ff), classifying them as no minals. In a footnote, though, Bauer 
states that 
 
Historically, numerals do not belong to a separate word-class of their own, but 
function as simple verbs, contrary to Shorto’s statement in DMI (1971.xxv) 
where he recognizes “numeral roots” – which, in fact, are interpreted here as 
verbal bases – and in DSM (1962.xii ) where numerals are subsumed under 
nouns. An important trace in SM favours my interpretation of cardinal numbers 
as verbs: The negation of ‘to have, possess; be’, /nùm/, is the verb /mòa/ ‘[to be] 
one’ preceded by the negative particle /hù ʔ/, in /hù ʔ mòa/ ‘not to have; there is 
no n .’. The second argument is that in OM numerals form derivatives by 
affixation, and it is assumed that only verbals can function as bases. (1982:521, 
footnote 134) 
 
 In his 1989 paper Bauer merely states  that “numerals in Mon are verbs” 
(1989:90). Bauer’s classification of numerals as verbs is problematic, though. 
He states that “it is assumed that only verbals can function as bases [for 
derivation]”. There are, however, OM forms like ‹jiñju ï› ‘post of building, 
pillar’, which is derived by affixati on (reduplication of initial with nasal 
infix) from the nominal base ‹ju ï› ‘foot, leg’. The base is well attested in 
Mon-Khmer languages (DMI:121f, 125). The formation looks similar to the 
derivate of the numeral OM ‹moy› ‘one’, OM ‹mirmoy› ‘one, unit, each’ 
(DMI:295). An argument against classifying the numerals as verbs is Bauer’s 
own restriction that verbs ca nnot occur in shapes like / ʔiʔC-/ (s. above). The 
 
 
46 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
numeral ‘five’ is pəsn, which becomes ʔiʔsn in combination with ten and 
its multiples, exhibiting the frequent nominal prefix ʔiʔ-. This use is not 
attested in OM, where five in combinations has the simple form ‹sun›. 
Furthermore, there are no recorded instances of numerals taking the 
inflectional affixes ‹s-› and ‹-m-›,
35 which according to Bauer is one criterion 
to establish verbs as a distinct class (s. below). 
 
 I will return to the problem of the negation of the existential verb nùm in 
section 2.5.4. I now turn to sorting out  criteria for classifying verbs as 
opposed to other word classes. 
 
2.2.2 Verbs as a word class in Mon 
 
Bauer does not succeed in using phonologi cal criteria to define verbs as 
opposed to other word classe s, especially nouns, apar t from the inability of 
verbs to be formed with th e (nominalizing) prefixes ʔə- and ʔiʔ-. 36  The 
number of tri- and tetra-syllabic verbs is small, due to the fact that most 
words in Mon with more than two sylla bles are loans, mostly from Pali or 
Sanskrit. Obviously nouns ar e more easily borrowed than verbs, a trend that 
can be observed in languages around th e world. Verbs as a separate word 
class in Mon then must be establishe d on formal grounds. Bauer’s restriction 
that only verbs can take the inflectional affixes in OM is valid for OM and 
probably MM, but as one of the affixes has been lost in SM (‹s-›) and the 
other is not productive anymore (‹-m-›), its usefulness for SM is restricted.  
 How can we define the verb in Mon then? The most intuitive statement we 
can make about verbs in terms of syntax  is that they occupy the position after 
the subject NP of the sent ence. This rule is not absolute, though, because the 
subject NP does not have to be overtly present in the sentence, and a number 
of topic and focus particles can occur between the subject and the verb. This 
leads to the conclusion that the verb cannot be defined by  its position after 
the (overt or understood) subject alone. 
 In the following examples the verbal complex of each sentence is in bold 
script. (2.1) exhibits ‘normal’ SVO wo rd order, with all arguments overtly 
expressed. 
 
(2.1)  kyə pan   klʔ  na       a n   t a k     t ʔ. 
SM   Japanese  cross CAUS:GO  road  walking that 
     ‘The Japanese crossed that road.’ (KD)  
                                                      
35 There is one instance, though, of a numeral taking the nominalising infix -w-: OM cas 
‘ten’ - cwas ‘-ty’ (i.e. multiples of ten). The semantics do not, however, suggest a verb - noun 
relation here. 
36 In SM, especially in the southern dialects, there are a number of ve rbs with the phonemic 
structure ʔəCV(C), e.g. ʔəkt ‘be startled’. These regul arly correspond to k əCV(C) and 
təCV(C) in the northern dialects. 
 
 
47 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The object can be topicalised and the su bject left out, as in (2.2). If the 
subject was to be overtly expressed, its position would be between kh and 
tk. 
 
(2.2)  kwah kyac hnòk k h tk k     ìʔ. 
SM   pupil monk big  TOP beat GIVE LITTLE 
     ‘Please hit your pupils [for me], Reverend.’ (KN) 
 
 In (2.3a), it is the subject that is mark ed as topic, while in (2.3b) the subject 
is marked as focus: 
 
(2.3a)  t əkh  k h k y o   c e h        ʔ a. 
SM   ogre   TOP look  MOVE.DOWN GO 
     ‘That ogre looked down.’ (KKP) 
 
(2.3b) t əkh  ra ʔ k y o   c e h        ʔ a. 
SM   ogre   FOC look  MOVE.DOWN GO 
     ‘It was the/an ogre that looked down.’ 
 
 Among other properties of verbs not shared with nouns or other word 
classes is their ab ility to form a complete st atement of their own without 
obligatory verbal or sentential particle s. This is possible with nouns only in 
restricted contexts, such as one-word an swers to questions in very informal 
colloquial SM. If a non-verbal element is  to form a predicative statement, a 
particle like the focal raʔ or the assertion marker noŋ is usually added. Notice 
that numerals cannot form a one-word an swer, which further indicates that 
they are not to be analysed as verbal elements. 
 
(2.4a)  èh-kh iəʔ  l    p r à t ?          ʔuə ra ʔ. / r ə   n o ŋ. 
S M    w h o     e a t    KEEP banana        1s  FOC / friend  ASRT 
     ‘Who ate the bananas?’           ‘I did.’ / ‘My friend did.’ 
 
(2.4b) pràt   n ʔ iəʔ kʔ h a ?           (iəʔ)  k ʔ. 
SM   banana this eat  GET Q            ( e a t )   GET 
     ‘May I eat this banana?’          ‘Yes(, you may).’ 
 
(2.4c)  kʔ l   p r à t    m ù ʔciʔ    m ʔ?   (kʔ) mùə  m ʔ raʔ. 
SM   get KEEP banana how.many  CL     ( g e t )  o n e   CL  FOC 
     ‘How many bananas did you get?’    ‘I got one.’ 
 
 Apart from their ability  to form a one-word sentence, verbs alone can be 
preceded by the negation particle  hù ʔ. If a nominal expression or a whole 
clause is to be nega ted, the longer negation hùʔ si əŋ ‘it is not so’ is used, 
 
 
48 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
which has wider scope than the si mple negation marker (s. 2.3.1). The 
shortest possible negative answers to  the above sentences are for (2.4a) ʔuə 
hùʔ si əŋ ‘It wasn’t me’, for (2.4b) (iəʔ) hù ʔ k ʔ ‘You may not’, and for 
(2.4c) kʔ l  pràt hù ʔ si əŋ ‘I didn’t get any banana s’. Only the answer to 
(2.4b) can be negated directly. 
 The only case of a non-verbal element directly negated is hùʔ mùə ‘there is 
no; have no’, lit. ‘ NEG one’. Historical reasons can account for this usage, 
which I will return to below. Notice that the other numerals do not have this 
possibility. An expression like * hùʔ a ‘not two’ is not acceptable in any 
form of modern Mon nor is it attested in older stages of the language. 
 In this paper, I define as verbs words that can form a one-word sentence 
without obligatory clause or sentence particles, and, more importantly, that 
can be preceded by the simple negation marker hù
ʔ. Different verb classes 
can be established on semantic rather than structural grounds. This will be the 
subject of section 2.5. 
 
2.2.3 Nominal predicates and topicalised verbs 
 
A sentence in Mon can be complete without a verb, exhibiting a nominal 
predicate. This may be considered a marked case as opposed to common 
verbal predicates, which in standard  speech requires the presence of a 
predicate marker. The most common predicate markers are the focal raʔ and 
the assertive noŋ, which will be discussed in detail in chapter 5. 
 
(2.5a)  kon-r ə h əʔ n ʔ ra ʔ. 
SM   follower house this FOC 
     ‘He’s a follower of this hous e. / He belongs to this house.’ (KD) 
 
(2.6a)  ʔ  k h ʔŋkəlòc  no ŋ. 
SM   PREF TOP English  ASRT 
     ‘That was the English [who did it].’ (KD) 
 
 Although nominal phrases can form a pr edicate in certain contexts, their 
predicative functionality is restricted. Nominal predicates can take operators 
only on clause level, i.e. they are not accessible to aspect, modality and direct 
negation. Negation of sentences with nom inal predicates is  possible only in 
combination with the defective existential verb (hùʔ) si əŋ, which acts as 
dummy verbal predicate (s. sections 2.3 and 2.5.4). 
 
(2.5b) kon-r ə h əʔ n ʔ hùʔ  siəŋ. 
SM   follower house this NEG be.so 
     ‘He’s not a follower of this hous e. / He does not belong to this house.’ 
 
 
 
49 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.6b) ʔ  k h ʔŋkəlòc  hù ʔ siəŋ. 
SM   PREF TOP English  NEG be.so 
     ‘That was not the English [who did it].’ 
 
 On clause level, at least the interro gative operator is possible with nominal 
predicates: 
 
(2.5c)  kon-r ə h əʔ n ʔ ha? 
SM   follower house this Q 
     ‘Does he belong to this house?’ 
 
(2.6c)  ʔ  k h ʔŋkəlòc  ha? 
SM   PREF TOP English  Q 
     ‘Was that the English?’ 
 
 Any element in a sentence can be to picalised or focussed, including verbs. 
A verb in topic position does not act as predicate of the sentence. As topic, 
the verb can with certain restrictions co-occur with predicate operators. 
 A common structure in sentences with verb al topics is an initial verb with a 
topic marker (most commonly kh or l , more rarely rao, especially in 
negative contexts) and a copy of the verb in predicate position. 
 
(2.7) klon  m ŋ  h ənày  kh kh h klon  ket. 
SM  do   STAY place  TOP TOP 3   do   TAKE 
    ‘The work at that place,  they did it themselves.’ (KD) 
 
Notice that the first kh in (2.7) marks hənày ‘place’ as topic, while the 
second topicalises the whole verbal expression. The topic klon is a verb, and 
it occurs in this sentence with the aspectual mŋ ‘STAY’. In (2.8), three 
marked topics occur in one sentence, the second one a verb, which is repeated 
in predicate position. 
 
(2.8) hətìn kh cp,  cha ʔ mŋ k h ʔuə m ŋ  l ŋsì  k h klà ŋ. 
SM  Hatin TOP arrive but  stay  TOP 1s  stay  Lounzi TOP much 
    ‘I did get to Hatin, but st ay I did a lot at Lounzi.’ (KD) 
 
The analysis of the third topic in this  sentence is ambiguous. It is possible to 
take only the place name Lounzi as t opic. Alternatively, the topic may 
include the verb and subject ʔuə m ŋ, leaving klàŋ ‘be much’ as predicate, 
leading to a reading ‘as for my staying at Lounzi, it was a long time/a lot.’ 
Recursive topicalisation is common in Mon. 
 Another common pattern of verb topical isation which is used with transitive 
verb expressions consists of the object in marked topic position and the verb 
 
 
50 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
in its normal position. The topic marker used in th is construction type is 
usually l. Very often the object is generic (non-referential) or semantically 
empty. 
 
(2.9)  kə lon l  hùʔ   klon, p ŋ  l  hùʔ   iəʔ. 
SM   work TOP NEG  do   rice  TOP NEG  eat 
     ‘He doesn’t work nor eat.’ 
 
 If the verb is intransitive or no object is overtly expressed, the verb itself is 
repeated, as in (2.10). 
 
(2.10) lè ə  rao    l è ə  k    èh. 
SM   tell TOP.NEG tell GIVE 3 
     ‘You didn’t even tell him about it.’ (KN) 
 
In (2.10), rao could be replaced with the more common l hù ʔ ‘TOP NEG ’ 
without changing the meaning: lèə l hùʔ lèə k èh. 
 
 It is a small step from topicalised verb expressions to conditional clauses, 37 
which are treated in section 1.4.3. 
 
2.3 Negation 
 
It has been stated above that the ability to be negated is one exclusive 
characteristic of verbs in Mon. Modern Mon has two basic negation markers, 
hù
ʔ in statements and questions, paʔ in prohibitive contexts. Both exhibit 
irregular semantic and phonological deve lopments from their OM sources. 
Although hùʔ and pa ʔ formally always negate the verb which they precede, 
semantically another part of the sentence can be the element negated. An 
extended negation marker, hù ʔ si əŋ ‘it is not so’ is used to negate a whole 
sentence or utterance or to mark contra stive/high focal negation of a part of 
the sentence. In the latter case, the element to be negated usually directly 
precedes hù
ʔ siəŋ.   
 
2.3.1 Negated statements and questions 
 
In OM two verbs were used to express negative statements, ‹kah › (with a 
weak form ‹ka› attested already in OM) ‘do not’ and ‹sak› ‘be without, lack, 
be free from’. Only the first occurs with the prospective/hypothetical prefix s-, 
                                                      
37  s. Haiman (1978). 
 
 
51 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
which makes the verbal status of the latter somewhat dubious. 38 The two 
verbs pleonastically co-occur in OM as ‹kah sak› with the meaning ‘lack, not 
have’. Both ‹kah› and ‹sak› combine with verbs as well as with nouns. 
 
(2.11) ma kah rb(i)n tinraï 
OM   REL NEG firm  door 
     ‘who have not secure doors’ (DMI:54) 
 
(2.12) pa pun  kah  moy  prak ār 
OM   do merit NEG  one  kind 
     ‘made merit of several kinds’ (DMI:54) 
 
The scope of the negative verb is over the numeral ‹moy› ‘one’ only, giving a 
reading as ‘not one, seve ral’. The numeral ‹moy› preceded by the negative 
verb ‹sak› or its MM weak form ‹ha› gives a reading ‘there is not one, none’, 
which already in MM replaces the negative of the existential verb 
‹nom/nwaÿ› ‘exist, be, have’. In OM ‹sak › alone or the combination ‹kah 
sak› is used to express the negation of ‹nom›. 
 
(2.13) sak het 
OM   lack reason 
     ‘without reason’ (DMI:354) 
 
 Used with verbs, ‹sak› expresses si mple negation or the modal negation 
‘cannot’. 
 
(2.14) ma sak t īm  tarla 
OM   REL NEG know master 
     ‘which their masters do not know of’ (DMI:354) 
 
(2.15) sak das smoh  
OM   NEG be  equal 
     ‘cannot match him’ (DMI:354) 
 
 The combination of the two negative verbs ‹kah  sak› is very frequent in 
OM: 
 
(2.16) smi ï ma t āw  óey sth ān ma kah sak ks īw 
OM   king  REL dwell LOC place REL NEG NEG shake 
     ‘the king who lives in a place that cannot be shaken’ (SSKh11f) 
                                                      
38 That no s- inflected instances of ‹sak› are found in the OM corpus may be due to the fact 
that ‹sak› most often occurs as second element in the combination ‹kah sak› and only the first 
verb of a compound is usually inflected for the prospective/hypothetical aspect/mood. 
 
 
52 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 In LM and SM, ‹kah › has survived only in c onnection with the negative 
marker hùʔ as hù ʔ kaʔ  ‘not lacking, be at least as much as’. Sentence (2.17) 
is the answer to the question “What year was it when the camp at Panga 
fell?”. 
 
(2.17) p əʔ kl m c h, pəʔ kl m c h hùʔ kaʔ raʔ pùh. 
SM   three 100  ten three 100  ten NEG lack FOC NEG.INT 
     ‘It was in 1310 (AD 1948), at least 1310.” (KD) 
 
 The modern Mon form kaʔ  appears to be a re-loan from Burmese ká ‘lack’, 
which is mostly used as negative m ă-ká ‘be not less than’, and was originally 
borrowed from OM or MM ‹kah › (s. Okell and Allott 2001:252). An 
indication that modern Mon kaʔ is not a direct development from MM ‹ka› 
but rather a borrowing from Burmese is the position of the (modern) negation 
marker. While in OM and MM the order is always ‹kah  sak›, the modern 
form is hù ʔ kaʔ, which goes back to a non-attested *‹sak kah › The negative 
marker hùʔ is an irregular development fr om OM ‹sak› via the MM weak 
form ‹ha›, which is still wi dely used in LM. For MM ‹kah  sak› we would 
expect something like *kəsk in SM. 
 
 The OM/MM negative verb  ‹sak› is has two representations in the modern 
language. In LM we find the regular de velopment ‹sak› in the fixed form 
‹sakku› ‘be without, have not’. This is  composed of ‹sak› and the oblique 
marker ‹ku›, which is still used in LM but merged in SM with the verb k 
‘give’. The form ‹sakku› is used as opposite of ‹nwaÿ ku› ‘be with, have’.  
 In SM, only the MM weak form ha has survived. While ‹ha› is frequent in 
LM (pronounced hə in SM), the secondarily strengthened form ‹hwa’› hùʔ is 
preferred in modern texts and in careful pronunciation. This is a rare case of a 
weak form being reinforced by adding phonetic material that was not present 
in the original form (vowel, final glottal stop). The heavy register value of the 
syllable is unexpected, too, after th e initial light register consonant h. The 
irregularity of this word is also reflected in the modern orthography as ‹hwa’›. 
The semantic development from a ve rb meaning ‘lack’ into a general 
negation marker is found also in Archaic Chinese and some African 
languages (Bemba, Fulfulde; s. Heine and Kuteva 2002:188). 
 The negation marker in modern M on can negate only verbs (including 
auxiliaries), with the only exception of hù ʔ mùə ‘not to have’ (lit. ‘not one’) 
mentioned above. This is not an indicati on that numerals are verbs, as stated 
by Bauer; it is rather a relic of OM  and MM usage. Probably the numeral 
‹moy› was originally used to reinforce the negation, as it still sometimes is in 
 
 
53 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
SM:39
 
(2.18) hùʔ kiəŋ   c h   mùə. 
SM   NEG EXPER meet one 
     ‘I’ve never seen one/it at all.’ 
 
 As mentioned above, the part of the se ntence that is actually negated is not 
necessarily the verb, although it is the element forma lly marked as negative. 
The scope of the negation marker hùʔ depends on the context of the utterance. 
While in a neutral contex t (2.19) is understood to ex hibit sentence negation, 
other contexts can change the scope of the negation in the same sentence, 
usually involving a shift of the main st ress to the element to be negated. This 
grammatically relevant variation of intonation cannot be expressed in the 
written form. 
 
(2.19) ŋuə n ʔ ʔuə hùʔ  t n    phə   pùh. 
SM   day this 1s  NEG move.up school NEG 
     ‘ I  am not going to school today.’  
     a. I am staying home. (whole sentence is negated) 
     b. I am going there tomorrow. ( today is negated) 
     c. I am going to the hospital. ( school  is negated) 
     d. My brother is going. ( I is negated) 
 
 To put more stress on the negation of a specific constituent of the sentence, 
the extended negation marker hùʔ siəŋ ‘it is not so’ is used.40 In SM hùʔ siəŋ 
is usually placed after the constituent to be negated, although it can be placed 
in front of it, especially in LM. The latter word order is probably the original 
one, which was replaced in the modern language by the Burmese influenced 
order XP -  hù
ʔ si əŋ.41 In this construction the negated constituent may be 
moved into topic position at the beginning of the sentence to add more stress. 
 
(2.19a)  ŋuə n ʔ hùʔ siəŋ  ʔuə t n    phə . 
SM    day this NEG be.so 1s  move.up school 
      ‘It is not today that I am going to school.’ 
 
                                                      
39 The use of mù ə as negation intensifier is more common in Thai Mon dialects. Mon in 
Burma prefers the Burmese loan pùh in sentence final position (B. hpù, probably from hpù 
‘ever’, s. Okell 1969:302f). 
40 Another possibility to explicitly mark the element to be negated is using the topic marker 
kòh or the focus marker raʔ, together with fronting of the marked element. 
41 Mon hùʔ si əŋ translates directly into Burmese as mă-hou’ ‘not be so’, with the only 
difference that Burmese hou’ can be used in affirmative contexts, as in the frequent 
expression hou’ ké ‘right, yes, OK’. 
 
 
54 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.19b)  ʔuə hùʔ siəŋ  t n    phə   ŋuə n ʔ. 
S M     1 s   NEG be.so move.up school day this 
      ‘It is not me w ho is going to school today.’ 
 
(2.19c)  ŋuə n ʔ ʔuə t n      p h ə  hùʔ siəŋ. 
SM    day this 1s  move.up  school NEG be.so 
      ‘It is not school I am going to today.’ 
 
 The verb siəŋ is used only in negative and interrogative contexts. Already in 
MM ‹seï› appears to be restricted to ne gative sentences. The only context 
where ‹seï› can occur in an affirmative context in LM is the compound form 
‹seï leï› ‘truly’, where ‹leï› appears to be a semantically empty euphonic 
rhyme element, pronounced liəŋ with irregular light register in SM. 
 
 In serial verb constructions the nega tion marker always stands in front of 
the verb that is logically negated, which can be either V 1 or V 2 (or V x), 
depending on the semantics of the e xpression. So the natural negation of ʔa 
klày ‘go looking for’ is hùʔ ʔa klày ‘not to go looking for’, not ?ʔa hùʔ klày, 
which could be interpreted as ‘go but not look for’. For klày ch ‘(look for 
and) find’ on the other hand, the most natural negation is klày hùʔ ch ‘(look 
for but) not find’. An expression like ?hùʔ klày ch could only be understood 
as ‘not look for and find’, whic h is pragmatically problematic. 42  In some 
instances the position of the negation marker varies, usually with a difference 
in meaning:  
 
(2.20a) ʔuə iəʔ hùʔ kʔ. 
S M    1 s   e a t   NEG GET 
     ‘ I  c a n n o t  e a t . ’  
 
(2.20b) ʔuə hùʔ iəʔ (l) k ʔ. 
SM   1s  NEG eat  (TOP) GET 
     ‘I don’t have to ea t; I can do without eating.’ 
 
In this case negation of both verbs is po ssible, with the meaning as logically 
expected: 
 
(2.20c) ʔuə hùʔ iəʔ hùʔ kʔ. 
SM   1s  NEG eat  NEG GET 
     ‘I have to eat; I cannot do without eating.’ 
 
 In connection with  the focus marker raʔ, the interpretation of the negation is 
                                                      
42 The meaning ‘find without looking for, find by coincidence’ is expressed by ch t h (s. 
6.3.14) 
 
 
55 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
often negated NSIT (‘not anymore’), although th ere are examples where the 
NSIT reading is excluded (s. ch. 5). With  the sentence final persistive marker 
nm ‘still, yet’, the negation marker yields the reading ‘not yet, still not’. 
 
 The negation marker is always us ed in connection with preverbal kla 
‘before, prior to, first; PROVISIONAL’,43 often reinforced by the sentence final 
persistive marker nm ‘still, yet’: kla hùʔ iəʔ (nm) ‘before eating’, kla hùʔ 
ʔa (nm) ‘before going/leaving’ (s. 6.3.18) 
 
 The general negation marker in Mon since at least early LM is hùʔ or its 
weak form hə . With a closed set of verbs there has been a secondary 
development with hùʔ splitting into a h-prefix and a labial infix. 44  This 
development is restricted to single pos ition velar initials (k and kh), giving 
rise to pre-aspirated labialised ve lar sounds (hkw-), in one case a doubly 
aspirated labialised vela r (hkhw-). The pre-aspiration is sometimes skipped, 
leaving only a labial infix as marker of negation. 45  This development is 
common to all recorded Mon dialects of Burma but unknown to the varieties 
spoken in Thailand. As the bulk of Thai-R āmañ (‘Thai Mon people’) settled 
in Thailand in the second half of the 18 th century, we can conclude that this 
development set in at some point after the 18 th century. The verbs invariably 
taking the negation infix are the following: 
 
k e t     -   ( h ) k w e t       ‘ t a k e ’  
k    -  (h)kw       ‘ g i v e ’  
kʔ   -  (h)kw ʔ     ‘ g e t ’  
khh  -  (h)khwh     ‘good’ 46
 
A few others usually take the infixed form: 
 
kiəŋ   -  (h)kwi əŋ     ‘have ever, EXPERIENTIAL’ 
kŋ   -  (h)kw ŋ     ‘ d a r e ’  
 
Rarer is the use of the negation infix with 
 
k o k    -   ( h ) k w o k      ‘ c a l l ’  
 
Notice that the negation infix is used irre spective of the use as full verb or as 
                                                      
43 kla in modern Mon is used as an adverb, while its OM source ‹tl ār› was a verb. The 
attributive form ‹tamlā› ‘former, earlier’ is still used in LM. 
44 see Jenny 2002. 
45 Shorto (1963:58) mentions this phenomenon in a footnote but does not elaborate or give 
any examples. 
46 In some speakers pronunciation, (h)khwh ‘not good’ becomes [xw h], [fw h] or even 
[fh]. 
 
 
56 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
auxiliary with all the above listed verbs.47
 
 While the above listed verbs always or mostly occur with the negative infix, 
there are many other verbs with an init ial simple velar which are used only 
with the full form of the negation hùʔ, never with the infix. These include 
such frequent verbs as kk ‘be cold’ and kem ‘grasp’. Interestingly, the verb 
kaʔ ‘lack’, which as mentioned above occurs only in connection with the 
negative marker, does not allow the infixed form *hkwaʔ as one might expect. 
Frequency of negative use cannot be the (only) explanation for the 
development of the infixed negation forms. 
 The infixed forms are still mostly rest ricted to the spoke n language. Only a 
few pieces of modern popular literature  actually employ these forms in 
writing, and when they do, they do it inc onsistently. In the spoken language, 
on the other hand, the infixation is automatic and occurs even in very careful 
and slow speech. The inconsistency in us e in LM is shown in the following 
sentence with the same verb ‹kuiw› ‘give’ once negated with the full form of 
the negative and twice with the infix. 
 
(2.21) gamit    ro  kwuiw   kit, gagit ro  kwuiw   cat,  
LM   mosquito TOP NEG:GIVE bite bug  TOP NEG:GIVE sting   
     r u y  l e w  hwa’ kuiw óun  ra. 
     f l y   TOP NEG  GIVE perch FOC 
     ‘They wouldn’t allow the mos quitoes to bite [their baby girl], 
     they wouldn’t allow the bed bugs to sting her, and they wouldn’t 
     allow the flies to sit down on her.’ (MKP:6) 
 
 One might suspect that the choice of th e topic marker here has an influence 
on the use of the negation. We have seen above (sentence (2.10)) that ‹ro›  
can be used as negative topic marker. The first two parts of sentence (2.21) 
would then exhibit double negation. In some contexts, though, ‹ro› is used as 
simple emphatic topic marker, as in questions like pèh rao? ‘And what about 
you?’. OM ‹yo› and MM ‹ro› are mostly used as relative question particles 
(sentence final after WH-questions). Burmese has borrowed the form with the 
spelling ‹ro›, pronounced yò as topic marker (s. Ok ell and Allott 2001:190f). 
The negative connotation of ‹ro› seems to be a secondary development of the 
older interrogative/topical meaning. Ther e is obviously no relation between 
the use of the topic marker and the form of the negation. The text from which 
sentence (2.21) is taken indiscrimina tely makes use of both infixed and non-
infixed negation in other places. 
 
                                                      
47 The verb ʔa ‘go’ with the negation marker becomes hwa, which is often pronounced [xwa]. 
 
 
57 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
2.3.2 Prohibitive 
 
Negative imperative or prohibitive in OM was expressed by the preverbal 
particle ‹lah›,48 as in 
 
(2.22) lah  sandeh  gaÿ  da. 
OM   PROH doubt  more FOC 
     ‘Don’t doubt anymore!’  (SSKh43) 
 
(2.23) ’or   ku ÿ  mirnas   lah   wit! 
OM   order 2s   remember PROH forget 
     ‘So that you may re member, don’t forget!’ (SSKf6) 
 
 In MM, ‹lah › is replaced by the combination ‹lah  pa› ‘don’t do’, which is 
contracted to ‹lapa› and may be rein forced by the imperative or politeness 
particle ‹ñi› ‘a little bit’.  
 
(2.24) lapa  pa ñi! 
MM   PROH do LITTLE 
     ‘Don’t do it!’ (DMI:330) 
 
(2.25) [tar]la ’ey ta’ lapa lor   jare ï   ñ i !  
M M    l o r d    1 s   PL PROH keep vicinity LITTLE 
     ‘My Lords, don’t keep them near [you]!’ (DMI:330) 
 
Sentence (2.25) shows that the subject can be overtly expressed in prohibitive 
contexts. 
 
 In LM the form is further contracted to ‹lpa›, which is regularly pronounced 
paʔ in SM, making the prohibitive pa rticle homophonous with the verb paʔ 
‘do’. Sentence (2.24) in SM thus becomes paʔ pa ʔ ìʔ. From a historical 
point of view the verb ‹pa› ‘do’ was first used to reinforce the prohibitive 
particle, which was eventually dropped leaving only the rein forcing verb ‘do’ 
to mark the prohibitive. This leads to less confusion than might be expected, 
as pa
ʔ as full verb is always followed by non-verbal expressions, usually 
nominals, while pa ʔ as prohibitive marker is norm ally used only with verbs. 
The only situations that could conceivably lead to confusion are verbal 
expressions composed of a noun and a verb, such as ct ot ‘be dispirited’, lit. 
‘the heart is small’. The sentence paʔ ct ot is technically ambiguous (‘don’t 
be dispirited’ or ‘make your heart small’). In almost all natural contexts only 
the first interpretation makes sense,  though, leaving hardly space for 
                                                      
48 This particle is probably related to Khm. ‹lah › ‘abandon, set free’. Cf. also the derivates of 
this (unattested) root OM ‹blah› ‘be free’, MM ‹salah› ‘give away, abandon’ (DMI:279, 368). 
 
 
58 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
ambiguity to arise in a conversation. 
 In reading pronunciation, the li terary form ‹lpa› is pronounced ləpaʔ, while 
many modern publications spell the prohibitive pa rticle ‹pa›, making it a 
homonym of the verb ‘do’. In classical texts, ‹lpa› is always the preferred 
form, but ‹pa› is sometimes used in lyrical texts when the use of ‹lpa› would 
result in violation of the syllable rules of the stanza.  
 
 As in MM, in SM the subject can be overtly expressed with the prohibitive. 
 
(2.26) ʔ paʔ  ket ra ʔ lèy! 
SM   2s  PROH take FOC EMPH 
     ‘Don’t you take anymore!’ (KN) 
 
 The prohibitive can be reinforced by  the imperative/politeness particle ‹ñi› 
in modern Mon as in MM. 
 
(2.27) mi    lpa   dah gawi ï    l p a   g w i ï  ñi! 
LM   mother PROH be  NML:worry PROH worry  LITTLE 
     ‘Don’t you be worried, mother, don’t worry!’ (DC:19) 
 
 The prohibitive, like the simple nega tion, can be modified by the sentence 
final particles raʔ  ‘ FOCUS’ and nm ‘still, yet’. The former is usually 
understood as ‘don’t V anymore’ (s. (2.26) above), the latter as ‘don’t V yet’. 
 
(2.28) paʔ  ʔa nm, mŋ  ʔənʔ kla! 
SM   PROH go PERS stay  here  before 
     ‘Don’t go yet, stay here for the time being.’ 
 
2.3.3 Summary 
 
In LM and SM there is one basic mo rpheme indicating negation, viz. ‹hwa’› 
hùʔ, which has the spelling variants ‹ha,  h-› and the pronu nciation variants 
hʔ, hə and (h)Cw -. The historical development of hùʔ is rather unusual, it 
being a strengthened form of a weak form of the original verb ‹sak›: 
 
sak → *sə- → hə- → hùʔ (→ h-w-) 
 
The negation marker always stands in  front of the verb to be negated, 
although its scope can exte nd over arguments of the verb and peripheral 
elements such as adverbs. To put em phasis on the element to be negated, the 
extended negation hùʔ si əŋ is used. The same form is also used to negate 
non-verbal elements or as emphatic sentence negation. 
 
 
59 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The prohibitive in SM is expressed by the form paʔ, which is homophonous 
(and historically identical) with the verb ‘do’. The subject in prohibitive 
sentences can be expressed overtly. 
 Both negation and prohibitive marker s can be modified by the sentence 
final particles raʔ and nm, resulting in (implied) negated NSIT and persistive 
readings respectively.  
 
2.4 Verbal morphology 
 
OM exhibits a relatively rich set of  verbal morphological processes, both 
inflectional and derivational. In modern  Mon, most of these processes have 
been lost, leaving only traces in opaque forms. Most of the old derived forms 
today can be considered lexical, as the processes involved lost their 
productivity in MM times. The only major morphological process that is still 
transparent in modern Mon is the causa tive, which is described in detail in 
chapter 4. Many of the old morphologica l affixes merged in modern Mon, 
giving rise to a new ‘universal’ derivational prefix hə-, which takes over 
many of the roles of the old prefixes and infixes, and the use of which is 
increasing in SM, replacing also othe r surviving prefixes such as the 
causative pə-. 
 
2.4.1 Historical development 
 
Diffloth (1984:263ff) reconstructs several morphologi cal affixes for 
Dvāravatī Mon. As the Dvāravatī inscriptions themselves are rather short and 
not particularly rich in morphological forms, Diffloth’s reconstruction is 
mainly based on the comparison between  Mon and Nyah Kur. Whenever the 
two closely related languages have a given morphological affix in common, 
the affix is supposed to be inherited from at least Dv āravatī times. The 
following affixes are reconstructed for Dvāravatī Mon by Diffloth: 
 
A f f i x        F u n c t i o n      E x a m p l e s  
-w- infix     nominalizer    *caa ʔ ‘eat’ - *cwaaʔ ‘flesh’49
-m- infix     attributive     *jl ʔ ‘be short’ - *jmlʔ ‘short’ 
-m- infix     agentive      *daac ‘hit, slap’ - *dmaac ‘smith’ 50
-n-  infix     nominalizer    *saal ‘make bamboo strips’ - snaal ‘bamboo mat’ 
-n-  infix     instrument     *twas ‘sweep’ - tnwas ‘broom’ 
-rn- infix     instrument     *tun ‘climb’ - trnun ‘ladder, stairs’ 
-r-  infix     locative       *dm ŋ ‘stay’ - drmŋ ‘place’ 
p-  prefix     causative      *tun ‘climb, go up’ - ptun ‘raise’ 
                                                      
49 In modern Mon ‹cwa› means ‘curry’. 
50 The attributive and agentive infixes are probably historically identical. They appear to be 
related to the proclitic relative markier ‹ma›. 
 
 
60 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
k-  prefix51    causative?     *t əər ‘get up’ - *ktəər ‘have arise in one’ 
- u -   i n f i x      c a u s a t i v e       * d mŋ ‘stay’ - *dumŋ ‘install, set’ 
 
 Shorto gives an overview of th e morphological affixes found in OM 
inscriptions. Two of the affixes are inflectional, the rest derivational. 
Interestingly the most common and widely used affix of OM, the 
“hypothetical” ‹s-› prefix, does not appear in the Dv āravatī inscriptions and 
was not reconstructed for Dvāravatī Mon by Diffloth (1984). Bauer dedicates 
two papers (1991, 1992) to this aspectual morpheme, while Duroiselle (1963) 
and Jacob (1963) each give a short account  of the form. I will return to the 
prefix ‹s-› below. 
Shorto (1971:xxiiiff) lists the following morphological affixes: 
 
An attributive is derived from simple verb forms by means of the infix -m-, -um-, 
-uÿ-. It is equivalent to the constructi on with the clause-subordinating particle 
ma (gmoï ‘brave’ = ma goï, literally ‘who are brave’) [...]. 
Causatives are formed by means of two affixes in complementary distribution, 
p- (before nasals pu-, pa-) with simple-initial roots and -u- with others: pdas ‘to 
bring into being’ ~ das [‘be’], guraï ‘tell’ ~ graï [‘know’]. 
Frequentatives are rarely found contrasting with simple forms [...] and generally 
denote continuous or repeated action. The majority are formed by means of the 
infix -in- &c. /ən/, before labials -uÿ-. Infixes -ir- and -i- occur in a few verbs. 
Nouns are formed from verbal roots in a number of ways, not readily 
distinguishable semantically. [...] The most frequent of the nominal formations 
proper is with the infix -ir-: dirdas ‘existence’ ~ das [‘be’]. [...] An infix -in- 
(&c; before labials -uÿ, -im-) in roots with two-place initial usually corresponds 
to an infix -n- in simple-initial roots[.] Simple-initial roots only may combine 
with with an infix -w-, following p, b -uw- , with root-initial m, w pu- [...]. Two 
other nominalizing infixes may be regarded as compounds of the foregoing: -ir-
n- (cf. cirna  ‘food’ ~ ca ‘eat’) and -uÿ-w- (cf. ju ÿwin ‘present’ ~ jin  ‘make 
over’). 
 
 The most prominent and only real inflec tional affix of OM is the prefix ‹s-›, 
with allomorph ‹si-› before initial s-. The ‹s-› prefix can technically be 
attached to any verbal base, both dynamic and stative. The fact that some 
verbs are not attested with the prefix is probably due to the limitedness of the 
material available. In expressions co ntaining more than one verb, only the 
first in the series carries the inflectional prefix, the others remain unmarked. 
 
Duroiselle (1963:201) states that 
 
                                                      
51 The k- prefix is quite common in Nyah Kur causatives (s. Gainey 1990), but its role in 
Mon is marginal at best. 
 
 
61 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
‹sa› as a verbal prefix, very often denotes, first, the future [...]; it seems to be an 
attenuation of the old prefix ‹si›; s(a) is also used on the Ānanda plaques and 
Pagan inscriptions with a future sense , and is very common in the modern 
literary language, in which we find also the form ‹sī ›. Second- It has sometimes 
a causal sense (O[ld].T[alaing]. ‹su›) [...]. Third - Very often, it does not appear, 
from the context, to have any particular force or sense. 
 
Only the first sense listed by Duroiselle describes OM usage (in part at least) 
correctly. The second seems to be a rean alysis of the causa tive infix ‹-u-› in 
verbs with initial sC - cluster where the s is integral part of the root, not the 
inflectional prefix, e.g. ‹s tik› ‘sleep’ ‹sutik› ‘put to bed’. The form was 
reinterpreted as containing a ‘causative prefix’ ‹su-›. The MM variant 
regularly is ‹sa-›, which later changed in pronunciation to [hə-], merging with 
other prefixes and infixes. The third reflects the modern LM usage, with the 
original value of the prefix lost. 
 According to Shorto (1971:xxiif) “[Verb s] may be combined with the prefix 
s(i)- to yield the hypothetical form which in  particular denotes futurity.” This 
prefix differs from other affixes in that “[a]lone among affixes it combines 
with secondary-system loanwords (e.g.  ’ ānubhāw [‘have supernatural 
powers’], sāmarttha [‘be competent’]).” 
 Jacob (1963:69) mentions that OM uses a prefix for the “hypothetical and 
preparative function (prefixes s and sa/su). These I have put together as they 
are similar in meaning as well as  possibly identical phonologically: e.g. gap 
‘please’, sgap ‘shall please’; rap ‘hold’, surap ‘put ready at hand’.” In a 
footnote Jacob states that “Mr. Shorto has suggested that the OM preparative 
function is in effect a ‘causative [-u-] of the hypothetical [s-]’. ‘Put ready at 
hand’ might then be paraphrased ‘cause (someone) to be about to hold’.” 
There are, however many instances of  the combination of hypothetical and 
causative with the ‹s-› prefix added to the causative, rather than the causative 
affix added to the ‹s-› inflected form, e.g. (ibid.) c’ah
 ‘be pure’ scu’ah ‘shall 
purify’ (not *suc’ah). 
 In 1991 Bauer published a short article on Old Mon s-, in which he analyses 
the usage of the prefix in OM inscriptions and the Ānanda plaques. The 
Ānanda plaques give pictures of the J ātaka stories, together with glosses in 
OM, thus providing the rare possibility to  actually see what is expressed in 
the written sentence, comparable to modern comic strips. Bauer found out 
that  
 
“[w]hile occurrences of s- in the Shweizigon inscription ( EB #I) would strongly 
suggest the identification of a tense/modal prefix ‘future/irrealis’, the glosses, on 
the contrary, would imply the aspect ‘ingressive’. This is especially clear in 
plaque #565 (Duroiselle #28) [...], where the action referred to in the verb (#565 
 
 
62 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
scis ‘descend’ [...]) has not yet been accomplished, but has already been 
initiated.”  
(Bauer 1991:241) 
 
 The gloss of plaque #565 (An28) is given below as (2.29). 
 
(2.29) kā l  scis        h a n   t i .  
OM   time  S-move.down LOC  earth 
     ‘When [Temiya] is descending to the ground.’ 
 
The accompanying picture given in the 1963 edition of the Epigraphica 
Birmanica is unfortunately not very clea r. It is apparent, though, that Temiya 
is descending from the chariot, with one foot stepping down to the ground. In 
this case the prefix certainly does no t have hypothetical meaning, but rather 
progressive (rather than “ingressive”, as  stated by Bauer, obviously due to a 
confusion of terms, as Bauer’s own explanation suggests). A prospective 
interpretation is possible, too, in this context, with the goal object ‹ti› as 
telicizer. The interpretation in this ca se would be ‘Temiya is about to reach 
the ground’. 
 
 The other plaque mentioned by Bauer in the same article is #721 (An189): 
 
(2.30) mahos    slop    s ïi   smi ï. 
OM   Mahosadha S-enter house king 
     ‘Mahosadha enters the king’s house.’ 
 
The accompanying picture shows Mahosadha about to enter the house where 
the king sits waiting for him. Also in th is context the prefix may be regarded 
as progressive, although Bauer’s analysis as “ingressive” is here possible, too, 
as is the prospective reading suggested in other contexts, again with a 
telicizing goal object ‹s ïi› ‘house’. There is far from enough linguistic 
material in the Ananda plaques, though, for an in- depth analysis of the 
functions of ‹s-›, but I would favour the label ‘prospective aspect’ based on 
the available evidence from the Ananda glosses and other inscriptions. 
 The ‹s-› prefix has lost its origin al morphological function in the modern 
language and is added seemingly indi scriminately to verbs in LM. Its 
function has partly been taken over by the assertive sentence particle noŋ in 
SM and LM. 
In his 1982 thesis, Bauer writes that  
 
Although noŋ conveys the idea of future events or actions [...], its scope [...] 
includes eventuality or hypothetical events as well (“would, might’). This 
confirms well with the historical evidence from OM and EMM where its 
 
 
63 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
corresponding role was taken by the inflectional prefix ‹s-› marking the 
hypothetical. [...] SM noŋ, LMM/LM /roŋ/ emerged later, taking up that function, 
even if LM shows still the starred [= fossilized, frozen] prefix ‹s-› (co-
occurrence of this prefix and 
noŋ in classical texts is still to be examined). 
(Bauer 1982:436) 
 
 Although it is true that th e ‹s-› prefix has been lost in modern Mon and part 
of its functions have apparently been taken over by the assertive particle noŋ, 
there is no one-to-one correspondence betw een the two (s. ch. 5). While ‹s-› 
was still alive in MM, the assertive marker ‹rwo ï› already emerged during 
the MM period and the two co-existed for some centuries, sometimes (but not 
necessarily) co-occurring in the same sentence: 
 
(2.31) na   jraku he ï  dewatau ma sduï    bali-bakar  
MM   INSTR body EMPH god    REL S-receive offering 
     puiy  rwo ï sdah óeh ksap tuy. 
     1 p l   ASRT S-BE  3   think FINISH 
     ‘He thought: The god must be going to receive our offering 
     in person.’ (DMI:326) 
 
The ‹s-› prefix here seems to indicate the prospective aspect, while the 
assertive adds a dubitative element. 
      
 At the present stage of our knowledge and with the inscriptional material 
available, it is not possi ble to give a more precise analysis of the exact 
function of the ‹s-› prefix in OM and MM. Nothing is known about the origin 
of the prefix, and no cognates in ot her Mon-Khmer languages have been 
found.52 I use the gloss PROSP for the ‹s-› prefix in examples from LM, even 
if in most cases it obviously has lost its grammatical function and appears to 
be purely cosmetic. 
 Unlike other prefixes such as the causative ‹p-›, ‹s-› does not induce a 
change of register when prefixed to  nasal or liquid initials, which might 
indicate either that the prefix was not pronounced anymore at the time of the 
emergence of registers in Mon, or  that it was pronounced as [s] when 
prefixed to voiceless initials and as [z ] when prefixed to voiced ones. More 
research in historical phonetics of Mon is needed  to reach a conclusion on 
this point. At the time being there is not even consensus about when the 
devoicing of initial consonants and with  it the emergence of two distinct 
registers took place in Mon. 
 
                                                      
52 The similarity with Lao siʔ  ‘will, shall; PROSPECTIVE’ and Vietnamese sẽ ‘FUTURE’ is 
probably coincidental.  
 
 
64 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
2.4.2 Modern Mon 
 
Apart from some frozen forms containing traces of the old ‹s-› prefix, nothing 
survives in modern Mon of the OM inflectional morphology. One example is 
LM ‹stiÿ, satiÿ, samtiÿ›, SM hətm ‘remember’ and LM ‹samtiÿ, gatiÿ›, 
SM hətm ‘souvenir, memorial gift’, which are derivations of OM ‹t īm› 
‘know’. According to Shorto (197 1:359, 365) MM ‹satim› is “probably 
originally [a] preparative formation, ‘bring to the notice of’”, of which the 
form ‹samtim› would be the attributive (‘that which brings to the notice of’). 
The LM spelling shows the uncertainty of the initial syllable, which had been 
weakened to [h ə-] in late MM times. For native speakers today the form 
hətm is connected to the base tm, of which it is a derivate by means of the 
new universal prefix hə-.53
 
 The attributive ‹-m-› infix survives in modern Mon only in frozen traces. 
While the labial nasal was probably stil l pronounced as such in MM, it is 
weakened to -ə- in SM. LM sometimes still reflects the original nasal infix, 
but it does so inconsistently. Also the OM nominalizing infixes ‹-n-, -rn-, -ir-›, 
as well as the causative infix ‹-u-› merged in SM in -ə-, wiping out the 
difference between attributive, nomin alizer, and causative in many cases. 
While OM had three distinct derivates from the root ‹glu ï› ‘be plentiful, 
much’, viz. ‹guÿluï› ‘much’, ‹girluï› ‘quantity’, and *‹guluï› ‘increase’, 
only two derived forms from the root ‹glui ï› are left in LM, ‹gamluiï› 
‘much’ and ‹galuiï› ‘quantity; increase’, while in SM they all merge in həlàŋ. 
The connection with the base SM klà ŋ ‘be much’ is still evident to native 
speakers, though not readily  understandable in terms of derivation. Shorto 
(1962) explains cases like this one as “base with vocalic infix”. The “vocalic 
infix” is applied to bases with initial c onsonant clusters, with the first part of 
the cluster undergoing (mostly) regular changes: 
 
‹g, j, d, b, s› → [ h - ]         ‹ g a l u i ï› → həlàŋ ‘much’ , ‹janok› → hənòk ‘big’ 
‹k, c54, t, l› → [k-]55       ‹ k a l o n ›  → kəlon ‘do, work’,  ‹caruit› → kərt ‘cover’ 
 
 Where there was originally a labial nasal infix, the SM reflex is often [p-], 
while LM retains ‹-m-›: 
 
‹lamcåk›       → pəck ‘black’ from the base ‹lcåk› kəck ‘be black’ 
‹tamra’, kamra’›  → pərʔ ‘madman’ from the base ‹tra’, kra’› krʔ 
‹kamlat, palat›   → pəlt ‘thief’ from the base ‹klat› klt ‘steal’ 
                                                      
53 This intuition of native speakers is reflecte d in Shorto 1962, which analyses the form 
simply as “¶ hə-, tm ‘to know’”. 
54 The reflex of ‹c-› with vocalic infix is usually [k-], sometimes [h-] 
55 If the main syllable begins with a velar sound, the reflex is [t-] 
 
 
65 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The LM variant ‹palat› for the last example shows adaptation to SM usage 
and is of recent date. 
 There are cases, though, where the or iginal ‹-m-› infix was lost without 
leaving any traces apart from the vocalic infix, such as 
 
‹kamlon› → kəlon ‘royal attendant’ (*pəlon) 
 
which was originally the agentive/attributive form of ‹klon› ‘do, work›. 
 
 After the old derivational morphology had collapsed in modern Mon, new 
devices had to be applied to take over some of the functions of the original 
affixes. The most common, as we have  seen, is the new universal prefix hə-, 
which originates in different prefixes as well as in some infixes. This prefix is 
used in SM to spontaneously create derivates as needed. A Mon speaker can, 
for example, ask for a həpk p əlŋ, and everyone involved understands that 
he wants a bottle opener, although the word may never have been used before 
and is not part of the standard language. The formation is transparent as hə-, 
pk ‘open’ and pəlŋ ‘bottle’. 
 In more formal contexts, a new nominali zing prefix ‹la-› is used. This prefix 
probably originates in the reanalys is of OM/MM infixed forms with r as first 
element in initial clusters, such as OM ‹rjuh › ‘be deep’, of which a MM 
nominalized form ‹layoh› ‘depth’ is attested. Other verbs that show the same 
initial patterns and could form similar nominal derivates (although they are 
not attested in the inscriptions discov ered and published so far) include OM 
‹rjuï› ‘be clear’, ‹rbin› ‘be firm’, ‹rmeï› ‘hear’, ‹rlim› ‘be ruined’, etc. For 
examples in modern Mon see the excerpt of Saddā Man given in appendix C.  
 Other nominalizing devices are used  in modern Mon, but as they are 
restricted to small sets of verbal bases, they can be considered lexical rather 
than morphological, such as ʔəchk ‘succession, lineage, descent’ from the 
base chk ‘connect’ which is a loan from Burmese hse’ ‹chak› ‘connect, 
continue’, with the nominalized form ăhse’ ‹’achak›. In some instances there 
are alternative affixes for the nominalization, sometimes with a difference in 
meaning: pac ‘split, halve’ - ʔəpac ‘half-viss (measure of weight)’, kəpac 
‘side, direction’ - kəwac ‘half’. The latter form exhibits the old nominalizing 
‹-w-› infix. The LM forms are ‹p āk›, ‹’apāk›, ‹lpāk, lap āk›, and ‹pawāk› 
respectively. 
 Other formations have undergone so  drastic changes that no connection 
between the base and the derivate is apparent in SM, e.g. ʔəhm ‘lower part, 
beneath’ from s ‘be low’; həraʔ ‘wound, sore’ from saʔ ‘be sore, wounded’. 
Only the LM forms reveal the connections: ‹’asmaw› - ‹saw› and ‹sara› - 
‹sra› respectively. 
 In SM, the most widespread device to form verbal nouns is by means of a 
periphrastic construction with  a nominal head, such as pərao ‘story’, pəriəŋ 
 
 
66 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
‘affair, thing, cause’, sk ‘thing to do, something to V’, combined with the 
verb to be nominalized: 
 
chan ‘love’  →   pərao chan ‘love’ 
uh ‘hate’   →   pəriəŋ uh ‘hatred’ 
iəʔ ‘eat’   →   sk iəʔ ‘food, something to eat’ 
 
 In many contexts where we would e xpect a nominal element the verb does 
not need nominalization at all. Verbs in Mon combine freely with 
prepositions such as nù ‘from, since’, ə ín, at, while’ and some quantifiers 
as kəmp ‘every, each’. 
 
 As mentioned above, the attributive form as such has become 
indistinguishable from other derived form s, while its function is still alive in 
LM and formal SM. Where clarity is de sired, the attributive is now usually 
built analytically by means of the relative proclitic mə, which in SM is often 
dropped or almost inaudible, leaving a tr ace only as slight prenasalization of 
the initial of the following verb. It is more common in SM to leave the 
attributive unmarked or mark it by mean s of reduplication of  the verb, as in 
mənìh hnòk-hnòk ‘the big people’, wùt ky
-ky ‘the pretty girls’. 
 
2.4.3 Summary 
 
SM does show traces of morphological pr ocesses, but the formations are not 
transparent anymore in the modern language. Bauer (1982:156ff) speaks of 
“Affix-Synkretismus”. Shorto (1962)  lists as morphological affixes the 
prefixes hə-, p ə-, k ə-, ə-, tə-, the vocalic infix, and th e “labial” and “nasal” 
forms of verb roots, without trying to assign semantic values to the different 
affixes (which would not be possible for SM in the first place).  
 It is evident that the modern Mon verbal morphology cannot be understood 
without referring to older stages of the language. This we are fortunate 
enough to be able to do, given the rath er large corpus of Mon inscriptions 
covering over one thousand years of language development. 
 The causative formation as only su rviving real morphological process in 
Mon is described in chapter 4. 
 
2.5 Verb classes and types of verbs 
 
Verbs can be subcategorised into different classes, some of which are 
language specific while others appear to be universal. Most languages make a 
distinction between transitive and intr ansitive verbs. Another widespread 
feature for verbal subcategorisation ar e aktionsarten (actionality), though not 
all languages seem to make clear-cut di stinctions between verb classes based 
 
 
67 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
on aktionsarten. The relevant verbal s ubcategories in Mon are described in 
the following sections. 
 
2.5.1 Transitive and intransitive verbs 
 
In most languages there is  one class of verbs that can form a statement of 
their own, without additional complement s, and another class consisting of 
verbs that allow or require a complement, nominal, adverbial, adpositional, or 
sentential. Most transitive verbs do not necessarily requi re an overt object, 
although in some languages some do. In English an expression like He killed 
Ø is syntactically incomplete, as the undergoer of the verb to kill  must be 
present. The verb to eat can occur with a direct object, but it does not have to. 
I have already eaten  is a complete sentence in English, although to eat is 
considered a transitive verb. In Mon,  on the other hand, arguments of verbs 
do not have to be overtly expresse d, neither subject nor object. The Mon 
translation of the English sentence He killed Ø  is therefore perfectly 
grammatical in many contexts: h həct Ø. Active topics, as well as other 
information retrievable from the general context, are not usually expressed in 
a sentence and no use is usually made of weak pronouns like English he, she, 
it. There is a set of verbs, though, that in many contexts require a generic or 
inherent object, which is non-referential. In the Mon translation of I have 
already eaten, the verb iəʔ ‘eat’ requires an object, the default for which is 
pŋ ‘cooked rice’:  
 
(2.32a)  ʔuə  iəʔ pŋ toə    ya ʔ. 
S M     1 s   e a t   r i c e  FINISH NSIT 
      ‘I have already eaten (rice).’ 
 
This sentence can also be uttered when the food eaten was actually bread or 
noodles but the speaker does not want to  mention the kind of food he had. 
The object here merely indicates that a meal has been eaten and not just some 
sweets or fruit, which is not considered ‘real eating’ in many Southeast Asian 
cultures. 56 Without the object pŋ the sentence loses its general meaning and 
refers to some food mentioned or visible: 
 
(2.32b)  ʔuə iəʔ toə   y a ʔ. 
S M     1 s   e a t   FINISH NSIT 
      ‘I have already eaten of that.’ 
                                                      
56 In this case a specific object ha s to be expressed in Mon, e.g. iəʔ kwa  ‘eat sweets’ or 
iəʔ st-chuʔ ‘eat fruit’. 
 
 
68 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The situation is similar with the verb həton ‘learn’, 57  which naturally 
combines with the generic object lòc ‘book, writing’ when no specific object 
of learning is expressed. 
 
 The range of nouns functioning as direct  objects in Mon is much wider than 
in European languages (s. also secti on 2.6 on complements), including also 
location and goal, among others. In th e following sentences, both location 
and goal are unmarked, appearing as direct  objects of the respective verbs of 
location and motion. There are alternative forms marking the location and, 
less commonly, the goal as prepositional (oblique) objects, sometimes with a 
difference of reading. 
 
(2.33a)  h mŋ ph ə  l əkyac. 
SM    3   stay  temple monk 
      ‘He is staying at the temple.’ 
 
(2.33b)  h mŋ  uə phə  l əkyac. 
S M     3    s t a y   LOC temple monk 
      ‘He is at the temple.’ 
 
(2.34a)  poy ʔa  ŋkk. 
SM    1pl go  Bangkok 
      ‘We are going to Bangkok.’ 
 
(2.34b)  poy ʔa thʔ  ŋkk. 
SM    1pl go GOAL Bangkok 
      ‘We are going (all the way) to Bangkok.’ 
 
 Transitive verbs typically express ac tivities, while intransitive verbs can 
express both states and activities. Th ere are a few verbs expressing states 58 
that can take a direct object. In many cases the combination of state verb and 
object seems to be lexically fixed,  with only a limited number of nouns 
available as object. The most common ex ample of a fixed object is the noun 
ct ‘heart’ (from Pali citta ‘id.’), which combines with state verbs to express 
feelings or states of mind, such as mìp ct ‘be happy’ (lit. ‘pleasant heart’), 
ʔon ct ‘be disheartened’ (lit. ‘little heart’).  The verb ʔon ‘be few, little’ also 
occurs with other nouns as object, e.g. ʔon hloə ‘have little money, be poor’.  
 In OM there are expressi ons like ‹jnok riddhi, jnok ’ ānubhāw› ‘big in 
supernatural and spiritual power’ (SSKa31). SM has expressions like lùə hloə 
                                                      
57 When həton has the meaning ‘teach’ it does not take the generic object. ‘He teaches’ as a 
general statement is rather expressed as h paʔ ʔəca lit. ‘he does (work as a) teacher’. 
58 I will return to the question of “stative verbs” as a formally distinct aktionsart category in 
Mon below. For the time being I prefer to refer to them as “verbs expressing states” from a 
purely semantic point of view. 
 
 
69 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
‘be.easy money, i.e. be rich’. Other ve rbs expressing states can take a wide 
range of direct objects, such as tm ‘know’, chan ‘love’, th ct ‘like’,59 etc. 
 
 Although objects do not have to, or  in many cases cannot, be overtly 
expressed, the distinction transitive versus intransitive holds for Mon. There 
are verbs that cannot take an unmarked (direct) object, e.g. toc ‘lie down, 
sleep’,60 ŋùh ‘be awake, wake up’.  
 Some verbs take only one out of a very  restricted set of nouns as objects, in 
some cases only the nominalization of the verb itself, e.g. krìp mùə hərìp ‘run 
a course’. The same verb krìp ‘run’ may occur with a few other nouns as 
object, e.g. krìp phə ‘run away from school, skip classes’, where the direct 
object phə  ‘school, temple’ has ablative value. See sectio 2.6 for a more 
detailed discussion of verbal complements and their functions. 
 Most verbs can take at least one of a restricted  set of nouns as unmarked 
object, ranging from fixed combinations such as hlo c t ‘be calm, without 
worries’ (lit. ‘be.asleep heart’) to very general activities taking about any 
nominal as object, such as paʔ ‘do’ and iəʔ. The choice of object in these 
cases is restricted only by semantic criteria.  
 A small set of verbs can logically take more than one unmarked object 
(ditransitive verbs). The most prominent example is k ‘give’. In SM only 
one object is usually expressed, though, and the ordering with two overt 
objects is not always certain. The normal word order is Actor-Verb-
Recipient-Theme, although some speakers put the theme before the recipient 
in some contexts. 
 
(2.35a)  h k  ʔəca   lòc  mùə. 
SM    3   give teacher book one 
      ‘He gave the teacher a book.’ 
 
(2.35b)  h k   l    l ò c   ʔ uə. 
SM    3   give  KEEP book 1s 
      ‘He gave me a book.’ 
 
 Other speakers prefer to mark the reci pient as oblique. This is especially 
frequent with verbs other than k ‘give’, which is homophonous with the 
oblique marker. It is however possible for  the two to co-occur: 
 
                                                      
59 th c t is itself a compound of the verb th ‘hit’ and the noun ct ‘heart’, resulting 
formally in expressions with two direct objects. 
60 Verbs like toc can have an unmarked nominal comp lement if that nominal expresses a 
period of time, such as a hətm ‘two nights’. This is an adverbial rather than an object, and 
does not form part of the core (or VP). 
 
 
70 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.35c)  h k  lòc  k  ʔəca . 
SM    3   give book OBL teacher 
      ‘He gave the teacher a book.’ 
 
 Another way of avoiding two adjace nt unmarked objects is by fronting the 
theme into topic or focus position. In th is case it is usually overtly marked as 
topic or focus: 
 
(2.35d)  lòc  k h h k  ʔəca. 
SM    book TOP 3   give teacher 
      ‘He gave the teacher the book (we were talking about).’ 
 
(2.35e)  lòc  ra ʔ h k  ʔəca. 
SM    book FOC 3   give teacher 
      ‘It is a book he gave to the teacher.’ 
 
 In LM the recipient is regularly marked  as oblique with the preposition ‹ku› 
or its newer variant ‹kuiw›.61 There are instances in LM (and less frequent in 
SM) where also direct objects are marked as oblique, which shows the 
uncertainty of the distinction between direct and oblique objects in Mon. 
 
 Some authors mention morphological pa irs of verbs expressing intransitive 
and transitive verbs respectively (Haswell 2002, Halliday 1955, Sadd ā Man). 
These pairs of verbs are actually simp le verb bases and the morphologically 
derived causatives. While it is certainly true that all derived causatives are 
transitive, there are many bases that are transitive too, e.g. pət
m ‘inform’ 
from the base tm ‘know’, piəʔ ‘feed’ from iəʔ ‘eat’, etc. The opposition 
can therefore not be stated as intransitiv e versus transitive, but rather as base 
versus causative. The causative forma tions are the topic of chapter 4. In 
section 2.6 different kinds of verb complements will be discussed, including 
direct objects. 
 
2.5.2 Aktionsarten 
 
Aktionsarten is a term used to describe aspectual properties of the semantics 
of a verb. The most common distinctions made among the world’s languages 
are telic versus atelic, dynamic versus stative, and punctual versus durative. 
Aktionsarten of the verbs of a given language must be established based on 
language specific formal cr iteria. No universal set of tests can be applied, 
although there are some rules of thumb th at help to establish groups of verbs 
belonging to different aktionsarten. Aktionsart is an  inherent part of the 
                                                      
61 The form ‹kuiw› k is actually the result of the merger of two etymologically distinct 
words, viz. OM ‹kil› ‘give’ and ‹ku› ‘to, for, with’. S. section 6.3.11 for more details. 
 
 
71 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
verbal semantics and must not be confused with aspect, which is expressed 
morphologically or periphrastically (Johanson 2000). According to some 
linguists (e.g. Sasse 1991), aktionsart and aspect are not to be regarded as 
generally distinct phenomena. They  are rather the same phenomenon 
expressed by different means, i.e. lexically versus morphosyntactically. 
According to Sasse, a given language more  or less closely represents one of 
three basic types, which correspond to  points on a continuum ranging from 
“zero lexical, maximal grammatical” to “maximal lexical, zero grammatical” 
(Sasse 1991:44). The three basic types according to Sasse are 
 
- The purely morphosyntactical type , where no aktionsarten are 
lexicalised and all aspectual differences are expressed by means of 
aspect markers. Verbs in these la nguages are neutral (underspecified) 
in terms of aktionsart. 
 
- The interactional type , where lexicalised aktionsart and 
morphosyntactically aspect marker interact to express aspectual 
differences. 
 
- The lexical type, in which aspect is expressed by purely lexical means 
and no morphosyntactical processes related to aspect are found. 
 
 No explicit study of aktionsart in Mon has to my knowledge been made. 
From the data available, it seems that  Mon is to be positioned close to the 
morphosyntactical type, with aktionsart hardly lexicalised in most cases. 
Other languages close to this type are Chinese and Thai (s. Jenny 2000), 
which show only marginal lexicalised aktionsarten. 
 A distinction can be made between act ivities and states in Mon, the latter 
including adjectives in European langua ges (verbs expressing a quality). The 
main distinctive characteristic of the ve rbs expressing states is the possibility 
of reduplication. 62 Reduplication of state verbs o ccurs chiefly in attributive 
and adverbial function, rarely in predicative: kl hnòk-hnòk ‘a rather big dog’, 
iəʔ pr h-prh ‘eat quickly’.63 The distinction between  activity verbs and 
verbs describing states is relevant in connection with the directional-aspectual 
operators ʔa ‘go; move away from point of reference’ and klŋ ‘come; move 
towards point of reference’ (s. sections 6.3.2 and 6.3.3) . In combination with 
activity verbs, ʔa and klŋ express an ongoing action/situation, i.e. they leaed 
to (or at least favour) an imperfective/progressive reading, while with statives 
the (perfective) inchoative/ingressive reading isd preferred.64  
                                                      
62 Dynamic verbs can be reduplicated in certain contexts, e.g. after interrogatives to express a 
general meaning: mùʔ h klon-klon  ‘whatever he does’. 
63 See sentences (6.36) and (2.94) for examples of reduplication in predicate position. 
64 See the relevant sections in chapter 6 for details and differences between the two operators. 
 
 
72 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The aspectual value of the directionals is only present when the main verb 
does not involve a movement. Where this is the case the original directional 
reading is always preferred. 
 Although telicity is often described as pa rt of the verbal semantics, it is in 
many cases more appropriate to speak of  the telicity of a verb phrase or a 
verbal expression. The addition of a (mostly specific) object can turn an atelic 
verb into a telic one, as in the English expressions ‘eat apples’ versus ‘eat an 
apple’. The former is atelic, i.e. it does not imply an inherent end point of the 
action. The act of eating apples can be interrupted at any point and the subject 
will still have eaten apple(s). The second expression is telic, i.e. it has an 
inherent end point, namely the point where the apple has been eaten up. If the 
act of eating is interrupted before that  point is reached, the subject cannot be 
said to have eaten an apple. In Mon, where no object has to be overtly 
expressed, about any verb can be interpreted as telic in an appropriate context.  
 There are, on the other hand, verbs that  can hardly be interpreted as atelic, 
i.e. they must include an end point or more precisely a change of state/event. 
These verbs express a change of state (not the process le ading up to that 
point) and the period following the ch ange of state, i.e. they are 
“initiotransformative” as establishe d by Johanson (2000) or “ingressive-
stative (ISTA)” according to Sasse (1991). Examples of this group of verbs are 
cp ‘arrive’, khyt ‘die, be dead’, pk ‘open, be open’, etc. They all combine 
with the originally imperfective/progressive marker mŋ to describe the 
situation following the change of stat e. The change of state itself can be 
highlighted by an operator, such as the original directionals ʔa ‘go’ and klŋ 
‘come’, often combined with the sentence final NSIT marker yaʔ. 
 
(2.36a)  h cp   kl ŋ  ŋkk   ya ʔ. 
S M     3    a r r i v e   COME  Bangkok NSIT 
      ‘He has arrived in Bangkok.’ 
 
(2.36b)  h cp   m ŋ ŋkk   raʔ . 
S M     3    a r r i v e   STAY Bangkok FOC 
      ‘He is in Bangkok now.’ 
 
(2.37a)  kl  khyt ʔa  ya ʔ. 
SM    dog die   GO  NSIT 
      ‘The dog has died.’ 
 
(2.37b)  kl  khyt m ŋ ra ʔ. 
SM    dog die   STAY FOC 
      ‘The dog is dead.’ 
 
 
 
73 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
According to some informants, sentence (2.37b) can refer only to the 
situation where the dead dog is visible. If the carcass is out of sight, (2.37a) is 
preferred. 
 With some verbs, such as pk ‘open’ and mat ‘close’, there is a difference 
whether the subject is actor or undergoer: 
 
(2.38a)  h pk  m ŋ  p ərŋ. 
SM    3   open STAY door 
      ‘He is opening the door.’ 
 
(2.38b)  pə rŋ pk  m ŋ. 
SM    door open STAY 
      ‘The door is open.’ 
 
While (2.38a) describes the act of openi ng the door (telic in  most contexts), 
(2.38b) describes the state after the change of state. The underlying difference 
between the verb p
k in (2.38a) and (2.38b) is that  the former is causative 
(activity), while the latter is  non-causative/intransitive ( ISTA). With most 
verbs this difference is morphologically marked, ‘open’ and ‘close’ being 
conspicuous exceptions (cf. 4.3.7). If in sentences (2.36) and (2.37) the 
subject is actor instead of undergoer,  the causative forms of the respective 
verbs (həc
p and həct) must be used: 
 
(2.36c)  h həcp      n ŋ      ŋ kk   ya ʔ. 
S M     3    CAUS:arrive  CAUS:COME Bangkok NSIT 
      ‘He has brought (her) to Bangkok.’ 
 
(2.36d)  h həcp      m ŋ ŋkk   raʔ . 
S M     3    CAUS:arrive  STAY Bangkok FOC 
      ‘He is bringing (her) to Bangkok.’ 
 
(2.37c)  h həct     k l ŋ/nŋ       k l  ya ʔ. 
S M     3    CAUS:die COME/CAUS:COME dog NSIT 
      ‘He has killed a dog. 
 
(2.37d)  h həct     m ŋ kl ra ʔ. 
S M     3    CAUS:die STAY dog FOC 
      ‘He is killing a dog.’ 
 
In sentence (2.37c) either the intransitive directional klŋ or the causative nŋ 
can be used. The former implies that the subject killed a dog a nd left it at the 
place where he killed it, while the latter implies that he killed the dog and 
brought the carcass along. 
 
 
74 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The aspectual difference seems to be due to the opposition ISTA versus 
activity. With the former, the aspect operator mŋ focuses on the situation 
following the event expressed by the verb, while with the latter the same 
operator puts the focus on the causation of the event. 
 Verb classes in Mon are semantically  underspecified and the interpretation 
depends very much on the context. Th e common tests for actionality do not 
seem to be generally applicable in Mon (cf. Van Valin and LaPolla 1997:94). 
Tentatively I propose two main aktionsart classes in Mon, viz.  activities and 
ISTA, the latter with two semantic sub-classes, i.e. more punctual 
(transformation prominent), and more stative (state prominent). The 
distinction is not an absolute one, though, as an appropria te context and/or 
choice of operators can in most cases lead to a non-standard reading, i.e. 
highlight the beginning of an event or  the ongoing event. The distinction is 
made here based on the reading produced by the directional operators and the 
default interpretation without operators . Without operators present and in a 
neutral context, the most natural interpretation of the verbs listed below is  
h
m ‘speak’, khyt ‘die’ and ky ‘be beautiful’.  
 
1 .  A c t i v i t i e s :             hm ʔa   ‘keep speaking, go on speaking’ 
2a. ISTA (transformation):   khyt ʔa   ‘ d i e ’     
2b. ISTA ( s t a t e ) :           ky ʔa    ‘become beautiful’ or ‘become 
more beautiful’ 
 
2.5.3 Resultative verb compounds (RVC) 
 
In many Southeast Asian languages, a common construction is what has been 
described as “resultative verb co mpounds” (cf. Bisang 1992). Resultative 
verb compounds are typically made up of  a verb describing an activity and 
another verb expressing the result of the first one, thus pr oducing telicity of 
the whole expression. While V1 is obligatorily dynamic, V2 can belong to any 
verbal category. The subject of resu ltative verb constructions has usually 
control over only V 1; V2 is not within the scope of the direct control of the 
subject.  Resultative verb compounds  in Mon frequently occur in the 
following constructions: 
 
V1-V2:         k l à y  c h           ‘find’ (lit. ‘look for - meet’) 
V1-NEG-V2      k l à y  h ù ʔ ch       ‘cannot find’ (lit. ‘look for - not - meet’) 
V1 - GOAL - V2   k l à y  t hʔ ch      ‘must find’ (lit. ‘look for - until - meet’) 
V1 - GIVE - V2    klày k ch       ‘must find’ (‘look for - so that - meet’ 
V1 - COND - V2   klày teh ch        ‘if you look for you will find’ 
 
 While neither V 1 nor V 2 have to be telic, the whole expression is usually 
considered telic, with the final limit of the activity explicitly expressed by V2. 
 
 
75 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Apart from V 1 having to be an activity, there are no formal restrictions on 
resultative verb compounds in Mon. What makes sense semantically is 
deemed correct, although some expressi ons are more idiomatic than others. 
Examples of frequently used compounds are: 
 
iəʔ phə        ‘ e a t  -  f u l l ’           ‘ e a t  o n e ’ s  f i l l ’  
ʔa hùə          ‘ g o  -  f a r ’            ‘ g o  f a r  a w a y ’  
toc hlo         ‘lie down - asleep’     ‘sleep, fall asleep’ 
 
 If V 2 is a morphological causative in the construction V1-V2, it is changed to 
its base form in the other constructions listed above. The conditional 
construction does not occur with these V 2 at all. As the subject has control 
over both V 1 and V 2 with causative V 2s, it is questionable if we should talk 
about resultative verb compounds at a ll in these cases. With the subject 
controlling also V2, there is always a conative co nnotation, i.e. the result may 
or may not be realised. Another indication that the construction with a 
causative V 2 is fundamentally different from genuine resultative verb 
constructions is the position of the di rect object, which stands between V 1 
and V2 in resultative verb constructions, but after V2 if this is causative. 
 
pn həct        ‘shoot - CAUS:die’      ‘shoot dead’ 
pn hùʔ khyt     ‘shoot - NEG - die’      ‘shoot without killing’ 
pk pətt        ‘chase - CAUS:exit’      ‘chase out’ 
pk hùʔ tt       ‘chase - NEG - exit’      ‘cannot chase out’ 
iəʔ həʔt        ‘ e a t  -  CAUS: a l l ’         ‘ e a t  u p ’  
iəʔ thʔ ʔt       ‘ e a t  -  GOAL - all’       ‘eat until it’s finished’ 
 
 One might be tempted to analyse direc tionals as resultative verb compounds 
as well, as in 
 
kwac ʔa          ‘ w a l k  -  g o ’            ‘ w a l k  a w a y ’  
ket nŋ         ‘ t a k e  -  CAUS:come’      ‘bring hither’ 
 
The analysis would be along the lines that  the movement is the result of the 
activity (‘move away from point of reference’ as result of the activity ‘walk’). 
This analysis does not hold, though, as the impossibility of the following 
constructions shows: 
 
*kwac hùʔ/thʔ/teh ʔa 
*ket hùʔ/thʔ/teh nŋ 
 
Compare these with the common expressions 
 
 
 
76 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
iəʔ hùʔ/thʔ/teh phə        ‘eat not enough/your fill/and you will be full’ 
pn thʔ khyt            ‘shoot until it dies, shoot dead’ 
 
 I take as real resulta tive verb compounds in Mon only constructions with an 
active ([+control]) V1 and a V2 which is beyond the cont rol of the subject ([-
control]). The position of the direct object is between V1 and V2 and there can 
be a switch of function from object to subject, as in 
 
(2.39a) h pn  h əcem hù ʔ khyt. 
SM   3   shoot bird   NEG die 
     ‘He couldn’t shoot the bird; he shot the bird but it did not die.’ 
 
Here the bird is synt actically the object of pn but subject of khyt. 
Semantically it is the undergoer of bot h verbs. With this sentence compare 
(2.39b) with a causative V 2 and a shared object, both syntactically and 
semantically (həcem is undergoer of both verbs): 
 
(2.39b)  h pn  hə ct    h əcem. 
SM    3   shoot CAUS:die bird 
      ‘He shot dead a bird.’ 
 
 In other cases the subject of V 1 is also the subject of V2: 
 
(2.40) ʔuə iəʔ pŋ phə ya ʔ. 
SM   1s  eat  rice full  NSIT 
     ‘I am full; I have eaten and am full now.’ 
 
In (2.40) ʔuə is syntactically the subject of both verbs, but semantically it is 
actor of V1 and undergoer of V2. 
 Resultative verb compounds can be c onsidered a sub-category of serial 
verbs constructions, an account of which will be given in section 3.1. 
 
2.5.4 Existential verbs (Copulas) 
 
A small set of verbs, labelled existential verbs or copulas, show unusual 
syntactical and semantic behaviou r in Mon. This group includes the 
following verbs, some of which are defective: 
 
S M       L M  
th       ‹dah›       ‘be sth., be in a state of’ 
mŋ      ‹ m å ï, dmåï›   ‘stay, remain, be at’ 
n ù m       ‹ n w a ÿ›      ‘be at, there is, have’ 
(hùʔ) siəŋ  ‹se ï›        ‘ ( n o t )  b e  s o ’  
 
 
77 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The first three verbs listed above have developed into aspect/manner 
operators while the last item occurs only in negative and interrogative 
contexts. The verb nùm never occurs in negative contexts, where it is 
replaced by the numeral mùə ‘one’ as mentioned above (2.2.2). 
 
2.5.4.1 ‹dah› th ‘be something, be in a certain state, be born, become’ 
 
The existential verb th (OM ‹das›, MM, LM ‹dah›) ‘be sth., be in a state of’ 
is mainly used as copula with nominal predicates: 
 
(2.41a)  h th r ə   ʔuə. 
SM    3   be  friend  1s 
      ‘He is my friend; he is a friend of mine.’ 
 
 The use of th with nominal predicates is not obligatory, as the following 
sentence shows. The construction in (2.41b) is actually more common than 
(2.41a). 
 
(2.41b)  h kh r ə   ʔuə raʔ. 
S M     3    TOP friend  1s  FOC 
      ‘He is my friend; he is a friend of mine.’ 
 
 The use of th is obligatory with nominal predicates that express a state of 
mind or an illness: 
 
(2.42)  h th k əsak. 
S M     3    b e   NML:happy 
      ‘He is happy.’ 
 
(2.43)  h th y ə   n è ə. 
SM    3   be  illness stomach 
      ‘He has got the cholera.’ 
 
(2.44)  pa ʔ  th h əwò       ìʔ. 
SM    PROH be  NML:anxious LITTLE 
      ‘Don’t worry.’ 
 
 The verb th is also used with expressions of time, as in the following 
sentences. 
 
(2.45)  pe ï tau   klu ï   ’away ’ āyuk 5  snāÿ dah ra. 
L M     f u l l  STAND COME  age   age  5  year  be  FOC 
      ‘It was when she reached the age of five years.’ (MKP:7) 
 
 
78 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.46)  ma   l ʔ       t  mùə   hnam  kr p  th. 
SM    extent long.time about one  year   near  be 
      ‘It was a long time, nearly a year.’ (KD) 
 
 In certain contexts, th has ingressive-stative read ing. This is the case for 
example in the expression ŋuə th mənìh ‘birthday’ (lit. ‘day be man’). 
 
 The causative form of th, həth/pəth, means ‘bring into being, organize, 
establish’ and can occur as secondary verb or as a full verb. 
 
(2.47)  poy       dhaw   jnok-jnok lew klon  badah  tuin  ’uit ra. 
LM    performance teaching big- RDP  TOP do   CAUS:be UP   a l l   FOC 
      ‘I shall organise a great performance of all teachings.’ (DC:16) 
 
(2.48)  ŋuə yèh     h həth   p u ə. 
SM    day morning 3   CAUS:be performance 
      ‘The next day they organized a theatre.’ (KD) 
 
 In postverbal position, th developed into a modal operator, expressing the 
ability to do something or the successful result of the activity expressed by 
the main verb. This is directly compar able to and may have been influenced 
by (or influenced) both Burmese hpyi’ ‘be’ and Thai pen ‘id.’ with the same 
function in postverbal position (Okell and Allott 2001:140f). 
 
(2.49)  yaw  ra  hwa’ khyap bac ā   p óay cuit  klon  mgah   m ū ’arā  
 kicca 
LM    COND FOC NEG  ponder consider LOC  heart do   COND  what
 thing affair 
      m w a y  r o   k l o n   h w a ’  mān, klon  hwa’ dah sak-sak ra. 
      o n e    TOP do   NEG  WIN  do   NEG  BE  INTENS  FOC 
      ‘Whatever we do, if we do not think about it thoroughly in our 
hearts, we will 
      not be capable of doing it, we will not achieve the goal at all.’ 
(LPM:24) 
  
(2.50)  ʔuə h m  ʔ ərè     khyi əŋ kh rao hù ʔ th. 
SM    1s  speak  language Chin  TOP TOP NEG BE 
      ‘I cannot speak Chin.’ (‘As for me speaking that Chin language, 
      I cannot speak it.’) (KD) 
 
 In sentence final posi tion, MM ‹dah› developed into the focal marker raʔ, 
with which th can co-occur in the modern language. Sentence final th is 
best translated as ‘it is the case’ (unless it has modal value as in (2.50) above). 
 
 
79 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
This usage is probably influen ced by Burmese sentence final hpyi’ ‘be’ with 
the same function, explained by Okell and Allot as “used redundantly in 
some contexts, perhaps for stylistic effects”. (Okell and Allott 2001:141). 
 
(2.51)  jwa   gah ’an āy tuip  law  hwa’ khyuit-pluit  ra  dah. 
L M     c o r p s e  TOP uncle bury KEEP NEG  c e r t a i n      FOC BE 
      ‘It must be the case that you haven’t buried that corpse well.’ 
(MKP:17) 
  
 For details of the devel opment of the focus marker raʔ from ‹dah› see 
chapter 5. 
 
 In negated contexts, th as full verb/copula is usually replaced by (hùʔ) siəŋ 
‘it is not the case, it is not so’: 
 
(2.41c)  h rəʔ   ʔuə hùʔ  si əŋ. 
SM    3   friend  1s  NEG  be.so 
      ‘He is not my friend.’ 
 
 The negation of th is common with expressions of states of mind, but less 
so with expressions of illnesses. With the latter, the whole clause is usually 
negated with hùʔ siəŋ. 
 
(2.42b)  h hùʔ th k əsak. 
S M     3    NEG be  NML:happy 
      ‘He is not happy.’ 
 
(2.43b)  h th y ə   n è ə    hùʔ  siəŋ. 
SM    3   be  illness stomach NEG be.so 
      ‘He has not got the cholera.’ 
 
2.5.4.2 ‹måï› mŋ ‘be at, remain, stay’ 
 
As a full verb, mŋ (OM ‹dmoï›, MM ‹dmåï›) means ‘stay at a place, remain, 
be at a place’. As mŋ expresses a conscious, controlled activity, its subject is 
usually animate, although inanimate subjects can occur.  
 Since MM times, ‹dmå ï› has developed a secondary meaning as 
imperfective/progressive a uxiliary, which has become very widespread in 
LM and SM, in the latter replac ing the older progressive marker tao ‘dwell, 
stand, be somewhere’. The aspectual use of mŋ will be described in section 
6.3.1. 
 The old spelling ‹dmå ï› is preserved in older LM, but increasingly replaced 
by the more phonetic variant ‹må ï› in newer texts. Some authors apparently 
 
 
80 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
attempt to make a distinction between the full verb ‹må ï› and the aspect 
operator ‹dmåï›,65 but this usage lacks a histor ical basis and no consistency 
has arisen so far.  
 
 There are no restrictions on the combinability of mŋ with verbal and 
clausal operators: 
 
(2.52)  ʔuə mŋ ʔənʔ raʔ. 
S M     1 s   s t a y   h e r e   FOC 
      ‘I am going to stay here; I live here.’ 
 
(2.53)  ʔuə mŋ ʔənʔ  hùʔ  màn  ra ʔ. 
S M     1 s   s t a y   h e r e    NEG WIN  FOC 
      ‘I cannot stay here anymore.’ 
 
(2.54)  h məkʔ mŋ ə  ŋ  h əmə. 
S M     3    DES   s t a y   LOC  land  Burma 
      ‘ H e  w a n t s  t o  s t a y  i n  B u r m a . ’  
 
(2.55)  ŋ  w ŋkaʔ     n ʔ ʔuə hùʔ  mŋ pùh. 
SM    town Sangkhlaburi  this 1s  NEG stay  NEG 
      ‘I am not going to stay in Sangkhlaburi.’ 
 
 The idiomatic expression mŋ phə ‘stay at school’ means ‘be a pupil of a 
certain school, be studying’, as opposed to t n phə ‘go up to school’, which 
means more specifically ‘be going to school right now’. 
 
 Two old derivates of the base verb ‹dmå ï› still exist in LM and SM. The 
form and pronunciation of both have merged in the modern language, but the 
meanings are kept apart: OM ‹dirmo ï›, MM ‹dramåï, damå ï› ‘dwelling 
place, place’ is a regular nominalization of ‹dmåï›, while OM ‹dumoï›, MM 
‹damåï› ‘set, install, cause to dwell’ is  the morphological causative. In LM 
both forms are ‹damåï›, in SM həmŋ. The use of the causative həmŋ is rare 
in SM, the periphrastic construction k m ŋ ‘GIVE stay’ being preferred (s. 
chapter 4 on causatives). 
 
 In a given text in LM and especially in SM, m ŋ is easily one of the most 
frequent words. This is due to the extended use of the verb as aspectual 
marker, which can combine with practical ly any verb or verbal expression in 
practically any context as will be shown in section 6.3.1. 
 
                                                      
65 E.g. Palita (1985) and Candimācāra (2001). 
 
 
81 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
2.5.4.3 ‹nwaÿ› nùm ‘be at, exist, have’ 
 
In OM, the verb ‹nom› with the regu lar ‘hypothetical’ form ‹snom› and the 
irregular attributive ‹lmom› (< *‹nm om› with nasal dissimilation) has the 
meaning ‘be, exist; to have, possess’  (DMI:216). The ca usative ‹panom› 
means ‘endow, confer’. In LM the base verb is ‹nwa ÿ›, the attributive 
usually ‹mnuÿ›, rarer ‹ma nwa ÿ›. The hypothetical and causative forms 
have been lost in the modern language. 
 The meaning ‘have, to possess’ in OM can be expressed either by ‹nom› 
and a direct object, as in (2.56), or by ‹nom› and an oblique object marked 
with the preposition ‹ku›, as in (2.57). Notice that both sentences are from the 
same inscription. 
 
(2.56)  ñah   ma ’an  yiryuk  dirhat     gu ÿloï  
OM    person REL lack vigour66 NML:strong ATTR:many  
      snom      yiryuk dirhat. 
      PROSP:exist vigour NML:strong 
      ‘Those who lack vigour and st rength shall have them.’ (SSKe18-19) 
(2.57)  ma nom  ku  yiry ās     j i r k u  
OM    REL exist OBL NML:bright body 
      ‘(he) who has light shining from his body’ (SSKa5)  
 
 In the MM inscriptions, the meaning ‘h ave, possess’ is usually expressed by 
the ‹nom ku›, apart from a few set expressions, such as 
 
(2.58)  thah   thor  ma nwom bnat    ïuh  mwoy lak   kas āp 
MM    bowl gold  REL exist  amount price one   10,000 Kyat 
      ‘a golden bowl which was about 10,000 Kyat worth’  
      ( A j a p ālacetī A12) 
       
 The normal construction in MM is illustrated in the following example. 
 
(2.59)  smi ï ma nwom tau   ku  saddh ā 
MM    king  REL exist  STAND OBL faith 
      ‘the king who has faith’ (SDGb22) 
 
 In SM nùm can be used as transitive verb with the meaning ‘have, possess’, 
as in 
 
                                                      
66 ‹yiryuk› is the nominalization of a not attested verb *‹yuk› ‘be vigorous’. Cf. LM ‹that 
yuk› ‘be in good health’, which represents the root verbs of both ‹yiryuk› and ‹dirhat›. 
 
 
82 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.60a)  ʔuə m əkʔ nùm  ka. 
S M     1 s   DES   exist car 
      ‘I would like to have a car.’ (NOP) 
 
This construction is rare, though. The preferred expression in SM and LM is 
with nùm as existential verb ‘there is’, be at’, with either the possessor or the 
possessed marked as oblique. The above sentence (2.60a) is deemed 
unnatural language by some speakers, the more idiomatic expression being 
 
(2.60b)  ʔuə məkʔ kʔ ka. 
S M     1 s   DES   get car 
      ‘I would like to get a car.’ 
 
 In (2.61) the possessor is marked as locative, while  the possessed object is 
unmarked (subject): 
 
(2.61)  póay ’ide’   brau   gah kawe ï   c h ān nwaÿ dmå ï hā? 
LM    LOC  y.sister  woman TOP NML:play love  exist  STAY Q 
      ‘Do you have a lover, little sister?’ (MKP:20)  
 
 In (2.62) it is the posse ssed object that is mark ed as oblique, while the 
possessor functions as subject. 
 
(2.62)  mnih mnuÿ    k u i w  puin  kusuiw  ta’  gah 
L M     m a n   ATTR:exist OBL  merit fortune  PL  TOP 
      ‘the people who have  fortune and merit’ (DC:6)  
 
 In SM, the preferred construction of possessive expressions is with either 
the possessor or the possessed in senten ce initial topic position, the latter 
being more common. 
 
(2.63a)  ka  ʔuə nùm.  ( ?ʔuə ka  nùm. / ʔuə nùm  ka.) 
SM    car 1s  exist  ( 1s  car exist / 1s  exist car) 
      ‘I have a car.’ 
 
This construction can also be anal ysed as ‘my car exists’, with ʔuə as 
(regularly unmarked) possessive. 
 It is interesting that in OM the us e of ‹nom› as transitive ‘have, possess’ 
appears to have been more widespr ead than in MM and in the modern 
language. Perhaps this development can be  attributed to Burmese influence, 
which as we have seen must have been rather strong since late Pagán times. 
In Burmese, possessive cons tructions involve the verb hyí ‘exist, there is, be 
at’ and the possessor marked as locative: 
 
 
83 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.63b)  c ăno-hma kà  hyí  te. 
B      1 s m - LOC  car exist RL 
 
 In colloquial Burmese, as in SM, the possessor can be unmarked (c ăno) or 
marked as possessive (cănó). The Burmese sentence corresponding to (2.60a) 
is 
 
(2.60c)  ?căno kà  hyí  hcin  te. 
B      1 s m   c a r  e x i s t  DES  RL 
     
This sentence is not ac cepted by all speakers, though. The more idiomatic 
expression in Burmese, both written and colloquial, is 
 
(2.60d)  c ăno kà  lou  hcin  te. 
B      1 s m   c a r  w a n t  DES  RL 
 
 It would be interesting to investigate the development of nùm in the Thai-
Mon dialects, which have been under increasing Thai influence for the past 
250 years. The existential verb mi in Thai is regularly used as a transitive 
verb meaning ‘have, possess’:67
 
(2.60e)  chan 4 yak1 mi   rot 3. 
T h      1 s    DES  have car 
 
 The basic meaning of nùm in SM and LM is ‘be at, there is’, which overlaps 
with the meaning of mŋ. The main difference is that nùm excludes the 
control (and volition) of the subject, while mŋ is controlled by the subject. 
This means that nùm cannot be used in imperative, desiderative or most other 
modal contexts, as the following examples illustrate. 
 
(2.64)  *ʔ uə nùm  ʔənʔ hùʔ màn. 
S M      1 s   e x i s t  h e r e   NEG WIN 
 
(2.65)  * pèh nùm  ʔənʔ ìʔ! 
S M      2    e x i s t  h e r e   LITTLE 
 
(2.66)  * h məkʔ nùm  ə w ŋkaʔ     r a ʔ. 
S M      3    DES   e x i s t  LOC Sangkhlaburi  FOC 
                                                      
67  Interestingly the same verb in Shan, a Tai language spoken in northern Burma and 
increasingly influenced by Burmese, is not commonly used as a transitive verb, possession 
being usually expressed with the possessor marked as locative, as in Burmese: (ti) kău kha mi 
hn ʔ  ‘(LOC) I have house SFP’ (s. Cushing 1906:17). 
 
 
84 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 If nùm is replaced by mŋ the above sentences become grammatically 
correct and yield the readi ngs ‘I cannot stay/live here.’, ‘Stay here!’, and ‘He 
wants to stay/live in Sangkhlaburi.’ respectively.  
 
Negation of nùm 
 
 No negative occurrence of nùm is attested in any period or dialect of Mon. 
In OM, ‹nom› was in complementary di stribution with th e negative marker 
‹sak›, which appears to have original ly meant ‘there is no’, making it the 
semantic opposite of ‹nom›. This is the only genuine case of lexicalized 
negation in Mon. As we have seen above (section on 2.3 Negation), ‹sak› 
often pleonastically combines with the other negation marker ‹kah›. 
 
(2.67)  sak     h e t    k y āk buddha  [ta]rley  guÿ loï   sik’im  
OM    NEG.exist reason holy  Buddha lord:1s  ATTR:many PROSP:smile 
      c i    k a h  sak. 
      EMPH NEG NEG.exist 
      ‘It does not happen that the Buddhas smile without a reason.’ 
(SSKa27f) 
       
 In MM the negative verb ‹sak› had been weakened to ‹ha› and lost its 
original verbal character. As ‹nom › now lacked a lexical opposite, its 
negation had to be expressed periphrast ically, as is the case with all other 
verbs in Mon. Interestingly the most obvious negation *‹ha nom› was not 
chosen. Instead the originally reinforced negation OM ‹sak moy› ‘there is not 
one’ was taken as regular negative form of ‹nom›, which lead to the present 
situation with the pair nùm -hù
ʔ mùə ‘there is - there isn’t’. 
 
 It is not clear whether the inability to  be negated is an original feature of 
nùm or a later development due to the presence of a lexical opposite in OM. 
No cognate forms outside the Monic branch have been found, making an 
interpretation of the Mon word rather difficult. The corresponding verb in 
Nyah Kur is nm, which exhibits a differe nt register from Mon. 68 The Nyah 
Kur verb freely combines with the negation marker ku: 
 
(2.68a)  ku  n m mənìh ch  tim. 
NyK   NEG exist man   name  Tim 
      ‘There is no-one (h ere) called Tim.’ (Diffloth 1984:218) 
 
                                                      
68 We would expect second or ‘breathy’ regist er also in Nyah Kur after the initial voiced 
nasal. Diffloth (1984:218) reconstructs *nm for Proto-Monic and *[ʔ]nm for Proto-Nyah 
Kur. 
 
 
85 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.69a)  w y ku  n m prak. 
NyK   1s  NEG exist silver 
      ‘I don’t have any money.’ (Thongkham 1984:284) 
 
The same sentences in SM are given below. 
 
(2.68b)  hùʔ mùə m ənìh y əmùʔ tem. / mənìh  yəmùʔ tem  hùʔ mùə. 
SM    NEG one  man   name  Tim  man   name  Tim  NEG one  
 
(2.69b)  hloə    ʔuə hùʔ mùə. / ( ə) ʔuə hùʔ mùə hlo ə. 
SM    copper 1s  NEG one  / LOC  1s  NEG one  copper 
 
 The fact that the Nyah Kur verb can be negated while the corresponding 
Mon verb cannot can be explained in tw o ways. First, it is possible that in 
pre-Pagán Mon (Dv āravatī period), ‹nom› was a regular verb with the 
possibility of negation, which was preserved in the Dvāravatī Mon enclave in 
central Thailand which is known as Nyah Kur. The other possibility is that 
Nyah Kur developed the regular negation of DOM ‹nom› under the influence 
of Thai, which must have been very strong for many centuries. As there is no 
instance of negated ‹nom› in the Dvāravatī inscriptions so far discovered and 
published, this issue cannot be solved at the present. 
 
 In sentence final position, nùm  has developed into an auxiliary which 
“denotes [a] general and persecuting state of affairs” (Shorto 1962:132). This 
use is not very frequent  in either LM or SM. Shorto gives one sample 
sentence of this use (spelling adapted): 
 
(2.70)  ʔəkwk k ʔ pn  s ənat ʔənʔ ʔuə t h t ŋ   ʔəmò nùm ha? 
S M     f o r      GET shoot gun  here  1s  HIT receive permit EXIST Q 
      ‘Do I have to get a permit to shoot here?’ 
 
 With no further examples of nùm as SFP in my database, I consider the 
grammaticalised use of nùm as rather marginal in LM and SM. 
 
2.5.4.4 ‹(hwa’) seï› (hùʔ) siəŋ ‘(not to) be so’ 
 
The verb siəŋ ‘be so, be the case that, be a f act’ in modern Mon is defective 
as it can occur only in negated and in terrogative contexts. The verb is not 
attested in inscriptions before MM, where its occurrence is restricted to 
negative contexts. As seen above, siəŋ is in quasi-complementary distribution 
with th ‘be’, of which it functions as regular negation in many contexts. The 
LM compound ‹seï-leï› ‘truly,indeed’ suggests that at an earlier stage of the 
language ‹seï› could be used also in affirmative contexts. Data from Nyah 
 
 
86 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Kur seem to confirm this to some extent. Diffloth (1984:184) writes about the 
corresponding verb in Nyah Kur, which he reconstructs as * siəŋ for Proto-
Monic and *iaŋ for Proto-Nyah Kur: “(usually,  but not always in Negative 
Sentence): (not) to be right; (sth./s.one)(not) to be (sth./s.one)  [V. intr]”. 
Diffloth gives no exampl es of the use of * iaŋ i n  N y a h  K u r ,  b u t  L .  
Thongkham (1984:310) lists chiəŋ with the meaning ‘that’s it; be so’. She 
illustrates the use of this verb with the expression chiəŋ ʔy69 ‘Yes, it is. 
That’s it.’ The second, longer example given by Thongkham is interesting, as 
it shows that in Nyah Kur, too, chiəŋ appears to function as the negative form 
of thh ‘be’,70 just as it does in Mon: 
 
(2.71a)  m ənìh dii   ʔh ku  chi əŋ phàaʔ  w y, ìn th h  c əwaay  wy. 
N y K    m a n    CLHUM that NEG be.so father  1s,   3   be   uncle   1s 
      ‘That man is not my father , he is my uncle.’ (Thongkham 1984:310)  
 
The negated first part of the sentence uses chiəŋ, while the affirmative second 
part has thh. The same sentence translated into SM is given in (2.71b). 
 
(2.71b)  m ənìh t ʔ ʔəpa ʔuə  hùʔ siəŋ, èh th ʔənày  ʔuə. 
S M     m a n    t h a t  f a t h e r  1 s   NEG be.so 3   be  uncle  1s 
 
 The use of hùʔ si əŋ as extended or emphatic negation marker has been 
illustrated above (section 2.3.1). Another important function of the 
expression is as negative answer to a question or proposition, often, but not 
necessarily, ending itself in (hùʔ) si əŋ (ha) 71  ‘isn’t it?’. The affirmative 
counterpart in this case is usually th ‘hit (the mark); be right, correct’. 
 
(2.72)  ʔiʔnʔ  lòc  pèh siəŋ  ha ?      hùʔ  siəŋ. / t h raʔ. 
SM    NML:this book 2   be.so Q       NEG be.so / HIT FOC 
      ‘This is your book, right.’ 
 
 Younger speakers of Mon in Thailand s poradically answer a question like 
the above with siəŋ alone, but in most cases immediately realise that 
something was wrong and correct themselves, adding th. This is a case of 
strong Thai influence confusing bilingua l speakers rather th an an indication 
of a tendency to extend the use of siəŋ to affirmative contexts. This 
development under Thai (and Khmer) influence may be the cause for the 
Nyah Kur usage, though, and it remains to be seen if something similar 
happens in the future in the Thai-M on dialects. Sakomoto (1994:1124f) lists 
                                                      
69 Spelling adapted. 
70 NyK thh is historically related to SM th  (OM ‹das›). 
71 In colloquial SM, the sentence final question marker ha is often dropped, leaving many 
sentences ending in siəŋ, which in turn is shortened to sé with high intonation. 
 
 
87 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
only negative occurrences under ‹hu seï› in his dictionary of the Pakkret 
Mon dialect, north of Bangkok. 
 
2.5.5 Directionals 
 
Directionals are verbs that add a direct ion usually, but not exclusively, to a 
verb denoting a manner of movement. Bisang (1992) makes a distinction 
between “orientation verbs” and “directionals”. The former group comprises 
the verbs ‘go’ and ‘come’, the latter such verbs as ‘enter’, ‘exit’, ‘move up’, 
‘move down’, etc. This distinction is basically justified also for Mon, as 
orientation verbs may co-occur with di rectionals, while only one directional 
may occur in a verbal expression. I take orientation verbs to be a subcategory 
of the directionals, rather than a separate class, as they share a number of 
features, such as the licensing of a go al object with motion verbs and similar 
grammaticalization paths. Two directionals (usually  one directional and one 
orientation verb) may co-occur in M on, but series of three or more 
directionals are ungrammatical. 
 
(2.73)  krìp ceh   ʔa,  krìp tn pl n. 
S M     r u n  DOWN GO  run UP  again 
      ‘We ran down, and then we ran up again.’ (KN) 
 
(2.74)  * h kwac ceh   t t  ʔa  nù  h əʔ. 
S M      3    w a l k  DOWN OUT GO  ABL house 
       ‘He walked down out of the house.’ 
 
 The choice of the orientation verb depends on the point of reference, by 
default ‘here and now’ or ‘I’, i.e. th e speaker. If the movement (actual or 
imagined) expressed by the verb is aw ay from the point of reference, the 
orientation verb ʔa ‘go’ is used, if the movement is towards the point of 
reference, klŋ ‘come’. If the main verb denotes the induced movement of an 
object, the causative forms, na and nŋ respectively, are used. 
 As a verb denoting a manner of movement, such as krìp ‘run’ or kwac 
‘walk’ does not include a direction of movement (i s not oriented),  it can not 
include a goal of the movement. In or der to add a goal to the movement, a 
directional or orientation verb has to be added. 
 
(2.75a)  * h kwac ph ə. 
SM     3   walk school 
       ‘He is walking to school.’ 
 
 
 
88 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.75b)   h kwac ʔa  phə . 
S M      3    w a l k  GO  school 
       ‘He is walking to school.’ 
 
(2.75c)   h kwac tn phə . 
S M      3    w a l k  UP  school 
       ‘He is walking up to school.’ 
 
The directionals here take over the function of prepositions in other 
languages, a phenomenon labelled “co-verb” by Bisang (1992). 
 
 As directionals denote a movement in reference to a specific point in space, 
the extension to the di mension of time is readily made. Directionals 
(including orientation verbs) theref ore could easily develop aspectual 
meanings. Transferring the movement from  the concrete to an abstract level 
resulted in directionals having modal or manner value in some cases. These 
developments and other functions of th e directionals will be discussed in 
chapter 6 in the respective sections. 
 
2.6 Complements of Verbs 
 
A complement is an integer part of th e VP (or the core, i.e. it is a core 
argument, in RRG terminology), in other words it forms part of the predicate 
per se. Three kinds of verbal complement s can be distinguished in Mon, 
which will be discussed in the follow ing sections. Section 2.6.1 deals with 
direct (unmarked) objects, section 2.6.2 with oblique (prepositional) objects 
and section 2.6.3 takes a look at complement clauses/sentences, i.e. clauses or 
sentences that function as complements of verbs. As will be seen in the 
following sections, the use of the differe nt complement types is overlapping 
in some cases. There are some verbs that may take either a direct object, i.e. a 
simple NP, or a clause/sentence as  its complement, as for example tm 
‘know’ and th ‘hit, be affected by’ (s. 6.3.14 ), which occur in expressions 
like tm lòc ‘know the text, can read’, tm èh klŋ ‘know that he comes’, th 
pŋ ‘be hit by a bomb’, th kl kit ‘be bitten by a dog’. Some verbs may take 
a simple verbal complement besides a direct object, such as th ct ‘like’: th 
ct w  ‘likes to play’ besides th c t s t-krk ‘likes mangoes’. The 
difference between verbs like th and th ct is that the former combines with 
a subordinate clause with a different  subject from the matrix clause, 72 which 
may or may not be overtly expressed, while the latter takes a subordinate 
clause with the same subject as the matrix clause. In this case the subordinate 
                                                      
72 In the case of th ‘hit, be affected by’, the subject of the matrix clause is identical with the 
object of the subordinate clause, which is obligatorily deleted. This is due to the semantic 
structure of th, not to a general syntactic restriction. 
 
 
89 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
subject is always delete d, the subordinate clause appearing as simple VP. 
Other verbs may take either an NP, a VP, or a clause as complement. One 
example is phc ‘fear, be afraid (of)’, which occurs in expressions like the 
following: phc kəlok ‘be afraid of ghosts’, hùʔ phc khyt ‘not be afraid to 
die’, and phc h hù ʔ kl ŋ pùh ‘be afraid that he will not come’. If the 
complement is a V or VP, the verb may be interpreted as an auxiliary, though 
often, as in the case of phc, it can hardly be said to be grammaticalized. 
 
2.6.1 Direct objects 
 
As already outlined in section 2.5.1 on tr ansitive vs. intransitive verbs, the 
range of functions covered by unmarked or direct objects in Mon is much 
wider than in European languages. I will here only briefly recapitulate the 
different kinds of direct objects in Mon. 
 
 The prototypical direct object expresses the semantic undergoer of the verb. 
This holds also in Mon. The object is  identified only by its postverbal 
position in unmarked sentences with SVO word order: ʔuə chan pèh.  ‘I love 
you’ vs. pèh chan ʔuə. ‘You love me’. The object may be fronted, in which 
case it is usually, but not invariably, mark ed either as topic or as focus. The 
subject remains in preverbal position, leading to OSV sentences: pèh kh ʔuə 
chan. ‘I do love you’ (kh = TOP), pèh raʔ ʔuə chan. ‘It’s you I love; you are 
the one I love’ (raʔ = FOC).  
 
 A number of verbs take a ge neric (inherent) object, like iəʔ ‘eat’, which is 
usually combined with pŋ ‘cooked rice, food’, and khyu ‘write’, which takes 
lòc ‘writing, text’ as its natural object. As other objects, the inherent object is 
dropped when the verb is repeated in the near context (u sually within the 
same paragraph). Not having a seman tic content of their own, inherent 
objects cannot be fronted to topic or focus position like other direct objects. 
 
 Verbs of directed motion (e.g. ʔa ‘go’, klŋ ‘come’, ceh ‘move down’, etc.) 
may take a locational noun as direct  object, expressing the goal of the 
movement: ʔa ph ə ‘go to the temple’, ceh w ŋkaʔ  ‘come/go to 
Sangkhlaburi’,73 lùp həʔ ‘enter the house’, etc. Verbs expressing manners of 
motion ( kwac ‘walk’, krìp ‘run’, etc.) need either a preposition or a 
directional verb to introduce a goal-object: kwac ʔa həʔ ‘walk home, walk to 
the house’, krìp ə krp ‘run in the forest’ (with the preposition ə ‘LOC’), 
etc. The expressions * kwac həʔ and *krìp kr p are ungrammatical. If these 
verbs occur with an unmarked object, it usually expresses the path: kwac kl ŋ 
nʔ. ‘walk this way’. 
                                                      
73 In Mon, moving from the capital city  to any other place is expressed by ceh ‘move down’, 
irrespective of the geographical altitude.  
 
 
90 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
 With verbs that express a transfer of possession ( SUBJECT = SOURCE), such 
as k ‘give’, cn ‘hand over’, etc., the direct object can be either the theme, 
i.e. the object transferred, or the recipient: k ʔuə ‘give me’, k lòc ‘give (me) 
a book’. The same goes for verbs expres sing a request for a transfer of 
possession ( SUBJECT = RECIPIENT ), such as ʔat ‘ask for’, where the direct 
object may be either the theme ( ʔat hloə ‘ask for money’) or the source ( ʔat 
ʔəmèy ‘ask from mother’). Where both theme and recipient/source are overtly 
expressed, the word order is ‘V RECIP/SRC  THEME’, but in SM VPs with two 
overt objects are usually avoided (cf. section 2.5.1). 
 
 Some verbs describing states (equiv alent to adjectives) may take direct 
objects, the relationship of which to the verb is semantically defined. The 
combination of state verbs with a direct object is not frequent in SM and LM, 
though, and most, if not all instances can be seen as  fixed idioms. Examples 
include expressions like lə hlo ə ‘be well-to-do, rich’, lit. ‘be.easy money’, 
ʔon hloə ‘have little money, be poor’, lit.  ‘be.few money’. Constructions of 
this type are found already in OM (s. 2.5.1). 
 
 The range of semantic roles covere d by unmarked objects in Mon includes 
PATIENT, THEME , RECIPIENT , GOAL , SOURCE , LOCATION , PATH , among others 
(cf. Van Valin 1997:85f). 
 
2.6.2 Oblique objects 
 
Although a wide range of functions can be expressed by unmarked direct 
objects in Mon, prepositions are used to mark oblique relations in some cases. 
The most common object marki ng prepositions in SM are k ‘to, for, with, 
by’, the ablative nù ‘from’ and the locative ə ‘in, at’. Among these 
prepositions, k has gained something like univers al status as oblique marker 
and may combine with nù and d ə as nù k and ə k respectively, without 
change in meaning. Prepositional objects are chiefly adjuncts/adverbials, i.e. 
they belong to the periphery of a clause. Some oblique objects appear as core 
arguments, though, as will be seen below. 
 
 The development of k has already been described in section 6.3.11 as a 
merger of the OM preposition ‹ku› with the grammaticalized verb ‹kil› ‘give’. 
The history of nù is less clear. Shorto lists  OM ‹nor› as a noun meaning 
‘space, time, bounded by initial term; fr om, after, than’ (DMI:216f). The 
word is obviously lost in Nyah Kur, but its 6th century (Dvāravatī) occurrence 
confirms its ancientness in Mon. There are no certain Mon-Khmer 
connections of this word, DMI mentioning only Boloven 74 nuarr ‘formerly’ 
                                                      
74 Boloven (Loven, Jru) is a West-Bahnaric language spoken in Laos (s. Parkin 1991:80). 
 
 
91 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
as a possible cognate. L. Thongkham (2001:543) reconstructs PWB * nuər, 
nr with the meaning ‘before’ (Thai kn1), based on Jru (Laven) nuər and 
Laveh nr. Although Shorto classifies OM ‹nor› as a noun, the (attributive) 
derivate OM ‹mnor› ‘time after, subs equent or future time’ (DMI:301) 
suggests a verbal origin of this lexeme . The Thai translatio n of the Bahnaric 
forms given by L. Thongkham is does not he lp to clarify the classification of 
the Mon-Khmer word, as the status of Thai kn1 ‘before’ is not certain. It 
has some verbal features (negation in some contexts possible, attributive 
function), but it cannot f unction as main predicative element of a sentence, 
which makes it more noun-like. This mi ght be a rare instance of a ‘real’ 
adjective in Thai and in Mon-Khmer. 
 OM ‹ óey› is given in DMI as a preposition “ introducing location in space 
or time, in, on, at, into, to,  and sometimes beneficiary of action,  to, towards, 
for”. The form has Austro-Asiatic a nd Austronesian cognates, such as 
Indonesian di ‘in, at’ (DMI:137). It may be considered a ‘real’ preposition, 
together with OM ‹ku› ‘for, to, etc.’. 
 
 The three basic prepositions me ntioned above are semantically 
underspecified to the extent that with some verbs any of them can occur to 
introduce an oblique object, without obvious semantic difference. 
 
(2.76a)  h ʔa t     h l oə   nù  ʔəmèy  h. 
SM    3   ask.for money ABL mother  3 
 
(2.76b)  h ʔa t     h l oə   ə ʔəmèy  h. 
SM    3   ask.for money LOC mother  3 
 
(2.76c)  h ʔa t     h l oə   k  ʔəmèy  h. 
SM    3   ask.for money OBL mother  3 
      ‘He asked his mother for money.’ 
 
 Some verbs can occur either with a di rect or with an oblique object, the 
latter usually marked with k, sometimes also with the locative marker ə. 
 
(2.77a)  pèh ʔa hman ʔəmèy. 
SM    2   go ask  mother 
 
(2.77b)  pèh ʔa hman k/ə   ʔ əmèy. 
SM    2   go ask  OBL/LOC  mother 
      ‘Go and ask mother!’ 
 
 The prototypical functions of modern Mon k include INSTRUMENTAL, 
COMITATIVE, and BENEFACTIVE. All three of these functions can be expressed 
 
 
92 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
more elaborately to avoid ambigu ity, in some cases by means of a 
combination of k with a more specific preposition. 
 
(2.78a)  h iəʔ k  c n. 
S M     3    e a t   OBL spoon 
  
(2.78b)  h iəʔ nʔ   k   c n. 
S M     3    e a t   INSTR  OBL spoon 
      ‘He eats with a spoon.’ 
 
(2.79a)  h kwac ʔa  k  r ə. 
S M     3    w a l k  GO  OBL friend 
 
(2.79b)  h kwac ʔa  sm  (k )  r ə. 
S M     3    w a l k  GO  INCL ( OBL) friend 
      ‘He walked off with his friend.’   
 
(2.80a)  h ràn kwa   k      kon. 
SM    3   buy sweets OBL/GIVE child 
 
(2.80b)  h ràn kwa   ʔərŋ/swk  kon. 
SM    3   buy sweets BEN       c h i l d  
      ‘He bought sweets for his children.’ 
 
The preposition ʔərŋ ‘for’ in (2.80b) is colloquial SM, pronounced by some 
speakers as rŋ or rìəŋ. The form is probably an ex tension of use of the verb 
rŋ ‘bring, be together, align’ (resp. of a nominalized form of it), which also 
used in the expression rŋ həkʔ ‘together, mutually, each other’ (with həkʔ 
‘group’). The form swk is used in LM and formal SM, showing reading 
pronunciation of the initial cl uster. In colloquial SM, sw- is reduced to hw-, 
and the preposition is by some speakers actually pronounced [hwk].  
 As benefactive, k is best analysed as a gra mmaticalized form of the verb 
k ‘give’ (s. 6.3.11), while the instrumental and comitative functions go back 
to the old preposition ‹ku›. This overlapping makes the glossing of k  
somewhat inconsistent as the choice between GIVE and OBL is not always 
obvious and may seem rather arbitrary in some cases. 
 
 The preposition ə places an object or event in space or time. The usual 
notion is that of locative, which is also used here consistently to gloss ə, 
but in some contexts it may be allative or ablative, as in (2.76b) above. 
Sometimes the preposition ə is replaced by the derived adverb ʔəə 
‘inside’, which leads to an unambi guous locative, or more precisely 
‘inessive’ reading. Other forms competing (but not synonymous) with ə are 
 
 
93 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the nominal c ərìəŋ ‘vicinity, near, at’ (formal) and ʔətao ‘top, on’, and the 
verbal krp ‘be close, near’ and cp, làk ‘arrive, to’. Examples are given in 
the following sentences. 
 
(2.81)  h nùm  ə  h əʔ. 
S M     3    e x i s t  LOC  house 
      ‘He is in the house.’ 
 
(2.82)  kl ŋ ə ʔəpa! 
S M     c o m e  LOC father 
      ‘ C o m e  t o  D a d d y ! ’  
 
(2.83)  h mŋ  ə/cərìəŋ  ŋkk. 
S M     3    s t a y   LOC/vicinity Bangkok 
      ‘He lives in/near Bangkok.’ 
 
(2.84)  ə hnam nʔ ʔuə hùʔ   cao   ŋ    h əmə ra ʔ. 
SM    LOC year  this 1s  NEG  return  country Burma FOC 
      ‘I am not going to Burma this year.’ 
 
 The preposition nù denotes the source of an object in space (‘from’) or the 
starting point of an event in time (‘since’). It is also used as temporal 
preposition to locate an event in the past (‘at, on, in’). This usage corresponds 
to the Burmese post positional marker -ká ‘from, since; past time’ (cf. Okell 
1969:315ff; Okell and Allott 2001:1). It may combine with nouns to form 
secondary prepositions, such as h
t nù ‘because of’ (with ht ‘cause, reason’ 
from Pali hetu ‘id.’) and həmàn nù ‘because of’ (with həmàn ‘cause, reason’). 
Furthermore, nù is used to mark the comparative degree (‘more than’), 
usually, but not exclusively, with verbs describing qualities. 
 
(2.85)  h klŋ nù  ŋkk. 
S M     3    c o m e  ABL Bangkok 
      ‘He comes from Bangkok.’ 
 
(2.86)  nù  caʔ   ch   pèh ʔuə h m  ‘I love you’. 
SM    ABL begin meet 2   1s  speak ‘I love you’ 
      ‘When I first met you I said ‘I love you’’. (Hongchan) 
 
(2.87)  nū dah kwah  bhā   k y āk     jnok ... 
LM    ABL be pupil temple holy.being big 
      ‘Since he became a pupil of the abbot ...’ (DC:7) 
 
 
 
94 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2.88)  həmàn nù  ʔ ʔuə t h t k. 
S M     c a u s e   ABL 2fam 1s  HIT beat 
      ‘Because of you I was beaten up.’ (KKP) 
 
(2.89)  ʔ      kon h, tk-kh   h m,  ʔəpa  h teh 
SM    NML:this75 child 3   Tok-Khae speak  father  3   COND 
      hnòk nù  n ʔ m əsn cha ʔ   n m. 
      b i g   ABL this five   measure PERS 
      ‘This is his son, Tokkhae sai d. If it comes to his father, he is 
      five times bigger than this one.’ (WK) 
 
(2.90)  k ŋ  kl ŋ  nù  ʔuə. 
S M     d a r e   c o m e   ABL 1s 
      ‘You dared to come (to Thailand) more than I (would have dared).’  
      ( K K P )  
       
 Functions not covered by these three basic prepositions are expressed either 
by nouns or verb functioning as prepositions, such as the above mentioned 
ʔətao ‘top’ > ‘on (top of)’, cp ‘arrive’ > ‘until, to’, and a number of other 
ones. The liberty in combining multiple  verbs and nouns to express a variety 
of relations makes the use of prepositions, and therefore of oblique objects, in 
Mon less prominent than in European la nguages. This feature is shared with 
Thai, which makes heavy use of ve rbal and nominal combinations 
(serialization, cf. Bisang 1992), but is strikingly different from Burmese 
usage, which prefers the use of postpositions to unmarked verbal or nominal 
compounds (cf. Okell 1969). 
 
2.6.3 Complement clauses 
 
One of the most common paths of grammaticalization found in languages 
around the world is from a verb meaning ‘say’ to a complementizer (s. Heine 
and Kuteva 2002:261ff, Lord 1993:151ff, Ebert 1991). 
 Mon shares this development, but the use of the resulting complementizer is 
restricted to rather formal contexts and plays a marginal role in SM, which 
prefers unmarked complement clauses. 
 The verb that underwent this gram maticalization in Mon is OM ‹gah › ‘say, 
tell’, which is either followed or preceded by reported speech. The former 
word order corresponds to original Mon usage, while the latter shows 
Burmese influence. In OM, the verb is not found as complementizer yet, 
occurring only as a full verb with a sentential complement. In MM, ‹gah› also 
appears as second element in verb al compounds, such as ‹twas gah › ‘mean, 
be equivalent to’ (with ‹twas› ‘utter’) and ‹saddhā gah › ‘declare sincerely’ 
                                                      
75 For the contracted (infixed) nominalized form of nʔ ‘this’ s. Jenny 2003:187ff. 
 
 
95 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(with Pali ‹saddhā› ‘be honest’). When ‹gah› was extended in use and applied 
to a wide variety of verba dicendi and verbs of cognition, the path was open 
for the development into a general complementizer. 
 
 Starting in MM, ‹gah › was gradually replaced as a full verb by ‹huim› (LM 
‹huiÿ›, SM h m), which in the modern language covers the meanings of 
‘say’ and ‘speak’. The meaning ‘tell’ is expressed by the verb lèə (LM ‹lau›), 
which may be connected to (or borrowed from) Thai law2 ‘id.’. It is not found 
in OM and MM, and no related Nyah Kur form is recorded by L. Thongkham 
(1984) and Diffloth (1984). 76  These lexemes have not undergone 
grammaticalization and are used only as full verbs. 
 
 In LM, the verb ‹gah › is still used as full verb, but its main function is as 
SFP indicating a conditional clause (cf. section 1.4.3). Its use as 
complementizer is illustrated in the following sentences. 
 
(2.91)  smi ï óuï  ’a ïwa khyap  gah tuin     s āk  õa’ ra. 
LM    king  city  Ava   consider SAY move.up  kind  this FOC 
      ‘The king of Ava thought that they had gone up that way.’ (DC:12) 
 
(2.92)  yaw  ra  ’ ā glåï  gluï  kuiw bam ā    s a m t iÿ  gah  ’ ā glåï   tuik, 
LM    COND FOC go way boat  GIVE Burmese  know   SAY  go way  land 
      y a w   r a   ’ā glåï  tuik  kuiw bam ā    s a m t iÿ  gah   ’ ā glåï   gluï. 
      COND FOC go way land  GIVE Burmese  know   SAY  go way  boat 
      ‘If we go by boat, let the Burmese think (lit. know 77) that we go by 
       land; if we go by land, let the Burmese think that we go by boat.’  
      (RDR:199) 
       
(2.93)  ’ay ñ āt gah ’ay dah  juin     kuiw óuï    ku  kon  ’ay. 
L M     1 s   s e e  SAY 1s  HIT hand.over GIVE country OBL child 1s 
      ‘I see that I have to hand  over the kingdom to my son.’ (DC:30) 
 
(2.94)  theï   gah yay   gna-kyā k óāÿ-óāÿ pra-pra. 
LM    think SAY illness queen   real- RDP  true-RDP 
      ‘He thought that the illne ss of the queen was real.’ (DC:17)  
 
                                                      
76 Li 1977 does not reconstruct the Thai root for Proto-Tai, but cognate forms are found e.g. 
in L ānnā law2 ‘read, recite; spread a rumour’ (Watcharasat 1995:212), Shan law3 ‘address 
(royalty)’ (Tern Moeng 1995:285), Dai (Lü) lău6 ‘tell a story’ (Burusphat 1996:361). The 
lexeme seems to be restricted to the Southwestern Tai languages, which makes borrowing 
from Mon-Khmer at least possible, but in this case not very likely, given the phonetic shape 
of the word (tone pattern) and the lack of Mon-Khmer cognates for Mon ‹lau›. 
77 The morphology and semantics of ‹samtiÿ› are not entirely clear. The form is obviously 
derived from the verb root ‹ti ÿ› ‘know’, but the derivation is obscure. In SM, hətm means 
‘remember’. Notice also the application of a verb meaning ‘know’ to an untruth.  
 
 
96 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 As mentioned above, SM prefers unmarked complement clauses to the use 
of kh. The only instance of the complementizer kh in the recorded data is 
given in (2.95), where the complement  sentence precedes the main clause 
instead of following it. 78  Such syntactic Burmanisms are frequent among 
Mon speakers and have been pointed out on different occasions throughout 
the text.  
 
(2.95)  m ŋ  m ŋ  h ənày  kh mùə hətm ʔiʔtoə,      h əyaʔ  kh teh. 
S M     s t a y   STAY place  TOP one night  PREF:FINISH  think  SAY COND 
      ‘If you thought that you’d just  have to stay there one night, and  
      that’s it ...’ (KD) 
 
 More common are sentences containing unmarked direct or indirect 
reported speech like the following ones.  The complement sentence may be a 
statement, a question, or an command, without formally marked difference. 
 
(2.96)  kwan  poy ʔətʔ    h ù ʔ  mù ə  ra ʔ h hm. 
SM    village 1pl NML:that  NEG  one  FOC 3   speak 
      ‘Our village there does not exist anymore, they said.’ (KD) 
 
(2.97)  ʔəmèy h hm m ŋ  th ʔ   p h ə  kla. 
SM    mother 3   speak stay  THROW school before 
      ‘My mother said that I should remain in school for the time being.’ 
(KN)  
  
 Sentence (2.98) exhibits negation rais ing, i.e. the negation which logically 
belongs to the subordinate clause a ppears in the matrix clause. Negation 
raising is not very common in Mon, though, and restricted to a few verbs of 
cognition, especially expressing ‘thinking’ or ‘believing’. In most cases the 
negation appears where it logically be longs, with differently positioned 
negatives expressing different ideas, as in English ‘know that it is not good’ 
vs. ‘not know that it is good’. 
 
(2.98)  ʔuə hùʔ  h əyaʔ  pùh  èh   n ʔ k ʔ klh. 
S M     1 s   NEG think  NEG  person this GET understand 
      ‘I don’t think that  he’ll understand.’ (= ‘I think that he will not  
      understand.’)  
 
                                                      
78 The only regular use of kh in SM is in the combination cha ʔ k h ‘but’ (literally ‘only 
SAY’). The word chaʔ is originally a noun meaning ‘measure, amount’. It is used together 
with numerals in expressions like a chaʔ ‘twice as (much)’ (cf. sentence (2.89)). Another 
extension of meaning led to ‘as much as’ > ‘only as much as’ > ‘only’; ‘only SAY’ > ‘but’. 
 
 
 
97 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Summary 
 
Verbs in Mon can take a wide range of unmarked objects, which are 
interchangeable in some contexts with  marked objects. The objects may be 
either nominal, verbal, or sentential, the latter sometimes marked with the 
complementizer ‹gah› in LM, rarely in SM. Instead of real prepositions, of 
which a small number exists in Mon, ve rbal and nominal elements are often 
used to express semantic relations. In th is respect Mon again is closer to Thai 
than to Burmese, which makes heavy use of postpositional markers on nouns 
and clauses in connection with verbs as well as post-clausal 
complementizers/subordinators. 
 
 
3. The Syntax of Verbs 
 
Verbs in Mon exhibit some interesti ng syntactical features, which are the 
topic of the present chapter. The first section gives an account of serial verb 
constructions in Mon, a construction type  that is widespread in Asian and 
African languages. Sec tion 3.2 deals with the topic-comment sentence 
structure common to most languages  of Southeast Asia. The use and 
development of the passive voice in M on from OM to SM is described in 
section 3.3. Finally 3.4 ta kes a look at the relative constructions and the 
attributive form of verbs, which share a common origin as still easily seen in 
OM and MM, but are all but lost in SM. 
 
3.1 Serial verb constructions 
 
Verb serialisation is a constructi on typefound in African and Creole 
languages, as well as in many langua ges of East and Southeast Asia. 
Although the phenomenon has received a fair amount of attention from 
linguists, no commonly agreed definition of the term ‘serial verb’ has been 
established so far. As Lord states: 
 
Defining serial verb constructions is a sticky business. Most definitions include 
a string of verb phrases sharing the same tense, aspect, mood and polarity, where 
the understood subject of a non-initial verb is the subject or object of the 
preceding verb. If we focus on surface form, we can limit prototypical serial 
verb constructions to successive ve rb phrases without overt connective 
morphemes. (Lord 1993:1) 
 
 Other authors define serial verb cons tructions in similar terms but tend to 
leave out the parts of the definition that do not neatly  apply to the language 
they are describing (cf. Sebba 1987, Hans ell 1993, Seuren 1991) or add other 
 
 
98 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
aspects, such as the ‘one event constr aint’, i.e. a serial verb construction 
describes a single event rather than a se ries of distinct events (cf. Durie 
1997). The definition that most authors seem  to agree upon is that serial verb 
constructions are strings of the type 
 
NP - V1 - (NP) - V2 - (NP) - ... - Vx - (NP) 
 
with no overt linkage marker between th e VPs. An NP can be the syntactical 
subject of any number of Vs to its righ t and/or the object of the V (or, in 
some languages, Vs) to its left. An NP referring to the same entity is 
expressed only once in a serial verb c onstruction, irrespective of its function 
as subject and/or object. 
 This very broad definition of serial verb constructions includes also strings 
of verbs that are not considered serial verbs by most authors, such as the 
combination of verbal operators (i n Mon basically expressing aspect, 
direction and modality/manner).  
 A number of authors (Bisang 1992, Lord 1993) have described a subclass of 
serial verbs that function as prepositi ons in some of languages. Lord quotes 
Clark’s (unpublished) dissertation entitled “Coverbs and Case in 
Vietnamese” (1975, University of Hawaii). Clark identified a number of 
motion verbs with prepositional functi on in Khmer, Thai and Vietnamese. 
Bisang (1992) extended the research, in cluding also Mandarin Chinese and 
Hmong. Coverbs are not restricted to th e Southeast Asian linguistic area, nor 
are they to motion verbs, although motion verbs are very common among the 
coverbs. Typical examples of cove rbs can be found in Thai, including yu
1 
‘stay; LOC’, pay ‘go; ALL’, cak1 ‘leave; ABL’, hay2 ‘give; DAT’, etc. 
 In Mon there are a few verbs that can be used in the function of prepositions, 
although the phenomenon is less prominen t in Mon than in Thai and other 
central and eastern Southeast As ian languages. The directionals 
ʔa ‘go’ and 
klŋ ‘come’ may in some contexts be analysed as coverbs, while the 
stationary directional mŋ never seems to have this function, the locative case 
being regularly expressed by the preposition ə ‘in, at, to’. Possible uses as 
prepositions/coverbs will be described under the respective headings in 
chapter 6. 
 In the Role and Reference Gramma r model, serial verbs are one among 
different construction types that can be  used to link “nuclei”, “cores” or 
“clauses”. The nucleus is the main predicative element of a sentence, usually 
the verb. The core consists of the nucleus and the “core arguments”, i.e. 
subject and object(s) of (di-)transitiv e verbs. The core together with the 
“periphery” (non-core arguments, adverbials) forms the clause (s. Van Valin 
1997, ch. 2, 8, 9). In “nuclear juncture” two verbs with common arguments 
(subject and object) are joined, forming th e predicate of the clause. This type 
 
 
99 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
of verb serialisation occurs mostly w ith aspectual markers and directionals, 
although other functions are found too.  
 
NP1 = S of V1 and V2, NP2 = O of V1 and V2
79
 
or 
 
NP1 = S of V1, NP2 = O of V1, V2 = ASP/DIR 
 
In “core juncture” the join ed verbs share at least one of their arguments, the 
most common types being  
 
NP1 = S of V1, NP2 = O of V1 = S of V2  
 
and  
 
NP1 = S of V1 and V2, NPx = O of preceding V 
 
“Clause juncture” involves two potentially independent events with no shared 
arguments. Clause juncture most often involves an overt linkage marker, i.e. 
a coordinator or subordinator. Serial verb constructions most frequently occur 
on the level of nuclear and core j unctures, although heavily serialising 
languages allow serial verbs in clause  juncture, too. As coordinators and 
subordinators often originate in verbs, it is not always easy  (or possible) to 
determine if a given construction involves an overt linkage marker or a serial 
verb. This is the case for example with the verb toə ‘finish’, which, among 
other functions, is used as sequential marker (s. 6.3.16). 
 
3.1.1 Historical development 
 
In all recorded stages of Mon seque nces of verbs without overt linkage 
marker are frequent. These sequences belong to different types as outlined 
above. The following examples illustrate different serial verb constructions in 
OM. 
 
(3.1)  ñah   pan tluï  sm āñ. 
OM   person four come ask 
     ‘The four come to ask.’ (An166) 
 
                                                      
79 More than two verbs may be involved in a serial verb construction in Mon. The formula 
can be extended accordingly. 
 
 
100 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(3.2)  mun     han ’ba  s’ār      m a ï    s īl. 
OM   announce LOC father PROSP:go observe precept 
     ‘He announces to his father that he is going to keep the precepts.’  
     (An225) 
 
In sentence (3.1), the subject of V 1 is also subject of V 2. V2 is transitive and 
could possibly have an object, wh ich would not be shared with V 1. In (3.2), 
the understood subject of V 1 is also subject of V 2 and V 3, while the 
prepositional object ‹han ’ba› belongs only to V1. The NP ‹sīl› is object only 
of V 3, not of V 2 or V 1. The whole expression ‹s’ ār ma ï s īl› itself is a 
sentential complement of V 1. In the following sentence, the NP ‹sacchu’› 
‘fruit’ is the object of both verbs. The subject is not expressed but understood 
to be identical for both verbs, too.  The accompanying picture of this plaque 
shows two people plucking fruit from a tree and handing th em over to two 
children. 
 
(3.3)  bas  kil    sacchu’. 
OM   pick  give  fruit 
     ‘They pick fruit for them.’ (An305) 
 
 Sentence (3.4) is semantically similar to (3.3), but the construction is 
fundamentally different with the common object occurring after V1 instead of 
V2, which is marked for the prospective aspect: 
 
(3.4)  raï  birbe ï    sikil . 
OM   bring alms.bowl  PROSP:give 
     ‘They bring the alms bowl and give it to him.’ (An64) 
 
The picture of this plate shows two attendants of King Mah ājanaka handing 
him an alms bowl. Both the position of  the object and the aspect marker on 
the second verb suggest that the sentence (3.4) involves clause juncture rather 
than core or nuclear juncture as in (3.3). As seen above  in sentence (3.2), 
only the first verb of a series takes th e prospective prefix ‹s-›, the following 
verbs being unmarked. As no arguments have to be overtly expressed in 
Mon, the verb ‹sikil› alone can constitute a complete clause. 
 
 In (3.5) V 2 expresses the result of V1: 
 
(3.5)  smi ï tlu ï    c i p . 
OM   king  come  arrive 
     ‘The king arrives.’ (An371) 
 
 
 
101 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 (3.6) expresses two subsequent events  with shared subject and object, both 
not overtly expressed: 
 
(3.6)  yok rusāl. 
OM   lift  lay.down 
     ‘He lifts up [her head] and lays it on his lap.’ (An360) 
 
The picture of An360 shows Vessantara with Maddī’s head on his lap, whom 
he believes to be dead. 
 
 The use of serial verbs in MM is illustrated in the following sentence. 
 
(3.7a)  óeh ta’ ket na ï      k u i w  ku  kyā k-tray. 
MM   3   PL take CAUS:COME give  OBL Buddha 
     ‘They bring it to offer it to the Lord Buddha.’ (SDGa50) 
 
The second verb, ‹naï› functions as causative directional modifying the verb 
‹ket›, while ‹kuiw› introduces a clause of its own, similar to the OM example 
in (3.4). In SM the same sentence would most naturally be rendered as 
 
(3.7b)  h tʔ  ket  n ŋ      k    kyac-kr ə. 
S M     3    PL  take  CAUS:come GIVE Buddha 
 
 In SM the MM verb ‹kuiw› ‘give’ and the preposition ‹ku› merged in k , 
which takes over the function of bot h, marking benefactive and oblique 
objects in general. The expression k kyac-kr ə is not necessarily (but 
possibly) a clause in SM, but may be c onsidered an adjunct in this context. 
Increasing grammaticalization of serial verbs can be observed in newer stages 
of Mon in general, as the next section shows. 
 
3.1.2 Serial verbs in modern Mon 
 
Strings of verbs without overt linkage  marker are common in both LM and 
SM. Usually the semantics and the context determine the relationship 
between the different verbs or verb phrases, although there are instances of 
ambiguous readings. In many cases one or  more of the verbs involved have 
undergone grammaticalization to a degree that their verbal character has all 
but disappeared. These grammaticalized serial verbs mostly function as 
aspect operators or directionals; some have taken the function of prepositions. 
In certain contexts, directionals have aspectual func tion, as will be shown in 
detail in chapter 6.  
 A verb series can express a single even t, as in (3.8), where the use of five 
different verbs puts emphasis on the task of writing: 
 
 
102 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
(3.8)  khyū khnaÿ badah  dhamåk    patit      r u p - r a u   mān  ro ï. 
LM   write build   CAUS:be CAUS:appear CAUS:exit  image  WIN  ASRT 
     ‘I shall be able to write and shape the image [of the story].’ (DC:2) 
 
A more literal translation would be ‘I shall succeed in writing, thus build and 
create the image, make it appear and emerge.’ In this sentence, all verbs share 
the (understood) subject ‘I’ as well as the overt object ‹rup-rau› ‘image, 
shape’ and the modal operator ‹m ān› ‘win > be able, capable’. The shared 
object regularly occurs after the last verb. In the next sentence, only the 
subject is common to all verbs, the objects are different. In the original 
sentence no objects are overtly expre ssed. The objects retrievable from the 
context are inserted here in square brackets to show their position. 
 
(3.9)  poy r ə      k w a n   krìp t t   [ n ù   k w a n ]   p    [ ŋ-kya ]. 
SM   1pl companion village run  EXIT [ ABL village] watch  [ship-wind] 
     ‘We villagers ran out [of the village] to see [the aeroplane].’ (KD) 
 
 The object of V 1 becomes subject of V2 in (3.10) and (3.11). 
 
(3.10)  p     ŋ -kya,  p    h əyaʔ th tao   rao hùʔ   tao  k h... 
SM    watch  ship-wind watch  think  HIT burn TOP NEG  burn TOP 
      ‘We watched that aeroplane a nd thought it must burn, but it did not  
      burn...’ (KD) 
 
(3.11)  h ket h ənùh k h h pàk   k ʔ  pt      ʔ a. 
SM    3s  take lance  TOP 3s  cut.off neck break.off GO 
      ‘He took the lance and he cut off its head.’ (WK) 
 
 The indirect object (recipient) of V 1 in sentence (3.12) becomes subject of 
V2. 
 
(3.12)  ʔəmèy h k   p ŋ  èh     iəʔ. 
SM    mother 3s  give  rice  person  eat 
      ‘His mother gave him rice to eat.’ 80 (WK) 
 
 In some instances the verbs in a string  have different subjects. This does not 
have to be overtly marked, as in (3.13). 
                                                      
80 The use of the 3 rd person pronouns in this sentence is inconsistent. If h refers to the son, 
we would expect the same pronoun in  the second part of the sentence. h may refer to  
ʔəmèy, but as èh is the higher honorific form, èh should correctly be used to refer to the 
mother and h to the son. 
 
 
103 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(3.13)  hə mə   tn     k l ŋ  ph c h rp  k ʔ. 
SM    Burmese  move.up COME  fear  3s  catch GET 
      ‘The Burmese came up and we were afraid that they would catch 
us.’ (KD) 
       
This is an instance of two joined independent clauses (clause juncture) 
without overt linkage marker, not unc ommon in SM. There is no audible 
intonational pause between klŋ and phc in the audio recording. The second 
clause itself consists of the verb phc and the sentential complement h rp 
kʔ. 
 The verb kʔ ‘get’ is used as full verb in sentence (3.14), but 
grammaticalized as potential marker in (3.15). The difference of 
grammaticalization is evident from th e position of the direct object, which 
occurs after the last transitive verb, but before the modal operator. 
 
(3.14)  ʔa rp  k ʔ ʔŋkəlòc. 
SM    go catch get English 
      ‘They went to catch (and caught) the English.’ (KD) 
 
(3.15)  ʔuə ʔa ràn kaʔ hùʔ  kʔ. 
SM    1s  go buy fish NEG GET 
      ‘I cannot go to buy fish.’ 
 
 An intermediate stage is shown in se ntence (3.16), where the first instance 
of kʔ functions syntactically as part of a serial verb before the object, but 
semantically has the meaning of the modal ‘can’. 
 
(3.16)  la ʔ   t ʔ poy sʔ k ʔ pràt   mù ə no,   k ʔ hloə   m ù ə  k t. 
SM    time  that 1pl sell GET banana one bunch get copper one  10,000 
      ‘Back then we could sell  one bunch of bananas for 10,000 Kyat.’  
      ( K D )  
 
 The verbs of orientation such as ʔa ‘go’ and klŋ ‘come’ can combine with 
verbs indicating a manner of movement to express a directed movement, with 
the goal appearing as unmarked object. 
 
(3.17)  h krìp ʔa phə. 
SM    3s  run GO school 
      ‘He ran to school.’ 
 
In this sentence the semantics of ʔa are still intact, as the subject physically 
moves away from the point of refere nce. In (3.18), on the other hand, ʔa is 
further grammaticalized as pure directional. The subject remains stationary. 
 
 
104 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(3.18)  krìp t n  r ŋ  ʔa  phə   k ʔ-kyac t ʔ àt hə ʔt. 
SM    run  UP   look  GO  temple Kawkyaik that see ADV:all 
      ‘We ran up [the hill] and looked at the temple of Kawkyaik.  
      We could see everything.’ (KN) 
 
 The verb thʔ ‘throw (away), discard’ can be understood in its original 
meaning in sentence (3.19), although its  grammaticalized meaning as marker 
of an impulsive, undeliberate, often irreversible action shows through as well. 
 
(3.19)  hə mə   pn  hə ct     t h ʔ  r ə      kwan  poy k h. 
SM    Burmese  shoot CAUS:die throw  companion village 1pl TOP 
      ‘The Burmese shot (and got ri d of) the people in our village.’ (KD) 
 
In (3.20), on the other hand, thʔ can only be understood as manner-aspect 
operator. 
 
(3.20)  ket th ʔ   k əpac  th   ra ʔ. 
S M     t a k e  THROW  half   only  FOC 
      ‘You just take fifty Kyat!’ (KN) 
 
 As the subject receives some money, thʔ certainly does not mean ‘throw 
away’ in this context. It rather indicates that he should take the fifty Kyat and 
leave it at that, not considering any further action (i.e. ask for more). 
 
 As a full verb toə means ‘finish, be finished’. When it occurs in a serial verb 
construction of the form V A toə VB, it usually indicates that action/event A 
has been finished and action/event B fo llows. This is clearly the case in 
(3.21). 
 
(3.21) kyac hnòk h m k əph  ʔəhmak, kəph  to ə  ʔt  
SM   holy  big  speak gather rubbish gather FINISH all 
     k l h     t h ʔ    n a       r a ʔ. 
     d i s c a r d   THROW  CAUS:GO  FOC 
     ‘The abbot said, “Collect the rubbish and then take it all away!”.’  
     ( K N )  
 
 In many instances, the verb preceding toə does not express an action that 
can naturally be finished. In this case, toə merely indicates that event B 
follows event A, i.e. it has been gr ammaticalized as sequential marker, as 
illustrated in sentence (3.22). 
 
 
 
105 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(3.22) kon  èh   t ʔ tm  m ŋ to ə   p k    c a o    k l ŋ  l əkh. 
SM   child person that know STAY FINISH follow return  COME  then 
     ‘His children knew it and then followed him back home.’ (KKP) 
 
 In other contexts, the two events oc cur simultaneously, or even in reverse 
order, as in (3.23), where the mother cer tainly first puts the poison into the 
rice and then wraps it, not the other way round. 
 
(3.23) ʔəmèy  h kwì  l    p ŋ toə   c u t  l    h əʔuy. 
S M    m o t h e r   3    w r a p  KEEP rice FINISH put KEEP medicine 
     ‘His mother put poison into  the rice and then wrapped it.’ (WK) 
 
 The semantics and grammaticalizati on of the most common serial verbs 
turned operators/auxiliaries will be discussed in detail in chapter 6.  
 
3.2 Voice 
 
OM has a special marker for the passive voice, viz. ‹ñin›. The original 
meaning of this word is not clear. Shorto (DMI:133) suggests a connection 
with Theng n ‘receive, accept, co llect’, Riang-Lang _n ‘bear, endure’ 
and Vietnamese nhận ‘receive’. Shorto explains ‹ñin› as a “passive auxiliary, 
marking subject as goal of action denot ed by v[erb].” (DMI:132). Examples 
of its use are given below in (3.25) through (3.28) 
 
(3.24)  dinïal  thar  ma ñin  cincon ku    rat. 
OM   mirror  gold  REL PASS be.set  OBL gem 
     ‘A golden mirror that is set with gems’ (SSKc6) 
 
The verb ‹cincon› in (3.24) has itself passive semantics (‘be set, decorated’), 
so that the overt passive marker is superfluous. The passive marker is omitted 
in (3.25) and (3.26), which come from the same source as (3.24), viz. the 
Shweizigon Inscription, but  appears in (3.27) and ( 3.28), in the latter with 
atypical VS word order. 
 
(3.25) ma rap  ci[rc ū]n dewat āw   m a  t m u y      n a    b a j r a  
OM   REL catch staff    god     REL ATTR:finish INSTR diamond 
     ‘who takes hold of the staff of the gods, which is decorated with  
     diamonds’ (SSKb18) 
 
 
 
106 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(3.26)  kon  lw ūt   smiï  guÿ loï   m a   g ñ i       n a    r a t      
OM   child virgin  king  ATTR:many REL  be.adorned INSTR gem  
     m a   k a h   moy  prakār. 
     REL NEG one  kind 
     ‘the daughters of the kin g, who were adorned with many kinds  
     of gemstones’ (SSKc10)  
 
(3.27)  yaï   p i ña k   t r e y   p i    w o ’  m a  l i ñ        ’ār  goh  ñin     
OM   EMPH  Pi ñaka three three this REL be.destroyed GO TOP PASS   
     t ūn   p k o m         j u ÿwan   cu’ah      t ūn. 
     a g a i n  CAUS:associate  literary.text CAUS:pure  again 
     ‘ T h e  T i p iñaka, which had become scattered and obscured,  
     was collected again a nd the texts purified.’ (DMI:132) 
 
(3.28)  ... goh -ma ñin  dumo ï    r ūp   kyek  thar  moy. 
OM   ... then    PASS CAUS:stay  image Lord  gold  one 
      ‘Then a Buddha image of  gold was installed.’ (DMI:132f.) 
 
 Generally speaking, two reasons account for a speaker  to choose the passive 
voice if his language provides this possi bility. The first is what Van Valin 
(1997:294f) calls “PSA [privileged syntactic argument] modulation” and the 
second “argument modulation”. According to Van Valin, “these two features 
of voice alternations [...] are logically independent of each other and [...] they 
do not always occur together.” (ibid.)  In PSA modulation, a non-privileged 
argument is promoted to privileged status, i.e. a semantic object functions as 
a syntactic subject in accusative languages. PSA modulation is mostly used to 
put emphasis on a nominal which is not the semantic subject (actor) of the 
sentence. 
 In argument modulation, the actor appear s as peripheral object or is omitted 
all together. Thus argument modulation is mainly used when the actor is not 
known or the speaker does not want to mention him. 
 PSA modulation is importan t in languages with relatively fixed word order 
which do not allow the movement of elements for emphasis. Argument 
modulation plays a role especially in languages that do not allow the subject 
to be omitted. In pro-drop languages, where there is no need for the subject to 
be overtly expressed, no need for argu ment modulation passive constructions 
arises. This does not mean that pro-drop languages with free word order do 
not have passive constructions. Histori cal change and foreign influence can 
result in pleonastic constructions, as  seen in sentence (3.25) above. In the 
case of Mon, it can be expected that the overtly marked passive arose under 
the influence of Pali (as did some other grammatical categories such as aorist 
and cases), but it probably was never part of the actual spoken language. As 
we have seen in previous sections, non-actor nominals may be freely moved 
 
 
107 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
into prominent sentence initial position as topic or focus, and arguments do 
not have to be overtly expressed in  a sentence. This makes the passive 
construction in Mon superfluous. 
 There exist in modern Mon ways to express the passive, though. One 
common construction involves the auxiliary th ‘hit (a mark), be affected by’, 
which has also developed other grammatical functions (s. 6.3.14). This 
passive construction usually has a negative connotation (adversative), i.e. the 
subject undergoes an unpleasant experience, as in (3.29). 
 
(3.29a)  ŋuə yèh    t ʔ pèh th t k raʔ . 
SM    day morning that 2   HIT beat FOC 
      ‘Tomorrow you’ll be beaten up.’ (KKP) 
 
 The secondary subject (actor of the main verb) may be overtly expressed 
and remains in its usual position in front of the main verb, as seen in (3.29b). 
 
(3.29b)  ŋuə yèh    t ʔ pèh th ʔəpa  t k raʔ . 
SM    day morning that 2   HIT father  beat FOC 
      ‘Tomorrow you’ll be beaten up by your father.’  
 
 The structure of passive c onstructions in Mon is thus 
 
S1 th S2 V 
 
where S 1 is the semantic undergoer and S 2 the actor of V, which in most 
cases describes an unpleasant experience for S1. 
 
 The adversative meaning in (3.30) is  not obvious, but the broader context 
makes it clear that the speaker, at th e time of the event a young temple boy, 
was not really happy about being invited to a far away village, having to walk 
the long way there. 
 
(3.30)  th nì ʔmòn  ə  mès əlì t ʔ. 
SM    HIT invite   LOC  Mesali that 
      ‘We were invited to Mesali.’ (KN) 
 
 Neutral or positive experiences are expressed by tŋ ‘receive’, although this 
too can involve negative experiences, as in (3.31). 
 
(3.31)  ʔa tŋ     t k  p əʔ ʔətn. 
S M     g o  RECEIVE  beat  three instance 
      ‘We went and we were hit three times.’ (KN) 
 
 
 
108 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The use of tŋ instead of th in (3.31) suggests that the speaker was ready 
(though probably not happy) to go and get his punishment. Unlike th, the 
verb tŋ involves control of the subject over the event. 
 
 In (3.32) and (3.33), the experience expre ssed by the “passive” is positive. It 
is noticeable that these sentences ar e from LM. The use of the passive 
construction for positive experiences in SM is very rare. 
 
(3.32)  thek   duï     s p a      p ūjau   mnih dewatau ’in   bruiÿ   
L M     w o r t h y  RECEIVE PROSP:do worship man  god    Indra Brahma  
      g a ÿluiï   tuy. 
      ATTR:many FINISH 
      ‘He was worthy to be wo rshipped by man and gods, Indra and  
      Brahma.’ (DC:33) 
 
(3.33)  sui ÿ kuiw duï    ’ a t h u iï-’asah ñah   jnok  bok   pnā n. 
LM    INCL OBL  RECEIVE NML:praise  person big  group  soldier 
      ‘He was praised by the el ders and by the soldiers.’ (DC:38) 
 
The main verb in (3.33) appears in nominalized form, so that the sentence is 
more literally rendered as ‘he received praise from the elders and the 
soldiers’.  
 
 The passive voice in Mon, as in other Southeast Asian languages, plays a 
marginal role. The only genuine passive construction is the adversative with 
the auxiliary t
h, expressing unpleasant experiences.  
 
3.3 Attributive and relative 
  
The notions of attributive and relative are closely related. Both are used to 
modify (qualify or restrict) a noun phra se. In many languages the attributive 
is either a special form of a verb (participle) or an adjective, while relative 
constructions typically involve whole clau ses. We have seen above that what 
usually are adjectives in European  languages in Mon form a subgroup of 
verbs, and that a single verb can form a whole clause or sentence. This means 
that the formal difference between attributive and relative expressions in Mon 
is rather small. Where there is no mor phological (infixed) attributive form of 
a verb, it is often impossible to de icide whether a given expression is 
attributive or relative, as in the fr equent expression OM ‹ma himo’ ...›, LM 
‹ma ymu ...› ‘(who is) called ...’.  
 OM has a particle ‹mun› (variants ‹man, min›),81 which “connect[s] relative 
cl[ause] to n[oun] denoting goal, locus,  etc. of action” (DMI:297). Another 
                                                      
81 Old Khmer has ‹man› ‘particule à valeur conjonctive: que, qui’ (Long Seam 2000:453f) 
 
 
109 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
particle ‹ma, ma’› marks the attributive and “connect[s] relative cl[ause] to 
n[oun] (a) denoting agent, [...] (b) deno ting goal of action [...] (c) denoting 
locus etc. of action” (DMI:281). The attributive form of verbs is often 
morphologically marked with the infix ‹-m-›, which “is equivalent to the 
construction with the clause-subordinating particle ma [...] and is used chiefly 
when the verb has no object or other ex tension; thus especially when it 
translates an English adjective.” (DMI:xxiiif)  
 All three morphemes may be related to each other and ultimately to the 
interrogative OM ‹mu, mo’› ‘what’, weak form OM ‹ma› (DMI:296). Shorto 
states that “ ma + v. is sometimes used interc hangeably with the attr. form” 
(DMI:282), as in thar ma y ās and thar yim ās ‘shining gold’, both attested in 
the same Pagán era inscription (Kyansittha’s Palace inscription), ma nom s īl 
and lmom sīl ‘virtuous; lit. having virtue’, both from the Myazedi inscription. 
Diffloth (1984:264ff) tentatively makes a distinction between the attributive 
/-m-/ infix, which turns “Stative Verbs into Attributive Adjectives” and 
“another -m- affix, which turns Transitive Verbs into Agent Nouns”. The 
former is infixed in roots with double or triple initial and in some cases 
prefixed to single initial verbs, while the latter is always infixed. Diffloth 
concludes, however, that  “actually, both the Agentive /-m-/ Infix and the 
Attributive /m/ Infix/Prefix may well have a common historical origin, but 
only at a period far more ancient than  Dvaravati-Old-Mon”. In a footnote 
(op.cit. p. 349) Diffloth ventures to relate the Mon a ffixes to the functionally 
and phonologically strikingly similar Aust ronesian affixes found in Tagalog 
as ma- (prefix of stative verbs) and -um- (infix of agent focus verbs). 
Evidence from Mon itself, however, seems hardly sufficient to postulate two 
different affixes. An agentive like LM ‹damāt› ‘smith’ (‘one who beats iron’) 
from the root ‹dāt› ‘beat out’ is formally not different from an attributive like 
‹gmåï› ‘soldier, brave man’ (‘one who is brave’) from ‹gåï› ‘be brave’. 
 
 The word order for relative constructions  in OM appears to be consistently  
 
N ma RELATIVE CLAUSE 
 
as in 
 
(3.34)  gl īk  ma óeh s ūl   jeyyalekha     goh 
O M     c l o t h  REL 3   write auspicious.letter  TOP 
      ‘cloth on which they had written auspicious letters’  
      ( K y a n s i t t h a  F 8 - 9 )  
       
 The attributive and relative markers sometimes co-occur pleonastically in 
OM: 
 
 
 
110 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(3.35)  ma d mas   kb aï ju ÿnok 
OM    REL ATTR:be ship  ATTR:big 
      ‘which was (like) a big ship’ (SSKd40f) 
 
 In other instances the attributive is unmarked, as in (3.36), where we would 
expect the attributive form of ‹jnok› ‘be big’. 
 
(3.36)  ñah   jnok guÿloï 
OM    person big  ATTR:many 
      ‘the many senior men’ (SSKh40) 
 
 The attributive infix is also attached to words of foreign origin, such as the 
Pali loan ‹duk› (P. dukkha ‘suffering, unsatisfactoriness’). 
 
(3.37)  manus dmuk    m a  s j i ï    n a    s g o ’      p ūï glīk  ku ÿ 
O M     m a n    ATTR:suffer REL difficult INSTR PROSP:get rice cloth too 
      ‘also poor people who can ha rdly get food and clothes’ (SSKd47f) 
 
Sentence (3.37) shows the use of the infixed attributive ‹dmuk› and the 
periphrastic relative ‹ma sjiï›. The former is preferred with objectless, simple 
verbs, while the latter occurs regularly with extended verb expressions. 
 
 In MM, the relative marker is sometim es prefixed directly to the verb, a 
word order which seems to become more  frequent in LM as in (3.38) and 
(3.39). 
 
(3.38)  ’atui ï    payyah -duih  ky āk   ma kuiw law 
LM    according NML:prophesy Buddha REL give  KEEP 
      ‘according to the prophecy which the Lord Buddha made’ (DC:6) 
 
(3.39)  ’atui ï    k a s a p      j a k u   ma khyap law 
LM    according NML:think  body REL think  KEEP 
      ‘according to the thought he had himself’ (DC:21) 
 
 This word order brings the relative construction closer to  the attributive, 
which is always marked on the verb itself, either by adding the prefix (or 
proclitic) ‹ma› or the infix ‹-m-›: ‹ma jnok› ~ ‹jamnok› ‘big’, ‹ma gluiï› ~ 
‹gamluiï› ‘many, much’, etc.  
 In some cases the infixed form has developed special semantics, 
differentiating it from the prefixed attributive form. These lexicalised 
attributives have often survived in SM, while other attributives have been all 
but lost. The word hənòk still exists with the meaning ‘chief, senior person’. 
 
 
111 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The attributive of hnòk remains unmarked: həʔ hnòk ‘a big house’ or ‘the 
house is big’.  
 
 In SM and in newer texts of LM, both relative and attributive usually 
remain unmarked, apart from a few set expressions, usually adverbials with 
the head pùə ‘manner’, e.g. pùə mə-klàŋ ‘a lot’, pùə mə-lòn ‘exceedingly’.  
 Some speakers retain the relative marker in SM, usually weakened to [m ə] 
or even [m ̩], which is prefixed to the main verb. Most often this remnant 
of the relative subordinator seems to occur in expressions with sentence 
initial interrogative pronouns, such as (3.40) and (3.41). 
 
(3.40)  ʔəl   h (m̩) ʔa? 
S M     w h e r e  3    (REL) go 
      ‘Where did he go?’ 
 
(3.41)  mù ʔ  h (m̩) hm? 
S M     w h a t  3    ( REL) speak 
      ‘What did he say?’ 
 
 This vocalic nasal is barely audibl e and for most speakers non-existent. 82 
Most naturally both relative and attributive expressions are simply attached to 
the noun phrase they modify, without any overt marker. Often the topic 
marker kh is attached to the whole expression, marking it as a (nominal) unit, 
though not obligatorily. 
 
(3.42)  mənìh kl ŋ iəʔ pŋ kh  
SM    man   come eat  rice TOP 
      ‘the one who came for dinner’ (KKP) 
 
(3.43)  kon  mòn  klon  m ŋ  k əlon   ə ŋ    s e m   kh 
SM    child Mon do   STAY NML:do LOC country Thai TOP 
      ‘the Mon people working in Thailand’ 
 
(3.44)  klan   gah sm ān råï  khóā k nwa ÿ dmå ï jareï   gah ra. 
LM    python TOP ask  LOOK crow  exist  STAY vicinity TOP FOC 
      ‘The python asked a cr ow that was nearby.’ (LPM:10) 
 
The second instance of ‹gah› in  (3.44) is deictic (‹jare ï gah› ‘that vicinity, 
there’) and does not mark the NP modified by the relative clause as in (3.42) 
and (3.43). 
                                                      
82 One learned informant, NOP, obviously tends to add the relative marker in transcriptions 
of life recordings where no distinct nasal sound can be heard in the recording. It is difficult or 
impossible in many contexts to detect the weak [m̩], especially in nasal contexts. 
 
 
112 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 If the attributive expresses a quality (“adjective”), the verb is often 
reduplicated in LM and SM. Sentence ( 3.45) shows an activity verb as well 
as a quality verb functioning as attributive in postnominal position. The 
former remains unmarked, while the latter is reduplicated. 
 
(3.45)  ʔ  ŋ-kya  hətum   kh h-khh mùə  kh 
SM    PREF aeroplane fall.down good- RDP  one  TOP 
      ‘a good aeroplane that crashed’ (KD) 
 
 In (3.46), the verb ‘big’ is not reduplicated in attributive position. 
 
(3.46)  mh āther jnok tak law  thapuiy gah. 
LM    monk   big  beat KEEP novice  TOP 
      ‘The senior monk beat the novice.’ (LPM:14) 
 
 In more formal contexts such as newspaper articles, a genre which is 
especially prone to foreign influen ce and calques, the relative/attributive 
m a r k e r  ‹ m a ›  i s  r e g u l a r l y  u s e d  w i t h  non-restrictive relative clauses, as in 
(3.47). 
  
(3.47)  Mohammed Atef 83 ma dah ’adhika thakuip pn ān ... 
L M     M . A .           REL be  prime   head   army ... 
      ‘Mohammed Atef, who is the commander-in-chief, ...’  
      (Guiding Star 28:10) 
       
 Other frequent constructions using th e relative/attributive marker are the 
rather formal ‹ma ptaÿ nū ...› ‘beginning with ...’ and the nominalizer ‹dadah 
ma V› ‘V-ing, -tion’, which in Na i Tun Way’s dictionary (Tun Way 
2000:559-593) covers almost forty pages. Both constructions are rarely used 
in SM apart from formal speech. 
 SM can be said to be a languag e without productive overt relative or 
attributive formation.84 Like the lack of real productive nominalizing devices, 
this obviously poses no communicative problem. 
 
4. Causatives 
4.1. Introduction 
 
Causatives are verb forms that increase the argument struct ure of base verbs 
by one, the causer. The subject of the ba se verb becomes the syntactic object 
(causee) in the causative construction. The causer causes, i.e. allows, forces, 
                                                      
83 Spelt in Latin characters in the original text. 
84 Different speakers come up with different devices when asked to translate corresponding 
expressions from Thai or Burmese into Mon. 
 
 
113 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
or act in such a way that the causee performs the act or assumes the state 
described by the base verb.  
 All causatives are by definition transitive, while the base verb can be either 
transitive or intransitive. There is no restriction in Mon as to the semantic 
scope of the base verbs to be used in  causative constructions. Any verb can 
be causativized, although the morphol ogical causative is not always 
available, sometimes due to loss of th e form through the development of the 
language. Causatives can be formed from verbs describing events or states, as 
well as from resultative compounds. 
 Once a morphological causative is form ed, it can function as secondary base 
for derivation, especially nominalization: 
lm ‘be twisted’ -  plam ‘twist around, train (vine plants)’  -  pəlam ‘trellis for 
climbing plants’.85
 Recursive causativization is possibl e in Mon with one morphological and 
one periphrastic form (with k ‘GIVE’, s. 6.3.11): 
 
(4.1a)  hə  l m         a. 
SM   house  be.destroyed GO 
     ‘The house was destroyed.’ 
 
(4.1b)  h plm        na       h . 
S M    3    CAUS: destroyed  CAUS:GO  house 
     ‘He destroyed the house.’ 
 
(4.1c)  èh-kh  k   h pəlm       na       h ə. 
S M     w h o      GIVE 3   CAUS:destroyed CAUS:GO  house 
     ‘Who let/made him destroy the house?’ 
 
(4.2)  ’åk   kuiw  ptiÿ       n āy   ’akā y       s n e h h a  
LM   father  GIVE  CAUS:know  master exceedingly beloved 
     ‘[Your] father made [me]  inform [you], my dearest lord.’ (SGD:77)  
 
4.2 Historical overview 
 
The OM language had an elaborate sy stem of causative formation, making 
use of both prefixes and infixes. To ve rbs with a single initial consonant, p- 
was prefixed, resulting in  a cluster where phonologica lly possible. In other 
cases, a short vowel sound [ ə] was inserted. The p- prefix is well attested in 
the Austroasiatic language family (Shorto 1971:218) and is also found to the 
Austronesian stock, where the prefix pa- forms causatives (Dahl 1976:119f.). 
Verbs with initial consonant clusters usually form the causative by means of 
the vocalic -u- infix in OM, although there are a few exceptions, which will 
be discussed below. Diffloth (1984 :268ff) postulates also a prefix k- for Mon 
                                                      
85 The verb lm is not attested in older stages of Mon; the reconstructed forms in OM would 
be *‹lām›, *‹plām›, and *‹pirlām›. 
 
 
 
114 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(or Monic), mainly based on evidence from Nyah Kur, where this prefix 
usually replaces the more common p- prefix of Mon. Th e only instance of k- 
in Mon proper seems to be OM ‹tir› ‘r ise’ - ‹ktir› ‘have arise in one’. The 
causative meaning of the prefix is not  entirely clear, and the MM and LM 
usage suggests a translation ‘arise’ rather than ‘have arise in one’. A regular 
causative is formed by infixing ‹-u-›: ‹kutir› ‘rouse, bring into being’. If there 
is actually a causative k- prefix, this might ultimately be connected to OM 
‹kil, kel›, SM k
 ‘give, let’, used in modern Mon to form periphrastic 
causatives. 
 
4.2.1 Verbs with single initial (non-labial) 
 
The prefix p- probably had an allophone pə- (spelt ‹p-›) already in OM in 
front of nasals and stops . While the first three examples in (4.3) were 
pronounced with an initial cluster /plø , plop, phum/, the la st four probably 
had an epenthetic short vowel between the prefix and the initial consonants 
/pətit, pətim, pəøt, pəār/.86
 
(4.3) OM/MM 
‹liñ›   -  ‹pliñ›        ‘be destroyed’ - ‘destroy’     (SM l  - pl) 
‹ l o p ›    -   ‹ p l o p ›         ‘ g o  i n ’  -  ‘ i n s e r t ’            ( S M  l ù p  -  p l o p )   
‹hum›  -  ‹p-hum, phum›  ‘take a bath’ - ‘bathe so.’      (SM hum - phum  
‹ut›   -  ‹p u t ›         ‘ b e  a l l ’  -  ‘ u s e  u p ’           ( S M  t - ht)  
‹ār›   -  ‹p ār›        ‘go’ - ‘carry out, practice’     (SM a - na) 
‹tit ›   -  ‹ptit›        ‘go out’ - ‘take out’        (SM t t - pətt)  
‹tim›  -  ‹ptim›        ‘know’ - ‘inform’          (SM t m - pətm) 
 
(4.4)    óūï  ’arimaddanap ūr  goh ̣ ci   kā l  satru  bu ÿrūk goh ̣ óeḥ  
OM    town Arimaddanapura that EMPH time  enemy hostile  TOP 3       
      spliñ             wel... 
      PROS:CAUS:destroyed also 
      ‘When hostile foes ravage the kingdom of Arimaddanapura...’  
      (SSKb24) 
   
(4.5)    óeḥ ptit     jrum han p āï   trus  moy. 
O M     3    CAUS:exit snake LOC mouth man  one 
      ‘He extracted a snake from a man via his mouth.’ (Ku202)  
 
(4.6)    óek  ma sp-hum87      j i ñ j u ï 
OM    water REL PROS:CAUS:bathe post 
      ‘water with which to bathe the posts’  (Kyansittha K17) 
 
                                                      
86  OM phonetic reconstruction according to Shorto 1971. 
87 The spelling <p-hum> indicates an OM cluster <p-h> instead of the simple aspirate <ph>, 
which is used in modern LM. 
 
 
115 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Verbs beginning with a palatal stop c-, j-  or s- regularly formed the 
causative by prefixing p-, with the resulting clusters *pc-, *ps- being changed 
into phy- in MM.  
 
(4.7) OM/MM 
‹cau ›  -  ‹phyau›   ‘return’     -   ‘take, bring back’   (SM cao  - phyao) 
‹cuih›  -  ‹phyuih›  ‘go down’    -   ‘take, bring down’  (SM ceh  - phyeh) 
‹chuy›  -  ‹phyuy›88  ‘move away’  -   ‘move away sth.’   (SM chuy - phyuy) 
‹suk ›  -  ‹p ṣuk›    ‘be happy’    -   ‘make happy’     (SM sak  - phyak) 
‹suï›  -  ‹p ṣuï›     ‘ d r i n k ’       -   ‘ c a u s e  t o  d r i n k ’     ( S M  s  - phy) 
 
 Examples of the OM and MM forms are given in the following sentences.  
 
(4.8)   ket dh āt  swok turau phyau    t h ān  damå ï   jaku   tuy... 
MM   take relic  hair  six   CAUS:return place NML:stay body  FINISH 
     ‘Taking the six hair relics and bearing them away to their dwelling- 
     places...’  (DMI:256) 
 
(4.9)   pṣuk      ’ u t   m a h ājan  guÿ luï 
OM   CAUS:happy all  people   ATTR:many 
      ‘made all the pe ople happy’ (Myakan A18f) 
 
(4.10)  guÿ’īr  moy  tiñju  ca  gris    óeḥ pṣuï      c h i m   k ṣeḥh. 
OM   monk   one  worm  eat  entrails  3   CAUS:drink blood  horse 
     ‘He made a monk whose entra ils were being eaten by worms drink  
     the blood of a horse.’ (Ku201)  
 
The last two items on the list (4.7) were later changed to ‹phyuk› and ‹phyuï› 
resp. in MM. The verb ‹suk› is a Pali loan ( sukha ‘happiness’), here with a 
Mon causative. 
 
 There are some verbs with initial c- that went a different way. For ‹ca›  eat’ 
the attested causative form in MM is ‹baca›, which Shorto (DMI:258) traces 
back to an earlier, unattested form *‹pi ñca›, the frequentative causative with 
p- CAUS and -iñ- FREQ affixes.  
 
(4.11)  dleï         ’ o h      baca     m i .  
MM   carry.on.yoke  firewood CAUS:eat  mother 
     ‘[He] carried loads of firewood to provide food for his mother.’ 
(DMI:258) 
In SM the form varies between həiə, where hə- is the regular reflex of MM 
‹ba-›, and pəiə, piə ,piə, phyiə (LM ‹bca, baca›). 
 
                                                      
88 This verb is attested only in LM and SM, not in MM and OM. The expected causative 
from an OM root *‹ chuy› would be an infixed form, the aspirated initials in OM being 
regarded as clusters. 
 
 
116 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.12)  kyəpan   pəiə   m ŋ  i  hù   ph ə  lèy. 
SM    Japanese  CAUS:eat  STAY eat   NEG  be.full EMPH 
     ‘The Japanese fed them, but they could not eat their fill.’ (KD) 
 
(4.13)  h piə     əta  kwan. 
SM    3   CAUS:eat  along  village 
     ‘He fed the whole village.’ (WK) 
 
 * pj- was changed into * bj- > by-. This initial cluster is rare and its status in 
SM is not sure. All attested examples  are MM, but cf. OM ‹pju, pju’› > LM 
‹byu›, SM pyù ‘be old’ with the same development of the initial cluster. 
 
(4.14) MM 
‹juiw› - ‹byuiw› ‘fight’ - ‘cause to fight, incite enmity’  (SM  c - py ~ həc)  
 
(4.15)  byuiw    c i ï    kuiw smi ï ekarā t  man. 
MM   CAUS:fight elephant OBL  lord  king    Mon 
     ‘[He] set his elephant at the Mon king’s.’ (DMI:274) 
 
4.2.2 Verbs with labial initial 
 
The causative of verbs with initial p- or b-  is formed with the prefix pu-, 
which in MM is voiced to ba-, as in 
 
(4.16) OM/MM 
‹piñ›    -  ‹pupiñ› >  ‹bapeñ›   ‘be full’  -  ‘fill’     (SM p  - həp)  
‹bir, bar› -  ‹pubar› >  ‹babuiw›  ‘look’   -  ‘show’   (SM p  - həp) 
 
 In early MM, p-  before voiced initials is changed into b-, except where p- is 
bound in a real cluster. Thus, the causa tive of ‹guir› ‘shine’ is ‹bguir›, which 
was probably pronounced [bəgør] or [bəgøw] with an epenthetic vowel.  
 
 There is one case of an apparently irregular causative, attested only in MM, 
viz. ‹bru›, ‘make a noise’. This looks like the causative of LM ‹ru›, ‘be loud, 
sound›, which is not attested  in MM, but frequent in LM. If we are in fact 
dealing here with a causative, the voiced prefix requires an explanation. 
Furthermore, there is a regular causativ e of ‹bru›, viz. ‹buru› ‘cause to 
sound’.  The root itself is widespread in MK languages (s. DMI:276), but rare 
in SM. The triplet in LM and SM reads:  
 
(4.17) LM/SM 
‹ru› rù ‘be loud’ - ‹bru› prù ‘make a noise’ 89  - ‹baru› hərù ‘cause to 
sound’ 
                                                      
89 In some Mon dialects of Thailand, the verb prùʔ means ‘speak, say’ and replaces the 
common Mon root hm with the same meaning. (This use of prùʔ is recorded for the Mon 
dialect of Baang Khan Maak in Lopburi Province.) 
 
 
117 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
 A comparable case might be LM ‹blin›, SM plìn ‘divert, turn aside’, which 
according to Bauer has a (not otherwis e attested) “de-causative” form, viz. 
LM ‹dalin, galin ›, SM həlìn ‘be out of order’. As there are no other cases 
known of de-causativization with the vocalic infix, an alternative explanation 
along the lines of ‹bru› above is maybe more convincing. From a hypothetical 
base *‹lin› meaning ‘be out of order’ a causative could be formed, viz. ‹blin› 
with the same irregular voicing of the prefix as ‹bru›. The non-causative form 
həlìn could be explained as containing another prefix, the identity of which 
cannot at the moment be established. Notice that the LM spelling does not 
give any indication as to the origin of the prefix and is a mere representation 
of the SM prefix hə- without change of register  in the main syllable. The 
expected form *‹balin› is not attested. 
 
4.2.3 Verbs with initial consonant cluster 
 
OM verbs beginning with a consonant cluster form the causative by infixing -
u- between the initial consonants.  
 
(4.18) OM 
‹blah›  -  ‹bulah ›  ‘be free’         - ‘set free,’   (SM pl h - həlh) 
‹jnok›  -  ‹junok›  ‘be big’         - ‘increase’   (SM hnòk - h ənòk) 
‹graï›  -  ‹gura ï›  ‘know’          - ‘inform’   (SM kr ŋ - hərŋ) 
‹tlūï›  -  ‹tul ūï›   ‘ c o m e ’           -  ‘ b r i n g ’     ( S M  k lŋ - nŋ) 
‹kya ›  -  ‹kuya›   ‘lose, be defeated’   - ‘defeat’    (SM kya  - kəya) 
‹ksīw›  -  ‹kus īw›  ‘be shaken, tremble’ - ‘shake’    (SM khyi - pəkhyi ~ k əsə) 
‹phic›  -  ‹buhic›  ‘be afraid’        - ‘scare’    (SM ph c - ph) 
 
 After ‹ks īw› ‘tremble’ had become ‹khyī› in late MM or early Modern Mon, 
the old causative was replaced with the more transparent form ‹pakhy ī›, 
although the older ‹kas ī› can still be found in LM and in some contexts in 
SM, e.g. kəsə càŋ ‘move one’s legs’.  
 
(4.19) ey p əkhyi    h n   t e h   p ŋka  h əta t khyi.       
SM    eh  CAUS:move like.this COND rotor  front that move 
     ‘Eh, if you moved it like th is, the front rotor moved.’ (KD) 
 
 The old causative of phc has been replaced by ph in SM, the form 
‹bahek› phc with the causative meaning being restricted to archaic and 
classical LM. The nominalized form of the same verb survives in SM as 
pəhc from *‹birhic›. ‹buhic› seems to show voicing of the initial labial in the 
infixed form already in OM. Another possibility might be that in pre-OM the 
cluster *bh- was devoiced to ph- but the original voiced labial was retained 
when separated from the voiceless h. Similar cases can be seen in OM 
‹that(ta)› ‘be strong’, ‹dirhat› ‘strength’, in SM th
t ~ sht/səht and in OM 
‹chān› ‘have compassion’, ‹jirhān›, ‘loving kindness’ with the nominalizing 
 
 
118 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
infix and voiced initial, SM chan ‘love’, shàn/səhàn ‘love’, both with 
irregular register in the second syllable. Originally voiced initials *‹bh-, dh-, 
jh-› for ‹phic›, ‹that›, and ‹ch ān› would explain the unexpected second 
register in the derivates. 
 
4.2.4 Irregular causatives  
 
There are a few instances where p- is prefixed to st ems with an initial 
consonant cluster. The traces of the initi al cluster, that was lost already in 
MM, can still be seen in SM by the absence of initial clusters in the 
causatives in some cases, e.g. pəlm (*plm) ‘destroy’. 
 
(4.20) OM 
‹rlim› - ‹*parlim, paluim› ‘be corrupted’ - ‘corrupt’       (SM l m - pəlm) 
‹rlāk› - ‹*parlāk, palāk›  ‘be in ruins’   -  ‘ruin’         (SM làc - p əlac, plac) 
‹rlāy› - ‹*parlāy, palāy›  ‘come loose’  - ‘make loose, melt’ (SM lày - pəlay, play) 
 
For these verbs, the causative is not attested in OM, but the MM formation 
with ‹pa-› indicates that they were  in use before the initial cluster rl- was 
reduced to l-. No causative is attested for OM ‹rl āy› until LM, where both 
‹palāy› and ‹plāy› occur, obviously without semantic difference. For ‹palāk›, 
there is a more common alternative form in SM plac, which goes back to an 
unattested MM *‹plāk›. It remains to be explained why these verbs took the 
prefix rather than the infix usually found with initial cl usters. The initial 
cluster ‹rl-› was maybe pronounced [r l-] with a slightly vocalic r, which 
would explain the prefix instead of the infix.  
 There is some counter-evidence, th ough, to this explana tion. Another verb 
with a r- cluster, OM ‹rbin› ‘be firm’ has the regular causative ‹rubin›. In SM 
the couple is pn ‘be firm, secure’ and həpn ‘secure, fix’ (LM ‹buin› - 
‹labuin, gabuin, dabuin, thabuin›). If r- as first element in a cluster was really 
spoken syllabically, we would expect here a form *‹p ərbuin› > *‹babuin›. 
This would result in SM in the same form həpn, but with different 
orthography in LM (notice that the exp ected form *‹babuin› is not found in 
LM). A parallel case is OM ‹rmiï› ‘hear’, of which no causative is attested in 
OM and MM. In LM, the verb ‘announce, make hear” is ‹pmi ï, kami ï, 
lamiï›, SM kəmo. The LM spelling ‹lamiï› seems to represent the expected 
(regular) form *‹rumiï›, but the light register of the causative in SM suggests 
‹pmiï› or ‹kamiï› to be the actual source of the SM form. Another possible 
explanation here is that the causative was formed later in MM (or early LM) 
when the p- prefix was fully productive. LM ‹pmiï› would then represent the 
original form, which was later changed to kəmo due to dissimilation of the 
labials p-m. Alternatively, we might be dealin g with another instance of the 
rare k- causative (s. above, 4.2).  
 LM ‹s ïay, sïoy, jïay, jïoy› ‘be far away, distant’ has a causative ‹pasïay, 
pasïoy› ‘push away’ (SM hùə - p əhuə). The OM and MM glosses are not 
attested, but the corresponding verb in Nyah Kur confirms the antiquity of the 
word in Mon. The reconstructed form in Dv āravatī Mon is *j ïəy (Diffloth 
 
 
119 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
1984:248), which would regularly form the causative with the vocalic infix as 
*juïəy (> LM *‹jaïay›, SM *kəhə). Tun Way (2000:1240) lists the derivate 
“‹jïoy› [jòa²] v. to push away” under the entry “‹sïoy› [sòa²] v. to be far, 
distant, far away.” On p.735, Tun Wa y gives the more common causative 
“‹pa, sïoy› (sic!) [pă  s oa²] v. to put off, to pos tpone, to put away from 
one.”  
 The causative of ‹jïoy› was probably formed when the vocalic infix had lost 
its productivity or the initial cluster *‹jï-› had already become ‹h-›. There is 
no simple way in LM to write initial h-  in heavy register words, ‹j ï-› being 
the most common spelling for these word s. The attributive and nominalized 
forms of the same word are attested in OM and MM as ‹jam ïay›, ‹jirïey› > 
‹jaïay›, LM ‹jamïay›, ‹jaïay›, which merge in SM in kəhùə ‘distance, distant 
place’. The SM reflexes with the irregular rhyme -uə instead of the expected -
ə for MM ‹-ay› are probably due to the velar nasal initial ŋ. A similar 
phonetic development can be seen in SM ŋuə ‘sun, day’ from MM ‹tïay›.90
 
4.2.5 Causatives of directionals 
 
The directionals ‘go’, ‘enter’, and ‘exit’ have alternative causative forms in 
OM and MM, viz. compounds of ‹raï› ‘take away, bring’ and the non-
causative base. In late OM the first element was weakened to ‹rin-›, 
functioning like a regular prefix (s. DMI:312). Only the reflex of ‹rin’ ār› has 
survived into LM and SM as ‹õā› and na resp. via MM ‹n’ā›. 
 
(4.21) OM/MM 
‹‘ār›  -  ‹raï ’ār›  > ‹rin’ār›   ‘go’   - ‘take away, bring’    (LM ‹ õā›, SM na) 
‹tit›  -   ‹raï tit›  > ‹rintit›   ‘exit’  -  ‘take out’ 
‹lop› -  ‹raï lop› > ‹rinlop›   ‘enter’ -  ‘introduce, bring in’ 
 
 The causative of OM ‹óuk› ‘be complete’ (SM  ak) is ‹rin óuk› (LM 
‹ranuk›, SM rənk), which looks like a parallel  construction. The expected 
*‹raïóuk› as original form is not attested, though. The form ‹rin óuk› appears 
in inscriptions of the 11th century (DMI:319). 
 
4.2.6 Affix syncretism in MM 
 
In MM and early LM, the vowels and fi nals of weak presyllables were 
reduced to ə, so that many forms merged, a phenomenon that Bauer calls 
“Affix-Synkretismus”, i.e. ‘affix syncretism’ (Bauer 1982:156ff.). Old 
distinctions between attributives, frequentatives, nominalizations and 
causatives could not longer be ma de. This merger caused spelling 
irregularities and gave rise to new pr efixes through reanalysis of old ones. 
The following examples illustrate the merger of prefixes: 
 
                                                      
90 But compare also LM ‹’ay›, SM ʔuə ‘(instead of the expected, but not attested *ʔə) ‘I’.  
 
 
120 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
gloss form OM    MM   LM   SM  
be big BASE ‹jnok›  ‹jnok›   ‹jnok›  hnòk  
(big) size NML ‹jirnok›  ‹janok›  ‹janok›  hənòk 
to increase CAUS ‹junok›  ‹janok ›  ‹janok› hənòk 
chief, adult ATTR ‹juÿnok›  ‹jamnok› ‹jamnok› hənòk 
to dance BASE *‹rleh›  ‹leh›   ‹leh›  lèh  
a dance NML ‹rinleh› *‹raleh› ‹galeh›  həlèh 
to dance FREQ ‹rinleh› *‹raleh›    
let dance CAUS *‹ruleh› ‹raleh›    
         Table 4.1: Affix merger in LM and SM 
 
4.3 The situation in modern Mon 
 
As the old system of prefixes and in fixes collapsed in SM, with only a 
restricted number of prefixes and onl y one infix between initial consonants, 
viz. the vowel -ə-, surviving, the causative system of the language underwent 
some changes as well. The present syst em cannot be analyzed without taking 
into consideration the older stages of the langua ge and the orthography, 
which reflects much of MM usage. 
 There are in SM five ways to form  causatives, only two or three of them 
still productive, including the periphrastic formation. The old forms seem to 
be largely lexicalized, their seman tics often not being recognizable as 
causatives of the corresponding root verb s. Where the old causative was not 
understood as such anymore, a new form  could arise, resulting in different 
causatives of the same verb in the spoken language, in some cases as many as 
four: 
 
(4.22) SM 
l à c  ‘ b r e a k  d o w n ’            k l ‘ c r o s s  o v e r ’           B A S E  
I .    p l a c  ‘ b r e a k  d o w n  s t h . ’                            p -  p r e f i x  
II.  p l a c  ‘ t e a r  d o w n ’                               p ə- prefix 
III.  h làc ‘blast away’          h kl‘take across’         h ə- prefix 
I V .                       k l  ‘take across’         - ə- infix  
V.  pa  (k) làc ‘make break down’ paʔ k klʔ ‘make cross over’  PERIPHRASTIC 
 
 
4.3.1 Productivity of the  p-/pə- prefix 
 
The causatives with pə- are still productive, to some extent at least, as recent 
loans from Burmese show. The phonological shape of k and tu indicate 
that they are recent loans from Burmese, 91 hardly older than 100-200 years, 
i.e. they belong to the modern Mon period, not MM. 
 
                                                      
91 The initial // is used almost exclusively in  Burmese loans. The rhyme /-u ʔ/ in light register 
syllables is usually changed to /-aoʔ/ in inherited words in SM (except after c and ch). 
 
 
121 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.23) SM 
tu  -  p ətu   ‘be fake’ - ‘fake’ 
k  -  p ək   ‘be confused’ - ‘confuse, disturb, interrupt’ 
 
are from Burmese tú ‘be fake’ and hyou’ ‘be confused’ respectively, both 
without corresponding causative. k is often used without overt causative 
marking in causative contexts in SM, e.g. 
 
(4.24a) uə klon  m ŋ  k əlon, pa   k           ì.         
SM   1s  do   STAY work  PROH (CAUS:)confused LITTLE 
     ‘I am working, don’t disturb me!’  
 
This apparently inconsistent use can easily be explained by the fact that the 
corresponding verbs in both Burmese and Thai 92  are used in causative 
contexts without overt marking: 
 
(4.24b)  nga ălou’   lou’ nei  te,   la   m ă-hyou’    né. 
B       1 s   NML:do do  STAY REAL come NEG- disturb PROH 
 
(4.24c)  chan 4 tham aan yuu¹, yaa¹  yu². 
T h      1 s    d o    w o r k  STAY PROH disturb(ed) 
   
 Another Burmese loan with a real Mon causative formation is 
 
(4.25) SM 
p r e y    -   pərey     ‘be smooth’ - ‘smooth’ 
 
from Burmese pyei, spelt ‹pre›, with the Burmese causative form hpyei, 
‹phre›. This verb operates with the vocalic infix co mmonly used with initial 
clusters in OM and obviously still alive in MM. This verb is not attested in 
OM and MM or early LM. See below (sentence 4.27) for the same Burmese 
loan with its Burmese causative.  
 
4.3.2 The hə- and pə- prefixes 
 
Newer loans from Burmese form the causative with the prefix hə-, as in 
 
(4.26)  wèy  kwah ph ə  həpyk    t h    c h  poy t ra  ha.   
SM    INTJ  pupil temple CAUS:fall.off THROW shop 1pl all  FOC Q   
     ‘Hey you temple students, are you going to ruin my whole shop?’  
     ( K N )  
 
                                                      
92 Thai, unlike Burmese and Mon, does not make  use of morphological processes such as 
causativisation at all. 
 
 
122 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
where pyk >  həpyk ‘fall off, be ruined’ > ‘ruin’ is from Burmese pyou’, 
spelt ‹prut›, causative hpyou’, ‹phrut›. The initial cluster py- for Burmese 
‹pr-› in colloquial SM shows that this is a recent loan. 
  
 In the following sentence, the same Burm ese verb as in (4.25) above is used 
with Burmese causative morphology in  Mon. Here the initial cluster phy- for 
Burmese ‹phr-› suggests a recent date of this loan, unlike pre in (4.25). 
 
(4.27)  mənìh hnòk-hnòk èh    phyàn-phyèy  th .      
SM    man   big- RDP   person  CAUS:solved  THROW 
     ‘The big men (leaders) solved the problem.’ (KD) 
 
 The causative prefix hə- is the result of at leas t two independent processes 
in MM. One is infixation with regular change of the initial consonant to hə- 
in SM, if it was a voiced or aspirated stop or the fricative s . This process can 
be seen in the development of OM ‹blah› -  ‹bulah› ‘be free’ - ‘set free, 
release’ above in (4.18). The MM opposition ‹blah › - ‹balah › regularly 
becomes plh - həlh in SM. The other source of the SM hə- causative prefix 
is the voicing that happened in MM of the p- prefix in certain contexts (see 
above). 
 
 Once hə- was established as causative prefix, among others, it came to serve 
as universal means to form causatives, sometimes leading to pleonastic 
formations, as in 
 
(4.28) SM 
lùp  -   plop  -  h əplup   ‘enter’ - ‘insert, put in’  - ‘insert, put in’ 
 
The form həplup is commonly heard in colloquial SM and has made its way 
into the written language of modern publications such as newspapers and 
journals. It is still considered substandard or incorrect by educated speakers 
though.  
In many cases, hə- replaces the older pə- prefix: 
 
(4.29) SM 
tn  -  p ətn ~ hətn   ‘go up’ - ‘bring up, elevate’ 
tt    -   p ətt ~ htt    ‘go out’ - ‘take out, issue’ 
ùh  -  p əŋaoh ~ həŋùh  ‘wake up’ - ‘wake up so., arouse’ ~ ‘wake up so.’ 
 
(4.30) lèy-thi   ceh      ey    h pn  hətn   n a .         
SM   parachute move.down eh  PREF 3   shoot CAUS:UP  CAUS:GO 
    ‘The parachutes came down and they  shot up (their guns in the air).’  
    ( K D )  
 
 There is apparently no difference in  meaning between the two alternative 
forms, apart from the one with hə- being more colloquial. In the case of ŋ ùh, 
 
 
123 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
only həŋùh is commonly used in SM as semantic causative of ŋùh, although 
Shorto (1962:91, 143) lists only pəŋ aoh. The vowel change from -uh to -aoh 
is regular in the light re gister. In co lloquial Mon, pəŋaoh is used only in the 
meaning ‘arouse (interest, etc.)’. 
 
 In other cases, the pə - prefix is retained, as in 
 
(4.31)  nàc  k h pətup    t h     m n ì h .                
SM    Naga TOP CAUS:same THROW  human 
     ‘That Naga took on human shape.’ (WK) 
 
 A few verbs that are expected to take the originally voiced ‹ ba-› prefix (h- 
in SM) show alternative forms with pə-, probably due to analogy: 
 
(4.32) 
LM ‹dah›  ‘touch, hit’  SM th  -  h th ~ pəth ‘bring into contact’ 
LM ‹dah›  ‘be’    SM t h  -  h th ~ pəth ‘arrange, organize’ 
 
 Others take only the pə- prefix, even though their initial consonant is voiced 
in MM: 
 
(4.33) 
LM ‹gåï› ‘be brave’    SM  k ŋ  -  p kŋ   ‘embolden, make brave  
LM ‹get›  ‘revolve’     SM kèt   -  p kèt  ‘turn around, rotate’ 
 
4.3.3 The vocalic infix 
 
Verbs with an initial consonant cluster retain the causative with vowel infix, 
which is always realized as -ə- in SM: 
 
(4.34) SM 
kl   -    k l     ‘cross over’  -  ‘take across’ 
k l a h    -    k lah     ‘be clear’   -  ‘explain’ 
pln    -    p ln     ‘do again’   -  ‘return’ 
 
 In some cases the causative was lost in SM, e.g. OM *‹tmi› (MM ‹tami›) 
‘be new’ - ‹tumi› ‘renew’, of which only the non-causative survived into the 
modern language: kəmə, LM ‹tmi, tami› ‘be new’. The reflex of the 
causative would have merged in SM (which obviously was no reason to 
replace the causative in other instances, as the example of həton ‘learn, teach’ 
shows, s. below) and was replace d by the periphrastic construction, pa 
kəmə, pa k kəmə. 
 
 If the first consonant of  the cluster was a voiced  or aspirated stop or a 
fricative, it is regularly changed to h- in SM: 
 
 
 
124 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.35) SM 
khyt   -    h ct   ‘die’ - ‘kill’          (OM ‹kcit› - ‹kucit› > LM ‹gacuit›) 
klò   -    h lò   ‘be long’ - ‘lengthen’    (LM ‹jli ï, gliï› - ‹jaliï›) 
klàŋ   -    h làŋ   ‘be much’ -‘increase’   (LM ‹glui ï› - ‹galuiï›)  
hlə   -    h lə   ‘be wide’ - ‘widen’     (LM ‹slay› - ‹phalhay› for *‹salay›) 
hlŋ   -    h lŋ   ‘be high’ - ‘raise’      (LM ‹slu ï› - ‹saluï, phaluï›) 
 
The spelling with ‹pha-› indicates the reanalysis of the infix as causative 
prefix, the labial quality of which (p-, pa-, ba-, pha-) is intuitively understood 
by literate speakers. 
 
(4.36)  kyac     hnòk hlh    n a        əkùn   nà ŋ.        
SM    holy.being big  CAUS:free CAUS:GO  monk   Naing 
     ‘The abbot let the monk Naing go.’ (KN) 
 
(4.37)  kon poy  p m   l     h əct.                       
SM    child 1pl manner which CAUS:die 
     ‘How can we kill our son?’ (WK) 
 
 Some of the old infixed causatives have been replaced or supplemented by 
prefixed forms, e.g. instead of the above mentioned kəl
 ‘take across’, one 
hears həkl ‘id.’ at least in some areas: 
 
(4.38)  èh   həkl       k   əkùn  to ə   l à k   a  ph ə     k h.  
SM    person CAUS:cross.over OBL monk  FINISH arrive GO  monastery  TOP 
     ‘He took the monk across [the river] and he arrived at that 
monastery.’  
     ( K N )  
 
 This use is considered substandard or incorrect by some speakers and seems 
not to be used in the southern areas at all. 
 
4.3.4 The p- prefix in clusters 
 
Where the p- prefix resulted in an initial consonant cluster of the type pr-, pl-, 
ph- or phy- this cluster was usually retained in SM, together with the change 
of register where applicable: 
 
(4.39) toə   t e h   c ər e y     k h  plon       n ŋ      ŋ  sem  n . 
SM   FINISH COND secretary TOP  CAUS:exceed  CAUS:COME land Thai this 
    ‘And then that secretary brought  him over here to Thailand.’ (KD) 
 
 
 
125 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.40)  mèy h cŋ  n a      k h y t  a toə   
SM    mother 3   burn tr CAUS:GO die   go FINISH 
      mèy  phi      n a       k   ph . 
     m o t h e r   CAUS:float CAUS:GO  OBL raft 
     ‘His mother burnt him and when he was dead she let him float  
     away on a raft.’ (WK) 
 
(4.41)  h phyeh     w à ŋ  to ə   t ì      èh-hək .  
SM    3   CAUS:down  rink  FINISH attack  each.other 
     ‘He brought [the bulls] down into the rink and they attacked  
     each other.’ (WK) 
 
 In other cases, the newer form with hə- is found: 
 
(4.42)  uə həck     n a      k   h ənùh uə mù ə  t ə   h nh ra .   
SM    1s  CAUS:collide CAUS:GO OBL lance  1s  one  hand win   FOC 
     ‘I will pierce it with my la nce just once and it will win.’ (WK) 
 
 The form with p- prefix, phyk is also attested with no perceptible 
difference in meaning, but rarely used in colloquial SM. 
 
 The development of ‹pj-› > ‹bj› > ‹by-› is less clear and examples are hard 
to find. The newer form always seems to be available, and the status of the 
older form is not certain. The only exam ples in the recorded data show the 
newer form with hə-: 
 
(4.43)  ket   k h həcm     poy.   
SM    take PREF TOP CAUS:collide 1pl 
     ‘He took that thing to hit us [make it collide with us].’ (KN) 
 
The expected causative *pym is not attested in SM or LM, and the base verb 
‹juim› is not found in OM or MM. 
 
4.3.5 Irregular developments 
 
In the cases where an OM cluster required an epenthetic vowel after p-, as in 
the case of ‹rlim›, ‹rlāy›, and ‹rlāk› (s. 4.2.4), the form is retained in SM as 
pə-:       
 
(4.44) h  ket  h plm        p lac      k r m t con.   
SM    3   take  3   CAUS:destroyed CAUS:ruined nasty all  indeed 
     ‘Whoever they took, they ruined them; they were really very nasty.’  
     ( K D )  
 
 There are alternative forms for pəlac and pəlay, viz. plac and play resp., but 
not for pəlm (*pl m). SM pəlay, play has a related form, viz. kəlay, LM 
 
 
126 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
‹talāy, kal āy, calā y›, ‘come loose, hang down; unbind, let down’, i.e. with 
both non-causative and causative mean ing. This form cannot be derived 
directly from ‹rlāy› or *‹rulāy›, which in SM would have resulted in * kəlày 
with heavy register. The OM form corresponding to SM kəlay is ‹tulāy› ‘hang 
down’. This looks like the causative of an unattested verb *‹tl āy›, in spite of 
its non-causative meaning in OM. This might be a case of affix confusion, 
not uncommon in Mon at least since MM.  
 No hə- prefixed form is attested in SM or LM for ‹l āy›, as is the case for 
both ‹rlim› and ‹rlāk›, i.e. LM ‹baluim›, SM h əlm and LM ‹bal āk›, SM 
həlàc respectively. The three similar OM verbs therefore exhibit different 
patterns in LM and SM: 
 
 
Gloss OM SM CAUS I CAUS II CAUS III 
‘be ruined’ rlim lm  
 
pəlm həlm 
‘fall to pieces’ rlāk làc plac 
 
 pəlac həlàc 
‘be dissolved’ rlāy lày play  pəlay  
           Table 4.2: Causatives of OM rl- clusters 
 
 The verb lùp ‘enter, go in’ has a regular causative plop, plup ‘insert, bring 
in’, as seen above, besides a more recent colloquial variant həplup. Less 
frequent is the form pəlup ‘introduce, bring in’: 
 
(4.45)  èh-kh plup    pèh ə h əkom  rao. 
SM    who    CAUS:enter 2   LOC society  QREL 
     ‘Who introduced you to the society?’ (DSM:149) 
 
 In MM there is an additional form ‹rinlop› ‘take into’, a compound of ‹raï› 
‘bring’ and ‹lop› ‘enter’. This form obviously has been lost in LM and SM 
without leaving any traces. It cannot be  the source of any of the modern 
forms. 
 
 
4.3.6 The periphrastic construction 
 
In SM the periphrastic construction with pa ‘do’, pa k ‘do + GIVE > CAUS’ 
or simply k ‘ GIVE > CAUS ’ is available for virtually all verbs. The 
periphrastic construction is mainly used when there is stronger focus on the 
causation, which can be permission or an  order, among others. In (4.47), it is 
clear from the broader context that th e speaker was not really happy with his 
mother’s decision to put him in Mon monastery school, as he would have 
preferred to go back to the Burmese school. In (4.46) the circumstances are 
more neutral; therefore the morphological causative is used. 
 
 
 
127 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.46)  ’amāt   khna ÿ knā jnok  mway tuy   damåï   law  ’arhan ta’. 
LM    minister build  hall big  one   FINISH CAUS:stay KEEP saint  PL 
     ‘The minister built a big ha ll and accommodated the saints there.’  
     ( R ājāwaÿsakathā:14) 
 
(4.47)  əmèy  h k   m ŋ phə     m ò n   k  əyk hə cam hnam. 
S M     m o t h e r   3    GIVE stay  monastery Mon get age   eight  year 
     ‘My mother let/had me stay at the Mon monastery school when I  
     was eight years old.’ (KN) 
 
 The periphrastic construc tion exhibits syntactic stru ctures clearly different 
from sentences with morphological causa tives, as the following sentences 
illustrate.  
 
(4.48a)  h ə  lm        a. 
SM     house  destroyed  GO   
      ‘The house was destroyed.’ 
 
(4.48b)  h pəlm         n a       h . 
S M      3    CAUS: destroyed  CAUS:GO  house   
      ‘He destroyed the house.’ 
 
4.48c)  h hlm        n a       h ə. 
S M      3    CAUS:destroyed CAUS:GO  house       
      ‘He destroyed the house.’ 
 
(4.48d)  h pa hə  l m       a. 
SM     3   do  house  destroyed GO   
      ‘He destroyed the house.’ 
 
The English translations of sentences  (4.48a-d) are identical. There is no 
difference in meaning according to na tive speakers between the second and 
third sentences, while the last one s ounds odd out of context. It implies a 
more active destruction or a deliberat e action that lead to the house being 
destroyed, i.e. stronger focus on the cause. 
 While morphological causatives take the causative directional na, which 
stands before the object, the periphras tic construction takes the non-causative 
directional a after the object. The morphologi cal causatives are seen as 
single clauses, the periphrastic formation at least originally consists of two 
separate clauses. The same can be seen in the following sentence, were the 
morphological causative c ould have been chosen instead of the serial 
construction without difference in meaning: 
 
(4.49a)  h pàc     k   pt       a.      
SM     3   cut.down neck break.off GO  (WK)  
                           
 
 
128 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
for    
 
(4.49b)  h p à c      h əpt        n a       k . 
SM    3   cut.down CAUS:break.off CAUS:GO  neck 
      ‘He cut off [the bird’s] neck so that it broke off.’  
 
 In some cases where the morphol ogical causative was lost (or never 
existed), only the periphrastic construc tion is available in LM and SM, as in 
the case of kəmə ‘be new’ (s. above 4.3.3). The word khh ‘be good’ is not 
attested in older stages of Mon and cannot be reconstructed to Dv āravatī 
Mon. Its origin is not clear at present.  It probably never formed a causative, 
presumably because the regular proce sses were not available anymore when 
it entered the language (or when it recei ved its present meaning?). The only 
available causative today is therefore the periphrastic pa k khh. 
 As seen above, periphrastic causativ e constructions consist of two clauses, 
while morphological causatives consist of a single clause. This is also evident 
from the reference of həkao ‘body, self’ in the fo llowing sentences, which 
can only take the subject of the clause as its antecedant. 
 
(4.50a)  này ka i kok phyao     na       này kha j cao   h ə  hi, j
S M      M r .  A   c a l l  CAUS:return  CAUS:GO  Mr. B   return  house  3  
      ‘ M r .  A i took Mr. Bj back to hisi, j house.’ 
 
(4.50b)  này kai kok phyao     na       này kha j cao   
S M     M r .  A   c a l l  CAUS:return  CAUS:GO  Mr. B   return  
     h ə  h əkaoi 
     house  self 
     ‘ M r .  A i took Mr. Bj back to hisi house.’ 
 
(4.50c)  này ka i k   này kha j cao   a  h ə  hi, j
S M      M r .  A   GIVE Mr. B   return  GO  house  3 
      ‘ M r .  A i let Mr. Bj go back to hisi, j house.’ 
 
(4.50d)  này ka i k   này kha j cao   a  h ə  həkao j
S M      M r .  A   GIVE Mr. B   return  GO  house  self 
      ‘ M r .  A i let Mr. Bj go back to hisj house.’ 
 
4.3.7 Verbs without morphological causative 
 
A number of verbs can be used w ith a causative meaning without being 
overtly marked as such either: 
 
(4.51) SM 
mat    ‘be closed’ - ‘close sth.’ 
pk    ‘be open’ - ‘open sth.’ 
həton   ‘learn’ - ‘teach’ 
 
 
129 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The first verb is not attested in OM  or MM, but its phonetic shape does not 
suggest a foreign origin. mat is spelt ‹kmāt›, the expected causative of which 
would be *kəmat *‹kamāt›. The expected causative of pk is həpk, which in 
SM has an obscene meaning (among others) and is therefore avoided in polite 
speech. This form seems to be new, though, and can hardly be seen as an 
original causative which was lost due to taboo restrictions. There is no 
causative of p
k attested in OM, MM or LM.  
 It is remarkable that the same verbs ‘open’, ‘close’, and ‘learn, teach’ do not 
have overt causative marking in spoken Burmese: 
 
(4.52) B 
pei’    ‘be closed’ - ‘close sth.’ 93
hpwín  ‘be open’ - ‘open sth.’ 
thin    ‘learn’ - ‘teach’ 
 
The second verb, hpwín, is formally a causativ e, which in the spoken 
language has taken over the meaning of  the root verb as well. The non-
causative pwín survives in the meaning ‘bloom, blossom’. 
 
 In OM there is a verb *‹bton› with th e meaning ‘learn’. The frequentative is 
‹binton›, the causative ‹buton›, both becoming ‹baton› in MM, leaving a 
single form for ‘learn’ and ‘teach < let learn’. There is already in OM some 
inconsistency in use of the frequentativ e and causative forms of this verb. In 
SSKe11-12, the compound ‹dindu binton› ‘instruct-learn’ obviously means 
‘instruct’, ‹binton› having causative meaning, not freque ntative. It is likely 
that Burmese usage with thin meaning both ‘learn’ and ‘teach’ has at least 
facilitated the semantic development of Mon *‹bton› and its derivates. In SM 
sentences out of context are often ambiguous, as in 
 
(4.53)  k      s rì   h həton     p a  lù-pyi ək. 
SM    o.brother Sawri  3   learn/teach do  clown 
     ‘Your brother Sawri taught [you] how to act as a clown?’ (KN) 
 
Only the extra-linguistic context de termines the meaning of the verb həton in 
this sentence. The reading ‘Your brother learns how to act as a clown’ would 
in another context be possible. 
 
4.3.8 Suppletive stems 
 
A few verbs in Mon have a causative c ounterpart completely independent of 
the root verb. One example is phc ‘be afraid, fear’ and ph ‘frighten, scare’, 
which has taken the place of the regular causative * pəhc/pəhc. Another 
                                                      
93 This verb, spelt ‹pit›, looks very si milar to the corresponding Thai verb, pit¹ ‘close, 
closed’. The presence of the verb in Old Bu rmese as well as the cognate archaic Chinese 
pi̯ĕd, Luce1985:Y114) confirm the form to be Sino-Tibetan, i.e. Thai is the borrower rather 
than Burmese. 
 
 
130 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
unrelated pair is tao ‘burn’ and c ‘burn sth.’. The causative of klŋ ‘come’ 
is either the regular infixed form kəl or the suppletive n ŋ. The former in 
SM means ‘welcome, receive so.’, while  the latter is used mainly as a 
directional with the meaning ‘b ring here, hither’. OM ‹rin’ ār› ‘take away, 
convey’, according to Shor to a contraction of ‹ra ï ‘ār› ‘bring + go’ 
(DMI:318), merged in LM with  the MM postverbal particle ‹n ā› ‘away’ in 
‹õā›, which today is th e normal causative of ‹‘ ā› ‘go’. Though historically 
connected, the two forms are not generally understood as such and must 
therefore be considered suppletive stems. 
 
 In some cases there seems to be base-causative relationship, although the 
semantics are rather far apart. In SM lùt means ‘commit a fault, sin’, the 
regular causative derivate plut is ‘slander, malign, traduce’i.e. not ‘cause to 
sin’ but rather ‘cause to look like a sinner’, a kind of conative causative. 
 
4.4 Causatives with directionals 
 
Causatives naturally combine with the causative directionals na ‘(take) away’ 
and nŋ ‘(bring) hither’ rather than with a ‘go, away’ and klŋ ‘come, 
hither’. 
 
(4.54)  kyac     hnòk  həlh     n a        əkùn  nà ŋ. 
SM    holy.being big   CAUS:free CAUS:GO  monk  Naing 
     ‘The abbot let the monk Naing go.’ (KN) 
 
(4.55)   phyao     k teh  phyao     na       h ət. 
SM    2   CAUS:return  GET COND CAUS:return  CAUS:GO  ADV:all 
     ‘If you can take it b ack, take it back all.’ (WK) 
 
(4.56)  uə həck      n a       k   h nùh uə mù ə  t ə   h ənh  ra. 
SM    1s  CAUS:collide CAUS:GO  OBL lance  1s  one  hand win   FOC 
     ‘I will pierce it with my la nce just once and it will win.’ (WK) 
 
(4.57)  s-kyet   p l a o      n a      h kao. 
SM    Soing-Kyet CAUS:roll CAUS:GO  body 
     ‘Soing Kyet rolled over [his body].’ (KD) 
 
 There are, however, instances wher e a causative takes the non-causative 
directional, usually with a difference in meaning. Compare the following two 
sentences: 
 
(4.58)  h həct     n ŋ      k l   mù ə. 
SM    3   CAUS:die CAUS:COME dog  one 
     ‘He killed a dog [the body of the dog is here now] .’ (NOP) 
 
 
 
131 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.59)  h həct     k l ŋ  kl   mù ə. 
SM    3   CAUS:die COME  dog  one 
     ‘He killed a dog [it is not known/important where the body  
     of the dog is] .’ (NOP) 
 
 The same opposition can be observed in non-causative transitive verbs, as in 
the following sentence, where the use of the intransitive directional indicates 
that the subject walked off with the fr uit he got, away from the speaker who 
did not find any: 
 
(4.60)  kyàn  k  a  s t  pì  p n. 
SM    Kyan  get  GO  fruit bael four 
     ‘Kyan got four bael fruits [and I didn’t find any].’ (KN) 
 
 In a few cases there is apparently il logical use of a non- causative verb with 
the causative directional.  
 
(4.61)  kyəpan  kl     n a        a n   t a k     t . 
SM    Japanese cross.over CAUS:GO  path  walking that 
     ‘The Japanese crosse d that foot-path there.’ (KD) 
 
It remains to be explained why the causative na was chosen here instead of 
the expected a. 
 
 The use of directionals is explained in detail in the respective sections of 
chapter 6. 
 
4.5 Semantics of causative derivates 
 
Causatives in Mon are not restricted to direct causation of the initiator of the 
action, as can be seen in the following sentence: 
 
(4.62)  əmèy h kwì  l    p ŋ toə   c u t  l    h əuy     
S M     m o t h e r  3    w r a p  KEEP rice FINISH put KEEP medicine 
      əmèy h həct     h 
     m o t h e r  3    CAUS:die 3 
     ‘His mother wrapped cooked rice for him and then put in poison.  
     His mother [wanted to] kill him.’ (WK) 
 
The mother is only the indirect cause of the killing (the poison being the 
immediate one). The object in this case does not die, because he finds out in 
time. The causative can be used even if there is no result. The context 
dependent conative notion of active verb s without overt marking seems to be 
widespread in Southeast Asia. Another example of a causative without result 
can be seen in the following sentences: 
 
 
 
132 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(4.63)  buin   ñah    gruih ’uit  gacuit   ’agni ï,  hwa’  khyuit  
LM    though person cruel most CAUS:die ???    NEG   d i e     
     gyui ï  tao.  
     l i v e    STAND 
     ‘Even though the cruel people did [try to] kill him, he did not die  
     and is still alive.’ (SGD:164) 
 
(4.64)  pleï      ñ a h    h w a ’  l eï,   puiy  le ï    ’uit-s’ah  
LM    CAUS:ruined person NEG  ruined 1pl  ruined  completely 
     ‘We tried to destroy hi m, but he was not destroyed.  
     It is us who are completely destroyed.’ (SGD:161) 
 
 Causatives in Mon can also have the meaning of reflexives, although this 
use seems to be rare and restricted to a few verbs. Sometimes the reflexive 
həkao
 ‘body, self’ is used as  a dummy object in thes e constructions, as in 
sentence (4.65) below.  
 
(4.65)  so-kyet    p l a o     n a       h əkao. 
SM    Soing Kyet  CAUS:roll CAUS:GO  body 
     ‘Soing Kyet rolled over [his body].’ (KD) 
 
 In other instances, the reflexive causative does not seem to increase the 
argument structure and function like intran sitive verbs, which is contrary to 
the statement in the introduction of th is chapter that a ll causatives are 
transitive. One example is plam ‘twine, creep’, said of plants and snakes. 
This is formally the causative of l
m ‘grow by putting out  tendrils, twine 
round, palpate, crawl’ (the change of vowel is regular with the change of 
register). The meaning of the causative here is reflexive (and intransitive) and 
the directional used with plam in this sense usually is 
a ‘go’, not the 
causative directional na. The same form plam can also be used in a real 
causative meaning, i.e. ‘train (a gourd by twining it around a support)’. In this 
case, the directional most naturally used is na ‘make go, take along; 
CAUS:GO’. 
 
(4.66)  nm  l m  a. 
SM    plant twist GO 
     ‘ T h e  p l a n t  c r e e p s . ’  
 
(4.67)  sùm   p l a m       a. 
SM    snake  CAUS:twist GO 
     ‘The snake wriggled along.’ (DSM:141) 
 
(4.68)  h p l a m      n a       l . 
SM    3   CAUS:twist CAUS:GO  gourd 
     ‘He trained the gourd.’ 
 
 
 
133 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Compare the semantically and phone tically very sim ilar (and probably 
related) verb lìm ‘twist, be twisted, be deceitful, deceive, cheat’ with the 
regular causative plm ‘twist together, cross (arms, legs)’. 
 As was pointed out above, many old causatives are lexicalized in SM with 
no direct obvious semantic connection to the base. In these cases, a new 
causative form usually has taken the place of the old one. This can be seen in 
c ‘fight’, the old causative of which, py has taken the meaning ‘incite 
enmity’, while the newer formation həc means ‘set to fight, let fight’. 
Another example is ŋùh ‘wake up’, the old causative of which, pəŋaoh, is 
today only used in the meaning ‘arouse’. For transitive ‘wake up’ the only 
expression in common use is həŋùh. In both cases the form as well the 
semantics of the original form are less transparent than of the newer derivate. 
In py
, the initial was changed from c- to y-, which formed a cluster with the 
prefix p-, while pəŋ aoh underwent a change of register and vowel (u > ao). 
Where the phonological and semantic  development obscured the old 
connection base - derivate, newer fo rms took over, both in semantics and 
phonetic shape. Formal opacity here obviously goes hand in hand with 
semantic opacity.  
 In the case of kl ŋ ‘come’, the original infixed causative, kəlŋ, shifted in 
meaning to ‘welcome, receive so.’, while the OM ‹raï› ‘bring’ has taken the 
place of ‘cause to come ’, resulting in LM ‹na ï›, SM n ŋ. This shows the 
opposite development, i.e. the morphologi cally related and transparent form 
has developed semantically further away from the base verb, while the 
suppletive stem has filled the empty semantic slot. 
The prefixes available for new causatives were (or in some cases still are) pə- 
and hə-. The former combines with roots be ginning with an aspirate or plain 
non-labial stop, the latter with all other verbs. 
 
4.6 Orthography of causatives 
 
There are no fixed orthographic rules for writing causatives in LM, but the 
following seems to be an accepted ‘standard’ (cf. Wedagu 2001): 
 
(4.69) 
SM p -       LM  ‹pa-›   (‹p-› with some initials) 
SM p -       LM  ‹ba-›   (sometimes pa-) 
SM h -       LM  ‹pha-›   (other spellings also common, esp. ‹tha-›) 
SM h -       LM  ‹ba-›     (also other spellings, e.g. ‹da-, ga-›) 
 
Notice that LM ‹ba-› can represent SM pə- or hə-. 
 
 The OM causative infix - u- has been weakened to - a- in LM (ə  in SM). In 
the orthography this is usually re presented by using two full initial 
consonants in sequence rather than th e subscript forms, which regularly 
represent true clusters. The pronunciation in most cases is kə- or pə- in light 
register words and hə - in heavy register words. Sometimes only the (correct) 
 
 
134 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
orthography reveals the connection between  the causative and its base, as in 
the following example. 
 
(4.70) 
LM:  ‹sra› -  ‹sara›        
SM:  sa ʔ  -  h əraʔ 
‘be wounded, scarred’ -  ‘break up the surface, scratch’ 
 
4.7 Summary of causatives in SM 
 
Causative formation is one of the fe w morphological processes surviving in 
SM that are still productive (others ar e to some extent nominalization and 
adverbialization, both with the new ‘universal’ prefix hə-). The situation in 
SM is far from clear though, with regular phonetic development and analogy 
having led to a number of causative form s that are not obvi ously related to 
their base verbs. LM in most cases retains the connection, although spurious 
spellings abound, especially in newer texts, reflecting the merger of affixes in 
the spoken language. 
 The following table summarizes the different processes available in SM to 
form causatives. It has to be noted that in many cases several alternative 
forms are available for one base verb, sometimes involving different semantic 
developments, which are explained in th e preceding text. The translation is 
given only for the base verb. Not listed are the periphrastic constructions, 
which are technically available for all verbs in appropriate contexts. 
 
 
 
 
135 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
   Table 4.3: Summary of causatives in SM 
Gloss base p- p- h- -- unmkd. suppl. 
‘float’ hi phi      
‘go down’ ceh phyeh      
‘eat’ iə piə pəiə həiə    
‘awake’ ŋùh  pəŋaoh həŋùh    
‘fight’ c py  hc    
‘be lost’ l pl  hl    
‘be 
dissolved’ lày play play     
‘fall to 
pieces’ 
làc plac plac hlàc    
‘be 
ruined’ 
lm  plm hlm    
‘go up’ tn  ptn htn    
‘be same’ tup  ptup     
‘enter’ lùp plop plup hplop    
‘receive’ tŋ   htŋ    
‘be all’ t   ht    
‘escape, 
be free’ 
plh    hlh   
‘be much’ klàŋ    hlàŋ   
‘lose’ kya    kya   
‘move, 
shake’ 
khyi  pkhyi  ks   
‘die’ khyt    hct   
‘cross 
over’ kl   hkl kl   
‘confused’ k  pk   k  
‘learn’ həton     hton  
‘close’ mat     mat  
‘open’ pk   (hpk)  pk  
‘be afraid’ phc    (‹bahek›)  ph 
‘come’ klŋ    kl  nŋ 
‘go’ a    (‹paā›)  na 
‘burn’ tao      cŋ 
 
 
136 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
5. The focal and assertive particles, ‹ra› ra/ and ‹roï› noŋ 
5.1 Description 
 
The two particles ra and noŋ deserve some more detailed investigation, 
although they are not part of the verbal system per se. Earlier descriptions of 
Mon place the two particles at least close to the verbal complex, which 
requires some explanation. Of the two, ra/ occurs more frequently, as it can 
stand in virtually any sentence in clau se (or phrase) final position. The use of 
noŋ is more restricted, as we will see. The analysis of the two particles under 
discussion here is different in the few sources writte n about Mon. Let us first 
take a look at definitions given by earlier authors for ra/ and noŋ. 
 
(1) ra/ 
 
Haswell (LM) (1902/2002):  
2.Verbal Affixes. (a.) Assertive Affixes.  [...] ‹ra› as an assertive affix, when 
combined with ‹tuy›, always follows it, when combined with ‹h ā› in the direct 
question, it stands before it [...] It sometimes adds strength to the verb [...] 
(implying past recall). 
(c.) Imperative Affixes. [...] ‹ra› is used [in] the imperative when the speaker 
assumes superiority over the person addressed. 
(g.) Closing Affixes. ‹ra› is often used simply to close a sentence. It seems also 
to supply the place of the verb to be in predicating a quality. (pp. 29ff) 
 
Halliday (LM) (1955):  
 Accidents of Verbs.  The accidents of verbs are expressed by words coming 
before or going after, sometimes called prefixes and affixes. [...] Affixes [...] Ra, 
assertive; emphatic; imperative. (p. xx-xxi) 
 Ra  v.a. [verbal affix] assertive, closi ng the sentence, in questions it preceeds 
[sic!] the interrogative particle, also used with the imperative. (p.377) 
 
Shorto (SM) (1962):  
 ra’  ps. [sentence particle] Particle of unqualified assertion. [...] In emphatic use 
sometimes follows word or phrase in initial prominence position. (p. 175) 
 
Shorto (OM, MM) (1971):  
 da 1,  rarely  da’ ps. & ns. Predicative particle, (1) in verbal sents., perfective, 
usy. final. [...] (2) in nominal sents., usy. followed by attr p.  [...] (3) otherwise 
following n., emphatic.  [...] Perh. orig. w[eak] f[orm] /d ´/ of das  ‘be’, the 
modern vocalism developing under (secondary) stress in final posn. (p. 184f) 
 
 
 
137 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(2) noN 
 
Haswell (LM) (1902/2002): 
‹roï› v.a. of the future tense. (p. 348) 
Frequently the future is shown only by the connection [...] It is also denoted by 
‹roï›. (p.28) 
‹roï› is sometimes merely assertive. (p. 30) 
 
Halliday (LM) (1955):  
 Nong,  adv. certainly. Oa ā nong, I shall certainly go. (p. 179) 
 Rong, v.a. of the future tense, assertive, emphatic. (p. 384) 
 
Shorto (SM) (1962):  
 no ŋ ps. Particle of future, inferential or limited assertion. (p. 129) 
 
Shorto (OM, MM) (1971):  
 rwo ï, rarely roï /ro N/ ps. (MM.) particle closing (esp. final cl. of complex) 
sent., marking sequential, consequential, or inferential character of assertion; 
such a cl. is usy. nominalized by the inclusion of ma. (p. 326) 
 
Bauer (SM) (1982) lists ra / and no ŋ as “Group-I sentence particles”, 
together with the “completive-perfect” marker toə ‘FINISH’:  
 
 This group comprises modal and tense particles, ra’, noŋ, and tçə. noN and tçə 
might be interpreted both as tense particles, future and past respectively, but ra’ 
may co-occur only with tçə and not with noŋ (with which it commutes in its 
position). Although noŋ conveys the idea of future events or actions (and this is 
one of the reasons why it does not collocate with tçə), its scope is similar to 
Khmer nŋ (not a cognate!) in that it includes eventuality or hypothetical events 
as well (“would, might”). [...] A further reason for linking ra’ and noŋ to the 
same set is that both cannot co-occur with the negative particle hù’, and are 
complementary in statements like ’a ra’ ha ‘are you going?’- ’a noŋ ‘yes, I will’. 
noŋ may not occur in relative or absolute questions. [...] tçə and noŋ share the 
tense-designating function of past and future/hypothetical, respectively, noŋ and 
ra’ the assertive function limited/unqualified, and tçə and ’i’ combined with ra’ 
an aspectual colouring ‘perfective’. [...]  ra’ assigns an assertive, unqualified 
value to a statement, and it is very difficult to render in(to) English; [...] It may 
also have an aspectual colouring, nài nçp ’a ÎŒŋ ra’ ‘Nai Nop has gone to town’, 
nài nçp ’a ÎŒŋ ‘Nai Nop is going/is about to go to town’. [...] That ra’ and noŋ 
are exclusively marking aspects can be seen in the behaviour of verbal 
complexes: 
klŒŋ cÅp nù lE$’phun ‘he has arrived from Lamphun’ [...] klŒŋ cÅp nù 
lE$’phun ra’ ‘he has just arrived ...’, klŒŋ cÅp nù lE$’phun ’i’ra’ ‘???’, klŒŋ cÅp nù 
lE$’phun tçə ‘he arrived from Lamphun’. The perfective meaning of the arrival is 
 
 
138 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
marked in all cases rather by the second position-verb cÅp than by the particle 
ra’; only where tçə occurs, ra’ marks it as an aspectual sequence. tçə and ’i’ may 
not co-occur. [...] ra’ cannot fulfill a hortatory function which, in Burma, is ¯ì’ 
(and also sentence-final in position). (pp. 435ff) 
 
 In the Mon grammar sketch of his Mun-Myanma Abhidhan, Nai Htun Thein 
(1980) in most cases uses Burmese thi (i.e. the literary variant of colloquial te 
‘REALIS’, s. Okell 1969:424ff) to translate Mon ‹ra›, though he leaves it 
untranslated in some sentences  while in others Burmese thi is present where 
Mon has no SFP. Mon ‹roï› is consistently rendered in Burmese as léin-myi, 
which according to the Myanmar-English Dictionary is a “postpositional 
marker suffixed to verbs to indicate probable future occurrence (equivalent in 
usage to auxiliary verb ‘will’)” (Myanmar Language Commission 1993:458). 
Okell and Allott (2001:220f) translate léin-me/léin-myi  as “probably will V, 
possibly will V, will no doubt V; will V imminently”.  The Myanmar Pocket 
Dictionary (Myanmar Language Commission 1999:242,301) explains both 
myi and léin as “postverbal future tense markers” ( ănaga’ kalá pyá k ăríya 
nau’ hse’ săkà lòun ). Other ways to express the same notion in Mon are 
according to Htun Thein (1980:12) ‹krak› and ‹s-›, which may not co-occur 
with ‹roï›, but only with ‹ra›. 
 
5.2 Historical development 
 
Both ra/ and noŋ are the results of irregular developments from OM/MM. 
The modern reflex of OM ‹da› would be *tE$/, a form that is not attested 
anywhere in modern Mon. For MM ‹rwo ï/roï›, one would expect a form 
*ròŋ in SM, again not attested in the dialects. The shift from OM ‹d› to SM r 
has no parallel, while OM/MM ‹r› > modern ‹n› is also found in the causative 
directional OM ‹raï›, LM ‹naï› ‘(bring) hither’.
94 The light register value of 
both forms is irregular, too, as OM and MM show voiced initials in both 
cases, which regularly give rise to heavy register in SM. In LM, ra
/ is written 
‹ra›, noŋ is usually spelt ‹roï›. The more phonetic spelling ‹õoï› is becoming 
more popular in modern texts, though. Halliday, who first published his 
dictionary in 1922, lists rong and nong as different words, as does Tun Way 
(2000). 
 In the first known Mon inscri ptions, dating back to the 6 th and 7th centuries, 
in Thailand, the word ‹da› does not occur. This may be a coincidence, as the 
oldest Dv āravatī Mon inscriptions are rather  short and not very numerous. 
The text of the Lopburi inscription s hows complete sentences, though, which 
could, and probably would, end in ‹da› in classical OM. The oldest 
inscriptions of Thaton (the Trā p and Paõóit inscriptions, 11th c.), which were 
probably written before the Burmese invasion of Thaton, equally do not make 
                                                      
94 The shift from t > d >  is found in colloquial Burmese in intervocalic position. 
 
 
139 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
use of ‹da›. That no trace of ‹da›  is found in the earliest inscriptions is of 
some importance, as these texts are the only ones in which Burmese influence 
can be excluded. 
 Shorto (1971:185) states that OM ‹da› is perhaps a weak form of the verb 
‹das› ‘be’. There are no phonological or semantic obstacles to this etymology, 
especially given the fact that clauses ending with ‹da› are usually followed by 
the attributive/relative marker ‹ma› as illustrated in (5.1a). 
 
(5.1a)   risi   bisn ū  goḥ kuÿ   da  ma  skanda ÿ   kom     ku  ku ÿ. 
OM    hermit Vishnu that EMPH FOC ATTR PROS:build associate OBL 2s 
      ‘It is the hermit Vishnu who is going to build it with you.’ 
      (‘The hermit Vishnu is [the one] who ...’)  (SSKa41f)  
 
 More problematic is the syntactical structure of a sentence like (5.1b), taken 
from the same inscription, if we take ‹da› to be a weak form of ‹das›.  
 
(5.1b)  kyā k buddha  tarley  ’ ār  nibb ān  óey óūï  kusin ār   da. 
OM    holy  Buddha lord   go  Nirvana LOC town Kusinara FOC 
      ‘The Lord Buddha attained Nirvana at Kusinara.’ (SSKb1f) 
 
 In Mon, predicate nouns appear after the copula ‹das, dah› th ‘be’. If ‹da› 
originates in the OM verb ‹das›, we have to account for its sentence-final 
position. According to Mon syntax we w ould expect in the above sentence 
?‹das kyāk buddha tarley...› ‘it was that the Lord Buddha ...’ or ?‹da óey óūï 
kusinār ...› ‘it was as Kusinara that ...’, in stead of ‹da› in the sentence final 
position. The sentence-final position is pr obably an indication that already in 
OM ‹da› was not understood as verb anymore, but had developed into a 
particle. 
 
 Already in the Pagán inscriptions we  find ‹da› in imperative and prohibitive 
contexts, as in the following two examples: 
 
(5.1c)  smi ï dewatau ku ÿ  rmiï da! 
OM   king  god    2s   hear  FOC 
     ‘Hear, king of gods!’  (SSKb5)  
 
(5.1d) laḥ sandeḥ gaÿ  da! 
OM   PROH doubt  more FOC 
     ‘Don’t doubt anymore!’ (SSKh43) 
  
 The wide range of functions of ‹da› shows that ‹da› was grammaticalized to 
a large extent already in the early Pagán period.  
 
 
 
140 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The attested word order with fina l ‹da› seems to exhibit Burmese SOV 
influence. Pagan of the 11 th and 12th centuries, where classical OM was at its 
height, was clearly a Burmese state, although Mon still was the main literary 
language. We may expect increasing pressure on the Mon language from 
Burmese, which certainly was the langua ge of the majority. Clause-final 
verbs with particle func tion are common in modern Mon (and have been so 
since MM times). These particle-verbs in clude the (regular) modern reflex of 
OM ‹das›, viz. tç$h ‘be’, as well as nùm ‘exist, be somewhere, have’.  
 If ra/ originates in OM ‹das›, we might here have early evidence of a 
structural Burmanism in Mon. The intonational pattern of Mon is iambic, 
which means that stress increases towards the end of a clause or phrase. In 
this position the secondary strengthening of the weak form ‹da› /də/ to ra/ is 
not uncommon. What remains to be explained is the irregular development of 
the initial and register, and the weakeni ng of the particle in sentence final 
position in the first place. 
 
 The other particle under discussion here, noŋ, is not attested until MM. 
According to Bauer noŋ has taken the place of the OM aspectual prefix ‹s-›:  
 
 This [that noŋ includes eventuality or hypothetical events] conforms well with 
the historical evidence from OM and EM M [early MM] where its corresponding 
role was taken by the inflectional prefix  ‹s-› marking the hypothetical (OM /’ar/ 
‘to go’, /s’ar/ ‘shall go’, /ket/ ‘to take’, /sket/ ‘shall take’). SM noŋ, LMM/LM 
/roŋ/ (LM ro ï ~ õ oï) emerged later, taking up that function, even if LM shows 
still the starred [i.e. frozen] prefix ‹s-› (co-occurrence of this prefix and noŋ in 
classical texts is still to be examined). (1982:436) 
 
 Nothing can be said at the time be ing about the etymology and original 
semantics of noŋ. It does share some characteristics with OM ‹s-›, but as noŋ 
seems to have pragmatic rather than strictly syntactic functions, comparison 
with evidence from OM inscriptions ha s to be done with care. OM ‹s-› has 
indeed been lost in modern Mon (SM as well as LM), but classical LM seems 
to make correct use of the prefix at least to some extent, while noŋ is already 
well established in the language. In SM  there are other means to express 
future or prospective events, especi ally auxiliaries, which can be used 
together with noŋ. 
 As mentioned above, Mon has been in fluenced to some degree by Burmese 
and later Thai. As most Mon today are (and for centuries have been) bilingual 
speakers of Mon and Burmese and/or Thai, the foreign influence was not 
only in the vocabulary, but also on a deeper structural level. Mon ra/ may 
have been influenced by the Burmese sentence particle te (REALIS), the focal 
and aspectual particle tó, and the nominal predicate marker pè (s. Okell 
1969:424ff, 441ff, 294ff; Okell and Allo tt 2001:94ff, 77ff, 121f). This does 
 
 
141 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
not mean that ra/ is derived from or modelle d on a particular Burmese 
particle, but rather that the Burmese sentence structure (‘the urge to end a 
clause with something’) may have influenced the structure of Mon.  
 On a more concrete level, noŋ appears to be modelled on the Burmese 
sentence particle me (IRREALIS), with which it shares many functions, and of 
which it is a standard translation (Okell 1969:354ff; Okell and Allott 
2001:157ff). There are important differences, though, such as the 
incompatibility of the Burmese particle  with nominal predicates, where Mon 
noŋ is common, and the incompatibility of Mon noŋ with interrogatives.  
 
 Besides regular contact between M on and Thai since at least the 13 th 
century, the later Mon population in Th ailand has been under linguistic 
pressure from their hosts for two hundred years and more. Many Thaiisms 
can be seen in contemporary Thai-Mon (R āman) on all levels of the 
language. It is not implausible therefore that the Thai aspect marker for “new 
situation” (
NSIT, s. Jenny 2001:124ff) has in fluenced the use of Mon ra/, 
which today serves as sta ndard translation of Thai l E˘w3 ‘NSIT’ in most 
contexts.95
 
5.3 Modern Mon 
 
Let us now consider more extensiv e language data from modern Mon, 
showing the functions of ra/ and noŋ. We will see that the earlier 
descriptions of ra / as ‘assertive’ particle ca n not be sustained, nor can 
Bauer’s statements about the ‘aspec tual colouring’ and restrictions 
concerning co-occurrence of ra / and noŋ  with each other and with the 
negative marker hùʔ. It will be seen that ra/ can be analysed as a particle 
marking focus. Where ra/ seems to exhibit aspectual or temporal values, this 
can be explained as either implicature or as a result of influence from the 
dominant neighbouring languages Burmese and Thai. noŋ does not inherently 
express futurity (though this may be imp licated in many contexts), but rather 
puts emphasis on the truth of the statemen t. There seems to be an undertone 
of uncertainty in noŋ, which may be an implicatur e rather than the primary 
function of the particle. Actually noŋ may be said to override the uncertainty 
of the statement. Based on the li nguistic data examined, I take noŋ to be an 
assertive particle.  
 
5.3.1 The focal particle ra/ 
 
The focal particle ra/ can occur in a wide range of  clauses, and it is very 
frequent in sentence final position. In this case, the whole sentence is marked 
as focal. 
                                                      
95  See also section 6.3.17 on the new NSIT marker ya/. 
 
 
142 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(5.2)   m ç$tçka   yə tha krìp mç$ŋ  /ətao  k ç$h ra/. 
SM    motorcar train run STAY on.top TOP FOC 
      ‘Cars and trains run up there.’ (KD) 
 
This sentence was uttered talking about Japan, which the speaker describes as 
a big island where cars and trains are running. ra / here marks the whole 
sentence as FOCUS, contradicting the expectation that “there are no cars and 
trains on an island”. The focus marker here has, to some degree at least, 
counter-expectative function. 
 
(5.3)   ŋuə-yèh  t F/ pèh  t E$h t Ek  ra/. 
SM    t o m o r r o w  t h a t  2     HIT beat  FOC 
      ‘Tomorrow you’ll be beaten up.’ (KN) 
 
Sentence (5.3) is about a nightly excursion from the temple where the speaker 
was living as a temple boy. The kids are caught and the above threat is 
uttered by the one who found them. The sentence clearly has future time 
reference, as can be seen from the use of the temporal expression ŋuə-yèh 
‘tomorrow’. The use of ra
/ in this context stresses the inevitability of the 
(future) event. 
 
 That ra/ is not inherently a marker of ‘new situation’ is demonstrated in the 
following sentence. 
 
(5.4)   t ç$h m ç$ŋ  p l à y       ra/ lèy. 
S M     b e   STAY young.man FOC EMPH 
      ‘We were (still) young me n back then, that’s it.’ (KD) 
 
The speaker, a 76 year old man, talks about their lives when they were still 
young. In this context the contrast is  clearly ‘then – now’ (young man – old 
man), not ‘earlier – then’ (child – young man). The expression t
ç$h mç$N plày 
ra/ in another context may very well be  understood as ‘he has grown into a 
young man’, indicating a NSIT reading. 
 
 The use of ra/ in questions excludes its definition as ‘assertive particle’. 
 
(5.5)   l əkç$h  ¯èh   p ək o m        h Et-hEt   ra/ ha? 
S M     t h e n    p e r s o n  CAUS:associate quiet- RDP FOC Q 
      ‘Did they assemble all quietly at that time?’ (KD) 
 
The use of ra/ here indicates sentence focus with a counter-expectative 
connotation. It is unexpected that at  the time of the Burmese re-occupation 
(after the British and Japanese had le ft in 1948) the Mon could assemble 
 
 
143 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
without the enemy knowing about it. 
 
 In negative contexts, ra/ often seems to have an undertone of NSIT (‘not 
anymore’). This is clearly the case in (5.6a) and (to a lesser degree) in (5.7a). 
 
(5.6a)   kwan  poy /ət/ hù/ mùə  ra/,  ÎEh hÅm. 
SM    village 1pl there NEG one  FOC  3    s p e a k  
      ‘Our village (country, home ) over there does not exist anymore,  
      t h e y  s a i d . ’  ( K D )  
 
The Japanese in Monland complain about the destru ction of their country by 
the nuclear bombs. Clearly they used to have their “village” there (in Japan) 
before, but at the time of uttera nce their home has been destroyed. ra/ here 
puts more emphasis on the statement,  giving it more importance. The NSIT 
connotation is implicative, although one might think of Burmese influence. 
The Burmese standard translation of ( 5.6a) is given below. Notice the use of 
the focus marker tó to mark 
NSIT in negative contexts. 96 The proper NSIT 
marker pyi does not occur in negative contex ts in colloquial Burmese (Okell 
1969:385). 
 
(5.6b) hou-hma  tóu-yé  ywa   mă-hyí   tó /*pyi hpù, thu-tóu pyò  te. 
B     t h a t -LOC  1pl- POSS village NEG-exist NSIT    NEG 3-PL   speak REAL 
 
(5.7a)  ÎEh hù/  k Å   h əyèh  ra/. 
S M    3    NEG  GIVE sing   FOC 
     ‘He didn’t allow us to sing anymore.’ (KN) 
 
The translation of (5.7a) is natural, but it implicates that he (in this context 
the abbot of the temple) allowed the boys to sing before, which is not the 
case. True is that the boys did actually sing before they were caught, and now 
they cannot anymore. The Burmese tran slation in this case would most 
naturally include tó, as in (5.6a): 
 
(5.7b)  thu pèi  mă-hsou  tó   hpù. 
B     3    GIVE NEG-sing NSIT  NEG 
 
 In sentence (5.8), taken from the historical novel about King Dhammacet ī, 
Queen Mi Cao Pu had been abducted by the Burmese king of Pagán, and her 
foster son, the monk Pi ñakadhara, brought her back to Pegu. They waited 
outside the town until everything was ready for the big reception of the 
queen. 
                                                      
96  Burmese tó may actually be related to Mon ra/, i.e. it may be derived from OM da. In 
connected speech, tó is usually pronounced Ró, approaching the Mon form also phonetically. 
 
 
144 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 This example clearly demonstrates that  ‹ra› also in negative contexts has no 
inherent NSIT meaning. The presence of the persistive marker  ‹õiÿ› ‘yet’ (s. 
6.3.18), definitely excludes a reading as ‘new  situation’. Notice that in the 
Burmese translation of this sentence the use of tó is impossible, as tó can not 
co-occur with the persistive marker thèi. 
 
(5.8)  hwa’ lup  óuï  prah-prah õiÿ  ra.         
LM   NEG  enter town early- RDP PERS FOC  
 
B    thu-tóu myóu htè-kou    myan-myan  mă-win  thèi  hpù. 
     3 - PL   town inside- GOAL fast- RDP    NEG-enter PERS NEG       
     ‘They were not in a hurr y to enter the town yet.’ (DC:25) 
 
 The focus marker ra/ can be used to form str ong imperatives that do not 
allow contradiction. Sentence (5.9a) is from the temple boy’s narrative again. 
The boys are playing and the senior monk sends out another monk to call 
them. The use of the familiar 2 nd person pronoun ∫E$/ together with ra/ 
reinforces the urgency of the order. 
 
(5.9a)   /əkùn kok m ç$ŋ,  /a  ra/  ∫E$/  t ç/! 
SM    m o n k   c a l l  STAY  go  FOC  2fam PL 
      ‘The monk is calling you; go now!’ (KN) 
 
 The situational cont ext of (5.10a) implies NSIT reading of the prohibitive. 
The monks were out on an extended alms round and the accompanying 
temple boys who had to carry the donations back to the temple get their share 
of pocket money. The speaker got only 100 Kyat and asks for more. 
 
(5.10a)  ∫E$/  pa/  ket ra/ lèy! 
S M     2 f a m  PROH take FOC EMPH 
      ‘Don’t take anymore!’ (KN) 
 
As the boy has already got his 100 Kyat, th e meaning is clearly that he must 
not ask for more, not that he must not ask for money at all. In both (5.9b) and 
(5.10b) the Burmese translation includes tó:  
 
(5.9b)  hpòuncì hko nei  te,   thin-tóu thwà tó  lei! 
B      m o n k    c a l l  STAY REAL 2-PL    g o    FOC EMPH 
 
(5.10b)  thin mă-yu   né   tó! 
B     2    NEG-take PROH NSIT 
 
 Without verb,  ra / can mark a noun/noun phrase as predicate. In the next 
 
 
145 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
sentence, the speaker is talking about a pagoda th e Japanese built near 
Thanbyuzayat during the occupation of southern Burma. 
 
(5.11a)  kyac  k ç$h mù/  kyac  hù /  t Em,  kyac  ky əpan  ra/. 
SM    pagoda TOP what pagoda NEG  know pagoda Japan   FOC 
      ‘I don’t know what pagoda that was, just a Japanese pagoda.’ (KD) 
 
Sentence (5.11) would be  ungrammatical without ra/, as would be (5.12a), 
the answer to ‘What aeroplane was it that crashed at Ko’ Dot?’: 
 
(5.12a)  ∫EN-kya  /Eŋk´lòc ra/. 
SM    ship-wind England  FOC 
      ‘It was an English aeroplane.’ (KD) 
 
 The narrow focal function of ra / is illustrated in (5.13a). Having finished 
his story, the speaker asks if it was OK, as he didn’t know anything else to 
tell. Notice the use of ra/ after the initial adverbial and after the verbal 
complex of the sentence.  
 
(5.13a)  /əkhak  nç/  ra/,  lèə   k / ra/. 
SM    manner this FOC  tell GET FOC 
      ‘That’s it, that’s how I can tell stories.’ (KN) 
 
The most common Burmese translations  of sentences (5 .11a) – (5.13a) 
involve the use of the particle pè, which marks nominal predicates and focal 
elements (often translated as ‘just, only’): 
 
(5.11b)  hou hpă yà  ba   hp ăyà  lè m ă-thí   hpù,  c ăpan  hp ăyà   pè. 
B     that pagoda what pagoda Q  NEG-know NEG  Japan  pagoda  FOC 
 
(5.12b)  ingă lei’ lei-yin     pè. 
B     England wind-vehicle FOC 
 
(5.13b)  di-lou    myòu  pè  pyò   ta’     te. 
B     t h i s - ADV  kind   FOC speak  be.able  REAL 
 
Summary of raʔ 
 
Since at least the 11 th century, the particle da/ra was used in Mon in a wide 
range of functions. Already in the ear ly inscriptions do we encounter the 
particle in statements as well as impe rative and prohibitive contexts. In OM, 
da does not seem to occur in negated sentences, a restriction that is not found 
in the modern language and may be due to the limited data available of 
 
 
146 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
earlier stages of the language. In LM and SM da is always clause/phrase final 
and fully stressed, usually receiving hi gh pitch and sometimes lengthening of 
the vowel. Bauer (1982:438f) states that “in no instance ever does ra’ lose its 
final glottal stop, an important prosodic feature for the delimitation of clauses 
and sentences (Grenzsignal)”. The analysis of ra / as focus marker is 
consistent with its being in dire ct opposition with the topic marker kç$h.97 
This opposition is illustrated in senten ces (5.12c) and (5.13c), in which the 
focus marker of the original (5.12a) and (5.13a) has been replaced by the 
topic marker. Notice that the replacements  results in a phrase that cannot in 
itself constitute a sentence. Unlike ra/, the topic marker is not usually 
stressed, even in sentence final position, receiving low pitch. 
 
(5.12c)  ∫Eŋ-kya  /Eŋkəlòc kç$h 
SM    ship-wind England  TOP 
      ‘as for that English aeroplane, ...’ 
 
 
(5.13c)  /əkhak  nç/  kç$h lèə  k / ra/. 
SM    manner this TOP tell GET FOC 
      ‘Well, I can tell stories like that.’ 
 
 Besides the functions listed above, ra/ appears in a few idiomatic 
expressions, all usually in clause initial position: yç$ ra/ ‘if’, ∫Ån ra/ ‘though’ 
(usually with kÅm lèy at the end of the clause), hətç$h ra/ ‘thus, this being the 
case’.  
 In combination with the prefix /i/-, ra / developed aspectual value (s. 
section 6.3.17 on /i/-ra/ / ya/ ‘NSIT marker). 
 
5.3.2 The assertive particle ‹roï› noŋ 
  
The use of noŋ is much more restri cted than that of ra / in the modern 
language, both in SM and LM. noŋ  can mark a statement as definitive, as in 
(5.14). The speaker reinforces a stat ement made by his wife about the 
medicine of the English, which “would defeat all diseases.” 
 
(5.14)  hə /uy   ÎEh khÅh m ç$ŋ  noŋ. 
SM    medicine 3   good STAY ASRT 
      ‘Their medicine was definitely good.’ (KD) 
 
Clearly there is no future or irrealis connotation in this statement. The same is 
true for (5.15), with the LM spelling ‹ro ï› for SM noŋ. The sentence is from 
                                                      
97   k ç$h is the modern reflex of the OM deictic/topic marker goh, goh  ‘that, the afore 
mentioned’ (DMI:82f).  
 
 
147 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the cover of a religious text printed in Moulmein in 1989. 
 
(5.15)  gakoÿ     r āmañadhammācariya ’aluÿ   d e s a     r a ḥ  man   
LM    a s s o c i a t i o n  R .               w h o l e   p r o v i n c e  s t a t e  M o n         
      phan-phak tuy    ma  p óuiw bui ÿ   c a k      
      a r r a n g e     FINISH ATTR press  likeness machine  
      t a k  t r a h ̣   p t i t      roï. 
      b e a t  s p r e a d CAUS:OUT ASRT 
       
      ‘Compiled, printed,  published and distributed by the Ramanya  
      Dhammacariya association of Monland.’ 
 
This and similar sentences appear of ten on the cover of printed Mon books. 
One could possibly construe a prospectiv e reading for the second part of the 
sentence, which temporally follows the first part ending in  ‹tuy›, along the 
lines ‘after compiling, the associati on will publish’, but the sentence as a 
whole certainly does not have future reference. 
 In the next sentence, habitual reading is the most natural interpretation, 
given the subject ‘everyone’. That the habitual is not in the meaning of noŋ 
(though it is compatible with  it) is evident from th e possibility of omitting 
noŋ or replacing it with ra/. The sentence is part of the description of a 
beautiful but cunning young girl. 
 
(5.16)  ’arew  cn āy  kon- ïāk brau   ma  hui ÿ õā,       j m āp ñah ̣    
LM        speech deceit  child   female ATTR speak CAUS:go  every person 
      m a   m i ï  pateh   tau   ro ï. 
      ATTR hear  believe  STAND ASRT 
      ‘Everyone who heard the deceitf ul words of that girl believed her.’ 
      ( M K P : 0 5 )  
 
Both (5.15) and (5.16) allow an interpretation of noŋ describing an event that 
follows another event, a pparently giving relative temporal value to the 
particle. The next sentence seems to support this interpre tation. The speaker 
describes his journey from Monland to Thailand. Here it is made explicit by 
the use of toə teh ‘and then’ that the walking followed a prior action/event, in 
this case riding a boat. Clearly the absolute time reference of the utterance is 
past, as the speaker already is in Thailand at the time. 
 
(5.17)  to ə   t e h   /uə kwac kl ŋ  noŋ. 
SM    FINISH COND 1s  walk COME  ASRT 
      ‘And then I walked here.’ (KKP)  
 
 Although noŋ is compatible with and in some cases leads to an inference of 
 
 
148 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
relative future, relative tense is not part of the semantics of noŋ. In the next 
example, it merely reinforces the certainty (or overrides the uncertainty) of 
the speaker that it really  was the temple boys who had stolen and eaten the 
Bael fruit. 
 
(5.18)  kwah phE$ ə  t ç/ kl çt  ˛iə/  m ç$ŋ  h ə/Åt   noŋ. 
SM    pupil temple PL  steal eat   STAY ADV:all  ASRT 
      ‘The temple boys stole and ate them all (I’m sure).’ (KN) 
 
 In (5.19), the non-success of the intended action is not implied by the use of 
noŋ but rather by the broader context. Even if noŋ was replaced by ra/ in the 
same sentence, the meaning would remain unchanged. 
 
(5.19)  hə t/     k a   ÎE h t/ noŋ, ka  ÎEh hù/  h ət/     k Å. 
SM    CAUS:stop  car 3   that ASRT car 3   NEG  CAUS:stop  GIVE 
      ‘We tried to stop their car, but they wouldn’t stop their car (for us).’  
      ( K K P )  
       
 In connection with the preverbal modal tE$h ‘HIT; must; PASSIVE’, noŋ is 
often used to reinforce the modal reading ‘must’, although it does not exclude 
the passive reading (s. secti ons 3.2 and 6.3.14). The use of tE$h ... noŋ ‘must’ 
seems to be influenced by the parallel Burmese construction yá me ‘must’, 
which includes the irrealis marker me (s. Okell 1969:456f; Okell and Allott 
2001:178f)) While in Burmese me is used to get the ‘must’ reading (cf. yá te 
with realis marker ‘can, possible’), this is not necessary in Mon. 
 The following sentence is from the intr oduction of the historical novel about 
Dhammacetī: 
 
(5.20)  daḥ khyū j a n      c h a k    ’ ā  gata  te’  roï. 
LM    HIT write compose  continue GO  front that ASRT 
      ‘I do have to go on writing and composing.’ (DC:2) 
 
 Sentence (5.21) reports the advice of an officer at a meeting with the Mon 
leaders, telling them to separate from the Burmese if they were really 
interested in gaining independence. The first part of the sentence shows a rare 
occurrence noŋ in a conditional context. 
 
(5.21)  lùp  l ç$   c Åt  noŋ  teh  tE$ h pac    th Å/    no ŋ. 
S M     e n t e r  KEEP heart ASRT COND HIT separate THROW  ASRT 
      ‘If you are really intereste d, you have to separate for good.’ (KD) 
 
 The co-occurrence of ra/ and noŋ  is rare, but not ungrammatical, as the 
following examples illustrate. In (5.22) the speaker is not quite sure about the 
 
 
149 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
correctness of his interpretation and therefore uses noŋ to give more weight to 
his statement. In sentence (5.23), too, a slight dubitative undertone may be 
heard, which is not expressed by noŋ itself; noŋ rather serves to override this 
dubitative undertone. 
 
(5.22)  yə mù/ kyəpan  kç$ h chàn teh  hnòk  ra/ no ŋ,  /uə h əya/  r ç$ŋ. 
S M     n a m e   J a p a n    TOP chan COND big   FOC ASRT 1s  think  LOOK 
      ‘The Japanese, if they had a chan98 attached to their names, they  
      were important people, I think.’ (KD) 
 
(5.23)  kyac  h ətEm   l ç$   ra/ no ŋ. 
S M     m o n k   r e m e m b e r  KEEP FOC ASRT 
      ‘The monk still remembers me, I’m sure/I think.’  (KD) 
 
 With nominal predic ates, the function of noŋ seems to be very close to ra/. 
The only difference is that it perhaps puts more emphasis on the (asserted) 
truth of the statement. (5.24) is the answer to the ques tion if it was the 
Japanese guards who scattered the rice of the English prisoners. 
 
(5.24)  hə /Eh, ∫E$/  k ç$h /ENkəlòc no ŋ. 
S M     n o     PREF TOP English  ASRT 
      ‘No, it was the English (themselves who did it).’ (KD) 
 
 In (5.25) the speaker is talking abou t a man who remained in Monland after 
the war. The previous assertion was that there was a Japanese man still living 
in the area. 
 
(5.25)  kr k   noŋ, /ey /i/kç$h   kç$ h. 
S M     C h i n e s e  ASRT eh  NML:TOP  TOP 
      ‘ T h a t  i s  a  C h i n e s e  ( n o t a Japanese), that one.’ (KD) 
 
 Apparently noŋ is incompatible with imperative and interrogative contexts, 
adding weight to its analysis as assertive marker.  
 
 There are a few instances in my data of noŋ in negated sentences, e.g. in the 
MM Shwedagon inscription. The passage is  not very clear and the reading 
less than sure. The general context has past tense reference, speaking of 
monks in former times when they did not receive any alms on their rounds. 
 
                                                      
98  It is not clear which Japanese word the sp eaker is talking about. Having only learnt a few 
words and expressions during the Japanese occupation over fifty years ago, his knowledge of 
Japanese is far from perfect. Probably he is referring to the suffix 樣 -san ‘Mr., Mrs., Ms.’. 
 
 
150 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(5.26)  ñaḥ   ma  kuiw d ān    ha   mwoy rw[o]ï. 
MM    person ATTR give  donation NEG one   ASRT 
      ‘There was no one to give donations.’ (SDGa46) 
 
 Other examples of noŋ in negated contexts are (5.27) and (5.28), both taken 
from a Mon newspaper published in 2002. 
 
(5.27)  mu  katuiw dah ku  ñah    ta’ ro  gah puiy  hwa’ gwa’  
LM    what arise  be  OBL person PL QREL TOP 1pl  NEG  GET 
      t i ÿ   ket  khyuit-pluit  roï. 
      know  TAKE certainly    ASRT 
      ‘We cannot ourselves know for sure what happened to them.’  
      (Guiding Star Nr. 35, July 2002, p. 12) 
 
(5.28)  yaw ra   sm ān kon  óuï   y ūrop  ta’  man  gah mu  ro   
L M     i f   FOC ask  child county Europe PL  Mon TOP what QREL  
      m g a h     ñah   t a ’  hwa’ tiÿ  roï. 
      ATTR:SAY person PL NEG  know ASRT 
      ‘If you ask Europeans “What are the Mon?” they don’t know it.’ 
      (Guiding Star Nr. 35, July 2002, p. 12) 
 
 The use of noŋ in negated sentences in SM is illustrated in (5.29), a 
spontaneous statement of the abbot of  a monastery at the Thai-Burmese 
border about a rope he just made out of  a plastic bag to carry heavy bunches 
of bananas. Reverend Mahe is obviously very certain about the strength of his 
rope (and equally proud of it) and his statement is an answer to doubtful 
looks from the person who received the bananas. 
 
(5.29) h hùʔ pt  noŋ. 
S M    3    NEG break ASRT 
     ‘It is not going to break for sure!’ 
 
 The particle noŋ shares the clause final slot with the interrogative markers 
ha and rao, and the common imperative/politeness marker ¯ì/ ‘a little bit’ 
with which it cannot co-occu r. This indicates that noŋ is best analysed as a 
marker of illocutionary force, namely of ‘assertion’. In this function, noŋ can 
occur in both verbal and nominal cl auses. Like the other IF markers, noŋ is 
usually fully stressed, and often receives vowel lengthening and high pitch.  
 
5.4 Conclusion 
 
The clause particles ra/ and noŋ  were described by earlier authors in 
different ways. They were usually taken to be mutually exclusive, occupying 
 
 
151 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the same slot in a sentence. Most authors analysed ra/ and noŋ  as sentence 
particles indicating different degrees of assertion with aspecto-temporal 
connotations. I have shown in this chapter that neither are the two 
morphemes mutually exclusive, nor do they have inherent aspectual or 
temporal (or modal) value. The particle ra/ is analysed here as a focal 
particle, the use of which may have  been influenced by neighbouring 
languages. The particles ra/ and noŋ  serve as standard translations for a 
number of Burmese and Thai morphemes that cover similar (but in neither 
case identical) functions. The influence must be seen on a more abstract 
structural level rather than as direct ‘loan translations’ or calques. In a largely 
bilingual society ‘standard translations’, however accurate or inaccurate, arise 
easily and become part of common language usage also in monolingual 
contexts. 99
 While ra/ and noŋ  do influence the verbal system of Mon through 
pragmatic inference and implicatures, they are not part of the verbal system 
proper. The actual value of ra/ and noŋ  in a given clause/sentence mainly 
depends on the (pragmatic) interpre tation of the broader context, both 
linguistic and extra-linguistic. Both pa rticles under discussion here are the 
results of irregular developments from OM and MM, a fact that concurs with 
their unstable semantics. 
 The only instance where ra/ and noŋ  do appear to share the same 
syntactical slot is in nominal predicates, which can end in either of the two 
particles. This is also the onl y case where the use of either ra
/ or no ŋ is 
compulsory. The use of ra/ in nominal predicates us ually leads to a neutral, 
the use of noŋ to a more emphatic or dub itative reading. This can be 
explained by the fact that ra/ is much more frequent than noŋ, which makes 
the latter a more powerful marker than the former. 
 
 
6. TAM markers and other verbal operators 
 
The categories of tense, aspect, and modality are not obligatorily expressed in 
Mon. The notion of tense is only margin ally present in SM. Temporality is 
mostly expressed by adverbials such as  h əmùh ‘now’, kla t ʔ ‘back then, 
before’, toə teh ‘then, later’, and others. Bauer (1982:435f) analyses noŋ and 
toə as “tense particles, future and past respectively”. The same particles are 
used by Talanon (2000) to translat e English future and past forms 
respectively. As we have seen above, and will see in more detail below, toə 
‘finish’ can serve as se quential marker and as an operator describing 
situations with perfect-like interpretation, while noŋ  is an assertive clause 
                                                      
99  Asked about the meaning of noŋ, which one informant used unusually often in elicited 
sentences, he stated that in Burmese one “uses noŋ a lot”, although not all Burmese sample 
sentences included the Burmese irrealis marker me. 
 
 
152 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
particle (ch. 5). Both may induce a temporal reading in some contexts, but the 
notion of future and past is implicated rather than an inhe rent part of their 
semantics.  
 OM, MM, and classical LM texts use a particle ‹cin› ~ ‹cuin› to translate 
Pali aorist (DMI:99) while the old prefix ‹s-› is still used to some extent in 
older LM to translate Pali future, besides the formal particle ‹krak›. No trace 
of this (imported) tens e system is found in SM. SM occasionally uses a 
preverbal operator kyan to indicate future tense, but this operator seems to 
express prospective aspect rather than  future tense, similar to the Thai 
operator caʔ1 (cf. Jenny 2001:133f). It is no t found in LM (and therefore not 
used in indigenous grammar textbooks) a nd not used very frequently in SM, 
which makes an analysis at the present impossible.100
 The categories of aspect and modali ty, too, are not ob ligatorily overtly 
expressed in a sentence in Mon. Wh en marked, both aspect and modality 
usually make use of grammaticalized verbs, although clause particles may 
take over aspectual and modal functions as well, besides adverbials and other 
devices such as reduplication. In many cas es no clear-cut distinction can be 
made between aspect/aktionsart and ma nner, as many verbs functioning as 
aspect operators add more to the meani ng of the verbal expr ession than just 
(temporal) aspect. We may take the word  ‘aspect’ in Mon to have a broader 
meaning than the one commonly used as  “different ways of viewing the 
internal temporal constituency of a situation” (Comrie 1995:3).  An obvious 
example of such an aspect-manner operator in Mon is thʔ  ‘throw (away)’, 
which occurs in postverb al position to express a completed event with a 
connotation of undeliberateness, sometim es definiteness or irreversability. 
Another one is the verb turned operator th ‘hit (a mark)’, which in 
postverbal position expresses a comple ted event with the connotation of 
involuntariness/inadvertence. The verbal  operators in Mon can be said to 
express aspect-like distin ctions (in many cases not readily distinguishable 
from aktionsart) and add a ‘point of view’ of the speaker, i.e. they express the 
manner in which the event is viewed and presented by the speaker. 
 
(6.1)   h iəʔ thʔ    h əʔt. 
S M     3    e a t   THROW  ADV:all 
      ‘He (just) ate it all.’  
 
(6.2)   h iəʔ th h əʔt. 
S M     3    e a t   HIT ADV:all 
      ‘He happened to eat it all (without intention).’ 
 
 In other cases, the category of aspect is intermingled with the category of 
directionals. In (6.3), the verb ʔa ‘go’ expresses a completed event as well as 
                                                      
100 kyan is obviously a recent loan from B. can ‹kraÿ› ‘think, consider’. 
 
 
153 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the movement away from the point of reference (and towards the goal of the 
movement), while in (6.4) it rather describes an ongoing activity operator. 
 
(6.3)   h cao   ʔa  ŋ. 
S M     3    r e t u r n   GO  town 
      ‘ H e  r e t u r n e d  t o  h i s  t o w n . ’  
 
(6.4)   kat  bton ’ā  suik-suik ra. 
L M     s t u d y  l e a r n  GO  gradually FOC 
      ‘He went on studying gradually.’ (DC:8) 
 
 The same operator in (6.5) focuse s on the beginning of the situation. 
 
(6.5)   th ʔa  l əkh lèy.  
S M     b e   GO  then  EMPH 
      ‘It happened at that time.’ (KD) 
 
 The difference in interpretation of th e verbal operators apparently depends 
on the semantics of the main verb, as  well as the broader context of the 
expression.  
 
6.1 Iterative and continuous events 
 
The iterative or frequentative is an “aspectual form expressing repetition of 
an action and constituting a subtype of imperfective aspect.” (Trask 
1996:149) OM has a morphological frequentative, mostly formed with the 
infixes ‹-in-› and ‹-uÿ-›. Shorto states that “fre quentatives are rarely found 
contrasting with simple forms, bu t they contain roots which may be 
recognized in corresponding causative formations, and generally denote 
continuous or repeated action.” (DMI:xxiv) Of the examples given by Shorto, 
none are semantically clearly frequentative: 
‹dindar› ‘be shaded’ (‹pdar› ‘shade’), ‹rinleh› ‘dance’ (‹raleh› ‘make dance›), 
‹kuÿpar› ‘go round, encircle’ (‹kupar› ‘put round’) (ibid.). 
 No trace of this formation is left in  LM and SM. The main device to express 
repeated events in the modern languag e is by means of re duplication, usually 
of the main verb, less frequently of the object as in (6.9). The repeated verb 
may or may not be accompanied by the directionals ʔa ‘go’ and klŋ ‘come’. 
 
(6.6)  ʔəca   yàp k h èh    ʔ a-ʔa  kl ŋ-klŋ lèy. 
SM   teacher Yap TOP person  go- RDP come-RDP EMPH 
     ‘Mr. Yap kept coming and going.’ (KD) 
 
 
 
154 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.7)  h phyeh      wà ŋ  to ə   t ì ʔ     èh-həkʔ,  
S M    3    CAUS:descend ring  FINISH attack each.other 
     klèə   tìʔ    tì ʔ    tì ʔ    tì ʔ    tì ʔ    k h. 
     cow  attack  attack  attack  attack  attack  TOP 
     ‘He led the bull down into th e ring and they attacked each other 
     again and again.’ (WK) 
 
(6.8)  dadan  dnā y ñah   m a  k w āk klo’  ’ā  klo’  kl ŋ  dmå ï  ruih  
LM   bridge place person REL walk cross GO  cross COME  STAY every 
     d a d a h    t ïay  gah ra 
     NML:be  day  TOP FOC 
     ‘It was a bridge which peopl e used to walk across every day.’  
     ( D C : 3 2 )  
 
(6.9)  kə lʔ   kyac   kyac   kyac    t o ə ... 
SM   worship Buddha Buddha Buddha FINISH 
     ‘We worshipped all the Buddha images and then ...’ (KN) 
 
 Other possibilities to express iterativ e or repeated actions are by combining 
the quantifier cəmp ‘each, every’ directly with the verb, as in cəmp ʔa 
‘every time I go’, 101  or by adverbial expression s, which usually involve 
reduplication or repetition of some kind, as in the following sentences. 
 
(6.10)  rao    s āk  wwa’ dagut  huiÿ  tau  dmå ï plun-plun102 ra. 
LM    manner kind  this  haggle speak STAY STAY again-RDP   FOC 
      ‘In this manner she spoke and tried to beat down the price again and  
      again.’ (MKP:27) 
 
(6.11)  dagut  hui ÿ dmåï thap103  kuiw thap  ra. 
LM    haggle speak STAY PILE   OBL  PILE   FOC 
      ‘She beat down the price again and again.’ (MKP:27) 
 
(6.12)  ʔərè   mìʔ -yày həkn,  hm  toə    h m  pl n. 
SM    speech mother  instruct speak  FINISH speak  again 
      ‘The words that mother told me, she said them again and again.’ 
      ( L y r i c s  o f  cəma iəʔ krh by Hongchan, 1999) 
 
                                                      
101 This parallels Burmese usage with V- tàin ‘every time one Vs’ and N- tàin ‘every N’ (s. 
Okell 1969:420; Okell and Allott 2001:83) 
83 ‹plun-plun› is obviously a variant of ‹plan›, [pln] ‘return, do again’.  
103 The verb ‹thap› (from B hta’ ‘id.’) means ‘add on top, pile up, superimpose’. It is used in 
Mon as in Burmese in preverbal position to mark a repeated action. (cf. Okell 1969:309; Okell 
and Allott 2001:103) 
 
 
155 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Continuous activities ar e usually expressed by ve rbal operators, most 
commonly ʔa ‘go’, chk ‘join, connect; continue’, and the imperfective 
markers mŋ and tao , which are explained in deta il below. Repetition of the 
verb or verbal operator, or both, can also be used to denote continuous 
actions, as shown in (6.13) to (6.16). 
 
(6.13)  poy cao   h əʔ hùʔ  t h raʔ , poy kwac ʔa  ʔa  ʔa. 
SM    1pl return  house NEG HIT FOC 1pl walk GO  GO  GO 
      ‘We didn’t know the way back home, so we kept on walking.’ (KN) 
 
(6.14)  ʔuə cao   th ʔ,  cao   cao   cao    k əlok phʔ ʔuə. 
S M     1 s   r e t u r n   THROW return  return  return  ghost scare 1s 
      ‘I went straight back, and as I was going back a ghost scared me.’ 
(KN) 
       
(6.15)  h kwac kwac kwac kwac kwac ʔa  k h 
SM    3   walk walk walk walk walk GO  TOP 
      ‘He walked and walked and walked.’ (WK) 
 
(6.16)  h t   k h ra ʔ ʔa ʔa ʔa kwac kwac kwac. 
S M     r e a s o n  TOP FOC go go go walk walk walk 
      ‘Therefore we went  on and walked on and on.’ (KN) 
 
 In (6.17), the directional is repeated  and the vowel of the repeated verb 
lengthened to emphasise the extended duration of the action. 
 
(6.17)  h kwac ʔa  ʔaaaaa. 
S M     3    w a l k  GO  GO 
      ‘He kept walking for a long time.’ (WK) 
 
6.2 Conative reading 
 
The conative denotes an attempted action, the result of which is not certain or 
not included in the verbal expression. In English the conative is usually 
translated by ‘try to V’. The conative can  be said to be a subcategory of the 
atelic aktionsart, in that it emphasises the action without respect to the 
result/outcome. As in other Southeast Asian languages, most verbs can have 
conative reading in an appropriate cont ext, i.e. the simple unmarked verb 
may express the attempt to do something rather than the actual performing of 
the activity itself.
104 This also holds for verbs which in other languages or 
other contexts usually are considered telic, like həct ‘kill’ in (6.18). The 
                                                      
104 Cf. Jenny (2001:107) for the same phenomenon Thai. 
 
 
156 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
broader context of this sentence makes it clear that the on e who “was killed” 
did not actually die, i.e. the attempt was unsuccessful. 
 
(6.18)  ʔəmèy h həct     h. 
S M     m o t h e r  3    CAUS:die 3 
      ‘His mother tried to kill him.’ (WK) 
 
 In (6.19), the speaker tries to stop a passing car , but no one would stop for 
him. 
 
(6.19)  hə tʔ    k a    h tʔ noŋ ,  ka  h hùʔ h ətʔ    k . 
SM    CAUS:stop car 3   that ASRT car 3   NEG CAUS:stop GIVE 
      ‘We tried to stop their cars, but they wouldn’t stop for us.’ (KKP) 
 
 The conative reading is frequent in conditional and purposive contexts, as in 
the following two sentences. 
 
(6.20)  puə        n ʔ lèh  hù ʔ to ə  pùh teh,  cao   ʔa  teh  
SM    performance this dance NEG finish NEG COND return  GO  COND 
      ʔ əca   càt    h əlah    ʔ əkhoŋ    h a ?  
      teacher theatre CAUS:free permission Q 
      ‘If this performance (season) is not over yet, if you (want to) go  
      home, will the manager of the theatre allow it?’ (KN) 
 
(6.21)  ñah    k l u ï  r ān,  ’ay klu ï  r ān, maï-blāy  duik-gat  
LM    person  come buy  1s  come buy young.man poor  
      h w a ’  g w a ’  s w a ’  r a .  
      NEG  GET  sell  FOC 
      ‘Everyone came to buy (his products), but the poor young man 
      did not sell them anything.’ (LPM:3) 
 
 The possibility of conative reading gr eatly increases the context dependence 
of most sentences in Mon, both spoke n and written. In many cases only the 
context, whether linguistic or other, can decide if an act was actually carried 
out or if it was only attempted. 
 
6.3 Predicate operators 
 
I now turn to the most common pred icate operators. Mo st of these are 
originally full verbs which have de veloped grammatical functions, some 
since the beginning of the r ecorded language, some at a later stage. Most of 
the operators still have full verbal fu nction today. Two points concerning the 
verbal operators have to be kept in mind. First, many of them do not denote a 
 
 
157 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
single aspectual or modal category, but have different values in different 
contexts, mainly but not solely depending on the semantics of the main verb 
of the expression. Second, the common aspectual and modal categories (cf. 
Comrie 1976, Palmer 1995) can be expre ssed by different op erators in Mon, 
usually with different connotations. 
 Some operators occur directly after the main verb, i.e. before the object, but 
other positions are possible, including preverbal (between subject and main 
verb), especially for modals, and clause final position. Some operators can 
occur in different positions with di fferent meanings/functions. These 
differences will be illustrated in the respective sections below. 
 In the following sections, the main predicate operators are described in 
detail, for the above mentioned reas ons arranged according to operators 
rather that to grammatical categories. 
 The operators are arranged in loos e semantic groups, starting with the 
stationary verb mŋ, follwed by the dire ctionals, disposers, benefactives, 
indicators of success, and finally operators with more general TAM functions. 
Each section begins with a general de scription, includi ng an overview of 
earlier treatments (where av ailable) and the historical development. Then the 
functions of the operator in different positions are explained and illustrated. It 
has to be kept in mind that a single operator can fulfil different functions, 
making the groups overlapping to some extent. 
 
A. Stationary verb 
 
6.3.1 ‹måï› mŋ and ‹tau› tao  ‘STAY’ , ‘STAND’ 
 
The DMI entry for OM ‹t āw› (MM, LM ‹tau›, SM tao) gives the following 
translations: 
 
To remain, be stationary, stand, stay, dwell, , be (located), be steadfast, to endure. 
[...] rarely foll. v., implying habitual action . [...] (MM.) to dwell, live, be located. 
[...] esp. as va. foll. v., implying contin uous, habitual, or recurring action, or 
sometimes continuous result of action. (DMI:147f) 
 
 With this compare the semantically similar lexeme OM ‹dmo ï›, MM, LM 
‹dmåï›, SM mŋ: 
 
To stay, remain, be (located), sit, take station, reside esp. temporarily, lodge. [...] 
dmoï tāw to remain, be. [...] (MM.) foll. verbal expression, to remain, continue 
[in posture, state]. [...] hence, and by extension of phrasal use  [...]  as va. 
implying continuous action. (DMI:203) 
 
 
 
158 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 In SM and LM mŋ can occur with a location as direct object, as in mŋ 
phə ‘stay at school’. Alternatively the locative object may be marked with 
the locative preposition ə ‘in, at’. In spite of the possibility to occur with an 
unmarked locative object, mŋ has not developed prepositional use like the 
corresponding lexemes in other South east Asian languages such as Thai, 
Khmer, and Vietnamese (s. Bisang 1992). 
 
 Bauer lists mŋ as progressive aspect marker developed from the full verb 
meaning ‘be (situated) at, reside’, which “may occur with stative verbs as 
well as operative verbs. It is the transl ation equivalent of English progressive 
tense /-iŋ/ and indicates ongoing action or a pr ocess which is not complete(d) 
yet.” (1982:393, 397) 
 
 Both mŋ and tao  are stationary verbs, denot ing a position in space, which 
by extension of use includes the temporal dimension. While mŋ in older 
stages of the language involves volition and thus requires an animated subject, 
tao does not have this restriction. In SM, tao has been all but obliterated by 
m
ŋ, which no longer requires its subj ect to be necessarily animated, 
although it usually is. The non-volitional counterpart of mŋ which is 
commonly used with inanimate subjects is the existential verb nùm described 
in section 2.5.4.3. The verb mŋ can be described as a verb indicating zero 
movement, ‘remain at point of reference’, as opposed to ʔa ‘move away from 
point of reference’ and klŋ ‘move towards point of reference’. There is thus 
a direct opposition between mŋ on one side and ʔa/klŋ on the other. In spite 
of this opposition, m ŋ as an aspect marker is pe rfectly compatible with both 
of its semantic “opposites”, ʔa mŋ usually meaning ‘is going, is on his way 
there’ and klŋ mŋ ‘is coming, is on his way here ’. This indicates the high 
degree of grammaticalization of mŋ. On the other hand, both ʔa and klŋ 
can function as verbal operators and co-occur with mŋ as full verb (s. the 
following two sections). Unlik e the orientation verbs, mŋ does not have a 
direct causative counterpart. The mor pheme closest to that function is 
probably l ‘keep’, frequently used as a verbal operator (s. 6.3.7  below). 
 
 The development from a full verb meaning ‘stay’ or ‘stand’ into an 
aspectual morpheme denoting the imperfec tive aspect (or a subcategory of it 
such as continuous/durativ e/progressive) is well a ttested in the world’s 
languages (see e.g. Foley 1986:144f; Heine and Kuteva 2002:255f, 280; 
Jenny 2001:113ff). Heine and Kuteva (2002:282) state that “
CONTINUOUS 
markers may further develop into HABITUAL markers.” A further step in the 
development is the complete bleach ing of the continuous form through a 
genearl imperfective into an aspectually unmarked neutral form.  
 
 
159 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 As aspect operators mŋ and tao always occur after the main verb and 
before the object. 105 This is also true for fixed idiomatic expressions such as 
tk (m ŋ) kya  ‘chat, talk’ (lit. ‘beat wind’), mìp (m ŋ) c t ‘be happy’ (lit. 
‘happy heart’), etc. Bauer (1982:389ff) states that word order differences 
occur with neologisms such as  the formal expression SM paʔ hətao ‘reside’ 
with the aspect operator mŋ following the object hətao (a nominalized form 
of the verb tao). Other expressions are, according to Bauer, ambiguous as to 
word order, such as hm ʔərè ‘speak (a language)’,  where some aspect 
operators occupy the postverbal position, while others stand after the object. 
The word order for the first is indeed paʔ h ətao m ŋ..., with the location 
following the whole verbal expression. This suggests an analysis of mŋ not 
as operator, but rather as  serial verb (‘take reside nce staying at...’). There 
would therefore be no violation of the re gular word order in this case. As for 
the expression hm ʔərè m ŋ ‘he is speaking’ quoted by Bauer (1982:390), 
this is not accepted by native speakers from Burma, who use hm mŋ ʔərè, 
as expected. Perhaps Bauer’s informants, who are mostly Thai-Mon, show 
structural influence from  Thai, where verbal opera tors consistently occur 
after the whole VP, including the object. Another apparent deviation from the 
regular word order is found in the expression 
iəʔ ka (m ŋ) ‘use, send on an 
errand’.106 Popular etymology explains iəʔ ka as compound of iəʔ ‘eat’ and 
ka ‘work, act’.107 A compound of this form would require the aspect operator 
mŋ to occur between iəʔ and ka . The expression iəʔ m ŋ ka  is in fact 
perfectly grammatical in SM, but semantically absurd with the meaning ‘he is 
eating a car’. 108 In OM there is a word ‹cu(k āl)› ‘depute’, the causative of 
‹ckāl› ‘receive’. The reading of the OM text (6 th century) is not certain, but 
the form has survived in MM as ‹cak ā›, making the connection rather secure 
(s. DMI:103, 109). The popular etymologi cal connection has resulted in 
irregular phonetic de velopment of the first syllabl e of the word (one would 
expect *cəka/təka in SM from MM ‹cak ā›), but not of its syntactic structure, 
iəʔ ka being a simple verb with the operator following it. 
 
 In spite of the intonational pattern of Mon, which increases stress towards 
the end of a clause or sentence, mŋ as aspect operator is weakened in 
postverbal position, becoming barely a udible in some instances. There is no 
loss of phonetic material, but the word is usually pronounced at a low pitch 
and with less force than the main verb.  
 
                                                      
85 Where mŋ occurs before the main verb, the interpretation is purposive: ‘stay in order to 
V’. 
106 The status of this word is being co mpeted by the more recent Burmese loan sŋ-cuə (B. 
‹suÿ-cwai›, thòun-swè). 
107 From Pali kāraõa. 
108 With ka is in this case understood as a loan from English car. 
 
 
160 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Historical development 
 
In OM ‹tāw› is mostly used as a full verb as in (6.22): 
 
(6.22)  row    t ïey  ma tāw  ku ÿ. 
OM    manner sun  REL stand even 
      ‘Just like the sun standing [in the sky].’ (SSKc21f) 
 
 When it follows a verb, the preferred interpretation is still as full verb: 
 
(6.23)  lop  tāw  boy krow  ci ï    y ān. 
OM    enter stand ADV behind elephant vehicle 
      ‘He entered and stood behind th e riding elephant.’ (Kyansittha F16f) 
 
 In MM, ‹tau› is increasingly used as aspect marker, sometimes apparently 
pleonastically together with ‹dmåï›: 
 
(6.24)  [ka]jo’ dmåï tau   r a .  
MM    sit    STAY  STAND FOC 
      ‘He was sitting.’ (SDGb10f) 
 
 Its grade of grammaticalization can be seen in its extended use with verbs 
that do not denote a position. 
 
(6.25)  krau  wwo’ smiï  ma nwom  tau    ku  saddhā   
MM    after this  king  REL exist  STAND OBL faith     
      m a  p a  t i l a  r a h     rman ta gah.  
      REL do lord country Mon PL TOP 
      ‘the faithful kings who ru led over the Mon Country after that.’  
      (SDGb22) 
 
The expression ‹ma nwom tau ku saddh ā› literally translates as ‘who had 
faith’. 
As aspect operator, ‹tau› can co-occur with the full verb ‹tau›: 
 
(6.26)  smi ï n āk  mwoy ma himu jayasena  ma tau  tau  
MM    king  N āga one   REL name Jayasena  REL dwell STAND 
      p óay bhū mindha[ra]nā(gabhow) 
      LOC  subterranean.N āga.world 
      ‘ a  N āga king who dwelt in the subterranean Nāga world’ (SDGb1) 
 
 
 
161 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Modern Mon   
 
Of the two OM and MM lexemes, only ‹dmå ï› is in current use in SM, both 
as full verb and as aspect operator. LM uses both ‹dmå ï› and ‹tau›, 
apparently with the same meaning, although as full verb ‹dmå ï› is more 
common. As seen above in (6.24), the two forms may co-occur, a situation 
that still holds in LM. Examples of ‹tau› as aspectual marker in LM are 
abundant. In some contexts, ‹tau› can be interpreted as a marker of habitual 
or continuous aspect, while in other contexts this analysis is more difficult to 
sustain, as the following examples illustrate. 
 
(6.27)  ga’ ī  t a ’  g a h  s a t       tau   bway ma lon   ra. 
LM    gourd PL TOP bear.fruit STAND ADV  REL exceed FOC 
      ‘The gourds bore much fruit every year.’ (MKP:3) 
 
It is clear from the broader context of  this sentence that the gourds did not 
only bear fruit on this occasion, but re gularly did so. Thus ‹tau› in this 
sentence denotes a habitual event. 
 Where ‹tau› occurs with stative verbal  expressions as in (6.28) and (6.29), a 
continuous or habitual reading is more difficult to get, as these verbs do not 
usually occur with continuous/habitual marking. 
 
(6.28)  tla  ñah    bañ ā  t h a u   k y e w     g o w     c hāy        
LM    lord person Banya Thao beautiful  comely  handsome  
      tau     bway ma lon. 
      STAND ADV  REL exceed 
      ‘Queen Banya Thao was exceedingly beautiful.’ (DC:14) 
 
(6.29)  ekarā j brau   tla  ñah    bañ ā  thau  ma cuin  dah tau   kon  
LM    king   woman lord person Banya Thao REL AOR  be  STAND child 
      w u t    t l a   ñ a h    r ājādhirāj  gah 
      maiden lord person Rajadhiraj  TOP 
      ‘Queen Banya Thao (who) was the daughter of King Rajadhiraj’  
      ( D C : 1 0 )  
 
The verb ‹dah› ‘be’ in (6.29) is doubly marked, once with the aorist marker 
‹cuin›, which is mainly used in translations from Pali, and once with ‹tau›, 
which in this context can simply marks the imperfective aspect, as in the 
previous example. 
 
 In other contexts, ‹tau› occurs wh ere the situation requires an inceptive 
reading: 
 
 
 
162 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.30)  mi kon pli ÿ lew klu ï  cuip  bh ā   t u y    s m ān tau   huit-phuil  
LM    Mi Kon Plim TOP come arrive temple FINISH ask  STAND reason 
      k u   l a k y āk jnok  ’ācā   r a .  
      OBL monk  big  teacher FOC 
      ‘Mi Kon Plim then came to the temple and asked the senior monk 
      about the reason (for calling her).’ (MKP:24) 
 
 Other contexts suggest a perfective (completive) reading of the verbal 
expression marked with ‹tau›: 
 
(6.31)  ja’a’  tau   kle’  gyi   ta’ gah ñi   hwa’ kuiw  
L M     v o m i t   STAND LOSE poison PL TOP little NEG  GIVE          
      s e h     p óay jaku  ra.  
      r e m a i n  LOC  body  FOC 
      ‘He spat out all the poison, not leaving a bit in his body.’ (LPM:11) 
 
The perfective interpretation of this sentence is reinforced by the use of ‹kle’› 
‘LOSE’, which is the LM correspondent of SM thʔ ‘throw (away), abandon, 
discard’ in its use as aspect opera tor denoting a perfective event with a 
connotation of undeliberateness and irreversibility (s. 6.3.8 below). 
 
 Like LM ‹tau›, SM mŋ can denote continuous events: 
 
(6.32)  hə mùh pk   mŋ k      s rì   h kh mùʔ  klon  mŋ? 
S M     n o w    f o l l o w  STAY o.brother Sawri  3   TOP what do   STAY 
      ‘Now you are following your br other Sawri. What are you doing?’  
      ( K N )  
 
The answer to (6.32) is given in (6.33): 
 
(6.33)  lùp  mŋ  càt,  paʔ  mŋ lù-pyiək. 
S M     e n t e r  STAY theatre do  STAY clown 
      ‘I am in the theat re, I act as a clown.’ (KN) 
 
 The first part of (6.34) suggests a reading as ‘actua l’, rather than 
continuous: 
 
(6.34)  èh   t ʔ t m  mŋ nùm  m ŋ  ʔəhm k h. 
SM    person that know STAY exist STAY under  TOP 
      ‘He knew they were down there.’ (KD) 
 
 The habitual reading is illustrated in (6.35). 
 
 
 
163 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.35)  èh   k ənh  kl ŋ p əlŋ mŋ ʔəpot st-chuʔ tənʔ. 
SM    person other  come send STAY stuff fruit    PL.this 
      ‘The other people kept coming and bringing stuff and fruit and the   
      l i k e . ’  ( W K )  
 
 Again as LM ‹tau›, SM mŋ can occur with verbs denoting qualities 
(statives): 
 
(6.36)  kyə pan s-s   mŋ, ʔŋkəlòc  hnòk-hnòk hl ŋ-hlŋ mŋ. 
S M     J a p a n   l o w -RDP STAY English  big- RDP   t a l l -RDP  STAY 
      ‘The Japanese were rather shor t, and the English were really big and  
      t a l l . ’  ( K D )   
 
 Where mŋ occurs with ISTA verbs with prominent init ial point, it denotes a 
continuous state after the event. An exam ple of this can be seen in the first 
part of sentence (6.33) above, where lùp ‘enter’ is a punctual event, but the 
result is ongoing (‘be in the theatre, work with the theatre’). At least for some 
speakers there is a difference between th e expressions in (6.37a) and (6.37b), 
the former indicating that the dead body is in sight while the later leaving it 
open whether  the body is in sight or not. 
 
(6.37a)  h khyt mŋ yaʔ. 
S M     3    d i e   STAY NSIT 
      ‘ H e  i s  d e a d . ’  ( N O P )  
 
(6.37b)   h khyt ʔa  ya ʔ. 
S M      3    d i e   GO  NSIT 
       ‘He (has) died.’ (NOP) 
 
 In some contexts mŋ has a persistive connotation, usually combined with 
nm ‘still’ or phh ‘still, yet’.  
 
(6.38)  pyùʔ  ʔt yaʔ ,  nùm  mŋ ph h. 
SM    old  all  NSIT  exist STAY still 
      ‘They are all old now, but there are still some around.’ (KD) 
 
In combination with n m, mŋ often has a connotation of ‘in spite of other 
orders’, as is the case in (6.38). The monk who caught the temple pupils 
sneaking out of the temple and watch TV at a nearby shop asks them if they 
still intended to disobey his orders in  the future. This special use of the 
persistive might be labelled ‘insistive’. 
 
 
 
164 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.39)  ʔ  t ʔ  t ò     k ərao  p     m ŋ nm ha? 
S M     2 f a m  PL  middle behind watch  STAY still  Q 
      ‘Are you (still) going to watch (TV) again guys?’ (KN) 
 
 The combination mŋ n m is often contracted to mənm in SM, which in 
turn can occur with mŋ, resulting in redundant double marking with mŋ, as 
in (6.40). 
 
(6.40)  ʔŋkəlòc  ʔiʔ  nùm  mŋ m ənm   n o ŋ. 
S M     E n g l i s h   TOP exist STAY STAY:still ASRT 
      ‘ T h e r e  a r e  a l s o  s o m e English left, I’m sure.’ (KD) 
 
 The operator mŋ is compatible with notions of the perfect, such as action 
continuing up to the present (6.41) and experiential (6.42). 
 
(6.41)  ch ān tuy   på ï     må ï kluï  ñ ī-ñī-sā-sā. 
LM    love  FINISH associate STAY COME  harmoniously- RDP 
      ‘We loved each other and have been living together harmoniously.’ 
(MKP:7) 
       
(6.42)  ʔəplŋ  k h ʔəpa  kiəŋ  m ŋ mŋ? 
SM    Aploun TOP father  EXPER stay  STAY 
      ‘Have you ever stayed at Aploun, father?’ (KD) 
 
Sentence (6.42) also show s the co-occurrence of mŋ as full verb and as 
aspect operator, a sign of its degree of grammaticalization. 
 
 In all examples given so far, mŋ can be interpreted as imperfective marker, 
including the sub-categories habitu al and continuous. The imperfective 
reading is more difficult to sustain where the action is described as completed, 
which suggests perfective rather than imperfective, as in the following 
examples. 
 
(6.43)  nù  kl ŋ       kyac hnòk hman mŋ. 
SM    ABL moment.ago monk big  ask   STAY 
      ‘The abbot just as ked (a moment ago).’ (KD) 
 
(6.44)  puə        r a o  hùʔ th m ŋ ra ʔ. 
SM    performance TOP NEG be  STAY FOC 
      ‘There is no show anymore.’ (KN) 
 
 The combination of negation and the focus marker raʔ in (6.44) often 
implicates a negated NSIT reading ‘not anymore’ (cf. ch. 5).  
 
 
165 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The use of həʔt ‘all, completely’  in (6.45) reinforces the perfective-
completive reading of the sentence,  in spite of the presence of mŋ. The 
sentence is a report to the abbot by a vi llager who found out that some of the 
temple boys had stolen and eaten all the fruit he had given to the abbot. 
 
(6.45)  kwah phə   t ʔ  kl t  iəʔ mŋ h əʔt   no ŋ. 
SM    pupil temple PL  steal eat  STAY ADV:all  ASRT 
      ‘The temple pupils have stolen and eaten them all!’ (KN) 
 
 We have seen above that the natural interpretation of mŋ combined with 
ISTA verbs is as ‘continuous state after the event’. This reading is also present 
in (6.46). The broader context of the sentence suggests that there was a single 
volcano eruption, so that an iterative reading is not av ailable. The point here 
is obviously the long-time damage that  the volcano erruption caused on the 
island. 
 
(6.46)  ʔ  ot-mi-tàŋ həth mŋ. 
SM    PREF volcano  burst  STAY 
      ‘That volcano erupted.’ (KD)  
 
 Sentence (6.47) suggests an ingressive reading of tm ‘know’ (‘find out, 
realise’), which we would expect to be marked with a the directional ʔa rather 
than mŋ. 
 
(6.47)  kon  èh   t ʔ tm  mŋ  to ə   p k    c a o    k l ŋ  l əkh. 
SM    child person that know STAY FINISH follow return  COME  then 
      ‘The children realised (that they had been left behind in the forest) 
      and followed (their father) back home.’ (KKP) 
 
Summary 
 
The operators tao and mŋ originally denoted the imperfective aspect with 
the subcategories habitual , continuous/progressive, and persistive. Extended 
use led to bleaching of the syntactic meaning, which in turn lead to the 
combinability of the two operators with a wider range of situations, including 
typical domains of the perfective such as inceptive/ingressive and completive. 
Of the two forms, tao  is chiefly used in LM, alongside with mŋ, while the 
latter is the common marker used in SM.  LM sometimes seems to make a 
functional difference between ‹må ï› and ‹tau›, the former having 
imperfective and the latter perfective reading.  
 
 
 
166 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.48)  mi ï  rams āï mnih yāÿ dmåï  tuy   smān tau   parui ï ra . 
LM    hear  sound  man  weep STAY  FINISH ask  STAND news  FOC 
      ‘She heard the sound of people crying and asked what it was 
      all about.’ (MKP:16) 
 
This difference is spurious, as shown by numerous counter-examples of ‹tau› 
having imperfective value. 
 Unlike the other directionals, tao and mŋ, indicating zero movement, are 
used as operators mainly in the temporal dimension. The function as real 
(spatial) directional is restricted to  expressions denoting posture such as 
həcʔ m ŋ ‘is sitting’, hətao m ŋ ‘is standing’, etc. Also unlike the other 
directionals, tao and mŋ did not develop prepositional function. 
 
Heine and Kuteva (2002:254f; 280ff; 324f) list two common grammaticalized 
functions each for the verbs meaning ‘remain’ (Mon mŋ) and ‘stand’ (Mon 
tao). The functions of the former, durat ive and habitual, are both in common 
use in Mon. ‘Stand’ according to Heine and Kuteva occurs as continuous 
marker, also found in Mon, and as copula (absent in Mon).  
 
B. Directionals 
 
6.3.2 ‹’ā› ʔa ‘GO’ and ‹õā› na ‘CAUS:GO’ 
 
The verb ʔa (OM ‹’ār›) generally expresses a movement away from the point 
of reference, which by default is the speaker. 109 The point of reference may 
be changed by an appropriate context. The goal of the movement may or may 
not be expressed and usually remains unmarked, i.e. it appears as direct 
object: ʔa ph ə ‘go to school, go to the temple’. As second element in a 
verbal concatenation, ʔa is used to add a directi on to a verb of movement, 
thus the label ‘directional’ or ‘orientation’ verb. As ʔa also introduces a goal 
object to the verbal expression, it can be labelled coverb (cf. Bisang 1992), 
although the distinction between directional and coverb is not clear-cut: 
 
(6.49a)  h kwac ʔa  phə . 
S M     3    w a l k  GO  school 
      ‘He is walking to school.’ ‘He walked (off) to school.’ 
 
(6.49b)  * h kwac ph ə. 
SM     3   walk school 
 
In (6.49a), ʔa has different functions. Firstly it adds a direction/orientation to 
the motion verb kwac ‘walk’. Secondly it introduces a goal as object. On the 
                                                      
109 Heine and Kuteva (2002:155) use the label “andative” or “centrifugal” for this directional. 
 
 
167 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
aspectual level, ʔa can express an ongoing action (‘is walking on’) or a 
completed action (‘has walked off’), depending on the context. This 
ambiguity arises from the competing notions of space and time. The spatial 
notion favours the reading as completive, while the temporal notion favours 
the continuous interpretation. The use of 
ʔa leaves open the question whether 
the goal has been reached or not. The addition of an overtly expressed NP 
denoting the goal does not necessarily make the expression telic, although 
this is the most natural interpretation. 
 The temporal point of reference is by default the present, ‘now’. As the use 
of ʔa is extended from the spatial to the temporal dimension, it can be used to 
denote an ongoing action/event, i.e. an event that ‘moves away from the 
present to the future’. We have s een above that the stationary verb mŋ can 
be used to express a continuous or progr essive event. The same is true for ʔa, 
but with a dynamic connotation. Therefore ʔa is rarely used as continuous 
aspect operator with stative (quality) verbs. 
 When functioning as operator, ʔa occurs in postverbal position before the 
object. When it occurs before another verb, ʔa denotes a purposive action, as 
in (6.50) and (6.51). 
 
(6.50)  mun   ’ba  s’ār     m a ï   s īl. 
OM    inform father PROSP:go watch  precept 
      ‘ H e  i n f o r m s  h i s  f a t h e r  t h a t  h e is going (to the forest) to keep the 
      precepts.’ (An225) 
 
(6.51)  ʔa rp  ka ʔ k m coʔ . 
SM    go catch fish too  ADH 
      ‘Let’s go fishing!’ (WK) 
 
Postverbal ʔa 1: directional  
 
The use of ʔa as postverbal directional, with or without overtly expressed 
goal, is frequent in all stages of Mon. 
 
(6.52)  ’in   cow   ’ār. 
OM    Indra return  GO 
      ‘Indra returns.’ (An368)  
 
(6.53)  tin    ’ ār tāwatiï. 
OM    ascend GO  Tavati ÿsa 
      ‘ H e  a s c e n d s  t o  T a v a t iÿsa Heaven.’ (SSKa52) 
 
 
 
168 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.54)  sui ÿ ma dak-don 110 cau   ’ā  s ïi     j a k u   r a .  
LM    INCL REL curse     return  GO  house  body FOC 
      ‘He went back to his hous e, swearing (all the way).’ (MKP:19) 
 
In (6.54) the use of ‹’ā› is not necessary to introduce the goal-object, as ‹cau› 
can take an object: ‹cau s ïi› ‘return home’. The function of ‹’ ā› in this 
sentence is thus directio nal (i.e. her home is fart her away from the point of 
reference than her initial position) and aspectual (either continuous or 
completive). As the act of returning is further modified by the adverbial 
‹suiÿ lak-don›, the continuous reading is here preferred. 
 
(6.55)  t k-kh pk   ʔ a  ʔeykəràt  cao   ʔa  nòn. 
SM    Tokkhe follow GO  king     return  GO  palace 
      ‘Tokkhe followed the king back to the palace.’ (WK)  
 
 Both verbs followed by ʔa in (6.55) are verbs e xpressing a motion. Where 
this is not the case, ʔa has purely aspectual value, sometimes with a manner 
connotation (‘away from centre of interest’).  
 
Postverbal ʔa 2: Aspect and manner 
 
The aspectual (and manner) use of the directional is rarely attested in the OM 
corpus, but increasingly frequent in MM and fully established at latest by 
classical LM times. The aspect expressed by 
ʔa varies according to the 
context.  
 In (6.56), the notion is that of continuous, reinforced by the repetition of the 
main verb: 
 
(6.56)  iəʔ ʔa  l əkh, iəʔ  ʔa  iəʔ ... 
S M     e a t   GO  t h u s    e a t    GO  eat 
      ‘So they ate and ate ...’ (KKP) 
 
 With a punctual event like th pŋ ‘be hit by a bomb’, the natural reading is 
that of completive, with a manner connot ation of ‘adversative event; not in 
the speakers sphere of influence or interest’. 
 
(6.57)  th ʔa  p ŋ. 
S M     h i t   GO  bomb 
      ‘He was hit by a bomb (so what could we do).’ (KD) 
                                                      
110 ‹dak-don› in the original text should be corrected to ‹lak-don›. The word ‹dak-dan› 
(pronounced in many dialects the same as ‹dak-don›, /tk-tòn/) means ‘mourn’, which does 
not fit in the contexts of the sentence, as the subject is angry, not sad, about having been 
cheated by Mi Kon Plim. 
 
 
169 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The completive reading is also available with  verbs, such as tao ‘burn’ and 
kyaʔ ‘lose’. 
 
(6.58)  l əmàŋ   tao  ʔa  hùʔ   ʔon. 
SM    Lamaing  burn GO  NEG  little 
      ‘Lamaing was damaged a lot by the fire.’ (KD)  
 
 The completive reading can be reinforced by the completive marker toə 
‘finish’ or the NSIT marker yaʔ (LM ‹ira›). 
 
(6.59)  l əmàŋ   tao  ʔa  to ə. 
SM    Lamaing  burn GO  FINISH 
      ‘Lamaing was burnt down.’ (KD) 
 
(6.60)  klèə   ʔuə kyaʔ ʔa  ya ʔ. 
SM    bull  1s  lose  GO  NSIT 
      ‘My bull has already been defeated.’ (WK) 
 
 With quality verbs, ʔa can denote an increasing degree, sometimes 
combined with the completive marker toə. 
 
(6.61)  dadah   ’ay mi    byu jarā  ’ā  tuy   ra. 
LM    NML:be  1s  mother old old  GO  FINISH FOC 
      ‘I have reached an old age now, my son.’ (DC:36) 
 
 In some contexts, ʔa is used to focus on the inception of a state or sutuation 
event. This is especially common in connection with the main verb th ‘be’, 
giving a reading ‘become, happen, come to be’, as well as with ISTA verbs 
expressing qualities. 
 
(6.62)  th ʔa  l əkh lèy. 
S M     b e   GO  thus  EMPH 
      ‘Well, this is how it happened/turned out to be.’ (KD) 
 
(6.63)  h thə   th ʔa  kr ŋ  l əkh. 
SM    3   plough be  GO  brook  thus 
      ‘(The aeroplane) ploughed (the ground) and a brook came into  
      being.’ (KD) 
 
(6.64)  ʔu ph  ʔŋ  t ʔ  lùə  ʔa  l əkh  lèy. 
SM    U Hpou Aung PL  easy  GO  then   EMPH 
      ‘Now this is when U Hpou Aung and his family got rich.’ (KD) 
 
 
 
170 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Causative directional na 
 
When the main verb is transitive and its object is put in motion as direct 
result of the activity expressed by it, the directional takes the causative form 
na, LM ‹ õā›. This is an irregular development, possibly the merger of 
different forms, from OM ‹nā›, described by Shorto as verb particle, suffixed 
to verbs and meaning ‘away’ (DMI:211). OM ‹rin’ār› ‘take away, carry off›, 
a pseudo-causative formation of ‹’ār› was shortened to ‹n’ā› in MM and later 
merged with ‹nā›, resulting in LM ‹õā›., SM na. This lexeme is rarely used as 
full verb in the modern language and functions mainly as causative 
directional in postverbal position. 
 OM uses ‹n ā› in expressions like ‹kil n ā› ‘gives away’ (An277), while the 
simple (non-causative) form is used in other contexts where the modern 
language would require the causative, as in ‹culo’ ’ ār› ‘bring across’ 
(DMI:16). The form ‹culo’› is the causative of ‹clo’› ‘cross over’, after which 
we would expect a causative directional. 
In MM, the use of the caus ative directionals is more consistent, as shown in 
(6.65). 
 
(6.65)  ket phyeh     n ā     l a r    p óay th ān  jaku. 
MM    take CAUS:DOWN CAUS:GO KEEP LOC  place body 
      ‘They took it down to their own place.’ (SDGb2) 
 
This sentence is paralleled in the SM sentence (6.66). 
 
(6.66)  ket na       l    mìt. 
S M     t a k e  CAUS:GO  KEEP turmeric 
      ‘They took along turmeric.’ (KKP) 
 
 In LM and SM, na is consistently used when the object is involved in the 
movement. There are rare instances of na in sentences where the object is 
stationary, as in (6.67). 
 
(6.67)  kyə pan   klʔ  na       a n   t a k     t ʔ. 
SM    Japanese  cross CAUS:GO  road  walking that 
      ‘The Japanese crossed that path.’ (KD) 
 
Although the verb klʔ ‘cross’ is transitive, its object is not involved in the 
movement, unlike the causative kəlʔ ‘bring across’. We would therefore 
expect (and usually get) the simple directional ʔa after klʔ. Why in this 
particular instance the causative is used remains to be explained. 
 
 
 
171 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Where there is no actual physical movement involved, na, like ʔa, denotes 
an act that is outside the sphere of influence or interest of the speaker: 
 
(6.68)  ’arew  cn āy  kon- ïāk brau   ma huiÿ õā      g a h  
LM    speech deceit  child   woman REL speak CAUS:GO  TOP 
      ‘the deceitful words that the girl spoke.’ (MKP:5) 
 
 Unlike ʔa, na does not have aspectual value. Its use is restricted to the 
spatial dimension and, as stated above,  to the manner notion ‘away from the 
centre of interest or influence’. There is a difference in meaning whether the 
simple directional ʔa or its causative form na is used. Compare the following 
sentences: 
 
(6.69a)  h hm  ʔa. 
S M     3    s p e a k   GO 
      ‘He kept speaking, he speaks on.’ 
 
(6.69b)  h hm  na . 
S M     3    s p e a k   CAUS:GO 
      ‘He said it (but I don’t care).’ 
 
(6.70a)  h kʔ ʔa. 
S M     3    GET go 
      ‘He had a chance to go, he went.’ 
 
(6.70b)  h kʔ na. 
S M     3    g e t  CAUS:GO 
      ‘He got it.’ 
 
While the most natural interpretation of (6.70a) is with kʔ as auxiliary and 
ʔa as main verb, other read ings are possible in an a ppropriate context, as in 
(6.70c). The speaker clearly indicates that the event is classified as 
adversative and beyond his influen ce (though presumably not beyond his 
interest). The use of na in this context would be less strong in making this 
point. 
 
(6.70c)  kyàn kʔ ʔa  s t   p ì    p n  m ʔ  to ə. 
S M     K y a n  g e t  GO  fruit Bael four  CL   FINISH 
      ‘Kyan got four bael fruit (and I didn’t get anything).’ (KN)  
 
 
 
172 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Summary 
 
The full verb ‹’ ār› in OM had already develo ped directional function in 
postverbal position. This was extended to aspectual use in OM and 
increasingly in MM and LM. The causative form became firmly established 
in MM and LM, where the two original forms ‹n ā› ‘away’ and ‹rin’ār› ‘bring 
away’ merged into ‹nā, õā›, which retains its verbal character only in a few 
contexts and is chiefly used as postverbal directional with manner 
connotations in some contexts, especi ally indicating an event outside the 
sphere of influence or interest of the speaker (or in some cases of the subject). 
 Heine and Kuteva (2002:155ff; 321) list a large number of 
grammaticalizations of the verb meaning ‘go (to)’ found in languages around 
the world, including ‘andative’, ‘cha nge of state’, ‘continuous’, among 
others . Most of them are also presen t in Mon. The grammaticalized uses of 
ʔa in Mon fit very well into the general picture of languages around the world 
as surveyed by Heine and Kuteva. Additional functions such as the 
completive have developed in Mon from  the aspectualization of the spatial 
dimension (‘away from me and here’ → ‘completed’, ‘towards a goal’ → 
‘reach the goal’). 
 
6.3.3 ‹kluï› klŋ ‘COME’ and ‹naï› nŋ ‘CAUS:COME’ 
 
The verb OM ‹tl ūï, tluï›, LM ‹kluï›, SM kl ŋ ‘come’ is the conceptual 
opposite of ʔa ‘go’. While the latter can be described as andative or 
centrifugal, the former is venitive or  centripetal. It describes a motion 
towards the centre of interest, usually the speaker in the spatial dimension 
and, by extension, the present or ‘now’ in the temporal dimension. In the 
temporal dimension, postverbal klŋ denotes the perfect aspect in that it 
describes an event that develops  towards the present moment. The 
interpretation can be either as perfect continuous (‘has be en V-ing’) or as 
completive (‘has V-ed’), depending on the context. In preverbal position klŋ 
usually has purposive reading ‘come to V’; in connection with the ablative 
preposition nù it denotes a kind of recent past or past event with present 
relevance. Standing alone or at the begi nning, less frequently at the end, of a 
sentence, klŋ has hortative meaning, in this case often weakened to [kl ] or 
[klʔ] in SM. After verbs of motion, klŋ, like ʔa, not only adds a direction 
(orientation), but it also functions as coverb, i.e. it opens the possibility to add 
a goal as object. The goal of the movement is closer to the point of reference 
than the origin. When the object is dire ctly involved in the movement, i.e. 
when the act expressed by the main verb causes the object to move, the 
suppletive causative form n
ŋ is used. The regular morphological causative, 
OM ‹tulūï›, LM ‹tluï›, SM kəlŋ is used in the modern language with the 
meaning ‘welcome’, usually in combination with tŋ ‘receive’ as tŋ kəlŋ. 
 
 
173 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
Historical development 
 
Since OM, ‹tlūï› is found as sole verb or as first or second member of verb 
concatenations: 
 
(6.71)  tluï  han  ’bo’. 
O M     c o m e  LOC  mother 
      ‘He comes to his mother.’ (An287) 
 
(6.72)  smi ï tluï  cip . 
OM    king  come arrive 
      ‘The king arrives.’ (An371) 
 
(6.73a)  smi ï goh (pi)ndoï tlū ï  ’ āc   ci ï. 
OM    king  TOP send    come ask.for elephant 
      ‘The king sent them hither to ask for elephants.’ (Ku217) 
 
The word order of (6.72) in LM and SM can be either as in the OM sentence 
or reversed to ‹cuip kluï›. This latter word order is far more common in the 
modern language and almost exclusiv ely used when the goal is overtly 
expressed.  
 
(6.74)  p əʔ kl m   c h  k h poy cp   kl ŋ  k ʔ ot  ya ʔ. 
SM    three hundred ten  TOP 1pl arrive  COME  Ko’ Dot  NSIT 
      ‘By 1310 [1948] we had al ready arrived in Ko’ Dot.’ (KD) 
 
 In modern Mon, the sentence corresponding to (6.73a) requires the use of 
the causative form of kl
ŋ, viz. nŋ: 
 
(6.73b)  hmo   k h pəlŋ nŋ      ʔ at    co . 
SM    king   TOP send CAUS:COME ask.for elephant 
 
 The function of ‹tlu ï› in (6.75) is ambiguous. It may function as directional 
of the expression ‹jak cuih› ‘march down’, or it may be linked to the second 
verbal expression ‹óok phåï› ‘ride a raft’. Probably both interpretations are 
correct and ‹tluï› here has a twofold function. The gloss should in this case 
be ‘ COME/come’, indicating the use as  a grammaticalized element 
(directional) and as a full verb ‘come to V’. 
 
 
 
174 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.75)  sui ÿ priw āra ma glui ï jak   cuih  tlu ï  óok phåï thaw. 
MM    INCL retinue  REL many march DOWN come ride raft  gold 
      ‘Together with a big retinue he marched down and embarked 
      on his golden raft.’ (Bayi nnaung’s Bell Inscription 18f, Pagán 1557) 
 
Preverbal klŋ 
 
Sentences (6.73a) and (6.76) - (6.78) illustrate the use of preverbal ‹tlu ï› in 
OM, LM, and SM with purposive meaning. This use is widespread in all 
stages of Mon, and may be considered the origin of the adhortative meaning 
of klŋ in SM. 
 
(6.76)  ñah   pan tluï  sm āñ. 
OM    person four come ask 
      ‘The four of them come to ask.’ (An166) 
 
(6.77)  tla  ñah    t i ÿ  dadah   gna-ky āk yay   ’ ā  tuy   kuiw  
LM    lord person know NML:be  queen    be.sick GO  FINISH GIVE  
      ’ c ā   s a w      m a h ā-saw   ta’ kluï lw ī-parā  ra.  
      teacher medicine big-medicine PL come look.after FOC 
      ‘The king learned that th e queen had fallen ill and ordered the 
      doctors and big healers to come and cure her.’ (DC:17) 
 
(6.78)  h klŋ khay  èh   h m. 
SM    3   come dig  person speak 
      ‘They came to dig, people say.’ (KD) 
 
 In sentence in itial position, klŋ can have imperative or adhortative value, 
often phonetically reduced to [kl] or [klʔ]. 
 
(6.79a)  kl,  iəʔ pŋ! 
SM    COME eat  rice 
      ‘Come on, let’s eat!’ 
 
 The degree of desemanti calisation is illustrated by its co-occurrence with ʔa 
‘go’. 
 
(6.80a)  kl,   ʔa w  co ʔ! 
SM    COME  go play  ADH 
      ‘Come on, let’s go out (for fun).’ 
 
 The word order can be reversed, with klŋ in sentence final position. No 
difference in meaning is involved in the change of word order. 
 
 
175 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.79b)  iəʔ pŋ, kl! 
(6.80b)  ʔa w coʔ, kl! 
 
Postverbal klŋ 1: Directional 
 
In LM and SM, klŋ in postverbal position is fre quent and covers a number 
of functions, some parallel to the use of its opposite, ʔa ‘go’. The most basic 
function, found at least since MM, is as  directional or orientation verb, 
indicating that the main verb expresses a movement towards the centre of 
interest. The goal of the movement may or may not be overtly expressed. 
 
(6.81)  krìp cao   kl ŋ  kwan  p əŋaʔ. 
SM    run return  COME  village Panga 
      ‘He came running back to Panga.’ (KD) 
 
(6.82)  ʔŋkəlòc  ak klŋ  la. 
SM    English  ride COME  mule 
      ‘The English came riding on mules.’ (KD) 
 
 
Postverbal klŋ 2: Aspect and manner 
 
When there is no physical movement involved, klŋ usually has perfect 
reading, i.e. past event with presen t relevance, either continuous or 
completive, according to the context. 
 
(6.83)  kon- ŋàc mù ə tao  kl ŋ  k əmot. 
SM    child   one burn COME  fire 
      ‘A child had suffered burns.’ (KD) 
 
(6.84)  brau    mway tru ĥ  b ā  gah hwa’ mway kluï   r a .  
L M     w o m a n   o n e    m a n   t w o  TOP NEG  one   COME  FOC 
      ‘There has never been a case of one woman and two men (living 
      together as husbands and wife).’ (MKP:28) 
 
 When klŋ is used in perfect continuous contexts, it may co-occur with mŋ 
or tao ‘STAY’. 
 
(6.85)  måï tau   klu ï   gruip  glui ï kuiw sn āÿ. 
L M     s t a y   STAND COME  forest  many OBL  year 
      ‘We have been living in the forest for many years.’ (MKP:7) 
 
 
 
176 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The use of ‹kluï› in (6.85) implies past tense reading of the sentence. With ʔa 
‘go’ instead of klŋ, the sentence is temporally neutral, the continuous aspect 
of the event being emphasised. 
 Although the co-occurrence of tao and kl ŋ suggests perfect continuous 
interpretation, this is not necessarily  the only possible reading. The verbal 
expression in sentence (6.86) has completive, rather than continuous value. 
 
(6.86)  kā la  peï   t a u    k l u ï  dacit gitu. 
LM    time  be.full STAND COME  nine  moon 
      ‘The time came when nine months had passed.’ (MKP:6) 
 
 Like ʔa, klŋ can denote a change of state or an ingressive event. This is 
exemplified in (6.87). The use of klŋ instead of ʔa here indicates that the 
speaker is directly affected by the event,  i.e. it is a change towards or within 
the sphere of interest of the speaker , though the event is adversative. The 
speaker has to stay in the house, even if  it has become so dilapidated that it 
hardly inhabitable anymore, as st ated in the context. The use of ʔa in the 
same sentence would implicate that the sp eaker is ready to move out of the 
old house. 
 
(6.87)  s ïi    puiy  plan  lew byu kluï  ra. 
LM    house  1pl  again TOP old COME  FOC 
      ‘Our house, too, has become old.’ (MKP:11) 
 
Causative directional nŋ 
 
Where the object is directly put in motion by the event expressed in the main 
verb, the causative form of klŋ, viz. n ŋ is used in LM and SM. This 
suppletive stem is the result of an irregular development from OM, MM ‹raï› 
‘bring’. This OM verb combines with both ‹’ ār› ‘go’ and ‹tluï› ‘come’ to 
indicate the direction of the ‘bringing’: ‹ra ï ’ār› ‘bring thither’, ‹raï tlu ï› 
‘bring hither’. 
 
 Already in MM a secondary form ‹na ï› came to be used in postverbal 
position, besides the expression ‹na ï chaï› ‘bring down’ with prevervbal 
‹naï› (DMI:312). In LM ‹raï › is still used with the meaning ‘bring’, while 
SM rŋ means ‘conduct’. The form LM ‹na ï›, SM n ŋ is chiefly used as 
postverbal directional, although it can still be found as full verb. As 
illustrated in (6.82) above, the conditioning factor for the choice of nŋ or 
klŋ is not the transitivity of the main verb, but its denoting the cause for the 
movement of the object. This means that after a causative main verb, nŋ is 
always the natural choice, while afte r non-causative transitive verbs, both 
forms are possible, with differences in meaning. 
 
 
177 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.88)  m ənìh pyù ʔ-pyùʔ k h h rùy   h ətn111  n ŋ. 
S M     m a n    o l d -RDP   TOP 3   choose CAUS:UP  CAUS:COME 
      ‘They chose the old people.’ (KD) 
 
 In sentence (6.89) the use of nŋ indicates that the deceitful words of the 
Japanese were the cause of the Bu rmese coming down to Monland. Although 
the verb lìm ‘deceive’ does not in itself involve a movement, it is the cause of 
the movement, licensing the use of the causative directional. The use of the 
non-causative klŋ in the same sentence carrie s no implication of (but does 
not exclude) the Burmese moving anywhere and has purely temporal notion. 
 
(6.89)  kyə pan  plup      l    c t  teh  lìm    n ŋ       
SM    Japanese CAUS:enter KEEP heart COND deceive CAUS:COME  
      h əmə  k h. 
      B u r m e s e  TOP           
      ‘The Japanese made them interested 112 and thus deceived the  
       Burmese into  coming here.’ (KD) 
 
 A similar case is the use of nŋ and klŋ with the verb hm ‘speak’. The 
directional klŋ here indicates that someone has spoken, while nŋ indicates 
that someone has spoken (or will speak ) to the speaker, i.e. the centre of 
interest. 
 Completely different readings result from the use of klŋ and n ŋ with the 
verbs kʔ ‘get’ and k ‘give’, both of which may be interpreted either as full 
verb or as auxiliary: 
 
(6.90a)  h k/kʔ   k l ŋ. 
S M     3    GIVE/GET come 
      ‘He let (me) go.’ / ‘He had a chance to go.’ 
 
(6.90b)  h k/kʔ  ŋŋ. 
SM    3   give/get CAUS:COME 
      ‘He gave (it to) me.’ / ‘He got it.’  
 
Notice that the English sentence ‘He got it.’ can be rendered in Mon either as 
h kʔ nŋ or as h kʔ na, depending on whether the object he received 
moved closer to the speaker (not the recipient!) or farther away from him. 
The sentence h k  na (instead of h k  n ŋ) implies that he gave the 
object to someone else, not the speaker, while h k nŋ may be interpreted 
                                                      
111 hətn is colloquial for the regular causative pətn. 
112 lùp ct, lit. ‘enter the heart’ means ‘be interested’, probably calqued on B. sei’ win sà 
‘id.’. The regular causative is plup ct ‘make interested, arouse interest’. 
 
 
178 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
as ‘He gave it to her.’ if she is closer to me (physically or mentally) than the 
subject. 
 
Summary 
 
The full verb OM ‹tl ūï, tlu ï› has developed into a postverbal directional 
already in OM. At least since MM, its use has been extended to the temporal 
dimension, resulting in aspectual value, in some cases with a temporal (past) 
and/or manner connotation (towards or within the sphere of speaker’s 
interest). 
 
Heine and Kuteva (2002:68ff; 318f) list 11 different paths of 
grammaticalization under the headings COME, COME FROM and COME TO . 
Some of the listed grammaticalized f unctions are found in Mon, while some 
others present in Mon are not in Heine and Kuteva’s list.like the prepositional 
meaning as allative (not ablative), used when the goal is closer to the point of 
reference then the origin. 
 
6.3.4 ‹tuin› tn ‘MOVE.UP’ and ‹ptuin› pətn ‘CAUS:UP’113
Historical development 
 
The verb ‹tin› in OM means ‘move up, go up, come up, ascend’. It is used as 
main verb, as in ‹tin tmo’› ‘(he) goes up the hill’ (An88), or as directional in 
postverbal position, as in ‹sc ās tin› ‘(they) shall go up against (the water)’ 
(SSKb28). The word order of ‹tin› comb ined with an orientation verb is 
fixed: ‹tin ’ār› ‘go up’ (*‹’ār tin›). The use of ‹’ ār› to indicate a goal is 
possible, as in ‹tin ’ ār tā watiï› ‘go up to Tavati ÿsa heaven’, but it is not 
obligatory, as seen in the expressions ‹tin tmo’› ‘go up a hill’ and ‹tin prāsād› 
‘enter the palace’ (An51).  
 Shorto’s translation of the expression ‹drep tin› (DMI:150) as ‘speed up’ (lit. 
‘run UP’) out of context might lead to  an interpretation of ‹tin› as 
grammaticalized into an operator indi cating ‘increasing degree’ already in 
OM. The whole sentence in the inscription reads 
 
(6.91)  [y]ir[y ās  b ā]r goh óeh dre[p] ti[n cup    brahm]alok  [mleh ]. 
OM    NML:shine two TOP 3   run   UP  arrive  Brahmaloka completely 
      ‘The two rays went up all the way to the Brahmaloka.’  
      (Myakan Inscription B11-12, Pagán) 
 
                                                      
113 In the glosses I use ‘move.up’ and ‘CAUS:up’ for tn and pətn resp. as full verbs and ‘UP’ 
and ‘CAUS:UP’ when they appear in grammaticalized functions.  
 
 
179 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The verb ‹tin› in this sentence is us ed as directional, not indicating an 
increase in degree (of the speed), a us e common in the modern language as 
we will see below. 
 No causative form of ‹tin› is attested in OM. This may be due to the 
limitedness of the inscriptional data and further inscriptions may well reveal 
the expected OM form *‹ptin›. 
 
 The functions of MM ‹tuin› parallel OM  ‹tin› as full verb, with or without 
additional directional/ori entation verb, and as directional in postverbal 
position. In addition, MM ‹tui n› is used to indicate a change of state, in 
particular an increased degree, as in ‹jnok tuin› ‘grew bigger, became bigger’.  
 MM has a causative form ‹ptuin›, used both as a full verb and as directional. 
There are instances in MM where the simple form is used where modern Mon 
would require the use of the causative, as in ‹bar reï duï tuin› ‘heap up, build 
a platform’ and ‹dak tuin› ‘build up’. 
 
(6.92) tma’ lw ān  kalo’-kalo’ gah b a r     [ r eï    d u ï]  tuin  tuy 
MM   stone laterite hard- RDP  TOP heap.up arrange  receive UP  FINISH 
     m a ïah  óeh ma kuiw dak  tuin   l’it.  
     outside  3   REL GIVE build UP   brick 
     ‘They heaped up hard laterite blocks, arranged them so that they 
     would support (the pagoda) and then had bricks built up  
     on the outside.’ (SDGb35) 
 
The Burmese translation of the inscri ption (U Hkyit Thein 1965:II 80) has si 
te’ sei  ‘made build up’ (lit. ‘arrange UP CAUS’) for both ‹bar reï duï tuin› and 
‹dak tuin›. The verb/directional te’ ‘move up’ in Burmese does not have a 
causative form, i.e. it is used in both non-causative and causative contexts. In 
the 15
th century, when the Shwedagon Inscription was written, the Mon (and 
their language) had been exposed to Burmese influence for at least four 
centuries and many Mon, especially the e ducated elite, were bilingual with 
Burmese. This may have led to insensitivity to grammatical distinctions in 
some contexts when these distinctions were not made in Burmese. 
Alternatively one might suspect that the causative system was not yet fully 
developed in MM. This hypothesis is  supported by OM data, but not by 
further Mon-Khmer comparison. 
 
Modern Mon 
 
In modern Mon, both LM and SM, tn is used as full verb and as operator. Its 
aspectual function has been extended, covering not only a change of state 
(increased degree), but also inceptive  events with a manner connotation of 
surprise and suddenness. 
 
 
180 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 As a full verb, tn occurs alone or in connectio n with a directional. It can 
have an unmarked object indicating either the path or the goal, as in t n t   
‘go up the hill’ and tn phə ‘go to school’. In preverbal position tn can be 
used to indicate a purpose, ‘go up a nd V, go up to V’. The word order in 
(6.93) is atypical; we would expect the directional ʔa to occur after tn. This 
seems to be an instance of verb serialization with out grammaticalization, i.e. 
ʔa and tn function as full verbs in sequence.  
 
(6.93)   ʔa  tn      m ŋ thʔ   ə  nòn   k m. 
SM    go  move.up  stay  THROW LOC  palace too 
      ‘He went and ascended to the palace to live there.’ (WK) 
 
 The use of tn as postverbal directional is illustrated in the following 
sentence. 
 
(6.94)  krìp t n r ŋ  ʔa  ph ə  k ʔ-kyac  t ʔ. 
S M     r u n  UP   look  GO  temple Ko’-Kyaik that 
      ‘We ran (up the hill) and looked over to Ko’ Kyaik monastery.’ 
(KN) 
       
 A change of state is expressed in (6.95) and (6.96). 
 
(6.95)  mù ə phan kərao-coh, ca ʔ  lèt- ʔu     t ʔ p n-coh, h p  t n. 
SM    one glass six-ty     begi n beginning that four-ty  3   add UP 
      ‘One glass was sixty Kyat; in the beginning it was forty, but they  
      i n c r e a s e d  t h e  p r i c e . ’  ( K N )  
 
(6.96)  to ə   kon   h hnòk tn. 
SM    FINISH child 3   big  UP 
      ‘And then his children grew up.’ (KKP) 
 
 Postverbal tn can express a sudden event, usually with a connotation of 
surprise. This is exemplified in (6.97) to (6.99). 
 
(6.97)  tla  ñah    t h a p   smān tuin sāk    õa’ plan  ra. 
LM    lord person PILE  ask  UP  manner this again FOC 
      ‘The king asked like this again.’ (DC:33) 
 
(6.98)  khayya  ket  kamlat    klat  tuin  sat   pnah. 
LM    think   TAKE ATTR:steal  steal UP  fruit  jackfruit 
      ‘He thought that a thief ha d stolen the jackfruit.’ (MKP:23) 
 
 
 
181 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.99)  p ŋk a     h ətaʔ tʔ khyi  t n. 
SM    propeller tail  that move UP 
      ‘Suddenly the tail rotor started moving.’ (KD) 
 
 The causative form pətn114 can be used as main verb or as directional if the 
activity expressed by the main verb causes the object to move upwards. The 
causative form, whether as full verb or as operator, usually requires an 
additional directional to occur in the causative form, too. If causative pətn 
occurs with a non-causativ e directional such as ʔa ‘go’, the latter is 
interpreted as aspectual operator rather than directional: pətn ʔa ‘keep 
setting up’, ‘has set up’. There are instances of non-causative tn in contexts 
where one would expect the causative fo rm in SM, as in (6.100). In this 
sentence tn obviously does not function as a di rectional, but rather as an 
inceptive aspectual operator.115
( 
6.100)  so    kyet  həlh     t n na . 
SM    Soing  Kyet CAUS:free UP  CAUS:GO 
      ‘Soing Kyet suddenly fired (his gun).’ (KD) 
 
 When used as directional in the same context, the causative form is used, as 
in sentence (6.101) from the same text as (6.100). 
 
(6.101)  h pn  hə tn  na . 
SM    3   shoot CAUS:UP CAUS:GO 
      ‘They shot up.’ (KD) 
 
The use of hətn here indicates that the men who shot were actually located 
lower than their target. In another context the same sentence could be 
translated as ‘he shot into the air’. The upwards movement may be abstract 
rather than real, as in (6.102). 
 
(6.102)  ñah   knah hui ÿ thuiï-sah patuin  ca  gu õ  jaku  m ān  gah. 
LM    person other speak praise    CAUS:UP EAT merit body ABLE TOP 
      ‘Other people may be able  to praise their own merit.’ (DC:2) 
 
Summary 
 
The lexeme tn has been grammaticalized as postverbal directional at least 
since OM. At least since MM the func tion as aspect operator indicating a 
                                                      
114 The colloquial variant hətn is gaining popularity among Mon speakers, adding to the 
extended use of the universal prefix hə- in SM. 
115 One might suspect here the colloquial variant hətn as in sentence (6.101), but the audio 
recording does not reveal a presyllable. It is possible, though, that the inaudibility here is due 
to the preceding aspirate final (həlh hətn > həlhətn > həlh tn). 
 
 
182 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
change of state or increase in degree is attested. In the modern language the 
aspectual value as inceptive (with a connotation of unexpected event, 
surprise) has become increasingly impor tant. In all stages of Mon, both the 
simple form and the causative can function as full verb or as operator. In both 
functions they may combine with the directionals ʔa ‘go’ and klŋ ‘come’ (or 
their causative counterparts) in the fixed word order V (pə)tn ʔa (na)/kl ŋ 
(nŋ). The lexeme tn licenses an unmarked object, expressing either path or 
goal, while its causative counterpart pətn takes the theme as object. In 
combination with verbs denoting manner of motion like kwac ‘walk’, which 
do not allow unmarked objects, tn also has the function to add an object, i.e. 
it may be labelled a coverb in this context. 
 
The grammaticalized uses of Mon tn are well attested in Southeast Asian 
languages, e.g. Thai khn2
 ‘move up’ covers almost the same functions as 
the modern Mon lexeme. Some of the functions of Mon tn are also reflected 
in the use of the English adverb ‘ up’ in expressions like ‘speak up’, 
corresponding to Mon hm tn ‘speak UP.’ and ‘grow up’, Mon hnòk tn ‘big 
UP’.116
 
6.3.5 ‹ceh› ceh ‘MOVE DOWN’ and ‹phyeĥ› phyeh ‘CAUS:DOWN’ 
Historical Development 
 
The semantic opposite of t n is OM ‹cis›, MM ‹cuih›, LM ‹ceh›, SM ceh 
‘move down’. It is used in OM as full verb, with the allative object unmarked 
or marked by the preposition ‹han›, and the ablative object marked by the 
preposition ‹nor› ‘from’. 
 
(6.103)  cis        t ūn   han manussalok. 
OM    move.down  return  ALL world.of.man 
      ‘He came back down to the world of man.’ (SSKf29) 
 
(6.104)  smi ï in   cis       n o r  t āwatiï. 
OM    king  Indra move.down ABL Tavatiÿsa 
      ‘Lord Indra came down from Tavati ÿsa Heaven.’ (SSKg39) 
 
 In postverbal position, ‹c is› denotes a downward movement, as in ‹drep cis› 
‘run down’, ‹scuti cis› ‘will be born in a lower sphere, e.g. a god will be 
reborn as a human’. OM does not seem to make use of a causative form of 
‹cis›, which is attested in later stages of Mon. The verb ‹la ÿbor› ‘droop, put 
down’ in (6.105) is intransitive, although the translation suggests a transitive 
reading. The correspon ding verb in SM kəmò can be used both in transitive 
                                                      
116 Heine and Kuteva (2001) do not list a verb with the meaning ‘go up, move up’ in their 
paths of grammaticalization. 
 
 
183 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
and intransitive contexts, choosing the respective fo rm of the directional, ceh 
or phyeh. 
 
(6.105)  yal  nom  sanor   chu  óeh laÿb o r         c i s   
OM    COND exist heritage wood 3   put.down.branches DOWN  
      r o w     d l a ÿ    ’ a k u ÿ. 
      manner chamber  even 
      ‘If it has the heritage of a tree, it puts down branches like a  
      chamber.’ (Ku92) 
    
 Occurring before another verb, ‹cis›, like the other directionals, denotes a 
purpose: 
 
(6.106)  (kaleï ) tin  han tul    ’ ākās pa prātihār blah   
O M     f l o a t   UP  ALL above  air   do miracle SEQ 
      c i s         l ïor      k y āk buddha  tarley. 
      move.down  pay.respect holy  Buddha lord:1s 
      ‘He floated up into the sky and performed a miracle, then he  
      came down to pay respect to the Lord Buddha.’ (DMI:102) 
 
 In MM, ‹cuih› as a full verb regular ly occurs with the directionals ‹’ā› ‘go’ 
and ‹kluï›  ‘come’, always in the order ‹cis ’ā› and ‹cis kluï›. There is one 
apparent exception to this word orde r in the Shwedagon inscription, but 
according the U Hkyit Thein (1965:156) the word ‹’ā › in the sentence in 
question is unreadable or at least not clear. 
 
(6.107)  ... (ma) himu siwathe  kuiw [’ā] cuih     k e t  d h āt  swok. 
MM    ... REL  name Sivathera GIVE go  move.down take relic  hair 
      ‘... who is called Sivathera le t him go down and take the hair relic.’  
      ( S D G b 5 )  
       
 After verbs of motion, ‹cuih› deno tes a downward movement, optionally 
modified by a second directional ‹’ ā› or ‹kluï›. The goal of the movement 
may further be introduced by the verb ‹cuip› ‘arrive’. The order is fixed as 
 
Vmotion cuih DIR cuip GOAL. 
 
 In causative contexts MM uses the causative form ‹phyuih›, which goes 
back to an unattested OM form *‹pc is›. MM ‹phyuih›, later ‹phyih›, occurs 
both as full verb and as postverbal directional. 
 
 
 
184 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Modern Mon 
 
In modern Mon, ceh 117  occurs as full verb de noting a movement from a 
higher place to a lower one. The relative altitude may be physically real or 
abstract. The unmarked object of ceh indicates either the goal (allative) as in 
(6.108), or the origin (ablative) as in  (6.109), of the movement, depending on 
the context. Usually the ablative ob ject is marked by the preposition nù, 
while the allative is introduced by a directional (ʔa or klŋ). 
 
(6.108)  h c e h         ac. 
SM    3   move.down  water 
      ‘ H e  w e n t  i n t o  t h e  w a t e r . ’  
 
(6.109)  ʔeykəràt c e h        n ò n . 
SM    king    move.down  palace 
      ‘The king left the palace.’ (KKP) 
 
 As in MM, ceh in SM and LM is used as postverbal directional to indicate a 
downward movement, either concrete or abstract. 
 
(6.110)  ʔəkùn  t k  kwac,  kwac lòt  ceh   ə pa    k ərŋ. 
SM    monk  Touk walk  walk fall DOWN LOC mouth door 
      ‘The reverend Touk walked, a nd as he walked he fell down at the 
door.’ (KN) 
 
 The movement of kyo ‘look, glance’ is less concrete, as it applies only to the 
activity itself, not the actor: 
 
(6.111)  t əkh kh kyo  ceh    ʔa. 
SM    ogre  TOP look  DOWN GO 
      ‘The ogre looked down.’ (KKP) 
 
 The verb ‹ruih› ‘count’ in (6.112) doe s not involve a physical movement. 
The directionals ‹ceh› and ‹’ā› are used in an abstract sense in this context. 
 
(6.112)  kale ï  ruih ceh    ’ ā kali lon   klu ï  pwuiï masun kla ÿ  
LM    return  count DOWN GO pass exceed COME extent five   hundred 
      s n āÿ praï-praï    t e ’   g a h  
      y e a r   m o r e . t h a n -RDP that TOP 
      ‘Counting back (down) it is more than five hundred years.’ (DC1) 
 
                                                      
117 For some speakers the pronunciation is cih rather than ceh. 
 
 
185 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The use of ‹ceh› in (6.113) is even more abstract, indicating a decrease in 
degree rather than a movement. This is the logical opposite of tn ‘move up’, 
which is used to denote a increase in degree. 
 
(6.113)  t ā-lyuiï lew  sā   ceh    ’ ā  ’uit. 
LM    duty    TOP  light DOWN GO  all 
      ‘The burden of her dutie s had all become lighter.’ (DC:37) 
 
 Although ceh may be (and usually is) used to introduce a goal, it is not 
obligatory. Some verbs of movement ma y take an unmarked goal as object, 
as in the following sentence, where ceh could be inserted between hə tom and 
kʔ ot without changing the meaning. 
 
(6.114)  la ʔ   ŋ-kya  hə tom k ʔ ot k h. 
SM    when ship-wind fall   Ko’ Dot TOP 
      ‘When that aeroplane crashed at Ko’ Dot.’ (KD) 
 
 With some verbs, ceh  may be used as resultative, as in the combination 
iəʔ hùʔ ceh ‘cannot eat’, lit. ‘eat not move.down’. This expression denotes a 
physical or mental state of anxiety which prevents one from eating. The use 
of ceh in RVCs is restricted to a small set of verbs and may be considered 
lexicalised rather than productive. 
 
 The causative form LM ‹phye ĥ›, SM phyeh  (for some speakers phyih) is 
used as full verb meaning ‘take down, bring down’ and as postverbal 
directional to denote a downward move ment. Like the simple form, the 
causative can be applied to concrete and abstract movements. 
 
Summary 
 
The verb ceh ‘move down’ has developed less grammatical functions than the 
other directionals. Its use as postverba l directional has been extended from 
concrete movements to increasingly abstract movements, resulting in ceh  
denoting a decrease in degree with ve rbs of quality. As resultative verb, ceh 
has restricted use occurring with a few verbs indicating the result of the 
action expressed by the main verb. 
 
Heine and Kuteva (2002:117; 320) list the grammaticalization path DESCEND 
→ DOWN , which is found in languages of Africa, Oceania and Asia. This 
corresponds to the use of ceh as postverbal directional in Mon. 
 
 
 
186 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
6.3.6 Other directionals:  ‹tit/ptit›  tt/pətt ‘EXIT’  
                  ‹ l u p / p l o p ›  lùp/plop ‘ENTER’  
                  ‹ c u i p / b a c u i p ›  cp/həcp ‘ARRIVE’  
                  ‹ c a u / p h y a u ,  k a l e ï, plan› cao/phyao, kəliəŋ, pln 
‘RETURN’ 
                    
tt and lùp 
 
The directionals tt/pətt ‘exit, move out’/‘take out, bring out’ and lùp/plop  
‘enter, move in’/‘insert, put in’ are used as full verbs and as postverbal 
directionals in all reco rded stages of Mon. The unmarked object of both tt 
and lùp usually denotes the goal, the sour ce of the movement being marked 
by the ablative preposition nù. 
 
(6.115)  tit  bih ār      r m e ï dhar. 
OM    exit monastery  hear  Dhamma 
      ‘He goes out to the mona stery to hear the Dhamma.’ (Ku115) 
 
(6.116)  tit  nor  ummaï. 
O M     e x i t  ABL tunnel 
      ‘He comes out of the tunnel.’ (An196) 
 
 The causative forms come into regular use in MM and are consistently used 
in causative contexts in LM and SM. 
 
(6.116)  h tk  pətt     l əkh raʔ. 
S M     3    b e a t   CAUS:EXIT  thus  FOC 
      ‘He beat it out like this.’ (KD) 
 
(6.117)  kuiw thapuiy pan  yuik plop      õā     k a ëā  jnok  mway. 
LM    GIVE novice  four  lift   CAUS:ENTER CAUS:GO chest big  one 
      ‘He had the four novices ca rry a big chest (into the palace).’  
      ( D C : 2 3 )  
 
 The forms tt and lùp  have not developed exte nded grammatical functions 
beyond the use as directionals. They ma y be used as second elements in 
resultative verb compounds, e.g. ku (hùʔ) tt ‘can(not) think of it’, lit. ‘think 
(not) exit’, but this use is restrict ed to a few set compounds and does not 
seem to be productive (yet?). 
 
 
 
187 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
cp 
 
OM ‹cup, cip, cap› ‘arrive at, come to’ is used as full verb with the goal as 
unmarked object, as in ‹cip ’assamapit› ‘he arrives at the hermitage’ (An326). 
In combination with verbs of motion, ‹cup, cip› occupies the last place in the 
sequence: ‹kluï cip› ‘come to, arrive’, ‹tit ’ār cip› ‘go out to’. No causative 
form is attested in OM. 
 In MM the reversed word order is found, i.e. ‹cuip ’ ā›, besides the older ‹’ā 
cuip› ‘arrive at’. The causative form ‹bacuip› is a new formation in MM. If 
OM had a causative of this verb, the form should be *‹pcip›, which would 
result in MM *‹phyuip› (cf. MM ‹phyui h› from OM *‹pcis› ‘bring down’, 
from the root OM ‹cis›, MM ‹cuih› ‘move down’). 
 In SM both word orders are possible, apparently without difference in 
meaning. The following two sentences are from the same speaker, exhibiting 
both word orders. 
 
(6.118)  kyə pan   tn    ʔ a  cp    k r ŋ k ŋ  k h. 
SM    Japanese  move.up GO  ARRIVE  river Kang TOP 
      ‘The Japanese went  up to Kroeng Kang River.’ (KD) 
 
(6.119)  cp   ʔa  kyac   s ŋ-lān. 
S M     a r r i v e   GO  pagoda  Thanlan 
      ‘They arrived at Kyaik Thanlan Pagoda.’ (KD) 
 
 The causative həcp is regularly used in causative contexts in SM, 
sometimes in combination with the simple form: 
 
(6.120)  kala ʔ kh h ʔa pəlŋ həcp       n a       c p     
S M     t i m e   TOP 3   go send CAUS:ARRIVE  CAUS:GO  ARRIVE   
      h əʔ  ʔkkəthaʔ. 
      house  president 
      ‘At that time they brought hi m to the house of the president.’ (KD) 
 
 Sometimes the simple form is used instead of the expected causative. This 
might be an indication of the degree of grammaticalization, i.e. development 
towards prepositional function of c
p. 
 
(6.121)  l ïau   ta’ gah yuik  p h y a u      c u i p    s ïi. 
LM    sesame PL TOP lift   CAUS:return  ARRIVE  house 
      ‘She carried the sesame  back to her house.’ (MKP:30) 
 
 
 
188 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Alternatively, though less likely, one might interpret th e sentence as 
containing consecutive events: ‘Carrying back the sesame she arrived home.’ 
 
 Like tt and lùp, cp may be used in a few resultative constructions but has 
not developed extended grammaticalized functions in Mon. It may be used as 
coverb, introducing the goal of the motion, a function which has been 
extended to the temporal dimension (‘unt il’) in some contexts. All functions 
of cp are still clearly related to its original semantics ‘arrive at, come to’. 
 There are three different lexemes expr essing the notion of ‘return, go back’, 
viz. cao, k əliəŋ, and pl n. They have reached different degrees of 
grammaticalization in the modern language, pln now being used almost 
exclusively as adverb. Only the first of the lexemes is attested in OM, the 
latter two appearing only in MM an d modern Mon. Another OM verb, ‹t ūn› 
‘return, go back’ has developed into a particle denoting emphasis or 
topicality in LM. 
 
cao, kəliəŋ and pln 
 
The word OM ‹cow›, MM, LM ‹cau›, SM cao is used as full verb, with or 
without an unmarked object indicating the goal of the movement, or as 
postverbal directional. In combination with other verbs of motion and 
directionals, the word order is fixed (optional elements are in parentheses): 
 
(S) Vmotion cao (ʔa/klŋ) (c p) (GOAL) 
 
e.g. 
 
(6.122)  krìp cao    kl ŋ  kwan  p əŋaʔ. 
SM    run  RETURN COME  village Panga 
      ‘He came running back to Panga.’ (KD) 
 
 Since MM the causative ‹phyau› ‘bring back, take back’ is attested. Its form 
suggests that it goes back to an (unatte sted) OM form *‹pcow› (cf. ‹cuip› - 
‹bacuip› vs. ‹cuih› - ‹phyuih› above). 
 Apart from its use as directional, wh ich may in some contexts be extended 
to abstract senses, cao has not developed grammatical functions.  
 
 The verb ‹kale ï› is attested since MM and occurs chiefly in combination 
with ‹cau› as ‹kaleï cau› ‘return’. In the modern language, ‹kaleï›, kəliəŋ is 
mainly used in preverbal position to e xpress the notion of ‘go back to V-ing’ 
or a backward motion, both concrete and abstract, e.g. kəliəŋ h m ‘answer, 
reply’, kəliəŋ k  ‘give back’. When used as full verb it does not license an 
unmarked goal object, unlike cao. If kəliəŋ occurs with a direct object, this is 
 
 
189 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
interpreted as THEME, not as goal, as in kəliəŋ hloə ‘return the money’. One 
may therefore say that kəliəŋ has inherent causative meaning (‘bring back, 
give back’), though this is not the case where it occu rs as intransitive verb. 
The auxiliary function of preverbal kəliəŋ is illustrated in the following 
sentences. 
 
(6.123)  kaleï   r u i h ceh   ’ ā. 
LM    RETURN count DOWN GO 
      ‘Counting backwards.’ (DC:1) 
 
(6.124)  ʔuə h m ʔuə kəliəŋ  m ŋ phə   h əmə   p l n  noŋ . 
SM    1s  speak 1s  RETURN stay  school Burmese  again ASRT 
      ‘I said I am going back to study at the Burmese school.’ (KN) 
 
 The word ‹plan, plon› is used as verb as well as adverb in MM. It is not 
attested in OM and its origin is un clear. There is a connection with Old 
Burmese ‹plan›, modern pyan ‘return, turn, do again’. According to Shorto 
(DMI:252) this might be a Mon causative formation of the Burmese root lan 
‘be turned up’, of which there is also a regular Burmese causative, viz. hlan 
‘change position, turn in side out’. Mon has a secondary causative ‹palan› 
‘restore, give back’. 
 In MM, ‹plan› is used as full verb, often followed by a directional, as in 
‹plan ’ā› ‘go back’. In postverbal position, ‹plan› is translated as ‘again, in 
turn, re-V’, as in the expressions ‹dak  plan› ‘rebuild’, ‹huim plan› ‘reply’, 
‹jnah plan› ‘defeat in turn’ (DMI:252). 
 In SM, pln is used almost exclusively as adverb with the meaning ‘again, 
in turn’. Shorto  (1962:142) lists pln also as verb ‘repeat, do again, turn 
around’, but gives no example sentences. All LM and SM instances of pln in 
my data are adverbial and best translated as ‘again’. 
 
(6.125)  khyū thb ah kuiw plan roï. 
LM    write show GIVE again ASRT 
      ‘I am going to write it down again (for everyone to read).’ (DC:4) 
 
(6.126)  kə liəŋ ʔa  pln, ʔa toə   p     h əyèh. 
SM    return  GO  again go FINISH watch  sing 
      ‘We went back again, we went there and we watched them sing.’  
      ( K N )  
       
 In colloquial SM, pln is also used with nominal elements, as in the 
frequent phrase ʔuə pln ‘Me again!’, used to show dissatisfaction with being 
called or talked about again.  
 
 
 
190 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Heine and Kuteva (2002:259f; 325) lis t the grammaticalization of ‘return’ 
into an iterative marker. This also ho lds for the MM verb ‹plan›, which is 
used in modern Mon only in adverbial function, not as verb. Of the other 
lexemes denoting ‘return’, one, OM ‹cow› has retained its value as full verb 
and has hardly undergone any grammaticalization apart from its function as 
directional, while the other, MM ‹kale ï› has retained its full verb value and 
acquired some grammatical functions as well.  
 
We thus have the following developments of verbs meaning ‘return’ in Mon: 
 
O M          M M                          S M  
‹cow› ‘return’  →  ‹cau› ‘return; DIR (BACKWARD)’ → cao ‘return to; DIR’ 
           ‹ k a l e ï› ‘return; in turn, back’    → kəliəŋ ‘return; in turn, back’ 
           ‹ p l a n ›  ‘ r e t u r n ;  a g a i n ’          → pln ‘again (ITER), REPET’ 
 
cao:   DO = GOAL  
kəliəŋ:  DO = THEME 
 
C. Disposers 
 
6.3.7 ‹law› l ‘KEEP’ 
Historical Development 
 
According to DMI, OM ‹l ār› is a verb meaning ‘d eposit, place’, which is 
mainly used as a postverbal auxiliary “marking perfective aspect” (DMI:333). 
Examples given in DMI include the following sentences. 
 
(6.127)  myil ’abhipr āy    ’ o r       (s ūl) lār  girlu ï     g u õa jirku. 
OM    order  roya l.order command write KEEP NML:many virtue body 
      ‘He gave orders that the sum of his virtues should be inscribed.” 
 
(6.128)  man kyāk buddha  tarley  byādes   l ār. 
OM    REL holy  Buddha lord:1s prophesy KEEP 
      ‘Which the Lord Buddha foretold.’ 
 
 In OM, ‹l ār› is frequently used in the combination ‹re ï l ār› ‘bring (and 
leave), make ready for (lat er) use’. The use of OM ‹l ār› suggests a 
relinquitive or preparative function, rather than plain perfective aspect. 
 
 In MM, ‹lar, law, lor, low, låw› has full verbal meaning as ‘deposit, place’. 
The phonological development from OM ‹l ār› to MM ‹lar, etc.› is irregular. 
We would expect a MM form *‹l ā›. There is already in OM a (weak?) form 
 
 
191 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
‹lar›, which may be the source of the MM forms. 118  The prospective 
(“hypothetical”) form ‹slar,  slor›, which is not f ound in the OM data, is 
attested in MM inscriptions. 
 
 The use as full verb in MM is illust rated in the following example from the 
Shwedagon Inscription. If ‹lar› was used as an auxiliary, the preceding verb 
in this sentence should be ‹õā› ‘bring’ instead of ‹’ā› ‘go’. 
 
(6.129)  dhā t  swok smi ï n āk  jayasena  ma ’ā   lar    p óay  
MM    relic  hair  king  N āga Jayasena  REL go  deposit  LOC 
      b h ūmindharanā(gabhow) 
      earth:hold.up:N āga:world 
      ‘the hair relics which the N āga King Jayasena had gone to deposit 
      in the world of the N āgas who hold up the earth’ (SDGb5) 
 
 The regular reflex of the MM forms in modern Mon is LM ‹law›, SM l  
with the meaning ‘deposit, keep, leave at a place’. In the modern language 
the use as full verbs is  rather restricted, l  being chiefly used as postverbal 
operator. The development from OM to MM and SM seems atypical, with the 
OM lexeme being chiefly a grammatical element turning into a full verb in 
MM and then back into a grammatical operator again in SM. The apparent 
circularity of the development may be spurious and the seeming lack of use 
as main verb in OM is probably due to the limited data available for this stage 
of Mon. 
 
Modern Mon 
 
The use of l  ‘deposit, leave, keep’ as V2 in SM and LM seems to be 
inflational, the original function as relinquitive or prep arative operator not 
always being present. According to Shorto (1962:183) l is used to mark “the 
perfective aspect”. Bauer (1982:396) states that l denotes the “perfective 
aspect”, which “marks the conclusion of an act, and doe s not occur with 
stative verbs”. The operator l  does indeed not occur with verbs expressing 
qualities. It does occur w ith a wide range of verb s, including activities and 
ISTA with prominent initial point, and in a wide range of situations. In no 
instance does l describe an ongoing situation itself, but rather the ongoing 
result of an event or act. In comb ination with temporal prepositions like laʔ 
‘when’, ʔəkhò ‘when, while’, V+l is to be translated as ‘when he had V-ed’, 
not ‘when he was V-ing’. There are contexts, though, that are incompatible 
with the use of l. This is due to the additiona l connotation of the operator, 
                                                      
118 If this is the case it remains to be explained why the weak form survived in MM in all 
functions, including the one as full verb, which seems to be extended in MM and later stages 
of the language. One would expect a phonetically full form in this function. 
 
 
192 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
expressing ongoing interest in the event by either the subject of the sentence 
or by the speaker. 
 The relinquitive expresses the ongoing re sult or influence of an act. Such 
expressions may be paraphrased as ‘do and leave in a state’, as in (6.130) and 
(6.131). 
 
(6.130)  hə tŋ   t h p   ʔəhm h pk  l    ʔt m ŋ  ra ʔ. 
SM    window storey below 3   open KEEP all  STAY FOC 
      ‘They had opened (and left open) all the windows of the 
      l o w e r  s t o r e y s . ’  ( K D )  
 
(6.131)  ʔəca   ʔŋ  thon  t ʔ  pk  l    t p        y a ʔ. 
SM    teacher Aung Htun PL  open KEEP military.unit NSIT 
      ‘Aung Htun and his people had already set up their unit.’ (KD) 
 
By the time the speaker is talking about, Aung Htun had set up an armed 
group and kept it in this state, i.e. the group was still fighting or ready to fight. 
This meaning is close to the preparative, expressed in (6.132). The 
preparative denotes an act that is done now fo r later use, to prepare 
something or someone for a later (possible) event. The subject of (6.132) are 
children who know that they are to be abandoned in the forest by their father 
and before leaving home take along turm eric powder with which they mark 
the way back. This is the Mon versi on of the popular ‘Hansel and Gretel’ 
theme. 
 
(6.132)  k e t  n a      l    mìt. 
S M     t a k e  CAUS:GO KEEP turmeric 
      ‘They took along turmeric.’ (KKP) 
 
 In (6.133) l not only functions to express an ongoing result of the act (of 
remembering), it also distinguishe s the volitional/controlled use of hətm 
‘remember’ from its involitional/uncontrolled use. The latter is commonly 
marked by the postverbal operator t
h ‘HIT’ (s. 6.3.14). The context of 
(6.133a) would suggest an uncontrolled read ing, but this is  excluded by the 
use of l.  
 
(6.133a) kyac  hətm   l    r a ʔ noŋ . 
S M     m o n k   r e m e m b e r  KEEP FOC ASRT 
      ‘The monk can still remember me, I’m sure.’  
      (lit. ‘still keeps me in mind’) (KD) 
 
 
 
193 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The opposite of hətm is wt ‘forget’, which does not co-occur with l. The 
act of forgetting is conceptualized in Mon as leading to a ‘non-state’, so there 
can be no ongoing result or future use to be denoted by l.  
 
(6.133b) * kyac  wt   l    r a ʔ noŋ . 
S M      m o n k   f o r g e t   KEEP FOC ASRT  
 
This is not a case of interference of the original semantics ‘keep’ with the 
grammaticalized functions, as shown by combinations like th ʔ l  ‘discard, 
throw away’ which are common in SM. The point seems to be that there must 
be a describable state of the object afte r the activity/event expressed by the 
main verb. If the object disappears comple tely, as is the case with ‘forget’, l 
may not be used. There is a compon ent of reversibility involved in l, i.e. the 
state described is conceived as potentially prone to later change back to the 
original state or to some other stat e. This explains the impossibility of 
combinations like *khy
t l ‘die KEEP’. This connotation is not present in all 
occurrences of l, though, as shown in the sentences below. Instead of 
‘reversibility’ we may speak of ‘ongoing interest in the act/event’. 
 The result of the act may persist merely in an abstract sense, as in the next 
sentence. The speaker is a N āga snake whose life was saved by a young man. 
Now the Nāga takes the young man to meet its mother and tells her about the 
incident. The result of helping the N āga is that the N āga now owes gratitude 
to the man (besides the fact that the snak e is still alive, which is not the topic 
of this sentence). 
 
(6.134)  ʔ      r a ʔ m ənìh phàŋ l   ʔuə. 
SM    NML:this119 FOC man   help  KEEP 1s 
      ‘This is the man who saved me.’ (KKP) 
 
 While in (6.134) there is still some visible result of the act, this is not the 
case in (6.135). Here the act lives on merely in the memory of the subject. 
This use brings l
 close to the experiential, with which it co-occurs here. 
 
(6.135)  ʔuə ki əŋ   ʔa l   ŋkk. 
S M     1 s   EXPER go KEEP Bangkok 
      ‘I have been to Bangkok.’ (NOP) 
 
 Having been extended in us e to experiential contexts, l can also be used in 
purely past contexts, as in (6.136) wh ere the speaker, Nai Cae’ talks about 
working on the Thailand-Burma Railway under the Japanese. The railway has 
long disappeared, at least the part Nai Cae’ was working on. There is 
therefore no remaining result of his act, besides his memory. 
                                                      
119 ʔ ‘this’ is an infixed form of LM ‹i-õa’›, SM ʔiʔnʔ. See Jenny (2003:187f). 
 
 
194 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
(6.136)  ʔuə klon l    lèy. 
SM    1s  do   KEEP EMPH 
      ‘I did work there.’ (KD) 
  
 Another example of l apparently expressing past tense is given in the next 
sentence, here co-occurring with the negation marker. 
 
(6.137)  h hùʔ klŋ l . 
S M     3    NEG come KEEP 
      ‘He didn’t come.’ (KD) 
 
 These examples seem to suggest a development of l from relinquitive 
(and/or preparative) to a general past  tense marker in SM. Indeed most 
instances of l in the data are in past contexts, but this is due to the nature of 
the data - people generally talk more a bout the past than about the future - 
rather than the actual function of l. The use of l  is not restricted to past 
contexts, as shown by expressions like (6.138), which is temporally neutral. 
 
(6.138)  ʔu kʔ mŋ  ʔuə saŋ  l    h əʔ mù ə  m ʔ. 
S M     1 s  GET stay  1s  build KEEP house one  CL 
      ‘I am building/have built a house to live in.’ (KKP) 
 
 Sentence (6.132) above could, in anot her context, be understood as a 
command ‘Take along some turmeric powder!’, i.e. with future reference. 
 
Summary 
 
The verb ‹lār› ‘deposit, place’ was used as a perfective aspectual auxiliary at 
least since OM times. Its use as perfec tive (relinquitive, preparative) aspect 
marker was extended, probably already in  MM, where ‹lar, etc.› is used as 
full verb and auxiliary. In modern M on the use was further extended and the 
semantics accordingly bleached. In SM l  may be used in purely past 
contexts, leading some speakers to use it as a standard translation for English 
past tense. The use of l is not restricted to pa st contexts, though, and also 
occurs in future contexts. The developm ent may have been influenced by the 
corresponding lexeme in Burmese htà ‘keep, deposit, leav e at a place’ with 
similar grammaticalized functions (s. Okell 1969:308f; Okell and Allott 
2001:99f). 
 An important part of the semantics of l is that of ‘ongoing interest in the 
act/event’, which excludes verbs denotin g a definitive or irreversible event 
like khyt ‘die’ and wt ‘forget’ from occurring with l. A situation that is 
 
 
195 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
not reversible or an event that leads to a non-state is not the object (or 
worthy) of further interest. 
 
6.3.8 ‹tho’› thʔ  ‘THROW (AWAY), DISCARD’ 
 
The other “aspectual verb” described as “perfective marker” by Bauer is thʔ, 
which overlaps in use with l. According to Bauer (1982:396) “[a]s yet, no 
distributional/precise account can be offered as to wh ether certain classes of 
autonomous verbs occur only with one particular aspectual verb.” Bauer goes 
on stating that some verbs may be used with both l and th ʔ, while others 
occur only with one. Accord ing to Shorto (1962:120), thʔ simply marks the 
“perfective aspect”.  
 As is the case with l described above, thʔ is a marker of manner or 
“subjective point of view of the speak er or subject” rather than of 
aspect/aktionsart. Whereas l denotes ongoing interest in an event, the use of 
thʔ indicates that either the subject or the speaker have no further interest in 
the event or its consequences. This lack of interest may be interpreted as 
undeliberate or impulsive act in some contexts (‘do something without 
considering the result or consequences’). Indicating no furthe r interest in the 
event, thʔ, unlike l, occurs frequently with irreversible situations. 
 
 The verb thʔ is not attested in OM, where its place as full verb and 
auxiliary is taken by ‹ du’il, du’ol, du’ul› ‘cast off, abandon’. MM ‹tho’› 
‘throw away, abandon’ does not seem to occur as auxiliary, the function of 
which is covered by ‹kle’› ‘leave, forsake, deposit’ (in LM and SM also ‘be 
lost, out of sight, disappear’). Acco rding to Shorto, ‹kle’› is used 
“[e]xtensively as final element in v. c pds. with sense of removal, rejection” 
(1971:63) 
 
 In LM, ‹tho’› and ‹kle’› both occur as postverbal perfective operator, with 
the former becoming increasingly popular. In SM, kl ʔ is hardly used as 
operator and occurs chiefly as full verb meaning ‘be lost, disappear’, while 
thʔ is used both as full verb meani ng ‘throw (away), discard, abandon’ and 
as postverbal operator indicating ‘no furt her interest’ or impulsiveness. This 
is shown in the following sentences. 
 
(6.139)  kut th ʔ  h ətn, cŋ  th ʔ  h ətn  ya ʔ. 
S M     c u t  THROW bridge burn THROW bridge NSIT 
      ‘They just cut off the bridge, they burned the bridge (and 
      that’s the end of it).’ (KD) 
 
 
 
196 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.140)  menìh khyt th ʔ   t   m a    h əlàŋ     klon   an  k h  
S M     m a n    d i e    THROW  about extent NML:many do   way  TOP 
      t o k    k e t    t e h .  
      count TAKE COND 
      ‘Many people died working on that railway, if you count them.’  
      ( K D )  
 
 The notion of ‘do without considering the consequences’ is illustrated in 
(6.141). 
 
(6.141)  ʔ  t ʔ  k h si əŋ  rp  th ʔ   ʔt siəŋ ,  ʔuə mù ʔ  iəʔ mùʔ? 
S M     2 f a m  PL  TOP right? catch THROW  all  right?  1s  what eat  what 
      ‘You guys caught all (the fish) right? What (do you suppose) 
       am I going to eat now?’ (WK)   
 
 Besides denoting the undeliberateness/in considerateness of the subject’s act 
of catching all the fish in the pond, the use of thʔ also indicates that for the 
speaker the situation is irreversible, i.e.  there are no fish left for him to catch. 
The use of l in the same sentence (rp l ʔt) would indicate that the speaker 
has further interest in the fact that th e other men have caught all the fish, i.e. 
he hopes to get some from them. The combination of thʔ with rp ‘catch’ 
also indicates the high degree of gramma ticalization of this marker. This is 
further demonstrated by its co-occurrence with thʔ as full verb as in (6.142), 
as well as the fact that postverbal thʔ is often phonetically reduced to [h ʔ], 
one of the few instances of phonetic reduction of an operator in Mon. 120
 
(6.142)  h hùʔ iəʔ, h thʔ      t h ʔ. 
S M     3    NEG eat   3   throw.away  THROW 
      ‘He didn’t eat (poisoned rice), he threw it away.’ (WK) 
 
 Sentence (6.143) shows that thʔ is primarily a marker of manner or point 
of view, not of aspect. This senten ce seems to suggest an imperfective 
reading. The use of thʔ in this contexts is licensed by the notion of 
‘undeliberateness’ or ‘incosiderateness’. Although the main verb mŋ is 
modified by the temporal expression ma lʔ ‘for a long time’, the situation is 
described as complete and its internal structure is not accessible to further 
description, i.e. it is not possible to add an event that occurred during their 
(the Japanese’) stay at Ko’ Dot village. 
 
                                                      
120 The other operator undergoing phonetic reduction (or rather weakening) in some contexts 
is mŋ (s. 6.3.1). 
 
 
197 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.143)  mŋ thʔ   k ʔ ot k h ma   l ʔ. 
S M     s t a y  THROW  Ko’ Dot TOP extent long.time 
      ‘They stayed at Ko’ Dot for a long time.’ (KD) 
 
 The use of thʔ in imperative contexts denotes an order that does not allow 
or expect any contradicti on or argument. The order is  seen as irreversible. 
The speaker of (6.144) asked his mother for permission to ordain as a novice, 
but she plainly refuses hi s request, as he has not finished school yet. The 
second instance of thʔ occurs in a context that  suggests continuous rather 
than perfective reading. Here agai n the manner connotation overrides the 
aspectual value. 
 
(6.144)  ʔəmèy h hm  m ŋ th ʔ   p h ə  kla,  
SM    mother 3   speak  stay  THROW  school before 
      m ŋ  th ʔ     a  p əʔ hnam  
      s t a y   THROW  two three year 
      ‘My mother said: “You st ay at the (Mon) school for another 
      two or three years!”.’ (KN) 
 
 In (6.145), the speaker requests he r husband to abandon his children, 
because they are too poor to feed them. If he does not obey, she will leave 
him. The operator is reinforced by the addition of the directional/aspectual 
verb 
ʔa. 
 
(6.145)  pèh pliə    t h ʔ  ʔa  kon  pèh. 
SM    2   abandon THROW GO  child 2 
      ‘You get rid of your children (for good)!’ (KKP) 
 
Summary 
 
The verb thʔ has been grammaticalized as postverbal operator, mostly 
indicating a point of view (manner) of ‘no further interest’, impulsiveness, 
undeliberateness, and inconsideratene ss. In some contexts the use of thʔ 
leads to a perfective/completive read ing, but this is probably due to 
contextual factors and implicature rather  than an inherent function of this 
opeartor. 
The development of th ʔ has probably been influenced by the corresponding 
Burmese verb pyi’ ‘throw away, abandon’, which is used as verb modifier 
expressing “to V quickly, thoughtlessl y, toss off V-ing” (Okell 1969:397; 
Okell and Allott 2001:125f), paralleling at least some of the functions of Mon 
thʔ.121
                                                      
121 Other functions of Mon thʔ are covered in Burmese by the verb lai’ (s. Okell 1969:30ff; 
Okell and Allott 2001:214ff) 
 
 
198 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Heine and Kuteva (2002:297f) desc ribe the grammaticalization of THROW 
into a PERFECT marker, which may further develop into a PAST marker. The 
process is attested in languages of Australia and Asia.  
 
6.3.9 ‹ca› iəʔ ‘EAT’ 
 
The verb ‹ca› (OM, MM, LM), iəʔ in SM, is a well established Mon-Khmer 
root with the meaning ‘eat’: OKhm ‹cya› (modern irregular sì), Semang chi, 
(s. DMI:90), Katu caca, ca  (Costello and Khamluan 1993:4, 13). Burmese 
shows a similar root sà ‹c āh›, which in turn has broad Tibeto-Burman 
affiliation: Mru tsa1,4 (Luce 1985:280),  Tibetan ‹bza, za, zas› (Luce 
1985:305), Limbu ca- (Ebert 1994:42). The details of the connection between 
the Mon-Khmer and Tibeto-Burman roots are not clear. 
 The causative ‹baca› ‘let eat, feed’ is at tested since MM. SM iəʔ shows 
irregular phonetic de velopment from MM ‹ca›, the expected form of which 
would be SM ca ʔ . This form is found in SM, but with the meaning ‘begin, 
start’, a recent loan from Burmese sá ‹ca›.  
 In SM iəʔ is a frequent postverbal mark er, covering different functions, 
which are not easily definable. It is grouped here with the disposers because 
there are some similarities with both l and th ʔ, although the exact 
connotation is not clear. Shorto (1962:92) lists cʔ once as full verb meaning 
‘eat, live on, govern, etc.’ and once as verb particle “den oting generic or 
habitual aspect”. Some of the exam ples given by Shorto do not fit his 
definition as generic or habitual, e.g. oa mòŋ hù’ mìp c’ eh122 ‘I am not very 
well’. Halliday (1955:xx) lists ći among the verbal a ffixes, “expressing 
usefulness or enjoyment”. Halliday does not give any examples of the use of 
this “affix”. Native speakers, when asked explicitly about the meaning of iəʔ, 
give different answers. Among the typical  explanations are “the action is not 
really important”, “we use it to add em phasis to the verb”, and “we just say 
this, it does not mean anything special ”. These are quite common utterances 
made by native speakers about abstract words in their language. 
 
Historical development 
 
Already in OM ‹ca› possi bly had aspectual value. Shorto (DMI:90f) gives 
two separate entries, one for the full ve rb ‹ca› ‘eat’, the second for the verb 
particle ‹ca› “denoting constant or habitual character of action or permanence 
of its effect”. 
 Examples of the auxiliary use of ‹ca› in OM are given in the following 
sentences. 
 
                                                      
122 Shorto’s original spelling. The same senten ce in the adapted spelling used in this study 
would be ʔuə mŋ hùʔ mìp iəʔ h. 
 
 
199 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.146)  óuï midhil ma smi ï widehar āja tāw  ca  wo’. 
OM    city Mithil ā REL king  Videhar āja dwell EAT this 
      ‘This is the city of Mithil ā, where King Videharāja lives.’ (Ku156) 
 
(6.147)  sal ī ma s a c      c a  
O M     r i c e  REL bear.fruit EAT 
      ‘rice which fruits constantly’ (Ku48) 
 
Luce (1961:368; 385) translat es (6.146) as ‘Mithila, dwelt in and ‘eaten’ by 
king Vedehar āja’, i.e. he interprets ‹ca› as a full verb with the meaning ‘be 
lord of, receive revenues, hold as fief ’. This meaning is common in LM and 
SM, but according to Shorto (DMI: 90) it is not found prior to MM. 123  
Sentence (6.147) according to Luce is tentatively translated as ‘the rice which 
fruits, they eat’. Luce adds a questi on mark to his translation, showing his 
uncertainty of its correctness. The thir d example given in DMI appears to be 
semantically less ambiguous: 
 
(6.148)  row    ma tak   ca  tnak      birsey pan... 
O M     m a n n e r  REL fasten  EAT NML:fasten iron   four 
      ‘As if it were anchored w ith four stakes of iron...’ (SSKc50) 
 
The same sentence in EB (I/I, p.101) is given as 
 
row [m]a ..... tak (na) [tn]a[k birsey p]an 
 
The word (na), according to a footnote, “looks like ca”. 
 
U Hkyit Thein (1965:I 20) gives the same sentence as 
 
‹row ma . . tak [na] tnak birsey pan 
 
 In OM (as in MM and LM) ‹na› is a preposition marking the instrumental. 
If this is indeed the correct read ing, we are left without  certain instances of 
‹ca› as aspectual marker in OM. 
 
 The situation is different in MM, where there is a row of unambiguous 
occurrences of postverbal ‹ca› showing its grammaticalized function. Among 
the sentences given in DMI are the following two, where the original 
semantics of ‹ca› as ‘eat’ has obviously been lost. 
 
                                                      
123 Cf. the corresponding expressi ons in Burmese and Thai, viz. myòu sà ‘govern; governor’ 
and kin məŋ ‘govern, be master of a city’ respectively, both lit. ‘eat a town/land’.  
 
 
200 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.149)  spa     sor     tuy   s m a y      c a  yay   ñah . 
MM    PROSP:do medicine FINISH PROSP:treat EAT illness person 
      ‘He will practice medicine and treat people’s illnesses.’ (DMI:90) 
 
While ‹ca› in this sentence may be interpreted as ‘do for a living’, a use of the 
verb meaning ‘eat’ also found in Burmese ( lou’ sà ‘do eat’) and Thai (tham 
kin ‘do eat’), this interpretation is not available in (6.150). 
 
(6.150)  ptup     ca  ku  th ān  te’  tuy. 
MM    CAUS:same EAT OBL place that FINISH 
      ‘Making it a replica of the place there.’ (DMI:90) 
 
Modern Mon 
 
The use of postverbal iəʔ  in modern Mon is frequent and seems to be 
increasing in SM. A development from a semantically full verbs into a 
postverbal operator can be seen in the following examples. 
 The original meaning of iəʔ as ‘eat’ is present in some contexts: 
 
(6.151)  khep ca  sat      khep dah  tay. 
LM    cut  eat  areca.nut cut  HIT hand  
      ‘She cut areca nut (to eat)  and inadvertently cut her finger.’  
      (RDR:178) 
 
6.152)  kə ph  k ʔ hloə   p əsn həke ràn iəʔ ao. 
SM    collect get money five  Kyat buy eat  sugarcane 
      ‘He got five Kyat and he bought sugarcane (to eat).’ (KKP) 
 
 In combination with wì  ‘look after, cure, treat, raise, tend’, iəʔ  has 
obviously lost its full verbal semantics,  as it would otherwise occur in the 
causative form pəiəʔ . 
 
(6.153)  t əkh kh wì   iəʔ  ə h əʔ. 
SM    ogre  TOP tend  EAT  LOC house 
      ‘The ogre fostered her in his house.’ (KKP) 
 
Here iəʔ may have habitual reading. This is also the case in the combination 
kok iəʔ ‘call, name’ (lit. ‘call eat’), where the use of iəʔ distinguishes the 
main verb from its use as ‘call, summon’. 
 
 
 
201 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.154)  khu-m ʔ h kok iəʔ  hao ʔ. 
SM    kome    3    c a l l  EAT  uncooked.rice 
      ‘They (the Japanese) called uncooked rice kome.’ 124 (KD) 
 
 No habitual notion is present in the combination lèə iə (sometimes with 
causative V2 lèə pəiəʔ) ‘tell, inform’. In this combination iəʔ has some as 
yet undefined function. No information can be obtained from native speakers 
about the value of iəʔ in the following sentences. Perhaps the notion of 
‘usefulness’ as given by Halliday is relevant here. 
 
(6.155)  ʔuə lèə  iəʔ  k    ʔəkùn  s ərəʔ ra ʔ. 
S M     1 s   t e l l  EAT  GIVE monk  Siri    FOC 
      ‘I told the monk Siri.’ (KN) 
 
(6.156)  khóā k lau bca      h u i t    p a r ū-parā. 
L M     c r o w   t e l l  CAUS:EAT reason matter 
      ‘The crow told (her) what had happened.’ (LPM:10) 
 
 The notion of ‘usefulness’ can also be seen in the following sentences. 
 
(6.157)  ʔətah    lòn teh  k əchŋ iəʔ mŋ  teh... 
SM    new.year pass COND wash   EAT STAY COND 
      ‘As the New Year’s festival was over and I was doing the laundry...’  
      ( K D )  
  
(6.158)  ŋuə klù ʔ  poy ʔa hlay  iəʔ  m ŋ  k   p ŋ-mə. 
SM    sun dark  1pl go change EAT  STAY OBL trousers 
      ‘When it got dark we went to change into trousers.’ (KD) 
 
 Halliday’s ‘enjoyment’ is present in (6.159). 
 
6.159)  t əkh kh klŋ ket iəʔ ʔəmèy h nʔ. 
SM    ogre  TOP come take EAT mother 3   this 
      ‘That ogre came and took his mother (for his wife).’ (WK) 
  
 In other contexts it is questionable if iəʔ is used to express usefulness or 
enjoyment. The following sentence wa s uttered in a non-formal, real-life 
situation. When asked about its correctness later, many speakers denied that it 
can be used. Others accepted the sent ence as correct, and many keep using it 
when not aware of being observed. 
 
                                                      
124 Jap. 米 kome ‘uncooked rice’. 
 
 
202 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.160)  ʔuə lùp  iəʔ  h əʔ  ac  kla. 
S M     1 s   e n t e r  EAT  house  water before 
      ‘I am going to the toilet for a minute.’ (NOP) 
 
 Other contexts suggest neither usef ulness/enjoyment nor habitual/generic 
aspect. This is the case in the combination k iəʔ, where iəʔ indicates a 
lasting result of the act of giving. 
 
(6.161)  kon  wùt    t h k  iəʔ ləkh. 
S M     c h i l d  w o m a n   HIT give EAT thus 
      ‘He thus had to hand over his daughter.’ (KKP) 
 
 The notion of lasting result can also be seen in contexts that clearly exclude 
usefulness and enjoyment, as in the next two sentences. 
 
(6.162)  ʔuə wt   iəʔ  ya ʔ. 
S M     1 s   f o r g e t   EAT  NSIT 
      ‘I have forgotten it.’ (KD) 
 
(6.163)  thàt    kl ʔ     m ŋ  ìʔ  teh  khyt iəʔ  ʔon ìʔ. 
SM    element cross.over STAY little COND die   EAT  few little 
      ‘If the body elements got thr ough a little bit, not so many died.’  
      ( K D )  
 
 
Summary 
 
The postverbal operator iəʔ ‘EAT’ covers a wide range of functions, some of 
which are difficult to define. The common notion of iəʔ seems to be 
immediate or permanent result of the act, in some cases with a connotation of 
usefulness and/or enjoyment. The habitual reading assigned to this operator 
by Shorto is probably an implicature of  either ‘permanent result’ as in kok 
iəʔ ‘call (a/by name)’ or ‘usefulness’ as in klon iəʔ ‘do (for a living)’. 
 The corresponding verb in Burmese has some of the grammaticalized 
functions it has in Mon, but to a much smaller extent. Okell and Allott 
(2001:50) list sà as postverb meaning ‘consume, to V with relish, to savour 
V-ing, V permanently’.  
 
 
 
203 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
D. Benefactives 
 
  6.3.10 ‹ket› ket ‘TAKE’ 
 
The verb ket ‘take’ remained unchanged in form and meaning from OM 
through MM up to LM and SM. Being an active, volitional verb ket is often 
used in a conative sense, leading to a tr anslation as ‘want’ rather than ‘take’. 
Already in OM ‹ket› is used as sec ond element in verb compounds such as 
‹pkom ket› ‘assemble, bring together’, ‹dūï ket› ‘receive’, ‹rap ket› ‘seize, 
capture’ (DMI:51). The meaning ‘take’ is still intact in these combinations. 
 At least since MM, the use of ‹ket› as postverbal operator “implying action 
for one’s own benefit or purpose” (ibid.) is attested. In this function the 
original verbal semantics have been lost, i.e. ‹ket› is fully grammaticalized. 
This grammaticalized use of ‹ket› is illustrated in (6.164) and (6.165), both 
from Dhammacet ī’s inscription at Kaly āõi Thein in Pegu. Shorto’s analysis 
as “action for one’s own benefit or purpose” is valid only for the former 
sentence, the latter expressing not ‘self-benefit’ but rather a ‘self-initiated, 
spontaneous’ event. 
 
(6.164)  ey ler  spa     ket   kam  sara ï tanoh   ra. 
MM    1s TOP PROSP:do TAKE deed act   separate FOC 
      ‘ I  s h a l l  p e r f o r m  m y  c e remonies separately.’ (KLYa51) 
 
(6.165)  ( óe)h dah ket  ’aluir   óe(h) 
M M     3     b e   TAKE volition 3 
      ‘It arises spontaneously.’ (KLYc14) 
 
 In the modern language, ket is a very frequent  postverbal operator, 
indicating that the act is performed either for one’s own benefit (‘egoistic’) or 
of one’s own accord, without external impulse such as permission or 
command from another person. In some instances ket co-occurs with non-
volitional verbs of perception such as mò
 ‘hear’ and àt ‘see’. Its function in 
these contexts is less clear, but there is always the notion of ‘egocentricity’125  
involved in the use of ket. 
 
 The following sentences illustrate the ‘self-benefactive’ function of ket. 
 
 (6.166) h klon ket   an  k h. 
S M     3    d o    TAKE way  TOP 
      ‘They (the Japanese) built that railway for their own purpose.’ (KD) 
 
                                                      
125 ‘subject-centricity’ would be more accurate. 
 
 
204 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.167)  thapuiy pi ñakadhara  gah kok ket  kwah  jaku  kharah  pan. 
LM    novice  Pi ñakadhara  TOP call TAKE pupil body layman  four 
      ‘The novice Pi ñakadhara called four of his lay pupils (to come 
      and assist him).’ (DC:22)  
 
 In the following sentence, ket indicates that the act is done spontaneously. 
 
(6.167)  ʔe y  t a t      h k  h lèy  h mŋ ket   lèy. 
SM    eh  camp 126 3   OBL 3   EMPH 3   stay  TAKE EMPH 
      ‘Well, in their camps, they just stayed there (without further  
      asking for permission).’ (KD)  
 
 The function of ket in the next sentences is very similar. Here it indicates 
that the act is performed by subject himself, without help from another person 
or without letting anyone  else perform the act. The English translation 
equivalent in this function is ‘V x-self’. 
 
(6.168)  klon  m ŋ  h ənày  kh kh   h klon ket . 
S M     d o    STAY place  TOP TOP127 3   do   TAKE 
      ‘When it came to working at that (strategic) place, they  
      (the Japanese) did the work themselves.’ (KD) 
 
(6.169)  m əkʔ  cao   teh  cao   ket . 
SM    DESID   return  COND return  TAKE 
      ‘If you want to go back, you (f ind a way to) go back yourself.’ (KD) 
 
(6.170)  p m  kyac   k h l əkh raʔ h klon ket   noŋ . 
SM    image Buddha TOP thus  FOC 3   do   TAKE ASRT 
      ‘This Buddha image, now, they (the Japanese) made it themselves.’  
      ( K D )  
 
 Where the main verb denotes an non-volitional act, which is by definition 
spontaneous and not directly init iated by the subject, the use of ket merely 
marks a general ‘egocentricity’ of the act. This use is attested since MM, 
where ‹ket› occurs in combination with ‹tim› ‘know’. Postverbal ket may 
have inceptive value in combination with verbs of perception. Whether this is 
actually part of the gram maticalized semantics of ket remains to be 
investigated. The following examples seem to suggest an inceptive function. 
                                                      
126 tat is a loan from Burmese ta’ ‹tap› ‘army, armed forces’. The meaning in Mon was 
shifted from ‘army’ to ‘army camp’. The Burmese word itself is an earlier loan from Mon 
‹dap› ‘stockade, fence; armed forces, army unit’. 
127 The first topic marker has scope only over hənày ‘that (afore mentioned) place’, while the 
second instance of kh covers the whole phrase klon m ŋ hənày kh ‘as for working there’. 
Recursive topics are commonplace in SM and LM. 
 
 
205 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.171)  bodhisat   rå ï  tiÿ  ket   kalok. 
LM    Bodhisatta look  know TAKE ghost 
      ‘The Bodhisatta looked (at him) and knew (realised) that he was 
      a ghost.’ (Jat:22) 
 
(6.172)  mi    ma  b ā  s g o ’       ñ āt ket   muk  kon  bl āy. 
LM    mother father two PROSP:GET see TAKE face  child young.man 
      ‘The parents saw the face of their baby boy.’ (DC:6) 
 
(6.173)  mi  li ÿ cn āy  lew sgo’      miï  ket   tuy  
L M     M i   L i m  C a n a y  TOP PROSP:GET hear  TAKE FINISH 
      m i p    m r a h   c u i t   b w a y  m a  l o n    r a .  
      happy merry  heart ADV  REL exceed FOC 
      ‘Mi Lim Canay heard (the ne ws) and was very happy about it.’   
      ( M K P : 7 )  
      
 As the main verb is in most inst ances preceded by the preverbal operator 
kʔ ‘get’ (which see below), it is not clear if the inceptive meaning is 
conveyed by ket or by kʔ (or by both). 
 
Summary 
 
The verb ket ‘take’ developed from its use in verbal compounds like tŋ ket 
‘receive take’, rp ket  ‘catch take’ and others into a postverbal marker 
indicating an act performed for the s ubject’s own benefit. In a further 
extension of the grammatical function ket came to cover acts (spontaneously) 
performed by the subject of hi s own accord. In this function ket is the only 
common translation equivalent of Englis h ‘V x-self’ in Mon. In combination 
with verbs of perception, ket may have an inceptive aspectual connotation, 
although the main component remains that of ‘egocentricity’. The verb ket 
may be described as operator expressing an ‘egoistic, egocentric act’. 
 The development of ket parallels that of the corresponding Burmese verb yu 
rather than its Thai counterpart ʔaw. The former is used as postverbal marker 
expressing “V and take, V for oneself” (Okell and Allott 2001:176), while the 
latter has acquired prepositional value, introducing an object or an instrument 
in preverbal position (Jagacinski 1992:118ff; cf. also Heine and Kuteva 
2002:288f). Thai ʔaw is also used as second element in verbal compounds, 
but its use is much more restricted than  in Mon and Burmese, with the verbal 
semantics ‘take’ always dominant (Jagacinski op.cit.). 
 
Of the grammaticalization paths of the verb ‘take’ to a morpheme marking 
CAUSATIVE, COMITATIVE, COMPLETIVE, FUTURE, INSTRUMENT, PATIENT, and H-
POSSESSIVE given by Heine and Kuteva ( 2002:325), none is found in Mon. 
 
 
206 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The possible aspectual value of ket, if present at all, is inceptive rather than 
completive, although ket may occur in completive contexts. This does not 
assign completive function to ket  though, but rather indicates that it is 
aspectually neutral. 
 
6.3.11 ‹kuiw› k ‘GIVE’ 
 
The modern Mon verb k ‘give; OBLIQUE marker’ is a merger of two separate 
OM roots, viz. ‹kil, kul, kel, keil› ‘give’ and ‹ku, ku’, ko’› ‘marker of DATIVE, 
OBLIQUE’. SM k, LM ‹kuiw› is the regular reflex of OM ‹kil, etc.›, which 
represent phonetic [køl] (DMI:42). The old oblique preposition is still found 
in (formal) LM as ‹ku›, but has been replaced in SM by k.128  
 
Historical development 
 
Already in OM ‹kil› occurs as pr everbal and postverbal operator with 
different functions. In preverbal position ‹kil› expresses an indirect order or 
has causative/permissive value. In this function it stands in competition with 
‹or› ‘cause, command’, which it completely replaces in SM. The 
causative/permissive function of preverbal ‹kil› in OM is illustrated in the 
following sentences. In (6.174) the origin al sense of ‹kil› ‘give’ is still 
present and the sentence may be translated as ‘he gave him emblic 
myrobalans fruit to eat’, a translation favoured by Luce (1961:374), as 
opposed to Shorto (DMI:42) who translates the same sentence as ‘has him eat 
emblic myrobalans’. 
 
(6.174)  ... kil   ca  sac  tarluy. 
OM    ... give  eat  fruit  wild.plum 
      ‘... let him eat wild plums.’ (Ku102) 
 
 In (6.175) ‹kil› appears fully gra mmaticalized, denoting the (denied) 
permission for the heretics  to enter the house of Up āli, the householder who 
went out to receive the Buddha. Here ‹kil› has purely permissive function. 
 
6.175)  tirta     (t)o’  tlu ï  sak óeh kil   lop   s ïi. 
O M     h e r e t i c129 PL   c o m e  NEG 3   GIVE enter house 
      ‘The heretics come but they  don’t let them enter the house.’ (Ku116) 
 
                                                      
128 The SM form kao ʔ occurs, but its use is restricted to formal contexts. It is not found in 
colloquial SM. 
129 Luce (1961:376) reads the first word as ‹tirta› ‘heretic’. Shorto (DMI:153) corrects this 
into ‹tir ta›, with ‹ta› as plural marker. As all instances of ‹tirta› in the Kubyauk-Gyi 
inscriptions are followed by the plural marker ‹to’›, Luce is probably right in reading ‹tirta›, 
which is derived from (Buddhist hybrid) Sanskrit tīrthya. 
 
 
207 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 While ‹kil› in preverbal position is us ed to express permission, the jussive 
in OM is preferably expressed by ‹or›, 130 as illustrated in the next sentence, 
where both ‹kil› and ‹or› occur. 
 
(6.176)  or   co ï  pnā ï  c óow sak kul  plit . 
OM    order burn candle lamp NEG GIVE be.extinguished 
      ‘ H e  o r d e r s  t h e m  t o  l ight candles and not let them go out.’131  
      ( S h w e i h s a n d a w  A 6 )  
       
 The jussive value of ‹or› is also dominant in (6.177). In SM, ‹or› in both 
(6.176) and (6.177) would be replaced by k. 
 
(6.177)  mah ājan guÿloï    c i    e y  s’or       m a [ ï  s ī]l. 
OM    pepole  ATTR:many  EMPH 1s PROSP:order watch  precepts 
      ‘All the people I will have keep the precepts.’ (SSKg29f) 
 
 In postverbal position, ‹kil› has bene factive function already in OM. The 
object of the benefactive expression is often, but not obligatorily introduced 
by the oblique preposition ‹ku›.  
 
(6.178)  tarley    gawa ÿpati guraï    k e l   smi ï in. 
OM    lord:1s 132 Gavampati CAUS:know GIVE king  Indra 
      ‘The Lord Gavampati informs Indra.’ (SSKa53) 
 
 The meaning of the benefactive seems to have undergone some bleaching 
already in OM, with ‹kil› expressing th e goal of the action in general rather 
than a strictly benefactive notion. 
 
(6.179)  tarley  gava ÿpati  tin     kiïkan kel  ku   smi ï in. 
OM    lord:1s Gavampati move.up instruct GIVE OBL king  Indra 
      ‘The Lord Gavampati ascends (to T āvatiÿsa Heaven) to  
      instruct Indra.’ (SSKh30f) 
 
 The use of ‹kil› in this sense is not obligatory, as is illustrated by sentence 
(6.180), taken from the same inscription. 
 
(6.180)  row    goh  kyāk Buddha tarley  kinkan ku  tarley  gawa ÿpati. 
O M     m a n n e r  TOP holy  Buddha lord:1s instruct OBL lord:1s Gavampati 
      ‘Thus did the Lord Buddha in struct the Lord Gavampati.’ (SSKa50) 
                                                      
130 OM ‹or› is also used as permissive, directly competing with ‹kil› (s.DMI:24f). 
131 Duroiselle (1960:164) translates this sentence as ‘in order to burn tapers that should never 
be allowed to go out.’ 
132 OM ‹tarley› is a combination of ‹tirla› ‘lord’ and ‹ey› ‘I’, lit. ‘my lord’. 
 
 
208 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The object of the benefactive may be  left unexpressed. I this case ‹kil› 
simply indicates that the act is perfor med not for the subject himself, but for 
someone else. In this function, postverba l ‹kil› acts like the direct opposite of 
postverbal ‹ket› ‘take’, expressing an ‘altruistic’ mood. This use is very 
frequent in modern Mon, as will be shown below. 
 
(6.181)  kuÿ   byāpār      k e l   ut  ku  kā l. 
OM    2s   render.service GIVE all  OBL time 
      ‘You shall assist him at all times.’ (SSKa49f) 
 
(6.182)  b as  kil   sacchu. 
OM    pluck GIVE fruit 
      ‘He plucks fruit (for them).’ (An305) 
 
 In MM the use of preverbal ‹kuiw› is extended from permissive contexts to 
cover also jussive function, taking the place of OM ‹or›. 
 
(6.183)  smi ï sirim āsoka kuiw [ïah] tah  k l e ’       c a [ ’ a h]  
MM    king  Sirim āsoka GIVE clear clear DEPOSIT133 CAUS:clean 
      j a ïah kle’    dasuiw gruip  tuy 
      c l e a r  DEPOSIT bush  forest  FINISH 
      ‘ K i n g  S i r i māsoka ordered them to clear away the bush and wood.’  
      (SDGb20) 
 
 This extended use of ‹kuiw› in MM makes many expressions ambiguous. 
Only the broader context can decide whether ‹kuiw› in sentence (6.184) has 
permissive or jussive f unction. The religio-c ultural and political context of 
15th century Burma suggests that the king ordered rather than allowed the 
construction of Buddhist religious sites,  favouring a jussive reading in this 
sentence. The same sentence uttered a bout sites of other religions would 
suggest a permissive reading. 
 
(6.184)  dla ÿ   d h āt  ler  kuiw kanaÿ, buddha  patim ā ler  kuiw kanaÿ . 
MM    chamber relic  TOP GIVE build   Buddha image TOP GIVE build 
      ‘Relic chambers he had cons tructed, as well as Buddha images.’ 
(SDGb3) 
       
 Postverbal ‹kuiw› is used in MM like in OM and modern Mon to indicate an 
action for the benefit of another person, i.e. an ‘altruistic’ act. 
 
                                                      
133 For the use of ‹kle’› as aspectual marker in MM, see section 6.3.8. 
 
 
209 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Modern Mon 
 
With the loss of the preverbal jussive marker ‹or› and the oblique preposition 
‹ku› merging with the reflex of ‹kil› in modern Mon, the use of LM ‹kuiw›, 
SM k is even further extended. In LM and SM, k can occur in three 
positions, viz. preverbal, medial, and postverbal. Each position denotes one 
or more grammatical functions of k, which will be discussed below. In 
addition to the function as verbal operator, k is also used as oblique 
preposition, marking a wide rang e of object functions such as DATIVE, 
COMITATIVE, INSTRUMENTAL , etc. The oblique marker can often not be 
distinguished from postverbal k, especially when marking a 
benefactive/dative object. I use the gloss OBL (oblique) where k has clearly 
prepositional value and GIVE when its function is rather verbal, but it should 
be kept in mind that the choice is not always unequivocal and may seem 
rather arbitrary in some instances. 
 
Preverbal k: Causative, jussive, permissive 
 
Preverbal k is used to express a causative, especially with permissive or 
jussive, sometimes optative meani ng, but also where there is no 
morphological causative available (s. ch. 4). In some cases the periphrastic 
causative construction with k has replaced an older morphological form, e.g. 
OM ‹dumoï› ‘install, make stay’ is replaced in SM by k mŋ ‘let stay’. 134
 The following sentences illustrate  the permissive and jussive use 
respectively of preverbal k in modern Mon.  
 
(6.185)  èh   k   ak mŋ  ha, ʔuə chan- u lèy. 
SM    person GIVE ride STAY Q  1 s   p i t y     EMPH 
      ‘They wouldn’t let them ride (the cart). I really pitied them.’ (KD) 
 
(6.186)  ʔuə k    k əph n ŋ       s t   hmah. 
S M     1 s   GIVE collect CAUS:COME  fruit  pure 
      ‘I told you to collect only fruit (nothing else).’ (WK) 
 
 As in MM, only the co ntext decides whether k in SM has permissive or 
jussive value. This is th e case in sentence (6.187), wh ere both interpretations 
are possible. 
 
                                                      
134 SM həmŋ is formally used in the specialised sense ‘house, accommodate’. 
 
 
210 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.187)  m ənìh prè ə    c əkh     h k   c a o   t h ʔ. 
S M     m a n    w o m a n   PL:TOP135 3   GIVE return  THROW 
      ‘As for the women, they let th em go home/told them to go home.’  
      ( K D )  
       
An important function of preverbal (and medial) k is the change of subject it 
indicates, a prominent notion of causative constructions. The use of preverbal 
k always involves a superordinate and a subordinate subject, whether overtly 
expressed or not. The first occurs before the operator k, the latter after it. In 
sentence (6.187) above, the subordinate subject ( mənìh prè ə) appears in 
sentence initial topic position and is marked as such by kh. 
 
 In some combinations the change of subject is the sole function of k. This 
is especially obvious with the desiderative marker məkʔ, which is a 
contraction of ‹mik gwa’› ‘want get’. Compare the following sentences with 
and without preverbal k. 
 
(6.188a) ʔuə məkʔ  ʔa w  b ŋkk. 
S M     1 s   DES    go play  Bangkok 
      ‘I would like to go to Bangkok (for fun).’ 
 
(1.188b) ʔuə məkʔ  k    ʔa w  ŋkk. 
S M     1 s   DES    GIVE go play  Bangkok 
      ‘I would like you/him/her to go to Bangkok.’ 
 
 In constructions of the type V 1 k V2, k has purposive or jussive function. 
V1 denotes the act leading to  the event expressed by V 2, with k functioning 
as linker, comparable to English to, but also indicating a change of subject 
from V1 to V 2.  In a very common instance of this construction type, V 1 is 
hm ‘speak’, as in the following sentence. 
 
(6.189)  ŋuə mù ə   k h ʔəmèy h hm k    t k-kh  k h r ŋ tè ʔ. 
SM    day one 136 TOP mother 3   speak GIVE Tokkhae  TOP look brother 
      ‘One day his mother told Tokkhae to look after his younger  
      brother.’ 137 (WK) 
       
                                                      
135 The form cəkh is a contraction of ʔiʔtʔ kh ‘NML:PL TOP’ (s. Jenny 2003:189f). 
136 The expression ŋuə mùə ‘one day’ shows Thai influence, where the unstressed numeral 
nŋ1 ‘one’ follows the noun, functioning like an indefinite article. In Mon, numerals always 
precede nouns expressing quantities, to which expressions of time belong. We would 
therefore expect mùə ŋuə for ‘one day’, which is the form commonly heard in Burmese Mon. 
137 tèʔ means younger sibling. Kinship terms in Mon are gender neutral from EGO downwards 
(I, younger sibling, child, grandchild, niece/nephew) but show gender distinctions from 
‘older brother’ (ʔək/ʔəwao) and ‘older sister’ (ʔəmaʔ/ə) upwards. 
 
 
211 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 In other instances, the V 1 has more specific meaning, as in (6.190). 
 
(6.190)  t h m ŋ càŋ h, ʔey   m ŋ càŋ h th c   k   h sŋ. 
SM    HIT stay foot 3   INTERJ stay foot 3   HIT pour GIVE 3   drink 
      ‘They (the Mon girls) had to sit by their (the Japanese’s) feet, 
      they had to sit by their feet and pour (wine) for them to drink.’ (KD) 
 
 V 1 may also be a combination of the existential verb nùm with a noun 
phrase, as in (6.191). Here the jussive va lue of the first instance of ‹kuiw› is 
made clear by the semantics of the preceding noun ‹’asa ÿ› ‘ (royal) order, 
edict’. The second instance of ‹kuiw› has a more neutral causative notion. 
 
(6.191)  nwaÿ ’asaÿ kuiw  niman kña  na ï       k h m ī 
L M     e x i s t   e d i c t   GIVE invite  invite CAUS:COME  monk 
      p i ñakadhara  p óay nan   kuiw klu ï  twa ĥ  dhaw   ra. 
      P i ñakadhara  LOC  palace GIVE come preach doctrine FOC 
      ‘The king issued the order that the monk Pi ñakadhara be invited 
      to come to the palace in order to preach the Doctrine (Dhamma).’  
      ( D C : 1 6 )  
  
 In (6.192) ‹kuiw› has purposive function (‘so/in order that it is adequate’). 
In English, the expression introduced by k  may be translated as an adverb 
(‘well, thoroughly, adequately’). 
 
(6.192)  tla  ti    n āy   brau    khyap bcā     g a t a   k r a u    
LM    lord earth master woman  think  consider front behind  
      k u i w  d a h -rah. 
      GIVE adequate 
      ‘The queen considered  everything adequately.’ (DC:31) 
        
 There are instances of medial k that obviously do not involve a change of 
subject. This is the case especially in purposive constructions with the subject 
being actor of V 1 and undergoer of V 2. Many speakers of Burmese Mon 
prefer thʔ / thə (from LM ‹duiw› ‘until, up to’) over k in these expressions. 
The use of k here may be influenced by the parallel Thai construction V 1 
hay2 V2 ‘V1 so that/in order to V 2’. More detailed investigation into the 
regional distribution of the preferences might shed some light on this issue. In 
colloquial SM, both (6.193a) and (6.193b) are acceptable.138
 
                                                      
138 The grammaticality of these sentences was checked with speakers of WK Mon, who are 
bilingual with Thai or trilingual with Thai and Burmese. Not all spea kers accepted (6.191a), 
though. 
 
 
212 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.193a)  iəʔ k   p h ə. 
S M      e a t   GIVE satisfied 
 
(6.193b)  iəʔ thʔ ph ə. 
SM     eat  until satisfied 
       ‘Eat your fill!’ 
 
Postverbal k: Benefactive 
 
In postverbal position, k expresses an altruistic act, like in OM and MM. In 
this function k is very frequent in SM, with the benefactee of the action 
overtly expressed or understood. Postverbal k is directly attached to the 
main verb, with the noun phrase following it  acting either as direct object of 
the main verb, as in (6.194) and (6.195)  or as benefactee of the whole verbal 
expression, as in (6.196) and (6.197). 
 
(6.194)  h  k    k r k  th   mù ə ʔətn. 
SM    pluck GIVE mango gold  one time 
      ‘Get (me) a golden mango!’ (WK) 139
 
(6.195)  ʔuə k ʔ c a t     k    m ù ə. 
S M     1 s   GET contact  GIVE one 
      ‘I could contact one (a  girlfriend) (for you).’ (KN) 
 
(6.196)  ʔuə m əkʔ tm  teh  hm k    ʔuə k ʔ ha? 
S M     1 s   DES   know COND speak GIVE 1s  GET Q 
      ‘If I want to know it,  can you tell me about it?’ (KKP) 
 
 The first instance of ‹kuiw› in (6.197) is as preposition, here marking a 
direct object rather than an oblique. The second instance indicates that the act 
of answering and showing is done for the benefit of the novices who come to 
ask. Another conceivable interpretation is  with ‹kuiw› as optative marker on 
‹mān›, i.e. ‘let me be able to answer ...’. 
 
 (6.197) jm āp-jmāp s āmaõī ma smā n kuiw ’ay gah sah   thbah  
LM    every- RDP  novice REL ask  OBL  1s  TOP answer show   
      k u i w  mān  ñi. 
      GIVE able  little 
      ‘May I be able to answer a nd show everything that the novices ask  
      me about.’ (LPM:15) 
 
                                                      
139 With this sentence compare the OM sentence in (6.182) above. 
 
 
213 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Very often no object (direct or bene factee) is overtly expressed in the 
sentence, leaving k to denote an ‘altruistic’ act in general. 
 
(6.198)  èh   c p  s ŋ  ʔəpac tʔ èh   həklʔ    k . 
SM    person arrive bank side  that person CAUS:cross GIVE 
      ‘He arrived at the bank over ther e, he took (us) across (the river).’   
      ( K N )  
 
(6.199)  hə tʔ    k a    h tʔ noŋ   ka  h hùʔ hətʔ    k . 
SM    CAUS:stop car 3   that ASRT car 3   NEG CAUS:stop GIVE 
      ‘We would (try and) stop thei r cars, but they wouldn’t stop (for us).’ 
      ( K K P )  
     
As illustrated in (6.199), the negation part icle stands before the main verb. 
Postverbal and (in most cases) medial k cannot be indepe ndently negated, 
unlike preverbal k. This shows that k in postverbal and, to a lesser degree, 
medial position has lost its full verbal  character and has developed into a 
(modal/manner) operator, lik e the grammaticalized verbs discussed in the 
preceding sections. 
 
Summary 
 
The verb k ‘give’ has undergone different pa ths of grammaticalization. Its 
main functions are as full verb (‘giv e’), as preverbal causative marker 
(usually permissive or jussive), as  medial purposive marker involving a 
change of subject, and as postverbal ‘a ltruistic’ marker, indicating that the 
action is performed for the benefit or purpose of another person. In this last 
function k is the direct opposite of  the ‘egoistic’ marker ket discussed in the 
previous section. 
 The development of the gram maticalized func tions of Mon k closely 
parallel the development of the same verbs in Thai (hay2 ‘give’ covers almost 
exactly the same functions as Mon k) and Burmese pèi ‘give’. Burmese pèi 
is exceptional as it occurs as pr everbal operator indicating a causative 
(usually permissive) action. 140  Verbal operators in Burmese in almost all 
cases follow the main verb, as is exp ected in a SOV language. This is also 
true for the competing morphemes sei ‘make V, let V’ and hkàin ‘make V, 
order to V’. In postverbal position, Burmese pèi marks an act performed for 
the benefit of another person, as in Mon (s. Okell 1969:382; Okell and Allott 
2001:120f). 
 
                                                      
140 Maybe Mon influence can account for the irregularity in word order in Burmese pèi-V 
constructions. 
 
 
214 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Heine and Kuteva list five grammati calization paths for the verb ‘give’ 
(2002:149-55; 321), all of whic h are present in Mon in some way or another: 
BENEFACTIVE, CAUSATIVE , CONCERN , DATIVE , PURPOSE . The functions of 
concern and dative, to some extent also  benefactive, are covered in OM and 
MM (partly also in LM) by the preposition ‹ku›, which merged in SM with 
the verb ‘give’. 
 
The development of many of the grammati calized functions of ‘give’ in Mon 
is also found in other Southeast As ian languages. See for example Matisoff 
(1991:427ff) and Bisang (1992, 1996) . Iwasaki and Yap (2000:371ff) 
describe the relationship between benefactive and causative constructions in a 
row of languages, often expressed by a verb meaning ‘give’. 
 
E. Indicators of success 
 
  6.3.12 ‹gwa’› kʔ ‘GET’ 
 
The verb meaning ‘get, acquire’ shows striking similarities in its 
grammaticalization paths among different Southeast Asian languages 
belonging to unrelated families. Enfi eld (2003) dedicates a full book-length 
study to the description and analysis of  this lexeme in a sample of over 20 
languages belonging to at least four language families, which exhibit an 
identical or similar development of th e grammatical use of ‘get, acquire’. 
Among the main languages discussed by Enfield are the Mon-Khmer 
languages Vietnamese, Khmer, and Kmhm u Cwang. No mention is made of 
Mon itself, data for which are still not readily available to the Western 
linguist. Like Mon k
 ‘give’, kʔ ‘get’ can occur in preverbal and postverbal 
position, with different (but in some cases overlapping) functions. As main 
verb, Mon k
ʔ is a non-agentive, non-volitional, non-controlled verb 
meaning ‘get, obtain, come to have, come into possession of’. It is also used 
to introduce adverbial expressions denoting a quality (V kʔ kh h ‘(can) V 
well’, lit. ‘V get good’) or a quantity (V kʔ a ŋuə ‘have V-ed for two days’ 
lit. ‘V get two day’). The semantics of the main verb with the meaning ‘get, 
acquire’ in a row of non-related Southeast Asian languages is given in detail 
in Enfield 2003. 
 
Historical development 
 
OM ‹go’› is attested since the 7 th century with the verbal meaning ‘get 
possession of, obtain, receive , possess’ (DMI:80f). The verb ‹go’› denotes a 
non-volitional, non-controlled act, which may or may not be the result of a 
preceding volitional act. In no recorded stage of Mon does ‹go’› or the 
corresponding form occur in imperative or prohibitive contexts. Where ‹go’› 
 
 
215 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
is used in imperative or prohibitiv e contexts, the use of a causative 
(permissive, jussive) marker like OM ‹or›, SM k is required. This is 
illustrated in (6.200) from the Myazedi inscription at Pagán. 
 
(6.200)  ya ï  ñirñ āc  kyek   tray    mettey  lah   or   óeh  go’. 
OM    EMPH NML:see Buddha exalted  Metteya PROH order 3   get 
      ‘Don’t let him get/may he  not get a sight of the exalted  
      Buddha Metteya.’ (Myazedi 32f) 
       
 Already in OM ‹go’› appears to be used as a preverbal operator, according 
to Shorto “implying potentiality” (DMI:81). This is illustrated in the 
following sentence from the Myakan inscription at Pagán. 
 
(6.201)  [d ïah  sarwwa satta gu ÿ]loï   [sgo]’    s u k    s e y     
O M     s o . t h a t  a l l      b e i n g  ATTR:many PROSP:get happy happy  
      subhik. 
      have.abundance  
      ‘So that all beings may en joy happiness, bliss, and plenty.’  
      (Myakan c29-d1) 
 
According to the Epigraphica Birmanica  (Vol.I,I, p.137) and Hkyit Thein 
1965 (part 1, pp.71f) the reading of the beginning of the sentence, including 
the crucial verb ‹sgo’› is not clear. Apart from the uncertainty of the reading 
of the text, it is by no means sure that the words following ‹sgo’› ‘get, obtain’, 
viz. ‹suk›, ‹sey›, and ‹subhik›, are in fact invariably verbs in OM usage. All 
three are loans from Pali, where they are used as nouns or adjectives, rather 
than verbs: ‹suk› from Pali sukha ‘agreeable, pleasant; happiness’, ‹sey› from 
Pali seyya ‘better, excellent; ha ppiness, well-being’, and ‹subhik› from Pali 
subhikkha ‘abundance of food’ (Davids and Stede 2003:716, 723, 504 resp.) 
It is not uncommon to find Pali nouns used as verbs in Mon. The morphology 
of ‹suk› with the causative ‹ps uk› ‘make happy’ and the nominalised form 
‹sirsuk› ‘happiness’ and ‹subhik› with the prospective form ‹sisubhīk› attest 
their verbal use in OM. M on is not always consistent  in the assignment of a 
lexeme to a special word class, though, especially when it is a foreign loan. 
 The other two instances of preverbal ‹go’› expressing ‘potentiality’ given in 
DMI are not much clearer. One involves verb-medial ‹go’› rather than 
preverbal: ‹sak das go’ smoh› ‘no one is able to rival him’ (lit. ‘
NEG be get 
be.like’). The other sentence is fr om the Kubyauk-Kyi inscriptions the 
reading of which is dubious (Luce 1991:401). With no more evidence from 
OM inscriptions, the use of ‹go’› as preverbal auxiliary is not certain for this 
stage of the language. No clear ex ample of postverbal ‹go’› in its 
grammaticalized function as marker expr essing ‘potentiality’, ‘possibility’ or 
‘success’ is found in the OM inscriptions. 
 
 
216 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 In MM, ‹go’› occurs as a full verb before nouns to express the concrete or 
abstract ‘coming into possession of’ something. In this sense ‹go’› can be 
used with personal referents, as in ‹go’ gayoï› ‘get a husband’ as well as with 
abstract nouns, as in ‹go’ ’akhwoï› ‘obtain permission’ or ‹go’ tradah kyāk› 
‘attain Buddha-hood’ (‘get NML:be Buddha’).  
 In MM, ‹go’› appears frequently in preverbal (less commonly in postverbal) 
position with the meaning “to be able, to be enabled to, to get the opportunity 
of, to come to, sometimes to be omitted in translation, esp. in neg. ” (DMI:81). 
The preverbal use is illustrated in the following sentence from the Kaly āõi 
inscription. The function of the negated ‹go’› here is to express the general 
impossibility of the undertaking (of creating the light). 
 
(6.202)  ( óe)h dah ket  ’aluir    óeh,  ma mik  kuir  ñah  
M M     3     b e   TAKE own.will  3    REL want GIVE person 
      mwoy mwoy ha  go’ kanaÿ bdah. 
      o n e    o n e    NEG GET build  CAUS:be 
      ‘It arises spontaneously; no one who wants to can create it.’  
      ( K L Y c 1 4 )  
       
 In the next sentence, preverbal ‹go’ › denotes a successful outcome of the 
action expressed by the main verb. There is a connotation of past involved in 
its use here, though this is not part of the meaning of ‹go’› per se. 
 
(6.203)  dhar    ma ey go’ graï      k e t   (wo’) 
MM    doctrine REL 1s GET comprehend TAKE this 
      ‘this doctrine which I have come to comprehend’ (Ajapāla B4f) 
 
 In other contexts, ‹go’› is left untranslated in English, as stated by Shorto (s. 
above). The exact function and meaning of  ‹go’› in these contexts remains a 
puzzling question, which will be discussed below. One example from MM is 
(6.204). Certainly the candl es could have been gilded had the wish (or 
necessity) to do so arisen.  
 
(6.204)  pnā ï  ma ha  go’ (c)u(t) thar 
MM    candle REL NEG GET put   gold 
      ‘ungilded candles’ (KLYe16) 
 
 Postverbal ‹go’› is found in MM, alt hough its use is not ve ry frequent. The 
following sentence from the Shwedagon inscription illust rates the use of 
‹go’› in both preverbal and postverbal position. Notice that in the first clause, 
preverbal ‹go’› refers to a situation that  already exists (present rather than 
past), while the second clause uses negated ‹go’› in postverbal position. In 
the third clause, preverbal ‹go’›, morphologically marked as prospective, has 
 
 
217 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
future time (purposive) reference. This shows that the difference in tense is 
not an inherent part of the position of the operator. 
 
(6.205)  dhamma-rat   sa ïgha-rat       puiy  [ óik]  go’ liïor  
MM    Dhamma-jewel monks.order-jewel 1pl  slave  GET worship 
      p ūjau     ra,   buddha-ratana mwoy gah puiy óik  mik 
      pay.respect FOC  Buddha-jewel one   TOP 1pl slave DES 
      [liï o]r  p ūjau    ha   go’ (swo’), dhāt  ky āk      t r a y      
      worship pay.respect NEG GET EMPH  relic  holy.being exalted  
      t u [ y    p u i y ]  óik  ma s g o ’       p h y i h     cuit  buddha-rat. 
      FINISH 1pl   slave REL PROSP:GET CAUS:down heart Buddha-jewel. 
      ‘We can now worship and pay respect to the jewel of the Teaching  
      (Dhamma) and the order of the monks (Sangha); we would like also  
      to  worship and pay respec t to the jewel of the Buddha, but we  
      cannot. In order that we may lay down our hearts to the jewel of the  
      Buddha, (please arrange for us) a holy relic.’ (SDGb17f)  
 
 MM shows widespread use of ‹go’› as  grammatical element in addition to 
its use as a full verb. Grammaticalized ‹go’› mostly occurs in preverbal 
position. The situation is changed again in modern Mon, where ‹gwa’› k
ʔ 
‘get’ appears in preverbal position and in two postverbal positions, before or 
after the object, with different functi ons. I will first discuss the postverbal 
uses of k
ʔ, before turning to an attempt to describe and define its preverbal 
functions. 
 
Modern Mon  
Postverbal kʔ:  resultative → modal operator 
 
Postverbal kʔ occurs in two different positions  in SM and LM, viz. directly 
after the verb or after the object of the main verb, i.e. after the VP (or in core-
final position). The former seems to be more original, showing the 
development from a serial cons truction involving a controlled V
1 with an 
agentive subject and a non-controlled V 2 (kʔ) with a non-agentive subject, 
expressing the result of V 1. This can still be seen in expressions like the 
following, where kʔ retains its verbal semantics. Notice that hloə ‘money’ is 
logically the object of both verbs ( kəph and kʔ), while the quantifier pəsn 
həke ‘five Kyat’ is the object only of kʔ, as the exact amount of money was 
not fixed beforehand and is outside th e sphere of control of the subject. 
Sentence (6.206) can be analysed as se rial verb construc tion involving three 
separate clauses with a shared subject and separate objects. 
 
 
218 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.206)  kə ph  hloə   kʔ pəsn  hə ke ràn iəʔ ao. 
SM    collect money get five   Kyat buy eat  sugar-cane 
      ‘He collected (money and got) five Kyat and bought sugar-cane  
      ( t o  e a t ) . ’   ( K K P )  
       
(6.207)  ʔa  r p  kʔ ʔŋkəlòc. 
SM    go  catch get English 
      ‘They (the Japanese) went to catch (and got some) Englishmen.’  
      ( K D )  
       
(6.208)  klày    kʔ klŋ mù ə. 
SM    look.for get boat  one 
      ‘He (looked for and) found a boat.’ (WK) 
 
From expressions like the ones above, postverbal kʔ developed a more 
grammatical function, expressing merely  the successful result of the action 
expressed by V1. The position between V 1 and its object remains unchanged, 
although the NP following kʔ cannot be considered the object of kʔ 
anymore, as is still the case in se ntences (6.206) - ( 6.208) above. A clear 
example of this development is the first instance of kʔ in sentence (6.209), 
where the subject does not come to possess the bananas, but quite the 
opposite is the case. 
 
(6.209)  la ʔ  t ʔ poy sʔ k ʔ pràt  mù ə  no    k ʔ hloə   m ù ə  k t. 
SM    time that 1pl sell GET banana one  bunch get money one  10,000 
      ‘At that time we could sell bananas; we got 10,000 Kyat for one  
      bunch.’ (KD) 
       
 After kʔ had become a fully grammaticalized marker indicating that ‘V is 
carried out successfully’, its func tion was extended to mark potential 
modality. While sentence (6.209) implies th at the bananas were in fact sold, 
the actual carrying out of the verb is not  necessarily present in other contexts. 
In this function k ʔ is moved to the position afte r the object. This movement 
is further evidence for the gr ammaticalization path taken by kʔ. In direct 
postverbal position, kʔ functions either as serial verb expressing the 
successful outcome of V 1, with the object shared by V 1 and kʔ, or it acts as 
resultative marker, i.e. as an aspectual operator of V 1. As aspect markers are 
considered “nuclear” operators, i.e. influencing the verb directly (s. Van 
Valin 1997:40ff), we expect them to o ccur closer to the verb than other 
operators. That this is in fact true  in Mon has been shown with other 
operators fulfilling chiefly aspectual (and directional) functions. With the 
development into a potential marker, kʔ becomes a modal operator, which 
acts on the core level (ibid.). The move  to the position after the object (i.e. 
 
 
219 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
core-final) is therefore in line with Van Valin’s theory of operators and not 
unexpected. Compare the difference in meaning according to the position of 
kʔ in the following sentences. 
 
(6.210a) h rp  k ʔ kaʔ. 
S M     3    c a t c h  g e t  f i s h  
      ‘He caught (and got) some fish.’ (KKP) 
 
(6.210b) h rp  ka ʔ kʔ. 
S M     3    c a t c h  f i s h  GET 
      ‘He can/may catch fish.’ 
 
While the resultative use of kʔ in (6.210a) describes an actual action that 
was carried out successfully, the modal use in (6.210b) merely  indicates that 
he can/may catch fish if he wants to, with no mention made of the actual 
performance and its outcome. This modal use of postverbal kʔ is widespread 
in LM and SM. The grammaticalization is complete, i.e. kʔ can occur after 
practically any verb, irrespective of its semantics. In both postverbal 
positions (i.e. postverbal and post-VP/core-final) k
ʔ can be negated, again 
with very different meanings. 
 
(6.210c) h rp  hù ʔ kʔ kaʔ. 
S M     3    c a t c h  NEG get fish 
      ‘He did not get fish (he got something else while trying to catch  
      f i s h ) . ’  
 
(6.210d) h rp  ka ʔ hùʔ kʔ. 
S M     3    c a t c h  f i s h  NEG GET 
      ‘He cannot/must not catch fish.’  
 
 While the modal operator kʔ  (post-VP) can be negated in all contexts, the 
negation of the (postverbal) resultative kʔ is restricted to contexts where it 
retains its original verbal semantics. This excludes the negation of k ʔ in 
sentence (6.209) above. 
 
Preverbal kʔ 
 
While the development and function of postverbal kʔ appears rather clear, 
the preverbal usage is much more puzzling. Although parallel developments 
of verbs meaning ‘get, obtain, acquire’ in both preverbal and postverbal 
positions are found in most Southeast Asian languages and a fair number of 
linguists and language teachers have at tempted to explain the function of 
 
 
220 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
preverbal ‘get’, no conclusively convincing explanation has been offered so 
far. 
 The definition of preverbal kʔ in SM given by Shorto (1962:78) is the 
following: “To have the chance to, ( occasionally combined with  màn141) to 
be able to, to do at one of a number  of possible moments; to have to; in neg. 
often may [not], must [not].” The meaning ‘have to’, i.e. marking obligation 
or necessity, is rarely found in Mon and may be attributed to Burmese 
influence, where the corresponding verb yá ‘get’ is used as postverbal modal 
expressing general possibility, like post-NP kʔ in Mon, or successful result, 
like postverbal kʔ in Mon, when combined with the ‘realis’ marker te (V yá 
te ‘can/may V’, ‘V successfully’) and obligation when combined with the 
‘irrealis’ marker me (V yá me ‘must V, have to V’) 
 
 Bisang (1996) describes the corres ponding morphemes in Hmong, Thai and 
Khmer ( tau, ay2, and ban resp.) as preverbal TAM markers, denoting a 
combination of PAST and POTENTIAL in Hmong and Thai, and PAST tense in 
Khmer. Thai ay2 ‘get’ as preverbal auxiliary is indeed described as ‘past 
tense’ marker not only by Western lingui sts, but also by indigenous Thai 
grammarians, using Indian and Englis h grammar models to describe Thai. 
The Dictionary of the Royal Thai Institute defines preverbal ay2 in Thai as 
“verbal auxiliary indicating past tense” (Royal Institute 2003:419).  This view 
is not accepted by more progressive Thai scholars, as the following statement 
by Chit Bhumisak, a well-known Thai scholar who was imprisoned and 
finally killed in the 1960s for holding communist views, illustrates. 
 
The auxiliary ay2 [‘get’] is used in the following ways: 1. When used to stress 
the meaning, make the event more prominent,  it is placed before the verb. [...] 3. 
When used sarcastically or insultingly, it is placed before the verb. [...] This use 
of auxiliaries as shown above is not descr ibed in Thai grammar textbooks. [...] 
On the contrary, Thai grammars teach us that ay2 is used to indicate tense , i.e. 
the past. Honestly, I would like to ask whether the authors of those textbooks 
really speak for themselves. Never has ay2 in Thai been used to indicate the 
past tense! (Bhumisak 2004:255f) 
 
 Bauer sticks to the ‘traditional’ view in respect to the Thai usage, which he 
suggests to have influenced SM. He states that  
 
“some [Mon] speakers today use kʔ in exactly the same way as Thai dây [...] 
preceding the main verb together with the negative particle mây to indicate past 
tense [...] Whenever preceding the main verb, hùʔ kʔ may either indicate that 
the speaker or person talked to did not ha ve the chance [...] - and in this sense it 
                                                      
141 màn ‘win’ is another grammaticalized verb expressing ‘ability, possibility’, which will be 
described in the next section. 
 
 
221 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
indicates an action which was not accomplished, but past (like Thai!), as a quasi-
negative-perfective aspect - or that an action to be performed is prohibited.” 
(Bauer 1982:402f) 
 
 Bauer does not discuss the non-negated use of preverbal kʔ at all. 
 
 Native Mon speakers, when asked about the function and meaning of 
preverbal kʔ, offer different, sometimes contradicting explanations. 
Although bilingual speakers of Wangka spontaneously link Mon kʔ with the 
corresponding Thai verb ay2 in most functions, they do not consider it as a 
‘past tense marker’, as some native Thai speakers obviously do. 
 
 Starting the discussion of the function of preverbal daj0 ‘get, acquire’ in Lao, 
Enfield makes clear that he uses a di fferent approach and reaches different 
conclusions.  
 
From the outset I would like to dismiss the view that preverbal daj0 is a ‘tense’ 
marker, as is routinely claimed.  [...] It does, however, have aspectual properties 
related to successful attainment of actions/events [...], and a common ‘past 
tense’ interpretation can arise from this. (Enfield 2003:140) 
 
 Enfield goes on describing the “primary function of preverbal daj0” as 
marking that the main predicate is th e “result of some (unspecified) prior 
event” (p.141). He gives a number of examples to illustrate his definition and 
concludes that 
 
Despite the appearance of an array of me anings in the translations [...], the 
semantic contribution of preverbal daj0 in each of these examples is unitary and 
consistent, and can be stated, precisely, as follows: 
 
  daj0-V 
  V; because of something else that happened before this      (p. 142) 
 
 Enfield reaches the same conclusion for preverbal ‘get, acquire’ in all 
languages discussed in the book (Enfield 2003:290ff). 
 Taking up Enfield’s analysis, one is tempted to compare preverbal kʔ in 
Mon with it’s semantic opposite, k ‘give’. As described above, preverbal k 
has causative function:  
 
NP1 k NP2 V means that ‘NP1 causes NP2 to V’.  
 
Compare this with the use of k as full verb:  
 
 
 
222 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
NP1 k NP2 NP3  m e a n s           ‘ N P 1 gives NP3 to NP2’  
            o r  i n  o t h e r  w o r d s    ‘ N P 1 causes NP2 to have NP3’ 
 
If we exchange the roles of the NPs we get (for the full verb kʔ) 
 
NP2 kʔ NP3, i.e. ‘NP2 gets NP3 (from NP1)’ 
 
and (for the preverbal auxiliary k) 
 
NP2 kʔ V, i.e. ‘NP2 gets to V (because of NP1)’142
 
NP1 may be any nominal referent, not only personal, and it may not be 
present at all in the sentence. The follo wing sentences illustrate this possible 
development in SM. 
 
(6.211a)  h k   ʔuə lòc.   →   ʔuə kʔ lòc. 
SM     3   give  1s  book      1s  get book 
       ‘He gave me a book.’ →   ‘I got a book.’ 
 
(6.211b)  h k   ʔuə ʔa.    →   ʔuə kʔ ʔa. 
S M      3    GIVE 1 s   g o         1 s   GET go 
       ‘He let me go.’     →   ‘I got to go.’ > ‘I could (and did) go.’ 
 
(6.212)   k   h ʔa .        →   h kʔ ʔa. 
S M      GIVE 3    g o            3    GET go 
       ‘ M a y  h e  g o . ’        →   ‘He got to go, he could (and did) go’ 
 
 Preverbal kʔ in Mon may indeed originate in the development described 
above, but modern Mon usage does not suggest that k ʔ +V marks ‘V as 
result or consequence of a (unspecified) prior cause’ in all contexts, as will be 
shown below, unless we take this cause (or causing force) to be so abstract as 
to render the definition per se useless. 143  It has been stated for other 
Southeast Asian languages (e.g. Clark 1974:80f on Vietnamese, quoted and 
commented by Enfield 2003:301) that the verb meaning ‘get’ in preverbal 
position denotes an event that is ‘pleasant’ or ‘good’ for the subject. That this 
is certainly not true for Mon will be seen in the examples below. 
 
                                                      
142 The ablative preposition nù is used to indicate the source (e.g. of ‘get, receive’) as well as 
the cause (in the latter case in combination with the Pali loan hetu > ht ‘reason’: ht nù 
‘because of’) 
143 Of course every event can be seen as conseque nce of some sort of a prior event, but if the 
connection between the two events is too abstract, there is no point in expressing this 
connection grammatically, much less to develop a special morpheme to express it. 
 
 
223 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Another way of looking at preverbal kʔ is by comparing it with its 
postverbal counterpart. As shown above, postverbal k ʔ denotes the 
successful conclusion of the action expressed by the main verb, i.e. it stresses 
the final (right) limit of the event. Ther e is some evidence that suggests that 
preverbal kʔ stresses the initial (left) limit of the event. This is especially 
clear in sentences like the following, where postverbal kʔ indicates a 
successful result of the event, while preverbal kʔ merely indicates that the 
event could (and did) take place, without reference to its outcome. 
 
(6.213a)  h klày   k ʔ kaʔ. 
SM     2   look.for GET fish 
       ‘He found some fish.’ 
 
(6.213b)  h kʔ klày    k a ʔ. 
S M      3    GET look.for fish 
       ‘He could (and did) look for fish.’ 
 
 If this analysis is correct, we have an interesting case of syntactic/aspectual 
iconicity in Mon and other Southeast Asia n languages. This view is held by 
Haiman, who explains the ‘migration’ of the corresponding Khmer auxiliary 
baan from postverbal to preverbal position as iconic: 
 
It should be noted that in these examples, the order of ‘auxiliary’ and ‘main 
verb’ is iconic (the chance to do something occurs before one actually does it) so 
that the migration  
V...baan > baan (...) V 
is accounted for without invoking any independent formal principles.  
(Haiman 1999:155) 
 
 
 In an answer to Haiman’s paper, Enfield questions the proposed 
development from postverbal to preverbal baan (Enfield 2001:117). The 
development of postverbal and preverbal baan in Khmer may have been 
simultaneous, or, in Enfield’s words: 
 
Indeed, it may also have been the case that today’s pre-V baan appeared prior to 
post-V baan, which hypothesis, again, could be verified or falsified by empirical 
data. (ibid.) 
 
This means that there was no ‘migration’ of the postverbal auxiliary into 
preverbal position as postulated by Haiman. In Mon, the linguistic evidence 
strongly suggests that the two auxili aries arose independently from one 
another. While MM appears to have favoured preverbal ‹go’›, LM and SM 
 
 
224 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
make use of both the preverbal a nd postverbal form. Although Haiman’s 
conclusions about Khmer preverbal baan ‘get’ are dismissed by Enfield, 
Haiman offers some interesting thoughts. He gives ‘inchoative’ as one 
possible function of preverbal baan (Haiman 1999:157). This function may 
have developed independently from the full verb, without invoking a 
movement from postverbal position. The iconicity outlined above does not 
rely on such an (unlikely) movement. The inchoative/ingressive meaning is 
present in Mon in some contexts and may eventually be proved to be part of 
the semantics of this auxiliary. 
 There are instances in SM of preverbal kʔ combined with a postverbal 
resultative, as in (6.214). 
 
(6.214)  mù ʔ  t h h kʔ pn  h əct? 
S M     w h a t  b e   3    GET shoot CAUS:die 
      ‘Why did they (have to) shoot them dead?’ (KD) 
 
 Preverbal kʔ here fits Enfield’s definition as ‘result/consequence of prior 
event’, this prior event here being asked about by mùʔ t h ‘why’. The verb 
pn (‘shoot (with the intention to kill)’) can also bee seen as having overtly 
highlighted initial ( kʔ) and final ( həct) limits, i.e. it is marked both as 
‘ingressive’ and ‘egressive’. 
 Let us look at some more examples from SM illustrating the use of 
preverbal kʔ. 
 (6.215a) clearly shows the original semantics of the verb. The sentence 
could easily be rewritten, using k
 ‘give’ instead of kʔ ‘get’. 
 
(6.215a)  h kʔ hm  ʔər è      m ù ʔ-ciʔ   n a i? 
S M      3    GET speak  language how.much  hour 
       ‘How many hours were they allowed they speak?’ (KD) 
 
(6.215b)  èh   k   h hm ʔər è      m ù ʔ-ciʔ   n a i? 
SM     person GIVE 3   speak language how.much  hour 
       ‘How many hours did they allow them to speak?’  
 
This sentence shows the even t expressed by the main verb hm ʔərè ‘speak’ 
as consequence of a preceding event,  i.e. the permission given by the 
organisers of the discussion. This is also the case in the next sentence, with 
negated preverbal k
ʔ. 
 
(6.216)  kyə pan   èh   mù ə  hùʔ  kʔ tm  ah   l    klòc. 
SM    Japanese  person one  NEG  GET know change KEEP waistcloth. 
      ‘He changed into a (Mon) wa istcloth so that no one would know  
      that he was Japanese.’ (KD)  
 
 
225 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
The word order of this sentence shows some Burmese influence with the 
subordinate clause preceding the main clause, i.e. the event leading to ‘kʔ 
V’ follows the kʔ expression. In this senten ce, several functions can be 
attributed to kʔ, viz. ‘inchoative’ (‘get to know, find out’), ‘purposive’ (‘in 
order that, so that’), and ‘consequence of prior event’ (‘because he changed 
into a Mon waistcloth’). This illust rates the difficulty in extracting the 
inherent meaning of kʔ and separating it from contextually induced 
implications. 
 In other sentences, the connection to a pr ior event is very weak, if present at 
all. 
 
(6.217)  set-p      h əlàŋ      h kʔ khyt k h... 
SM    commander  ATTR:many 3   GET die   TOP 
      ‘Many of their commanders died there...’ (KD) 
 
The death of the (English) commanders was a consequence of their fighting 
the Japanese, but this is at best part  of the very gene ral context of the 
sentence. The direct connection is not th e point of discussion here. Similarly, 
the going astray and being stuck is the result of the monks and his pupil 
leaving the temple at some point prior to the event, but this is not part of the 
actual context of the following sentence. 
 
(6.218)  kʔ yòŋ     k h k   m ŋ  ʔəl   r a o ?  
SM    GET go.astray be.stuck STAY where QREL 
      ‘Where did you get stuck?’ (KN) 
 
The preceding two sentences illu strate that the use of kʔ does not imply an 
event that is ‘pleasant’ or ‘good’ for the subject, as has been postulated for 
parallel constructions in other S outheast Asian languages (s. above). 
Obviously, dying or going as tray and being stuck in the bush somewhere is 
neither pleasant nor good for anyone. 
 Sentence (6.219) seems ne utral in terms of modali ty and tense or aspect. 
The connection to a prior event is even less concrete here than in the other 
sentences given above. 
 
(6.219)  mù ʔ  kʔ ch    k   ʔuə? 
S M     w h a t  GET concerned OBL 1s 
      ‘What has that got to do with me?’ (WK) 
 
This sentence was uttered by a Mon sp eaker of Wangka who is perfectly 
bilingual with Thai. It is noteworthy that the corresponding sentence in Thai 
does not contain the preverbal auxiliary ay2 ‘get’. This indicates that the 
grammatical value of the Mon morpheme has become more bleached than its 
 
 
226 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Thai counterpart and that Mon usage in this respect is not influenced by Thai 
(or Burmese) usage. 
 
 A past tense reading can be seen in (6.220) and (6.221), but (6.222), having 
future reference, proves this to be c ontextually induced and not part of the 
meaning of kʔ +V. 
 
(6.220)  kʔ cp   p əŋaʔ   k ʔ ot n ʔ. 
SM    GET arrive  Panga’  Ko’ Dot this 
      ‘They arrived at Panga’ and here at Ko’ Dot.’ (KD) 
 
(6.221)  hùʔ  kʔ paʔ nm pùh. 
SM    NEG GET do  yet NEG 
      ‘I haven’t done it yet.’ (KN) 
 
(6.222)  to ə   t e h   kʔ iəʔ. 
SM    FINISH COND GET eat 
      ‘Then we can eat; we can eat in a minute.’ (WK) 
 
Summary 
 
The main verb kʔ ‘get, obtain, come to possess, acquire’ expresses a non-
agentive, non-controlled event. It can not be used in impe rative contexts or 
with controlled adverbs (‘careful ly’). The non-agentivity of kʔ is also 
supported by its use in the fixed and phonetically eroded combination with 
mòc ‘want’ as məkʔ ‘want to, DESIDERATIVE’, which is discussed further 
below (section 6.3.15). As in other Southeast Asian languages, this lexeme 
underwent different grammaticalizing de velopments, most importantly as 
postverbal resultative marker, which came to denote a general 
possibility/potentiality, and as preverbal marker, the function of which is still 
elusive in most Southeast Asian languages, including Mon. 
 We can postulate two independent paths of grammaticalization for Mon, 
based on diachronic evidence. As second verb in combination with a main 
verb which expresses an intention to obtain , e.g. ‘catch’, ‘take’, ‘look for’, 
etc.,144 kʔ is used to denote the (successful) result of the action: ‘catch and 
get’, ‘take and get, obtain’, ‘look for and get, find’, etc. From this aspectual 
(perfective, resultative) use in direct postverbal pos ition, a modal (potential) 
function developed. Modal operators te nd to occur farther away from the 
main verb than aspect operators, as they  operate on the core level, rather than 
on the nuclear level like aspect markers. Postverbal kʔ as modal operator, as 
                                                      
144 It has to be remembered that agentive verbs in Mon often have a conative connotation, i.e. 
the verb expresses ‘try to V’ rather than ‘actually V’. The result is thus not necessarily part of 
the verbal semantics and may be expressed separately by a V2. 
 
 
227 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
expected, occurs after the object of the main verb. While in its function as 
resultative marker kʔ shares the object with the main verb, this is not the 
case with the modal operator kʔ. An intermediate stage is attested in SM (s. 
sentence (6.209)). 
 The other grammaticali zation path was from fu ll verb to a preverbal 
operator, which denotes a general possibility to do something in earlier stages 
of Mon. In this function kʔ shares the preverbal slot with other auxiliaries 
denoting circumstances leading to V, such as th ‘must’ and məkʔ ‘want to’. 
This suggests that preverbal kʔ originally had modal function. This is 
supported by MM inscriptional evidence. The later development in LM and 
SM of preverbal k
ʔ may have been influenced by different factors, including 
areal linguistic factors and parallelism with related morphemes, especially 
postverbal (egressive) k
ʔ (leading to a possible ingressive reading) and 
preverbal k ‘give’, which is the semantic opposite of kʔ. 
 Only post-VP (core-final) k ʔ can form a one-word answer. Its preverbal 
counterpart must always be followed by a full verb. 
Heine and Kuteva (2002:143ff; 321) list no less than nine grammaticalization 
paths for the verb ‘get’, namely ‘abili ty’, ‘change of st ate’, ‘obligation’, 
‘passive’, ‘past’, permissive’, ‘H-possessive’.’possiblity’ and ‘succeed’. Most 
functions are present in Mon, too, with the exception of ‘H-possessive’. Some 
correspondences may be due to implicat ure rather than in herent, as shown 
above. 
 
6.3.13 ‹lep› lèp ‘ABLE’ and ‹mān› màn ‘WIN’ 
 
Two other verbs have developed into post-VP modal auxi liaries, partly 
competing in this position with kʔ. These are OM ‹lep› ‘be skilled in, know 
how to do’ and MM ‹m ān› ‘be able to V’. The latter is used in MM as 
postverbal auxiliary and occurs only in negated contexts in the inscriptions 
(DMI:292). Another verb which has developed similar meaning as postverbal 
modal is SM th, which will be discussed in the following section. 
 
lèp 
 
In OM, ‹lep› occurs before verbs and nouns (usually  nominalized verbs). In 
MM its position is still before the main verb, denoting an ability or skill to do 
something. 
 In LM and SM, lèp occurs as full verb meaning ‘be skilled in, know’. It can 
take a direct object expressing the skill, as in lèp lòc mòn ‘know how to read 
and write Mon’ (lit. ‘be skilled in Mon writing’) or lèp ʔərè ʔŋkəlòc ‘know 
how to speak English’ (lit. ‘be skilled in the English language’). As a full 
verb, lèp may co-occur with the modal operator k
ʔ, as in the following 
 
 
228 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
sentence, which is the answer to the que stion about the speaker’s skills as a 
Mon theatre actor. 
 
(6.223)  lèp     k ʔ ìʔ-ìʔ   t h   ra ʔ. 
SM    be.skilled GET little-RDP only  FOC 
      ‘I can act only a little bit.’ (KN) 
 
 In its function as modal operator, lèp usually occurs after the VP, in LM 
sometimes also between V a nd object. It expresses a skill or ability, usually 
acquired by learning, besides a more idiomatic meaning as ‘be given to V’. 
 
(6.224)  póay kuiw ñah    m a  bah  lep  lik      m a n   l ïiÿ gah ñah  
LM    LOC  OBL  person REL read  ABLE writing  Mon 1,000 TOP person 
      m w a y  g w a ’  bah  lep  lik    t r e ÿ m ān  gah sjuiï   san  ra. 
      o n e   GET  read  ABLE writing old  WIN  TOP heavy  EMPH FOC 
      ‘In one thousand people who ar e able to read Mon, it is extremely 
      difficult to find one who can read old texts.’ (LPM:17) 
 
 In SM the word order ph lòc lèp  ‘can read’ (lit. ‘read writing able’) with 
post-VP lèp is preferred. 
 
màn 
 
The verb ‹mān› is not attested in OM, but the connection with Khmer mìən 
‘have, possess’ (Lit. Khm. and Old Khm. ‹mān›) proves it to be an inherited 
root. The restriction in MM to negate d contexts only is not found in the 
modern language and probably due to the scarcity of inscriptional data 
available. The same may be said for its  absence as full verb in MM. In LM 
and SM ‹mān›, màn means ‘win; be capable, able’. The semantics of Khmer 
mìən together with the meaning of màn in modern Mon suggests an original 
meaning ‘gain’ or similar. In the closest relative of Mon, Nyah Kur, the same 
verb means ‘be successful in gambling or hunting’ (Diffloth 1984:208). 
 As full verb, the most common meaning of màn is ‘win’. In this function it 
competes with the Burmese loan ʔŋ145 ‘win, be successful, pass (an exam)’ 
and the Mon-Khmer root hənh146 ‘win, be victorious’, the two of which are 
often combined as ʔŋ-hənh. 
 As modal operator màn occurs after the VP and denotes a physical, 
circumstantial or mental capability or ability, as opposed to lèp which 
denotes an acquired or learned ability. Post-VP màn can also express a 
general possibility, competing with post-VP k ʔ. The following sentences 
illustrate the different meanings of the modal màn. 
                                                      
145 Burmese aun ‘succeed, pass an exam’. 
146 LM ‹jnah›, cf. Khmer chnəh ‘win, be victorious’. 
 
 
229 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.225)  hə cit ŋuə n ʔ k h kwac klŋ màn . 
SM    nine  day this TOP walk COME WIN 
      ‘You could (were strong enough to ) walk here for nine days.’ (KKP) 
 
(6.226a) kon pèh ʔuə phyiəʔ   h ù ʔ  màn  pùh. 
SM    son 2   1s  CAUS:eat  NEG  WIN  NEG 
      ‘I am not able (don’t have enough food) to feed your children.’ 
(KKP) 
 
The direct object in (6.2 26a) is moved to sentence in itial topic position. The 
non-topicalized neutral word order of the same expression shows the position 
of màn after the VP 
 
(6.226b) ʔuə phyiəʔ   kon pèh hùʔ   màn pùh. 
      1 s    CAUS:eat  son 2   NEG  WIN  NEG 
        
 In the following sentence, the ability is mental rather than physical as in 
(6.225) or financial as in (6.226a). 
 
(6.227)  èh   k ənh  kl ŋ teh  ʔuə mŋ hùʔ  màn  ŋ    h əmə. 
SM    person other  come COND 1s  stay  NEG WIN  country Burma 
      ‘If others came (to Thailand)  I could not stay there, in Burma.’  
      ( K K P )  
       
 The next sentence expresses a general pos sibility rather than an individual 
ability or capability. 
 
(6.228)  y    r ə   kwan  hùʔ  h əck     h tm  màn  ha? 
SM    COND fellow village NEG CAUS:touch 3   know WIN  Q 
      ‘If the villagers hadn’t given them (the refugees) away,  
      could they (the Japanese so ldiers) possibly have known it?’ (KD) 
 
 
Summary 
 
The postverbal (chiefly post-VP) modal operators kʔ, lèp, and màn  all 
translate into English as ‘can V’, but they denote different aspects of the 
ability. While V+ kʔ denotes a general circumstantial possibility or ability, 
i.e. the absence of any obstacles for the subject to V (including ability, skill, 
permission, time to V, etc), lèp explicitly indicates that the subject has 
learned and acquired a certain skill and is therefore able to V. Postverbal màn 
indicates that the subject is physicall y, financially, mentally or otherwise 
capable of V-ing. Both k
ʔ and especially màn have developed epistemic 
 
 
230 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
modal functions (‘it is possible that...’), while lèp has only deontic value. The 
difference is illustrated in the following sentences. 
 
(6.229a)  ʔuə h əyèh  kw k hùʔ  k ʔ. 
SM     1s  sing   song NEG  GET 
       ‘I cannot sing (e.g. because I don’t have the time).’ 
 
(6.229b)  ʔuə h əyèh  kw k hùʔ  lèp. 
SM     1s  sing   song NEG  ABLE 
       ‘I cannot sing (because I haven’t learned it).’ 
 
(6.229c)  ʔuə h əyèh  kw k hùʔ  màn. 
SM     1s  sing   song NEG  WIN 
       ‘I cannot sing (e.g. because I’m too tired/shy/etc.).’ 
 
 The Mon usage so closely parallels the usage of the Burmese auxiliaries yá, 
taʔ and nain  respectively that mutual infl uence is probable (s. Okell 
1969:456f, 417f, 362f; Okell and Allott 2001:178f; 90; 109). 
 
6.3.14 ‹dah› th ‘HIT’ 
 
The OM verb ‹dah › is used in the sense ‘touch, be contiguous with’. Its 
meanings attested in MM are ‘touch, be or come in contact with, be exposed 
to, be fitting, right, befall, etc.’ as full verb and ‘have to, must’ as auxiliary 
(cf. DMI:200). Mon-Khmer cognates of this lexeme include Khmer təh 
‘slap’ and Stieng dăh ‘hit’. Nyah Kur has tàh and thàh (different dialects) 
with the meaning ‘hit, touch (tr. an d it.), undergo (an undesirable action), 
reach (as postverb), correctly’ (Diffloth 1984:256).  
 In modern Mon, ‹dah ›, th has a number of transla tions, including ‘hit (a 
mark, a target), touch, corre ct, cheap’ as a full verb, ‘have to, must; undergo, 
PASSIVE (ADVERSATIVE)’ as preverbal auxiliary, and ‘correctly, able; 
inadvertently, unintentionally’ as postverbal auxiliary. Unlike its Mon-Khmer 
relatives, Mon t h denotes a non-agentive, non- controlled, non-volitional 
event. This semantic component is so important that th developed into a 
postverbal auxiliary indicating that an action is carried out without intention. 
Some of the functions of t h have close parallels in other Southeast Asian 
languages, usually involving lexemes with the same general meaning as Mon 
th, while other developments are idiosyncratic. A few idiomatic expressions 
involve th, both as full verb and as auxiliary. 
 
 
 
231 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Full verb usage → passive 
 
Used as a full verb, th cannot be used in imperative and prohibitive contexts. 
A sentence like ‘Don’t touch it!’ is expressed in SM as 
 
(6.230)  pa ʔ  k    th! 
SM    PROH GIVE hit 147  
 
which literally means ‘don’t let it touch’ or ‘don’t let it hit’. Other ways of 
expressing English ‘touch’ in agentive contexts involve verbs with similar 
semantics but lacking the non-agentive component of th, such as rp ‘catch, 
touch’ and tk ‘hit, beat’. When used as full verb, th often means ‘undergo, 
suffer, be exposed to’. In this meani ng it is in many cases translatable as 
passive (‘be hit by, be affected by’) and usually indicates that the experience 
is not a pleasant one (‘adversative’). 
 
(6.231)  th l    tak-puə 148 ə s ŋkəpu. 
S M     h i t   KEEP fighting  LOC Singapore 
      ‘They (the Japanese) were att acked in Singapore.’ (lit. ‘suffered an  
      attack, fighting’) (NC) 
 
(6.232)  k        ò   h əyaʔ th ʔuə th p ŋ   khy t. 
SM    o.brother Nyein think HIT 1s  hit  bomb  die 
      ‘ B r o t h e r 149 Nyein thought that I was hit by a bomb and died.’ (NC) 
 
Sentence (6.232) shows th once as postverbal auxiliary and once as full verb. 
The full verb use illustrated in the preceding sentences, with undergoer-
subject, led to the development of t
h into a preverbal adversative passive 
marker. The only change involved in this development from full verb to 
auxiliary is the extension of its combinab ility with verbs or clauses instead of 
nouns. In other words, the direct object of th may be either an NP or a clause. 
 
(6.233)  ŋuə yèh     t ʔ pèh th ( ʔəpa)  t k raʔ . 
SM    day tomorrow that 2   HIT (father)  beat FOC 
      ‘Tomorrow you will be beaten (by father).’ (KKP) 
 
 Especially in LM, the combination of ‹dah › with ‹duï› ‘receive, accept’ is 
common to express passive events. 
                                                      
147 I use the glosses ‘hit’ and ‘HIT’ for th, but it must be kept in mind that th is ‘hit’ only in 
its non-agentive reading. The English translation varies according to the context. 
148 tak-puə is from B tai’-pwè ‘fight, attack’, which in turn is made up of two Mon words. 
The Mon word order is found in the variant puə-hətak ‘id.’ 
149 k from B ă kou ‘older brother’ is a common prefix for personal names and, as in other 
languages of the area, does not necessarily indicate actual relatedness. 
 
 
232 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.234)  ekar āj brau    dah duï    r a p .  
LM    king   woman  HIT RECEIVE catch 
      ‘The queen was caught.’ (DC:12) 
 
See section 3.2 for a fuller discussion of passive expressions in Mon.  
 
Preverbal th: Obligation and neccessity 
 
While the development from a full verb meaning ‘be unpleasantly affected by 
or suffer N’ into an auxiliary meani ng ‘be unpleasantly affected by or suffer 
V/CLAUSE’ is rather clear and straightforw ard, the grammaticalization of the 
verb meaning ‘hit, touch, etc.’ into a preverbal modal marker indicating 
obligation or necessity is less obvious. This development is found not only in 
Mon, but also in Thai, where one of the verbs meaning ‘hit, touch’, viz. tŋ2 
all but lost its full verb function and is used chiefly as preverbal modal 
meaning ‘have to, must’ (deontic as well as epistemic). The other verb with 
similar semantics in Thai, thuuk
1 developed into a preverbal passive marker, 
which is extending its function from adversative to neutral contexts, a result 
of increasing westernization of standard Thai. 
 
 In Mon, preverbal th is ambiguous, indicating e ither voice (passive) or 
modality (obligation, necessity). In another context sentence (6.233) above, 
without a secondary subject, could be interpreted as ‘tomorrow you’ll have to 
beat (them)’. Usually the context is cl ear enough to decide which reading is 
intended, especially as there is no rest riction concerning the semantics of the 
verb following modal t
h, while passive th is always followed by a transitive 
and, for most speakers at least, unpleasa nt event.  In the following sentences, 
it is clearly the modal function that is intended. 
 
(6.235)  mù ʔ  th klon  m ŋ  n m. 
S M     w h a t  HIT do   STAY PERS 
      ‘What else do I have to do.’ (WK) 
 
(6.236)  kla   hù ʔ th ʔp     k h h priəŋ   l    senat. 
S M     b e f o r e  NEG HIT hand.over TOP 3   prepare  KEEP gun 
      ‘Before they had to hand over (their weapons) they got the guns 
      ready.’ (NC) 
 
(6.237)  dah khyū j a n      c h a k     ’ ā  gata  te’  ro ï. 
LM    HIT write compose  CONNECT GO  front that ASRT 
      ‘I have to go on writing a nd composing (the story).’ (DC:2) 
 
 
 
233 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 In most contexts t h expresses deontic ‘must’, i.e. an obligation to do 
something. There are instances of th with obviously epis temic meaning, i.e. 
the probability or certainty that someth ing will happen. This is illustrated in 
the following sentence. 
 
(6.238)  p     ŋ -kya  p     h əyaʔ  th tao   rao hùʔ  tao  k h. 
SM    watch  ship-wind watch  think  HIT burn TOP NEG burn TOP 
      ‘We watched that aeroplane,  we watched it and we thought that it 
      must certainly catch fire, but it didn’t.’ (NC) 
 
 Syntactic tests can unambiguously deci de on the grammatical function of 
preverbal th. While the passive voice marker th can form a complete one-
word expression, for example as an answer to the question ‘will he be 
beaten?’, the preverbal modal th is always followed by a full verb. The most 
common answer to th tk ha ‘Will he be/was he beaten?’ is simply th ‘ Yes, 
he will be/was.’, but the same question in tended as ‘Do I have to beat him?’ 
can only be answered by th tk ‘Yes, you have to’. 
 
Postverbal th: ‘Correctly’ or ‘inadvertently’ 
 
As in preverbal position, th developed into two distinct postverbal operators. 
Firstly, it came to be used as V2 in  verbal resultative compounds (RVC), 
indicating a successful or correct outcome of the action described by the main 
verb. In this function th competes with the semantically related generalized 
‘success verbs’ kʔ, lèp and màn  (which see above, sections 6.3.12, 6.3.13) 
and occurs after the VP. In English, post-VP t h can often be translated as ‘V 
correctly’ or ‘can V’. It is frequently used in the idiomatic expression ket hùʔ 
th (often shortened to hùʔ t h) ‘I don’t know’, lit. ‘take NEG HIT ’. The 
following sentences illustrate post-VP th. 
 
(6.239)  poy cao   h əʔ hùʔ th ra ʔ. 
SM    1pl return  house NEG HIT FOC 
      ‘We didn’t know the way back home.’ (KM) 
 
(6.240)  ʔək    ʔ ŋ  san kla   t ʔ ph (lòc    ky əpan)  
SM    o.brother Aung San before that read (writing Japan)   
      t h m ŋ  h əʔt   nah. 
      HIT STAY ADV:all  EMPH  
      ‘Back then brother Aung San could read it (Japanese) all.’ (NC) 
 
 In immediate postverbal position, th marks a non-volitional act. The 
subject is marked as non-agentive; th e responsibility for the action described 
by the main verb is taken off his shoulders. In this function t h is not 
 
 
234 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
compatible with some inherently non- agentive, non-volitional verbs, such as 
khyt ‘die’. It does occur with other non-agentive verbs, such as ch ‘see, 
find’, though. At this point of research it is not entirely clear what triggers the 
compatibility or incompatibility of postverbal th. The development probably 
started with th as serial verb, which can still be seen in the following 
sentences. The NP following th is the object of both V1 and th (6.241) or of 
th only (6.242), as is common in Mon verb serialization. 
 
(6.241)  khep ca  sat      khep dah   tay. 
LM    cut  eat  areca.nut cut  hit/ HIT hand 
      ‘She was cutting an areca nut and cut (hit) her finger.’ (RDR:178) 
 
(6.242)  ə k   i   èh   t ʔ ʔa  t h t ùn. 
SM    LOC OBL river person that go  hit  bamboo 
      ‘Swimming in the river he  hit a piece of bamboo.’ (KKP) 
 
 The use of postverbal th was extended to contexts where the following NP 
is not the object of th, as in the next sentence. The development is from 
serial verb to an aspectoid operator, expressing manner rather than temporal 
aspect. 
 
(6.243)  h ch th pr p     iəʔ pərà. 
S M     3    f i n d  HIT squirrel eat  marian.plum 
      ‘ H e  s a w  a  s q u irrel eating a plum.’ (KM) 
 
In this context, th seems to indicate that the subject was not actively looking 
for a squirrel, by saw it by chance. An approximate translation in English 
would be ‘he happened to see a squirrel’. 
 Sentence (6.244) is sim ilar, although one might su spect that the people did 
actually intend to come a nd listen to the sermon of the famous novice monk. 
The use of ‹dah› here indicates that they were ‘hit, struck’ by his words. 
 
(6.244)  mnih miï  dah dhaw   kon  thapuiy ta’ gah klah   cuit. 
L M     m a n   h e a r   HIT doctrine child novice  PL TOP clear heart 
      ‘The people who came to  hear the teaching of the young novice 
      became clear in their hearts (i.e. understood everything).’ (DC:9) 
 
 In SM, postverbal th is very frequent after about any agentive verb, 
indicating that the subject did somethi ng without intention or by mistake, as 
in iəʔ th ‘happen to eat (what one was not supposed to eat)’, ʔa th ‘happen 
to go (where one was not supposed to go)’, hm th ‘happen to speak (what 
was to be kept secret)’, etc. This pattern comes in very handy whenever one 
needs an excuse for doing something that one was not supposed to do. It can 
 
 
235 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
also indicate that the outcome of the action, rather than the action itself, was 
not intended. 
 
(6.245)  puiy  tak dah  tay  lon   ’ ā  tuy   khyuit ’ ā  ro ï. 
LM    1pl  beat HIT hand exceed GO  FINISH die   GO  ASRT 
      ‘We may have beaten him too much and he died.’ (MKP:23) 
 
The beating up of a conceived thief in  the temple by the temple boys was 
intended, but not the killing of the thief. 
 In some complex sentences th seems to indicate that  the subordinate event 
is not wanted/intended by the superordin ate subject, as in the following 
sentence. The abbot of the temple tries to cover up the killing of the thief by 
his temple boys and is worried that someone might know about it. It is the 
abbot’s non-intention (to let anyone know about the inci dent) rather than the 
people’s (to find out about it). 
 
(6.246)  gwi ï  phek ñah   gamlui ï   tiÿ  dah. 
L M     w o r r y   f e a r   p e r s o n  ATTR:many know HIT 
      ‘He was worried and afraid that the people might find out.’  
      ( M K P : 2 6 )  
 
 As the direct object often remain s unexpressed in M on, the sequence V + 
th ambiguous. For example hm t h can be translated either as ‘he 
inadvertently said it’ or ‘he speaks right’. As for preverbal th, a simple 
syntactic test can be applied to decide the function. The post-VP modifier can 
form a one-word sentence, while the postverbal aspectoid operator cannot. 
 
Summary 
 
The verb meaning ‘hit, touch, be or come  in contact with’, which in LM and 
SM always takes a non-agentive undergoer-subject, 150  developed four 
different grammatical functions. 
 
1. Preverbal adversative passive voice marker:  
[NP1 th NP2 V] ‘NP1 is V-ed by NP2’ 
 
This development is an extension of the full verb with inherent passive 
meaning. It is also found in other S outheast Asian languages, e.g. Thai 
(thuuk
1 ‘hit, touch > PASSIVE’). The original pattern  
 
S th O            ‘S hits O unintentionally’, ‘S is affected/hit by O’  
                                                      
150  The situation is not clear in earlier stages of the language. The semantics of the 
corresponding verb in Nyah Kur suggest that OM ‹dah› could be used in agentive contexts. 
 
 
236 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
was changed into  
 
S th V/CLAUSE       ‘S is affected by/suffers V/ CLAUSE’. 
 
In this position and function, th can form a one-word answer and can be 
negated. 
 
2. Preverbal modal operator indicating obligation or necessity:  
[NP1 th V] ‘NP1 must V’ 
 
This grammaticalization path is less cl ear than the passive voice marker. It 
found also in Thai ( tŋ2 ‘touch > must, have to’). The semantic idea behind 
this development seems to be that the subject is given no choice, i.e. is non-
agentive. He acts because of some ex ternal force. In the modal function, th 
cannot form a one-word answer, but direct negation is possible. 
 
3. Post-VP marker expressing the ability to perform V correctly:   
[NP1 V NP2 th] ‘NP1 knows how to V NP2’ 
 
This function corresponds to  post-VP use of Thai thuuk1. Parallel 
developments of serial verbs into modals (modifiers) are found in other post-
VP modals k ʔ, lèp, and màn. The postverbal modifier  can form a one-word 
answer and can be directly negated. 
 
4. Postverbal marker of a non-volitional, unintended action, relieving the 
subject of his responsibility:  
[NP1 V th NP2] ‘NP1 Vs NP2 unintentionally/by mistake’ 
 
The semantic component ‘non-agentivity’ of the full verb th gained enough 
prominence to develop into an independent operator. This function does not 
allow th as a one-word answer or take direct negation. The 
grammaticalization path probably lead fr om a serial verb construction with 
th as V2 and a shared object (as in pn th həcem ‘shoot and hit a bird’) to a 
generalised use of th. The same grammaticalization is found in Burmese mí 
‘(manage to) catch > V inadvertentl y, unintentionally, by mistake’ (Okell 
1969:358f; Okell and Allott 2001:153, Myanmar Language Commission 
1993:338). The presence of a Burmese mo rpheme expressing an involuntary, 
unintentional action may have influenced the development of Mon t
h on a 
structural level. It is not clear, though, in which direction the influence 
occurred.  
 
 
 
237 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Other TAM operators 
  
6.3.15 ‹mik, mik-gwa’› mòc, məkʔ ‘want (to) → DESIDERATIVE’ 
Historical Development 
 
In OM ‹mic› ‘desire, want’ could be used as independent full verb and as 
preverbal modal operator. Its use as full verb is illustrated in (6.247). 
 
(6.247)  wo’ kāl  smi ï duÿ poh tluï  bi ï     óuï b ārānasī mic  
OM    this time  king  seven   come surround  city Benares desire 
      k u ÿci-dnal smiï kussar āja. 
      b r i d e      k i n g   K u s s a r āja 
      ‘This is when seven kings come and besiege Benares, desiring 
      K i n g  K u s s a rāja’s bride.’ (DMI:293) 
 
 In the next sentence, ‹mic› occurs before a verb as modal: 
 
(6.248)  ’abhayo mic   tit  cinleh  ku  t(w)ar. 
OM    Abhaya desire  exit fight  OBL enemy 
      ‘Abhaya wants to go out and fight with the enemy.’ (Ku99) 
 
 The modal does not necessarily have to be followed by  a full verb, as 
illustrated in (6.249). 
 
(6.249)  ’ba   ’ja  ’or      kmin ’ja  sak mic. 
O M     f a t h e r   3    c o m m a n d  r e i g n  3    NEG desire 
      ‘His father bids him be king, but he does not want to.’  (DMI:293) 
     
 In MM, ‹mik› appears grammatica lized as preverbal modal with 
desiderative value. It has all but lost its function as  full verb. As already in 
OM in certain contexts, MM ‹mik› is used interchangeably with its 
prospective form ‹smik›, obviously without difference in meaning (s. 
DMI:293). It often appears in combination with ‹go’› ‘GET’ in the pattern 
 
S mik go’ V     ‘S wants to V, would like to V’.  
 
This pattern is becoming increasingly popular in LM and is the only one used 
in SM in affirmative contexts, as will be seen below. 
 
(6.250)  mik ka[naÿ] cetī    tuy... 
MM    DES build   pagoda FINISH 
      ‘He wanted to build a pagoda and ...’ (SDGb3)  
 
 
 
238 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.251)  (dhā t swo)k ky āk    t r a y    s m iï mik go’ cut kwom  tuy... 
MM    relic  hair   Buddha exalted king  DES GET put together FINISH 
      ‘The king wanted to enshrine  the hair relic of the Lord Buddha,  
      too and ...’ (SDGb3f) 
 
Modern Mon 
 
In modern Mon, as in MM, ‹mik›, mòc  is used only as modal operator. The 
full verb translation equivalent of English ‘want, desire’ in Mon is usually ket 
‘take’. It should be kept in mind that agentive verbs in Mon have a conative 
connotation, ket therefore being translatable as ‘try/want to take’. The 
position of mòc  before the main verb is iconic in that the desire to do 
something occurs before the actual act (cf. also th ‘HIT’ as preverbal modal 
‘must, have’, section 6.3.14). In LM ‹mik› can occur as simple auxiliary or in 
combination with ‹gwa’› ‘GET’, without obvious difference in meaning. 
 
(6.252)  ’ay mik huiÿ  kuiw mar āj ñi. 
L M     1 s   DES speak  OBL  king  LITTLE 
      ‘I would like to speak with the king.’ (LPM:29) 
 
(6.253)  s m i k      g w a ’  t iÿ  dadah   sjaï    ’ a y  óik   
LM    PROSP:DES  GET  know NML:be  sword 1s  servant  
      khuih hwa’ khuih. 
      good NEG  good 
      ‘Your Majesty wants to know about my sword if it is good or not.’  
      (RDR:118) 
       
Originally the addition of ‹gwa’› may have had aspectual function, i.e. 
stressing the ingressive/inchoative read ing of the verb (s. secion 6.3.12 for a 
discussion of preverbal ‹gwa’›) which is inherently part of  the desiderative. 
One first has the desire to do somethi ng and then starts doing it. In most 
natural contexts it does not make sens e to express a wish about an ongoing 
(or finished) action or state. 
 The following passage from the J ātaka tales with ‹mik› in two adjoining 
sentences, once in the simple form and once in combination with ‹gwa’› 
suggests that at the time of writing the J ātakas (end of the 18 th c.), there was 
no conceivable difference between the two forms. 
 
 
 
239 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.254)  mnah  s m i k      t i ÿ  dewadhaw    h ā?  
L M     2     PROSP:DES  know divine.doctrine Q 
      ’ a y  s m i k      g w a ’  t i ÿ   bway ma lon   ra. 
      1 s   PROPS:DES  GET  know  ADV  REL exceed FOC 
      ‘Do you want to know/learn about the divine doctrine?’ 
      ‘I want to know about it very much.’ (Jat:22) 
 
 In SM the combination * mòc k ʔ is always shortened to məkʔ in 
affirmative contexts.  
 
(6.255a)  ʔat     ak kwi k h məkʔ cao. 
SM     ask.for ride cart TOP DES   return 
       ‘They asked for a ride on that cart, they wanted  to go home.’ (KD) 
 
 Unlike OM usage, SM  məkʔ must always be followed by a verb, also if the 
verb is present in the immediate context. 
 
(6.256a)  məkʔ ʔa  ha? 
S M      DES   go  Q 
       ‘Do you want to go?’ 
 
(6.256b)  məkʔ ʔa .       ( * m əkʔ.) 
S M      DES   g o        
       ‘ Y e s . ’  
 
This parallels Burmese, but not Thai usage: 
 
(6.256c)  yaak1 pay may4?   yaak1.  (? yaak1 pay.) 
T h       DES  go  Q       DES    
 
(6.256d)  thwà- hcin l à ?       t h w à -hcin te.  (*hcin te) 
B       g o - DES   Q       g o - DES   RL  
 
 In negative contexts SM uses the simple form mòc. Like m əkʔ, mòc must 
always be followed by a verb. The ne gated counterparts of the sentences 
(6.255) and (6.256) above are given below. 
 
(6.255b)   hùʔ mòc cao. 
S M       NEG DES return 
        ‘They didn’t want to go home.’ 
 
 
 
240 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.256e)   hùʔ mòc ʔa pùh ha?    hùʔ mòc ʔa pùh.   (*hù ʔ mòc.) 
S M       NEG DES go NEG Q      NEG DES go NEG  
        ‘Don’t you want to go?’ ‘No.’ 
 
 If the subject of the desiderative expression wants some one else to do 
something, the change of subject must be indicated by k ‘GIVE’: məkʔ k 
ʔa ‘I want (you/him/her/them) to go.’ (s. section 6.3.11 for details on k). 
 
Summary 
 
In OM, ‹mic› occurs as full verb with a nominal object, meaning ‘want, 
desire’. MM ‹mik› is used almost ex clusively with verbal objects, rapidly 
developing into a preverbal modal oper ator. This development is completed 
in LM and SM, where the simple form is replaced by the combination with 
k
ʔ in affirmative contexts. There is in SM a perfect complementary 
distribution with məkʔ in affirmative and mòc in negative contexts. The full 
verb function of OM ‹mic› is taken over in modern Mon either by verbs 
expressing similar meanings, such as ket ‘take’ or by the combination məkʔ 
kʔ  ‘want to get’. Apart from the co mplementary distribution pattern, Mon 
məkʔ/mòc is structurally identical with its Burmese counterpart hcin 
‘DESIDERATIVE’ in most functions (cf. Okell 1969:266f; Okell and Allott 
2001:36). 
 
6.3.16 ‹tuy› toə  ‘FINISH’ 
Historical development 
 
In OM, ‹tūy, tuy› is not found as an independent verb. No prospective form is 
attested in the inscriptions, but the cau sative ‹ptuy› ‘make ready’ occurs, as 
well as the attributive ‹tm ūy› , which has developed irregular semantics as 
‘be complete with’, and the nominalized form ‹tirtuy› ‘perfection’ 
(DMI:161f). According to Shorto, ‹t ūy, tuy› functions as an adverbial 
“indicating completion or priority of ac tion” and “esp. connecting statements 
of consecutive events” (ibid.). Later st ages of Mon and derived forms in OM 
confirm the original verbal semantics of ‹t ūy› as ‘finish, complete’. The fact 
that the OM lexeme is not found in th is function may be due to coincidence 
rather than real absence from the la nguage. Sentence (6.257) illustrates the 
former function of OM ‹tūy›, (6.258) the latter. 
 
(6.257)  kil   d ān      (t)ū y. 
OM    give  donation  FINISH 
      ‘He has finished almsgiving.’ (An349) 
 
 
 
241 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.258)  tarley  cwin dhyā n tūy   t i n       ’ ār  t āwatiï. 
OM    lord:1s enter trance FINISH move.up  GO  T āvatiÿsa 
      ‘Our Lord (Gavampati) went into trance and then ascended to 
      t h e  T āvatiÿsa heaven.’ (SSKa52) 
 
 In the function of a sequential marker, ‹t ūy› competes with ‹blah › 
(DMI:278),151  which usually occurs in clause initial position, but is also 
found between two clauses to indicate that clause 2 follows clause 1, as in 
(6.259) below. It is not clear  at the present st age of studies whether there is a 
difference in meaning between the two forms. One possible functional 
difference may be that ‹t ūy› expresses a closer link between the events than 
‹blah›. This is supported by the fact that after ‹blah › the subject of clause2 is 
often overtly expressed, even if it is identical with the subject of clause 1, 
while after ‹t ūy› the subject of clause 2 remains often unexpressed. This 
tendency may be due to the scarcity of inscriptional ev idence, though, and 
more inscriptional data than is available at the present would be needed to 
reach a conclusion on this point. In MM, LM and SM, only the reflex of ‹tūy› 
has survived, occurring both in clause initial and clau se final position, as we 
will see below. 
 
(6.259)  tarley  guraï      k e l   s m i ï in   blah tarley   cis  
OM    lord:1s CAUS:know GIVE king  Indra SEQ  lord:1s  move.down 
      t ūn   jetawanamah āwihār. 
      return  Jeta.forest.great.monastery 
      ‘ O u r  L o r d  i n f o r m e d  t h e  L ord Indra and then came back down to 
      the great monastery at Jeta Forest.’ (SSKa53f) 
 
 In MM, ‹tuy› is used as a full verb  meaning ‘be finished’, as a verbal 
auxiliary marking a completed event or action, and as sequential marker 
linking two events in tem poral sequence. As indicated above, I believe that 
the MM use as full verb is not an  innovation or lexicalization of a 
grammatical element (a process that is rarely attested in the world’s 
languages), but that the lack of this us e in OM is due to the scarcity of 
inscriptional material available. The full verb use in MM is illustrated in the 
following sentence. 
 
(6.260)  ’akhā kā   w i h ā  ma tuy  gah... 
MM    time  work temple REL finish TOP 
      ‘When the work on the temple was finished...’ (Mah ārāma 10) 
                                                      
151 One might suppose a connection of this morpheme with the OM verb ‹blah› ‘be relieved, 
come to an end’, but comparison with related languages suggest two separate roots. See DMI 
(p.279) for linguistic comparisons of OM ‹blah ›
1
 ‘that which precedes or is finished’ and 
‹blah›
2
 ‘be relieved, come to an end’. Perhaps the two roots are connected at some (much 
earlier) stage of the language. 
 
 
242 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The grammaticalized clause final form can occur with ‹tuy› as a full verb, as 
in (6.261), or with anothe r verb describing an ev ent that has a logical 
endpoint. 
 
(6.261)  dak  plan    tuy  tuy   h e ï. 
MM    build RETURN finish FINISH EMPH 
      ‘They had finish ed the rebuilding.’ (SDGb28) 
 
(6.262)  buddhapatim ā gah th āpanā lar   p óay dla ÿ   tuy. 
MM    Buddha.image TOP enshrine KEEP LOC  chamber FINISH 
      ‘He had enshrined the Buddha image in the relic chamber.’ (SDGb8) 
 
The use of postverbal ‹tuy› to describe a complete d event as in (6.261) and 
(6.262) led to a twofold extension of th e function of ‹tuy›. Firstly it came to 
have a connotation of ‘past event’, as can be seen in the following sentence. 
 
(6.263)  bā   kla ÿ   pi-cwos turau cn ām gah kali   lwon  ’ ā  tuy. 
MM    two hundred three-ty six   year  TOP elapse exceed GO  FINISH 
      ‘Two hundred thirty six years had elapsed.’ (SDGb16) 
 
 The other development, which was completed already in OM, is from 
‘completed event’ to ‘event 1 is completed and event 2 follows’. Both 
developments were carried on into  LM and SM, making LM ‹tuy›, SM toə a 
very frequent morpheme covering a wide range of functions, all of which can 
be drawn back to the original (and still present) verbal semantics ‘be finished, 
finish’. 
 
Modern Mon: Full verb → resultative → completive, experiential 
 
In modern Mon, toə is used as a full verb with both agentive and passive 
meaning, i.e. the subject can be either actor as in (6.264) or undergoer as in 
(6.265), similar to the use of English ‘be finished’. 
 
(6.264)  ʔuə to ə   k l a    ʔt. 
SM    1s  finish  before all 
      ‘I finished first.’  
 
(6.265)  óuï hwa’ gatāp   tuy  õiÿ. 
L M     c i t y  NEG  catch.up finish yet 
      ‘The (building of) city was not completed yet.’ (RDR:13) 
 
 As resultative verb in a serial construction, toə denotes the completion of 
the action and is negatable. 
 
 
243 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.266)  puə        n ʔ lèh  hù ʔ  toə  pùh  teh   ... 
SM    performance this dance NEG  finish NEG  COND 
      ‘If this theatre (seas on) is not finished yet ...’ (KN) 
 
Constructions of this kind can be seen as the starting point for the 
development into a postverbal completive  marker, which is already attested 
in OM and MM. While the resultative serial verb toə can be negated, as seen 
in the example above, the post-VP co mpletive aspect operator cannot. The 
development in Mon went less far than the grammaticalization of the 
corresponding lexeme in Thai and Burmese (s. Jenny 2001:124ff for Thai, 
and Okell 1969:382ff; Okell and Allott  2001:128ff for Burmese). The use of 
toə for many speakers is still restrict ed to verbs which contain an obvious 
endpoint. With stative verbs de scribing qualities, the use of toə is not 
accepted by most native speakers. N one of the informants interviewed 
accepted the expression *kh
h toə ‘it is good already’.152 There are instances, 
though, both in LM and SM where non-dynamic verbs occur with to ə. Most, 
but not all speakers rej ect an expression like tm toə  ya ʔ ‘know (already)’ 
while iəʔ to ə ya ʔ ‘have eaten (already)’ is accepted by all speakers. But 
compare the following sentences from LM. 
 
(6.267)  mnah  ta’ tiÿ  må ï tuy   ’uit ra. 
L M     2     PL know STAY FINISH all  FOC 
      ‘You already know it all.’ (DC:33) 
 
(6.268)  dadah   ’ay mi    byu jarā ’ā  tuy   r a .  
LM    NML:be  1s  mother old old GO  FINISH FOC 
      ‘I have grown old.’ (DC:36) 
 
 In SM, most speakers would probably not use toə in these sentences, but 
replace the sentence final focus marker with the ‘NEW SITIUATION’ marker yaʔ 
(NSIT, s. section 6.3.17 below). The ‘unna tural’ LM usage may have been 
influenced by the use of toə as standard translation equivalent of Pali past 
tense/aorist (s. for example Ketuma ti 1965:122) and/or by Burmese and Thai 
usage. As seen above, the development from ‘completive’ to ‘past tense’ 
marker can already be observed in MM, although SM usage suggests that this 
never became part of the everyday language. SM favours the completive 
reading where available and an experien tial reading where the completive is 
not available or excluded by the context. When asked about the 
grammaticality of the expression khy
t toə yaʔ ‘has died’153, native speakers 
take some time before they offer tw o opinions. Firstly, “for some speakers 
                                                      
152  The corresponding Thai and Burmese expressions, ii l w3 and kàun pi resp., are 
perfectly grammatical. 
153 This sentence is actually attested in the conversation KD. 
 
 
244 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
this sentence may be fine, but we woul d not put it this way”, and secondly, 
“this means that he has died before (and was reborn)”, i.e. they assign an 
experiential notion to toə. 154  In the following sentence, the completive 
reading is possible, but the broader context suggests experiential reading. The 
speaker is talking about a hot spring that the Japane se soldiers discovered in 
southern Burma during WW II. She is proud that she has visited the place and 
taken a bath there. 
 
(6.269)  poy hum toə   lèy. 
SM    1pl bathe FINISH EMPH 
      ‘We have (been there and) taken a bath.’ (KD) 
 
 Alternatively toə can co-occur with the experiential marker kiəŋ (s. section 
6.3.18): 
 
(6.270)  a wŋ   l ŋ  sì ra ʔ ʔuə kiəŋ  m ŋ to ə. 
SM    Ba Waeng Loun Zi FOC 1s  EXPER stay  FINISH 
      ‘It was at Ba Waeng Loun Zi that I stayed (at least) once.’ (KD) 
 
 As the experiential in Mon is restricted to past time reference, 155 toə does 
have implied past tense notion in Mon, but  not in a general sense as stated by 
Western (e.g. Bauer 1982:435ff, Haswell 2002:29) and some native 
grammarians (e.g. Ketumati 1965, Talanon 2000). In spite of its position after 
the VP (not directly  after the verb), wh ich would suggest it to be a modal or 
tense operator, toə is a resultative serial verb grammaticalized into a general 
completive marker, i.e. it has aspectual rather than temporal or modal value. 
 
Completive → sequential marker 
 
Apart from being used as completive ma rker, the other impo rtant function of 
toə in LM and SM, as in older stagers of the language, is as sequential marker, 
linking clauses or sentences in temporal order. The arrangement of events is 
almost always iconic, i.e. in the formulation event 1 toə event 2, event 1 
precedes event2.156 Simultaneous events are linked by the INCLUSIVE marker 
sm in the pattern ‘sm event1 sm event2’, rather than by toə. 
 
                                                      
154 These statements were obtained from native speakers of WK Mon who are fully bilingual 
with Thai and have very good command of Bu rmese. The interview wa s conducted in Thai, 
which clearly distinguishes between NSIT/COMPLETIVE (lw3) and EXPERIENTIAL (khey). 
155 This contrasts with Burmese usag e, where the experiential marker hpù may have future 
reference, as in the expression thwà hpù hcin te  ‘I would like to go there once’ (cf. Okell 
1969:302; Okell and Allott 2001:135f). 
156 See sentence (3.23) for an example of inversed order of events. 
 
 
245 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.271a) sŋ  iə  toə   iəʔ  p ŋ. 
SM    drink beer  FINISH eat   rice 
      ‘First we drink beer and then we eat (rice).’ 
 
(6.271b) sm  s ŋ  iə  sm  iəʔ pŋ. 
SM    INCL drink beer  INCL eat  rice 
      ‘We drink beer and (a t the same time) eat (rice).’  
 
 Apart from being temporally ordered, the sentences or clauses joined by toə 
are independent. They can have a shared subject as in (6.272) and (6.273) or 
different subjects as in (6.274) and ( 6.275), which may be overtly expressed 
or understood. 
 
(6.272)  h cù  toə   yèh     h kʔ ʔa raʔ. 
S M     3    r e s t  FINISH morning 3   GET go FOC 
      ‘He took a rest and th en next day he went on.’ (WK) 
 
(6.273)  tla  ñah    t i ÿ  dadah   gna-ky āk yay  ’ ā  tuy   kuiw  
LM    lord person know NML:be  queen    sick  GO  FINISH GIVE      
      ’ c ā    s a w      m a h ā- s a w     t a ’   k l uï   l w ī-parā ra’. 
      teacher  medicine big-medicine  PL  come  treat    FOC 
      ‘The king learned about the queen having fallen sick and let 
      the big doctors come and treat her.’ (DC:17) 
 
 Theoretically, ‹tuy› in this sentence could be taken to have scope over the 
expression ‹yay ’ā› ‘become sick’, but the context suggests it to have scope 
over the whole first clause. 
 
(6.274)  kyə pan   ak kʔ toə   ʔŋkəlòc  l k l     ʔ a? 
SM    Japanese  ride GET FINISH English  side which go 
      ‘The Japanese were on top (i .e. had an advantage), so where could 
      t h e  B r i t i s h  g o ? ’  ( K D )  
 
(6.275)  puiy  tak  dah  tay  lon   ’ ā  tuy   khyuit ’ ā  ro ï. 
LM    1pl  beat  HIT hand exceed GO  FINISH die   GO  ASRT 
      ‘We must have beaten him too hard and he has died.’ (MKP:23) 
 
 In SM, toə can occur in sentence initia l position, indicating that an 
unmentioned event precedes the event expressed in the sentence. 
 
(6.276)  toə   ʔəmèy h həkn  l    k    h kh r ŋ  tè ʔ. 
SM    FINISH mother 3   order  KEEP GIVE 3   TOP look  y.brother 
      ‘Then his mother told him to look after his younger brother.’ (WK) 
 
 
246 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 When used as a sequential marker, toə is often combined with the 
conditional marker teh (see section 1.4.3). The combination toə teh is usually 
shortened to tteh/toteh in colloquial Mon. This form occurs both in sentence 
medial and sentence initial position, with overt or understood subject. 
 
(6.277)  ʔuə hùʔ  t m  toə   teh   ʔuə c ə  l    nìn. 
S M     1 s   NEG know FINISH COND 1s  hang KEEP waistcloth 
      ‘I didn’t know about it and I hung the waistcloths to dry.’ (KD) 
 
(6.278)  toə   t e h   kyə pan   d h k   cao. 
SM    FINISH COND Japanese  3   GIVE return 
      ‘And then the Japanese let us go back.’ (KD) 
 
 Often toə teh  is best translated into E nglish as ‘and’. Although there is 
strictly speaking no temporal consecuti on in the following sentence, the fact 
that Ma Het is a friend of the speaker is a causal circumstance leading to her 
coming to talk with the speaker. 
 
(6.279)  ma ʔ het k h t h m ŋ  r ə   ʔuə toə   t e h   kl ŋ t k   
S M     M a  H e t  TOP be  STAY friend  1s  FINISH COND come beat   
      k y a   k   ʔuə. 
      w i n d  OBL 1s 
      ‘Ma Het was a friend of mine and she came to chat with me.’ (KD) 
 
 Although the sequential marker toə (teh) is very frequent in SM, a sequence 
of events can be expressed by verb serialization without overt linker. 
 
(6.280)  ʔŋ    p n   t a n    t t  th ʔ. 
SM    succeed four  grade  exit THROW 
      ‘I finished grade four and then I left school.’ (KN) 
 
 Another way of marking a sequence of  events is by the grammaticalized 
verb pk ‘follow’. This sequential marker  indicates that the sequence of 
events is immediate. Its use is not very frequent both in LM and SM. An 
example is given in the following sentence. 
 
 
 
247 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.281)  kyə pan   cao   p k    h əmə   ʔup-khyup-yey157 cp    
SM    Japanese  return  FOLLOW Burmese  administration   arrive   
      l əkh raʔ. 
      t h e n   FOC 
      ‘As soon as the Japanese had returned (left), the Burmese  
      a d m i n i s t r a t i o n  a r r i v ed here (in Monland).’ (KD) 
 
 In other contexts pk as V2 means ‘V accordingly, V following the 
example’. 
 
Summary 
 
The verb ‹tuy› was grammaticalized al ready in OM as completive aspect 
marker and as sequential marker. While it is not attested as full verb in OM, 
later stages of the language use ‹tuy›  as full verb meaning ‘be finished, 
complete(d)’. In most contexts, full verb  ‹tuy› is used as non-agentive verb 
with undergoer subject, although SM allo ws an agentive reading with actor 
subject in some contexts. 
 The grammaticalization proba bly started with ‹tuy› as resultative serial verb, 
which is still in use in modern Mon. Wh ile the resultative verb ‹tuy› can be 
negated, the completive aspect operator cannot. 
 The development in modern Mon led to an extension of th e use of ‹tuy› to 
not strictly completive contexts, gi ving the morpheme a more general 
perfective value. The acceptance of toə in non-completive contexts differs 
among speakers. There may be influence from Burmese and Thai, both of 
which have carried the development of the lexeme meaning ‘(be) finish(ed)’ 
on into a general marker for ‘new s ituations’. In some contexts, an 
experiential reading of toə is favoured in SM, which leads to a past time 
connotation (but does not  indicate an inherent general past tense notion). 
Although native and Western scholars describe toə as ‘past tense marker’, 
this analysis is not supported by linguistic data from LM and SM. 
 The sequential marker is widely used in LM and SM, both in sentence 
medial and sentence initial position, although its use is not obligatory. The 
combination with the conditional marker teh is very frequent in SM. 
 The different functions of toə can be summarised as follows: 
 
VP  toə          ‘resultative serial verb’ (negatable) 
VP   toə          ‘completive’ > ‘perfective’/’experiential’ (not 
negatable) 
VP  toə  VP       ‘sequential’ (> toə VP ‘afterwards’) 
 
                                                      
157 The expression həmə ʔup-khyup-yey is a direct loan from Burmese băma ’ou’-hcou’-yèi 
‘Burma administer-NML’, including the Burmese word order modifier-modified. 
 
 
248 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Heine and Kuteva (2002:134ff, 320) list the following five 
grammaticalization paths of the verb meaning ‘finish’ commonly found in the 
world’s languages: 1. AFTER, 2. ALREADY, 3. COMPLETIVE, 4. CONSECUTIVE, 6. 
PERFECTIVE. 
 All of these functions are found (to some extent at least) in Mon. The 
meaning ‘already’ (respectively ‘new situation’, NSIT) is covered in SM by 
the recent morpheme ya ʔ (see the next section). Most speakers do not accept 
purely NSIT readings for toə, although Burmese and Thai both have 
completed the development ‘finish’ > NSIT. This is one instance of Mon 
showing structural firmness against fore ign influence, while in other respects 
the (structural) influence from Thai and Burmese is considerable. 
 
6.3.17 ‹ira, yya› ʔiʔraʔ, yaʔ ‘NEW SITUATION, NSIT’ 
 
Shorto (1962:1) lists ʔiʔ as a verb particle which “is always followed by ra’”, 
indicating the “perfect” (tense/aspect). According to Bauer, “ ’i’ combined 
with ra’” has “an aspectual colouring ‘perfective’” and “may not co-occur” 
with toə (Bauer 1982:435ff). Shorto (DMI: 312) gives the MM form ‹yra›, a 
“perfect particle”. As there is only one  example given in DMI, with ‹yra› in 
parentheses, indicating a dubious readi ng, its presence in MM is not certain, 
although the phonological development ‹yra› > ‹ira› is possible. 
 The form ‹ira› is rare in LM. It is  found only in newer publications, not in 
classical LM such as the J ātaka tales by ’Acā Hwo’. In SM, ʔiʔraʔ is almost 
always contracted to yaʔ (s. Jenny 2003:190f). Very  recent publications, 
including newspapers, cartoons, and popul ar karaoke music videos, use the 
form ‹yya›158 also in the written language. 
 As the form is not attested in older stages of the language (apart from the 
rather dubious occurrence in MM mentione d above), the original meaning is 
unknown. One might suspect an innovative development involving the 
frequent prefix ʔiʔ- and the focal marker raʔ. The prefix ʔiʔ- is frequently 
used with female names and kinship terms. An extension of the use as 
onomastic prefix led to the use of ʔiʔ- as pronominal prefix, as in ʔiʔ-kh 
‘that one, the mentioned one’ from the topic marker kh, which in SM usually 
becomes ch (s. Jenny 2003:188f). In the case of ʔiʔ-raʔ, the prefix probably 
only functions to reinforce the focal pa rticle. This is supported by the fact 
that classical LM consistently uses ‹ra› where SM would have yaʔ. 
 
 The function of yaʔ in SM seems to be that of a ‘new situation’ marker, 
combining aspectual with status notions. NSIT describes a new (but expected) 
state, that has come into being and is opposed to a previous state, which no 
longer holds (cf. Ebert 2001:152ff and Jenny 2001:125ff for 
NSIT). It always 
                                                      
158 The spelling ‹yy› is conventionally used to represent light register words with initial /y-/; 
‹yya› thus represents SM yaʔ. 
 
 
249 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
occurs in sentence (or clause) final position as SFP. Although the clause final 
position of yaʔ suggests it to be a clause  or sentence operator, yaʔ cannot 
occur with non-verbal predic ates. This distinguishes ya ʔ clearly from raʔ in 
its distribution, although the former is derived from the latter. The necessity 
to have a morpheme expressing ‘new situation’ may have been influenced by 
Burmese and Thai usage, both of which have developed a ‘NSIT’ marker from 
the completive marker (s. above, section 6.3.16). SM yaʔ may combine with 
any verb and most verbal operators, indi cating that the situation described by 
the main verb is a new one, i.e. there was a change of situ ation at some point, 
although that point is not in the centre of interest. The ch ange of situation 
may be either the beginning or the end of  an event, or it may be the arrival at 
some crucial intermediate point. The translation varies according to the 
semantics of the main verb and the context. The main verb does not contain 
new information in itself, the combination ‘V ya
ʔ’ rather expresses that a 
(previously expected) situation has arisen.  
 
(6.282)  h thiə   yaʔ. 
SM    3   angry  NSIT 
      ‘He got angry; he is angry (now).’ (KD) 
 
(6.283)  pyùʔ  ʔt yaʔ,  nùm  m ŋ  ph h. 
SM    old  all  NSIT  exist STAY still 
      ‘They have all grown ol d, the ones that are still around.’ (KD) 
 
(6.284)  p əʔ kl m   c h k h poy c p  kl ŋ  k ʔ ot yaʔ. 
SM    three hundred ten TOP 1pl arrive COME  Ko’ Dot NSIT 
      ‘By 1310 (1949) we had already arrived at Ko’ Dot.’ (KD) 
 
The time reference in (6.284) does not mean that the speaker and her husband 
arrived at Ko’ Dot in the year 1949, but  that by that time they had already 
arrived there. In other words ya ʔ describes a state that is the result of a 
change of state, not the change of state itself. 
 
 Opposite to Bauer’s statement that ʔiʔ can not co-occur with toə (see above), 
the combination toə yaʔ is very frequent in SM, meaning ‘I have finished it; I 
am done with it; it is ready now; etc. ’. Combinations with other verbal 
operators are also common, as shown in the following sentences. 
 
With preverbal kʔ: 
 
(6.285)  hə mùh kʔ ch kəlon   yaʔ  ha k ʔ  klon? 
S M     n o w    GET find NML:do NSIT  Q  GET  do 
      ‘Have you found a job yet?’ (KKP) 
 
 
250 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
With postverbal iəʔ: 
 
(6.286)  ʔuə w t   iəʔ yaʔ. 
S M     1 s   f o r g e t   EAT NSIT 
      ‘I have forgotten it.’ (KD) 
 
With postverbal thʔ: 
 
(6.287)  kut   th ʔ   h ətn, c ŋ  thʔ   h ətn  yaʔ. 
S M     c u t . o f f  THROW bridge burn THROW  bridge NSIT 
      ‘They had cut off and burned the bridge.’ (KD) 
 
With postverbal ʔa: 
 
(6.288)  ʔəpa  khy t ʔa  ya ʔ. 
S M     f a t h e r   d i e   GO  NSIT 
      ‘Father was already dead.’ (KKP) 
 
With postverbal mŋ: 
 
(6.289)  h khyt  mŋ yaʔ . 
S M     3    d i e    STAY NSIT 
      ‘ H e  i s  d e a d . ’  ( N O P )  
 
With post-VP toə: 
 
(6.290)  k ʔ kəw   toə   y a ʔ  ha? 
S M     g e t  NML:play FINISH NSIT  Q 
      ‘Have you already got a girlfriend?’ (KN) 
 
 Other combinations are possible, de pending on the semantics of the main 
verb. 
 In negated contexts, yaʔ is always replaced by the focus marker raʔ, as 
illustrated in the following sentence, where the yaʔ occurs in the affirmative 
first clause while raʔ is used in the negative second one. 
 
(6.291)  pə c u       t ə   yaʔ  teh  h əct     h ù ʔ  k ʔ raʔ. 
SM    CAUS:upright hand NSIT  COND CAUS:die NEG  GET FOC 
      ‘If they have lifted their hands, you cannot kill them (anymore).’  
      ( K D )  
 
 
 
251 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Summary 
 
Modern Mon has developed a morpheme indicating a changed or new 
situation, with similar functions as the NSIT markers in Burmese ( pi, s. Okell 
1969:382ff; Okell and Allott 2001:128ff) and Thai ( lw3, s. Jenny 
2001:125ff). Mon yaʔ can occur with any verb and most verbal operators, but 
not in negative and imperative/prohibitive contexts. The historical 
development of 
ʔiʔraʔ/yaʔ is not clear, with only dubious presence in MM 
and no examples from older LM. The form is a prefixed (probably 
reinforced) variant of the focus marker , by which it is replaced in negative 
contexts. The urge to develop a 
NSIT marker probably stems from intimate (or 
internal) contact with Burmese and Th ai of bilingual Mon speakers. The 
operator yaʔ cannot form a one-word answer nor can it be negated. This 
confirms its syntactic status as SFP ra ther than as verbal operator, although 
functionally it is closer to the latter. 
 
6.3.18  ‹keï› kiəŋ ‘ever, EXPERIENTIAL’  
     ‹ k l ā› kla ‘BEFORE, PROVISIORY’  
     ‹ õiÿ, phuih› nm, phh ‘PERSISTIVE’ 
 
There are a few more verbs turned operators in Mon which have developed 
aspectual or aspectoid value. In this section I will briefly introduce four of 
these morphemes in common use in SM. Unlike other operators discussed in 
this chapter, the functional range of th ese four operators is  rather restricted. 
The verbal origin of some is not certain and they may be classified as adverbs 
rather than verbal operators. This is especially true for the persistive markers 
n
m and ph h, which can both be translated as ‘yet’ or ‘still’ and occur as 
SFPs.  
 
kiəŋ 
 
The verbal character of kiəŋ ‘be accustomed, have had an occasion to, 
EXPERIENTIAL’ is clear from its derivations pəkiəŋ ‘accustom’ and ʔəkiəŋ 
‘manner, custom’, although it is never used as a full verb in  SM. This verb is 
not found in OM and MM, nor is there a related form in Nyah Kur, which 
makes it suspect of being a recent loa n. There is possibly a connection with 
Burmese cín ‹kyáï› ‘practice, train, be accustomed’ (s. Myanmar Language 
Commission 1993:33) but the recentness of the word in Mon would suggest a 
form *kyiəŋ or *ky
ŋ  rather than kiəŋ for this Burmese lexeme.159  
 The experiential notion in Mon is in most natural contexts restricted to past 
events, which gives ki əŋ a past tense connotation. Ha ving lost its full verbal 
                                                      
159 Cf. Mon khyiəŋ ‘Chin (people)’ from B. hcìn ‹khyàï› and Mon ch ŋ ‘descend’ from B. 
hsìn ‹chàï›. 
 
 
252 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
character, kiəŋ cannot form a one word answer. It always occurs before a 
verb and may co-occur with other operators, such as mŋ ‘STAY’, toə ‘FINISH’, 
and l ‘KEEP’, among others. Although the mo st common translation by 
native speakers is ‘used to V’, ki əŋ V does not imply a habitual or regular 
event. In fact, a single occurrence is enough to apply kiəŋ, and this may be 
even the prototypical use of th e operator. The negated form hùʔ ki əŋ (resp. 
hə-kwiəŋ for some speakers) corresponds to  English ‘never’ with past time 
reference.160
 
 The following sentences illustrate the use of kiəŋ. 
 
(6.292)  ’apā   k y āk hwa’ keï   m i ï  h ā? 
LM    father  holy  NEG  EXPER hear  Q 
      ‘Have you never heard of this, revered father?’ (MKP:25) 
 
(6.293)  ʔəplŋ  k h ʔəpa  kiəŋ  m ŋ  mŋ. 
SM    Aploun TOP father  EXPER stay  STAY 
      ‘I stayed at Aploun (for some time).’ (KD) 
 
(6.294)  ʔuə kiəŋ  ʔa l   ŋkk. 
S M     1 s   EXPER go KEEP Bangkok  
      ‘I have been to Bangkok.’ (NOP) 
 
kla 
 
OM ‹tlār› has the full verb meaning ‘be an terior’, but according to Shorto 
(DMI:176) it is chiefly used as an adverb  ‘formerly, first, before’.  In modern 
Mon, the verbal character has been completely lost, leaving only traces in the 
attributive form LM ‹taml ā› ‘former, ancient’. In SM, kla i s  u s e d  a s  a n  
adverb in pre-clausal or post-clausal position with different functions.  
 In pre-clausal position, kla is always followed by a negated main verb, 
meaning ‘before V’. Notice that the iconic order of events is reversed with 
the use of kla, i.e. the main clause expressi ng the (preceding) event usually 
follows the kla-clause (cf. sentence (6.236) above). 
 
(6.295)  kla   poy hùʔ kʔ cp  k h mùə hnam... 
SM    before 1pl NEG GET arrive TOP one year 
      ‘One year before we arrived there...’ (KD) 
 
 
                                                      
160 ‘Never’ with future reference is expressed in Mon as chəlʔ hmaʔ hùʔ V pùh, lit. ‘when 
CONN NEG V NEG’, an obvious loan translation of Burmese betó hmá mă V bù ‘id.’. 
 
 
253 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.296)  nū  gayah    prah  kl ā   c āï  g wu i ’       g r a u   õiÿ... 
LM    ABL morning early before cock NEG:GET161  crow PERS 
      ‘Early in the morning before the cocks crowed...’ (MKP:24) 
 
 In post-clausal position, kla indicates either that the event occurs before 
another event, or that the subject perf orms the action before another subject. 
This use is attested already in OM. Th e former function led to a ‘provisory’ 
connotation of the combination ‘V kla’, indicating that the event expressed 
by V holds for the time being and is likel y to change or fo llowed by another 
event at some point in the future. In this use kla is very frequent in SM, 
though it is not the only possible reading of post-clausal kla. 
 
(6.297)  ʔəmèy  h hm  m ŋ  th ʔ    p h ə  kla. 
S M     m o t h e r   3    s p e a k   s t a y   THROW  school before 
      ‘My mother said that I shoul d stay at school for the time being.’  
      ( K N )  
       
(6.298)  an  h lùp  kla,   w ə  ʔənàŋ   n ʔ... 
SM    way  3   enter before Wae Anaing  this 
      ‘The way they first en tered here, at Wae Anaing...’ (KD) 
 
(6.299)  ʔ  poy kə mə teh  k əlaʔ həʔ  hùʔ   iəʔ kla   t e h   
SM    eh  1pl guest  COND lord  house  NEG  eat  before COND 
      poy iəʔ  hùʔ   kh ŋ   pùh. 
      1 p l  e a t    NEG  at.ease  NEG 
      ‘If we are guests, if the hous e owner does not eat first, we do not  
      feel  at ease eating.’ (KD) 
 
 Having lost its verbal character, kla cannot form a one word answer or be 
preceded by the negation marker hùʔ. The common expression in SM hù ʔ kla 
‘don’t do it yet, wait’ is actually a weak form of tʔ kla ‘stop it for the time 
being’ and does not involve the negation marker hùʔ. 
 
 The functions of kla in modern Mon can be summed up as follows. 
 
kla hùʔ  + CLAUSE     ‘ b e f o r e  CLAUSE’ 
CLAUSE kla         ‘ CLAUSE for the time being’ 
                ‘ S Vs before other S’, ‘S V1s before he V2s’ 
                ‘ CLAUSE for the first time’ 
 
 The distribution and functions of kla correspond more closely to the Thai 
adverb kn1 ‘before’ than to any Burmese morpheme. The four main 
                                                      
161 This is one of the rare occurrences of infixed negation in LM (s. section 2.3.1). 
 
 
254 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
functions of Mon kla are expressed in Burmese by at least four different 
morphemes (m ă V hkin , V òun, ăyin V, păht ămá V, cf. Okell 1969:278f, 
372f, 466f; Okell and Allott 2001:28, 261f , 225 for the first three, Myanmar 
Language Commission 1993:250 for the fourth). Mon shares with Burmese 
the rule that pre-clausal kla must always occur with a negated verb. 
 
nm and phh 
 
Both nm and ph h are attested only in MM (‹ni ÿ, õiÿ›) and in the modern 
language (LM ‹ õiÿ› and ‹phuih›). They occur in clause or sentence final 
position as SFPs indicating an unchanged s ituation or intention to act, and 
may be labelled PERSISTIVE markers. Another function of nm i s  a s  a n  
additive marker, corresponding roughly to  English ‘else, more’. In some 
contexts it may be used merely to put emphasis on the verb, similar to 
English ‘even’. The marker phh is not very frequent and can be classified as 
an adverb putting emphasis on the uncha nged character of the situation. It 
never occurs in negated contexts, in which it contrasts with nm. When n m 
and phh co-occur in the same sentence, th e word order is fixed as ‘V phh 
nm’. The originally imperfective marker mŋ frequently occurs with both 
nm and ph h, with the former in the close combination mənm. The latter 
has developed into an inde pendent particle, with ‹må ï› further 
desemanticized. This can be seen from the position of mənm after the VP, 
while the aspectual ‹måï› always occurs within the VP, i.e. between V and O. 
The combination mənm thus originates in the combination of mŋ with nm, 
but it is synchronically distinct from it. The distinction is obvious only with 
transitive verbs, and there seems to be no semantic difference. 
 
(6.300a)  h iəʔ mŋ  p ŋ nm. 
S M      3    e a t   STAY rice PERS 
       ‘He is still eating.’ 
 
(6.300b)  h iəʔ pŋ mənm. 
S M      3    e a t   r i c e  PERS 
       ‘He is still eating.’ 
 
 The different uses of nm and phh are illustrated in the following 
sentences. 
 
(6.301)  nùm  m ŋ  a  p əʔ nm. 
S M     e x i s t  STAY two three PERS 
      ‘There are two or three left.’ (KD) 
 
 
 
255 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(6.302)  ʔ  to ʔ t ò     k ərao  p     m ənm ? 
S M     2 f a m  PL  middle behind watch  PERS   
      ‘Are you guys going to wa tch (videos) again (in spite of 
      the order not to do so)?’ (KN) 
 
(6.303)  mù ʔ  t h klon  mənm? 
S M     w h a t  HIT do   PERS 
      ‘What else do I have to do?’ (WK) 
 
(6.304)  hə ʔt   hlo ə   klàŋ   nù  ak ka  nm. 
SM    CAUS:all money much ABL ride car PERS 
      ‘I spent more money (walking he re) than I would have taking a bus.’  
      ( K K P )  
       
(6.305)  ʔəmaʔ  ot  pèh hù ʔ  k ʔ th m ənìh nm l əkh. 
SM    ol.sister small 2   NEG  GET be  man   PERS then 
      ‘Your youngest older sister wasn’t born yet, back then.’ (KD) 
 
 Most instances of phh in the data show co-o ccurrence with the aspect 
operator mŋ.  
 
(6.306)  nùm  mŋ ph h, t h ʔa  p m   mòn  lèy. 
S M     e x i s t  STAY PERS  be  GO  manner Mon EMPH 
      ‘There are still some (Chinese) around; they’ve all become like  
      Mon.’ (KD) 
 
 There is one instance in the data where phh occurs without mŋ and is 
obviously used to put emphasis on the unexpected situation that a woman can 
succeed in deceiving four men. 
 
(6.307)  óeĥ dah mnih brau   phuih óeĥ liÿ    c a - k ā puiy 
L M     3    b e   m a n   w o m a n  PERS  3   deceive use  1pl  
      m n i h  b l āy      pan   gah. 
      man  young.man four  TOP 
      ‘She is only a woman and stil l she can deceive and command us four  
      young men!’ (MKP:14) 
 
 Neither nm nor ph h may be directly negated or occur as a one-word 
answer, which supports the analysis as adverbs or SFPs rather than verbs, 
although they may ultimately be verbal in origin. Without established 
cognates in other Mon-Khmer languages,  this can at the present not be 
confirmed. 
 
 
 
256 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
6.4 Summary of verbal and clausal operators 
 
In the preceding sections we have seen that a number of full verbs developed 
grammatical functions in Mon. The gram maticalization of individual verbs 
took place at different times in the hi story of Mon and went along different 
paths. One common source of grammaticalized functions of verbs is the 
extension of serial verbs, involving a semantic bleaching. Some verbs have 
developed along different paths, leading to  a number of distinct functions for 
the same original lexeme, as is the case for example with th ‘hit, touch’, 
which can occur in four different positions with four different functions. 
 The verbal operators are to be di stinguished from the sentence final 
particles (SFP), which may express similar notions and which may overlap in 
use with verbal operators. Like verbal  operators they may be derived from 
verbs, though they may have other origins as well. 
 Four positions are open to verbal opera tors, plus the sentence final position 
for SFPs, which may be summarized as fo llows. It should be noticed that any 
operator position may be occupied by more  than one element. Operators of 
the same position may combine freely as long as their functions are not 
contradictory. The internal arrangeme nt of operators occupying the same 
position is usually fixed and iconic where possible. The examples given in 
table 6.1 for each position are by no means exhaustive and serve merely to 
illustrate the different functions and positions available.
162 For details refer to 
the respective sections above. A complete list of the operators and SFPs 
discussed in this study is given in appendix E. 
The negation marker hùʔ can be placed in front of OP1, OP2, and OP4, but not 
OP3.163
One-word answers are possible only with OP 1 and OP 4. This can be clearly 
seen in the behaviour of th, for example. While the answer to th t k ha?  
‘was he beaten?’ (‘HIT beat Q’) is t h ‘yes’, the same question meaning ‘do I 
have to beat (him)?’ can only be answered by th tk ‘yes’, i.e. the main verb 
must be repeated if th occurs in OP2 position. The same distribution can be 
observed with the two postverbal positions of t h. Only the post-clausal 
modifier th can occur as a one-word answer (positive or negative), not the 
postverbal aspectoid-manner operator. 
 The impossibility of most operators to occur as one-wor d answers in Mon 
corresponds with Burmese usage and is in opposition to Thai, where also OP2 
position elements can occur as one-word answers. There is an interesting 
parallelism with Burmese in the s yntactic distinction of homonymous 
operators. One obvious example of th is phenomenon in Burmese is the 
                                                      
162  ( ASP/MDF) indicates that the operator has comb ines aspectual and manner (modifying) 
values. 
163  Negation of OP 3 position is possible in restricted contexts, esp. where the whole 
expression is analysed as serial verb construction (cf. e.g. section 6.3.12). 
 
 
257 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
auxiliary yá ‘GET’, which occurs in postverbal 164 position denoting either a 
possibility or an obligation. If the question thwà yá mă là? (‘go GET IRR Q’) is 
intended to mean ‘do I have to go?’, the only correct answer is thwà yá me  
‘yes’. The same question with the intended meaning ‘will I be able/allowed to 
go?’ is answered by yá me ‘yes’, i.e. the main verb is not repeated with the 
potential modal. The negative answers are mă thwà yá bù  ‘you don’t have to 
go’ and (thwà) m ă yá bù ‘you will not be able/all owed to go’ respectively. 
More detailed investigation in the concer ned languages is needed to establish 
the details of the areal diffusion of these syntactical features.165
OP1 S OP2 V OP3 O OP4 SFP 
        
    mŋ (ASP)    
  ʔa 
SER/PURP) 
 ʔa (ASP/DIR)    
    thʔ 
(ASP/MDF) 
   
    iəʔ 
(ASP/MDF) 
   
k (CAUS)    k (BEN)    
  kʔ (ASP)  kʔ 
(SER/RVC) 
 kʔ 
(MOD) 
 
th (PASS)  th (MOD)  th 
(ASP/MDF) 
 th 
(MDF) 
 
  məkʔ 
(MOD) 
     
[toə (SEQ)]      toə 
(PERF) 
 
       yaʔ (NSIT) 
  kiəŋ 
(EXPER) 
     
[kla 
(before)] 
      kla (PROV) 
       (mə)nm 
(PERS) 
       pùh (NEG) 
       ìʔ ( IMPER, 
POL) 
       noŋ (ASRT) 
Table 6.1 Summary of verbal and clausal operators 
                                                      
164 In Burmese all operators occur after the main verb, the one striking exception being the 
preverbal causative/jussive/change-of-subject marker pèi ‘GIVE’ (cf. section 6.3.11). 
165  Neither Okell (1969:456f) nor Okell and Allott (2001:178f) mention the different 
syntactic behaviour of the different functions of Burmese yá. 
 
 
258 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 The position of Mon toə is not entirely clear. It seems to operate outside the 
normal framework given above in at  least some respects. Unlike OP 1 
elements it may not be negated or form a one word answer, although it 
appears in OP1 position. This may be due to a more recent development from 
the intersentential SEQUENTIAL marker into a pre-clausal element. A similar 
case is pre-clausal kla, which does not function like an OP 1, although it 
appears in this position. Like toə, kla may not be negated or form a one word 
answer.  
 Both toə and kla  probably belong to a different (pre-sententia l) position, 
expressing a temporal ordering of events. In this function kla is exceptional in 
that it orders events in reverse order, i.e. the usual iconicity principle of Mon 
grammar is overridden. 
 Sentence final particles cover a wi de range of functions, some with 
aspectual notions, such as the NSIT marker yaʔ and the PERSISTIVE markers 
nm and ph h. In some cases verbal operato rs are fused or closely linked 
with SFPs, as the combination mənm ‘still’ (‹måï õiÿ› ‘STAY PERS ’) and 
toəyaʔ/toyaʔ ‘already done, finished’ (‹tuy ira› ‘ FINISH NSIT ’). These were 
included in the discussion on verbal operators for their functional closeness to 
the verbal system. Other SFPs are discussed in section 1.4. 
 
 Future studies will hopefully reveal mo re aspects of the verb system of Mon, 
including the exact function of many of the operators which at present still 
seem elusive and not easily definable. Areal studies are promising, especially 
comparison with Thai and Burmese usage, and, to some extent, Karen. All of 
these languages have been in close contact with Mon over many centuries 
and mutual influence can be shown on many levels. An in depth study of the 
influence of Pali as main cultural langua ge in Southeast Asia on the deeper 
structure of the local languages might equally prove fruitful.  
 
 
 
 
259 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
APPENDICES 
 
A. Maps of Mon speaking areas  
B. Phonology tables of Mon dialect  
C. Excerpt from Saddā Man ‘Mon Grammar’ 
D. Sample Texts (OM, MM, LM, SM) 
E. Table of operators and SFPs 
F. Text Sources 
G. References 
 
 
260 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix A: Maps showing Mon speaking areas  
(adapted from www.mapquest.com) 
Map 1: Central Southeast Asia 
 
Map 2: Southern Burma 
 
 
261 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Map 3: Mon Dialect areas (locations approximate) 
 
KN: Kanni, Karen State 
KKP: Ko’ Kapoun, Mon State 
KD: Ko’ Dot, Mon State 
WK: Wangka (Sangkhlaburi), Thailand 
 
 
262 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix B: Phonology tables of Mon dialects  
 
Mon phonology: Standard 
       
I. Initials   
 k 
 
        
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
IV. Rhymes 
-V -V - -h -k - -c - -t, n, p, m -y 
i i i ih ik i   it  -  im  
e e e eh     et - em ey 
   h k    t  -  m  
a  a ah ak a ac a at  -  am ay 
   h     t  -  m  
   h k    t  - m  
   h k  c  t  -  m  
o o o oh ok o oc o ot  -  om oy 
u u u uh     ut  -  um uy 
ao aoh ao  i 
  
 
kh   
 c ch  h 
 t th n hn 
 p ph m hm 
y r l hl w 
hw  s   h   
II. Initial clusters 
ky kr kl kw 
khy khr khl khw 
py pr pl  
phy phr phl  
III. Presyllables 
- h- k- p- m- 
t- n- c- s- y- r- l- kh- ch- th- ph- 
 
 
263 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Mon phonology: Wangka Dialect (w ka) 
       
 
        
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
IV. Rhymes 
-V -V - -h -k - -c - -t, n, p, m -y 
 i  ih ik i   t  -  m  
   eh     t  -m y 
 e ‡ ‡h k    t  -  m  
a  a ah ac a ac a at  -  am ay 
   h     t  -  m  
   h c    t  - m  
o  a ah k  c  t  -  m  
   oh ok o c  t  -  m oy/y 
 u  uh     t  -  m uy 
a ah a u  
I. Initials   
 k kh   
 c ch  h 
 t th n hn 
 p ph m hm 
y r l hl w 
xw/f  s   h   
II. Initial clusters 
ky kr kl kw 
ch khr khl khw/f 
py pr pl  
phy/p phr phl  
III. Presyllables 
- h- - p- m- 
t- n- c- s- y- r- l- kh- ch- th- ph- 
 
 
264 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 Mon phonology: Ko’ Dot Dialect (k ot) 
   
  
 I. Initials   
        
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
IV. Rhymes 
-V -V - -h -k - -c - -t,n,p,m -y 
i/ i i/ ih/h ik i   it/ t  
e   h     et/ t y 
 ‡ ‡ ‡h ak-k a-   t  
a/
‡  a/‡ ah/‡h ac a aic ai at/‡t ay 
   h     t/t/ot  
/
u u u uh/h     ut/ t uy 
/
o  o oh k  c  t/ ot  
o/
   h-oh ok o /  oc o ot/ t oy 
   h/h c    t/t  
ao aoh ao 1  
 
Notes: 
- In some speakers’ careful pronunciation, [] and [] are heard for /ə/ and /əʔ/. 
- Some speakers pronouce //  as [o].
 k kh   
 c ch  h 
 t th n hn 
 p ph m hm 
y r l hl w 
f  s   h   
II. Initial clusters 
cy kr kl kw 
ch/khy khr khl khw/f 
py pr pl  
phy phr phl  
III. Presyllables 
- h- - p- m- 
t- n- c- s- y- r- l- kh- ch- th- ph- 
 
 
265 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Mon phonology: Kanni Dialect (kan nì) 
      
I. Initials   
 k 
 
        
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
IV. Rhymes 
-V V - -h -k - -c - t,n,p,m -y 
i   h ik i   t  
  /-
e 
h-əh     t y 
e  e- eh ‡k-k ‡-   t-t  
a  a ah ak/ac a/a ac a at ay 
 u  h     t  
/   h k/c /   t  
-
o 
 o-
o/ 
oh k-
ok/k 
-
o/ 
c  t-ot/t  
o u ? oh ok o oc o ot oy 
  u/ uh/h     ut/t uy 
ao aoh ao u       
 
kh   
c c ch  h 
 t th n hn 
 p ph m hm 
y r l hl w 
xw s   h   
II. Initial clusters 
c kr kl kw 
ch khr khl xw 
py pr pl  
phy phr phl  
III. Presyllables 
- h- k- p- m- 
t- n- c- s- y- r- l- kh- ch- th- ph- 
 
 
266 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Mon phonology: Ko’ Kapoun Dialect (ko həp) 
       
 I. Initials   
        
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
IV. Rhymes 
-V -V - -h -k - -c - -t, n, p, m166 -y 
 i  h ik i   t  -  m  
   h     t - m y 
   eh k    t  -  m  
a  a ah ac a ac a at  -  am ay 
   h     t  -  m  
   h c    t - m  
o  o oh k  c  ot  -  om  
   h ok o c  ot  - om oy 
  u uh     t  -  m uy 
ao aoh ao  i 
 
                                                      
166  In some people’s pronunciation, final labials become dentals or velars (-n, -t/-,-k) 
 k kh   
h c ch  h 
 t th n hn 
 p ph m hm 
y r l hl w 
khw  s   h   
II. Initial clusters 
ky kr kl kw 
ch khr khl khw 
py pr pl  
phy phr phl  
III. Presyllables 
- h- k- p- m- 
t- n- c- s- y- r- l- kh- ch- th- ph- 
 
 
267 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Written Mon 
      
 
        
    
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. Initials 
 k 
k 
g 
kh 
K 
G 
 
tC 
cC 
 
 
s 
 
c 
s 
z 
ch 
S 
z{ 
 
kÎ 
v 
h 
VH 
 
; 
t 
t 
d 
th 
T 
D 
n 
$ 
n 
hn 
×H 
zN 
 
/ 
Æ 
p 
p 
b 
ph 
f 
B 
m 
kM 
m 
hm 
mH 
y 
y[ 
y 
r 
 
r 
l 
È 
l 
hl 
lH 
w 
 
w 
hw 
qW 
zW 
s 
q 
\z 
 
rH 
h 
h 
zC 
 
a 
II. Initial clusters 
cy 
k[ 
kr kl kw 
kW ]k kL 
g[ \g gL gW 
khy khr khl 
K[ \K KL 
GL 
khw 
KW 
]G GW 
py pr pl 
p[ \p pL 
bL b[ \b 
 
phy phr phl 
f[ 
B[
\f 
]B
fL 
BL
 
III. Presyllables (not exhaustive) 
- 
a  
l 
h- 
q K 
f T  
d D 
z g 
b G 
k- 
k 
t 
g 
p- 
p  
b 
m- 
p 
m  
t- 
t 
n- 
n 
c- 
s  
z 
s- 
q  
\z 
y- 
y 
r- 
r 
l- 
l 
kh- 
K  
G
ch- 
S 
th- 
T  
D 
ph- 
f  
B 
 
 
268 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
IV. Rhymes with examples (Mon script) 
-V V - -h -k - -c - -t, n, m, p -y 
i 
K[I 
gWI 
i 
eTY 
erY 
i 
si 
gi 
ih 
fihj 
mNihj 
ik 
epkj 
perkj 
i 
eqcj 
ercj 
  it, in, ip, im 
kitj ainj 
mitj  mipj 
 
e 
edÒwj 
aerwj 
e 
 
do 
e 
ep· 
ed· 
eh 
esHj 
ebHj 
    et, en, ep, em 
ektj ep:nj 
ebàtj  elpj 
ey 
elwj 
aem 
 
ek[wj 
enwj 
 
 
B. 
 
ekL· 
m 
h 
e;· 
d, 
k 
tkj 
arkj 
 
k:cj 
mcj 
  t, n, p, m 
titj tJ 
g·>  l.pj 
 
a 
k. 
nwjewmjb> 
 a 
k 
ah 
kW, 
ak 
tuikj 
duikj 
a 
puicj 
zuicj 
ac 
k[.j 
b.j 
a 
s.cj 
r.cj 
at, an, ap, am 
;.tj S.nj 
v.tj m.nj 
ay 
S.Y 
gL.Y 
 
kuE 
 
bÐI 
 
eT.· 
h 
Kuihj 
    t, n, p,m 
suitj /uipj huJ 
 
 
SuE 
guE 
  
et· 
gW· 
h 
fuihj 
¾gihj 
k 
sukj 
zukj 
 
pucj 
bucj 
  t, n, p, 
m 
 
wuitj luJ   
 
 
kwj 
lwj 
 
tY 
rY 
 
k· 
l· 
h 
tHj 
dHj 
k 
p·kj 
g·kj 
 
s·cj 
m·cj 
c 
efkj 
behkj 
 
epLcj 
elcj 
t, n, p, m 
Ttj pLnj 
\zhtj rpj 
 
o 
tuY 
o 
suiaj 
oh 
eaHj. 
erHj. 
ok 
ek.j 
ebã 
o o o oc ot, on, op, 
om 
oy 
puO ekÐ.wj eq.cj
egL.cj 
qÐikj 
gLikj 
sicj 
ricj ed>wj e;.tj ea.nj 
mtj el.nj 
  u 
aY 
mWY 
u 
Su 
u uh   ut, un, up, 
um 
Sutj hu· 
kU 
gU 
ÇÕhj 
cCÕhj bru 
gutj  Bu· 
uy 
gxÕY 
ruY 
ao ao 
kuquE 
  
pÒo 
aoh 
±t· qCi 
i  
s 
 
 
269 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
IV. Rhymes with examples (transliterartion) 
-V -V - -h -k - - -t, n, m, 
p 
-c -y 
i 
khyī 
gwī 
i 
they 
rey 
i ik 
pek 
i 
seï 
  ih 
phih 
it, in, ip, 
im 
 
ci 
gi mnih parek reï kit, ’in 
mit, mip 
e e e 
dkew 
’arew 
 
dau 
pe’ 
de’ 
eh 
ceh 
beh 
    et, en, 
ep, em 
ket, póen  
bget, lep 
y 
le 
’ame 
   
kle’ 
ma 
h 
óeĥ kyew 
new 
 
bhā dah 
k 
tak 
’arak
 
kóaï 
maï 
 t, n, 
p, m 
 
tit, tiÿ 
gāÿ, lāp 
 
a 
kā 
nawwemb
ā 
 a 
ka 
ah 
kwah
ak 
tuik 
duik 
a 
puiï 
a 
zuiï 
ac 
kyāk 
bāk 
cāï 
rāï 
at, an, 
ap, am 
dāt, 
chān 
ñāt, mān 
ay 
chāy 
glāy 
 
kuiw 
  
tho’ 
h t, n, 
p,m khuih
 
suit, 
buip, 
huiÿ 
    
btī 
 
chuiw 
guiw 
  
te’ 
gwa’ 
h 
phuih
gruih
k 
suk 
juk 
 t, n, 
p, m 
  
puï 
buï  
wuit, 
luim 
 
   h k  c  t, n, 
p, m 
 
kaw tay ka’ tah påk cåï phek pleï
law ray la’ dah gåk måï bahek leï that, 
plan 
jrahat, 
rap 
o o o o o oh ok oc ot, on, 
op, om 
oy 
ktow tuy cui’ ’oh kok soï stik ciï 
riï 
puiy 
dow roh bok gloï glik óot, ’on 
mat, lon 
u u u uh     ut, un, 
up, um 
uy 
kū 
gū 
’ay 
mway 
chu 
bru 
óuh ga-
uy ïuh chut, 
huÿ ruy 
gut, 
bhuÿ 
ao  i ao aoh 
pkau truĥ kusuiw sïi ca 
 
 
270 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix C: Excerpt from Saddā Man (/sttə mòn/ Mon Grammar) 
 
 Verbs (pp.7ff) 
 
Words describing actions, states a nd existence are called verbs ( kriyā), e.g. ’ā 
‘go’,167 kluï ‘come’, óun ‘cook’, thakaḥ ‘break’, cin ‘be cooked’, khyuit ‘die, be 
dead’, dah ‘be’, nwaÿ ‘exist, be at, have’, jnok ‘be big’, óot ‘be small’, khuih ‘be 
good’, kyew ‘be beautiful’. 
 
(a) Verbs showing actions (pwa ma klon) 
mi siri kluï nū kyāk. ‘Mi Siri comes from the  market.’ 
nāy waÿsa óun måï puï. ‘Nai Wongsa is cooking rice.’ 
ñaḥ ’ā kwān juiï kyāk. ‘He is going to Zingyaik village.’ 
  
kluï ‘come’, óun ‘cook’ and ’ā ‘go’ are verbs denoting actions. 
 
(b) Verbs showing states (pwa ma dah) 
óeĥ gah dah kwaḥ bhā ra. ‘He is a student.’ 
mi campā khyuit ’ā ra. ‘Mi Campa has died.’ 
puï cin måï ra. ‘The rice is cooked.’ 
  
dah ‘be’, khyuit ‘die, be dead’ and cin ‘be cooked’ are verbs denoting states. 
 
(c) Verbs showing existence (pwa ma nwaÿ) 
puï nwaÿ dmåï póay thmāy ra. ‘There is rice in the pot.’ 
póay óeĥ sran nwaÿ pi klaÿ ra. ‘He has three hundred (Kyats).’ 
    
nwaÿ ‘be at, exist, have’ is a verb denoting existence. 
 
There are two further kinds of verbs: 
(a) Intransitive verbs (kriyā suddha) 
(b) Transitive verbs (kriyā kāraka) 
 
(a) Verbs that can have complete meaning without object ( kaÿ) are called 
intransitive verbs. 
kon-ïāk tik ra. ‘The child is sleeping.’ 
cma paluiÿ sro’ ta’ khyuit ’uit ra. ‘The bugs have destroyed the rice  
   and it all died.’ 
 
tik ‘sleep’ and khyuit ‘die, be dead’ do not have to take an object to have 
complete meaning. 
 
                                                      
167  Translations of all examples added by the author. 
 
 
271 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
(b) Verbs that need an object to have complete meaning are called transitive 
verbs. 
’cā tak kwaḥ bhā. ‘The teacher hits the student.’ 
mi kyew óun puï. ‘Mi Kye cooks rice.’ 
  
tak ‘hit’ and óun ‘cook’ need the objects kwaḥ bh ā ‘student’ and puï ‘rice’ 
respectively to have complete meaning. 
 
Intransitive verbs Transitive Verbs 
khyuit ‘die, be dead’ gacuit ‘kill’ 
gyuiï ‘be alive’ gayuiï ‘keep alive’ 
gluiï ‘be much’ galuiï ‘increase’ 
kyew ‘be beautiful’ payyew ‘make beautiful’ 
to-tak ‘improve’ pato-patak ‘improve sth.’ 
 
Verbs - Nouns 
 
To change verbs into nouns, a conson ant has to be added. In other cases a 
compound is used. 
 
(1) ’a- is prefixed to the verb to form a verbal noun: 
cī-reï ‘arrange’ ’acī-’areï ‘arrangement’ 
con-pråk ‘be spotted’ ’acon-’apråk  ‘something spotted’ 
thuiï-saḥ ‘praise v.’ ’athuiï-’asaḥ ‘praise n.’ 
cåï-tū ‘be anxious’ ’acåï-’atū ‘anxiousness’ 
kruiÿ ‘shout, roar’ ’akruiÿ ‘acclamation’ 
 
(2) la- is put in front of the verb to form a verbal noun: 
ñāt ‘see’ lañāt ‘opinion, vision’  
’ā ‘go’ la’ā ‘gait, pace’ 
huiÿ ‘speak’ lahuiÿ ‘speech, utterance’ 
’āt ‘beg, ask for’ la’āt ‘wish, desire’ 
leï ‘be destroyed’ laleï ‘destruction’ 
’eï ‘endure’ la’eï ‘endurance’ 
 
(3) da-, pwa ma or sjak are put in front of the verb to form a verbal noun: 
dah ‘be’ dadah ‘being, state’ 
’ā ‘go’ pwa ma ’ā ‘going’ 
ca ‘eat’ sjak ca ‘food, sth. to eat.’ 
 
(4) -am- is infixed between two initial consonants to form a verbal noun: 
klon ‘work, do’ kamlon ‘(royal) attendant, servant’ 
jnok ‘be big’ jamnok ‘chief, headman’ 
 
 
272 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
klat ‘steal’ kamlat  ‘thief’ 
 
(5) -w- is infixed after the initial consonant to form a verbal noun: 
pa ‘do’ pwa ‘act, deed’ 
påk ‘open’ pwåk ‘opening, aperture’ 
yāÿ ‘cry, weep’ ywāÿ ‘weeping’ 
yuiÿ ‘breathe’ ywuiÿ ‘breath’ 
 
(6) sam- is put in front of the verb to form a verbal noun: 
tiÿ ‘know’ samtiÿ ‘sense’ 
duih ‘be fool’ samduih ‘fool’ 
’uy ‘putrid’ sam’uy ‘putridity’ 
 
Adjectives (pp.10f) 
 
Words that specify the meaning of nouns  (lit. ‘make nouns special’) are called 
adjectives (n āmawisesana), e.g. kyew ‘be beautiful’, óot ‘be small’, khuih ‘be 
good’,  óāt ‘be sweet’, bu ‘be white’. 
 
Adjectives can be divided into four groups, according to their meaning: 
(a) Verbal adjectives (nāmawisesana kriyā) 
(b) Nominal adjectives (nāmawisesana nām) 
(c) Deictic adjectives (nāmawisesana cnon thḅaḥ, lit. ‘pointing adjectives’) 
(d) Numeral adjectives (nāmawisesana lmih saïkhyā) 
 
(a) Verbs that specify the meaning of nouns are called verbal adjectives: 
kyew ‘be beautiful’, khuih ‘be good’, óot ‘be small’, bu ‘be white’ 
 
swa khuih gah ca ’uit gluiï roï. ‘A lot of the good curry will be  
  eaten.’ 
(The verb khuih ‘be good’ specifies the meaning of swa ‘curry’.) 
 
mi óeĥ yuik law kon-ïāk óot gah ra. ‘His mother lifted up the small  
  child.’ 
   
(The verb óot ‘be small’ specifies the meaning of kon-ïāk ‘child’.) 
 
glik bu gah cay law tuy ra.  ‘The white longyi is already dry.’ 
   
(The verb bu ‘be white’ specifies the meaning of glik ‘longyi’.) 
 
(b) Nouns that specify the meaning of nouns are called nominal adjectives: 
chu ‘wood’, sla ‘leaf’, pkau ‘flower’ 
 
 
273 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
sïi chu ‘wooden house’ 
kla’ pkau ‘flower garden’ 
jrap man ‘Mon rest house’ 
kwī pmat ‘railway’ (lit. ‘fire cart’) 
 
The nouns chu ‘wood’, pkau ‘flower’, man ‘Mon’, and pmat ‘fire’ specify the 
meaning of the nouns s ïi ‘house’, kla’ ‘garden’, jrap ‘rest house, pavilion’, and 
kwī ‘cart’. 
 
(c) Words that point out [something] to specify the meaning of nouns are called 
deictic adjectives: 
õa’ ‘this’, gah ‘the mentioned’, te’ ‘that’, wwa’ ‘this’, tnah ‘other’ 
 
cetī õa’ ‘this pagoda’ 
óuï tnaĥ ‘other countries’ 
ekarāj gah ‘the (mentioned) king’ 
 
õa’ ‘this’, tnah ‘other’, and gah ‘the mentioned’ specify the meaning of the 
nouns cetī ‘pagoda’, óuï ‘country, town’, and ekarāj ‘king’. 
 
(d) Numerals that specify the meaning of nouns are called numeral adjectives: 
masun ‘five’, klaÿ ‘hundred’, lïuiw ‘some’, pha’uit ‘all’ 
 
(1) póay nāy kau de’ nwaÿ pi ra. ‘Nai Kao has three younger brothers  
  and  sisters.’ 
   
(pi ‘three’ specifies the meaning of de’ ‘younger sibling’.) 
 
(2) kwaḥ bhā lïuiw pañā khuih ra. ‘Some students are intelligent.’ 
  
(lïuiw ‘some’ specifies the meaning of kwah bhā ‘student’.) 
  
(3) khamī pha’uit tuin måï lik ra. ‘All monks are reading their books.’ 
   
(pha’uit ‘all’ specifies the meaning of khamī ‘monk’.) 
  
(4) māÿ pkau thaw gwa’ lāp dutiya ra. ‘Mem Kao Thaw got the second  
  prize.’ 
   
(dutiya specifies the meaning of lāp ‘prize’.) 
 
Verb auxiliaries (’athåk kriyā ‘verb support’) (p.22) 
 
 
274 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
 
gåï ‘dare’, daḥ ‘PASSIVE; must; inadvertently’, hwa’ ‘not’, gapw [short form for 
gap-gaw] ‘should, ought’, lep ‘be able, skilled’, ow ‘order’, kña ‘invite’, gwa’ 
‘get’, pa ‘do’,  lpa ‘don’t!’, lew ‘also, too’, mik-gwa’ ‘want to’, japhan ‘while; 
be in the process of’, ’agho ‘while, during’, kuiw ‘give’: 
  
(a)  ñaḥ gåï ḅiï klo’ ḅī saï lon ra.  
 ‘He dares to swim across the Salween river.’ 
 gåï ‘dare’ in front of ḅiï ‘swim’ specifies the meaning of the verb. 
  
(b)  khamī ta’ kña kluï nū kwān bhā thaw ra.  
 ‘The monks are coming from Phea Thaw village.’ 
 kña ‘invite’ in front of kluï ‘come’ specifies the meaning of the 
 verb. 
  
(c) blah ̣ nū yay tuy mik-gwa’ ca cna phyaḥ-phyaḥ ra.  
 ‘Having recovered from the illness I want to eat sour food.’ 
 mik-gwa’ ‘want to’ in front of ca ‘eat’ specifies the meaning of the 
  verb. 
  
(d) måï cåï hwa’ s’aḥ jïaḥ mgaḥ lep dah yay roï. 
 ‘If the meat is not clean, one may easily become sick.’ 
 lep ‘be able, skilled’ in front of dah ‘be’ specifies the meaning of  
    the verb.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
275 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix D: Sample texts 
 
1. Old Mon: Myazedi Inscription (Rājakumār Inscription), Pagán, 11.c. 
 
(Complete text of the Mon face) 
 
śrī       namo    buddh āya  śrī       s ās    kyek buddha  tirley   
prosperous reverence Buddha.to  prospe rous religion holy Buddha  lord:1s 
  
kuli  ’ ār moy l ïim    turow  kla ÿ   b ār cwas diñc ām  cnā m tuy   
last  GO one  thousand six    hundred two ten  eight   year  FINISH   
 
óey óuï ’arimaddanapur   wo’ smi ï śrītribhuwanādityadhammarāj   das. 
LOC town Arimaddanapura  this king  Śritribhuvanadityadhammaraja  be 
 
gna-kyek smin  gohh moy  trilokawa ñaÿsakādewī imo’.     kon gna-kyek 
queen    king  that  one  Trilokavatangsakadevi be.named son queen  
 
gohh r ājakumār   i m o ’ .     s m i nï gohh kil   óik  pi   tw āñ   ku 
that  Rajakumar be.named king   that  give  slave three village  OBL 
 
gna-kyek goh h. kāl  gna-kyek goh  cuti ’ār  ’ut  kiry ā  gna-kyek  gohh 
queen    that  time  queen    that die GO  all  regalia queen    that  
 
ku  óik  pi   tw āñ  goh smi ï tun   kil  ku  kon gna-kyek ma   
OBL slave three village that king  return  give OBL son queen     ATTR  
 
i m o ’     r ājakumār  goh . smiï gohh kmin b ār cwas diñc ām cnām tuy. 
be.named Rajakumar that king  that  reign two ten  eight  year  FINISH 
 
kāl  smi ï goh ’jey  ñan  scuti    kon  gna-kyek ma imo’   
time  king  that sick  near  PROSP:die son  queen   ATTR be.named  
 
rājakumār  goh  mirnas   gu õ  ma  smi ï iñcim  jirku.    kindaÿ  
Rajakumar  that remember merit ATTR king  feed   body/self  build 
 
kyek     thar  moy’ ār  tub ok  smi ï munas row    wo’: kyek    thar  
holy.thing  gold  one go  offer  king  inform manner this  holy.thing gold  
 
wo’ ey pa raÿpo’  tirla.óik  pi   tw āñ  ma  tirla kil  ku  ey goh h ey 
this 1s do behalf  lord slave three village ATTR lord give OBL 1s that  1s  
 
óik  kil  ku  kyek    wo’.tirla  ’anumodan ā da’.  kā l  goh  smiï 
slave give OBL holy.thing this lord  approve    FOC  time  that king   
 
sóik-gap-pumas.    thic  ’ ār  thic  ’ ār  smin  pa s ādhukār .      k āl   
PROSP:be.well.pleased well GO  well  GO  king  do verbal.approval time     
 
 
 
276 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
gohh tirla  poy mhā ther     tic ār     muggaliputtatissatther 
that   lord  1pl senior.monk venerable Muggaliputtatissathera 
 
ticār     sumedhapa õóit  tic ār      b r a h m a pāl  tic ār      b r a h m a d i w  
venerable Sumedhapandita venerable  Brahmapala  venerable Brahmadiva 
 
ticār      s o n  t i cār      s a ïghasenawarapaõóit   kinta     tirla  ta goh  
venerable Son venerable Sanghasenavarapandita  in.front.of  lord   PL that   
 
smiï cut óek  han ti.   blah     g o h   kon gna-kyek ma   imo’ 
king  put water LOC earth finished that  son queen    ATTR be.named 
 
rājakumār  goh  ket  kyek     thar  goh  thāpanā  kanda ÿ guoh clo ï 
Rajakumar that take  holy.thing  gold  that enshrine  build   cave spire 
 
thar  wo’. k āl  busac   kyek     guoh wo’ kon  gna-kyek goh  ket   
gold  this  time  dedicate holy.thing  cave this  son  queen    that take 
 
sakmunalon moy  tw āñ  rapā y  moy  tw āñ   ñahh gir uy  moy  tw āñ 
Sakmunalon one  village Rapay one  village Nyah Gir Uy one  village 
 
’ut  óik  pi   tw āñ  goh. cut óek  ku   kyek    ma  th āpanā  hin 
all  slave three village that put water OBL  holy.thing ATTR enshrine  LOC 
 
goh  wo’  rā dhanā row   wo’: sinra ï ey wo’ or das het  ku  gwo’ 
cave this  pray   manner this  act    1s this  let be  cause OBL get 
 
sarwwañutañāõ.  kon ey lah  c o w       e y  l a h  kulo    ey lah  ñah    c ’ e ï  
omniscience    son 1s too grandchild 1s too kinsman 1s too person other 
 
lah yal pa upadrow  ku  óik   ma  ey kil  kyek     wo’ ya ï  ñirñ āc 
too if  do harm    OBL slave  ATTR 1s give holy.thing  this EMPH NML:see 
 
kyek     trey  mettey   lah    or óeh go’. 
holy.thing  holy  Metteyya PROH  let 3   get  
 
 
Translation 
 
‘Prosperity! Reverence to the Buddha! Prosperi ty! When the religion of the 
Lord Buddha had lasted for one thousand six hundred twenty-e ight years, in 
the land Arimaddanapura (Pagán), Śrī Tribhuvanā dityadhammarāja 
(Kyansittha) became (king). One queen of that king was named 
Trilokavataÿsakādevī. The son of this queen weas named R ājākumar. The 
king gave three villages of slaves to the queen. When the queen died the king 
gave all the queen’s possessi ons together with the thr ee villages of slaves to 
the son of the queen, whose name was Rājākumar. 
 The king had reigned for twenty-eight  years when became sick. As he was 
approaching death, the queen’s son whose name was Rājākumar remembered 
 
 
277 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
the favoures with which the king ha d nourished him. He made a golden 
Buddha image and went to offer it to the king, saying: “This golden Buddha 
image I have made in behalf of my Lo rd. The three villages of slaves which 
my Lord has given to me, I will give to this Buddha image. May my Lord 
approve!” 
 The king was happy and well pleased. “W ell done, well done”, he expressed 
his approval. Then the king poured wate r onto the ground in the presence of 
the senior monk, the Venerable Muggaliputtatissa, the Venerable 
Sumedhapaõóita, the Venerable Brahmap āla, the Venerable Brahmadiva, the 
Venerable Son, and the Venerable Saïghasenapaõóita. 
 After this, the queen’s son who was named R ājākumar, took the golden 
Buddha image and enshrined it, buildi ng this golden spired cave pagoda. 
When dedicating this Buddha image and cave-pagoda, the queen’s son 
brought the slaves of all th ree villages, Sakmunalon, Rap āy, and Nyah 
Gir’uy. He poured water on (or for) the Buddha image that he had enshrined 
in this cave pagoda and prayed thus: “May  this act of mine be a cause for the 
attainment of omniscience. Be it my children, my grandchildren, my 
kinsmen, be it any other person, if the do harm to the slaves that I have given 
to this Buddha image, may they not ge t sight of the exalted Buddha Metteya 
(the Buddha of the future).”’ 
 
 
2. Middle Mon: Shwedagon Inscription, Rangoon, 15.c 
 
(face B, lines 15-21 ) 
 
nor cn ām tila puiy  ky āk tray   ma pa parinibbā n gah b ā  kla ÿ    pi  
ABL year  lord 1pl  holy  exalted REL do Nibbana   TOP two hundred three 
 
cwoh turau cnām gah kali  lon   ’ ā  tuy,   tila puiy  ’arahan  b ā   ma  
ten  six   year  TOP pass  exceed GO  FINISH lord 1pl  Arahant two  REL 
 
himu soõathe  uttarathe   gah klu ï  p t a n      s āsanā  p óay  
name Sonathera Uttarathera TOP come CAUS:firm religion LOC   
 
suwaõõabhum  ra.  kh ā  s āsanā  ma tan  tuy   gam ī truh   
Suvannabhumi FOC time  religion REL firm  FINISH monk male 
  
gamī  b r a u    sāmaõī truh  s āmaõī brau   kh ā  ma nwom tuy   gah 
monk  female novice male novice female time  REL exist  FINISH TOP 
 
khā  gah smi ï sirim āsoka gah gah ku  tila puiy  b ā   ra:   yo’ tila ey,  
time  TOP king  Sirimasoka TOP say OBL lord 1pl  two  FOC  oh  lord 1s 
 
dhamma-rat   sa ïgha-rat    gah puiy  óik  go’ liïw or  p ūjau   ra.   
Dhamma-jewel Sangha-jewel TOP 1pl  slave get worship respect   FOC  
 
buddha -ratana mwoy gah  puiy  óik  mik lo ïwor  p ūjau  ha  go’ swo’. 
Buddha-jewel one   TOP  1pl  slave DES worship respect NEG GET EMPH 
 
 
 
278 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
dhāt  ky āk tray    tuy   puiy  óik  ma sgo’      phyih     cuit    
relic  holy  exalted  FINISH 1pl  slave REL PROSP:GET CAUS:down heart  
 
buddha-rat    puiy  ói k   m a  s g o ’       l iïwor  p ūjau   ey-puray  gah.   
Buddha-jewel 1pl   slave REL PROSP:GET worship respect  venerate  TOP   
 
tila  ey ta’ re ï    ku  puiy  óik  ñi.     rau    gah smi ï pa   
lord  1s PL arrange  OBL 1pl  slave LITTLE  manner TOP king  do   
 
’āyācanā  ku  tila puiy  ra.   kh ā  gah tila puiy  mah āt h e     b ā  gah 
request   OBL lord 1pl  FOC   time  TOP lord 1pl  senior.monk  two TOP  
 
cetī   d h āt  swok ky āk tray   min tapussa  bhallika ma th āpanā lar 
pagoda relic  hair  holy  exalted REL Tapussa Bhallika REL enshrine KEEP 
 
póay latū  kóip  tmo’ tambagutta  dasuiw  gruip   ma grop badan  lar 
LOC  top head rock  Tambagutta  bush   forest   REL cover hide   KEEP 
 
tuy   ma ña ḥ   h a   t i m   d n āy gah,  tab aḥ kuiw ku  smi ï  sirimāsoka  
FINISH REL person NEG know place TOP  show GIVE OBL king  Sirimasoka 
 
ra.  khā   gah smi ï sirimāsoka kuiw ïaḥ  ta ḥ  kle’   ca’a ḥ jïaḥ  kle’ 
FOC time  TOP king  Sirimasoka GIVE clear clean LEAVE clear clean LEAVE 
 
dasuiw gruip  tuy   ce tī    kuim  lar  pras āt   ma dah guim 
bush  forest  FINISH pagoda  also   too pavilion REL be  lamp(?) 
 
cetīya- ghara   kuim lar  kuiw kana ÿ tuy   pa tau   p ūjau  ra.   
pagoda-building also too GIVE build  FINISH do STAND respect FOC  
 
pa taÿ     n ū  gah kuim n óa’uit ku  ñaḥ   m a  t a u   p óay th ān      
do beginning ABL TOP also  FOC all OBL person REL stand LOC  place  
 
raḥ    rman wwo’ gah pabwoy rame ï      h e ï   ma klu ï   
country Mon this  TOP ADV    ATTR:arrange EMPH  REL come  
 
tau   p ūjau   heï  ra. 
STAND respect  EMPH FOC 
 
Translation  
 
‘When two hundred thirty six years had elapsed after the Lord Buddha 
entered Nibbana, two Arahants called Soõathera and Uttarathera came to 
establish the religion in  the land Suvannabhumi. When the religion was 
established and there were monks a nd nuns, male and female novices, King 
Sirimāsoka said to the two Arahants: “My lords, we now have the jewel of 
the Doctrine (Dhamma) and the jewel of the monks’ order (Sa ïgha) to 
worship and pay respects to, but we w ould also like to, but cannot worship 
 
 
279 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
and pay respect to the jewel of the B uddha. In order that we may lay down 
our hearts to the jewel of the Buddha, that we may worship and praise Him, 
please arrange and bring us a holy relic. ” Thus made the king his request to 
the two holy men. Then the two Arahants showed King Sirim āsoka the 
pagoda in which Tapussa and Bhallika had enshrined the hair relic of the 
Lord on top of Tambagutta Hill, whicch was all covered with bush and wood, 
so that no one knew its place. Then King Sirim āsoka had the bush and wood 
cut away and the place cleared. The pagoda as well as the pavilion which was 
the building surrounding the pagoda he ha d (re-)built and he paid respect (to 
the relic) Since that time, all pe ople living in the Mon Kingdom came in 
succession to worship (at this pagoda).’ 
 
 
3. Literary Mon: The story of King Dhammacetī (Palita 1985:15f) 
 
(Context: The Mon queen Mi Cao Pu wa s kidnapped by the soldiers of the 
Burmese king and taken to Ava, where she lives as chief queen of King Min 
Yeswakyi. Her adopt ed son, the monk Pi ñakadhara, follows her to Ava. He 
stays at a local monastery, looking for an  opportunity to see her in the king’s 
palace and make plans to bring her back to Haÿsavatī.) 
 
bnat   mway t ïay  kui ÿ lew cuit  hwa’ mip   la ḥ-laḥ ra.   bui ÿ   
extent one   day  also  too heart NEG  happy at.all  FOC  likeness 
 
luiw   gwa’ pru-pre ï  c ī-reï   tuy   gwa’ duï    phyau       
which GET  organise  arrange  FINISH GET  receive  CAUS:RETURN  
 
naï       gah  ro.  ’ay gwa’ du ï    phyau      na ï         
CAUS:COME  TOP  QREL 1s  GET  receive  CAUS:RETURN CAUS:COME   
 
mi    ekarā j  b r a u    m i     sāsanā  ’ay da ḥ gl āy    nay-kay khuih  ra. 
mother king   female mother religion 1s  HIT look.for method  good    FOC  
 
dmåï  t h o ’     b uih-buih hwa’ tiÿ  guõ    ña ḥ-ska’   gah hwa’ 
stay   THROW  calm- RDP NEG  know merit   each.other  TOP NEG    
 
daḥ-raḥ   ra.   [...] ’agho  dmå ï ’ā  p óay bhā       t u i k     l i k    g a h  
appropriate FOC    w h i l e   s t a y   GO  LOC  monastery  building book TOP  
 
suiÿ kat  lik   bh āsā    b m ā     s u i ÿ twa ĥ  dhaw    bh āsā  
INCL study book language   Burmese  INCL preach Dhamma  language  
 
bmā     plan  ra.   kon  ñaḥ   óuï ’aïwa gamlui ï   s g o ’      m i ï 
Burmese  again FOC  child person city Ava   ATTR:many PROSP:GET hear 
 
ket  rah  dhaw    khm ī  ma ñ  mahāpitakadhara  tuy   ktuiw  dah  
TAKE taste Dhamma monk  Mon Mahapiñakadhara  FINISH arise  be 
 
 
 
280 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
dhaw    saddh ā lyuï   j r uï  s óuik   jnok  kuiw jrahat     ’uit ra. 
Dhamma faith  bright  clear pleasant big  OBL  NML:strong all  FOC 
 
nū  gwa’ mi ï  r a h   d h a w     óuin  óot  jip-glip  mip    p óay katow 
ABL GET  hear  taste Dhamma soft  small subtle   pleasant LOC  ear 
 
gah tuy,   kluï  bagin chak   kw āy   tm āy dhaw    bway  ma  glui ï,  
TOP FINISH come offer continue present  gift  Dhamma ADV   REL much  
 
pūjau   dhaw    ’uit ra.  [...] par ū -parā dayah-tah gal ān rah  dhaw 
respect  Dhamma all  FOC    n e w s     f a m e     w o r d  t a s t e  D h a m m a   
 
gah cuip   ’ ā  tla   ñaḥ   m a ï  re-chw ā-gī  tuy   pmik    cuit  ktuiw  
TOP arrive  GO  lord  person Min  Yeswakyi  FINISH NML:DES  heart arise  
 
dah mik-gwa’ kalaï paï-hmiï dhaw    khm ī  mañ  kon óuï haÿsāwatī 
be  DES     listen listen    Dhamma monk  Mon son city Pegu 
 
ra.  huit   n ū  gnap  mik-gwa’ miï   dhaw    jnok  kuiw jrahat 
FOC reason ABL desire  DES     hear  Dhamma big  OBL  NML:strong 
 
gah tuy   nwa ÿ ’asaÿ   kuiw niman kña  na ï       k h m ī piñakadhara  
TOP FINISH exist  order  GIVE invite  invite  CAUS:COME  monk Piñakadhara 
  
póay nan   kuiw klu ï  twa ĥ  d h a w     r a .   ’cā    d h a w   
LOC  palace GIVE come preach Dhamma FOC  teacher  Dhamma 
 
dayah-tamñaw  lup  cuip   klu ï   w a ï      n a n    e k a r āj tuy   dn āy  
f a m o u s        e n t e r  a r r i v e   COME  compound palace king   FINISH place 
 
thek  kuiw kon ky āk ta’  gja’ pa datau     gah nwa ÿ ’asaÿ   kuiw  
fit   GIVE son holy  PL  sit  do NML:stand  TOP exist  order  give   
 
’akhoï    t u i n     g j a ’  l a tū  pna ï  ekarā j ra.   khyuin  kha õa   gah 
permossion move.up sit  top  throne king   FOC  t i m e     m o m e n t  TOP  
 
twaĥ dhaw    pmiï     dhammadesan ā  kuiw ekar āj kamlon 
preach Dhamma CAUS:hear  Dhamma.sermon GIVE king   ATTR:make  
 
moï-ma óik  tla gamlui ï   t u y    t l a   ñ a ḥ   m i ï  da ḥ ramy āï  
consort  slave lord  ATTR:many FINISH lord person hear  HIT sound  
 
d h a w     s p a      ’ a s a w    b w a y  m a  l o n    ’ u i h - t a m u i h   m i p    c u i t  
Dhamma PROSP:do wonder ADV  REL exceed pleased    happy heart 
 
bway  ma  lon   tuy   niman law  swak gwa’ twa ĥ  dhaw  
ADV   REL  exceed FINISH invite  KEEP for   GET  preach Dhamma 
 
póay wa ï      n a n    l m u i n   k āla  ro ï. 
LOC  compound palace always time  ASRT 
 
 
281 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Translation 
 
‘Not a single day was  (Piñ akadhara) happy in his heart. “How can I arrange 
and organise to bring my mother, the queen, the mother of our religion back? 
I have to find a good way to  bring her back. It is no t appropriate for me to 
stay calm, not doing anything, ungrateful to each other.  
 While staying at he monastery, whic h had a library, he studied the Burmese 
texts and gave sermons in Burmese. The people of Ava heard the Dhamma 
sermons of the Mon monk Mah āpiñakadhara and gained clear and bright faith 
in the Dhamma. After having heard his soft and subtle preachings, which was 
pleasant in the ear, they came to make religious offerings to him and pay 
respect to the Dhamma. 
 The news about the famous preacher  got through to King Min Yeswakyi. A 
desire arose in him to hear the Mon m onk, the son of the city of Pegu, preach 
the Dhamma. Because of his strong desi re to hear a sermon, the king ordered 
(his ministers) to invite the monk Pi ñakadhara to come to the palace and 
preach the Dhamma. When the famous  Dhamma preacher arrived at the 
palace compound and looked for an appropriate place for a son of the Lord to 
sit and install himself, the king gave permission for him to ascend the royal 
throne and sit upon it. The the monk gave his sermon, he le t the king and his 
attendants and consorts, together with the slaves and masters, hear the 
Dhamma. When the king heard the sound of the preaching, he was filled with 
great amazement. He was very happy a nd content at heart and extended an 
invitation (to Pi ñakadhara) to regularly come to the palace and preach the 
Dhamma.’ 
 
 
4. Spoken Mon: Memories of a temple boy (Kanni dialect) 
 
kyac  hnòk h əlh     n a       ʔ əkùn  nà ŋ.   t h nì ʔmòn  ə m səlì 
monk  big  CAUS:free CAUS:GO  monk  Naing HIT invite   LOC Mesali  
 
tʔ. cao   k -pn168 t  t k  p n  nə i  k əriəŋ k h kok: ‘ ʔ  khə n,  
that return  eat      a bout beat  four  hour Karen TOP call  eat  noodle  
 
ʔ  khə n’ iəʔ hənm iə  h ənm toə,   iəʔ  iəʔ  to ə   ʔəkùn  nà ŋ  
eat  noodle eat  noodle eat  noodle FINISH eat   eat   FINISH monk  Naing  
 
k-pn toə    ʔt to ə,   ʔ  k h t t  kl ŋ,  kyàn,  kyàn èh   a      
eat    FINISH all  FINISH PREF TOP exit COME  Kyan  Kyan person two    
 
ʔuə, kyàn èh   a  ʔuə  kyàn èh   a  ʔuə kwah phə   kon ʔ   
1s  Kyan person two 1s   Kyan person two 1s  pupil temple son PREF  
 
ʔənòk     hə ʔi  k h h ch  t h  prp,   h ch  t h pr p 
grandfather Kha’i TOP 3   meet HIT squirrel 3   meet HIT squirrel 
     
                                                      
168 k pn ‘eat’, lit. ‘give merit’ is a term used only for monks. 
 
 
282 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
iəʔ pərà. iəʔ ʔt ʔa  phyun, c ʔ l    m ʔ  t əkə.       iəʔ təkə 
eat  plum  eat  all  GO  flesh  put KEEP seed  hang.down eat  hang.down 
 
mùə tə.  s t  pì,   s t  pì  nùm  m ŋ  k h,  h klʔ      ʔ a  n m   
one hand fruit bael  fruit bael exist STAY TOP  3   cross.over GO  tree   
 
st    p ì    k h.  kyàn  k ʔ ʔa  s t    p ì    p n  m ʔ toə   poy t ʔ  
fruit  bael  TOP  Kyan  get GO  fruit  bael  four  CL  FINISH 1pl PL 
 
khrʔ      c e h    ʔa,  ceh      ʔa  ʔəhm  t   t ʔ. poy  
walk.proudly DOWN GO  move.down GO  beneath hill that 1pl  
 
c e h         ʔəhm  t   k h ,   c e h       ʔəhm  t   k h ʔa klt   
move.down  beneath hill TOP  move.down beneath hill TOP go steal  
 
mənao.  ʔa hum  ac  ə kwan  k əriəŋ k h,  kl t  m ənao “ təkho,  
lemon  go bathe water  LOC village Karen TOP  steal lemon  thief   
 
təkho” krìp ceh   ʔa  krìp t n pl n.  krìp t n r ŋ ʔa  ph ə 
thief  run DOWN GO  run UP  again  run UP  look GO  monastery 
 
kʔ-kyac  t ʔ,  àt hə ʔt.   r ŋ  ʔa  ph ə     k ʔ-kyac  àt 
Ko’ Kyaik that  see ADV:all  look  GO  monastery  Ko’ Kyaik see 
  
həʔt   toə    [...] poy t ʔ  cao   hù ʔ  t h ra.   kwac  ʔa  nù   
ADV:all  FINISH    1pl PL  return  NEG  HIT FOC  walk  GO  ABL 
 
lŋ-kəmn   n ʔ th ʔ  làk  s ŋ  k əpac tʔ t ʔ, làk  àn  to ə   teh, 
Laung Kamon this GOAL reach shore side  that that reach Nyan  FINISH COND 
 
àn  to ə   t e h   ʔa ʔa ʔa,  kwac kwac kwac, ŋuə klù ʔ  ʔa  kle  m ŋ  
Nyan FINISH COND go go go  walk walk walk sun dark  GO  dirty STAY 
 
həʔt.  [...] kh k m ŋ  ə r p   t ʔ, rp   hə lʔ yh-yh.  ʔa ʔa ʔa  
ADV:all     stuck STAY LOC thicket that thicket thorn many-RDP  go go go 
 
èh   h m, wèy! èh   h m èh   h əklʔ       k    ʔəkùn  to ə,   
person speak hey  pe rson speak person CAUS:cross.over GIVE monk  FINISH 
    
həklʔ,        h əklʔ       t o ə    l à c    ʔa  ph ə     k h, làc   ʔa 
CAUS:cross.over CAUS:cross.over FINISH reach GO  monastery  TOP reach GO 
 
phə,     kyac hnòk k   th ʔ    h l o ə.  ʔuə k ʔ mùə  kl m   th .   
monastery  monk big  give THROW  money 1s  get one  hundred only   
 
 
 
283 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
ʔəkùn pà   h m ʔ pa ʔ  ket ra ʔ lèy!   pu ə       r a o  h ù ʔ  t h 
monk Paing speak 2 fam PROH take FOC EMPH  performance TOP NEG  be 
 
mŋ  ra ʔ. ʔeʔ, ket  th ʔ   k əpac th ra ʔ! ʔa nìʔmòn  hù ʔ  ʔon  l ʔ    
STAY FOC eh  take  THROW half  only FOC go invite   NEG  few  long  
 
ʔuə, ʔa mùʔ-ciʔ   coh ŋuə hùʔ t m,  c h to ə   èh   k    k əpac 
1s   go how.much  ten day NEG know thus FINISH person give  half   
 
toə   k h ʔuə ʔa ràn iə  th ʔ. 
FINISH TOP 1s  go buy eat  THROW 
 
 
Translation 
 
‘The abbot let Rev. Naing go. We were i nvited to Mesali. We went back to 
eat. It was about four o’clock, and the Karen shouted “O khan , o khan”,169 
eat noodles, eat noodles. We ate the noodles, and when Rev. Naing had 
finished his meal, that guy came out, Kyan. Kyan and me, the two of us 
temple students, the son of old Kha’i,  he saw a squirrel . He saw a squirrel 
eating wild plums. It ate all the fl esh and the seed was hanging down. The 
seed was hanging down in one hand, and then there were bael fruit. It jumped 
over to that bael fruit tree. Kyan got away with four bael fruit, and we 
proudly walked down that hill. We went down that hill, and when we wwere 
at the foot of the hill we went stealing lemons. We went to take a bath in that 
Karen village and we stole some lemons. “Takho, takho!”
170  (the Karen 
shouted) and we ran down and then we ran up again. We ran up and looked at 
Ko’ Kyaik monastery over there and we  could see everything. We looked at 
Ko’ Kyaik monastery and we could see everything, and then we did not know 
the back anymore. We walked from Long Kamon all the way to the bank 
over there. We came to Nyan. we came  to Nyan and went on and on and on, 
we walked and walked and walked. It got  dark and we were all dity. We got 
stuck in a thicket, in a thicket with lots of thorns. We went on and on, until 
someone said “hey, I’ll take you over to the other side, Reverend”. He took 
us across the river and we reached th e monastery. We reached the monastery 
and the abbot gave us some mone y. I got only one hund red (Kyat). Rev. 
Paing said “Don’t take any money! Th ere is no more performance going on. 
OK, take half of it.” I had been on invitation tour
171 quite some time, I don’t 
know how many tens of days. Well, he gave me half of the money and I went 
to buy something to eat.’ 
 
 
                                                      
169 Karen ‘eat noodles’ 
170 B. thăhkòu ‘thief’ 
171 nìʔmòn from Pali nimanteti means ‘invite a monk, especially to offer him food at one’s 
house’. 
 
 
284 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix E: Table of Operators and SFPs. 
 
Operator Gloss Position Neg. 1-w Meaning 
ʔa go OP2 + + PURP 
ʔa go OP3 - - CONT, INCREASE, INGR, DIR 
cp arrive OP3 + ?+/- DIR 
cao return OP3 - - DIR 
ceh down OP2 + + PURP 
ceh down OP3 - - DIR 
ceh down OP4 + + RVC: SUCCESS 
iəʔ eat OP3 - - unimportant event?, 
immediate result?
ha Q SFP - - INTERROGATIVE 
k give OP1 + + OPTATIVE , CAUS  
k give OP3 - - BENEFACTIVE 
kʔ get OP2 - - POT?, INGR?, get to V  
kʔ get OP3 +/- +/- SVC: SUCCESS, get 
kʔ get OP4 + + POT 
kəliəŋ return OP2 - - REPETITION, back 
ket take OP3 - - OWN BENEFIT, self 
kiəŋ accustomed OP2 + - EXPER 
klŋ come OP2 + + PURP 
klŋ come OP3 - - CONT, INCREASE, INGR, DIR 
kla before SFP - - PROVISORY, for now 
l keep OP3 - - PREPARATIVE, RLNQ 
lèp, màn able, win OP4(/3) + + POT, ABILITY 
lùp enter OP2 + + PURP 
lùp enter OP3 - - DIR 
mŋ, tao stay, stand OP3 - - DUR, ACTUAL, Ø 
mòc, məkʔ want OP2 + - DESIDERATIVE 
nm, phh still SFP - - PERSISTIVE 
noŋ ASRT SFP - - ASRT 
ìʔ little SFP - - IMPERATIVE, POLITENESS 
pln return SFP - - REPETITION, again 
rao Q SFP - - REALTIVE INTERROGATIVE 
raʔ (be) SFP - - FOCUS 
th hit OP1 + + PASS 
th hit OP2 + - OBLIGATION, NECESSITY 
th hit OP3 - - -VOLITION, inadvertently 
th hit OP4 + + RVC: correct 
tn move up OP2 - + PURP 
tn move up OP3 - - INGR, SURPRISE, INCREASE, DIR 
tt exit OP2 + + PURP 
tt exit OP3 - - DIR 
tt exit OP4 + + RVC: SUCCESS 
teh if SFP - - TOPIC, CONDITIONAL 
thʔ throw OP3 - - PFTV, UNDELIBERATE 
toə finish OP4 + + PERF, FINISH, EXPER 
yaʔ NSIT SFP - - NSIT 
 
 
285 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix F: Text sources 
 
Title Period Location / kind of 
text 
Source(s) 
Ajapāla MM Ajapālacetīya 
Inscription, Pegu 
15th c. 
Hkyit Thein 1965. 
An OM Jātaka glosses at 
the Ananda 
Temple, Pagán 12
th 
c. 
Duroiselle 1962. 
DC intermediary 
LM 
Story of 
Dhammacetī 
Palita 1985. 
DMI OM, MM  Shorto 1971. 
DSM SM Kaw Kyaik, Karen 
State 
Shorto 1962. 
Guiding Star modern LM Mon newspaper Guiding Star. 
Hongchan modern 
LM/SM 
Song lyrics Karaoke VCD 
Jat classical LM 550 Jātaka tales Acā Hwo’ 1982. 
KD SM Ko’ Dot, Mon 
State 
audio recording 
KKP SM Ko’ Kapoun, Mon 
State 
audio recording 
KLY MM Duroiselle 
1921/1928. 
Kalyāõī Thein 
Inscription, Pegu 
15
th c. 
KN SM Kanni, Karen State audio recording 
Ku OM Kubyauk-Gyi 
Inscriptions, Pagán 
12th c. 
Luce and Bohmu Ba 
Shin 1961. 
Kyansittha OM Kyansittha’s 
Palace Inscription, 
Pagán 11
th-12th c. 
Hkyit Thein 1965, 
Hpei Maung Tin 
1957. 
 
 
286 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
LPM modern LM collection of Mon 
Prose 
Htun Thein 
(undated). 
Mahārāma MM Mahārāma 
inscription, Pegu 
15
th c. 
Hkyit Thein 1965. 
MKP modern LM Candimācāra 2001. Mi Kon Pliÿ 
Myakan Hkyit Thein 1965, 
Duroiselle 1921. 
OM Myakan 
Inscription, Pagán 
11
th c. 
Myazedi OM Myazedi 
Inscription, Pagán 
12
th c. 
Duroiselle 1960, 
Hkyit Thein 1965,  
Pu Pa 1999, Than 
Hswei 1971. 
NOP SM elicited data, Nai 
Ok Pung, Wangka 
field notes 
classical LM  Khun Lau 1997. Rājavaÿsakathā 
RDR classical LM Rājādhirāj, 
historical novel 
Pan Hla 1958. 
SDG MM Shwedagon 
Inscription, 
Rangoon 15
th c. 
Hkyit Thein 1965, 
Lu Hpei Win 1958. 
SGD classical LM Mem Ong 1999, 
Kalyāõa 1999. 
Legend of Saïgadā 
SSK OM Shweizigon 
Inscription, Pagán 
11th c. 
Duroiselle 1972, 
Hkyit Thein 1965, 
Hpei Maung Tin 
1965. 
WK SM Sangkhlaburi, 
Thailand 
audio recording 
 
 
 
 
287 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Biblographic data of published text sources: 
Aca Hwo’. 1982. z.tjwt¸ÕmqunjkL·mqunjesH.j (550 Jātaka Tales) 2vls. [in Mon]. Moulmein: 
Mi Nyo’ Piñaka Shop.  
Candimācāra (ed.) 2001. miek.njpLJ (Mi Kon Pli ÿ). [in Mon] Moulmein: Klo’ Pakao 
Monastery. 
Duroiselle, Charles (ed.) 1921/1928. Epigraphica Birmanica. Vol. III. [Part 1: 1921, 
Part 2: 1928]. Rangoon: Government Printing and Stationery. 
Duroiselle, Charles (ed.) 1960/1972. Epigraphica Birmanica. Vol. I . [1st. ed. 1919]. 
Rangoon: Government Printing and Stationery. 
Duroiselle, Charles (ed.) 1962. Epigraphica Birmanica. Vol II. The Talaing Plaques 
on the Ananda Plates. [1st ed. 1921]. Rangoon: Government Printing and Stationery. 
Guiding Star. qN·cjtuicj. [Newspaper in Mon]. Bangkok, Sangkhlaburi. 
Hpei Maung Tin. 1957. likjtMajmnjnnjqMicjk[.njey[tj  
(The Palace Inscription of Kyansittha). [Mon, Burmese] Rangoon: Ministry of Union 
Culture. 
Hpei Maung Tin. 1965. eräsvj,Ku·mWnjek[.kjs. (The Shweizigon Mon inscription). [Mon, 
Burmese] Rangoon: Ministry of Union Culture. 
Htun Thein, Nai. [undated] likjpl,mnj (Mon prose). [in Mon] Rangoon: Mon 
Literature and Culture Committee. 
Kalyāõa, Nai. 1999. ek.njqMicjqgád> (Prince Sa ïgadā). [in Mon]. Pha’auk: New 
Monastery. 
Khun Lau, Nai (ed.) 1997. r.z.w·qkT. (Rājāwaÿsakathā - The royal chronicles). [in 
Mon]. Sangkhlaburi: NOP C&D. 
Luce, G. H. and Bohmu Ba Shin. 1961. Pagan Myinkaba Kubyauk-Gyi Temple of 
Rājākumār. (The Mon writings on its walls.) Rangoon: Bulletin of the Burma 
Historical Commission. Vol. II, 1961. 
Mem Ong, Nai (ed.) 1999. wt¸Õqcjgd> (The Story of Saïgadā). [in Mon] Wangka: Mon 
Culture Committee. 
Pa Pu, Nai (ed.) 1999. \dhtjlikjtM·mnj (The power of Mon inscriptions). [in Mon]. 
Association of Monks teaching Mon inscriptions (Moulmein?). 
Palita, Nai. 1985. at¸ÕpPtÐipRUddHj¿kr.zjmvjqMicj 
Dm?estI (The story of King Dhammacetī). [in Mon]. Rangoon: Shwei Pyei Soun Offset. 
Pan Hla, Nai (ed.) 1958. a±kJk|molWIr.z.Dir.zj (Struggle of Razadarit). [in Mon]. 
Rangoon: Burma Research Society. 
Than Hswei, Daw. 1971. r.z.kum.rj mWnjek[.kjs. el<l.K[kj (The Rajakumar Mon 
Inscription - exercise) [Mon, Burmese]. Rangoon: The Hanthawaddy Press. 
Hkyit Thein, U. 1965. mWnjek[.kjs.ep>cj,K[Õpj (Collection of Mon inscriptions). [I. Mon 
texts, II.Burmese translations]. Rangoon: Historical Research Department. 
Lu Hpei Win, U. 1958. likjtMajmnjk[.jlàÕcj (The Shwedagon Mon Inscription). [Mon, 
Burmese]. Rangoon: Ministry of Union Culture. 
 
 
288 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Appendix G: References 
 
Aung-Thwin, Michael. 2001. The Legend that was Lower Burma.  Paper presented at 
the International Conference on Text and Context in Yangon, December 2001. 
Bauer, Christian. 1982. Morphology and Syntax of Spoken Mon. [unpublished 
dissertation]. London: SOAS. 
Bauer, Christian. 1986. “Structural borrowing in Mon. Towards language death?” In 
Journal of Language and Culture. Bangkok: Mahidol University. 
Bauer, Christian. 1989. “The verb in spoken Mon.” In  Mon-Khmer Studies 15 , 87-
110.  
Bauer, Christian. 1991a. “Notes on Mon epigraphy.” In Journal of the Siam Society, 
Vol. 79/1, 31-83. 
Bauer, Christian. 1991b. “Old Mon s-.” In Davidson, J.H.C.S. (ed.) Austroasiatic 
Languages. Essays in honour of H. L. Shorto, 241-249. London: SOAS. 
Bauer, Christian. 1992. “OM [s-] Addenda.” In: Mon Khmer Studies XVIII-XIX , 
250-253.  
Benedict, Paul K. 1991. “Austric: An ‘extinct’ proto-language.” In Davidson, 
J.H.C.S. (ed.) Austroasiatic Languages, 7-11. London: SOAS. 
Bhumisak, Chit. 2004. โองการแชงน้ําและขอคิดใหมในประวัติศาสตรไทยลุมน้ําเจสพระยา (The water 
allegiance and new thoughts on Thai history in the Menam basin) [In Thai] 1 st ed. 
1981. Bangkok: Fah Diau Kan. 
Bisang, Walter. 1992. Das Verb im Chinesischen, Hmong, Vietnamesischen, Thai 
und Khmer.  Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. 
Bisang, Walter. 1996. “Areal typology and grammaticalization: Processes of 
grammaticalization based on nouns and verbs in East and Mainland South East Asian 
languages.” In Studies in Language 20/3, 519-597.  
Boonyapatiphak, Tasanalai. 1983. A Study of Aspect in Thai.  [unpublished 
dissertation]. London: SOAS.    
Brown, Marvin. 1985. From Ancient Thai to Modern Dialects.  Bangkok: White 
Lotus. 
Burusphat, Somsonge et al. (eds.) 1996. Languages and Cultures of the Kam-Tai 
(Zhuang-Dong) Group: A Word List.  Bangkok: Mahidol University. 
Byrne, Francis and Thom Huebner (eds.) 1991.  Development and Structures of 
Creole Languages. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Byrne, Francis. 1991. “Approaches to missing internal (and external) arguments in 
serial structures”.  In Byrne, Francis and Thom Huebner (eds.) Development and 
Structures of Creole Languages, 207-222. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Campell, G. 1986. Specimens of Languages of India. [1st ed. 1874]. New Delhi: 
Asian Educational Services. 
Coedès, G. 1968. The Indianized States of Southeast Asia. Honolulu: UP of Hawaii. 
Comrie, Bernard. 1995 (1976). Aspect.  Cambridge: UP. 
Comrie, Bernard. 1985. Tense.  Cambridge: UP. 
 
 
289 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Costello, Nancy A. and Khamluan Sulavan. 1993. Katu Folktales and Society. 
Katu-Lao-English. Vietniane: Ministry of Information and Culture. 
Cushing, D. D. 1906. Elementary handbook of the Shan language. Rangoon: 
American Baptist Mission Press. 
Crystal, David. 1998. A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics. [1st ed. 1980]. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Davids, Rhys T.W. and William Stede. 2003. Pali – English Dictionary. [1st ed. 
1921-1925]. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 
Diffloth, Gérard. 1984. Dvaravati Old Mon and Nyah Kur. Monic Language 
Studies, Vol. I. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn UP. 
Durie, Mark. 1997. “Grammatical Structures in Verb Serialization.” In Alsina, Alex 
et al. (eds.) Complex Predicates, 289-354. Stanford: CSLI Lecture Notes 64. 
Ebert, Karen H. 1991. “Vom Verbum dicendi zur Konjunktion: Ein Kapitel 
universaler Grammatikentwicklung.” In Bi sang, Walter and Peter Rinderknecht. Von 
Europa bis Ozeanien - von der Antonymie zum Relativsatz, 77-95. Zurich: ASAS 11. 
Ebert, Karen H. 1994. The Structure of Kiranti Languages. Comparative Grammar 
and Texts. Zurich: ASAS 13. 
Ebert, Karen H. 2001. “Tense-aspect flip-flop and a somewhat elusive gram type.” 
In Ebert, Karen H. and Fernando Zúñiga. Aktionsart and Aspectotemporality in Non-
European Languages, 141-158. Zurich: ASAS 16. 
Ebert, Karen H. and Fernando Zúñiga (eds.) 2001. Aktionsart and Aspecto-
temporality in Non-European Languages. Zurich: ASAS 16. 
Enfield, N. J. 2001. “Remarks on John Haiman, 1999.” In Studies in Language 25/1, 
115-124. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Enfield, N. J. 2003. Linguistic Epidemiology.  London: Routledge Curzon. 
Ferlus, Michel. 1986. “Essai de Phonétique Historique du Môn” In Mon-Khmer 
Studies XII, 1-90.  
Foley, William A. 1986. The Papuan Languages of New Guinea.  Cambridge: UP. 
Gainey, Jaroon. 1990. “Causativization in Nyah Kur.” In Mon-Khmer Studies 16-17, 
25-30.  
Givón, T. 1984. Syntax - a functional-typological introduction. Volume I 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Co. 
Guillon, Emmanuel. 1971. “Sur 21 chansons populaires Môn.” In L’Homme XI-2, 
58-108. Paris: Mouton & Co. 
Guillon, Emmanuel. 1974. “Recherches sur quelques inscriptions Môn.” In Bulletin 
de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient LXI, 83-120. 
Guillon, Emmanuel. 1976. “Some aspects of Mon syntax.” In Jenner Ph. et al (eds.)  
Austroasiatic Studies, 407-421. Hawaii: UP. 
Guillon, Emmanuel. 1977. “Recherches sur quelques in scriptions Mônes.” In 
Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient LXIV, 339-348. 
Guillon, Emmanuel. 1999. The Mons. A Civilizatio n in Southeast Asia.  Bangkok: 
Siam Society. 
Guillon, Emmanuel. 2003. Parlons Môn.  Paris: L’Harmattan. 
 
 
290 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Haiman, John. 1978. “Conditionals are Topics.” In Language 54/3, 564-589.  
Haiman, John. 1999. “Auxiliation in Khmer- The case of baan.” In Studies in 
Language 23/1, 149-172. 
Halliday, R. 1917. The Talaings. Rangoon: Government Printing. 
stHalliday, R. 1955. A Mon-English Dictionary. [1  ed. 1922]. Rangoon: Ministry of 
Union Culture. 
Hansell, Mark. 1993. “Serial Verbs and Complement Constructions in Mandarin: A 
Clause Linkage Analysis.” In Van Valin, Robert, Jr. (ed) Advances in Role and 
Reference Grammar, 197-233. Amsterdam/ Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Haswell, J.M. 1901. Grammatical Notes and Vocabulary of the Peguan Language. 
2nd ed. edited by E.O. Stevens [reprint 2002]. Rangoon: American Baptist Mission 
Press.   
Hawkins, Peter. 1984. Introducing Phonology.  London: Routledge. 
Heine, Bernd and Tania Kuteva. 2002. World Lexicon of Grammaticalization.  
Cambridge: UP. 
Hopper, Paul. J. and Elizabeth Closs Traugott. 1993. Grammaticalization.  
Cambridge: UP. 
Htun Thein, Nai. 1995. mWnjae]k.cj,qiek.cj,sr. ×Hcj<a\K.,eS.cj,p>,m[., (Interesting facts about 
the Mon and other writings). [in Burmese] Rangoon: Mon Literature and Culture 
Committee. 
Htun, Thein. Nai. 1980. ek[.cj,qu·, mWnj -\mnjm. aBiD>nj ×Hcj< qd¡>× iécj,yHxjK[kj (Mon -Burmese 
dictionary with grammatical notes for school use). [in Burmese] Moulmein: Sein 
Yatana Parikkhara. 
Hudak, Thomas John (ed.) 1997. William J. Gedney’s Thai and Indic Literary 
Studies. Michigan Papers on South and Southeast Asia Nr. 46.  Michigan: UP. 
Iwasaki, Shoichi and Foong-Ha Yap. 2000. “‘Give’ constructions in Thai and 
beyond: A cognitive and grammaticalizati on perspective.” In Somsonge Burusphat 
(ed.) Proceedings of the International C onference on Tai Studies July 29-31, 1998 , 
371-382. Bangkok: Mahidol University. 
Jacob, Judith M. 1963. “Prefixation and Infixation in Old Mon, Old Khmer, and 
Modern Khmer.” In Shorto H.L. (ed.) Linguistic Comparison in South East Asia and 
the Pacific, 62-70. London: SOAS. 
Jacob, Judith M. 1968. Introduction to Cambodian.  London: Oxford UP. 
Jagacinski, Ngampit. 1992. “The ʔau usages in Thai.” In Compton, Carol J. and 
John F. Hartmann (eds.). Papers on Tai Languages, Linguistics and Literatures , 118-
138. Northern Illinois University: Occasional Paper No. 16. 
J.B.R.S. Journal of the Burma Resreach Society. Rangoon. 
Jenny, Mathias. 2001. “The Aspect System of Thai.” In Ebert, K. and Fernando 
Zúñiga (eds.) Aktionsart and Aspectotemporality  in Non-European Languages , 97-
140. Zürich: ASAS 16.  
Jenny, Mathias. 2003. “New Infixes in Spoken Mon.” In  Mon-Khmer Studies 33, 
183-194.  
 
 
291 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Johanson, Lars. 2000. “Viewpoint operators in European languages.” In Dahl, Ö.  
(ed.) Tense and Aspect in the Languages of Europe , 27-187. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Ketumati, Bhaddanta. 1965. Four Languages - English,  Mon, Burmese and Pali.  
Moulmein: Suvannavaÿsa Printing House. 
L. Thongkham, Theraphan. 1984. Nyah Kur (Chao Bon)-Thai-English Dictionary. 
Monic Language Studies Vol. II. Bangkok: Chulalongkorn UP. 
L. Thongkham, Theraphan. 2001. Languages of Southern Laos. [in Thai]. 
Bangkok: Chulalongkorn UP. 
La Loubère, Simon. 1693. A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam. 
[undated photocopy re-edition by Chalermnit, Bangkok]. London: FL. 
Ladefoged, Peter. 1993. A Course in Phonetics.  Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace College 
Publishers. 
Li Fang Kuei. 1977. A Handbook of Comparative Tai.  Hawaii: UP. 
Long Seam. 2000. Dictionnaire du Khmer ancien. (D’après les inscriptions du 
Cambodge du VIe. - VIIIe. siècles). Phnom Penh: Phnom Penh Printing House. 
Lord, Carol. 1993. Historical Change in Serial Verb Constructions.   Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Luce, G. H. 1985. Phases of Pre-Pagán Burma. Languages and History. Vols. 1 & 2. 
London: SOAS. 
Macdonell Arthur Anthony. 1979. A practical Sanskrit dictionary. London: Oxford 
UP. 
Maspero, Georges. 1915. Grammaire de la langue khmère. Paris: Imprimerie 
Nationale. 
Matisoff, James A. 1991. “Areal and universal dimensions of grammatization in 
Lahu.” In Traugott and Heine (eds.) Approaches to grammaticalization , 383-453.  
Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Mon Textbook Committee. [undated] qd¡>mnj (Saddā Man - Mon Grammar) [in 
Mon].  
Myanmar Language Commission. 1993. \mnjm. ø agálipj aBiD.nj Myanmar-English 
Dictionary.  Rangoon: Ministry of Education. 
Myanmar Language Commission. 1999. KrJ,eS.cj \mnjm.aBiD.nj (Myanmar Pocket 
Dictionary).  Rangoon: Ministry of Education. 
Myint Aung, U. 1977. “The capital of Suvannabhumi unearthed?” In Shiroku 10, 
Nov. 1977, 40-53. Kagoshima: UP. 
Okell, John and Anna Allot. 2001. Burmese/Myanmar Dictionary of Grammatical 
Forms.  London: Curzon. 
Okell, John. 1969. A reference grammar of colloquial Burmese. 2 vols. London: 
Oxford UP. 
Palmer, F.R. 1995 (1986). Mood and Modality.  Cambridge: UP. 
Pan Hla, Nai. 1986. “Remnant of a lost Nation & their cognate words to Old Mon 
Epigraph.” In Journal of the Siam Society, Vol.74, 122-155. 
Pan Hla, Nai. 1988-9. Introduction to Mon Language.  Kyoto: University Press. 
 
 
292 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Pan Hla, Nai. 1991. “The major role of the Mons in Southeast Asia.” In Journal of 
the Siam Society, Vol.79/1, 13-21. 
Pan Hla, Nai. 1992. The significant role of the Mon language and culture in 
Southeast Asia. Part 1. Yokyo: ILCAA. 
Parkin, Robert. 1991. A Guide to Austroasiatic Speakers and their Languages. 
Oceanic Linguistics Special Publication No. 23. Honolulu: Hawaii UP. 
Payne, Thomas E. 1997. Describing Morphosyntax. A guide for field linguists.  
Cambridge: UP. 
Pookajorn, Surin et al. 1992. The Phi Tong Luang (Mlabri): A hunter-gatherer 
group in Thailand.  Bangkok: Silpakorn University. 
Prapassorn, Posrithong (ed.) 1999. Phrapathom Chedi National Museum.  
Bangkok: Fine Arts Department. 
Rischel, Jørgen. 1995. Minor Mlabri – a Hunter-Gatherer Language of Northern 
Indochina.  Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum Press. 
Royal Institute. 2003. พจนานุกรมฉบับราชบัณฑิตยสถาน พ.ศ. ๒๕๔๒ (Dictionary of the Royal 
Institute 1999 edition) [in Thai; official Thai standard dictionary]. Bangkok: Royal 
Institute.   
Sakomoto, Yasuyuki. 1994. Mon-Japanese Dictionary. [Pakkret Dialect, Thailand; 
in Japanese]. Tokyo: University of Foreign Studies. 
Sakomoto, Yasuyuki. 1996. Japanese-Mon Dictionary. [Pakkret Dialect, Thailand; 
in Japanese]. Tokyo: University of Foreign Studies. 
Saraya, Dhida. 1999. (Sri) Dvaravati. The Initial Phase of Siam’s History.  
Bangkok: Muang Boran. 
Sasse, Hans-Jürgen. 1991.  “Aspect and Aktionsart: A reconciliation.”  In Vetter, 
Carl & Willy Vandeweghe (eds.) Perspectives on Aspect and Aktionsart , 31-45. 
Bruxelles: Belgian Journal of Linguistics 6. 
Searle, John and Daniel Vanderveken. 1985. Foundations of illocutionary logic.  
Cambridge: UP. 
Sebba, Mark. 1987. The Syntax of Serial Verbs.  Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Seuren, Pieter. 1991. “The definition of serial verbs”.  In Byrne, Francis and Thom 
Huebner (eds.) Development and Structures of Creole Languages, 194-205. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Shorto, H. L. 1962. A Dictionary of Spoken Mon.  London: Oxford UP 
Shorto H.L. (ed.) 1963. Linguistic Comparison in South East Asia and the Pacific . 
London: SOAS. 
Shorto, H. L. 1963. “The Structural Patterns of Northern Mon-Khmer Languages.” 
In Shorto H.L. (ed.) Linguistic Comparison in South east Asia and the Pacific, 45-61. 
London: SOAS. 
th thShorto, H. L. 1971. A Dictionary of Mon Inscriptions from the vi -xvi  Centuries.  
London: Oxford UP. 
South, Ashley. 2003. Mon Nationalism and Civil War in Burma.  London: Routledge 
Curzon. 
 
 
293 
Mathias Jenny: The Verb System of Mon  
Talanon. 2000. The Basics of Mon-English Grammar. [English grammar in Mon]. 
Bangkok: Tech Promotion & Advertising.  
Tern Moeng, Sao. 1995. Shan-English Dictionary.  Kensington: Dunwoody Press. 
Than Myat, U. 1956. mWnj\mnjm.akÉr.qmuicj, 
(The History of Mon Burmese Alphabet). [in Burmese]. Rangoon: Jubilee Hall. 
Thompson, Lawrence C. 1991. A Vietnamese Reference Grammar. Mon-Khmer 
Studies xiii-xiv [1st ed. 1965]. Hawaii: UP. 
Tun Way, Nai (ed.) 1977. mWnjø\mnjm.aBiD>nj (Mon-Burmese Dictionary). [vol.1: ’a - 
kha]. Rangoon: U Than Maung. 
Tun Way, Nai. 1997. The Modern English-Mon Dictionary. Published by the Open 
Society Institute Burma Project. Bangkok: Tech Promotion and Advertising. 
Tun Way, Nai. 2000. The Modern Mon-English Dictionary. Published by the Open 
Society Institute Burma Project. Bangkok: Tech Promotion and Advertising. 
Van Valin, Robert D. jr. and Randy LaPolla. 1997. Syntax. Structure, meaning and 
function.  Cambridge: UP. 
Van Valin, Robert D. jr. 2001. An Introduction to Syntax.  Cambridge: UP. 
Varasin, Uraisi. 1984. Les éléments khmèrs dans la formation de la langue siamoise.  
Paris: SELAF. 
Wanida Phisetphongsa. 1996. อักษรในจารึกกอนสมัยสุโขทัย (Alphabets of pre-Sukhothai 
inscriptions). [in Thai]. Bangkok: Thai Watthanaphanich. 
Watcharasat, Bunkhit. 1995. คนเมือง อูคําเมือง (Lānnā people speak L ānnā). [in Thai]. 
Chiangmai: UP. 
Wedagu, Rev. 2001. aKuikjK[êlikjmnj (Mon orthography). [in Mon]. (Moulmein?): Kon 
Rot. 
Wedañāna, Rev. 1997. kb[alká.mnjgmLÕicj (Mon poetry). [in Mon]. Sangkhlaburi: Mon 
National Committee. 
Wongthet, Sujit. 2002. พระปฐมเจดีย ไมใชเจดียแหงแรก แตเปนมหาธาตุหลวงยุคทวารวดี (Phra Pathom 
Cedi - not the first pagoda, but a royal pagoda of the Dv āravatī period) [in Thai]. 
Bangkok: Silpa Watthanatham. 
Wongthet, Sujit. 2003. ภาษาและวรรณคดีในสยามประเทศ (Language and literature in Siam) [in 
Thai]. Bangkok: Silpa Watthanatham. 
 
ZZZZZZZ G zzzzzzz 
\pkuihj}kiy.B.q.mnjtuYSwW·rao 
; pu ¼ di ¼ a. : 
 
 
294 