>^  /;> 


'%    ,# 


.>>; '.»■■'  :>  ,A'^f-CAl!FOP/,'. 


^ 


=Tn  —  i-n  -  ^  O    / 

~"!^  -32         :3        Lf       J  ^        ■ 


C3    ^    <^  CD 


.<-- 


■   JIJ  JI  111  Ml    J  »  ■■ 


,^Of-CAliF0f?4> 


30 


'>t; 


% 


A^^  = 


^ 


A^^-' 


s,--/ 


'3^ 


■< 


3-, 


1^ 


-J    ^ 


N(]3WV^         %Qimi^'^       %0JITOJO'^ 


^^O/ 


< 


1 


> 

so 

-< 


M;OFCAUF0% 


> 


C3 
>■ 

as 


^^.OF-CAI.IFr% 


iZ, 


'O 

-o 


in 


^t?Aavaan# 


.ii; 


\WEllNIVER5//j 


9r 


< 


■s?.^ 


^TiUDNysOV^" 


LlBRARYttr 


>i. 


,  ^^^t  UNivERi'/A 

S3 


1nl 


O 


vj^l(JS-ANCa% 

o 


%a3AiNrtmv 


^^NStUBKARYQ^ 


^<^OJI1V3-J0'f- 


y^ 


.11 FO/?^ 


C3 


^\^f  UN!VEf?5/A 


^v^lOSANCflfj> 


^OfTAIlFO/?^ 


-X. 


<y^^ 


\ 


A^^UBRARYQ.* 


-j^UiBRARYOc 


norm-i^"^ 


.5MI:-UN!VtR% 


< 


'7       c?  ■«•->  ^'■ 

%a3AiNa-3y\v 


^QFCA1!F0% 


%. 


Ot 


C~5 


^6'Aavaan-i^ 


^;OFCAl!FO% 


4^^ 


^a 


^ 


V 


^  ,  ,.- 


.^ 


,^\^F•llMVFR% 

>-  i    /' — .?"■<        -- 

cc    - 


eel 


pall  Zc^t  Society 


SASANAVAMSA 


EDITED  BY 


MABEL  BODE,  PH.D. 


LONDON 

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  PALI  TEXT  SOCIETY  BY  HENRY  PROWDE 

OXFORD   UNIVERSITY   PRESS  WAREHOUSE,  AJIEN   CORNER  E.C. 

1897. 


Printed  by  W.  Dtngulin,  Leipzig  (Germany). 


PREFACE. 


The  present  edition  of  the  Sasanavamsa  is  based  on  the 
following  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum  Collection: 

1.  Or.  2253  (A)  and 

2.  Or.  2252  (B) 

both  on  palmleaf  and  in  the  Sinhalese  character. 

I  also  compared  my  own  transcript  with  one  that 
Prof.  Serge  D'Oldenbourg  was  kind  enough  to  send,  from 
the  papers  of  his  predecessor,  the  late  Professor  of  Sans- 
krit in  St.  Petersburg.  Prof.  Miuaev  had  himself  intended 
editing  this  interesting  modern  work,  and  had  collated, 
for  this  purpose,  the  abovementioned  MSS.  (A  and  B) 
in  the  British  Museum,  with  two  (paper)  MSS.  from 
Ceylon,  viz.  a  copy  made  for  Prof.  Rhys  Davids  (D)  and 
another  sent  by  Sul)huti  (S). 

In  some  doubtful  passages  I  have  followed  corrections 
made  by  Minaev.  Where  I  have  preferred  the  reading 
of  MSS.  A  and  B  the  Minaev  transcript  is  cited  as  Min: 
in  the  notes. 

The  chief  difficulty  with  the  clear  and  well-written 
palmleaf  MSS.  has  been  the  transcription  of  frequently 
occurring  Burmese  names.  Many  sounds  in  Burmese  are 
not  adequately  represented  by  the  Sinhalese  (Pali)  alphabet 
and  the  copyists  appear  to  have  been  sometimes  at  a 
loss,  for  Burmese  letters  are  even  wedged  in  here  and 
there  among  the  Sinhalese. 

In  revising  my  own  copy  I  have  adopted  Minaev's 
system  (following  the  Pali  MSS.  syllable  for  syllable) 
though  I  have  observed  that  the  usual  method  of  representing 


1062095 


•^        IV         H$- 

Burmese  pronunciation  in  European  books  gives  to  these 
same  names  (of  places  and  persons)  a  very  different  form. 
For  instance,  in  my  transcript  from  the  Pali,  the  vowel  a 
appears  after  a  nasal  n  (in  place  of  a  final  n(/  or  ngh), 
while  the  diphthongs  an  or  ou  are  represented  by  the 
Pali  0. 

I  owe  sincere  thanks  to  Prof.  E.  Miiller-Hess  who  gen- 
erously spent  much  time  in  going  through  the  proof-sheets 
with  me.  I  wish  also  to  thank  Prof.  Rhys  Davids  for  his 
patience  and  cordial  kindness,  during  the  many  delays 
that  occurred  before  I  could  complete  the  edition. 


M.  B. 


INTEODUCTION 


Among  the  modern  works  on  Buddhism  written  by 
Buddhists  is  a  PaH  Text  of  Burmese  authorship,  entitled 
Sasanavamsa.  The  Sasanavamsa  (now  edited  for  the 
first  time)  has  been  known  for  many  years  to  scholars. 
Prof.  Kern  in  his  recent  Manual  of  Indian  Buddhism 
{Grundriss  der  Indo-arischen  Philologie  und  AUerthum- 
shmde,  III.  Band,  8  Heft.,  p.  9)  speaks  of  it  as  "highly 
important  for  the  ecclesiastical  history  of  Ceylon."  The 
late  Prof.  Minaev's  Becherches  sur  le  Bouddhisme  con- 
tains critical  remarks  on  this  text  and  several  extracts 
(Appendices  A  and  B  to  Becherches,  also  pp.  189,  208, 
231,  232,  273).  Eeferences  to  it  occur  in  Childers'  Pali 
Dictionary,  and  Prof.  Hardy  has  drawn  on  it  for  his 
article  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Frage  oh  DhaminajJdla,  &c. 
Z.D.M.G.,  51  Band,  1897.  Louis  de  Zoysa,  in  his 
Beport  on  the  Inspection  of  Temple  Libraries  in  Ceylon 
(1873),  mentions  the  Sasanavamsa  as  "  a  very  interesting 
historical  work."  The  author,  Pahhasami,  who  dates  his 
book  1223  of  the  Burmese  Common  Era  (1861  a.d.),  was 
the  tutor  of  the  then  reigning  King  Meng-dun-Meng-, 
and  himself  a  pupil  of  the  Samgharaja,  or  Head  of  the 
Order,  at  Mandalay. 

The  Mdtikd  [table  of  contents]  and  opening  chapter  of 
the  Sasanavamsa  seem  to  promise  a  general  history  of 
Buddhism.  Beginning  from  the  birth  of  the  Buddha,  the 
author  gives  a  brief  summary  of  the  orthodox  Sinhalese 
tradition,  drawn  from   a  few  well-known  Pali  works — 

1 


2  INTRODUCTION. 

the  Atthakatha  (of  the  Mahavihara  in  Ceylon^),  the 
Samantapasadika,2  (commentary  of  Buddhaghosa  on  the 
ViNAYAPiTAiCA,  the  Mahavamsa  and  the  Dipavamsa 
(Chronicles,  historical  and  religious,  of  Ceylon).  Events 
are  brought  up  to  the  time  of  the  Third  Council  in  the 
time  of  AcoKA  Piyadasi  3  and  the  sending  forth  of 
Missionaries  from  Pataliputra  to  nine  different  countries 
by  the  thera,  Maha-Moggaliputta-Tissa.  The  later 
history  of  religion  is  then  followed  in  the  countries 
mentioned,  a  separate  chapter  being  given  to  each. 

The  v^hole  of  these  nine  chapters  fall,  roughly  speaking, 
into  two  Books  or  Parts,  by  which  division  the  scope  of 
the  Sasanavamsa,  as  a  History  of  Buddhism,  becomes 
clear. 

i  Part  I.,  as  we  may  call  it  (departing  slightly  from  the 
order  of  the  Matika) ,  is  a  group  of  chapters  of  unequal 
length,  mostly  very  short,  and  consisting  of  a  few 
legends,  strung  together  with  quotations  from  Buddha- 
ghosa and  the  Dipavamsa. 

The  accounts  of  Sihala  and  Suvannabhumi,  however, 
show  far  more  care^^indncompleteness,  or  we  should  rather 
say,  more  knowledge  of  the  subject  than  the  others  of  this 
group.  That  of  Sihala  is  drawn  chiefly  from  the  same 
sources  as  the  opening  chapter,  with  some  additions  from  a 
work  of  Burmese  origin,  Buddhaghosuppatti A  For  Suvan- 
nabhumi the  author  gives  as  his  sources  the  Atthakatha, 
the  Bajavamsa  (probably  the  Pegu  Chronicle),  and  lastly 


^  Introduction  to  Oldenberg's  edition  of  the  Vinayapi- 
takam,  p.  xli.  ;  Kern,  Manual  Ind.  Buddli.,  p.  110, 
et  seq. 

2  Written  some  time  between  410-432  a.d.  Kern,  Man. 
Ind.  Buddh.  p.  125. 

3  Dated  238  year  of  Eeligion  in  Chap.  I.  of  the  Sasana- 
vamsa, but  235  in  Chapter  II.  (The  Third  Council  is  now 
placed  at  about  241  B.C.     Man.  Ind.  Buddh.,  p.  109). 

4  Edited  and  translated  by  Jas.  Gray.     London,  1892. 


INTRODUCTION.  6 

the  Inscriptions — dating  from  the  fifteenth  century — of 
the  celebrated  Kalyani  SIma,  the  remains  of  which  still 
exist  in  a  suburb  of  Pegu  city.^ 

Part  II.  is  the  longer  and  more  important.  It  takes 
up  about  three-fifths  of  the  book,  but  consists  solely  of 
Chapter  VI.,  which  treats  of  the  history  of  religion  in 
Aparanta,  that  is,  in  Mramma  ^  or  Burma  proper. 

Before  this  chapter  is  examined  a  few  characteristic 
traits  of  Part  I.  should  be  pointed  out. 

The  resume  of  the  early  history  of  Buddhism  (including 
the  three  Councils  and  the  Great  Schism,  followed  by  the 
rise  of  seventeen  sects,  in  the  second  century  of  Eeligion) 
is,  as  I  have  said,  drawn  from  well-known  Sinhalese 
sources,  but  a  few  chronological  details  are  added  from 
Burmese  history — or  rather,  legend.  At  the  time  of 
the  First  Council  the  mahathera  Kassapa  is  said  to 
have  established  the  new  era. 3  Further  a  certain  jam- 
BUDiPADHAJA  4  is  named  as  the  king  reigning  at  Tagaung, 
the   ancient   capital   of   Upper   Burma,   in   the   time   of 


^  The  Text  and  Translation  of  the  Inscriptions,  edited 
by  Taw  Sein  Ko,  appeared  in  the  Indian  Antiqiiarij , 
vol.  xxii.  (1893).  See  the  same  author's  ArchcBological 
Tour  through  Bamafihadesa  (Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxi.  p.  383), 
and  Bemarks  on  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions  {Ind.  Ant.,  vol. 
xxiii.,  April,  1894). 

2  Mramma  (Maramma  or  Myanma)  see  Phayre, 
Hist.  Bur.  passim.  The  derivation  of  the  name  is  not 
yet  settled;  see  Taw  Sein  Ko,  Folk-lore  in  Burma,  Ind. 
Ant.  vol.  xxii.  p.  160,  Note;  also  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii. 
p.  30. 

3  According  to  Burmese  tradition  the  era  which  was 
suppressed  by  Kassapa  had  been  established  148  years 
before  by  the  maternal  grandfather  of  Gotama  (Bp. 
Bigandet,  Life  or  Legend  of  Gaudama,  p.  361). 

4  See  Sir  Arthur  Phayre's  History  of  Burma,  pp.  9,  276 ; 
A.  Bastian's  Geschichte  der  hido-Chinesen,  p.  12. 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

Ajatacatbu,  the  friend  of  the  Buddha ;  Dvattaponka  ^ 
is  mentioned  as  the  contemporary  of  Kalacoka,  the  former 
being  king  of  Burma  in  the  year  100  of  KeHgion.  Finally, 
the  date  of  the  Third  Council  is  said  to  have  fallen  in  the 
12th  year  of  the  reign  of  Eamponka,^  King  of  Sirikhetta 
(Prome).  The  Section  of  Chapter  I.  that  deals  with  the 
Missions  may  be  said  to  strike  the  keynote  of  the  Sasana- 
vamsa.  The  author  gives  a  few  explanatory  notes  on  the 
Nine  Regions  visited  by  the  first  Missionaries,  and,  of 
these  nine,  five  are  placed  in  Indo-China.  His  horizon 
seems  to  be  limited,  first,  by  an  orthodox  desire  to  claim 
most  of  the  early  teachers  for  the  countries  of  the  South 
(and  hence  to  prove  the  purest  possible  sources  for  the 
Southern  doctrines)  ;  and,  secondly,  by  a  certain  feeling 
of  national  pride.  According  to  this  account,  Maha- 
Moggaliputta  Tissa  (as  if  with  a  special  care  for  the 
religious  future  of  Mramma)  sent  two  separate  missionaries 
to  neighbouring  regions  in  the  valley  of  the  Irawaddy — 
besides  three  others,  who  visited  Laos  and  Pegu. 

A  few  geographical  notes  explain  the  nine  regions 
(leaving  out  Sihala)  as  follows  : — 

SuvANNABHUMi  is  (as  in  the  Atthakatha)  identified  with 
Sudhammapura — that  is  Thaton  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Sittaung  River. 3 

^  Dwottabaung  101  (Year  of  Religion).  See  Phayre's 
list  of  Kings  of  the  Prome  dynasty.  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  277. 
The  legend  of  Dwottabaung  or  Duttabaung  (b.c.  442)  is 
given  in  Taw  Sein  Ko's  article  Folk-lore  in  Burma,  Ind. 
A7it.,  vol.  XXX.  pp.  159  et  seq. 

2  See  Phayre's  list  (His.  Bur.,  p.  277).  Ranbaung, 
sixth  of  the  dynasty  established  at  .  Tharekhet-ta-ra, 
reigned  fifty  years  (from  193  to  243  Era  of  Religion).  In 
Crawfurd's  Journal  of  an  Embassy  to  tlie  Court  of  Ava, 
Appendix  viii.,  a  Burmese  chronological  table  dates  Ram- 
b'haong,  King  of  Prome,  B.C.  351. 

3  SuvANNABHtJMi  see  E.  Forchhammer's  Notes  on  the 


INTRODUCTION.  5 

YoNAKARATTHA  is  the  country  of  the  Yavana  people  or 
Jan-May  ^  (the  country  of  the  Shan  tribes  about  Zimme) . 

The  identification  of  Pafiiiasami  is  one  to  be  met  with 
commonly  in  the  works  of  Burmese  writers,  according  to 
whom  Yona  is  the  Shan  country  about  Chieng-Mai  (Taw 
Sein  Ko,  Bemarks,  &c.;  Forchhammer,  Early  History, 
&c.)-  European  authorities  have  unanimously  placed 
Yonaka  in  the  N.  W.  region  of  India  invaded  and  held  by 
the  Greeks  (see,  among  others,  Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism, 
p.  227  ;  Sylvain  Levi,  La  Grece  et  VInde,  p.  37  ;  Max 
Duncker,  Geschichte  der  Arier,  p.  378). 

In  the  chapter  on  Yonakarattha  the  author  of  the 
Sasanavamsa  localises  the  Yonaka  country  more  exactly, 
mentioning  the  countries  HaribJiimja,  Kamboja,  Khema- 
vara,  and  Ayuddha,  also  the  cities  of  Sokkataya  and 
Kapu7iiia.  From  these  hints  we  may  gather  that  his 
Yonaka  country  extends  along  the  valleys  of  the  Me-7iam 
and  Me-ping  rivers  and  includes  the  Shan  States  to  the 
north  of  these.  The  names  Kamphaung  and  Zimme  (on 
the  Meping)  Thukkate  and  Yuthia  (on  the  Me-nam)  can 
be  easily  recognised  under  their  pseudo-Pali  forms. 


Early  History  and  Geography  of  British  Burma.  The  first 
Buddhist  Mission  to  Suvannahliumi  ;  Taw  Sein  Ko, 

Preliminary  Study  of  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions  (Ind.  Ant. 
vol.  xxii.  p.  17)  explains  Sudhammanagara  as  the 
modern  Thatou  ni  the  Amhurst  district.  Phayre  (Hist. 
Bur.  p.  19)  describes  Suvdrnabhnmi  as  including  the  delta 
of  the  Irawadi  and  Thahtun  (being  the  capital)  see  also 
op.cit.]).  24,  for  references  toLassen,  Yule,  and  Bp.Bigandet 
on  Suvannabhumi. 

The  chapter  on  Suvannabhumi  touches  briefly  on 
Religion  in  Muttima  (Martaban)  as  a  part  of  Bdmahna. 
The  history  of  this  region  is  only  carried  on  to  the  year 
1478  A.D.  (reign  of  the  celebrated  King  Dhammaceti.) 

I  Yonakarattha  (The  Jan-May  of  the  Pali  MSS.  of 
this  work,  is  usually  transcribed  Zimme  or  Chieng-Mai). 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

With  regard  to  the  Yavana  people,  it  may  further 
be  noted  that  in  the  sketch  map  of  the  ancient  classical 
divisions  of  Indo-China,  in  Lucien  Fournereau's  Le  Siam 
Ancien  {Annales  dit  Musee  Guimet,  Tome  27)  Yavanade(;a 
lies  to  the  east  of  the  Me-ping  Eiver.  For  the  Yavana 
people  in  Indo-China  see  also  Abel  Bergaigne's  L'ancien 
Boijaiime  de  Campd  d'apres  les  Inscriptions,  p.  61,  and 
Memoires  et  documents  de  la  Mission  Pavie,  p.  3. 

The  ancient  Haripumja  is  identified  by  M.  Fournereau 
with  Lamphun  {Skun  Ancien,  p.  53).  M.  Pavie  says, 
describing  a  Thai  inscription  at  Lamphun,  "  Ce  Hari- 
pufijapura  fut  dans  le  haut  Laos  la  station  la  plus  reculee 
vers  la  frontiere  de  la  Chine,  et  sans  donte  nous  avons  la 
la  capitale  du  Yavanadega  qui  du  temps  de  la  colonisation 
brahmanique  comprenait  la  contree  du  haut  Mekhong, 
probablement  toute  le  partie  longeant  la  frontiere  de  la 
Chine  entre  Chieng  Mai  et  le  Ton-king"  (Memoires  et 
documents  de  la  Mission  Pavie  (ed.  M.  Pavie  et 
P.  Lefevre  PontaHs),  p.  144. 

In  the  Po"!,  U'l  Daung  Inscription  near  Prome  (ed.  Taw 
Sein  Ko,  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  1,  et  seq)  the  following 
states  of  the  then  Burmese  kingdom  are  mentioned 
among  otheva^Kamboja  (including  Mone,  Nyangwe, 
Thibo  and  Alomeik),  Aguttaya  (including  Dvaravati 
(Bangkok)  Yodaya  (Ayuthia)  and  Kamanpaik). 

Khemavara,  is  the  region  including  Kaington  and 
Kyaing  Kaung.  It  lies  between  the  Saliwen  and  Me-kong 
rivers.  (See  also  F.  Gamier,  Voyage  d' exploration  en  Indo- 
Chine,  p.  366  ;  and  Yule,  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava, 
p.  352.) 

Vanavasi  ^  (on  which  Western  opinion  has  been  divided) 


I  Vanavasi.  Some  opinions  on  Vanavasi  may  be 
cited :— Childers  (Pall  Diet,  s.v.)  explains  Vanavaso  : 
"Name  of  a  country.  According  to  Vijesimiha  it  means 
Thibet." 

Ehys  Davids  says  {Buddhisjn,  p.  227),  "Vanavasi,  that 


INTRODUCTION.  V 

is  the  region  round  Prome.  In  support  of  this  explana- 
tion the  author  mentions  that  an  ancient  image  of  the 
Buddha  was  found  near  Prome  some  years  ago,  the 
inscription  of  which  says  that  it  was  erected  for  the 
homage  of  the  people  of  Vanavasi. 

Of  Kasmira-Gandhara  it  is  only  said  that  these  two 
countries  formed  part  of  one  kingdom  [i.e.,  that  of 
A9oka  I]    at  the  time  of  the  Missions. 

Mahimsakamandala  is  (in  agreement  with  other 
writers)  identified  as  the  Andhaka  —  or  Andhra  — 
country.  2 

Cinarattha,  in  the  Matika  of  the  Sasanavamsa,  takes 
the  place  of  the  Himavaritapadesa  of  the  Ceylon  books. 


is  the  wilderness.  It  surely  cannot  mean  Thibet.  .  .  . 
perhaps  it  was  on  the  borders  of  the  great  desert  in 
Rajputana." 

Fergusson  and  Burgess  (quoted  by  Taw  Sein  Ko  in 
Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  103)  place  Vanavasi  in  Kanara 
(see  Cave  Temples  of  India,  p.  17)  and  Koppen  {Religion 
des  Buddha,  vol.  i.  pp.  195,  196)  conjectures  it  to  be 
"  im  Sudosten  des  heutigen  Goa." 

1  KasmIra-Gandhara.  The  Gandhara  country  lay  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Indus,  south  of  Cabul  (Max  Duncker, 
Geschichte  der  Arier,  p.  273). 

2  Mahimsakamandala  :  Cf .  the  following  : — 

"  Mahlsamandala  worunter  man  vermuthet  Mahismat 
Oder  Mahlsvara  au  der  mitteren  Nerbudda  zu  verstehen 
ist  "  (^Koppen,  Bel.  des  Buddh.,  vol.  i.  p.  195). 

Mahisa,  "  the  most  southerly  settlement  of  the  Aryans 
South  of  the  Godavari,  in  the  Nizam's  dominions"  (lih. 
Davids,  Buddhism,  p.  227,  quoting  Lassen's  Indische 
AlteTthumskunde,  i.  681). 

Mahlsamandala;  Maisur  (Fergusson  and  Burgess, 
Cave  Temples  of  India,  p.  17). 

(Burma   has  its   own   Mahimsaka^nayidala,  a  district. 


8  INTEODUCTION. 

Himavantapadesa,  mentioned  in  our  text  as  forming 
one  region  with  Cinarattha,  has  been  identified  with 
the  Central  Himalayas  (Eh.  Davids,  Buddliism,  p.  227), 
and  with  Nepal  (Fergnsson  and  Burgess,  Cave  Temples, 
p.  17).  The  Sen,  or  Ghinarattha,  of  the  Po^  U;;  Daung 
Inscription  is  the  borderland  to  the  N.E.  of  Burma  {i.e., 
includes  the  districts  of  Bhamo  andKaungsin,  the  district 
bordering  on  the  Chinese  province  Yunnan).  But  in 
Chapter  X.  of  the  Sasanavamsa,  "  On  Keligion  in  Cina- 
rattha," we  read  that  the  ruler  of  Clna  at  one  time  ruled 
over  Kasmlra-Gandhara,  though  at  the  time  of  Majjhima's 
mission  the  latter  countries  did  not  form  part  of  his 
domain.  Kasmlra-Gandhara  did  as  a  matter  of  fact 
become  part  of  the  great  kingdom  of  the  Mauryas  in  the 
time  of  A9oka  (Max  Duncker,  Geschichte  cler  Arier,  pp. 
275,  374),  but  at  a  later  period  war  was  waged  between 
China  and  a  rival  power  over  these  North-West  provinces 
(Sylvain  Levi,  Notes  stir  les  hido-Sci/thes,  p.  62). 

Maharattha  is  Mahanagararattha,  or  Siam. 

Maharattha  is  considered  by  a  number  of  European 
scholars  to  be  the  region  of  the  Upper  Godavari,  that  is, 
the  country  of  the  Maharastras  (see  E.  Miiller,  Journal 
of  the  Pali  Text  Society,  1888;  also  Eh.  Davids,  BuddJiism, 
p.  227;  Koppen,  Bel.  Buddh.,  pp.  195,  196;  Fergusson 
and  Burgess,  Cave  Temples,  p.  17).  Childers,  however, 
explains  Maharattha  as  Siam. 

The  author  of  the  Sasanavamsa  explains  that  his 
Maharattha  or  Mahanagararattha  borders  on  Siam. 
From  this  observation  and  one  or  two  others  occurring 
in  the  chapter  on  Maharattha,  it  would  seem  that  the 


mentioned  in  the    Po",   U',]  Dating   Inscription,  including 
Mogok  and  Kyatpyin). 

It  should  be  mentioned  here  that  the  name  of  the 
missionary  to  Mahiinsaka  is  Maharevata  in  Sas.  V. 
Mahddeva  in  Dlpa  V.,  Maha.  V.,  Suttav.,  Saddh.  Samy., 
and  Sam.  Pas. 


INTRODUCTION.  » 

country  in  question  is  Laos.  An  interesting  if  slight 
allusion  is  made  to  the  Brahmanic  cult  prevailing  there 
at  the  time  of  the  Mission  (aggihrttadimicchdka7mna7n 
ijebhmjijena  akmmu).  Nagasena  is  mentioned  as  preach- 
ing in  this  region.  (For  Nagasena  in  Laotian  legend  see 
Francis  Garnier,  Voyage  cV exploration,  pp.  248,  251.  This 
author  learnt  that,  in  Siamese  tradition,  Laos  is  a  Holy- 
Land.)     {Op.  cit.,  p.  100.) 

I  should  add  that  an  inscription  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  quoted  by  Burmese  diplomatists  in  negotiation 
with  the  British  Government  and  translated  for  his 
Government  by  Colonel  Burney  (Kesident  at  Ava,  1837), 
thus  defines  the  region  Mahanagara,  "All  within  the 
great  districts  of  Kyain-youn  and  Mamgeen "  (Yule, 
Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava,  p.  351). 

Finally,  Aparantarattha  (placed  by  European  scholars 
west  of  the  Punjab),  is  none  other  than  the  Sunaparanta 
of  the  Burmese,  i.e.,  the  region  lying  west  of  the  Upper 
Irawaddy. 

It  is  best  here  to  quote  verbatim  a  passage  from  the 
Burmese  scholar  to  whose  researches  I  am  indebted 
for  so  many  facts  :  "  The  native  writers  of  Burma,  how- 
ever, both  lay  and  clerical,  aver  with  great  seriousness 
that  the  Apardntaka  referred  to  is  Burma  Proper, 
which  comprises  the  upper  valley  of  the  Irawaddy. 
Such  flagrantly  erroneous  identification  of  classical 
names  has  ansen  from  the  national  arrogance  of  the 
Burmans,  who,  after  their  conquest  of  the  Taking 
kingdoms  on  the  seaboard,  proceeded  to  invent  new 
stories  and  classical  names,  so  that  they  might  not  be 
outdone  by  the  Talaings,  who,  according  to  their  ow^n 
history  and  traditions,  received  the  Buddhist  religion 
direct  from  missionaries  from  India.  The  right  bank  of 
the  Irawaddy  river  near  Pagan  was  accordingly  re- 
named Sunaparanta,  and  identified  with  Aparantaka " 
(Taw  Sein  Ko,  Some  Bemarks  on  the  KalyZmi  Inscrip- 
tions, Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.   103). 

In    the    British    Burma    Gazetteer    (vol.    ii.    p.    746) 

2 


10  INTEODUCTION. 

Thoonaparanta  is  identified  with  the  upper  portion  of 
the  Thayet  district,  or  the  west  bank  of  the  Irawaddy. 

"West"  is  the  sense  in  which  "  Aparanta  "  has  been 
taken  as  indicating  a  borderland  west  of  the  Punjab  by 
European  scholars,  of  whom  I  need  only  quote  Professor 
Ed.  Miiller  {Journal  of  the  Pali  Text  Society,  1888), 
Professor  Ehys  Davids  {Buddhism,  p.  227),  Koppen 
{Religion  des  Buddha,  vol.  i.  p.  192). 

Taranatha  (p.  262  of  Schiefner's  translation)  mentions 
Aparantaka  as  a  part  of  India  including  ' '  Bhangala  and 
Odivi9a." 

The  rest  of  Part  I.  of  the  Sasanavamsa  must  be  dis- 
missed here  with  a  few  words.     The  religious  history  of 
the  three  regions  outside  Indo-China  and  Ceylon  is  not 
carried  beyond  the  point  where  Buddhaghosa  leaves  it. 
To  the  brief  account  of  the  Atthakatha  and  the  Dlpa- 
vamsa  the  Burmese  author  adds  a  few  words  of  melan- 
choly comment   on   the   darkened   state  of   those   lands 
whence  the  sunlight  of  Keligion  has  vanished.     Maha- 
rattha,  Yonakarattha,  and  Vanavasi   are   treated   some- 
what  more  fully,  but  these  six   chapters  together  made 
up  only  a  small  part  of  the  book.     I  may  add  here  that 
the  Pali   of   the    Sasanavanisa   also   shows  the  author's 
intimate  acquaintance  with  the  commentaries.     The  style 
is  plainly  founded  on  that  of  Buddhaghosa  and  his  suc- 
cessors.    Naturally,  in  so   modern   a   text  there  are  no 
points  of  strictly  philological   interest.     The   obscurities 
that  occur  here  and  there  may,  I  believe,  be  set  down  to 
the  difficulties    a   Burman    author  would   meet  with   in 
rendering  into  Pali   some    phrases   characteristic  of   the 
Burmese  language.     Again,  some  words  used  by  Panna- 
sami  in  Part  II.  would  appear  to  have  a  special  applica- 
tion to  the  circumstances  of  his  own  country.     It  is  this 
Part  II.,  the  most  original  and  interesting  chapter  (on 
Religion  in  Aparanta),  that  is  properly  the  subject  of  the 
present  short  study. 


THE  MONKS  AND  THE  KINGS  OF   MEAMMA. 

[7ji  the  folloiving  chapter  the  names  and  dates  of  the  Kings  of  Burma 
appearing  in  the  text  follow  Paiinasami ;  those  in  the  notes  are  draivn  from 
other  sources  (sec  authors  cited)  for  comparison.  Occasional  references  are 
given  (by  page)  to  the  printed  text  of  the  Sasanavamsa  (published  by  the 
Pali  Text  Society).] 

In  the  Burma  of  to-day,  as  in  the  Europe  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  the  monks  are  the  historians ;  the  last  recension 
of  the  National  Chronicle,  or  History  of  the  Kings 
(Maharajavamsa),  was  the  work  of  "  a  body  of  learned 
monks  and  ex-monks  "  in  the  year  1824.^ 

But,  though  a  lay  point  of  view  is  hardly  to  be  ex- 
pected from  such  a  body  of  editors,  the  native  chronicles 
consulted  by  students  of  Burmese  history  have  been 
described  as  very  full  and  by  no  means  untrustworthy.  ~ 

The  Sasanavamsa,  a  work  of  narrower  scope,  cannot,  of 
course,  add  to  our  knowledge  of  the  political  and  military 


^  See  Taw  Sein  Ko's  remarks  on  the  native  histories 
of  Burma  {Indicui  Antiquary),  vol.  xxii.  p.  (31. 

Lassen  {Iiidische  Alterthitmshunde) ,  vol.  iv.  p.  369), 
writing  in  1861,  mentions  a  recension  of  the  Mahdrd- 
javamsa,  made  by  command  of  the  king,  some  sixty  years 
before.  The  work  was  based  on  two  older  histories. 
Amoilg  the  works  of  the  celebrated  thera  Aggadhamma- 
lamkara  (17th  century),  mentioned  in  our  text,  occurs  an 
abridged  version  {Samkhepa)  of  the  Bdjavmnsa,  written 
at  the  request  of  the  king. 

2  See  preface  to  Sir  Arthur  Phayre's  History  of  Burma, 
London,  1883. 


12  A  BUEMESE   HISTORIAN   OF   BUDDHISM. 

history  of  the  author's  country.  Yet,  in  so  far  as  the 
rehgion  of  the  Buddha  has  played  a  great  part  in  Burma's 
social  life,  and  has  been  the  first  awakener  of  her  intel- 
lectual life  and  the  supreme  interest  controlling  it,  a 
record  of  the  Order  which,  for  centuries,  has  been  the 
living  embodiment  of  that  religion,  cannot  but  be 
interesting. 

The  Kajavamsa  is  one  of  the  authorities  frequently 
referred  to  (besides  inscriptions  and  "  ancient  books  ")  by 
the  author  of  the  Sasanavamsa,  but  he  chooses  from  his 
material  with  a  very  strict  regard  for  the  purpose  of  his 
book.  The  National  Chronicle  is  quoted  here  and  there, 
but,  as  a  whole,  the  part  history  plays  in  the  religious 
records  is  slight.  We  find  here  only  abrupt  mention  of 
wars  and  sieges,  and  allusions  to  kings  of  Burma,  who 
serve  as  chronological  milestones  by  the  way,  or  stand 
out  as  pillars  of  the  Religion,  if  they  spend  liberally  to 
do  it  honour. 

Pamiasami's  history  is  a  purely  ecclesiastical  piece  of 
work.  Kings  are  judged,  as  a  rule,  according  to  their 
"acts  of  merit" — the  building  of  cetiyas  and  viharas 
and  the  supporting  of  the  Samgha — with  a  certain  calm 
detachment,  that  is  able  to  separate  their  names  from  any 
other  associations,  and  to  measure  their  virtue  and  im- 
portance by  a  measiu'e  of  its  own. 

In  the  following  analysis  of  the  Sixth  Chapter  of  the 
Sasanavamsa  I  have  set  set  side  by  side  with  such  hints 
of  history — bare  dates  and  scanty  facts — as  occur  there, 
some  references  to  the  national  chronicle. ^     Occasionally 


^  That  is  to  such  translations  or  abstracts  as  were 
accessible  to  me  in  the  works  of  European  writers, 
namely,  Sir  Arthur  Phayre  {History  of  Burma),  Bishop 
Bigandet  (Life  or  Legend  of  Gaudavia),  Sir  H.  Yule 
{Narrative  of  a  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava),  J.  Crawfurd 
{Journal),  A.  Bastian  {Geschichte  der  Indo-Chinesen), 
li'ather  San  Germano  {The  Burmese  Empire,  ed.  Jardine), 


DISSERTATION.  13 

iihere  is  a  curious  and  characteristic  difference  be- 
tween the  ecclesiastic's  version  and  that  of  the  kings' 
■chroniclers.  I  have  been  compelled  to  leave  out  the 
picturesque  element  brought  into  the  Mramma  chapter 
by  the  stories  told  of  noteworthy  theras.  The  historical 
thread  is  broken  by  these  side-episodes,  and  some  of  the 
chief  points  obscured,  which  a  closer  drawing  together 
of  the  more  important  events  may  serve  to  bring  out 
■clearly. 

The  History  of  Eeligion  in  Mramma  begins  with  a 
legendary  visit  of  the  Buddha  himself  ^  to  the  Lohita- 
candana  vihara  (presented  by  the  brothers  Mahapunna 
and  Culapunna  of  Vanijagama).^  The  Faith  was  not 
"  established  "  in  the  land  till  the  mission  to  Aparanta- 
Tattha  in  the  year  235  after  the  Parinirvdna,^  but  the 
historian  mentions  communities  of  bhikkhus  as  already 
existing  in  Aparanta  when  Yonakadhammarakkhita  ar- 
rived and  points  out  that  the  Sutta  preached  by  that  thera 
— the  "  Aggikkhandhopama  "  4 — has  a  special  bearing  on 
the  duties  of  bhikkhus.  In  this  connection  he  refers,  for 
the  first  time,  to  the  heretics    called  Samanakuttakas,5 


Taw  Sein  Ko  {Indian  Antiquarij,  vols.  xxii.  and  xxiii.), 
E.  Forchhammer  {Beports  to  the  Government),  British 
Burma  Gazetteer,  Col.  Burney's  articles  in  J".  A.  S.Bengal, 
vol.  iv.,  &c.,  &c. 

I  Cf.  Spence  Hardy,  Manual  of  Buddhism,  pp.  215  and 
268. 

-  Legaing  (Taw  Sein  Ko,  Indian  Antiquary,  vol.  xxii. 
p.  6). 

3  The  Burmese  tradition  places  the  Parinirvana  at  543- 
544  B.C. 

4  A  discourse  in  the  Suttanipata  (not  yet  edited)  of 
the  Anguttara  Nikaj^a.  I  owe  this  reference  to  Prof. 
E.  Hardy,  editor  of  the  Anguttara  (together  with  other 
kind  help  in  my  study  of  the  Sasanavaiusa). 

5  It  is  certain  that  the  Buddhism  of  Burma  fell  away 
from  purity  at  an  early  time.     Positive  evidence  exists  of 


14  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

who  are  said  to  have  gained  a  footing  in  Arimaddana 
(Pugan)  even  at  that  early  period. 

To  give  Arimaddana  due  rehgious  importance  from  the 
earhest  times,  another  legend  is  quoted  here  from  the 
Ancient  Books  {pordiiapottkaJid) ,  telling  how  the  Buddha 
visited  a  spot  in  Tambadlpa  ^  and  prophesied  that 
Sammutira.ja  -  would  build  a  city  there,  and  religion 
would  stand  fast  in  that  city. 

To  prove  that  Yonakadhammarakkita  preached  in 
Tambadlpa  as  well  as  in  Aparanta,  Pahhasami  points  out 
that  it  is  said  in  the  Atthakatha  that  thousands  of  persons 
of   the    Ksatriya    clan    were   converted  and  entered  the 


the  great  changes  that  had  come  over  the  religion  of  the 
people  by  the  eleventh  century,  at  which  time  "  a  debased 
form  of  Buddhism  which  was  probably  introduced  from 
Northern  India  existed  at  Pagan.  Its  teachers,  called 
Aris,  were  not  strict  observers  of  their  vow  of  celibacy, 
and  it  is  expressly  recorded  in  native  histories  that  they 
had  written  records  of  their  doctrines,  the  basis  of  which 
was  that  sin  could  be  expiated  by  the  recital  of  certain 
hymns  "  (Taw  Sein  Ko,  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxiii.  p.  258).  The 
writer  I  quote  refers,  in  another  place,  to  ancient  inscrip- 
tions in  Burma  as  pointing  to  the  influence  of  the 
Northern  School  of  Buddhism  {Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii. 
p.  165). 

^According  to  the  inscription  translated  by  Col.  Burney 
(see  above),  Tambadlpa  includes  the  districts  of  Pugan, 
Ava,  Panya,  and  Myenzain.  In  the  British  Burma 
Gazetteer  (vol.  ii.,  p.  746)  Tambadlpa  is  described  as  the 
upper  portion  of  the  Thayet  district,  on  the  east  bank 
of  the  Irawaddy. 

2  This  King  (Samudri,  Thamugdarit,  Thamudirit 
or  Thamoondirit)  established  a  dynasty  at  Pugan  in  108 
A.D.  (Phayre,  History  of  Burma,  p.  278.  Brit.  Bur. 
Gazetteer,  Article  "  History,''  vol.  i.  p.  289  ;  Burney 
Notice  of  Pugan,  J.  A.  S.,  Bengal,  vol.  iv.  p.  400). 


DISSERTATION.  15 

Order,  and,  since  there  were  no  Ksatriyas  in  Aparanta, 
this  statement  points  to  a  visit  of  Yonakadhammarakkita 
to  the  neighbouring  province,  Tambadlpa.' 

But  though  Arimaddana  was  destined,  to  be  a  centre  of 
rehgion,  heresy  was  rife  there  from  the  time  of  Sammuti 
himself,  and  continued  to  grow  and  multiply  till  in  the 
time  of  Anuruddha  ~  the  adherents  of  the  Samana- 
kuttakas  numbered  many  thousands.  The  chief  and  most 
dangerous  heresy  of  this  sect  is  briefly  described  ;  it  lies  in 
the  boundless  abuse  of  the  Paritta,^  which  becomes, 
with  these  heretics,  a  charm  to  absolve  from  guilt  even 
the  murderer  of  mother  or  father.  Such  doctrines 
(together  with  others  that  raised  the  acariyas  to  tyrannical 
power  over  the  family  life  of  the  laity  4)  had  corrupted  the 


1  Taw  Sein  Ko  observes  :  "  The  finding  among  the 
ruins  of  Tagaung  of  terracotta  tablets  bearing  Sanskrit 
legends  affords  some  corroboration  of  the  statement  of 
the  native  historians  that  long  before  Anorat'azo's  con- 
quest of  Thaton,  in  the  eleventh  century  a.d.  successive 
waves  of  emigration  from  Gangetic  India  had  passed 
through  Manipur  to  the  upper  valley  of  the  Irrawady, 
and  that  these  emigrants  brought  with  them  letters, 
religion,  and  other  elements  of  civilisation"  (Ind.  Ant., 
voll.  XXV.  p.  7).  For  the  same  opinion  see  Phayre,  Hist. 
Bur.  (pp.  15,  16),  and  rorchhammer's  Notes  on  the 
Early  .History  and  Geography  of  British  Burma,  p.  G. 

2  Anoarahta,  consecrated  King  in  1010  a.d.  He  is 
the  great  hero  of  the  Burmese.  (Phayre,  Hist.  Bur., 
p.  22)  ;  A.  Bastian,  Geschichte  der  Indo-Chinesen,  p.  38). 

3  Originally  hymns,  suttas  and  auspicious  texts  to 
ward  off  danger  and  evil  spirits.  (Childers,  Pali  Dic- 
tionary, s.v.  ;  C.  Bendall,  Catalogue  of  Sanskrit  and 
Pali  Books,  in  the  British  Museum,  1892.) 

4  Sir  Arthur  Phayre,  writing  of  this  period,  says  that  a 
change,  from  some  unknown  external  cause,  had  corrupted 
religion  in  Burma — a  change  such  as  had  already  taken 
place  in  the  Buddhism  of  the  Punjab  in  the  sixth  century. 


16  A   BUEMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

religion  of  Tambadlpa,  when  -in  the  eleventh  century  a 


He,  too,  gives  the  name  "  Ari  "  as  that  by  which  the 
heretics  were  known.  Might  not  this  Ari  be  a  slightly 
altered  form  of  the  Sanskrit  ari/a,  the  Arija  of  Buddhist 
terminology  ? 

A  further  comparison  of  the  Samanakuttaka  heresy 
(very  briefly  sunnned  up  in  the  Sasanavamsa)  with  the 
North  Indian  or  rather  Tibetan  Buddhism,  is  suggested 
to  me  by  the  following  sentences  in  our  text : 
"  Sace  pi  puttadhltanam  avahavivahakammaiii  kattukamo 
bhaveyya  acariyanani  pathamani  niyyadetva  avahaviva- 
hakammaiii kattabbani ;  yo  idam  carittam  atikkameyya 
bahu  apuhhaiii  pasaveyya  ti."  ("If  any  man  be  desirous 
of  giving  sons  or  daughters  in  marriage,  he  must  first 
hand  over  (one  of  his  offspring)  to  the  acariyas  before 
(any)  giving  in  marriage.  ^Miosoever  transgresses  tliis 
rule  commits  great  sin  (lit.  produces  great  demerit).")  If 
my  interpretation  is  correct  (making  niyyadetva  refer 
to  a  direct  object,  understood  from  the  puttadhltanam 
preceding)  the  passage  recalls  a  trait  of  Tibetan 
Buddhism.  "It  would  appear  that  compulsion  is  also 
exercised  by  the  despotic  priestly  government  in  the  shape 
of  a  recognised  tax  of  children,  to  be  made  Iclrnas,  named 
htsun-gral.  Every  family  thus  affords  at  least  one  of  its 
sons  to  the  church.  The  first  born  or  favourite  son  is 
usually  so  dedicated  in  Tibet.  The  other  son  marries  in 
order  to  continue  the  family  name  and  inheritance.  .  .  ." 
(L.  A.  Waddell's  Buddhism  of  Tibet,  p.  70). 

I  ought  to  add,  however,  that  there  is  no  mention  in 
the  Sasanavamsa  of  Naga-worship,  as  a  practice  of  the 
Samanakuttakas,  but  Phayre's  authority  describes  the 
Aris  (the  priests  of  this  corrupt  cult) ,  living  in  monasteries 
like  Buddhist  monks.  They  were  expelled  and  stripped 
of  their  robes  (like  the  Samanakuttakas)  when 
Anuruddha  had  come  under  the  influence  of  ' '  Arahan  ' ' 
from  Thahtun  {Hist.  Bur.,  p.  83). 

With  regard   to  the  name   Samanakuttaka :  from  the 


DISSERTATION.  17 

new  era    opened    with    the    arrival   of    the    great    thera 
Arahanta,  from  Thaton.' 

Arahanta's  coming  to  Arimaddana,  and  the  sweeping 
reforms  that  King  Annruddha  forthwith  carried  out  at 
his  instance,  are  related  with  a  fulness  that  shows  how 
momentous  this  episode  is  in  the  eyes  of  the  historian. 
[The  story  is  first  told  in  the  words  of  the  Hajavamsa, 
but  two  other  versions   follow,  drawn  from  the  Parit- 


analogy  with  Kuttima  =  artificial  (derived  by  Childers 
from  Skt.  Krtrma),  kuttaka  seems  to  be  the  Skt. 
Krtaka  =  ials,e,  artificial,  simulated.  Samanakuttaka 
would  therefore  simply  mean  :  simulating  (the  life  of) 
the  Samanas.  It  is  expressly  said  that  the  outward 
show  of  a  monastic  life  like  the  Buddhist  monks  was 
kept  up  by  this  sect,  and  that  the  kings  who  patron- 
ised them  believed  them  to  be  disciples  of  Got  am  a. 
Professor  E.  Miiller  has  kindly  pointed  out  to  me  an 
instance  of  the  use  of  this  adjective  m  the  passage, 
"  kuttakan  ti  solasannam  natakitthhiam  thatva  nacca- 
nayoggan  unnamayattharanam "  {Sumangcdavildsini,  I. 
p.  87).  Here  an  artificial  carpet  is  meant,  affording  room 
to  sixteen  dancing  girls. 

Discussing  the  term  Cramanakrtakah,  Prof.  Bendall 
writes  :  "  There  are  plenty  of  mentions  of  '  false 
Samanas'  ..."  For  a  modern  use  of  a  similar  phrase,  I 
may  also  refer  to  a  passage  in  Mr.  Bird's  valuable  work, 
Wanderings  in  Burma,  where  he  speaks  of  the  modern 
clergy  in  the  Eastern  Shan  States  as  "  less  orthodox 
than  those  in  the  Western  States  and  Burma,"  who  call 
them  "  Htii"  or  ''Imitation  priests."  (See  p.  23  of 
Wanderings  in  Burma.  George  Bird,  Education  Depart- 
ment, Burma,  London,  1897.) 

^  The  capital  of  Pegu,  mentioned,  in  the  text,  by  its 
classical  Pali  name  Sudhammapura  (see  Taw  Sein  Ko, 
Breli?ninary  Studg  of  tlie  Kalydni  Inscriptions,  Ind.  Ant., 
vol.  xxii.  p.  17  ;  Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  34). 


18  A  BUEMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

TANIDANA  and  Sasaxapaveni  I.]  The  Samanakuttakas' 
heresy  was,  in  fact,  annihilated  and  their  communities 
were  relentlessly  broken  up,  but  Arahanta  warned  the 
king  that  there  was  danger  for  the  future  of  religion,  since 
no  relics  of  the  Master's  body  were  treasured  in  the  capital, 
and  the  sacred  Texts  were  wanting.  He  therefore  urged 
Anuruddha  to  send  an  embassy  to  Sudhammapura  where 
there  was  a  wealth  of  relics  and  books.  This  was  done, 
but  Manohari,2  king  of  Pegu  (jealous,  as  it  is  said — 
perhaps  envying  Anuruddha  the  honour  of  Arahanta' s 
intimacy),  refused  the  request,  with  a  contempt  that  roused 
the  Burmese  king  to  fury. 3  He  descended  on  Sudham- 
mapura with  a  huge  land  force  and  a  number  of  ships,  and 
laid  siege  to  the  city.     For  a  while  the  army  was  miracu- 


^  I  have  not  come  across  the  titles  of  these  two  works 
in  any  catalogue  of  Pali  books  or  MSS.  that  I  have  been 
able  to  consult.  They  may  be  Burmese  works,  mentioned 
here  by  a  classical  instead  of  their  vernacular  name 
(according  to  Pafihasami's  usual  custom).  I  may  note 
that  the  difference  between  the  three  versions  is  cha- 
racteristic. The  Rdjavamsa  naturally  brings  the  king 
into  the  foreground  ;  the  Parittaniddna  tells  the  story  of 
the  thera's  successful  attack  on  the  chief  heresy  of  the 
Samanakuttakas,  his  exposure  of  a  false  miracle,  and  the 
burning  of  a  book  of  false  doctrine,  while  the  Sdsana- 
paveni  lays  stress  on  Arahanta's  place  in  the  succession 
of  theras. 

2  See  Prelwiiiiari/  Study  of  the  Kalijdni  Inscriptions, 
Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  17.  Manohari  is  also  called 
Manuha  (Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  34). 

3  The  words  of  the  message  are  given — a  home  thrust 
at  Anuruddha's  former  patronage  of  heretics  :  "  It  is  not 
seemly  to  send  the  three  pitakas  and  relics  to  such  as  you, 
who  hold  false  doctrine — even  as  the  fat  of  the  maned  lion 
can  be  kept  in  a  bowl  of  gold  and  not  in  a  vessel  of  clay." 

A  proverb  turning  on  this  folk-superstition  occurs  in 


DISSERTATION.  19 

lously  prevented  from  approaching,  but  when  Anuruddha's 
Brahman  soothsayers, ^  skilled  in  the  Atharvaveda,  came 
to  the  rescue,  the  protecting  spell  was  broken  by  the 
finding  of  the  mutilated  body  of  anmrdered  Hindu,  buried 
under  the  city  walls.=  It  was  dug  up  and  thrown  into  the 
sea  and  the  besiegers  entered  Sudhammapura. 

Manohari  and  all  his  household  were  carried  away 
captive,  and  with  his  captives  Anuruddha  brought  back 
to  Pugan  many  elephant-loads  of  relics  and  books.  All 
the  members  of  the  Sanigha  in  Thaton  were  transferred 
to  Pugan,  so  that  there  were  now  a  thousand  teachers  to 

the  well-known  DJiamnianiti  of  Burma  (Section  V., 
v.  62). 

Sihameda  suvannena  na  ca  titthanti  raj  ate 
Panditanam  kathavakyain  na  ca  titthati  dujjane. 

The  superstition  is  that  the  fat  of  the  lion  evaporates  if 
placed  in  a  common  vessel.  (See  Jas.  Gray's  JSiiti  Litera- 
ture of  Burma,  p.  51.) 

^  For  the  employment  of  Brahmanical  astrologers  at 
the  court  of  Burmese  kings  see  Taw  Sein  Ko,  The 
Spiritual  World  of  the  Burmese  {Transactions  of  the  Ninth 
International  Congress  of  Orientalists,  p.  179). 

2  "  The  Burmese  kings  of  old  used  to  have  human 
beings  buried  alive  at  the  four  corners  of  the  walls  of  their 
capital  city  at  the  time  of  its  foundation,  in  order  that  the 
spirits  of  the  deceased  might  keep  watch  and  ward  over 
the  population,  and  by  their  occult  influence  fail  the 
attempts  of  invaders  to  force  an  entrance  into  the  city  " 
(Taw  Sein  Ko,  Spiritual  World,  &c..  Trans.  Lit.  Con. 
Or.,  vol.  X.  p.  180). 

Cf.  A.  Hillebrandt  :  "  Weit  verbreitet  ist  das  Cxlaube 
dass  ein  Bau  nur  wohl  befestigt  sei  wenn  ein  Mensch  oder 
Tier  in  seine  Fundamente  gegraben  ist  "  (Vedische  Opfer 
iind  Zauher.  Grundriss  der  Tndo-arischen  Philologic  u. 
Alterthumshiijtde.     1.  Band,  2  Heft,  p.  9). 


20  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OP   BUDDHISM. 

expound  the  sacred  texts.  Annruddha  further  sent  for 
copies  from  Ceylon,  which  Arahanta  compared  with  those 
of  Pegu,  to  settle  the  readings.  Manohari  is  said  to  have 
been  made  a  pagoda-slave,'  but  there  is  some  evidence  in 
the  Sasanavamsa  that  he  was  not  ungenerously  treated, - 
for  while  at  Arimaddana  he  still  possessed  at  least  one  of 
his  royal  jewels,  a  splendid  gem,  the  price  of  which  he 
devoted  to  the  making  of  two  great  statues  of  the 
Buddha.  According  to  Pahhasami  the  statues  exist  to 
this  day. 

The  Sasanavamsa  here  leaves  Anuruddha  3  and  passes 
on  to  the  time  of  Narapatisisu  4  (1167  a.d.)  The 
celebrated  teacher  Uttarajiva  had  come  from  Sudham- 
mapura  to  Arimaddana  and,  in  his  turn,  had  established 
religion  there.  His  pupil  Chapada  spent  ten  years 
studying  in  Ceylon,  and  then  returned  with  four 
colleagues — -Sivali,   Tamalinda,  Rahula,  and  Ananda — to 


1  Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  84. 

2  Forchhammer,  describing  the  so-called  "Palace  of 
Manuha,"  in  his  report  of  the  ruins  of  Pugan,  observes  : 
"  Anuruddha  seems  to  have  allowed  Manuha  the 
semblance  at  least  of  a  king"  (Report,  Jan.,  1891,  pp. 
7  and  8).     Bird,  Wanderings,  &c.,  p.  353. 

3  Anuruddha' s  later  attempts  to  get  relics  (from  China 
and  Ceylon)  seem  to  have  been  less  successful  than  his 
raid  on  Sudhammapura.  (Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  35  ; 
Bastian,  Gescli.  Ind.  Chin.,  pp.  33,  38.) 

4  Narabadi-tsi-tsi-thu  (1167).  Six  kings,  the  eariier 
successors  of  Anuruddha,  are  here  passed  over.  Two  of 
them  are  mentioned  in  the  text  further  on.  (See  Phayre, 
Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  37,  49,  281.) 

"Vielleicht  erst  mit  Narapadisethu  wird  wieder 
geschichtlicher  Boden  getreten  "  (Bastian,  Gesch.  Ind. 
Chin.,  p.  35). 


DISSERTATION.  21 

the  capital. I  There  they  set  up  a  community  apart, ^  and 
were  specially  favoured  by  King  Narapati.  After  the 
death  of  Chapada  separate  schools  came  into  existence, 
having  their  origin  in  certain  differences  3  that  arose 
between  the  three  surviving  teachers — Sivali,  Tamahnda, 
and  Ananda  (p.  66),  Eahula  having  already  quitted  the 
Order. 

The  schools  were  named  each  after  its  leader,  but  are 
together  known  as  the  2'>ciccJidgana  (or  later  school)  to 
distinguish  them  from  the  earlier  school  in  Arimaddana 
(purimagana)  founded  by  Arahanta  (p.  67). 

The  three  teachers  died  early  in  the  thirteenth  century, 
a  time  when,  it  is  said,  religion  shone  at  its  brightest  in 
Pugan.  A  short  digression  is  made  here  to  mention  the 
building  of  the  celebrated  Nanda  (or  Ananda)  temple  by 
King  CHATTAGUHINDA4  (p.  68)  in  the  eleventh  century, 
and  the  history  then  returns  to  the  time  of  Narapati, 5 


1  The  whole  story  is  related  in  the  Kalyani  Inscriptions. 
(See  Taw  Sein  Ko,  Preliminary  Study,  &c.  Ind.  Ant., 
vol.  xxii.  p.  29,  et.  seq.) 

2  Narapati  assigned  separate  quarters  to  the  different 
sects  then  flourishing  at  Pugan.  (See  Forchhammer's 
Archaeological  Eeport,  1891.) 

3  They  disagreed  on  the  application  of  Vinaya  rules  to 
the  following  cases  :  The  keeping  of  a  tame  elephant, 
received  as  a  present  from  the  king  (instead  of  setting  it 
at  hberty),  and  the  personal  recommending  of  pupils  by  a 
teacher  (Vacwihiiatti) . 

"> Kyansitthd  (1057  a.d.).  (Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  39, 
281.)  For  descriptions  of  the  still-frequented  Ananda 
temple  see  Yule,  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava,  p.  36,  and 
Crawfurd's  Journal,  p.  114. 

5  It  is  rather  curious  that  only  one  passing  mention 
occurs  in  the  text,  of  Alon-can-nu  (Alaungsithu,  1058 
A.D.),  the  grandson  of  Kyansittha,  a  notable  king  and  a 
zealous  Buddhist.     He  built  the  great  Shwe-ku  temple  at 


22  A    BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

(p,  69),  a  king  whose  personality  stands  out  with  some 
distinctness  in  a  story  of  the  thera  Sllabuddhi.  We  see 
in  this  latter  one  of  the  best  types  of  tlie  Buddhist  monk 
unspoilt  by  kingiy  favour  as  untouched  by  spiritual  pride 
He  opposes  the  sovereign's  wish  to  build  a  cetiya  on  the 
Khanitthipada  hiil,  warning  him  that  there  is  no  merit  in 
forcing  on  his  people  the  heavy  labour  of  levelling  the 
ground.  He  refuses  to  eat  of  the  king's  bread,  and  would 
leave  for  Sihala  but  is  prevented,  by  a  stratagem  of  a 
resourceful  minister,  and  brought  back  to  the  king. 
Narapati,  warned  by  the  haunting  of  a  terrifying  Yaksha, 
that  he  has  erred,  receives  the  holy  man  with  great 
honour,  and  hands  over  to  him  his  five  sons.  Sllabuddhi's 
characteristic  response  is  to  trace  out  five  sites  where  his 
royal  bondsmen  shall  build  five  cetiyas,  and  with  that  act 
he  restores  them  their  freedom. 

Other  anecdotes  follow  to  illustrate  the  splendour  of 
religion  in  Arimaddana  and  its  continuance  through 
Saints  and  Arhats.^  The  author  adds  that  he  could 
relate  many  more,  but  that  he  fears  to  overload  his  history 
(p.  72). 


Pugan,  improved  the  administration  of  law  in  his  king- 
dom, interfered  successfully  in  the  affairs  of  Arakan,  and 
caused  the  Buddhist  temple  at  Gaya  to  be  repaired,  where 
an  inscription  testifies  to  his  piety  (see  Phayre,  Hist.  Bur., 
p.  39).  Some  explanation  of  this  silence  may,  perhaps, 
be  found  in  a  fact  noted  by  Bastian  (Gesch.  Incl.  Chin., 
p.  88),  namely,  that  the  personalities  of  Anoarahta  and 
xllaungsithu  have  become  mingled  in  Burmese  tradition 
(to  the  profit  of  the  greater  hero's  reputation). 

I  The  difficulty  of  recognising  the  arhat  in  this  world 
is  briefly  discussed  here.  Examples  of  abstract  questions  in 
the  Sasanavamsa  are  so  rare  that  I  mention  this  instance. 
An  anecdote  relating  to  arhatship  is  told  of  Mahakassapa, 
whose  attainment  to  that  state  was  not  recognised  by  his 
.mddhiviharika,  the  pupil  who  was  his  daily  attendant. 


DISSERTATION.  23 

On  the  anecdotes  follows  an  account  of  the  religious 
LITERATURE  of  Tambadlpa,  the  beginning  of  which  is 
traced  back  to  the  reign  of  San-lan-kron  raja^  con- 
temporary of  Mahanama  of  Sihala.  The  mahatheras  of 
Mramma  were  already  writing  books  in  the  time  of 
Buddhaghosa  and  Buddhadatta,  and  tikas  were  composed 
by  later  authors,  for  the  full  understanding  of  the  ancient 
works.  In  the  year  1127,  Aggavamsa  wrote  the  cele- 
brated grammatical  treatise  Saddamti^  expounding  the 
original  meaning  of  the  language  used  in  the  three  Pitakas. 
Sinhalese  scholars  of  that  time,  we  are  told,  said  of  this 
work  that  they  had  none  in  their  own  country  to  compare 
with  it,  in  settling  difficult  points. 

Other  works  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries 
are  mentioned,  with  the  names  of  their  authors.  Pro- 
minence is  given  to  books  on  grammar,  and  here  the  name 
of  Saddhammakitti  is  marked  out  for  special  honour  as 
the  author  of  the  Ekakkharakosa.3  Saddhammakitti 
lived  in  the  troublous  times  when  religion  languished  in 
Tambadlpa  under  the  cruel  rule  of  a  heretic  of  the  Jaluma 
family. 4     The  Ekakkharakosa  was  written  to  keep  alive 


B.  E.  887. 


Thestory  of  Pilindavaccha  is  Teieiredto{see  Suttavibhaiiga, 
xxiii.  1,  and  Iddhikatha  of  Kathavatthu,  xxi.  4). 

The  digression  leads  up  to  the  statement  that  the 
theras  Sihalabuddhi,  Pollohka,  and  Sumedha  of  Arimad- 
dana  were  arhats. 

^  Theng-lay-gyung,  about  345  a.d.  {Bajaweng  list  of 
Kings  of  Pugan.     Phayre's  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  279). 

2  Forchhammer's  Archseological  Keport  on  Pugan,  p.  2. 

3  Ekakkharakosa,  a  small  vocabulary  of  words  of  various 
significations  ending  in  certain  final  letters,  compiled  by 
a  very  learned  Buddhist  priest  of  Burma  named  Saddham- 
makitti. [Subhuti,  preface  to  his  edition  of  Ekakkhara- 
kosa, edited  with  Ahhidlidiuqipadlpikd,  Colombo,  1883.] 

4  A  son  of  the  Shan  chief  and  conqueror  of  Ava,  Salun 
or  Tsalun.  Ava  was  taken  by  the  Shans  about  1523,  and 
Salun  placed  his  son  Tho-han-bwa  on  the  throne.    Under 


24  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

sacred  learning,  then  in  mortal  danger  from  the  great 
destruction  of  books  in  the  land  (p.  7G). 

From  Saddhammakitti's    time,  the    beginning    of   the 
sixteenth  century,  the  story  again  goes  back  to  the  later 
Kings  of  Pugan.     Of  King  Jeyyasinkha  (1219  a.d.),'  we 
only  hear  that  he  forsakes  the  world,  broken-hearted  at 
B.  E.  581.  the  death  of  a  son,  and  is  succeeded  by  Kyocva.      The 

latter's  piety  and  zealous  furthering  of  religion  are 
enthusiastically  praised.-  Plunged  in  study  he  left  the 
affairs  of  state  to  his  son  :  he  was  himself  the  author  of 
two  manuals,  Paramatthahindu  and  Saddabindu,  for  the 
use  of  his  wives,  and  one  of  his  daughters  wrote  the 
Vibhatyattha.s  It  was  even  currently  said  that  this  king, 
in  a  former  existence,  had  been  the  mighty  champion 
of   religion,  Anuruddha. 


him  the  Buddhist  monks  suffered  a  ruthless  persecution 
(see  Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,^.  93,  and  British  Burma  Gazetteer ^ 
vol.  i.  p.  278). 

1  According  to  Phayre' s  authorities  Jeyyasinkha 
succeeded  his  father  in  1204,  and  his  reign  came  to 
an  end  in  1227.  His  son  Kyocva  or  Kyatswa  appears  in 
Phayre's  list  of  Kings  {Hist.  Bur.,  p.  281),  but  there  is 
no  further  account  of  him.  It  was  at  this  period  that 
"danger  began  to  gather  round  the  Pugan  monarchy" 
(Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  51). 

2  A  Burman  Chronicle,  quoted  by  Crawfurd  (Journal, 
vol.  ii.,  p.  288),  says  of  Kyocva,  "He  loved  everybody, 
read  and  became  master  of  every  book,  held  public  dis- 
putations, and  seven  times  a  day  instructed  his  household. 
He  wrote  himself  a  work  called  Parmata  Bingdu,  and 
built  a  great  house  for  the  purpose  of  holding  disputations. 
He  also  constructed  a  monastery  at  Sagu  and  a  great  tank 
by  damming  a  mountain  stream.  During  this  reign  there 
were  no  wars  or  commotions  of  any  kind.   .   .  ." 

3  Vibhatyattha  affords  examples  of  the  Pali  cases. 
(Subhtiti,  preface    to   Abhidhanajjpadijnkd.) 


DISSERTATION.  25 

The  career  of  the  thera  Disapamokkha,  who  attained  to 
profound  knowledge  in  his  old  age,  illustrates  these  golden 
days  of  learning  under  Kyocva.  The  story  is  followed 
by  a  glowing  account  of  the  science  and  zeal  of  the 
women  of  Arimaddana,  and  anecdotes  are  told  of  their 
skill  in  grammar  and  the  keenness  of  their  wit  ^  (p. 78). 
On  this  joyous  note  the  history  of  religion  in  Arimaddana 
ends.  There  is  no  mention  of  Kyocva's  next  successors. 
UzANA  (1243  A.D.)  and  Narathihapate  (1248).  (Phayre, 
Hist.  Bur.,  p.  281.)  Bastian  quotes  an  inscription  in 
Sagain  which  mentions  Nara-siha-pade,  under  whom 
the  temples  of  Pugan  w^ere  torn  down  to  fortify  the 
city  against  the  Chinese  (Gesch.  Ind.  Chin.,  p.  41). 
Even  the  building  of  a  gorgeous  cetiya  does  not  earn  a 
place  for  Narathihapate  among  the  kings  of  the  Sasana- 
vamsa.  The  Burmese  people  remember  him  as  Taruk- 
PYE-MENG,  a  nickname  that  keeps  alive  only  the  memory 
of  his  unkingly  flight  from  his  capital  before  the  Taruk  ; 
and  in  the  eyes  of  the  monks  the  "  merit  "  of  the  great 
cetiya  may  well  have  been  lost  to  its  founder,  when  the 
temples  of  Arimaddana  were  torn  down  in  a  vain  attempt 
to  fortify  the  city  against  the  Mongol  invaders. ^ 

The  centre  of  interest  now  shifts  from  Tambadlpa  to 
Ketumati,  the  capital  of  Jeyyavaddhana  3  and  the  history 
suddenly  passes  over  to  a  later  period  (1510  a.d.)  (p.  80). 
The  founding  of  Ketumati  by  king  Mahasiri.jeyyasura,4 


^  An  extract  from  this  part  of  the  Mramma  chapter  is 
given  by  Minaev  in  Appendix  B  to  Chapter  III.  of  his 
Becherches  sur  le  Bouddhisnie. 

2  Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  51,  53,  54;  and  Col.  Burney's 
translations  from  Bdjavamsa.  J.  A.  S.  Bengal,  vol.  iv. 
p.  400,  et  seq.     Bird,  Wanderings,  p.  121. 

3  Taungu.     {Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  4,  &c.) 

4  MengKyinyo,  who  assassinated  his  uncle  and  suc- 
ceeded him  in  1845.  He  founded  Taungu  city.  Phayre, 
Hist.  Bur.,^.  92,  and  Mason  (abstract  from  the  chronicles 
of  Taungu)  in  Burma,  p.  65. 

3 


26  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

a  descendant  of  the  fallen  dynasty  of  Pugan,  and  the 
steady  growth  of  liis  power,  as  a  rival  to  the  Shan 
usurpers  then  ruling  in  Tambadlpa,  give  a  historical  im- 
portance to  his  reign,  but  it  is  naturally  not  for  this 
reason  that  it  stands  out  in  the  annals  of  religion.  The 
events  chronicled  in  the  Sasanavamsa  are  the  arrival,  in 
the  year  1530,  of  the  thera  Mahaparakkama  from  Ceylon, 
and  the  breaking  out  of  a  controversy  which  he  was  after- 
wards called  upon  to  decide.  The  dispute  was  about  the 
precept  (sikkhdpada)  relating  to  intoxicating  drinks. ^ 
The  disputing  parties  differed  in  their  interpretation  of 
passages  in  the  Kankhdvitarani,^  and  other  commen- 
taries, dealing  with  the  question  :  at  what  stage  of  its 
preparation  the  juice  of  the  coconut  palm,  &c.  \tdli-ndli- 
kerddinam],  should  be  considered  an  intoxicating  [and 
therefore  unlawful]  drink.  Mahaparakkama  gave  judg- 
ment and  afterwards  wrote  the  book  called  Surdvinicchaya 
on  this  same  question. 

Here  another  change  of  period  takes  us  back  more 
than  two  hundred  years  to  the  last  days  of  the  hapless 
KiTTiTARA,3  the  deposed  king  of  Pugan.  The  scene  is 
again  Tambadlpa,  but  Arimaddana  is  no  longer  the  citadel 
of  religion.  A  blank  is  left  between  the  reign  of  the 
pious  Kyocva  I.  and  that  of  the  three  Shan  usurpers,  who 
B.E.  664.  iiow  (1302  a.d.)  hold  the  last  king  of  Pugan  prisoner  at 

Khandhapura.4  One  episode  alone  brings  Khandhapura 
into  the  History  of  Religion,  namely,  the  siege  of  the  city 
by  a  Mongol  army,  at  the  instance  of  the  Burmese  king's 

1  One  of  the  five  that  are  binding  on  every  Buddhist. 
(Rhys  Davids,  Buddhism,  pp.  139,  140.) 

2  Buddhaghosa's  Commentary  on  the  Patimokkha. 

3  Kyoswa  or  Kyautswa  H.  (1279  a.d.).  Hist.  Bur., 
pp.  58,  281. 

4  Myinzaing,  a  few  miles  to  the  south  of  Ava.  (See  Hist. 
Bur.,  p.  58,  and  Col.  Burney's  Translation  (ioc.  sit.)  for 
the  Rajavamsa  account  of  this  episode.  It  agrees  in  its 
main  features  with  that  given  in  Sasanavamsa.) 


DISSERTATION.  27 

son,  who  sought  to  restore  his  father  to  power.  Accord- 
ing to  the  Sasanavamsa  the  Shan  brothers,  at  the  time  of 
the  siege,  sought  the  advice  of  a  learned  thera,  as  to 
their  best  tactics,  and  received  the  rather  sarcastic  answer 
that  such  affairs  were  not  the  province  of  the  Samana 
ajud  they  had  better  consult  the  actors  (p.  82).  The 
brothers  followed  this  counsel  to  the  letter,  took  the  song 
of  some  actors,  in  a  water-spectacle,  as  a  hint  to  be  acted 
upon,  and  killed  their  captive.  The  besiegers  then  with- 
drew, holding  it  useless  to  carry  on  the  war  on  behalf  of 
a  dead  man. 

According  to  Burmese  chronicles  a  monastery  was 
built  at  Khandhapura  by  the  Shan  governors,^  but  this  is 
not  mentioned  in  the  Sasanavamsa,  where  it  is  only 
stated  that  a  number  of  theras  dwelt  in  the  city,  but  no 
books  were  written  there. 

The  youngest  of  the  three  Shan  brothers,  however — 
SiHAStJRA  - — finds  a  place  in  our  history  as  the  founder  of 
the  capital  Vijayapura  3  (in  1812)  and  as  a  protector  of  b.  e.  674. 
religion.  Yet  in  his  reign  there  were  few  righteous  bhik- 
khus  and  the  Samanakuttaka  heresy  revived.  Better 
days  followed  in  the  reign  of  his  adopted  son  Ujana-^ 
(1822)  who  built  seven  great  cetiyas  and  bestowed  gifts  of  b.  e.  684. 
land  with  them.  Religion  flourished  then  in  Vijayapura, 
for  many  thousands  of  theras  had  settled  there;  neverthe- 
less, a  scandal  was  caused  by  the  quarrels  of  the  bhikkhus 
appointed  to  receive  from  the  tillers  of  the  soil  the  due 
share  of  the  monastery  lands.  As  a  protest  against  this 
unseemly   discord    a   sect   was   formed,  whose  members 


1  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  58. 

2  Thihathu  {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  59,  282).     Bastian,  Gesch. 
I  lid.   Chin.,  p.   58. 

3  Panya,  a  few  miles  to  the  north  of  Myinzaing.     {Hist. 
Bur.,  p.  59.) 

■*  Son  of  the  deposed  Kyautswa.     {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  (50, 
282.)     Crawfurd's  Journal,  Appendix  viii. 


28  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

withdrew  from  the  more  social  hfe  of  the  viharas  and 
lived  in  the  forests. 

B.  E.  704.  In  1342  Ujana  abdicated  in  favour  of  his  half-brother 

Kj^ocva  I  (p.  85).  Here  a  group  of  short  tales  enlivens 
the  chronicle.  The  author  seems  almost  to  enjoy  writing 
of  a  wrestling  match  or  describing  the  king's  swiftest 
horse,  but  the  religious  aim  of  these  anecdotes  is  not 
quite  clear.  Kyocva  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a 
notable  benefactor  of  religion.  In  his  young  days  he  had 
not  a  thought  beyond  hunting,  till  he  was  advised  by 
Sakra,  in  a  dream,  to  observe  Uposatha,  as  a  means  of 
arriving  at  power  and  kingship.  Later,  when  on  the 
throne,  he  was  the  patron  of  Samanakuttakas  and  even 
had  them  in  his  service.  But  he  was  an  auspicious 
prince ;  he  captured  the  five  white  elephants  promised  by 
Sakra,  and  his  extraordinary  luck  is  (consistently  with 
the  general  theory  of  re-birth),  counted  to  him  for  merit. 

B.  E.  713.  The  reign  of  his  son  Kittisihasura  ^  (1351  a.d.)   or 

Catusetibhinda  is  marked  by  the  writing  of  some  well- 
known  works.  Among  others  is  mentioned  the  Sadda- 
sdratthajdlini,  and  a  picturesque  story  is  told  of  the 
author,  Nagita,  or  Khantakakhipa — so  nicknamed  from 
the  oddly  inauspicious  opening  of  his  religious  life,  when 
he  was  so  unwilling  to  be  taken  to  study  with  a  bhikkhu 
that  his  father,  by  way  of  rebuke,  threw  the  obstinate  boy 
into  a  thorny  bush. 

The  second  Shan  capital,  Jeyyapura,3  and  its  founder 

B.E.  685.  Sam-kha-ya-co-yon  4  (1323  A.D.)  are  mentioned  only  with 

the  remark  that  no  books  were  written  in  the  city.     No 


'  Kyoaswa  or  Nga-si-sheng  (1342  a.d.).     Hisf.  Bur., 
pp.  60,  282. 

2  Kyoaswa  IV.     Hist.  Bur.,  pp.   GO,  282.     Crawfurd's 
Journal,  Appendix  viii. 

3  Sagain,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Irawaddy. 

4  Athengkaya  (1322),  a  son  of  Thihathu,  who  died  in 
that  year.     {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  60,  283.) 


DISSERTATION.  29 

record  of  the  last  forty  years  of  the  Shan  dynasty  appears 
in  the  Sasanavamsa.     A  few  sentences  carry  the  history 
over  the  destruction  of  Vijayapura  and  Jeyyapura,  in  1364,  b.  e  726. 
to  the  opening  of  a  new  epoch  with  the  foundation  of 
Katanapura  I  by  Sativa-raja  in  the  same  year  (p.  87). 

The  first  episode  set  down  in  the  rehgious  record  of  the 
new  capital  is  the  "  establishment  "  of  religion  by  two 
theras  from  Ceylon,  Sirisaddhainmalainkara  and  Slhala- 
mahasami,  who  landed  at  Kusima  in  1429,  bringing  relics  b.  E.  79i. 
from  their  country  (p.  90). 

Byahha,2  King  of  Pegu,  refused  to  allow  them  to  settle 
in  his  dominions,  and  they  proceeded  to  Sirikhetta, 
where  the  King  of  Burma  3  gave  them  a  splendid  recep- 
tion. On  the  arrival  of  the  relics  an  earthquake  took 
place,  which  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  people.  The 
Ceylon  theras  settled  in  Mramma,  and  the  spread  of 
religion  in  the  country  is  ascribed  to  them.  Still,  the 
earlier  kings  of  Ratanapura  had  not  neglected  works  of 
piety.  Ma-na-kri-cok  4  (1368  a.d.)  rebuilt  the  celebrated  b.  e.  730. 
Ca-nah-khum  Cetiya,  and  bestowed  on  his  tutor,  Khema- 


I  Ava,  at  the  confluence  of  the  Irawaddy  and  Myit-nge, 
founded  by  Thadominbya  in  1364.  This  prince,  who 
was  supposed  to  be  of  the  ancient  royal  race  of  Burma, 
resolutely  attacked  the  Shan  power  and  made  himself 
king.  {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  63,  64;  Ind.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  8.) 
He  built  pagodas  in  his  new  capital,  but  "he  is  denounced 
(says  Phayre)  in  Burmese  history  as  a  man  of  cruel  dis- 
position who  altogether  disregarded  religion."  He  reigned 
less  than  four  years. 

-^  Binya-Ran-Kit  {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  83,  290). 

3  Mexg-nan-si  (1426  a.d.),  a  Shan,  who  claimed  descent 
from  Panca-setibhinda  {Hist.  Bur.,  p.  82). 

4  Meng-kyi-swa-soa-kai,  elected  successor  to  Thado- 
minbya in  1368.  He  left  so  great  a  reputation  as  a 
warrior  that  he  is  counted  among  the  five  kings  of 
Burma  whose  conquests  brought  the  most  glory  and 
territory  to  his  country  (Yule,  Mission   to  the  Court  of 


80  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

cara,  whom  he  made  head  of  the  Order,  the  royal  dignity 
of  the  white  umbrella. 

It  is  at  this  period — in  the  time  of  Adhikaeaja  ^  (1400 
A.D.) — that  a  Samghardjd  is  first  mentioned  in  this 
chapter.  Adhikaraja's  tutor,  on  whom  he  bestowed  the 
title,  is  expressly  excluded  by  our  author  from  the  suc- 
cession of  theras ;  but  the  same  king  was  fortunate  in 
calling  bhikkhus  to  his  aid  in  temporal  affairs.  When 
Eajadhira.ja,2  King  of  Kamahfia,  invaded  his  country 
and  threatened  his  capital  with  a  siege,  it  was  a  bhikkhu 
of  his  council  who  confidently  undertook  to  parley  with 

B.  E.  766.  the  foe,  and  exhorted  Eajadhiraja  to  such  purpose  that  he 

returned  peaceably  to  his  own  country. 

B.  E.  788.  In  the  following  reign  (that  of  Meih-na-nah,  1426  a.d.),3 

the  era  was  changed  and  a  new  reckoning  established 
(according  to  the  old  Burmese  custom)  to  avert  an  evil 
omen.  In  the  Sasanavamsa  the  king  is  said  to  have  been 
counselled  by  two  learned  theras  to  make  the  change ;  it 
is  an  interesting  and  (in  our  text)  an  unusual  mention  of 
theras  acting  as  astrologers  (their  advice  to  the  king  is 
given  on  the  strength  of  the  Vedasattha).  There  is  no 
hint  that  these  two  were  wanting  in  sacred  knowledge, 
though,  in  another  passage,  a  distinction  is  severely  made 
between  the  higher  learning  and  secular  science. 

Among  the  theras  who  lived  and  wrote  at  Eatanapura  in 
the  fifteenth  century,  the  most  celebrated  was  Ariyavamsa 
(author  of  Maiiisdramanjusd,  Manidtpa,  Gandhdhliarana 
and   JdtaJiavisodhana).     He    is    another    example    of    a 


Ava,  p.  269;  Bastian,  GescJi.  Ind.  Chin.,  p.  55;  Phayre, 
Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  64,  284). 

1  Meng-Khaung,  son  of  Meng-Kyi-swa-soa-kai  {Hist. 
Bur.,  pp.  70,  284). 

2  Eajadirit  came  to  the  throne  of  Pegu  1385  (Hist. 
Bur.,  pp.  68,  290).     The  Eajavamsa  tells  the  same  story. 

3  In  Father  San  Germano's  abridgement  of  the  Eaja- 
vamsa {Burmese  Empire,  chapter  viii.),  Saddammara.ja 
(1426  A.D.)  changed  the  era  because  of  an  evil  omen. 


DISSERTATION.  31 

bhikkhu  with  that  strong  influence  over  the  king,  that 
the  monks  have  known  so  well  how  to  exercise  and  their 
chroniclers  to  describe.  Ariyavamsa,  the  scholarly  and 
niagnaminous  teacher,  stands  out,  a  dignified  figure,  in 
some  anecdotes,  that  occur  here,  together  with  an  in- 
teresting list  of  the  works  produced  by  different  writers 
in  this  fruitful  period.  Among  the  literary  theras  two 
poets  are  mentioned,  who  are  not  counted  by  the  authors 
af  the  pordtiapotthakd  in  the  Succession  of  theras. ^ 

A  celebrated  teacher  in  the  reign  of   Siritribhavan- 

ADITYANARAPATIVARE  2     (1501      A.D.)     WaS      the     Saddham-    B.  E.  863. 

makitti,  of  whom  we  have  already  heard.  His  name  is 
bound  up  with  memories  of  the  bitter  persecution  of  the 
monks  that  followed  the  invasion  of  Burma  by  the  Shans 
early  in  the  sixteenth  century. 

Saddhammakitti  withdrew  for  safety  to  KetumatI  with  b.  e.  912. 
his  pupils,  one  of  whom,  Tisasanadhaja,  was  afterwards 
brought  to  Hamsavati  3  by  King  Anekasetibhinda,4  who 
was  reigning  over  Pegu  and  Burma  in  1551  a.d.     Aneka- 
setibhinda's  predecessor,  Ta-beng-shwe-hti  5  (1540  a.d.). 


'  For  further  remarks  on  the  writing  and  reciting  of 
poetry  by  Samanas,  Pahhasami  refers  to  his  own  book, 
Uposathavinicchaya ,  where  he  treats  of  the  sikkhdpada 
relating  to  singing  and  dancing. 

-  Shwe-nan-sheng  Narapati  (1501  a.d.)  [an  error  in 
my  transcript,  observed  too  late,  places  this  king  three 
years  earlier] .  In  his  reign  Salun,  the  Shan  chief  of 
Monyin,  "after  years  of  desultory  warfare,"  took  Ava 
by  storm,  and  the  king  was  killed  escaping  from  the  city 
{Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  89,  285).  3  Pegu  city. 

4  Bureng  Naung  (cahed  "  Branginoco  "  by  the  Portu- 
guese), 1551,  Iling  of  United  Pegu  and  Burma  {Hist.  Bur., 
pp.  161,  290). 

5  Prince  of  Taungu,  at  the  time  of  the  Shan  rule  in 
Burma.  He  is  reckoned  as  a  descendant  of  the  ancient 
royal  race.  He  reigned  ten  years  as  "  emperor"  at  Pegu 
{Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  93,  291). 


32  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

is  not  mentioned,  although  he  appears  in  the  histories  as 
a  patriot  and  even  "the  recognised  champion  of  the 
Burmese  people."  The  Shan  rule  in  Burma  was  broken 
in  his  successful  campaigns,  but  his  religious  foundations 
were  in  Pegu,  and  would  therefore  be  no  concern  of  the 
Burmese  samgha. 

Very  little  is  said  of  Anekasetibhinda.  It  was  in 
Eamahna  that  he  built  cetiyas  and  viharas,  and  the 
Europeans  of  his  time  who  wrote  of  the  dazzling  splendour 
of  his  capital  and  court  and  the  width  of  his  dominion,  speak 
of  him  as  the  "  King  of  Pegu."  From  the  faint  trace  left 
by  this  imposing  personality  in  the  Sasanavamsa,  we  may 
suppose  that  religion  did  not  suffer  by  the  disturbed 
state  of  the  country.  Bureng  Naung's  activity  was  felt 
throughout  the  whole  of  Burma  in  his  conquests  and 
administration,  and  it  is  recorded  of  him  that  he  even 
forced  Buddhism  on  the  Shans  and  Muslim  in  the  north 
of  his  kingdom. 

Of  Bureng  Naung's  son,  No-na-ra-mah,  or  Sihasura- 

B.E.  961.  dhammaraja^  (1599  A.D.),  WO  Only  hear  that  he  restored 

Ava  and  was  building  cetiyas  and  viharas  when  he  met 

his  death  on  his  return  from  a  victorious  expedition  to 

Theinni  (or  Sinni).^ 

Under  his  eldest  sons  the  Order  seems  to  have  flourished 


1  Nyaung-Kam-Meng  (1599  a.d.).  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  280. 
He  was  a  younger  son  of  Anekasetibhinda,  and  tribu- 
tary king  of  Ava. 

2  In  the  North  Shan  States,  a  little  to  the  west  of  the 
Upper  Salwen  river  (see  Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  V21 ,  128). 

3  Mahadhammaraja  (1605  a.d.).  Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  128, 
129,  286.  A  notable  feat  of  the  king  is  passed  over  by  our 
history.  He  successfully  attacked  Philip  de  Brito,  the 
Portuguese  Governor  in  Pegu,  and  avenged  the  wrongs 
done  to  the  Order  by  "  the  sacrilegious  wretch  who 
destroyed  Pagodas."  This  event,  however,  would  touch 
the  Samgha  of  Burma  only  indirectly,  if  at  all,  and  its 


DISSERTATION. 


83 


both  materially  and  intellectually,  for  a  great  number  of 
works  were  written  in  the  viharas  built  by  the  king's 
bounty. 

A  few  titles  of  poems  and  commentaries  are  given,  and 
mention  is  made  of  two  bhikkhus  from  Eamamia,  who 
were  favoured  by  the  king  for  their  ability  in  temporal 
affairs  (lokadhammachekatdija).  As  their  science  lay 
chiefly  in  the  Vedasatthas,  the  ancient  chroniclers  do 
not  reckon  them  in  the  Succession  of  theras  ;  but  the 
reputation  they  left,  notwithstanding,  is  one  of  the  signs 
of  an  undoubted  revival  of  scholarship  at  this  time,  which 
showed  itself,  during  the  following  reign,  in  a  keen  rivalry 
between  the  monks  of  Pegu  and  those  of  Burma. 

King  Ukkamsika,^  a  famous  patron  of  religion,  had 
established  his  capital  at  HamsavatI,-  but  had  a  jealous 
regard  for  the  reputation  of  the  Mramma  scholars. 
Hearing  that  they  were  underrated  in  Kamahha, 
he  sent  for  learned  theras  from  his  own  country,  and 
caused  a  disputation  to  be  held,  in  which,  according  to  our 
author,  the  theras  of  Burma  shone  by  such  profound 
knowledge  that  even  those  of  Eamahha  were  forced  to 
testify  to  the  scholarship  of  the  new-comers. 

Ukkainsika  returned  to  his  Burmese  subjects  in  Eatana- 
pura  in  1684.3  In  1647  occurred  an  attempt  upon  his  b.  e  ioo9 
life  and  throne,  the  story  of  which,  as  told  in  the  Sasana- 
vaiiisa,  is  different  from  the  Eajavamsa  version  of  the 
same  event,  and  shows  the  bhikkhus  in  a  rather  unusual 
character ;  in  fact,  as  good  lighters  in  case  of  need. 


affairs  are  throughout  kept  rigidly  apart  from  those  of  the 
Sanigha  of  Pegu. 

1  Thadodhammaeaja  (1629  a.d.),  brother  of  Maha- 
dhammaraja.  The  date  given  in  the  Sasanavamsa  is 
1684,  in  which  year  Ukkamsika  left  HamsavatI  and  estab- 
lished his  capital  at  Eatanapura.  (Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  134, 
286.) 

2  Hist.,  Bur.,  p.  134.  3  Ibid.,  p.  135. 


o4  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

Pamiasaiiii's  account  of  the  affair  is,  briefly,  as  follows. 
In  the  year  1647,  the  king's  younger  brother^  died.  Then 
the  king's  son,  the  Prince  of  Uccanagara  placed  himself 
at  the  head  of  a  conspiracy  to  dethrone  his  father,  and 
forced  his  way  into  the  palace.  The  king  fled  from  the 
city,  in  disguise,  bearing  away  some  of  the  royal  jewels, 
and  accompanied  by  two  of  his  ministers.  They  reached 
the  river,2  revealed  the  king's  identity  to  a  samanera,  who 
was  about  to  cross  over,  and  induced  him  to  give  them  a 
place  in  his  boat.  The  samanera  took  them  to  his  vihara, 
where  the  royal  fugitive  threw  himself  on  the  protection 
of  the  superior.  He  was  not  only  loyally  received,  and 
kept  in  hiding,  but  all  the  bhikkhus  of  the  neighbourhood 
were  called  together  and  organised  for  a  stout  defence 
bj^  one  of  the  theras,  who  seems  to  have  had  some 
military  experience  when  a  layman.  The  vihara  was 
guarded  by  outposts  of  bhikkhus  armed  with  staves  ;  and 
the  king's  pursuers  at  last  withdrew  baffled  and  overawed. 
The  attempted  revolution  failed,  and  the  king,  when 
restored  to  power,  showed  his  gratitude  to  his  defenders 
by  gifts  of  viharas  (p.  109). 

It  is  interesting  to  set  against  this  story  the  summary 
of  the  Kajavainsa  account  given  in  Phayre's  History  of 
BiinnaJ  "  The  conduct  of  Thadodhammaraja  seems  to 
have  been  irreproachable.  Nevertheless,  his  life  was 
endangered  from  a  conspiracy,  the  leading  features  of 
which  have  been  repeated  in  recent  times.  The  Heir- 
Apparent  having  died,  his  son  was  discontented  that  he 
was  not  appointed  to  succeed  to  that  office.  He  suddenly 
assembled  a  band  of  armed  desperate  men  and  forced  his 
way  into  the  palace.    The  king  fled  by  the  west  gate,  and 


1  The  Heir-Apparent  (according  to  Burmese  custom) 
Mengre-Kyoaswa. 

2  In  this  passage  the  Irawaddy  is  called  the  liajata- 
vdluka  (river  of  silver  sand)  instead  of  Eravati,  as  else- 
where in  the  text.  3  Pp.  135,  136. 


DISSERTATION.  35 

took  refuge  in  a  monastery.  He  then  crossed  the  river  mid 
entered  a  stockade  near  Sagaiiig,  ivJiich  loas  guarded  hi/ 
soldiers.  The  rebel  prince  having  no  influence  in  the 
country,  a  large  body  of  men  rallied  round  their  sovereign. 
The  prince  came  out  of  the  city  and  was  killed  fighting. 
The  king  then  returned  to  his  palace,  and  all  the  men 
of  rank  who  had  been  forced  to  join  the  rebels  were,  with 
their  wives  and  children,  burnt  as  traitors." 

Among  Ukkainsika's  religious  foundations  are  men- 
tioned the  Bajamanicula  Cetiya'  and  three  viharas,  in  one 
of  which  a  certain  learned  thera  wrote  two  grammatical 
works.  The  tutor  to  Ukkainsika's  son  and  successor, 
81RINANDADHAMMAEA.JAPAVARADHIPAT12  (1648),  at  about  b.  e.  loio. 
this  time,  wrote  a  commentary  on  the  celebrated  gram- 
matical treatise  Nydsa. 

In  the  Sasanavamsa  we  so  rarely  hear  of  popular  move- 
ments and  feelings  that  it  is  interesting  to  find  a  mention 
of  evil  omens  occurring  in  1650,  and  causing  widespread  b.  e.  1012. 
anxiety  and  terror  lest  the  guardian  gods  should  be  leav- 
ing the  capital. 3  Though  we  have  here  a  clear  glimpse 
of  Nat-worship,  the  omens  had  their  bearing  on  the  history 
of  the  Faith.  It  was  at  this  time,  says  the  historian,  that 
the  armies  of  the  Emperor  of  China  devastated  Mramma,^ 
and  religion  was  dimmed  as  the  moon  by  clouds. 

'  The  "  stupendous  temple  "  known  as  the  Kaung-mhu- 
doa,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  five  miles  from  Sagain 
(Crawfurd's  Journal,  vol.  i.  p.  846  ;  Phayre,  Hisf.  Bur., 
p.  135.) 

^  Bengtale  (1648  a.d.)  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  136. 

3  Devatd  in  text — the  Pali  equivalent  for  the  Burmese 
Nat.  Bishop  Bigandet  observes  of  the  Nat-worship  of 
Burma,  that  it  is  observed  privately  or  publicly  by  all,  from 
the  king  downwards,  and,  further,  that  it  is  formally  incul- 
cated by  the  monks.  (Life  or  Legend  of  Gaudama,  French 
edition,  pp.  24,  77)  ;  see  also  Taw  Sein  Ko,  The  Spiritual 
World  of  the  Burmese.) 

4  Burma  was  troubled  from  1651  to  1661  by  rumours  of 


B.  E.  1034-5. 


36  A   BUEMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

Nevertheless  in  the  reigns  of  Mahapavaradhammara- 
B.  E.  1013.  JALOKADHIPATI  ^  (1G51)  and  his  successor  Naravara 
(1672)  2  we  hear  of  the  building  of  viharas  and  the 
writing  of  books,  and  King  Siripavaramahadhamma- 
RAJA  3  (1673)  evidently  took  a  real  interest  in  religion  for 
he  commanded  that  the  PatthdiiapaJcarana  ^  should  be 
preached  (for  the  first  time)  in  Mranmia  and  also  in 
Ramahha.  It  was  in  his  reign,  we  are  told,  that  the  custom 
was  first  introduced,  in  Mramma,  of  decorating  the  outside 
boards  of  MSS.  with  lacquer  and  gold  in  the  fashion  that 
obtains  to-day.  There  is  a  note  of  bitterness  in  a  general 
comment  of  the  author  here  on  the  last  five  kings  of  the 
No-NRA-MAH  dynasty  reigning  in  Ava.s  In  their  indiffer- 
ence to  religion  they  showed  equal  favour  to  worthy  and 
unworthy  bhikkhus,  so  that  religion  languished.  Yet,  he 
adds,  the  succession  of  theras  continued  unbroken — as 
indeed   did   the    succession   of    heterodox    teachers — -the 

wars  with  China  and  later  raids  of  Chinese  marauders, 
who  even  threatened  Ava.  {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  136,  137; 
Bastian,  Gesch.  Ind.  Chin.,  p.  62.) 

^  An  insurrection  had  followed  on  the  king's  supposed 
indifference  to  the  sufferings  of  the  people.  It  was  headed 
by  the  Prince  of  Prome,  who  caused  his  brother  to  be 
drowned  and  was  consecrated  as  Maha  Pawra  Dhamma 
Eaja  (1661).     {Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  138,  286.) 

-  Son  of  Mahapavaradhammaraja.  He  died  within  a 
year  of  his  accession.     {Hist.  Bur.,  p.  140.) 

3  Brother  of  Naravara.  He  was  not  a  capable  ruler 
and  his  reign  was  marked  by  a  gradual  decline  of  the 
monarchy  in  Burma.     {Hist.  Bur.,  p.  140.) 

4  The  seventh  book  of  the  Abhidhamma. 
3  That  is,  from  Naravara  (1672)  to  Mahadhammara- 

.JADHIPATI  (1733).  {Hist.  Bur.,  p.  286.)  It  was  a 
disastrous  period  for  Burma,  with  raids  from  the  North, 
rebellion  from  the  South,  and  a  breaking-up  of  the  state 
itself,  till  Ava  was  at  last  burnt  to  the  ground  by  the 
Talaings  in  1752. 


'o^ 


DISSERTATION.  O  i 

handing  down  of  the  so-called  dcariijapaveni.  The  two 
opposing  elements  in  the  Order  w^ere  soon  to  be  matched 
in  a  long  and  noteworthy  struggle. 

With  the  reign  of  SirimahasThasurasudhammara.ja  ^ 
(1698  A.D.)  begins  a  new  chapter  in  the  history  of  Burmese  b.  e.  loeo. 
Buddhism — the  Parupana-Ekamsika  controversy. 

The  rise  and  many  phases  of  the  dispute  are  set  forth 
at  length  by  the  author  of  the  Sasanavamsa.  His 
account  must  be  followed  here,  without  such  omissions 
as  would  give  a  false  idea  of  the  proportion  this  cha- 
racteristic part  bears  to  the  whole,  though  the  story  is  as 
tedious  as  those  of  all  such  contentions,  where  the  im- 
portance of  the  issues  is  comprehensible  only  to  the 
parties  in  the  dispute.  Yet  here  and  there  a  convincing 
touch  shows  us  that  certain  principles  were  fought  for  as 
well  as  mere  matters  of  monastic  propriety,  and  the 
Sasanavainsa  account  (by  an  ardent  Pdnipana),  gives  us, 
if  in  a  strong  party  spirit,  an  instructive  view  of  a 
question  that  kept  the  Samgha  in  a  state  of  ever-renewed 
strife  for  more  than  a  century. 

A  thera  named  Gunabhilamkara  had  gathered  round 
him  a  following,  who  were  distinguished  by  going  about 
in  the  village  with  one  shoulder  uncovered  by  the  upper 
garment  (p.  118).  From  their  distinguishing  mark,  the 
one  bared  shoulder,  this  party  came  to  be  called  the 
Ekamsika  sect.  Meanwhile  the  followers  of  four  other 
teachers — Buddhankura,  Citta,  Sunanta,  and  Kalyana — 
strictly  observed  the  wearing  of  the  upper  garment  on 
both  shoulders,  during  the  village  rounds.  These  latter, 
from  their  habit  of  going  clothed,  were  called  the  Pdru- 
pa7ia  sect. 2 

1  Son  of  Siripavaramahadhammaraja.  {Hist.  Bur., 
p.  286.) 

2  Prof.  Rh.  Davids  has  been  kind  enough  to  give  me 
some  interesting  details  of  two  sects  in  Ceylon  at  the 
present  day  (the  Buramdgama  and  Siijamdgama)  which 
correspond  to  the  Pdrupana  and  Ekaimika  sects.     The 


38  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

On  this  difference  in  daily  practice  the  whole  controversy 
turns. 

The  Ekamsikas  asserted  that  their  custom  had  been 
taught  by  the  thera  Saddhammacari,  who  had  visited 
Ceylon  (a  warrant  of  orthodoxy) .  Moreover  they  bribed 
a  layman  of  loose  morals,  who  had  quitted  the  Order,  to 
write  a  book  supporting  their  views.  At  the  same  time  a 
further  irreligious  tendency  showed  itself  in  the  Samgha  : 
a  bhikkhu  at  the  head  of  another  group  busied  himself  in 
drawing  away  the  forest-dwelling  monks  from  their  retired 
life  and  attracting  them  to  his  own  vihara. 

The  king  now  intervened,  for  the  first  time,  and  issued 
a  decree,  commanding  the  two  sects  to  keep  to  their  own 
precincts,  observing  their  own  respective  customs,  and 
leaving  each  other  in  peace.  But  in  the  reign  of  his 
B. E,  1074.  successor,  Setibhinda^  (1712  a.d.),  the  quarrel  revived. 
Ukkamsamala,  the  leader  of  the  Parupanas,  was  able  to 
prove  that  the  Parnpana  practice  was  supported  by  the 
ancient  writers,  while  the  Ekamsikas  rejected  it  on  the 
strength  of  their  own  party  traditions  (dcariyapaveivi). 
(p.  120.) 

The  king  appointed  a  tribunal  of  four  theras,  before 
whom  the  two  sects  were  to  set  forth  their  arguments. 
But  the  arbiters  were  monks  without  learning  in  the 
Sacred  Texts  and  Commentaries,  merely  courtiers  aiming 
to  please  the  king.  The  question  thus  remained  unsettled. 
The  Ekamsikas  could  not  conquer,  by  reason  of  the  real 
weakness  of  their  cause,  and  the  Parupanas  wisely  lay 
low,  since  the  enemy  was  strong  for  the  time  being. 


Buramagama,  or  Burma  sect,  wear  the  upper  garment  habi- 
tually over  both  shoulders  and  only  bare  the  left  shoulder 
as  a  mark  of  courtesy,  in  intercourse  with  others.  The 
Siyamagama  (Siam  sect)  adopt  the  slightly  more  ostenta- 
tious fashion  of  having  one  shoulder  always  uncovered. 

I  Hseng-phyn-sheng  (in  Rdjavamsa  hst,  1714  a.d. 
Hist.  Bur.,  p.  286),  another  of  the  insignificant  kings  of 
the  declining  dynasty.     (Hist.  Bur.,  p.  140.) 


DISSERTATION.  39 

Now  was  indeed  hardly  the  time  for  the  king  to  occupy 
himself  with  ecclesiastical  questions.  From  a  few  abrupt 
words  of  the  historian  we  learn  that  we  have  arrived  at 
the  moment  of  disaster  for  the  long  declining  power  of 
Burma.  In  the  year  1751  a.d.  the  King  of  Eamaiiiia  ^  b.  e.  1113. 
gained  a  victory  over  Mramma,  Eatanapura  was  sacked, 
and  the  king  carried  away  captive  to  Hamsavatl.^ 
But  it  does  not  appear  that  the  political  changes  made 
any  great  difference  to  the  religious  world.  The  rule  of 
one  Buddhist  king  instead  of  another  could  by  no  means 
be  fraught  with  the  same  dangers  and  terrors  to  the 
Order  as  a  Shan  raid  or  a  Chinese  invasion.  80,  in  these 
troublous  times,  the  head  of  the  Parupanas  (the  King's 
tutor,  Nanavara)  wrote  several  books.  The  strife  of  the 
sects  was  meanwhile  kept  up  by  the  attacks  of  Pasamsa, 
the  head  of  the  Ekamsikas  (p.  122).  The  superior  of  one 
of  the  great  royal  viharas  had  been  appointed  Vinatja- 
dhara.  But  the  king's  weakness  for  a  favourite  had 
blinded  him  to  the  monk's  unfitness  for  the  responsibility, 
and  as  the  king  himself  was  only  equal  to  issuing  a  decree 
that  every  bhikkhu  in  his  kingdom  should  observe  what 
rules  of  life  he  pleased,  the  religious  difficulty  remained  as 
far  from  a  solution  as  ever. 

Of  all  that  passed  in  the  eventful  two  years  following 
the  sack  of  Ava  we  have  the  merest  glimpse.  It  is  in 
connection  with  a  revival  of  religion  rather  than  of  a 
people's  freedom  that  we  hear  how  "  the  king  who 
founded  Ratanasikha  "3  swept  the  Talaing  armies  out  of 
the  land,  and  conquered  Eamahiia  and  ruled  over  it.  The 
work  of  AL0MPRA4  the  patriot,  who,  obscure  and  almost 

^  BiNYA  Dala  (1746  A.D.).  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  145;  Bastian, 
Gesch.  Incl.  Chin.,  p.  64.  ~  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  147. 

3  Or  Eatanasingha  (Shwe  bo,  or  Montshobo)  about  60 
miles  to  the  north  of  Ava  {Tnd.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  28;  Hist. 
Bur.,  p.  150). 

4  Alaungh-pra  (vernacular  rendering  of  the  Pali 
Bodhisatta.    See  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  149,  et  seq.;  Yule,  Mission 


40  A    BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

single-handed,  drew  together  the  fragments  of  the  broken 
state,  and  in  two  years  raised  Burma  to  a  miited  nation, 
is  recorded  as  a  rehgious  work — "  Eehgion  revived,  so 
that  the  people  of  Mramma  said,  '  Our  king  is  a 
bodhisat.' " 

The  king  insisted  on  the  observance  of  Uposatha  by  all 
his  court,  furthered  the  study  of  the  Sacred  Texts  and 
supported  the  Samgha,  and  now  the  Parupana-Ekamsika 
controversy  entered  on  a  new  stage.  The  principal 
members  of  the  Parupana  sect  set  forth  their  views  in  a 


to  the  Court  of  Ava,  p.  184).  An  incident  in  Alaungh-pra's 
conquest  of  Pegu  is  thus  related  by  Sir  A.  Phayre  :  *'  By 
the  end  of  October  (1756)  the  whole  of  Alaungh-pra's 
army  .  .  .  had  closed  round  the  devoted  city  (Pegu). 
The  King  of  Pegu  had  no  resource  left  but  to  appeal  to 
the  mercy  and  the  religious  sentiment  of  his  enemy — an 
expedient  of  which  several  instances  are  mentioned  in 
the  histories  of  the  wars  of  Burma.  The  deeply  revered 
Eahans,  headed  by  their  venerable  superior,  appeared  in 
the  camp  of  the  invader,  and  in  the  name  of  religion 
besought  him  to  put  an  end  to  the  war,  and  to  live  as 
elder  and  younger  brother  with  the  King  of  Pegu.  In 
other  words  the  kingdom  was  to  be  held  as  tributary  to 
the  King  of  Burma.  The  chief  Kahan,  in  his  address, 
with  sincere  or  artful  allusion  to  the  conqueror  as  a 
destined  Buddha,  referred  to  the  satisfaction  he  would 
feel  in  after  ages  when  that  high  and  holy  state  had  been 
attained  in  his  last  birth,  and  when  he  could  look  back 
with  pure  delight  on  a  noble  act  of  generosity  and  mercy 
which  would  give  relief  to  millions  of  human  beings  " 
{Hist.  Bur.,  p.  168).  The  venerable  envoy  was  received 
with  the  respect  that  the  kings  seem  always  to  have 
shown  to  the  Order  ;  but  a  further  defence  brought  down 
on  the  Talaings  the  sack  of  the  city  and  a  slaughter,  in 
which,  according  to  the  chronicles  of  Pegu,  even  the 
monks  were  not  spared. 


DISSERTATION.  41 

letter  to  the  king.  Thereupon  the  Ekamsikas  (of  whom 
Atiila,^  the  king's  tutor,  was  the  leader),  wrote  to  the 
king,  asserting  that  the  whole  question  had  been  settled 
in  the  time  of  his  predecessors,  and  could  not  be  raised 
again. 

The  king  in  reply  declared  that  he  was,  just  then,  too 
much  busied  with  state  affairs  to  attend  to  religious 
matters,  and  shortly  afterwards  issued  a  decree  that  all 
bhikkhus  were  to  conform  to  the  practice  of  the  royal 
dcariya.  The  order  was  generally  obeyed,  but  two 
Parupana  theras  of  Sahassorodhagama  held  staunchly  to 
their  principles,  and  continued  to  teach  their  following  as 
before.  Atula  sent  for  these  two  to  come  to  the  capital, 
and  tried  to  destroy  their  credit  with  the  people,  but  his 
unjust  dealing  brought  down  on  him  a  supernatural 
warning — a  storm,  in  which  thunderbolts  fell  on  his  own 
vihara  and  the  king's  palace  (p.  125). 

A  touch  of  vivid  interest  brightens  here  the  monotonous 
story  of  the  long,  futile  dispute.  The  thera  Muninda- 
ghosa  observed  and  taught  the  Parupana  x^i'^ctice  with 
unswerving  steadfastness,  in  defiance  of  the  royal  pro- 
hibition and  in  despite  of  banishment.  At  last,  with  his 
life  in  his  hand,  he  came  to  the  capital  and  faced  the 
formidable  Alompn^.  Neither  begging  the  latter's  mercy 
nor  fearing  his  wrath  he  simply  laid  aside  the  monastic  robe, 
and  came  as  a  layman,  lest  the  grievous  guilt  of  slaying  a 
monk  should  be  upon  the  king.  "I  have  come  hither, 
laying  aside  my  vows,  that  this  heavy  sin  might  not  be 


I  rpj^g  a  j.QyQ\  preceptor  "  (Atula  Sayado)  is  mentioned 
in  the  Po"  U"  Daung  Inscription  of  1774.  "He  was  the 
Thathanabaing  or  Buddhist  Archbishop  appointed  by 
Alaungp'aya  when  the  latter  became  king.  Atula  Sayado 
retained  his  office  throughout  the  reign  of  five  kings,  and 
was  removed  by  B6-do-p'aya  for  his  schismatic  doctrines  " 
(Taw  Sein  Ko,  Po'!,  U"  Daung  Inscriptio)i  of  S'in-hiju-yin. 
Incl.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  8). 

4 


B.  E.  1122. 


B.  E.  1125. 


42  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

thine.     Now,  if  thou  wilt  slay  me,  slay  !  "  he  said.     And 
Alompra  dared  not. 

Alompra's  last  expedition  to  Siam  ^  is  mentioned.  He 
died  upon  the  homeward  march  (or  rather  the  retreat), 
and   was    succeeded    in    1760    a.d.    by    his    eldest   son 

SiRIPAVARAMAHADHAMMARAJA  -   (p.  127). 

As  the  royal  tutor  (the  learned  grammarian  and  philo- 
sopher Nana)  held  the  Parupana  views,  the  orthodox 
party  now  hoped  to  gain  recognition.  They  laid  a  written 
memorial  before  the  king,  but  their  chief  opponent, 
Atula,  interposed  as  before,  and  prevented  a  fair  hearing 
by  a  counter-declaration  that  the  question  had  been 
already  settled.  Nothing  noteworthy,  it  would  seem, 
happened  during  the  short  reign  of  Siripavaramaha- 
dhammaraja.  Under  his  successor,  Siripavarasudhamma- 
MAHARAJADHiPATi  3  (1768  A.D.)  a  certain  heresy  arose 
and  spread  widely.  What  the  heresy  was  we  are  not 
told,  but  only  that  the  king  forced  the  heretics  to  embrace 
the  true  religion. 4 

Of  Hsen-byn-Sheng  we  hear  very  little,  though  he 
was     "an     enlightened     monarch,"    and     "a     staunch 


1  1760  A.D.     Phayre,  Hist  Bur.,  p.  168. 

2  Naung-doa-gyi,  Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  184,  287. 

3  Hseng-byn-Sheng,  the  second  son  of  Alaungh-pra. 
{Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  186,  287.)  [Erroneously  dated  at  B.E. 
1205  (1848  A.D.)  in  the  Text.] 

4  A  certain  movement  in  the  Burmese  community  is 
noticed  by  Spence  Hardy  in  Eastern  Monachism 
(1850)  which  may  perhaps  have  been  a  revival  of  the 
"  heresy  "  suppressed  by  Hseng-byn-Sheng  in  the  middle 
of  the  eighteenth  century.  "About  fifty  years  ago  a 
class  of  metaphysicians  arose  in  Ava  called  Paramats, 
who  respect  only  the  Abhidhamma  and  reject  the  other 
books  that  the  Buddhists  consider  as  sacred,  saying  that 
they  are  only  a  compilation  of  fables.  The  founder  of 
the  sect,  Kosan,  with  about  fifty  of  his  followers,  was 
put   to  death   by  order  of   the  king  "  {op.  cit.,  p.   331). 


DISSERTATION.  48 

Buddhist."  ^  The  rehgious  act  commemorated  in  the 
Inscription  at  Prome,^  namely,  the  crowning  of  the  great 
pagoda  at  Rangoon — is  not  mentioned  in  the  Sasana- 
vamsa.  It  is  said  of  this  king,  however,  that  the 
Ekamsika  heresy  had  no   success  under  his  rule. 

When  his  son  Mahadhammarajadhiraja  3  (1776)  b.  e.  iiss. 
mounted  the  throne,  the  Ekamsikas  again  approached  the 
new  king.  Sing-gu-sa,  who  was  under  the  influence  of 
the  orthodox  thera  Nandamala,  summoned  both  parties 
to  hold  an  open  disputation  before  him.  The  result  was 
a  crushing  defeat  for  the  Ekamsikas  ;  whereupon  the  king 
commanded  that  all  bhikkhus  should  instruct  their 
samaneras  in  the  orthodox  practice.  How  far  this  decree 
succeeded  we  are  not  told  ;  but  the  next  king  Bodoah 
Pra4  (1781)  was  by  no  means  content  to  let  the  religious  b.  E.  1143. 
question  rest.  He  held  that,  as  the  disputation  had  been 
held  in  the  palace,  the  one  party  had  been  intimidated  or 

At  least  one  connecting  link  may  be  pointed  out  here 
between  this  later  school  and  the  sect  denounced  by 
Pafinasami — the  Sasanavamsa  mentions  that  Gunabhi- 
lamkara,  the  first  leader  of  the  Ekamsikas,  "  taught  his 
pupils  the  Abhldhamvia."  Heresies  of  doctrine  and 
practice  were  no  doubt  intermingled,  all  along,  though 
we  hear  little  of  the  former  in  our  history.  It  is  possible 
that  Christianity,  first  introduced  into  Uj^per  Burma  in 
the  18th  century,  may  be  meant  (see  Bird's  Wanderings 
in  Burma,  p.  88). 

^  Jas.  Gray,  Dynasty  of  Alaung-Prd,  p.  24.  This  author 
mentions  that  Hsen-byn-Sheng  warmly  encouraged  the 
study  of  Sanskrit  literature,  and  sent  to  Benares  for 
Brahman  scholars  to  come  and  live  at  his  capital. 

2  The  Poo  Uo  Daung  Inscription,  Ind.  Ant.,  yo\.  xxii. 
p.  1. 

3  Sing-gu-sa,  who  succeeded  at  the  age  of  nineteen.  For 
his  short  and  futile  reign  and  miserable  death,  see  Hist. 
Bar.,  pp.  207,  208,  209. 

4  Fifth  son  of  Aloinpra.     Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  208,  209,  287. 


44  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

overawed,  and  had  therefore  suffered  defeat.  His  plan 
was  to  send  commissioners  to  the  different  monasteries 
that  the  theras  might  set  forth  their  views  to  these  latter, 
mihampered  by  any  fears.  The  Captain  of  the  Bodyguard 
was  made  head  of  the  Commission  of  Inquiry.  The 
Ekainsikas  (perhaps  upon  a  royal  hint)  ^  acknowledged  to 
the  king's  commissioners  that  their  practice  was  not 
supported  by  the  scriptures,  but  only  by  tradition.  The 
king,  judging  the  question  to  be  closed  by  this  avowal, 
issued  a  decree  commanding  the  observance  of  the  rules 
laid  down  for  samaneras  by  orthodox  teachers. ^ 

The  founding  of  the  new  capital  Amarapura  in  1782  ^ 
is  mentioned  with  the  conventional  prophecy  supposed  to 
have  been  uttered  by  the  Buddha  upon  the  site,  in  his 
lifetime.  While  Bodoah  Pra  went  about  to  expiate  the 
bloodshed  of  the  opening  of  his  reign,  and  to  build  the 
"Immortal  City"  by  the  unpaid  and  unwilling  labour  of 
his  subjects,^  he  was  careful  to  assure  himself  a  religious 
reputation  in  other  ways.  A  list  of  viharas  (which,  the 
author  assures  us,  does  not  contain  all,  lest  his  book 
should  be  inordinately  long)  shows  the  splendid  bounty 
of  the  king,  the  royal  family,  and  the  nobility  of  this  time. 5 


^  The  king's  own  tutor  was  of  the  orthodox  school ;  and 
from  our  knowledge  of  Bodoah  Pra's  usual  methods,  we 
can  hardly  suppose  that  there  was  less  intimidation  in 
the  "  Inquirj^  "  than  in  the  open  debate. 

2  Parimandalasuppaticchmiasikkhdpaddni  enjoin  the 
entire  covering  of  the  person  while  walking  abroad. 

3 Hist.  Bur.,  p.  211.     Yule's  Mission,  p.  180  et  seq. 

4 Hist.  Bur.,  pp.  210,  211.  Father  San  Germano, 
Burmese  Empire   (ed.  Jardine),  p.  68. 

5  The  light  thrown  on  Bodoah  Pra's  personality  and 
acts  by  less  partial  writers,  brings  out  a  curious  contrast 
between  his  religious  zeul  and  his  atrocious  inhumanity 
and  cruelty  as  a  ruler.  Father  San  Germano  speaks  with 
detestation  of  this  king  as  a  monster  of  wickedness,  but 
notes  that,  in  his  time,  it  was  a  capital  offence  to  drink 


DISSERTATION.  45 

A  step  was  made  during  this  reign  in  the  further  organi- 
sation of  the  Sanigha,  at  the  head  of  which  were  four 
Saipgharajas,  under  the  Supreme  Head  of  the  Order. 
Four  more  were  now  added  to  the  number.  The  king's 
Guru,  Nanabhisasanadhaja,  was  made  Supreme  Head. 
He  is  said  to  have  been  very  active  in  religious  reforms, 
moving  from  vihara  to  vihara,  teaching,  practising 
ascetism,  and  writing  books. 

Two  years  after  the  founding  of  Amarapura,  the 
Parupana-Ekamsika  dispute  had  been  revived  by  the 
restless  i^.tula,  who  sent  a  letter  to  the  king  maintain- 
ing that  he  had  scriptural  authority,  in  a  text  called 
Crdcujantliipada,  for  the  practice  of  baring  one  shoulder 
and  wearing  a  girdle  round  the  body  (p.  186).  The  king 
thereupon  called  together  an  assembly  of  Mahatheras  to 
meet  the  champion  of  the  Ekainsikas,  and  come  finally 
at  the  truth. 

This  debate,  in  which  Atula  was  put  to  utter  shame 
and  met  with  "threefold  defeat,"  is  described  with  great 
zest.  The  historian  illustrates  each  "  defeat "  with  a 
picturesque  tale,  to  bring  home  to  the  reader  the 
miserable  confusion  of  the  heretic  and  the  triumph  of  his 
■opponents.  The  triumph,  this  time,  was  final  and  com- 
plete for  the  orthodox  party. 

With  the  dramatic  scene  in  the  Council  Hall  ends 
the  long-drawn-out  story  of  the  controversy.  A  royal 
command  established  the  Parupana  practices  for  the 
whole  of  the  kingdom,  and,  according  to  the  author, 
they  obtain  everywhere    to   the   present    day   (p.    142).^ 


wine,  smoke  opium,  or  kill  any  large  animal.  {Burmese 
Empire,  ed.  Jardine,  p.  85.)  Father  San  Germano's 
description  is  borne  out  by  the  royal  history  itself. 
{Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.   230.) 

^  He  adds'  that  his  account  is  only  a  sunnnary,  for  if 
the  whole  controversy  were  related,  with  all  the  disputes 
and  arguments  on  both  sides,  the  Sasanavainsa  would  be 
too  tedious. 


B.  E.  1162. 


46  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM! 

i\.n  important  religions  event  at  the  opening  of  the 
present  century  was  the  rise  of  the  so-called  "  Amara- 
PURA  "  school  of  Ceylon,^  which,  as  Pahhasami  is  careful 
to  point  out,  owed  its  origin  to  the  Burmese  Samgharaja 
Nanabhivamsa.  He  had  bestowed  ordination  in  the  year 
1800  to  a  Sinhalese  deputation,  headed  by  the  thera 
Ambagahapati,-  whose  visit  to  Amarapura  proved  a 
strong  feeling,  existing  in  a  part  of  the  Ceylon  community, 
that  the  unbroken  succession  of  theras  could  only  be 
secured  by  consecration  in  Mramma  (p.  142). 

Bodoah  Pra's  later  years  are  passed  over  in  silence. 3   In 


^  Spence  Hardy  gives  the  chief  tenets  of  the  Amarapura 
School,  whose  aim  was  to  restore  the  ancient  purity  of 
Buddhism.  Among  the  principal  points  are,  that  this 
sect  (1)  allows  ordination  to  all  castes  ;  (2)  the  members 
go  about  with  both  shoulders  covered  and  eyebrows 
unshorn.     {Eastern  Monacltism,  pp.  328,  829.) 

-  The  following  account  of  this  incident  is  given  by 
Yule:  "In  the  teeth  of  fundamental  principles  the 
privilege  of  admission  to  the  Order  was,  in  Ceylon,  long 
confined  to  the  highest  caste.  ...  In  the  end  of  the  last 
century  a  bold  candidate  of  low  caste,  with  several  like- 
minded  companions,  visited  Amarapura  in  search  of 
ordination.  They  were  well  received  by  the  king  and 
priests,  were  admitted  to  the  Order,  and,  on  their  return 
to  Ceylon  in  1802,  accompanied  by  several  Burman 
priests,  brought  a  missive  from  the  Thathana  Bain  or 
Patriarch  at  Amarapura,  to  the  corresponding  dignitary 
at  Kandy.  Their  community  is  known  in  Ceylon  as  the 
Amarapura  Society,  and  they  denounce  the  heterodox 
practices  of  the  established  body  there."  {Mission  to  the 
Court  of  Ava,  p.  241.) 

3  It  would  be  difficult  for  our  historian  to  speak  either 
of  the  king's  pretensions  to  Buddhahood,  which  the  Order 
refused  to  recognise,  or  the  gigantic  pagoda,  begun  by  his 
command,  which  his  deeply  discontented  subjects  would 


DISSERTATION.  47 

1819  his  grandson  Siritribhavanadityapavaeamanditai  b.  e.  iisi. 
succeeded  him.  Three  of  this  ruler's  rehgious  discussions 
with  his  ministers  are  recorded,  two  of  which  were  of 
very  practical  interest,  dealing  w4th  the  ancient  grants  of 
land,  &c.,2  to  the  Samgha.  The  Ministers  laid  down  the 
principle  (based  on  the  A^ina5'a  and  Atthakatha)  that  the 
Order  could  continue  to  claim  all  rights  bestowed  by 
donors  in  time  past  (such  as  a  share  of  produce  of  the 
land  granted,  provision  for  the  repairing  of  cetiyas,  &c.) 
(p.  145.) 

On  another  occasion  Hpagyidoa  asked  in  whose  reign 
gifts  of  land,  with  cetiyas  and  viharas,  had  first  been 
bestowed  on  the  Order.  In  this  case,  too,  the  minister 
consulted  (who  went  back  as  far  as  the  time  of  the 
Bhagavat  Sujata  for  a  precedent)  was  able  to  answer  to 
the  king's  satisfaction. 

Hpagyidoa's  later  years,  darkened  by  listless  brooding 
over   defeat  3   and   narrowed  territory,  were  not  marked 

not  finish  (see  Father  San  Germano's  account  in  Burmese 
Empire;  Yule,  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava,  p.  169; 
Phayre,  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  219). 

'  Hpagyidoa  (1819).  Hist.  Bur.,]).  287.  "He  com- 
menced his  reign  well.  He  remitted  some  taxes  for  three 
years,  and  in  a  speech  to  his  courtiers  promised  to  rule 
justly  and  to  follow  the  precepts  of  religion  "  (Hist.  Bur., 
p.  252). 

-  Bp.  Bigandet  says  that  according  to  inscriptions 
found  at  Pugan  it  is  evident  the  monasteries  and  temples 
were  endowed,  in  the  palmy  days  of  that  city,  with  rice- 
fields,  fruit-trees,  cattle,  &c.  ;  but  that  no  vestige  of  such 
acts  of  bestowal,  dating  within  the  last  three  or  four 
centuries,  has  been  found  (see  Life  or  Legend  of  Gaudama^ 
p.  169). 

3  In  the  first  Anglo-Burmese  War  (1824)  he  sank  into 
inactivity  and  melancholy,  and  was  at  length  dethroned 
by  his  brother,  the  Prince  of  Tharawadi  {Hist.  Bur., 
p.  260),  who,  himself,  afterwards  went  mad. 


B.  £.  1208. 


48  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

B.  E.  1199.  by  any  special  benefits  to  the  Samgha.  In  1837  the 
reign  of  his  younger  brother  Siripavaradityalokadhi- 
PATI  began  :^  the  only  events  recorded  are  the  appoint- 
ment, death,  and  funeral  of  the  Samgharaja,  the  appoint- 
ment of  his  successor  (who  wrote  a  commentary  on  the 
Saddhammajmjoti'kd),  and  the  arrival  of  another  depu- 
tation from  Ceylon  (p.  147). 

The  accession  of  Siripavaradityavijayananta  ^ 
(1846  A.D.)  seems  to  have  fallen  at  the  beginning  of  a 
period  fruitful  in  religious  literature.  A  great  number 
of  books  were  written;  those  mentioned  by  Pahhasami 
are  chiefly  Atthayojanas  in  Burmese,  on  the  Suttapitaka 
and  commentaries.  It  is  certain  that  the  scholars  of 
the  Burmese  community  were  deeply  in  earnest  in 
their  endeavour  to  make  the  ancient  scriptures,  the 
treasury  of  the  purer,  earHer  Buddhism,  accessible  to 
the  lesser  learned,  to  whom  tihds  written  in  Pali  would 
have  taught  nothing.  The  author  of  the  Sasanavamsa 
(whose  name  now  appeal's,  for  the  first  time,  as  a 
pupil  of  the  Sanigharaja)  praises  with  exaggerated, 
enthusiastic  loyalty  the  king  who  next  ascended  the 
throne  (p.  148),  Meng-dun-Meng3  (1852),  as  the  source 
of  the  religious  revival  of  those  days ;  but  it  is  clear  that 
the  monks  had  already  done  their  part  of  the  work  in 
writing  and  teaching  before  the  righteous  king  was  at 
the  head  of  affairs.  An  immediate  consequence,  how- 
ever, of  the  king's  earnestness  was  that  religion  was 
zealously  practised,  in  appearance  at  least,  by  the  royal 
family,  the  court,  and  the  people  as  a  whole. 


B.  E.  1214. 


'  Tharawadi  Meng  (1837  a.d.).  Hist.  Bur.,  p.  287  ; 
Yule's  Mission,  pp.  131,  226. 

2  Pugan-Menci  (son  of  Tharawadi)  (1846  a.d.),  of 
whom  Sir  Henry  Yule  says  :  "  He  had  all  the  worst  parts 
of  his  father's  character  without  the  plea  of  insanity  in 
excuse." 

3  Brother  of  Pugan-Meng,  whom  he  deposed  {Hist. 
Bur.,  p.  287). 


DISSERTATION  49 

The  historian  rises  Hterally  into  a  song  of  praise  ^  as  he 
•dwells  on  the  virtues  of  the  clhammardjd  and  the  new 
■enthusiasm  for  religion,  in  monks  and  laity  alike.  But 
4iilready,  a  year  after  the  festival  of  the  founding  of  Ratana- 
punna  2— Meng-dun-Meng's  new  capital  —  the  general 
fervour  seems  to  have  cooled.  Meng-dun-Meng  learned 
with  grief  that  signs  of  growing  laxity  were  appearing  in 
the  Order.  It  was  the  old  story — a  departure  from  the 
primitive  strictness  of  the  precepts  that  the  Master  had 
laid  down,  to  rule  the  bhikkhu's  life.  Some  used  gold 
and  silver,  others  chewed  betel-nut  at  unseasonable  hours, 
drank  forbidden  beverages,  and  went  into  the  villages, 
wearing  shoes  and  carrying  umbrellas.  The  king  was 
anxious  to  impose  a  vow  {patinnd)  of  abstinence  from 
these  indulgences,  but,  doubting  if  such  a  measure  w'ould 
be  lawful,  he  consulted  the  Samgharaja.  The  Primate 
summoned  a  council  of  Mahatheras,  and  charged  the 
king's  minister  to  question  them  on  their  views  (p.  155). 
Opinion  was  divided.  The  Samgharaja  and  some  others 
held  that  the  king  would  be  justified  (by  his  earnest  desire 
for  reform)  in  imposing  the  vow  ;  but  others  were  against 
it.  Finally  the  Samgharaja  called  on  his  pupil  Pahhasami 
to  set  forth  the  views  of  the  Head  of  the  Order.  The 
younger  thera  then  delivered  a  discourse  ;  taking  as  his 


^  He  quotes  here  several  verses  from  a  poem  of  his 
own  composition,  the  Nagardjuppatti.  The  poem 
shows  that  its  author  understands  the  courtly  art  of 
praising  kings.  It  must  be  said  that  Meng-dun- 
Meng  won  a  tribute  of  high  practice  from  many 
European  writers,  who  judged  him  from  a  severer  stand- 
point than  his  dcariya.  It  is  generally  agreed  that  he 
was  an  enlightened,  just  ruler,  earnestly  striving  after  the 
good  of  his  people,  and  perhaps  more  true  to  the  noble 
ideals  of  the  religion  he  "supported"  than  any  of  his 
predecessors. 

2  Mandalay,  founded  1857. 


50  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF   BUDDHISM. 

text  passages  of  the  Vinaya,  Pdtimokkha,  Parivdra,  and 
Siittavihhanga,  and  referring  to  Buddhaghosa's  com- 
mentary, he  argued  that  imposing  a  vow,  in  all  sincerity, 
to  restrain  the  monks  from  sin,  would  be  a  blameless  act. 
He  pointed  out  in  how  many  religious  acts  the  jj«fi?l«a 
enters.  Newly  ordained  bhikkhus,  at  the  time  of  the 
Upasampada  ordination,  pronounce  a  solemn  vow,  on  the 
exhortation  of  the  upajjhayas.  In  the  same  way  novices 
(sdmcmerd)  at  the  moment  of  renouncing  the  world 
ipabbajjd)  take  a  vow  to  observe  the  Precepts  ;  bhikkhus, 
when  acknowledging  a  fault  committed,  continually  take 
a  vow  of  amendment ;  novices,  when  entering  upon  their 
training  under  an  upajjhdija,  take  a  vow  ;  and  the  vow  the 
king  wished  to  impose  did  not  differ  from  these,  solemnly 
sanctioned  by  scripture  and  by  precedent. 

The  assembly  was  convinced,  the  king  acted  on  its 
judgment,  and  the  laxer  members  of  the  Order  returned, 
under  compulsion,  to  a  stricter  way  of  Ufe  (p.  158). 

We  now  come  to  the  last  controversy,  perhaps  recorded 
because  it  points  to  the  influence  of  the  Burmese  Sanigha 
in  Ceylon  (p.  159).  An  ancient  Simd  in  the  island  was 
the  subject  of  dispute.  One  party  in  the  Sinhalese 
Samgha  maintained  that  consecration  performed  within 
this  boundary  was  not  valid,  as  the  Slmd  was  no  longer 
fit   in  every  respect  for  the  ceremony. '     Another  party 


I  The  fault  of  the  Simd  in  question  was  Samkdradosa,. 
i.e.,  confusion  (of  boundaries),  because  a  causeway  had 
been  built  connecting  it  with  others  (c/.  the  discussion  on 
the  validity  of  Slmds  for  ordination  in  the  Kalyani 
Inscriptions  where  the  j)hrase  occurs  :  "  Apare  tu  thera  : 
dvinnam  baddhaslmanani  yeva  rukkhasakhadisam- 
bandhen'  amiamafihasamkaro  hoti  .  .  .  ."  [Text  of 
Kal.  Ins.  by  Taw  Sein  Ko,  hid.  Ant.,  vol.  xxii.  p.  155  ; 
Translation,  vol.  xxii.  pp.  15,  29,  et  sea.]  The  complete 
purification  of  the  space  for  ceremonies  is  a  vital  point,, 
hence  the  importance  of  well-defined  boundaries. 


DISSERTATION.  51 

held  that  the  Sl)nd  fulfilled  all  requirements,  and  the 
matter  was  brought  for  judgment  to  the  Samgharaja  at 
Mandalay,  bj^  deputations  (with  a  short  interval  of  time) 
from  both  sides. 

They  were  hospitably  received,  viharas  were  built  for 
them,  and  the  Samgharaja  gave  judgment,  after  con- 
sulting various  books.  The  members  of  both  deputations 
received  presents  from  the  king,  and  those  who  had  been 
proved  in  the  wrong  were  safeguarded  (against  a  break  in 
the  succession  of  theras)  by  reordination. 

A  few  ecclesiastical  details  of  slight  interest,  that  need 
not  be  brought  into  this  review,  bring  the  record  up  to  the 
year  1860,  when  the  History  of  Eeligion  in  Aparanta 
closes. 


CONCLUSION. 

The  History  of  Eeligion  in  Mramina  is,  as  we  have  seen, 
nothing  more  than  the  history  of  the  Buddhist  Order  in 
SuNAPAEANTA  and  Tambadipa.  The  record  takes  us  beyond 
these  Hmits  in  two  periods  only,  that  is  when  Taungu, 
under  a  king  of  Burmese  descent,  represented  the  older 
state  (Aparanta  being  at  that  time  under  Shan  rule),  and 
later,  when  the  kings  of  Burma,  as  "  Emperors  of  Pegu," 
held  their  Court  at  Hamsavati.  But  the  record  of  the 
two  Irawaddy  provinces  cannot  be  called  a  "local" 
chronicle,  for  the  history  of  the  Burmese  as  a  nation 
centres  in  a  group  of  cities  on  the  upper  river — Pugan, 
Sagain,  Ava,  Panya,  Amaeapuea,  Mandalay — each,  in  its 
turn,  the  seat  of  kings.  In  the  monasteries  and  cetiyas  of 
the  capital  has  been  reflected,  more  or  less  faithfully,  the 
welfare  of  the  country.  Of  necessity  they  prospered  or 
suffered,  in  some  degree,  according  as  Burma  triumphed 
over  neighbouring  states  or  suffered  invasion,  raid,  and 
plunder  from  China,  the  Shan  tribes,  and  Pegu. 

Such  glimpses  of  the  times  as  occur  in  the  Sasana- 
vamsa,  and  the  dates,  which  serve  as  a  guide  through  a 
crowd  of  anecdotes  and  digressions,  agree,  on  the  whole, 
with  the  secular  history  of  Burma ;  but  there  are  some 
significant  omissions.  The  invasion  of  the  Mongol 
armies  of  Kublai  Khan  and  the  taking  of  the  capital  in 
1284  A.D.  are  passed  over  in  absolute  silence  ;  and  this  is 
only  one  example  among  many  that  might  be  brought 
forward.  Some  kings  are  altogether  ignored,  and  those 
whose  "merit"  assures  them  a  place  in  the  rehgious 
chronicle  are  often  shadowy  figures,  or  are  painted  in 

52 


CONCLUSION.  53 

colours  that  give  the  he  to  history.  In  the  Sasanavamsa 
we  hear  of  the  pious  zeal  of  Kyocva  and  the  bounty  of 
BoDOAH  Pra.  Yet  we  cannot  do  more  than  guess  at  the 
real  greatness  of  Alompra,  and  we  hear  nothing  of  the 
tyranny  and  crimes  of  his  successors — the  hideous  cruelty 
of  one,  the  downright  insanity  of  another.  Nowhere 
does  a  single  hint  occur  of  the  appearance  of  the 
Portuguese  in  Burma,  or  the  later  advance  of  the  English 
into  the  heart  of  the  old  kingdom.  Yet  we  know,  from 
passages  in  the  Sasanavamsa  itself — not  to  speak  of 
European  testimony — that  monks  have  been,  for  centuries, 
advisers  of  the  sovereign,  peacemakers  and  negotiators  in 
affairs  of  state.  Mere  ignorance  and  pious  seclusion  from 
the  world  are  no  explanation  of  the  omissions  in  the 
Sasanavainsa.  The  historian  knows  the  relations — often 
shameful  and  grim  enough — of  the  kings  to  their  kins- 
folk, subjects,  and  neighbours,  but  it  does  not  come 
within  his  plan  to  set  them  down. 

It  is  in  this  very  one-sidedness  of  the  record  that  lies 
no  small  part  of  its  interest.  While  isolating  the  religion 
of  the  rulers  from  their  political  and  private  lives,  it 
brings  before  us  a  picture  of  the  relations  of  State  and 
Samgha  in  Burma  for  eight  centuries,  from  the  time  of 
Anuruddha,  with  his  constant  adviser,  Arahanta,  to 
the  time  of  Meng-dun-Meng,  with  his  council  of 
Mahatheras. 

Those  relations  may  be  briefly  summed  up  as  a  mutual 
dependence.  The  Order,  though  enriched  by  the  gifts  of 
pious  laymen,  yet  depends,  in  the  last  resort,  upon  the 
king.  Under  such  despotic  rule  no  man's  property  or 
labour  is  his  own  ;  the  means  of  supporting  the  Samgha 
may  be  withdrawn  from  any  subject  who  is  under  the 
royal  displeasure.  The  peaceful,  easy  life  dear  to  the 
Burmese  bhikkhu,  the  necessary  calm  for  study  or  the 
writing  of  books,  the  land  or  water  to  be  set  apart  for 
ecclesiastical  ceremonies  (a  fitting  place  for  which  is  of 
the  highest  importance),  all  these  are  only  secured  by  the 
king's  favour  and  protection.     If  this  be  borne  in  mind. 


54  A   BUEMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

the  general  loyalty  of  the  Samgha  to  the  head  of  the 
State  is  easy  to  understand.  On  the  other  side,  the  king's 
despotism  is  held  in  check  and  his  religious  feelings  (if 
they  exist  at  all)  sharpened  by  expediency,  or  their  place 
(if  they  are  non-existent)  supplied  by  the  strongest 
motives  of  self-interest.  At  the  lowest,  the  royal  gifts  of 
viharas  and  the  building  of  cetiyas  are  either  the  price 
paid  down  for  desired  prosperity  and  victory,  or  the 
atonement  for  bloodshed  and  plunder ;  and  the  despot 
dares  not  risk  the  terrors,  the  degradation,  that  later 
births,  in  coming  time,  may  hold  in  store  for  him,  if  he 
injures  or  neglects  the  Samgha. 

It  would  be  a  totally  false  view,  however,  to  see  in  this 
mutual  dependence  only  mutual  bargaining.  It  cannot 
be  doubted  that  many  of  the  kings  have  been  swayed  by 
a  real  reverence  for  the  sublime  ideal  of  the  Religion,  and 
a  real  awe  before  the  silent,  impalpable  power  facing  their 
own.  And — for  the  monks — the  Sasanavamsa  bears  witness 
again  and  again  to  the  noble  indifference  of  members  of 
the  Order  to  kingly  favour  or  disfavour.  More  than  one 
strong  protest  is  recorded,  even  against  the  building  of  a 
cetiya,  by  forced  labour,  and  gifts  to  the  Order,  wrung  from 
the  misery  of  the  people,  have  been  steadfastly  refused. 

As  a  general  rule,  the  king  seems  to  have  had  a  great 
and  recognised  authority  in  ecclesiastical  affairs.  The 
record  (within  historical  times)  begins  with  Anuruddha's 
vigorous  reforms.  In  later  centuries  we  find  the  sovereign 
connnanding  teachers  hither  and  thither,  at  his  pleasure, 
and  even  enforcing  the  study  of  this  or  that  branch  of 
sacred  learning.  Though  the  development  of  the 
hierarchy  in  Burma  to  its  modern  form  ^  is  not  distinctly 
traced  in  the  Sasanavamsa  the  nature  of  the  Samgharaja's 
office  is  very  clear.  He  is  no  elected  Head  of  the  Order, 
but  appointed  by  the  king,  whose  favourite,  and 
tutor  he  usually  is,   and  on  whose  death  or  deposition 

^  Bishop  Bigandet,  Life  or  Legend  (French  edition), 
pp.  477-480. 


CONCLUSION.  55 

he  will,  most  often,  be  replaced  by  the  dcariija  of  the 
successor.  Finally,  it  appears,  from  the  accounts  of 
controversies  such  as  the  great  Parupana-Ekamsika 
dispute,  that  the  sovereign's  power  to  settle  a  religious 
question  by  royal  decree  is  fully  recognised  by  the 
Sanigha  ;  while,  to  keep  the  balance  of  mutual  depen- 
dence, we  see  the  king  himself  usually  under  his  dcariya's 
influence,  so  far  as  to  ensure  his  favouring  the  orthodox 
or  unorthodox  school,  according  to  the  views  of  the 
Sanigharaja. 

The  controversies  of  which  we  read  in  the  Sasanavamsa 
have  their  interest  from  another  point  of  view.  They 
illustrate  not  only  the  influence  of  the  king  in  the  affairs 
of  the  Order,  but  the  whole  character  of  the  Buddhism 
of  Burma. 

It  was  said  by  Bishop  Bigandet,  many  years  ago  (and 
by  many  writers  since  his  day),  that  the  Buddhism  of 
Burma  has  kept  the  primitive  character  lost  in  other 
countries  (as  Nepal) ;  and  this  is  well  borne  out  by  the 
religious  annals  of  Mramma.  Here  we  find,  at  least,  a 
consistent  striving  carried  on,  century  after  century,  to 
uphold  the  precepts  and  to  keep  before  the  bhikkhus  of 
later  times  the  earliest  ideal. 

That  controversies  have  raged  only  too  often  over  the 
veriest  trifles,  is  the  first  and  irresistible  impression  that 
the  reading  of  these  records  brings  with  it.  But  strict- 
ness in  details  is,  in  itself,  no  departure  from  the  spirit  of 
the  ancient  and  pure  Buddhism.  The  "  Discipline  "  of 
the  Order  embodies  countless  rules  on  the  smaller  decen- 
cies of  life,  which  are  ascribed  to  the  watchful  wisdom  of 
the  Master  himself.  Here,  of  course,  the  individual 
point  of  view  of  the  author  has  to  be  taken  into  account, 
besides  his  monastic  standing.  Heresy,  for  Paiinasami, 
means,  before  all,  a  falling  away  from  the  ancient 
Discipline ;  the  controversies  he  records  as  noteworthy 
turn,  for  the  most  part,  not  on  philosophical  subtleties  but 
on  daily  life, — on  the  precepts  of  the  Vinaya  rather  than 
on  the  questionings  of  the  Kathavatthu. 


56  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

The  individual  bias  is  clear,  too,  in  the  interesting,  if 
short,  notices  of  the  literary  history  of  Burma,  contained 
in  the  Sasanavamsa.  The  author's  great  delight,  as  a 
scholar,  is  in  grammar.  His  anecdotes  of  theras  cele- 
brated in  this  branch  of  learning,  or  of  keen-witted  women 
disputing  with  monks  on  Pali  accidence,  sound  a  note  of 
real  enthusiasm.  It  is  a  pious  enthusiasm  too  ;  accord- 
ing to  the  orthodox,  scriptural  warrant  is  everything,  in 
the  settlement  of  religious  difficulties.  From  the  word 
of  the  ancient  texts,  expanded  in  the  Atthakatha  and 
further  explained  by  Ukas  and  atthayojanas  there  is  no 
appeal.  So  the  actual  "  word  "  becomes  the  rock  on 
which  right-believing  and  right-living  rest,  and  generation 
after  generation  of  teachers  devotes  itself  passionately  to 
the  study  of  the  Pali  grammar.  The  "  science  of  words  " 
is  held  to  be  vital  to  the  cause  of  Truth,  and  the  writing 
of  grammatical  treatises  rises  to  the  height  of  a  religious 
duty. 

The  Sasanavanisa  can  be  fairly  judged  only  by  bearing 
in  mind  the  express  and  declared  purpose  with  which  the 
book  was  written.  The  author's  first  aim  is  to  trace 
the  Theraparcmipard, — the  spiritual  pedigree  of  orthodox 
Buddhist  teachers  from  the  Master's  own  disciples  down- 
wards. Like  the  tie  of  blood  between  father  and  son  is 
the  relationship  between  each  teacher  and  the  pupil  who 
is  his  direct  successor.  The  succession  depends  on  (1) 
Personal  relation  with  the  teacher  as  his  pupil  (sissa) 
and  companion  (saddliivihdriha)  ;  (2)  valid  ordination ; 
(3)  strict  orthodoxy — another  name  for  the  doctrine 
professed  by  the  Vibhajyavadins,  who  already  claimed, 
in  A9oka's  day,  to  uphold  the  true  teaching  of  the 
Master  against  encroaching  heresies ;  (4)  holiness  of 
life,  or  "modesty"  (to  translate  literally  the  charac- 
teristic phrase  of  the  Buddhists).  The  alajjibhikkhu  is 
no  more  to  be  reckoned  in  the  Therajparampard  than  is 
the  adhammavddl. 

Already,  in  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Sasanavamsa, 
the  first  two  centuries  of  Buddhism  are  no  sooner  passed 


CONCLUSION.  57 

in  review  than  the  author  turns  back  to  follow  the  succes- 
sion of  theras  from  Upali,  the  Master's  own  saddhivi- 
hdrika  to  Maha-Moggaliputtatissa,  from  whom  down  to 
the  present  time  the  line  of  orthodox  teachers,  each 
inheriting  his  master's  authority,  is  held  to  have  been 
uninterrupted.  And  throughout  the  book  we  see  an 
underlying  purpose,  even  in  the  anecdotes,  haphazard 
and  irrelevant  as  some  of  them  at  first  appear  to  be.  That 
purpose  is  to  separate  the  orthodox  from  the  unorthodox 
(or  even  doubtful)  theras,  and  to  prove  their  claim  to 
descent,  in  unbroken  line,  from  the  great  teachers  of  the 
past.  But,  in  fulfilling  this  purpose  for  Buddhist  readers, 
the  History  of  Eeligion  brings  the  Samgha  before  us  as 
no  priestly  caste  nor  even  a  community  bound  by  neces- 
sarily life-long  vows,  but  a  brotherhood  in  touch  with 
every  class  in  the  nation,  sharing  its  activities,  its  feel- 
ings, many  of  its  weaknesses. 

It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  highest  interest  of 
the  Sasanavamsa  lies  rather  in  its  reflection  of  the  spirit 
than  its  history  of  the  career  of  Buddhism  in  Burma. 
We  value  what  the  writer  unconsciously  reveals,  rather 
than  his  dates,  which  are  sometimes  doubtful,  or  events, 
which  are  often  fantastically  wide  of  the  truth.  Even  the 
orthodox  prejudices  woven  into  the  work,  and  certainly 
the  national  traditions  and  local  details  with  which  it  is 
coloured  lend  it  a  worth  of  its  own.  Its  very  narrow- 
ness brings  us,  by  a  direct  way,  the  closer  to  this 
strange  and  great  religion,  so  t3^pical  in  itself  of  the 
Indian  genius,  yet  planted  in  the  midst  of  non-Indian 
races  and  secure — with  roots  deep  in  a  past  of  many 
centuries  ;  secure,  in  spite  of  ineradicable  folk-super- 
stitions and  even  reconciled  with  them. 

We  see  in  the  religious  History  of  Mramma  a  striking 
departure  from  the  Master's  conception  of  the  true 
Samana,  the  monk-philosopher,  with  his  intense  spiritu- 
ality, his  rapt  calm,  his  abandonment  of  joy  and  sorrow, 
his  love  for  all  beings,  and  his  detachment  from  all.     Yet 

5 


58  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

we  find,  too,  a  certain  abiding  fidelity  to  the  Discipline 
and   an  earnest  teaching  of   the  Law  of  Gotama.     We 
see    the    Order    growing    and  changing  to  a  hierarchy, 
relaxing    its    strictness    of    renunciation,    so    that     its 
higher  members  become  councillors  of  State  or  dignitaries 
of  a  Church  supported  and  enriched  by  royal  bounty ;  but 
we  must  recognise,  besides,  in  all  its  ranks,  a  social  force, 
an  upholder  of   humanity    and   justice    against  barbaric 
tyranny,  a  grave,  strenuous  influence  in  the  midst  of  a 
careless  people,  teaching  the  love  of  learning  and  com- 
pelling the  obeisance  of  kings.     We  see  the  land  loyal  to 
the  Conqueror  it  has  never  wholly  understood,  and  none 
the  less  loyal,  though  the  old  gods  still  people  every  tree 
and  stream  and  watch  over  every  village.     The  chroni- 
cler's intimate  knowledge,  with  all  its  limitations,  comes 
to  the  aid  of  the  more  critical  historian  ;    the  Burmese 
monk,  busied  in  his  quiet  kijaung,  lends  help  that  cannot 
be   foregone,    if    the    history    written    from    the    outside 
point  of  view  is  to  be  no  less  just  in  its  judgments  than 
true  as  a  record  of  facts. 


en 


oo 


tr> 

CT> 


OO 
04 


S 


11 

% 

o 

a 

o 

3 
O 

<S3 
u 
.a 

o 
H 


I 
5 


i^ 


0^ 


As 


K4^ 


< 
2; 


<^ 


^: 


2    X 


o 


m 


b 


LIST   OF   PEINCIPAL  AUTHORITIES 
CONSULTED. 

Bastian  (^ Adolf),  Geschichte  cler  Inclo-Chinesen. 

Bergaigne  (Abel),  UAncien  Boyaume  de  Campd. 

Bigandet,  Life  or  Legend  of  Gaudama. 

Bird  (Geo.),  Wanderings  in  Burma. 

British  Burma  Gazetteer. 

Burney,  /.  B.  A.  S.,  Bengal,  dc. 

Childers  (R.  C),  Pali  Dictionary. 

Crawfurd   (John),  Journal  of   an  Embassy  to  the  Court 

of  Ava. 
Forbes,  British  Burma. 
Forchhammer(Emil),((x)-R?;^or/^.s  {Archczological,  dec.)  to  the 

British  Goverm?ient. 

(b)  Early  History  and  Geography  of  British  Burma. 

(c)  Jardi?ie  Prize  Essay  on  Buddhist  Law  in  Burma,  dc. 
Fournereau  (Lucien),  Le  Siam  Ancien. 

Gamier  (Francis),  Voyage  d'Exploration  en  Lndo-Chine. 
Gray  (James),  Nlti  Literature  of  Burma,  dc. 
Hardy  (Spence),  (a)  Manual  of  Buddhism. 

(b)  Eastern  Monachism. 
Kern,  Manual  of  Lidian  Buddhism. 
Koppen,  Beligion  des  Buddha. 
Lassen  (Chr.),  Lidische  Alter thumskunde. 
Levi  (Sylvain),  («)  La  Grece  et  L'Inde. 

(b)  Notes  sur  les  Indo-Scythes,  dc. 
Minaev  (Ivan),  Becherches  sur  le  Bouddhisme. 
Miiller  (Ed.),  Pali  Proper  Names  {J.  P.  T.  S.),  dc. 
Oldenberg  (H.),  (a)  Vinayapitakam.    (B)  VinayaTexts,dc. 
Pavie,  Memoir es  et  Documents  de  la  Mission  Panic . 

59 


60  A   BURMESE    HISTORIAN    OF    BUDDHISM. 

Phayre  (Arthur),  History  of  Burma. 
Rhys  Davids  (T.  W.),  {a)  Buddhism. 

ih)  Schools  of  Buddhist  Belief,  dc. 
San  Germano,  The  Burmese  Em/pire  (Jardine's  edition). 
Taw  Sein  Ko,  Indian  Antiquarij ,  vols,  xxii.,  xxiii.,  &c. 
Tumour  (Geo.),  Mahdvamsa. 
Waddell  (L.),  Buddhism  of  Thibet. 
Yule  (Henry),  Mission  to  the  Court  of  Ava. 
De  Zoysa  (Louis),   Beport  on    the  Inspection  of  Temple 
Libraries  in  Ceylon. 


TJNWIN  BBOTHERS,  PBINTERS,  WOKING  AND  LONDON. 


SASANA-VAMSA. 


Namo  tassa  bhagavato  araliato  sammasambuddliassa. 


Buddhamsumrdi  dipaduttamo  tamo 
Hantvaua  bodhesi  'dha  pamkajam  pajam 
Maggaggaselamhi  suvuttliito  tliito 
So  mam  ciram  patu  sukham  sada  sada, 

Sihaladlpato  yeva  agatehi  disantaram 

Bhikkhilhi  jacito  kassam  Sasanavamsappadipikam 

Kamaii  ca  poranehi  ya  Sasanavamsappadipika 
Vittharavacana  magga  viracita  ^  vinicchaya 

Sa  paiia  Mramma-bhasaya  katatta  yeva  etesam 
Dipantaranivasinam  va  hati  suttbuuuttham  ^  (?) 

Tasma  hi  mulabhasaya  karissami  aham  have. 
Samsanditvana3  gandhehi  tarn  sallakkhentu  sadhavo  ti. 


T  a  t  r  a  y  a  m  m  a  t  i  k  a. 

TsTavatthanagatasasanavamsakathamaggo. 
Sihaladipikavasanavamsakathamaggo. 
Suvannabhumisasanavamsakathamaggo. 
Yonakaratthasasanavamsakathamaggo. 


'  A.  ciracita.        ^  so  all  AISS.  except  B.  which  has  hoti 
sutthunattham.         5  Sd,  samsandhi". 

Sasana-Vamaa.  1 


Vanavasiratthasasanavamsakathrimaggo. 

Aparantaratthasasanavamsakathamaggo. 

Kasmiragandliriraratthasasanavamsakatbrimaggo 

Maliimsakaratthasasanavamsakatliamaggo. 

Maliaratthasasanavamsakatliamaggo. 

Cinaratthasasanavamsakatliamaggo  ca  ti. 


Tattlia  ca  navatthanagatasasanavamsakathamaggo  evam 
veditabbo.     Katbam? 

Ambakam  bi  bbagava  sammasambuddbo  veneyyanam 
bitattbaya  attano  battbagatam  sukbam  anadiyitva  Dipam- 
karassa  bbagavato  padamule  vyakaranam  ^  nama  mauju- 
sakapuppbam  pibindbitva  kappasatasabassadbikani  cattari 
asankbeyyani  aiiekasu  jatisii  attano  kbedam  anapekkbitva 
samatimsapriramiyo  piiretva  Vessantarattabbavato  cavitva 
Tusitapure  devasukbam  anubbavi. 

Tada  devebi  iiyyojiyamano  butva  Kapibivattbumbi  Ma- 
basammatarafiiio  pabbuti  ^  asambbinnakbattiyavamsikassa 
Suddbodanassa  nama  mabarafino  aggamabci-iiya  asambbmna- 
kbattiyavamsikaya  Mayaya  kuccbismini  Asalbimasassa 
pimnamiyain  guruvare'^  patisandbini  gabetva  dasamasacca- 
yena  vesakbamasassa  punnamiyam  sukkavare  vijayitva 
solasavassikakale  rajjasampattim  patva  ekimathiisa4  vassani 
atikkamitva  mangala-iiyyanam  nikkbamanakale  devebi 
dassitani  cattari  nimittani  passitva  samvegam  apajjitva 
mababbinikkbamanam  nikkbamitva  Anomaya  nama  nadiya 
tire  bbamaravannasannibbani  kesani  cbinditva  devadatti- 
yakasavam  paticcbadetva  Neranjaraya  nama  nadiya  tire 
vesakbamasassa  punnamiyam  pacciisakale  Sujataya  nama 
settbidbltaya  dinnain  payasam  ekunapannasavarena  pari- 
bbunjitva  purimikanams  sambuddbanani  dbammataya*^ 
suvannapatim  nadiyam  otaretva  mababodbimandam  upa- 
samkamitva  aparajitapaUaiike  nisiditva  anamatagga-sam- 
sarato  pattbaya  attanam  cbaya  viya  anuyantanam  aneka- 
satakilesavermam    sisani    catubi    maggasattbebi    cbinditva 

^  B.  veyyakaranam.  ^  B.  •'ppabbiiti.  3  B.  garu° 

"^  Min:  ekunavisa.  s  B.  puri°  ^  B.  dbammakaya. 


tilokaggamaliadhammarajattam  patva  pancacattalisavassa- 
ni  tesu  tesu  thanesu  tesam  tesam  sattanaiu  maliakaruna- 
samapattijalam  })attliaretva  desanananam  vijambhetva 
dhammam  desetva  sasauam  patitthapesi.  Patittliapetva  ca 
pana  asitivassayukakrile  vijjotayitvS  nibbayanapadlpajalaiii 
viya  anupadisesanibbanadhatuya  parinibbayi.  Maccu- 
dharamassa  ca  nama  tisu  lokesu  atimamayitabbo  esa  ati- 
garukatabbo  esa  atibliayitabbo  eso  ti  vijananasabhavo 
natthi.  Bhagavautam  yeva  tava  tilokaggapuggalam  adaya 
gacchati.  Kimangam^  pana  amhe  ye  va  te  va.  Aho 
vata  acchariyo  sankharadhammo-  ti.  « 
Honti  c'ettha: 

Maccudbammo  ca  nam  'esa  nillajjo  ca  anottappi 
Tilokaggam  va  adaya  gacchij  pag  eva  annesu'*. 
Yatha  gogbatako  coro  maretum  yeva  rira])hi 
Gonam  biddhana  lokamhi  payojanani  va  ettbakam 
Tath  'eva  maccuraja  ca  nindagunams  gnnam  idba 
Na  vijanati  eso  hi  maretum  yeva  arabbi  ti, 

Sattabaparinibbute  ca  bbagavati  ayasnia  Mabakassapo 
tiyaddhasatadbikebi  sabassamattebi  bbikkbiibi  saddhini 
Pavato  Kusinrirayam  agacchanto  antaiTimagge  bbagava 
sammasambuddho  pariniblnito  ti  sutva  avitasoke  Idiikkbii 
rodante  disva  vuddhapabbajito  Subbaddo  nrima  bbikkbu 
evam  vadati:  Ma  avuso  paridevittba,  natth'  ettba  soci- 
tabbo  nama  koci,  pubbe  mayam  bbavama  samanena  Go- 
tamena  upadduta,  idam  karotba  idam  tumhakam  kappati 
ma  idam  karittba  na  idam  tumhakam  kappati  ti  seyyatba 
pi  inasamikena  daso  ti,  idani  pana  mayam  yam  yam 
icchama  tarn  tani  sakkil  katum  yam  yam  pana  na  iccbtlma 
tarn  tarn  sakka  akatun  ti.  Tarn  sutva:  idisam  pana  verl- 
puggalam^  paticca  sammasambuddbassa  bhagavato  sasa- 
nam  kbippam    antaradbayeyya ",    idani    suvannakkbandha- 


'  Min:  kimanga.  ^  B.  samsara°  ^  B.  gaccham. 

4  D.  afinusu.     5  A.  tindagunam  or  ninda°.  B.  has  l)hinda° 

corrected  to  hinda°        ^  B.  veri°        ^  B.  antaradhrireyyain. 


-^       4        H$" 

sadiso  sariro  samvijjamano^  yeva  dukkhena  nipphadite  sa- 
sane  mahabliayam  uppajji,  idiso  puggalo  annam  idisam 
puggalam  sabayam  labhitva  vuddbim  apajjanto  sasanam 
hrn)etum  sakkuneyya  mafine  ti  cittakbedam  ^  patva 
dbammasamvegam  kibbitva  imam  bbikkbum  idb'  eva  seta- 
vattbam  nivasapetva  sarire  bbasmena^  vikiritva  babiddba 
karissami  ti  cintesi. 

Tada  ayasmato  Mabakassapatberassa  etad  ahosi:  Idani 
samanassa  Gotamassa  sarlram  samvijjamaBam  yeva  parisa* 
vivadaiii  karontl  ti  manussa  upavadissanti  tis.  Tato  paccba 
imam  vitakkam  vilpasametva  kbamitva:  sammasambiiddbo 
bbagava  parinibbayamano  pi,  tena  pana  desito  dbammo 
samvijjati,  tena  desitassa  dbammassa  tbiram^  patittbapa- 
nattbaya  samgayiyamanam  idisebi  puggalebi  sasanam  na 
antaradbayissati,  ciram  tbassati  yeva  ti  manasikaritva  bba- 
gavato  dinnapamsnkiilacivaradivasena  dbammanuggabani 
aniissaritva  bbagavato  parinibbanato  tatiye  mase  asalbi- 
masassa  piinnamito  pancame  divase  E-fijagabe  Sattapanni- 
gubayam  Ajatasattun  nama  rajanam  nissaya  pancabi  ara- 
bantasatebi  saddbim  sattamasebi  patbamam  samgayanam 
akasi. 

Tada  attbacattalisadbikasatakaliyugam  anavasesato 
apanetva  kaliyugena  sasanam  samam  katva  tbapesi.  Yada 
pana  Aiatasatturanno  raj  jam  patva  attba  vassani  bonti 
tada  Marammarattbe  Takom-samte  ?  pure  Jambudl- 
])adbajassa  nama  rafmo  rajjam  patva  atirekapancavassani 
abesun  ti. 

Imissam  ca  patbamasangitiyam  ayasma  Mabakassapo 
ayasma  UpFili  ayasma  Anando  ayasma  Anuruddbo  ca  ti 
evamadayo  pancasatapamana  mabatbera  patbamam  sam- 
gayitva  sasanam  anuggabesum. 

Evam  Subbaddassa  vuddbapabbajitassa  duttbavacanam 
sasanassa  anuggabe^  karanam  nama  abosi.     Subbaddo  ca 

^  B.  savijjamano.         ^  S.  D.  cittukkbedbara. 
3  B.  bbasnena.  ^  B.  purisa.  s  gg.  upavadissanti. 

6  B.  tiram.  7  Min:  Ta-ko-iiab-satve.    D.  Ta  ko  iiab 

sanah  satve.    Sg.  Takonabsantau. 
^  B.  ami  Min.  sasane  anuggabassa. 


-^H         5         Hg- 

llama  buddliapabbajitoAtumanagaravasi  lioti  kappakakuliko. 
So  yada  bliagava  Atumam  nagaram  gacchati  tada  attano 
putte  dve  samanere  kappakakammam  karapetva  laddhehi 
tandulateladihi  vatthulii  yagum  pacitva  sasamghassa  bud- 
dhassa  adasi.  Bhagava  pana  tani  apatiggahetva  karanam 
pucchitva  vigarahitva  akappiyasma  danadukkatapattim 
kappakapubbassa  bhikklmssa  khuradharanadukkatapattifi 
ca  pannapesi.  Tarn  karanani  j^i^ticca  veram  bandhitva 
sasanam  viddhamsitukamataya  tattaka-ayogiilam  gilitva 
uggiranto  viya  idisara  duttbavacanam  vadi  ti. 

Ajatasattiiraja  ca:  tumbakam  bhante  dhammacakkam 
hotii,  inama  anacakkam  pavattissami,  vissattha  hiitva 
samgayaiitii  ti  aniiggabesi.  Ten'  esa  pathamam  sasana- 
nuggaho  raja  ti  veditabbo.  Mabrikassapadinan  ca  arahan- 
tanam  pancasatanam  sissaparampara  aneka  honti  gaua- 
napatham  vltivatta.  Yam  ettba  ito  param  vattabbam 
tarn  Attbakathayam  vuttanayena  veditabbaiii. 

Te  pana  mahathera  samgayitva  parinibbayimsu  ti. 

Honti  c'ettha: 

Iddhimanto  ca  ye  theiTi  pathamasamgitim  katva 

Maccuvasam  vasampatta 

Kincapi  iddbiyo  santi  tatha  pi  ta  jahitva 

Nibbayimsu  vasam  maccuni '  patva  te  chinnapakkba  va 

Ka  katha  'va  ca  ambrdcam  amhakam  gabane  pana 

Maccuno  nattbi  bbaro  ca  evam  dbareyya^  pandito  ti. 

Ayarn  patbamasaiigitikathasaiikbepo. 

Tato  param  vassasatam  tesam  sissaparamparasasanain 
dbilretva  agamamsn.  Atb'  anukkamena  gaccbantesu  ratti- 
divasesu  vassasataparinibbute  bhagavati  Vesalika  Vajji- 
puttaka  bbikkbu  Vesaliyam :  kappati  singilonakappo,  kappati 
dvangulakappo,  kappati  gilmantarakappo,  kappati  avasa- 
kappo,  kappati  anumatikappo,  kappati  acinnakappo,  kappati 


^  A.  maccu  (vasam  omitted). 
^  Min:  dbareyya. 


^^     6     -^ 

amatliitakappo ',  kappati  jalogi  patum-,  kappati  adasakam 
nisidanam,  kappati  jataruparajatan  ti  imani  dasa  vatthimi 
dipesum. 

Tesam  Siisimagaputto  Kalasoko  nama  raja  pakklio  aliosi. 
Tena  kho  pana  samayena  ayasma  Yaso  Kakandaputto^ 
Vajjisu  carikam  caramano  Vesalika  kira  Vajjiputtaka 
bhikkliu  Vesaliyam  dasa  vatthuni  dipentl  ti  sutva  na  kho 
pan'  etam  patiriipam  yvaham^  dasabalassa  sasanaviijattim 
sutva  appossukko  bliaveyyam  handaham  adhammavadiiio 
niggalietva  dhammam  dipessaml  ti  cintayaiito  yena  Vesall 
tad  avasari,  Tada  ayasma  Mahayaso  B,evata-Sabbakami- 
adihi  sattasatehi  arahantehi  saddhim  saiigayissami  ti  Ve- 
srdiyam  Valiikaraniam  agaccbi.  Vajjiputtaka  ca  bbikkhu 
uparambbacittas  Kalasokam  nama  rajanam  upasamkamitva : 
mayam  kho  mabaraja  imasmim  mabavanarame  gandbakutira 
rakkbitva  vasama.  Idani  mabaraja  adbammavadino  aiine 
bbikkbu  vihimpitukama  viddbamsitukama  agata  ti  aro- 
cesum  Kalasoko  ca  mabaraja  agantukanani  bbikkbiinam 
appavisanattbaya  nivaretba  ti  amacce  pesesi.  Amacca  ca 
uivaretum  gaccbanta  devatanam  anubbavena  bbikkbu  na 
passanti.  Tadabe  ca  rattibbage  Kalasokamabaraja  lo- 
bakumbbiniraye  paccanakarena^  supinam  passi.  Tassar  anno 
bbagini  Nanda  nama  tberi  akasena  agaccbanti  dbamma- 
vadino  mabatbere  nigganbitva  adbammavadinam  bbikkbii- 
nam paggabane  dosababalattam^  pakasetva  sasanassa 
paggabanattbaya  ovadam  akasi. 

Kalasokaraja  ca  samvegapatto  butva  ayasmantanam 
Mabayasatberadinan  ca  kbamapetva^  Ajatasatturaja  viya 
samga-yane  paggabam  akasi. 

Ayasma  Mabayasatberadayo  ca  Kalasokam  rajanam 
nissaya  Vrdukarame  Vajjiputtakanam  bbikkbiinam  paka- 
sitani  adbaminavattbiini  bbinditva  attbabi  maselii  diitiya- 
samgayanam  akamsu. 

^  A.  amadbita.    B.  corrects  to  amatbikata" 

^  B.  corrects  to  jalobbr    Min:  jalogim  piitura. 

3  B.  Min:  Kakan(iaka°         4  Min:  yo° 

5  S.  uparambbaka.     '^  MSS.  pakana°      ^  A,  °babalatam. 

*  S.  canapetva. 


-^     7     Hg- 

Tcxda  ca  Majjhimadese  Pataliputtanagare  Susunaga- 
rafino  puttabhiitassa  Kalasokaraiino  abhisekam  patva 
dasa  vassani  ahesiim.  Marammarattlie  pana  Sirikhettana- 
gare  Dvattaponkassa  nama  ranno  al)hisittakalato  pure  eka- 
vassam  aliosi,  jinasasanam  pana  vassasatam  ahosi. 

Imissan  ca  dutiyasamgitiyam  Mahayasa-Revata-Sabba- 
kamipamukba  sattasatapamana  mahathera  dutiyam  sam- 
gayitva  dutiyam  sasanam  paggabesum. 

Ayasma  Mabayasatbero  ca  nama  pancabi  etadaggattba- 
nebi  bbagavata'  tbomitassa  Anandatberassa  saddbivibririko 
abosi.  Vajjiputtakanam  bbikkbunam  adbammavattbudl- 
panam-  dutiyasamgitiyam  karanam  eva.  KalasokaiTija  ca 
pag  eva  adbammavadibbikkbunam  sabayo  pi  samanojpuna 
dbammavadibbikkbunam  sabayo  butva  anuggabani  akasi. 
Tasma  dutiyasiisanapaggabo^  raja  ti  veditabbo, 

Dutiyasamgitiyam  pana  Mabayasatbera-Revata-Sabba- 
kamipamukbanam  sattasataiiain  mabatberanam  sissapa- 
rampara  aneka  bonti  gananapatbam  vltivatta.  Yam  ettba 
ito  param  vattabbam  tarn  Attbakatbayam  vuttauayena 
veditabbam.  Te  pana  mabatbera  dutiyam  samgayitvas 
parinibbayimsu  ti. 

Honti  c'ettba: 

Buddbimanto  ca  ye  tbera 
Dutiyasamgitim  katva 
Sasanam  paggabitvana 
Maccuvasam  vasampatta^ 

Iddbimanto  pi  ye  tbera 
Maccuno  tava  vasam  gamim 
Katbam  yeva  mayam  mutta 
Tato  araka  muccana  ti. 

Ayam  dutiyasamgltikatbasaiikbepo. 


^  D.  ''to.         ^  B.  corrects  to  dipanadutiya'' 

-5  D.  paya  pi  yamano.  4  A.  and  S.  dutiyamsSsana" 

5  B.  samgayita.         ^  Min:  vasam  sampatta. 


-^         8         H^ 

Tato  param  attbatimsaclhikani  dvevassasatani  samma- 
sambuddhassa  bliagavato  sasanam  nirakulam  abosi  nirab- 
budam.  Atthatimsadbike  pana  dvivassasate  sampatte 
Pataliputtanagare  Siri-Dbammasokassa  ranuo  nama  kale 
Nigrodbasamaneram  paticca  buddbasasane  paslditva 
bbikkbusamgbassa  labbasakkaram  babullam  abosi. 

Tadii  sattbisabassamatta  ^  tittbiya  labbasakkaram  apek- 
kbitva  apabbajitapi  pabbajita  viya  liutva  uposatbapava- 
raiiadikammesu  pavisanti. 

Seyyatba  pi  nama  bamsanam  majjbe  baka 

yatbii  ca  gimiiam^  majjbe  gavaja 

yatba  ca  sindbavanam  majjbe  gadrabba  ti. 

Tads,  bbikkbusamgbo  idani  aparisuddba3  parisa  ti 
manasikaritva  uposatbam  na  akasi.  Sasane  abbudam 
butva  satta  vassani  uposatbapavaranani  bbijjanti.  Siri- 
Dhammasoko  ca  raja  tarn  sutva  tam  adbikaranam  vupa- 
samebi  uposatbam  karapebl  ti  ekam  amaccam  pesesi. 
Amacco  ca  bbikkbii  uposatbam  akattukame  kim  karissa- 
mlti  rajanam  patipuccbitum  avisabataya  sayam  mulbo 
butva  anfiena  miilhena  mantetva  sace  bbikkbusamgbo 
uposatbam  na  kareyya  bbikkbusamgbam  gbatetukamo 
mabfiraja  ti  sayam  mtilbo  butva  mulbassa  santika  mulba- 
vacanam  sutva  vibaram  gantva  uposatbam  akattukamam 
bbikkbusamgbam  gbatesi. 

Raja  ca  tam  sutva  ayaru  balo  may  a  ananatto  va  butva 
idisam  luddakammams  akiisi.  abam  papakammato  mun- 
cissami  va  ma  va  ti  dvelbakajato  butva  Maba-Moggaliputta- 
Tissatberam  Gaiigaya  patisotato  anetva  tam  karanam 
tberam  puccbi.  Tbero  ca  dlpakatittirajatakena  acetana- 
taya  papakammato  mocessasi^  ti  vissajjesi.  Sattabaui 
pi  tittbiyanam  vadam  Siri-Dhammasokaraniio  sikkbapesi 
vadena  vadam  tulayitva  sattbisabassamatte  tittbiye  sasana 


^  B.  "sabassan  ca.  ^  B.  gunnanam.  3  D.  omits. 

t  B.  bbijjissanti    i).  sijjaiiti.         5  D.  laddba'' 
^  D.  mocessabi  ti. 


->i      9      K- 

bahiram  akasi.  Tada  pana  uposatham  akasi.  Bhagavata 
vuttaniyamen'  eva  Kathavatthun  ca  bhikkhusaragliaraajjlie 
vyakasi.  Asokarame  ca  sabassamatta  mabatbera  navabi 
masebi  samgayimsu.  Tada  Majjbimadese  Pataliputtanagare 
Siri-Dbammasokarabfio  rajjam  patva  attbrirasa  vassani 
abesun  ti, 

Marammarattbe  pana  Sirikhettanagare  Eam-pom-kassa 
nama  ranno  rajjam  patva  dvadasa  vassani'  abesun  ti. 
Imissafi  ca  tatiyasanigitiyam  Maba-Moggaliputta-Tissa- 
tbero  nama  dutiyasamgayakebi  mabatberebi  Brabmalokam 
gantva  sasanassa  paggabanattbam  Tissam  nama  Maba- 
brabmanam  ayacitaniyamena  tato  cavitva  idba  Moggaliya 
nama  brabmaniya  kuccbimbi  nibbattasatto.  Labbasakka- 
ram  apekkbitva  sattbimattanam  tittbiyanam  samanalayam 
katva  uposatbapavaranadisu  kammesu  pavesanam  parisaya^ 
asuddbatta  satta  vassani  uposatbassa  akriranan  ca  sasanassa 
paggabane  karanam  eva  Maba-Moggabputta-Tissa-Majjban- 
tika-Mabadevapamukba  mabatbera  tatiyam  samgayitva 
tatiyam  sasanam  paggabesum. 

Siri-Dbammasokarajfi  ca  tittbiyanam  vadam  sallakkbetva 
tittbiye  babisasanakaranadibi  sasanassa  paggabo  raja  ti 
veditabbo.  Maba-Maggaliputta-Tissa-Majjbantika-Maba- 
devapamuldianam  sabassamattanam  mabatberanam  sissa- 
parampara  aneka  bonti  gananapatbam  vitivatta. 

Yam  ettba  ito  param  vattabbam  tarn  Attbakatbayam 
vuttanayena  veditabbani.  Te  pana  maliatbera  tatiyam 
samgayitva  parinibbayimsii  ti. 


Honti  c'ettba: 


Mabiddbika  pi  ye  tbera 
Samgayitvana  sasane 
Maccuvasam  va  gaccbimsu 
Abbbagabbbam  va  bbakaro. 


'  D.  "dvi. 

^  A.  paribaya. 


-^         10         H^ 

Yatha  ete  ca  gacchanti 
Tatlia  mayam  pi  gaccliama. 
Ko  nama  maccuna  mucce 
Maccuparayana  satta. 

Tasma  lii  pandito  poso 
Nibbanam  pana  accutam. 
Tass'  eva  sacchikattaya  ^ 
Pufinam  kareyya  sabbada  ti. 

Ay  am  tatiyasamgitikatliasaiikliepo. 


Tato  param  kattba^  sammasambuddhassa  bhagavato 
sasanam  suttbu  patitthahissati  ti  vimamsitva  Maha-Moggali- 
putta-Tissathero  paccantadese  jinasasanassa  supatitthi- 
yamanabbavam  passitva  nava  tbanani  jinasasanassa  patittba- 
])anatthaya  visum  visum  mahatbere  pesesi  seyyatbldam 
Maba -  Mahindatberam  Sibaladipam  pesesi:  Tvam  etam 
dipam  gantva  tattba  sasanam  patittbapebi  ti.  Sonatberam 
Uttaratberafi  ca  Suvannabbumim,  Mabrirakkbitatberam 
Yonakalokam,  Yonakarakkbitatberam  Vanavasirattbam, 
Dbammarakkbitatberam  Aparantarattbam ,  Majjbantika- 
tberam  Kasmlragandbarattbam,  Maba-Revatatberam  Ma- 
bimsakamandalain ,  Maba -Dbammarakkbitatberam  Maha- 
rattbam,  Majjbimathei'am  Cinarattban  ti.  Tattba  ca  upa- 
sampadapabonakena  samgbena  saddbim  pesesi.  Te  ca 
mabatbera  visum  visum  gantva  3  sasanam  tattba  tattba 
patittbapesum.  Patittbiipetva  c'eva  tesu  tesu  tbanesu  bbik- 
kbimam  kasavapajjotena  vijjotamana  abbbambi  dliumarajo  + 
Rabusankhatebi  vimutto  viya  nisanatbo  jinasasanani  anan- 
tarayam  butva  patittbasi. 

Tesu  pana  navasu  tbanesu  s  Suvannabbiimi  nama  adbuna 
Sudbammanagaram  eva.  Kasma  pan'  etam  vinuayati  ti  ce^: 

Magganumanato  tbananumilnato  va.  Katbam  magganu- 
manato? 


'  A.  and  B.  sacchikattbaya.     ^  Min:  katbam  S.  kattba. 
3  S.  omits.         4  A.  and  B.  abbbabima"  S.  cadbiima  rajo 
pesesi.         s  S.  omits.         ^  Min:  ca. 


-^      11      H5- 

Ito  kira  Siivannabhumira  ^  sattamattani  yojanasatani 
lionti.  Ekena  vatena  gacclianti  nava  sattabi  ahorattelii 
gacchanti.  Atli'  ekasmim  samaye  evam  gacchanti  nava 
sattaham  pmadlghavattamaccbapitthen' ^  eva  gata  ti 
Attbakatbayam  viittena  Sibaladlpato  Suvannabbumim 
gatamaggapamanena  Sudbammapurato  Sibaladipam  gata- 
maggapamanam  sameti.  Sudbammapurato  kira  bi  Sibala- 
dipam sattamattani  yojanasatfini  bonti.  Ujumvayu-aga- 
manakale  gaccbanti  vayunava  sattabi  aborattebi  sampa- 
punati.     Evam  magganumanato  vinuayati. 

Katbam  tbananumanato.  Suvannabbumi  kira  mabasa- 
muddasamipe  tittbati.  Nanaverajjakanamj  pi  vrmijanam 
upasamkamanattbanabbutam  mabatittbam  boti.  Ten'  eva 
mabajanakakumaradayo  Campanagaradito^  samvobarattbaya 
navaya  Suvannabbumim  agaccbantis.  Sudbammapuram 
pi  adbunil  mabasamuddasamipe  yeva  tittbati.  Evam  tliana- 
numanato  vifinayati  ti. 

Apare  pana  Suvannabbumi  nama  Haribbunjarattbam'' 
yeva  ti  vadanti,  tattba  suvannassa  Indiullatta  ti  vadauti. 
Anne  pana'  Siyamarattbam  yeva  ti  vadanti.  Tarn  sabbam 
vlmamsitabbam, 

Aparantam  nama  visum  ekarattbam  eva  ti  apare  vadanti. 
Anne  pana  Aparantam  nama  Sunaparantarattbam  eva  ti 
vadanti.  Tarn  yuttam  eva.  Kasma?  Aparantam  nfima 
Sunaparantarattbam  eva  ti  vinnayati  ti  ce  attbakatbasu. 
Dvibi  namebi  vuttattil  Uparipannasattbakatbayam  bi  Sala- 
yatanasamyuttattbakatbayau  ca  attbakatbacariyebi  Suna- 
parantarattbe  Kondadbanatberena(?)  salrdvadanadbikare  ^ 
laddbe  tadaggattbanatam  dassentebi''  Aparantarattliani 
sunasaddena  yojetva  vuttam.  Dbammapadattbakatbayam 
pana  Aiiguttarattbakatbayan  ca  tarn  eva  rattbam  vina 
sunavaddena  vuttam.    Sunasaddo '"  c'ettba  puttapariyayo  ". 

"■  B.  °bbumi. 

^  B.  sattabam  pi  nidiya  vattit°    A.  pi  nadlgbaya  vatta° 

J  B.  Veraiijakanam.         '^  A.  Cammri° 

5  Min:  mid  B.  agamamsutl  ti.         ^  D.  °rattbe. 

7  A.  annena.     ^  A.  and  B.  silaka"  D.  sabakfidi  namika  tbere. 

9  A.,  B.  and  D.  dassantebi.        ^"  I),  sadde.        "  D.  vutta'' 


-^     12     f^ 

Mandhaturafifio  jetthaiDutto  catudipavasino  pakkositva' 
tesam  visuiii  visum  nivasatthanam  niyyadesi^  Tattlia 
uttaradipavasmam  thanani^  Kururattliam  nama,  pubba- 
dlpavrisiuaiii4  pana  Vedeliaratthaiii  uama  paccliimadlpa- 
vaslnain  Aparantain  nama.  Tattha  paccliimadipe  jatattas 
te  sunasaddena  vutta.  Tatra  jata  pi  hi  tesam  putta  ti 
va  suna  ti  va  vutta  yatlia  Vajjiputtaka  bliikkliu  ti. 
vatticcliavaseiia  va  vacasilitthavasena  ca  idam  eva  su- 
nasaddena visesetva  voliarantl  ti  datthabbam. 

Yonakaratthani  nama  Yavanamanussanam  nivasatthanam 
eva.     Jam-may^  iti  vuccati. 

Vanavaslrattham  nama  Sirikhettanagaratthanam  eva. 
Keci  pana  Vanavaslrattham  nama  ekam  rattham  eva  na 
Sirikhettanagaratthanan  ti  vadanti.  Tarn  na  sundaram. 
Sirikhettanagaratthanam  eva  hi  Vanavasirattham  nama. 
Kasma  pan'  etam  vihnayati  ti  ce  imassa  amhakam  raiiho 
l)hatikarahfio  kale  Sirikhettanagare  gumbehi^  paticchadite 
elcasmim  pathavimahceS  anto  nimmujjitva  thitam  porani- 
kam9  ekam  lohamayabuddhapatibimbam  patilabhi.  Tassa 
ca  pallauke  idam  Vanavaslratthavaslnam  pujanatthaya  ti 
adina  poranakalekhanam  ^°  dissati.  Tasma  yev'  etam 
vihhayati  ti. 

Kasmiragandhararattham  nama  KasmTrarattham  Gan- 
dhararatthah  ca.  Tani  pana  ratthani  ekabaddhani  hutva 
titthanti.  Ten'  eva  Majjhantikattheram  ekam  dvisu  ratthesu 
pesesi.  Janapadatta  pana  napurasakekattam  bhavati. 
Tada  pana  ekassa  rahho  anaya  patitthanavisayatta  ekattha- 
vacanena'^  Atthakathayam  vuttan  ti  pi  vadanti. 

Mahimsakamandalan  nama  Andhakarattham  yam 
Yakkhapuraratthan  ti  vuccati. 

Maharatthaiii    nama   Mahanagararatthaiu.     Adhuna    hi 


^  A.  pappositva.^     ^  B.  vasattbanam  nlyadeti.  C.  na  vasa° 

3  A.  and  B.  dhanam.  4  A.  navatatthanam. 

5  B.  pubbadaja  pacchimadaja.    C.  jatattiia. 

^  B.  Jail— may.    D.  yam  yanahmaya.        7  B.  rambhehi. 

«  B.  i)uiice.    Min:  pathavi  punje.         9  B.  poranitam. 

°  B.  porana°         ^^  A.  ekattavacanena. 


-^-        13        H^ 

Maharattham  eva  nagarasaddena  yojetvaMahanagararatthan 
ti  voharanti  ti.     Siyamarattban  ti  pi  vadanti  acariya. 

Cinaratthau  nrima  Himavantena  ekabaddham  hiitva 
tliitam  Cinaratthara  yeva  ti. 

Idara  sasanassa  navasu  tlianesu  visuin  visum  patitthanam. 

Idani  adito  patthaya  theraparamparakatlia  vattabba, 
Sammasambuddbassa  bi  bbagavato  saddbivibariko  Upali- 
tbero,  tassa  sisso  Dasakatbero,  tassa  sisso  Sonakatbero, 
tassa  sissa  Siggavatbero,  Candavajjitbero  ca\  tesa.m  sisso 
Moggalipiitta-Tissatbero  ti  ime  pafica  mabatbera  sasa- 
navamse  adibbiita  acariyaparampaiTi  nama.  Tesam  bi 
sissaparamparabbuta  tberaparampara  yavajjataiia  na  upa- 
ccbindanti'.  Acariyaparamparaya  ca  bijjibbikkbii  yeva 
pavesetva  katbetabba  no  abijjibbikkbu.  Alajjibbikkbu  nama 
bi  babiissuta  pi  samana  labbagani-lokagani-3,dlbi  dbamma- 
tantim  nasetva  sasanavare  mababbayam  uppadenti  ti. 
Sasanarakkbanakamman  nama  bi  bijjmam  yeva  visayo 
no  abijjmam,  ten'  abu  porana:  Mabatbera  anagate  sasa- 
nam  ko  nama  rakkbissati  ti  anupekkbitva  anagate  sasanam 
bijjino  rakkbissanti  bajjino  rakkbissanti  lajjino  rakkbissanti 
ti  tikkbattum  vacam  niccbaresum. 

Evara  Majjbimadese  pi  abijjipuggala  babu  santi  ti 
veditabba. 

Parinibbanato  bi  bbagavato  vassasatanam  upari  pubbe- 
vuttanayen'  eva  Vajjiputtaka  l)bikkbil  adbammavattbuni 
dipetva  patbamasamgltikrde  baliikatebi  papabbikkbiilii 
saddbim  mantetva  sabayam  gavesetva  mabasamgitivobarena 
mabatbera  viya  samgitim  akamsu. 

Katva  ca  visum  3  gana  abesura.  Abo  vata  idam'^  basi- 
tabbam  kammam.  Seyyatba  pi  nama  jarasiiigalo  catupadasri- 
maniiena  manam  jai)petva  attanam  sibam  viya  mafinitva 
sibo  viya  sibanadam  nadi  ti  te  pavacanam  yatbabbutam 
ajanitva  saddacbayamattena  yatbabbutam  attbam  nasimsuS; 
Kifici   kinci^   pavacanam   pi   apanesum   tan    ca   sakagane 

^  B.  corrects  to  candavajji"    A.,  S.  and  D.  canda° 
^  D.  omits.         3  B.  omits  visum.         '^  B.  iti. 
5  B.  namasimsu.         "  B.  kanci.    D.  kinci  pi. 


-^        14       H^ 

yeva  hoti  na  dhammavadigane.  Dliammavinayam  vikopetva 
yatli'icchitavasen'  eva  carimsu.  Ayam  pana  Mahasanigiti 
nama.  Eko  adhammavadi  gano  tato  pacclia  kalam 
atikkante  tato  yeva  afifiamafmam  vadato  bhijjitva  Gokuliko 
nama  eko  gano  Ekavyokaro'  nama  eko  ti  dve  gana  bhijjanti^ 

Tato  paccha  Gokulikaganato  yeva  annamanfiam  bhijjitva 
Baliussutiko  nama  eko  gano  Pafmattivado  nama  eko  ti  dve 
gana  bhijjimsu.  Puna  pi  tehi  yeva  ganehi  Cetiyavado 
nama  eko  gano  bhijji.  Tato  paccha  cirakalam  atikkante 
dhammavadigane  hi  visabhagaganam  pavisitva  Mahimsa- 
sako  nama  eko  gano  Yajjiputtako  nama  eko  ti  dve  gana 
bhijjimsu.  Tato  paccha  pi  Vajjiputtakaganato  yeva  aiiha- 
mahuain  bhijjitva  3  Dhammuttariko  nama  eko  gano 
Bhaddayaniko  nrima  eko  gano  Channagririko*  nama  eko 
Sammiti^  nama  eko  ti  cattaro  gana  bhijjimsu.  Puna  pi 
Mahimsasakaganato  ahhamahham  bhijjitva  Sabbatthivado^ 
nama  eko  gano  Dhamuiaguttiko7  nama  eko  Kassapiyo  va 
nama  eko  Samkantiko  nama  eko  Suttavado  nama  eko  ti 
pahca  gana  bhijjiiusu. 

Evam  Majjhimadese  dutiyasamgltim  samgayantanam 
mahatheranam  dhammavaditheravadaganato  visum  visum 
bhijjamana  adhammavadigana  sattarasavidha  ahesum.  Te 
ca  adhammavadi  gana  sasane  theraparamparaya  ananto- 
gadha.  Te  hi  sasane  u})akara  na  honti  therai)aramparaya 
ca  pavesetva  ganitum  na  sakka.  Yatha  hamsagane**  bako^ 
yatha  ca  gogane  gavajo  yatha  ca  suvannagane'°  harakiito"  ti 

Maha-Kassapatheradito  pana  agata  theraparampara 
Upali-Dasako  c'eva  ti  adina  Parivarakhandhake  Samanta- 
pasadikatthakathayah  ca  agatanayen'  eva  veditabba. 

Upalitheradinam  parisuddhacaradmi  anumanetva  yava 
Moggahputta-Tissa-thero"  tava  tesam  theranam  jjarisuddha- 
caradinl  ti  sakka  hatum. 


'  B.  byotaro.  Min:  Ekabyokaro.  ^  B.  bhijjimsu. 
3  A.  sajjitva.  4  Min:  Chandagariko  s  B.  Chanamutiko. 
A.  Samuddiko.  D.  Samuko.  S.  Samutiko.  '^  B.  Sabbatti" 
7  A.,  B.,  D.,  S.  "kuttiko.  ^  B.  Tathayam  hamsagane. 
9  Min:  baka.  '"  B.  corrects  to  supanna"  ''  D.  kutho. 
"  A.,  B.  and  S.  Hthera. 


->t         15         H$- 

Seyyatha  pi  nadiya  iipari  sote  meghavassanam '  aniima- 
netva  adho  sote  nadiya  udakassa  bahullabhavo  vinfiatum 
sakka  ti  ayam  karananiimauanayo  nama.  Yava  pana 
Moggalipiitta-Tissathero  ^  tava  theranam  parisuddhacara- 
dini  anumanetva  Upalitherassa  parisuddhacaradml  ti  sakka 
natum. 

Seyyatlia  pi  nama  upari  dliiiniam  passitvu  anumanetva 
aggi  atthi  ti  sakka  fiatun  ti  ayam  phalanumananayo  nama. 
Adiblmtassa3  pana  Uprditherassa  avasanabhiitassa  ca 
Moggalipiitta-Tissatherassa  parisuddhacaradini  anumanetva 
majjhe  Dasaka-Sona-Siggavadlnam  theranam  parisuddh- 
acaradini  ti  sakka  natum.  '         - 

Seyyatlia  pi  nama  silapattassa  orabliage  parabhage  ca 
migapadavalanjanam^  disva  anumanetva  majjhe  apakatam 
padavalahjanam  atthi  ti  sakka  natun  ti  ayam  migapada- 
Valaiijananayo  nama.  Evam  tlhi  nayehi  ayam  theravada- 
gano  dhammavadi  hijji  i)esalo  ti  veditabbo.  Evam  upari- 
nayos  netabbo  theraparampara  ca  yava  potthakarulha 
Parivarakkhandhake  Samantapasadikayah  ^  ca  tato  Ma- 
hindo  Ittiyo  ti^  adina  vuttanayena  veditabba  ti. 

Iti  Sasanavamse  navatthanagatasasanavamsakathamaggo 
nama  pathamo  paricchedo. 


Idani  Sihaladipasasanakathamaggaiu  vattum  okaso  anup- 
patto.     Tasma  tarn  vakkhami. 

Sihaladipam  hi  sasanassa  patitthanabhiitatta  cetiyagabbha- 
sadisam  hoti.  Sammasambuddho  kira  Sihaladiijam  dhara- 
manakale  pi  tikkhattum  agamasi.  Pathamam  yakkhanani 
damanatthani "  ekako  va  gantva  yakkhe  dametva  'mayi 
parinibbute  Sihaladipe  sasanam  patitthapissati'  ti  Tamba- 
pannidipe  rakkham"'  karonto'"  tikkhattum  dipam  avihchi". 

^  A.  and  B.  vassani.    D.  °vassam  na. 

'■"  A.  and  B.  thera.         j  D.  adisutassa. 

4  B.  valahjanam.    D.  S.  "ahcanam, 

5  B.  pi  nayo.   A.  uparivinayo.       ^  B.  °pasadikacayah  ca. 
7  A.  and  D.  Itthiyo.         ^  S.  namana° 

9  B.  arakkham.         '"  S.  karonto,         ''  B.  avicchi. 


-^      16      H5- 

Dutiyam  luatiilabhagineyyanani  nagarajunam  damanattliaya 
ekako  va  gantva  te  clametva  agamasi.  Tatiyam  jjanca- 
bhikkliusataparivaro  gantva  Maliacetiyattliane  ca  ThuparE- 
macetiyattliane  ca  Maliabodhipatittliitatthane^  ca  Mahi- 
yauganacetiyattbane  ca  Mutiijganacetiyattbane^  Digbavapi- 
cetiyattbane  caKalyamyacetiyattbane  ca  nirodbasamapattim 
samapajjitva  nisidi. 

Tada  ca  pana  sasanam  ogahetvana  tava  tittbati.  Paccba 
pana  yatbavuttatberaparamparaya  samabbinivittbena  Maba- 
Moggaliputta-Tissatberena  pesito  Maba-Mabindatbero 
jinacakke  paficatimsadbike  dvisate  sampatte  diitiyakatti- 
kamase  Ittiyena-5  Uttiyena  Sambalena  Bbaddasalena  ca  ti 
etebi  tberebi  saddbim^  Sibaladipaiii  agamasi.  Sonuttara- 
ttbeiTidayo  jinacakke  pancatimsadbike  dvisate  sampatte 
dutiyakattikamase  yeva  sasanassa  patittbapanattbaya  attano 
attano  sampattabbarabbiitam  tarn  tarn  tbanam  agamamsu. 

Maba-Mabindatbero  pana  satta  masrini  agametvas  jina- 
cakke cbattimsadbike  dvisate  sampatte  jettbamasassa 
pimnamiyam  Sibaladipam  sasanassa  patittbapanattbaya 
agamasi.  Ten'  eva  tesu  navasu  tbanesu  Slbaladi})am  cba- 
ttiinsadbike  dvisate  agamasi^.  Anfiani  pana  attba  thanani 
paficatimsadbikadvisate  yeva  agamasi  ti  visum  vavattba- 
petabbo.  Kasma  pana  Maba-Mabindatbero  satta  masani 
agametva  sabbapaccba  Sibaladlpaiii  agaccbati  ti?  Tada 
Slbaladipe  Mutaslvo'  nama  raja  jaradubbak)  abosi  sasa- 
nani  paggabetum  asamattbo^.  Tassa  pana  piitto  Devanam 
-piya-Tisso  nama  rajakumaro  dabaro  sasanam  paggabetum 
samattbo  bbavissati.  So  ca  Devanampiya-Tisso  rajjani 
tava  bibbatu  Yedissakagirinagare?  matuya  saddbim  natake 
tava  passami  ti  apekkbitva"'  satta  masani  agametva  cbattira- 
sadbikadvisate  yeva  jinacakke  Maba-Mabindatbero  Sibala- 
dipam gacchati  ti  veditabbam. 


2 


A.  patittbitattbrinattbane. 

A.  and  I).  Mudiyangana°  Mudiiigana" 
3  A.  and  D.  Ittbiyena.         '^  S.  =  pe  =  mase. 
5  A.  agamitva.  °  Min:  asamasi.  t  first  Buddba" 

**  A.  asamasattbo.         '->  S.  corr.  Vetisaka" 
'°  B.  avekkbitva. 


-^     17     f^ 

Maha-Maliindathero  ca  Ittiyadlhi  therelii  catulii  bhagi- 
neyyena-Siimana-samanerena  Bhandukena  nama  upasakena 
ca  ti  etehi  saddliim  chattimsadliike  dvisate  jinacakke 
jettliamasassa^  punnamiyam  suvannahamsa  viya  jetthamase 
nabham  uggantva  akasamaggena  Anuradhapurassa  piirat- 
thimadisabhage  Missakapabbatakute  patittbasi. 

Jetthamasassa  ca  punnamiyam  Lankadipe  jettbamiila- 
nakkbattasabba  butva  manussa  cbanam^  akamsu.  Ten' 
ev'  aba  Sarattbadlj)aiiiyain  nama  Yinayatikayam:  Jettba- 
masassa  punnamiyam  j  ettbanakkbattam  midanakkbattam 
va  boti  ti.  Tattba  ca  punnaminakkbattam  iTijamattan  te^ 
punnammakkbattavicarananayena'^  vuttan  ti  dattbabliam. 
Devanam-piya-Tisso  ca  raja  nakkbattam  nama  gbosapetva 
cbanam  karetba  ti  amacce  anapetva  cattalisapurisasabassa- 
parivaro  nagaramba  nikkbamitva  yena  Missakapabbato 
tena  payasi  migavam  kilitukamo.  Atba  tasmim  pabbate 
adbivattba  eka  devata  migarupena  rajanam  palobbetvas 
pakkositva  tberassa  abbimuldiam  karoti^.  Tbero  rajanam 
agaccbantam  disva  mamam  yeva  raja  passatu  ma  itare  ti 
adhittbabitva  Tissa  Tissa  ito  ebi  ti  aba.  Raja  tani  sutva 
cintesi:  imasmim  dipe  jato  sakalo  pi  manusso  mam  Tisso 
ti  namani  gabetva  alapitum  samattbo  nama  nattbi.  Ayam 
pana  cbinnabbinnapatadbaro  bbandukasavavasano  mam 
namena  alapati.  Ko  nu  kbo  ayam  bbavissati  manusso  v;i 
amanusso  va  ti.     Tliero  aba: 

Samana  mayam  mabaraja 
Dbammarajassa  savaka 
Taveva7  anukarapaya^ 
JambudipS,  idbagata  ti. 

Tada  ca  Devanampiya-Tisso  raja.  Asokaranna  pesitena 
abbisekena     ekamasabbisitto     boti  ?     visakbapunnamayam 


^  S.  A.  and  B.  °masa.         ^  D  munassa  nam. 
3  Sic  318 S.     Min:  ntande.         4  B.  °nakkbattam° 
5  B.  palopetva.         ^  B.  akasi.         7  Min:  tarn  eva. 
^  S.  Taveva  anukammaya.         9  B.  abosi. 

Sasana-Vamsa.  2 


-^         18        H$- 

hi'ssa  abhisekam  akamsu.  So  ca  Asokaraniia  pesite 
(Ihammapannakare  ratanattayagunapatisamyuttam  sasana- 
pavattim  acirasutam^  anussaramano  tarn  therassa:  Samana 
may  am  maharaja  Dhammarajassa  savaka  ti  vacanam  sutva 
ayya  nu  kho  agata  ti  tavad  eva  a\Tidham  nikkhipitva 
ekamantam  nisidi  sammodaniyam  katham  kathayamano. 
—  Yath'  aha: 

A\aidham  nikkhipitvana  ekamantam  upavisi 
Nisajja  raja  sammodi  balium  atthupasamhitan  ti-. 

Sammodaniyam  katham  ca  kurumane  yeva  tasmim  tani 
pi  cattallsapurisasahassani  agantva  samparivaresuniJ, 

Tada  thero  itare  pi  cha  jane  dassesi+.  Raja  disva  ime 
kada  agata  ti  aha. 

Maya  saddhim  yeva  maharaja  ti. 

Idani  pana  Jamhudlpe  ahhe  pi  evarupa  samana  santi  ti. 

Santi  maharaja  etarahi  Jambudlpo  kasavapajjoto  isivata- 
pativato  tasmim  — 

Tevijja  iddhipatta  ca  cetopariyayakovida 
Khlnasava  arahanto  bahfi  buddhassa  savaka  ti. 

Bhante  kena  agat'atthas  ti. 

Neva  maharaja  udakena  na  thalena  ti. 

Raja  akasena  agata  ti  aiihasi.  Thero  atthi  nu  kho  raiino 
pahnaveyyattikan  ti  vimarnsanatthaya  asannam  ambarukkham 
arabbha  pahham  pucchi. 

Kin  namo  maharaja  ay  am  rukkho  ti.  ' 

Ambarukkho  niima  bhante  ti. 


^  B.  acirabhutam. 
^  A.  atthupasahnitan. 
5  A.  sampavaressum. 

4  Min:  dasseti. 

5  D.  agatatta. 


-^     19     f<- 

Imam  pana  maharaja  ambam  muiicitva  anno  ambo  atthi 
va  n  atthi  va  ti. 

Atthi  bhante  aiine  pi  bahu  ambanikkha  ti. 

Imah    ca    amban   te    ca   ambe   muiicitva   atthi   nu   kho 
maharaja  ahhe  rukkha  ti. 

Atthi  bhante  te  pana  na  ambarukkha  ti. 

Anne  ca  ambe   anambe   ca  muiicitva  atthi   pana  anno 
rukkho  ti. 

Ayam  eva  bhante  ambarukkho  ti. 

Saclhu  maharaja   pandito   'si  ti.     Atthi   pana  maharaja 
te  hataka  ti. 

Atthi  bhante  bahujana  ti. 

Te  muhcitva  ahhe  keci  ahhataka  pi  atthi  maharaja  ti. 

Auhataka  bhante  hatakehi'  bahutara  ti. 

Tava  natake  ca  annatake   ca  muhcitva   atth'anho   koci 
maharaja  ti. 

Aham^  eva  bhante  ti. 

Sadhu  maharaja  atta  nama  attano  neva  hatako  na 
anhatako  ti. 

Atha  thero  pandito  raja  sakkhissati  dhammam  ahnatun 
ti  Culahatthipadopamasuttam  kathesi. 

Kathripariyosane  raja  tisu  saranesu  patitthahi  saddhim 
cattalisaya  janasahassehl^  ti. 

Tato  param  yam  yam  vattabbam  tarn  tarn  Samanta- 
pasadikadlsu  vuttanayena  veditabbaiu. 

Iccevam  Sihaladipe  sasananuggahaka  Mahindatherato 
agata  sissaparampara  bahu  honti  gananapatham  vitivatta. 
Katham  ?  Maha  -  Mahindatherassa  sisso  Arittho  nama 
thero,  tassa  sisso  Tissadatto  +,  tassa  sisso  Kalasumano,  tassa 
sisso  Digho,  tassa  sisso  Dighasumano,  tassa  sisso  Kala- 
sumano s,  tassa  sisso  Nago,  tassa  sisso  Buddharakkhito, 
tassa  sisso  Tisso,  tassa  sisso  Revato,  tassa  sisso  Sumano, 
tassa  sisso  Ciilanago,  tassa  sisso  Dhammapalito^,  tassa 
sisso  Khemo,  tassa  sisso  Upatisso,  tassa  sisso  Phussadevo, 


I  Min;  natake  ti.         -  D.  A.  ayam. 

^  Min:  panasahassehi.         ^  A.  Tissadattho. 

5  A.  Valasumano.         '^  D.  Tisso. 


^-     20     Hg- 

tassa  sisso  Sumano,  tassa  sisso  Mahapadumo,  tassa  sisso 
Mahasivo,  tassa  sisso  Upali,  tassa  sisso  Mahanago,  tassa 
sisso  Abhayo,  tassa  sisso  Tisso,  tassa  sisso  Sumano,  tassa 
sisso  Culabhayo,  tassa  sisso  Tisso',  tassa  sisso  Culadevo, 
tassa  sisso  Sivo  ti.  Ayani  yaya  potthakarulhasankhata 
catuttliasamgltika  tava  theraparampara  ti  datthabba. 
Yuttam  c'etam  Atthakathayam:  Yavajjatana  tesam  yeva 
anteviisikaparamparabhutaya  acariyaparamparaya  abha- 
tan^  ti  veditabban  ti. 

Evam  tesam  sissaparamparabhuta  acariyaparampara 
yavajjatana  sasane  pakata  hutva  agacchanti  ti  veditabbam. 
Sasane  vinayadharehi  j  nama  tilakkhanasampannehi  bbavi- 
tabbam.     Tini  hi  vinayadharassa  lakkhanani  icchitabbani. 

Katamani  tini?  Suttam  c'assa  svagatam  hoti.  Suva- 
vatthitam"^  suvinicchitam  suttato  anuvyanjanato  ti  idam 
ekam  lakkkanam. 

Vinaye  kbo  pana  tbito  boti  asamhiro  ti  idam  dutiyam. 
Acariyaparampara  kbo  pan'assa  suggabita  hoti  sumanasi- 
kata  supadharita  tis  idam  tatiyam. 

Tattba  acariyaparampara  kbo  jian'  assa  suggabita  hoti 
ti  theraparampara  sissaparampara^  c'assa  sutthu  gahita 
hoti  sumanasikata  ti  sutthu  manasikata  avajjitamatte  ujja- 
Htapadipo  viya  hoti. 

Supadharita  ti  sutthu  upadharita  pubbaparanusandhito 
atthato  karanato  ca  upadharita  attano  matim  pahaya 
acariyasuddhiya  vutta  hoti.  Mayham  acariyo  asukacariyassa 
santike  ugganhi  so  asukassa  ti  evam  sabbam  acariya- 
paramparatheravadangam  ilharitva  yava  Upalithero  samma- 
sambuddhassa  santike  ugganhi  ti  papetva  thapeti.  Tato  pi 
aharitva  Upalithero  sammasambuddhassa  santike  ugganhi, 
Dasakathero  attano  upajjhayassa  Upalitherassa,  Sona- 
kathero  attano  upajjhayassa  Dasakatherassa,  Siggavathero 


'  D.  omits.         ^  A.  B.  abhatanti  ti. 

3  A.  Min:  °dharo  hi. 

■»  Min.  atid  B.  supavatti.     D.  suvapatti. 

5  D.  adds  yam. 

^  All  MSS.  saparampara.     Min:  corr.  to  sissa" 


-^         21         H^ 

attano  upajjhayassa  Sonakatherassa ,  Moggaliputta-Tissa- 
thero  attano  upajjhayassa  Siggavatherassa '  Candavajji- 
ttherassa  ca  ti  evam  sabbam  ficariyaparamparatherava- 
daiigam  aharitva  attano  acariyam  pripetva  thapeti.  Evam 
uggahita  hi  acariyaparampara  suggahita  hoti.  Evam 
asakkontena  pana  dve  tayo  parivatta  uggahetabba.  Sabba- 
pacchimena  hi  nayena  yatha  acariyo  ca  acariyacariyo  ca 
palin  ca  paripucchafi  ca  vadanti  tatha  natum  vattati  ti. 
Yathavuttatheraparampara  pana  bhagavato  dharamanakala- 
to  patthaya  yava  potthakarulhiX  mukhapathen'  eva  pitakatta- 
yam  dharesum.  Pariiaunnam  pana  katva  potthake  likhitva 
na  thapenti. 

Evam  mahathera  dukkarakammam  katva  sasanam  pag- 
ganhimsu.     Tatr'  idam  vatthu. 

Sihaladipe  kira  Candalatissabhayeua  saiikhubhitva  -  devo 
ca  avassitva  dubbhikkiiabhayara  uppajji.  Tada  Sakko  de- 
vanam  indo  agantva  tumhe  bhante  tepitakaniJ  dliaretum  na 
sakkhissatha,  navam  pana  aruhitva  Jambudiiiam  gacchatha'*. 
Sace  nava  appahonaka  bhaveyya  kattbena  va  veluna  va 
taratha,    abhayatthaya  pana  mayam  rakkhissama  ti   rdia. 

Tadil  satthimatta  bhikkhil  samuddatlram  gantva  j5una 
etad  ahosi:  mayam  s  Jambudipam  na  gaccbissama  idh'  eva 
vasitva  tepitakam  dharissama  ti.  Tato  paccha  navii  titthato 
nivattitva  Sibaladipekadesam  Malayajanapadam  gantva 
midaphaladilii  eva  yapetva  sajjbayam  akamsu.  Chataka- 
bhayena  atipllita  hutva  evam  pi  katura  asakkonta  valu- 
katale^  uram  thapetva  sisena  sisam  abhimukhani  katva 
vacam  aniccharetva  manasa  yeva  akamsu.  Evam  dvadasa- 
vassani  saddhim  atthakathaya  tepitakam  rakldiitva  sasanam 
anuggahesum. 

Dvadasavassesu  pana  atikkantesii  tain  bhayam  vupa- 
samitva  pubbe  Jamlnidipam  gacchanta  satta  bliikkbusata 
agantva  Sibaladipekadesam  Rrimajanapade  Mandalar- 
amaviharam  apa jj  ini  su. 


'  B.  Siijffa"         ^  B.  saiikhum  bhitva. 


'b 


MSS.  omit  te.         ^  B.  sfaccha  ti. 


b' 


5  S.  D.  yam.         ^  D.  °thale. 


-^     22     f<- 

Te  pi  satthimatta  bhikkhu  tam  eva  viharam  gantva 
annamanfiara  sammantetva^  sajjhayimsu.  Tada  afinamaiifiam 
samenti  ^  na  virujjhanti.  Gaiigodakena  viya  Yamunodakam 
samsandenti.  Evam  pitakattayam  mukhapatlieii'  eva  dha- 
retviX  mahathera  dukkarakammam  karonti  ti  veditabbaniJ. 

Yam  pi  pariyattim  ekapadamattam  pi  avirajjhitva 
dliarenti  tam  dukkarakammam  eva,  Sihaladipe  kira 
Pumiabbasukassa  nama  kutumbiyassa  putto  Tissathero 
buddhavacanam  iigganbitva  imam  Jambudipam  agantva 
Yonaka-Dhammarakkhitatherassa  santike  buddhavacanam 
ugganhitva  gacchanto  navam  abhiruhanatitthe  ekasmim 
pade  uppannakam  kho  yojanasatamaggam  nivattitva  aca- 
riyassa  santikam  agaccbanto  antaramagge  ekassa  kutum- 
bikassa  pai"ibam4  kathesi.  So  pasiditva  satasabassagghana- 
kam  kambalam  adasi.  So  pi  tam  aharitva  acariyassa 
adasi.  Thero  vasiyil  kottetvas  nisidanattbane  paribhandam 
karesi.  Kim  atthayS  ti?  Pacchimaya  janataya  anugga- 
battbaya.  Evam  kir'assa  abosi:  amhakam  gatamaggam 
avajjitva^  anagate  sabrahmacarino  patipattim/  pure- 
tabbam  mahiiissantl  ti.  Tissathero  pi  acariyassa  santike 
kaiikham  chinditva  Sihaladipam  eva  sakatthanam  agamasi  ti. 

Iccevam  pariyattim  ekapadamattam  pi  avirajjhitva  dha- 
ranam  pi  dukkarakammam  eva  ti  datthabbam. 

Yam  pi  yebhuyyena  pagunam  na  karonti  tassa  anantara- 
dhanatthaya  asammosatthaya  ^  uggahadharanadivasena  rak- 
khanam  pi  karonti  tam  dukkarakammam  eva.  Sihaladipe 
yeva  kira  mahabhaye  ekass'eva  bhikkhuno  mahaniddeso 
paguno  ahosi.  Atthacatunikayika-Tissatberassa  upajjhayo 
Mahatipitakathero  nama  Maharakkhitatheram  aha:  avuso 
Mahfirakkhita  asukassa  santike  Mahaniddesam  ganhabi  ti. 

Papo  kir'ayam  bhante  na  ganhuml  ti.  Ganh'avuso  ahani 
te  santike  nisidissami  ti.    Sadhu  bhante  tumhesu  nisinnesu 


^  A.  B.  sammannetva.         ^  S.  D.  santi. 
3  Min:  veditabba.         •*  Min.  and  A.  pahham. 
5  B.  corrects  to  vasiLa  kqttetva.     A.  casiya  kottetva. 
D.  kotthetva.         ^  A.  B.  Apajjitva. 

7  D.  patitthapattim.         ^  B.  asammohatthaya. 


-^     23     H5- 

ganhissaml  ti  patthapetva,  rattindivam  nirantaram  pariya- 
punanto  osanadivase  hettlia  mafice  itthim  disva  bhante 
sutam  yeva  me  pubbe:  sac'  aham  evam  janeyyam  na  idi- 
sassa  santike  dbammam  pariyapimeyyan  ti  aha.  Tassa 
pana  santike  bahu  mabathera  ugganbitva  Mahaniddesam 
patittbapesum. 

Evam  yam  yebbuyyena  pagunam  na  karonti  tassa  anan- 
taradbanattbaya  asammosattbaya  uggabadbaranadivasena 
rakkbanam  pi  dukkarakammam  yeva  ti  dattbabbam. 

Iccevam  bbagavato  dbaramanakalato  pabbuti  cirakalam 
yatbavuttamabatheraparampara  pariyattim  mukbapatben' 
eva  dbaresum. 

Abo  vata  poranikanam  mabatberanam  satipaniia  samadbi- 
vepullataya^  bi  te  mukbapatben'  eva  dbriretum  sakkil  ti. 
Mukbapatben'  eva  poranikatberanam  pariyattidbaranam  pan- 
canavutadhikani  catusatani  abosi.  Bbagavato  parinibba- 
nato  Mabavamsa-Sarattbasamgabesu  agatanayena  jinacakke 
pannasadbike  catusate  sampatte  Tambapannidipe  rajunam 
attbamako  Saddbatissassa  nama  ranno  putto  Yattagamani 
nama  raja  rajjam  patva  cbavassakale  anagate  satta  bina- 
satipafifiasamadbika  butva  na  sakkbissanti  mukbapatbena 
dbaretun  ti  upaparikkbitva  pubbe  vuttebi  mabatberebi 
anupubbena  agata  pancamatta  mabatberasata  Yattagamani- 
rajanam  nissaya  Tambapannidipe  padese^  Mabiyajanapade 
Alokalene  attbakatbaya  saba  pitakattayam  pottbake  aro- 
pesum.  Tan  ca  yatbavuttasamgltiyo  upanidbaya  catuttba- 
samgiti  yeva  nama  ti  veditabba. 

Yuttam  c'etam  Sarattbadlpaniyam  nama  Yinayatikayam : 

Catuttbasamgitisadisa  bi  pottbakarobasamglti  ti. 

Sibaladlpe  pana  Yattagamaniraja  Marammarattbe  Siri- 
kbettanagare  eko  nama  Kukkutasisaraja  ca  ekakalena 
rajjam  karesi. 

Amarapuramapakassa  ranno  kale  Slbaladipabbikkbiibi 
idba  pesitasandesakatbayam  pana  tettimsadbikacatusate 
sampatte  pottbakanilbam  akamsu  ti  agatam. 


^  B.  vepbullataya.         ^  B.  dipekadese. 


->«     24     HS~ 

Vuttam  h'etam  tattba: 

Tettimsadhikacatuvassasataparimanakalan  ti. 

Idam  Sihaladipe  yava  potthakarulha  sasanassa  pa- 
titthauam. 

Atlvaparam  Jambudipe  Sihaladipe  ca  bhikkbu  visum 
visum  ganavasena  bbijjimsu  yatba  Anottatadabato  ^  nik- 
kbamananadiya  Ganga-Yamunadivasena  bbijjanti  ti.  Tattba 
Jambudipe  gananam  bbijjamanatam  upari  yeva  vakkbama. 
Sibaladipe  pana  gananam  bbijjamanata  evam  dattbabba. 
^  Katbam?  Sibaladipe  sasanassa  patittbapayamanakalato 
attbrirasridbikavassasate  sampatte  Vattagamanlranna  kara- 
pite  Abbayagirivibare  Parivarakbandbakam  patbato  attbato 
ca  vipallasam  katva  Mabrivibaravasiganato  putbu  butva 
eko  gano  bbijji. 

So  Abbayagirivasigano  nama  Dbammarucigano  ti  ca 
tass'  eva  namam. 

Abbayagirivasiganassa  bbijjamanato  dvecattallsadbikati- 
vassasate  sampatte  Mabasenena  nama  ranna  karapite 
Jetavanavibrire  bbikkbii  ubbato  Vibbangapatbe  viparita- 
vasena  abbisankbaritva  Abbayagirivasiganato  visum  eko 
gano  abosi. 

So  Jetavanavasigano  nama  Sagaliyagaiio  ti  ca  tass'  eva 
namam. 

Jetavanavasiganassa  bbijjamrinakalato  ekavassadbikanara 
tinnam  vassasatanam  upari  Kurundavasino  Kolambavasino 
ca  bbikkbii  bbagineyya-Datbripatim  nama  rajanam  nissaya 
ubbato  Vibbanga  - Parivarakbandbakapatbe  viparitavasena 
abbisankbaritva  yatbavuttebi  dvibi  ganebi  visum  butva 
Mabavibaravasiganuttamam  tulayitva  upacaretva  Maba- 
vibaranamam  gabetva  eko  gano  bbijji. 

Evam  Sibaladipe  Maba-Mabindatberadinam  vam?abbii- 
tena  Mabavibaravasiganena  saddbim  cattaro  gana  bbijjimsu. 
Tattba  Mabavibaravasigano  yeva  eko  dbammavadi  abosi. 
Sesil  pana  adbammavadino.  Te  ca  pana^  adbammavadino 
gana  bbiitattbam  pabaya  abbiitattbena  dbammara  agarum 
katva  carimsu  ti  vacanato  Sibaladipe  adbammavadino  tayo 


'  B.  Anodatta"         ^  Min:  tayo. 


->t     25     f<- 

pi  alajjino  gana  parimandalasuppaticliannadi  sikkliapadani 
anadiyitva  vicarirasu.  Tato  patthn^ya  sasane  ekaccanam 
bhikkhtinam  nanappakriravasena  nivasanaparupanadlni  dis- 
santl  ti  veditabbam. 

Adhammavadigananam  bbijjamrmakrilato  sattavisadbi- 
kaiiam  pancasatanam  vassasabassanan  ca  upari  Sirisam- 
ghabodbi  nama  raja  MabavibSraganassa  pakkbo  butva 
adbammavadino  tayo  gane  nigganbitva'  jinasasanam  pagga- 
besi.  So  ca  Sirisamgbabodbiraja  ambakam  Marammarattbe 
Arimaddananagare  Anuriiddbena  nama  ranna  samakrda- 
vasena  rajjasampattim  anubbavi.  Tato  paccba  Sibaladipe 
Vobaratissassa  nama  ranno  kale  Kapilena  nama  amaccena 
saddbim  mantetva  Mabavibaravasino  bbikkbii  nissaya 
adbammavadigane    nigganbitva    jinasasanam    pagganbasi. 

Tato  paccba  ca  Gotbabbayassa  nama  ranno  kale 
Abbayagirivasino  bbikkbu  parasamuddam  pabbajetva 
Mabavibaravasino  bbikkbu  nissaya  sasanam  visodbayi. 
Tato  paccba  pi  Gotbabbayaranno  puttabbutassa  Maba- 
senassa  nama  ranno  kale  Abbayagirivasinam  bbikklmnam 
abbbantare  Samgbamitto  nama  eko  bbikkbu  ranno  pa- 
dbanacariyo  butvil  Maba-Mabindatberadinam  arabant- 
anarp.  nivasattbanabbutam  Mabavibararamam  vinassituni 
Mabiilsenaranna  mantetva  arabbi. 

Tada  nava  vassani  Mabavibaro  bbikkbusunno  ^  abosi. 

Abo  vata  mabatberanam  mabiddbikanam  nivasanattba- 
nam  j  alajjino  bbikkbii  vinassapesuni  suvannabamsanam 
nivasanattbanam  kaka  viya  ti. 

Jetavanavasinaii  ca  bbikkbimam  abbbantare  eko  Tisso 
nama  bbikkbu  ten'  eva  ranna  mantetva  Mabavibare  simam 
samiibani.  Acbekatta  pana  tesam  simasamubanakammam 
na  sampajji  ti. 

Abo  vata  dussllauam  papakanam  kammara  accbariyam. 

Seyyatba  pi  nama  sakbamigo  appaggbo  kasivatthani 
mabaggbam  l)bindati. 

^  A.  niggabetva.  ,  ,        ;     .      , 

^  B.  bbikkbu  sanno. 

3  A.  and  B.  nivasattbanara. 


"^      26      ^<r- 

Evam    eva    bhinditabbavatthuna    bhedakapuggalo '    ati- 
viya  duro  ahosi  ti. 
Bhavanti  c'ettha: 

Yatha  sakbamigo  papo  appaggho  yeva  kasikam 
Mabaggbam  kaccbacbinnamcbinnam^  mabussabena 

cbindati. 
Evam  adbammavadi  papo 
Dbammavadiganain  subbam 
MabussiXbena  bbindayi 
Abo  accbariyo  ayam. 

Araka  durato  asum 
BbinditabbebiJ  bbedaka 
Bbumito'  va*  bbavagganto  (?) 
Abo  kammam  ajanatans  ti. 

Iccevam^  adbammavadigananam  balavataya  dbamma- 
vadigano  paribayati.  Yatba  bi  gijjbasakunassa  pakkba- 
vatena  suvannabamsa  pakatiya  tbatum  na  sakkonti  evam 
eva  adbammavadinam  balavataya  dbammavixdi  paribayati. 
Byaggbavane7  viya  suvannamigo  niliyitva*  gocaram  ganbati 
yatba  rucivasena  dbammam  caritum  okasam  na  labbi. 

Sibaladipe  sasanassa  patittbanato  dvisattatadhikanam 
catusatanam  vassasabassanan  ca  upari  sammasambuddbassa 
parinibbanato  attbasattatadbikanam?  vassasatanam  upari 
Mabaraja  nama  bbiipalo  rajjam  karesi.  So  pana  raja 
Udumbaragirivasi.  Kassapattberapamukba  Mabavibarava- 
sino  bbikkbu  tani  eva  rajanam  nissaya  sasane  malain 
visodbesum.  Yatba  beranniko  biranne  malan  ti  Maba- 
vibaravasiganato  anne  adbammavadino  uppabbajetva  vi- 
sodbesum.     So    ca    Mabaraja    ambakam   Marammarattbe 


*  B.  vattbam  na  bbedakam  puggalo. 
2  D.  kacca  jinnarajinnara.     A.  (md  B.  kacca  cbiunam- 
cbinnam.         3  A.  cbindital^bebi.         ^  S.  pabba  va° 
5  A.  D.  S.  janatan  ti.         ^  B.  Iccetam. 
7  Min:  vyaggbavasena.         ^  B.  nikiyitva. 
''  B.  attbasatadbikanam. 


-^     27     -^ 

Arimaddananagare  Narapati'-can-na-su-na  nama   ranna 
samakalavasena  rajjam  karesi  ti  veditabbo. 

Tato  paccha  pi  Vijayabahurajanam  Parakkamabaliu- 
rajanan  ca  nissaya  Maliaviharavasino  bhikkhu  sasanam 
parisuddham  akamsu.  Adhammavadino  sabbe  pi  uppabba- 
jetva  Mahavibaravasigano  yeva  eko  patitthahi.  Yatha 
abbhadi-upakkilesamalehi  vimutto  nisanatho  ti. 

Sirisamgbabodhiraja  Voharika  -  Tissaraja  Gotbabbaya 
raja  ti  ete  rajano  sasanam  visodbenta  pi  sabbena  sabbam 
adbammavadigananam  avinassanato  sasanam  parisuddbam 
na^  tava  abosi.  Sirisamgbabodbimabarafmo  Mabriraimo 
Vijayabahuraiiiio  Parakkamabriburauno  ti  etesam  yeva 
rajunam  krde  sabbena  sabbam  adbammavadinam  vinassa- 
natO'^  sasanam  parisuddbam  abosi.  Tada  pana  adbamma- 
vadino  sisam  pi  uttbabitum  na  sakka  yatba  arunuggamane 
kosiya  ti.  Aparabbage  pana  ciram  kalam  atikkante  mic- 
cbixdittbikanam  vijatiyanam  (?)  bbayena  Laiikadipe  sasanam 
osakkitva  ganapuranamattassa  pi  bbikkbusamgbassa  avijja- 
manataya  Mahavijayabrdmranno  kale  Ramafifiadesato 
samgbam  anetva  sasanam  patittbripesi.  Tato  paccba  ca 
Yimaladbammasuriyassa  nama  ranno  kale  Eakkbanga- 
purarattbato'*  samgbam  anetva  sasanam  patittliapesi.  Tato 
paccba  ca  Vimalassa  nama  ranno  kale  tato  yeva  samgbam 
anetva  sasanam  patittbripesi. 

Tato  paccba  ca  Kittissirirajasibassa  nama  ranno  kale 
Siyamarattbato  samgbam  anetva  tatli'  eva  akasi  ti. 

Ayam  Sibaladipe  sasanassa  osakkanakatba. 

Tato  paccba  jinasasane  navutadbike  attbavassasate  sam- 
patte  Buddbadasassa  nama  rafmo  krde  eko  dbammakathi- 
katbero  tbapetva  Yinayapitakam  Abbidbammapitakan  ca 
avasesam  Suttantapitakam  Sibalabbasaya  parivattitva  abbi- 
saiikbaritva  tbapesi.     Tan  ca  karanam  Culavamse  vuttam. 

Tassa  kira  Buddbadasassa  rafmo  putta  asitimatta  asiti 
mabasavakanam  namen'  eva  vobarita'besum. 


'  B.  Narapatiranna  suna.  Min:  Narapati  ca  Xa-su-na. 
2  D.  omits.  J  D-  vinayassanato.  B.  corrects  to  above. 
4  D.  S.  Bakkbapura^ 


-^     28     H^ 

Tesu  puttesu  Sariputtatherassa  namena  voharito  eko 
Upatisso  nama  rajakumaro  pitari  devam  gate  dvecattalisa 
vassani  rajjam  kfiresi.  Tato  paccha  kanittho  Malianamo 
nama  rajakumriro  dvasiti  vassani  rajjam  karesi.  Tassa  ranfio 
kale  jinacakke  tettiinsadhikanavuti  vasse  Slhaladipe  cha- 
sattbimattanam  rajunam  puranakale  Buddhaghoso  nama 
tliero  Sihaladlpam  gantva  Silialabhasaya  likhite  attha- 
kathagandhe  Magadhabhasaya  parivattitva  likbi.  So  pana 
Mabanamaraja  amhakam  Marammarattbe  Siripaccaya- 
nagare  Sa-na-la-nab-kro-nab  ^  namakena  rafina  samakalo 
butva  rajjam  karesi.  Parittanidane  pana  Bru-mam-ti^ 
namakena  ranna  samakrdo  butva  rajjam  karesi  ti  vuttam. 

Tani  na  yujjati  yeva. 

Sibaladipe  pana  Kittissirimegbo  nama  raja  butva  navame 
vasse  tasmim  yeva  dipe  rajunam  dvasattbimattanani  pura- 
nakrde  jinacakke  timsadbike  attbasatavasse  Jambudipe 
Krdingapurato  Kubasivassa^  nama  ranfio  jamata  Danta- 
kumaro  Hemamalan  nama  rajadbitaram  gabetva  datba- 
dbatum  tbenetva  navaya  taritva  Sibaladlpani  agamasi. 
Jinacakke  timsadbikadvivassasate  Jettbatissaraja  nava 
vassani  rajjam  kriresi  Buddbadasaraja  ektinavisativassani 
Upatissaraja  ca  dvicattalisavassani  Mabanamaraja  dva- 
visati  vassani  ti  sabbani  sampinditva  jinasasanam  dvattim- 
sadbikanavavassasatapamanam  boti.  Tasmifi  ca  kale 
yada  dvibi  vassebi  imam  abosi  tada  Mabanamaraiino  krde 
timsadbikanavavassasatamatte''  sasane  Buddbagboso  nama 
tbero  Laiikadipam  agamasi. 

Amarapuramapakassa  raiirio  kale  Sibaladipakebis  bbik- 
kbubi  pesitasandesapanne  pana  cbapannasadbikanava- 
vassasatatikkantesii  ti  vuttam. 

Evam  ettba  tbatva  Buddbagbosatberassa  attbuppattim 
sankbepamattam*^  vakkbami.     Katbam? 


'  D.  Na-la-nrdi-kro-iiah.    A.  San-lan-krom.    B.  Sa-vu  laii 
kro  vu.       ^  B.  Bru-mam-tbi.    B.  Bru-ma-iudi-tbi.    A.  °tblb. 
3  B.  Kubassivassa.     Min:  Gubasibassa. 
■*  all  Jl/SS.  °navutivassamatte.         5  Min:   Siludadipe. 
^  B.  sankbetamattam. 


-^        29        r<- 

Silialabhasakkharehi  parivattitam  pariyattisasanam  Ma- 
gadhabhasakkliarena  ko  naiiia  puggalo  parivattitum  sakkhis- 
sati  ti  mahathera  nimantayitva  Tavatimsabhavanam  gantva 
(jrhosam  nama  devaputtam  disva  saddhiin  Sakkena  devanam 
indena  tarn  yacitvS  bodhirukkhasamipe  Ghosagame  Ke- 
sassa  nama  brabmanassa  Kesiya  nama  brabmaniya 
kuccbimbi  patisandbim  ganbapesum. 

Kbadatba  bbonto  pivatba  bbonto  ti  adi  biTibmananam 
aiinamannani  gbosakale  vijiXyauatta  Gboso  ti  namam  akasi. 
Sattavassikakale  so  tinnani  vedanam  paragu  abosi,  Atba 
kbo  ekena  arabantena  saddbim  vedakatbam  sallapanto  tarn 
katbam  nittbapetva  kusala  dbamma  akusala  avyakata 
dbammii  ti  adina  paramattbam  vedam  nama  buddba- 
mantam  puccbi.  Tada  so  tarn  sutva  ugganbitukamo  butva 
tassa  arabantassa  santike  pabbajitva  devasikam  devasikam 
pitakattayam  sattbimattebi  padasahassebi  sajjbayam  akasi. 
Yacuggatam  akasi.  Ekamasen'  eva  tinnam  pitakanam 
priragu  abosi.  Tato  paccba  rabo  ekako  va  nisinnassa  etad 
abosi:  Biiddbabbasite  pitakattaye  mama  va  panna  adbika 
udabu  upajjbayassa  va  ti.  Tarn  kriranam  natva  upajjba- 
cariyo  niggabam  katva  ovadi.  So  samvegapatto  butva 
kbamapetuni  vandi.  Upajjbacariyo  tvam  avuso  Sibaladlpam 
gantva  pitakattayam  Sibalabbasakkbarena  Kkbitam  Maga- 
dbabbasakkbarena  likbabi  evam  sati  abam  kbamissami  ti 
aba.  Buddbagboso  ca  pitaram  miccbadittbibbavato  mo- 
cetva  acariyassa  vacanam  sirasa  patiggabetva  pitakattayain 
bkbitum  Sibaladipam  navaya  agamasi^ 

Tada  samuddamajjbe  tibi  divasebi  taranto  Buddba- 
dattatbero  ca  Sibaladipato  navaya  agaccbanto  antara- 
magge  devrmam  anubbavena  afinamannam  passitva  karanam 
puccbitva  janitva  janitva  ca  Buddbadattatbero  evam  aba: 

Maya  avuso  kato  Jinalamkriro  appasaro  ti  maunitva 
pitakattayam  parivattitum  likbitum  okasam  nadamsu. 
Tvam  pana  pitakattayam  samvannebi  ti  vatva  attano 
Sakkena  devanam  indena  dinnam  baritakipbalam  ayomaya- 
lekbanadandam  nisitasilaii  ca  Buddbagbosatberassa  adasi. 


Min:  agamasi. 


-^     30     f^ 

Evam  tesam  dvinnam  theranam  anfiamanfiain  sallapan- 
tanam  yeva  dve  nava  sayam  eva  apanetva  gacchimsu. 
Buddhaghosatbero  ca  Sihaladlpam  patva  pathamam  Sam- 
ghapalatheram  passitva :  pitakattayam  Magadhablifisak- 
kliarena  parivattetum  agato  'mhi  ti  karanam  arocetva 
Silialabliikkhu  ca  sile  patittbaya  ti  adi  gatbam  niyyadetva 
imissa  gatbaya  attbam  pitakattayam  aloletva  samvannebi 
ti  uyyojesum. 

Tasmim  yeva  divase  sayanbakalato  pattbaya  yatba  vutta- 
gatbam  pamukbam  katva  Visuddbimaggam  akasi.  Katva 
tam  kammam  nippbadetva^  tassa  fianapabbavam  vimam- 
setukamo  devanam  indo  tan  ca  gandbam  antaradbapesi. 
Puna  pi  tbero  akasi.  Tatb'  eva  devanam  indo  antara- 
dbapesi. Puna  pi  tbero  akasi.  Evam  tikkbattum  kara- 
petva^  pubbagandbe  pi  dassesi^  tinnam  pi  gandbanam 
afmamaimara  ekapadamattena  pi  visesata  nattbi  Samgbapa- 
latbero  ca  tam  aradbayitva  pitakattayam  niyyadesi.  Evam 
Visuddbimagge  Samgbaprdatberassa  ayacanam'*  arabbba 
Visuddbimaggo  kato  ti  agatam. 

Buddbagbosuppattikatbayam  pana  Samgbarajatberassa 
ayacanam  arabbba  ti  agatam. 

Ayam  Buddbagbosuppattikatbayam  agatanayena  dassita- 
Buddbagbosuppattikatbasankbepo. 

Culavamse  pan'  evam  agato.  Buddbagbosatbero  nama 
mababodbirukkbasamipe  ekasmim  brabmanagame  vijato 
tinnam  pi  vedanam  paragu  abosi.  Tesu  tesu  vadesu  ca 
aticbeko.  So  annebi  ca  saddbirn  puccbavyakaranakammam 
kattukamo  Jambudipatale  abindanto  ekam  vibaram  patva 
tasmim  va  agantukabbavena  nisidi.  Tasmin  ca  vibare 
Eevato  nama  tbero  vasi.  Tena  tberena  saddbirn  saUapanto 
so  brabmanamanavo  tisu  vedesu  aloletva  panbam  puccbi. 
Puccbitam  puccbitam  tbero  vyakasi.  Tberassa  pana  puc- 
cbitam  panbam  maiiavo  na  sakka  vyakatum.  Atba 
manavo  puccbi:  Ko  namayam  bbante  manto  ti.     Buddba- 


'  D.  nippa"         ^  B.  antaradbapetva. 

3  A.  corrects  to  dasse  pi.         ■*  A.  B.  yacanam. 


-^i      31       H5- 

manto  namriyan  ti  vutte  ugganliitukamo  hutva  therassa 
santike  pabbajitva  pitakattayam  ugganlii.  Aciren'  eva 
tinnam  pi  pitakanam  paragu  ahosi.  Buddhass'  eva  ghoso 
yassa  atthi  ti  Biiddhaghoso  ti  namena  pakato  ahosi. 
Buddhaghoso  ca  ayasmato  Revatassa  santike  nisidanto 
Nanodayan  nama  gandham  Atthasalinin  ca  gandham  akasi. 
Tato  paccba  parittattliakatham  kattukamo  hutva  arabhi. 
Tada  acariyo  evam  aha: 

Jambudiiie  pana  avuso  palimattam  yeva  atthi  attha- 
katha*  pana  natthi.  Acariyavado  ca  bhinno  hutvil  atthi. 
Ten'  eva  Maha-Mahindatherena  anlta  atthakatha  tisu  ca 
saingitisu  aruiha  paliyo  Sariputtatheradihi  desito  kathamaggo 
Sihaladipe  atthi. 

Tvam  gantva  Magadhabhasakkharena  likhahi  ti^  uyyoji- 
yamano  Buddhaghosathero  Sihaladipam  gantva  Anura- 
dhapure  Mahaviharam  pavisitva  Samghapalatherassa  santike 
saddhim  Sihalatthakathaya  theravade  sutva  atthakatham 
karissami  ti  arocesi.  Sihalabhikkhu  ca  pubbe  vuttanayen' 
eva  sile  patitthaya  ti  adi  gatham  niyyadesum.  Buddha- 
ghoso ca  saddhim  atthakathaya  pitakattayam  samkhipitva 
Visuddhimaggam  akasi. 

Pubbe  vuttanayen'  eva  Sakko  antaradhapetva  tikkhattum 
karapesi.  Samghapalathero  pi  aradhayitva  pitakattayam 
niyyadesi  ti. 

Iviiica  pi  nanagandhesu  nanakarehi  Buddhaghosuppatti 
agata.  Tatha  pi  Buddhaghosatherassa  Sihaladipam  gantva 
pitakattayassa  likhanam-3  atthakathanah  ca  karanam  eva 
pamanan  ti  manokilittham  na  uppadetabban  ti  Buddha- 
ghosathero pitakattayam  likhitva  Jambudipam  paccaga- 
masi^. 

Iccevam    palibhasaya    pariyattim   parivattitvas   paccha 
acariyaparamparasissanusissavasehi "  Sihaladipe  jinacakkam 
majjhantikamsumali    viya    atidibbati.     Anekakotipamanehi 


6 


'  A.  D.  atthakathaya.     B.  atthakathayo. 
-  B.  likheiil  ti.     D.  °hi  tain.         ^  A.  linam. 
<  A.  D.  pacchagamasi.         s  A.  parivattetva. 
^  A.  pabbajja.         7  All  MSS.  hut  D.  sissavasehi. 


~>-        32        r<^ 

sotapanna-sakadagami-anagami-araliantehi  Lankadlpam  ati- 
sobliati  sabbapaliphullena  tiyojanakaparicliattakarukkhena 
Tavatimsabbavanam  viva  sabapattapadumadibi^  mabapok- 
kbaranl  viya  tesu  tesu  tbanesu  maggamabamaggaapa- 
nagbaradvaratittbavanapabbatagubamandiravibarasriladlsu 
aladdbamaggapbalattbanan  nama  kifici  nattbi  tbokam  aga^ 
metva  pindaya  tittbamanapadese  pi  maggapbalani  kibbimsu 
yeva.  Maggapbalani  saccbikarontanam  puggalanam  babulla- 
taya  ay  am  putbujjano  ay  am  putbujjano  ay  am  putbujjano 
ti  aiiguHm  pasaretva  dassetabbo  boti.  Ekasmim  kale 
Sibaladipe  piitbujjanabbikkbu  nama  n'attbi. 

Tatba  bi  vuttam  Vibbangattbakatbayam: 

Ekavaram  piitbujjanabbikkbu  nama  nattbi  ti. 

Abbinnalabblnam  kira  mabiddbikanam  gamanagamana- 
vasena  suriyobbasam  alabbitva  dbannakottaka^  matugama 
dbafmam  kottitum  okasam  na  labbimsu.  Devalokato 
Sumanasamanero  dakkbinakkbakam  Sibaladipam  anetva 
tassa  patibariyam  dassanavasena  udakabindtibi  tiyojana- 
satam  sakalam  pi  Laiikadipam  vyapetva  bbagavata  pari- 
bbuttacetiyanganam  viya  butva  navaya  gaccbanta  maba- 
samudde  udakato  nalikeramattam  pi  disva  sakala-Lanka- 
dipam  pujenti.  Maba-Mabindatberassa  santike  Arittbat- 
tberena  saddbim  pancamatta  bbikkbusata  patbaman  tava 
Yinayapitakam  ugganbimsii  ti.  Imebi  karanebi  Laiikadipam 
jinacakkassa  patittbanam  Imtva  varadipan  ti  namam  pati- 
labbi.  Sibaladipe  yeva  pitakattayam  pottbakariilbavasena 
patittbapetva  tato  pacclia  Coranagassa  nama  ramio  kale 
sakala- Laiikadipam  dubbbikkbabbayena  piletva  pitakatta- 
yam dbarenta  bbikkbu  Jambudipani  agamamsu. 

Anagantva  tattb'  eva  tbita  pi  bbikkbii  cbatakabbayena 
piletva  udarapatalam  bandbitva  kuccbim  valukarasimbi 
tbapetva  pitakattayam  dbaresum. 

Kutakannatissassa  ranno  kale  yeva  dubbbikkbabbayam 
vupasamitva  Jambudipato  bbikkbu  puna  gantva^  Sibaladipe 
bi    tbitebi    bbikkbiibi    saddbim    Mabavibrire    pitakattayam 

•    ^  A.  satapatta°         ^  Min:  co7T.  to  °kottbaka. 
3  D.  gatanattha. 


-^       33     K^ 

avirodhapetva  samasamam  katva  thapesum.     Tliapetva  ca 
pana  Slliajadlpe  yeva  suttliu  dharesiim. 

Tatth'  eva  atthakathayo  Buddhaghosathero  Magadha- 
bhasaya  parivattetva  viraci.  Pacclia  ca  yebliuyyena  tatth' 
eva  atthakatha-tlka-anumadhulakkhanaganthigandliantara- 
ni  akamsu. 

Puna  sasanam  nabhe  raviiidu  va  pakatan  ti.  Tattlia 
Buddhavamsatthakatham  Buddliadattathero  akasi.  Iti- 
vuttodana  -  Cariyapitaka-  Thera  -  Therl-Vimanavatthu  -  Peta- 
vatthu - Nettiatthakathayo  ilcariya  -  Dhammapalathero  akasi. 
So  ca  acariya-Dbammapfilathero  Sihaladipassa  samipe 
Damilaratthe  Padaratitthambi  nivasitatta  Sibaladipe  yeva 
samgabetva  vattabbo. 

Patisambbidamaggattbakatbam  Mabanamo  nama  tbero 
akasi.    Mabaniddesattbakatbam  Upaseno  nama  tbero  akasi. 

Abbidbammatikam  pana  Anandatbero  akasi.  Sa  ca 
sabbasam  tikrmam  adibbiitatta  Mubitlka  ti  pakata. 

Visuddbiinaggassa  mabatlkam ,  Dlgbanikayattbakatbaya 
tikain,  Majjbimanikayattbakatbaya  tikam,  Samyuttanikay- 
attbakatbaya  tikam  sa  ti  imayo  acariya-Dbammaprdatbero 
akasi. 

Sarattbadlpanim  nama  Vinayatikam  Anguttaranikaya- 
tikafi  ca  Parakkama-Baburanna  yacito  Sririputtatbero 
akasi.  Vimativinodanim  nama  Vinayatikam  Damilarattba- 
vasi  Kassapatbero  akasi. 

Anutlkam  pana  acariya  -  Dbammapalatbero.  Sa  ca 
Mulatikaya  anuttanattbani  uttanani  katva  samvannitatta 
anutika  ti  vuccati. 

Visuddbimaggassa  Ciilatikani  Madbudipanifi  ca  aniiatara 
tbera  akanisu. 

Sa  ca  Mulatikaya  attbavasesani  ca  anuttanattbani  utta- 
nani ca  katva  Midatikaya  saddbim  samsauditva  katatta 
madburasatta  ca  Madbudipani  ti  vuccati. 

Mobaviccbedanim  pana  lakkbanagandbam  Kassapatbero 
akasi. 

Abhidbammavataram  pana  Rupavupavibbagam  Vinaya- 
viniccbayau  ca  Buddbadattatbero,  Vinayasamgabam 
Sririputtatbero ,    Kbuddasikkbam   Dbanimasiritbero ,    Para- 

Sasana-Vamsa.  o 


-^        34        r^ 

matthavinicchayam  Namarupapariccheclam  Abhidhamm- 
atthasamgahan  ca  Anuruddhathero,  Saccasaiildiepam 
Dhainmaprilathero,  Khemam  Kliemathero  te  ca  sankliepato 
samvannitatta  sukbena  ca  lakkbaniyatta  lakkbanagandba  ti 
vuccanti. 

Tesam  pana  samvannanasu  Abbidbammattbasamgabassa 
j)oranatikain  Nava-Vimalabuddbitbero  '  akasi,  Sacca- 
s  ankbepa  -  Namarupapariccbeda  -  Kbema  -  Abbidbammavata- 
ranam  poranatikam  Vacissara-Mabasamitbero,  Para- 
mattbaviniccbayassa  poranatikam  Mababodbitbero. 

Abbidbammattbasamgababbidbammavatarabbinavatikayo 
Sumangalasamitbero,  Saccasankbepabbinavatikam  Aramia- 
A'asitbero. 

NamarupapariccbedribbiuavatikamMabasaniitbero,  Para- 
mattbaviniccbayabbinavatikam  annataratbero ,  Vinaya- 
viniccbayatikam  Revatatbero,  Kbuddasikkbaya  puranatlkam 
Mabayasatbero ,  taya  yeva  abbiuavatikam  Samgbarak- 
kbitatbero  ti. 

Vajirabiiddbim  nama  Vinayagantbipadattbam  Yajira- 
buddbitbero. 

Culagai.itbi-Majjbimagantbi-Mabagantbim  ca  Sibaladipa- 
vasino  tbera.  Te  ca  padakkamena  asamvannetva  anuttana- 
ttbane  yeva  samvannitatta  gantbipadattba  ti  vuccanti. 

Abbidbanapadipikam  pana  Maba  -  Moggallanatbero, 
Attbavyakbyanam^  Culabuddbatbero ,  Vuttodayam  Sam- 
bandbacintanam  3  Subodbalamkarafi  ca  Samgbarakkbita- 
tbero. 

Vyakaranaiu  Moggallanatbero,  Mabavamsam,  Ciila- 
vamsam,  Dipavamsani,  Tbiipavamsam,  Bodbivamsam,  Dbatu- 
varasam  ca  Sibaladipavasino  tbera. 

Datbadbatuvamsam  pana  Dbammakittitbero  akasi. 

Ete  ca  palimuttakavasena  vuttatta  gandbantara  ti 
A'uccanti. 

Iccevam  Buddbagbosadayo  tberavara  yatbabalam  yatba- 
sattim  pariyattisasanam  upattbambbetva  babiibi  miilebi 
babubi    sakbahi    babiibi    ca   vitapebi    upattbambbiyamano 


'  B.  03»ifonava.    '  iliAS/S.  Attbavyakkbanam.    3  B.  °cittam. 


-^     35     HS- 

vepiillam    apajjamano    mahanigrodharukklio    viya    tliiram 
liutva  cirakalam  titthati  ti  veditabbam. 

Idam  Sihaladipe  potthakarulhato  paccba  sasanassa 

patittbanam. 

Ete  pi  ca  mabatbera  yatba  sattim  yatba  balam 
Attbakatbadayo  katva  maccumukbam  upagamum. 

Seyyatba  pi  ca  lokasmim  obbasitvana^  candima 
Avabitvana  sattanam  bitam  attliam  va  gaccbati. 

Evam  eva  mabatbera  nanobbasebi  bbasiya 
Avabitvana  sattanam  bitam  maccum  upagamuni  ti. 


Iti  Sasanavamse  Sibaladipikasasanavamsakatbamaggo 

nama  dutiyo  pariccbedo. 


Idani  yatbatbapitamatikavasena  Suvannabbumirattbe 
Sasanavamsakatbamaggassa  vattum  okaso  anuppatto  tasma 
Suvannabbiimirattbasasanavamsakatbamaggam  arabbis- 
sami. 

Tattba  Suvannabbiimi  ti  tisu  Ramannarattbesu  ekassa 
namam.  Tini  bi  Ramannarattbani  bonti  Hanisavati-Miittima- 
Suvannabbumivasena.  Ekadesena  sa])bam  pi  Ramanna- 
rattbam  gabetabbam.  Tattba  pana  UkL"ipajanapade  ^ 
Tapbussa-Bballike  3  adim  katva  bbagavato  abbisambujjbitva 
sattasattabesu  atikkantesu  yeva  asalbimasassa  junbapak- 
kbapaficamadivasato  pattbaya  Eamannarattbe  sasanain 
patittbabi. 

Idam  Ramannarattbe  patbamam  sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Bbagavato  abbisambiiddbakrdato  pubbe  yeva  Aparantaka- 
rattbe  Subbinnanagare  Tissaraiifio  kale  ekassa  amaccassa 
Tisso  Jayo  ca  ti  dve  putta  abesum.  Te  gibibbave  samvegam 
labbitva  mabasamiiddassa  samlpe  Gajjagirimbi  nama  pab- 
bate    isipabbajjam    pabbajjitva    nisidimsu.     Tada    nagiya 


'  A.  obbasetvana.         ^  S.  Ulbipa" 
3  A.  Tapbussii.     B.  Tbapbussii. 


-^     36     f<- 

vijjridharo  sautbavam  katva  dve  andaui  vijayitva  sa  nagi 
lajjaya  tani  vijahitva  gacclii. 

Tada  jettho  Tissakumaro  tani  labliitva  kanitthena  saddhim 
vibhajitva'  ekam  ekassa  santike  thapesi.  Kale  atikkante 
tehi  andehi  dve  maiiussa  vijayimsu.  Te  dasavassavaye 
sampatte  kanittbassa  andato  vijayane  dabaro  krdam  katva 
Majjbimadese  Mitbilanagare  Gavampati  nama  kiimaro 
butva  uppajji.  So  sattavassikakrde  buddbassa  bbagavato 
santike  niyyadetva  pabbajetva  aciren'  eva  araba  abosi. 
Jettbassa  pana  aiidato  vijayane  dabaro  dvadasavassikakale 
Sakko  devanam  indo  agantva  Ramannarattbe  Sudbamma- 
puram  nama  nagaram  mapetva  Sibaraja  ti  namena  tattba 
rajjam  karapesi.  Sikalekbane  pana  Sirimasoko  ti  namena 
ti  vuttani.  Gavampatitbero  ca  attano  mataram  dattbukamo 
Mitbilanagarato  agantum  arabbi.  Tada  dibbacakkbuna 
matuya  kalam  katabbavan  fiatva  idani  me  mata  kubim 
nppajjatl  ti  avajjanto^  babullena  nesadake  vattanam  niva- 
sauattbanabbtite  dese  uppajjati  ti  natva  sac'  rdiam  gantva 
na  ovadeyyam  matli  me  apayagamanlyam  apuiinam  vicinitva 
catiisu  apayesu  uppajjeyya  ti  cintetva  bbagavantam  yacitva 
E-amannarattbam  vebasamaggena  agaccbi.  Ramannarattbe 
Siidbammapnram  patva  attano  bbatuna  Sibarajena  saddbim 
rattbavasinam  dbammam  desetva  paiicasu  silesu  patittbapesi. 
Atba  Sibaraja  aba:  Lokesu  bbante  tvam  asi  aggataro 
puggalo  ti.  Na  mabaraja  abam  aggataro  tisu  pana  bba- 
vesu  sabbesam  sattrmam  makutasamkaso  Gotamo  nama 
maybam  sattba  attbi.  Idani  Majjbimadesam  Riijagabam 
pativasati  ti, 

Evam  pana  bbante  sati  tumbakam  acariyam  mayani 
dattbnm  arabama  va  no  va  ti  puccbi.  Gavampatitbero 
ca:  Ama  mfdiaraja  arabatba  bliagavantam  dattbum.  Abain 
yacitva  agaccbami  ti  vatva  bbagavantam  yaci. 

Bbagava  ca  abbisambujjbitva  attbame  vasse  saddbini 
anekasatabbikkbubi  Ramannarattbe  Sudbammapuram  aka- 


2 


B.  vicajitva.     Mint  vibbajitva 
A.  avajjento  avajjento. 


-^         37         r^ 

sena  agamasi.  Rajavamse  pancahi  bhikkhusatehi  agamasi 
ti  vuttam.  Silalekhane  pana  visatisahassamattehi  bhikkhuhi 
ti  vuttam. 

Ettha  ca  yasma  bhagava  sapariso  yeva  agacchi  na 
ekako''  ti  ettakam  eva  icchitabbam  tasma  nanavadatam 
paticca  cittass'akulita  na  nppadetabba  ti. 

Atha  agantva  Ratanamandaj)e  ^  nisiditvE  sarajikaiiam 
ratthavaslnam  amatarasam  adasi  tisii  saranesii  paiicasu 
ca  silesu  patitthapesi. 

Atha  bbagava  dassanattbaya  agatanam  cbannain  tapa- 
sanam  cba  kesadhatuyo  pujanattbaya  adasi.  Tato  paccha 
sattatimsa  vassani  piijetva3  jiarinibljanakale  pi  bbagavato 
adbittbananuriipena  citakatbanato  tettiinsa  dante  gabetva 
Gavampatitbero  Siidbammapuram  anetva  Sibarafino  datvil 
tettimsa  cetiyaiii  patittbripesi. 

Evam  bbagavato  parinibbanato  attbame  yeva  vasse 
Gavampatitbero  Rainannarattbe  Sudbammapure  sasanam 
patittbapesi. 

Idam   Ramaiiiiarattbe    dutiyam    sasanassa    patittbanam. 

Bbagavato  parinibbutapancatimsadliikanam  dvinnam  sa- 
tanam  upari  Suvannabbumim  nama  Ramanfiarattbam 
agantva  Sonatbero  Uttaratbero  ca  ti  dve  tbera  panca- 
vaggakammarabebi  Ijbikkbidii  saddliim  sasanam  patittba- 
pesum. 

Te  ca  tbera  Maba-Moggabpiitta-Tissatberassa  saddbi- 
vibarika  ti  attbakatbayam  agata. 

Tapbussa-Bballike^  Gavampatitberan  ca  paticca  sasanam 
triva  patittbabi. 

Tail  ca  na  sabbena  sabbam  ogabetva  ye  ye  pana  saddha 
sampannas  te  te  attano  attano  iccbavasen'eva  sasanaiu 
pasidimsii. 

Paccba  pana  Sonuttaratbera  mabussabena  acariya- 
anattiya    sasanassa    patittbapanattbaya   ussukkam   Tipanna 


'  B.  S.  ekato.         ^  B.  mandappe.         3  Min:  puretva. 
+  B.  Tapiissu  Bbalbke.     5  a.  B.  pasanna. 


-^     38     f<^ 

Ijatittbapesum.  Tena  Attliakatliaj^am  etam  rattham  gantva 
ettha  sasanam  patitthapelii  ti  karitapaccayavasena  anatti- 
vibhattivasena  ca  vuttam^ 

Tada  pana  Suvannabhumirattlie  Sudliammapure  Sirima- 
soko  nama  raja  rajjam  karesi.  Tan  ca-  Sudhammapuran 
nama  Kelasapabbatamuddliani  dakkhinaya  anudisaya  pub- 
baddliabhagena  pabbatamiiddbani  aparaddhabhagena  bbii- 
mitale  titthati. 

Tani  yeva  gulapacakanam  manussanam  gehasadisani 
gehani  yebhuyyena  samvijjanti  ten'  eva  Golamittikanamena 
pi  vobarlyanti. 

Tassa  pana  nagarassa  mabasamuddasamipe  tbitatta  daka- 
yakldiini  sabbada  agantva  rajagebe  jate  jate  kumare  kbadi. 

Sonutteratberrinam  sampattadivase  yeva  rajagebe  ekam 
puttam  vijayi.  Dakayakkbini  ca  kbadissami  ti  saba  pafi- 
cabi  yakkbinisatebi  agata  tarn  disva  manussa  bbayitva 
mahaviravam  ravanti.  Tada  tbera  bbayanakam  slba- 
sisavasena  3  ekasisasariradvayasambandbasantbanam  manu- 
sibarupam  mapetvat  dassetva  tarn  yakkbinim  saparisam 
palapesum.  Tbera  ca  puna  yakkbiniya  anagamanattbaya 
parittam  akamsu.  Tasmifi  ca  saniagame  agatanam  manus- 
snnam  Brabmajabisuttam  adesayum.  Sattbimattasabassa 
sotapannadiparayana  abesuiu.  Kidadarakanam  addbuddba- 
nis  sabassani  pabbajimsu  kuladbitanam  pana  diyaddba- 
sabassam.  Eajakumaranam  paficasatadbikasabassamattam 
pabbajimsu.     Avasesa   pi    manussa    sarane    patittbabimsu. 

Evam  so  tattba  sasanam  patittbapesi  ti. 

Vuttan  ca  Attbakatbayam : 

Suvannabbumim  gantvana  Sonuttara  mabiddbika 
Pisace  niddbamitvana  Brabmajalam  adesayun  ti. 

Tato  pattbaya  rajakumaranam  Sonuttaranamebi  yeva 
namam  akamsu.     Avasesadarakanam  pi  rakkbasabbayato^ 


'  D.  catuttbam.        ^  Min:  tarn  bi.        j  B.  A.  omit  siba. 
4  S.  papetva.         s  B.  S.  °ddbadi.     D.  ad(Ibuni. 
°  S.  rakkbassayatbo. 


-^     39     Hg- 

vimocanattham  tjllapattabbiijjapattesu  therehi  mapitam 
manusiharupam  dassetva  matthake  thapesum.  Manussa 
ca  silamayam  manusiliariipam  katva  Sudhammapurassa 
asanne  padese  thapesum.  Tarn  yavajjatana  attlii  ti. 
Iccevam  bhagavato  parinibbanato  paiicatiiiisadbike  vassa- 
sate  sampatte  Sonuttarathera  agantva  sasanara  patittbapetva 
anuggaham  akamsu  ti. 

Idam  Ramafinaratthe  tatiyam  sasanassa  patitthanam. 

Tato  paccha  chasatadhike  sahasse  sampatte  pubbe 
vuttehi  tibi  karanehi  sasanassa  uppattittbclnabbutam 
Ramafmarattham  damarikacorabhayena  pajjararogabha- 
yena  sasanapaccatthikabhayena  ca  ti  tibi  bhayehi  akulitain 
a  ho  si. 

Tada  ca  tattha  sasanam  dubl)alam  ahosi  yatha  udake 
mande  tatra  jatam  uppalam  dubbalan  ti. 

Tattha  bhikkhu  pi  sasanam  yatha  kamam  piiretum  na 
sakka.  Suriyakumrirassa  nSma  Manoharirahho  pana  kale 
sasanam  ativiya  dul)l)alam  ahosi.  Jiuacakke  ekasatthadhike' 
vassasate  sampatte  kahyuge  ca  ekimavisatadhike  catuvassa- 
sate  sampatte  Arimaddananagare  Anuriiddho  nama  raja 
tato  saha  pitakena  bhikkhusamgham  anesi.  Tato  paccha 
jinacakke  navildhike  sattasate  sahasse  ca  sampatte  Lanka- 
dlpe  Sirisamghabodhi  -  Parakkamal)ahumaharaja  sasanam 
sodhesi.  Tato  channam  vassanam  upari  kaliyuge  dvattim- 
sadhike  pahcasate  sampatte  Uttarajlvo  nfima  thero  sasane 
pakato  ahosi. 

So  i^ana  Ramahharatthavasino  Ariyavamsatherassa  sad- 
(Ihivihariko. 

Ariyavamsathero  pana  Kappunganagaravasino  ^  Maha- 
kalatherassa  saddhivihariko.  Mahakalathero  pana  Sud- 
liammapuravasino  PrSnadassltherassa  j  saddhivihariko. 

Ayam  pana  Uttarajlva  -  Chapadatheranam  vamsadlpa- 
nattham  vutta.  So  pana  Pranadassithero'^  lokiyabhihhayo 
labhitva     niccaiu     abhinhani     pato     va     Magadharatthe 


^  B.  ekasatadhike. 

^  B.  Kambimganagara°     A.  kappuna" 

3  S.  adds  dasa"        ^  A.  Branadassi. 


-^     40     HS- 

Uruvelanigame^  mahabodhim  gantva  mahabodhiyaiiganam 
sammajjitva  puna  agantva  Sudhammapure  pindaya  cari. 
Idain  tlierassa  nibaddhavattam. 

Avail  ca  attho.  Sudliammapurato  Magadharattham 
gantva  Uruvelanigame  vanijakammam  karonta  tadakaram 
passitva   paccagamanakale   Siidhammapuravasinam   kathe- 

sum. 

Tasma  vinnayati^  tasmin  ca  kale  Uttarajivatbero  pari- 
])imnavisativassena  Cbapadena  nama  samanerena  saddhim 
Sibaladlpam  gaccbi.  Sibaladipavasino  ca  bbikkbu:  mayam 
Maba-Mahindatberassa  vamsika  bbavama  tumbe  pi  Sonut- 
taratberanam  vamsika  bbavatba,  tasma  mayam  ekavamsika 
bbavama  samanavadika  ti  vatva  Cbapadasamanerassa  upa- 
sampadakammam  akamsu. 

Tato  paccba  cetiyavandanadlni  kammani  nittbapetva 
Uttarajivatbero  saddbim  bbikkbusamgbena  Arimaddana- 
nagaram3  paccagamasi. 

Cbapadassa  pana  etad  abosi :  sac'  abam  acariyena  saba 
Jambudlpam  gaccbeyyam  babilbi  iiatipalibodbebi  pari- 
yattuggabane  antarEyo  bbaveyya*.  Tena  bi  Sibaladipe 
yeva  vasitva  pariyattim  uggabetva  paccagamissami  ti. 
Tato  acariyassa  okasam  yacitva  Sibaladipe  yeva  pativasi. 
Sibaladipe  vasitva  yava  laddbatberasammutika  pariyattim 
pariyapunitva  puna  Jambudlpam  paccagantukamo  abosi. 
Atba  tassa  etad  abosi:  abam  ekako  va  gaccbanto  sace 
mama  acariyo  nattbi  sace  pi  Jamljudipavasina  bbikkbu- 
sauigbena  saddbim  Vinayakammam  katum  na  iccbeyyam 
evam  sati  visum  kammam  katum  na  sakkuneyyaui,  tasma 
pitakadbarebi  catubi  tberebis  saddbim  gaccbeyyam  iccetara 
kusalan  ti. 

Evam  pana  cintetva  Tamalittigamavasina  Sivalitberena, 
Kambojaranfio  puttabbutena  Ttlmalindatberena,  Kincipura- 
vasina  Anandatberena  Rabulatberena  ca  ti  imebi  catubi 
tberebi  saddbim  navaya  paccagaccbi^. 


'  Mill:  "nigamam.         ^  B.  vinfiayi  ti. 
3  A.  Ariyamaddana"         ^  S.  bbaveyyam. 
5  ]Vlin.  and  B.  omit  tberebi.        ^  B.  gaiicbi. 


-^     41     ^ 

Te  ca  tliera  pitakadliara  ahesum''  dakkha  tliamasampanna 
ca  tesu  visesato  Rrdiulathero  thamasampanno.  Kusimana- 
garam  sampattakale  upakattliavassupagamanakalo  hiitva 
Arimaddananagare  acariyassa  santikam  asampapunitva 
Kusimanagare  yeva  vassam  upagamimsu. 

Tesam  vassupagamanaviharavatthuaramapakriro  ca  Kii- 
simanagarassa  dakkhinadisabhage  yavajjatana  attlii. 

Vassam  vuttbakale  pana  mahapavaranaya  pavaritva^  te 
pafica  thera  Arimaddananagaram  agamamsu. 

Uttarajivathero  ca  Arimaddananagaravasilii  bhikkliiihi 
visum  butva  samgbakammani  akasi.  Kinca  pi  c'ettha 
Uttarajlvatberadayo  Sihaladipato  paccagaiitva  Arimadda- 
nanagare vasitva  sasanam  anuggabesuin. 

Erimailnarattbe  pana  jatatta  publ)e  ca  tattba  nivasitatta-3 
idba  dassita  ti  dattbabba. 

Tasmiii  ca  kale  Dalanagare  Padipajeyyagame  jato  Sfiri- 
putto  nama  mabaHakasamanero  eko  Arimaddananagaram 
gantva  Anandatherassa  santike  upasampajjitva  pariyattiin 
pariyapuni. 

So  babussuto  abosi  dakkbo  tbamasampanno  ca.  Tam 
attbam  svitva  Narapati-can-sii'^  raja  cintesi:  Sace  so  aiiga- 
paccaiigasampanno  bbaveyya  acariyam  katva  tbapessami 
anuggabessami  ti.  Raja  evam  cintetva  rajapurise  pesetva 
vimamsapesi. 

Rajapurisa  ca  tassas  cbinnapadaiiguttbaggatam^  passitva 
tam  attbam  ranno  arocesum.  Raja  tain  sutva  evam  vikal- 
angapaccango  bbaveyya  padbanacariyattbane  tbapetum  na 
yutto  ti  katva  padbanacariyal)bavam  na  akasi.  Pujasakka- 
ramatten'  eva  anuggabam  akasi. 

Ekasmin  ca  kale  Dbammavilaso  ti  lancbam^  datva 
Ramannarattbe  sasanam  sodbetva  parisuddbam  karobi  ti 
Ramaiinarattbam  pesesi. 


^  Min:  bonti.         ^  A.  pavaretva.         j  B.  nivasatta. 

+  B.  Narapati-can-cbu.     D.  "can  fiu. 

3  A.  B.  yassa.     D.  b'assa.     S   corr.  to  tassa. 

^  A.  "aiiguttbatara.         ?  A.  B.  lancaiii. 


->•     42     •<-- 

So  ca  Ramaimarattham  gantva  Dalanagare  bahimnam 
hhikkliiinam  dliammavinayam  vacetva  sasanam  paggaliesi. 
Tattha  ca  Kamaiinamanussa  tassa  Dhammavilasatberassa 
sissanusissa  Sihalabhikkliugana  ti  voliaranti.  Iccevam 
Sihaladiijikassa  Anandatherassa  sissam  Dbammavilasam 
paticca  Ramanfiaratthe  Sllialadipato  sasanassa  agata- 
ixiaggo  ti. 

Idam  Ramanfiaratthe  catuttham  sasanassa  patittlianam. 

Tasmifi  ca  kale  Muttimanagare  aggamahesiya  acariya 
Buddhavamsathera-Mahanagathera  Sihaladipam  gantva 
Mabaviliaravasiganavamsabliutanam  bbikkbimam  santike 
puna  sikkbam  gaubitva  Muttimanagaram  paccagantva 
Muttimanagaravasibi  bbikkbubi  visum  biitva  samgba- 
kammani  katva  sasanam  paggabesum.  Te  ca  tbera  paticca 
Ramanfiarattbe  puna  Slbaladipato  sasanam  agatan  ti. 

Idam  Ramanfiarattbe  pancamam  sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Tato  paccba  ca  Muttimanagare  Setibbindassa  ranfio 
matuya  acariyo  Medbamkaro  nama  tbero  Sibaladipam 
gantva  Slbaladipe  arannavasinam  mabatberanaru  santike 
puna  sikkbam  gabetva  pariyattim  pariyapunitva  suvanna- 
rajatamaye  tipuslsacbanne  Setibbindassa  ranuo  matuya 
karapite  vibare  nisiditva  sasanam  anuggabesi.  Lokadipa- 
kasaran  ca  nama  gandbam  akasi.  Atbaparam  pi  Muttima- 
nagare Sevasuvannasobbano  nama  tbero  Sibaladipam  gantva 
Mabrivibriravasiganavamsabbutanam  tberanam  santike  puna 
sikkbam  gabetva  Muttimanagaram  eva  paccagaccbi\ 

So  pana  tbero  aranfie  yeva  vasi  dlmtangadbaro  ca  aliosi 
appiccbo,  santuttbo,  lajji,  kukkuccako,  sikkbakamo  dakkbo 
tbamasampanno  ca.  Slbaladipe  Kalambumbi  nama  jatassare 
udakukkbepasimayam  atirekapancavaggena  Yanaratanan 
nama  samgbarajam  upajjbayam  katva  Rabula-Bbaddam 
nama  Vijayabrdiuraniio  acariyabbiitam  tberara  kammava- 
cacariyam  katva  upasampajji.  So  ca  tbero  pun'  agantva^ 
Muttimanagare  yeva  vasitva  ganara  vaddbetva  sasanam 
anuggabesi  ete  ca  dve  tbere  paticca  Ramannarattbe 
Slbaladipato  sasanam  agatara. 

\  B.  gaficbi.         -  B.  gantva. 


-$H     43     H$- 

Idam  Ramanilaratthe  chattliain  sasanassa  patittlianain. 

Tato  paccha  sasanavasena  dvivassadhike  dvisate  kali- 
yugato  ekasitike  sampatte  Hamsavatinagare  Siriparama- 
mahadliammaraja  ti  laddbanamo  Dhammacetiyaraja 
Kusimamandale  HamsiXvatimandale  Muttimamandale  ca 
I'atthavasiuo  sapajam  viya  dliammena  samena  rakkhitva 
raj  jam  karesi. 

So  ca  raja  tisu  pitakesu  catusu  ca  vedesu  vyakarana- 
chandalamkaradisu  ca  cheko,  sikkliitananasippo  ^  nana- 
bhasasu  ca  pasuto  saddhasiladiguiiopeto  kumudakimdasa- 
radacandikasamanasitagajapatibhuto^  ca  sasane  ca  ativa 
pasanno  abosi. 

Ekasmim  krde  so  cintesi:  bbagavato  sasanam  nama 
pabbajjaupasampadabbaveua  sambandbam  u^jasampada- 
bbavo  ca  simaparisavattbunattikammavacasampattibi  sam- 
bandbo  ti.  Evan  ca  pana  cintetva  Simaviniccbayam  tassa 
vannanam3  Vinayasamgabam  tassa  vannanam  Slmrdam- 
karam  Simasamgabaii  ca  saddato  atthato  ca  piinappimain 
upaparikkbitva  anuamaniiam  samsanditva  publ)aparam 
tulayitva  bbagavato  adbippayo  idiso  gandbakaranam 
adbippayo  idiso  ti  passitva  ambrdvam  Ramafifiarattbe 
baddbanadlsamuddajatassaiTidayo  simayo  '^  babuka  pi 
samana  ayam  parisuddba  ti  vavattbapetum  dukkaram. 

Evam  sati  sima  parisa  jiarisuddba  bbavituiii  dukkara 
ti  patibbati. 

Tato  paccba  Eamannarattbe  ti  pitakadbaravyattapati- 
balatberebi  mantetva  ranfio  patibbananurupam  simaparisa 
parisuddba  bbavitum  dukkara  ti  tberil  viniccbiniuisus.  Atba 
ra  °ja  evam  pi  cintesi :  Abo  vata  sammasambuddbassa 
sasanam  pafica  vassasabassani  patittbabissati  ti  gandbesu 
vutto  pi  samano  abbisambuddbato  catusattbadbikadvisa- 
bassamatten  'eva  kalena  sasane  malain  butva  upasampada- 
kammesu  kaidvbatbanam  tava  uppajji  katbam  pana  panca- 
vassasabassani  sasanassa   patittbanam   bbavissati   ti   evam 


'  B.  "kappo.         ^  D.  S.  "candaka" 

3  A.  D.  S.  vannanam.         •*  Miii:    siraadayo. 

5  Min:   viuiccbindimsu. 


-^     44     ►«- 

dhammasamvegam  uppadetva  puna  pi  evam  cintesi.  Evara 
ettakam  sasane  malam  dissamano  pi  samano  upasampada- 
kamme'  kankhatlianam  dissamano  pi  samano  parisuddh- 
atthaya  anrirabbitva  madiso  appossukko  majjhatto  nisiditum 
ayutto.  Evam  hi  sati  l)hagavati  saddliapasanno  'mlil  ti 
vattabbatam  anapajjeyjara. 

Tasma  sasanam  nimmahim  katum  arabbissami  ti. 

Kuto  nil  kbo  dilni  sasanam  rdiaritva  tbiram  patittbapeyyan 
ti  avajjanto  evam  cintesi:  bbagavato  kira  parinibbunato 
cbattimsadhike  dvisate  sampatte  Mabamoggaliputta-Tissa- 
tbero  Maba-Mabindatberam  pesetva  Slba]adlpe  sasanam 
patittbapesi.  Tad  a  Devanampiya-Tissaraja  Mabavibaram 
krirapetva  adasi.  Sasanavaraii  ca  ekasitadbikani  dvivassa- 
satani  vimalam  butva  patittbabi.  Bbikkbusamgbo  pi 
Mabavibaravasiganavasena  ekato  va  attbasi.  Tato  paccba 
Abbayagirivasi  -  Jetavanavasivasena  dvedba  butva  bbijji. 
Jinacakke  attbasattatadbike  sabasse  sampatte  Sirisamgba- 
bodbi  -  Parakkamababumabriraja  Kutambbayagirivasi-Ma- 
bakassapatberapamukbam  -  Mabavibaravasiganam  anugga- 
betva  yatba  vutte  dve  gane  visodbesi  sasanam  nimmalam 
akixsi.  Tato  paccba  Vijayababu-Parakkamababurajunam 
dA-innam   kale  pi   sasanam  nimmabim  butva  yeva   attbasi. 

Ten'  eva  vyattapatil^abibbikkbii  ayacitva  Sibaladipam 
gantva  puna  sikkbam  ganbapessami  tebi  pana  parampara- 
vasena  pavattanam  bbikkbimam  vasena  ambakam  Kamaima- 
rattbe  sasanam  nimmalam  butva  patittbabissati  ti  evam 
pana  cintetva  Moggallanatberam  Somatberafi  ca  Sibala- 
dipam gamanattbaya  yaci. 

Tbera  ca  sasanapatiyattakammam  idan  ti  manasikaritva 
patiiiiiam  akamsu3.  Raja  ca  datbadbatupujanattbaya 
bbikkbusamgbassa  pujanattbaya  ■*  Bbuvanekababuranno 
pannakrirattbaya  deyyadbammapannrdvaravattbimi  patiyS- 
detva  Citradutam  Ramadiitan  ti  ime  dve  amacca  dvisu 
navasu  iiayakattbane  tbapetva  kaliyuge  sattatimsadbike 
attbavassasate    sampatte    magbamasassa    punnamito    eka- 


^  D.  kammesu.  ^  g_  Kutumbaya°  3  D.  S.  akasi. 

■*  B.  bbunjanattbaya. 


-5>-     45     •<- 

dasamiyam  suraccavare^  Citradutam  saddhiiii  Moggalla- 
natlierapamuklielii  bhikkhilhi  ekaya  navaya  gamapesi- 
Phaggunamasassa  attlianiiyaiu  Sihaladlpe  Kalambutittliaiii 
payasi.  Ramadiitam  pana  tasmim  yeva  vasse  maghamasassa 
punnamito  dvadasamiyam  candavare  saddhim  Somatlierapa- 
mukliehi  bhikkhiilii  ekaya  navaya  gamapesi. 

Ujukam  pana  vatam  alabhitva  citramasassa  jnnhapakkha- 
navamiyam  Sihaladlpe  Valligamam  payasi.  Tato  paccha 
te  pi  dve  amacca  dvisu  navasu  abliatani  datal)bapanna- 
karavattbuui  sandesapannani  ca  Bliuvanekabahuranno 
bhikkhusamghassa  ca  adasi. 

Raima  pesitabhikkhunan  ca  sandesapanne  kathitaniyamen' 
eva  Kalyaniyam  nama  nadiyam  udakukkhepaslniayam  sa- 
manerabhumiyain  patitthapetva  puna  upasampadakaniniaiii 
akamsu. 

Upasampajjitva  ca  BhnvanekababuiTija  nanapakare 
bhikkhunam  sFiruppe  parikkhare  datva  idam  pana  amisa- 
danam  yava  jivitapariyosana  yeva  paribhunjitabbam  bha- 
vissati  namakincham  ^  pana  na  jirissati  ti  katva  Ramadutassa 
navaya  padhanabhutassa  Somatberassa  Sirisamghabodhi- 
sami  ti  namam  adasi. 

Avasesanam  pana  dasannamj  theranam  Kittisirimegha- 
saml  Parakkamabahusami  BuddhaghosasamI  Silialadipa- 
visuddhasami  Gunaratanadbarasaml  Jlnalamkarasaml  Rata- 
iiamalisaml  Sattamatejasami  Bhuvanekabahusami  ti  namani 
adasi.  Citradiitassa  navaya  padhanabhutassa  Moggalla- 
natherassa  Dhammakittilokagarusami  ti  namani  adi5,si. 
Avasesanam  pana  Sirivanaratanasami  Mangalatherasami 
Ivalyanatissasami  Candagirisami  Siridantadhatusami  Vaiia- 
vasitissasami  Ratanah\mkarasami  Mahadevasami  Uduinba- 
ragirisiJmi  Culabhayatissasami  ti  namani  adiisi.  Bavisatiya 
pana  paccha  samananam  namam  na  adasi.  Abhinavasikkham 
pana  sabbesam  yeva  adasi.  Tato  paccha  cetiyapujanadlni 
katva  tain  tam  kiccam  nipphadetva  puna  againamsu. 


'  B.  corrects  to  suravare.         ^  A.  B.  lahcam. 
^  S.  dasanam. 


V 


-$^     46     f<- 

Bhiivanekabalmraja  Citradiitam  evam  aha:  Eamadliipati- 
no  ranno  pannakaram^  paticlatum  iccliami  patidiitan  ca 
pesetum  tava  tvam  agamehl  ti.  Evam  pana  vatva  pacca- 
gamanakrde  ^  candavatabhayena  mahasamuddamajjhe  nSva 
avagaccliati  ^. 

Tena  Slbalarafifio  pesitanavaya  sannipatitva  arubitva 
agaccbanta  tini  divasani  atikkamitva  puna  candavatabba- 
ena  agambbirattbane  silaya  gbattetva4  laggitva  gantum 
asakkunitva  ekam  ubimpam  bandbitviX  jamgben'  eva 
agamamsu.  Sibalaranno  ca  diito  pannakaram  datva 
paccagamasi.  Bbikkbusii  ca  cba  bbikkbu  antaramagge 
yeva  maccu  adaya  gaccbati  abo  anicca  vata  sankbara  ti. 

Hoiiti  c'ettba: 

Imesam  pana  araddbam 
JNa  kiccam  yava  mttbitam 
Na  triva  adiyissanti 
Maccu  nattbi  apekkbana. 

Nikkanmiko  bi  esa 
Babikkarena  adiya 
Rodamanam  va  natinam 
Aniccbantam  va  gaccbati  ti. 

Ramadbipatiraja  ca  tesam  bbikkbimam  pattakfile  Ham- 
savatlnagarassa  paccbimasmim  disabbage  Narasurena  nama 
amaccena  paribbutte  gamakbette  paliattbakatbatikadayo 
punappunam  passitva  upaparikkbitva  simasamubanasima- 
sammutikamnianis  kaiTipesi.  Sibaladlpe  bbagavata  nabayita- 
])ubl)aya  Kalyaniya  nama  nadiyam  udakukkbepasimam 
katva  tattba  Mabavibriravasinain  bbikkbimam  santike 
upaladdbaupasampadabbavebi  bbikkbubi  katatta  Kalyani- 
sima  ti  samannara  akasi. 

Iccevam  Ramadbipatiraja  patta-Laiikabbikkbu  nissaya 
sasanam    sutthu    patittbitani    akasi.      Kaliyugassa    attba- 


^  A.  pannakadaram.         ^  M8S.  paccba  agamanakale. 
•5  Min:  agaccbati.         ^  S.  gbatetva.     D.  gbattbetva. 
5  A.  B.  omit. 


-^-t     47     HS- 

tirasadhika  -  atthavassasatakalato '  yava  ekacattalisadhika- 
atthavassasata  tesani  bhikkhuiiam  vamse  asitimatta  gana- 
pamokkhatbera  ahesum. 

Tesam  sissajatani  pana  chabbisadhikani  dvisatani 
catusahassani  dasasabassani  abesum.  Evam  bbagavato 
sasanam  Ramannarattbe  vuddbira  veriilbim  vepuHam  apajji  ti. 

Idam  Ramafmarattbe  pancamam  sasaiiassa  patittbanam. 

Yada  pana  Arimaddananagare  Anuruddbo  nama  raja 
Siidbammapuram  sarajikam  abbibbavitva  viddbamsi  tada^ 
Ramanfiarattbara  rajasimnam  butva  tittbatij.  Ramafmarattbe 
Muttimanagare  Sonuttaravamso  eko  gano.  Sivalivamso  eko, 
Tamalindavamso  eko,  Anandavamso  eko,  Buddbavaraso  eko, 
Mabanagavamso  eko  ti  cba  gana  visum  visum  butva 
atthamsu  nanasamvasaka  nananikaja.  Dbammacetiya- 
rafina  pana  karapitasasanam  pi  abbijjamanam4  Imtva 
attbasi.  Samanasamvasos  ekanikayo  yeva  abosi.  Hamsavatl- 
Muttima-Suvannabbumivasena  tini  pi  Ramannarattbani 
Sunaparantasarakbatena  Marammarattbena  ekabaddbani 
butva  tittbanti. 

Pubbe  ca  Marammarattbindarajunam  anapavattanattba- 
nani  abesum. 

Tasma  Marammarattbato  ekacce  bbikkbu  Ramaima- 
rattbam  gantva  Kalyanislmayam  puna  sikkliam  ganbimsu. 
Dbammacetiyaranna  karapitasasanam  sakalam  Maramma- 
rattbam  pi  vyapetva  ogabetva  tittbati. 

Ramaniiarattbe  Sonuttaratberanam  sasanam  patittba- 
pitakaLato  pattbaya  yava  Sudbammapure  Manobarirafina 
arabantanam  samvijjamanata  veditabba.  Tato  paccba  pana 
Uttarajiva-Ariyavarasa-Mabakala-Pranadassitberanam  kale 
lokiyajjbrinabbimialabbino°  yeva  samvijjanti.  Adbuna  pana 
tisu  pi  Ramafmarattbesu  Dbammacetiyaranna  karapitasa- 
sanam yeva  tittbati.  Ettba  ca  betupbalasambandbavasena 
adiantavasena  ca  sasanavamsam   pannaya   tulayitva  adito 


'  A.  Attbasatadbika"        '  A.  D.  S.  yada. 

3  B.  patittbabi.         '^  A.  abbijjbamanam. 

5  S.  samanavaraso. 

^  B.  lokiyadbyanabbinnalabhiyo.     Min:  4abhiyo. 


-$^     48     H^ 

va   dassitelii    tilii    nayelii   yatlia   paveni    ghattiyati^    tatlia 
ganheyya  ti. 

Ay  an  ca  Sasanavamso  lajjipesalasikkhalvamanam  yeva 
vasena  Tutto  nalajjinam  vasena  ti  datthabbo. 

Taya  ca  theraparamparaya  Muttimaiiagaravasi  Medliam- 
karathero  Lokadlpakasaram  -  iiama  gandham  akasi,  Hara- 
savatinagaravasl  pana  Anaudatliero  Madhiirasarattha- 
dlpanin^  naiiia  Abliidhammatikaya  samvannanam  Hamsa- 
vatinagaravasi  yeva  Dhammabuddbatliero  Kavisaran  iiama 
cbandovannanam  Hamsavatinagaravasi  yeva  Saddbamma- 
lamkaratbero  Pattbanasarattbadlpanin4  nama  pakaranam 
tattb'  evas  aiinataro  tbero  Apheggusaran  nama  gandbam 
akasi.  Evam  anekappakriranam  gandhakaranam  maba- 
tberanam  vasanattbanam  butva  sasanam  ogabetva  virHl- 
battbanam  abosi  ti. 

Iti  Sasanavamse  Suvannabbiimisasanavamsakatbama^eo 
nama  tatiyo  pariccbedo. 

Idani  pana  Yonakarattbe  sasanass'  nppattiiu  katbessami. 

Bbagava  bi  veneyyabitavabo  Yonakarattbe  mama  sasanam 
cirakalam  patittbabissati  ti  pekkbitva  saddbim  bbikkbu- 
samgbena  desacarikam  abindanto  Labbuiijam  nama  nagaram 
agamasi.  Tada  eko  nesado  baripbalam  datva  tarn  pari- 
bbunjitva  baribije  kbipite^  pathaviyam  apatitva  akase  yeva 
patittbasi  7.  Tarn  disva  si  tarn  patvakasi.  Tam  attbam  disva 
Anandatbero  puccbi.  Anagate  kbo  Ananda  imasmim 
tbane  mama  dbatucetiyam  jiatittbabissati  sasanam  virulbam 
aj^ajjissatiti  vyakasi. 

Bbagavata  pana  baripbabissa  libufijitattbanatta  Hari- 
bbufijo  ti  tassa  rattbassa  namam  aliosi.  Dvinnam  tapasa- 
nam  tbapitam  jabasuttitam^  paticca  Yonakanam  bbasaya 
Labbunjo  ti  namam  abosi.  Tadil  tattba  Mapinnaya  nama 
ekissa    matikaya    samlpe    nisinno    eko    lavakidikajettbako^ 


'  B.  gbatbiyati.     Min:  gbattbiyati.     A.  gbantblyati. 

^  A.  Lokapadipasriram.         ^  B.  JMadbu'' 

4  A.  B.  "saradlpanim.         s  A.  Min:    tatb'eva. 

^  Min:  kbipi  te.         7  A.  B.  tittbasi. 

^  B.  elasuttitani.         ^  B.  lavapubka"     A.  Lavakusika" 


-^     49     Kg- 

attano  puttam  sattavassikam  bhagavato  niyyadetva  pabbajesi. 
Kammatthanannyogavasena  aciren'  eva  arahattam  papimi. 
Sattavassikassa  ca  samanerassa  arahattam  sacchikatattba- 
natam  paticca  Yonakabhasaya  etam  thanam  Ca-nah-ma 
iti  vuccati.     Cirakalavasena  Ja-mali-ma  iti  vuccati. 

Tato  patthaya  yeva  Yonakarattbe  sasanam  patitthahl  ti, 

Idam  Yonakarattbe  patbamam  sasanassa  patitthanam. 

Sasane  pana  pancatimsaclhike  dvivassasate  sampatte 
Mabarakkbitatbero  Yonakarattbain  gautva  Kamboja- 
Khemavara-Haribbiinja-Ayuddbayadisu  anekadisu  rattbesu 
sasanam  patittbapesi. 

Tani  bi  sabbani  rattbani  samgabetva^  dassentebi^ 
attbakatbacariyebi  Yonakalokan  ti  okasalokavacakena 
samanfiasaddena  vuttam.  Pakati  b'esa  gandbakaranam 
yena  kena  c'akarena  attbantarassa  vimiapana  ti. 

Mabarakkbitatbero  ca  saddbim  jiaiicabi  bbikkbubi 
Pataliputtato  anilapatbamaggena  Yonakalokam  agantva 
Kalakilramasiittena  Yonake  pasadesi,  Sattatisabassadbika- 
piii.iasatasabassassa  maggapbalalamkaram  adasi,  santike 
c'assa  dasa  sabassani  pabbajimsu.  Evam  so  tattba  sasanam 
patittbapesi. 

Tatba  ca  vuttam  Attbakatbayam : 

Yonakarattbam  tadagantvil  so  Mabarakkbito  isi 
Kalakaramasuttena  te  pasadesi  Yonake  ti. 

Tato  pattbaya  tcsam  sissaparampara  babu  bonti  ganana- 
})atbam  vitivatta. 

Idam  Yonakarattbe  Mabarakkbitatberadayo  paticca 
dutiyam  sasanassa  j)atittbanam. 

Yonakarattbe  Lakunnanagare  jinacakke  paiicavassasate 
manimayam  buddbapatimam  mapetva  Vissakammadeva- 
putto^  Nagasenatberassa  adasi. 

Nagasenatbero  ca  tasmim  patimambi  dbatii  agantva 
patittbatu  ti  adbittbasi.  I 

^  A.  tam  gabetva.         ^  A.  and  B.  dassantebi.  • 
•5  A.  Visukamma° 

Sasana-Vainsa.  4 


-^     50     f<- 

Adhitthanavasen'eva  satta  dhatuyo  agantva  tattlia  patittlia- 
liitva  patibririyam  dassesun  ti  Eiijavamse  vuttam. 

Tan  ca  vacanam  mama  parinibbanato  pancavassasate 
atiklcante  ete  uppajjissanti  ti  Milindapanbayam  vuttava- 
canena  kalaparimanavasena  ca  sameti.  Yonakarattbe 
IVIiHndaranno  krde  jinacakke  pancavassasate  yeva  Naga- 
senatberam  paticca  jinacakkam  verulbam  butva  patittbasi. 

Idam  Yonakarattbe  Nagasenatberam  paticca  tatiyam 
sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Kaliyuge  panca  sattbivasseLabbunjanagarato  samkamitva 
Kyii-nab-ranagaram '  mapikassa  Byaiina-co-ma-ua-ra- 
namakassa-  ranfio  krde  Majjbimadesato  Kassapatbero 
pancabi  tberebi  saddbim  agaccbi. 

Tada  so  raja  vibaram  katviX  tesam  adasi.  Sibaladipato 
ca  dbatiiyo  anetva  eko  tbero  agaccbi  j.  Dbatuto^  patibari- 
yam  disva  paslditva  Labbimjacetiye  nidbanam  akasi.  Te 
ca  tbere  paticca  Yonakarattbe  sasanavamso  agato. 

Idam   Yonakarattbe    catuttbam    sasanassa   joatittbanam. 

Kabyiige  dvasattbadbike  sattasate  sampatte  Clnarattbin- 
daraja  abbibbavitva  sakalam  pi  Yonakarattbam  safdcbu- 
bitams  boti.  Tadii  Mabadbammagambbiratbero  Maba- 
Medbamkaratbero  ca  ti  dve  tbera  Yonakarattbato  saddbim 
babubi  bbikkliubi  Sibaladipain  agamamsu,  Tada  Sibaladipe 
dubbbikkbabbayena  abbibbiito  butva  tato  Siyamarattbfi. 
Sokkatanagaram  puna  agamamsu. 

Tato  paccba  Lakunnanagaram  gantva  sasanam  paggan- 
bantanara  bijjipesalanam  bbikkbimam  santike  puna  sikkbam 
ganbimsu.  Te  ca  tbera  Siyamarattbe  Yonakarattbe  ca 
sabbattba  sasanam  patittbapesura. 

Idam  Yonakarattbe  pattabinke^  dve  tbere  paticca 
paficamam  sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Kabyuge  paucavlsadbike  attbavassasate  sampatte  Siri- 
saddbammalokapaticakkavattiraja    Labbunjacetiyam    puna 

^  B.  Kyujab-ra°  A.  Kyu-ja-iiah-ra"  D.  Kyi-iiah-tu-nari- 
mapitassa,  ^  g_  Byafmab-co-ma-na-jab  ra.  D,  Byannab 
co-ma-iia-reb.         3  A.  agancbi.         -^  I).  S.  dbatuyo. 

5  B.  sakkbumbbitam,    D.  sandvbulj])bitam.        '^  pallanke. 


-^     51     ^ 

mahantam  katva  tassa  cetiyassa  samipe  cattfiro  viliare 
karapetva  Malia-medhamkaratlierassa  Sariputtatherassa 
ca  adasi.  Tada  pi  te  dve  thera  sasanam  parisuddham 
katva  patittliapesim  ti. 

Idam  Yonakaratthe  Malia-Medliamkara-Sariputtathere 
paticca  chattham  sasanassa  patittlianam. 

Kaliyuge  te  cattrillsadhike  navutivasse  sampatte  Ham- 
savatinagare  Anekasetibhindo  iiama  raja  Youakarattbaiii 
abliibhavitva  attano  battbagatam  katva  balibbufijanattbaya^ 
jettbaputtassa  Aniiruddbassa  nama  iTijakiimarassa  datva 
babubi  amaccebi  saddbim  tattba  gantva  anurajabbavena 
rajjam  karapesi  sasanan  ca  visodbetum  ^  Saddbamma- 
cakkasamitberam  tena  saddbim  pabini.  Anekasetibbiudo 
kira  rilja  Yonakarattbam  vijayakrde^  patbamam  sasanassa 
patittbrinabbutam  idan  ti  katva  tarn  rattbavasino  karama- 
raiiitabbavena4  na  aggabesi  ti  yatbavuttatberavamsesu  ca 
eko  Lakunnanagare  aranfiavasl  tbero  tattba  nagare  ajja 
asukasmim  tb^ne  eko  mato  tis  gibinam  katbetva  yatba 
katbitam  bbiitam  biitva  ayam  abbiiinalabbi  ti  pakato  abosi. 

Tasmim  yeva  ca  nagare  Mabamaiigalo  nama  tbero 
Anekasetibbindassa  ranno  yujjbitum  agatakale  Anekase- 
tibbindo  raja  mam  pakkosissati  samanajatikam  diitam 
pesessati  ti  pakkositakalato  patbamam  eva  vadi. 

Yatbavuttaniyamen'  eva  pakkosanato  ayam  abbiufuJabbl 
ti  kittigboso  abosi. 

Tattba  nagare  Nanavilasatbero  Sankbyapakasakan  nama 
pakaranam  akasi.  Tarn  tikam  })ana  pattabinkatberassa 
vibare  vasanto  Sirimangalo  nama  tbero  akasi,  Visuddbi- 
maggadipanim  pana  sanfiatta-arannavasi  '^  Uttararamo 
nama  eko  tliero,  Mangabidipanim  Sirimangabitbero,  Uppa- 
tasantim7  afinataro  tbero.  Tam  kira  Ui^patasantim  sajjbayitva 
Cinaranno  senam  ajini  ti.  Iccevam  Yonakarattbe  abbinfia- 
labblnam  gandbakaranan  ca  tberanam  anubbavena  jina- 
sEsanam  parisuddbam  biitva  patittbati. 

'  A.  pari"         ^  D.  S.  visodbfipesum. 

J  D.  vicara"     S.  vicarana"         ■*  A.  karamanika° 

5  Min:  ajja  re  tivice.     ^  A.  safiimtta"     ^  A.  iippadasantini. 


-5H     52     H^ 

Evam  hetuphalasambandhavasena  adi-anta-sambandha- 
vasena  ca  yatha\Tittelii  tihi  nayebi  tlieraparampara 
ghattetva^  gahetabba. 

Iti  SiXsanavamse  Yonakaratthasasanavamsakatbamaggo 
nama  catuttbo  pariccbedo. 

Idam  Vanavasirattbe  Sirikbettanagare  Sasanavamsam 
vakkbami. 

Jinacakke  bi  ekavassasate  sampatte  Jatilo,  Sakko,  Nago, 
Garulo^,  Kumbbando,  Candiparamisvaro  ^  ca  ti  ime  satta 
Sirildiettam  nama  nagaram  mapesum.  Tattba  Dvattapoiigo 
nama  raja  rajjam  karesi.  Tassa  kira  tini  akkbini  santi  ti. 
Tada  bbagavato  savaka  arabanta  tisabassamatta  vasimsu. 
So  raja  tesara  arabantanam  devasikam  catubi  paccayebi 
iipattbambbi. 

Cba  sarlradbatiiyo  ca  ekekam  ekekasmim  nidabitva  cba 
cetiyani  kfirapesi.  Dakkbinababum  pana  nidabitva  ekam 
cetiyam  karapesi  unbisadbatum  pana  Kamarannagarato  ■* 
anetva  ekam  pi  cetiyam  karapesi.  Tarn  pana  tava  na 
nittbitam  paccba  Anuruddbaraja  gabetva  Arimaddanana- 
garam  anetva  ca  Can-Hmms  nama  cetiye  nidbanam  akasi. 
Tasma  Rakkbitatberassa  agamanato  pubbe  pi  sasanam 
patittbasi  ti  dattbabbam.  Tato  paccba  sasanam  dubbalam 
butva  attbasi. 

Idam  Vanavasirattbe  patbamam  sasanassa  patitthanam. 

Maba-Moggaliputta-Tissatberena  pana  pesito  Rakkhi- 
tatbero  Yanavaslrattbam  gantva  akase  tbatva  anamatagga- 
pariyaya  katbaya  Vanavasike  pasadesi.  Katbapariyosane 
pan'assa  sattbisabassanam  dbammabbisamayo  abosi,  sattati- 
sabassamatta  pabbajimsu,  paiicavibarasatani  patittbapesum. 

Evani  so  tattba  sasanam  patittbapesi. 

Ten'  eva  Attbakatbayam : 

Gantvana  Rakkbitatbero  Vanavasim  mabiddbiko 
Antalikkbe   tbito  tattba   desesi  anamataggiyan  ti  vuttam. 


'  S.  gbatetva.     D.  gbattbetva.         ^  D.  S.  Garulbo. 
3  A.  candima-ramisvaro.  ^  A.  Kamabrannagbarato. 

B.  Kamab-ran-nagarato.     D.  Ka-ma-ra° 
5  A.  ukbum.     B.  ujum.     D.  Ca-na-kbum. 


-^         53        r^ 

Evam  Vanavaslrattlie  pubbe  yeva  sasanam  ogahetva 
patitthahi.     Na  pana  tava  sakalam  vyapetva  patitthabi. 

Idam  tava  Vanavasirattbe  Sirikhettanagare  diitiyam 
sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Jinacakke  pana  tettimsadbike  catuvassasato  Kukkutaslso 
nama  eko  raja  rajjam  karesi.  Tassa  raiifio  kale  bbagavato 
savaka  arabauta  paficamatta  abesum,  Tesaiu  pi  so  raja 
devasikam  catubi  paccayebi  upattbambbesi.  Sotapanna- 
sakadagami-anagamino  pana  gananapatbam  vitivatta  abesum. 

Idam  Yanavasirattbe  Sirikbettanagare  paramparabbata- 
vasena  tatiyam  sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Iccevam  Yanavasirattbe  anekasatebi  arabantatberebi 
sasanam  punnindusamkasam  butva  ativiya  vijjotesi. 

Sasanikagandbakrirti,  pana  inabatbera  tattba  na  samdis- 
santi.  Arabantatbera  pana  rajimam  ayacanam  arabbba 
dbammasattbam   ekarn  viracayimsu   ti  porana  vadantP  ti. 

Iccevam: 

Te  ca  tbera  mabapanfia 
Paggabetvana  sasanam 
Suriyo  viya  attbaiigo 
Upaga^  maccu  santikam. 

Tasma  bi  pandito  poso 
Yava  maccu  na  c'agato 
Tava  pumiam  kare  niccam 
Ma  pamajjeyya  sabbada  ti. 

Iti  Sasanavamse  Yanavasirattbasasanavamsakatbamaggo 
nama  pancamo  pariccbedo.  ^ 

Idiini   pana  Marammamandale  Aparantarattbe   sasana-  ^ 

vamsam  vakkbami. 

Ambakam  kira^  Marammarattbe  Suppadakatittbe  Yanija- 
game  vasante  Culapunna-Mabfipunne  dve  bbatike  paticca 
bbagavato  dbaramanass'  eva  "•  atirekavisativassakalato 
pabbuti    sasanam    patittbasi.      Na    pana    tava    vyapetva 


'  A.  B.  vedanti.         ^  Min:  upaya.  .      ^  Min:  bi. 
4  B.  bbavato  maramanass'  eva. 


patitthasi.  Ten'  eva  puna  sasanassa  patitthapanatthaya 
Maha-Moggaliputta-Tissatbero  Yonaka-Dhammarakkhita- 
theram  pesesi  ti.  Bhagava  pana  Lohita-candana-viharam 
patiggahetva  satta  sattahani  nisiditva  samagatanam  ^  deva- 
manussanam  dhammarasam  adasi.  Sattahesu  ca  ekasmim 
ekasmim  abu.  Caturasiti  panasahassanani  dhammabhisamayo 
abosi  pancasatamattebi  ca  pasadebi  agaccbanto  antara- 
magge  Saccabandbapabbate^  nisinnassa  Saccabandbassa 
nama  isino  dbammara  desetva  cbabi  abbinnabi  saddbini 
arabattam  papesi. 

Vanijagame  ca  Isidinnasettbi  adinam  pi  dbammarasam 
payesi. 

Iccevam  Saccabandba-Isidinna-Mabapunnadayo  paticca 
ambakam  Marammamandale  sasanam  patittbasi. 

Idam  Marammamandale  Aparantarattbe  patbamam 
sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Bbagavato  parinibbanato  3  pancatimsadbike  dvivassasate 
sampatte  tatiyasamgitim  samgayitva  avasane  Maba-Mogga- 
liputta-Tissatbero  attano  saddbivibarikamYonaka-Dbamma- 
rakkbitatberam  saddbim  catubi  bbikkbiibiAparantarattbam 
pesesi.  Aparantarattban  ca  nama  ambakam  Maramma- 
mandale Sunaparantarattbam  eva.  Tam  attbam  pana  bettba 
avocumba. 

Yonaka  -  Dbammarakkbitatbero  pi  Aparantarattbam 
agantva  Aggikkbandbopamasuttena  rattbavaslnam  pasadesi. 
Sattatimattanam  panasabassanam  dbammarasam  payesi. 
Rattbavasino  ca  babavo  sasane  pabbajimsu,  rajakulato  pi 
sabassamatta  pabbajimsu,  ittbinam  pana  atirekasattbi- 
sabassamatta  pabbajimsu.  Tan  ca  na  Aggikkbandbo- 
pamasuttantara  sutva  pabbajantinani  ittbinam  vasena  vuttam. 
Atba  kbo  adito  pattbaya  yava  cirakalam  sasanam  pasi- 
ditva  pabbajantinam  ittbinam  vasena  vuttan  ti  dattbabbam. 
Kasma  ti  ce :  Ittbinam  bbikkbuninam  santike  yeva  pabba- 
jitum  yuttatta.  Yonaka  -  Dbammarakkbitatberena  ca 
saddbim      bbikkbuninam      anagatatta      evam      cirakalam 

^  B.  sabagatanam.         ^  A.  B.  Saccabanda° 
3  A.  parinibbutato. 


~$^     55     «§- 

atikkamitvil  pacchri  bliikkhuniyo  agantva  tasam  santike 
pabbajitrinam '  vasena  vuttan  ti  dattliabbam. 

Sihaladlpe  Aniiladeviya  pabbajitakrde  Maha-Mahinda- 
therassa  Samgbamittatheriya  pakkosanata  idba  fiapaka  ti. 

Evam  Yonaka-Dliammarakkhitatherani  paticca  Apa- 
rantaratthe  sattanam  bahupakaro  ahosi.  Ten'  ev'  Attha- 
kayam: 

Aparantam  vigahitva  Yonaka-Dbaminarakkbito 
Aggikkbandhupamen'  ettba  pasadesi  jane  babu  ti. 

Tatthayam  adbippayaviseso  gabetabbo. 

Katham?  Aggikkbandbopamasuttantam  nama  bbikkbii- 
nani  patipattivasena  vuttam  tarn  bbikkhimani  yeva  desetum 
vattati^.  Tbero  pi  tattba  tarn  desesi.  Tasma  Pimna- 
Saccabandbildayo  paticca  bbagavato  dharamanassa  vlsati- 
vassakale  yeva  sasanam  Aparantarattbe  patittbabitva  kas- 
miiici  kasmiiici-3  thane  bbikkbiinam  samvijjamrmatta  tesam 
bbikkhimam  samgabetva  desetum  paccba  agatanan  ca 
bbikkbiinam  parisuddbacaranam*  viiiuripetiim  Aggikkban- 
dbiipamasuttam  tbero  desesi  ti. 

Evaii  ca  sati  Arimaddananagare  samanakiittakanam 
samvijjamanabhavani  vakkbamanena  vacanena  sameti. 

Idam  Marammamandale  Aparantarattbe  dutiyam  sasa- 
nassa  patittbanam. 

Yasma  pana  buddbo  bbagava  Punnattberassa  yacanam 
arabldia  Aparantarattham  agantva  vanijebi  karite  Canda- 
navibare  vasitva  ekasmim  samaye  Anandena  paccha  sa- 
manena  Tambadiparattbam  pi  desacarikams  abindi. 
Abinditva  Arimaddananagarattbanasamipam  patva  pabba- 
tamnddbani  tbatva  anagate  kbo  Ananda  imasmim  padese 
Sammuti  nSma  raja  Arimaddanam  nama  nagaram  mapes- 
sati,  tasmiii  ca  nagare  mama  sasanam  virulbam  butva 
patitthabissati  ti  vyakasi,  Ayam  attbo  poranavedapottba- 
kesu  vutto. 


^  B.  pabbajitani.         ^  D.  desetu  sumvattbati. 
3  B.  kasmihca  kasminca. 

'^  B.  corrects  to  "cfiranam    A.  parisuddbacrirakam. 
5  D.  rattbani  padesa° 


-^     56     f^ 

Yonaka  -  Dhammarakkbitathero  ca  Aparantarattham 
agantva  Tambadiparattham  pi  abinditva  Tarabadiparattba- 
vaslnam  pi  dbammarasam  piiyesi  yeva.  Ayam  attbo 
kbattiyakulato  eva  purisasabassani  pabbajimsu  ti  Attba- 
katbayam  vuttatta  vifmayati.  Tada  bi  Aparantarattbe 
kbattiyo  nattbi  Tambadiparattbindo  yeva  tarn  anusasetva 
abbivasati. 

Kbattiye  ca  asante  kuto  kbattiyakulani  bbavissanti  ? 
Ten'  eva  Tambadiparattbato  purisasabassani  pabbajimsu 
ti  vinnatabbam. 

Tasma  Tambadlpikasasanavamsam  pi  idba^  vattum 
yujjati.    Ten'  idani  Tambadlpikasasanavamsam  vakkbami^. 

Ambakam  bi  Marammamandale  Tambadlparattbe  Ari- 
maddananagare  Sammutiraja  nama  bbiipfilo  rajjam  karesi. 
Tato  pattbaya  yava  Anuruddbaranfia  Samati  -  namake  ^ 
dese  nisinnanam  timsasabassamattanam  samanakuttaka- 
nam  sattbisabassamattanam  sissanam  ovadam  datva  ca- 
rimsu. 

Tesain  pana  samanakuttakanaiu  ayam  vado: 

Sace  yo  panatipatam  kareyya  so  idisam  parittam  bba- 
nanto  tamba  papakamma  parimunceyya.  Sace  pana  yo 
matapitaram  bantva  anantariyakammato  parimuccitukamo 
bbaveyya  idisam  parittam  l)baneyya.  Sace  pi  puttadbita- 
nam  avabavivabakammam  kattukamo  bbaveyya  acariyanam 
patbamam  niyyadetva  avabavivabakammam  katabbam.  Yo 
idam  carittam  atikkameyya  babu  apufmam  pasaveyya  ti 
evam  adibi  miccbavadcbi  attano  attano  upagatanam  ova- 
dam  adamsu.  Tam  attbam  sutva  Anuruddbaraja  paricita- 
puiino  tesarn  vadam  na  ruci.  Ayam  tesam  miccbavado  ti, 
Tada  ca  Arimaddananagare  Arabanto  nSma  tbero  agantva 
sasanam  patittbapesi.  Ayam  Arabantatberassa  attbuppatti 
Riijavamsagata-Parittanidanagata-Sasanapaveniyagatavase- 
na*  tividba  boti.  Tattbayam  Rajavamsagatattbuppatti. 
Tada  bi  Sunaparanta-Tambadiparattbesu  sabbena  sabbam 
sabbada    tbirani    sasanam    na    tava    patittbasi.     Ten'  eva 

^  D.  idam.  ^  Min:  pavakkbami.  ^  B.  Sammuti" 

4  I).  S.  '"pavesani" 


bhagavata  byakataniyameua  sasanam  patitthapessama  ti 
cintetva  maliathera  Sakkassa  devanam  indassa  santikain 
gantva  sasanam  aiiuggaliitum  samattham^  puggalam  delil  ti 
yacimsu.  Sakko  ca  devanam  indo  Tavatimsabliavane  ekam 
devaputtam  yacitva  ekisstl  brabmaniya  kucchimhi  pati- 
sandbim  ganbapesi. 

Dasamasaccayeua  vijayanakrde  Sllaljuddbi  nama  tbero 
anurakkbitva  vaye  sampatte  pabbajesi. 

Tisu  pitakesu  ativiya  cbeko  butva  arabattam^  papuni. 
Arabanto  ti  namena  pakato  abosi.  So  ca  tbero  Maram- 
mamandale  jinasasanam  vijjotapetiim  Arimaddananagaram 
agantva  nagarato  avidure  ekasmim  aranfie  nisidi.  Tada 
Sakko  devanam  indo  ekam  nesadara  palopetva-^  tassa 
tberam  dassesi.     Atba  nesadassa  etad  abosi: 

Ayam  pana  amanusso  yakkbo  bbaveyya  sace  pana  manusso 
bbaveyya  evam  sati  milakkbajatiko  bbaveyya  ti. 

Evam  pana  cintetva  raniio  dassanattbaya  nagaram  anesi. 
Tbero  ca  attba  parikkbare  gabetva  anugaccbi.  Nesado 
ca  tberam  anetva  raiino  dassesi.  Raja  disva  santindriyo 
ayam  na  mibikkbajatiko  imassa^  abbbantare  saradbammo 
attbi  maiine  ti  laddbasuriyobbasam  viya  padumani  pbuUa- 
cittam  butva  vimamsitukamo s  tberam  aba:  attano  sarup- 
parn  asanam  natva  nisidabi  ti. 

Tbero  ca  raj ap alia iikam  arubitva  nisidi.  Raja  ca  ayani 
aggasane  nisidi.  Avassam  aggapnggalo  bbaveyya  ti  cintetva 
tvarn  kassa  nati  kassa  sisso  kuto  ilgato'  si  ti  puccbi. 
Tbero  ca  evam  aba: 

Lokasmim  yo  navagunasampanno  bliagava  sammasam- 
buddbo  tassabam  nati  so  bliagava  yeva  mam'  acariyo 
bbikkbusaragbassa  nisiunattbanato  agato  'mbi  ti. 

Raja  ca  somanassappatto  butva  rdia : 

Tava  acariyena  desitam  dliammain  ekadesato  desebl  ti. 
Atba  yatba  Siri-Dliammasokaraiino  Nigrodbasamanerena 
appamadadbammo  desito  evam  appamadadbammam  yeva 
tbero  desesi. 


^  B.  tam  attbam.     ^  Min:  arabantam.     j  Min:  palapetva. 
t  B.  dumassa.         s  Min:  vimamsetukamo. 


-^     58     ^<^ 

Raja  ca  puna  aha:  Kuliin  dani  sammasambuddlio  nisl- 
dati,  tena  pana  desito  dhainmo  katipamano  tassa  savaka 
paua  katipamana  tumhadisa  aniie  attlii  va  ma  va  ti. 

Idani  amhakam  acariyo  sammasambuddlio  parinibbuto 
dhatuyo  yeva  idani  atthi  tena  pana  desito  dhammo  catu- 
rilsiti  dhammakkhandhasabassapamano.  Sudbammapure 
pitakattayam  yugalavasena  tividbam  atthi  maya  anno  para- 
matthasammutivasena  duvidho  pi  samgho  atthi  ti. 

Tarn  sutva  raja  bhiyosomattaya  pasanno  hutva  puna 
arocesi:  Mama  bhante  imasmim  paccakkhe  natthi  taya 
anno  natho.  Ajjatagge  panupetam  mam  upasako  ti  dha- 
rehi,  tava  ovadam  aham  sirasa  patiganhissami  ti.  Tato 
paccha  Arahfiakaiigarahe  thane  viharam  karapetva  adasi. 
Samanakuttakanam  pi  vadam  bhindi.  Yatha  pana  suvanna- 
patim  hibhitva  suvannabhajanam  labhitva  mattikabhajanan 
ti  sakale  pi  ca  ratthe  samanakuttakanam  vadam  jahapesi. 

Tasmih  sa  kale  samanakuttaka  ^  hinalabha  hutva 
therassa  upanaham  bandhimsu^.  Te  pana  samanakuttaka 
arahfie  nissamika  viya  koleyaka  sunakhil  anatha  hutva 
kayikacetasikadukkham  lal)himsu. 

Eiija  ca  tam  attham  hatva  yatha  samanakuttaka  nabhi- 
bhavanti-5  tatha  arakkham  thapesi.  Te  ca  samanakuttake 
setavattham  nivasapetva  avudhagahayodhabhavena  raja- 
kamme  niyojapesi.  Thero  ca  sasane  pasanne  jane  pabba- 
jetva  upasampadetva  sasanam  visodhapesi.  Raja  ca  imasmim 
ratthe  poranika  rajano  samanakuttakanam  vadam  gahetva 
rajjam  karesum,  sace  hi  pana  tesam  anatthakarajjam* 
puna  ganhapetum  sakkuneyyam  evam  sati  aham  tesam 
anatthakarajjam  apanetva  satthakarajjam  ganhapetum 
icchami  ti  anusoci  ti. 

Ayam  pana  Parittanidanagatatthuj^patti. 

Sihaladipe  kira  Vijjavaslnagare  nisinno  eko  bhikkhu 
Upadvaravatinagaram  5  gantva  pariyattim  ugganhi. 


'  B.  "kuttika.         -  D.  bhindimsu. 

3  D.  nabhambhibhavanti.         •*  D.  anatta" 

5  A.  Upamaravati° 


TatopaccliaSudhammapuram  gantva  pariyattim  ugganhi. 

Tasmin  ca  kale  Sirikhettanagare  patalinikkhe  eko  gandlio 
atthi  ti  sutva  Sudhammapurato  Sirikhettanagaram  agamasi. 
Antaramagge  luddako  tberam  passitva  ayarp.  yakkho  ti 
mannitva  gahetva  Anuraddliaranfio  dassesi.  Tada  raja 
theram  piicchi:  Ko  pana  tvan  ti. 

Aham  mahriiTija  Gotamassa  savako  ti. 

Puna  raja  pucchi:  Tinnam  pana  ratananam  kidiso  ti. 

Thero  aha:  maliosadhapandito  viya  mabaraja  biiddho 
dattbabbo;  ummaggo  viya  dbammo;  Videbasena  viya 
samgbo  ti.  Evam  upamabi'  pakasito  raja  puna  puccbi: 
kin  uu  kbo  ime  Gotamassa  savaka  ti. 

Na  kbo  mabaraja  ime  Gotamassa  savaka,  ime  pana 
ambebi  visabbaga  samanakuttaka  yeva  ti  evam  vutte  tato 
pattbaya  te  samanakuttake  vijabi.  Tinam  viya  natimanni- 
pataHrukkbasusirato  pi  laddbam  tesam  gandbam  bxddbat- 
tbane  yeva  aggina  jbapesi. 

Tam  pi  tbanam  yavajjataua  Aggijbfipanatabm  ti  paka- 
tam  ti.  Tbero  ca  Vimrmavattbura  rafiiio  desesi.  Raja  ca 
pasiditva  Sirikbettanagarato  Arimaddananagararu  pacca- 
gamanakrde  anesi. 

Idam  pana  patalisusire  laddbagandbassa  karanam.  Te- 
sam hi  samanakuttakanam  abbbantare  eko  upayacbeko 
samanakuttako  attano  vadanurupam  gandbam  katva  Siri- 
kbettanagare  dvattimsa  ratanakbandbassa  patalirukkbassa 
susire  pavesetvil  punap})unam  udakena  temetva  mattikaya 
limpetva  puna  tacani  uppadetva  uttbapesi. 

Tada  mayani  supine -3  patalirukkbe  saragandbo  attba- 
vyanjanasampanno  eko  attbi  ti  passama  ti  kolabalam 
uppadesuDQ.  Tam  sutva  raja  Sirikbettanagaram  gantva 
tam  patalirukkbain  bbinditva  gavesanto^  tam  gandbam  ^ 
labbi.  Gandbe  pana  sakavadavasena  samanakuttakasa- 
mannata  idisa  yeva  ete  Gotamasavaka  bonti  etesam  yeva 
acaro     saggamaggapatbabbiito    ti    evam     adibi     karanebi 


'  I),  upamabara.        -  A.  natimainie.        3  Min:  supinena. 
4  A.  gavesento. 


-^         60        r^ 

vuttam.       Raja     ca     pasiditva     samanakuttanam     bahuni 
databbani  adasi. 

Tato  paccha  therassa  dhammakatham  sutva  tarn  aggina 
jhapesi  ti  evam  samanakiittakanam  vacanam  sutva  Siri- 
khettanagaram  gantva  Arimaddananagaram  paccagacchanto 
theram  auesi  ti  dattliabbain. 

Arimaddananagaram  sampattakale  Jetavanam  nama 
vihriram  karapetva  adasi.  Tliero  ca  tattlia  sasanam  vi- 
sodhetva  nisidi.  E,aja  devasikam  udakam  anetva  agga- 
mahesi'  pana  devasikam  yeva  pindapatam  anetva  bhojesi. 
Uppannakaiikhakale^  pi  tarn  tarn  kankhathanam  pucchi  ti. 

Ayam  pana  Sasanapaveniyagatatthuppatti. 

Sudhammapure  hi  samapattilabhl  Anomadassi  nama 
tliero  Sonuttaratheranaiii  vamsanurakkbanavasena  saddbim 
pancabi  bbikkbusatebi  nisidi.  Tassa  pana  padbanasisso 
Adbisilo  nama,  tassa  padbanasisso  Pranadassi  nama, 
tassa  padbanasisso  Kalo  nama,  tassa  padbanasisso  Ara- 
banto  nama,  tassa  j^adbanasisso  Ariyavamso  nama  ti. 
Idan  ca  vacanani. 

Ko  pan'  esa  Uttarajlvamabatbero  3  ti.  Ayam  bi  tbero 
Ramafinadesiyaputto  Ariyavamsatberassa  sisso  Ariya- 
varasatbero  pana  Kappiiiiganagaravasl''  Mabakalatberassa 
sisso.  So  pana  Sudbammanagaravasino  Pranadassimaba- 
tberassa  sisso  ti  Kalyanisilrdekbane  vuttavacanena  na 
sametis.  Evam  pi  sati  yatbiccbitadbipi^ayo  na  nassati  ti 
dattbabbam. 

Evam  nanacariyanam  vado  nanakarena  dissamano  pi 
Arabantatberassa  Arimaddananagare  sasanam  anugga- 
betva  patittbanata^  yev'  ettba  pamanan  ti  katva  nava- 
mannitabbo. 

Sabbesam  bi  acariyanam  vade  pi  Arabantatbero  Ari- 
maddananagaram  agantva    sasanam   patittbapesi  ti   attbo 


^  B.  aggamabesim.         ^  A.  °kankbam° 

3  D.  S.  Uttarasajlva°        ^  B.  corrects  to  Kambuiiga" 

5  A.  KalyanisiL"dekbanI  vuttavacanena  sameti. 

^  INfin:  patittbanaka. 


-^         61         H^ 

iccbitabbo  yeva  ti,  Araliantathero  pana  mulanamena 
Dhammadassl  ti  pakato  Sudhammapuravasi  Silabuddhithe- 
rassa  sisso  ti  datthabbo. 

So  ca  tbero  piibbeva  pabbajjakalato  catusu  vedesii 
sikkbitasippo. 

Pabbajitva  pana  sattbakatbam  pitakattayam  ugganbitva 
param  gantva  sabbattba  pakato.  Sokkatayanagaram ' 
ilnetva  manussa  piijenti. 

Tattba  dasa  vassani  vasitva  puna  Sudbammapuram 
agantva  araiinavasam  samadayi^. 

Tato  paccba  jinacakke  ekasattbadbike  pancasate  sabasse 
ca  sampatte  kabyuge  ekasattatadbike  tisate  sampatte 
Auuniddbaraja  rajjam  papuni. 

Tada  Arimaddananagare  samanakuttaka^  mayam  Gota- 
masavaka  ti  vatva  tinasatimsavagga^  butva  nisidimsii. 
Vaggavasena  kira  sabassamatta  tis. 

Anuruddbaraja  ca  tesam  samanakuttakanam  agariya- 
brabmacariyadini  sutvana  pasidi.  Evam  pi  paveniya  aga- 
tatta  na  pajabi. 

Arabantam  pana  tberam  passitva  tato  pattbaya  tesam 
samanakuttakanam  nibaddbavattani'^bbinditva  sasane  pasidi. 

Idam  Marammamandale  Tambadlparattbe  Arimaddana- 
nagare Arabantam  nama  tberam  paticca  tatiyam  sasanassa 
patittbanam. 

Tasmiii  ca  kale  Arabantattbero  Anuruddbarajanara  aba: 

Tisu  sasanesu  pariyattisasane  tittbante  yeva  patipatti- 
sasanam  tittbati  patipattisasane  tittbante  yeva  pativedba7- 
sasanam  tittbati. 

Yatba  bi  gunnam  sate  pi  sabasse  pi  vijjamane  paveni- 
palikaya  dbenuya  asati  so  vamso  sa  paveni  na  gbatiyati 
evam  evam  dbutaiigadbaranam  bbikkbunam**  sate  pi  sa- 
basse pi  vijjamane  pariyattiya  antarabitaya  pativedbo  nama 
na  boti.  Yatba  pana  nidbikumbbiyo  jananattbaya  pasana- 
pittbe  akkbaresu  tbapitesu  yava  akkbarani  dbaranti  tava 


^  A,  Sokkata°         ^  Min:  samadiyi    D.  samadbiyi. 

3  B.  D.  °kuttika.  ^  D.  tisatisavaggl.  s  D.  or^ji 

^  D.  °ttbani.         ^  B.  pativeda.  '  S.  omits. 


■^>4     62     Hs-- 

nidhikumbliiyo  nattlia  nama  na  honti  ti  evam  evam  pari- 
yattiya   dharamanriya  sasanam    anantarahitan   nama    hoti. 

Yatha  va  mahato^  talakassa  paliya  thiraya  udakam  na 
thassatl  ti  na  vattabbam  udake  sati  padumadlni  puppliani 
na  puppbissanti  ti  na  vattabbam.  Evam  evam  mabatala- 
kassa  thirapalisadise  tepitake  buddhavacane  sati  udaka- 
sadisa  patipattipiiraka  kulaputta  nattbi  ti  na  vattabbam 
tesu  sati  padumadipuppbasadiso  pativedbo  nattbi  ti  na 
vattabbam.  Evam  ekantato  pariyattim  eva  pamanam  tasma 
antamaso  dvisu  patimokkbesii  vattamanesu  pi  sasanam 
anautarabitam  eva  pariyattiya  antarabitilya  supatipannassa 
pi  dbammabbisamayo  nattbi  anantarabitaya  eva  dbamma- 
bbisamayo  attbi.  Idani  pi  ambakam  pariyattisasanam 
paripunnam  nattbi,  sariradbatuyo  ca  nattbi,  tasma  yattba 
pariyattisasanam  sariradbatuyo  ca  attbi  tattba  pannakarena 
saddbim  diitam^  pesetva  anetabba.  Evam  sati  ambakam 
rattbe  jinasSsanam  cirakalam  patittbabissati  ti. 

Evam  pane  bbante  sati  kattba  yacissama  ti. 

Suvannabbumirattbe  mabaraja  Sudbammapure  tihi  varehi 
pitakattayam  likbitva  thapeti  sariradbatuyo  ca  babii  tattba 
attbi  ti. 

Raja  evam  bbante  ti  patiganhitva  babii  pannakare  pati- 
yadetva  rajalekbanani  likbitva  attbangasamannagatam  3 
ekam  amaccam  dutam  katva  pesesi. 

Sadbammapurindo  Manobari^  nama  raja  pi  maccbera- 
citto  butva  tumbadisanam  miccbadittblnam  tbane  pita- 
kattayam sariradbatuyo  ca  pabinitum  na  yutta  tilokaggassa 
bi  sammasambuddbassa  sasanam  sammadittblnam  tbane 
yeva  patittbabissati  yatba  nama  kesarasibarajassa  vasa 
suvannapatiyam  yeva  na  mattikabbajane  ti. 

Duta  paccagantva  Anuruddbaranfio  tarn  attham  arocesum. 
Tani  sutva  Anuruddbaraja  kujjhi,  tattakakapale  pakkbit- 
tatilam  viya  tatatatayi. 


'  D.  Mabati  and  adds:    yatba  ca  mababbo  talatakassa. 
^  D.  dutiyara.         3  A.  sampannagatam. 
■*  B.  corrects  to  Manomari. 


-^     63     -^ 

Atlia  raja  nacllmaggena  navanam  asltisatasahassehi 
navikanam,  yodhanam  attha  kotlhi  senam  vyiihitva^  thala- 
maggena  saddhim  catulii  mahayodlianriyakelii^  batthinam 
asitisahasselii ,  assanam  navutisatasaliassehi ,  yodhanam 
asiti  kotiya  senam  vyuliitva  sayam  eva  yujjliitiiin  Sudhamma- 
piiram  gacchi. 

Tarn  sutva  Manohariraja  bhltatasito  hiitva  attano  bahii 
yodbe  samvidabitva  Sudhammapure  yeva  patisenam  katva 
nisidi.  Atba  Atbabbanavede  agatapayogavasena  punappu- 
nam  vayamanta  pi  nagaramulam  upasamkamitum  na  sakka. 
Tada  rSja  vedanfmno  puccbi:  Kasma  pan'  ettba  nagara- 
miilam  upasamkamitum  na  sakkoma  ti.  Vedannuno  ahamsu : 
Athabbanavedavidbanam  maharaja  attbi  manne  ti.  Atba 
raja  patbaviyam  nidahitva  matakalevaram  uddbaritva 
mabasamudde  kbipesi. 

Ekam  kira  manussam  bindukubim  Jogylnamakarn  j 
kitam  kbadapetva'*  tarn  maretva  battbapadadini  angapac- 
caiigani  gabetva  cbinnabbinnani  s  katva  nagarassa  samanta 
patbaviyam  nidahitva  thapesi. 

Tada  pana  nagaram  upasamkamitum  sakka.  Nagaran 
ca  pavisitva  Anuruddharaja  Manobarirajanam  jivaggabam 
ganhi.  Sudhammapure  poranikanam  rajimam  paveni-agata- 
vasena  ratanamayamafijiisayam  thapetva  pi'ijitam  sabadba- 
tuhi  pitakattayam  gabetva  Manohariranno  santakanaiii 
dvattimsabatthlnam  pittbiyam  arojietva  anesi.  Arimadda- 
nanagaram  pana  patva  dhatuyo  ratanamayamanjusfiyam 
thapetva  sirisayanagabbbe  ratanamance  sisopadesassa  sami- 
pe  thapesi.  Pitakattayam  pi  ratanamaye  pasade  thapetva 
bhikkbusamghassa  uggahadhriranadiattbay a  ^  niyy adesi. 

Tato  kira  anitam  23itakattayam  uggauhantanam  ariyanam 
sahassamattam  abosi  ti.  Sudhammanagarani  vijabitva7 
pitakena  saddhim  bhikkbusamgham  anetva  sasanassa 
patittbapanam  ^  jinacakke  ekadhike  chasate  vassasabasse9 


^  D.  byabitva.         ^  D.  °yoja"         3  A.  Jyongyam° 

4  Min:  dapetva    D.  dadapetva. 

5  A.  B.  chinnacbinnani.         ^  A,  uggabana" 

7  A.  vijabitva.        ^  A.  patittbanam.         9  D.  sahassa  iv 


-^     64     f<g- 

kaliyuge  ca  sojasadhike  catusate  sampatte  ti  silalekhanesu 
vuttam.  Anurucldliarafmo  kale  punnanubhavena  tinnam 
ratananam  parij)unimtta  ^  punnagamo  ti  samanna  ahosi. 
Cirakalam  atikkante  nnakaranam^  lopavasena  makarassa 
ca  niggahitavasena  Piigam3  iti  Marammabliasaya  voliari- 
yati  ti  Anagatavamsa-Eajavaiiisesu  vuttam. 

Aniiruddharaja  yeva  cattaro  mahayodhe  Sihaladipam 
{lesetva  tato  pitakattayam  anesi. 

Sihaladlpato  anitapitakattayena  Sudhammapurato  anita- 
pitakattayam  aniiainafinam  yojetva  samsandetva  Arahan- 
tatliero  vimamsesi. 

Tada  Gangodakena  viya  Yammodakam  annamaiinam 
animam  anadhikam  ahosi  tehi  pitakehi  aniiani  pi  vaddlietva* 
tipitakagabbhe  tliapetva  piijesi  tesu  tesu  pi  thanesu  pa- 
titthripesi. 

Manoharirajanam  pi  Mram-ka-pa  nama  dese  upatthakehi 
saha  thapesi.  Tassa  ca  kira  raiiiio  mukham  vivaritva 
katham  sallapentassa  mukhato  ol)haso  pajjalitva  nikkhami. 
So  kadaci  kadaci  Anuruddliaranno  santikaips  agantva 
garavavasena  vandanadini  akasi  tada  Anuruddharaniio 
lomahamso  uppajji  ubbiggo  ca.  Tasma^  tassa  raiiiio 
nittejattliaya  Buddharupassa  cetiyassa  bhattam  ptijetva 
tarn  gabetva  Manohariraniio  bbojesi.  Tada  tassa  tadanu- 
bbavo  antaradhayi.  Manoliariraja  samvegam  apajjitva 
samsare  samsaranto  yava  nibbanam  na  papunami  tava 
paravasenaniivatteyyan  ti  pattlianam  akasi. 

Sudhammapurato  al3hatani7  attano  santakam  manomaya- 
manim^  ekassa  setthino  santike  vikkinitva  Laddhamulena 
pahcavaharajatena  abhujitapallankavasena  ekam  mahan- 
tam  buddhabimbam  parinibbanakarena  ekan  ti  dve  buddha- 
patibimbani  karapesi.     Yilvajjatana  tani  santi  ti^. 


'  D.  paripunnato;   omits  punnagamo;   other  MSS.  puri- 
punnata. 

^  B.  atikkante  unnakaranara.         3  Min:  Pumgam. 
4  B.  vattetva.         5  B.  santike.        ^  D.  kasma. 
7  A.  agatam.         ^  A.  manomanim. 
9  B.  Yavajjatama  asanti  ti    S.  fini  santi  ti. 


^.     65     H^ 

Iccevam  Anuruddharaja  Sudhammapurato  Silialadipato 
ca  sasanam  anetva  Arimaddananagare  patitthapesi  ti. 

Idam  amhakam  Marammamandale  Tambadiparatthe  Ari- 
maddananagare Amiruddharajanam  paticca  catuttham  sa- 
sanassa  patitthanam. 

Uttarajivathero  pi  Sonuttaranarn  vamsato  sasanam  ga- 
hetva  Sudhammapurato  Arimaddananagaram  agantva  sa- 
sanarp.  patitthapesi. 

Idam  amhakani  Marammamandale  Tambadiparatthe 
Arimaddananagare  Uttarajivatheram  paticca  paficamam 
sasanassa  patitthanam. 

Uttarajlvatherassa  Sihaladlpam  gatahrde  tena  saddhim 
gatam  Chapadam  nama  samaneram  Sihaladlpe  yeva  Sihala- 
dipika  pabbajimsu. 

Pabbajitva  ca  Chapadasamanero  pariyattim  ugganhitva 
dasavassam  tattha  vasitva  Arimaddananagaram  pacca- 
gacchi. 

SivalTtherah  ca  Tamalindatherah  ca  Anandatherari 
ca  Rahuhxtherah  ca  anesi.  Te  pana  thera  tipitakadhara 
honti  vyatta  dakkha  ca,  ayafi  c'attho  vittharena  hettha 
vutto. 

Arimaddananagaram  patva  Arimaddanavasihi  bhikkhidii 
saddhim  Vinayakammani  akatva  puthu  luitva  nisidimsu. 
Narapatiraja  ca  tesu  theresu  ativiya  pasidi. 

Eravatlnadiyam  uhimpam  bandhitva  tatth'  eva  upasam- 
padakammam  karapesi.  Cirakalam  atikkamitva  so  gano 
vuddhi  hutva  uppajji.  Narapatiraja  te  there  saddhim 
sams^hena  nimantetva  mahadanam  adasi.  Tada  chane 
akappasampunnam  rupasobhaggappattara  ekarn  natakitthim 
disva  Rahuhithero  patibaddhacitto  lepe  higgitavanaro 
viya  kaddame  laggitamataiigo  viya  ca  kamagunalepakadda- 
mesu^  Laggito  hutva  sasane  viramitva  hlnaya  vattitum 
arabhi^. 

Maranantikarogena  abhibhuto  viya  atekiccho  hutva  se- 
satheresu  ovadam  dinnesu  pi  nadiyi.  Tada  sesathera  tarn 
evam  ahamsu3: 


^  B.  kamaraga"  ^  A.  arabhati.  3  A.  S.  D.  aha. 

Sasana-Vamsa.  O 


-^     66     i<- 

Ma  tvam  ekam  tain'  paticca  sabbe  pi  ambe  lajjapetuiii 
na  arabasi.  Ma  idba  binaya  vattebi,  Mallrirudipam  ^  gantva 
yatba  riicim  karobi  ti  pesesum  Rabulatbero  ca  Kusima- 
tittbato  navam  aruyba  Mallarudipam  ugamasi.  Mallaru- 
dipam  pattakale  Mallriruraja  Vinayam  janitukamo  sabati- 
kaya  Kbuddasikkbapakaranara  tassa  santike  ugganbitva 
ekapattamattam  inanim  adasi.  So  ca  tarn  labbitva  binaya 
vatti  ti. 

Honti  c'ettba: 

Atidiire  va  botabbam  bbikkbuna  nama  ittbibbi3 
Ittbiyo  nama  bbikkbiinam  bbavanti  idba  verino. 

Tava  tittbantu  diippanba,  mayam*  poranika  pi  ca 
Mabapaiiiia  vinasam  patta  baritacadayos. 

Tasma  bi  pandito  bbikkbu  antamaso  va  ittbibbi 
Vissasam  na  kare  loke  rago  ca  duppavarito  ti. 

Sesesu  ca  tberesu  Cbapado  nama  tbero  patbamam  kalam 
kato.  Sivall-Tamalindanandatbera^  yeva  tayo  pariyatti- 
uggabanadbaranadivasena?  sasanam  upattbambbetva  Ari- 
maddananagare  nisldimsu.  Ekasmin  ca  kale  raja  tesam 
tinnam  tberaaam  ekekam  battbim  adasi.  Slvall-Tamalin- 
datbera  patiggabetva  vane  vissajjapesum.  Anandatbero 
pana  Kificipuranagaram^  pabinitva  natakanam  debl  ti 
Kusimatittbam  gantva  navam  aropesi.  Tarn  karanam  fiatva 
Sivall-Tamabndatbera  tarn  evam  abamsu: 

Mayam  pana  avnso  battbinam  sukbattbaya  vane  9  vissaj- 
jema,  tvam  pana  adbammikam  karosi  ti.  Kin  nama  bbante 
iiatakanain  samgabo  na  vattati?  nann  natakanan  ca 
samgabo  ti  bbagavata  vuttan  ti. 

Tbera    abamsu:     Sace    tvam    ambakam    vacanam    na 

'  B.  ekamkam  paticca  {corrected  f rout  ekam  tvam)  S.  omits. 

^  B.  corrects  to  Malayadipam.         3  Min:  ittbibi. 

4  B.  ayam.         s  B.baritacbadayo. 

^  A.  and  B.  omit  Ananda.         7  B.  ugganbana" 

"*  D.  Kicci?         9  D.  gane. 


-^     67     ■<^ 

kareyyasi  tava  iccliixnurupam  karolii.     Mayam  pana  taya 
saddhim  samvasaiu  na  karissamil  ti  visum  nisidimsu. 

Tato  patthaya  dve  gana  bliijjiiiisu.  Tato  pacchakale 
atikkante  Tamalindathero  balmssutanam  vyattil^alanam 
sissanam  anuggaliattliaya  galiatthanam  santike  ayam 
baliussiito  ayiim  maliapafino  ti  evam  adina  vacl-viniiattim 
samuttbapesi.  Evam  kate  kulaputta  sulabbapaccayavasena 
sasanassa  bitam  avahitum  sakkbissanti  ti  katva  tarn  kara- 
nam  sutva  Slvalitbero  evam  rdia:  Kasma  tvam  vaci- 
viiinattim  samuttbapetva  buddbapatikuccbitam  kammam 
karosi  ti?  Bhagavato  attano  attbaya  yeva  vacl-vinnatti 
patikkbitta.  Abam  pana  paresam  yeva  attbaya  vaci- 
viniiattim  samuttbapemi,  nattaiio  attbaya;  sasanassa  bi 
vepullattbaya ^  evam  vacl-vifinattim  samuttbapemi.  Siva- 
litbero  pi :  Na  tvam  mama  vacanam  karosi  yam  yam  tvam 
iccbasi  tam  tarn  karobi,  abam  pana  taya  saddbim  samva- 
sam  na  karissami  ti  visum  butva  saddbim  sakapakldiena 
nisldi.     Tato  pattbaya  tayo  gana  bbijjimsu. 

Evam  Arimaddananagai'o  Arabantatberassa  eko  vamso, 
Sivalitberassa  eko,  Tamalindatberassa  eko,  Anandatbe- 
rassa  eko  ti  cattaro  gana  abesum. 

Tesu  Arabantatberagano  Sudbammapurato  patbamam 
agatatta  purimagano  ti  vobrirlyati.  Aiifie  pana  paccba 
agatatta  paccbagana  ti. 

Sivalitbero  Arimaddananagare  yavajivam  sasanam 
pagganbitva  kabyuge  navutadbike  paucavassasate  kale 
kalam  akasi. 

Anandatbero  pana  Arimaddananagare  yeva  catucatta- 
lisavassani  sasanam  pagganbitva  cbanavutadbike  paiica- 
vassasate  kale  kalam  akasi. 

Tamalindatbero  pi  yavajivam  sasanam  pagganbitva 
attbanavutadbike    paucavassasate    kale    kalam    akasi    ti. 

Abo  samldiarasalibavo  ti. 

Seyyatb'  ajagarass'  eva^    nabbiya    cakkamandale 

Laggo  saso  bbamitva  pi  disam  gaccbati  tam  mukbam 


^  A.  B.  vebullattaya. 

^  D.  seyyatba  ca  nagarass'  eva. 


-^     68     f<- 

Tath'  eva  sabbasatta  pi  maccucakkesu  laggita 
Yavajivam  pi  dhavitva  maccumukham  upagamun^  ti. 

Iccevam  Arimaddanapure  arahantebi  ca  gandhakarehi 
ca  puthujjanelii  jinasasanam  nabhe  cando  viya  vijjotati. 

Tattba  bi  yada  Anuruddbaraja  Sudbammapurato  sasa- 
nam  anesi  tada  arabanta  cbasatasabassamatta^  agata, 
sotapannasakadagami-anagamino  pana  gananapatbam  viti- 
vatta  ti. 

Cbattagiibindassa3  nama  ranfio  krde  pi  Himavante 
Garidbamridanaj)abbatato  attba  arabanta  pindaya  raja- 
gebam  agamamsu.  Eaja  ca  pattam  gabetva  pindapatena 
bbojetva  idani  kuto  agatattba  ti  pucclii.  Himavante  maba- 
raja  Gandbamadanapabbatato  ti.  Atba  raja  atipasanno 
hutva  idba  temasam  vassam  upagaccbatba  ti  yacitva  viba- 
ram  krirapetva  adasi.  Temasam  bi  anto  gebe  nimantetva 
pindapatena  bbojesi*. 

Ekam  samayam  arabantanam  Gandbamadanapabbate 
Nandamtilaguliam  viya  ekam  gubam  mapetva  dassebl  ti 
yaci.  Te  ca  arabanta  Nandamulagubam  viya  ekam  gubam 
iddbiya  mapetva  dassesum.  Raja  ca  taya  gubaya  sadi- 
sam  ekarp.  guliam  karapesi.  Naudamiilagubakarenas  pana 
katatta  Nanda  iti  namam  pi  akasi.  Iccevam  Cbattagu- 
bindassa  rafifio  krde  Gandbamadanapabbate  Nandamula- 
gubato  agantva  arabanta  sasanam  patittbripesum. 

Arabantabbavo  ca  nam'  esa  yatbabbutam  janitum 
dukkaro  anupasampannanam  uttarimanussadbammadassa- 
nassa  patikkbittatta  arabattana  va  patva  pi  vasanaya  appa- 
jabitatta.  Araba  pi  bi  samano  abam  araba  ti  anupasam- 
pannanam katbetum  na  vattati.  Arabattam  patva  pi  ekacco 
vasanam  pajahitum  na  sakka. 

Pilindavaccbatheravattbu  c'ettba  napakam.  . 

Evam  loke  arabantabbavo  janitum  dukkaro.  Ten'  eva 
Maba-Kassapatberassa    upattbako     eko    bbikkbu    attano 


^  B.  vupagamun.         ^  B.  omits  cba. 

3  A.  Cbattagubindassa    B.  corrects  to  Cbattarubindassa. 

4  A.  bbojapesi.         s  D.  Nandana" 


-^>^     69     Hg- 

upajjhayassa  Maliakassapatlierassa  santike  vasitva  pi  tassa 
arahantabhavain  iia  juui. 

Maha-kassapatheram  hi  ekena  saddhiviharikena  saddhiiu 
araiifiaviharato  gamam  pindaya  carautam  antaramagge 
pattadiparikkhare  galietva  pacchato^  gacchanto  yeva  eko 
saddhivihariko  evam  aha:  Lokasmim  bhante  araha  araha 
ti  pakato  sutamatto  va  'ham  bhavami  na  kadaci  ditthapubbo 
ti.  Tarn  sutva  thero  paccha  parivattetva  olokento:  Parik- 
khare  avuso  gahetva  arahantassa  paccha  gacchanto  yeva 
arahantabhavam  na  janati  ti  aha  ti. 

Arimaddananagare  pi  Silabuddhi-Pollouka-Sumedhathc- 
riidayo  pi  arahanta  yeva  ahesurn.  Narapatiraja  hi  Kha- 
nitthipadapabbatam  ^  gantva  paccagamanakrde  antara- 
magge ekissa,  matikaya  manobhasam  disva  idha  pufiham 
karetukamo  Sakko  dasseti  mahhe  ti  manasikaritva  cetiyam 
karapessami  ti  tattha  ratthavasihi  samam  bhiimibhagaui 
karapesi. 

Atha  eko  Silabuddhi  nama  thero  evani  rdia:  Puhham 
maharaja  karissami  ti  idani  bhumiparikammam  karapesi. 
Evam  kariipentassa  te3  apuuham  yeva  bhavati  no  puhhau 
ti  vatva  bahii  hi  4  satta  ma  kilamantu  tis  manasikatva 
raiiho  dandakammena  tajjanatthaya  rahfia  dinnam  pinda- 
patam  na  Idmnji.  Raja  ca:  Sace  tvam  maya  dinnam 
pindapatain  abhufijitukanio  bhaveyyasi  mama  vijite  vasanto 
yeva  tvani  mama  pindapata  na  muiiceyyasi.  Ratthavasihi 
pi  dinnapindapato  mayham  eva  santako  nanu  nama  mama 
pinda])atam  yeva  tvam  bhuhjasi  ti  aha. 

Sihibnddhithero  pi  sace  aham  evam  bhaveyyami  Slhala- 
dipam  gantva  vasissami  ti  cintetva  arahhe  vasi. 

Atha  tarn  attham  janitva  nagaradvrire  arakkho  eko 
yakkho  rahho  agatakale  abhimukhain  thito  va  bhayanaka- 
riipl^  nisldi.  Atha  nanavijjakammehi  apanento  pi  iia 
sakka  apanetum. 


'  A.  B.  paccha.         '  D.  Khanitti"    A.  B.  khanitva. 
3  B.  vata.         4  Min:  omiie.         s  A.  B.  kilantu  ti. 
^  All  MSS.  except  B.  rupaiii. 


-^M        70        H5^ 

Atha  raja  nimittapatbake  pakkosapetva  pucchi:  Kena 
karanena  ayaiii  yakkho  idha  nisinno  ti.  Tvam  maharaja 
Silabiiddhitheram  agaravavasena  piibbe  katbesi.  Yakkba 
pi  tbere  ativiya  pasanna  ti  ambebi  siitapubba,  tarn  paticca 
yakkho  bbayanakarfipam  dassetva  nisinno  bbavissati  ti  aba. 

Haja  pi  amacce  anapesi:  tberam  pakkosatba  ti.  Tbero 
nagaccbi.  Slbaladipam^  yeva  gamissami  ti  arabbi.  Tarn 
attbam  sutva  raja  ekam  Caturangapaccayan  nama  amaccam 
pakkosapetva^  tvam  gantva  tberam  pakkosabi  ti  pesesi. 
Caturaugapaccayo  ca  cbekataya  ekam  suvannamayam 
buddbapatibimbam  navaya  tbapetva  mabasamiiddatittbam 
agamasi.  Atba  tberam  sampapunitva:  Idani  idba  bbagava 
sammasambuddbo  agamasi.  Silabuddbitbero3  bbagavato 
sammasambuddbassa  dassanattbaya  agaccbatu  ti  dutam 
pesesi.  Tbero  pi  bbagavato  sammasambuddbassa  dassan- 
attbaya agaccbatu  ti  vacanam  patikkbipitum  buddbagara- 
vavasena  avisabataya  agaccbl  ti. 

Poranikanam  va  tberanam  buddbe  garavam^  idba 
Pandito  garavam  buddbe  kare  pasannacetasa  ti. 

Navam  abbirubitva  tbero  bbagavato  sammasambuddbassa 
vandanamana-piljasakkaradlnis  akasi.  Tberassa  evam 
vandanamana-pujasakkaradini  karontass'  eva  vegena  navam 
anetva  gaccbi.  Atba  Caturaugapaccayo  evam  aba:  Idani 
bbante  tumbakam  acariyassa  sammasambuddbassa  sasanara 
pagganbitum  yutto  ti.  E,aja  ca  amaccebi  parivarito 
paccuggaccbi.  ^Nrivaya  tberassa  battbe  gabetva  rajagebam 
anesi.  Dvaram  pattakale  yakkbo  patbaviyam  nislditva 
tberam  vandi. 

Raja  rajagebam  patva  tberam  nanabbojanebi  bbojesi. 
Evan  ca  avoca:  Ajjatagge  bbante  tvam  asi  mam'acariyo 
bbagavato  va  ovadani  sirasa  patiggabetva  anuvattissama 
ti  attano  paiica  putte  pi  7  tberassa  adasi.     Te  paiica  ku- 

^  Min:  "dlpe.         ^  A.  sakkosapetva.         3  B.  Siba" 

*  A.  Buddbesu  garavam.    *  s  B.  corrects  to  vandamana** 

^  Min:  omits  Nrivaya  &c.         7  J),  bi. 


-^         71         H^ 

mara  therena  sacldhim  anuvattimsii.  Thero  te  pakkosetva 
viharam  agamasi.  Antaramagge  kappiyapatliaviyam  panca 
parimandalakrirani  likhitva  tesam  rajakumaranam  dassetva 
nivattapesi.  Rajakumrira  patinivattitva  tarn  karanam  ranno 
arocesum.  Raja  ca:  Tumhakam  pufifiam  karapanatthaya 
dasseti  ti  vatva  tulavasena^  tehi  iTijakumarehi  suvannam 
samam  katva  tena  suvannena  miikim  katva  bli'agavato 
dharamanakrile  Pasenadi-Kosalarafiiia  krirapitam  candana- 
patibimbaiii  viya  visum  visum  patibimbam^  karapesi.         ' 

Tesam  nidhariatthanabhutaniJ  pafica  cetiyani  pi  Sakko 
kammavidhayako  butva  patittbapesi.  Ettba  ca  pubbe 
ranfia*  pasiditva  tberassa  rajakumrira  dimia  milbim  rata- 
nattayassa  datva  puna  rajakumare  bhujisse  karetukamataya 
tbero  evaiu  sanfiams  adasi  ti  datthabbam. 

So  ca  Sikibuddhithero^  Arabantaganavamso  ti  datthabo. 

Arimaddananagare  yeva  Xarapatirafifio  kale  Kassapo 
nama  tbero  desaearikaui  caramano  Pollonkanamakam  de- 
sani  tad  avasari.  Atha  dve  mabaUakapolloiika?  manussa 
tbere  atipasannataya  dve  putte  upattbakattbaya  niyyadesuiu. 

Pollonkamanussanam  atipasannatam  paticca  tbero  pi 
Polloiikatbero  ti  vobariyati.  Yada  ca  pana  so  tbero  Sibala- 
dipam  gantukrimo  abosi  tada  Sakko  devanam  indo  vyaggba- 
rupam  mapetva  pittbiya  yava  mahasamuddatiram*^  anesi. 
Mabiisamuddatiram  pana  patva  navam  abbiruhitva  vanijebi 
saddhim  tari. 

Mahasamuddamajjhe  pana  patva  sa  nava  na  gaccbi^. 
Niccala  va  attbasi.  Atba  vanija  mantesum:  Amba,kain 
navaya  alakkhl  papajano  attbi  marine  ti.  Evam  pana 
mantetva  salakadanam^°  akarasu.  Yava  tatiyam  pi  tberass' 
eva  batthe  salaka  pubbe  katakammavipakavasena  nipati. 
Idam  pana  tberassa  pubbe  katakammam.  Tbero  bi  tato 
attabbavato  sattame  bbave  ekasmira  game  kukidarako 
butva    kilanattbaya     ekam     sunakbam    nadiyam    otaretva 


^  B.  tbuLao   D.  kuLa.         ^  D.  omits.         3  A.  B.  nidana" 
4  A.  B.  ranno.         5  A.  annam.         °  D.  Sihala° 
7  D.  mabamaHaka"         ^  S.  B.  A.  "tira. 
•5  B.  gaccbati.         '"  Min:  salakadanara. 


-^        72       r^ 

udake  Idlamai^esi.  Evam  Idlamantam  sunakliam  sayam 
eva  urena  uggahetva  tli-am  anesi  ti.  Evam  puLbe  kata- 
kammam  vipakavasena  therass'  eva  hattlie  salaka  nipati. 
Tada  vanija  iidakapittlie  khipimsu.  Atha  Sakko  devanain 
indo  kumbbilariipam  mapetva  pittbiyam  aropetva  anesi. 
Tbero  Yakkbadlpam  patva  andbacakkbukanam'^  yakkba- 
nam  mettanubbavena  cakkbum  labbapesi.  Yakkha  ca 
tberassa  gunam  fiatva  dve  yakkbe^  bbatike  adamsu. 
Tbero  ca  Sibaladipam  gantva  Mabacetiyarupam  Loba- 
pasadarupam  sariradbatum  mababodbibijani  ca  anetva 
paccagamasi  ti. 

Sumedbatbero  ca  Halamkassa^  nama  nagarassa  dakkbi- 
nadisabbage  Muttigame*  purattbimaya  anudisaya  Dinna- 
namakes  vibare  vasi. 

Tbanassa  paiia  namavasena  tberassa  pi  Dinnavibaro 
tveva^  namam  abosi. 

So  pi  tbero  paiusiikuliko  lajji  pesalo  sikkbakamo  jbana- 
labbl  araba  yeva.  So  bi  devasikam  devasikam  attbanava- 
yojanapamane  padacetiyam  gantva  vandi,  cetiyai'igana- 
vattan  ca  akasi.  Tato  agantva  Muttigame  jnndaya  cari. 
Idam  tberassa  nibaddbavattam. 

Aparani  pi  vattbuni  babiini  santi.  Sabbani  pana  tani 
vittbaretva  vattabbani  pi  gandbagaravabbayena  na  vakkba- 
ma.  Sabbani  pi  lii  vuccamanani  ayani  Sasanavamsadipika 
atipapaiica  bbavissati. 

Sammasambuddbassa  bi  pariiiibbanato  yavajjatana  tbe- 
ranam  paramparavasena  samgbattetva  anayanam  ev'  ettba 
adbippetam,  yatba  vuttani  pana  vattbuni  adbuna  abbifma- 
labblnani  puggalanani  akbettabbavena7  pasangananapati- 
babanattbam  Arimaddananagare  ca  babunnam  abbinba- 
labbinam  puggalanani  nivasattbanatadassanattbam  vuttani. 
Vuttam  c'etam  Bbikkbunikbandbakattbakatbayain: 


'  D.  "cakkbunam.         ^  A.  B.  yakkba    1).  yakkba. 
3  B.  Halamkissa.         4  Min:  Mratti°   S.  Mutti° 
5  B.  Dinnanainike    A.  Dvinnanamake. 

A.  pi  vibaro  teva  —  (omits  Dinna). 

B.  corrects  from  acettba  bliavena  to  abbavena. 


6 


-^     73     -^ 

Patisambhidapattelii  vassasahassam  sukkliavipassakehi 
vassasaliassam  anagamilii  vassasahassam  sakadagamihi 
vassasahassam  sotapannehi  vassasahassan  ti  evam  paiica 
vassasahassani  pativedhadhammo  thassati  ti. 

Dlghanikayatthakathayam  pana  Samyuttanikayattha- 
kathayah  ca:  Patisambhidapattehi  vassasahassam  chala- 
bhifihehi  vassasahassam  tevijjehi  vassasahassam  sukkhavi- 
jiassakehi  vassasahassam  patimokkhena  vassasahassan  ti 
vuttam. 

Anguttaranikayatthakathayam  paua  Vibhaiigatthakatha- 
yah  ca: 

Buddhanam  parinibbanato  vassasahassam  eva  patisam- 
bhida  nibbattetum  sakkonti.  Tato  param  cha  abhihha 
tato  pi  asakkonta  tisso  vijjiX  nibbattimsu.  Gacchante 
kale  til  pi  nibbattetum  asakkonta  sukkhavipassaka  honti. 
Eten'  eva  nayena  anagamino  sakadagamino  sotapanna  ti 
vuttam.  Evam  nananayehi  Atthakatha  pi  agatatta  adhuna 
loke  ariyapuggahl  bhavituni  na  sakka  ti  na  vattabbam. 

Ariyanam  eva  khettassa  adhuna  pi  saml)havato  sace 
araddhavipassaku  l)haveyya  so  araha  bhavitum  sakka 
yeva  ti  nittham  ettha  gantabbani. 

Atthakathasu  pana  nanabhanakatheranam  nanavadava- 
sena  vuttan  ti  datthabbaiii.  Ettaken'  eva  j^ana  nanakarena 
vado  bhinno  pi  sasanani  na  bhijjati  yeva  sasanassa  abhin- 
nam  yeva  hi  ettha  pamanan  ti. 

Evam  Marammamandale  Aiimaddananagare  anekehi 
arahantasatehi  sasanain  vijjotati.  Bhagavato  pana  pari- 
nibbanato timsadhikanani  navavassasatanam^  upari  Ma- 
rammaratthe  Saii-Lah-krom^  namena  raiiha  samakahiva- 
sena  Sihaladipc  rajjani  pattassa  Mahanamarahho  krde 
Buddhaghosa  -  Buddhadattatherehi  pabhuti  te  te  maha- 
thera  te  te  gandhe  akamsu. 

Tato  paccha  sati-samadhipahuamaddavavasena^  sukha- 
vabodhanattham      tikayo      akainsu.       Arimaddananagare 


^  so  B.    All  other  MSS.  timsadhikanani  navutivassanam. 
'  D.  Sa-na-la-ha-kro-iia.         3  A.  ]).  B.  °manda" 


-^>^     74     ,<-^ 

jinacakke  sattatriclhike  ^  clia  sate  sahasse  ca  sampatte 
tinnam  j)itakrinam  mulabhutesu  saddanayesu  sotriranaiu 
chekataya^  mail asaiimd tie  viya  Anando  nama  maliamaccho 
tisu  pitakesu  sattliakathesu  viloletva  x\ggavamso  nama 
tliero  Saddamtipakaraiiam  akasi.  Arimaddaiianagare  hi 
Uttarajivatheradlnam  Silialadipam  gamamito  pubbe  yeva 
tayo  mahathera  pariyattivisarada  Malia-Aggapandito,  tassa 
saddliiviliariko  Dutiya-i^ggapandito,  tassa  bhagineyyo  Tati- 
ya-Aggapandito  ti.  Tatiya-Aggapandito  pana  Aggavamso 
ti  pi  vohariyati. 

Tasmiii  ca  kale  Arimaddananagaravasino  saddakovida 
bahavo  santi  ti  yava  Lankadipa  kittighoso  pattliari. 

Tasma  Silialadipika  saddakovida  Ylmamsetukaraa  liutva 
Arimaddanaiiagaram  agamamsu.  Tada  Arimaddananagara- 
vasino l)hikkhu  Saddinitipakaranam  dassesmn. 

Silialadipika  ca  tarn  disva  upadharenta  saddavisaye 
ayani  gandho  viya  Sihaladipe  gandho  nattlii.  Imasmim 
pakarane  agatavinicchayam  pi  sakalam  na  janimha  ti 
nanapakarehi  tliomesun  ti.  Yavajjatana  katliamaggo  na 
iipaccliinno  ti. 

Arimaddananagare  Silialadipam  gantva  paccagato  Clia- 
pado  nama  Saddhammajotipfilathero  saddanaye  chekataya 
Suttaniddesam  akasi,  Paramatthadliamme  ca  chekataya 
Samkhepavannanam  nama  Caradipakah-^  ca  Vinaye  cheka- 
taya Vinayagiilhatthadipaniiii  Simalamkarah  ca  akasi. 
Attano  katanam  gandhanaiii  nigame  Saddhammajotipalo 
ti  mfdanamena  vuttam.  Kusimanagare  pana  Chapadagame 
jatatta  th<"inassa  namena  Chapado  ti  pakato.  Kukhana- 
nagare  pana  Chapado  ti  voharito  pi  eko  thero  atthi.  So 
alajji  dussilo.  Ekacce  pana  nama  samannalesamattena 
pattalaiikara  silavantaiu  pesalam  sikkhakamam  Chapada- 
theram  alajji-dussilabhavena  npavadanti^  yatha  nama 
samaiihalesamattena  Mallaputtam  ayasmantam  Dabbam 
asamacarena   ti.     Arimaddananagare   yeya  Alom-cah-hiis 

^  so  A.    All  oilier  MSS.  sattanavasadike. 

^  B.  chetattaya.         i  B.  corrects  to  Saradipakafi. 

*  A.  uvadanti.         s  B.  Alou-cah-su   A.  Aloh-cah-tn. 


-^-     75     H$- 

namakassa  rafifio  krde  Maha-Vimalabiiddhitbero  Cula- 
Vimalabuddhithero  ti  dve  thera  pariyattivisarada  aliesum. 
Tesu  Maha-Vimalal)uddliitliero  Kaccayanassa  samvannanam 
Nyasagandliam  akasi. 

Keci  pana  SihaladipavasI  Vimalabuddhithero  tarn  akasi 
ti  vadanti.  Cula -Vimalabuddhithero  pana  Vuttodayassa 
poranatikam  akasi. 

Chandosaratthavikasinim  Saddhammafianathero  akasi. 
Yacanatthajotim  pana  VepuHathero  ^  akasi.  .Nyasa- 
gandhassa  poranatikam  Narapatiraiiiio  kale  eko  amacco 
akasi.  So  hi  ranho  ekam  orodham  paticca  jatam  ekam 
dhltaram  disva  vanaro  viya  lepe  laggito  patibaddhacitto  "^ 
hutva  laggi. 

Tam  attham  janitviX  raja  evam  aha: 

Sace  etam  iccheyyasi  ekam  gandham  paripunnaviniccha- 
yam  gulhattham  karohi.  Sace  tvani  tadisam  gandhani 
katiim  sakkuneyyasi  etam  labhissasi  ti.  Atlia  so  Nyasassa 
samvannanam  poranatikam  akasi. 

Tato  patthaya  hinaya  vattitva  dhitaram  datva  rajjuggfi- 
hamaccatthane^  thapesi  yarn  Marammavoharena  Sam- 
byan*  iti  vuccati.  Tena  pana  katatta  so  pi  gandho  tam 
namena  ■v'nccati.  Karikam  tassa  ca  samvannanam  Chatta- 
guhindassas  nama  rahho  kale  Dhammasenapatithero  akasi. 
Tena  kira  karripite  jSTandaguhaya  samipe  Nandavihare 
nisiditva  akasi.  Tasmih  ca  kale  Gandhamadanapabbate 
Nandamiilaguhato^  arahantil  agantva  tasmim  vihare  vassam 
upagacchimsu.  tesam  sammukhe  katatta  te  ca  gandha 
panditehi  sarato  pacceta])ba  ti  acariya  vadanti.  Vaca- 
vacakam  pana7  Dhammadassi  nama  samanero  akasi.  Sad- 
datthabhedacintam  pana  Arimaddananagarasamipe  thitassa 
Khanitthipadapabbatassa^  samipe  ekasmim  game  vasanto 
Saddhammasiri  nama  thero  akasi.  So  yeva  thero  Brihajani 
nama  vedasatthain  pi  Marammabhasaya  parivattesi. 


'  B.  Vephulla"        '  S.  "bandha"        3  A.  rajjuggamacca° 
4  B.  Sam-pyam.         s  B.  Chattaruhindassa. 
^  A.  Nandaguhato   B.  Nandaguhato. 
7  A.  Vriccavaccakara.        ^  B.  Khanitti" 


-$H        76        r^ 

Ekakkbarakosam  pana  Saddhammakittittliero  akasi.  So 
hi  kaliyuge  sattasitadliike  attliasate  sampatte  iniccha- 
dittliikanani  Jaliimasaiiuitaiiam  ^  kulfinam  bhayena  sakale 
pi  Tambadijmrattbe  sasanobbaso  milayati. 

Babimi  pi  pottbakani  aggibbayena  nassesum^.  Tada 
tarn  pavattim  passitva-j  sace  pariyattidbammo  vinasseyya 
patipattidbammo  pi  nassissati  patipattidbamme  nassante 
kuto  pativedbadbammo  bbavissati  ti  samvegam  apajjitva 
imam  gandbam  akasi  ti  tattikayam4  vuttam. 

Mukbamattasriram  Sagaratbero  akasi. 

Kaliyuge  ekasitadbike  paiicasate  sampatte  ekam  dabara- 
puttam  krdam.  katam  paticca  samvegam  apajjitva  pacceka- 
buddbattam  j^attliayantassa  Jeyyasimkba-namakassas  raniio 
putto  Kyacva^  namako  raja  rajjam  karesi. 

DbammaiTija  ti  pi  nama  bincbam  patigganbi.  Tisu 
pana  pitakesu  yatbabbiitam  vijanakataya  Marammavobarena 
Kyacca  ti  vobariyati.  So  ca  kira  raja  pali-attbakatba- 
tika-gandbantaresu  aticbekataya  pitakattaye  sakaccba- 
mattam  pi  katum  samattbo  nama  nattlil  ti  uggabita- 
tipitako  butva  bbikkbusaiiigbanam?  pi  divase  divase  sattabi 
varebi  gandbam  vaceti^. 

Kbanittbipadapabbatassa  samipe  pi  ekam  talakam  ka- 
rapetva  tattba  rajagaram  karapetva  tattba  nisiditva 
gandbam  vaceti.  Sabbani  pana  rajiinam  kiccani  puttass' 
eva  uparajassa  niyyadesi.  Gandbam  ugganbantanam  oro- 
dbilnam  attbaya  samkbepato  Saddabindun  nama  pakaranam 
Paramattbabinduii  ca  nrima  j^akaranam  akasi.  Tassa  hi 
cittam  pariyattiyani  yeva  rammati.  Annam  pana  raja- 
kiccam  sunitum  pi  na  iccbi.  Anuruddbaraja  anagate  abam 
raja  bbaveyyami  tada  yeva  imani  talibijaui  uttbabantu  ti 
adbittbabitva  ropesi.  Tani  tassa  rauno  kale  uttbabimsu9. 
Ten'  eva  Anuruddbaraja  yev'  ay  an  ti  rattbavasino  saiija- 
nunsu.  Sammutiraja  bi  Anuruddbaraja  Kyacva  raja  ti 
ime  tayo  ekasantana  ti  vadanti.  " 

^  S.  corr.  from  Jalunama"  D.  Jalabbutisatanam. 
2  S.  nassasum.  -5  A.  pattitva.  ^  A.  tani  tikayam. 

5  B.  Jeyyasikbi''  ^  A.  Kyac-ca.  ^  A.  °sanigbam. 

**  A.  vacesi.        ^  B.  vuttba° 


So  rajfi  ekam  pi  cetiyam  akasi  na  tain  nittham  agamasi 
pariyattiyam  yeva  paricarakatta  ti  Rajavamse  agatam. 
Lokasammutivaseiia  kakkhaladine '^  itthakani  karapetva 
tasmim  yeva  dine  bhumisamam  katva-  tasmim  yeva  dine 
anriam  pi  sabbam  karapesi.  Tena  Marammavoliarena 
Pra-stah3  cetiyau  ti  yavajjatana  pfikatam. 

Tassa  rafino  eka  dhlta  Vibhatyattliam  nama  gandham 
akasi  ti. 

Pubbe  kira  Arimaddananagare  uggahadharanadivasena* 
sasanam  ativiya  viriilbam  apajji.  Arimaddananagare  yeva 
bi  eko  vuddhapabbajitos  bbikkbu  gandbara  likbitum  sila- 
lekbanadandena  iccbanto  rajagebam  pavisi.  Raja:  Kena 
agato  'si  ti  pucchi.  Gandbam  Hkbitum  silalekhanadandena 
iccbanto  agato  'mbl  ti. 

Evam  inabaHako  tvam^  gandbam  mabussabena  pariya- 
punanto  pi  gandbesu  cbekassa  okasam  na  passami;  sace  bi 
musalo  ankuram  uttbapetva  riibeyya7,  evani  sati  tvam 
gandbesu  cbekatam  apajjeyyasi  ti  aba.  Tato  paccba  vi- 
baram  gantva  devasikam  devasikarp.  ekadantakattbapama- 
namattam  lekbanam  uggabetva  Kaccayana-Al)bidbamm- 
attbasamgabapakaranam  adim  katva  acariyassa  santike 
ugganbi. 

So  aciren'  eva  gandbesu  cbekatam  patva  musale  jam- 
burukkbaiikurara  bandbitva  ussapetva  rajagebam  pavisi. 
Atba  tarn  raja  puccbi:  Kena  agato  'si  ti.  Ayam  mabaraja 
musalo  ankuram  uttbrqietva  riibati  ti  acikkbitum  agato 
'mbl  ti  vutte.  Raja  etassa  gandbesu  cbekatam  patto  'mbi 
ti  vuttani  boti  ti  janasi.  Tam  saccam  va  abkam  va  ti 
vimamsanattbaya  mabatberanam  santikam  pabini.  Maba- 
tbera  pi  gtilbattbanam  gulbattbanam  puccbirasu.  So  pi 
puccbitam  puccbitain  vyakasi.  Atba  so  bbikkbu  mabatbere 
evam  aba:  Tumbe  bbante  mam  babu  puccbatba.  Abam  pi 
tumbe  puccbitum  iccbami;  okasam  detba  ti  yacitva  anna- 
samanacetasikan  ti  ettba   annasaddassa  avadbyapekkbatta 

^  B.  kakaladine.         ^  B.  ofnits  bbumi  samam  katva. 
3  A.  Bra-stab   B.  Pra-sta.         4  A.  ugganha° 
5  B.  vudda°         ^  A.  tarn.         ?  Min:  rubeyya. 


^^        78        :^ 

avadhipadam  uddliaritva "  dassetha  ti  pucchi.  Mahathera 
pi  pubbe  amanasikatatta  sigham  vissajjitum^  na  sakkliimsu. 
Raja  tarn  attham  sutva  tuttliacitto  liutva  Disapamokklia- 
namena  acariyatthane  tliapesi.  So  pana  bliikklm  agandha- 
karako  pi  gandhakarako  viya  paccliimauam  janatanam 
dinnopadesavasena  upakaram  katva  sasane  uppajjl  ti. 
Honti  c'ettlia: 

Aham  maliallako  homi  duppaiino  pariyattikam, 
Uggaham  mahiissahena 3  na  salcJcliissanii  janitum. 

« 

Evan  ca  natimanneyya  nfipposukkatam  apajje, 
Saddhamme  chekakamo  ussaham  va  kare  poso. 

Vuddhapabbajito  bhikkhu  mahallako  pi*  duppaimo 
Apajji  chekatam  dhamme;  tarn  apekkhantus  sotaro  ti. 

Pubbe  kira  Arimaddananagare  matugama  pi  gandham 
ugganhimsu  yeblmyyena  uggahadharanadivasena  pariyatti- 
sasanam  paggabesum.  Matugama  hi  annamannam  passanta: 
tumhe  kittakain  gandbam  ugganbatba  kittakam  gandbam 
vacuggatam  karotba  ti  puccbanti^.  Eko  kira  matugamo 
ekam  niatugamam  puccbi:  Tvain  idrmi  kittakam  gandbam 
vacuggatam  karosi  ti?  Abam  pana  idani  dabaraputtebi 
palibodbatta  byakuLam  patva  babum  gandbam  vacuggatam 
katum  na  sakka,  samanta  Maba-pattbane  pana  kusalatti- 
kamattam  va  vacuggatam  karomi  ti  aba  ti. 

Idam  pi  Arimaddananagaravasinain  matugamanam  pi 
pariyattuggabane  ekam  vattbu?. 

Ekam  kira  bbikkbuni  pindaya  carantam  eka  dvadasa- 
vassika  dabarittbi^  puccbi:  Kin  namo  'si  tvam  bbante  ti. 
Kbema  nam'  aban  ti. 

Katbam  ti  bbante  puma  va  samano  ittbiliiigena  namam 
akasi  ti  rdia. 


^  B.  uttaritva,         ^  A.  B.  vissajjetum. 

3  B.  puccbissanti   A.  puccbiinsu  ti.         •*  S.  manu° 

5  A.  ti.        ^  D.  lakkbantu.         ">  B.  vattbii    A.  vattbum. 

8  A.  B.  oittbi. 


-^        79        r<r- 

Atha  anto  gehe  nisinna  luata  sutva  dhitaram  alia:  Tvam 
rajadiganassa  lakklianam  na  janasi  ti.  Ama  janami,  ayam 
pana  khemasaddo  na  rajadiganapakkham  bliajati  ti.  Atha 
inata  evam  alia:  Ayam  pana  khemasaddo  ekadesen'  eva 
rajadiganapakkham  bhajati  ti.  Ayam  pan'  ettha  dhitu 
adhippayo:  Xa  rajadisaddo  kadaci  iTijo  ti  paccattavacana- 
vasena^  okaranto  dissati.  Vina  devarajo  tiadisamasavisayam; 
khemasaddo  pana  katthaci  khemo  ti  ca  kheman  ti  ca 
lingantaravasena  rupantaram  dissati.  Ten'  eva  khema- 
saddo na  iTijadigano  ti  veditabbo  ti. 

Ayam  pana  matu  adhippayo:  Khemasaddo  abhidlieyya- 
lihgatta  tiliiigiko ,  yada  pana  sahhasaddadhikare  paccatta- 
vacanavasena  khema  ti  akaranto  dissati  tada  ekadesena 
khemasaddo  rajadiganapakkham  bhajati  ti. 

Idam  pi  ekam  vatthu. 

Arimaddananagare  kira  ekassa  kutnmbikassa  eko  putto 
dve  dhitaro  ahesum.  Ekasmih  ca  kale  ghammabhibhutatta 
gehassa  uparitale  nahayitva  nisidi.  Atha  eka  dasi  ge- 
hassa  hettha  thatva  kihci  kammam  karonti  tassa  kutumbi- 
kassa  guyhatthanam  olokesi.  Tam  attham  janitva  kutum- 
biko  sa  kham  olokesi  ti  ekam  vakyam  bandhitva  puttassa 
dassesi.  Imassa  atthayojanam  karohi  ti.  Atha  putto  attha- 
yojanam  akasi:  Sakhaiii  rukkhasakham  olokesi  udikkliati  ti. 
Atha  pacclia  ekaya  dhituya  dassesi.  Imassa  atthayojanam 
karohi  ti.  Sa  pi  atthayojanam  akasi:  Sa  sunakho  kham 
akasam  olokesi  udikkhati  ti.  Atha  paccha  ekaya  dhituya 
dassesi:  Imassa  atthayojanam  karohi  ti.  Sa  pi  atthayojanam 
akasi:  Sa  itthi  khani'  aiigajatam  olokesi  mukham  uddham 
katva  lokesi  ti. 

Idaui  pi  ekam  vatthu. 

Eko  kira  samanero  RatanapuravasI  Arimaddananagare 
matugama  pi  saddanayesu  atikovida  ti  sutva  ahani  tattha 
gantva  janissami  ti  Arimaddananagaram  gato.  Atha  antara- 
magge  Arimaddananagarassa  samipe  ekam  daharitthim 
kappasavatthum  rakkliitva  nisinnain  passi.   Atha  samanero 


^  A.  paccattha" 
^  A.  B.  itthikani. 


-^     80     K^ 

tassa  santikam  maggapucchanattliaya  gacclii.   Atha  dalia- 
rittlii  samaneram  pucchi:  kuto  agato  'si  ti^ 

Samanero  aha:  Ratanapm-ato  aliam  agacchati  ti.  Kiihim 
gato  'si  ti  vutte  Arimaddananagaram  gacchati  ti  aha. 
Atha  daharitthi  evam  rdia:  Tvam  bhante  saddayoga- 
vinicchayam  anupadharetva  kathesi.  Amhayogatthanehi 
tvam  namayogasaddena  yojetva  kathesi.  Nanii  panditanam 
vacanena  nama  paripimnatthena  aviruddhasaddanayena 
punnmdusamkasena  bbavitabbau  ti. 

Atha  samanero:  Khettavatthuni  rakkhanti  duggata^  daha- 
ritthi pi  tava3  saddanayakovida  hoti.  Kimaiiga  pana 
bhogasampanna  mahallakitthiyo  ti  hijjitva  tato  yeva  patini- 
vattitva  paccagamasi  ti. 

Idam  Marammamandale  Tambadiparatthe  Arimaddana- 
iiagare  theraparamparavaseiia  sasaiiassa  patitthanam. 

Idani  Marammamandale  yeva  Jeyyavaddhanaratthe  Ke- 
tumatinagare  Sasanavamsam  vakkhami. 

Kaliyiige  hi  dvisattatadhike  atthavassasate'^  sampatte 
J  eyyavaddhanaratthe  Ketumatlnagare  Mahasirijeyyasiiro 
nama  raja  rajjam  karesi.  Ekam  atichekam  Devanagana- 
makams  ekam  hatthim  nissaya  vijitam^  vittharam  akasi. 
Tassa  pana  rahho  kale  kaliyuge  dvinavutadhike  attha- 
vassasate  sampatte  Mahriparakkamo  nama  thero  Sihala- 
dlpato  navaya  agantva  Ketiimati  nama  nagaram  sampatto. 
Raja  ca  Dvaravatinagarassa  dakkhinadisabhage  Maha- 
viharam  karapetva  tassa  adasi  niccabhattam  pi,  tasmifi  ca 
vihare  simam  sammannitva7  tissam  slmayana  tulavasena 
attana  samam  katva  lohamayabuddhapatibimbam  karapesi. 
Tan  ca  buddhapatibimbam  sabbattha^  Lankadipan  ti 
namena  pakatam  ahosi.  Tassa  rauho  kale  surameraya- 
sikkhapadani  paticca  vivado  ahosi.  Katham?  Bijato 
patthaya  ti  sambhare  patiyadetva  catiyam  pakkhittakalato 


'  A.  kuto  magato  si.         ^  A.  duggaha.         3  B.  jina  va. 

+  MSS.  "sahasse.         ^  A.  Devanagaramakam. 

^  A.  B.  vijitum.         ^  A.  sammannetva. 

8  D.  sampattaka    S.  corrects  from  sampatta. 


-^        81        H$- 

patthaya  talanalikeradmam  puppharaso  pupphato  galita- 
bhinavakalato  patthaya  ca  na  patabbo  ti  KamkliEvitarani- 
tlkadisu  ruttavacane  aclhippayam  vipallasato  gahetva 
talanalikeradmam  raso  galitabhiuavato  pattliaya  pivitum  na 
vattati  ti  ekacce  vadanti.  Ekacce  pana  evam  vadanti: 
Takmrilikeradinam  raso  galitabhinavakrde  pivitum  vattati  ti. 

Tattha  pubbapakkhe  acariyanam  ayam  adhippayo. 

Bijato  pattbaya  ti  ettba  sambhare  patiyadetva  catiyam 
pakkhittakakito  patthaya  na  patabbo;  trdanabkeradlnain 
puppharaso  ca  galitabhinavakalato  yeva  na  patabbo  ti. 

Ayam  pana  aparapakkhe  acariyanam  adhippayo. 

Bijato  patthaya  ti  ettha  sambhare  patiyadetva  catiyani 
pakkhittakrdato  patthaya  na  patabbo:  Trilanahkeradmam 
sambharehi  patiyadito  puppharaso  pupphato  galitabhina- 
vakalato na  patabbo  ti. 

Evam  talanrdikeradmam  raso  galitabhinavakalato  pattha- 
ya patuni  vattati  na  vattati  ti  vivadarn  karontanam  majjhe 
nislditva  sampattalanko  Mahaparakkamathero  tadiso  pivi- 
tum vattati  ti  vinicchindi.  Suravinicchayau  ca  nama 
gandham  akasi.  Evam  Ketumatinagaram  mapentam 
Mahasirijeyyasuram  nama  rajanain  nissaya  Ketumatiyani 
sasanam  patitthahi. 

Idam  Marammamandale  yeva  Ketmnatinagare  sasanassa 
patitthanam. 

Idani  Marammamandale  Tambadiparatthe  yeva  Khan- 
dhapurasasanavamsarn  vakkhami. 

Kaliyuge  hi  catusatthadhike  chavassasate  tayo  bhatika 
Kittitaranamakam  rajanam  rajjato  cavetva  Khandhapura- 
nagare  rajjam  krtresum. 

Tada  Kittitaranamakassa  raiiho  ekaputto  Cmaratthinda- 
rajanam  yacitva  bahuhi  senaiigehi  Khandhapuranagaram 
samparivilretva  atthasi.  Atha  tisu  pitakesu  chekarn  ekam 
mahatheram  pakkosetva  mantesum.  Thero  evam  aha: 
Janapad  ay  attain  idam  kammam  samananam  na  kappati 
vicaretum.  Aham  pi  samano,  natakehi  pana  saddhim  man- 
tetha  ti.  Atha  iiatake  pakkosapetva'  mantesum.   Nataka  pi: 


'  B.  pakkosetva. 

Sasana-Vamsa. 


-^     82     H^ 

Sace  karanam  natthi,  evam  sati  phalam  ua  bhaveyya' 
Sace  puti  natthi,  makkbika  na  sannipateyyun  ti. 

Gltam  gayitva  udake  kilanti.  Atha  te  ca  tayo  bhatika 
tain  sutva  Kittitaranamakam  ^  rajanam  bandbanagarato 
gabetva  maretva  idam3  rajje  tbapayissama  ti  cintetva 
tumbe  gaccbatba  ayam  tassa  siso^  idani  esa  paralokam 
gato  ti  sisam  dassesum.  Atba  Cinarattbasenayo  pi:  idani 
rajavamsiko  natthi,  tena  hi  yujjbitnm  na  icchama  yam 
rajje  tbapayissama  ti  katva  may  am  agata  idani  so  natthi 
ti  vatva  nivattetva  agamamsu. 

So  ca  tbero  natakehi  saddhim  mantetha  ti  ettakam  eva 
vuttatta  bhikkbubhavato  na  mocetl  ti  datthabbam.  Vuttam 
c'etam : 

Pariyayo  ca  anatti  tatiye  dutiye  pana 

Anatti  ye  ca  sesesus  dvayam  etam  na  labbbatl  ti. 

Tasmim  pana  Khandhapure  Arimaddananagare  Arahan- 
taganavamsika  Chapadaganavamsika  Anandaganavamsika 
ca  thera  bahavo  vasanti,  tehi  pana  katagandho  nama  koci 
natthi  ti. 

Idam  Khandhapure  sasanassa  patittbanam. 

Idani  Marammamandale  Tambadiparattbe  Vijayapure 
Sasanavamsam  vakkbami. 

KaHyiige  hi  catusattatadhike  chavassasate  Sibasuro  nama 
raja  Yijayapuram  mapesi.  Tato  paccha  dvisu  samvaccha- 
resu  atikkantesu  Camumnadiyani  mabasetibham^  ekam 
h^bhitva  Ekasetibhindo  ti  tassa  namam  pakatam  abosi. 

Tassa  ranuo  kale  Vijayapure  silavanta  lajjl  pesala 
bhikkhti  bahavo  natthi.  Arimaddananagarato  Anuruddha- 
rajakale  rajabbayena  niliyitva  avasesa  samanakuttaka  yeva 
bahavo  atthi.  Paccha  Cula-Arahantatbera-Dibbacakkhu- 
thei'anam  agatakale  yeva  lajji  pesala  bhikkhti  balavanta 
hutva  ganam  vaddhapesum.     Kaja  ca  Dibbacakkhutheram 


»  B.  abhaveyya.        ^  A.  Kittihara°   B.  Kittitaru° 
3  A.  adds  yam.        ^  A.  sisso.        s  A.  pesesum. 
^  A.  mata" 


-^     83     f<- 

antepuram  pavesetva  devasikam  devasikam  pindapatena 
bhojesi.  Aniiruddharaniia  tambulamafijusayara  thapetva 
pujita  satta  dhatuyo  labhitva  tasam  jDanca  dhiltuyo  Canah- 
khum  cetiye  nidhanam^  akiisi,  avasesa  pana  dve  dhatuyo 
Punnassa  nama  amaccassa  piijanattliaya  niyyadesi.  So  ca 
amacco  Jeyyapure  Pufinacetiye  nidhanam  akasi. 

Tada  ca  kira  samanakuttaka  gahattha  viya  rajaraja- 
mahamattanam  santike  upattlianam  akamsu.  Kaliyvige 
catiiasitadhike  chavassasate  sainpatte  Sihasurarafino  jettha- 
putto  Ujano  nama  raja  rajjam  karesi.  So  pana  Avapam- 
kyolmamake^  dese  campakakatthamaye  sattatisatta 
vihare3  karapesi.  Dvivassjidhike  sattavasse  sate  kale  te 
vihara  uittliam  agamamsu.  Tesu  viharesu'^  Campakam 
nama  padhanavihriram  amaccaputtassa  Sudliammamaha- 
samitlierassa  adasi.  So  pana  thero  Arimaddananagare 
Arahantatherassa  vamsiko  ti  datthabbo.  Jetavanam  nama 
parivaraviharam  pana  sakalavinayapitakam  vacuggatam 
karontassa  Gunaramatherassa  s  adasi.  So  pana  thero  Ari- 
maddananagare yeva  Anandatherassa  vamsiko. 

Kulaviharam  nama  parivaraviharam  Adiccaramsino  nama 
therassa  adasi.     So  pi  Anandatherassa  vamsiko  yeva. 

Suvannaviharam  nrima  parivaraviharam  Sudhammalam- 
karassa  nama  therassa  adasi.  So  pi  Anandatheravamsiko 
yeva. 

Nicageham  nama  parivaraviharam  Varapattassa  nama 
therassa  adasi.  So  pana  Sudhammamahasamitherassa 
antevasiko. 

Dakkhinakotim  nama  parivaraviharam  Siripunnavasino 
nama  therassa  adasi.  So  pi  Sudhammamahasamitherassa 
antevasiko  ti. 

Tesam  vihriranam  asannatthane^  rilja  sayam  eva  hatthena 


^  A.  B.  nidilnam.         ^  A.  B.  Avapamkya° 
3  B.  campakakatthamaye  sattavihiire.  I),  camma" 
-*  D.   sattavihare   A.   Dhammakakattha"    S.  corr.   A.  vi- 
hare  ca. 

5  A.  B.  Ganarama"        ^  A.  asannasatthane. 


-^     84     -^ 

gahetva  mahabodliirukkham  ropesi.  Tesam  viharanam 
patijagganatthaya  bahimi  pi  kliettavatthuni  adasi  arama- 
gopakakulani  ca. 

Tesam  pana  theranam  Sudhammapura-Arimaddanapura- 
bhikkhuvamsikatta  lajjipesalata  vinnatabba;  ten'  eva 
Vijayapure  sasanam  ativiya  parisuddham  ahosi  ti  datt- 
babbam. 

Tesam  pi  sissaparampara  anekasabassapamana  ahesum. 
Evam  lajjipesalanam  yeva  bbikkbimam  santika  keci  saddhi- 
vibarika  Kitagirimhi  Assaji-Pimabbasuka  viya  alajji  dussila 
iippajjimsu  seyyatba  pi  niXma  madburambarukkbato  am- 
bilapbakxn  ti. 

Te  pana  babu-anacaram  carimsu  yeva.  Idam  pana 
tesam  mula-uppatti-dassanam. 

Raja  bi  tada  tesam  viharanam  patijagganattbaya  babuni 
kbettavattbimi  adasi.  Tesii  kbettavattbiisu  balivicaran- 
attbaya''  Sudbammamabasamltbero  ekacce  bbikkbii  arak- 
kbanattbane  tbapesi.  Arakkbanabbikkbu  pana  dbamma- 
nulomavasena  kassakanam  ovadapesi.  Kbettavattbusami- 
bbagam  pi  patigganbapesi.  Tasmin  ca  kale  Idiettavattbiini 
l^aticca  bbikkhii  vivadam  akamsu.  Atba  tarn  vivadam 
sutva  sasanadbaratbero  ^  ca  dve  parakkamatbera  ca  tato 
nikkbamimsii. 

Nikkbamitva  sasanadbaratbero  Kbanittbipadapabbate 
nisidi.  Dve  parakkamatbera  ca  Ca-kri-nab-pabbatakandare^ 
nisidirasu*.  Tesam  hi  nivasattbanam  s  yavajjatana  Parakka- 
mathanan  ti  pakatam  ahosi.  Te  pana  thera  ekacara  ti 
voharimsu.  Avasesa  pana  bhikkhu  gamavasi  bahucara  ti 
voharimsn^.  Tato  pattbaya  arannavasi-gamavasivasena 
visum  gana  ahesun  ti7  vibarassa  dinnanam  khettavatthtinam 
balipatiggabakabbikkhiinam^  pi  samghajatisamafiha  ahosi. 


^  D.  balibi  caranattliaya. 

^  A.  sasanavaratthero    S.  corr.  "vara° 

^  D.  Ki-ku-iiah   A.  Cain-kri-iiab   B.  Ca-ci-kri-iiab. 

+  D.  adds  tesam  hi  nisidimsu. 

5  B.  nivasatthanattha   D.  adds  ti.  ^  A.  vobaresum. 

7  B.  gana  honti    D.  honti.  ^  Min:  "gahana" 


-^     85     f<^ 

Kaliyiige  catuvassadhike  sattasate  Ujanassa  raniio 
dharamanass'  eva  kanittliabhatiko  Kyocva'  nama  raja- 
kumaro  rajjam  ganhi.  Ayam  pana  tassa  attlmppatti. 
Ujano  nama  raja:  Tvam  Samuddamajjham  nama  gamam 
gautva  tattha  nislditva  tatr'  uppadam  balim^  bhunjahi  ti 
niyyadesi.  So  pana  rajakumaro  luddakammesu3  yeva  abbi- 
ramanasilo^  ekasmim  samaye  migavam  gantva  pacca- 
gatakales  rattiyam  supinam  passi.  Sakko  devanam  indo 
agantva:  Uposathasilam  samadiyabi;  evam  sati  aciren'  eva 
setibbe  labbissasi^  ti  vatva  Tavatimsabbavanam  puna 
gato  ti. 

So  ca  rajakumaro  tato  pattbaya  uposatbasikim  sama- 
diyi7,  Paccba  kale  pi  attano  batthe  gutbena  kilinnam 
bbavati  ti  puna  supinam  passi.  So  aciren'  eva  panca 
setibbe  labbi.  Atba  eko  amacco  gantva  raniio  tam  attbani 
arocesi.  Raia  tuttbacitto  butva:  Mama  kira  bbonto 
kanittbabbatiko  panca  setibbe  lal)bl  ti  rajapurisanam 
majjbe  samvannesi.  Amacco  puna  rajakumrirassa  santikam 
gantva s  tam  attbam  arocesi.  Rajakumaro  pi:  Mama  bba- 
tiko  raja  akatbitapubbavacapeyyam?  vadati  ti  arSdba- 
yitva  puna  gantva  tam  attbam  raiifio  arocapesi.  Raja  pi 
tatb'  eva  vadati  ti  tam  sutva  rajakumaro  bblyo  pasidi. 
Kasma  pana  Ujano  raja  Kittitaran  nama  rajakmnaram'" 
kanittbavobarena  na  vadati  ti?  Ekasetil)bindo  bi  raja  apa- 
rassa  raniio  devim  gabbbinim  anetva  aggamabesittbane 
tbapesi.  Tbapetva  aciren'  eva  Ujanam  vijayi.  Ten'  eva 
na"  Ujano  Ekasetibbindassa  putto,  Kittitaro  nama  raja- 
kumaro yeva  Ekasetibbindassa  putto;  tasnia  tam  karaiiam 
paticca  so  tam  kanittbavobarena  na  vadati  ti.  Kanittbo 
panca  setibbe  labbatl  ti  sutva  raja  bbayitva  kanittbassa 
rajjam  upaniyadesi.  Raja  rajagebassa  paccbimadvarena 
nikkbami.      Kanittbo    purimadvarena    pavisi.    Pancannam 


'  A.  Kyocca   B.  Kyocbva.         ^  B.  uppadababm. 
3  A.  Imddbakammesu    Min:  luddba"         4  D.  sigala. 
5  Min:  paccba  gata''  ^  kibbissati  ti.  7  I),  ^dayi. 

^  D.  ganbi.         ^  B.  va  jappeyyaiu. 
^°  Min:  Kittitaram  Mana  raja°         "  S.  omits. 


^-     86     Hg- 

pana  setiblianam  laddhatta  Pancasetibhindo  ti  pakato. 
Mulanamam  pan'  assa  Sihasuro  ti  datthabbam.  Tassa 
ranuo  kale  bahu  alajjiuo  gamasamantavihare  vasitva 
anekavidham  anacaram  carimsii.  Sudhammapura-Ari- 
maddanato  paramparavasena  agata  bliikkhu  pi  babu  lajjino 
sikkbakama  santi. 

Atba  tassa  ranfio  bbattam  paribbunjanakale  eko  samana- 
kuttako  attba  parikkbare  gabetva  agantva  ranilo  sammukbe 
attbasi.  Kim  attbaya  agato  'si  ti  puccbite  pi  pindapat- 
attbaya  agato  'mbi  ti  aba.  Atba  raja  sayam  bbunjissami 
ti  arabbitva  atipasannataya  pana  suvannapatiya  patiyaditam 
sakakim  bbattam  adasi.  Atba  raja  evam  cintesi:  Ayain 
bbikkbu  pindapatattbaya  upamajjbantikam  yeva  agantva 
attbasi.  Na  so  putbujjanabbikkbu;  atba  kbo  abbinnalabbi 
araba  bbaveyya  mama  punfiattbaya  agato  bbaveyya  mam 
anukampam  upadaya  ti. 

Evam  pana  cintetva  ekam  rajapurisam  anapesi  tassa 
paccba  anugantva  oloketum.  So  pana  samanakuttako 
sayam  alajjlbbiitatta  va  attano  bbariya  paccuggantva 
pattara  ganbi.  Tarn  disva^  rajapiiriso  raniio  santikam 
gantva  patbamam  eva  evam  cintesi:  Sace  yatbabbiitam 
aroceyyam  raiino  pasado  vinasseyya,  evani  pana  anarocetva 
yatba  rafino  pasado  bbiyyosomattaya^  ])baveyya  maybam 
pi  labbo  uppajjeyya  samanakuttako  pi  rajaparadbato  vi- 
mucceyya,  evam  rirocessami  ti.  Evam  pana  cintetva  abam 
mabaraja  nam  anugantva  olokesini3,  atba  mama  olokentass' 
eva  antaradbayi  ti  arocesi.  Raja  bbiyyosomattaya 
pasiditva  battbam  pasaretva:  Yatb'  abam  manuami  tatba 
avirajjbanam■^  ev'  etan  ti  tikkbattum  vacam  niccbaresi; 
rajapurisassa  ca  databbam  adasi. 

Tasmim  yeva  divase  eko  amacco  raniio  pannakar attbaya 
Velobakam  nama  ekam  turangamam  adasi.  Atba  raja 
mama  punnanubbavena  esa  laddbo  ti  sampabamsi. 


'  A.  ganbitum  disva. 

2  A.  somanataya. 

3  MSS.  olokesi. 

■♦  A.  avirajjanam. 


-^     87     Hg- 

Tarn  pana  turangamam  arohitva  ekaip  hattharoham 
pajapesi'. 

Atha  mahajanassa  olokentassa  hattliaroliassa  sise  vetha- 
nadussam  yeva  passitva  akase  pakkhanto  bako  viya 
pannayati.  So  pana  tm-aiigamo  pato  va  Vijayapurato 
gacchanto  Pabbatabbhantaranagaram  sayanbasamaye  pa- 
pimi.     Abbbavijambhana-asso^  ti  pi  namam  akasi. 

Iccevam  samanakuttaka  daram  pi  posesum.  Pag  eva 
itaram  anacaram  ten'  eva  te  samanakuttaka  raniio  raalla- 
rangam  pi  pavisitva  niallam  yujjbesum3.  Tesii  pana 
samanakuttakesu  Do-na-ca-nah-dhum4  sarngbajo  nSma 
samanakuttako  mallakamme  ativiya  cbeko  adhiko.  So  kira 
samvaccbare  samvaccbare  ranno  mallarange  jayitva  panna- 
rasa  va  visati  va  asse  patilabbi  ti. 

Ratanapuranagare  mallakamme  aticbeko  adbiko  ekoKam- 
bbojakulo  attlii.  So  Ratanapuranagare  Jeyyapuranagare  ca 
attana  samatbamams  mallapurisam  alabbitva  Vijayapuram 
agantva  Campakavibarassa  dvarasamipe  mallasabba- 
mandape  pavisitva  mallakammam  katum  iccbaml  ti  raniio 
arocesi.  Atba  raja  tarn  samgbajam  amantetva  evam  aba: 
Idani  bbo  tvam  imina  saddbim  mallayuddham  katum 
sakkbissasi  ti°,  Ama  mabaiTija  pubbe  abam  dabaro  butva 
kilanattbaya  yeva  mallakammam  akilsim.  Idani  pana 
ekunasattativasso  abam  ito  paccba  mallayuddbam  katum 
sakkbissami  va  ma  va  ti  abam  na  jan5,mi.  Idani  para- 
pakkbain7  mallapurisam  mallakammena  maressami  ti 
vadi. 

Atba:  Rajunam  mallakammam  nama  kilanattbaya  yeva 
bbavati  ma  maretum  ussabain  karobl  ti  vatva  abnamannam 
mallayuddbam    karilpesi.      Saparisassa    ranno    olokentass' 


^  A.  rajapesi    S.  corr.  from  papesi   D.  pacapesi. 

=  A.  B.°vijjambbana''  S.  corr.  "vijjasoua"  Min:  vijjabbbana° 

3  Min:  yujjesum. 

4  B.  De-cba-na-can-kbum   A.   Ga-afi-nah-kbum    D.  Do- 
na-ca-nah-dbum. 

5  B.  corrects  to  samasamam.  ^  D.  S.  sakkbissati  ti. 
^  Min:  pana  pakkbam. 


-^     88     f<- 

eva  te  mallakarena  naccitva  afmamanfiam  samlpam  upa- 
gaccbimsu.  Atha  samghajo  mallo  Kambhojamallassa 
paclena  paharanakaram  dassetva  dakkhinabatthamutthina 
kapale  pabaram  adasi.  Atba  Kambbojamallassa  mukbam 
paccbato  abosi.  Tada  sapariso  raja:  Idisa  pana  vimukbato 
maranam  eva  seyyo.  Idani  pana  imam  passitum  na  visa- 
bami  ti  vadati.  Puna  samghajo  vamabattbamuttbina  ^  paba- 
ram adasi ^  Atba  Kambbojamallassa  mukbarri^  parivattetva 
yatba  pubbe  tatba  patittbasi.  Tasmifi  ca  krde  sapariso 
kbattiyo  tarn  accbariyam  disva  dve  asse  tinasamattani 
vattbani  satakabapanan  ca  adasi  ti. 

Idafi  ca  vacanam  poranapottbakesu+  agatatta  sadbu- 
jananan  ca  samvejaniyattbanatta  vuttam.  Samvegalabbam 
bi  tbapetva  nattbi  aiifiam  kinci  payojauan  ti. 

Kaliyuge  terasadbike  sattavassasate  Vijayapure  yeva 
tassa  putto  Kittinamako  raja  rajjam  karesi.  Pitara  sadisa- 
namavasen'  eva  Sibasiiro  ti  namam  patigganbi;  pitu  rabiio 
kale  laddbesii  pancasu  setibbesu  catimnam  yeva  avasesatta 
Catusetibbindo  ti  namam  pakatam.  Ten'  ev'  aba  Abbi- 
dbanappadipikatikayam  Catusetibbindo  ti.  Tassa  ranno 
kale  Caturangabalo  nama  mabamacco  gandbakovido 
Abbidbanappadipikasamvannanam  akasi.  So  pana  sakalavyS- 
karanavanasangananacarl  abosi.  Ekasmin  ca  samaye  raja 
ekam  mabantam  vibaram  karripetva  asukaranna  ayani 
vibaro  knrapito  imasmim  vibare  silavanta  yeva  nisidantu 
ti  kolabalam  uppadesi.  Atba  Sa-ca-ii-nama-gamavasis 
eko  tbero  Sgantva  nisidi.  Ayam  pana  tassa  tberassa 
attbuppatti.  Sa-ca-iigame  kira  eko  gabapati  attano  j)uttam 
sippuggabanattbaya  vibrire  ekassa  bbikkbussa  santike 
niyyadesi.  Puttassa  pana  vibaram  agantukamassa^  tajjan- 
attbaya  sakantakagaccbassa7  upari  kbipati^.  So  ca  dabaro 
nikkbamitva  gebam  anagantva  vibare  yeva  nisidi.  Mata- 
l^itunam  santikam  anagantva  tbokam  tbokam  duram  gantva 


'  B.  mutbina.         ^  j)    g_  akasi.         3  A.  sukbam. 

-*  A.  pottbake.     s  B.  Sa-ca-na°  A.  Sa-ca-u°  S.  D.  Sa-ca-na° 

^  A.  agantukamassa.         "  S.  D.  A.  sakandaka" 

^  A.  pati. 


-^     89     H$- 

samanerabhumito  upasampadabliumim  patva  Arimaddana- 
nagaram  gaccbi.  Atipanfiavantataya  pana  pattapattathane 
mabatbera  samganbimsu.  Ten  ev'  esa^  sakala-Maramma- 
rattbe  pakato  abosi.  Atba  matapitaro  puttassa  agamanam 
apekkbitva  yeva  nisidimsu. 

Tam  attbam  pana  sutva  esa  ambakam  putto  bbavissati 
va  no  va  ti  vimamsitiikamo  pita  anugaccbi.  Arimaddana- 
nagare  tam  sampapiinitva  upattbapetva  nisidi.  So  pi 
bbikkbu  yatba^  upattbanen'  eva  santappetva  gandbam 
ngganbi.  Aparasmini  pana  kale  so  bbikkbu:  Ajja  siipo 
appalono  ti  adina  punappunam  bbanati^. 

Atba  pita  evam  aba: 

Pubbe^  piyaputtaka  taya  idisam  vacanams  na  katbitam; 
idani  pana  tvam  abbinbam  idisani  vacanam  bbanasi^, 
Karanani  ettba  kin  ti  puccbi.  Pubbe  gandbesu  cbekattam 
apatva  gandbesu  cbekattam  vyapannacittataya  na  vuttam; 
idani  pana  maya  iccbito  attbo  mattbakam  patto,  tasma 
kayababipariggabanattbaya  mayil  idisam  vacanam  vuttan 
ti  vadati7.  Tam  vacanam  sutva^  pitamatuya  santikain 
gamanattbaya  okasam  yacitvil  pitara  saddbim  sakattbanam 
agaccbanto  Vijayapuram  cetiyavandanattbaya  pavisi.  Tada 
ranna9  ruttavacanam  sutva  tasmini  vibare  arubitva  nisidi. 
Arakkbapuriso  ca  tam  libikkbum  vibare  nisinnam  disva 
tam  attbam  ranno  arocesi.  Kaja  ca  Caturaiigabalan  nama 
amaccam  anapesi;  gantva  tassa  bbikkbussa  iianatbamam 
upadbarebl  ti.  Caturaiigabab)  ca  gantva  tam  bbikkbum 
gulbagulbatbanam  puccbi.  So  pi  puccbitam  puccbitam 
vissajjesi.  Caturaiigabalo  ca  tam  attbam  ranno  arocesi. 
Raja  tuttbacitto  butva  tam  vibriram  tassa  bbikkbussa 
adilsi.  Tassa  pana  bbikkbussa  dabarakakisakantakagaccbe^° 
pituno  kbipanam  paticca  Kbantakaldiipatbero"  ti  samanna 
abosi.  Mulaniimam  pan'  assa  Nagito  ti.  So  tasmim  vibare 
nisiditva  Saddasarattbajalinim  nama  gandbam  akasi.  Tassa 


^  B.  assa.         ^  D.  sati.         ^  A.  bbani. 
•^  A.  B.  Na  pubbe.  s  A.  vadanam.         ^  A.  bbanati. 

7  A.  vadi.         ^  Min:  na  sutva.         ^  A.  B.  1).  ranno. 
^°  S.  "sakanta"         "  A.  B.  Kbandakakbipattbero. 


kira  therassa  krde  tasniim  nagare  araddhavipassana  dhura 
mahallaka  bhikkhusahassamatta  ahesum.  Araddhagandha- 
dhura  pana  daharabliikkhii  gananapatliam  vitivatta. 

Tassa  pana  pitaram  pi  setthitthane  thapesi.  Ten'  eva 
tarn  gamam  Setthigamo  ti  namena  voharimsu. 

Kaccayanavannanam  pana  Vijayapure  yeva  Abhaya- 
giripabbate  nisinno  Mahavijitavi  nama  thero  akasi,  Vacako- 
padesam  pi  so  yeva  akasi.  Saddavuttim  pana  Saddbamma- 
gurutbero  akasi. 

Iccevam  Vijayapure  anekebi  gandbakarebi  sasanam  vi- 
pubim  abosi. 

Kaliyuge  pana  paficasitadbike  cba  vassasate  sampatte 
Samkbaya-coyon  namako  raja  Jeyyapuranagaram  mapetva 
tattba  rajjam  karesi.  Tattba  pana  rajimam  kale  tberebi 
katagandbo  nama  nattbi. 

Kaliyuge  cbabbisadbike  ^  sattavassasate  vesakbamase 
Jeyyapuranagaram  vinassi.  Tasmim  yeva  saravaccbare 
jettbamase  Vijayapuram  vinassi,  tasmim  yeva  samvaccbare 
pbaggunamase  Sativaraja  Ratanapurani  nama  nagarani 
mapetva  rajjam  karesi  ti. 

Idam  Vijayapura-Jeyyapuresu  sasanassa  patittbanaip. 

Idani  Marammamandale  Tambadiparattbe  yeva  Ratana- 
puranagare  Sasanavamsam  vakkbami. 

Kaliyuge  bi  attbasitadbike  sattavassasate  Narapatiranno 
dbitaya  saddbim  Alonab-can-sii-raiino  ^  putto  Ananda- 
suriyo  nama  santbavam^  katva  ekam  Samiddbikara  nama 
puttani  vijilyi*.  So  vaye  sampatte  rajjasampattini  labhi. 
Tato  pabbuti  yava  Mreii-co-ra  tis  ranila  Arimaddanana- 
gare  rajjam  akarnsu.  Tato  paccba  Sirisudbammarajadbipati 
ti  laddbanamo  Sativaraja  Ratanapuranagare  rajjam  karesi. 
Tassa  raiino  kale  kaliyuge  ekanavutadbike  sattavassasate 
sampatte  Lankadlpato  Sirisaddbammfdamkaratbero  Siba- 
lamabasamitbero^  ca  ti  ime  dve  tberS  panca  sariradbatuyo 
anetva  navaya  Kusimatittbam    papunitva  Ramannarattbe 


^  B.  cbavisadbike.         ^  D.  "drdi-ca-iia° 

3  A.  S.  sandbavam.      ^  D.  vijjayi.      s  ]j.  Mren-co-ra-na. 

^  B.  Sirisibala°  . 


-^     91     f^ 

Byaiinaran'  namena  ranfia  nivarita  anisiditva  tato  so  eva 
raja  there  yava  Sirikhettanagara  pabini.  Tarn  attham 
natva  Ratanapurindo  raja  cattallsaya  navahi^  yava  Siri- 
khettanagaram  paccuggantva  anesi.  Anetva  ca  Malianava- 
gamamj  pattakale  saha  orodhehi  amaccehi  ca  sayam  eva 
raja  paccuggacchi.  Ratanapuram  pana  pattakale  maha- 
pathavi  cali  patinadah  ca  nadi.  Tada  raja  sammasam- 
buddhassa  ti  lokaggassa*  sasanam  pagganbissami  tis  cin- 
tetva  sariradbatum  anetva  idba  pattakrde  ayam  mabapatbavi 
calati^  j)atinadan  ca  nadati.  Idam  amhakam  rattbe  jina- 
sasanassa  cirakalam  patittbanabbave  pubbanimittan?  ti 
sayam  eva  nimittapatbam  akasi. 

Tava  tittbatu  jivamanassa  sammasambuddbassa  anu- 
bbavo.  Abo  vata  sariradbatuya  yeva  anubbavo  ti  babu- 
rattbavasino  pasidirasu. 

Honti  c'ettba: 

Sariradbatuya  tava  mabanto  'ccbariyo^  boti 

Ka  katba  pana  buddbassa  jivamanassa  settbassa? 

Evam  anussaritvana  uppadeyya  pasadakam 
Buddbagunesu  babuHam  garavan  ca  kare  jano  ti. 

Kaliyuge  dve  navutadbike  sattavassasate  ta  pafica  dba- 
tuyo  nidabitva9  Jeyyapuranagarato  paccbimadisabbage 
samabbumibbage  cetiyam  patittbripesi.  Tail  ca  cetiyam 
Ratanacetiyau  ti  pannapesi,  battbirtipababullataya  pana 
Anekibbindo  ti  pakatam  abosi^''.  Tibi  sirigabbbebi  sattabi 
dvarebi  ca  alamkatam  Ummagani  nama  mabavibaram" 
karapetva  dvinnarn  Slbaladipikanam  tberanam  adasi.  Tato 
paccba    tesu    Mabantatbero    sakavibarasamipe    pabbata- 


'  D.  Bya-fmu-ran.         ^  B.  navaya.         ^  B.  Mahanama. 
4  A.  tiropaggassa.         s  A.  patiganbissami  ti. 
^  A.  carati.         ^  Min:  pubbe  nimittan. 
'^  B.  mabantoccbariya.      9  B.  nidhabitva  A.  niddbabitva. 
'°  D.  boti. 
''  A.  abimkata-umanga  nava  maba"   A.  Ummaga  nama. 


•^     92     H$- 

muddliani  attano  sisse  pi  apavesetva  lajjipesalabahussuta- 
sikkbakamehi  tlhi^  therehi  saddhim  simam  sammannati. 

Iccevam  simasammutipariyattivacanadikammehi  Maram- 
maratthe  silsanam  virulham  katva  patitthapesi. 

Idain  Marammamandale  Ratanapuranagare  Silialadipike 
dve  there  paticca  pathamam  sasauassa  patitthanam. 

Kaliyuge  cliabbisadliike  sattavassasate  sampatte  pbaggu- 
namase  Sativaraja  Ratanapuranagaram  mapesi. 

Tassa  ranuo  krde  Jeyyapuranagare  eka  pupika*  ittbi 
alajjino  ekassa  bhikkbussa  santike  dbanam  upanidabi. 
Aparabbage  sa  tarn  dbanam  3  yfici.  Atba  so  bbikkbu 
tava  dbanam  abam  na  patigganbriml  ti  musa  bbanati. 
Evam  vivadam  katva  tarn  karanam  ranno  arocesi.  Raja 
paldcosapetva  sayam  eva  tarn  bbikkbum  piiccbi*:  tvams 
bbante  tassa  ittbiya  dbanam  patigganbasi^  va  ma  va  ti. 

Aliam  mabaraja  samano,  aHkam  bbanitum  na  vattati. 
Na  patiganbaml  ti  vadati.  Tam  karanam  raja  ca  punappu- 
nam  puccbitva  vimamsanto  bbikkbussa  keratikabbavam  7 
janitva  samano  samano^  bbagavata  pannattam  silvkbapadam 
akkamitva  musa  bbanati  ti  kujjbitvil  sayam  9  eva  apara- 
dbanurupam  sisam  cbinditva  rajagebato  bettba  kbipi^°. 

Tan  ca  karanam  sakala-Marammarattbe  pakatam  abijji- 
bbikkbu  pi  afine  papakammam  katum  ua  visabimsu". 
Ranna  bbayitva  yeva  sikkbapadam  na  akkamesura. 

Kabyuge  timsadbike  sattavassasate  sampatte  Ma-iiab- 
krl-cva-cok"  nama  raja  rajjam  karesi.  So  pana  raja 
rattbavaslnam  sukbattbaya  nimittam  gabetva  talavantam^3 
gabetva  rajagebam  patigganbi.  So  ca  raja  sakkaraje  panca 
cattalisadbike  sattavassasate  sampatte  Ca-nab-kbum  nama 
cetiyam  patittbapesi.  Yaii-ab-ra-namakassa  silapabba- 
tassa  samipe  poranikam  ekam  cetiyam  nadiudakam  bbindi. 

^  B.  saddbabitabbebi   A.  saddbabi  sabbebi  tberebi. 

^  Min:  pujika.         3  D.  kbanam. 

4  A.  puccbim.     s  A.  tam.     ^  A.  and  Min:  patiganbami. 

7  A.  karatika°         ^  A.  samano  samano. 

9  S.  corr.  ayam   A.  B.  ayam.         '°  B.  tbapi. 
''  D.  visayimsu.         '^  D.  °nab-kri-cca° 
'3  A.  kalavantam   D.  "mandam. 


-^     93     H^ 

Tada  sakarandaka  pafica  dliatuyo  iidake  nimmujjantiyo 
Eravano  nama  niigo  gahetva  paccha  Ca-nah-khiim  nama 
cetiyam  patittliapessami  ti  ranna  araddhakale  yeva  Datha- 
iiagassa '  nama  therassa  saha  karandakena  paiica  dliatuyo 
niyyadesi.  So  ca  tliero  raiino  adasi.  Eaja  dve  dliatuyo 
Mu-tho  cetiye^  nidlianam  akasi.  Tisso  pana  Ca-iiah-kliuiii 
cetiye  ti  poiTinapotthakesu  vuttam. 

So  raja  kumarakale  sikkhapakassa  acariyassa  setaccliattam 
datva  samglianayakatthanam  niyyadesi.  Kliemacaro  nama 
eko  tliero  rattibhage  majjhantikakale  cetiyaugane^  olam- 
betva*  thapitam  bherim  anekavaram  paliari.  Atha  raja 
rajagehato  yeva  sutva  yatha  thapitaniyamavasena  vihare 
koci  bliikkhu  kalam  kato  bliaveyya  ti  maniiitva  viharam 
gantva  pucchahl  ti  diitam  pesesi.  Diito  viharam  gantva 
karanam  pucchi.  Bhikkhu  ca  evam  ahamsu:  Na  amliesu 
kalam  katabhikklm  nama  natthi.  Atha  kho  Sakko  devanam 
indo  idani  kalam  kato  ti  bahunam  manussanam  hapanatthaya 
bherim  paharimha  ti.  Puna  raja  bhikkhu  pakkosapetva 
pucchi:  Kasma  pana  bhante  tumhe  Sakkassa  devanam 
indassa  kalam  katabhavam  janatha  ti.  Atha  bhikkhu 
evana  aharusu: 

Bhagavato  parinibbanakale  sasanam  rakkhissami  ti 
Sakko  devanam  indo  patiuham  katva  pi  idani  sasane 
vasantilnam  amhakam  anupalanakammam  nama  kihci  na 
akasi.  Sace  pana  Sakko  devanam  indo  jivamano  bliaveyya 
sammasambuddhassa  santike  patihhani  dalham  katva  idani 
apposukko  na  bhaveyya.  Idani  jjana  Sakkassa  devanam 
indassa  arakkhanakammam  nama  kifici  na  dissati.  Tasmas 
idani  Sakko  devanam  indo  kalam  kato  ti  janimha  ti. 

E,aja  tarn  sutva  Khemacaratherassa  pasiditva  viharam 
karapetva  adasi.  So  ca  thero  Sudhammapuravaslnam 
Sihalavamsikanam  mahatheranam  vamse  ahosi^  lajji  pesalo 
ahosi  ti^. 


'  S.  Datha°         '  B.  Miilacetiye    S.  A.  Muttho° 
3  A.  cetiyasangane.         **  S.  D.  olimpetva. 
^  S.  corr.  tatha    A.  tatha.         °  B.  bhavati. 
7  B.  hot!  ti. 


-^     94     f<^ 

Eatanapuranagare  yeva  Adhikaranno  kale  Ratanapura- 
nagarassa  dakkhinadisabhage  mahasetum  karapesi.  Tassa 
pana  acariyo  samgharaja  lajjlpakkbam  na  bhaji  ti^  Ten' 
eva  theraparamparaya  esa  na  samgabitabbo. 

Tassa  ranno  kale  cbasatthadbike  sattavassasate  kaliyuge 
Rajadbiraja  nama  Ramannarattbindo  bbiipalo  tisabassa- 
pamanasu  navasii  sattbisatasabassebi  yodbebi  saddbim 
nadlmaggena  yujjbanattbaya  Ratanapurabbimukbam  agato. 

Atba  Adbikaraja  babavo  amacce  ca  bbikkbu  ca  sanni- 
patapetva  mantesi:  Idani  Ramannarattbindo  raja  yujjban- 
attbaya idba  agaccbati.  Yuddbam  akatva  ken'  upayena 
tarn  patinivattapetum  sakkbissama  ti. 

Atba  sabbe  kinci  akatbetva  tunblbbaven'  eva  nisidimsu. 

Atba  jatavasena  ekatimsavassiko  upasampadavasena  ^ 
pana  ekadasavassiko  eko  bbikkbu  evam  aba: 

Eko  pana  Ramannarattbindo  Rajadbirajil  tava  tittbatu. 
Sace  sakale  pi  Jambudipe  sabbe  rajano  agaccbeyyum 
evam  pi  katbasallapen'  eva  yuddbam  akatva  patinivatta- 
petum sakkomi  ti. 

Atba  Adbikaraja  tuttbacitto  butva  aba:  Yatba  bbante 
tvam  sakkosi  Rajadbirajam  katkasallapena  patinivattapetum 
tatba  karobi  ti. 

Atba  so  bbikkbu  mettasandesapannam  pesetva  okasam 
yaci  tassa  Rajadhirajassa  santikam  pavisitukamo.  Rajadbi- 
raja  ca  tassa  bbikkbussa  mettasandesapannam  passitva  tam 
bbikkbum  sigbani  anetbiX  ti  dutam  pesesi. 

Duto  anetva  ranno  dassesi.  Atba  so  bbikkbu  Rajadbi- 
rajarn  dbammadesanaya  ovadarn  datva  sakattbanam  pati- 
nivattapesi,  Ayan  ca  bbikkbu  Arimaddananagare  catiisu 
ganesu  Arabantaganavamsiko  sikkbakamo  lajji  pesalo. 
Arimaddananagare  Cagamo^  nama  dese  pana  jatatta  Ca- 
gra-un4  bbikkbu  ti  vobariyati. 

Kaliyuge  attbasitadbike  sattavassasate  sampatte  Mrih- 
naiiabs   dbammaraja  Eatanapure   yeva^  rajjam  sampatto. 


^  B.  bbajati    A.  bbajiti.         ^  A.  °vassena. 

3  D.  B.  Cagabe  nama.     ^  A.  B.  Ca-gyi-ba  D.  Ca-brau-ba. 

5  D.  Mra-ua-nab.         ^  Min:  Ratanapuren'  eva. 


^^     95     H^ 

Tassa  raiino  kale  Sllialadipato  dve  mahathera  Ratanapui'am 
agantva  sasanam  anuggabetva  nisidimsu. 

Tada  kaliyuge  atthasate  sampunne^  poranakam  kaliyugam 
apanetva  abhinavam  thapetum  okaso  aniippatto.  Atha  Ca- 
groii-ha^  tliero  ca  Rajaviharavasithero  ca  evam  aliamsu: 
Apanitabbakale  maliaraja  sampatte  anapanetum  na  vattati  ti. 

Atha  raja  puna  evam  aha:  Apanitahbe  sampatte  ana- 
panetva  ajjhupekkhitva3  vasantassa  ko  doso  ti.  Sace  apani- 
tahbe sampatte  anapanetva  ajjhupekkhitva  nisldeyya 
ratthavasmam  dukkham  bhavissati  ti  Vedasatthesu''  agatam, 
Sakkarajam  apanento  pi  raja  tasmim  yeva  vasse  devam 
gatos  bhaveyya  ti  ahamsu. 

Atha  raja:  Sattanam  sukham  labhiyamanatam  jananto 
yeva  madiso  attano  bhayain  apekkhitva  apanitabbam 
anapanetva  nisiditum  na  vattati.  Kappam  khiyitva  pi  mama 
agunam  loke  pattharitva  patitthahissati  ti  manasikaritva 
sakkaraje  atthavassasate  sampunne  Pasyu-chidra-muni- 
samkhyam"  apanetva  cammavasesam  thapesi.  Atha  maha- 
mandapam  karapetva  mahachanam  katva  mahadanam  pi 
adasi.  Ca-gro-ha^  thero  Rajaviharavasithero  ca  ti  Ari- 
maddananagare   Arahantavamsiko   lajjlpesalo  sikkhakamo. 

Idisam  pana  vacanam  sasanapatiyattatta  ca  ratthavasi- 
kayattatta^  ca  dhammanulomavasena  viittam. 

Kaliyuge  catuvassadhike  atthasate  Maha-Narapati  raja 
Ratanapuranagare  rajjam  karesi.  So  ca  raja  Thiiparama- 
cetiyam  karapesi.  Tassa  pana  acariyo  Mahasamlthero 
nama.  So  pana  thero  Sihaladipam  gantva  Sihalindassa 
raiiho  acariyassa  Sariputtattherassa  santike  sikkham  ga- 
hetva  Pacchagatatheravamsiko'5  ti  datthabbo.  Tassa 
raimo  kale  Ratauapuranagare  Maha-Ariyavamso  nama  eko 
thero  atthi.  So  pana  pariyattivisarado  Arimaddananagare 
Chapadaganato  ^°  agatavamsiko. 

^  A.  sampanne   B.  sampunno.         ""  Min:  (Ca  gra  un?). 

3  A.  ajjui)ekkhitva.       •*  E.  "sattesu.       s  A.  devam  kato. 

^  A.  S.  corr.  ])as-hra-Gliidra-raanaha  B.bas-ha-chidra-muni. 

7  Min:  Ca-gra-uh   A.  B.  Ca-gri-ha. 

«  B.  "attattha. 

9  B.  Paccagata°        '"  D.  "ganagata. 


-^     96     Hg- 

Ekasmim  samaye  Je}'yapuranagaram  gantva  Re-tam' 
iti  pakatassa  mahatherassa  santike  saddanayam  ugganhitva 
nisidi.  So  pana  kira  mahathero  aimehi  saddliim  yam  va 
tarn  va  katham^  asallapitukamataya  miikhe  udakam  tha- 
petva  yeblmyyena  nisidati.  Ten  ev'  esa  Marammavoharena 
Re-tam  j  iti  prikato  aliosi. 

So  kira  Ariyavamsatliero  Re-tam'*  therassa  santikam 
gandham  vacripetum  okasam  yacissami  ti  upagaccliarito  pi 
kathasallapam  akatva  dve  aliani  vattam  paripuretva  yeva 
paccagacchis.Tatiyadivase  pana  cammakhandam  akotanatta^ 
saddam  sutva  mukliato  udakam  uggiritva  karanam  pucchi. 
Gandham  uggahanattliaya  agatabliavam  arocesi.  Atha 
tliero  evam  aha:  Aham  aviiso  divase  divase  tikkhattum 
gandham  vacemi.  Majjhantikatikkamakale  pi  Pmlhacetiyam 
gantva  cetiyaiigane  sammajjanakiccam  karomi,  okasam  na 
labhami.  Evam  pi  tvam  bahii  gandhe  nggahetva  pi  acari- 
yehi  dinnopadesam  alabhitva  puna  mama  santikam 
agacchasi.  Tasma  cetiyaiigane  sammajjanavattam  tavakali- 
kam  vikopetva  gandhuggahanatthaya  okasam  dassami  ti 
vatva  Abhidhammatthavibhavinim  nama  lakkhanatlkam 
ugganhapesi.  Nananayehi  upadesam  datva  vacesi.  Ya- 
cetva  ca  tatiyadivase  acariyassa  santikam  nagacchi. 
Mahathero  pi  karanam  akaUataya  anagato  bhaveyya 
ti  mahhitva  pucchanatthaya  bhikkhii  pesesi. 

Ariyavamsathero  ca  acariyassa  santikarn  gamissami  ti 
agato  antaramagge  yeva  dutabhikkhu  passitva  tehi  saddhim 
mahatherassa  santikam  agamamsu^. 

Acariyassa  santikam  patva  acarivo  Ariyavamsatheram 
pucchi:  Kasma  pana  tvarn  na  uggahanatthaya  agato  'si  ti. 
Aham  l)hante  tumhehi  dinnopadesam  nissaya  idani  sabbam 
nayam  janami  ti.    Atha  acariyo  aha:  Yam  pana  gandham 


^  B.  E,e-vum   1).  Re- vara.         ^  B.  katam. 

3  S.  corr.  from  Retthuiii    D.  Retham. 

•^  Min:  Re-iium, 

5  A.  S.  pacchagacchi. 

"  B.  akotanatthaya. 

7  B.  agamamsu. 


^     97     H$- 

nissiSya  tvam  chekatam  patto  ti  *  tassa  ^  samvannanam  katviX 
upakaram  karolii  ti.  Atha  Ariyavamsathero  acariyassa 
vacanam  sirasa  patiggalietva  Abliidhammatthavibhaviniya 
Manisriramanjusam  nama  anusamvannanam  akasi,  Nitthi- 
tam  nitthitam  patham  uposatliadivase  uposathadivase  Punfia- 
cetiyassa  cetiyangane  bhikkhusamgham  sannipatapetva 
bliikkhusamghassa  majjhe  vacapetva  sunapesi;  sace  koci 
doso  atthi  tam  vadatha  ti. 

Atha  Arimaddananagarato  cetiyavandanatthaya  eko 
bhikkbu  agantva  parisakotiyam  sunitva  nisldi.  Atha  so 
bhikkbu  dve  varam  e,  e3  iti  saddam  akasi  tarn  thanam 
sallakkhetva  thapesi  nivasanattbanaii  ca  puccbi.  Ariya- 
vamsatbero  pi  sakavibaram  patva  tasmim  tbane  iipa- 
dbrirento  ekasmim  tbane  ekassa  attbassa  dvikbattum 
Yuttatta  punaruttidoso  dissati.  Ekasmim  tbane  imam 
gandban  ti  puniiigarupena  vattabbattbane  idam  gandban 
ti  napumsakaliiigena*  vuttatta  lingavirodbidoso  dissati. 

Atha  tarn  puggalam  pakkosapetva  evam  aba:  Abam 
avuso  imam  gandbam  mabussahena  karomi.  Tan  ca  vi- 
vekakrde  rattibbage  yeva  pottbakam  pattbaritva  likbami. 
Evam  mabussahena  karontam  pi  tvam  aruccanakarenas 
saddam  karosi. 

Kidisam  pana  dosam  sutva  evam  karosi  ti  puccbi. 
Atha  so  bhikkbu  evam  aha:  Taya  bhante  mabussahena 
kate  gandhe  dosavasena  bahu  vattabbattbanam  natthi. 
Saddato  c'eva  attbato  ca  paripunno  yev'  esa  gandho. 
Atha  kho  pana  ekasmiiu  thane  ekassa  attbassa  dvikkhattum 
vuttatta  punaruttidoso  dissati.  Ekasmim  pana  imam 
gandban  ti  pullingena  vattabbattbane  idam  gandban  ti  na- 
pumsakalihgena  vuttatta  lingavirodbidoso  dissati.  Evam 
ettakam  yeva  dosam  disva  idisam  aruccanakaram  dassemi  ti. 

Atha  Ariyavamsathero  tuttbacitto  hutva  attano  sarlra- 
parupitam  dupattacivaram  iminaham  tava  nanam  pujemi 
ti  vatva  adasi.  Pacchakale  Adhikaraja  tam  attham  sutva 
namahmcham'^  adasi. 


^  B.  patto  'si.         2  D.  tam.         ^  A.  B.  eva. 

4  A.  puhgaka"      5  B.  B.  arucanakrirena.      "  D.  lahcam. 

Sasana-Vamsa.  7 


-^        98        r<- 

So  ca  Ariyavamsathero  Manidipara  iiama  gandham 
Gandliabharanafi  ca  Jatakavisodhanaii  ca  palibhasaya 
akiisi. 

Anutikaya  pana  attliayojanam  Marammabhasaya   akasi. 

Ekam  samayam  Adhikaraja  viharam  gantva  dhammam 
suni.  Tliero  dhammam  desetva  nitthitakale  yanabalim 
siikhatthaya'  yaci.  E,aja  adatva  navam  abhiruhitva  pacca- 
gacchi.  Antaramagge  navaya  piyam  eko  sumsumriro 
mukhena  ganhitva  niccalam  katva  tbapesi.  Tlierena  ya- 
citam  yanabalim  dadami  ti  mabasaddam  katva  raja  purise- 
tikkbattum  niccbaresi.  Atba  sumsumaro  navam  muncitva 
gaccbi.  Ekasmiii  ca  kale  raja  vibaram  nikkbami.  Atba 
eka  battbinl  vibarasamipe  bandbitva  th'^ipesi.  Sa  bodbi- 
rukkbasakbam  cbinditva  kbadi.  Sa  tattb  'eva  bbiimiyam 
pati. 

Atba  tbero  saccakiriyam  katva  mettabbavanam  bbavetva 
mettodakena  sinci.  Tarn  kbanafi  iieva  sa  uttbabi.  Raja 
ca  tarn  accbariyam  disva  tassa  aggbanakamulam  datva 
vibarato  naditittbam  gamanamagge  silapattam  cinitva-5 
setum  akasi  ti. 

Saddbammakittitbero  pana  Ariyavamsatberassa  saddbi- 
vibariko  Jetavanavibaravasi;  te  pana  tbera  Cbapadagana- 
vamsika  ti  dattbabba. 

Kaliyuge  dvecattajlsadbike  attbavassasate  sampatte 
Ratanapuranagare  yeva  Sirisudbammarajadbipati  nama 
diitiyadbikaraja  rajjam  karesi  tasmin  ca  kale  Pabbata- 
bbbantaranagarato  Maba-Sllavamso  nama  tbero  4  pafica 
cattalisadbike  attbavassasate  sampatte  Sumedbakatbam  ka- 
byalamkaravasena  bandbitva  Buddbalamkaran  ca  nama 
kabyalamkaram  Pabbatabbbantarapatisamyuttan  c'eva  ka- 
byalamkaram  bandbitva  te  gabetva  Ratanapuranagarain 
agaccbi. 

Atba  raja  Tbiiparamacetiyassa  asannattbane  Ratanavi- 
manavibares  nisidapesi.     So    ca   tbero   tattba    sotaranam 


^  D.  sukbattaya.  ^  A.  B.  S.  rajapurise. 

3  B.  kbinitva.         4  B.  Silavamso  nama  tbero. 
5  A.  Ratanabbimana° 


-^     99     HS~ 

pariyattim  vacetva  nisidi.  So  ca  tliero  tattha  nisinnanam 
theranam  attbamako  lioti.  So  ca  Maha-Silavamsathero 
kaliyiigassa  pannarasadliike  attliavassasate  jato'  timsa- 
vassakale  Eatanapiiranagaram  agato  ti  poranapotthakesu 
vuttam. 

So  pana  tliero  Nettipaliya  attliayojanam  Maramnia- 
bhasaya  akasi  Parayanavattbim  ca.  Ratanapuranagare 
yeva  Rattbassaro  nama  eko  tbero  attbi  Maba-Sriavamsa- 
tberena  samafmanatbamo. 

So  pana  Ratanapuranagare  yeva  kaliyiigassa  timsadbike 
attbavassasate  kale  jato^  Blmridattajatakam  Hattbipala- 
jatakam  Samvarajatakan  ca  kabyalamkaravasena  bandbi 
afiiian  ca  anekavidbam  kabyalamkaram.  Te  pana  dve 
tbera  kabyalamkarakaraka  ti  tberaparamparaya  pavesetva  3 
na  ganenti  poranaka.  Ettlia  ca  kincapi  samananam 
iiposatbikanan  ca  kabyalamkaram  bandliitiim  vacetiiin  va 
kabyrikabyavicaranain+  vattiim  okaso  laddbo. 

Sasanavamsam  pana  vattiims  okasassa  ativittbaravase- 
satta^  tam  avatva  ajjbupekkbissama.  Uposathaviniccbaye 
pana  naccagltadisikkbapadassa  visaye  vittbarena  mayam 
avociimba.  Kaliyiigassa  gate  sattbadbike  attbavassasate 
Ratanapuranagare  yeva  Siritribbanadityanarapati  ^  varo  ® 
Mabadbammarajadbipatiraja  rajjam  karesi. 

Tassa  ranno  kale  Tisasanadbajo"  nama  bbikkbii  ^° 
Saddbammakittitberassa  santike  gandbam  ugganbi.  Atba 
Arimaddananagarato  eko  mabatbero  sotimam  vacitva 
Ratanapiiranagare  nisidissami  ti  agato.  Atba  Saddbamma- 
kittitberassa "  gandbam  vacentass'  eva  vibarassa  bettba 
nisiditva  so  mabatbero  saddam  simitva  evam  cintesi: 
Ekassa'^  santike  abam  navakattbane  tbatva  tbokam  gandbam 


'  A.  jate.         ^  A.  jate  {corrected  from  jato). 
J  A.  bbavesetva. 

+  B.  D.  kappakai^pavicaranam  corr.  kabbrikabba° 
5  B.  vattbum.         ^  Min:  vittbaravasesatta. 
7  B.  D.  Siriribbavanadityanarapati.     ^  B.  pare  A.  vare. 
9  A.  Sasanadbajo    S.  D.  Tissasamanacajo. 
'°  A.  sikkba.         "  B.  Saddbammatissa° 
"  A.  and  B.  Etassa. 


-^     100     f<- 

ganliissaml  ti.  Atha  so  maliathero  Saddbammakittitlier- 
assa  santikam  pavisitva  gandham  vacapetum  okasam  yaci. 
Atha  Saddliammakittithero  vassapamanam  pucchitva:  Tvam 
bhante  maya  vuddhataro  'si  ti  aha.  Aham  tayS,  'v^iddhataro 
pi  samano  navakatthane  thatva  gandham  ugganhissami  ti 
aha.  Atha  Saddhammakittithero  tassa  gandham  vacesi. 
Atha  pasiditva^  pana  tam  mahatheram  Maha-Sadhujjano 
ti  namena  voharati.  Atha  paccha  Marammarattham  kali- 
yugassa  pahcasitadhika-atthasatakalato  patthaya  yava 
atthasitadhika-atthasatavassakalam  nanabhayehi  ^  saiikhu- 
bhitam  ahosi.  Tada  Kambojaratthato  Sirihamsva3  nama 
bhinnakulo  agantva  Ratanapuranagare  rajjam  ganhi.  Atha 
so  evam  cintesi:  Bhikkhii  adara  aputtika  hutva  puna  sisse 
posetva  parivaram4  gavesanti.  Sace  bhikkhu  parivarani 
vicinitva  rajjabhavams  ganheyyum  evam  sati  rajjam  gahetum^ 
sakkhissanti  idan  'eva  bhikkhu  gahetva  maretum  vattati 
ti  evam  pana  cintetva  Toii-bhi-hdi^  namake  khettavane 
bahu  mandape  kariipetva  gomahisakukkutasiikaradayo 
,(;.  maretva   bhikkhu    bhojessami  ti  vatva  Jeyyapura-Vijaya- 

pura-Ratanapuranagaresu  sabbe  mahathere  bahuhi  ante- 
vasikehi  saddhim  pakkosfipetva  tesu  mandapesu  nisida- 
petva^  hatthiassadisenaiigehi  parivaretva  maresi.  Tada 
P  kira  tisahassapamana  bhikkhu  marimsii  ti  bhikkhu  ca 
maretva  bahCi  pi  potthake  aggina  jhapesi^  cetiyani  pi 
bhedapesi.  Aho  vata  pripajanassa  papakamman  ti. 
Honti  c'ettha: 

Sasanam  nama  riljanam  nissaya  titthate  idha, 
Micchaditthi  ti  rajano'"  sasanam  dusenti  satthuno. 

Sammaditthi  ca  rajano  pagganhant'eva  sasanam, 
Evan  ca  sati  akase  uhiraja  va  dibbatl^^  ti. 

^  B.  atipasiditva.  ^  B.  ajihi   A.  arihi. 

3  B.  Sahantva  nama    D.  S.  Sihantva   A.  Siriham. 

4  A.  omits  parivarara.         s  A.  ajjabhavam. 
^  A.  ganhitum    B,  ganhetum. 

7  S.  A.  Le-tan-bhi-byuh    D.  To-na°   B.  No-bhi-byuh. 
**  A.  nisidripesi  A.  omits  following  i)assage  to  aho  vata  &c. 
'^  B.  dhyapesi.     '"  Min:  °ditthikarajano  D.  ditthi  hi  rajano. 

"  Sic  MSS.  Min:  corrects  to   dippati  ti. 


^1' 


/ 


-^     101     ^<~ 

Atha  kaliyuge  ekavassadliike  navavassasate  sampatte 
akase  bahulii  tarakehi  dlmma  nikkhamimsii  Cannali-khum^ 
cetiye  pi  buddhapatibimbassa  akkhikupato  udakadhara 
nettajalani  viya  nikkhamimsii  ti  Rajavamse  viittam. 

Atha  Saddhammakittithero  saddhim  Maha-Sadhujjana- 
Tisasanadhajatherehi  Ketumatmagaram  agamasi. 

Ratthasarathero  pi  Sirikhettanagaram  sayam  eva  aga- 
masi ti  poranapotthakesii  vuttara.  Tarn  pana  Rajavamse 
Sirikhettanagarindo  Sativaraja  tarn  anesi  ti  viittavacanena 
na^  sameti.  Saddhammakittithero  pi  Ketiimatmagare 
kalam  kato  tato  paccha  thokam^  kahxm  atikkamitviX  Maha- 
sadhiijjanathero  tatth  'eva  kalam  akasi. 

Tisasanadhajathero  pana  kaUyuge  dvadasadhike  nava- 
vassasate sampatte  Hamsavatinagare  Anekasetibhindassa 
rahfio  kale  Ketumatinagarato  Hamsavatinagaram  agamasi. 

Tato  paccha  ticattalisavassiko  hutva  kaliyuge  terasadhike 
navavassasate  Moh-ghah-byanarapatirahno  ^  krde  puna 
Jeyyapuranagaram  sampatto  hutvil  Jetavanaviharasamipe 
ekissam  guhayam  nisidi.  Maha-Ariyavamsaganikassa  Jeta- 
vanatherassa  santike  upasamkami. 

Tasmih  ca  kale  Jetavanathero  gilano  hutva :  Mayi  kalam 
kate  mama  thanam  adhuna  Hamsavatinagarato  agato 
Tisasanadhajo  nama  thero  parigganhitum  samattho  bha- 
vissati  tassa  niyyadessami  ti  cintesi.  Tasmim  khane  Tisa- 
sanadhajathero purimayame  supinam  passi  matakalebaram 
samipam  agacchati  ti,  majjhimayame  pana  tam  matakale- 
baram guhayam  pavisati  ti,  pacchimayame  matakalebarassa 
mamsam  satthena  chindati  ti.  Atha  supinam  passitabha- 
vam  attano  samipe  sayantassa  ekassa  samanerassa  arocesi. 
Arocetva  ca  pana  parittam  bhanetvas  nisidantass  'eva 
Jetavane  thero  tam  pakkositva  Jetavanavihriram  tassa 
niyyadesi.  Tisasanadhajathero  ca  Jetavanavihfire  nisi- 
ditva  gandham  vacetva  nisidi;  Moh-ghah-byanarapatiraja 
ca  tassa  anuggahani  akasi. 


^  A.  Cattha"  D.  Ca-hih.      ^  A.  omits  na.      ^  D.  sokani. 
4  A.  Mo-byu°   B.  Moh-gliah-dhya°         s  B.  khanitva. 


-^     102     f«- 

Paccba  kalijaige  solasadhike^  naravassasate  sampatte 
Hamsavatinagarindo  Anekasetibhindo  nama  raja  Eatana- 
puranagaram  vijayitvii  ekam  viharam  karapetva  tassa  adasi. 

So  ca  Tisasanadbajathero  Arimaddananagare  Arabanta- 
ganavamsiko  ti  dattbabbo. 

Tassa  pana  sissii  anekasatapamana  ^  lajjino  abesum. 
Tesii  pana  sissesu  Varababutbero,  Bbumiiiikbananagara- 
vasi3  tbero,  Mabarattbagamavasino  tayo  mabatbera  ti  hue 
panca  tbera  visesato  pariyattikovida  ti. 

Tisasanadbajatbero  ca  mabaUakakale  anapanasati- 
kammattbauam  gabetva  arannam  pavisitva  vivekattbanam 
ganbi.  Tada  Jetavanaganadayo  Arabantaganavamsa  yeva 
aparabbage  yeva  tesam  sissanusissaparamparasu  keci  bbik- 
kbu  siraccbadanam  nanavannapatimanditafi  ca  tabivantam 
gabetva  acaravikaram  apajjimsu. 

Kalijaige  ekavassadbike  sabasse  sampatte  Ukkamsiko 
nama  raja  vibaram  krirapetva  Tisasanadbajatberassa 
sissabbiitassa  Varababutberassa  sissabbutassa  Maba-Ra- 
tanakarassa  nama  tberassa  adasi. 

So  ca  Maba-Ratanakaratbero  Ukkamsikaranno  Siri- 
sudbammaraja-Mabadbipatl  ti  namalaucbam  Cbandrdam- 
karam  saddanettinayebi-^  abamkaritva  dassitam  Rajindaraja- 
bbidbeyya-dlpanims  nama  gandbam  akasi. 

Tan  ca  gandbam  parivisodbanattbaya  Pabbatantar- 
abbidbeyyassa^  mabatberassa  niyyadesi.  Tisasanadbaja- 
tberassa sissabbtitesu  Mabarattbagamavasisu  tisu  bbatika- 
tberesii7  jettbo  nisam  gubasu^  vasanto  pariyattim  vacetva 
nisidi.  Sativaraja  ca  tasmim  tbere  ativiya  pasanno  abosi. 
No-na-ra-mab9  namakassa  ranno  kale  pi  ciilapita  ekam 
vibaram  karfipetva  tass'eva  adasi. 


'  A.  sodasadbike.         =  S.  °sabassa° 

■vJ  A.  Bbiimininildiana°   B.  Bbuminikba"   Min:  °kbana° 

'^  A.  Kbandabimkara° 

5  S.  "dbipati. 

^  B.  tiropabbatabbidbeyyassa. 

7  D.  natika"         **  B.  tisarabasu   A.  D.  nisaiigubasu. 

">  A.  Min:  No-iia-mab. 


-^     103     H$- 

Ukkamsikaranno  '  kale  pi  Mamvanna-namake  pabbate 
viharam  karilpetva  tass'eva  adasi.  Tesu  Mabarattliagama- 
vasitberesu  majjbimatbero  pi  Tisasanadbajatherassa 
jettbabhatikatberassa  ca  nivasattbanabbiite  Jetavanavibare 
yeva  gandbam  vacetva  nisldi.  Kauittbatbero  pi  tesani 
nivasattbanabbutesu  yeva  vibaresu  gandbam  vacetva  nisidi, 
Ettba  ca  Tisasanadbajatbero  iiama  bijji-alajjivasena 
dubbidbo.    Yatbavuttatbero  pana  lajji  yevil  ti  dattbabbo. 

Alajji  pana  imasmim  tberaparamparildassane  na  icclii- 
tabbo.  Abijjibbutassa  pana  Tisasanadbajatberassa  vattbuiu 
idba  avatva  ajjbiipekkbissama  payojanabbava  gandbassa 
papaiicupagamanattba  ti. 

No-ua-ra-mah  ^  namakassa  rafino  kale  Jeyyapure  Su- 
vannagubavasi-3  mabatbero  Dakkbinarama-vibaravasI  mabii- 
tbero  Catubbumika-vibaravasi  mabatbero  Toii-bbl-lub'* 
vibaravasi  mabatbero  ca  Tisasanadbajatberassa  saddbi- 
vibarika  yeva.  Tesam  pana  vattbum  pi  gandbavittbarabba- 
yena  na  vadama.  Lajjiganavamsika  ete  tis  vijananam^  eva 
b'ettba  pamanan  ti. 

Kaliyuge  ekasattbadbike  navavassasate  sampatte  pbag- 
gunamasassa  junbapakkbadutiyadivase  sukkavrire  Ratana- 
puranagaram  dutiyam  mapetva  No-na-ra-mah 7  nama  raja 
rajjam  karesi.  Sibasuradbammaraja  ti  pi  namalancbam 
patigganbi.  Tom-bbi-lub-vibaravasimabatberassa  ^  uddissa 
catubbumikavibriram  karapesi,  cattari  mabamunicetiyani  pi 
karapesi.  Vibaracetiyesu  anittbitesii  yeva  Sinninagaram 
nikkbamitva  tattba  veram^  vilpasamapetva  paccagatakrde 
saiikbarasabbavam  anatikkamanato  devamgato  abosi. 

Abo  vata  saiikbaradbamma  ti. 


'  A.  B.  D.  Ukkamsiya° 

^  A.  Noiu-bba-ra-myab-    B.  Nom  ra  mab    D.   Kno-iia- 
ra-mah. 

■5  A.  B.  "gubavasimba  vasl.  .      -   ' 

-*  Min:  To-na-ti°   A.  Tom-bbl-lyab   D.  To-iia-",  .  / 
5  D.  bi.         *^  Min:^  vijanam.  .      , 

7  A.  °nab-ra°   D.  Niio-ua-ra-mah-so-na.  ,  - 

'^  D.  A.  B.  "tberam. 
9  A.  veraiigu  Min:  veri.  .         ..       .;;,:..,,... 


-^      104      i<r- 

Honti  c'ettha: 

Seyyatlia  vanijanam  va  gbaragolikarupakam' 

Tarn  tarn  disam  bbamitva^  va  sisam  tliapesi^  uttaraiu 

Evam  lokamhi  satta*  ca  sanclliicutlnam  antare 
Yatha  tatha  bhamitva  va  ante  tbapenti  santanans  ti. 

Ivaliyiige  sattasattbadbike  navavassasate  pbaggunama- 
sassa  kalapakkbaterasamiyam  tassa  jettbaputto  pitusan- 
takam  rajjam  ganbi.  Mabadbammaraja  ti  namalaiicban 
l)i  patigganbi.  Pitu  kale  anittbitani  cetiyani  puna  karapesi. 
Catubbumikavibarafi  ca  nittbam  gamapetva^  Tom-bbi-liib 7 
mabatberassa  paralokam  gantva  avijjamanattaya*  Catu- 
bliumikavibaravasimabatberassa  dassilmi  ti  antepurani 
pakkosapesi. 

Tbero  dve  varani  pakkosiyamano  pi  nagaccbi.  Tatiya- 
vare  pana  babii  saddbivibarika:  Antepuram  gantva  pavi- 
satba9,  na  bi  sakka  rafina  va  pakkosito  patikkbipitun  ti 
abamsu. 

Atba  tbero  evam  aba:  Abam  avuso  rattbapilanapinda- 
patam  bbunjitum  na  iccbami.  Evam  pi  sace  tumbe 
iccbatba  ranno  santikam  gantiim,  evam  sati  idani  ranno 
santikam  abam  gamissami  ti  antepuram  pavisi, 

Pavisitva  ranna  saddbim  sallapam  katva:  Ayam  vibaro 
arafmavasinam  bbikkbimain  asappayo  ti  patikkbipi.  Evam 
pana  bbante  sati,  tasmim  vibiire  nisidiyamanam  tberam 
upadissatba  ti.  KbanittbipadavibaravasI  mabaraja  tbero 
pariyattivisarado  sikkbrdvamo,  tassa  datum  vattati  ti. 

Atba  raja  tassa  tarn  vibaram  adasi  Mabasamgbanatbo 
ti  namalaficbam  ])i  adasi.  So  tattba  pariyattim  vacetva 
nisidi.     Tassa  pana  vibarassa  parivfirabbi'itesu  cattallsaya 


'  A.  sara  gotikaramakam. 

^  D.  S.  A.  samitva    D.  corr.  from  bba° 

■5  D.  A.  B.  tbapeti.        ^  A.  sattba. 

5  B.  santanunti    D.  san  natun. 

^  B.  nittbam  gabapetva.         ^  D.  To-na-° 

^  A.  B.  avijjabanataya.         ^  B.  pavisati. 


-^     105     f<$- 

viharesii  uttaraya  anudisaya  ekasmim  vihare  vasanto 
Varabhisamghanatlio  uama  thero  Manikimdalavatthum 
Marammabhasaya  akasi. 

Pacchimaya  ^  anudisaya  ekasmim  vihare  vasanto  eko  thero 
Sattarajadhammavatthum  Marammabhasaya^  akasi. 

Tasmih  ca  kale  Bah-mam-akyo  Acara-akyo  ti  dvinnam 
bhikkhimain  ca  lokadhammesu  chekataya  dve  vihare  katva 
adasi. 

Te  pana  dve  thera  vedasatthakovida  pariyattipatipattisu 
pana  manda  Ramahharatthato  agata.  Te  pana  therapa- 
ramparaya  na  ganenti  porana. 

Kaliyuge  tisattatadhike  3  navavassasate  sampatte  Maha- 
municetiyassa  puratthimadisabhage  cattriro  vihare  kara- 
petva  catmmam  theranam  adasi. 

Te  ca  thera  tattha  nislditva  sasanam  pagganhimsu. 

Tasmim  yeva  krile  Badaravanavasi  nama  eko  pi  thero 
atthi.  So  pi  pariyattivisarado  Chapadavamsiko.  So  ca 
thero  yavajlvain  yathabalam  sasanam  pagganhitva  dutiya- 
bhave  Calanganagare  ekissa  itthiya  kucchimhi  patisandhini 
ganhi.  Dasamasaccayena  kaliyuge  cattallsadhike  nava- 
vassasate sampatte  budhavare  vijayitva  terasavassikakale 
sasane  pabbajitva  pariyattim  ugganhi.  Sirikhettanagarindo 
raja  Sirikhettanagaram  anetva  Sirikhettanagare  Samanero 
ti  namena  pakato  hutva  kaliyuge  catupannasadhike  nava- 
vassasate sampatte  pannarasavassikakiile  Vessantarajata- 
kam  kabyalanikaravasena  bandhi.  Paripunnavisativassa- 
kale  Sirikhettanagare  yeva  Sirikhettanagarindo  Veravijayo 
nama  raja  anuggahetva  upasampadalihumiyam  patitthahi^. 
Pacchimapakkhadhiko  nama  rajiX  Sirikhettanagaram  attano 
hatthagatam  akasi.  Tasmih  ca  kale  tarn  theram  anetva 
Ratanapuranagare  vasapesi.  Siirakitcinamarahho  kanittha- 
bhatiko  Eravatlnaditlre  catubhumikavihiiram  karapetva 
tassa  therassa  adasi.  Raja  ca  Tipitakalaiukaro  ti  nama- 
lahcham  adasi. 


^  D.  majjhi°        ^  A.  B.  oimt. 

3  Min:  adhikena. 

■t  B.  patitthati   Min:  patitthahi. 


-^     106     H5- 

Kaliyuge  vassasahasse  sampatte  phaggunamasassa  punna- 
miyam  satthivassiko  hutva  Tiriyapabbatam  gaiitva  aranna- 
vasam  vasi.  Dvevassadliike  vassasahasse  raja  tasmim 
viliaram  kfirapetva  tass  'eva  therassa  aclasi.  So  pana 
Tipitakalarakaratliero  Sirikhettanagare  Navaiigakanclare 
Pattalaiikassa  Atulavamsatherassa  vamsiko.  Sirikhettana- 
gare Navangakandare  Suvannavihare  vasantassa  tassa  the- 
rassa kittighoso  sabbattha  patthari.  Jeyyapure  Eravati- 
nadltire  Catiibhumikavihare  vasanakale  Atthasaiiniya  adito 
visati  gathanam  samvannaiiam  akasi. 

Siirakittinamakassa  kanitthabhatikassa  yacanam  arab- 
bha  Yasavaddhanavatthum  ^  ca  akasi.  Tiriyapabbate  va- 
sanakale Vinayrilamkaratikam  akasi.  Pacchimapakkhadhi- 
karanno  kfile  Mahasamghanathatheram  saingharajabhave 
thapesi. 

So  ca  sanigharaja  ativiya  pariyattivisarado.  Tasmih  ca 
krde  E-atanapuranagare  pi  Ariyalamkarathero  nama  eko 
attlii.  So  pana  Tipitakrdamkaratherena  samafianathamo 
vayasa  pi  samanavassiko. 

Tesu  Tipitakalamkarathero  gandhantarabahussutatthane 
adhiko,  Ariyalamkarathero  pana  dhatupaccayavibhagatthane 
adhiko  ti  datthabbo.  Paccha  pana  Ukkamsikarahho  kale 
te  pi  dve  thera  raiiho  acariya  hutva  sasanam  pagganhimsu. 
Tesu  Ariyfilamkarathero  aparabhage  krdam  karitva  tassa 
therassa  saddhiviharikassa  Dutiya-Ariyalamkaratherassa 
Rajamaniculacetiyassa  samipe  Dakkhinavanaramam  nama 
viharam  kfirapetva  adasi.  Ukkamsiko  nama  raja  pana 
jinasasane  bahiipakaro.  So  ca  kaliyuge  chanavutadhike 
navavassasate  rajjam  patto;  rajjam  pana  patva  Siridhamma- 
sokaraja  viya  cattari  vassani  atikkamitva  muddhabhise- 
kampatiggahetva^  Sirisudhammaraja-Mahadhipati  ti  nama- 
laficham  pi  patigganhi.  Ekasmira  pana  samaye  Hamsa- 
vatlnagaram  gantva  tattha  nisidi.  Atlia  Ramahharattha- 
vasino  evam  ahamsu:  Marammikabhiklchii  nfima  pariyatti- 
kovida     vedasatthahhuno     natthi     ti.       Tarn     sutva     raja 


B.  Yasavaddhana°         ^  Min:  pari° 


-^     107     H^ 

Catubhiimikaviliaravasitherassa  santikam  sasanam  pesesi: 
Timsavassika  cattallsavassika  va  pariyattikovida  vedasatth- 
anfmno  bhikkhu  Raraannaratthaiii  mama  santikam  pesetlia 
ti.  Atlia  CatubhumikaviharavasI  thero  Tipitakalamkaram 
Tilokalamkaram  Tisasanrdamkarafi  ca  saddliiqi  timsamat- 
telii  bhikkhidii  pesesi.  Hamsavatinagaram  pana  patva 
Mo-dho-cetiyassa  '^  puratthimabhage  vihare  karapetva  tesam 
adasi. 

Uposathadivasesu  sudhammasalayam  Ramafinaratthava- 
sino  pariyattikovide  vedasattliannimo  sannipatripetva  tehi 
tibi  therehi  saddbim  katbasallapam  karapesi.  Atba 
Ramafinarattbavasino  bhikkhii  evam  ahamsu:  Pubbe  pana 
mayam  Marammarattbe  pariyattikovida  vedasatthaniiuno 
natthi  ti  mannama.  Idani  Marammarattbavasino  ativiya 
pariyattikovida  vedasattbaiiiiuno  ti.  Aparabbage  kaliyuge 
clianavutadbike  navavassasate  sampatte  raja  Eatanapura- 
nagaram  paccagaccbi. 

Te  pi  tbera^  paccagantukama  Ramannarattbe  padbrma- 
bbiitassa  Tilokagarii  ti  namadbeyyassa  ^  mabatberassa 
santikam  vandanattbaya  agamamsu. 

Tada  Tilokagariitbero  pi  tebi  saddbim  sallapam  katva 
evam  aba:  Tumbesu  pana  Tipitakalamkaratbero  patbamam 
avasavibaram  labbissatl  ti.  Kasma  pana  bbante  evam 
avoca  ti  vutte  ayam  pana  pindaya  caranto  pi  antaramagge 
veluvettadmi  labbitva  gabetva  vibare  patisamkbaranam 
akasi.  Tasmrdiam^  evam  vadami.  Loke  vibrire  patisam- 
kbaranaslla  bbikkbu  sigbam  eva  avasavibaram  bibbantl  ti 
porunatbera  abamsu  ti  aba. 

Te  pi  Ratanapuranagaram  paccagaccbiinsu.  Tilokagaru- 
tberassa  vacananurupam  eva  Tipitakfdamkaratbero  sabba- 
patbamam  avasavibaram  labbi  ti. 

Kabyuge    pana    navavassadbike    vassasabasse    sampatte 
raiino    kanittbo    kalam    akasi.     Atba    ranfio    putto    ucca-^ 
nagarabbojako^brdajanebi  santbavam  katva  tesarn  vacanam 

'  A.  S.  corr.  He-te°        ^  S.  tepitakattliera. 
J  A.  Silogarumuti  namadbeyassa  namatberassa. 
4  S.  Tam  abam.         s  A.  Uccanagarato  eko. 


-^     108     f^ 

adiyitva  paccusakale  pitaram  gliatetukamo  antepuram 
sahasa  pavisi. 

Kaja  ca  anaggham^  muddikam  gahetva  Nandajeyyena 
nama  amaccena  Eajayodhena  nama  amaccena  ca  saddhim 
amiataravesena  nagarato  nikkliamitviX  Rajatavrilukanadim 
sampatto.  Tasmin  ca  kale  eko  samanero  matapitunam 
gehe  pindapatam  anessami  ti  khuddakanavaya  nadiyam 
agacchi.  Atha  tarn  samaneram  disva  raja  evam  aha: 
ainlie  bliante  paratiram  navaya  anelii  ti.  Samanero  ca 
aha:  Sace  upasaka  tumhe  paratiram  aneyyam  bhattakrde 
atikkameyyan  ti.  Atha  raja:  Amhe  yeva  sigham  anehi 
imam  muddikam  dassami  ti  assasetva  anetum  okasam  yaci. 

Atha  samanero  karuiihapattam  vacanam  sutva  para- 
tirani  anesi.  Atha  Catubhiimikaviharam  patva  tasmim 
vihare  therassa  sahbam  pi  karanam  arocetva  evam  aha: 
Sace  bhante  amhe  ganhitum^  agacchey}' am  3  te  nivaretha 
ti.  Thero  ca:  Mayani  maharaja  samana  na  sakka  evani 
nivaretum;  evam  pi  eko  upayo  atthi.  Nisinnaviharavasi  thero 
pana  gihikammesii  ativiya  cheko.  Tarn  pakkosetva  '*  kara- 
nam cintetuni  ynttan  ti.  Atha  tarn,  pakkosetva  tam  attham 
arocetva  raja  idam  avoca:  Sace  bhante  amhe  ganhitum 
agaccheyymn,  atha  kenacid  eva  upayena  te  nivaretha  ti. 
Atha  so  thero  evam  aha:  Tena  hi  maharaja  ma  kihci  soci 
ma  bhayi,  viharamajjhe  sirigabbham  pavisitva  nisidatha  ti 
vatva  pindaya  acarante  bhikkhii  samanere  sannipiltapetva 
visum  visum:  Dandahattha  hutva  ekassa  pi  purisassa  vi- 
haram  pavisitum  okasam  ma  detha  ti  vatva  senam  viya 
bruhesi.  Samantaviharesu  pi  vasante  bhikkhii-samanere 
pakkosi.  Tada  kira  agantva  sannipatanam  bhikkhusama- 
neranam  atirekasahassamattam  ahosi.  Thero  te  vihare 
dvarakotthakesu  s  agatamagge  ca  visum  visum  dandahattha 
hutva  arakkhanatthaya  thapesi.  Yatha  vad(lhaki  sukaro 
vyagghassa^  nivara^iatthaya  visum  visum  siikare  samvidhaya 


'  A.  anaiigam.         ^  A.  bhanituni. 

^  A.  B.  agaccheyya.         ^  Min:  pakkosapetva. 

5  B.  "guttakesu   D.  °kudda°   Min:  °kotta° 

6  A.  vyaggyassa. 


•^     109     H$- 

thapesi  ti.  Atha  puttassa  yodha  pi  rajanam  gahetum  na 
sakka^  Bhikkhusamaneranam  garavavasena  balakkarena 
maretva  pavisitum  na  visahanti  bhikkhusamaneranam 
bahullataya  ca, 

Tasmim  yeva  samvacchare  assayujjamasassa  kalapakkha- 
pahcamito  yava  kattikamasassa  kalapakkhapaiicami  vihare 
yeva  raja  niliyitva^  nisidi.  Atha  antepuravasika  amacca 
puttam  apanetva  rajanam  anetva  rajje  thapesum.  Raja 
ca  puna  rajjam  patva  vihare  nisinnakale  ma  bhayi  maha- 
raja  tvam  jinessati  ti  rahiio  arocentassa  vedasatthafmuno 
ekassa  bliikkhussa  Ca-iiahkhum3  cetiyassa  asannatthane 
ekam  viharam  karapetva  adasi.  Dhammanandarajagurii  ti 
namalancham  pi  adasi.  Tassa  pana  vijatatthanabhutam 
gamam  nissaya  Marammavoharena  Ren-nat-ca-ka-ro-da  + 
ti  samaniia  ahosi. 

Eaja  ca  puna  rajjam  patva  tasmim  yeva  samvacchare 
kattikamasassa  kalapakkhacuddasamiyam  sabbe  pi  maha- 
there  nimantetva  rajageham  pavesetvas  pindapatena  bhojesi. 
Atha  raja  evam  aha:  Catubhiimikavasi  thero  samparayi- 
katthavaho^  acariyo.  NisinnaviharavasI  thero  pana  dittha- 
dhammikatthavaho  ti  evam  Rajavamse  vuttam.  Poranapot- 
thakesu  pana:  Catubhiimikaviharavasi  thero  ekantasamano 
acariyo  NisinnaviharavasI  thero  pana  yodharaho  yodha- 
kamme7  cheko  ti  raja  aha  ti  vuttam.  Raja  kira  sampa- 
rayikattham^  anupekkhitva9  dinnakale  Nisinnaviharather- 
assa  na  adasi.  Kadaci  kadaci  pana  ditthadhammikattham 
anupekkhitva  tassa  visum  adasi  ti;  ettha  ca  yasma  Nisinna- 
viharavasl  thero  rahno  bhayehi^°  nivaranatthaya  arakkham 
akasi  na  paresam  vihethanatthaya  anattikapayogo "  ca  na 


^  B.  puttassa  pi  rajanam   gahetum  na  sakka  yodha  pi. 

-  B.  nihiyitva.         j  A.  Chattha-khum. 

'^  B.  Ka-ca-kri-roiii    A.  Ta-cani-ka-ro-ha. 

5  S.  D.  A.  B.  pavisetva. 

^  A.  B.  °i)arayikatt"   D.  °kattha  maho. 

7  S.  A.  Yodharaho  yeva  kamme.         ^  A.  B.  "attaru. 

9  B.  anumapekkhitva   A.  anapekkhitva.  '°  B.  arehi. 

''  A.  "yoge. 


-^         110         H^ 

dissati  tasma^  nattlii  apattidoso.  Saddhatissaranno  bha- 
yelii  nivaranattliam  arahantehi  tlierehi  katapayogo  viya 
datthabbo. 

Catubhumikavihriravasl  tliero  pana  Khanitthipadagame 
jato  Arimaddanapure  ^  Araliantatheraganapabhavo  yattha 
katthaci  gantva  afmesam  bhikklmnam  acaram  yatliabliiitamj 
janitva'^  telii  catupaccayasambhogo  na  katapubbo  antamaso 
iidakam  pi  na  pivitapubbams  tarn  tarn  thanam  pi^  camma- 
kbandam  gabetva  yeva  gamanasilo.  Ukkamsikaraja  pana 
Sirikhettanagare  Dvattaponkarafma  kfirapita-cetiyasantha- 
nam  gabetva  Rajamaniciilam  nama  cetiyam  akasi.  Tarn 
pana  cetiyam  parimandalato  tibattbasatapamanam  7  ubbe- 
dhato^  pi  ettakam  eva.  Tassa  pana  cetiyassa  catiisu  passesu^ 
cattaro  vibare  karapesi;  purattbimapasse  Pubbavanaramo 
nama  vibaro,  dakkbinapasse  pana  Dakkbinavanaramo  nama, 
paccbimapasse  Paccbimavanriramo  nama,  uttarapasse  Utta- 
ravanaramo  nama  vibaro.  Tesu  catiisu  vibaresii  Uttara- 
vanaramo  nama  vibaro  asanipataggina  dayhitva'°  vinassi. 
Avasese  pana  tayo  vibare  pariyattikovidanam  tinnam 
mabatheranam  adasi.  Nrimabxncbam  pi  tesam  adasi. 
Pacchimassa  railfio  kale  yeva  uttarapasse  vibaram  karapesi. 

Tasmim  pana  cetiye  chattam  anarojDetva  yeva  so  raja 
devam  gato.  Tesu  pana  catiisu  vibaresu  nisinnanam 
tberanam  Dakkbinavanaramavibaravasi  mabatbero  Kacca- 
yanagandbassa  attbam  cbabbidbebi  samvannananayebi 
alamkaritva  Marammabbasaya  samvannesi.  Paccbima- 
vanriramaviharavasi  tbero  pana  Nyasassa  samvannanam 
cbabi  nayebi  alamkaritva  akasi. 

Kaliyuge  dasavassadbike  saliasse  sampatte  tassa  raiino 
putto  Sirinandadbammaraja  -  Pavaradbipatiraja  rajjam 
karesi.  Pituno  rajagebam  bbinditvil  vibaram  karapetva 
Tilokrdamkarassa    nama   mabatberassa   adasi.     Ariyalam- 


'  A.  kasma.         ^  Min:  con:  "nagare. 

J  D.  acarajatabhiitam.         '^  A.  janetva. 

5  A.  na  pivanapubba.         ^  A.  thanan  ti. 

7  Min:  corr.  parimanam.         *^  A.  pubbedliato. 

9  A.  B.  vassesu.         ^°  Min:  dabitva. 


-^         111         H^ 

karathero  ca  nama  Tipitakrilamkaratherena  samafianatha- 
massa'  Ariyrilamkaratherassa  sisso  ti  datthabbo. 

Ayan  c'attho  hettha  dassito.  Jeyyapiire  catubhumika- 
Atulaviharam  karapetva  Dathiinagarajagurutherassa  adasi. 

So  ca  thero  Niruttisarainaiijiisani  nama  Nyasasamvanna- 
nam  akasi. 

Kaliyuge  dvadasildhike  vassasahasse  sampatte  phagguna- 
mase  sotapanna  nama  arakkhadevata  anfiattha  gamissama 
ti  ahamsii  ti  nagara  supinam  passauta  hutva  bahu  sanni- 
patitva  devapujam  akamsu.  Devatanam  pana  samkamanam 
nama  natthi;  pubbanimittam  ev'  etan  ti  dattbabbam. 

Tasmiii  ca  kale  Cinarariuo^  yodba  agantva  Maramma- 
rattbam  dusesum.  Sasanam  abbbapaticcbamio  viya  cando 
dubbalam  abosi. 

Kaliyuge  terasadbike  vassasaliasse  sampatte  tassa  rafmo 
kanittho  MahapaYaradliammaiTija-Lokadbipati  nama  raja 
rajjam  karesi.  Tasmin  ca  kfde  lokasamketavasena  pufinam 
mandam  bbavissati  ti  vedasattbanfiubi  rirocitatta  lokasam- 
ketavasen  'eva  j  abhinavapufinuppadanattliam  Kliandbavara- 
gebam  karapetva  tavakrdikavasena  samkamitva  nisidi. 
Tato  aparabliage  Uttaragebam  bbinditva  tasmim  yeva 
tbane  vibriram  kruTipetva  ekassa  mabatberassa  adasi. 

Dakkbinagebam  pana  nagarassa  piirattbimadisabbfige 
vibaram  karapetva  Aggadbammalamkaratberassa  adasi. 
So  ca  tbero  Kaccayanagandbassa  ca  Abbidbammattba- 
samgabassa  c'eva  Matika-Dbatulcatba-Yamaka-Pattbananan 
ca  attbani  Marammabbasaya  yojesi. 

Uparaja  ca  mabasetuno  pamukhe  tbane  Sovannamaya- 
vibaram'^  karapetva  Uttaragebavibaravasitberassa  ante- 
vasikassa  Jinaramatberassa  adasi.  Tasmim  yeva  tbane 
nanaratanavicitram  vibaram  karapetva  tass  'eva  tberassa 
antevasikassa  Gunagandbatberassa  adasi. 

So  pana  tbero  Khya-nah-tvam  game  vijatos  vaye  pana 
sampatte  Ratanapuranagaram  gantva  pariyattim  ugganbitva 


^  A.  samannanatbamassa. 

-  A.  Kbinarafino    B.  corr.  Min:  corr.  kbina° 

3  A.  saiukbeta"       '  Min:  Sovannamaba"       ^  B,  pi  jatu. 


-^        112        H5- 

tato  puna  nivattitva  Padumanagare '  Badaragame  ^  nisiditva 
pacchiX  Kliya-nah-tvam  -game  catubi  paccayehi  kilamato 
hutva  vasi.  Tasmiii  ca  kale  tasmim  game  Mokkhassa 
nama  purisassa  santike  ekam  auaggharii  manim  raja 
labhitva  ativiya  -5  mamayi.  Khya-iiali-tvam  Mokkhamani  ti 
pakato  aliosi. 

Atha  Uttaragehaviharavasl  thero  aba:  Kbya-iiab-tvam 
gamake  na  mani  yeva  anaggbam  atba  kbo  eko  pi  tbero 
Gunagaiidbo  nama  pariyattikovido  anaggbo  yeva'^  ti. 

Atba  tain  sutva  raja  tam  pakkosetva  catiibi  paccayebi 
upattbambbetva  pujam  akasi. 

Sabassorodbagame  Gunasaro  nama  tbero  Palinagame 
Sujato  nama  tbero  ca  Gunagandbattberassa  sissa  yeva 
abesum. 

Ekasmifi  ca  kale  Tiriyapabbatavibaravasi  mabatbero 
bbikkbusamgbamajjbe  Aggadbammalarpkaratberam  kilana- 
vasena  evam  aba:  Ambesu  avuso  antaradbayamanesus  tvam 
loke  eko  gandbakovidatbero  bbavissati^  manne  ti.  Atba 
Aggadbammalamkaro  evam  aba:  Tumbesu  bbante  antara- 
dbayamanesu  mayam  gandbakovida  na  bbaveyyama ;  ko 
nama  puggalo  loke  gandbakovido  bbavissati  ti.  Porana- 
pottbakesu  pana  Ariyalamkarattbero :  Na  nu  pan'  idani^ 
mayam  gandbakovida  na  tava  bbavama  ti  evam  aba  ti 
vuttam.  So  Aggadbammalamkaratbero  yeva  raiina  yacito 
Rajavamsasamkbepam  pi  akasi.  So  pana  tbero  amacca- 
l^utto.  Ekasmifi  ca  kale  binayavattako^  eko  maba-amacco 
raniio  santikam  attana  upaladdbaparibbogam  sabbam  ga- 
betva  vibaram  agantva  Aggadbammrdamkaratberena 
saddbim  sallapam  akasi.  Sallapam  pana  katva  sabbam 
paribbogam  tberassa  dassetva:  Sace  bbante  tvam  gibi 
bbaveyyasi  ettakam  paribbogani  labbissasi  ti^  aba.  Tbero 
pi  evam  aba:  Tumbakam  pana  ettako  paribbogo  ambakam 

^  B.  Bbadunagare   A.  Banda°   S.  corr.  Baddba° 
^  ]\[in:  Padara'^         >  A.  B.  D.  atlva. 

4  A.  anaggbo  vido  yeva. 

5  A.  B.  antaradbarayamanesu.         ^  Min:  bbavissasi. 
7  B.  na  nu  padani.         ^  A.  B.  binayavattako. 

9  All  MSS.  labbissati  ti. 


-^        113        r^ 

samananam  vaccakiitim  asubliabhavanam  bhavetva  pavi- 
santanam  pufifiain  kalam  nagghati  solasin  ti.  Kificapi 
idafi  ca  pana  vacanam  Sasanavamse  apadanam'  hoti. 
Pubbacariyasiliehi  pana  vuttavacanam  yava^  apannakotika 
saritabbam  eva  ti  manasikarontena  viittan  ti. 

Kaliyuge  pana  catutimsadhike  vassasahasse  sampatte 
tassa  putto  Naravaro  nama  raja  rajjara  karesi.  Mahasilia- 
suradhammaraja  ti  namalancham-'  patigganhi.  Tassa  raiirio 
kale  ca  Ca-Nah-klmm  *  cetiyassa  samipe  Jetavanavihare 
gandhos  ugganhanto  eko  daharabhikkhu  gandhacheko  pi 
samano  balakrile"^  brdacittena  akulito^  hutva  vaccakiipe 
vatatapehi  bahisukkhasakliena  ^  paticcliadito  dandena  alu- 
litva  diiggandho,  viya  cittasantane^  pariyattivatatapehi 
bahisukkhabhavena  paticcliadite  kenacid  eva  ruparamma- 
nadina  aliilitva  kilesasattisamkhato  duggandlio  vayitva 
hlnayavattissami  ti  cintetva,  gihivattbani  gahetva,  saddhim 
sahayabhikkhiihi  naditittham  agamasi.  Antaramagge  tava 
bbikkhubhaven'  eva  cetiyam  vandissami  ti  gibivatthani 
sahayanam  batthe  tbapetva  cetiyam  paniukhe  lenam  pavi- 
sitva  vanditva  nisidi.  Atba  eka  daharittlii  cetiyanganam 
agantva  balii  lenam  nisiditva  udakam  sincitva  pattbanam 
akasi:  Imina  punnakammena  ^°  sabbehi  apayadidukkbebi 
moceyyami,  bbave  bbave  ca  binayavattakassa  purisassa  pa- 
dacarika  na  bliaveyyami  ti. 

Atba  tarn  sutva  dabarabbikkhu  evam  cintesi:  Idani 
abam  hinayavattissami  ti  cintetva  agato ;  ayam  pi  dabaritthi 
liTnayavattakassa  purisassa  padacFirika  n;i  bbaveyyami  ti 
patthanam  akasi.  Idani  tarn  dabarittbim  kriranam  puccbis- 
sami  ti.  Evam  pana  cintetva  babi  lenam  nikkliamitva  tam 
dabarittbina  karanam  piiccbi. 


^  B,  apadbanara.         ^  D.  ya  ca    Min:  apannakatika.^ 
3  B.  laddbalaficbam.  4  Min:  Nah-kbum-    D.  Na° 

5  Min:  gandbam.         ^  A.  B.  °krilena. 
7  Min:  rdvulilco. 

^  A.  lahusukkassavena  B.  siikkbabbavena  Min :  °sukkha 
sakliena. 

9  S.  D.  sandbane.         '"  D.  pufinena  kammena. 

Sasana-Vamsa.  8 


-^         11-i        H5- 

Kasma  pana  tvain  hinayavattakassa  purisassa  padacarika 
na  bhaveyyami  ti  patthanam  karosi  ti. 

Hinayavattakassa  bliante  purisassa  padactirika  na  bha- 
veyyami  ti  vuttavacanain  balapiirisassa  padacarika  na  bha- 
veyyaml  ti  vuttavacanena  nana  na  hoti  \  sadisattam  ^  eva  3. 
Na  nu  hinayavattako  brdo  yeva  nama?  Sace  pana  bhante 
hinayavattako  brdo  nama  na  bhaveyya  ko  nama  loke  balo 
bbaveyya?4  Bhikkhu  nama  hi  parehi  dinnam  civarapinda- 
piTitasenasanam  paribhunjitva  sukham  vasati;  sace  gandham 
ugganhitukamo  bhaveyya  yathakamams  yeva  gandham 
ugganhitum  okasarn  kibhati.  Evam  i^ana  ahutva,  alasiko 
yeva  bhuhjitva,  sayitva  nisiditum  iccheyya,  evam  pi  yatha- 
kamam  bhuhjitum  sayitum  okasam  labhati.  Evam  pi  samano 
parassa  daso  homi  darassa  kimkaro  homi  ti  akathento 
viya  hutva  hinayavatteyya  so  loke  ahnehi  brdehi  adhiko 
brdo  ti  aham  maiihami.  Sace  pana  balatarassa  bhariya 
bhaveyya  aham  balatari  bhaveyyan  ti  vutte  so  dahara- 
bhikkhu^  samvegam  apajjitva  bahi  nagaradvaram  nikkha- 
mitva  vanaraganena  vina  jhayanto  viya  vanaro  jhayitva 
nisidi. 

Atha  sahaya  agantva  gihivatthani  ganhahi  ti  pakkosimsu, 
Tasmim  kale  so  daharabhikkhu :  Agacchatha  bhavanto  ti 
vatva  sabbam  karanam  tesam  acikkhitva:  Idani  pana  bha- 
vanto hinayavattehi  ti^  sace  yo  koci  agantva  mama  sisam 
muggarena  pahareyya,  evam  sante  pi  hinayavattitum  na 
icchami.  Ito  patthaya  yavajivitapariyanta  hinayavattitum 
manasa  pi  na  cintayissami  ti  vatva  Eravatinadim  taritva 
Jeyyapuram  agamasi.  Tada  kira  daharitthi  devata  bhaveyya 
na  manussitthi  ti  tarn  vadanti  pandita  ti. 

Jeyyapuram  pana  patva  pariyattikovidanam  mahathera- 
nam  santike  nayam  gahetva  Puhnacetiyassa  dakkhinadisa- 
bhage    ekasmim   vihare   nisidi.      Pariyattira   vacetva   atha 


'  D.  nayo  ti.         ^  D.  °attham   B.  "attakam. 

3  A.  B.  eva  ti.         +  A.  bhaveyyasi. 

5  D.  °karamara. 

^  A.  omits  from  akathento  to  daharabhikkhu. 

7  A.  B.  hi. 


-$H       115      Kr- 

kamena  tam-tam-disahi  bliikklm-samaneiTi  aj?antva  tassa 
santike  pariyattim  ugganhimsu. 

Avasam  alabhitva  keci  bhikkhu-samanera  chattani  pi 
chaditva  nisidimsii.  Ekasmim  kale  raja  nikkhamitva  Punfia- 
cetiyam  vandissami  ti  cetiyanganam  pavisi.  Atha  chattaai 
cbadetva,  iiisinne  l^hikkhii  disvii  guhaya  saddhim  viharam 
karapetva  tassa  bhikkluissa  adasi  Tilokagarii  ti  pi  nama- 
lancham  adasi.  Sukliavoharattham  pana  kakaralopam 
katva  Tilogagarii  ti  voharimsu\  Tassa  pana  saddhivihar- 
iko  sattavassiko  Tejodlpo  nama  bhikkhii  Parittatikam 
akasi. 

Aparabhilge  pana  Tilokalamkaro  ti  namalaiicham  adasi. 
Evani  Tejodipo  nama  bhikkhu  Naravararanfio  kale  Paritta- 
tikam akasi  ti  datthabbam,  keci  pana  Pacchimapakkhadhi- 
karanno  kale  ti  vadanti. 

Ekasmim  pana  kale  Tiriyapabbataviharavasi  mahathero 
Padacetiyam  vandanatthaya  gantva  paccagatakale  Kukha- 
nanagare  Suvannaguliayam  Jambudhajatherassa  santikam 
pavisitva  sallapam  akasi.  Te  ca  mahathera  annamafmam 
passitva  sallapitva  ativiya  pamodimsu;  lokasmim  hi  balo 
balena  pandito  panditena  saddhim  ativiya  pamodati  ti. 
Te  ca  dve  thera  samanavassika.  Tiriyapabbataviharavasi 
mahathero  tena  saddhim  sallapam  katva  paccha  gacchi. 
Jambudhajathero  ca  maggam  acikkhituni  anugacchi.  Atha 
Tiriyaj)abbataviharavasl  mahathero  Jambudhajatheram  aha: 
Ahain  bhante  rajavallabho  homi  rajaguru;  tvam  yeva  mama 
purato  gacchahi  ti.  Atha  Jambudhajathero  pi  Tiriya- 
pabbataviharavasitheram  aha:  Tvam  bhante  rajavallabho 
bhavasi  rajaguru.  Loke  rajaguru  nama  padhanabhave^ 
thito,  tasma  tvam  yeva  mama  purato  gacchahi  ti.  Ettha 
ca  dve  pi  mahathera  ahhamahham  garavavasena  lokavattam 
apekkhitva3  evam  ahamsu  ti  datthabbam.  Tiriyapabbata- 
viharavasi mahathero  pi  Ratanapuranagaram  patva  Raja- 
vamsapabbatam  gantva  araniiavasam  vasi. 

Atha  Ukkamsiko  raja  kanitthenaSurakittinamena  saddhim 


^  B.  voharimsu.  ^  A.  pamanabhave. 

3  B.  pekkhitva. 


->•       116       r^- 

mantesi:  Sace  tvam  vane^  theram  pathamam  passasi^  tvam 
yeva  vihriram  kriiTipetva  therassa  daclahi;  sace  panaham 
pathamam  passeyyam  aham  viliaram  katva  dadami  ti. 

Atha  kanittho  pathamam  passitva  Tiriyapabbatakandare 
Jetavanam  nama  viharam  karapetva  adasi. 

Idafi  ca  vacanam:  Sadhujananam  gunam3  ekavaram 
pitisomanassam4  uppajji;  tena  pimnakammena  tena  piti- 
somanassena  sattakkhattum  devarajjasampattim  sattak- 
khattum  manussarajjasampattim  patihibhl  ti  vuttatta  sadhu- 
jananam gimam  anussaritva  puhhavisesalabhatthayas  vuttam. 

Tiriyapabbataviharavasi  mahathero  ca  Jambudhaja-. 
therassa  gnnam  Ukkamsikarahho  arocesi.  Eaja  ca  ativiya 
pasiditva  Jambudhajo  ti  miilaname  dipasaddena  yojetva 
Jambudlpadhajo  ti  namalaiicham  adasi. 

Jambudhajathero  ca  nama  Dhammanandatherassa^ 
saddhivihririko  Dhammanandathero  ca  Jotipmihatherassa 
saddhivihririko.     Te  ca  thera  Arahantaganavamsika. 

Jambudhajathero  pana  Vinayapaliya  atthakathaya  ca 
atthayojanam  Marammabhasaya  akasi.  Maniratano  nama 
pana  thero  Atthasrdini-Sammohavinodani-Kankhavitaranl- 
attliakathanam  Abhidhammatthavibhavani-Sainkhepavanna- 
na-tikanau  ca  attham  Marammabhasaya  yojesi. 

Mulavasagame  ca  Pubbaramaviharavasi  Giilhatthadlpa- 
nim  nama  gandham  Visnddhimaggaganthipadatthah  ca 
mulabhasaya  akasi.  Nettipaliya  ca  attham  Maramma- 
bhasaya yojesi. 

So  pana  thero  pubbe  gamavasi  hutva  sisavethanatala- 
pattani7  gahetvii  acariyapavenivasena  vinayavilomacaram 
cari.  Paccha  pana  tarn  acarani  vissajjitva  arahhavasam 
vasi^.  So  pi  thero  gambhirahaniko  saddatthanayesu  ativiya 
cheko.  '    , 

Kaliyuge  pana  pahcatimsadhike  vassasahasse  sampatte 
kanittho  Siripavaramaharaja  nama  bhiiprdo  rajjam  karesi. 


^  A.  pana.         ^  A.  passati.         ^  A.  sadhujjagunam. 
'^  A.  pitti.         5  A.  labhattaya. 

^  A.  Dhammanandha°         ^  Min:  sisavethanapattani. 
^  B.  aranhavasi  vasi. 


-^       117       H^ 

Dabbimukhajatassare  pana  geliam  karapetva  nisidanato 
Dabbimukbajatassaro  ti  namam  pakatam  ahosi.  Tasmini 
pana  jatassare  Jeyyabhumikittim  nama  vibaram  karapetva 
Sirisaddhammatherassa  adasi.  Babimnam  pi  gamavasi- 
araniiavasibbikkbunam  anuggabam  akasi.  Ratanapurana- 
garasmim  bi  dasasu  No-na-ra-mah-iTijavamsesu  pacchima 
panca  rajano  avicinitva  yeva  alajji-Lajjl-missakavasena 
sasanam  pagganbimsu. 

Tada  jinasasanam  abbbantare  cando  viya  atiparisuddbanx^ 
na  abosi. 

Evam  pi  bijjino  attauo  attano  vamsanurakkbanavasena 
dhammam  puretum  anivaritatta  lajjiganavamso  na  bbijjati^. 
Tatha  ab\ijino  pi  attano  attano  acariyapavenivasena  vica- 
rimsu;  tena  alajjiganavamso  pi  na  bbijjatl3  ti  dattbabbara. 
Tassa  ranno  kale  Devacakkobbaso  nama  eko  tbero  attbi 
vedasattbafmu  pitakesu  pana  mando  ti. 

Kaliyuge  pana  attbatimsadbike  vassasabasse  sampatte 
vesakbamasassa  kalapakkba-attbamito  pattbaya  lokasam- 
•ketavasena '^  uppajjamanam  bbayam  nivaretum  Navaguba- 
yams  tena  Devacakkol)basatberena  katbitaniyamena  jiatlia- 
mam  Marammikabbikkbii  Pattbanapakaranam  vacapesi* 
Tato  paccba  jettbamasassa  junbapakkbe  patipadadivasato 
E,amaniiarattbavasike  bbikkbii  Pattbanapakaranam  vacapesi 
mabacbanan  ca  krirapesi  rattbavasino  pi  babupiijasakka- 
rarn  karapesi.  Tassa  kira  raiiiio  kale  pottbakam  attbi- 
bballikarukkbaniyyasebi  parimattham'^  katva  manosilaya 
likbitva  suvannena  limpetva  pitakam  patittbapesi.  Tato 
pattbaya  yavajjatana  idam  pottbakakammam  Maramma- 
rattbe  akamsii  ti. 

Kaliyuge  sattbadbike  vassasabasse  sampatte  assayuja- 
masassa  kalapakkba-cbattbamiyain  angaravare  tassa  putto 
rajjam  karesi.  Sirimabasibasiira-sudbammaraja  ti  naraa- 
lancbam  pi  patigganbi.  Pitu  raniio  gebattbane  cetiyaiii 
karapesi.    Tassa  pana  Mrirajeyyaratanan  ti  samamia  abosi. 


^  Min:  parisuddbi.         ^  A.  B.  cbijjati    U.  sijjati. ,'' 

3  A.  D.  B.  cbijjati.         ^  A.  B.  °samketo° 

5  A.  °gubaya.       ^  A.  S.  paripattbam  D.  paripatbamani. 


-^i        118        H$- 

Tassa  pana  ranuo  kale  Sallavatiya  nama  nadiya  paccliima- 
bhage  Tunna-namake'  game  Gimabhilarakaro  ^  nama  tliero 
samaneranam  gamapavesanakrile  ekarasam  uttarasaragam 
karapetva  sisavethanatarapattani-i  pana  na  ganhapetva 
talavantam4  eva  ganliapesi.  Eko  gano  hutva  saparivarena 
sadcUiira  Timnagames  nisidi.  Tunnagano  ti  tassa  samamia 
aliosi. 

So  pana  tliero  pali-atthakatha-tika-gandliantaresu  adhip- 
payam  yathabiiutam  na  jani^.  Abhidbammapitakam  yeva 
sissanam  vacetva  nisidi.  Tasmifi  ca  kale  Ketumatinagare 
nisinna  Buddhankurathera^-  Cittathera,  Dlpanganagare  * 
Ulugame^  nisinno  Sunantathero '",  Taluppanagare "  Jaya- 
bahu-andhagame  '^  Kalyanathero  ti  ime  cattaro  thera 
samaneranam  gamapavesanakrde  ekamsam  uttarasamgam 
akarapetva  ^^  sisavethanatarapattani  aganhapetva  "»  civaram 
parupapetva  talavantam's  ganhapetva  sakasakaganam  ova- 
dam  katva  nisldimsu.  Te  pana  thera  pali-atthakatha-tika- 
gandhantaresu  adhippayam  yathabhutam  janirasu  tisu  pi 
pitakesu  kovida  ahesum.  Iccevaiii  Sirimahasihastirasudham- 
marahho'*^  kale  prirupanabhikkhidii  nanahutva  viriipam 
apajjitva  ekamsikagano  nama  visum  bhijji.  Yatha  pana 
ayamalara  ayato  utthaliitva  visadisam  hutva  viruddham^? 
hot!  ti  evam  bhijjamana  pi  gana  raja'^  pamado  anussuko 
hutva  attano  attano  rucivasen'  eva  caritva  nisidimsu. 

Tesu  ca  dvisu  ganesu  parupanagane  thera  pali-attha- 
katha-tika-gandhantaresu  nitatthavasena  '9  vuttam  vacanam 

'  B.  corrects  to  Thunna    S.  Tuna"         ^  D.  gunasi^ 

i  •'vatthana   Min:  ratarapattani. 

*  A.  talavantham  B.  "dandam.      5  g.  Thuna  nama  game. 

^  A.  yayabhatam  na  jani   B.  janati. 

7  A.  S.  Buddhangura"   B.  corrects  to  above. 

'^  B.  Dlpayanga"         ?  A.  Utthagame.        '°  D.  Sunanda<* 
"  A.  Thaluppa"   D.  Tala°         '^  B.  Jayya°  A.  Jeyya" 
'^  A.  akarapetva. 

'+  A.  sisavaddhana    tarapatto    ni    aganhapetva    S.    a?id 
D.  °vattana° 
'5  A.  talavantham.         '^  Min:  "Ijhudhamma" 
'7  A.  viraddham.         '^  S.  ganam  raja   Min:  ganaraja. 
'^  D.  A.  nivattha" 


^^         119         r^ 

nissaya  nikkanldia,  niddosa  va  ^  liutva  nisidimsii.  Ekamsi- 
kagane  pana  tliera  attano  attano  vado  iia  paliyam  na  ca 
atthakatliasu  neva  tikasu  na  pi  gandhantaresu  dissati; 
imam  attliam  ajananta  idam  eva  saccam  mogbam  anfian 
ti  vatva  keci  pana  sakasakasissanam  ovadam  adamsu^; 
evarupa  pi  sissa  ovadam  patigganhimsu. 

Keci  pana  paliyadisii  sakavadassaj  anagatabliavam  natva 
yeva  aparisuddhacitta  hutva  sammasambuddliassa  bbaga- 
vato  mukbam  anoloketva  sammasambuddbass'  eva  bbaga- 
vato  gunam  anussaritva  sakavade  Tikase  pasaritabattbo 
viya  apatittbano'*  ti  janitva  yeva  ambakam  vado  sampatta- 
bmkassa  Saddbammacaritberassa  vamsapabbavo  ti  anissa- 
yabbQtam  pi  5  nissayam  akamsu. 

Abbiitena  mabatberam  silavantam  abbbacikkbimsu.  Byasi- 
namake  game  dittbadbammikasamparayikattbam^  anapek- 
kbautassa  blnayavattakassa  dussilassa  upasakassa  lancbam 
datva  ambakam  vadanuriipam  ekam  gandbam  karobi  ti 
uyyojetva  anagate  anubliaviyamanadukkbato  abbayitva  nis- 
sayam gavesimsu  ti. 

Tasmifi  ca  kale  Nigrodba-pali-suvanna-vibaravasi  tbero 
gamavasibbikkbuganam  samitim^  katva  tassa  nayako  butva 
sisavetbanam  adbarento^  amangalabbikkbu  sasane  ma  tit- 
tbantii  ti  araiinavasmam  bbikkbunam  gandbam  vikopetva 
tato  tato  ^°  pabbajesum". 

Atba  Hattbisabigamassa  purattbimaya  anudisaya  Settbi- 
tale  dakkbinaya  anudisaya  vibare  nisinne  atirekapannasa 
bbikkbu  pi  pabbajessama  ti  cintetva  gamavasibbikkbii 
samnabitva  agamasi'^. 

Atba  raja  tam  attbam  siitva:  Gamavasi  gano  pi  eko  aran- 
navasl  gano  pi  eko.     Gamavasibbikkbu  araniiavaslbbikkbu 

^  A.  B.  omit  va.         ^  A.  adimsu. 

3  S.  bbavassa.         ^  1).  ava° 

5  A.  S.  tberassa  viya  vasavo  ti  anissayatatam  pi  Min: 
omits  vamsa. 

^  S.  A.  B.  "attain.         7  B.  °priti°        ^  D.  "tarn. 

9  A.  adbarenta.  '"  S.  omits. 

"  A.  pabbajeyymu. 

'-  A.  sannabitva  agamasi    B.  sannaybitva. 


-^     120     H^ 

vihetlietuiu  na  sakka  sakasakavadavasena  sakasakattliaiie 
nisiditabban  ti  rajaleklianam  pesesi.  Atlia  arannavasi- 
bhikkhii  sukham  vasitum  oktisam  labhimsii. 

Kaliyuge  chasattatadhike  vassasahasse  sampatte  tassa 
rafmo  putto  Mahaslhasuradhammarajadhiraja  nama  raj  jam 
karesi.  So  veva  Suramiiiarajri '  ti  ca  Setibhindo  ti  ca 
vohariyati^. 

Tassa  ranno  kale  Suvannayanalokanagamavasi-Ukkainsa- 
malam3  nama  therani  antoyiidhanayako  eko  amacco  anetva 
Ratanaiiagarapuram  patva  Siivannakukkutacale  vibaram 
karapetva  tbapesi. 

So  pali-attbakatha  -  tikii- gandhantaresu  ativiya  cbeko 
Vannabodhanam^  nSma  Likbanaiiayan  ca  akasi.  Tassa 
gamassa  rajuhi  dinnavasena  cetiyajaggaiiakamme  yuttaku- 
latta  pana  ranno  acariyatthane  atthapetva  antoyudbana- 
yakass'  eva  pujanattbaya  niyyadesi.  Tassapi  ranno  kale 
samanerehi  gamapavesanakale  parupitva  s  pavisitabban  ti 
ekacce  vadirasu.  Ekacce  pana  ekamsam  uttarasamgam  katva 
pavisitabban  ti  vadinisu.  Evam  annamannam  kalaliam 
akamsn. 

Tattha  Ukkamsamrda-namako  tbero  pfirupanagane  pa- 
dbano  butva  nanagandliesn  parupanavattam  eva  agatan 
ti  pakasimsu.  Ekanisikagane^  pana  Tiriyapabbatavihara- 
vasi  mabathero  [padbano  butva]  acariyapavenidassana- 
vasena  parupanavadam7  patikkhipimsu. 

Atba  raja  ca  Pbalikakbacitavibaravasitberam^  Mesucca- 
viharavasitberam ?  Subattliatberam '^  Buddbankuratheraii 
ca  ti  ime  cattriro  tbere  vinayaviniccbakattbaiie  tliapetva 
dve  pakkba  attano  attano  vadam  dassentii  ti  aba. 


^  B.  Suraccaraja   D.  Siirajja° 
^  A.  vobariyati  ti    Min:  voliariyati. 
5  Min:  Ukkamsapalam.         4  B.  Vannabodbanim. 
5  Min:  parupetva.         ^  B.  ekamsaka° 
7  A.  parupapanavadam. 

^  B.   raja  ca  Pbabkacitavibrira°    A.  raja  Kapbalika"    S. 
Balikamcita. 

">  B.  Meruccavibara"   Min:  Megbuccana° 
'"  B.  Subatta° 


^     121     f^ 

Te  ca  cattaro  tliera  prili-atthalvatha-tika-gandhantaresu 
akovida.  Tesam  hi  thapetva  rajavallabliamattam  anno  koci 
gunaviseso  natthi. 

Rajagurubhavattliaya  yatha  vyaggha  rukkbagacchala- 
tadipaticchanne  *  duggattliane  nisinne  mige  khuddakatta 
diibbale  pi  ganhetum  na  sakkonti,  evam  eva  te  ekamsika- 
tbere  rajanam  nissaya  gandbesu  anagatatta  dubbale  pi 
vadavasena  abhibhavitum  na  sakkhimsu.  Ten'  eva  para- 
senaya  balavatam  janitva  nipaccakaram  dassetva  verani^ 
sametva  nisinno  panditayodho  viya  vadam  nittham  apa- 
petva  yeva  parupanagana  3  nisldimsii  ti. 

Kaliyuge  pana  paucanavutadhike  vassasabasse  sampatte 
tassa  putto  Maharajadbipati  nama  rajjam  karesi.  Paccba 
pana  terasadbike  sate-*  vassasabasse  ca  sampatte  Ramaiiua- 
rattbindo  raja  tarn  abbibbavitva  anitatta  Patta-Hamsavati 
ti  pakatam  abosi. 

Tassa  ranno  kale  Kukbananagare  Jalasuttagamatos 
Nanavaram  nama  tberam  anetva  acariyattbane  tbapesi. 
So  pana  tbero  pali-attbakatba-tika-gandbantaresu  ativiya 
cbeko  sudbammasabbayam  pariyattivacakanam^^^  sotrira- 
nam7  attbaya  Abbidbammattliasanigabapakaranassa  gantbi- 
padattbam  patbamam  akasi. 

Tato  paccba  Attbasaliniyam  gantbipadattbam  Suravi- 
nicchayan  ca  akasi. 

Tato  paccba  tena  ranna  yacito  Abbidbanapadipikaya 
attbaiu  Marammabbasaya  yojesi.  Eafiho  namalancbam 
Cbandalamkrira  -  Saddanetti  -  Vidaggadandi  -  vyanjanayebi^ 
abimkaritva  dassitani  Rajadhirajanamattapakasinira^  nama 
gandbam  pi  akasi. 


"^  Min:  yatba  vyaggbekarukkba" 

^  A.  B.  verim. 

3  A.  parupanaka  nisidirasun  ti   S.  parupanako.      - 

•*  A.  tberasamike  sake. 

5  D.  B.  A.  Jakyutta" 

"  A.  parivatti''         7  D.  so  tberfinara. 

^  A.  cbandrdamkasadda" 

9  A.  Rajadliirrijanrmiattapakasinim    D.  ^namattlia*' 


-^     122     H$- 

Eaja  Hatthisalanrimake  dese  krirapitageham  bhinditva 
satapadhane^  vihare  karapetva  sabbesam  pi  viharanam 
kittijeyyavasattliapanan  ti  namani  pafinapetva^  tass'  eva 
therassa  adasi.  Viliaranamen'  eva  ca  therassa  pi  taiuj- 
saraanna  ahosi. 

Tasmin  ca  kale  ayyakaranfio*  pituranno  ca  kale  tesam 
dvinnam  gunanam  vivadavasena  avippakatavacanams  puna 
vivadassa  viipasamanatthaya  attano  attano  vadam  katba- 
pesi.  Parupanagane  so  thero  padhano^  butva  ekamsika- 
gane  pana  Pasamsatliero  padhano  butva  katbayuddbam 
akasi.  Atba  raja  ativiya  rajavallabbam  Jeyyabbiiniisu- 
vannavibaravasitberam  tesam  vadassa  viniccbindanattbaya 
vinayadbarattbane  tbapesi. 

Kifica  pi  so  pana  tbero  pali-attbakatba-tika-gandbanta- 
resu  tbokam  yeva7  janakatta  pariyattikovidesu  abbobariko^ 
yeva  abosi.  Eajavallabbatta^  pana  raja  yatbablmtam 
ajanitva  vinayadbarattbane  tbapesi.  Yatba  pana  ayani 
purattbimadisa '°  ayam  pana  paccbimadisa'°  ti  evam  adina 
disavavattbanamattam  "  yeva  katum  samattbam^^  naiigala- 
kotiya  samvaddbantain^3purisairi  rajagare  dbammaviniccba- 
kamaccattbane^^  tbapeti. 

Evam  eva  raja  ayam  idiso  ayam  idiso  ti  ajanitva  vina- 
yadbarattbane tbapitatta  so  Jeyyabbumisuvannavibriravasi- 
thero  tesam  dvinnam  pakkbanam  dvisu  vadesu  ayam  bbiito 
ayam  abbiito  ti  vattum  na  sakka  advfiragbare  pavittbakalo 
viya  tada  abosi. 

Seyyatha  pi  nama  mabimso'5  attano  samipe  tbatva 
devagitam  gayitva  devavlnam  vadentassa  devagandbabbassa 


'  B.  pamane    S.  sakapamane   Min:  corrects  to  above. 

^  A,  maiinapetva,    B.  pafina"         ?  A.  tberassamitam. 

4  A.  karaka"         s  B.  avippagata°         ^  D.  pamano" 

7  D.  so-ki-beva.         ^  A.  B.  abbbo° 

9  A.  S.  °vallabbattba.  ^'^  Min:  "disaya. 
''  A.  "vaccattanamattam  Min:  °vavattana. 
'^  B.  tam  attbam. 

'^  Min:  nangalakotiya  yam  vaddbannarn 
'»  A.   dliammaviniccbakamaccbatbane    B.  "viniccbikamaii 
ca  tbane.         '5  Min:  corrects  to  mabino. 


-5H        123        H^ 

velusalakam  paharantassa  ca  grimadfirakassa  ^  saddesu 
kifici  visesam  na  janati  evain  idam  sampadam  dattbab- 
bam.  Atba  raja:  Mama  vijite  ye  ye  bbikkbu  yam  yam 
iccbanti  te  te  bbikkbii  tam  tam  caritva  yatbakammam 
nisidantii^  ti  rajalekbanam  tbapesi.  Tesam  vivado  tada 
na  vupasami. 

Aparabbage  terasadhike  sate  sabasse  ca  sampatte  Ra- 
tanapuranagaram  vinassi  3. 

Tato  paccba  diitiye  samvaccbare  Ratanasikbanagarama- 
pako*  raja  Ramanfiarattbindassa  rafmo  senam  yavakbettato 
cbatakasakunams  viya  attano  puiinanubbavena  Maramma- 
rattbato^  inbaritva  sakabxm  pi  Ramannarattbam  attano 
battbagatam  katva  rajjam  karesi. 

Tasmiu  ca  kale  sakala-Marammarattbavasinam  cittam 
pasadesi.  Yatba  nama  suriyatapena  milayantanam  kumiida- 
nara  Anotattodakena'  sincitva  baritattam^  papesi  evam 
eva  Ramanfiarattbindassa  senabalatapebi  dukkbappattanam^ 
Marammarattbavasinam  gabattbanan  *'*  c'eva  bbikkbunaii 
ca  attano  punfianotattodakena  sincitva  kayika-cetasika- 
vasena  duvidbam  pi  sukbam  uppadesi. 

Sakala-Maramma-rattbavasino  ca:  Ayam  ambakam  raja 
bodbisatto  ti  vobarimsu.  Atba  ekasmim  ekasmim  mase 
catusu  catusu^^  uposatbadivasesu  bbikkbusamgbam  niman- 
tetva  antepure  pavesetva  pindapatena  bbojesi. 

Rajorodbamaccebi  saddbim  uposatbam  upavasi.  Sabbe- 
sam  pi  rajorodbamaccanam  gunattbaya"  patbam  saba 
attbayojananayena  vacuggatam  krirSpesi. 

Atba  Beluvagamavasi'3 -Yasatberara  anetva  attano 
acariyattbane   tbapesi.     Maba-Atukx-YasadbamDiarajagurii 

'  A.  and  Min:  °varakassa.         ^  D.  nisiddba"^ 
3  A.  D.  vinassati. 

•*  B.  Yatana°  D.  Ratanasakba"  A.  samvaccbaye  Eata- 
nasikhanagara'* 

5  A.  jatasakunam   B.  cataka" 

^  A.  B.  Ramaiinarattbato.         7  A.  I).  S.  Anodatta" 
^  D.  "attbam.         ^  A.  dukkbuppattauaiii. 
'°  A.  B.  kabattbanan.         "  A.  B.  catusu. 
B.  gunattaya.         '-5  D,  Beluva" 


12 


-^     124     f^ 

ti  namalancbam  pi  adasi.  Tato  pattliaya  pana  Atulathero 
ti  namena  pakato  ahosi.  Tasmifi  ca  krde  prirupanagana- 
pakkha  Palenagamavasi-Sujatatlieradayo  samaneranam 
gamapavesanakale  civaram  parupitva  pavisitabban  ti  ak- 
kbaram   likbitva  rafino  santikam  saiidesapannam  pavesesi. 

Atba  ekamsikaganapakkba  pi  Atulatberadayo  pubbe- 
sam  rajiinam  kale  adbikaranam  viipasami.  Idani  viipa- 
samitakammam  puna  na  uppadetabban  ti  lekbanam  Hkbitva, 
raiino  santikam  pesesi. 

Atba  raja  dvinnam  pakkbanam  sakasakavadam  katbetu- 
kamo  ])i':  Idani  rajapatisamyuttam  kammam  babu  attbi. 
Tittbatii  tava  sasanapatisamyuttam  kammam^  rajapatisam- 
yuttam eva  kammarn  patbamani  Tirabbissami.  Paccba 
sasanapatisamyuttam  kammam  karissami  ti  rajalekbanam 
tbapesi. 

Aparabbage  pana  raja  evarn  anam  tbapesi:  Idani  mama 
vijite  sabbe  pi  bbikkbu  mama  acariyassa  matim3  anuvat- 
titva  carantu  ti. 

Atba  parupanaganabbikkbu  pi  ekamsikaganam  anuvatte- 
sum'^  ranfio  anavasena.  Sabassorodbagame  pana  dve  maba- 
tbera  attano  parisam  parupanavasen'  eva  gamapavesaua- 
vattam  paripuritabban  ti  ovaditva  nisldimsu. 
■  Tada  ranfio  acariyo  Atubitberos  tarn  attbam  sutva  te 
pakkosapesi.  Te  ca  agantva  nagaram  sampattakale  eko 
upasako  te^  pasanno  butva  tesam  tberanam  pindapatena 
upattbabi.  Atba  Atubatbero  te  mabatbere  durattbanato 
vrdukam   anetva  tassa   upasakassa^  gebasamipe   okirapesi. 

Idam  vinayadbammassa^  ananulomavasena  carantanam 
daiidakamman  ti  kolababxm  pi  uppadesi.  Atba  tesam 
vabikam  abarantanana  yeva  annamaniiam  saUapesum.  Idani 


^  Min:  boti  pi.  ... 

^  D.  adds  babu  attbi  tittbatu  tava  patisamyuttam  kammam. 

3  S.  matam. 

4  S.  anuvattitum    A.  B.  anuvattetum.  .... 

5  B.  Yasattbero.         ^  A.  B.  omit  te. 

7  A.  Tissakassa  upasakassa.  ■      •' 

**  Min:  corr.  vinayadliamma°  -    .  .    ,  .' ■ 


-^i     125     f<^ 

bhante  vinayadhammanulomavasena  acarantanam  amhakam 
idisam  kammam  asariippam\  Alio  accliariyadliammo  loke^ 
ti  eko  thero  alia.  Atlia  pana  eko  thero  evam  aha:  Idani 
avuso  lokapala  deva  idisara  adhammakammam  disva  yeva 
ajjhiipekkhitva  apposukka^  nisiditum  na  sakkil,  idani  loka- 
l^ala  deva  pamajjitva  nisidanti  manfie  ti. 

Tasmim  yeva  hi  khane  vegena  megho  iitthahitva  Atu- 
latherassa  vilifire  rajagehe  ca  ekakkhanena  asaniyo  nipa- 
timsu*.  Evam  samano  pi  so  thero  atimanathaddhatayas 
satim  na  labhi^. 

Puna  raja  idani  mama  vijite  sabbe  pi  bhikkhu  mama 
acariyassa  matim  anuvattanti  va  ma  va  ti  amacce  pucchi. 

Amacca  pi  evam  rafmo  arocesum: 

Idani  maharaja  Kukhananagare^  Nlpagiime  nisinno 
eko  mahatliero  Munindaghoso  nama  atthi.  So  parupana- 
vasena  attano  parisam  ovadetva  bahuganam  uppadetva 
nisidati  ti^. 

Atha  raja  evam  aha: 

Tarn  pakkosapetva^  sudhammasabhayam  mahathere^'^ 
sannipatapetva  tassa  therassa  vinayapannattim "  yatha- 
bhiitam  ajanantassa  yathabhiitam  sabhavam"  dassetva 
evade ntu  ti. 

Atha  amacca  tatha  akarnsu. 

Mahathera  ca  sudhammasabhayam  sannipatitva  tarn 
pakkosetva  ovadirpsu.  Tesu  pana  mahatheresu  eko  thero 
bhupalassa  samgharahho  ca  mukham  oloketva  bhagavato 
pana  sammasambuddhassa  mukham  anoloketva  Muninda- 
ghosatheram  evam  rdia:  Idani  avuso  imasmim  Maramma- 
ratthe  sabbe  pi  bhikkhu  bhupalassa  samgharahho  ca  anam 
anuvattitva  ekarnsika  yeva  ahesum.  Tvain  yeva  eko  sad- 
dhim  parisaya^3  parupanavattarn  caritva  nisidasi.    Kasma 

^  Mill:  cor7\  assaruppara.         ^  A.  B.  loko. 

3  A.  apposukko.         4  D.  patiinsu. 

5  S.  A.  °taddhatriya.         "  B.  labhati. 

7  D.  Kukhanagare.         ^  A.  nisldimsu  ti. 

9  A.  B.  D.  "setva.  '"  A.  thera.  "  B.  pannattam. 

"  D.  sabhagara. 
^3  B.  corrects  to  parisaya  otlier  31SS.  saparisaya. 


-^     126     f^ 

pana  tvam  manathaddho  ^  butva  idisam  anacSram  avija- 
hitva  titthasi  ti.  Atha  Munindaghosatliero  tassa  therassa 
mukliam  iijukam  oloketva  evam  aha:  Tvam  lajji  pesalo 
sikkhakamo  ti  pubbe  maya  sutapubbo;  idiso  pana  puggalo 
idisam  vacanam^  vattiim^  na  yiitto;  idisassa  hi  puggalassa 
idisam  vacanam  asaruppam.  Sace  tvam  ayam  appapuhho 
nittejo  anatho  ti  mam  mahhitva  agaravavasena  vattmn  + 
iccheyyasi  evam  sante  pi  mamacariyassa  mukham  olo- 
ketva mamacariyassa  gunam  janitva  tasso  sisso  'yaii  ti 
anussaritva  idisam  vacanam  adhammikara  vattum  na  sakka  ti. 

Atha  so  thero  tam  pucchi:  Ko  pana  tav'  acariyo  ti. 
Atha  sudhammasabhayam  thapitam  buddharupam  van- 
ditva:  Ayam  mam'  acariyo  ti  aha.  Mam'  acariyo  ti  vatva 
pana  bhikkhusamghamajjhe  utthahitva  ekamsara  uttara- 
samgam  katva  ukkutikam  nisiditva  ahjalim  paggahetva: 
Aliam  bhante  yavajivitapariyosSnas  mama  jivitam  yeva 
pariccajissSmi  bhagavato  pana  tilokaggassa  sikkhapadam 
na  vijahissami  ti  arocesi. 

Atha  raja  tam  attham  sutva:  Manathaddho  eso  mama 
vijite  nisidapetum  na  vattati  ratthantaram  pabbajetabbo  ti 
rajanaya  ratthantaram  pesesi. 

Riijapurisa^  ca  tam  pakkosetva  ratthantaram  anesi7. 
Mahaiigam^  nama  desain  patva  Mahahganayako  puriso 
rajapurisanam  lahcam9  datva  evam  aha:  Ayam  pana  bhonto 
Marammaratthassa  pariyantapadeso;idh'  eva  thapetva  tumhe 
nivattatha  ti. 

Rajapurisa  pi  lahcam  gahetva  tatth'  eva  thapetva  *°  ni- 
vattimsu.  Thero  pi  catuhi  disahi  agatanam  bhikkhu-samane- 
ranam  parupanavasena  ovadam  datva  pariyattim  vacetva 
tattha  nisidi. 

Abhidhammatthasamgahagandhassa  atthayojanam  pi  Ma- 
rammabhasaya  akasi. 


^  A.  D.  manasaddho    S.  "saddho.         ^  A.  B.  omit  va. 
3  A.  vatthu.     4  A.  vatthura.     s  B.  yavajivikapariyosana. 
^  A.  najjurisa.         7  Sic  all  MSS. 

^  B.  Pahangam    D.  Bahah°       9  A.  lanjam   B.  lahcham. 
*°  A.  tam  vatta   S.  vatta. 


-^     127     H$- 

Ajiarabhage  raja  tarn  atthani  sutva:  Idani  so  thero  mama 
vijitapariyante  yeva  nisiditva  amliehi  anicchitam  uivaritam 
kammam  katva  nisldi,  tarn  pakkosatha  ti  aha. 

Rajaduta  ca  tattha  gantva  pakkosimsu.  Thero  ca:  Idani 
mam  raja  maretukamo  ti  mafihitva  sikkham  paccakkhitva 
gihivattham  nivasetva^  tehi  saddhim  agacchi.  Nagaram 
pana  agantva  pattakale  raiifio  santikam  anesi. 

Atha  raja  evam  aha:  Tvam^  bhikkhu  hutva  ganam 
vaddhapetva  nisidasi  ti  maya  siitam.  Kasma^  pan'  idani 
gihl  bhavasi  ti.  Sace  tvam  maharaja  mam  maretukamo 
pakkoseyyasi,  evam  sati;  yadi  sikkham  apaccakkhaya  thitam 
mam  mareyyasi^  tava  bhariyam  kammam  bhavissati  ti 
manasikaritva  tava  kammassa  abhariyatthayas  sikkhaiii 
paccakkhitva  agato  'mhi  sace  mam  mriretukamo  'si  marehi 
ti.  Haja  ca  bandhanagare  thapetva  Siyrimarattham  yuj- 
jhanatthaya  gacchi.  Yujjhanatthaya  paua  gantva  pacca- 
gatakale  antaramagge  va  devam  gato  ahosi  ti. 

Kaliyuge  pana  dvavisadhike  vassasate  sahasse  ca  sam- 
patte  tassa  jetthaputto  Siripavaramahadhammaraja  nama 
rajjam  karesi.  E,atanasikhanagarato  samkametva  Jeyya- 
puram  dutiyam  mapitatta  Jeyyapuramapako  raja  ti  pi 
tassa  samahiia  ahosi.  Tasmih  ca  kale  MahSpabbatabbhan- 
taranagaravasim  Nanatheram  anetva  acariyatthane  thapesi. 
So  kira  thero  gambliirapahho.  Ekasmim  ekasmim  divase 
nava  va  dasa  va  bhanavare  vacuggatam  katum  samattho 
ahosi.  Abhinavopasampannakale  yeva  Padavibhagagandhara 
Nyasasarnvannanam  Yamakasamvannanam  Mahapatthana- 
samvannanam  ca  Marammabhasaya  akasi.  Raja  Maha- 
bhiimiramaniyaviharam^  nama  karapetva  tass'  eva  adasi. 
Nanalamkaramahadhammaraja  ti   pi  namakxficham   adasi. 

Tasmih  ca  krde  prirupanagane  thera  evam  cintesuni; 
Idani  pana  amhakara  pakkhiko  thero  rauho  acariyo  ahosi. 
Idani   mayani  patitthanam  labhama  ti.     Evam  pana  cin- 


^  S.  A.  vatthani  vasetva.         ^  D.  turahakam. 

3  A.  tasma. 

4  B.  thitam  mareyya  —  all  MSS.  niareyya. 

5  A.  abhariyattaya.         ^  S.  °ramma" 


-^        128        r^ 

tetva  samaneiTmam  gamapavesanakale  civaram  parupetva 
pavisitabban  ti  sandesapannam  rafifio  santikam  pavesesi". 
Atlia  Atulathero :  Pubbe  vuttanaye  vvipasamitam  kammam 
idan  ti^  sandesapannam  rafmo  santikam  pavesesi\ 

Ten'  eva  afifiamafinam  pativacanavasena  dassetum  oka- 
saiii  na  kxbhimsuj  ti. 

Tato  paccha  kaliyuge  paficavassadhike  dvisate  sahasse 
sampatte  tassa  ranno  Siiipavara-sudhammamaharajindadhi- 
pati  nama  raja  rajjam  karesi. 

Ratanapuram  pana  tatiyam  mapakatta  Ratanapurama- 
pako  ti;  ekassa  pana  chaddantanagaiTijassa  samibhiitatta 
Setibhindo  ti  ca  samanfia  ahosi. 

Marammagrimavasicandovaram  4  nama  tberam  anetva 
attano  acariyatthane  thapesi.  Bhiimikitti-atubim  nama 
viharam  karapetva  tassa  adasi.  Jambudipa-anantadhaja- 
mahadhammarajaguriis  ti  pi  namalancham  adasi.  Tassa 
ranno  kale  ekacce  manussa  ditthivipallasa^  abesnm;  te  pi 
pakkosapetva  sammaditthim  ganhapesi.  Tassa  pana  raiino 
kale  ekamsikaganam  abbibliavitum  okasam  na  labhimsii  ti. 

Tato  paccha  kaliyuge  atthatimsadhike  vassasate  sahasse 
ca  sampatte  tassa  ranno  putto  Mahadhammarajadhiraja 
nama 7  rajjam  karesi.  Nagarassa  dakkhinadisiibhage  pahca- 
bluimikaviharam  karapetva  Jeyyabhumivasatulanamena 
pafinapetva  Mayavattakassa  nama  therassa  adasi  Guna- 
munindabliisasanadhammarajadhirajaguru  ti  pi  namalan- 
cham adasi. 

Tasmin  ca  kale  Nandamalo  nama  thero  Calaiiganagarassa 
purattliimadisabhage  vihare  nisiditva  bahunnam  bhikkhu- 
samaneranam  gandham  vacesi. 

Samaneranam  gamapavesanakale  parupanavattam  ^  eva 
paripuretva  pavisitabbam  ekamsikavattarn  pana  neva  pali- 
yam  na  atthakathayam  na  ca  tikasu  na  pi  gandhantaresu 


^  B.  pesesi.         '  A.  kammividham  ti. 
J  B.  alabhimsu  ti. 

4  B.  Caraccagama"    A    B.  '^canda" 

5  Min:  Tinandadhaja°        ^  D.  A.  vippalla   B.  vippalasa. 
7  A.  B.  raja  ti  nama  raja.         ^  A.  "pavattam. 


-^     129     i<~ 

dissati  na  dhaminanuloman  ti  ovadam  abhinliam  adasi. 
Pali-atthakatliadlsu  ngatavinicchayam  dassetva  ekam  pi 
gandham  akasi. 

Atlia  ekamsikaganika  bliikkhil  tarn  gandham  ranfio 
santikam  pavesimsu^  dosavikaranatthaya.  Tasmiii  ca  kale 
raja  evarupam  supinam  passi,  Sakko  hi  devaraja  setavattam^ 
nivasetva  setalamkarehi  alamkaritva  setakusumani  pilan- 
dhitva  rafiho  santikam  agantva  evam  aha:  Aparantaratthe 
hi  mahaiTija  Nammada3-nadltire  padacetiye  bahimi  tinani 
utthahitva  afmamahham  mulena  midam  khaudhena  khan- 
dham  pattena  pattam  sambandhitva  paticchadetva  thitani. 
Tani  pana  pubbarajuhi  yathabhiitam  ajanantelii  avisodhi- 
tani,  idani  pana  taya  yathabhtitain  janantena  parisuddham 
kattukamena  visodhitabbani.  Tattha  ca  eko  bhikkhu  agant- 
va upadesanayam  dasseti  ti*. 

Evam  pana  supinam  passitva  Nandamalam  nama  theram 
pakkosapetva  Ratanapuranagarassa  asannatthanes  udaka- 
kilanatthaya  karapite  rajagehe  vasaj)esi. 

Atha  thero  samanerrmam  gamapavesanakale  parupana- 
vasena  pavisitahban  ti  pali-atthakatha-tika-gandhantarehi 
rajanam  janapesi.  Yathii  Maha-Moggaliputta-Tissathero 
Siridhammasokarajanam  sammavadan  ti^.  Atha  raja:  Pari- 
citaparamipunhasambharo  7  mahajaano  janasi  parupanavado 
yeva  pali-atthakatha-tika-gaudhantaresu  agato,  ekamsikavado 
pana  tesu  katthaci  pi  na  agato  ti.  Evam  pana  janitva  rahiio 
gehe  dve  pakkhe  there  sannipatapetva  attano  attano  vadara 
kathapesi. 

Atha  ekamsikathera  evam  ahamsu:  Tumhrikam  paru- 
panavado kattha^  agato  ti.  Tada  parupanathcra:  Pari- 
mandahim  pfirupissami  ti  adina  nayena  pali-atthakatha- 
tika-gandliantaresu  prirupanavado  agato  ti  ahamsu.  Tato 
paccha  paru})anathera  evam  ahamsu:  Tumhakam  pana 
ekamsikavado  kattha  agato  ti. 

^  B.  corrects  to  pesimsu.         '  A.  sveta° 

J  S.  A.  Maramada°        ^  B.  D.  dassati  ti. 

5  A.  esantathfme. 

^  B.  dhammavadan  ti. 

'  A.  paramitapunham  bhriro.         ^  A.  tattha: 

Sasana-Vanisa.  9 


-^     130     H5- 

Tada  te  ekamsikathera  advaragharam  pavittliakrdo  viya 
rattibhage  mahrivanamagge  gamanakrdo  viya  ca  hutva 
kinci  vattiim  ^  na  sakka;  mukliam  nama  katlianatthaya 
bhunjanattbaya  boti  ti  -M^ittatta  yam  va  tain  va  vadanta  pi 
rajanam  aradbetum  na  sakkbimsu. 

Raja  ca  tberara  nissaya  vinaye  kosaUataya  paliyam  idiso 
yeva  agato  attbakatbadisu  idiso  yeva  ti  vatva:  Tumbakam 
ekamsikavado  pali-attbakatba-tika-gandbantaresn  na  dissati. 
Evam  pi  samana  kasma  idisam  vattam^  akamsii  ti  puccbi. 
Atba  te  ekamsikatbera  catubattbagabbbe  saba  bbandena 
gabitacora3  viya  manussebi  gabitak.aka  viya  kinci  vattum 
asakkuneyyataya  sabbadisasu  oloketva  yeva:  Ambakam 
carittam  pali-adisu  na  dittbapubbam.  Atba  kbo  pana 
acariyapavenivasena  eva  carimba  ti  vatva  parajayam 
patva  parupanapakklie  yeva  pavisimsu  ti.  Raja  ca  ito 
pattbaya  bbikkbu  prirnpanavattam  eva  karapetum  samane- 
ranam  ovadantil  ti  rajanam  tbapesi. 

Tato  pattbaya  ekamsikapakkba  tbera  arunuggamanakale 
kosiya^  viya  sisam  uttbabitum  na  sakka  ti. 

Lokasarabbii  -  mabacetiyassa  purattbimadisabbage  d vibi 
pasadebi  alamkatam  catubbumikam  Bbumikittiviramani 
nama  5  vibarani  karapetva  Nandamabitberassa  adasi.  Na- 
rindabbidbajamabadbammarajadbirajaguru  ti  namalaiicbam 
pi  adasi. 

So  pana  tbero  Cbapadavanisiko  ti  dattbabbo.  Abbina- 
vopasampannakale  yeva  Vinayaviniccbayassa  Suttasam- 
gabassa  Mabavaggattbakatbaya  ca  attbayojanam  Maramma- 
bbasaya  akasi.  Sasanasuddbidipikam  nama  gandbam  pi 
akasi  ti. 

Tato  paccba  kaliyuge  te  cattallsadbike  vassasate  sabasse 
sampatte  pbaggunamasassa  kalapakkba-pannarasamiyam 
Ratanasikbamapakassa  rafmo  majjbimaputto  I'ajjam  karesi. 


D.  A.  vattbum. 

A.  Min:  vattbum  D.  bbassam. 

A.  S.  saboddbanagabita°  Min:  saboddbena. 

A.  kale  re  kosiya. 

B.  Bbiimikittivibaram  nama. 


-^     131     H$- 

Tada  raja  evam  cintesi:  Ekamsikaparupanavasena  uppanno 
vivado  pubbesam  rajunam'  kale  vupasamitum-  na  sakka. 
Siripavarasudhammamaharajiudadhipatmo  kale  pi  rSjagehe 
saunipatapetva  ranno  sammukhes  kathapitattat  vissatthenas 
kathetum  okasassa  aladdhatta  yathakamam  vattum  avisa- 
hatta^  parajayo  aliosi  ti  lesam  odditum^  okaso  bhaveyya; 
mayliam  pana  kale  idisam  akatva  tesaiu  tesam  tlieranam 
vihare  dutam  pesetva  sakasakavadam  katbapessami^.  Evam 
hi  sati  te  te  thera  vissattba^  hutva  katbessanti  ti. 

Evam  pana  cintetva  antoyudbanayakam  amaccam  padba- 
nam  katva  tesam  tesam  tbeiTimim  santikam  gautva  firoca- 
pesi:  Sakasakavadam  vissattba  butva  vadatba  ti.  Atba 
ekamsikaganika  tbera:  Amhebi  vuttavacanam  pali-adisu  na 
dissati.  Atba  kbo  pana  acariyapavenivasen'  eva  mayam 
carimba  ti  anujanimsu. 

Mabaraja  ca:  Evam  tberanam  anujanane  sati  kifici  kat- 
tabbam  nattbi.  Idfini  parimandalasuppaticcbannasikkbapa- 
dani  avikopetva  samanera  gamam  pavisantu  ti  rajalekba- 
nam'°  tattba  tattba  pesesi. 

Aparabbage  pana  Sabassorodbagamato  upasampada- 
vasena"  sattavassikam  Nanam  nama  bbikkbum  anetva 
Antoyudbavihriram  nama  karapetva  tassa  adasi.  Nana- 
bbisasanadbajamabadbammarajaguru    ti    namalaficbam    pi 

adasi. 

Atba  ranna  yacito"  Rajabbisekagandbam  parisodbetva 
Marammabbasaya  attbam  yojesi. 

Aparabbage  bbagava  dbaramano'3  yeva  agantva  catunnam 
yakkbanam  dametva  tebi  dinnam  mamsodanam '-t  patigga- 
betva  Pabbatasamantadesaui  gantva  paribbunjitva  tam 
tbanam  oloketvS  sitam  patvakasi. 


'  D.  pubbe  sarngbarajimam.        ^  A.  upasamitum. 

3  D.  pamukbe.         +  13.  tatba  pi° 

5  S.  visagattbena  D.  visatbena.        "  D.  S.  "ttba. 

7  D.  ottitum   Min:  oddbitum.         «  oj^^. 

9  D.  visatba.         '"  Min:  raja  lekbanam. 

^  A.  "vassena.         '^  A.  raiiiio  jato. 

3  A.  dbaramane.         '4  D.  pi  sodanara. 


►^     132     H$- 

Atha  Anandathero  karanain  pucchi.  Anagate  kho 
Ananda  imasmim  dese  mahanagarara  bliavissati,  cattaro 
ca  ime  yakkha  tasinim  nagare  rajano  bhavissanti  ti  vyakasi. 

Yathavyakataniyamen'  eva  kaliyuge  catucattalisadliike 
vassasate  sahasse  ca  sampatte  maghamasassa  kalapakklia- 
dvadasamiyam  aiigaravare  Uttarapliaggunlnakkliattena  ^ 
yoge  Amarapurara  nama  maharajatthrininagaram  mapesi. 

Siripavaravijayananta  -  Yasatribliavanadityadhipatipandi- 
tamahadliammaraja^  ti  namalancham  pi  patigganlii. 

Aggamaliesiya  karapitam  Jeyyabliiimiviharakittinama- 
kam  viliaram  Gunaljhilamkarasaddhammamaliadhammara- 
jadhirajaguriitherassaj  adasi.  So  La-kham-khum-kha-ram-to'i 
iti  vuccati.  Kanninagarabhojakayas  rajakafinaya  kara- 
pitam Eamaniyaviramam  nama  viharam  Gunamuniudadhi- 
patimahadhammarajatirajagurutherassa  adasi.  So  Marilam- 
ka-khii-ra-to^  iti  vuccati  uparanfio  deviya  karapitam  Maiiga- 
ladbiramam7  nama  viharam  Tipitakasaddbammasamima- 
hadhammarajiXdhirajaguriitberassa  adasi. 

So  Kbum-ta-kba-ra-to^  iti  vuccati.  Majjbimagehavasi- 
deviya  karapitam  Mangalavasatulam  nama  viharam  Nana- 
jambudlpa  -  anantadhajamahadhammaraj  adhirajagurutheras- 
sa9  adasi.  So  Mam-gain-kha-ra-to  iti  vuccati.  Ime  pana 
cattaro  mahathere  samgharajatthane  tbapesi. 

Uttaragebavasideviya  krirapitam  Maiigahxbbumikittim 
nama  viharam  Kavindabhisaddhammavaradhajamahadbam- 
marajagurutberassa'"  adasi.  So  No-na-kha-nam-kba-ra-to" 
iti  vuccati. 

^  A.  "pbalguniin"   Min:  uttara° 

^  B.  "kri"  D.  "ananda-yasatribbavanadityadi-patipandito° 
Min:  mandito. 

3  B.  "raja  ti  rajaguru° 

4  D.  To-ma-na-ta-hi-ja-ra-to  B.  Yo-mam-da-kbum-cba-ra- 
tora   A.  Yo-kha-khum-kba-ra-to. 

5  D.  °kara   Min:  bhojanaya. 

^  D.  Meta-matula-u-cba-ra-to. 

7  B.  Mangalaviramam    D.  "viharam. 

^  B.  Mam-Cbaratom   D.  Chum-tbah-cba-ra-to. 

9  D.    °Ananda°         '"  B.  D.  "dharadbaja" 

"  D.  Nno-iia-ka-na-cba-ra-no. 


-^     133     -<s- 

Sirikhettanagarabliojakena  rajakumarena  karapitam 
Atulabhumivasara '  nama  viharam  Kavindabliisaddhamnia- 
pavaramahadliammarajagurutherassa  adasi.  So^  Ne-no- 
khe-ram-to3  iti  viiccati. 

Anto-amaccena'*  ekena  karapitam  viharam  Nanalaiuka- 
rasaddhammadliajamaliadhammarajagurutlierassa  adasi.  So 
Kham-ga-tam-kha-ram-tos  iti  viiccati. 

Vamabalanayaken'^  amaccena  karapitam  viharam  Para- 
masirivanisadhajamahadhammarajagurutherassa7  adasi.  So 
Ma-tih-kha-ram-to^  iti  viiccati. 

Dhammavinicchakena9  eken'  amaccena  karapitam  viharam 
Kavindasaradhajamahridhammarajadhirajagurutherassa'° 
adasi.     So  Lo-kam-pa-nam-ram-to  "  iti  viiccati. 

Iccevam  pariyattikovidanam  anekanam  mahatheranani 
saddhini  namalauchena  viharam  datva  anuggaham  akasi. 
Yasma  pana  sabbesara  theranam  namam  uddharitva  visum 
visum  kathite  ayam  Sasanavamsapadipikakatha  atipapahca'^ 
bhavissati  tasma  idha  ajjhlpekkhitva'3  vattabbam  eva 
vakkhami  't. 

Pacchabhage  cattaro  mahathera  jaradubbahitaya  yatha- 
kamam  sasanam  visodhetum  na  sakkhissanti  ti  mahnitva 
puna  attha  there  etehi  catuhi  mahatherehi  saddhim  sasanam 
visodhapetum  samghanayakatthane  thapesi,  seyyathldam:  Ka- 
vindabhisaddhammapavaramahadhammarajaguruthero,  Ti- 
pitakalamkaradhaj amahadhammaraj aguruthero ,   Cakkind a- 

^  B.  °bhiimi  va  nSma. 
^  D.  S.  A.  B.  Yo. 

3  D.  Re-to-che-ra-to    B.  Nria-to-ha-kha-ra-tom. 

4  Miu:  corr.  ante° 

5  D.  Cha-ua-te-ja-ra  to   B.  Cham-ta-cha-ra-tom. 
^  U.  Gamabala° 

7  D.  Marama°    S.  Pavara° 

^  D.  Mi  tih  cha  ra  to   B.  Ma-tih-cha-ra-to. 

9  B.  °vinicchikena.         '°  A.  Kabindha" 
^^  D.  Lo-kam-ha-ka-hah-cha-iTi-to    B.    Lo-kam-ha-na-ka- 
iiah-cha-ra-tom. 
'2  S.  A.  omit  ati. 
'3  S.  A.  ajjiipekkhitva. 
^4  A.  B.  vakkhilma  ti.  ' 


-^     134     Hg- 

bliidhaj amabadhammarajagiiruthero ,  Paramasirlvamsadha- 
jamaliadhammarajaguriithero,  Janindribliipavaramabadham- 
marajagurutbero  \  Mabananabbidbajamabadbammarajagu- 
rutbero  ^  Nanabimkarasaddbammadbaj amabadbammaraja- 
gurutbero ,  Nanabbisasanadbajamabadbammarajagurutbe- 
ro  ti. 

Atba  araba  pi  samano  nissayamuccakangavikakj  vina 
nissayacariyena  vasitum  na  vattati  ti3  janitva  nissayacari- 
yapabonakanam  tberanam  nissayangani  nissayamuccaka- 
rabaiiam4  nissayamuccakangani  paripurapetva  nissitakanam 
nissayam  ganbitva  va  nisidapesi. 

Tato  paccba  kaliyuge  panfiasadbike  vassasate  sabasse 
ca  sampatte  Nanabbisasanadbaiamabadbammarajaguriitbe- 
ram  yeva  ekam  saragbarajattbane  tbapesi.  Tato  pattbaya 
so  yeva  eko  samgbanayako  biitva  sasanam  visodbesis, 

Tato  paccba  ekapannasadbike  vassasate  sabasse  sampatte 

pbaggunamase  Mabamimicetiyassa  dakkbinadisabbage  dvibi 

ittbakamayebi     pakarebi     parikkbittam^    pancabbumikam 

Asokarame  Ratanabbumikittim  nama  vibaram  atimabantam 

karapetvaNanabbisasanadbajamabadbammarajaguriitberas- 
sa  adasi. 

Nanabbivamsadbammasenapatimabadbammarajadbiraja- 
giirii  ti  namalancbam  pi  puna  adasi.  Tato  aiinani  Jeyya- 
bbumivibarakittimangalaviiTimadayo  aneke  pi  vibare  tass' 
eva  adasi. 

So  pana  tesu  vibaresu  varena  nisiditva  pariyattim  vacesi, 
Ubbatovibbangani  pi  vaciiggatam  akasi,  niccam  yeva 
ekasanikadbiitaiigani  samadiyi. 

So  pana  tbero  upasampadavasena^  pancavassiko  butva 
piibb'  eva  samgbarajabbavato  Petakalamkaram  nan^a  uetti- 
samvannanam  abbiuavatikam  akasi.  Attbavassikakale 
samgbaraja  abosi.  Samgbaraja  butva  Sadbujjanavilasinim 
nama  Digbanikayatikam  akasi. 


'  Min:  Janindatri°         _^  ^ 

'  A.Nanabbisasana°  D.Nanabbisasana  Min :  Nanabliiiiiia° 
3  A.  vattbati.         4  D.  "kanam.        s  Min:  visodbayi. 
^  B.  patikkbittam.        7  B.  °vassena. 


-^     135     H$- 

t» 

Ariyavamsrilamkaram  nama  gandhafi  ca  akasi.  Maha- 
dhammarafma '  yacito  Jatakatthakatliaya  attbayojanam, 
Catusamaneravatthum,  Rajovadavatthum  -,  Tigumbathoma- 
nam3,Cbaddantanagarajiippattikatbam3^yi^idbirajavilasiuim 
nama  gandbau  ca  ti  evam  adayo  pi  akasi. 

Kaliyuge  pana  dvasattbadbike  vassasate  sabasse  ca 
sampatte  Sibaladipato  Ambagabapatisso  '*,  Mabadbampo  s, 
Koccbagodbo'^.  Brabmanavattbo,  Bogabavattbo^,  Vatura- 
gammo  ti  ime  cba  samaneril  dasa  dbatuyo  dbammapanna- 
karattbaya  anetva  Amarapuram  nama  mabarajattbani- 
nagaram  iXgata  saddbim  ekena  iipasakena. 

Atba  Nanabbivamsadbammasenapatimabadbammaraja- 
dbirajaguruna^  samgbaranna,  upajjbayena  Kavindabbi- 
saddbammadbaradbajamabadbammarajagunitberena,  Janin- 
dabbidbajamabadbammarajagurutberena,  Mimindagbosa- 
mabadbammarajaguriitberena  ti  evam  adibi  rajagiirutberebi 
kammavacacariyebi  Hattbirajjasuvannagubaslmayam^  upa- 
sampadakammam  karapesi.  Upasakaii  ca  samanerabbumi- 
yam  patittbapesi.  Tato  paccba  ca  anekavaram  agatSnam 
bbikkbunam  puna  sikkbam  ganbapesi  samaneranan  ca 
npasampadakammam  karapesi  upasakanaii  ca  pabbajja- 
kamman  ti. 

Aparabbage  pana  kabyuge  cba  cattalisadbike  vassasate 
sabasse  ca  sampatte  pitu  raimo  acariyapubbo  Atulo  nama 
tbero  clvarapatalam  uparisamgbatim  urabandbanavattbani 
bandbitabban  ti  Culagantbipade  vuttatta  samaneranam 
gamapavesanakrile'°  ekamsam  uttarasamgam "  katva  ura- 
bandbanavattbani '^  bandbitva  yeva  pavisitabban  ti  dalbani 
katva  raniio  santikam  lekbanam  pesesi'3. 

'  A.  °ranno.        ^  A.  Eajovadana*' 

3  A.  Tigumbbatemanam  Min:  Tirambbatigumba°  D.  Ti- 
rambbave  bbamanara. 

+  A.  Ampagabapatiso  sa   B.  Ambagabatisso. 

5  D.  B.  °dampo.        ^  A.  Koccagodbo. 

''  A.  B.  Brabmanavatto   D.  Bbogabavattovanno. 

8  A.  "Dbammasenadbipati"        9  D.  Hattbirajju" 
'"  Min:  pavisana"  "  A.  "saragbam^  '-  B.  vattam. 

'3  A.  lekbani  pavesesi   Min:  lekbaiiam  pavesesi. 


-^     136     H5- 

Atha  raja  tarn  sutva  mahatliere  siidhammasabliayam 
sannipatapetva  Atulatherena  saddhim  sakaccham  karapesi. 
Atha  Atulathero  civarapatalara  uparisamgliatini  katva 
urabandhanavattham  bandliitabban  ti  CCilagantbipade 
agatapatbam  dassetva  samaneranam  gamapavesanakrile 
ekamsam  uttarilsamgam  katva  urabandbanavattbam  ban- 
dbitva  pavisitabban  ti  aha. 

Atha  mahathera  nam'  pucchimsu:  Idiso  adhippayo 
annattba  dissati  va  ma  vE  ti.  Atha  Atulathero  evam 
aha:  Annattba  pana  idiso  adhippayo  na  dissati  ti.  Evam 
hotu  ayam  gandho  kena  keua  ti  Sihaladipe  Aniiradha- 
purassa  dakldiinadisabhage  Pokkantigame^  arahantena 
Moggallanatherena  ti.  Ayam  attho  kathara  janitabbo  ti. 
Pitakattayalakkhanagandhe  agatatta  ti.  Ayan  ca  Pita- 
kattayalakkhanagandho  kiito  laddho  ti.  Buddhaghosatherena 
kira  Sihaladipato  anitatta  tato  laddho.  Ayam  hi  gandho 
Sihaladipato  attaua  anitesii  gandhesu  asuko  gandho  asukena 
therena  kato  ti  vihnapanatthaya  Buddhaghosatherena  kato. 
Idanayani  gandho  amhakam  hatthe  samvijjati  ti.  Sace 
idanayam  gandho  tumhakam  hatthe  samvijjati  amhakam 
dassehi  ti.  Passath'  avuso  ayam  amhakam  hatthe^  gandho 
ti  dassesi+.  Atha  mahatherehi  samgharajapamuldiehi  tas- 
mim  gandlie  pi  dassites  Yinayaganthipadam  Sihaladipe 
Parakkamabahurahho  kale  Moggallanathero  akasi  ti  aga- 
tam^  na  Culaganthipadam  Sihaladipe  Anuradhapurassa 
dakkhinadisfibbage  Pokkantigame  araha  Moggallanathero 
akasi  ti.  Atha  thera  evam  ahamsu:  Kasma  pana  Pita- 
kattayalakkhanagandhe anagatam  pi  iigatani  viya  katva 
musa  vadatha.  Nanu  tumhakam  pi  ekamsikabhikkhunam 
musavadasiklv'lulpadam  atthl  ti.  Atha  Atulathero  uttarira 
vattum  aoakkuneyyatta  luddakassa  vakare  bandhe  migo^ 


'  A.  B.  D.  tarn.         ^  A.  Pokkhanti" 
3  Min:  gandhe   D.  tattha. 

"^  A.  and  Min:  omit  from  idanayam  {P^  time)  to  gandho 
ti  dassesi. 

5  A.  B.  S.  passite.         ^  A.  D.  S.  agata. 
7  Min:  bandhamigo. 


-^.     137     H^ 

viya  banclbamano '  hutva  atthasi;  sahorldhena  galilto^  viya 
coro  sahamusavadakammena  so  thero  galiito  ahosi  ti. 

Idara3  imassa  attliassa  avibliavatthaya  4  vattliu. 

Imasmim  kira  ratthe  eko  janapadavasi  puriso  kenacid 
eva  karanlyena  Amarapuram  nama  maharajattlianinaga- 
rara  agacclii.  Agantva  ca  paccagatakfilcs  antaramagge 
patlieyyam  khayam  ahosi.  Ath'  assa  etad  ahosi  ^:  Idilni 
mama  pfitheyyam  khayam.  Imasmim  kira  ratthe  Sahasso- 
rodhagame  Laddhavaro  nama  mahasetthi  sabbattha  bhiitale 
ativiya  pakato.  Tassaham  iiati  ti  vahcetva  kathessami. 
Evam  sati  tena  mahasetthina  mittasaiithavam  katiim  te  te 
gamika  manussa  mama  bahii  labhara  dassayissanti^.  Tada 
patheyyena  akiccho^  bhavissami  ti.  Evam  pana  cintetva 
antaramagge  sampattasampattagamesu  mahabhoganam 
geham  vicinetva  mahabhoganam  santikam  pavisitva  katha- 
sallapam  akasi. 

Atha  te  te  gamika:  Tvara  kuto  agato  kuhirn  gamissasi 
kassa  hati  ko  va  tvan  ti  piicchimsu.  Amarapuramaha- 
rajatthaninagarato  agato  Sahassorodhagamarn  gamissami; 
Sahassorodhagame  Laddhavarassa  nama  mahasetthino 
jamata  Dhanavaddhako  namahan  ti  aha. 

Atha  te  te  gamika  Laddhavarena  mahasetthina  mitta- 
santhavam  katum  nEnabhojanehi  bhojesura,  ahhehi  pi 
bahuhi  pannakarehi  samgaham  akamsii.  Imina.  va  nayena 
sampattasampattagamesu  vancetva  attano  giinam  kathetva 
addhanamaggam  tari.  Paccha  pana  Sahassorodhagamani 
sampatto,  so  Sahassorodhagamarn  na  sampattapubbo 
Laddhavaro  mahasetthi  tenana  ditthapubbo;  Sahassorodha- 
gamani sampatte  yeva  ayam  kin  nama  gamo  ti  apucchitva 
yeva  tasmim  game  mahabhogatarassa  mahageham  vicinanto 
tass'  eva  Laddhavarassa  setthino  mahantam  geham  pas- 
sitva^  Laddhavarassa  setthino  santikam  pavisitva  tena 
saddhim  kathasallapara  akasi. 


'  B.  phandamano.         ^  D.  banda°  B.  sahoddena. 
3  A.  Idha.         ■*  A.  avibhavatthaya.         s  A.  paccha° 
^  Min:  omits.        ?  S.  D.  A.  B.  dassissanti. 
^  Min:  corr.  to  patheyye  na  atikiccho.         9  Min:  omits. 


-^     138     -<- 

Atlia  maliasetthi  tain  piicclii:  Tvam  kuto  agato  kuhim 
gamissasi  kassa  fiati  ko  va  tvan  ti, 

Amarapuramaharajatthaninagarato  sami  agato,  Sahasso- 
roclhagamam  gamissami,  Sahassorodhagame  Laddliavarassa 
nama  mahasetthino  jamata  Dhanavaddliako  namahan  ti 
aha. 

Atha  maliasetthi  tassa  mukham  ujum  oloketva:  Ayam 
manava  Sahassorodhagamo  yeva,  aham  pi  Laddhavaro  uama 
mahasetthi;  mama  dve  dhitaro  santika  pi  sasamika'  yeva 
hoiiti,  idani  ta  sakasakasamikanam  yeva  santike  vasanti. 
Na  tvam  kadaci  maya  ditthapubho  kena  karanena  kuto 
agantva  mama  jamata  bhavasi  ti  pucchi. 

Atha  so  manussehi  anubandhiyamano  viya  migo  sakalam 
pi  kayam  phandapetva^  kiiici  vattabbam  vacanam  ajanitva^ 
aladdhapatitthS-nataya  evam  sati  kuto  agato  kuhim  gamis- 
sami kassa  hati  ko  vFi  ahan  ti  idrmi  na  janami  sabbadisa 
sammuyhami.  Khamahi  mama  aparadham;  ito  patthaya 
yavajivitapariyosana  na  vaficessami  vaiicetum*  na  visahami 
idani  ati^dya  bhayami  ma  kiiici  dandakammam  karohi  ti 
vatva  vegena  utthaliitva  palayi  ti. 

Iccevam  Atulathero  dummukho  hutva  yam  va  tarn  va 
mukharulham  vilapitva  samghamajjhe  nisidi. 

Ayam  Atuhitherassa  pathamo  parajayo. 

Tato  paccha  khalitvixs  kuddame  patitam  purisam  puna 
upari  akkamanta  viya  puna  mahathera^  evam  pucchimsu: 
Ayam  bhante  tava  Ciilaganthipadani  nama  tisu  Yinaya- 
mahatikasu  sadhakavasena  dassitam  Culaganthipadam 
udahu  aparan  ti. 

Tisu  Vinayamahatikasu  sadhakavasena  dassitam  Cula- 
ganthipadam yeva  idan  ti.  Evam  sati  kasma  tava  Cula- 
ganthipade  yeva  vuttam  hi  Vajirabuddhitlkayam  \Tittam 
hi  Sriratthadipanitlkayam  tatha  hi  vuttam  Vimativinodanl- 
tikayan  ti.  Tasara  Yinayamahatikanam  paccha  hutva  ta 
tisso  Yinayamahatikayo  sadhakavasena  dassita^  ti.    Evam 


'  Min:  santi  ta  pi  sasamika.      ^  S.  A.  B.  bandhapetva. 
3  B.  ajanitva.         ^  A.  mahcetum.         s  A.  kalitva. 
^  A.  mahatheram.         7  A.  dassana. 


•^     139     ^<- 

pana  pucclianto  so:  Maya  piibbe  vuttaiii  tisu  mahavinaya- 
tlkasu  sadhakavasena  dassitam  Culaganthipadam  yeva  idan 
ti  vacanam  saccam '  eva  ti  mukhasunfiatthaya  punappimam 
vadi.     Idan  ca  imassa  attliassa  avibhavatthaya  vatthu. 

Eko  kira  i^uriso  ekena  salaayena  saddhim  puttadarapo- 
sanatthaya  raiino  bhatim  gahetva  yuddhakammam  katum 
samgamam  gacchati.  Atha  parasenaya  yujjhitva  parasena^ 
abhibhavitva  sabbe  manussa  attano  attano  abhimukhatthil- 
nam3  palayimsu.  Atha  so  pi  puriso  tena  sahayena  saddhim 
attano  abhimukhatthanam  palayi.  Thokam  palayitva  an- 
tarSmagge  parasenahi  paharitadandena  mncchito*  hutva 
so  puriso  tena  saddhim  gantum  na  sakka  antamaso  nisl- 
ditum  pi  na  sakka. 

Atha  sahayassa  etad  ahosi:  Idani  ayam  ativiya  balha- 
gilanos  hoti  maranasanno.  Sacaham  tassa  upatthahitva 
idh'  eva  nisideyyam  verino  agantva  mam  ganhissanti  ti. 
Evam  pana  cintetva  gilanassa  santakani  kahapanavattha- 
dini  gahetva  tam  tatth'  eva  thapetva  gacchi^.  Sakattha- 
nasamipam7  pana  pattassa  tassa  etad  ahosi:  Sace  tam 
antaramagge  thapetva  agacchami  ti  vadeyyam^  tassa  fiataka 
mama  upari  dosam9  ropessanti.  Idani  so  maritva  aham 
ekako''"  va  agacchami  ti  vadissaml  ti.  Sakatthanam  pana 
patva  tassa  bhariya  tassa  santikam  agantva:  Mayham  pana 
samiko  kuhim  gato,  kattha  thapetva  tvam  ekako  va^° 
agacchasi  ti  piicchi.  Tava  ayye  samiko  paresam  avudhena" 
paharitva  kahxm  kato.  Imani  tava  samikassa  santakani  ti 
vatviX  kahapanavatthadini  datva  ma  soci  ma  paridevi  idani 
matakabhattam  datva  punhabhagam '^  yeva  bhajehl  ti 
samassasesi. 

Atha  sa  tani  gahetva  roditva  matakabhattam  datva 
pimhabhagam  bhajesi. 


^  S.  sayam.        ^  Min:  parasenam.        3  Min:  "atthanam. 
4  A.  muccito.         5  A.  balagilano. 
^  B.  gacchati.         i  A.  Sakatthanasmim. 
^  A.  vadeyyum.         9  A.  B.  desam. 
'°  A.  B.  D.  S.  ekato    S.  va.         '°  A.  avndhehi. 
'^  B.  pminabhavam. 


->         140         :^ 

Aparabliage  pana  tliokam  kalam  atikkante  giLaiio  vutthito 
sakageham  agacchati.  Bliariya  pi  tarn  na  sadclalii.  Aliam 
na  kalam  kato,  gilanam  yeva  mam  thapetva  so  mama  san- 
takani  gahetva  gato.  Sace  mam  tvam  na  saddaliasi  aliam 
anto  gabblie  niliyitva  nisidissami,  tarn  pakkosetva  puccbalil 
ti  aha. 

Atlia  sa  tarn  pakkosetva  bahi  gabbbe  nisiditva  puccbi: 
Mama  sami  samiko  kalam  kato  ti  tarn  saccam  va  alikam 
vji  ti.    Saccam  ev'  etam'  yam  tava  samiko  kalam  kato  ti. 

Atba  so  piiriso  bahi  gabbham  nikkhamitva  angulim 
pasaretva  na  idani  bho  samma^  aham  kihci  mato  pi 
marami;  kasma  pana  amarantam  yeva  mam  mato  eso  ti 
vadesi  ti.  Atha  kifici  vattabbassa  karanassa  adissanato 
mukhasuhhatthaya  angulim  pasaretva  ujuni  oloketva:  Idani 
tvam  idha  agantum  samattho  pi  mato  yeva  mato  ti  maya 
vuttavacanam  saccam  yeva,  naham  kihci  alikam  vadami 
ti  aha.  Evam  so  punappunam  vadanto  pi  jivamanassa 
tassa  samvijjamanatta3  paccakkhe  yeva  ca  tassa  thitattai 
koci  pi  tassa  vacanam  na  saddahati  parajayara  yeva  so 
patto  ti. 

Iccevam  Atulathero  mukhasuhnatthaya  s  vadanto  pi  koci 
na  saddahi.     Parajayam  yeva  patto  ti. 

Ay  am  Atulatherassa  dutiyo  parajayo. 

Puna  pi  seyyatha  pi  luddako  kuhjaram  disva  ekena 
varena  usuna  vijjhitva^  mahantam7  pi  kuhjaram  puna- 
nutthahanatthaya  katipayavarehi  usiihi  vijjhati  evam  eva 
ekavaren'  eva  parajayam  pattam  puna  vadassa  anukkhi- 
panatthaya  katipayavarehi  parajayam  papetum  parupana- 
vadino  mahathera  evam  ahamsu: 

Tava  Culaganthipade  yeva  samaneranam  parimandala- 
suppatichannadini  vatthani^  abhinditva  yeva  gamo  pavisi- 
tabbo  ti  pubbe  vatva  civarapatalam  uparisamghatim  katva 

^  Min:  eva  tarn.        ^  A.  so  samma. 
3  A.  vadanto  pi  jivamanattassa  samvijjamauatta  B.  omits 
D.  manakassa  S.  manatassa. 

■*  D.  paccakkha  ye  ca  tassa  tatha. 

5  B.  "suhhattaya.         ^  A.  vijjitva. 

7  B.  patanti  pi  D.  adds  mahantam.     ^  A.  B.  S.  D.  vattani. 


-^     141     f«- 

urabandhanavattliam  ^  bandhitabban  ti  puna  vuttam;  kasma 
pana  pubbena  aparam  asamsanditva  vuttam  tumhakaiii 
vadepatisaranabhutanam  pali-atthakatba-tlka-gandbantaiTi- 
nam  natthitaya  idam  amhakam  patisaranabhutam  Cula- 
gantliipadan  ti  vadatba.  Tumbakam  patisaranabhuta  ^ 
ganthipadato  yeva  bbayam  uppajjati  ti  vatva  saba  niliyan- 
attbanena  gabitam  coram  viya  saba  nissayena  adbamma- 
vadino  ganbimsu. 

Idam  imassa  attbassa  avibbavattbaya  vattbu3. 

Atite  kira  Baranasito  avidiire  naditire  gamake  PataH 
nama  natanacco  vasati.  So  ekasmim  ussavadivase  bbari- 
yam  adaya  Baranasim  pavisitva  naccitva  vinaiu  vaditva 
gayitva  dhanam  labbitva  ussavapariyosane  babu  surabbat- 
tam4  gabapetva  attano  gamam  gaccbanto  nadltlraiii  patva 
navodakam  agaccbantam  disva  bbattam  bbufijanto  suram 
pivanto  nisiditva  matto  butva  attano  babini  ajananto  ma- 
bavinam  givaya  bandbitvS  nadim  otaritva  gamissami  ti 
bbariyam  battbe  gabetva  nadim  otari.  Ylnacbiddebi 
udakam  pavisi.  Atba  nam  sil  vIna  udakes  osidapesi. 
Bbariya  pan'assa  osidanabbavam  fiatvil  tani  vissajjitva 
uddbain  taritva^  naditire  attbasi. 

Natapatali  sakim  ummujjati,  sakim  nimmujjati7,  udakam 
pavisitva  uddbumata-udaro  abosi. 

Atb'  assa  bbariya  cintesi:  Maybam  samiko  idani  maris- 
sati,  ekam  gitara  yilcitva  parisamajjbe  tarn  gayanti  jivitam 
kappessaml  ti  cintetva:  Sami  tvam  udake  nimmujjasi.  ekam 
me  gitam  debi,  tena  jivitam  kappessaml  ti  vatva: 

Bahussutam  cittakatbam^  GangS  vabati  Patabm 
Vuybamanaka  bbaddan  te  ekam  me  debi  gatbakan  ti^. 


'  B.  vattam.         ^  Min:  "bbutam. 

i  B.  a\dbbiXvriya  vattbu. 

4  A.  S.  °battbaiii.         s  A.  B.  udakam. 

^  A.  B.  uttaritva. 

7  B.  omits  sakim  nimujjati  (All  MSS.  Natapali). 

^  B.  Babu  sukani   Min:  cittakatara. 

9  A.  ekam  me  deti  gatliakan  ti   B.  gitakara.     (See  «)at. 
432.  Fausboll  YoL  III  p.  507). 


-^     142     i<s- 

Atha  nam  Natapatali^:  Bhadcle  katham  tava  gitam 
dassessami,  idani  mahajanassa  patisaranabliutam  udakam 
mam  mareti  ti  vatva: 

Yena  sincanti  dukkliitam^  yena  sincanti  aturam 
Tassa  majjbe  marissami,  jatam  saranato3  bhayan  ti, 

Atha  Atulathero  attano  patisaranabhuta  Ciilaganthi- 
padato  bbayam  uppajjitva  kifici^  vattabbam  ajanitva  adbo- 
mukbo  hutva  parajayam  patto  ti. 

Ay  am  Atiilatberassa  tatiyo  parajayo. 

Atha  rFijiX  tesam  dviiinaiii  pakkhanam  vacanam  sutva 
Culagantbipadassa  pubbaparavirodhidosehi  akulatta  sutta- 
suttanulomadisu  a2)avittbatta  agamasuddbiya  va  abbavato 
paro  vassasatam  ciram  thitassa  gebassa  viya  atidubbala- 
vasena  atigatams  janitva  idani  sasanam  parisuddbam 
bbavissati  ti  somanassapatto  hutva  mama  vijite  sabbe  pi^ 
bliikkhii  parupanavasena  samanavadino  7  hontii  ti  anam 
tbapesi,  Tato  patthaya  yavajjatana  sakale  pi  Maramma- 
ratthe  parupanavasena  samanavadika  bhavanti  ti. 

Ayam  ettha  sankbepo;  tesam  hi  dvinnam  pakkhanam 
sannipatitva  vacanapativacanavasena  vivadakatha*^  vittha- 
rena  vuccamana  chapaficabbanavaramattam  pi  patva 
nittham  na  papuneyya;  yasma  pana  sabbam  anavasesetva 
vuccamanam  ayam  Sasanavamsapadipika  atipapahca  bba- 
vissati, tasma  ettha  icchitamattam?  eva  dassayitva  ajjhupek- 
khama  ti. 

NanabhivamsadhammasenapatimahadhammaiTijadhiraja- 
guru  pana  saraghaiTija  mahathero  Sihaladipe  Amarapura- 
nikayikanam  l)hikkbimam  adiljhiito  acariyo  bahupakaro. 
Amarapuranikayo  ti  tattherapabhavo  ti. 

Kaliyuge  pana  ekasitadhike  vassasate  sahasse  ca  sampatte 
tassa  rahho  natta  Siritribhavanadityapavarapandita- '° 
mahadhammarajadhiraja    nama    rajjam    kriresi.      So    pana 

'  B.  Naccapatali.       ^  A.  B.  dukkitara  Min:  dakkhinara. 
3  B.  maranato.      4  B.  omits  kiiici.      s  Min.  A.  atiratain 
B.  athiratam.       ^  A.  °hi.       7  Min:  vadika.      ^  D.  vividha" 
''  Min:  icchitam  attham.         '°  Min:  "mandita" 


-^     143     H$- 

AmaraiDurato  samkamitva  Eatanapuram  catuttham  mapesi. 
Tassa  rafino  kale  Guriamimindadhipatimahadhainmarajadhi- 
rajagurutherassa  sissam  Sacivagamavasi-Silacaram  nama 
tlieram  arannavaslnam  bhikkhimam  pamokkliattbane  tba- 
pesi\  Rajagaranamake  dese  viharam  kaiTipetva  tass'  eva 
adasi. 

Kaliyuge  ekasltadhike "  vassasate  sahasse  ca  sampatte 
Calangapurato  ^  Panfiasiham  nama  tlieram  anetva  Aso- 
karame  Ratanabhumikittiviliare  patittbapesi.  Munindabbi- 
sirisaddbammadbajamabadbammarajadbirajaguru  ti  nama- 
lancbam  datvFiJ  Mabajeyyabbiimivibare  Ramaniyam  nama 
vibaram  datva  tain  yeva  mabatberain  samgbarajattbane 
tbapesi. 

Ekasmin  ca  samaye  mabatbere  raja  puccbi:  Catasso 
datba  nama  cattalisaya  daiitesu  antogadba  va  udrdiu 
cattalisaya  dantebi  visum  bbuta  ti  puccbi. 

Atlia  ekacce  tbera  evam  abamsu: 

Catasso  datba  nama  cattalisaya  dantesu  antogadba  ti; 
ekacce  pana  catasso  datba  nama  cattrdisaya  dantebi  visuni 
bbuta  ti  abamsu.  Atba  raja:  Gandbam  abaratba  ti  rdia. 
Atba  antogadbavadika  tbera  gandbam  abariiiisu.  Annesam 
paripunnadantanam  pi  dvattimsa  danta  bonti,  imassa  pana 
cattalisam  bbavissanti  ti  ca.  Danta  pi  paripunnadantassa 
dvattimsadantattbikani ;  te  pi  vannato  seta,  santbanato 
anekasantbana.  Tesain  bi  bettbimaya  tava  dantapaliya 
majjbe  cattaro  dautil  mattika  pinde  patijiatiya  tbapitrdabu- 
bijasantbana,  tesam  ubbosu  passesu  ekeko  ekamidako 
ekakotiko*  mallikamakutasantbano  5,  tato  ekeko  dvimilla- 
kotiko  yanaka-upatbambbanisantbano;    tato  dA'e  dve  timu- 


'  A.  omits  from  catuttbam  mapesi  .  .  to  Rajagaranamake. 

2  Min:  Valaiiga° 

•5  B.  adds  namalancbam  pi  adasi.  Kaliyuge  catiisitadbike 
vassasate  sabasse  ca  sampatte  Muniiidabbivamsadbamma- 
senapatimaliadbammarajadbirajaguru  ti  nfimalancbain  datva 
Mahrijcyya°  &c. 

4  B.  ekako  tbito. 

5  B.  mallikamakula" 


-$»4       144      i<r 

laka  tikotika;  tato  dve  dve  catumulaka  catukotika  ti 
uparimaya  dantapaliya  pi  es'  eva  nayo  ti  ca. 

Tassa  kira  uttarottha-appakataya^  tiriyam  plialetva 
apanitaddliam^  viya  kliayati;  cattaro  dante  dve  ca  datha 
iia  chadeti,  tena  nam  otthaddlio^  ti  voliaranti  ti  ca. 

Tattlia  tassa  ti  Liccliavino  nama  rajakumarassa.  Utta- 
rottha-appakataya  ti  upari-otthassa  appakataya.  Apanitad- 
dham  viya  ti  upari-otthassa  upaddliabhagam  apanltam  viya 
kliayati  ti  attlio.  Na  cliadetl  ti  upari-otthassa  upaddha- 
bhage  pana  na  paticchadeti.  Teua  ti  yena  cattaro  dante 
dve  ca  datha  na  chadeti  teiia'^  nam  Licchavirajakumaram 
otthaddho  ti  voharanti  ti.  Evam  autogadhavadehi  therehi 
gandham  aharitva  dassite  sablie  ti  tasmim  vade  patittha- 
himsu  ti. 

Ekasniih  ca  kale  raja  mantinims  amaccam  pucchi: 
Pubbarajuhi  viharassa  cetiyassa  va  dinnani  khettavatthu- 
adini  paccliimarajiinam  krde  yathadinnam^  tani  patittha- 
hanti7  va  ma  va  ti, 

Atha  luantini-amacco  evam  kathesi:  SamghikSya  bhii- 
miya  puggalikani  bijani  ropayanti,  bhagam  datva  pariblmh- 
jitabbanl  ti  dasakotthase  katva  eko  kotthaso  blmmisami- 
kanam  dritabbo  ti  ca. 

Vinayapali  -  atthakathasu  vuttatta  pubbe  ekena  rauha 
dinnani  khettavatthu-adini  paccha  ekassa  rahho  kale 
yathadinnam  thitani.  Ettha  hi  samghikaya  bhumiya  ti 
vuttatta  labhasmiayam  viya  balim  yeva^  adatva  saha  bhu- 
miya dinnatta^  pavenivasena  samghika  bhumi  attlii  ti 
vihhayati.      Ettha    ca    patiggahakesu    matesu    tad    anno 


'  A.  appakathaya.         ^  A.  apanitaddham. 

3  B.  otthado. 

'^  A.  upari-otthassa  upaddhabhagena  na  paticchadeti.  Tena 
ti  yena  ti  yena  cattaro  dante  dve  ca  dittha  na  chadeti  tena 
nam  Licchavi  &c.  Min:  upari-otthassa  upi)addhabhagena 
na  paticchadeti.  Tena  ti  yena  cattaro  dante  dve  datha  na 
chadeti  tena  nam  Licchavi  &c. 

5  S.  Mantitini  D.  Mantim.     ^  A.  "dinnanarn  D.  dvinnam. 

'  B.  tani  hatitthahan  ti. 

^  A.  bali  yeva   B.  balii    D.  phali.         9  \\,  dinnattha. 


-^     145     f<$-  ^ 

catiiddisasamglio  anagatasamglio  ca  issaro  tassa  santako 
tena  vicaretabbo  ti.  Cetiye  paclipanatthaya^  patisankharanat- 
tliaya  va  clinno  aramo  jaggitabbo  vetanam^  datviX  pi 
jaggapetabbo  ti^.  Cetiye  chattam  va  vedikam^  va  jinnams 
va  patisamkbarontena^  sudhakammadlni  va  karontena 
cetiyassa  iipanikkhepato  karetabban  ti  ca  atthakathayam 
vuttatta  pubbarajuhi  cetiyassa  dinnani  khettavattbu-adini 
paccbimarajunam  kale  pi  cetiyasantakabhaven'  eva^  tbitanl 
ti  veditabbani. 

Athaparam  j)i  puccbi:  Tada^  kassa  ranno  kale  adim 
katva  kbettavatthu-adini  vibarassa  cetiyassa  va  dinnani  ti. 
Atba  mantini-amacco  evani  aba:  Purimakappesu  purima- 
nam9  rajunam  krde  pi  vibarassa  cetiyassa  va  dinnani  ti 
veditabbani;  ten'  eva  Sujatassa  nama  bbagavato  ambakam 
bodbisatto  cakkavattiraja  saddbim  sattabi  ratanebi  dvisa- 
basse  kbuddakadipe  cattaro  mabadipe  ca  adasi.  Rattba- 
vasino  ca  firamagopakakiccam  karSpesi  ti  gandhesn  agatam, 
tasma  cirakalato  yeva  pattbaya  pubbarajidii  kbettavattbu- 
adlni  dinnani  ti  veditabbani. 

Rajavamsesu  pi  bbagavato  parinibbanato  vassasatanam 
upari  Sirikbettanagare  ekilya  apiipikaya  dinnapancakarlsa- 
mattam  kbettam  ekassa  tberassa  dinnam  tarn  Dvattaponko^° 
nama  raja  vilumpitva  ganbi. 

Atba  pabaragbanta  bberiyo  pabarita"  pi  saddam  na 
akamsu,  raiino  kuntacakkam^^  pi  yatba  pubbe  tatba  pesi- 
tattbanam  na  gaccbi. 

Atba  tarn  karanam  iiatva  Spupikaya  yatbadinnam  eva 
tberassa  niyyadesi. 


'  Min:  padlpattbaya.         ^  vettbanam. 

3  S.  D.  omit  from  cetiye  to  jaggapetaro  ti. 

4  A.  veditam.      s  B.  cbinnam  A.  S.  cinnam  D,  dvinnarn. 
^  A.  patisaiikarontena.         ^  A.  cetiyasattaka" 

^  B.  D.  kada.         9  A.  purimakammesu  purimani. 

»°  B.  Dottbapoiiko. 

"  A.  mabaragandatberiyo  paliarita  pi  B.  °gbantbabheriyo 
pabaritva. 

*2  A.  kuttacakkam. 

Sasana-Vamsa.  10 


^     146     f<5- 

Kaliyuge  pana  navanavutaclbike  vassasate  sahasse  ca 
sampatte  tassa  kanittho  Siripavaradityalokadliipativijaya- 
maliadhammarajridhiraja  rajjam  karesi.  So  pana  raja 
Ratanapurato  samkamitva  Ainarapuram  dutiyam.  mapesi. 
Tassa  ranfio  rajjam  pattasamvacchare  yeva  jettliamasassa 
junhapakkhapancamiyam  Ratanapiiranagare  Maravijaya- 
ratanasudhammiXya  nama  pitakasalaya  Suriyavamsassa 
nama  tlierassa  parisamajjlie  rajalekhanam  vacapetva  sam- 
gharajjam  niyyadesi. 

Suriyavamsabhisiripavarrdamkaradhammasenapatimaha- 
dhammarajadhirajagiiru  ti  namalancham  pi  adasi. 

So  pana  tliero  kaliyuge  pancavisadbike  vassasate  sa- 
hasse ca  sampatte  migasiramasassa  junliapakkhasattamiyam 
sukkavare  Valukavapigame  patisandliiya  vijato  ti  sadda- 
vayam^  sampatte  samgharajjam  patto  santindriyo  khanti- 
dhammo  sikkbakamo  pariyattivisarado  ti  Pitakalamkara- 
mabadbammarajagurutberassa  sisso.  So  pana  kaliyuge 
pannarasadbike  dvivassasate  sabasse  ca  sampatte  tassa 
raiino  kale  yeva  maccuvasam  patto. 

Atba  raja  anekasabassebi  pasadebi  abbutapubbebi 
accbariyakammebi  sarirajbapanakiccam  akasi.  Atba 
kaliyuge  solasadbike  vassasate  sabasse  ca  sampatte  tassa 
mabatberassa  sissam  Neyyadbammam  nama  tberam  puna 
samgbarajattbane  tbapesi.  Patbamam  Neyyadbammalam- 
karadbammasenapatimabadbammaraj  adbirajaguru  ti  nama- 
lancbam  adasi.  Tato  paccba  dutiyam  Neyyadbammabbi- 
vamsasiripavaralamkaradbammasenapatimabadbammariXja- 
dbirajagurii  ti  namalancbam  adasi. 

So  pana  tbero  kaliyuge  ekasattbadbike  vassasate  sabasse 
ca  Devasuragfime  patisandbiya  ^  vijato  butva  asltadbike 
vassasate  sabasse  ca  patbamam  asalbimasassa  junbapakkba- 
cuddasamiyam  upasampadabbumim  patto  tassa  raiino  kale 
kaliyuge  navanavutadbike  vassasate  sabasse  ca  sampatte 
Sibaladipato  Panilatisso   nama  tbero   saddbim  Sunandena 


^  Min:  sattativayam. 
^  A.  patisandbissa. 


~^.     147     H$- 

nama  bliikkhunil  Indasarena  nama  samanerena  ekena 
upasakena  ekena  darakena  ca  Ainaraimram  nama  nagai'am 
sampatto. 

Atha  samgharaja^  tesam  paccayanuggaliena  dhamma- 
niiggahena  ca  anuggaliesi. 

Tesu  aparabliage  kaliyuge  dvivassadhike  dvisate  vassa- 
sahasse  ca  sampatte  Pamiatissathero  jararogena  abhi- 
blmtatta  saukharadhammanam  sabhavam  anativattatta 
krilam  akasi.  Tassa  puna  sikkham  ganhissami  ti  parivi- 
takko  mattliakam  apatto  liutva  vinassayi. 

Tenaha  bhagava: 


Cintitam  pi  vinassati  acintitam  pi  vinassati^ 
Na  hi  cintamaya3  bhoga  itthiya  purisassa  va 


.1  ti. 


Imasmim  pana  loke  pandito  piinnam  kattukamo  abliit- 
thare  va^  kareyya.  Ko  nama  jafina  ajja  Ya5  suve  va 
parasuve  va  maranam  bhavissati  ti. 

Tenaha  bhagava: 

Abhittharetha  kalyane^  papacittam  nivaraye 

Dandham  hi  7  karato  puimam  ijapasmim  ramati  mano  ti. 

Atha  mahiiraja  sarirajhapanakiccam  bahiihi  sadhukilana- 
sabhagehi^  akasi.  Tato  paccha  Sunandassa9  nama  bhik- 
khussa  puna  sikkham  adasi,  samaneram  pana  upasampada- 
l)humiyam  patitthfipesi  darakah  ca  samanerabhiimiyan  ti. 

Tena^°  pana  maharaja  kaliyuge  tivassadhike  dvisate 
sahasse  ca  sampatte  maghamase  bahiihi  paccayehi  upa- 
tthambhetva  tani  tani  sabbani  kammani  tiretva  Kusima- 
nagarajetthassa  ekassa  amaccassa  bharam  katva  tass'  eva 
sabbani  kiccani  niyyadetva'^  Sihaladlpam  pahini  ti. 


'  A.  Atisamgharaja.         ^  A.  B.  D.  bhavissati. 
3  B.  "rnaha.       *  A.  abhittare  va  (sic),      s  Min:  ajj'  eva. 
^  A.  kalyanam.    7  Min:  Dandah  ca  (comp.  Dhammap.  116.) 
^  A.  sabhahehi   B.  sabhavelii.  9  Min:  sunandanassa. 

'°  Min:  te.         "  B.  omits  from  tani  to  niyyadetva. 


-^        148        r^^ 

Samgharajamaliatliero  pana  sasanassa  ciratthitattaya  ^ 
sotaranam  sukliapatibodhanatthaya  nanagandhelii  patham 
visoJhetva  Saddhammapajjotikaya  nama  Mahaniddesattha- 
kathaya  attliayojanam  Marammabhrisaya  akasi.  Bahunam 
sissanam  pariyattivacanavasena  jinasasanassa  anuggaliam 
akasI  ti. 

Aparabhage  kaliyiige  atthavassadbike  dvisate  sabasse 
ca  sampatte  migasiramasassa  junbapakkba  -  atthamiyam 
tassa  piitto  Siripavaradityavijayanantayasamabadbammara- 
jadbiraja^  nama  rajjam  karesi.  Tad  a  Suriyavamsabbisiri- 
pavarrdamkaradbammasenapatimabadbammarajadbirajagu- 
rumabatberass'  eva  sissam  Pannajotabbidbajamabadbamma- 
rajadbirajagurutberam  samgbarajattbane  tbapesi. 

So  pi  silava  pariyattikovido  sikkbrdvamo  bijji  pesalo 
Angiittaranikayapaliya  tadattbakatbayan  ca  attbayojanam 
Marammabbasaya  akasi. 

Tassa  raiino  krde  Neyyadbammfibbivamsasiripavaralam- 
karadbammasenapatimabadbammarajadbirajagurutbero  Sa- 
ddbammavilasiniya  nama  Patisambbidamaggattbakatbaya 
attbayojanam  Marammabbasaya  akasi. 

Manijotasaddbammalamkriramabadbammarajadbirajagu- 
rutbero  Samyuttanikayapaliya  tadattbakatbaya  ca  attbayo- 
janam Marammabbasaya  akasi. 

Medbabbivamsasaddbammadbajamabadbammarajadbira- 
jagurutbero  Dlgbanikayapaliya  tadattbakatbaya  ca  attba- 
yojanain  Marammabbasaya  akasi. 

Neyyadbammabbivamsasiripavarabimkaradbammasenapa- 
timabadbammarajadbirajagurutberassa  sisso  upasampada- 
vasena3  pancavassiko  Pannasami  namabam  Saddattbabbe- 
dacintanamakassa  gandbassa  gantbipadattbavannanam 
Marammabbasaya  akasim.  Dasavassikakrde  pana  Abbi- 
dbanappadipikasamvannanaya  attbayojanam  Marammabba- 
saya akasim.  Tassa  ca  patbam  babubi  gandbebi  samsanditva'' 
visodbesin  tis. 


^  A.  ciratbitattnya. 

^  D.  °vijayananda"  3  Min:  "vassena. 

4  A.  samsandbitva.  s  Min:  visodbesi  ti. 


-^        149        r<- 

Aparabliage  Sakkaraje  cuddasadhike  dvisate  saliasse  ca 
sampatte  ayam  amliakam  dhammiko  raja  anekasatajatisu 
upacitapuiinrmubhavena  jiiiasasariassa  pagganhanatthaya 
samadevalokaprdehi  ^  uyyojiyamano  viya  rajjasampattim 
patilabhi;  dasabalasasanapagganhitukamassa^  dhammara- 
jassa  manoratbo  mattbakam  patto  abosi;  mariyadam3 
bbinditva  dinnakathamaggam  "s  viya  udakam  laddbokasa- 
taya  saddbamabogbo  avattbaritva  5  tittbati.  Cattari  ca 
vassani  atikkamitva  vesakbamase  paiicakakudbabbanda- 
dlbi^  anekebi  rajabhoggabbandebi  parivaretva  Udumbara- 
bbaddapittbe  saddbim  mabesiya  abbisekam  patto. 

Tenavocumba  Nagarajuppattikatbayam7: 

Mabapunno  va^  rajayam  kottbasaggbe^  va  agate 
Sakkaraje  bi  sampattim  patva  dane  yato  va  ti. 

Tada  cattari  vassani  atikkamitva  visadbike^°  saddbim 
mabesiya  sekapatto  butva  mabatale" 

Jinacakkan  ca  jotesi"  Mabasokadayo  yatba 
Abijjino  ca  niggayba  paggabetvana^j  lajjino 
Rattbe  ca  danasilesu  bbavanayabbiyunjaye 
Nimirajadayo  yatba  ti. 

Tada  yasma  alajjino  niggabitabbapuggale  avicinarake 
nikkbipanto '4  viya  niggabakammam  akasi.  Tasma  te 
aladdbokasa  niliyanti^s  yatba  anmuggamanakrde  kosiya  ti. 

Tenavocumba  Nagarajuppattikatbayam: 

Tada  pana  jinacakkam  nabbe  cando  va  pakatam 
Abijjino  niliyanti  anmugge  va  kosiya  ti. 

Yasma  ca  bijjino  paggabitabbapiiggale  bbavagge  ukkbi- 
panto  viya  paggabakammam  karoti,  tasma  te  biddbokasa 
uttbitasisa  nirasanka'^  butva  tittbanti. 

^  B.  sabadeva"     ^  B.  °sasanassa  pagg°     ^  A.  pariyadam. 

4  Min:  katba°   D.  "kata''  s  Miu:  avattayitva. 

6  A.  °gandridibi.         7  B.  Rrijanagaruppatti°         *^  A.  ca. 

9  A.  kattiiataggbc  va  B.  kattbatbagbe  va  D.  katbatagbe 
Min:  amends  to  kattbanagge. 
"  A.  visadbike.         "  A.  mabitale. 

^^  A.  sobbesi  D.  jodbesi  S.  jovesi.     ^3  A.  B.  paggabitvana. 
H  S.  nikkbamauto.      'S  B.  nilayanti.       '^  A.  uirasaiikba. 


7 


-^     150     H$- 

Yathjx   candimasuriya  lokfinam   patiladdhakale  adikam- 
mika^  ti. 

Tenavociimha: 

Tada  pi  ca  jinacakkam  khe  bhanuma^  va  pakatam 
Lajjino  pi  uttliabanti  obhaladdhe3  va  kappika  ti. 

Tepitakam  pi  navangam  buddhavacanam  ciratthiti- 
kam  kattukaino  pariyattivisaradebi  mahatberebi  visodha- 
petva  lekbabbatikanam  4  bbatim  datva  kantbajamuddhaja 
dividbanams  sitbibidbanitadividbarian  ca  piinappunam 
vicaretva  antamaso  pariccbedalekbamattam  pi  aviradbetva 
antepuram  pavisetva  suvannamayesu  lobamayesu  ca  pottha- 
kesii  likbapesi^.  Nanatbamasampanne  ca  bhikkbii  vicinetva 
yatbabalam  Vinayapatikam  visum  visum  dbareti  vacugga- 
tam  karapeti.  Aggamabesim  adim  katva  sakala-orodbadayo 
babii  rajasevaka  amaccadayo  nagarike  ca  yatbabalam 
Suttantapitakam  Abbidbammapitakan  ca  visum  visum 
ekekasuttamatikapadabbajane  ^  cittavaradivasena  vibba- 
jetva  dbareti  vacuggatam  karapeti  9.  Sayan  ca  anattalak- 
kbanadikam  anekavidliam  suttam  devasikam  sajjliayam 
karoti.  Jinasasanassa  cirattbitattbaya  sakalavijite  ca 
araiine  vasinam  bbikkbimani  assamassa  samantato  panca 
dbanusatappamane'°  tbane  tbaladakacaranam"  sabbesam 
sattanam  abbayam  adasi.  Pariyattivisaradanan  ca  tberanu- 
tberanarp  matapitadayo  iiatake  sabbarajakiccato  babkam- 
mato  ca  mocapetva  yatbasukbam  vasapeti'^.  Ekaben'eva 
pi  sabassamatte  kubiputte  pabbajjiipasampadabbiimisu 
patittbapetva  sasanam  pagganhi.  Afinani  pi  babiiui  pufma- 
kammani    karoti    katva    ca   vivattam'3    eva   pattbeti'''*   no 

*  A.  adikappikii.         ^  A.  kbe  banuma  va  pakatam, 

3  obbaladdbe  all  MSS.         -^  B.  lekbakanam. 

5  A.  kantbejumuddbaranam  vidbanam    S.  kantbajamud- 
dbajaranam  vidbanam   B.  D.  "muddbaja  ti  vidbanam. 

^  A.  B.  S.  °ti.         7  S.  "rodbavadayo. 

^  A.  °padabajarane   B.  °bbajanl.         9  B.  karapesi. 
'°  A.  satapamane   B.  satakappamane. 
"  Min:  taladaka"         "  A.  Min:  vassapeti. 
^3  S.  vivaddbam.         '4  A.  patteti. 


-$H        151        H$- 

vattam  'S.  Afine  ca  vorodliiidayo :  Tumhe  yani  kanici  punna- 
kammani  vivattam  eva  patthetha  ma  vattan  ti  abhinham 
ovadati.  Aniccalakkhanadisamyuttaya  dhammakathaya  nic- 
cam  ovadati.  Sayam  pi  samatliavipassanasu  niccriraddham 
akasi.  Rajiiiiam  pana  rattliasamikanam  dhammataya  kicca- 
bahiiUataya^  kadaci  kadaci  okasam  na  labhati  kammattha- 
nam  anuyufijitum.  Evam  pi  samano  sariramalaparijaggana- 
kale  pi  kammatthiinaiu  aniiyunjati^  yeva.  Na  moghavasena  + 
kalaiu  khepeti,  Loke  hi  maugalasammatanis  pi  manussaslsa- 
kapalatthi-adlni  susaiiato  anetva  dantakatthadini  va  tarn 
sadisani^  karapetva  attano  samipe''  thapetva  atthikadi- 
bhavanamayapuiinam^  vicinati. 

Tada  pana  amhakam  acariyavaram  pariyattivisaradam 
tikkhajavagambblradifianopetam  vicitradhammadesaiia- 
katham  sakaki-Marammikabhikkhimam  onamitatthanabliii- 
tam  vuddhapacayim  9  rupasobliaggapattam  ^^  yuttavadikam 
Neyyadhammabhimunivarananakitti  -  Siridbajadhainmase- 
napatimabadbammarajadbirajaguru  ti  tatiyam  laddbalan- 
cbau^^  tani  bbikkbusamgbrmam  sakalarattbavasinam  pa- 
mokkbabbave  patittbapesi  Asokamabaraja  viya  Maba- 
Moggaliputta-Tissatberam. 

Tenavocumba  Nagarajuppattikatbayam  ^^: 

Tada  ca  bbikkbiisamgbanam  tberam  pamokkbabbavake 
Neyyadiladdbalancban '3  tain  patittbripesi  sadbukan  ti. 

Tada  ca  ambakara  dbammikamabaraja  sakkaraje  ekiina- 
visatadbike  sabasse  dvisate  ca  sampatte  Mantalakbyata- 
calassa   saraipe    subbumilakkbanopetam    ekanipatatittbam 


^  S.  vaddbam.         ^  ^[[yi:  "babiiUata. 

5  A.  B.  kammattbane  manuyunjitum. 

-*  B.  amogbavasena.         5  B.  amaiigabi° 

^  B.  katisadisani.         7  A.  samlpam. 

^  B.  tbapikadibbavanamaya.         9  Min:  vuddbapacayira. 

^"  A.  Min:  riipabbagga°         ''  B.  bincam,^ 

'-  B.  Nagariq)pattikatbayain.  ^^  B.  Neyyadbi" 


-^     152     H^ 

iva  baliujananayanaviblianganam  ^  sabbanagaralamkarehi 
parikkbittam  manussanam  cakkhulolatta  janakam^  nanara- 
tanebi  sampuiinam  Banaverajjavaiiijanam  putabbedanattba- 
nabbiltam  3  Ratanapunnanrimakam  mabarajattbanikam  ^ 
mixpesi  Mandbatu  viya  Rajagabam  Sudassano  viya  ca 
Kusavatinagaran  ti. 

Tenavociimba  Nagarajuppattikatbayam: 

Tada  kottbasaggbe  sampattes  Mautalakbyacalassa  ca 
Eravati  ti  namaya  mapesi  samipe  nagaram. 

Subbumilakkbanopetam  Ratanapimnanamakam 
Rajagabam  va  Mandbatu^  atirammanlyam7  subban  ti. 

Seyyatba  pi  nama  loke  rdokattbikanam  sattanam  plti- 
somanassam  uppadento  upakaronto  Udayapabbatato  sa- 
bassaramsi  divakaro  uttbabati,  evam  evam  Marammarattbi- 
kanam  lajjipesalanam  sikkbakamanam  bbikkbimam  gibinaii 
ca  pitisomauassam  uppadento  upakaronto  ayam  dbammiko 
raja  imasmini  Maramiuarattbe  uppajjati. 

Imafi  ca  dbammikarajanam  nissaya  Marammarattbe 
sammasambuddbassa  sasanam  ativiya  joteti^  vuddbim? 
virulbim  vepuHam  apajjati. 

Sasanafi  ca  nam'  etam  rajanam  nissSya  tittbati  ti.  Ayam 
dbammikaraja  yeva  na  sasanass'  upakaro  dbammacarl 
dbammamani  api  ca  kbo  dbammikarajanam  nissita  pi 
sabbarattbavasika  sasanass'  upakara  yeva  dbammacarino 
dbammamanino  rajanugata  butva. 

Ten  ev'  rdia  Mababodbijatakadlsu: 

Gavafi  ce  taramananam  ujuni  gaccbati  pungavo 
Sabba  gavP"  njum  yanti  nette  ujum  gate  sati". 


'  S.  "vibbaganam.         ^  A.  janikarn. 
3  Jl/SS.  bbiita.         4  A.  rajattbanika. 
5  A.  kattbatajjbyo  sampatte  B.  °kocye  sampatte  S.  kat- 
tbanajjbo  Min:  °tacye. 

'^  A.  mandati.  "  Min:  "ramaniyam.  ^  A.  sobbeti. 

9  A.  B.  vuddbim.         '"  D.  B.  A.  sabba  ta. 
"  Comp.  Anguttara  lY.  70. 


-^     153     H^ 

Evam  eva  manussesu  yo  lioti  setthasammato 
So  ce  pi  dhammam  carati  pageva  itara  paja 
Sabbarattham  sukbam  seti  raja  ce  boti  dbammiko  ti. 

Visesato  pana  dutiyam  Amarapuraiu  mapentassa  maba- 
dbammaramio  aggamabesiya  ajjavamaddavasobaccadigima- 
yuttaya'^  dblta  ambrdiam  ranno  aggamabesl  sammacarini 
l^atibbata  sabbanannam  aggabbavam  patta  pi^  samana 
kamagunasankbatena  suiTimadena  appamajjitvaj  pumia- 
kammesu^  appamadavasena  niccaraddbaviriya  boti.  Niccam 
pariyattiya  uggabanam  akasi.  YedapSragu  ca  abosi. 
Sammasambuddbasasane  ativiya  pasanna  anna  pi  orodba- 
dayo  mabadbammarafino  ovade  tbatva  dbammam  carimsii 
sasanes  pasidimsu  yeva.  Uparaja  pi  mabadbammarajassa 
ekamatapitiko  mabadbammarajiccbaya  avirodbetva  yeva 
sakalarattbavasinam  giblnam  bbikkbunafi  ca  attbabitam 
avabati.  Seyyatba  pi  cakkavatti  rafino  sail  tike  jettbaputto 
tbamajavasampanno  atisuro  uttbanaviriyo.  Afiile  pi  amacca 
anekasabassapamana  mabadbammaramiiX  laddbesu  bxddbesu 
tbanantaresu  tbita  mabadbammarafino  tarn  tarn  Idccam 
avabanti  puiinakammesii  abbiramanti.  Sakabxrattbavasino 
ca  manussa  danasilabbavanasu  yeva  cittam  tbapenti. 
Bbikkbii  ca  samgharajapamukbadayo  tbera  navamajjbima 
gandbadburavipassaiia  dbiiresu  abbiyufijanti. 

Evam  ekassa  sadbujanassa  giinam  mabantena  ussabena 
katbento  pi  dukkaram  tava  nittbam  papetum  bbagavato 
pana  tilokaggassa  auekasabassaparamitanubbavena  pa- 
vattam  gunam  ko  nama  puggalo  sakkbissati^  nittbam  pa- 
petva  katbetim  ti  evam  mabadbammarajassa  ca  aggama- 
besiya c'eva  nparajadlnan  ca  gune  visattbena  vittbarato'' 
katbiyamaue  imassil  Sasauavamsapadipikaya  anekasata- 
bbanavaramattam  pi  patva  pariyanto  na  pannayeyya^  yasma 


"■  B.  °sobajjridi   A.  B.  "guna°         ^  S.  A.  patva  pi. 
3  Min:  avimajjitva.         ^  A.  °kamesu. 
5  Min:  sasanam.         ^  sakkbissasi  MSS. 
7  B.  visesattena   Min:  -sisattbanavittbarato. 
*  A.  panncyya. 


-^     154     ^<- 

atipajDafica  bhaveyya  tasma  saiikliepen'  evayam  kathita 
sadhujananam  mahapunnamayaya  pitiya  anumoclanatthaya 
idam  hi  sunantelii  sadhujjanehi  anumoditabham.  Asu- 
kasmim  kira  kale  asukasiuim  ratthe  asiiko  nama  rajiX 
sasanam  pagganhitva  vuddhim  verulhim  vepullam  apajji 
seyyatlia  pi  nama  rukkho  bliiimodakanam  nissaya  vuddhim 
veriilhim  VepuHam  apajjati. 

Imassa  rahho  kfile  I^eyyadhammabhivarahanakittisirl- 
dhajadhammasenapatimahadhammarajadhirajaguru  nama 
samgharaja  mahathero  rahha  abhiyacito  Surajamaggadi- 
panim  nama  gandham  akasi.  Majjhimanikayatthakathaya 
attham  sissanam  vacetva  yatha  vacitaniyamena  atthayoja- 
nanayam  potthake  aropapesi. 

Medhabhivamsasaddhammadhajamahadhammarajadhira- 
jaguru  nama  mahathero  Jatakapaliya  atthayojananayam 
Marammabhasaya  akasi. 

Samgharrgassa  sisso  Pahfiasamisirikavidhajamahadham- 
marajadhirajagurii  ti  rafma  hiddhanamalahcho  so  yev- 
riham  dhammarahha  aggamahesiya  ca  abhiyacito  Slhikathain 
niima   gandham  Upayakatham  nama  gandhah   ca  akasim. 

Raiiiio  acariyabhiitena  Disapamokkhena  nama  upasakena 
abhiyacito^  so  yevaham  Akkharavisodhanim  niima  gand- 
ham Apattivinicchayam  nama  gandhah  ca  tatha  samgha- 
rahha  codito  so  yevaham  KagaiTijuppattikatham  Voha- 
ratthabhedah  ca  Vivadavinicchayah  ca  akasim. 

Tatha  Pahcajambugamabhojakena  lekhakamaccena  dvihi 
ca  arocanalekliakamaccehi  abhiyacito  so  yevaham  E,aja- 
sevakadipanim  nama  gandham  akasim.  Tatha  Dlghana- 
vanagarabhojakena  maha-amaccena  abhiyacito  so  yev 
aham  l^irayakathadlpakam  nama  gandham  akasim. 

Tatha  Silaleddhukanamakena^  upasakena  abhiyacito  so 
yevaham  Uposathavinicchayam  nama  gandham  akasim. 
Tatha  bahuhi  sotujanehi  yacito  so  yevaham  Saddanltiya 
samvannanam  palibhasaya  akasin  ti. 

Ekasmih  ca  samaye  kahyuge  vlsadhike  dvisate  sahasse 
ca  sampatte  rahho  etad  ahosi:  Idani  buddhassa  bhagavato 


'  A.  atlyacito.         ^  ^i[^.  ogji^ledduka" 


-$H     155     H$- 

sasane  kesaii  ci  bhikkliiinam  samaneranan  ca  kukidusanadi- 
asaruppakammehi  uppadita  cattaro  paccaya  balm  dissanti. 
Keci  pi  alajjl  puggala  jatarupridinissaggiyavatthum  pi 
sadlyanti.  Keci  pi  vina  paccayam  vikrile  tambukim^  kbadanti 
sannidhifi  ca  katva  dhumani  ca  pivanti  agilana  hutva 
sa-upabana  gamam  pavisanti  chattam  dharenti  aiifie  pi 
avinayanulomacare  caranti.  Idani  bhikkbiinam  samaneranaii 
ca  buddbassa  sammukbe^  buddbam  sakkbim  katva  ime 
anacare  na  carissama  ti  patififiam  karapetva  bbagavato 
sikkbapadani  rakkbapetuni  vattati.  Evaii  ca  sati  bbikkbu 
samanera  ca  mayam  buddbassa  sammukbe  evam  patiniiam 
karoma3.  Patiuiiam  ca  katva  vika^am'^  apajjantanam  am- 
bakam  5  imasmim  yeva  attabbave  imasmim  yeva  paccakkbe^ 
kiiici  bbayam  uppajjeyya  ti  paccakkbabbayam  apekkbitva 
te  sikkbapadam  rakkbissanti  ti.  Evam  pana  cintetva 
bbikkbunam  samaneranaii  ca  evam  patifinam  karapetum 
yiijjati  va  ma  va  ti  mayam  na  janama  idani  samgbaraja- 
dayo  mabatbere  sannipatapetva  puccbissama  ti  puna  cintesi. 

Atba  sabbe  pi  mabatbere  samgbarajassa  vibare  sanni- 
patapetva imam  karanam  puccbatba  ti  amacce  anapesi. 
Atba  amacca  mabatbere  sannipatapetva  puccbimsu:  Idani 
bbante  sasane  bbikkbunam  samaneranan  ca  avinayanulo- 
macarani?  disva  buddbassa  sammukbe  buddbam  sakkbini 
katva  raja  yatba  ime  anacarena  carissama  ti  patifinam 
karapetva  bbagavato  sikkbapadani  rakkbapetum  iccbati 
tatba  karapetum  yujjati  va  ma  va  ti? 

Atba  samgbarajapamukbadayo  mabatberiX  evam  ahanisu: 
Yasma^  sasanassa  parisuddbabbavam  iccbanto  evam  karoti 
tasma  tatbS  karapetum  yujjati  ti. 

Panditabbidbajamunindagbosamabadbammarajaguruthe- 
radayo  pana  katipayatbera   evam  abamsu:   Idani  bbikkbu 


^  A.  B.  tandubim.        ^  S.  pamukbe. 

3  Min:  A.  karomi.         '^  A.  cikaram   D.  vibfiram. 

5  D.  B.  apajjanta  maya. 

^  S.  A.  imasmim  yeva  attabbave  pakaccakkbe. 

7  Min:  ^'anulomani  'carani   A.  "anulomanin  carani. 

*  S.  omits. 


-^     156     H$- 

iiama  saddhabaladmam  appataya'  bliagavato  anasankhatam 
sacittakacittakapattim  apajjitva  bhagavata^  yeva  anufma- 
tehi  desanaviittlianakairimelii  patikaritva  silam  parisud- 
dliam  katva  lajjipesakibhavam  karonti.  Na  kadaci  apattim 
anapajjitva,  tasma  bhagavatru  patikkliittam  kammam  san- 
cicca  na  vltikkamissama4  ti  buddliassa  sammuklie  patiniia- 
karanam  atiblifiriyam  hoti. 

Sace  pi  pubbe  patiiinam  katva  paccha  visamvadeyya 
evam  sati  patissavavisamvade  suddhacittassa  dukkatam 
patissavakkhane  eva  pacitti  itarassa  ca  ti  vacanato  tarn 
tarn  apattim  patissavavisamvadanadukkatapattiya  sah' 
eva  apajjeyya.  Atlia  patinnakaranato  yeva  apattibahulata 
bhaveyya.  Yatha  paiia  rogam  viipasamitum  asappayams 
bliesajjam  patisevati  atli'  assa  rogo  avupasamitva  ati- 
kammeyya.  Evam  evam  apattim  anapajjitukamo  buddliassa 
sammuklie  patiiiiiam  karoti  ath'assa  apattibaliula  yeva 
bhaveyya  ti  kihcabhiyyo  abliayadassavino  bhikkliu  aneka- 
satabuddhassa  sammukbe  anekasatavarani  pi  patifinam 
katva  sikkhapadam  vitikkamitum  visaliissanti^  yeva  ti. 

Atha  samgbaiTija  mahatbero  attano  sissam  Pafifiasami- 
sirlkavidliajamabadhammarajadbirajagurum  nama  mam 
uyyojesi  tassa  therassa  vacane  pativacanam  datum. 
Atbaham  evam  vadami: 

Dve  puggala  abhabba  sancicca  apattim  apajjitum  bliik- 
khu  ca  bhikkliuniyo  ca  ariya  puggala  dve  puggala  abhabba 
sancicca  apattim  apajjitum  bhikkhu  ca  bhikklmniyo  ca 
puthujjana  ti  Parivarapaliyam  vuttatta  ariyapuggalanam7 
viya  putlmjjananam  vissatthena  patihham  katum  na  vattati 
ti  manasikaritva  puthujjanabhikkhunam  patihhakaranam 
atibhariyan  ti  vadeyya  ce.  Sabbehi  pi  ariyaputhujjanehi 
lihikkhuhi  upasampadamalake  adito  va  cattari  akaranlyani 
acikkhitabbani  ti  vuttesu  catiisu  akaraniyesu  antamaso 
tinasalakani    upadaya   yo  bhikkhu    padam  va  padaraham 


^  B.  Min:  thokataya.  ^  B.  bhagavato. 
5  A.  bhagavato.  '^  A.  vitakkamissama. 
5  B.  asappayi.         ^  B.  visayyissanti.         ^  B,  puggalani. 


->i     157     Hg- 

atirekapadam  va  adinnain  tlieyyasaukhatam  adiyati^  asa- 
mano  hoti  asakyaputtiyo  ti^.  Antamaso  kuntakipillikara^ 
iipadaya  yo  bhikkhii  sancicca  manussaviggaham  jivita 
voropeti  antamaso  gabbhapatanam^  iipadaya  assamano 
hoti  asakyaputtiyo  ti.  Antamaso  sufifiagare  abhiramami 
ti  yo  bhikkhii  pfipiccho  icchapakato  asantani  abhiitam 
uttarimanussadhammam  ullapati  assamano  hoti  asakya- 
puttiyo ti  ca. 

Upajjhacariyehi  ^  ovadiyamanehi  abhinavopasampannehi 
ama  bhante  ti  patihna  kata  yeva^  samanerehi  pi  pabbajjak- 
khane  yeva  upajjhayassa  santike  panatipataveramani  sikkha- 
padain  samadiyami  ti  adina  pathamam  patihha  kata  yeva^ 
tatha  bhikkhfihi  tarn  tarn  apattim  apajjitva  desanaya 
patikaranakale  sadhu  sutthu  bhante  samvarissami  ti  al^hin- 
ham  patihna  kata  yeva  samanerehi  pi  upajjhacariyassa 
santike  sikkhagahanakrde  pi  panatipataveramanisikkhripa- 
dam  samadiyami  ti  adina  abhinham  patihna  kata  yeva 
trdii  pana  j)atihhahi  abhayitva  ito  yeva  bhayama  ti  vutta- 
vacanam  acchariyam  viya  hutva  khayati.  Imaya  hi  patih- 
haya  tasam  patiimanam  visesata  na  dissati  ti«  Ayam  pan' 
ettha  sannitthanattho^  patissavadukkatapatti  nama  Sa- 
vatthiyam  Pasenadi-Kosahxrahha^  imasmim  vihare  vassam 
upagacchrdii ''°  ti  ayacite  sadhu  ti  patijanitva  labhabahula- 
taiu  paticca  antaramagge  anhasmim  vihare  vassam  upa- 
gantva  patissavavisam  vadanapaccaya  Upanandam"  nama 
bhikkhum  arabbha  panhatta  Samantapasadikayah  ca  nama 
Vinayatthakathaya  vassupanayikakhandhakavannanayam  pa- 
tissave  ca  apatti  dukkatassa  ti  ettha  na  kevalam  imain 
temasam  idha  vassam  vasatha'^  ti  viittassa  etass'  eva 
apatti  imam  temasani  ganhatha  ubho  pi  mayam  idha 
vassam  vasissama'^  ekato  uddissapessama  ti   evam  adina 


^  Min:  adiyati.         ^  S.  hoti.  3  B.  kuntha" 

■*  A.  gabbhavatanam.         s  A.  B.  D.  acariyena. 

^  A.  katham  eva.         7  A.  katha  yeva. 

^  A.  sannitthanatto.         '^  A.  B.  "rahho. 

'°  A.  B.  "gacchami  ti.         "  A.  Upanaudham. 

'^  B.  vassatha.         '3  A.  vassim  vasissami. 


~$^     158     f-$- 

pi  tassa  tassa  j)atissave  dukkatam  tan  ca  kho  pathainam 
suddhacittassa  visamvadanapaccaya  pathamam  pi  suddha- 
cittassa  jDana  patissave  pacittiyan  ti  vuttam. 

Iccevam  bliikkhunam  anfmmannaiii  dayakehi  ca  saddhim 
patijanitva  visamvadanapaccaya  aiinesani  attahitabhede  ^ 
yeva  dukkatapatti  vutta.  Na  attano  icchavasena  sayam 
eva  aliam  bhunjissami  sayissami  ti  evam  adina  vatva- 
yatha  viittanurupam  akatva,  visamvadenti.  Sace  pana 
bliikkhu  samaneranani  pathamam  eva  ama  bhante  ti  adina 
patinfiam  katva  paccha  kenacid  eva  karaniyena  tain  tarn 
apattim  apajjanto  saliapatissavavisamvadena  3  dukkat- 
apattiya  apajjeyya  evam  sati  tattha  tattha  sikkhapadesu 
dve  dve  apattiyo  paiinapeyya  na  ca  evam  pi  paimatta 
ten'  eva  patissavadukkatapatti  nama  paresam  santike  pa- 
sam  matim  gabetva  patijanitva  visamvadanatthane  yeva 
pannatta  ti  datthabba. 

Idani  raja  sasanassa  suddbim  iccbanto  imina  upayena 
bbikkbusamaneranam  silam  sainvarapento  paccakkbasam- 
parayikabbayam  anupekkbitva  samvaram  apajjeyyun*  ti 
cintetva  buddbassa  sammukbe  patinfiam  krirapitatta  na 
koci  doso  dissati.  Bbikkbusamaneranam  pi  bbiyyosomattaya 
silam  samvasitva  silaparisuddbi  bbaveyya  ti. 

Atba  raja  sabbesam  bbikldiusamaneranams  buddbassa 
sammukbe  patiiinam  karapetvii  silam  rakkbapesi  ti. 

Iccevarn  imassa  raiiiio  krde  pubbe  alajjino  pi  samilna 
l)bayam  anupekkbitva  yebbuyyena  lajjino  va  bbavanti  ti. 

Buddbassa  bbagavato  parinibbanato  tisatadbikanam 
vassasabassanam  upari  navutime  samvaccbare  babi  nadi- 
tire  gamasimato  pattbaya  yava  anto^  udakukkbepa  tava 
kammam  karontanam  bbikkbiinam  sukbena  gamanattbaya 
Gabattbagamasimaya  udakukkbeiiasimam  sambandbitvfi 
setum  akamsu. 

Atba  tattba  Nanalamkarasumanamabadbammarajaguru- 
ganacariyanamako  tbero  upasampadadivinayakammani 
katipayavassesu  akasi. 

'  A.  B.  D.  attbabita°     -  A.  vutta.     ^  S.  B.  A.  vadana. 
4  A.  apajjeyyan.         ^  ^n  MSS.  samanere.        "^  A.  ante. 


-^-        159        r^ 

Dliirananclatliero  pana  tattha  samkaracloso  lioti  ti  kam- 
mam  katum  na  icchati.  Tato  patthaya  ye  ye  Nanrdamkara- 
sumanamahadhammarajaguruganacariyassa  matim  ruccanti 
te  te  tassa  pakkhika  bhavanti.  Ye  ye  pana  Dhlrananda- 
therassa  matim  ruccanti  te  te  tassa  pakkhika  bhavanti. 
Evam  Lankadipe  Amarapuranikayika  bhikkhu  dvedha 
bhinditva  titthanti. 

Atha  Dhiranandapakkhe  bhikkhu  tappakkhikassa^  Sl- 
lakkhandhatherassa  sisse  Dhammakkhandha-Vanaratana- 
bhikkhu  amhakam  Jambudipe  Ratanapunnanagaram  pese- 
sum  samgharajamahatherassa  santike  ovadassa  patigga- 
hanatthaya.  Te  ca  kaliyuge  attharasadhike  dvivassasate 
sahasse  ca  sampatte  kattikamasassa  junhapakkha-attha- 
miyam  Sihaladipato  nikkhamitva  agacchanta  ekunavisadhike 
dvivassasate  sahasse  ca  sampatte  Phaggunamasassa  junha- 
pakkhasattamiyam  Ratanapunnanagaram  sampatta. 

Atha  dhammaraja^  samgharajassa  arame  catubhumikam 
viharam  karapetva  tattha  3  te  vasapesi  catCdii  paccayehi 
ca  saiigaham  akasi.  Saingharaja  ca  tesam  dvinnam 
pakkhikanam  vacanarp.  sutva  bahiihi  gandhehi  samsanditva 
vivadam  vinicchiudi.  Idise*  thane  samkaradosassa  atthi- 
bhavam  pakasetva  sandesapannam  pi  tesam  adasi. 

Mahadhammaraja  ca  tesam  puna  sikkhain  samgharajassa 
santike  ganhapetva  pitakattayapotthakadlni  anekani  da- 
tabbavatthiini  datva  tasmim  yeva  samvacchare  pathamam 
asalhimasassa  kalapakkhadasamiyam  navaya  te  pesesi. 

Tato  paccha  ca  Nanrdanikarasumanamahadhammaraja- 
guruganacariyapakkhe  bhikkhu  pi  tappakkhikassa^  Paiiha- 
molitherassa  sisse  Vimalajoti-Dhammanandabhikkhii  pese- 
suna  saddhim  Ariyalamkarena  nama  samanerena  catHhi 
ca  upasakehi.  Te  ca  kaliyuge  visadhike  dvisate  sahasse 
ca  sampatte  kattikamasassa  junhapakkhapahcamiyam  sam- 
patta 6. 


'  A.  B.  tampakkhikassa.         ^  B.  raja.        ^  A.  B.  omit 

4  B.  D.  Tadise. 

5  B.  tampakkhikassa. 

"  A.  kattikamase  anaySsena  sampatta. 


-^-     160     f<^ 

Tada  pi  samgliarajassa  arame  yeva  ekaviharam  kara- 
petva  te  vasapesi.  Catuhi  paccayehi  ca  saiigaham  akasi. 
Samgliaraja  pi  puna  vinicchayam  aclasi  yatluiviittanayena. 
Diiammaraja  tesam  pi  bliikkliunam  samgliarajassa  santike 
puna  siklvhani  ganliapetva  srimaneram  ca  iipasampadetva 
catuhi  imccayelii  saiigaham  katva  pahini. 

Tato  pacclia  ca  kaliyuge  dvavlsadhike  ^  dvivassasate 
sahasse  ca  sampatte  maghamasassa  kalapakkha-ekadasa- 
miyam  Sihaladipato  yeva  dve  bhikkhu  tayo  samanera 
cattaro  upasaka  sarajatasuvannakarandakam  ^  sarajatasu- 
vannacetiyadhatum3  hatthidantamayam  buddharupam  ma- 
habodhipattani  mahabodhitacam  mahabodhipatitthanabhii- 
mim  Sihaladakkhinasakhabodhipattani  dutiyasattabhaya  ^ 
animisatthanabhiimim  ca  dhammapannakaratthaya  gahetva 
Ratanapunnam  nama  mahaiTijatthaninagaram  sampatta 
tesam  pi  dhammaraja  catuhi  paccayehi  saiigaham  katva 
samgharahno  Tirame  vasapesi  bhikkhiinam  ca  puna  sikkham 
ganhapesi  sama^ieranam  upasamiiadakammam  gahatthanah 
ca  pabbajjakammam  ganhapesi. 

Iccevam  Marammaratthe  bhagavato  parinibbanato  pat- 
thaya  yavajjatanas  sasanassa  theraparamparavasena  pa- 
titthanata  veditabba,  Iccevam  Marammamandale  Ari- 
maddanapure  Arahantattheragano  Uttarajivathera-  Chapa- 
datheragano  Sivalitheragano  Anandatheragano  Tamalin- 
datheragano  ti  pahca  gana  ahesum. 

Idani  Arimaddananagare  pahcaganato  patthaya  Vijaya- 
pura-Jeyyapura-E,atanapuresu  theraparamparavasena  sasa- 
nassa anukkamena  agatalihavam  dassayissami.  Sirikhetta- 
nagare  hi  Co-ra-na-no-ha^  nama  raja  Parakkamavamsikassa^ 
Saradassitherassa  antevasikara  Saddhammatthititheram 
attano  acariyam  katva  pujesi. 

Kaliyugassa  ca  catuvassadhika-atthasatakale  Sirikhetta- 
nagarato    agantva    so    Eatanapure    rajjani    karesi.     Atha 

'  B.  bavlsadhike.         ^  A.  B.  °kandakam. 

3  A.  surajata"   A.  "cetiyam  datum. 

4  A.  "sattabhaya   Min:  sattrdia"  s  A.  yavajjatanaya. 
^  A.  Co  ya-na-non-garama  raja   S.  °nom-ga. 

7  B.  visikassa.  ,.      • 


-^         161         H^ 

attano  puttam  Anekibham^  nama  iTijakumaram  maliaraja- 
namena  Sirikhettanagaram  blmnjapesi. 

Dakkliinadisabhage  Ivii-tva-uka-ta-ru-pa-mo-nagaram  ^ 
pacchimadisabhage  Phih-kho-iia-uamattbrinani  ^  uttaradisa- 
bhage  Malvananagaram  puratthimadisabbage  Kub-kho-na'i 
namatthanam  ettbantare  uisinnanam  gibinam  mama  put- 
tassa  ilna  pavattatu  bbikkbunam  mam'acariya-Saddbamma- 
ttbititberassa  ana  pavattatu  ti  niyyadesi. 

Tassa  ca  Saddbammattbititberassa  Ariyavamsatbero 
Mabasamitbero  ti  dve  sissa  abesum,  Tesu  Mabasamitbero 
pubbe  viittauayena  sasanavamsam  anessami  ti  Sibaladipam 
gantva  Sibaladipato  saddbim  pafica  bbikkbubi  Saddbamma- 
carim  nama  tberam  anetva  abbinavasikkbam  ganbitva 
Sirikbettanagare  Sibaladipavamsikam  sasanam  vaddbapetva 
nisidi.  Tassa  Mabasamitberassa  sisso  Atukivamso  nama 
tbero  catusii  disasu  abinditva  pariyattim  ugganbitva  Siri- 
Idiettanagare  yeva  Tambiilabbunjamatikasamipes  sasanani 
pagganbitva  nisidi.  Tassa  Atukivamsatberassa  sisso  Ra- 
tanaramsi  nama  tbero  pariyattivesarajjam  patviX  Sirikbetta- 
nagare yeva  sasanam  pagganbitva  nisidi. 

Tassa  ca  E-atanavamsitberassa  sisso  Sativadbammarajassa 
acariyo  Abbisanketo^  nama  tbero  pariyattivesarajjam  patva 
Sirikbettanagare  yeva  sasanam  pagganbitva  nisidi. 

Tassa?  pana  sisso  Munindagboso  nama  tbero  attbi. 
Kaliyuge  sattatadbike  navasate  sampatte  Paccbimapakkba- 
dbikaraja^  Sirikbettanagaram  abbibbavitva  Nandayodbena^ 
nama  amaccena  saddbim  tarn  Munindagbosatberain  anetva 
Ratanapure  patittbapesi. 

So  kira  Paccbimapakkbadbikaraja  evam  katbesi:  Abam 
Sirikbettanagarani  labliitva  ekam  yeva  bbikkbum  ekani 
yeva  gibim  labbami  ti. 


'  A.  Anebaiii   S.  Aiiobbam. 

^  S.  Ku-tvam-ka-ta-ru-pa-mbbe°    B.   Ku-tvak-ta-ru-pani- 
moni.         3  A.  S.  Bbib-kbo-nama° 

4  A.  B.  Kum-kbom-°  S.  Kuiii-kbo-na. 

5  A.  Tandulabbunjamatika.         ^  S.  B.  A.  °kbeto. 

'  B.  atb'  assa.  ^  A.  pakkbadika.  9  A.  Nandba" 

Sasana-Vamsa.  H 


-^      162      ne- 

So  pana  thero  samaneranamena  Munindaglioso  nama;iipa- 
sampannakale  pana  matulabhutassa  tlierassa  namena 
Upali  iiama;  rafifia  dinnanamena  pana  Tipitakalarakaro 
nama;  Tiriyapabbatavihare  pana  vasatthananamena '  Tiri- 
yapabbatathero  nama. 

So  kira  Eravati-nadl-tire  catubbiimikavihrire  patbamam 
nisiditvS,  paccba  kaliyugassa  vassasabasse  kale  sattbi- 
vassayuko  butva  Tiriyapabbatavibare  nisidi.  Samanerakale 
so  Jaluma-siyaraabbayena^  E.atanpurato  nikkbamitva 
Ivetumatinagaram  patva  tattba  Tisasanadbajatberassa 
sissabbiitassa  Dbammarajagurutberassa  santike  gandbam 
ugganbi. 

Pali-attbakatba-tikasu  aticbekataya  dabarakale  yeva  ca 
Vessantarajatakam  kabyrilamkarena  bandbitviX  katbanato 
ativiya  pakato  abosi.  Tassa  pana  tberassa  sisso  Uccana- 
garavasl  Maba-Tissatbero  ti  Bbani-giri-janai5ade3  araniia- 
vasani  vasitva  pariyattim  vacetva  sasanam  pagganbi.  Tassa 
pana  sisso  Repinagame^  gamavasi  Candatberos  nama. 
Tassa  sisso  tamgamavasl  Gunasiritbero  nama.  Tassa  sisso 
tarn  gamavasi  Kalyanadbajatbero  nilma.  So  pana  tbero 
Padumanagare^  Sabassorodba -Bodbodadbi-gamesu  pari- 
yattim vacetva  nisidi.  Tassa  sisso  Bodbodadbigamavasino 
Indobbasa-Kalyanacakka-Vimalacaratbera  Sabassorodba- 
gamavasino  Gunasara-Candasaratbera  Vantumagamavasi 
Varapbasitbero  7  Kantinagare^  Jaradbagamavasis  Guna- 
siritbero ca  ti  ime  tbera  Kalyanadbajatberassa  santike 
puna  sikkbam  galietva  pariyattim  ngganbitva  kovida 
abesum. 

Tass'  eva  Kalyanadbajatberassa  sisso  Bbam-giri-jana- 
pade '°  Samivanagaine  nisinno  Dbammadbaro  nama  maba- 


'  A.  S.  casattattbana"  B.  vasattbana*^ 
^  B.  Calumasiyrimabbaycna.     3  S.  Jamkira  A.  Bbam-kira. 
■I  S.  B.  A.  Reniina"         5  A.  S.  Cbandnttbero. 
^  A.  Min:  Badiima°         ^  B.  Jarapbasi. 
**  A.  D.  Kanninagare   B.  Kinni° 
9  S.  B.  A.  Jararaja° 
^°  A.  Bbam-kira° 


-^     163     H^ 

tliero  '^    maliallakakale    Paclumanagare    Kusumamulagame 
nisiclitva  gandham  vficetva  sasanam  pagganhi. 

Tesii^   Gunasirltliero  Amarapuramapakassa    ranno  kale 
Gunabbilamkarasaddliammamahadhammarajadliirajaguru 
ti  namalaficliam   gaiihitva  Jeyyablmmivasakittivihare  pati- 
vasi. 

Tassa  pana  therassa  sisso  Nanabhivamsadhammasena- 
pati  mahadbammaiTijadhirajagiiru  nilma  mabathero  tass' 
eva  raiino  kale  samgbaraja  abosi.  So  pana  tbero  Slbala- 
dipe  Amarapuranikayikanam  pabbavo.  Gunabbilamkara- 
saddbammamabadbammaraj adbirajagurutberass'  eva  sisso 
Tipitakalamkaramabadbammarajagiiru  nama  tbero,  tassa 
sisso  Suriyavamsabbisiiipavaralamkaradbammasenapatima- 
badbammarajadbirajaguni  nama  tbero  Aniarapuradutiya- 
mapakassa  raiino  kale  samgbaraja  abosi.  Tassa  pana 
sisso  isTeyyadbammabbivamsamunivaraiianakittisiripavara- 
lauikaradbammasenapatimabadbammarajadbirajagurumaba- 
tbero  dutiyam  Amarapuramapakassa  E,atanapunnamapa- 
kassa  ca  ranno  kalesu  samgbaraja  abosi.  So  pana  Nana- 
bhivamsadbammasenapatimabadbammarajadbirajagurutber- 
assa  samgbaranno  sisso  Saravamsitberassa3  sisso  pi  abosi. 

Ayarti  Sibaladipato  sabbapaccbimagatebi '^  Saddbamma- 
cari-Mabasamitberebi  yava  ambakam  acariyatberaparam- 
para  dassanakatba. 

Ayam  pi  apara  tberaparampara  veditabba.  Cbapada- 
tberavamsiko  Saddbammakitti  nama  tbero  Jeyyapuram 
agantva  Catudipabbumittbane  nisiditva  Maba-Ariyavarasa- 
tberassa  santike  pariyattim  ngganbitva  tato  paccba  Jeta- 
vanavibaram  samkamitva  tattba  nisiditva  pariyattim  vacetva 
sasanarn  pagganbi. 

Tassa  Saddbammakittitberassa  sisso  Tisasanadbajo  nama, 
tassa  sisso  Dhammarajagurii  nama,  tassa  sisso  Munindagboso 
nama,  tassa  sisso  Maba-Tisso  nama,  tassa  sisso  Candapanuo 
nama,   tassa  sisso  Gunasirl  nama,   tassa  sisso  Nanadbajo 

^  Min:  Dbamniadbaro  nfima  tliero  A.  B.  dbammadbaro 
Mabanama  mabatbero. 

^  A.  Gatasu.         3  B.  D.  sarapbasi.         4  A.  iigate  ti. 


/ 


-^         1G4:         H$- 

nama  tassa  sisso  Dliammadliajo '  iiama  tassa  sisso  Indo- 
bluiso  nama;  tato  pattbaya  Kalyanacakka-Vimalacara- 
Gunasara  -  Canclasara  -  Varaphasi  -  Gunasiri  -  Nanabbivamsa- 
Neyyadbammabbivamsatberanam  vaseiia  sasanavamso  vedi- 
tabbo  ti. 

Ayam  patta-Lankassa  Cbapadatberassa  sissabbiita 
Saddbammakittittberato  pattbaya  tberaparamparadassana- 
katba '. 

Idam  Ratanapunnanagave  sasanassa  patittbrinams. 

Evam  Aparantasaukbatena '^  ekadesena  sakalam  pi  Ma- 
rammarattbam  gabetva  Sasanavamso  dassetabbo.  Bbagava 
2)i  bi  Aparantarattbe  Candanavibare  vasitva  Tambadipa- 
rattbe  tarn  tarn  desams  pi  iddbiya  caritva  sattanam 
dbammam  desesi  yeva  ti, 

Iti  Sasanavamse  Aparaiitarattbasasanavainsakatbrimaggo 
nama  cbattbo  pariccbedo. 

Idani  yatbavuttamatikavasena  Kasmira  -  Gandbara- 
rattbasasanavamsakatbamaggam  vattum  okaso  anuppatto; 
tasma  tarn  vakkbami. 

Tatiyasamgitavasane  bi  Maba-Moggaliputta-Tissatbero 
Majjbantikatberam  Kasmlra-Gandbararattbani  pesesi:  Tvain 
etam  rattbam  gantva  ettba  sasanam  patittbapelii  ti.  Ettba 
ca  Kasmira-Gandbararattbaiii  nama  Cinaratthe  samipe 
tittbati;  ten'  eva  bi  adbuna  Kasmira-Gandbararattbavasino 
Cinarattbavasino  ca  manussa.  Aravalassa  nama  nagara- 
jassa  uppajjanakfilato  pattbaya  yavajjatana  nagarupam 
katva  manenti,  piijenti,  sakkaronti,  vattbabbiljanadisu^  pi 
nagarupam  eva  te  yebbuyyena  karonti  ti. 

So  ca  Majjbaiitikathero  pi  catubi  Ijbikkbubi  saddbim 
attapancamo  butva  Patabputtato  vebasain  abbbuggantva 
Himavati  Aravabidabassa  upari  otari.  Tena  kbo  pana 
samayena  Kasmlra-Gandbararattbe  sassapakasamaye  Ara- 
valo  nama  nagaraja  Aravrdadabe  nislditva  karakavassam 


"  S.  D.  Dbammadbaro   A.  S.  "varo. 
^  B.  "paramparadassanekatba   S.  A.  °paramparanam. 
•3  Mm:  omits.         4  Min:  Aparantarattbasaiikbatena. 
5  D.  disam.         ^  S.  A.  vata°  B.  vatta° 


~^.     1G5     H$-^ 

nama  vassapetva  sassam  harapetviX  maliasamudclam  papesi. 
Thero  ca  Aravaladahassa  upari  otaritva  Aravalaclalia- 
pitthiyam  caukamati  pi  tittliciti  pi  nisidati  pi  seyyam  pi 
kappeti.  Nagamanavaka  tarn  disva  Aravalassa  nagarajassa 
arocesum:  Maharaja  eko  chinnabhinnapatadharo  bliandu- 
kasixvavasano  amliakam  iidakam  dtiseti  ti.  Tada  pana 
thero  attanam  yeva'  naganam  dassesi.  Nagaraja  tavad  eva 
kodhribhibhi'ito  iiikkhamitva  theram  disva  pakkham  asaha- 
mano-  antalikkhe  anekani  bhimsanakani  niminini.  Tato 
tato  bhusa  vata.  vayauti,  rukkha  bhijjanti,  pabbatakiita 
patanti,  megha  gajjanti^,  vijjullata't  niccharanti,  asaniyo 
phalanti,  bhinnam  viya  gaganam  udakam  paggharati,  ])ha- 
yanakariipa  nagakumara  sannipatanti,  sayam  pi  dhiimayati, 
pajjalati,  paharanavutthiyo  vissajjeti.  Ko  ayam  luimdako 
chinnabhinnapatadharo  ti  adi  pharusavacanehi  theram 
santajjeti.  Etha,  ganhatha,  hanathas;  niddhamatha  imam 
samanam  ti  nagabalam  anapesi. 

Thero  sabbani  tani  bhimsanakam  attano  iddhibaleua 
patibahitva  nagarajanam  aha: 

Sadevako  pi  ca  loko  agantva  tasayeyya^  mam 
Na  me  patilmhi  assa  janetum  bhayabheravam. 

Sace  pi  tvam  mahim  sabbam  sasamuddam   sapabbatam 
Ukkhipitva  mahanaga  khippeyyasi^  mam  upari. 

JSTeva  me  sakkuneyyasi  janetnm  bhayabheravani 
Ahhadatthu  tav'ev'assa  vighato  uragadliipa^  ti. 

Evam  vutte  nagaraja  vihatanubhavo  nipphalavriyamo9 
dukkhl  dummano  ahosi. 

Tarn  thero  tarn  khananurupaya  dhammiya  kathaya  san- 
dassetva    samada})etva    samuttejetva    sampahamsetva    tisu 


^  A.  h'eva.         ^  A.  asmamano    S.  asamamano. 
3  S.  D.  gacclianti.         '^  A.  B.  vijjutrda. 
5  A.  manasa.  ^  A.  B.  naseyya.  7  A.  kippeyyasi. 

^  A.    B.    uragadhija    cf.    Hist.    Int.    Samantapas.    (Ed. 
Oldenburg)  Vinaya  P.  vol  III.  p.  315. 
9  D.  B.  nibbala" 


-^     166     H^ 

saranesu  paiicasu  silesu  patitthapesi.  Sacldliim  catiirasltiya 
nagasahassehi  aiiiiehi  baliil  Himavantavasino  yakkha  ca 
gandliabba  ca  kumbhanda  ca  therassa  dhammakatham 
sutva  saranesu  ca  silesu  ca  patitthabimsu.  Pancako  pi  yakkbo 
saddhim  bbariyaya  yakkbiniya  paficabi  ca  puttasatebi 
patbame  pbale  patittbito.  Atb'  ayasma  Majjbantikatbero 
sabbe  iiagayakkharakkbase  amantetva  evam  aba: 

Ma  'dani  kodbam  jaiiayittba  ito  uddbam  taya  pure 
Sassagbataii  ca  ma  kattba,  sukbakama^  bi  prinino 
Karotba  mettam  sattesu  vasantu  manuja  sukban  ti. 

Te  sabbe  pi  sadbu  bbaiite  ti  tberassa  vacanam  pati- 
sunitva  yatbanusittbam  patipajjinisu.  Tarn  divasam  eva 
nagarajassa  pujasamayo  abosi^.  Atba  nagaiTija  attano 
ratanamayam  paUankam  abaiTipetva  tberassa  pannapesi. 
Nisidi  tbero  paHauke  nagaraja  pi  tberam  vijayamano3 
samipe  attbasi.  Tasmim  kbane  Kasmira-Gandbararattba- 
vasino  agantva  tberam  disva:  Ambrikam  nagarajato  pi  tbero 
mabiddbikataro  ti  tberam  eva  vanditva  nisinna,  tbero 
tesam  Asivisopamasuttam  katbesi.  Suttapariyosane  aslti- 
ya  panasabassanam  dbammabbisamayo  abosi  kulasatasa- 
bassan  ca  pabbajitato  pabbuti  ca  Kasmira  -  Gandbara 
yavajjatanil  kasavapajjota  isivataparivata*  eva. 

Gantva  Kasmlra-Gandbarani  isi  Majjbantiko  tada 
Duttbams  nagani  pasadetva  mocesi  bandbaua  babii  ti. 

Adbuna  pana  Kasmira-Gandbarasasanassa  attbam  ga- 
tassa  viya  suriyassa  obbaso  na  pafifiayati.  Tasma  tattba 
sasanassa  patittbane  vittbarena  vattabbakiccam  nattbi  ti. 

Iti  Sasanavamse  Kasmira-Gandbarasasauavamsakatba- 
maggo  nama  sattamo  pariccbedo. 

Idani  yatbavuttamatikavasena  Mabimsakarattliasasana- 
vamsakatbamaggam  vattum^  okaso  anuppatto.  Tasma 
tarn  vakkbami. 

^  A.  sasagbatafi  ca  makattam°         ^  B.  D.  boti. 

3  A.  bijayamane.         t  A.  B.  pati"         s  B.  Rattbam. 

^  A.  vattlium. 


-^^     1G7     H$- 

Tatiyasamgitavasane  hi  Malia  -Moggaliputta  -  Tissathero 
Malia-Revatatheram  Mahimsakamandalam  pesesi:  Tvam 
etam  rattham  gantva  ettha  sasanam  patittliapehi  ti. 

So  ca  attapancamo  hutva  Mahimsakamandalam  agamtisi. 
Paccantimesii  janapadesu  paiicavaggo  gano  alam  upasam- 
padakammaya  ti  malifiamauo  thero  Mahiinsakamandahim 
gantva  Devadutasuttam  kathesi. 

Suttapariyosane  cattalisapanasahassani  dhammacakkhum 
patihibhimsu.    Cattallsam  yeva  panasahassani  pabbajjimsn. 

Gantvana  rattham  Mahimsam  mahathero^  mahiddhiko 
Codetva  devadute  hi  mocesi  bandhana  bahil  ti. 

Adhima  pana  tattha  sasanassa  abbhehi  viya  paticchan- 
nassa  suriyassa  obhaso  dnbbalo  hntva  pahhayati-. 

ItiSasanavamseMahimsakaratthasasanavamsakathrimaggo 
nama  atthamo  paricchedo. 

Ito  parain  Maharatthasasanavamsakathamaggam  katha- 
yissami  yathavuttamatikavasena. 

Tatiyasamgitavasane  hi  Maha-Moggaliputto -Tissathero 
Maha-Dhammarakkhitatheram  Maharattham  pesesi:  Tvam 
etam  rattham  gantva  ettha  sasanam  patitthapehi  ti, 

Maha-Dliammarakkhitathero  ca  attapancamo  3  hiitvil 
Maharattham  gantva  Maha-Narada-Kassapaj atakakathily a 
Mahriratthake  pasadetva  caturasitipanasahassani  magga- 
phalesu  patitthapesi.  Terasasahassani  pabbajjimsn.  Evam 
so  tattha  sasanam  patitthapesi. 

Maharattham  isi  gantva  so  Mahadliammarakkhito 
Jatakam  kathayitvana  pasadesi  mahajanan  ti. 

Tattha  kira  manussrt  pubbe  aggihutridimicchilkanunam 
yebhuyyena  akamsu.  Ten'  eva  thero  Maha-Narada-Kassa- 
pajatakakatham  desesi.  Tato  patthaya  tattlia  nianussa 
jatakakathain  yebhuyyena  sotum  ativiya  icchanti.  Bhikkhu 
ca   yebhuyyena   gahatthanam  jatakakathain   yeva   desenti. 

^  A.  Maha-Revo.  -  A.  panfiapeti.  3  A.  adds  va. 


-^     168     f<^ 

Visesato  pana  Vessantarajatalcakatham  te  manussa  bahulii 
(latabbavatthuhi  pujetva  sunanti. 

Tafi  ca  Maharattham  naiiia  Siyrimaratthasamipe  thitam 
ten'  eva  Siyamarattliavasino  bliikkliu  ca  galiattlia  ca 
yebhuyyena  sotum  iccbanti  ti.  Maha-Dbammarakkbitatbero 
pi  Mahfirattbavasibi  saddbim  sakala-SiyamarattbavasInam 
dbammam  desesi,  amatarasam  payesi,  yatba  Yonaka-Dbam- 
marakkbitatbero  Aparantarattbam  gantva  sakabi-Maram- 
marattbavasinan  ti. 

Yam  pana  Youakaratthasasanavamsakatbayam  vuttam 
tarn  pi  sabbam  ettba  pi  dattbabbam  yeva  tebi  tassa  eka- 
sadisattena  tbitatta  ti.  Tatba  bi  Nagasenatbero  pi  Yo- 
nakarattbe  vasitvaSiyamarattbadisu  pi  sasanam  patittbapesi. 
Yonakarattbavasino  Maba-Dbammagambbiratbera-Maba- 
Medbamkaratbera  ca  saddbim  babiibi  bbikkbilbi  Sibala- 
dipam  gantva  tato  puna  gantva  Siyamarattbe  Sokkatayam 
nagaram  patva  tattha  nislditva  sasanam  pagganbitva  paccba 
Lakimnanagare  nislditva  sasanam  pagganbi.  Evam  Yona- 
karattbe  sasanam  tbitani  Siyamadisii  in  tbitam  yeva  ti 
dattbabbam. 

Buddbassa  bbagavato  parinibbanato  dvisatadbikanam 
dvinnam  vassasabassanam  upari  naviitime  vasse  Sibaladlpe 
vajjain  pattassa  Kittisirirajasibamabarajassa  abbisekato 
tatiye  vasse  ten'  eva  Kittisirirajaslbamabaranna  pabita- 
pannrdvrirasasanam ^  agamma  Saramadbipatidbammikama- 
baiTijadbirajen'  anattebi^  Lankadipam  agatebi  Upalittber- 
adibi  patittbapito  vamso  Ujirdivamso  ti  pakato. 

So  ca  duvidbo  Pubbaramavibaravasi-Abbayagirivibara- 
vasivasena  ti.  Evani  Mabanagara-Yonaka-Siyamarattbesu 
sasanam  tbiram3  butva  tittbati  ti  veditabban  ti. 

Iti  Sasanavamse  Mabarattbasasanavamsakatbamaggo 
nama  navamo  pariccbedo. 

Tato  param  pavakkbami  Clnarattbasasanavamsakatba- 
maggam  yatbatbapitamatikavasena. 


'  A.  patita"         ^  Saramamiyati" 
•3  S.  A.  timu   B.  titbim   D.  tiyam. 


-^     169     H$- 

Tatiyasaingitavasane  hi  Malia-Moggaliputta-Tissattliero 
Majjhimatheram  Cinaratthara  pesesi:  Tvam  etam  rattliam 
gaiitva  ettha  sasanam  patitthapeln  ti. 

Majjliimathero  ca  Kassapagottatherena  Alakadevathe- 
rena  ^  Diiddabliiyatherena^  Maha-Revatatherena  ca  saddliim 
Himavantapadese  paiica  Clnarattham  gantva  Dliamma- 
cakkapavattanasuttantakathaya  tarn  desam  3  pasadetvS, 
asitipanakotiyo  maggaphalaratanani  patilabliesi.  Pafica 
pi  ca  te  thera  panca  ratthani  pasadesum.  Ekam  ekassa 
santike  saliassamatta  pabbajjimsu.  Evam  te  tattba  sasa- 
nam patittbapesum. 

Gantvana  Majjbimatbero  Himavantam  pasadayi 
Yakkbasenara  pasasento  Dbammacakkapavattanan  ti. 

Tattba  kira  manussa  yebbuyyena  Candiparamissaranam'^ 
yakkbanaiu  piijam  karonti.  Ten'  eva  te  panca  tbera  tesam 
yakkbasenam  pakasayitva  dbammam  desesum.  Kasmlra- 
Gandhararattbam  pana  kadaci  kadaci  Cinarattbindassa 
vijitam  boti,  kadaci  kadaci  pana  visum  boti;  tada  pana 
visum  yeva  abosi  ti  dattbabbam. 

Clnarattbe  pana  bbagavato  sasanam  dubbakim  yeva 
butva  attbasi,  na  tbirams  butva.  Ten'  eva  idani  tattba 
kattbaci  yeva  sasanam  cbayapattam°  va  pannilyati  vatu- 
vegena  vikinna-abbbam  viya  tittbati  ti. 

Iti  Sasanavamse  Cmarattbasasanavainsakatbamaggo  na- 
ma  dasamo  pariccbedo. 

Evam  sabbena  sabbam  Sasanavamsakatbamaggo  nittbito. 

Ettavata  ca: 

Lankagatena  santena  Citrananena7  bbikkbuna 
Saranamkaranrimena  Saddbammattbitikamina 

Durato  yeva  dipamba  Sumangalena  jotinil 
Visuddbasibna  c'eva  dlpantarattbabliikkbuna 


^  B.  Alaka"   S.  ALamka° 

^  B,  Kbudda°  D.  Duddasiya.         ^  B.  desesi. 

4  B.  S.  D.  Canda°         s  A.  tiram.         ^  B.  D.  "mattam. 

7  A.  Mitra" 


-^     170     f<- 

Annehi  cabliivacito  Paiinasami  ti  namako 

Akasim  ^  suttlmkam  gandham  Sasanavamsapadipikam 

Dvisate  ca  saliasse  ca  tevisiidliike  gate 
Piinnayam  migasirassa  nittham  gata  va  sabbaso^ 

Koci  ettli'  eva  doso  ca  paiinayati^  sucittaka 

Tarn  khamantu  ca  sudliira  ganliautu   yuttikam  have  ti'*. 


D.  adds  Sasanavamsappadipikam  iiittliitara. 
Akkliara  ekara  ekafi  ca  buddharupam  saiuam  siya. 

Tasma  hi  j^andito  poso  likheyya  pitakattayam. 
Sasanavamsappadipika. 


^  B.  S.  akasi.         ^  A.  Nittham  gaya  va  sabbato. 
3  A.  ca  mamiayati    B.  ce.         *  JB.  A.  bhave  ti. 


IliDEX  1. 


Akkliaravisodhani  154 

Aggadliaramalamkara(tliera) 
111,  112 

Aggapandita(thera)  74 
Aggavamsa(t]iera)  74 

Aggikkhandliopamasutta   54, 
55 

Aggijhapanatala  59 
Anguttaranikaya  11,  73,  148 
Anguttara(tika)  33 
Ajatasattii(raja)  4,  5,  6 
Atthasrilini  31,  106,  IIG,  121 
Atuk(tliera)    124,    125,    128, 

135,  136,  138,  140,  142 
Atiila(vihara)  111 
Atiilabhumivasa(vihara)  133 
Atiilavamsa(tliera)  106,  161 
Atthavyakhyana  34 
Atbabbana-veda  63 
Adhikaraja  94,  97,  98 
(Dutiya)  „    98 
Adhisila(tliera)  60 
Anagatavamsa  64 
Anuradliapura(nagara)  17,31, ' 

136  I 

Anuruddha(thera)  4,  34  ! 

Aiuimddlia(rrija)    25,  39,  47, ' 


52,  56,   59,   61,   62,   64,  65, 

68,  76,  82,  83 
Auuriiddha(kumrira)  51 
Anula(devi)  55 

Anekasetibhinda(raj  a)51 , 1 01 , 

102 
Anekibba(  kiimara)  1 6 1 
Anekibhiiida(cetiya)  9 1 
Anotatta(daba)  24,  123 
Anomadassl(tbera)  60 
Anomaya(nadl)  2 
Anto-amacca  133 
Antoyudba(vibrira)  131 
i  Andbaka(rattba)  12 
I  Aparanta(i'attlia)    2,    10,    11. 

35,  53,  54,  55,  56,  129,  164, 

168 
Apbeggusarafgandha )  48 
Abbaya(tbera)  20 
Abbayagiri(pabbata)  90 
Abbayagiri(vibara)     24,     25, 

44,  168 
Abhidbaimna(pitaka)  27, 118, 

150     (tika)  33,  48 

Abbidbainmattbavibbavini 
96,  97,  116 

Abhidbammattbasamgaba34, 
77,  111,  121,  126 


^.     172     -^ 


Abliiclliiimmavatara  34 
Abliiclbanappadi2)ika  34,  121, 

148 
Abhiclhanappadipika  samvan- 

nana  88 
Abbisaraketa(thera)  161 
Amarapura(nagai-a)  132, 135, 

137,  143,  146,  147,  153 
Amarapuranikaya    142,    159, 

163 
Amarapuramapakaraj  a  23,163 
Ambagabapatissa    (bbikkbu) 

135 
Ayudclbaya(nagara)  49 
Aranfiakafi  garaba  58 
Arannava si  (thera)  34 
Aravrda(daba)  164,  165 
Ai-avabi(nagaraja)  164,  165 
Arabantaftbera)    56,   57,   60, 

61,  64,  67,  71,  82,  94,  102, 

110,  116,  160 
(Cula)-Arabanta  82 
Arittba(thera)  19,  32 
Arimaddana(nagara)  25  jjrts- 

sim 
Ariyavarasa(tbei-a)  39,47,  6(), 

161 
(Maba)Ariyavamsa  95,  96,  97, 

98,  101,  163 
Ariyavamsrilamkara(gandba) 

135 
Ai'iyalamkara  (tbera)  106,110, 

111,  112 
(Dutiya)lamkara(tbera)  106 
Ariyrilaiiikara(samanera)  1 59 
Alakadeva(tliera)  169 
Ava-paiii-kyob(desa)  83 
Asoka  17,  18,  149,  151 


Asokarama  134,  143 

Assaji  84 

A 

Acara-akyo  (bbikkbu)  105 
Atiima(nagara)  5 
Adiccaramsi(tbera)  83 
Anaiida(tbera)  4,   7,   33,  40. 

41,  42,  47,  48,   55,   65,  66, 

67,  82,  83,  132,  160 
Ananda(mabrimaccba)  74 
Anandasuriva  90 
Apattiviniccbaya(gandba)l  54 
Alon-ab-can-sii(i'aj  a)  90 
Asivisopamasatta  166 
Aloka(lena)  23 

I 

Ittiya(tbera)  15,  16,  17 
Itivuttaka  33 
Indasara(samanera)  147 
Indobbasa(tbera)  162,  164 
Isidinna(settbi)  54 

U 

TJkkamsamalaf  tbera)  120 
ITkkamsika(raja)     102,     103, 

106,  110,  115,  116 
Uklapa(janapada)  35 
Uccanagara  107,  162 
Ujana(raja)  83,  85 
Uttara    10,    37,    38,    39,   40, 

47,  60,  65 
Uttarageba(vibara)   111,  112 
Uttarapbagguni(nakkbatta) 

132 
Uttaravanarama  110 
Uttarajiva(tbera)   39,  40,  41, 

47,  60,  65,  74,  160 


-^     173     -<$- 


Uttararama  51 
Uttiya(tliei-a)   16 
Udayapabbata  152 
Udana  33 
Udumbaragiri  26 
Udumbaragirisami  45 
Udumbarabhaddapittha  149 
Upatissa(tliera)  19 
Upatissa(raja)  28 
Upadvaravati(nagara)  58 
Upananda  157 
Uparipannasa  11 
Upasena(thera)  33 
TJpayakatbri(gandba)  154 
Upali  4,  13,  14,  15,  20,  168 
Uposathavinicchaya(gaudha) 

99,  154 
Uppatasanti  51 
Ubbatovibhaiigani  24,  134 
Ummaga(vihara)  91 
Uruvela(iiigama)  40 
Ulugama  118 

E 

Ekakkbarakosa(gandLia)  76 
Ekamsika(gana,  vada  &c)  118, 

119,  120,  121,  122,  124,  125, 

128,  129,  130,  131 
Ekavyokara(gana)  14 
Ekasetibbinda(raia)  82,  85 
Eravati(nadi)    65,    105,    106, 

114,  152,  162 
Eravana(uaga)  93 

K 

Kankhavitarani  81,  116 
Kaccayana(gandba)    75,    77, 
110,  111 


Kathavatthu  9 
Kanni(nagara)  132,  162 
Kapila(amacca)  25 
Kapilavattbu  2 
Kappiiiiga(iiagara)  39,  60 
Kamai'an(nagara)  52 
Kamboja(rattha)  40,  49,  100 
Kanibboja(malki)  87,  88 
Kalambu(jritassara)42(tittha) 

45 
Kalyana(thera)  118 
Kalyanacakka(tbera)  162, 164 
Kalyanatissasami(tbera)  45 
Kaly5nadhaja(tbera)  162 
Kalyaiii(nadi)   45,  46   (sima) 

46,  47,  60 
Kalyaniya(cetiya)  16 
Kavis[ira(gandha)  48 
Kasmira-Grandhararattba    2, 

10,  12,  164,  166,  169 
(Maba)Kassapa    3,   4,   5 

44,  68,  69 
Kassapa(thera)    26,    33, 

71 
Kassapiya(gana)  14 
Kakanda  6 
Krinka(gandba)  75 
Kaliugapura  28 
Kala(tbera)  60 
KalakaiTima(sutta)  49 
Kalasumana(tbera)  19 
Kalasoka(raja)  6,  7 
Kincipura  40,  66 
Kitti(i'aja)  88 
Kittitara(raja)  81,  82,  85 
Kittimangala^draiiia(vihrira) 

134 
Kittissirimegba(raja)  28 


14, 
50, 


-^     174     H$- 


Kittissirimeghasaml(thera)45 
Kittissirirajasiha(rajri)  27, 168 
Kitagiri  84 

Kiikkutaslsa(raja)  23,  53 
Kuldiana(nagara)      74,     115, 

121,  125 
Kutambhayagiri  44 
Kiimblianda  52 
Kurunda  24 
Kururattlia  12 
Kulaviliara  83 
Kusavatl(nagara)  152 
Kusinara  3 
Kiisima(nagara)    41,   43,    74, 

147  (tittha)  66,  90 
Kusumamula(gama)  163 
Kuhaslvafraja)  28 
Kuh-klio-iia  161 
Kutakannatissa(raja)  32 
Ku-tva-iika-ta-rii-pa-mo(na- 

gara)  161 
Ketumati(nagara)  80,  81, 101, 

118,  162 
Kelasapabbata  38 
Kesa(biTihmana)  29 
Kesi  29 

Koccagodha  135 
Kondadhana  (?)  (tbera)  11 
Kolamba  24 
Kyacva(raja)  76 
Kyu-nali-ra(nagara)  50 
Kyocva(raja)  85 

Kb 

Kbam-ga-tam-kba-ram-to(ra- 

jaguni)  133 
Kbanittbipadapabbata  69,  75, 

76,  84,  104,  (gama)  110 


Khantakakbipa(tbera)  89 
Kbandbapiira  81,  82 
Kbum-ta-kba-ra-to   (samgba- 

raja)  132 
Kbuddasikkba  33,  34,  66 
Khema(tbera)   19,  34  (bhik- 

kbu)  78 
Kbeina(gandha)  34 
Kbeinacara(tbera)  93 
Khemavara  49 
Kbya-nah-tva(gama)  111,  112 

G 

Gaiiga  8,  22,  24,  64,  141 
Gajjagiri  35 
Gandbamadbanapabbata  68, 

75 
Gandbabharana  98     • 
Gandbara(rattba)  12 
Garula  52 

Gavaiiipati(tbera)  36,  37 
Gabattbagama(sima)  158 
Gunagandba(tbera)  111,  112 
Gunamumnda(rajagiiru)  132, 

143 
Gimaratanadbarasami  45 
Gunasaratbera  112,  162,  164 
Gimasin(tbera)  162,  163,  164 
Gimabbibiiiikara(tbera)    118, 

132,  163 
Gunarania(tbera)  83 
Gulbattbadipani  116 
Gokubka(gana)  14 
Gothabbaya(rrija)  25,  27 
Gotama  3,  4,  36,  59,  61 
Gobxmittika  38 

Gb 
Gbosa(gama)  29 


~$H       175       ■<r 


C 

Ca-kri-nah(pabbata)  84 
Cafi-khum         \  (cetiya)  52, 83, 
Ca-uali-klmm   [  92,  93,  101, 
Can-nah-khuml     109,  113 
Candavajji(thera)  13,  21 
Candalatissa  21 
Catudipablmmi  163 
Catubliiiiiiika(vibara)  103,104, 

106,  107,  108,  109,  110 
Caturangapaccaya  70 
Catiirangabala(amacca)  88,89 
Catusamanera(vattbu)  135 
Catiisetibbinda(rajiX)  88 
Canda(tbera)  162 
Candagirisami  45 
Candana(vibara)  55,  164 
Candapaniia(tbera)  163 
Caiidasara(tbera)  162,  164 
Candiparamisvara(yakkba) 

52,  169 
Cainum(nadi)  82 
Campaka(vibara)  83,  87 
Campa(nagara)  11 
Calariga(nagara)  105, 128,143 
Cagama(desa)  94 
Ca-era-iin 


bbikkbu  94,  95 


Ca-gron-haf 
Ca-gra-ub 
Ca-gri-ba 
Caradipaka  74 
Citta(tbera)  118 
Citrafiana(bbikkbu)  169 
Citraduta(ainacca)  44,  45,  46 
Cma(rattba)  2,  10,  13,  50,  81, 

82,  164,  168,  169 
ClnaiTija  51,  111 
Culagantbi  34 


Culaganthipada  135,  136,138, 

139,  140,  141,  142 
Culadeva(tbera)  20 
Culanaga(thera)  19 
Culapumia  53 
Culabuddba(tbera)  34 
Culavamsa  27,  30,  34 
Culabattbipadoparaasutta  1 9 
Culabbaya(tbera)  20 
Culabbayatissasami  45 
Cetiyavada(gana)  14 
Coranaga(raja)  32 
Co-ra-na-no-na(raja)  160 

Cb 
Cbattagubinda(raja)  68,  75 
Chaddantanagarajuppattil35 
Cbandrdamkara(gandba)  102, 

121 
Cbandosarattbavikasinl  75 
Cbannagarika(gana)  14 
Cbapada  (thera,  gana)  39,  40, 

65,  66,  74,  82,  95,  98,  105, 

130,  160,  163,  164 

J 

Ja-mab-ma  j 

(or  Ca-uab-ma)  )  12,  49 
Jan-may  ' 

Jatibi  52 

Jauibudipa  passim 
Jambudlpadbaja(iTija)  4 
Jambudbajatbera  115,  116 
Jay a  35 

Jayababu-andba(gama)  118 
Jaradba(gama)  162 
Jaluina(kula)  76,  162 
Jataka(pali)  154 
Jataka-attbakatba  135 


~>i     176     HS- 


Jatakavisodhana(gandha)   98 
Jrilasutta(gaina)  121 
Jinarama(tliera)  111 
Jinalamkai'a(gandlia)  29 
Jinalamkrirasaml  45 
Jettliatissa(raja)  28 
Jetavana  24,  44,  60,  83,  98, 

101,  102,  103,  113,  116,  163 
Jeyyapura  83,  87,  90,  91,  92, 

96,  100,  101,  103,  106,  114, 

127,  160,  163 
Je}7abhiimikitti(vihara)   117, 

132,  134 
Jeyyabhumivasakitti  j  i^  163 
Jeyyabhiimivasatula   J-j5  128 
Jeyyabhumisuvanna   ]  \S  122 
Jeyyavaddhanarattha  80 
Jogyi  63 
Jotipuima(tliera)  116 

Nana(thera)  127 
Nana(bhikkhu)  131 
Nanadbaja  163 
Kanavara(tbera)  121 
Nanavilrisa(tbera)  51 
Is[anabhivarasa(samgharaja) 

135,  142,  163,  164 
Nanabhisasanadbaja(samgba- 

raja)  134 
]Nanalamkara(thera)  158, 159 
Nanodaya(gandba)  31 
Neyyadbamma 
Neyyadbamma- 

bbimuni 
Neyj^adbamma- 

bhivamsa 


(samghanija) 

vl46,148,151, 

154,163,164 


No-iia-ra-mali(raja)  102,  103, 

117 
]Sro-na-kba-mara-kha-ra-to(ra- 

jaguru)  132 

T 

Ta4com-saii-te(pura)  4 
Taphiissa  35,  37 
Tambadipa(rattba)     55,     56, 

61,  65,   76,  80,  81,  90,  164 
Tambapanni(dipa)  15,  23 
Tambukibbiiuja(matika)  161 
Tamalitti(grima)  40 
Tamalinda(thera)  40,  47,  65, 

66,  67 
Tabippa(iiagara)  118 
Trivatimsa(bbavaiia)  29,  57, 85 
Tigumbbatbomana(vatthu) 

135 
Tipitakrdamkrira(thera)    105, 

106,  107,  111,  162,  163 
Tiriyapabbata  106,  112,  115, 

116,  120,  162 
Tilokagurii(thera)  107,  115 
Tilokalamkara(thera)  107, 110 
Tisirisanadbaja(thera)  99,  101, 

102,  103,  163 
Tisasanakxmkara(thera)  107 
Tissa(raja)  35,  36 
Tissa(tbera)  19,  20,  22  (bhik- 

kbu)  25 
Tissadatta(thera)  19 
Tumia(gama)  118 
Tusitapiira  2 
TejodTpa(l)bikkhu)  115 
Toii-bhi-luli(khettavaiia)  100 
Tou-bhi-luli(vibara)  103,  104 
Thupavamsa(gandba)  34 


^        177        r^ 


Tliuparrima(cetiya)  16,  95,  98 
Theragatha  33 
Tlierl(gatha)  33 


D 

Dakkbinakoti(viliara)  83 
Dakkhinarama(viliara)  103 
Dakkhinavanarama(vihara) 

106,  110 
Danta(kumara)  28 
Dabba  74 

Dabbiniiikba(jatassara)  117 
Damila(rattba)  33 
Dala(nagara)  41,  42 
Drithadbatuvamsa  34 
Datbanaga(tbera)  93 
Datbanaga( rajuguru)  111 
Datbapati(raja)  24 
Dasaka(tbera)  13,  14,  20 
Dinna(vibara)  72 
Dibbacakkbu(thera)  82 
Disapamokkba(tbera)78(iipa- 

saka)  154 
Digba(thera)  19 
Dlgbanava(nagara)  154 
Dlgbanikaya  33,  73,  134,  148 
Dlgbavapi(cetiya)  16 
Digbasumana(tbera)  19 
Dlpamkara(buddba)  2 
Dipariga(nagara)  118 
Dipavamsa  34 
Duddabbiya(thera)  169 
Devacakkobbasa(thera)  117 
Devaduta(sutta)  167 
Devanaga(battbi)  80 
Devanampiya-Tissa  16, 17,  44 
Devasura(gama)  146 
Do-iia-ca-nah-dbum(malla)  87 

Sasana-Vamsa. 


Dvattaponka(raja)  7,  52,  110, 
145 

Dvaravatl(nagara)  80 

Db 

Dbanavaddbaka  137,  138 
Dbammakittilokagurusami  45 
Dbaminakkbandba(bbikkbu) 

159 
(Maba)Dbammagambblra 

(tbei-a)  50,  168  •  . 
Dbammaguttika(gana)  14 
Dbammacakkapavattana  (sut- 

ta)  169 
Dbainmacetiya(raja)  43,  47 
Dbammadassi(tbera)  61,  (sa- 

manera)  75 
Dbammadbaja  164 
Dhammadhara(tbera)  162 
Dbaminananda(tbera)  116 
Dbammapada  11 
Dbamniapala(tbera)  33 
Dbamniaprilita(tbera)  19 
Dbaiiimabuddba(tbera)  48 
Dbammarakkbita(tbera)  10 
(Maba-)Dbammarakkbita  10, 

167,  168 
Dbammaruci(gana)  24 
Dbammavilasa(tbei'a)  41,  42 
Dbammasiri(tbera)  33 
Dbammasenapati  75 
Dbammasoka  8,  9,   57,   106, 

129 
Dbammiittarika(gana)  14 
Dbatiikatba  111 
Dbatuvamsa  34 
Dbirananda(tberaj  159 


-^     178     Hg- 


N 
Natapatali  142 
Nanda(gulia)  75 
Nauda(Yiliara)  75 
Nandajeyya(amacca)  108 
Nandamala(tliera)   128,   129, 

130 
ISTandamidaguha  68,  75 
Nandayodha(amacca)  161 
Nanda  6 

NammadiX(nadi)  129 
Narapati(raja)  65,  69,  71,  75, 

90 
(Maha)Narapati(raja)  95 
Karapati-can-su(iTija)   27,  41 
Nar  avara  (r  aj  a)  113 
Narasura(amacca)  46 
Navaguha  117 
Navangakandara  106 
Naga(thera)  19 
Naga  52 
Nagarajuppattikatlia  149, 151, 

154 
Nagasena  49,  50,  168 
Nagita(tliera)  89 
Namarupapariccheda  34 
Nigi'odha(samanera)  8,  57 
Nigrodhapalisiivanna  (vihara) 

119 
Nirayakatliadipaka(gandha) 

154 
Niruttisaramanjusri(gandha) 

111 
Nisinna(vihara)  108,  109 
Kicageba(vihrii"a)  83 
Nipa(gama)  125 
Netti(pali)  99,  116,  134 
Netti-atthakatlia  33 


]S[e-no-klie-i'am-to(rajagurii) 

133 
Neranjara(nadi)  2 
Nyasa(gandha)75,110,lll,127 


Pacchagana  67 
Pacchagata(theravamsa)  95 
Pacchima(raja)  110 
Pacchimapakkhadhika(raja) 

105,  106,  161 
Pacchimavaiiarama(viliara) 

110 
Pancajambu(gama)  154 
Pancasetibbinda(raja)  86 
Pafinattivada(gana)  14 
Pafmajotabbidbaja(samgba- 

raja)  148 
Pannatissa(tbera)  146,  147 
Pafinamoli(tbera)  159 
Paiinasami(rajaguru)  148,154, 

169 
Pannaslba(tbera)  143 
Patisambbidamagga  (gandba) 

33,  148 
Pattbana  111,  117,  127 
Pattbanasarattbadipani  48 
Panditabbidaja(rajaguru)  155 
Patta-Hamsrivati(raja)  121 
Padara(tittba)  33 
Padavibbaga(gandba)  127 
Paduma(nagara)  112, 162, 163 
Pabbatantarabbidbeyya(tbe- 

ra)  102 
Pabbatabbbantara(nagara)  87, 

>  98 

(MabajPabbatabbb.antara  ji27 
Pabbatasamanta(desa)  131 
Parakkama(vamsa)  160 


-$H     179     hS- 


Paralvlvamabahu(i-aja)  27,  33, 

44,  136 
Parakkamabahusami  45 
Paramattliabindu(gandlia)  76 
Paramatthavinicchaya(gan- 

dha)  34 
Parayanavatthu  99 
Paritta(tika)  115 
Parittanidana  28,  56,  58 
Parivara(khaiidhaka)   14,  15, 

24,  156 

Palina  1  (gama)  112,  124 
Palena  J 

Pasenadi-Kosala(raja)  71, 157 
Pasyu-cliidra-muiii-(samkliya)  \ 

95 
Patali(natanacca)  141 
Pataliputtanagara     7,    8,    9, 

49,  164 
Padacetiya  115 
Parupana(gana  &c)  118,  120, 

121,  122,  124,  125,  126,  127, 

128,  129,  130,  131 
Pava(nagara)  3 
Pasamsa(thera)  122 
Pitakalamkara(rajaguru)  146 
Pilindavaccha(tbera)  68 
Punna(amacca)    83     (cetiya) 

83,  96,  97,  114,  115 
Punna(thera)  55 
Punabbasuka  22,  84 
Pubbavanarama(vihara)  110 
Pubbarama(vihara)  116,  168 
Purimagana  67 
Pu-gam  64 

Petakalamkara(gandlia)  134 
Petavatthu  33 
Pokkantigama  136 


Pollonka(desa)  71 
Pollonka(thera)  69,  71 
Pra-stali(cetiya)  77 
Pranadassi(thera)  39,  47,  60 

Ph 

Phalikakhacita(viliara)  120 
Phih-kho-na  161 
Phussadeva(thera)  19 

B 

Badara(gama)  112 
Badara(vana)  105 
Bahiissutika(gana)  14 
Baranasi  141 

Brih-mam-akyo(bhikkliu)  105 
Buddhaiikura(thera)  118, 120 
Buddhaghosa  28,  29,  30,  31, 

33,  34,  73,  136 
Buddhaghosasami  45 
Buddhagliosuppatti(katha)30, 

31 
Biiddhadatta  29,  33,  73 
Buddhadasa(rajri)  27,  28 
Buddharakkhita(tliera)  19 
Buddharupa(cetiya)  64 
Buddhavamsa  33,  42,  47 
Buddhrilamkara(gandba)  98 
Beluva(gama)  123 
Bogahavattha(samanera)  135 
Bodbivamsa  34 
Bodbodadhi(gama)  162 
Byafma-co-ma-na-ra(raj  a)  50 
By aiifi5,-ram  (raj  a)  9 1 
Byasi(gama)  119 
Brahma  9 

Brahmajala(sutta)  38 
Brihaja(vedasattba)  75 
Bru-mam-ti(raja)  28 


-^        180        r^ 


Bh 

Bham-giri(janapada)  162 
Bhanduka(upasaka)  17 
Bhaddayanika(gana)  14 
Bbaddasala(thera)  16 
Bhallika  35,  37 
Bliikkhimikhandhaka  72 
Bhuvanekabahu(raja)   45,  46 
BhuvanekabahusarQi  45 
Bhumikitti-atula(vihara)   128 
Bliumikittivirama(vi]iara)  130 
Bliuminikhanana(nagara)  102 
Bhuridattajataka  99 

M 

Ma-nah-kri-cva-cok(rajri)  92 
Mam-gain-kha-ra-to(sanigba- 

raja)  132 
Mamvanna(pabbata)  103 
Magadba(rattba)  39 
Maiigalatberasami  45 
Mangaladipam  51 
Mangalabbumikitti(vihara) 

132 
Mangalavirania(vibrira)  1 34 
MarigaLadbirama(vibara)  132 
Majjbantika(tbera)  9,  10,  12, 

164,  166 
Majjbima(tbera)  10,  169 
Majjbimagantbi(gaiidba)  34 
Majjbimageba  132 
Majjbimadesa    7,    9,    13,    14, 

36,  50 
Majjbimanikaya  33,  154 
Manikundalavattbii  105 
Manijota(iTijaguru)  148 
Manidipa(gandba)  98 


Manisaramanjiisa(gandba)  97 
MandaLarama(vibara)  2 1 
Madbudlpani  33 
Madburasarattbadipanl  48 
]Manobari(iTija)  39,47,62,63,64 
Mantala(cala)  151,  152 
Mandbatu(raja)  12,  152 
Mapinna(matika)  48 
I  Maramma(rattha)  4,  passim 
Marammagamavasicandovara 

(tbera)  128 
Malaya(janapada)  21,  23 
Mallaru(dipa)  66 
Malvana(nagara)  IGl 
Mabaiiga(desa)  126 
Mabaiita(tbera)  91 
Mabrikala(tbera)  39,  47,  60 
Mabagantbi(gandba)  34 
Mabacetiya  16,  72 
Mabatipitaka(tbera)  22 
Mabatissa(tbera)  162,  163 
Mabadeva(tbera)  9 
Mabadevasami(tbera)  45 
Mabadbampa(sainanera)  135 
Mabanagara(rattba)    12,    13, 

168 
Maba-Narada-Kassapa  (jata- 

ka)  167 
Mabanavagama  91 
Mabanaga(tbera)   20,  42,  47 
Mabanama(raja)  28,  73 
Mabaniddessa  22,  23,  33,  148 
Mabaparakkama(tbera)  80, 81 
Mabripavai'a(raja)  111 
Mabapunna  53,  54 
Mababodbi(tberaj  34 
Mababodbi(jataka)  152 
Mababodbipatittbita  16 


^^        181        H^ 


Mahabhiimiramaniya(vihara) 

127 
Maliamangalafthera)  51 
Mahamiini(cetiya)  105,  134 
Maharakkhita(tliera)   10,  22, 

49 
Maharattha    2,    10,    12,    13, 

167,  168 
Maharaja  26 
Maharajadliipati  121 
Mahavamsa  23 
Mahavagga  130 
Maliavijitavi(thera)  90 
Mahavihara    24,   25,   26,   27, 

31,  32,  42,  44,  46,  80 
Maliasaiuglianatha(samglia- 

raja)  104,  106 
Mahasami(tliera)  34,  95,  161, 

163 
Mahasirijeyyasiira(raja)  80, 81 
Mahasena(raja)  24,  25 
Mabimsaka(rattha)  2,  10,  12, 

166,  167 
Mahimsasaka(garia)  14 
Mahinda  10,    15,  16,  17,  24, 

25,  31,  40,  44,  55 
Maliiyangana(cetiya)  16 
MagadluKbhasa)  28,  29,  30,  33 
Matika  111 
Maya  2 

Mayavattaka(tliera)  128 
Maraj  eyy  aratana(cetiya)   117 
Maravijayaratanasaddhamma 

(pitakasala)  146 
Mari-lam-ka-klia-ra-to(sara- 

gharaja)  132 
Mitliila(nagara)  36 
Milinda(raja)  50 


Milindapaiiha  50 
Mukbamattasara(gandha)  76 
Mutasiva  (raj  a)  1 6 
Miitbo(cetiya)  93 
Mutingana(cetiya)  16 
Mutti(gama)  72 
Miittima(nagara)  35,  42,  43, 

47,  48 
Mimindagbosa(tbera)125,126, 

161,  162,  163 
Mulavasa(gama)  116 
Mulatlka  33 
Medbamkara(tbera)    42,    48, 

50,  51,  168 
Medbabliivainsa(rajagiiru) 

148,  154 
Mesncca(vibara)  120 
Mokkba  112 
Mokkbamaiii  112 
Moggallana(araba)  136  (tbe- 

ra)  34,  44,  45,  136 
(Maba)Moggabputta-Tissa  8, 

9,    10,    13.    14,    15,    16,    21, 

37,    44,    52,    54,    129,    151, 

164,  167,  169 
Moggali  9 
Mo-dbo(cetiya)  107 
Mobaviccbedani  33 
Mob-gbab-bya-narapati  (raja) 

101 
Mram-ka-pa(desa)  64 
Mrih-naii-ah(raja)  94 
Mren-co-ra(raja)  90 

Y 

Yakkbadipa  72 
Yakkbapura(rattba)  12 
Yan-ab-ra(pabbata)  92 


-^     182     H5^ 


Yamaka  111,  127 
Yaiiiuna(nadi)  22,  24,  64 
Yasa  6,  7,  34 
(Atula)Yasa(thera)  123 
Yasavaddlianavattlm  106 
Yonaka(rattha)  1,  48,  49,  50, 

51,  52,  168,  (loka)  10 
Yonakadhaiiimarakkliita(the- 

ra)  22,  54,  55,  56,  168 
Yonakarakkhita(tliera)  10 

R 

Rakklian  gapiira  2  7 
Eakkhita(thera)  52 
Eaj  atavriluka(iiadl)  108 
Ilattbasara(thera)  99,  101 
Ratanacetiya  91 
Ratanapunna(nagara)  152, 

159,  160,  163,  164 
Ratanapura  79,  i)assim 
Ratanaljliiimikitti(vihrira)134, 

143 
Ratanamandapa  37 
Ratanamalisami  45 
Ratanavimana(viliara)  98 
Ratanasiklia(nagara)  123, 127, 

130 
Ratanrikara(tliera)  102 
Ramaniya(viliara)  132,  143 
Rajagaha  4,  36,  152 
Rajamanicula(cetiya)      106, 

110 
Rajayodha(amacca)  108 
Rajavamsa  37,  50,  56,  64,  77, 

101,  109,  145 
Rajavamsapabbata  115 
Rajavamsasamkbepa  112 
Rajavibara  95 


Rajasevakadlpam  154 
Rajagara(desa)  143 
RajadbirajafRamannarattbin- 

da)  94 
Ra  j  adhiraj  anamattap  akasini 

121 
Rajadbirajavilasini  135 
Rajabbiseka(gandba)  131 
Rajindarajabbidbeyyadlpani 

102 
Rajovadavattbu  135 
Raina(janapada)  21 
Ramafma(desa)  27,  35,  36,  37, 

39,   41,  42,  43,  47,   60,  90, 

94,  105,  106,  107,  117,  121, 

123 
I  Ramaduta  44,  45 
Ramadbipati(r5,ja)  46 
Rabu  10 

Rahula(tbera)  40,  41,  65,  66 
Rabubi-Bhadda  42 
Rupariipavibbaga(gandha)  33 
Re-tam(tbera)  96 
Ren-nat-ca-ka-ro-da(tbera) 

109 
Repma(gama)  162 
Revata(tbera)    6,    7,    19,    30, 

31,  34,  167,  169 


Lakiinna(nagara)  49, 50,51, 168 
La-kbam-kbum-kba-rara-to 

(sanigbaiTija)  132 
Lanka(dipa)    17,    27,   28,   32, 

39,  46,  74,  80,  90,  159,  164, 

168 
Laddbavara(settbi)  137,  138 
Labbunja(nagara)  48,  50 


-^      183      i<r 


Labhiinja(cetiya)  50 
Likliananaya(gandha)  120 
Licchavi(rajakimirira)  144 
Lo-kaiu-pa-nam-ram-to(i'aja- 

giiru)   133 
Lokadlpakasara(gandlia)  48 
Lokasarabliu(cetiya)  130 
Loliapasada(cetiya)  72 
Lohitacandana(viliara)  54 

V 

Vacanattliajoti(gandlia)  75 
Vajirabiiddhi(tbera)   34,   138 
Vajjipiittaka  5,  6,  7,  12, 13,14 
Vattagamani(raja)  23,  24 
Vannabodbana(gandha)  1 20 
Yanaratana  (samgharajaj  42, 

(bhikkhu)  159 
Vanavasirattha2,10, 12,52,53 
Vanavasitissasaml  45 
Vantuma(gama)  162 
yarapatta(tbera)  83 
Varapbasi  162,  164 
Varababu(tbera)  102 
Varabbisamgbanatba(tbera) 

105 
ValHgiXma  45 
Vacakopadesa(gandba)  90 
Vacavacaka(gandba)  75 
Vacissara  (Mahasami)  (tbera) 

34 
Vanijagama  53,  54 
Vaturagamma  135 
Vamabalanayaka-amacca  133 
Vakikrirrima  6 
Valukavapi(gama)  146 
Vijayapura(nagara)     82,    84, 

87,  88,  89,  90,  100,  160 


Vijayabahu(raja)  27,  42,  44 
Vijjavas](nagara)  58 
Vidaggadandi(pakarana)  121 
Vinaya(pitaka)  27,  32,  66,  74? 

116,  144,   150,   (attbakatba) 

157  (tika)  33,  138 
Vinayaganthipada  136 
Vinayagulbattbadipani  74 
Vinayaviniccbaya  33,  130 
Vinayasamgaba  33,  43 
yinayalamkara(gaudba)  106 
Vibbanga  24,  32,  73 
Yibbatyattba  77 
Vimativinodani  33,  138 
Vimala(raja)  27 
VimaLajoti(bbikkbii)  159 
yimabidbammasuriya(raja)27 
(Cula)Vimab\buddbi    ]  -^^  75 
(Nava)Viniabibuddbi   J  J   34 
(Maba)Vimalabuddbi  )  ^  75 
Vimalacara(tbera  162,  164 
Vimanavattbu  33,  59 
VivadavmiccbaYa(gandba) 

154 
Visuddbimagga30,31,  (tika)33 
Visuddbimaggagantbipadat- 

tba  116 
Yisuddbimaggadlpani  51 
Yisuddbislb(bbikkbu)  169 
Yissakamma  49 
Yuttodaya(gandba)  34,  75 
Yedissakagiri(nagara)  16 
Yedebarattba  12 
YepuHa (tbera)   75 
Yeravijaya(raja)  105 
Yelobaka(tui'angama)  86 
Yesali  5 
Yessantarajataka  106, 162,168 


-^     184     ^ 


Vessantaratta(bhava)  2 
Yobriratissa(rrija)  25,  27 
Yoharatthabheda(gandha) 
154 

S 

Sa-ua-la-nali-kro-nali  1  ^  28 

Saii-Lan-krom  J  !E  73 

Samyuttanikaya  73,  148 
Samvarajataka  99 
Sakkafdeva)  21,   29,   31,   3(3, 

57,  69,   71,    72,  85,  93,  129 
Sakka  52 

SaTnkantika(gana)  14 
Sam-kha-ya-co-yonfrajri)  90 
Samkliepavannana(gandlia) 

74,  116 
Samkhyapakasaka(gandlia)51 
Samghapala(thera)  30,  31 
Samgliamitta(bliikkliu)  25 
Saragbamitta(tberi)  55 
Samgharakkbita(tbera)  34 
Sacivafgama)  143 
Saccabandlia(isi)  54,  55  (pab- 

bata)  54 
Saccasamkbepa(gandba)  34 
Sativa(raja)  90,  92,  101,  102, 

161 
Sattapanni(guba)  4 
Sattamatejasami  45 
Sattarajadbammavattbii  105 
Saddatthabbeda-     ^  I 

cinta  75,148 1 

Saddaniti  i^^  74,1 54 

Saddanetti  |^    121 

Saddabindu  ^    76 

Saddavutti  90 

Saddasarattbajalinlj         89 


Saddbammakitti(tbera)  76,98, 

99,  100,  101,  163,  164 
Saddbammagiiru  90 
Saddbammacakkasaml  51 
Saddbammacari(tbera)     119, 
161,  163 

Saddbammaiotiprda(thera)  74 
Saddbammanana(tbera)  75 
Saddbammattbiti(tbera)  160, 

161 
Saddbaminattbitikaml(bbik- 

kbu)  169 

Saddhammapajjotika(gandba) 
148 

Saddbainmavilasini(gandba) 

148 
Saddbammasiri(tbera)  75 
Saddbammalanikara(tbera) 

48 
Saddbatissa(raja)  110 
Sabbakami  6,  7 
Sabbatthivada(gana)  14 
Samantapasadika  14,  15,  157 
SarQivana(gama)  162 
Samuddamajjba(gama)  85 
Sambaiidbacintana(gandba) 

34 
Sambala(tbera)  16 
Sainbyan(gandba)  75 
(Maba)Sammata(raja)  2 
Sammiti(gana)  14 
Sammuti(raja)  55,  56,  76  (de- 

sa)  56 
Sammobavinodani  116 
Saranamkara(bhikkbu)  1 69 
SaiTimadbipati(raj  a)  168 
Sallavatl(nadi)  118 
Salayatana  11 


-$^     185     f^ 


Saliassorodha(gama)  112, 124,  |  Sirimangala(tliera)  51 
131,  137,  138,  162  i  Sirimasoka(raja)  3,  6 


Sagara(thera)  76 

Sagaliya(garia)  24 

Sa-ca-u(gaiiia)  88 

(Maha)  Sadhujjana  100,  101 

Sadhujjanavilasim  134 

Saratthadipani  17,  23,  138 

Saratthasamgaha  23 

Saradassi(thera)  160 

Saravamsi(thera)  163 

Sariputta  28,  31,  33,  41,  51,  95   Sirihamsva(kula)  100 

Savatthl  157  Sirisaddhammalamkara(tlie- 


Sirimahasihasura(raja)     117, 

118 
Sirisamgliabodhi(raja)  25,  27, 

39,  44 
Sirisaddhamma(thera)  117 
Sirisaddhammarajadliipati 

(raja)  98  ' 

Sirisaddhammalokapati  (raja) 

50 


Sasanapaveni  56,  60 


ra)  90 


Sasanavamsappadlpika29assM)i '  Simrdamkara      ]  ^  43,  74 
Sasanasuddhidlpika(gandlia)     Simaviniccliaya  [  :B   43 
130  Simasamgaha     (  §  43 

Siggava(tliera)  13,  15,  20 
Siniii(nagara)  103 


Silakatha  J  ^  154 

Sllabuddhi(tliera)  57,  61,  69, 
70,  71 


Siyamarattlia  11,  13,  27,  50, 
127,  168  (Maha)Silavamsa(thera)  98,99 

Siriklietta(nagara)    7,    9,    12,   Silacara(thera)  143 
23,  52,  59,  60,  91,  101,  105, 1  Slva(tliera)  20 
106,  110,  133,  145,  160,  161   Slvali(thera)    40,  47,   65,  66, 


Siritribhavanadityanarapati 

(raja)  99 
Siritribhavanadityapavara(ra- 

ja)  142 


67 
Siharaja  36,  37 
Sihala(dipa)  passim 
Sihaladlpavisuddbisami 


Siridantadantadhatusami  45  |  Silialamahasami(tbera)  90 
Sirinandadhammaraja-Pava-   Slliasiira(raja)  82,  83,  86,  88, 


radhipati  110 
Siripaccaya(nagara)  28 
Siripavara(rajri)  110 
Siripavaramabadhammaraja 

127 
Siripavarasudhammaraja  128, 

131 
SiripunnaYasi(thera)  83 


(Maba)  120 
Sujrita(tbera)  112,  124,  (bba- 

gava)   145 
Sujata  2 

Sunanta(tbera)  118 
Suttauta(pitaka)  27,  150 
Suttaniddesa  74 
Suttavada(gana)  14 


-^     186     H$^ 


Suttasamgalia  130 
Sudassana(raja)  152 
Suddhodana(raja)  2 
Suddlianima(nagara,  pura) 

10,  11,  36,   37,   38,  39,  40, 

47,   59,   60,  61,  62,   63,  64, 

65,  67,  68,  84,  86,  93 
Sudliammamahasaml(thera) 

83,  84 
Siidliammalamkara(thera)  83 
Sunanda(bliikklm)  146,  147 
Suiiaparanta(rattlia)    11,   47, 

54,  56 
Suppridaka(tittha)  53 
Subodlialainkara(gandlia)    34 
Subhadda  3,  4 
Subhinna(nagara)  35 
Sumaiigala  169 
Sumangalasaml(tbera)  34 
Suinana(sanianera)     17,     32, 

(thera)  19,  20 
Siimedha(thera)  69,  72 
Sumedhakatha  98 
Suramma(raja)  120 
Surajamaggadlpani  154 
Suravinicchaya(gandha)     81, 

121 
Suriyavainsa(thera)  146,  163 
Suvannakukkutacala(vihJXra) 

120 


Suvannaguha  103,  115 
Suvannabhumi(ratthaj   1,  10, 

11,  35,  38,  47,  62 
Suvannayaualokana(gama) 

120 
Suvannavihara  106 
Susunaga  6,  7 
Subattha(thera)  120 
Siirakitti(raja)  105,  106,  115 
Setthitala  119 

Setibhinda(raja)  42,  120,  128 
Sokkata     |  (nagara)  50,  61, 
SukkatayaJ  168 

Sona(thera)  10,  15,  16,  37,  38, 

39,  40,  47,  60,  65 
Sonaka  13,  20,  21 
Soma(thera)  44,  45 
Sovannamaya(vihara)  111 

H 

Hamsavati(nagara)  35,43,46, 
47,  48,  51,  101,  102, 106, 107 

Hatthipalajataka  99 

Hatthirajjasiivannaguba(si- 
ma)  135 

Hattbisala(gama)  119,  122 

Haribbuiija(rattba)  11,  49 

Halamka(nagara)  72 

Himavanta   13,   68,  164,  169 

Hemamala  28 


INDEX  n. 

[Technical  Teems  of  Buddhism]. 


Akaraniyani(cattari)  156 
Akhettabhavo  72 
Aggapuggalo  57 
Anamataggasamsaro  2 
Anagami  32,  53,  68,  73 
Anupasampanno  68 
Anupadisesanibbanadhatu  3 
Anumatikappo  5  ' 

Apadanam  113 
Apayo  36,  113 
Apunnam  36,  56,  69 
Appamadadbammo  57 
Abbiima  32,   39,  47,  51,  54, 

72,  73,  86 
Abhisambuddha  35,  43 
Amataraso  37,  168 
Amathitakappo  6 
Arabattam  49,  54,  57,  68 
Arabantabbavo  68,  69 
Araba  4,  5,  G,  18,  29,  32,  36, 

47,   52,  53,  68,  69,  73,  110, 

134,  136 
Ariyapuggalo  73,  156 
Asakyaputtiyo  157 
Asamano  157 


Agama  142 
Acinnakappo  5 
Anapanasatikammattbanam 

102 
Abbujitapalbxiiko  64 
Araddbavipassako  73 
Araddbavipassana  90 
Avasakappo  5 
Avlci(narako)  149 


Iddbi  5,  68,  164,  165 
Iddbimant  5,  7 
Isi  18,  54,  166,  167,  (°pabba- 
jja)  35  Cvataparivata)  166 

U 

Uttarimanussadbainmo  68,157 
Upasampadam  10  iMSsim 
Upasako  17  imssim 
Uposatbo  8  'passim 

K  . 

Kammam(saragba°    &c)     40 
passim 


-^     188     H^ 


^ 


Kammatthanam  49 
Kammavaca  42,  43,  135 
Kasavapajjoto  10,  18,  166 
Kesadhatu  37 
Khinasavo  18 


Khuradbaranadukkatapatti  5  okhandlio  58 


Dh 

Dhamma  14,  19,  24,  36, 
42,  52,  59,  62,  84,  95,  98, 
117,  129,  147,  164,  16G,  168 

°katha  60,  151 


Khettam(ariyanam)  73 

G 

Gamantarakappo  5 

C 
Cakkavattiraja  145,  153 
Catuddisasamglio  145 

J 

Jalogi(patura)kappo  6 
Jataruparajatakappo  6 
Jinacakkam  16,  imssim 
Jinasasanam  7,  imssim 
Jlianam  47 


Natti  43 


N 


T 


°tanti  13 

°desaiia  94 

°raso  54,  56 

°samvego  4,  44 

Dhatu  50,  52,  58,  62,  63,  72, 

83,  90,  91,  93,  106,  135 
;  Dhutanga  42,  61 

Nibbanam  10 
Nirodbasamapatti  16 


'Paccaya(catu)  52,  67,  110, 
112,  147,  155,  159,  160 

Patipatti  61,  62,  76 

Pativedba(dbammo)  61,  62, 
73,  76 

Patisambbida  73 


Tilokagga  3,  62,  91,  126,  153  Patissavadukkatapatti  156, 


Tilokamabadbammaraj  attain 

3 
Tevijja  18,  73 

D 

Dandakammam  69,  124 
Dasabalo  6 
Dipaduttamo  1 
Danadukkatapatti  5 
Dibbacakkbu  36 
Dvaiigulakappo  5 


157,  158 
Pattbanam  113,  114 
Paramattbadbammo  74 
Parikkbara(attba)  57,  69,  86 
Parittam  38,  56,  101 
Parinibbanam  13,  passim 
Pariyatti  23,  passim 
Pavaranam   8,  9   (maba")  41 
Pacitti  156 
Panatipata  56,  157 
Patiinokkbam  62,  73 


-^     189     ^ 


Paramiyo(timsa)  2,  129 
(Ti)Pitakarri  39,  passim 
Pitakattayam  21,  passim 
Pitisomanassam  116,  152 
Puimam   10,   53,   69,   71,  86, 
111,113,116,129,147,150,153 
Puunanubhavo  64,  86,123,149 

Ph 
Phalam  32,  167 

B 

Buddhavacanam  22,  62,  150 
Bodhirukkho  29,  84 

M 

Mahabodhi  2,  40,  72,  160 
Mahabbinikkhanianam  2 
Mabiddhiko    9,   25,   32,   106, 
167 

E 

(Ti)Ratanani  59,  64 
Batanattayam  18,  71 
Ruparammanam  113 

L 

Lokaprda  125,  149 
Lobakumbbl(nirayo)  6 

V 

Vacivinfiatti  67 

Vassam  41,  08,  157 

Yasana  68 

Yinayo   14,   20,   65,  83,  116, 

120,  122,  124,  125,  130 
Yivattam  150 
Yisamvudanadukkatapatti 

156,  157,  158 


S 

Sainkbara(dbammo)  3, 67, 103, 

147 
Samgiti  4,  7,  10,  13,  14,  23, 

31,  54 
Samgbo  27,  passim 
Samvego  2, 6,  35,64, 76,88,114 
SakadagamI  32,  53,  68,  73 
Saddba  43 

Saddbivibariko  7,  passim 
Samana  9,  17,  18,  45,  55,  81 
Samapatti  60 

Sammajjanakiccam  96        •    - 
Sammadittbi  62,  100,  128 
(Ti)Saranam  19,  37,  166 
Sikkham  42,  44,  47,  50,  95, 

127,    135,     147,    159,     160, 

162 
Sikkhapadam  25,  80,  92,  126, 

131,    136,     155,     156,    157, 

158 
Siiigilonakappo  5 
(Ti)Sasanam  61 
Sima  25,  42,  43,  45,  46,  80, 

92,  158 
Sila(panca)    36,  37,  43,   156, 

158,  166 
Silavant  74,  82,  88,  119 
Sukbavipassako  73 
Sotapanno  32,  38,  53,  68,  73, 

(arakkbadevata)  111 

H 

Hinriya(vattitum)  65,  66,  75, 
113,  114 


CORRiaENDA. 


On  p.  10  for  Yonakarakkhitatlieram  read  Rakkhitao  and  for  Dham- 

marakkhitatheram  read  Yonakadhammao 
On  p.  17  (end)  sentence  runs  on  raja  Asokaraiina  &c. 
On  p.  24  for  ubliato  Yibhaiigao  read  Ubhatovibbangao 
On  p.  24  and  171  for  Anottatadahato  read  Anotattao 
On  p.  26  for  Udumbaragirivasi  read  ovasi. 
On  p.  38  for  sarane  read  saranesu. 
On  p.  43  for  ra  <^ja  r-ead  raja. 

On  p.  56  read  Sammmutinamake  in  Text  and  Samatio  in  note. 
On  p.  62  for  Saddbammapurindo  read  Sudbamma° 
On  p.  64  for  Y^ammodakam  read  Yamunodakam. 
On  p.  94  for  Cagamo  r-ead  Cagame. 

On  p.  132  {I.  16)   sentence   to   be   divided  iti  vuccati,    Uparauno  &c. 
On  p.  162  for  Kantinagare  in  text  read  Kannio 


k 


u 


<b 


-b^ 


A^^ 


"3   ■ 


^•a^.'tV.thT-'/i'^ 


v^ 


5 
<> 


5? 


.#. 


^ 


(SI 

5 


,^' 


^^/l 


>dOf 


<? 


ii'a*' 


•<     -■.    >   )>- 


.V 


50        " 


.#• 


G    < 


'umm^      <^jONv-soi^     "^/-^ 


o 


i 


^^l-UBRARY(?/         .^: 


uj     -*       <= 


:3-       »*j 


^  ^ 


O 

?3 


>• 


^riuoKVSfll^        %J!3AIN(I3WV' 


^.OFCA!IF0% 


lOFCA 


^ 


^. 


CO 

•»  so 


w^HIBRARY6>/,       <^U!8RARYa^ 

#1  tr-r  ^  — ^ 


^ 


1  ir"  ^ 


C 


m 
SO 


33 
50 


cc 


V*-: 


o 


# 


University  of  California,  Los  Angeles 


L  007  183  995  5 


'4 


# 


^~Xa 


> 


\ 


O 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


iiiyiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii 

^      A  A      000  348  276    7 


,'<^imvBs//i 


3£   T- 


'A 


\      C2 


-# 


%a3A!Nft]ftV 


>■ 


to  A 


^     > 


i? 


%13DNYS0]-^ 


— '        ''  "■  r-r» 


i    =3 


£2      => 


.^ 


%30.WS01^ 


o 


o 


%133NVSO# 


^0FCAIIF0% 


^^WFUNIVfR% 


en 


O 


S     5 

5     a-J-"^  'g 


/  O        u- 


^OFCAIIFO^,^ 


-as 


^OF-CAIIFOI?^ 


^i  I 


"^^Awian^^s^"^ 


'V\^EfJWIVFR5//, 

oa  1  — - 


i 


o   i 


< 


(— 1 


a 


-n         I—* 


1 


CO 

-< 


^ 


^ 


