Source PDF File: d:\01_APP\Research\output\islam_nusantara\research-notes\loop_08\documents\2018-Mamat-ImpactIslamMalaccaSultanate.pdf
Total Pages: 12
Statistics: Chars=32760, ThaiWords=6552.0, EnglishWords=6639

--- Page 1 of 12 ---
International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies Full Paper UMRAN 
|03 (2018) pp. 41 - 51 | www.http://jurnalumran.utm.my/index.php/umran | 
© 2018 Penerbit UTM Press. All rights reserved 
The Impact of Islam on The Concept of Government of The Sultanate of 
Malacca During The 15th Century 
Ismail Mamat* 
Department of Uṣūl al-Dīn and Comparative Religion, Kulliyah of Islamic Revealed Knowledge and Human Sciences, 
International Islamic University Malaysia, P.O. Box 10, 50728 Kuala Lumpur 
*Corresponding author: ismail.m@iium.edu.my 
Article history 
Received: 2017-12-06 
 
Received in revised form: 2018-01-11 
 
Accepted: 2018-01-12 
 
Published online: 2018-10-31 
Abstract 
This article attempts to look at the impact of Islamization process on the Sultanate of Malacca during the 
15th century. Islam has offered civilizational life for the Malays. Malacca grew from an unknown place 
during the pre-Islamic period to become one of the well -known centres of Islamic religion and culture in 
the region. Islam has changed the status of Malacca after reducing its pre-Islamic customs and ways of life. 
The importance of the Malay Sultanate of M alacca has been well-documented and much has been written 
about it by many authors either by Malaysians such as Buyong Adi1, Kernal Singh Sandhu, Mohd Jamil 
Mukmin, Mohd Taib Osman, Muhammad Yusoff Hashim, Abu Hassan Sham, Khoo Kay Kim, and 
Joginder Singh Jessy, and Zubir Usman, or by the non -Malaysians including R. O. Winstedt, R. J. 
Wilkinson, Walter William Skeat, C. O. Blagden, Paul Wheatley, D. G. Hall, F. J. Moorhead, J. Bantin and 
R. Roolvink, J. Kennedy, John Bastin, Liang Liji, M. B. Hooker, Nichol as Tarling, Paul Wheatley, Sarnia 
Hayes Hoyt, T. W. Arnold, W. P. Groeneveldt, Christoper H. Wake, P. E. de Josselin de Jong and H. L. A 
van Wijk, Robert W. McRoberts, and Wang Gangwu. They wrote on various genres of literature and 
culture of the Malays a s well as the history of the Sultanate. However, some of them especially the 
orientalists, because of their adoption of various Western social theories, this application of such theory to 
the sultanate or the Malay society yield untenable results. We shall argue some of whom tend to regard 
Islam as unimportant in shaping the Malay worldview, society and identity. This article will emphasize the 
civilizational significance of the Islamic impact by looking at the system of political authority and the 
concept of government of the Sultanate. 
Keywords: Malay, Malacca, Islamization, Civilization, Sulṭān, Khalīfah, Imāmah

--- Page 2 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 42 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
In order to understand the concept of government in Islam, it is necessary to examine the 
concept of Khalīfāh al-Mu’minῑn fῑ al-Arḍ (Vicegerency of the believers on earth) (Zahrawy, 1982). 
The term khalīfah in the constitutional terminology of the Sunn ῑ refers to the title o f the head of 
the Islamic state (Manzoorul -Din, 1962). The term Imāmah has been also by Sunn ῑ Muslim 
thinkers like Abū Ḥasan al-Māwardῑ (d. 450 A.H./1058 C.E.), who wrote al-Aḥkām al-Sulṭāniyyah 
wa al-Wilāyāt al-Dῑniyyah, in a similar reference to al-khalīfah (al-Khatib, 1953). 
In the register of Shiite jurists, however, the word Imām is also used to refer to the head of 
the Islamic state, but in special sense. The Imām, according to their theory, becomes not only a 
head of state who administers the sharῑ’ah on behalf of the believers, but is a repository of secret 
knowledge which inve sts on him with additional spiritual powers, placing him above ordinary 
men. Their theory of Imāmah not only provides for the hereditary rules based on Divine right 
reminiscent of the theory of the Divine Right of kings of Medieval Europe, but also 
acknowledges ‘ismah (infallibility) of the Imām (al-Khatib, 1953). 
The khalīfah is a unique institution peculiar to the characteristics of the Arabs; their social 
mores, cultural values and tradition (Anwar, 1960). Its mechanism and functions were different 
from all political system prevailing at the time. It had no precedence in the pre -Islamic history of 
the Arabs (Paydar, 1973). It refers to the office which performs the function of the successor to 
the Prophet in protecting the religion ( ḥirāsah al-Dῑn) and managing the affairs of this world ( wa 
siyāsah al -Dunyā bihi ) (al -Mawardi, 1983). The khilāfah does not refer to the prophetic religious 
function if Muhammad, for the divinely inspired religious role of Muhammad ended with his 
death. Therefore, the establi shment of the khilāfah institution in Islam was a product of political 
necessity. While the Islamic law ( sharῑ’ah) provides the foundation of Islamic polity, the caliphate 
office provides the means whereby the law is translated from the sphere of potential ity into 
actuality and the caliphate provides sanctions for its enforcements (Deiranieh, 1974). 
In Māward ῑ’s opinion, the Islamic law ( sharῑ’ah) is applied both to the ruler and the ruled, 
and it is used as a means of brin ging them under the rule of law. He who was one of the leading 
jurists of the ‘Abbasid period, followed the footsteps of the Umayyads and declared that a caliph 
can legitimately assume his office through succession if this is done wi th the consent of the 
community (al-Mawardi, 1983). 
Pertaining to the Sul ṭanate of Malacca, its political system was strengthened by its well -
organized structure. It practiced a system of administration which could be classified as unique 
and most suited to the needs of the nation and also the Malay society at the time. This system 
developed after the coming of Islam. It did not follow the Hindu concept of devaraja or divine 
kingship, as viewed by some western scholars. The following discussion will analyse the Islamic 
impact upon the concept and the role of Sulṭanate of Malacca. 
2.0 THE TECHNICAL TERM USED FOR THE RULERS 
Referring to Sejarah Melayu or Sulalat al -Salatin (henceforth SS) and Undang -undang Melaka or 
the Laws of Malacca (henceforth LM), some terms used specially for the rulers were found.

--- Page 3 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 43 
I. Sulṭān 
The SS and the LM always mention this term referring to the rulers of Malacca, such as; 
Sulṭān Iskandar Shāh, Sul ṭān Mu ẓaffar Shah, Sul ṭān Man ṣur Shāh, Sulṭān ‘Alā al -Dῑn Ri’āyat 
Shāh, and Sulṭān Aḥmad Shāh. 
This term has its role and status in Islam history. The title sulṭān is said to have been given 
for the first time by Harūn al -Rashid of the ‘Abbāsid Caliphate to his minister ( wazīr). We find it 
was occasionally used by the caliphs, both during the ‘Abbāsid and Fā ṭimid periods (Lewis, 
1988). 
By the tenth c entury it had become a common designation, though still only used 
informally, for independent rulers and potentates, used to distinguish them from those who were 
still subject to the effective authority of the central power. There are many literary referen ces, in 
poems, letters, and historical narratives, to such use, but there are no coins or inscriptions in 
which sulṭān is used as a personal title. From this, it is clear that it had not had been officially 
recognized. It became official in the eleventh ce ntury, when it was used by Turkish dynasty 
known as the Great Seljuks ( al-Sālajiqah), who adopted it as their principle title. The Seljuks, 
according to Ibn Kath ῑr (d. 774 A.H./1372 C.E.) established their reign in Khurasan in 429 
A.H./1037 C.E. They moved to Baghdad in 447 A.H./1065 C.E. In Seljuk usage, sul ṭān had a 
new sense and embodied a new claim, no less than a title to universal empire. For the Seljuks, 
there was one sul ṭān just as there was one caliph, and the sul ṭān was the supreme political and 
military head of Islam. 
In the post-Seljuk period, sulṭān became the usual Islamic title of sovereignty. That is to say, 
it was the standard title used by a monarch claiming to be the head of a state and not recognizing 
any suzerain or superior. Thus, it wa s used in the late Middle Ages by the Mamluk sul ṭān in 
Egypt, by the Ottoman sulṭāns in Turkey, and by many others (Lewis, 1988). 
II. Khalifat al-Mukminin 
The LM mentions: “He was the first ruler to embrace Islam and to codify royal customs and 
rules, and the rules pertaining to high dignitaries. (It was he too) who laid down the laws and 
rules of the land, handed down through the generations to His Majesty Sul ṭān Muẓaffar Shāh, 
and then to H.M. Sul ṭān Manṣur Shāh, and then to H.M. Sul ṭān ‘Alā al -Dῑn Ri’āyat Sh āh, and 
then to H.M.’s son, Sul ṭān Ma ḥmud Shāh, khalifah al-mu’minῑn (the Caliph of the Faithful), ẓill 
Allāh fi al-‘ālam (the Shadow of God on Earth)” (Liaw, 1976). 
In the SS: “when Bendahara Paduka Raja was about to die, he told his family; In all sincerity 
of heart do your duty toward God Almighty and the Apostle of God (may God bless him and 
give him peace), and do your duty toward your Raja(Ruler), forgetting not what the divines tells 
us, that a just prince is joined with the Prophet of God like two jewels in one ring. Moreover, the 
Raja is as it were the deputy of God. When you do your duty to the Prophet of God it as though 
you were doing it to God Himself, as says the Word of God in the Quran, ‘Do your duty 
towards God and the Apostle of God…” (Winstedt, 1938). 
In Islamic history. The caliphate was the most sovereign institution, beginning with the 
death of the Prophet and the appointment of Abū Bakr as his successor to the headship of the 
community. He is the first of a long series. There is a n interesting conversation, recorded in 
several versions by later Arabic writers, which runs as paraphrased: “When Abū Bakr succeeded 
the Prophet, he was called Khalīfat Rasūl Allāh , the deputy of the prophet of God. Then ‘Umar 
succeeded or perhaps replaced him (istakhlafahu). A man came to hear ‘Umar and addressed him

--- Page 4 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 44 
as Khalīfat Allāh. ‘Umar cursed him, and said: ‘That is David.’ The man then called him Khalīfat 
Rasūl Allāh, deputy of the Prophet of God, and ‘Umar said: ‘But that was Abū Bakr, who is now 
dead.’ So the man addressed him as Khalīfat Khalīfat Rasūl Allāh , deputy of the deputy of the 
Prophet of God, and ‘Umar said: ‘That is correct, but it grows longer,’ and the man said: Then 
what shall we call you? And ‘Umar said: ‘You are the believers and I am your commander, 
therefore call me Amῑr al-Mu’minῑn, commander of the believers.” (Ibn ‘Asakir, 1984). 
The title khalīfat Allāh, with the vastly more extensive claim that it implies, was used in a 
tentative, one might say an unofficial way. It appears, for example, in odes of praise addressed to 
the Umayad caliphs and later to the Abbasid caliphs, by their court poets, or as we might 
nowadays call them, their public relations officers. It appears occasionally in speeches and letters 
cited in books, or in historical narratives and other writings (Mamat, 2016). 
The first who appears to have used the title in inscriptions was Umayyad caliph ‘Abd al -
Malik (r. 685 -705 C.E.). He was also the first caliph with a conscious and explicit imperial 
purpose, a Muslim rival to the Christian Byzantine Emperor in Constantinople. His imperial 
ambitions were expressed in a creation of a new, centralized administration working in the 
Arabic language and, most dramatically, in the issue of a new gold currency with Arabic, Is lamic 
inscriptions. There are also coins of the Abbasid caliph al -Ma’mūn (r. 813-833 C.E.) in which he 
describes himself as khalīfat Allāh. The third to use the title of khalīfat Allāh in an inscription was 
the late Abbasid caliph al-Nāṣir (r. 1180-1225 C.E.). (Lewis, 1988). 
The title was used politically for a series of rulers in Islam from just after the death of the 
Prophet Muhammad (pbuh). These caliphates were, for instance; Umayyyads (661 -750 C.E.), 
‘Abbasids (750-1258 C.E.), Fāṭimids (910-1160 C.E.), and ‘Uthmāniyyah (1299-1924 C.E.). 
III. Zill Allāh fi al-‘Ālam 
The LM mentions: “He was the first ruler to open up the land of Malacca, bearing the title 
of Sulṭān Maḥmūd (Muḥammad) Shāh, Ẓill Allāh f ῑ al-‘ālam (the Shadow of God on Earth). He 
was the first ruler to embrace Islam and to codify royal customs and rules, and rules pertaining to 
high dignitaries. (It was he too) who laid down the laws and rules of the land, handed down 
through the generations to His Majesty Sul ṭān Muẓaffar Shāh, and then to H.M. Sul ṭān Manṣūr 
Shāh, and then to H.M. Sul ṭān ‘Alā al-Dῑn Ri’āyat Shāh, and then to H.M.’s son, Sul ṭān Mahmūd 
Shāh, khalifah al-mu’minῑn (the Caliph of the Faithful), ẓill Allāh f ῑ al-‘ālam (the Shadow of God 
on Earth)”. 
The SS mentions: “… in the reign of Sul ṭān ‘Alā al -Dῑn Ri’āyat Shāh, ẓill Allāh f ῑ al-‘ālam 
(Shadow of God upon earth), while he had a settlement at Pasir Raja…”(Winstedt, 1938). 
Since Islam has played an important role in Malay Societ y, the association of the ruler’s authority 
with Islam carries considerably weight. To further emphasize the religious element, the theory 
that ruler was ‘God’s shadow on earth’ was also put forward. It was a very ancient title that was 
first used in Babyl on. It was later adopted by the Caliphate in Baghdād and the Delhi sul ṭāns in 
India. The Abbasid caliphs considered themselves to be the representatives of ‘God’s rule on 
earth’ (sulṭān Allāh fῑ arḍihi) and even as ‘God’s shadow on earth’. The ruler was ta ught: ‘the ruler 
is God’s shadow on earth, all those troubled find refuge in it’ (Goldziher, 1971). 
This title was also used for other Malay rulers, for instance, the leader of the Malays converted 
the Patani ruler, Phya Tu Antara (Phya Tu Naqpa) to Islām in 1457 C.E. and he adopted a Muslim 
name and title and called himself Sultan Ismail Shah, ẓill Allāh fῑ ‘āl-‘ālam (Teeuw, 1970).

--- Page 5 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 45 
From the above discussions, it is safe to say that the coming of Islam changed the system of 
political authority and power of Malays from devaraja to the sultanate system of government. 
The devaraja cult grew out of Hinduism which taught that the king was a divine universal ruler, a 
manifestation of the Hindu god, often attributed to Shiva or Vishnu. 
The sul ṭān who reserved power (daulah) in matters relating to the administration of the state, 
internal or otherwise and in declaring a state of war, of peace. The change of the ruler’s title from 
that of ‘Raja’ (King) to that sul ṭān which related to the concept of khalīfah and ẓill Allāh fῑ al-
‘ālam shows the development in the political system of the Malay government. 
2.1 Impact of Islam on the Political Authority of Malacca 
Political authority in Islam stems from at least three basic principles; justice (‘ adl), obedience 
(ṭā’ah) and shurā (Uthman, 1972). The political head of the state as well as all its public officials 
must be guided by justice. The Quran states: Allah commands justice, the doing of good… (Surāt 
al-Naḥl 16: 90) Allah doth command you to render back your Trust to tho se to whom they are 
due; and then when ye judge between man and man, that ye judge with justice … (Surāt al-Nisā 4: 
58) 
The LM and the SS in many time, stress the importance of justice. Both for demand the 
administration of Malacca be run justly in accordance with the law of Allah: 
“Concerning all the ministers and sida (court officers) and the fighting man they should act 
in accordance with the words of God Most High in the Qur’ān, they should obey the command 
to do good and the injunction forbidding to do evil” (Liaw, 1976). 
“Kullukum rā’in wa kulluk um mas’ūlun ‘an ra’iyyatihi , which means: All of you being shepherds 
will be questioned about your herds”. 
“Al-‘abdu tin al-maula”, means: The subject is the land of the Master”. 
 “Al-ra’yatu cun bikh sultan [ chu] dirakh” (Persian), means: “The subjects are like root s and the 
rulers are like trees” (Winstedt, 1938). 
…kerana pada yaum kiamat atas batang leher kamu tergantung pekerjaan itu”, means: “… 
because on the Day of Resurrection, on your neck is hung this work (you will have to account 
for your deeds). This clause perhaps refers to the Quranic verse ( Surāt al -Isrā’ 17:13) which 
means “Every man’s fate We have fastened on his own neck: On the Day of Judgment We shall 
bring out him a scroll, which he will see spread open.” (Liaw, 1976). 
The LM also contains provisions relating to the Ruler (government), the administration and 
administrative law. Chapter 1:3 mentions the qualities required of a ruler which are four in 
number. Firstly, he is merciful; secondly, he is generous; thirdly, he is courageous; and fourthly, 
he is able to give his verdict decisively. These qualities actually are important in order to maintain 
the stability of political power. 
The SS describes Sultan Mansur Shah’s advice to his son, Sul ṭān ‘Alā al-Dῑn Ri’āyat Shah to 
rule the state according to the command of Allāh; 
“Upon you is laid the duty of faithfully cherishing those who are subject to you and of 
liberally forgiving any offences they may commit, as we are bidden by Almighty God in th e 
words ‘Verily God is with them that shew forbearance.’ If you are confronted with your own 
business and the business of God, put the business of God before your own: and submit

--- Page 6 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 46 
yourself utterly to the will of God before your own: and submit yourself utte rly to the will of 
God, for the Prophet said: ‘Resign Thyself to the will of God and shall suffice unto your thee’. 
Do as I am telling you, my son, and assuredly you shall receive the blessing of Almighty God and 
the blessing of his Prophet (may God bless him and give him peace)” (Winstedt, 1938). 
The SS reported that Sul ṭān ‘Alā al -Dῑn Ri’āyat Shah disguised himself one night, when he 
fought against many thieves. His actions result in wiping out almost all thieves: 
“Now it happened once that thieves were rife in the city of Malacca and people were robbed 
night after night. So distressed was Sul ṭān ‘Alā al -Dῑn to hear of the depredations of these 
thieves that one night having dressed himself like a thief he went in disguise with Hang Isak and 
Hang Siak round the city to see what was going on. On researching a certain spot, the king came 
upon five thieves carrying a chest slung on a pole. He set upon them and the thieves took fright 
and bolted, all five of them, and they threw away(?) the chest…”. 
 The second principle of state and government in Islam is the obedience of the ruled to 
their rules. The Qur’ān commands that Muslims render their obedience to Allah, to Messenger, 
and those charged the authority among them. ( Surāt al-Nisa 4: 59). Yet this concept of obedience 
is also a limited and conditional obedience on their part, for Mus lims are told that they do not 
owe obedience to unjust command. In order words, “No obedience due to him who does not 
obey God or rebel against God’s commandment” (Asad, 1961) 
The LM also mentions the following clauses to show the role of the sulṭān and the ruled: 
Aṭi’ Allāh wa a ṭi’ al-Rasūl wa uli al -Amri minkum (Surāt al-Nisā’ 4: 59), means: “Obey Allah and 
obey the Messenger and those who have the command over you”. 
The third principle of political life in Islam is shūrā. In a board sense, the Arabic term al-shūrā 
means consultation with others for the purpose of knowing their opinions (al-Duri, 1974). It is a 
process of mutual consultation in the affairs of the Muslim communit y (Dieranieh, 1975). The 
rulers and the ruled conduct their affairs by mutual consultation. 
The Qur’ān commands Muslims to take their decisions, after consultation, whether on a 
public matter or a private one (Hamudullah, 1969). The Qur’ān provides two ma in injunctions 
which directly refer to the concept of al-shūrā. The first is the Quranic passage, “ amruhum shūrā 
baynahum” (Surāt al-Shūrā 42: 38) who conduct their affairs by mutual consultation. Another one 
is “wa shāwirhum fῑ al-amr” (Surāt al-‘Imrān 3: 159) and consult them in affairs. 
The key terms which determines the scope of the consultation in both passage is the noun 
“amr” (affair), which refers to the object of the consultation. We should examine how this term 
was defined by the Prophet. Durin g the lifetime of Mu ḥammad, his overall conduct is divided 
into two categories: spiritual and temporal. “The spiritual aspect of life was regulated by the Law 
Giver whether through the direct Quranic revelation ( waḥy) or through the divinely inspired 
(ilhām) explanatory spiritual legislation which was beyond human reason, and so the Prophet 
made reference to nobody. The second type was the temporal legislation which dealt with 
conduct of worldly affairs. At this level the prophet would m ake it a matter of c onsultation” (alMunifi, 1973). Therefore, the Prophet defined the object of the consultation as those temporal 
matters about which there were no precise injunctions in Qur’ān. 
In light of the previously quote Quranic injunctions concerning shūrā and how they were 
applied by the Messenger of Islam, it became a rule of thumb in Islamic legal traditional that 
whenever there is a naṣṣ or precise injunction of the sharῑ’ah pertinent to the subject under 
consideration, upholding such an injunction with respect to its application to the case under

--- Page 7 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 47 
consideration is mandatory on both the ruler and the ruled. Consultation, in this case, is relevant 
only to the determination of the best possible methods of applying that junction and may be 
undertaken by the people in whatever form they choose (Liaw, 1976). 
In the Sulṭanate in Malacca, although political power and concerns rested upon one person, 
the sulṭan, the constitution of the state defined the requirement of consultation in accordance 
with the concept shūrā. The LM mentions that the sulṭāns had consulted and c ooperated with 
their ministers: 
“And this is what is to be done by all the ministers who are holding this kind of office. You 
should from early morning sit in the hall of audience, because God has to a great extent left all 
human being to (the care of) the rulers and their ministers, for the Prophet, may God bless him 
and give him peace, has said: 
 “All of you, being shepherds, will be questioned about your herds, (and) therefore, if the 
occasion arises, (we) should willingly take orders and carry out wherever task may be assign to us 
in this world so that we may feel without burden in the world to come, because, even if the ruler 
be just (‘ādil), if has no ministers or judges to carry out (his orders), his justice cannot take effect. 
Even if is brave and wise but the ministers and subjects do not agree (among themselves), 
(the country) will not be at peace. It is like fire, if there is no firewood, certainly the fire cannot 
burn. And it also it is with the rulers” (Liaw, 1976). 
In the SS, there are many statements which show the practice of shūrā: 
“… Now the Raja of Rekan was, as it were, ruler of Malacca, Sul ṭan Abū Shah ῑd being still 
in minor, the chiefs, ministers and war-chiefs assembled before the Bendahara to take counsel”. 
“… And Tun Telenai consulted with Menteri Jana Putra…” 
“… The Laksamana, the Sri Bija diraja and the war -chiefs accordingly foregathered with 
Bendehara Paduka Raja to consider what should be done,,,” 
 “… Bendahara Paduka Raja then sent for the Sri Bija diraja, the Laksaman, and the war -
chiefs; and when they had come, the Bendahara took consel of them.” 
For the above statement, it was understood that although the sulṭans have power ( daulah), 
there were some rule s relate to them. In the SS and particularly the LM there is emphasis upon 
the right and duties of the ruling classes and the rules which they must know and take particular 
care of. As mentioned, the Quran injunction “Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those of 
you who have the command over you” has been highlighted. The rulers, ministers and people 
must cooperate and enjoin to act in accordance with the word of God. The minister is likened to 
a shepherd to a shepherd to whose care God has entrusted the people. He must be just and carry 
out the ruler’s proper commands. His religious authority stems only from his role as symbolic 
defender or guardian of Islam, so that obedience to him is restricted to politic al affairs 
(Deiraneih, 1975).

--- Page 8 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 48 
3.0 GOVERNMENTAL AUTHORITIES 
These authorities can be divided into three; legislative, executive and judicial authorities. 
I. Legislative Authority 
As the Quranic verse highlighted: “Aṭi’ Allāh wa aṭi’ al-Rasūl wa uli al-Amri minkum” (Surāt alNisā’ 4: 59). This means: “Obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those who have the 
command over you”, and a statement which is always mentioned at the end of almost every 
chapter; “ Wa’lLāhu a’lam bi al - ṣawāb”, means: “And Allah knoweth best the truth”, show t he 
absolute sovereign is God alone and by extension sovereignty belongs to His final revealed 
message of Islam. Therefore, the absolute legislative authority belongs to Allah alone, the 
absolute sovereignty and judgment or decision (Winstedt, 1938). 
II. The Executive Authority 
The LM described the structure of Malacca’s administration; 
Every king must, in the first place, appoint a Chief Minister ( Bendahara), secondly, a Police -
Chief ( Temenggung), thirdly, a Treasurer ( Penghulu Bendahari ) and fourthly, a Harbo ur-master 
(Shahbandar), (and if he does so) both the ruler and his subjects can live in peace and security. 
Therefore, the highest rank was the sultan. He was assisted by the Chief minister ( Bendahara) 
who was his trusted advisor on matters of state. Meanwhile, he had a Police-Chief (Temenggung) 
to ensure peace within the state, a Commander ( Laksamana) to ensure peace at sea and a 
Harbour-master (Shahbandar) who collected taxes in the port. 
There were certain characteristics which were prerequisites for th e appointment of a 
minister. Besides the principles in the previous discussion, there were other six requirements. He 
should (Liaw, 1976): 
i. Be able to investigate whether a subject is guilty or not 
ii. Be able to know the law 
iii. Be able to know how to solve disputes (arising out) of the taking of employment 
iv. Be able to hear both parties 
v. Be able to (be) humane, even at the time of giving severe punishment 
vi. Be able to know (how to conduct) an investigation properly. 
III. Judicial Authority 
The coming of Islam gave new light to Malaccan people, with the application of the Islamic 
law ( sharῑ’ah). This law aims at construct human life on the basic of ma’rūfāt (virtues) and to 
cleanse it to munkarāt (vices) (Ibrahim, 1957) or in the other words to pursue ḥusn (high moral 
standard) and to avoid qubḥ (ugliness of life and character). The law in Malacca was legally 
administered by a qāḍi or ḥākim (judge). 
Historically, it was a costume of the Prophet (peace upon him) to appoint qāḍῑs, he was 
followed in this by the Rightly Guid ed Caliphs (al-Khulafā’ al-Rāshidūn), although they themselves 
exercised judgment personally. It was, therefore, incumbent upon the ruler ( sulṭān), if he could

--- Page 9 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 49 
not personally give judgement, to appoint qāḍῑs; failing which, it was not feasible for him to 
execute the ordinances of the sharῑ’ah (Lambton, 1981). 
By the 15 th century, Islamic legal institutions, especially that of the qāḍῑ existed in Malacca. 
The SS mentions qāḍῑs in the reign of Sul ṭan Man ṣur S hah (1456 -1577 C.E.) of Malacca 
(Winstedt, 1938). That was Mawlānā Abū Bakar, who presented the book, Durr al -Manẓūm to 
Sulṭan Manṣur Shah, and was appointed the qāḍῑ of the sulṭanate in addition to his function as a 
religious advisor to the sulṭan (Hashim, 1988). There were several other religious advis ors in 
Malacca who apparently also functioned as the sharῑ’ah functionaries, for they were called qāḍῑ, 
the most prominent among them being Qā ḍῑ Yusuf, Qā ḍῑ Munawwar, Qā ḍῑ Sadr Jahan. 
(Winstedt, 1938). These qāḍῑ were also reported to have exerted considerably influence upon 
court circles, and were socially on a par with the tradi tional dignitaries and notables (Osman, 
1997). Of course, the qāḍῑ’s function is to redress wrongs and to enforce rights. He was supreme 
and the administration of justice h ad to be above the suspicion of subs ervience to executive 
authority (Ibrahim, 1975). 
The relatively strong authority of the qāḍῑ vis-à-vis the rulers in the Malay world reminded 
us of the powerful structure of the sharῑ’ah functionaries in other parts of the Muslim world, for 
example in the Ottoman Empire. Even through the qāḍῑ in certain parts of the Malay world, 
including Malacca, exercised a relatively tremendous influenced upon the population and rulers 
like their Ottoman counterparts, they generally had no such highly elaborated Ottoman hierarchy 
of Islamic legal authorities (Gibbs, 1957). 
Consequently, having a well -organized system and power, Malacca was able to widen its 
empire to include the Malay Peninsula and some parts of Sumatera, such as Kampa r, Inderagiri, 
Jambi, Bangkalis, Carimun Island, Pasai, Siak and Riau -Lingga. Through the expansion of the 
empire, Malacca had directly brought Islām to Malay world. 
4.0 MALACCA’S LEGAL SYSTEM 
In Malaysian historiography, Islamic law became the basis of the laws of the Malay states sin ce 
the early history of Malacca (Ibrahim 1975). In Malacca, the influenced of Islām in its laws, was 
so strong that in the Maritime Laws of Malacca, the helmsman of a ship was likened to the leader 
of a prayer congregation (imām) and the crew as this congregation (ma’mūm) (Winstedt, 1956). At 
the same time, the basis for the provisions related to Islamic law in the LM is stressed: “… they 
should act in accordance with words of God Most High in the Qur’ān, they should obey “the 
command to do good and the junction forbidden to do evil.” (Liaw, 1976). 
The LM mentions: “…this is a treatise on the Kanun law (adhere to) in all large lands and by 
all great rulers and their viziers and on the customs in the dependent areas and villages, i n the 
hope that it will benefit the land and the rulers.” 
The LM did reflect the impact of Islamic law upon the Malay a dministrative and legal 
systems (Hashim, 1988). It is considered the earliest Malay law digest available, and it indeed 
contained a great deal of Islamic elements in addition to those of the indigenous ‘ ādah (local 
customary usage/tradition). The text showed how Islamic legal doctrine interacted with and 
adapted to local circumstances. 
Some Western researchers like William R. Roff and Alfred P. Rubin even claimed that the 
LM were basically based on Islamic law, apart from some inclusions of nationality and customary

--- Page 10 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 50 
laws. Prior to the coming of Islam, two major schools of customary law were practiced by the 
inhabitants of the Malay stat es, i.e. Adat Perpateh and Adat Temenggong (Hamid, 1983). These 
customary laws had bound every individual and had in some cases been a bulwark against the 
tyranny of chief or rulers. Islam played an important role in lessening the force of the traditional 
customs which regulated political and legal affairs (Ryan, 1971). 
5.0 CONCLUSION 
This article aims to present the Islamic impact on this Malay historical state, as well as its role in 
the formation of the Malay-Islamic civilization. It is to the credit of Sye d Muhammad Naquib alAttas who initiated a general consciousness for the need to reinterpret Islamic history in 
Southeast Asia. In his books, "Preliminary Statement on A General Theory of the Islamization 
of the Malay -Indonesian Archipelago" and "Islam Dal am Sejarah dan Kebudayaan Melayu", he 
took the onerous task of explaining in great depth the intellectual and civilizational significance 
of the Islamic impact. The process comes through the transformation of key terms and concepts 
in the worldview of the Muslims. Insofar as the Malay Archipelago is concerned there are three 
important elements that he observed in the Islamization process: first is the transformation of 
the Malay -Indonesian Hindu -Buddhist aesthetic worldview into the more rational, scientifi c, 
universal lslamic worldview; second is the role of language in the process of Islamization and 
conversely of deislamization; and third is his emphasis on the metaphysical elements as the 
primary and basic component of Islamization. 
The Islamization of M alacca was an episode from the general theory of the Islamization of 
the Malay Archipelago. Its process generally refers to the process that brought about the 
phenomenon of historical and cultural impact of Islam upon the Sultanate of Malacca which 
revolutionized its vision of reality and existence into a distinctly Islamic worldview. 
The article emphasizes the civilizational significance of the Islamic impact by looking at the 
use at technical terms for the rulers: Sulṭān, Khalīfat al -Mu'minīn and Ẓill All āh f ī al -'Alam, the 
concept of government in Islam, the system of political authority and the governmental 
authorities of the Sultanate. It also comprises the discussion on the legal system in Malacca. 
It is hoped, therefore, this article would have shed some lights on the significant role played 
by Islam in Malacca by looking at how Malacca, with the advent of Islam, developed into the 
strongest and most influential cent re of Islam in the fifteenth century in this part of the world. 
Although Malay civilization in general may have begun much earlier than the Malay Sultanate of 
Malacca, however fundamental changes took place soon after Islam took a firm hold on the 
Malay Archipelago. 
References 
‘Abd al-Aziz, Sa’id. (1980). “The Use and Abuse of Democracy in I slam,” in International Human Right 
Contemporary Issue. ed. Jack Nelson and Vera Green. New York: Human Right Group Earl Cohen 
Enterprise, p. 68. 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. (1990). Islam Dalam Sejarah Dan Kebudayaan Melayu. 4th Edition. 
Petaling Jaya: Angkatan Belia Islam Malaysia (ABIM). 
Al-‘Awdah, ‘Abd al-Qadῑr. (1978). al-Islām wa Awḍāʻunā al-Siyāsiyyah. Cairo: al-Mukhtar al-Islami. 
Al-Attas, Syed Muhammad Naquib. (1969). P reliminary Statement on a General Theory of the Islam ization of the 
Malay-Indonesian Archipelago. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.

--- Page 11 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 51 
Al-Khatῑb, ‘Abd al-Karῑm. (1975). al-Khilāfah wa al-Imāmah. Beirut: Dār al-Ma’ārif. 
Al-Māwārdῑ, Abū al- Ḥasan. (1983). Al-Aḥkām al-Sulṭāniyyah wa al-Wilāyāt al-Dinῑyyah. Beirut: Dār al-kutub 
al-‘Ilmiyyah. 
Al-Munῑfῑ, Abdullāh A. (1973). “The Islamic Constitutional Theory” ( Ph.D dissertation ), University of 
Virginia. 
Al-Rayyis Muhammad. (1969). Al-Naẓariyyat al-Siyāsiyyah al-Islāmiyyah. Cairo: Dār al-Ma’ārif. 
Anwar, Chejne. (1960). Succession of the Rule in Islam. Lahore: S.H Muhammad Ashraf. 
Asad, Muḥammad. (1961). The Principles of State and Government in Islam. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 
Deiranieh, Akram Raslan. (1975). “The Classical “concept of State in Is lam” (Ph.D Thesis), Washington 
D.C.: Department of Political Science Howard University, Summer. 
Gahṭān ‘Abd al-Raḥmān al-Dūrῑ. (1974). al-Shūrā Bayna al-Naẓariyyah wa al-Taṭbῑq. Baghdād: Maṭba’ah alUmmah. 
Gibbs, H. A. R. & Bowen, H. (1957). Islamic Society and the West, 2 vols. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Goldziher, Ignaz. (1971). Muslim Studies 2. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd. 
Grunebaum, Gustave E. von. (1953). Medieval Islam. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Ḥamidullāh, Muḥammad (1969). Introduction to Islam. Paris: Centre Culturel Islamique. 
Hashim, Mohammad Yusuf. (1988). Persejarahan Melayu Nusantara. Kuala Lumpur: Teks Publishing Sdn. 
Bhd. 1988). 
Ibrahim, Ahmad. (1975). Islamic Law in Malaya. Kuala Lumpur: Malaysia Socio logical Research Institute 
ltd. 
Ibn ‘Asakir. (1984). Mukhtaṣar Tārikh Dimashq li Ibn ‘Asākir. Dimashq: Dar al-Fikr. 
Ismail Hamid. (1983). The Malay Islamic Hikayat. Bangi: Penerbit Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. 
Lambton, Ann. (1981). “Changing Concepts of Authority in the Late Ninth/Fifteenth and Early 
Tenth/Sixteenth Centuries”, in Islam and Power , Alexanders Cudsi & Alo E. Hillal Dessouki (eds.), 
London: Croom Helm, pp. 49 – 74. 
Liaw, Yock Fang. (1976). Undang-undang Melaka (The Laws of Malacca). The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Lewis, Bernard. (1988). The Political Language of Islam. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. 
Mamat, Ismail. (2011). “The Islamization of the Malay Worldview: A Cultural Transformation”. In Islamic 
Revealed Knowledge Dimension of Thought . Edited by Thameem Ushama. Gombak: IIUM Press , pp. 95 - 
112. 
Mamat, Ismail. (2016). “The Impact of Islam on the Malay Language ”. In Islamic Thought and Its 
Contemporary Relevance. Edited by Thameem Ushama. Gombak: IIUM Press, pp. 291-310. 
Manzooruddῑn, Aḥmad. (1962). “The Classical Muslim State,” Islamic Studies. Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 83-104. 
Osman, Mohd. Taib. (1997). Islamic Civilization In the Malay World . Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan 
Pustaka. 
Paydar, Ma nouchehr. (1973). “Aspects of the Islamic State: Religious Norms and Political Realities”. 
(Ph.D Thesis), University of Utah: Department of Political Science. 
Rubin, Alfred. (n.d.). The International Personality of Malay Peninsular: A Study of International Law of Imperialism. 
Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press. 
Ryan, N. J. (1971). The Cultural Heritage of Malaya. Kuala Lumpur: Longman.

--- Page 12 of 12 ---
Ismail bin Mamat / UMRAN – International Journal of Islamic and Civilizational Studies. vol. 5, no.3 (2018) pp. 41 - 52 
Page | 52 
Shaban, M. A. (1971). Islamic History C.E. 600-750. Cambridge: Cambridge University. 
Teeuw, A. E. and Wyatt, D. K. (1970). Hikayat Patani: A Story of Patani. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Uthman, ‘Abd al-Karim. (1972). Ma’ ālim al-Thaqāfāh al- Islāmiyyah. Beirut: Maktab al-Nur. 
William, Roff. (1967). The Origin of Malay Nationalism. Kuala Lumpur: University of Malaya Press. 
Winstedt, R. O. (1938). “The Malay Annals or Sejarah Melayu.” Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal 
Asiatic Society (JMBRAS). Vol. 16. No. 3, pp. 1-41. 
Winstedt, R.O. and Jong, P.E. Josselin De. (1956). “The Maritime Laws of Malacca”. Journal of the 
Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society (JMBRAS). Vol. 29. No. 38, pp. 22-59. 
Zahrawy, Saleh Faris. (1982). Political Representation in Islam”. (Ph.D Thesis), Washington D.C.: Faculty 
of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences of the Catholic University.