# SOURCE FILE: Ancient Buddhist scrolls from Gandhara  the British Library Kharoṣṭhī fragments (1999) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\PDF\Ancient Buddhist scrolls from Gandhara  the British Library Kharoṣṭhī fragments (1999) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_5_chronology (5. คัมภีร์โบราณที่สุด มิติภูมิศาสตร์ และการกำหนดอายุ C-14)
# PAGES: 328 | TOTAL CHARS: 742750

=== PAGE 1 ===
ology at 
“tii iui 

=== PAGE 2 ===

=== PAGE 3 ===

=== PAGE 4 ===

=== PAGE 5 ===
Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara 

=== PAGE 6 ===
Fragment 2, r 

=== PAGE 7 ===
Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara 
The British Library Kharosthi Fragments 
RICHARD SALOMON 
with contributions by Raymond Allchin and Mark Barnard 
Foreword by His Holiness the Dalai Lama 
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON PRESS 
Seattle 

=== PAGE 8 ===
LIBRARY 
JONT SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
4325 N. COLLEGE AVE. 
CLAREMONT, CA 91711-3199 
Copyright © 1999 by the University of Washington Press 
Published in the United Kingdom by The British Library 
Printed in Hong Kong 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any infor- 
mation storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Salomon, Richard, 1948— 
Ancient Buddhist scrolls from Gandhara : The British Library Kharosthi fragments / 
Richard Salomon 
: with contributions by Raymond Allchin and Mark Barnard. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-295-97768-X (cloth : alk. paper). — ISBN 0-295-97769-8 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Manuscripts, Kharosthi—Pakistan—Gandhara. 
2. Buddhist antiquities— 
Pakistan—Gandhara. 
3. Sarvastivadins—Pakistan—Gandhara—History—Sources. 
4. British Library. Dept. of Oriental Manuscripts and Printed Books. 
I. Allchin, F. Ray- 
mond (Frank Raymond), 1923— 
~~. _‘II. Barnard, Mark, 1953—__—.._ 
III. Title. 
BQ244.G35S25 1999 
294.3'8—dc21 
98-37360 
IP 
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of the American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library 
Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. 
Shaded relief base maps from the Mountain High Maps collection © 1993, 1995 Digital 
Wisdom, Inc. 
All photographs courtesy of The British Library, except the following: 
Pls. 5-6, 19-20: Isao Kurita 
Pls. 12-14: By the author, with the owner’s permission 
Pl. 16: By the author 
Pls. 17-18: Ashmolean Museum 
Fig. 8: From Journal Asiatique, ser. 3, vol. 2 (1836): pl. XI.1 

=== PAGE 9 ===
Contents 
Chapter | 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
List of Illustrations 
ix 
Foreword by His Holiness the Dalai Lama 
xiii 
Preface 
xv 
Note on the System of Transcription and Citation 
xviii 
Abbreviations 
xx 
The Background: Gandhara and Gandharan Buddhism 
3 
1.1. Gandhara: Geographic Setting and Early History 
3 
1.2. Buddhism in Gandhara 
5 
1.3. Textual Sources and the Modern Academic Study of Buddhism 
7 
1.4. Previous Discoveries of Early Buddhist Manuscripts and Their Significance 
for the Study of Buddhism 
8 
1.5. The British Library Kharosthi Fragments and Gandharan Buddhism: 
A Preview of the Potential Significance of the New Discovery 
9 
The Contents of the British Library Kharosthi Collection 
15 
2.1. General Description 
15 
2.2. Texts and Genres Represented in the Collection 
22 
2.3. Catalog of the Fragments 
42 
2.4.Summary of Original Scrolls or Scroll Sets 
53 
2.5. Summary of Scribal Hands 
54 
Previous Discoveries of Kharosthi Manuscripts 
57 
3.1. Kharosthi Manuscripts Found in Chinese Central Asia 
58 
3.2. Kharosthi Manuscripts Found in Afghanistan 
59 
3.3. Kharosthi Manuscripts from Other Regions or of Unknown Origin 
66 
3.4.Conclusions 
68 
Origin and Character of the Collection 
69 
4.1. Physical Evidence 
69 
4.2. Textual Evidence: The “Likhidago” Interlinear Notations 
71 

=== PAGE 10 ===
ce 
Fragments 16-19 before 
unrolling and conservation 

=== PAGE 11 ===
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Appendix 
4.3. Archeological Parallels 
77 
4.4. A “Buddhist Genizah”? 
81 
CONTENTS 
vii 
4.5. Additional Comments on the Interment of Manuscripts and Birch Bark Texts 
84 
Format, Material, and Construction of the Scrolls 
87 
5.1. The Large (Composite) Scrolls 
87 
5.2. Construction of the Smaller Texts 
98 
5.3. Observations on the Origin and Use of the Scroll Format 
100 
5.4. Scribal Materials and Techniques 
106 
Paleographic and Linguistic Features of the Gandharan Scrolls 
6.1. The Gandhari Language and the Kharosthi Script 
110 
6.2. Paleographic Features 
114 
6.3. Orthographic Features 
120 
6.4. Phonological Features 
124 
6.5. Morphology and Syntax 
130 
6.6.Lexicon 
133 
6.7. General Remarks and Conclusions 
135 
The Date of the Manuscripts 
141 
7.1. Internal Evidence for Dating 
141 
7.2. Dating of the Pots and Their Inscriptions 
151 
7.3. Conclusions 
154 
Preliminary Evaluation of the New Corpus 
156 
8.1. Observations on the Contents of the New Corpus 
156 
8.2. Sectarian Considerations: The Dharmaguptaka Connection 
166 
8.3. Conclusions: A New View of Buddhism in Gandhara_ 
178 
Inscribed Pots and Potsherds in the British Library Collection 
1. Technical Description and Evaluation of the Pots and Potsherds 
(by Raymond Allchin) 
183 
2. Kharosthi Pot and Potsherd Inscriptions 
187 
3. The Inscribed Pots in the British Library Collection 
191 
4. The Inscribed Potsherds in the British Library Collection 
225 
5. Conclusions: The Functions of the Inscribed Pots 
240 
Glossary 
249 
References 
253 
Index 
265 
110 
183 

=== PAGE 12 ===

=== PAGE 13 ===
Illustrations 
NO 
60) 
SY 
ON 
OM 
10. 
ll. 
12. 
1B. 
14. 
15. 
ie 
18. 
20. 
aie 
IP, 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
Df 
Color Plates (following page 76) 
. Fragments 16-19 before unrolling and conservation 
. Fragment 23 before unrolling and conservation 
. Specimen of a deteriorated manuscript fragment after unrolling and conservation: 
fragment 23, part 2, r 
. Specimen of a relatively well preserved manuscript fragment after unrolling and 
conservation: fragment 1, part 5, r 
. Pot D with manuscripts inside (1993), viewed from above 
. Earliest available photograph (1993) of fragment 1, removed from pot D 
. Fragment 12, parti,r 
. Detail of fragment 9, part 3, r 
. Partial colophon text in fragment 3B 
Detail of fragment 14, r, showing a copyist’s notations 
Detail of fragment 16, r, showing a copyist’s notation 
Pyxis-shaped reliquary in a private collection 
Contents of the pyxis-shaped reliquary 
Fragments of a birch bark manuscript found inside the pyxis-shaped reliquary 
Fragment 2, r 
. Amonastery cell at Jauliaf (Taxila) with fragments of a pot in which a birch bark 
manuscript was found 
Clay pot decorated with ink drawings of monks 
Detail of decorated pot in pl. 17 
. Traces of the inscription on the decorated pot in pl. 17 
Decorated pot in pl. 17, showing the bones found inside it 
Fragment 1, part 2, v 
Pot A 
Pot A, viewed from above 
Pot B 
Pot B, viewed from above 
Pot C 
Pot C, viewed from above 

=== PAGE 14 ===
x 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
14. 
15-22. 
Dek 
24-7. 
28. 
29-35. 
36. 
SY 
40. 
41-8. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
. Potsherd12 
232 
54-5. 
56. 
57: 
58. 
59. 
PotD 
. Pot D, viewed from above 
= Lone 
. Pot E, viewed from above 
. Potsherds 1-9 
. Potsherds 10-18 
. Potsherds 19-26 
Figures 
. Fragments 25-7 before unrolling and conservation 
14 
. Mark Barnard and Mike Chambers unrolling fragment 24 
16-7 
. Fragment 24 after conservation 
18 
. Kharosthi manuscript discovered by Martin Honigberger at Shiwaki stupa 
63 
. Fragment 1, part 2, 1, detail of separated juncture between segments 
93 
. Fragment 1, part 5, r, detail of intact juncture between segments 
95 
. Original segments of the Khotan Dharmapada scroll 
97 
. Chart of Kharosthi script, as written by the scribe of fragments 1, 12 + 14, and 
16+ 25 (hand no.1) 
111 
. Genealogical chart of ASpavarman and his immediate relatives in the line of 
the kings of Apraca 
150 
Cross section of pot A, with inscriptions1and2 
192 
Details of inscriptions 1 and 20n pot A 
193-7 
Cross section of pot B, with inscription 
200 
Details of inscription on pot B- 201-2 
Cross section of pot C, with inscription 
204 
Details of inscription on pot C 204-8 
Cross section of pot D, with inscription 
215 
Details of inscription on pot D 
215-6 
Cross section of pot E, with inscription 
217 
Details of inscription on pot E 
220-3 
Potsherd 5 227 
Potsherd 6 
227 
Potsherd7 
229 
Potsherd 9 
230 
Potsherd 14 
233 
Potsherd17 
235 
Potsherd 20 
237 
Potsherd 22 
238 
Potsherd 26 
240 

=== PAGE 15 ===
ILLUSTRATIONS 
xi 
Maps 
1. Gandhara 
2 
2. Findspots of Kharosthi manuscripts 
56 
3. Findspots of pots and potsherds with Kharosthi inscriptions 
189 

=== PAGE 16 ===

=== PAGE 17 ===
THE DALAI LAMA 
All Buddhist traditions have been at pains to ensure the authenticity of 
the teachings they propound. There are several ways to do this. One involves reliance 
on scriptural sources, many of which originate in the actual words of the Buddha 
himself, while others involve logical examination and actual application in practice. 
There are several classic collections of Buddhist scriptures preserved 
in the Pali, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Tibetan languages. All of them derive 
from sources that were committed to writing long after the Buddha’s parinirvana. 
Consequently, the Kharosthi manuscripts that are believed to date from the first 
century C.E. and that are now in the possession of the British Library are of immense 
value and interest to Buddhist scholars of all traditions. 
These birch bark scrolls are believed to be the oldest surviving Buddhist 
texts ever discovered. They provide us with the earliest written testimony of the 
original words of the Buddha. They will provide fascinating insights into how the 
teachings of the Buddha were studied, preserved, and understood nearly 2,000 years 
ago. And as such, I believe that they will reinforce and clarify rather than challenge 
our modern understanding of the fundamental doctrines of Buddhism. 
In terms of historical enquiry, these texts also document the importance 
of Gandhara as a center of Buddhist literature and scholarly thought. They confirm 
Gandhara’s key role in the transmission of Buddhism from India, the land of its 
origin, to central Asia and beyond. 
Despite the great respect that Buddhists universally have for their 
scriptures, there is sometimes a risk of books being venerated from a distance rather 
than read. This is all the more likely when the manuscripts concerned, like these, are 
extremely rare and fragile. I am very glad, therefore, that a series of books of which 
Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara is the inaugural volume is to be published. 
This will make these valuable fragments of ancient Buddhist literature, otherwise 
necessarily available only to a limited number of professional scholars, accessible to 
everyone who is interested to read them. 
‘September 30, ag 
LY) 

=== PAGE 18 ===
GA 
iy 
Z 
part 5,r 
’ 
Fragment | 

=== PAGE 19 ===
Preface 
In September 1994, the British Library’s Oriental and India Office 
Collections, through the generous assistance of an anonymous benefactor, acquired 
the collection of twenty-nine birch bark scrolls containing texts in Kharosthi script 
that constitute the subject of this volume. It immediately became clear that this 
was a find of extraordinary interest, among other reasons because these fragments 
are likely to be the oldest Buddhist manuscripts, as well as the oldest Indian manu- 
scripts, known to date. In June 1996, this discovery came to the attention of the 
media, and in that and subsequent months numerous reports, inevitably varying 
in accuracy,’ appeared in the press and electronic media worldwide. The first schol- 
arly publication on the manuscripts, a brief summary of and introduction to the 
new materials (Salomon 1997a), was published in July 1997. The present book 
provides a more detailed description of the new manuscripts and a survey of their 
contents, in order to evaluate, in a preliminary way, their overall significance and to 
set an agenda for their further study. It is intended as the first volume of a series of 
studies of these manuscripts. Subsequent volumes in this series will comprise edi- 
tions and detailed studies of particular texts within this corpus, and it is hoped that 
the first of these volumes, an edition and study of the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra frag- 
ment,’ will appear not long after the publication of this introductory volume. Also 
projected for a later phase of the project are comparative studies of the Buddhologi- 
cal and linguistic and paleographic significance of these manuscripts. 
Because of the wide interest in this discovery that has been expressed 
outside as well as within the academic community, I have attempted to make this 
presentation as accessible as possible to the nonspecialist reader, without compromis- 
ing scholarly standards. Much of the material in chapter 1, for instance, is intended 
primarily for the nonspecialist, with a view to providing a broader context within 
which the significance of the new materials can be understood. It is also for the con- 
venience of the nonspecialist audience that a Glossary, providing brief definitions of 
1. Among the more accurate reports were those in the New York Times (July 7, 1996, p. 3), 
Asiaweek (September 6, 1996, p. 49), and the Seattle Times (February 16, 1997, section L, pp. 1-2). 
2. See section 2.2.3. 
XV 

=== PAGE 20 ===
xvi 
PREFACE 
Buddhist words and other technical terms that will be familiar to the experts, has 
been added (pp. 249-52). Some other sections of the book, such as chapter 6, on the 
language and script, and the Appendix, on the interpretation of the inscriptions on 
the pots associated with the manuscripts, may try the patience of the general reader, 
who should feel free to skip at least parts of them, though in each case the introduc- 
tory and concluding portions may be of broader interest. Chapter 8, on the other 
hand, in which the topics introduced in a general way in the first chapter are devel- 
oped at greater length, is particularly intended for the attention of both categories 
of readers. It is also with the interests of the nonspecialists in mind that, contrary to 
standard scholarly practice in this field, I have translated quotations from scholars 
writing in French and German into English. I hope that in doing so I have not in any 
way distorted their intended meanings. In the case of longer quotations, the original 
text is given in a footnote, so that those who wish to check the translation can do so 
conveniently. I am fully aware that, in trying to write a book that will be of use and 
interest to both professional scholars and to general readers, one runs the risk of 
pleasing neither. I can only hope that this is not the case here, but when in doubt I 
have favored the interests of the former and trust that the latter will understand my 
priorities. 
Inevitably, most of what is said here about the manuscripts, their contents, 
and their significance is provisional. Much of it will need to be supplemented and 
modified in the course of future detailed studies, and at least some of it will surely 
turn out to be incorrect. Nonetheless, I have felt, in view of the unusual degree of 
interest that this discovery has aroused worldwide, an obligation to bring out this 
volume as soon as practically feasible, even if this requires some compromise with 
the degree of certainty and comprehensiveness that is normally desirable in a schol- 
arly publication. 
The British Library Kharosthi fragments are being studied and published 
under the auspices of the British Library/University of Washington Early Buddhist 
Manuscripts Project, which supported the preliminary phase of research that has led 
to the publication of this introductory volume and which is continuing to support 
the preparation of the individual text studies that are to follow it. I would like to ex- 
press my sincere gratitude to these two institutions for their generous support, and 
especially to certain individuals within them who have made these arrangements 
possible. At the British Library, the efforts of Graham Shaw, Deputy Director of the 
Oriental and India Office Collections, and Michael O’Keefe, Assistant Keeper, have 
been invaluable. Not only their practical support but also their keen interest in 
and enthusiasm for the project have made it a pleasure to work at their institution. 
Thanks are also due to Mark Barnard, head of the Preservation and Conservation 
Department of the Oriental and India Office Collections, and to all the members 
of his staff, both for their skill and expertise in preserving the manuscripts and for 
their assistance in facilitating their study. I am also indebted to Anne Seawright of 

=== PAGE 21 ===
PREFACE 
xvii 
the British Museum for her outstanding efforts in preparing the line drawings of the 
pots and the inscriptions on them. Above all, everyone who is in any way concerned 
with or interested in this project is profoundly indebted to the sponsor, who prefers 
to remain anonymous, who not only made it possible for the British Library to 
acquire this collection initially but also continues to support its study and publica- 
tion in a most generous manner. 
At the University of Washington, special thanks are due to the College 
of Arts and Sciences and its former Dean, Dr. John B. Simpson, and especially to the 
former Divisional Dean for Humanities, Dr. Richard J. Dunn, who went to extra- 
ordinary lengths and expended great personal effort to arrange support for this pro- 
ject. The current Divisional Dean for Arts and Humanities, Dr. Michael Halleran, 
has also provided important assistance for the continuation of the project. All con- 
cerned are much indebted to the University’s Office of Research and its Director, 
Dr. Alvin L. Kwiram, for providing support for the initial, preliminary phase of this 
research, which led to the establishment of the joint British Library/University of 
Washington project, and for subsequent assistance as well. 
Equally indispensable, at another level, was the assistance of my colleague 
Professor Collett Cox and of our graduate students, especially Timothy Lenz and 
Jason Neelis. The weekly meetings during which all of us have studied and discussed 
the manuscripts provided insights and ideas beyond counting, and much of what 
is presented in this volume is the direct result of their contributions. In addition, 
Collett Cox has provided me with extensive help and suggestions with regard to the 
preparation of this volume, and I can only hope that her profound knowledge of 
Buddhism has to some degree provided a balance to my lack thereof. 
Other scholars who, in correspondence and conversation, have provided 
useful insights and information about the materials presented here are, unfortu- 
nately, too numerous to mention. But at least a few whose assistance was especially 
important must be mentioned here by name: Mark Allon, Yael Bentor, Alice Egyed, 
Fumio Enomoto, Charles Hallisey, Jens-Uwe Hartmann, Oskar von Hintiber, Robert 
Knox, Isao Kurita, Kazunobu Matsuda, and Robert Senior. I have a special debt of 
gratitude to Gregory Schopen, who provided a large number of thoughtful com- 
ments on, and insightful criticisms of, a draft version of this volume. 
The contributions of Pamela Bruton of the University of Washington 
Press are also deserving of special mention. Her skill and diligence in editing the 
manuscript of this book at all stages have made the result far better than it would 
have been without her painstaking efforts. 
Finally, on a personal note, I would like to thank my friends Tom Lowen- 
stein and Brigid MacCarthy, whose inexhaustible hospitality during my frequent stays 
in London over the past three years made those visits a pleasure as well as a success. 

=== PAGE 22 ===
Note on the System of Transcription and Citation 
In general, the symbols and conventions to be used for the transcription 
of texts in this volume and in subsequent publications in this series are based on the 
standards established in Bechert 1990: 14—5 and 1994: lix in connection with the San- 
skrit manuscripts from the Berlin Turfan collection. However, they have been modi- 
fied in some respects to make them more appropriate for use with the Kharosthi 
manuscripts. 
/// 
xviii 
An unclear or partially preserved syllable (aksara) whose reading is not 
certain. 
A lost or completely illegible syllable that has been conjecturally restored 
on the basis of the context. 
A syllable that has been omitted by the scribe and conjecturally restored. 
A missing portion (consonantal or diacritic vowel sign) of a partially leg- 
ible syllable. For example, .e transcribes a syllable in which the diacritic 
vowel sign e is visible, but the consonant to which it was attached is lost 
or illegible, while g. represents a syllable whose consonantal element is 
legible as g, but which is incompletely preserved so that it cannot be de- 
termined which vowel diacritic, if any, was attached to it. An r.. marks a 
syllable in which the preconsonantal r sign is visible but both the conso- 
nant that followed it and the vowel of the syllable are illegible. An a. indi- 
cates an “alif? or vowel carrier sign (7), that is similarly incomplete, so 
that it cannot be determined if a diacritic sign (indicating the indepen- 
dent vowel i, u, e, or 0) was originally attached to it. 
A visible, but illegible syllable, or one that is completely lost on an other- 
wise intact part of the manuscript, for example, due to peeling of the 
surface. 
A syllable that would have appeared on a lost portion of the manuscript. 
A series of these signs indicates the number of lost syllables (actually cal- 
culated in verse texts, usually estimated in prose). 
Beginning or end of an incompletely preserved line. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
NOTE ON THE SYSTEM OF TRANSCRIPTION AND CITATION 
xix 
A superscript dot indicates a small dot or circle placed on or above the 
line in the original text as a mark of punctuation, indicating a word, sen- 
tence, or verse unit division. 
fe) 
A larger circle, a design composed of several circles, or some other such 
larger symbol used in the original text to mark a major sectional division. 
With regard to the transliteration of modern geographical names, an at- 
tempt has been made to be as accurate as possible, though in practice it is impossible 
to maintain complete consistency. In general, toponyms in Afghanistan are spelled 
according to Ball 1982, and in Pakistan according to Zwalf 1996. But in the case of 
better-known places for which more or less standard English spellings are estab- 
lished, such as Peshawar and Jalalabad, these, rather than technical transcriptions 
with diacritics, are used. 
All bibliographic citations refer to the list of references at the end of the 
book. However, citations of Pali texts refer, unless otherwise specified, to the relevant 
Pali Text Society edition (by volume and page number), and these are not individu- 
ally cited in the list of references. 

=== PAGE 24 ===
Abbreviations 
KDhP 
Khotan Dharmapada (“Gandhari Dharmapada”) 
MIA 
Middle Indo-Aryan 
NIA 
New Indo-Aryan 
OIA 
Old Indo-Aryan 
E 
recto 
Skt. 
Sanskrit 
As 
Taisho Shinsht: Daizokyo 
Vv 
verso 
XX 

=== PAGE 25 ===
Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara 

=== PAGE 26 ===
UZBEKISTAN 
( 
Approximate Scale — |:9,800,000 
eee 
% 
0 
100 
200 mi 
Kara Tepe 
~< 
& 
ee 
j 
=_~ 
100 
200 
Any, oD 
seers 
es 
(@) rya 1) 
300 ki ae Khotan 
QU TN A) | 
yl 
4 
3 
U 
ic 
aS 
PAKISTAN 
Gandhara proper 
Greater Gandhara 
—— Base map 
Soo 
MAP| 
Map |. Gandhara 

=== PAGE 27 ===
Chapter 1 
The Background: Gandhara and Gandharan Buddhism 
1.1. Gandhara: Geographic Setting and Early History 
Gandhara, strictly speaking, is the ancient name of the Peshawar Valley 
region in what is now the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan, between the 
Suleiman Mountains along the Afghanistan border in the west and the Indus River 
in the east (see map 1). The term Gandhara is, however, also often used in a broader 
sense to refer to what might be called “Greater Gandhara,’ comprising, besides Gan- 
dhara proper, several neighboring regions, particularly the Swat and other river val- 
leys to the north, the region around the great city of Taxila to the east, and the 
eastern edge of Afghanistan to the west. These, and later on other, more distant 
regions as well, came under the cultural influence of Gandhara proper in the period 
with which we are concerned, namely, the first few centuries before and after the be- 
ginning of the Christian era, mainly as a result of being incorporated into the several 
Indo-Greek, Indo-Scythian, Indo-Parthian, and Kusana empires that were centered 
in Gandhara proper. The Gandharan character of the culture of these regions is most 
clearly attested by their adoption of the distinctive eclectic styles of Gandharan art 
and by their use of the Gandhari language. 
Gandhari is one of the Prakrit, or Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA), vernacular 
languages derived from Sanskrit, or, more precisely, from the Old Indo-Aryan (OIA) 
dialect group. As such, it is closely related, historically and linguistically, to the other 
Indo-Aryan languages of India, yet it has a distinct character which sets it off from 
the rest of them. This special character of Gandhari, or of “Northwestern Prakrit” 
as it is also sometimes called, was conditioned by several factors: by its geographical 
isolation, on the western fringe of the Indo-Aryan linguistic and cultural area; by 
its dialectal peculiarities, several of which are unique among the MIA group; and by 
the fact that it was out of the mainstream of the classical Indian literary tradition, 
which did not recognize it as one of the principal Prakrit dialects. 
But what most effectively sets off Gandhari from all other Indo-Aryan 
and other Indian languages is the fact that it was written in the Kharosthi script,* 
whereas all the others have been written, from the earliest times, in the Brahmi 
1. See figure 12 for a chart illustrating the basic forms of Kharosthi script. 

=== PAGE 28 ===
4 BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
script or its several local variants and derivatives. The Kharosthi script, which devel- 
oped as an adaptation for an Indian language of the Aramaic script used by the 
Achaemenian Empire of ancient Iran, is visually very distinct from the pan-Indian 
Brahmi script group, especially because it is written from right to left, instead of left 
to right as are the Brahmi-derived scripts. Although this and many of the other 
differences between these scripts are essentially superficial, they are nonetheless em- 
blematic of the distinct flavor of the Gandharan culture, which, though very much 
part of the greater Indian cultural sphere, always retained a separate and special 
identity within it.” 
Especially in the latter part of the historical period in question, that is, 
around the second and third centuries a.p., the Gandhari language and its con- 
stant companion, the Kharosthi script, spread far beyond even the reaches of Greater 
Gandhara as defined above, into the territories of ancient Bactria (comprising mod- 
ern northern Afghanistan and southern Uzbekistan and Tajikistan) and the oasis 
cities of the silk routes around the Tarim Basin in central Asia, in what is now the 
Xinjiang- Uighur Autonomous Region of China. This far-reaching influence of Gan- 
dhara in ancient times is directly attributable to its strategic location at the primary 
gateway to the Indian subcontinent, a location that has enabled it to play, over and 
over throughout history, the role of a crossroads and melting pot of cultures. Until 
relatively modern times, Gandhara was the principal point of encounter of the 
Indian world to the east with the Iranian world to the west, and thence with the 
ever-shifting cultural mosaic of central Asia. On an even broader scale, through 
these connections Gandhara has also been the contact zone, usually indirectly but 
at certain points in history directly as well, with the Western world, including both 
the Middle East and Europe. 
Three great waves of migration and invasion from central Asia that fun- 
damentally shaped the history of the Indian world passed through the gateway of 
Gandhara: first, the Indo-Aryan immigrations in, probably, the second millennium 
B.C.; next, the conquests by the Bactrian Greeks, Scythians, Kusanas, and associated 
ethnic groups around the beginning of the Christian era; and finally the series of 
Afghan, Turkish, and Mongol incursions—the so-called Muslim invasions—between 
the eleventh and sixteenth centuries a.p. As a result of the first of these three waves, 
Gandhara and adjoining regions were for a time a center of Vedic and Brahmanical 
culture; in ancient times, for example, the Sanskrit spoken in Gandhara was held 
to be the purest and most refined form of the sacred language. After the Vedic period, 
Gandhara became a rich prize for the great empire builders of the first millennium 
B.C., being first incorporated into the Achaemenian Empire of Iran by King Darius 
in the sixth century B.c., then falling briefly into the hands of Alexander the Great 
2. For a more detailed introduction to the Gandhari language and the Kharosthi script, see 
section 6.1. 

=== PAGE 29 ===
BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
5 
in 327-326 B.C. These events set the stage for the succeeding series of cosmopolitan 
kingdoms whose diverse ethnic origins seem to have made them particularly recep- 
tive to the Buddhist religion, which was ever ready to accept sympathizers, converts, 
and patrons regardless of their ethnic and cultural backgrounds. 
1.2. Buddhism in Gandhara 
It is generally assumed (though this remains to be confirmed historically 
and archeologically) that Buddhism was first introduced to Gandhara around the 
middle of the third century B.c. under the sponsorship of Asoka, the great emperor 
of the Mauryan dynasty and patron of Buddhism, whose control of the region is at- 
tested by the sets of his rock edicts engraved in Kharosthi script at Shahbazgarhi and 
Mansehra. A second testimony to an early presence of Buddhism in the northwest- 
ern edge of the Indian subcontinent is the famous “Questions of Milinda,” which 
purports to record a philosophical dialogue between King Menander, the greatest 
of the Indo-Greek rulers in the second century B.c., and a Buddhist monk named 
Nagasena. Although the presumed Gandhari original of this text is lost, it survives 
in various Pali and Chinese versions and stands as the earliest explicit testimony 
of the encounter of Buddhism with the cosmopolitan cultures of Gandhara—an 
encounter which, in later centuries, is vividly and abundantly illustrated in Gan- 
dharan sculpture with its unique combination of Indian and Hellenistic or Roman 
themes and styles. 
But other than these two sources, we have little direct evidence for this 
early phase of Gandharan Buddhism, for it is not until the first century B.c. that we 
begin to find abundant physical remains, in the form of stupas and other structural 
remains, figural and narrative sculpture, and, especially, Buddhist ritual and dedica- 
tory inscriptions. From this point on we can begin to trace the history of Gandharan 
Buddhism in relative detail, as Buddhist institutions grew, flourished, and expanded 
under the patronage of the successive “foreign” dynasties. By the first two centuries 
of the Christian era Gandhara had become one of the major centers of Buddhism in 
India, and it was apparently at some point during this period that Buddhism began 
to make its way beyond the borders of its Indian homeland and establish footholds 
in parts of Iran and China. 
There is compelling evidence that Gandharan monks in particular were 
instrumental in the early expansion of Buddhism beyond India. For example, two 
Buddhist inscriptions in the Kharosthi script and the Gandhari language, which 
must have been written by monks from Gandhara, have been found near the cities of 
Lo-yang and Chang-an, which were major early centers of Buddhism in China.> Fur- 
thermore, the abhidharma literature of the influential Sarvastivadin school, which for 
the most part survives only in Chinese translations, frequently refers to a Gandharan 
3. See Salomon 1998: 160 for details and references. 

=== PAGE 30 ===
6 BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
tradition, and it is generally agreed by modern scholars that some of the important 
abhidharma treatises extant in Chinese translations, such as the Abhidharma-hrdaya, 
were originally composed in Gandhara.‘ And finally, linguistic analysis indicates 
that at least some of the early Buddhist texts rendered into Chinese were translated 
from originals in, or at least derived from prototypes in, the Gandhari language. 
Thus it was specifically the Gandharan form (or forms) of Buddhism that was first 
encountered by other parts of Asia, and here once again Gandhara’s strategic loca- 
tion enabled it to play a pivotal role in the cultural history of Asia, serving, as it were, 
as the geographical springboard from which Buddhism made the great leaps that en- 
abled it to transform itself from an Indian religion into a pan-Asian and ultimately a 
world tradition. 
But our knowledge of Gandharan Buddhism has been, until now, curi- 
ously skewed. Its archeological remains are very abundant, and these have enabled 
scholars to reconstruct, in broad outline at least, the historic, artistic, and architec- 
tural manifestations of Gandharan Buddhism. For example, it is primarily the hun- 
dreds of dedicatory Kharosthi inscriptions, which are often dated and sometimes 
mention the names of contemporary kings and officials, that have made it possible 
to reconstruct the skeleton of the political and cultural history of this period. But 
the textual, and hence the doctrinal, content of Gandharan Buddhism has, until 
now, remained mostly obscure. Although the aforementioned Chinese translations 
of abhidharma texts give us some sense of the important doctrinal issues and posi- 
tions in Gandharan Buddhism (and in the process prove that Gandhara was a vital 
center of Buddhist intellectual activity), we have had virtually no direct, primary 
records of these matters. Only one specimen of an original Gandharan Buddhist 
text has been available to date, namely, the famous “Gandhari Dharmapada” scroll 
(Brough 1962), which was, however, found, not in Gandhara itself, but near Khotan 
in the Xinjiang region of China. For lack of anything to compare it to, it has until 
now been difficult to assess the significance of this unique manuscript with regard 
to the textual and doctrinal character of Gandharan Buddhism. 
In particular, it has been a matter of controversy whether or not the 
Khotan scroll (KDhP) should be taken to imply the existence of a hypothetical 
“Gandhari canon” resulting from an organized and concerted project of rendering 
Buddhist texts into the local language.’ This notion of a Gandhari canon was a pri- 
ori plausible in light of the traditionally liberal Buddhist attitude toward translation, 
which encouraged the use of local vernaculars in spreading the dharma, and the new 
discoveries that are the subject of this book prove that Buddhist texts were indeed 
4. See Willemen 1975: xiv, xvi, xxli-xxiil. For connections between various early Sarvastivadin 
abhidharma texts and the Gandhara region, see Nishimura 1982; Nishi 1934; Yamada 1957; and 
Kawamura 1974: 25ff., esp. 37. (These references provided by Collett Cox.) 
5. See chapter 3 and section 8.1.1 for further discussion of the Gandhari canon issue. 

=== PAGE 31 ===
BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
7 
translated into, and sometimes also originally composed in, Gandhari. Thus it is 
now becoming clear that the abundant physical remains of Gandharan Buddhism 
were matched by what was probably a similarly vast corpus of written texts in the 
local language, of which we now have at least an intriguing sample, if only still a 
tiny fraction of what must have been the whole. 
|.3. Textual Sources and the Modern Academic Study of Buddhism 
For some two centuries, scholars have been striving to understand the 
history of Buddhism, primarily by studying its texts on the one hand, and by observ- 
ing its modern practice in various parts of Asia on the other. For scholars principally 
interested in the origins and earlier history of Buddhism, the value of the latter 
approach is seriously circumscribed, not only because of the obvious difficulties in 
interpreting the past—nearly two and a half millennia back—on the basis of present 
practice, but also because Buddhism died out in its Indian homeland many centuries 
ago. Thus they have tried to seek out the origins of Buddhism mainly from its 
textual remains, that is, ultimately, from manuscripts. Early modern investigations 
concentrated on the Pali textual tradition of the Theravada school, largely because 
Theravada Buddhism had survived down to modern times in Sri Lanka, Burma, 
Thailand, Cambodia, and other parts of Southeast Asia, and so the texts of the Pali 
canon, or Tipitaka, were readily available there. This gave some early scholars the im- 
pression, which has since turned out to be illusory, that the Pali Tipitaka comprised 
and represented the sole original textual corpus of Buddhism, preserved more or less 
intact in its original form and language. 
Gradually, however, other approaches and discoveries, and a consequent 
broadening of the point of view of academic scholars of Buddhism, showed that 
this was by no means the whole story and that the total picture of the history of 
Indian Buddhism was far more complex and varied than it had seemed at first. In 
particular, the discovery, first in Nepal in the later part of the nineteenth century and 
then in central Asia (mainly in Xinjiang) at the end of the nineteenth and beginning 
of the twentieth century, of vast numbers of Buddhist manuscripts in Sanskrit or 
hybrid Sanskrit representing the textual corpus of previously little-known sectarian 
and doctrinal groups showed that the Pali tradition was by no means the sole 
authentic representative of Indian Buddhism. 
Meanwhile, a gradually increasing awareness of the vast canons of east 
Asian Buddhism in Chinese, Tibetan, and other east Asian and central Asian lan- 
guages had a similar effect. In particular, the Chinese translations of Indian Bud- 
dhist texts were found to preserve large portions of all three of the main divisions 
of the canons (sutra, vinaya, and abhidharma) of the various early Indian sectarian 
traditions such as the Sarvastivadin, Dharmaguptaka, and Mahasanghika, among 
others. Despite the fact that most of these sectarian canons did not survive in any 
of their original Indian languages, their Chinese versions have in principle an equal 

=== PAGE 32 ===
8 BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
claim to authority and originality to that of the Pali canon of the Theravadins, and 
therefore in this connection it has gradually become clear that the primacy accorded 
to that tradition by early modern scholars was exaggerated. It was only because 
Theravada Buddhism happened to have survived in a more or less uniform and 
continuous tradition in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia that it loomed so much larger 
than other regional, sectarian, and linguistic traditions of Indian Buddhism, particu- 
larly the lost traditions of northern India and its heirs in central and east Asia. In 
short, scholars gradually began to understand Indian Buddhism as a complex of 
local traditions, none of which could in and of itself be seen as the “original” or 
“true” form of the religion. 
1.4. Previous Discoveries of Early Buddhist Manuscripts 
and Their Significance for the Study of Buddhism 
Original manuscripts naturally provide the best, and in many cases the 
only, testimony to the earlier stages of development of these various local Buddhist 
traditions, at least as far as their textual and doctrinal corpora are concerned (though 
these, admittedly, are by no means completely representative of the traditions’ his- 
torical reality). In most cases, however, such manuscripts are not of great antiquity, 
mainly because Indian manuscripts, which are normally written on palm leaf or, 
in the far north, on birch bark, tend not to survive very long in the hot and humid 
monsoon climate that prevails throughout the subcontinent. Thus, written text tra- 
ditions only survive when the manuscripts are copied and recopied with frequency 
and regularity and are carefully stored and preserved. Such was the case, for exam- 
ple, in the Theravada tradition of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia; in these regions, 
Pali manuscripts survive in very large numbers, but relatively few of them are more 
than a few centuries old. But in India proper, where Buddhism effectively died out 
by around the thirteenth century a.p., the tradition of preserving and copying man- 
uscripts died out with it, and relatively few Buddhist manuscripts survive. In Nepal, 
where Buddhism remained vital, large numbers of Buddhist manuscripts do survive, 
but there too, the majority are relatively recent, with only a very few specimens more 
than one thousand years old known. 
But in the Tarim Basin in modern Xinjiang, which, as we now know, 
was an important center of Buddhism in the first millennium a.p., a very different 
situation prevailed, for there the desert climate was highly conducive to the survival 
of manuscripts on organic materials such as palm leaf, birch bark, or paper. Thus 
the explorations undertaken by European, Japanese, and American scholars in this 
region around the beginning of this century yielded a massive corpus of unprece- 
dentedly early manuscripts from a previously unknown major phase of Buddhism. 
As mentioned in the previous section, this discovery of thousands of fragments of 
manuscripts in Sanskrit and various local languages, mostly dating from about the 
seventh century or later but in a very few cases as old as the second or third century, 

=== PAGE 33 ===
BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
9 
had a major influence on scholarly views of the history of Buddhism, undermining 
the old Pali-centered attitudes and precipitating a gradual revision of attitudes 
which is still continuing today. 
Now it is true that older manuscripts are not always or automatically 
more valuable, authentic, or revealing than later ones. Nevertheless, early manu- 
scripts are always potentially, and usually in practice, of extraordinary value, not 
only because they tend to preserve more accurate versions of texts, less corrupted 
by the changes that they inevitably undergo in the course of long-term transmission, 
but also, and more important, because they provide direct testimony of the textual 
material that was in use at a remote period. Especially in the case of very early man- 
uscripts such as the ones described in this book, we may find not only forms of pre- 
viously known texts that may be significantly different from those we know from the 
later and modern traditions but also texts, and even entire genres and classes of texts, 
that were previously wholly unknown. 
This is particularly important because in Buddhism, as in most institu- 
tionalized religious traditions, canons of authoritative texts were eventually estab- 
lished that in effect defined the textual corpora of the various local and linguistic 
groups, as happened, for example, in the Pali and Tibetan traditions. Such standard- 
ized canons inevitably have the effect of obscuring and even completely suppressing 
earlier texts or even entire bodies of literature. They present, in effect, a censored 
version of the textual and doctrinal history of their tradition, with the old varia- 
tions, controversies, and heresies neatly excised from the record. For this reason, in 
most cases it is only through the discovery and interpretation of old manuscripts 
that historical scholars can peek behind an established religious tradition’s official 
facade and uncover the complex history that inevitably underlies it. A case in point, 
from the Western world, is the dramatically altered picture of early Christianity that 
has been provided by the discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls and the Nag Hammadi 
manuscripts. 
1.5. The British Library Kharosthi Fragments and Gandharan Buddhism: 
A Preview of the Potential Significance of the New Discovery 
Although the British Library fragments are comparable to the Dead Sea 
scrolls and the Nag Hammadi manuscripts in that they give actual samples of the 
textual corpus of a much earlier phase of Buddhist tradition than had been previ- 
ously available, they are unlikely to contain anything as radically unfamiliar as 
appeared in their Christian counterparts. The survey of the new fragments carried 
out to date, the results of which are summarized in the rest of this book, has revealed 
nothing that is startlingly at odds with early Buddhist doctrine as previously under- 
stood, nor is there much reason to expect that further analysis will turn up anything 
that will be. The importance of the new collection is on a different and perhaps less 
spectacular level, though this does not diminish its importance. These fragments 

=== PAGE 34 ===
10 BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
give us an unprecedented direct glimpse into the contents of what appears to have 
been a monastic collection or library of the Dharmaguptaka school in or around 
the first half of the first century a.p., and they are by far the earliest such sampling of 
a Buddhist textual corpus that has ever been found. It is likely, though not quite 
certain, that the British Library fragments are the oldest Buddhist manuscripts yet 
known,” and in any case they are definitely the oldest coherent set of manuscript 
material. 
An important feature of the new manuscripts is the inclusion in some of 
them of local Gandharan lore and traditions, which suggests that early Gandharan 
Buddhism and, by implication, perhaps the other early regional centers of Indian 
Buddhism as well were more distinct and localized in their character than has 
previously been apparent.’ In particular, the references in some of the new texts to 
at least two members of the contemporary Indo-Scythian ruling houses of the early 
first century A.D., who were previously known from coins and inscriptions, are a 
remarkable and unexpected discovery which enhances the texts’ historical value.* 
These references enable us to place the textual tradition of the new manuscripts in a 
historical context and thereby open up to us the previously obscure formative stage 
of Gandharan Buddhism during the Indo-Scythian period. Our view of Gandharan 
Buddhism has up to now been colored largely by the dominating effect of the Kusana 
Empire (ca. mid-first to third century a.p.), which, we now begin to suspect, over- 
shadowed and obscured the preceding Indo-Scythian period in later north Indian 
Buddhist tradition, wherein the Kusana period, and especially the reign of Kaniska, 
were portrayed as a sort of golden age. The new manuscripts now bring to light a 
forgotten but crucial earlier phase in which the Indo-Scythian dynasties played a 
role in promoting Buddhism and Buddhist institutions around the beginning of the 
Christian era that was comparable to the better-known activities of the Kusanas in 
the succeeding two centuries. 
This historical background may be significantly related to another major 
point of interest about the new manuscripts—namely, their probable connection 
with the Dharmaguptaka sect. The Dharmaguptakas have until now been a shadowy 
presence within Indian Buddhism, despite the fact that they are known to have played 
a leading role in the early dissemination of Indian Buddhism in central Asia and 
China. The collection therefore promises to provide the missing link, or at least 
one of the missing links, between Indian Buddhism and its early manifestations in 
central and east Asia. Moreover, the new material, combined with other recent epi- 
graphical discoveries, suggests that the early success and subsequent decline of the 
6. The Gandhari Dharmapada from Khotan may be of comparable antiquity, or a little later; 
the earliest central Asian manuscript fragments are probably a century or more later. For details of 
the relative and absolute dating of the new fragments, see chapter 7. 
7. These and related issues are addressed in sections 2.2.4 and 8.1.4.1. 
8. These references are discussed and evaluated in sections 7.1 and 8.3.3. 

=== PAGE 35 ===
BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
Dharmaguptakas could have been the result of shifting patterns of patronage as 
their Indo-Scythian supporters were replaced by the Kusanas, who were evidently 
more favorably inclined to the better-known Sarvastivadin sect.® 
Another important and surprising feature of the new manuscripts is the 
amount of unfamiliar material in them. In general, much, though by no means all, 
of the textual material found in the various later manuscript traditions that have 
been briefly described above is more or less common to, or at least broadly familiar 
from, one or more of the extant canonical traditions. For example, many of the cen- 
tral Asian Sanskrit manuscripts contain texts that are essentially variant versions of 
ones already known in Pali and/or other languages. To some extent this is true of 
the new Gandhari manuscripts as well, but, somewhat unexpectedly, a substantial 
majority of the approximately two dozen distinct texts represented in them have so 
far not been identified with known texts in other Buddhist languages and traditions. 
If this pattern continues to hold as more detailed studies of the individual texts are 
carried out, it would mean that the textual corpus of the Gandharan monastery 
from which they came, and presumably, by extension, of early Gandharan Buddhism 
generally, may be considerably more different from the extant corpora than might 
have been expected. In other words, although the doctrinal positions presented in 
the new materials are not radically at odds with what is familiar from other tradi- 
tions, the modes and forms of their presentation and study may be different indeed 
from what has been known to date. 
If this pattern holds true, it has wider, perhaps profound implications 
for our understanding of the notion of a “Buddhist canon” in general. For example, 
we may well be dealing here with a stage of development which is still pre- or proto- 
canonical, that is, a stage at which the contents, arrangement, and delimitation of 
a canon in the stricter sense of the term were not yet fully formed. It is also impor- 
tant to note that these manuscripts come from a time when, if traditional accounts 
can be accepted, writing had only recently been adopted as a substitute for, or rather 
as a supplement to, the older techniques of memorization and oral recitation of Bud- 
dhist texts. If this is true, we may be dealing with materials from the early phase of 
an extended period of gradual transition from a primarily oral tradition to what 
eventually became a largely written one, and examination of this material is likely 
to clarify the complex issues of the interrelation of these modes of text transmission 
and of the patterns of canon formation that grew out of them.’° 
One major class of texts which seems to imply structures and genres 
different from those of the more familiar Buddhist corpora are the commentaries 
on sets of verses, which are very prominently represented among the British Library 
fragments.” Although the individual verses explicated in these commentaries are for 
9. The Dharmaguptaka connection and its ramifications are discussed in detail in section 8.2. 
10. See section 8.1.4.2 for further discussion. 
uu. For further descriptions and a sample of this class of texts, see section 2.2.2. 

=== PAGE 36 ===
12 BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM 
the most part Gandhari translations of material well known in other traditions, the 
nature, organizational principles, and function of the texts as a whole remain largely 
obscure. Presumably, they represent local modes of instruction and preaching in the 
fundamentals of Buddhist teachings, which should provide an interesting counter- 
part to the well-known Pali commentaries, whose archetypes, now lost, were said 
to have been composed in the local Sinhalese vernacular language. We may therefore 
have in these new fragments the earliest surviving original specimens of an ancient 
tradition of vernacular commentaries. 
Such texts, and others as well, may also give us unprecedented insights 
into the methods of preaching and instruction that were employed in Gandharan 
monasteries, and the texts that were preferred for such purposes. For example, a par- 
ticular subset of texts within the new collection has an intriguing similarity to a list 
of texts recommended for study by novice monks in a vinaya text preserved in 
Chinese translation.” In view of such indications as these, it seems that the British 
Library collection provides a representative selection of the works of various types 
and classes that were studied in the monastery where they were kept, including basic 
texts, commentaries and explanatory works, and technical treatises. What we have, in 
other words, is not a set of fragments from a comprehensive, systematized canon of 
the sort that is often found in later, more developed and standardized traditions but 
rather a random sampling of texts that were actively used for study and recitation. 
Among the more technical texts in the new collection are several abhi- 
dharma or abhidharma-related fragments which are likely to be of great interest for 
the study of the development of Buddhist doctrine. As noted above, we already knew 
from later traditions, mostly preserved in Chinese, that Gandhara was an important 
early center of abhidharma studies. Now, for the first time, we have original and early 
specimens of Gandharan abhidharma texts, which are likely to represent a crucial 
formative period and which therefore have the potential to fundamentally alter and 
improve our understanding of the history of Buddhist scholastic thought. 
Notably absent from the new material is any significant reference to or 
indication of Mahayana concepts and ideals. The origins—historical, geographical, 
and doctrinal—of the Mahayana have long been a matter of fundamental concern 
and intense controversy in Buddhist studies, and it is believed by many that the Gan- 
dhara region had a crucial role in its development. But it appears that if these new 
documents are to have any effect at all on this issue, it will be a negative, or at best 
an indirect, one.¥ 
Finally, on a broader scale, the unprecedented discovery of a significant 
body of Buddhist texts in Gandhari may ultimately provide a new standard for eval- 
uating and comparing the previously known corpora of early Indian Buddhist texts 
12. See section 8.1.2.1. 
13. For further discussion of this issue, see section 8.3.1. 

=== PAGE 37 ===
BACKGROUND: GANDHARA AND GANDHARAN BUDDHISM = 13 
in Pali and Sanskrit, as well as in Chinese and other translations. Just as the discov- 
ery and analysis of early Sanskrit manuscripts contributed to a correction of the pre- 
vailing Pali-centered view of Buddhism, the new Gandhari texts can be expected to 
shift the balance by providing a new point of reference with which to compare the 
previously known traditions. In short, although it is impossible to predict at this 
point the full ramifications of this discovery over the long run, it is probably safe 
to say that it will open an entirely new chapter in Buddhist studies. 

=== PAGE 38 ===
Fig. |. Fragments 25—7 before unrolling and conservation 

=== PAGE 39 ===
Chapter 2 
The Contents of the British Library Kharosthi Collection 
2.1. General Description 
2.1.1. Arrangement and Initial Disposition 
The Kharosthi manuscripts as originally received in the British Library 
consisted of twenty-nine fragmentary rolls of birch bark manuscripts (pls. 1-2; fig. 
1). Associated with the scrolls were five clay pots and twenty-six potsherds, all bear- 
ing dedicatory inscriptions in Kharosthi. The manuscript rolls were said to have ori- 
ginally been found inside one of the clay pots, but they had been removed from it 
and placed inside thirteen modern glass jars. Unfortunately, being extremely brittle, 
they had suffered considerable damage from having been forced into the narrow 
glass jars. 
After being acquired by the British Library, the fragments were moistur- 
ized and carefully unrolled by the conservation staff of the Oriental and India Office 
Collections and mounted in fifty-six glass frames about 30 centimeters wide by 45 
centimeters high (figs. 2-7). The delicate process of unrolling and conserving the 
scrolls is described as follows by Mark Barnard, head of Preservation and Conser- 
vation at the Oriental and India Office Collections: 
When first received by the Library, the documents were still in their original 
format, that is, strips of birch bark rolled up into scrolls some 15 cm wide 
and 4 cm in diameter. On some of the scrolls writing was visible on the 
outermost layer of birch bark, in other cases not. The immediate and over- 
whelming impression was of the extreme fragility of the scrolls. Birch bark 
is an inherently fragile material, and birch bark of great antiquity even more 
so. The brittleness of the scrolls was apparent from the fact that minute 
fragments—some with writing upon them—had fallen off and collected as 
a layer at the bottom of the modern glass jars in which they had been tem- 
porarily placed. It was also observed that some of the scrolls had a shinier 
appearance than others. At some stage the outer surface of some of the 
scrolls had been crudely treated, probably with some kind of lacquer spray, 
no doubt in an attempt to overcome the brittleness, to consolidate the mate- 
rial and to prevent further shedding of fragments. The spray has not yet 

=== PAGE 40 ===
16 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
Figs. 2-6. Mark Barnard and Mike Chambers of the Preservation 
and Conservation Department, Oriental and India Office Collections, 
British Library, unrolling fragment 24 
been identified but its adverse effect upon the scrolls is already apparent 
in the wrinkling or corrugation of the surfaces so treated. It was clear that 
urgent attention was needed on two grounds: to arrest the process of frag- 
mentation of the scrolls and encapsulate them so that they could be handled 
more easily, and to enable the written data they contained to be recovered 
and recorded as soon as possible before more text was lost. 
In conservation terms the first task was to unroll the scrolls. Before this 
could be attempted at all successfully, however, it was necessary to slowly 
and gently reintroduce some moisture content into the birch bark in order 
to restore some of its natural flexibility and lessen its brittleness. It was 
decided to use an ordinary glass bell-jar for this purpose. A layer of slightly 
dampened blotting-paper was placed over a bowl inside the bell-jar together 
with some silica gel to ensure that the remoisturization took place gradually 
and moderately, since too much moisture could have promoted the growth 
of mold in the birch bark. The scrolls were then placed on top of the blotting 
paper one or two at a time and left for up to fifteen or sixteen hours in the 
moist atmosphere created inside the bell-jar (with a relative humidity con- 
tent of approximately 75%). This method was found to be successful and 
sufficient pliability was reintroduced to the birch bark to enable it to be 
unrolled without undue difficulty. Two conservators were required for the 
unrolling process, one holding the scroll carefully with tweezers while the 
other slowly teased it open. Throughout the unrolling, further moisture 
was applied as required with an ultrasonic humidifier supplied by CLE 
Design Ltd. 
Due to the inherent fragility of the birch bark with its horizontal stria- 
tions, each layer of the scroll tended to form a separate fragment of varying 
length as it was unrolled, but it was possible to preserve in very large mea- 
sure the original sequence of layers and their texts. These fragments were 

=== PAGE 41 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
17 
then encapsulated between layers of glass, this being the most suitable stor- 
age medium for birch bark (as for papyrus). A special cabinet for the long- 
term storage of the scrolls has been custom-built by Jezer Conservation 
Engineers for the British Library. It is made of aluminum and each sheet 
of glass is housed in its own individual tray edged with plastazote foam to 
absorb shocks and thus prevent the fragile birch bark from being further 
disturbed. 
It will be obvious from this description that the scrolls have not been 
conserved in the full modern sense of the word. They have simply been “made 
safe” until a satisfactory means of preserving birch bark has been developed. 
The experience of one German library in using an adhesive to consolidate 
birch bark scrolls has not been entirely successful, as with time the adhesive 
coating has darkened, rendering the text beneath less legible. The British 
Library is continuing to monitor research in this field (such as that currently 
being undertaken at the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine into 
ensuring the long-term stability of such material), and would welcome any 
expressions of interest in a collaborative program to investigate the problems 
of birch bark conservation. 
After unrolling, the fragments proved to differ widely in size and condi- 
tion, ranging from small pieces containing only a few badly damaged and incom- 
plete lines of text to large sections of scrolls as long as two meters and preserving 
several hundreds of lines with most of the text more or less intact. Specimens of 
the fragments after conservation are shown in plates 3 and 4, as examples of one of 
the many badly deteriorated pieces (frag. 23, part 2) and one of the best-preserved 
pieces (frag. 1, part 5),’ respectively. 
1. A sample text and translation from this fragment are presented in section 2.2.3. 

=== PAGE 42 ===
Fig.7. Fragment 24 after conservation 

=== PAGE 43 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
19 
In the preliminary cataloging system that was established when the scrolls 
were being unrolled, each fragment was labeled according to the number of the glass 
jar (arbitrarily numbered 1 to 13) in which it was found. Some of these jars contained 
only one scroll, others as many as four, and the scrolls from jars with more than one 
scroll were numbered as separate “fragments” within each jar, for example, “Ji2, frag- 
ment 1.” However, since the placement of scrolls together in a particular jar was the 
work of their modern discoverers and hence presumably of no historical or textual 
significance, the “J numbers” have been dropped here and the fragments are simply 
renumbered sequentially, following the same arbitrary order. Thus the single scroll 
in jar 1 has been renumbered as fragment 1, the two in jar 2 (formerly J2, fragments 
1 and 2) as fragments 2 and 3, and so on.” 
The larger fragments are subdivided into “parts,” as in “fragment 1, part 
5”; in brief references the part numbers are given in parentheses, thus “frag. 1 (5).” 
These parts represent sections of the larger scrolls that were mounted in separate 
glass frames, and hence part numbers have no intrinsic textual significance. The 
division of the parts of the larger fragments among separate glass frames did not 
involve any actual cutting of the scrolls, because the compression that the rolls 
were subjected to inside the pot in which they were buried had caused numerous 
horizontal breaks (see above and sec. 5.3.3), so that the rolls were in effect already 
divided into smaller pieces. Thus each “part” of the collection as currently arranged 
contains at least one, and more often several, separated horizontal sections of 
inscribed bark, depending on the degree of fragmentation of the scroll. 
For several reasons, the total number of “fragments” (twenty-nine) does 
not correspond exactly to the number of original scrolls whose fragments are repre- 
sented in the collection, nor to the number of texts represented in these scrolls. For 
example, in some cases (e.g., frags. 16 and 25, and frags. 12 and 14) it is clear that two 
2. The following is a concordance of the provisional and final numbering of the fragments, 
together with the frame numbers in which they are mounted: 
Original (Provisional) Number 
Final Number 
Frame Numbers 
ji 
1 
1-5 
J2, frags. 1-2 
2-3 
6-7 
J3 
4 
8-14 
J4, frags. 1-4 
5-8 
15-18 
Js, frags. 1-3 
9-11 
19-23 
J6, frags. 1-3 
12-14 
24-8 
7 
15 
29-32 
J8, frags. 1-4 
16-19 
33-6 
J9 
20 
37-41 
Jio, frags. 1-2 
21-2 
42-4 
Ju 
23 
45-6 
Ji2, frags. 1-4 
24-7 
47-50 
J13 
28-9 
51-5 

=== PAGE 44 ===
20 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
fragments were part of the same original scroll, while in other cases (e.g., frags. 20 
and 23, frags. 26 and 28) this appears to be so but is not yet definite. Also, some of the 
fragments proved after unrolling to be composites, in which smaller fragments of 
what were apparently two or more originally separate scrolls were rolled up together, 
as in the case of fragment 5, which evidently comprises parts of three originally differ- 
ent scrolls. Depending on how these variables are interpreted, there could have been as 
few as twenty-one original scrolls involved or as many as thirty-two (see also 2.4). 
The number of original texts, as opposed to scrolls, involves further 
complications, and hence is also indeterminate. For one thing, in several cases a 
single scroll contains two separate and apparently unrelated texts. In other cases, 
we find examples of separate scrolls containing what seem to be parts of the same 
text or similar texts written in the same hand, which may be separate “volumes” of 
a longer text that was divided up over several scrolls (see 2.2.2 and 5.1.1). Depending 
on how these cases are interpreted, the possible number of individual texts in the 
collection could be anywhere from twenty-three to thirty-four. Detailed studies of 
the individual texts will have to be carried out before their complex interrelation- 
ships can be fully clarified. 
It is mainly because of these complexities that the original, arbitrary 
numbering order has been retained, though with modifications as described above. 
Although it might have seemed desirable to combine fragments that definitely be- 
long to the same original scroll, such as fragments 16 and 25, in practice any such 
renumbering is likely to cause as many problems as it would solve, as long as the 
relationships between many of the fragments remain to be determined. 
2.1.2. Original Situation and Provenance 
No reliable information is available as to the circumstances, location, 
and date of the discovery of the manuscripts and associated materials. This is highly 
regrettable, as the loss of a proper archeological context seriously diminishes their 
scholarly value. To a certain extent, however, this damage can be undone, since some 
of the missing information can be partly reconstructed through comparative research. 
A few of the relevant points concerning this are introduced briefly in this section, 
and these issues are discussed at greater length in the relevant places in the following 
chapters (3, 4, and 8). 
As to the original provenance of the jars and scrolls, oral reports, received 
indirectly, suggested that they had come from Afghanistan. Although such reports 
are by no means necessarily reliable, subsequent analysis of these relics has con- 
firmed that they are very likely to have come from eastern Afghanistan. The abun- 
dant Buddhist stipa sites in the Jalalabad Plain (the ancient district of Nagarahara) 
and particularly those in the neighborhood of the village of Hadda (see 3.2.1) 
have yielded many specimens of both inscribed jars and Buddhist manuscripts in 
Kharosthi script that seem to closely resemble the new materials, although few of 
the former and none of the latter have ever been properly published. Thus, as will 

=== PAGE 45 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
21 
be discussed in sections 3.2 and 3.4, the new relics can be presumed to have come 
from somewhere in this region, possibly from the Hadda area itself. Given the diffi- 
cult conditions that have prevailed in this area for many years and continue to do 
so as of this writing, it has been impossible to investigate the matter on-site or even 
to obtain any kind of reliable information about it, so that for the foreseeable future 
at least, we must be content with this circumstantial but highly probable hypothesis. 
Since the manuscripts had been removed from the clay pot in which 
they had reportedly been found by the time that they were purchased by the British 
Library, and since five similar pots were acquired along with them, it was at first not 
clear which (if any) of the pots had originally contained the scrolls. This was a mat- 
ter of crucial importance, since the inscriptions on some of the jars contained refer- 
ences to different Buddhist sects (Sarvastivadin and Dharmaguptaka), while others 
had references to localities and individuals which could assist in dating the manu- 
scripts and in identifying their original provenance and historical associations. For- 
tunately, this critical question can be answered by reference to the earliest available 
photographs of these objects, which were taken in 1993, before these materials were 
acquired by the British Library. One of these photographs, reproduced here in plate 
5, shows what is now designated British Library pot D (also illustrated in pls. 28-9) 
viewed from above, with the scrolls lying inside it. Although it is remotely possible 
that the unknown modern discoverers of these relics for some reason removed some 
or all of the scrolls from another pot or other container and placed them in this one, 
there is little reason to think that this was the case, and it may be presumed with rea- 
sonable certainty that the scrolls were in fact originally found in British Library pot D. 
Another of the 1993 photographs, reproduced here in plate 6, shows 
what is now British Library fragment 1 taken out of pot D. This photograph shows 
several lines of text on the verso that are no longer preserved; this portion of the 
outside of the roll was evidently destroyed by mishandling between the time that 
this photograph was taken and the time that the scrolls reached the British Library 
(see 5.3.3). A comparison of plates 5 and 6 confirms that this roll is in fact the large 
one seen inside pot D at the center of plate 5. These identifications in turn confirm 
that the British Library scrolls were almost certainly originally found inside pot D, 
which bears a dedicatory inscription labeling it as a donation to the members of the 
Dharmaguptaka sect (.. . dhamaiiteana [p]arig[r]ahami, ° 
of the Dharmaguptakas”), and this in turn means that the manuscripts must have 
« ...1n the possession 
come from, or at least have been associated in some way with, a monastery of the 
Dharmaguptaka sect.? The ramifications of this important point will be discussed 
in detail in section 8.2. 
3. At an early stage in this study, before the information described here had become available, 
it was thought that the scrolls had been found inside a pot with a Sarvastivadin dedication and 
hence were affiliated with this sect. This hypothesis was mentioned in some early media reports 
and public presentations but is now refuted. 

=== PAGE 46 ===
22 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
It has, however, been reported that British Library pot A, and apparently 
some of the other pots as well, also originally contained small fragments of similar 
birch bark manuscripts. This suggests that at least some of the other pots in the col- 
lection were also used, like pot D, as depositories for scrolls, but apparently for some 
reason these manuscripts did not survive intact to modern times. 
2.1.3. Form of the Scrolls 
The texts are written with a reed pen and black ink on scrolls consisting 
of sections of birch bark, which in most cases were glued together to form long strips 
(see 5.1.2 for details). In general, the texts were written continuously over the recto 
and verso sides of the scroll, but in a few manuscripts only the recto is inscribed. All 
of the texts are incomplete and have suffered from varying degrees of loss and dam- 
age, in many cases severe (see 5.3.3). This is attributable in large part to the instability 
of old birch bark, which becomes extremely fragile and usually survives only in 
favorable conditions such as when it is placed in an airtight container. In all cases 
the upper parts of the scrolls have been completely lost, since this is the part that is 
most vulnerable to wear, being exposed on the outside when the scrolls are rolled up 
from the bottom. Although it is impossible to extrapolate any precise measurements 
for the original lengths of the complete scrolls, it appears that the largest and best- 
preserved specimens, such as fragment 15, whose surviving portion is about 115 cen- 
timeters long, might represent approximately half of the original scroll (see 5.1.1). 
The loss of the upper portions of the scrolls is particularly troublesome because it is 
at the top of the scrolls that we would expect to find titles and/or colophons of the 
texts, at least in the case of those written continuously on both sides. Due to these 
circumstances, such colophons are not found (but for one partial exception, dis- 
cussed in 2.2.6), which renders the task of identifying the texts immeasurably more 
difficult. 
The scrolls also suffer from several other types of damage, including de- 
terioration of one or both margins and peeling and fading of the outer, inscribed 
layer of the bark, which render them difficult to read in many places and not infre- 
quently all but illegible. Although some of this damage, as noted above, is due to mis- 
handling by the unknown discoverers, it is clear that the scrolls were already damaged, 
and in some cases badly deteriorated, in ancient times, before they were placed in the 
clay pot. This, along with certain other indications, which will be discussed at length 
in chapter 4, implies that the fragments were probably pieces of worn-out texts that 
had been discarded and were accorded ritual burial in a pot that was interred within 
the precincts of a Buddhist monastery, probably in or near a stiipa. 
2.2. Texts and Genres Represented in the Collection 
Since the fragments in the British Library collection appear to represent 
a more or less random selection of the contents of the library of a Gandharan Bud- 

=== PAGE 47 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
23 
dhist monastery of about the first century a.D., it is not surprising that virtually 
all them proved to contain Buddhist religious texts, representing a wide variety of 
texts, genres, and styles. The best-represented genres are poetic compositions and 
compilations such as the Dharmapada, the Anavatapta-gatha, and the Rhinoceros 
Horn Sutra; texts in the avadana and similar genres, relating pious legends of vari- 
ous kinds; and lengthy commentaries on various groups of verses. But for one ex- 
ception (frag. 8, containing a Sanskrit medical text written in Brahmi script), all of 
the texts are composed in the Gandhari language and written in the Kharosthi script 
invariably associated with it. 
At this still preliminary stage of the analysis of the fragments, the number 
of texts which have been definitively identified is rather small, perhaps disappoint- 
ingly so. Fewer than a quarter of them have been directly connected with Buddhist 
texts extant in other languages such as Pali, Sanskrit, Chinese, and Tibetan. Some 
more identifications may become possible in the course of further studies, but it 
should by no means be assumed that all of the texts will have parallels elsewhere 
in Buddhist tradition. On the contrary, it appears that a sizable portion of the new 
texts may be locally composed material that is unique to the Gandharan tradition 
and has not been preserved in other Buddhist literatures. 
Moreover, “identifying” a text is not necessarily a simple matter, in that 
some of the texts have varying degrees of partial correspondences with previously 
known texts, such that it is not always obvious whether we should speak of an “iden- 
tification” or simply of parallel or related passages in what may be essentially different 
texts. Such problems are due, in part at least, to the complex and fluid character of 
the Buddhist textual tradition, in which textual units seem to have been gradually 
combined and collected in complex and often overlapping patterns. A good illustra- 
tion of this type of problem is the text on fragments 12 and 14 (discussed below in 
2.2.1), which corresponds in part to sections of the Pali Anguttara-nikaya, but in a 
complex and uncertain relationship. Of course, the unfortunate circumstance that 
none of the titles of the texts are preserved in the fragments makes it all the more 
difficult for us to understand their relationships to known works. 
Given these problems with regard to the identifications of texts, for pur- 
poses of a preliminary presentation the textual material is described here in general 
terms, that is, under broad headings of genre categories. At this point in the prelim- 
inary study of the collection, the majority of the fragments, or at least the majority 
of the larger and better preserved ones, have been assigned to one of the categories 
listed below. Those texts which have been more or less specifically identified are de- 
scribed under these general headings. However, the following survey is not meant 
to be a comprehensive description of the entire contents of the collection but rather 
presents a representative sampling of the various types of texts and genres as far as 
they are understood at the present time. 

=== PAGE 48 ===
24 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
2.2.1. Sutra Texts and Commentaries 
The number of fragments that can be definitively placed in this category 
is surprisingly small. The most clearly identifiable sutra text is the relatively long 
and well-preserved fragment 15, which contains a version of the Sangiti-sutra with 
an unidentified commentary, which is evidently not the same commentary as the 
Sangiti-paryaya known from a Chinese translation by Hstian-tsang and from a frag- 
ment of the original Sanskrit found at Bamiyan (Lévi 1932: 9-11). The Sangiti-sutra 
itself, an important siitra of the numerical listing type, is preserved in Pali as suttanta 
no. 33 of the Digha-nikaya, in Sanskrit fragments from central Asia (Stache-Rosen 
1968), and in the Chinese translation of the Dirghagama (T. 1 [no. 1], pp. 49b ff.) as 
well as in a separate Chinese translation (T. 1 [no. 12], pp. 226c ff.). In the new frag- 
ment, the ordering of the topics within each of the ten numerical groups agrees most 
closely with that of the Chinese Dirghagama version of the sutra rather than with 
the Pali or Sanskrit versions, a fact which has important ramifications that will be 
discussed in 8.2.2.1. For reasons that will be explained in section 5.1.1, the surviving 
part of the text can be estimated at a little less than half of the original. A brief sam- 
ple of this text is presented in section 6.7.3. 
The text preserved in fragments 26 and 29 seems to contain a sutra-type 
text concerning the four stages of meditative trance (jana- = Skt. dhydna-/ Pali jhana-). 
Many of the terms and phrases appearing in these fragments resemble ones preserved 
in various texts in the Pali canon, for instance in the Sallekha-sutta (suttanta I.8 of 
the Majjhima-nikaya), but as yet it has not been possible to relate the text as a whole 
to any specific sutra in Pali or elsewhere. 
A third sutra-type text is the aforementioned one in fragments 12 and 14, 
containing a sutra text that corresponds in part to the Pali Anguttara-nikaya. It con- 
tains three discrete passages, of which the first consists of a dialogue between the 
Buddha and the brahman Dhona which corresponds closely to the dialogue with 
Dona in Anguttara-nikaya, Catukka-nipata 36 (Anguttara 2.379). This is followed 
by a brief discourse on, apparently, the words of the Buddha (budha-bayana- = Skt. 
buddha-vacana-), for which no parallel has been found in Pali. The third discourse, 
concerning the four prasanas (= Skt. pradhana-/prahana-, Pali padhana-), closely 
resembles Anguttara-nikaya, Catukka-nipata 14 (Anguttara 2.16-7). Thus this text 
has a significant but incomplete correspondence with passages in the Pali Anguttara- 
nikaya; two of its sections are very similar to passages in the same part (the Catukka- 
nipata) of the Anguttara, though they appear there separately and in a different 
sequence, while the third is apparently not found in the Pali. These fragments could 
constitute part of a Gandhari compilation equivalent to the Pali Anguttara-nikaya 
and the Sanskrit Ekottarikagama, but it would be premature to state this outright at 
this point. The following sample text? (frag. 12, part 1, r, lines 8-14; pl. 7) is an extract 
from the first discourse, the dialogue between the brahman Dhona and the Buddha: 

=== PAGE 49 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
25 
... (bha*)yavadu tena uasakrami uvasakramita bhaya[va]du egha[do] 
ba[tena] ? ? ? (devo bhu bhavisasi naho bramana de*)v[o] bhavis[e] 
ghadhrarvo bhu bhavisa[si] naho bramana ghadhrarvo bhavise’ yaksu 
(bhu bhavisasi naho bra*)mana yaksu bhavise’ manosu bhu bhavisasi naho 
bramana manosu bhavise’ (devo bhu bhavisa*)si idi p[r]othu samana ema 
vadesi naho bra[ma]na dev(o*) bha[vis](e*) ghadh(arvo bhu bhavisasi i*)di 
p(r*)othu samana ema vadesi naho bramana ghadharvo [bha]vise’ ya[ks](o*) 
bhu bhavisasi [i]di p[r]oth(u*) [sama](na*) [e](ma*) vadesi naho bramana 
yaksu bhavise manosu bhu bhavisasi [id] (i*) p(r*)othu samana (ema vade*)si 
naho bramana manosu bhavise k[u] re bhu bhavisasi budho mi bramana 
budho /// 
[The brahman Dhona] approached the Blessed One, and after approaching 
[said these words (?)] to the Blessed One: 
[“Sir, will you be® a god?” 
“No, brahman,] I will not be a god.” 
4. Here and in the other preliminary text samples presented in this chapter, the text is pre- 
sented exactly as it appears in the original manuscript, without detailed apparatus and annotation. 
Complete critical apparatus and explanatory notes on these passages will be given in the separate 
editions of the texts to be published in subsequent volumes. The accompanying translations are, 
of course, also tentative. Thanks are due to Mark Allon for his assistance in the reading and inter- 
pretation of this passage. 
Note that the broken pieces that make up this fragment (see pl. 7) are out of order. The pas- 
sage cited here begins in the second line of the larger piece that is the second one from the bottom, 
then continues in the piece at the top, which originally followed it. Some parts of the text quoted 
are on the small loose pieces at the bottom. 
5. The corresponding Pali text (Anguttara-nikaya 2.38—9) reads: 
Dono brahmano... yena Bhagavad ten’ upasanikami, upasankamitva Bhagavantam 
etad avoca: 
Devo no bhavam bhavissatiti? 
Na kho aham brahmana devo bhavissamiti. 
Gandhabbo no bhavam bhavissatiti? 
Na kho aham brahmana gandhabbo bhavissamiti. 
Yakkho no bhavam bhavissatiti? 
Na kho aham brahmana yakkho bhavissamt. 
manusso no bhavam bhavissatiti? 
Na kho aham brahmana manusso bhavissamiti. 
Devo no bhavam bhavissatiti iti puttho samano na kho aham brahmana devo 
bhavissamiti vadesi, gandhabbo no bhavam bhavissatiti iti puttho samano na kho aham 
gandhabbo bhavissamiti vadesi, yakkho . 
. 
. vadesi, manusso no bhavam bhavissatiti iti 
puttho samano na kho aham brahmana manusso bhavissamiti vadest, atha ko carahi 
bhavam bhavissatiti? 
... Buddho ti mam brahmana dharehiti. 
6. On the translation of Pali bhavissati, etc. (corresponding to Gandhari bhavisasi, etc.) 
in this passage, see Woodward 1952: 44 n. 1. 

=== PAGE 50 ===
26 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
“Sir, will you be a gandharva?” 
“No, brahman, I will not be a gandharva.” 
[“Sir, will you be] a yaksa?” 
[“No,] brahman, I will not be a yaksa.” 
“Sir, will you be a human?” 
“No, brahman, I will not be a human.” 
“When you were asked, ‘{Sir, will you be a god?]’ you answered thus, 
‘No, brahman, I will not be a god? When you were asked, ‘[Sir, will you be] 
a gandharva?’ you answered thus, ‘No, brahman, I will not be a gandharva.’ 
When you were asked, ‘Sir, will you be a yaksa?’ you answered thus, “No, 
brahman, | will not be a yaksa? When you were asked, will you be a human?’ 
you [answered thus], ‘No, brahman, I will not be a human. What, then, will 
you be?” 
“T am a buddha, brahman, a buddha...” 
2.2.2. Scholastic Treatises and Commentaries 
A large number of texts, including several of the longest fragments, fall 
into the category of scholastic treatises and commentaries, which, however, is admit- 
tedly something of a grab bag in that nearly all of the texts classified here are essen- 
tially unidentified and are probably of rather diverse contents. One particularly 
interesting text—or perhaps, rather, group of texts—consisting of a commentary 
on an apparently otherwise unknown collection of verses is represented by several 
fragments (3B, 7, 9, 13, and 18) that have similar contents and are written in the same 
hand but that seem to be parts of different scrolls. It is not yet clear whether these 
fragments constitute part of the same “book,” written out in several scrolls (or “vol- 
umes”), or whether they are fragments of separate manuscripts of the same text, or 
of different texts of similar form and content. In these texts, each section of the com- 
mentary begins with the citation of the beginning (usually the first quarter) of the 
verse to be explained, followed by the phrase sutro tatra nideso, apparently meaning 
“{Thus,] the stttra; [now,] the explication of it.” After this comes a detailed, more or 
less word-by-word commentary on the entire verse. 
Most of the verses cited in these commentary texts correspond to ones 
found in the Pali canon in various texts of the Khuddaka-nikaya of the Sutta-pitaka, 
such as the Sutta-nipata, Udana, Dhammapada, Itivuttaka, and Theragatha, but the 
order in which they are quoted does not seem to correspond in any way with these 
Pali works.” By way of a sample, the following table shows the sequence of verses 
quoted on the recto of fragment 9, with their Pali parallels as far as they have been 
identified so far: 
7. The ramifications of this will be discussed in section 8.1.2.2. 

=== PAGE 51 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
27 
Partand Line 
Citation 
142 
kamesana bhavesana 
2.19 
[illegible] 
2.23-4 
ana va ladhva vasana 
va kale 
2.32-3 
sutva (a*)ha vira 
agamo agami 
2.40 
ta ? milasa]rosi 
2.44 
anava[su]... 
3.14 
ajaro jiamanena 
3.21 
paca kadha parinae 
3.27-8 
yasa idriani subhavidani 
2.37, 
??jama [a] ke[vali]... 
3.45 
aho prove 
Pali Parallel 
kamesana bhavesana 
Itivuttaka 55 (= Anguttara 2.42) 
annan ca laddha vasanani ca kale 
Sutta-nipata 971 (Sariputta-sutta, 
Atthaka-vagga) 
sutvan’ aham viram 
akamakamim 
Sutta-nipata 1096 
(JJatukannimanava-puccha, 
Parayana-vagga) 
2 
anavassutacittassa 
Dhammapada 39 (Citta-vagga) 
ajaram jiramanena 
Theragatha 32 (Suppiya thera) 
parica kkhandhe parinnaya 
Theragatha 369 (Sona Kutikanna thera) 
yass’ indriyani bhavitani 
Sutta-nipata 516 (Sabhiya-sutta, 
Maha-vagga) 
arnena ca kevalinam mahesim 
(possibly) Sutta-nipata 82 
(Kasibharadvaja-sutta, Uraga-vagga) 
ahu pubbe tada n‘ahu 
Udana V1.3 
The first text on the long fragment 4 (recto) seems to be a commentary 
of a similar type, but it is written in a different hand than those referred to above, 
which are all in the same hand. It contains verses that mostly, but not exclusively, 
correspond to ones in the Pali Dhammapada, but in a sequence that does not cor- 
respond at all to that of the extant Pali Dhammapada or of the related collections 
in other languages. 
Thus, these verse commentary texts, which taken together make up a 
substantial portion of the complete collection, imply the existence of one or more 
compilations or arrangements of well-known Buddhist gathas and udanas in Gan- 
dhari translation that do not follow the organizational principles familiar from simi- 
lar compilations in other traditions. This may mean that these commentaries, and 
perhaps also the compilations of verses that presumably underlie them, were of 
local (i.e., Gandharan) origin (see 8.1.4.1). The underlying rationale or system of the 

=== PAGE 52 ===
28 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
arrangement of verses is as yet unclear, but a detailed study of the texts of this genre 
may eventually clarify the matter. 
Presented below is a specimen of the commentary on one verse from 
a text of this group (frag. 9, part 3, r, lines 14-21; pl. 8). The verse in question corre- 
sponds, with some variations, to verse 32 of the Pali Theragatha® and 159 of the 
KDhP (Jara-varga).° Only the first quarter of the verse (ajaro jiamanena) is actually 
quoted as a pratika at the beginning of the commentary, but the rest of it can be 
reconstructed from the lemmata in the commentary itself and from the parallel 
verses, as follows: 
ajaro jiamanena dasamanena nivudi 
nimesa parama Sati yoaksemo (anutaro*)'° 
Following the interpretation of the commentary, the translation of this verse would be 
Exchange” the decaying, the burning, for the undecaying, [which is] 
cessation, ultimate calming, supreme peace. 
The text of the commentary (with lemmata printed in boldface) reads as follows: 
[line 14, middle] ajaro jiamanena sutro tatra nideso (15] ajaro anuadisesa- 
nivanadhadu' jiamano’ pacau(a*)[da]na-khadha’ te osirati [16] [niva]no’* 
payesidavyo’ ajaribhave’ dasamana’’ trihi ni[ghe/hi tisa ksayo” 
payel17|sidav[y]o’ ya[tra] na kayi dasana’ esa hoso yoaksemo|{'| due nivana- 
dha[djJue’ n[i][me]sa [18] parama sati’ dukha yatr[o] osirita grina[dha] due 
nivanadhadue ['| [sa]ksev[e] jia[19|mana dukho' ajare nivuti' niroso’ 
dajamana’ samudayo |'| n[iJmesa’ nanana [20] osiridavya’ aya mago asava 
nivudi kilesaksayo’ nimesa [21] kamaksayo’ ajaro dukhaksayo o'4 
8. ajaram jtramanena tappamanena nibbutim 
nimmissam paramam santim yogakkhemam anuttaram. 
9. ayara jiyamanena dajamanena nwrudi 
nimedha parama sodhi yoka-ksemu anutara. 
10. This last word is not cited in the commentary but is tentatively reconstructed on the basis 
of the reading of the corresponding KDhpP verse. 
u. The verb nimesa is phonetically ambiguous and could be interpreted as a first-person 
future form equivalent to the Pali nim(m)issam, “I will exchange.” But the commentary seems to 
give the plural imperative grinadha (= Skt. grhnita) as its gloss, which would mean that the ending 
-sa was intended to be equivalent to the -dha (-s- = -s- < -dh-; see 6.3), presumably imperative, of 
the KDhP’s reading nimedha. 
12. The expected reading here would be the lemma nivudi, but this does not seem to be the 
case, as the third syllable is quite clearly no. 
13. dasamana = Skt. dahyamana-; for Gandhari -s- < Skt. -hy-, see Brough 1962: 105 ($61). 
Note also the KDhP reading, dajamana- (cited here by Brough), and the alternate spelling of 

=== PAGE 53 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
29 
This can be tentatively translated as 
“The decaying for the undecaying...”: [Thus,] the stitra; [now,] the expli- 
cation of it: “The undecaying” is the element of nirvana without remainder. 
“The decaying” is the five appropriating aggregates; one [should] abandon” 
them. Nirvana should be sought after; [it is] the state of becoming undecay- 
» 
ing. “The burning,” [that is, burning] with the three evils.'° Their elimina- 
tion should be sought after. Where there is no [such] burning, that has 
become” “peace.” [These are] the two elements of nirvana [i.e., with and 
without remainder]. “Exchange” [means] take up “supreme calm,” where 
suffering has been abandoned. [This too refers to] the two elements of 
nirvana. In short: “The decaying” is suffering; “undecaying cessation” is 
suppression; “the burning” is arising; and “exchange” [means that arising] 
should be abandoned by means of knowledge;'® [this is] the noble path.'? 
Or else: “cessation” is the elimination of defilements; “exchange” [means] 
the elimination of karma; [and] “the undecaying” is the elimination of 
suffering. 
Another interesting scholastic document is fragment 28, apparently 
an abhidharma treatise or commentary discussing topics such as the nature of 
existence in the different times. A representative passage (frag. 28, part 2, r, lines 
21-2) reads sarvakal[o] sarvam asti’ sarvatra sarvam asti sarvagarena sarvam asti 
the same word later in this sample text (line 19) as dajamana. Here the Pali verse has the variant 
reading tappamdnena. 
14. The following approximate rendering into Buddhist Sanskrit is offered to help clarify the 
interpretation of this passage: 
ajaram jiryamanena [iti] sitram. tatra nirdesah: ajaram anupadhisesa- 
nirvanadhatuh. jiryamanam paricopadana-skandhah. tan osirati. nirvanam 
paryesitavyam ajaribhavah. dahyamanam tribhir nighath. tesam ksayah paryesitavyah. 
yatra na kimcid dahanam, esa bhito yogaksemah. dvau nirvana-dhatu. niminita 
paramam santim duhkham yatra osiritam grhnita. dvau nirvana-dhatu. samksepe: 
jiryamanam duhkham. ajaram nirvrtir nirodhah. dahyamanam samudayah. 
niminita jndnena osiritavyam. arya-margah. athava: nirvrtih klesaksayah. niminita 
karmaksayah. ajaram duhkhaksayah. 
15. The present tense verb osirati is surprising; a gerundive form might have been expected 
here. For the verb itself, see Edgerton 1953: 75, S.v. avasirati, etc. 
16. These are presumably raga, “passion”; dvesa, “hatred”; and moha, “delusion.” 
17. This is a provisional translation for hoso, which seems to be a preterite form of the verb 
ho- (= Skt. Vbhii). 
18. flanana apparently = Skt. jadnena; cf. tano = tena in the passages cited in sections 6.5.1 
and 6.7.3. Apparently in these texts, as in the KDhP, “[n]ot infrequently, an etymological (i, e) is 
omitted in the writing” (Brough 1962: 81). 
19. Here the commentator summarizes the verse by equating what he takes as its four main 
words with the four noble truths. 

=== PAGE 54 ===
30 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
sarvakara[ne]na (sarvam asti’*) sarvabhaveha sarvam asti’ sarvaheduha sarvam astt 
sarvapacageha sarvam asti’ (“Everything exists at all times. Everything exists every- 
where. Everything exists with the aspect of everything. Everything exists as the rea- 
son for everything. Everything exists as all entities. Everything exists as all causes. 
Everything exists as all conditions.”).”° 
Other substantial remains of scholastic texts include the large fragments 
20 and 23, which seem to be part of the same scroll or the same text in multiple 
scrolls. The contents of these fragments have not yet been closely analyzed, but they 
seem to treat of a variety of technical topics typical of the concerns of what may best 
be called “mainstream” Buddhism." This text is the largest one for which no clear 
textual or genre identification has yet been made. 
2.2.3. Verse Texts 
The category of verse texts, represented by three important fragments, 
presents much less difficulty than the other categories with regard to the identifica- 
tion of texts. One work of this class is the first of two texts on the long and relatively 
well preserved fragment 1, consisting of a portion of the Anavatapta-gatha, or Songs 
of Lake Anavatapta. This popular text is widely represented in the northern Bud- 
dhist tradition, including two separate recensions each in Sanskrit and Chinese. One 
of these versions appears within the Bhaisajyavastu of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, 
extant in Chinese and Tibetan translation and also, in somewhat fragmentary condi- 
tion, in the original Sanskrit among the Gilgit manuscripts (Bechert 1961; Hofinger 
1982). This Mulasarvastivadin version consists of the recitations by thirty-six of the 
Buddha’s disciples of their own past lives and karmic histories, which they revealed 
to an assembly of five hundred followers on the shores of Lake Anavatapta in the 
Himalayas. The Gandhari fragments contain, in part or in full, the recitations by 
the disciples Nanda, KotivimSa, Yasas, Pindola Bharadvaja, Vagisa, Nandika, and 
Kusuma, which correspond to the recitations numbered 26, 6, 11, 8, 7, 10, and 5 in 
the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya version. This scroll evidently did not contain the entire 
poem but rather was part (perhaps the first part) of a multivolume text. The discov- 
ery of a Gandhari version of the Anavatapta-gatha confirms the popularity of this 
poem in early northern Buddhist tradition. A comparative study of this Gandhari 
20. This translation was prepared with the assistance of Collett Cox. 
21. By “mainstream” Buddhism I refer to what is otherwise variously known as “traditional,” 
“Sravakayana,” “Nikaya,’ or “Hinayana” Buddhism, that is, pre- and non-Mahayana Indian Bud- 
dhism (see also 8.3.1). It is notoriously difficult to settle on an acceptable term for this tradition 
that is free of sectarian implications. 

=== PAGE 55 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
31 
version with the other, apparently later recensions in other languages is likely to yield 
important clues as to the textual and sectarian history of this poem. 
The following is a preliminary reading and translation of the recitation 
by Kusuma (frag. 1, part 5, r, lines 16-29; pl. 4).”* The point of the story is that, simply 
by giving a single flower from his hair to a stupa of the Buddha Vipasyin, Kusuma 
(whose name itself means “Flower,” as also does the name Sumanas, by which he is 
known in the Sanskrit version) earned favorable karma that brought him a long se- 
ries of good births in heaven, culminating in his becoming a human disciple of the 
Buddha in his present life. 
22. The corresponding Sanskrit text of the recitation by Sumanas from the Gilgit manuscript 
of the Milasarvastivada-vinaya (V.60-74; partially reconstructed) is reprinted below (from Bechert 
1961: 111-4, with minor editorial changes). Sanskrit verses that do not have a correspondent in the 
Gandhari text are put in square brackets; verses that occur in a different sequence in the Gandhari 
are marked with an asterisk at the beginning. 
karne sumanasam krtva krtva malam ca murdhani/ 
udyanabhtimim niryami vayasyaih parivaritah //60// 
vipasyinah stipam aham tatrapasyam mahamuneh / 
supujyamanam mahata janakayena sarvatah //61// 
vayasyaka grhitas ca sarve malam svakam svakam / 
tasminn aropayan stupe prasannena ca cetasa //62// 
tan aham tatra drstvatha janam anyam tatha bahu / 
karnad grhitva kusumam stipe adropaye tada //63// 
[tenadham kusalamilena yatra yatropapannavan / 
devabhuto manusyas ca krtapunyo virocitah //64//] 
(aradhitah sarthavahah sambuddho ‘yam anuttarah / 
arhatvam ca maya praptam Sitibhiito ‘smi nirvrtah //65//] 
*ekapuspam parityajya varsakotisatany aham / 
devesu paricary’ 
eva sesena parinirvrtah //66// 
saced bhadanta ajriasye sambuddhasya gunan bahin 
bhiyo ‘karisye satkaram suprasannena cetasa //67// 
tasmat prajanatam asya sambuddhasya gunan bahin / 
karyah sttipesu satkdro bhavisyati mahaphalah //68// 
*na hi cittaprasadasya svalpa bhavati daksina / 
tathagate ca sambuddhe buddhanam sravakesu va //69// 
etad bhadantas smardmi yan maya kusalam krtam / 
anubhatam phalam tasya kantam istam manoramam //70// 
[tena karmavipakena nasti jatu punarbhavah / 
arhann asmi hataklesah sitibhito ‘smi nirvrtah //71//] 
[naham punarbhavam sayyam samsare sayitah kvacit / 
iyam me pascima jatir anupadaya pascima //72//] 
[tenaiva hetuna cedam nama me sumana ti / 
mukto ‘smi sarvaduhkhebhya uttirno bhavasagarat //73//] 
ity evam sumanah sthaviro bhiksusamghagratah sthitah / 
vyakaroti svakam karma anavatapte mahahrade //74// 

=== PAGE 56 ===
32. CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
[line 16] kane karita sumana na*> mala [ca] + + [17] krida’ 
uyana[ho]mi niasi vayasehi puraskidu’ 
tatra dasi [ma]{18|ha thubu vivasisa sirimad[u] 
janaghayu samaghatva satkarisu mal|19|ma**+hisu [ya] 
de vayasa samaghatva’ spa spo malu ghrahi[tvana’] 
[20] a[rJoaisu thuvaspi prasanamanacedasa’ 
tesu aho dhrispana ana[21]manana pasia’ 
kanade ghriha sumana thuve aroae spa[e] (*) 
(na hi*) [22] citu prasanasa apaa bhudi dhaksina’ 
tasaghada a sabudha ye ya [b]u[dha][23]na save[a'] 
s[ae] aha budha-ghuna janamana tasaghad[u] 
thuve [karise] [24] satkaro bhoya bhasa ma?[h]io’ 
taspa ho peanamanena sastara[sa] [25] baho ghuna’ 
thuve kurusa satkaru [ta]da muks[u] sadhrogha[di]’ 
(eko*) [26] puspu caitana sahasu barsakudina 
devehi pariarita avase[27|se mi ni[b](u*)[d](1*)['] 
edaho sparami bha[te’] e[ko] p[usp]u [cai](t*)[va](na*) 
[28] anohodu phal[u] ta[sa] [na h](1*) karmu pranasadt 
eva kusuma [the][29|ro bhikhu budhasa sa[va]o 
spat karmu viaghase anodate maha|[sare] 
“Putting a flower behind my ear and a garland [on my head], I went out 
to the park together with my friends. 
There I saw the great stupa of the glorious (Buddha) Vipasyin. A crowd 
of people*® had come together and were worshiping and honoring it. 
Those friends (of mine) came together, and each of them took his own 
garland and placed it on the stupa, with devoted heart. 
Seeing them and watching all the others” [as well], I took the flower from 
my ear and put it on the stupa myself. 
For there is no small benefit from a heart that is devoted to an enlightened 
Tathagata and the disciples of the Buddhas. 
23. This syllable seems to be a dittographic error by the scribe. 
24. Here again, there may be a dittographic error; the verse is hypermetric. 
25. This aksara is blurred and may have been canceled or corrected. 
26. janaghayu = Skt. janakayah. This scribe always writes gh in place of g; see 6.4.2. 
27. anhamanana = Pali anhamanna- and Buddhist Skt. anyamanya/anyonya, “various,” 
“different” (not “mutual |ly]”; cf. Edgerton 1953: 42, s.vv.). The word anyonya is used in the same 
way in the Sanskrit Anavatapta-gatha, VII. 87 (Bechert 1961: 129). 

=== PAGE 57 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
33 
If | had known of the Tathagata with his Buddha-virtues, I would have wor- 
shiped the sttpas all the more; [this would have been most beneficial (?)7*]. 
Therefore, knowing” the many virtues of the Teacher, worship the stupas; 
thence [come] liberation and good future births.>° 
For giving*! [one] flower, I was served by the gods for a thousand eons and 
liberated in the end. 
This, your reverences, I recall; for (merely) giving one flower, I experienced 
(this] fruit of that (deed). For karma does not fail.” 
Thus did the elder Kusuma (“Flower”), a monk and a disciple of the Bud- 
dha, explain** his own karma at Lake Anavatapta. 
The second poetic text in the British Library collection is fragment 5B, 
which preserves a substantial part of a Gandhari version of the famous poem 
known in Pali as the Khaggavisana-sutta (Rhinoceros Sutta or Rhinoceros Horn 
Sutta)’? and in Sanskrit as the Khadgavisana-gatha.*4 The Gandhari text in general 
corresponds to the Pali version, which appears in the Tipitaka as the third sutta in 
the Sutta-nipata and which is repeated twice more in other parts of the Khuddaka- 
nikaya, once in the Apadana and again, with commentary, in the Culla-niddesa. 
However, the ordering of the verses in the Gandhari text, and to some extent also 
their wording and composition, differ significantly from both the Pali and the San- 
skrit texts, and there are at least four verses in the Gandhari version which do not 
appear at all in the other versions of this poem. It is interesting, though perhaps not 
too surprising, to find the Rhinoceros Horn Sitra represented in the new collection, 
since it has long been recognized that it holds a special position in the Theravada 
28. The sense of bhasa ma?[hJio is not clear, and a tentative translation is proposed here on 
the basis of bhavisyati mahaphalah in the partly corresponding position (verse V.68d; Bechert 1961: 
113) in the Gilgit manuscript of the Sanskrit version. This parallel suggests that bhasa could have 
been miswritten for bha(vi*)§a or the like, although this raises metrical problems. The word maf?hio 
might have represented something like Skt. mahahitah. The text may be corrupt here. The second 
syllable of this word is partly covered by a blob of ink, which may have been a scribal correction. 
29. The syntax here is not entirely clear, as the participle (?) peanamanena is in the instru- 
-mental, which does not accord with the verb kurusa, apparently in the imperative. Compare 
prajanamanena in a similar but unfortunately incomplete verse (IV.11a; Bechert 1961: 107) in a 
Turfan manuscript of the Sanskrit Anavatapta-gatha. 
30. sadhroghadi = Skt. sadhugatih. 
31. caitana = Pali cajitvana (see Bechert 1961: 110)/Skt. tyaktva. 
32. viaghase = Pali vydkasi/Skt. vyakarsit (see n. 26). 
33. For a recent review of the old controversy as to the correct interpretation of the term 
khaggavisana-, see Norman 1996. In the translation sample below, I have tentatively accepted 
his conclusion that “rhinoceros horn,” rather than “rhinoceros,” was the original sense. 
34. This Sanskrit version is preserved in the Mahavastu (1.357—9 in Senart’s ed.). 

=== PAGE 58 ===
34. CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
tradition, as indicated by, among other things, the fact that it is repeated three times 
in the Khuddaka-nikaya (see Norman 1983: 64-5). Modern scholars have regarded 
its numerous archaisms in language, form, and content as an index of its antiquity 
and hence its importance as a record of an early stage of Buddhism (see, e.g., Jaya- 
wickrama 1949). A detailed study of the relationship of the Gandhari Rhinoceros 
Horn Sitra with the Pali and Sanskrit versions thus promises to be of particular 
significance, and this text has been designated as the first priority for publication in 
this series. 
The following extract from the Gandhari version of the Rhinoceros Horn 
Sutra is reconstructed from subfragments 7a (lines 2-4) and 7b (lines 1-3) of frag- 
ment 5B (see the description of frag. 5B in sec. 2.3). In the translation, the lacunae 
are supplied in square brackets on the basis of the corresponding Pali text.*° 
nago Vi yusani vivajaita 
samjadakamdho patumam urado 
co Seana 
ar eles ae te 
FEE 
EP PELE SF 
niloluo nikuho nikasayo 
nimoho nidhamto kasaya[mra]ks[o] 
+++++++42(e*) bhavitva 
eko car(e*) khargavisa[na] 
++ 
catu[d](i*) 
[so] [a]padiho kuhica 
samtusamana itaridarena 
++4++++h[i]ta achambi 
eko care khargavisanaga + 
35. The corresponding Pali verses (nos. 19, 22, and 8 of the Khaggavisana-sutta = 53, 56, and 
42 of the Sutta-nipata) read: 
nago va yuthani vivajjayitva 
sanjatakhandho padumi ularo 
yathabhirantam vihare arafifie 
eko care khaggavisanakappo. 
nillolupo nikkuho nippipaso 
nimmakho niddhantakasavamoho 
nirasayo sabbaloke bhavitva 
eko care khaggavisanakappo. 
catuddiso appatigho ca hoti 
santussamano itaritarena 
parissayanam sahita achambhi 
eko care khaggavisanakappo. 

=== PAGE 59 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
35 
As a mighty, broad-shouldered, spotted elephant who shuns the herds might 
move about [at will in the forest, so one should wander alone like the rhi- 
noceros horn]. 
Free of greed, deceit, faults, and delusion, casting off faults and disparage- 
ment,°° becoming [free of intentions in the whole world], one should 
wander alone [like] the rhinoceros horn. 
At home everywhere, avoiding conflict anywhere, satisfied with one thing or 
the other, [enduring dangers] without fear, one should wander alone like the 
rhinoceros horn. 
The third poetic composition in the new collection appears as the first 
of two texts on fragments 16 and 25, which are the right and left halves respectively 
of the same original scroll. These fragments preserve portions of the last few lines of 
the end of a text corresponding closely, though not exactly, to the end of the Bhikhu- 
varga (verses 78-90), which is the second chapter of the KDhP. Therefore, this scroll 
was probably part of a Dharmapada text comprising several scrolls, of which this 
was presumably the first (see 5.1.1). The close similarity of this fragment to the cor- 
responding passage in the KDhP makes it likely that it represents a slightly different 
text of the same recension of the Dharmapada. This text was written by the same 
scribe who wrote the Anavatapta-gatha text and the sutra text in fragments 12 + 14 
(a23:9). 
2.2.4. Avadanas and Related Texts 
One of the best represented genres among the British Library fragments 
is collections of stories, apparently of quite diverse content, most of which are 
explicitly labeled in the manuscripts as “avadanas.” The largest and best-preserved 
specimens of these texts are in fragments 1, 4, 12 + 14, and 16 + 25. In most cases, 
these texts seem to be secondary ones that were added to scrolls on which the 
bottom of the recto and the entire verso had been left blank by the scribes who 
wrote the first texts on the recto only (see 5.1.1). Smaller remnants of what seem 
to be texts of the same class are found in fragments 2, 3A, and 21, but their original 
position and relationship to other texts on the same scroll, if any, are unclear due to 
the very fragmentary condition of these pieces. An unusual feature of the texts of this 
genre is that nearly all of them are written in the same distinctive large hand. The 
only exception is the first part of the avadana text in fragment 4, which is in a hand 
36. The phrase nidhamto kasaya[mra]ks[o] is a semicompound, corresponding to Pali 
niddhanta-kasavamoho, of a type that is not rare in the Kharosthi manuscripts and other 
Gandhari texts. 

=== PAGE 60 ===
36 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
that is not seen in any other texts. However, the latter part of this collection is writ- 
ten by the scribe of the other avadanas,*’” who evidently was a specialist in this genre. 
The larger avadana fragments contain collections of brief recitations 
which in most cases are numbered sequentially. These numbers in the surviving 
fragments run as high as sixteen (frag. 4, part 2, v, line 2, sodaso 10 4 11) or possibly 
seventeen (line 12, sa(ta*) 
[dasa]... ). In many cases, the individual recitations end 
with an abbreviation formula such as vistare sarvo karya, “The whole [story] is to be 
done [i.e., recited] in full” (e.g., frag. 25, 1, line 26); vistare janidave siyadi, “(The story] 
should be known [i.e., recalled] in full” (frag. 4, part 7, v, line 4); or the frequent but 
enigmatic sarva vistare yasayupamano siyadi (frag. 1, part 2, v, line 74) or vistare jant- 
davo yasayupamano siyadi (frag. 4, part 6, v, line 30), whose interpretation remains 
to be fully clarified.3* These notations, which resemble similar formulae in other 
Buddhist texts in Pali and Sanskrit,°° as well as the overall brevity, sometimes extreme, 
of the avadanas give the impression that the texts are merely skeletons or outlines, 
which were evidently meant to be filled in and expanded by the reader or reciter. In 
this respect they resemble the similarly abridged avadana and jataka texts in the Bai- 
ram Ali manuscript from Merv in Turkmenistan (Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1983: 71). 
Although many of these avadana texts resemble avadanas in Sanskrit 
and other languages with regard to their style and phrasing, in terms of content 
they appear to represent different traditions from previously known texts of this 
genre. Thus we find, for example, such stories as the avadanas of Jhadamitra (frag. 1, 
avadanas nos. 7 and 8), Sarthadasa (frags. 12 + 14, avadana no. 7), and an Ajivika 
(ayiviga; frag. 1, avadana no. 1), for which no correspondents have so far been found 
in published texts. Some of the other avadanas, especially those in the large collec- 
tion in fragment 4, concern more familiar figures in Buddhist tradition such as 
Gavampati, Mahakasyapa, and Asoka, but the specific content of these stories does 
not correspond to any previously known material—or at least so it appears on the 
basis of preliminary studies. 
In at least a few cases, however, there seems to be a possibility of linking 
an avadana with stories known from other Buddhist traditions. For example, the first 
avadana in the collection in fragments 12 + 14 concerns a person named Puniga, who 
is associated in some way (which is not entirely clear due to the fragmentary condi- 
tion of the text) with the householder Anathapindika (anasapidigasa grahavadisa) 
and with King Prasenajit (p/rJasen[i]g/e]no rayeno). This Puniga therefore might 
be connected with the theri (female elder) named Punna or Punnika who is men- 
tioned in several Pali commentaries as a servant of Anathapindika (Malalasekere 
37. See also the description of this fragment in 2.3. 
38. See the text sample below and n. 46 for a provisional interpretation of these phrases. 
39. Cf. the various formulae with the word vistarena in Buddhist Sanskrit (Edgerton 1953: 
504) and with peyyadla in Pali. 

=== PAGE 61 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
37 
1937-8: 2.227—8). But as of this writing, this and other possible connections with 
other Buddhist traditions remain to be confirmed and further investigated. 
At least two of the avadana-type texts contain references to contempo- 
rary historical figures: the mahaksatrapa Jihonika and ASpavarman, who can be se- 
curely identified with Indo-Scythian rulers of the early first century a.p. and who 
are well known from coins and inscriptions.4° These and other peculiar features sug- 
gest that, unlike the majority of the avadanas known from Buddhist Sanskrit and 
other traditions, at least some, probably even most, of the texts labeled “avadana” 
do not consist of stories illustrating the karmic results of actions in previous lives. 
Rather, the term avadana is apparently being used here in something more like its 
broader, and not exclusively Buddhist, sense of “pious legend” or “great deed.”#" In 
general, the avadanas in these texts seem to fall into two classes: those that concern 
well-known traditional figures of the time of the Buddha Sakyamuni and those that 
seem to be set in the contemporary world of Indo-Scythian Gandhara. Curiously 
enough, avadanas of both types seem to be mixed together within the separate col- 
lections on different scrolls. The relationships between the individual avadanas 
within each collection and the rationale for their arrangement remain to be clarified. 
Several of these peculiarities and problems are also exemplified in the 
second text in fragments 16 + 25. This comprises a particularly interesting series of 
stories, most of which are similar in form to the avadana texts and which are written 
in the same hand but are labeled provayoge (Skt. puirvayogah), “past birth(s),” rather 
than avaddna. Unlike the avadanas, these purvayoga stories do describe the past in- 
carnations of well-known personages in Buddhist tradition, such as Ajfatakaundinya 
(afiadakodina), Ananda (anada), and the Bodhisattva (bodhisatva/bosisatva) himself. 
Thus, surprisingly, it is these purvayoga texts, rather than the ones labeled avadanas, 
that more closely resemble what are typically known as avadanas in the Buddhist 
Sanskrit tradition and as apadanas in Pali. Yet, this collection also includes at least 
one story (the sixth, which is not labeled a purvayoga) that is set in Taxila (taksaile) 
and concerns the interaction between a monk (samano = Skt. sramana-) and, ap- 
parently, an unnamed Saka (Scythian) (afadaro . 
. 
. sago, “some Saka”); this evi- 
dently belongs to the class of “contemporary” stories alluded to above. As in the other 
similar texts, the relationship between this story and the other ones in the same col- 
lection remains obscure. 
The stories of past births in this pirvayoga collection are also of particu- 
lar interest because better parallels are available for them than appears to be the case 
with the avadanas. For example, the second purvayoga in this text describes Ajna- 
takaundinya’s past life as a potter (kulala).4* The Mahavastu contains a previous- 
40. See sections 7.1.1-2 for a detailed discussion of these passages and their significance. 
41. On the sense of the term avadana, see Speyer 1906-9: preface, i—iv. 
42. This story seems to be repeated, in a shorter form, in fragment 3. 

=== PAGE 62 ===
38 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
birth story, labeled jataka (Senart’s ed., 3.347-8), describing Ajhatakaundinya’s life as 
a potter (kumbhakdra-, bhdrgava-), and although the plot of the story has little re- 
semblance to the one found in the new manuscripts, there are some intriguing simi- 
larities in style and phrasing.# But a much closer parallel is found in the “Previous 
History of Kaundinya” contained in the Fo pén hsing chi ching (T. 3 [no. 190], pp. 
813c—814b; translated in Beal 1875: 256-8), a biography of the Buddha that, 
significantly (see 8.2), is generally considered to be a Dharmaguptaka text (see, e.g., 
Hirakawa 1990: 263). The very brief story of the previous life of Ananda told in the 
fifth story in this group, which is transcribed and translated below, also has a proba- 
ble parallel in the previous life of Ananda described at the end of the Fo pén hsing 
chi ching (T. 3, pp. 930a—931b; not translated by Beal). These parallels suggest that at 
least some of the lore preserved in this collection, and presumably also in the other 
avadana collections, represents Dharmaguptaka traditions that are not otherwise 
extant in Indian-language materials but for which it may eventually be possible to 
discover parallels in Chinese translations.*4 
This collection of purvayogas also includes, evidently by way of a supple- 
ment (apparently labeled [u/dahara[na], “example”) to the first story, concerning 
the Bodhisattva’s past life as a merchant, a very brief summary rendition of a story 
corresponding to the well-known Vessantara-jataka. The hero, however, is here not 
called Vessantara as in the Pali and other well-known versions of this story, but 
sudasa, that is, sudasna; this evidently corresponds to Sudamstra, which is given as 
the name of the hero of this tale in some northern traditions (e.g., in the Rastrapala- 
pariprccha; Finot 1901: 22, line 18). This is the only passage yet found in the entire 
collection to have any relationship to the jataka literature as it is known in other 
Buddhist traditions. But the relationship of this familiar story to the rest of the text 
in which it is found, and the rationale for its inclusion there, remain to be explained. 
The following specimen from fragments 16 + 25 (v, lines 8—11; fifth story) 
presents, in the extremely terse manner characteristic of the avadana-type texts, the 
aforementioned story of the previous life of Ananda: 
[line 8] anadasa pr[uva](yo*)ge yasayupamano sarvo [9] [gadha]badhaga isa 
jabudive rayo [h](o*)vadi pradesige tasa duve |10] putra hovadi sabrudidrigo 
co bha[nJo (co.*) [sab] (ru*)[didri]g[o] pravayi[d]o ? [11] [praJc.[g.s.]budh[i] 
prato gatha vi(stare*)o 41 
43. This parallel was discovered by Timothy Lenz, who is preparing an edition of fragments 
16 + 25 for publication. 
44. See also the further comments on this point in section 8.2.2.3. 
45. See also Appendix, n. 38. 

=== PAGE 63 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
39 
The previous birth of Ananda: The whole [introductory portion is to be 
recited] according to the usual pattern (?).4° Gadhabadhaga (= Skt. Gandha- 
bandhaka?) was king here in Jambudvipa. He had two sons, {who were his] 
regional governors: Sabrudidrigo (= Skt. Samvrtendriya) and Bhano (= Skt. 
Bhanu). Sabrudidrigo became a mendicant.”” He attained individual enlight- 
enment.‘® The verse is to be recited in full.49 [Story number] 5. 
2.2.5. Other Genres and Miscellaneous Texts 
Fragment 5C is a unique specimen in the British Library collection of a 
stotra, or hymn of praise, to the Buddha composed in poetic meters such as vasan- 
tatilaka, describing him with such epithets as gunehi guna-parami pratam, “who has 
attained through his virtues the perfection of virtue”; soma-sadisa-[va]dana-, “whose 
face is like the moon’; and sarvasatvutamam, “supreme among all beings.” Unfortu- 
nately, the fragment is in particularly poor condition, so that no complete verses can 
be read. The content is fairly similar to the only directly comparable text, namely, 
the stotra verses preserved in central Asian Gandhari in Niya documents nos. 510 
and 511 (Boyer, Rapson, and Senart 1920-9: 2.184-7). 
Another unique item is fragment 6, containing a passage from an as yet 
unidentified medical text. This piece stands out from the others in the collection in 
form as well as in content; unlike all the others, it is in Brahmi script and Sanskrit 
language, and the scroll on which it is written is much narrower (5.5 cm) than the 
others. These anomalies may mean that this fragment originally came from some 
source outside the library’s collection. The fact that it is written on birch bark, how- 
ever, means that its original provenance was somewhere in the northwest or far 
north of India. 
Finally, there are several other fragments, such as 5A, 8, 10, 11, 21, and 22, 
whose contents are as yet completely undetermined. Most of these are very small or 
very poorly preserved, but it is hoped that, as the contents of the collection as a 
whole become more familiar, it will eventually become possible to identify these 
pieces as well, at least with regard to their genre and general contents. 
46. “According to the usual pattern” is a provisional translation for yasayupamano, inter- 
preted as equivalent to a Skt. *yathopamanam; cf. Pali tath’upamam, “likewise,” “in the same way.” 
In this interpretation, the phrase is read as yasa-y-upamano, with a glide or “sandhi consonant” y, 
which is, however, admittedly not expected in Gandhari. See also n. 39 above. 
47. pravayido = Skt. pravrajitah; cf. [pravaya]di = pravrajanti in KDhP, verse 146. 
48. Apparently, [pra]c(e*)[g](a*)[s](a*)budh[i] = Skt. pratyeka-sambodhim. 
49. Gathd here presumably refers to a well-known verse summarizing this legend, which the 
scribe did not see any need to write down but simply added this reminder to insert it here at the 
end of the story. Such notes presumably were prompts for use when the story was to be delivered 
in an expanded, oral form. 

=== PAGE 64 ===
40 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
2.2.6. A Unique Fragment of a Colophon 
As noted above, the loss of the upper portions of all of the scrolls has 
probably deprived us of the colophons, which would have been of crucial value in 
identifying the texts and understanding the circumstances of the composition of the 
scrolls. But there is, fortunately, one partial exception. This is the small fragment 3B, 
measuring 10 X 4.5 cm, one side of which contains what is clearly part of a colophon 
(pl. 9). Portions of three lines of text are preserved on it, and below the last line is a 
blank space about 2 cm in height. The side with the colophon has been labeled as the 
recto, though this actually only means that it faced the inside of the roll in which it 
was found. Since the other side of the colophon fragment contains remnants of text 
in a different hand, the colophon could have been written at the end of a text at the 
bottom of the recto, and the other text added on to the verso at a later time. But it 
is also possible that the colophon was written at the top of the verso, that is, at the 
very end of the scroll, which then may have contained a single text written in two 
different hands, as was the case, for example, in the second text on fragment 4. But in 
view of the otherwise consistent pattern of the loss of the upper ends of the scrolls, 
the former alternative is probably the more likely one. Unfortunately, the remains of 
the unidentified text on the other side are too fragmentary to permit any conclusive 
judgment at this point, though further study of it and other texts may eventually 
clarify its contents. The colophon was rolled up together with fragments of what is 
almost certainly originally a different scroll (frag. 3A), and hence it seems to have 
been a loose piece that was put together with other small fragments for interment in 
the clay pot in which it was found (see 4.1). 
Although too little remains of the colophon to permit any identification 
of the text at this point, its handwriting is not unfamiliar. It is almost certainly the 
same hand as that of the verse commentaries on fragments 7, 9, 13, and 18 and hence 
probably—though not certainly—belongs to that text, or perhaps rather to one 
among that group of texts.*° Here again, it is hoped that future studies of this im- 
portant subgroup within the collection will clarify the position and relationship of 
the colophon fragment with them. 
The remaining text of the colophon reads as follows: 
LHll [pf SH 
2./// [tv.]a idi navodasa o 
3. /// [mi] postaga gasa[e]” pacavisadi 20 4 1 saghasravasa samanasa 
The lower part of one syllable preserved in the first line and the first three 
letters in the second line are presumably part of the end of the text proper. This is 
50. See the descriptions of these fragments below in section 2.3. 
51. There is a blank space between sa and e about the width of one syllable, but no trace 
of an original aksara is visible, and it seems that this space was originally left blank. 

=== PAGE 65 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
41 
followed by idi navodasa, “Thus [ends number] nineteen” or “Thus [ends] the nine- 
teenth,’ which is presumably the label of a section—apparently the last—of that 
text. The third line, preserving the colophon proper, can be tentatively translated 
“... book; twenty-five (25) verses; of the monk Sanghaérava.” 
The interpretation of this colophon is facilitated by a comparison with 
the verse that is written at the head of the KDhP manuscript, given below according 
to Brough’s reading and translation (1962: 119 and 177; see also xx—xxi): 
budha-varmasa samanasa 
budhanadi-sardhavayarisa 
ida dharma-padasa postaka 
dharmuyane likhida arafi 
This manuscript of the Dharmapada, belonging to the monk Buddhavarman, 
pupil of Buddhanandin, has been written in the Dharmodyana forest. 
The phrase dharma-padasa postaka, “manuscript of the Dharmapada,” 
in this verse suggests that the word preceding postaga in our colophon probably con- 
tained the name of the text. Regrettably, all that is left of it is part of the last syllable, 
apparently mi, or possibly me or ge. This could be the end of the title, though mz 
occurs most commonly in Gandhari as a locative ending. It is also possible, though 
less likely, that the syllable mi or me is the personal pronoun “my,” in which case it 
might agree with the name saghasravasa in the genitive; the translation would then 
be“... my book—[in] twenty-five (25) verses—the monk Sanghasrava.” 
Like our colophon, the Dharmapada verse has the name of a monk 
(samana) in the genitive, which Brough takes in its literal sense as indicating owner- 
ship of the manuscript. However, since the verse lacks a word in the instrumental 
to supply the expected agent of the participial main verb likhida, “was written, it 
seems reasonable to understand the genitive phrase as indicating that the monk 
Buddhavarman wrote it. This interpretation can be justified on technical grounds, 
since the agentive use of the genitive with participial forms in Gandhari is well at- 
tested, especially in the central Asian documents, where it is “almost exclusively used 
for expressing the agent with passives, i.e. the participle in -taga” (Burrow 1937: 58). 
By analogy with this, we can suspect that the phrase saghasravasa samanasa in the 
new colophon gives us the name of the scribe, rather than the owner, strictly speak- 
ing, of the scroll. 
Finally, the phrase gasa[e] pacavisadi 20 4 1 has no parallel in the Dhar- 
mapada verse quoted above but is reminiscent of similar usages elsewhere in the 
KDhP manuscript. There, we find at the end of each of the vargas, or chapters, of 
the text (except for the first two) the letter ga followed by a numerical figure corre- 
sponding to the number of verses in the chapter. The letter ga is presumably an ab- 

=== PAGE 66 ===
42 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
breviation for Gandhari gatha or gasa (= Skt. gatha), “verse” (Senart 1998:.205), and 
the same word appears in the new colophon as gasa-.>* The number twenty-five, 
written out both in words and in numerical symbols,» must represent the number 
of verses in the text, or perhaps rather only in its last section. The form gasa/e/, 
however, is problematic, since the expected form of the nominative plural feminine 
would be gasa, the same as the singular; a nominative feminine plural in -e would 
be difficult to explain. But the reading here is uncertain in any case, as the syllable e 
is not definite, and there may have been another syllable before it that has disap- 
peared (see n. 51). 
The sense of the passage, therefore, remains to be completely clarified, 
but it is nearly certain that it specifies the number of verses in the preceding text. 
Given the similarity of the handwriting to that of the aforementioned verse com- 
mentary texts, we probably have here the end of one such text, or a subsection of it, 
which contained a commentary on twenty-five verses. Whether this piece actually 
belongs to one of the specimens of this genre preserved elsewhere in the new collec- 
tion is unknown at this point, though once again a close study of the manuscripts 
concerned may eventually provide an answer. 
2.3. Catalog of the Fragments 
This preliminary catalog is presented in order to give the reader an idea 
of the scope, character, and variety of the British Library Kharosthi texts and also 
to facilitate reference to specific fragments in this and in future studies of the collec- 
tion. The fragments are listed and described according to the numbers assigned to 
«>> 
them as explained in section 2.1.1. The sides of the manuscripts are referred to as 
“r 
and “v” (i.e., recto and verso) respectively; the recto side, which was the original 
outer surface of the bark, is the inside of the scroll when it is rolled up. References 
to “right” and “left” (e.g.,“right margin”) are made with reference to the recto. 
The brief description of each fragment addresses the following points: 
1. General form, condition, and degree of legibility. 
2. Maximum dimensions (width and length) and number of lines. Most 
of the figures given here are only approximate because, more often than not, the 
fragments are incomplete, with ragged or even crumbled edges, and are often broken 
into several or many pieces, so that it is virtually impossible to give exact measure- 
ments. For similar reasons, it is in many cases impossible to give an exact count of 
lines in a fragment, since many lines are incomplete, overlapping, or illegible. 
52. The word could also be read as gadha, since this scribe (assuming that he was the same 
scribe who wrote frags. 7, 9, 13, and 18) had the habit of writing dha and sa almost identically. In 
any case, the meaning would be the same. 
53. This isa common practice in Kharosthi documents, followed, for example, in the dates 
of some inscriptions. Among the new manuscripts we also find it in the numeration of some 
of the avadana collections; see the examples cited in section 2.2.4. 

=== PAGE 67 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
43 
3. Hand(s). A brief, mostly subjective characterization of each scribal 
hand is provided, particularly with a view to grouping together separated fragments 
of the same original scrolls. (The results of this analysis are summarized in sec. 2.5.) 
Other than some observations here and in section 6.2, detailed paleographic and or- 
thographic comments on each hand are not provided in this preliminary survey but 
will be discussed in the individual editions of separate texts as they are prepared. 
4. Contents. Specific textual references are provided where confirmed or 
probable identifications have been made. In other cases, only brief comments as to 
the contents and possible genre affiliations are provided, and these should be under- 
stood as provisional. For further comments, see also the descriptions of selected texts 
in section 2.2. 
Fragment |, Parts |—5 (Frames |—5) 
1. Extensive remains of a single original scroll. Some sections are more 
or less intact except for slight damage at the left margin. Other portions, especially 
the upper parts (1 and 2), are more badly deteriorated at the right and especially 
the left margins. On the whole, fragment 1 is the best-preserved text in the entire 
collection. 
2. 14.5 X 154.8 cm; 130 lines on r, 79 on v. 
3. First hand (r, from beginning to part 5, line 29): Medium sized, up- 
right, thick; same hand (no. 1 in sec. 2.5) as in fragments 12 + 14 (first hand) and 
16 + 25 (first hand). 
Second hand (r, part 5, lines 30-34, and all of v): Large, flowing hand with 
big spaces between syllables and lines. Same hand (no. 2) as in fragments 2, 3 (second 
hand), 4 (third), 12-14 (second), 16 + 25 (second), and 21 (first). 
4. First text (first hand): Portions of the Anavatapta-gatha. See 
section 2.2.3. 
Second text (second hand): A collection of avadanas not identified 
elsewhere. The separate stories are numbered in words and numbers; for instance, 
the sixth one is labeled sa 4 11 (part 3, v, line 45). 
Fragment 2 (Frame 6) 
1. Small fragment, intact at right edge, but left side lost. The intact 
portion is clearly legible. 
2. 11.2 X 23. cm; 14 lines on 1, 13 on v. 
3. The large, flowing hand (no. 2) of fragments 1 (second hand), 3 
(second), etc. 
4. Apparently a collection of avadanas, one of which concerns the 
mahaksatrapa Jihonika (jihonige mahaksatra( *pe), 1, line 2; see sec. 7.1.1). 

=== PAGE 68 ===
44. CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
Fragment 3 (Frame 7) 
Fragment 3 appears to be a composite, containing small fragments of 
what were originally two separate scrolls. These are subdivided here into subfrag- 
ments 3A and 3B. 
Subfragment 3A 
1. Comprises ten small pieces of (probably) a single manuscript. The 
larger pieces are intact at the left edge. The smallest fragments contain as little as 
one aksara. The intact portions are mostly legible. 
2. The largest piece measures 10.5 X 8.9 cm and contains 6 lines on each 
side. The next largest is 7 x 6 cm, with 3 lines on each side. 
3. First hand (only on r of one piece, measuring 8 X 5.2 cm and contain- 
ing 4 lines, and of another small chip, 2.2 x 0.7 cm, containing parts of 5 aksaras): 
A thin, rounded hand (no. 3), apparently the same as that of fragment 8. This part 
of the text is badly faded and difficult to read. 
Second hand (r of the rest of the fragments and v of all of them): The 
large, flowing hand (no. 2) of fragments 1, 2, etc. 
4. The contents of the small remainders of the first text (in the first 
hand) are undetermined. The larger portion, in the second hand, apparently con- 
tains a narrative text of the avadana class. The verso of the largest piece contains 
the story of a potter (kulala), which is apparently a variant version of the story of 
Ajnatakaundinya’s previous life that also appears in fragments 16 + 25 (see 2.2.4). 
Subfragment 3B 
1. One small piece and five minuscule chips with a few aksaras that ap- 
pear to belong to the same text.°4 The text is mostly legible. 
2. 10 X 4.5 cm; 3 lines on r, 4 on v. 
3. First hand (r): A small, rounded, precisely written hand. Apparently 
the same hand (no. 4) as that of fragments 7, 9, 13, and 18. 
Second hand (v): A small, thick, upright hand, not noticed elsewhere. 
4. The text on the recto (perhaps properly v) is part of a colophon (see 
2.2.6). Presumably it belongs to the same or a similar type of commentary text as 
those in fragments 7, etc., which are written in the same hand. The text on the verso 
is undetermined, perhaps also a commentatorial text. 
Fragment 4, Parts |—7 (Frames 8-14) 
1. Extensive portion of a large scroll containing, apparently, two different 
texts in three hands. The condition varies; many large sections, especially on the recto, 
54. A sixth tiny fragment, containing two aksaras on the verso, seems, to judge from the 
handwriting, to be part of fragment 5B (the Rhinoceros Horn Sitra text). 

=== PAGE 69 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
45 
are fairly legible, though fragmentary. The upper parts (1-5), however, are badly worn 
at the edges, and part 1 is actually a group of ten small pieces, five of which are flipped 
over from their proper orientation (i.e., the r text appears on the v side and vice versa). 
2. The maximum width of the best-preserved portions, for example, in 
part 6, which appear to be only slightly damaged at each edge, is about 16.3 cm. The 
total length of the surviving portions of the scroll is approximately 213.4 cm, with 
about 204 lines on r and 144 on v. 
3. First hand (r, beginning to part 6, line 16): A distinctive squared, up- 
right, bold hand, not seen elsewhere. 
Second hand (from part 6, 1, line 16 to part 6, v, line 20): A distinctive 
thin, slanting, vertically elongated hand, also not seen elsewhere. 
Third hand (from part 6, v, line 20 through the rest of v): The large, 
flowing hand (no. 2) of fragments 1, 2, etc. 
4. First text (first hand): A commentary on a set of verses which corre- 
spond to verses found in the Dhammapada and other Pali texts but which appar- 
ently are part of a different and as yet unidentified compilation (see 2.2.2). This 
seems to be a work of the same genre, but not the same text, as the ones represented 
in fragments 7, 9, etc. 
Second text (second and third hands): Another avadana collection. Sepa- 
rate sections or stories are numbered in both words and numerical signs; for in- 
stance, du[ve] 2 (part 6, r, line 39), pac[o] 4 1 (part 6, v, line 20), and navo 4 4 1 (part 
4, V, line 8). There seem to have been at least eighteen stories in the surviving por- 
tions (see 2.2.4). Though written in two different hands, the collection seems to be 
continuous, with the first five stories in the second hand and the rest in the third. 
Fragment 5 (Frame 1|5) 
Fragment 5, like fragment 3, is a composite, containing parts of what 
were evidently three originally separate scrolls, labeled here as subfragments 5A, 5B, 
and 5C. 
Subfragment 5A 
1. Small fragment of the right side of a scroll. Intact at the right margin 
and mostly legible. The fragment is mounted in frame 15 together with fragments 5B 
and sC and partly overlaps the former, but it is evidently originally part of a different 
scroll. However, it might also be the remnant of a separate text which was written on 
the same scroll as 5B, since both of these, unlike most of the other scrolls, are unin- 
scribed on the verso. 
2. 8.2 X 3.5 cm; 4 lines on r; v is blank. 
3. Thick, medium-sized hand. 
4. Contents unidentified; possibly didactic verses. 

=== PAGE 70 ===
46 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
Subfragment 5B 
1. Badly fragmented section of a scroll which has been divided vertically, 
probably due to having been bound with a string which cut through the middle 
portion or to having been folded in half lengthwise while rolled up (see 5.3.1 and 5.3.3). 
The two resulting vertical sections are reversed from their proper place (see 4.1). 
The fragment is broken into many smaller pieces, which were jumbled together 
in the roll in a more or less random order, with several of them placed upside down. 
The surviving portions are mostly legible, though in many places only with difficulty. 
2. 22 X 38.2 cm; 43 lines on 1; v is blank. 
3. Small, thick hand, with a pronounced diagonal slope toward the 
lower left. 
4. Gandhari version of the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra, generally similar to 
the Pali Khaggavisana-sutta (see 2.2.3). The verses are written one to each line, with 
small spaces between each pada (quarter-verse). 
Subfragment 5C 
1. Small section of an unusually wide scroll which has been damaged but 
not completely cut through at the center. The piece is mounted together with frag- 
ments 5A and 5B but is evidently part of an originally different text and scroll. The 
text is fragmentary and only partially legible. 
2. 24 X 13 cm; 14 lines on r,7 on v. 
3. Small, carefully drawn hand. 
4. A stotra, containing verses in vasantatilaka and other meters in praise 
of the Buddha (see 2.2.5). 
Fragment 6 (Frame 16) 
1. A small and exceptionally narrow scroll, apparently complete at the 
margins. The ink is faded and often only partly legible. 
2. 5.5 X 24.6 cm; 25 lines on r, 22-0n v. 
3. Small, carefully written but somewhat cursive hand (in Brahmi). 
4. Fragment of a medical text in Sanskrit language and Brahmi script of 
about the Kusana period. The only text in the collection not in Gandhari/Kharosthi 
(see 2:25): 
Fragment 7 (Frame | 
7) 
1. Two small pieces, very badly deteriorated, mostly illegible. 
2. 11 X 6 cm (combined size); 7 lines each on r and v. 
3. Small, rounded, precise hand, apparently the hand (no. 4) also seen 
in fragments 3B (first hand), 9, 13, and 18. 
4. Apparently part of the same text or class of texts (and possibly from 

=== PAGE 71 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
47 
the same scroll) as one or more of fragments 3B, 9, 13, and 18; see fragment 9 for 
description of contents. 
Fragment 8 (Frame 18) 
1. Small fragment, fair to poor condition. The recto is mostly legible, 
verso only partially. The ink is faded. 
2. 10 X 9.7 cm; 8 lines on r, 11 on Vv. 
3. Thin, rounded hand, apparently the same (no. 3) as that of fragment 
3A (first hand). 
4. Contents undetermined. 
Fragment 9, Parts |—3 (Frames 19-21) 
1. Large fragment in relatively good condition except for part 1, which 
is in three pieces and badly broken at both edges. The rest is mostly intact for the 
entire width. The recto is clearly legible, verso somewhat less so. 
2. 14 X 102 cm; 124 lines on 1, 120 on v. 
3. Small, rounded, precise hand (no. 4); same as that of fragments 3B 
(first hand), 7, etc. 
4. Commentary on an as yet unidentified collection of verses. The verses 
are partially cited, followed by the phrase sutro tatra nideso and then by the commen- 
tary. Most of the verses correspond to ones found in Pali compilations such as Sutta- 
nipata, Udana, Dhammapada, and Theragatha (see 2.2.2). This fragment is evidently 
part of the same text, and possibly but not necessarily of the same original scroll, as 
some or all of fragments 3B, 7, 13, and 18. 
Fragment |0 (Frame 22) 
1. Medium-sized fragment, in comparatively good condition. The upper 
portion is much damaged at both edges, while the lower part is mostly intact. The 
recto is mostly legible, verso somewhat less so. 
2. 10 X 45 cm; 43 lines on r, 38 on Vv. 
3. Small, precise hand, similar to but not the same as that of fragments 
3B, 7, etc. Spaces between lines are wider than usual. 
4. Unidentified, apparently a scholastic commentary. 
Fragment || (Frame 23) 
1. Small piece, fragmentary and very difficult to read. The verso seems 
to be blank. 
2. 11 X 22 cm; about 18 lines. 
3. Tall, thin hand. Possibly the same hand (no. 13), and hence part of the 
same scroll and/or text, as fragments 21 and 24. 
4. Undetermined; possibly a verse text. 

=== PAGE 72 ===
48 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
Fragment 12, Parts |—2 (Frames 24-5) 
1. Fairly large fragment in reasonably good condition. The upper part 
(including all of part 1) is very fragmentary, with portions lost at both edges and 
many small loose pieces, mostly displaced and out of order. The rest of the text, in- 
cluding most of part 2, is intact at the right margin, though the left side is incom- 
plete and damaged throughout. Fragment 14 is a continuation of the same original 
scroll. 
2. 16.5 X 57 cm; 55 lines on r, 22 on v. 
3. First hand (r): Medium-sized, thick, upright hand (no. 1), same as that 
of fragments 1 (first hand), 14 (first), and 16 + 25 (first). 
Second hand (v): Large, flowing hand (no. 2), same as that of fragments 1 
(second hand), 2, etc. 
4. First text (1, first hand): Sutra text corresponding in part to Pali 
Anguttara-nikaya, Catukka-nipata, 36 and 14 (see 2.2.1). 
Second text (v, second hand): A series of avadanas, including, apparently, 
the avadanas of Puniga and Sarthadasa. 
Fragment 13, Parts |—2 (Frames 26-7) 
1. Large section of text in relatively good condition. The left edge is 
mostly intact, but the right side is damaged. The recto is mostly legible, the verso 
somewhat less so. 
2. 14 X 62.5 cm; 71 lines on r, 65 on V. 
3. First hand (r and first 20 lines of v): The same small, rounded hand 
(no. 4) as that of fragments 3B (first hand), 7, 9, and 18. 
Second hand (rest of v): A superficially similar hand, but on close analy- 
sis evidently the work of a different scribe, since the forms of certain letters, such as 
aand na/na, are consistently different from those of the first hand. 
4. First text (first hand): Part of the same or a similar commentary text, 
though not necessarily of the same scroll, as fragments 3B, 7, 9, and 18. 
Second text (second hand): Unidentified; apparently not part of the same 
text as the preceding. 
Fragment 14 (Frame 28) 
1. The contiguous portion of the same scroll as fragment 12, in good 
condition except that the left edge is crumbled away. Mostly legible. 
2. 14.5 X 27.7 cm; 24 lines on 1, 15 on v. 
3. First hand (r, lines 1-20): Medium-sized, thick hand (no. 1), same as 
that of fragments 1 (first hand), 12 (first), and 16 + 25 (first). 
Second hand (r, lines 21-4 and all of v): Large, flowing hand (no. 2), same 
as that of fragments 1 (second), 2, etc. 

=== PAGE 73 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
49 
4. Same texts described under fragment 12. Fragment 14 seems to have 
followed directly after 12, with no loss of text between them. 
Fragment |5, Parts |—4 (Frames 29-32) 
1. Extensive section of a single scroll. Generally in good condition, ex- 
cept for the upper section (part 1 and upper portion of part 2), which is broken into 
smaller pieces with substantial losses at both edges. The rest of the text is mostly in- 
tact except for slight losses at both edges and damage resulting from crushing of the 
scroll while it was rolled up. This caused the scroll to separate, when unrolled, into 
sections of about 4 cm each in height, and at the juncture of each section a part of 
a line is usually lost. 
The recto is generally legible except for the damaged portions, especially 
on part 1. The verso is somewhat less clear but also largely legible. 
2. 17.5 X 115 cm; 180 lines on r, 185 on v. 
3. The entire text is in a very distinctive hand, somewhat cursive and 
extremely small, the characters measuring about 0.2-0.5 cm in height. 
4. Sangiti-sttra with a previously unknown commentary (see 2.2.1). 
Fragment |6 (Frame 33) 
1. A narrow, vertical strip of a scroll, which is the right-hand side of the 
same scroll whose left half is fragment 25. Evidently the original scroll was split in 
half vertically by a binding string or by lengthwise folding (cf. frag. 5B). The upper 
portion is very fragmentary, while the lower section is mostly intact. The recto is 
clearly legible in most places, while the verso is fairly clear in the lower section but 
faded and difficult to read in the upper part. 
2. 10.5 X 40.5 cm; 33 lines on r, 26 on Vv. 
3. First hand (r, lines 1-15): The medium-sized, thick hand (no. 1) of 
fragments 1 (first hand) and 12 + 14 (first). 
Second hand (r, lines 15-33, and all of v): The large, flowing hand (no. 2) 
of fragments 1 (second hand), 2, etc. 
4. First text (first hand): Concluding part of a text corresponding closely 
to the end of the Bhikhu-varga (verses 78-90) of the KDhP (see 2.2.3). 
Second text (second hand): A series of stories of the previous births 
(provayoge = Skt. ptirvayogah) of the Bodhisattva (i.e., Sakyamuni), Ajiata- 
kaundinya, Ananda, etc. (see 2.2.4). 
Fragment |7 (Frame 34) 
1. Small piece in poor condition and very fragmentary. Surviving por- 
tions of the text are mostly legible. 
2. 11 X 20.5 cm; 19 lines each side. 
3. Thick, upright hand. 

=== PAGE 74 ===
50 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
4. Unidentified text, probably a scholastic or abhidharma text; mentions 
padicasamupada = pratitya-samutpdda in r, line 2. 
Fragment 18 (Frame 35) 
1. Small fragment, evidently part of the same text and possibly of the 
same scroll as fragments 3B, 7, 9, and 13. Condition generally fair; broken into small 
sections, with losses at both edges and between horizontal portions. Surviving por- 
tions of the recto are generally legible, the verso partly so. 
2. 12.5 X 17.5 cm; 28 lines on r, 31 on Vv. 
3. Small, rounded hand (no. 4) of fragments 3B, 7, etc. 
4. Part of the same or a similar commentary text, though not necessarily 
of the same scroll, as fragments 3B, 7, etc. 
Fragment 19 (Frame 36) 
1. Medium-sized fragment, in poor condition. The piece is very badly 
fragmented and the surface decayed. The recto and lower part of the verso are partly 
legible in places, but the upper part of the verso is mostly illegible. 
2. 13.3 X 44.5 cm; about 37 lines each side. 
3. Large, thick, upright hand. 
4. Undetermined. 
Fragment 20, Parts I—5 (Frames 37-41) 
1. Long section of a scroll, in generally fair condition. The upper and 
lower sections are fragmentary, but the middle is partly intact, with small portions 
of each edge lost. Generally fairly legible, but some portions, especially the upper 
part of the verso, are illegible. 
2. 19.7 X 137 cm; about 135 lines each side. 
3. Small, neat hand with a distinctive spidery appearance. 
4. Unidentified text, probably commentatorial or scholastic. Apparently 
part of the same text, and possibly of the same scroll, as fragment 23. 
Fragment 21 (Frame 42) 
1. Medium-sized section of a scroll in poor condition, fragmentary and 
illegible in many places, especially on the recto. 
2. 16.8 X 26 cm; about 9 lines on r, 14 on v. 
3. First hand (r): The distinctive large, flowing hand no. 2. Only a few 
syllables are legible. 
Second hand (v): Tall, thin hand, resembling that of fragments 11 and 24 
(hand no. 13). All three may be fragments of the same scroll. 
4. Undetermined; see fragment 11. This scroll was apparently rolled up 
back-to-front. What appears as the verso, that is, the outside of the scroll as it was 

=== PAGE 75 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
51 
rolled, was probably the original recto, since the tall, thin hand on it appears on the 
recto of the apparently matching pieces 11 and 24, whose versos are blank. The large 
hand (no. 2) on the nominal recto typically appears in the other scrolls on the verso, 
where it was apparently added to original texts with a blank verso. Possibly, a short 
text was added that covered only part of the verso of a single scroll, of which frag- 
ments 11, 21, and 24 are the remains. 
Fragment 22, Parts |—2 (Frames 43—4) 
1. Several small pieces of a scroll in poor condition, very fragmented and 
crumbling. The scroll was partially broken down the middle, presumably by a bind- 
ing cord or by folding. The text is only sporadically legible. 
2. 15.5 X 28 cm; about 20 lines on each side. 
3. Thin, upright hand. 
4. Undetermined. Possibly part of the same scroll and/or text as 
fragment 27. 
Fragment 23, Parts |—2 (Frames 45—6) 
1. Very fragmentary remains of a scroll, mostly broken into small pieces. 
The recto is partially legible, the verso only sporadically. 
2. 18.5 X 56.5 cm; approximately 53 lines on r, 42 on v. 
3. Small, neat, and precise hand, same as that of fragment 20. 
4. Apparently part of the same scroll and/or text as fragment 20. 
Fragment 24 (Frame 47) 
ro Small fragment, very faded and only partially legible. 
11.5 X 16 cm; 10 lines on r; v is apparently blank. 
Tall, thin hand, apparently same as that of fragments 11 and 21. 
2 . Undetermined; see fragment 11. 
Fragment 25 (Frame 48) 
1. Narrow vertical strip of a scroll, in good condition. The recto is legible, 
verso mostly so. On the lower portion, the original left margin is mostly intact. This 
is the left-hand side of the same scroll whose right side is preserved as fragment 16. 
2.. 9.7 * 29.3 cm; 24. lines on # 19.0n Vv. 
3. First hand (r, lines 1-6): The medium-sized, thick hand (no. 1) of frag- 
ment 1 (first hand), etc. 
Second hand (r, lines 7-24, and all of v): The large, flowing hand (no. 2) 
of fragment 1 (second hand), etc. 
4. See fragment 16. 

=== PAGE 76 ===
52 CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
Fragment 26, Parts |—2 (Frames 49-50) 
1. Long, thin section of a scroll, with the original right-hand margin in- 
tact in some places near the middle but otherwise fragmentary and incomplete. Fair 
condition. The intact portions of the recto are mostly legible, the verso partly so. 
2. 8.2 X 64.5 cm; 49 lines on fF, 36 on Vv. 
3. A very distinctive large, angular, thick hand, skillfully written with a 
calligraphic effect. 
4. Apparently a sutra or some other text, not yet identified, on medita- 
tive states (see 2.2.1). Evidently part of the same scroll as fragment 29. 
Fragment 27 (Frame 50) 
1. Small fragment in poor condition. Only a few small portions are legible. 
2. 6.2 X 12.5 cm; about 12 lines each side. 
3. Thin, upright hand. 
4. Undetermined. Possibly part of same scroll and/or text as fragment 22. 
Fragment 28, Parts |—2 (Frames 51-2) 
1. Substantial portion of a relatively well preserved scroll. On the middle 
and lower sections, both margins are nearly intact. Mostly legible, especially the 
middle and lower portions. 
2. 12.0 X 65 cm; 83 lines on r, 84 on v. 
3. Small, neat hand, with closely spaced lines. 
4. An unidentified abhidharma text (see 2.2.2). 
Fragment 29, Parts |—3 (Frames 53-5) 
1. Large section of a scroll, in fairly good condition. On the lower por- 
tion the right margin is intact, but the left edge is lost throughout. Portions near the 
right margin are generally legible, but much of the center and left side, where pre- 
served at all, is badly decayed and difficult or impossible to read. 
2. 13.8 * 127.7 cm; 87 lines on 1,71 On v. 
3. Large, angular, calligraphic hand, same as that of fragment 26. 
4. Evidently part of same scroll as fragment 26. 
Debris 
In addition to the manuscripts preserved under glass, there are thirteen 
small boxes containing loose bits of bark that were collected from each of the glass 
jars in which the manuscripts were brought to the British Library. Most of these are 
minuscule pieces without text, but some slightly larger pieces with one or more legi- 
ble aksaras are also present. In some cases as many as four or five syllables of a single 
line are preserved, and in a few others, parts of two different lines are visible. For 
some of the manuscripts, especially nos. 5B and 15, there is a significant amount of 

=== PAGE 77 ===
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION | 53 
inscribed debris. Thus it may eventually be possible, in the course of detailed studies 
of the individual texts, to locate the original position of some of these fragments in 
the manuscripts and thereby put them to use in textual reconstruction. 
In addition, there is an extra glass frame (no. 56), labeled “Box 14,” con- 
taining twenty-six pieces of miscellaneous debris, of which eighteen have at least 
some traces of writing, in some cases as many as three or four aksaras. Here too, it 
may eventually become possible to identify at least some of these fragments with 
particular scrolls. 
2.4. Summary of Original Scrolls or Scroll Sets 
In this summary an attempt is made, in a provisional way, to group to- 
gether the fragments that may originally have been part of the same scroll or set of 
scrolls. There are, however, several uncertainties involved. In some cases, particularly 
in connection with small fragments or ones in very poor condition, it is difficult to 
determine such relationships with confidence (e.g., in the case of no. 12; see below). 
In other cases, where we find fragments that are written in the same hand and con- 
tain similar texts, it often cannot yet be determined whether they are parts of the 
same original scroll, of separate scrolls constituting “volumes” of a longer text, or 
even of separate copies of the same or similar texts (e.g., no. 9). All such problematic 
cases are marked below with a question mark. The total number of original scrolls 
and scroll sets arrived at here, twenty-one, is the minimum possible, and it is likely 
that the actual number is somewhat higher because of the uncertainty of several of 
these associations (see 2.1.1). Conversely, it is also possible that in the course of fur- 
ther study, other linkages may be established between fragments. 
Where known, the name of the text or its genre type is also indicated, but 
some of these identifications are also provisional. 
1. Fragment 1: Anavatapta-gatha plus avadana collection 
Fragment 2: Avadana collection 
Fragment 3A: Avadana collection, plus another unidentified text 
Toe 
Fragments 3B + 7 + 9 + 13 + 18 (these may actually be parts of the 
same text but not of the same scroll; that is, they may compose parts 
of a single long text that was written out on two or more scrolls): 
Commentary on a verse collection 
Fragment 4: Verse commentary text plus avadana collection 
Fragment 5A: Didactic verses? 
Fragment 5B: Rhinoceros Horn Sutra 
Fragment 5C: Stotra 
Go 
SN 
Fragment 6: Medical text in Sanskrit/Brahmi 
10. Fragment 8 
11. Fragment 10 

=== PAGE 78 ===
54. CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
12. Fragments 11 + 21+ 24 (?) 
13. Fragments 12 + 14: Sutra text partially parallel to Anguttara-nikaya 
14. Fragment 15: Sangiti-sttra and commentary 
15. Fragments 16 + 25: Dharmapada plus avadana collection 
16. Fragment 17 
17. Fragment 19 
18. Fragments 20 + 23 
19. Fragments 22 + 27 (?) 
20. Fragments 26 + 29: Sutra text? 
21. Fragment 28: Abhidharma text 
2.5. Summary of Scribal Hands 
This list summarizes, again in a preliminary manner, the different scribal 
hands that appear in the entire collection and the collocations of fragments written 
by the same scribe. Here too there are several uncertainties, particularly in connection 
with small or poorly preserved fragments, for which it can be difficult to conclusively 
identify different hands. Such uncertain cases are indicated by a question mark. 
It is not yet possible to determine with certainty who these scribes 
were. Some vinaya and related texts—for instance, the Bhaisajyavastu of the 
Mulasarvastivada-vinaya from Gilgit (Dutt 1947: 281)—refer to professional scribes 
(kayastha) who became monks and were permitted, contrary to the general rule, 
to keep their professional equipment (bhdnda). Other related texts, however, such 
as the Gilgit Civaravastu (Dutt 1942: 143, 146), refer to the costs involved in copying 
manuscripts, evidently suggesting that the work was hired out to persons other 
than monks. But I would consider it a priori more likely that the British Library 
scrolls represent the work of monks who were, by specialization, scribes or scholars 
(or both). 
1. Bold, thick, upright hand: fragments 1 (first hand), 12 + 14 (first), 
16 + 25 (first)>> 
2. Large, flowing hand with big spaces between letters: 1 (second 
hand), 2, 3A (second), 4 (third), 12 + 14 (second), 16 + 25 (second), 
21 (first) 
. Thin, rounded hand: 3A (first hand), 8 
. Small, rounded, precise hand: 3B (first hand), 7, 9, 13 (first), 18 
. Thick, upright hand: 3B (second hand) 
. Square, upright, bold hand: 4 (first hand) 
. Thin, elongated, slanting hand: 4 (second hand) 
. Thick, medium-sized hand: 5A 
Coe 
SS) 
fe 
Way 
SS 
SS) 
55. See figure 12 for a chart showing Kharosthi script as written by this scribe. 

=== PAGE 79 ===
10. 
i. 
13% 
13. 
. Hand similar to, but apparently distinct from, hand 4: 
15: 
. Thick, upright hand: 17 
17, 
18. 
. Thin, upright hand: 22, 27 (?) 
20. 
21. 
CONTENTS OF THE BRITISH LIBRARY KHAROSTHI COLLECTION 
55 
. Small, thick, diagonally slanted hand: 5B 
Small, thin hand: 5C 
Small, slightly cursive hand (Brahmi script): 6 
Small, precise hand with unusually large spaces between lines: 10 
Tall, thin hand: 11, 21 (second hand), 24 (?) 
13 (second hand) 
Very small, cursive hand: 15 
Large, thick, upright hand: 19 
Small, neat, spidery hand: 20, 23 
Large, angular, thick, calligraphic hand: 26 + 29 
Small, neat hand: 28 

=== PAGE 80 ===
e Kucha 
Approximate Scale — |:15,000,000 
0 
100 
200 
300 mi 
| 
Oat 
taal Na a ee 
eno 
ee} 
[eae 
raca [sean Sees 
bar 
[ees 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 km 
e Kohmari Mazar 
Bamiyan eeShahr-i Zuhak  « Najigram 
45°N 
on A 
RPO 
TAN 
Approx. 
Scale — 1:400,000 
3 
Sek 
se: 
on 
& 
MAIN MAP| 
oN 
0 
5 mi 
Abe. 
PKYRGYZSTA} 
nl Gee 
: 
; &, 
ty Ne 
x 
: 
® 
- 
ve 
ey 
as 
TAJKISTAN 
CHINA 
eS 
ROS? 
Ty, 
Nandara e 
ey 
L/ 
Passani 
mmm IO) 
f 
DETAIL MAP 
e 
y 
at 
Pi 
Kotptr wor? 
/ 
SA 
‘Ubet 
wo 
} 
st 
soit 
we 
. 
cA 
a 
ae 
E 
mj, 
~O 
va 
rh 
4 o 
— 
Chakhil-i Ghundi 
at 
Tapa Shutur , 
e 
v4 
S 
Hadda tope no. 
1°* Hadda 
SY stn 
Tapa Kalan’ 9:\" 
oe 
Map 2. Findspots of Kharosthi manuscripts 
5° .N 

=== PAGE 81 ===
Chapter 3 
Previous Discoveries of Kharosthi Manuscripts 
Although only one manuscript in the Gandhari language and Kharosthi 
script—namely, the “Gandhari Dharmapada’” scroll found near Khotan (KDhP)'— 
has been published until now, a survey of various sources, published and unpub- 
lished, reveals that in fact considerable numbers of such texts have been discovered 
since the early nineteenth century in various parts of Afghanistan, Pakistan, and 
Chinese central Asia (see map 2). Thus although Kharosthi manuscripts are scarce 
in comparison to better-known and better-documented later materials in Brahmi 
and Brahmi-derived scripts, they are by no means as rare as has been generally be- 
lieved. This impression, however, is easy to understand, since, other than the KDhP, 
none of these Kharosthi manuscripts have been properly studied, reproduced, or 
published, and many or most of them seem to have been lost or destroyed. More- 
over, the circumstances of the finds of Kharosthi manuscripts, including the KDhP, 
have for the most part not been properly documented. 
The apparent—but illusory—uniqueness of the KDhP text has led schol- 
ars to question whether it could be taken to imply the existence of a larger body of 
Buddhist texts that had been more or less systematically translated into Gandhari, 
that is, of what has been referred to in this context as “the Gandhari canon’; or 
whether, on the contrary, it was an anomalous case of one particularly popular text 
being rendered into the local language on the whim of some individual. In general, 
scholarly opinion has tended to be cautiously inclined toward the former opinion, 
as represented, for example, by the authoritative comments of John Brough: 
There are tolerably good grounds for considering that the mere existence of 
this one text does allow the inference—indeed almost compels it—that there 
1. I have chosen to refer in this book to this manuscript as thie “Khotan Dharmapada,” rather 
than the “Gandhari Dharmapada,’ as it is usually known after the title of Brough’s definitive edi- 
tion. I do so in order to avoid confusion with the fragmentary remains in the new collection of 
another manuscript of what is essentially the same Gandhari version of the Dharmapada (frags. 16 
+ 25), since the term “Gandhari Dharmapada’ is now no longer a distinctive one. In earlier publi- 
cations, the Khotan text was referred to by various names, such as “ms. Dutreuil de Rhins” and 
“Prakrit Dhammapada.” 
57 

=== PAGE 82 ===
58 
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
did exist a more extensive canonical collection of texts belonging to the same 
school. It seems to me very difficult to believe that a group of monks might 
have possessed a Dharmapada . . 
. without at the same time possessing at 
least some stock of Sutra and Vinaya works. 
I should therefore not hesitate to say that the existence of this Dharma- 
pada does imply the existence of a canon of which it formed a part. (1962: 43) 
As the material presented in this chapter will show, even before the discovery of 
the new British Library collection the large number of previously known Gandhari 
manuscripts could have produced more confidence in the hypothesis of a “Gandhari 
canon,” had they been properly brought to the attention of scholars. In any case, the 
new collection shows beyond any doubt that there was a large—perhaps very large— 
body of Buddhist texts that were translated into, and in some cases probably also 
originally composed in, Gandhari. In this sense, then, we can say that the Gandhari 
canon hypothesis has already been confirmed, although it must be stipulated that 
this is only true with reference to a loose sense of the word “canon” as referring to 
a sizable body of scriptural texts in a single language.’ 
3.1. Kharosthi Manuscripts Found in Chinese Central Asia 
3.1.1. The Khotan Dharmapada (“Gandharr Dharmapada”) 
The KDhP first came to light in 1892 when part of it was acquired by 
J.-L. Dutreuil de Rhins and F. Grenard in Khotan. Another portion was acquired by 
N. Th. Petrovskii at about the same time, but the missing third fragment of the man- 
uscript has never been located. John Brough’s definitive study and edition of this 
text has shown that in the original intact form in which it was apparently discovered 
(it seems to have been torn into fragments by its unknown modern discoverer) it 
was a single birch bark scroll, approximately 20 cm wide and 5 m long. According to 
information reported by Grenard (1898: 142), the manuscript was found in a cave at 
Kohmari Mazar, twenty-one kilometers southwest of Khotan, which has been identi- 
fied with the ancient Gosrnga- or Gosirsa-vihara mentioned by Hsiian-tsang and 
other Buddhist writers. But this reported provenance is doubtful, especially as Aurel 
Stein visited the cave in question in 1900 and found it “distinctly improbable that 
the antiquarian relics now in Paris and St. Petersburg [i.e., the KDhP manuscript] 
were actually discovered within the cave” (Stein 1907: 188; see also Brough 1962: 2 
and n. 3). The remarkably good condition of the scroll, as compared to all other 
specimens of Kharosthi manuscripts, including the new ones that are the subject of 
this volume, indicates that it must have been preserved in some secure and airtight 
2. Some further comments on the complex problem of precisely what kind of “canon,” or 
perhaps rather protocanonical collection, the British Library texts actually represent will be offered 
in section 8.1. 

=== PAGE 83 ===
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
59 
container. This container might have been the “bowl of well-finished pottery” (Stein 
1907: 188) which was said to have been found “next to the manuscript” (“a cété du 
manuscrit”; Grenard 1898: 143), since, as will be seen below, several other manu- 
scripts of this and similar types have been found inside pottery vessels. Since the 
description of the circumstances of the find was based on unreliable secondhand 
reports, it seems more likely that the manuscript was actually inside, rather than 
“next to,” the pot with which it was allegedly found, for if it had lain exposed over 
the centuries, it could hardly have remained in such excellent condition. 
3.1.2. Other Kharosthi Manuscripts from Chinese Central Asia 
According to M. I. Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, the S. F Oldenburg Collec- 
tion in the Institute of Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences in St. 
Petersburg includes “[a] small fragment of palm leaf bearing a text in the Kharosthi 
script in Gandhari, and evidently an excerpt from the Hinayana version of the Maha- 
parinirvana sutra” (in Litvinsky 1996: 435). The findspot of this important fragment, 
as yet unpublished, is unknown, but it may be presumed to have come, like the other 
texts in the Oldenburg Collection, from Chinese central Asia. 
Numerous other fragments of Kharosthi manuscripts, mostly as yet un- 
published and little understood, have been found in various places in Chinese central 
Asia. Among these is an unpublished fragment of an unidentified text in Sanskrit 
written in Kharosthi on palm leaf, which was found in the region of Kucha and is 
now in the Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris. Some specimens of texts written on slips 
of wood in what appears to be a late variant or derivative of Kharosthi script are illus- 
trated in Filliozat 1958: pl. VII. A small fragment of a paper manuscript with a text in 
Kharosthi is described and illustrated, with a tentative reading by E. J. Rapson, in 
Conrady 1920: 140, 191, and pl. 38 (no. 36). Further references to central Asian Kharos- 
thi manuscripts are provided by Lin (forthcoming). 
3.2. Kharosthi Manuscripts Found in Afghanistan 
3.2.1. Kharostht Manuscripts from Hadda and Other Sites 
around Jalalabad and Kabul 
Several specimens of fragmentary birch bark manuscripts in Kharosthi 
script were discovered in eastern Afghanistan as early as 1834 by the explorer Charles 
Masson, as described in his “Memoir on the Topes and Sepulchral Monuments of 
Afghanistan” (chap. 2, pp. 55-118, of Wilson 1841). Masson reported that he found in 
reliquaries and other containers from several sites in the region of Jalalabad “twists 
of tuz-leaves, inscribed internally with characters” (Wilson 1841: 59-60). Here Wilson 
explained in an editorial note that “[i]t seems likely that what Mr. Masson denomi- 
nates ‘tuz-leaves’ is the inner bark of the bhurj or birch tree, which was very com- 
monly used for writing upon by the Hindus in early times” (1841: 60 n. 1; see also 
41-2). Masson added that “it is peculiarly unfortunate that they have become so de- 

=== PAGE 84 ===
60 
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
cayed as to have crumbled away, or to do so when handled. In one or two instances 
only have we obtained twists in better preservation, their leaf being of coarser tex- 
ture, and consequently more durable than the finer specimens generally employed. 
The characters on these leaves are invariably those found on the native legends of 
our Bactrian and Indo-Scythic coins” (i.e., Kharosthi) (p. 60). From his sketchy de- 
scriptions, it is difficult to be sure of the exact nature of Masson’s “twists,” but I con- 
sider it most likely that they are manuscripts in scroll form, similar to the ones that 
are the main subject of this book, as opposed to, for example, smaller amulet-type 
texts on birch bark of the type discussed in section 4.5.2. 
The first of the birch bark texts described by Masson was found by him in 
the relic chamber of tope (i.e., sta) no. 1 at Nandara, where he discovered “fragments 
of tuz-leaves, . 
.. completely pulverized, but which clearly had been originally formed 
into a twist, and bound with thread. These contained Bactro-Pali [i.e., Kharosthi] char- 
acters, but the state in which the faithless [sic] record was found rendered it impossible 
to do any thing with them, even to copy them” (Wilson 1841: 84). Interestingly, these 
manuscript fragments were found in the relic chamber together with “a box of bark 
of tree, enveloped with tuz-leaves, formed into a twist at the top, and bound with a 
thread. These originally fragile materials had become so decayed as to crumble on 
being touched” (p. 83; illustrated in Wilson’s pl. IX, between pp. 118 and 119). 
Masson also mentions, among the relics he found in tumulus? no. 2 near 
the “topes” of Passani, a human skull, a large steatite vase divided into five compart- 
ments, and “a twist of coarse tuz-leaf inscribed with Bactro-Pali characters” (Wilson 
1841: 94). Similarly, he found inside a steatite vase in the nearby tope no. 1 at Hidda 
(= Hadda) “a twist of tuz-leaf ... inscribed with Bactro-Pali characters, but I fear 
it is too much to expect that it could be unrolled and deciphered” (p. 106). In tope 
no. 2 at the same site, Masson also found “the fragments of a casket of bark of tree” 
(p. 106), presumably similar to the one he found at Nandara, as quoted above. 
At Hidda tope no. 13 Masson discovered, inside a “small earthen jar,” “a 
stone wrapped in tuz-leaves” (Wilson 1841: 111), though he does not refer to any in- 
scription on them. Similar examples of stone wrapped in bark, but again evidently 
3. Masson also refers to “a box of bark of tree” (in Wilson 1941: 76), presumably a similar 
object, found by J. M. Honigberger at Bimaran tope no. 5. 
4. According to Simpson (1881: 189), “[Masson] made a distinction between topes and 
tumuli, which my experience leads me to reject.” Simpson felt that what Masson called “tumuli” 
were simply decayed “topes.” Some of Masson’s comments—for instance, “[t]opes are always 
accompanied by inferior structures, which may be called tumuli. 
. 
. 
. no tope, however remotely 
situated, is without its dependent tumulus” (in Wilson 1841: 58)—suggest that at least some of his 
“tumuli” are actually what were later referred to as “votive stupas,” that is, the small subsidiary 
stupas that usually surround a large one 
5. Although this is not very clear in his report, the “Bactro-Pali inscription, written with a 
pen,’ that Masson refers to in the next sentence is evidently the inscription on the earthen jar itself; 
this is the “Hidda inscription of the year 28” published in Konow 1929: 157-8 and Konow 1935-6. 

=== PAGE 85 ===
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
6l 
uninscribed, were noticed by Masson inside Hidda tope no. 8, where he found “a 
huge boulder, covered with tuz-leaves, which I carefully examined, but found no 
characters upon them” (p. 107), and at tumulus no. 7 of Passani, where he found “a 
large stone covered with layers of plain tuz leaves, or perhaps the smooth internal 
bark of some tree” (p. 95). 
In figure 11 of plate HI in Wilson 1841 (between pp. 53 and 54) is illustrated 
“[a] piece of birch-bark, with characters, such as has been found in several topes, but 
in fragments too small and brittle to offer any continuous and legible inscription” 
(p. 53). No information is provided as to its exact provenance; presumably it is part 
of one of the “twists of tuz-leaves” referred to above, but there is no way to know 
which one. In the sketch itself, portions of two lines are visible. Of the upper line, 
only the nondistinctive bottoms of the syllables are preserved, but in the lower line, 
the first two syllables can be read clearly enough as midha,° followed by a fragment 
of a third unidentifiable letter.” This is presumably one of the specimens “of coarser 
texture” (p. 60)® that survived at least partially, unlike the others, which appear to 
have disintegrated completely. 
Georg Buhler examined some fragments of birch bark in the British 
Museum that were said to belong to Masson’s “twists” but reported that they “show 
no letters” (1904: 18 n. 6). However, I had occasion in October 1996 to examine a small 
box of birch bark fragments from Masson’s collections in the British Museum, which 
are presumably the fragments seen by Buhler, and found, among the hundreds or 
perhaps even thousands of minuscule fragments, one fragmentary aksara (perhaps 
the tip of a ya) on a piece of bark about 0.5 cm in diameter. Meager as this result 
may be, it does confirm that at least some of the fragments belonged to an inscribed 
piece of bark. 
This, sad to say, is all that is known of the Kharosthi manuscripts found 
by Masson in the stupas of the Jalalabad Plain. But other specimens of texts of 
similar types were found by John Martin Honigberger, who explored the Buddhist 
remains of eastern Afghanistan in 1833 (i.e., just before Masson), as described in 
Jacquet’s accounts (1836, 1838) of his discoveries. The most striking of Honigberger’s 
finds came from “Bourdj i takht i minareh siah Tchekeri bala,” that is, what is known 
in later archeological literature as the Shevaki (Wilson 1841: 114) or Shiwaki (Ball 
1982: 1.253-4, no. 1087) stupa, on the southwestern outskirts of Kabul, where in 1833 
he found inside a stone reliquary “a papyrus, fairly well preserved, folded in several 
6. Since the compound thina-middha (Pali)/styana-middha (Sanskrit), “sloth and drowsi- 
ness,” is very common in Buddhist texts, it is likely that the word that preceded this was the 
Gandhari equivalent of thina/stydna, perhaps stina. 
7. Buhler (1895: 87 n. 1) read the third letter as “ya (?).” He refers to these birch bark fragments 
as probably “the oldest MSS., actually found” (p. 87). 
8. This “coarser texture” probably refers to pieces of bark with a relatively large number of 
component layers; see section 5.4.1. 

=== PAGE 86 ===
62 
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
layers, on the reverse of which were drawn in black some Bactrian characters” 
(Jacquet 1836: 260).? From this description and the excellent drawing of the object in 
the accompanying plate XII.1 (reproduced here in fig. 8), it appears that this text may 
have had the form, not of a scroll, but rather of a small single sheet (see 5.2) that was 
folded repeatedly into a small packet so that it could be fitted inside the small (four 
inches high; Jacquet 1836: 259) reliquary, though it is also possible that it was origi- 
nally a larger scroll that had been folded up for the same reason. Despite Jacquet’s 
description of it as “papyrus,” it can be assumed that the material was in fact birch 
bark. Judging from the illustration, the object seems to have been remarkably well 
preserved, and Jacquet adds a suitable note of caution that it would be “the most 
precious of objects discovered until now in the topes if one could succeed in opening 
it without damaging either the material of the sheet itself or the characters drawn 
upon it; this material has indeed become so fragile that it will be necessary to resort 
to chemical procedures to soften and open it” (1836: 260-1).’° Unfortunately, this was 
apparently never actually done, and the fate of this potentially very important text is 
unknown. In his memoirs, Honigberger reported that “the only Bactrian manuscript 
which has ever been found” (Honigberger 1852: 59) lay for fifteen years in the custom- 
house in Vienna, after which it was sold for “about three pounds” at auction to per- 
sons unknown, whereby “in all probability, the invaluable contents of the Bactrian 
scroll will be lost forever to the scientific world!” (1852: 60). 
Among Honigberger’s other discoveries was “a very fine and fairly well 
preserved fabric, folded in several layers which were stuck together by the liquid 
which had penetrated them” (Jacquet 1838: 184-5), found inside a silver box in 
Kotpur stupa 1 (cf. Wilson 1841: 64-5). Jacquet commented that “one can assume 
from the start that this strip of material had been covered with writing and 
deposited in this box with the same intention as the papyrus in the one from the 
tope of Tchekeri bala” 
Also, in the stupa at Bourdj i Kemri (= Masson’s Kamari; Wilson 1841: 114), Honig- 
(p. 185 n. 1).’7 Again, nothing further is known of this object." 
berger found a bronze bowl containing, among other relics, “pieces of bark” (Jacquet 
1836: 266); these too were most likely fragments of an inscribed piece of birch bark. 
9. “...un papyrus assez bien conservé, plié en plusieurs doubles, sur le revers duquel sont 
tracés en noir quelques caractéres bactriens.” 
10. “...le plus précieux des objets jusqu’a présent découvertes dans les topes, si lon peut 
réussir a le déployer sans altérer ni la substance méme de la feuille, ni les caractéres qui y sont 
tracés; cette substance est en effet devenue si friable qu il sera nécessaire de recourir 4 des procédés 
chimique pour l’amollir et l’étendre.” 
1. “...un tissu trés fin et assez bien conservé, plié en plusieurs doubles, agglutinés par le 
liquide qui les avait pénétrés.” 
12. “...0n peut supposer d’abord que cette band d’étoffe avait été couverte d’écriture et 
déposée dans cette boite avec la méme intention que le papyrus dans celle du tope de Tchekeri bald.” 
13. Iourkevitch comments that Honigberger “lost many things, including some manuscript 
rolls” (1974: 81), but it is not clear whether he is referring to the objects mentioned above or to 
others, or what his source of information is. 

=== PAGE 87 ===
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
63 
Fig. 8. Kharosthi manuscript discovered 
by Martin Honigberger at Shiwaki stiipa 
Several more examples of Kharosthi texts on birch bark from the same 
region were discovered nearly a century later by J. Barthoux in the course of his ex- 
cavations at Hadda. He refers, for example, to some pots which contained “debris of 
manuscripts (bark paper)” (1933: 60), presumably referring to Kharosthi texts, and 
also, more specifically, to “some fragments of a manuscript (bark paper) in Kharo- 
sthi characters, with the color, appearance, and fragility of papyrus” (p. 61). One such 
manuscript, “the size of a fist” (p. 61), was found rolled up in the ruins of Chakhil-i 
Ghundi under stiipa C, 8. According to Barthoux, “the text reproducing the sermon 
at Benaras was unfortunately without interest for the chronology of the structures” 
[!] (p. 61), and he provides no further information about it. It would have been par- 
ticularly interesting to know on what grounds he identified the contents of the text 
as the “sermon at Benares,” but apparently no further information about this impor- 
tant text has been published. Elsewhere, however, Barthoux refers to what is presu- 
mably the same manuscript “reproducing the sermon at Benares” (p. 63) as having 
been found at Tapa-i Kafariha, which is a separate site located some four kilometers 
to the southeast of Chakhil-i Ghundi. Barthoux’s apparent confusion about the 
findspot does not increase the reader’s confidence in his vague description and un- 
documented identification of the manuscript. 
Barthoux also mentions fragments of another, coarser (“plus grossier”) 
manuscript found in chamber K 19 at Tapa Kalan. These fragments, “very deterio- 

=== PAGE 88 ===
64 
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
rated and incomplete, did not permit any exact reconstruction of the texts” (1933: 
61). Barthoux then goes on to describe further discoveries of such manuscripts: 
Others, very fine, bearing prayers, were met with in the rubble of the rooms. 
Finally, others were also found in holes in the walls where they had been 
deposited, but most often, they were placed in the hands of meditating Bud- 
dhas, the depression between them and their bodies being admirably suited 
for such a deposit. It is in this way that they turned up in the stupas T[apa] 
K{alan] 23, 119, and 122 within the hands of isolated statues dressed in yellow- 
ish white robes. 
These fragments, very fragile, had already been crushed by the rubble, 
and in removing them, despite all the precautions that were taken, one man- 
aged to destroy them. (1933: 61)'4 
Only the specimen found in TK 122 is mentioned further, described as “a prayer on 
bark paper, carefully folded .. 
. [and] placed between his [the meditating Buddha’s] 
hands” (p. 103). 
Despite the frustrating lack of detail, it is at least clear from Barthoux’s 
brief descriptions that he found numerous Kharosthi manuscripts on birch bark at 
Hadda. Two in particular seem to have been substantial scrolls similar to the KDhP 
and the new British Library texts. Masson’s description of the texts that he found at 
Hadda and other nearby sites as “twists,” in one case (Nandara) tied up with thread, 
seems to imply that they too were rolled-up scrolls of the same type. But some of the 
other texts found by Barthoux, referred to by him vaguely as “prayers,” such as the 
one that was “carefully folded” and placed in the hands of a Buddha figure, appear 
to have been of a different format, apparently written on smaller sheets of bark and 
folded, rather than rolled up as scrolls. The intact manuscript found by Honigberger 
at Shiwaki also appears to have been of this class, and another possible example is 
described below in section 3.3. The smaller-format texts in the British Library collec- 
tion (see 5.2) seem also to belong to a similar type of text. It is impossible to tell how 
many of these smaller texts Barthoux found, but his vague references to “others” 
might be taken to imply that they were fairly numerous. 
It is also not clear what has become of the Kharosthi manuscripts discov- 
14. “... trés déteriorés et dont il manquait une partie, n’ont permis aucune reconstitution 
précise de textes. .. 
. D’autres, trés fins, portant des priéres, ont été rencontrés dans les décombres 
des chambres. D’autres enfin se trouvaient encore dans les trous des murs ot ils avaient été 
déposés, mais le plus souvent, ils étaient placés dans les mains de Bouddhas en méditation, la dé- 
pression située entre elles et le corps du personnage convenant admirablement a un tel dépét. C’est 
ainsi qu’ils se présentaient dans les stiipa TK, 23, TK, 119 et TK, 122 entre les mains de statues isolées 
et vétues du manteau blanc jaunatre. 
“Ces fragments, tres fragiles, étaient déja broyés par les décombres, et en les retirant, malgré 
toutes les précautions prises, l’on achevait de les détruire.” 

=== PAGE 89 ===
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
65 
ered by Barthoux at Hadda. He admits that the smaller pieces were destroyed in the 
process of removal, but the fate of the larger ones, especially the one tantalizingly 
identified as the sermon at Benares, is not known to me, and I have not been able 
to locate any illustration, publication, or further reference to any of them. 
Apparently similar materials were also found at Hadda during the more 
recent Afghan excavations at the Tapa Shutur site. One such manuscript, found dur- 
ing the fourth season there, was described by Mustamandi: 
Another and headless figure made of stucco has aroused our deep interest 
in the rear part of the statue containing a small booklet, with a size of 3 x 2.3 
cm, embedded in it. The booklet is probably made of date-palm bark or 
peepul-tree bark. . .. What the booklet mean(s] is difficult to say... . [NJo 
definite opinion can be expressed unless and until the booklet is opened and 
i[t]s contents deciphered. (1970: 71; see also Stwodah 1980: 7) 
Another, evidently similar item was found in the fifth campaign at Tapa Shutur: 
[T]he mission was able to find two heads of a Bodhisattva. 
. 
. 
. made of 
unbaked mud. . 
. 
. Inside their heads there are holes in which rolls of “Ficus 
Religivsa” [sic] leave[s] were stuffed. On the leaves is some writing. Due to 
this fact the leaves are very important, but unfortunately neither these nor 
the [roll] of leaves, found last year, has been s[t]udied so far. It is rather hard 
to separate the leaves from each other here in Afghanistan. (Mustamandi 
1971: 131) 
In light of the other inscribed objects previously reported from Hadda, 
it is likely that the material in question is birch bark rather than date-palm bark or 
Ficus religiosa leaves as reported here, and that the writing on it is Kharosthi. Judging 
from the placement of these texts inside statues of Buddhas or Bodhisattvas, we can 
surmise that they were more in the nature of the “prayers” found by Barthoux in 
the hands of Buddha figures, that is, short votive texts rather than complete scrolls. 
However, I have not been able to find any further information about or description 
of these texts. As with the other materials from Hadda described above, their present 
location and fate are unknown, but there is reason to fear that they have been lost, 
since, according to Ball, “[t]he Tepe Shutur remains and museum were completely 
destroyed in the fighting in 1980” (1982: 1.116). 
3.2.2. Kharosthi Manuscripts from Other Parts of Afghanistan 
Besides the abundant examples of Kharosthi manuscripts on birch bark 
found by Masson, Barthoux, and Mustamandi in the area of Hadda and the other 
Buddhist sites in the Jalalabad Plain, numerous specimens of Kharosthi manuscripts 

=== PAGE 90 ===
66 
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
have been found elsewhere in Afghanistan, mainly in the Bamiyan area in central 
northern Afghanistan. These were noted by Sylvain Lévi, quoting Joseph Hackin’s 
description of the “large quantity” of birch bark manuscripts found in a cave thirty- 
five meters east of the great Buddha of Bamiyan, among which “some rare manu- 
scripts are in Kharosthi” (Lévi 1932: 1). As far as I have been able to determine, these 
Kharosthi texts have never been published, but I have seen a photograph (kindly sup- 
plied by Dr. Lore Sander) taken many years ago in the Kabul Museum that shows a 
small manuscript fragment with three lines of text on each side in Kharosthi, with 
about twelve characters per line; this may be one of the Bamiyan fragments found 
by Hackin. 
Four small fragments of Kharosthi manuscripts from Shahr-i Zuhak, 
twelve kilometers east of Bamiyan, were illustrated by Pauly (1967: pl. IV.E—H), with 
the comment that “not knowing this script, I leave it to those who are more capable 
to take the effort to decipher them” (p. 283). As far as | am aware, no further mention 
has been made of these fragments in subsequent publications. 
I have also recently seen in a private collection a substantial group of 
small fragments of Kharosthi manuscripts on palm leaf which are believed to have 
come originally from somewhere near Bamiyan. This collection comprises seventy 
fragments in all, representing parts of twenty-three original manuscripts. Their con- 
tents remain to be analyzed and identified, but in general they seem to be somewhat 
later in script and style than the British Library fragments, as suggested, for example, 
by their Sanskritized orthography. 
3.3. Kharosthi Manuscripts from Other Regions or of Unknown Origin 
Another interesting specimen of remnants of a Kharosthi text on birch 
bark was recently observed by me in a private collection. These fragments were found 
inside a pyxis-shaped reliquary of green schist (illustrated here in pl. 12), measuring 
10.5 cm in height and 37.1 cm in circumference and bearing traces of red pigment 
around the knot on the lid. Around the outside of the base there is a “Kharosthi” 
inscription in two lines, but this is patently a modern forgery, presumably added 
on to enhance the antiquarian value of the piece. Nonetheless, the reliquary itself 
and its contents are clearly genuine. These contents (pl. 13) are the following: 
1. A round silver casket, 3.6 cm in diameter and 1.5 cm in height, con- 
taining seventeen small flower-shaped pieces of gold leaf about 1 cm 
in diameter, and thirty-two similar pieces in silver. 
A small round gold casket, 1.7 cm in diameter and 0.9 cm in height. 
Two pins, in brass and iron, 5.2 and 5.3 cm long respectively. 
Two brass (or gold?) earrings. 
ys 
YP 
A circular copper lid with a loop at the center, 4 cm in diameter and 
0.9 cm in height. 

=== PAGE 91 ===
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
67 
. Nine bronze rings, 1.7—2.0 cm in diameter. 
. Two heart-shaped bangles of turquoise-colored glass, 4.8 cm wide. 
. One broken iron bangle, 5.9 cm wide. 
Ney 
ie 
ye 
. Fourteen beads of various forms. 
10. Ten bow-shaped ivory necklace pieces, each with two holes, 
1.6 cm wide. 
Besides these items, the bottom of the reliquary was covered with tiny 
fragments, apparently numbering in the thousands, of birch bark. The largest of 
these fragments was about 0.9 cm in diameter, but most were smaller and many 
were completely decomposed, hardly larger than a speck of dust. Nonetheless, on 
many of the larger fragments it was possible to discern parts of Kharosthi aksaras. 
No complete aksaras were found, but in a few cases parts of two syllables were visi- 
ble on the same fragment (pl. 14, lower left and lower right fragments), and in rare 
instances it was possible to identify a partial aksara, for instance, rma (perhaps part 
of the word dharma) on the upper right fragment in plate 14. 
Although there is no possibility of identifying or reconstructing the text 
that was contained on these minuscule fragments, it is clear that they are the rem- 
nants of a birch bark manuscript. Given the similar discoveries by Honigberger of 
small pieces of inscribed birch bark placed inside reliquaries, this might have been 
another “small-format” text consisting of a single folded piece of bark, though once 
again it could also have been a complete scroll that was folded up to fit inside the 
small casket. If this was a small piece of bark containing a short text, the contents, 
at a guess, might have been a sacred formula, quite possibly the pratitya-samutpdada, 
for this formula was added as a supplementary text to the donative inscription on 
the Kurram relic casket (Konow 1929: 155) and also seems to have been the text 
written in Brahmi script on a birch bark strip similarly found inside a reliquary at 
Lauriya-Nandangarh (see 4.5.2). 
The findspot of the reliquary examined is unfortunately unknown, but 
given its general resemblance to other objects found in the Gandhara and Swat re- 
gions of Pakistan, it could well have come from that general area. There is also some 
evidence of a similar item having been found in the Swat Valley; Tucci refers to the 
discovery at one of the sttipa sites near Najigram in lower Swat of “a well-preserved 
casket in steatite which was found among their ruins, containing a small golden box 
with some relics, and also it seems a birch-tree leaflet which has since disappeared: 
according to what I was told the casket was given to the Wali Saheb” (1958: 317). No 
further information or description of this object is provided, but given its character 
and provenance it is more than likely that the “birch-tree leaflet” was yet another 
example of a birch bark manuscript in Kharosthi. 
15. For further references to this practice; see Bentor 1995: 251-2. 

=== PAGE 92 ===
68 
PREVIOUS DISCOVERIES OF KHAROSTHI MANUSCRIPTS 
3.4. Conclusions 
Sketchy as most of the reports cited here may be, they suffice to show 
that Kharosthi manuscripts on birch bark must have been very numerous in ancient 
Gandhara and surrounding regions.'° No doubt many more of them have been dis- 
covered but subsequently lost or destroyed by mishandling; hopefully, more also re- 
main to be discovered. They seem to have been especially common in the numerous 
stiipa sites in the Jalalabad Plain of eastern Afghanistan but are also attested in other 
areas, such as Swat and Chinese central Asia, that were under the cultural influence 
of Gandhara. The relative rarity of surviving specimens is no doubt due to their ex- 
treme fragility, such that even those which survived until modern times have, more 
often than not, been destroyed by their discoverers, as shown by the confessions of 
Masson and Barthoux quoted above. 
As far as can be deduced from the scanty information available, it would 
appear that there were (at least) two main types of birch bark manuscripts in wide 
use in Buddhist Gandhara. The first type consists of scrolls containing continuous 
texts for use in Buddhist monasteries and monastic libraries, and is exemplified 
by the KDhP manuscript, the new British Library texts, and also, presumably, the 
longer of the texts found by Barthoux at Hadda and at least some of Masson’s dis- 
coveries. The second type, even less well documented, consists of small pieces of 
inscribed bark used, apparently, as charms or amulets, which were placed in or on 
stupas, statues, or reliquaries. In the latter case, they seem to represent supplemen- 
tary offerings, or dharmasarira (“bodily relics of the dharma”; Bentor 1995: 251), to 
go with the bodily relics (sarira or dhatu) contained in the reliquaries, or perhaps 
in some cases to substitute for them (see also 4.5.2). But as yet, no intact specimen 
of this latter type of text from the period in question has come to light for scholarly 
examination, so that this remains in part a matter of speculation.” 
Finally, the large number of birch bark manuscripts that have been found 
at Hadda and other nearby sites in the Jalalabad Plain makes the hearsay reports that 
the new British Library manuscripts came from Hadda more plausible. Moreover, 
Hadda is known to be very rich in its yield of funereal clay pots, often decorated 
and/or inscribed in Kharosthi, and we know from Barthoux’s reports, sketchy and 
unsatisfactory though they are, that these sometimes contained remnants of birch 
bark manuscripts. 
16. Buhler noted that even in his time (the late nineteenth century), “(t]he Himalaya seems 
to contain an inexhaustible supply of birch-bark. . 
. 
. To give an idea of the quantities which are 
brought into Srinagar, I may mention that on one single day I 
counted fourteen large barges with 
birch-bark on the river” (1877: 29). Similarly, commenting on a birch bark manuscript of the com- 
plete Rg Veda in 191 folios, Miller noted that “there was no difficulty in producing from the bark 
of the birch tree thousands and thousands of pages of the largest quarto or even folio-size, per- 
fectly smooth and pure, except for the small dark lines peculiar to the bark of that tree” (1880: 159). 
Presumably in ancient times, too, birch bark was a cheap and abundant material for writing and 
other uses, and one can easily envision monastic libraries with very large numbers of bark scrolls. 
17. See also the further discussion of the format of birch bark manuscripts in 5.1-2. 

=== PAGE 93 ===
Chapter 4 
Origin and Character of the Collection 
This chapter addresses the question of why this particular set of manu- 
scripts was placed in a clay pot and buried, apparently, in the precincts of a Buddhist 
monastery. Specifically, it focuses on the search for some common factor—not 
necessarily a textual one—among the scrolls, which are very diverse with regard to 
their contents and physical form. This search is very seriously hampered by our 
ignorance of their original archeological context and also by the fact that the scrolls 
had already been removed from their container by the time they were first subjected 
to scholarly examination, so that their original positions and relationships cannot 
be reconstructed. Largely as a result of this unfortunate situation, the hypothesis 
presented here—namely, that the collection represents a ritual interment of worn 
and discarded manuscripts—cannot be conclusively proven. Nonetheless, for 
reasons that will be presented below in detail, it seems to me the best explanation, 
given the limited evidence that is available to us. 
4.1. Physical Evidence 
There are several indications that the fragmentary character of these 
manuscripts is only partly due to the decay that must have affected them during 
the nearly two thousand years in which they lay buried and/or to further damage 
that may have been inflicted on them between the time that they were unearthed 
and their acquisition by the British Library. It is certain that at least some of the 
manuscripts were incomplete and otherwise damaged even before they were assem- 
bled and deposited in a clay jar. 
An extreme example is fragment 5, which actually consists of parts of 
what were evidently three originally separate scrolls containing different texts in dif- 
ferent handwritings, which had been put together into a single roll. Of these, frag- 
ment 5A is a small piece, preserving only parts of four lines. Fragment 5B is a larger 
piece, which seems to preserve most of an original small-format scroll (see sec. 5.2), 
but in very decrepit condition, as will be explained below. Fragment 5C is another 
very decrepit fragment, larger than 5A but smaller than 5B, of yet another separate 
scroll, probably also originally of the smaller format. 
The remnants of fragment 5B, which contains the text of the Gandhari 
69 

=== PAGE 94 ===
70 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
recension of the Rhinoceros Horn Sitra, are divided vertically into two parallel 
columns. This probably resulted from the original scroll having been cut in half 
lengthwise by a tying cord or having been folded in half lengthwise (see 5.3.3). How- 
ever, when the fragment was unrolled, it became apparent that it was arranged with 
these two vertical columns reversed left to right from their original position; this was 
obvious from the fact that the verses were written one to a line, and the refrain which 
is the last quarter of each verse in this siitra (eko care khargavisanagapo, “One should 
wander alone like the rhinoceros horn”) appeared in the fragments in the right-hand 
column, rather than in its proper position at the left (since Kharosthi script is writ- 
ten from right to left). This proves that the splitting of the scroll into two vertical 
columns took place in ancient times, before the scroll was deposited in the pot. 
At that point it must have already been in pieces, which were carelessly rolled up 
together without regard for their proper positions. This is confirmed by the fact 
that the two columns of text themselves are composed of several smaller fragments, 
fourteen in all, and these too are randomly arranged with no regard to their original 
sequence. Many of them, moreover, are placed upside down. 
Thus one gets the impression that fragment 5 was a composite roll put 
together from scraps of at least three originally separate and already badly fragmented 
scrolls. There is at least one other case of such a composite scroll—fragment 3— 
which combines pieces of at least two originally separate fragments (see 2.2.6). Here 
too we seem to be dealing with a set of miscellaneous small fragments that were 
rolled up together before being interred. 
In several other cases, there is evidence that longer scrolls that had been 
constructed by gluing shorter pieces of birch bark together (see 5.1.2) had separated 
into their component parts before they were interred. This is evidently the case, 
for example, with fragments 12 and 14, whose textual contents show that they are 
contiguous sections of the same original scroll, but which were found rolled up 
separately. In other cases, such as fragment 29, a subfragment about 1.9 cm in length 
was found to be oriented upside down within the larger scroll of which it is a part. 
This too must have been a component section, or a part of one, that had separated 
from the scroll, and, as in the case of fragment 5B, the separate remnants of this 
already fragmented scroll were evidently rolled up together for ritual disposal with- 
out special attention as to their proper sequence or orientation. 
In these examples, there is incontrovertible evidence that the scrolls were 
already fragmentary before they were buried (or otherwise disposed of). In several 
other cases, the evidence is less clear, but there is at least some reason to think that 
the situation was similar. This is so, for example, in several instances where sections 
of what seem to be the same or a similar text written in the same hand were found 
in separate scrolls. In most of these cases we do not know yet whether we are dealing 
with separated fragments of the same original scroll or of distinct scrolls of a long 
text written out in multiple “volumes.” Another interesting case is that of fragments 

=== PAGE 95 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
71] 
16 + 25, which are the right and left sides respectively of the same original scroll, 
which, like fragment 5B, had been cut in half lengthwise. In this case, however, it 
is not clear whether the scroll had been completely divided before it was put in the 
pot, or whether it broke in two during the long period that it lay buried. Had it been 
possible to examine the manuscripts in their original position in the pot, the posi- 
tions of the fragments probably would have made this clear, but as it is we can only 
guess. Given the indications from the previously mentioned examples, I would say 
that there is a good possibility that the original scroll that comprised fragments 16 + 
25 had in fact already been broken in two before it was deposited, but this cannot be 
proven with the evidence now at hand. 
These examples of scrolls which were evidently worn out and damaged 
before being placed in the pot raise the possibility that all of the scrolls were in some 
sense defective, and that this is the common factor which caused them to be interred 
together. It must be admitted, however, that such cases are not representative of the 
entire collection, which also includes several less fragmentary specimens. In the case 
of the more complete and better preserved scrolls, such as fragments 1, 4, and 15, we 
have the remains of scrolls whose lower portions, at least, seem to have been mostly 
intact when they were first unearthed. In these examples, the damage consists prin- 
cipally of the loss of a substantial part of the upper part of the scrolls, which was the 
outer, and hence most vulnerable, part of the scroll when it was rolled up from the 
bottom, and which is missing to a greater or lesser extent in all the fragments (see 
5.3.3). At least some of this loss, which in the three relatively well preserved examples 
under discussion here seems to amount to roughly half of the original length of the 
scroll, must have resulted from gradual decomposition during the nearly two thou- 
sand years of interment, and some more was undoubtedly caused by mishandling of 
the scrolls by their discoverer (2.1.1 and 2.1.2). But there is no way to know for sure 
how much, if any, of the upper part of these and other scrolls had already been lost 
before they were placed in the pot. It is possible that some of them were complete 
and more or less wholly intact when they were deposited, but they might equally 
well have already suffered this type of damage before that time. On the physical 
evidence, there is no way to prove either alternative, and if this were all we had to 
go on, the nature of the manuscript deposit would have been largely indeterminate. 
Fortunately, however, there is also textual evidence which supports the hypothesis 
that the collection as a whole consists of discarded texts. 
4.2. Textual Evidence: The “Likhidago” Interlinear Notations 
This textual evidence consists of a series of secondary interlinear nota- 
tions observed on several of the manuscripts, including some of the well-preserved 
specimens such as fragment 1.’ For example, fragment 14 has two such notations on 
1. Fora 
list of these annotations, see the summary at the end of this section. 

=== PAGE 96 ===
72 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
the recto (pl. 10). The first of these is written between the middle of the third and 
second lines from the bottom (lines 22 and 23), which are the fourth and fifth lines 
respectively of the second text on the fragment, namely, the avadana collection that 
commences near the bottom of the recto. The inserted word slants downward to the 
left, so that the bottoms of its letters overlap with the tops of the letters of line 23 of 
the text proper. This first annotation reads likhidago, “[it is] written.” The second 
annotation commences at about the middle of the last line (24), following a large 
circle which served as a punctuation sign in the original text, marking the end of the 
first avadana in the collection. The space in which the annotation was written was 
therefore originally a blank half-line left by the scribe at the very bottom of the scroll 
before he commenced the next avadana at the top of the verso. Like the other one, 
this annotation slants downward toward the left. It reads likhidago sa[rvo] “[it is] 
all written.” 
The term likhidago and its graphic variants appearing in the other inter- 
linear notes described below can be interpreted as an extended past participle form, 
that is, as meaning “written,” by comparison with the frequent use in the central 
Asian Kharosthi documents of the corresponding word likhitaga/likhidaga/lihitaga/ 
lihidaga, etc. both as a noun, “(written) document,” and, as here, as a past participle 
with a pleonastic suffix -ga (< *-ka), which is common generally in the central Asian 
Kharosthi documents (Burrow 1937: 53-4). An example of the latter function is found 
in document no. 586, undertablet, obverse, line 8, esa pravamnaga likhidaga mahi, 
translated by Burrow as “This receipt was written by me” (1940: 124). In the label on 
the cover tablets (obverse, lines 1-2) of the duplicate texts 431-2, the word is used in 
both senses, as noun and as participial adjective: esa likhidaga yave avVanammi masu 
prace[ya] likhidaga, which Burrow renders “This document is written concerning 
the wine in Yave avana” (p. 87). 
A similar scribal annotation is found at the top of the verso of one of 
the several small pieces that make up fragment 3A: lihidaga sarve, “{it is] all written.” 
Presumably, this note was originally placed between this line and the one preceding 
it, which is now lost. Curiously, though, this note is written upside down in relation 
to the rest of the text on the fragment. Whatever may be the reason for this, it con- 
firms that the phrase is an incidental addition rather than part of the original text. 
In fragment 16, we find on line 18 of the recto (the third line visible in the 
detail photograph in pl. 11), which is the fourth line of the second text on the scroll, 
the phrase likhitage aca avadane, apparently meaning “the avadana has been writ- 
ten.”* The upper right corner of the first aksara of this phrase slightly overlaps the 
upper left end of the preceding syllable, va, of the main text, confirming that it is 
a secondary annotation. The phrase is written on the level of a line of the original 
text, rather than between or across the lines as in fragment 3A and the first annota- 
2. The meaning of the uncertain word aca is discussed below. 

=== PAGE 97 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
73 
tion on fragment 14 respectively. In this respect, its position resembles that of the 
second notation on 14, which was written on what had been a blank space at the 
very bottom of the scroll; the place where the notation on fragment 16 was written 
was also almost certainly originally a blank space in the text. For one thing, a similar 
blank space appears at the right end of the line two lines above (line 16), apparently 
marking the transition between the first and second texts on the scroll. Second, the 
annotation on line 18 is followed (on fragment 25, which is actually the left half of 
the same scroll; see 4.1) by a large punctuation mark originally consisting of (proba- 
bly) nine circles arranged in three rows of three circles each,’ and then by the words 
bosisatva provayoge (“The previous life of the Bodhisattva”), introducing the first of 
the series of purvayoga (“previous life”) stories that are the theme of the second text 
on fragments 16 + 25. Thus the space where the annotation likhitage aca avadane was 
written on fragment 16 was almost certainly originally a blank between sections of 
this text, probably coming between a prefatory introduction and the first of the pur- 
vayoga stories. 
Since fragment 1 resembles fragments 12 + 14 and 16 + 25 in containing 
two texts written in the same two hands, namely, nos. 1 and 2 (see sec. 2.5), we should 
not be surprised that it too had such interlinear notations. The second and more evi- 
dent of the two interlineations in fragment 1 appears on the verso of part 4, where it 
is written across the middle of the scroll, between lines 23 and 24, and reads clearly 
likhidago aco sa[rvo], “[it is] all written.” The first interlinear notation on fragment 1 
is at the very bottom of the recto (part 5), which is badly fragmented and difficult to 
read. However, it is possible to discern at the center of the upper edge of the short 
(approximately 1 cm high) separated segment at the very bottom of the scroll the 
lower portions of what are fairly clearly the syllables dago, and before them also a curl 
which could easily be the very bottom of kh(1*) (see pl. 4). From this, we can securely 
reconstruct, on the basis of the parallels presented above, the familiar word likhidago. 
The word was evidently written sloping downward to the left, as was the case with the 
corresponding word in fragment 14, which explains why the lower portions of only 
the left-hand letters are preserved below the horizontal break. 
Finally, fragment 2 also has what seems to be an interlinear note between 
lines 8 and 9 of the recto (pl. 15). The notation, which is broken off at the left, seems 
to read sarva ime avadasa [a] ?, but the last complete character could perhaps be read 
as a slightly unusual form of na rather than as sa. Although at first glance it looks 
more like a sa, it is in fact quite different from the sa at the beginning of the phrase, 
3. The small stroke at the edge of line 18 on fragment 16, to the left of the word avadane, may 
be a remnant of one of these circles. Four of them survive at the right edge of the corresponding 
line of fragment 25, arranged in a vertical row of three circles at the left, plus a fourth at the right 
of the bottom one. The complete set thus seems to have originally consisted of nine circles 
arranged in three rows of three. 

=== PAGE 98 ===
74 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
with a bigger head and a curve rather than an angle leading into the vertical stem; 
thus na is at least a possible reading. If this is correct, the full notation might have 
been sarva ime avada[na] [aca] (likhidaga*), “all these avadanas have been written,” 
similar to the notation on fragment 16 (likhitage aca avadane). 
Thus we have seven examples on five separate scrolls of this kind of sec- 
ondary notation. In all five of these scrolls at least part of the text is written in the 
distinctive hand no. 2. Three of the five (frags. 1, 14, and 16) each contain two sepa- 
rate texts written by the same two hands (nos. 1 and 2). A fourth, fragment 2, has 
only a text in hand no. 2, but since only a small part of this scroll survives, it may 
originally also have had another text, perhaps again in hand no. 1 as in the other 
three scrolls. The fifth interlineated fragment, 3A, also had two texts, one again in 
hand no. 2, but the other in a different hand (no. 3). Thus the manuscripts with the 
secondary notations fall into a distinct separate group within the entire collection in 
that they all have at least one hand in common, and in at least three of five cases the 
same two hands. This is clearly a significant link, since the collection as a whole con- 
tains the work of about twenty-one different scribes. 
As to the hands of the notations themselves, all but the notation on 
fragment 2 are the same hand, which superficially resembles hand no. 1 of the texts 
proper but which on closer examination is revealed to be a different one, not seen 
elsewhere in these or any other texts in the entire collection. This is confirmed by 
the fact that the annotator uses the consonant ga, whereas hand no. 1 never writes 
ga but always uses gha in its place (see 6.4.2). Only the annotation on fragment 2 
seems to be in yet another hand, and in this case we also find a slightly different 
phrasing (according to the conjectural reconstruction suggested above), sarva ime 
avada[na] [aca] (likhidaga*), in contrast to the other constructions such as likhitage 
aca avadane (frag. 16) and likhidago sa[rvo] (14). 
Thus five scrolls, which seem to have been in some sense part of a set, 
contain seven secondary notations that were made (with one exception) by the same 
hand and that label them as having been “written.” What could the point of this have 
been? One explanation might be that the notations were the work of an inspector or 
supervisor of the original writing of the manuscripts whose task was to certify their 
correctness and completion. But if this were the case, why were the notes written in 
such a haphazard fashion, between and even across the lines of the text (frag. 14) or 
upside down with respect to it (frag. 2)? For these reasons I think it is more likely 
that the secondary annotations were added, not by an inspector or editor, but by a 
subsequent copyist. According to this theory, the scribe who had been assigned to 
make new copies of the texts contained in our scrolls would have marked them, after 
he had finished recopying them, as “written” (likhidaga), that is, “copied,” to indicate 
that they could be discarded. The casual placement of the notations is much easier 
to understand in such circumstances. 
Such a theory would also help to clarify the different formulations of the 

=== PAGE 99 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
75 
notations, and particularly of the double notations in fragments 1 and 14. In 14, we 
find first likhidago and then, a few lines below, likhidago sa[rvo]. Perhaps this indi- 
cates that the first notation was made after the copying of the first text (a sttra-style 
text, written in hand no. 1) had been completed, while the second one was added 
after the second text, a collection of avadanas written by hand no. 2, had also been 
copied, whence the added word sarvo, “all, referring to the contents of the entire 
scroll. In fragment 1, we find a similar pair of notations. The first one, reconstructible 
as likhidago, is written at the very bottom of the recto, just after the beginning of the 
second text, an avadana collection, while the second notation, reading likhidago aco 
sa[rvo], is written on the verso, approximately 100 cm up from the bottom of the 
scroll. Except for the addition of the word aco and the different location of the 
second note, this pair of annotations is virtually identical to those on fragment 14. 
Thus, here too this pattern probably indicates that the contents of the scroll had 
been recopied in two separate stages. The difference in the position of the second 
notations on these two scrolls—at the bottom of the recto in fragment 14 and well 
up on the verso in 1—is probably of no particular significance, since, as we have 
seen, these notes seem to have been placed more or less randomly. 
In fragment 16, we have a situation similar to that of 1 and 14, with the 
two original texts on the scroll in the same two hands, but here only a single annota- 
tion by our hypothetical copyist, reading likhitage aca avadane, is preserved. Here 
avadane obviously refers to the second text, which as in the case of fragments 1 and 
14 is written by hand no. 2 and comprises a collection of avadana-like texts (actually, 
purvayogas). In view of the patterns noted above, it is conceivable that there may 
have also been a previous annotation reading likhidago written further up on the 
recto of fragments 16 + 25, of which only a small piece from the bottom of the scroll 
is preserved. If this were the case, we would have a reasonably close parallelism be- 
tween the pairings likhidago/likhadago (aco) sarvo in fragments 1 and 14 and a hypo- 
thetical pair (likhidage*)/likhitage aca avadane in 16 + 25. Given the similar contents 
of all three scrolls (a first text followed by an avadana or avadana-like text), the 
phrases likhidago (aco) sarvo and likhitage aca avadane would in effect indicate the 
same thing.* 
One remaining problem is the explanation of the word aca (frag. 16)/aco 
(frag. 1). It can be assumed that these are simply variant spellings for the same word, 
since an alternation between final a and o is well attested among the new texts (see 
6.5.1). Given its position and apparent syntactic function, it seems most likely that 
4. Of course, this interpretation depends on a hypothetical lost first annotation in fragments 
16 + 25. If this never existed, the single annotation likhitage aca avadane might indicate that the 
entire scroll, including both texts, had been copied in one stage, rather than two, as seems to have 
been the case of fragments 1 and 14. Alternatively, it could mean that the copyist who inserted the 
annotation had copied only the avadana text, and that the first text (a portion of the Dharmapada) 
was for some reason not copied, or at least not by him. 

=== PAGE 100 ===
76 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
aca/aco is an adverbial particle of some sort. Some connection with ca, “and,” is 
conceivable—for instance, a contracted form of api ca or the like—in which case 
likhadago aco sarvo and likhitage aca avadane would mean something like “and [it is] 
all written” and “and the avadana has been written” respectively. It is also tempting 
to think of aca/aco as a derivative of Sanskrit adya, “today,” in place of the expected 
aja (i.e., ajja). But the devoicing of j 
would be difficult to explain; according to 
Burrow, “internal j never becomes c” (1937: 72). Although he does note certain excep- 
tions elsewhere (p. 5), these seem to reflect misspellings by native speakers of non- 
Indian languages in central Asia and hence are not relevant to the problem being 
addressed here. 
Alternatively, aca/aco could be, not an adverbial particle, but a demon- 
strative pronoun; this is suggested, perhaps, by the variant annotation reconstructed 
as sarva ime avada[na] [aca] (likhidaga*) in fragment 2. But there are phonetic and 
etymological problems here. A derivation from a pronominal stem aya-, for exam- 
ple, is hardly likely, for although the change of intervocalic c to y is well attested in 
Gandhari, a development in the opposite direction would not be expected. In short, 
the word aca/aco remains to be clarified. 
However this may be, the close linkages among the subset of texts con- 
taining these secondary copyists’ marks suggest that the process not only of the orig- 
inal writing of the scrolls but also of their storage and recopying was orderly and 
controlled. This was evidently not the case, however, with their disposal. It would 
appear that, once they had been recopied and marked for disposal, the old and 
damaged scrolls were consigned to some sort of discard pile whose contents were 
assembled more or less at random and placed in clay pots for a ritual burial. 
Summary of the “Likhidago” Annotations 
1. Frag. 1, part 5, r, between lines 33 and 34 
(li*)kh(1*)dago 
2. Frag. 1, part 4, v, between lines 23 and 24 
likhidago aco sa[rvo] 
3. Frag. 2, r, between lines 8 and 9 
sarva ime avada[na] 
[aca] (likhidaga*) 
4. Frag. 3A, v, at top edge of the largest fragment 
[thidaga sarve 
5. Frag. 14, r, between lines 22 and 23 
likhidago 
6. Frag. 14, 1, line 24 
likhidago sa[rvo] 
7. Frag. 16, r, line 18 
likhitage aca avadane 

=== PAGE 101 ===
Pl. |. Fragments 16-19 
before unrolling and conservation 

=== PAGE 102 ===
P|. 2. Fragment 23 before unrolling and conservation 
Pl. 3. Specimen of a deteriorated manuscript fragment 
after unrolling and conservation: fragment 23, part 2, r 

=== PAGE 103 ===
Pl. 4. Specimen of a relatively well preserved 
manuscript fragment after unrolling and 
conservation: fragment |, part 5,r 

=== PAGE 104 ===
re 
: 
ae 
OVE 
es 
PI.5. Pot D with manuscripts inside (1993), 
viewed from above 
PI. 6. Earliest available photograph (1993) 
of fragment |, removed from pot D 

=== PAGE 105 ===
Pl. 7. Fragment 12, part I,r 

=== PAGE 106 ===
PI.8. Fragment 9, part 3, r: detail of passage 
transcribed and translated on pp. 28-9 
PI.9. Partial colophon text in fragment 3B 
Pl. | 1. (opposite) Detail of fragment 16, r, 
showing a copyist’s notation 

=== PAGE 107 ===
PI. 10. Detail of fragment 14, 
showing a copyist’s notations 

=== PAGE 108 ===
Pl. 12. Pyxis-shaped reliquary 
in a private collection 

=== PAGE 109 ===
Pl. 13. Contents of the pyxis-shaped reliquary 
Pl. 14. Fragments of a birch bark manuscript 
found inside the pyxis-shaped reliquary 

=== PAGE 110 ===
Pl. 15. Fragment 2, r 

=== PAGE 111 ===
Pl. 16. A monastery cell at Jauliah (Taxila) 
with fragments of a pot in which a birch bark 
manuscript was found 

=== PAGE 112 ===
te 
Pl. 17. Clay pot decorated with ink drawings of monks 

=== PAGE 113 ===
£ 
rakes 
o 
re 
No) 
oO 
Oo 
bo 
fe 
= 
° 
ee) 
— 
i= 
° 
£ 
Res, 
o 
Loo} 
i= 
S 
fe) 
~ 
fo] 
vu 
(= 
fos] 
SA 
c 
° 
(= 
vu 
oO 
seo} 
Cos} 
fe 
fo] 
bo 
& 
= 
° 
t=; 
” 
~N 
a 
= 
» 
° 
a 
as) 
oO 
rs) 
wo 
= 
° 
1e) 
o 
me) 
— ° 
§ 
oO 
Q 
© 
a 

=== PAGE 114 ===
Pl. 19. Traces of the inscription 
on the decorated pot in pl. 17 
PI. 20. Decorated pot in 
pl. 17, showing the bones 
found inside it 

=== PAGE 115 ===
PI.21. Fragment |, part 2, v 

=== PAGE 116 ===
PI.22. Pot A 

=== PAGE 117 ===
P|. 23. Pot A, viewed from above 

=== PAGE 118 ===
PI.24. Pot B 
Pie 
SmPOeB; 
viewed from above 

=== PAGE 119 ===
PI.26. Pot C 
PI 272 RouG, 
viewed from above 

=== PAGE 120 ===
PI.28. Pot D 
Pl. 29, Pot D: 
viewed from above 

=== PAGE 121 ===
PI.30. Pot E 
Pisiliroue 
viewed from above 

=== PAGE 122 ===
PI. 
32. 
Potsherds 
I—9 

=== PAGE 123 ===
PI. 
33. 
Potsherds 
10-18 

=== PAGE 124 ===
. 
Hato 
ma 
ai fey 
a 
uty 
Ne) 
fee 
is 
P|. 
34. 
Potsherds 
19-26 

=== PAGE 125 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
77 
4.3. Archeological Parallels 
The hypothesis that Gandharan Buddhists ritually interred old manu- 
scripts in clay pots is well supported by data from other discoveries. For example, at 
least one of the pieces of birch bark with Kharosthi inscriptions discovered by Mas- 
son at Hadda (tope no. 13; see 3.2.1) was found inside a “small earthen jar.” Barthoux 
also described, in somewhat vague terms, “some pots”—he does not tell us how 
many—containing “a sort of earth among which was mixed the debris of manu- 
scripts (bark paper)” (1933: 60).> We have also seen (3.1.1) that there is reason to 
believe that the KDhP scroll may have been preserved in the clay pot which was 
reported to have been found along with it. 
Finally, there is at least one similar discovery that has been well docu- 
mented and described in detail, unlike the previously mentioned ones. This is the 
fragmentary birch bark manuscript of an unidentified Buddhist text written in San- 
skrit in late Brahmi script that was found in the course of Marshall’s Taxila excava- 
tions at the Jaulian site (Marshall 1951: 1.387; Chanda 1921). The pot in which the 
manuscript was found was located in the northeast corner of cell 29 in the Jaulian 
monastery. When I visited this site in January 1996, some remnants of this pot were 
still visible under a pile of rubble, and it appeared that it had been partially buried 
in the soil with the upper part and neck left exposed (pl. 16). The cell in which the 
pot was found is the one immediately adjacent to the entrance to the monastery, and 
the outer wall of this cell has the largest of the several sculpture alcoves in the mon- 
astery complex, containing a terra-cotta figure of the Buddha with several attendant 
figures (Marshall 1951: 1.380-1). Thus cell 29 seems to have had some particular im- 
portance that made it stand out from the twenty-eight other cells. Several of these 
other cells also contained clay pots, but none of them contained manuscripts or any 
other remains deemed worthy of note by Marshall (p. 380). In short, it would seem 
that the pot containing the manuscript was placed in a location of some special sig- 
nificance. Although the Jaulian manuscript reflects a late phase of Gandharan Bud- 
dhism in which the Kharosthi script and Gandhari language had been, or at least 
were being, supplanted by Brahmi and Sanskrit, we are still, broadly speaking, within 
the same cultural tradition whose earlier phase is represented by the British Library 
manuscripts, and there is no reason to doubt that similar ritual practices concerning 
the storage or disposal of old manuscripts were current throughout the entire period. 
Further clues about the intention and significance of the interment of 
old manuscripts in pots are provided by several cases where similar pots in similar 
locations were found to contain human remains. The following is a longer extract 
from Barthoux’s description of the contents of the pottery he found at Hadda, part 
of which was already quoted above: 
5. “... une sorte de terre a laquelle étaient mélangés des débris de manuscrits (papier 
» 
d écorce) 

=== PAGE 126 ===
78 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
All of these pots were covered with a slab of schist that protected their 
contents from dust and wind.[°] In the interior [was] found debris of semi- 
calcinated bones . 
.. among which were distinctly discernible vertebrae, the 
bases of ribs, and clavicle joints. . .. Most often, the bones had completely 
disappeared through calcination and the contents of the pots were nothing 
more than a sort of earth among which was mixed the debris of manuscripts 
(bark paper) . 
. 
. or coins. (1933: 60)” 
What is particularly striking in Barthoux’s report is the suggestion of 
a juxtaposition of human bones and manuscript fragments in similar situations, 
and possibly even in the same pot, though it is not exactly clear from his comments 
whether this was actually the case. However this may be, the discovery of bones, pre- 
sumably human, in Gandharan clay pots was already well attested—for instance by 
A. Foucher’s description of “a round earthen vase with the usual form of Indian jugs 
(gharrah, Skt. ghata) . . . it contained, besides a small quantity of clay, ‘fragments of 
cinders and carbonized bones” (1905: 52).° 
A group of what would seem to be similar relics was found by Masson, 
who reported, in connection with the many jars he saw in the Hadda area: 
Large numbers of funereal jars may be found in a mound behind the village 
of Hidda, near Tappa Kelan. ... They vary much in size, from a depth of 
three feet to six inches: they . . . generally are marked with some ornamental 
lines around the head and shoulders. Some of them are further adorned 
with flowers of varying colours. ... They contain merely ashes and bones 
in greater or less quantity, and their mouths are invariably covered with 
stones. .. 
. They have been deposited sometimes in regular succession . 
. 
. 
resting on a common line of cement. . 
. 
.On one an inscription was 
scratched. (Wilson 1841: 112-3)? 
6. This and similar comments on finds from Hadda and elsewhere (cited below) show that 
it was standard practice to seal the mouths of the buried pots with a stone or other covering. Al- 
though no trace of any covering material has been preserved with the British Library pots, they 
must have been similarly sealed or the manuscripts could not have survived. Unfortunately, none 
of the relevant reports contain illustrations or detailed descriptions of these covers, so that it is 
not possible to form any clear idea of how they looked and functioned. 
7. “Toutes ces poteries étaient recouvertes d’une dalle de schist préservant leur contenu de 
la poussiére et des vents. A l’intérieur, se trouvaient des débris d’ossements a demi-calcinés . . 
. 
parmi lesquels se distinguaient nettement des vertebres, des tétes de cétes, des articulations de 
clavicules. 
. 
. . Le plus souvent, les os avaient complétement disparu par calcination et le contenu 
des poteries n’était plus qu'une sorte de terre a laquelle étaient mélangés des débris de manuscrits 
(papier d’écorce) . . 
. ou des monnaies.” 
8. “[U]n vase de terre ronde de la form habituelle des cruches indiennes (gharrah, Skt. 
ghata) ... ilcontenait, outre une petite quantité d’argile, ‘des fragments de charbons et d’os 
carbonisés.” 
9. The inscription referred to by Masson is presumably the one reproduced in Wilson 1841: 
pl. IX, along with four of the jars, but nothing can be made of it from this rough eye-copy. 

=== PAGE 127 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
79 
The arrangement of such jars “in regular succession” brings to mind 
a group of four pots that were found “standing in a row from north to south, each 
covered with a flat stone” (Marshall and Vogel 1902-3: 163), outside the square court- 
yard in the southeast portion of the Palati Dheri mound at Charsada. In size and 
form the Palatt Dheri jars resemble the other ones under discussion here, including 
the new British Library jars; they are roughly spherical with a wide neck (see Mar- 
shall and Vogel 1902-3: fig. 24, no. 19), and the largest of the four is three feet, four 
inches in circumference. Unfortunately, no mention is made in the report of what, if 
anything, was found inside these jars. Three of the four jars had dedicatory inscrip- 
tions in Kharosthi, which have been edited by Konow (1929: 120-2). These are typical 
brief dedicatory inscriptions, with no reference to the intended function of the jars 
(see Appendix, sec. 2). 
A better-documented instance of clay jars containing bones from the 
Hadda complex is presented in Tarzi 1990: 715-7. Tarzi describes two funeral urns 
“containing fragments of human bones mixed with ashes” (p. 715) that were discov- 
ered along the outside walls of chapels I and V adjoining the central stupa courtyard 
at the Tapa-e-Top-e-Kalan site.’° Their situation on the outside of a square central 
courtyard matches that of the Palatt Dheri jars, and it would seem that such a loca- 
tion, adjoining but not within the central precincts of the stipa compound, was a 
favored one for the burial of funereal vessels. The jars, which are not inscribed, are 
illustrated in Tarzi 1990: 720, fig. 13. They are squat, roundish vessels with wide 
mouths, rather different in form from most of the inscribed Gandharan pots. 
Fussman (1969) has also published a well-preserved inscription on a 
broken clay jar from Hadda that closely resembles the similar objects described by 
Masson and Barthoux and that, according to a subsequent note by Fussman, was 
probably the one from the Chakhil-i Ghundi site mentioned by Barthoux in 1933: 175 
(Fussman and Le Berre 1976: 46 n.1)."' Judging from the neck and upper part, which 
are all that remain of this pot, it seems, unlike the ones mentioned in the previous 
paragraph, to have resembled the newly discovered inscribed pots in the British 
Library collection. The label in the Kabul Museum describing it reads, according 
to Fussman’s translation from the Persian, “comes from Hadda, found in a large jar 
with earth and bones” (1969: 5). Fussman offers the following interpretation, which 
seems plausible, of this note: “I think... that the Persian inscription only means 
that the inscribed potsherd had been found inside the jar, that is to say that the 
jar had been crushed and its neck [bearing the inscription] had fallen inside it. 
In our opinion there never was any other jar than this one, which contained the 
10. Not to be confused with Tapa Kalan, which is a different subsite in the complex of 
Buddhist monuments in and around the village of Hadda; see Tarzi 1990: 708. 
u. Further information on funereal jars from Afghanistan is provided in Fussman and Le 
Berre 1976 and in Fussman 1974: 61. 

=== PAGE 128 ===
80 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
bones” (1969: 9).’* Thus, it seems likely that this jar too was used as a funereal vessel, 
although more recent discoveries show that Fussman was probably not correct in 
thinking that the pot “was intended for the inhumation of the monk” (p. 9) whose 
name appears in the inscription. 
Finally, another clay jar (pl. 17), which contained bones, now in the Ash- 
molean Museum, Oxford (accession no. EA 1995.158), was apparently found at about 
the same time as the pots that are now in the British Library collection and may 
have come from the same site. This jar differs from the others, however, in that it is 
decorated with drawings in ink of several figures. The best-preserved figure is that 
of, apparently, an aged monk, before whom one, or perhaps two, younger monks are 
bowing (pl. 18). About 90° to the right of this there are traces of another indistinct 
figure facing to the right and, apparently, yet another figure facing him. Also visible 
in the earliest available photograph, taken in 1993, are traces of a Kharosthi inscrip- 
tion (pl. 19), in which, however, only a few aksaras are legible.’4 Inside the pot were 
found pieces of charred bones (pl. 20), presumably human. 
To sum up the information provided here: there have been numerous 
finds, particularly from Hadda and other sites in the Jalalabad Plain of eastern 
Afghanistan but also from sites in Gandhara proper, of large earthen pots, generally 
resembling ordinary waterpots of a type still used widely in south Asia today. Some 
of the pots bear Kharosthi inscriptions recording their dedication to the Buddhist 
community by pious lay followers; in several such inscriptions, the objects are 
explicitly labeled as “waterpots” (pani-ghade, etc.; see Appendix, sec. 5.1). Several 
of the pots, including both inscribed and uninscribed examples, contained human 
remains, while others contained fragments of Kharosthi texts written on birch bark. 
Thus such waterpots were evidently sometimes put to secondary use (see Appendix, 
sec. 5.2) by the inhabitants of the monasteries for the disposal of sacred relics, which 
included the ashes and bones of deceased monks or other persons and also, it now 
appears, the remains of old and worn-out manuscripts of Buddhist texts. 
In some places—for example, at Tapa Kalan (Hadda) and Palatu Dheri— 
several such pots were found arranged in a neat row. This is reminiscent of similar 
situations at Buddhist sites in western India such as Sudhagarh, Nadsur, and 
Pitalkhora, in southern India at Guntupalle, and in the northeast at Lauriya- 
Nandangarh, where stupas containing bodily relics are arranged in “orderly rows” 
(Schopen 1991: 304). Abundant epigraphical and archeological evidence for the prac- 
tice, evidently current from early Buddhist times, of burying the faithful “ad sanc- 
12. “Je crois .. 
. que inscription persane signifie seulement que le tesson inscrit a été trouvé 
a Pintérieur de la jarre, Cest-a-dire que la jarre était écrasée, et que son col était tombé a 
Pintérieur. A notre avis il vy a donc jamais eu qu une jarre et cette jarre, contenait des ossements.” 
13. The interpretation of this inscription and related matters are discussed in detail in the 
Appendix, section 5.2. 
14. This inscription is discussed in detail in the Appendix, section 5.3. 

=== PAGE 129 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
8l 
tos,” that is, in the vicinity of the main stupa of their monastery, has been collected 
and analyzed by Schopen (1987, 1991, 1994b). Various types of containers for the 
remains of the deceased have been found at Buddhist sites in many parts of India, 
including conventional relic caskets, special recesses at the top of sttipas (Schopen 
1991: 294, 304), and earthenware vessels.” In the northwest the last type seems to 
have been preferred, to judge from the numerous examples found there.’° 
But the most important point with regard to our main topic, namely, 
the significance of the placement of the old scrolls in pots, is that they not only 
were deemed to be worthy of ritual interment but were evidently treated in the 
same way as the bodily relics of monks. This implies that written texts were per- 
ceived to have some sanctity or spiritual power comparable to that of the relics 
of deceased holy persons; or rather, that they were considered as a sort of relic 
themselves. Although it might seem strange that relics (bodily and textual) were 
interred in such humble containers as old waterpots and that no explicit inscrip- 
tional or textual record of this act was provided, this pattern is nonetheless consis- 
tent with the archeological and epigraphic record of Gandhara: although monks’ 
relics were often labeled by inscriptions in other parts of Buddhist India, in Gan- 
dhara inscriptions seem to have been used only in connection with the relics of 
Sakyamuni himself (Schopen 1987: 198). 
4.4. A“Buddhist Genizah”? 
Several traditional cultures around the world have developed rules or 
customs that prohibit treating old written texts, especially holy scriptures, as ordi- 
nary refuse and that mandate some sort of ritual interment or disposition. Probably 
the best known manifestation of this phenomenon is the Jewish institution of the 
genizah, a storeroom in a synagogue in which worn-out books and ritual objects 
were placed. The original rationale of this institution was to avoid destroying the 
name of God written in religious texts, but eventually the practice was extended to 
the point where all written materials, regardless of their contents, were disposed in 
the genizah, in order to avoid even a remote possibility of obliterating God’s name. In 
Islam too, it is common practice to avoid destroying written materials, again for fear 
of obliterating the name of God, and storerooms, analogous to the Jewish genizah, 
15. E.g., several clay pots containing bones were found at Ratnagiri in Orissa; see, e.g., Mitra 
1981-3: 1.29 and pl. XVIIA. 
16. Although the burial of bones in and around stupas is thus established as a widespread 
practice in early Indian Buddhism generally, it is nonetheless tenipting to speculate that the partic- 
ularly large number of human bones which seem to have been interred at Hadda might be con- 
nected with the local cult of the Buddha’s skull, which according to the Chinese pilgrims Fa Hsien 
(Legge 1886: 36-8) and Hsiian-tsang (Beal 1884: 95-6) was kept in a vihara at “He-lo” (i.e., Hadda) 
and was an object of great veneration there. Moreover, as was first suggested by Cunningham (1871: 
38-9), the name Hadda itself seems to be derived from the Sanskrit/Prakrit word Hadda, “bone,” 
and the name of the place itself may have promoted this association. 

=== PAGE 130 ===
82 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
for discarded books, especially Korans, are also found in some old mosques (Sadan 
1986: 42). The question of the proper procedures for the disposal of worn-out holy 
books was also a matter of concern among Muslim theologians (Sadan 1986). 
A similar reverence for written materials has also developed in Asian 
cultures, though presumably not for the same reason. Thus in Tibet, according to 
Y. Bentor, “decaying holy scriptures are deposited in stupas and especially in edifices 
called tsha-khangs (tsha-tsha khang-pa or tsha-tsha house) that house both relics 
deposited in tsha-tshas [clay votive tablets] and decaying holy books” (private com- 
munication, August 1997). In China too, it was traditional to avoid throwing away 
any papers with written characters. “Orthodox persons would erect stone receptacles 
by the roadside where one could deposit unwanted scraps of inscribed paper . 
. . so 
as to prevent them from becoming soiled or being trodden upon in the street” (van 
Gulik 1956: 52). 
In some cultures, a “dead book” is explicitly compared with, and treated 
analogously to, a dead human being. Sadan notes that “certain figures in Islamic ju- 
risprudence . . 
. have drawn a parallel between the burial of the body of a deceased 
person ... and the burial of worn-out sacred books” (1986: 39) and that, in Jewish 
practice, “[i]n many communities, once the Torah scroll has become worn-out and 
difficult to read, a ‘funeral’ is arranged to bury it” (p. 39). In India, the same concept 
seems to be reflected in Hoernle’s report that “[i]n India, e.g. in Benares, it is the 
practice, when manuscripts have become old and damaged, to prepare a fresh copy, 
and consign the old one to the waters of the sacred river Ganges” (1916: 1). Hoernle 
also mentions the practice in eastern Turkestan “of giving to old and damaged man- 
uscripts an honoured burial in the relic chamber of a stupa” (p. 1). 
The new material presented above suggests that the Buddhists of ancient 
Gandhara may have followed practices analogous to those of Jewish, Islamic, and 
other traditions, in respect to both the general concept of ritually depositing old 
scriptures in the precincts of the place of worship and the specific idea of burying 
them in the same way as dead persons. Although there does not appear to be any 
direct textual reference to such a practice in Buddhist tradition, Bentor, in a study 
of the treatment of Buddhist books as relics in India and Tibet, does consider it 
“possible that Buddhist scriptures were deposited in sttipas in a practice analogous 
to the Jewish geniza ... , that is to say, damaged books were ‘buried’ in a stipa” 
(1995: 251 n. 18). It is true, however, that the actually attested examples of books 
treated as relics in the Buddhist world, including some of the Gilgit manuscripts as 
well as the stupa burials of early Buddhist Japan and the abundant modern exam- 
ples such as those described by Bentor (1994, 1995), involve complete and intact, 
rather than “dead,” books (see also 4.5.1.). 
All in all, the best explanation of the British Library Kharosthi fragments 
seems to be that they are a collection of old, worn-out or damaged texts that had 
been recopied and then ritually buried like dead monks. If this is correct, what we 

=== PAGE 131 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
83 
have is, in effect, a scrap heap of “dead” manuscripts from the library, or perhaps 
rather from the scriptorium, of a Buddhist monastery, probably of the Dharmagup- 
taka school, dating from around the first century a.p. and apparently located in 
eastern Afghanistan. As such, the contents of the scrolls could be expected to reflect 
a more or less random sampling of the contents of the library from which they came, 
and the detailed analysis of the texts, to be undertaken in years to come, should pro- 
vide us with unprecedented insights into the corpus of texts that were set in writing 
by a community of Gandharan Buddhists in this formative period. 
Although the selection of the pieces that have survived is a matter of 
chance, there is internal evidence to suggest that the process of the recopying and 
disposing of old texts was an orderly and planned activity. As discussed in section 
4.2, the manuscripts with the later copyists’ notations form a coherent group in that 
not only were they originally written by the same two scribes but also the later anno- 
tations on them are, in six out of seven cases, in an identical third hand. This means 
that these manuscripts not only originally constituted a distinct set of texts but also 
were recopied as a unit. This in turn suggests that they constituted part of a “library” 
in the proper sense of the term, that is, of an orderly and systematic collection of 
written texts, as opposed to a more or less randomly accumulated pile of manu- 
scripts.” Furthermore, the fact that they were evidently recopied as a group indicates 
that the preservation of written texts was also an organized and systematic activity.'® 
Although we should not assume that the existence of what seems to be an orderly 
corpus of written scriptures means that the Buddhists of ancient Gandhara main- 
tained a formal and comprehensive written canon in the strict sense of the term, it 
does show that they used writing as an important, if not exclusive, means for pre- 
serving their traditions.” 
Finally, it must be conceded that the explanation presented here of the 
British Library fragments as a cache of discarded manuscripts is not the only possi- 
ble one, nor is it completely beyond doubt. As mentioned previously, it is possible 
that some of the scrolls could have been more or less intact when they were placed 
in the pot. Thus, it is conceivable, though I think less likely, that the collection as 
originally interred in ancient times was a mixture of intact and fragmentary scrolls. 
If this were the case, a different explanation would have to be found. Such a situa- 
tion, for instance, could reflect a practice parallel to that followed in contemporary 
17. Virtually nothing can be said at this point about the physical form, location, and arrange- 
ment of such a (still hypothetical) monastic library, though some possibly relevant hints appear in 
the vinaya literature (see Schopen 1994a: 530-1). 
18. If we are correct in thinking that all the scrolls were to some extent damaged or fragmen- 
tary before they were interred, the question arises as to how satisfactory copies could have been 
made from them. The copyists might have accomplished this either by referring to other, better- 
preserved copies of the same texts and/or by reconstructing the missing portions from memory. 
19. This point will be discussed further in section 8.1.4.2. 

=== PAGE 132 ===
84 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
Tibet, where learned lamas are said to be buried together with their books. If such 
a practice was current in ancient Gandhara, we would expect to find cases in which 
remains of both human bones and manuscripts were found together in funereal ves- 
sels. Unfortunately, none of the available reports clearly document such a case, and 
there is no indication that the pot that contained the British Library fragments also 
had any traces of human remains; but since we have no reliable report of its com- 
plete original contents, it is possible that this was the case. In view of these uncer- 
tainties, it may not be possible to definitively determine the nature and purpose of 
the deposit of the British Library manuscripts, unless similar materials should hap- 
pen to come to light, under more favorable circumstances, in the future. But for the 
time being, I consider the genizah model the most likely explanation. 
4.5. Additional Comments on the Interment of Manuscripts 
and Birch Bark Texts 
4.5.1. The Burial of Books in Later Buddhist Practice 
The practice of storing or interring written texts, particularly sacred 
texts, in earthenware containers was widespread in the ancient world, although the 
motives for doing so were probably quite diverse. The Nag Hammadi codices and 
the Dead Sea scrolls, for example, were, like the Gandharan manuscripts, found in 
clay jars. In the Buddhist world, numerous Sanskrit manuscripts in Brahmi-derived 
scripts, all somewhat later than the ones with which we have been concerned here, 
have been found in more or less similar circumstances in diverse regions. For in- 
stance, birch bark manuscripts dating from about the fifth and sixth centuries A.D. 
were found inside painted clay vases buried in the stupas at Merv and Bairam Ali*° 
in Turkmenistan (Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1983: 69-85; Frumkin 1970: 147-8; Bon- 
gard-Levin 1975-6: 78-80). The so-called Gilgit manuscripts are another outstanding 
example of the interment of manuscripts in stipas (though not in earthenware con- 
tainers). The manuscripts comprise a large group of Buddhist texts on birch bark 
which, according to Joseph Hackin’s report, were found “deposited in the chamber 
arranged in the interior” of the largest of a group of four stupas at Naupur, near 
Gilgit in northern Pakistan (quoted in Lévi 1932: 14). 
There is, however, an important difference between the circumstances 
of the interment of the British Library manuscripts and of these later texts. Whereas 
the British Library scrolls were evidently already damaged and fragmentary before 
the time of their interment, the later deposits usually consist of texts that were more 
or less intact and complete, and sometimes, as in the case of some of the Gilgit man- 
uscripts, even in excellent condition. And the ritual deposit of intact manuscripts, 
though better attested in later centuries, may also be reflected in the case of the 
20. On the Bairam Ali manuscript, see also section 2.2.4. 

=== PAGE 133 ===
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
85 
KDhP scroll, which is at least approximately coeval with the British Library scrolls. 
If it is true, as I have provisionally surmised (3.1.1), that the KDhP scroll was actually 
kept inside a clay jar, it must have been placed there while still relatively new and 
intact, since it seems to have been complete and in good condition when it was 
discovered in the late nineteenth century. Unfortunately, the circumstances of the 
discovery of the KDhP are too poorly documented to permit any definite conclusion 
on this point, but if the KDhP is in fact a case of ritual interment of an intact text, 
this would establish a much earlier origin for this practice. 
Thus, it remains to be determined how the hypothetical practice of ritu- 
ally disposing of “dead” books might relate to the practice, better attested in later 
times, of depositing written texts as dharmasarira (“bodily relics of the dharma”), or 
even whether there is in principle any difference between them; and further, whether 
and how either or both of these practices may be historically related to the Mahayana 
“cult of the book” (Schopen 1975). The ramifications of these questions, however, go 
far beyond the scope of the present study, and this issue is merely raised here by way 
of a suggestion for future discussion. 
4.5.2. Birch Bark Texts Found in Reliquaries 
Besides the several cases of texts written on birch bark in Kharosthi and 
other scripts and preserved in earthen funereal vessels, examples are also known of 
small inscribed pieces of birch bark placed in conventional stone or metal reliquar- 
ies. One such example—remnants of a Kharosthi text on bark found inside a pyxis- 
shaped stone reliquary—was described above in section 3.3. Another specimen is a 
“long strip of thin birch-leaf manuscript” with an inscription in Brahmi script of 
about the fourth century a.p. that was found inside a “tiny copper vessel with a 
lid fastened to it by a wire” (A. Ghosh in Archaeology in India 1950: 60) in the loose 
soil near a small sttpa at Lauriya-Nandangarh. The strip was “so fragile that it was 
impossible to spread it out thoroughly. The bits that could be extricated were suffi- 
cient to show that the manuscript was that of a Buddhist text (probably the Pratitya- 
samutpada-stitra, as the word nirodha could be read a few times)” (Ghosh 1989: 2.255; 
see also Ghosh 1966: 23). If this guess as to the contents of the text (which unfortu- 
nately seems to be the only information available on it) is correct, the find is remi- 
niscent of the dedicatory Kharosthi inscription on the Kurram casket, which includes, 
as a sort of postscript, a text of the pratitya-samutpdda in Gandhari (Ghosh 1967). 
The Kharosthi text on the hopelessly fragmented piece of bark that was placed along 
with relics and other objects in the aforementioned pyxis-shaped reliquary cannot 
be reconstructed at all, but it too might have contained a pratitya-samutpada or sim- 
ilar formulaic text. The same might also have been the case with the “prayers” found 
by Barthoux on small pieces of bark at Hadda (see 3.2.1), as well as with some of the 
inscribed pieces of bark found by Masson, such as the one inside a steatite vase at 
Hadda tope no. 1. 

=== PAGE 134 ===
86 
ORIGIN AND CHARACTER OF THE COLLECTION 
Small birch bark texts of this type also sometimes contained dharanis. 
A dharani text from Tunhuang cited by Hoernle recommends that it be copied onto, 
among other materials, birch bark (bhiirja-patre va vastre va kalke va kayagate va 
kanthagate va likhitva; Hoernle 1911: 475), and several actual specimens of dharani 
texts on small scrolls of birch bark were found inside reliquaries at Naupur, near 
Gilgit (von Hinitiber 1981: 166-7). But some of the birch bark texts found inside reli- 
quaries may also have been ordinary manuscripts intended to accompany, or even 
to substitute for, the bodily relics. This could be the case, for example, with the one 
found by Honigberger at Shiwaki (see 3.2.1 and fig. 8). In any case, this is all more or 
less guesswork, since none of these smaller birch bark texts has been satisfactorily 
studied and published. 
It is clear, however, that birch bark texts were used as amulets, in both 
Buddhist and Hindu practice, for many centuries. Bentor (1995: 255) quotes a late 
Buddhist text recommending that one should write the “Buddhist creed” (ye dharma 
hetuprabhavah, etc.) on a piece of birch bark and wrap it around a relic, and Buhler 
reported that in the late nineteenth century “the use of birch-bark for writing still 
survives in India, though the fact is little known. Mantras, which are worn as amu- 
lets, are written on pieces of Bhtrja. ... The custom prevails in Bengal, as well as 
in Gujarat” (1877: 29 n. 4). R. Mitra also described “a piece of birch-bark about a 
hundred years old, which on a space of ten inches by eight, contains the whole Bha- 
gavadgita, written with letters so small that they are illegible to the naked eye. .. 
. It 
was evidently intended to be worn as an amulet enclosed in a locket of gold or cop- 
per” (cited by Janert 1955-6: 71).” It thus appears that birch bark had, or eventually 
developed, a ritual function well beyond the geographical and temporal boundaries 
of ancient Gandhara. Although these later remains involve different practices from 
those motivating the interment of the British Library manuscripts, it is nonetheless 
possible to see a broad continuity with regard to a certain sanctity granted to texts 
written on birch bark. 
21. I have not been able to trace the original text cited by Janert. 

=== PAGE 135 ===
Chapter 5 
Format, Material, and Construction of the Scrolls 
5.1. The Large (Composite) Scrolls 
5.1.1. Format and Dimensions 
All of the fragmentary manuscripts in the new collection are in the form 
of scrolls composed of strips of birch bark. From the fragmentary colophon in frag- 
ment 3B and from the verse written at the top of the KDhP scroll (see 2.2.6), we 
know that these scrolls were referred to as postaka or postaga, an Iranian loanword 
which appears in Sanskrit as pustaka, “book.” The majority of the scrolls are com- 
posite pieces made up of several pieces of bark cut to an appropriate size and glued 
together to form long strips of continuous writing surface. The scribes would begin 
writing at the top of the recto side, which was the outer surface of the bark, and 
continue to the bottom. Then, in most cases, the strip would be turned over and 
the writing continued in the reverse direction on the verso, from the bottom of the 
scroll back up to the top. The writing on the verso is thus upside down in relation 
to that on the recto, and both the beginning and the end of the text (assuming that 
the verso was completely filled up) would have been at the top of the scroll. The 
inscribed scrolls were rolled up from the bottom with the recto on the inside. In 
theory, then, a colophon at the end of the scroll (1.e., the top of the verso) would be 
visible when the scroll was rolled up, enabling a reader to identify the contents of 
the scroll without having to unroll it. However, for reasons that will be discussed 
below, the tops of the scrolls have not survived, except for one apparent exception 
(see 2.2.6). In all the texts, the writing is across the scroll, that is to say, parallel to its 
narrow dimension, so that the scrolls would have been held vertically when read. 
In several scrolls, however, instead of a single text written continuously 
from top to bottom on the recto and then, on the verso, back again to the top of the 
scroll, we find that a text was written on the recto only (e.g., frags. 1, 5A, 5B, 14, and 
16 + 25), and the scribe stopped writing at or near the bottom. Evidently the recto, 
that is, the soft white outer side of the bark, was the preferred writing surface, and 
some scribes did not like to use the verso at all. In writing longer texts, they appar- 
ently preferred to use several scrolls inscribed on the recto only to make up a single 
text in multiple “volumes.” In several of these cases, however (e.g., frags. 1, 14, and 16 
+ 25), the blank spaces remaining at the bottom of the recto and on the whole of the 
87 

=== PAGE 136 ===
88 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
verso were filled in, presumably at a later date, by another scribe writing what seem 
to be unrelated texts.' In most such examples, the same two hands (nos. 1 and 2 in 
the list given in 2.5) are involved, so that this might have been an arrangement pecu- 
liar to this particular set of scrolls; but I think it likely that this was common practice, 
in part because similar usages are well attested in other parts of the ancient world— 
for instance, in Egyptian, Greek, and Roman papyri (Diringer 1953: 130, 138). Likewise, 
many of the Chinese rolls found at Tunhuang have secondary texts added on the verso. 
The width of the scrolls varies considerably, and for most of them it is 
impossible to provide precise figures because one or both of their vertical edges are 
broken off. The maximum widths observed are 24 cm (frag. 5C), 22 cm (5B), and 
19.7 cm (20), but in each case the margins are damaged, so their original widths 
must have been somewhat greater. The widest scroll for which precise measurements 
can be given, that is, whose edges are intact at one or more points along its length, 
measures 14.5 cm (frag. 1), but this is actually one of the narrower scrolls, which 
tended to suffer less damage to their edges. The narrowest scroll with intact margins 
measured only 5.5 cm, but this one (frag. 6) is the unique and anomalous Sanskrit 
medical text in Brahmi script, which should not be taken as representative. Other- 
wise, the narrowest intact scroll is the comparatively well preserved fragment 9, 
whose width varies between 13 and 14 cm. The original width of the majority of 
scrolls whose margin(s) are damaged is impossible to establish with precision, but 
it is noteworthy that several of the present widths fall within the range of 16-20 cm; 
for example, fragment 20, with both margins lost, measures a maximum of 19.7 cm, 
and the maximum width of fragment 23, whose left margin is intact in a few places 
and whose right margin is broken off, is 18.5 cm. Thus, the original width of the ma- 
jority of the scrolls probably ranged from about 14 to 25 cm, or 5-9 inches. This 
agrees with the dimensions of the only comparable piece, namely, the KDhP scroll, 
whose present width, according to Brough, “varies for the most part between 19 and 
19.5 cm., but occasionally approaches 21 cm. Allowing for some slight loss through 
wear, the average width in its original state may be taken as approximately 20 cm. 
or 8 inches” (1962: 18). 
The original length of the scrolls is more difficult to determine. The 
longest surviving sections are 213.4 cm (frag. 4), 154.8 cm (1), 127.7 cm (29),” and 115 
cm (15). But all of these and the other scrolls are incomplete, and the amount of ma- 
terial missing can only be estimated, in a very rough way, from textual indications. 
This can be done in connection with scrolls bearing texts for which parallel or re- 
1. It is, however, possible that the second texts, which are invariably avadana or similar 
collections, were in some way linked to the first texts, perhaps by way of serving as commentarial 
material or illustrative examples, but no firm evidence of this has yet been found. 
2. Fragment 29 seems to be part of the same text and scroll as 26, which is 64.5 cm long, but it 
is not yet clear whether the two fragments originally followed one after the other or were the right 
and left halves of a scroll split vertically like fragments 16 + 25 (see 5.3.3). 

=== PAGE 137 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
89 
lated texts are available in complete form from other sources, enabling us to estimate 
the proportion of missing text. This applies, for example, to fragment 15, which con- 
tains the Sangiti-sttra with a commentary. The Sangiti-stitra consists of lists of sets 
of items or categories grouped according to the number of items in each set, from 
one to ten; that is to say, the first section is a list of single items, the second is a list 
of paired items, the third, groups of threes, and so on. The Sangiti-siitra is extant in 
several different versions, in Pali, Sanskrit, and Chinese, which diverge considerably 
from one another, but the number and ordering of the items in the new Gandhari 
recension agree most closely with the Chinese Dirghagama version (see 8.2.2.1), so 
that version is used as a basis for comparison here. 
The Gandhari text of the Sangiti-sttra, like most of the larger scroll frag- 
ments, preserves only the lower part of the original scroll, which contains the middle 
of the text, since the beginning and end would have been at the lost top of the scroll, 
on the recto and verso respectively. The preliminary examination of the text carried 
out to date has located the sets corresponding to sets III.16 through V.6 of the Chi- 
nese version. Since the Chinese text has a total of thirty-seven triads in section II 
and thirty-six tetrads in section IV, this means that the total number of items dis- 
cussed in the surviving portions of the scroll should be approximately sixty-four, 
that is, the last twenty-two triads of III (37 minus 15) plus all thirty-six tetrads in IV 
and the first six pentads of V. The total number of sets in all ten sections of the com- 
plete Chinese text is 139, which would mean that the extant portion of the Gandhari 
scroll, comprising about sixty-four sets, should be slightly less than half of the com- 
plete text.? Therefore, since the surviving portion of fragment 15 is 115 cm long, the 
length of the complete scroll would probably be slightly more than double that, or 
in the neighborhood of 230-50 cm (=90-100 inches). 
Using the same principle, an estimate may be made of the length of 
another original scroll, portions of which are preserved as fragments 16 and 25, 
which are actually the right and left halves respectively of the same original piece. 
The surviving portion of the larger fragment, 16, is 40.5 cm long, of which, on the 
recto side, the lower 26 cm are taken up by a second text that was evidently added 
to the blank space left at the bottom after the first text was completed. The first text 
consists of fragments of verses that correspond closely to the last thirteen verses of 
the Bhikhu-varga (nos. 28—40 = nos. 78—90 of the text as a whole) of the KDhP. Since 
3. This estimate depends on the following assumptions: 
a. That the total number of topics was similar in the Chinese and Gandhari texts: this 
is very likely, in view of the close parallels in their sequences for the extant portion of the latter 
(as documented in 8.2.2.1). 
b. That the length of the commentary on each of the topics in the Gandhari text is on 
average approximately equal: preliminary studies of the text seem to bear this out. 
c. That the text began and ended at or near the lost top of the scroll, without any lengthy 
blank space at the end: this cannot be determined but seems to be the most likely assumption. 

=== PAGE 138 ===
90 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
the Bhikhu-varga is the second chapter of the KDhP, it is likely that the first, text on 
this fragment contained the first two vargas of the same or a similar recension of the 
Dharmapada and constituted the first scroll of a multivolume manuscript of this 
text. This assumes, of course, that the sequence of vargas was the same in both texts, 
but the close (though not perfect) correspondence in the order of the surviving 
verses makes this fairly likely. In any case, if this assumption is correct, the missing 
upper portion of the scroll would have contained the fifty verses of the first chapter 
(Brammana-varga) plus the first twenty-seven verses of the Bhikhu-varga. Since the 
thirteen. surviving verses in the new fragment take up about 15 cm of the scroll, the 
entire text of the Brammana- and Bhikhu-vargas, comprising ninety verses, should 
have covered about 100 cm. This, added to the remaining 26 cm at the bottom of the 
scroll, which had apparently been left blank by the original scribe of the Dharma- 
pada and filled in later by a different scribe writing a different (avadana) text, yields 
a total length for the entire scroll of roughly 125 cm (=50 inches). 
An estimate of the total length of the KDhP scroll was made by Brough 
on similar grounds, though his results are likely to be considerably more accurate, 
since a greater portion of that scroll is preserved than is the case with the new ones 
discussed here. Brough’s calculations yielded a total original length of “some 5 me- 
tres or 16 feet 6 inches” (1962: 19), with a maximum margin of error of about 1 foot. 
Thus, unlike the case of the width, where the comparison of the new scrolls with the 
KDhP produced similar results, the calculated lengths of the two new fragments in 
question are much less than that of the KDhP; slightly less than half in the case of 
fragment 15 and only one quarter in the case of 16 + 25. Therefore, if the estimates 
proposed here are even remotely close to correct, they would indicate two signifi- 
cantly different techniques of constructing scrolls. In the case of the KDhP, it was 
clearly the intention of the scribe to write the complete text on a single long scroll, 
as explained by Brough (1962: 13). But at least some of the scribes of the new texts 
preferred to divide longer texts onto two or more scrolls. This is presumably the 
case, for example, with fragments 16 + 25, where the first text ends with the last 
verse of the second chapter (of twenty-six chapters) of the KDhP. If we are correct to 
assume that this was the first of a set of scrolls containing a complete Dharmapada, 
and if we can further assume that the text as a whole was similar in extent and 
sequence to that of the KDhP, the complete set would probably have comprised six 
scrolls of similar size, since these two chapters (the longest in the collection, whose 
sections are generally arranged according to the number of verses they contain in 
descending order) have ninety verses in all, while the complete KDhP is estimated 
by Brough (1962: 23) to have had about 540 verses. 
One reason for dividing a single text among several scrolls is an evident 
distaste for writing on the verso side, at least on the part of the scribe (hand no. 1) 
who wrote the first text on fragments 16 + 25, as well as on two other manuscripts 
(1 and 14) that also have different texts on recto and verso. The scribe in question has 

=== PAGE 139 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
91 
a neat and precise hand and seems to have been a careful writer who was particular 
about his materials and disliked writing on the rougher texture of the inner surface 
of the bark. Another possible motivation for writing multivolume texts is that 
several shorter scrolls may be more convenient to read than a single long scroll 
(see Brough 1962: 12). In fact, the practice of using multiple scrolls is well attested 
in other parts of the ancient world (see, e.g., Diringer 1953: 130-3) and accounts for 
the modern term “volume” (from Latin volumen, “a roll”), as well as for the use of 
“book” to refer to a subsection of a long text that, in modern practice, may actually 
be printed in a single volume. 
But whatever his motivations might have been, it is virtually certain that 
this scribe in particular, and presumably others as well, divided single texts over 
multiple scrolls. This is confirmed, for example, by fragment 14, where a passage 
that corresponds approximately to section 14 of the Catukka-nipata of the Pali 
Anguttara-nikaya ends after the detailed description of the third of the four pradha- 
nas (samvara, anuraksana, bhavana, and prahdna) that were introduced earlier in 
the text. The text breaks off in the middle of a discrete section and certainly must 
have been continued on another scroll, which unfortunately has not been preserved. 
In some other cases, however, such as that of the Sangiti-sttra manuscript described 
above, a single text was evidently written out in full on a single scroll, recto and 
verso, as was the KDhP. The extremely small handwriting of the scribe of fragment 
15 evidently facilitated fitting the entire text on one relatively short scroll. 
But beyond the two cases discussed above, we can only guess the original 
lengths of the new scrolls. Further detailed study and identification of the texts of 
some of them might make additional estimates of this type possible, but such indi- 
cations as are available at present suggest that most, if not all, of the new scrolls were 
much shorter than the KDhP. It could be that the latter scroll, at about five meters, 
was an anomalously long one in the Gandharan tradition, but comparisons with 
other parts of the ancient world show that scrolls of this and greater length were 
not unusual. For example, Pliny the Elder, who lived at around the same time (a.D. 
23-79) as the probable date of the new manuscripts, described standardized papyrus 
rolls being sold in Rome with a length that seems to correspond to about fifteen feet 
(Diringer 1953: 129), and much longer Egyptian and Greek scrolls are known. 
Diringer concludes that in the classical world, “[g]enerally speaking, the length of 
the rolls seems to have varied according to taste and convenience” (p. 133), and this 
seems to have been the case in the Gandharan cultural sphere as well. Nonetheless, it 
is striking that, as far as we can tell from the surviving fragments, the newly discov- 
ered scrolls appear to have been considerably shorter than the KDhP scroll. This is 
one of several indications, which will be discussed in this and the following chapter, 
that although the Khotan scroll comes, broadly speaking, from the same Gandharan 
cultural milieu as the new Kharosthi texts, it nonetheless seems to represent a sepa- 
rate tradition with different scribal, paleographic, and linguistic habits. 

=== PAGE 140 ===
92 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
5.1.2. Construction 
Scrolls several meters long, like the KDhP, and even the relatively shorter 
ones in the new collection, at least some of which were probably two to three meters 
long, were not constructed out of a single sheet of bark. The technique of construc- 
tion of the KDhP scroll has been a matter of uncertainty in the past, but the new 
scrolls now enable us to clarify the matter. Brough does not directly address the 
question of the construction of the long scroll, only referring rather vaguely to 
“the whole strip, held together by stitching down both edges” (1962: 18). Also, in 
discussing the total length of the scroll, he speculates that “the scribe normally takes 
the obvious precaution of continuing to extend his strip until he is a little beyond 
half-way in the text” (p. 13), but he fails to explain exactly what a scribe might have 
done to “extend his strip.” In earlier descriptions of the Khotan scroll one finds com- 
ments such as “[t]he strips of bark on which this manuscript is written, measure 
about 8 inches (or 20 centimeters) in width and one yard, more or less, in length” 
(Hoernle 1900: 126). But this figure of one yard, and the 1.23 meters reported by 
Senart (1898: 199), seem to refer to the pieces into which the complete scroll was torn 
after its discovery in the late nineteenth century and have no relevance to its original 
components. Kaye seems to come closest to a correct understanding of the composi- 
tion of the KDhP scroll in supposing that “[t]he scapus was made by joining pieces 
of unknown depth together,’ though he adds, “[B]ut I can see no evidence of this in 
the illustrations given in the Journal Asiatique (1898, p. 308)” (1927: 10 and n. 1). 
In several of the new scrolls, however, the method of construction is 
readily apparent. In fragment 1, in particular, we can clearly see places where sepa- 
rate strips of bark have been overlapped and glued together to form the long com- 
pound scrolls. This becomes even clearer in some places where the separate strips 
have come apart, as for example in part 2 of fragment 1 (fig. 9). Here the joint has 
separated and a gap appears between the two component sections as they have been 
set in the glass frames. On the recto, the lower piece has a blank space about 3 cm 
high below a neatly trimmed straight edge at the top, while on the verso there is a 
similar blank at the bottom of the upper piece (upper piece of verso = lower piece 
of recto). These empty spaces represent the area that was originally overlapped and 
glued to another section before the composite scroll was inscribed. Part 4 of the 
same scroll has a similar separated joint, and the distance between these two joints is 
approximately 45 cm. Farther down the scroll, on part 5, at almost exactly the same 
distance (44 cm) from the joint on part 4, there is a joint that is still intact but easily 
discernible in the form of a heavy horizontal line with a notably different texture in 
the bark surface above and below it (fig. 10). The line of text immediately above this 
juncture line is incomplete, ending halfway across the scroll, and the text resumes at 
the beginning of the next line. The scribe has apparently done this in order to avoid 
having to write across the juncture line, which he otherwise could not have avoided 
because he had written the preceding line with a pronounced downward slope. 

=== PAGE 141 ===
Fig.9. Fragment |, part 2, r, detail of 
separated juncture between segments 

=== PAGE 142 ===
94 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
Thus in fragment 1, the continuous scroll, of which 154.8 cm is preserved, 
was evidently pieced together from separate strips about 45 cm in length, except for 
the bottom strip, which seems to have been about 30 cm long and hence may have 
been trimmed to size. Similar junctures are visible in several other of the better- 
preserved scrolls, though nowhere as clearly as in fragment 1. For example, there is a 
partially separated joint at the middle of fragment 12, part 2, and another one at the 
bottom of the same fragment.‘ In this case, the two junctures are separated by only 
21 cm, so that 12 + 14 was apparently made up of shorter sections than fragment 1. 
The margins of the composite-scroll manuscripts were usually sewn 
along each vertical margin about 0.5—1 cm in from the edge (see also Kaye 1927: 10). 
In the KDhP these margin threads are well preserved and clearly visible. In the new 
manuscripts they have mostly disappeared, although a few remnants of them are 
preserved, for example, in fragment 25, where a frayed piece of dark brown, almost 
black thread about 4.5 cm long is visible lying across the upper right corner of the 
verso. But in most of the scrolls where parts of one or both margins are preserved, 
the needle holes through which the edging string had been threaded, typically about 
5 mm apart, are still clearly visible, as also are the vertical bruises left by the thread 
itself between the holes. 
The purpose of sewing the margins was probably not so much to protect 
the edges themselves as to guard against the horizontal cracks that birch bark is 
prone to develop when it is rolled up for long periods (see 5.3.3). The binding would 
serve both to retard the process of horizontal splitting and also to hold together those 
pieces of scrolls that had split apart. Although the margin threads may have helped 
to reinforce the joints between the sections of the composite scrolls, this was evi- 
dently not their primary function, as seems to be suggested by Brough’s reference 
to “the whole strip, held together by stitching down both edges” (1962: 18), for if this 
were the intention, there would be no reason to stitch the entire length of the mar- 
gins. As will be shown below, in the KDhP scroll the joints were reinforced by two 
separate, additional rows of stitching, nearer the center than the continuous margin 
threads, but this was not done in any of the scrolls in the new collection. 
A few of the scrolls appear to have had unsewn edges. This is clearly the 
case, for example, in the small fragments 2 and 3A. Fragment 6 is also unsewn, but 
this manuscript is anomalous in several respects, being the only text in the collection 
in Sanskrit and in Brahmi script, as well as being much narrower than all the others, 
so that it cannot be considered representative. Finally, fragments 11, 21, and 24, which 
are tentatively attributed to the same original text and/or scroll, are also unsewn. If 
4. This latter joint was originally connected to the top of fragment 14. The identical hand and 
textual continuity (see pp. 48, 70) show that fragment 14 is actually the next component section of 
the same original scroll as fragment 12, although the juncture between them had separated before 
they were interred, so that they were rolled up and placed in the pot separately (4.1). 

=== PAGE 143 ===
,r, detail 
part 5 
Fragment |, 
10. 
Ig 
F 
of intact juncture between segments 

=== PAGE 144 ===
96 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
these pieces, including the relatively large fragment 21, are in fact part of the same 
scroll, this would establish that even longer scrolls were sometimes left unsewn. 
5.1.3. Comparisons with the Khotan Dharmapada Scroll 
In light of this new information, it is now possible to have another look 
at the KDhP with a view to finding evidence of a similar composite structure. A 
close study of the published photographs in Brough’s edition led me to suspect that 
this scroll too has similar junctures, hitherto unnoticed, and this was confirmed by a 
direct examination of fragments A, B, and C, which are kept in the Bibliotheque Na- 
tionale, Paris, in December 1996. My inspection revealed that the long KDhP scroll is 
actually made up of twelve separate strips, ranging from about 13 to 47 cm in length, 
each joined to the next with an overlapped section from about 2.5 to 4 cm long. Each 
juncture is reinforced by two small rows of thread, from 1.7 to 3.5 cm long, double- 
stitched vertically over the overlapped portion at a point anywhere from 3.5 to 6.5 
cm in from each margin. These joint-reinforcing threads are visible, with varying 
degrees of clarity, in the plates in Brough 1962 (e.g., in pl. II at the lower left), but 
they are more clearly reproduced in the plates in Senart 1898 (e.g., pl. III, center). On 
the original fragments they are well preserved and easily visible, though they seem to 
have escaped the attention of the several scholars who have studied the scroll. 
Below each pair of reinforcing threads, the line of juncture between the 
separate sheets of bark is visible as a horizontal line, which is sometimes discernible 
in the photographs (e.g., in Brough’s pl. IX, between lines 198 and 199) and which is 
unmistakably clear in the original fragments. In most cases, the normal amount of 
space is left between the lines of writing above and below the juncture line, but in 
one case, on the verso of fragment C, a vertical space about 5.5 cm long has been left 
blank. This blank area corresponds more or less to the overlapping junction of the 
two joined sections, and the surface here shows several anomalously wrinkled por- 
tions. (These are virtually invisible in Brough’s pl. XX but clear in Senart’s pl. IV.) 
Here Brough suggests that “the reason seems to have been an unusually rough piece 
of bark” (p. 14), but I think it more likely that the wrinkling resulted from an exces- 
sive application of glue to the juncture. 
Contrary to what Brough believed, it can be established that the compos- 
ite scroll of the KDhP was made up in full before the scribe began writing on it. The 
clearest indication of this is that, in numerous places, a larger than normal space is 
left between letters located on either side of one of the vertical joint-reinforcing 
threads. For instance, in lines 217—9 of fragment C, the space between the second 
and third aksaras of the fourth pada in each line (viha-ramu, viha-ramu, putre-su) 
is considerably wider than normal because of the presence of the joining thread be- 
tween them (see Brough’s pl. X). This and many other similar examples throughout 
the manuscript show that the entire scroll was prepared before writing began and 
that Brough was wrong to think that the scribe would “extend his strip” (1962: 13) as 
Fig. 
11. Original segmen 
of the Khotan Dharma- 
pada scroll, based on 
Brough 1962: 11, with tt 
divisions between the s 
ments added. Solid and 
broken lines (after Brou 
mark the pieces into wh 
the scroll was torn after 
its discovery. Dotted lin 
(added to Brough) mark 
the junctures between t
original segments of the 
scroll, and lines of x’s m: 
such junctures hypothet 
cally posited in the miss 
parts of the scroll. 

=== PAGE 145 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
97 
he went along, estimating the length (though wrongly, according to Brough 1962: 13) 
(2) 
that he would need to fit his full text on the scroll. Actually, instead of a cumbersome 
and time-wasting procedure of building up the scroll section by section as the scribe 
proceeded in writing the text, we may think, in light of the larger number of scrolls 
now known, of a system of manufacturing birch bark scrolls in advance, whether 
with a specific text in mind or, perhaps more likely, through production en masse in 
a separate workshop. In this scenario, a scribe might have chosen from an available 
@) 
store of blank composite bark scrolls what appeared to him to be an appropriately 
sized prepared piece for the text he intended to write or copy. 
Now that it is possible to positively locate the junctures in the KDhP 
scroll, its component sections can be identified and measured with reasonable accu- 
racy. The results of such an analysis, carried out on the basis of a direct examination 
in the case of the Paris fragments and from published photographs of the sections 
X 
(lost) 
XK XXXM XY 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
I 
1 
| 
| 
I @ 
now in St. Petersburg, are presented below and in figure 11: 
Number and Extent of Section 
Length (cm)? 
1. From beginning (top) of the scroll to line 28 (frag. O) 
40.6 + 2° 
2. From line 29 to line 116 (frag. B) 
46.9 
3. From line 117 to (hypothetical) juncture 
G) 
in the lost fragment X 
26.9 +? 
4. From juncture in fragment X to line 175 (frag. A*) 
2+ 35.8 
5. From line 176 to (hypothetical) juncture 
in the lost fragment Y 
Bue 
6. From juncture in fragment Y to line 198 (frag. C) 
(13.8 
© 
7. From line 199 to line 219 (frag. C) 
235 
8. From line 220 to line 82/90 (“fragments with M”)” 
20.4 
9. From line 83/89° to line 249 (frag. N) 
20.0 
@ 
10. From line 250 to line 269 (frag. N) 
23.1 
u. From line 270 to line 283 (frag. N) 
17.5 
12. From line 284 to end of the scroll (frag. N) 
13.1 
5. Measured directly from the originals in the case of the Paris fragments. A comparison with 
these measurements shows that Brough’s plates are about 80% of actual size, so that approximate 
measurements for the actual size of the St. Petersburg fragments were derived by multiplying their 
sizes in Brough’s plates by 1.25. Given these and other variables such as the unevenness of the junc- 
tures between sections, the measurements provided are approximate but should be accurate 
within about 1 cm. 
6. Brough’s plate I does not show the complete extent of the blank space at the top of the 
scroll, so the actual length is somewhat (but probably not too much) longer than 40.6 cm. 
7. This designation (following Brough) refers to several loose fragments that were arranged 
and photographed in St. Petersburg together with fragment M (at the upper portion of the scroll) 
but that textual studies have shown to actually belong between fragments C and N, near the end 
of the scroll. Here and throughout, the numbering of the lines of the KDhP scroll is dependent on 
Ge 
© 
® 
© 

=== PAGE 146 ===
98 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
This chart shows that the component sections of the KDhP scroll were 
arranged approximately in order of size, with the largest pieces at the beginning and 
the smallest at the end. This situation could have resulted from a process whereby 
the scribe, or perhaps rather the artisan whose task it was to construct the scrolls, 
would choose from a stock of precut pieces of bark the largest and best pieces first 
and then resort to gradually smaller sections until he had reached the desired length 
for the complete scroll. The construction of the British Library scrolls, particularly 
that of fragment 1 as discussed above, indicates a similar pattern of shorter sections 
toward the bottom of the scrolls, although their incomplete condition does not 
permit a complete analysis like the one presented above for the larger and better- 
preserved KDhP. It is also striking that the length of the sections in the KDhP and 
in the new scrolls is closely comparable, particularly with respect to the maximum 
attested size, namely about 47 cm in the KDhP and 45 cm in British Library fragment 
1. This is perhaps not coincidental but may be governed by factors such as the size of 
the largest vertical section of bark that could be safely and conveniently peeled from 
a birch tree (see 5.4.1). 
In conclusion, a comparison of the techniques of construction of the 
KDhP scroll and the new British Library scrolls shows that they are essentially simi- 
lar, differing only in detail. In both cases, the long scrolls were built up of strips of 
bark that were joined together, but the method of juncture differs. In the KDhP, the 
strips were sewn and (apparently) also glued together, whereas the British Library 
scrolls seem to have been glued only, as no traces of the type of reinforcing threads 
seen in the KDhP have been found in them. 
5.2. Construction of the Smaller Texts 
Although the long composite-scroll format predominates among the 
new manuscripts (and hence, presumably, among Gandharan manuscripts gener- 
ally), the British Library collection also contains a few smaller pieces that seem to 
have been constructed in a different manner. The clearest example of this is frag- 
ment 5B, the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra text. The remaining fragments of this unfortu- 
nately very fragmentary and poorly preserved text cover an area about 22 cm wide 
and 38 cm long. The width is exceptionally large compared to most of the scrolls. 
The length, on the other hand, is unusually short, but there is reason to think that 
their placement in the photographs rather than their proper position in the original scroll, which 
was only determined gradually later on through the efforts of various scholars who worked on 
them, culminating in Brough’s definitive edition. This explains the anomalous and seemingly 
illogical ordering of many lines (e.g., in this case, line 82 following line 219). The double line num- 
bers here (“line 82/90”) represent cases where parts of the same original line were separated and 
numbered differently according to their positions in the photographs. 
8. Line 89 follows line 90 because the small fragment that contains these lines was placed 
upside down in the photograph; see the preceding note. 

=== PAGE 147 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
99 
the fragment, despite its poor state, contains most of the original text. This is estab- 
lished mainly on the grounds of a comparison with the corresponding Pali text, the 
Khaggavisana-sutta, which contains forty-one verses, while the remaining fragments 
of the Gandhari text preserve parts of about forty-three verses, at least thirty-five? of 
which correspond to verses in the Pali version (though in a largely different order). 
This indicates that the two versions of the poem were approximately similar in con- 
tents and scope, although the Gandhari one was slightly longer, and this in turn sug- 
gests that the complete Gandhari text was probably only slightly longer than the part 
of it that has survived. If this is correct, the poem was written on a relatively small, 
single, noncomposite piece of bark, unless it was part of a longer composite scroll 
containing two or more texts. But this is not likely, since the multitext scrolls that are 
attested in this collection seem to involve secondary texts added to uninscribed por- 
tions of preexisting composite scrolls rather than collections of short texts on a long 
scroll originally prepared for such use. Thus, it seems that some brief texts were 
written on small, single sheets of bark, much shorter but perhaps somewhat wider 
than most of the long, composite scrolls. 
The Rhinoceros Horn scroll has other features that set it apart from 
most of the other manuscripts, though these features are not necessarily character- 
istic of the shorter format. For instance, the verses are written one to a line, with a 
space about 1.5 cm in length between each of the quarter-verses. This agrees with 
the arrangement of the KDhP but not with the other verse texts, such as the 
Anavatapta-gatha (frag. 1), in the new collection, where the lines are written con- 
tinuously without regard to verse divisions or pada breaks. Also unlike most of the 
other new manuscripts, the verso of the Rhinoceros Horn scroll was left blank, being 
used neither for the primary text nor for a secondary text, as was done with many of 
the longer scrolls with originally blank versos. But this is readily understandable, 
since the blank verso portion was probably too small to be of much use to a later 
scribe in search of a free writing surface. 
However, another specimen of the short-roll format in the new collec- 
tion does use both recto and verso for one continuous text. This is the stotra text 
(frag. 5C), which was rolled up with the Rhinoceros Horn text, but which was evi- 
dently part of a different original manuscript. It too is exceptionally wide (at least 24 
cm), and it is perhaps for this reason that the two fragmentary scrolls were rolled up 
together. Although the text is incomplete and very fragmentary, it appears to be part 
of a relatively short collection of verses, and like the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra was 
probably written on a single, noncomposite sheet. 
These smaller texts thus may be similar to the small birch bark texts 
that have been found at various sites, folded up and tucked into holes in statuary 
9. Only four of the Gandhari verses do not correspond at all to a verse in the Pali version. 
Another four are too fragmentary to be judged either way. 

=== PAGE 148 ===
100 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
or rolled up in reliquaries (see 3.2.1, 3.3, and 4.5.2). However, it is impossible to make 
any direct comparisons, since no specimens of this latter class of documents have 
survived intact. In any case, despite their small size, these small-format texts in the 
new collection were evidently still “scrolls,” at least in the sense that they were stored 
in rolled-up form. In the case of the two new texts discussed above, this is evident 
from the fact that they have been broken in two (the Rhinoceros Horn scroll) or 
at least damaged in the middle (the stotra fragment) by a tying string or by length- 
wise folding. This damage could not have resulted from the manuscripts’ having 
been tied or folded immediately before they were placed in the pots and interred, 
because the two columns of text in the Rhinoceros Horn text as it was found had 
been switched from their original, proper positions before interment. Thus the 
manuscript had already broken in half while it was being stored, rolled up, in the 
monastery library, and therefore this must have been the usual method of storing 
the small-format texts as well as the larger, composite scrolls. 
5.3. Observations on the Origin and Use of the Scroll Format 
It therefore appears that all of the texts, including the small ones, in this 
collection, and by extension in the hypothetical monastery library from which they 
came, were treated as scrolls. This may have been, in part at least, a matter of conve- 
nience for storage and retrieval purposes; although no archeological or textual evi- 
dence survives, one can imagine some structure of wood or other material in which 
large numbers of scrolls could be efficiently stored in a relatively small space on 
shelves or in cubbyholes. 
In any case, the discovery of these new manuscripts removes the doubts 
that have hitherto lingered as to the original format of the KDhP text. Old theories 
like that of Kaye that “[m]ost probably it was never intended that the manuscript 
should be rolled up; possibly it was to be hung on a wall” (1927: 10) are easily 
rejected. But it has still remained uncertain until now whether the strip was indeed 
rolled up or was perhaps rather folded in some fashion. Senart referred to long 
leaflets (feuillets) which, “once they were inscribed . . 
. were folded over themselves 
in such a way as to have the appearance of booklets 20 centimeters long and 4, to 5 
centimeters high. Given the condition in which the fragments have reached us, we 
cannot further determine if and how they were originally intended to be attached 
to each other” (1898: 199—200)."° It was apparently these folding marks at intervals 
of about 4.5—5 cm that also led Brough to state that “though it is possible that it was 
originally intended to be a roll... . it seems certain that at a later date it was folded 
10. “Une fois écrits, ils étaient repliés sur eux-mémes de facon a se présenter sous l’aspect de 
cahiers de 20 centimetres de long sur un hauteur de 4 centimétres et demi a 5 centimetres. Etant 
donné |’état ot nous sont parvenus nos fragments, nous ne pouvons d’ailleurs décider si et 
comment ils étaient primitivement déstinés a étre rattachés les uns aux autres.” 

=== PAGE 149 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
101 
into the concertina-form” (1962: 12). But in view of what we now know from the new 
British Library manuscripts, all of which were rolled up as scrolls, as well as from 
clues provided by descriptions of now-lost specimens of what seem to be similar 
items, such as Masson’s “twists” (see 3.2.1), there can no longer be any doubt that the 
original format of the KDhP was also that of a roll or scroll. Brough’s idea that the 
KDhP scroll was at some point folded concertina-fashion may be correct, but as 
Brough correctly observed, this could hardly have been the original arrangement; 
quite possibly it was the work of the modern discoverers of the manuscript. 
5.3.1. Evidence for the Use of Rollers 
Brough observed in connection with the KDhP that, “if a roll was the 
original intention, it must be assumed that it was wound round a cylinder, possibly 
of wood, since the end of N, which would have been the innermost part, shows no 
signs of the tight folding which is characteristic of most paper strips which have 
been rolled without a centre-piece” (1962: 12). It should also be noted that there is a 
narrow horizontal strip missing from the otherwise well-preserved fragment N just 
above the blank space at the very bottom of the KDhP scroll (see Brough’s pl. XIII, 
bottom, and pl. XIV, top). This damage could have been inflicted when the scroll 
was separated from such a rolling cylinder to which it had been pasted or otherwise 
attached. No direct evidence of such a cylinder was found among the new scrolls, 
which were simply wound around themselves with nothing in the center, but it may 
be that their rollers were removed for reuse when the fragments were marked for 
disposal, according to the hypothesis developed in chapter 4. There are in fact a few 
cases where we can detect at the bottom of the new scrolls what could be traces of an 
original attachment to a central roller, as in the case of the KDhP. In fragment 14, for 
example, there are two small circular holes just above the bottom margin (pl. 10), 
which could have been left by pins that fastened the bottom of the scroll to a roller. 
In this case, as in other similar ones such as fragment 1, part 5, the first scribe ended 
his text a few inches from the bottom, a practice which would be consonant with the 
use of an attached roller. However, in both of these cases the secondary text that was 
added on by another scribe is written down to the very bottom of the recto side and 
then continued from the very top of the verso. Thus, even if the scroll had originally 
been fixed to a roller, it could not have been so when the secondary texts were added 
to it. Thus the evidence for the use of a central roller in the new scrolls, as in the 
KDhpP, remains inconclusive; there are some features that could be taken as indica- 
tive of its use, but no direct evidence. 
5.3.2. Theories on the Origin of the Scroll Format 
Perhaps because the scroll format of the KDhP scroll seemed so untypi- 
cal of other early Indian books, which almost always are in some variety of the long, 
narrow “pothi” format based on the shape of palm leaves, several scholars have sug- 

=== PAGE 150 ===
102 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
gested that it was constructed under the influence of non-Indian traditions. Thus, 
Hoernle drew a comparison to “Greek manuscripts of papyrus” (1900: 126), while 
Kaye suggested directly that “the Khotan manuscript . 
. 
. seems to have been shaped 
in imitation of the western papyrus roll” (1927: 8). But Janert, commenting on 
Hoernle’s comparison, pointed out differences in format between the KDhP and 
Greek papyrus scrolls, noting in particular that in the former (and this is true of all 
the new scrolls as well) the text is written across the scroll, that is, parallel to its nar- 
rower dimension, instead of in columns parallel to the long side, as was the usual 
practice in Greek scrolls." Janert therefore concluded that “the birch bark manu- 
scripts were not similar to the Greek papyrus rolls” (1955-6: 73 n. 57). 
An alternative suggestion for the inspiration of the scroll format was 
offered by Schlingloff, who referred to the KDhP’s “divergent form, perhaps imitated 
from Chinese books” (1956: 121). Although he did not present any further evidence 
for the Chinese model, Schlingloff referred (p. 121 n. 8) to the arguments by Konow 
(1914) on linguistic grounds in favor of the view that the KDhP scroll was actually 
written in Khotan rather than imported from the Gandhari-speaking regions of 
India. Presumably, Schlingloff had in mind here the fact that Khotan was on the 
fringe of the Chinese sphere of influence in the period in question. It may also be 
noted that some later Sanskrit manuscripts written in central Asian Brahmi script 
in scroll format have been found at sites on the northern edge of the Tarim Basin in 
Chinese central Asia (Waldschmidt 1959; Bechert 1995: 89-90). 
However, now that we know that many Kharosthi texts in scroll format 
existed in Gandhara proper and in adjoining regions of what are now Pakistan and 
Afghanistan, the theory of a Chinese inspiration looks less persuasive. Moreover, at 
least some of Konow’s linguistic arguments for a Khotanese origin have been cast 
into doubt by subsequent and recent discoveries (see 6.4.3). Questions about the 
alleged central Asian origin of the KDhP also arise in connection with its material, 
namely, birch bark. Although it has been clearly established by Schlingloff (1956: 
121-2; see also Sander 1968: 27-8) that birch bark was used as a writing material in 
the ancient sites on the northern rim of the Tarim Basin (contrary to the previously 
prevailing assumption that all birch bark texts must have been imported from India), 
there is still, to my knowledge, no other case of a birch bark manuscript from 
Khotan or any other of the southern Tarim sites. 
If the new discoveries of numerous birch bark scrolls from the greater 
Gandhara region weaken the hypothesis of a Chinese background for the scroll for- 
mat, they support the argument for a Hellenistic source. The Khotan manuscript 
appears no longer as a unique specimen of its class but rather as an isolated case 
u1. Janert also cites as a difference from Greek papyri the fact that “the birch bark was .. 
. not 
glued together but consisted of a single piece” (1955-6: 73 n. 57), but it is now clear that this is not 
correct (see 5.1.2). 

=== PAGE 151 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION _ 103 
from the most distant limits of Chinese influence, whereas we now can see that 
the birch bark scroll was the standard book format in a time and place—that is, in 
Gandhara in the early centuries of the Christian era—which was still under a strong 
influence of late Hellenistic culture. For example, the discovery of a hybrid figure of 
Herakles-Vajrapani at Tapa Shutur (Tarzi 1976: 396-7; Mustamandi 1984) illustrates 
the Hellenistic atmosphere of the Hadda area itself, which is likely to be the original 
provenance of the new manuscripts. Thus, the Greek papyrus scroll must be consid- 
ered a priori the more probable inspiration for the Gandharan scrolls, despite the 
differences in details of their construction noted by Janert. It is of course also con- 
ceivable that the scroll was an indigenous Gandharan development, since the scroll 
format has been developed, apparently independently, in various parts of the world, 
including, for example, Egypt, China, and central America. But all in all, in view of 
the pervasive Hellenistic influence in Gandhara during the Indo-Scythian period, it 
seems only reasonable to assume that the Gandharan scrolls arose as an imitation, or 
rather an adaptation, of the Greek papyrus scrolls that must have been familiar to its 
inhabitants. 
A Hellenistic origin for the scroll format is also supported by the depic- 
tions of similar scrolls in Gandharan sculpture. One example is in a relief from Swat 
in the British Museum (OA 1904.12-17.43-4), showing a man seated on a stool and 
holding in his left hand a half-rolled scroll. To his right stands a female figure hold- 
ing what Tissot (1985: 109 and fig. 257) identifies as a covered box intended to con- 
tain the scroll. The identification of the scene is problematic. Zwalf suggests that it 
may be an unusual rendition of the schooling of the Bodhisattva in which “a West- 
ern model, perhaps one of the poet and Muse, has replaced the usual iconographies 
among which a woman may occur carrying the Bodhisattva’s writing board” (1996: 
1.232), whereas Kurita (1988—90: 2.fig. 859) identifies it as a scene from the Maha- 
ummagga-jataka. But Tissot compares the theme with that of a similarly composed 
mosaic portrait from Hadrumetum (Tunisia) showing Virgil holding a half-rolled 
scroll in his left hand (Bianchi Bandinelli 1971: 236, fig. 218). Although the resem- 
blance between these two renditions is striking and presumably not coincidental, 
there is an important difference with regard to the present discussion: in the 
Hadrumetum mosaic, the poet is holding the scroll horizontally across his lap, read- 
ing the text (which is actually legible on the mosaic) as written in the European fash- 
ion, that is, in columns parallel to the long dimension of the scroll, while in the Swat 
relief the man holds the scroll vertically, reflecting the now well attested Gandharan 
pattern in which the lines are written across the scroll, parallel to its shorter dimen- 
sion. Thus, the Swat relief is, in a sense, emblematic of the Indo-Hellenistic culture 
of Gandhiara, in that the scene is evidently based on a Western theme, but with a 
significant element, namely, the arrangement of the scroll, adapted to local custom 
rather than slavishly imitated from the Western model. Therefore, although this 
relief is in no sense a direct proof of a Hellenistic origin for the Gandharan scroll 

=== PAGE 152 ===
104 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
format, it reinforces the impression that the use of scrolls reflects the cosmopolitan 
and semi-Hellenistic environment of ancient Gandhara. 
Another Gandharan relief, whose current location is unknown but which 
was briefly described by Taddei (1983: 338 and pl. IIb), shows three monks seated 
around a table, each holding a partially unrolled scroll. Here too the scrolls are held 
vertically, in the Gandharan fashion. Yet another relief, found at Shnaisha Gumbat 
in lower Swat (Rahman 1993: 95, pl. XLIa), shows a man, described by Rahman as 
a “state functionary” (p. 28), sitting in front of two standing figures and holding a 
partly opened scroll, once again placed vertically in the Gandharan manner. 
An unusual gold object, possibly a headdress ornament, said to be from 
Kashmir and dated to the first century B.c. or A.D. (Errington and Cribb 1992: 138- 
40), shows a winged female divinity holding a small scroll. The scroll bears an inscrip- 
tion which can be interpreted as the Greek word 8€a, “goddess” or “divine.” Here, 
the direction of writing follows the pattern seen in metal scrolls with Kharosthi relic 
dedication inscriptions (see, e.g., Salomon 1986, 1996b: 233-8), which, unlike the 
manuscript scrolls, are always inscribed across the longer dimension. 
There are also several Gandharan sculptures (listed in Quagliotti 1990: 
105-9) showing a bodhisattva holding what is variously described as an Indian-style 
book (e.g., Foucher 1918: 238, “en forme de manuscrit indien sur feuilles de palmier”) 
or as a “book or scroll” (Ingholt 1957: 123). It is indeed difficult to determine from 
the available photographs whether the object in the bodhisattva’s hands is intended 
to represent a rolled-up scroll of the type with which we are concerned here or 
rather a conventional Indian folio manuscript, though a direct examination of the 
originals might clarify the issue.’* 
5.3.3. Patterns of Damage Conditioned by the Scroll Format 
The scroll format provides a clear explanation for the patterns of damage 
which affect all of the manuscripts in the British Library to a greater or lesser degree. 
The fact that all of them are missing a substantial part—in many cases, apparently, 
the majority—of their upper portion is explained by the practice of rolling such 
scrolls up from the bottom, so that the upper part is most subject to wear and tear. 
Especially in the case of as fragile a material as birch bark, which becomes extremely 
brittle when old and dried out, it is inevitable that the outer layers of the scrolls will 
be lost unless they were treated with exceptional care or deposited in a secure con- 
12. Two of the specimens of such “books” have what appear to be inscriptions in Kharosthi, 
but Quagliotti (1990: 110) is probably correct to observe that in the example with which she is pri- 
marily concerned (in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London), “(t]he inscription does not seem 
to have any specific meaning. . 
. 
. the artist drew the signs just in order to show that the object held 
by the bodhisattva was a book.” The writing on a similar object in the Indian Museum, Calcutta, 
may also be merely a pseudo-inscription, notwithstanding the interpretation proposed in Sawoo 
1983: 58. 

=== PAGE 153 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, AND CONSTRUCTION 
tainer while still intact. Biihler noted that even among birch bark manuscripts of 
much lesser antiquity, which, in the Kashmiri fashion, were bound together between 
leather covers like modern European books, “[t]he friction of the leather invariably 
destroys the first and last leaves in a very short time, and hence many Sanskrit works 
from Kasmir have neither beginning nor end” (1877: 30). 
At least some of this damage to the upper sections of the new scrolls had 
probably taken place in antiquity, before the already worn scrolls were interred, and 
further damage no doubt was inflicted during the nearly two millennia in which 
they lay underground. Furthermore, a comparison of the earliest available photo- 
graph of one of the fragments (no. 1), taken in 1993 (pl. 6), shows that it then had 
four or five more lines of writing on the verso than it did by the time it reached the 
British Library. This means that a further section of the scroll which may have been 
as long as 7 or 8 cm was lost during this interval (see 2.1.2). 
As noted above (4.3.1), most of the scrolls, when unrolled, show a pattern 
of regular horizontal cracks or, very often, actual breaks at vertical intervals of about 
3-4 cm, resulting from compression of the brittle rolls. Here too, the damage was 
probably inflicted gradually at different times. Some of the scrolls may have already 
been cracked in this way before they were interred, but part, perhaps most, of this 
damage probably resulted from their lying atop each other for many centuries inside 
the clay pot; this is indicated by the superior condition of fragment 1, which we know 
from the early photograph reproduced in plate 6 to have been at the top of the pile. 
Although the lower (i.e., inner, more tightly folded) parts of fragment 1 are cracked 
in the usual manner, its upper sections, unlike nearly all the other manuscripts in 
the collection, are relatively intact. 
All of the manuscripts also suffer, to a greater or lesser degree, from de- 
terioration of one or both of the edges. Only rarely do we find, in a few manuscripts, 
some lines that are preserved completely or nearly completely at both margins. Here 
once again the damage is probably a combination of deterioration before interment, 
gradual crumbling during the long period of burial, and mishandling after the 
discovery. Not surprisingly, the widest texts have tended to suffer the most in this 
respect, while the edges of narrow scrolls tend to be better preserved. Thus the best- 
preserved specimen in this respect is the anomalously narrow (5.5 cm) fragment 6, 
which, alone among all the other scrolls, retains both of its margins completely intact. 
In many of the scrolls, one margin is more or less intact while the other is badly de- 
teriorated. This is probably the result of one end of the scroll having been in contact 
with the inner surface of the pot, causing it to absorb excessive moisture from the 
ground. 
As mentioned previously, several scrolls are damaged along a vertical line 
throughout their length, or are even broken into two separate columns. This type 
of damage could have resulted from the action of a binding string that gradually cut 
through the middle of the rolled-up scroll, but it is more likely that it results from a 
105 

=== PAGE 154 ===
106 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
habit of folding the rolled-up scrolls in half lengthwise while they were fresh and 
flexible, causing an area of weakness in the center that would crumble or actually 
disintegrate as the scrolls grew old and brittle. 
In view of the extreme fragility of old birch bark, as illustrated by the 
condition of the British Library manuscripts, the relatively excellent condition of 
the KDhP scroll is all the more remarkable. Although it is now divided in numerous 
fragments, it is certain that it was intact and in one piece when discovered in or 
around 1892 (Brough 1962: 15), after which it was apparently torn into smaller sec- 
tions by its finder(s) with a view to selling them separately and thereby maximizing 
their gains. The manuscript seems also not to have suffered from the sort of crack- 
ing caused by compression that is so prominent among the new manuscripts, since 
the periodic cracks across its width were more likely caused by its being folded con- 
certina-fashion after it was unearthed (see 5.3). Thus, the KDhP scroll, unlike the 
British Library manuscripts, must have been interred, probably by itself, in some 
secure and airtight container—perhaps the clay jar that was reported to have been 
found with it (3.1.1)—while it was still fairly new and in good condition, and then 
lain undisturbed until it was rediscovered a century ago. But exactly why and how 
this happened we unfortunately have no way to know, given the obscure circum- 
stances of its discovery. 
5.4. Scribal Materials and Techniques 
5.4.1. Preparation and Usage of Birch Bark 
The bark of the birch and certain other trees is naturally well suited for 
use as a writing material, being readily procured and prepared, easy and convenient 
to write on, and visually attractive. But it has, as we have seen, one serious disadvan- 
tage: its lack of durability. Birch bark has been employed for writing or drawing in 
many parts of the world (see, e.g., Janert 1955-6: 68 n. 49), though in few regions 
was it adopted as the primary material, and nowhere was it so widely used as in the 
northern and northwestern reaches of the Indian subcontinent, in some parts of 
which (especially Kashmir) it remained the standard writing material until modern 
times (Buhler 1877: 29 n. +; Kaye 1927: 4). The usual species used for writing was the 
silver birch (Baetula utilis or Baetula bhojpattr), which is found throughout the 
Himalayan regions and also in parts of Afghanistan (Janert 1955-6: 67 n. 45). The use 
of birch bark (Skt. bharja, bhiirjatvac; bhojpatr in modern Indian languages) as a writ- 
ing material in premodern India is attested both by the many surviving manuscripts 
from all periods and by frequent literary references in works from or about India. 
Among Indian writers, Kalidasa twice mentions writing on birch bark, in a descrip- 
tion of the Himalayas, “where pieces of birch bark are inscribed with mineral ink” 
(Kumarasambhava I.7, nyastaksara dhaturasena yatra bhirjatvacah), and in a de- 
scription of a love letter: “Here is a letter on birch bark” (Vikramorvasiya IL.11/12, 
bhurjapatragato ‘yam aksaravinyasah). Among works by non-Indian authors, we 

=== PAGE 155 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
107 
find references to writing on bark in India in Q. Curtius Rufus (see Biihler 1904: 6 
and 92, and Janert 1955—6: 68) and in al-Birtini (Sachau 1888: 1.171). 
It is now clear that in the earliest times from which any birch bark docu- 
ments survive (i.e., from the early centuries of the Christian era), the scroll was the 
standard format. Later on, the standard Indian pothi format of long, unbound leaves 
was adopted for birch bark documents, as exhibited, for example, in the Bower man- 
uscript (Hoernle 1914) from Kucha, which probably dates from about the fourth or 
fifth century a.p., and in the Gilgit manuscripts from a slightly later period. It is 
perhaps not insignificant that the shift to the standard Indian format coincides with 
the adoption of the Sanskrit language and Brahmi script, representing the gradual 
dissolution of the distinctive features of the Gandharan linguistic and literary tradi- 
tion and their replacement by the mainstream traditions of classical India. At a later 
period, there developed in Kashmir, probably under the influence of Islamic culture, 
the distinctive local tradition of writing birch bark texts on pages taller than they are 
wide and bound together like modern books. 
The traditional methods of preparation of birch bark for writing pur- 
poses are unfortunately not well known; according to Biihler, “the method of pre- 
paring it has been lost” (1877: 30) in Kashmir. The only clear testimony’ is that of 
al-Biruni, who reported in the eleventh century a.p.: “In Central and Northern 
India people use [for writing material] the bark of the tz tree. .. 
. It is called bhairja. 
They take a piece [of bhiirja] one yard long and as broad as the outstretched fingers 
of the hand, or somewhat less, and prepare it in various ways. They oil and polish 
it so as to make it hard and smooth, and then they write on it” (Sachau 1888: 1.171). 
Unfortunately, the delicate condition of the British Library manuscripts, which are 
now permanently encased in glass, does not allow for technical studies of their ma- 
terial and preparation. For the same reason, it has not been possible to study in de- 
tail the character of the individual fragments with regard to such matters as the 
varying quality of the bark and the number of component layers or laminations 
(Hoernle 1914: 18). 
The new scrolls accord with Kaye’s observation that “[i]n all birch-bark 
manuscripts the writing is parallel to the lenticels, which on the bole of the tree are 
horizontal” (1927: 8). The correct explanation for this is again presumably the one 
offered by Kaye, namely, that “the reason for this direction of the writing is that the 
bark tends to split in the same direction” (i.e., horizontally) (1927: 8, see also p. 5). 
Thus, the bark of the new scrolls, or rather on their component sections, is posi- 
tioned as it originally was on the birch tree, and this explains why the scrolls were 
constructed as composites. Although it might seem simpler to use longer single 
13. Hoernle refers to “the process (probably boiling in milk or water) by which the bark was 
prepared for the reception of writing” (1914: 18), but Janert rightly questions the authority of this 
statement, which he calls “pure conjecture” (1955-6: 72). 

=== PAGE 156 ===
108 
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
strips taken from around the circumference of the tree, this, given the conyention 
of writing across the scroll, would have involved writing against the natural grain 
of the surface and caused splitting and other problems. Thus the composite scrolls 
were evidently prepared from a section of a convenient height which was peeled 
off from around the tree and then cut into parallel strips that were joined together 
vertically to form a scroll of the desired length and with the desired orientation, 
namely, with the lenticels and grain of the bark positioned horizontally, as on the 
original tree. 
5.4.2. Writing Implements and Scribal Techniques 
The scrolls were written in black ink with a split-reed pen. The effects of 
the split nib are visible in numerous places where the pen ran low on ink, as a result 
of which the center of the line becomes faint or even totally absent, resulting in 
a split line. Such an effect is visible, for example, in the syllables rana near the end 
of line 21 of fragment 16, r (the sixth line visible in the detail photograph in pl. 11). 
This phenomenon is typically seen in the last or last few syllables of a word, as in the 
present example, where a word division is indicated by the dot following the last let- 
ter (na). As a matter of fact, in some texts there is a regular pattern of darker letters 
at the beginning of words and lighter ones at the end. This is clear, for instance, on 
line 20 of the same fragment (fifth line in pl. 11), reading samudanido’ mahasamudro 
adirno’ y...,'+ where the first syllable of each of the words stands out as noticeably 
darker than the rest. This shows that the scribe was evidently in the habit of writing 
a single word with one load of ink and avoided refilling his pen before finishing a 
word, even if he was running low on ink. This habit sometimes provides a useful 
clue for the modern interpreter in showing where the word boundaries are. This is 
important because word or phrase division markers of the sort mentioned above are 
used only in some texts, and then sporadically and inconsistently (sometimes even 
incorrectly), while word boundaries are not otherwise marked (e.g., by spacing) in 
any of the texts. 
On the same fragment 16, 1, we can discern the effects of wear on the 
nib of the reed pen. In line 28 of this fragment, the letters begin to be distinctly 
thinner and slightly ragged in appearance, and in the following line, this impression 
becomes even more pronounced. But then in line 30, the letters have returned to 
normal thickness. Evidently the scribe stopped here to trim the point of his pen, or 
perhaps discarded it entirely for a new one. 
The visual effect of writing with this type of pen varies considerably 
from hand to hand. Some scribes, such as the writer (hand no. 1) of the Anavatapta- 
gatha (frag. 1; see pl. 4) and several other texts, held the pen in such a way as to 
14. On this passage, see also section 6.7.3. 

=== PAGE 157 ===
FORMAT, MATERIAL, 
AND CONSTRUCTION 
109 
produce a consistently wide line throughout. Others, notably the scribe of the Rhino- 
ceros Horn Sutra (frag. 5B; hand no. 9), held their pens at an angle, producing a 
strong contrast between thick and thin lines. An outstanding use of this technique 
is displayed by the scribe of fragments 26 and 29 (hand no. 20), whose ornate 
hand is the only one among the new manuscripts that could be considered truly 
calligraphic. 
Although no specimen of such an ancient reed pen seems to have sur- 
vived from this region, we can get an idea of what they must have looked like from 
the two copper pens, 5.81 and 4.37 inches long, found in the excavations at Sirkap 
(Taxila), which according to Marshall are “shaped like reed pens with the point di- 
vided by a cut, as in the modern nib. This is a reproduction in metal of the reed pen” 
(Marshall 1951: 2.598; see also 1.190 and 3.pl. 173gg and hh). The Sirkap excavations 
also yielded several examples of copper ink pots (Marshall 1951: 2.597 and 3.pl. 176, 
nos. 328-35), including ornate types with a serpentine handle, a sunken lid with a 
hole for the pen, and a stopper for the hole, attached to the handle with a chain (e.g., 
no. 335; Marshall 1951: 3.pl. 35a, pl. 176, no. 335, and pl. 184n). It may be surmised that 
the scribes who wrote the British Library manuscripts used implements similar to 
these. 

=== PAGE 158 ===
Chapter 6 
Paleographic and Linguistic Features 
of the Gandharan Scrolls 
6.1. The Gandhari Language and the Kharosthi Script 
The name “Gandhari” is a modern coinage for the language that pre- 
vailed in ancient times in and around the region of Gandhara on the northwestern 
fringe of the Indian subcontinent (see 1.1). This name was initially proposed by 
H. W. Bailey (1943-6: 764) and has won general acceptance in scholarly circles. In 
earlier publications, and sometimes still in more recent ones, the language has been 
referred to as “Northwestern Prakrit.” As this latter name indicates, Gandhari is one 
of the regional dialects of the Prakrit, or more precisely Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA), 
tongues, and broadly speaking it shows the same processes of phonetic change, mor- 
phological simplification, and syntactic reconfiguration of Sanskrit, or more accu- 
rately of the Old Indo-Aryan (OIA) parent language, as do the other MIA languages. 
However, Gandhari has certain peculiarities, mainly with respect to its phonetic 
structure, that set it off from all the other MIA dialects. Two features in particular 
are especially characteristic of Gandhari phonology. The first is the preservation, in 
most phonetic contexts, of the three sibilants (5, s, s) as they were in OIA, in contrast 
to all other MIA languages, where the three sibilants were reduced to one (Sor s, de- 
pending on the dialect). The other distinctive phonetic feature of Gandhari is the 
preservation of several of the OIA consonant clusters, particularly those involving 
stop consonants plus the semivowels r and y, which in the other dialects were simpli- 
fied by gemination. Thus, for instance, Sanskrit sarva, which becomes savva or sabba 
in other MIA dialects, remains unchanged in Gandhari. Historical remnants of these 
and certain other distinctive phonetic features of Gandhari have been traced in the 
modern Dardic languages of northern Pakistan, proving that they were legitimate 
dialect features and not merely orthographic survivals or artificial Sanskritisms. 
The other feature which sets Gandhari off from all the other MIA lan- 
guages is the script in which it is written (see fig. 12). Whereas the other Prakrits 
were always written in the Brahmi script and its various derivatives, ancient and 
modern, Gandhari invariably appears in the Kharosthi script, which evidently came 
into being as an adaptation for this Indian language of the Aramaic script that was 
widely used in the Achaemenian Empire of Iran.’ Since Gandhara was incorporated 
1. For further information on the origin and development of Kharosthi see Salomon 1998: 42-56. 

=== PAGE 159 ===
INITIAL VOWELS 
a 
1 
u 
e 
) 
DIACRITIC VOWELS 
ka 
ki 
ku 
ke 
ko 
CONSONANTS 
unvoiced 
voiced 
unvoiced 
voiced 
nasal 
seml- 
sibilant 
unaspirated unaspirated aspirated 
aspirated 
vowel 
ka 
kha 
ga 
gha 
na 
ha 
velar 
ip 
c 
P 
De 
ca 
cha 
ja 
jha 
na 
ya 
éa 
palatal 
4 
f 
af 
Je 
J 
\) 
ta 
tha 
da 
dha 
na 
ra 
sa 
retroflex 
i: 
aT, 
a 
qe 
} 
yi 
Sif 
ta 
tha 
da 
dha 
na 
la 
sa 
dental 
, 
iC 
Ss 
zy 
J 
ee 
pa 
pha 
ba 
bha 
ma 
va 
labial 
p 
Q 
ve 
cs 
) 
CONJUNCTS 
kra 
ksa 
tra 
tva 
tsa 
dhra 
rma 
rva 
spa 
sta 
Lima ina Aver atm 0] 
Fig. 12. Chart of Kharosthi script, as written by the scribe 
of fragments |, 12 + 14, and 16 + 25 (hand no. |) 

=== PAGE 160 ===
112 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
within that empire from the sixth to the fourth century B.c., it is easy to under- 
stand how such a script would have arisen and become entrenched there. Although 
Kharosthi shares with the Brahmi script that prevailed in the rest of ancient India 
essentially the same system of graphic representation, namely, the characteristic dia- 
critically modified consonant-syllabic structure, it differs considerably from Brahmi 
in detail. The two most fundamental distinctions are, first, that whereas Brahmi was 
written from left to right, Kharosthi goes from right to left and, second, that whereas 
Brahmi distinguishes vowel quantity, Kharosthi does not, using the same symbol for 
each pair of short and long vowels. 
Thus, although in theory Gandhari and Kharosthi are both part of the 
larger sphere of Indian languages and scripts, in practice they developed and main- 
tained a separate identity and represented a distinct cultural area. Consequently, 
they have formed a separate area of focus in modern linguistic, epigraphical, and 
textual scholarship. This special position is due not only to their linguistic and 
graphic peculiarities and relative geographical isolation but also to their unique 
cultural role as the vehicle of Buddhism in the northwest. 
Our understanding of the Kharosthi script and the Gandhari language, 
with which it is almost always linked, has been based, until now, on four classes of 
documents. The first group consists of inscriptions on stone, various types of metal, 
and earthenware materials, nearly all of which, except for the Kharosthi/Gandhari 
versions of the Asokan rock edicts at Shahbazgarhi and Mansehra, record Buddhist 
donations or foundations. These inscriptions date from the time of Asoka, that is, 
the middle of the third century B.c., until the third or possibly the early fourth cen- 
tury A.D., at which time the Kharosthi script seems to have fallen out of use in the 
Indian world and been replaced by local derivatives of Brahmi script (Salomon 1998: 
46-7). Kharosthi inscriptions are particularly abundant in the first two centuries of 
the Christian era, that is, from the time of the Scythian, Parthian, and Kusana dynas- 
ties of the northwest. The fundamental collection of Kharosthi inscriptions is still 
Sten Konow’s volume in the Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum (vol. 2.1, published in 
1929), which contains the approximately one hundred examples then known. Since 
that time, a great deal of new material has been discovered, so that we now have well 
over twice that number of Kharosthi inscriptions. References to Kharosthi inscrip- 
tions published since 1929 were collected and evaluated in Fussman 1989, but now 
even that is somewhat outdated, since several more inscriptions, including some of 
considerable importance, have appeared subsequently. 
The continuing discovery of new inscriptions and other documents con- 
firms the increasing sense among epigraphists and Buddhist scholars that the degree 
and range of influence of the Gandhari language in the Buddhist cultures of north- 
western India and beyond, especially in the early centuries of the Christian era, were 
far greater than they had appeared in decades past, when our knowledge of the script 
and language was restricted to a relatively small number of inscriptions from the 

=== PAGE 161 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
113 
northwestern edge of the Indian subcontinent. Not only the number but also the 
geographical range of Kharosthi inscriptions have been vastly expanded by recent 
discoveries, including two inscriptions found in China (in Lo-yang and Chang-an), 
numerous inscriptions from Termez and neighboring areas of the southern part 
of modern Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, and dozens of graffiti on rocks in the valleys 
of the upper Indus and its tributaries in the Northern Areas of Pakistan (Salomon 
1998: 143). 
The second group of Kharosthi/Gandhari documents comprises the 
legends on the coins of the Indo-Greek, Indo-Scythian, Indo-Parthian, Kusana, and 
other kings or states. These legends are often recorded bilingually, mostly with Greek 
and Brahmi scripts but also with Chinese in central Asia. Although this vast body 
of material is of great value for historical studies, as well as for having provided 
the keys to the decipherment of Kharosthi script in modern times (Salomon 1998: 
209-15), the coin legends are of limited use for linguistic and literary studies. 
The third major body of Kharosthi/Gandhari texts consists of the docu- 
ments, now numbering nearly one thousand (Lin forthcoming), that were found 
in the ruins of the oasis cities of the silk roads bordering the Tarim Basin in what is 
now the Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region of China. Most of these documents 
were discovered by Aurel Stein at Niya and other sites along the southern silk route 
and published in Boyer, Rapson, and Senart 1920-9, which contains 764 documents. 
Several more documents of this type have been published subsequently (see Salomon 
1998: 159 and n. 128), and many more, most of which remain to be published, have 
been discovered in the course of recent Chinese archeological expeditions in 
Xinjiang. Most of the central Asian Kharosthi documents are legal and administra- 
tive ephemera, written in ink on wooden tablets or pieces of leather. Their script and 
language are local variants of Indian Kharosthi and Gandhari, characterized by such 
distinctive features as the widespread adoption of loanwords from Greek, Iranian, 
and other local languages and the development of new consonantal characters and 
ligatures required to represent them. These documents show that in and around the 
third century a.p. Gandhari had become the administrative language of the oasis 
kingdoms of the southern silk route, presumably as a result of trade and political 
connections promoted by the vast Indo—central Asian empire of the Kusanas. On 
the northern silk route as well, some Kharosthi documents have been discovered, 
but these remain to be published and are not yet well understood (see Salomon 
1998: 47). 
The fourth class of Kharosthi/Gandhari documents consists of liter- 
ary texts, taken in the broad sense of the term to include Buddhist texts in manu- 
script form. Until now, this class has essentially been represented only by a single 
document—the KDhP—although among the aforementioned central Asian Kha- 
rosthi documents there are also a few stray specimens of poetic texts (nos. 204, 510, 
and 511 in Boyer, Rapson, and Senart 1920-9). The new documents introduced in 

=== PAGE 162 ===
114. 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
this volume will therefore provide us with a far more detailed and extensive under- 
standing of this class of materials and will serve as a balance to the previously 
better documented classes of inscriptional, numismatic, and administrative texts 
in Kharosthi. Until now, our understanding of the Gandhari language has been 
severely limited by the special character of the majority of the specimens. The inscrip- 
tions, for the most part, are highly formulaic, repetitive, and largely shaped by pan- 
Buddhist ritual terminology (Fussman 1982: 37). The central Asian documents are 
equally constricted by administrative and legal formulae and the associated technical 
jargon. Thus we get from these two classes of material a rather limited and restricted 
picture of the language as a whole, particularly with respect to the spoken vernacu- 
lar. This will no doubt prove to be the case, for the most part, with the new manu- 
scripts as well, but their relatively large number and highly diverse contents will 
help to balance this limitation. Indeed, some of the new materials, particularly the 
avadana and related texts, do reflect a more colloquial form of Gandhari, less influ- 
enced by the style and formulae of other Buddhist languages (see 6.7.3). These texts 
in particular may give us a much clearer picture than ever before of the Gandhari 
language in its original form. 
In the rest of this chapter, some notable or unusual features of the script 
and language of the new documents will be discussed under the conventional head- 
ings of paleography, orthography, phonology, morphology, syntax, and lexicon. But 
it should be admitted at the outset that these distinctions are to some degree arbi- 
trary. The informal, unstandardized, and inconsistent practices that prevailed in 
writing Gandhari, in these as in other documents, often make it difficult to clearly 
separate these categories; for example, what according to a superficial analysis may 
seem to be a difference in morphology may actually be only a matter of variant 
spellings of the same spoken form. Nonetheless, in order to present the data in a 
reasonably orderly fashion it is necessary to make such distinctions, albeit with these 
words of caution as to the limitations of their validity. 
6.2. Paleographic Features 
A preliminary paleographic analysis and comparison of the approxi- 
mately twenty-one different hands represented in the British Library collection (see 
2.5) reveals that they comprise a wide variety of different styles, forms, and ortho- 
graphic practices. Thus the large, curving letters of the avadana scribe (hand no. 2) 
contrast with the tiny, cramped hand of the scribe (no. 15) of fragment 15, while the 
unadorned, starkly functional forms of the latter in turn are strikingly different from 
the ornate, almost baroque appearance of fragments 26 and 29 (hand no. 20). And 
yet, these prominent differences are in a sense superficial, in that comparisons of the 
individual letter forms of the various hands reveal that all or nearly all of them re- 
flect essentially the same stage of development of Kharosthi script. The contrasts 

=== PAGE 163 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
115 
among the various hands thus in all probability result not so much from chronolog- 
ical differences, or even, as far as can be determined, from geographical or sectarian 
styles, but rather reflect free stylistic variations within a script that had not become 
fully standardized by this time (and apparently never did). Indeed, this phenomenon 
of nonstandardization and apparently idiosyncratic variation is not restricted to 
writing styles but is equally characteristic of the orthographic practices and even 
of the morphology of the new documents, as we will see later in this chapter. 
6.2.1. Paleographic Analysis of Test Letters 
The general contemporaneity of the different writing styles among the 
new manuscripts can best be established by a comparison of those letters, such as 
the consonants ka, ca, cha, ya, and especially sa, that underwent the most extensive 
formal changes, mostly in the direction of cursivization and stroke reduction, dur- 
ing the five centuries or so during which the Kharosthi script was in use in India and 
that therefore serve as the most reliable and convenient “test letters” for the chrono- 
logical evaluation and comparison of different specimens of the script.* 
Sa is generally considered the most revealing and reliable test letter be- 
cause it had three clearly distinct forms at different historical periods: the archaic, 
closed form (7) seen in the Asokan Kharosthi inscriptions and in some other early 
inscriptions; the semi-open form (/), in which the vertical stem of the letter was 
still written as a separate stroke but was commenced below the upper line of the 
first stroke, leaving a gap between them, rather than touching it as in the old form; 
and the late, open form (/), in which the character has been cursively reduced to 
a single stroke with a full opening at the left side. In general the intermediate, semi- 
open form is characteristic of inscriptions of the Indo-Scythian and Indo-Parthian 
period, that is, the late first century B.c. and early first century a.p., while the late, 
open form is most characteristic of—though not limited to—inscriptions from the 
time of Kaniska and his successors in the Kusana dynasty, that is, from the late first 
or early to middle second century a.p. (depending on which of the possible dates 
for Kaniska one prefers) onward. The new manuscripts consistently have the late, 
open form of sa. However, it should be added that this type of sa can be further di- 
vided into two subtypes: an earlier subvariety that preserves a point? and sharp angle 
where the lower part of the letter turns from a leftward to a downward direction (/) 
and a further-cursivized subvariety in which this point has been completely elimi- 
nated (7) and, in Konow’s words, “head and leg is only one wavy line” (1929: cxxiv). 
This latest form of sa, which is characteristic of inscriptions of the time of the 
2. See also the comments on the special problems and limitations involved in the paleographic 
dating of Kharosthi in section 7.3. 
3. This point is the remnant of the junction of the two separate strokes that originally 
constituted the letter. 

=== PAGE 164 ===
116 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
post-Kaniska Kusana kings,‘ is never found in the new documents, all of which have 
forms, with slight variations, of the open but pointed sa. 
A similar but slightly more complex pattern emerges in connection with 
ya, which is generally the second most useful test letter, after sa, for the chronologi- 
cal comparison of Kharosthi documents. This letter has two distinct forms, an ear- 
lier one consisting of two diagonal lines meeting at a point at the top (A) and a later 
one in which a separate top line or curve links two more or less upright strokes (71). 
The later form is, broadly speaking, characteristic of the inscriptions of the time of 
Kaniska and later. However, the situation is complicated because the later variety has 
several subvarieties that do not appear to be consistently distributed. Moreover, un- 
like sa, whose form is quite consistent among the different manuscripts in the new 
corpus, ya appears in several different forms. Some hands, such as no. 1, the scribe of 
the first texts on fragments 1, 12 + 14, and 16 + 25, and no. 9, who wrote the Rhinoc- 
eros Horn Sutra (frag. 5B), show the old angular form of ya (A), while others, such 
as hand no. 2, the scribe of the avadana texts, use the subvariety of the later type in 
which a short line sloping diagonally down toward the left connects the tops of the 
two uprights (71). There are no cases, however, of the very late variety seen in some 
inscriptions (e.g., Wardak), where the connecting line at the top has become hori- 
zontal (M), so that the ya becomes virtually indistinguishable from sa. 
The test letter ca has two distinct forms: the old shape, consisting of two 
semicircular strokes arranged vertically and open at the top and bottom respectively, 
either touching each other or, more often, connected by a short vertical (7); and a 
later, cursivized form, in which the letter has been reduced to a single stroke by the 
addition of a diagonal line connecting the right end of the old upper semicircle with 
the left tip of the lower one (4). To judge from the inscriptional evidence, the shift 
from the earlier to the later type took place in and around the early first century a.D.; 
only the later variety occurs in the new manuscripts. The situation is similar with cha, 
which has an archaic variety, in which the lower horizontal stroke is a straight line 
(¥), and a later one, in which the lower stroke becomes a curve opening toward the 
bottom (*). As in the case of ca, the transitional period is reflected in inscriptions 
of the early first century a.p., and all of the new manuscripts have the later form. 
Finally, ka is essentially stable through the early and middle stages of the 
development of Kharosthi, though it shows minor variant forms. In some late vari- 
eties of the script, however, the two strokes of the letter are reconfigured, from a ver- 
tical stem with a horizontal line to the left at the top plus a hooked line added to the 
right side of the vertical (7), to a longer, curved stroke at the top and right with the 
vertical stem inserted below the top stroke (/7)). This new form is characteristic of the 
4. It appears, for example, in the Ara inscription of Kaniska [II], [Kaniska] year 41, and 
the Wardak inscription of the time of Huviska, [Kaniska] year 51 (Konow 1929: pls. XXXII.1 and 
XXXIII). 

=== PAGE 165 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
117 
latest (i.e., post-Kaniska) variety of Kharosthi, though it sporadically appears earlier. 
Among the new manuscripts, the older type of ka strongly predominates, although 
the later variety is used regularly in at least one text (frag. 10). 
Two significant points emerge from this preliminary and partial paleo- 
graphic survey of the new documents. First, the letter forms are generally consistent 
among all of the fragments, the variations in form for a given character being for the 
most part at the level of what might be called “handwriting,” that is to say, of indi- 
vidual style or preference rather than of different chronological or geographical ori- 
gins. The divergent forms of ya do constitute a notable exception, but probably not 
one that is sufficient to overrule the overall pattern, since, as will be discussed in the 
following section, the coexistence of older and newer forms at a given point in time 
is the rule rather than the exception in Kharosthi paleography generally. Second, 
among the characters which take distinctly different forms at different stages of the 
history of Kharosthi, the new manuscripts regularly show the later varieties; but 
where the late forms can be subdivided into later and latest, as in the case of sa and 
ya, they consistently are the former rather than the latter. Here too, though, ya is a 
partial exception, in that some texts still retain the oldest form. 
6.2.2. Evaluation and Implications for Dating 
Taken at face value, the comparisons presented above might lead one to 
conclude that the new manuscripts should be dated, on paleographic grounds, to the 
middle Kusana period, that is, to the time around Kaniska’s reign in the late first or 
early to middle second century a.p. But to jump to such a conclusion without con- 
sidering other relevant factors would be misguided. The first and most important 
of these additional factors is the universal rule that in all scripts monumental letter 
forms, that is, those used in inscriptions on hard surfaces such as stone or metal, 
tend to be more conservative than manuscript forms, which are written (typically) 
in pen and ink on a soft surface. This is especially true when, as is the case with 
the Kharosthi examples described in the preceding section and also with the paleo- 
graphic development of most other scripts, the innovative forms are based on 
cursivized pen-and-ink developments.’ That is to say, a change in the form of a 
5. Note, for example, the comments of Fussman: “The engraving of the Kurram and Wardak 
reliquaries, like that of many metal objects, was done by a craftsman specialized in the use of a 
punch and small hammer. ... Although the craftsman may often be skillful and reproduce the 
forms of the Kharosthi aksaras with fairly high accuracy, the writing engraved in this way is in- 
evitably less cursive than that of a manuscript written in ink. Like all monumental writing, it can 
be slightly archaizing” (1989: 437). (“La gravure des reliquaires de Kurram et de Wardak, comme 
celle de nombreux objets de métal, a été faite par un ouvrier spécialisé au moyen d’un poincon et 
dun petit marteau. 
. 
. 
. Bien que le graveur soit souvent habile et reproduise avec une assez grande 
fidélité le tracé des aksara khar., lécriture ainsi gravée est nécessairement moins cursive que celle 
dun manuscrit écrite a ’encre. Comme toute écriture monumentale, elle peut étre lé¢gerement 
archaisante.”) 

=== PAGE 166 ===
118 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
particular letter will normally begin to appear in inscriptions considerably later than 
in manuscript writing, and therefore, to compare the two without due allowance for 
this pattern is almost certain to lead to inaccurate results. The approximate dates 
for the appearance of the later forms of Kharosthi sa, ya, etc. cited in the preceding 
section are based entirely on data from inscriptions, so that it is a priori possible, 
and in fact likely, that the actual date of the manuscripts will be somewhat earlier 
than it would seem from a direct comparison of their letter forms with those of 
inscriptions. 
This is confirmed by the fact that the innovative forms in question 
typically begin to appear sporadically in inscriptions at an earlier date than those 
referred to above, those being the dates by which the new forms had become more 
or less standard and regular in epigraphic style. For example, although the late, open 
form of sa is consistently used only from the time of Kaniska onward, it is occasion- 
ally seen in earlier inscriptions, for example, in the Takht-i-Bahi inscription of a.p. 
46 (Konow 1929: pl. XII.1), the Indravarman reliquary of A.D. 6 (see Fussman 1980: 
7-8), and even in the Mathura lion capital inscriptions, which probably date from 
the first century B.c.° 
The coexistence at a particular point in time of earlier and later forms 
of a particular letter and the overlapping of the chronological ranges of their use are 
well attested for Kharosthi in general (as for other scripts), and in the case of sa in 
particular this phenomenon is clearly illustrated by a set of three reliquary inscrip- 
tions that were published together in Fussman 1980. Two of the three are dated, and 
the earlier of them, Indravarman’s reliquary of the Azes year 63 (= A.D. 6), consis- 
tently has the sa of the intermediate, partly open type. But the later of the two dated 
inscriptions, Ramaka’s reliquary of year 74 of the same era, regularly has the old type 
of closed sa, despite the fact that it is eleven years younger than the inscription that 
uses the more modern form of the letter. Moreover, the third inscription of the group, 
which is undated but which must be more or less contemporary with the second one 
because it also records a donation by Ramaka, has, in the portion of the inscription 
on the reliquary lid, two sa’s of the late, open type, while the sa’s on the base of the 
reliquary are more like those of the intermediate type, with a slight extension of the 
vertical stem above its juncture with the upper stroke. 
This situation can only mean that all three forms of sa (early, middle, 
and late) were in use simultaneously and at a relatively early period, namely, the 
beginning of the first century a.p. The preference for one or the other form on the 
part of a particular scribe might have been determined by any number of factors, 
including but not limited to his age. But what is certain is that the occurrence of a 
6. See Salomon 1996: 442. However, Dani has expressed suspicions about the unexpectedly 
advanced forms of some of the letters in this relatively early inscription and has suggested that it 
might be an ancient forgery which “was actually engraved in the time of the Kanishka group of the 
Kushana rulers” (1960: 147). 

=== PAGE 167 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
119 
particular form of a letter such as sa does not establish a precise date for a document 
containing it, but only a broad range of possible dates, and that the range of possible 
dates for earlier and later forms of a given character overlap, possibly by a consider- 
able span of time. 
With this in mind, and also taking into account the aforementioned 
overall principle that graphic innovations tend to appear first in handwritten docu- 
ments and only gradually make their way into epigraphic use thereafter, the probable 
range of dates for the new manuscripts arrived at purely on paleographic grounds 
runs from the earlier part of the first century a.p., when late forms for letters such 
as sa first appear sporadically in inscriptions and hence were likely to have already 
been common in manuscript usage, to around the time of Kaniska, in the late first 
or early to middle second century, by which time these developed forms had become 
well established in epigraphic style. A later date than this is less likely on paleographic 
grounds because the latest forms of letters such as sa and ya are not found anywhere 
in the new documents. As will be discussed at length in chapter 7, historical infor- 
mation in and associated with the manuscripts points toward a similar range, and 
particularly toward its earlier part, that is, the first century A.D., as the most likely 
date for the manuscripts. 
6.2.3. Comparisons with the Khotan Dharmapada 
Although the paleography of the new manuscripts is broadly comparable 
to that of the Khotan manuscript of the Gandhari Dharmapada, it differs in several 
details. With regard to the date of the KDhP, Brough notes “a reasonable similarity 
to the styles of writing on the Kurram casket and the Wardak vase” but adds that this 
is “an impressionistic judgement which admittedly is provisional” (1962: 55). Fuss- 
man thinks that the KDhP could date from anywhere from the late first to the late 
third century a.p., “with a slight and subjective preference for the second century” 
(1989: 438). Although Fussman rules out the possibility of a date before the time of 
Kaniska (i.e., the late first century, according to his preferred chronology) on the 
grounds of the consistent use of the late, open sa, the examples cited above of earlier 
epigraphic specimens of this form raise doubts about this lower limit. In terms of 
chronologically distinctive letters like sa, ya, and cha, the KDhP is broadly in agree- 
ment with the new manuscripts in that it shows the later, but not the latest, most 
cursive forms. But the specific forms of many of these and other letters in the KDhP 
are notably different from those which prevail among the new manuscripts, though 
unfortunately not in a way that is chronologically distinctive. Characteristic pecu- 
liarities of the KDhP style, such as the hooked flourish at the lower right of bha, 
the curved vertical of ba, and the extra hook at the bottom of dha, have not been 
observed in the new documents, but it is not yet possible to determine whether these 
contrasts represent chronological changes, geographical and/or dialectal features, or 
merely idiosyncratic variants. As yet, our knowledge of the paleography of Kharosthi 

=== PAGE 168 ===
120 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
manuscripts is even more rudimentary than that of the epigraphic version of the 
script, though we can anticipate that when, in due course, the paleography of the 
new manuscripts has been studied in detail, their chronological and other relation- 
ships to the KDhP will become clearer. 
One point that is already clear, however, is that the differences between 
the paleographic characteristics of the KDhP and the new texts are consistent with 
a broader pattern applying to other topics such as orthography and morphology, as 
discussed later in this chapter. In all of these categories we find a general similarity 
between the two but differences in detail that when taken singly seem minor, but 
when seen as a whole give the impression that they stem from separate, though 
closely related, cultural spheres. Although it is tempting to explain these differences 
on the grounds that the KDhP is, as some scholars have claimed, a central Asian 
manuscript in origin rather than an import from the Indian subcontinent, this 
explanation is subject to doubt on other grounds, as noted in sections 5.3.2 and 6.4.3. 
Detailed paleographic and linguistic studies of the new texts may eventually clarify 
this issue, but for the moment it must be left open. 
6.3. Orthographic Features 
Like their paleography, phonology, and morphology, the orthography 
of the new manuscripts exhibits numerous idiosyncratic variations which do not 
appear to be reducible to any simple or consistent pattern. The principal variables 
discussed below, such as the presence or absence of anusvara and the use of the “spe- 
cial” sibilant s, do not fall into coherent groupings with respect to the various manu- 
scripts but rather seem to follow the personal preferences of the individual scribes, 
who apparently did not have any single authoritative standard on which to model 
their writing. 
The variable notation in Kharosthi of nasalized vowels or nasals preced- 
ing consonants—that is to say, the usage or avoidance of the anusvara—is already 
a well-known phenomenon in the inscriptions and other Gandhari documents. For 
instance, in the KDhP manuscript anusvara is almost totally absent, while in the 
central Asian documents it is commonly and fairly consistently written. Among the 
inscriptions, we find many specimens with and many without anusvara, as well as 
many examples of the troublesome category of “pseudo-anusvara,” discussed in the 
Appendix (sec. 3, pot C). This inconsistent treatment of anusvara must reflect a 
weakening of nasalization in the spoken Gandhari language or at least a leveling 
of nasalization as a phonemic category, as has been discussed at length in Fussman 
1989: 473-9. This presumably is the reason that among the new manuscripts we find 
some scribes who never use anusvara, others who use it more or less regularly and 
in the usual fashion, and yet others who use it sporadically or in particular contexts 
only. On the whole, it appears, on the basis of a very preliminary survey, that the 
majority of scribes did employ anusvara with reasonable regularity but that a sizable 

=== PAGE 169 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
121 
minority avoided it. This latter group, however, includes two scribes (hands nos. 1 
and 2) who are represented by multiple fragments in the collection. 
The distribution of the nasal consonants that are conventionally tran- 
scribed as dental n (7) and retroflex n (f) also typically varies among different 
Kharosthi documents. Like the problem of anusvara, this reflects or at least involves 
the phonemic leveling of the two sounds, particularly in the middle and later stages 
of development of the Gandhari language. Thus, we need not be surprised to find 
that among the new manuscripts, as in many previously known Kharosthi docu- 
ments, most texts use one to the exclusion of the other, though there also seem to 
be a few examples in which, for example, a scribe who prefers n will occasionally 
use n. In general, more scribes seem to prefer the retroflex n, but a fair number write 
n. Among the two best-represented scribes, hand no. 2, the avadana specialist, always 
uses n, while hand no. 1 writes only n. It is typical of the aforementioned inconsis- 
tent grouping of orthographic practices among the various scribes and manuscripts 
that these two prominent scribes agree in avoiding anusvara but disagree in their 
usage with regard to the nasal consonants. 
The “special” sibilant s (.) has a complex and, once again, highly vari- 
able history in the Kharosthi script as a whole. Some experts (e.g., Brough 1962: 69) 
believe that it originally arose as a cursivized reduction of a ligature for sya. This 
theory is based in part on the regular use of s in some documents to represent the 
genitive singular ending -s(y)a, apparently under the influence of a Sanskritized 
spelling. But whatever its origin may have been, s is also widely used in Kharosthi 
documents of various classes to represent the sounds corresponding to the original 
Sanskrit consonants th and dh in intervocalic position, indicating that this letter 
came to represent a voiced interdental fricative (/d/) or similar sound which devel- 
oped in the course of the phonetic history of Gandhari and for which the script 
had no original primary character. It is mainly in these situations, rather than as a 
genitive case inflection as in the central Asian documents and some of the Indian 
inscriptions, that we find s used in the majority of the new manuscripts—but once 
again, inconsistently. For example, here too our two best-represented scribes part 
company. Hand no. 2 uses s regularly for old intervocalic th and dh: for instance, 
writing bosisatva- for Sanskrit bodhisattva- (frag. 25, r, line 19) and pranist- for 
pranidhi- (v, line 7). Hand no. 1 never uses s, writing an ordinary s in such contexts, 
as in prasana- = Pali padhana- (frag. 12, r, line 39). We also find that some scribes 
occasionally use s where it is not etymologically justified, for example, in wvasakra- 
mita = Sanskrit upasamkramya (frag. 4, part 6, v, lines 6 and 11). In such cases s 
seems to have become more or less interchangeable with ordinary s, a state of affairs 
that also prevailed in the KDhP (see below). 
The use of diacritic additions to various consonant signs, either to repre- 
sent modified pronunciations or to mark abbreviated forms of consonantal clusters, 
is another prominent variable feature in Kharosthi orthography, and the new docu- 

=== PAGE 170 ===
122 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
ments show many examples of such usages, usually in situations identical or similar 
to those observed in other types of Gandhari documents. Such diacritics often take 
the form of a horizontal line above the consonant, which, for instance, is used fre- 
quently with s (7, transcribed Sa) in various types of Kharosthi documents, almost 
always in positions corresponding to Sanskrit sma. Thus, in the new documents 
we find, very frequently, the word tasa = Sanskrit trsnd, “thirst,” “craving.” The hori- 
zontal diacritic is also applied, again as in previously known documents, to j (Y, 
transcribed ja) in phonetic situations corresponding to jh in Pali and other MIA 
languages, probably representing /z/ or a similar sound. This character appears fre- 
quently in the word jana-, “meditative state” (= Pali jhana < Skt. dhyana). The same 
diacritic is also seen in a few cases with c, where it presumably represents an original 
cluster sc, as in other Kharosthi documents; thus, pacavita (frag. 4, part 6, v, line 18), 
apparently = *pascapita, “set behind,” “rejected.” Other well-attested types of dia- 
critic marking, such as g or t with a small horizontal stroke at the right side of the 
base to indicate, apparently, a fricative pronunciation (e.g., ¥, g), are also sporadi- 
cally found in the new texts. 
While the uses of diacritics present nothing startlingly new, some of 
the new manuscripts do show unusual treatments of certain consonantal conjuncts. 
Particularly interesting is the use in some of them of the subscript preconsonantal r 
in places where, contrary to normal Kharosthi usage, it seems not to be etymologi- 
cally justified. Thus, in the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra manuscript (frag. 5B), the word 
for “rhinoceros,” which occurs in the refrain of each verse, is spelled consistently 
as kharga (%S ). This is not the normal derivative of Sanskrit khadga in Gandhari, 
where we would expect to find, as in Pali and other MIA dialects, khagga. Several 
examples of what would seem to be the same or a related phenomenon appear 
among the avadana texts, where we find, for example, forms such as uparno = San- 
skrit utpannah (frag. 4, part 6, r, lines 26, 30, etc.), pradivarno = pratipannah (frag. 4, 
part 5, v, line 10), and bhirno = bhinnam (frag. 25, r, line 20). The common denomi- 
nator among all examples of nonetymological r noted so far is that they occur in 
places where a simple geminate consonant would have been expected. It is there- 
fore possible that preconsonantal r came to have a secondary function of marking 
geminates, which were otherwise not indicated in the Kharosthi script. If this is ac- 
tually what happened, it curiously prefigures similar developments in later Brahmi- 
derived scripts, where, for example, in manuscripts from Bengal and Nepal the 
superscript preconsonantal r is often written, without etymological justification, 
when the following consonant is a geminate.” This peculiar usage is rare but not 
7. This development presumably represents the influence of vernacular pronunciations in 
which Sanskrit clusters of the form r+ consonant (r-C) were pronounced as a geminate of the 
following consonant (/CC/). But such an explanation for what seems to be a parallel graphic de- 
velopment in Gandhari is less cogent, since r plus consonant groups were generally more stable in 
that language than in other MIA dialects. The phenomenon thus remains to be fully clarified. 

=== PAGE 171 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
123 
totally unprecedented in Kharosthi, since in the KDhP we have the forms sabarno = 
Sanskrit sampannah and samavarno = samapannah,® and it may be significant that 
here, as in many of the cases in the new texts, the nonetymological r appears in con- 
nection with derivatives of Sanskrit past participles in -nna, particularly in forms 
of panna (< Vpad). 
Some of the new manuscripts use vowel signs which are not normally 
seen in Kharosthi, although these “special” vowels, like most of the orthographic 
peculiarities of the new texts, have been observed occasionally in other documents. 
For example, in at least one case, the word manasikrta (frag. 29, part 2, v, line 9), 
the Sanskrit syllabic r is represented as such with a special diacritic vowel sign (# = 
kr). The notation in Gandhari of the syllabic vowel 7, which is lost in all other MIA 
languages, has previously only been observed in a few cases among the central Asian 
documents (Boyer, Rapson, and Senart 1920-9: 3.298) and coin legends (Das Gupta 
1958: 404, table IV, no. 19-IV). The use of r is presumably influenced by a tendency 
toward Sanskritized orthography that is characteristic of some Kharosthi docu- 
ments, especially in the later period of the use of that script. It may be significant 
that the only one of the new manuscripts in which r has so far been noted, the 
sutra(?) text in fragments 26 + 29, is written in a calligraphic style and hence seems 
to embody a more formal style of writing than most of the others. 
Some of the new manuscripts also sporadically note certain long vowels. 
Although Kharosthi normally does not distinguish vowel length, the occasional di- 
acritic indication of long vowels has, once again, been previously observed in some 
varieties of Kharosthi, most frequently in the central Asian documents (Boyer, Rap- 
son, and Senart 1920-9: 3.298—9). Among the new manuscripts, this usage seems 
to be limited to the full (nondiacritic) form of the vowel a, which is sometimes rep- 
resented by a normal a with the addition of a diagonal stroke running downward 
to the right from a point near the bottom of the stem of the letter (2). Examples 
of long a have to date only been noticed among the avadana texts written by hand 
no. 2, and there only sporadically, for instance, in dyiviga (= ajivika-; frag. 1, part 5, 
r, line 30). 
In conclusion, all or nearly all of the distinctive or unusual ortho- 
graphic features of the new manuscripts have parallels in at least one of the previ- 
ously known classes of Kharosthi documents (1.e., the inscriptions, coins, central 
Asian documents, and the K.DhP manuscript), although their significance had not 
in all cases been clear until now. But the distribution of the orthographic variants 
and peculiarities does not, at this point at least, seem to follow any regular pattern. 
Most, if not all, of the variable features seem to have been adopted merely according 
8. See Brough 1962: 98. Brough’s idea that the intrusive r in these forms marks the following 
nasal as retroflex does not accord with the evidence of the new documents and therefore can be 
discarded. 

=== PAGE 172 ===
124 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
to the personal preference of the individual scribe, and there is no evidence of any 
sort of standardization of usage. Further study of these features and of the individ- 
ual texts will undoubtedly clarify at least some of the details of the history, signifi- 
cance, and distributional patterns of these features, but it is unlikely to disprove 
the overall impression of a nonstandardized scribal tradition. 
Finally, a comparison of these orthographic features with those of the 
KDhP scroll reveals more contrasts than similarities, even though one might have 
expected the KDhP to resemble the new texts, since in terms of its contents it is the 
most similar among the aforementioned classes of Kharosthi texts. For example, one 
of the distinctive orthographic characteristics of the KDhP is that, unlike most other 
Kharosthi documents, it not only uses the signs for both nasals n and n but also 
maintains a consistent distinction between them, the former being regularly used at 
the beginning of words and the latter in internal position.? No trace of this pattern 
of distribution between n and n has been found in the new documents, or elsewhere 
in Kharosthi. The distribution of s and s in the KDhP too is very different from what 
we find in the new documents. In the KDhP, the two are mere mechanical graphic 
variants, with the choice being determined by the vowel diacritic (if any) attached to 
the consonant: the syllables sa, si, and se are always written with “special” s, while so, 
su, and sam are written with the normal s (Brough 1962: 67). This is entirely different 
from the usage of the new documents, as well as from all other known varieties of 
Kharosthi. Thus, contrary to what might have been expected, we find that in terms 
of these two important variables, among other points, the orthography of the KDhP 
differs markedly from that of the new manuscripts, whose orthography, broadly 
speaking, has more in common with inscriptional and central Asian Kharosthi. 
This is another example of the pattern noted above (6.2.3) of a surprising degree 
of difference with regard to paleographic, linguistic, and material features between 
the KDhP and the new Kharosthi manuscripts. 
6.4. Phonological Features 
6.4.1. Treatment of Intervocalic Consonants 
In Gandhari, as in the MIA languages generally, the clearest index of the 
stage of linguistic development of a given document is the treatment of intervocalic 
consonants, particularly the stops. The new documents generally reflect a stage in 
which most of the stops in intervocalic position have been voiced and/or fricativized, 
with some of the “weaker” consonants such as the gutturals and palatals being elided. 
In other words, the documents represent a middle stage of development, between 
that of the early MIA languages such as Pali, in which intervocalic stops are mostly 
preserved in their original form (1.e., as they appear in Sanskrit), and that of the late 
g. The distribution pattern is actually a little more complicated than this, but the details need 
not concern us here; see Brough 1962: 97-8. 

=== PAGE 173 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
MIA dialects such as Maharastri Prakrit, in which most of them (except the retro- 
flexes) have been elided. This middle stage of phonetic development is generally 
consistent with that of Kharosthi inscriptions up to the latter part of the first century 
A.D., as was shown by Fussman (1989) in his definitive study of the historical devel- 
opment of the Gandhari language. It is around this time that we begin to regularly 
find characteristics of the later stage of MIA, mainly the extensive elision of inter- 
vocalic consonants, particularly dentals; for example, in the Kalawan inscription of 
the Azes year 134 (= A.D. 77) we find forms such as sarvastivaana instead of the pre- 
viously usual sarvastivadana for Sanskrit sarvastivadanam (Fussman 1989: 457). 
The following chart summarizes the results of a preliminary survey of 
the treatment of intervocalic consonants in a representative sampling of the new 
texts. The data are derived primarily from six texts that are relatively well preserved 
11° Some less common consonants 
and have already been studied in some detai 
for which no or very few examples were found are omitted from the chart, as are 
those (such as the semivowels other than y) that are generally preserved unchanged. 
Since the data were generally consistent among these six texts, it can reasonably be 
expected that further examination of the remaining texts will not drastically change 
the picture. 
Original Consonant 
Renditions in Intervocalic Position 
k 
2&0 
g 
&Y%O 
C 
y,@ 
c(c)h 
ch 
j 
y, © 
th 
d, dh (both rare) 
d 
d (rare) 
t 
t, d, © (two cases) 
th 
Ses 
d 
d, t (sporadic, in two texts only), 
© (one case) 
dh 
Sc 
p 
v, O 
bh 
bh, h (one case) 
y 
%O 
10. The texts are the Anavatapta-gatha (frag. 1, first text); part of a verse commentary text 
(frags. 9 and 13); a sutra text (frags. 12 + 14, first text); the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra (frag. 5B); and 
two avadana-type texts (frags. 1, second text, and 16 + 25, second text). 
11. See section 6.3. 
12. See section 6.3. 
125 

=== PAGE 174 ===
126 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
In general, the representation of intervocalic consonants in the new 
manuscripts closely parallels that of the majority of the previously known Kharosthi 
inscriptions, including the KDhP (Fussman 1989: 464). Unfortunately, data of this 
type are of very limited value for absolute or even relative dating, due mainly to the 
strongly conservative and (mostly in later documents) even intentionally archaizing 
orthographic tendencies, which have the effect of disguising or at least minimizing 
phonetic changes (Fussman 1989: 485). Therefore, while the appearance of later 
phonetic features in a given document may be taken as an indication of a later date, 
their absence does not prove that a document is early. Thus, although Fussman 
found that the stage of phonetic development reflected in the KDhP corresponded 
to that of the second half of the first century B.c., he felt that the actual date of the 
manuscript was likely to be at least a century later than that (1989: 46s). 
We do find in the new manuscripts a few sporadic cases of the elision of 
original intervocalic dental stops (t and d), which are diagnostic of the later stages of 
phonetic change in MIA. Thus, the Anavatapta-gatha has piu = Sanskrit pitur (frag. 
1, part 2, r, line 20) and nai/ti]ru for naditiram (part 4, 1, line 1), and the verse com- 
mentary text (frag. 9, part 3, r, line 11) has pamdia, apparently = panditah."4 But it is 
hard to be sure whether these relatively few examples among the fairly large number 
of data collected so far should be taken as indications of a later date for the texts as 
a whole. According to Fussman’s principle enunciated above, this would, in theory, 
be the case. But on the other hand, it is by no means unusual to find what Fussman 
calls a “fore-runner” (avant-coureur) (1989: 464 n. 42), that is, an anomalous spelling 
in a relatively early text reflecting a phonetic change that is not regularly observed 
until later, the classic case being sasumate = Sanskrit sadhumata- in Asoka’s Shah- 
bazgarhi rock edict I, which seems to anticipate the development of intervocalic dh 
to s (i.e., /6/, written as s; see 6.3, p. 121) in later Gandhari.” As a matter of fact, ex- 
amples of the elision of original intervocalic -t- are found in inscriptions as early as 
the beginning of the first century a.D., as in maiilena for Sanskrit matulena, “with 
maternal uncle,” and maiilanie 
= matulanya, “with maternal uncle’s wife,” in the 
Indravarman reliquary inscription of A.D. 6. 
In short, in view of the peculiarities of Kharosthi orthography, which 
exhibits on the one hand a strong tendency toward archaic spellings and on the 
other hand sporadic anticipations of incipient phonetic shifts, texts can be dated 
13. But five lines later the same word is spelled naditiru, with typical inconsistency. 
14. Also, the Sangiti-sutra commentary (frag. 15, part 3, 1, line 41), which is not among the 
samples tabulated above, has acaiitha = Skt. acaturtham. Note that a similar spelling for the related 
word catidisami (= caturdise) appears in the inscription on British Library pot D; see section 7.2.2.1. 
15. Fussman himself doubts the linguistic significance of this particular example, but Caillat 
(1989a: 426 n. 70), referring to Fussman, does see it as “a fact of the actual language; an anticipa- 
tion, perhaps, of an evolution well attested later on.” 

=== PAGE 175 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
127 
on the basis of their (apparent) phonetic features only in terms of broad estimates. 
With regard to the present collection, we find a general predominance of features 
that coincide with those of dated inscriptions of the first century a.p., but in the 
current state of our knowledge, it would be imprudent to claim any more certainty 
or precision than this. 
6.4.2. Representation of Voiced Aspirates 
It has often been noted that the aspirate consonants, and in particular 
the voiced aspirates, are represented inconsistently in some Kharosthi documents, 
and this has been taken, no doubt correctly, to indicate a dialectal weakening of 
the distinction between aspirates and nonaspirates (e.g., Brough 1962: 100). This 
feature is attested more vividly in some of the new manuscripts than in any previ- 
ously known documents, especially in the texts written by hand no. 1 (fragments 1, 
12 + 14, and 16 + 25), who invariably writes gha in place of ga and often also dha for 
original da. Thus, in the Anavatapta-gatha (frag. 1, first text) we find, for example, 
sughadisu = Sanskrit sugatisu (part 1, r, line 4), gharu = grham (part 2, r, line 13), 
and araghae = aragayeyam (line 15). No exceptions to the substitution of gha for ga 
have been found in any of the texts written by this scribe; that is to say, the letter ga 
never occurs in his manuscripts. A sporadic tendency to write gha for ga has been 
noticed in other documents; for example, in drugha = Pali dugga in the KDhP (verse 
132) and bhaghava = bhagavat- in an inscription of (probably) the Azes year 157 
(= a.D. 100) (Salomon 1995b: 138). But nowhere else has such a complete and consis- 
tent leveling of ga/gha, or of any other nonaspirate/aspirate pair, been observed. 
Scribe no. 1 often writes dha in place of expected da, but only in word- 
initial position, and even then not always. Thus, we find in the Anavatapta-gatha 
fragment dhrohiksu or dhrohikse = durbhikse (part 5, 1, lines 3 and 5), dhosehi = 
dusyaih (part 2, r, line 14), dhrispa or dhrispana = drstva (part 2, 1, lines 36 and 40), 
and dhaksina = daksina (part 4, r, line 35), but also dade = Sanskrit dade, “I gave” (°) 
(part 2, r, line 14) and deva = devah (part 2, 1, line 17). A similar change of initial d- 
to dh- has been noted a few times in inscriptions (Fussman 1989: 482, dhaksinami) 
and, in noninitial position, in several cases in the KDhP, for instance, in kusidhu = 
Pali kusito (Skt. kusidah; verse 316; cf. Brough 1962: 95). But this change appears to 
be statistically much more frequent in the manuscripts written by scribe no. 1 than 
in previously known documents. 
As for the other voiced aspirates, dha occurs very rarely in the new man- 
uscripts. In most cases where it would have been expected etymologically, the corre- 
sponding nonaspirate appears, for instance, in padidu = pathitum (frag. 1, part 4, 5, 
line 39). This is not surprising, as dha is generally seen in Kharosthi only in early in- 
scriptions. As for jha, which is also rare overall in Kharosthi, it has been found only 
in the proper name jhadamitra or jhadimitra, the hero of two of the avadanas in the 

=== PAGE 176 ===
128 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
second text on fragment 1 (part 3, v, line 1, to part 2, v, line 28). The name seems to 
be of Iranian derivation, and jh is here apparently being used to represent /z/ (see 
also sec. 7.1.2, n. 6). Bha, on the other hand, is mostly stable in all positions in the 
new texts, as is generally the case in Kharosthi. In a few instances, however, in inter- 
vocalic position it is reduced to h, v, or vh; for example, in dhrohikse/u = durbhikse 
(frag. 1, part 5, r, lines 3 and 5), avisameti = abhisameti (frag. 4, part 4, r, line 39), and 
avhilambyi = abhilambi (2) in the stotra text (frag. 5C, r, line 2). Such spellings are 
well attested in other Kharosthi documents (see, e.g., Brough 1962: 96-7). 
Thus, with regard to the treatment of the five voiced aspirates in the 
new documents, two of them (gha and dha) are often written in place of the corre- 
sponding nonaspirates, two others (jha and dha) are largely absent, and one, bh, 
is preserved regularly. This seemingly inconsistent pattern confirms the theory of 
a general weakening of the aspirate/unaspirate contrast among voiced consonants 
(with the possible exception of bh) in Gandhari. The peculiar frequency of aspirate/ 
unaspirate variations in the manuscripts of one particular scribe (hand no. 1) brings 
to mind the opinions of earlier authors who were inclined to attribute such alterna- 
tions to writers who were native speakers, not of Gandhari, but of other, non-Indo- 
Aryan languages. Thus Konow attributed similar instances in Indian Kharosthi 
inscriptions to “the influence of the Iranian tendencies of some of the individuals 
who made use of the language” (1929: cii), while Burrow explained the incorrect no- 
tation of aspiration in the central Asian Kharosthi documents on the grounds that 
“the native language of Shan-Shan had no aspirates and consequently in pronounc- 
ing the Prakrit they neglected them” (1937: 9). The theory that the incorrect treat- 
ment of voiced aspirates reflects the linguistic habits of particular scribes who were 
not native speakers of Gandhari or other Indian languages might also be supported 
by a recently published brief dedicatory inscription on a stupa model (Sadakata 
1992: 2), in which dh and bh are regularly written in place of d and b respectively, 
for instance, in dhanamukhe = Sanskrit danamukham and bhudhanadhasa = buddha- 
nandasya. The concentration of this pattern in certain documents may indeed 
indicate that they were written by nonnative speakers, and it may be true that the 
influence of other languages to some extent affected the development of the aspi- 
rates in Gandhari, especially in central Asia. But a broad pattern of weakening of 
the voiced aspirate/unaspirate distinction is sufficiently well attested in Kharosthi 
documents in general, including the new manuscripts, to show that this phenome- 
non was essentially an internal development within Gandhari. Of course, it is not 
a coincidence that the weakness of the voiced aspirates in Gandhari echoes their 
absence in the Iranian languages which were its direct neighbors to the west, but 
the new information suggests that we should view this similarity as a common areal 
feature rather than as a contamination resulting from the adoption of Gandhari 
by nonnative speakers. 

=== PAGE 177 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
129 
6.4.3. Treatment of Nasals + Homorganic Stops 
One of the most distinctive phonological features of the KDhP is its 
peculiar treatments of nasals + homorganic stop combinations, which typically in- 
volves the voicing of unvoiced consonants (e.g., Sadi < Santi) and elision of voiced 
consonants (e.g., vinadi < vindati; see Brough 1962: 98-100). This development is 
paralleled in the central Asian Kharosthi documents (Burrow 1937: 17) but is not 
usually observed in Indian Kharosthi inscriptions. In this regard, as in several others, 
the new manuscripts agree more with the usage of inscriptional Kharosthi than with 
that of the KDhP. The only apparent instance of a sound change of this type noticed 
so far is pamjamo = pamcamah (frag. 9, part 3, r, line 7), but this seems in any case 
to be an anomalous spelling, since the word pamca appears regularly in its standard 
spelling in the same text (lines 5, 15, and 21). 
The absence of any significant evidence among the new documents for 
the special sound changes involving nasals + stops might seem to support the theory 
that this feature of the KDhP reflects a central Asian dialect of Gandhari, since it 
also appears in the Niya documents but not in the inscriptions or in the new manu- 
scripts from the India subcontinent. However, Bloch (1912) demonstrated that 
similar sound changes occur in some later and modern dialects of western and 
northwestern India, for instance in Sindhi and Punjabi, and hence they may reflect, 
not a central Asian dialect feature, but rather an underlying dialectal and/or ortho- 
graphic variation within Indian Gandhari. Moreover, there is at least one exception 
to the general absence of these sound changes in inscriptions from the subcontinent: 
the word sabradu = sampraptah, “arrived,” used in several of the Kharosthi graffiti 
from the Alam Bridge site in northern Pakistan (Humbach 1980: 102). 
It is also important to note that two supplementary notes added onto 
the KDhP scroll itself lack this characteristic feature of the main text and treat the 
nasal + stop combination in the manner normal to Indian Kharosthi inscriptions 
and other documents. The first of these two passages is the introductory verse at 
the head of the scroll, identifying it as the property of one Buddhanandin, whose 
name is spelled budhanadisa in the manner of epigraphic Kharosthi rather than 
*budhananisa as would have been expected in the orthography of the KDhP text 
itself (Brough 1962: 177). The second additional passage consists of two verses (nos. 
343 and 344 in Brough’s numbering) added in a different hand to the otherwise 
blank verso of fragment B. Here we find vaditva (343c) for (probably) vanditva, 
written in normal Indian Kharosthi orthography, instead of *vanitva as would be 
expected in the KDhP text (Brough 1962: 281).!° These points cast further doubt on 
16. There is another later addition to the KDhP scroll on the verso of fragment A (opposite 
line 161 of the recto), which does not appear in any of the published photographs and which has 
apparently not been noticed until now. It consists of eight or nine aksaras, several of which are 
blurred so that it is difficult to give a coherent reading, and therefore no linguistic conclusions can 
be drawn from it. 

=== PAGE 178 ===
130 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
the theory that the KDhP’s peculiar treatment of stop + homorganic consonant is a 
distinctive feature of central Asian Gandhari and consequently further obscure the 
issue of whether that manuscript was composed in central Asia or imported from 
India. Nevertheless, the differences in this respect between the orthography of the 
KDhP and the new scrolls do confirm the pattern of minor but numerous contrasts 
between them and strengthen the suspicion that they were written in different parts 
of the Gandhari-speaking area. But whether these contrasts reflect different usages 
within south Asia, or beyond it, remains uncertain. 
6.5. Morphology and Syntax 
6.5.1. Nominal Forms 
Varying forms of nominal inflections frequently pose complex problems 
of analysis in Gandhari texts of all types. For example, -o, -e, -u, -a, and occasionally 
other endings as well are all attested as terminations for the nominative singular of 
masculine and neuter stems in -a. Moreover, it is quite common to find two or more 
of these endings alternating according to no discernible pattern within the same 
document, or even within the same phrase; the inscriptional example cited by Fuss- 
man (1989: 460), vaga stratego puyaide, “Vaga, the commander, is honored,” is by no 
means unusual. Not surprisingly in view of such a situation, efforts to establish con- 
ventional dialect isoglosses for such alternative forms have been largely unsuccessful. 
This became clear even at an early stage of the study of Gandhari on the basis of the 
Indian inscriptions: among Asokan inscriptions the -e ending predominated in the 
eastern version at Mansehra and -o in Shahbazgarhi to the west, but in later inscrip- 
tions the pattern appeared to be reversed, with -e generally prevailing to the west of 
the Indus River and -o to the east (Konow 1929: cxii). This apparent contradiction 
led Brough to suspect that “the contrast between the two forms in Gandhari may 
have been less clear-cut than is suggested by the writing” (1962: 115). Subsequent dis- 
coveries and analyses have confirmed this impression, to the point that Fussman is 
surely correct in stating, with reference to Kharosthi inscriptions of the early first 
century A.D., that “the final vowels were no doubt pronounced very weakly, to the 
point that they were no longer differentiated” (1989: 460). Unsatisfying as this con- 
clusion may seem, and inadequate as it may be for purposes of philological analysis, 
it is the only one that can explain the otherwise incomprehensible distribution of 
variant endings in the nominative singular masculine and neuter, as well as in sev- 
eral other morphological categories.” 
17. This means that the alternate endings in such cases are not, strictly speaking, a matter of 
“morphology,” but rather of orthography. Nevertheless, they are discussed here under the former 
heading, not only as a matter of convenience, but also because they are of some value, despite their 
inconsistency, in the philological analysis of the new texts. Although they are not morphological 
alternatives in the strict sense of the term, detailed study of their patterns of occurrence and alter- 

=== PAGE 179 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
131 
As in other Gandhari documents, this bewildering variability of inflec- 
tional forms is best attested among the new documents in the nominative singular 
masculine and neuter endings, if only because of the statistical frequency of these 
forms. For the nominative singular, most of the new texts use two or more different 
endings with no consistent principle of distribution, but there are significant differ- 
ences among the particular patterns observed in individual texts. Some of them, 
such as the Anavatapta-gatha, use -u, -o, -a, and -e in declining order of frequency, 
with the first three approximately equally common and the last comparatively rare. 
Others, such as the avadana and related texts, do not use -u at all but have a strong 
preference for -o, with an occasional -e and -a ending. In the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra 
(frag. 5B), -o also predominates, along with some -a endings, but none in -e or =“ 
Thus, in the new documents as a whole, -o is the most common ending for the nom- 
inative singular, but in any given document it alternates in varying patterns with one 
or more of the other possible endings. 
Despite the complexity of the distribution of these endings, certain pat- 
terns indicate that they are not totally random. For example, in some texts the nomi- 
native in -a shows a strong tendency to be attached to adjectives or participial forms 
rather than to substantives; thus, three of the four nominatives in -a in the Rhinoc- 
eros Horn Sutra are present participles in -mana. Significant patterns also emerge 
among the endings of the accusative singular. In general, these endings vary in ways 
similar to the nominative, but accusatives in -e are absent from all of the sample 
texts analyzed to date, including those that use -e in the nominative. Also, in the 
Rhinoceros Horn Sutra the preponderance in the nominative of -o over -a (twenty- 
six to four) is reversed in the accusative, where thirteen examples end in -a versus 
only eight in -o. Brough’s analysis (1962: 113) of the endings of the nominative and 
accusative singular masculine in the KDhP yielded broadly similar results, with a 
much greater frequency of -a in the accusative than in the nominative (107 vs. 19 
cases), and thus we must agree with him that, despite the great flexibility in spelling 
that prevailed in all types of Gandhari, “the forms in -o, -u, -a are not distributed 
at random, as might have been expected if the scribe (or translator) had been un- 
aware of any difference between masculine and neuter, and between nominative 
and accusative” (1962: 114). 
nation can sometimes be helpful in interpreting the grammar and syntax of the texts, and hence 
they do in a sense function as quasi-morphological elements. Examples of this principle will be 
illustrated below. 
18. The following chart summarizes the results of a rough preliminary count of nominative 
singular masculine endings in these three representative texts. The avadana-type text cited is the 
best-preserved portion (r, line 14, to v, line 8) of fragments 16 + 25 (second text): 
0 
u 
e 
a 
Anavatapta-gatha 
20 
26 
6 
19 
Avadana sample 
26 
0 
B 
4 
Rhinoceros Horn 
26 
0 
0 
4 

=== PAGE 180 ===
132. 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
The phonetic leveling of vowels in word-final position described by 
Fussman is no doubt also the explanation for the occasional cases of locative singu- 
lars in -o, -u, and (possibly) -a instead of the normal -e (or -ami). Thus the Angut- 
tara fragment (12, r, line 27) has viharadi jedavano anasapidiasa aramu, “was staying 
in the Jetavana, in the grove of Anathapindika,” as an equivalent to the familiar Pali 
formula viharati jetavane andthapindikassa ardme. Similarly, in the Anavatapta-gatha 
(frag. 1, part 5, 1, line 3) we read dhrohiksu batamanae, “while a famine was going 
on, where the corresponding Sanskrit version (in the Gilgit manuscript; Bechert 
1961: 137) has durbhikse vartamdane ca. Similar phenomena, especially a locative in 
-a, have been occasionally observed in Kharosthi inscriptions, where they have been 
again explained by Fussman on the grounds of “weakening of final vowels” (1989: 
456; see also 458 and 471-2). 
Some other morphological peculiarities of the new documents that 
have not been previously observed in Gandhari texts can also be attributed to the 
phonetic neutralization of final vowels. Thus, in the numerous avadana texts, nearly 
all of which were written by the same scribe, the instrumental singular ending (mas- 
culine or neuter) is consistently -eno rather than the expected -ena, and the genitive 
plural ending is equally regularly -ano instead of -ana (< Skt. -dndm). Examples are 
teno kalen(o*) tano’9 samageno, “at that time, at that juncture” (frag. 16, r, lines 16-17) 
= Sanskrit/Pali tena kdlena tena samayena; and pacano indrigano (frag. 2, r, line 11) = 
Sanskrit paficanam indriyanam. 
In the Rhinoceros Horn Sitra, the ending of the locative plural is regu- 
larly -eso instead of the usual -esu, as in putreso dareso (frag. 5B, subfragment 2a, line 
2) = Pali puttesu daresu. This accords with a previously attested tendency toward 
alternations between o and u in final and other unstressed positions (Brough 1962: 80), 
which is also manifested among the new manuscripts in spellings like anoraksana- 
(frag. 14, r, line 10) = Pali anurakkhana-. 
6.5.2. Verbal Forms and Syntax 
Verb morphology, usage, and syntax differ considerably among the 
various texts and genres of the new documents. Particularly striking is the contrast 
between texts with pan-Buddhist parallels such as the Anavatapata-gatha and the 
Anguttara fragments on the one hand and the apparently locally composed texts 
of the avadana class on the other.”° In the former group, we find a rich variety of fi- 
nite (especially preterite) and nonfinite verb forms that are mostly parallel to those 
of other MIA languages, especially Pali, and that appear to reflect the influence of 
19. Here tano = tena, as also in the passage cited in section 6.7.3; cf. fanana = jhdnena in 
the passage quoted in 2.2.2, and n. 18 there, and tasa = tesam in the KDhP (Brough 1961: 82). 
20. The commentatorial and scholastic texts generally have relatively few verb forms, and 
these mostly in the present tense, so that they provide less material for analysis in this regard. 

=== PAGE 181 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
133 
the underlying language or languages from which these texts were evidently trans- 
lated into Gandhiri. The avadanas, in contrast, have a minimal verbal system whose 
repertoire of finite verb forms is limited mainly to the present and future tenses, 
with the preterite being almost always expressed periphrastically with the past 
participle. 
In the Anavatapta-gatha, for example, besides numerous present tense 
forms and occasional specimens of the future, optative, and imperative, we find a 
large number of finite preterites of what may broadly be called the “aorist” type, 
such as viaghase, “he expounded” (= Pali vyakasi, Skt. vyakarsit; frag. 1, part 4, 1, 
line 12), and abhinirkhami, “I went forth” (= Pali abhinikkhamim; part 3, r, line 5). 
Frequently, the preterite augment is preserved, as in adhraksema, “we saw” (Pali 
adassama, Skt. adraksma; part 2, 1, line 33), and aghami, “I went” (Pali agamam, Skt. 
agamam; line 38). A wide variety of gerund forms is also attested in the Anavatapta, 
including ones that resemble Pali and Buddhist Sanskrit types such as the doublet 
dhrispa and dhrispana, “having seen” (cf. Pali disva/disvana; part 2, r, lines 36 and 
40), and more characteristically Gandhari types like sastarita, “having spread out” 
(Skt. samstirya; part 2, 1, line 14), and pariarita, “having gone about” (Skt. paricarya; 
line 46). 
In the avadana texts, in contrast, the narration of past events is expressed 
by a mixture of present tense forms with narrative past value such as hovati, “was,” 
¢ 
and matredi, “said, and past participle forms such as hodo, “was,” “became,” gado, 
“went, and atarahido, “disappeared.” To date, no specimens of active preterite forms 
or of gerunds have been noticed in these texts. Imperative expressions are generally 
formed with the passive gerundive construction, for example, isa pradighetavo, “this 
is to be taken,” that is, “take this” (frag. 16, r, line 32). In general, the avadana texts 
display a much simpler and more colloquial style of Gandhari than the other texts, a 
style which in some respects resembles the phrasing of inscriptional usage but which 
also probably represents something much closer to the contemporary colloquial 
form of Gandhari than anything that is seen in the technical or translated texts (see 
also 6.7.3). 
6.6. Lexicon 
In the past it has been difficult to discern distinctive elements of the local 
lexicon in Gandhari texts, mainly because of the strong predominance in the avail- 
able documents of Buddhist terms common to all Indo-Aryan languages as used by 
Buddhists. Nonetheless, in at least one well-documented case it has been possible to 
show that a word occurring in a Gandhari inscription reflects local vocabulary as 
attested by its derivatives in the modern Dardic and neighboring Indo-Aryan lan- 
guages of the northwest, which are, broadly speaking, the descendants of Gandhari. 
This is the word spasana/spasuna, “of [my] sisters,” appearing in both Kharosthi 
versions (Shahbazgarhi and Mansehra) of Asoka’s rock edict V and contrasting with 

=== PAGE 182 ===
134 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
bhagininam and the like in the other (Brahmi) versions. As was shown by Morgen- 
stierne (1950), the same contrast is reflected in the geographic distribution of words 
for “sister” in the New Indo-Aryan (NIA) languages, among which derivatives of 
OIA svasr- are represented only in the Dardic languages (Shina sa(s), Tirahi spas, 
etc.), while all the rest of the NIA languages have derivatives of bhagini (Hindi 
bahin, Marathi bhain(1), etc.). 
While pan-Buddhist vocabulary is of course as prominent in the new 
documents as it is in the previously known Gandhari texts, the sheer volume of the 
new texts, as well as the more colloquial character of some of them, makes it possi- 
ble to identify several other instances of what seem to be regional words. One is 
especially inclined to suspect such cases when a word in a Gandhari text contrasts 
with a different but synonymous one in a corresponding text in another Indo-Aryan 
language, as occurred in the case of the ASokan words for “sister” noted above. For 
example, in the Anavatapta-gatha, bata occurs three times (frag. 1, part 3, r, lines 
18-20) where it contrasts with upala[h] and pdsana[h], “stones,” in the Sanskrit ver- 
sion of this text (Bechert 1961: 132). Gandhari bata is evidently a derivative of *varta, 
“round stone” (Turner 1966: 1.661, §11348), whose derivatives are widely attested in 
Dardic (e.g., Torwali bat, Tirahi bat), Nuristani (Ashkun and Waigali wat), and 
northwestern Indo-Aryan languages (Punjabi vatta, etc.).”" It is true that this word 
is also attested in Oriya (bati) and Bihari (batt, “stone roller for spices”), but the 
absence of derivatives in any of the central NIA languages is more significant, since 
a similar pattern of geographic distribution, reflecting “inner” and “outer” strata of 
Indo-Aryan vocabulary, is observed in connection with several other words of this 
class, as will be discussed below. 
A particularly interesting case of this is vadi in the phrase so gado 
kasavasa vadi, “he went to Kasyapa,” in an avadana text (frag. 4, part 7, r, line 5). This 
is certainly the same word, derived from Sanskrit upante, that appears frequently as 
a postposition in the central Asian Kharosthi documents in the form vamti, “with,” 
« 
«cs 
to,” 
“in the presence of,” etc. (Burrow 1937: 42-3 and 118), but that has not previously 
been found in Kharosthi/Gandhari documents from the Indian subcontinent. Mod- 
ern Indo-Aryan derivatives of this term are attested only in Nuristani (e.g., Waigali 
Wat, name of a village), Dardic (e.g., PaSai dda, udé, “near”), Punjabi (vada, “sepa- 
rate”), and Sinhala (vata, “edge,” and veta, “vicinity”; Turner 1966: 1.108, $2303). A 
similar pattern appears with regard to the use, with great frequency and regularity, 
especially in the avadana texts, of matredi in the neutral sense of “say” (as also in the 
central Asian documents). Once again, the modern derivatives of Sanskrit mantra- 
yate in the general sense of “say,” “speak,” are, according to Turner (1966: 1.565, $9837), 
restricted to Dardic (Kalasha [Rumbiar dialect] matrem, “I speak”), Nuristani (e.g., 
= 
6 
Waigali matram, “I ask, say”), and Assamese (matibd, 
“to speak, recite”). 
21. For further details see Fussman 1972: 2.274-6. 

=== PAGE 183 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
135 
From this handful of examples, we begin to discern a pattern of what 
appears to be local vocabulary mixed in among the more standard Indo-Aryan and 
Buddhist lexicon of the new texts. The later and modern derivatives of such words 
are concentrated at, but not limited to, the northwestern borders of the Indo-Aryan 
language area (i.e., the Dardic and Nuristani languages, and Punjabi and neighbor- 
ing dialects), for they also pop up at the eastern (Assamese, Oriya, Bihari) and south- 
ern (Sinhala) edges. This is no doubt a manifestation of the well-known pattern of 
distribution of various linguistic phenomena among the Indo-Aryan languages into 
“inner” and “outer” circles. As noted by Morgenstierne, this pattern reflects the prin- 
ciple that “innovations in India, as elsewhere, have often radiated from the centre, 
leaving a disconnected margin with more archaic forms” (1950: 31). Thus, it may be 
that, at a deeper historical level, the “distinctive” Gandhari/Dardic vocabulary which 
is beginning to emerge among the new documents actually reflects the retention of 
archaic, originally far more widespread words. Such a situation would hardly be sur- 
prising, in view of the general historical principle of the relative resistance to change 
among the less central members of a language family, and in particular of the con- 
servative character of the Dardic and Nuristani languages. 
All of this is, of course, based on a preliminary and very incomplete sur- 
vey of the materials, and further study should clarify the situation and provide more 
and better examples of this pattern. But in any case, it is already clear that these new 
documents do provide a distinct, if limited, indication of the local character of the 
vocabulary of colloquial Gandhari. 
Another example of interesting lexical data from the new manuscripts 
is chado, “sound” (accusative) in the Anguttara fragment (frag. 16, r, line 44), corre- 
sponding to Pali saddam (Skt. sabdam). The same word appears in the form chada 
in verse 37 of the KDhP, but since the word was at that point a hapax legomenon, 
Brough was uncertain whether it was “a sandhi-alternate . 
. 
. due to the specific con- 
text of the verse in question, or whether . 
. 
. it had become the normal form of the 
word within the dialect” (1962: 101). But Buddruss, noting that Nuristani words for 
“sound,” etc. suggested a derivation from chada, proposed that this was indeed the 
normal form of the word in Gandhari (1975: 39), and the appearance of this form 
in a new Gandhari text now confirms this. 
6.7. General Remarks and Conclusions 
6.7.1. The Overall Unity of the Language of the Documents 
The preliminary and partial survey whose results have been presented 
above shows that the new Gandhari documents are all in essentially the same script 
and language, despite what seem to be considerable differences in paleography and 
morphology. The majority of these contrasts are essentially minor variations and 
superficial distinctions reflecting, on the one hand, the nonstandardized character 
of the Gandhari language and, on the other, the differences in style and content 

=== PAGE 184 ===
136 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
among the various texts. Thus, with regard to the apparently different “grammar” 
of the various texts, for example, in noun morphology, it has been shown that in 
most cases the variant inflections are actually only different ways of writing what, 
in the spoken language, were probably more or less the same endings, the quality 
of whose vocalic element had been neutralized and which therefore could be repre- 
sented by different vowels, evidently at the whim of the scribe. With respect to the 
widely differing usage of verb forms and syntax, however, the contrasts seem to be 
determined mostly by the nature of the texts. Those that were translated from proto- 
types in other MIA languages are full of verbal forms and syntactic structures such 
as aorist-type preterites and gerunds in -tva or -tvana that were probably not part 
of the living colloquial Gandhari of the time but rather reflect a general Buddhist 
jargon. In short, we are probably dealing in all of these texts with essentially the 
same language, whose underlying unity is masked by its nonstandardized character 
and by the different stylistic features and linguistic backgrounds of the texts com- 
posed in or rendered into it. This preliminary conclusion will of course have to be 
tested and refined by detailed studies of the individual texts, but it can be expected 
that, on the whole, these will tend to confirm the underlying unity of the Gandhari 
language represented in the new manuscripts. 
6.7.2. The Problem of Nonstandardization of Gandharr 
Despite the seeming chaos of Kharosthi/Gandhari orthography, a mea- 
sure, or at least an approximation, of consistency within the individual texts in the 
British Library collection can still be discerned. For example, although a particular 
scribe may alternate, apparently at random, among two, three, or even more endings 
for the nominative singular (see 6.5.1), each scribe does have distinct preferences for 
certain endings over others. Similar patterns emerge with regard to other points of 
orthographic variation, such as the use (or not) of the variant form of the sibilant s, 
which is usually employed with some regularity and consistency within the works 
of a particular scribe, though the patterns of use vary widely from scribe to scribe. 
A priori, one would expect such patterns to reflect independent ortho- 
graphic traditions, whether based on chronological, geographical, sectarian, or per- 
haps other distinctions. Since it can be assumed that our scribes learned to write 
through some formal training process,” the preferences they show for particular 
orthographical alternatives presumably reflect those of their teachers. Thus, there 
must have been, in some form or other, different traditions of ways to write 
Gandhari. The material that we have, however, does not (at least not yet) permit us 
to determine what the basis or distribution of such varying orthographies may have 
22. The story told in the Lalitavistara of the future Buddha’s first day in school (lipisala- 
samdarsana) illustrates the methods of elementary instruction in reading and writing used in 
ancient times, and it has been shown that this story is based on a Gandharan original in which the 
script being taught was Kharosthi in the Arapacana order; see Brough 1977 and Salomon 199o0b. 

=== PAGE 185 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
been. The wide variety of orthographic preferences exhibited by the fairly large 
selection of new texts from, in all likelihood, the same monastery library gives the 
impression that these habits coexisted side by side with no coherent pattern of 
distribution, that is, that the different modes of writing Kharosthi were governed 
merely by the habits or personal whims of each scribe. Nevertheless, common sense 
suggests that there must be more to it than this. It remains to be seen whether fur- 
ther study will reveal any meaningful patterns. 
However this may be, the fact remains that the Gandhari language at 
the time of these new documents and, as far as we can tell, throughout the period 
of its use as a literary medium was never subjected to any single authoritative ortho- 
graphic and grammatical standard. The question is why this should be the case. We 
now know, much more clearly than before, that the Kharosthi/Gandhari textual tra- 
dition was not, as it might once have appeared, an isolated and ephemeral provincial 
phenomenon but rather was well entrenched, widely used, and highly influential 
over a vast area of south and central Asia. The textual and epigraphic materials now 
known are impressive in their number and geographical extent, and the indications 
(discussed in chapter 3) that the newly discovered manuscripts constitute a tiny frac- 
tion of a very large number of such texts that must have existed in ancient times 
confirm what many scholars have already suspected—namely, that Gandhari was a 
major Buddhist language and cultural vehicle in the early centuries of the Christian 
era. Given this situation, one might have expected that an impulse would have arisen 
to standardize the language, as had occurred at an earlier date with Sanskrit and 
would occur later on with Pali. And yet, despite the abundant materials now avail- 
able to us, there is no evidence at all that this ever happened. 
The best explanation may simply be that such a process of linguistic 
standardization would indeed have happened had Gandhari continued to play the 
important role in Buddhist culture that it did, albeit relatively briefly, in the time of 
the Scythian, Parthian, and Kusana dynastics. But in fact, the Gandhari language and 
Kharosthi script gradually fell out of use in India in or not much later than the third 
century A.D. Although the reasons for this decline remain to be definitively ascer- 
tained, it is surely no coincidence that it accompanied the collapse of the dynasties 
that are so closely linked with the florescence of Gandharan Buddhism. The failure 
of Gandhari to undergo the process of “linguistic canonization” (Salomon 1989: 279, 
281, 289) that was applied to some other Indo-Aryan languages and dialects used for 
the transmission of Buddhist texts was essentially a historical accident caused by its 
premature death. Had historical circumstances been different and had Gandhari 
continued to be the canonical language of a flourishing regional Buddhist tradition 
in the northwest, an authoritatively standardized and defined form of canonical 
Gandhari would surely have developed, complete with grammatical treatises, proba- 
bly similar in form and concept to those composed for Sanskrit, Pali, and other MIA 
languages. But as things actually happened, there was apparently not enough time 
137 

=== PAGE 186 ===
138 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
for such a process of scholastic standardization to develop—or at least so it appears 
from the documents that have been discovered to date. 
6.7.3. Stylistic Varieties of Gandhari: Scholastic and Colloquial Language 
Despite their underlying linguistic unity, the new documents present us 
with an unprecedentedly wide view of styles and registers of the Gandhari language, 
ranging from formulaic scholastic compositions to specimens that seem to approach 
the genuine colloquial form of the spoken language. The latter, moreover, include 
narrative texts that appear to have been originally composed in Gandhari rather 
than translated from or at least based on models in other Indo-Aryan languages, as 
had been the case with most other previously known specimens of the language. In 
terms of style, then, the new texts can be conveniently divided into those that seem 
to represent something close to “real,” colloquial Gandhari and those that are largely 
patterned after styles and formulae common to Indian Buddhist textual traditions 
in the Indo-Aryan languages generally. 
The latter type can be further divided into two subcategories: the scho- 
lastic or commentatorial style, and the narrative or poetic style. Specimens of the 
scholastic style are widely represented among the new texts, and not surprisingly 
there is little in them that is distinctively Gandhari other than the use of the 
Kharosthi script and the phonology of the words; with regard to their vocabulary, 
phrasing, and contents they differ little from similar texts in Pali and other Buddhist 
languages. Therefore, it is not easy to determine whether such scholastic texts were 
originally composed in Gandhari or translated from another MIA dialect. A repre- 
sentative example of the scholastic style is provided by the following extract from 
the Sangiti-sitra commentary (frag. 15, part 3, 1, line 41): 
trae kasavastue atitam ba arabha kasevi anakatam ba etarahi va pracupamna’ 
acatitha apamcama kasavastu bhavate’ 
There are three topics of discussion (kasavastu = Pali kathavatthu/Skt. 
kathavastu): one may speak either of [something] that began in past time or 
that is yet to come or that has presently come into being. There is no fourth 
[or] fifth topic of discussion. 
The narrative/poetic style of texts such as the Anavatapta-gatha and the 
Rhinoceros Horn Sutra has a distinct “translationese” flavor, betraying their origins 
as translations from other Indo-Aryan languages at every turn. In reading them, 
23. Compare the corresponding passage in the Pali Sangiti-suttanta (Digha-nikaya 3.220): 
tint katha-vatthini. Atitam va addhanam arabbha katham katheyya. ... Andgatam va addhanam 
arabbha katham katheyya. . 
. 
. Etarahi va paccuppannam addhanam arabbha katham katheyya. 

=== PAGE 187 ===
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
139 
one gets the same impression that Brough got from the KDhP, namely, that such 
texts “might be described more appropriately as word-for-word transpositions 
of their original rather than as translations in the usual sense. . 
. 
. the translation 
involved . 
. 
. is scarcely more than a mechanical transposition between the sound- 
systems of the dialects” (1962: 113).74 As noted above (6.5.2), this Gandhari transla- 
tionese contains numerous grammatical formations and syntactic constructions 
that are unlikely to have been natural in colloquial Gandhari. A characteristic verse 
from the Anavatapta-gatha (frag. 1, part 4, r, lines 16-8) reads:*5 
pharusa bhasisu baya bata bhujai bhuyano 
tena karmavivaghena niraghehi ksevisu ciru’ 
I spoke harsh words [to my mother]: “Eat stones for your food!” 
By the ripening of the karma [from this act], I passed a long time 
in the hells (niraghehi = Skt. nirayesu). 
Although such specimens may not teach us much about “real” Gandhari, they are 
potentially of considerable philological importance for their reflection of the under- 
lying dialect from which they were translated and for the elucidation of the process 
of their later Sanskritization. 
A very different matter is the material, mostly consisting of avadana and 
similar texts, that does show us something like colloquial Gandhari language and 
style. These texts show few of the sort of forms and stylistic turns that result from 
the translation from an original in another language, and in these texts we are 
apparently dealing with material that was originally composed in Gandhari with 
a minimum of interference from other languages. The impression is reinforced by 
the content of these avadanas, for which few parallels have been located in other 
Buddhist traditions (see 2.2.4) and which therefore can be presumed to be local 
Gandharan lore. Of course, these are not the only extant texts that were originally 
composed in Gandhari. The many Kharosthi inscriptions were composed in Gan- 
dhari, but their value as specimens of the colloquial language is limited by their 
stereotyped character, which often consists of little more than a patchwork of stan- 
dardized ritual phrases (see 6.1 and Fussman 1989: 485-6). The central Asian docu- 
ments too were originally composed in Gandhari, but this is a provincial Gandhari 
24. See also the remarks in a similar vein in Bechert 1980: 12 and on related questions of 
“translation” and “transposition” in Norman 1993: 95-8. 
25. The corresponding Sanskrit verse in the Gilgit manuscript of the MUlasarvastivada- 
vinaya (Bechert 1961: 132) reads: 
++++4+ vam vaca upalam bhumksva bhojanam 
tena karmavipakena narake ksepitam bahu 

=== PAGE 188 ===
140 
PALEOGRAPHIC AND LINGUISTIC FEATURES 
spoken in a region far distant from the homeland of the language and is heavily 
overlain with stereotyped legal and bureaucratic jargon. Thus, it is in the new 
avadana texts that we now find the clearest approximation to colloquial Gandhari 
as it might have actually been spoken in its original territory, although they too of 
course also partake of common Buddhist words and turns of phrase. A characteristic 
specimen is the following passage (frags. 16 + 25, r, lines 19—21), describing the previ- 
ous birth ( provayoge) of the Bodhisattva: 
bosisatva vaniage ho[va](di*) . 
. 
. [sa]mudravanige tano® patio samudanido’ 
mahasamudro adirno’ y(anapatro*) bhirno’ vaniaga talavilayam avarnage’ 
This can be tentatively translated as 
The Bodhisattva was a merchant .. 
. 
,an oceangoing merchant. He assem- 
bled his wares. He went down” to the great ocean. [His boat] broke. The 
merchant lost his support(?).78 
As noted in 6.5.2, these texts are characterized by short, simple sentences 
using the historical present tense and past participial verb forms, giving the impres- 
sion of a direct written rendition of an informal oral narrative style.*? The preva- 
lence of the passive participle construction for the past tense of transitive verbs, for 
example, is characteristic of the vernacular style of MIA generally (as well as of later 
Sanskrit and the modern Indo-Aryan languages). All in all, these texts provide us 
with something much closer to the “spoken norm” (norme parlée) (Fussman 1989: 
485) of the Gandhari language than anything we have seen hitherto. 
26. tano = Skt. tena (see 2.2.2, n. 18, and 6.5.1, n. 19). 
27. Given the context, adirno would be expected to correspond to Pali otinno/Skt. avatirnah, 
“descended”; cf., e.g., Divyavadana (ed. Cowell and Neil), p. 376, mahdsamudram avatirnah. 
Perhaps it is a scribal error for odirno. 
28. That is, he was cast adrift. The word avarnage probably = Skt. dpannah (see 6.3). The 
phrase tala-vilayam seems to mean something like “loss of support” (literally, “dissolution of 
basis”). 
29. It should be noted that this Gandhari avadana style has much in common with the sim- 
pler narrative style of the Sanskrit prose avadanas, as seen, for example, in some sections of the 
Divyavadana. But this does not necessarily argue against the idea that the new avadanas are speci- 
mens of colloquial Gandhari. In fact, the truth could be the opposite, that is, that the Sanskrit texts 
were influenced by, or even translated, directly or indirectly, from originals in Gandhari or some 
similar MIA dialect. 

=== PAGE 189 ===
Chapter 7 
The Date of the Manuscripts 
7.1. Internal Evidence for Dating 
Despite its importance, a complete discussion of the problem of the date 
of the manuscripts has been deferred to this point, mainly because the complexity 
of the issue requires that it be addressed only after certain other issues have been 
discussed in detail. The paleographic and linguistic indications of their date have 
already been discussed in the previous chapter, but here the question is reexamined 
comprehensively from all relevant points of view. 
The most important and reliable clues for attributing a date to the 
new manuscripts, or at least to their prototypes, are the references in them to two 
historical figures who were previously known from other sources, namely, coins and 
inscriptions. The persons in question are Jihonika, who is mentioned once in frag- 
ment 2 as a mahaksatrapa, or great satrap, and ASpavarman, whose name appears 
four times in the avadana text on the verso of fragment 1, part 2, the first time with, 
possibly, the title stratega (Greek otPMTNY6c), or commander. 
7.1.1. The Jihonika Fragment 
The reference to Jihonika comes, unfortunately, in a small and very frag- 
mentary text (frag. 2, r, line 2; pl. 15). This fragment is the right side of the bottom 
of a scroll, whose original dimensions cannot be determined. It is evidently written 
in the same hand (no. 2) as most of the avadana-type texts (including the one men- 
tioning ASpavarman discussed in the following section) and also resembles them 
in that it apparently consists of separate, numbered textual units; the one in which 
Jihonika’s name is mentioned is probably the fifth. Although the contents are not 
explicitly labeled as avadanas in the surviving portion of the original text, the inter- 
linear notation partially preserved between lines 8 and 9 on the recto, the legible 
portion of which reads sarva ime avada[na] ... 
, apparently refers to them as such 
(although there is a slight problem about its reading; see 4.2). Like many of the 
avadana texts in the British Library collection, the text preserved in fragment 2 does 
not consist of the sort of previous-life stories or karmic histories that are typical of 
the genre as it is generally known from later Buddhist literature. Rather, it seems to 
represent a broader class of legends, including ones with historical content, in the 
modern sense of the term (see 2.2.4). 
14] 

=== PAGE 190 ===
142 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
Only the right-hand portions of, apparently, the last six lines of the story 
that contains Jihonika’s name are preserved, for the seventh line of the fragment be- 
gins with a circular punctuation mark followed by the numerical figure 5, apparently 
marking the end of the fifth story in the compilation. It is, however, also possible 
that the Jihonika story was actually the fourth story, whose end and number were 
somewhere in the lost left-hand portions of lines 3-6. 
The text reads as follows: 
1. pasido prasa[do] ya[vi] /// 
. ra jihonige mahaksatra /// 
. riadi’ manusa pradi ?* /// 
. ava [diJrila’ kul[.e] /// 
. gadharami o ? /// 
. ve[stra]ge na bahadi kri[s.] /// 
. 041 
Soy 
SS 
From these fragmentary remains, I am not able to discern the subject of 
the narration or Jihonika’s part in it or offer a coherent translation. My comments 
are therefore limited to the following notes: 
Line 1: pasido would seem to be a form of the root pas, “see.” The ending 
suggests a past participle, but the past participle of the verb “to see” in Gandhari, 
as in the other MIA languages, is usually formed from the root drs (dritha-). The 
form therefore remains uncertain. Prasa[do] could correspond to Sanskrit prasdda-, 
“favor, or prasdda-, “palace.” The use here of the “special” s instead of s (see 6.3) is 
untypical of the avadana scribe, who generally writes s only in positions correspond- 
ing to original intervocalic th or dh, rather than as an alternative spelling for an orig- 
inal sibilant, as seems to be the case here. The word yavi is used very frequently in 
the avadana texts at the beginning of sentences, apparently as a conjunction mean- 
ing, perhaps, “then.” The etymology is unclear, though a connection with Sanskrit 
yavat is possible, especially since ydvat is often similarly used as a narrative conjunc- 
tion at the beginning of sentences in Buddhist Sanskrit (e.g., in the Divyavadana). 
Line 2: ra must be the last syllable of a word continued from the missing 
end of line 1. Jihonige is presumably the same proper name as jihonika in the Taxila 
silver vase inscription (Konow 1929: 81-2) and ZEIQNIZH2/jihunia of the bilingual 
(Greek and Gandhari) coin legends; the variation of k/g/@ is normal in Gandhari 
(see 6.4.1). The -e ending is presumably nominative singular; the avadana texts gen- 
erally prefer the nominative in -o, but -e is an occasional variant (6.5.1 and n. 18). 
Mahaksatra /// is certainly to be reconstructed as mahaksatrape, or perhaps -po, that 
is, “the Great Satrap Jihonika.” 
1. Only a small trace of this last syllable is visible, most of it being covered by a loose chip 
of bark. 

=== PAGE 191 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
143 
Line 3: riadi appears to be the end of a verb in the third-person passive 
present, of the type kariadi, “is done” (= Skt. kriyate); but the context is too frag- 
mentary to propose a reconstruction. In the phrase manusa pradi ? ///, manusa, 
“man, could be either nominative or, perhaps more likely, accusative.’ It is therefore 
probably either the agent or object of a following verb beginning with the prefix 
pradi- (Skt. prati-). 
Line 4: ava [diJrila is completely obscure, and the word division given 
here is no more than a guess. The syllables ku[.e/ could perhaps represent kule, 
“line, “clan,” or kupe, “well. 
Line 5: gadharami must mean “in Gandhara.” Although partly obscured 
in the photograph, the reading of the third syllable as ra is clear on the original 
fragment. 
Line 6: ve/stra]ge is obscure. A possible alternative reading is ve[kra]ge. 
The words na bahadi could correspond to Sanskrit na vahati, “does not ride/bear.” 
For lack of any parallel or similar text, or any other sort of external assis- 
tance, it does not seem possible at this point to make much of the narration in which 
Jihonika’s name appears. Neither does the rest of the fragment offer any direct help. 
The Jihonika story, apparently the fifth in the collection, is followed by the very 
brief sixth story, which starts at the beginning of line 7 and ends in the next line. 
Nothing can be made of this story except that it is set in Taxila (line 7, taksaila). 
The next episode begins in line 8 with the enigmatic word masrugaha. Line 11 
begins with a large circular punctuation mark, but here, unlike the ones in lines 7 
and 8, it is not followed by a number, so that it is not clear whether the text con- 
tinues the “masrugaha story” or is the beginning of a new one. In any case, the text 
from here until approximately line 11 of the verso seems to be a continuous narra- 
tive concerning five idrigas (Skt. indriya), apparently here meaning “leaders,” who 
seem to be occupied in dealing with thieves (e.g., r, line 13, corasamagule siyadi = 
Skt. corasamakulah syat, “may be infested with thieves”). Finally, the last two lines 
of the verso seem to introduce a new episode, whose contents cannot be ascertained 
from its very meager remains. 
None of this helps us much with understanding what Jihonika’s role in 
this fragmentary text may have been, but at least it is certain that he is referred to 
by the title mahaksatrapa, “great satrap.” Jihonika was previously known from the 
Taxila inscription and coins as a ksatrapa, or satrap, but in view of the numerous 
instances in Indo-Scythian history of the promotion of a satrap to great satrap, we 
can easily assume that Jihonika at some point in his career was awarded the superior 
title. Moreover, there appears to be numismatic confirmation of this. Mitchiner 
(1976: 596, type 886) ascribes a coin to Jihunia (Jihonika) as mahaksatrapa, but the 
2. There seems to be an overall tendency for the ending -a to be used more frequently in the 
accusative than in the nominative; see section 6.5.1. 

=== PAGE 192 ===
144. 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
legend in the specimen illustrated by him is not clearly legible. However, I have 
been informed by Robert Senior that better specimens of coins of Jihonika as 
mahaksatrapa have been found and will be published shortly. 
In short, despite the minor differences in titles, there is little reason 
to doubt that all the references are to the same Jihonika, especially since this is an 
unusual and otherwise unattested name. With regard to Jihonika’s date, the only 
specific evidence? is the date of the Taxila vase inscription, which Konow reads 
and interprets as ka 1100 20 20 20 20 101 maharaja[bhra][ta Ma*][ni][gula*]sa 
putrasa Jihonikasa Chukhsasa ksatrapasa, “Year 191 (during the reign) of Jihonika, 
the ksatrapa of Chukhsa, the son of Manigula, the brother of the Great King.” But 
the interpretation of the date is controversial due to its peculiar notation, which in- 
volves two problems. First, ka is nowhere else attested as an abbreviation for “year,”4 
and second, even if it does mean “year,” it is not clear to which of the several eras 
that were in use in the Indo-Scythian period it refers. As to the first problem, Konow 
(1929: 82) thought that ka might be an abbreviation for kale, “at the time,’ though 
the use of this word instead of the usual samvatsare, etc. is not attested in any con- 
temporary documents. Perhaps because he was unsatisfied with this interpretation, 
Konow later (1931-2: 255) offered the revised reading saka, taken to refer to “an era 
designated as a Saka institution? which he proposed to identify with the era of 
Azes.> Since the Azes era is now firmly established as commencing in 58-57 B.c. 
(i.e., it is the same era as the modern “Vikrama’ era), this would give a date for 
Jihonika around a.p. 134. Others, however, notably Marshall (1951: 1.61), have as- 
signed Jihonika’s year 191 to the “Old Saka” or “Indo-Bactrian” era, which probably 
commenced around 155 B.c., which would put Jihonika’s date at about A.D. 35. 
This latter date is clearly preferable on archeological grounds, since, 
3. A recently published inscription on gold leaf (Sadakata 1996b: 305-8, 1996c), said to be 
from Hadda, is dated in the Azes year 39 (= 19 B.c.) and contains the name Jihonia twice (lines 7 
and 14). Sadakata (1996b: 308) thinks that this is probably not the same Jihonika known from the 
Taxila inscription, because of the early date of the new inscription. But he also notes (p. 307) some 
peculiarities about the formulation of this date, and this is one of several reasons, including the 
untypical phrasing and formulation, unusual format, and peculiar handwriting, that I strongly 
suspect that this inscription is a modern forgery. It will therefore not be taken into further con- 
sideration here. 
4. It is not out of the question that the figure 191 does not represent a date at all but rather 
the weight of the silver vase. Recent discoveries have confirmed that it was common practice in 
the Indo-Scythian period to mark the weight of silver objects with Kharosthi inscriptions (see 
Salomon 1996a: 431). However, the weight units most commonly used in such inscriptions are 
staters (abbreviated sa) and drachmas (dra), and no unit abbreviated ka has been seen elsewhere. 
If this is in fact a weight inscription, ka could perhaps stand for an otherwise unattested karsdpana 
or some other measure. But such an interpretation could only be confirmed by reference to the 
actual weight of the object, and this does not seem to have been recorded in any publication. 
5. As pointed out by Lohuizen-de Leeuw (1949: 377 n. 197), “Konow changed his mind with 
regard to this (Sa)ka several times,” returning in a later article published in 1948 to his original 
reading ka. 

=== PAGE 193 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
145 
according to Marshall, the form of the vase is “typical of the first century B.c. to first 
century A.D. work” (1951: 2.611), and on numismatic grounds, as has been shown in 
persuasive detail by MacDowall (1973). MacDowall demonstrated that Jihonika’s 
silver coinage fits neatly in a metrological and typological sequence between the 
late and posthumous (imitation) base-silver issues of Azes II and the billon tetra- 
drachms of the stratega ASpavarman (see the following section). Since the dates 
of both of these rulers are now well established in the first half of the first century 
A.D., the attribution of Jihonika’s inscriptional date to the “Old Saka” era is virtually 
confirmed, as is his reign in or around the first quarter of the first century. More- 
over, MacDowall adduces strong evidence from archeology and classical literature 
to corroborate a date for Jihonika’s coins in or near the third decade of the first 
century. 
7.1.2. The ASpavarman Fragment 
The name Aspavarman occurs four times (with several probably incon- 
sequential variant spellings) in the eighth avadana (frag. 1, part 2, v, lines 9—28; pl. 21) 
of the avadana collection that is the second text on fragment 1, beginning at the very 
bottom of the recto and continuing throughout the verso. The main character in 
this avadana is one Jhadamitra or, as the name is occasionally also written, Jhadimi- 
tra. This unusual name, which contains the only instance so far discovered in any 
of the new manuscripts of the consonant jha (6.4.2), is probably of Iranian origin,° 
which is not surprising in view of the strong Scythian presence in northwestern 
India at the time with which we are concerned.’ It is unfortunately not clear, how- 
ever, who this Jhadamitra might have been. The name, as far as I have been able to 
determine, is otherwise unattested in Buddhist tradition and thus must have been 
part of the local Buddhist lore that is reflected in several of the new texts but that 
evidently did not make its way into the mainstream of Buddhist tradition. 
Jhadamitra is also the “hero” (i.e., the title character) of the avadana in 
this same collection (no. 7; frag. 1, part 3, v, line 1 to part 2, v, line 7) that precedes the 
6. The element Jhada- presumably represents the Iranian zdda (= Skt. jdta), “born [of], a 
common element in Iranian names, including several attested in Kharosthi texts, where it is spelled 
jada, jhada, etc.; for example, Avakhajada in the Charsada reliquary inscription (Konow 1940: 307). 
It is unusual, however, to find it as the initial, rather than the final, element of such names. But in 
later Iranian names at least, zad- does appear as an initial element, where, according to Justi (1895: 
377), it is a contraction of azdad, “well-born, “noble,” “free”; in fact, in Justi 1895: 378 we find the 
name Zadmihr, attested in the eighth century a.p., which would seem to correspond to our Jha- 
damitra. But Jhadamitra could also be an “Umkehr-Name’” of the type observed in similarly con- 
structed Old Iranian names such as *Data-miéra = Midra-data (Mayrhofer 1973: 280); that is 
to say, it is to be understood as Zada-midra = *Miora-zada. 
7. The Indo-Scythian cultural background of the British Library manuscripts, and particu- 
larly of the avadanas, is further corroborated by the appearance in one of them of an (unnamed) 
Saka (sago) as a main character (see 2.2.4). 

=== PAGE 194 ===
146 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
one in which Aspavarman appears. To judge from the fragmentary remains of that 
story, it seems that in it Jnadamitra encounters a Buddhist monk (samana = Skt. 
Sramana) and makes a vow to attain individual enlightenment (part 2, lines 5—6, yadi 
sadhama atarahide haksa[di] aha pra[ca]gebos(i*) praiiisa, “If the true dharma will 
disappear, I will attain individual enlightenment”).® At a guess, we might imagine 
that Jhadamitra was a member of the dominant class of Saka nobles who became a 
Buddhist and, to judge by the contents of the second avadana concerning him, used 
his influence with Aspavarman, whom we know from other sources to have been 
an important Saka ruler, to the benefit of the sangha (monastic community). In any 
case, the fact that not one but two avadanas concern Jhadamitra suggests that he was 
a prominent figure in the Buddhist lore of his time. 
Though still quite fragmentary, the surviving portions of the text con- 
cerning Aspavarman are much more extensive than those of the Jihonika fragment, 
so that it is possible to get at least a general sense of the contents of the story. In gen- 
eral, the right-hand margin of the scroll is intact, while varying amounts of the left 
side have been lost, though a few lines are preserved completely. The portions of the 
lines that do survive are for the most part legible. 
The following is a preliminary reading of the story: 
9. 04111 jhadamitrasa cevo’ bidige avada[na] 
10. evo s[u]yadi jhadimitro karya [tva] ? ? /// 
ul. savaso’ uvagado’ aspavarmano sa [stra] ?+++/// 
12. sarva suhasaneno nimatrido’ yada sapurusasa 
13. vado ghi[sic|nido’ vacad[i]* [teJjna+++++ 
14. naro avadhaditri na[gha]ha’ nami’ [va] ? ? ? ? 
15. ? vido’ ya(vi*) ? [ha]do’ so bhato jha(damitro*) /// 
16. 
+++ (u*)?vathayagasa matr[e]d(i*) /// 
17. hi [hi]do sapurusasa yavada[th.] ? a[ha-]'° 
18. ro yavi dito jhadamidro matre[di]" + 
19. ta sapurusasa ma + + + mil[da] /// 
20. des[o] vasu pisasi yav[i] [gado] + +/// 
21. tatro pradesami’ vistar[e] [y.s.](yupamano si- 
8. The Sanskrit equivalent of this sentence would be yadi saddharmo ‘ntarhito bhavisyati, 
aham pratyekabodhim prapsyami. 
9g. Cf. Pali upatthaka/Buddhist Skt. upasthdyaka-, “servant, “attendant” (Edgerton 1953: 144). 
10. The last two syllables of this line are on a section of bark that adhered to the upper left 
corner of the lower section of this fragment when the joint between its component sections sepa- 
rated; see plate 21. 
u. Here again the last two syllables of the line adhered to the separated lower section, except 
that a small portion of the two lines at the upper right corner of the syllable tre remains in its orig- 
inal place at the end of line 18. 

=== PAGE 195 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
147 
22. ya*")di° yavi aspava[r]ma'’s 
++++/// 
23. +di?ki(ci) #+++/// 
24. abhayo me dahi yavi + + /// 
25. [a]spavarmo vacadi + /// 
26. sano so co bhadato vasagro kara[man.] /// 
27. ?? [a]spavarmo sap(u*)ru[s]o [a] ? [.o] /// 
28. [sa]r[va] [vi]stare yasayupamano siya(di*) ? [4] 214 /// 
Although it is not yet possible to offer a coherent translation of the entire 
episode, some of the better-preserved portions are fairly comprehensible. The first 
five lines, for example, can be rendered as follows: 
.. 7.) Also (cevo = caiva) of Jnadamitra, a second avadana.!° Thus it is 
heard: “Jhadamitra [etc.]” is to be recited.” ... The time of the retreat for 
18 
the rainy season’® 
came. By (?) the commander (?) ASpavarman [they] all 
were invited to sit comfortably. When the word (vado = Skt. vadah) of a 
good man is accepted," he says... 
The story as a whole evidently involves some interaction between 
Aspavarman and Jhadamitra with regard to the provision of a place for the monks 
to stay during the rainy season, and apparently also to the construction of a shelter 
there. This latter theme is indicated by such phrases as tatro pradesami (21), “in that 
place,” and vasagro kara[man.] (26), “building a residence for the rainy season.””° 
12. The end of line 21 and beginning of 22 can be reconstructed by comparison with the 
phrase vistare yasayupamano siyadi and similar expressions which appear frequently in the 
avadana texts, for instance, in line 28 below. For a possible interpretation of this phrase, see 
section 2.2.4, n. 46. 
13. Here, anomalously, the first syllable of ASpavarman’s name is spelled with the diacritically 
modified form of a which normally represents the long vowel a (see 6.3). 
14. The expected reading here would be 0 4 4, but the text is too badly damaged to confirm this. 
15. This is the number at the end of the previous avadana, whose main character was also 
Jhadamitra. 
16. That is, “the second avadana of Jhadamitra.” Gandhari bidige = Skt. dvitiyam. 
17. Here, karya is probably a shortened form of one of the abbreviation formulae such 
as vistare sarvo karya, “The whole is to be done [i.e., recited],” indicating that some formulaic 
elements at the beginning of the story, perhaps the description of the location, are to be supplied 
by the reader/reciter from the preceding avadana(s) and/or from memory. 
18. We can confidently restore va at the missing end of line 10, hence (va*)savaso = Skt. 
varsavasah. 
19. In the central Asian Kharosthi documents, ghinido = Skt. grhitah; cf. gi(m)nita-, ginitaga-, 
etc. Note also the Dardic and other derivatives, such as Phalura ghin, “seize, listed in Turner 1966: 
1.227, s.v. grbhdayati ($4236, para. 2). 
20. Vasagro probably means “shelter from the rains” or the like; cf. Buddhist Skt. varsaka 
(Edgerton 1953: 472) and Pali vassika, vassagga. Cf. similar phrases such as bhiksuni-varsakah 
karitah (Avadana-Sataka [Speyer’s ed.] 1.269) and raja... tayo pasade kdrapesi, ekah vassikah 
(Digha-nikaya 2.21). 

=== PAGE 196 ===
148 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
Thus, ASpavarman seems to be appearing in the role of a patron of the Buddhist 
sangha. The term sapurusa, presumably = Sanskrit satpurusa-, “good man,” recurs 
four times (lines 12, 17,19, and 27). The first occurrence is apparently a reference 
to the benefits (?) of “accepting the word of a good man,’ and in the last occurrence, 
at the end of the story, the term is apparently directly applied to Aspavarman. The 
point of the whole story may be that, in granting residences to the sangha, ASpavar- 
man proved himself to be a “good man.” 
Unfortunately, it is not clear whether or not ASpavarman is actually 
accorded the title of stratega (commander) in line 11, as the end of the line is badly 
damaged. After the letter which is fairly clearly stra, there is a trace of a practically 
illegible syllable, for which d(e*) would be at least a possible reading. After this the 
surface is so damaged by peeling and tearing that the rest of the line is completely 
illegible. Thus it is possible, though far from certain, that some form of the word 
stratega- originally was written at the end of this line. Its position, following Aspa- 
varman’s name, would be parallel to that of Jihonika’s title (jihonige mahaksatra( pe*)) 
in fragment 2. The comparative rarity of the conjunct stra, and also the well-attested 
association of the title stratega with ASpavarman in coins and an inscription (cited 
below), increase the temptation to reconstruct this word here. But it must also be 
conceded that the reading of the syllable stra is not certain, and moreover that the 
syllable sa following aspavarmano is problematic. Were it not for this syllable, the 
text could have been reconstructed as aspavarmano stra[de][geno*], “by the com- 
mander ASpavarman,’~ which fits the context perfectly, but the sa, which is fairly 
clear, remains to be explained. 
Although the reading of his title, if that is what it is, is quite uncertain, 
the name of Aspavarman is well known as that of the son of Indravarman, a scion 
of the line of the Apraca kings, who ruled, apparently, in Bajaur and adjoining areas 
of the modern frontier region between Pakistan and Afghanistan,* and there is little 
reason to doubt that the ASpavarman mentioned in this fragment is the same per- 
son. ASpavarman is known from the inscription on a silver saucer found at Taxila 
(Sirkap), reading aspavarmasa strategasa sa 10 1 dra 2 dha 2, “[Property] of Com- 
mander Aspavarman; [weight,] 11 staters, 2 drachmas, 2 dhanes.”*4 He is also known 
from numerous coins issued jointly with either Azes (II) or Gondophares, with the 
Kharosthi legend indravarmaputrasa aspavarmasa strategasa, “[Coin] of Comman- 
der Aspavarman, son of Indravarman.” Aspavarman’s date can be approximately but 
21. It may be relevant that the equivalent term sapurisa- is regularly applied as an honorific to 
the names of the venerables inscribed on the relic caskets found at Sanchi stipa no. 2. In Marshall 
and Foucher 1940: 1.289, it is rendered as “saint.” 
22. For instrumentals in -ano for -eno (= Skt. -ena), see section 6.5.1, n. 19. 
23. On the history of the Apraca dynasty, see below, 7.2.2.2, and Salomon 1996a: 443-50 and 
further references provided there. 
24. For the reading and interpretation, see Marshall 1951: 2.613, and corrections suggested in 
Salomon 1990a: 154 n. 7. 

=== PAGE 197 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
149 
securely fixed at around the second and third decades of the first century A.D, first 
by reference to the date of his father, Indravarman, who dedicated a reliquary in A.D. 
6 (Salomon and Schopen 1984), and second by reference to the dates of his overlords 
Azes II and Gondophares, the latter of whom overthrew the former in about A.D. 19 
according to the evidence of the Takht-i-Bahi inscription (Konow 1929: 57-62). These 
dates indicate that the two Indo-Scythian rulers Jihonika and ASspavarman men- 
tioned in the new manuscripts were contemporaries, or very nearly so, and this 
impression is confirmed by the other sources. The coins demonstrate a close relation- 
ship between Jihonika and Aspavarman, with the former, according to MacDowall’s 
analysis (1973), being slightly earlier than the latter. Moreover, silver vessels bearing 
inscriptions mentioning both of them were found at the same site, Sirkap, at Taxila. 
All in all, there can hardly be any doubt that these two princes were contemporaries 
in the Indo-Scythian world of northwestern India in the early first century a.p., and 
that the occurrence of their names in separate but related texts within the new cor- 
pus of Kharosthi manuscripts is not at all a matter of coincidence. 
7.1.3. A Reference to Another Ksatrapa 
The second story in the avadana collection that is the second text on 
fragments 12 + 14 refers, in an uncertain context, to a ksatrapa, or satrap, whose 
name is either illegible or not mentioned. The avadana (frag. 14, v, lines 1-9) seems 
to concern some crime, (apa*)radha (line 4), and a penalty, dado (= Skt. dandah, 
line 5), imposed by a king. Line 7 reads maharayasa pade paido na usa ¢ ? ksatrapo 
[spi], which seems to mean “He fell at the foot of the Great King, [saying?] ‘I am 
not... satrap.” Unfortunately, the illegible part of the line prevents us from know- 
ing what satrap is being referred to, but in any case this additional reference to a 
satrap, along with the one to (Great) Satrap Jihonika in fragment 2, confirms that 
these texts stem from the Indo-Scythian period, in which this Iranian-derived title 
was in wide use. 
7.1.4. Context and Significance of the References to Indo-Scythian Rulers 
Jihonika’s role in fragment 2 cannot be determined due to the poor con- 
dition of the text, but it is likely to have been similar to that played by ASpavarman 
in fragment 1, that is, a patron of Buddhism, and this association would not be sur- 
prising for either of them. Although we have no other direct evidence of Aspavar- 
man’s patronage of the sangha, his parents, Indravarman and Uttara (see fig. 13), 
have been revealed by several recent epigraphic discoveries to have been active sup- 
porters of Buddhism (Salomon 1996: 443-4). As for Jihonika, the inscription on the 
Taxila silver vase bearing his name may have been intended to mark it as his dona- 
tion to the sangha rather than as his personal possession, since it was found as part 
of a large hoard in a house immediately adjacent to a Buddhist apsidal temple 
(Marshall 1951: 1.156). 

=== PAGE 198 ===
150 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
Visnuvarman 
= 
Rukhunaka 
(king of 
Apraca) 
Suhasoma 
= 
Vasavadatta 
Indravarman 
= 
Uttara 
(kinsman of 
(prince 
Senavarman, 
of Apraca) 
king of Odi) 
ASspavarman 
(commander) 
Fig. 13. Genealogical chart of Aspavarman and his 
immediate relatives in the line of the kings of Apraca 
Though unexpected, the references to these two rulers in the texts, and 
possibly to another contemporary satrap in fragment 14, are not inconsistent with 
attested patterns in Buddhist literature. The references to Jihonika and ASpavarman 
are presumably no different in principle from the glorification of better-known royal 
patrons like Asoka and Kaniska in north Indian Buddhist literature, and it is perhaps 
only an accident of history that their names were forgotten in Buddhist tradition 
and have only now been retrieved. 
As to the date of the manuscripts themselves, these references to datable 
historical figures strictly speaking give us only a terminus post quem, and this, not 
for the manuscripts themselves, but only for the texts contained in them. Thus, all 
that we know for sure, to this point, is that the texts concerned, namely the avadana 
collections in fragments 1, 2, and 14, and by association, presumably, the other texts 
in the collection, could not have been written before about the second decade of the 
first century A.D., this being the earliest likely date for the reigns of Jihonika and 
ASpavarman. But there is no way to know for sure whether the texts referring to these 
rulers were composed during their lifetimes, or whether the references to them were 
posthumous. I consider the former alternative to be a priori more likely, since such 
stories seem to be designed primarily to celebrate their patronage and presumably 
also thereby to stimulate and perpetuate it, although one could also argue that such 
propaganda was aimed at their descendants or successors, by way of setting an ex- 
ample to be emulated. 
Moreover, the actual manuscripts of these texts could, in theory, have 
been written any time after the original composition of the texts, during or after the 
lifetimes of Jihonika and Aspavarman, although their upper chronological limit is 
established, albeit in a much less precise manner, by their linguistic and paleo- 
graphic features, at around the time of Kaniska, that is, the late first century or first 

=== PAGE 199 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
151 
half of the second century a.p. Unfortunately, it is not possible to definitively 
determine their date within this range, but some possible indications are discussed 
in the following sections. 
7.2. Dating of the Pots and Their Inscriptions 
7.2.1. Dating on Stylistic and Technical Grounds 
A thermoluminescence test performed on British Library pot C at the 
British Museum in September 1996 indicated a possible range of dates of 1200 to 
2000 years B.P., or between about the first to eighth centuries a.p. In his study 
of the pots and potsherds associated with the scrolls (Appendix, sec. 1), Raymond 
Allchin concludes on stylistic and technical grounds that they most closely resemble 
ceramics datable to the early and middle Kusana period, mainly on the basis of com- 
parisons with ceramics from Shaikhan Dheri and other sites. The combined weight 
of these two examinations thus points to a likely range of dates for the pots and pot- 
sherds in or around the first to second century a.D.; a range which, as will be shown 
below, is consistent with the paleographic, linguistic, and historical features of the 
pots themselves and of the associated manuscripts. 
7.2.2. Dating of the Pot Inscriptions 
7.2.2.1. The Inscription on Pot D. 
Unfortunately, of the five inscribed 
pots in the British Library collection, pot D, which probably originally contained 
the scrolls, is the one with the briefest inscription and therefore offers the least help 
for dating. The inscription on it reads simply saghami catidisami dhamaiiteana 
[p]arig[rjahami, “|Given] to the universal community, in the possession of the 
Dharmaguptakas.”* This is the briefest possible version of the donative formula 
used on clay pots and other objects presented to the congregation, specifying only 
the name of the recipients, namely, the Buddhist community in general (saghami 
caiidisami = Skt. sanghe caturdise) and the Dharmaguptakas in particular. But nei- 
ther the name of the particular Dharmaguptaka monastery nor even, surprisingly, 
the name of the donor is mentioned,”® so that we do not have any historical or geo- 
graphical clues of the sort that are sometimes provided by such donative records, 
including those on some of the other pots in this collection. To date such an inscrip- 
tion we can only turn to paleographic and linguistic features; but these, as usual, 
offer only a broad range of possible dates. 
The first character of the inscription is sa, which is generally the most 
reliable test letter for the paleographic dating of a Kharosthi text (see 6.2.1). It has an 
archaic or transitional subvariety of the later cursive (one-stroke) form, in which the 
scribe extends the point of juncture between the head portion and the vertical stem 
25. For a detailed discussion of the pot and inscription, see the Appendix, pp. 214-7. 
26. See the Appendix, section 5.1, for discussion of this point. 

=== PAGE 200 ===
152 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
upward, nearly closing the “mouth” of the letter (?). This style of sa is characteristic 
of the late first century B.c. and the early first century A.p. and is rarely seen there- 
after. Thus, the most reliable paleographic index suggests a relatively early date for 
this pot. Also worthy of note is the somewhat unusual shape of dha, formed with 
straight, rather than curved, lines and ending in a straight vertical downstroke rather 
than curving toward the left as in the usual form of this letter. This peculiarity does 
not, however, seem to be attributable to Kharosthi of any particular period. Similar 
forms of dha are given in Dani’s paleographic chart for inscriptions of the first cen- 
tury B.c. and early first century A.D. (1963: pl. XXIIa, lines 5-7), but the published 
reproductions of the inscriptions in question do not clearly confirm that this form 
regularly appears in them. 
Although the paleography of the inscription on pot D points to an earlier 
date, it also has a phonological feature—the elision of the original intervocalic tin 
catidisami = Sanskrit caturdise—that might be taken to suggest a later date. (The 
other pot inscriptions in the British Library collection that contain this phrase— 
those on pots B, C, and E—have cadurdisami, caturdise, and catudise respectively.) 
However, it has already been pointed out (see 6.4.1) that instances of the elision 
of -t- are found sporadically as early as the very beginning of the first century a.p. 
(in the Indravarman reliquary inscription of A.D. 6), so this feature is no definite 
proof of a later date. 
In short, it is not possible to date the inscription on the pot in which 
the manuscripts were probably found with any more precision than sometime in or 
around the first century A.D.; a conclusion that, not coincidentally, accords with the 
one arrived at regarding the manuscripts themselves on similar grounds of paleo- 
graphic and linguistic analysis. In any case, it should be remembered that, even if 
one could come up with a more precise date for the dedication of the pot, this date 
would not necessarily apply directly to the manuscripts that were placed in it at 
some later time. According to my understanding of the relationship between the pot 
and the manuscripts (see chapter 4 and the Appendix, sec. 5), the relationship is only 
a secondary one, in that the worn-out scrolls were at some point placed in the pot, 
which was probably also already old. We don’t know whether the pot is older than 
the manuscripts or vice versa, but given their general similarities in script and lan- 
guage, it is not likely that the difference in age is very great. 
7.2.2.2. The Other Pot Inscriptions. 
The dedicatory inscriptions on the 
other pots in the British Library collection, particularly the one on pot A, are more 
susceptible to precise dating on historical grounds, though unfortunately there is 
no way to be sure of their archeological, and hence chronological, relationship with 
the crucial pot D. The inscription on pot A (see Appendix, sec. 3) records that it 
was donated by one Vasavadatta, wife of Suhasoma. Among documents of the Indo- 
Scythian period, the name Vasavadatta is attested as that of one of the sisters of the 
Apraca prince Indravarman in his reliquary inscription of A.D. 6. Suhasoma is the 

=== PAGE 201 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
153 
name of a royal kinsman (anakaa) and officer (asmanakara) of Senavarman, king 
of Odi, mentioned in line ga of the latter’s Kharosthi reliquary inscription on a gold 
leaf (Salomon 1986). Senavarman’s inscription is dated in his fourteenth regnal year, 
for which the absolute equivalent is unknown, but the reference in it to a member 
of the Kusana royal family named Sadaskana, the son of Kujula Kadphises (line 8g, 
kuyula-kataphsa-putro sadaskano), indicates a date around the early to middle first 
century A.D. Thus, if the Vasavadatta and Suhasoma of British Library pot A can be 
identified with the persons of the same names in these two Kharosthi inscriptions, 
the pot would be firmly dated to the first half of the first century a.p. This cannot 
be proven absolutely, but I consider it a priori very likely because no other historical 
personage named Vasavadatta is known from this general period, and, moreover, the 
unusual name Suhasoma is completely unknown except in the inscription on pot A 
and in Senavarman’s inscription. In short, it is probable, though not absolutely cer- 
tain, that British Library pot A dates from the first half of the first century.” 
Unfortunately, for lack of reliable information as to their provenance 
and original situation, there is no way to prove that the datable pot A was archeolog- 
ically associated with pot D, which evidently contained the manuscripts. These, as 
well as the other pots in the British Library group and also some others that have 
been recently discovered (see, e.g., Salomon 1996b: 238—42), all appear to belong 
to the general class of inscribed clay jars that was particularly common at Hadda 
and other nearby stupa and monastery complexes in the Jalalabad Plain. However, 
they presumably did not all come from the same site, since the ones which contain 
inscriptions mentioning the location of the donees refer to different places: Purna- 
garafia (British Library pot B), Rayagaha (British Library pot C), and Masenarana 
(Salomon 1996b: 238—42). The critical question for the dating problem, however, is 
the relationship between pot D, which contained the manuscripts, and pot A, which 
contains the name of known historical figures, and neither of the inscriptions on 
these pots contains a toponym. 
Nevertheless, a connection between pots A and D can be hypothesized, 
though not proven, on historical grounds. If the Vasavadatta who donated pot A 
was in fact the sister of the Apraca prince Indravarman, as I think is very likely to 
be true, she was also the aunt of ASpavarman, Indravarman’s son, who is mentioned 
prominently in the avadana text discussed in section 7.1.2 (see fig. 13). This connec- 
tion between the manuscripts and pot inscription A is unlikely to be a coincidence 
but rather must reflect the direct involvement of the Apraca kings and their families 
in the patronage of the Buddhist establishments of the Nagarahara region (see 8.3.3). 
The appearance of the names of close blood relatives in the manuscripts and in one 
27. If this is correct, it would also establish that there was a marital alliance between the Saka 
houses of Apraca and Odi, a fact not previously known but entirely plausible on historical and 
geographical grounds. 

=== PAGE 202 ===
154. 
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
of the pot inscriptions increases the likelihood, though it does not conclusively 
prove, that pot A did come from the same monastery and was interred at about the 
same time as the pot that contained the scrolls (pot D). If this is correct, it would 
mean that the references to ASpavarman and Jihonika in the manuscripts were in 
fact contemporary references, and that the manuscripts date from their time, that is, 
from the early decades of the first century a.D. 
7.3. Conclusions 
As has been discussed in chapter 6, the paleographic and linguistic 
features of the new manuscripts are broadly attributable to a period ranging from 
about the early first century A.D. to the middle of the second century a.p., but it is 
impossible, at least in the current state of our understanding of the Kharosthi script 
and the Gandhari language, to authoritatively fix them more precisely within this 
span. This difficulty arises from two problems. The first is the nonstandardization of 
orthography and morphology, such that variations and changes cannot be fixed to a 
particular date but rather tend to appear sporadically over long periods. The second 
problem is that, until now, we have had only one significant specimen, of uncertain 
date, of a Kharosthi manuscript of the type that we are concerned with here, namely, 
the KDhP scroll, and nothing to compare it to. Even with the addition now of a large 
new corpus, we still lack fixed points from which to begin constructing a framework 
for the chronological development of the manuscript forms of Kharosthi script. The 
detailed study of the new documents may eventually provide us with the means to 
refine our understanding, but this will take time. 
The dating of the pots possibly associated with the manuscripts, includ- 
ing the one (pot D) in which they were almost certainly originally found, is similarly 
ambiguous, and according to the expert opinion of Allchin, the most likely range of 
dates is approximately the same as that determined on linguistic and paleographic 
grounds. So, at least for the present, the only way to pin down the date of the docu- 
ments with more precision is through their historical associations. Here, as we have 
seen, the references to well-known historical figures in the manuscripts themselves 
give a firm terminus post quem at about the second decade of the first century A.D. 
The evidence of an inscription on a possibly related artifact, pot A, suggests that 
the manuscripts are indeed likely to be more or less contemporary with the Indo- 
Scythian rulers whose names appear in them, but due to the irreparable loss of their 
archeological context this cannot be established with certainty. Nevertheless, the 
suggestive pattern of linkages of persons associated with the Apraca lineage and 
their contemporaries such as Jihonika and the kings of Odi, and through them with 
Kujula Kadphises, the first Kusana king of India, makes an early-first-century date, 
and in particular a date between about a.p. 10 and 30, the most likely one for the 
composition of the scrolls. Although their paleographic features could be conserva- 
tively interpreted as indicating a somewhat later date, perhaps in the late first or 

=== PAGE 203 ===
DATE OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
155 
early second century, I am inclined to place more weight on the historical data, which, 
though by no means free of uncertainties, are much more likely to be accurate. 
In any case, the references in the manuscripts to Jihonika, ASpavarman, 
and possibly other contemporary historical figures prove that the cultural tradition 
of the texts, if not the scrolls themselves, stems from the Indo-Scythian Buddhist 
world of the early first century a.p. This point is ultimately more important than 
the date of the actual manuscripts and is likely to have wide-ranging ramifications 
for the history of Gandharan Buddhism, as will be discussed further in section 8.3.3. 

=== PAGE 204 ===
Chapter 8 
Preliminary Evaluation of the New Corpus 
8.1. Observations on the Contents of the New Corpus 
8.1.1. The Gandhari Canon Issue Revisited 
It has already been stated (sec. 1.2) that the manuscripts described here 
confirm the old hypothesis of the existence of a Gandhari canon, at least in a loose 
sense of the term “canon,” referring to a substantial and at least partly systematic 
and organized body of texts. But we must now address the question of exactly what 
sort of “canon” the British Library Kharosthi manuscripts might constitute. Although 
it is not practically possible to address here in any detail the complex questions of 
the conceptions and manifestations of canons in Buddhist tradition in general, let 
alone in other religions, it should be pointed out that most Buddhist traditions seem 
to have developed, at some point in their history, at least a “notional” canon that was 
conceived as comprising the totality of the “scriptures,” that is to say, the words of 
the Buddha (buddha-vacana), however conceived.’ Such comprehensive canons are 
actually manifested, for example, in the Pali Tipitaka and the Tibetan Kanjur. If we 
accept as historical the accounts of the communal recitations (sangiti) of the Bud- 
dha’s words at the earliest Buddhist councils, this sense of a need to collect the Bud- 
dha’s teachings in a complete and standardized corpus would go back to the very 
roots of the tradition, and hence be fundamental to it. But it must also be kept in 
mind that the historicity of these traditions is not beyond doubt, and the concept of 
a comprehensive collection of the teachings is not conclusively proven to be original 
to Buddhism. 
Indeed, observation of Buddhist practice in many different periods and 
places suggests that the complete canon, if present at all, tends to be more an abstract 
entity, or at best a set of books that sit, mostly unread, on a shelf, rather than a cen- 
tral focus of the monks’ and lay followers’ daily study and worship. In practice, the 
number of texts actually read, chanted, and studied in a given tradition is generally 
quite limited; according to Collins (1990: 103), “[t]he evidence suggests that both in 
so-called ‘popular’ practice and in the monastic world, even among virtuosos, only 
parts of the Canonical collection have ever been in wide currency.’ Indeed, some 
1. On the various understandings of the concept of buddha-vacana, see McDermott 1984. 
156 

=== PAGE 205 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS _ 157 
highly successful Buddhist sects focus on a single text—for example, the Lotus 
Sutra—virtually to the exclusion of all others, conceiving of that text as the essence 
and totality of all the buddha-vacana. 
We have, then, evidence of various types of “canons” embodied in the 
scriptures of various Buddhist traditions. At one extreme is the comprehensive, 
voluminous, and even (at least in the Theravada case; see Collins 1990: 91 ff.) exclu- 
sive canon; and at the other, the “canon” is reduced in effect to a single text that is 
endlessly chanted, copied, and explicated to the effective exclusion of the others. 
Between these extremes, there is a wide range of intermediate “canons,” including, 
perhaps most importantly, what Collins calls the “ritual canon,” which “contains the 
texts, canonical or otherwise, which are in actual use in ritual life in the area con- 
cerned” (p. 104). It seems reasonable to assume that the British Library manuscript 
fragments, which probably represent a random sampling from a larger, perhaps 
much larger, corpus of written texts (4.4), are part of such a written “canon” falling 
somewhere between the two extremes outlined above in terms of its extent and 
comprehensiveness. On the one hand, even this relatively small group of fragmen- 
tary texts displays a considerable range and diversity of genres and individual texts. 
On the other hand, we should not assume that it represents the surviving portion of 
a comprehensive written canon of the sort with which we are all familiar in the Pali 
canon of the Theravada sect. As shown by Collins (1990), this type of definitive, ex- 
clusive, written canon is prone to develop only under certain historical conditions, 
and there is no evidence that such circumstances had arisen in Gandhara at the time 
in question. Indeed, there is not much reason to suppose that such a comprehensive 
canon, in the strict sense of the term, was ever developed in Gandharan Buddhism.” 
In this chapter, an attempt will be made to determine what can be de- 
duced about the character, contents, arrangement, and affiliations of the “Gandhari 
canon’ as represented in the British Library fragments and, furthermore (in sec. 8.3), 
what this may tell us about Buddhism in Gandhara generally, which up to now 
has been known mostly from abundant but inherently limited archeological and 
epigraphical sources. The understanding of the Gandhari canon that can be derived 
from the new manuscripts is enhanced by the fact that, although they represent a 
random collection, they are sufficiently numerous and diverse to be of more than 
incidental value. Moreover, the texts contained in them do seem to fall into signifi- 
cant patterns that provide at least some hints as to the contents and arrangement of 
the larger corpus of texts of which they presumably constitute a fraction. Needless 
to say, the conclusions, or rather hypotheses, presented here are provisional at best, 
as they are based for the most part on preliminary surveys, readings and, where 
2. Although the germ, at least, of such a development might seem to be implied by the 
account of Kaniska’s council of Kashmir as recorded by Hsiian-tsang (Beal 1884: 151-6), the signifi- 
cance and historicity of this event are subject to considerable doubt. 

=== PAGE 206 ===
1588 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
possible, identifications of the individual texts, and the detailed studies of them that 
are to be pursued in years to come will undoubtedly clarify and correct whatever is 
offered here. Indeed, most of the material in this chapter is presented more by way 
of guidelines for future investigations than of hard facts or final conclusions. 
8.1.2. Parallels and Relationships with Other Text Collections 
8.1.2.1. A List of Novice Texts in the Mahdsdnghika-vinaya. 
Ina ground- 
breaking article in which he assembled from vinayas of the Buddhist sects references 
to recitations of particular groups of texts or textual genres, Sylvain Lévi (1915) re- 
ferred to a passage from the Chinese translation of the Mahasanghika-vinaya (T. 22 
[no. 1425], 337a) where the Buddha cites a set of siitras that “serve for the instruction 
of novices” (pp. 422-3). Lévi rendered the list as follows: “the sacred text of the Eight 
Groups (= Asta-varga stra), the sacred text of the Po-lo-ye-na (Parayana), the sacred 
text of the difficulties of discussion, the sacred text of Lake A-neou-ta, the sacred text 
of the Pratyekabuddhas, and all sorts of texts of this type” (p. 423). As to the identifi- 
cation of these texts, other than the first two, Lévi says: “The other texts cited are 
obscure. It seems, however, that we still have to do with collections. The Anavatap- 
tahrada sutra is probably the first teaching of Abhidharma expounded by the Buddha. 
_.. The Loun-nan recalls by its title the Tsa nan ‘Various difficulties (or questions)’ 
which the Vinaya of the Dharmaguptas . 
. 
. classes in the Ksudraka” (p. 424).3 
Although Lévi identifies “the sacred text of Lake A-neou-ta,” or “Anava- 
taptahrada sutra,” with the first discourse on abhidharma, I think it far more likely 
that it refers to the now well known Anavatapta-gatha, of which a large fragment 
survives among the new British Library fragments. Lévi’s failure to identify it as such 
is probably to be attributed to the fact that the Anavatapta-gatha was not known at 
that time as an independent text. Since then, however, numerous fragments of the 
Sanskrit text of the Anavatapta-gatha have been discovered, both as incorporated 
into the Bhaisajyavastu of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya in the Gilgit manuscripts 
and as an independent text among the fragments from Kyzil in Xinjiang (Bechert 
1961). These discoveries, combined now with that of the Gandhari recension of the 
same text, show that the Anavatapta-gatha was a popular and widespread text in the 
northern Buddhist tradition, and hence almost certainly the one referred to in the 
Mahasanghika-vinaya’s list of novice texts. This identification is corroborated by the 
fact that one of the central Asian texts of the Anavatapta (ms. 466; Bechert 1961: 49) 
3. “... le texte sacré des Huit classes . 
. 
. (= Asta-varga sittra), le texte sacré du Po-lo-ye-na... 
(Parayana), le texte sacré des difficultés de discussion ..., le texte sacré du lac A-neou-ta..., le 
texte sacré des Pratyekabuddha ... et toutes sortes de textes de ce genre...” (p. 423). 
“Les autres textes mentionnés sont obscurs. Il semble pourtant qu'il s agit encore de 
collections. L-Anavataptahrada sitra est probablement le premier enseignement d’Abhidharma 
prononcé par le Bouddha. . . 
. Le Loun-nan rappelle par son titre le Tsa nan ‘Difficultés (ou 
Questions) diverses’ que le Vinaya des Dharmagupta . . . classe dans le Ksudraka . 
. .” (p. 424). 

=== PAGE 207 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS _ 159 
was found as part of a manuscript that also contained the Sanskrit version of the 
Parayana, while another Anavatapta manuscript (ms. 1072; Bechert 1961: 50) also 
contained the Arthavargiya-sttra (otherwise known as Astavarga-sttra, etc.; Lévi 
1915: 412-4). It is surely no coincidence that both of these texts which were written 
together with the Anavatapta-gatha in central Asian manuscripts are also included 
along with it in the Mahasanghika list of novice texts. 
Lévi offers no comments regarding the identification of the “sacred text 
of the Pratyekabuddhas” in the same list, but I think it is very likely that this refers to 
the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra, which again is found in a Gandhari version among the 
British Library fragments. Although the word pratyekabuddha (solitary enlightened 
one) does not appear in this version or in the previously known Pali or Sanskrit 
versions of the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra, it is unanimously agreed by the commenta- 
torial and interpretive traditions that each verse of this poem represents the inspired 
utterance of a particular pratyekabuddha, and the association of this poem with the 
pratyekabuddhas is so widespread and consistent that one can easily imagine that it 
could have come to be known as “The Sutra of the Pratyekabuddhas.” 
8.1.2.2. Connections with the Sutta-nipata and Khuddaka-nikaya. 
Thus 
we find that at least two of the five texts cited in the Mahasanghika list of novice 
texts can be identified, with reasonable certainty, with texts found among the British 
Library fragments. This in itself would be interesting, but hardly conclusive. How- 
ever, it is possible to establish further connections, albeit less direct than the ones 
presented above, between two other texts in the Mahasanghika-vinaya list—namely, 
the “Asta-varga sutra” and the Parayana—and the new collection. The Pali equiva- 
lents of these texts—the Atthaka-vagga and the Parayana-vagga—are incorporated 
in the Theravada canon as the fourth and fifth (and final) sections of the Sutta- 
nipata, itself the fifth of the fifteen parts of the Khuddaka-nikaya. Now, in general 
there is a decided concentration among the British Library fragments of texts whose 
Pali correspondents are found in the Khuddaka-nikaya generally and the Sutta- 
nipata in particular. Among Khuddaka texts, we find the Dharmapada fragment, 
which constitutes part of a compilation that is the approximate counterpart of the 
Pali Dhammapada, the second text in the Khuddaka-nikaya. As it happens, most of 
the small part of the Dharmapada that is preserved in the new collection (frags. 16 + 
25, first text) contains a set of parallel verses using as a refrain the metaphor of the 
snake shedding its skin (so bhikhu jahadi oraparo uragha jinam iva tvaya purano, 
“That monk discards this shore and yonder shore, as a snake discards his old, worn- 
out skin”). In the Gandhari tradition this sequence of verses was incorporated into 
the Bhikhu-varga of its Dharmapada (as shown by the more complete version of 
that text preserved in the Khotan scroll), but in Pali it was separately preserved as 
the first sutta, called “The Snake Sutta” (Uraga-sutta), of the first section of the 
Sutta-nipata (which is named Uraga-vagga after it). It is presumably just a coinci- 
dence that this particular passage happens to be the one that survived from what 

=== PAGE 208 ===
160 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
was evidently a complete, multivolume text of the Dharmapada (see 5.1.1), but this 
coincidence nonetheless illustrates the close connections and flexible relationships 
that obtained among the texts of this genre as a whole. 
Among texts in the new collection that correspond more directly with 
those in the Pali Sutta-nipata, the most striking case is the Rhinoceros Horn Sitra, 
which in the Pali canon is the third sutta of the aforementioned Uraga-vagga, the 
first of five sections of the Sutta-nipata. It is worthy of note that two of the new 
Gandhari texts correspond, directly in this case, indirectly in the case of the Uraga- 
sutta, with suttas placed in very prominent positions—the first and third suttas out 
of seventy overall—in the Sutta-nipata. This suggests that these were texts of partic- 
ular popularity and importance, perhaps precisely because of their suitability for 
the general instruction of lay followers and novice monks, and this impression is 
confirmed by the fact that both texts are repeated elsewhere in the various canons. 
For example, the Rhinoceros Horn Sutra appears three times in the Pali canon (see 
2.2.3), while another version of the Uraga-sutta is found as a separate section at the 
end of the Patna Dharmapada (Cone 1989: 209-15). 
Another text in the new collection that exhibits a connection with the 
Pali Khuddaka-nikaya in general, with the Sutta-nipata in particular, and with the 
Parayana- and Atthaka-vaggas of the Sutta-nipata even more specifically is fragment 
9 (described in 2.2.2), which is the best-preserved specimen of the several texts con- 
sisting of citations of verses and commentaries thereon. The following table enu- 
merates the parallels in the Pali canon, as far as they can be identified, to the verses 
cited in fragment 9:4 
Pali Text Containing 
Number of Citations 
Corresponding Verse 
in Fragment 9 
Sutta-nipata, total 
1 (including 1 doubtful case) 
Atthaka-vagga 
5 
Parayana-vagga 
4 
Maha-vagga 
1 
Uraga-vagga 
(1 doubtful) 
Ctla-vagga 
O 
Theragatha 
2 
Itivuttaka 
i 
Dhammapada 
1 
Udana 
1 
[Unidentified or illegible] 
4 
4. Including the text on both the recto, which was summarized in section 2.2.2, and the verso, 
which was not cited there. 

=== PAGE 209 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
16l 
Thus, all of the verses cited in this fragment for which Pali parallels have 
been identified (sixteen out of twenty in all) correspond more or less directly with 
verses found in various texts included in the Pali Khuddaka-nikaya; of these sixteen 
Khuddaka verses, eleven are in the Sutta-nipata; and of these eleven, nine are in the 
Atthaka-vagga or Parayana-vagga. Thus, although the exact nature of the verse col- 
lection on which this commentatorial text is based remains uncertain, it is evident 
that it comprises material similar to that of the Pali Khuddaka, and especially of the 
Atthaka-vagga and Parayana-vagga sections of the Sutta-nipata. 
These two compilations of short suttas, which in the Pali canon (but 
not in the other extant canons) were lumped together with three other collections 
to form the larger unit of the Sutta-nipata, are known from other sources to have 
circulated as independent units in many parts of the Buddhist world. These sources 
include the Chinese traditions cited in Lévi 1915, the central Asian manuscript remains 
(Bechert 1961: 11), and indications within the Pali canon itself (Norman 1983: 63). 
It is not yet certain whether this was also the case in the Gandharan tradition, since 
the Atthaka and Parayana citations cited here are embedded in a text which also 
contains citations corresponding to other parts of the Sutta-nipata as well as to 
other Khuddaka-nikaya texts. This may become clearer as these commentary texts 
are studied in detail, and it would be interesting to learn whether the Gandharan 
tradition had any kind of larger grouping corresponding to the Sutta-nipata of the 
Pali Tipitaka, since this compilation, which contains some of the most important 
and apparently oldest texts in the Tipitaka, has no correspondent in any of the other 
Buddhist canons, although many of its component texts and subtexts—once again, 
most notably, the Atthaka-vagga and Parayana-vagga—are widely attested. 
In any case, it is clear that—not surprisingly—the Gandharan tradition 
represented in the British Library fragments did include materials similar to those 
found in other recensions of the Pali Khuddaka-nikaya, the Sanskrit Ksudrakagama, 
and the Chinese translations thereof. This implies, though it does not prove, that 
the Gandharan tradition represented by these texts had some sort of Ksudrakagama 
collection or approximate equivalent thereof, though its arrangement and contents 
are not yet known. The list of the contents of the Ksudrakagama of the Dharma- 
guptakas given in the Chinese translation of the vinaya of that school (Lévi and 
Chavannes 1916: 33-4) does show some similarity with the contents of the British 
Library Gandhari fragments, which are almost certainly associated with the Dharma- 
guptaka school. Among the twelve works listed are the equivalents of the Atthaka- 
vagga, the Parayana-vagga, Dharmapada, Avadana, and Sthaviragatha, the last of 
which is a text associated, and in some traditions possibly identified or confused, 
with the Anavatapta-gatha (Bechert 1961: 11-12, esp. 12 n. 1). 
But to return to our main subject, namely, the correspondence of the 
contents of the British Library fragments with groupings of texts attested in other 
Buddhist canons, we can now summarize the results of the comparison with the list 
of five novice texts in the Mahasanghika-vinaya discussed in the previous section: 

=== PAGE 210 ===
162 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
Two of them, “the sacred text of Lake A-neou-ta” and “the sacred text of 
the Pratyekabuddhas,” can be directly identified with the Anavatapta-gatha and Rhi- 
noceros Horn Sutra texts in the new collection. 
Two others, “the sacred text of the Eight Groups” (Asta-varga sutra) and 
“the sacred text of the Po-lo-ye-na (Parayana),” are represented, not as separate texts 
within the new collection, but indirectly as the most prominent sources of the verses 
cited in the commentary text on fragment 9. 
The fifth text, “the sacred text of the difficulties of discussion,’ remains 
unidentified, though it is still possible that further study of the new manuscripts 
may eventually establish some relationship. 
Though neither perfect nor complete, the correspondences between the 
Mahasanghika-vinaya list of novice texts and the contents of the British Library 
fragments are far too close to be dismissed as coincidence. This parallel could be 
taken to mean that the manuscripts in question are specimens of the kinds of texts 
that were particularly favored for the instruction of novices and lay followers in the 
monastery from whose collection they came, though they may well have also been 
used for other purposes, such as communal recitations. In any case, it is clear that 
texts of this class have some special status and popularity. Thus, it is not surprising 
that they should be relatively well represented in this apparently random sample of 
the monastery’s entire corpus of written texts, since it could be expected that such 
texts would have been in frequent use and hence prone to be worn out, copied, and 
discarded. If this interpretation is correct, moreover, it would establish that the 
random fragments in the British Library collection, meager as they probably are in 
comparison to the complete collection of texts in the hypothetical source library, are 
nonetheless numerous enough to have some statistical significance and to represent 
at least some of the major genres and types of texts in the entire collection and 
hence to give us some conception of that “canon’s” contents. 
It need not trouble us that the correspondence between the 
Mahasanghika-vinaya list of novice texts and the ones found in the British Library 
fragments is not exact. For one thing, the list is an open one, concluding with “and 
all sorts of texts of this type,” so that one could imagine that other texts found 
among the new collection, such as the Dharmapada and possibly also the avadanas, 
could also have been part of such a novice curriculum or set of general texts. Neither 
should too much be made of the fact that the list in question belongs to the Maha- 
sanghika sect, while the Gandhari fragments come, in all probability, from a Dhar- 
maguptaka institution (see 8.2). Although it might be argued that the Mahasanghika 
list is therefore irrelevant here, it is actually likely that such groups of basic texts 
were more or less similar across sectarian lines, and hence it is of no particular sig- 
nificance that the list happens to be preserved in the Mahasanghika tradition. Here 
the observation of Paul Mus that “the primary cycle of instruction in Buddhism 

=== PAGE 211 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
163 
was common to all the sects” (1939: 191), though made with reference to a different 
period and class of literature, is in principle applicable. 
In support of this position it may be noted that the sort of texts in ques- 
tion do indeed tend to be found, albeit in different languages, arrangements, and 
locations, in different sectarian canons. The Anavatapta-gatha, for example, is known 
in Sarvastivadin, Mulasarvastivadin, and now, probably, Dharmaguptaka recensions, 
as well as in the form of a closely related text included in the Apadana of the Thera- 
vadins (Bechert 1961: 29). The claim that other schools would be likely to have had 
groupings of texts similar to those found in the Mahasanghika list is moreover di- 
rectly confirmed by the co-occurrence, noted above, of the Anavatapta-gatha with 
both the Parayana and the Arthavargiya-sitra (= Asta-varga sutra) in central Asian 
manuscripts of the Sarvastivadins. 
8.1.3. Comments on the Distribution of the Texts of Other Genres 
If it can be accepted that the distribution of the British Library fragments 
belonging to the class of basic texts and associated commentaries is significant for 
reconstructing a broader picture of the “canon” of which they are a small part, we 
may proceed to an examination along similar lines of the texts of other genres. Here, 
however, the results will inevitably be less clear-cut, since we are dealing with a much 
larger and more diverse corpus. Indeed, it may be more useful to note what is absent 
from the corpus as a whole than to try to categorize what is there, for there is one 
striking lacuna: the total absence (or at least so it seems on the basis of the still pre- 
liminary survey of the contents of the collection) of vinaya texts of any kind. This 
absence could, of course, be simply an accident of chance, or it could be determined 
by some other, as yet unknown factor. One could, for example, hypothesize that 
vinaya manuscripts were in some way treated differently, perhaps interred or other- 
wise disposed of separately from those of other classes. But, given the otherwise wide 
diversity of texts and genres that were disposed of together in a single pot, I do not 
consider this likely. There is no evidence, direct or indirect, of any process of selec- 
tion or separation among these fragments, and hence no reason to hypothesize that 
vinaya texts, or any other particular class of manuscripts for that matter, were treated 
specially. 
I therefore think that we should consider the possibility that the reason 
there are no vinaya texts among the British Library fragments is that there were few 
or no vinaya texts in the hypothetical source library as a whole. In other words, it 
may be that, at this relatively early stage of the written preservation and transmis- 
sion of Buddhist texts, not all texts or genres of texts had yet been set down in writ- 
ing. For reasons that will be discussed further in 8.1.4.2, it appears that at this point 
in the development of the written tradition of Buddhist texts, writing was viewed 
primarily as a practical matter; texts were set down in written form only when this 
seemed necessary or useful, as for instance when, for one reason or another, a text 

=== PAGE 212 ===
164 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
was not firmly set in memory or was perceived to be in danger of being forgotten. 
If this was the case, certain classes of texts, particularly the basic vinaya texts, namely 
the pratimoksas, would have been the least likely to be written down, since their fre- 
quent communal recitation would preclude any danger of their being forgotten or 
corrupted.’ 
This would be merely a matter of speculation were it not for the fact 
that a strikingly similar pattern has been noted by Lore Sander among the earliest 
strata of central Asian Sanskrit Buddhist manuscripts, those from before the fifth 
century A.D., among which she finds a “total absence” (1991: 142) of vinaya texts, 
which she attributes to the continued vitality of the bhanaka recitation traditions 
in this period, as attested by Fa-hsien (p. 141). This absence of vinaya manuscripts 
among the early Sanskrit texts, moreover, is in striking contrast to the situation in 
later centuries, when they become very common in central Asia. So the complete 
absence of vinaya texts from both the British Library Kharosthi fragments and 
from the early group of central Asian Buddhist texts can hardly be a coincidence, 
and thus it corroborates the theory that vinaya texts were not yet set in writing at 
this relatively early period. 
With regard to other genres, especially sutra texts, however, the situation 
is less clear-cut. Among the early central Asian texts, Sander found sitra texts, like 
vinaya texts, to be totally absent, but this does not correspond to the situation in the 
Gandhari fragments, wherein we find at least one manuscript of a stra text without 
commentary (the Anguttara-like text on frags. 12 + 14), one other probable example 
(the dhyana [?] text in frags. 26 + 29), and one specimen of a sutra with commentary, 
the Sangiti-sutra (frag. 15). Nevertheless, stitra texts are relatively sparsely represented 
in the collection as a whole—at most, apparently, three out of a total of about two 
dozen or so distinct texts. If this is not a mere statistical accident, it may reflect an 
early or transitional phase in which writing was being used as a secondary or supple- 
mental technique for the preservation of stitras, which were presumably still being 
transmitted primarily by oral recitation. 
In contrast to the wholly absent vinaya texts and the relatively few sutra 
texts, the classes of texts which are best represented overall among the British Library 
fragments are the commentaries on unidentified verse collections and the avadanas. 
If we can judge from the lack of success to date in finding parallels for these texts in 
other traditions, they would seem to be local compositions. It remains to be seen 
whether the statistical predominance of texts of this type is significant, for instance 
in indicating that such texts were more frequently rendered in written form than the 
5. As for the expanded vinaya texts of the vibhangas and skandhakas, their absence would 
have to be accounted for on other grounds, which cannot be fully explained at this point. One pos- 
sibility, however, that has been proposed recently by Schopen (1994a: 552-3) is that such texts had 
not been composed yet, or at least were only in their formative stages, during the period at which 
the British Library fragments are most likely to have been written (i.e., the early first century a.p). 

=== PAGE 213 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS _ 165 
sutra and vinaya texts, or whether this is merely a coincidence. More detailed studies 
of these texts and, should they occur, future discoveries of similar materials might 
eventually clarify this question, but for the moment it must be left open. 
8.1.4. Conclusions regarding the Character of the Gandharan Canon 
8.1.4.1. Local versus Translated Material. 
As was observed in reference to 
the linguistic characteristics of the new texts, some of them are obviously translated 
or, rather, more or less mechanically “transposed” into Gandhari from preexisting 
versions in some other, not precisely identifiable MIA language(s), whereas others— 
most notably the several avadana collections—show few characteristics of “transla- 
tionese” and hence are likely to have been composed originally in Gandhari. Still 
other texts, more technical and scholastic in nature, are more difficult to pin down 
as to their linguistic origins, but at least some of them are likely to be commentaries 
written directly in Gandhari on texts whose archetypes were in other MIA dialects. 
Thus, the materials that are most likely to have been directly composed in Gandhari 
are precisely those for which no parallels have been located in other Buddhist tradi- 
tions, and this is presumably not a coincidence. These texts evidently reflect local 
exegetical and didactic traditions, distinct from but based on the common core of 
Buddhist canonical texts, of the sort that can be presumed to have developed sepa- 
rately in most, if not all, regional centers of Buddhism, in south Asia and beyond. In 
the commentatorial texts, for example, we may well have something analogous to 
the lost Sinhala prototype of the Pali commentaries, and had Buddhism continued 
to flourish in the northwest as it did in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, texts such as 
these would probably have survived—though perhaps in a Sanskritized garb— 
through the ages. When fully analyzed, they should provide us with an unprecedented 
insight into the formative stages of such a tradition of local vernacular commentaries 
and didactic texts. 
8.1.4.2. Written and Oral Components of the Gandhdaran Textual Corpus. 
As explained above, there is reason to think that the textual corpus of Gandharan 
Buddhism in or around the first century a.D. was only partly transmitted in written 
form, and that at least some texts and textual genres, notably vinaya materials, were 
still preserved exclusively or primarily in oral form. Such a mixed system is directly 
attested, moreover, by the avadanas, whose abridged, sometimes extremely terse 
texts with numerous formulae of abbreviation seem to fall somewhere between writ- 
ten and oral tradition. Like the corresponding texts in the considerably later and geo- 
graphically remote Bairam Ali manuscript (see 2.2.4), the Gandhari avadanas seem 
to be more in the nature of notes or memory aids than of formal written texts. In 
other words, they fall somewhere between the strict division of written versus oral 
texts, serving, evidently, as written supplements to oral deliveries. 
It is difficult, however, to know what criteria determined whether a given 
text would be transmitted in oral or written form, or both. The absence of written 

=== PAGE 214 ===
166 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
vinaya texts in the new collection, as in the early central Asian manuscripts, seems 
to imply that those texts which were best known and most widely memorized would 
be the least likely to be written down, and, conversely, the presence of relatively large 
numbers of commentary texts could be taken to make the same point. But the pres- 
ence of written versions, in somewhat smaller but still not insignificant numbers, 
of sttra texts and of well-known verse texts such as the Anavatapta-gatha warns us 
that the matter may be more complex than that, and that other factors, as yet unde- 
termined, may be at work. Although further studies may at least partially clarify 
the question, the amount of material in the British Library collection may not be 
sufficient to provide a definitive answer. 
In any case, the new manuscripts indicate that the writing down of texts 
served as a supplement to, and not a substitute for, the traditional method of oral/ 
aural transmission. This is hardly surprising, as it is entirely in keeping with overall 
trends in Buddhism (and, for that matter, in traditional Indian culture generally), 
where oral and written forms of texts have typically functioned side by side, with 
complex patterns of interaction. Parallels from other parts of the Buddhist world 
show that writing, once introduced, does not necessarily supersede oral transmis- 
sion; thus, according to Bechert, “to a certain extent oral transmission exists along 
with the written .. . among the Buddhists (especially in Burma) even to the present 
day” (1980: 28). Similarly, Collins, with reference to the Pali tradition as a whole, 
remarks that “despite the existence of written texts, the Buddhist tradition remained 
in various ways also an oral/aural one” (1992: 121). What is particularly interesting 
about the new materials, however, is that we now have, for the first time, substantial 
specimens of written text from a period at which, in all likelihood, the use of writing 
for the preservation of texts was still in a formative or at least a relatively early stage 
of development. The comprehensive study of these documents can therefore be ex- 
pected eventually to clarify this critical transition from a purely or primarily oral to 
a largely written mode of textual transmission and preservation. 
8.2. Sectarian Considerations: The Dharmaguptaka Connection 
The early photographs showing the scrolls inside pot D, which bears 
a dedication to the Dharmaguptakas, can be taken as an indication, though not 
absolute proof, that the manuscripts were the product of, or at least were kept in, a 
monastery of that school. Although it is theoretically possible that the manuscripts 
had been removed from an original container, presumably one of the other inscribed 
pots in the British Library collection, and placed inside pot D by some unknown 
person, it is hard to imagine why this would have been done, and there is no external 
indication of it. Nonetheless, it would still be desirable to be able to confirm on 
internal grounds that the manuscripts, or rather the texts that they contain, can be 
associated with the Dharmaguptakas, and fortunately there is evidence that points 

=== PAGE 215 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS _ 167 
strongly in this direction. Before proceeding to a detailed discussion of this point, 
however, it may be useful to summarize current theories about the Dharmaguptaka 
school and its Gandharan connections. 
8.2.1. Hypotheses on the Dharmaguptakas and Gandhara 
8.2.1.1. The Dharmaguptakas in India, Central Asia, and China. 
The Dharmaguptakas figure prominently among the so-called Hinayana or Nikaya 
schools mentioned in the various accounts of the formations of the Buddhist sects. 
In these accounts, the Dharmaguptaka school is generally presented as one of the 
subsects derived from the Sarvastivadins, and in some sources, for instance, in 
Vasumitra’s Samayabhedoparacanacakra and in the Pali Theravada tradition 
(Bareau 1955: 16-19, 29-30, 34; Lamotte 1988: 529-32), it is identified more specifically 
as an outgrowth of the Mahisasaka sect, itself a Sarvastivadin subsect. Although the 
history of the Dharmaguptaka school in India® has, until now, been very obscure, 
its prominent role in early Buddhism in central Asia and especially in China is well 
attested. Lamotte, for example, comments: 
In the list of the five schools drawn up in China, it was the Dharmaguptakas 
who most frequently occupied the place of honour. There is nothing surpris- 
ing in this considering the role played by that school in the diffusion of the 
Vinaya in China. The first formularies (karmavacana) 
. 
. 
. pertained to that 
school. According to I ching, China followed mainly the Dharmaguptaka 
Vinaya and . 
. . the Pratimoksa of that school was considered to be the para- 
mount code of Hinayanist Buddhism until the final years of the Empire. 
(1988: 538; see also Bareau 1955: 39) 
This early primacy of the Dharmaguptakas in China is one of the reasons 
that certain scholars, most notably Bernhard, have postulated that “an early wave 
of Buddhist mission in Central Asia” (1970: 59) was sponsored by this sect, using 
Gandhari as its language medium. Probably the strongest single piece of evidence 
cited by Bernhard (p. 59) is the fact that, according to him, one of the central Asian 
Kharosthi documents from Niya (no. 510) contains six verses which correspond 
to the concluding verses of the Pratimoksa-suttra in the Dharmaguptaka version, 
implying that its writer belonged to this sect. At the least, this would show that 
Dharmaguptaka monks were present in the Buddhist communities of the Shan- 
shan Kingdom in and around the third century a.p., and since there is no direct 
6. Here and elsewhere in this section, “India” is used in its wider, traditional sense, referring 
to the Indian subcontinent as a whole, including the borderlands of the northwest, rather than to 
the modern national boundaries of India. 

=== PAGE 216 ===
168 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
evidence there for the presence of any other particular sect at this relatively early 
period, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the Dharmaguptakas were the dominant 
school there. 
Even from the later phase of central Asian Buddhism, when the Sarvas- 
tivada and, to a lesser extent, the Milasarvastivada schools had become predominant, 
there are a few textual remnants of the Dharmaguptakas in the form of Sanskrit 
manuscript fragments that can be attributed to this sect on the basis of parallels 
with Chinese translations of their texts. The most secure of these is a fragment, 
probably from Kyzil, of a Pratimoksa text which is attributed to the Dharmagup- 
takas on the basis of the exact correspondence in the order of its rules with the 
Chinese translation of the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya (Waldschmidt 1965: 297-8, 
no. 656; see esp. p. 298 n. 2).7 Another important example is a fragment of the 
Mahaparinirvana-sttra from Murtug (Waldschmidt 1968: 3-16), whose contents 
and ordering diverge widely from the corresponding stra of the Sarvastivadins/ 
Mulasarvastivadins but agree closely with the version of that sttra included in the 
Chinese translation of the Dirghagama, which is believed to represent the Dharma- 
guptaka version of the collection (see 8.2.2.2).° These two fragments indicate that 
the Dharmaguptaka school continued to have a presence in Chinese central Asia 
even after it had lost its dominant position there. 
In India itself, however, the textual and archeological remains of the 
Dharmaguptakas have until now been very scanty. From Hstian-tsang’s memoirs we 
learn that some Mahayana monks in Uddiyana (i.e., Swat) still followed the vinaya 
of the Dharmaguptakas, as well as of several other “Hinayana” schools, in the early 
seventh century A.D. (Beal 1884: 121), while I-ching confirms that, later in the same 
century, the Dharmaguptaka school survived in India only in Uddiyana (Takakusu 
1896: 20). This concentration in the Swat Valley in the seventh century does not in 
and of itself prove anything about the geographical origins of the school in earlier 
times, but a long-standing connection with northwestern India and adjoining 
regions to the west is supported by the fact that several of the early translators of 
Dharmaguptaka texts into Chinese were natives of Sogdia, Parthia, and Chi-pin, 
which toponym, according to Enomoto (1994: 361), refers broadly to northwestern 
India, probably including both Gandhara and Nagarahara. According to Przyluski, 
this “is proof that the Dharmaguptaka school had already taken root in Iranian 
territory by the third century of our era” (1926: 326). 
In general, the most direct and reliable evidence for the localization of 
Indian Buddhist sects comes from inscriptions, and although it is not correct that 
7. Note that, according to von Hiniiber, “(t]he ordering of the rules . 
. . is always a very strong 
argument with regard to sectarian affiliation” (1985: 67). 
8. On the linguistic features of these two texts, see Waldschmidt 1980: 162-9 (part II, “The 
Language of the Ch’ang-a-han-ching and Dharmaguptaka Texts”). 

=== PAGE 217 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
“{n]o inscription mentions them as a sect” (Lamotte 1988: 527; at least two Dharma- 
guptaka inscriptions were already known when Lamotte published the original 
French edition of his monumental work on the early history of Indian Buddhism 
in 1958), it is true that, until recently, inscriptions mentioning them were rare. Until 
now, only two Kharosthi inscriptions referring to the Dharmaguptakas have been 
known. The first is the Jamalgarhi stone inscription, Liiders’s corrected reading of 
which (1940: 17-203 see Appendix, sec. 3, pot D) revealed that it recorded a donation 
to the Dharmaguptakas (dhamaiitea(na*) parigrahe). This, as noted by Liiders, pro- 
vided the first clear evidence that “in the first centuries A.p. the Dharmaguptakas 
had a place in northwestern India too, whereas until now they had been epigraphi- 
cally attested only in Mathura” (p. 20). The other Kharosthi inscription referring to 
the Dharmaguptakas was the so-called Qunduz vase (Fussman 1974: 58-61), whose 
exact findspot is not known but which is reported (p. 59) to have come from some- 
where in northern Afghanistan, that is, in ancient Bactria. The inscription on this 
copper vase records, in the usual phraseology, that it was presented to the Dharma- 
guptaka teachers (acariyanam dhammagutakana parigrahe). 
These two Kharosthi inscriptions support the conclusion drawn from 
the Chinese sources that the Dharmaguptakas were prominent in the northwestern 
fringe of greater India and in the adjoining regions to the west. But, as noted by 
Liiders, this school is also epigraphically attested in Mathura, in the heartland of 
northern India. Ltiders refers to a Brahmi inscription on the base of a bodhisattva 
statue (Liiders 1961: 187, no. 150), whose findspot is unknown but which presumably 
came from Mathura or its environs. The inscription records, in hybrid Sanskrit, 
the statue’s donation to the Dharmaguptaka teachers (acaryana dharmagutakana 
pratigrahe). Another Brahmi/hybrid Sanskrit pedestal inscription from the 
Mathura region (Girdharpur), recording a dedication to the Dharmaguptakas 
(dharmaguptikanam parigrahe) in the year 29 of Maharaja Huviska, has been noted 
by Rosenfield (1967: 229-30 and fig. 32; see also Shizutani 1979: 131), though as far as 
I have been able to determine, it has never been definitively edited. 
Thus, the previously published inscriptional records of the Dharma- 
guptakas place them precisely and exclusively within the territories associated most 
closely with the Indo-Scythian and Kusana kings of the northwest: Bactria in the far 
west, Gandhara in the heartland of their empires, and Mathura in India proper. The 
Dharmaguptakas are notably absent from the epigraphic records of other parts of 
north India as well as of the Deccan and the south, and moreover the numerous new 
discoveries of Dharmaguptaka inscriptions, described below in section 8.2.3.1, con- 
firm their concentration in the greater Gandhara region. 
8.2.1.2. The Dharmaguptakas and the Gandhari Language. 
Since it is 
now well established that the Dharmaguptakas were prominent in northwestern 
India and the neighboring regions of the Iranian world in the early centuries of the 
Christian era, it would be only reasonable to suppose that their preferred language 
169 

=== PAGE 218 ===
170 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
was Gandhari; and indeed, there is already ample evidence of this. For instance, there 
is the case of Kharosthi document no. 510 from Niya, discussed in the previous sec- 
tion, containing the concluding verses of the Dharmaguptaka Pratimoksa-sutra in 
Gandhari. Another indication of an association between the Dharmaguptakas and 
Gandhari is the evidence, on phonetic grounds, that the Chinese Dirghagama, which 
is evidently a Dharmaguptaka text (see 8.2.2.2), was translated from a Gandhari 
prototype rather than from an original in some other Prakrit dialect or in Sanskrit 
(Brough 1962: 50-4; 1965: 608). Also, there is the testimony from the Dharmaguptaka- 
vinaya that members of that sect used the Arapacana formula, whose origin is 
closely connected with Gandhara and Gandhari (Salomon 1990b, esp. 255), in their 
recitation formulae (Lévi 1915: 439-40; Lamotte 1988: 497). 
Finally, and most important, there is the much-discussed question of 
the sectarian affiliation of the KDhP scroll. Although the matter is far from settled, 
there is something approaching a consensus among experts that this text is most 
likely a Dharmaguptaka document. Brough was characteristically cautious in his 
conclusions, declaring that the Dharmaguptakas or Kasyapiyas were the most 
probable candidates, although “other possibilities cannot be ruled out” (1962: 45). 
He arrived at this conclusion primarily by deduction, beginning with a list of sects 
epigraphically attested in the northwest and eliminating those (the Sarvastivadins 
and the Mahasanghikas) for whom other versions or equivalents of the Dharmapada 
(the Udana-varga and the extracts from a Dharmapada-type text incorporated in 
the Mahavastu respectively) were already attested (p. 41). Brough did not make 
any clear choice between his two remaining candidates, the Dharmaguptakas and 
Kasyapiyas, but several scholars since him have been inclined toward the former al- 
ternative, and some have even unreservedly ascribed the KDhP to them. For exam- 
ple, von Simson includes it without hesitation among “the little that is left to us of 
the Dharmaguptakas in an Indian language” (1985: 84; similarly, von Hiniiber 1989: 
354 and Fussman 1994: 21). More cautious opinions are expressed, for example, by 
Bernhard, who suggests such an association but warns that “there are no internal 
textual arguments which make it possible to identify the Gandhari Dharmapada 
dogmatically” (1970: 60), while de Jong states, more emphatically, “It is not possible 
to determine to which school the Gandhari Dharmapada belonged” (1987: 63). 
The discovery among the new fragments, found in a pot that belonged 
to the Dharmaguptakas, of a small portion of what was evidently a manuscript of 
the Dharmapada (or rather one scroll from a multivolume manuscript; see 5.1.1) in 
a version very similar to that of the Khotan text constitutes something approaching 
definite proof of a Dharmaguptaka affiliation for the latter. This in turn confirms 
what already seemed highly likely on the basis of previously known materials: the 
language used by the Dharmaguptaka sect for its texts in the period in question, 
both in India and in central Asia, was Gandhari. A note of caution must, however, 
be added, to the effect that this does not mean that any Buddhist text written in 

=== PAGE 219 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS _ 171] 
Gandhari can automatically be assumed to be a Dharmaguptaka text, since inscrip- 
tional evidence shows that other sects, such as the Sarvastivadins and Mahasanghikas, 
could have also had texts in Gandhari (Brough 1962: 42; see also von Hiniiber 1983: 
33). Bernhard warns that “scholars over and over again speak of the Sanskrit canon 
and of one canon in northwestern Prakrit, as though there could be only one canon 
in the same language. In Sanskrit, canonical works of at least four and perhaps even 
of five sects have come down to us and there is no reason for assuming that the use 
of the Gandhari dialect was limited exclusively to one single sect” (1970: 61; see also 
von Hintiber 1985: 75 and 1989: 353-4). In other words, the use of Gandhari by at 
least three sects (Dharmaguptaka, Sarvastivada, and Mahasanghika) was simply 
conditioned by their activity in the Gandhara region, in keeping with the long- 
established tradition of adopting the local language for the transmission of the 
dharma. 
These words of caution notwithstanding, it does appear that most, per- 
haps all, of the Gandhari manuscript texts that we have belong to the Dharmagup- 
takas. It remains to be seen whether this is simply a matter of chance, that is to say, 
that Gandhari manuscripts of, for example, the Sarvastivadins simply happen not to 
have come to light; or whether it reflects some more significant factor, such as a pre- 
dominant role, previously unclear but now becoming more apparent (see 8.2.3), on 
the part of the Dharmaguptakas in the formative period of Gandharan Buddhism, 
as well as in the transmission of Buddhist religion and texts into central Asia. In 
this regard, it will be most interesting to learn more about the small fragment of the 
Mahaparinirvana-sutra in Gandhari that has reportedly come to light in St. Peters- 
burg (see 3.1.2). Since at least one fragment of a later Sanskrit version of the Dhar- 
maguptaka recension of this text has been found in central Asia (8.2.1.1), there is 
reason to expect that this older Gandhari text will also prove to belong to this school, 
and if so, this will further confirm the central role that the Dharmaguptakas played 
in the early transmission of Buddhism beyond its Indian homeland. 
8.2.2. Internal Textual Evidence for the Sectarian 
Affiliation of the British Library Fragments 
8.2.2.1. The Sangiti-stitra Commentary. 
The survival among the British 
Library fragments, in one of the longest and relatively best preserved texts (frag. 15), 
of the Sangiti-sttra with a commentary (see 2.2.1) is a lucky circumstance in that 
it provides ideal textual material for the examination of sectarian affiliation. The 
Sangiti-sttra is extant in several versions belonging to different schools: a Theravada 
version in Pali (stra no. 33 of the Digha-nikaya), a Sarvastivada/Miulasarvastivada 
recension (see Tripathi 1985) preserved in Sanskrit fragments from Afghanistan 
(Bamiyan; Lévi 1932: 9-11) and central Asia (Stache-Rosen 1968) as well as in Chinese 
translation (T.1 [no. 12], pp. 226c ff.), and finally what is probably the Dharmaguptaka 
recension (as explained in the following section) preserved in Chinese translation 

=== PAGE 220 ===
172 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
in the Dirghagama (T.1 [no. 1], pp. 49b ff.). Since the Sangiti-stitra consists of lists of 
numerically grouped topics, it is easy to compare the numbers and orderings of top- 
ics in the various recensions to clarify the relationships and contrasts among them. 
The following chart, based in part on Stache-Rosen’s concordance (“Konkordanz zu 
Sangitisttra, Sangitisuttanta, Sangitiparyaya” in 1968: 213-7), compares the list of 
topics discussed in the best-preserved part of the new Gandhari text of the Sangiti, 
comprising the end of the topics grouped in threes and the beginning of the fours, 
with the numbers of the corresponding topics in the other recensions. 
Comparison of British Library Fragment |5 with Other Recensions of the Sangiti-sutra 
Part and 
Line in 
Frag. 15 
3,1, 40 
3,1 41 
3,1 43 
3,0 45 
3,1, 46 
3,1, 47 
3, 1, 50 
31,54 
31, 54 
4,17 
4,114 
4, r, 18 
Axia 22 
4, T, 23 
4, I, 27 
ATOM 
4, T, 25 
Name of Group in 
Gandhari version 
of Sangiti-sutra 
trae cot’ana 
trae kasavastue 
trae rasie 
... [soyeo] 
[sara](?) thero 
trae cakhu 
catvari va(ya-ducarita”*) 
catuhi arie voharehi 
catvarime ahara 
catvari dhamma-samatana 
catvari uvadana 
catvari kaagratha 
catvari Sa[la] 
catvari yoni 
catvari [satuvathana] 
catvari i[dhJivada 
catvari apravamnia 
Number of 
Corresponding 
Group in Chinese 
Dirghagama Version 
of Sangiti-sutra 
IIT.32 
IT1.33 
III.34 
IIT.35 
III.36 
III.37 
IV. 
TV.4 
IV.5 
IV.6 
IV.7 
IV.8 
IV.9 (tz’u, “thorn’”) 
IV.10 
TV.11 
IV.13 
IV.15 
Number 
in Sanskrit 
Sangiti-sutra 
Number and Name 
in Pali Sangiti-sutta 
IIl.29 
III.22 
III.28 
111.46 
III.27 
Ill.39 
IV.45 
IV.46 
IV.22 
IV.35 
IV.39 
IV.40 
IV.29 
IV. 
IV.3 
IV.7 
III.39 tini codana-vatthtni 
Il].57 tini katha-vatthtni 
II.28 tayo rasi 
III.52 tini soceyyani 
III.37 tayo thera 
II1.46 tini cakkhtni 
IV.41 cattaro anariya-vohara 
IV.42 cattaro ariya-vohara 
IV.17 cattaro ahara 
1V.24 cattari dhamma- 
samadanani 
IV.35 cattari upadanani 
IV.34 cattaro gantha 
IV.36 catasso yoniyo 
IV.1 cattaro satipatthana 
IV.3 cattaro iddhipada 
IV.6 catasso appamafifiayo 

=== PAGE 221 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
173 
The conclusion to be drawn from this representative sampling is obvious: 
the number and sequence of the topics in the newly discovered Gandhari version of 
the Sangiti-stitra agree almost perfectly with the corresponding sitra in the Chinese 
Dirghagama but differ widely from both the Sanskrit and the Pali versions of the 
same text. The slight discrepancies between the Gandhari and Chinese texts are 
probably insignificant, in that the topics that seem to be missing in the Gandhari 
(nos. IV.2-3, 12, 14) probably were present in the original manuscript but were lost 
or have become illegible due to fragmentation. Moreover, it is likely in the case of 
the “threes,” and presumably of the other numerical groupings as well, that not only 
the ordering but also the total number of groups were the same, since the last triad 
in the Gandhari text, trae cakhu, is also the last triad (III.37) in the Chinese. In short, 
the arrangement of the Gandhari and Chinese Dirghagama texts of the Sangiti-sutra 
is very similar, indeed nearly identical, and this must mean that they represent the 
texts of one and the same school, especially since the ordering of topics in this 
important list, like the ordering of rules in the Pratimoksa (see n. 7), is the type of 
feature that is most likely to be distinctive in different sectarian traditions. 
8.2.2.2. The Sectarian Affiliation of the Chinese Dirghagama. 
It being 
established that the Gandhari Sangiti-sttra is virtually identical with the correspond- 
ing version in the Chinese Dirghagama, the next step is to determine the sectarian 
affiliation of the latter. According to Waldschmidt, “widespread agreement has been 
reached . . . in attributing the Dirghagama (Ch’ang-a-han-ching) to the school of 
the Dharmaguptakas” (1980: 136), and Mayeda confirms that this view is “widely 
accepted . 
. 
. by almost all scholars in Japan” (1985: 97). The main grounds for this 
claim are, first, that the monk Buddhayasas of Chi-pin (i.e., of northwestern India; 
see 8.2.1.1), who along with Chu Fo-nien translated the Dirghagama in A.D. 412-3, 
was also the translator of the Dharmaguptaka-vinaya, which he was said to be able 
to recite by heart (Shih 1968: 89), and, second, that the preface to this Dirghagama 
translation describes a vinaya whose structure (in four parts and ten recitations) 
agrees with the vinaya of the Dharmaguptakas (Przyluski 1926: 355). Moreover, 
Bareau has presented what he describes as “the definitive proof of the Dharmagup- 
taka origin of the Dirghagama translated into Chinese by Buddhayasas and Chu 
Fo-nien” (1966: 49), mainly on the grounds that the donative rites described in 
connection with the gift of the mango forest in the Mahaparinirvana-sttra in the 
Chinese Dirghagama agree closely with those mentioned in connection with the 
account of the gift of the bamboo forest in the Dharmagupta-vinaya but differ 
from the parallel accounts in the other vinayas (Theravadin and Mahisasaka); 
these differences reflect the conflicting doctrinal positions of these sects regarding 
the relative value of gifts to the Buddha and to the sangha. 
In addition to the textual evidence, it has also been argued, initially by 
Waldschmidt (1932: 231) and later by others (see, e.g., 8.2.1.2), that the transcription 

=== PAGE 222 ===
174 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
of proper names in the Chinese Dirghagama, particularly in the Mahasamaja-sutra, 
reflects an original text in Gandhari rather than in some other MIA language or in 
Sanskrit. Although the details of the argument are complex and not entirely beyond 
question, this theory has been accepted by the majority of experts. Brough, for ex- 
ample, concluded that “it is difficult to see how the general picture can be explained 
except on the hypothesis that the original of these Dirghagama transcriptions was 
fundamentally the same language as that of the [Gandhari] Dharmapada” (1962: 54). 
Although the Dharmaguptakas were probably not the only Buddhist 
school using Gandhari in the early centuries of the Christian era (8.2.1.2), we do 
now know that this language was characteristic of them, and thus the linguistic ar- 
gument, combined with the textual evidence, makes the theory of a Dharmaguptaka 
origin for the Chinese Dirghagama very strong. This, taken together with the close 
textual linkage of the new Gandhari text of the Sangiti-sttra with the Chinese 
Dirghagama—that is, the Dharmaguptaka—version and the fact that it was found 
in a pot that had been dedicated to the Dharmaguptakas make it virtually certain 
that we are indeed dealing with the textual tradition of that sect. 
8.2.2.3. Confirmation and Ramifications of the Dharmaguptaka Connection. 
Although a Dharmaguptaka identity is now firmly established for the Sangiti-stitra 
fragment, this does not automatically prove that all the texts found with it are also 
Dharmaguptaka texts, though this is certainly suggested by the fact that they were all 
interred together in a vessel belonging to members of that school. Unfortunately, it 
will be more difficult to confirm the sectarian affiliation of the other texts on inter- 
nal, textual grounds than it was for the Sangiti, where we happen to have another 
Dharmaguptaka version of the text as a basis for comparison. But at least one 
other case points distinctly in the same direction: the striking parallels between the 
descriptions of the previous lives of Ajiatakaundinya and Ananda in fragments 
16 + 25 and the corresponding tales in the Fo pén hsing chi ching, which is probably 
a Dharmaguptaka biography of the Buddha (see 2.2.4). Although the details and 
ramifications of these parallels remain to be worked out, this example (and perhaps 
others remain to be discovered among the avadana texts) is the strongest confirma- 
tion yet found of the theory that the collection as a whole represents Dharmaguptaka 
literature. 
In some other cases, it may be possible to establish that certain of the 
Gandhari texts represent a different recension, presumably reflecting a different sec- 
tarian origin, from other known versions, though this would not necessarily prove 
directly that they are Dharmaguptaka texts. This is the situation, for example, in the 
case of the Anavatapta-gatha, wherein we find a version that differs significantly in 
language, wording, and arrangement from the previously available sectarian recen- 
sions of the same text (the Sarvastivadin, known from central Asian fragments, and 
the Milasarvastivadin, known from the Gilgit manuscripts and from Chinese and 
Tibetan translations). Here it is evident that the Gandhari recension belongs to a 

=== PAGE 223 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
175 
separate tradition, and circumstantial evidence points toward the Dharmaguptakas, 
but the text itself does not seem to provide any direct proof of this. 
In other cases, it may eventually become possible to establish sectarian 
connections for some of the stra and abhidharma texts on internal grounds, for 
example, by reference to their doctrinal positions. But this will have to await detailed 
studies of individual texts, and in any case this approach is more likely to provide 
isolated clues than clear and conclusive proof. 
It should not always be assumed—though it often is—that different ver- 
sions (in terms of language, contents, and arrangement) of a given text necessarily 
correspond to sectarian divisions or that, conversely, a particular sect will necessarily 
have a single and distinct version of a given text. Especially in the case of nontechni- 
cal texts of the type used in the instruction of novices and lay followers, texts which 
were common to most or all schools and regions of Buddhism, it is entirely possible 
that different sectarian recensions were not always clearly distinguished and stan- 
dardized, especially at the relatively early period with which we are concerned here. 
Therefore, simplistic identifications of particular recensions with particular schools 
may produce misleading results. Nevertheless, it is clear that more technical and for- 
mally standardized texts, such as the Sangiti-sttra, did at this period have distinct 
sectarian versions, and it is on these that we will probably have to depend most 
heavily for the study of sectarian affiliation. The apparently complete absence of 
vinaya texts is unfortunate in this respect, since these would naturally have provided 
the most direct, reliable, and definitive markers of sectarian identity. 
Despite these cautions, there remains little doubt that the British Library 
fragments represent, in part at least and quite possibly as a whole, a selection of the 
textual corpus of a Dharmaguptaka monastery. This in turn reinforces the theory, 
proposed by several scholars in the past but not until now clearly supported by 
archeological evidence, that the Dharmaguptaka school flourished in Gandhara. 
Fortunately, a sizable body of new epigraphic data has now become available to 
further corroborate this hypothesis. 
8.2.3. A Revised Picture of the Buddhist Schools in and around Gandhara 
8.2.3.1. New Epigraphic Evidence for Dharmaguptaka Institutions. 
Pot D, 
which contained the manuscripts, is the only one of the five complete inscribed pots 
in the British Library collection that was dedicated to the Dharmaguptakas. Of the 
other four pots, two (B and C) were given to the Sarvastivadins, while the inscriptions 
on the remaining two do not specify any sect. However, the British Library collection 
also includes twenty-six inscribed potsherds (see Appendix, sec. 4) of uncertain 
provenance but possibly from the same site as the pots or from a neighboring site, 
of which at least three (nos. 8, 1, and 17) and possibly a fourth (no. 26) recorded 
donations to the Dharmaguptakas; the names of no other sects were discernible on 
any of these sherds. The Dharmaguptakas are similarly prominent among other re- 

=== PAGE 224 ===
176 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
cent finds of pots and potsherds with Kharosthi inscriptions that probably also came 
from eastern Afghanistan, although once again their exact provenance unfortunately 
cannot be determined. For instance, a pot I saw recently in a private collection has 
a complete Kharosthi inscription, in duplicate, recording the pot’s donation to the 
Dharmaguptaka teachers at Sretharafia; the inscription begins saghe cadudise 
s[re]tharane acaryana dharmaiitakana para|sic|grahami.? The same collection also 
includes a small sherd with the letters takana, which can be confidently restored as 
part of the same or a similar phrase, that is, acaryana dharmaiitakana parigrahami 
or the like. Among the twenty-two inscribed pots and potsherds (seventeen with 
Kharosthi inscriptions, five with Brahmi) in this private collection, besides these two 
references to the Dharmaguptakas there is only one other reference to a particular 
Buddhist sect, the Mahisasakas (aryana [sic] mahisasakana ///), which occurs in a 
Kharosthi inscription on a large potsherd. 
Sadakata (1996b: ins. d, 1996c) has also published a pair of sherds, which 
are evidently parts of the same original pot, with the inscription /// cadudisami 
srethara[nami] /// /// maiitaka ///. This is obviously part of the same formula as that 
of the pot inscription cited above, which therefore must have come from the same 
place, the Sretharafia monastery. Another large sherd, also illustrated by Sakadata 
in figure d (1996b), but not transcribed by him, contains yet another reference to 
the same place (/// [gha]mi cadudi[sa]mi srethara[nami] ... ). The text that follows 
this is not legible in Sadakata’s photograph, but presumably it would have also con- 
tained some variant or part of the phrase acaryana dharmaiitakana parigrahami or 
the like. I have seen a photograph of another inscribed potsherd, apparently from 
the same group though not illustrated by Sadakata, which reads [maliita; this once 
again can be confidently restored to something like acaryana dharmaiitakana 
parigrahami. 
Finally, in 1996 I saw another privately owned pot, similar in form to 
British Library pot E, with a complete Kharosthi inscription. The pot itself, whose 
present whereabouts are not known to me, was in excellent condition, but the 
inscription was worn and damaged, making it very difficult to read. However, the 
phrase acaryana dharmaiitaana parigrahe could be made out fairly clearly. Before 
this was a word ending in -rafie, no doubt the name of the monastery, but the full 
name was illegible. 
8.2.3.2. The New Picture of the Dharmaguptakas and Related Sects. 
Thus, 
we have among recently discovered materials at least nine definite cases, and pos- 
sibly two more, of pot or potsherd inscriptions in Kharosthi recording dedications 
to the teachers of the Dharmaguptaka sect. Among the other inscriptions in the col- 
lections concerned, only two other sects are mentioned, the Sarvastivadins twice (in 
9g. This inscription is partially edited (... acaryana dharmautakana parigrahe ...) in 
Sadakata 1996b (ins. c) and 1996c. 

=== PAGE 225 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
177 
the British Library pots) and the Mahisasakas once. This new material drastically 
shifts the balance of the representation of Buddhist sects in Kharosthi inscriptions 
in general, including reliquary and other types of dedicatory inscriptions as well 
as inscriptions on pots. Previously the Sarvastivadins, and to a lesser extent the 
Kasyapiyas, had predominated, especially in Gandhara proper, while the Dharma- 
guptakas were represented by only two Kharosthi inscriptions, one from Gandhara 
proper (Jamalgarhi) and one from Bactria. But among the new materials, nine of 
twelve definite references to particular sects are to the Dharmaguptakas. Unfortu- 
nately, the provenance of none of these objects is reliably reported, but their overall 
similarity makes it likely that they came from the same general area, and all indica- 
tions are that the area in question is the Jalalabad Plain, that is, the ancient 
Nagarahara. 
Thus, it begins to appear that Nagarahara was a stronghold, quite possi- 
bly even the principal center, of the Dharmaguptaka sect in the early centuries of the 
Christian era. The new inscriptional and textual discoveries confirm the indications 
from Chinese sources that pointed to a northwestern origin and/or concentration 
for this school, showing the Dharmaguptakas centered in the northwest, and partic- 
ularly, it would seem, in eastern Afghanistan, where they evidently flourished under 
the patronage of the Indo-Scythian kingdoms affiliated with the House of Azes. Yet, 
even during the period of their apparent dominance and in the region in question, 
the Dharmaguptakas were no doubt coexisting with other sects, especially the 
Sarvastivadins (see Sadakata 1996b: 312). Thus, it appears that the Dharmaguptakas 
and Sarvastivadins were probably the dominant sects in Nagarahara in the first and 
second centuries A.D. 
As to their specific location, all that we know for sure is that the Sar- 
vastivadins were present at Hadda, as shown by the jar inscription from the Chakhil-i 
Ghundi site published by Fussman (1969) bearing a dedication to that sect and by 
another jar with a Sarvastivadin inscription reported to have been found at the Tapa 
Shutur excavations at Hadda (Tarzi 1976: 409) but not yet published.'° Whether 
the Dharmaguptakas also had monasteries at these or other sites at Hadda itself, or 
whether they were located at some of the many other sites in the neighboring area, 
unfortunately cannot be determined now, but it is quite possible that the members 
of both schools coexisted at Hadda, since the cohabitation of followers of different 
sects is well attested, at least for a somewhat later period, by the reports of the Chi- 
nese pilgrims in India (Lamotte 1988: 519). Probably still other sects were present 
in the area as well; for example, the Mahisasakas, who in most of the traditional 
genealogies of the Buddhist sects are closely connected with the Dharmaguptakas, 
are attested in one of the new potsherd inscriptions, as well as in another recently 
discovered Kharosthi inscription (Fussman 1985b) of unknown provenance, dating 
10. See Fussman’s comment in Sadakata 1996b: 311 n. 34. 

=== PAGE 226 ===
178 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
from about the same period (Azes year 126 = A.D. 69)."' Further archeological in- 
vestigations could probably clarify these and related issues, but given the conditions 
currently prevailing in Afghanistan it is unlikely that any such can be carried out in 
the foreseeable future. 
8.3. Conclusions: 
A New View of Buddhism in Gandhara 
8.3.1. Doctrinal Orientation of the New Manuscripts 
Although it would be premature at this point to draw detailed conclu- 
sions about the doctrinal positions of the tradition represented by the British Library 
fragments, it is worth mentioning that the preliminary studies carried out to date 
reveal no clear traces of Mahayana ideas or tendencies. The only possible exceptions 
noted so far are phrases such as Sufiatae prafia (= Skt. stinyatayah prajna), observed 
in an uncertain context in an unidentified text (frag. 10, v, line 9), apparently a com- 
mentary of some sort; but such terminology, though characteristic of the Mahayana, 
is by no means exclusive to it. In general, the fragments seem to concern issues and 
subjects that are typical of “mainstream” (i.e., pre- or non-Mahayana) Indian Bud- 
dhism.” Of course, closer analyses of individual texts, including the one just cited, 
might bring to light material that would require modification of this statement, but 
on the whole it appears that the manuscripts come from a time and place in which 
Mahayana ideas had not come into play at all, or at least were not being reflected in 
scholastic texts. This issue is of particular interest because these texts come from a 
period and region—first-century a.p. Gandhara—which, according to some views 
at least, played a central role in the origins of Mahayana. It remains to be seen in 
what way, if any, the new manuscripts may contribute to this issue, but it now seems 
most likely that any such contribution will be a negative, or at best an indirect, one. 
Of course, further analysis and possible future discoveries could well change the pic- 
ture, but as matters stand at this point, the British Library scrolls do not offer any 
support for the hypothesis of a relatively early origin for Mahayana Buddhism. 
8.3.2. Gandhara as a Center of Buddhist Intellectual Activity 
Even before the discovery of the new Kharosthi manuscripts, there was 
no doubt that Gandhara had been an important center of Buddhist scholarship at 
various periods. Hstian-tsang, for example, reports, “From old times until now this 
border-land of India has produced many authors of sastras” (Beal 1884: 98; see also 
Zwalf 1996: 1.30 and 33 n. 12), and the abhidharma tradition preserved in Chinese 
translation also testifies to the extensive intellectual activity there. Nevertheless, di- 
rect evidence of original Gandharan texts has until now been lacking, and this has 
11. For the revised interpretation of this date, which Fussman tentatively read as the Azes year 
26, see Salomon 199sb: 130. 
12. On these terms, see section 2.2.2, n. 21. 

=== PAGE 227 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
179 
led to skepticism on the part of some scholars about the intellectual originality and 
regional distinctiveness of Gandharan Buddhism in the early centuries of the Chris- 
tian era. Fussman, for instance, remarks: “The list of sects active in Gandhara and 
the epigraphical attestations . 
. 
. assure us, in any case, of the nonexistence in Gan- 
dhara of texts truly specific to that region. The same texts were studied there as else- 
where in north India. . 
. 
. On the level of ideology, the Buddhism of Gandhiara is 
not distinguished at all from Gangetic Buddhism” (1994: 43).'3 Such skepticism may 
have been justified on the basis of the previously known textual evidence, mainly 
inscriptions, whose “doctrinal content . 
. 
. contains nothing but the most banal” 
(Fussman 1994: 22). But the new discoveries reveal—not surprisingly, in hindsight— 
that the inscriptions gave us a very incomplete and therefore misleading picture. 
They reflect, for the most part, ritual activities concerned with the relic cult and 
pious donations to monasteries, and as such there is no reason to expect them to 
contain much more than stereotyped formulae, or to be surprised that such “textual” 
passages as they do contain are no more than “a collection of cliches” or “an anthol- 
ogy of more or less accurate citations, not extracted from any particular text” (Fuss- 
man 1982: 37). But we now know that the absence of regionally distinctive textual 
materials in the inscriptions did not mean that they did not exist, merely that they 
were not expressed therein. With the benefit of hindsight, it seems only natural that 
Gandharan Buddhism of the first and second centuries a.p. should have developed 
an extensive and distinctive textual and intellectual tradition to match its tremen- 
dous achievements in the material expression of its beliefs in the form of sculpture, 
architecture, etc. Indeed, it would have been surprising if this period of Gandharan 
Buddhism had not had a rich intellectual tradition of its own—though this too is 
easier to say in hindsight. 
Of course, it still remains to be determined exactly how much of the new 
textual material is in fact original to Gandhara. As mentioned above, the scholastic 
texts, which are the most important in this respect, happen also to be the type of 
material whose origins are most difficult to pin down on linguistic and stylistic cri- 
teria. If it can be provisionally assumed that those texts for which no parallels have 
been found in other Buddhist traditions are of Gandharan origin, the amount of 
such distinctive material is quite large in proportion to the total extent of the frag- 
ments. But this is a dangerous assumption, since it is quite possible that parallels for 
at least some of these texts will eventually be identified, and moreover, even if they 
are not, this may mean only that they happen not to have survived in those other 
traditions, not that they were never known to them. 
13. “La liste des sectes actives au Gandhara et les témoignages épigraphiques . . 
. nous 
assurent en tout cas de l’inexistence au Gandhara de textes véritablement spécifiques a ce pays. On 
y étudiait les mémes textes qu’ailleurs en Inde du Nord. . . 
. sur le plan idéologique, le bouddhisme 
du Gandhara ne se distingue en rien du bouddhisme gangétique.” 

=== PAGE 228 ===
180 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
There is at least one important class of textual materials, however, for 
which a local Gandharan origin is nearly certain: this is the avadana texts, whose 
local character is indicated by references to historical figures of the region and by 
their marked contrasts with the avadana traditions attested in Buddhist schools of 
other regions. This in itself is enough to compel a modification of the view, quoted 
above, that “the same texts were studied there as elsewhere in north India.” To what 
degree the new manuscripts will prove to represent a distinct intellectual tradition 
will become clear only gradually as they are studied in detail, but there is every rea- 
son to expect that they will confirm that the material richness of Gandharan Bud- 
dhism was matched by its scholastic achievements. 
8.3.3. The Geographic and Chronological Context of the British Library Scrolls 
The references in the avadana texts to the rulers Jihonika and ASspavar- 
man indicate that the textual tradition represented in these manuscripts, though 
not necessarily the manuscripts themselves, goes back at least to the time of the later 
Indo-Scythian kingdoms of the early first century a.p. This shows that the great 
flowering of Gandharan Buddhism was not exclusively or even primarily a phe- 
nomenon of the Kusana period, particularly of the time of Kaniska, as it may have 
appeared in the past. Later Buddhist tradition itself, among other influences, has 
given us this impression through its enthusiastic celebration of Kaniska’s patronage, 
and his generosity seems to have outshone that of his Indo-Scythian predecessors 
and in effect expunged them from Buddhist historical tradition. But other factors 
may be at work as well. The textual and epigraphic material presented here makes 
it possible to conceive a situation wherein the Dharmaguptaka school was the pre- 
dominant one, at least in parts of the northwestern region, in the earlier part of the 
first century a.D., while it enjoyed the patronage of the Indo-Scythian kings. Under 
their successors, the Kusanas, however, the Sarvastivadins seem to have gained the 
upper hand, and it is surely no accident that Kaniska is portrayed as the great 
patron, a latter-day Asoka as it were, in the Sarvastivadin tradition. Such a shift in 
sectarian fortunes would be consistent with parallel developments that have been 
posited for early central Asian Buddhism, where the Dharmaguptakas seem to have 
prevailed at an early period before they were eclipsed by the Sarvastivadins. It 
would also contribute to an explanation of the apparent disappearance of much of 
the tradition represented in the new manuscripts. Kaniska’s role as the patron par 
excellence of the Sarvastivadins might have led to the suppression, or perhaps just 
the displacement, of references to earlier Dharmaguptaka patrons such as Jihonika 
and Aspavarman, so that their names were entirely forgotten in subsequent Buddhist 
traditions. 
The new evidence of scholastic activity in Gandharan Buddhist institu- 
tions in the Indo-Scythian period accords with numerous recent discoveries of relic 
inscriptions dedicated by the Apraca kings and other Indo-Scythian rulers of the 

=== PAGE 229 ===
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
181 
late first century B.c. and early first century a.p. (see Salomon 1996a: 443, 450). 
Thus, Fussman’s assertion, based mainly on the epigraphic evidence, that “the 
Indo-Scythian period and the Kushana period are the golden age of Gandharan 
Buddhism” (1994: 32; emphasis mine) is confirmed by the new material. The geo- 
graphical connections involved, however, are less clear, not only because the exact 
provenances of the manuscripts and many of the other relevant artifacts are not 
known, but also because of our sketchy knowledge of the territories of the Indo- 
Scythian rulers associated with them. Among the Indo-Scythian rulers mentioned 
in the new manuscripts, Jihonika is entitled in his Taxila inscription (cited in 7.1.1) 
“Satrap of Cukhsa,” a toponym generally believed to correspond to the modern 
Chach, representing approximately the area around Taxila (Konow 1929: Lxix; 
Marshall 1951: 1.48, 2.773-4). The territories of ASpavarman are more difficult to pin 
down, but they presumably were at least partly equivalent to those of his forefathers, 
the kings of Apraca, who seem to have ruled in Bajaur and perhaps in the adjoining 
regions to the east bordering on the lower Swat Valley (Salomon 1995a: 30). Although 
there is no direct evidence during the period in question of the political status of 
the Nagarahara region, where the manuscripts were evidently stored and copied 
and presumably also originally written, the region was probably within the Indo- 
Scythian Empire, so that even if it was not part of the personal territories of Jihonika 
or ASpavarman, it is not surprising to find that they were active there as patrons.'4 
One can easily imagine, for example, that they undertook tours of pilgrimage in this 
area, in the course of which they bestowed their largess on the many Buddhist insti- 
tutions there. This hypothesis is supported by the inscription on British Library pot 
A (see 7.2.2 and Appendix, pp. 198-9), which records its dedication by one Vasava- 
datta, who is probably the sister of the Apraca prince Indravarman and hence the 
aunt of ASpavarman. 
In conclusion, the preliminary survey and analysis of the British Library 
scrolls presented here indicate that they represent a random but reasonably repre- 
sentative fraction of what was probably a much larger set of texts preserved in the 
library of a monastery of the Dharmaguptaka sect in Nagarahara. At least some of 
the unanswered questions about these texts and their origins, significance, and influ- 
ence on later Buddhist traditions will gradually be answered as the texts are studied 
and edited in years to come, though it is probably also wise to assume that they will 
raise at least as many new questions as they will answer old ones—this being the na- 
14. Although the Buddhist sites at Hadda and neighboring places are generally dated to the 
late and post-Kusana period, this is probably only a result of the incomplete archeological investi- 
gations that have been carried out there. It is not at all unlikely that some of these sites, if not the 
surviving structures, go back to the first century A.D. or possibly even earlier (see Mustamandi 
1974: 111). For example, the evidence of coin hoards from reliquary deposits in stupas at Hadda and 
adjoining sites assembled in MacDowall 1990 (esp. pp. 732-3) shows that several of these deposits 
go back to the time of Gondophares and Wima Kadphises, that is, to the early first century A.D. 

=== PAGE 230 ===
182. 
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF THE NEW CORPUS 
ture of such discoveries. No doubt these future studies will also necessitate extensive 
revisions, and quite possibly also retractions, of what has been presented here, so I 
hasten to repeat what was said at the outset, namely, that most of the statements in 
this book are more or less provisional and that it is presented more in the spirit of 
an agenda for future discussion than of a definitive treatise. It is much too soon to 
try to predict what effect this discovery will ultimately have on our understanding of 
the early history and development of Buddhism, but it is probably safe to say that it 
will provoke the rethinking of issues such as the regional character of early Indian 
Buddhist traditions, the process of the formation of standardized written canons, 
and the transmission of Buddhism into central and east Asia. 

=== PAGE 231 ===
Appendix 
Inscribed Pots and Potsherds in 
the British Library Collection 
|. Technical Description and Evaluation of the Pots and Potsherds 
(by Raymond Allchin) 
!.1. Character and Comparative Status of the Ceramic Craft Exemplified in 
the Collection 
Miller (1985) has shown that globular vessels of one kind or another are 
still regularly manufactured in villages throughout India and Pakistan. Such vessels 
are generally known by specific type-names, which vary from region to region and 
with the language or dialect spoken (matka, ghara, kundi, goli, maman, etc.). In his 
study of the pottery of a central Indian village, Miller found that each of the several 
type-names of the globular pots was in theory associated with a specific function, 
but that in practice the vessels might be used for a variety of functions apart from 
water carrying and storage. These included the storage of numerous varieties of 
grain and other foodstuffs. We have also seen instances of such globular pots being 
used for burying ashes collected from cremations. That they should serve as reposi- 
tories for worn-out manuscripts or other relics in a religious context is entirely cred- 
ible. We shall see below that waterpots of this kind are frequently found in Buddhist 
monasteries in northwest Pakistan, and that examples inscribed with Buddhist do- 
native or dedicatory phrases are a regular occurrence in this region. Callieri’s (1997) 
summary of data relating to discoveries of pottery in Buddhist monasteries in Swat 
confirms this statement.’ These prefatory remarks are intended to indicate the 
difference between the theory of a potter making a pot of a particular form which 
is known by a particular name and which ideally should be used for a particular 
function, and actual practice, in which any of several differently named pots may 
be used for any of several functions. 
1.2. The Inscribed Pots 
Of the five inscribed pots in the British Library collection, four are 
complete (pots B, C, D, and E), and one (pot A) has lost its neck and rim. All five 
belong to the class of globular or near-globular jars used for the carrying and 
1. [This publication is not yet available to me, and hence has not been consulted—RS. } 
183 

=== PAGE 232 ===
184 APPENDIX 
storage of water and for domestic storage of a wide range of commodities. 
In spite of minor differences in the rims, the four complete pots are 
essentially all of one type. They are all made from a finely sorted alluvial clay, which 
gives the impression that it was derived from a single, probably local source. The clay 
of pot B is slightly less well sorted than that of the other three, and the body clay in- 
cludes numerous small particles, apparently of mica. The pots are manufactured by 
a well-known technique which involves the initial throwing of a small, thick-bodied 
vessel on the wheel. This vessel is subsequently expanded by beating out the body 
with the aid of a wooden paddle and an anvil. In many parts of south Asia anvils are 
often found in archeological assemblages. They are occasionally made of stone, but 
more commonly of terra-cotta. The beating of the globular body is applied by the 
paddle from outside while the anvil is held in the other hand inside the pot. A good 
description of the technique as it is practiced today in northwestern Pakistan can be 
found in Rye and Evans 1976: 50-3; the method is used, with regional minor varia- 
tions, throughout the Indian subcontinent and has been described many times in 
the past century or more. The rim and neck of the pot are thrown on the wheel as a 
separate unit, and once the expanded body and the neck are leather-hard the two are 
luted together to make the finished form. One can confidently infer the use of these 
processes from the telltale traces they occasionally leave. In the interior of the globu- 
lar body, some visible traces are almost always left by the anvil in the form of slight 
concavities; similarly, at the junction of the neck and body of the pot, the interior 
often retains the finger marks made during the luting process. 
The surface of the British Library vessels has been smoothed or lightly 
burnished, possibly with a string of beads, and a light wash or slip, of cream or buff 
color, has been added, apparently before firing. Pots A, B, and C have been further 
decorated with stamped impressions of lotus rosettes (numbering three, three, and 
four respectively). The pots have been well fired, the clay has burnt to a pink-to-red 
oxidized color, and the surface wash is generally of a lighter pink to creamy buff 
color. The ink inscriptions and the occasional red ocher lines appear in all cases to 
have been added to the pots after firing. 
!.3. The Inscribed Potsherds 
The inscribed potsherds display several decorative features that are not 
in evidence on the complete pots, although in terms of their original forms one may 
hazard a guess that almost all are fragments of similar waterpots. The principal ex- 
ception is a shallow bowl, or “beaker,” having a distinctive profile, in which the upper 
half of the wall is concave, with a rounded rim, while the lower half is markedly con- 
vex (no. 14; fig. 55). The type doubtless has its origins in the imitations of metallic 
forms found at Shaikhan Dheri and elsewhere in the Indo-Greek period, and con- 
tinuing in modified form through all subsequent periods down to the late Kusana. 
Following Marshall (1951), we may reasonably infer that the missing base for such a 

=== PAGE 233 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
beaker was a standard foot. The closest parallels for the British Library example 
come from the middle Kusana period at Shaikhan Dheri (Husain 1980: type 11.2, 
pl. 25, nos. 1-4; see below). 
As far as can be seen, the clay of the sherds is very similar to that of the 
pots. As a rule the sherds have burned to a good pink-red color. The surface is in 
most instances covered with a cream-buff wash, part of which has sometimes flaked 
off, revealing the redder body clay beneath. A new feature of surface treatment is 
supplied by the use of a wooden paddle scored with parallel grooves. This produces 
a distinctive surface decoration, applied as a diagonal band in the case of no. 24 and 
as two diagonally opposed lines producing a herringbone effect in no. 3. Several 
sherds have one or more bands of wavy lines incised in the wet clay (nos. 1, 13, 20, 
and 25). No. 9 has been incised with what appears to be a roulette (fig. 52). Nos. 20 
and 22 are decorated with appliqué bands, incised diagonally to make what look like 
cables in the case of the latter and a chain in the former (figs. 57-8). Stamped decora- 
tions can be seen on several sherds. Nos. 6 (fig. 50), 10, and 18 have lotus rosettes, and 
no. 25 shows the edge of a rather different form of rosette, surrounded by an outer 
ring of dots. No. 3 has a characteristic wheat-ear motif stamped upon its upper sec- 
tion. No. 7 has a unique stamped oblong motif measuring approximately 3 by 4 cm 
(fig. 51). Its subject is not clear. It may represent a lajja gauri, a headless nude female 
with knees raised and thighs spread wide to reveal the genitalia. But it is more prob- 
ably intended to represent the head of a lion or other beast with forepaws crossed, 
emerging from a cave in the manner seen in the Gandharan icon of the visit of Indra 
to the Buddha in his mountain retreat (see Marshall 1960: pl. 83). 
!.4. Possible Provenance of the Pots and Potsherds 
The information derived from this short view of the potter’s craft in the 
two groups leads to certain tentative conclusions. First, the whole collection appears 
to be coherent and evidently represents the production of a single potter’s yard, or at 
least a single group of potter’s yards. The probability is that the wares were produced 
locally and sold to the users, who added their own inscriptions and employed the 
pots for their own purposes. To know more of these purposes, the nature of the in- 
scriptions must also be taken into account. Unfortunately, no information is avail- 
able regarding the site from which the finds were derived. There are, however, certain 
pointers toward the general area in which it may have been. The context suggests 
that the site was a Buddhist monastery, and judging by other finds of comparable 
pottery, we may infer that the collection comes either from somewhere in the North- 
West Frontier Province of Pakistan or from adjacent parts of Afghanistan. 
A number of good comparative examples come from the former region. 
Marshall and Vogel (1902-3) discovered four large “chattis,’* three bearing inscrip- 
2. The term chatti is Anglo-Indian, deriving from the Tamil name for a waterpot. 

=== PAGE 234 ===
186 
APPENDIX 
tions, during excavations in the Buddhist monastic complex of Palata Dheri (see 
4.3), a short distance from Charsada. Their description of these vessels and their 
manufacture suggests that they were more or less identical to the British Library 
pots and provides a good early account of the beating technique. The Kharosthi in- 
scriptions were republished by Konow (1929: 120-2), who also described potsherds 
bearing related inscriptions from Takht-i-Bahi and Sahri Bahlol (pp. 63 and 112-2). 
In all these cases the inscriptions reinforce the clear archeological indications that 
they were discovered in Buddhist monastic sites. 
A further body of data, in the form of twenty-four inscribed sherds, 
was brought to the representative of the Archaeological Survey of India in Peshawar 
shortly before partition. They were studied and published by B. C. Chhabra (1949- 
50), the government epigraphist at that time. The exact whereabouts of the discovery 
was not known and could not be ascertained, but Chhabra inferred that they had 
probably been discovered in a Buddhist monastic institution in the vicinity of 
Peshawar itself. 
Inscribed pottery, including a “water jar,” is reported in the Italian exca- 
vations in Swat (Callieri 1989: 227; 1997). From farther east in Pakistan, Taxila offers 
a well-excavated series of sites for comparison with the craft aspects of the British 
Library collection. Certainly, Taxila provides evidence of the early occurrence of 
globular jars from ca. 200 B.c. and their continuation until at least ca. A.D. 100, 
and probably thereafter. A late find of this sort came from sttipa deposits at Bhamala 
(stupas As and Ais), datable to the fifth century (Marshall 1951: 1.394). But inscribed 
pots do not appear to have been found at any of the excavated monastic sites at 
Taxila. It is also noteworthy that the local clay in that region is recognizably not as 
finely sorted as that of the Vale of Peshawar or the alluvial plains of the Indus or its 
main tributaries. 
Although there were undoubtedly many Buddhist monasteries in the 
area of Nagarahara around Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan, and although there are 
references to discoveries of pottery and in some instances even of inscribed pottery 
there, the publication of this material is scarcely adequate to allow critical compari- 
son to be made with the British Library materials (see Callieri 1997: 424-5). My rec- 
ollection of the pottery of that region and my knowledge of the terrain indicate that 
equally finely sorted alluvial clays are also common there. I must therefore enter a 
caveat against drawing any inference either positive or negative from an argumen- 
tum ex silentio in this context, but we may conclude that this area must be regarded 
as one of the possible sources for the British Library collection. 
!.5. Probable Dates of the Pots and Potsherds 
The ceramic evidence offers a surprisingly clear indication of the date 
of manufacture of the British Library collection. This is largely thanks to a detailed 
study of the pottery obtained from the well-stratified excavations at Shaikhan Dheri 

=== PAGE 235 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS_ 
187 
(Dani 1965-6). Regrettably, the study in question is as yet unpublished, but it is 
available in the form of the Ph.D. thesis of Dr. Javed Husain (1980). Further evidence 
is available from the well-published accounts of pottery finds throughout the exca- 
vated sites at Taxila (Marshall 1951). Another excavation that will undoubtedly be 
helpful when it is published is that of Barikot in Swat. The broader perspective on 
the history of the globular jars or waterpots can be augmented by reference to sites 
in the Ganges Valley. At Hastinapura and Atranjikhera these vessels make their first 
regular appearance in the period of the northern black polished ware and thus 
neatly coincide with the evidence from Taxila mentioned above. 
At Shaikhan Dheri, Husain classifies waterpots as his type 31 and globu- 
lar jars as his type 32.1. Although both these types deserve our attention, it is particu- 
larly the former which we may compare with the British Library pots. The globular 
body does not convey much information, but the neck and rim forms do. They sug- 
gest that our pots are equally close to the early Kusana and the middle Kusana exam- 
ples from Shaikhan Dheri. The British Library beaker (no. 26) is closely similar to a 
type that occurs at both Taxila and Shaikhan Dher'i; at the latter site it is represented 
by Husain’s type 11.2, which is found in every period in the excavation (i.e., Indo- 
Greek; Scytho-Parthian; and early, middle, and late Kusana). Here too, the closest 
resemblances are to examples from the early and middle Kusana periods. At Taxila, 
Marshall refers to a type of open-mouthed pots with standard bases which occur 
during the late Saka-Parthian period at Sirkap. This type is probably earlier than 
our example, but it seems probable that the Shaikhan Dheri type 11.2 was also origi- 
nally mounted upon a standard base, as Husain suggests. One other possible cross- 
dating point is available for the tanga-like motif painted on sherd no. 12 (fig. 53). 
This closely resembles an example illustrated by Hartel (1993: fig. 115) from Sonkh 
and there assigned to the Kusana period. 
To sum up: my reading of this evidence points toward the early and 
middle Kusana periods at Shaikhan Dheri as the time of closest resemblance between 
the British Library and the Shaikhan Dheri ceramics. There is, however, no question 
that many elements of the pottery at Shaikhan Dheri and similar sites originated 
several centuries earlier than this date, and related examples occur not only in the 
Indo-Greek and Saka-Parthian periods but in some instances also in the late Kusana 
period. However, the closest parallels for our British Library inscribed pottery are to 
be found in the intermediate early and middle Kusana periods. 
2. Kharosthi 
Pot and Potsherd Inscriptions 
Inscribed pots or, more often, fragments of pots made of clay, or occa- 
sionally of metal, have been found at many sites in the area of ancient Bactria and 
Gandhara and adjoining regions of modern Pakistan and Afghanistan and Uzbek- 
istan (see map 3). Like the British Library pots and potsherds, they typically have 

=== PAGE 236 ===
188 APPENDIX 
Kharosthi or sometimes Brahmi? inscriptions recording their donation to Buddhist 
monasteries. Konow’s corpus of Kharosthi inscriptions (1929) included specimens 
from Takht-i-Bahi (no. XXII), Palatt Dheri (LV), Sahri Bahlol (LVI), and Tor Dherai 
(XCII). Since the publication of Konow’s volume, many more examples of such in- 
scriptions have been discovered. Particularly important specimens have been found 
from Peshawar (Chhabra 1949-50), Qunduz (Fussman 1974: 58-61), and Kara Tepe 
and Faiz Tepe near Termez, Uzbekistan (Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1983: 24—42; Verto- 
gradova 1995). Other examples include those from Basawal (Mizuno 1971: 1.23, 2.39— 
41, 108-9), Butkara (Petech 1966), Tepe Zargaran (Balkh; Schlumberger 1949: 183—4),° 
Gul Dara (Fussman and Le Berre 1976: 92-3, pl. li), Saidu Sharif (Fussman in Callieri 
1989: 225-30), Mekhasanda (Mizuno 1969: 58, 93-4), Ranigat (Gandhdara 2 1988: 
59-62, 127-30), and Shaikhan Dheri (Dani 1965—6: 109-13), as well as examples of un- 
known provenance (Sadakata 1996b: part 4, 1996c; Salomon 1996b: 238—42). Of par- 
ticular interest in the present context are the several inscriptions of this type found 
at Hadda. Only two of them have been published (no. 1: Konow 1929: no. LXXXII 
and Konow 1935-6; no. 2: Fussman 1969), while a third, found at the Tapa Shutur site 
and apparently recording a dedication to the Sarvastivadins, was briefly mentioned 
by Tarzi (1976: 409). 
There are also probably many other inscriptions of this type in various 
museums and private collections which have not been properly reported or pub- 
lished. For example, “a considerable number” of potsherds with Kharosthi inscrip- 
tions, containing as many as eighteen aksaras, were found by D. B. Spooner and 
Aurel Stein during the excavations at Sahri Bahlol (Konow 1929: 122 and references 
given there in nn. 3 and 4), but these have apparently never been published or illus- 
trated. Also, a private collection (see 8.2.3.1) contains seventeen pots and potsherds 
with Kharosthi inscriptions, which I hope to publish in the near future. It is likely 
that many other inscriptions of this type have been found in the course of excava- 
tions, officially sanctioned or otherwise, but not properly reported or even saved. 
At some of the sites noted above, large numbers of specimens of 
fragmentary inscriptions of this type have been found. These include Gul Dara 
(eight), Saidu Sharif (eleven), Shaikhan Dheri (twenty-three), Peshawar (twenty- 
3. Inscriptions of this type in Brahmi script have been found in good numbers in the north- 
west; see, e.g., the several examples from Termez and other sites in Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1983: 
42-9 and Vertogradova 1995: 89-113. The periods of use of the two scripts must have been at least 
partly overlapping, since there are several examples of biscripts (Vertogradova 1995: 106-13), but 
in general the Brahmi inscriptions can be presumed to be later than those in Kharosthi. 
4. See the list and bibliography in Fussman and Le Berre 1976: 92, though this too is now out 
of date. 
5. The reading by R. Curiel cited by Schlumberger (1949: 184) and Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 
(1983: 29), khurosammi (rva?), is incorrect. The first four aksaras are clearly dudisami, obviously 
part of the standard formula saghecadudisami. The following letter is apparently ko, after which 
there are traces of one or two more characters which cannot be read. This piece is also illustrated 
and briefly mentioned, without a reading, in Gardin 1957: 41, pl. XVI.s5. 

=== PAGE 237 ===
TAJIKISTA No 
Approximate Scale — 1:9,250,000 
Map 3. Findspots of pots and potsherds 
with Kharosthi inscriptions 
_y 
f 
iS 
»\Kara Tepe 
4 
of 
face 
© 
Ais 
ae 
om wat Faiz glepe 
( 
gus al 
} 
age 
0 
100 
200 
300 km 
TY 
eS 
é 
4 
catia 
S (Ars pik: =. oy | 
' 
of “VW 
% 
Sie 
Va) 
\ 
‘ 
d 
T 
Tepe Zargaran 
* Qunduz 
es. 
G ie [ N A 
& 
* ao ee a 
8 
AFGHANISTAN 
sy 
fe “ 
s 
St See 
u 
Shari 
: 
Ko 
a bul Deke Dheri Tak Bahi 
ae G: o 
Gul Dara, is 
Ra at 
SG 
Hadda* 
ang 
<< 
aS 
\ inhstha i‘. 
nN 
Basawal 
7 Sahri Bahlol 
~~ 
Peshawar i 
Dheri | 
ys 
poe 
es 
- 
e 
© 
| peut 
.s 
b 
| 
( 
i 
Ney 
Sos! 
aces 
va 
gone be ee 
a = 
\ 
’ 
Y a 
& is 
( of 
/ 
A 
Si 
Of 
othe 
ak 
: 
liga \ 
| 
<| 
Fe 
ae 
L 4 
2 
=} 
ees 
vA 
va 
\ 
i ys Se 
if 
( a 
a iw 
wn lg 
' 
\ 
ue 
we a 
_—— 
j 
! 
( 
ZL 
we 
ies cach 
2 
a 
Z of 
< 
lat? 
y 
ys 
ates 
5 
Tor Dherai* | , 
oie 
INDIA 
y 
(vi 
Snes 
—- 
PAKISTAN 
/ ~~ 
Le 
PE 
\ 
| 
as 
a 
a 
45°N 
Approx. Scale — |:400,000 
RAE 
OD 
soit 
0 
5 mi 
PRG 
STAN 
Lone, Beare oe 
‘ 
(ia ee ne ee eae 
al 
ae 
: 
Bes 
TAWKISTAN 
MAIN |e EIENA 
xs 
= 
MAP 
Ne 
mY 
Ki 
f 
nat 
Ly) 
S 
DETAIL MAP 
ee 
= Z 
IRAN 
PS” 
ae 
Tibet 
Lae 
| 
= 
| 
df 
1S 
Chakhil-i Ghundi | 
one 
; 
be 
\7 
Tapa Shutur 
ae 
Hi 
adda 
/ 
Masson s tope13 
4 
ose 
Aon 
5° N 

=== PAGE 238 ===
190 
APPENDIX 
four), and especially Termez (at least ninety-four). In most cases, only sherds bear- 
ing small fragments of the original inscriptions have survived. Complete or nearly 
complete inscriptions such as the five being published here are relatively rare; the 
only previously known ones are the specimens from Qunduz and Hadda (no. 1) and 
from an undetermined provenance (Salomon 1996b: 238—42).° Konow was able to 
piece together from the Tor Dherai fragments, which came from several different 
pots with identical or similar inscriptions, an almost complete text,” so that, from 
a textual point of view, they constitute in effect a full inscription. 
The inscriptions on the clay vessels were typically written with black ink 
after the jars had been fired (Fussman and Le Berre 1976: 92), as is the case with the 
new specimens presented here. The inscription is usually placed on the shoulder of 
the pot, often just below a decorative line, either incised or inked. The quality of the 
writing varies widely, from highly calligraphic (as in British Library pot C) to semi- 
literate. Inscriptions of the latter class often present serious difficulties for their edi- 
tors, but the interpretation of such records generally, and the reconstruction of the 
fragmentary ones, are facilitated by their formulaic character. Dedicatory inscrip- 
tions on the pots, like other types of Buddhist donative records, followed fairly stan- 
dard patterns. The following would be a typical donative formula in the longer pot 
inscriptions (of which the reconstructed Tor Dherai inscription, quoted in n. 7, is a 
good specimen): 
This (water)pot [(paniya-)ghada or -kudika] is the pious gift [deyadharma 
or danamukha] of so-and-so in the possession [parigrahe or pratigrahe] of 
the teachers [acaryanam] of such-and-such a sect in the universal commu- 
nity [caturdise saghe] at such-and-such a place. May it be for a primary share 
[of the merit of the donation; agre- or samme-pratyamsa] on the part of [the 
donor’s] parents, relatives, and all beings. 
Within this general pattern, the texts vary considerably, particularly in 
the concluding blessing, which may also contain other wishes such as “for the benefit 
of [the donor’s] own health” (atmanasa arogadaksinae). Many examples (such as in 
the one edited in Salomon 1996b) use a much briefer donative formula, omitting, for 
6. There are also two complete pot inscriptions in the private collection mentioned above. 
7. sahi-yola-miras(y)a viharasvamis(y)a deyadharmo yam prapa svakiya [or [a *]taniya]- 
yola-mira-sahi-vihare samghe caturdise acaryanam sarvastivadinam parigrahe. ito ca s(r)amapa- 
rityagato agre [*ma]tapitrinam [pratiyam* 
]so sarvasatvanam agre pratiyamso dharmapatis(y)a ca 
dirghayu[ta bhavatu*]. Konow (1929: 176) translates: “Of the Shahi Yola Mira, the master of the 
vihara, this water hall (is) the religious gift, in his own Yola-Mira-shahi-Vihara, to the order of the 
four quarters, in the acceptance of the Sarvastivadin teachers. And from this right donation may 
there be in future a share for (his) mother and father, in future a share for all beings and long life 
for the master of the law.” 

=== PAGE 239 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
191 
example, the label “This (water)pot, the blessing, and other portions of the full for- 
mula such as the sect of the recipients. In some cases, as in pot D described below, 
even the donor’s name is omitted, surprising as this may seem.® 
The Buddhist sects mentioned as recipients in inscriptions of this class 
are the Sarvastivadins, in the Hadda (no. 2) and Tor Dherai inscriptions, as well as 
in British Library pots B and C described here; the Dharmaguptakas, in Qunduz, 
British Library pot D and potsherds 8, 11, 17, as well as in several other pots and 
potsherds, mostly still unpublished; the Mahisasakas (one unpublished piece; see 
8.2.3.1); the Kasyapiyas and(?) the Bahusrutikas, in the Palatt Dheri potsherd, and 
possibly also the Kasyapiyas in Takht-i-Bahi;? and the Mahasanghikas, in as many 
as twelve inscriptions from Termez.’° 
3. The Inscribed Pots in the British Library Collection 
Pot A 
Pot A (pls. 22-3 and fig. 14) is a large wheel-made vessel of coarse red clay 
with gritty inclusions, globular in form with a round bottom. The neck is lost, and 
the jar has been reconstructed from the surviving fragments, which compose most, 
though not all, of its body. One of the missing pieces contained part of one of the 
inscriptions (no. 2), of which about 9.5 cm has therefore been lost, but the missing 
text can be reconstructed from formulaic parallels. The pot, in its present condition 
(i.e., without the neck), is 37.6 cm high, with a maximum diameter of 40.5 cm. It is 
decorated, just below the neck, with five parallel incised horizontal grooves, below 
which is a single wavy line. Lower down on the shoulder, about 11 cm from the lower 
edge of the (lost) neck, is a thick blurry line of red pigment, which runs through 
three circular stamped designs, spread more or less evenly around the circumference 
of the pot, consisting of six-petaled lotuses inside a circle. There was probably also a 
fourth such stamp in the missing portion of the vessel. These symbols are stamped 
into the jar at the level of the main inscription (no. 2), which is written just below 
the red line. With reference to the inscription, the stamped designs fall at the begin- 
ning (before aya), between susomabharyae and atmanasa, and between suhasomasa 
and sammepratyasae. 
8. See below, section 5.1 for further discussion of this point. 
g. Only the first syllable, ka, is preserved. This could stand for kasaviyana, “of the Kasyapiyas” 
(Konow 1929: 63). 
10. Kara Tepe nos. 2, 6, 36, 63 (Vertogradova 1995); Faiz Tepe nos. 11, 14, 23, 25, 30, 32, 36b, 37 
(Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1983). In most of these examples the word mahasamghigana, “of the 
Mahasanghikas,” or the like is incompletely preserved but can be confidently restored from the 
context and the parallels provided by the sherds which do have the complete word (Kara Tepe 
no. 63 and Faiz Tepe no. 37). 

=== PAGE 240 ===
Fig. 14. Cross section of pot A, 
with inscriptions | and 2 

=== PAGE 241 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS_ 
193 
Fig. 15. Detail of inscriptions | and 2 on pot A 
This jar bears two inscriptions. The briefer inscription (no. 1, pl. 23 and 
figs. 14-15, 19-22) is written near the top, about 5 cm below the neck and slightly 
below the decorative incised lines. The five words of this inscription are spaced 
evenly around the circumference, covering a total space of 60 cm. The letters are 
similar in size to those of the main inscription (no. 2)—that is, about 0.8-1.2 cm 
in height on average—and are in the same hand. Except for the second word, the 
inscription is clear: 
bhadamta 
[caJt[ulaJsa 
saghapriya 
sadhamviharisa 
 pratigraha 
The possession of the Reverend Catula(?), pupil of Samghapriya. 
The formulation here is unusual in that it records a dedication to an 
individual monk; most dedicatory inscriptions of this sort are addressed to the uni- 
versal community (saghe caturdise), often also specifying the teachers (acarya) of a 
particular sect or at a particular monastery (see below, sec. 5.2). The use of the ap- 
parently endingless pratigraha instead of the usual locative form (pratigrahe or prati- 
grahami) is paralleled in the Wardak vase inscription (line 4, esa vihara acaryana 

=== PAGE 242 ===
194 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 16. Detail of inscription 2 on pot A 
mahasamghigana parigraha)," which Konow (1929: 170) takes as a nominative (“This 
vihara is the acceptance of the Mahasanghika teachers”), but which Fussman (1989: 
472) considers to be an example of the locative in -a (cf. above, 6.5.1). This latter in- 
terpretation is possible, in which case the translation would be “[Given] in the posses- 
sion of ...,” but in light of the parallels from other inscriptions that serve to label the 
pots they are written on as the property of an individual monk (see below, sec. 5.2), 
I have followed Konow’s interpretation and taken pratigraha as a nominative in -a.* 
Unfortunately, the second word of the inscription, which gives the name 
of the donee of the pot, is badly damaged, so that the reading is uncertain. If the 
proposed reading, Catula, is correct, this name is not one that occurs elsewhere in 
Kharosthi inscriptions or other relevant documents. The name of the donee’s pre- 
ceptor,’3 Samghapriya, however, is familiar, since it also occurs as that of the donor 
in potsherd inscriptions nos. 2 (partially reconstructed) and 4 (in the variant form 
saghapriha-). These three inscriptions could refer to the same person, but in view 
u. The terms pratigraha- and parigraha- seem to be used more or less interchangeably in 
these formulae. 
12. With regard to the translation of this word as “possession,” note that Edgerton (1953: 321) 
gives “property” as a gloss for the synonymous (see n. 11) parigraha, citing Saddharmapundarika 
85.4 (grham... purusasya ekasya parigraham bhavet). 
13. The term sadhamvihari- (= Skt. sardhamviharin-) designates a monk’s (here Catula’s) 
relationship to his upddhyaya, or preceptor (here Samghapriya). On the problems involved in the 
translation of this term, see the comments by Brough (1962: xx and 177). 

=== PAGE 243 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS_ 
195 
Fig. 18. Detail of inscription 2 on pot A 

=== PAGE 244 ===
196 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 20. Detail of inscriptions | and 2 on pot A 

=== PAGE 245 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
197 
Fig. 22. Detail of inscriptions | and 2 on pot A 

=== PAGE 246 ===
198 
APPENDIX 
of the generic Buddhist character of the name Samghapriya and of the uncertainty 
as to whether the potsherds came from the same site as this pot, it is impossible to 
be sure of this. 
Inscription 2 (pl. 23 and figs. 14-22) is written around the shoulder of the 
jar, about 11 cm below the neck. The maximum height of the letters is 3.5 cm (rme) 
and the minimum 0.5 (ma, ta), while the average height is about 0.8—1.2 cm. The 
total length of the inscription, which covers the whole circumference of the pot, is 
128 cm. As in inscription 1, the words are arranged neatly around the circumference, 
with a space of 1.5-3.5 cm between words, and the text is placed so that the stamped 
decorations fall in the spaces between words. In two cases, however—ayam pdanaya 
and ghade deyamdharme—short phrases are grouped together without spaces 
between their component words. In the phrase mitrafiatisa lohitana |sic], the scribe 
has incorrectly divided the compound mitra-fati-salohitana (= Skt. mitra-jfati- 
sdlohitanam), presumably because he mistook the sa- at the beginning of salohitana 
for a genitive singular ending on the preceding word. 
[a]yampanaya ghadedeyamdharme va[sa]vadatae susomabharyae atmanasa 
arogadaksinae svamiasa suhasomasa sammepratyasae madapi[t]rina 
sammepratya ++ +++++'4 sammepratyasae mitranatisa lohitana 
sammepratya[sa]e bhava[tu] 
This waterpot is the pious gift of Vasavadata [Vasavadatta], wife of Susoma,” 
for the benefit of her own health. May it be for a proper share on the part of 
(her) husband Suhasoma, for a proper share on the part of (her) mother and 
father, for a proper share on the part of [all beings], for a proper share on the 
part of her friends, kinsmen, and blood relatives. 
Paleographically, the two inscriptions on pot A are noteworthy for their 
calligraphic qualities. Several letters have elaborate decorative extensions, particu- 
larly the final sa of sadhamviharisa in no. 1 and of atmanasa, svamiasa, and suhaso- 
masa in no. 2, in which the bottom of the letter is extended in a long curve to the 
right ending in a double hook below. It is clear that this is not intended to represent 
a Sanskritic spelling sya for the genitive ending, since in sammepratyasae we have 
(four times) the normal form of the subscript y, with a loop leading into a curved 
line pointing to the left. The extension of the final sa is thus evidently a mere flour- 
ish without phonetic significance, such as is found occasionally added to certain 
letters in other Kharosthi texts, particularly in word-final position. 
The sa of vasavadatae also has an anomalous bend at the bottom of the 
14. A comparison with similar donative formulae in other inscriptions such as Tor Dherai 
(see n. 7) indicates that the missing letters here were probably -sae sarvasatvana or the like. 
15. On the identity of Vasavadatta and Su(ha)soma, see section 7.2.2.2. 

=== PAGE 247 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS_ 
199 
letter upward and to the right. This resembles the normal form for a subscript r, 
but since the context makes this reading unlikely, I prefer to dismiss it as another 
phonetically insignificant flourish. 
Other decorative features include the treatment of the subscript precon- 
sonantal r in susomabharyae, whose loop ends in a double-hook shape at the right."® 
The superscript preconsonantal r in deyamdharme is also treated calligraphically, 
with a radical extension of the straight vertical and curved horizontal portions at 
the top of this ligature. Such a treatment of rma has not been noted elsewhere in 
inscriptions, but a similar form with the extended vertical is occasionally seen in the 
KDhP manuscript, for instance, in line 57d. This, like the form of the subscript 1, is 
evidently a pen-and-ink style of calligraphic ornamentation. 
In the syllable tu in the second word of inscription 1 and at the very end 
of inscription 2, there is an extra horizontal stroke to the left above the diacritic u at 
the bottom of the character (2). A similar treatment of diacritic u appears in the in- 
scriptions on pot C (in hetuvatinam) and potsherd 20 (.u). 
In panaya-, the long vowel is indicated by means of a short, slanting, al- 
most vertical line near, but not touching, the foot of the consonant p. The diacritic 
notation of long vowels, usually a, is very sporadic in Kharosthi inscriptions, but it 
also occurs in a variant form of the same word (ayam paniya-kumdika) in one of the 
similar water jug inscriptions from Kara Tepe (Vertogradova 1995: 49 and fig. 2). An- 
other fragment of the same inscription contains a second example of this diacritic 
in mahadharmakathi[ka*-], confirming that it is in fact a long-vowel indicator.” 
The sporadic notation of long d is also observed in some of the new manuscripts; 
see above, 6.3. 
Pot B 
Pot B (pls. 24-5 and fig. 23) is a globular, round-bottomed vessel, similar 
in overall form and material to pot A but slightly smaller (33.3 cm in height, 35.5 cm 
in diameter) and much better preserved. The neck is 3.5 cm high, with an everted lip 
at the top, whose outer diameter is 12.5 cm. The exterior has a buff slip, but a dark red 
slip is visible on the inside of the neck, and there are also a few red spots on the 
shoulder. The vessel is decorated with one pair of incised parallel lines at the base of 
the neck and another on the shoulder, just above the inscription. Additional decora- 
tion consists of three stamped designs of four-petaled lotuses inside a circle, spaced 
around the circumference just below the inscription. 
The inscription (pl. 25 and figs. 23-7) is written on the shoulder of the 
jar, 4.5 cm below the bottom of the neck. Unlike the inscriptions on pots A and C, 
16. Similar calligraphic elaborations of subscript r are seen among the manuscripts only 
in fragment 10. For a similar form in an inscription, see Fussman 1985¢c: 149. 
17. Contra Fussman 1989: 474 n. 53; cf. Vertogradova 1995: 20. 

=== PAGE 248 ===
200 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 23. Cross section of pot B, with inscription 
it does not cover the full circumference of the vessel but ends about two-thirds of 
the way around, covering a total space of 44 cm. Between the last two syllables, the 
scribe has left a blank space 4 cm long to avoid writing over the upper edge of the 
stamped design. The letters are on average about 2.5 cm high, with a maximum of 
4 cm (de, sti) and a minimum of 1 cm (ta, du). 
aya panighade saghe cadurdisami acaryana sarvastivatana parigrahami 
pu[r]nagaranami™® 
This waterpot [is a gift] to the universal community, in the possession of 
the Sarvastivadin teachers in the Purnaga grove. 
18. This inscription was read in part by Sadakata (1996b: 312, ins. a; 1996c: 22, ins. a) as 
“... saghe cadurvisami [Read cadurdisami] acaryana sarvastivatana parigrahami. . 
. .” 

=== PAGE 249 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
20! 
Fig. 24. Detail of inscription on pot B 
Fig. 25. Detail of inscription on pot B 

=== PAGE 250 ===
202 
APPENDIX 
ion on pot B 
inscript 
Fig. 26. Detail of 
Fig. 27. Detail of inscription on pot B 

=== PAGE 251 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
203 
The inscription follows the short form of the donative formula, which 
probably was used in some of the previously known fragmentary specimens but is 
attested here in full for the first time. On the omission of the donor’s name (as also 
in pot D), see below, section 5.1. 
Paleographically, this inscription is less noteworthy than those on pots 
A and C. The hand is upright and unadorned, without the cursive and calligraphic 
features of A and C. This would seem to be in keeping with the humbler, “generic” 
character of the inscription. There are no spaces between words and phrases. 
The final word, pu[r]/nagaranami, provides the name of the “grove” (Skt. 
aranya), that is, the monastery, that was the residence of the Sarvastivadin teachers 
who were the recipients of the donation. For similar uses of the term (a)rafia- in this 
sense, see Konow 1929: nos. XLV and LXXX (line 1) and Konow 1935-6: 42;'? Salomon 
1995b: 138 and Salomon 1996b: 242; and below, section 5.2. Pu[r]naga- presumably 
corresponds to Sanskrit purnaka-, which is not to my knowledge attested elsewhere 
in inscriptions as the name of a monastic establishment. 
Pot C 
Pot C (pls. 26-7 and fig. 28) is another globular, round-bottomed, wheel- 
made vessel of coarse red clay with gritty inclusions, with a buff slip on the exterior. 
It measures 38 cm in height and 37.2 cm in diameter. Its condition is good, except 
for some chipping of the lip of the spout and peeling of the lower surface. The neck, 
6 cm high, has a thick everted lip 2 cm high with a diameter of 12.7 cm. It is deco- 
rated with two pairs of incised grooves around the lip, another pair at the middle 
of the neck, three more pairs just below the neck, and, below them, a single line of 
incised spiraling. On the shoulder, just above the level of the inscription, are four 
stamped designs consisting of five-petaled lotuses within a circle, spaced around the 
circumference. 
The inscription (pl. 27 and figs. 28-35) is written on the shoulder, just 
below a faded line of red ink, about 10-11 cm from the bottom of the neck. The full 
length of the inscription was 95.5 cm, but a section of the pot has been lost which 
contained about 16 cm of the inscription, though the tops of three of the missing 
letters and the bottom of one are preserved. Probably about eleven aksaras are lost 
in the missing portion. The letters are on average 1-2 cm high, with a maximum of 
4.8°° (na in acaryanam) and a minimum of 0.8 (ta in viratatae). Short spaces, 1-1.5 
cm long, are left between words, though in two cases (aya panighada and samghe 
caturdise) phrases are written together without a space between their component 
19. The term here (line 1) is ramaramfami, “in the Rama grove’; this is a correction of 
Konow’s previous reading (1929: 158), rajaramnammi. 
20. The letter rma whose distinctive upper part is preserved above the missing part of the 
inscription must have originally been considerably larger than this. 

=== PAGE 252 ===
’ 
. 28. 
Ig 
F 
Cross section of pot C 
with inscription 
jon on pot C 
inscript 
Fig. 29. Detail of 

=== PAGE 253 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
205 
words. The inscription covers almost the entire circumference of the pot but for a 
space of 4 cm between the beginning and end, where the remains of a badly blurred 
inked design, apparently a floral motif, are visible. 
[a]yapanighada [da]nammukh[o] viratatae* [srva]hiama-bharyae niryateti 
samghecaturdise rayagahami acaryanam sarvastivatinam k[r]Jiavatinam 
viryavatinam hetuvatinam [.1]*? 
++++++ [rm.] 
++ [nam]*3[b..?] 
pral[tilgra 
This waterpot [is] the pious gift of Viratata, wife of Srvahiama; [she] 
presents [it] to the universal community at Rayagaha (Skt. Rajagrha), in 
the possession of the Sarvastivadin teachers, who teach actions, who teach 
energy, who teach causation ..., (who teach karma), ... 
This inscription is distinguished by several unusual paleographic fea- 
tures. The characters are highly ornate, and many are furnished with elaborate calli- 
graphic extensions. For example, the true anusvara sign (as opposed to the “pseudo- 
anusvara, discussed below) attached to na and una is regularly extended into a large 
hook, open to the left and coming to a point with an acute angle at the right, as 
in acaryanam sarvastivatinam k[r]iavatinam viryavatinam hetuvatinam” and in 
[da]nammukh[o].* Also regularly subject to calligraphic treatment is the subscript 
preconsonantal r, which, as in the inscription on pot A, has an extra decorative bend 
in the right side of the loop, clearly seen, for example, in acaryanam sarvastivatinam. 
In several places, diacritic vowel signs are accorded anomalous treat- 
ments, presumably with calligraphic intent. For example, in rayagahami the 1 vowel 
21. The second syllable in this word could also be read as sa, but ra is more likely. The fourth 
syllable superficially looks like tra or dra (fig. 30), but close examination shows that this is an 
illusion caused by the nearly complete fading of a portion of the horizontal line at the middle of 
the ta. 
22. The top of what is probably the vowel diacritic i (or possibly e) that was attached to the 
first missing syllable in the lost portion of the inscription is preserved on the intact surface above 
the broken piece. 
23. Only a very faint trace of the top of this letter and a part of the distinctive curve of the 
anusvara below are preserved. Given the pattern of the preceding intact portion of the inscription 
(k[rJiavatinam viryavatinam hetuvatinam), it seems likely that this last word too ended in nam 
or nam (i.e., it was in the genitive plural). Since the distinctive top part of the ligature rm is also 
preserved a few letters before this, we can tentatively reconstruct the last missing word as 
(ka*) [rm] (avati*) 
[nam] (see p. 213). 
24. Part of the last letter is lost with the damaged portion of the jar, but the top and the right 
side of the calligraphic extension below are preserved. 
25. The spelling of this word with anusvara is paralleled in danammuhe in the Begram bas- 
relief inscription, where Konow (1933: 14) attributes it to “the well-known tendency to nasalize a 
vowel before a nasal.” 

=== PAGE 254 ===
206 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 
31. Detail of inscription on pot C 

=== PAGE 255 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
207 
Fig. 33. Detail of inscription on pot C 

=== PAGE 256 ===
208 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 35. Detail of inscription on pot C 

=== PAGE 257 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS_ 
209 
diacritic of the final syllable is extended upward in a long straight line. Elsewhere, 
diacritic 7 is treated normally, and its special treatment here is probably attributable 
to the tendency of Kharosthi to apply extra calligraphic flourishes to the last syllable 
of a word. Another example of the calligraphic elaboration of diacritics is the e in 
the first syllable of hetuvatinam (2), whose right end is extended through a right- 
angle bend upward leading into a semicircular curve to the right and then down- 
ward.”° The u diacritics in caturdise and hetuvatinam have a triangular, rather 
than the usual round, form. Also unusual is the treatment of the ligature rdi (4) in 
caturdise, where the 1 diacritic, which diagonally crosses the upper left of the conso- 
nantal element d, is extended by an acute angle to the right, horizontally crossing the 
center of the d, then turning downward with a right-angle bend into a vertical line 
to which is attached the subscript (preconsonantal) r sign. This contrasts with the 
normal form of the ligature rdi (§), commonly seen in inscriptions of this type in 
the same word, caturdise, where the loop representing preconsonantal r is attached 
normally to the bottom of the consonant d itself rather than linked to the vowel dia- 
critic as here. This treatment, to my knowledge, is unique. 
The form of the ligature mu in [da]/nammukh[o] 
is interesting; instead of 
the usual diagonal line with a curved hook attached at the lower left ( 
), this 
aksara consists of a long vertical line joined at a right angle at the bottom to a short 
leftward horizontal line which turns upward into a loop open to the left (2). This 
variant, evidently a calligraphic elaboration, of the ligature mu occurs in a few other 
Kharosthi inscriptions, mostly late in date. It is used two or three times in the Kur- 
ram casket inscription, for example, in sakyamunisa at the end of line 1 (2/).”7 
Konow (1929: 153) refers to this as “the peculiar mu,” without further comment. A 
similar variety of mu, which Konow here calls the “square, standing, form” (p. 93), 
appears in Jauliafi inscriptions nos. 2 (danamukhe/o [sic]; Konow 1929: pl. XVIII.2) 
and 12 (Sakamu(ni*); pl. XVII1.12). This ligature also occurs in a recently discovered 
Kharosthi jar inscription (Salomon 1996b: 241). 
Besides these unusual but readily understandable formations, the 
inscription also contains a few anomalous characters that do present problems of 
interpretation. One of these is the initial aksara Gi ) of the word tentatively read as 
[srva]hiama-, in which the bottom stroke of a normal sa is extended in a line curv- 
ing upward and to the right (i.e., behind) the letter, ending far above it. This upward 
extension is provided with a loop, curving off from it to the left, then curving up and 
back across the stem and terminating in a downward, double-hooked flourish. This 
26. The syllable he is usually formed with the vowel diacritic added to the top of the conso- 
nant, but occasionally it is attached, as here, to the right side of the middle. Such an example is 
seen, for instance, in parigrahe in the Hadda jar inscription (Fussman 1969), though without the 
extra calligraphic extension noted here. 
27. The other occurrences are in line 4 (D), praticasammupate, and, apparently, in 3 (D), 
sammudae, though the reading is not clear here. 

=== PAGE 258 ===
210 
APPENDIX 
anomalous additional element is virtually identical to the one representing precon- 
sonantal 1, either in subscript position in normal combinations like rya and rdi or 
in superscript position in the incomplete /rm.] in the broken portion of the inscrip- 
tion. But we can hardly think of reading the syllable as rsa, first because of the pho- 
netic implausibility of such a combination at the beginning of a word (even allowing 
for the fact that it is an unfamiliar and presumably non-Indic name), and second 
because, even if this were the intended reading, the scribe would have presumably 
used the normal (i.e., subscript) form of preconsonantal r. Disregarding this addi- 
tional element, the line extending upward from the bottom of the s to its right looks 
more or less like the normal Kharosthi sign for a postconsonantal y, so that it seems 
as if the scribe were trying to represent some combination of the three consonants 
s, v, and r. His use of the preconsonantal form of r might imply that he was trying to 
represent something like srva, which I can only explain as an attempt to render some 
unfamiliar foreign (Saka or other Iranian?) phoneme, and for lack of a better expla- 
nation I have so rendered this very peculiar ligature. 
Another, even more problematic ligature appears immediately after the 
damaged portion of the inscription. The upper part looks more or less like a normal 
b, below which there appear to be traces of several other lines, including, at the right, 
an element terminating in what looks like a small anusvara sign, and to the left, a 
straight vertical. This whole area, however, is badly blurred and damaged, and I am 
unable to provide any plausible explanation for the peculiar letter. Moreover, this 
ligature seems to be out of context, as it follows a series of words in the genitive 
plural which, according to the standard pattern of such donative inscriptions, are 
governed by the word pratigra [sic] that follows the ligature under discussion. There- 
fore, one would have expected here another adjective in the genitive plural to follow 
the sequence k[r]iavatinam viryavatinam hetuvatinam, etc., and it is possible that 
the scribe here tried in some way to squeeze in an abbreviated form of the last (prob- 
ably the sixth) in this series of epithets describing the Sarvastivadin teachers when 
he realized that he was running out of space on the circumference of the jar. We 
might guess, for example, that the intended reading was b(osivatinam”*) (= Skt. 
bodhivadinam) or the like. 
The last word, pra/[ti]gra, was obviously intended for the standard prati- 
grahe or pratigrahami, “in the possession (of), but is peculiar in two respects. First, 
it is missing its last syllable, which one might be inclined to attribute once again 
to lack of space; but in fact there is enough room between the syllable gra and the 
floral design marking the beginning of the text for at least one more syllable. Second, 
the circle drawn around the word is unparalleled, to my knowledge, in Kharosthi 
inscriptions. One might speculate that this circle functions somewhat like a car- 
touche, intended to emphasize the word, but actually there does not seem to be any 
reason that a scribe would want to call attention to this ordinary word; if he were to 
stress anything in this way, it would presumably be the names of the donor and/or 

=== PAGE 259 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
211 
the recipients. Thus, the only thing that is clear is that the end of the inscription was 
somehow botched or disturbed, perhaps because of lack of space. Given the poor 
condition of this portion of the inscription and the loss of the part that immediately 
precedes it, it is not possible to completely explain the end of the text, though the 
intended sense is at least generally clear. 
Another orthographic peculiarity of this inscription is the addition 
of small semicircular marks, open to the left, at the foot of many of the characters. 
This sign is virtually indistinguishable from the diacritic that, in standard forms of 
Kharosthi script, designates the anusvara. This sign is seen, for instance, on each 
aksara of the word transcribed above as rayagahami, but we cannot consider reading 
the word as ramyamgamhammim or, for similar reasons, amcamryanam instead of 
acaryanam. In other words, we are dealing with the phenomenon, well attested in 
Kharosthi, of the nonetymological “pseudo-anusvara” (Fussman 1985a: 37, 1989: 
474). In this inscription, there is in general a contrast between the smaller anusvara- 
like signs that seem to represent the otiose pseudo-anusvara and the larger diacritics 
which I take to be “true” anusvara, especially since they appear in cases where a nasal- 
ization is etymologically expected (see n. 25).7° I have therefore chosen to ignore the 
smaller, pseudo-anusvara marks also in less etymologically clear contexts, such as in 
the phrase viratatae [srva]hiama-bharyae, which would otherwise have to be read 
as viramtamtae [srva]hiammam-bharyae. Although in his edition of the reliquary 
inscription of Trasaka, Fussman (1985a) transliterated the pseudo-anusvara by a 
superscript m (e.g., samva™ tsaraye and a pratithavita-pruve), this procedure seems 
inadvisable for the present inscription in view of its profligate use of this sign, which 
is applied, with only a few exceptions, to almost all of the characters that are not 
otherwise marked by a vowel or other diacritic sign. This circumstance makes it 
clear that pseudo-anusvara is, in effect, nothing more than a semicalligraphic finish- 
ing flourish added by the scribe at the end of simple consonantal characters.” 
Unlike many Kharosthi documents, this inscription retains separate signs 
for the retroflex and dental nasals, but their pattern of distribution, especially in 
the sequence acaryanam sarvastivatinam k[rJiavatinam viryavatinam hetuvatinam, 
shows that they were interchangeable. Indeed, the regular alternation of na and na 
in the endings of these five words suggests that the scribe was consciously playing 
with this alternative; similar examples of what seem to be whimsical scribal manipu- 
28. This distinction, however, is not always absolutely clear. There are some cases where the 
hook sign under the letter is of a size somewhere between the large “true” anusvara and the small 
“pseudo-anusvara,” and in such cases my transcription has been guided by etymology; thus, 
samghe but hetuvatinam rather than hetuvamtinam. Due to the inconsistent, even random place- 
ment of pseudo-anusvara in this and other inscriptions, it is impossible to establish an absolutely 
consistent system of transcription for them. 
29. See Fussman 1989: 474, where the pseudo-anusvara phenomenon is discussed in terms 
of, on the one hand, a partial phonetic neutralization of nasalization in Gandhari and, on the 
other, a natural scribal tendency to add an anusvara-like flourish to the bottom of the letter. 

=== PAGE 260 ===
212 
APPENDIX 
lations of the flexible Kharosthi orthography (see 6.7.2) were noted by Brough, who 
suspected that the scribe of the Dharmapada manuscript “took especial pleasure in 
using alternative possible spellings. . 
. 
. particularly when the two spellings can be 
balanced one against the other” (1962: 65). 
Besides its several paleographic peculiarities, this inscription also exhib- 
its some linguistic curiosities. The syntax of the phrase [da]nammukh[o] viratatae 
[srvaJhiama-bharyae niryateti samghe caturdise, “the pious gift of Viratata, wife 
of Srvahiama; [she] presents [it] to the universal community,” is peculiar in its 
apparent mixing of the nominal construction commonly used in donation records 
of this type (“gift of .. . in the possession of... ”) and the less common active 
construction (“gives ... in the possession of... ”). The active construction is more 
usual among Kharosthi inscriptions recording relic dedications, which are typically 
worded along the lines of “.. . establishes this relic . 
. 
. ”” with the verb pratithaveti 
or the like, whereas donative records in general and those on clay pots in particular 
are usually constructed without any verb at all, as in inscription 2 on pot A (ayam 
panayaghade deyamdharme vasavadatae). The active verb niryateti is less usual in 
an inscription of this type, although various forms of the verb mi(r)yat- in the sense 
“give, “present, are common in other Kharosthi inscriptions and in Buddhist usage 
generally.°° For example, British Library potsherd 5 reads (pan™)ighade niryadide, 
“(This water)pot was given.” This and similar constructions with the past participle, 
such as danamuhe niyadide, “pious gift was given,’ in the inscription on the Bimaran 
reliquary (Konow 1929: 52), suggest that the present active verb form niryateti, “pre- 
sents,’ in the new inscription could have been written in error, the scribe having re- 
versed the last two syllables of what should have been the passive participle niryatite, 
“was presented.” With this emendation, the anomalous syntax of the inscription 
would become normal and would agree with that of the Bimaran inscription, though 
this is probably not sufficient grounds to emend the text, especially since such cases 
of mixed active/passive constructions are not uncommon in inscriptions generally 
(Salomon 1998: 97). 
The series of honorific epithets, k[rJiavatinam viryavatinam hetuvatinam, 
describing the Sarvastivadin teachers is not, to my knowledge, paralleled elsewhere 
in Kharosthi inscriptions, where the recipients are usually characterized only by 
their sectarian affiliation and sometimes also their monastic location.» But similar 
sets of epithets do occur in various Pali texts, where they are applied to the Buddha(s) 
and other teachers, often in a polemic context. For example, in Anguttara-nikaya 
30. See Edgerton 1953: 304, s.v. nirydtayati, “[v]ery common in most texts.” 
31. There may be a partial parallel in the Mathura lion capital inscriptions, where (lines 
N.1-3) a teacher is characterized, in Konow’s translation (1929: 49), as “a khalula (dialectician?) to 
teach the foremost Mahasamghikas the truth”; but the reading and interpretation of this passage 
are highly uncertain. Another possible parallel appears in the Shelarwadi cave inscription (Das 
Gupta 1949-50: 77), where the recipients are characterized (line 4) as dcari[ye]hi bhata-vireyehi, 
although the meaning of the latter word is, in the editor’s estimation, “not clear” (p. 77 n. 5). 

=== PAGE 261 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
213 
1.287, the Buddhas (arahanto sammadasambuddha) are characterized as kammavada 
ceva... kiriyavada ca viriyavada ca, in contrast to the Ajivika Makkhali who denied 
karma, action, and energy (1.286, natthi kammam, n‘atthi kiriyam, n‘atthi viriyan ti). 
In the inscription, the epithets k/rJiavatinam viryavatinam clearly correspond to 
Pali kiriyavada ca viriyavada ca. A parallel to the third epithet in the inscription, 
hetuvatinam, “who teach causation,” occurs in the Sanskrit Mahaparinirvana-sitra 
(40.57; Waldschmidt 1950-51: 384), where the dgneya-jatila ascetics are praised as 
karmavadino .. 
. kriyavadino hetuvadino viryavadinah. This also suggests (see n. 23) 
that we should reconstruct the fifth epithet in the inscription as karmavatinam, 
“who teach karma,” though it could also be dharmavatinam, “who teach the 
dharma.” The latter possibility brings to mind similar sets of epithets of the Buddha 
such as dhammavadi vinayavadi in Digha-nikaya 1.4 and 3.135. This pair of epithets 
in turn suggests that the fourth epithet in the inscription, of which only the top of 
the diacritic vowel sign, probably i, of the first syllable remains, might have been 
vinayavatinam, “who teach the discipline.” 
Thus, the inscription almost certainly lists five epithets, probably to 
be reconstructed as k[r]iavatinam viryavatinam hetuvatinam (v*)i(nayavatinam 
ka*)[rm](avati*) 
[nam], and possibly also an abbreviated sixth epithet as well 
(perhaps indicated by the problematic character /b../, as discussed above) that were 
applied to the Sarvastivadin teachers to whom the jar was presented. In the Pali texts, 
these epithets are generally applied to the Buddha(s), usually with a view to express- 
ing the superiority of their doctrines to those of the other, heterodox teachers, so it 
is not too surprising to find them applied to the Sarvastivadin teachers, though this 
has not been seen before in inscriptions. Perhaps the application of such epithets 
ending in -vatinam (= Skt. -vadindm) was promoted by their similarity in formation 
to the sect name sarvastivatinam (Skt. sarvastivadinam). 
Finally, the term rayagahami (= Skt. rajagrhe, literally “at the king’s 
palace”), given as the location of the Sarvastivadin teachers who were the recipients 
of the pot, calls to mind various monastic institutions given names like rajakarama 
and rajavihara in honor of their royal founders, which are well attested in Buddhist 
tradition.** But the second element gaha- (= Skt. grha-) is unusual, such establish- 
ments being normally called vihara, drama, or aranya. Therefore, it is more likely 
that rayagaha- referred to a place of that name, presumably named after the original 
Rajagrha in Magadha, renowned in Buddhist tradition.* It is much less likely that 
the name rayagaha- refers to a Buddhist establishment at or adjoining a royal palace, 
in view of the warnings in the vinayas (e.g., in the Pali vinaya, IV.159—-60) of the dan- 
gers that monks are liable to upon entering a royal court (rdajantepurappavesane). 
32. See Vertogradova 1982: 153 for examples. But the apparently similar term rajaramfiammi 
read by Konow (1929: 158) on the Hadda jar proved to be a misreading; see n. 19. 
33. Note that Hsiian-tsang reports that Balkh was commonly referred to as “little Rajagrha” 
(Beal 1884: 44 and n. 149). 

=== PAGE 262 ===
214 
APPENDIX 
Pot D 
This pot (pls. 28-9 and fig. 36), which was evidently the one that con- 
tained the scrolls, is generally similar in form and material to the others but is some- 
what smaller, with a height of 34.8 cm and diameter of 31.1 cm. The exterior surface 
and the interior of the neck have a buff slip. The neck, 5 cm high with a diameter of 
12.8 cm, has a thick everted lip, 1.9 cm in height. Decoration is limited to two pairs of 
parallel incised lines just below the bottom of the neck, and below them, a roughly 
incised row of wedges. 
The inscription (pl. 29 and figs. 36-9), written on the shoulder about 
3.5 cm below the bottom of the neck, runs roughly two-thirds of the way around the 
vessel, covering a space of 34.5 cm. There are no spaces between words. The letters 
are between 2.2 and 2.7 cm high on average, with a maximum height of 4.0 (mi) and 
a minimum of 1.6 (di). 
saghami caiidisami dhamaiiteana [p]arig[r]ahami** 
[Given] to the universal community, in the possession of the 
Dharmaguptakas. 
The inscription is written in a plain, unadorned hand, lacking any of the 
decorative flourishes like those seen on pots A and C. In this respect, it resembles 
pot B, with which it also shares the peculiarity of omitting the name of the donor. 
The text embodies the briefest possible form of the standard donative formula, 
omitting not only the donor’s name, as in B, but also the label “This waterpot” (aya 
panighade), the word “teachers” (acaryana), and the location of the recipients, all of 
which are included in the less drastically abridged wording on pot B.» 
The identification of the recipients of the gift, the dhamaiiteana, with 
the Dharmaguptaka sect presents no problem. The same word in line 2 of the Jamal- 
garhi stone inscription was initially read wrongly by Konow (1929: 113) as dhamaiite 
[oke] and translated “an asylum connected with religion.” But as shown by Liiders 
(1940: 17-20) and endorsed by Brough (1962: 44 n. 3), the correct reading is 
dhamaiite[a](na*) parigrahe, “in the possession of the Dharmaguptakas.” Thus, the 
name of the sect is spelled in the Jamalgarhi inscription exactly (except for the in- 
consequential difference of dental versus retroflex nasal) as in the new inscription. 
This shows that Liiders’s suspicion that in the Jamalgarhi inscription “it is much 
more likely that the vowel sign is an -7 stroke that was not properly extended down- 
wards and that Dhamaiitiana is what was intended” (p. 19) is not justified, and that 
the reading is correct as it stands. His alternative suggestion, that the word be read 
34. Sadakata (1996b: 312, ins. b; 1996c: 22, ins. b) read this inscription as saghami caudisami 
dhamauteana parigahami. 
35. See the further comments on these points below in section 5.1. 

=== PAGE 263 ===
Fig. 36. Cross section of pot D, 
with inscription 

=== PAGE 264 ===
216 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 39. Detail of inscription on pot D 

=== PAGE 265 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
217 
as it is and taken to correspond to a Sanskrit *Dharmagupteyanam, is preferable, 
unless we want to posit an underlying *Dharmaguptikanam on the grounds of the 
Gandhari tendency toward alternation of i and e (Brough 1962: 80). In any case, this 
variant spelling is further confirmed by British Library potsherd 17, presented below. 
Pot E 
Pot E (pls. 30-1 and fig. 40) resembles the others in the group in material 
and form, particularly pot B with its squat profile and lip with a pronounced diago- 
nal profile (although the lip of pot E slopes inward toward the top, and that of B 
slopes outward). The pot measures 35.5 cm in height and 37.0 cm in diameter, and 
the neck is 4.5 cm high with a maximum diameter (at the lip) of 13.0 cm. The everted 
lip is 1.5 cm high. The vessel is decorated with a pair of incised lines around the neck 
and, at the bottom of the neck, a single line, another pair of lines below that, and 
finally a scalloped line. 
Fig. 40. Cross section of pot E, 
with inscription 
ws 
os 
= 
Cs 
a 
ari: 
Pn 
, 
al 
£P 
“es, 
: 
% ieee 
A; 
~ 
$ 
ae OP RD 7 sath teed 

=== PAGE 266 ===
218 
APPENDIX 
The inscription (pl. 31 and figs. 40-8), written on the shoulder 
12 cm 
below the bottom of the neck, runs almost completely around the pot except for 
a blank space of 3.5 cm between its beginning and end. Its length is 102 cm, and the 
average height of the characters is 0.8-1.2 cm, with a minimum of 0.5 (da). The 
largest letters are rsa, 4.5 cm high, and the calligraphically lengthened se and rma, 
which are 13 and 16 cm long, measured diagonally. As in pots A and C, small spaces, 
1.0-1.5 cm long, are left between words or phrases, but the phrase saghecatudise is 
grouped together as in pot C, and ayapa[ni]ya ghadae is incorrectly divided, as in 
pot A (ins. 2). The inscription is less well preserved than those on the other four 
pots, and in several places, especially in the latter part, the letters are so worn as to 
be difficult or impossible to read. Unlike the other inscriptions, this one is very 
carelessly written, with numerous misspellings and other apparent errors, which 
combine with its worn condition to make its interpretation difficult. Only with the 
aid of comparisons to similar formulaic inscriptions, and with some hypothetical 
suggestions for emendations of botched words, can any sense be made of it. 
ayapa[ni]ya ghadae hastadatae teyavarmabharyae deyadharma saghecatudise 
atmanasa arogadaksine tevarmasa aramiyasa bhikhuniyae ra[ksva]?[niJe 
sudasasa sudarsanasa gu[ha]datae ga?[sa]? [pri]? ? sam?[sa] ?taga[na]sa 
sakse ? ? [vaJe sastasatvana da[gha]pacheya bhavatu yine bhra[do puya]>° 
This waterpot is the pious gift of Hastadata [Hastadatta], wife of Teyavar- 
man, to the universal community, for the benefit of her own health. May it 
be for the principal share (?) of the monastery attendant (?) Tevarman, of 
the nun ?, of Sudasna, of Sudarsana, of Guhadata (Guhadatta), of ?, of 2, of 2, 
of ?; in short (?), of all beings (?); and in honor of [her] brother. 
The hand of the inscription resembles that of pot A, with a similar 
tendency to place ornamental flourishes at the bottoms of the letters, especially at 
the ends of words. Many letters have the nonetymological pseudo-anusvara (e.g., 
hasta(m)datae), which is here ignored in the transcription for the reasons explained 
above in connection with pot C. Diagonal lines at the tops of letters, such as diacritic 
e or the stem of the ligature rma, are calligraphically extended far above the line. 
Many letters have peculiar and anomalous forms, which are not easy to interpret 
without contextual clues. For instance, the ni in pa[ni]ya is curiously malformed, 
with a shape somewhat like a se, and but for the context it would have been impos- 
sible to read it correctly. The gh in saghe has, instead of the usual hook to the right 
of the vertical stem, a peculiar shape, somewhat resembling a sa, below the normally 
36. The last six syllables are written above the main line of the inscription, beginning above 
the ya in -pacheya. 

=== PAGE 267 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
219 
formed top of the letter; but here again the word is formulaic, so the reading is be- 
yond doubt. In the syllable mi in bhikhuniyae, the diacritic vowel i, instead of touch- 
ing the consonant, is placed above and to the left of it. The reading of the second 
syllable of the proper name guhadatae is little more than a guess based on context, 
since the form of the aksara is unlike any in normal Kharosthi, though it somewhat 
resembles a badly malformed ha. All in all, one gets the impression that the scribe 
who wrote this inscription was careless, poorly trained, or both—a situation unfor- 
tunately none too rare in Kharosthi inscriptions. 
In its contents and formulation too, this inscription resembles the one 
on pot A, though the two differ in details. Both begin with the phrase “This water- 
pot” (also used in pot C), and both include lists of sharers in the merits of the dona- 
tion, beginning with the donor herself and her husband. In A, however, the other 
cobeneficiaries are mentioned only in general relational terms (“mother and father. . 
. 
friends, kinsmen, and blood relatives”), whereas inscription E provides the names of 
specific individuals, but in most cases without designation of their familial or other 
relationship with the donor. 
In view of the many problems in the reading and interpretation of this 
inscription, a detailed phrase-by-phrase discussion is necessary. The opening phrase, 
ayapa[ni]ya ghadae, is normal except for the peculiar inflection of the final word. 
This may reflect an extended stem form (cf. Skt. ghatika-), or it may result from con- 
tamination with the following word, hastadatae, in the genitive feminine. The for- 
mation of this donor’s name, corresponding to Sanskrit Hastadatta, reminds us of 
that of the donor of pot A, Vasavadatta. This, together with the other broad similari- 
ties between pots A and E, suggests that these two women might have been related 
to each other or at least may have come from the same region or cultural milieu. 
The names Hastadatta and Vasavadatta were presumably nakstra-names,*” which, 
according to Hilka (1910: 34), were particularly common among Buddhists; compare, 
for example, muladataye (= Skt. muladattayd), attested in a Sanchi inscription 
(Hilka 1910: 37; Buhler 1894: 373, no. 153). 
The following phrases, teyavarmabharyae deyadharma saghecatudise 
atmanasa arogadaksine, follow the usual pattern and present no problems. This is 
the end of the first sentence of the text. The remainder of the inscription consists 
mainly of a long series of names and titles in the genitive case, all governed by the 
problematic da[gha]pacheya (to be discussed below) near the end. The name of 
the first of these beneficiaries of the donation is given as tevarmasa aramtyasa. 
This must be the donor Hastadatta’s husband, who was previously introduced as 
teyavarma. The contracted form of his name is reminiscent of the two different 
spellings of the name of the donor’s husband in the inscription on pot A, susoma- 
37. Panini (Astadhyayi 4.3.34) gives Hasta among the personal names that can be derived 
from a birth-star. 

=== PAGE 268 ===
220 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 42. Detail of inscription on pot E 

=== PAGE 269 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
221 
Fig. 44. Detail of inscription on pot E 

=== PAGE 270 ===
222 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 46. Detail of inscription on pot E 

=== PAGE 271 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
223 
Fig. 48. Detail of inscription on pot E 

=== PAGE 272 ===
224 
APPENDIX 
and suhasoma-. The name Te(ya)varma- is unfamiliar and is perhaps, like many 
Indo-Scythian names, a non-Indic name in semi-Indian guise. Also problematic is 
his title or epithet aramiyasa. This might seem to correspond to the Sanskrit/Pali 
aramika, “monastery attendant,” but according to the usual formula we expect the 
word svamiasa, “husband” (cf. pot A, ins. 2, atmanasa arogadaksinae svamiasa suha- 
somasa), and I strongly suspect that this was the intended reading. The incompetent 
scribe of this inscription might well have misinterpreted the ligature sva (2) in an 
archetype that he was copying from as two separate syllables, ara (17). 
The rest of the list of beneficiaries is largely illegible, though we can 
make some reasonable guesses as to their identities. The first is a nun (bhikhuntyae) 
whose name is uncertain, but which appears to begin with raksa-. There follows a 
pair of masculine names, sudasasa3* and sudarsanasa, which, to judge from their 
similarity, might have been the names of brothers, presumably the brothers of the 
donor. The next name is the feminine gu/ha]datae, perhaps that of the donor’s sister. 
This is followed by four more names, apparently masculine, which are mostly illegi- 
ble and of which nothing can be made. 
The phrase sakse ? ? [va]e sastasatvana means nothing as it stands, but 
the intended reading was probably something like samksepe sarvasatvana, “in short, 
of all beings.” The restoration of the second word, at least, is quite secure (see n. 14); 
the scribe evidently misread the ligature rva (4) in his archetype as sta (T). 
The next word, which seems to be da[gha/pacheya, is hopeless as it 
stands, and I can only guess at some sort of connection with the word pratyamsa, 
“share (of merit),” or similar terms that commonly occur in such contexts; compare, 
for example, sammepratyasae (= Skt. samyak-pratyamsaya) in pot A (ins..2) and 
phrases like agre pratiyamso in the Tor Dherai potsherds (Konow 1929: 176) or agri 
pracaya in the first Hadda jar inscription (Konow 1935-6: 42). Da[gha] could con- 
ceivably be a miswriting for the contextually anticipated agra-, and pacheya perhaps 
a garbled attempt at rendering something like the pracaya of the Hadda inscription. 
Thus, for lack of anything better, I have provisionally translated the phrase 
da[gha]pacheya bhavatu as “May it be for the principal share of. . . .” 
Finally, at the end of the inscription, the additional phrase yine bhra[do 
puya] is written in above the line (see n. 36), apparently as an insertion of a passage 
that was inadvertently omitted, or perhaps rather added on as an afterthought. The 
sense of the first word (?) yine eludes me entirely, but the remaining bhra[do puya] 
evidently means that the donor’s brother is to partake of the merit of the gift; com- 
pare many other Kharosthi inscriptions where the names of the sharers of the merit 
are linked to the words puyae, “in honor of, or puyaita, “is honored.” 
38. The name suda§a (i.e., sudasna) also occurs in one of the new manuscripts (frag. 16, r, 
line 23), evidently as an alternative name of the legendary figure who is known in Pali as Vessan- 
tara; see section 2.2.4. 

=== PAGE 273 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
225 
4. The Inscribed Potsherds in the British Library Collection 
Besides the five complete pots, the British Library collection also contains 
twenty-six potsherds (pls. 32-4) with fragmentary inscriptions in Kharosthi and, in 
one case (no. 9), in Brahmi. The provenance of the potsherds and their relationship, 
if any, with the complete pots are unknown, but they evidently belong to the same 
general class of artifacts and could well have come from the same site as the complete 
pots or from a neighboring one. Unfortunately, there is no way to confirm this. 
All the pieces are fragments of red clay ware with buff slip. The dimen- 
sions of the potsherds are given in centimeters, indicating the maximum width and 
height, followed by the thickness. The height of the letters is given as a range where 
there is considerable variation in size, otherwise as a single average figure. 
Potsherd | (pl. 32) 
Dimensions: 
13.5 X 7.8; 0.5-0.8 
Decoration: 
Four parallel incised lines and below them, 
a scalloped line above the inscription. 
Height of letters: 
1.5-2.5 
Reading: 
/// mi kepeami tasahodi[p.][g.][.e] /// 
Translation: 
¢ 
The text is unusual and problematic, not following the typical patterns 
of texts of this kind, so no translation can be offered. The first part seems to contain 
a phrase, presumably a toponym, in the locative case. The sense of the second half 
eludes me entirely, and the reading is not quite clear; the syllable read as ta could 
also be a sa, and the following one, read as sa, could be na. The syllables hodi- call 
to mind the (apparent) proper name hodreana in a Taxila inscription (Dharmarajika 
no. 2; Konow 1929: 90-1). At the left edge, there are small traces of the tops of two or 
three more characters, which can only be tentatively read. 
Potsherd 2 (pl. 32) 
Dimensions: 
14.9 X 10.73 0.4-0.7 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letters: 
2.3-5.0 
Reading: 
teryadharma samghap(r.*)ily.] /// 
Translation: 
Pious gift [of] Samghapriya. 
The text is written in a thick, cursive hand. The phrasing and the small 
blank space at the right indicate that this is the beginning of the inscription. The first 
word, teryadharma, seems to be a hyper-Sanskritized variant of the usual deyadharma, 
“pious gift.” The second word can be confidently restored as samghap(r*)ty(asa*). 
The gha has an unusual calligraphic extension in the form of a loop added to the 
bottom of its right-hand member. The name Samghapriya, possibly referring to the 
same individual, occurs on pot A (ins. 1) and potsherd 4. 

=== PAGE 274 ===
226 
APPENDIX 
Potsherd 3 (pl. 32) 
Dimensions: 
15.0 X 12.83 0.6-1.4 
Decoration: 
Two rows of parallel diagonal lines on the lower 
part; at the right, after vihare, a stamped design 
shaped like a long thinleaf, and part of another 
such sign at the left edge. 
Height of letters: 
1.0—2.6 
Reading: 
ayam yarughadike [.e] /// ? + vihare 
Translation: 
This water (?) pot...in the... monastery. 
The sherd contains the beginning (ayam) and end of the full inscription, 
which must have extended all the way around the pot. After ayam yarughadike, we 
can reconstruct (d*)e(yadharma*), after which were probably given the names of the 
donor and the recipients and finally the name of the monastery. The term yarugha- 
dike is problematic. The many other inscriptions with terms like panighada (pot C) 
suggest that yaru might be another word for “water” or perhaps for some other liquid 
substance, but I cannot explain it etymologically. 
Potsherd 4 (pl. 32) 
Dimensions: 
7.9 X 8.83 0.5 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letters: 
2.6-3.2 
Reading: 
//1 saghapriha[sa] /// 
Translation: 
... of Saghapriha... 
The name saghapriha is presumably a graphic variant of the common 
Samghapriya. The writing of h in place of y in intervocalic position is attested else- 
where in Kharosthi texts, for example, in seho = Skt. sreyas- in the KDhP (Brough 
1962: 92). This Samghapriya may be the same person as the donor of potsherd 2 
and/or the individual of the same name mentioned in inscription no. 1 on pot A. 
Potsherd 5 (pl. 32 and fig. 49) 
Dimensions: 
8.6 X 9.43 0.4-0.5 
Decoration: 
Above the inscription, a thick, blurry line of red 
ink; above this line, at the top center, the bottom 
of a chevron-shaped design in black ink. 
Height of letters: 
2.0 on average. The surviving portion of rya with 
its ornamentally extended subscript, broken off 
at the bottom, is 5.6 cm high. 
Reading: 
/I/ (.i]ghade niryadide /// 
Translation: 
... [water] pot was given... 

=== PAGE 275 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
227 
The letters are written in a thin, delicate hand. Ornamental extensions 
are applied to the bottom of de, the i diacritic in di, and the subscript r in rya. At 
the right edge, nearly touching the middle of the gha, is the very end of a line which 
could be the 7 diacritic written horizontally across the stem of an n. The missing 
beginning of the text can therefore be reconstructed as (aya pan*)/iJ- (i.e., “This 
water[pot]”). 
For the use of niryadida-, etc. in donative formulae, see the comments 
above on niryateti on pot C. 
This sherd may have come from the same pot as the following one, as 
discussed below. 
Potsherd 6 (pl. 32 and fig. 50) 
Dimensions: 
Decoration: 
Height of letters: 
Reading: 
Translation: 
12.0 X 8.4; 0.4—0.5 
Above the inscription, a thick, blurry line of red 
ink. At the left-hand corner is preserved most of 
a stamped design consisting of a flower with six 
petals enclosed within a circle. 
0.8—2.0 on average. The remaining portion of the 
incomplete ligature rva is 6.7 cm high. 
//! [da]rana na[vas]eana sarvasya nativagras. |// 
... of mother and father (?), of the Navaseas (2), 
of the entire group of kinsmen... 
Fig. 49. Potsherd 5 
Fig. 50. Potsherd 6 

=== PAGE 276 ===
228 
APPENDIX 
The inscription is written in a thin, delicate hand with ornate characters 
with long flourishes. The ornamental characters are similar to those seen on pot C, 
for example, the long hooked flourish below fia. The context (fati- = Skt. jnati-) 
shows that this is a decorative flourish or pseudo-anusvara rather than a true 
anusvara. 
The slip is largely peeled off, causing some damage to the inscription, 
especially at the left side. The surviving portion of the inscription seems to be from 
the list of beneficiaries, given in the genitive case, which was presumably governed 
by a following word such as sammepratyasae as in pot A, inscription 2. The sense 
of the last phrase, sarvasya fiativagras., is clear enough although its formulation is 
slightly different from the usual general citations of relatives, such as mitranatt- 
salohitana on pot A. Vagra- is presumably a metathesized form of Skt. varga used as 
a collective suffix, like samgha in the Palatt Dheri jar inscription C, fiadiga-samghe 
(Konow 1929: 122; the reading, however, is not certain). 
The word partially preserved at the beginning of the potsherd may have 
been madapidarana or the like, that is, “of [the donor’s] mother and father.” The 
trace of a letter at the very edge of the sherd, before rana, could well be a da. The 
reading of the word following this is problematic due to the peeling of the surface, 
which has damaged several of the letters, and the sense of the apparent reading, 
na[vas]eana, is not clear. Most likely, it is a proper name, perhaps a family or clan 
name, such as appear, not infrequently, in the plural in Kharosthi inscriptions; com- 
pare, for example, hodreana (Dharmarajika ins. 2; Konow 1929: 91) and imtavhriapu- 
trana (Taxila silver scroll; Konow 1929: 77, line 2). 
This sherd quite possibly, though not definitely, came from the same 
vessel as potsherd 5. The ornate handwriting is very similar, as is the overall fabric 
of the sherd. 
Potsherd 7 (pl. 32 and fig. 51) 
Dimensions: 
13.1 X 9.8; 0.6 
Decoration: 
At the upper left, a square stamped design with 
what appears to be a monstrous face (kirtimukha 
or lion?).*? At the right side, some inked lines 
resembling a face in profile. 
Height of letters: 
No complete letters. 
Reading: 
2 
Translation: 
2 
Only the bottoms of two or three letters are preserved at the right side 
of the upper edge. No reading can be proposed. 
39. See also Allchin’s comments above (p. 185). 

=== PAGE 277 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS_ 
229 
Fig. 
51. Potsherd 7 
Potsherd 8 (pl. 32) 
Dimensions: 
10.6 X 6.6; 0.5—-0.7 
Decoration: 
At the upper left corner, a row of five incised 
dots, presumably the remnants of a decorative 
row that went all the way around the shoulder of 
the pot, above the inscription. Above the dotted 
line, a very small remaining section of a single 
continuous incised line. 
Height of letters: 
2.4+ (height of surviving portions); the only 
complete letter, rma, is 3.7 cm high. 
Reading: 
//1 [ca](r*)yana dharma/ii] /// 
Translation: 
... of the Dharmagu([ptaka*] teachers... 
The letters, written in a thick, even hand, are all incomplete at the bot- 
tom, except for rma. Part of the inscription can be confidently reconstructed as 
(a*)[ca](r*)yana dharma|ii](teana parigrahe™) or the like. The surviving portion 
of the last letter is the upper part of the “alif,” or vowel carrier sign, but it is virtually 
certain that it originally had a u diacritic at the bottom, on the basis of the parallels 
in pot D, potsherds 11 and 17, and other examples cited in section 8.2.3.1. The missing 
beginning of the inscription, following the usual pattern, must have been something 
like aya panighade deyadharme saghe caturdise; compare, for example, the inscrip- 
tion on pot B. 

=== PAGE 278 ===
230 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 52. Potsherd 9 
Potsherd 9 (pl. 32 and fig. 52) 
Dimensions: 
10.9 X 10.2; 0.4—-0.9 
Decoration: 
At the top, remnants of two lines of vertical 
hatching. 
Height of letters: 
1.2 (ca) to 4.8 (ryya) 
Reading: 
/// mi acaryya |// 
Translation: 
we 
lot themeacherss 
This inscription is the only one in this collection written in Brahmi 
script, although groups of potsherds with inscriptions in both Kharosthi and Brahmi 
are not unusual (see n. 3). The form of the script (particularly the letters a and m) 
appears to be rather late, so that the inscription could date from as late as the fourth 
or fifth century a.p. It is striking that the scribe has neglected to note the long vowels 
in acaryya(nam”*). This seems to reflect the work of a scribe who was more accus- 
tomed to writing Kharosthi and thus prone to be careless about the marking of long 
vowels. 
The mi at the beginning of the sherd is probably the end of the phrase 
samghami caturdisami. The next word can be readily reconstructed as acaryya(nam”*) 
[sic], which would have been followed by the name of the sect and then by parigra- 
hami, “in the possession of.’ The locative ending in -mz in the first word indicates 
that the Brahmi text was written in hybrid Sanskrit, or perhaps rather in Sanskritized 
Gandhari. 

=== PAGE 279 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
231 
Potsherd 10 (pl. 33) 
Dimensions: 
8.6 X 7.43 0.4-0.5 
Decoration: 
A thick, blurry red line at the level of the top of 
the inscription; at the upper left corner, part of a 
stamped circular design. 
Height of letters: 
1.5+ (ya) to 4.4+ (na); average about 3.0. 
Reading: 
//1 [ya]narana[m.] /// 
Translation: 
oy2. (itu) the eeeror Ove ..e 
The letters are written in a thick, even hand, somewhat similar to that of 
potsherd 8. The surviving portion of the inscription evidently contains part of the 
name of the monastic institution where the recipients of the gift resided; for other 
names of monasteries ending in -(a)rafia- (Skt. aranya-), see pot B and comments 
thereon. The first character, read tentatively as ya, could also be sa; neither reading 
suggests a previously known institution. At the end, just before the broken left edge, 
is the small remnant of a letter which could be the right side of an m, in which case 
we can reconstruct the expected locative ending -mz. This potsherd almost certainly 
comes from the same vessel as no. 11. 
Potsherd | | (pl. 33) 
Dimensions: 
8.3 X 6.63 0.4-0.5 
Decoration: 
Blurry red line at the level of the top of the 
inscription. 
Height of letters: 
2.0 (ta) to 3.4+ (pa) 
Reading: 
//| [ma]iitaana pa |// 
Translation: 
... [in the possession] of the 
[Dhar*]maguptaka ... [teachers*] ... 
The letters are in a thick, even hand, evidently the same as that of 
potsherd 10. The inscription can be confidently restored in part to (acaryana 
dhar*)maiitaana pa(rigrahe*) or the like, according to the usual donative formula. 
The sherd almost certainly belongs to the same vessel as no. 10, since the 
form and material are identical, the hand is the same, and the texts are consistent. 
It is not possible to be sure what their relative order was, however, because in some 
cases the location of the recipient monastery (i.e., the text partly preserved in pot- 
sherd 10) comes before the name of the sect (e.g., in the inscription on pot C), and 
sometimes after it (as in pot B). 

=== PAGE 280 ===
232 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 53. Potsherd 12 
Potsherd | 2 (pl. 33 and fig. 53) 
Dimensions: 
8.0 X 14.43 0.4-0.9 
Decoration: 
At the right side, a Srivatsa (auspicious symbol) 
in ink. 
Height of letters: 
3.3 (sa, only complete letter) 
Reading: 
salgh.] /// [m.] 
Translation: 
...community...at(?)... 
The fragment contains the beginning of the inscription, which can 
be reconstructed as sagha(mi caturdisamt”*) or the like, according to the short form 
of the standard dedicatory formula (see pot D). At the upper right edge, there is a 
tiny trace of what must have been the last letter of the inscription. (The Srivatsa 
thus separates the beginning and end of the inscription, which ran all around the 
pot, as in pot C.) This letter could be an m, in which case we can tentatively recon- 
struct (-7mi*) as the locative ending either of the word (parigraha*)mi or of a topo- 
nym (see potsherd 10). 

=== PAGE 281 ===
Potsherd | 3 (pl. 33) 
Dimensions: 
Decoration: 
Height of letters: 
Reading: 
Translation: 
Written in a small, neat hand. 
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
233 
9.1 X 6.43; 0.6—0.7 
At top, five incised parallel lines plus one wavy 
line below them. 
1.1 (du) to 3.2 (mi) 
//I [sa]ghami cadudisa[mi] /// 
... to the universal community... 
Potsherd | 4 (pl. 33 and figs. 54-5) 
Dimensions: 
Decoration: 
Height of letters: 
Reading: 
Translation: 
7.0 X 8.8; 0.7—1.1 
Three incised lines:around the upper rim. 
Below the inscription, three more incised lines. 
1.5—-3.0 
/// mt ghosyana [s.] /// 
7. 
ate. Of the:Ghosyas(@)ia.. 
The sherd belongs to a different kind of vessel than the globular, narrow- 
necked jug of the other pots and potsherds. The inscription is written on a narrow 
depressed band 3 cm high. Above this band is the top rim of the vessel, 1.8 cm high. It 
seems to have been a shallow pot with a wide opening at the top, perhaps resembling 
a piece found at Taxila (Sirkap; Marshall 1951: 2.411, 3. pl. 122, no. 42) (see also sec. 1.3). 
The inscription is in a moderately ornate style, with the familiar pseudo- 
anusvara flourishes at the bottom of some characters (m1, gho). The sense is not clear. 
At the upper left of the first syllable, 7, there is a small dot of ink which could be 
meant to represent a word divider, as seen in several of the manuscripts. If so, the mi 
would be the locative ending of the preceding word. The following word, ghosyana, 
is presumably in the genitive plural and seems to be a proper name; compare the 
comments on na[vas]eana on potsherd 6. 
Figs. 54 and 55. Potsherd 14 

=== PAGE 282 ===
234 
APPENDIX 
Potsherd | 5 (pl. 33) 
Dimensions: 
8.3 X 7.23 0.5-0.8 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letters: 
2.2-2.8 
Reading: 
/// [tra]nadena 
Translation: 
... by [MiJtrana[n]da. 
This appears to be the end of the inscription; although the upper left 
corner of the sherd is broken away, the space remaining after the last letter (na) is 
slightly more than the normal space between letters. The surviving portion seems 
to be a proper name in the instrumental case, most likely (mi*)tranadena (= Skt. 
mitranandena). The instrumental might have been governed by a participial verb 
such as niryadide (as in potsherd 5), that is, “given by.” 
Potsherd | 6 (pl. 33) 
Dimensions: 
12.2 X 8.9; 0.5-0.8 
Decoration: 
None 
Height 
of letters: 
1.5—2.3 
Reading: 
sra[tsasa] ti 
Translation: 
2 
The inscription, which is rather badly faded, appears to be complete, as 
there is a sizable blank space to the right, while on the left, near the edge, there is a 
spiral design that does not correspond to any Kharosthi letter and hence seems to be 
a punctuation mark or auspicious sign such as are often used to mark the end of an 
inscription. The reading and interpretation are uncertain. The first letter seems to be 
sra but could possibly be bra. The second is apparently the conjunct tsa (or possibly 
spa), and the third is probably sa. The word might represent the name of the owner, 
or rather the recipient of the vessel, but if so I cannot explain it etymologically. 
Potsherd |7 (pl. 33 and fig. 56) 
Dimensions: 
9.8 X 5.0; 0.5-0.6 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letters: 
2.0 on average; Maximum 4.5+ (rma) 
Reading: 
/// ca(r)ya dharmaiite pari /// 
Translation: 
... in the possession of the Dharmagupta 
teacher[s]... 

=== PAGE 283 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
235 
Fig. 56. Potsherd 17 
The inscription is a cursively written and inaccurate rendition of the 
standard donative formula, in which the scribe has omitted the normal genitive 
plural endings. The intended reading is presumably to be restored as (a*)carya<na*> 
dharmaute<ana*> pari(grahami*). The syllable te (cf. the similar spelling of dhar- 
mauteana in pot D) is rendered by a t with two parallel lines like a diacritic e above 
and to the right, but not connected with the consonant. Apparently the scribe first 
wrote the one at the right and, dissatisfied with its distance from the ¢, wrote it again 
slightly to the left, closer, though still not connected, to the consonant. The cursive 
character of this hand is also manifested by the rough and simplified forms of ca, 
rya, and dha. 
Potsherd 18 (pl. 33) 
Dimensions: 
11 X 10.53 0.7—1.0 
Decoration: 
At the lower left corner, most of a stamped 
circular six-petaled lotus design, similar to the 
ones on pot A and potsherds 6 and 10. 
Height of letters: 
About 1.2-1.5+ (more complete letters); all are 
incomplete at bottom. 
Reading: 
/// [t.]fiatisal.h. /// 
Translation: 
... [of friends,] kinsmen, and blood relatives .. 
. 
The text can be restored to the familiar formula (mi*)t(ra*)-fati- 
sal(o*)h(itana*); see the comments on potsherd 6. The letters /(0*) and h(7*) are 
separated by a space of about 2 cm where the scribe has avoided writing over the 
lotus design. 

=== PAGE 284 ===
236 
APPENDIX 
Potsherd | 9 (pl. 34) 
Dimensions: 
10.2 X 8; 0.5-0.6 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letters: 
1.5-4.0 
Reading: 
//! [na] puyae sa[n]i/// 
Translation: 
vee I MOMOMOL a. 
The first letter, if na is the correct reading, is probably a genitive plural 
depending on puyae, “in honor of, which is part of a common formula for sharing 
the merit in reliquary inscriptions, though less usual in dedicatory records on pot- 
tery. The last letter is probably ni but could also be tha. I can offer no reconstruction 
for the last word, which is perhaps a proper name. 
Potsherd 20 (pl. 34 and fig. 57) 
Dimensions: 
14 X 13.6; 0.6—-0.7 
Decoration: 
Incised lines, described from the top down: 
above the inscription, three parallel lines; at the 
level of the bottom of the inscription, three 
parallel wavy lines; below the inscription, three 
parallel lines; another triple wavy line; a raised 
line, diagonally hatched; and another raised line, 
diagonally hatched in the opposite direction. 
Height of letters: 
Average 1.3—2.5; maximum 4.4 (sya) 
Reading: 
[a] /// .u[dha]savapu[tra]sya 
Translation: 
[This] ... of the son of [B]uddhaéava. 
The inscription is written in a thick, upright hand. At the left edge, 
divided by a sizable blank space from the rest of the text, there is a portion of the 
bottom of a letter, which must have been the first syllable of the inscription that ran 
around the vessel. It could be a, in which case the text might have begun with a(ya 
panighada*) or a similar phrase. The end of the inscription is preserved at the right 
side of the sherd, and the genitive ending of the final word probably marks it as 
the gift or possession (see below, sec. 5.2) of the person whose patronymic it con- 
tained. Presumably this name is to be reconstructed as (b*)udhasavaputrasya (= Skt. 
buddhasravaputrasya). The form of tra is peculiar, but this is probably due to the 
interference of the incised wavy lines with the scriber’s pen. On the peculiar form 
of the u diacritic in the first syllable, see the discussion of pot A. The previous word 
probably would have been the personal name of the donor or owner. 

=== PAGE 285 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
237 
Fig. 57. Potsherd 20 
Potsherd 21 (pl. 34) 
Dimensions: 
Decoration: 
Height of letters: 
Reading: 
Translation: 
9.5 X 9.7; 0.5-0.7 
None 
All incomplete; probably originally 
about 2.0—2.5. 
///? bhr.. /// 
Se WHE 
eco 
Only the second syllable is more or less completely preserved. Of the first 
syllable, only a small trace remains at the left edge, and of the third, only the bottom. 
This latter has a looped flourish that is evidently a cursive rendition of a subscript 
(preconsonantal) 7, although the loop is smaller than usual, making it resemble a 
form of the diacritic e that can be added to the bottom of certain letters, such as the 
a (“alif”). In view of the bh. that precedes it, the most likely reconstruction of the 
word is bh(a*)r(ya*)-, that is, Sanskrit bharyd, “wife” (probably originally in the 
genitive or instrumental case, bharyae), which commonly occurs in donative inscrip- 
tions; compare, for example, susomabharyae in pot A, inscription 2. 

=== PAGE 286 ===
238 
APPENDIX 
Fig. 58. Potsherd 22 
Potsherd 22 (pl. 34 and fig. 58) 
Dimensions: 
9.1 X 9.03 0.8-1.2 
Decoration: 
At top, a series of horizontal incised lines above 
a thicker scalloped line. 
Height of letters: 
2.0-3.1 
Reading: 
/// likhide bha[.r.] /// 
Translation: 
a: 
e Whitten... 
The word likhide, “written,” presumably marks a scribal signature, and 
the following word would have been the scribe’s name, which probably began with 
bha(d*)r(a*)-, in the instrumental case. Such scribal signatures are sometimes found 
in reliquary and other types of inscriptions, for instance, in the Kurram casket 
(Konow 1929: 155, line 4, aya ca praticasammupate likhida mahiphatiena). But this 
apparent instance on a pot inscription is, to my knowledge, unique. It is not entirely 
surprising, however, in view of the calligraphic efforts that some scribes dedicated 
to inscriptions of this type, such as the one on pot C. 

=== PAGE 287 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
239 
Potsherd 23 (pl. 34) 
Dimensions: 
9.8 X 8.03 0.4-0.5 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letters: 
2.0 
Reading: 
/// sara[nasu] /// 
Translation: 
¢ 
The ink is badly faded, especially at the left side of the sherd, so that the 
reading is uncertain. The text may contain the name of a monastic establishment 
([aJrafa-; see the comments on pot B and potsherd 10), although the usual locative 
ending is absent. 
Potsherd 24 (pl. 34) 
Dimensions: 
9.0 X 7.0; 0.6—-0.8 
Decoration: 
Below the inscription, the sherd is covered with 
diagonal hatching composed of deeply incised 
lines. 
Height of letters: 
1.0 
Reading: 
//I [s.]koda [a] /// 
Translation: 
Q 
The fragment is too small to permit any interpretation. The writing 
seems to be cursive in style, with the k written in the variant in which the top hori- 
zontal is written in one stroke together with the right-hand member (7) instead 
of being joined to the vertical stem as in the more standard form (A; see 6.2.1). 
Potsherd 25 (pl. 34) 
Dimensions: 
8.5 X 8.3; 0.8-1.1 
Decoration: 
At the top, three pairs of parallel incised lines 
above a wavy line; at the bottom, the top edge 
of a circular design. 
Height of letters: 
0.7-2.2 
Reading: 
/// [(naka]na ja[khe]yapunaé /// 
Translation: 
2 
The inscription is cursively written and badly faded, so that no sense 
can be made of it. The letter read tentatively as ka appears to be of the cursive variety 
noted in potsherd 24, but it could also be some other consonant, perhaps m, with the 
vowel sign o. The lower part of the syllable that is tentatively read as khe looks like the 
ligature mu, but this reading is rejected because it is placed lower down than mu, 
which is usually set above the line, and the trace of the vertical line above it would not 
be oriented in the way that is usual for the upper stem of that ligature. I have there- 
fore preferred to take it, with considerable doubt, as a diacritic e on top of a partially 
obliterated kha. 

=== PAGE 288 ===
240 
APPENDIX 
Fig.59. Potsherd 26 
Potsherd 26 (pl. 34 and fig. 59) 
Dimensions: 
6.7 X 5.15 0.5—-0.6 
Decoration: 
None 
Height of letter: 
35 
Reading: 
/// dha[r..] /// 
Translation: 
2 
The small fragment preserves only one complete letter, but there is also 
a trace of a horizontal ink stroke at the upper left, which might have been the upper 
part of the ligature rma. If so, this was probably part of the word dhar(magupteana*) 
or the like. 
5. Conclusions: The Functions of the Inscribed Pots 
5.1. Waterpots as a Form of Pious Donation 
In four of the five complete dedicatory pot inscriptions presented here 
(pots A, B, C, and E), the object is labeled with the term aya pani-ghada, “this water- 
pot,” or some variant form thereof. Among the potsherds edited above, one (no. 5) 
has the word ghade, which can probably be restored to (aya pani*)-ghade, and an- 
other (no. 3) bears the similar but problematic designation yaru-ghadike. Other 
Kharosthi (and Brahmi) inscriptions with similar labels are well attested among the 
inscriptions on pots and potsherds from Kara Tepe and Faiz Tepe in Termez, where 
we find such phrases as iyo pani-ghada (Kara Tepe no. 36, Vertogradova 1995: 69; 
reading revised according to Salomon 1997b: 408). On the whole, though, the syn- 
onymous word kundika and its variants are much more common among the Termez 
pot inscriptions than ghada; for example, in Kharosthi, ayam paniya-kumdika (Kara 

=== PAGE 289 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
241 
Tepe no. 1, Vertogradova 1995: 49), and in Brahmi, ayam panika-kundika (Kara Tepe 
no. 11, Vertogradova 1995: 97).4° 
In the corresponding context in the reconstructed text of the Tor Dherai 
potsherds we find the expression yam prapa, which Konow translated, without com- 
ment, as “this water hall” (1929: 176). But since we now have numerous attestations 
of other words meaning “waterpot” in this context, we should consider whether 
prapa could not also have had this sense in the Tor Dherai inscriptions. In defense 
of Konow’s interpretation, however, it may be significant that the inscription in 
question was “repeated on several jars” (Konow 1929: 174), so that they could have 
been intended as labels, not of individual jars, but of the “water hall” that contained 
them.*' It is also true that Sanskrit prapd and Pali papd normally denote a watering 
place or a well rather than a jar as such. Nevertheless, given the parallels of the other 
inscriptions, which are otherwise very similar in wording and content, I am inclined 
to suspect that prapd did in fact have the extended sense of “jar” in the Tor Dherai 
inscriptions. 
The majority of the pots (and potsherds, as far as their contents can be 
discerned) with donative inscriptions in Kharosthi do not have any such explicit la- 
bels. In these inscriptions, the donated object is usually referred to by general terms 
such as deyadharma or danamukha, “pious gift.” This briefer formula is found in 
most of the inscriptions of similar type from the other sites listed in section 2 of 
this Appendix; for example, saghe cadurdise masenarane danamukhe budhaghosasa 
(“Pious gift of Buddhaghosa to the universal community at Masenarana”) in an in- 
scription of unknown provenance (Salomon 1996b: 239). Since explicit labels of the 
type aya panighada are usually combined with one of these general terms (e.g., in 
British Library pot C, aya panighada danammukho . .. “This water pot [is] the 
pious gift... ”), the use of deyadharma or danamukha alone could be understood 
as an abridged equivalent of the longer formulae with an explicit label of the 
donated object. In some cases, such as British Library pot D (saghami caiidisami 
dhamaiiteana parigrahami), an even more abridged formula is used, in which the 
inscription contains no label at all, specific or generic. 
The overall consistency of the donative text in its longer and shorter 
forms, as well as the similarity of the objects on which they were written, suggests 
that most, if not all, of the inscribed vessels were originally intended for the same 
purpose: as containers for drinking water for the residents of the monasteries to 
which they were donated. Such pots were a common and widespread form of dona- 
40. A similar donative Kharosthi inscription from Faiz Tepe (Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1974: 
117-22) labels the stone bowl on which it is written as suyi-kuda, which evidently corresponds to 
Sanskrit suci-kunda, perhaps referring to a vessel used for ritual cleansing. 
41. Such a “water hall” could conceivably be what is referred to in the Tibetan translation of 
the Ksudrakavastu of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya as a “water house” (chu’i khan pa; Derge Kan- 
jur, Tha 109b.7). 

=== PAGE 290 ===
242 
APPENDIX 
tion on the part of worshipers and pilgrims at Gandharan Buddhist monasteries, 
evidently by way of a minor gift. This is indicated, first of all, by the very large number 
of records of this kind, though mostly fragmentary, that have been found (but by no 
means always published) in the course of formal excavations or as casual finds at Gan- 
dharan sites. Second, there is the small cash value of such vessels, which no doubt in 
antiquity as now were sold for a trivial price. Third, and most revealing, is the casual 
character of many, though by no means all, of the donative inscriptions on them. 
It is true that in some cases, such as British Library pots A and C, dedica- 
tory pot inscriptions are fairly elaborate in terms of their form, being written in 
calligraphic style, and their content, listing many beneficiaries, for example. Nonethe- 
less, the briefer formula and casual style of writing are more common, and moreover 
such inscriptions occur on vessels of the same type and form (e.g., British Library 
pots B and D) as the more elaborately inscribed ones. This suggests that the length 
and degree of formality of the inscription were matters of personal choice on the 
part of the donor rather than an indication of any inherent difference in the nature 
of the gift itself. 
The absence, however, in some of the short-formula inscriptions, includ- 
ing British Library pots B and D, of the donor’s name is very striking, since this is 
normally understood to be the most important part of a donative record, that is, the 
part that ensured that the karmic merit generated by the gift would accrue to the 
donor (see Fussman 1969: 7-8). Such an omission would be virtually unthinkable in 
other types of Buddhist donative records, for instance, in those recording the foun- 
dation of a stupa or a relic dedication, in which the sponsor’s name, as well as those 
of his or her relatives, associates, and/or superiors, is almost invariably mentioned 
in a prominent position. So the surprising absence of the donor’s name in some pot 
inscriptions is perhaps best explained on the grounds that these pots represented 
casual or minor gifts for which it was not felt absolutely necessary to record the 
donative formula, including even the donor’s name, in full. 
It is also significant that none of the many waterpot inscriptions is 
dated.** This feature too sets them off from more formal donative records, which 
were often, though by no means always, dated. This contrast reinforces the impres- 
sion that, whereas donations of relics and reliquaries were events of some note which 
were probably accompanied by solemn ceremonies,* the presentation of a water jar 
42. The first Hadda jar inscription (now lost) seems to be an exception, since it is dated in 
the year 28, probably of Kaniska. But the inscription itself (pratisthapita sarira ramaramnami 
thubami... ) shows that the vessel was presented as a reliquary and hence is not actually compar- 
able, in terms of function, to the ones under discussion here, though it was apparently similar to 
them in physical form. One of the Kara Tepe potsherds (Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja 1983: 32, no. 3) 
was read as containing the word dive/se], “on the day . . 
. ” implying a dated inscription, but this 
reading has been shown by Vertogradova (1995: 52) to be incorrect. 
43. Such a ceremony (in Khotan) was described by Hsiian-tsang (Beal 1884: 317-8). 

=== PAGE 291 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
243 
was more on the level of a minor or symbolic gesture of piety and was not consid- 
ered worthy of being inscriptionally recorded in the same detail as a relic donation. 
5.2. Relationships between Inscribed Pots and Funerary Vessels 
In numerous cases, which have been summarized in chapter 4, clay pots 
similar in form and type to the inscribed ones discussed here were found to contain 
human remains or the debris of birch bark manuscripts. Unfortunately there is as 
yet no clear, well-attested example of human remains found in an inscribed pot, but 
there is some reason to think that there may have been such cases. The strongest in- 
dication of this is the report concerning the second inscribed jar from Hadda, kept 
in the Kabul Museum, which, according to Fussman (1969: 5), was accompanied by 
a note in Persian to the effect that the inscription “comes from Hadda, found in a 
large jar with earth and bones.” Fussman (1969: 9; quoted above in 4.3) deduced, 
apparently correctly, that this probably meant that the inscribed jar itself contained 
the bones. This, among other factors, led Fussman to suspect that the jar was in- 
tended as a funerary vessel from the very beginning, and that the inscription on it 
contained the name of the monk whose remains it was destined to contain. He also 
noted that the inscriptions on other clay pots were added to the pots after they were 
fired, which he took to indicate that they were not originally intended for the storage 
of liquids (presumably since liquids and moisture would tend to obliterate the un- 
fired ink) but rather that some of them were designed to be funereal jars (Fussman 
and Le Berre 1976: 92). 
Fussman did, however, concede that there are some problems with this 
interpretation (1969: 8), and subsequent discoveries of many more inscriptions of 
this type show that his reservations were justified. Although Fussman interpreted 
the phrase samamtapase mahapriyasamfie (as read by him) on the Hadda jar as the 
name of the monk whose remains the jar contained (“... pious gift... to Samam- 
tapasa Mahapriyasamfa’; p. 9),4 inscriptions such as those on British Library pots B 
and C and the other examples mentioned above in connection with them show that 
the longer dedicatory formula on inscribed jars often included in the corresponding 
position the name of the monastic establishment to which the jars were presented; 
for instance, in pot C, samghe caturdise rayagahami acaryanam sarvastivatinam. 
Moreover, the names of such establishments very often contained the final element 
(a)rafia-, “grove” (Skt. aranya-), as in pot B, . 
. 
. purnagarafiami. | would therefore 
propose that we should read, instead of samamtapase mahapriyasamfie on the Hadda 
jar, samamtapase mahapriyaramne, “at Samantapasa in the Mahapriya grove.” The 
crucial penultimate syllable of this phrase does indeed appear in the photograph 
44. The full text of the inscription, according to Fussman’s reading, is Sihasudaya atmanasa 
arogada[ksJi[na-... ] samghe caturdise Samamtapase Mahapriyasamne acaryenam sarvastivadinam 
parigrahe deyadharme. 

=== PAGE 292 ===
244 
APPENDIX 
(Fussman 1969: pl. III) to be ram rather than sam and in view of the parallels cited 
should, I think, be read as such and reinterpreted accordingly. 
A similar revision may be proposed with regard to Fussman’s (1974) in- 
terpretation of the inscription on the Qunduz copper vase, which, although written 
on a different material, follows the same formula. Here again Fussman takes the 
phrase staraya baliyaphaimkavihare* to indicate that “like the Hadda jar, the Qunduz 
vase was intended for the ashes of the monk Stara” (p. 61). He reaches this conclusion, 
among other reasons, on the grounds that “Starayabaliyaphaimka would be a very 
long toponym. That is why we are resigned to dividing Staraya Baliyaphaimkavihare, 
PPP] 
‘for Stara, in the monastery of Baliyaphaimka’” 
(p. 60). But here too a comparison 
with the numerous parallels now available from other inscriptions indicates that 
starayabaliyaphaimka probably was indeed the name of the monastery to whose 
teachers the vase was donated, and that there is no reference to an individual monk 
for whose ashes it was destined. Such monastic institutions (vihara or (a)rafia) seem 
to have been named, in some cases at least, after their patrons or “owners,”4° as may 
be the case, for example, with the purnagarania- of pot B and the ramarana- of Hadda 
pot no. 1 (Konow 1935-6). A long name such as starayabaliyaphaimkavihare might 
reflect more than just the simple name of its founder. For example, it could contain 
the names of two (or more?) joint founders or perhaps the founder’s personal name 
plus an ethnonym or patronymic. For the latter possibility, we might compare the 
long (and incomplete) monastery name 
.. 
. vhara-gulavhara-jhada-viha(rami*), “in 
the Vihara of .. 
. vhara, son of Gulavhara” (Kara Tepe no. 58; Vertogradova 1995: 45 
and 84). 
Thus, in light of comparisons with the more recently discovered inscrip- 
tions of similar type, there is no longer any compelling reason to believe that the 
Hadda and Qunduz jars were originally intended as funereal vessels. The pattern 
and formulation of their dedicatory inscriptions agree well with those of the many 
others now known, including those several examples which tell us explicitly that the 
inscribed vessel was intended as a water jar. Fussman’s argument that the addition 
of the inscriptions to the jars after firing indicates that they were not intended to be 
used to contain water but rather were meant to be funerary vessels from the very 
beginning is hardly compelling in light of the new inscriptional evidence to the con- 
trary. Rather, I would be inclined to explain this casual treatment of the inscriptions 
as reflecting the objects’ status as minor and informal gifts, whose inscriptions, un- 
like those in or on reliquaries, were not expected to last as permanent records. 
This is not to deny that, on the one hand, some of these vessels were do- 
nated to individual monks for their personal use (though not for the disposal of 
45. The full text is... budhaputrasa Ana. . 
. 
. pasa deyadhamma saghe catudise Staraya 
Baliyaphaimkavihare acariyanam dhammagutakana parigrahe savasatvanam h(i)tasukhaya. 
46. On these and related terms and their ramifications, see Schopen 1996: esp. 84-6. 

=== PAGE 293 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
245 
their bodily remains) and, on the other hand, that some of them were reused, at a 
later date, as funereal vessels or for analogous purposes. As a matter of fact, both of 
these seem to have been the case. As for donations of pots to individual monks, we 
have among the new specimens one example, pot A, which, in addition to the stan- 
dard donative formula in the longer inscription (no. 2), also has a separate, shorter 
inscription that explicitly marks it as a donation (pratigraha) to a particular monk, 
apparently named Catula. So there can be no doubt that pot A was in fact specifically 
donated to a particular monk within the larger community. Moreover, it is equally 
definite that it was not meant to contain his ashes: inscription 2, which is in the 
same hand and hence can be presumed to have been written at the same time as 1, 
tells us that the object of the donation (deyadharme) was “this waterpot” ([a]yam 
panayaghade). 
Despite the concerns expressed by Fussman (1969: 8-9) and Vertogra- 
dova (1995: 46) that such donations seem to violate the vinaya rules concerning the 
personal possessions that can be given to an individual monk, the evidence of the 
inscriptions shows beyond a doubt that the pot was in fact presented to an individ- 
ual. In fact, the Pali vinaya contains specific stipulations for the designation of gifts 
to particular monks (Dutt 1924: 185). Moreover, we now have evidence from inscrip- 
tions from other Buddhist sites that clay jars were frequently marked as the personal 
possession of individual monks. At Kara Tepe, for example, numerous water jars were 
explicitly labeled by inscriptions as the “personal possession” (pugaliga/pudgaliya, 
etc.) of individual monks; for instance, ayo kudiya bhiksusya budhasirasya pugali- 
gasya [sic], “This jar is the personal property of the monk Buddhasiras” (Vertogra- 
dova 1995: 109). Similar examples were noted by von Hintiber (1991) among vessels 
with Brahmi inscriptions from the Buddhist site of Salihundam in Andhra Pradesh, 
showing that this practice was widespread in the Indian Buddhist world. 
As to the possibility that some of the donated inscribed waterpots were 
secondarily used as funerary vessels or for related purposes, there are strong indica- 
tions that in some cases this was actually done, although unfortunately the archeo- 
logical documentation is not sufficiently detailed and reliable to establish this with 
certainty. One indication is the note that was attached to the Hadda pot, cited above, 
suggesting that it was found with bones, or rather (as explained by Fussman) con- 
tained bones. Another example could be one of the “funereal jars” from Hadda on 
which, according to Masson (in Wilson 1841: 113; see sec. 4.3 and n. 9), “an inscription 
was scratched.” Since no further information on this item is available, and since 
the inscription is not legible in Wilson’s plate IX, it is impossible to draw any def- 
inite conclusion about the nature of this object, but I think it likely that, like the 
other inscribed Hadda pot, it was originally a waterpot that was later reused as a 
funereal vessel. 
If, as seems very likely, some of the inscribed waterpots were later reused 
as funereal jars of the type that are well attested in Gandharan Buddhist sites (see 

=== PAGE 294 ===
246 
APPENDIX 
4.3), this was a secondary and incidental function. Presumably, such vessels were 
available in large numbers in Gandharan monasteries, and they might have been 
chosen, perhaps more or less at random and without regard for the original donative 
inscription (or lack thereof), when the need arose for a burial. 
The use of such clay pots as funereal vessels may have been conditioned, 
on the one hand, by established practice going back to prehistoric times in this re- 
gion (similar vessels were used in burials of the Gandharan grave culture, whose 
sites often coincide with stupa sites of the historical period) and, on the other hand, 
by certain requirements of Buddhist monastic practice. As demonstrated by Schopen 
(1996: 112-9) on the basis of the Mulasarvastivada-vinaya, monks were obligated to 
put any property or objects that were donated to them to continuous use for as long 
as possible, in order to produce the maximum merit (paribhoganvayam punyam, 
“merit arising from use”) for their donors. Moreover, according to a passage cited 
by Schopen (pp. 114-5) from the Ksudrakavastu, this rule even applied to minor gifts 
such as “dishes” (Tibetan sder spyad = Skt. bhajana). And even when a donated ob- 
ject had become so worn out as to be useless, it could not simply be thrown away but 
was to be recycled in such a way as to enable it to continue to generate merit for its 
donor, as prescribed in another Ksudrakavastu passage: “Even when it is completely 
useless the cloth should not be thrown away. You should mix it with dung or mud 
and use it as a filler for cracks in the pillars or holes in the wall. The merit of the 
donor will then be multiplied over a long period of time” (Schopen 1996: 117). The 
secondary use of surplus water jars as funereal vessels, as indicated by the archeolog- 
ical and epigraphic record, may have been a function of this law. Using a discarded 
jar as the receptacle for the remains of a dead monk would, like incorporating the 
scraps of a donated cloth into the structure of the monastery, enable it to continue 
producing merit for its donor indefinitely. 
The use of old waterpots for the ritual burial of “dead” manuscripts, as 
proposed in section 4.4, would have been an analogous practice, for which clay jars, 
inscribed or otherwise, might have been taken more or less at random as the need 
arose. Here too documentation is sparse, but in the new materials we have clear evi- 
dence of old scrolls being placed in pots bearing donative Kharosthi inscriptions that 
have no connection with this secondary function. To sum up, the epigraphic and 
archeological evidence indicates that the clay jars bearing Kharosthi inscriptions were 
originally intended as water storage jars donated to Buddhist monasteries by their 
patrons by way of a minor gift, and this appears to be the sole import of the dedica- 
tory inscriptions, whether or not they explicitly label the vessels as “waterpots.” In 
some cases, however, these waterpots were subsequently put to use as funerary vessels, 
whether in the conventional sense, that is, for the burial of the bodily remains of dead 
monks, or in the extended sense of containing the “bodily” remains of “dead” books. 

=== PAGE 295 ===
INSCRIBED POTS AND POTSHERDS 
247 
5.3. A Possible Exception to the Rule 
At least one Gandharan clay pot may indicate that what was said 
above about the original and secondary functions of such objects is not the whole 
story. This is the inscribed and decorated’ pot (see 4.3 and pls. 17-20) now in the 
Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, that may have come from the same site as the British 
Library pots or from a neighboring site. It was clearly used as a funereal vessel since 
it contained charred bones, presumably human (pl. 20). But the drawings on it of 
human figures, including that of an aged monk, give the impression that it might 
well have been made as a funereal vessel from the very beginning, rather than being 
an ordinary jar that was used in a secondary function, as in the other cases discussed 
above. 
The inscription, written to the left of one of the bowing figures, is of crit- 
ical importance to the interpretation of this unusual object, but unfortunately it is 
only barely visible in the earliest available photograph (pl. 19) and has subsequently 
completely disappeared, apparently as a result of incompetent cleaning. It consists, 
apparently, of seven syllables, most of which are out of focus in the photograph and 
hence only very tentatively legible. A possible reading is [dhamavaja]n[e] sama[na]. 
The reading is too uncertain to justify an extended discussion, but it seems that the 
inscription contains the name of a monk (samana) and hence could be a label for 
the contents of the pot, the bodily remains of that monk. This inscription seems to 
have little in common with the formulaic donative inscriptions seen on all other clay 
pots with Kharosthi inscriptions, and the pot itself is evidently in a different class 
from them. It appears to be a funereal vessel in the strict sense, that is, one that was 
originally intended and designed as such, unlike the other known specimens, which 
were used for funereal purposes only secondarily. If this is correct, we would hardly 
expect it to be unique, and other such items must have existed, though none have 
apparently come to light yet. This does not, however, invalidate the conclusions 
drawn above concerning the nature of the more usual type of inscribed pots, since 
these evidently belong to a different class. 
47. For another decorated but not inscribed Gandharan clay pot, generally similar in form 
to the ones under consideration here, see Eskenazi 1995: 12-3. 

=== PAGE 296 ===
=, oS roe 
oq 
Pi 
UT 
ges pity "dae 
2 
<a ie 
sn? 
: 
ell 
oF ONE 
_ 
—- 
— 
Pie, 
(| AE 
oe 
.e 
- 
ent 
Sar Oe 
. 
a 
(Alem 
‘ 
= 
ah 
enn aT ineFa I 
i 
—_ 
“Soe 
10! 
“Se 
ar | 
nt 
2 
(es Sere apis 
Jars 
(Wipe 
Lamy 
iva PAD E as 
ee 
ros 
‘D\eegd) d-Veie 
af 
f 
Pinar 
eas 
i 7 " 
a 
: 
—e 
ae 
ae 
roe 
- 
_ 
7 
> - ita 
tO 
ite pew UGE esERe 
EE 
es 0. Qn * A ar 
rs he 
alge @p - Ang 
: 
: 
oS 
; 
7 ; 
“= ~<a Aa ‘ 7 a. 
p 
an 
= 
' 
7 
7 
all > 
eye ] 
= 
> 
a 
-_ 
- 
. 
: 
=, eee 
2 
Sf 
- 
an 
Si 

=== PAGE 297 ===
Glossary 
The terms are given in their Sanskrit (Skt.) form, unless specified as Pali 
(P.); where appropriate, the equivalent in the other language is added in parentheses. 
Terms printed in italics in the definitions are defined separately. 
abhidharma (P. abhidhamma): The exegesis of Buddhist doctrine, as 
presented in a genre of texts that systematically elaborate and analyze the doctrines 
expounded in the discourses (sutta). These abhidharma texts constitute one of the 
three “baskets” of the Buddhist canon (Tipitaka). 
Ajivika: A fatalist sect, whose members were among the rivals with whom 
the Buddha debated. 
aksara: The basic syllabic unit of Kharosthi script (and of other Indian 
scripts), consisting of a single vowel (e.g., a) or, more frequently, a consonant or a 
ligature of two or more consonants plus a following vowel (e.g., te or rya). 
Anguttara-nikaya (P.; the equivalent text in Skt. is called Ekottaragama 
or Ekottarikagama): “The collection increasing by units,” one of the five nikayas 
(collections) that make up the Sutta-pitaka of the Pali Buddhist canon. It consists 
of short discourses (sutta) grouped according to numerical principles, from one 
to eleven. 
anusvara: A diacritic mark added to the foot of a Kharosthi character to 
indicate nasalization. 
Asoka: Mauryan dynasty emperor (ca. 269—232 B.c.), renowned in Bud- 
dhist tradition as its greatest royal patron. 
avadana: A story illustrating Buddhist principles, particularly the opera- 
tions of the law of karma, often by reference to events in a past life of a particular 
individual, such as one of the disciples of the Buddha. Compare jataka. 
bhanaka: “Reciter,” a monk who specializes in the recitation of a particu- 
lar portion of the Buddhist canon. 
bodhisattva: “Enlightenment-being,” in traditional usage, the designation 
of the Buddha before his enlightenment; in Mahayana usage, a person who volun- 
tarily defers his own liberation in order to assist other beings toward enlightenment. 
249 

=== PAGE 298 ===
250 
GLOSSARY 
Dardic: The subgroup of New Indo-Aryan languages spoken on the 
northwestern fringe of the Indo-Aryan linguistic area, in approximately the same 
areas where Gandhari was spoken in ancient times. 
dharani: A magical formula believed to protect its reciter or writer. 
dharma (P. dhamma): “The way” or “the truth,” a collective term for 
Buddhist doctrines and principles. (The term also has several other more specific 
and technical meanings.) 
Dharmapada (P. Dhammapada): An extremely popular collection of 
verses on general moral principles. Included as one of the texts of the Khuddaka- 
nikaya in the Pali canon. Other versions or equivalent texts are also extant in Sanskrit 
(the Udana-varga), Gandhari, and other Buddhist languages. 
Digha-nikaya (P.; Skt. Dirghagama): “The long collection,” one of the five 
nikayas (collections) that make up the Sutta-pitaka in the Pali canon, containing the 
longer discourses (sutta). 
Ekottaragama/Ekottarikagama: See Anguttara-nikaya. 
gatha: A verse, particularly an inspired or uplifting one. Compare udana. 
hinayana: “The inferior vehicle,” a polemic term used by adherents of the 
mahayana to refer to traditional or conservative Buddhism, which is also known as 
“mainstream Buddhism, “Nikaya Buddhism,” etc. (see chap. 2, n. 21). 
jataka: A story about the events of a past life, usually of the Buddha, illus- 
trating the operations of the laws of karma. Compare avadana. 
Kaniska: The greatest of the Kusana emperors, who ruled in the early to 
middle second century a.p. (exact dates uncertain), and who was renowned in Bud- 
dhist tradition as one of the great royal patrons. 
Khuddaka-nikaya (P.; Skt. Ksudrakagama): The “shorter” or “lesser collec- 
tion,’ one of the five nikayas (collections) that make up the Sutta-pitaka in the Pali 
canon. It consists of fifteen texts, mostly compilations of various short discourses 
(sutta) and other types of texts, for instance, jdtakas and uddnas. 
Mahavastu: A large collection of miscellaneous textual materials, written 
in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, culled from the vinaya of the Mahasanghika-Lokottara- 
vadin school. 
mahayana: “The great vehicle,” the form of Buddhism, generally a later 
development, that stresses the bodhisattva ideal of assisting other beings to attain 
enlightenment. 
Majjhima-nikaya (P.; Skt. Madhyamagama): “The middle-length collec- 
tion,” one of the five nikayas (collections) that make up the Sutta-pitaka in the Pali 
canon, containing the discourses (sutta) of medium length. 
Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA): The intermediate stage of development of the 
Indo-Aryan language family, which is the Indian branch of the Indo-European fam- 
ily. The MIA languages include Pali and Gandhari as well as many other dialects that 
are generally grouped under the heading of “Prakrits.” 

=== PAGE 299 ===
GLOSSARY 
25] 
New Indo-Aryan (NIA): The later and modern stages of the Indo-Aryan 
languages, comprising many languages spoken today in north and central India and 
in the neighboring nations of southern Asia. 
Nuristani: The languages spoken in the remote area of Nuristan (formerly 
called Kafiristan) in eastern Afghanistan, generally considered to belong to a separate 
subgroup of the Indo-Iranian group of the Indo-European languages. These lan- 
guages share some features with the Dardic languages. 
Old Indo-Aryan (OIA): The early stage of the Indo-Aryan languages, com- 
prising Vedic (archaic) Sanskrit and later, or classical, Sanskrit. 
pada: Quarter-verse. 
Pali: The Middle Indo-Aryan language, in origin probably a dialect 
of north-central India, that became established as the canonical language of the 
Theravada tradition and is now used as a religious language in Sri Lanka and South- 
east Asia. 
pratimoksa: The lists of monastic rules that constitute the basis of the 
vinaya texts. 
pratitya-samutpada: “Dependent co-origination,’ a fundamental Buddhist 
doctrinal formula summarizing the conditioning relations among the constituent 
elements of sentient beings. 
Saka (Skt. Saka): Scythian; ethnonym referring to central Asian nomads 
of Iranian linguistic affiliation. Various groups of Sakas entered northwestern India 
from central Asia and were politically dominant there in the first centuries B.c. 
and A.D. 
Sakyamuni: “Lion of the Sakya clan,” the honorific title of the Buddha. 
Samyutta-nikaya (P.): “The combined collection,” one of the five nikayas 
(collections) that make up the Sutta-pitaka in the Pali canon, containing the shorter 
discourses grouped thematically. 
sangha: The Buddhist monastic community. 
stupa (P. thupa): A Buddhist sacred monument, usually in the form of 
a mound of stone or bricks, containing the bodily remains of a Buddha or other 
sacred relics. 
sutta or suttanta (P.; Skt. sutra): A text recording one or more of the dis- 
courses of the Buddha or occasionally Buddhist teachings spoken by other persons. 
The suttas as a whole comprise the Sutta-pitaka, one of the “three baskets” 
(Tipitaka) of the Pali canon. 
Sutta-nipata (P.): A collection of seventy-two short suttas grouped into 
five sections; constitutes one of the fifteen texts of the Khuddaka-nikaya. 
Sutta-pitaka (P.): One of the three “baskets” of the Pali Buddhist canon 
(see Tipitaka), comprising the suttas, or discourses. Divided into five nikayas (collec- 
tions): digha, majjhima, anguttara, samyutta, and khuddaka. 
Theragatha: “The Songs of the Elders,” a collection of verses (gatha) 

=== PAGE 300 ===
252 
GLOSSARY 
attributed to the early followers of the Buddha; it constitutes one of the fifteen texts 
of the Khuddaka-nikaya. 
Theravada: “The Doctrine of the Elders,” the Buddhist school, generally 
doctrinally conservative, that is predominant in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. 
Tipitaka (P.; Skt. tripitaka): “The three baskets,” a term used (principally 
in the Theravada tradition) to denote the complete Buddhist canon. The three baskets 
are sutta, vinaya, and abhidhamma. 
udana: An inspired utterance, in verse or prose (cf. gathd). Also, a collec- 
tion of short texts containing such inspired utterances that constitutes one of the 
fifteen texts of the Khuddaka-nikaya. 
Udana-varga: See Dharmapada. 
vihara: A Buddhist monastery. 
vinaya: “Discipline,” the code of monastic laws that makes up the vinaya- 
pitaka and is one of the three “baskets” of the Buddhist canon (see Tipitaka). 

=== PAGE 301 ===
References 
Archaeology in India. 1950. Bureau of Education, India, Publication no. 66. Calcutta: 
Government of India. 
Bailey, H. W. 1943-6. “Gandhari.” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies u1: 
764-97. 
Ball, Warwick (with Jean-Claude Gardin). 1982. Archaeological Gazetteer of Afghanistan/ 
Catalogue des sites archéologigues d’Afghanistan. 2 vols. Paris: Editions 
Recherches sur les Civilisations. 
Bareau, André. 1955. Les sectes bouddhique du petit véhicule. Publications de l’Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 38. Saigon: Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient. 
. 1966. “Lorigine du Dirgha-agama traduit en Chinois par Buddhayaésas.” In Ba 
Shin, Jean Boisselier, and A. B. Griswold, eds., Essays Offered to G. H. Luce 
by His Colleagues and Friends in Honour of His Seventy-fifth Birthday. Vol. 1, 
Papers on Asian History, Religion, Languages, Literature, Music, Folklore, and 
Anthropology, pp. 49-58. Artibus Asiae, Supplementum 23.1. Ascona: Artibus 
Asiae. 
Barthoux, J. 1933. Les fouilles de Hadda. Vol. 1, Stupas et sites, texte et dessins. Mémoires de 
la Délégation Archéologique Francaise en Afghanistan 4. Paris: Les Editions 
d'Art et d’ Histoire. 
Beal, Samuel. 1875. The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha: From the Chinese-Sanscrit. 
London: Triibner & Co. 
. 1884. Si-yu-ki: Buddhist Records of the Western World, Translated from the Chinese 
of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D. 629). London: Triibner & Co. 
Bechert, Heinz. 1961. Bruchstiicke buddhistischer Versammlungen aus zentralasiatischen 
Sanskrithandschriften. Vol. 1, Die Anavataptagatha und die Sthaviragatha. 
Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden 6. Berlin: Akademie- Verlag. 
, ed. 1980. Die Sprache der diltesten buddhistischen Uberlieferung/The Language 
of the Earliest Buddhist Tradition. Symposien zur Buddhismusforschung 2. 
Abhandlungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen, Philologisch- 
historische Klasse, ser. 3, vol. 117. G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
, ed. 1985. Zur Schulzugehorigkeit von Werken der Hinayana-Literatur. 2 vols. 
Symposien zur Buddhismusforschung 3.1. Abhandlungen der Akademie der 
Wissenschaften in Géttingen, Philologisch-historische Klasse, ser. 3, no. 149. 
G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
, ed. 1990. Abkiirzungsverzeichnis zur buddhistischen Literatur in Indien und 
Siidostasien. Sanskrit-W6rterbuch der Buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan- 
Funden, Beiheft 3. Gdttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
, ed. 1994. Sanskrit-Wéorterbuch der buddhistischen Texte aus den Turfan-Funden 
253 

=== PAGE 302 ===
254° 
(INEFEREN'CES 
und der kanonischen Literatur der Sarvastivada-Schule. Vol. 1. G6ttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
(with Klaus Wille), eds. 1995. Sanskrithandschriften aus den Turfanfunden. Vol. 7. 
Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland 10.7. Wies- 
baden: Franz Steiner Verlag. 
Bentor, Yael. 1994. “Inside Tibetan Images.” Arts of Asia, May—June, pp. 102-9. 
. 1995. “On the Indian Origins of the Tibetan Practice of Depositing Relics and 
Dhdranis in Stapas and Images.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 115: 
248-61. 
Bernhard, Franz. 1970. “Gandhari and the Buddhist Mission in Central Asia.” In J. 
Tilakasiri, ed., Anjali, Papers on Indology and Buddhism: A Felicitation Vol- 
ume Presented to Oliver Hector de Alwis Wijesekara on His Sixtieth Birthday, 
pp. 55-62. Peradeniya: University of Ceylon. 
Bianchi Bandinelli, Ranuccio. 1971. Rome, the Late Empire: Roman Art A.D. 200-400. 
Trans. Peter Green. New York: Thames & Hudson. 
Bloch, Jules. 1912. “Le dialecte des fragments Dutreuil de Rhins.” Journal Astatique, ser. 10, 
vol. 19: 331-7. 
Bongard-Levin, G. M. 1975-6. “New Sanskrit and Prakrit Texts from Central Asia.” Indo- 
logica Taurinensia 3/4: 73-80. 
Boyer, A. M., E. J. Rapson, and E. Senart. 1920-9. Kharosthi Inscriptions Discovered by 
Sir Aurel Stein in Chinese Turkestan. 3 parts (part 3 by E. J. Rapson and P. S. 
Noble). Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Brough, John. 1962. The Gandhari Dharmapada. London Oriental Series 7. London: 
Oxford University Press. 
. 1965. “Comments on Third-Century Shan-shan and the History of Buddhism.” 
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 28: 582-612. 
1977. “The Arapacana Syllabary in the Old Lalita-vistara.” Bulletin of the School 
of Oriental and African Studies 40: 85-95. 
Buddruss, Georg. 1975. “Gandhari-Prakrit chada “Ton.” Studien zur Indologie und Iranis- 
tik 1: 37-48. 
Buhler, G. 1877. Detailed Report of a Tour in Search of Sanskrit Mss. Made in Kasmir, 
Rajputana, and Central India. Extra number of Journal of the Bombay Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society. 
. 1894. “Further Inscriptions from Sanchi.” Epigraphia Indica 2: 366-408. 
. 1895. Indian Studies. No. 3, On the Origin of the Indian Brahma Alphabet. 
Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-historischen Classe der Kaiserlichen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Abhandlung 5. Vienna: F. Tempsky. 
. 1904. Indian Paleography from About B.c. 350 to About A.D. 1300. Trans. J. F. 
Fleet. Appendix to Indian Antiquary 33. 
Burrow, T. 1937. The Language of the Kharosthi Documents from Chinese Turkestan. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
.1940. A Translation of the Kharosthi Documents from Chinese Turkestan. James G. 
Forlong Fund 20. London: Royal Asiatic Society. 
Caillat, Colette. 1989a. “Sur Pauthenticité linguistique des édits d’ Asoka.” In Caillat 1989b: 
413-32. 
, ed. 1989b. Dialectes dans les littératures indo-aryennes. Publications de l'Institut 
de Civilisation Indienne, série in-8°, fasc. 55. Paris: Collége de France. 
Callieri, Pierfranceso. 1989. Saidu Sharif (Swat, Pakistan). Vol. 1, The Buddhist Sacred 
Area: The Monastery. Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 

=== PAGE 303 ===
REFERENCES 
255 
Centro Scavi e Ricerche Archaeologiche, Reports and Memoirs 23.1. Rome: 
Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente. 
. 1997. “Pots in Buddhist Sacred Areas: A Study of the Evidence from the IEMEO 
Excavations in Swat.” In Raymond Allchin and Bridget Allchin, eds., South 
Asian Archaeology, 1995, pp. 417-27. New Delhi: Oxford University Press and 
IBH. 
Chanda, Ramaprasad. 1921. “The Jauliah Manuscript.” In John Marshall, Excavations 
at Taxila: The Stupas and Monasteries at 
Jaulidn, pp. 66-75. Memoirs of the 
Archaeological Survey of India 7. Calcutta: Superintendent Government 
Printing. 
Chhabra, B. C. 1949-50. “Peshawar Potsherds with Kharoshthi Writings.” Epigraphia 
Indica 28: 125-9. 
Collins, Steven. 1990. “On the Very Idea of the Pali Canon.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 
15: 89-126. 
. 1992. “Notes on Some Oral Aspects of Pali Literature.” Indo-Iranian Journal 35: 
121-35. 
Cone, Margaret. 1989. “Patna Dharmapada. Part I, Text.” Journal of the Pali Text Society 
13: 101-217. 
Conrady, August. 1920. Die chinesischen Handschriften und sonstigen Kleinfunde Sven 
Hedins in Lou-lan. Stockholm: Generalstabens Litografiska Anstalt. 
Cunningham, Alexander. 1871. The Ancient Geography of India. London: Triibner & Co. 
Dani, Ahmad Hasan. 1960. “Mathura Lion Capital Inscription (A Paleographical Study)? 
Journal of the Asiatic Society of Pakistan 5: 128-47. 
. 1963. Indian Paleography. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
. 1965-6. “Shaikhan Dheri Excavation: 1963 and 1964 Seasons.” Ancient Pakistan 2: 
17-214. 
Das Gupta, Charu Chandra. 1949-50. “Shelarwadi Cave Inscription.” Epigraphia Indica 
28: 76-7. 
. 1958. The Development of the Kharosthi Script. Calcutta: Firma K.L. Mukhopahyay. 
de Jong, J. W. 1987. A Brief History of Buddhist Studies in Europe and America. 2d ed. 
Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica 33. Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications. 
Diringer, David. 1953. The Hand-Produced Book. New York: Philosophical Library. 
Dutt, Nalinaksha. 1942. Gilgit Manuscripts. Vol. 3, part 2. Calcutta: Calcutta Oriental Press. 
1947. Gilgit Manuscripts. Vol. 3, part 3. Calcutta: Calcutta Oriental Press. 
Dutt, Sukumar. 1924. Early Buddhist Monachism, 600 B.c.—100 B.c. London: Kegan Paul, 
Trench Triibner & Co. 
Edgerton, Franklin. 1953. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. Vol. 2, 
Dictionary. William Dwight Whitney Linguistic Series. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
Enomoto, Fumio. 1994. “A Note on Kashmir as Referred to in Chinese Literature: Ji-bin.” 
In Yasuke Ikari, ed., A Study of the Nilamata: Aspects of Hinduism in Ancient 
Kashmir, pp. 357-65. Kyoto: Kyoto University. 
Errington, Elizabeth, and Joe Cribb. 1992. The Crossroads of Asia: Transformation in 
Image and Symbol in the Art of Ancient Afghanistan and Pakistan. Cambridge: 
Ancient India and Iran Trust. 
Eskenazi, John. 1995. Inaugural Exhibition: Images of Faith. London: John Eskenazi. 
Filliozat, Jean. 1958. “L-agalloche et les manuscrits sur bois dans l’Inde et les pays de 
civilisation indienne.” Journal Asiatique 246: 85-93. 
> 

=== PAGE 304 ===
256 
REFERENCES 
Finot, L. 1901. Rastrapalapariprecha: Sutra du Mahayana. Bibliotheca Buddhica 2. St. 
Petersburg: Académie Impériale des Sciences. 
Foucher, A. 1905. Lart gréco-bouddhique du Gandhara. Vol.1. Publications de l’ Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale. 
.1918. Lart gréco-bouddhique du Gandhara. Vol. 2.1. Publications de Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale. 
Frumkin, Grégoire. 1970. Archaeology in Soviet Central Asia. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Fussman, Gérard. 1969. “Une inscription Kharosthi a Hadda.” Bulletin de Ecole Frangaise 
ad Extréme-Orient 56: 5—9. 
——. 1972. Atlas linguistique des parlers dardes et kafirs. 2 vols. Publications de l’Ecole 
Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 86. Paris: Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient. 
——. 1974. “Documents épigraphiques kouchans.” Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise 
d’Extréme-Orient 61: 1-76. 
———. 1980. “Nouvelles inscriptions éaka: Ere d’Azés, ére Vikrama, ére de Kaniska.” 
Bulletin de l' Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient 67: 1-43. 
—.. 1982. “Documents épigraphiques kouchans (III). Linscription Kharosthi de 
Senavarma, roi d’Odi: Une nouvelle lecture.” Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise 
ad’ Extréme-Orient 71: 1-46. 
———. 1985a. “Nouvelles inscriptions Saka (III).” Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme- 
Orient 74: 35-41. 
———. 1985b. “Nouvelles inscriptions Saka (IV).” Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme- 
Orient 74: 47-51. 
—. 1985c. “A Pedestal Inscription from the Peshawar District,” East and West, n.s., 35: 
143-52. 
——. 1989. “Gandhari écrite, Gandhari parlée.” In Caillat 1989b: 433-501. 
—_.. 1994: “Upaya-kauSalya: Limplantation du bouddhisme au Gandhara.” In Fukui 
Fumimasa and Gérard Fussman, eds., Bouddhisme et cultures locales: Quelques 
cas de réciproques adaptations, pp. 17-51. Etudes Thématiques 2. Paris: Ecole 
Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient. 
Fussman, Gérard, and Marc Le Berre. 1976. Monuments bouddhiques de la région de 
Caboul. Vol. 1, Le monastére de Gul Dara. Mémoires de la Délégation 
Archéologique Frang¢aise en Afghanistan 22. Paris: Diffusion de Boccard. 
Gandhara 2: Preliminary Report on the Comprehensive Survey of Buddhist Sites in 
Gandhara, 1986. 1988. Kyoto University Scientific Mission to Gandhara. 
Kyoto: Kyoto University Press. 
Gardin, J.-C. 1957. Céramiques de Bactres. Mémoires de la Délégation Archéologique 
Francaise en Afghanistan 15. Paris: C. Klincksieck. 
Ghosh, A. 1966. “The Relic-Casket from Devnimori.” Journal of the Maharaja Sayajirao 
University of Baroda 15: 21-4. 
. 1967. “A Note on the Relic-Casket from Devnimori.” Journal of the Maharaja 
Sayajirao University of Baroda 16: 135. 
1989. An Encyclopaedia of Indian Archaeology. 2 vols. Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal. 
Grenard, F. 1898. Mission scientifique dans la haute Asie, 1890-1895. Part 3, Histoire— 
Linguistique—Archéologie—Géographie. Paris: Ernest Leroux. 
Gulik, R. H. van. 1956. Siddham: An Essay on the History of Sanskrit Studies in China and 
Japan. Sarasvati-Vihara Series 36. Nagpur: International Academy of Indian 
Culture. 
Hartel, Herbert. 1993. Excavations at Sonkh: 2500 Years of a Town in Mathura District. 

=== PAGE 305 ===
REFERENCES 
257 
Monographien zur Indischen Archaologie, Kunst, und Philologie 9. Berlin: 
Dietrich Reimer Verlag. 
Hilka, Afrons. 1910. Beitrdge zur Kenntnis der indischen Namengebung: Die altindischen 
Personennamen. Indische Forschungen 3. Breslau: M. & H. Marcus. 
Hintiber, Oskar von. 1981. “Namen in Schutzzaubern aus Gilgit.” Studien zur Indologie 
und Iranistik 7: 163-71. 
—.. 1983. “Sanskrit und Gandhari in Zentralasien.” In Klaus R6hrborn and Wolfgang 
Veenker, eds., Sprachen des Buddhismus in Zentralasien, pp. 27-34. Wiesbaden: 
Otto Harrassowitz. 
———.. 1985. “Die Bestimmung der SchulzugehGrigkeit buddhistischer Texte nach 
sprachlichen Kriterien.” In Bechert 1985: 1.57—75. 
——. 1989. “Origin and Varieties of Buddhist Sanskrit.” In Caillat 1989b: 341-67. 
—. 1991. “Inscribed Vessels from Buddhist Monasteries in Termez and Salihundam.” 
Pakistan Archaeology 26: 120-4. 
Hirakawa, Akira. 1990. A History of India Buddhism: From Sakyamuni to Early 
Mahayana. Trans. Paul Groner. Asian Studies at Hawaii 36. Honolulu: 
University of Hawaii Press. 
Hoernle, A. F. Rudolf. 1900. “An Epigraphical Note on Palm-Leaf, Paper and Birch-Bark.” 
Journal of the Asiatic Society 69: 93-134. 
. 1911. “The ‘Unknown Languages’ of Eastern Turkestan, II.” Journal of the Royal 
Asiatic Society, pp. 447-93. 
1914. The Bower Manuscript. Reprinted, with additions, from vol. 22 of the 
New Imperial Series of the Archeological Survey of India. Bombay: British 
India Press. 
. 1916. Manuscript Remains of Buddhist Literature Found in Eastern Turkestan. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Hofinger, Marcel. 1982. Le congrés du lac Anavatapta (Vies de saints bouddhiques). Vol.1, 
Légendes des anciens (Sthaviravadana). 2d ed. Publications de l'Institut 
Orientaliste de Louvain 28. Louvain-la-Neuve: Université Catholique de 
Louvain. 
Honigberger, John Martin. 1852. Thirty-five Years in the East: Adventures, Discoveries, 
Experiments, and Historical Sketches Relating to the Punjab and Cashmere... 
. 
London: H. Bailliére. 
Humbach, Helmut. 1980. “Hybrid Sanskrit in the Gilgit Brahmi Inscriptions.” Studien 
zur Indologie und Iranistik 5/6: 99-121. 
Husain, Javed. 1980. “Shaikhan Dheri Pottery: A Methodological and Interpretive 
Approach.” Ph.D. diss., Cambridge University. 
Ingholt, Harald. 1957. Gandharan Art in Pakistan. New York: Pantheon Books. 
Iourkevitch, E. A. 1974. “Histoire de l’explorations des monuments kushans 
d Afghanistan.” Afghanistan 27.1: 77-88; 27.2: 46-56. 
Jacquet, E. 1836. “Notice sur les découvertes archéologiques faites par M. Honigberger 
dans l’ Afghanistan.” Journal Asiatique, ser. 3, vol. 2: 234-77. 
. 1838. “Notice sur les découvertes archéologiques faites par M. Honigberger dans 
P Afghanistan (suite).” Journal Asiatique, ser. 3, vol. 5: 163-97. 
Janert, Klaus Ludwig. 1955-6. Von der Art und den Mitteln der indischen Textweitergabe: 
Bericht iiber miindliche und schriftliche Tradierungsmethoden sowie die 
Schreibmaterialen in Indien. Jahresarbeit dem Bibliothekar-Lehrinstitut des 
Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen zur Diplomapriifung . . 
. vorgelegt. Cologne: 
Bibliothekar-Lehrinstitut des Landes Nordrhein- Westfalen. 

=== PAGE 306 ===
258 
REFERENCES 
Jayawickrama, N. A. 1949. “Sutta Nipata: The Khaggavisana Sutta.” University of Ceylon 
Review 7: 119-28. Reprinted in Pali Buddhist Review 2 (1977): 22-31. 
Justi, Ferdinand. 1895. Iranisches Namenbuch. Marburg: N. G. Elwert. 
Kawamura, K. 1974. Abidatsuma ronsho no shiry6 teki kenkyti. Tokyo: Nihon Gakujutsu 
Shinkokai. 
Kaye, G. R. 1927. The Bakhshali Manuscript: A Study in Mediaeval Mathematics. Archaeo- 
logical Survey of India, New Imperial Series 43. Calcutta: Government of 
India. 
Konow, Sten. 1914. “Bemerkungen iiber die Kharosthi-Handschrift des Dhammapada.” In 
Festschrift Ernst Windisch zum siebzigsten Geburtstag am 4. September 1914 
dargebracht von Freuden und Schiilern, pp. 85-97. Leipzig: Otto Harrassowitz. 
—. 1929. Kharoshthi Inscriptions with the Exception of Those of Asoka. Corpus 
Inscriptionum Indicarum, vol. 2, part 1. Calcutta: Government of India. 
———. 1931-2. “Kalawan Copper-Plate Inscription of the Year 134.” Epigraphia Indica 21: 
251-9. 
—. 1933. “Kharoshthi Inscription on a Begram Bas-relief.” Epigraphia Indica 22: 
1-14. 
—.. 1935-6. “Hidda Inscription of the Year 28.” Epigraphia Indica 23: 35—42. 
—. 1940. “A New Charsadda Inscription.” In Bimala Churn Law, ed., D. R. 
Bhandarkar Volume, pp. 305-10. Calcutta: Indian Research Institute. 
Kurita, Isao. 1988-90. Gandara bijutsu/Gandharan Art. 2 vols. Tokyo: Nigensha. 
Lamotte, Etienne: 1988. History of Indian Buddhism from the Origins to the Saka Era. 
Trans. Sara Webb-Boin. Publications de l'Institut Orientaliste de Louvain 36. 
Louvain-la-Neuve: Institut Orientaliste. 
Legge, James. 1886. A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms: Being an Account by the Chinese 
monk Fa-hien of His Travels in India and Ceylon (A.D. 344-414)... . Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
Lévi, Sylvain. 1915. “Sur la récitation primitive des textes bouddhiques.” Journal Asiatique, 
ser. 11, vol. 5: 401-47. 
. 1932. “Note sur des manuscrits sanscrites provenant de Bamiyan (Afghanistan), 
et de Gilgit (Cachemire).” Journal Asiatique 220: 1-45. 
Lévi, Sylvain, and Edouard Chavannes. 1916. “Les seize arhat protecteurs de la loi.” 
Journal Asiatique, ser. 11, vol. 8: 5-50, 189-304. 
Lin, Meicun. Forthcoming. “A Survey of Kharosthi Texts from China.” Journal of the 
American Oriental Society. 
Litvinsky, B. A., ed. 1996. History of Civilizations of Central Asia. Vol. 3, The Crossroads 
of Civilizations: A.D. 250 to 750. Multiple History Series. Paris: UNESCO. 
Lohuizen-de Leeuw, Johanna Engelberta van. 1949. The “Scythian” Period: An Approach 
to the History, Art, Epigraphy and Palaeography of North India from the 1st 
Century B.c. to the 3rd Century a.p. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 
Liiders, Heinrich. 1940. “Zu und aus den Kharosthi-Urkunden.” Acta Orientalia 18: 15-49. 
1961. Mathura Inscriptions: Unpublished Papers Edited by Klaus L. Janert. Abhand- 
lungen der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen, Philologisch- 
historische Klasse 3.47. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
MacDowall, David W. 1973. “The Azes Hoard from Shaikan-Dheri: Fresh Evidence for 
the Context of Jihonika.” In Norman Hammond, ed., South Asian Archaeology: 
Papers from the First International Conference of South Asian Archaeologists 
Held in the University of Cambridge, pp. 215-30. London: Duckworth. 

=== PAGE 307 ===
REFERENCES 
259 
. 1990. “The Chronological Evidence of Coins in Stipa Deposits.” In Maurizio 
Taddei (with the assistance of Pierfrancesco Callieri), ed., South Asian 
Archaeology 1987: Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference of South 
Asian Archaeologists in Western Europe, 2.727-35. Serie Orientale Roma 66. 
Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente. 
Malalasekere, G. P. 1937-8. Dictionary of Pali Proper Names. 2 vols. London: Pali Text 
Society. 
Marshall, John. 1951. Taxila: An Illustrated Account of Archaeological Excavations Carried 
Out at Taxila. .. 
. 3 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
.1960. The Buddhist Art of Gandhara: The Story of the Early School, Its Birth, 
Growth and Decline. Memoirs of the Department of Archaeology in Pakistan 
1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Marshall, John, and Alfred Foucher. 1940. The Monuments of Sanchi. 3 vols. Calcutta: 
Government of India. 
Marshall, John, and J. P. Vogel. 1902-3. “Excavations at Charsada in the Frontier 
Province.” Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports, pp. 141-84. 
Mayeda, Egaku. 1985. “Japanese Studies on the Schools of the Chinese Agamas.” In 
Bechert 1985: 1.94—103. 
Mayrhofer, Manfred. 1973. Onomastica Persepolitana: Das altiranische Namengut der 
Persepolis-Téifelchen. Sitzungsberichte der Osterreichischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse 286; Ver6ffentlichen 
der Iranischen Kommission 1. Vienna: Osterreichische Akademie der 
Wissenschaften. 
McDermott, James P. 1984. “Scripture as the Word of the Buddha.” Numen 31: 22-39. 
Miller, Daniel. 1985. Artefacts as Categories: A Study of Ceramic Variability in Central 
India. New Studies in Archaeology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Mitchiner, Michael. 1976. Indo-Greek and Indo-Scythian Coinage. Vol. 7. London: Hawkins 
Publications. 
Mitra, Debala. 1981-3. Ratnagiri (1958-61). 2 vols. Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey 
of India 80. New Delhi: Archaeological Society of India. 
Mizuno, Seiichi. 1969. Mekhasanda: Buddhist Monastery in Pakistan Surveyed in 
1962-1967. Publication of the Kyoto University Scientific Mission to Iranian 
Plateau and Hindukush. Kyoto: Kyoto University. 
. 1971. Basawal and Jelalabad-Kabul: Buddhist Cave-Temples and Topes in South- 
east Afghanistan Surveyed Mainly in 1965. 2 vols. Publication of the Kyoto 
University Scientific Mission to Iranian Plateau and Hindukush. Kyoto: 
Kyoto University. 
Morgenstierne, G. 1950. “Svdsd and bhagini in Modern Indo-Aryan.” Acta Orientalia 20: 
27-32. 
Miiller, F. Max. 1880. “On Sanskrit Texts Discovered in Japan.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, n.S., 12: 153-88. 
Mus, Paul. 1939. La lumieére sur les six voies: Tableau de la transmigration bouddhique. . 
. 
. 
Vol. 1, Introduction et critique des textes. Travaux et Memoires de l'Institut 
@Ethnologie 35. Paris: Institut d’Ethnologie. 
Mustamandi, Shahibye. 1970. “Report on Kushanid Studies in Afghanistan.” Afghanistan 
23: 70-3. 
. 1971. “Preliminary Report on Hadda’s Fifth Excavation Period.” Afghanistan 24: 
128-37. 

=== PAGE 308 ===
260 
REFERENCES 
[C. Mustamindy]. 1974. “Les nouvelles fouilles de Hadda.” In Central‘naja azija v 
kusanskuju époxu/Central Asia in the Kushan Period (Proceedings of the Inter- 
national Conference on the History, Archaeology and Culture of Central Asia in 
the Kushan Period), 1.107—12. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo “Nauka.” 
[Chaibai Mustamandy]. 1984. “Herakles, Ahnherr Alexanders, in einer Plastik 
aus Hadda.” In Jakob Ozols and Volker Thewalt, eds., Aus dem Osten des 
Alexanderreiches: Volker und Kulturen zwischen Orient und Okzident; Iran, 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Indien, pp. 176-80. Cologne: DuMont Buchverlag. 
Nishi, G. 1934. “Ubushnai ni okeru hotchi hi-hotchi kei nado no shoshu no gakusetsu 
oyobi gakuto no kenkyt.” Shiikyo Kenkyiti 11.4: 564-79; 11.5: 768-89. 
Nishimura, M. 1982. “Rokusokuron no seiritsuji.” Sanko Bunka Kenkyujo Nenpo 1s: 
141-56. 
Norman, K. R. 1983. Pali Literature, Including the Canonical Literature in Prakrit and San- 
skrit of All the Hinayana Schools of Buddhism. A History of Indian Literature 
7.2. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz. 
. 1993. “The Languages of Early Buddhism.” In Premier colloque Etienne Lamotte 
(Bruxelles et Liége 24-27 septembre 1989), pp. 83-99. Publications de l'Institut 
Orientaliste de Louvain. Louvain-la-Neuve: Institut Orientaliste. 
. 1996. “Solitary as Rhinoceros Horn.” Buddhist Studies Review 13: 133-42. 
Pauly, Bernard. 1967. “Fragments sanskrits d’Afghanistan (fouilles de la D.A.E.A.).” 
Journal Asiatique 255: 273-83. 
Petech, Luciano. 1966. “A Kharosthi Inscription from Butkara I (Swat).” East and West, 
N.S., 16: 80-1. 
Przyluski, Jean. 1926. Le concile de Rajagrha: Introduction a Vhistoire des canons et des 
sectes bouddhiques. Buddhica, Mémotres 2. Paris: Librairie Orientaliste Paul 
Geuthner. 
Quagliotti, Anna Maria. 1990. “Mafijusri in Gandharan Art: A New Interpretation of 
a Relief in the Victoria and Albert Museum.” East and West, n.s., 40: 99-113. 
Rahman, Abdur. 1993. “Shnaisha Gumbat: First Preliminary Excavation Report.” Ancient 
Pakistan 8: 1-124. 
Rosenfield, John M. 1967. The Dynastic Arts of the Kushans. Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press. 
Rye, Owen S., and Clifford Evans. 1976. Traditional Pottery Techniques of Pakistan: Field 
and Laboratory Studies. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology 21. 
Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. 
Sachau, Eduard C., trans. 1888. Alberuni’s India: An Account of the Religion, Philosophy, 
Literature, Geography, Chronology, Astronomy, Customs, Laws, and Astrology 
of India about A.D. 1030. 2 vols. in 1. London: Triibner. 
Sadakata, Akira. 1992. “Gandara no kishin bun.” Bukky6 Gaku 33: 1-6. 
. 1996a. “Azesu sanjukyt men no kishin mei.” Shunju, no. 7: 13-16. 
.1996b. “Inscriptions kharosthi provenant du marché aux antiquités de 
Peshawar.” Journal Asiatique 284: 301-24. 
.1996c. “Seihoku Indo no hézobu.” Shunju, no. 10: 20-3. 
Sadan, J. 1986. “Genizah and Genizah-like Practices in Islamic and Jewish Traditions: 
Customs concerning the Disposal of Worn-out Sacred Books in the Middle 
Ages, according to an Ottoman Source.” Bibliotheca Orientalis 43: 36-58. 
Salomon, Richard. 1986. “The Inscription of Senavarma, King of Odi.” Indo-Iranian 
Journal 29: 261-93. 
. 1989. “Linguistic Variability in Post-Vedic Sanskrit.” In Caillat 1989b: 275-94. 

=== PAGE 309 ===
REFERENCES 
261 
———. 1990a. “A Kharosthi Inscription on a Silver Goblet.” Bulletin of the Asia Institute 
4: 149-57. 
——. 1990b. “New Evidence for a Gandhari Origin of the Arapacana Syllabary.” 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 110: 255-73. 
———. 1995a. “A Kharosthi Reliquary Inscription of the Time of the Apraca Prince 
Visnuvarma.” South Asian Studies 11: 27-32. 
——. 1995b. “Three Dated Kharosthi Inscriptions.” Bulletin of the Asia Institute 9: 
127-41. 
———. 1996a. “An Inscribed Silver Buddhist Reliquary of the Time of King Kharaosta 
and Prince Indravarman.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 116: 
418-52. 
———.. 1996b. “Five Kharosthi Inscriptions.” Bulletin of the Asia Institute 10: 233-46. 
———..1997a. “A Preliminary Survey of Some Early Buddhist Manuscripts Recently 
Acquired by the British Library.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 
117: 353-8. 
——. 1997b. Review of Vertogradova 1995. Journal of the American Oriental Society 
117: 406-8. 
——. 1998. Indian Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of 
Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, 
and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Salomon, Richard, and Gregory Schopen. 1984. “The Indravarman (Avaca) Casket 
Inscription Reconsidered: Further Evidence for Canonical Passages in 
Buddhist Inscriptions.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist 
Studies 7: 107-23. 
Sander, Lore. 1968. Paldographisches zu den Sanskrithandschriften der Berliner Turfan- 
sammlung. Verzeichnis der orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, 
Supplementband 8. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag. 
.1991. “The Earliest Manuscripts from Central Asia and the Sarvastivada 
Mission.” In Ronald E. Emmerick and Dieter Weber, eds., Corolla Iranica: 
Papers in Honour of Prof. Dr. David Neil MacKenzie on the Occasion of His 
65th Birthday ..., pp. 133-50. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang. 
Sawoo, Mangala. 1983. “An Interesting Buddha Image in the Indian Museum, Calcutta.” 
Indian Museum Bulletin 1983: 58-60. 
Schlingloff, Dieter. 1956: “Die Birkenrindenhandschriften der Berliner Turfansammlung.” 
Mitteilungen des Instituts fiir Orientforschung 4: 120-7. 
Schlumberger, Daniel. 1949. “La prospection archéologique de Bactres (printemps 1947), 
rapport sommaire.” Syria 26: 173-90. 
Schopen, Gregory. 1975. “The Phrase ‘sa prthivipradesas caityabhiito bhavet in the 
Vajracchedika: Notes on the Cult of the Book in Mahayana.” Indo-Iranian 
Journal 17: 147-81. 
. 1987. “Burial ‘ad Sanctos’ and the Physical Presence of the Buddha in Early 
Indian Buddhism: A Study in the Archaeology of Religions.” Religion 17: 
193-225. 
——. 1991. “An Old Inscription from Amaravati and the Cult of the Local Monastic 
Dead in Indian Buddhist Monasteries.” Journal of the International Associa- 
tion of Buddhist Studies 14: 281-329. 
—. 1994a. “Doing Business for the Lord: Lending on Interest and Written Loan 
Contracts in the Milasarvastivada-vinaya.” Journal of the American Oriental 
Society 114: 527-53. 
—. 1994b. “Stupa and Tirtha: Tibetan Mortuary Practices and an Unrecognized 

=== PAGE 310 ===
262 
REFERENCES 
Form of Burial ad Sanctos at Buddhist Sites in India.” In Tadeusz Skorupski 
and Ulrich Pagel, eds., The Buddhist Forum, vol. 3, 1991-1993 (Papers in Hon- 
our and Appreciation of Professor David Seyfort Ruegg’s Contribution to Indo- 
logical, Buddhist and Tibetan Studies), pp. 273-93. London: School of 
Oriental and African Studies, University of London. 
. 1996. “The Lay Ownership of Monasteries and the Role of the Monk in 
Milasarvastivadin Monasticism.” Journal of the International Association 
of Buddhist Studies 19: 81-126. 
Senart, Emile. 1898. “Le manuscrit Kharosthi du Dhammapada: Les fragments Dutreuil 
de Rhins.” Journal Asiatique, ser. 9, vol. 12: 193-308. 
Shih, Robert. 1968. Biographies des moines éminents (Kao seng tchouan) de Houet-kiao. 
Bibliotheque du Muséon 54. Louvain: Institut Orientaliste. 
Shizutani, Masao. 1979. Indo bukky6 himei mokuroku. Kyoto: Heirakuji Shoten. 
Simpson, William. 1881. “On the Identification of Nagarahara, with Reference to the 
Travels of Hiouen-Thsang.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, n.s., 13: 
183-207. 
Simson, Georg von. 1985. “Stil und SchulzugehGrigkeit buddhistischer Sanskrittexte.” 
In Bechert 1985: 1.76—93. 
Speyer, J. S. 1906-9. Avadanagataka: A Century of Edifying Tales Belonging to the Hina- 
yana. Bibliotheca Buddhica 3. St. Petersburg: Imperial Academy of Sciences. 
Stache-Rosen, Valentina. 1968. Dogmatische Begriffsreihen im alteren Buddhismus. Vol. 2, 
Das Sangitisutra und sein Kommentar Sangitiparyaya. Sanskrittexte aus den 
Turfanfunden 9. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. 
Stein, M. Aurel. 1907. Ancient Khotan: Detailed Report of Archaeological Explorations 
in Chinese Turkestan. 
. 
.. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Stwodah, Mohammed Ibrahim. 1980. “Library Condition in the Kushan Civilization 
(A Preliminary Historical Research).” Tahqiqat-i Kushani 3: 1-8. 
Taddei, Maurizio. 1983. “Addenda to The Story of the Buddha and the Skull-Tapper 
(AION, 39, 1979, 3). Annali dell’Istituto Universitario Orientale 43: 333-9. 
Takakusu, J. 1896. A Record of the Buddhist Religion as Practised in India and the Malay 
Archipelago (A.D. 671-695) by I-tsing. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Tarzi, Zémaryalai. 1976. “Hadda a la lumiére des trois derniéres campagnes de fouilles 
de Tapa-é-Shotor (1974-1976).” Comptes Rendus de l’Academie des Inscriptions 
et Belles-lettres, pp. 381-410. 
. 1990. “Tapa-e-Top-e-Kalan (TTK) of Hadda.” In Maurizio Taddei (with the 
assistance of Pierfrancesco Callieri), ed., South Asian Archaeology 1987: 
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference of South Asian Archaeolo- 
gists in Western Europe, 2.707—26. Serie Orientale Roma 66. Rome: Istituto 
Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente. 
Tissot, Francine. 1985. Gandhdra. La Vie Publique et Privée dans I’ Inde Ancienne, 2d ser. 
Paris: Librairie d’ Amérique et d’Orient. 
Tripathi, Chandrabhal. 1985. “Sangiti-sttra, Nipata II, und Ekottaragama-Parallelen.” In 
Bechert 1985: 1.191—9. 
Tucci, Giuseppe. 1958. “Preliminary Report on an Archaeological Survey in Swat.” East 
and West, n.s., 9: 279-328. 
Turner, R. L. 1966. A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages. 3 vols. London: 
Oxford University Press. 
Vertogradova, V. V. 1982. “Indijskie nadpisi na keramike iz raskopok 70-x godov na 
Kara-tepe.” In B. Ja. Staviskii, ed., Buddhijskie pamjatniki Kara-tepe v starom 

=== PAGE 311 ===
REFERENCES 
263 
Termeze: Osnovnye itogi rabot 1974-1977 gg, pp. 134-59. Moscow: Glavnaja 
Redakcija Vostoénoj Literatury. 
. 1995. Indijskaja epigrafika iz Kara-tepe v starom Termeze: Problemy desifrovki 1 
interpretacit. Moscow: Vostoénaja Literatura. 
Vorob’eva-Desjatovskaja, M. I. 1974. “Novye nadpisi pis’mom kxarostxi iz Termeza.” 
Vestnik Drevnej Istorii 1: 116-26. 
. 1983. “Pamjatniki pis‘’mom kxaro$txi i braxmi iz sovetskoj srednej Azii.” In 
Istorija i Kultura Central ‘noj Azii, pp. 22-96. Moscow: Izdatel’stvo “Nauka.” 
Waldschmidt, Ernst. 1932. Bruchstiicke Buddhistischer Siitras aus dem zentralasiatischen 
Sanskritkanon. Kleinere Sanskrit-Texte 4. Leipzig: Deutsche Morgenland- 
ische Gesellschaft. 
—. 1950-51. Das Mahaparinirvanasutra: Text in Sanskrit und Tibetisch,verglichen mit 
dem Pali. ... Abhandlungen der Deutschen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu 
Berlin, Klasse ftir Sprachen, Literatur, und Kunst, no. 1 (1949) and no. 2 
(1950). Berlin: Akademie- Verlag. 
—. 1959. Kleine Brahmi-Schriftrolle. Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenchaften 
in Géttingen, Philologisch-historische Klasse 1959.1. G6ttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht. 
— (with Walter Clawiter and Lore Holzmann). 1965. Sanskrithandschriften aus 
den Turfanfunden. Vol. 1. Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in 
Deutschland 10.1. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag. 
—.. 1968. Drei Fragmente buddhistischer Siitras aus den Turfanhandschriften. 
Nachrichten der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Géttingen, Philologisch- 
historische Klasse 1968.1. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
—.. 1980. “Central Asian Sutra Fragments and Their Relation to the Chinese 
Agamas.” In Bechert 1980: 136-74. 
Willemen, Charles, ed. and trans. 1975. The Essence of Metaphysics: Abhidharmahrdaya. 
Publications de l’Institut Belge des Hautes Etudes Bouddhiques, série 
“Etudes et Textes,” 4. Brussels: Institut Belge des Hautes Etudes 
Bouddhiques. 
Wilson, H. H. 1841. Ariana Antiqua: A Descriptive Account of the Antiquities and Coins 
of Afghanistan. London: East India Co. 
Woodward, F. L., trans. 1952. The Book of the Gradual Sayings (Anguttara-nikaya) or 
More-numbered Suttas. Vol. 2, The Book of the Fours. Pali Text Society Trans- 
lation Series 24. London: Luzac, for the Pali Text Society. 
Yamada, R. 1957. “Ubu gandara kei ronsho no tokushitsu.” Nihon Bukkyo Gakkai Nenpo 
22: 283-99. 
Zwalf, W. 1996. A Catalogue of the Gandhara Sculpture in the British Museum. 2 vols. 
London: British Museum Press. 

=== PAGE 312 ===

=== PAGE 313 ===
Index 
abbreviation formulae (in avadana texts), 36, 
147 nN. 17, 165 
abhidharma, 158, 158 n. 3 
Gandharan school of, 5-6, 12 
texts among British Library fragments, 12, 
29, 50, 525 54, 175 
text sample, 29-30 
texts surviving in Chinese, 5-6, 6 n. 4, 7, 12, 
178 
Abhidharma-hrdaya, 5 
aca/aco (problematic word), 72 n. 2, 75-6 
Achaemenian Empire, 4, 110, 112 
“ad sanctos” burial, 80-1 
Afghanistan, 3, 4, 106, 178, 186 
Dharmaguptaka school in, 177 
funereal jars from, 79 n. 11 
inscribed pots from, 187 
Kharosthi inscriptions from, 175-6 
Kharosthi manuscripts from, 20, 57, 59-66 
passim, 68 
Sanskrit manuscripts from, 171 
Afghans, 4 
Ajivika (member of a heterodox sect), 36, 213 
Ajnatakaundinya (subject of a pirvayoga 
story), 37-8, 44, 49, 174 
Alam Bridge, 129 
Alexander the Great, 4-5 
amulets, 86 
Ananda (subject of pirvayoga story), 37-9, 49, 
174 
Anathapindika, 36 
_Anavatapta-gatha 
British Library manuscript of, 23, 30, 43, 53, 
162, 166; format, 99; lexicon, 134; mor- 
phology, 131, 131 n. 18, 131, 132-3; phonolo- 
gy, 125 N. 10, 126, 127; scribe, 108; style, 
138-9; text sample, 31-3, 139 
Chinese and Tibetan versions of, 158-9, 
161—2, 174 
recensions, 163, 174 
Andhra Pradesh, 245 
Anguttara-nikaya 
British Library manuscript corresponding 
to, 23, 48, 54, 91, 132, 164; lexicon, 135; 
style, 133; text sample, 24-6 
Palins e527; 
anusvara. See under Kharosthi script 
Apadana (Pali text), 33, 163 
apadana (Pali text genre), 37 
Apraca kings, 148 n. 23, 153 n. 27, 154, 180-1 
genealogy, 150 (fig. 13), 152-3 
territories, 148, 181 
Ara inscription, 116 
Aramaic script, 4, 110 
Arapacana alphabet, 136 n. 22, 170 
Arthavargiya-sttra. See Atthaka-vagga 
Ashkun (Nuristani language), 134 
Asoka, 150, 180 
mentioned in avadana text, 36 
rock edicts, 5, 112, 126, 130, 133-4 
Aspavarman (Indo-Scythian ruler), 153-4. See 
also Apraca kings 
coins, 145 
date, 148-9 
mentioned in avadana text, 37, 141, 145-8, 
147 N. 13, 150, 155, 180 
territories, 181 
Assamese language, 134, 135 
Astavarga-sutra. See Atthaka-vagga 
Atranjikhera, 187 
Atthaka-vagga (of Sutta-nipata), 27, 158, 159, 
160-3. See also Sutta-nipata 
auspicious symbol, 232, 234 
avadanas, among British Library fragments, 23, 
35-95 43-5> 48, 53> 545 725 75-6, 90, 125 N. 
10, 147 N. 17, 161, 162, 164 
abridged form, 165 
colloquial style, 139-40, 140 n. 29, 165 
date, 150 
historical references in, 141, 145, 145 n. 7, 149, 
153, 180 
265 

=== PAGE 314 ===
INDEX 
avadanas (continued) 
Jhadamitra, story of, 145-7, 147 nn. 15-6. See 
also Jhadamitra/Jhadimitra 
lexicon, 134, 142 
local (Gandharan) origins, 178 
morphology, 131, 131 n. 18, 132, 133 
orthography, 122, 123, 127 
parallels in other text traditions, 174 
scribe, 114, 121 
script, 116 
text samples, 38-9, 140 
Avadana-Sataka, 147 n. 20 
Avakhajada (Indo-Scythian individual), 145 n. 
6 
Azes [I] (Indo-Scythian king), 144, 177 
Azes [II] (Indo-Scythian king), 145, 148, 149 
Bactria, 4, 169, 177, 187 
Bactrian Greeks, 4. See also Indo-Greeks 
Bahusrutikas (Buddhist school), 191 
Bairam Ali manuscript, 36, 84, 84 n. 20, 165 
Bajaur (Pakistan), 148, 181 
Balkh, 213 
Bamiyan (Afghanistan), 24, 66 
Barikot (Swat), 187 
Barthoux, J., 63-5, 68 
Basawal (Afghanistan), 188 
Begram inscription, 205 
Bengal, 122 
Bhagavadgita, 86 
Bhaisajyavastu (section of Mulasarvastivada- 
vinaya), 30, 54, 157 
Bhamiala, 186 
bhanakas, 164 
Bhano (character in purvayoga story), 39 
Bihari language, 134, 135 
Bimaran (Afghanistan), 60 n. 3, 212 
birch bark (as writing material), 59-60, 65, 84 
conservation, 15-17 
fragility, 16-7, 22, 62, 64, 68, 104-6 
lenticels, 107, 108 
preparation, 106-8 
references to in literature, 106-7 
sanctity associated with, 86 
species used, 106 
supply, 68 n. 16 
used in central Asia, 102 
used in far northern India, 8, 39, 103, 106, 
107 
used in other parts of the world, 106 
al-Birtini, 107 
Bodhisattva, 37, 38, 49 
Bourdj i Kemri (Kamari), 62 
Bower manuscript, 107 
Brahmanical culture, 4 
; 
Brahmi script, 3, 4, 57, 67, 77; 84, 85 
British Library fragment in, 23, 39, 46, 53, 88, 
94 
central Asian, 102 
coin legends, 113 
direction of writing, 112 
Gandhara, adopted in, 107 
pot and potsherd inscriptions, 188 n. 3, 225, 
230, 240-1, 245 
used for Prakrits (except Gandhari), 10 
buddhavacana (“words of the Buddha”), 156, 
157 
Buddhavarman (monk mentioned in KDhP 
colophon), 41 
Buddhayaésas (translator), 173 
Buddhism 
archeological remains in Gandhara, 5, 7 
central Asian, 171, 182 
councils, 156, 157 n. 2 
east Asian, 7 
foreign rulers attracted to, 5 
Gandharan, 5-7, 10, 77, 155, 157, 171 
inscriptions, 5, 6 
origins and early history, 7, 34 
regional centers, 165, 182 
sects and schools. See individual schools: 
Bahusrutikas; Dharmaguptakas; 
Kasyapiyas; Mahasanghikas; Mahisasakas; 
Mialasarvastivadins; Sarvastivadins; 
Theravadins; and Khotan Dharmapada, 
sectarian affiliation 
Buddhist creed, 86 
Buddhist inscriptions, 5, 6 
Buddhist Sanskrit/Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, 7, 
133, 142, 230 
Burma, 7, 166 
Butkara (Pakistan), 188 
calligraphic writing 
in British Library fragments, 109, 114, 199 n. 
16 
in pot and potsherd inscriptions, 198-9, 203, 
205, 205 N. 24, 209, 211, 218, 227, 228, 238, 
242 
Cambodia, 7 
canons (Buddhist) 
Chinese, 7, 13 
formation, 9, 182 
Gandharan, 6, 11, 57, 58, 156-8, 163, 165—6 
notion of, 11, 58 n. 2, 156-7 
oral vs. written form, 11, 163—6 
Pali, 7, 8, 9, 156, 157 
sectarian, 7 
Tibetan, 7, 9, 156 

=== PAGE 315 ===
central Asia 
Buddhist Sanskrit manuscripts from, 7, 11, 
102, 163, 164, 166, 168, 171, 174 
Dharmaguptaka school in, 167-8 
Gandhara, relations with, 4 
Gandhari language, 128 
Kharosthi manuscripts from, 57, 59, 68, 72, 
113, 134, 139-40, 167 
Kharosthi script used in, 4 
spread of Buddhism to, 10, 180, 182 
Chakhil-i Ghundi, 63, 79, 177 
Chang-an (China), 5, 113 
Charsada, 79, 145 n. 6, 186. See also Palatu 
Dheri 
China, 82 
Buddhism, spread to, 5 
Dharmaguptaka school in, 167-8 
Kharosthi script used in, 4-5, 113 
Chinese language 
abhidharma texts, 5-6 
Buddhist canons, 7, 13 
coin legends, 113 
translations of Buddhist texts, 5—6, 7, 38 
Chinese pilgrims, 177. See also Fa-hsien; 
Hstian-tsang; I-ching 
Chinese scrolls, 88, 102, 103 
Chi-pin, 168, 173 
Christianity, 9 
Chu Fo-nien (translator), 173 
Civaravastu (section of Milasarvastivada- 
vinaya), 54 
clay pots. See pots and potsherds 
COINS, 113, 114, 142, 143, 144, 145, 148, 149, 181 n. 
14 
colophons, 22, 40-2, 87 
commander. See stratega 
commentaries 
British Library fragments of, 11-12, 40, 42, 
44, 47, 50, 53, 125 N. 10, 132 N. 20, 164, 
165—6; sources of verses quoted in, 26-9, 
45, 160-2; text sample, 28-9 
Pali, 12, 165 
Sinhalese (lost), 12, 165 
copying of manuscripts, 74, 76, 83, 83 n. 18 
Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, 112 
councils, Buddhist, 156, 157 n. 2 
Cukhsa (Pakistan), 181 
Cila-vagga (of Sutta-nipata), 160. See also 
Sutta-nipata 
Culla-niddesa, 33 
cult of the book, 85 
Curtius Rufus, Q., 107 
INDEX 
267 
Dardic languages, 110, 133-5, 147 n. 19 
Darius (Achaemenid king), 4 
“dead” books, 82, 85 
Dead Sea scrolls, 9, 84 
Deccan, 169 
Dhammapada (Pali), 26, 27, 45, 47, 159, 160. See 
also Dharmapada (Gandhari); Khotan 
Dharmapada 
dharanis, 86 
Dharmaguptakas (Buddhist school), 166-78 
passim 
in Afghanistan (Bactria), 169 
in central Asia, 167—8, 180 
in China, 167-8 
decline, 10-11 
Dirghagama attributed to, 168, 170, 173-4 
in Gandhara and northwestern India, 169, 
175-8, 181 
Gandhari language, 167, 169-71, 174 
inscriptional records, 168-9, 177 
in Iran, 168, 169 
Khotan Dharmapada, 170 
in Mathura, 169 
patronized by Indo-Scythians, 11, 177, 180 
probable source of British Library frag- 
ments, 10, 38, 83, 161, 162, 163, 166, 170-2, 
174-5 
referred to in inscriptions, 21, 151, 169, 175-8, 
191, 214, 217, 229, 231, 234-5, 240 
relations with other schools, 167 
role in Gandharan Buddhism, 167 
role in spread of Buddhism beyond India, 10 
texts preserved in Chinese, 7, 168 
vinaya, 158, 158 n. 3, 161, 167, 168, 170, 173 
Dharmapada (Gandhari), 23, 35, 41, 49, 54, 57 
Nn. 1, 58, 75, 90, 159, 160—2, 170. See also 
Khotan Dharmapada 
Dharmarajika inscriptions, 225, 228 
dharmaésarira, 68, 85 
Dhona (a brahman), 24-6 
didactic verses, 45, 53 
Digha-nikaya, 147 n. 20. See also Dirghagama 
Dirghagama (Chinese), 172 
Dharmaguptaka affiliation, 168, 170, 173-4 
transcription of proper names in, 173-4 
Divyavadana, 140 nn. 29-30, 142 
drachma (as weight unit), 144 n. 4, 148 
Dutreuil de Rhins, J.-L., 57 n. 1, 58. See also 
Khotan Dharmapada 
east Asia, 7, 10 
Egyptian papyri, 88, 91 
Ekottarikagama, 24. See also Anguttara-nikaya 

=== PAGE 316 ===
INDEX 
eras 
of Azes, 144 
“Old Saka” or “Indo-Bactrian,” 144, 145 
Fa-hsien, 81 n. 16, 164 
Faiz Tepe (Uzbekistan), 188, 191 n. 9, 240, 241 
n. 40. See also Termez 
Fo pén hsing chi ching, 38, 174 
Gadhabadhaga (character in purvayoga story), 
39 
Gandhara 
as center of Buddhist scholarship, 178-80 
cosmopolitan culture, 5 
cultural influence on other regions, 4 
dynasties, 3 
geographical extent, 3, 168 
“Greater Gandhara,” 3, 4 
literary tradition, 107 
local traditions reflected in British Library 
manuscripts, 10, 12, 23, 37, 165, 178-9 
Mahayana Buddhism, 178 
mentioned in a British Library manuscript, 
142, 143 
part of Achaemenian Empire, 110, 112 
role in spread of Buddhism, 6 
Gandharan art, 3, 5, 103 
Gandharan grave culture, 246 
Gandhari canon hypothesis. See canons, 
Gandharan 
“Gandhari Dharmapada.” See Dharmapada 
(Gandhari); Khotan Dharmapada 
Gandhari language. See also Kharosthi script 
aspirate consonants, 127-8 
Buddhist texts composed in or translated 
into, 6-7, 27 
central Asian dialect, 113, 129, 130 
central Asian documents, 39, 41, 113, 114, 121, 
123, 147 n. 19. See also Niya documents 
China, used in, 5 
coin legends, 113, 142 
colloquial form, 114, 133, 134, 138-40, 140 n. 
29 
decline, 77, 137 
Dharmaguptaka school, used by, 167, 169-71, 
174 
dialect features, 120 
final vowels, weakened pronunciation, 130, 
132 
inscriptions and their styles, 112-3, 114, 133 
intervocalic consonants, 122, 124—7, 152 
literary texts, 113 
loanwords, 113 
local vocabulary, 135 
Gandhari language (continued) 
name, origin of, 110 
nasal sounds, 120-1 
nonstandardization and variability of forms, 
114, 131, 136-8, 154 
noun inflections, 130-2 
original language of Chinese translations, 6, 
170 
“Questions of Milinda,” 5 
region of use, 3, 4 
role in Buddhist culture, 112, 137 
Sanskritized variety, 230 
scholastic form, 138 
secular documents from central Asia, 113 
sibilants, 120, 121 
translation of Buddhist texts into, 133, 136, 
138-9, 139 N. 24, 165 
types of texts extant, 12-4 
verbal forms, 132-3, 136, 140 
gathas, 27, 39 n. 49, 41-2, 42 n. 52 
Gavampati (subject of avadana), 36 
GhoSya (family name?), 233 
Gilgit manuscripts, 30, 31 n. 22, 33 n. 28, 54, 82, 
84, 86, 107, 132, 139 N. 25, 158, 174 
Girdharpur inscription, 169 
Gondophares (Indo-Parthian king), 148, 149, 
181 n. 14 
Gosrnga-/GoSsirsa-vihara, 58 
great satrap, 141, 142, 148 
Greek language, 113, 142 
Greek papyri, 88, 91, 102, 102 n. 11, 103 
Greek script, 113 
Grenard, F., 58 
Gul Dara (Afghanistan), 188 
Guntupalle, 80 
Hadda (Afghanistan), 61, 85 
Chakhil-i Ghundi site, 63, 79, 177 
dating of sites, 181 n. 14 
Dharmaguptaka presence, 177 
excavations by J. Barthoux, 63 
Hellenistic influence, 103 
human remains in pots, 77-8, 79-80, 243-5 
inscribed clay jars, 153, 188, 190, 209 n. 26, 
213 N, 32, 224, 242 n. 42, 243-5 
inscription (spurious?), 144 n. 3 
Kharosthi manuscripts, 60, 63-5, 68, 77, 79 
name, origin of, 81 n. 16 
probable provenance of British Library frag- 
ments, 20-1 
Sarvastivadin presence, 177 
Tapa-e-Top-e-Kalan site, 79 
Tapa-i Kafariha site, 63 
Tapa Kalan site, 63-4, 78, 79 n. 10, 80 
Tapa Shutur site, 65, 103, 177, 188 

=== PAGE 317 ===
Hadrumetum (Tunisia), 103 
hands (of different scribes), 43-52 passim, 
54-5, 74, 114-5, 117, 121. See also scribes 
Hastinapura, 187 
Hellenistic culture, 103—4 
Herakles-Vajrapani, 103 
Hidda. See Hadda 
Himalayas, 106 
Hindi, 134 
Honigberger, John Martin, 61-2, 64, 67, 86 
Hstian-tsang, 24, 58, 81 n. 16, 157 n. 2, 168, 178, 
213 N. 33, 242 n. 43 
Huviska (Kusana king), 116 n. 4 
I-ching, 167, 168 
Indo-Aryan languages, 3 
Indo-Aryans, 4 
Indo-Greeks, 3, 5, 113, 184—5, 187 
Indo-Parthians, 3, 112, 113, 137 
Indo-Scythians, 3, 37, 144, 144 n. 4, 145 n. 7, 149, 
152, 154-5, 169, 181, 224. See also Sakas; 
Scythians 
as patrons of Buddhism, 10, 11, 177, 180 
Indravarman (Apraca prince), 148, 150 (fig. 13), 
153, 181 
reliquary inscription of, 118, 126, 149, 152 
Indus River, 3 
interlinear notations, 71-6 
Iran, 4, 5, 168, 169 
Iranian languages, 113, 128, 145, 210 
Islam, 81-2 
Itivuttaka, 26, 27, 160 
Jalalabad (Afghanistan), 59 
Jalalabad Plain, 20, 61, 65, 68, 80, 153, 177, 186 
Jamalgarhi stone inscription, 169, 177, 214 
Japan, 82 
jatakas, 36, 38. See also Mahaummagga-jataka; 
Vessantara-jataka 
Jauliaf, 77, 209 
Jhadamitra/Jhadimitra (subject of avadana), 
36, 127-8, 145-7, 147 nn. 15-6, 149 
Jihonika (Indo-Scythian ruler), 144 n. 3, 148, 
150 
date, 143-4, 149, 154 
mentioned in a British Library avadana, 37, 
43, 141-3, 180 
terrritories, 181 
Judaism, 81, 82 
Kafiri languages. See Nuristani languages 
Kalasha (Dardic language), 134 
Kalawan inscription, 125 
Kalidasa, 106 
INDEX 
269 
Kamari, 62 
Kaniska (Kusana king), 10, 115, 117, 119, 150, 156 
n. 2, 180, 242 n. 42 
Kaniska [II] (Kusana king), 116 n. 4 
Kanjur, 156 
Kara Tepe (Uzbekistan), 188, 191 n. 10, 199, 
240-1, 242 n. 42, 244, 245. See also Termez 
karsapana (weight unit), 144 n. 4 
Kashmir, 104, 105, 106, 107 
Kasyapiyas (Buddhist school), 170, 177, 191, 191 
n. 9 
Khadgavisana-gatha. See Rhinoceros Horn 
Sttra 
Khaggavisana-sutta. See Rhinoceros Horn 
Sutra 
Kharosthi script, 110-24 passim 
anusvara, 120-1, 205, 210-11, 211 n. 28, 228 
Aramaic script, derivation from, 4, 110 
Asokan form, 115 
central Asian variety, 113, 124, 128, 130 
chart of, 111 (fig. 12) 
China, used in, 4-5, 113 
coin legends, 113, 114 
cursivization, 115, 117 
decline, 77, 112, 137 
diacritic signs, 121-2 
direction of writing, 112 
Gandhari language, association with, 3, 4, 
110 
inscriptions, 6, 104, 104 Nn. 12, 114, 139; of 
Asoka, 5, 112; in Corpus Inscriptionum 
Indicarum, 112; geographical range, 113; 
graffiti, 113, 129; linguistic characteristics, 
125, 129, 132; on silver objects, 144 n. 4. See 
also pots and potsherds, Kharosthi 
inscriptions on 
literary texts, 113 
long vowels, 199, 230 
manuscripts: from Hadda, 20; from Kotpuar 
sttipa, 62; from Nandara, 60, 64; from 
Pakistan, 57, 67; from Passani, 60, 61 
nonstandardization, 115, 124, 154, 212 
paleographic development and dating, 
115-20, 151-2 
pseudo-anusvara, 120,205, 210 Jin. 285 2185 
228 
secular/administrative documents from cen- 
tral Asia, 113, 114 
vowel notation, 123, 199, 230 
Khotan (China), 6, 10 n. 6, 58, 102, 242 n. 43 
Khotan Dharmapada, 6, 57 n. 1, 91, 113, 135, 154, 
159, 174 
additions to, 129, 129 n. 16 
arrangement of text, 99 

=== PAGE 318 ===
INDEX 
Khotan Dharmapada (continued) 
colophon, 41 
condition, 106 
construction and format of scroll, 92, 96-8, 
101-2 
date, 10 n. 6, 119, 126 
different features from British Library frag- 
ments, 91 
dimensions, 88, 90, 91 
discovery, 58-9, 77, 84-5 
orthography, 121, 123, 124, 212 
paleographic characteristics, 120, 199 
parallels with texts in British Library frag- 
ments, 28, 28 n. 10, 28 n. 13, 35, 49, 89-90 
phonology, 126, 129-30 
place of origin, 57, 120, 130 
rolling cylinder, possible use of, 101 
sectarian affiliation, 170 
style, 139 
Khuddaka-nikaya, 26, 33, 34, 159-61 
Kohmari Mazar (near Khotan), 58 
Koran, 82 
Kotptr stupa (Afghanistan), 62 
ksatrapa (satrap), 143, 144, 149, 181 
Ksudraka (section of Dharmaguptaka-vinaya), 
158 
Ksudrakagama. See Khuddaka-nikaya 
Ksudrakavastu (section of Milasarvastivada- 
vinaya), 241 N. 41, 246 
Kucha, 59, 107 
Kujula Kadphises (Kusana king), 153, 154 
Kumarasambhava (poem by Kalidasa), 106 
Kurram relic casket inscription, 67, 85, 117 n. 5, 
119, 209, 238 
Kusanas, 113, 115-7, 137, 151, 153, 154, 169 
as patrons of Buddhism, 10, 11, 180-1 
pottery from time of, 184, 187 
rule in Gandhara, 3, 4, 112 
Lalitavistara, 136 n. 22 
Lauriya-Nandangarh, 67, 80, 85 
leather (as writing material), 113 
libraries (in Buddhist monasteries), 83, 83 n. 17, 
100, 137, 162, 163, 181 
Lo-yang (China), 5, 113 
Magadha, 213 
Mahakasyapa (subject of avadana), 36 
mahaksatrapa (great satrap), 141, 142, 148 
Mahaparinirvana-sttra, 59, 168, 171, 173 
Maharastri Prakrit, 125 
Mahasamaja-sitra, 174 
Mahasanghikas (Buddhist school) 
attested in inscriptions, 170, 191, 191 n. 10, 
194, 212 n. 31 
Mahasanghikas (continued) 
Gandhari language, use of, 171 
texts in Chinese, 7 
vinaya, 158—9, 161, 162, 163 
Mahaummagga-jataka, 103 
Maha-vagga (of Sutta-nipata), 27, 160. See also 
Sutta-nipata 
Mahavastu, 33 n. 34, 37-8, 170 
mahayana, 85, 168, 178 
absent from British Library fragments, 12, 
30, 30 n. 21 
Mahiéasakas (Buddhist school), 167, 173, 176, 
177, 191 
“mainstream” Buddhism, 178 
Mansehra Asokan rock edicts, 5, 112, 130, 133 
Marathi language, 134 
masrugaha (enigmatic word), 142 
Masson, Charles, 59-61, 64, 65, 68, 77, 85 
Mathura 
Girdharpur inscription, 169 
lion capital inscriptions, 118, 118 n. 6, 212 n. 
31 
Sonkh, 187 
Mauryan dynasty, 5 
medical text (in British Library fragments), 23, 
39, 46, 53, 88, 94 
Mekhasanda (Pakistan), 188 
Menander (Indo-Greek king), 5 
Merv (Turkmenistan), 36, 84 
Middle East, 4 
Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA) languages, 3, 110, 
125, 126, 132, 137 
Mongols, 4 
mosques, 82 
Mulasarvastivadins (Buddhist school), 163, 174 
in central Asia, 168 
vinaya, 30, 31 N. 22, 54, 139 n. 25, 158, 241 n. 
41, 246 
“Muslim invasions,” 4 
Nadsur (Maharashtra), 80 
Nagarahara (Afghanistan), 20, 153, 168, 177, 181, 
186 
Nagasena (Buddhist monk), 5 
Nag Hammadi manuscripts, 9, 84 
Najigram (Swat Valley), 67 
Nandara (Afghanistan), 60, 64 
Naupur (Gilgit), 84, 86 
Navaseas (family name?), 227, 228, 233 
Nepal, 7, 8, 122 
New Indo-Aryan (NIA) languages, 134 
Niya documents, 39, 113, 129, 167, 170. See also 
Gandhari language, central Asian docu- 
ments 
Northern Areas (Pakistan), 113 

=== PAGE 319 ===
northern black polished ware, 187 
“Northwestern Prakrit,” 3, 110, 171. See also 
Gandhari language 
North-West Frontier Province (Pakistan), 3 
numerical symbols (in Kharosthi), 42, 42 n. 53 
Nuristani languages, 134, 135 
Odi (Indo-Scythian kingdom), 153, 153 n. 27, 
154 
Old Indo-Aryan languages, 3. See also Sanskrit 
Oriya, 134, 135 
Pakistan, 3, 84 
Gandhari manuscripts, 57, 67 
inscribed clay pots, 187 
Palatu Dheri (Charsada), 79, 80, 186, 188, 228 
Pali, 11, 122, 124, 132, 133, 137 
canon, 7, 13 
manuscripts, 8 
Theravada textual tradition in, 7 
palm leaf (as writing material), 8, 66, 101 
Panini, 218 n. 37 
paper (as writing material), 8 
papyrus, 17, 88, 91, 102-3 
Parayana-vagga (of Sutta-nipata), 27, 158-9, 
160-3. See also Sutta-nipata 
Parthia, 168. See also Indo-Parthians 
Pasai (Dardic language), 134 
Passani (Afghanistan), 60, 61 
Patna Dharmapada, 160. See also 
Dhammapada (Pali); Dharmapada 
(Gandhari) 
Peshawar, 186, 188 
Peshawar Valley, 3, 186 
Petrovskii, N. Th., 58 
Phalura (Dardic language), 147 n. 19 
Pitalkhora (Maharashtra), 80 
Pliny the Elder, 91 
pothi (Indian-style book), 101, 104, 107 
pots and potsherds 
Buddhist monasteries, found at, 185—6 
decoration, 80, 184-5, 189, 191, 199, 203, 205, 
214, 217, 225-40 passim, 247 
drawing on, 80 
human bones buried in, 77-81, 243, 247 
Kharosthi inscriptions on, 15, 20-1, 68, 
78-80, 153, 183-247, 189 (map 3); refer- 
ences to Buddhist schools, 175-7, 188, 190 
N. 7, 191, 191 NN. 9-10, 194, 200, 203, 205, 
210, 212—4, 217, 229, 231, 234-5, 240; stan- 
dard formula, 190, 191, 203, 214, 218, 229, 
231, 232, 235, 236, 241-4, 247 
manuscripts buried in, 15, 19, 21-2, 69, 76-7, 
78, 80, 85, 106, 214, 243, 246 
INDEX 
271 
pots and potsherds (continued) 
stamped designs on, 185, 191, 198, 199, 203, 
226, 227, 228, 231, 235 
pradhana/prahana (Skt.; = Gandhari prasana), 
24, 91 
Prakrit, 3, 110. See also Middle Indo-Aryan 
languages 
“Prakrit Dhammapada,” 57 n. 1. See also 
Khotan Dharmapada 
pratimoksa, 164, 167, 168, 170, 173 
pratitya-samutpada, 50, 67, 85 
pratyekabuddhas, 159 
pseudo-anusvara. See under Kharosthi script 
punctuation signs, 72, 73 
Puniga (subject of avadana), 36, 48 
Punjabi language, 129, 134 
Punna/Punnika. See Puniga 
purvayogas, 37, 38, 49, 73, 75, 140 
Questions of Milinda, 5 
Qunduz vase inscription, 169, 188, 190, 191, 244 
Rajagrha, 213, 213 n. 33 
Ramaka’s reliquary inscription, 118 
Ranigat (Pakistan), 188 
Rastrapala-pariprccha, 38 
Ratnagiri (Orissa), 81 n. 15 
reed pen, 22, 108-9 
relics (Sarira, dhatu) and relic cult, 68, 81, 86, 
179, 183, 242 
reliquaries, 66, 67, 68, 81, 85, 86 
Rhinoceros Horn Sutra (*Kharga-visana- 
slitra), 23, 33-4, 44 N. 54, 46, 53, 70, 125 n. 
10, 162 
format, 98-100 
identified with “Sacred text of the Pratyeka- 
buddhas,” 159 
morphology, 131, 131 n. 18, 132 
orthography, 122 
Pali parallels, 160 
script, 109, 116 
style, 138 
text sample, 34-5 
Roman papyri, 88, 91 
Rukhunaka (Indo-Scythian queen), 150 (fig.13) 
Sabrudidrigo (character in purvayoga story), 
39 
Sadaskana (Kusana prince), 153 
Sahri-Bahlol (Pakistan), 186, 188 
Saidu Sharif (Pakistan), 188 
Sakas, 37, 153 n. 27, 210. See also Indo- 
Scythians; Scythians 
Sakyamuni, 49, 81 

=== PAGE 320 ===
INDEX 
Salihundam (Andhra Pradesh), 245 
Sallekha-sutta, 24 
Samayabhedoparacanacakra (work by 
Vasumitra), 167 
Samghapriya (monk mentioned in inscrip- 
tions), 194, 194 N. 13, 198, 225, 226 
Sanchi, 148 n. 21 
Sanghasrava (monk mentioned in colophon 
fragment), 40-1 
sangiti (communal recitations), 156 
Sangiti-paryaya (commentary on Sangiti- 
sutra), 24 
Sangiti-sttra 
Chinese versions, 24, 89, 171-4 
Gandhari version, 24, 49, 89, 91, 126, 164, 
171-4, 175; text sample, 138 
Pali version, 24, 138 n. 23, 171-3 
Sanskrit fragments, 24, 171-3 
Sanskrit, 122, 122 n. 7, 124, 125, 137. See also 
Buddhist Sanskrit/Buddhist Hybrid 
Sanskrit 
Buddhist texts in, 7, 8, 11, 13, 77 
central Asian manuscripts, 102 
in Gandhara, 4, 107 
as source of Middle Indo-Aryan (Prakrit) 
languages, 3, 110 
unique text among British Library frag- 
ments, 39, 46, 53, 88, 94 
Sarthadasa (subject of avadana), 36, 48 
Sarvastivadins (Buddhist school), 163 
- abhidharma literature, 5, 6 n. 4 
in central Asia, 168, 180 
Gandhari language, use of, 171 
patronized by Kusanas, 11, 180 
referred to in inscriptions, 21, 21 n. 3, 170, 
175, 176, 177, 188, 190 N. 7, 191, 200, 203, 
205, 210, 212, 213 
relationship to other schools, 167 
texts preserved in Chinese, 7 
satrap. See ksatrapa 
scribes, 54-5, 74. See also hands (of different 
scribes) 
preferences and styles, 87-8, 90-1, 108-9, 114, 
120, 121, 124, 128, 137, 219, 230 
signatures, 238 
training, 136 
scriptorium, 83 
scrolls 
construction, 22, 70, 87, 92-6, 100-1 
dimensions, 42-52 passim, 88-91 
division into “volumes,” 20, 26, 30, 53, 70, 
87, 90-1 
early birch bark manuscripts, preferred for- 
mat for, 107 
scrolls (continued) 
found inside statues, 65, 68 
known as “postaka/postaga,” 87 
large format, construction of, 70, 87, 92-6 
numbering system applied to British Library 
collection, 19, 19 n. 2 
number of texts in British Library collection, 
20 
original number of, in British Library collec- 
tion, 19-20 
origin of scroll format, 101-4 
patterns of damage, 22, 40, 46, 69-71, 104-6 
ritual interment, 69, 76-7, 80-1, 82, 84-5, 
152, 183 
rolling cylinder, 101 
sewing of margins, 94-6 
size and condition, 17, 22 
small format, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 86, 98-100 
storage, 100 
written on one side only, 87-8, 88 n. 1, 90-1, 
99 
Scythians, 4, 37, 112, 137, 145. See also Indo- 
Scythians; Sakas 
Senavarman (Indo-Scythian king), 150 (fig. 13) 
reliquary inscription of, 153 
sermon at Benares, 63, 65 
Shahbazgarhi Asokan rock edicts, 5, 112, 126, 
130, 133 
Shahr-i Zuhak (Afghanistan), 66 
Shaikhan Dheri (Pakistan), 151, 184-5, 186-7, 
188 
Shan-Shan (China), 128, 167 
Shevaki sttipa. See Shiwaki stipa 
Shina (Dardic language), 134 
Shiwaki stipa (Afghanistan), 61, 62, 64, 86 
Shnaisha Gumbat (Pakistan), 104 
silk routes, 4, 113 
Sindhi language, 129 
Sinhala language, 134, 135 
Sirkap silver saucer inscription, 148, 149 
skandhakas, 164 n. 5 
Sogdia, 168 
Songs of Lake Anavatapta. See Anavatapta- 
gatha 
Sonkh, 187 
Southeast Asia, 7, 8, 165 
Sretharafia monastery, 176 
Sri Lanka, 7, 8, 165 
Srivatsa (auspicious symbol), 232, 234 
stater (weight unit), 144 n. 4, 148 
Sthavira-gatha, 161 
stotra (in British Library fragments), 6, 53, 99, 
100 
stratega (commander), 141, 148 

=== PAGE 321 ===
stupas 
in Gandhara, 5 
manuscripts found in, 60-4, 68, 82, 84, 85 
worship of (in texts), 31, 32 
Sudamstra (alternate name of Vessantara), 38 
Sudhagarh (Maharashtra), 80 
Suhasoma (Indo-Scythian functionary), 150 
(fig. 13), 152, 153, 198, 198 n. 15, 218, 224 
Suleiman Mountains, 3 
Susoma. See Suhasoma 
sutras 
among British Library fragments, 24-6, 48, 
52, 54, 75, 123, 125 N. 10, 164—6, 175 
among central Asian Sanskrit manuscripts, 
164 
in Chinese canons, 7 
remains found in Afghanistan, 20 
Sutta-nipata. 33, 34 n. 35, 157, 159-61. See also 
Atthaka-vagga; Parayana-vagga 
quoted in Gandhari commentary texts, 26, 
27, 47 
Swat Valley, 3, 67, 68, 168, 181, 183, 186-7 
synagogue, 81 
Tajikistan, 4, 113 
Takht-i-Bahi inscriptions, 118, 149, 186, 188, 191 
Tapa-e-Top-e-Kalan site, 79 
Tapa-i Kafariha site, 63 
Tapa Kalan site, 63-4, 78, 79 n. 10, 80 
Tapa Shutur site, 65, 103, 177, 188 
Tarim Basim, 4, 6, 102, 113. See also Xinjiang- 
Uighur Autonomous Region 
Taxila, 3, 37, 109, 186-7, 233 
Bhamiala, 186 
Dharmarajika inscriptions, 225, 228 
Jauliaf, 77, 209 
Kalawan inscription, 125 
silver scroll inscription, 228 
silver vase inscription, 142, 143, 144 n. 3, 149, 
181 
Sirkap silver saucer inscription, 148, 149 
Tchekeri bala. See Shiwaki stupa. 
Tepe Zargaran, 188 
Termez (Uzbekistan), 188, 188 n. 3, 190, 191, 240 
Thailand, 7 
Theragatha, 26, 27, 28, 47, 160 
Theravadins (Buddhist school), 7, 8, 33-4, 157, 
163, 167, 173 
thermoluminescence testing, 151 
Tibet, 82, 84 
Tibetan language (Buddhist canons in), 7, 9, 
156 
tipitaka, 7, 156. See also canons (Buddhist); Pali 
Tirahi (Dardic language), 134 
Torah, 82 
INDEX 
273 
Tor Dherai inscriptions, 188, 190, 190 n. 7, 191, 
198 nN. 14, 224, 241 
Torwali (Dardic language), 134 
translation, Buddhist attitude toward, 6 
Trasaka, reliquary inscription of, 211 
tsha-khang, 82 
Tunhuang, 86, 88 
Turfan manuscripts, 33 n. 29 
Turkestan, 82 
Turkmenistan, 36, 84 
Turks, 4 
Udana (Pali text), 26, 27, 47, 160 
udanas (inspired verses), 27 
Udana-varga, 170. See also Dharmapada 
Uddiyana. See Swat Valley 
Uraga-sutta, 159, 160. See also Sutta-nipata 
Uraga-vagga (of Sutta-nipata), 159, 160. See 
also Sutta-nipata 
Uttara (Apraca princess), 149, 150 (fig. 13) 
Uzbekistan, 4, 113, 187, 188 
vasantatilaka (meter), 39, 46 
Vasavadatta (Apraca princess), 150 (fig. 13), 152, 
153, 181, 198, 198 n. 15, 218 
Vasumitra (author of 
Samayabhedoparacanacakra), 167 
Vedic culture, 4 
Vessantara-jataka, 38, 224 n. 38 
vibhangas, 164 n. 5 
Vikrama era, 144 
Vikramorvasiya (poem by Kalidasa), 106 
vinaya, 83 n. 17, 164 n. 5, 245. See also under 
Dharmaguptakas; Mahasanghikas; 
Mulasarvastivadins 
absent from British Library fragments, 
163-6, 175 
in Chinese canons, 7, 12 
Vipasyin (Buddha), 31, 32 
Virgil, 103 
Visnuvarman (Apraca king), 150 (fig. 13) 
Waigali (Nuristani language), 134 
Wardak relic bowl inscription, 116, 116 n. 4, 117 
N. 5, 119, 193 
Wima Kadphises, 181 n. 14 
wood (as writing material), 113 
word division, 108 
writing implements, 108-9 
Xinjiang-Uighur Autonomous Region (China) 
Buddhist manuscripts from, 6, 7, 8 
as center of Buddhism, 8 
Gandhari language, 4, 233 
THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
HEY KPEMONT, CALIF. 

=== PAGE 322 ===

=== PAGE 323 ===
m 
d 
ay 
wey 
‘ 
te 
= 
7 
‘ 
- 
wa 
Ay 
‘ 
‘ 
i 
\ 
AX 
ri 
- 

=== PAGE 324 ===

=== PAGE 325 ===

=== PAGE 326 ===

=== PAGE 327 ===

=== PAGE 328 ===
ey 
Rien 
Uae aay 
Seseatras 
3 
Sa 
Be 
Sate 
eae 
ea 
BUG 
ALS. 
es ett 
i 
ania 
ath 
Bs 
ae 
CBE 
retin 
Waigaias 
ie 
i 
Uti 
ten 
iat 
2 
Hipp Waren 
% 
COON Hie ae is Sane Be 
atin 
Speen 
ie feet Ne 
i 
ree Rrra EEA SRM MID 
Sa nae 
SNe) SAMO MnT Don nau? 
Rael THAMES 
isteeenr 
pate uaeton) 
pehbeatts 
UST 
ats 
Hay aieateae ¥) 
i 
Benes 
“f Carteret 
ese 
ty 
DAs oin 
ey 
ey 
Nahe 
aat 
ste 
iti 
eon 
cco 
5 
aise 
sis 
ehh 
sha 
Sept 
ont Ma 
Ay 
ects 
sat 
' 
er a8 
2 
i ( 
ie a 
is aR) REN 
SeH LT HME 
Nearly svt 
Hitler 
nt 
itt iy SaEIN i 
+) 
perp tei ne eas tit 
Mateus) 
i 
a 
; 
f 
se boy i eet dius pyaaaie 
sats Ba Minis i 
hi 
Ly 
HC 
Hi gi Hen ne? i 
j 
M 
TN ea 
i 
: 
eae 
eles N 
etic 
‘ 
Wyn! 
oH 
punt) 
; 
Kanak 
ae 
ae 
: 
Spee 
adsta 
5 
she pees 
: 
Y 
tise Lit 
if 
Hatstatel 
Le 
ties 
PAU 
OSS Cd asthe 
yeh 
i 
Haase et Meatengt metieiyy 
Aner 
iot 
oe oan eet 
gas 
Cee a 
Posse 
fds 
Ricenasutya, 
i 
; 
ace 
3 
i 
i 
f 
Hie 
ie 
SR MW 
staeariaraatey ease Lag 
aa 
Nat 
eee pa 
Mat 
aig 
is 
ah REE 
EAT RAE 
ita 
bt saa 
ABI yi 
ae 4 epi 
UAE 
Me 
Ia 
a aA 
ett! 
aap 
ar 
PRE eb 
(ed 
We 
eat 
vt Raitt 
BY aD 
eetarteartap! 
ae 
cK 
fi 
+ 
¥ 
Aree hotest 
ee 
a 
¥ 
Meade 
4 
% 
isfy 
e 
eR 
HEHE Chat ede 
ase 
vPny 
ada 
aaa 
ok set eit 
sia! 
sth?) 
septate 
hy 
ot 
ahh 
tad 
Y 
ee 
4 
ey 
tren he ty 
us An) 

