# SOURCE FILE: Schlosser_etal_2022_Bajaur_Ch2_PhysicalDescription.pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\loop_A25\documents\Schlosser_etal_2022_Bajaur_Ch2_PhysicalDescription.pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_5_chronology (5. คัมภีร์โบราณที่สุด มิติภูมิศาสตร์ และการกำหนดอายุ C-14)
# PAGES: 26 | TOTAL CHARS: 84039

=== PAGE 1 ===
Three Early Mahāyāna Treatises from Gandhāra 
Bajaur Kharoṣṭhī Fragments 4, 6, and 11

=== PAGE 2 ===

=== PAGE 3 ===
3
Chapter 1
Introduction 
1.1 General Remarks and the Topic of the Manuscripts 
The three manuscripts, apparently found in the late 1990s in the district of Bajaur in modern 
Northwest ­Pakistan, offer us a valuable and rare insight into Buddhist thinking during the early 
centuries of the Common Era, a time when the Mahāyāna movement was at its inception. They 
are written in a Kharoṣṭhī script datable to the second century, all by the same scribe. As the 
birch bark on which they were written is only preserved in fragments, the Gāndhārī texts are 
not complete and thus not always fully comprehensible. In addition, since there are no parallel 
texts, sometimes words are clearly legible but remain unclear as to their meaning. Nevertheless, 
large parts of the preserved texts are coherent and show us an interesting picture of a scholastic 
approach to the Buddhist way towards awakening and liberation from suffering. 
The unifying element between all three manuscripts is the knowledge of what is painful 
and useless (G dukhañaṇaṇisamarthañaṇa = Skt. duḥkhajñāna and niḥsāmarthyajñāna). How-
ever, it is not directly explained what this knowledge is. In BC 4 it is said to be the Dharma, 
which one should teach other beings, and thus establish them on the path to awakening. One 
should abandon what is painful and useless, empty, and like a dream. In BC 11 this is more 
specific: it is the inner and outer sense bases that are painful and useless, as they are the seed 
of suffering. Any happiness based on them would be useless, because it is transitory. In BC 6 
dharmas in general are said to be painful and useless. Accepting and fully understanding this, 
one should not become passionate or hateful. The proper mind set to overcome this kind of 
attachment to the dharmas (by way of passion or hatred) is apparently to stop every agitation of 
the mind. Then, a notion of happiness will arise, a happiness that does not depend on anything. 
In short, if one abandons what is useless and painful (which seems to be the perception of any 
dharma by way of the senses), inevitably a special kind of joy will arise that does not decay and 
does not lead to rebirth.
All three manuscripts deal more or less with the same topic, namely abandoning attach-
ment to sense experiences and the five aggregates of existence—a process which will finally 
lead to the bliss of liberation (mokṣasukha). In BC 4 this is expressed by being “dispassionate 
with regard to the triple world” or by the “benefit of dispassion” (BHS virāgānuśaṃsa). In 
BC 11 the same is called “benefit of release” (avasargānuśaṃsa). The theme and background 
is essentially the śūnyatā / prajñāpāramitā doctrine, through which one realizes that in ultimate 
reality everything is void of inherent existence and one is encouraged to not have attachment 
to it. The proposed practice of the bodhisattva path is: ­thoroughly understanding (parijñā) 
the origins of suffering, abandoning (prahāṇa) these origins, and attaining sustained joy and 

=== PAGE 4 ===
4
INTRODUCTION
­happiness by realizing the emptiness of all dharmas. While on the path, only good states will 
be gained and one will lead other beings to awakening. 
1.2 Summary of the Texts and Their Interrelation to Each Other
Each of the three manuscripts is written on a separate scroll. Regarding their internal structure 
and style they are all somewhat different. BC 4 is a coherent text dealing with the practice of 
a bodhisattva. It is predominantly written from the first-person perspective, giving the impres-
sion that the author is sharing his experience. BC 11 seems more like a scholastic comment on 
certain passages of BC 4, although not directly citing them but discussing aspects of the same 
issues, especially the bliss experienced on the path to awakening. Likewise, BC 6 refers to pas-
sages in BC 4 as well as BC 11, focusing on the process of becoming passionate and hateful. 
BC 4 thus appears to be the basic text.1 
1.2.1 BC 4
At the beginning of BC 4 (§ 1), the author of the text advertises detachment and presents the 
prospect of every kind of fortune (sampatti), contrasting these fortunes to their opposites. The 
benefits (BHS anuśaṃsa) are exemplified and enumerated in two lists, of which the first is related 
to states and experiences in this life and the next (sāṃdr̥­ṣṭika / dr̥­ṣṭadhārmika and sām­parāyika), 
and the second refers to meditation or physical issues during the development of the path (see 
table 1).2 The prospects are a good destination (sugati), meetings with worthy men (satpuruṣa­
darśana), and liberation (mokṣa). While reborn as a human, one will experience only good 
things: physical ease and mental happiness (sukha), as well as pleasant (śubha) and wholesome 
(kuśala) states.3 During practice one will be mentally and physically alert (jāgaryā, laghūtthāna), 
one will know what to do and do it [with words, thoughts, and deeds] (kr̥tya, ­karman), and one 
will achieve states of comfort and health (BHS spr̥­śana, ārogya). By relinquishing attachment 
to the ­skandhas that constitute existence, one will finally attain liberation from rebirth (§ 2). The 
knowledge helping one let go of everything [relating to the triple world] is the knowledge of 
what is useless and painful. This is indirectly equated with the prajñā­pāramitā (§ 3–6), the real-
ization of the empti­ness of all dharmas,4 which is obtained in this lifetime after one has formed 
the intention to attain awakening for the first time (prathama­cittotpāda).5 
1	
Interrelationships between BC  4, BC  6, and BC  11 have been marked in the edition by cross-­
references in the margins. 
2	
I have not found any similar listings in other Buddhist texts, whether in Pali or ­Sanskrit.
3	
In BC 11 the stereotypic G hakṣati of BC 4 (“will exist”) is replaced by G anubhaviea (“would 
experience”) in the case of śubha and kuśala, and by G gachiea (“would go to”) in the case of gatis 
(11r15). In general, the items of the lists are characterized by “relating to this and the next life” or 
“relating to body and mind” (11r10–11).
4	
In § 3 the bodhimaṇḍa is said to be void, thus indicating an understanding of emptiness that is not 
only related to the self but to everything, as is common in prajñāpāramitā literature and Madhya­maka 
philosophy. 
5	
That the prajñāpāramitā was esteemed as a shortcut to awakening is indicated in the Aṣṭasāhasrikā 
in a passage also (partly) preserved in the Gāndhārī version; cf. AsPSp 5-55 (Falk and Karashima 
2013: 162–63).

=== PAGE 5 ===
5
INTRODUCTION
One of the most important parts of BC 4 is its section 6, since due to its contextual and struc-
tural ele­ments, it can be compared to a praṇidhāna, i.e., the resolution of a bodhisattva to strive 
for awakening for the sake of others.6 If we compare this passage to other praṇidhānas (cf. Binz 
1980: 88 ff.), all essential parts are included:
	
(1) 	 the intention to become a Buddha, 
	
(2) 	 the duties of a bodhisattva (kuśalamūla, “wholesome roots”),
	
(3) 	 the dedication. 
BC 4	
(1)	
edeṇa dukhañaṇaṇisamarthañaṇeṇa  
sarve dukha uadiṇae as̮ivas̱idae hakṣadi uekṣidae hakṣadi  
sarve suhe paricatae as̱ivasidae hakṣadi  
ta par⟨*i⟩ṇirvahido log̱ado cariśe 
	
(2)	
akuśalo varjamaṇa kuśalo karamaṇa  
(*sarva)g̱areṇa b(*u)dhadharmasagho puyamaṇa  
satvaṇa ca artho karamaṇa  
dharme ca edam io ṇis̱ama(*r)thadukhañaṇo deś̱amaṇa 
satva ya bos̱a praïṭhavamaṇa 
6	
Praṇidhānas as such mainly occur in Mahāyana contexts, even though they are not totally unknown 
in Śrāvakayāna texts (cf. Binz 1980: 1, 78, 161). One of the few is the vow of the bodhi­sattva Su­
medha (later to become Buddha Śākyamuni) in the presence of Dīpaṃkara, even though this is called 
adhikāra or abhinīhāra (Binz 1980: 79–80). The identification of § 6 in BC 4 with a praṇidhāna was 
first suggested by Vincent Tournier during a workshop in Lausanne (2013).
Table 1. Summary of the miseries and fortunes enumerated in BC 4. 
droaca / doṣ̱a 
Skt. daurgatya / doṣa
sapati / aṇuśaśa
Skt. sampatti / BHS ānuśaṃsa
list 1 
§ 1A2 
§ 1B2 
§ 7A2a 
§ 7B2a
drogadi 
Skt. durgati
sugadi
Skt. sugati
as̱apuruṣ̱a / drugaṇa 
Skt. asatpuruṣa / durgaṇa
sapuruṣ̱a (darśaṇa) 
Skt. satpuruṣa (darśana)
(saṃsara) badhaṇa
Skt. (saṃsāra) bandhana
(saparaïa) mokṣa
Skt. (sāmpārayika) mokṣa
(kaïacedas̱ia) dukha
Skt. (kāyikacaitāsika) duḥkha
(sadriṭhia) suha
Skt. (sāṃdr̥­ṣṭika) sukha
 aśuha
Skt. aśubha
śuha
Skt. śubha
 akuśala
Skt. akuśala
kuśala
Skt. kuśala 
list 2 
§ 7A2b 
§ 7B2b
 midha
Skt. middha
jag̱aria
Skt. jāgaryā 
 alas̱ia
Skt. ālasya
lahuṭ́haṇa
Skt. laghūtthāna
 akica
Skt. akr̥­tya
kica
Skt. kr̥­tya 
 akarma
Skt. akarman
karma
Skt. karman 
aśpriś̱aṇa
BHS aspr̥­śana
śpriś̱aṇa
BHS spr̥­śana 
gelaña
BHS glānya
aroga
Skt. ārogya 

=== PAGE 6 ===
6
INTRODUCTION
	
(3)	
ṇa ciri ve (*sa)rvasapati ca me ha(*kṣa)di sarvadroaca ca ṇa hakṣadi  
atvahida ca parahida ca sarvas̱atvahida ca hakṣadi
 	
(1)	
By this knowledge of [what is] painful and this knowledge of [what is] useless, 
every suffering [that will be] taken up will be accepted [and] looked at with an 
even mind. Every happiness [that will be] given up will be accepted. In this way, 
having reached complete extinction, I will leave this world.
	
(2)	
Avoiding [what is] unwholesome, doing [what is] whole­some, honoring ­Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha in (*­every) respect, acting for the profit of [all] living beings, 
teaching this ­Dharma, which is the knowledge of [what is] useless and painful, 
and establishing [all] beings in awakening,
	
(3)	
[then] certainly before long every fortune will exist for me and every misery will 
not exist; [there] will be welfare for myself, welfare for others, and welfare for 
every living being.
The intention (1) is expressed by “… I will leave this world” (G log̱ado cariśe). The duties of 
a bodhi­sattva (2) are: doing good, honoring Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha (i.e., the founder, the 
doctrine, and the community in the name of the Buddha), acting for the profit of other beings, 
teaching the ­Dharma (which is the knowledge of what is useless and painful), and leading oth-
ers to awakening. The dedication or aim (3) is the wish to achieve good states for oneself, as 
well as welfare for oneself and others. Although the passage contains all the common elements, 
the differences from other known Buddhist sources are quite sizable, and none of the standard 
formulations mentioned by Binz (1980: 91) are found.7 
An interesting difference is also that the passage describes a reso­lution rather than an 
earnest wish, indicated by the use of the future instead of the usual optative,8 and accordingly, 
there is no prediction (vyākaraṇa) by a presiding Buddha. Nonetheless, a slight difference 
in style may be justified. Similarly, in the Sukhāvatīvyūha the praṇidhānas are not expressed 
as wishes but as demands (cf. Binz 1980: 131 for references). Another difference in BC 4 to 
usual praṇidhāna passages (cf. Binz 1980: 4) is that the term itself is not mentioned anywhere. 
However, this could also be due to the fact that the praṇidhānas examined by Binz are always 
embedded in a narrative, whereas in BC 4 the passage rather seems to represent some kind of 
invocatory recitation, perhaps for a ritual or ­meditation. Such a resolution might also be called 
a “self proficiency of a bodhisattva.”
The position of a praṇidhāna within a bodhisattva career is principally at its beginning, 
together with the cittotpāda. This is followed by a long period of practicing the pāramitās un-
til one finally reaches buddhahood. In comparison to the bodhisattva career as found in other 
7	
Hence, it may be assumed that BC 4 is to be dated to a time before stereotypes had been formulat-
ed, that is, before the fixing of wording evident in such texts as the Mahāvastu, Divyāvadāna, etc. 
as they have come down to us (cf. Binz 1980: 91 and 96–120 in general for the development of 
praṇidhānas). 
8	
One could argue that the future may be interpreted as carrying an optative sense, but other pra­ṇi­
dhānas are unambiguous in their use of an optative verb (cf. Binz 1980: 5). 

=== PAGE 7 ===
7
INTRODUCTION
Mahāyāna texts, BC 4 comes closest to the system presented in the Daśabhūmikasūtra, where 
the bodhisattvacaryā begins with the resolve to attain awakening (bodhicittotpāda) and not 
give up, after which the adept is to practice the pāramitās while ascending the ten stages to 
buddhahood.9 In BC 4, however, the concept of ten stages is not referred to, and nothing more 
is said about the bodhisattva’s career.10 The main ­issue concerns the performance of good and 
the avoidance of bad things. The dur­a­tion of such practice seems to be considered joyful and 
pleasant. Similar statements can be found in other texts, as for example, in the Ratnāvalī, where 
the fruits of following the Mahāyāna are not only future awakening, but all kinds of comfort 
or happiness during the journey, both in this life and the next (verses 126–27, 222, 285, 398). 
One of the duties is also quite simply avoiding unwholesome actions and striving for whole-
some ones (verses 22, 222, 227, 230), as well as practicing non-­attachment due to realizing the 
truth as it really is (verses 290, 230). Likewise, in the Pratyutpanna­buddha­saṃmukhāvasthita­
samādhisūtra, happiness is concomi­tant to the realization of truth, i.e., understanding and ac-
cepting that all dharmas are in fact unarisen and empty (cf. Harrison 1998: 103, T 13 no. 418 
p. 919b6). 
The last section of BC 4 (§ 7) is not yet clear, because too many as yet unclarified but cru-
cial words make this section almost incomprehensible (G aloa / aloṇea and aride kerea / aṇaride 
­kerea, cf. p. 176). It could possibly be connected with some sort of ritual of repentance regard-
ing one’s negative actions and of rejoicing in meritorious acts. Paul Harrison has suggested that 
the passage might deal in some way with the triskandhaka ritual.11 According to Jan Nattier, the 
tri­skandhaka­dharma must be recited three times during the day and three times at night (Nat-
tier 2003: 117 and 259–60). It has not been exactly defined what is meant by “three sections” 
(tri­skandhaka), but one of the more favored suggestions is: repenting for bad deeds, rejoicing 
in future merits, and requesting the Buddhas to teach. Other suggestions brought forward by 
Jan Nattier have been repentance regarding rāga, dveṣa, and  moha, or repentance of the body, 
speech, and mind. She has argued that not all three items (repentance, rejoicing, requesting) are 
attested in the earliest version of the Ugraparipr̥­cchā, “which lacks any ­mention of requesting 
9	
The beginning of the bodhisattva career is also referred to this way in the Abhisamayālaṃkārālokā 
(1. bodhipraṇidhicitta, 2. bodhiprasthānacitta). Cf. Binz 1980: 123–27 and 148 for other exam-
ples. In the earliest Chinese translations of Mahāyāna texts by Lokakṣema at the end of the second 
century CE, the cittotpāda is followed by three key stages: (1) the anutpattikadharmakṣānti (the 
realization of the fact that dharmas are unarisen); (2) the attainment of the stage of non-regression, 
whereupon a bodhi­sattva is assured of reaching his or her goal (avaivartika); and (3) the prediction 
(vyākaraṇa); cf. Harrison 1993: 171 and also Strauch 2010a: 43.
10	
Likewise, in the Ugraparipr̥­cchā the pāramitās are not associated with particular stages (­Nattier 2003: 
154). 
11	
Personal communication. Cf. also Skilling 2004: 151: “The aspiration to full awakening is called 
‘giving birth to bodhicitta.’ This is something more than a dry doctrine: it was, and is, a public ritual 
act, a social performance. The earliest text we know for this is the triskandhaka, to which reference is 
made in several early Mahāyāna sūtras, for example the Ugraparipr̥­cchā.” Cf. Pagel 1995: 24–26 for 
potential texts and references: “In the Vimaladattaparipr̥­cchā, a triskandhaka is cited alongside the 
Bodhisattvapiṭaka as a treatise (dharmaparyāya) the bodhisattva should retain and memorise” (Pagel 
1995: 25, italics adjusted in both citations).

=== PAGE 8 ===
8
INTRODUCTION
the Buddhas to teach.” Additionally, “in all extant versions of the sūtra the practice of rejoicing 
in the merit of others is said to precede the recitation of the triskandhaka, rather than being 
contained within it” (Nattier 2003: 121). 
Likewise, in BC 4 the invocation of Buddhas is not indicated. The text begins with a con-
templation on the benefits of freedom from all desires, which could point to the act of rejoicing 
before reciting the triskandhaka. The ritual itself could be repre­sented by section 7, where on 
the one hand a person should admonish and exhort something or someone (paribhāṣ), and on 
the other hand one should praise / salute something or someone and recommend the opposite 
(abhivad). In the first half of the paragraph (§ 7A1), the verbs have negative connotations and 
could refer to the bad deeds to be confessed and repented (svadoṣa, leading to svadaurgatya); 
in the second half (§ 7B1) they are positive in meaning and could refer to the good deeds to be 
rejoiced at (BHS svayamānuśāṃsa, leading to svasampatti). If this is done, all the fortunes that 
have been enumerated will come into existence, and finally the states of intrinsic nature will 
disappear and not rise anew. 
The repeated attribute “three” for all nouns in the lists is interpreted as referring to the three 
times, i.e., past, present, and future (see p. 157), since the times are also named in the instruc-
tions preceding the lists (§§ 7A1 and 7B1). Thus, if BC 4 is indeed connected to a tri­skandhaka 
intended for recitation, or if parts represent it, the prefix tri- would most probably refer to the 
three periods of time. This being the case, the term trikoḍ̱i in § 7A1 (4r24), translated as “three 
points of time,” might refer to the three points of time during the day or night when, according 
to the Ugraparipr̥­cchā, the tri­skandhaka is said to be performed. The following G uhae vatave 
(Skt. ubhaye vaktavyam, “both should be spoken”) in addition to other verbs related to speech 
indicates the oral character of this (proposed) ritual. However, it is not clear what exactly is 
to be done. The pronominal adjective “both” seems to point to the phrases G satahi aloehi / 
as̱atiade ca aloṇeade ca aride kerea and sata aloa / as̱atia ca aloṇea ca aṇaride kerea. Unfor-
tunately, all these uncertain words are the basis of a mystery, and as long as they are not satis-
fyingly identified, nothing definite can be said. 
Nevertheless, it becomes clear that the text deals in general with the starting point of bodhi-
sattva practice, describing in particular a certain ritual that must be performed. This ritual 
resembles the triskandhaka,12 as well as, in part, the seven-membered prayer consisting of 
verses about regretting past negative acts, rejoicing in positive deeds, and dedicating accu-
mulated virtue to the welfare of all beings. Even though BC 4 does not contain the otherwise 
usual invocation of Buddhas, common steps are the confession of unwholesome deeds and 
the rejoicing in wholesome ones. A similar confession and repentance practice is also known 
from early Chinese Buddhist texts commonly categorized as bodhisattvaprātimokṣa, such as 
the Vinayaviniścayopāli­pari­pr̥cchāsūtra.13
12	
According to the Ugraparipr̥­cchā, the triskandhaka ritual is performed by a lay bodhisattva who is 
still a beginner on the path to expiate his faults and overcome possessiveness and attachment [to the 
world], if no Buddha or member of the āryasaṅgha is “at hand” (Barnes 2012: 213). 
13	
決定毘尼經, Juédìng píní jīng, T 12 no. 325 pp. 37b1–42c10, cf. Barnes 2012 for this text and others 
related to the triskandhaka ritual, as well as Martini 2013. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
9
INTRODUCTION
1.2.2 BC 11
It is difficult to find a structure in the text of BC 11. The author seems to be loosely examining 
various topics found in BC 4, discussing them at length. The main focus, however, is a discus-
sion of different types of happiness (sukha). 
The highest forms of happiness are avasargasukha (“happiness of release”) and parijñā­sukha 
(“happiness of thorough understanding”). Elsewhere also viveka- and virāgasukha (“happiness of 
detachment and dispassion”) are named as being the most important. Other types of happiness 
that are mentioned include: aparādhīnasukha, avijñapti­sukha, [indriya]antargata­sukha, mokṣa­
sukha (“happiness that is not dependent on anything else, happiness due to non-cognition, inner 
happiness or happiness [with the senses] turned inwards, happiness of liberation”). Thus, the 
highest forms are any kind of bliss not based on something else, whether in the realm of desire, 
forms or something formless (kāma-, rūpa-, or ārūpyadhātu). 
Opposed to this is the happiness that is mixed with suffering due to sense experiences or 
desires (summarized as kāmasukha), as well as happiness due to a remedy (pratikāra­sukha) and 
happiness due to a cause (BHS upaniṣatsukha). However, as long as one abides in saṃsāra it 
seems impossible to experience viveka- / virāgasukha without traces of happiness arising from 
sensual pleasures.14 Only lokottarabhūtajñāna (superworldly true knowledge, i.e., knowing 
phenomena as they really are) enables the experience of sustained happiness or contentment. 
Given this perspective, the joy attained does not then lead to rebirth, and therefore does not 
need to be relinquished. Thus, it is important to abide in knowledge while experiencing sukha. 
The lokottarabhūtajñāna is not explicitly equated to the reali­zation of śūnyatā, but it is circum-
scribed as a way to look at all phenomena as being impermanent, having no self, being empty, 
being like a dream, not coming from anywhere or going anywhere, etc., common expressions to 
describe the illusionary character of the perceived world, which is nothing other than śūnyatā. 
In general, the aim is not the total elimination of feelings, but achieving or maintaining a 
state of bliss (comparable to that of an “arhat monk who, free from the fever of desire has en-
tered the third stage of contemplation” 15). This might involve first a shift from rather negative 
or neutral aims to a more positive aim concentrating on sukha, finally leading to imagining 
pure lands like ­Sukhāvatī or Abhirati, where only happiness prevails and one is reborn in order 
to strive for buddhahood under the best circumstances (cf., e.g., Gómez 1999: 74, 90). This 
ideal is similar to the future prospect of all kinds of prosperities presented in BC 4. It may be 
noted, however, that aiming for bliss does not contradict the principles of ­Śrāvakayāna affiliat-
ed texts, where nirvāṇa is also sometimes described as a state of bliss or supreme joy.16
14	
Cf. Drewes 2010a: 62, where he states that the Śūraṃgasamādhisūtra “repeatedly makes the point 
that avoidance of sensual pleasures is not important for bodhisattvas” (cf. also Drewes 2011: 356). 
Drewes refers to a passage in the Aṣṭasāhasrikā, where the listener is instructed that “we should 
not be surprised if a dharmabhāṇaka turns out to be devoted to the pursuit of wealth and sensual 
pleasures […] Given that Buddhist monks are traditionally not supposed to engage in the pursuit 
of sensual pleasure, it seems that this advice can only be an attempt to justify behavior that actual 
followers of the Aṣṭasāhasrikā’s dharma­bhāṇakas were likely to encounter.” 
15	
Larger Sukhāvatīvyūha § 28(38), tr. Gómez 1999: 74. Similarly: “comparable to that of a monk who 
in medi­tation has attained the state of cessation,” Larger Sukhāvatīvyūha § 82, tr. Gómez 1999: 90. 
16	
Cf., e.g., Giustarini 2006: 170. 

=== PAGE 10 ===
10
INTRODUCTION
1.2.3 BC 6
The preserved text of BC 6 is often incomplete or difficult to understand. Therefore, the follow-
ing statements are partly based on my own interpretation. The text first places what is painful 
and useless in relation to the aggregates, elements, and sense bases (skandhadhātvāyatana). It 
seems to be said that if one considers these aggregates to be permanent, that is, if one views 
­dharmas as arising and ceasing, and considers them to exist, then this causes suffering (§ 1). 
If one views ­dharmas as neither arising nor ceasing, and considers them as being like a dream 
and thus non-­existent, that is, if one understands that it is useless to hold on to them, then suf-
fering does not arise (§ 2). Thus, one should not long for the existence of aggregates, elements, 
and sense bases. If one understands that dharmas are, by their very nature, painful and useless, 
then one ultimately does not become passionate or hateful towards them. Even though at this 
point the manuscript is fragmentary (§ 3), the text seems to say that one should not be attached 
to any view at all: neither a non-existential one, whereby dharmas are without boils, thorns, 
etc., nor an existential one, whereby ­dharmas are permanent, etc. On the contrary, the correct 
mind set seems to be a concentrated state of mind in which notions are reduced to a minimum. 
Finally, there should be no mental agitation at all; then the “master’s notion of happiness” ­arises 
(§§ 4–5). It seems to be discussed whether there is an exception with respect to paligodha; 
apparently this form of desire had a special status. However, the author of our text is of the 
opinion that any form of passion (as well as, of course, any form of hatred) is to be avoided. 
1.3 Genre of the Texts 
1.3.1 Elements of Mahāyāna
Based on the praṇidhāna section, the cittotpāda and, above all, the prajñāpāramitā as the most 
important of the six pāramitās, BC  4 can be classified as Mahāyāna,17 or more cautiously 
as proto-Mahāyāna, since the designation Mahāyāna is not mentioned in the text itself and 
most probably at the time of its composition was not yet established or widely used.18 The 
17	
Cf., e.g., Skilling (2004: 151) for the distinctive indications for Mahāyāna. These are essentially 
the reading of (or listening to) Mahāyāna sūtras and the practice of the six (or ten) perfections 
within the Mahāyāna doctrine. According to Lethcoe (1977: 265, referring to the Aṣṭasāhasrikā), 
aiming for the prajñāpāramitā is a necessary condition for being on the bodhisattva path. Cf. also 
Murakami 2004: 8. However, as the evidence of BC 2 shows, the term prajñāpāramitā does not 
need to be included to make a text Mahāyāna. More important is the common basic understanding 
and calm acceptance of the fact that all dharmas are without arising (anutpattikadharmakṣānti). It 
seems that only in a second stage of development did the term prajñāpāramitā become equivalent 
to this realization of emptiness. 
18	
The earliest written evidence in Indic languages is from the third or fourth centuries onwards: (1) A 
Schøyen fragment, ca. fourth century CE (Gupta Brāhmī), mentioning the king Huviṣka having “set 
out on the Mahāyāna path,” G (*mahā)yānasamprasthito huveṣko nā(*ma rājā); Salomon 2002: 256. 
(2) Correspondingly, the Mathurā / Govindnagar pedestal inscription documents the ritual establish-
ment of an image of Amitābha in the year 26 [of Kaniṣka I] during the reign of Huviṣka, i.e., 153 
CE (cf. Schopen 1987). (3) Further, the Endere site stone inscription characterizes the king of Shan-
shan / ­Kroraina, who is most likely Aṃgoka of the middle of the third century CE, as one who had 
“set out on the Mahāyāna path,” G mahayanasaṃprastida-; ­Salomon 1999b: 3. (4) Another secular 
document on a wooden tablet from Niya (document no. 390) with the epithet mahāyānasaṃprastita- 

=== PAGE 11 ===
11
INTRODUCTION
prajñāpāramitā is nothing other than the concept of śūnyatā and the denial of any svabhāva, 
also expressed as “superworldly true knowledge” (lokottarabhūtajñāna) in BC  11. ­Further, 
while an altruistic orientation is indicated (by the statements “establish [all] beings in awaken-
ing” and “welfare for myself, welfare for others, and welfare for every living being”), it is not 
stressed as such. Additionally, the author uses typical exaggerations like “world systems [as 
numerous] as the sands of the river Gaṅgā,” which are so familiar from Mahāyāna texts. 
The mention of a bodhisattva (BC 4) does not conclusively prove a Mahāyāna ­orientation, 
since this term was already used in non-Mahāyāna texts as an epithet of the Buddha, and 
“there is evidence that the term ‘bodhisattva’ originally meant only ‘a śrāvaka who truly un-
derstands the Dharma’ rather than [someone] of a separate group” (Rawlinson 1977: 8–9). In 
fact, there seem to have been two “true” bodhi­sattvas in the early first centuries, both claiming 
that they represented the prototype of someone striving for awakening (cf. Fujita 2009: 144, 
who differentiates between the two by the designations “Nikāya bodhisattva” and “Mahāyāna 
bodhi­sattva,” with respect to the texts they are based on). Thus, the “Nikāya bodhisattva” relies 
only on the tripiṭaka and the avadānas (also called the śrāvakadharma), while the “Mahāyāna 
bodhi­sattva” adds the prajñāpāramitā sūtras, claiming that the tripiṭaka is not enough.19 In due 
course of time, the latter came to designate themselves as bodhisattva mahāsattva to make their 
position clear (cf. Williams 2009: 55). Thus, BC 4 and, based thereon, also BC 6 and BC 11 
seem to stand somewhere in the middle, being grounded in the Śrāvakayāna tradition but in-
corporating ideas that were later central to Mahāyāna texts. 
1.3.2 Elements of Abhidharma 
In addition to these Mahāyāna features, scholastic elements are evident in the texts, as for ex-
ample, the lists of contrastive pairs as well as the summaries and categories in BC 4.20 A more 
scholastic approach in general can be observed in BC 11, where logical conclusions are drawn 
in the process of argumentation (G yadi … ta avaśi …, keṇa karaṇeṇa …, ṇa ida ṭ́haṇo vijadi) 
and instructions are given. In all three texts, the literary technique of dialogue has been used 
is dated to the third or fourth century CE (cf. Salomon 1999b: 6, 10). For all of these instances, see 
Allon and Salomon 2010: 3–4. One of the earliest attestations in Chinese (possibly the earliest) is 
the trans­lation of the Pratyutpanna­buddha­saṃmukhāvasthita­samādhisūtra by Lokakṣema, 179 CE 
(see Harrison 1998: 12, for one example). Deleanu (2000: 66) dated the proto-Mahāyāna period to 
ca. 100 BCE–100 CE and the early Mahāyāna period to between the first century BCE and the fifth 
century CE. 
19	
In this context, of particular interest is a passage in the Mahāprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstra (cf. Fu-
jita 2009: 102), where “some other bodhisattvas” ask what is lacking in the śrāvakadharma and 
equate each part of their śrāvakadharma to the six pāramitās. Since the Abhidharma is described 
as “six-limbed,” it is assumed that reference is being made to the Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma (Fujita 
2009: 102 n. 7). Further­more, this Abhidharma is equated to prajñā and dhyāna, thus providing a 
connection between scholasticism and insight / meditation. 
20	
A typical feature for (early) Abhidharma texts are listings or summaries called mātr̥­kā / P mātikā. 
Normally, these texts begin with a certain list which is then explained. In the Pātimokkhasutta, the 
sequence dhammadhara, vinayadhara, mātikādhara is repeatedly mentioned, making the mātikā 
equivalent to the Abhidharma category (cf. Gethin 1992b). 

=== PAGE 12 ===
12
INTRODUCTION
for rhetorical and argumentative purposes, whereby aha (Skt. āha) introduces an objection or 
possible question (“Someone / an objector says” in the sense of “someone might say …”) and 
ta vucadi (Skt. tad ucyate) introduces the answer or explanation (“it is said [in answer]” in 
the sense of “then I would say / answer …”).21 Furthermore, the dialectic style is supported by 
­direct addresses (second person pronouns and verbs). 
Another possible scholastic feature is the term traidhātuka (BC 4), corresponding to kāma- / 
rūpa- / ārūpyadhātu (BC 11), as well as the categorizations laukika / alaukika / ­lokottara (BC 11). 
Similarly, the concept of svabhāva (BC 4) was a develop­ment of Abhidharma ­scholars (Williams 
2009: 68). As Johannes Bronkhorst has pointed out (2013), the emphasis on non-­substantiality 
(niḥsvabhāvatā) or non-existence of dharmas in—prajñāpāramitā related—Mahāyāna texts only 
makes sense if simultaneously there were convictions about the exi­stence of dharmas. This was 
the case in the Sarvāsti­vāda Abhi­dharma, which is thought to have originated in Gandhāra and 
Kashmir (cf. Willemen et al. 1998: 57, 70, 73). According to Bronkhorst (2013) a scholastic “in-
tellectual revolution” (“new Abhidharma”) took place around 150 BCE, possibly “inspired by 
the interaction between Buddhist and Indo-Greeks” that gave rise to a new perspective on the 
doctrinal material and ontological background, resulting in the concept of the emptiness of all 
dharmas,22 a key term for (at least one group of) Mahāyāna literature.23 
It is indeed striking that early Mahāyāna texts show such a strong influence of scholasti-
cism.24 In the case of BC 4 / 6 / 11 this is observed in the style and application of terms. The 
same is quite obvious in another text of the Bajaur Collection, namely BC 2, where there are 
long passages filled with listings of categories and terms revolving around the idea of the non-­
perception of dharmas, thereby circumscribing the śūnyatā doctrine (cf. Schlosser and Strauch 
2016). This indeed suggests that (Sarvāstivāda) Abhidharma was one essential precondition 
for the emergence of Mahā­yāna.25 In this early proto-Mahāyāna literature, this may be more 
visible than in later texts, where other features became prevalent.
 
1.4 Context
1.4.1 Prajñāpāramitā and Mahāyāna
Despite some clear commonalities with what later came to be labeled Mahāyāna, the gen­eral 
appearance and wording of the texts is very similar to those associated with ­basic Nikāya or 
mainstream Buddhism, suggesting a gradual reform within the traditional ­Sangha that “can 
21  	 Cf. Tubb and Boose 2007: 245–46 § 2.49.6 and § 2.50.1. 
22	
Bronkhorst 2013: “Indeed, these scholiasts may have been the first to call themselves śūnyavādins.”
23	
There could, however, also be other reasons for the development of new aspects or methods, such 
as, for example, influence from Brahmanical institutions that were restored by Puṣyamitra in the 
middle of the second century BCE (cf. Willemen et al. 1998: 102–3). 
24	
Skilling (2004: 148): “Mahāyāna sūtras may be read as records of debates and negotiations, as 
attempts to resolve contradictions and tensions in Buddhist doctrine and practice. Debates about 
dharmas and the path are reflected in the prajñāpāramitā sūtras.” Cf. Deleanu 2000: 69 for the 
“new hermeneutic approach” in prajñāpāramitā literature, or also Gómez 1999: 117. 
25	
Cf. von Rospatt 1977: 165, Willemen et al. 1998: 278.

=== PAGE 13 ===
13
INTRODUCTION
explain the doctrinal continuities between the two movements” (Deleanu 2000: 81).26 What 
seems to be the crucial distinguishing element is often the practice of the teaching of prajñā­
pāramitā, “characterized by emptiness (śūnyatā) and essencelessness or non­substantiality (niḥ­
sva­bhāvatā)” (Fujita 2009: 100). This is realized in meditation, which in the Aṣṭasāhasrikā, for 
example, is indicated by the samādhi called sarvadharma-aparigr̥­hīta or dharma-anupādāna, 
the non-­appropriation of or non-grasping at dharmas. Also BC 4 / 6 / 11 indicate that the proto-­
Mahāyāna bodhisattva path in the early first centuries—at least in the place in Gandhāra where 
these texts were produced—was primarily concerned with meditation and withdrawal from the 
senses. The path, as illustrated in these scrolls, is the practice of prajñāpāramitā as a means to 
let go, in the sense of giving up any attachments to the world.27 
Likewise, in BC 2 it is repeatedly stated that nothing can or should be perceived (G ṇa 
samaṇupaśati) or conceived (G prañayadi): no ātman, no ­sattva, etc.28 Through this non-­
perception of or non-attachment to any dharma, the practitioner attains the dharmakṣānti and 
becomes non-retrogressive. In BC 4, this analytic process is not described (since it is not the 
topic of the text), but it is included in terms like prajñāpāramitā or śūnya, or the disappear-
ance of svabhāvatā. In BC 6, terms and formulations like amaṇas̱iara (Skt. amanasikāraḥ), ṇa 
spuramaṇas̱a (Skt. na sphuranmānasaḥ), taṇua saña (Skt. tanukā saṃjñā), or vovaś̱ama (Skt. 
vyupaśamaḥ) suggest that the practice mainly consisted of bringing the mind to rest and reduc-
ing notions of the outside world. 
Based on some of the insights gained from BC 4 / 6 / 11, as well as from BC 2, it seems like-
ly that the starting point for Mahāyāna in Gandhāra was the concept of śūnyatā, an understand-
ing that all dharmas are essentially unarisen and without inherent existence, which is gained 
through mental analysis and (physical) experience during absorptive states in meditation. At 
some point the prajñāpāramitā became a key term for this insight. Early Mahāyāna texts, as 
rightly observed by John Thompson (2008: 53–54), “offer little step-by-step instruction on how 
to perfect prajñā,” but rather treat it in a theoretical / philosophical manner. “Perhaps the most 
common description of prajñā in the prajñāpāramitās is non-attachment to objects and ideas” 
(Thompson 2008: 53–54, cf., e.g., AsP 235), thus inserting śūnyatā into the practice of the 
Buddhist path as a means to an end. The same is true for the Gāndhārī manuscripts edited here. 
26	
Cf. also Rawlinson 1977: 15. Most scholars agree that early Mahāyāna, in principle, was not dis-
tinct from mainstream Buddhism (for example, Yamada 1957, 1959, Bechert, e.g., 1973, Silk 2002, 
Murakami 2004, Sasaki 2009, Fujita 2009). 
27	
Cf. Deleanu (2000: 88): “Becoming a Buddha oneself means the transcendence of all attachments 
whatsoever, […] The early arhat ideal is not so different from this but what gives Mahāyāna its 
distinctive flavour is pushing the non-attachment, emotional and cognitive, to its utmost logical con-
sequences. […] A discursive mode of thinking can no longer serve the basic purpose of attainment 
without attainment. It is here that meditative states, super-normal powers, and Buddha’s inspiration 
come to play a crucial role.” 
28	
This is reminiscent of P passan na passati in the teaching of Uddaka Rāmaputta (Wynne 2007: 46). 
Furthermore, the non-perception of the elements (earth, water, fire, air, space) in BC 2 suggests a 
relation of this kind of meditation to the element meditation of early Brahmanism (cf. Wynne 2007: 
29–31). 

=== PAGE 14 ===
14
INTRODUCTION
1.4.2 Prajñāpāramitā and Bodhisattvayāna 
The prajñāpāramitā teaching or practice and the ideal of a bodhisattva path are not necessarily 
linked to each other, as for instance was shown by Tilmann Vetter using examples from pas-
sages of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā, where the bodhisattva path is not recommended but only 
the prajñāpāramitā, “albeit not under this name,” as a kind of absorption method to “experi-
ence […] nirvāṇa here and now” (Vetter 2001: 82).29 Moreover, “the method for buddhahood 
called prajñāpāramitā is likely to have been formed after a new method of monks for a direct 
experience of release” (Vetter 1994: 1259), emphasizing a speedy attainment of awakening 
in contrast to the more difficult bodhisattva way, which was “probably regarded as taking too 
much time.” 30 It appears as if the meditation on śūnyatā was voluntary among bodhisattvas,31 
which explains the co-existence of Śrāvaka­yāna and Mahāyāna, sometimes also in one and the 
same monastery.32 Hence, a Mahāyāna adherent could and most probably had to be a member 
of a mainstream monastery / Vinaya tradition,33 but whoever was interested could practice the 
prajñāpāramitā, independent of his traditional nikāya affiliation.34 More important than his 
status was the mental attitude of the practi­tioner (cf. Tsai 2014: 266). 
If we accept the reconstruction of tribodhi in BC 4 and its explanation as referring to the 
three ways to awakening of a śrāvaka, a pratyekabuddha, or a ­samyak­saṃ­buddha (see p. 164), 
this could show that the instructions given in BC 4 are addressed to each of the three groups. If 
so, this scroll would be another piece of evidence for the prajñāpāramitā ­having been used by 
anyone who wished to follow this sort of method, which was praised as some kind of shortcut to 
awakening or simply as a method to experience nirvāṇa, that is, the contentment and appease-
ment associated with it, here in this lifetime. This would categorize BC 4 as a re­presentative of 
29	
Cf. also Fujita (2009: 114): “This means that at least in the Prajñāparamitā-sūtra the notion of 
‘Mahā­yāna’ was not equivalent to that of ‘bodhisattva vehicle.’ ”
30	
Vetter 1994: 1257 referring to a paragraph in the Aṣṭasāhasrikā, represented in the first Chinese 
translation (T 8 no. 224 pp. 426c20–21 and 428bl7–25). 
31	
Cf. Nattier (2003: 197 ff.) regarding the “absence of the rhetoric of absence” in the Ugra­paripr̥­cchā, 
thus being an example for a Mahāyāna text not being grounded on the śūnyatā doctrine.
32	
Strauch 2007/2008: 66: “[…] early Mahāyāna texts like the Ugraparipr̥­cchā clearly show that monks 
following the newly introduced Bodhisattvayāna lived together with those adherent to the traditional 
Śrāvakayāna (Nattier 2003: 81–89). Similar is the situation which can be deduced from the Pratyut­
pannabuddhasaṃmukhāvasthitasamādhi-sūtra, which ‘suggests that in some monasteries adherents 
of different movements lived together, avoiding discussing their differences (between mainstream 
and Mahāyāna, and within Mahāyāna itself) openly’ (Vetter 1994: 1265).” Cf. also Drewes 2010b: 
71 and Allon and Salomon 2010: 13 n. 45 for further references.
33	
Cf. Strauch 2007/2008: 67: “Xuanzang [600–664 CE] is reporting about the Mahāyāna monks in 
Udyāna (Swāt) […]: ‘The schools of the Vinaya traditions traditionally known among them are the 
Sarvāstivādins, the Dharmaguptas, the Mahīśāsakas, the Kāśyapīyas, and the Mahāsāṃghikas: these 
five’ (Beal 1884,1: 120–121).” 
34	
Cf. also Skilling 2004: 151 regarding the differences between Mahāyāna and Śrāvakayāna. A sig-
nificant difference was the reading of Mahāyāna sūtras, in addition to the classical tripiṭaka. Skilling 
2004: 142–43: “available scriptures of the eighteen schools allow all three options [of yānas]: it is 
one’s own decision” which one to take. 

=== PAGE 15 ===
15
INTRODUCTION
a “weak form” of Mahāyāna universalism,35 that “retains the traditional ­scenario of the three ve-
hicles,” agreeing with the other vehicles in destination but not in the path (­Nattier 2003: 175).36 
In the beginning, both śūnyatā adherents and others would have called themselves bodhisattvas 
to express their striving after buddhahood, but prob­ably in the course of time, more and more 
distinctive and distinguishing aspects came up that finally lead to a separation, generating the 
designation Mahāyāna ­(as well as the more specific appellation bodhisattva mahāsattva) in 
contrast to Hīnayāna (bodhisattva). This is likely to have taken place in the second century at 
the latest, since the term Mahāyāna is already found in the earliest Chinese translations (cf. 
­Nattier 2003: 193–97). Further­more, there are texts such as the Ratnāvalī attributed to Nāgār-
juna (second century) that discuss the differences between both parties, encouraging the reader 
to see their similarities (verse 386) and refrain from condemning the Mahāyāna if one is unable 
to accept it (verses 388, 389, 397). The need to discuss this and plead for the Mahāyāna might 
indicate that it was being differentiated and separated from mainstream Śrāvakayāna ­circles at 
this time. 
1.4.3 Mahāyāna in the Earliest Chinese Translations 
Many of the earliest translations of Mahāyāna texts into Chinese by the Yuezhi Loka­kṣema at 
the end of the second century CE 37 display an emphasis on meditation and absorption (samādhi) 
as well as on ascetic practices and forest dwelling (Williams 2009: 30, based on ­Harri­son 1995: 
65–66). Lokakṣema stayed in Luoyang between 168 or 178 and 189 CE, translating at this 
time, most prominently, the Aṣṭasāhasrikā, known as the “Practice of the Path” (道行般若經, 
Daòxíng bānruò jīng, T 8 no. 224).38 While Ān Shìgāo 安世高, a native from Parthia, was 
the first translator of Buddhist texts named in Chinese sources (having arrived in Luoyang 
35	
For the universalism of the prajñāpāramitā teaching, cf. Rawlinson 1977: 15 referring to the Aṣṭa­
sāhasrikā, where it is labeled as “beneficial for all [three] vehicles” (prajñāpāramitā sārvayānikī) 
or an­other passage where it is stated that “(Those who) want to learn the Dharma of the arhan(t) 
[…]. (Those who) want to learn the Dharma of the pratyekabuddhas […]. (Those who) want to 
learn the ­Dharma of the bodhisattvas, should listen to the Prajñāpāramitā, should study it, should 
bear it (in mind), should cultivate it” (Falk and Karashima 2012: 38–39, with regard to AsPSp 1-25 
ṣavaabhumie va śikṣamaṇeṇa ayam eva prañaparamida śodava). Also in BC 2, all three paths are 
mentioned side by side without explicitly favoring or degrading any one of them. 
36	
Nattier (2003: 175) further: “Thus even as they [i.e. early Mahāyāna sūtras] instruct the bodhisattva 
on the specifics of his or her chosen path […] they also treat the path of the śrāvaka as entirely legit-
imate. […] this nonuniversalist position was actually quite widespread, especially in the early stages 
of the production of Mahāyāna literature.”
37	
Active ca. 168–89 CE (Harrison 1987: 68). Zürcher (1991: 283): ca. 170–90 CE; Nattier (2008: 73): 
178–89 CE. 
38	
Lokakṣema is reported to have translated fourteen texts, but not all have come down to us. The ones 
­accepted as genuine by Harrison (1987, 1993: 137, 1995: 53) and Zürcher (1991) are the following, 
with those underlined for which parallels in Gāndhārī manuscripts have already been identified: 
T 8 no. 224 (Aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñā­pāramitāsūtra), T 10 no. 280 (part of the Avataṃsaka), T 11 no. 
313 (Akṣobhyatathāgatasya­vyūha), T 12 no. 350 (Kāśyapaparivarta), T 13 no. 418 (Pratyutpanna­
buddhasaṃmukhāvasthita­samādhisūtra), T 14 no. 458 (Wénshūshīlì wèn púsà shǔ jīng with affinity 
to the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa), T 15 no. 626 (Ajāta­śatrukaukr̥­tyavinodanāsūtra), T 17 no. 807 (Lokānu­

=== PAGE 16 ===
16
INTRODUCTION
in 148/149 CE), he did not translate any Mahāyāna affiliated texts.39 His compatriot Ān Xuán 
安玄 came to Luoyang in 181 CE and translated the Ugraparipr̥­cchā (T 12 no. 322),40 a Mahā­
yāna sūtra that was especially concerned with the bodhisattva path. Another Yuezhi monk and 
one of Lokakṣema’s students was Zhī Yaò 支曜, who, like his teacher, is said to have translated 
a Mahāyāna text, the “Sūtra on the Completion of Brightness” (成具光明經, Chéngjù guāng-
míng jīng, T 15 no. 630). It was quite popular even two hundred years later as an authority 
on the philo­sophy of prajñā, together with, according to Thompson (2008: 96), the Pañca­
viṃśati­sāhasrikā (T 4 no. 211, translated by *Mokṣala) and the Aṣṭasāhasrikā (T 8 no. 224, 
translated by Loka­kṣema).41 Thus, it appears that while the Ugraparipr̥­cchā that was translated 
by a Parthian (Ān Xuán 安玄) focused on the bodhisattva path and on the dānapāramitā as 
the foremost of the six pāramitās, other texts that were translated by Yuezhi (Loka­kṣema, Zhī 
Yaò 支曜) focused on prajñā / samādhi (cf. Thompson 2008: 61–81). Thus, not (only) temporal 
but (also) geo­graphical or ideological reasons might have played a role in the co-­existence 
of different strands of the bodhi­sattva path, with emphasis either on the bodhisattva ideal or 
on śūnyatā / prajñā. ­Johannes Bronkhorst (2013) has suggested that first the bodhisattva path 
emerged, with the prajñāpāramitā philosophy then added later in Gandhāra. 
1.4.4 Mahāyāna in Manuscripts Written in Gāndhārī
It is assumed that the earliest Chinese translations of Mahāyāna texts were made on the ­basis of 
manuscripts written in Kharoṣṭhī and composed in Gāndhārī or another similar Prakrit ­dialect 
other than pure Sanskrit,42 suggesting the origin or at least a stronghold of Mahā­yāna in the 
northwest.43 The so far earliest testimonies to Mahāyāna Buddhism among Gāndhārī manu­
vartanā­sūtra). Another one, T 15 no. 624 (Drumakinnararājaparipr̥­cchāsūtra) is accepted only by 
Harrison (1993: 141); cf. Nattier 2008: 76–89 for a discussion. 
39	
Ān Shìgāo 安世高 translated sixteen texts according to Zürcher 1991, all of them between ca. 150 and 
170 CE (T nos. 13, 14, 31, 32, 36, 48, 57, 98, 112, 150, 602, 603, 605, 607, 792, 1508). There is some un-
certainty regarding the last; cf. Nattier 2008, also with regard to additional uncertain text attributions. 
40	
In 181 CE according to Zürcher (1959: 34). Nattier (2003: 44) dates the Ugraparipr̥­cchā to between 
180 and 190 CE. 
41	
Zhī Yaò 支曜 (active in the late second century) was also listed by Harrison in 1987, but cf. Nattier 
2008: 94–102.
42	
For the Gāndhārī hypothesis, see Boucher 1998 and cf. Allon 2008: 170, 177; Salomon 2006: 144; 
Salomon 2008b; Salomon 2010: xxxiii. The designation of a manuscript as 胡本 húběn as opposed 
to 梵書 fànshū / 梵文 fànwén (Brāhmī / Sanskrit) could indicate that it was written in Kharoṣṭhī. For 
example, the manuscripts from which Dharmarakṣa translated the Lalitavistara (with its Arapacana 
formulary) were labeled 胡本 húběn (cf. Boucher 1998: 499–502). 
43	
Cf. Glass 2004: 138 and also Salomon 2010: xxxiii. Already Lamotte (1954: 392) and Conze (1978: 
4) observed that the prajñāpāramitā “had a great success in the North-West at the Kushāṇa period, 
and that […] that region may well be the ‘fortress and heart’, though not necessarily the ‘­cradle’ 
of the Mahāyānistic movement. The Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa (LIII v. 575) says that under Kaniṣka the 
prajñāpāramitā was ‘established’ (pratiṣṭhitā) in the North-West, but not that it originated there” 
(Conze 1978: 4). Cf. hereto Dessein (2009: 53), who says: “As the Bahu­śrutīyas were the only 
Mahāsāṃghika subgroup that resided both in the north and in the south, it is not unlikely that they 
served as an intermediary in a general process in which Mahayanistic ideas that were developed 

=== PAGE 17 ===
17
INTRODUCTION
scripts are a prajñāpāramitā text parallel to the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñā­pāramitā 44 (Falk and 
Karashima 2012, 2013), the “Bajaur Mahāyāna Sūtra” with partial parallels to the Akṣobhya­
vyūha (Schlosser and Strauch forthcoming), the *Sucintisūtra similar to and presupposing the 
Vimala­kīrti­nirdeśa with parallels to three Chinese translations (T 14 nos. 477–79, cf. Allon 
and Salomon 2010: 11, Harrison, Lenz, and Salomon 2018: 118), as well as fragments of the 
Pratyut­panna­buddha­saṃmukhāvasthita­samādhi­sūtra (Harrison, Lenz, and Salomon 2018) and 
the Samādhi­rāraja­sūtra (cf. Harrison, Lenz, and Salomon 2018: 118), all dated to the first or 
second century CE.45 Furthermore, there are several small palm leaf fragments from ­Bamiyan 
with text passages familiar from the Bhadra­kalpika­sūtra46 (Baums, Glass, and Matsuda 2016), 
the Bodhi­sattva­piṭaka­sūtra (Baums et al. 2016), the Sarva­puṇya­samuccaya­samādhi­sūtra (Harri-
son et al. 2016), the Vīra­datta­paripr̥­cchā (Melzer and Schlosser forthcoming), as well as another 
as yet unidentified Mahāyāna sūtra (Matsuda 2013), all dated to the third or fourth century CE. 
The earliest texts are all presumed to have come from Gandhāra, more precisely the ­Bajaur 
district or its neighborhood, and they all lay stress on the śūnyatā doctrine. Additionally, some 
of them include visualization techniques, such as imagining a ­buddha­field. The group of six 
pāramitās is mentioned in the prajñāpāramitā text, in BC  11, and in the fragments of the 
Bhadrakalpikasūtra from Bamiyan. In BC 4 only the prajñāpāramitā is mentioned. The notion 
of the group of six pāramitās does not coincide with the emphasis on śūnyatā, but rather rep-
resents a universal concept suitable for any bodhi­sattva path (cf. Nattier 2003: 153).47 
1.5 Similar Texts
As no direct parallel has been found for the Gāndhārī manuscripts under consideration, the 
following statements are merely references to texts that are vaguely similar with regard to their 
overall content, title, special terms, or stylistic features. 
With respect to their “background philosophy,” BC 4, BC 6, and BC 11 are connected to 
prajñā­pāramitā texts. Hence, similar phrases in other Indic languages (Sanskrit / Pali) frequently 
occur in prajñā­pāramitā affiliated literature, especially in commentaries on such literature. 
and matured in the north were transmitted to the south and vice versa. More precisely, it appears 
that it was in the north that early Mahayanistic ideas were fitted into the framework of Sarvāstivāda 
abhidharmic developments.”
44	
The Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā is also the earliest preserved Mahāyāna manuscript in Brāhmī, 
composed in (Buddhist Hybrid) Sanskrit. It is written on several palm leaf fragments found in 
­Bamiyan that have been dated to the second half of the third century CE based on paleography (late 
Kuṣāṇa Brāhmī, cf. Sander 2000b: 1 and Hartmann 2011: 31). The language and orthography point 
to a northwestern origin of the manuscript and a Gāndhārī influence (Sander 2000a: 97). 
45  	 There is another unidentified Mahāyāna sūtra with an unusually extensive paścime kāle formula (cf. 
Harrison, Lenz, and Salomon 2018: 118), but no more details are known. 
46	
“The Tibetan and Chinese traditions regard the Bhadrakalpikāsūtra as a Mahāyāna text. Therefore 
these fragments may be part of the oldest known manuscript of a Mahāyāna sūtra. However, some 
care must be taken before making this connection, as it is not certain that this text would have been 
considered a Mahāyāna work at this time” (Glass 2004: 141; cf. also ­Allon and Salomon 2010: 7).
47	
A passage in the Vibhāṣā (T 27 no. 1545 p. 892a24) claims that the group of six pāramitās were 
peculiar to the west of Kashmir (cf. Qing 2001: 23).

=== PAGE 18 ===
18
INTRODUCTION
With respect to categories, terms, and phrases, partial parallels can be found in the com-
mentaries on the Aṅguttara- and Khuddakanikāya of the Pali canon and in scholastic texts 
(Abhi­dharma­kośa­bhāṣya and -vyākhyā). Sometimes the parallels are not directly obvious, but 
can be seen in synonyms. 
Among canonical or para-canonical Pali literature discussing the proposed meditation 
practice, similarities can be observed in the techniques described in the Pārāyanavagga in the 
dialogue with the Brahmin Upasīva.48 This meditation is based on nothingness; apparently 
a co-­product of it is calm joy or delight. According to Wynne (2007: 75), it has its origin in 
Brahminic methods of absorption, with the ­difference that in the Buddhist adaptation, mind-
fulness and insight are included. The result is liberation in life, although the liberated sage, 
as well as the liber­ation itself, is beyond conceptual dualities and not expressible (cf. Wynne 
2007: 109). Wynne points to the fact that the Upasīva dialogue is quite unlike other texts in 
the Suttapiṭaka.49 Moreover, the Pārāyanavagga (Sn V) together with the Aṭṭhakavagga (Sn IV) 
and the Khaggavisāṇa­sutta (Sn I 35–75) are thought to have existed ­independently before they 
were incorporated into the Suttanipāta (Wynne 2007: 73). The Gāndhārī manu­scripts show 
that these texts were also known in Gandhāra in the first centuries CE, separately or as a group 
(cf. Salomon 2000: 14–18). So far, parallels to the Khaggavisāṇasutta (G *Khargaviṣaṇasutra), 
preserved in BL 5B, and to parts of the Aṭṭhakavagga (G *Artha­pada), preserved both in the 
Split Collection and another private collection,50 have been identified. Also a verse commen-
tary (NirdL2) edited by Stefan Baums (2009) comments on verses known from the ­Aṭṭhakavagga 
and the Pārāyanavagga, among others from a Dharma­pada or Udāna. Thus, possibly also BC 4 
might stand in some connection to the Pārāyana­vagga or at least the meditation form proposed 
in it. Already in 1976, Luis Gómez suggested that the Aṭṭhaka­vagga and Pārāyanavagga might 
be proto-Madhyamaka; there are also some indications in the Gāndhārī Saṅgītisūtra commen-
tary (SaṅgCmL) suggesting that at the time of its composition, categorical systems existed that 
bore similarities to those in prajñāpāramitā texts (cf. Baums 2009: 23, 52). But, again, since 
Mahāyāna seems to have gradually developed within a Śrāvakayāna environment, the classi-
fication into the one or the other vehicle is often not easy to determine, and there are several 
peculiarities / terms shared by both parties.51
48	
The Pārāyanavagga contains three short dialogues with Upasīva, Udaya, and Posāla showing that the 
Buddha taught a form of meditative practice based on the goal of Āḷāra Kālāma “that was thought 
to lead to a non-intellectual sort of insight” (Wynne 2007: 75). Among these dialogues, the one with 
Upasīva is particularly similar to the overall ­picture emerging from BC 4 / 6 / 11. 
49	
Cf. also Bronkhorst 2011: 171–72: “nothing in the teaching of the B. as traditionally handed down 
suggests that ordinary reality does not exist. This idea was introduced later into the Buddhist tra-
dition.” Especially the Pārāyanavagga deals with forms of meditation which are unusual for Bud-
dhism. They are described as meditations that had been taught to Brahmins. Also stylistic features 
make them different from common texts in the Pali canon (e.g., the unusual beginning “I ask”).
50	
SC 1, recto: Sn 841–44; private collection: Sn 862–909; SC 1, verso: Sn 966–68. 
51	
Within the Gāndhārī manuscripts, also some of those that have been assigned to mainstream Bud-
dhism contain possible indications of Mahāyāna, or at least references to śūnyatā and prajñā. One 
example is BL 10 (cf. Salomon 1999a: 178). For problems in identifying early Mahā­yāna texts, cf. 
Nattier 2003: 171–97, Ruegg 2004, Schopen 2005, and Pagel 2006. 

=== PAGE 19 ===
19
INTRODUCTION
With regard to its application of the six pāramitās as prerequisites to buddhahood as well 
as its apparent intermediate state between Śrāvakayāna and Mahāyāna, BC 4 is quite similar to 
the Cariyā­piṭaka of the Khuddakanikāya.52 The Cariyāpiṭaka is divided into three vaggas based 
on the first three pāramīs, i.e., dāna, sīla, nekkhamma, while the other perfections are included 
in the last vagga and in the last stanza (note that also in BC 4, only three pāramitās are named 
specifically as examples, but are otherwise referred to as part of a group of six). Regarding the 
Cariyāpiṭaka, ­Bhikkhu Bodhi (1996) has emphasized the universalism of the pāramī practice, 
stating that “the work remains well within the bounds of Theravāda orthodoxy” and that its 
“section on the perfection of wisdom has nothing more in common with the prajñāpāramitā 
literature than the core of Buddhist doctrine shared by all schools.” He adds that it “should 
be noted that in established Thera­vāda tradition the pāramīs are not regarded as a discipline 
­peculiar to candidates for buddha­hood alone but as practices which must be fulfilled by all 
aspirants to awakening and deliverance, whether as Buddhas, paccekabuddhas, or disciples.” 53 
Among texts that can be clearly attributed to the Mahāyāna, a similar work with respect 
to the pāramitās being requisites or provisions for awakening is the Bodhi­sambhāra, ascribed 
to Nāgārjuna, although it includes more mature Mahāyāna ideas.54 Judging merely from the 
­title, another text that may resemble BC 4 is the *Bodhi­sattvanidānasūtra mentioned in the 
Mahāprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstra (fascicle 38),55 but neither the original nor any translation of 
this work is extant (cf. Kimura R. 1927: 415). As already mentioned above, other works, such 
as the Ratnāvalī commonly attributed to ­Nāgārjuna, contain statements similar to ones made in 
BC 4 (as well as BC 6 and BC 11) regarding the practice of a bodhi­sattva. 
Based on Pagel (1995: 91), also some parts of the Bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra are similar in 
their content. Above all, this is the case for section 7.3, which mentions the factors impeding 
moral conduct and singles out passion (rāga) as the most devastating force. It is argued that 
the best way to overcome this peril is to see its manifestation from the perspective of emp-
tiness (śūnyatā). The whole text is much more elaborate than BC 4 / 6 / 11 and is surely to be 
dated later (the earliest material evidence are the Schøyen fragments from the third or fourth 
century CE). Chapter 11 is about the bodhisattva path, with an emphasis on meditation and 
prajñāpāramitā, also similar to the Gāndhārī texts. 
With regard to certain special terms, most notably the twenty kinds of joy (viṃśati prīti, 
BC 4 § 1), there is a Chinese text that contains analogies to the stages of a bodhisattva and to 
what a bodhisattva must do to help other beings attain awakening: the “Sūtra of the ­Garland of a 
52	
The Cariyāpiṭaka is believed to be a late addition (Horner 1975, II: vi) and has been described as 
hagio­graphical (von Hinüber 1996: 43). 
53	
“What distinguishes the supreme bodhisattva from aspirants in the other two vehicles is the degree to 
which the pāramīs must be cultivated and the length of time they must be pursued. But the quali­ties 
themselves are universal requisites for deliverance, which all must fulfill to at least a minimal degree 
to merit the fruits of the liberating path” (Bodhi 1996).
54	
T 32 no. 1660, being a translation of the South Indian monk Dharmagupta (ca. 609 CE) together with 
the commentary of Bhikṣu *Vaśitva, who apparently lived not long after ­Nāgārjuna sometime during 
the first quarter of the first millennium. 
55	
For a discussion of the author being Nāgārjuna or Kumārajīva, who was responsible for the only 
extant Chinese version, produced in 406 CE, cf. Takeda 2000 and also Deleanu 2000: 68. 

=== PAGE 20 ===
20
INTRODUCTION
Bodhisattva’s Primary Karmas” 56 (菩薩瓔珞本業經, Púsà yīngluò běnyè jíng, T 24 no. 1485).57 
A commentary on it is preserved in T 85 no. 2798 (本業瓔珞經疏, Běnyè yīngluò jíng shù). Ac-
cording to Mochizuki (1946), this was considered an apocryphal Chinese composition and not 
a translation, although it was apparently composed making use of various Central Asian sourc-
es.58 For example, it shows similarities to the Brahmajālasūtra and elements in the Gaṇḍavyūha, 
using exaggerations as a typical feature (e.g., gaṅgānadīvālikāsama…). T 10 no. 281 (菩薩本
業經, Púsà běnyè jíng) is purported to be an older version of (parts of) a text with a similar 
name,59 although some essential keywords are missing there, as for example the twenty prītis, 
which constitute the crucial link to BC 4. Apparently T 24 no. 1485 is the only parallel to this 
group of twenty kinds of joy. Unfortunately, the two texts do not match exactly, but they do ex-
amine similar topics and contain wordings in the same sequence. Another parallel is that both 
are structured with numbers, although the Chinese text is far more elaborate and detailed. It 
may have originally had the same basis—whether in text form or merely regarding the contents 
in general—and then grew gradually over the years or centuries, including material from other 
(Central Asian) sources. 
Among the earliest Chinese translations of the late second century CE, there is none with 
any striking similarities to BC 4 (or BC 6 or BC 11). Based on the overview of texts on Buddhist 
­phil­osophy from 100 to 350 CE given in Potter 1999 (Vol. VIII), similar or relevant contem-
porary texts might be T 15 no. 630, 成具光明定意經, Chéngjù guāngmíng dìngyì jīng, “Sūtra 
on the Completion of Brightness” (translated by Zhī Yaò 支曜, ca. 185 CE)60 or T 17 no. 778, 
菩薩內習六波羅蜜經, Púsà neìxí liù bōluómì jīng (*Ṣaṭpāramitāsūtra),61 with both appearing 
likely to contain elements congruent to at least BC 4. However, the Gāndhārī manuscripts do 
not explain the six pāramitās in detail, but simply refer to them without paying much attention 
to the set as such. Thus, it is unlikely that either of the two Chinese texts forms a direct parallel. 
As an example for a similar background or intention behind composing a text, the *Mahā­
yāna­śraddhotpādaśāstra, “The Awakening of Faith [in the Mahāyāna / suchness]” (T 32 no. 1666, 
大乘起信論, Dàchéng qǐxìn lùn, tr. Hakeda 1967), may be named. According to Hakeda (1967: 
25–26) the reason for the production of this text was to convince men to free themselves from 
56	
“The Pusa yingluo benye jing is often rendered as ‘Scripture of the Original Acts that Serve as Neck-
laces for the Bodhisattvas.’ A different English translation such as the ‘Scripture of the Ori­ginal 
Acts as Adornments of Bodhisattvas’ may also be possible” (Funayama 2013: 15 n. 1).
57	
I owe this information to Abdurishid Yakup, who helped me search for several keywords from BC 4 
in the Chinese canon (2011, Berlin). Later (2012, Munich), Hiromi Habata helped me to read the 
text and compare it to the Gāndhārī manuscript. Cf. also Funayama 2013. 
58	
Funayama 2013: 17; personal communication of Hiromi Habata (2012). 
59	
For more information about T 10 no. 281, cf. Nattier 2008: 138, and accordingly, especially Nattier 
2005.
60	
A treatise on the six perfections and the “Mental Concentration on Integral Illumination. The sec-
ond part contains a description of the moral and religious duties of various classes of lay devo­tees” 
(Zürcher 1991: 299, cf. Potter 1999: 95). 
61	
Ascribed to Yán Fótiào 嚴佛調 (i.e., late second century CE) according to DDB (s.v. 佛說菩薩
內習六波羅蜜經); cf. also Kimura R. 1927: 413, Hirakawa 1990: 276, Pagel 1995: 31 for cross-­
references to other Buddhist texts. 

=== PAGE 21 ===
21
INTRODUCTION
all suffering and to gain final bliss, and further, to point out the advantages [of studying the 
treatise] and to encourage them to make an effort [to attain awakening]. The focus is on such-
ness / one mind only, and it is stated that there are ten advantages gained by the practice of 
cessation (Hakeda 1967: 99). Due to the inclusion of particularly mature Mahāyāna ideas akin 
to Yogācāra philosophy (cf. Hubbard 1994), this is by no means a direct parallel, but it may be 
a further elucidation of the same topic.62
1.6 Authorship and Purpose
1.6.1 Oral / Aural Features
Based on some phono­logical and orthographic observations (p. 71), I argue that certain features 
point to an oral original, whether this was a speech, lecture or dictation of a second person that 
was written down by a scribe simultaneously or from memory, or whether it was an indepen-
dent composition, in which case the oral features would indicate a process of writing while 
speaking aloud or of noting an inner speech.63 The linguistic similarities to Niya documents 
(p. 99) suggest that BC 4, BC 6, and BC 11 are not translations, but texts that were originally 
produced in Gāndhārī. 
Rhetorical elements such as repetitions and summaries at the end of the lists make BC 4 
suitable for being presented out loud. Parallel structures, rhythmic patterns, as well as a mini­
mized vocabulary facilitate understanding and make the text catchy and easy to remember. 
Exhortations, instructions, and the use of first and second person pronouns (“I,” “we,” or “you”) 
suggest that the text addresses an audience. Also in BC 6 and BC 11 there are direct addresses 
(as for example: 6r9 “If you too understand it thus,” and 11r39 “We should become content 
by not obtaining something”). These direct addresses function as literary devices, as do the 
questions and answers, to address the reader, whether real or fictitious, listening or reading. 
Since paṇḍitas are named twice as foremost figures, they may be the target group of the texts. 
Once they are mentioned as undertaking the right practice (11r7), and once the author appears 
to regard himself as a paṇḍita (6v9). In addition, there seems to be some opposition towards 
pravrajitas, since they are apparently not doing the right practice (11r31).
62	
It is interesting to note in this context that this text is traditionally believed to have been written by 
Aśvaghoṣa (ca. 80–150 CE) and, allegedly, translated by Paramārtha in 553 CE. Modern scholars, 
however, consider it to have been composed in Chinese or even written by Paramārtha himself (cf., 
e.g., Nattier 1992: 180–81, Buswell 1990: 1–29, Ching 2009). However, the arguments brought forth 
by Jan Nattier, referring to Waley 1952: 53, are based on the single account of a story, whereby 
“during his stay at Nālandā University Hsüan-tsang [Xuánzàng 玄奘] discovered that this important 
text was unknown to his ­Indian coreligionists. And his response, we are told, was to translate the 
text into Sanskrit.” This of course does not exclude the possibility of it having been renowned some-
where else prior to the seventh century CE. 
63	
Cf, e.g., Balogh 1927: 212–20, 232 on the act of reading aloud in antiquity (paginalis locutio). Cf. also 
Falk (2011: 14) with regard to SC 1 (Arthapada) and the use of different graphemes for sa or ta: “The 
scribe obviously tried to differentiate the sounds he ­uttered when reciting the text. He found variants 
in pronunciation and tried to assign to them diacritic forms to express the differences he heard in 
writing.” For questions regarding orality and composition, cf. also Skilling 2014: 501, 511, 515. 

=== PAGE 22 ===
22
INTRODUCTION
In another passage in 6v6, reference is made to the “master’s notion of happiness” (G 
bhaṭareasa suhasaña = Skt. bhaṭṭārakasya sukhasaṃjñā), which suggests that the manuscript 
was produced after having listened to the teaching of a spiritual person (bhaṭṭāraka) and his 
instructions on the notion and development of happiness. 
1.6.2 Material-Based Features 
The scriptio continua suggests the prevalence of an oral culture (“literate orality”).64 A minor 
addition to this statement is that in BC 4 the lines are written out in full, whereas in BC 11 
sometimes the ends of lines have been left blank on purpose, apparently indicating a sort of 
conceptual junction with the beginning of the new line. In BC 6 sometimes the lines are writ-
ten out in full, while other times the end of a line has been left blank on purpose. This could 
indicate that BC 4 was the result of an oral dictation or represents written notes on a speech 
given orally, whereas BC 6 and BC 11 were written at a later stage by the scribe himself, as a 
commentary on BC 4. 
Indications of the birch-bark scrolls having been the original medium for the texts are the 
numbered sections and punctuation marks (though this is not conclusive), as well as instruc-
tions with relation to the reading process. 
1.6.3 Instructions Referring to Reading the Text
There are two statements in BC 4 and BC 6 that can be understood as instructions to the reader. 
These are: 
4r28 maje ca ṇ(*i)s̱amarth(*e) purve dukhe pac̱̄a dukhe ma(*je ca ṇi)samarthe purve aśuha 
pa(*c̱̄a a)śuha maja ṇisamartha sarvatra ithu kaṭave
“In the middle useless, before painful, afterwards painful; in the middle useless, before un-
pleasant, afterwards unpleasant. ‘[In the] middle useless,’—[when this is written,] in every 
case it should be done thus.”
6v7 yahi aji tahi sava pada kaṭava yava …
“Now every word should be done [as above]—up to …” 	 
(lit.: “When today / now, then every word / sentence has to be done—up to …”)
In 4r28, first the full sequence is given, then an abbreviation (which is added as an interlinear 
gloss throughout the text), followed by the explanation that every time one comes across the 
phrase “in the middle useless” one should add “before painful, afterwards painful” as well as 
“before unpleasant, afterwards unpleasant,” as in the full sequence. 
In 6v7, the instruction points to a previous passage in the text (cf. the discussion of this 
phrase on p. 258). 
The inclusion of the word aji for Skt. adya is also known from avadānas and pūrvayoga 
texts in the British Library Collection: 
64	
Cf. Kim 2013: 28, and also Nattier 2008: 22–23. 

=== PAGE 23 ===
23
INTRODUCTION
	
AvL1 173 likhidago aco sarvo, “Now, all is written.” 
	
AvL2 8a sarva ime avadana aca (*likhidaga), “Now, all these avadānas are written.” 
	
AvL6 18 likhidage aca avadane, “Now the avadānas have been written.”
The meaning and significance of these phrases have been discussed in Salomon 1999: 71–76 
and Lenz 2003: 102–5 (§ 7.8). In summary, remarks like this suggest “that their scribes are 
probably the authors of the texts rather than the copyists of previously written documents” 
(Lenz 2003: 102). In consequence, the dialect of such texts “provides us with examples of 
more colloquial Gāndhārī” (Lenz 2003: 105). The same seems to hold true for BC 4 / 6 / 11 with 
respect to the language, as well as to the writer being the author. 
1.6.4 References to Writing
So far, the pūrvayoga and avadāna texts of the British Library, the Khotan Dharmapada, as well 
as some Niya documents have been the only known Gāndhārī manuscripts containing likhida 
or ­likhidaga notations.65 Now, in BC 6 similar remarks are found. At several places and in vari­
ous contexts, reference is made to the writing process by using the word likhida or likhidae 
(Skt. likhita or BHS likhitaka), “has been written”: 
	
6r6 yas̱a aji hi de likhida, “as it has just been written,” probably referring to a longer pas-
sage in the previous section, similar to today’s note “see above.” 66 
	
6r11 śeṣ̱a patade likhidae, “the remainder has been written on the reserve [side of the 
scroll],” referring to the continuation of the text on the verso. 
	
6v8 likhide ithu, “thus it is written,” probably referring to the following statement. 
In the second example (6r11), reference is being made not only to the process of writing but to 
the writing material itself, the reader being instructed to turn over the scroll to continue reading 
the text. Almost the same phrase, at least the beginning of it, is found in BC 4: 
4r28 śeṣ̱ae patade hi vivaryaeṇa matra ca idara ca ahi(*va)d(*i)dava …
“For the remainder, on the reverse [side of the scroll] inversely the full measure [of seven] 
as well as the other [group] should be saluted …”
In BC 4, the remark is found in the last line of the recto and embedded directly in the text (it 
starts in the middle of the line). In BC 6, it is also located at the bottom of the recto, but in a 
65  	 G likhita is also used in the Gāndhārī Prajñāpāramitā of the Split Collection, but within the narra-
tive. For the reading Dharmaśraveṇa likhida, “it has been written by Dharmaśrava,” in the uddāna 
of the Khotan Dharmapada, cf. Baums 2014: 204.
66  	 Cf. also, for example, the note yatha upari lihita[g̱a] in Niya document no. 345. 

=== PAGE 24 ===
24
INTRODUCTION
separate line. In addition, the script looks a little ­different than the rest and is smaller, and there 
is very little space left below it on the scroll. It thus seems to have been added later, after the 
birch bark was already cut into form. The embedding of the statement “on the reverse [side] 
…” in BC 4 with reference to the content on the verso presupposes that the scribe knew what 
was about to follow, and that he also knew the physical position of his writing on the birch 
bark. This suggests that the scribe was the author of the text. (It is of course also possible that 
only the “turn the page” note was added later and that the rest was a direct transcript of an oral 
speech. This, however, seems unlikely since the statement starts in the middle of the line.)
Based on the considerations above, it seems likely that the texts were meant to be read. 
First of all, this is because statements like the instructions are not the sort of text that would be 
read out loud. Also, in BC 6 the wording is “as it has just been written” or “thus it is written,” 
and not “thus it is said” or “as it has been said earlier,” which would be more reasonable if the 
text was meant to be recited, or if it was a draft for presentation.
Moreover, the direct addresses in the second person (see above) and cross-references with-
in the text (such as “see above”) suggest that the texts were meant to be read by someone other 
than the author himself. Thus, the texts appear to have been written for an audience, and more 
precisely, an audience of readers, not listeners. 
It might even be possible that the manuscripts are letters, since at the beginning of BC 6 the 
word karitava may have been used as some kind of opening formula to a letter. This, however, 
is very uncertain (cf. annotations on 6r1 karitava, p. 238). 
1.6.5 Purpose
It is imaginable that a Buddhist scholar (paṇḍita) produced these texts promoting the prajñā­
pāramitā or śūnyatā doctrine to motivate and convince others about this new perspective. It has 
occasionally been suggested that the rise of Mahāyāna was primarily connected with the cul-
tural tool of writing.67 In the case of our three Bajaur manuscripts, it was not a dharmabhāṇaka 
producing new Mahāyānā sūtras, but rather a Buddhist practitioner writing scholastic treatises, 
possibly training for debate, either in the form of independent works in their own right or as 
part of letters. 
Another explanation for the use of scriptures, especially for Mahāyāna texts, is that some 
teachings were initially not accepted widely and thus had to be handed down in written 
form.68 This may have been another (additional) reason for writing being the chosen medium 
for transmitting the Bajaur texts. 
67  	 Drewes 2010b: 70: “What seems more likely is that early Indian Mahāyāna was, at root, a textual 
movement that developed in Buddhist preaching circles and centered on the production and use of 
Mahāyāna sūtras. At some point, drawing on a range of ideas and theoretical perspectives that had 
been developing for some time, and also developing many new ideas of their own, certain preachers 
began to compose a new type of text […] Mahāyāna preachers gave their imaginations free rein to 
expand the old Buddhist world and locate it within an infinitely more vast and glorious Buddhist 
universe with new religious possibilities for all.”
68  	 Cf., for example, an instruction in the Aṣṭasāhasrikā (AsP 221) according to which one should hurry 
to copy the sūtra and write it down as quickly as possible, because there are so many difficulties and 

=== PAGE 25 ===
25
INTRODUCTION
Still another suggestion for why early texts were written is their relevance for liturgic or 
ritual purposes.69 In BC 4, some paragraphs, such as § 6 and parts of § 7, are suitable for recita­
tion, either on a daily basis or on a single occasion, such as an inauguration ceremony at the 
beginning of a bodhisattva career. Moreover, the praṇidhāna in § 6 was perhaps not verbalized 
only once at the beginning of a bodhisattva career, but also at a later point in time to keep the 
vow alive. And § 7 may be connected to some sort of ritual of repentance and rejoicing (see 
p. 7). Through its oral performance the practitioner would confess his misconduct and “get back 
on the right track.” 70 Thus, it could very well be that the Bajaur texts have preserved rituals that 
were the basis of a (Mahā­yāna) bodhisattva’s training, also called the bodhisattvaprātimokṣa. 
As such, they should contain most if not all of the foundational practices of Mahāyāna, which 
Peter Skilling has summarized as “refuge (śaraṇa), confession of misdeeds (pāpadeśanā), re-
joicing in other’s merit (puṇyānumodanā), [and] liturgical aspiration to awakening (bodhi­citta)” 
(Skilling 2018: 124). 
Regardless of whether the scrolls were letters or scholastic treatises addressed to a larger 
audience, I consider BC 4 (as well as BC 6 and BC 11) to be the product of a person wishing to 
praise detachment through the perspective of śūnyatā as the essential prerequisite for a path to 
awakening. By following the given instructions, it would be possible for practitioners to acquire 
every possible fortune and gain the ultimate bliss of liberation. This praise appears to be a sort 
of motivational guide for the practice of letting go. The new aspect or speciality of this method 
is superworldly true knowledge (lokottarabhūtajñāna), through which nothing must be given 
up, especially not happiness or contentment. There are several indications suggesting that this 
endeavor is a task for the individual.71 Although detachment is primarily related to the senses, it 
may have also involved physical solitude to facilitate the meditation process. As such, it seems 
more than appropriate if the author wrote these texts in seclusion, later handing them to others 
in written form. 
1.7 Conclusion 
The Gāndhārī manuscripts BC 4, BC 6, and BC 11 may be characterized as autographic treatises 
written by and addressed to a practitioner on the bodhisattva path based on the prajñāpāramitā 
doctrine of the emptiness of all dharmas. This knowledge would enable the practitioner to let 
obstacles in the way of doing this. In another passage (AsP 328), the opponent claims that the sūtra 
is poetry and not the word of the Buddha. 
69	
E.g., Steinkellner 2012: “Dennoch ist dabei noch weniger an das Vorhandensein eines geschriebenen 
Kanons, etwa des Saṃyuktāgama zu denken, als zunächst an Formen der schriftlichen Nieder­legung 
der oralen Überlieferung zu verschiedenen praktischen oder rituellen Zwecken.”
70	
A similarity to confessions in the Vinaya corpus is found in § 1B3, which begins with ya mama ta 
sakṣitena (= Skt. yad mama tad saṃkṣiptena), i.e., a pronoun in the first person and the operator 
saṃkṣiptena (suggested by Richard Salomon, personal communication).
71	
In BC 4, these are the sections §§ 1B3, 3, 4, 5, 6, where there are references to the first person sin-
gular being the protagonist, as well as the imperative “establish [yourself]” at the end of the scroll. 
In BC 11, such indications include the phrase “I am released” (or perhaps “I release [myself]”) and 
terms referring to solitude (asaṃganikā and, in this context, also vivekagata).

=== PAGE 26 ===
26
INTRODUCTION
go and become detached from the world of the senses and thus to reach liberation, which is 
described as a state of permanent bliss not leading to rebirth. 
If we think of Mahāyāna having evolved as a slow and silent reform within a Śrāvakayāna 
environ­ment, with a different approach to or focus on certain topics in the Buddhist doctrine, 
the first step may have been meditative techniques in which concentrating on emptiness was 
a means for secluding oneself from the world and for developing new ways of experiencing 
liberation and happiness in this life. The process was an individualized task of renunciation, 
possibly, but not necessarily, in physical seclusion. In this respect, the bodhisattva path was a 
solitary and ascetic endeavor. The altruistic element was confined to the aim of leading other 
beings on the same way to awakening by teaching them the new doctrine, namely the knowl-
edge of what is useless and painful (and like a dream). 
The universal application of the śūnyatā concept may have evolved on the basis of the 
analytic methods of (Sarvāstivāda) Abhidharma, and this scholastic approach is still visible in 
all three of the manuscripts under consideration. In practice, the realization of emptiness was 
accomplished by insight meditation aimed at non-perception of anything whatsoever. Among 
the several theories proposed to date on the origin of Mahāyāna,72 those explaining it as a 
concentration on meditative practices combined with new ways to liberation and new ideas 
about the reality of things are confirmed by BC 4, BC 6, and BC 11. This new approach was to 
experience the bliss of nirvāṇa and liberation “here in this lifetime,” with nirvāṇa as the end 
of suffering due to attachment to the world, resulting in a deep happiness and a ­serene state of 
mind beyond words. 
72	
The most recent summaries are: Shimoda 2009, Drewes 2010a, Allon and Salomon 2010. 

