# SOURCE FILE: The Senior Manuscripts Another Collection of Gandharan Buddhist Scrolls (2003) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
# ORIGINAL PATH: d:\01_APP\Research\output\palmleaf_india_nepal\research-notes\PDF\The Senior Manuscripts Another Collection of Gandharan Buddhist Scrolls (2003) (z-library.sk, 1lib.sk, z-lib.sk).pdf
# CLUSTER: cluster_5_chronology (5. คัมภีร์โบราณที่สุด มิติภูมิศาสตร์ และการกำหนดอายุ C-14)
# PAGES: 21 | TOTAL CHARS: 69974

=== PAGE 1 ===
The Senior Manuscripts: Another Collection of Gandharan Buddhist Scrolls
Author(s): Richard Salomon
Source: Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 123, No. 1 (Jan. - Mar., 2003), pp. 73-
92
Published by: American Oriental Society
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3217845 .
Accessed: 16/06/2014 21:03
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
 .
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 .
American Oriental Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of
the American Oriental Society.
http://www.jstor.org 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 2 ===
The Senior Manuscripts: 
Another Collection of Gandharan Buddhist Scrolls 
RICHARD SALOMON 
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In 1994 the British Library acquired a collection of twenty-nine fragments of birch bark 
scrolls containing various Buddhist texts written in Kharosthi script and Gandhari (Prakrit) 
language (Salomon 1997). At the time, these were virtually the only known specimens of 
what must have been a very extensive Gandharan Buddhist literature, with the exception of 
one other manuscript, namely the famous "Gandhari Dharmapada," which had been discov- 
ered in 1892 near Khotan in what is now the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region of 
China. In 1996 the British Library/University of Washington Early Buddhist Manuscripts 
Project was constituted to study and publish this new collection. To date four volumes of 
studies of the British Library scrolls have been published (Salomon 1999, Salomon 2000, 
Allon 2001, Lenz 2003), and several further volumes are in progress. 
Since the project was inaugurated in 1996, a large amount of additional related material 
has come to light. Most of this new material is contained in three major collections. The first 
of these is the Sch0yen collection of Buddhist manuscripts, which includes, in addition to 
several thousand fragments of Buddhist texts in Sanskrit and Brahmi script, 238 small frag- 
ments in Kharosthi script and a sanskritized variety of the Gandhari language (see Salomon 
2001), written on palm leaf in folio or pothi format. Study and publication of the Kha- 
rosthi portion of the Sch0yen collection has been begun by members of the Early Buddhist 
Manuscripts Project in cooperation with Professor Jens Braarvig of the University of Oslo, 
who is supervising the publication of the Sch0yen collection as a whole (Braarvig 2000; 
Braarvig 2002; Allon and Salomon 2000; Salomon 2002a). Another collection, smaller but 
still significant, of Gandhari manuscripts on palm-leaf folios is the eight fragments in the 
Bibliotheque Nationale de France, which were found by the Pelliot expedition in the north- 
ern Tarim Basin (Salomon 1998). 
The third additional major collection of Gandhari manuscripts (the fourth in total, includ- 
ing the British Library collection), and the one which is the subject of this article,1 is the 
Among the several persons who have assisted in the preparation of this article, I am profoundly grateful, first 
and foremost, to Robert Senior, the owner of the collection, for making it available to my collaborators and me and 
for granting us permission to study and publish it. Second, I wish to thank all of the members of the British Library/ 
University of Washington Early Buddhist Manuscripts Projects working group, with whom I have been examining 
the Senior collection. Among them, Mark Allon in particular provided invaluable assistance and many important 
suggestions on the basis of his deep knowledge of Buddhist sutra literature and his careful study of the Senior 
manuscripts. Andrew Glass assisted in the paleographic and orthographic study of these texts, as well as in prepar- 
ing the figures, while Tien-chang Shih helped in locating, interpreting, and evaluating Chinese parallels for several 
of them. Paul Harrison of the University of Canterbury (New Zealand) provided advice on the interpretation of the 
relevant Chinese materials. Finally, I wish to thank the members of the conservation staff of the British Library's 
Oriental and India Office Library, especially Mark Barnard and John Burton, for facilitating access to the scrolls 
during the process of their conservation. 
1. Prior to this article, the Senior collection has only been briefly referred to in Salomon 2002b: 121, Salomon 
forthcoming: part 11.4, and Allon 2001: xiv. 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
73 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 3 ===
74 
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
Senior collection, named for its owner, Robert Senior of Butleigh, Glastonbury (U.K.). This 
collection consists of twenty-four birch bark scrolls or scroll fragments of widely varying 
size, format, and quality of preservation. Like the British Library scrolls, the Senior scrolls 
were found inside an inscribed clay pot (described below in part 2) whose original prove- 
nance is not known with any certainty, but which is believed to have come from one of the 
several stupa sites in and around Hadda, near Jalalabad in eastern Afghanistan. After being 
unrolled and conserved by the staff of the British Library's India Office and Oriental Col- 
lections, the scrolls were found to contain varying amounts of textual material in Kharosthi 
script and Gandhari language (except for one scroll, no. 6, which proved to be blank). Sev- 
eral of the Senior scrolls, such as nos. 5, 19, and 20, are complete or nearly complete, in 
contrast to the British Library scrolls, all of which were more or less fragmentary. 
The owner of the collection has generously agreed to put it at the disposal of the Early 
Buddhist Manuscripts Project for study and publication, and this work is now in progress. 
Following this article, which is intended to introduce the Senior collection as a whole, the 
project staff plans to begin publishing texts from the collection in the Gandharan Buddhist 
Texts series as soon as possible. The first volume on the Senior manuscripts will contain a 
detailed overview and catalogue of the collection as a whole (analogous to Salomon 1999 
for the British Library collection), plus sample editions of one or more of the texts con- 
tained therein. 
2. THE INSCRIPTIONS ON THE POT AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS 
FOR DATING OF THE MANUSCRIPTS 
Like the British Library scrolls, the Senior scrolls were found in a clay jar with a Kha- 
rosthi inscription. The inscription on the pot that contained the British Library scrolls (British 
Library pot D; Salomon 1999: 151-54, 214-17) was of great importance for establishing a 
likely sectarian affiliation of the manuscripts (ibid., pp. 166-78), since it refers to a gift to 
members of the Dharmaguptaka school (dhamaiteana parigrahami), but it was undated. The 
inscription on the Senior pot, conversely, contains no sectarian reference (see also part 6 
below), but is dated in the year twelve of an era which is unspecified but which, as ex- 
plained below, can safely be identified as the Kaniska era. The inscription thereby provides 
an important clue to the dating of the accompanying manuscripts. 
The Senior pot actually consists of two parts. The pot proper (fig. 1) is a large spherical 
vessel measuring about 35 cm in height and 30 cm in diameter, generally similar in form to 
the five inscribed pots in the British Library (Salomon 1999: 183-224), including the one 
(D) that contained the British Library scrolls. The second part is a smaller, cup-shaped lid 
(fig. 2), 13.8 cm high, which fits over the mouth of the jar. Both parts are inscribed with 
essentially the same text, but the version on the lid is abbreviated at various points. The 
black ink in which the inscriptions are written is badly faded, at some points illegible or 
even almost invisible to the naked eye. The reading of the inscription was facilitated by the 
use of an alcohol spray, which briefly enhances the visibility of the ink without damaging 
it, but even so many of the letters remain uncertain or illegible. The readings2 and interpre- 
tations that follow are at this point still provisional; a more detailed study of them will be 
presented in the projected survey volume on the Senior collection referred to above. 
2. Incomplete, damaged, or uncertain syllables are noted in square brackets; illegible syllables are indicated by 
a question mark; and contextual reconstructions of lost or illegible syllables are given in parentheses, with asterisk. 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 4 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
FIG. 1. The jar in which the Senior scrolls were discovered. 
FIG. 2. The lid of the jar in which the Senior scrolls were discovered. 
75 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 5 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
Inscription 1, on the pot: 
1. [sa]ba[tsa]ra [ba](*da)[sa](*mi) ma[se] a[vadu]nake sa[ste]hi (*paca)hi i[sa] (*ksuna)mi 
[prati]tha[vi]? [matrapi]tra-p[uya]e sarva[satva]na [p]u(*ya)[e] 
2. r(*o)hanasa masumatraputrasa 
In the year [twelve], in the month Avadunaka, 
after (*five) days; at this time [this] was estab- 
lished in honor of [his] father and mother, in honor of all beings; [donation] of Rohana, son of 
Masumatra. 
Inscription 2, on the lid: 
[sa]batsara 10 [2] mas[u] a[vadu] saste 4 1 ? ? ? ? ? rohanena masumatraputrena3 
thu[ba]m[i] sava[satvana pu](*ya) 
Year 12, month Avadu[naka], after 5 days, (*established?) by Rohana, son of Masumatra, in the 
stupa, in honor of all beings. 
Although the date is only partially legible in each of the two inscriptions, it can be com- 
pletely reconstructed by combining the legible portions of each. The year date is given in 
inscription 2 in figures (presumably in order to save space on the smaller surface on which 
it is written) as 10-2, that is, the year 12 of an unspecified era ([sa]batsara). This en- 
ables us to reconstruct the partially legible year number written in words in inscription 1 as 
ba(*da)sa(*mi), "twelve," confirming the date. The month name, abbreviated in inscription 
2 as a[vadu], is spelled out in full in inscription 1 as a[vadu]nake, that is, the Macedonian 
month Audunaios (Aid6uvacio). The day number given in words in inscription 1 is illegible 
except for the instrumental/locative plural ending -hi, but the corresponding numerical fig- 
ures in inscription 2 are legible as 4-1, that is, 5, so that the illegible word in 1 can be recon- 
structed as (*paca)hi. 
Thus the pot was dedicated on the fifth day of Avadunaka/Audunaios in the twelfth year 
of an unspecified era. This era can be identified as that of Kaniska on the basis of the dating 
formula, which is typical of Kaniska-era dates. The expressions sastehi "day[s]" and isa 
ksunami4 "at this time" or "on this date," which are of Iranian rather than Indic origin,5 are 
typically found in the dates of Kharosthi inscriptions attributable to the Kaniska era. In the 
Wardak inscription, for example, dated to the [Kaniska] year 51 during the reign of Hu- 
viska, the month date reads masye arthamisiya sastehi 10 4 1 "in the month Arthamisiya 
[Artemisios], after fifteen days" (Konow 1929: 170). 
Several other inscriptions contain dates attributable to the Kaniska era which are very 
similar in phrasing and format to the date on the Senior pot. Particularly relevant is the 
"Hidda inscription of the year 28" (Konow 1929: 157-58; Konow 1935), which, like the 
Senior pot, was also written on a clay jar (now lost), and which was found at "Hidda" (i.e., 
Hadda), reportedly also the findspot of the Senior pot. Its date reads sambatsarae atha- 
visatihi 20 4 4 mase apelae sastehi dasahi 10 isa ksunammi "in the year twenty-eight, 28, 
3. After this word is inserted a monogram, partly visible at the left side of fig. 2, which seems to consist of a 
combination of several Kharosthi syllables but which cannot be clearly interpreted. It may be the name or symbol of 
the stupa referred to by the following word thubami. The same monogram also is written twice at the end of the first 
line of inscription 1. At the end of the second line of inscription 1 there is also a different, larger monogram, which 
is partly visible in fig. 1 at the left. 
4. This word is only partially legible in inscription 1, but the reconstruction (*ksuna)mi is quite secure on the 
basis of parallel formulae in many similar inscriptions. 
5. On the etymology and use of these terms, see Konow 1929: lxxiv and 152. 
76 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 6 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
77 
in the month Apelaa [Apellaios], after ten days, 10; at this time .. ." Another similar dating 
formula appears in the "Box-lid inscription of the year 18" (Konow 1929: 151-52), which 
is written on the lid of a brass casket, also now lost. Its provenance is unknown, but it may 
well have also been found at Hadda or a nearby site, since, like the "Hidda" inscription, it 
was found by Charles Masson who explored this area in the 1830s. Its date is read by 
Konow as sam 10 4 4 masye arthamisiya sastehi 10 is[e] ksunamm(r)i "Year 18, in the 
month Arthamisiya [Artemisios], after 10 days; at this time ..." 
The use of Macedonian, as opposed to Indian, month names is also characteristic of dates 
from the Kaniska era, as in the examples cited above,6 although Macedonian months do also 
sometimes occur in earlier inscriptions such as the Taxila copper plate of Patika (Konow 
1929: 28), dated in the month Panema = Panemos. All in all, there can be little if any doubt 
that the year twelve of the inscriptions on the pot which contained the Senior scrolls refers 
to the Kaniska era. This means that the pot was dedicated either around A.D. 90, if one sub- 
scribes to the theory that the Kaniska era is identical to the Saka era of A.D. 77/78, or at some 
time in the first half of the second century, following the several proposals, nowadays 
favored by an increasing number of specialists (see, e.g., Cribb 1999, Falk 2001), which 
would put the beginning of Kaniska's reign sometime in or around the first quarter of the 
second century. Thus, the best estimate for an absolute date of the Senior pot would prob- 
ably be around A.D. 140. 
We can reasonably assume that, unlike the case of the British Library scrolls, the inscrip- 
tions on the Senior pot are contemporary with its deposit, and hence with the deposit 
(though not necessarily the composition) of the scrolls it contained. The undated inscrip- 
tion on the British Library pot referred to its original donation, presumably as an everyday 
utensil, to a Dharmaguptaka monastery, while its reuse as a container for the ritual burial of 
sacred texts was evidently secondary and took place at some later date (Salomon 1999: 152). 
The inscription on the Senior pot, on the contrary, refers to the ritual "establishment" of the 
pot in a stupa, as expressed by the word [prati]tha[vi]? in inscription 1, which can be re- 
constructed as pratithavi(*da) or the like.7 
It is also noteworthy that, whereas the similar Hidda inscription of the year 28 mentioned 
above labels the object being established by the donor in the stupa as "bodily relics" (scil. 
of the Buddha; pratistapita sarira ramaramnami thubami samghamitrena navakarmiana), 
as is typical of inscriptions of this type, the inscription on the Senior pot lacks this or any 
corresponding term. The nominative subject of the verb "established" (pratithavi(*da)) is 
unstated, implying that the thing being established was either the pot itself, or perhaps 
rather its contents, namely the manuscripts. 
With regard to the date of the texts, then, we can be confident that the inscription on the 
pot is contemporaneous with their interment, and this gives us a relatively firm terminus 
ante quem for the manuscripts themselves: they were buried, most likely, around A.D. 140. 
The question then arises of how old the scrolls were at that time. The fact that at least some 
of them were intact and in good condition at the time of their burial (see below, part 3) sug- 
gests that they were not very old. Although we have no way of determining their age at 
interment with any degree of precision, it seems safe to say that we are dealing with years 
or at most decades, rather than centuries. It is even possible that the scrolls were new when 
they were buried, having been drawn up for the express purpose of being ritually interred 
6. See also the list in Fussman 1994: 28-29, n. 72. 
7. This or a similar word is presumably also to be reconstructed for the sequence of four or five illegible syl- 
lables in inscription 2. 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 7 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
(as discussed in part 3). In any case, all of this adds up to a strong likelihood that the Senior 
scrolls were written, at the earliest, in the latter part of the first century A.D., or, perhaps 
more likely, in the first half of the second century. 
This would make the Senior scrolls slightly but significantly later than the scrolls of the 
British Library collection, which have been provisionally dated to the first half of the first 
century (Salomon 1999: 141-55, esp. 154-55). Thus the Senior scrolls may be roughly 
fifty to one hundred years younger than the British Library scrolls. Some tentative confir- 
mation of this dating has been found in preliminary readings of the scrolls, which seem to 
show a somewhat greater tendency towards elision of original (Old Indo-Aryan) intervo- 
calic dentals8 than do the British Library manuscripts. For example, in the Senior scrolls 
the equivalent of Buddhist Sanskrit anyatara- / Pali aiiatara- "some, a" is regularly 
spelled aieara-, as in line 15 of the sample text from Senior scroll 20 presented below in 
part 6. Similarly, in Senior scroll 2, which contains the beginning of a Gandhari version of 
the Sramanyaphala-sutra (see part 3), the equivalent of Pali pasldeyya "may have faith in" 
(Digha-nikaya I 47.14)9 is prasiea (11. 19 and 20). This contrasts with the situation in the 
British Library scrolls, where the elision of original intervocalic dentals occurs in only a 
very few cases (Salomon 1999: 126).10 Certain features of the script (see fig. 4) also point 
toward a similar dating, as discussed further in part 5 below. Although it remains to be seen 
whether further study of the Senior collection as a whole will confirm this pattern, these 
gleanings do provide provisional confirmation of a somewhat later date for the Senior 
manuscripts as compared to the British Library scrolls. 
3. CHARACTER AND CONTENTS OF THE COLLECTION 
The Senior collection is superficially similar in character to the British Library collection 
in that they both consist of about two dozen birch bark manuscripts or manuscript frag- 
ments arranged in scroll or similar format and written in Kharosthi script and Gandhari lan- 
guage. Both were found inside inscribed clay pots, and both are believed to have come 
from the same or nearby sites, in or around Hadda in eastern Afghanistan. But in terms of 
their textual contents, the two collections differ in important ways. Whereas the British 
Library collection was a diverse mixture of texts of many different genres written by some 
two dozen different scribes (Salomon 1999: 22-55, esp. 22-23 and 54-55), all or nearly all 
of the manuscripts in the Senior collection are written in the same hand, and all but one of 
them seem to belong to the same genre, namely sutra. Moreover, whereas all of the British 
Library scrolls were fragmentary and at least some of them were evidently already damaged 
and incomplete before they were interred in antiquity (Salomon 1999: 69-71; Salomon 
2000: 20-23), some of the Senior scrolls are still more or less complete and intact and must 
have been in good condition when they were buried. 
Thus the Senior scrolls, unlike the British Library scrolls, constitute a unified, cohesive, 
and at least partially intact collection that was carefully interred as such. Therefore, the hy- 
pothesis that was proposed in Salomon 1999: 69-86 to account for the circumstances of the 
contents and disposition of the British Library collection, namely that it was a ritual burial 
of randomly collected "dead" manuscripts, it is not applicable to the new collection. This 
8. See also part 5 for further discussion of the treatment of original intervocalic dentals. 
9. All citations of Pali texts in this article refer to the volume, page, and line numbers of the Pali Text Society 
editions, unless otherwise indicated. 
10. One of the few examples of elision of dentals cited there, nai- for nadi- in British Library fragment 1, was 
based on an incorrect preliminary reading and should now be disregarded. 
78 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 8 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
79 
may or may not mean that the aforementioned explanation of the British Library collection 
is wrong; for it is not yet clear what the intention of the Senior deposit may have been, and 
therefore whether it should be understood in terms similar to or different from the British 
Library group. Hopefully, this will become clearer in the course of further study of both 
collections. But it is certain that, in terms of its overall contents and character, the Senior 
collection differs significantly from its predecessor, for whatever reasons. 
As noted above, all but one of the Senior scrolls seem to contain sutra texts. To date, def- 
inite textual parallels have been located for nine of the sutras on the Senior scrolls, six of 
which are found in the Pali Samyutta-nikdya and/or the Chinese Samyuktagama (Za ahan 
jing PlA[Jnlr). For example, Senior scroll 5 contains four short sutras. Of these four, no 
direct parallel has been located for the first, although it does have partial parallels in both 
the Samyutta- and Ahguttara-nikayas. The second sutra on the scroll is parallel to the 
Natumhaka-sutta (1) in Samyutta-nikaya III 33-34 and Za ahan jing (T 99) sutra no. 269. 
The third sutra is parallel to the first Kulaputtena dukkha-sutta (Samyutta-nikdya III 179 = 
Za ahan jing sutra no. 47), and the fourth to the Vasijatam- or Nava-sutta (Samyutta-nikaya 
III 152-53 = Za ahanjing sutra no. 263). Many of the other Senior texts for which parallels 
have not yet been located are, like those mentioned above, short sutras for which the most 
likely source for parallels should be the Pali Samyutta-nikdya and its parallel collections in 
Sanskrit and Chinese, and it may be hoped that at least some more such parallels will even- 
tually be located in these texts. 
Although the largest number of parallels for the sutras in the Senior collection are in the 
Samyutta-nikaya and the corresponding collections in Sanskrit and Chinese, there are at 
least three texts for which parallels appear in other parts of the previously known Buddhist 
canons. These are: 
1) Senior scroll 12, containing a sutra parallel to the Culagosihga-sutta of the Pali 
Majjhima-nikaya (I 205-11) and the Niujue suoluo lin jing +-t t&H < of the Chinese 
Madhyamdgama (Zhong ahan jing [J@G'4; T 26.1: 729b26-731a27, sutra no. 185). 
2) Senior scroll 2, containing a suitra parallel to the Samaiinaphala-sutta of the Pali 
Digha-nikaya (I 47-86), the Sramanyaphala-sutra of the Sanskrit Dirghagama (Hartmann 
2002: 139, 147, and the Shamen guo jing &Vr & of the Chinese Dirghdgama (Chang 
ahan jing T:&[4; T 1.1: 107a18-112c19, sutra no. 17). 
3) Senior scroll 14, containing a portion of the introductory section and most of the first 
chapter (the recitation of Mahakasyapa) of a text corresponding to the Anavatapta-gdtha. 
The Anavatapta-gatha, a poetic text (not a sutra), is also known in Sanskrit, Tibetan, and 
Chinese versions (Bechert 1961: 12-15), as well as in another Gandhari version among the 
British Library Kharosthi fragments (Salomon 1999: 30-33, 43, 138-39). 
The identification of these three texts shows that the Senior scrolls as a whole cannot 
be described as a collection of Samyukta-type sutras, despite the predominance of parallels 
with the Samyutta-nikaya and analogous texts. While it is conceivable that a text corre- 
sponding to the Culagosihga-sutta, though classed as a Majjhima sutta in the Pali canon, 
might have been considered a Samyuktasutra in other canons, this could hardly be the case 
for the Sramanyaphala-sutra, which in view of its length could hardly be construed as any- 
thing other than a Dirgha sutra. Senior scroll 2, which is quite well preserved and nearly 
complete with seventy-three lines of writing in total (recto and verso), covers only the 
introductory portion of the Srdmanyaphala-sutra, concluding at the point at which King 
Ajatasatru encounters the Buddha. Thus the complete text of this Gandhari version of the 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 9 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
Sramanyaphala-sutra would have covered several scrolls, so that the Gandhari version of 
this sutra, like those in other languages, would certainly have been a "long" sitra. 
Moreover, the presence of a partial text of the Anavatapta-gatha creates some doubt as 
to whether the collection was even necessarily composed of sutras alone. The Anavatapta 
does not occur in any of the sutra collections in other Buddhist canons, but rather is pre- 
served either as an independent text, as in the Chinese translation by Dharmaraksa (Fo 
wubai dizi zishuo benqi jing {H,o-F- 
g<i~.; 
T 199.4: 190al-202a15) and in the 
British Library Gandhari version (Salomon in progress), or as imbedded in the Mulasarva- 
stivada-vinaya (Wille 1990: 65-107). The Anavatapta consists of a series of recitations in 
verse by the principal disciples of the Buddha (thirty-six in all in the Vinaya version of the 
text), each of whom reveals his own karmic history. Although there is no evidence that the 
Anavatapta-gatha was considered to be a sutra in any other of the Buddhist traditions, it is 
still conceivable that it could have been so classified in the Gandharan tradition represented 
in the Senior scrolls. But even if this were the case, it would have to have belonged to the 
"long" category since, as in the case of the Sramanyaphala-sutra scroll, the Senior Ana- 
vatapta-gatha manuscript seems to be the first part of a long text which, if complete, would 
have comprised a large number of scrolls. 
Thus the Senior collection, as far as its contents have been analyzed to date, consists 
mostly of sutra texts, especially ones that correspond to sutras of the Samyukta category in 
other Buddhist canons, but also sutras of the Dirgha and Madhyama class, as well as one 
text (the Anavatapta-gatha) which in other canons is not classed as a sutra. It is therefore 
uncertain whether the Senior collection as a whole can be considered as a group of sutras, 
but this is still at least a possibility, and it is hoped that detailed studies of the manuscripts 
will eventually clarify this question. 
But whatever the rationale of the contents of the group, it is clear that it represents a 
unified, organized collection. This is proven by the presence of two scrolls, numbers 7 and 
8, which seem to constitute a sort of guide or index to the collection as a whole. Scroll 8 
(fig. 3) contains six lines of writing, the first five of which include the opening words or key 
phrases of various sitras. Some of these key phrases clearly correspond to sutras on other 
scrolls in the Senior collection. For example, the end of the third and the entire fourth line 
on scroll 8 read ka[da] ? [a.h.] /// [ka]dara maranasanasahaga kadara aharapadikulasaia 
kadara savaloga anaviragadasa[n.] ///, which directly corresponds to the four main topics 
of the first of the four sutras on scroll no. 5. The following text on the fifth line of scroll 8 
reads [j.n.sa] bhiksave pasasa asavana ksao vad[e]mi na ajanada kasa janada ka[sa] 
pasada, corresponding to the beginning of the fourth sutra on scroll no. 5. The intervening 
second and third sutras on scroll 5 are not cited on the index scroll 8, but they are men- 
tioned on the other index scroll (no. 7), which is a longer text of twenty lines. Thus line 15 
of scroll 7 begins 1 sadhasa bhiksave kulaputrasa sadhae agarada spanagario (sic) par- 
vayidasa, etc., which corresponds to the beginning of the third sutra on scroll 5, sadhasa 
bhiksave kulaputrasa sadha akaraspa ?, etc.; and the following line (16) of index scroll 7 
has 1 ta ki maniasi bhiksave yo himasa jedavane sahakathapalasap., etc., corresponding to 
a passage in the second sutra on scroll 5, sayasavi yo himaspi jedavane trinakathasaha- 
patrapalasa, etc. 
Thus the relationship between these two index scrolls and the rest of the scrolls in the 
Senior collection is complex and not yet clearly understood. The text scroll 5 has four su- 
tras, the first and last of which are enumerated on index scroll 8, while the second and third 
are listed (but in reverse order!) on index scroll 7. Many, but by no means all of the other cita- 
tions on the index scrolls correspond to texts on the other scrolls. For example, the second 
80 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 10 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
FIG. 3. Senior scroll 8. 
81 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 11 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
citation on line 1 of index scroll 8, sata bhiksave mahaparadaha nama nire, refers to the 
second sttra on scroll 20, the beginning of which is presented below (part 6) as a sample 
text; the brief notation gosigo in the first line of index scroll 7 presumably refers to the 
Ciilagosihga-sitra in scroll 12; and the citation 2 bhayava vedutalae viharadi, etc. in line 
17 of scroll 7 refers to the beginning of the sitra on Senior scroll 13, which corresponds to 
the Veludvareyya-sutta of the Pali Sam yutta-nikaya (V 352-56). 
But in many other cases, the citations on the index scrolls apparently cannot be corre- 
lated with the other surviving fragments of the collection. This is the case, for example, 
with the third citation on the first line of scroll 8, ya bhiksave dukha ca nid. ///, and also 
with a large number of the citations on the longer index scroll 7, for example, the enigmatic 
3 upalo oma musalo ama (1. 9). There are also several cases in which extant scrolls in the 
collection do not seem to be referred to in either of the index scrolls. This is the case, for 
example, with the Sramanyaphala scroll (no. 2), for which no citation in the indices has 
been located. 
In other instances, there are partial but imperfect correspondences between the index 
scrolls and the text scrolls, as in the six references to texts called anodatie in lines 2 and 3 
of index scroll 8. This word evidently refers to chapters (Gandhari anodatie = Skt. *ana- 
vataptika) of the Anavatapta-gathd, and each anodatie citation is linked to the name of one 
of the narrators. But the name of Mahakasyapa, the narrator of the surviving Anavatapta 
fragment in scroll 14, does not occur in the list on the index scroll, which begins with 
sastarasa anodatie (*sa)[rip]u[tr.sa] a[nud.tie] "The Anavatapta recitation of the Teacher; 
the Anavatapta recitation of Sariputra," etc. Moreover, it is clear that Mahakasyapa's nar- 
ration is the first one in the text, not only in the other versions of the Anavatapta but also 
in Senior scroll 14 where it immediately follows the introductory portion; and in all of the 
extant complete versions of the Anavatapta the Buddha's (sastarasa) recitation is the last, 
rather than the first as listed here in the index scroll. Thus it is not clear exactly how the ano- 
datie citations in index scroll 8 correspond to the fragmentary text of the Anavatapta pre- 
served elsewhere in the collection, although there must be some connection between them. 
In view of these problems, it is not entirely clear what the purpose or function of the 
index scrolls was. To some extent they resemble the familiar uddanas or mnemonic sum- 
maries that are widespread in Buddhist canonical literature, but they also differ from tradi- 
tional uddanas as seen in Pali, Sanskrit, and Gandhari texts in various respects-for 
instance, in that they are not in verse. It has, however, already been noticed that the princi- 
ples of composition of uddanas in Gandhari texts are somewhat different from those of Pali 
and Sanskrit (Salomon 2000: 33-37), so it is still not impossible that these scrolls could rep- 
resent something analogous to an uddana. 
Alternatively, the index scrolls might be understood as sort of a table of contents, serv- 
ing as a guide or label to a set of scrolls that constituted the Senior collection; that is to say, 
they may have been something more analogous to a modern library catalogue than to the 
traditional mnemonic uddana. Yet another possible explanation1' is that they were an in- 
formal outline or set of notes that were jotted down in advance by the scribe who had been 
assigned to write out the texts that comprise the collection. This theory would provide at 
least a partial explanation for the diverse and somewhat unsystematic character of the in- 
dex scrolls, in which, for example, the four sutras on scroll 5 are referred to in two different 
places and in a different order from that in which they actually appear in the text scroll. 
According to this theory, the scribe may have been employed by or on behalf of the donor 
Rohana Masumitraputra whose name is recorded in the inscription on the pot that con- 
11. This hypothesis was proposed by Mark Allon. 
82 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 12 ===
SALOMON: 
The Senior Manuscripts 
83 
tained the scrolls, who commissioned the copying and interment of the scrolls as a pious 
donation. 
The last line of the index scroll 8 provides an important clue to the scope and interpreta- 
tion of the collection as a whole. This line, which is set off from the first five lines by a large 
blank space, reads in part: sarvapida sutra pacapacaisa 20 20 10 4 1 "In all fifty-five, 55, 
sutras." Here we have a clear reference to a discrete compilation of fifty-five sutras, which 
presumably corresponds, at least in part, to the manuscripts in the Senior collection as we 
have them. This passage is followed by a set of references to various texts or groups of texts, 
each preceded by the word sadha "with," perhaps in the sense of "together with, including": 
sadha dharmadasena sadha tasagadavagena sadha spadiihaniena sadha an[oda.i] ? ///. 
The references of these citations are for the most part not clear, although some of them may 
correspond to texts found elsewhere in the collection; for example, the last, incomplete item, 
sadha an[oda.i] ? /// presumably refers to the Anavatapta-gathd or some part thereof. This 
seems to confirm the suspicion, mentioned above, that the Anavatapta-gathd might have 
been considered as a sutra in the Gandharan tradition represented by the Senior scrolls. 
Despite the many uncertainties about the details, there is no doubt that the Senior collec- 
tion is a coherent set of texts, in contrast to the randomly compiled British Library scrolls. 
The exact character and nature of the Senior group remains largely obscure, but at the cur- 
rent stage of our understanding the most likely interpretation of the collection is that it con- 
stituted an anthology of important or representative Buddhist texts, consisting mainly if not 
completely of sutras. Selective anthologies of roughly similar scope, that is, consisting of a 
few dozen sutras, are attested in two Chinese translations which are probably attributable to 
the early translator An Shigao; these are the Zajing sishisi bian 
,' E~f- Eh containing 
forty-four sutras from the Ekottarikagama (imbedded within T 150A, Qi chu san guan 
jing -Lt__- W ; see Harrison 1997) and the smaller text of the Za ahan jing WFP"'!f 
(T 101) with twenty-seven Samyuktagama sutras (Harrison 2002). 
There is also a possibility that the fragment of a series of Ekottarikagama-like sutras in 
the British Library Kharosthi collection was part of a similar short anthology of sutras, as 
opposed to a complete Ekottarikagama, although this cannot be conclusively proven on 
the basis of the surviving portion of the text (Allon 2001: 22-25). Thus there is now some 
reason to believe that sutra anthologies of this type were popular in Gandharan Buddhist 
literature of this period, and that such Gandharan texts, or their descendants, may have been 
the archetypes of the similar anthologies translated, apparently, by An Shigao. If this is cor- 
rect, the Senior scrolls may represent a sutra anthology of this or some similar type, though 
for the time being this is only a working hypothesis which remains to be confirmed or con- 
tradicted by further study of the collection. 
Finally, the first entries in each of the index scrolls may also hold some clues to the over- 
all character of the compilation. Scroll 7 begins with silakadhe ? dukhakadhio, while the 
first entry on scroll 8 is trikadhao dharmapaiao (corresponding to Sanskrit *triskandhako 
dharmaparyayah). Although the significance of these notations and their relationship to the 
other scrolls are not yet clear, their prominent position at the head of the two index scrolls 
suggests that they have some special significance, perhaps indicating that the anthology as 
a whole was divided into three sections called kadha (Skt. skandha). 
4. FORMAT OF THE TEXTS 
Although the Senior scrolls are broadly similar to the British Library scrolls in their 
overall format, there are some important differences in the details of their construction, for 
instance, in their length. Although none of the British Library scrolls is preserved in its 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 13 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
entirety, some of the surviving fragments are quite large, and textual correlations have 
made it possible to estimate that some of them could have originally been as long as about 
230 to 250 cm (Salomon 1999: 89). The Senior scrolls, in contrast, seem to be much 
shorter, at least to judge from the more complete specimens. Senior scroll no. 2, for ex- 
ample, which is more or less complete, measures only 49 cm in length and 14 to 15 cm in 
width. Another of the better preserved scrolls, no. 20 (fig. 5), is even smaller, at 19.5 cm 
long and 21 to 22 cm wide. Thus the Senior scrolls belong to the short, wide "small format" 
type of scroll which was also represented by a few of the fragments in the British Library 
collection (Salomon 1999: 98-100). 
The Senior manuscripts also differ from the British Library scrolls in their arrangement 
of text units. In the British Library collection, most of the scrolls contained one text, or one 
part of a long text which was divided over a set of several scrolls (Salomon 1999: 90-91). 
A few of the British Library scrolls contained two texts, but in such cases the second text 
was evidently added on secondarily at a later date by a different scribe who wished to 
make use of the blank space on the verso of a scroll which had originally only been in- 
scribed on one side (ibid., pp. 87-88). Among the Senior scrolls too there are several cases 
in which one scroll corresponds to one complete text (e.g., nos. 12 and 19), but there are 
also several scrolls containing two or more independent sutras written by the same scribe 
at the same time. Senior scroll no. 5, for example, contains four separate sutras, as we have 
seen already. 
There are also at least three cases in the Senior collection (as also in the British Library 
collection) in which a scroll contains part of a longer text, which presumably was to be 
continued on additional scrolls; these are scrolls 2, the Sramanyaphala-sutra scroll, 13, the 
Veludvareyyd-sutta parallel, and 14, the Anavatapta-gatha. In all three of these cases, the 
surviving scroll contains the beginning of the text. This may be only coincidence, but it 
also gives rise to a suspicion that the entire text was perhaps never completed. Conceivably, 
if the scrolls were specially prepared for a ritual interment, it was felt to be sufficient to 
write out only the first part of the longer texts, by way of presenting a representative or 
symbolic scroll. 
Like several of the British Library manuscripts (Salomon 1999: 105-6), many of the 
Senior scrolls were double-folded; that is, after being rolled up vertically, the entire roll 
was folded in half lengthwise. This was the case, for example, with scroll 20, illustrated in 
fig. 5. Scrolls that were double folded in this way typically have a crack running down the 
middle after they are unrolled and conserved, as shown in the second image of scroll 20 
in fig. 6. Although scroll 20 is remarkably well preserved and has suffered only minimal 
damage due to the double fold, in many other cases this practice has caused the loss of a 
sizable section of the middle of the scroll, where the double-folded bark has disintegrated 
(see Salomon 2000: 22, 26-27 for a similar case among the British Library scrolls). In 
some cases in both the British Library and Senior collections, the two halves of a double- 
folded scroll have broken apart completely and become separated, as a result of which they 
have to be preliminarily catalogued as separate scrolls, although detailed study later on 
may make it possible to identify and rejoin them (as, for example, in the case of British Li- 
brary fragments 16 and 25; see Salomon 1999: 49, 51 and Lenz 2003: 3). There are at least 
nine scrolls in the Senior collection (nos. 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 21) which are definitely 
or probably such half-scrolls, and it should eventually be possible to join at least some of 
them together into single scrolls. 
A few of the Senior scrolls, for example nos. 19 and 20, appear to have been creased and 
folded up into a long flat strip rather than being rolled up into a cylindrical shape like the 
British Library scrolls and, apparently, most of the other Senior scrolls. This practice may 
84 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 14 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
Scribe 
ka 
ca 
cha 
ya 
sa 
Senior 
j) 
J 
BL 1 
lb 
; 
3' 
BL2 
P 
5 
'7 
BL9 
f 
r 
- 
7 
FIG. 4. Comparison of test letters in the Senior scrolls and selected British Library 
scrolls (for British Library [BL] scribe numbers, see Salomon 1999: 54-55). 
FIG. 5. Senior scroll 20, before conservation; the second half of the first line on the verso is visible. 
FIG. 6. Senior scroll 20, after conservation (composite detail of lower part of recto plus first line of 
verso). 
85 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 15 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
have contributed to the excellent state of preservation of these two scrolls, in that the creas- 
ing produces a clean smooth break with minimal loss of material when the manuscript is 
unfolded. 
5. SCRIPT AND LANGUAGE 
The variety of Kharosthi script (see fig. 4) used by the single scribe who wrote all or 
most of the Senior manuscripts has several distinctively late features that would be consis- 
tent with the later date, probably in the early second century A.D., that was suggested above 
(part 2) on other grounds. Particularly notable in this connection is the characteristically late 
form of ka (0) which the scribe generally writes, although the earlier variety also occasion- 
ally appears. In older forms of this letter (,a) the first stroke consists of an angled line com- 
prising the head, the upper half of the vertical stem, and the right arm, whereas in this late 
form the upper stroke has been restructured into a curve (Glass 2000: 49-51).12 Also typi- 
cally late is the shape of sa (J), in which the stroke for the "head and leg is only one wavy 
line" (Konow 1929: cxxiv). This type of sa, categorized by Glass (ibid., 106) as the fourth 
and latest variety of this letter, is regularly used by the Senior scribe, although he also some- 
times writes the earlier, third type of sa. 
The Senior scrolls have several interesting orthographic peculiarities. Among these is 
the use, in most cases, of a modified form of dental da (S), namely 2, transcribed as da, to 
represent the sound derived from an original unaspirated dental consonant in intervocalic 
position (i.e., -t- or -d-). This is seen, for example, in nidan[e] = Pali/Sanskrit nidana- in 
the sample text provided below in part 6 (1. 11). This character is presumed to represent a 
modified, probably fricative pronunciation such as /6/ (Konow 1929: 2-3; Fussman 1993: 
99-101; Glass 2000: 79-80). It is attested sporadically in Kharosthi inscriptions from a 
relatively early period (Konow, loc. cit.) and also occurs in some of the British Library 
Kharosthi manuscripts, for example the Sahgiti-sutra scroll (British Library fragment 15; 
Salomon 1999: 24, 49). 
Sporadic nonetymological alternations between unaspirated and aspirated consonants 
have been noted in several Kharosthi inscriptions and manuscripts (Salomon 1999: 127-28; 
Allon 2001: 68), but this tendency seems to be particularly pronounced in the Senior scrolls. 
The Senior scribe seems to be especially inclined to graphic deaspiration, as in the surpris- 
ing spelling bikhu (scroll no. 2,1. 2) in place of normal bhikhu 'monk'. Other examples of 
this pattern include saradi (no. 13, 1. 4) corresponding to Pali sarathi 'charioteer' and sagi 
(no. 2, 1. 26) = Pali samghi 'leader of a monastic community'. 
Also characteristic of the orthography of the Senior scrolls are nonetymological alterna- 
tions between unvoiced and voiced consonants, for example in makasa = Pali/Skt. magadha- 
'Magadhan' (no. 2, 1. 5). This alternation seems to be particularly common with the palatals 
c and j. The scribe often writes j for original c in positions where it would not normally be 
voiced, for example for word-initial c- as injadamasi- = Pali cdtumasini- 'last day of a sea- 
son' (no. 2, 1. 3), or for intervocalic geminate -cc- as in ariasaja = Pali ariyasaccam / Skt. 
dryasatyam 'noble truth' (no. 20, 1. 20). Conversely, he often writes c for etymological j, 
as in acali = Pali anjalim 'reverent gesture' (no. 13, 1. 7) and cadarua- = jatarupa- 'gold' 
12. In the hand of the Senior scribe, this late form of ka is very similar, sometimes virtually identical, to sa (2). 
This similarity has recently been convincingly cited by Boucher (2001: 101-2) as evidence that the archetype manu- 
script of Dharmaraksa's translation of the Rastrapalapariprccha was written in a similar late form of Kharosthi in 
which k and s were easily confused, leading to a misreading of an original esamanah as *ekamandh, which would 
explain the otherwise unaccountable Chinese translation of the word as "unifies his mind" (yi qi xin --JL). 
86 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 16 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
87 
(no. 13, 1. 10). This pattern suggests that this scribe, and presumably at least some other 
contemporary speakers of Gandhari as well, did not distinguish between c and j in their 
dialect, and this impression is confirmed by the fact that the scribe frequently writes the 
same word with c or j, apparently at random; for example, the spellings jadamasi and cada- 
rua cited above alternate with the etymologically correct forms cadamasi and jadarua. 
An especially interesting instance of this phenomenon is the spelling in the Sramanya- 
phala-sutra scroll (no. 2) of aca for Pali ajja / Skt. adya 'today' in the phrase kam=aca 
samana va bramana va (1. 25) = Pali kam nu kh'ajja samanam va brdhmanam va (Digha- 
nikaya I 47.13). This is important because it confirms the interpretation, tentatively proposed 
in Salomon 1999: 75-76, of the same word aca (also spelled aco) in the interlinear nota- 
tions by the secondary scribes in the British Library scrolls as equivalent to Pali ajja / Skt. 
adya. In light of this new data, that interpretation can now be considered virtually certain and 
the other proposed interpretations (ibid.) may be discarded, so that the interlinear notations 
such as likhidago aco sarvo can definitely be translated "All has been written today."13 
Another distinctive feature of the Senior scrolls is the peculiar spellings of certain proper 
names. The name of King Ajatasatru (Pali Ajatasattu), for example, is regularly rendered as 
ajadasasta- or ajadasastu- in the Sramanyaphala-sutra manuscript (no. 2, 11. 5, 13, etc.). In 
the same scroll, the name of one of the king's ministers, who is known in Pali as Sunidha, 
is given as sunida (1. 18; compare the comments above on the tendency toward graphic 
deaspiration). And in scroll 1 (1. 14), the king known in Pali as Pasenadi and in Sanskrit as 
Prasenajit is called [raya] pras(*e)nao, presumably equivalent to a Sanskrit *Prasenaka-, 
which is not otherwise attested as far as I am aware. Among toponyms, we find vedutala 
as the location of the sutra on scroll 13 (1. 1) corresponding to Pali veludvaram (SN V 
352.16), and ayajae as the setting of the sutra on scroll 19 (1. 1), evidently equivalent to 
Pali ayojjhayam (= Skt. ayodhyayam). 14 
6. SAMPLE TEXT: SCROLL 20, SUTRA 2 (FIGS. 5 AND 6) 
By way of a representative example of the material in the Senior collection, I present here 
the opening portion, consisting of the first eight lines, of a sutra corresponding to the 
Parildha-sutta of the Pali Samyutta-nikaya (V 450-52) and to sutra no. 422 of the Chinese 
Za ahanjing (T 99.2: 11 lb10-24). 
This sutra is the second of two sutras on scroll 20. The 
first sutra, which corresponds in part to the first Hatthapadupama-sutta in the Samyutta- 
nikaya (IV 171-72), covers the first ten lines and part of the eleventh line of the recto. The 
sutra presented here begins in the left half of line 11, immediately after a small circular punc- 
tuation mark indicating the end of the preceding sutra. This second suitra covers the rest of 
the recto (through line 17) and continues on through all thirteen lines on the verso. The 
introductory portion presented here comprises the text at the bottom of the recto plus the 
first line of the verso.15 
13. For further comments on the interpretation of the interlinear notations in the British Library scrolls, see now 
Lenz 2003: 108-10. 
14. The locus of the Pali parallel to the sutra on Senior scroll 19, namely the first Darukkhanda-sutta (SN IV 
179-81), is given as Kosambi in the PTS edition (Kosambiyam, SN IV 179.6), but Ayojjhayam is cited as a variant 
reading in the Sinhalese manuscripts (SN IV 179 n. 4). 
15. There is no internal punctuation within the sutra; periods, commas, and question marks have been added in 
the transcribed text to facilitate reading. Incomplete, partially legible, and other problematic syllables or portions of 
syllables are indicated in square brackets. 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 17 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
[11] eva me suda eka samae savasti nidan[e]. sata [12] bhiksave mahaparada namo nirea. 
tatra satvana ja[da]na bhudana avinivurtana adita kaya bhoti sapra ali[13]da saj[e]di- 
bhud[e]. sayasavi ayaiida divasasa[ta]ta adita bhoti sapacalida sajedibhuda evam=eva sati 
[14] mahaparadaha nama nirea. tatra satvana jadana bhudana avinivurtana adita kaya 
bhoti sapaci[l5]lida sajedibhude. asa anearo bhikhu bhayavata edavaya. mahada bhate so 
paradae, sumahada so bha16 [16] bhate so paradae. asti bhate taspi paradae ana paradae 
asimahadaro ya [17] bhayanadaro ya? [verso, 1] [ast. bhikh]u taspi paradao aha paradao 
asimadadoro ya bhayanadaro ya. 
TRANSLATION 
Thus I heard at one time. [Supply] the Sravasti introductory formula. [The Buddha said:] 
"There are, O Monks, hells named 'Great Burning.' The bodies of beings who are born, 
come into being, reborn there are heated, scorched, and set on fire. Just as iron balls heated 
for a [full] day are scorched and set on fire, just so are the hells named 'Great Burning.' The 
bodies of beings who are born, come into being, reborn there are heated, scorched, and set 
on fire." 
Then some monk said this to the Blessed One: "Great, Sir, is this [hell named] 'Burning'; 
very great, Sir, is this [hell named] 'Burning.' Is there, Sir, another [hell named] 'Burning' 
besides this 'Burning,' even greater and more terrible?" [The Buddha said:] "There is, O 
Monk, another [hell named] 'Burning' besides this 'Burning,' even greater and more terrible." 
PARALLEL TEXTS 
Pali: Samyutta-nikaya V 450-51: atthi bhikkhave mahaparilaho nama nirayo. tattha yam 
kinci cakkhuna rupam passati anittharupam yeva passati no ittharupam. akantarupam yeva 
passati no kantarupam. amanaparupam yeva passati no manaparupam. yam kiici sotena 
saddam sunati. .. pa-pe ... yam kihci kayena potthabbam phussati . . pe ... yam kiici 
manasa dhammam vijanati anittharupam yeva vijanati no ittharupam. akantarupam yeva 
vijdndti ... pe ... no mandparupan ti. 
evam vutte annataro bhikkhu bhagavantam etad avoca. maha vata so bhante parilaho 
sumahC vata so bhante parildho. atthi nu kho bhante etamha parilaha ahho parilaho ma- 
hantataro ca bhayanakataro ca ti. 
atthi kho bhikkhu etamha parilahd aino parilaho mahantataro ca bhayanakataro ca ti. 
Chinese: Za ahan jing, T 99.2: 11 blO-17: 
n 
rx. -WfIr?3 :"_Wu 
tf. 
W 
:Af 
iffl ? 
$ 
,thf,lIbMUM 
^ 
^ 
^b^"lI:LN_OTES/A]), 
NOTES 
Line 11. sata is evidently plural (= Pali/Skt. santi), as shown by sati in the similar passage 
in line 13, and by the nominative plural forms in -a (graphic for -a) of the subject words 
(mahaparada... .nirea). (In taspi paradae in 1. 16 and taspi paradao in verso, 1. 1, how- 
ever, the "[Great] Burning" hell is apparently referred to in the ablative singular.) The spell- 
ing sata for sati is a case of the phenomenon, attested elsewhere in Kharosthi documents 
16. This syllable has been crossed out by the scribe. 
88 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 18 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
89 
(e.g., Brough 1962: 81-82; Allon 2001: 74), of the scribal omission of vowel diacritics on 
word-final syllables. 
1. 12, avinivurtana: The n in the third syllable of this word has a sharply curved tail at the 
bottom that makes it look like a t, but the intended reading is clearly n; compare the n in 
nirea in line 14, which has a similar though smaller tail. The intended reading of the fifth 
syllable of this word is rta, but the syllable seems to have been corrected or rewritten over 
another letter, making it look like rna. The intended reading is confirmed by the spelling of 
the same word in line 14, avinivurtana (= Pali abhinibbattanam). The peculiar shape of two 
syllables in this word may indicate that it was corrupt or damaged in the archetype text 
from which our scribe was copying. 
For the phrase jadana bhudana avinivurtana compare, for example, jatdnam bhutinam 
nibbattanam in the Visuddhimagga (Warren 1950: 28.30). In Pali, this expression seems not 
to occur in canonical suttas, but only in later and commentarial texts; for similar patterns in 
Gandhari sutra texts, see Allon 2001: ?2.4. 
11. 12-13, adita kaya bhoti sapra alida saj[e]dibhud[e]: 
For this phrase, compare, for 
example, Samyutta-nikaya II 261.24-25 
kayo 'pi aditto sampajjalito sajotibhuto (similarly 
Ahguttara-nikdya I 141.14-15, IV 128.12-13, etc.). Gandhari adita, attested here for the 
first time, seems to be a conflation of the equivalents of Pali dditta- / Skt. adlpta- and Pali 
addita-, attita- (compare Thera-gdtha 157 kamaragena attito) / Skt. ardita-. 
1. 13. sayasavi ayaiida divasasa[ta]ta adita bhoti sapacalida sajedibhuda: Compare Digha- 
nikaya II 335.2-3 seyyathapi rajanna puriso divasasantattam ayogulam adittam sampajja- 
litam sajotibhutam tulaya toleyya; also Samnyutta-nikaya V 283.13 ayogulo divasam santatto. 
1. 15. edavaya: This phrase is one of the several Gandhari equivalents of Pali etad avoca 
"said this"; see Allon 2001: 163-65. 
11. 15-16. sumahada so bha bhate so paradae: The text seems to be defective here; the ex- 
pected reading would be sumahada bhate so paradae. The scribe seems to have lost his place 
in the archetype; he partially corrected his error by crossing out the first bha (see n. 16), but 
failed to fix the repetition of so. 
1. 16. asimahadaro: The prefix element asi- here seems to correspond to Pali/Skt. adhi- in 
the sense of 'superior, more', as in, for example, Pali adhimatta- 'exceeding'. The Pali par- 
allel (cited above) has here the more usual comparative form mahantataro. 
verso, 1. 1. [ast. bhikh]u: Only the very bottoms of the first three syllables, which are 
non-distinctive, are preserved, but the text can be securely reconstructed from the parallels. 
verso, 1. 1. asimadadoro: This spelling, instead of the expected -mahadaro as in line 16, 
seems to be a scribal error, influenced by the similarity of the consonants d and h. 
COMMENTS ON THE RELATIONSHIPS OF THE THREE VERSIONS OF THE SUTRA 
Although the rest of this Gandhari sutra (not presented here) on the verso of scroll 20 
agrees fairly closely with the Pali parallel in the Samyutta-nikaya, describing the meta- 
phorical hell in which those who are ignorant of the Four Noble Truths dwell, the descrip- 
tion of the "Burning" or "Great Burning" hell(s) (mahapara'da/mahaparadaha/paradae) 
at the beginning of the sutra, presented above, is very different. In the Pali text, the "Great 
Burning" hell (mahaparilaho) is described as a place where all sensory impressions are 
unpleasant (tattha yam kinci cakkhund rupam passati anittharupam yeva passati no 
ittharupam, etc.). In the new Gandhari text, the hell is described, true to its name, as a 
place where beings are tormented by fire (tatra satvana ja[da]na bhudana avinivurtana 
adita kaya bhoti sapra alida saj[e]dibhud[e]). 
Here the Gandhari is closer to the Chinese 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 19 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
Samyuktagama version, which describes the dare hell (7ttjf1rt ) in generally similar 
terms, though more concisely than the Gandhari: "If beings are born in it, they constantly 
experience burning" (n..T 
. P/-~ 
,fi.:],). 
But it would be highly premature to draw from this single observation any conclusions 
about the textual and sectarian affiliations among the three versions of the sutra in question. 
This will have to await a complete study of the new Gandhari version of it, as well as of the 
other texts of the Senior collection, and previous experience in analogous situations should 
lead us to expect that the relationships among the extant versions of the Samyutta-nikaya/ 
Samyuktagama (including the Central Asian Sanskrit fragments as well as the Pali, Chinese, 
and the new Gandhari specimens) will turn out to be very complex. This comparison is pre- 
sented here merely by way of an example of the sorts of relationships that are likely to 
emerge in the course in the study of the Senior collection. It seems reasonable to assume 
that they will probably be at least broadly similar to the issues that arose in connection with 
the Ekottarikdgama-type sutra fragments in the British Library collection (Allon 2001: 
chapter 2). 
With regard to the question of the sectarian affiliation of the Senior scrolls, we are at a 
distinct disadvantage in comparison to the British Library collection, which was found in- 
side a jar bearing a dedication to the Dharmaguptakas (see above, part 2). The presumed 
Dharmaguptaka affiliation of the British Library collection, or at least of portions of it, was 
supported on textual grounds by the close parallels between the Sahgiti-sitra manuscript 
contained within it and the corresponding version of that sutra in the Chinese Dirghagama, 
for which a Dharmaguptaka origin is generally, though not unanimously accepted (Salomon 
1999: 171-75). In the case of the new Gandhari Samyuktagama-like texts in the Senior col- 
lection, however, the situation is much more difficult. First, the inscription on the pot that 
contained them contains no sectarian reference on which to base a hypothesis. Second, the 
sectarian affiliations of the three Chinese Samyuktagama collections (T 99-101) are far 
more problematic and uncertain than in the case of the Dirghagama (see, e.g., Mayeda 
1985: 99-101). 
On circumstantial grounds, the a priori possibilities most likely for the sectarian affilia- 
tion of the Senior scrolls would be Dharmaguptaka or Sarvastivadin, these being, to judge 
from inscriptional evidence, the dominant schools in the region and period in question 
(Salomon 1999: 176-77). Since the long version of Chinese Za ahanjing (T 99) which pro- 
vides the best parallel for the Gandhari text presented above is generally considered to be 
most likely connected with the Sarvastivadins or an affiliated tradition such as the Mulasar- 
vastivadins (Mayeda 1985: 99-101; Enomoto 1983: 198; Harrison 1997: 280), we can make 
a preliminary approach to the issue by positing a Sarvastivadin connection for the Senior 
texts, although at this point this is no more than a guess. Indeed, it is by no means certain 
that it will ever be possible to definitively determine their affiliation, even after a complete 
study. Nonetheless, the addition of a substantial and coherent corpus of sutra texts to the 
surviving repertoire of early Buddhist canonical literature is bound to elucidate the history 
of this tradition, probably in ways which at this point cannot even be predicated. 
REFERENCES 
Allon, Mark. 2001. Three Gandhari Ekottarikagama-type Sutras: British Library Kharosthi Frag- 
ments 12 and 14. Gandharan Buddhist Texts, vol. 2. Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press. 
,and Richard Salomon. 2000. Kharosthi 
Fragments of a Gandhari 
Version of the Mahapari- 
nirvana-sitra. In Braarvig 2000. Pp. 243-73 + plates X.1-3. 
90 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 20 ===
SALOMON: The Senior Manuscripts 
Bechert, Heinz. 1961. Bruchstiicke buddhistischer Verssammlungen aus zentralasiatische Sanskrithand- 
schriften, I: Die Anavataptagatha und die Sthaviragatha. Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften 
zu Berlin, Institut fur Orientforschung, Veroffentlichung 51; Sanskrittexte aus den Turfanfunden, 
vol. 6. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag. 
Boucher, Daniel. 2001. The Textual History of the Rastrapalapariprccha: Notes on its Third-Century 
Chinese Translation. Annual Report of the International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhol- 
ogy 4: 93-115. 
Braarvig, Jens. 2000. Manuscripts in the Sch0yen Collection I: Buddhist Manuscripts, Volume I. Oslo: 
Hermes Publishing. 
.2002. Manuscripts in the Schoyen Collection III: Buddhist Manuscripts, Volume II. Oslo: 
Hermes Publishing. 
Brough, John. 1962. The Gandhari Dharmapada. London Oriental Series, vol. 7. London: Oxford 
University Press. 
Cribb, Joe. 1999. The Early Kushan Kings: New Evidence for Chronology. Evidence from the Rabatak 
Inscription of Kanishka I. In Coins, Art, and Chronology: Essays on the Pre-Islamic History of the 
Indo-Iranian Borderlands, ed. Michael Alram and Deborah E. Klimburg-Salter. Pp. 177-206. 
Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophische-historische Klasse, Denkschriften 
280. Vienna: Verlag der 6sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
Enomoto, Fumio. 1983. The Formation and Development of the Sarvastivada Scriptures. In Proceed- 
ings of the Thirty-First International Congress of Human Sciences in Asia and North Africa, vol. I, 
ed. Yamamoto Tatsuro. Pp. 197-98. Tokyo: Toho Gakkai. 
Falk, Harry. 2001. The yuga of Sphujiddhvaja and the Era of the Kusanas. Silk Road Art and Archae- 
ology 7: 121-36. 
Fussman, Gerard. 1993. L'indo-grec M6nandre ou Paul Demieville revisite. Journal asiatique 281: 
61-138. 
. 1994. Upaya-kausalya: L'implantation du bouddhisme au Gandhara. In Bouddhisme et cul- 
tures locales: Quelques cas de reciproques adaptations, ed. Fukui Fumimasa and Gerard Fussman. 
Pp. 17-51. Etudes thematiques, vol. 2. Paris: Ecole francaise d'Extreme-Orient. 
Glass, Andrew. 2000. A Preliminary Study of Kharosthi Manuscript Paleography. M.A. thesis, Univer- 
sity of Washington. Available at http://depts.washington.edu/ebmp/downloads/Glass_2000.pdf 
Harrison, Paul. 1997. The Ekottarikagama Translations of An Shiago. In Bauddhavidyasudhakarah: 
Studies in Honour of Heinz Bechert on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday, ed. Petra Kieffer-Pilz 
and Jens-Uwe Hartmann. Pp. 261-84. India et Tibetica, vol. 30. Swistall-Odendorf: Indica et 
Tibetica Verlag. 
.2002. Another Addition to the An Shigao Corpus? Preliminary Notes on an Early Chinese 
Samyuktagama Translation. In Shoki Bukkyo kara Abidaruma e: Sakurabe Hajime hakushi kiju 
kinen ronshu (Studies in Early Buddhism and Abhidharma Thought: In Honor of Dr. Hajime 
Sakurabe on His Seventy-seventh Birthday). Pp. 1-32. Kyoto: Heirakuji shoten. 
Hartmann, Jens-Uwe. 2002. Further Remarks on the New Manuscript of the Dirghagama. Journal of 
the International College for Advanced Buddhist Studies 5: 133-50. 
Konow, Sten. 1929. Kharoshthi Inscriptions with the Exception of those of Asoka. Corpus Inscriptio- 
num Indicarum, vol. 2.1. Calcutta: Government of India. 
.1935. Hidda Inscription of the Year 28. Epigraphia Indica 23: 35-42. 
Lenz, Timothy. 2003. A New Version of the Gandhari Dharmapada and a Collection of Previous-Birth 
Stories: British Library Kharosthi Fragments 16 and 25. Gandharan Buddhist Texts, vol. 3. Seattle: 
Univ. of Washington Press. 
Mayeda, Egaku. 1985. Japanese Studies on the Schools of the Chinese Agamas. In Zur Schulzuge- 
horigkeit von Werken der Hinayana-Literatur, ed. Heinz Bechert. Pp. 94-103. Abhandlungen der 
Akademie der Wissenschaften in Gottingen, Philologisch-historische Klasse, dritte Folge, nr. 149. 
Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. 
Salomon, Richard, 1997. A Preliminary Survey of Some Early Buddhist Manuscripts Recently Ac- 
quired by the British Library. JAOS 117: 353-58. 
91 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

=== PAGE 21 ===
Journal of the American Oriental Society 123.1 (2003) 
1998. Kharosthi Manuscript Fragments in the Pelliot Collection, Bibliotheque Nationale de 
France. Bulletin d 'Etudes Indiennes 16: 123-60. 
. 1999. Ancient Buddhist Scrolls from Gandhara: The British Library Kharosthi Fragments. 
Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press; London: The British Library. 
. 2000. A Gandhari Version of the Rhinoceros Sutra: British Library Kharosthi Fragment 
5B. Gandharan Buddhist Texts, vol. 1. Seattle: Univ. of Washington Press. 
. 2001. "Gandhari Hybrid Sanskrit": New Sources for the Study of the Sanskritization of 
Buddhist Literature. Indo-Iranian Journal 44: 241-52. 
2002a. A Jar with a Kharosthi Inscription. In Braarvig 2001. Pp. 351-55 + plates XIX. 1-2. 
.2002b. Gandhari and its Relationships with Other Indo-Aryan Languages in Light of 
Newly Discovered Kharosthi Manuscripts. In Indo-Iranian Languages and Peoples, ed. N. Sims- 
Williams. Pp. 119-34. Proceedings of the British Academy, vol. 116. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 
for the British Academy. 
. Forthcoming. New Manuscript Sources for the Study of Gandharan Buddhism. In The Bud- 
dhism of Gandhara: An Interdisciplinary Approach, ed. Behrendt and Brancaccio. 
. In progress. A Gandhari Version of the Songs of Lake Anavatapta (*Anavataptagatha): 
British Library Kharosthi Fragment 1. Gandharan Buddhist Texts, vol. 5. 
Warren, Henry Clarke (rev. Dharmananda Kosambi). 1950. Visuddhimagga of Buddhaghosdcariya. 
Harvard Oriental Series, vol. 41. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press. 
Wille, Klaus. 1990. Die Handschriftliche Uberlieferung des Vinayavastu der Mulasarvastivadin. 
Verzeichnis der Orientalischen Handschriften in Deutschland, Supplementband 30. Stuttgart: Franz 
Steiner Verlag. 
92 
This content downloaded from 195.78.108.163 on Mon, 16 Jun 2014 21:03:01 PM
All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions

